CHAPTER 1 Essentials of Molecular Biology: Basic Principles
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 1
Essentials of Molecular Biology: Basic Principles
Lance A. Liotta
Edison T. Liu
Storage and Transmission of Genetic Information
Nucleic Acids
DNA
RNA
Nucleases and Polymerases
Genes and their Expression
Transcription Control: Promoters and Enhancers
Processing of the RNA Transcript
Repair of DNA
Reading the Genetic Code and Production of Encoded Proteins
Genetic Code
Ribosomes
Protein Synthesis: Initiation, Elongation, and Termination
Protein Structure and Function
Amino Acids
Protein Folding into a Collection of Functional Motifs
Protein Posttranslational Modifications
Subcellular Molecular Structure
Plasma Membrane
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
Membrane Proteins
Molecular Oncogenesis: Cellular Signal Transduction
Different Pathways to Cancer
Perturbations in Signaling
The Wrong Place at the Wrong Time
Release of Suppression
Cell Death
Genetic Instability
Suggested Readings

STORAGE AND TRANSMISSION OF GENETIC INFORMATION
NUCLEIC ACIDS
The genetic material of all known organisms is nucleic acid: deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). Nucleic acids act as an information storehouse.
They also actively participate in the reading and transmission of stored information within the cell and from one cell generation to the next. The usual flow of genetic
information is from DNA to RNA to protein. The transition from DNA to RNA is called transcription, and the transition from RNA to protein is called translation. The
direction of flow from DNA to RNA to protein was considered the “central dogma” in biologic sciences because most organisms exhibit this directionality in the
expression of genetic information. However, it was found that some viruses, including retroviruses and the virus that causes autoimmune deficiency syndrome,
transmit information from RNA to DNA using an enzyme called reverse transcriptase. Nucleic acids are polymers comprised of nucleotides (generally four different
types) chemically linked together in chains that can be many millions of units long. The number of possible nucleic acid combinations n units long is thus 4 n. A nucleic
acid only 10 units in length therefore has 4 10 possible sequences.
Each nucleotide in the chain contains a nitrogenous base, a five-carbon sugar, and a phosphate group. The sequence of bases is the form in which the genetic
information is coded.
There are two types of bases: pyrimidines and purines. Pyrimidines are six-membered rings and include cytosine (C), thymine (T), and uracil (U). Purines are fused
five- and six-membered rings and include adenine (A) and guanine (G). The chemical structures of the bases is shown in Figure 1-1. Bases C, A, and G are found in
both DNA and RNA. T is specific to DNA, and U is specific to RNA.

FIGURE 1-1. Purines and pyrimidines.

Nucleosides are constituted by a nitrogenous base linked to a five-carbon sugar (pentose). The linkage is from the N1 position of the pyrimidines or from the N9
position of the purines to the carbon at position 1 on the pentose. DNA and RNA use different pentose sugars. The sugar in DNA is deoxyribose, and the pentose in
RNA is ribose. The difference in the two sugars is a hydroxyl group at the 2' position on the sugar.
Nucleotides are nucleoside phosphates. A nucleotide is formed when a phosphate group is added to the 5' position on the pentose. The nucleotides that form the
nucleic acid chain are connected in a very specific way: The 5' position of one pentose ring is connected to the 3' position of the next pentose ring by a phosphate
group. The connection is called a phosphodiester bond.
DNA
The DNA backbone is made up of bonded sugar and phosphate groups in which a phosphate group connects the 5' carbon of one sugar to the 3' carbon of the next
sugar in the chain by a phosphodiester bond. As shown in Figure 1-2, the beginning of the DNA chain has a phosphate group attached to the 5' carbon of
deoxyribose, whereas the end of the chain has an OH group on the 3' carbon of deoxyribose.

FIGURE 1-2. The backbone of DNA is made of bonded sugar and phosphate groups in which a phosphate group connects the 5' carbon of one sugar to the 3' carbon
of the next sugar in the chain. The beginning of the chain has a phosphate group attached to the 5' carbon of deoxyribose.

DNA is a double helix. It is a double-stranded polymer. The bases of each chain face inward, with the restriction that a purine is always paired opposite to a
pyrimidine; thus, a G on one strand is paired with a C on the other, and an A is paired with a T. The sugar phosphates are on the backbone of the helix. The resulting
negative charge on the outside of the helix is neutralized in the chromosome by metal ions or positively charged proteins.
The two polynucleotide chains in the double helix are connected by hydrogen bonds between the bases. As noted earlier, G hydrogen-bonds specifically with a C,
whereas an A can only hydrogen-bond with a T. The resulting base pairs are said to be complementary. As shown in Figure 1-3, the GC base pair has three hydrogen
bonds, and the AT base pair has only two hydrogen bonds. Each strand can serve as the template for the synthesis of the other, enabling faithful reproduction of the
genetic code.

FIGURE 1-3. Base pairs are formed by hydrogen bonds. T=A; GºC.

The two polynucleotide chains of the DNA double helix run in opposite directions (antiparallel). Thus, as one strand runs in the 5' to the 3' direction, the partner strand
runs in the 3' to 5' direction, as in the following example:
5' P A G T C T G C C A OH 3'
3' HO T C A G A C G G T P 5'
DNA can be methylated in the carbon-5 position of cytosine to form 5-methylcytosine. This occurs in animals in DNA locations where the cytosine is followed on the
same strand by guanine. The pattern of methylation is passed on when the DNA replicates.
RNA
In RNA, the pyrimidine uracil replaces the DNA base thymine, and the pentose ribose is used instead of deoxyribose in DNA. During the synthesis of RNA from a DNA
template, adenine in DNA is transcribed into uracil in RNA.
Because the pentose ribose is used in RNA instead of deoxyribose, this produces a ribonucleotide having a 2' OH group on the sugar, whereas the 2' OH group is not
present in DNA. The important consequence is that RNA is much less stable than DNA. RNA is highly base labile. Although RNA can have a complex secondary
structure, it is single stranded, not double stranded like DNA.
RNA is transcribed from a DNA template and is the first step by which the genetic information of DNA is converted into the synthesis of specific proteins. A single
strand of RNA is generated that is identical in its sequence to one of the strands of the DNA. The DNA strand that has the same sequence (with T instead of U) as the
messenger RNA (mRNA) is the coding, or positive, strand; the opposite antiparallel strand is the anticoding, or negative, strand. The RNA itself then becomes the
template (mRNA) for translation into the sequence of amino acids that comprise the protein polypeptide.
Three main types of RNA are present in the cell: mRNA, ribosomal RNA (rRNA), and transfer RNA (tRNA). mRNA encodes the sequence for all cellular proteins;
however, most initial transcripts of mRNA contain large pieces of intervening sequences, or introns, that must be spliced out to leave the coding sequences, or exons.
At the 3' end of most mRNA molecules is a poly(A) tail of 150 to 250 adenine nucleotides. The mRNA also has an untranslated leader and tailer sequence at both
ends. rRNA does not code for protein. Instead, it comprises part of the machinery that decodes the information in the mRNA. tRNA also does not code for protein. It
reads off the mRNA triplet code and matches it with the correct amino acid. tRNA contains specific bases not found in other RNAs: inosine, pseudouridine, and
dihydrouridine. At the end of each tRNA is an acceptor arm whose free end is aminoacetylated, or carries the specific amino acid. Another arm on the tRNA contains
the anticodon, which recognizes the complementary mRNA codon. Thus, mRNA functions as a transportable copy of the blueprint for the synthesis of protein, and
tRNA functions as part of the protein synthetic assembly line.
NUCLEASES AND POLYMERASES
Endonucleases are enzymes that cleave bonds within a nucleic acid chain. They may be specific for RNA, DNA, or hybrids of RNA-DNA or DNA-DNA. Restriction
enzymes are a special class of endonucleases that recognize specific short sequences of DNA and cleave the DNA at or next to the recognition sequence. These
enzymes are isolated from bacteria and are named after the genus (first letter) and species (second two letters) of the bacteria they are derived from. Because a
bacteria can make more than one restriction enzyme, the specific member is designated by a roman numeral (e.g., EcoRI: Escherichia coli, strain R, first enzyme from
that strain). Restriction enzymes cut DNA at palindromes. The palindrome is a sequence of DNA that is the same when one strand is read left to right (5' to 3') or the
other is read right to left (still 5' to 3' because of the antiparallel rule). An example for EcoRI is
5' GAATTC 3'
3' CTTAAG 5'
Restriction endonucleases are now standard tools in molecular biology and permit the cutting of large stretches of DNA at very precise points. They allow fragments
of DNA to be “fingerprinted” by the size of the cleaved fragments. Moreover, a restriction enzyme can cleave the DNA so as to leave blunt ends, or staggered “sticky”
ends with 5' or 3' overhangs. Because of this property, restriction enzymes are powerful tools to analyze DNA sequences and to create cleaved pieces of DNA that

can be shuffled, recombined, and reannealed in the process of DNA cloning.
Polymerases are enzymes that synthesize nucleic acid chains. RNA polymerases synthesize RNA, and DNA polymerases synthesize DNA. All polymerases require a
template (nucleic acid strand to be synthesized), which is complementary to the strand being synthesized. They also need a primer, which is a short sequence
(oligonucleotide) that is complementary to the 3' end of the template. This provides a free 3' OH end at which the polymerase starts to build a new chain.
Reverse transcriptase is a special polymerase that has, as its primary function, the ability to use RNA as a template to generate a copy in the form of DNA. It is an
important enzyme in the life cycle of the human immunodeficiency viruses that cause autoimmune deficiency syndrome and other disorders, and as such, is a prime
target for anti–human immunodeficiency virus therapeutics. Reverse transcriptase is also a unique reagent that can be used to create complementary DNA (copy)
from mRNA extracted from cells, and therefore it is used in complementary DNA cloning.
The genetic code is a series of three mRNA nucleotides; each is a codon that encodes one amino acid ( Fig. 1-4). Three codons are nonsense or termination codons.
The genetic code is degenerate, with more than one codon for most amino acids.

FIGURE 1-4. Genetic code. The first base of each codon is presented vertically outside the left margin. The second base of each codon is presented horizontally
above and below the chart. The third (wobble) position of each codon is presented just within the left margin.

GENES AND THEIR EXPRESSION
A gene is a unit of inheritance that carries the information representing a polypeptide or a structural RNA molecule. Genes are stable information packets transmitted
from one generation to the next.
A gene includes “control” regions that precede and follow a central coding region and that include the sequences encoding the protein product. The coding region is
preceded by a leader sequence and followed by a trailer. The leader and trailer are not translated into protein and represent the 5' and 3' untranslated regions of the
mRNA that often function in regulating the half-life of the mRNA or in controlling translation.
The coding region is divided into alternating exons and introns. The exons, which are represented in the mature spliced RNA product, are interrupted or intervened by
the introns. The introns are spliced out and do not encode amino acids. The reason for the introns is not obvious, but it is a hallmark of all higher order species in
evolution. A gene family is a set of genes whose exons are related. A gene cluster is a group of genes related to each other that are adjacent.
Transcription is the process by which a single-stranded RNA is generated that is identical in sequence with the coding strand of the DNA. A transcription unit is a
sequence of DNA that can be transcribed by RNA polymerase into a single RNA, beginning at an initiation start point and ending at a terminator.
Three types of genes are found in eukaryotes that are differentiated from each other by the type of RNA polymerase that transcribes the gene: RNA polymerase I, II,
and III. RNA polymerase II produces heterogeneous nuclear RNA, which becomes mRNA after processing and splicing.
Proteins are encoded by mRNA. In the vast majority of cases, therefore, it is the protein product of a polymerase II gene that finally determines gene activity. The
genetic code that transfers nucleotide sequences into amino acid sequences is organized as triplets of nucleotides forming a codon. Each codon is recognized by the
translational machinery as representing an amino acid. Some codons are used as traffic signals that tell the machinery to start and stop translation (therefore their
designation as start and stop codons). Mutations in important tumor suppressor genes, such as the breast cancer gene BRCA1 and the colon cancer gene APC, are
frequently mutations that convert a codon that normally encodes an amino acid to a stop codon. This results in a prematurely truncated and, therefore, inactive
protein.
A series of potential points for control of gene expression and functional protein production exist. These include activation of the gene chromatin complex, initiation of
transcription, processing and capping of the RNA transcript, splicing of the RNA, polyadenylation of the RNA transcript, transport of the RNA to the cytoplasm,
degradation of the RNA, translation of the mRNA into protein, correct folding and posttranslational modifications of the protein, transport and secretion of the protein,
cleavage of the protein, or combination with inhibitors or activators.
In the nucleus, DNA exists in a complex with proteins to form chromatin. Structural changes occur to the chromatin to activate the regions of the DNA and unwind
regions of the DNA. The eukaryotic chromatin is made from nucleosomes. A nucleosome contains approximately 200 base pairs (bp) of DNA that is wrapped around
an octomer of histone proteins. In between the nucleosomes are linker regions that can be digested by DNAases. Transcribable active DNA is particularly sensitive to
DNAases.
Between 2% and 7% of cytosines in animal DNA are modified by methylation, most often in sites where a C is followed by a G (CpG doublets). Methylation most often
appears in genes that are not being expressed. DNA that is actively transcribed is often undermethylated. CpG-rich islands are often found upstream of constitutively
transcribed genes near or at the promoters. This fact has been used by molecular geneticists to identify potential transcription units in large stretches of sequenced
genomic DNA.
TRANSCRIPTION CONTROL: PROMOTERS AND ENHANCERS
A promoter is a region of DNA that is involved in binding of RNA polymerase (and associated factors) to initiate transcription and are therefore cis-acting sites.
Promoters for polymerase I and II are usually located upstream of the transcription unit (initiation start point). Promoters for polymerase III are located downstream.
Transcription factors are trans-acting elements that recognize specific cis-acting sites in the promoter. Cis-acting sites can be spread over regions of DNA that are
greater than 100 bp. In general, they can be tentatively identified by footprinting experiments that localize sequences covered by transcription factors. In this type of
experiment, a putative promoter DNA binding sequence is allowed to bind to the transcription factor. The DNA is radioactively labeled, digested with nucleases, and
then electrophoresed on a sequencing gel. In the region of the binding site, access to nuclease digestion is blocked because of the “footprint” of the transcription
factor. Once a candidate promoter sequence is mapped, it is possible to directly test its ability to regulate expression of a reporter gene that is positioned downstream.
Promoters are characterized by short consensus sequences called boxes. The TATA box is usually located approximately 25 bp upstream from the start point of
transcription. This consensus sequence of AT base pairs (e.g., TATAAAA) is important in the correct positioning of the RNA polymerase II (in concert with a series of
transcription factors) at the beginning of the initiation site. The CAAT box (often GGCCAATCT) is located approximately 80 bp upstream of the transcription start
point. A large number of different transacting factors recognize the CAAT box. Its role is to determine the strength (frequency or rate of initiation events) of the
promoter. The GC box comprises the sequence GGGCGG. It is found in multiple copies in either orientation. The GC box, usually upstream of the TATA box, is the

binding site for the Sp1 transcription factor, which regulates the strength of the promoter.
Enhancers are sequences that enhance initiation but may be located at a considerable distance from the start point upstream or downstream. Some enhancers have
even been found within introns. Some transcription factors can bind to both promoters and enhancers. In retroviruses, enhancers are located in the viral long terminal
repeats and are important for pathogenesis. Papillomaviruses contain enhancer elements that are specific for keratinocytes and thereby contribute to the specific
tropism of the virus to these cells. Another example is the immunoglobulin cellular enhancer, which stimulates transcription in specific immune cell types.
Response elements are consensus sequences that allow specific transcription factors to coordinate the transcription of a whole group of genes that all have the
consensus sequences. Examples are the heat shock response element, which responds to heat; the glucocorticoid response element, which responds to
glucocorticoids; the metal response element; and the tumor promoting element (TRE). The TRE is a response element to TPA the carcinogenic promoting agent. It
has the sequence TGACTCA. In response to TPA or phorbol ester, AP-1 transcription factors (a plurifunctional family including Jun and Fos) bind to the TRE.
PROCESSING OF THE RNA TRANSCRIPT
A cap is a complex methylated structure at the 5' end of mRNA that is essential for translation. The first base of a gene that is transcribed into an mRNA molecule is
usually a purine (A or G). Almost immediately after transcription starts, a nuclear enzyme guanylyl transferase catalyzes the addition of a 5' G to the first transcribed
base of the mRNA. This step is followed by a series of methylation events. The final cap structure maintains the stability of the mRNA transcript as it is forming.
Processing of RNA includes termination and polyadenylation. All eukaryotic mRNAs (except histone genes) contain a poly(A) tail at their 3' end, which is added by
poly(A) polymerase. A consensus sequence called the polyadenylation signal AAUAAA is located 10 to 30 bases upstream of the poly(A) tail. The polymerase
transcribes through the polyadenylation signal, and after termination, an endonuclease cleaves the transcribed RNA at a site 10 to 30 bases downstream of the
polyadenylation signal. The site of this event involves small nuclear ribonuclear particles. Once the cleavage occurs, the poly(A) polymerase adds A residues one by
one to the 3' free end of the RNA. The poly(A) tail added to the end of the cleaved mRNA may assist the mRNA export out of the nucleus and may also be involved in
the stability and lifespan of the mRNA molecule.
Processing of the transcribed RNA is required to remove the introns and produce a continuous linear sequence as a template for translation into the protein
polypeptide. The coding region of a gene consists of exons and introns. Splicing is the mechanism by which the introns are removed from the precursor RNA to form a
mature mRNA.
Splicing mechanisms differ depending on the type of RNA being spliced. Splicing of heterogeneous nuclear RNA requires a cap structure and is not complete until a
poly(A) tail is added. The ends of the intron conform to the GT-AG rule, meaning that each intron in the gene begins with GT and ends with AG. The left 5' site is the
donor site, and the right 3' site is the acceptor site. Alternative splicing refers to the possibility that there are variations in which exons are spliced together. A large
complicated gene with many exons and introns can use alternative splicing to encode different proteins that are generated by different combinations of exons. Cellular
genes for structural proteins, such as collagen, fibronectin, and myelin basic proteins, use alternative splicing to produce different proteins with different biologic
functions. In this manner, a single gene can produce a number of protein isoforms using sequences within its “start” and “stop” borders.
Translation is the process by which the nucleotide sequence of mRNA is converted into a sequence of amino acids to make a protein. As mentioned, the genetic
information of the RNA is organized into triplets of bases called codons. Translation requires ribosomal RNA that combines with ribosomal protein to form ribosomes.
The ribosomes are docking sites for adaptor molecules, such as tRNA, that can recognize specific codons and the correct amino acid specified by that codon. Thus,
the tRNA translates the base sequence of the mRNA into the different language of the amino acid sequence of the protein.
REPAIR OF DNA
Correction of DNA sequence errors is critical to survival. Environmental factors, including radiation, mutagenic chemicals, and thermal energy, can induce errors in
the DNA sequence. In addition, errors are occasionally introduced by DNA polymerases during replication. A certain low level of random DNA errors may be required
to generate genotype variation to fuel Darwinian evolution. Nevertheless, if most errors were left uncorrected, then both proliferating and nonproliferating cells would
accumulate so much genetic damage that they would no longer be viable. Moreover, damage of DNA in germ cells can prevent normal offspring from developing.
Although a significant body of knowledge has been accumulated about DNA polymerase proofreading and excision repair in E coli, many of the enzymes required for
repairing DNA damage in eukaryotic cells are now being characterized. DNA repair mechanisms have significant roles in carcinogenesis (see Chapter 2).

READING THE GENETIC CODE AND PRODUCTION OF ENCODED PROTEINS
GENETIC CODE
The genetic code refers to triplets of DNA or RNA and the amino acids they specify. A triplet code specifies 4 3 words; thus, there are 4 3 codons. The code is
redundant because more than one codon can specify the same amino acid.
An open reading frame is a string of codons that are flanked on the 5' side by an initiation codon and on the 3' side by a termination codon. All proteins start with
methionine. The codon AUG specifies methionine and is therefore the initiation codon. Termination or nonsense codons are stop signals for the end of a protein
chain. They include the codons UAA, UAG, and UGA. Protein synthesis proceeds from the amino-terminus (N-terminus) to the carboxy-terminus (C-terminus).
Because of the triplet codon, each stretch of mRNA contains three potential open reading frames. The reading frame can be shifted by moving the starting point one
or two bases to the right or left. Mutations in which a base is deleted or inserted within an exon are called frameshift mutations, because they would alter the reading
frame of the sequence.
RIBOSOMES
Ribosomes are the protein synthesizing machinery that brings together the mRNA template and the charged tRNAs. The ribosomes contain two subunits. The small
subunit is 40s; it contains an 18s rRNA and 40 proteins and is responsible for binding the tRNAs and the mRNAs. The large subunit, which catalyzes peptide bonds
between amino acids on the growing polypeptide chain, has three rRNAs of 28S, 5.8S and 5S, as well as 50 proteins.
Every tRNA has two properties: It can covalently link to the amino acid it recognizes to form a charged aminoacyl-tRNA, and it contains an anticodon that is
complementary to the codon recognizing its amino acid. The anticodon recognizes the codon by complementary base pairing. Some of the base pairs in the third
position can be nonstandard or can wobble. This permits one tRNA to recognize more than one codon.
PROTEIN SYNTHESIS: INITIATION, ELONGATION, AND TERMINATION
There are three general steps of protein synthesis: initiation, elongation, and termination. Initiation is the recognition by a specific initiating tRNA for the small
ribosome subunit, along with guanosine triphosphate (GTP), and the initiating codon of the mRNA. A special tRNA met binds to the small ribosome subunit, and a
molecule of GTP correctly positions the initiating AUG codon of the mRNA on the ribosomal subunit. In concert with several initiating factors, the large ribosomal
subunit now binds to the small subunit, met ferrying-tRNA met becomes localized to the ribosome at the P site (peptidyl-tRNA).
Elongation is the extension of the amino acid chain by introducing a second aminoacyl-tRNA to the proper site on the ribosome called the A site. With the help of
elongation factors, the growing polypeptide chain is attached to the tRNA that brought in the previous amino acid. A peptide bond is formed between the carboxyl
group of the methionine and the amino group of the incoming amino acid to make a dipeptide that is attached to the new tRNA. Peptide bond formation requires GTP
hydrolysis, which furnishes energy for the reaction. Thus, each elongation step requires two GTPs. Elongation is continued with each new charged tRNA binding to
the A site, peptide bond formation, and translocation of the peptidyl-tRNA to the P site (with displacement of the now uncharged tRNA from the P site). In each
translocation, the ribosome moves three nucleotides downstream of the mRNA; therefore, more than one polypeptide chain can be produced from one mRNA

simultaneously (Fig. 1-5).

FIGURE 1-5. Synthesis of secretory proteins on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). An elongated signal recognition particle (SRP) binds to the signal sequence, and
then the SRP, nascent polypeptide, and ribosome bind to the ER membrane through the SRP receptor. The signal sequence inserts into the ER membrane and is
elongated. The signal sequence is cleaved in the ER lumen by signal peptidase. Carbohydrates are added to asparagine residues by enzymes on the luminal surface.
After synthesis is complete, the ribosomes are released and the remaining C-terminus is transferred to the ER lumen. mRNA, messenger RNA.

Termination occurs when the ribosome reaches the termination codon of the mRNA. A termination factor supports the recognition of the nonsense codon, the release
of the last tRNA, and the dissociation of the subunits. This final step also requires GTP hydrolysis.
Once mRNA is transcribed and translated, several factors affect its stability. Degradation of mRNA is a regulated process. Several sequence elements have been
detected on mRNAs that regulate decay. An example is the ARE (AU-rich elements) that contain the consensus sequence AUUUA repeated once or several times
within the 3' untranslated region.

PROTEIN STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
AMINO ACIDS
The result of the transcription-translation process is the generation of a protein polypeptide. Proteins, the working molecules of the cell, catalyze a diverse range of
chemical reactions, act as information sensors, provide structural scaffolding for cells and extracellular tissue components, control membrane permeability, transduce
signals, recognize and covalently bind other molecules, cause motion, and control gene function.
This breadth of tasks are performed by biomolecules constructed from 20 different amino acids. A 100–amino acid protein has 20 100 possible structures. This
enormous potential for variation means that cells and organisms can differ greatly in structure and function even though they are built from a limited number of
biopolymer subunits using similar biochemical reactions.
Nineteen of the 20 amino acids contain an amino group (-NH2) and an acidic carboxyl group (-COOH). Proline has an imino group (-NH-) instead of an amino group.
All amino acids have a central carbon atom, called an alpha carbon, which is bonded to an amino (or imino) group, to the carboxyl group, to a hydrogen atom, and to
one variable group called a side chain or R group. The side chains give the amino acids their individual characteristics. Amino acids with polar but uncharged R
groups are serine, threonine, asparagine, and glutamine. Amino acids with positively charged R groups are lysine, arginine, and histidine. Those with negatively
charged R groups are glutamic acid and aspartic acid. Amino acids with hydrophobic R groups include alanine, isoleucine, leucine, methionine, phenylalanine,
tryptophan, valine, and tyrosine. Special amino acids are cysteine, glycine, and proline.
PROTEIN FOLDING INTO A COLLECTION OF FUNCTIONAL MOTIFS
Peptides are polymers composed of amino acids connected by peptide bonds. The peptide bond joins the carboxyl group of one amino acid to the amino group of the
next amino acid. The nature of the peptide bond limits rotation around the alpha carbon and contributes to the three-dimensional spacing and folding of the protein.
The newly synthesized protein adopts a three-dimensional conformation through noncovalent (ionic, hydrogen, van der Waals, and hydrophobic) interactions among
the amino acids. The final conformation is stabilized by covalent disulfide bonds between cysteines in different parts of the chain, or between two different chains.
Multiple different polypeptide chains can interact with each other by noncovalent forces or by covalent bonds, but polypeptide chains are never branched.
Thus, remarkably, the complete three-dimensional shape of a protein is determined by its primary structure, which is the linear sequence of amino acids. The
secondary structure of a protein pertains to the folding of parts of the protein into regular structures, such as a helices and b pleated sheets. The tertiary structure
describes the interaction of these regular structures into compact domains. The quaternary structure is the final organization of several polypeptide chains (originally
encoded by separate genes) into a single protein molecule. The final protein can fold to form a long structural support rod, such as collagen, or a compact ball
(globular protein), as in many proteins that catalyze chemical reactions.
Large polypeptides often fold into several globular units rather than one huge unit. Most domains contain between 50 and 300 amino acids. In a water fluid
environment, the domains of proteins usually contain a hydrophobic interior and a hydrophilic surface. A regular substructure that occurs in different domains is a
motif. Specific motifs are associated with specific functions.
A good example is transcription factor proteins, which have characteristic DNA binding motifs in the protein primary and secondary structure. The helix-turn-helix
structure exhibits an a helix, a turn, and a second a helix. An example is the homeodomain in homeobox proteins that regulate development and differentiation. Zinc
finger proteins contain tandem repeats of a 30-residue motif that contains cysteine and histidine residues that bind zinc. The zinc finger binds to a consensus
sequence GCGTGGGCG on the DNA. Steroid receptors display a zinc binding domain different from the zinc finger and respond to steroid hormones (e.g., estrogen),
retinoids, thyroid hormones, and vitamin D. The leucine zippers protein domain appears in many general transcription factors, including Jun and Fos. The zipper itself
is a leucine-rich stretch of amino acids in a 30– to 40–amino acid region. The leucines are separated at regular intervals by six amino acids. A conserved repeat of
hydrophobic residues is present three residues to the N-terminal side of the leucines (valine or isoleucine). In addition, the leucine zipper proteins have a basic region
that is rich in arginines and lysines. The basic region binds to the DNA, and the leucine zipper region forms two parallel a helices in a coiled-coil arrangement. In
addition to DNA binding, the leucine zipper plays a role in protein dimerization. Molecules that bind with themselves form homodimers, and those that couple with
other proteins form heterodimers. Examples are the homodimers Jun-Jun and the heterodimers Jun-Fos, members of the AP-1 binding proteins involved in
transcriptional control.
PROTEIN POSTTRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATIONS
Proteins undergo several types of covalent and noncovalent modifications. These include the cleavage of the N-terminal methionine, the formation of disulfide bridges
between two cysteine residues, or cleavage of a precursor polypeptide region. A large number of stable protein modifications can be made, including hydroxylation of
proline and lysine in collagen, acetylation of lysine, methylation of histidine, attachment of carbohydrated groups to asparagine, presence of serine or threonine side
chains, linkage to lipids, and addition of various groups to the N-terminus.
Protein functions during cell signaling are also controlled by reversible side-chain modifications. A key modification is phosphorylation, which is the substitution of
phosphate groups for hydroxyl groups on serine, threonine, or tyrosine. The activity of many critical enzymes in cancer biology is regulated by their state of
phosphorylation (e.g., src, HER2/neu, RET, and the retinoblastoma gene product). In fact, phosphatase and kinase enzymes themselves can be regulated by
phosphorylation. The phosphorylation is mediated by enzymes called kinases and removed by enzymes called phosphatases. Thus, the phosphorylation cascade
provides a simultaneous means of information exchange, amplification, pathway channeling, and regulation. Its importance in cancer is the fact that many oncogenes
are themselves mutated kinases that are rendered constitutively active [e.g., epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), bcr-abl] ( Fig. 1-6). Moreover, some tumor

suppressor genes are strong regulators of kinases (e.g., p16, p27).

FIGURE 1-6. Oncogenes can arise from protooncogenes that encode cell-surface receptors. On the left, the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor becomes
oncogenic by loss of the coding region for the extracellular domain. On the right, the neu ERB-2 oncogene encodes a protein with a single amino acid substitution in
the transmembrane domain.

SUBCELLULAR MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
PLASMA MEMBRANE
Both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells are enclosed in a plasma membrane. In addition, most eukaryotic cells contain extensive internal membranes interconnected to
the plasma membrane. These internal pockets and sacs define a collection of subcellular organelles. The largest organelle is the nucleus. Examples of other
organelles are mitochondria (oxidation of small molecules to generate adenosine triphosphate); rough and smooth endoplasmic reticula, a network of membranes in
which glycoproteins and lipids are synthesized; Golgi vesicles, which channel membrane constituents to correct locations in the cell; and lysosomes, which degrade
proteins. The organelles maintain a specific, demarcated, confined chemical environment (such as an acid pH in the case of lysosomes) and contain a host of bound
enzymes that catalyze requisite chemical reactions.
NUCLEUS
Chromosomal DNA in eukaryotic cells is wrapped in a set of five different positively charged proteins called histones. Histone-DNA interactions occur at regular
intervals. Every sequence of 150 to 180 bp of DNA is bound to one molecule of histone H1 and to two molecules each of histones H2A, H2B, H3, and H4.
The eukaryotic nucleus is surrounded by two membranes containing phospholipids. The outer membrane is continuous with the cytoplasmic membrane system. The
space between the inner and outer membrane communicates with the lumenal cavity of the rough endoplasmic reticulum. The inner membrane defines the nucleus
proper. Fibrous proteins called lamins form a two-dimensional network on the inner surface of the inner membrane. Ring-like nuclear membrane pores, formed from a
special set of membrane proteins, are regulated channels for the movement of material between the nucleus and the cytoplasm.
The nucleolar organizer, a region of one or more chromosomes in the nucleolus, is a focal point for synthesis of ribosomal RNA. Generated ribosomal subunits pass
through the nuclear pores into the cytoplasm.
CYTOPLASM
The cytoplasm is the region outside the nucleus of eukaryotic cells, and it contains an array of fibrous proteins collectively constituting the cytoskeleton. The most
abundant cytoskeleton components are microfilaments, which are built of actin; slightly wider microtubules, made of tubulin; and intermediate filaments, built of a set
of rod-shaped protein subunits. The cytoskeleton is not just a structural scaffolding. It plays critical roles in cell movement, differentiation, intracellular trafficking, cell
division (microtubules mediate chromosome movement), and signal transduction. Some of the most active chemotherapeutic agents, such as the taxanes and the
vinca alkaloids, directly affect microtubular assembly as their primary mode of action.
The plasma membrane surface is highly specialized to interact with the environment according to the functional requirements of the individual differentiated cell.
Protuberances and extensions of the plasma membrane, such as cilia, pseudopods, and villi, contain cores of specialized cytoskeletal extensions and have broad
functions in locomotion and macromolecule uptake. The plasma membrane contains embedded receptors and anchor points that bind to the extracellular matrix,
surrounding cells, or soluble cytokines.
MEMBRANE PROTEINS
Proteins interact with membranes using a variety of mechanisms. Integral membrane proteins contain amino acid residues with hydrophobic side chains that interact
with the fatty acyl groups of the membrane phospholipids. Other integral proteins contain covalently bound fatty acids that function as anchors in the hydrophobic lipid
bilayer. An important example is the farnesyl residue of the oncogene p21 ras (the mutant of the normal cellular small g protein) and the myristate residue of the v-src
tyrosine kinase oncogene (the mutant of the normal cellular protein c-src). The farnesyl residue is linked by a thioester bond to a cysteine residue four amino acids
from the C-terminus of the protein, and then the three C-terminal residues are cleaved off. Myristate is bound by an amide linkage to the glycine residue found at the
N-terminus. Cancerous transformation by such oncogenes requires the membrane-attachment function of these covalently attached lipids.
MOLECULAR ONCOGENESIS: CELLULAR SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION
Mutations that cause cancer are mainly those that alter the ability of the cell to maintain genetic stability, such as mutations in repair genes, or those that alter the
transmission of signals that control the machinery of cell growth and survival ( Fig. 1-7). The transmission of signals within the cell and from inside and outside the cell
is called signal transduction. Surface receptors are the sensors providing the cell's window to the outside environment. Most receptors fall into one of three general
types depending on the signal transduction mechanism used. Channel–linked receptors are ligand gated ion channels involved in rapid synaptic signaling. These
receptors belong to a family of homologous multipass transmembrane proteins. Catalytic receptors are activated by a ligand to operate directly as enzymes. Most of
the known catalytic receptors are transmembrane proteins with a cytoplasmic domain that normally accepts controlled signals from outside the cell and transmits
signals to the inside of the cell. Many of these proteins function as a tyrosine-specific protein kinase. An important example is the receptor for the EGF-related ligands
(EGFR). Included in the EGFR family is the ERB2/Neu receptor, which plays a major role in the biology of human breast cancers. When mutated, the RET oncogene
is activated and associated with both hereditary and sporadic thyroid cancers, and overexpression of the MET protooncogene leads to increased cell motility and
metastatic potential. Conversely, the normal function of the transforming growth factor-b pathway is to suppress growth and oncogenesis. When mutated, the
inactivation of the ligand or receptor renders the cell susceptible to transformation. Intracellular kinases that do not transmit signals across the cell membrane but
potentially within the cell are also important in oncogenesis. The ABL kinase is activated when participating in the bcr-abl translocation. The majority of these
transmembrane receptors normally transduce signals through the controlled phosphorylation of intracellular substrates, usually on tyrosine, serine, or threonine
residues that function as signaling nodes in a complex intracellular communications network. The control of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events are used
by cells to relay signals, amplify signals, and regulate pathways and to act by changing the conformation and, therefore, the function of the phosphorylated protein.
Any member of a signaling cascade can be a potential target for oncogenic mutation.

FIGURE 1-7. Control points in cellular regulation that can be targets for carcinogenic events. The following classes can become oncogenes: growth factors (I),
receptors (II), transducers (III), and gene regulation factors (IV). mRNA, messenger RNA.

A third class of receptors is the G protein–linked receptors. These sensors indirectly activate or inactivate a separate membrane-bound enzyme or ion channel. The
interaction takes place through an intermediary protein, the GTP-binding regulatory protein (G protein). The G protein–linked receptors activate a cascade of
downstream intracellular messengers. The messengers in turn activate or regulate other target proteins in the cell. Important intracellular messengers are calcium
ions, cyclic adenosine monophosphate, and phospholipids.
The Gs protein functions as a shuttle between two membrane proteins: the receptor for the stimulus and the downstream effort enzyme (adenyl cyclase), which
generates the second messenger. Thus, Gs is a signal transducer, relaying to the recipient enzyme the conformational change in the receptor triggered by the ligand
binding to the receptor ( Fig. 1-8). The Gs protein cycles between active and resting forms, which are determined by the state of its subunits. Gs is composed of three
polypeptides: an a chain Gsa, which binds and hydrolyzes GTP and activates adenyl cyclase, and a tight complex of a b chain and a g chain GBg, which anchors Gs
to the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane. In the resting state, Gsa contains bound guanosine diphosphate (GDP) and is coupled to Gbg. When GTP binds to
Gsa, it is hydrolyzed to GDP by the reaction: Gsa + GTP ®Gsa + GDP + inorganic phosphate. The change in the receptor conformation is passed on through the Gag
to the Gsa and causes GDP to be replaces by GTP. When GTP is bound to Gsa, the Gsa dissociates from the Gbg subunits. The Gsa, with its bound GTP,
undergoes a conformational change that enables it to bind and activate adenyl cyclase. In a resting cell, most Gs molecules contain GDP. Binding to a hormone or
agonist changes the conformation of the receptor protruding on the inner surface of the membrane. The altered receptor can now bind Gs, causing GDP to be
displaced and GTP to be bound. The GTP-bound form of Gsa then acts as a shuttle that translocates to bind adenyl cyclase and activate it to hydrolyze adenosine
triphosphate to cyclic adenosine monophosphate and inorganic phosphate. Immediately after activation of adenyl cyclase, Gsa hydrolyzes bound GTP to GDP and
returns to its coupled state with Gbg.

FIGURE 1-8. Cascade of molecular exchange events involved in the transduction of a signal through G protein–linked receptors. ATP, adenosine triphosphate; cAMP,
cyclic adenosine monophosphate; GDP, guanosine diphosphate; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; PPi, inorganic pyrophosphate.

All receptors that interact with a G protein share a common stretch of 22 to 24 hydrophobic amino acids that generate seven back and forth trans membrane a helixes.
A large loop between helixes 5 and 6 protrudes into the cytosol and interacts with the G protein.
In cancer, the most important G proteins are found in the ras family of oncogenes: N-ras, K-ras, and H-ras. Specific mutations of the normal cellular ras protein causes
it to be activated by disarming its GTPase activity. This renders the protein incapable of converting its active GTP-bound form into the inactive GDP-bound form.
Thus, mutant ras proteins are constitutively “on” and are oncogenic. The downstream consequences of ras activation are through the induction of cellular proliferation
and in enhancing cell motility. Ultimately, these membrane and cytoplasmic signaling molecules all converge to alter cellular transcription through the activation of
transcription factors (see Fig. 1-7). Oncogenesis can be initiated by a molecular lesion that disrupts this cascade at any level, from the ligand or receptor all the way to
the nuclear transcription factor ( Table 1-1). In cancer biology, there is ample evidence of direct mutational activation of transcription factors in the genesis and
maintenance of the cancerous state. Myc, AML1, MLL, and the homeobox proteins are all examples of altered transcriptional machinery in the induction of human
cancers.

TABLE 1-1. Selected Oncogenes and Their Proteins

DIFFERENT PATHWAYS TO CANCER
PERTURBATIONS IN SIGNALING
Viral oncogenes were the first evidence that host genes can directly cause cancer. Normal cellular genes (protooncogenes, identified by the c prefix) are “picked up”
or transduced by the retrovirus and mutated through the error-prone process of the retroviral replication. This results in a viral oncogene (v- onc) that is functionally
arrested in a biochemically activated form. Early studies revealed that the oncogene precursors, the protooncogenes, act as biochemical switches in the command
and control processes of a cell, specifically transmitting signals from the outside of the cell to the nucleus. The normal and controlled transfer of extracellular signals is
bypassed when one of the relay members is mutated and is made constitutively activated, resulting in the characteristic of a cancer cell—unmanaged growth. In

nature, one finds oncogenic mutations in members of signaling pathways. For example, the receptor tyrosine kinase (EGFR; mutated or overexpressed in brain and
epithelial cancers; related retroviral oncogene, v- erbB), when stimulated with one of its ligands, transforming growth factor-a (overexpressed in some human cancers),
interacts with ras (retroviral homologue, v-H-ras or v-K-ras; mutated in 10% to 20% of human cancers) through bridging proteins. Ras is controlled by
GTPase-activating proteins (oncogenic homologue is NF1, the gene involved in neurofibromatosis) and transmits signals by activating raf (retroviral homologue,
v-raf). Stimulation of the ras/raf pathway results in increased expression of the nuclear proteins jun, fos, and myc (retroviral homologues, v-jun, v-fos, v-myc; myc is
mutated and rearranged in lymphoid malignancies and amplified in breast cancers), which are proteins that can induce the expression of other genes (called
transcription factors). Thus, every relay node in this signal transduction pathway is a potential site for oncogenic conversion. The complexity of the transformation
process is reflected in the multiple parallel signaling pathways that are promiscuous in their selection of biochemical partners. For example, the receptor tyrosine
kinase HER-2 physically associates with itself or with related receptor tyrosine kinases, such as EGFR, HER-3, and HER-4; ras can be regulated by either
ras–GTPase-activating proteins or NF1; and stimulation of the ras pathway activates a number of mitogen-activated protein kinases.
THE WRONG PLACE AT THE WRONG TIME
In human cancers, mutations in protooncogenes result in altered function. However, inappropriate expression of structurally normal proteins that have no role in the
biology of a specific tissue can also lead to cancer. Several transcription factors are in this category: myc, tal-1/SCL, lyl-1, Ttg-1, and Ttg-2. These oncoproteins are
structurally identical to their normal forms but are either inappropriately expressed in the cell cycle or in inappropriate tissues. myc is expressed in all cells and plays a
role in cell division and differentiation. Activation of myc due to the t(8;14)(q24;q32) seen in Burkitt's lymphomas and B-cell acute lymphocytic leukemias deregulates
myc expression, and the exquisite control of myc transcription is lost. In lymphoid tissues, this leads to the expansion of pre–B cells in transgenic mice inappropriately
expressing myc, which ultimately results in the emergence of a lymphoid malignancy. Other members on this list ( tal-1/SCL, lyl-1, Ttg-1, and Ttg-2) are linked to T-cell
acute lymphocytic leukemia. In this group, oncogenic activation is through expression in an inappropriate cell type: tal-1 is normally expressed in erythroid and
myeloid precursors and not in T cells; lyl-1 is expressed only in myeloid and B-lymphoid cells; and Ttg-2 transcripts are found in liver, spleen, and kidney but not in
activated T cells. In these examples, the inappropriate expression of a transcription factor serves as a molecular switch to induce a malignancy.
RELEASE OF SUPPRESSION
Whereas protooncogenes are identified by a gain of function after mutational damage, another class of cancer genes, tumor suppressor genes, contribute to cancer
induction by a loss of function. To this end, tumor suppressor genes, such as the retinoblastoma gene ( Rb-1) and p53, block cellular proliferation, and each appears
to function through distinct pathways. Rb-1 negatively regulates the important transcription factor E2F, and the deletion of the Rb gene (seen in congenital
retinoblastoma) releases the suppression of E2F. p53 enhances the expression of p21/CIP1, which is a suppressor of cell-cycle regulatory kinases [cyclin-dependent
kinases (CDKs)]. Activation of these CDKs is necessary for progression through the cell cycle, and CDK inhibitors, such as p21/CIP1, block this process. Thus, the
loss of p53 and the attenuation of p21/CIP1 expression result in unmanaged progression through the cell cycle.
That both Rb and p53 are involved in the genesis of cancer is evidenced by the identification of germline mutations of these genes in individuals with cancer
predisposition syndromes, such as congenital retinoblastoma ( Rb) and the Li-Fraumeni multicancer syndrome (p53). As with oncogenes, the presence of a single
abnormal tumor suppressor allele alone is insufficient for cancer to develop; lesions at other genetic lesions are necessary. For example, both Rb and p53 may need
to be inactivated for some normal cells to be rendered immortal. The DNA tumor virus, the human papillomavirus (HPV) that is the causative agent in many cervical,
anal, and penile carcinomas, inhibits both these critical proteins through binding with and inactivation by the HPV viral proteins E6 and E7. In this manner, HPV
biochemically achieves the same outcome that carcinogens accomplish through inactivating genetic mutations. In colon cancers, mutations in p53 are frequently
associated with other genetic lesions, including those involved in cytoskeletal organization (APC), signal transduction ( ras), and cell motility (DCC) in the progress
toward an invasive cancer.
A tumor suppressor gene can be defined as any gene whose loss of function contributes to cancer progression. One category of suppressor genes are the inhibitors
of the CDKs, which are enzymes that control the progression through the cell cycle. They, in turn, are controlled by protein activators (called cyclins) and inhibitors
(called CDK inhibitors). The attenuation of expression of CDK inhibitors, such as p16, p27, and p57, has been associated with a diverse range of cancers, from lung to
head and neck, breast, and pancreas cancers, as well as melanoma. In malignant melanoma, the loss of both p16 alleles is found in most primary tumors, and
inactivating germline mutations in p16 segregate with familial melanoma syndromes. Therefore, CDK inhibitors, such as p16, maintain the normal cellular state by
regulating cell proliferation, and disruption of its inhibitor function leads to cancer.
CELL DEATH
Earlier on, the study of molecular oncogenesis concentrated on processes that stimulated growth. However, the accumulation of cancer cells can also be
accomplished by a decrease in cell loss as well as by an increase in cell proliferation. Current evidence suggests that the abrogation of programmed cell death
(apoptosis) is an important mechanism for neoplastic transformation. Certain cellular processes, such as cytokine signaling (e.g., tumor necrosis factor, interleukin-3
withdrawal) or DNA damage, can trigger a cascade of events culminating in activation of intracellular proteases. These activated proteases then lead to the regulated
cleavage of cellular components, including proteins and DNA, and ultimately to cell death. The cell exerts exquisite control of this process using redundant systems to
induce or block apoptosis, and some of these control switches are involved in cancer and cancer treatment.
The clearest example of an oncogene modulating the apoptotic process is bcl-2, found to be the oncogene involved in the t(14q;18q) translocation frequently found in
follicular lymphomas. bcl-2 blocks apoptosis when overexpressed or inappropriately expressed, and in lymphomas, translation involving bcl-2 may be among the
earliest oncogene abnormalities that act to prolong the lifespan of cells that are prone to accumulate genetic mutations. In experimental lymphomas, bcl-2 does not
cause cancer directly but is followed by rearrangements at other oncogenes, such as the c- myc, which result in accelerated progression of the lymphoma. This
bcl-2/myc interaction highlights another principle of oncogene action—that is, more than one cancer gene must be perturbed for a malignancy to arise. Other
bcl-2–related proteins have been identified, all of which are capable of physically interacting with each other as homo- or heterodimers. bcl-Xl, like bcl-2, is
antiapoptotic; overexpression of bax, bak, bcl-Xs, and BAD, however, actually induces apoptosis. Thus, the ratio of antiapoptotic to proapoptotic factors determine the
cell's “set point” triggering apoptosis. Significantly, this set point can modulate a cell's responsiveness to radiation and chemotherapy.
More recently, growth factor receptors and other surface signaling molecules have been shown to directly affect the apoptotic process. Many receptor kinases, such
as platelet-derived growth factor receptor and Met, recruit and activate the phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3-kinase). PI3-kinase activates the Akt protein kinase,
which supports cell survival through its phosphorylation and inactivation of BAD, one of the bcl-2–related proteins that promotes cell death. Therefore, augmented Akt
function induced by ligand receptor interactions is predicted to have an antiapoptotic effect. It is not clear why certain tumors genetically alter bcl-2 to alter apoptotic
potential whereas others use alternative biochemical pathways to accomplish the same ends. Nevertheless, it is clear that normal cells have self-policing mechanisms
that activate suicide programs. When the mutational load of a cell exceeds a critical level, self-destruct processes are activated. Cancer, however, may result when
genetically abnormal cells are not cleared but are allowed to proliferate, thus accumulating mutations potentially in important cancer genes.
GENETIC INSTABILITY
A characteristic of a cancer cell is its ability to generate and to sustain genetic mutations. Normal cells not only have the ability to identify and repair DNA damage, but
also to prevent the expansion of mutation-laden daughter cells by suicide mechanisms such as apoptosis. Defects in DNA repair found in rare disorders such as
xeroderma pigmentosum and ataxia-telangiectasia are associated with cancer risk. More recently, however, common human cancers have been linked to
abnormalities in repair processes. One example is the hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC) syndrome. HNPCC is an inherited syndrome characterized by
increased risk for colon cancer without the associated polyposis seen in carriers of another hereditable cancer syndrome, adenomatous polyposis coli. Affected
individuals with HNPCC show signs of a defect in the repair of DNA mismatches. Additions or reductions in the number of two nucleotide repeats found in human DNA
(called microsatellite instability) were clonally detected in their tumors. This type of DNA abnormality is a signature for a form of repair defect previously studied in
bacteria and yeast. When incorrectly paired nucleotides occur in a DNA duplex, either through misincorporations or nucleotide damage, cells use a mismatch repair
system to identify and remove the mismatch. This recognition and cleavage is mediated by the protein products of the MSH2, MSH3, MSH6, MLH1, PMS1, and PMS2
genes. HNPCC patients have primarily mutations in MSH2 and MLH1, although mutations in the other mismatch repair genes also are found. The clinical
consequence of this molecular defect in humans is the emergence of colon cancers that differ from the sporadic variety and that are characterized by fewer ras and
p53 mutations, as well as fewer allelic losses. Moreover, colon cancer in HNPCC patients appear to have a better prognosis than their sporadic counterparts.
Advances in molecular biology and their application to cancer research have yielded a wealth of new knowledge uncovering molecular mechanisms that can trigger
and sustain uncontrolled growth. From the clinical perspective, it is astonishing that the molecular pathways that lead to cancer can be different in different types of

neoplasms, in different tissues, and even in the same type of pathology. Nevertheless, elucidating each new molecular pathway involved in cancer provides strategies
for diagnosis, intervention, and treatment. Thus, a molecular understanding of cancer clarifies why curing this disease is so difficult, while at the same time, this
knowledge provides more precise targets for treatments in the future.
SUGGESTED READINGS
1. Hunter T. Signaling2000 and Beyond. Cell 2000;100:113.
2. Hurtley S. Frontiers in cell biology: quality control. Science 1999;286:1881.
3. Lewin B. Genes VII. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
4. Lodish H, Baltimore D, Berk A, et al. Molecular cell biology. New York: Scientific American Books, 1995.
5. Sobel ME. Introduction to molecular biology approaches to the study of cancer. In: Cossman J, ed. Molecular genetics in cancer diagnosis. New York: Elsevier Scientific Publ. Co., 1990:7.
6. Zou X, Calame K. Signaling pathways activated by oncogenic forms of Abl tyrosine kinase. Minireview. J Biol Chem 1999;274:18141.

CHAPTER 2 Essentials of Molecular Biology: Genomics and Cancer
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 2
Essentials of Molecular Biology: Genomics and Cancer
LANCE A. LIOTTA
EDISON T. LIU
Understanding Cancer at the Molecular Level: the New Frontier
Genetic Mechanisms of Cancer Progression: Cancer is a Genetic Disease
Cancer Genes: Models of Action
Molecular Profiling: Prognosis and Treatment Tailored to the Individual Patient
Postgenome Challenge for Molecular Medicine
cDNA Microarrays are a New Tool to Analyze Gene Expression Patterns in Human Cancer
Technology for Tissue Microdissection Brings Molecular Analysis to the Tissue Cell Level
Tumor Tissue Arrays
Beyond Functional Genomics to Cancer Proteomics
Chapter References

UNDERSTANDING CANCER AT THE MOLECULAR LEVEL: THE NEW FRONTIER
Genomic and proteome research is a new frontier for the molecular characterization of cancer. The ongoing revolution in molecular medicine can be divided into three
phases. The first phase is gene discovery, in which the tools of molecular biology are applied to identify and sequence previously unknown genes. Identification of
most of the expressed human genes will be accomplished before 2002. The second phase is molecular fingerprinting, which correlates the genomic state, the cDNA
expression pattern, and the protein repertoire with the functional status of the cells or tissue. The promise of this phase is that expression profiles can uncover clues
to functionally important molecules and will generate information to tailor a treatment to the individual patient. The third phase is the synthesis of proteomic
information into functional pathways and circuits in cells and tissues. This must take into account the dynamic state of protein posttranslational modifications and
protein–protein or protein–DNA interactions. Through an integrated genomic and proteomic analysis, the ultimate outcome will be an actual functional understanding
of the molecular events underlying normal development and disease pathophysiology. This higher level of functional understanding will be the basis for true rational
therapeutic design.
Progress in these three phases of molecular medicine is largely driven by new technologies. The development of polymerase chain reaction (PCR), high throughput
sequencing, and bioinformatics has been a driving force in the first phase. In the second phase, microhybridization arrays applied to genetic analysis and gene
expression are a powerful new tool that has entered the commercial sector and is becoming widely available to researchers. As more genes are identified, it is likely
that specialized arrays will be offered that are specific for a tissue type (e.g., mammary gland chip), physiologic process (e.g., apoptosis chip, angiogenesis chip,
invasion chip), or class of genes (e.g., suppressor gene chip, oncogene chip).

GENETIC MECHANISMS OF CANCER PROGRESSION: CANCER IS A GENETIC DISEASE
Cancer is a genetic disease. Progression from normal tissue to invasive cancer takes place over 5 to 20 years and is influenced by hereditary genetic factors as well
as somatic genetic changes (Fig. 2-1). Cancer progression is driven by a series of accumulating genetic changes. Some genetic oncogenic changes contribute to
uncontrolled growth or loss of senescence. Some oncogenes cause uncontrolled growth by activating persistent growth stimulatory signal transduction pathways.
Some oncogenes cause uncontrolled growth by altering critical nodes in the cell cycle. Uncontrolled growth can be caused by deregulation at the level of DNA
transcription factors.

FIGURE 2-1. Molecular progression of cancer. Microscopic premalignant lesions originate within a background of hereditary predisposition. Genetic instability leads to
molecular derangements that drive somatic genetic progression. Host interactions enable the cancer lesions to expand, vascularize, and metastasize. Diagnosis
usually takes place at a late stage when there is a high probability of metastasis.

Separate genetic changes (beyond those causing uncontrolled growth) are required for tumor invasion and metastasis. Invasion and metastasis form a multistep
cascade involving positive and negative regulatory pathways. Cancer invasion and angiogenesis are an uncontrolled version of physiologic invasion.
Genetic instability may predispose the premalignant cell to generate malignant offspring. Instability can take place at the macro level (chromosome karyotype), as well
as the micro level (DNA sequence copy fidelity repair). Chromosomal rearrangement can activate silent oncogenes or delete regions containing suppressor genes.
Loss of heterozygosity is a hallmark of suppressor gene inactivation in cancer progression. Telomerase defects may affect growth control as well as genetic instability.
Mutations in cellular DNA can activate oncogenes or inactivate suppressor genes. Defects in DNA repair mechanisms contribute to the accumulation of genetic
defects fueling cancer progression. Genetic defects causing an inhibition of cell death pathways are an important mechanism in tumorigenesis.

CANCER GENES: MODELS OF ACTION
Genetic alterations involved in cancer can activate inductive processes (oncogenes) or block negative pathways (suppressor genes). Early models of cancer genetics
categorized cancer genes into oncogenes, which are growth inducing, and tumor suppressor genes, which are growth suppressing. Thus, mutations in oncogenes
activate a promoting function, but lesions in tumor suppressors inactivate an inhibitory function. Examples of these models were the ras oncogene and the
retinoblastoma (rb) tumor suppressor gene. Mutations in codons 12, 13, and 61 in the ras gene result in biochemical activation of the protein product and an induction
of its transforming activity. Deletions or inactivating mutations in the rb gene lead to a compromised suppressor protein that is incapable of inhibiting cell growth.
Aberrations in both genes are found as somatic mutations in human cancers and, in the case of rb, also in the germline of individuals at risk for cancer.
Dominant oncogenes play a significant role in human cancers. Ras mutations are found in 10% of cancers and appear frequently in colon and lung adenocarcinomas.
Ret is a receptor tyrosine kinase in which activating single nucleotide mutations are associated with hereditary thyroid carcinomas. Myc, encoding a nuclear
oncoprotein, is involved in the t(8;14) translocation, which is etiologic for Burkitt's lymphoma. Inappropriate overexpression of myc is sufficient for transformation of
lymphocytes in transgenic models. Similarly, amplification and overexpression of the HER2/neu receptor tyrosine kinase not only causes mammary malignancies, but
is prognostic in human breast cancers. Although originally these oncogene abnormalities were thought to induce cancer primarily through unregulated growth, other
cellular phenotypes such as enhanced survival and motility may be equally important contributors to the cancer state.
It was also originally thought that tumor suppressor genes function mainly by inhibiting cell growth. Later, this was expanded to genes that block the emergence of a
tumor, but not growth in culture. More recent studies, however, have uncovered other mechanisms unrelated to growth by which tumor suppressor genes act to inhibit
cancer formation. In fact, it now seems that the inhibition of growth may not be the most important function of these genetic suppressors. Wild-type (or the normal) p53

is able to slow the proliferation of cancer cells in culture, and naturally occurring mutants of p53 lose this capability. However, many cell lines grow well with both
normal p53 and rb genes, suggesting that they are not necessary for cellular proliferation (reviewed in Chapter 1). In the case of p53, one of its major roles is in DNA
repair. As it appears, the regulation of growth is coupled with the regulation of DNA repair. When cells suffer DNA damage, cellular hibernation manifested by an
arrest at the G1 or G2 checkpoints permits repair to take place and prevents the accumulation of mutant sequences. 1 Cells harboring mutant p53 genes lose the ability
to arrest in G 1 after exposure to gamma irradiation or other genotoxins. 2 Mice with p53 gene disruptions are completely viable, but exhibit an enhanced rate of tumor
formation, and the abrogation of the G 1 checkpoint after exposure to DNA-damaging agents. 3,4 In addition, p53 appeared to be involved in two other critical functions:
genomic stability and apoptosis. Cells without a functional p53 show an increased ability to amplify their DNA. This measure of genetic plasticity is characteristic of
cancer. 5 In addition, a mutant p53 renders cells less likely to undergo apoptosis after cellular stress including gamma irradiation and chemotherapeutic agents.
Normal cells that experience a high level of DNA damage, overwhelming their repair capabilities, trigger cell death. This appears to be a mechanism to prevent the
accumulation of cells harboring mutant genes. Taken together, these data suggested that the primary role of p53 is not to regulate growth, but to maintain the genetic
integrity of a cell.
We know that other important tumor suppressors have similar policing functions. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are structurally unrelated genes with converging clinical effects:
Disabling mutations in either gene render an individual more susceptible to breast and ovarian cancers. Although both genes carry the hallmarks of a tumor
suppressor gene, their main function is not growth regulation. In gene transfection experiments, BRCA1 is able to inhibit cellular growth only under limited conditions,
possibly in cells with an intact retinoblastoma gene product. 6,7 In other experiments, however, BRCA1 and BRCA2 paradoxically appear to be associated with signs of
growth promotion. Both are increased at S phase, and mouse embryos that have either gene disrupted die in utero exhibiting an increase in the cell-cycle inhibitor
p21, a decrease in cyclin E, and a reduction in proliferating cells. 8 These data suggest that BRCA1 and BRCA2 serve to support rather than to suppress proliferation.
More important, however, is the finding that BRCA1 and BRCA2 are both associated with each other and with DNA repair proteins RAD51 and PCNA, especially after
DNA damage.9 The functional consequences of this association are exemplified by the experimental data. Cells from a BRCA1 null mouse are defective in
transcription-coupled DNA repair. 10 BRCA2 null cells are exquisitely sensitive to gamma irradiation 11 and to chemotherapeutic agents. 12 It is remarkable that two
structurally dissimilar proteins interact with the same biochemical entities and lead to similar disease phenotypes. Thus, the fundamental lesson learned from BRCA1
and BRCA2 is that the primary causes of breast cancer may be related to DNA damage and repair and not to excessive growth.
The primacy of repair over growth regulation is also seen in the MLH1 and MSH2 genes that are responsible for the syndrome of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
cancer. The respective gene products are involved in the recognition and repair of mismatches between complementary DNA strands: When these mismatch repair
(MMR) genes are mutated, the mechanism for the correction of nucleotide mismatches is defective. This defect leads to an increased risk of gastrointestinal
(especially colorectal) and endometrial cancers. 13
Oncoproteins such as p53 not only act to induce a cell-cycle arrest in order for DNA repair to complete, but also promotes apoptosis to eliminate damaged cells with a
high cancer potential. Therefore, an attenuation of the apoptosis mechanism is therefore likely to support transformation. The cancer susceptibility gene,
PTEN/MMAC, is an example of a genetic guardian whose primary function is to regulate cell death and survival. PTEN, localized to 10q23, was identified through
position cloning as the gene responsible for Cowden's syndrome. Cowden's is a syndrome characterized by gastrointestinal hamartomas, cutaneous trichilemmomas,
and increased rates of breast (25% to 50%) and thyroid cancers (3% to 10%), as well as uterine leiomyomas. Although germline PTEN mutations are distinctive for a
relatively rare disorder, somatic mutations leading to the loss of PTEN function are detected in a large number of sporadic cancers including high-grade gliomas,
thyroid cancers, and endometrial cancers. 14 Transfection of the wild-type PTEN cDNA inhibits growth in established cell lines, and mice with one disrupted PTEN
allele exhibit high rates of tumor formation, especially lymphomas, teratocarcinomas, and liver and prostatic cancer. 15 Thus, PTEN fulfills the classic criteria of a tumor
suppressor.
Functionally, PTEN is as a multifunctional phosphatase that removes phospho groups from tyrosine and serine residues as well as from phospholipids such as
phosphatidylinositol second messengers. The most important biochemical consequence of PTEN is to disarm the PI3'-kinase/AKT pathway. 16 AKT is a pivotal member
of a pathway that induces cell survival and motility and was originally found as a retroviral oncogene, v-akt, causing lymphomas in infected mice. More recently, the
AKT protooncogene was also found to be amplified in human ovarian cancers. It is thought that AKT phosphorylates BCL2 proapoptotic homologue BAD, resulting in
a block to apoptosis. 17 Mutations in PTEN result in an increase in AKT activity, rendering cells more resistant to cell death signals. This mode of cancer induction is
similar to the antiapoptotic effects of the bcl2 oncogene. Augmented levels of bcl2 expression associated with the t(14;18) translocation render affected B cells less
sensitive to apoptotic signals and more susceptible to be transformed. Thus, activation of the PI3'-kinase/AKT pathway, either through crippling the tumor suppressing
phosphatase, PTEN, or augmenting the activity of the AKT kinase, can lead to cancer. This is but one example of the biochemical intersect between classic tumor
suppressor and oncogenes that blur the taxonomic distinctions.
Our current state of knowledge of tumor suppressors shows a picture of complex interactions between multiple suppressor genes with oncogenes to generate the
malignant state. A dramatic example of the convergence of oncogenic processes is seen in the analysis of the transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b) pathway in
gastrointestinal carcinogenesis. It has been long understood that the peptide factor TGF-b can inhibit tumor formation, and that tumor progression is associated with
loss of response to TGF-b. This loss of response now appears to be due to the disruption of the type II TGF-b receptor. TGF-b functions by inducing heterodimers
between the cognate type I and II receptors (TGF-bRI and TGF-bRII), resulting in the phosphorylation of the type I receptor and activation of downstream pathways.
Markowitz and colleagues found that many tumors, especially colorectal cancers, harbor frameshift mutations in a short polyadenine tract within the gene that
generates a truncated TGF-b protein bearing defective kinase activity. 18 Interestingly, this frameshift mutation occurs most commonly in cancers with concomitant
aberrations in mismatch repair (MMR) as is seen in patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Moreover, this mutational switch occurs during the
conversion from colonic adenoma to malignant carcinoma. 19 Further downstream, the TGF-b signaling pathway requires engagement by the activated receptors and
phosphorylation of cytoplasmic SMAD proteins. Activated SMADs form heterodimers between SMAD1 or SMAD2 with SMAD4 and are transported to the nucleus
where they interact with DNA-binding proteins to induce transcription of TGF-b–responsive genes. 20 The importance of this pathway is that SMAD4, which is an
essential component in the TGF-b signaling pathway, has been found to be disrupted in 50% of human pancreatic cancers and to a lesser extent in gastric, breast,
ovarian, and prostatic cancers. 21,22 Thus, the TGF-b pathway alone engages three functional nodes with significant roles in human cancers: mismatch repair,
TGF-bRII, and SMAD4. The complexity lies in the fact that these elements are connected not only by biochemistry, but genetics and peculiarities in DNA sequence. It
is, therefore, with the use of many of the analytical tools described previously that these relationships can be uncovered.

MOLECULAR PROFILING: PROGNOSIS AND TREATMENT TAILORED TO THE INDIVIDUAL PATIENT
The concept of employing tumor characteristics such as histologic features as a predictor of best treatments has long been part of the practice of oncology. For
example, not only are the natural histories of the lymphomas different, but the requirements for optimal therapy are distinct: Burkitt's lymphomas require high-dose
alkylator chemotherapy to achieve optimal cure rates, whereas doxorubicin-based therapies are optimal for large cell lymphomas. 23
A significant refinement of this histology-based approach to selection of therapeutics has been the application of molecular markers and is best exemplified in the use
of markers in the treatment of human leukemias. With the availability of effective chemotherapy, it was observed that cytogenetic profiles could discern those who are
likely to respond. In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), patients with t(8;21), inv(16), and t(15;17) show the best overall survivals, whereas patients with del(5q)/5q-,
del(7q)/7q-, and inv(3) show the lowest complete response rates. Patients with 11q23/+11 abnormalities exhibit average remission rates, but a high probability of
relapse and low overall survival. 24
Many of the genes involved in these leukemia translocations have now been cloned and biochemically characterized. The t(9;22), characterizing common chronic
myelogenous leukemia, involves the translocation between bcr on chromosome 22 and the tyrosine kinase abl on chromosome 9. The chimeric bcr-abl oncoprotein
activates the abl kinase and the ras pathway and blocks apoptotic processes in hematopoietic precursors. 25 In acute lymphoid leukemias, one of the major discerning
factors also appears to be the presence of the bcr-abl rearrangement as exemplified by the t(9;22) translocation. The Philadelphia chromosome (Ph1) and the
resultant bcr-abl fusion gene is the single most common abnormality in adult ALL, accounting for up to 50% of the B-lineage disease. 26 Although bcr-abl–positive ALL
cases easily achieve complete remissions, relapse is uniform and the potential for cure using standard forms of chemotherapy is low. By contrast, bcr-abl
translocations occur only in 5% of pediatric ALL cases, and the low frequency of this adverse prognostic marker may explain some of the differences in survival rates
between pediatric and adult ALL.
In AML, the key gene involved in the t(8;21)(q22;q22) translocation found in AML-M2 through positional cloning is AML1, which is related to the Drosophila pair rule
gene, runt. Runt is a transcription factor that regulates the expression of specific patterns of the homeobox genes. 27 The human homologues of these homeobox
genes have been implicated in hematopoietic differentiation. 28 The normal AML1 binds to a protein partner called CBFb to exert its physiologic function as a
transcription factor. Coincidentally, translocations of CBFb are also involved in leukemias harboring inv(16) that generates the fusion protein CBFb-MYHII. This

biochemical interaction between the principal gene products of the t(8;21) and the inv(16) rearrangements is even more remarkable in that both translocations are
associated with favorable clinical outcomes, although the exact mechanism explaining this association remains unclear. Rearrangements involving chromosome
11q23, however, are uniformly associated with poor outcome and with short durations of remission. Initially described in the uncommon translocation t(4q21;11q23)
observed in both AML and ALL, this rearrangement creates a fusion oncogene mutating the ALL1/MLL gene (residing on 11q23). ALL1 is the human homologue of
another Drosophila gene, trithorax, a transcription factor that maintains specific expression patterns of the homeobox genes. Once the exact genetic mutation for the
chromosomal rearrangement was identified, other abnormalities at chromosome 11q such as trisomy 11 were found to contain perturbations in ALL1. 29 Moreover, the
importance of 11q aberrations in leukemias was further raised when a syndrome characterized by 11q23 translocations in secondary leukemias resulting from
etoposide treatment was recognized. 30 In every case, the clinical syndrome linked with 11q abnormalities and its associated ALL1 lesion is characterized by poor
clinical outcome.
For solid tumors, the development of tumor markers for the prediction of therapeutic response has been much slower. One impressive positive example, however, has
been the HER2/neu gene. HER2 gene encodes a 185-kD protein, which belongs to transmembrane type I tyrosine kinase receptor family including the EGF receptor,
HER3, and HER4. Clear evidence from clinical studies demonstrates that HER2 amplification or overexpression is a marker for poor prognosis for node-positive
patients. A major question, however, has been whether this poor prognosis is irrevocable or can be bypassed by some intervention. In 1994, the national cooperative
group, Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) published a preliminary study on 442 patients suggesting that the poor clinical outcome of node-positive breast
cancer patients with HER2 overexpression can be overcome by adequately dose-intensive regimens of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and
5-fluorouracil. The HER2-negative group, however, experienced no benefit from the cyclophosphamide, Adriamycin, and 5-fluorouracil dose escalation. Thus, the
beneficial effect of dose intensification was present only for the HER2-positive cohort but absent for the HER2-negative patients. In a parallel study, in which
node-positive patients were treated with cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, fluorouracil, vincristine, and prednisone (CMFVP) for four cycles, then randomized to
completing CMFVP or to vinblastine (Velban), Adriamycin, thiotepa, and fluoxymesterone (Halotestin), patients treated only with CMFVP showed worse survival if their
tumors overexpressed HER2. By contrast, patients given Velban, Adriamycin, thiotepa, and Halotestin showed no differential survival between the HER2-positive and
-negative groups. These data raised the possibility that the adverse effects of HER2 overexpression can be specifically overcome by effective doses of Adriamycin.
The most definitive test of the HER2–doxorubicin interaction was seen in two studies: the reanalysis of the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast Project trial B-11, and
the 10-year follow-up of the analysis of the complete cohort in CALGB 8541. 31 In B-11, node-positive breast cancer patients were randomized between L-PAM and
fluorouracil versus L-PAM, Adriamycin, and fluorouracil so that the only treatment variable was doxorubicin. Of the 638 patient tumors, 37.5% were scored as positive
for HER2 protein overexpression. After a mean time of study of 13.5 years, clinical benefit from the addition of doxorubicin to L-PAM and fluorouracil was apparent
only for HER2-positive patients. The completion study of CALGB 8869/8541 conducted by the CALGB looked at over 900 cases from the original CALGB 8869/8541
study with a median follow-up of 9.5 years. 32 Important in the analysis was that the HER2 determination was rigorously validated by concurrent analysis by
immunohistochemistry, differential PCR, and fluorescent in situ hybridization. Patients with HER2-positive tumors responded with improved overall survival when
treated with dose-intensive cyclophosphamide, Adriamycin, and 5-fluorouracil chemotherapy, whereas HER2-negative patients showed no benefit with dose
escalation. Although the mechanism of this interaction and putative resistance is unclear, there is evidence that inhibition of HER2 signaling is associated with a
decreased ability of the cell to repair DNA damage such is seen after chemotherapeutic exposure. 33
Thus far, we have centered on examples of how the molecular profile of a cancer may give information pertinent to response to standard chemotherapeutic agents. In
most cases, however, the mechanism for this oncogene-associated relative resistance or sensitivity is uncertain. However, many of the markers that define the profile
may themselves be suitable targets for molecularly based therapeutics. Given the surface location of HER2 on cells, and the overexpression that occurs mainly in
cancerous states, the HER2 oncoprotein represented one such attractive target for antibody-directed therapeutics. One such antibody, 4D5, suppressed cancer cell
growth both in in vitro and in vivo animal studies. 34 When coupled with standard chemotherapeutic agents, 4D5 showed additive and potentially synergistic
antiproliferative effects. The humanized form of the murine 4D5 antibody (Herceptin) was developed for clinical applications, and the initial phase II data showed
promise: As a single agent in pretreated individuals, Herceptin showed a 16% response rate with 4% complete responders, and a median time to relapse of 9.1
months.35 The subsequent phase III study was also significant. The study randomized individuals with metastatic breast cancer to chemotherapy alone or
chemotherapy plus weekly Herceptin. The results showed that patients treated with chemotherapy alone had a response rate of 32%, a duration of response at 5.9
months, and time to disease progression of 4.6 months. Those treated with chemotherapy and Herceptin exhibited an improvement in all measures: response rate of
49% (vs. 32% with chemotherapy alone), median duration of response of 9.3 months (vs. 5.9 months with chemotherapy alone), and time to progression at 7.6 months
(vs. 4.6 months with chemotherapy alone). 36 Thus, as predicted in the in vitro investigations, the combination of chemotherapy and Herceptin led to a more favorable
outcome.
Since oncogenes are signaling molecules that rely on protein–protein interactions to conduct their signals, interruption of these interactions was predicted to disrupt
critical pathways that maintain the cancerous state. Inhibition of the enzymatic activity of certain oncogenes, such as ras proteins and kinases, with small chemically
derived molecules has been both an attractive and ultimately successful approach. Some of the most notable clinical successes have been in the treatment of
leukemias. Acute promyelocytic leukemia is characterized by the uniform presence of a cytogenetic signature, the reciprocal translocation of chromosomes 15 and 17
[t(15;17)], which generates a fusion between the PML gene and the retinoic acid receptor-a gene (PML/RARA). The resultant fusion protein places the DNA-binding
domain of a nuclear protein PML adjacent to a truncated RARA that retains its ligand-binding domain. This observation immediately suggested a molecular
explanation for why acute promyelocytic leukemia occasionally responded to available retinoids. 37 This hypothesis was supported by dramatic reports showing clinical
remissions to an isomer of retinoic acid, all- trans-retinoic acid. In patients with newly diagnosed or relapsing acute promyelocytic leukemia, a 90% complete response
rate was seen with single-agent all- trans-retinoic acid. 38,39 This response is highly specific: all- trans-retinoic acid is ineffective in the absence of the PML-RARA fusion
protein. Another significant development has been the Novartis compound, the 2-phenylaminopyrimidine derivative STI571. Derived to inhibit the activity of the
activated BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase, STI571 was found to render remissions in the majority of patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia. In both leukemic
conditions, other standard chemotherapeutic agents are equally effective. However, the specificity of the drugs significantly avoided the side effects of chemotherapy
and underscored the potential of inhibiting a single molecular target to control extensive cancer conditions.
There is currently a rich developmental pipeline for these kinase inhibitors with many potential agents that will be ready for or have been in clinical testing. The targets
include the ras proteins PDGF and EGF and the VEGF receptors. The number and diversity of targets, however, make molecular profiling a necessary adjunct to
therapeutic decision making. Thus, a comprehensive approach for target detection will no longer remain solely of academic interest, but is predicted to become a
clinical necessity.

POSTGENOME CHALLENGE FOR MOLECULAR MEDICINE
Sequencing the human genome will provide new tools and insights that will enhance our understanding of the genetic mechanisms underlying cancer. 40,41 A major
objective of the Human Genome Project is the identification of the complete set of human genes. A leading method for rapid gene discovery is single-pass partial
sequencing of cDNA clones from one or both ends to generate expressed sequence tags. This strategy has been widely and successfully applied to humans and
other species. Before 1991 and the development of the expressed sequence tag method, sequence data existed for fewer than 3000 human genes. 40,41 Now that the
entire human genome sequence has been completed, the effect on science and society will be incalculable. 42,43 The combination of data on gene expression and
putative gene functions inferred from sequence similarities and motif analysis will provide a powerful means of assessing the transcriptional activity of the genome in
the cells and tissue before, during, and after disease. For the next generation of scientists and clinicians, identification of a new gene will be as rare as finding a new
species of mammal.
Completion of the human genome sequence is just the beginning. The current challenge is to generate a comprehensive understanding of the software and the
hardware of the cell and the organism. 44 Less than 2% of the noninfectious human disease burden is monogenic in nature. The rest (98%) is polygenic (caused by
multiple genes at once) or is epigenetic (caused by nongenetic or postgenetic alterations in cellular molecules). Consequently, elucidating disease mechanisms and
full penetration of the causal mechanisms driving carcinogenesis and cancer progression will require analysis tools ranging from direct DNA sequencing, mRNA
expression monitoring, protein sequencing, protein localization studies, and finally to metabolic or physiologic profiling.
A further essential phase will be a description of the normal range of human polymorphisms (base variations in the genome), which may provide a starting point for
correlating genetic variance with disease states. The final physiologic state is further complicated because biologic diversity causally associated with disease may be
due to posttranslational processes regulated by the cellular environment. These changes cannot be inferred from known DNA variance. Thus, a complete
understanding of the molecular basis of cancer depends on a multidisciplinary approach combining genetics, pathology, protein structure and function, cell biology,
and clinical medicine.
Finding all the expressed human genes is a different task from sequencing the genome itself. This is because only a small proportion of the genome actually makes

up the actual expressed genes and their regulatory elements. The actual number of expressed human genes may be 100,000. However, at any point in time, for any
individual cell in any given tissue, the amount of genes in use may be as few as 10,000. Of this 10,000, only a proportion may be susceptible to the influence of
carcinogenic events. Thus, an important goal for molecular profiling of cancer is to identify a subset of expressed genes that is correlated with, or causally related to,
the development and progression of cancer. Setting aside hereditary susceptibility, it is likely that the majority of cancers may originate in tissue that starts with a
completely normal genome. Carcinogenic events produce heritable genetic alterations that expand in microscopic premalignant states such as hyperplasia and
dysplasia, before frank malignant cancer ensues. Identification of the important genetic derangements and the causally important genes and proteins will depend on
direct analysis of actual human cancer tissues, combined with insights gained using animal and cell culture methods. The massive profiling of genes associated with
cancer progression is now possible using new technology for microdissection and array hybridization.

cDNA MICROARRAYS ARE A NEW TOOL TO ANALYZE GENE EXPRESSION PATTERNS IN HUMAN CANCER
Every oncologist is daily faced with the biologic heterogeneity of cancer emergence, aggressiveness, and treatment response in individual patients. Every pathologist
is daily faced with the enormous histologic diversity of human neoplasms. We assume that the morphologic microscopic appearance (e.g., staining pattern, nuclear
shape and contour, cellular configuration and pleomorphism) of a particular neoplastic lesion that spells cancer is the outward manifestation of molecular changes that
are occurring inside the interacting tissue cell populations. Scores of molecules and genes can be involved in the behavior of an individual patient's tumor. The
clinical heterogeneity of cancer mirrors the underlying molecular heterogeneity of the cancer cell. This is evident in the variable presence of chromosomal
translocations, deletions of suppressor genes, and numbers of chromosomes. Consequently, it is critical for molecular oncology of the future to adopt high-throughput
technology to survey panels of genes, ranging from hundreds to even the whole human expressed gene set, and apply this technology to the classification of tumor
pathologic entities in individual patients.
In response to this challenge, investigators in both the public and private sectors have been perfecting gene-chip arrays that can be used to survey great patterns of
gene expression. 45,46,47,48,49 and 50 The change in the pattern can then be correlated with histomorphology, clinical behavior, or response to treatment. Typically, the
analysis takes the form of rows and rows of oligonucleotide strands lined up in dots on a miniature silicon chip or glass slide or sheet of nitrocellulose. The
microarrays work as follows. First, the RNA is extracted from the tumor tissue, amplified, and labeled with a fluorescent or radioactive probe. This of course assumes
that the highly labile RNA is preserved when the tissue is extracted. The labeled total RNA, containing the mRNA of the expressed genes, is applied to the surface of
the chip or sheet. After appropriate hybridization, the relative intensity of the signal for each spot on the chip corresponds to the abundance of its matching mRNA
species and hence reflects the expression level for its gene. With appropriate pattern recognition software it is then possible to assemble a global score for the gene
study set represented on the substratum.
Tremendous progress has been made in the use of DNA arrays to analyze gene expression patterns in human cancer cell lines and human cancer tissue. Perou et al.
used cDNA microarrays to study 60 cancer cell lines used by the National Cancer Institute to screen anticancer drugs. 48 When they classified the cell lines based on
the gene expression subclasses, they obtained a correspondence to the ostensible cell type origin of the cancer cell line (i.e., epithelial or fibroblast or hematopoietic).
Specific features of the cell line expression pattern appeared to correlate with the growth rate in culture or drug metabolism. These investigators then went on to use
the cultured cell gene expression pattern as a template for comparison with RNA extracted from actual pieces of cancer tissue. They found that the gene pattern of the
cancer tissue varied greatly from one cancer type to the next. Moreover, the pattern of a carcinoma gene expression appeared to correspond with the cell lines that
had an epithelial origin. This study provided direct evidence that tissue pathology was heterogeneous at the level of gene expression patterns and offered hope that
this information could potentially be applied to predict patient outcome.
The first major clinical correlation of gene expression patterns with disease outcome was provided by Alizadeh et al. 45 Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, the most
common subtype of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, is clinically heterogeneous. Sixty percent of the patients succumb to the disease, whereas the remainder respond well
to the current therapy and have prolonged survival. This variability in natural history correlated with a distinct pattern of gene expression revealed by DNA arrays. The
group identified two molecularly distinct forms of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma ( Fig. 2-2): One had a gene expression pattern indicative of a B-cell differentiation
pattern. The second type expressed genes induced during in vitro activation of peripheral B cells. Patients with the germinal B-like diffuse large B-cell lymphoma had
a significantly better overall survival (see Fig. 2-2). This provides evidence that the molecular classification of tumors into general categories of gene expression can
potentially identify previously undetected and clinically significant subtypes of cancer.

FIGURE 2-2. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) clinical subtypes elucidated by DNA chip profiling. Hierarchical clustering of data from the chip profiling of
thousands of lymphocyte-relevant genes reveals gene patterns associated with lymph node germinal center B cells (GC B) and activated B cells. The patients with
activated B-like profiles underwent a much poorer overall survival. CLL, chronic lymphocytic leukemia; FL, follicular lymphoma.

TECHNOLOGY FOR TISSUE MICRODISSECTION BRINGS MOLECULAR ANALYSIS TO THE TISSUE CELL LEVEL
Molecular analysis of pure cell populations in their native tissue environment will be an important component of the next generation of medical genetics.
Accomplishing this goal is much more difficult than just grinding up a piece of tissue and applying the extracted molecules to a panel of assays. This is because
tissues are complicated three-dimensional structures composed of large numbers of different types of interacting cell populations. The cell subpopulation of interest
may constitute a tiny fraction of the total tissue volume. For example, a biopsy of breast tissue harboring a malignant tumor usually contains the following types of cell
populations: (1) fat cells in the abundant adipose tissue surrounding the ducts, (2) normal epithelium and myoepithelium in the branching ducts, (3) fibroblasts and
endothelial cells in the stroma and blood vessels, (4) premalignant carcinoma cells in the in situ lesions, and (5) clusters of invasive carcinoma. If the goal is to
analyze the genetic changes in the premalignant cells or the malignant cells, these subpopulations are frequently located in microscopic regions occupying less than
5% of the tissue volume. Following the computer adage garbage in, garbage out, if the extract of a complex tissue is analyzed using a sophisticated technology, the
output will be severely compromised if the input material is contaminated by the wrong cells. Culturing cell populations from fresh tissue is one approach to reduce
contamination. However, cultured cells may not accurately represent the molecular events taking place in the actual tissue they were derived from. Assuming methods
are successful to isolate and grow the tissue cells of interest, the gene expression pattern of the cultured cells are influenced by the culture environment and can be
quite different from the genes expressed in the native tissue state. This is because the cultured cells are separated from the tissue elements that regulate gene
expression, such as soluble factors, extracellular matrix molecules, and cell–cell communication. Thus, the problem of cellular heterogeneity has been a significant
barrier to the molecular analysis of normal and diseased tissue. This problem can now be overcome by new developments in the field of tissue microdissection.
Laser capture microdissection (LCM) has been developed to provide scientists with a fast and dependable method of capturing and preserving specific cells from
tissue, under direct microscopic visualization 50 (Fig. 2-3). With the ease of procuring a homogeneous population of cells from a complex tissue using the LCM, the
approaches to molecular analysis of pathologic processes are significantly enhanced. The mRNA from microdissected cancer lesions has been used as the starting
material to produce cDNA libraries, microchip microarrays, differential display, and other techniques to find new genes or mutations ( Fig. 2-4).

FIGURE 2-3. Laser capture microdissection. This new technology enables the investigator or clinician to directly procure pure tissue cell subpopulations under
microscopic visualization. A transparent polymer film is placed in contact with the surface of the tissue section. A laser beam activates the film over the selected cells
to actively capture the cells of interest and leave all the unwanted cells behind.

FIGURE 2-4. RNA isolated from tissue is reverse transcribed to cDNA. The sample cDNA is used to prepare cDNA libraries of the expressed genes in use by the
tissue cells or to probe cDNA arrays of known pathways. EST, expressed sequence tags.

Sgroi et al. 51 have combined LCM of breast cancer tissue with cDNA arrays, as an approach to the identification of genes that change their expression during the
progression of breast cancer. The group monitored gene expression in LCM-procured pure normal epithelium, invasive cancer, and metastatic tissue cell populations.
Differences in the in vivo gene expression profile were verified and validated by real-time quantitative PCR and immunohistochemistry. The combined use of LCM and
cDNA microarray analysis revealed genes specifically associated with the progression from normal to metastatic breast cancer cells ( Fig. 2-5). Since normal breast
epithelium is a minor component of breast tissue, this analysis could not be done with simple ground-up whole breast tissue samples. This study demonstrated that in
vivo gene expression profiling can be done on specific tissue cell populations, and that the results of the cDNA arrays correlated well with the real-time quantitative
PCR analysis and immunohistochemistry. Consequently, cDNA arrays can be used to uncover patterns that correlate with the biology and find lead candidate genes
that may serve as future markers or drug targets.

FIGURE 2-5. Molecular profiling of cancer premalignant progression. Invasive metastatic cancer emerges after a long premalignant phase that occurs in microscopic
regions of the tissue epithelium. Microdissection makes it possible to profile the molecular patterns that track all the way through from normal epithelium to metastatic
cancer in the same patient.

The development of the LCM allows investigators to determine specific gene expression patterns from tissues of individual patients. Pure populations of cells can be
obtained, RNA extracted, copied to cDNA, and hybridized to thousands of genes on a cDNA microchip microarray. In this manner, an individualized molecular profile
can be obtained for each histologically identified pathology. Using such multiplex analysis, investigators will be able to correlate the pattern of expressed genes with
the etiology, premalignant progression (see Fig. 2-5), and response to treatment. A patient's risk for disease and appropriate choice of treatment could, in the future,
be personalized based on the profile. A growing clinical database of such results could be used to develop a minimal subset of key markers that will lead to a
revolutionary approach for early detection and accurate diagnosis of disease.
Efficient coupling of LCM of serial tissue sections with multiplex molecular analysis techniques 52,53,54,55,56 and57 should lead to sensitive and quantitative methods to
visualize three-dimensional interactions between morphologic elements of the tissue. For example, it will be possible to trace the gene expression pattern along the
length of a prostate gland or breast duct in order to examine the progression of neoplastic development. The end result will be a new era in the integration of
molecular biology with tissue morphogenesis and pathology.

TUMOR TISSUE ARRAYS
Once a putative marker (or set of markers) is identified by cDNA array analysis of cancer tissue samples, the next step is to validate these markers in a large
population of human tumors. In the past, immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridization has been the method of choice to evaluate an individual patient's tissue
sections one slide at a time. Consequently, in order to screen hundreds of patient specimens, it was necessary to laboriously stain hundreds of microscopic glass
slides. This exhaustive process has now been telescoped into a high-throughput miniaturized tissue array. 52 The array consists of 1000 cylindrical tissue biopsies,
each from a different patient, all distributed on a single glass slide. Thus, each tumor is represented by a minute disk-shaped tissue section 0.6 mm in diameter and 4
to 8 µm in thickness (Fig. 2-6). Tumor arrays are ideal for comparing large numbers of solid tumor samples. Full automation of tumor array creation and screening is
envisioned as a means to expeditiously correlate marker levels over large study sets of tumors.

FIGURE 2-6. Tumor tissue arrays. Paraffin-embedded fixed tumor tissue in blocks is sampled with a punch to generate cylindrical cores. The cores are packed
together into a new block that contains a core from one of hundreds of different patients. The composite array block is sliced into sections that are placed on a glass
slide. The slide now contains hundreds of different tumor samples.

BEYOND FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS TO CANCER PROTEOMICS
While DNA is an information archive, proteins do all the work of the cell. The existence of a given DNA sequence does not guarantee the synthesis of a corresponding
protein. The DNA sequence is also not sufficient to describe protein structure, function, and cellular location. 53 This is because protein complexity and versatility
stems from context-dependent posttranslational processes such as phosphorylation, sulfation, or glycosylation. Moreover, the DNA code does not provide information
about how proteins link together into networks and functional machines in the cell. In fact, the activation of a protein signal pathway causing a cell to migrate, die, or
initiate division can immediately take place before any changes occur in DNA/RNA gene expression. Consequently, the technology to drive the molecular medicine
revolution into the third phase is emerging from protein analytical methods. An important goal will be to apply this knowledge at the level of human tissue itself ( Fig.
2-7).

FIGURE 2-7. Tissue proteomics. Proteins extracted from microdissected tissue subpopulations can be applied to quantify known proteins, to discover new proteins,
and ultimately to reconstruct signal pathways. PSA, prostate-specific antigen; SELDI, surface-enhanced laser desorption and ionization.

The term proteome, which denotes all the proteins expressed by a genome, was first coined in late 1994 at the Siena two-dimensional gel electrophoresis meeting.
Proteomics is proclaimed as the next step after genomics. A goal of investigators in this exciting field is to assemble a complete library of all the proteins. Only a small
percentage of the proteome has been cataloged in 2000. Since PCR for proteins does not exist, sequencing the order of 20 possible amino acids in a given protein
remains relatively slow and labor intensive, compared with nucleotide sequencing. Although a number of new technologies are being introduced for high-throughput
protein characterization and discovery, 54 the mainstay of protein identification continues to be two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. 53,54,55 and56 Two-dimensional
electrophoresis can separate proteins by molecular weight in one dimension and charge in second dimension. When a mixture of proteins is applied to the
two-dimensional gel, individual proteins in the mixture are separated out into signature locations on the display, depending on their individual size and charge. Each
signature is a spot on the gel that can constitute a unique single protein species. The protein spot can be procured from the gel and a partial amino acid sequence
can be read. In this manner, known proteins can be monitored for changes in abundance under treatment or new proteins can be identified. An experimental
two-dimensional gel image can be captured and overlaid digitally with known archived two-dimensional gels. In this way it is possible to immediately highlight proteins
that are differentially abundant in one state versus another (e.g., tumor vs. normal or before and after hormone treatment).
Two-dimensional gels have traditionally required large amounts of protein starting material equivalent to millions of cells. Thus, their application has been limited to
cultured cells or ground-up heterogeneous tissue. Not unexpectedly, this approach does not provide an accurate picture of the proteins that are in use by cells in real
tissue. Tissues are complicated structures composed of hundreds of interacting cell populations in specialized spatial configurations. The fluctuating proteins
expressed by cells in tissues may bear little resemblance to the proteins made by cultured cells, which are torn from their tissue context and are reacting to a new
culture environment. Proteins extracted from ground-up tissue represent an averaging of proteins from all the heterogeneous tissue subpopulations. For example, in
the case of breast tissue, the glandular epithelium constitutes a small proportion of the tissue: The vast majority is stroma and adipose. Thus, it has previously been
impossible to obtain a clear snapshot of gene or protein expression within normal or diseased tissue cell subpopulations.
To address the tissue-context problem, new technology is again coming to the rescue; tissue proteomics is an exciting expanding discipline (see Fig. 2-7). Two major
technologic approaches have been successfully used to sample macromolecules directly from subpopulations of human tissue cells. The first technology is LCM, a
technology for procuring specific tissue cell subpopulations under direct microscopic visualization of a standard stained frozen or fixed tissue section on a glass
microscope slide. Tissue cells procured by LCM have been used for highly sensitive and reproducible proteomic analysis using two-dimensional gels and other
analytical methods.
A second major approach to isolate tissue cell subpopulations is affinity cell sorting of disaggregated cells from pieces of fresh tissue. A highly notable application of
this technology in the field of breast physiology is the result of a collaboration between Oxford Glycosciences and the Ludwig Institute. In this study the investigators
separated and purified normal human breast luminal and myoepithelial from reduction mammoplasty specimens using double-antibody magnetic affinity cell sorting
and magnetic bead sedimentation. 55 After using enzymatic treatments and various incubation, separation, and washing steps, the investigators obtained purified
luminal and myoepithelial cells in yields of 5 × 10 6 to 2 × 107. Proteins from these cell populations were then analyzed by two-dimensional gels. A master image for
each cell type comprising a total of 1738 distinct proteins was derived. The investigators found 170 protein spots that were elevated twofold or more between the two
populations. Fifty-one of these were further characterized by tandem mass spectroscopy. The proteins preferential to the myoepithelial cells contained muscle-specific
enzymes and structural proteins consistent with the contractile muscle-related derivation of these cell types.
A pathologic hallmark of early cancer progression from carcinoma in situ to invasive cancer is the loss or redistribution of myoepithelial cells. The conspicuous
absence of myoepithelial cells in breast cancer progression could mean that these cells produce suppressor proteins that normally keep the malignant cells in check.
Thus, one or more of the proteins identified in tissue myoepithelial cells could be candidate cancer prevention molecules.
The complicated changing pattern of protein expression should contain important information about the pathologic process taking place in the cells of the actual
tissue. This pattern of protein information could provide correlates with pathologic state or response to therapy. Using a protein biochip which classified protein
populations into molecular weight classes, Paweletz et al. 58 showed distinct protein patterns of normal, premalignant, and malignant cancer cells microdissected from
human tissue.
Furthermore, they reported that different histologic types of cancer and tissue (ovarian, esophageal, prostate, breast, and hepatic) exhibited distinct protein profiles.

Such a means to rapidly display a pattern of expressed proteins from microscopic tissue cellular populations ( Fig. 2-8) will potentially be an important enabling
technology for pharmacoproteomics, molecular pathology, and drug intervention. Proteomic array technologies of the future will be used to rapidly generate displays
of signal pathway profiles (see Fig. 2-7). Investigators will be able to assess the status of defined pathways that control mitogenesis, apoptosis, survival, and a host of
other physiologic states. The information flow through these circuits, separately or through cross-talk, may dictate clinical behavior and susceptibility to therapy.

FIGURE 2-8. Surface-enhanced laser desorption and ionization (SELDI) analysis of laser capture microdissection microdissected microscopic stages of human
prostate cancer. This technology generates a protein fingerprint consisting of the distribution of molecular weights. In the example study set, the ratios of specific
protein peaks change specifically in the invasive carcinoma compared with the normal epithelium.

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. O'Connor PM. Mammalian G1 and G2 phase checkpoints. Cancer Surv 1997;29:151.
2. O'Connor PM, Jackman J, Bae I, et al. Characterization of the p53 tumor suppressor pathway in cell lines of the National Cancer Institute Anticancer Drug Screen and correlations with the
growth-inhibitory potency of 123 anticancer agents. Cancer Res 1997;57: 4285.
3. Donehower LA, Godley LA, Aldaz CM, et al. The role of p53 loss in genomic instability and tumor progression in a murine mammary cancer model. Prog Clin Biol Res 1996;395:1.
4. Harvey M, McArthur MJ, Montgomery CA Jr, et al. Spontaneous and carcinogen-induced tumorigenesis in p53-deficient mice. Nat Genet 1993;5:225.
5. Livingstone LR, White A, Sprouse J, et al. Altered cell cycle arrest and gene amplification potential accompany loss of wild-type p53. Cell 1992;70:923.
6. Holt JT, Thompson ME, Szabo C, et al. Growth retardation and tumour inhibition by BRCA1. Nat Genet 1996;12:298.
7. Aprelikova O, Liu ET ( submitted).
8. Hakem R, de la Pompa JL, Sirard C, et al. The tumor suppressor gene Brcal is required for embryonic cellular proliferation in the mouse. Cell 1996;85:1009.
9. Chen J, Silver DP, Walpita D, et al. Stable interaction between the products of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 tumor suppressor genes in mitotic and meiotic cells. Mol Cell 1998;2:317.
10. Gowen LC, Avrutskaya AV, Latour AM, Koller BH, Leadon SA. BRCA1 required for transcription-coupled repair of oxidative DNA damage. Science 1998;281:1009.
11. Sharan SK, Morimatsu M, Albrecht U, et al. Embryonic lethality and radiation hypersensitivity mediated by RadS1 in mice lacking Brca2. Nature 1997;386:804.
12. Abbott DW, Freeman ML, Holt JT. Double-strand break repair deficiency and radiation sensitivity in BRCA2 mutant cancer cells. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:978.
13. Papadopoulos N, Lindblom A. Molecular basis of HNPCC: mutations of MMR genes. Hum Mutat 1997;10:89.
14. Eng C. Genetics of Cowden syndrome: through the looking glass of oncology. Int J Oncol 1998;12:701.
15. Suzuki A, de la Pompa JL, Stambolic V, et al. High cancer susceptibility and embryonic lethality associated with mutation of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene in mice. Curr Biol 1998;8:1169.
16. Stambolic V, Suzuki A, de la Pompa JL, et al. Negative regulation of PKB/Akt-dependent cell survival by the tumor suppressor PTEN. Cell 1998;95:29.
17. Datta SR, Dudek H, Tao X, et al. Akt phosphorylation of BAD couples survival signals to the cell-intrinsic death machinery. Cell 1997;91:231.
18. Markowitz AM, Wang J, Myeroff L, et al. Inactivation of the type II TGF-b receptor in colon cancer cells with microsatellite instability. Science 1995;268:1336.
19. Grady WM, Rajput A, Myeroff L, et al. Mutation of the type II transforming growth factor-b receptor is coincident with the transformation. Cancer Res 1998;58:3101.
20. Massague J. TGF-b signal transduction. Annu Rev Biochem 1998;67:753.
21. Hahn SA, Schutte M, Hoque ATMS, et al. DPC4, a candidate tumor-suppressor gene at human chromosome 18q21.1. Science 1996;271:350.
22. Hata A, Shi Y, Massague J. TGFb signaling and cancer: structural and functional consequences of mutations in Smads. Mol Med Today 1998;4:257.
23. Shipp MA, Mauch PM, Harris NY. Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. In: DeVita VT, Hellman A, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology, 5th ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven, 1997:2165.
24. Mrozek K, Heinonen K, de la Chapelle A, Bloomfield CD. Clinical significance of cytogenetics in acute myeloid leukemia. Semin Oncol 1997;24:17.
25. Cortez D, Stoica G, Pierce JH, Pendergast AM. The BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibits apoptosis by activating a Ras-dependent signaling pathway. Oncogene 1996;13:2589.
26. Westbrook CA. Molecular subsets and prognostic factors in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemia 1997;11(Suppl 4):S8.
27. Look AT. Oncogenic transcription factors in the human acute leukemias. Science 1997;278:1059.
28. Magli MC, Largman C, Lawrence HJ. Effects of HOX homeobox genes in blood cell differentiation. J Cell Physiol 1997;173:168.
29. Caligiuri MA, Strout MP, Oberkircher AR, et al. The partial tandem duplication of ALL1 in acute myeloid leukemia with normal cytogenetics or trisomy 11 is restricted to one chromosome. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:3899.
30. Felix CA, Hosler MR, Winick NJ, et al. ALL-1 gene rearrangements in DNA topoisomerase II inhibitor-related leukemia in children. Blood 1995;85:3250.
31. Paik S, Bryant J, Park C, et al. erbB-2 and response to doxorubicin in patients with axillary lymph node-positive, hormone receptor-negative breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1361.
32. Thor AD, Berry DA, Budman DR, et al. erbB-2, p53, and efficacy of adjuvant therapy in lymph node-positive breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1346.
33. Pegram MD, Finn RS, Arzoo K, et al. The effect of HER-2/neu overexpression on chemotherapeutic drug sensitivity in human breast and ovarian cancer cells. Oncogene 1997;15:537.
34. Shak S. Overview of the trastuzumab (Herceptin) anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody clinical program in HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer. Herceptin Multinational Investigator Study
Group. Semin Oncol 1999;26:71.
35. Baselga J, Tripathy D, Mendelsohn J, et al. Phase II study of weekly intravenous recombinant humanized anti-p185HER2 monoclonal antibody in patients with HER2/neu-overexpressing
metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:737.
36. Slamon D, Leyland-Jones B, Shak S, et al. Addition of Herceptin (humanized antiHER-2 antibody) to first line chemotherapy for HER2 overexpressing metastatic breast cancer markedly
increases anticancer activity: a randomized, multinational controlled phase III trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:98.
37. Flynn PJ, Miller WJ, Weisdorf DJ, et al. Retinoic acid treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia: in vitro and in vivo observations. Blood 1983;62:1211.
38. Huang ME, Ye YC, Chen SR C, et al. Use of all-transretinoic acid in the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia. Blood 1988;72:567.
39. Degos L, Chomienne C, Daniel MT, et al. Treatment of first relapse in acute promyelocytic leukemia with all-trans retinoic acid. Lancet 1990;336:1440.
40. GenBank release 68, June 1991.
41. Adams MD. Initial assessment of human gene diversity and expression patterns based upon 83 million nucleotides of cDNA sequence. Nature 1999;377:3.
42. Murray RW. The Human Genome Projectand beyond. Analytical ChemistryNews and Features 1999, May 1:292.
43. Genes and justice; the growing impact of the new genetics on the courts. Judicature 1999;83, entire issue.
44. Hancock W, Apffel A, Chakel J, et al. Integrated genomic/proteomic analysis. Analytical Chemistry 1999;71:743.
45. Alizadeh AA. Distinct types of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma identified by gene expression profiling. Nature2000;403:503.
46. Golub TR, Slonim DK, Tamayo P, et al. Molecular classification of cancer: class discovery and class prediction by gene expression monitoring. Science1999;286:531.
47. DeRisi J, Penland L, Brown PO, et al. Use of a cDNA microarray to analyze gene expression patterns in human cancer. Nat Genet1996;14:457.
48. Perou CM, Jeffrey SS, van de Rijn M, et al. Distinctive gene expression patterns in human mammary epithelial cells and breast cancers. Proc Natl Acad SciU S A 1999;96:9212.
49. Ross DT, Scherf U, Eisen MB, et al. Systematic variation in gene expression patterns in human cancer cell lines. Nat Genet2000;24:227.
50. Emmert-Buck MR, Bonner RF, Smith PD, et al. Laser capture microdissection. Science 1996;274:998.
51. Sgroi DC, Teng S, Robinson G, et al. In vivo gene expression profile analysis of human breast cancer progression. Cancer Res1999;59:5656.
52. Kononen J, Bubendorf L, Kallioniemi A, et al. Tissue microarrays for high throughput molecular profiling of tumor specimens. Nat Med 1998;4:844.
53. Banks RE, Dunn MJ, Forbes MA, et al. The potential use of laser capture microdissection to selectively obtain distinct populations of cells for proteomic analysis. Electrophoresis 1999;20:689.
54. Emmert-Buck MR, Gillespie JW, Paweletz CP, et al. An approach to proteomic analysis of human tumors. Mol Carcinog 2000;27:158.
55. Humphery-Smith I, Cordwell SJ, Blackstock WP. Proteome research: complementarity and limitations with respect to the RNA and DNA worlds. Electrophoresis 1997;18:l217.
56. Gygi SP, Rist B, Gerber SA, et al. Quantitative analysis of complex protein mixtures using isotope-coded affinity tags. Nat Biotechnol 1999;17:994.
57. Page MJ, Amess B, Townsend RR, et al. Proteomic definition of normal human luminal and myoepithelial breast cells purified from reduction mammoplasties. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1999;96:l2589.
58. Paweletz CP, et al. Rapid protein display profiling of cancer progression directly from human tissue using a protein biochip. Drug Dev Res 2000;49:34.

CHAPTER 3 Essentials of Signal Transduction
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 3
Essentials of Signal Transduction
CHRISTOPHER L. CARPENTER
LEWIS C. CANTLEY
Introduction
The Sensory Machinery: Ligands and Receptors
Signals
Receptors
Propagation of Signals to the Cell Interior
Regulation of Protein Kinases
Regulation of Protein Phosphatases
Guanosine Triphosphate–Binding Proteins
Small-Molecule Second Messengers
Efficiency and Specificity: Formation of Multiprotein Signaling Complexes
Compartmentation
Domains That Mediate Protein-Protein Binding
Domains That Mediate Protein Binding to Membrane Lipids
Regulation of Protein Levels: Transcription, Translation, and Proteolysis
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Signal transduction is the chemistry that allows communication at the cellular level. Cells sense signals from both the outside environment and other cells and, in
response, they regulate protein expression and function. Protein expression is controlled by rates of transcription, translation, and proteolysis, whereas protein
activities are affected by location, covalent modifications, and noncovalent interactions. Signal transduction pathways regulate all aspects of cell function, but most
pathways target five primary processes: metabolism, cell division, death, differentiation, and movement.
In single-celled organisms, signal transduction pathways determine chemotaxis, mating, and adaptation to varying food sources. In multicellular organisms, signal
transduction pathways are necessary for embryonic development, and they regulate differentiation, division, and death in both the mature and developing organism.
Signal transduction pathways also control the particular functions of specialized cells (e.g., synthesis and secretion of insulin by the pancreas, migration and
phagocytosis by neutrophils) and the abnormal behavior of diseased cells (e.g., invasion and growth of cancer cells).
To emphasize the essentials of signal transduction, we have focused on the variety of solutions to the two common problems faced by cells and organisms in signal
transduction: (1) How is a signal sensed and (2) how are the levels and activities of proteins modified in response to the signal? Most signals are transmitted by
ligands and are sensed by the receptors to which they bind. Binding of a ligand to a receptor stimulates the activities of proteins necessary to continue the
transmission of the signal. Often, this involves the formation of multiprotein complexes and the generation of small-molecule second messengers. Integration of
signals from multiple pathways determines the cell's responses to competing and complementary signals.

THE SENSORY MACHINERY: LIGANDS AND RECEPTORS
SIGNALS
Signal transduction pathways have evolved to respond to an enormous variety of stimuli and to generate an equally extensive number of signals. Molecules that
initiate signaling cascades include proteins, peptides, amino acids, lipids, nucleotides, gases, and light ( Table 3-1). Most extracellular signals, such as growth factors,
bind to receptors on the plasma membrane, but others, such as cortisol, diffuse into the cell and bind to receptors in the cytoplasm and nucleus. Single-celled
organisms respond primarily to signals that arise from the environment rather than the organism, but they are capable of generating signals, as illustrated by the
mating pathway in yeast.1 Multicellular organisms respond to diverse signals produced from within. Signals can be a direct reaction to a stimulus, such as the
secretion of insulin by pancreatic b cells in response to increases in blood glucose. Signal release can be triggered by the nervous system in response to either
external or internal cues, as in the release of epinephrine by the adrenal glands in response to stress. Signals also can be continuous, such as those sent by the
extracellular matrix. Usually, signaling molecules are stored in the cell and are released to provide communication with other cells under specific conditions. Some
ligands are stored outside the cell (e.g., in the extracellular matrix) and become accessible in response to tissue damage or remodeling. Cells also respond to signals
that arise from within. Important examples include the checkpoint pathways that ensure the orderly progression of the cell cycle and the pathways that sense and
repair damaged DNA.2,3 When activated, these pathways lead either to cell-cycle arrest, so the damage can be repaired, or to cell death. Exactly how DNA damage
and cell-cycle abnormalities are sensed is not yet known, but many components of the pathways that transmit the signals are understood.

TABLE 3-1. Ligands That Stimulate Signal Transduction Pathways

RECEPTORS
Usually, signaling pathways begin with binding of a ligand to a receptor ( Table 3-2). Receptors can be located either on the cell surface or intracellularly. Ligands that
are on the cell surface or cannot transverse the membrane bind to receptors on the plasma membrane, whereas some ligands (e.g., retinoids or nitric oxide) that are
membrane-permeable bind to receptors inside the cell. Usually, cells are exquisitely sensitive to ligand-receptor binding. The affinity of receptors for ligands generally
is found to be in the pM to nM range, and very few receptors have to be occupied to transmit a signal. Many cytokine-responsive cells express only a few hundred
receptors on the cell surface. (Signal amplification, which allows signals to propagate to the entire cell, is discussed later in Efficiency and Specificity: Formation of
Multiprotein Signaling Complexes.)

TABLE 3-2. Receptors in Signal Transduction

Both receptors and ligands are multifunctional. Often, ligands can activate more than one receptor, and receptors can bind more than one ligand. The stimulation of
most receptors leads to the activation of several downstream pathways that either function cooperatively to activate a common target or stimulate distinct targets.
Generally, some of the pathways activated are counter-regulatory and serve to attenuate the signal.
Binding of ligands to receptors leads to a conformational change in the receptor that initiates signaling or oligomerization (or both). As a result of ligand binding, the
intrinsic activity of the receptor or of associated proteins is stimulated. Receptors can have intrinsic enzymatic activity or can associate with protein kinases, guanine
nucleotide exchange factors, and transcription factors. The receptor families used by eukaryotic cells in signal transduction illustrate both the diversity of receptor type
and how signaling is initiated.
Receptor Tyrosine Kinases
Receptor tyrosine kinases are transmembrane proteins that have an extracellular ligand-binding domain, a transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase
domain.4 The ligands for these receptors are proteins or peptides. Most receptor tyrosine kinases are monomeric, but the insulin receptor family are heterotetramers
in which the subunits are linked by disulfide bonds. Receptor tyrosine kinases have been divided into six classes, primarily on the basis of the sequence of
extracytoplasmic domain. Examples of tyrosine kinase receptors include the insulin receptor, platelet-derived growth factor receptor, the epidermal growth factor
receptor family, and the fibroblast growth factor receptor family.
Activation of receptor tyrosine kinases requires tyrosine phosphorylation of the receptor. Receptor tyrosine kinases transmit signals both by autophosphorylation of
the receptor and by phosphorylation of other substrates. Receptor phosphorylation occurs on multiple sites, some of which stimulate the kinase activity of the receptor
and others of which allow binding of downstream-signaling molecules. Ligand-dependent oligomerization of receptors brings the kinase domains into close proximity
so that they cross-phosphorylate. Often, this transphosphorylation locks the kinase into a high-activity conformation.
Ligands stimulate receptor oligomerization in a variety of ways ( Fig. 3-1). Some ligands, such as platelet-derived growth factor, are dimeric, so that the ligand is able
to bind two receptors simultaneously. 5 Other ligands, such as growth hormone, are monomeric but have two receptor-binding sites that allow them to induce receptor
dimerization. 6 Fibroblast growth factors (FGF) also are monomeric but have only a single receptor-binding site. FGF molecules bind to heparin sulfate proteoglycans,
which promotes dimerization of FGF and the FGF receptor. 7 Epidermal growth factor (EGF) also is monomeric, but it may have a second low-affinity receptor-binding
site, or receptor-ligand dimers may bind to a second receptor to allow receptor-receptor interaction and transphosphorylation. 8,9 Ligands not only stimulate
receptor-dependent signaling; some ligand-receptor interactions result in signaling by the ligand. Ephrins are ligands for the protein tyrosine kinase EPH receptors.
Ephrins are expressed on the surface of adjacent cells, and interaction of EPH receptors and ephrins both activates the tyrosine kinase activity of the receptor and
leads to stimulation of signaling by the ligand in the adjacent cell. 10,11 The insulin receptor is an exception to the idea of dimerization leading to activation. The insulin
receptor is a heterotetramer before ligand binding, and likely a conformational change brings the cytoplasmic tails in proximity or stimulates kinase activity (or does
both).

FIGURE 3-1. Dimerization of tyrosine kinase receptors. Most tyrosine kinase receptors are activated by ligand-induced dimerization. Some ligands, such as
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), are dimeric and induce dimerization using the two receptor-binding domains. Other ligands, such as growth hormone, contain
two receptor-binding domains in the same molecule. The fibroblast growth factors (FGF) rely on proteoglycans to aid the formation of ligand dimers. Some ligands,
such as the ephrins (EPH), are present on nearby cells and, when the cells come into contact, bind to the receptors and promote clustering.

Studies of the EGF receptor family illustrate some important concepts in signal transduction. The EGF-signaling pathways involve four known receptors (EGF
receptor, erbB2, erbB3, and erbB4) and many ligands. 12 EGF can stimulate homodimerization of the EGF receptor but, under certain conditions, heterodimerization
with other family members also occurs. The same ligand can activate different signaling pathways, depending on the subgroups of EGF receptor family members
expressed in a cell. For example, heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor stimulates mitogenesis but not chemotaxis when it activates the EGF receptor but is both a
mitogen and chemotactic factor when it activates Erb4. 13 Recent work also suggests that different ligands binding to the same receptors can activate distinct
downstream-signaling pathways. 14 These findings suggest that different ligands may cause distinct conformational changes that lead to the phosphorylation of
different sets of tyrosine residues on the receptor and could lead also to phosphorylation of distinct sets of substrates.
RECEPTORS THAT ACTIVATE TYROSINE KINASES. A number of receptors do not have intrinsic enzymatic activity but stimulate associated tyrosine kinases. The cytokine

and interferon receptors associate constitutively with members of the Jak family of tyrosine kinases. 15 The kinases appear to be inactive in the absence of ligand but,
as happens in receptors with intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity, signaling is initiated by ligand-stimulated heterodimerization of the receptors. 16 Dimerization of the
receptors brings the Jak kinases in proximity to each other or to other tyrosine kinases, and transphosphorylation leads to their activation. Downstream signaling is
dependent on the active Jak kinases phosphorylating the receptors and other substrates.
SERINE-THREONINE KINASE RECEPTORS. The transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b) family of receptors are serine-threonine kinases. 17 These receptors are

transmembrane proteins that have an extracellular ligand-binding domain, a transmembrane domain, and an intracellular serine kinase domain. TGF-b ligands are
dimers that lead to oligomerization of type I and type II receptors. The type I and type II receptors are homologous but distinctly regulated. The type II receptors seem
to be constitutively active but do not normally phosphorylate substrates, whereas the type I receptors are normally inactive. On ligand-mediated dimerization of the
type I and type II receptors, the active type II receptor phosphorylates the type I receptor and converts it to an active kinase. Subsequent signal propagation is
dependent on the kinase activity of the type I receptor and the phosphorylation of downstream substrates.

Receptor Phosphotyrosine Phosphatases
Like kinases, receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs) have an extracellular domain, a single transmembrane-spanning domain, and cytoplasmic catalytic
domains.18 The extracellular domains of many receptor tyrosine phosphatases contain fibronectin and immunoglobulin repeats, suggesting that some of these
receptors may recognize adhesion molecules as ligands. Several RPTPs are capable of homotypic interaction, but no true ligands are yet known for RPTPs. Most
receptor tyrosine phosphatases have two catalytic domains, and both are active in at least some receptors. Both functional and structural evidence suggests that the
phosphatase activity of some of these receptors is inhibited by dimerization. Normally, these receptors might be active as tyrosine phosphatases but lose that activity
after ligand binding. In this way, constitutive or stimulated tyrosine kinase activity becomes enhanced. Signaling by RPTPs is complicated because they do not always
function in opposition to tyrosine kinases. For example, CD45 is necessary for signaling by the B-cell receptor, which also requires tyrosine kinase activity. 19
G PROTEIN–COUPLED RECEPTORS. G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs) are by far the most numerous receptors. Of the 19,000 genes in Caenorhabditis elegans,

approximately 800 (or nearly 5% of the genome) are GPCRs, and nearly 2000 mammalian GPCRs are known. 20,21 The number of GPCRs is so high because they
encode the light, smell, and taste receptors, all of which require great diversity. These receptors have seven membrane-spanning domains: The N-terminus, and three
of the loops are extracellular, whereas the other three loops and the C-terminus are cytoplasmic. A wide variety of ligands bind GPCRs, including proteins and
peptides, lipids, amino acids, and nucleotides. No common binding domain exists for all ligands, and interactions of ligands with GPCRs are fairly distinct. 22 In the
case of the thrombin receptor, thrombin cleaves the N-terminus of the receptor, freeing a new N-terminus that self-associates with the ligand pocket, leading to
activation. Amines and eicosanoids bind to the transmembrane domains of their GPCRs, whereas peptide ligands bind to both the transmembrane domains and the
extracellular loops of their GPCRs. Neurotransmitters and some peptide hormones require the N-terminus for binding and activation.
The receptor appears to be kept in an inactive conformation by intramolecular bonds involving residues in the transmembrane or juxtamembrane regions. 23 In the
inactive state, the receptor is bound to a heterotrimeric G protein, which also is inactive. Agonist binding results in a conformational change that activates the guanine
nucleotide exchange activity of the receptor. Exchange of guanosine triphosphate (GTP) for guanosine diphosphate (GDP) on the a subunit of heterotrimeric G
proteins initiates signaling. Though GPCRs all activate heterotrimeric G proteins, this action ultimately results in the stimulation of other signaling pathways, including
protein tyrosine and serine kinases, phospholipases (PLCs A, C, and D) and ion channels. 24 Important recent work has shown that certain GPCRs activate receptor
tyrosine kinases. Often, stimulation of GPCRs leads to activation of the EGF receptor, which is necessary for the GPCR to activate the mitogen-activated kinase (MAP
kinase) pathway.
NOTCH FAMILY OF RECEPTORS. The Notch receptor has a large extracellular domain, a single transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic domain. Ligands for the

Notch receptor are proteins expressed on the surface of adjacent cells, and the primary target of notch signaling is activation of the transcription factor SuH in
Drosophila species or CBF-1 in mammals. Though the mechanisms by which Notch transmits signals have not been worked out definitively, it appears to be fairly
different from other receptors. 25 Current evidence suggests that the cytoplasmic domain of the Notch is proteolytically cleaved and translocated to the nucleus, where
it interacts directly with transcription factors.
GUANYLATE CYCLASES. Cyclic nucleotides are important second messengers and allosteric regulators of enzyme activities. The synthesis of cAMP by adenylate

cyclase is regulated principally by heterotrimeric G proteins, but the synthesis of cGMP is regulated directly by ligands. Plasma membrane guanylate cyclases are
receptors for atrial natriuretic hormone, and nitrous oxide binds to soluble guanylate cyclases in the cytoplasm. 26 Both stimuli increase cGMP levels.
TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR RECEPTOR FAMILY. The tumor necrosis factor family of receptors has a conserved cysteine-rich region in the extracellular domain, a

transmembrane domain, and a domain called the death domain in the cytoplasmic tail. 27 The receptors undergo oligomerization after ligand binding, which is
necessary for signaling. These receptors are distinct in several respects. Stimulation of the receptor leads to recruitment of cytoplasmic proteins that bind to each
other and the receptor through death domains. 28 They activate a protease, caspace 8, that initiates apoptosis, although they also can stimulate antiapoptotic signals.
This family of receptors also includes “decoys” or receptors that are missing all or part of the cytoplasmic tail and thus cannot transmit a signal. 29 This feature
provides a unique mechanism for inhibiting and further regulating signaling.
NUCLEAR RECEPTORS. Some ligands diffuse into the cell and bind to receptors either in the cytoplasm or the nucleus. These ligands include steroids, eicosanoids,

retinoids, and thyroid hormone. 30 The receptors for these ligands are transcription factors that have both DNA and ligand-binding domains. The unliganded receptor is
bound to heat-shock proteins, from which they release after ligand binding. Release from the chaperone complex and ligand binding allow the DNA-binding domain to
contact DNA and the receptors to regulate transcription directly.
ADHESION RECEPTORS. Cell adherence via integrins either to the extracellular matrix or to other cells is mediated by receptors that function mechanically and stimulate

intracellular signaling pathways, primarily through tyrosine kinases. 31 Integrins are composed of heterodimers of a and b subunits and bind to an argenine, glycine,
aspartate (RGD) motif found in matrix molecules. Activation of integrin signaling involves both binding to ligand and clustering of integrins. Ligand binding can be
stimulated also by intracellular signals, presumably by a change in conformation of the integrin. Integrin signaling is necessary for cell movement but, in contrast to
many other pathways, adherence provides a continuous signal to cells. This signal appears to be necessary for survival of many cell types. The ability to circumvent
the requirement for adherence-dependent survival plays a major role in the development of human cancers by allowing tumor survival in inappropriate locations.

PROPAGATION OF SIGNALS TO THE CELL INTERIOR
Eukaryotic cells use a varied collection of receptors and ligands to initiate cell signaling. Binding of ligands to receptors may stimulate an intrinsic enzymatic activity of
the receptor-like protein tyrosine or serine kinases or the guanine nucleotide exchange activity of GPCR. Other receptors do not have intrinsic enzymatic activity, but
ligand binding results in activation of downstream enzymes (e.g., proteases by the tumor necrosis factor receptor family or protein tyrosine kinases by the cytokine
receptors). Signals are transmitted by all receptors by affecting the function of downstream proteins ( Table 3-3). The function of intracellular signaling proteins is
regulated by covalent modifications, by noncovalent binding of other proteins and small molecules, and by the level of protein expression.

TABLE 3-3. Enzyme Classes Stimulated by Active Receptors

REGULATION OF PROTEIN KINASES
Proteins undergo many covalent modifications, but phosphorylation is the most common covalent modification involved in the regulation of protein function. Both
phosphorylation by kinases and addition of a phosphate moiety in the form of GTP exchange for GDP result in conformational changes that regulate protein activity
(Fig. 3-2). Proteolysis is less common in the activation of signaling pathways but is necessary for some pathways (e.g., apoptosis) and also is an important pathway
by which signals are attenuated.

FIGURE 3-2. Regulation of protein activity by phosphate. The activity of many proteins is regulated by phosphate. The exchange of guanosine triphosphate (GTP) for
guanosine diphosphate (GDP) bound to G proteins induces an activating conformational change dependent on the additional g phosphate of GTP. This reaction is
catalyzed by guanine nucleotide exchange factors. GTPase-activating proteins (GAP) accelerate the hydrolysis of GTP to GDP to remove the g phosphate and
attenuate G protein signaling. Protein kinases add phosphate to proteins that can result in conformational changes and changes in enzymatic activity. The phosphate
can be removed by protein phosphatases to inhibit the signal. Both G proteins and protein kinase substrates undergo a similar cycle of phosphate addition and
removal to regulate their activity. ADP, adenosine diphosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; GEF, guanine nucleotide exchange factor.

The balance between kinase and phosphatase activity controls protein phosphorylation. 32 Protein kinases themselves, transcription factors, and cytoskeletal
components are a few examples of proteins regulated by phosphorylation. Most protein kinases in eukaryotic cells are divided into three classes on the basis of
residues they phosphorylate: protein tyrosine kinases, protein serine-threonine kinases, and dual-specificity kinases that phosphorylate serine, threonine and tyrosine
residues. Important issues in understanding the role and regulation of protein phosphorylation are how specificities of kinases and phosphatases are determined and
how phosphorylation alters the function of proteins. Recent work at both the structural and functional levels provides preliminary answers to these questions.
Most signal transduction pathways activate tyrosine kinases, either directly (as in the case of receptor tyrosine kinases) or indirectly. Phosphorylation of proteins on
tyrosine can result in either the stimulation or inhibition of enzymatic activity or can provide sites for protein-protein interaction. An example of how tyrosine
phosphorylation regulates enzymatic activity is the Src family of protein tyrosine kinases, which are regulated both positively and negatively by tyrosine
phosphorylation. 33 Phosphorylation of a tyrosine residue in the C-terminus leads to an intramolecular bond involving this phosphotyrosine and the Src homology 2
(SH2) domain that blocks access of substrate to the catalytic domain. In contrast, phosphorylation of a tyrosine in the T loop of the catalytic domain stimulates the
kinase activity by stabilizing the catalytic pocket in an active conformation.
A common theme in the regulation of the activity of both tyrosine and serine-threonine protein kinases is phosphorylation of the T loop as a mechanism of activation.
The T loop forms a lip of the catalytic pocket and may occlude the active site, preventing access of the substrate. In the case of the insulin receptor, the
unphosphorylated T loop also appears to interfere with adenosine triphosphate (ATP) binding. 34 Crystallographic studies indicate that the T loop is mobile and thus
probably is not always in an inhibitory confirmation; hence, a kinase has some constitutive activity. This low level of activity is sufficient to phosphorylate a nearby
kinase (e.g., autophosphorylation of a partner in a dimeric receptor). After phosphorylation, the T loop undergoes a conformational change that allows substrate
access to the catalytic site.
Once a protein kinase is active, only specific substrates are phosphorylated. This specificity rests on two properties: colocalization of the kinase with the substrate
(discussed later in Efficiency and Specificity: Formation of Multiprotein Signaling Complexes ) and the presence of sequences in a potential substrate that can be
phosphorylated by the kinase. Though protein kinases appear to phosphorylate many substrates in vitro, particular motifs have been identified that in some cases
govern absolutely whether a protein will be a substrate, such as a proline following a serine or threonine for substrates of MAP kinases. 35,36 In other cases, particular
motifs are favored as phosphorylation sites. 37,38 Likely these motifs fit best into the catalytic cleft of the kinase. In some cases, sequences distant from the site of
phosphorylation can mediate low-affinity association of a kinase with a substrate and thus can enhance phosphorylation.
Most signaling pathways also activate serine kinases, but a higher level of constitutive phosphorylation of proteins occurs on serine and threonine. Still unclear is how
much of this basal phosphorylation is involved in regulation of the activity or location of proteins and how much might be irrelevant. Myriad cellular functions are
regulated by serine phosphorylation ranging from the activity of transcription factors and enzymes to the polymerization of actin. Serine kinases themselves are
regulated in a variety of ways. Mammalian serine-threonine kinases have been subdivided into 11 subfamilies, on the basis of primary sequence homology, which has
been predictive also of related function. 39 Location, phosphorylation, and ligand binding regulate serine kinases. Activation by ligand binding separates some classes
of serine protein kinases. For example, cyclic nucleotides (e.g., cAMP) activate the protein kinase A (PKA) superfamily. 40 Calcium and diacylglycerol activate
members of the protein kinase C family. 41 The akt family is activated by phosphatidylinositol phosphate products of phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3-kinase), which
allows phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1) to phosphorylate the activation, or T loop. 42 Association with cyclins activates the cyclin-dependent kinase family,
and the calcium-calmodulin-dependent kinases are activated by calcium. 43,44 Kinase cascades also are important in allowing multiple levels of regulation and
amplification of serine kinase activity. For example, MAP kinases are activated by phosphorylation of the T loop after activation of upstream kinases: Activation of Raf
leads to phosphorylation and activation of MEK1, which phosphorylates and activates the ERKs ( Fig. 3-3).45

FIGURE 3-3. Activation of the MAP kinase pathway. Many receptors activate the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAP kinases). Most receptor tyrosine kinases
stimulate the activity of the Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factor son of sevenless (SOS), which associates with the linker proteins Shc and Grb2. The activation of
Ras by SOS stimulates a protein serine kinase cascade initiated by Raf, which stimulates MEK. MEK then activates the MAP kinases. MAP kinases phosphorylate
transcription factors to regulate gene expression. GDP, guanosine diphosphate; GTP, guanosine triphosphate.

REGULATION OF PROTEIN PHOSPHATASES
Protein phosphatases remove the phosphate residues from proteins and can either activate or inactivate signaling pathways, depending on the sites that are
dephosphorylated. Protein phosphatases can be divided into the same three groups as are the kinases, on the basis of their substrates: tyrosine phosphatases,
serine-threonine phosphatases, and dual-specificity phosphatases. Tyrosine phosphatases and dual-specificity phosphatases use a cysteinylphosphate intermediate,
whereas the serine-threonine phosphatases are metal-requiring enzymes that dephosphorylate in a single step. 46,47
Recent structural work has revealed how the activity of some nonreceptor tyrosine phosphatases is regulated. The SHP-2 phosphatase has, in addition to the catalytic
domain, two SH2 domains. These domains (discussed in more detail in Domains That Mediate Protein-Protein Binding ) mediate binding to other proteins by direct
association with phosphorylated tyrosine residues. In the inactive state, the catalytic cleft of SHP-2 is blocked by the N-terminal SH2 domain. 48 Binding of the

N-terminal SH2 domain to a phosphotyrosine residue of a target protein induces a conformational change that allows substrate access to the catalytic domain.
Tyrosine phosphatases act both to attenuate signals that require tyrosine phosphorylation and to activate pathways inhibited by tyrosine phosphorylation. An example
of the negative regulatory function of tyrosine phosphatases is the role of SHP-1 (a homolog of SHP-2) in inhibiting cytokine and B-cell receptor signaling. In contrast,
SHP-2 is necessary for cytokine stimulation of cells. On the basis of the ability of phosphatase inhibitors (e.g., vanadate) to activate tyrosine kinase-dependent
signaling in the absence of ligands, acute inactivation of specific tyrosine phosphatases may play a more important role than previously appreciated in regulating the
balance of tyrosine phosphorylation and dephosphorylation that controls signaling pathways.
Protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), PP2A, PP2B, and PP2C are the major serine-threonine phosphatase activities in vivo.49 Both PP1 and PP2A are composed of catalytic
and regulatory subunits. PP1 is involved in regulating many pathways, from glycogen metabolism to the cell cycle. PP2B binds to calmodulin and is regulated by
calcium. Phosphorylation of either the regulatory or catalytic subunit regulates the activity of many serine phosphatases. More than 100 PP1 regulatory subunits
function to target the catalytic domain to different cellular locations and mediate activation or inhibition. This action provides an example of how a single catalytic
activity can perform multiple specific functions as a result of targeting by a regulatory subunit.
GUANOSINE TRIPHOSPHATE–BINDING PROTEINS
Just as covalent modification as a mechanism of protein activity regulation is important, so is noncovalent binding to proteins. A number of small molecules regulate
protein function, as does protein-protein interaction. G proteins are the best-studied protein mediators that regulate other proteins.
GTP-binding proteins function as digital switches. They are inactive when bound to GDP, but GTP binding results in a conformational change that allows binding to
effector molecules and transmission of a signal (see Fig. 3-2). GTP-binding proteins regulate the same molecules activated by receptors: protein and lipid kinases,
phosphatases, and phospholipases. GTP-binding proteins are categorized into two large classes: the heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins and the Ras-like
GTP-binding proteins. Activation of GTP-binding proteins is regulated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors that catalyze the release of GDP and allow GTP to bind
to and activate the protein. GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) accelerate GTP hydrolysis and regulate inactivation of GTP-binding proteins. All GTP-binding proteins
have lipid modifications that promote membrane association.
Heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins have three subunits and are activated by GPCR. 23 In the inactive state, the a, b, and g subunits are associated as a heterotrimer.
In mammalian cells, 20 a subunits, 6 b subunits, and 12 g subunits are known. The heterotrimeric forms are divided into four classes on the basis of function. Gs
stimulates adenylate cyclase, Gi inhibits adenylate cyclase, Gq activates phospholipase C b, and G12 and G13 form a group whose function is not yet known.
Activation of GPCR allows them to catalyze GDP/GTP exchange of the a subunit of heterotrimeric G proteins. In response to GTP loading of the a subunit, the a and
b/g subunits dissociate. The b and g subunits do not dissociate in vivo. Both the a subunit and the b/g complex send signals. The a subunit undergoes a
conformational change in response to GTP that allows it to bind to effectors. 50 The b/g dimer does not undergo a conformational change, but release from the a
subunit exposes surfaces that allows it to bind to effectors. 51,52 Both the a and b/g subunits affect the activity of a wide range of downstream effectors, including ion
channels, protein kinases, and phospholipases. Domains termed regulators of G protein signaling act as GAPs toward the a subunit and attenuate the signal by
catalyzing hydrolysis of GTP to GDP. 53
Ras-like GTP-binding proteins are monomeric and of lower molecular weight than are the heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins. Ras-like GTP-binding proteins are
classified into five families: the Ras, Rho, Rab, Arf, and Ran families. 54 The Ras and Rho families regulate cell growth, transcription, and the actin cytoskeleton; the
Arf family regulates phospholipase D and vesicle trafficking; the Rab family regulates vesicle trafficking; and the Ran family regulates nuclear import. 55,56,57,58 and 59
Ras-like GTP-binding proteins are activated in a manner similar to that of the a subunit of heterotrimeric G proteins. 60 Exchange of GTP for GDP results in a
conformational change that promotes binding to effector molecules. 61 In contrast to heterotrimeric G proteins, nucleotide exchange for Ras-like GTP-binding proteins
is not catalyzed by receptors. Specific exchange factors are activated downstream of receptors or in response to specific cellular events. Signals are attenuated by
the action of GAPs, analogous to regulators of the G protein–signaling domain-containing proteins that catalyze GTP hydrolysis.
GTP-binding proteins affect the activity of their targets by causing conformational changes and perhaps by serving to localize the target. Recent crystal structures of
the catalytic domain of adenylate cyclase bound to G proteins illustrate the conformational change. 62 Gsa binds to the C2a domain of adenylate cyclase, causing
rotation of the C1a domain, which likely positions the catalytic residues more favorably for conversion of ATP to cAMP. Though crystal structures of small G proteins
bound to portions of their targets also have been solved, the effect on the activity of target molecules as a result of binding has not yet been explained. Studies of the
role of Ras in the interaction of Raf suggest that an important role of Ras is localization of Raf to the membrane, but Ras also may help to activate Raf directly. 63
SMALL-MOLECULE SECOND MESSENGERS
Many small molecules transmit signals by binding noncovalently to protein targets and affecting their function. Many of these molecules are called second
messengers because they are generated within the cell in response to a first messenger, such as a growth factor, binding to a cell surface receptor. Both the
generation and attenuation of small-molecule signals is regulated. Our review of the role of several small molecules in signal transduction pathways is not meant to be
comprehensive.
cAMP was the first second messenger discovered.64 Adenylate cyclase, activated by heterotrimeric G proteins, catalyzes the synthesis of cAMP from ATP. 65 The
primary target of cAMP is protein kinase A, and the activation of protein kinase A by cAMP demonstrates how second messengers function. 40 The inactive form of
protein kinase A is a tetramer of two catalytic and two regulatory subunits; the regulatory subunit inhibits the activity of the catalytic subunit. The regulatory subunit
contains two cAMP-binding sites. Binding of cAMP to the first site causes a conformational change that exposes the second site. Binding of cAMP to the second site
causes dissociation of the regulatory and catalytic subunits. The free catalytic subunits are then active.
Many activated receptors stimulate phospholipases C. 66 All three families of phospholipases C (PLC)—b, g, and d—are activated by calcium. PLC b is activated by
both the a and the b/g subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins, and PLC g is activated by tyrosine phosphorylation. The regulation of PLC d is not as well understood.
Phospholipases C cleave PtdIns-4,5-P 2 to produce diacylglycerol and inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate, resulting in a bipartite signal. Diacylglycerol interacts with the C1
domain of protein kinases C to mediate their membrane localization and activation. Inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate binds to a calcium channel in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) and stimulates the release of calcium from intracellular stores. 67 The initial increase in cytoplasmic calcium is followed by an influx of extracellular
calcium via capacitive calcium channels at the plasma membrane. 68 Still unclear is how the capacitive calcium channels are activated. In unstimulated cells, cytosolic
calcium is much lower than in the extracellular space or ER (100 n M versus 1 mM), so opening channels in the endoplasmic reticulum or plasma membrane allows
calcium to flood into the cytoplasm, temporarily raising the cytoplasmic calcium to micromolar concentrations. Ultimately, calcium returns to basal levels as a result of
closing the channels, which increases extracellular transport and pumping calcium into intracellular sites in the ER and mitochondria. Calcium has a multitude of
cellular effects, including directly regulating enzymatic activities, ion channels, and transcription. Several calcium-binding domains are known, including the C2
domain and EF hands. Calcium binds directly to enzymes and regulates their activity or it can bind to regulatory subunits, such as calmodulin.
Eicosanoids are ubiquitous signaling molecules that bind to both GPCR and transcription factors. Eicosanoid synthesis occurs in response to a number of stimuli and
is an example of rapid cell-to-cell signaling. Unlike most second messengers, eicosanoids produced in one cell can escape that cell and diffuse to nearby cells and
either bind to receptors or be metabolized further. Eicosanoid synthesis is regulated by the production of arachidonic acid, which can be produced from diacylglycerol
(DAG) via diglyceride lipases or from phospholipids by phospholipases A. 69 Phospholipases A2 cleave the sn-2 acyl group of phospholipids to produce a free fatty
acid and a lysophospholipid. The calcium-regulated form of PLA2 shows a preference for substrates containing arachidonic acid. The further metabolism of
arachidonic acid results in the synthesis of prostaglandins and leukotrienes.

EFFICIENCY AND SPECIFICITY: FORMATION OF MULTIPROTEIN SIGNALING COMPLEXES
COMPARTMENTATION
The ability of a signal transduction pathway to transmit a signal or to stimulate flux through a pathway is dependent on the probability that a protein finds its target.
The likelihood of any two proteins coming into contact is proportional to their concentrations. Recruiting a protein to a specific compartment of a cell allows the local
concentration of that protein to be increased markedly, thereby increasing the probability that it will interact with other proteins or small molecules that are recruited to
or generated in the same compartment. Colocalization of proteins in a signaling pathway is achieved by recruitment to the same membrane surface or organelle (e.g.,
plasma membrane versus ER) and ultimately by protein-protein interactions. Conversely, separating proteins or second messengers (or both) into distinct

compartments turns off signaling pathways.
The regulation of transport of signaling proteins into the nucleus is important in a number of signal transduction pathways and illustrates the concept of colocalization
in the same organelle. 70 Nuclear transport proceeds through nuclear pores that can be transversed by diffusion of proteins of less than 40 kD. Transport of larger
molecules requires a nuclear localization signal to which the importin proteins bind. The importins target the protein to the nuclear pore, and the complex is
transported into the nucleus. The Ran G protein dissociates the importins from their cargo once they are in the nucleus. Regulated export of proteins from the nucleus
is similar to import. A nuclear export signal (NES) is recognized by the protein exportin which then transports the cargo out of the nucleus.
Regulation of nuclear localization of the transcription factor nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT), required for its transcriptional activity, is an example of the
importance of nuclear localization in signal transduction. 71 In response to T-cell activation and a rise in intracellular calcium, NFAT is dephosphorylated by the
calcium-responsive phosphatase calcineurin. Dephosphorylation allows the nuclear localization signal in NFAT to bind to the importins, and NFAT, along with
calcineurin, is imported into the nucleus. NFAT also contains a NES, and phosphorylation appears to allow the NES to bind to exportin, resulting in transport to the
cytoplasm.
Protein compartmentation can also occur on a smaller scale. Proteins in a signal transduction cascade can exist in a preformed but inactive complex, such as the
yeast MAP kinase module composed of the Ste11, Ste7, and MAP kinases bound to the scaffolding protein Ste5. 72 Pheromone signaling activates a G protein, which
in turn activates the Ste20 kinase. Ste20 phosphorylates and activates the Ste11, which activates the kinase cascade on Ste5. Once the first kinase in the cascade is
activated, the other kinases are phosphorylated quickly and are activated because of their proximity.
A similar scaffolding probably functions in the activation of the Jnk kinase pathway in mammalian cells. The enzymes in the mammalian MAP kinase cascades are
homologues of the yeast proteins. A protein originally thought to inhibit Jnk kinase (JIP-1, jnk inhibitory protein) binds to MLK1, MKK7, and Jnk and facilitates the
activation of Jnk, presumably by localizing the components in the cascade. 73 Other examples of scaffolding proteins are the A kinase-anchoring proteins. 74 This family
of proteins binds the regulatory subunit of protein kinase A and localizes it to such diverse intracellular locations as ion channels, centrosomes, and mitochondria.
This activity results in the preferential activation of PKA at specific intracellular locations where the relevant substrates are.
DOMAINS THAT MEDIATE PROTEIN-PROTEIN BINDING
Another way in which signal transduction pathways commonly are stimulated is through regulated assembly of protein-protein complexes. Most often, these
interactions are mediated by conserved domains found in many signal transduction proteins that recognize phosphorylated tyrosine or serine residues or proline-rich
sequences (Table 3-4).

TABLE 3-4. Protein-Protein Interaction Domains and Motifs

Both SH2 domains and phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB) domains bind to motifs containing phosphorylated tyrosine residues. 75 Tyrosine kinases and phosphatases
regulate the formation of complexes involving these domains. Tyrosine kinases themselves can serve as docking sites for other proteins, which is most evident with
tyrosine kinase receptors that recruit such proteins as PI3-kinase, p120 Ras GAP, PLC g, and SHP-2 through SH2 domain-dependent interactions. Tyrosine kinases
also phosphorylate other proteins. Tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor substrate 1 protein by the insulin receptor leads to recruitment of SH2
domain-containing proteins to insulin receptor substrate-1. 76 In addition to mediating protein-protein interactions, binding of SH2 domains to phosphotyrosine residues
stimulates the enzymatic activities of such proteins as PI3-kinase and Src kinases. 77,78 In some cases, such as Src kinases, the SH2 domain binds to an
intramolecular phosphotyrosine to regulate catalytic activity. Usually, this type of regulation is inhibitory. The crystal structures of several SH2 domains have been
determined and reveal a pocket that binds the phosphotyrosine and a groove that determines binding specificity based on the fit of the residues C-terminal (or, in a
few cases, N-terminal) to the phosphotyrosine. 79
PTB domains are functionally analogous to SH2 domains in that they bind phosphotyrosine residues to assemble multiprotein complexes, but they have no sequence
or structural similarity to SH2 domains. 80 Thus, they represent an independent evolutionary solution to phosphotyrosine-dependent assembly of protein complexes. A
few PTB domains bind to a tyrosine-containing motif in the absence of phosphorylation.
In the last few years, it has become evident that recognition of phosphoserine motifs is also an important means of protein-protein interaction. Forkhead-associated
domains, 14-3-3 proteins, and some WD40 and WW domains bind to regions of proteins containing phosphoserine. 81,82,83 and 84 WD40 domains in proteins that are
members of the F-box and WD40 repeat family are important in regulating ubiquitination and subsequent proteolysis of proteins, such as the inhibitor of kB (IkB),
which regulates the activity of the transcription factor nuclear factor kB (NFkB). 14-3-3 proteins are a family of small proteins whose primary function appears to be
binding to phosphoserine motifs. An example of the importance of this interaction is the role of 14-3-3 in regulating the nuclear location of the phosphatase Cdc25 that
regulates the cell cycle. 85 Binding of 14-3-3 to phosphorylated Cdc25 leads to its export from the nucleus and a block in the cell cycle.
Src homology 3 (SH3), WW, and ena-vasp homology domains are structurally distinct, but all bind to proline-rich sequences. 86,87 and 88 Still not clear is how the
interaction of these domains with proline-rich regions in other proteins is regulated. Many proteins that contain SH3 domains also have proline-rich regions that could
be involved in intramolecular binding, suggesting that a conformational change in the protein could disrupt intramolecular binding and allow the SH3 domain to
interact with other proteins. Similarly, the accessibility of proline-rich regions to SH3 domains may be regulated by conformational changes that expose the
proline-rich region or disrupt an intramolecular interaction.
PDZ domains recognize motifs in the C-termini of proteins. 89,90 These domains are found in cytoplasmic proteins, and many contain multiple PDZ domains. PDZ
domain–containing proteins often function to aggregate transmembrane proteins, such as the glutamate receptor. Group I PDZ domains bind to a consensus
sequence, T/S-X-V/I, where V/I is the C-terminus of the protein. 91 Phosphorylation of the S or T in this motif can disrupt PDZ binding in some cases. For example,
phosphorylation of this serine in the b 2-adrenergic receptor was shown to lead to a loss of PDZ domain–mediated binding to EBP50, which regulates endocytic sorting
of the receptor.92
DOMAINS THAT MEDIATE PROTEIN BINDING TO MEMBRANE LIPIDS
Localization of proteins to membranes greatly limits the space in which proteins can diffuse and increases the probability that enzymes and substrates will contact
each other. C1 domains present in protein kinases C (PKC) bind to DAG and thereby recruit PKC to the membrane. 41 Membrane recruitment of PKC is aided also by
the C2 domain, which binds to anionic phospholipids in the presence of calcium. This pathway is controlled by DAG production, and the primary source is DAG
produced by PLC hydrolysis of PtdIns-4,5-P 2.
Domains homologous to a region in pleckstrin (PH) are present in a number of proteins and bind to phosphoinositides, thereby targeting proteins to the plasma

membrane.93 Both the accessibility of the PH domain and availability of phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns) phosphates likely regulate this interaction. Phosphoinositide
kinases regulate the production of phosphoinositides. 94 PtdIns 4-kinases synthesize PtdIns-4-P from PtdIns. Type I phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinases (PIPKs)
phosphorylate PtdIns-4-P at the 5 position to make PtdIns-4,5-P 2. PtdIns 3-kinases phosphorylate PtdIns, PtdIns-4-P, and PtdIns-4,5-P 2 at the 3-position of the inositol
ring to make PtdIns-3-P, PtdIns-3,4-P 2, and PtdIns-3,4,5-P3, respectively. Phosphoinositide levels also are regulated by phosphatases. The recessive oncogene
PTEN has significant homology to tyrosine phosphatases but recently was shown to remove the phosphate from the 3 position of PtdIns-3,4-5-P 3 and less well from
PtdIns-3,4-P2 and PtdIns-3-P.95 PTEN thus counteracts PI3-kinase signals, and cells from which PTEN is absent have increased signaling through
PI3-kinase-dependent pathways.96 A family of phosphatases that removes the phosphate from the 5 position of PtdIns-3,4-5-P 3, the SH2 inositol phosphatases, also
regulates phosphoinositide signaling pathways. 97
Some PH domains bind best to PtdIns-4,5-P 2, and others bind best to PtdIns-3,4-P 2 or PtdIns-3,4,5-P3.98 Thus, acute production of specific phosphoinositides in a
membrane compartment results in the recruitment of proteins containing a PH domain that recognizes the phosphoinositide. Colocalization of a subset of proteins
allows them to interact more efficiently. A recent example of the role of PH domains in such a pathway is the activation of akt by PDK1. PDK1 and akt are protein
serine-threonine kinases that contain PH domains that bind PtdIns-3,4-P 2 or PtdIns-3,4,5-P3. Activation of PI3-kinase leads to local synthesis of PtdIns-3,4-P 2 and
PtdIns-3,4,5-P3 recruitment of akt and PDK1 to the same membrane location. This activity facilitates phosphorylation and activation of akt by PDK1. 99 Other domains
unrelated to PH domains also bind phosphoinositides. For example, FYVE domains are present in several proteins involved in vesicle trafficking, and they bind to
PtdIns-3-P.
Cellular membranes are not uniform and appear to be highly organized. One of the principal structures in the plasma membrane is lipid rafts. 100 They are composed of
regions of the membrane that are rich in sphingolipids and cholesterol on the extracellular side of the plasma membrane. The lipid component of the cytoplasmic face
of lipid rafts is not known, but some evidence suggests that PtdIns-4,5-P 2 is enriched. Glycophosphatidylinositol-linked proteins, transmembrane proteins, and src
family members have been found to localize to lipid rafts. Both the Fce receptor and the T-cell receptor cluster in lipid rafts, which is necessary for their signaling. The
basis of protein recruitment to rafts is not yet known.

REGULATION OF PROTEIN LEVELS: TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND PROTEOLYSIS
In addition to influencing the activity of proteins in the cell, signal transduction pathways also regulate the type and levels of proteins expressed in cells. This sort of
regulation is necessary for differentiation and the specific function of distinct cell types. Whether a protein is expressed at all in a cell is regulated at the transcriptional
level, whereas transcription, translation, and proteolysis have a role in determining the amount of an expressed protein present in a cell.
Ultimately, many signal transduction pathways regulate gene transcription and, thus, the level and type of proteins expressed in the cell. The magnitude of the effect
of a signaling pathway on the transcriptional output of a cell is illustrated by the effects of serum on levels of particular mRNAs in fibroblasts. 101 Of 8600 genes
analyzed in this study, more than 500 underwent substantial changes in response to serum stimulation. The ability to transcribe a gene is regulated at many levels,
including the structure of chromatin in the region of the gene, modifications of the promoter regions, and the activity of transcription factors and coactivators. Signal
transduction pathways regulate histone acetylases and deactylases that determine the accessibility of chromatin to the transcriptional apparatus. Recent work has
shown that a number of signals lead to histone hyperacetylation that disrupts the nucleosome to allow transcription. For example, the Rho family small G protein
Cdc42 and one of its effectors, Jnk, lead to histone hyperacetylation. 102 Likely these pathways cooperate with the activation of transcription factor to induce
transcription.
Signal transduction pathways activate transcription factors by many different means. The binding of ligands to the nuclear receptor family of transcription factors
causes dissociation of the receptor from a complex with heat-shock proteins and allows the receptor to bind to DNA. Tyrosine phosphorylation of the STAT family of
transcription factors by Jak kinases in response to stimulation of cytokine receptors allows them to dimerize through their SH2 domains and enter the nucleus to bind
DNA.15 TGF-b receptors activate transcription by phosphorylating SMAD proteins on serine residues. 17 Phosphorylation of SMAD proteins promotes
heterodimerization with SMAD4 and exposes the DNA-binding domain. Activated SMADs translocate to the nucleus, complex with a protein called Fast1, and bind to
DNA to regulate transcription.
Activation of transcription factors also can occur much further downstream from the receptor. Stimulation of the transcriptional activity of Elk-1 by EGF requires
activation of a Ras exchange factor, which leads to activation of Ras. Active Ras promotes the stimulation of Raf activity. Raf in turn phosphorylates and activates
MEK1, which phosphorylates and activates ERK. Active ERK translocates to the nucleus and phosphorylates and stimulates the activity of the transcription factor
elk-1.
Translation also is controlled at many levels. 103 The sequence of the RNA can result in stable tertiary structures that bind proteins to regulate location or translation.
Often, the ability of these types of RNAs to be translated is regulated by protein kinase cascades. A common target of signal transduction pathways is phosphorylation
of initiation factor eIF-4E and availability of eIF-4E. p70 S6 kinase regulates the translation of specific RNAs containing a 5' terminal oligopyrimidine tract by
phosphorylation of the ribosomal S6 protein. 104 This increases the ability of the ribosome to process such messages.
The levels of proteins also are regulated by proteolysis, which can occur via either the proteosome or the lysosome. Ubiquitination targets proteins to the
proteosome.105 An example of the role of ubiquitination is the regulation of inhibitor of kB (IkB) levels. Phosphorylation of IkB is stimulated by a number of
receptor-mediated signaling pathways. This action leads to its dissociation from the transcription factor nuclear factor kB (NFkB) and allows NFkB to enter the nucleus
and bind DNA. After phosphorylation, the b transducin repeat–containing protein binds to IkB, recruiting ubiquitin ligase that catalyzes the ubiquitination of IkB and
leads to its recognition and degradation by the proteosome. 106
The second major pathway of protein degradation is the lysosomal pathway, which is important also in signal transduction. An early response to the stimulation of
receptors is their internalization into endosomes; some evidence suggests that signaling persists at this location after endocytosis. 107 In the case of receptor tyrosine
kinases, ligand-dependent kinase activity is necessary for endocytosis, mediated by clathrin-coated pits. After endocytosis, either receptors may recycle to the plasma
membrane or the endosomes may fuse with lysosomes, leading to degradation of the receptor.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Bardwell L, Cook JG, Inouye CJ, Thorner J. Signal propagation and regulation in the mating pheromone response pathway of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Dev Biol 1994;166:363.
2. Skibbens RV, Hieter P. Kinetochores and the checkpoint mechanism that monitors for defects in the chromosome segregation machinery. Annu Rev Genet 1998;32:307.
3. Weinert T. DNA damage and checkpoint pathways: molecular anatomy and interactions with repair. Cell 1998;94:555.
4. Fantl WJ, Johnson DE, Williams LT. Signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases. Annu Rev Biochem 1993;62:453.
5. Fretto LJ, Snape AJ, Tomlinson JE, et al. Mechanism of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) AA, AB, and BB binding to alpha and beta PDGF receptor. J Biol Chem 1993;268:3625.
6. de Vos AM, Ultsch M, Kossiakoff AA. Human growth hormone and extracellular domain of its receptor: crystal structure of the complex. Science 1992;255:306.
7. Spivak-Kroizman T, Lemmon MA, Dikic I, et al. Heparin-induced oligomerization of FGF molecules is responsible for FGF receptor dimerization, activation, and cell proliferation. Cell
1994;79:1015.
8. Tzahar E, Pinkas-Kramarski R, Moyer JD, et al. Bivalence of EGF-like ligands drives the ErbB signaling network. Embo J 1997;16:4938.
9. Lemmon MA, Bu Z, Ladbury JE, et al. Two EGF molecules contribute additively to stabilization of the EGFR dimer. Embo J 1997;16:281.
10. Bruckner K, Pasquale EB, Klein R. Tyrosine phosphorylation of transmembrane ligands for Eph receptors. Science 1997;275:1640.
11. Holland SJ, Gale NW, Mbamalu G, et al. Bidirectional signaling through the EPH-family receptor Nuk and its transmembrane ligands. Nature 1996;383:722.
12. Hackel PO, Zwick E, Prenzel N, et al. Epidermal growth factor receptors: critical mediators of multiple receptor pathways. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1999;11:184.
13. Elenius K, Paul S, Allison G, et al. Activation of HER4 by heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor stimulates chemotaxis but not proliferation. Embo J 1997;16:1268.
14. Crovello CS, Lai C, Cantley LC, et al. Differential signaling by the epidermal growth factor-like growth factors neuregulin-1 and neuregulin-2. J Biol Chem 1998;273:26954.
15. Leonard WJ, O'Shea JJ. Jaks and STATs: biological implications. Annu Rev Immunol 1998;16:293.
16. Moutoussamy S, Kelly PA, Finidori J. Growth-hormone-receptor and cytokine-receptor-family signaling. Eur J Biochem 1998;255:1.
17. Massague J. TGF-beta signal transduction. Annu Rev Biochem 1998;67:753.
18. Neel BG, Tonks NK. Protein tyrosine phosphatases in signal transduction. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1997;9:193.
19. Siminovitch KA, Neel BG. Regulation of B cell signal transduction by SH2-containing protein-tyrosine phosphatases. Semin Immunol 1998;10:329.
20. Bockaert J, Pin JP. Molecular tinkering of G proteincoupled receptors: an evolutionary success. Embo J 1999;18:1723.
21. The C. elegans Sequencing Consortium. Genome sequence of the nematode C. elegans: a platform for investigating biology. Science 1998;282:2012.
22. Ji TH, Grossmann M, Ji I. G proteincoupled receptors: I. Diversity of receptor-ligand interactions. J Biol Chem 1998;273:17299.
23. Hamm HE. The many faces of G protein signaling. J Biol Chem 1998;273:669.
24. Hall RA, Premont RT, Lefkowitz RJ. Heptahelical receptor signaling: beyond the G protein paradigm. J Cell Biol 1999;145:927.

CHAPTER 4 Essentials of Immunology
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 4
Essentials of Immunology
NICHOLAS P. RESTIFO
JOHN R. WUNDERLICH
Introduction
T Cells and Cellular Immunity
Antigen Presentation to T Cells
Major Histocompatibility Complex Molecules as Antigen Receptors
Differences Between Major Histocompatibility Complex Class I and Class II Molecules
Major Histocompatibility Complex Class I Pathway for Antigen Processing
Major Histocompatibility Complex Class II Pathway for Antigen Processing
Antigen Processing and Presentation in Malignancy
Specialized Antigen-Presenting Cells
Dendritic Cells
Follicular Dendritic Cells
B Lymphocytes
Monocytes And Macrophages
T-Cell Recognition of Antigens
Antigen-Specific T-Cell Receptor
T-Cell Maturation
Markers and Phenotypes
Development of the T-Cell Antigen Repertoire: Role of the Thymus
Activation of Mature T Cells
Signal Requirements for T-Cell Activation
CD28 Signaling in T-Cell Activation
Ending the Normal Immune Response of Activated T Cells
Peripheral T-Cell Tolerance
T-Cell Clonal Anergy
Deletion of Mature T Cells
States of Mature T Cells
Naive, Effector, and Memory T Cells
Phenotypes of Antigen-Stimulated T Cells
T-Cell Migration
Functions of Mature T Cells
Helper T Cells
CD4+ T-Cell Subsets
Suppressor T Cells
Cytotoxic Effector Cell Mechanisms
Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes
Nonspecific Cytotoxic Cells
B Cells and Humoral Immunity
Immunoglobulin Heterogeneity and Classes
Monoclonal Antibodies
B-Cell Maturation in the Bone Marrow
B-Cell Maturation in Lymphoid Organs
Summary
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Potentially harmful challenges to the body include viruses, bacteria, unicellular and multicellular pathogens, and cancer cells. In response to these challenges, the
body has evolved active defenses that compose the immune system. While the immune system is composed of a wide range of distinct cell types, lymphocytes play a
central role by providing the specificity of immune recognition. Through its various appendages, the immune system is capable of interacting, directly or indirectly, with
nearly every cell in the body.
There is a central division in the immune system between the humoral branch, which is largely composed of B lymphocytes and their products, and the cellular
branch, many functions of which are performed by T lymphocytes. The humoral (from the Latin word umor meaning “fluid”) branch of the immune system is involved
with the production of antibodies that are capable of neutralizing or destroying harmful challenges to the body. Immune functions classically regarded as cellular
immune responses include delayed-type hypersensitivity 1 and rejection of foreign grafts 2 or tumors.3 As techniques for isolating and identifying cells associated with
immune responses developed, it became clear that T cells, or thymus-derived lymphocytes, are the cells essential for cellular immune responses. Thus,
understanding the principles of cellular immunity has largely come to mean understanding the development, function, and regulation of T cells.
There are fundamental differences in the ways that the cellular and humoral immune systems recognize antigens ( Table 4-1). B cells can recognize antigens not
presented in the context of other molecules. T cells, on the other hand, generally recognize antigens in the context of a “self” (major) histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecule on the surface of a cell. T cells use structures on their surfaces called T-cell receptors (TCRs) to recognize antigen-MHC molecule complexes; B cells use
immunoglobulin (Ig) molecules to react specifically to antigenic stimuli. Whereas Ig is secreted, sometimes in extremely large quantities, few, if any, TCRs are shed by
T cells. Underlying the difference in the molecules used for recognition is an important difference in the types of antigens recognized: While B cells can recognize
antigen in its native conformation, T cells generally recognize antigen that has been “processed” by another cell and then presented on the surface of the cell by MHC
molecules. More specifically, antigen is denatured, cleaved within the cell, and transported into specific subcellular compartments where it is bound by MHC
molecules. After a complex of antigen and MHC completes its journey to the cell surface, it is potentially recognizable by a T cell.

TABLE 4-1. Toward a Molecular Understanding of Immune Recognition of Antigen

We use antigen in this chapter for a substance that binds specifically to the combining site of an antibody or a TCR. Some of these substances elicit immune

responses (immunogens), whereas others do not. There are exceptions to this terminology, such as superantigens, which are discussed later in the section
Stimulation of T-Cell Receptors by Superantigens . Also, T cells commonly recognize MHC-peptide complexes, but both the peptide and its parent protein often are
termed antigens in the literature.

T CELLS AND CELLULAR IMMUNITY
T lymphocytes were first identified as a functional subset of lymphocytes, the development of which depends on the existence of a thymus. 4,5 and 6 In conditions of
congenital absence of the thymus or following neonatal thymectomy in animal models, a number of immune responses were found to be impaired, including
cell-mediated killing and transplantation reactions such as graft-versus-host disease and allograft rejection. Subsequent to this functional definition of T lymphocytes,
differentiation antigens on T cells were identified using antibodies. The ability to identify T cells and thus to isolate T cells and their subsets, and the ability to grow
these cells selectively in culture, has resulted in a body of experimental evidence concerning the mechanisms of maturation, activation, and effector function of this
population.
Early experiments showed that the growth of a syngeneic tumor in a mouse could be prevented by prior immunization with that same tumor. 7,8,9,10 and 11 Since then, the
mechanisms involved in the antitumor immune response have been partially elucidated, 12,13 and T cells have been shown to play a critical role. 14,15 and 16 Guided by
results from animal model studies, human T cells have been shown to be capable of specifically lysing autologous tumor cells in vitro.17,18 T cells can also specifically
secrete cytokines, such as interleukin-2 (IL-2), interferon-g (IFN-g), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and tumor necrosis factor-a
(TNF-a), and proliferate in response to stimulation with autologous tumor cells. 19,20 Antitumor T cells can be grown to large numbers in vitro and transferred adoptively
to treat even substantial tumor burdens in both humans and mice. 21 Finally, tumor antigens recognized by autologous human T cells have been identified by the use
of molecular cloning techniques. 22,23,24,25 and 26 Taken together, these findings provide nearly incontrovertible evidence that a T-cell immune response can occur
against an autologous tumor.

ANTIGEN PRESENTATION TO T CELLS
The relative importance of how antigens are recognized by T cells (i.e., what T cells “see”) to the biologic therapy of cancer is linked largely to the establishment of
new immunotherapies based on T cells. These new therapies have ushered in an entirely new set of challenges having to do with how T cells recognize, or may fail to
recognize, tumor antigens.
T-cell responses were found by early investigators to be controlled by the presence of particular genes encoded in the MHC. Polymorphisms at this genetic region
were observed to control the ability of an animal to mount a T-cell response. Early attempts to demonstrate direct binding of antigen to T cells failed, while attempts
succeeded in the case of B cells. Although a straightforward and still useful model of the recognition of antigen by humoral factors was promulgated before the 1900s,
it took nearly another hundred years for a similar event to occur for T cells.
T cells express on their cell surfaces molecules of exquisite sensitivity, very much like the antibody molecules found on the surfaces of B cells. These molecules,
called TCRs, recognize peptide fragments of antigens, called epitopes, that are noncovalently complexed with MHC molecules. The two major types of MHC
molecules, class I and class II, are integral membrane glycoproteins that are noncovalently complexed with antigenic peptides. Class I molecules present antigenic
peptides to CD8+ lymphocytes; class II molecules perform the same function for CD4+ lymphocytes. CD8+ effector cells sometimes are termed cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs), because they can lyse target cells directly through the release of lytic granules as well as through triggering “death” receptors, such as Fas, on
target cells. CD4+ T cells, while also capable of cytotoxic activity in some cases, are called helper T cells, because they enhance antibody responses by activating B
cells, promote other T-cell responses, and activate other important cells in the immune system, such as dendritic cells and macrophages.
A model of how the two major types of T lymphocytes may interact with target cells is depicted in Figure 4-1. A CD8+ T cell is shown interacting directly with a tumor
cell, while a CD4+ T cell is shown interacting with an antigen-presenting cell (APC) expressing class II molecules. While class I molecules are found on most tumor
cells and somatic cells, class II molecules are found in high concentrations on only a subset of tumor cells and on B-cell, bone marrow–derived phagocytic cells (e.g.,
macrophages), Langerhans'-dendritic cells, follicular dendritic cells and, in lesser quantities, on other cells including subpopulations of thymocytes, activated
peripheral T cells, and certain epithelial cells.

FIGURE 4-1. A model for stimulation of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell antitumor immunity, based on CD8+ T cells interacting with tumor cells and CD4+ T cells interacting
with host antigen-presenting cells (APCs). MHC, major histocompatibility complex; TCR, T-cell receptor.

MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX MOLECULES AS ANTIGEN RECEPTORS
A molecular understanding of the structure of MHC molecules has made clear their function with respect to antigen recognition by T cells: MHC molecules are
receptors for peptide antigens. 27,28 and 29 The major locations, or loci, for class I genes are named A, B, and C in the human and K, D, and L in the mouse (Fig. 4-2).
Class II molecules originate from three major subregions in the human, designated DP, DQ, and DR, and two in the mouse designated I-A and I-E. MHC molecules
from these major subregions are codominantly expressed. The extent of MHC polymorphism present in the gene pool usually results in heterozygosity for most
individuals at every major class I and class II locus. Because there are three different major class I loci and three different major class II loci in the human, most
individuals express six different class I alleles and six different class II alleles. Codominant expression in a single individual of MHC molecules originating from
multiple loci enhances that individual's ability to present a variety of antigens.

FIGURE 4-2. Highly schematic map of the genomic arrangement of the major histocompatibility complex in humans and mice. For simplicity, class Ib genes and the
class III regions are not shown.

MHC class I molecules can also act as inhibitors of lysis by natural killer (NK) cells and at least some T cells, a function described later in this chapter in the section
Natural Killer Cells and in recent reviews. 30,31
Structure of Major Histocompatibility Complex Molecules
X-ray crystallographic data have indicated that MHC molecules have peptide-binding domains consisting of a deep groove that runs between two long a helices found
on the outward-facing surface of the MHC molecule. 27,28,32 X-ray crystallographic findings have since been refined and extended to include x-ray images of particular
peptides lying in the clefts of MHC molecules in an extended conformation. 33,34,35,36,37,38,39 and 40 An ever-clearer crystallographic picture of the interaction of the TCR
with the peptide-MHC complex has become available with the solution of the diffraction pattern of this trimolecular structure. 41,42
While the general architecture of the peptide-binding grooves of MHC class I and class II molecules are almost identical, critical differences fundamentally change the
way peptides are bound. Class I molecules bind shorter peptides of defined lengths (generally 8 to 10 residues), whereas class II molecules bind peptides that appear
to be arbitrary in length (often 12 to 20 amino acids, but occasionally longer). In fact, class II molecules often bind a core motif of an antigen that can extend in either
direction by different lengths (also referred to as nested sets of peptides). The binding cleft of class I molecules is closed at both ends, enabling the molecule to make
hydrogen bonds with the bound peptides at both the N-terminal and C-terminal. Class II molecules, on the other hand, have a peptide-binding cleft that is open on
both ends. In both the class I and class II molecules, peptides are bound by pockets in the binding site.
The affinity of the TCR for the peptide-MHC complex is far weaker than that of most antibody-antigen interactions, a property consistent with an important role for
other antigen-independent T-cell surface receptors acting as cofactors in the triggering process. 43,44 TCR-peptide-MHC complex interactions have low affinities and
rapid off-rates, thus allowing for a rapid scanning-type interaction. 45,46
Polymorphism of Major Histocompatibility Complex Molecules
Sequence studies indicate that MHC class I and class II molecules are among the most highly polymorphic molecules in the genome. The polymorphism of MHC
molecules is concentrated in the peptide-binding grooves. 47,48 Specifically, the polymorphism of MHC molecules is concentrated in the pockets along grooves of MHC
molecules where amino acid side chains fit into the molecule. The polymorphisms form the molecular basis for the preference of different MHC alleles for different
peptide sequence motifs, and they enable each MHC molecule to bind a different set of peptides. It has been demonstrated that MHC polymorphism causes
differences in levels of human resistance to specific infections and ensures that, within a species, a broad ability to bind peptides derived from a pathogenic challenge
exists.49,50
MHC diversity is, of course, what makes the job of the transplantation surgeon so difficult and must be taken into account by the cancer immunotherapist. For
example, tyrosinase, which is a tumor antigen associated with normal melanocytes and with melanoma cells, has an epitope that is presented to lytic CD8+ T
lymphocytes in the context of the human leukocyte antigen HLA-A24. 51 Use of this peptide in a patient not expressing this class I molecule is likely to be ineffective,
because that particular peptide would be unlikely to bind efficiently to other class I alleles and because the appropriate presenting molecule would not be found in that
patient.
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX CLASS I AND CLASS II MOLECULES
Although class I and class II molecules are united by their function as receptors for antigenic peptides, the differences in structure and intracellular trafficking are
critical. Class I and class II molecules differ structurally, have different genetic organization and tissue distribution, present bound peptides to different T-cell subsets,
and elicit different types of immune responses. Class I and class II molecules also differ in their requirements for binding of peptide antigens, and these peptides
originate from different sources. Finally, the two types of MHC follow different intracellular routes on their way to the cell surface and noncovalently associate with
peptides in different subcellular compartments.
Recognition of Major Histocompatibility Complex–Antigen Complexes by T-Cell Subsets
There are many interactions involved in T-cell activation, but the specificity of T-cell recognition of a cognate partner cell occurs via the interaction of the TCR with an
MHC molecule to which is bound a peptide. The TCR, which is a heterodimer associated on the cell surface with the CD3 complex, 52 is discussed in greater detail
later, under Antigen-Specific T-cell Receptors. Although no clear structural or sequence differences between TCRs' detecting class I and detecting class II molecules
have been found, a clear difference between the two sets of T cells is found in the ligands for the cell surface markers CD4 and CD8, from which the T-cell sets derive
their names. CD8 molecules bind to the a 3 domain of the class I molecules on the target cell, 53,54 and 55 and CD4 molecules bind to the b 2 domain of the class II
heterodimer on the target cell. 56,57,58 and 59
Some peptide-MHC complexes, designated antigenic, trigger a T-cell response that can consist of proliferation, up-regulation of surface molecules, activation of lytic
machinery, secretion of cytokines, or even death by apoptosis. The minimum number of MHC molecules that must be occupied by a particular peptide to activate a
very responsive T cell is thought to be extremely low: on the order of 0.03% of the total MHC or fewer than several hundred peptide-MHC complexes. 60,61
Sources of Antigens Bound by Major Histocompatibility Complex Class I and Class II Molecules
Antigens complexed with MHC class I and class II molecules originate from two different sources ( Fig. 4-3). Class I molecules generally present antigens derived from
intracellular sources, whereas class II molecules usually present antigens derived from extracellular sources, although clear examples exist that contradict this
distinction, especially in “professional” APCs. 62 A more precise understanding of the difference in the sources of antigens can result from an understanding of patterns
of intracellular trafficking of these two sets of molecules: Class II molecules intersect endocytosed antigen, whereas class I molecules efficiently bind to intracellular
antigens in the endoplasmic reticulum. 63,64 Thus, antigens or antigenic fragments intersecting with the endoplasmic reticulum can be presented by class I molecules;
those that intersect with the endosomal subcellular compartment can be presented by class II molecules.

FIGURE 4-3. Intracellular trafficking pathways in the presentation of endogenous and exogenous antigen (Ag). CPL, compartment for peptide loading; SRP, signal
recognition particle; TAP, transporter associated with antigen processing.

As a result of the differences in the cell biology of MHC molecules, peptides binding to class I molecules are derived mainly from intracellular-cytosolic proteins such
as histones and stress proteins, whereas class II peptides are derived primarily from membrane glycoproteins or serum proteins known to enter the acidic vacuolar

compartment in large quantities. 65,66 Naturally processed peptides bound to class I molecules are of a very specific size (8 to 10 amino acids) and are smaller than
those bound to class II molecules (12 to 20 amino acids), which are much more variable and often nested. 65,66 These peptides bind to MHC molecules with affinities
that can range from the picomolar to micromolar range. Despite a restricted length of peptides presented by MHC class II molecules and the even more restricted
length of those presented by class I, a tremendous amount of specificity can still occur. (Note that it is possible to make at least 5 × 10 11 different peptides of nine
amino acids.)
It is now possible to forecast which epitopes within a protein will bind to particular MHC molecules. Allele-specific epitope forecasting has now been done with a large
number of human and murine MHC molecules,67,68,69,70 and 71 which are characterized by strong preferences for particular amino acid side chains at some positions in
the bound peptides and a wide tolerance for amino acid side chains at other positions. Although the anchor positions are critically important in the prediction of which
peptides will bind to particular MHC molecules, the amino acid side chains at other positions can play a role and cannot be disregarded. 72
MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX CLASS I PATHWAY FOR ANTIGEN PROCESSING
CD8+ T lymphocytes are able to monitor the contents of cells by interacting with class I molecules, presenting a display of peptides carried from the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) to the cell surface. 73,74 and 75 Antigen processing is generally necessary for the expression of class I molecules at the cell surface, because class I a
chains do not efficiently exit the ER in large quantities unless they are fully assembled with peptide and b 2-microglobulin. Furthermore, they need to bind a peptide to
be thermodynamically stable. “Empty” class I molecules appear to be unstable at 37°C but somewhat more stable at lower temperatures. 76 Such empty class I
molecules are short-lived and subject to proteolysis but nevertheless are expressed at relatively low levels by certain cells, especially those deficient in antigen
processing. Because most nucleated cells express stable class I molecules on their cell surfaces, antigen processing is probably a universal characteristic of normal
cells. Thus, the molecules involved in the processing of antigen are likely to be expressed ubiquitously as well.
Structure of Major Histocompatibility Complex Class I Molecules
Class I molecules are heterodimers composed of an extremely polymorphic 45-kD a chain and b 2-microglobulin. Class I molecules are considered by some to be true
heterotrimers, as a peptide eight to ten amino acids long having a molecular weight of approximately 1 kD is required for stability and proper expression. Highly
schematic structures of class I and class II molecules are shown in Figure 4-4. A bound peptide is presented by the class I molecule.

FIGURE 4-4. Highly schematic diagram of the domain structure of class I and class II. b 2-M, b2-microglobulin; P, peptide; S, disulfide links.

The a chains of class I molecules (also called heavy chains) are encoded in the genome in an eight-exon form. The first exon encodes a signal peptide or leader
sequence that directs insertion of the rest of the nascent class I molecule into the ER during translation. The next three exons encode the three large extracellular
domains (see Fig. 4-4). The a1 and a2 domains are directly involved in the binding of peptides. The a 3 domain (exon 4) contains the nonpolymorphic region that is the
ligand for the CD8 molecule and shares close homology with the constant region of Igs. Note that b 2-microglobulin also shares structural homology with the Ig
constant regions. Exon five encodes a 25–amino acid transmembrane region that forms a hydrophobic a helix that anchors class I into the cell membrane. A short
intracytoplasmic segment (30 amino acids long encoded by exons 6, 7, and 8) is involved in the intracellular trafficking of class I molecules and contains regions that
interact with the cytoskeleton as well as residues that can be phosphorylated by cyclic adenosine monophosphate–dependent protein kinase A and pp60 src kinase.
b2-microglobulin is a structural component of the MHC class I molecule presented on the cell surface and plays an indispensable role in the proper folding of the
45-kD class I a chain. The b 2-microglobulin molecule is noncovalently associated with the a chain. Its gene is not encoded within the MHC and has minimal
polymorphism, even among mammalian species. A number of human cell lines, including melanomas, renal cell cancers, and a cell line named Daudi, express
virtually no class I on their cell surfaces as a result of absent or mutated b 2-microglobulin. 77,78 Thus, in these cell lines, the class I a chain molecules do not fold
properly, never leave the ER, and are degraded rapidly. b 2-microglobulin-deficient mice have been found to express little, if any, functional class I antigen and have
no mature CD8+ T cells.79
Origin and Generation of Peptides: The Proteasome
The task of generating peptide fragments from intracellular proteins for presentation by class I molecules is achieved, in part, by a molecular complex known as the
proteasome.80 This bulky complex has a remarkable ring-like appearance when visualized through the electron microscope and is composed of at least 16 subunits.
Highly conserved through evolution, the proteasome is thought to be involved in the protein economy of cells. This primitive structure was likely adapted by the
eukaryotic immune system to sample the products of cellular proteolysis for display to the immune system by MHC class I. 81
Two polymorphic proteasome component genes (low-molecular-weight proteins) are encoded in the class II region of the MHC and are designated LMP-2 and LMP-7
and appear to affect the peptide sets that are generated by this structure. Like many of the molecules involved in antigen processing and presentation, the expression
of LMP-2 and LMP-7 is up-regulated by IFN-g. 82,83 and 84 Interestingly, low or absent expression of these two molecules has been found in some cancer cells. 85 Another
molecule, called MECL-1, or LMP-10, is also up-regulated by IFN-g and can replace the proteasome subunit Z. 86
Other proteasomal subunits that may play a positive role in the processing of some antigens are PA28 and PA700. Although their precise functions are unknown,
these subunits may aid in the unfolding or degradation of protein substrates. One model proposes that the proteasome binds to molecules that transport peptides
across the ER membrane, but this mechanism remains to be demonstrated. IFN-g changes the proteolytic activity of proteasomes, perhaps to favor the production of
peptides capable of binding to MHC class I. 87
Many cytosolic proteins, the peptide fragments of which eventually find their way onto MHC class I molecules, are first ubiquitinated. Ubiquitin, a protein so named
because it seemed to exist everywhere inside the cell at the same time, is attached to proteins that have been targeted for degradation. This attachment is covalent
and is mediated by a clustered triad of enzymes called E1, E2, and E3. Ubiquitinated proteins generally are proteolytically degraded by the proteasome. 88
Translocation of Peptides by TAP and the Role of Tapasin
Once peptide fragments are generated in the cytosol, they must be transported into the ER, a task largely carried out by another product of the MHC region, the
transporter associated with antigen processing, called TAP. The genes encoding TAP are located in the MHC class II region in both the human and mouse genomes
and are interdigitated with the genes encoding the two LMP components of the proteasome. The TAP heterodimer is an adenosine triphosphate–dependent peptide
pump, is a member of the ABC (ATP-binding cassette) superfamily of transmembrane transporters, and is related to the products of the multidrug resistance
gene.89,90,91,92 and 93 TAP transfers peptides from the cytoplasm directly to newly synthesized class I molecules. 94 There is a growing body of evidence for the selectivity

of peptide transport by TAP, although the specificity of the TAP peptide-binding site is more promiscuous in human cells than in mouse cells.
In addition to their role in antigen processing, TAP molecules are involved in the assembly of the class I a chain/b 2-microglobulin/antigenic peptide trimolecular
complex through a molecule called tapasin.95 Tapasin, a 48-kD protein, binds to newly born MHC class I heavy-chain b 2-microglobulins that have not yet been loaded
with peptide, as well as to the TAP heterodimers. Tapasin may facilitate peptide loading of class I molecules in a number of ways. First, it approximates empty class I
molecules to the transporters by tethering the two together. Second, tapasin may regulate TAP function by inhibiting TAP's ability to transport peptides in the absence
of empty class I molecules in the ER. Third, a part of the tapasin molecule has been hypothesized to bind directly, but with low affinity and with a fast off-rate, to the
peptide-binding cleft of the class I heavy chain. This interaction might be similar to the way the peptide-binding grooves of “empty” MHC class II molecules are
occupied by a piece of the invariant chain known as CLIP [described later in the section Role of Invariant Chain (Ii) in the Folding, Trafficking, and Protection of Class
II]. ER-60 is part of the late assembly complexes consisting of MHC class I, tapasin, TAP, calreticulin, and calnexin.
Classical class I molecules assemble in the ER with peptides mostly generated from cytosolic proteins by the proteasome. The activity of the proteasome can be
modulated by a variety of accessory protein complexes. A subset of the proteasome b subunits (LMP-2, LMP-7, and MECL-1) and one of the accessory complexes,
PA28, are up-regulated by IFN-g and affect the generation of peptides to promote more efficient antigen recognition. The peptides are translocated into the ER by
TAP. A transient complex containing a class I heavy-chain b 2-microglobulin dimer is assembled onto the TAP molecule by successive interactions with the ER
chaperones calnexin and calreticulin and a specialized molecule, tapasin. Peptide binding releases the class I b 2-microglobulin dimer for transport to the cell surface,
while lack of binding results in proteasome-mediated degradation. The products of certain nonclassical MHC-linked class I genes bind peptides in a similar way. A
homologous set of b2-microglobulin-associated membrane glycoproteins, the CD1 molecules, appears to bind lipid-based ligands within the endocytic pathway.
Chaperones in the Class I Pathway
Although the class I pathway generally presents peptides of cytoplasmic origin, exogenous antigens that are chaperoned by a heat-shock protein (HSP) can gain
access to the class I processing pathway of certain cells, such as particular subsets of macrophages. 96,97 HSPs derived from tumor cells may be useful in stimulating
antitumor CTLs in vitro.98,99 Furthermore, inoculation of purified HSPs derived from tumor cells can induce protective immune responses against subsequent tumor
challenge in experimental animal systems. 100
Chaperone proteins are involved in the folding of nascent or incompletely folded proteins and are thought to aid proteins in gaining their proper conformation. Two
important chaperones that help glycoproteins in the ER to fold are calnexin and calreticulin. Immature class I molecules have been shown to associate transiently with
an 88-kD protein called calnexin.101 Calnexin (also called P88 or IP90) probably is involved in the folding of class I molecules. Association of class I a chains with
b2-microglobulin and peptide is likely to cause dissociation of the chaperone molecules. 102 In addition to its possible functions in protein folding, calnexin may be
considered a quality-control molecule, because it prevents unfolded, misfolded, or incompletely assembled a chain molecules from exiting the ER. 101,103,104,105,106 and 107
Calnexin plays a similar role for other proteins, among them such immunologically important proteins as MHC class II 108,109 and 110 and the a/b chains of the T-cell
receptor, which do not leave the ER until they are fully assembled with the CD3 complex. Calreticulin, another ER-resident molecule, is a lectin-like chaperone that
may replace calnexin after the MHC class I heavy chain binds with b 2-microglobulin. 111 Calreticulin clearly differs from calnexin in the way that it associates with class
I. Another molecule known to associate with immature Ig molecules, called BiP, also may associate with a subset of class I molecules or may associate with class I
molecules in some not-yet-understood sequence with calnexin.
Role of Interferon-g
There is genetic evidence for the related functions of many of the various molecules described in the class I pathway: TAP and proteasome component molecules
appear to be very closely associated with the MHC region encoding class I a chains and class II on chromosome 17 in the mouse or chromosome 6 in the human.
Many of these groups of molecules appear to be regulated in concert, with IFN-g as the conductor. Molecules known to be up-regulated by IFN-g include at least two,
but probably three, proteasome component and regulatory molecules, 112 the peptide transporters, class I heavy chain, and b 2-microglobulin. Note also that some
HSPs also are inducible with IFN-g. 113 Thus, these groups of molecules appear to share regulatory elements that allow them to be regulated in concert.
Nonclassical Major Histocompatibility Complex and Non-Major Histocompatibility Complex–Encoded Class I Molecules
Nonclassical MHC molecules often are labeled as MHC class Ib molecules in the literature. It is now clear that this group of molecules includes members that are not
encoded with the MHC region of the genome. As a group, nonclassical MHC molecules generally are expressed at low levels. They are characterized by limited
polymorphism, in stark contrast to MHC class I or class II molecules, which are among the most polymorphic genes to be described. Here, we summarize only briefly
some examples of nonclassical MHC molecules. A number of excellent reviews of the topic have recently been published. 114,115 and 116
One important class Ib molecule is designated HLA-E. Its homologue in the mouse is likely to be Qa-1. These molecules have limited sequence polymorphism and are
expressed on many different tissues. An important function appears to be modulation of NK-cell activity through binding with NK cell surface CD94/NKG2A (inhibition)
or CD94/NKG2C (activation). 117
HLA-G molecules are expressed by the placenta at the maternal-fetal interface. Mice appear to lack any homologue. Although HLA-G is nonpolymorphic, it behaves in
many ways like classical class I molecules in that its loading in the ER is TAP-dependent and it binds to b 2-microglobulin. HLA-G binds to peripheral blood
myelomonocytic cells.118 Like HLA-E, it may contribute to the inhibition of NK cells. 119
Two other MHC class Ib molecules warrant mention. The first is the mouse H2-M3 molecule, which appears to have a specialized capacity to bind to N-formylated
peptides. Formylated peptides are characteristic of some peptides derived from microorganisms, as well as from “self” mitochondrial proteins. Finally, CD1 is a
molecule encoded outside the MHC that is capable of interacting with both ab and gd T cells. 120 CD1 appears to be able to bind and present hydrophobic lipid- and
lipoglycan-containing molecules. 121,122 At least two different forms of CD1 exist—CD1a and CD1b—which exhibit different intracellular trafficking patterns and some
differences in function. 123,124
MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX CLASS II PATHWAY FOR ANTIGEN PROCESSING
The ability of a cell to process antigens via the class II pathway (see Fig. 4-3) is more specialized than the almost ubiquitous ability of nucleated cells to process
antigen via the class I pathway. Class II–producing cells include macrophages, dendritic cells, Langerhans cells, and B lymphocytes. These cells not only bear class II
heterodimers but also possess the invariant chain monomer, the requisite enzymatic machinery, an important subcellular compartment, and molecules called
HLA-DM, whose essential function in the class II pathway was discovered more recently. As in the class I system, the interaction of class II–peptide complexes with T
cells can now be studied with class II tetramers. 125
Structure and Assembly of Major Histocompatibility Complex Class II Molecules
The class II molecule is very similar to the class I molecule in its general shape, but it is composed of an a chain of 34 kD and a b chain of 28 kD, both of which are
integral membrane glycoproteins (see Fig. 4-4 for a highly schematic representation). a and b chains have transmembrane regions as well as short intracytoplasmic
regions. The a1 and b1 domains of the class II molecule correspond to the a 1 and a2 domains of the class I molecule and thus are directly involved in the binding of the
presented peptide. The a 2 domain of class II corresponds with the b 2-microglobulin light chain of class I. Finally, the b 2 domain of class II corresponds with the a 3
domain of class I and is involved in the binding of CD4.
Newly synthesized MHC class II molecules assemble in the ER. Three a/b dimers assemble together with an invariant chain trimer to form a nine-chain structure. 126
Such a conglomeration is thought to stabilize these molecules during their transport through the Golgi apparatus and into the endosomal system (sometimes via the
cell surface), where they intersect with peptides in a specialized subcellular compartment called the compartment for peptide loading (CPL) by some workers.

Compartment for Peptide Loading
The peptides ultimately presented by class II are derived from protein molecules that generally are acquired from outside the cell (i.e., exogenous) by endocytic
vesicles. These vesicles change in composition as they move away from the periphery of the cell toward the nucleus, become acidified, and acquire high
concentrations of proteolytic enzymes. Pharmacologic agents, such as chloroquine, that disrupt intracellular pH gradients inhibit antigen processing. Furthermore,
mutant cell lines, defective in endosomal acidification, diminish antigen-processing abilities. In B cells, surface-bound Ig molecules may be involved in the acquisition
of antigens for presentation. Protein molecules to be presented by the class II pathway are processed by denaturation and proteolysis to short linear segments, some
of which fit into the antigen-binding groove of class II molecules. These peptides play a role in determining the structure of class II heterodimers.
A unique endosome-related subcellular compartment has been identified in specialized APCs that naturally express class II. Class II molecules are loaded with
antigen in this specialized compartment known as the CPL.127,128,129 and 130 Morphologically, CPLs are somewhat heterogeneous in structure. They are spherical or
tubular and contain internal membrane vesicles or infoldings, covered with class II a/b. These infoldings presumably increase the surface area for class II and help
optimize exposure to potentially antigenic peptides. The invariant chain, Ii, likely targets the class II a/b/Ii complex to the CPL, probably by a dileucine motif in the
cytoplasmic tail of the Ii. 127 Because the FcRII-B2 receptor also contains a dileucine motif, such a motif could be implicated in the specific delivery of antigen
complexed with antibody to the CPL.
Role of Invariant Chain (Ii) in the Folding, Trafficking, and Protection of Class II
Class II heterodimers associate with the Ii in the ER soon after synthesis. Dissociation occurs before expression on the cell surface (see Fig. 4-3). The invariant chain
(Ii) has a single transmembrane domain and an amino-terminal cytoplasmic tail. It is coded for on human chromosome 5 and mouse chromosome 18, and it therefore
is not genetically linked with the MHC. Human Ii has been found in at least four forms: p33, p35, p41, and p43. These variations result from combinations of
alternative splicing and alternative points of the initiation of translation; their different functions are incompletely understood. 131
Ii is known to have at least three important functions. First, it facilitates the folding of class II molecules in a chaperone-like fashion. Second, a specialized portion of
the Ii called CLIP binds to and protects the peptide-binding site from binding by peptides before the designated physiologic site, the CPL. 132 Finally, the cytoplasmic
tail of Ii contains an endosomal targeting sequence that directs cellular routing of associated class II heterodimers.
Facilitating Peptide Loading with HLA-DM
Efficient processing of extracellularly derived protein antigens for presentation on class II molecules does not occur in the absence of HLA-DM. The human and the
murine (designated H-2M) versions of this molecule are heterodimers, the counterparts of which are called DMA and DMB in the human and H-2DMa and H-2DMb in
the mouse.133
These molecules are similar in structure to classical MHC class II molecules, but they are functionally distinct. They do not present peptide antigens to CD4+
lymphocytes but instead reside in the CPL. HLA-DM is likely to induce the dissociation of a nested set of Ii-derived peptides (CLIP) from MHC class II a/b dimers and
facilitates peptide loading. 134 This is likely to be a direct enzyme-like interaction that is optimized at an acidic pH.
ANTIGEN PROCESSING AND PRESENTATION IN MALIGNANCY
Most cells in the body express class I peptide complexes, which are the ligands for the TCR on CD8+ T cells. Some tumor cells clearly present antigenic peptides in
the context of class I, because specific recognition of tumor cells by cytolytic CD8+ T cells results in their destruction in vitro and in vivo. Tumor cells that fail to
process or present antigen recognizable by T cells may enjoy a selective advantage, because they are not susceptible to antigen-specific T cells. 135
Tumor cells escape antigen-specific T-cell recognition by a number of mechanisms. For example, some tumor cells derived from epithelium express either greatly
reduced or absent levels of class I molecules on their surfaces. These histologies include embryonal carcinomas, choriocarcinomas, cervical carcinomas, mammary
carcinomas, small cell carcinomas of the lung, neuroblastomas, some colorectal carcinomas, and some melanomas. Other tumors, including melanoma and renal cell
carcinoma, have been shown to loose b 2-microglobulin. 77,78 Other tumors can down-regulate the expression of particular class I loci, 136 or loose the genes for
particular class I a chains. 137 Still other tumors, including small cell carcinoma of the lung, can down-regulate the proteasome component molecules LMP-2 and LMP-7
and TAP1 and TAP2. 85
SPECIALIZED ANTIGEN-PRESENTING CELLS
How are antigens, and tumor antigens in particular, presented to the immune system in vivo? Although most tumor cells express class I molecules and some tumor
cells express class II molecules, they generally do not express an important set of products called costimulatory molecules (discussed in detail in the next section,
Dendritic Cells), which are believed to be critical for the activation of many T cells resting from prior stimulation and for the activation of all naive T cells. Naive T cells
are those that have not been stimulated by antigen outside the thymus. Specialized cells designated as accessory cells can help lymphocytes to respond to antigens.
These cells include, first and foremost, dendritic cells (DCs), but they also include mononuclear phagocytes (monocytes and macrophages), activated B lymphocytes,
and follicular dendritic cells (FDCs). They are distinguished functionally from the vast majority of somatic cells that can present antigens in the context of MHC only for
recognition as target cells by effector T cells. Antigen stimulation by “professional” APCs, exemplified by activated DCs, can stimulate responses not only by resting T
cells but also by naive T cells.
DENDRITIC CELLS
DCs were so named because of their distinctive cell shapes. They continually extend and retract processes that are reminiscent of dendrites in neural tissue. These
processes presumably increase the DCs' surface area and its ability to sample surrounding tissues. DCs can be differentiated from macrophages by their lack of Fc
receptors and their poor endocytic capacity. While macrophages are persistently adherent to plastic ex vivo, DCs are transiently adherent. They abundantly express
MHC class II molecules as well as a number of costimulatory molecules. 138,139
DCs are far more potent initiators of T-cell–dependent immune responses than any other APC that has been tested. 140 They have a remarkably high density of both
class I and class II molecules on their surfaces, 141 which are loaded with processed antigen acquired in large part from exogenous sources. 142 DCs are of
hematopoietic origin, but they lack B, T, and NK markers, and no specific or unique differentiation antigen has been found on their surfaces. They can be derived from
mononuclear phagocytes under the influence of immunomodulatory molecules in vivo.143 DCs express large quantities of the costimulatory molecules B7-1/CD80 and
B7-2/CD86 as well as other T-cell–activating ligands, including intracellular adhesion molecule-1/CD54 (ICAM-1/CD54). They are likely to play an important role in the
activation of antitumor T cells in vivo.
DCs are mobile, traveling from the epidermis to the afferent lymphatics as part of a process of maturation. They can be found in peripheral blood or in bone marrow,
but in extremely low numbers, and generally are isolated from spleen or blood by a combination of their buoyant density and their adhesive properties. Although
dendritic cells are a rare fraction of the total leukocyte population, they can present antigens efficiently for several days after activation. They acquire this antigen
through a process called cross-priming or cross-presentation in which T-cell responses are activated, by DCs, to cellular antigens that originate outside of the
DCs. 144,145 and 146 DCs can be activated by a number of stimuli including lipopolysaccharide (LPS), the interaction of CD40 and CD40 ligand, and double-stranded
RNA.147,148 and 149
FOLLICULAR DENDRITIC CELLS
FDCs differ from the DCs in many ways. FDCs are likely to be stromal or fibroblast in origin and, unlike DCs, are not from bone marrow stem cells. Although their
name may be confusing, suggesting some relationship to DCs, FDCs are, in fact, functionally unrelated to DCs. Their role in the activation of antitumor responses is
unclear, but they may have an immunologic role in the activation of B lymphocytes.

B LYMPHOCYTES
B cells can concentrate antigen using membrane-bound Ig. Activated B cells can also express large quantities of the costimulatory molecules B7-1 and B7-2. Finally,
B cells clearly present exogenous antigens to CD4+ T cells via their class II molecules, and this is a mechanism for B-cell stimulation of antigen-specific T-cell help.
MONOCYTES AND MACROPHAGES
Mononuclear phagocytes consist mainly of macrophages and monocytes. Monocytes are more differentiated and have more endocytic activity than do macrophages.
Macrophages are found in virtually all tissues, especially surrounding blood vessels and near epithelial cells. They generally have what is called a stellar morphology.
Once they are differentiated, monocytes and macrophages do not divide under normal circumstances. Macrophages in different tissues have different morphologies
and different functions. For example, liver macrophages (generally designated Kupffer cells) are located in the sinusoids. The Kupffer cells are the major cellular
system responsible for the clearance of particulate material or microbes from the circulation. Kupffer cells play a central role in the acute-phase response, releasing
IL-1, IL-6, and TNF on phagocytosing bacteria and their products. Macrophages in the peritoneum are a heterogeneous group of cells and can be microbicidal and
tumoricidal. Alveolar macrophages efficiently remove particulate materials from the alveolar spaces. They also secrete proteases and bactericidal molecules.
Macrophages in bone (osteoclasts) are specialized multinucleated giant cells that are involved in bone resorption and turnover.
Immunologically, macrophages participate as APCs. They can express high quantities of adhesion molecules and, importantly, they express on their surfaces the
costimulatory molecules in the B7 family. As noted later, macrophages can participate as major effector cells in antitumor responses and in resisting infectious agents.
Finally, macrophages can serve to dampen the immune response by secreting inhibitory cyto kines such as IL-10; transforming growth factor-b1 (TGF-b1), -b2, and
-b3; and an IL-1 receptor antagonist. They also ameliorate the cellular immune response by promoting connective tissue repair via such factors as fibroblast growth
factor.

T-CELL RECOGNITION OF ANTIGENS
Immune activities of T cells commonly are stimulated after they bind to certain types of other cells. The activities are not stimulated simply because of the binding,
however. A variety of receptor-ligand interactions occur between the two cell surfaces that initiate T-cell activation. One of these interactions, that between TCRs and
MHC-antigen complexes on the opposing cell surface, is critical for normal antigen-specific activation of most T cells.
ANTIGEN-SPECIFIC T-CELL RECEPTOR
Like other cells, T cells express a wide array of cell surface receptors for different ligands. However, that which is distinctively designated T-cell receptor reacts with
specific antigens, albeit generally only after proper processing and presentation by MHC on a target cell surface. The TCR consists of two paired proteins that form a
transmembrane, nonsecreted heterodimer unique for each clone of T cells and determining the antigen specificity of the TCR. 150 Two types of TCR have been
identified, the ab heterodimer and the gd heterodimer. The crystal structures, determined for four TCRs complexed with peptide-MHC class I and for one TCR
complexed with peptide-MHC class II, demonstrate the structural basis for a TCR recognizing both peptide and MHC. 151,152 In addition, recently developed, soluble,
fluorescent peptide-MHC complexes permit identification of individual T cells with a particular antigen specificity, including human tumor antigens. 153,154 and 155
T-Cell Receptor Genetics
TCR genetics provide the primary source of TCR diversity and antigen specificity. The a, b, g, and d genes encode the TCR by rearrangement from their germline
configuration, as do Ig heavy- and light-chain antibody genes. Families of TCR variable (V) genes exist for each receptor chain. During T-cell differentiation, one of
the V genes rearranges its position among other gene segments by connecting with one of several alternative joining (J) genes, as a result of losing intervening DNA.
A diversity (D) gene between the V and J genes is represented in some but not all classes of chains. This rearranged V(D)J segment encodes the variable region of
each TCR chain. After combination with a constant (C) gene, generation of RNA, and RNA splicing to remove unused intervening sequences between V(D)J and C
regions, the final protein chain is expressed.
The extracellular, amino-terminal portion of the molecule contains the antigen-binding variable segment, whereas the carboxyl-terminal portion contains the constant
region. In contrast to antibodies, the constant region of the T-cell receptor does not contain different subregions that relate to differences in function, such as binding
complement or binding to receptors on the surfaces of other cells. The major functions of the constant region appear to be to provide membrane attachment for the
TCR and to participate in signal transduction.
The overall diversity in each TCR chain is the result of independent selection of any one of the multiple variable V, D, and J segments and of the combinatorial
diversity inherent in the large number of permutations among these choices. Different possible ab or gd pairings also contribute to the TCR diversity. Both molecular
and serologic probes allow the determination of specific V-, D-, and J-region usage for the antigen receptor chains of a given TCR. Although somatic mutation does
not appear to be a source of diversity in TCRs, non–germline-encoded (N) regions at the junctional sites between V-, D-, and J-encoded segments add to overall
receptor diversity.
T-Cell Receptor Structure
Through a process of differentiation, a mature receptor-bearing T cell will express either an ab or a gd heterodimeric TCR. Nearly all T cells that have been
characterized as recognizing specific antigens in an MHC-restricted fashion express ab receptors. 150 On the cell surface, a and b chains, each approximately 40 to 45
kD in molecular weight, are disulfide-linked. Each mature T cell expresses only one b chain gene, because productive rearrangement of a TCR b gene prevents
subsequent full rearrangements of other b genes (allelic exclusion), with rare exceptions. 156,157 The TCR a gene is not subject to allelic exclusion, and T cells have the
potential to express two different a chain genes, one from each allele. 158 Most individual T cells, however, appear to be limited to the functional expression of antigen
receptors with the same a chains. 159
A high frequency of T-cell clones react not only with the foreign antigens that stimulated their response but also with allo-MHC determinants. 160 This dual reactivity
may represent cross-reactivity of a single TCR with different antigens, which would maintain the rule of one cell, one receptor. Nevertheless, the possibility of
significant numbers of T cells expressing two TCR ab receptors has not been excluded. 161,162
The second class of T cells are those expressing gd heterodimers in place of ab heterodimers. 150,163,164 and 165 The g and d chains are also the products of rearranged
genes. The family of V-region genes in the germline is smaller than that for a and b chains; however, additional mechanisms of diversification exist that expand the
mature TCR gd repertoire. Antigen processing and presentation commonly are not needed, and the antigen specificity mediated by gd receptors is predominantly
MHC-unrestricted. Indeed, many TCR gd receptors may recognize intact proteins in their native configuration, as Igs do, rather than as MHC-restricted peptides. TCR
gd receptors are not much involved in most of the classical T-cell responses; however, they appear to serve important roles in the immune system. They can react
with a variety of different antigens, particularly certain HSPs and phosphate-containing nonpeptidic bacterial antigens that have been highly conserved during
evolution. TCR gd cells are in the epithelia of the skin, lung, female reproductive tract, and intestine, where they may contribute to an early line of host defense.
T-Cell Receptor CD3 Complex
Expression of TCRs at the cell surface and also triggering of T cells after the cross-linking of TCRs through binding with antigen depend on the close but noncovalent
association of TCRs with the CD3 complex, which consists of several invariant proteins. 166 Cytoplasmic portions of this complex are critical to TCR-initiated signal
transduction, and particular extracellular portions provide serologic markers commonly used to define mature T cells with anti-CD3 antisera.
Stimulation of T-Cell Receptors by Superantigens
Superantigens involve a very different type of interaction between the TCR, MHC, and antigen that results in linking TCR and MHC. 167,168,169 and 170 Superantigens
(SAgs) bind in varying degrees to many MHC class II molecules on the target cells and to selected TCR b chain variable (Vb) regions on T cells, away from the classic

antigen-binding regions of these molecules. Crystal structures have been determined for the complex of staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB), a bacterial superantigen,
with TCR and also for SEB with MHC class II. 171,172 T-cell specificity for SAgs is determined by whether the T cell expresses the relevant TCR Vb region. SAgs do not
require antigen processing and are not MHC-restricted in the classic sense, as they bind to sites on the MHC class II molecule away from the antigen-binding groove.
They may be soluble or bound to cells, and they may arise from endogenous cellular genes. SAgs studied thus far are primarily viral and bacterial products, including
streptococcal pyrogenic toxins and staphylococcal enterotoxins, notably connected with toxic shock syndrome and selected types of food poisoning. SAgs also appear
to be associated with the human immunodeficiency and rabies viruses. Because of SAgs' binding properties, they can interact with a far higher proportion of T cells
than do standard T-cell antigens. Both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, and possibly T cells expressing selected TCR gd receptors, can be stimulated by SAgs. Like T-cell
responses to standard antigens, the potential results of SAg stimulation include T-cell proliferation, cytokine production, enhanced expression of particular cell surface
molecules, cytotoxic activity, and anergy or cell death.
Major Histocompatibility Complex–Independent Stimulation of T-Cell Receptors
Cross-linking of TCR/CD3 complexes with subsequent cluster formation appears to be a basic requirement for antigen-specific signal transduction in T cells. 173
Antibodies against extracellular domains of the TCR/CD3 complex will substitute for the MHC-antigen complex if the antibodies are anchored to a surface, such as to
other cells through the Fc portion of the antibody or to an artificial surface such as plastic. If the antibody specificity is against a nonpolymorphic determinant, T cells
are nonspecifically stimulated. On the other hand, if the antibody specificity is against a determinant unique to the TCR, then T-cell stimulation is highly specific.
T-cell mitogens, such as concanavalin A, bind to a variety of cell surface glycoproteins and stimulate T cells in a nonspecific fashion. The stimulation may depend on
cross-linking of the TCR/CD3 complex by the mitogens.
Some antigens that are not SAgs may be recognized by T cells in a fashion that is not MHC-restricted and does not require antigen processing. 163,164,174 Described as
being among these antigens are selected polyvalent haptens, myelin basic protein, the heme component of hemoglobin, and underglycosylated mucins produced by
particular adenocarcinomas of the breast, pancreas, colon, and ovary. A common feature of these particular antigens is tandem repeats of an epitope, such as a
particular amino acid sequence for tumor mucins. One model envisioned for this reactivity is based on an antigenic molecule with a polyvalent epitope that mediates
cross-linking of the TCR. These antigens, unlike SAgs, may attach through their epitopes to the classic antigen-binding site of the TCR. However, T-cell activation by
the MUC1 mucin tumor antigen requires target cell binding to both the TCR and accessory molecules on the T-cell surface. 175
In contrast to types of ligands that stimulate T cells independent of MHC, at least two particular types of T cells can recognize antigen in the absence of classical
MHC, namely those expressing TCR gd receptors and also NKT cells, discussed later in the section Natural Killer Cells .

T-CELL MATURATION
During ontogeny and in T-cell development in mature organisms, precursors of T cells migrate from the bone marrow to the thymus, where most T-cell development
occurs. 176,177 A series of important maturation events, which define specific functions of mature T cells, occur in the thymus. Here, among a considerable amount of
cell proliferation and cell death, T cells first express antigen specificity, develop MHC restriction for antigen recognition, and express the cell surface CD4 or CD8
molecules that relate closely to whether the T cell will recognize MHC class I– or class II–restricted antigens. It is here that individual T cells are limited to the
expression of a single functional TCR specificity. It is also here that the first round of selection occurs against maturing T cells that react against the body's normal
tissue antigens.
Much of the current understanding of T-cell maturation is based on models that involve genetic changes related specifically to T-cell function, such as transgenic or
knockout mice with added or deleted germline genes, respectively, and natural mutants that affect the immune system. 178,179 and 180 In addition, mouse models involving
T-cell activation by SAgs have served important roles, because they allow one to monitor the maturation of relatively large numbers of T cells with a known antigen
specificity.
MARKERS AND PHENOTYPES
Cell surface markers based on antibody reactivity have been identified that permit associating individual T cells with a particular stage of maturation. 181,182 The
markers are cell surface molecules, which present a characteristic identifying phenotype of the cell when expressed individually or in a certain combination. For
example, the TCR/CD3 complex now is commonly used as a marker for mature T cells. Thy-1 (mouse) and CD2 are expressed rather ubiquitously but not exclusively
on T cells. CD4 and CD8 are expressed differently by distinct T-cell subpopulations, and mature T cells generally express one but not both.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE T-CELL ANTIGEN REPERTOIRE: ROLE OF THE THYMUS
The antigen repertoire comprises the antigens that a group of T cells can recognize when the T cells are considered as a whole. The limits of the repertoire of all T
cells in the body are set by the combined specificities of TCRs that can be generated. The TCRs that are expressed initially by immature T cells in the thymus
represent random specificities that include binding affinities not only for determinants foreign to the host but also for determinants produced by the host's cells,
including tumor cells. However, as described later in this section and in T-Cell Death in the Thymus, T cells expressing some specificities are favored, whereas many
others are deleted in the thymus.
The TCRs that mediate MHC-restricted recognition of foreign antigens are encoded by germline genes that, with the few exceptions of extrathymic maturation, are first
expressed in the thymus. The TCR repertoire that is expressed by mature T cells as a whole in an individual, however, is molded during at least two points in T-cell
development. The first point occurs in the thymus. The second occurs with mature T cells that have left the thymus, and it is discussed later in the section Peripheral
T-Cell Tolerance .
In mouse models, cells with the general phenotype of Thy-1+CD4–CD8– contain the precursors of the T-cell lineage and are located primarily under the capsule in
the outer cortex of the thymus. Here, they proliferate rapidly. At this stage, rearrangement of the structural gene for the TCR b chain occurs, which suppresses further
rearrangements of the gene and allows assembly of a TCR b chain/surrogate TCR a chain/CD3 complex. This primitive TCR/CD3 complex promotes T-cell maturation
to the expression of CD4, CD8, a mature TCR a chain, and cell surface expression of a functional TCR/CD3 complex. The CD4+CD8+ cells are in the thymic cortex,
are relatively immature with respect to their functional capacity to respond to a variety of stimuli, and constitute by far the most thymocytes. For the most part, they are
destined to die in the thymus.
The CD4+CD8+ double-positive T cells in the thymic cortex undergo selection that results in their deletion or continued maturation ( Fig. 4-5). Positive selection favors
the survival of T cells that, outside the thymus (commonly called the periphery), will react with foreign antigens presented by the same MHC determinants that are
expressed in the thymic environment. Positive selection and termination of TCR a chain rearrangement follows the interaction of the TCR with MHC-peptide ligands,
primarily on the radiation-resistant cortical epithelial cells in the thymus. MHC-bound peptides that promote positive selection are derived primarily from the
endogenous pool of normal proteins within the thymus rather than from foreign proteins. Positive selection may depend on an appropriate level of signaling, triggered
by the TCR/CD3 complex and determined by the avidity that represents the concentrations of MHC, peptide, TCR, and their affinities. However, the nature of the
MHC-peptide ligands driving positive selection in the thymus and their relationship to the MHC-peptide ligands activating T cells in the periphery have not been
established; the relationship may include a TCR's cross-reactivity between one or more MHC-restricted self-peptides in the thymus and an MHC-restricted foreign
peptide in the periphery.

FIGURE 4-5. The fate of T cells maturing in the thymus, based on a model of T-cell receptor (TCR) affinity for the major histocompatibility–antigen complex on
antigen-presenting cells. MHC, major histocompatibility complex; NIL, no affinity.

Expression of the CD4 and CD8 molecules, as well as CD45, has an important role in positive selection and T-cell conversion to CD4 or CD8 single-positive
cells. 183,184,185,186 and 187 TCR and CD45, combined with either CD4 or CD8, frequently are considered as a unit with respect to early signals from the TCR/CD3 complex
and their regulation. The mechanism by which the irrelevant coreceptor, CD4 or CD8, is lost as selected double-positive cells mature into single-positive CD8+CD4–
or CD8–CD4+ T cells and T-cell lineage commitment is not clear.
Self–Major Histocompatibility Complex Defined in the Thymus
Under normal developmental circumstances, the MHC type of the T-cell maturation environment is identical to the genotype of the maturing T cell; that is, the MHC
that is functionally recognized as self by the T cell is also genotypically self. However, under certain experimental or clinical circumstances, functional self and
genotypic self need not be identical. For example, in bone marrow–transplanted patients or experimental animals, hematopoietic stem cells, including the precursors
of T cells, can develop in an MHC environment different from that of the stem cells. In this circumstance, T cells are selected that preferentially recognize foreign
antigen in association with MHC determinants of the host type, even when these are different from the genotypically self-MHC determinants of bone marrow–derived
cells. 188,189 This situation may present important constraints on the ability of hematopoietically derived cells to function effectively in an MHC-restricted fashion.
T-Cell Death in the Thymus
There appear to be three paths that end in the disappearance of T cells in the thymus (see Fig. 4-5). First, immature T cells die if they fail to express a functional
TCR. Second, they die if the TCR fails to react with MHC-antigen complexes. Third, negative selection deletes many of the T cells in the thymus that would otherwise
be reactive against normal tissues. These T cells—primarily CD4+CD8+ but also single positive cells, depending on the experimental system—are deleted or
sometimes rendered unresponsive in a clonal fashion, based on the ability of the TCR to react with MHC-antigen complexes expressed by cells in the thymic stroma.
In contrast to ambiguity about the nature of the TCR ligands (MHC-antigen complexes) that induce positive selection, investigators have identified a variety of ligands
that can cause negative selection. In mouse models involving SAgs or transgenic animals in which many T cells express a selected self-antigen specificity, the
antigens that activate mature T cells can also trigger antigen-specific deletion of immature T cells in the thymus. Both bone marrow–derived and thymic epithelial cells
are effective as APCs for negative selection, although the former appear to be more involved in vivo. CD4 and CD8 coreceptors appear to contribute to the triggering
of negative selection, as does the lymphocyte function–associated antigen-1/intracellular adhesion molecule (LFA-1/ICAM) interaction. Evidence suggests that clonal
T-cell deletion in the thymus has a lower activation threshold than that required for the activation of mature peripheral T cells. This balance would reduce the
likelihood of mature peripheral T cells that can react against normal tissues.
T cells in the thymus that are not selected for further maturation die by apoptosis, a process resulting in programmed cell death. 190,191,192,193 and 194 As many as 99% of
thymocytes in young rodents may be affected. The process is associated with engagement of the TCR and, possibly, costimulatory determinants that result in the
expression of genes connected with apoptosis. Immature T cells whose TCRs fail to bind to other cells in the thymus appear to be preprogrammed for death by
apoptosis. Apoptosis is characterized by cytoplasmic blebbing, shrinkage of the cell (including the nucleus), collapsing of the chromatin into patches, DNA
fragmentation, breakup of the nucleus and, finally, fragmentation of the cell. Apoptosis in thymocytes appears to involve the activation of “suicide” genes, among
which is an endogenous endonuclease. Early in the process, cells undergoing apoptosis in vivo are recognized by particular cell surface changes and are ingested by
phagocytes, so that the end-stages of the process are not reached and local tissue injury from the release of inflammatory agents by dying cells is minimized. 195
The differences in events between positive and negative selection that result in T-cell survival or apoptosis are not clear, but apoptosis may be initiated simply by a
strong signal or set of signals delivered to the immature thymic T cells by a combination of the TCRs and other receptors. The possibility also exists that different
MHC-positive cells in the thymic stroma, and perhaps differences in their MHC-restricted peptides, may contribute to whether the outcome is positive or negative
selection. It appears unlikely that Fas, a cell surface molecule belonging to the family of TNF receptors with cytoplasmic segment “death domains,” which, if triggered,
can initiate apoptosis, is required for thymocyte deletion; however, the issue of Fas involvement is controversial. By contrast, products of the Bcl-2–like family of
genes can promote cell survival and contribute to the regulation of apoptosis. 196 Their function appears to be important for maintaining thymocyte viability in older
animals, but alone their function or lack thereof does not account for positive or negative selection.
Thymic Maturation of gd T Cells
T cells that express the TCR gd receptors for antigen (T gd) can also arise in the thymus, but they are primarily CD4–CD8–, with a minority being CD4–CD8+. They
are the product of a T-cell lineage that shares with T ab cells a common precursor committed to the T-cell lineage. 163,164,197,198 The lineage of T gd cells parts from that
of T ab cells early during T-cell maturation in the thymus. 199,200,201 and 202 Studies carried out with mice whose T cells express TCR gd transgenes indicate that positive
and negative selection of these cells, too, occurs in the thymus.
T-Cell Development through Extrathymic Pathways
Extrathymic pathways for T-cell development in the intestinal epithelium have been studied extensively in thymus-deficient mice. 203,204 and 205 Several unusual features
of these cells have been identified. T cells expressing either TCR ab or gd that have developed extrathymically in the intestinal epithelium are predominantly CD4–
and commonly express an abnormal form of CD8 consisting of aa homodimers rather than the customary ab heterodimers. Also, the use of Vb genes is more
restricted than in their thymus-derived counterparts. Selection of at least some developing T cells may also occur in the intestinal epithelium, but this is an unsettled
issue. T cells generated in the intestinal epithelium usually do not recirculate to other tissues, which reduces their potential for causing autoimmune reactions.
Although their function is not well understood, at least some gd T cells have cytotoxic activity. Recently described NKT cells, described later in the section Natural
Killer Cells , also develop through extrathymic pathways.

ACTIVATION OF MATURE T CELLS
SIGNAL REQUIREMENTS FOR T-CELL ACTIVATION
The responses of mature T cells to activation commonly include combinations of cell proliferation, cytokine production and release, cytotoxic activity, and even death.
The initiation of antigen-specific T-cell activation requires cross-linking and clustering of the TCR/CD3 complex with an antigenic ligand, which generally consists of
an antigenic peptide in association with a self-MHC product on the surface of another cell. The antigen that initiates an immune response does not need to be the
same as that which triggers effector cell functions by the differentiated T cells. Thus, a foreign antigen, or perhaps a SAg, may trigger a response by T cells not
capable of being triggered by self-antigen; however, the resulting effector T cells expressing the same TCRs may also react with self-antigen, albeit at a lower affinity
than with the original stimulating antigen. TCR/CD3 signaling is closely involved with two additional cell surface molecules: CD8 or CD4, and CD45.

CD8 and CD4 Molecules as Coreceptors
CD8 and CD4, which are cell surface glycoproteins expressed by mutually exclusive subsets of mature T cells, serve as coreceptors for delivering the TCR/CD3
signals.152,184,185,206,207 Their role as coreceptors is required for most immune responses by naive T cells and by some activated effector T cells. Acting as coreceptors
during antigen recognition, CD8 or CD4 binds to nonpolymorphic regions of the same MHC molecule that presents antigen to the TCR, thus joining with a complex of
the TCR/CD3. CD8 and CD4 molecules stabilize the TCR/MHC-peptide complex and contribute to both the binding avidity of TCR to the MHC-antigen complex and to
the generation of cytoplasmic signals.
CD45 and T-Cell Activation
CD45, a transmembrane protein tyrosine phosphatase on T cells and other hematopoietic cells, also contributes in a critical fashion to TCR signaling. 208,209 and 210
CD45, generally known as the leukocyte common antigen, is expressed as multiple isoforms resulting from alternative splicing of three exons encoded by a single
gene. It has an essential role in linking antigen-stimulated TCR/CD3 complexes to their cytoplasmic signaling pathways. Although blocking antibodies have not had a
notable effect on T-cell function, T-cell lines lacking CD45 are markedly defective in TCR signaling by MHC-antigen complexes; responsiveness of the cells is
restored by introducing normal CD45 genes. In CD45-deficient mice, thymocyte maturation is largely blocked, and responses of the few peripheral T cells to
MHC-restricted antigens are defective.
Following activation of normal naive T cells, their expression of CD45 changes to a lower-molecular-weight form. The different isoforms of CD45 that are expressed
on naive as compared with activated or memory T cells may contribute to the different triggering responses of these cells. 184
T-Cell Receptor Signal Transduction
The cascades of biochemical reactions that transmit the TCR/CD3 activation signals from the cell surface to nuclear DNA have been partially established. 211,212
Phosphorylation of numerous cytoplasmic and membrane proteins is an essential part of the process. Inositol trisphosphate and diacylglycerol, referred to as second
messengers, are generated by the hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol(4,5)bisphosphate, which is initiated through several biochemical intermediates by triggering the
TCR/CD3 complex. Second messenger is a generic term for molecules produced in response to transduction of a signal initiated by an extracellular ligand, which is
the first messenger. The signal cascade is commonly referred to as the phosphatidylinositol (PI) second messenger pathway. The second messengers are at the
beginning of two major intracellular signaling routes. Inositol trisphosphate and diacylglycerol release free calcium from intracellular stores and activate protein kinase
C, respectively. The mobilization of calcium and activation of protein kinase C by other means, such as calcium ionophores and phorbol esters, respectively, can also
stimulate T-cell division and cytokine production, independent of TCR/CD3 triggering. The two TCR/CD3 signaling routes finally join in a synergistic fashion within the
nucleus to initiate gene transcription. TCR/CD3 complexes that have triggered signaling may be internalized, degraded, and replaced. This process permits
sequential receptor stimulation by individual MHC-peptide complexes on the target cells, and it improves the opportunity for target cells expressing low densities of
antigen to activate T-cell responses.
Some forms of TCR/CD3 triggering may be sufficient to contribute only to partial responses—for example, lymphokine production but not the expression of growth
factor receptors or proliferation. Indeed, the type of T-cell response is sensitive even to single amino acid substitutions in the peptide antigen that are sufficiently
subtle to preserve TCR/CD3 triggering yet different enough to vary the nature of the TCR/CD3 signal and the T-cell functional response. 213 The ultimate T-cell
response depends on the balance of a variety of factors, including the state of differentiation of the responding cell, the nature of the TCR/CD3 signal, and the
different modulating signals from its other cell surface receptors, which, in part, reflect the action of cytokines in the environment and the nature of the APC.
Functional Consequences of T-Cell Receptor Triggering
TCR triggering of T cells commonly induces expression of the high-affinity IL-2 receptor, rouses cells to move from the G 0 resting stage of the cell cycle into the G 1
stage, initiates gene transcription for selected cytokines such as IL-2, and activates effector cell functions of cytotoxic T cells. The IL-2 receptor has a major role in the
proliferation of T cells after activation by antigen. 214,215 and 216 The high-affinity cell surface receptor for IL-2 consists of three transmembrane chains—a, b, and g—and
is expressed only by activated T cells owing to the lack of a chain expression by resting T cells. The high-affinity receptor promotes T-cell proliferation with relatively
low concentrations of IL-2. The b chain, which is expressed constitutively by CD8+ but not by CD4+ T cells, combines with the g chain to form an IL-2 receptor with an
intermediate affinity that is approximately 1/100 that of the high-affinity receptor and is expressed on naive T cells. Expression of the b chain is also up-regulated
following T-cell activation. Thus, signals from triggered TCRs generally leave naive and many memory T cells poised to generate the T-cell growth factor, IL-2, among
other cytokines. The cells also are poised to proliferate after IL-2 binding to and triggering of IL-2 receptors. The result of TCR signaling, however, is not necessarily
the staging of an antigen-specific immune response. As described later in the section Deletion of Mature T Cells , it may precipitate cell death by apoptosis.
Adhesion and Accessory Molecules
Relatively weak interactions between the TCR and antigen can be reinforced. Binding of accessory molecules to ligands on APCs, such as LFA-1 to ICAMs, CD2 to
LFA-3, and CD5 to CD72, enhances conjugation of the two cells and thereby raises the likelihood of interactions between the TCR and the MHC-peptide complexes
(Fig. 4-6).217,218

FIGURE 4-6. Some of the cell surface molecules associated with receptor-ligand pairing during T-cell recognition of antigens on antigen-presenting cells (APCs).
ICAM, intracellular adhesion molecule; LFA-1, lymphocyte function–associated antigen-1; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; TCR, T-cell receptor.

Molecules that facilitate the binding of a lymphocyte to its target cell have been referred to as adhesion molecules. However, an increasing number of these molecules
also appear to provide signaling activity after engagement with their ligands, either by enhancing the signal generated by the TCR or by contributing independent
stimulatory signals. 182,219,220,221 and 222 CD28, CD2, CD5, LFA-1, CD44, CD69, CD4, and CD8 are examples of cell surface receptors that contribute to the signaling
events. Optimal activation of T cells with weak avidity for an antigen is thus dependent on receptor-ligand interactions that promote the binding of T cells to APCs and
that contribute to the T-cell–activating signals.
CD28 SIGNALING IN T-CELL ACTIVATION
Triggering the TCR/CD3 complex is often referred to as the first signal for T-cell activation. With naive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and many memory cells as well, the
first signal alone is commonly insufficient for stimulating IL-2 production, proliferation, and differentiation. CD28 molecules on the T-cell surface can provide a critical
second or costimulatory signal by engaging the B7 family of ligands on the APCs, particularly in inflamed sites where APCs are optimally activated. 223,224 Mice that
lack CD28 appear unable to generate T-cell responses to certain viruses or to generate T-cell–dependent antibody responses. CD28 is a homodimeric

transmembrane glycoprotein found on the majority of human peripheral T cells and, in the mouse, on almost all T cells in lymphoid organs or the peripheral blood.
Activation of T cells enhances the expression of CD28 and also induces the expression of CTLA-4, a structural homologue of CD28 with a lower level of surface
expression than CD28 but a far higher avidity for ligands in the B7 family. 225,226 and 227 CD28 and CTLA-4 signals can have opposite effects. Cross-linking CTLA-4 by
B7 ligand can inhibit T-cell activation, IL-2 production, and subsequent cell proliferation. Mice lacking CTLA-4 experience severe, generalized T-cell
lymphoproliferation and die within several weeks after birth. Consequently, CTLA-4 may provide a mechanism for down-regulating a T-cell response.
B7 Family of Ligands
The B7 family of ligands for CD28 and CTLA-4 has two key members: B7-1 (CD80), originally called B7 or BB1, and B7-2 (CD86), each of which can trigger second
signals.228,229,230 and 231 They are both expressed by APCs: the DCs, monocyte-macrophages, and activated B cells described earlier in the section Specialized
Antigen-Presenting Cells. They have also been detected on activated T and NK cells. Encoded by separate genes, B7-1 and B7-2 each react with CD28 and CTLA-4
with similar binding affinities, and they have, in part, overlapping and redundant functions. However, there are significant differences in their rates of enhanced
expression on activated cells and in their contributions to the development of autoimmune disease in several animal models.
Functional Consequences of the Second Signal
For naive and many memory T cells, the signaling pathway associated with triggering CD28 completes the pathway for T-cell activation that was initiated by
TCR/CD3.211 Triggering CD28, among other activities, appears to stimulate prolonged IL-2 production by increasing the half-life of its messenger RNA (mRNA) and by
increasing the rate of gene transcription.
IL-2, a single 15-kD polypeptide, is the major growth factor for T cells. 232,233 and 234 Although not produced by resting T cells, IL-2 is generated after cell activation,
particularly by the Th1 subset of CD4+ helper T cells. Extracellular levels of IL-2 are tightly regulated by the requirement for continuous activation signaling for
transcription of its gene, by the controlled half-life of its mRNA, by its serum half-life of minutes, and by the short life span of the activated T cells producing IL-2. IL-2
stimulates both cell proliferation and survival. Activated T cells commonly die without IL-2, as described later in the section Deletion of Mature T Cells .
Mice that are unable to produce IL-2 are only modestly immunodeficient, although they are more prone to autoimmune diseases and die at a young age. The
explanation may represent imperfect redundancy among subsets of cytokines. For example, partial compensation for IL-2 may be provided by IL-15, which can
stimulate proliferation and differentiation of T cells. 235,236 The second signal also increases the production of other cytokines (e.g., IFN-g and GM-CSF) likely by the
same mechanisms as associated with IL-2. In addition, the second signal activates genes whose products, particularly Bcl-xl, protect against apoptosis, as described
later in the section Deletion of Mature T Cells .
In some mouse models, CD28/B7 interactions induce sufficiently high IL-2 production by CD8+ cells that CD8+ CTLs can be generated in the absence of CD4+ T-cell
help.237 Indeed, a major function of helper T cells for CD8+ T-cell responses may be to activate APCs and their expression of costimulatory ligands, such as B7, rather
than simply to provide such cytokines as IL-2 directly to the responding CD8+ T cells. Thus, TCR engagement initiates the response in an antigen-specific fashion,
while the requirement for a second signal tends to restrict the response of naive T cells to APCs that provide both antigen and second signals. 238
Normal cells that express a TCR-reactive antigen but lack a second signal ligand will generally not activate naive T cells; indeed, these cells may induce anergy by
apoptosis, as described later in the section T-Cell Clonal Anergy . Of note, T cells can respond even if the ligands for first and second signals are on separate cells, as
might be the case for activating CD8+ CTL precursors, with a first signal stimulated by tumor cells and a second signal by APCs. Having the two signals initiated by
the same cell is far more efficient, however.
The stimulation requirements of one T-cell population can differ substantially from those of another. For example, naive CD8+ and CD4+ T cells require both TCR
triggering and second signals to proliferate and generate activated effector cells. Activated effector cells, however, do not require second signals to engage and kill
target cells or release cytokines. 239,240,241 and 242 The effector cells also do not need to produce IL-2 or to proliferate.
Costimulatory molecules on APCs that can provide critical second signals in the absence of the B7 family have been reported, such as ICAM-1 (the ligand for LFA-1),
heat-stable antigen, and selected members of the TNF family. 222,243,244 They apparently are not, however, the usual primary source of second signals, and the T-cell
response is commonly partial and suboptimal. Alternative sources of costimulation are most effective when combined with a strong primary signal from the TCR.
ENDING THE NORMAL IMMUNE RESPONSE OF ACTIVATED T CELLS
Eliminating most of the activating antigen generally results in death by apoptosis for the responding lymphocytes, except for those remaining as memory cells. 177,193,245
After antigen clearance, the priorities of the antigen repertoire of a body's T cells return toward their baseline levels, with emphasis represented by memory cells.
Studies of this subject, which are at a relatively early stage, indicate that many factors can contribute to the death or suppression of T cells activated in an immune
response and that no factor acting alone is generally responsible. Perhaps the foremost factor is that in the absence of antigen, the stimulation for producing
supportive cytokines—particularly IL-2—disappears, resulting in death of the activated T cells. Also, antiapoptosis factors in the Bcl-2 family, which raise the threshold
for death from IL-2 withdrawal, diminish without the T-cell activation signals. In addition, activated T cells express CTLA-4 at the cell surface, and triggered CTLA-4
can interfere with CD28-induced activation signals, as described earlier in the section CD28 Signaling in T-cell Activation . Activated T cells also express members of
the TNF receptor family with death domains, such as Fas, which can trigger apoptosis when cross-linked. Thus, activated T cells are more at risk for apoptotic death
than are resting cells. There are other factors too. Antiinflammatory cytokines, TGF-b and IL-10 in particular, are produced by activated lymphocytes and
macrophages or by tumor cells (TGF-b). These cytokines inhibit T-cell expansion, which contributes to the weakening of a response. Recent studies have identified
the liver as the key site where circulating, activated CD8+ T cells are trapped, after which they die by apoptosis. 246 Suppressor T cells may interfere with activated T
cells or their generation, as described later in the section Supressor T-Cell. T-cell responses may also be ended prematurely by mechanisms associated with
peripheral T-cell tolerance.
PERIPHERAL T-CELL TOLERANCE
In contrast to immune responses running a normal course, they can be avoided or aborted very early in the face of naive T cells capable of recognizing the antigen of
interest. These events contribute to tolerance, which can be considered, in the broad sense, as failure of the host to generate a normal T-cell response against the
antigen of interest and, consequently, failure of the host to clear away cells expressing the antigen. From the broad view, immunoregulatory factors that contribute to
ending a normal T-cell response, discussed in the previous section, may contribute to tolerance too, if they help to abort the response. Of note, mechanisms not
addressed here can account for a host's failure to reject cells against which a normal, sustained T-cell response has been generated.
The potential for mature T-cell responses to self-antigens is reduced in the thymus in an antigen-specific fashion by negative selection, a condition referred to as
central tolerance. However, some T cells leaving the thymus have the potential to react against self-antigens in the periphery. Escape of self-reactive T cells from the
thymus is particularly likely for cells that can react in the periphery with tissue-specific antigens unlikely to be presented adequately or imitated in the thymus in a
fashion sufficient to induce clonal deletion. The escaped T cells may encounter more potent immunizing conditions in the periphery, which are sufficient to stimulate
T-cell activity against MHC/self-peptide complexes on normal host cells that otherwise would be ignored. For example, an inflamed environment occurring naturally or
as part of intentional immunization might reach the threshold necessary for triggering otherwise unresponsive, self-reactive T cells by activating APCs and
up-regulating cell surface ligands and receptors that promote immune responses. The lack of a reaction between these potential antigen-responsive T cells and
relevant antigens that are present in the body has been referred to as a state of immunologic ignorance that, when overcome, may result in autoimmunity.
Tolerance among mature T cells can also be induced in the periphery in an antigen-specific fashion by causing cellular anergy, in which the T cells are unresponsive
to the antigen, or by deleting the cells.
T-CELL CLONAL ANERGY
In a variety of mouse models, primarily in vitro ones, naive T cells and some memory T cells become anergic in an antigen-specific or clonal fashion after TCR
triggering (signal 1) in the absence of costimulation (signal 2). 223,247,248 The anergic cells are not deleted; they produce cytokines other than IL-2, albeit at subnormal

levels, and they generate increased amounts of high-affinity IL-2 receptor. They do not, however, produce IL-2 or proliferate, even under optimal conditions for normal
activation. The antiproliferative state can develop within a day of antigen exposure and presumably can last as long as the anergic cells are exposed to antigen. The
anergy results from a block in IL-2 gene transcription.
CD4+ Th1 and many CD8+ naive T cells are susceptible. 249 Anergy appears to be inducible only in cells that secrete IL-2, and it can be reversed in at least some
cases with IL-2 or by removing the source of antigen.
The opportunities for delivery of signal 1 alone for antigens associated with autologous cells are numerous. Most nucleated cells express MHC class I with
endogenous antigens, but relatively few can also provide signal 2. Signal 1 for antigens complexed with MHC class II may be provided without signal 2 by resting B
cells and by selected cell types in areas of inflammation, such as vascular endothelial cells. DCs that express MHC class I–restricted antigens by cross-priming, as
discussed earlier in the section Dendritic Cells, but are not well activated may be a common source in draining lymph nodes of tolerance-inducing cells for
self-antigens. 250,251 and 252 Whether anergy is a prelude to cell death is an unsettled issue.
Other mechanisms or events that have been associated with a reversible, functional inactivation in various models include down-regulation of expression of the
TCR/CD3 complex and CD8 253,254 and exposure to structurally suboptimal ligands. 255 Future studies will determine the extent to which the existing observations of
anergy and ways of reversing it can be generalized to both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in various states of activation or differentiation and to in vivo situations.
DELETION OF MATURE T CELLS
After activation, mature peripheral T cells can be deleted by repetitive restimulation with high concentrations of antigen. 256,257,258,259 and 260 Conventional antigens, SAgs,
T-cell mitogens, and antibodies against the TCR/CD3 complex have all been associated with the outcome. The process, referred to as activation-induced cell death
(AICD), can affect Th1 and Th2 CD4+, CD8+, and TCR gd+ T cells. In most cases, T-cell deletion is preceded by IL-2 release from the activated cells, rapid
proliferation, and enhanced expression of Fas and Fas ligand for several days, followed by an apoptotic death. When activated, proliferating T cells pass through the
late G1 or S phase of the cell cycle, where they appear to be far more susceptible to apoptosis than in the resting stage.
The roles of factors contributing to AICD, such as the strength of the TCR stimulation, the presence of various cytokines, and cosignals delivered by accessory cells,
are unsettled. However, the deletion appears to be caused by apoptosis triggered primarily by Fas but also by the receptor for TNF, both of which are up-regulated on
activated T cells and subject to triggering by their respective ligands, which are also expressed by activated T cells. Studies of Fas-mediated AICD indicate that
apoptosis affects primarily the activated T cells with TCRs bound to antigen at the time that Fas is triggered. Activated T cells from mice with a defect in the Fas gene
are less susceptible to AICD than normal T cells. 261 These mice exhibit lymphoproliferative and autoimmune disorders. AICD may also serve a normal physiologic
function by limiting the height and duration of a T-cell response. Products of the Bcl-2–like family of genes appear to protect against peripheral T-cell apoptosis,
particularly Bcl-xl, which can be induced by costimulation from CD28 and can resist either death associated with IL-2 withdrawal or, in some cases, death from
activation of Fas. 193,262,263
A high and persistent load of antigen can induce clonal deletion of CTLs and result in a state designated as high-zone tolerance.264,265 and 266 High-zone tolerance may
develop through clonal anergy, clonal deletion, or both, and it appears particularly relevant to the tumor-bearing situation where high levels of antigen prevail.
Withdrawal of IL-2 can also result in the death of activated T cells. 193,260,267 The mechanism differs significantly from that associated with the triggering of receptors in
the TNF receptor family, such as Fas. IL-2 withdrawal and Fas stimulation probably involve two at least partially different apoptosis pathways. For example, apoptosis
associated with IL-2 withdrawal is better inhibited by selected members of the Bcl-2 family than apoptosis associated with Fas. Unlike Fas-mediated apoptosis, IL-2
withdrawal may destabilize mitochondria, resulting in leakage of cytochrome c and subsequent initiation of apoptosis. Moreover, apoptosis from IL-2 withdrawal may
be prevented by other T-cell growth cytokines, such as IL-4, IL-7, and IL-15.

STATES OF MATURE T CELLS
NAIVE, EFFECTOR, AND MEMORY T CELLS
Three populations of T cells—naive T cells, effector T cells, and memory T cells—constitute the antigen repertoire of the pool of mature T cells. 268,269,270 and 271 They
differ by their state of activation and by prior exposure to antigen. The T cells commonly referred to as naive or virgin are immunocompetent T cells that have not
encountered antigen in the periphery, such as those that have just emerged from the thymus, the primary lymphoid organ for generating mature T cells from
nonfunctional precursors. After activation, these cells may develop specific functions associated with cytotoxic activity or the release of particular cytokines. In this
activated state, they are referred to as effector cells. After a short period in the activated state, most of the cells die, but some appear to become memory cells. The
extent of T-cell death depends, in part, on the dose of antigen, with lower doses resulting in less death. Products of the Bcl-2–like family of genes provide a level of
protection against Fas-mediated apoptosis of activated mature T cells, and this may contribute to the survival of memory T cells after a T-cell response.
Naive T cells are long-lived and circulate through the blood stream and lymphatics between the secondary lymphoid organs, such as lymph nodes, where they may
encounter APCs presenting their specific antigens and be activated. The long life span of naive T cells appears to depend on their TCRs interacting with normal cells
expressing complexes of MHC/self-peptide; otherwise, the naive cells die by apoptosis. 272,273 The interaction does not trigger cell activation and the generation of
effector functions,273 perhaps because TCR triggering is relatively weak, as with positive selection in the thymus. Naive T cells are uncommon in nonlymphoid tissues.
They are primarily resting cells that do not proliferate rapidly without antigen stimulation, which would change them to the activated or effector category.
Consequently, little of the antigen repertoire represented by naive T cells is against a particular pathogen, unless a SAg is involved, as discussed earlier in the
section Stimulation of T-Cell Receptors by Superantigens . As a whole, naive T cells form the bulk of the body's antigen repertoire and, in response to general T-cell
depletion, the body's naive T-cell population commonly will expand back to its baseline numbers. 177
Effector T cells generally are activated, can proliferate rapidly, act immediately after target cell contact (e.g., cytolysis or cytokine release), and are short-lived.
Exhibiting homing properties different from those of naive T cells, they are commonly found in nonlymphoid, extravascular tissues.
Memory T cells are characterized by their ability to generate an immune response that is earlier, more intense, and longer-lasting than that of naive cells, after
reexposure of the host to the same antigen or a cross-reacting antigen. Unlike effector cells, however, they do not carry out effector cell functions immediately after
antigen stimulation, in the context of cytolysis or cytokine release. Their presence in both lymphoid and nonlymphoid peripheral tissues, including areas of
inflammation, may reflect the homing patterns of different subsets of memory cells. 274 They appear to be descended from naive T cells that have been activated,
although the nature of the progenitors has not been settled, such as naive cells versus effector cells. The memory response probably is associated with a higher
frequency of precursors to the effector cells and higher levels of cell surface signaling and adhesion molecules on the memory cells. 275,276 T-cell memory appears to
involve a chronic proliferation of T cells responding to persisting antigen, at least for relatively short-term memory. In at least some cases, long-term memory may
persist in the absence of the immunizing foreign antigen and even cross-reacting foreign or self-antigen. 177 Some of the memory T cells, probably those not
encountering foreign antigen, may be in a resting (nonproliferative) state. As discussed earlier in the sections T-Cell Clonal Anergy and Deletion of Mature T Cells , T
cells specifically reactive with the antigen may be deleted or functionally inactivated. In response to general T-cell depletion, the body's memory T cells expand back
to their baseline numbers, independent of that for naive T cells and that for B lymphocytes. 177
PHENOTYPES OF ANTIGEN-STIMULATED T CELLS
Characteristic cell surface markers have greatly facilitated tracking antigen-activated effector T cells and distinguishing them from naive T cells. The activated mature
peripheral T cells express CD45RO, a low-molecular-weight isoform of CD45, and relatively little of the higher-molecular-weight form (CD45RA) associated with naive
cells. They may also express a variety of cell surface molecules at higher levels than are found on naive T cells, including CD2, LFA-1, LFA-3, CD27, CD29, CD44,
CD69, adhesion molecules in the very late activation antigen (VLA) series that react with extracellular matrix proteins, the IL-2R a chain associated with high-affinity
IL-2 receptor activity, and MHC class II molecules. CD44 is commonly used as a marker for memory cells, because of persistent expression by the cells. As the
activated cells revert to a resting stage, many of the activation markers are lost. An unsettled issue is how well cell surface markers can distinguish between activated
cells and memory cells; consequently, the two types of cells are grouped together here.

T-CELL MIGRATION
The antigen repertoire of peripheral T cells can be partitioned, to an extent, in the body through the selected migration of T cells out of the circulation. Naive T cells
exit the circulation directly into lymphoid tissues through a specialized type of venule designated high endothelial venules.277,288 and 279 The movement of the T cells
through the endothelium occurs in several sequential steps that involve progressively tighter binding of the lymphocytes to the endothelial wall and, finally, migration
through the endothelium into the extravascular space. Specialized adhesion molecules on naive T cells (e.g., L-selectin), binding to particular mucin-like molecules on
the high endothelial venule, provide specificity for the exit site. The process of cell migration into particular tissues and microenvironments is also called homing.
Effector and most memory cells do not bear receptors (e.g., L-selectin) associated with migration directly into normal secondary lymphoid tissues. Instead, they
migrate to other selected sites, such as the gastrointestinal wall, the skin, and sites of inflammation. Other receptors not expressed by naive cells have been identified
(e.g., VLA-4 for inflamed sites and cutaneous lymphocyte antigen for skin) that contribute to the selective exit sites for memory and effector T cells.
Chemotactic cytokines, or chemokines, contribute to the exit sites for cells by binding to specific determinants on the endothelial wall, such as macrophage
inflammatory protein-1b (MIP-1b), which binds to selected proteoglycans on the endothelium and promotes T-cell adhesion, particularly of CD8+ T cells. 280
Inflammation and associated cytokines also up-regulate lymphocyte-binding ligands expressed by the endothelial cells.
The tissue migration of lymphocytes, and of leukocytes in general, is largely influenced by chemokines. 176,281,283 and 283 These small proteins belong to a family of at
least 40 members in humans. On the basis of a cysteine motif, most of the chemokines and their receptors are classified as in the CXC (a) or CC (b) subfamilies. At
least 15 cell surface, G protein–coupled receptors for chemokines have been identified. Chemokines in the CXC subfamily act primarily on neutrophils and other
selected leukocytes, whereas those in the CC subfamily generally act on a different spectrum of leukocytes and not on neutrophils. Within a subfamily, there is
redundancy in receptor-ligand pairing in that most receptors bind more than one chemokine and several chemokines can bind to more than one receptor. A single cell
can express different chemokine receptors; thus, cell migration may respond to combinatorial patterns and gradients of chemokines. Cells activated by chemokines
may change in other ways, too, such as modulating the expression of cell surface adhesion molecules. Although the conditions have not been resolved under which
several types of cells do or do not express particular chemokine receptors, a general pattern is emerging in which chemokine receptor expression, and thus
responsiveness to chemokines, may vary with the subtype of cell, such as Th1 versus Th2 T cells, with resting or immature versus activated or mature cells, and with
the source of activation. For example, immature DCs express receptors for chemokines commonly produced at sites of inflammation by resident cells and infiltrating
leukocytes and, hence, may home to these sites, where they gather antigens, are activated by cytokines associated with inflammation, and appear to alter their
expression of receptors to ones associated with chemokines produced constitutively in normal lymphoid tissues, with subsequent homing to these sites.
Consequently, the recruitment of particular combinations of cells to selected sites, such as naive CD8+ T cells, CD4+ Th1 helper cells, and APCs, is strongly
influenced by an integrated combination of cytokines and chemokines. By regulating lymphocyte migration to particular anatomic sites, chemokines affect not only the
activation of lymphocytes by antigens but the development and maturation of normal lymphoid tissues.

FUNCTIONS OF MATURE T CELLS
T cells carry out direct and final effector functions. They can also regulate the effector functions of distinct cell populations. This multiplicity of functions confers a
potentially pivotal role for the T cell in immune responses.
The CD4+ and CD8+ subsets of T cells differ from one another in important functional parameters. 249,284,285 CD4+ T cells frequently express a “helper” phenotype, as
measured by their ability to help B-cell responses (antibody secretion) or the responses of other T-cell populations. CD8+ T cells frequently are cytotoxic or are
capable of suppressing the immune response of other lymphoid populations. However, these correlations of CD4/8 phenotype with function are by no means absolute.
The bias toward helper function in CD4+ T cells appears to be the indirect consequence of the fact that most helper cells are MHC class II–restricted, and the bias
toward cytotoxic function in CD8+ T cells results from the fact that most cytotoxic T cells are MHC class I–restricted. The restrictions are a consequence of CD4 and
CD8 molecules binding to conserved determinants expressed by MHC class II and class I molecules, respectively.
The relationship works out well conceptually in that cells other than APCs, expressing antigenic peptides complexed with MHC class I molecules, generally express
endogenously produced antigens, such as virus-infected cells and tumor cells that are targets of the host immune response. In contrast, cells expressing antigenic
peptides complexed with MHC class II molecules generally have acquired the antigens from exogenous sources, and these cells stimulate the immune response
rather than serve as targets of the response.
HELPER T CELLS
In a variety of immune responses, one T-cell population facilitates or helps the development of effector functions of other T or B lymphocytes. The best-studied
example is T-cell help for particular antibody responses by B cells. 286,287 and 288 This function may involve specific signals transmitted by direct interaction of helper T
cells and B cells as well as signals delivered by T-cell lymphokines.
The generation of CTLs in situ also generally requires help from other T cells. 287,288 The helper T cells, activated on APCs, may provide IL-2 and other cytokines for
nearby CTL precursor cells attached to the same APCs. The predominant activity of helper T cells, however, may be to promote progressive self-activation and APC
activation through TCR/MHC-peptide coupling and CD40/CD40L coupling between conjugated helper T cells and APCs, followed by the activated APCs instigating
the critical first (TCR-triggering) and second (e.g., CD28-triggering) signals for activating attached naive CTL precursors. 289,290 and 291 In addition, the activated APCs
may provide important cytokines, such as IL-12, for CTL activation. The latter pathway allows for the stimulation of CTL precursors by APCs activated in the absence
of helper T cells, which occurs with some types of microbial infections.
CD4+ T-CELL SUBSETS
CD4+ helper T cells have been further subdivided into two groups of cells, Th1 and Th2, on the basis of the patterns of cytokines that they secrete after being
stimulated.249,292,293,294,295,296,297 and 298 In contrast to the T-cell receptor, which determines the specificity of the T cell, the secreted cytokines determine the function of
the T cell. One group promotes primarily cellular immune responses and the other group humoral immune responses. Thus, in mouse models, Th1 cells secrete
primarily IL-2, IFN-g, and TNF-b (lymphotoxin), but not IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, or IL-10, and they promote delayed-type hypersensitivity responses, cytotoxic cell responses,
and macrophage activation. Responses by Th1 cells promote cellular immune inflammatory reactions and appear to provide the primary host immune defenses
against intracellular pathogens. By contrast, Th2 cells secrete IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, and IL-10, but not IL-2 or IFN-g, and they promote B-lymphocyte responses and the
synthesis of IgG, IgE, and IgA antibodies. Responses by Th2 cells promote humoral immunity, allergic reactions, and immediate hypersensitivity reactions, which
provide defenses against extracellular pathogens. Th1 and Th2 cells appear to represent a later stage of differentiation from Th0 cells, which display an intermediate
cytokine profile. Naive T cells generate primarily IL-2 after stimulation, and the pattern of cytokines surrounding these stimulated T cells strongly influences whether a
Th1 or Th2 type of response develops.
The responses of the two classes of helper T cells are influenced differently by many factors, including the nature of the antigen and its dose, the type of APC and its
membrane-bound costimulatory signals, and various pharmacologic agents. As with humoral and cellular immunity, the responses of the two classes of helper T cells
often are regulated in a reciprocal fashion, and here the influence of cytokines is critical. For example, in mouse models, the presence of IFN-g and IL-12 and the
absence of IL-4 tend to promote the activation of Th1 cells, whereas IL-4 and IL-10 tend to promote the activation of Th2 cells. Reciprocal roles for individual
cytokines have been observed, in that IFN-g can directly inhibit the proliferation of Th2 cells, and IL-10 can inhibit cytokine production by Th1 cells indirectly by
inhibiting macrophage activation of the Th1 cells.
Patterns of secreted cytokine profiles have been extended to subgroups of CD8+ cytotoxic cells and to T gd cells as well, which are referred to as type 1 cells if they
secrete Th1-like cytokines (the major subgroup), or as type 2 cells if they secrete Th2-like cytokines. 299,300 and 301 Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells in these categories are also
referred to as Tc1 or Tc2cells.
Cytokine patterns themselves have been identified as type 1 or type 2, analogous to those typically produced by Th1 or Th2 mouse cells, to refer to their functions

rather than their cellular source. 302 This frame of reference has been useful when cells other than CD4+ T cells contributed to the cytokine pool, such as NK cells
(e.g., IFN-g) and macrophages or B cells (e.g. IL-10).
SUPPRESSOR T CELLS
T-cell suppression of other T cells can be mediated by a variety of mechanisms. 287,303,304 and 305 Suppressor cell activity has been associated with both CD4+ and CD8+
T cells.
In some instances, suppression appears to be antigen-nonspecific. Possible mechanisms include an effect of cytokines that nonspecifically interfere with proliferation
or differentiation of immune cells. For example, CD4+ Th1 and Th2 helper T cells can each release cytokines that nonspecifically suppress the other, promoting
“immune deviation” toward a Th1-propelled cellular response or a Th2-propelled humoral response. Alternatively, bystander T cells, activated against other antigens,
may consume the cytokines essential for T-cell responses against the antigen of interest. States of increased nonspecific suppression have been observed in several
pathologic conditions, including some tumor-bearing hosts.
In other cases, suppression may be highly antigen-specific. 304,306,307 and 308 Suppressor T cells may also act directly on the T cells being suppressed, by exerting veto
activity. Veto cells destroy T cells that recognize antigens on the surface of the veto cell. 309,310 and 311 In addition, cytotoxic CD4+ Th1 cells may suppress a response by
damaging APCs expressing antigens restricted by MHC class II. Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells may act in a similar fashion, as at least some APCs appear able to process
exogenous antigens and present them as MHC class I–restricted, as described earlier in the section Dendritic Cells.
Suppressive influences can exist in any immune response. The absence of a strong immune response does not necessarily reflect the absence of antigen recognition
by the immune system but rather may reflect suppression.

CYTOTOXIC EFFECTOR CELL MECHANISMS
Different host mechanisms for destroying target cells have evolved, resulting in a diverse collection of cytotoxic cells capable of reacting against a wide variety of
foreign cells and organisms. A common feature among them, however, is that cytotoxicity is a regulated process. They are generally activated as a result of cell
surface ligands on the target cells binding and triggering selected cell surface receptor molecules on the effector cells.
Major sources of cytotoxic effector cells that have been studied extensively are CTLs, NK lymphocytes, and activated macrophages.
CYTOTOXIC T LYMPHOCYTES
CTLs result from classic T-cell immune responses: (1) The CTL response is initiated by exposure to antigen, (2) generation and regulation of the response depends
on a complex MHC-dependent interaction of antigen-processing cells and T cells, (3) the T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) provides MHC-dependent antigen specificity
for the interaction between CTLs and target cells, and (4) memory responses commonly follow reexposure to the antigen, resulting in more rapid, longer, and
higher-level responses.
CTLs do not have a characteristic morphology. They may appear as small, resting, agranular lymphocytes or as large, blastic, granular cells or as gradations in
between.
All CTLs express the TCR/CD3 complex (described earlier in the section T-Cell Receptor CD3 Complex), which triggers antigen-specific responses. Most CTLs do not
express cell surface receptors for Ig (FcR). 312,313 Most CTLs express either CD8 or CD4 molecules (primarily CD8) but rarely both. In mouse models, both CD8+ and
CD4+ T cells can mediate tumor rejection.314 The class of MHC molecule with which the target cell antigen is associated correlates with whether the CTL is CD4+ or
CD8+: CD8+ CTLs recognize primarily MHC class I–associated antigens, and CD4+ CTLs recognize primarily MHC class II–associated antigens.
The distinction between T cells with cytotoxic activity and those with helper activity is not absolute. For example, stimulated CD4+ Th1 T cells can be cytotoxic by the
Fas ligand pathway described later in this section (probably their most cytotoxic common pathway), by the release of cytotoxic granules, or by the release of a
relatively slow-acting cytotoxic product, lymphotoxin. 315 Stimulated CD4+ Th1 T cells also may release cytokines, such as IL-2 and IFN-g, that can promote CTL
generation. Moreover, these cells may release GM-CSF after stimulation, which can promote tumor rejection, perhaps through enhancing the development of DCs and
their role as APCs. 316 Thus, Th1 or inflammatory CD4+ T cells have the potential to be either helper cells or cytotoxic cells; however, antigen-specific triggering of
these cells will be primarily from MHC class II–restricted antigens on the target cells.
Although CTLs use different pathways to destroy target cells, common features are found. The cytolytic reactions generally are triggered by cross-linking of the TCRs
on CTLs after contact with target cell antigens expressed at the cell surface. A variety of costimulatory accessory molecules, mentioned earlier in the section Adhesion
and Accessory Molecules, may not only facilitate the binding of CTLs to target cells but may contribute to T-cell triggering by the TCRs. Consequently, the activation
of only a few TCRs or TCRs with low affinity for MHC-antigen complexes may be capable of triggering T cells with the support of cosignaling molecules. Death of the
target cells usually includes apoptosis, with such distinguishing characteristics as membrane blebbing, chromatin condensation, and DNA fragmentation, followed by
lysis. In addition, CTLs are not destroyed during the cytolytic reaction; they can recycle to kill more target cells, although their life span is relatively short. CTLs appear
to use two significantly different ways of destroying target cells during rapid cytolytic reactions: granule exocytosis and the triggering of target cell receptors by
particular TNF-related molecules expressed by the CTLs, such as Fas ligand (FasL/Apo1L/CD95L) 317 and the recently reported TNF-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand (TRAIL/Apo2L). 318,319
With respect to granule exocytosis, specialized granules are secreted into areas of close contact with target cells after triggering of the TCRs. The granules contain
two types of proteins that contribute to the destruction of target cells: perforin (cytolysin), which is related to the terminal component of complement and forms pores in
the outer membrane of the target cells, and granzymes, a subfamily of serine proteases that are found in lymphocytes and appear to be necessary for apoptosis of the
target cells. The serine proteases may enter the target cells through the perforin-generated pores.
Other rapid cytolytic reactions of CTLs with target cells, however, lack features of the granule secretion mechanism and appear to depend on the triggering of
receptors for TNF-like molecules on the target cells. A well-characterized example of these receptors is Fas, also referred to as APO1 or CD95, which is expressed on
the surface of a wide variety of cell types. 194,320,321,322,323,324 and 325 Cross-linking of Fas molecules commonly triggers apoptosis in cells expressing these molecules. A
Fas ligand that is a transmembrane protein belonging to the TNF family has been identified on the surface of activated CTLs, particularly among CD8+ T cells and
CD4+ Th1 T cells. The antigen specificity of Fas-mediated cytolysis by CTLs may depend on TCR-mediated stimulation of the CTL for brief expression of the Fas
ligand in a functional form at the site of contact with the TCR-triggering target cell. 326,327
Tests of gene-knockout and gene-reconstitution mouse models have clearly established the importance of granule exocytosis and the Fas-mediated
pathways.326,327,328,329 and 330 Perforin-deficient mice are impaired in their resistance to at least noncytopathic choriomeningitis virus, Listeria monocytogenes, and
tumors.331,332 Whereas the granule exocytosis pathway may be used more against pathogens, the Fas-mediated pathway may be more involved with down-regulating
immune responses.191,194,245,260,333,334 Of note, Fas is markedly up-regulated on activated T cells, B cells, and NK cells. However, not all Fas-expressing lymphocytes
are susceptible to apoptosis through this pathway; prolonged stimulation for at least a period of days may be needed. Understanding which cells are susceptible to
this mode of down-regulation is at an early stage.
At least some T cells express additional receptors that can down-regulate cytotoxic activity through an interaction with MHC class I determinants on target cells. 335,336
Initially found on NK cells, the inhibitory receptors are not related to the antigen-specific TCR. They contribute to the balance between activation and inhibition of
T-cell cytotoxic function.
The release of cytotoxic mediators by CTLs is generally antigen-specific and MHC-restricted, because of the TCR-mediated triggering. The cytotoxic activity of the
released mediators, however, is not target cell–specific. Only to the extent that their activity is limited to the immediate vicinity of the triggered parent CTLs is
cytotoxicity specific for target cells bound to the CTLs. Local activity probably is facilitated by focused effector molecules at the site of target cell contact,

concentration gradients, a short burst of cytotoxic molecules from the parent CTLs, and a short half-life of the mediator.
Several exceptions to the antigen specificity of CTL-mediated lysis of target cells have been described. 317,337,338,339 and 340 For example, the expression of Fas ligand on
the CTL surface at sites other than contact with the TCR-triggering target cell may destroy innocent bystander cells that express Fas and are in contact with the CTL.
In addition, nonspecificity may result from lymphotoxin/TNF-a - like molecules that are released from CTL on triggering by MHC-restricted antigens but, given an
opportunity to accumulate in the intercellular space, are nonspecifically toxic. The TNF-related, apoptosis-inducing ligand, TRAIL, may be an exception, as the soluble
form appears to be more toxic for cancer cells than for normal cells; as a result, the soluble form is being evaluated as a possible cancer chemotherapeutic agent. 341
NONSPECIFIC CYTOTOXIC CELLS
NK cells and activated macrophages are the host's major sources of cell-mediated cytotoxic activity that is not triggered by antigen-specific recognition of foreign
cells. They are part of the host's innate or front-line defense mechanisms, because to function they require no antigen-specific adaptation of the host or immunization.
Although there is no memory response by these cells, NK cells and macrophages can be activated by T-cell cytokines, such as IFN-g. After cell contact, both types of
effector cells can be triggered to kill sensitive target cells by antibody-independent interactions between surface molecules on effector and target cells. The nature of
these molecules is at a relatively early stage of identification. By contrast, Ig receptors on NK cells and activated macrophages can trigger antibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity, if the bound target cells have reacted with appropriate Ig subclasses. Thus, apart from their independent roles in host defense, these cells are
also important accessories to cytotoxic immunity. In addition, their production of cytokines and chemokines as part of the early, innate host defense response can
strongly influence subsequent adaptive immune responses. For example, activated NK cells may release large amounts of IFN-g, which can promote inflammatory,
Th1-type T-cell responses and also enhance the expression of a wide array of cell surface molecules.
Natural Killer Cells
NK cells are a relatively small population of lymphocytes distinct from T and B lymphocytes. 342,343,344 and 345 They generally are large, granular lymphocytes that
originate in the bone marrow. NK cells share a common progenitor with T cells, and NK cell precursors have been identified in the thymus; however, they do not
require the thymus for maturation, and they probably diverge from the T-cell lineage at an early stage of differentiation. 176
Several markers are particularly helpful in distinguishing between NK cells and CTLs. 343,346 Human NK cells are primarily TCR/CD3–, CD5–, CD56+, FcR+. These cell
surface features have been used both for physically separating the cells and for functionally distinguishing between NK cell and CTL activity.
Although the picture is far from complete, the basic cytotoxic mechanisms of NK cells and CTLs appear to be similar. 321,346,347,348,349 and 350 Granule exocytosis, perforin,
and granzymes have well-established roles in cytotoxicity mediated by NK cells. As with CTLs, the bulk of lytic activity from NK cells depends on perforin. 351,352 Like
CTLs, NK cells depend on surface accessory molecules for the initial binding to target cells. Also like CTLs, accessory molecules expressed on NK cells, such as CD2
and CD69, can contribute to effector cell function when bound to ligand. Granule exocytosis is followed by target cell lysis with apoptosis and then detachment of the
NK cell.
NK cells, as with CTLs, can also express or secrete molecules related to TNF, such as FasL and TRAIL, and destroy target cells by apoptosis. 353,354 and 355 As in T
cells, activation of NK cells increases the expression of these molecules.
Although NK cells are not target cell–specific, they exhibit target cell selectivity by mechanisms independent of antibody and antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity.335,336,342,343 and 344,356,357 For example, they are more toxic for tumor cells and virus-infected cells than for most normal cells. Also, different clones of NK cells
show different patterns of cytotoxicity with panels of tumor cells from different sources. Different susceptibilities of target cells to NK cells are, in part, due to families of
cell surface receptors that can be expressed by NK cells and that recognize polymorphic MHC class I molecules expressed by target cells. 358,359,360,361,362 and 363 One
family of inhibitory receptors, the NK cell complex, is controlled by genes clustered on human chromosome 12 that encode glycoproteins of the C-type lectin
superfamily. Another family, designated killer inhibitory receptors, is controlled by genes clustered on human chromosome 19 that encode particular glycoproteins in
the Ig superfamily. When cross-linked, the receptors can deliver a dominant signal that inhibits triggering of cytotoxic activity and cytokine expression. Function of the
different families of inhibitory receptors is related to a component of their intracytoplasmic tails, the immunoreceptor tyrosine–based inhibition motif ( ITIM), which on
tyrosine phosphorylation can temporarily inhibit the activation of a variety of cellular activities, such as cytotoxicity and cytokine release. 364 This mechanism appears
to explain the tolerance of NK cells for normal cells, as a consequence of the inverse relationship between MHC class I expression and susceptibility to NK-mediated
cytotoxicity.365 Thus, there may be two functionally opposed sets of receptors and ligands associated with triggering cytotoxicity. One set, ill-defined, is not
MHC-restricted and triggers cytotoxic activity. The other set, which recognizes an MHC class I ligand, can inhibit cytotoxicity. If tumor cells lose MHC class I
expression, they escape CTLs; however, they become more susceptible to a subclass of NK cells.
The distinction between NK cells and NK-like activity is important. For example, CTLs cultured with IL-2 can exhibit NK-like activity, but they are not NK cells. Also, a
subset of T cells, NKT cells, has recently been described, that expresses some of the cell surface markers usually characteristic of NK cells. NKT cells develop
outside the thymus, depend on TCR interaction with MHC class I–like CD1 molecules for development, express a very limited TCR repertoire that reacts particularly
with galactosylceramide presented by CD1 molecules, and are CD4–CD8– or CD4+CD8–. 366 The TCRs of NKT cells are composed of an invariant TCR-a chain
paired preferentially with particular Vb chains (Va24/Vb11 in humans), and they commonly are able to recognize selected lipid or glycolipid antigens or hydrophobic
peptide antigens presented by cell surface CD1 molecules. NKT cells mediate NK-like cytotoxicity after triggering of the TCR; however, their role in regulating early
responses of NK cells and T cells also appears important because of their ability to release rapidly large amounts of IFN-g, IL-4, or both after activation.
Lymphokine-Activated Killer Cells
Both CTLs and NK cells cultured with relatively high doses of IL-2 show enhanced nonspecific cytotoxic activity, as revealed by their ability to lyse selectively a broad
spectrum of fresh autologous, syngeneic, or allogeneic tumor cells that are relatively insensitive to normal NK-mediated cytotoxicity. 367,368 and 369 They are referred to as
lymphokine-activated killer cells. The greater cytotoxic activity of these cells appears to result, in part, from their activation-enhanced expression of surface molecules
that contribute to target cell binding and to triggering cytotoxic activity.
Macrophages
Activated macrophages, as with NK cells and CTL cultured with relatively high doses of IL-2, can be nonspecifically cytotoxic for tumor cells in
vitro.314,370,371,372,373,374,375 and 376 IFN-g and bacterial products, such as LPS, are among the most potent sources of macrophage activators. Macrophages can be
activated by many additional factors, including tumor cell contact. 314,370,371,372,373,374,375 As with NK cells, the basis for triggering cytotoxicity after contact between
activated macrophages and tumor cells has not been established.
Macrophages and monocytes are clearly distinct from CTL and NK cells. In contrast to CTL or NK cells, they may be phagocytic; express CD14, CD36, or CD68; have
a relatively abundant cytoplasm lacking large azurophilic granules; and are commonly adherent to culture vessel surfaces in vitro. Although they may express CD4,
they do not express the TCR, CD3, or CD8. 377
Mediators of cytotoxicity, triggered by the binding of activated macrophages to tumor cells, include the following products: cytolytic proteases; TNF-a and related
factors; IFN-a,g; IL-1; reactive oxygen intermediates, such as H 2O2; reactive nitrogen intermediates, such as nitric oxide; arginase; thymidine; and lysosomal
enzymes.372,378,379 A serine protease has also been implicated. 373 Many of the cytotoxic mediators may also act on tumor cells that are not in direct contact with
macrophages, but most of the cytotoxic effects on bystander cells can be against both normal and tumor cells. Several mechanisms limit bystander effects, including
short half-lives of the cytotoxic factors.
Correlations have been established in several animal models between progressive tumor growth in vivo and resistance of tumor cells to macrophage cytotoxicity in
vitro. However, macrophages can also promote growth of some tumors by effects on the tissue stroma, the blood supply, or the tumor cells themselves. 380 The net
effect of macrophages on tumors appears to depend on an array of factors that, with naturally occurring host responses, may balance differently for each tumor.

B CELLS AND HUMORAL IMMUNITY
IMMUNOGLOBULIN HETEROGENEITY AND CLASSES
B cells are antibody-producing cells, in addition to serving as APCs. Driven by antigen binding to cell surface, membrane-anchored Ig, mature B cells proliferate and
differentiate into end-stage plasma cells, which produce and release soluble antibodies into extracellular fluids. Antibodies are commonly referred to as
immunoglobulins, which are highly heterogeneous but have a common basic monomeric structure consisting of four disulfide-linked polypeptide chains ( Fig. 4-7).381,382
and 383 The two smaller polypeptides of an antibody molecule are identical, are either kappa (k) or lambda (l), and are referred to as light chains. The two larger chains
of a monomeric Ig, also identical, are referred to as heavy chains. The great structural heterogeneity of antibody molecules that accounts for the body's ability to react
with a vast variety of antigens results from variability in parts of the molecule near the N-terminals of the heavy and light chains, where the binding sites for antigens
are located. A four-chain antibody structure has two antigen-binding sites, because each antigen-binding site is formed by the N-terminal regions of a heavy- and
light-chain pair.

FIGURE 4-7. IgG immunoglobulin molecule with pepsin and papain cleavage sites. SS, disulfide bond.

A second source of structural heterogeneity of antibodies is in the C-terminal portion of the heavy chains. This heterogeneity, which is much less than that associated
with antigen-binding activity, accounts for the structural and biologic differences between the five major Ig classes that have been identified in humans: IgG, IgA, IgM,
IgD, and IgE. The Ig classes (isotypes) differ from one another with respect to a variety of properties, such as size, carbohydrate content, the concentration in serum,
the serum half-life, the portion that is intravascular, and the ability to cross the placenta ( Table 4-2). The circulating Ig classes also are associated with particular
biologic activities resulting from interactions of the carboxy-terminal region of the heavy chain with Ig receptors on cells or with other soluble molecules. The biologic
activities of selected Ig classes bound to antigen include activating the complement cascade (IgG and IgM); triggering cytotoxic activity by macrophages and particular
lymphocytes, such as NK cells (IgG); triggering mast and basophil cells to degranulate (IgE); and promoting phagocytosis of antibody-antigen-complement complexes
(IgG and IgM). Entering secretions, such as breast milk and on mucosal surfaces, is characteristic of IgA antibodies, and bound antigen is not a prerequisite.

TABLE 4-2. Some Properties of Human Immunoglobulins

MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES
Normal humoral immune responses by B lymphocytes are polyclonal and, as a result, the antibodies are heterogeneous. By immortalizing and cloning
antibody-producing cells, however, large amounts of homogeneous antibody reacting with a single epitope can be generated. 384,385 and 386 Antibody-producing cells,
particularly from mice, are commonly immortalized by fusing them with plasma cell tumors that do not produce Ig but nevertheless are capable of supporting antibody
synthesis and secretion. The antibody-producing cell contributes the genetic coding for the antibody to the hybridoma brought about by the fusion, and the
plasmacytoma provides the ability to replicate indefinitely.
By cloning large numbers of hybridomas and characterizing the antigen specificities of the different monoclonal antibodies, investigators have generated large and
renewable quantities of reagents that, as a group, identify an extensive array of biologically important molecules. These include cellular components that stimulate or
regulate immune responses, cellular markers that distinguish one class of cell involved with immune responses from another, cellular markers that help to diagnose
the nature of a tumor biopsy specimen, and antigens selectively expressed by tumor cells. Monoclonal antibodies are used not only for identifying and purifying
molecules or cells but for triggering or blocking activation molecules on cell surfaces and for targeting cytotoxic and diagnostic imaging reagents to tumors in vivo.
With access to the mRNA coding, mouse monoclonal antibodies have been restructured genetically by recombinant DNA technology to generate new types that may
be useful in diagnosing and treating cancer. Examples include humanizing mouse antibodies by introducing human sequences without altering the antigen specificity
and reducing the antibody size by coding for variable regions of heavy and light chains connected by a polypeptide spacer.
B-CELL MATURATION IN THE BONE MARROW
Stem cells develop within the adult bone marrow into B cells expressing surface IgM and IgD Igs in a fashion that does not require interaction with foreign
antigens.387,388,389 and 390 These naive or virgin B cells then circulate to lymphoid organs where, stimulated by antigen and appropriate cosignals, they mature further
into cells expressing the other Ig classes.
Immunoglobulin Gene Rearrangements as Markers of Maturation Stages
The earliest indication of commitment of a bone marrow stem cell to the B-cell lineage appears to be rearrangement of nonadjacent germline variable V, D, and J
genes coding for the variable region of the IgM heavy chain, so that they are next to one another. Successful rearrangement of a V(D)J segment is followed by
synthesis of IgM (µ) heavy chains in a fashion similar to that of a T-cell receptor chain, cell surface expression of the µ chain combined with a temporary surrogate
light chain, cessation of further rearrangements of H-chain genes, and the start of rearrangements of kappa (k) light-chain genes. Successful Vk-Jk pairing results in
k-chain synthesis; matching of k and µ heavy chains and expression of monomeric surface IgM molecules; and termination of the gene rearrangements. With a few
nonproductive Vk-Jk alignments—perhaps only two—rearrangement of k-chain genes stops and that of lambda (l) light-chain genes starts, with success resulting in µ
heavy chains pairing with l light chains. The life span appears to be short for cells with nonproductive gene rearrangements. The large diversity among antibody
molecules reflects, in part, the different functional gene arrangements and chain pairings that are possible. Developing B cells with light chains and µ heavy chains

express surface IgM alone, followed in time by both IgM and IgD, which mark the completion of antigen-independent maturation in the bone marrow.
B-cell tumors and Ig-deficiency disorders often represent arrested stages of normal B-cell development. Characterizing the Ig gene rearrangements in these situations
has provided key information about the sequence of events during normal maturation and has helped to identify and classify B-cell tumors.
Igs anchored by transmembrane domains to the cell surface are specific markers for B cells. CD19 and CD20, which are not Igs, are also used for identifying B cells.
These cell surface products are expressed by pre–B cells and by mature B cells but not by plasma cells.
In addition to the conventional B-cell lineage, another lineage has been observed in humans and in animal models. 391 Referred to as B-1 B cells, in contrast to
conventional B-2 B cells, they are bone marrow–derived but differ from the conventional lineage, in part by the general location of mature cells (extra lymphoid sites,
such as the peritoneal cavity), cell surface markers (CD5), and the antigen specificity repertoire, which is more restricted, of lower affinity, and of broader specificity
than the conventional repertoire. Although not as common as conventional B cells, like Tgd cells they may contribute to early host reactions against particular
pathogens.
B-Cell Antigen Receptor
Igs integrated into the cell surface serve as antigen receptors and cell-signaling molecules. 392,393 These Igs appear to be part of a signaling complex, the B-cell
antigen receptor, that includes at least two additional noncovalently bound transmembrane invariant polypeptides, Ig-a and Ig-b, analogous to the TCR/CD3 complex
on T cells. Antigen-specific activation of B cells leads to cell proliferation and differentiation through a process of cell signaling that, like T-cell activation, appears to
use multiple tyrosine kinases and the phosphatidylinositol second messengers to turn on DNA transcription factors. Analogous to CD4 and CD8 in T-cell activation,
the complex of CD19, CD21, and CD81 has been implicated as a coreceptor for B-cell activation by the binding of CD21 (CR2) to fragments of complement CR3
associated with the antigen.
Regulation of B-Cell Maturation in the Bone Marrow
The maturation of B cells is sensitive to a variety of factors in the bone marrow environment, including stromal cells that provide supportive cytokines (e.g., IL-7),
chemokines (SDF-1), and direct cell interactions. 388,389,393,394
Cell surface IgM on developing B cells may have an important role in signaling, similar to the T-cell receptor on thymocytes. B-cell development is arrested in animals
genetically unable to express cell surface IgM, which may serve as a source of positive signals for development as a result of relatively low-affinity interactions with
self-antigens. However, activation of immature B cells by cross-linking surface IgM molecules with either antigen or anti-IgM antibodies can result in cell deletion,
likely by apoptosis, rather than proliferation and differentiation. Fas-dependent mechanisms appear to be associated with the apoptosis. For antigen-mediated
deletion of immature B cells, relatively high-affinity binding to the surface IgM may be needed. A pause in cell maturation appears to precede deletion. During this
period, a portion of the autoreactive B cells rearrange their light-chain genes by a process referred to as receptor editing, and cells with successful rearrangements
escape negative selection by expressing new antigen specificities that are not autoreactive. 395
One Antibody Specificity per Cell
As a consequence of limiting successful gene rearrangements, each B cell generally expresses the heavy chain of only one chromosome, the light chain of only one
chromosome (allelic exclusion) and, moreover, only one class of light chain (k or l, isotype exclusion). 396 Hence, each B cell generally produces only one antibody
specificity. 397 For individual B cells expressing both IgM and IgD molecules, the two classes of antibodies have the same heavy-chain variable region and the same
light chains, probably as a result of differential splicing of a single primary RNA transcript that includes the rearranged variable region and both µ and d constant
region genes. Hence, they have the same basic antibody specificity for antigen and preserve the general observation of one specificity per cell. As with T cells,
antigen specificity is established before a mature but naive B cell encounters foreign antigen. These B cells, considered as a whole, comprise a host's primary B-cell
repertoire. The primary repertoire represents antibodies of lower affinity and broader specificity than what follows with further antigen-driven maturation.
B-CELL MATURATION IN LYMPHOID ORGANS
Mature but naive B cells migrate from the primary lymphoid organ where they are produced—the bone marrow—to secondary lymphoid organs throughout the body,
where further maturation is induced by stimulation with antigens and appropriate cosignals. Successfully stimulated B cells differentiate into antibody-secreting
plasma cells or into memory cells. Unstimulated cells appear to die by apoptosis after a relatively short life span.
T-Cell–Dependent Antibody Responses
B-cell responses to protein antigens commonly depend on helper (CD4+) T cells. 392,398,399,340,341 and 402 T-cell–dependent activation of naive B cells starts with antigen
binding to Ig cell surface receptors. Antigen processing follows with presentation of MHC class II–restricted peptides. In T-cell–rich areas of lymphoid organs, the B
cells act as APCs to helper T cells, with receptors capable of binding to the MHC-restricted peptide. Successful T-cell/B-cell interactions may require previously
activated helper T cells. The cognate T-cell/B-cell interaction results in mutually rising levels of activation, including up-regulation of the cell surface B7 family of
costimulatory molecules on the B cells. Engagement of the CD40 receptor on B cells by a CD40 ligand (CD40L) on activated helper T cells leads to B-cell activation,
enhanced by exposure to T-cell–derived IL-4 and other cytokines and additional B-cell/T-cell receptor-ligand interactions. Establishing germinal centers that include
FDCs and helper T cells, the activated B cells undergo class switching, antibody affinity maturation and, finally, differentiation into antibody-secreting plasma cells or
memory B cells. The B-cell response to an antigen not previously encountered is, in the early stage, primarily by activated naive cells producing IgM antibodies of
relatively low affinity.
Class Switching
Ig class (isotope) switching occurs, in which cells expressing IgM and IgD receptors at the surface differentiate, essentially irreversibly, into cells expressing IgG, IgA,
or IgE receptors.403,404 Antibody molecules resulting from a class switch express a new isotype and new associated biologic functions; however, the antigen specificity
remains intact, because the light chains and the variable region of the heavy chain do not change. The switching is controlled by a combination of factors, including
B-cell–activating agents (e.g., antigens), contact with helper T cells, and particular cytokines (e.g., IL-4, IFN-g, and TGF-b). For example, the switch to IgE by B cells
previously activated by antigen and T-cell contact is promoted by IL-4 but inhibited by IFN-g. Class switching involves DNA recombination events between switch
regions associated with each heavy-chain constant region. As a result, the V(D)J rearrangement, coding for the variable region of the heavy chain, comes into close
approximation to a new constant region gene, probably because of intervening DNA forming a loop and being deleted (e.g., as a circular episome).
Changes in Antibody Affinity for Antigen
Somatic hypermutation in the variable region genes for heavy and light chains of dividing B cells in the germinal centers of secondary lymphoid organs increases the
antigen repertoire and the range of antibody-binding affinities for each antigen. 405,406 and 407 As a result, B cells expressing high-affinity antibodies preferentially expand
in the face of falling levels of antigen associated with the end of the response. If the response is prolonged, such as after immunization with an adjuvant, class
switching and affinity maturation may occur later during the initial (primary) response to the antigen.
Memory
Most B cells and plasma cells associated with a primary (IgM) antibody response disappear at the end of the response, which is associated with removal of the
antigen and Fas-mediated apoptosis. However, some B cells survive responses to T-dependent antigens as memory cells. 271,392 Memory B cells express surface Ig
molecules other than IgM and develop through a T-cell–dependent process. They appear not to be derived from B cells that have generated a primary (IgM) antibody
response but rather from a separate differentiation pathway. Expression of Bcl-2 genes in memory cells may protect against apoptosis. Memory cells are not restricted
to the site of antigen interaction; they contribute to the pool of recirculating lymphocytes. Long-term memory cells may not need to divide to survive for years. After
reexposure to antigen, activated memory cells generate a more rapid response than the primary one. Moreover, the secondary (anamnestic) response is more

intense, lasts longer, and exhibits class switching away from IgM antibodies and increased antibody affinity for the antigen.
T-Cell–Independent Antibody Responses
B-cell responses to some antigens, particularly various bacterial products, occur in the absence of MHC class II–restricted T-cell help. These responses are referred
to as T-cell–independent.408 They include antigen-specific responses against low doses of haptenated B-cell mitogens (e.g., trinitrophenyl (TNP)-LPS), which can
occur in the absence of accessory cells. They also include responses against large nonprotein molecules with repeating, appropriately spaced copies of an antigenic
epitope, such as particular bacterial polysaccharides. The multivalent antigens cross-link the B-cell surface Igs capable of binding the epitopes, resulting in a signal
that, combined with exposure to particular cytokines (e.g. IL-5), leads to B-cell activation and antibody secretion, particularly IgM. Isotype switching, affinity
maturation, and memory do not occur with these responses as they do with T-cell–dependent responses.
Mature B-Cell Tolerance
As with T cells, mature B cells may show tolerance for particular antigens, through deletion, anergy, or ignorance. 409,410,411 and 412 Mature B cells specific for
T-dependent antigens are subject to deletion after binding of autoantigen in the absence of successful signaling (e.g., the CD40 ligand) from helper T cells. Apoptosis
triggered by Fas on susceptible cells may be involved. B cells can also become unresponsive (anergic) to soluble antigens, probably at a lower antigen concentration
or affinity than with deletion, as a result of a failure in signaling from the surface Ig. The life span of anergic B cells is relatively short; hence, the anergy blends into
cell deletion. The anergic state may be offset by stimulating the cell surface CD40 molecule and adding IL-4 or by transferring the cells to an antigen-free
environment. In addition, B-cell responses that depend on T-cell help can fail as a result of T-cell tolerance. Also, autoreactive B cells may be competitively blocked
by other antigen-activated B cells from entering the limited space within the lymphoid follicles of secondary lymphoid organs, where conditions favor optimal
stimulation, proliferation, and differentiation. Finally, B cells may simply ignore antigens because of insufficient concentrations or avidity.

SUMMARY
The immune system has evolved as a highly complex and adaptive mechanism for distinguishing between nonself and self and for neutralizing or clearing nonself
from the host. Extracellular pathogens are attacked primarily by humoral immune responses, which depend on soluble antibodies produced by B lymphocytes for
antigen recognition and for recruitment of effector arms, such as phagocytes and the complement system. Foreign cells, including host cells bearing intracellular
pathogens, are recognized and destroyed primarily by cellular immune responses, which depend on the TCR for specific recognition of cell surface antigens and for
triggering T-cell activities that kill the foreign cells either directly or through recruitment of other host cells, such as macrophages.
T cells that directly kill foreign cells are commonly CD8+ and generally recognize a cell surface complex of MHC class I molecules and foreign peptides, derived
primarily from intracellular proteins processed in the foreign cells through a particular cytoplasmic pathway. Foreign proteins that are shed and picked up by the host's
normal APCs, such as macrophages and DCs, are processed mainly by a different cytoplasmic pathway for cell surface presentation if they are expressed as a
peptide complex with MHC class II molecules. The peptides bound to MHC class II molecules on APCs are recognized primarily by CD4+ T cells that are not directly
cytotoxic but rather function primarily to help immune responses. In this fashion, directly cytotoxic T cells focus on the foreign cells rather than on normal host cells.
Through somatic shuffling of gene components, millions of different gene combinations are efficiently generated by each host to produce antibodies and TCRs that,
taken as a whole for the host, can recognize millions of different antigens. Somatic mutations in antibody genes expand the range even further. Generally, each cell in
the B-cell lineage expresses only one antibody specificity, and each T cell expresses only one antigen receptor specificity. As a consequence, the immune system can
regulate the responses against each antigen by promoting or limiting the expansion and activation of cells that react specifically with the antigen. After immunization,
a select portion of lymphocytes may persist as a pool of antigen-specific memory cells, which generate relatively quickly a more intense and longer immune response
after reexposure of the host to the antigen.
Stimulating T lymphocytes in an antigen-specific fashion commonly requires two cell surface signals. The first signal selects the cell to respond and provides
specificity as a result of triggering the antigen-specific receptor (TCR) on the cell surface. The second is an essential (but by itself insufficient) costimulatory signal
from APCs, which adds stringency and reduces the likelihood of careless responses. A first signal without a second signal commonly results in anergy or death. The
immune response is promoted or limited by regulatory cells through their secreted cytokines and cell surface ligands, which, as a group, form a network of overlapping
activities that reduce the likelihood of general failure of an immune response or of an immune response getting out of hand.
Although far from perfect, immune responses avoid activity against self-antigens generally as a result of processes that remove or inactivate self-reactive cells during
the early maturation or adult life of T cells and B cells. Because autologous human tumor antigens recognized by the host's T cells commonly involve unaltered
self-proteins, the inactive T cells with potential antitumor activity are of particular interest to tumor immunologists.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Landsteiner K, Chase MW. Experiments on transfer of cutaneous sensitivity to simple compounds. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1942;49:688.
2. Billingham RE, Brent L, Medawar PB. Quantitative studies on tissue transplantation immunity: II. The origin, strength, and duration of actively and adoptively acquired immunity. Proc R Soc
Lond 1954;B143:58.
3. Mitchison NA. Passive transfer of transplantation immunity. Proc R Soc Lond 1954;B142:72.
4. Miller JF. The thymus and its role in immunity. Chem Immunol 1990;49:51.
5. Sprent J. T lymphocytes and the thymus. In: Paul WE, ed. Fundamental immunology, 3rd ed. New York: Raven Press, 1993:75.
6. Möller G, ed. Positive T-cell selection in the thymus. Immunol Rev 1993;135:5.
7. Gross L. Intradermal immunization of C3H mice against a sarcoma that originated in an animal of the same line. Cancer Res 1943;3:326.
8. Foley EJ. Antigenic properties of methylcholanthrene-induced tumors in mice of the strain of origin. Cancer Res 1953;13:835.
9. Prehn RT, Main JM. Immunity to methylcholanthrene-induced sarcomas. JNCI 1957;18:769.
10. Klein G, Sjögren HO, Klein E, Hellström KE. Demonstration of resistance against methylcholanthrene-induced sarcomas in the primary autochthonous host. Cancer Res 1960;20:1561.
11. Klein G, Sjögren HO, Klein E, Hellström KE. Demonstration of resistance against methylcholanthrene-induced sarcomas in the primary autochthonous host. Cancer Res 1960;20:1561.
12. Greenberg PD. Adoptive T cell therapy of tumors: mechanisms operative in the recognition and elimination of tumor cells. Adv Immunol 1991;49:281.
13. Schreiber H, Ward PL, Rowley DA, Stauss HJ. Unique tumor-specific antigens. Ann Rev Immunol 1988;6:465.
14. Greenberg PD, Cheever MA, Fefer A. H-2 restriction of adoptive immunotherapy of advanced tumors. J Immunol 1981;126:2100.
15. Rosenberg SA, Spiess P, Lafreniere R. A new approach to the adoptive immunotherapy of cancer with tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. Science 1986;233:1318.
16. Shimizu K, Shen F-W. Role of different T cell sets in the rejection of syngeneic chemically induced tumors. J Immunol 1979;122:1162.
17. Itoh K, Platsoucas DC, Balch CM. Autologous tumor-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in the infiltrate of human metastatic melanomas: activation by interleukin 2 and autologous tumor cells and
involvement of the T cell receptor. J Exp Med 1988;168:1419.
18. Topalian SL, Solomon D, Rosenberg SA. Tumor-specific cytolysis by lymphocytes infiltrating human melanomas. J Immunol 1989;142:3714.
19. Barth RJ Jr, Mule JJ, Spiess PJ, Rosenberg SA. Interferon gamma and tumor necrosis factor have a role in tumor regressions mediated by murine CD8+ tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. J Exp
Med 1991;173:647.
20. Toes RE, Ossendorp F, Offringa R, Melief CJ. CD4 T cells and their role in antitumor immune responses. J Exp Med 1999;189:753.
21. Rosenberg SA, Packard BS, Aebersold PM, et al. Use of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes and interleukin-2 in the immunotherapy of patients with metastatic melanoma. Preliminary report. N Engl
J Med 1988;319:1676.
22. Boon T, Cerottini JC, Van den Eynde B, van der Bruggen P, Van Pel A. Tumor antigens recognized by T lymphocytes. Annu Rev Immunol 1994;12:337.
23. Boon T, Gajewski TF, Coulie PG. From defined human tumor antigens to effective immunization? Immunol Today 1995;16:334.
24. Rosenberg SA. A new era for cancer immunotherapy based on the genes that encode cancer antigens. Immunity 1999;10:281.
25. Boon T, Old LJ. Cancer tumor antigens. Curr Opin Immunol 1997;9:681.
26. Boon T, Coulie PG, Van den Eynde B. Tumor antigens recognized by T cells. Immunol Today 1997;18:267.
27. Bjorkman PJ, Saper MA, Samraoui B, et al. Structure of the human class I histocompatibility antigen, HLA-A2. Nature 1987;329:506.
28. Bjorkman PJ, Saper MA, Samraoui B, et al. The foreign antigen binding site and T cell recognition regions of class I histocompatibility antigens. Nature 1987;329:512.
29. Rammensee HG, Falk K, Rotzschke O. MHC molecules as peptide receptors. Curr Opin Immunol 1993;5:35.
30. Long EO. Regulation of immune responses by inhibitory receptors. Adv Exp Med Biol 1998;452:19.
31. Long EO, Wagtmann N. Natural killer cell receptors. Curr Opin Immunol 1997;9:344.
32. Brown JH, Jardetzky TS, Gorga JC, et al. Three-dimensional structure of the human class II histocompatibility antigen HLA-DR1. Nature 1993;364:33.
33. Fremont DH, Stura EA, Matsumura M, Peterson PA, Wilson IA. Crystal structure of an H-2Kb-ovalbumin peptide complex reveals the interplay of primary and secondary anchor positions in the
major histocompatibility complex binding groove. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:2479.
34. Wilson IA, Fremont DH. Structural analysis of MHC class I molecules with bound peptide antigens. Semin Immunol 1993;5:75.
35. Stura EA, Matsumura M, Fremont DH, et al. Crystallization of murine major histocompatibility complex class I H-2Kb with single peptides. J Mol Biol 1992;228:975.
36. Matsumura M, Fremont DH, Peterson PA, Wilson IA. Emerging principles for the recognition of peptide antigens by MHC class I molecules. Science 1992;257:927.
37. Fremont DH, Matsumura M, Stura EA, Peterson PA, Wilson IA. Crystal structures of two viral peptides in complex with murine MHC class I H-2K b. Science 1992;257:919.
38. Stern LJ, Brown JH, Jardetzky TS, et al. Crystal structure of the human class II MHC protein HLA-DR1 complexed with an influenza virus peptide. Nature 1994;368:215.

39. Collins EJ, Garboczi DN, Wiley DC. Three-dimensional structure of a peptide extending from one end of a class I MHC binding site. Nature 1994;371:626.
40. Smith KJ, Pyrdol J, Gauthier L, Wiley DC, Wucherpfennig KW. Crystal structure of HLA-DR2 (DRA*0101, DRB1*1501) complexed with a peptide from human myelin basic protein. J Exp Med
1998;188:1511.
41. Garboczi DN, Ghosh P, Utz U, et al. Structure of the complex between human T-cell receptor, viral peptide and HLA-A2. Nature 1996;384:134.
42. Ding YH, Baker BM, Garboczi DN, Biddison WE, Wiley DC. Four A6-TCR/peptide/HLA-A2 structures that generate very different T cell signals are nearly identical. Immunity 1999;11:45.
43. Khilko SN, Jelonek MT, Corr M, et al. Measuring interactions of MHC class I molecules using surface plasmon resonance. J Immunol Methods 1995;183:77.
44. Corr M, Slanetz AE, Boyd LF, et al. T cell receptorMHC class I peptide interactions: affinity, kinetics, and specificity. Science 1994;265:946.
45. Boniface JJ, Reich Z, Lyons DS, Davis MM. Thermodynamics of T cell receptor binding to peptide-MHC: evidence for a general mechanism of molecular scanning. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1999;96:11446.
46. Corr M, Slanetz AE, Boyd LF, et al. T cell receptorMHC class I peptide interactions: affinity, kinetics, and specificity. Science 1994;265:946.
47. Barber LD, Parham P. Peptide binding to major histocompatibility complex molecules. Annu Rev Cell Biol 1993;9:163.
48. Parham P. HLA, anthropology, and transplantation. Transplant Proc 1993;25:159.
49. Hill AV, Allsopp CE, Kwiatkowski D, et al. Common West African HLA antigens are associated with protection from severe malaria. Nature 1991;352:595.
50. Roy S, Scherer MT, Briner TJ, Smith JA, Gefter ML. Murine MHC polymorphism and T cell specificities. Science 1989;244:572.
51. Kang X, Kawakami Y, El-Gamil M, et al. Identification of a tyrosinase epitope recognized by HLA-A24-restricted, tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. J Immunol 1995;155:1343.
52. Yagüe J, White J, Coleclough C, et al. The T cell receptor: the a and b chains define idiotype, and antigen and MHC specificity. Cell 1985;42:81.
53. Potter TA, Rajan TV, Dick RF II, Bluestone JA. Substitution at residue 227 of H-2 class I molecules abrogates recognition by CD8-dependent, but not CD8-independent, cytotoxic T
lymphocytes. Nature 1989;337:73.
54. Salter RD, Benjamin RJ, Wesley PK, et al. A binding site for the T- cell co-receptor CD8 on the a 3 domain of HLA-A2. Nature 1990;345:41.
55. Connolly JM, Hansen TH, Ingold AL, Potter TA. Recognition by CD8 on cytotoxic T lymphocytes is ablated by several substitutions in the class I alpha 3 domain: CD8 and the T-cell receptor
recognize the same class I molecule. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:2137.
56. Konig R, Huang LY, Germain RN. MHC class II interaction with CD4 mediated by a region analogous to the MHC class I binding site for CD8. Nature 1992;356:796.
57. Cammarota G, Scheirle A, Takacs B, et al. Identification of a CD4 binding site on the beta 2 domain of HLA-DR molecules. Nature 1992;356:799.
58. Ryu SE, Truneh A, Sweet RW, Hendrickson WA. Structures of an HIV and MHC binding fragment from human CD4 as refined in two crystal lattices. Structure 1994;2:59.
59. Vignali DA. The interaction between CD4 and MHC class II molecules and its effect on T cell function. Behring Inst Mitt 1994;133.
60. Harding CV, Unanue ER. Quantitation of antigen-presenting cell MHC class II/peptide complexes necessary for T-cell stimulation. Nature 1990;346:574.
61. Demotz S, Grey HM, Sette A. The minimal number of class II MHC-antigen complexes needed for T cell association. Science 1990;249:1028.
62. Kovacsovics-Bankowski M, Rock KL. A phagosome-to-cytosol pathway for exogenous antigens presented on MHC class I molecules. Science 1995;267:243.
63. Yewdell JW, Bennink JR. Cell biology of antigen processing and presentation to major histocompatibility complex class I moleculerestricted T lymphocytes. Adv Immunol 1992;52:1.
64. Germain RN. MHC-dependent antigen processing and peptide presentation: providing ligands for T lymphocyte activation. Cell 1994;76:287.
65. Pichler WJ, Wyss-Coray T. T cells as antigen-presenting cells. Immunol Today 1994;15:312.
66. Chicz RM, Urban RG. Analysis of MHC-presented peptides: applications in autoimmunity and vaccine development. Immunol Today 1994;15:155.
67. Rammensee HG, Friede T, Stevanoviic S. MHC ligands and peptide motifs: first listing. Immunogenetics 1995;41:178.
68. Vogt AB, Kropshofer H, Kalbacher H, et al. Ligand motifs of HLA-DRB5*0101 and DRB1*1501 molecules delineated from self-peptides. J Immunol 1994;153:1665.
69. Malcherek G, Gnau V, Stevanovic S, et al. Analysis of allele-specific contact sites of natural HLA-DR17 ligands. J Immunol 1994;153:1141.
70. Falk K, Rotzschke O, Stevanovic S, Jung G, Rammensee HG. Pool sequencing of natural HLA-DR, DQ, and DP ligands reveals detailed peptide motifs, constraints of processing, and general
rules. Immunogenetics 1994;39:230.
71. Rammensee HG. Chemistry of peptides associated with MHC class I and class II molecules. Curr Opin Immunol 1995;7:85.
72. Ruppert J, Sidney J, Celis E, et al. Prominent role of secondary anchor residues in peptide binding to HLA-A2.1 molecules. Cell 1993;74:929.
73. Benham A, Tulp A, Neefjes J. Synthesis and assembly of MHC-peptide complexes. Immunol Today 1995;16:359.
74. Howard JC. Supply and transport of peptides presented by class I MHC molecules. Curr Opin Immunol 1995;7:69.
75. Heemels MT, Ploegh H. Generation, translocation, and presentation of MHC class Irestricted peptides. Annu Rev Biochem 1995;64:463.
76. Ljunggren HG, Stam NJ, Ohlen C, et al. Empty MHC class I molecules come out in the cold. Nature 1990;346:476.
77. Restifo NP, Marincola FM, Kawakami Y, et al. Loss of functional beta 2-microglobulin in metastatic melanomas from five patients receiving immunotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:100.
78. Jakobsen MK, Restifo NP, Cohen PA, et al. Defective major histocompatibility complex class I expression in a sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma cell line. J Immunother 1995;17:222.
79. Zijlstra M, Bix M, Simister NE, et al. b 2-microglobulin deficient mice lack CD4 CD8+ cytolytic T cells. Nature 1990;344:742.
80. Rock KL, Goldberg AL. Degradation of cell proteins and the generation of MHC class Ipresented peptides. Annu Rev Immunol 1999;17:739.
81. York IA, Rock KL. Antigen processing and presentation by the class I major histocompatibility complex. Annu Rev Immunol 1996;14:369.
82. Gaczynska M, Goldberg AL, Tanaka K, Hendil KB, Rock KL. Proteasome subunits X and Y alter peptidase activities in opposite ways to the interferon-gamma-induced subunits LMP2 and
LMP7. J Biol Chem 1996;271:17275.
83. Van Kaer L, Ashton-Rickardt PG, Eichelberger M, et al. Altered peptidase and viral-specific T cell response in LMP2 mutant mice. Immunity 1994;1:533.
84. Gaczynska M, Rock KL, Goldberg AL. Gamma-interferon and expression of MHC genes regulate peptide hydrolysis by proteasomes. Nature 1993;365:264.
85. Restifo NP, Esquivel F, Kawakami Y, et al. Identification of human cancers deficient in antigen processing. J Exp Med 1993;177:265.
86. Rock KL, Goldberg AL. Degradation of cell proteins and the generation of MHC class Ipresented peptides. Annu Rev Immunol 1999;17:739.
87. Gaczynska M, Rock KL, Goldberg AL. Gamma-interferon and expression of MHC genes regulate peptide hydrolysis by proteasomes. Nature 1993;365:264.
88. Michalek MT, Grant EP, Gramm C, Goldberg AL, Rock KL. A role for the ubiquitin-dependent proteolytic pathway in MHC class Irestricted antigen presentation. Nature 1993;363:552.
89. Deverson E, Gow IR, Coadwell WJ, et al. MHC class II region encoding proteins related to the multidrug resistance family of transmembrane transporters. Nature 1990;348:738.
90. Monaco JJ, Cho S, Attaya M. Transport protein genes in the murine MHC: possible implications for antigen processing. Science 1990;250:1723.
91. Parham P. Transporters of delight. Nature 1990;348:674.
92. Glynne R, Powis SH, Beck S, et al. A proteasome-related gene between the two ABC transporter loci in the class II region of the human MHC. Nature 1991;353:357.
93. Spies T, Bresnhan M, Bahram S, et al. A gene in the human major histocompatibility complex class II region controlling the class I antigen presentation pathway. Nature 1990;348:744.
94. Androlewicz MJ, Ortmann B, van Endert PM, Spies T, Cresswell P. Characteristics of peptide and major histocompatibility complex class I/beta 2-microglobulin binding to the transporters
associated with antigen processing (TAP1 and TAP2). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:12716.
95. Ortmann B, Androlewicz MJ, Cresswell P. MHC class I/beta 2-microglobulin complexes associate with TAP transporters before peptide binding. Nature 1994;368:864.
96. Srivastava PK, Menoret A, Basu S, Binder RJ, McQuade KL. Heat shock proteins come of age: primitive functions acquire new roles in an adaptive world. Immunity 1998;8:657.
97. Suto R, Srivastava PK. A mechanism for the specific immunogenicity of heat shock protein-chaperoned peptides. Science 1995;269:1585.
98. Chandawarkar RY, Wagh MS, Srivastava PK. The dual nature of specific immunological activity of tumor-derived gp96 preparations. J Exp Med 1999;189:1437.
99. Ishii T, Udono H, Yamano T, et al. Isolation of MHC class Irestricted tumor antigen peptide and its precursors associated with heat shock proteins hsp70, hsp90, and gp96. J Immunol
1999;162:1303.
100. Tamura Y, Peng P, Liu K, Daou M, Srivastava PK. Immunotherapy of tumors with autologous tumor-derived heat shock protein preparations. Science 1997;278:117.
101. Bergeron JJ, Brenner MB, Thomas DY, Williams DB. Calnexin: a membrane-bound chaperone of the endoplasmic reticulum. Trends Biochem Sci 1994;19:124.
102. Sugita M, Brenner MB. An unstable beta 2-microglobulin: major histocompatibility complex class I heavy chain intermediate dissociates from calnexin and then is stabilized by binding peptide. J
Exp Med 1994;180:2163.
103. Hammond C, Braakman I, Helenius A. Role of N-linked oligosaccharide recognition, glucose trimming, and calnexin in glycoprotein folding and quality control. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1994;91:913.
104. Rajagopalan S, Xu Y, Brenner MB. Retention of unassembled components of integral membrane proteins by calnexin. Science 1994;263:387.
105. David V, Hochstenbach F, Rajagopalan S, Brenner MB. Interaction with newly synthesized and retained proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum suggests a chaperone function for human integral
membrane protein IP90 (calnexin). J Biol Chem 1993;268:9585.
106. Ou WJ, Cameron PH, Thomas DY, Bergeron JJ. Association of folding intermediates of glycoproteins with calnexin during protein maturation. Nature 1993;364:771.
107. Degen E, Cohen-Doyle MF, Williams DB. Efficient dissociation of the p88 chaperone from major histocompatibility complex class I molecules requires both beta 2- microglobulin and peptide. J
Exp Med 1992;175:1653.
108. Arunachalam B, Cresswell P. Molecular requirements for the interaction of class II major histocompatibility complex molecules and invariant chain with calnexin. J Biol Chem 1995;270:2784.
109. Anderson KS, Cresswell P. A role for calnexin (IP90) in the assembly of class II MHC molecules. EMBO J 1994;13:675.
110. Schreiber KL, Bell MP, Huntoon CJ, et al. Class II histocompatibility molecules associate with calnexin during assembly in the endoplasmic reticulum. Int Immunol 1994;6:101.
111. Basu S, Srivastava PK. Calreticulin, a peptide-binding chaperone of the endoplasmic reticulum, elicits tumor- and peptide-specific immunity. J Exp Med 1999;189:797.
112. Realini C, Dubiel W, Pratt G, Ferrell K, Rechsteiner M. Molecular cloning and expression of a gamma-interferon-inducible activator of the multicatalytic protease. J Biol Chem 1994;269:20727.
113. Anderson SL, Shen T, Lou J, et al. The endoplasmic reticular heat shock protein gp96 is transcriptionally upregulated in interferon-treated cells. J Exp Med 1994;180:1565.
114. Braud VM, Allan DS, McMichael AJ. Functions of nonclassical MHC and non-MHC-encoded class I molecules. Curr Opin Immunol 1999;11:100.
115. Burdin N, Kronenberg M. CD1-mediated immune responses to glycolipids. Curr Opin Immunol 1999;11:326.
116. O'Callaghan CA, Bell JI. Structure and function of the human MHC class Ib molecules HLA-E, HLA-F and HLA-G. Immunol Rev 1998;163:129.
117. Braud VM, McMichael AJ. Regulation of NK cell functions through interaction of the CD94/NKG2 receptors with the nonclassical class I molecule HLA-E. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol
1999;244:85.
118. Allan DS, Colonna M, Lanier LL, et al. Tetrameric complexes of human histocompatibility leukocyte antigen (HLA)-G bind to peripheral blood myelomonocytic cells. J Exp Med 1999;189:1149.
119. O'Callaghan CA, Tormo J, Willcox BE, et al. Production, crystallization, and preliminary X-ray analysis of the human MHC class Ib molecule HLA-E. Protein Sci 1998;7:1264.
120. Brossay L, Chioda M, Burdin N, et al. CD1d-mediated recognition of an alpha-galactosylceramide by natural killer T cells is highly conserved through mammalian evolution. J Exp Med
1998;188:1521.
121. Kronenberg M, Brossay L, Kurepa Z, Forman J. Conserved lipid and peptide presentation functions of nonclassical class I molecules. Immunol Today 1999;20:515.
122. Ernst WA, Maher J, Cho S, et al. Molecular interaction of CD1b with lipoglycan antigens. Immunity 1998;8:331.
123. Sugita M, Grant EP, van Donselaar E, et al. Separate pathways for antigen presentation by CD1 molecules. Immunity 1999;11:743.
124. Sugita M, Moody DB, Jackman RM, et al. CD1a new paradigm for antigen presentation and T cell activation. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 1998;87:8.
125. McMichael AJ, Kelleher A. The arrival of HLA class II tetramers. J Clin Invest 1999;104:1669.
126. Roche PA, Marks MS, Cresswell P. Formation of a nine-subunit complex by HLA class II glycoproteins and the invariant chain. Nature 1991;354:392.
127. Schmid SL, Jackson MR. Making class II presentable. Nature (London) 1994;369:103.
128. Amigorena S, Drake JR, Webster P, Mellman I. Transient accumulation of new class II MHC molecules in a novel endocytic compartment in B lymphocytes. Nature (London) 1994;369:113.
129. Tulp A, Verwoerd D, Dobberstein B, Ploegh HL, Pieters J. Isolation and characterization of the intracellular MHC class II compartment. Nature (London) 1994;369:120.
130. West MA, Lucocq JM, Watts C. Antigen processing and class II MHC peptide-loading compartments in human B-lymphoblastoid cells. Nature (London) 1994;369:147.
131. Arunachalam B, Lamb CA, Cresswell P. Transport properties of free and MHC class IIassociated oligomers containing different isoforms of human invariant chain. Int Immunol 1994;6:439.
132. Roche PA, Cresswell P. Proteolysis of the class II-associated invariant chain generates a peptide binding site in intracellular HLA-DR molecules. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:3150.
133. Russell HI, York IA, Rock KL, Monaco JJ. Class II antigen processing defects in two H2d mouse cell lines are caused by point mutations in the H2-DMa gene. EurJ Immunol 1999;29:905.
134. Denzin LK, Cresswell P. HLA-DM induces CLIP dissociation from MHC class II alpha beta dimers and facilitates peptide loading. Cell 1995;82:155.

135. Marincola FM, Jaffee EM, Hicklin DJ, Ferrone S. Escape of human solid tumors from T-cell recognition: molecular mechanisms and functional significance . Adv Immunol 2000;74:181.
136. Marincola FM, Shamamian P, Simonis TB, et al. Locus-specific analysis of human leukocyte antigen class I expression in melanoma cell lines. J Immunother 1994;16:13.
137. Marincola FM, Shamamian P, Alexander RB, et al. Loss of HLA haplotype and B locus down-regulation in melanoma cell lines. J Immunol 1994;153:1225.
138. Banchereau J, Steinman RM. Dendritic cells and the control of immunity. Nature 1998;392:245.
139. Schuler G, Steinman RM. Dendritic cells as adjuvants for immune-mediated resistance to tumors. J Exp Med 1997;186:1183.
140. Steinman RM. The dendritic cell system and its role in immunogenicity. Annu Rev Immunol 1991;9:271.
141. Steinman RM, Witmer-Pack M, Inaba K. Dendritic cells: antigen presentation, accessory function and clinical relevance. Adv Exp Med Biol 1993;329:1.
142. Pierre P, Turley SJ, Gatti E, et al. Developmental regulation of MHC class II transport in mouse dendritic cells. Nature 1997;388:787.
143. Randolph GJ, Inaba K, Robbiani DF, Steinman RM, Muller WA. Differentiation of phagocytic monocytes into lymph node dendritic cells in vivo. Immunity 1999;11:753.
144. Heath WR, Carbone FR. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte activation by cross-priming. Curr Opin Immunol 1999;11:314.
145. Kurts C, Heath WR, Carbone FR, Kosaka H, Miller JF. Cross-presentation of self antigens to CD8+ T cells: the balance between tolerance and autoimmunity. Novartis Found Symp
1998;215:172.
146. Carbone FR, Kurts C, Bennett SR, Miller JF, Heath WR. Cross-presentation: a general mechanism for CTL immunity and tolerance. Immunol Today 1998;19:368.
147. Gallucci S, Lolkema M, Matzinger P. Natural adjuvants: endogenous activators of dendritic cells. Nat Med 1999;5:1249.
148. Diehl L, den Boer AT, Schoenberger SP, et al. CD40 activation in vivo overcomes peptide-induced peripheral cytotoxic T-lymphocyte tolerance and augments anti-tumor vaccine efficacy. Nat
Med 1999;5:774.
149. Toes RM, Schoenberger SP, van der Voort EH, Offringa R, Melief CM. CD40-CD40Ligand interactions and their role in cytotoxic T lymphocyte priming and anti-tumor immunity. Semin Immunol
1998;10:443.
150. Davis MM, Chien YH. T-cell antigen receptors. In: Paul WE, ed. Fundamental immunology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1999:341.
151. Reinherz EL, Tan K, Tang L, et al. The crystal structure of a T cell receptor in complex with peptide and MHC class II. Science 1999;286:1913.
152. Garcia KC, Teyton L, Wilson IA. Structural basis of T cell recognition. Annu Rev Immunol 1999;17:369.
153. Yee C, Savage PA, Lee PP, Davis MM, Greenberg PD. Isolation of high avidity melanoma-reactive CTL from heterogeneous populations using peptide-MHC tetramers. J Immunol
1999;162:2227.
154. Lee KH, Wang E, Nielsen MB, et al. Increased vaccine-specific T cell frequency after peptide-based vaccination correlates with increased susceptibility to in vitro stimulation but does not lead
to tumor regression. J Immunol 1999;163:6292.
155. Altman JD, Moss PH, Goulder PR, et al. Phenotypic analysis of antigen-specific T lymphocytes. Science 1996;274:94.
156. Padovan E, Giachino C, Cella M, et al. Normal T lymphocytes can express two different T cell receptor beta chains: implications for the mechanism of allelic exclusion. J Exp Med
1995;181:1587.
157. Davodeau F, Peyrat MA, Romagne F, et al. Dual T cell receptor beta chain expression on human T lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1995;181:1391.
158. Padovan E, Casorati G, Dellabona P, et al. Expression of two T cell receptor alpha chains: dual receptor T cells. Science 1993;262:422.
159. Malissen M, Trucy J, Jouvin-Marche E, et al. Regulation of TCR alpha and beta gene allelic exclusion during T-cell development. Immunol Today 1992;13:315.
160. Ashwell JD, Chen C, Schwartz RH. High frequency and nonrandom distribution of alloreactivity in T cell clones selected for recognition of foreign antigen in association with self class II
molecules. J Immunol 1986;136:389.
161. Heath WR, Carbone FR, Bertolino P, et al. Expression of two T cell receptor alpha chains on the surface of normal murine T cells. EurJ Immunol 1995;25:1617.
162. Padovan E, Casorati G, Dellabona P, Giachino C, Lanzavecchia A. Dual receptor T-cells. Implications for alloreactivity and autoimmunity. Ann NY Acad Sci 1995;756:66.
163. Kabelitz D, Wesch D, Hinz T. gamma delta T cells, their T cell receptor usage and role in human diseases. Springer Semin Immunopathol 1999;21:55.
164. Salerno A, Dieli F. Role of gamma delta T lymphocytes in immune response in humans and mice. Crit Rev Immunol 1998;18:327.
165. Born W, Cady C, Jones-Carson J, et al. Immunoregulatory functions of gamma delta T cells. Adv Immunol 1999;71:77.
166. Malissen B, Ardouin L, Lin SY, Gillet A, Malissen M. Function of the CD3 subunits of the pre-TCR and TCR complexes during T cell development. Adv Immunol 1999;72:103.
167. Kotzin BL, Leung DY, Kappler J, Marrack P. Superantigens and their potential role in human disease. Adv Immunol 1993;54:99.
168. Möller G. Superantigens. Immunol Rev 1993;131:5.
169. Pucillo CE, Palmer LD, Hodes RJ. Superantigenic characteristics of mouse mammary tumor viruses play a critical role in susceptibility to infection in mice. Immunol Res 1995;14:58.
170. Lavoie PM, Thibodeau J, Erard F, Sekaly RP. Understanding the mechanism of action of bacterial superantigens from a decade of research. Immunol Rev 1999;168:257.
171. Jardetzky TS, Brown JH, Gorga JC, et al. Three-dimensional structure of a human class II histocompatibility molecule complexed with superantigen. Nature 1994;368:711.
172. Li H, Llera A, Mariuzza RA. Structure-function studies of T-cell receptor-superantigen interactions. Immunol Rev 1998;163:177.
173. Boniface JJ, Rabinowitz JD, Wulfing C, et al. Initiation of signal transduction through the T cell receptor requires the multivalent engagement of peptide/MHC ligands. Immunity 1998;9:459.
174. Finn OJ, Jerome KR, Henderson RA, et al. MUC-1 epithelial tumor mucin-based immunity and cancer vaccines. Immunol Rev 1995;145:61.
175. Magarian-Blander J, Ciborowski P, Hsia S, Watkins SC, Finn OJ. Intercellular and intracellular events following the MHC-unrestricted TCR recognition of a tumor-specific peptide epitope on the
epithelial antigen MUC1. J Immunol 1998;160:3111.
176. Spits H, Lanier LL, Phillips JH. Development of human T and natural killer cells. Blood 1995;85:2654.
177. Goldrath AW, Bevan MJ. Selecting and maintaining a diverse T-cell repertoire. Nature 1999;402:255.
178. von Boehmer H. Thymic selection: a matter of life and death. Immunol Today 1992;13:454.
179. Pfeffer K, Mak TW. Lymphocyte ontogeny and activation in gene targeted mutant mice. Annu Rev Immunol 1994;12:367.
180. Fischer A, Cavazzana-Calvo M, De Saint B, et al. Naturally occurring primary deficiencies of the immune system. Annu Rev Immunol 1997;15:93.
181. Barclay AN, Brown MH, Law SK, et al. The leucocyte antigen factsbook, 2nd ed. London: Academic Press, 1997.
182. Shaw S, Turni LA, Katz KS, eds. Protein Reviews on the Web. World Wide Web URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/prow, 1999.
183. Kishihara K, Penninger J, Wallace VA, et al. Normal B lymphocyte development but impaired T cell maturation in CD45-exon6 protein tyrosine phosphatase-deficient mice. Cell 1993;74:143.
184. Janeway CA Jr. The T cell receptor as a multicomponent signaling machine: CD4/CD8 coreceptors and CD45 in T cell activation. Annu Rev Immunol 1992;10:645.
185. Bosselut R, Zhang W, Ashe JM, et al. Association of the adaptor molecule LAT with CD4 and CD8 coreceptors identifies a new coreceptor function in T cell receptor signal transduction. J Exp
Med 1999;190:1517.
186. Leitenberg D, Boutin Y, Lu DD, Bottomly K. Biochemical association of CD45 with the T cell receptor complex: regulation by CD45 isoform and during T cell activation. Immunity 1999;10:701.
187. Byth KF, Conroy LA, Howlett S, et al. CD45-null transgenic mice reveal a positive regulatory role for CD45 in early thymocyte development, in the selection of CD4+CD8+ thymocytes, and B
cell maturation. J Exp Med 1996;183:1707.
188. Singer A, Hathcock KS, Hodes RJ. Self recognition in allogeneic radiation bone marrow chimeras. A radiation-resistant host element dictates the self-specificity and immune response gene
phenotype of T-helper cells. J Exp Med 1981;153:1286.
189. Fink PJ, Bevan MJ. Positive selection of thymocytes. Adv Immunol 1995;59:99.
190. King LB, Ashwell JD. Thymocyte and T cell apoptosis: is all death created equal? Thymus 1994;23:209.
191. Penninger JM, Kroemer G. Molecular and cellular mechanisms of T lymphocyte apoptosis. Adv Immunol 1998;68:51.
192. Moulian N, Berrih-Aknin S. Fas/APO-1/CD95 in health and autoimmune disease: thymic and peripheral aspects. Semin Immunol 1998;10:449.
193. Rathmell JC, Thompson CB. The central effectors of cell death in the immune system. Annu Rev Immunol 1999;17:781.
194. Nagata S. Apoptosis by death factor. Cell 1997;88:355.
195. Savill J, Fadok V, Henson P, Haslett C. Phagocyte recognition of cells undergoing apoptosis. Immunol Today 1993;14:131.
196. Chao DT, Korsmeyer SJ. BCL-2 family: regulators of cell death. Annu Rev Immunol 1998;16:395.
197. Möller G. Gamma/delta T cells. Immunol Rev 1991;120:5.
198. Haas W, Pereira P, Tonegawa S. Gamma/delta cells. Annu Rev Immunol 1993;11:637.
199. von Boehmer H, Aifantis I, Azogui O, et al. Crucial function of the pre-T-cell receptor (TCR) in TCR beta selection, TCR beta allelic exclusion and alpha beta versus gamma delta lineage
commitment. Immunol Rev 1998;165:111.
200. MacDonald HR, Wilson A. The role of the T-cell receptor (TCR) in alpha beta/gamma delta lineage commitment: clues from intracellular TCR staining. Immunol Rev 1998;165:87.
201. Robey E, Fowlkes BJ. The alpha beta versus gamma delta T-cell lineage choice. Curr Opin Immunol 1998;10:181.
202. Fehling HJ, Gilfillan S, Ceredig R. Alpha beta/gamma delta lineage commitment in the thymus of normal and genetically manipulated mice. Adv Immunol 1999;71:1.
203. MacDonald TT. Mucosal T cells. Chem Immunol 1998;71:1.
204. Poussier P, Julius M. Speculation on the lineage relationships among CD4()8(+) gut-derived T cells and their role(s). Semin Immunol 1999;11:293.
205. Beagley KW, Husband AJ. Intraepithelial lymphocytes: origins, distribution, and function. Crit Rev Immunol 1998;18:237.
206. Vidal K, Daniel C, Hill M, Littman DR, Allen PM. Differential requirements for CD4 in TCR-ligand interactions. J Immunol 1999;163:4811.
207. Devine L, Kavathas PB. Molecular analysis of protein interactions mediating the function of the cell surface protein CD8. Immunol Res 1999;19:201.
208. Kong YY, Kishihara K, Yoshida H, Mak TW, Nomoto K. Generation of T cells with differential responses to alloantigens in CD45 exon 6-deficient mice. J Immunol 1995;154:5725.
209. Trowbridge IS, Thomas ML. CD45: an emerging role as a protein tyrosine phosphatase required for lymphocyte activation and development. Annu Rev Immunol 1994;12:85.
210. Justement LB. The role of CD45 in signal transduction. Adv Immunol 1997;66:1.
211. Weiss A. Lymphocyte activation. In: Paul WE, ed. Fundamental immunology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1999:411.
212. Germain RN, Stefanova I. The dynamics of T cell receptor signaling: complex orchestration and the key roles of tempo and cooperation. Annu Rev Immunol 1999;17:467.
213. Kersh GJ, Allen PM. Essential flexibility in the T-cell recognition of antigen. Nature 1996;380:495.
214. Waldmann TA. The interleukin-2 receptor. J Biol Chem 1991;266:2681.
215. Nelson BH, Willerford DM. Biology of the interleukin-2 receptor. Adv Immunol 1998;70:1.
216. Karnitz LM, Abraham RT. Interleukin-2 receptor signaling mechanisms. Adv Immunol 1996;61:147.
217. Shimizu Y, Shaw S. T lymphocyte adhesion molecules. Year Immunol 1990;6:69.
218. Dustin ML, Springer TA. Role of lymphocyte adhesion receptors in transient interactions and cell locomotion. Annu Rev Immunol 1991;9:27.
219. Fraser JD, Straus D, Weiss A. Signal transduction events leading to T-cell lymphokine gene expression. Immunol Today 1993;14:357.
220. Linsley PS, Ledbetter JA. The role of the CD28 receptor during T cell responses to antigen. Annu Rev Immunol 1993;11:191.
221. Schwartz RH. Costimulation of T lymphocytes: the role of CD28, CTLA-4, and B7/BB1 in interleukin-2 production and immunotherapy. Cell 1992;71:1065.
222. Watts TH, DeBenedette MA. T cell co-stimulatory molecules other than CD28. Curr Opin Immunol 1999;11:286.
223. Powell JD, Ragheb JA, Kitagawa-Sakakida S, Schwartz RH. Molecular regulation of interleukin-2 expression by CD28 co-stimulation and anergy. Immunol Rev 1998;165:287.
224. Chambers CA, Allison JP. Co-stimulation in T cell responses. Curr Opin Immunol 1997;9:396.
225. Oosterwegel MA, Greenwald RJ, Mandelbrot DA, Lorsbach RB, Sharpe AH. CTLA-4 and T cell activation. Curr Opin Immunol 1999;11:294.
226. Thompson CB, Allison JP. The emerging role of CTLA-4 as an immune attenuator. Immunity 1997;7:445.
227. Bluestone JA. Is CTLA-4 a master switch for peripheral T cell tolerance? J Immunol 1997;158:1989.
228. Robey E, Allison JP. T-cell activation: integration of signals from the antigen receptor and costimulatory molecules. Immunol Today 1995;16:306.
229. Azuma M, Lanier LL. The role of CD28 costimulation in the generation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1995;198:59.
230. June CH, Bluestone JA, Nadler LM, Thompson CB. The B7 and CD28 receptor families. Immunol Today 1994;15:321.
231. Hathcock KS, Hodes RJ. Role of the CD28-B7 costimulatory pathways in T celldependent B cell responses. Adv Immunol 1996;62:131.
232. Morgan DA, Ruscetti FW, Gallo RG. Selective in vitro growth of T-lymphocytes from normal bone marrow. Science 1976;193:1007.

233. Rosenberg SA, Grimm EA, McGrogan M, et al. Biological activity of recombinant human interleukin-2 produced in E. coli. Science 1984;223:1412.
234. Smith KA. Interleukin-2: inception, impact, and implications. Science 1988;240:1169.
235. Waldmann T, Tagaya Y, Bamford R. Interleukin-2, interleukin-15, and their receptors. Int Rev Immunol 1998;16:205.
236. Giri JG, Anderson DM, Kumaki S, et al. IL-15, a novel T cell growth factor that shares activities and receptor components with IL-2. J Leukoc Biol 1995;57:763.
237. Harding FA, Allison JP. CD28-B7 interactions allow the induction of CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes in the absence of exogenous help. J Exp Med 1993;177:1791.
238. Lassila O, Vainio O, Matzinger P. Can B cells turn on virgin T cells? Nature 1988;334:253.
239. Chen L, McGowan P, Ashe S, et al. Tumor immunogenicity determines the effect of B7 costimulation on T cell-mediated tumor immunity. J Exp Med 1994;179:523.
240. Chen L, Ashe S, Brady WA, et al. Costimulation of antitumor immunity by the B7 counterreceptor for the T lymphocyte molecules CD28 and CTLA-4. Cell 1992;71:1093.
241. Townsend SE, Allison JP. Tumor rejection after direct costimulation of CD8+ T cells by B7-transfected melanoma cells. Science 1993;259:368.
242. Baskar S, Ostrand-Rosenberg S, Nabavi N, et al. Constitutive expression of B7 restores immunogenicity of tumor cells expressing truncated major histocompatibility complex class II molecules.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:5687.
243. Janeway CA Jr, Bottomly K. Signals and signs for lymphocyte responses. Cell 1994;76:275.
244. Sepulveda H, Cerwenka A, Morgan T, Dutton RW. CD28, IL-2-independent costimulatory pathways for CD8 T lymphocyte activation. J Immunol 1999;163:1133.
245. Van Parijs L, Abbas AK. Homeostasis and self-tolerance in the immune system: turning lymphocytes off. Science 1998;280:243.
246. Mehal WZ, Juedes AE, Crispe IN. Selective retention of activated CD8+ T cells by the normal liver. J Immunol 1999;163:3202.
247. Cohn M. The wisdom of hindsight. Annu Rev Immunol 1994;12:1.
248. Mueller DL, Jenkins MK. Molecular mechanisms underlying functional T-cell unresponsiveness. Curr Opin Immunol 1995;7:375.
249. Fitch FW, McKisic MD, Lancki DW, Gajewski TF. Differential regulation of murine T lymphocyte subsets. Annu Rev Immunol 1993;11:29.
250. Sallusto F, Lanzavecchia A. Mobilizing dendritic cells for tolerance, priming, and chronic inflammation. J Exp Med 1999;189:611.
251. Miller JF, Kurts C, Allison J, et al. Induction of peripheral CD8+ T-cell tolerance by cross-presentation of self antigens. Immunol Rev 1998;165:267.
252. Banchereau J, Steinman RM. Dendritic cells and the control of immunity. Nature 1998;392:245.
253. Rocha B, von Boehmer H. Peripheral selection of the T cell repertoire. Science 1991;251:1225.
254. Ferber I, Schonrich G, Schenkel J, et al. Levels of peripheral T cell tolerance induced by different doses of tolerogen. Science 1994;263:674.
255. Sloan-Lancaster J, Evavold BD, Allen PM. Induction of T-cell anergy by altered T-cell-receptor ligand on live antigen-presenting cells. Nature 1993;363:156.
256. Kabelitz D, Pohl T, Pechhold K. Activation-induced cell death (apoptosis) of mature peripheral T lymphocytes. Immunol Today 1993;14:338.
257. Green DR, Scott DW. Activation-induced apoptosis in lymphocytes. Curr Opin Immunol 1994;6:476.
258. Vacchio MS, Ashwell JD. T cell tolerance. Chem Immunol 1994;58:1.
259. Webb DR, Kraig E, Devens BH. Suppressor cells and immunity. Chem Immunol 1994;58:146.
260. Lenardo M, Chan KM, Hornung F, et al. Mature T lymphocyte apoptosisimmune regulation in a dynamic and unpredictable antigenic environment. Annu Rev Immunol 1999;17:221.
261. Russell JH, Rush B, Weaver C, Wang R. Mature T cells of autoimmune lpr/lpr mice have a defect in antigen-stimulated suicide. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:4409.
262. Cory S. Regulation of lymphocyte survival by the bcl-2 gene family. Annu Rev Immunol 1995;13:513.
263. Broome HE, Dargan CM, Krajewski S, Reed JC. Expression of Bcl-2, Bcl-x, and Bax after T cell activation and IL-2 withdrawal. J Immunol 1965;155:2311.
264. Mitchison NA. Induction of immunological paralysis in two zones of dosage. Proc R Soc Lond 1964;161:275.
265. Moskophidis D, Lechner F, Pircher H, Zinkernagel RM. Virus persistence in acutely infected immunocompetent mice by exhaustion of antiviral cytotoxic effector T cells. Nature 1993;362:758.
266. Moskophidis D, Lechner F, Pircher H, Zinkernagel RM. Virus persistence in acutely infected immunocompetent mice by exhaustion of antiviral cytotoxic effector T cells. Nature 1993;362:758.
267. Cohen JJ, Duke RC, Fadok VA, Sellins KS. Apoptosis and programmed cell death in immunity. Annu Rev Immunol 1992;10:267.
268. Tough DF, Sprent J. Life span of naive and memory T cells. Stem Cells 1995;13:242.
269. Sprent J. Immunological memory. Curr Opin Immunol 1997;9:371.
270. Dutton RW, Bradley LM, Swain SL. T cell memory. Annu Rev Immunol 1998;16:201.
271. Ahmed R, Gray D. Immunological memory and protective immunity: understanding their relation. Science 1996;272:54.
272. Freitas AA, Rocha B. Peripheral T cell survival. Curr Opin Immunol 1999;11:152.
273. Ernst B, Lee DS, Chang JM, Sprent J, Surh CD. The peptide ligands mediating positive selection in the thymus control T cell survival and homeostatic proliferation in the periphery. Immunity
1999;11:173.
274. Sallusto F, Lenig D, Forster R, Lipp M, Lanzavecchia A. Two subsets of memory T lymphocytes with distinct homing potentials and effector functions. Nature 1999;401:708.
275. Mackay CR. Immunological memory. Adv Immunol 1993;53:217.
276. Gray D. Immunological memory. Annu Rev Immunol 1993;11:49.
277. Picker LJ, Butcher EC. Physiological and molecular mechanisms of lymphocyte homing. Annu Rev Immunol 1992;10:561.
278. Shimizu Y, Newman W, Tanaka Y, Shaw S. Lymphocyte interactions with endothelial cells. Immunol Today 1992;13:106.
279. Springer TA. Traffic signals on endothelium for lymphocyte recirculation and leukocyte emigration. Annu Rev Physiol 1995;57:827.
280. Tanaka Y, Adams DH, Shaw S. Proteoglycans on endothelial cells present adhesion-inducing cytokines to leukocytes. Immunol Today 1993;14:111.
281. Baggiolini M. Chemokines and leukocyte traffic. Nature 1998;392:565.
282. Sallusto F, Lanzavecchia A, Mackay CR. Chemokines and chemokine receptors in T-cell priming and Th1/Th2-mediated responses. Immunol Today 1998;19:568.
283. Zlotnik A, Morales J, Hedrick JA. Recent advances in chemokines and chemokine receptors. Crit Rev Immunol 1999;19:1.
284. Sprent J, Webb SR. Function and specificity of T cell subsets in the mouse. Adv Immunol 1987;41:39.
285. Cantor H. T lymphocytes. In: Paul WE, ed. Fundamental immunology. New York: Raven Press, 1984:57.
286. Vitetta ES, Fernandez-Botran R, Myers CD, Sanders VM. Cellular interactions in the humoral immune response. Adv Immunol 1989;45:1.
287. Hodes RJ. T-cell-mediated regulation: help and suppression. In: Paul WE, ed. Fundamental immunology, 2nd ed. New York: Raven Press, 1989:587.
288. Oxenius A, Zinkernagel RM, Hengartner H. CD4+ T-cell induction and effector functions: a comparison of immunity against soluble antigens and viral infections. Adv Immunol 1998;70:313.
289. Lanzavecchia A. Immunology. Licence to kill. Nature 1998;393:413.
290. Heath WR, Carbone FR. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte activation by cross-priming. Curr Opin Immunol 1999;11:314.
291. Guerder S, Matzinger P. A fail-safe mechanism for maintaining self-tolerance. J Exp Med 1992;176:553.
292. Seder RA, Mosmann TM. Differentiation of effector phenotypes of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. In: Paul WE, ed. Fundamental immunology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers,
1999:879.
293. Romagnani S. The Th1/Th2 paradigm. Immunol Today 1997;18:263.
294. Seder RA, Paul WE. Acquisition of lymphokine-producing phenotype by CD4+ T cells. Annu Rev Immunol 1994;12:635.
295. Carter LL, Swain SL. Single cell analyses of cytokine production. Curr Opin Immunol 1997;9:177.
296. Constant SL, Bottomly K. Induction of Th1 and Th2 CD4+ T cell responses: the alternative approaches. Annu Rev Immunol 1997;15:297.
297. O'Garra A. Cytokines induce the development of functionally heterogeneous T helper cell subsets. Immunity 1998;8:275.
298. Abbas AK, Murphy KM, Sher A. Functional diversity of helper T lymphocytes. Nature 1996;383:787.
299. Sad S, Marcotte R, Mosmann TR. Cytokine-induced differentiation of precursor mouse CD8+ T cells into cytotoxic CD8+ T cells secreting Th1 or Th2 cytokines. Immunity 1995;2:271.
300. Mosmann TR, Li L, Sad S. Functions of CD8 T-cell subsets secreting different cytokine patterns. Semin Immunol 1997;9:87.
301. Carter LL, Dutton RW. Type 1 and type 2: a fundamental dichotomy for all T-cell subsets. Curr Opin Immunol 1996;8:336.
302. Clerici M, Shearer GM. The Th1-Th2 hypothesis of HIV infection: new insights. Immunol Today 1994;15:575.
303. Dorf ME, Kuchroo VK, Collins M. Suppressor T cells: some answers but more questions. Immunol Today 1992;13:241.
304. Bloom BR, Salgame P, Diamond B. Revisiting and revising suppressor T cells. Immunol Today 1992;13:131.
305. North RJ. Down-regulation of the antitumor immune response. AdvCancer Res 1985;45:1.
306. Benacerraf B, Germain RN. A single major pathway of T-lymphocyte interactions in antigen-specific immune suppression. ScandJ Immunol 1981;13:1.
307. Sambhara SR, Miller RG. Reduction of CTL antipeptide response mediated by CD8+ cells whose class I MHC can bind the peptide. J Immunol 1994;152:1103.
308. Hiruma K, Nakamura H, Henkart PA, Gress RE. Clonal deletion of postthymic T cells: veto cells kill precursor cytotoxic T lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1992;175:863.
309. Rammensee HG. Veto function in vitro and in vivo. Int Rev Immunol 1989;4:175.
310. Miller RG, Muraoka S, Claesson MH, Reimann J, Benveniste P. The veto phenomenon in T-cell regulation. Ann NY Acad Sci 1988;532:170.
311. Fink PJ, Shimonkevitz RP, Bevan MJ. Veto cells. Annu Rev Immunol 1988;6:115.
312. Lanier LL, Phillips JH, Hackett J Jr, Tutt M, Kumar V. Natural killer cells: definition of a cell type rather than a function. J Immunol 1986;137:2735.
313. Trinchieri G, Perussia B. Human natural killer cells: biologic and pathologic aspects. Lab Invest 1984;50:489.
314. Greenberg PD. Adoptive T cell therapy of tumors: mechanisms operative in the recognition and elimination of tumor cells. Adv Immunol 1991;49:281.
315. Hahn S, Gehri R, Erb P. Mechanism and biological significance of CD4-mediated cytotoxicity. Immunol Rev 1995;146:57.
316. Hung K, Hayashi R, Lafond-Walker A, et al. The central role of CD4(+) T cells in the antitumor immune response. J Exp Med 1998;188:2357.
317. Henkart PA. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes. In: Paul WE, ed. Fundamental immunology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1999:1021.
318. Ashkenazi A, Dixit VM. Death receptors: signaling and modulation. Science 1998;281:1305.
319. Griffith TS, Lynch DH. TRAIL: a molecule with multiple receptors and control mechanisms. Curr Opin Immunol 1998;10:559.
320. Rouvier E, Luciani MF, Golstein P. Fas involvement in Ca(2+)independent T cellmediated cytotoxicity. J Exp Med 1993;177:195.
321. Griffiths GM, Schopp J. Pathways for cytolysis. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1995.
322. Berke G. The CTL's kiss of death. Cell 1995;81:9.
323. Henkart PA. Lymphocyte-mediated cytotoxicity: two pathways and multiple effector molecules. Immunity 1994;1:343.
324. Crispe IN. Fatal interactions: Fas-induced apoptosis of mature T cells. Immunity 1994;1:347.
325. Nagata S, Golstein P. The Fas death factor. Science 1995;267:1449.
326. Kojima H, Shinohara N, Hanaoka S, et al. Two distinct pathways of specific killing revealed by perforin mutant cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Immunity 1994;1:357.
327. Walsh CM, Matloubian M, Liu CC, et al. Immune function in mice lacking the perforin gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:10854.
328. Lowin B, Hahne M, Mattmann C, Tschopp J. Cytolytic T-cell cytotoxicity is mediated through perforin and Fas lytic pathways. Nature 1994;370:650.
329. Kagi D, Vignaux F, Ledermann B, et al. Fas and perforin pathways as major mechanisms of T cellmediated cytotoxicity. Science 1994;265:528.
330. Henkart PA, Williams MS, Nakajima H. Degranulating cytotoxic lymphocytes inflict multiple damage pathways on target cells. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1995;198:75.
331. Kagi D, Ledermann B, Burki K, Zinkernagel RM, Hengartner H. Molecular mechanisms of lymphocyte-mediated cytotoxicity and their role in immunological protection and pathogenesis in vivo.
Annu Rev Immunol 1996;14:207.
332. van den Broek ME, Kagi D, Ossendorp F, et al. Decreased tumor surveillance in perforin-deficient mice. J Exp Med 1996;184:1781.
333. Crispe IN. Death and destruction of activated T lymphocytes. Immunol Res 1999;19:143.
334. Alderson MR, Lynch DH. Receptors and ligands that mediate activation-induced death of T cells. Springer Semin Immunopathol 1998;19:289.
335. Lanier LL, Phillips JH. NK cell recognition of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules. Semin Immunol 1995;7:75.
336. Bottino C, Vitale M, Pende D, Biassoni R, Moretta A. Receptors for HLA class I molecules in human NK cells. Semin Immunol 1995;7:67.
337. Paul NL, Ruddle NH. Lymphotoxin. Annu Rev Immunol 1988;6:407.

338. Aggarwal BB, Vilcek J. Tumor necrosis factors: structure, function, and mechanism of action. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1992.
339. Beutler B. Tumor necrosis factors: the molecules and their emerging role in medicine. New York: Raven Press, 1992.
340. Ratner A, Clark WR. Role of TNF-alpha in CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytemediated lysis. J Immunol 1993;150:4303.
341. Ashkenazi A, Pai RC, Fong S, et al. Safety and antitumor activity of recombinant soluble Apo2 ligand. J Clin Invest 1999;104:155.
342. Herberman RB. NK cells and other natural effector cells. New York: Academic Press, 1982.
343. Trinchieri G. Biology of natural killer cells. Adv Immunol 1989;47:187.
344. Moretta L, Ciccone E, Mingari MC, Biassoni R, Moretta A. Human natural killer cells: origin, clonality, specificity, and receptors. Adv Immunol 1994;55:341.
345. Whiteside TL, Herberman RB. The role of natural killer cells in immune surveillance of cancer. Curr Opin Immunol 1995;7:704.
346. Lanier LL, Phillips JH. Natural killer cells. Curr Opin Immunol 1992;4:38.
347. Berke G. The functions and mechanisms of action of cytolytic lymphocytes. In: Paul WE, ed. Fundamental immunology, 3rd ed. New York: Raven Press, 1993:965.
348. Henkart PA, Hayes MP, Shiver JW. The granule exocytosis model for lymphocyte cytotoxicity and its relevance to target cell DNA breakdown. In: Sitkovsky MV, Henkart P, eds. Cytotoxic cells:
recognition, effector function, generation, and methods. Boston: Birkhauser, 1993:153.
349. Yagita H, Nakata M, Kawasaki A, Shinkai Y, Okumura K. Role of perforin in lymphocyte-mediated cytolysis. Adv Immunol 1992;51:215.
350. Shi L, Kraut RP, Aebersold R, Greenberg AH. A natural killer cell granule protein that induces DNA fragmentation and apoptosis. J Exp Med 1992;175:553.
351. Doherty PC. Cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Cell 1993;75:607.
352. Kagi D, Ledermann B, Burki K, et al. Cytotoxicity mediated by T cells and natural killer cells is greatly impaired in perforin-deficient mice. Nature 1994;369:31.
353. Arase H, Arase N, Saito T. Fas-mediated cytotoxicity by freshly isolated natural killer cells. J Exp Med 1995;181:1235.
354. Kashii Y, Giorda R, Herberman RB, Whiteside TL, Vujanovic NL. Constitutive expression and role of the TNF family ligands in apoptotic killing of tumor cells by human NK cells. J Immunol
1999;163:5358.
355. Zamai L, Ahmad M, Bennett IM, et al. Natural killer (NK) cellmediated cytotoxicity: differential use of TRAIL and Fas ligand by immature and mature primary human NK cells. J Exp Med
1998;188:2375.
356. Yokoyama WM. Natural killer cell receptors specific for major histocompatibility complex class I molecules. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:3081.
357. Gumperz JE, Parham P. The enigma of the natural killer cell. Nature 1995;378:245.
358. Long EO. Regulation of immune responses through inhibitory receptors. Annu Rev Immunol 1999;17:875.
359. Moretta A, Bottino C, Millo R, Biassoni R. HLA-specific and non-HLA-specific human NK receptors. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1999;244:69.
360. Yokoyama WM. Natural killer cell receptors. Curr Opin Immunol 1998;10:298.
361. Lanier LL. NK cell receptors. Annu Rev Immunol 1998;16:359.
362. Parham P. Virtual reality in the MHC. Immunol Rev 1999;167:5.
363. Colonna M. Specificity and function of immunoglobulin superfamily NK cell inhibitory and stimulatory receptors. Immunol Rev 1997;155:127.
364. Daëron M, Vivier E. Immunoreceptor tyrosinebased inhibition motifs. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1997;244:1.
365. Karre K. How to recognize a foreign submarine. Immunol Rev 1997;155:5.
366. Porcelli SA, Modlin RL. The CD1 system: antigen-presenting molecules for T cell recognition of lipids and glycolipids. Annu Rev Immunol 1999;17:297.
367. Grimm EA, Mazumder A, Zhang HZ, Rosenberg SA. The lymphokine activated killer cell phenomenon: lysis of natural killerresistant fresh solid tumor cells by interleukin 2activated autologous
human peripheral blood lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1982;155:1823.
368. Ortaldo JR, Mason A, Overton R. Lymphokine-activated killer cells. Analysis of progenitors and effectors. J Exp Med 1986;164:1193.
369. Phillips JH, Lanier LL. Dissection of the lymphokine-activated killer phenomenon: relative contribution of peripheral blood natural killer cells and T lymphocytes to cytolysis. J Exp Med
1986;164:814.
370. Fidler IJ, Schroit AJ. Recognition and destruction of neoplastic cells by activated macrophages: discrimination of altered self. Biochim Biophys Acta 1988;948:151.
371. Drysdale BE, Agarwal S, Shin HS. Macrophage-mediated tumoricidal activity: mechanisms of activation and cytotoxicity. Prog Allergy 1988;40:111.
372. Duerksen-Hughes PJ, Gooding LR. Macrophage-mediated cytotoxicity. In: Sitkovsky MV, Henkart P, ed. Cytotoxic cells: recognition, effector function, generation, and methods. Boston:
Birkhauser, 1993:439.
373. Adams DO, Hamilton TA. Macrophages as destructive cells in host defense. In: Gallin JI, Golstein IM, Snyderman R, ed. Inflammation: basic principles and clinical correlates, 2nd ed. New York:
Raven Press, 1992:637.
374. Fauve RM. Fiftieth forum in immunology. Macrophages and cancer. Ann Inst Pasteur Immunol 1993;144:265.
375. Bogdan C, Nathan C. Modulation of macrophage function by transforming growth factor beta, interleukin-4, and interleukin-10. Ann NY Acad Sci 1993;685:713.
376. Williams MA, Newland AC, Kelsey SM. The potential for monocyte-mediated immunotherapy during infection and malignancy: I. Apoptosis induction and cytotoxic mechanisms. Leuk
Lymphoma 1999;34:1.
377. Knapp W, Rieber P, Dorken B, et al. Towards a better definition of human leucocyte surface molecules. Immunol Today 1989;10:253.
378. Hamilton TA, Adams DO. Mechanisms of macrophage-mediated tumor injury. In: Den Otter W, Ruitenberg EJ, ed. Tumor immunology: mechanisms, diagnosis, therapy. Amsterdam: Elsevier,
1987:89.
379. Nathan CF. Secretory products of macrophages. J Clin Invest 1987;79:319.
380. Mantovani A. Tumor-associated macrophages in neoplastic progression: a paradigm for the in vivo function of chemokines. Lab Invest 1994;71:5.
381. Fahey JL. Antibodies and immunoglobulins: I. Structure and function. JAMA 1965;194:183.
382. Fahey JL. Antibodies and immunoglobulins: II. Normal development and changes in disease. JAMA 1965;194:255.
383. Frazier JK, Capra JD. Immunoglobulins: structure and function. In: Paul WE, ed. Fundamental immunology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1999:37.
384. Kohler G, Milstein C. Continuous cultures of fused cells secreting antibody of predefined specificity. Nature 1975;256:495.
385. Ritter MA, Ladyman HM, eds. Monoclonal antibodies: production, engineering and clinical application. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
386. Goding JW. Monoclonal antibodies: principles and practice, 3rd ed. London: Academic Press, 1996.
387. Potter M. Neoplastic development in B-lymphocytes. Carcinogenesis 1990;11:1.
388. Burrows PD, Cooper MD. B cell development and differentiation. Curr Opin Immunol 1997;9:239.
389. Melchers F, Rolink A. B-lymphocyte development and biology. In: Paul WE, ed. Fundamental immunology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1999:183.
390. Küppers R, Klein U, Hansmann ML, Rajewsky K. Cellular origin of human B-cell lymphomas. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1520.
391. Kantor AB, Herzenberg LA. Origin of murine B cell lineages. Annu Rev Immunol 1993;11:501.
392. DeFranco AL. B-lymphocyte activation. In: Paul WE, ed. Fundamental immunology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1999:225.
393. Benschop RJ, Cambier JC. B cell development: signal transduction by antigen receptors and their surrogates. Curr Opin Immunol 1999;11:143.
394. Medina KL, Strasser A, Kincade PW. Estrogen influences the differentiation, proliferation, and survival of early B-lineage precursors. Blood 2000;95:2059.
395. Nemazee D. Receptor editing in B cells. Adv Immunol 2000;74:89.
396. Melchers F, Rolink A, Grawunder U, et al. Positive and negative selection events during B lymphopoiesis. Curr Opin Immunol 1995;7:214.
397. Nossal GJ. The Florey lecture, 1986. The regulatory biology of antibody formation. Proc R Soc Lond [B] Biol Sci 1986;228:225.
398. Clark EA, Ledbetter JA. How B and T cells talk to each other. Nature 1994;367:425.
399. Bonnefoy JY, Noelle RJ. The CD40.CD40L interactionall things to all immunologists. Research in immunology, vol 145. Paris: Elsevier Science, 1994.
400. Parker DC. T celldependent B cell activation. Annu Rev Immunol 1993;11:331.
401. Thorbecke GJ, Amin AR, Tsiagbe VK. Biology of germinal centers in lymphoid tissue. FASEB J 1994;8:832.
402. Sad S, Marcotte R, Mosmann TR. Cytokine-induced differentiation of precursor mouse CD8+ T cells into cytotoxic CD8+ T cells secreting Th1 or Th2 cytokines. Immunity 1995;2:271.
403. Stavnezer J. Antibody class switching. Adv Immunol 1996;61:79.
404. Snapper CM, Finkelman FD. Immunoglobulin class switching. Paul WE, ed. Fundamental immunology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1999:831.
405. Neuberger MS, Milstein C. Somatic hypermutation . Curr Opin Immunol 1995;7:248.
406. Storb U. Progress in understanding the mechanism and consequences of somatic hypermutation. Immunol Rev 1998;162:5.
407. Klein U, Goossens T, Fischer M, et al. Somatic hypermutation in normal and transformed human B cells. Immunol Rev 1998;162:261.
408. Mond JJ, Lees A, Snapper CM. T cell-independent antigens type 2. Annu Rev Immunol 1995;13:655.
409. Bretscher P, Cohn M. A theory of self-nonself discrimination. Science 1970;169:1042.
410. Goodnow CC. Balancing immunity and tolerance: deleting and tuning lymphocyte repertoires. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:2264.
411. Schwartz RH. Immunological tolerance. In: Paul WE, ed. Fundamental immunology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1999:701.
412. Carroll MC. The role of complement in B cell activation and tolerance. Adv Immunol 2000;74:61.

CHAPTER 5 Molecular Biology of Cancer: Cytogenetics
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 5
Molecular Biology of Cancer: Cytogenetics
MAZIN B. QUMSIYEH
PEINING LI
Introduction
History of Cancer Cytogenetics
Chromosome Structure and Function
Lower-Order Chromatin Structure
Higher-Order Chromatin Structure
Telomeres and Telomerase
Centromeres
Cytogenetic Methods
Specimen Requirements
Banding Techniques (Classic Cytogenetics)
FluorescenceIn Situ Hybridization
Multicolor FISH and Spectral Karyotyping
Primed In Situ Labeling
Comparative Genomic Hybridization
International System of Cytogenetic Nomenclature
Mechanisms and Implications of Chromosomal Abnormalities in Cancer
Numeric Abnormalities
Structural Abnormalities
Cautions to Exercise in Interpreting Chromosomal Abnormalities Seen in Cancer Studies
Failure to Detect a Chromosome Abnormality by Routine G-Banding
Constitutional Chromosomal Abnormalities
Fragile Sites
Satellite Associations
Problems with Solid Tumors
Clonal Evolution and Chromosome Evolution
Constitutional Chromosomal Abnormalities Predisposing to Cancer Development
Data Mining in Cancer Cytogenetics
Glossary
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Cytogenetic testing is one of the fastest-growing areas of testing in oncology. In most cytogenetic laboratories, cancer cases have come to constitute more than 50%
of cytogenetic testing done. It is difficult to estimate the total testing being done. A recent survey by the Association of Genetic Technologists reported that more than
95,000 cancer studies were performed in the United States in 1998 (reported by 202 responding laboratories from 243 laboratories surveyed). Because large
commercial laboratories did not report their numbers, one would estimate that the total number of such tests in the United States is close to 200,000 per year. This
number is, however, rapidly rising as clinicians are becoming aware of the prognostic and diagnostic value of chromosome studies. In this chapter, we do not review
the molecular cytogenetic knowledge in particular diseases nor discuss the biological effect of cancer chromosomal abnormalities (e.g., oncogene activation or tumor
suppressor genes), because these are covered in detail in separate chapters. We do, however, provide an overview of basic cancer cytogenetics covering
terminology, chromosome structure, mechanisms of formation of chromosomal abnormalities, and new technical developments in the field, and cover some genetic
topics not covered in other chapters. The continuous advances in techniques of molecular cytogenetics in the last decade are emphasized.

HISTORY OF CANCER CYTOGENETICS
Boveri1 established the modern paradigm that mutations in somatic cells cause the uncontrolled cell proliferation called cancer. The modern era of human
cytogenetics confirmed this view. This era was ushered in with the simultaneous publications by Tjio and Levan 2 of good-quality, unbanded human karyotypes
showing 46 chromosomes. Technical improvements were the key to the development of clinical cytogenetics. Within a few years (1956 to 1960), researchers
identified specific chromosomal abnormalities associated with congenital abnormalities (e.g., Down, Turner's, and Klinefelter's syndromes) and with cancer. The
opening salvo in cancer cytogenetics was the demonstration of the Philadelphia chromosome as associated with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). 3 The
development of banding techniques in 1969 and 1970 allowed further characterization of this aberration as a balanced translocation involving chromosomes 9 and
22.4 In the last three decades, the knowledge of human cancer cytogenetics has expanded significantly with the addition of new molecular methodologies, such as in
situ hybridization (discussed later in Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization). The field now is best described as molecular cytogenetics.

CHROMOSOME STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
Each normal human somatic cell nucleus has 46 chromosomes, 23 chromosomes being maternal and the other 23 being paternal in origin. This diploid chromosome
number is reduced to 23 (haploid) during meiosis, a specialized nuclear division during gametogenesis in the ovaries and testis. At conception, haploid cells from
each parent combine to form a new diploid cell (zygote), which then divides via mitosis (somatic nuclear division), ultimately creating the fetus. Errors in mitosis or
meiosis can lead to pathogenetic changes (discussed later in Numeric Abnormalities). Genetic instructions are encoded in DNA. DNA replicates during the S phase of
the cell cycle and condenses during the prophase of mitosis (somatogenesis) and meiosis (gametogenesis). During metaphase, the characteristic chromosome
structures can be observed: Each chromosome represents two chromatids joined at an area of constriction known as the centromere.
LOWER-ORDER CHROMATIN STRUCTURE
The human genome consists of approximately 6.8 × 10 9 base pairs (bp) of DNA in each diploid cell. If stretched end to end, this length of DNA would span 2 meters.
In a normal diploid human cell, this DNA is packaged into 44 autosomes and the two sex chromosomes in a compact nucleus. The first level of packaging involves a
wrapping of 200 bp in two turns around a histone core, resulting in the complexes called nucleosomes with a diameter of 10 nm. This basic DNA fiber then is further
condensed in a 30-nm-diameter spiral called a solenoid fiber. The solenoid in turn forms larger fibers that are visible with the light microscope as chromatin fibers.
Chromatin loops of 60 to 90 kb are anchored at scaffold attachment regions. These loops also appear to represent functional replication domains called replicons.
HIGHER-ORDER CHROMATIN STRUCTURE
The development of various banding techniques in the period from 1969 to 1971 revealed that various chromosomal regions respond differently to biochemical and
physical treatments. This suggested that there is a higher-order structure for human chromosomes. One of the first recognized divisions of chromatin is into the
categories of euchromatin and heterochromatin. Heterochromatin was the material that stained dark (heteropyknotic) with various staining techniques, giving rise to
chromocenters in interphase. We now know that this dark staining is a result of the more condensed DNA structure in these regions picking up more DNA dyes.
There are two types of heterochromatin. Constitutive heterochromatin is chromatin that is constitutionally condensed in all cells and cell types and is composed of
highly repeated sequences that can be detected in cytogenetic preparations using the technique of C-banding. In humans, constitutive heterochromatin is found at the
centromeric regions of all chromosomes as well as in the pericentromeric areas of chromosomes 1, 9, and 16 and in the distal long arm of the Y chromosome.
Facultative heterochromatin can switch from condensed to decondensed and vice versa. An example of the latter type is the inactivation of the X chromosome in
female cells for gene dosage compensation. Meiotic pairing has been shown to require heterochromatin homology and to be sensitive to repeat numbers in both male
and female Drosophila.5 Banding is produced along the chromosomal length of euchromatin because of both structural and functional differences in light and dark

G-bands (Table 5-1).

TABLE 5-1. Functional Significance of Chromosomal Banding Patterns

TELOMERES AND TELOMERASE
A double-strand break in DNA is susceptible to recombination and fusion and also triggers cell-cycle arrest mediated by p53. Further, DNA replication, as it is now
understood, would result in shortening of the ends of replicating linear DNA owing to the mechanisms of function of the DNA replication proteins. Thus, there is an
obvious need for telomeres to be unique. Examination of human cells as well as cells from other vertebrates showed that the ends of chromosomes are capped by a
simple repeat of six nucleotides (TTAGGG). The telomere sequence is synthesized by a specialized DNA polymerase called telomerase (reviewed in ref. 6). The
telomerase function includes an enzymatic protein component as well as an RNA component acting as a primer. Telomerase is responsible for programmed end
healing in vivo after breaks and in maintaining telomere length. The telomeres further bind other specific proteins that appear to function in protecting the ends of the
chromosomes from recombination, nuclease attack, activation of cell-cycle checkpoints, and end-to-end fusions.
Hayflick and Moorehead 7 recognized that fibroblast cells grown in culture have limited replicative potential (50 to 100 cell divisions). This Hayflick phenomenon is now
understood as explained by age-related deterioration of telomeres. 8 In the absence of telomerase, the ends of the chromosomes would shorten gradually (by 25 to
200 bp in each replication) owing to the end-replication problem. It is believed that in normal cells, this deterioration of telomeres can eventually lead to cell-cycle
arrest and, thus, cellular senescence. The reverse is also true; it was shown that telomerase reactivation is important in immortalization of cell lines and in cancer
development and metastasis.9,10 The technique developed by Kim et al., 9 called telomeric repeat amplification protocol, is used, with several available commercial and
other modifications, to detect telomerase activity in cell extracts.
It is now recognized that telomerase activity is found in the majority of primary human tumors. 11 There is the potential for development of novel cancer therapies by
regulating telomerase or proteins that in turn regulate telomerase levels in cancer cells. Prognostic value for examining telomerase activity in certain cancers is being
discussed. An example of this is a significantly worse prognosis in meningiomas with telomerase activity versus those without it. 12 One complicating factor is that there
are other pathways for developing “immortality” besides telomere maintenance or for maintaining telomeres without detectable telomerase activity (e.g., involving
recombination). In fact, some human cancer cells even at metastasis have decreased telomeres and are susceptible to end-to-end attachments in metaphase. This
phenomenon was recognized very early in human cytogenetics as “sticky” chromosomal ends. This reduction in telomere length is usually attributed to the increased
cell division (most cancers start from a single cell with increased proliferative capacity). Further, genetically engineered mice lacking telomerase RNA lose their
telomeres but are still capable of developing tumors. 13
Some human premature aging syndromes result from decreased replicative capacity of the cells. In the example of Hutchison-Gilford progeria, telomeres are markedly
reduced, resulting in decreased replicative capacity. Similar findings are reported in Down syndrome, which predisposes to premature senescence of the immune
system as well as predisposition to early Alzheimer's disease. 14 Other nuclear and mitochondrial genes seem to influence aging. For example, Werner and Bloom
syndromes are characterized by mutations in DNA helicases. 15
CENTROMERES
The centromeric DNA is vital to the attachment of specialized proteins to form a functioning structure called the kinetochore. Kinetochores are responsible for the
segregation of the chromatids to the opposite poles of the dividing nucleus during anaphase of mitosis and the segregation of the homologous chromosomes during
anaphase of the first meiotic division. The centromere provides a useful landmark along the chromosome axis, dividing each chromosome into two segments or arms:
a short arm (known as the p arm from the French petit) and a long arm (the q arm, named after the next letter in the alphabet). By convention, chromosomes are
identified by their centromeres. Thus, a derivative chromosome, mostly chromosome 3 material but only one centromere of chromosome 21, is a derivative
chromosome 21. Human chromosomes are normally monocentric. Cancer cells occasionally have dicentric and even polycentric chromosomes. Chromosomes are
classified by their centromere positions and size into seven groups, A through G ( Fig. 5-1). Metacentric chromosomes have equal or almost equal arms (centromere at
or almost at the middle of the chromosome). Acrocentrics (chromosomes 13, 14, 15, 20, 21) have a very tiny short arm carrying a satellite of repeat sequences and
the nucleolar organizer region and the DNA coding for recombinant RNA (rRNA). A submetacentric is a chromosome wherein the short arm is less than one-half the
length of the long arm. Centromeres can be detected using antikinetochore antibodies (e.g., from serum of patients with combined calcinosis cutis, Raynaud's
phenomenon, esophageal dysfunction, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia) as well as using alpha satellite DNA probes.

FIGURE 5-1. Chromosome numbering and nomenclature. The figure illustrates a normal male karyotype. Chromosomes are numbered according to size and
centromere position (left panel). Chromosomes are classified into groups based on size and centromere position and, within groups, by banding patterns. Groups A
(1–3), B (4,5), C (6–12, X), D (13–15), E (16–18), F (19–20), G (21, 22, Y). Examples of a metacentric, a submetacentric, and an acrocentric chromosome (right
panel).

CYTOGENETIC METHODS
SPECIMEN REQUIREMENTS
Most cancer cytogenetic testing involves bone marrow for hematologic malignancies. However, solid-tumor cytogenetics is likely to be the next area of increased
clinical relevance, especially with the new techniques of molecular cytogenetics. For hematologic malignancies, a bone marrow aspirate is the preferred sample,

although success can also be achieved in some difficult cases using core biopsies. Peripheral blood samples can be submitted if there are circulating blast cells. A
lymph node biopsy may also be used in cases with lymph node involvement. Technologies have developed such that even fine-needle aspirates can be tested for
cytogenetic abnormalities. Other types of specimens can be studied, including infiltrates, pleural effusion, spinal fluid, and basically any tissue that may contain
dividing cancer cells.
It is important to provide clinical information on specimens submitted for testing. This helps to select appropriate culture and analysis procedures and, in some cases,
to suggest additional tests. Examples include (1) the need to stimulate cultures with B-cell mitogens (e.g., Epstein-Barr virus, lipopolysaccharide, or
12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate) in B-cell malignancies; (2) the importance of longer culture time in some myeloid disorders [e.g., for detection of t(15;17) in
acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) M3]; and (3) offering fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) tests in cases of certain translocations should the routine
cytogenetics prove negative [e.g., inv(16) in M4e or t(9;22) in CML]. It is recommended that cytogenetic studies be performed at diagnosis and for follow-up of cancer
progression. Occasionally, failure to obtain results can be due to the fact that a patient is under treatment (treatments are intended to block cell division). Because the
study requires viable cells, specimen handling is important in cytogenetics. Drawing of a bone marrow or a blood sample should be performed using heparinized
(sodium heparin) and sterile collection tools and containers. For bone marrow aspirates, volumes can be from 0.25 to 1.0 mL; for blood, 3 to 5 mL is adequate.
However, small specimens can also be processed; the best approach is to check with the laboratory.
BANDING TECHNIQUES (CLASSIC CYTOGENETICS)
Chromosome analysis requires examining cells in the process of mitosis in which the chromosome structure is most clearly defined (most commonly cells in late
prophase or early metaphase). Spontaneously dividing tissues, such as occur in hematopoiesis or in cancer, would be expected to provide mitotic cells for analysis
even in a direct harvest of the material submitted. In practice, the quality of such preparations is suboptimal, and cell culture may be required in some cases. The time
required for culture and analysis varies, depending on the tissue sampled and specific testing requested. Average turnaround time for studies can be as short as 2 to
3 days for bone marrow, 4 to 7 days for blood, and up to 3 weeks for some solid-tissue biopsies. Chromosomes are prepared on glass slides and are treated by
digestion (e.g., with trypsin) and then stained to produce a banding pattern. The most commonly used staining techniques are G-banding and R-banding, which
produce characteristic staining or banding patterns for each human chromosome. These techniques, in combination with the physical chromosomal structure, allow for
the identification of individual chromosomes.
FLUORESCENCE IN SITU HYBRIDIZATION
Mammalian DNA is a double-stranded helix with a phosphate and sugar backbone and hydrogen bonds linking the nucleotides cytosine (C) to guanine (G) and
adenine (A) to thymine (T). Under appropriate conditions, the double-stranded DNA can be resolved to single strands, and the complementary single-stranded DNA
can be reannealed to a double-stranded helix. The property of DNA strand complementarity is used in various molecular methods involving DNA hybridization. By
merging the nucleic acid hybridization onto metaphase chromosome spreads, FISH has established a solid technical foundation for the field of molecular
cytogenetics. The principle of FISH is the hybridization of a DNA probe with incorporated reporter molecule to its complementary chromosomal locus, followed by
detection of the hapten using fluorescent microscopy, usually with computer-assisted imaging analysis. A routine FISH protocol involves multistep procedures. The
reporter molecule can be a protein, such as biotin or digoxigenin, or a fluorescent molecule, such as rhodamine or fluorosiothiocyanate. Incorporation of the reporter
molecule in the probe is performed using nick translation or primer extension with labeled nucleotides. The labeled DNA probe and targeted specimen are treated to
denature double-stranded DNA to single strands and then are allowed to hybridize for 2 to 24 hours (depending on specimen and probe).
FISH analysis extends routine cytogenetic banding methods by resolving ambiguous diagnosis and providing a new tool to diagnose submicroscopic abnormalities.
FISH is a relatively simple, fast, and reliable procedure. Depending on the sequence complexity of labeled DNA probe and the content of tested specimen, FISH has
variable signal sensitivity and spatial resolution. Hybridization probes range from very small DNA fragments (500 bp) to large yeast artificial chromosomes or bacterial
artificial chromosomes. The spatial resolution measured by the closest separable signals could range from 5 Mbp on metaphase chromosomes to 100 Kbp on
interphase chromatins. The most important features of FISH techniques are its applicability to different specimens and its use for simultaneous detection of several
targets using multiple probes. Specimens that can be used for FISH include peripheral blood cells, cultured cell lines, bone marrow cells, paraffin-embedded tissue
sections, and frozen tissues. Specific applications of FISH include:
1. Delineation of chromosomal numeric abnormalities. For example, interphase FISH has been used for detection of trisomy 8 in myeloid disorders, trisomy 7 in
prostate cancer,16 and trisomy 12 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia, 17,18 and ovarian cancers.19
2. Detection of specific translocations, such as those involving immunoglobulin genes in lymphomas, and other translocation seen in leukemias ( Fig. 5-2)
3. Determining degree of engraftment after sex-mismatched bone marrow and cord blood transplantations (see Fig. 5-2D)
4. Determining the origin of specific translocations and marker chromosomes using paint probes in cases where G-banding cannot identify the origin (see Fig.
5-2F;)
5. Revealing cases with gene amplification (e.g., see Fig. 5-2E).

FIGURE 5-2. Examples of application of molecular cytogenetics. A: Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using probes for ETV6 gene at 12p13 ( green) and
CBFA2 (AML1) gene at 21q22 (red). These are useful probes for the detection of the t(12;21), a very common translocation in childhood acute lymphocytic leukemia.
B: FISH using probes for BCR at 22q11.2 (green) and ABL at 9q34 in a case of chronic myelogenous leukemia. Arrow shows the Philadelphia chromosome with fused
signals. C: Using same probes as in B, showing the ability to detect a fusion in the interphase nucleus on the right ( arrow). D: Use of repetitive probes for X (red) and
Y (green) in sex-mismatched bone marrow transplant. E: Illustration of FISH use in gene amplification using a probe for c-myc on 8q24. The probe labels the distal 8q
in this case (arrow) plus an amplified area on the homologous 8q ( between arrows). F: Use of FISH to identify two marker chromosomes (arrows) as derived from
chromosome 15 (probes for 15p in green and proximal 15q in red). G: Comparative genomic hybridization profile of two chromosomes (19 and 20) from a case of
melanoma showing amplification of the distal end of 20q. FISH using BTAK(STK1 5), a gene that hybridizes to 20q and is amplified in a number of cancers showing
normal signal on metaphases from normal blood cells.

MULTICOLOR FISH AND SPECTRAL KARYOTYPING
In the last few years, new development of FISH allowed for detection of different chromosomes using probes combinatorially labeled with several fluorescent dyes.
One method of analysis of this is to image each fluorophore separately and then to allow a computer to translate the different color combinations to values or ratios
that are then pseudocolored, resulting in a karyotype with 24 colors for each of the human chromosomes (1 through 22, X, and Y). This multicolor FISH technique can
be used to identify derivative and marker chromosomes. A similar technique, named spectral karyotyping, also was introduced by using a combination of
epifluorescence microscopy, CCD (cooled-coupled device) imaging, and Fourier spectroscopic measurement. 20,21 Multicolor FISH and spectral karyotyping cannot
detect intrachromosomal anomalies, such as inversions, still require metaphases from the test specimen of good quality, and are limited in resolution to abnormalities
involving one or more bands at a 450-band level.
PRIMED IN SITU LABELING

Primed in situ labeling is a method combining complementary DNA hybridization and in situ primer extension. 22 The method consists of annealing DNA primers to their
complementary sequences on fixed chromosomes, followed by a primer extension reaction catalyzed by DNA polymerase to incorporate labeled nucleotides and then
visualization of synthesized DNA by image analysis. Primed in situ labeling has been used in interphase analysis of aneuploidy in cancer cell lines 23 and in the
detection and sizing of telomeric repeat DNA in situ.24
COMPARATIVE GENOMIC HYBRIDIZATION
Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) is a molecular cytogenetic approach with potential for detecting chromosomal imbalance without the need for dividing cells.
The method entails isolating DNA from a test sample (which can be a few cells from any source, including fixed material and even paraffin sections), labeling this test
DNA with one color, and cohybridizing this DNA with a control DNA labeled with another color to normal metaphases. The ratio of the colors on each chromosomal
segment will, thus, reflect the ratio of test DNA to control DNA on that segment. The differences in fluorescence intensities along the chromosomes on the reference
metaphase are measured through a digital image analysis and are shown as a ratio of the two distinct fluorophores. The decreased and increased ratios of
fluorescent intensities for the test DNA probes represent the deletion (losses) and amplification (gains) of the chromosomal regions in the cancer genome,
respectively.25 Using CGH, we are thus able to scan the entire genome to identify chromosomal imbalance. This is obviously more involved than FISH and requires
use of specific software to allow calculation of color ratios along each chromosome.
The CGH technique provides a genomic fingerprint at a megabase level of resolution for detecting gains and losses of DNA sequences. 26 Therefore, it is particularly
appropriate for cancer studies to identify recurrent chromosomal gains and losses, which serve as starting points for the characterization and isolation of
pathogenetically relevant genes, such as oncogene amplifications or the deletion of segments containing a tumor suppressor gene. CGH could also be used to detect
chromosomal imbalances for monitoring tumor progression and providing prognostic relevance, to analyze markers of genomic instability, and to identify clonal
differences within a specimen. 16,21,27 A recent review by Knuutila et al. 28 showed rapid adoption of these techniques in diverse neoplasms, including detecting
abnormalities of 1p32-p36, 1q, and 12q13-q21 in sarcomas; 2p13-p16 and 18q in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma; 2p23-p25 in neuroblastomas and small cell lung cancer;
and 3q, 5p, 8q, 12p, 17p11.2-p12, 17q12-q21, 17q22-qter, 20q, and Xp11-q13 in prostate cancer. CGH analysis also reveals unique genomic response toward clinical
treatment. Visakorpi et al., 29 using CGH, demonstrated that an Xp11-q13 amplicon containing the androgen receptor is present in relapsed (but not in primary)
prostate cancer. When prostate cancer is treated with androgen depletion therapy, amplification of the androgen receptor gene enables the cell to recover from the
depletion therapy. This is a finding with evident therapeutic implications.

INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF CYTOGENETIC NOMENCLATURE
As indicated, chromosomes are classified by size and centromere position (see Fig. 5-1). The bands along each chromosome are numbered consecutively, by region,
starting at the centromere, and each individual band is given a region and a band number from the centromere toward the telomere (see Fig. 5-1). Bands may also be
divided into sub-bands. Thus, in this international nomenclature, a description of 3q22.3 indicates the long arm of chromosome 3, region 2, band 2, sub-band 3.
Occasionally, more sophisticated techniques, such as high-resolution banding of late prophase chromosomes or in situ hybridization with DNA probes, are called for
to identify chromosomal abnormalities beyond the resolution limits of the routine banding methods. An International System of Cytogenetic Nomenclature (ISCN) 30
ensures uniformity of the terminology used to describe cytogenetic results. Table 5-2 lists examples of the karyotype designations based on the ISCN. Note that the
order of listing of abnormalities is sex chromosomes first, followed by numeric order (regardless of abnormality). The order of clone presentation is to list the main
clonal abnormalities followed by any sidelines (derived clones) and, finally, by the normal cells.

TABLE 5-2. Examples of the International System of Cytogenetic Nomenclature

MECHANISMS AND IMPLICATIONS OF CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES IN CANCER
Not all variations in chromosome structure are pathologic; some morphologic variations in human chromosomes are considered normal and carry little, if any, clinical
significance. Increased amounts of repetitive DNA in the heterochromatic regions on chromosomes 1, 9, and 16 and the Y chromosome are seen frequently and are
not associated with any clinical manifestations. A large Y chromosome is common in Asian populations and some Bedouin tribes and is entirely due to a large
heterochromatic region on the distal long arm. Another common nonpathogenic variant is a pericentric (around the centromere) inversion of the heterochromatic
region of chromosome 9. These normal or acceptable variations in chromosome structure are called polymorphisms. Other changes may be seen with little or no
pathologic significance. In normal individuals of advanced age, the loss of one of the two X chromosomes in lymphocytes of women and of the Y chromosome in men
is a common observation.
Beyond the polymorphic and normal variations, structural or numeric abnormalities can be causative of congenital anomalies (if constitutional) or malignancy (if
somatic or acquired; Fig. 5-3). Somatic or acquired chromosomal abnormalities occur after conception and commonly are present only in specific tissues.
Constitutional abnormalities are determined at conception and may be present in all somatic tissues of an individual (rarely as tissue-limited mosaicism).

FIGURE 5-3. Various types of chromosomal aberrations seen in cancer.

NUMERIC ABNORMALITIES
During the anaphase of meiosis I in germ cells, the homologous chromosomes separate (disjoin) after accomplishing recombination (crossover). During the anaphase

of mitosis and the second meiotic division, chromatids separate (disjoin) and migrate to the opposite poles of the cell. A failure of separation in either of these
situations is termed nondisjunction. Rather than both daughter cells receiving the expected number of chromosomes, there will be gain of material in one daughter
nucleus and loss of genetic material in the other daughter nucleus. For human autosomes, the normal situation is disomy (two copies of each chromosome). Thus,
trisomy refers to having an extra chromosome and monosomy to having a missing chromosome.
Another mechanism for producing a chromosome abnormality is anaphase lag, wherein a chromosome lags at anaphase and fails to be included in daughter nuclei
and so is lost. This can result only in monosomy. Trisomies and monosomies are common in human cancers. Polyploidy occurs when cells have more than the normal
two sets of chromosomes (diploidy). Thus, a triploid cell will have three sets of chromosomes (modal number of chromosomes, 69) and a tetraploid cell four sets
(modal number of chromosomes, 92). Polyploidy is noted in both hematologic malignancies and solid tumors and usually is seen duplicating a set of chromosomes
that already have abnormal chromosomes (structural or numeric).
Our understanding of the impact of numeric abnormalities on development and progression of cancer has actually lagged behind that of structural abnormalities. For
monosomy, speculation about loss of tumor suppressor genes on these chromosomes abound but, for the most common monosomies (e.g., monosomy 7 in myeloid
disorders), no confirmed tumor suppressor genes have yet been cloned that are proven to be directly related to these monosomies. Trisomies are even more
problematic, as it is difficult to show that specific genes on the extra chromosome are responsible for cell proliferation because of a dosage effect (three vs. two copies
of the gene). Recently, it was demonstrated that the extra chromosome 7 in papillary renal carcinomas with trisomy 7 includes the mutant MET allele. 31 This indicates
that one mechanism for the effect of a trisomy is duplication of mutant oncogenes. Other involved mechanisms include gene interactions, imprinting, or position
effects. 32,33
STRUCTURAL ABNORMALITIES
Numeric chromosomal abnormalities entail loss or gain of whole chromosomes. By contrast, structural abnormalities involve changes in part of one or more
chromosomes. By definition, structural chromosomal aberrations require one or more breaks in the DNA sequence. Structural chromosomal rearrangements are
expected to be deleterious. Thus, it is not surprising that strong selective forces in evolution resulted in numerous mechanisms to reduce the rate of chromosomal
aberrations, including numerous pathways of DNA repair or cell-cycle arrest after DNA breaks (e.g., p53-mediated cell-cycle arrest in response to double-stranded
DNA breaks); protective nuclear architecture with chromosome domains; increased nuclear size in the gametocytes; and asynchrony of DNA replication. Despite
these mechanisms, a high incidence of chromosomal abnormalities clearly escapes this negative selection, resulting in an estimated 1% of newborns with
constitutional chromosomal abnormalities and, of course, the many chromosomal abnormalities seen in cancer. 32,33
While DNA breaks can occur in any sequence, there are clear preferential sites for DNA rearrangements. Several studies on recurrent cancer translocations are
particularly illustrative of possible mechanisms for the origin of these abnormalities. In lymphoid neoplasms, it is now well established that many translocations in the
immunoglobulin family of genes (immunoglobulin heavy-chain and light-chain genes, T-cell receptor genes, etc.) occur during the genomic DNA rearrangements
normally seen in those cells. This occurs because of errors involving transposition during attempted normal recombination of these genes. 34,35 In other structural
abnormalities, a role for repeat sequences at the junction points is implicated. There is experimental evidence of the role of interchromosomal recombination using
repeat sequences after double-strand break repair. 36 Studies on the breakpoints involved in simple and complex t(9;22) showed Alu repeats preferentially localized
near the breakpoints. 37 Deininger and Batzer 38 reviewed many other cases of involvement of Alu repeats in both constitutional and somatic genomic rearrangements.
This, combined with the observation of proximity of these genes during certain stages of the cell cycle and differentiation of hematopoietic cells, suggests a possible
mechanism for their formation by illegitimate pairing and exchange. 39
The mechanisms by which structural chromosomal rearrangements exert an effect on the phenotype are varied. Clearly, balanced translocations in cancer lead to
fusion products or gene regulation changes (e.g., overexpression of certain genes) that have a direct impact on cellular proliferation, escape from cell-cycle arrest, or
apoptosis. In the case of deletions, duplications, trisomies, and monosomies, a gene dosage effect can also be involved. However, gene regulation at the
translocation breakpoint or dosage effects probably do not explain all cases. Accumulated data suggest that structural chromosomal abnormalities can impact gene
expression not only of the affected chromosomes but of nearby chromosomal regions. In cancer, the acquisition of “suites” of particular chromosomal rearrangements
in cancers after the presumed initial cancer genetic change may be explained by nuclear position effects. 32 Another example is cited for the repeated establishment of
isochromosome 17q in certain cancers. 40 However, gene alterations at or near the breakpoints clearly explain the effects of the majority of translocations in cancer
cytogenetics. This still provides a veritable gold mine for positional cloning of new cancer related genes.
Reciprocal Translocations
A common type of structural chromosome change is the reciprocal translocation. This involves breakage of two chromosomes, a reciprocal exchange, and resealing of
the broken ends (Fig. 5-4D). Considering the size of the genome and the small percentage of the DNA that is coding, most random breaks resulting in balanced
translocations would not produce a phenotypic effect because no genetic material is lost or gained in the process and no genes are disrupted. A clinically significant
abnormality may result when a translocation causes disruption or activation of genes or has a long-range effect on other genes. Although phenotypically normal
themselves, carriers of constitutional reciprocal translocations are at increased risk of producing chromosomally unbalanced offspring. Somatic (acquired)
translocations in cancer usually result in fusion gene products or in activation of an oncogene function or in both (discussed in Chapter 45.1 and Chapter 46.1).

FIGURE 5-4. Some structural chromosomal abnormalities seen in cancer cytogenetics; compare with normal banding pattern in Figure 5-1. A: Deletion of the short
arm of 17. B: Paracentric inversion of the long arm of chromosome 3. C: Dicentric chromosome with centromeres from chromosomes 7 and 11 (breakpoints on the
short arm). D: Common reciprocal translocation of 8q and 21q noted in acute myelogenous leukemia M2.

A few examples here are worth commenting on. The t(14;18)(q32;q21) is found in a majority of lymphomas with follicular center cell morphology and in one-third of
diffuse large cell lymphoma. The translocation is associated with overexpression of BCL2 gene at 18q21. The BCL-2 protein is localized in mitochondria, the
endoplasmic reticulum, and the nuclear envelope and is involved in cell-cycle regulation. Various rearrangements involving 11q23 occur in acute lymphocytic
leukemia (ALL) and a subset of cases with AML. The disrupted gene is the MLL gene at 11q23 with more than 30 different partner genes involved (hence, MLL is
called a promiscuous oncogene). The t(11;22)(q24;q12) is found in more than 90% of cases of Ewing's sarcoma and can be very diagnostic. FISH can be used to
detect all these translocations using dual color probes (see Fig. 5-2).
Robertsonian Translocations
Robertsonian translocations specifically involve breakage at or near the centromeres of two acrocentric chromosomes with the long arms joining to form a novel
metacentric or submetacentric chromosome. Because the short arms of these acrocentric chromosomes carry only ribosomal genes, these translocations can reduce
the chromosome number without causing a phenotypic abnormality. While these are the most common constitutional translocations, they are very rare as somatic
mutations in cancer. When they have been noted in cancer, they seem to exert an effect by being unbalanced translocations resulting in trisomies for the long arms of

the acrocentric chromosomes.
Deletions
Deletions are common in cancer cells. At the G-band level, these may appear as terminal deletions (i.e., one breakpoint with loss of material distal to the breakpoint;
Fig. 5-4A). However, most, if not all, are likely not true terminal deletions, and there is no proof that terminal deletions exist in cancer, probably because of cell-cycle
arrest due to failure to correct breaks. There are very rare examples of telomere regeneration. The single confirmed recapping by telomeres of a terminally deleted
chromosome is the reported chromosome 16 deletion noted in rare cases of patients with mental retardation and hemoglobin abnormalities. Deletions designated as
terminal, on the basis of G-band examination, are either interstitial deletions or cryptic unbalanced translocations. For example, a molecular study of melanoma cell
lines with identified “terminal deletions” 41 showed that there is subtelomeric material from other chromosomes located at the ends of these shortened chromosomes. A
specialized deletion that occurs on both ends of the chromosome with joining of the two ends results in ring chromosomes.
Duplication
An intrachromosomal duplication requires at least two breakpoints with the segment between them duplicated either head to tail (direct duplication) or head to head
(inverted duplication). One of the most common duplications seen in hematologic malignancies is the duplication of the long arm of chromosome 1 (breakpoints at
q12-21 and q31-q44). This duplication is especially noted in lymphoid malignancies (ALL and lymphomas), usually as a secondary abnormality with poor prognosis.
Inversions
An inversion is an alteration in a chromsomal segment involving two breaks, with reintegration of the segment in the chromosome in reverse orientation. When the two
breakpoints occur on one side of the centromere, this is termed paracentric inversion. A good example is the paracentric inversion of the long arm of chromosome 3
seen in AML (Fig. 5-4B). If the two breaks surround the centromere (pericentric inversion), a change in arm ratio of the chromosome may occur. The pericentric
inversion of chromosome 16 seen in acute myelomonocytic leukemia with abnormal eosinophils (M4eo) is a good example. The result of the inversion is a fusion
between the myosin heavy-chain gene (MYH11) on 16p13 and the core-binding factor b, a transcription factor at 16q22. In a subset of patients with inv(16), the
breakpoints also appear to cause loss of a gene for a multidrug resistance protein. 42 Because this inversion is rather difficult to see in suboptimal chromosome
preparations, FISH is an ideal tool for detecting this inversion. While noted in a number of FAB classes, most cases of inv(16) are classified as M4eo and carry a
favorable prognosis. In those patients, trisomy 8, trisomy 22, and deletion of chromosome 7 may also occur.
Isochromosomes and Dicentric Chromosomes
An isochromosome is derived by breaks in one arm of a chromosome followed by rearrangement of the chromatids to produce duplications of the other arm of the
chromosome. These are usually dicentric chromosomes, with the net effect being a loss of material from one arm and duplication of the other arm. A classic example
is the common observation of isochromosome 17q seen in myeloid and lymphoid malignancies as well as in adenocarcinomas (different organs) and neuroectodermal
tumors. In all these cases, the presence of i(17)(q10) carries a poor prognosis. An i(1)(q10) is noted in adenocarcinomas (breast, kidney, intestine, uterus) and less so
in hematologic malignancies. A variation is the break involving two nonhomologous chromosomes forming a dicentric chromosome ( Fig. 5-4C).
Gene Amplification
Molecular genetic methods allowed for rigorous study of variations in gene copy number in mammalian cells. This allowed for the understanding of the earlier
cytogenetic observation of “double minutes” (DMs) and of homogeneously staining regions (HSRs) in cancer cells and drug-resistant cell lines. HSRs and other forms
of chromosomal DNA amplification are notable as unusually banded regions on the chromosomes. DMs are extrachromosomal, acentric (lacking centromeres),
circular DNA molecules (lacking telomeres) and can be variable in size. Generally, DMs are less stable than HSRs in culture, which is expected, as DMs lack
centromeres and would not segregate properly to daughter nuclei in mitosis. Gene amplification is noted in many biological phenomena, including amplification of
insecticide detoxification genes in insects, induced amplification of certain genes in cultured cells (used to produce certain proteins industrially), amplification of
developmental genes in Xenopus and other organisms, amplification of drug resistance genes, and amplification of certain oncogenes in cancer.
It is the latter topic that is of interest here. A duplication of a chromosome or a chromosome region is not considered here under amplification (e.g., CML patients can
have two or three Philadelphia chromosomes harboring the fusion abl-bcr gene). An example of gene amplification in cancer drug resistance is dihydrofolate
reductase amplification in methotrexate resistance. Another interesting example is the amplification of the P glycoprotein gene (chromosome 7) in multidrug
resistance, causing failure of cancer chemotherapy. 43 Researchers have identified many genes amplified in cancer. Following are a few examples (a complete listing
and discussion being beyond the scope of this chapter):
c-myc (8q24) amplification in small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC)
N-myc (2p23-24) amplification in neuroblastoma (advanced stages), SCLC
Cholinesterases (3q26) in ovarian carcinoma
HER-2/neu (C-erbB-2, 17q11.2) in breast carcinoma
Cellular apoptosis susceptibility at 20q13 in breast cancer
Epidermal growth factor receptor (7p12.1-12.3) in glioma and non-SCLC
PRAD1/cyclin D1, bcl-1, HST-1, INT-2 (11q13) in breast, non-SCLC, head and neck, and other cancers
MDM2 (12q13-14) in neuroblastoma, sarcoma, glioma
Primase 1 (12q13) in osteosarcoma.

CAUTIONS TO EXERCISE IN INTERPRETING CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES SEEN IN CANCER STUDIES
FAILURE TO DETECT A CHROMOSOME ABNORMALITY BY ROUTINE G-BANDING
In examining a sample from a presumed malignant tissue, one must always remember that normal cells are found mixed with the malignant cells and, thus, can
significantly complicate the analysis. A report of 20 normal metaphases should be read with caution, as these metaphases could be those of a cancer that happens to
be diploid and to lack visible structural abnormalities or of normal surrounding cells. In some malignancies, normal cells in the submitted sample can give much better
chromosome morphology than abnormal cells. This is especially true in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Experienced cytogenetic technologists learn to analyze fuzzy,
poor metaphases and quickly to identify these abnormalities, even in poor cells. Further, there are expected variations between laboratories owing to different referral
bases. Physicians differ in their referral patterns, and individual referral may vary, depending on such factors as the patient-specific situation, stage of the disease,
and even financial considerations. As more data accumulate, there are now more clear indications for cytogenetic studies that should decrease (but not eliminate)
variation in the rate of detection of chromosomal abnormalities by different laboratories.
Failure to note the aberration in routine analysis may also occur because the abnormality involves a small amount of chromosomal material or produces little change
in perceived banding patterns. The t(15;17)(q22;q22) in AML M3 and inv(16)(p13q22) seen in AML M4eo are not easily noted in short or poorly banded
chromosomes. A more interesting example is the complete failure of detection of t(12;21) by banding methods because the exchange is between segments of these
chromosomes that stain similarly (light) by G-banding. The translocation resulting in a fusion of the ETV6 (TEL) gene at 12p13 and the CBFA2 (AML1) gene at 21q22
is variably reported in 16% to 36% of cases of childhood ALL. This t(12;21)(p13;q22) is reported to be associated with B-cell precursor ALL, with presumed favorable
prognosis. FISH using probes for ETV6 and CBFA2 is the method of choice for identifying this translocation (see Fig. 5-2A).
CONSTITUTIONAL CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES
Some chromosomal abnormalities are present at birth and are not related to neoplasia. These include balanced translocations, Robertsonian translocations,
inversions, and insertions that are found at some level in normal-appearing individuals (but in most cases affecting their reproductive success or resulting in the birth
of children with congenital abnormalities or both). Other constitutional abnormalities can be associated with an abnormal phenotype, and some predispose to cancer
development (e.g., Down, Klinefelter's, and chromosome breakage syndromes). Of course, these abnormalities usually are found in all cells in a person and are not
limited to a particular tissue type. Thus, when we find such abnormalities in all examined cells, we are suspicious of a potential constitutional translocation. Obvious
exceptions to this assumption are translocations classically noted in certain cancers, such as t(9;22) in CML, in which all examined cells may have the translocation,

but it is not a constitutional translocation. To distinguish between a constitutional translocation and a novel translocation found in all sampled cells, a cytogeneticist
may request a constitutional chromosome study. The simplest is to get a peripheral blood sample cultured for 48 to 96 hours using B- or T-cell stimulants (mitogens)
to ensure adequate numbers of actively dividing cells for analysis. Chromosome studies may also be performed using other cells, such as skin fibroblasts.
FRAGILE SITES
Cytogeneticists regularly observe breaks in preparations of human chromosomes. Fragile sites are visible cytogenetically as breaks at consistent sites in the genome.
Some of these sites are induced by certain chemicals (e.g., aphidicolin, methotrexate). The sites, which now number more than 100, are heterogeneous in their
method of induction (some are constitutively expressed and are not induced) and in their location and the sequences involved. Some are associated with integration
sites for oncogenic viruses. Some occur in or near tumor suppressor genes and may be associated with the chromosomal events leading to loss of those genes. The
best example of the latter phenomenon is the aphidicolin-induced fragile site at 3p14.2 (FRA3B), which occurs within the tumor suppressor gene FHIT involved in
numerous cancers, including the translocation t(3;8)(p14.2;q24) seen in clear cell renal carcinoma. 44 Much more work needs to be done to resolve the relationship
between other fragile sites and chromosome translocations and aberrations seen in cancer. When fragile sites are found in one or a few examined metaphases, this is
noted in the workup. Such findings may fall into one of three categories: (1) rare events in normal individuals noted as chromatid and chromosome breaks (not
clinically significant), (2) breaks at the same site in multiple untreated cells, considered constitutional fragile sites (their relevance to the cancer being unknown now),
or (3) multiple breaks in many cells at different sites, possibly suggesting one of the chromosome breakage syndromes (e.g., ataxia-telangiectasia or xeroderma
pigmentosum) or other pathologic mechanisms.
SATELLITE ASSOCIATIONS
The human karyotype normally includes five pairs of acrocentric chromosomes (chromosomes 13, 14, 15, 21, and 22). On average, seven to eight of the short arms of
these chromosomes carry satellites and a satellite stalk with the nucleolar organizer region. Satellite associations can be seen persisting through metaphase as
remnants of the nucleolar associations. These are normal findings. Speculations in the literature that this predisposes to Robertsonian translocations have not been
confirmed. Robertsonian translocations are common in animals that lack nucleolar organizer regions or satellites on the short arms of involved chromosomes.
PROBLEMS WITH SOLID TUMORS
A biopsy of a solid tumor usually contains a number of tissue types (e.g., blood vessels, epithelial cells, fibroblast) in addition to the tumor cells. Further, tumor cell
growth is usually not very good, and normal cells can grow faster than tumor cells in vitro. Various technical tricks can be used to obtain decent results from such
specimens, including selecting appropriate media (avoiding media that stimulate growth of normal fibroblasts), treating primary cultures with trypsin to remove
fibroblasts, and culturing at lower density. Recent molecular cytogenetic methods can obviate the need for cell culture in assaying for specific chromosomal
abnormalities.

CLONAL EVOLUTION AND CHROMOSOME EVOLUTION
Early studies using X-inactivation as a marker for clonality in female cells suggested that most, if not all, cancers originate clonally. Later chromosome studies
confirmed the clonal origin of cancer cells with specific chromosomal abnormalities. However, there are published cases of apparently independent clones with
distinct chromosomal abnormalities (occurring in approximately 1% of cases of leukemias and lymphomas). The generally accepted explanation for most of these
cases is that a unifying submicroscopic event occurred, with further genetic alterations appearing as unique events (i.e., they are an evolution of the original clone).
True multiclonal cancers are indeed rare. In testing, we usually examine a minimum of 20 metaphases in an attempt to locate a clone with a chromosomal
abnormality. According to the ISCN (1995), 30 a clone is recognized if three or more cells have the same missing chromosome or two or more cells exhibit the same
additional chromosome or structural abnormality. The reason for the difference in number of cells needed to define a clone with a missing chromosome (monosomy)
versus one with trisomy relates to the possibility in cytogenetic preparation of overspreading of chromosomes and, hence, artifactual “missing” chromosomes. If one of
the first 20 cells showed a particular aberration likely related to the cancer, a count of additional cells can be initiated or molecular cytogenetic methods used to
confirm the presence of a clone. In any case, once a clone is identified, this can provide a baseline for diagnosis, prognosis, and follow-up study of relapse.
Many cancers are seen with only simple aberrations, such as the t(9;22) in CML. Early cytogenetic studies, however, still showed significant complex karyotypes in
many cancers, suggesting that these early events can progress to more complex karyotypes. The stepwise progression of cancer by acquiring additional
abnormalities is now well established for a number of cancers. A good example of this is colorectal carcinoma, which involves a successive series of genetic
alterations. One must caution, though, that simplistic multistage scenarios usually are not the common pattern seen. For many solid tumors, chromosome instability
results in massive karyotypic changes that appear totally unrelated to selective advantage. One possible explanation is that a genetic event resulting in cancer or
predisposition to cancer removes a cell-cycle checkpoint involved in preventing damaged cells from dividing. An example is that cells missing p53 can accumulate
chromosomal abnormalities because of the absence of p53-mediated cell-cycle arrest after double-stranded DNA breaks.

CONSTITUTIONAL CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES PREDISPOSING TO CANCER DEVELOPMENT
We do not review here hereditary cancer syndromes due to gene mutation (e.g., hereditary breast cancer and Li-Fraumeni syndrome). We are more interested in
syndromes with microscopically visible chromosomal abnormalities that predispose to cancer. A partial listing of the latter conditions is shown in Table 5-3. Many of
these syndromes are detailed and continuously updated on the Web via Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www3.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim/). Specific
information about cancer risks for certain syndromes are available at http://www.infobiogen.fr/services/chromcancer/Kprones/Kproneliste.html . Both Bloom syndrome
and Werner syndrome genes have been cloned and found to code for putative helices on chromosomes 15 and 8, respectively. Because, in both of these conditions,
chromosome breakage is increased, it is suspected that the absence of these helices increases the probability of illegitimate recombination.

TABLE 5-3. Constitutional Chromosomal Abnormalities Predisposing to Cancer Development

DATA MINING IN CANCER CYTOGENETICS
The proliferation of information in the rapidly growing cancer cytogenetics field has been a great asset to both clinicians and researchers. Fortunately, the
development of information technology has made it easier to keep abreast of the rapid developments in this field. There are commercial or semicommercial databases
for cancer cytogenetics. An example is the software called Cancer Cytogenetics Lookup published by Gilbert B. Coté. Further, the large text by Mitelman, titled
Catalogue of Chromosome Aberration in Cancer,45 is also available as a compact disk (John Wiley & Sons). However, the proliferation of free Internet resources with
online direct access to continuously updated data has mushroomed. Table 5-4 lists some specialized Web pages of interest. Of course, there are many other
resources to the student of cancer cytogenetics, including subscribing to bibliographic updates (e.g., Current Contents, now available on the Web), running search
engines for Web pages (e.g., Yahoo, Infoseek, Excite, etc.), and local and national library search engines (e.g., Medline).

TABLE 5-4. Web Sites of Interest in Cancer Genetics and Cytogenetics

There are also specialized list servers that help to facilitate communications between researchers and clinicians. For example, one could get onto the Molecular
Genetics list serve at http://www.hum-molgen.de and be able to ask and answer questions for various areas of molecular genetics.

GLOSSARY
acrocentric: of chromosome whose centromere is very close to one end
amplicon: a unit of gene amplification, usually containing a large segment of DNA containing many genes
amplification: an increase in the number of copies of a particular DNA sequence
aneuploidy: meaning “not euploid,” having missing or additional chromosomes or chromosome material
centromeres (from kentron = center, meros = part): the site of attachment of chromosomes to the mitotic or meiotic spindle; considered by some to be the
kinetochore (the functional centromere) and that centromere should refer only to repetitive DNA sequences (in humans, alphoid repeats) that attract centromere
proteins
chromatid: one of the two visibly distinct longitudinal parts of a replicated chromosome seen in late prophase and in metaphase; after separation, becomes a
daughter chromosome
chromosome: a nuclear subunit that includes linked genes as well as a centromere structure (found in eukaryotes)
diploidy: having the normal two homologous sets of chromosomes
disjunction: the separation of daughter chromosomes (chromatids) or of homologous chromosomes (in meiosis I)
haploid: having one set of chromosomes (present in gametes)
kinetochore: a specialized structure at the centromere that functions to elongate or digest microtubules to allow disjunction in meiosis and mitosis; a functioning
centromere produces the primary constriction of a chromosome
metacentric: of chromosome, the centromere of which is roughly in a median position
monosomic: a condition in which one chromosome is missing; thus, in humans, having 45 chromosomes (2n – 1)
polyploidy: having one or more extra sets of chromosomes (triploidy, tetraploidy, etc.)
telomerase (telomere terminal transferase): a specialized ribonucleoprotein that uses its RNA component as a template to synthesize telomeric repeats
telomeres: repeated DNA sequences (TTAGGG in vertebrates) found at the ends of linear chromosomes; provide protection of the end from degradation and attract
proteins that prevent the ends from recombination and from triggering cell-cycle checkpoints
TRAP(Telomeric Repeat Amplification Protocol): a technique using polymerase chain reaction to measure telomerase activity in cell extracts; developed by Kim et
al.9 and now having numerous available modifications
trisomy: a condition in which there is one extra chromosome; thus, in humans, having 47 chromosomes (2n + 1)
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Boveri T. Zur Frage der Entstehung maligner Tumoren. Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1914.
2. Tjio JH, Levan A. The chromosome number of man. Hereditas 1956;42:1.
3. Nowell PC, Hungerford DA. A minute chromosome in human chronic granulocytic leukemia. Science 1960;132:1497.
4. Rowley JD. A new consistent chromosomal abnormality in chronic myelogenous leukemia identified by quinacrine fluorescence and Giemsa staining. Nature 1973;243:290.
5. Irick H. A new function for heterochromatin. Chromosoma 1994;103(1):1.
6. Kipling D. The telomere. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995:208.
7. Hayflick L, Moorhead PS. The serial cultivation of human diploid strains. Exp Cell Res 1961;25:585.
8. Harley CB, Futcher AB, Greider CW. Telomeres shorten during aging of human fibroblasts. Nature 1990;345:458.
9. Kim NW, Piatyszek MA, Prowse KR, et al. Specific association of human telomerase activity with immortal cells and cancer. Science 1994;266(5193):2011.
10. de Lange T. Activation of telomerase in a human tumor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:2882.
11. Shay JW, Bacchetti S. A survey of telomerase activity in human cancer. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:787.
12. Langford LA, Piatyszek MA, Xu R, et al. Telomerase activity in ordinary meningiomas predicts poor outcome. Hum Pathol 1997;28:416.
13. Blasco MA, Lee HW, Hande MP, et al. Telomere shortening and tumor formation by mouse cells lacking telomerase RNA. Cell 1997;91:25.
14. Vaziri H, Schachter F, Uchida I, et al. Loss of telomeric DNA during aging of normal and trisomy-21 human lymphocytes. Am J Hum Genet 1993;52(4):661.
15. Yu CE, Oshima J, Fu YH, et al. Positional cloning of the Werner's syndrome gene. Science 1996;272(5259):258.
16. Fox JL, Hsu PH, Legator MS, Morrison LE, Seelig SA. Fluorescence in situ hybridization: powerful molecular tool for cancer prognosis. Clin Chem 1995;41(11):1554.
17. Kwong YL, Pang J, Ching LM, et al. Trisomy 12 in chronic lymphocytic leukemiaan interphase cytogenetic study by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1994;72(2):83.
18. Qumsiyeh MB, Tharapel SA. Interphase detection of trisomy 12 in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia by fluorescence hybridization in situ. Leukemia 1992;6(6):602.
19. Persons DL, Hartmann LC, Herath JF, Keeney GL, Jenkins RB. F luorescence in situ hybridization analysis of trisomy 12 in ovarian tumors. Am J Clin Pathol 1994;102(6):775.
20. Schröck E, du Manoir S, Veldman T, et al. Multicolor spectral karyotyping of human chromosomes. Science 1996;273:494.
21. Ried T, Liyanage M, duManoir S, et al. Tumor cytogenetics revisited: comparative genomic hybridization and spectral karyotyping. J Molec Med Immunol 1997;75(1112):801.
22. Gosden J, Hanratty D, Starling J, et al. Oligonucleotide-primed in situ DNA synthesis (PRINS)a method for chromosome mapping, banding, and investigation of sequence organization.
Cytogenet Cell Genet 1991;57(23):100.
23. Pellestor F, Andreo B, Coullin P. Interphasic analysis of aneuploidy in cancer cell lines using primer in situ labeling. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1999;111:111.
24. Serakinci N, Koch J. Detection and sizing of telomeric repeat DNA in situ. Nat Biotech 1999;17:200.
25. Kallioniemi A, Kallioniemi O, Sudar D, et al. Comparative genomic hybridization for molecular cytogenetic analysis of solid tumors. Science 1992;258:18.
26. Parentc F, Gaudray P, Carle GF, TurcCarel C. Experimental assessment of the detection limit of genomic amplification by comparative genomic hybridization CGH. Cytogenet Cell Genet
1997;78(1):65.

27. Lichter P, Bentz M, Joos S. Detection of chromosomal aberrations by means of molecular cytogenetics: painting of chromosomes and chromosomal subregions and comparative genomic
hybridization. Methods Enzymol 1995;254:334.
28. Knuutila S, Bjorkqvist A-M, Autio K, et al. DNA copy number amplifications in human neoplasms: review of comparative genomic hybridization studies. Am J Pathol 1998;152:1107.
29. Visakorpi T, Kallioniemi AH, Syvanen A-C, et al. Genetic changes in primary and recurrent prostate cancer by comparative genomic hybridization. Cancer Res 1995;55:342.
30. Harnden DG, Klingor HP, eds. ISCN: an international system for human cytogenetic nomenclature. Basel, Karger, 1995.
31. Zhuang ZP, Park WS, Pack S, et al. Trisomy 7-harbouring non-random duplication of the mutant MET allele in hereditary papillary renal carcinomas. Nat Genet 1998;20(1):66.
32. Qumsiyeh MB. Impact of rearrangements on function and position of chromosomes in the interphase nucleus and on human genetic disorders. Chromosome Res 1995;3:455.
33. Qumsiyeh MB. Structure and function of the nucleus: anatomy and physiology of chromatin. Cell Mol Life Sci 1999;55:1129.
34. Riom K, Melek M, Gellert M. DNA transposition by the RAG1 and RAG2 proteins: a possible source of oncogenic translocations. Cell 1998;94:463.
35. Retiere CFH, Peyrat MA, Le Deist F, Bonneville M, Hallet MM. The mechanism of chromosome 7 inversion in human lymphocytes expressing chimeric gamma beta TCR. J Immunol
1999;162:903.
36. Richardson C, Moynahan ME, Jasin M. Double-strand break repair by interchromosomal recombination: suppression of chromosomal translocations. Genes Dev 1998;12(24):3831.
37. Jeffs AR, Benjes SM, Smith TL, Sowerby SJ, Morris CM. The BCR gene recombines preferentially with Alu elements in complex BCR-ABL translocations of chronic myeloid leukaemia. Hum
Mol Genet 1998;7(5):767.
38. Deininger PL, Batzer MA. Alu repeats and human disease. Mol Genet Metab 1999;67(3):183.
39. Neves H, Ramos C, da Silva M, Parreira A, Parreira L. The nuclear topography of ABL, BCR, PML, and RARalpha genes: evidence for gene proximity in specific phases of the cell cycle and
stages of hematopoietic differentiation. Blood 1999;93:1197.
40. Matioli GT. On a mechanism for isochromatid 17q in a subset of Ph+ chronic myeloid leukemia patients. Med Hypotheses 1998;50(5):375.
41. Meltzer PS, Guan XY, Trent JM. Telomere capture stabilizes chromosome breakage. Nat Genet 1993;4(3):252.
42. Kuss BJ, Deeley RG, Cole SPC, et al. The biological significance of the multidrug resistance gene MRP in inversion 16 leukemias. Leuk Lymphoma 1996;20(56):357.
43. Trambas CM, Muller HK, Woods GM. P-glycoprotein mediated multidrug resistance and its implications for pathology. Pathology 1997;29(2):122.
44. Mimori K, Druck T, Inoue H, et al. Cancer-specific chromosome alterations in the constitutive fragile region FRA3B. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96(13):7456.
45. Mitelman F, Johansson B, Mertens F. Catalogue of chromosome aberrations in cancer. New York: Wiley-Liss, 1994.

CHAPTER 6 Molecular Biology of Cancer: The Cell Cycle
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 6
Molecular Biology of Cancer: The Cell Cycle
MICHAEL B. KASTAN
STEPHEN X. SKAPEK
Introduction
Mechanics of the Cell Division Cycle
Brief Overview
G1 to S Transition
S Phase
M-Phase Entry and Exit
Control of the Cell Division Cycle
Extracellular Signals
Cell-Cycle Checkpoints
Implications for Cancer
Cancer Development
Cancer Therapy
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
A cell's ability to produce exact replicas of itself is an essential component of life. This process must be performed with great fidelity in order for whole organisms and
species to propagate. The molecular machinery used to control the cell division cycle and replicate is highly organized and well conserved through evolution.
Although we are only beginning to unravel the mechanisms in this process, it is clear that multiple extracellular and intracellular signals must be integrated in order to
accomplish this complex task.
Although evolution and cellular differentiation may rely on some subtle genetic or epigenetic changes in a given cell, these changes must occur in an orderly and
controlled fashion to prevent disastrous outcomes. Gross lack of fidelity in the cellular reproduction process leads to genetic instability, which appears to significantly
contribute to the development of malignancy. In order to understand how cancers start and to devise optimal strategies to eliminate cancer cells, we must be able to
identify the molecular distinctions between normal cells and tumor cells. Aberrations of normal cell-cycle control reflect some of the molecular alterations that are
characteristic of cancer cells.
In this chapter, we review (1) the present understanding of mechanisms by which a normal cell controls the ordered progression through its cell cycle, (2) how
regulatory mechanisms are integrated with extracellular signals, and (3) how a normal cell monitors its own progress through several checkpoints in the cell division
cycle. We emphasize how these normal processes may go awry in cancer cells. Finally, we discuss the potential implications of this knowledge for our understanding
of cancer biology and the development of novel therapeutic strategies.

MECHANICS OF THE CELL DIVISION CYCLE
BRIEF OVERVIEW
Cell-Cycle Phases
In any proliferating mammalian cell, the replication of the entire genome and the division of the cell into genetically identical daughter cells can be broken down into
four distinct cell-cycle phases ( Fig. 6-1). In the first phase, known as G 1 (for gap 1), the cell undergoes biochemical changes to prepare for entry into S phase in which
new DNA is synthesized. As discussed later, in section G1 to S Transition, a number of these biochemical events are now known; however, cellular factors that drive
these changes, such as cell size, protein content, or nutrient environment, are still poorly understood for mammalian cells. In S phase, the cell generates a complete
copy of its genetic material and then proceeds into a second preparatory phase, known as G 2 (for gap 2), before entry into mitosis (M phase). In M phase, the
replicated DNA is carefully condensed into compact chromosomes that are precisely segregated so that two daughter cells each receive a full complement of the
genetic material. Following mitosis, a proliferating cell directly reenters G 1phase as it prepares for further replication.

FIGURE 6-1. Schematic representation of cell-cycle phases. Mitogenic growth factors can drive a quiescent cell from G 0 into the cell cycle. Once the cell cycle passes
beyond the restriction point (R), mitogens are no longer required for progression into and through S phase. The DNA is replicated in S phase and the chromosomes
are condensed and segregated in mitosis. In early G 1 phase, certain signals can drive a cell to exit the cell cycle and enter a quiescent phase. Other signals such as
cellular differentiation can make this irreversible. Cell-cycle checkpoints (denoted by asterisks and discussed in the text) in G 1, S, G 2, and M have been identified.

Because of the complexity and irreversibility of cellular replication, eukaryotic cells have evolved several checkpoints, which are biochemically defined points in the
cell cycle that can be activated to prevent the transition across certain cell-cycle phases 1,2 (see Fig. 6-1). In this way, a normal cell can ensure that DNA synthesis is
not initiated or is not continued under adverse conditions, and that chromosomes do not condense and segregate into daughter cells until the entire genome has been
accurately replicated and prepared for mitosis. Loss of these checkpoints, which would have disastrous implications by leading to a variety of genetic abnormalities, is
commonplace in cancer cells.
As depicted in Figure 6-1, any proliferating cell has an additional option, which is the entry into a quiescent state known as G 0. Entry into G0 phase from G1 is an
important decision in cellular development (such as in lymphocyte or skeletal muscle cell maturation). In vitro, it is largely governed by the presence or absence of
growth factors or nutrients that allow the procession through G 1 into S phase. If these growth factors are adequate, the cell traverses a point in G 1 phase after which
the growth factors are not required. This point or transition is known as the restriction point (see Fig. 6-1).3 If cellular environmental conditions are not right for a cell to
proceed across the restriction point, it enters G 0 phase. Importantly, entry into G 0 may be reversible or it may be irreversible, such as during skeletal muscle or
neuronal differentiation. Although the restriction point was described over 20 years ago, the precise biochemical events that define it are still not known. 4

Regulatory Mechanisms
As described in further detail later in this chapter, research has characterized many of the molecular and biochemical events that control the transition across different
cell-cycle phases and into or out of a quiescent phase. Two common regulatory themes have emerged. First, many of the key regulatory proteins are controlled by
posttranslational modifications in a cell-cycle–dependent manner. Perhaps the best known example of this is the hyperphosphorylation of the retinoblastoma gene
product, RB, which renders it inactive as a cell crosses the restriction point. 5,6 The hyperphosphorylation of RB and many other components of the cell-cycle
machinery is mediated by heterodimeric complexes of regulatory proteins known as cyclins and their catalytically active partners known as cyclin-dependent kinases
(cdks).5 Regulation of cyclin/cdk activity is central to all phases of the mammalian cell cycle.
A second important theme that has emerged is that many of the posttranslational modifications of cell-cycle proteins alter their stability and increase their proteolytic
degradation.7,8 Because protein degradation is irreversible, it seems to be a natural mechanism to ensure that the cell cycle progresses in only one direction. This
regulatory mechanism is important in every cell-cycle phase and has been conserved in many eukaryotic organisms.
As one might expect, because cancer cells have fundamental abnormalities in cell-cycle control, it is not surprising that they have been found to have abnormalities in
many of the components that control each of the cell-cycle phases. These abnormalities are described in greater detail as specific phases of the cell cycle are
discussed.
G1 TO S TRANSITION
In a proliferating cell, molecular events in G 1 phase prepare the cell for the synthesis of new DNA. In different types of mammalian cells grown in culture, there can be
great variations in the length of this phase, which may be very short or last for many hours. The length of the G 1 phase is somewhat dependent on extracellular
signals (such as nutrients or growth factors in the environment) and may be coupled to a cell's growth in size. 9 Although much is known about events that lead up to
the exit from G1 into S phase, how the length of G 1 is determined for an individual cell is not clear.
Not only is the length of the G 1 phase of the cell cycle variable, but whether a cell completely traverses this phase at all seems to be an active decision. As noted
previously, when a cell does not traverse G 1, it enters a quiescent phase known as G 0. In vivo, there are many examples of different types of mammalian cells, such
as epithelial cells or lymphocytes, which are normally arrested in a quiescent phase but may be induced to reenter a proliferative phase by certain physiologic stimuli
such as mitogenic growth factors (see Fig. 6-1). This arrest and reentry into the cell cycle can be largely recapitulated in cell culture systems for normal cells.
However, the ability to arrest in G 0 phase of the cell cycle (e.g., because of contact with other cells or lack of external mitogenic growth factors) is fundamentally
abnormal in cancer cells.
In addition to entry into a reversible G0 state, under some conditions the entry into such a state can be irreversible (see Fig. 6-1). This occurs during the terminal
differentiation of cells such as skeletal muscle or neurons and during cellular senescence, which is largely an in vitro phenomenon that may be analogous to cellular
aging. 10,11 The molecular mechanisms by which this irreversible arrest occurs and is maintained are only now becoming clear in certain settings, such as in skeletal
muscle cells, which require the retinoblastoma gene product RB for irreversible cell-cycle arrest. 12,13
In vitro, it is clear that the complete transit across G 1 phase is governed by the presence of extracellular growth factors that push a cell past the restriction point. 3 This
point is functionally defined as a time in late G 1 phase beyond which growth factors are not required for initiation and completion of DNA synthesis and mitosis.
Without adequate growth factors, the cell enters a reversible G 0 arrest described previously. Biochemical events that are concurrent with passage through this
restriction point include the hyperphosphorylation of RB, the functional activation of a cellular transcription factor known as E2F-1, the accumulation of a certain
threshold level of cyclin/cdk activity, and the loss of key cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors. 5,14 However, whether or not this point can actually be attributed to any
single event in mammalian cells is formally unknown.
Of these possible biochemical events that may form the restriction point, most work has focused on the role of the retinoblastoma gene product RB. Disruption of the
RB gene was first found in retinoblastoma tissue 15 and subsequently in tumors from patients with sporadic forms of cancer. 16,17 The first clues to RB function came
when it was found that its forced expression caused cells to arrest in G 1 phase.18 Naturally occurring mutations in the RB gene rendered the protein unable to stop cell
proliferation. 19 Hence, RB was the first tumor suppressor identified that directly functioned to block cell proliferation.
Further insight into how RB itself was regulated came from studying how it was altered during the cell cycle. Numerous studies have now proven that RB becomes
progressively hyperphosphorylated as cells pass from G 1 into S phase. 20,21 This correlation suggested that hyperphosphorylation inactivated RB and allowed
cell-cycle progression into S phase. Although this inactivation may be important, it is probably not the sole basis for the restriction point because cells that lack the RB
gene still retain certain aspects of restriction point control. 22
One logical extension of these studies was to determine the mechanism by which RB prevented S phase entry and how RB hyperphosphorylation blocked this
function. Insight into this has come from a large body of work focused on identifying cellular proteins that interact with RB. There have been over 20 such proteins
identified using a variety of assays. 23 One of the proteins identified, the transcription factor E2F-1, is central to how RB prevents cell proliferation. 24,25
E2F-1 was the founding member of what is now known to be a family of at least six related transcription factors, which seem to have specific, nonoverlapping
functions in vivo.24 Most is known about E2F-1, which may be particularly important for regulating the G 1 to S transition. As a transcription factor E2F-1 activates the
expression of a variety of genes, many of which encode either transcription factors that are induced as cells enter S phase or proteins that are involved in DNA
synthesis, such as dihydrofolate reductase. 24 In fact, E2F-1–mediated activation of these genes is so critical that the forced expression of E2F-1 alone is sufficient to
drive some cells from quiescence into S phase. 26 A number of studies have also shown that when RB physically interacts with E2F-1, it blocks E2F-1–mediated
activation of these genes. 27,28 Hence, it has been proposed that the RB suppresses tumor formation by repressing genes normally induced by E2F-1 and the loss of
RB would be expected to disrupt this active repressor complex ( Fig. 6-2). How RB and E2F-1 form an active repressor complex is not known, but there are provocative
data that this complex may alter chromatin structure by modulating histone deacetylase activity. 29,30 Despite these studies, the importance of histone deacetylase as a
mediator of RB tumor suppression is not yet known.

FIGURE 6-2. Schematic model for the control of E2F-dependent genes and S-phase entry by RB. A: When active, RB can form a complex with the transcription factor
E2F. The localization of RB to this complex by E2F can suppress the transactivation function of E2F as well as other transcription factors that may be colocalized.
Other proteins (?) have been suggested to be in such a transcription repressor complex such as histone deacetylase-1. 29,30 This complex represses the expression of
genes required for S-phase entry. B: When RB is inactivated (by phosphorylation of the protein or by mutation of the gene) the repressor complex presumably does
not form and genes required for S phase are expressed.

Given the proposed model that hypophosphorylated RB and E2F-1 form an active repressor complex that is disrupted by RB hyperphosphorylation, it is important to
understand the mechanisms driving RB hyperphosphorylation. The first insight into this came with the discovery of a class of genes known as cyclins in yeast cells.
These cyclins are expressed in a cell-cycle–dependent manner and are required for the transition from G 1 into S phase in yeast. 5 It was later discovered that
mammalian cells also had cyclins, which were expressed in a cell-cycle–dependent manner and were functionally similar to yeast cyclins. Mammalian cyclins are
actually a family of related genes that includes D-type cyclins (D1, D2, and D3) and cyclin E, which are expressed maximally as cells progress from G 1 into S phase,
and cyclin A, and B-type cyclins, which are expressed in other phases of the cell cycle 5,14,31 (Fig. 6-3). Like the yeast cyclins, mammalian cyclins form complexes with
a catalytic partner, known as a cdk. There are at least seven mammalian cdks that function in distinct phases of the cell cycle (see Fig. 6-3) and have different
biochemical properties including different cyclin partners, potential substrates, and link to human cancer. 14,31 Elegant study of the crystal structure of cyclin A and
cdk2 demonstrated that the binding of the cyclin to the cdk physically alters the structure of the cdk and activates the enzyme. 32 In addition to this, cyclin binding may
provide substrate specificity to the cdk.

FIGURE 6-3. Schematic representation of changes in cyclins and cdks through the cell cycle. Synthesis of D-type cyclins are stimulated by growth factor signals in the
G1 phase of the cycle and associate primarily with cdks 4 and 6. Cyclin E is synthesized later in G 1 and associates with cdk2. Cyclin A is synthesized late in G 1,
throughout S phase, and into early G 2 and associates with cdk2 in early S phase and cdc2 in late S phase and early G 2. Cyclin B is synthesized late in G 2 and M
phase and associates with cdk1 (also known as cdc2). The loss of cyclin B/cdk1 activity at the end of M phase is required for reentry into the next G 1 phase.

With respect to the G 1 to S phase control, the key function of cyclins and cdks is to phosphorylate the RB protein. 33,34 The phosphorylation of certain serine or
threonine residues in RB reverses the cell-cycle arrest by disrupting the RB-E2F-1 complex. 35 In this process, D-type cyclin/cdk complexes are activated earlier than
cyclin E/cdk2, and both cyclins are required for the efficient phosphorylation of RB and entry into S phase (see Fig. 6-3).36 The significance of potential differences in
RB phosphorylation mediated by different cyclin/cdk complexes is not known.
It is relevant to emphasize that many aspects of cyclin/cdk biology are unresolved. First, although RB clearly is a target for cyclin/cdk complexes, whether it is the
most important substrate for regulating entry into S phase is not known. Other possible substrates include RB-related proteins p107 and p130 37,38 that seem to have
partially redundant roles with RB in cell-cycle control, components of the DNA synthesis machinery (discussed later in S Phase), and even E2F-1 itself. 39 Second, it is
not obvious why mammalian cells should require so many different cyclins/cdks to phosphorylate RB. This is especially true when one considers, for example, that
cyclin E seems to be able to accomplish everything that cyclin D1 can do in an elegant knockout/knockin experiment in mice.40 It seems likely that as more is
understood about possible in vivo targets for different cyclin/cdk complexes, the purpose of such a large family of cyclins will also become clearer.
Because cyclin/cdk activity is so important for regulating the G 1-to S-phase transition, their activity can be regulated at numerous levels. At present, it appears that
cyclin/cdk activity can be controlled by at least six different mechanisms ( Fig. 6-4).14,41 The first level of regulation is that different cyclins are synthesized at discrete
stages of the cell cycle. In this regard, the expression of D-type cyclins is closely coupled to the presence or absence of mitogenic growth factors and may be viewed
as growth factor sensors.42 Second, in addition to the regulation of cyclin synthesis, there is active regulation of cyclin degradation. In yeast cells in G 1, this is
mediated by a cellular activity known as the SCF (for Skp-1, cullin, and F-box). 43 A similar complex has been identified in mammalian cells as well. This machine,
which is analogous to the anaphase promoting complex (APC), that regulates mitosis, targets certain cell-cycle proteins for degradation by the ubiquitin-proteosome
system. Third, in addition to the regulation of cyclin protein levels, cyclin activity is regulated by the requirement for complex formation with a cdk as discussed
previously. Fourth, the cyclin/cdk complex must be activated by a cdk-activating kinase, which phosphorylates a conserved threonine residue on the cdk. 44 Fifth,
additional amino acid residues in the cdk must be dephosphorylated. This is accomplished by both inhibiting certain kinases (known as Wee1/Myt1) and activating
certain phosphatases (known as cdc25 A, B, and C). 41 Finally, cyclin/cdk activity is controlled by further protein-protein interactions between cdks or cyclin/cdk
complexes and other proteins known as cyclin/cdk inhibitors (CKIs). Once fully activated, cyclin/cdk complexes phosphorylate a variety of substrates that are involved
in both the G 1 to S transition as well as the G 2 to M transition.

FIGURE 6-4. Multiple levels of regulation of cyclin/cdk activity. The activity of cdks can be regulated by at least at six different mechanisms: (1) and (2) cyclins are
synthesized and degraded at specific stages of the cycle; (3) cdks must associate with cyclins in order to be active; p21-related and p16-related CKIs can positively
and negatively influence this step, respectively; (4) cdks complexed with cyclins must be activated by a cdk-activating kinase; (5) cdk activity is further controlled by
inhibitory phosphorylation at threonine 14 and tyrosine 15, which can be removed (and thereby activate the cyclin/cdk) by cdc25 phosphatases; and (6) p21-related
CKIs can further inhibit cyclin/cdk activity by direct complex formation with the cyclin/cdk. The activated cyclin/cdk complex phosphorylates a variety of substrates to
facilitate both the G 1 to S phase and the G2 to M phase transition.

CKIs have grown in importance and in number since they were first described. Thus far, two groups of CKIs have been identified ( Table 6-1). One group includes
p21WAF1/CIP1, p27KIP1, and p57KIP2, which appear to be universal inhibitors of cyclin/cdk activity that function by forming a complex with the cyclin/cdk. 45,46,47,48,49 and 50 A
second group includes p16 INK4a, p15 INK4b, p18INK4c, and p19INK4d.51,52,53 and 54 These four specifically inhibit cyclin D–associated cdk4 and cdk6 (hence, the name
inhibitors of cdk4). As was said of cyclins and cdks, why there should be such a large number of CKIs is an interesting question. To be sure, there are clear biologic
differences between these two families. First of all, although p16 INK4a clearly functions as a tumor suppressor in humans, the full role of other CKIs in human cancer is
not yet clear. 55 There are also biochemical differences among different CKIs. For example, p21-like CKIs bind to the cyclin/cdk complex, whereas p16-like CKIs bind
to the cdk4 or cdk6 subunit to prevent cyclin D/cdk complex formation 14 (see Fig. 6-4). Intriguingly, p21-related CKIs may function in some capacity as activators of
cyclin/cdks. 56 This is based on the observation that p21-like CKIs can bind to cyclin/cdks at greater than 1:1 stoichiometry. The activity of the cyclin/cdk complex is

only inhibited at high ratios of p21-like CKI to cyclin/cdk. 57,58 Finally, different CKIs can be regulated in distinct ways. For example, p21 WAF1/CIP1 was identified because
the p53 tumor suppressor gene can induce its expression. 46 As such, it was an obvious candidate effector for p53-mediated cell-cycle arrest after genotoxic stress
such as gamma irradiation59,60 (see Cell-Cycle Checkpoints, later in this chapter). Similarly, both p27 KIP1 and p15INK4b can be modulated by transforming growth
factor-b, and hence may be functional effectors of the antimitogenic effects of transforming growth factor-b. 52,61 It is likely that further understanding of the biochemical
differences between different CKIs and in vivo studies of their function will help clarify their relevance to human cancer.

TABLE 6-1. Classes of Cyclin-Dependent Kinase (cdk) Inhibitors

In summary, mammalian cells have developed an elegant system in which several layers of regulators control the decision to traverse G1 phase and enter S phase
(Fig. 6-5). RB and possibly other RB-related proteins function by actively repressing E2F-1–dependent genes at the working end of this biochemical and genetic
pathway. The ability of RB to form a repressor complex with E2F-1 is regulated by multiple members of cyclin/cdk family. Of these, D-type cyclins may be particularly
important as an intranuclear sensor of extracellular growth factors. The activity of cyclin/cdk complexes is regulated by multiple mechanisms to coordinate the decision
to enter S phase with extracellular cues. These mechanisms include positive and negative influences by members of two families of CKIs that respond to both
extracellular and intracellular signals. At some critical point that seems to be defined by the activation of a threshold level of cyclin/cdk activity, the RB-E2F repressor
activity is turned off and the cell makes the commitment to enter S phase.

FIGURE 6-5. Schematic diagram showing several layers governing the regulation of G 1-to S-phase transition. At present, the event most closely correlated with the
transition across the restriction point seems to be the phosphorylation of RB, which disrupts the RB/E2F-1 repressor complex. This leads to the induction of
E2F-1–dependent genes and commitment to enter and progress through S phase. The function of RB in this complex is controlled by a number of cyclin/cdk
(cyclin-dependent kinases) complexes that are active in G 1 phase. These cyclin/cdk complexes are, in turn, largely negatively regulated by a number of cyclin/cdk
inhibitors (CKIs). The activity of both cyclin/cdk complexes and CKIs are lastly regulated by a number of extracellular signals (such as mitogenic or antimitogenic
factors) and intracellular signals (such as DNA damage or differentiation factors).

Despite this detailed working model, important questions remain. For example, clarifying the molecular basis for the restriction point will be an important advance in
the basic understanding of cell-cycle control. Determining the importance of different regulatory proteins in different types of human cancer will also be important.
Finally, understanding how RB and E2F actually function as an active repressor may open up new therapeutic avenues based on better understanding of the working
end of this pathway.
S Phase
The task of generating an exact copy of more than 3 billion base pairs of DNA in the human genome is quite daunting. As is described here, mammalian cells have
had to surmount a number of mechanistic difficulties to accomplish this. The importance of the machinery that accomplishes this task is clear because many of the
components have been highly conserved from bacteria to humans. What is perhaps an even more important task, though, is how to regulate this DNA synthesis
machinery. Each of these 3 billion base pairs must be copied one time, and only one time, during each cell division cycle. Except in rare circumstances in certain
organisms or certain developmental states, the synthesis of DNA more or less than one time per cell cycle would be devastating. Since the last writing of this chapter,
much insight has been gained into how DNA synthesis is regulated.
It is now known that DNA synthesis begins at defined sequences in the genome of most organisms. These origins of replication contain specific DNA sequences,
which have been referred to as autonomously replicating sequences or replicator elements.62 A technique known as DNA footprinting was used to evaluate proteins
that were bound to these DNA elements at different phases of the cell cycle. These studies have shown that there are two different footprint patterns on replicator
elements at different phases of the cell cycle, and a change in this pattern occurs as DNA synthesis begins. The multiple proteins that form a DNA-binding complex to
generate these footprints are known as the origin of replication complex (ORC). 63 Based on the timing of the two observed ORC footprints, it is thought that these
represent a prereplication ORC (pre-RC) and a postreplication ORC (post-RC).64 The pre-RC is assembled and competent to begin replication in G 1 phase but is
held in check by some mechanism to prevent the formal initiation of DNA synthesis (i.e., the conversion of a pre-RC to a post-RC) until S phase. The post-RC
represents a complex that is competent to carry out DNA synthesis from the origin of replication to which it is bound.
The molecular components of a pre-RC and post-RC have been studied using biochemical and genetic approaches in different types of eukaryotic cells. There are a
large number of proteins of different classes that form these pre-RCs and post-RCs. Some of these proteins, such as ORC proteins 1 through 6 and MCM proteins 2
through 7, have been identified and are beginning to be biochemically characterized. 64 However, mechanistic details for how ORCs function are largely unknown.
In addition to identifying the individual components of the pre-RC and post-RC, work has focused on understanding how a pre-RC is converted to a post-RC and how
this is directly linked with DNA synthesis. The changes in footprint pattern as a pre-RC becomes a post-RC coincide with the loss or gain of different molecular
components of this complex. Because of the importance of cyclin/cdk activation at the G 1 to S transition, it is likely that cyclin/cdk complexes will be shown to
phosphorylate particular substrates that directly affect the pre-RC and post-RC complexes. For example, there is some evidence that MCM proteins, which are
components of the ORC, are phosphorylated at the transition to S phase. 65 The phosphorylation of at least one of these (MCM4) can be mediated by a cyclin/cdk. 66
Such a posttranslational modification may be involved in changing a pre-RC to a post-RC and actually driving the formal initiation of DNA synthesis.
The regulation of pre-RC and post-RC is also probably coupled to the mechanism by which a cell prevents rereplication of DNA in S phase. The cell cycle can be
generally divided into two states: an assembly state and a replication state. 64 The former state allows the assembly of pre-RCs at replicator elements but prevents the
formal initiation of DNA synthesis until other critical factors are supplied (such as G 1/S cyclin/cdk activity) (Fig. 6-6). The latter state allows DNA synthesis from

preassembled ORCs but does not allow assembly of new pre-RCs. The loss of cyclin/cdk activity at the end of mitosis is one factor that probably allows the
reformation of the pre-RCs. There may also be other factors, such as licensing factor,67 which seems to be supplied to a cell only after completion of mitosis to prevent
rereplication of DNA (see Fig. 6-6). As more is learned about the existence of states that are competent and not competent for new DNA synthesis, many more
regulatory details will be elucidated.

FIGURE 6-6. Schematic model of how the ability to synthesize new DNA may be regulated. After mitosis is complete, a cell becomes competent to initiate new DNA
synthesis. This competency correlates with the presence of a prereplication complex (pre-RC) bound to DNA replicator elements. At the formal initiation of DNA
synthesis (replication fork initiation), which is driven by certain poorly defined events (activating factors), the pre-RC complex changes to a post-RC complex while
DNA is synthesized. This post-RC complex is unable to bind to new DNA replicator elements and, hence, DNA can only be synthesized one time per cell cycle. The
transition from a post-RC back to a pre-RC, on completion of the next mitotic phase, is negatively and positively regulated by cyclin B/cdk1 and a poorly defined
licensing factor (see text for details).

In addition to the task of allowing DNA synthesis only one time during the cell cycle, the cell faces the task of ensuring that newly synthesized DNA is accurately
copied. The enzymes that accomplish this are called DNA polymerases, three of which are known to be involved in DNA replication (as opposed to repair) in
eukaryotic cells (DNA polymerases a, d, and e). The double-stranded nature of genomic DNA provides a mechanism to ensure accuracy because each existing strand
serves as a template for a new strand. Although the DNA polymerases copy it with high fidelity, they are not perfect. Approximately one incorrect nucleotide is
incorporated for every 10 5 to 106 correct nucleotides. At this rate, 1000 to 10,000 mutations would be generated with each cell division. In order to prevent this, the
DNA polymerases are endowed with proofreading functions that allow misincorporated nucleotides to be detected and removed by 3' to 5' exonuclease activity of the
DNA polymerase. This process reduces the error rate by approximately 1000-fold. 68 In addition to the repair activity that is closely coupled to DNA synthesis, other
repair processes detect and replace mismatched DNA bases or other DNA abnormalities to further limit errors associated with DNA replication. Inefficiencies in DNA
repair machinery appear to be important in the development of some forms of cancer, such as certain forms of hereditary colon cancer that are linked to abnormalities
in DNA mismatch repair enzymes.69
In addition to the problem of accuracy, the cell faces a problem due to the sheer magnitude of the task of copying all 3 billion base pairs. A single replication fork
traveling at approximately 3000 bases per minute would require approximately 1 month to replicate just one of the 46 human chromosomes. 70 As described
previously, the cell addresses this problem by initiating DNA replication at multiple origins of replications. Interestingly, these multiple origins appear to fire in an
ordered fashion.64 The mechanisms by which origins fire early or late in S phase are not understood.
After any individual ORC is activated to begin DNA synthesis, how the polymerase generates an elongating strand of newly synthesized DNA is another mechanistic
hurdle. Because DNA is a double-stranded helix, it must be unwound and both strands of the DNA must be copied simultaneously. The synthetic process is started
from an RNA primer on each of these strands and makes the new strand in the 5' to 3' direction ( Fig. 6-7). Because the double-stranded DNA is arranged in an
antiparallel fashion, one new strand is synthesized continuously ( leading strand) and the other discontinuously ( lagging strand). As described for the ORCs, much
work has focused on identifying the proteins that are required for DNA synthesis at the replication forks of eukaryotic cells. These include PCNA, RPA, RFC, DNA
polymerases, DNA primase, and RNAseH.71 Some of the mechanics of the process are now understood, such as PCNA forming a molecular sliding clamp to hold the
polymerase on the DNA.72 After the DNA polymerase complex has proceeded along the length of a strand of DNA to the next replicon, the RNA primer is replaced by
DNA and a DNA ligase closes the gap between the two newly synthesized stretches of DNA. With this, DNA synthesis is essentially complete.

FIGURE 6-7. The end-replication problem and role of telomerase in circumventing it. The end of a DNA molecule is replicated on one strand by continuous replication
proceeding to the end of the molecule, whereas the other strand is replicated discontinuously using RNA primers and Okazaki fragments. Removal of the RNA primer
and Okazaki fragment ligation leaves a region at the 3' end of one nascent DNA strand unreplicated ( box). If there were no mechanism to fill the gap, the chromosome
end would get shorter with each round of replication. Telomerase solves this problem by binding to the telomere at the 3' end of the nascent DNA strand and
extending this end. This provides an elongated template for the DNA polymerase to use, which allows the entire original genomic DNA sequence to be completely
replicated. (Adapted from ref. 74, with permission.)

One final hurdle, though, for a cell to completely copy the entire genome involves the synthesis of new DNA at the end of each chromosome. Because DNA
polymerases require an RNA primer to begin this process and because they only assemble a new strand in the 5' to 3' direction, each linear chromosome would fail to
copy DNA at the very 3' end of each chromosome with every round of replication (see Fig. 6-7).73 This would be deleterious because numerous rounds of DNA
replication would result in a large amount of DNA being lost from the chromosome ends.
It appears that eukaryotic cells deal with this end-replication problem by the use of specialized structures called telomeres, which are simple tandemly repeated
sequences at the end of each chromosome (see Fig. 6-7). These repeated DNA sequences are recognized by telomerase, a holoenzyme containing a reverse
transcriptase (polymerase) and an RNA component that is complementary to the repeated DNA sequences of a telomere. The reverse transcriptase extends the 3'
end of the chromosomal DNA by reading the RNA component as a template73,74 (see Fig. 6-7). In this way, telomerase prevents the loss of this 3' end of the DNA to
defeat the end-replication problem.
In addition to providing a mechanism to complete the DNA synthesis task, telomerase activity is particularly important for cancer biology because it confers unlimited
cell proliferation capacity, 73,74 which is a hallmark of a malignant cancer cell. There is good experimental evidence that most telomerase-deficient cells can only
replicate a finite number of times until the telo–meric ends of the chromosomes become shortened to a critical point that arrests further cell proliferation. 73 Because
most normal cells in the body do not have telomerase activity, it has been suggested that the loss of telomeric DNA may be the basis for cellular aging. On the other
hand, tumor cells appear to be immortalized by virtue of the increased telomerase activity. 75 Because increased telomerase activity is relatively specific to cancer cells
in a human body, the pharmacologic inhibition of telomerase may, indeed, be a new therapy for cancer that is directly based on better understanding of the DNA

synthesis process.
M-PHASE ENTRY AND EXIT
Once the cell has copied the entire genome, it enters a second gap phase, known as G 2, to prepare for entry into mitosis, the phase in which the duplicated genome is
segregated to two daughter cells. The successful completion of mitosis may be considered the most crucial phase in the cell cycle because errors in this process are
irreversible and lead to dramatic alterations in the genetic material such as the loss or gain of entire chromosomes. Much insight has been gained into the regulation
of this process since the last writing of this chapter and can be found in excellent, detailed reviews. 8,76,77 Three main features of this regulation are presented here.
Because of its complexity, it is helpful to consider mitosis in several distinct phases ( Fig. 6-8A). In the first place, the actual entry into mitosis is carefully controlled to
prevent the segregation of chromosomes that have not completed DNA synthesis. Second, there are many structural changes that occur in a cell during mitosis such
as chromosomal condensation, centrosome migration, microtubule polymerization, spindle assembly, nuclear membrane dissolution, microtubule and kinetochore
attachment, alignment of all chromosomes on a plane between the centrosomes, and the separation of sister chromatids (see Fig. 6-8A). The actual separation of
sister chromatids, a process that constitutes the metaphase to anaphase transition, represents an important checkpoint for a cell because chromatid separation is not
easily reversed. Finally, after anaphase is complete, the chromosomes lose their highly condensed structure, the nuclear envelope reforms, and the cell undergoes
cytoplasmic division (cytokinesis) to complete the cell cycle. At this stage, the cell must formally exit mitosis to reset itself for the next cell division cycle. Most of what
is known about mitotic control in mammalian cells relates to how the entry into mitosis, the metaphase to anaphase transition, and the exit from mitosis are governed.

FIGURE 6-8. Schematic diagram of G2- to M-phase regulation. A: The large number of complex structural changes that occur during M phase generally seem to be
regulated at three key transition points: the formal entry into mitosis, the metaphase to anaphase transition, and the formal exit from mitosis. B: Regulation of the
transition across M phase involves multiple events. First, the accumulation of maturation- (or mitosis) promoting factor (MPF) (cyclin B/cdk1) to a critical level seems
to mark the formal beginning of M phase. The accumulation of cyclin B is governed by decreased anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) activity, and a
number of other cyclin/cdk (cyclin-dependent kinase) activating steps (see Fig. 6-4). Once activated cyclin B/cdk1 phosphorylates a number of targets, including
cdc25 phosphatase, which positively feeds back to activate more cyclin B/cdk1. Cyclin B/cdk1 also seems to activate polo-like kinases (PLKs), which are kinases
physically localized to (and hence may regulate) certain key mitotic structures such as kinetochores and spindle pole bodies. Finally, PLKs can activate APC/C again
during M phase, which leads to the degradation of proteins that may be directly involved in the separation of sister chromatids (metaphase to anaphase transition).
APC/C activation also causes the degradation of cyclin B, which both ends the mitotic phase and facilitates the reformation of the pre-RC to set the stage for the next
cell-cycle phase (see Fig. 6-6).

The first regulatory mechanism for mitosis involved the maturation- (or mitosis) promoting factor (MPF), which was identified as a cytoplasmic activity in
metaphase-blocked Xenopus oocytes that could drive other cells into mitosis. 78 MPF was characterized as a complex of cyclin B and cdk1 (also known as cdc2) (Fig.
6-8B).79 Many studies have demonstrated that the activation of cyclin B/cdk1 is the most crucial step governing whether a cell enters mitosis. 77 Because of this central
role, cyclin B/cdk1 is regulated at many levels, including some that are different from the G 1/S cyclin/cdks discussed previously. First, the levels of cyclin B protein are
increased during late S and G 2 phase by both increased synthesis and decreased destruction. Second, newly synthesized cyclin B binds to unphosphorylated cdk1,
which becomes activated by phosphorylation at threonine 161 by cdk-activating kinase. Approximately concurrent with this, the cytoplasmic cyclin B/cdk1 complexes
must be relocalized to the nucleus by an as yet unclear mechanism. 80 In addition, the competing kinases (Wee1/Mik1/Myt1) and phosphatases (cdc25 B and C),
which govern the phosphorylation of threonine 14 and tyrosine 15 on cdk1, must allow dephosphorylation of these residues to activate the cyclin/kinase activity (see
Fig. 6-8B).77 Once activated, a positive feedback loop between cyclin B/cdk1 and cdc25C exists to allow further activation of B/cdk1, which drives the initiation of
mitosis by phosphorylating specific nuclear proteins. 77 The identification of the specific proteins that are phosphorylated by cyclin B/cdk1 to drive the initiation of
mitosis will be important for our understanding of this phase of the cell cycle. Because the cdc25 phosphatase plays a key role in the initial activation of cyclin B/cdk1,
it is not surprising that it also has an important role in a checkpoint pathway that can be activated to prevent the entry into mitosis in response to genotoxic stress (see
section G2- to M-Phase Checkpoint, later in this chapter).
A second important regulatory mechanism may help link biochemical changes such as phosphorylation of specific proteins with structural changes such as spindle
body assembly. This mechanism involves a family of kinases known as polo-like kinases (PLKs) after polo kinase, the first of this family identified in Drosophila.76 Like
cdks, PLKs represent a family of kinases conserved from yeast to humans. Although they may have functions at several stages of the cell cycle, the
best-characterized roles are during mitosis. 76 In the first place, they indirectly activate cyclin B/cdk1 by phosphorylating and activating cdc25. Whether PLKs are initial
activators of cyclin B/cdk1 or play a role in the positive feedback loop for B/cdk1 activation is not known. Second, at different stages of mitosis PLKs are localized to
spindle pole bodies, kinetochores, and the spindle midzone, which suggests that they may play a role in spindle apparatus assembly, sister chromatid pairing and
separation, and even cytokinesis. Because cyclin B/cdk1 may activate them, PLKs could directly link the biochemical activity of MPF with structural changes that
occur during mitosis. However, the mechanistic details of this are far from understood. Finally, PLKs may also activate the APC/cyclosome (APC/C), which has roles
in both the metaphase to anaphase transition as well as the formal exit from mitosis.
Finally, it has become clear that regulated destruction of certain proteins is a central force driving entry into, transition through, and exit from mitosis. At the heart of
this is a large complex of proteins known as the APC/C. As with PLKs, the importance of the APC/C is indicated by the fact that it has been conserved in evolution
from yeast to humans.8,81 It functions by marking particular proteins with a ubiquitin molecule that leads to the destruction of the ubiquitinated protein by the 26S
proteosome degradation machine. Numerous studies have shown that the down-regulation of APC/C activity contributes to the accumulation of cyclin B, which is
required for a cell to enter into mitosis (see Fig. 6-8B).82 In addition, the APC/C contributes to the destruction of the glue that holds sister chromatids together; hence,
it drives the metaphase to anaphase transition. 82 Finally, activation of the APC/C eventually guides the destruction of cyclin B protein to mark the end of mitosis. 82
Importantly, by destroying all mitotic cyclin/cdk activity, the APC/C also allows the entry into the next G1 phase by allowing the formation of new pre-RC (see Fig. 6-6).
Moreover, the APC/C remains active to prevent the reaccumulation of cyclin B until the next mitotic entry is scheduled.

CONTROL OF THE CELL DIVISION CYCLE
Obviously, the cell does not use the complex DNA synthesis and cell division machinery in a vacuum. It must continuously integrate extracellular signals from the
environment as well as intracellular signals regarding the status of the genome. These signals contribute to the control of cell division and also constitute formal
checkpoints that may be activated in times of cellular stress. How a cell accomplishes the integration of extracellular signals and the mechanisms by which it checks
its progress through cell division are reviewed in this section.
EXTRACELLULAR SIGNALS
Nutrient status, cell-cell contact, and extracellular peptides can all influence intracellular events. The significant question that arises is how do these extracellular
factors communicate with the intracellular machinery to influence cell-cycle progression? For example, growth factors cause cells in the resting or G 0 phase of the cell
cycle to enter and proceed through the cycle. Continued growth factor exposure is required for progression through G 1 until the cell reaches the restriction point (see
Fig. 6-3), after which time the cell proceeds through the rest of the cell cycle. How does the presence of an extracellular polypeptide, such as a growth factor,

influence the cell cycle in this way? Much progress has been made in understanding the exact details of the many events that occur after any single growth factor
stimulates a cell to proliferate. Unfortunately, these events are so complex that it would be impossible to provide adequate detail in this chapter. Therefore, we
address general themes that have emerged more recently.
Many growth factors (or cytokines) are soluble proteins that mediate cellular communication. In general, these growth factors bind to specific receptors on the surface
of cells and initiate a cascade of biochemical signals that influence intracellular events. Typically, one of the first events is the phosphorylation of the receptor or a
protein associated with the receptor. 83 Some cyto–kine receptors contain intrinsic tyrosine kinase domains, whereas other cytokine receptors have no intrinsic kinase
function but are capable of recruiting and activating nonreceptor tyrosine kinases, which can transduce signals downstream to other proteins. A common end point for
this cascade is the change in activity of certain transcription factors leading to the induction or repression of specific genes involved in cell proliferation, cell
differentiation, or cell survival ( Fig. 6-9). Examples of such signaling pathways include the activation of the RAS-RAF-MAP kinase pathway in response to epidermal
growth factor signaling, 83,84 and 85 or the activation of the Janus kinase (Jak) family that then activates the STAT family of transcriptional regulators in response to
interleukin signaling. 86,87 and 88 With the role that growth factor receptors and signal transduction components have in mediating the cellular decision to proliferate by
driving the G 1 to S transition, it is not surprising that many of these components have been found to be abnormal in human cancers. The HER2/neu epidermal growth
factor–like growth factor receptor is an elegant example of both the identification of important components of this pathway and how such knowledge has been
translated into a novel therapeutic approach that is specifically designed to disrupt this pathway using anti-HER2/neu antibodies. 89

FIGURE 6-9. Schematic illustration of two pathways that transduce extracellular signals to control intracellular and intranuclear events. Epidermal growth factor is
illustrated as an example of a growth factor that binds to its receptor and initiates a cascade of events, beginning with the autophosphorylation of the receptor itself.
An adaptor protein (Grb2) binds to the phosphorylated receptor, which then binds to the guanine nucleotide releasing factor (Sos). This complex activates ras by
exchanging guanosine diphosphate for guanosine triphosphate. The guanosine triphosphate–bound active form of ras binds to and activates the serine/threonine
kinase raf. Raf phosphorylates and activates mitogen-activated protein-kinase kinase (MAPKK), which in turn phosphorylates and activates mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK). The targets phosphorylated by MAPK appear to be both cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins, at least some of which can activate transcription of certain
gene products involved in cell proliferation. The Jak/STAT pathway is illustrated as being initiated by interferon (IFN) binding to its receptor (IFNR), which leads to
activation of members of the Jak family of nonreceptor tyrosine kinases. These kinases then phosphorylate members of the STAT family of transcription factors on
tyrosine residues, which translocate to the nucleus, bind specific DNA sequences, and promote transcription. There may be significant cross-talk between signaling
pathways. In this example, this is illustrated by (1) the activation of the Jak pathway by certain peptide growth factors ( dashed arrow) and (2) the phosphorylation of
serine residues on STAT proteins by MAP kinase.

It must be emphasized that these are only two of a large number of pathways that have been identified. Moreover, these apparently linear pathways are not linear at
all, as there is much cross-talk between different components of a pathway, which suggests that the cellular responses to any single factor may depend on the
balance of signals from different growth factor pathways. 90
Despite the complexity of these mitogenic signaling pathways, there is the suggestion that most converge on a common intranuclear event. It has been observed that
most, if not all, mitogenic growth factors at some point lead to increased expression of certain D-type cyclins. 5 As noted previously, this is an essential component of
the ultimate activation of cyclin D/cdk activity (see Fig. 6-4). However, the induction of cyclin D protein is not sufficient to drive the entire decision for a cell to
proliferate. Therefore, it must be integrated with other biochemical events in the nucleus. This observation provides a framework to think about how signaling of cells
at the cell membrane by extracellular growth factors can affect the machinery that directly drives cell proliferation across the G 1 to S boundary. As more is learned
about mitogenic signal transduction pathways, the knowledge of how growth factors influence the cell-cycle machinery should lead to novel therapeutic strategies to
treat cancer.
CELL-CYCLE CHECKPOINTS
The events of the cell cycle appear to be highly ordered into dependent pathways so that the initiation of any event in the cell cycle is dependent on the completion of
earlier events. For example, mitosis is dependent on completion of DNA synthesis, chromatid separation is dependent on kinetochore assembly and chromosome
alignment, and DNA replication during S phase is licensed by the cell having completed a prior mitosis. The control mechanisms that enforce this ordered dependency
are called cell-cycle checkpoints. 1,2 It is important to emphasize that a variety of signals, from both extracellular as well as intracellular events, can activate these
checkpoints to prevent cell-cycle progression. For example, nutrient deprivation, temperature changes and other forms of environmental stress, nucleotide depletion,
or damage to the DNA all can inhibit cell-cycle progression by invoking these cell-cycle checkpoint controls.
It is now clear that cell-cycle checkpoints are actively regulated by components of the cell-cycle machinery. For example, cell-cycle arrest following DNA damage is
not simply a by-product of the structural damage to the DNA. Moreover, mutations in the genes that control these checkpoints can disrupt the arrest signals and allow
continued cell-cycle progression when it may be inappropriate. Such mutations could result in altered responses to environmental or therapeutic DNA-damaging
agents, such as increased or decreased cell death, increased mutation rate, and genetic instability. It is not surprising, then, that mutations in cell-cycle checkpoint
genes are now thought to both significantly contribute to cancer development and affect the responses of tumor cells to chemotherapy and radiation therapy. 91
Damage to the DNA by ionizing radiation is the one stimulus for cell-cycle checkpoint activation that has been the most intensively studied. When nuclear DNA has
been damaged by either intrinsic or extrinsic processes, normal cells cease progressing through the cell cycle at one of several points: either before entry into S
phase, within S phase, or before entry into mitosis (see Fig. 6-1). Presumably, arrest at these particular points in the cell cycle would limit the propagation of genetic
mutations to daughter cells by allowing for DNA repair, and it may also prevent cell death. We briefly review what is known about each of these DNA damage
checkpoints as well as two additional checkpoints that are not directly activated by DNA damage but may still be relevant to cancer development.
G1- to S-Phase Checkpoint
The tumor suppressor gene, p53, appears to be a critical component of the signaling pathway that arrests cells in G 1 after DNA damage (Fig. 6-10). It is mutated in a
large proportion of human cancers and the Li-Fraumeni familial cancer syndrome is caused by germline mutations in the p53 gene, 92,93 which supports the importance
of p53 function in cancer prevention. There are two potential mechanisms by which the loss of the p53-mediated G 1 to S checkpoint could lead to increased cancer
susceptibility. First, DNA damage is known to increase p53 protein level and activity, which secondarily increases the level of the p21 WAF1/CIP1 CKI. Increased
p21WAF1/CIP1 inhibits the activity of cyclin/cdk complexes that drive the G 1- to S-phase transition by preventing the hyperphosphorylation of RB (see Fig. 6-10). In cells
that lack p21 WAF1/CIP1, the G1 to S arrest after DNA damage is defective. 60 In addition to being critical for G 1 to S arrest, p53 also can drive programmed cell death or
apoptosis in certain cells in response to DNA damage. 94,95 What governs whether p53 causes cell-cycle arrest or programmed cell death is not well understood.
Nonetheless, it is clear that the loss of p53 can result in inappropriate cellular response to DNA damage by two mechanisms: allowing damaged DNA to be replicated
and allowing the survival of cells that normally would undergo programmed cell death (see Fig. 6-10). In this regard, it is easy to understand how p53 mutations would
be critical to cancer development. In addition, the loss of p53-mediated apoptosis in response to therapies that cause DNA damage could have a significant effect on
tumor response. Two new genes, p73 and p63, have been identified as relatives of p53. 96,97 The full importance of these p53-related genes in human cancer and the

G1 to S checkpoint will require further study.

FIGURE 6-10. Schematic diagram of several cell-cycle checkpoints in mammalian cells. Ionizing radiation causes DNA damage in the form of strand breaks. This
activates several signal transduction pathways, depending on the phase of the cell cycle. For cells in G 1, DNA damage leads to increased p53 protein, which is
dependent on signaling through ATM. Increased p53 protein levels lead to transcriptional activation of certain genes, such as gadd45, mdm2, p21, cyclin G, and Bax,
which causes either cell-cycle arrest by induction of p21 WAF1/CIP1 or apoptosis. For cells in S phase, DNA damage arrests further DNA synthesis in an ATM-dependent
and an nbs1-dependent manner. 150 In cells in G 2 and M phase, DNA damage leads to the activation of proteins such as chk1 and chk2, which can phosphorylate
cdc25 phosphatase. Phosphorylated cdc25 is then bound by, and hence inactivated by, 14-3-3 proteins, which therefore prevents the activation of cyclin B/cdk1
(MPF). The role of ATM and potentially other proteins in this checkpoint are not yet known. It is important to emphasize that the cell-cycle checkpoints differ in
response to different types of DNA damage, such as that induced by gamma irradiation versus various genotoxic drugs or ultraviolet irradiation.

S-Phase Checkpoint
The molecular controls of S-phase arrest after DNA damage in mammalian cells are less well understood, but a number of yeast genes, such as MEC1, MEC2, and
HUS1, have been identified that control the S-phase checkpoint. 98 Although clear mammalian counterparts to these genes are just now being identified, the ATM
gene, which is mutated in ataxia-telangiectasia and is related to MEC1, seems to be particularly important for the S-phase checkpoint. The first insight into this came
from the study of patients with ataxia-telangiectasia, who are cancer prone, and from study of these patients' cells, which are defective in all three DNA
damage-induced checkpoints, including the S-phase checkpoint. 99 The ATM gene product is a nuclear and cytoplasmic protein kinase that can phosphorylate certain
proteins that are known to be involved in DNA damage checkpoints and DNA repair, such as p53. 100 Although studies of ATM-related genes in yeast have suggested
potential biochemical and genetic mechanisms, 2 how ATM regulates the S-phase checkpoint is not yet known (see Fig. 6-10).
G2- to M-Phase Checkpoint
The DNA damage-induced arrest of cells in the G 2 phase of the cell cycle is prominent in most mammalian cell types and has been intensively studied by
radiobiologists for years because of an apparent link between G 2 arrest and radiosensitivity. 101 In yeast, the RAD9, RAD17, RAD24, MEC1, MEC2, and MEC3 genes
all appear to be involved in signaling the cell to arrest in G 2 after DNA damage,91 and mutations in these genes lead to increased genetic instability and increased
radiosensitivity. Work clarifying many details of this pathway in mammalian cells indicates that it controls the activation of cyclin B/cdk1, which is particularly important
for regulating entry into mitosis (see Fig. 6-8). Briefly, in yeast it has been shown that DNA damage activates a kinase known as chk1, which can phosphorylate
cdc25, the phosphatase that is critical for activating cyclin B/cdk1 at entry into mitosis. Phosphorylated cdc25 can be bound and, hence, inactivated by interaction with
14-3-3 proteins (see Fig. 6-10).102 Similar themes are emerging from study of mammalian cells. ATM also appears to have a role in this pathway; however, the
molecular details are not yet known.
Mitotic Spindle Checkpoint
In addition to the DNA damage-induced checkpoint to prevent entry into mitosis, there is another mitotic checkpoint that involves the mitotic spindle apparatus. This
checkpoint functions to prevent the metaphase to anaphase transition until all sister chromatid pairs are aligned and attached to the mitotic spindle apparatus (see
M-Phase Entry and Exit, earlier in this chapter) (see Fig. 6-8). Abnormalities in this checkpoint can lead to gross changes in chromosome number, which is a common
occurrence in cancer cells. Several yeast genes (MAD1, MAD2, MAD3, BUB1, BUB2, and BUB3) have been found that control mitotic arrests when the microtubule
apparatus is poisoned, 91 but mammalian counterparts have not been identified. Interestingly, p53 has been implicated in a spindle checkpoint in mouse cells, 103 which
again demonstrates its importance in numerous aspects of cancer cell biology.
Cellular Senescence
Finally, it has been suggested that cellular senescence also represents a type of cell-cycle checkpoint that is activated when chromosomal telomeres become
shortened to a critical point. 104 It is thought that critically shortened telomeres may cause DNA strand abnormalities to activate one or more cell-cycle arrest signals
and prevent further cell proliferation (hence, senescence). This could be significant for tumorigenesis because tumor cells may have defective checkpoint-signaling
pathways. Thus, in addition to expressing telomerase activity (see S Phase, earlier in this chapter), the loss of a growth inhibitory checkpoint signal to induce
senescence could also contribute to the development of cellular immortality in tumor cells.

IMPLICATIONS FOR CANCER
CANCER DEVELOPMENT
Cancer cells exhibit a diverse set of phenotypic abnormalities, including loss of differentiation, increased motility or invasiveness, and decreased drug sensitivity.
However, one phenotypic abnormality that is virtually pathognomonic of all cancer cells is dysregulation of cell-cycle control. A common misconception is that cancer
cells replicate faster than normal cells. Rather, the growth abnormality in cancer cells appears to result from two factors: (1) lack of appropriate control responses to
the signals that normally cause the cell to stop going through the cell cycle, and (2) lack of a cellular death program in response to appropriate stimuli or stresses. The
transformation of a normal cell to a tumor cell appears to be dependent on mutations in gene products important in integrating extracellular and intracellular signals to
the cell cycle and cell death machinery and on those gene products involved in directly controlling cell-cycle progression. Loss of either type of function would lead to
loss of regulatory cell growth signals.
An evolution has occurred over the past 25 years in our thinking about the nature of the growth abnormalities present in cancer cells. The discovery of oncogenes in
the 1970s and their overexpression or increased activity in tumor cells led to the suggestion that the abnormality in tumor cells was the presence of too much of a
signal that pushed the cell through the cell cycle. The discovery of tumor suppressor genes in the 1980s added to this model by suggesting that the growth
abnormalities of tumor cells resulted from a combination of too few of the cell-cycle brakes (tumor suppressors) and too many of the cell-cycle accelerators
(oncogenes).
This model has been even further revised in the past several years with the recognition of the importance of cell death controls in maintaining appropriate numbers of
cells in a given tissue. Changes in tissue cell number are dictated by the number of new cells generated by cellular proliferation and the number of cells lost to the
tissue by cell death (Fig. 6-11). The number of proliferating cells is controlled by a combination of the gene products driving the cell through the cycle (can be
considered oncogenes in a simplified model) and the gene products that inhibit cell-cycle progression (considered tumor suppressor genes in a simplified model). In a
simplified model, the number of cells dying in a tissue is a function of the relative activities of the gene products that block programmed cell death (antiapoptosis
genes) and the gene products that enhance programmed cell death (apoptosis-enhancing genes). Thus, tumors may develop and malignant cells may continue to
increase their numbers by acquiring mutations in genes that result in combinations of increased drive through the cell cycle (increased oncogene activity), decreased

inhibition of cell-cycle progression (loss of tumor suppressor genes), increased antiapoptosis signals (e.g., overexpressed BCL2) and decreased proapoptosis signals
(e.g., decreased BAX or mutated p53). Cell differentiation is also probably associated with slowing or stopping cell proliferation, and some abnormal gene products in
malignancies that drive proliferation also appear to inhibit differentiation.

FIGURE 6-11. The steady-state number of cells in a tissue is a function of the relative amount of cell proliferation and cell death. Cell proliferation is influenced by the
balance of positive effects of oncogenes and negative effects of tumor suppressor genes. Cell death is influenced by the balance of positive and negative effects of
proapoptotic and antiapoptotic gene products. Simplistically, cell number may be increased by increased activity of oncogenes or antiapoptotic genes or by decreased
activity of tumor suppressor genes or proapoptotic genes.

Oncogenes
One formal definition for an oncogene is that the oncogene product contributes to malignant transformation either in vitro or in vivo. The concept used previously that
oncogenes are gene products that enhance cell-cycle progression is not always true, but is useful for the discussion here. Oncogenic mutations in tumor cells will not
be discussed in great detail here. However, it is clear that many of the genes that have been classified as oncogenes are positive growth signals. They can fall into
categories of abnormally activated growth factors (e.g., c-SIS), growth factor receptors (e.g., HER2/neu and c-FMS), intracellular signaling molecules (e.g., c-SRC,
RAS, and c-RAF), and nuclear transcription factors (e.g., c-MYC). Such signaling pathways were discussed previously as influencing the actual cell-cycle machinery,
and it is easy to envision how activating mutations in any of these genes could lead to enhanced signals that inappropriately keep the cell going through the cell cycle.
Positive signals directly involved in the cell-cycle machinery have been linked to oncogenesis by the observations of abnormally high levels of cyclin expression in
certain tumor cells.105 In addition, the cdk-activating cdc25 phosphatases have been demonstrated to have cooperative oncogenic activity in soft agar and nude
mouse tumor assays and appear to be overexpressed in a significant percentage of primary human breast carcinomas. 106
Tumor Suppressor Genes
The existence of tumor suppressor genes, predicted in the 1970s by the elegant epidemiologic studies of Knudson 107 and by subsequent cell fusion studies, 108 finally
became a reality with the discovery of the retinoblastoma (RB) gene and later the role of the p53 gene in the 1980s. 109 Although a number of tumor suppressor genes
have been identified to date (including APC, BRCA1, BRCA2, NF1 and NF2, WT1, and VHL), RB and p53 are unusual tumor suppressor genes in that they directly
influence the cell-cycle machinery. As discussed previously, RB expression inhibits cell-cycle progression by binding to E2F-1 and blocking transcription of genes
necessary for entry into S phase. p53 inhibits cell-cycle progression by inducing the transcriptional activation of the CKI, p21 WAF1/CIP1, which in turn inhibits activation
of the cdk such that it cannot phosphorylate substrates such as RB.
As discussed previously, p53 participates in a cell-cycle checkpoint signal transduction pathway that causes either a G 1 arrest or apoptotic cell death after DNA
damage. Loss of p53 function during tumorigenesis thus can result in both inappropriate progression through the cell cycle after DNA damage and survival of a cell
that might otherwise have been destined to die. It is easy to conceive how this would cause both increased genetic instability and decreased apoptosis and contribute
to malignant transformation. Additionally, roles for p53 in controlling certain aspects of the progression from the G 2 phase of the cell through mitosis and chromosome
segregation have been suggested. 110,111 Thus, it is not surprising that p53 is the most commonly mutated gene in human cancers identified to date, with at least 50%
of tumors having abnormal p53 genes.92 Some tumors also develop other mechanisms of inactivating p53 function by overexpression of the p53-binding protein,
mdm2,112 or by infection with high-risk human papilloma tumor virus (HPV) and expression of the HPV E6 protein, which binds to p53 and enhances its degradation. 113
Inactivation of p53 by overexpression of mdm2 appears to occur primarily in sarcomas and inactivation by HPV infection in cervical carcinomas. 112,114 Thus, many
tumors appear to inactivate p53 function by these mechanisms, rather than by mutation of the p53 gene itself, but the end result is the same since p53 function and
certain aspects of cell-cycle control are abrogated.
The RB gene is mutated in a number of different tumor types, but others may have mutations elsewhere in the cell-cycle pathways that use RB. For example, cyclin
D/cdk4 complexes phosphorylate RB and it appears that p15 INK4b and p16INK4a, which are inhibitors of cyclin D/cdk4, are mutated in a variety of tumor types. In
contrast, the p21 WAF1/CIP1 and p27KIP1 cdk inhibitors are rarely mutated. 115 In principle, any cdk inhibitor might act as a tumor suppressor protein. 14 Loss of RB pathway
function could certainly lead to loss of normal inhibitory controls of cell-cycle progression. However, some data also suggest that loss of RB function alone enhances
apoptosis tendencies of cells, so by itself might not result in tumor development. 116,117,118 and 119 It has been suggested 119 that loss of RB function, leading to enhanced
cell proliferation, coupled with genetic changes that cause loss of apoptosis signals, would be an efficient combination for enhancing malignant transformation (see
Apoptosis: Another Step in the Cell Cycle That Goes Awry in Tumor Cells? , later in this chapter).
Characterization of the tumor suppressor locus coding for the cyclin kinase inhibitor p16 INK4a revealed a novel tumor suppressor gene and a genomic organization that
is unprecedented in mammalian cells and affects both the RB and p53 pathways. 120 The p19ARF gene was found as an alternatively spliced gene encoded within the
genetic locus that codes for p16 INK4a. Interestingly, the p19 ARF gene product induces a growth arrest that is dependent on the p53 protein. 121,122 Thus, this single
genetic locus codes for two proteins, one of which (p16 INK4a) inhibits proliferation via the RB pathway by inhibiting activation of cyclin-dependent kinases and a second
protein (p19 ARF) that inhibits proliferation via activation of p53 ( Fig. 6-12).122 The mechanism by which p19ARF affects p53 protein levels has been shown to be via
binding to the mdm2 protein and sequestering mdm2 in the nucleolus. 122,123,124,125,126 and 127 The sequestration of mdm2 results in increased p53 protein levels because
mdm2 normally binds to p53 and enhances its proteolytic degradation. This p19 ARF-mediated increased level of p53 protein results in growth arrest of a cell.

FIGURE 6-12. Schematic diagram depicting the cell-cycle checkpoints mediated by the p16 INK4a/p19ARF genetic locus. Mitogenic signals that activate cyclin D/cdk4 to
lead to cell proliferation can be blocked by p16 INK4a. In certain cellular contexts, mitogenic signals that would normally drive cell proliferation can instead activate the
p19ARF pathway. Activated p19 ARF indirectly activates p53 by a mechanism that involves mdm2. Activated p53 may lead to cell-cycle arrest or apoptosis as noted in
Figure 6-10. In this way, p19 ARF can act as a checkpoint to “sense” what may be inappropriate oncogenic cell proliferation signals. Of note, the DNA damage response

checkpoint, which also involves p53, is independent of p19 ARF. (Adapted from ref. 122, with permission.)

The genetic locus coding for these two genes is on chromosome 9p in human cells and is a common area of mutation in human tumors. 128 Intriguingly, oncogene
activation is one cellular stimulus that has been shown to activate p19 ARF and initiate this p53-mediated growth arrest. 129,130 If this pathway were not inactivated during
tumor formation, activation of an oncogene would simply cause a p53-mediated growth arrest or apoptosis. Thus, tumor cells can bypass this normal cellular response
to oncogene activation by mutating either p19 ARF or p53 (see Fig. 6-12). Furthermore, since this same locus also codes for a gene product that limits cellular
proliferation by inhibiting the RB pathway, deletion of this locus would eliminate two gene products that limit cellular proliferation through two different critical
pathways. Thus, it is not at all surprising that this locus is so commonly mutated in human tumors.
Apoptosis: Another Step in the Cell Cycle That Goes Awry in Tumor Cells?
Apoptosis is a mode of cellular death that is an energy-dependent, programmed event (hence the name programmed cell death) that occurs in response to certain
stimuli. There are characteristic morphologic (nuclear condensation and fragmentation, cell shrinkage, and relative sparing of the cellular membrane and internal
organelles) and biochemical (DNA fragmentation and selected proteolysis) events that occur during apoptotic cell death. 131 In addition, a variety of stimuli, such as
irradiation or chemotherapy, viral infection, growth factor or hormone withdrawal, and cytotoxic lymphocyte killing, can initiate this death program. Obviously, some of
these stimuli are cell-type specific. Apoptosis is also a critical event in normal development and in normal tissue homeostasis, clearly playing a role, for example, in
nervous system development and in lymphocyte selection processes in the immune system.
Some of the gene products that control the cell cycle also appear to influence apoptosis tendencies (e.g., c-myc, p53, RB). It has been suggested that apoptosis
occurs when conflicting cell-cycle signals are simultaneously active in the cell or when survival signals coming from extracellular peptides are blocked. Some models
also conceive of apoptosis as an integral part of the cell cycle, with apoptotic death being viewed as a type of permanent exit from the cycle, just as the G 0 quiescent
phase is an exit from the cycle. It has also been suggested that apoptotic death is the natural default outcome for cycling cells unless a survival factor (hormone or
growth factor) is present to keep the cell alive as it progresses through the cycle. Since responses to current antineoplastic therapies (chemotherapy and radiation
therapy) are also likely to be affected by the apoptosis tendencies of cells, this process has obvious therapeutic implications.
It appears that a decrease in apoptosis tendencies is a key step in tumor development ( Fig. 6-13). Experimental tumorigenesis systems using DNA tumor virus models
and transgenic animal models led to the suggestion that an initial mutation in a cell may occur in a gene that increases cellular proliferation. Examples of such
mutations include loss of function of RB or overexpression of c-MYC. However, these genetic changes, which increase proliferation, also appear to lead to increased
apoptotic cell death, thus leading to no net increase in absolute cell number in the tumor. 132 However, if one cell in this proliferating (and apoptotic-prone) population
then developed a mutation that abrogated the cell death response, then it is easy to envision how this would lead to a significant increase in cell number in the
population. Dysfunction of p53 or overexpression of BCL2 are examples of genetic changes that could inhibit the death response initiated by c-MYC overexpression
or RB mutation. Subsequent genetic changes in these cells could then contribute to other phenotypic changes associated with tumors, such as invasiveness and
metastasis.

FIGURE 6-13. Model of multistep tumor progression incorporating current concepts of genetic changes occurring during tumorigenesis. Genetic changes such as loss
of RB function or overexpressed c-MYC may lead to increased cell proliferation. However, these changes also lead to increased apoptosis ( black ovals) and thus
there is no significant net increase in cell number. The viral gene products, E1A from adenovirus, T antigen from SV40, and E7 from human papilloma virus, appear to
have similar effects on the cell by virtue of binding to RB. Subsequent genetic changes that decrease apoptosis (such as loss of p19 ARF or p53 or overexpression of
bcl-2) would then lead to increases in total cell number. Viral gene products, such as adenovirus E1b, SV40 large T antigen, and human papilloma virus E6, appear to
accomplish this by binding to p53 protein. Additional genetic changes further contribute to the malignant cell phenotype by enhancing local invasiveness and
metastasis. Although the order of the genetic events may vary in different settings, the concept that both increased proliferation signals and decreased cell death
signals contribute to tumorigenesis probably applies to most tumor types. (Concept adapted from ref. 119, with permission.)

In addition to oncogenic genetic changes providing a selection pressure for loss of apoptotic signals during tumor development, the harsh microenvironment
surrounding the tumor mass can similarly favor cellular alterations that oppose death pathways. As the number of cells in a tumor mass grows, significant cellular
stresses ensue. For example, the tumor mass is exposed to periods of hypoxia as well as oxidative stress during reperfusion. In addition, suboptimal blood supplies to
tumor masses result in periods of time in which the tumor is exposed to acid pH and deprivation of nutrients and glucose. Growth of the tumor mass also results in
cellular detachment from normal tissue basement membranes. All of these microenvironmental situations might typically kill the exposed cells. In order for a tumor
mass to grow beyond a certain size, it must develop mechanisms to survive in this harsh microenvironment. Similar to the mechanisms a developing tumor uses to
survive the oncogenic stresses discussed previously, mutations in death-signaling pathway would allow the developing tumor to survive these microenvironmental
stresses. Thus, mutations in survival- signaling molecules or gene products involved the apoptosis machinery, and alterations in growth factor or cytokine exposure
favor continued development of a tumor mass (Fig. 6-14).

FIGURE 6-14. Mutations involved in tumor progression allow tumor cells to survive harsh microenvironmental stresses. Tumor cell stresses (A) would lead to cell
death in normal cells. Tumor cells acquire a number of genetic changes (B) that allow the malignant cells to survive these harsh conditions. For any given tumor type,
the exact nature of these genetic changes may not be known. Little is known about the sequence of these genetic changes during tumor development in vivo.

Significant insights have been gained into the molecular steps involved in cell death-signaling pathways. These insights began with the molecular characterization of

the t(14;18) chromosomal translocation commonly seen in follicular lymphomas resulting in identification of the antiapoptotic gene BCL2. 133 The concept developed in
the follicular lymphoma model was that the abnormal lymphoid cells grow initially because of loss of cell death tendencies due to BCL2 overexpression caused by the
translocation of the BCL2 gene from chromosome 18 to the actively transcribed immunoglobulin gene on chromosome 14 in B-lymphoid cells. At this point, such
lymphomas are rather indolent, but are difficult to cure with chemotherapy. However, at some later stage, they develop other genetic changes and become more
aggressive. We now know of a family of related gene products that interact with each other to influence apoptotic tendencies. Korsmeyer and colleagues developed a
model in which the bcl-2–like protein, bax, can drive the cell toward apoptosis when it forms complexes with itself 134,135 (Fig. 6-15). When bcl-2 protein is expressed at
high levels in cells, it forms complexes with bax, preventing bax homodimerization and inhibiting cell death. Other antiapoptotic proteins with homologies to bcl-2 and
bax, such as bcl-xL and mcl-1, have also been identified. 136,137 The list of antiapoptotic and proapoptotic gene products continues to grow and it appears that some of
this apparent redundancy of proteins results from tissue-specific expression and use of the different proteins in different signaling pathways.

FIGURE 6-15. Overexpression of Bcl-2 inhibits apoptotic cell death following many different stimuli. The current model of how Bcl-2 accomplishes this is based on the
observation that Bcl-2 protein binds to BAX protein. It has been proposed that BAX protein binds to itself and drives the cell toward apoptosis. Bcl-2 can bind to BAX
and prevent BAX homodimerization. A number of different proteins similar to Bcl-2 and BAX have been identified, some of which are proapoptotic (listed as BAX-like)
and some of which are antiapoptotic (listed as Bcl-2–like). The use of these different proapoptotic and antiapoptotic proteins may be cell-type specific. [Model based
on the work of Korsmeyer and colleagues (ref. 134), with permission.]

Critical details in death-signaling pathways have been elucidated in recent years and incorporate much of what had been known about the bcl-2 family and
survival-signaling pathways. One major insight was the identification of a family of specific proteases, now referred to as caspases, which are critical for apoptosis
signaling. 138 Current models suggest that apoptosis is dependent on a series of highly regulated proteolytic cleavages that result in selected activation or inactivation
of certain molecules and eventually result in the highly ordered internal destruction of the cell ( Fig. 6-16). The release of cytochrome C from the mitochondria and
association of cytochrome C with the apaf-1 protein and caspase 3, is a critical step in death induced by genotoxic damage, as would be induced by many
chemotherapeutic agents. 138,139 Predictably, growth factors, such as interleukin-3, which provide survival signals to cells, appear to act via modulation of one or more
steps in these pathways. 140,141 One particularly interesting mechanism along these lines is the interleukin-3–induced phosphorylation of the proapoptotic protein, BAD,
which causes the release of the antiapoptotic protein, bcl-x L, promoting cell survival. 142

FIGURE 6-16. Schematic diagram depicting mechanisms for activation of caspases that lead to apoptosis in mammalian cells. One pathway that can be activated by a
variety of cellular stresses (see text for details) involves the release of cytochrome C from mitochondria (MTC). Cytochrome C and apaf-1 activate procaspase 9,
which subsequently activates a series of effector caspases (Casp 3, 6, 7), which mediate proteolytic destruction of cellular proteins resulting in apoptosis. A second
apoptotic pathway can be activated by extracellular signaling molecules. Receptor activation leads to activation of procaspase 8, followed by activation of effector
caspases. This latter pathway may be independent of mitochondrial activities. (Adapted from Green DR. Apoptotic pathways: the roads to ruin. Cell 1998;94:695, with
permission.)

It is now clear that a group of extracellular molecules can also act as death-inducing signals by interaction with selected cell surface receptors (called death receptors)
to initiate cellular suicide via activation of a different caspase-dependent pathway, one that may not involve mitochondria (see Fig. 6-16).135,143 Fas ligand and Fas
receptor are examples of an extracellular molecule and death receptor that initiate programmed cell death in this way, and this pathway appears to be particularly
important in the regulation of cell death in lymphoid cells. Tumor necrosis factor and the TRAIL family 143 are additional examples of cytokines that act via this type of
pathway. As discussed previously, alterations in these death-signaling pathways can contribute to tumor development by keeping the tumor cells alive in the face of
genetic changes or microenvironmental stresses that would normally result in cell death. The potential impact of loss of these death-signaling pathways on tumor
responses to therapy is obvious.
CANCER THERAPY
A major limiting factor for cancer cures at this time is the toxicity of chemotherapy and radiation therapy to normal tissues. The doses of current antineoplastic agents
that would be required to kill resistant tumors would also lead to patient mortality. The selection pressures for loss of apoptotic pathways during tumor development
would only make this selective killing of tumor cells with cytotoxic agents more difficult. The more we understand about the molecular and cellular differences between
tumor cells and normal cells, the more likely we are to be able to achieve this selectivity by identifying specific targets within tumor cells.
Since alteration in cell-cycle control is one hallmark difference between normal and cancer cells, it is reasonable to consider cell-cycle targets to achieve this desired
specificity. Unfortunately, these same cell-cycle alterations may also contribute to making tumor cells more resistant to cytotoxic therapies. For example, genetic
instability is a common feature of tumor cells and presumably contributes to the large number of mutations that occur during tumorigenesis. Such genetic instability,
arising from mutations in cell-cycle checkpoint or DNA repair genes, could also give the tumor cell an advantage by creating the capability for it to mutate to find ways
to become resistant to therapeutic agents. Two ways to address this are to find ways to limit instability or to find ways to kill the cells quickly so that they do not have
time to become resistant. Although it is not clear how one might go about reducing genetic instability, taking advantage of new insights into apoptotic signaling
pathways could allow us to more effectively induce rapid apoptosis and achieve this second goal.
It has been suggested that we could take advantage of altered cell-cycle checkpoints in tumor cells to make chemotherapy and radiotherapy given in a particular
sequence more specifically toxic for tumor cells. 91 For example, although loss of the G 1 checkpoint in tumor cells by itself does not make tumor cells more sensitive to
irradiation, selective combinations of therapies could theoretically selectively kill the tumor cells that continued to progress through the cell cycle after treatment with
the first cytotoxic agent while the normal cells that arrested are relatively protected. Another scenario arises from the observations that yeast that are defective in the
G2 checkpoint are more sensitive to irradiation 1 and that abrogation of the G 2 checkpoint in mammalian cells (e.g., by caffeine) makes the cells more sensitive to

DNA-damaging agents. It has been suggested that tumor cells, particularly those tumor cells that have lost the G 1 checkpoint because of mutations in p53, may be
particularly sensitive to inhibition of the G 2 checkpoint.144,145 and 146
Telomerase provides another potential cell-cycle–related, tumor-specific target. As discussed previously, telomerase activity is expressed in embryonic tissues and is
usually turned off in differentiated somatic cells, but appears to be reexpressed in tumor cells, giving them unlimited replication potential. 75 Thus, since telomerase is a
relatively tumor-specific gene product and since inhibition of its activity would theoretically lead to eventual cessation of cellular replication, telomerase is an attractive
potential novel target for antineoplastic therapies. Potential problems with this as a target are the potential toxicity to stem cells in the gastrointestinal tract or bone
marrow and the question of how long it would be necessary to inhibit its activity before the tumor cell stopped growing. It is possible that the latter problem may be
circumvented by using telomerase inhibitors in combination with other cytotoxic agents.
Perhaps the most direct way to make tumor cells more sensitive to current therapies is to enhance the apoptosis tendencies of the tumor cells either directly or in
conjunction with exposure of the cells to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. It can be argued that the inherent rapid apoptosis tendencies of tumors dictate our observed
response rates with current therapies. The tumors in which we have reasonable cure rates (e.g., lymphoid malignancies, germ cell tumors) probably derive from
tissues that have greater tendencies to undergo DNA damage-induced apoptosis than the tissues that give rise to relatively resistant tumors (e.g., carcinomas of
colon, pancreas, breast). As we continue to elucidate the steps controlling apoptosis responses, then our opportunities to biochemically modulate these responses
are enhanced such that a rapid apoptosis response may be initiated on exposure of a resistant carcinoma cell to chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Specificity
could also theoretically be achieved by appropriate use of death receptor-ligand interactions or use of cell-type specific survival factors. 147 For example, at least in
certain settings, the TRAIL ligand appears to selectively induce a death-signaling pathway in tumor cells. 143,148,149 If this holds up in clinical settings, this particular
death-receptor pathway may provide a novel approach to enhance therapeutic index.
Advances have shed much light on the molecular controls of cell-cycle progression and cell death. These insights also suggest specific molecular differences
between normal cells and tumor cells that appear to be critical for cellular transformation and provide potential tumor-specific targets for improving antineoplastic
therapies. Continued investigations into these molecular processes may eventually provide the answers we need to prevent or better treat malignant processes.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Hartwell LH, Weinert TA. Checkpoints: controls that ensure the order of cell cycle events. Science 1989;246:629.
2. Elledge SJ. Cell cycle checkpoints: preventing an identity crisis. Science 1996;274:1664.
3. Pardee AB. G 1 events and regulation of cell proliferation. Science 1989;246:603.
4. Zetterberg A, Larsson O, Wiman KG. What is the restriction point? Curr Opin Cell Biol 1995;7:835.
5. Sherr CJ. G1 phase progression: cycling on cue. Cell 1994;79:551.
6. Weinberg RA. The retinoblastoma protein and cell cycle control. Cell 1995;81:323.
7. Krek W. Proteolysis and the G 1-S transition: the SCF connection. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1998;8:36.
8. Townsley FM, Ruderman JV. Proteolytic ratchets that control progression through mitosis. Trends in Cell Biology 1998;8:238.
9. Neufeld TP, Edgar BA. Connections between growth and the cell cycle. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1998;10:784.
10. Hayflick L. The limited in vitro lifetime of human diploid cell strains. Exp Cell Res 1965;37:614.
11. Hastie ND, Dempster M, Dunlop MG, et al. Telomere reduction in human colorectal carcinoma and with aging. Nature 1990;346:866.
12. Schneider JW, Gu W, Zhu L, Mahdavi V, Nadal-Ginard B. Reversal of terminal differentiation mediated by p107 in RB-/-muscle cells. Science 1994;264:1467.
13. Novitch BG, Mulligan GJ, Lassar AB. Skeletal muscle cells lacking the retinoblastoma protein display defects in muscle gene expression and accumulate in S and G 2 phases of the cell cycle. J
Cell Biol 1996;135:441.
14. Sherr CJ, Roberts JM. Inhibitors of mammalian G 1 cyclin-dependent kinases. Genes Dev 1995;9:1149.
15. Lee W-H, Bookstein R, Hong F, et al. Human retinoblastoma susceptibility gene: cloning, identification, and sequence. Science 1987;235:1394.
16. Harbour JW, Lai S-H, Whang-Peng J, et al. Abnormalities in structure and expression of the human retinoblastoma gene in SCLC. Science 1988;241:353.
17. Lee EYHP, To H, Shew J-Y, et al. Inactivation of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene in human breast cancers. Science 1988;241:218.
18. Goodrich DW, Wang NP, Qian Y, Lee EYHP, Lee W-H. The retinoblastoma gene product regulates progression through G 1 phase of the cell cycle. Cell 1991;67:293.
19. Qin X-Q, Chittenden T, Livingston D, Kaelin WG. Identification of a growth suppression domain within the retinoblastoma gene product. Genes Dev 1992;6:953.
20. Chen P-L, Scully P, Shew J-Y, Wang JYJ, Lee W-H. Phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma gene product is modulated during the cell cycle and cellular differentiation. Cell 1989;58:1193.
21. Buchkovich K, Duffy LA, Harlow E. The retinoblastoma protein is phosphorylated during specific phases of the cell cycle. Cell 1989;58:1097.
22. Herrera RE, Sah VP, Williams BO, et al. Altered cell cycle kinetics, gene expression, and G 1 restriction point regulation in Rb-deficient fibroblasts. Mol Cell Biol 1996;16:2402.
23. Skapek SX, Qian Y-W, Lee EYHP. The retinoblastoma protein: more than meets the eyes. Progress in Retinal and Eye Research 1997;16:591.
24. Dyson N. The regulation of E2F by pRB-family proteins. Genes Dev 1998;12:2245.
25. Nevins JR. E2F: A link between the Rb tumor suppressor protein and viral oncoproteins. Science 1992;258:424.
26. Johnson DG, Schwarz JK, Cress WD, Nevins JR. Expression of E2F1 induces quiescent cells to enter S phase. Nature 1993;23:349.
27. Hiebert SW, Chellappan SP, Horowitz JM, Nevins JR. The interaction of RB with E2F coincides with an inhibition of the transcriptional activity of E2F. Genes Dev 1992;6:177.
28. Helin K, Harlow E, Fattaey A. Inhibition of E2F-1 transactivation by direct binding of the retinoblastoma protein. Mol Cell Biol 1993;13:6501.
29. Brehm A, Miska EA, McCance DJ, et al. Retinoblastoma protein recruits histone deacetylase to repress transcription. Nature 1998;391:597.
30. Magnaghi-Jaulin L, Groisman R, Naguibneva I, et al. Retinoblastoma protein represses transcription by recruiting a histone deacetylase. Nature 1998;391:601.
31. Hunter T, Pines J. Cyclins and cancer II: cyclin D and CDK inhibitors come of age. PMID 1994;79:573.
32. Jeffrey PD, Russo AA, Polyak K, et al. Mechanism of CDK activation revealed by the structure of a cyclin A-CDK2 complex. Nature 1995;376:313.
33. Ewen ME, Sluss HK, Sherr CJ, et al. Functional interactions of the retinoblastoma protein with mammalian D-type cyclins. Cell 1993;73:487.
34. Hinds PW, Mittnacht S, Dulic V, et al. Regulation of retinoblastoma protein functions by ectopic expression of human cyclins. Cell 1992;70:993.
35. Knudsen ES, Wang JYJ. Dual mechanisms for the inhibition of E2F binding to RB by cyclin-dependent kinase-mediated RB phosphorylation. Mol Cell Biol 1997;17:5771.
36. Resnitzky D, Reed SI. Different roles for cyclins D1 and E in the regulation of the G1-S transition. Mol Cell Biol 1995;15:3463.
37. Ewen ME, Xing YG, Lawrence JB, Livingston DM. Molecular cloning, chromosomal mapping, and expression of the cDNA for p107, a retinoblastoma gene product-related protein. Cell
1991;66:1155.
38. Hannon GJ, Demetrick D, Beach D. Isolation of the Rb-related p130 through its interaction with CDK2 and cyclins. Genes Dev 1993;7:2378.
39. Peeper DS, Keblusek P, Helin K, et al. Phosphorylation of a specific cdk site in E2F-1 affects its electrophoretic mobility and promotes pRB-binding in vitro. Oncogene 1995;10:39.
40. Geng Y, Whoriskey W, Park MY, et al. Rescue of cyclin D1 deficiency by knockin cyclin E. Cell 1999;97:767.
41. Morgan DO. Principles of CDK regulation. Nature 1995;374:131.
42. Matsushime H, Roussel MF, Ashmun RA, Sherr CJ. Colony-stimulating factor 1 regulates novel cyclins during the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Cell 1991;65:701.
43. Peters J-M. SCF and APC: the yin and yang of cell cycle regulated proteolysis. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1998;10:759.
44. Fisher RP, Morgan DO. A novel cyclin associates with MO15/cdk7 to form the cdk-activating kinase. Cell 1994;78:713.
45. Harper JW, Adami GR, Wei N, Keyomarsi K, Elledge SJ. The p21 CDK-interacting protein Cip1 is a potent inhibitor of G1 cyclin-dependent kinases. Cell 1993;75:805.
46. El-Deiry WS, Tokino T, Velculescu VE, et al. WAF1, a potential mediator of p53 tumor suppression. Cell 1993;75:817.
47. Xiong Y, Hannon GH, Zhang H, et al. p21 is a universal inhibitor of cyclin kinases. Nature 1993;366:701.
48. Polyak K, Lee M-H, Erdjument-Bromage H, et al. Cloning of p27 Kip1 a cyclin-cdk inhibitor and a potential mediator of extracellular antimitogenic signals. Cell 1994;78:59.
49. Toyoshima H, Hunter T. p27, a novel inhibitor of G 1 cyclin-cdk protein kinase activity, is related to p21. Cell 1994;78:67.
50. Matsuoka S, Edwards MC, Bai C, et al. p57 (KIP2), a structurally distinct member of the p21 (CIP1) CDK inhibitor family, is a candidate tumor suppressor gene. Genes Dev 1995;9:650.
51. Serrano M, Hanno GJ, Beach D. A new regulatory motif in cell-cycle control causing specific inhibition of cyclin D/CDK4. Nature 1993;366:704.
52. Hannon GJ, Beach D. p15 INK4B is a potential effector of TGFb induced cell cycle arrest. Nature 1994;371:257.
53. Guan K, Jenkins Y, Nichols MA, et al. Growth suppression by p18, a p16 INK4/MTS1- and p14INK4B/MTS2-related CDK6 inhibitor, correlates with wild-type pRb function. Genes Dev 1994;8:2939.
54. Hirai H, Roussel MF, Kato J-Y, Ashmun RA, Sherr CJ. Novel Ink4 proteins, p19 and p18, are specific inhibitors of the cyclin D-dependent kinases cdk4 and cdk6. Mol Cell Biol 1995;15:2672.
55. Sherr CJ. Cancer cell cycles. Science 1996;274:1672.
56. Sherr CJ, Roberts JM. CDK inhibitors: positive and negative regulators of G 1-phase progression. Genes Dev 1999;13:1501.
57. Zhang H, Hannon GJ, Beach D. p21-containing cyclin kinases exist in both active and inactive states. Genes Dev 1994;8:1750.
58. LaBaer J, Garrett MD, Stevenson LF, et al. New functional activities for the p21 family of CDK inhibitors. Genes Dev 1997;11:847.
59. El-Deiry WS, Harper JW, O'Conner PM, et al. WAF1/CIP1 Is Induced in p53-mediated G1 arrest and apoptosis. Cancer Res 1994;54:1169.
60. Deng C, Zhang P, Harper JW, Elledge SJ, Leder P. Mice lacking p21 CIP1/WAF1 undergo normal development, but are defective in G1 checkpoint control. Cell 1995;82:675.
61. Polyak K, Kato JY, Solomon MJ, et al. p27 Kip1, a cyclin-Cdk inhibitor, links transforming growth factor-b and contact inhibition to cell cycle arrest. Genes Dev 1994;8:9.
62. DePamphilis ML. Origins of DNA replication in metazoan chromosomes. J Biol Chem 1993;268:1.
63. Newlon CS. Two jobs for the origin replication complex. Science 1993;262:1830.
64. Dutta A, Bell SP. Initiation of DNA replication of eukaryotic cells. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1997;13:293.
65. Todorov IT, Attaran A, Kearsey SE. BM28, a human member of the MCM2-3-5 family, is displaced from chromatin during DNA replication. J Cell Biol 1995;129:1433.
66. Hendrickson M, Madine M, Dalton S, Gautier J. Phosphorylation of MCM4 by cdc2 protein kinase inhibits the activity of the minichromosome maintenance complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1996;93:12223.
67. Blow JJ, Laskey RA. A role for the nuclear envelope in controlling DNA replication within the cell cycle. Nature 1988;332:546.
68. Kunkel TA. Exonucleolytic proofreading. Cell 1988;53:837.
69. Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Lessons from hereditary colorectal cancer. Cell 1996;87:159.
70. Laskey RA, Rairman MP, Blow JJ. S Phase of the cell cycle. Science 1989;246:609.
71. Stillman B. Smart machines at the DNA replication fork. Cell 1994;78:725.
72. Krishna TS, Kong XP, Burgers PM, Kuriyan J. Crystal structure of the eukaryotic DNA polymerase processivity factor PCNA. Cell 1994;79:1233.

73. Levy MZ, Allsopp RC, Futcher AB, Greider CW, Harley CB. Telomere end-replication problem and cell aging. J Mol Biol 1992;225:951.
74. Greider CW. Telomeres, telomerase and senescence. BioEssays 1990;12:363.
75. Kim NW, Piatyszek MA, Prowse KR, et al. Specific association of human telomerase activity with immortal cells and cancer. Science 1994;266:2011.
76. Glover DM, Hagan IM, Tavares AAM. Polo-like kinases: a team that plays throughout mitosis. Genes Dev 1998;12:3777.
77. Ohi R, Gould KL. Regulating the onset of mitosis. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1999;11:267.
78. Masui Y, Markert CL. Cytoplasmic control of nuclear behavior during meiotic maturation of frog oocytes. J Exp Zool 1971;177:129.
79. King RW, Jackson PK, Kirschner MW. Mitosis in transition. Cell 1994;79:563.
80. Nurse P. Ordering S phase and M phase in the cell cycle. Cell 1994;79:547.
81. King RW, Deshaies RJ, Peters J-M, Kirschner MW. How proteolysis drives the cell cycle. Science 1996;274:1652.
82. Zachariae W, Nasmyth K. Whose end is destruction: cell division and the anaphase-promoting complex. Genes Dev 1999;13:2039.
83. Schlessinger J, Bar-Sagi D. Activation of Ras and other signaling pathways by receptor tyrosine kinases. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantum Biology 1994;59:173.
84. Blenis J. Signal transduction via the MAP kinases: proceed at your own RSK. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:5889.
85. Aaronson SA. Growth factors and cancer. Science 1991;254:1146.
86. Muller M, Briscoe J, Laxton C, et al. The protein tyrosine kinase JAK1 complements defects in interferon-a/b and g signal transduction. Nature 1993;366:129.
87. Zhong Z, Wen ZL, Darnell JE Jr. STAT3-a STAT family member activated by tyrosine phosphorylation in response to epidermal growth factor and interleukin-6. Science 1994;264:95.
88. Taniguchi T. Cytokine signaling through nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinases. Science 1995;268:251.
89. Shak S. Overview of the trastuzumab (Herceptin) anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody clinical program in HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer. Herceptin Multinational Investigator Study
Group. Semin Oncol 1999;26:71.
90. Robinson MJ, Cobb MH. Mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1997;9:180.
91. Hartwell LH, Kastan MB. Cell cycle control and cancer. Science 1994;266:1821.
92. Hollstein M, Sidransky D, Vogelstein B, Harris CC. p53 mutations in human cancers. Science 1991;253:49.
93. Levine AJ, Momand J, Finlay CA. The p53 tumor suppressor gene. Nature 1991;351:453.
94. Lowe SW, Schmitt EM, Smith SW, Osborne BA, Jacks T. p53 is required for radiation-induced apoptosis in mouse thymocytes. Nature 1993;362:849.
95. Clarke AR, Purdie CA, Harrison DJ, et al. Thymocyte apoptosis induced by p53-dependent and independent pathways. Nature 1993;362:849.
96. Jost CA, Marin MC, Kaelin WG Jr. p73 is a human p53-related protein that can induce apoptosis. Nature 1997;389:191.
97. Yang A, Kaghad M, Wang Y, et al. p63, a p53 Homolog at 3q27-29, encodes multiple products with transactivating, death-inducing, and dominant-negative activities. Mol Cell 1998;2:305.
98. Weinert TA, Kiser GL, Hartwell LH. Mitotic checkpoint genes in budding yeast and the dependence of mitosis on DNA replication and repair. Genes Dev 1994;8:9.
99. Morgan SE, Kastan MB. p53 and ATM: cell cycle, cell death and cancer. Adv Cancer Res 1997;71:1.
100. Canman CE, Lim D-S, Cimprich KA, et al. Activation of the ATM kinase by ionizing radiation and phosphorylation of p53. Science 1998;281:1677.
101. Weinert TA, Hartwell LH. The RAD9 gene controls the cell cycle response to DNA damage in saccharomyces cerevisiae. Science 1988;241:317.
102. Weinert T. A DNA damage checkpoint meets the cell cycle engine. Science 1997;277:1450.
103. Cross SM, Sanchez CA, Morgan CA, et al. A p53-dependent mouse spindle checkpoint. Science 1995;267:1353.
104. de Lange T. Activation of telomerase in a human tumor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994; 91:2882.
105. Keyomarsi K, Pardee AB. Redundant cyclin overexpression and gene amplification in breast cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:1112.
106. Galaktionov K, Lee AK, Eckstein J, et al. CDC25 phosphatases as potential human oncogenes. Science 1995;269:1575.
107. Knudson AG. Mutation and cancer: statistical study of retinoblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1971;68:820.
108. Stanbridge EJ. Suppression of malignancy in human cells. Nature 1976;260:17.
109. Weinberg RA. Tumor suppressor genes. Science 1991;254:1138.
110. Fukasawa K, Choi T, Kuriyama R, Rulong S, Vande Woude GF. Abnormal centrosome amplification in the absence of p53. Science 1996;271:1744.
111. Bunz F, Dutriaux A, Lengauer C, et al. Requirement for p53 and p21 to sustain G2 arrest after DNA damage. Science 1998;282:1497.
112. Oliner JD, Kinzler KW, Meltzer PS, George DL, Vogelstein B. Amplification of a gene encoding a p53-associated protein in human sarcomas. Nature 1992;358:80.
113. Scheffner M, Werness BA, Huibregtse JM, Levine AJ, Howley PM. The E6 oncoprotein encoded by human papillomavirus types 16 and 18 promotes the degradation of p53. Cell 1990;63:1129.
114. zur Hausen H, Schneider A. The role of papillomaviruses in human anogenital cancer. In: Howley PM, Salzman NP, eds. The Papovaviridae. Vol. 2: Papillomaviruses. New York: Plenum,
1987:245.
115. Hirama T, Koeffler HP. Role of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors in the development of cancer. Blood 1995;86:841.
116. Howes KA, Ransom N, Papermaster DS, et al. Apoptosis or retinoblastoma: alternative fates of photoreceptors expressing the HPV-16 E7 gene in the presence or absence of p53. Genes Dev
1994;8:1300.
117. Pan H, Griep AE. Altered cell cycle regulation in the lens of HPV-16 E6 or E7 transgenic mice: implications for tumor suppressor gene function in development. Genes Dev 1994;8:1285.
118. Morgenbesser SD, Williams BO, Jacks T, DePinho RA. p53-dependent apoptosis produced by Rb-deficiency in the developing mouse lens. Nature 1994;371:72.
119. Symonds H, Krall L, Remington L, et al. p53-dependent apoptosis suppresses tumor growth and progression in vivo. Cell 1994;78:703.
120. Quelle DE, Zindy F, Ashmun RA, Sherr CJ. Alternative reading frames of the INK4a tumor suppressor gene encode two unrelated proteins capable of inducing cell cycle arrest. Cell
1995;83:993.
121. Kamijo T, Zindy F, Roussel MF, et al. Tumor suppression at the mouse INK4a locus mediated by the alternative reading frame product p19 ARF. Cell 1997;91:649.
122. Sherr CJ. Tumor surveillance via the ARF-p53 pathway. Genes Dev 1998;12:2984.
123. Kamijo T, Weber JD, Zambetti G, et al. Functional and physical interactions of the ARF tumor suppressor with p53 and Mdm2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:8292.
124. Pomerantz J, Schreiber-Agus N, Liegeois NJ, et al. The INK4a tumor suppressor gene product, p19 Arf, interacts with MDM2 and neutralizes MDM2's inhibition of p53. Cell 1998;92:713.
125. Stott F, Bates SA, James M, et al. The alternative product from the human CDKN2A locus, p14 ARF, participates in a regulatory feedback loop with p53 and MDM2. EMBO J 1998;17:5001.
126. Zhang Y, Xiong Y, Yarbrough WG. ARF promotes MDM2 degradation and stabilizes p53: ARF-INK4a locus deletion impairs both the Rb and p53 tumor suppression pathways. Cell 1998;92:725.
127. Weber JS, Taylor LJ, Roussel MF, Sherr CJ, Bar-Sagi D. Nucleolar Arf sequesters Mdm2 and activates p53. Nature Cell Biol 1999;1:20.
128. Ruas M, Peters G. The p16INK4a/CDKN2A tumor suppressor and its relatives. Biochim Biophys Acta 1998;1378:F115.
129. de Stanchina E, McCurrach ME, Zindy F, et al. E1A signaling to p53 involves the p19 ARF tumor suppressor. Genes Dev 1998;12:2434.
130. Zindy F, Eischen CM, Randle DH, et al. Myc signaling via the ARF tumor suppressor regulates p53-dependent apoptosis and immortalization. Genes Dev 1998;12:2424.
131. Wyllie AH. Apoptosis (The 1992 Frank Rose Memorial Lecture). Br J Cancer 1993;67:205.
132. Evan GI, Wyllie AH, Gilbert CS, et al. Induction of apoptosis in fibroblasts by c-myc protein. Cell 1992;69:119.
133. Tsujimoto Y, Gorham J, Cossman J, Jaffe E, Croce CM. The t(14;18) chromosome translocations involved in B-cell neoplasms result from mistakes in VDJ joining. Science 1985;229:1390.
134. Oltvai ZN, Milliman CL, Korsmeyer SJ. Bcl-2 heterodimerizes in vivo with a conserved homolog, Bax, that accelerates programmed cell death. Cell 1993;74:609.
135. Gross A, McDonnell JM, Korsmeyer SJ. BCL-2 family members and the mitchondria in apoptosis. Genes Dev 1999;13:1899.
136. Boise LH, Gonzalez-Garcia M, Postema CE, et al. Bcl-x, a Bcl-2-related gene that functions as a dominant regulator of apoptotic cell death. Cell 1993;74:597.
137. Kozopas KM, Yang T, Buchan HL, Zhou P, Craig RW. Mcl-1, a gene expressed in programmed myeloid cell differentiation, has sequence similarity to Bcl-2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1993;90:3516.
138. Cryns V, Yuan J. Proteases to die for. Genes Dev 1998;12:1551.
139. Zou H, Henzel WJ, Liu X, Lutschg A, Wang X. Apaf-1, a human protein homologous to C. elegans CED-4, participates in cytochrome c-dependent activation of caspase-3. Cell 1997;90:405.
140. Vander Heiden MG, Chandel NS, Schumacker PT, Thompson CB. Bcl-x L prevents celldeath following growth factor withdrawal by facilitating mitochondrial ATP/ADP exchange. Mol Cell
1999;3:159.
141. Packham G, White EL, Eischen CM, et al. Selective regulation of Bcl-XL by a jak kinase-dependent pathway is bypassed in murine hematopoietic malignancies. Genes Dev 1998;12:2475.
142. Zha J, Harada H, Yang E, Jockel J, Korsmeyer SJ. Serine phosphorylation of death agonist BAD in response to survival factor results in binding to 14-3-3 not BCL-L L. Cell 1996;87:619.
143. Ashkenazi A, Dixit VM. Death receptors: signaling and modulation. Science 1998;281:1305.
144. Fan S, Smith ML, Rivet DJ II, et al. Disruption of p53 function sensitizes breast cancer MCF-7 cells to cisplatin and pentoxifylline. Cancer Res 1995;55:1649.
145. Powell SM, DeFrank JS, Connell P, et al. Differential sensitivity of p53 (-) and p53(+) cells to caffeine-induced radiosensitization and override of G 2 delay. Cancer Res 1995;55:1643.
146. Russell KJ, Wiens LW, Demers GW, et al. Abrogation of the G 2 checkpoint results in differential radiosensitization of G 1 checkpoint-deficient and G 1 checkpoint-competent cells. Cancer Res
1995;55:1639.
147. Canman CE, Gilmer T, Coutts S, Kastan MB. Growth factor modulation of p53-mediated growth arrest vs. apoptosis. Genes Dev 1995;9:600.
148. Pan G, Ni J, Wei Y-F, et al. An antagonist decoy receptor and a death domain-containing receptor for TRAIL. Science 1997;277:815.
149. Sheridan JP, Marsters SA, Pitti RM, et al. Control of TRAIL-induced apoptosis by a family of signaling and decoy receptors. Science 1997;277:818.
150. Lim D-S, Kim S-T, Xu B, et al. ATM phosphorylates p 95 /nbs1 in an S-phase checkpoint pathway. Nature 2000;404:613.

CHAPTER 7 Molecular Biology of Cancer: Apoptosis
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 7
Molecular Biology of Cancer: Apoptosis
STANLEY J. KORSMEYER
SANDRA S. ZINKEL
Apoptosis
Genetics of Cell Death
Death Receptors
Caspases
The Bcl-2 Family
Bcl-2 Family Members Play Critical Roles in Tissue Homeostasis
Role of Mitochondria
Cell Proliferation and Apoptosis
Possibilities for Therapeutic Intervention
Conclusions
Chapter References

APOPTOSIS
Multicellular organisms have developed a highly organized and carefully regulated mechanism of cell suicide to craft the development of multiple lineages and to
maintain cellular homeostasis. Normal development and morphogenesis proceed by the production of excess cells, which are then removed by a genetically
programmed, evolutionarily conserved process. This same program of cell death is used by the organism to remove damaged cells, including virally infected cells.
Programmed cell death may have first been recognized in the developing neuronal system of the toad by Vogt. 1 Kerr and colleagues described cell deaths with
distinct ultrastructural features, including plasma membrane blebbing, volume contraction, nuclear condensation, and endonucleolytic cleavage of DNA. They noted
that these features were consistent with an active, regulated process and coined the term apoptosis from the Greek word used to describe “dropping off” or “falling off”
of petals from flowers or leaves from trees. 2,3
Studies of chromosomal translocations in human lymphoid malignancies yielded the BCL-2 gene, the first component of the cell death pathway to be identified. The
most common chromosomal translocation found in these malignancies is the t(14;18):(q32;q21) harbored by 85% of follicular and 20% of diffuse B-cell lymphomas. 4,5
The breakpoint proved to be the result of aberrant immunoglobulin heavy-chain gene rearrangements, 6,7 and 8 in which BCL-2 was introduced from chromosome 18.9
The consequence of this rearrangement is to place BCL-2 under the transcriptional control of the immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy-chain locus. B cells harboring this
translocation express inappropriately elevated levels of BCL-2 protein. 10
Clues to the biologic consequence of BCL-2 overexpression reside in the natural history of follicular lymphoma. 11 The disease usually follows an indolent course, with
symptoms that wax and wane over years. Transformation to a high-grade lymphoma with diffuse mixed or diffuse large cell morphology often occurs within the first
decade.11 When a BCL-2-Ig minigene that recapitulated the t(14:18) breakpoint was inserted into the germline of a mouse, follicular hyperplasia resulted ( Fig. 7-1).
This polyclonal expansion of small resting B cells was principally in G 0,G1 phase of the cell cycle. 12,13 Over time, these mice progress to diffuse, large cell
immunoblastic lymphoma. Long latency followed by progression to high-grade malignancy is essentially diagnostic for the acquisition of second genetic abnormalities.
Indeed, approximately one-half of the high-grade tumors have acquired an additional translocation, placing c-myc under the control of the Ig heavy-chain locus, thus
combining an inherent survival advantage ( Bcl-2) with a gene that promotes proliferation (c-myc).14 Further evidence for the potent synergy of such a combination
emerged when Bcl-2 transgenic mice were mated to myc transgenic mice, resulting in the rapid appearance of an undifferentiated hematolymphoid leukemia. 15,16 The
oncogenic potential of BCL-2 is not restricted to the B-cell lineage; overexpression in T cells results in peripheral T-cell lymphomas. 17,18

FIGURE 7-1. Bcl-2-Ig transgenic mice. The Bcl-2-Ig minigene recapitulates the t(14;18) chromosomal translocation of follicular B-cell lymphoma. Gain of function Bcl-2
leads to B-cell expansion and an enlarged white pulp in the transgenic spleen ( left) versus control spleen (right). B cells accumulate due to extended cell survival
(graph).12

Tumorigenesis reflects the accumulation of excess cells, which formally results from increased cell proliferation and decreased cell death. 10,19,20 The first oncogenes
to be discovered were genes involved in signal transduction or regulation of transcription. Gain of function mutations in these genes results in oncogenesis by
increased proliferation. A second class of oncogenes was subsequently identified whose normal function is to inhibit growth and proliferation. It is often loss of
function mutations in this class of genes that results in tumors. BCL-2 represents the cardinal member of a third class of oncogenes, which regulate cell death,
resulting in resistance to apoptosis that enables the accumulation of additional genetic aberrations. 12,13,14,15 and 16,20

GENETICS OF CELL DEATH
A genetic program of developmental cell death emerged from the study of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. These worms are particularly well suited to the study
of cell fates because they are transparent, allowing visualization of individual cells. During the development of the C elegans hermaphrodite, 1090 cells are
generated, and 131 of these cells undergo programmed cell death. 21,22 Genes have been identified that reside in a common, core pathway responsible for the
regulation of all 131 cell deaths. Moreover, lineage-specific genes that reside in private pathways more upstream are responsible for initiating the cell deaths.
Furthermore, two complementary sets of genes have been identified that control the phagocytosis of cell corpses. Functional mammalian counterparts to many of
these genes have been identified ( Fig. 7-2), indicating that the basic tenets of apoptosis are conserved from nematodes to humans.

FIGURE 7-2. The genetic pathway regulating cell death in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans has been well characterized and has been conserved in evolution
from worms to mammals. Cell death in the nematode transpires by a mechanism in which death is executed by a single protease (CED-3), whose activity is regulated
by a single activator (CED-4) and inhibitor (CED-9). 28 Mammalian counterparts for the C elegans genes are indicated in parentheses.

The ced-9 (for cell death abnormal) gene confers resistance to cell death. Loss of function mutations of ced-9 result in massive cell death leading to death of the
worm.23 Conversely, overexpression of ced-9 inhibits cell death. Thus, ced-9 is both a structural and functional homologue of Bcl-2.24,25
Three additional genes required for apoptosis have been identified, egl-1 (egg-laying abnormal), ced-3, and ced-4. Loss of function mutations in either ced-3 or ced-4
can rescue cells from death. 22Egl-1 functions as an upstream, negative regulator of the BCL-2 homologue ced-9.26 Whereas the killing activity of ced-4 requires
functional ced-3, the killing activity of ced-3 is independent of active ced-4.27Ced-4 thus appears to function upstream of ced-3 in this genetic pathway. An overall
genetic pathway consistent with all the observations would be egl-1®ced-9®ced-4®ced-3.
Ced-3 encodes a cysteine protease homologous to the mammalian interleukin 1 beta-converting enzyme (ICE), or caspase 1, required for the proteolytic activation of
pro–interleukin-1b. 28,29 and 30 Transient expression of either CED-3 or ICE induces apoptosis in mammalian cells, suggesting that this family of proteases plays a
critical role in programmed cell death. 31 The mechanism by which cell death in the nematode transpires is remarkably simple: Death is executed by a protease
(CED-3) whose activity is regulated by an activator (CED-4) and an inhibitor (CED-9). 32 Mammalian counterparts for each of the members of the C elegans apoptotic
pathway exist (see Fig. 7-2).

DEATH RECEPTORS
In mammals, the initiation of programmed cell death occurs through interaction of death ligands such as tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), Fas, or TNF-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), with their respective receptors followed by aggregation of these receptors. 33 Recruitment of adaptor proteins, such as
Fas-associated death domain (DD) protein (FADD), TNF receptor-associated DD protein (TRADD), and receptor interacting protein (RIP), to a plasma membrane
complex ensues through interactions between yet a third domain, the death domain (DD), present on both the receptor and adaptor proteins. 34,35,36 and 37 Recruitment
of the initiator caspase 8 (also called Fas-associated death domain–like interleukin 1 beta-converting enzyme [FLICE]) through interaction of its death effector domain
(DED), results in its subsequent activation, evidently by self-proteolytic cleavage ( Fig. 7-3). Caspase recruitment can be inhibited by proteins such as FLICE-inhibitory
protein (FLIP) whose DED interacts with and ties up adaptor proteins. 38

FIGURE 7-3. Cell fate after activation of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) family receptors (TNFR) is determined by the balance between cell survival and cell death
signals. Signals through Fas-associated death domain (DD) protein (FADD) result in recruitment and activation of the initiator caspase8 followed by activation of
downstream effector caspases, ultimately resulting in cell death. Signals through TNF receptor-associated DD protein (TRADD) result in recruitment of receptor
interacting protein (Rip), followed by nuclear factor kB (NFkB) activation and transcription of genes involved in cell survival. The balance between these two opposing
pathways determines the ultimate fate of the cell.

In addition to transducing a death signal through caspase activation, engagement of the TNF-a receptor results in a survival signal through nuclear factor kB
(NFkB).39,40,41,and 42 An additional survival signal appears to be mediated by TNF-induced activation of stress-activated protein kinase/c-JUN amino-terminal kinase. 43,44
It is the balance between these opposing signals that ultimately determines whether a cell lives or dies ( Fig. 7-4). Accordingly, mice deficient in the RelA subunit of
NFkB die between embryonic days 15 and 16 of massive liver apoptosis. 45 Mice deficient in the upstream DD kinase RIP survive this critical stage of development, but
die between days 1 and 3 with apoptosis of the thymus and adipose tissue. 46 T-cell death mediated by TNF receptor-2 requires RIP; induction of RIP during T-cell
activation promotes a change in TNF receptor-2 signaling from NFkB activation to apoptosis, suggesting a role for this kinase in the switch from survival to apoptosis
in some situations. 47

FIGURE 7-4. Model of the mammalian cell death pathway. Left: A major checkpoint in this pathway is the ratio of proapoptotic (BAX) to antiapoptotic (BCL-2)
members. Downstream of this checkpoint are two major execution programs: mitochondrial dysfunction and caspase activation. Mitochondrial dysfunction is
manifested as altered mitochondrial transmembrane potential (Dym); disturbed mitochondrial physiology, including ROS production; and, at times, mitochondrial
swelling. Cytochrome c is released from the mitochondrial membrane space to complex with Apaf-1 and activate caspase 9. Caspase activation may occur following a
mitochondrial loop with Apaf-1/cytochrome c or directly in cells in which caspase 8 activates effector caspase 3. Caspases are activated by two cleavage events
between the prodomain and the large subunit, and subsequently between the large and small subunits. The active caspase consists of a complex with two large and
two small subunits. These activated caspases cleave death substrates, such as poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) and laminin, culminating in cell death. Right:

Activation of a Fas/TNF-a-family cell surface receptor leads to recruitment and activation of caspase 8, which in turn cleaves cytosolic p22 BID. After cleavage,
truncated BID (tBID) translocates to the mitochondria, resulting in the release of cytochrome c.

Evidence that NFkB plays a role in cellular transformation arises from both human and animal tumors. 48 T-cell–specific expression of the avian retroviral oncogene
v-rel gives rise to T-cell leukemias in transgenic mice. Direct alterations of the NFkB2 locus have been reported in T-cell lymphomas.
Other death stimuli, including DNA-damaging agents and staurosporine, trigger the release of cytochrome c from the mitochondrial intermembrane space, resulting in
the formation of a caspase 3 activating complex, termed the apoptosome. The requisite members of the apoptosome include cytochrome c, deoxyadenosine
triphosphate (dATP), Apaf-1 (a mammalian homologue of CED-4), and caspase 9. 49,50 and 51 In the presence of cytochrome c and dATP, Apaf-1 oligomerizes together
with procaspase 9 via caspase activation and recruitment domains (CARD). 52 Procaspase 9 is subsequently activated by proteolysis and, in turn, activates caspase
3.53 Activated effector caspases carry out their role in cell death through the proteolytic cleavage of antiapoptotic proteins and repair proteins, as well as through the
degradation of cell structures such as the nuclear lamina. 54

CASPASES
Caspase 1 is the prototype of a large family of proteases whose members function in inflammation or apoptosis. 54 Caspases are expressed as inactive proenzymes
and are activated by proteolytic cleavage after a death stimulus. Members of the caspase family possess a common structural motif consisting of three domains: an
amino-terminal domain, a large subunit, and a small subunit. Caspase cleavage consensus sites separate each domain. After cleavage, the large and small subunits
associate to form a heterodimer. Crystallographic analyses of both caspase 1 and caspase 3 show association of two heterodimers to form a tetramer. Both the large
and small subunits contribute residues important for substrate binding and specificity. The two catalytic sites of the tetramer appear to function independently. 55,56 and 57
Caspases are cysteine proteases that cleave substrates after an aspartate residue. Substrate specificity of individual caspases is determined by the size of the
substrate binding pocket, which dictates the preferred amino acids immediately amino-terminal to this aspartate residue. 55,56,57,58 and 59 In the case of caspase 1, a
relatively large pocket is consistent with the preference for bulky, hydrophobic residues, whereas the smaller pocket of caspase 3 is consistent with the preference for
less bulky residues such as aspartate.
Caspases function in both initiation of apoptosis in response to proapoptotic signals and in the subsequent effector pathway to disassemble the cell. On this basis,
they can be separated into initiator caspases, which link death signals to the cellular death program, and effector caspases, which carry out a coordinated program of
proteolysis resulting in the destruction of critical cell structures involved in homeostasis and repair.
Caspase prodomains play a key role in specifically transducing death signals to result in caspase activation. Within these prodomains, two distinct structural domains
have been identified that mediate specific protein-protein interactions: DED and CARD. DEDs are found in initiator caspases, such as caspase 8 and caspase 10.
These domains mediate caspase targeting to death receptors via interaction with DEDs on adaptor proteins such as FADD/MORT1. 34,60,61,62,63 and 64 Activation of
upstream caspases initiates a proteolytic cascade that allows rapid transmission and exponential amplification of a death stimulus. Effector caspases such as caspase
3 are activated, culminating in destruction of the cell by apoptosis. Depending on the death signal and the cell type involved, this process appears to proceed through
a pathway of mitochondrial dysfunction and the release of cytochrome c or, alternatively, a mitochondrial-independent pathway. 65

THE Bcl-2 FAMILY
The Bcl-2 family of proteins is situated upstream of irreversible cell damage in the apoptotic pathway (see Fig. 7-4),66 providing a pivotal decisional checkpoint in the
fate of a cell after a death stimulus. At least two effector pathways exist downstream for the execution of apoptosis, the caspase pathway and mitochondrial
dysfunction. Mitochondrial dysfunction manifests as altered mitochondrial transmembrane potential (Dym); release of proteins from the mitochondrial intermembrane
space, including cytochrome c, that triggers the activation of Apaf-1 and caspases; and the production of reactive oxygen species. Thus, the effector caspases may be
activated directly following engagement of a surface death receptor or downstream of a mitochondrial amplification loop.
Both pro- and antiapoptotic family members have been identified ( Fig. 7-5). Members of the family possess up to four conserved a helical domains, designated BH1,
BH2, BH3, and BH4.67,68 and 69 Mutagenesis studies of BCL-2 indicate that the conserved domains are necessary for the interaction with proapoptotic proteins such as
BAX and for the inhibition of cell death. 70 The proapoptotic and apoptotic family members may also have independent activities. 71,72 An intact amphipathic a helical
BH3 domain is required for the proapoptotic proteins BAX or BAK to initiate apoptosis. 73,74 BAX and BAK are more highly conserved prodeath members of the BCL-2
family bearing BH1, BH2, and BH3 domains. A subset of proapoptotic Bcl-2 family members possess sequence homology only within the BH3 domain, further
emphasizing the concept that this region forms a critical DD. The recognition that the upstream proapoptotic molecule in C elegans, EGL-1, was also a “BH3 only”
protein supports the role of these proteins at the intersection with the core apoptotic pathway. 75

FIGURE 7-5. Summary of antiapoptotic and proapoptotic BCL-2 members. BCL-2 homology regions (BH1 to BH4) are denoted, as is the carboxy-terminal
hydrophobic (TM) domain. (From ref. 66, with permission.)

The three-dimensional structures for both an antiapoptotic molecule, BCL-X L, and the proapoptotic molecule BID have been determined. 76,77 and 78 The Bcl-XL a helical
structure includes two central hydrophobic cores sandwiched by two amphipathic a helices similar to the membrane translocation domain of the bacterial toxin
diphtheria toxin fragment B and the colicins. In fact, electrophysiologic studies have shown that BAX and BCL-2 are capable of forming ion channels in artificial
membranes.79 In their closed, monomeric forms, the a helices comprising domains BH1 to BH3 of the full family members are juxtaposed to form a hydrophobic
pocket; this pocket receives the hydrophobic face of a BH3 amphipathic a helix to form hetero- or homodimers. 80,81
As predicted from their structure, antiapoptotic molecules are principally integral membrane proteins found in the outer mitochondrial membrane, endoplasmic
reticulum, or outer nuclear membrane. 82,83,84 and 85 In contrast, many of the proapoptotic molecules, especially the “BH3 domain only” subset are localized to the cytosol
or cytoskeleton and undergo posttranslational modification after a death signal, which allows them to target and integrate into the mitochondrial membrane. 86,87,88 and 89
These modifications in response to death stimuli suggest that these BH3-only molecules are candidates for an upstream link between the BCL-2 checkpoint and
proximal signal transduction (Fig. 7-6).

FIGURE 7-6. Model of apoptotic and survival signaling pathways involving the BCL-2 members. Left: Activation of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)/Fas cell surface
receptor leads to activation of caspase 8. Caspase 8 cleaves cytosolic p22 BID, generating a p15 carboxy-terminal fragment that translocates to the mitochondria,
resulting in the release of cytochrome c. Released cytochrome c activates Apaf-1, which in turn activates a downstream caspase program. Right: A death stimulus
interleukin-3 (IL-3) deprivation induces the translocation of BAX to the mitochondria, where it is an integral membrane homo-oligomerized complex. Center: Activation
of the insulin-like growth factor (IGF), nerve growth factor (NGF), or interleukin-3 (IL-3) receptors stimulates phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3-K) and Akt, resulting in the
phosphorylation of BAD at serine 136. Survival factors, such as IL-3, also activate the mitochondrial-based cyclic adenosine monophosphate–dependent protein
kinase (PKA) holoenzyme, resulting in the phosphorylation of BAD at serine 112. Phosphorylated BAD is inactive, sequestered to the cytosol by the
phosphoserine-binding protein 14-3-3. Dym, mitochondrial transmembrane potential.

In support of this thesis, the BH3-only protein BAD is modified by phosphorylation on two serine residues in the presence of the survival factor interleukin-3 (IL-3). 90 In
its phosphorylated form, BAD is inactive, bound, and sequestered by a cytosolic molecule, 14-3-3. On exposure to a death stimulus, such as IL-3 deprivation, BAD is
dephosphorylated, resulting in the interaction of the BH3 domain of active BAD with the hydrophobic pocket of BCL-X L at the mitochondrial membrane.91
Distinct kinases appear to be responsible for the phosphorylation of the two serine sites in BAD. The phosphoinositide 3 kinase pathway regulates the
phosphorylation of serine 136 in BAD. AKT, a serine/threonine survival signaling kinase in that pathway, can phosphorylate BAD serine 136. 92,93,94 and 95 AKT can also
phosphorylate and inactivate the proapoptotic transcription factor FKHRL1 and caspase 9. 94,95 The phosphorylation and inactivation of serine 112 is mediated at the
mitochondrial membrane by cyclic adenosine monophosphate–dependent protein kinase that is tethered to this locale by a mitochondrial-based A kinase anchoring
protein (AKAP). 96 Thus, a single proapoptotic molecule BAD has multiple signal transduction pathways that converge to inactivate it. This example indicates how
complex the regulation of this pathway is and offers additional steps for therapeutic intervention.
Another BH3-only protein, BID, connects the death signal through TNF-a or Fas to the downstream death effectors. BID exists in the cytoplasm as an inactive 22-kD
protein. After TNF-a or Fas signals, BID is cleaved in an unstructured loop by caspase8 to generate an active 15-kD fragment, truncated BID (tBID) which translocates
and inserts into the mitochondrial membrane. 97,98,99 and 100 Cleavage eliminates the amino-terminal inhibitory a 1 helix, exposing the hydrophobic face of the BH3 domain
as well as two central hydrophobic cores. Once integrated into the mitochondrial membrane, p15 BID results in the release of cytochrome c. The presence of BCL-2
or BCL-XL ties up tBID, often preventing the release of cytochrome c.
The proapoptotic full family members BAX and BAK also demonstrate inactive and active conformations. Inactive BAX exists as a monomer in the cytosol, which
translocates to the mitochondrial membrane where it resides as an active homo-oligomerized integral membrane protein. The translocation and oligomerization steps
that activate BAX are, interestingly, blocked in cells protected by BCL-2.

Bcl-2 FAMILY MEMBERS PLAY CRITICAL ROLES IN TISSUE HOMEOSTASIS
The most stringent test for the role of a gene in normal development and homeostasis is an animal in which the gene of interest has been disrupted. Newborn Bcl-2
knockout mice are viable, but the majority die within a few weeks of birth. 101,102 and 103 The surviving mice develop renal failure due to severe polycystic kidney disease.
BCL-2 functions in the normal fetal kidney to maintain cell survival during inductive epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. At 5 to 6 weeks, the animals turn gray
because of apoptosis of melanocytes. The hematopoietic system is initially normal, but thymus and spleen subsequently undergo massive involution due to apoptosis,
reflecting a failure to maintain homeostasis in both B and T cells. Mice lacking Bcl-XL are unable to complete normal development, with embryos dying of erythroid and
neuronal apoptosis. 104,105 It thus appears that different antiapoptotic family members predominate in a tissue- and developmental-specific manner.
Loss of the proapoptotic gene Bax results in hyperplasia of thymocytes and B cells and accumulation of atrophic granulosa cells and excess primordial follicles that
fail to undergo apoptosis. 106 The male mice are infertile because of failure of normal postnatal death of spermatogonia. This leads to a markedly disorganized
seminiferous tubule and failure to successfully complete meiosis. Increased cell numbers are present in Bax-deficient neurons, indicating that cells that normally
would have died during embryonic development because of inadequate innervation are saved in the absence of Bax.107
Mice without BID successfully complete embryonic development and appear grossly normal. However, the mice are resistant to Fas-induced hepatocellular apoptosis,
indicating a critical role for a BID-dependent mitochondrial amplification loop in this Fas-signaled death. 108

ROLE OF MITOCHONDRIA
The mitochondrial dysfunction that occurs in cell death manifests as an initial hyperpolarization, followed by a loss of Dym; the release of proteins from the
mitochondrial intermembrane space, such as cytochrome c ; and altered mitochondrial physiology, including the production of reactive oxygen species. Prior studies
of necrotic death and late stages of apoptotic cell death have noted mitochondrial swelling attributed to the opening of a mitochondrial permeability transition pore that
allows the passage of solutes and dissipation of the transmembrane gradient. The localization of antiapoptotic molecules, such as BCL-2 and BClXL, as well as the
translocation of proapoptotic BAX and tBID to the mitochondrial membrane, emphasizes the importance of mitochondrial dysfunction in the action of these molecules.
The specific mechanisms by which these proteins elicit their mitochondrial effects is an area of intense interest.
The importance of the mitochondria in the execution of apoptosis varies depending on both cell type and death stimulus. In certain cell types, activation of the
TNF/Fas death receptor activates robust quantities of caspase 8 and subsequent effector caspase 3 with no requisite role for mitochondria, whereas other cells such
as liver require the mitochondrial amplification loop to die. Other death stimuli, such as growth factor deprivation, may proceed in the absence of caspases and
depend heavily on mitochondrial dysfunction. 109,110 and 111

CELL PROLIFERATION AND APOPTOSIS
Apoptosis represents a brake on cellular expansion, countering abnormal cell proliferation. Substantial evidence exists for cross-talk between proliferation and
apoptosis pathways. 112 The oncoproteins c-Myc and adenovirus E1A, both potent inducers of proliferation, also have been shown to possess proapoptotic
properties. 113,114,115 and 116 The mitogenic and apoptotic properties of both c-Myc and adenovirus E1A are genetically inseparable. 113,117,118 E1A induces proliferation and
apoptosis by interacting with either the retinoblastoma protein (Rb), a regulator of cell-cycle progression, or the transcriptional corepressor p300. 119,120,121,122 and 123
c-Myc appears to promote apoptosis by multiple pathways. 112
Rb itself also provides a link between cell proliferation and apoptosis. Rb functions as a cell-cycle checkpoint between G 1 and S phase and mediates its effect through
interaction with a family of transcription factors that control the expression of genes required for cell-cycle progression, the E2F proteins. 124,125 and 126 Complexes
containing both E2Fs and Rb have been shown to bind to target DNA sequences in a number of promoters and actively repress transcription. 127,128,129 and 130 Entry into
S phase induced by ectopic expression of E2F or mutagenesis, which abolishes interaction with Rb, results in increased apoptosis. 131,132 and 133 Mice in which the Rb
gene has been knocked out by homologous recombination die at embryonic day 12 to 13 and exhibit both proliferation and apoptosis of liver, central nervous system,

lens, and skeletal muscle. 134,135 E2F-1 knockout mice develop a broad spectrum of tumors, including lymphomas, and display decreased apoptosis in double-positive
thymocytes, further establishing the link between cell proliferation, apoptosis, and tumorigenesis. 136,137
Oncogenes have been shown to sensitize cells to a wide variety of stimuli, including DNA damage, hypoxia, death receptors such as TNF-a and Fas, and growth
factor withdrawal. 113,138,139,140,141,142,143 and 144 It appears that the cellular machinery directing cell proliferation and apoptosis is coupled, suggesting that the decision of a
cell to undergo apoptosis or proliferation may be determined by the balance between growth and survival signals. 145
One potential link between these two processes is the p53 tumor suppressor. Loss of p53 has been observed in numerous tumor types, and p53 function is abrogated
in a large percentage of tumors. 146,147 p53 expression is induced in response to a variety of cellular stresses, including DNA damage, hypoxia, and oncogene
activation, resulting in cell-cycle arrest or apoptosis. Mice deficient for p53 are developmentally normal, but 75% develop spontaneous tumors by 6 months of age. 148
Germline mutation of p53 in humans results in Li-Fraumeni syndrome, and more than 50% of these individuals develop tumors by 30 years of age. 149
The majority of p53 mutations in human tumors cluster within the DNA-binding domain, suggesting that p53 exerts its tumor suppressor effects through transcriptional
regulation of target genes. 150 The mechanism by which p53 exerts its apoptotic effect appears to be multifactorial. p53 is able to induce the expression of BAX and
FAS, as well as another member of the TNF family of death receptors, DR5. 151,152,153 and 154 In addition, p53 inhibits the expression of BCL-2, and BCL-2 can inhibit
p53-induced apoptosis in select settings. 155,156,157 and 158 p53 also appears to induce apoptosis by post-translational mechanisms. 159,160

POSSIBILITIES FOR THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTION
Given the ability to induce apoptosis in lymphoid cells and many types of tumor cells, the death receptors are attractive targets for therapeutic intervention in cancer.
However, infusion of TNF-a causes a lethal inflammatory response resembling septic shock, which results from proinflammatory activation of macrophages and
endothelial cells, 161,162 and infusion of agonistic anti-Fas antibody causes lethal hepatic apoptosis. The related death ligand TRAIL (APO2L) appears to possess the
ability to induce apoptosis in a wide variety of tumor cell lines. In vivo administration of a leucine zipper form of TRAIL in which the molecule is stabilized as a trimer
suppresses the growth of a mammary adenocarcinoma cell line in SCID (severe combined immunodeficiency) mice. 163 Normal cells treated in vitro with TRAIL showed
no decreased viability. Similarly, recombinant TRAIL administered shortly after tumor xenograft injection markedly reduces tumor incidence. In addition, treatment of
mice bearing solid tumors resulted in tumor cell apoptosis as well as improved survival. A synergistic effect was obtained with TRAIL and 5-fluorouracil or irinotecan
(CPT-11). Encouragingly, intravenous injections of TRAIL into nonhuman primates did not result in toxicity to tissues or organs.
The BCL-2 gene provides another promising target for therapeutic intervention, particularly in the therapy of low-grade lymphoma in which BCL-2 overexpression
plays an important role. 164 The strategy of antisense oligonucleotide therapy has been used to “silence” BCL-2 expression. Antisense oligonucleotides are short
stretches of DNA, approximately 16 to 20 bases in length. The oligonucleotides are internalized by cells through a saturable endocytosis pathway. On injection into a
host, expression of a specific gene can be blocked by hybridization with the target messenger RNA through Watson-Crick base pairing. The result is either
degradation of the RNA-DNA complex by Rnase H or block in translation of the RNA.
An 18-base-pair antisense oligonucleotide, G3139 (Genta, San Diego, CA), was designed against Bcl-2 for the treatment of follicular lymphoma. 165 Initial studies in a
t(14;18) murine xenograft lymphoma model were encouraging, with absence of disease by polymerase chain reaction in 10 of 12 animals tested. A phase I clinical trial
of G3139 has been completed on patients with relapsed B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with evidence of BCL-2 overexpression by immunohistochemistry of lymph
node biopsy. 166 The main toxicity was reversible thrombocytopenia. Of the 20 evaluable patients (N = 21), one complete response was achieved in a patient with
stage IV follicular lymphoma. Two patients had partial responses, eight patients had stable disease, and nine patients progressed. Current phase II studies are under
way to investigate the role of G3139 in combination with conventional chemotherapy.
BCL-2 also has been shown to play a role in solid tumors. In prostate cancer, Bcl-2 overexpression confers both chemoresistance and resistance to apoptotic cell
death after androgen withdrawal. 167,168,169,170,171 and 172 In an androgen-dependent tumor model, in vitro treatment of tumor cells with antisense BCL-2 enhances
cytotoxicity of paclitaxel. 167In vivo administration of antisense BCL-2 oligonucleotides in combination with paclitaxel to animals with established tumors results in
inhibition of tumor growth. In addition, treatment in combination with paclitaxel after castration results in a significant delay in tumor recurrence. BCL-2 is also highly
expressed in malignant melanoma.173,174 In a preclinical xenograft model, BCL-2 antisense oligonucleotides significantly sensitized the tumor cell response to
subsequent dacarbazine. 175 It thus appears that BCL-2 antisense therapy may have a potential role in combination with other chemotherapeutic drugs as a
chemosensitizing agent.

CONCLUSIONS
Apoptosis is an evolutionarily conserved, highly regulated mechanism for maintaining homeostasis in multicellular organisms. Numerous signals are capable of
modulating cell death. After a death stimulus, the signal is propagated and amplified through the activation by proteolytic cleavage of caspases, culminating in the
ordered disassembly of the cell. The process may transpire through a mitochondrial-dependent or -independent pathway, depending on the death signal and cell type
involved. The Bcl-2 family of proteins is situated upstream of irreversible cell damage in the apoptotic pathway, providing a pivotal checkpoint in the fate of a cell after
a death stimulus. The proapoptotic molecules BID, BAD, and BAX undergo modification and intracellular translocation on receipt of a death stimulus, connecting
distinct upstream signal transduction pathways with the common, core apoptotic pathway. The distribution of inactive conformers of the BH3-only members suggests
that they may function as sentinels for recognizing cellular damage. 66 BIM would monitor microtubule function, BID would amplify minimal caspase 8 activation, and
BAD would patrol for metabolic stress after loss of critical survival factors. This model would explain how seemingly diverse cellular injuries converge on a final
common pathway of cell death.
Finally, the cellular pathway to apoptosis appears to communicate with the pathway for cell proliferation. 112 As a result, activation of cell proliferation by oncogenes
also results in sensitization to apoptosis. Reciprocally, the expression of antiapoptotic molecules often retards cell-cycle progression. 176 This interconnection provides
a means for limiting the threatening expansion of cells with a lesion in either pathway. These observations fit the evidence that defects are required in both
proliferation and cell death pathways, as single defects tend to be self-correcting in their net effect on cell number. The molecules mediating apoptotic pathways
provide an exciting opportunity for rational design of new therapeutic agents to specifically promote apoptosis of cancer cells.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Vogt C. Untersuchungen uber die Entwickllungsgeschichte der Geburtshelferkroete (Alytes obsttertricians). Solothurn, Switzerland: Jent and Gassman, 1842.
2. Kerr JF, Wylie AH, Currie AR. Apoptosis: a basic biological phenomenon with wide-ranging implications in tissue kinetics. Br J Cancer 1972;26:239.
3. Wylie AH. Apoptosis, cell death in tissue regulation. J Pathol 1987;153:313.
4. Fukuhara S, Rowley JD, Varrakojis D, Golumb HM. Chromosomal abnormalities in poorly differentiated lymphocytic lymphoma. Cancer Res 1979;39:3119.
5. Yunis JJ, Frizzera G, Oken MM, et al. Multiple recurrent genomic defects in follicular lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1987;316:79.
6. Tsujimoto Y, Gorham J, Cossman J, Jaffe E, Croce CM. The t(14;18) chromosome translocations involved in B-cell neoplasms result from mistakes in VDJ joining. Science 1985;229:1390.
7. Bakhshi A, Jensen JP, Goldman P, et al. Cloning the chromosomal breakpoint of t(14;18) human lymphomas: clustering around JH on chromosome 14 and near a transcriptional unit on 18. Cell
1985;41:889.
8. Cleary ML, Sklar J. Nucleotide sequence of a t(14;18) chromosomal breakpoint in follicular lymphoma and demonstration of a breakpoint cluster region near a transcriptionally active locus on
chromosome 18. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1985;82:7439.
9. Tsujimoto Y, Croce CM. Analysis of the structure, transcription, and protein products of bcl-2, the gene involved in human follicular lymphoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1986;83:5214.
10. Korsmeyer SJ. Bcl-2 gene family and the regulation of programmed cell death. Cancer Res 1999;59[Suppl]:1693s.
11. Horning SJ. Natural history of and therapy for the indolent non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Semin Oncol 1993;20:75.
12. McDonnell TJ, Dean N, Platt FM, et al. Bcl-2-immunoglobulin transgenic mice demonstrate extended B-cell survival and follicular lymphoproliferation. Cell 1989;57:79.
13. McDonnell TJ, Nunez G, Platt FM, et al. Deregulated Bcl-2-immunoglobulin transgene expands a resting but responsive IgM/IgD B-cell population. Mol Cell Biol 1990;10:1901.
14. McDonnell TJ, Korsmeyer SJ. Progression from lymphoid hyperplasia to high-grade malignant lymphoma in mice transgenic for the t(14;18). Nature 1991;349:6306.
15. Strasser A, Harris AW, Bath ML, Cory S. Novel primitive lymphoid tumors induced in transgenic mice by cooperation between myc and bcl-2. Nature 1990;348:331.
16. Vaux DL, Cory S, Adams J. Bcl-2 gene promotes haemopoietic cell survival and cooperates with c-myc to immortalize pre-B cells. Nature 1988;335:440.
17. Hockenberry D, Nunez G, Milliman C, Schreiber RD, Korsmeyer SJ. Bcl-2 is an inner mitochondrial membrane protein that blocks programmed cell death. Nature 1990;348:334.
18. Nunez G, London L, Hockenberry D, et al. Deregulated c Bcl-2 expression selectively promotes survival of growth factor-deprived hematopoietic cell lines. J Immunol 1990;144:3602.
19. Bishop JM. The molecular genetics of cancer. Science 1987;235:305.
20. Korsmeyer SJ. Bcl-2 initiates a new category of oncogenes: regulators of cell death. Blood 1992;80:879.
21. Sulston JE, Horvitz HR. Post-embryonic cell lineages of the nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev Biol 1977;56:110.
22. Sulston JE, Schierenberg E, White JG, Thomson JN. The embryonic cell lineage of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev Biol 1983;100:64.

23. Hengartner M, Ellis R, Horvitz HR. C. elegans gene ced-9 protects cells from programmed cell death. Nature 1992;356:494.
24. Hengartner MO, Horvitz HR. C. elegans survival gene ced-9 encodes a functional homologue of the mammalian proto-oncogene bcl-2. Cell 1994;76:665.
25. Vaux DL, Weissman I, Kim S. Prevention of programmed cell death in Caenorhabditis elegans by human bcl-2. Science 1992;258:1955.
26. Conradt B, Horvitz HR. The C. elegans protein EGL-1 is required for programmed cell death and interacts with the Bcl-2-like protein CED-9. Cell 1998;93:519.
27. Shaham S, Horvitz HR. Developing Caenorhabditis elegans neurons may contain both cell-death protective and killer activities. Genes Dev 1996;10:578.
28. Cerretti DP, Kozlosky CJ, Mosley B, et al. Molecular cloning of the interleukin-1b converting enzyme. Science 1992;256:97.
29. Thornberry N, Bull HG, Calaycay JR, et al. A novel heterodimeric cysteine protease is required for interleukin-1b processing in monocytes. Nature 1992;356:768.
30. Ledoux S, Ellis HM, Horvitz HR. The C. elegans cell death gene ced-3 encodes a protein similar to mammalian interleukin-1b-converting enzyme. Cell 1993;75:641.
31. Miura M, Zhu H, Rotello R, Hartweig EA, Yuan J. Induction of apoptosis in fibroblasts by IL-1b-converting enzyme, a mammalian homologue of the C. elegans cell death gene ced-3. Cell
1993;75:653.
32. Cryns V, Yuan J. Proteases to die for. Genes Dev 1998;12:1551.
33. Nagata S. Apoptosis by death factor. Cell 1997;88:355.
34. Chinnaiyan AM, O'Rourke K, Tewari M, Dixit VM. FADD, a novel death domaincontaining protein, interacts with the death domain of Fas and initiates apoptosis. Cell 1995;81:505.
35. Chinnaiyan AM, Tepper CG, Seldin MF, et al. FADD/Mort1 is a common mediator of CD95 (Fas/APO-1) and tumor necrosis factorinduced apoptosis. J Biol Chem 1996;271:4961.
36. Hsu H, Xiong J, Goeddel DV. The TNF receptor Iassociated protein TRADD signals cell death and NF-kB activation. Cell 1995;81:495.
37. Stanger BZ, Leder P, Lee TH, Kim E, Seed B. RIP: a novel protein containing a death domain that interacts with Fas/APO-1 (CD95) in yeast and causes cell death. Cell 1995;81:513.
38. Irmler M, Thome M, Hahne M, et al. Inhibition of death receptor signals by cellular FLIP. Nature 1997;388:190.
39. Baeuerle PA, Baltimore D. NF-kB, ten years after. Cell 1996;87:13.
40. Wang CY, Mayo MW, Baldwin AS Jr. TNF and cancer therapyinduced apoptosis: potentiation by inhibition of NF-kB. Science 1996;274:784.
41. Van Antwerp DJ, Martin SJ, Kafri T, Green DR, Verma IM. Suppression of TNF-a-induced apoptosis by NF-kB. Science 1996;274:787.
42. Beg AA, Baltimore D. An essential role for NF-kB in preventing TNF-a-induced cell death. Science 1996;274:782.
43. Liu ZG, Hsu H, Goeddel DV, Karin M. Dissection of TNF receptor 1 effector functions: JNK activation is not linked to apoptosis while NF-kB activation prevents cell death. Cell 1996;87:565.
44. Natoli G, Costanzo A, Ianni A, et al. Activation of SAPK/JNK by TNF receptor 1 through a noncytotoxic TRAF2-dependent pathway. Science 1997;275:200.
45. Beg AA, Sha WC, Bronson RT, Ghosh S, Baltimore D. Embryonic lethality and liver degeneration in mice lacking the RelA component of NF-kB. Nature 1995;376:167.
46. Kelliher MA, Grimm S, Ishida Y, et al. The death domain kinase RIP mediates the TNF-induced NF-kB signal. Immunity 1998;8:297.
47. Pimental-Muinos FX, Seed B. Regulated commitment of TNF receptor signaling: a molecular switch for death or activation. Immunity 1999;11:783.
48. Gilmore TD, Koedood M, Piffat KA, White DW. Rel/NF-kappaB/IkappaB proteins and cancer. Oncogene 1996;13:1367.
49. Liu X, Kim CN, Yang J, Jemmerson R, Wang X. Induction of apoptotic program in cell-free extracts: requirement for dATP and cytochrome c. Cell 1996;86:147.
50. Li F, Srinivasan A, Wang Y, et al. Cell-specific induction of apoptosis by microinjection of cytochrome c. Bcl-X L has activity independent of cytochrome c release. J Biol Chem 1997;272:30299.
51. Zou H, Henzel W, Liu X, Lutschg A, Wang X. Apaf-1, a human protein homologous to C. elegans CED-4, participates in cytochrome cdependent activation of caspase-3. Cell 1997;90:405.
52. Zou H, Henzel WJ, Liu X, Wang X. An Apaf-1-cytochrome c multimeric complex is a functional apoptosome that activiates procaspase-9. J Biol Chem 1999;274:11549.
53. Zou H, Henzel WJ, Liu X, Wang X. An Apaf-1-cytochrome c multimeric complex is a functional apoptosome that activates procaspase-9. J Biol Chem 1999;274:11549.
54. Thornberry NA, Lazebnik Y. Caspases, enemies within. Science 1998;281:1312.
55. Walker NPC, Talanian RV, Brady LC, et al. Crystal structure of the cysteine protease interleukin-1b-converting enzyme: a (p20/p20)2 homodimer. Cell 1994;78:739.
56. Wilson KP, Black JAF, Thomson JA, et al. Structure and mechanism of interleukin-1b converting enzyme. Nature 1994;370:270.
57. Rotonda J, Nicholson DW, Fazil K. The three dimensional structure of apopain/CPP32, a key mediator of apoptosis. Nature Struct Biol 1996;3:619.
58. Talanian RV, Quinlan C, Trautz S, et al. Substrate specificities of caspase family proteases. J Biol Chem 1997;272:9677.
59. Thornberry N, Rano T, Peterson E, et al. A combinatorial approach defines specificities of members of the caspase family and granzyme B. Functional relationships established for key
mediator of apoptosis. J Biol Chem 1997;272:17907.
60. Boldin MP, Goncharov TM, Goltsev TV, Wallach D. Involvement of MACH, a novel MORT1/FADD-interacting protease, in Fas/APO-1 and TNF receptorinduced cell death. Cell 1996;85:803.
61. Boldin MP, Varfolomeev EE, Pancer Z, et al. A novel protein that interacts with the death domain of Fas/APO-1 contains a sequence motif related to the death domain. J Biol Chem
1995;270:7795.
62. Fernandes-Alnemri T, Armstrong RC, Krebs J, et al. In vitro activation of CPP32 and Mch3 by Mch4, a novel apoptotic cysteine protease containing two FADD-like domains. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 1996;93:7464.
63. Muzio M, Chinnaiyan AM, Kischkel FC, et al. Flice, a novel FADD-homologous ICE/CED-3-like protease, is recruited to the CD95 (Fas/APO-1) death-inducing signaling complex. Cell
1996;85:817.
64. Vincenz C, Dixit VM. Fas-associated death domain protein and interleukin-1b-converting enzyme 2 (FLICE2), an ICE/Ced-3 homologue, is proximally involved in CD95- and p55-mediated
death signaling. J Biol Chem 1997;272:6578.
65. Scaffidi C, Fulda S, Srinivasan A, et al. Two CD95(APO-1/Fas) signaling pathways. EMBO J 1998;273:3388.
66. Gross A, McDonnell JM, Korsmeyer SJ. Bcl-2 family members and the mitochondria in apoptosis. Genes Dev 1999;13:1899.
67. Adams JM, Cory S. The Bcl-2 protein family: arbiters of cell survival. Science 1998;281:1322.
68. Keleker A, Thompson CB. Bcl-2family proteins: the role of the BH3 domain in apoptosis. Trends Cell Biol 1998;8:324.
69. Reed JC. Bcl-2 family proteins. Oncogene 1998;17:3225.
70. Yin XM, Oltvai ZN, Korsmeyer SJ. BH1 and BH2 domains of Bcl-2 are required for inhibition of apoptosis and heterodimerization with Bax. Nature 1994;369:321.
71. Cheng EHY, Levine B, Boise LH, Thompson CB, Hardwick JM. Bax-independent inhibition of apoptosis by Bcl-X L. Nature 1996;379:554.
72. Perez GI, Robles R, Knudson CM, et al. Prolongation of ovarian lifespan into advanced chronological age by Bax-deficiency. Nat Genet 1999;21:200.
73. Chittenden T, Flemington C, Houghton AB, et al. A conserved domain in Bak, distinct from BH1 and BH2, mediates cell death and protein binding functions. EMBO J 1995;14:5589.
74. Wang K, Yin XM, Chao DT, Milliman CL, Korsmeyer SJ. BID: a novel BH3 domain-only death agonist. Genes Dev 1996;10:2859.
75. Conradt B, Horvitz HR. The C. elegans protein EGL-1 is required for programmed cell death and interacts with the Bcl-2-like protein CED-9. Cell 1998;93:519.
76. Muchmore SW, Sattler M, Liamg H, et al. X-ray and NMR structure of human Bcl-X L, an inhibitor of programmed cell death. Nature 1996;381:335.
77. Chou JJ, Li H, Salveson GS, Yuan J, Wagner G. Solution structure of BID, an intracellular amplifier of apoptotic signalling. Cell 1999;96:615.
78. McDonnell JM, Fushman CL, Milliman CL, Korsmeyer SJ, Cowburn D. Solution structure of the pro-apoptotic molecule BID: a structural basis for apoptotic agonists and antagonists. Cell
1999;96:625.
79. Schlesinger PH, Gross A, Yin XM, et al. Comparison of the ion channel characteristics of proapoptotic BAX and antiapoptotic BCL-2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:11357.
80. Sattler M, Liang H, Nettesheim D, et al. Structure of Bcl-X L-Bak peptide complex: recognition between regulators of apoptosis. Science 1997;275:983.
81. Zha J, Harada H, Osipov K, et al. BH3 domain of BAD is required for heterodimerization with Bcl-X L and pro-apoptotic activity. J Biol Chem 1997;272:24101.
82. Hockenberry D, Nunez G, Milliman C, Schreiber RD, Korsmeyer SJ. Bcl-2 is an inner mitochondrial membrane protein that blocks programmed cell death. Nature 1990;348:334.
83. Krajewski S, Tanaka S, Takayama S, et al. Investigation of the subcellular distribution of the bcl-2 oncoprotein: residence in the nuclear envelope, endoplasmic reticulum, and outer
mitochondrial membranes. Cancer Res 1993;53:4701.
84. De Jong D, Prins FA, Mason DY, et al. Subcellular localization of the bcl-2 protein in malignant and normal lymphoid cells. Cancer Res 1994;54:256.
85. Zhu W, Cowie A, Wasfy GW, et al. Bcl-2 mutants with restricted subcellular location reveal spatially distinct pathways for apoptosis in different cell types. EMBO J 1996;15:4130.
86. Hsu YT, Wolter KG, Youle RJ. Cytosol to membrane redistribution of Bax and Bcl-X(L) during apoptosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:3668.
87. Gross A, Jockel J, Wei MC, Korsmeyer SJ. Enforced dimerization of BAX results in its translocation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and apoptosis. EMBO J 1998;17:3878.
88. Puthalakath H, Huang DC, O'Reilly LA, King SM, Strasser A. The proapoptotic activity of the Bcl-2 family member Bim is regulated by interaction with the dynein motor complex. Mol Cell
1999;3:287.
89. Zha JP, Harada H, Yang E, Jockel J, Korsmeyer SJ. Serine phosphorylation of death agonist Bad in response to survival factor results in binding to 14-3-3 not Bcl-X L. Cell 1996;87:619.
90. Zha JP, Harada H, Osipov J, et al. BH3 domain of BAD is required for heterodimerization with BCL-X L and pro-apoptotic activity. J Biol Chem 1997;272:24101.
91. Datta SR, Dudek H, Tao X, et al. Akt phosphorylation of BAD couple survival signal to the cell-intrinsic death machinery. Cell 1997;91:231.
92. Del Peso L, Ganzalez-Garcia M, Page C, Herrera R, Nunez G. Interleukin-3-induced phosphorylation of BAD through the protein kinase Akt. Science 1997;278:687.
93. Blume-Jensen P, Janknecht R, Hunter T. The kit receptor promotes cell survival via activation of PI3-kinase and subsequent Akt-mediated phosphorylation of Bad on Ser136. Curr Biol
1998;8:779.
94. Brunet A, Binni A, Zigmond MJ, et al. Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead transcription factor. Cell 1999;96:857.
95. Cardone MH, Roy N, Stennicke HR, et al. Regulation of cell death protease caspase-9 by phosphorylation. Science 1998;282:1318.
96. Harada H, Becknell B, Wilm M, et al. Phosphorylation and inactivation of BAD by mitochondria-anchored protein kinase A. Mol Cell 1999;3:413.
97. Li P, Zhu H, Xu CJ, Yuan J. Cleavage of BID by caspase 8 mediates the mitochondrial damage in the Fas pathway of apoptosis. Cell 1998;94:491.
98. Luo X, Budihardjo I, Zou H, Slaughter C, Wang X. Bid, a Bcl2 interacting protein, mediates cytochrome c release from mitochondria in response to activation of cell surface death receptors. Cell
1998;94:481.
99. Gross A, Yin XM, Wang K, et al. Caspase cleaved BID targets mitochondria and is required for cytochrome c release, while BCL-X L prevents this release but not tumor necrosis factor-R1/Fas
death. J Biol Chem 1999;274:1156.
100. Han Z, Bhalla K, Pantazis P, Hendrickson EA, Wyche JH. Cif (cytochrome c efflux-inducing factor) activity is regulated by Bcl-2 and caspases and correlates with the activity of Bid. Mol Cell
Biol 1999;19:1381.
101. Veis DJ, Sorenson CM, Shutter JR, Korsmeyer SJ. Bcl-2 deficient mice demonstrate fulminant lymphoid apoptosis, polycystic kidneys, and hypopigmented hair. Cell 1993;75:229.
102. Nakayama K, Negisha I, Kuida K, Sawa H, Loh DY. Targeted disruption of Bcl-2 in mice: occurrence of grey hair, polycystic kidney disease, and lymphocytopenia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1994;91:3700.
103. Kamada S, Shimono A, Shinto Y, et al. Bcl-2 deficiency in mice leads to pleitrophic abnormalities: accelerated lymphoid cell death in thymus and spleen, polycystic kidney, hair
hypopigmentation, and distorted small intestine. Cancer Res 1995;55:354.
104. Motoyama N, Wang F, Roth KA, et al. Massive cell death of immature hematopoietic cells and neurons in Bcl-X L-deficient mice. Science 1995;267:1506.
105. Ma A, Pena JC, Chang B, et al. Bclx regulates the survival of double positive thymocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:4763.
106. Knudson CM, Tung SK, Tourtellotte WG, Brown GAJ, Korsmeyer SJ. Bax-deficient mice with lymphoid hyperplasia and male germ cell death. Science 1995;270:96.
107. Deckworth TL, Elliott JL, Knudson CM, et al. Bax is required for neuronal death after trophic factor deprivation and during development. Neuron 1996;17:401.
108. Yin XM, Wang K, Gross A, et al. Bid-deficient mice are resistant to Fas-induced hepatocellular apoptosis. Nature 1999;400:886.
109. Ashkenazi A, Dixit VM. Death receptors: signaling and modulation. Science 1998;281: 1305.
110. Wallach D, Kavalenko AV, Varfolomeev EE, Boldin MP. Death-inducing functions of ligands of the tumor necrosis family: a Sanhedrin verdict. Curr Opin Immunol 1998;10:279.
111. Scaffidi C, Schmitz I, Zha J, et al. Differential modulation of apoptosis sensitivity in CD95 type I and type II cells. J Biol Chem 1999;274:22532.
112. Evan G, Littlewood T. A matter of life and cell death. Science 1998;281:1317.
113. Evan GM, Wylie AH, Gilbert CS, et al. Induction of apoptosis in fibroblasts by c-myc protein. Cell 1992;69:119.
114. Sakamuro D, Eviner V, Elliott KJ, et al. c-Myc induces apoptosis in epithelial cells by both p53-dependent and p53-independent mechanisms. Oncogene 1995;11:2411.
115. Shi Y, Glynn JM, Guilbert LJ, et al. Role for c-myc in activation-induced cell death in T cell hybridomas. Science 1992;257:212.
116. White E, Cipriani R, Sabbatini P, Denton A. Adenovirus E1B 19-kilodalton protein overcomes the cytotoxicity of E1A proteins. J Virol 1991;65:2968.

117. Amati B, Littlewood TD, Evan GI, Land H. The c-Myc protein induces cell cycle progression and apoptosis through dimerization with Max. EMBO J 1993;12:5083.
118. Raychaudhuri P, Bagchi S, Devoto SH, Kraus VB, Moran E. Domains of the adenovirus E1A protein required for oncogenic activity are also required for dissociation of E2F transcription factor
complexes. Genes Dev 1991;5:1200.
119. Flint J, Shenk T. Viral transactivating proteins. Annu Rev Genet 1997;31:177.
120. Samuelson AV, Lowe SW. Selective induction of p53 and chemosensitivity in RB-deficient cells by E1A mutants unable to bind the RB-related proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1997;94:12094.
121. Shisler J, Duerksen-Hughes P, Hermiston TM, Wold WS, Gooding L. Induction of susceptibility to tumor necrosis factor by E1A is dependent on binding to either p300 or p105-Rb and induction
of DNA synthesis. J Virol 1996;70:68.
122. Querido E, Teodoro JG, Branton PE. Accumulation of p53 induced by the adenovirus E1A protein requires regions involved in the stimulation of DNA synthesis. J Virol 1997;71:3526.
123. Mymryk JS, Shire K, Bayley ST. Induction of apoptosis by adenovirus type 5 E1A in rat cells requires a proliferation block. Oncogene 1994;9:1187.
124. Johnson DG, Schneider-Broussard R. Role of E2F in cell cycle control and cancer. Front Biosci 1998;3:d447.
125. Weinberg RA. The retinoblastoma protein and cell cycle control. Cell 1995;81:323.
126. Nevins JR. E2F: a link between the Rb tumor suppressor protein and viral oncoproteins. Science 1992;258:424.
127. LaThangue NB. DRTF/E2F: an expanding family of heterodimeric transcription factors implicated in cell cycle control. Trends Biochem Sci 1994;19:108.
128. Weintraub SJ, Prater CA, Dean DC. Retinoblastoma protein switches the E2F site from positive to negative element. Nature 1992;358:259.
129. Lam EWF, Watson RJ. An E2F-binding site mediates cell-cycle regulated repression of mouse B-myb transcription. EMBO J 1993;12:2705.
130. Dynlacht BD, Flores O, Lees JA, Harlow E. Differential regulation of E2F transactivation by cyclin/cdk2 complexes. Genes Dev 1994;8:1772.
131. Qin XQ, Livingston DM, Kaelin WG Jr, Adams PD. Deregulated E2f-1 transcription factor expression leads to S-phase entry and p53-mediated apoptosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1994;91:10918.
132. Adams PD, Kaelin WG. The cellular effects of E2F overexpression. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1996;208:79.
133. Shan B, Lee WH. Deregulated expression of E2F-1 induces S-phase entry and leads to apoptosis. Mol Cell Biol 1994;14:8166.
134. Jacks T, Fazeli A, Schmitt E, et al. Effects of an RB mutation in the mouse. Nature 1992;359:295.
135. Clarke AR, Maandag ER, van Roon M, et al. Requirement for a functional Rb-1 gene in murine development. Nature 1992;359:328.
136. Yamasaki L, Jacks T, Bronson R, et al. Tumor induction and tissue atrophy in mice lacking E2F-1. Cell 1996;85:537.
137. Field SJ, Tsai FY, Kuo F, et al. E2F-1 functions in mice to promote apoptosis and suppress proliferation. Cell 1996;85:549.
138. Packham G, Cleveland JL. The role of ornithine decarboxylase in c-Myc-induced apoptosis. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1995;194:283.
139. Galaktionov K, Chen X, Beach D. Cdc25 cell-cycle phosphatase as a target of c-myc. Nature 1996;382:511.
140. Nip J, Strom DK, Fee BE, et al. E2F-1 cooperates with topoisomerase II inhibition and DNA damage to selectively augment p53-independent apoptosis. Mol Cell Biol 1997;17:1049.
141. Lowe SW, Ruley HE, Jacks T, Housman DE. P53-dependent apoptosis modulates the cytotoxicity of anticancer agents. Cell 1993;74:957.
142. Alarcon RM, Rupnow BA, Graeber TG, Knox SJ, Giaccia AJ. Modulation of c-myc activity and apoptosis in vivo. Cancer Res 1996;56:4315.
143. Klefstrom J, Vastrik I, Saksela E, et al. C-Myc induces susceptibility to the cytotoxic action of TNF-alpha. EMBO J 1994;13:5442.
144. Hueber AO, Zornig M, Lyon D, et al. Requirement for the CD95 receptor-ligand pathway in c-Myc-induced apoptosis. Science 1997;278:1305.
145. Harrington EA, Fanidi A, Evan GI. Oncogenes and cell death. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1994;4:120.
146. Hollstein M, Sidransky D, Vogelstein B, Harris CC. The p53 mutations in human cancers. Science 1991;280:1089.
147. Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. p53 function and dysfunction. Cell 1992;70:523.
148. Donehower LA, Harvey M, Slagle BL, et al. Mice deficient for p53 are developmentally normal but susceptible to spontaneous tumors. Nature 1992;356:215.
149. Malkin D, Li FP, Strong FC, et al. Germ line p53 mutations in a familial syndrome of breast cancer, sarcomas, and other neoplasms. Science 1990;250:1233.
150. Cho Y, Gorina S, Jeffrey PD, Pavletich NP. Crystal structure of a p53 tumor suppressorDNA complex: understanding tumorigenic mutations. Science 1994;265:346.
151. Burn TF, El-Deiry WS. The p53 pathway and apoptosis. J Cell Physiol 1999;181:231.
152. Miyashita T, Reed JC. Tumor suppressor p53 is a direct transcriptional activator of the human bax gene. Cell 1995;80:293.
153. Owen-Scaub LB, Zhang W, Cusack JC, et al. Wild-type human p53 and a temperature-sensitive mutant induce fas/APO1 expression. Mol Cell Biol 1995;15:3032.
154. Wu GS, Burns TF, McDonald ER III, et al. KILLER/DR5 is a DNA damageinducible p53-regulated death receptor gene. Nat Genet 1997;17:141.
155. Wang Y, Szekely L, Okan I, Klein G, Wiman KG. Wild-type p53-triggered apoptosis is inhibited by bcl-2 in a v-myc-induced T-cell lymphoma line. Oncogene 1993;12:3427.
156. Marin MC, Hsu B, Meyn RE, et al. Evidence that p53 and bcl-2 are regulators of a common cell death pathway important for in vivo lymphomagenesis. Oncogene 1994;9:3107.
157. Chiou SK, Rao L, White E. Bcl-2 blocks p53-dependent apoptosis. Mol Cell Biol 1994;4:25560.
158. Froesch BA, Aime-Sempe C, Leber B, Andrews D, Reed JC. Inhibition of p53 transcriptional activity by Bcl-2 requires its membrane-anchoring domain. J Biol Chem 1999;274:6469.
159. Brady HJ, Salomons GS, Bobeldijk RC, Berns AJ. T cells from baxalpha transgenic mice show accelerated apoptosis in response to stimuli but do not show restored DNA damageinduced cell
death in the absence of p53. EMBO J 1996;15:1221.
160. Fuchs EJ, McKenna KA, Bedi A. P53-dependent DNA damageinduced apoptosis requires Fas/APO-1-independent activation of CPP32 beta. Cancer Res 1997;57:2550.
161. Ashkenazi A, Pai RC, Fong S, et al. Safety and antitumor activity of recombinant soluble Apo2 ligand. J Clin Invest 1999;104:155.
162. Tartaglia L, Goeddel D. Two TNF receptors. Immunol Today 1992;13:151.
163. Walczak H, Miller RE, Ariail K, et al. Tumoricidal activity of tumor necrosis factorrelated apoptosis-inducing ligand in vivo. Nat Med 1999;5:157.
164. Cotter F. Antisense therapy of hematologic malignancies. Semin Hematol 1999;36:9.
165. Cotter FE, Johnson P, Hall P, et al. Antisense oligonucleotides suppress B-cell lymphoma growth in a SCID-hu mouse model. Oncogene 1994;9:3049.
166. Webb A, Cunningham D, Cotter F, et al. Bcl-2 antisense therapy in patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Lancet 1997;349:1137.
167. Miayake H, Tolcher A, Gleave ME. Chemosensitization and delayed androgen-independent recurrence of prostate cancer with the use of Bcl-2 antisense oligodeoxynucleotides. J Natl Cancer
Inst 2000;92:34.
168. McDonnell TJ, Troncosco P, Brisby SM, et al. Expression of the proto-oncogene Bcl-2 in the prostate and its association with the emergence of androgen resistance. Cancer Res 1992;52:6940.
169. Colombel M, Symmans F, Gil S, et al. Detection of the apoptosis-suppressing oncoprotein Bcl-2 in hormone-refractory prostate cancers. Am J Pathol 1993;143:390.
170. Berchem GJ, Bosseler M, Sugars LY, et al. Androgen resistance to bcl-2-mediated apoptosis in LNCaP prostate cancer cells. Cancer Res 1995;55:735.
171. Raffo AJ, Perlman H, Chen MW, Streitman JS, Buttyan R. Overexpression of Bcl-2 protects prostate cancer cells from apoptosis in vitro and confers resistance to androgen depletion in vivo.
Cancer Res 1995;55:4438.
172. Bauer JJ, Sesterhenn IA, Mostofi FK, et al. Elevated levels of apoptosis regulator proteins p53 and bcl-2 are independent prognostic biomarkers in surgically treated clinically localized prostate
cancer. J Urol 1996;156:1511.
173. Grover R, Wilson GD. Bcl-2 expression in malignant melanoma and its prognostic significance. Eur J Surg Oncol 1996;22:347.
174. Tron VA, Krajewski S, Klein-Parder H, et al. Immunohistochemical analysis of Bcl-2 protein regulation in cutaneous melanoma. Am J Pathol 1995;146:643.
175. Jansen B, Schlagbauer-Wadl H, Brown BD, et al. Bcl-2 antisense therapy chemosensitizes human melanoma in SCID mice. Nat Med 1998;4:232.
176. Linette GP, Li Y, Roth K, Korsmeyer SJ. Cross talk between cell death and cell cycle progression: BCL-2 regulates NFAT-mediated activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:9545.

CHAPTER 8 Molecular Biology of Cancer: Invasion and Metastases
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 8
Molecular Biology of Cancer: Invasion and Metastases
WILLIAM G. STETLER-STEVENSON
DAVID E. KLEINER, JR.
Introduction
The Metastatic Cascade
Oncogenesis: Metastasis and Tumorigenesis are under Separate Genetic Control
Angiogenesis: Balance of Positive and Negative Effectors
Tumor Heterogeneity and Clonal Dominance
Defining the Invasive Phenotype
Cell-Cell Adhesion Suppresses or Facilitates Metastasis Formation
Cell–Extracellular Matrix Interactions in Tumor Progression
Role of Cd44 in Tumor Invasion
Role of Integrins in Tumor Invasion
Cellular Migration: New Insights
Proteases in Tumor Cell Invasion
Intravasation, Extravasation, and Orthotopic Effect
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Metastasis is the spread of cancer cells from a primary tumor to vital organs and distant sites in the cancer patient's body. Metastatic disease is the hallmark of
malignant cancer. The formation of tumor metastasis is the major cause of treatment failure in cancer patients and is a principal contributing factor to cancer morbidity
and mortality. Metastatic disease has significant biologic and prognostic impact on cancer diagnosis and treatment.
The formation of metastatic foci is a continuous process that can begin early in the growth of the primary tumor and increases in frequency with tumor duration and
tumor burden. Metastases may also disseminate to form new metastatic lesions in other organs (metastases will metastasize). The variation in size, age, dispersed
anatomic location, and heterogeneous composition of metastases makes complete eradication of metastatic disease by currently available therapeutic strategies
extremely difficult. The patient with metastatic disease succumbs to organ failure secondary to anatomic compromise caused by multiple metastases or to
complications associated with systemic therapy directed against the metastatic disease. The design of more effective therapies to treat metastatic cancer requires
better understanding of the molecular events and cellular processes that are involved in the process of metastasis formation.

THE METASTATIC CASCADE
It is well established, from both clinical observations and mechanistic studies, that metastasis formation is an inefficient process. Studies have demonstrated that late
events in metastasis formation are largely responsible for the inefficiency of this process. Large numbers of tumor cells and tumor cell clumps are shed into the
vascular drainage system of a primary tumor. 1,2 It has been demonstrated experimentally that, after intravenous injection of highly metastatic tumor cells, only
approximately 0.01% of these cells form tumor foci. The number of circulating tumor cells and tumor emboli correlate with the size and age of the primary tumor (i.e.,
larger tumors shed more tumor cells and emboli). However, the number of circulating tumor cells does not correlate with the clinical outcome of metastases.
The inefficiency of tumor cells in completing the metastatic cascade is the result of the fact that successful formation of metastatic foci consists of several highly
complex and interdependent steps. Each step is rate limiting in that failure to complete any of these events completely disrupts metastasis formation. The steps
involved in metastasis formation are thought to be similar in all tumors and are characterized as follows ( Fig. 8-1):

FIGURE 8-1. The pathogenesis of cancer metastasis. To produce metastases, tumor cells must detach from the primary tumor, invade the extracellular membrane
and enter the circulation, survive in the circulation to arrest in the capillary bed, adhere to subendothelial basement membrane, gain entrance into the organ
parenchyma, respond to paracrine growth factors, proliferate and induce angiogenesis, and evade host defenses. The pathogenesis of metastasis is therefore
complex and consists of multiple sequential, selective, and interdependent steps whose outcome depends on the interaction of tumor cells with homeostatic factors.

1. Oncogenesis (tumorigenesis). After the initial neoplastic transformation, the tumor cells undergo progressive proliferation that is accompanied by further genetic
changes and development of a heterogeneous tumor cell population with varying degrees of metastatic potential. The initial growth of the primary tumor is
supported by the surrounding tissue microenvironment, which eventually becomes rate limiting for further growth.
2. Angiogenic switch. As the tumor grows and central tumor cells become hypoxic, the tumor initiates recruitment of its own blood supply. This process is called the
angiogenic switch and involves the secretion of various angiogenic factors and the removal or suppression of angiogenesis inhibitors. Vascularization of the
tumor is also associated with a dramatic increase in the metastatic potential of these tumors. Studies demonstrate that some tumors and metastases arising in
vascularized tissues may first co-opt existing vasculature before initiating recruitment of new vessels.
3. Clonal dominance and invasive phenotype. Continued genetic alterations in the tumor cell population results in selection of tumor cell clones with distinct growth
advantage and acquisition of an invasive phenotype. Invasive tumor cells down-regulate cell-cell adhesion, alter their attachment to the extracellular matrix
(ECM) by changing integrin expression profiles, and proteolytically alter the matrix. Collectively, these changes result in enhanced cell motility and the ability of
these invasive cells to separate from the primary tumor mass. These cells can detach from the primary tumor and create defects in the ECM that define tissue
boundaries, such as basement membranes, thus accomplishing stromal invasion. Furthermore, the poorly formed tumor vasculature that forms in response to
the angiogenic switch in phenotype of the primary tumor, as well as thin walled lymphatic channels in the surrounding stroma, are readily penetrated by these
invasive tumor cells and offer ready conduits to the systemic circulation. Endothelial cells responding to the angiogenic stimulus produced by the primary tumor
also express an invasive phenotype.
4. Survival in the circulation. Once the tumor cells and tumor cell clumps (emboli) have reached the vascular or lymphatic compartments, they must survive a
variety of hemodynamic and immunologic challenges. Little is known about how these factors may impact on the inefficiency of the metastatic process in human
cancers.
5. Tumor cell arrest. After survival in the circulation, tumor cells must arrest in distant organs or lymph nodes. This arrest may occur by size trapping on the inflow
side of the microcirculation, or by adherence of tumor cells through specific interactions with capillary or lymphatic endothelial cells, or by binding to exposed
basement membrane.
6. Extravasation and growth at the secondary site. In most cases, arrested tumor cells extravasate before proliferating. Studies suggest that extravasation of tumor
cells is not dependent on protease activity and is independent of metastatic potential. After exiting the vascular or lymphatic compartments, metastatic tumor
cells may proliferate in response to paracrine growth factors or become dormant. After extravasation, tumor cells migrate to a local environment more favorable

for their continued growth. Findings using in vivo videomicroscopy demonstrate that the poor growth of tumor cells after extravasation from the circulation is a
major factor contributing to the inefficiency of the metastatic process.
7. Angiogenesis in metastatic foci. Finally, continued growth of the metastatic foci is also dependent on angiogenesis. The development of this neovascular
network at the metastatic site enhances the metastatic potential of these cells just as it does for the primary tumor.
8. Evasion of immune response. Metastatic foci of tumor cells must evade eradication by immune responses that may be either nonspecific or targeted directly
against the tumor cells.
As might be expected from the highly complex nature of metastasis formation, no single gene product is responsible for metastasis formation. Successful completion
of many of the steps of the metastatic cascade is the result of both the acquisition of positive effectors as well as the loss of negative regulators. Unrestrained growth
is not sufficient to result in tumor invasion and metastasis. Tumor invasion is not a passive process secondary to tumor growth, and it may require additional genetic
changes other than those associated with the tumorigenic phenotype. Tumorigenicity and metastatic competence have some overlapping features but are clearly
under separate genetic control. Research on tumor cells has identified gene products that can facilitate completion of each of the steps outlined above. These are the
molecular effectors of tumor invasion and metastasis. In many cases, research also has identified gene products that function to block successful completion of each
of the steps in the metastatic cascade. The idea that there is loss of negative effectors, as well as positive phenotypic changes, associated with malignant progression
and metastasis formation is now well established. In this chapter, some of the steps in the metastatic cascade are examined with the aim of identifying both the
molecular mechanisms and the effector and suppressor genes that may become a target for new and effective cancer therapies. Immune modulation of cancer is
discussed elsewhere (see Chapter 4), as is the process of tumor-associated angiogenesis (see Chapter 9). In addition, the angiogenic response at the metastatic foci
is conceptually the same as in the primary tumor; therefore, the discussion of these points is limited here.

ONCOGENESIS: METASTASIS AND TUMORIGENESIS ARE UNDER SEPARATE GENETIC CONTROL
Many tumors progress through distinct stages that can be identified by histopathologic examination. Pathologists use the identification of these distinct phases to
diagnose and classify tumors into different prognostic categories (e.g., normal tissue, hyperplasia, dysplasia, carcinoma in situ, and frankly invasive carcinoma).
Genetic analysis of these different stages of tumor progression resulted in the multistep theory of tumorigenesis, which involves activation of oncogenes, inactivation
of tumor suppressor genes, and identification of a host of tumor-associated molecules (cancer markers). The progressive alteration in cellular oncogenes and
inactivation of tumor suppressor genes that results in uncontrolled growth and loss of contact-dependent cell growth has been well documented in many tumor types,
and it is the subject of separate chapters in this text (see Chapter 1 and Chapter 2). It also has been demonstrated that transfection of certain of these oncogenes into
the correct recipient cell can result in acquisition of invasive and metastatic phenotype. Thorgeirsson et al. 3 were first to demonstrate that transfection of activated Ras
oncogene sequences into fetal mouse fibroblasts result in acquisition of a metastatic phenotype when these cells are implanted in the nude mouse. This finding has
been confirmed in both fibroblast and epithelial cells of human and rodent origin when transfected with Ras. Similar findings, but with lower efficiency, have been
observed with several other oncogenes (Mos, Raf, Src, Fes, and Fms) when transfected into an appropriate recipient cell.
At first, these results might suggest that the metastatic phenotype might arise from genetic alterations associated with the acquisition of tumorigenicity. However, cells
can be transformed by oncogene transfection, but not all cells acquire a metastatic phenotype after oncogene transfection. 4 In addition, the adenovirus 2E1A gene
was shown to suppress Ras induction of the metastatic phenotype without alteration in tumorigenicity or inhibition of soft agar colony formation. 5 These findings
demonstrate that a clear separation exists between the genetic changes that drive tumorigenicity and the metastatic phenotype. These findings can be explained by
the fact that invasion and metastasis require activation of additional effector genes or suppression of local inhibitors over and above those required for uncontrolled
growth alone. The failure to induce metastatic competence by Ras in some cell systems is explained by a deficiency or suppression of these effector molecules in
these cell types. These metastasis effector genes or gene products may be downstream of Ras or totally independent pathways that are involved in cell attachment or
regulation of protease activity. In studies in which Ras effectively confers a metastatic phenotype, the metastasis effector genes are activated and suppressor genes
are inactivated before Ras transfection, and the addition of Ras oncogene allows completion of the metastatic cascade. This finding is demonstrated by the
observation that Ras plus E1A reverses the metastatic potential and metalloproteinase expression observed in rat embryo cell lines. 5,6 Candidate effector genes
include those associated with cellular adhesion to ECM components, as well as proteases, motility factors, angiogenic factors, and growth regulation. Candidate
suppressor genes would include genes associated with enhanced cell-cell attachment; phosphatase activities that regulate focal adhesion assembly; angiogenesis
inhibitors; protease inhibitors; and factors that suppress cell migration, invasion, and growth.

ANGIOGENESIS: BALANCE OF POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE EFFECTORS
Classic studies by Folkman and colleagues in the 1970s demonstrated that continued growth of tumors requires persistent new blood vessel growth and that inhibition
of this angiogenic response results in tumor dormancy. 7,8 These studies suggested that tumor cells release soluble factors that induce the angiogenic response (i.e.,
angiogenic factors). This process is now referred to as the angiogenic switch—that is, the switch from a nonangiogenic to an angiogenic phenotype. 9
It has been experimentally demonstrated that shedding of malignant cells into the venous drainage is commensurate with the initiation of a tumor angiogenic response
and is quantitatively related to the surface area of new tumor vessel. 10 This process may be facilitated by the immature nature of newly formed tumor vessels.
Weidner and colleagues have reported the correlation of angiogenic response with the frequency of metastasis, disease recurrence, and reduced survival in a
number of different human tumors.11,12 and 13
Some reports challenge the presumption that most tumors and metastases originate as small, avascular tumor cell clumps that must recruit new vessels for continued
growth. Studies find that tumors arising or metastasizing into vascularized tissues may initially co-opt existing blood vessels. 14 Subsequently, there is regression of
the co-opted vessels and increased production of angiogenic factors by the tumor cells that recruit a neoangiogenic response.
Researchers have begun to identify angiogenesis inhibitors that either must be modified or removed during the tumor-induced angiogenic response. Examples of
these inhibitors include platelet factor-4, interferon-a, thrombospondin, and protease inhibitors [tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs)]. The list of inhibitors of
angiogenesis continues to grow with the identification of pigment epithelium–derived factor. 15 Inhibitors of angiogenesis can work at many levels by blocking
endothelial cell growth, cell attachment, or migration.
A novel direction in angiogenesis inhibitors is the identification of cryptic inhibitors that are revealed by proteolytic modification of ECM components. This finding
suggests a class of angiogenesis inhibitors that are contained within other proteins that are not antiangiogenic and must undergo proteolytic processing to uncover
the antiangiogenic activity. Examples of these types of inhibitors include a 29-kD fragment of fibronectin 9; the 16-kD fragment of prolactin; angiostatin released from
plasminogen16,17; and endostatin, a C-terminal fragment of collagen XVIII. 18 The newest member of this group is the cleaved conformation of the serpin antithrombin. 19
Thus, local regulation of angiogenesis can be achieved by proteolytic release of cryptic angiogenesis inhibitors.
In a study by Bergers et al., 20 the RIP1-Tag2 model of pancreatic islet b-cell tumors has been useful in examining the effects of angiogenesis inhibitors on multistage
carcinogenesis in mice. The findings of this study demonstrate that antiangiogenic drugs can be targeted to selective stages of cancer progression and that
combination of agents with different mechanisms of action should be used at different stages of tumor development.
Tumor angiogenesis is the result of a tightly regulated process and a delicate balance of both pro- and antiangiogenic factors. The process of endothelial cell invasion
and formation of new blood vessels has many functional similarities to the process of tumor cell invasion. 21 Understanding the mechanisms of cell invasion may allow
identification of new strategies to disrupt the invasive process. In addition to therapeutic use of antiangiogenic agents, it should be possible to target molecules that
are involved in the process of cellular invasion that is required for both angiogenesis and tumor metastasis.

TUMOR HETEROGENEITY AND CLONAL DOMINANCE
It is now well recognized that most neoplasms consist of several tumor cell populations that vary widely in several important biologic characteristics. These
characteristics include growth rates, karyotype, production of growth factors and stimulators of angiogenesis, hormone production, receptor content, and susceptibility
to damage by cytotoxic agents, immune response, and hypoxia. Fidler et al. 22,23 and 24 first demonstrated the concept of heterogeneity of primary neoplasms in 1977.
This concept is important because it suggested that not all tumor cells in the primary tumor population share the same propensity to form metastases and that
formation of metastatic foci selects for an aggressive subpopulation of tumor cells out of the primary tumor. It was logical to assume that the size of the aggressive
subpopulation in the primary tumor would reflect the propensity of that tumor to metastasize. This assumption would be of prognostic significance if a clinical assay of
the primary tumor were able to detect and determine the presence of the highly aggressive subpopulation. However, evidence of a significant difference between the

average metastatic propensity of cells comprising a primary tumor compared with those from an established metastasis was not forthcoming. This discrepancy was
examined experimentally by Kerbel et al. 25,26 and 27 by using genetic markers to tag different subpopulations in the primary tumor. This work demonstrated that the
metastatic subpopulation dominates the primary tumor mass early in its development. This dominance arises secondary to a selective growth advantage in the
metastatic cells responding to local growth factors. Thus, the measurement of the average level of a molecular marker associated with metastatic propensity in the
primary tumor reflects the likelihood of that tumor to form metastases. This finding has subsequently been confirmed in clinical studies by demonstration that the
average level of a specific marker or oncogene measured within the primary tumor can be correlated with clinical evidence of metastasis or recurrence.

DEFINING THE INVASIVE PHENOTYPE
During the transition from benign to invasive carcinoma, extensive changes occur in the quantity, organization, and distribution of subepithelial basement membrane.
The hallmark of invasive carcinoma is disruption of the epithelial basement membrane and the presence of cancer cells in the stromal compartment. 21,28 Benign
proliferative disorders, such as fibrocystic disease, sclerosing adenosis, intraductal hyperplasia, intraductal papilloma, and fibroadenoma, are all characterized by
disorganization of the normal epithelial architecture. But no matter how extensive this disorganization may become, these benign lesions are always characterized by
a continuous basement membrane that separates the neoplastic epithelium from the stroma. 21,28
In contrast, invasive carcinoma is characterized by a loss of basement membrane around the invasive tumor cells in the stroma. Once the basement membrane
barrier is compromised, it is impossible to determine the quantity or location of tumor cells that may have escaped from the primary tumor. Thus, local invasion is
paramount to malignant conversion.
The ability to cross basement membrane barriers is not unique to malignant carcinoma cells. During an inflammatory response, nonneoplastic immune cells regularly
cross the subendothelial basement membranes, as do endothelial cells during the angiogenic response. Trophoblasts invade the endometrial stroma and blood
vessels to establish contact with the maternal circulation during development of the hemochorial placenta. However, these normal cell types respond to additional
signals that result in differentiation and subsequent loss of their invasive phenotype. Indeed, both normal and tumor cell invasion share functional similarities. In tumor
cell invasion, however, it is the lack of response to negative signals or regulators and the continued invasion with ongoing tumor cell growth that is unique to cancer
metastasis.21,28
Tumor cell interaction with the basement membrane is defined as the critical event of tumor invasion that signals the initiation of the metastatic cascade. 21,28
Basement membranes are composed of a dense meshwork of type IV collagen, laminin, and heparin sulfate proteoglycans that is interspersed with entactin and other
minor components. Basement membranes do not contain pores that would allow passive tumor cell migration. Early studies on defining the invasive phenotype on
malignant tumor cells focused on the interaction of tumor cells with the epithelial basement membrane. These studies defined the three-step hypothesis of tumor cell
invasion: tumor cell attachment to the basement membrane, creation of proteolytic defects in the basement membrane, and migration of tumor cells through these
defects.21,28 It is now recognized that these three steps describe tumor cell interaction with all types of ECM and not just basement membrane. Furthermore,
nonneoplastic invasive cells, such as trophoblasts, endothelial cells, and inflammatory cells, all use mechanisms for invasion that are functionally similar to tumor
cells. The difference between these normal invasive processes and the pathologic nature of tumor cell invasion is therefore one of regulation. An understanding of the
factors that control cellular processes essential to the invasive phenotype should allow identification of novel targets for therapeutic intervention to prevent and treat
both angiogenesis and metastasis formation.

CELL-CELL ADHESION SUPPRESSES OR FACILITATES METASTASIS FORMATION
The initial events in cellular invasion are changes in cell adhesion. These changes consist of alteration in both cell-cell adhesion and interactions with the ECM. A
variety of cell surface receptors that mediate these interactions have been characterized, including the cadherins, integrins, immunoglobulin superfamily, and CD44.
Tumor cells must decrease cell and matrix adhesive interactions to escape from the primary tumor. At later stages in the metastatic cascade, however, tumor cells
may need to increase adhesive interactions with cells and ECM, such as during arrest and extravasation at a distant site. The apparent contribution of each class of
cell adhesion molecules to invasive behavior will in some way be dependent on the tumor cell population and model system used to study these interactions. We
review the contribution of changes in cell-cell adhesion to tumor progression before considering alterations in association with the ECM.
The majority of human cancers arise in epithelial cells. Several types of junctional structures, such as desmosomes, tight junctions, and adherens-type junctions tightly
interconnect normal epithelial cells. The formation and maintenance of these contacts require Ca 2+-dependent homophilic interactions mediated by the cell-adhesion
molecules known as cadherins (Fig. 8-2). Cadherins are a superfamily of single-pass transmembrane glycoproteins that mediate Ca 2+-dependent cell-cell adhesion.
The cadherin superfamily now consists of five subfamilies: the classic type I and type II cadherins, desmosomal cadherins, protocadherins, and cadherin-related
proteins.29,30 The classic cadherin, epithelial cadherin (or E-cadherin), mediates homotypic cell adhesion in epithelial cells. E-cadherin is a transmembrane
glycoprotein that has five extracellular homologous domains (ectodomains), a single membrane-spanning region, and a cytosolic domain. E-cadherin is physically
anchored to the actin cytoskeleton by cytoplasmic proteins termed catenins. b-Catenin is also a major component of the WNT signaling pathway.

FIGURE 8-2. Disruption of cell-cell adhesion concomitant with tumor progression. E-cadherin is a homotypic cell adhesion molecule containing five homologous,
extracellular domains (ectodomains) that bind divalent calcium ions. Calcium binding promotes homophilic cell-cell E-cadherin complexes found in such structures as
desmosomes, tight junctions, and adherens-type junctions. The cytoplasmic tail of E-cadherin involved in cell-cell adhesion interacts with b-catenin, a-catenin, and
p120 CAS (p120). Loss of E-cadherin function, by germline mutation, promoter hypermethylation, or destruction of the ectodomains by matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)
activity, results in an increase in free cytosolic b-catenin levels. Increased cytoplasmic b-catenin can be directed to the proteosome complex by glycogen-synthetase
kinase 3b (GSK3b) phosphorylation and subsequent interaction with the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene product. The frizzled (FRZ)-disheveled (DSH)
pathway for WNT signaling can down-regulate the activity of GSK3b. Activation of the WNT signaling pathway or loss of APC function facilitate the increase in
cytosolic b-catenin levels, which are associated with loss of E-cadherin function, or mutations of the b-catenin gene, which result in reduced association with
E-cadherin cytoplasmic domain. Translocation of b-catenin to the nucleus results in gene expression associated with cell transformation and tumor growth (i.e., c-Myc,
cyclin D1). It is noteworthy that this cascade of cellular transformation can be initiated by expression of an extracellular protease that culminates in enhanced
chromosomal instability. 35 EGF, epidermal growth factor; P, phosphorylated amino acid residue(s); TCF, tissue coding factor.

Any disruption of the intracellular E-cadherin–catenin complex results in loss of cell adhesion. This would include changes in E-cadherin expression or function, as
well as genes other than E-cadherin that are required for complex formation and function. Abundant evidence indicates that E-cadherin function is frequently lost
during progression of many human cancers, including those arising in the breast, prostate, esophagus, stomach, colon, skin, kidney, lung, and liver. 31,32 This loss of
E-cadherin function arises via several different mechanisms. In familial gastric carcinomas, germline mutations in the E-cadherin gene predispose individuals to
develop malignant cancer. Mutations in b-catenin are found in many primary tumors, including prostatic cancer, melanoma, and gastric and colon cancer. Another
mechanism disrupting E-cadherin function during tumor progression is hypermethylation of the E-cadherin promoter, resulting in decreased gene expression. This has
been found to be a major mechanism in papillary thyroid cancer in that 83% of cases of this disease demonstrated hypermethylation of the E-cadherin promoter. 33 Yet
another mechanism to alter E-cadherin function is proteolytic modification. Lochter et al. 34 have reported that E-cadherin function can be disrupted by degradation of
E-cadherin's extracellular domains by stromelysin-1, a member of the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family that has been closely linked with tumor progression.

Constitutive expression of active stromelysin in mammary epithelial cells results in cleavage of E-cadherin and progressive phenotypic changes in vitro, including loss
of catenins from cell-cell contacts, down-regulation of cytokeratins, and up-regulation of vimentin and MMP-9. These changes result in a stable epithelial to
mesenchymal transition of cellular phenotype. In vivo stromelysin expression promotes mammary carcinogenesis that includes stereotyped genomic changes distinct
from those seen in other mouse breast cancer models. 35 It has been reported that loss of H-cadherin expression occurs during the progression of breast cancer, 36 but
little is known about the function of other cadherin family members during tumor progression. In summary, a decrease in cell-cell adhesion is associated with
malignant conversion. Forced expression of E-cadherin in tumor cell lines results in reversion from an invasive to a benign tumor cell phenotype. 31,32
In normal cells, b-catenin is sequestered in the intracellular adhesion complex with the cytoplasmic domain of E-cadherin, a-catenin, g-catenin, and p120 CAS
(Crk-associated substrate). Loss of cell-cell adhesion results in disruption of the adhesion complex and free b-catenin. Free b-catenin is bound by the adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC) gene product and is rapidly phosphorylated by glycogen-synthetase kinase 3b (GSK3b). Phosphorylated b-catenin is subsequently degraded in
the ubiquitin proteosome pathway. In many colon cancer cells, the tumor suppressor gene APC is nonfunctional. This lack of function can lead to accumulation of high
levels of cytoplasmic b-catenin that can subsequently be translocated to the nucleus. The WNT-1 protooncogene–initiated signaling pathway, which includes the
frizzled (FRZ) and disheveled (DSH) gene products, can block activity of GSK3b, which can also result in accumulation of b-catenin. In the nucleus, free
nonphosphorylated b-catenin can bind to members of the TCF (tissue-coding factor)/LEF-1 (lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1) family of transcription factors. It has
been demonstrated that, after inactivation of APC function, the increase in available b-catenin enters the nucleus, complexes with transcription factor Tcf-4, and
up-regulates c-Myc expression. 37 It also has been shown that b-catenin activates transcription from the cyclin D1 promoter and contributes to neoplastic
transformation by causing accumulation of cyclin D1. 38 These findings link changes in cell-cell adhesion with intracellular signaling, oncogene expression, and tumor
cell growth. Thus, loss of cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion is an important event that has many far-reaching consequences for acquisition of the invasive
phenotype and tumor progression.
Other types of cell-cell adhesive interactions can actually facilitate metastasis formation. These may be particularly important during tumor cell arrest and
extravasation. These molecules include members of the immunoglobulin superfamily, such as nerve cell adhesion molecule and vascular cell adhesion
molecule-1.39,40,41,42 and 43 The immunoglobulin superfamily has a wide variety of members involved in cellular immunity and signal transduction, as well as cell
adhesion. Members of the superfamily share the immunoglobulin homology unit that consists of 70 to 110 amino acid residues organized into seven to nine b-sheet
structures. The diversity of superfamily members precludes generalization about their role in tumor cell invasion and metastasis. However, the role of one family
member seems straightforward. Vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 is an endothelial cell, cytokine-inducible, counter-receptor for VLA-4 (very late antigen-4) integrin,
also known as a4b 1 integrin receptor. The role of integrin receptors is discussed separately (see Role of Integrins in Tumor Invasion, later in this chapter). Normally,
VLA-4 is expressed on leukocytes and functions in mediating leukocyte attachment to endothelial cells. VLA-4 is also found on tumor cells in malignant melanoma 44
and metastatic sarcoma but not in adenocarcinomas. 45 It is thought that expression of VLA-4 may facilitate interaction of circulating tumor cells with endothelium
before tumor cell extravasation. This was demonstrated by intravenous injection of human melanoma cells into nude mice pretreated with VLA-4–inducing cytokines,
which resulted in an enhanced number of lung metastases formed compared with no cytokine pretreatment of the mice. 46 Cell-cell adhesive interactions can either
suppress or facilitate metastasis formation. Either role is dependent on the specific context and molecular mechanisms of cell-cell interaction.

CELL–EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX INTERACTIONS IN TUMOR PROGRESSION
As already discussed, the interaction of the tumor cell with the ECM, in particular the basement membrane, defines the invasive phenotype, and tumor invasion is
paramount to metastasis. It is now recognized that the ECM exerts a profound influence on cell behavior and that cells direct the assembly and disassembly of the
matrix. This concept is known as dynamic reciprocity and also applies to the interaction of malignant tumor cells with the ECM. During the process of metastasis
formation, malignant tumor cells must interact with a variety of different types of ECM. These types include the subepithelial basement membrane of the tissue of
origin, stromal elements of the tissue of origin, subendothelial basement membranes during extravasation, and the stromal and basement membranes of the organ(s)
at the site of metastasis growth. Attachment of nonneoplastic cells to the ECM is prerequisite for cell survival. A fundamental difference for neoplastic cells is the loss
of anchorage requirement for cell survival and growth. The anchorage-independent growth of tumor cells may result from an uncoupling of cell survival signals
transduced from the ECM by attachment, coupled with activation of cell-cycle progression that is associated with neoplastic transformation. Tumor cell interactions
with the ECM have profound implications for both cell-cycle regulation and migration.
ROLE OF CD44 IN TUMOR INVASION
CD44 is a transmembrane glycoprotein with a large ectodomain and single cytoplasmic domain. CD44 is involved in cell adhesion to hyaluronan (HA). The gene
encoding CD44 is on the short arm of human chromosome 1147 and contains both constant and variable exons. 48 As a result of this gene structure, a number of
differentially spliced isoforms of CD44 can be generated. The isoform containing no variant exon sequences is referred to as standard CD44. A total of nine variant
regions (v2 to v10) can encode protein sequences. Alternatively spliced messenger RNA variants of CD44 (CD44v) can contain one or more variant coding regions.
More than 30 different splice variants have been detected by polymerase chain reaction analysis. 49 In addition to these variants, cell type–specific differences in
glycosylation of the core protein also exist. The pattern of glycosylation and presence of variant exons influence the ability of CD44 to function in HA binding. 50
Several lines of evidence suggest that CD44 expression plays a role in metastasis formation. Clinical correlation studies demonstrate that a variety of different types
of cancer that express high cell surface levels of CD44 have a poorer clinical outcome when compared with tumors that have low CD44 surface expression. 51,52 and 53
Forced expression of CD44v4 to v7 confers metastatic ability to a nonmetastasizing rat pancreatic carcinoma cell line. 54 Metastasis formation could be blocked using
antivariant antibodies. 55 However, the exact role of CD44v in metastasis formation remains elusive.
In some tumors, CD44-associated increases in tumor growth and metastatic potential correlate with CD44-mediated cell attachment to HA. 56,57 and 58 CD44 also
functions in HA uptake and degradation that is also correlated with tumor cell behavior. 56,59,60 It also has been demonstrated that CD44 aggregation on the cell surface
creates a binding site for the active MMP-9. 61 It is postulated that bound MMP-9 may liberate ECM-bound HA and facilitates tumor cell HA uptake and degradation.
These findings link cell adhesion and ECM turnover. In addition, they suggest that CD44 may function at different stages of tumor cell invasion and metastasis and
that the specific CD44 role may depend on the specific stage of metastasis formation that is examined.
ROLE OF INTEGRINS IN TUMOR INVASION
Integrins are heterodimeric transmembrane proteins that are formed by the noncovalent association of a and b subunits. 61,62,63 and 64 Considerable redundancy within
cell-ECM interaction mediated by integrins exist, because most integrins bind to several individual matrix proteins, and ECM components, such as laminin, fibronectin,
vitronectin, and collagens, bind to several different integrin receptors. This fact suggests that integrins are capable of providing the cell with detailed information about
the surrounding ECM environment, which is then integrated at the cellular level to generate a cellular response ( Fig. 8-3). It is now well established that integrins can
signal across the cell membrane in both directions. 65,66 and 67 Binding of ECM ligands to integrins is known to initiate signal transduction pathways that can result in cell
proliferation, differentiation, migration, or cell death (apoptosis, anoikis). This is referred to as outside-in signaling. It is also known that intracellular events can
modulate the binding activity of integrins for their ligands in the ECM, which is referred to as inside-out signaling. Both integrin clustering and ligand occupancy are
crucial for the initiation of intracellular integrin-mediated signal pathways. 68

FIGURE 8-3. Role of integrins in tumor cell invasion and metastasis: integration of kinase and phosphatase activities. Binding of extracellular matrix components to

integrin receptors initiates an intracellular signaling cascade that results in formation of a focal adhesion complex consisting of cytoskeletal and signal transduction
molecules. Ligand binding to the integrin receptor results in integrin clustering and association of signal transduction molecules. Integrin receptor clustering induces
autophosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) on tyrosine 397. Subsequently, a Src homology 2 (SH2)-containing (Shc) adapter protein of the Src kinase family
that binds to specific phosphotyrosine residues (Y397) on FAK is recruited to the integrin-FAK complex. Recruitment of additional proteins, such as a-actinin, talin,
and paxillin, to this complex connects the focal adhesion complex to the filamentous actin cytoskeleton. Interaction of Shc with FAK results in additional sites of
phosphorylation on the FAK molecule and subsequent recruitment of additional SH2 adapter proteins, such as Grb2 and the nucleotide exchange factor Sos. These
interactions lead to activation of the mitogen activated protein (MAP) pathway, which stimulates tumor cell growth, adhesion, and migration. Similarly, receptors for
growth factors can transiently associate with the focal adhesion complex to synergistically activate the MAP kinase pathway. FAK activation also acts upstream of the
Akt/protein kinase B (PKB) signaling pathway, which promotes cell survival. Association of the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K) with tyrosine 397 in
FAK mediates this effect. The rapid elevation of the phosphatidylinositol(3,4,5)triphosphate (PIP 3) lipid product of PI3K activity stimulates the Akt/PKB pathway,
leading to enhanced cell survival. Crk-associated substrate (p130 CAS) is another SH2- and SH3-conatining signal transduction that associates with FAK on integrin
binding to the extracellular matrix. Interaction of p130 CAS with FAK is mediated by a proline-rich region on FAK (residues 712–178) that interacts with the SH3 domain
of p130CAS. Activation of p130 CAS promotes cell migration and invasion that is associated with enhanced metastatic behavior. The tumor suppressor gene PTEN
inhibits cell adhesion, migration, and invasion. This inhibition is mediated by direct PTEN dephosphorylation of FAK and Shc, leading to negative regulation of the
p130 CAS pathway, which affects cell attachment, migration, and invasion. Down-regulation of the MAP kinase pathway by PTEN dephosphorylation of FAK and Shc
negatively affects cell growth in addition to attachment and migration. PTEN is also known to directly dephosphorylate PIP 3 and negatively regulate the downstream
Akt/PKB cell survival pathway. PTEN may also disrupt this pathway indirectly by dephosphorylation of FAK, which alters P13K activation. Thus, integrin-mediated
regulation of cell growth, adhesion, migration, and invasion is a complex network of signal transduction cascades that have both positive (kinase) and negative
(phosphatase) regulatory elements. EGF, epidermal growth factor; Erk, extracellular signal–regulated kinase; MEK, MAP kinase or ERK kinase; P, phosphorylated
amino acid residual(s).

Integrin-mediated signal transduction involves both direct activation of signaling pathways and collaborative signaling (also referred to as cooperative signaling), in
which integrins modulate signaling events initiated through receptor tyrosine kinases. 67,69 The cis association of integrins with other receptors on the same cell surface
results in formation of multireceptor complexes. There is little evidence that these multireceptor complexes signal through exclusive, integrin-specific pathways, but
instead they cooperate with the other receptors to influence a variety of signaling pathways. Direct integrin signaling starts after engagement of the integrin with their
ECM ligands, lateral clustering of the integrin receptors, and interaction of the integrin cytoplasmic domain to form complexes with proteins that link to the
cytoskeleton. This results in organization of cell structures known as focal adhesions.
Autophosphorylation of the focal adhesion kinase (FAK) was among the first integrin-mediated signaling events to be identified. This autophosphorylation event on
tyrosine 397 results in recruitment of Src-family protein kinases that in turn results in phosphorylation of additional tyrosine residues on FAK. Phosphorylation of FAK
can result in activation of the extracellular signal–regulated kinase (ERK)/mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway. Activation of the MAP kinase pathway has
been linked to induction of cell migration. 70 The activation of MAP kinase can be mediated by Grb-2 recruitment to FAK that then binds Sos, a guanine nucleotide
exchange factor for Ras.67,71 Alternatively, activation of the MAP kinase pathway can result from FAK phosphorylation of paxillin and the Crk-associated substrate
(p130Cas) that leads to binding of link proteins, such as Nck. 72 In addition, phosphorylation of FAK at tyrosine 397 creates a binding site for the regulatory subunit of
phosphoinositol-3 kinase and triggers activation of this signal pathway. 73
The knowledge that FAK is tyrosine phosphorylated on integrin activation suggests that focal adhesion–associated protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTP) could
modulate Fak function. Several PTPs that interact with components of the focal adhesion complex have been identified. These are PTP-a and PTP-PEST [protein
tyrosine phosphatase rich in proline (P), glutamic acid (E), serine (S), and threonine (T)], which negatively regulate Src and paxillin, respectively. 74,75 It has been
shown that, in PTP-PEST–deficient cells, a defect in cell motility correlates with an increase in the size and number of focal adhesions. 76 This defect appears to be
due in part to the constitutive increase in tyrosine phosphorylation of paxillin, as well as p130 CAS and FAK.
A PTP that interacts directly with FAK is referred to as PTEN.77 PTEN was identified as a tumor suppressor gene on human chromosome 10q23, which is frequently
mutated or deleted in a wide variety of human cancers, including gliomas and prostate, breast, lung, bladder, endometrial, kidney, and oropharyngeal cancers. 71 The
gene encodes both a phosphatase domain and also has extensive sequence homology to the cytoskeletal protein tensin. PTEN functions as a dual-specificity
phosphatase in that not only is it a PTP but it also dephosphorylates the lipid phosphoinositol(3,4,5,)triphophaste (PIP 3). The current view is that both phosphatase
activities function as tumor suppressor activities. The lipid phosphatase activity regulates levels of PIP 3, which in turn regulates activation of the protein kinase B
pathway that is protective against programmed cell death (apoptosis, anoikis). As a PTP, PTEN regulates the phosphorylation status of FAK and Shc that in turn
regulate cell adhesion, migration, cytoskeletal organization, and MAP kinase activation. To summarize, loss of PTEN function results in alterations in
integrin-mediated signaling via FAK and PIP 3 pathways, which results in achievement of an invasive phenotype. 71 The protein kinase activity just described functions
to promote cell invasion. This process is countered by the PTP activities, which act as tumor suppressors.
The roles of specific integrins in tumor progression and metastasis formation are dichotomous. The decreased expression of some integrins is associated with cellular
transformation and tumorigenesis. These include a 5b1 and a2b1 integrins. HT29 colon carcinoma cells lacking a 5b1 expression are either significantly less tumorigenic
or completely nontumorigenic when forced to express a 5.78 Loss of a2b 1 expression in breast epithelial cells correlates with the transformed phenotype, and
reexpression of this integrin abrogates the malignant phenotype. 79 On the other hand, expression of some integrins directly correlates with tumorigenicity and tumor
progression. For example, the a vb 3 integrin is expressed in metastatic melanoma but not in benign melanocytic lesions. 80,81 Antibodies against a v integrins blocked
growth of human melanoma xenografts in nude mice.82 Integrin a 6 expression is increased in oropharyngeal and bladder cancers and in lung tumors. 46,83,84,85,86 and 87
Tumor progression is associated with expression of a 3b1 in 82% of tumors. The molecular events associated with enhanced integrin expression and tumor progression
are not well defined. Clearly, in nontransformed cells, integrins are implicated in growth regulation. But tumor cell growth is anchorage-independent. This observation
suggests that the role of integrins in tumor invasion and metastasis may only be secondarily related to growth control. Integrins are also directly involved in cell
migration.
CELLULAR MIGRATION: NEW INSIGHTS
Cell migration requires transmission of propulsive force from the ECM to the cytoskeleton of the migrating tumor or endothelial cell ( Fig. 8-4). Repetitive assembly of
cytoskeletal elements to form membrane ruffles, lamellipodia, filopodia, and pseudopodia accomplishes cell movement. 88,89 Lamellipodia are broad, flat, sheet-like
structures in comparison to filopodia, which are thin, cylindrical projections. Cell movement begins with protrusion of a filopod or lamellipod. These are formed by
polymerization of actin to form elongated central filaments in the filopod and a broader cross-weave mesh in the lamellipod. 90 At the leading edge of the protruding
structures, integrins concentrate in specific regions, and after ligation with ECM, ligands form focal adhesions. These focal adhesions are anchored to the actin
filaments.

FIGURE 8-4. Cellular migration. Cell migration requires transmission of force from the extracellular matrix to the cytoskeleton. This is accomplished in distinct steps,
several of which are illustrated. First, there is protrusion of a cellular projection (filopodia or lamellipodia), which is mediated by actin polymerization. The second step

involves organization of the focal adhesion complex and connection with the actin cytoskeleton. This is accomplished via mechanisms described in Figure 8-3.
Evidence suggests that if the integrin component of these complexes is not activated, these complexes are continually recycled across the cell surface without cell
movement. Step 3 entails engagement of the integrin with the extracellular matrix, which is mediated by a change in integrin affinity. Traction force is generated and
transmitted by the contraction and reinforcement of the actin cytoskeleton. The final step in cell locomotion is the release or disruption of the focal adhesion complex
at the trailing edge of the migrating cell. Step 5 is accomplished by release of components of the integrin complex or via proteolytic disruption of focal adhesion kinase
connections with the filamentous actin cytoskeleton.

Microinjection studies have shown that integrin association with the Rho family of guanosine triphosphate (GTP)ases is critical for organization and assembly of the
actin cytoskeleton. It has been demonstrated that a hierarchical cascade exists among these GTPases that controls formation of specific cytoskeletal structures.
Cdc42 and Rac control formation of filopodia and lamellipodia, respectively, whereas Rho controls stress fiber formation and focal adhesions. 91
The integrin connection to the ECM provides adhesive traction, and contraction of the actin filaments results in forward propulsion of the cell body. As the cell moves,
new projections occur at the leading edge and are anchored with new focal adhesions. As the cell moves forward, the focal adhesions appear to move in a retrograde
fashion on the cell surface. This apparent movement of the focal adhesions has been observed using fluorescent-tagged beads coated with integrin substrates or
antiintegrin antibodies. 92,93 and 94 These coated beads can also be used to actually measure the integrin-cytoskeletal traction forces generated, which has led to the
demonstration that the strength of the integrin-cytoskeletal interaction can be modulated by the rigidity of the extracellular substrate. When cells are on a rigid
substrate, more restraining force is exerted to prevent movement of the focal adhesion. Cells can detect this change in the substrate, and they respond by increasing
the force generated by cytoskeletal linkage to the focal adhesion so that the cell pulls harder. This is referred to as reinforcement of the integrin-cytoskeletal
attachments. Data suggest that Src kinases may be selectively involved in regulating this reinforcement. 94 Researchers have shown that beads binding to the
fibronectin receptor in fibroblast containing either wild-type or Src-deficient cells show similar reinforcement of the fibronectin-receptor–actin cytoskeletal linkage. In
contrast, when they use vitronectin, there is little reinforcement of the vitronectin receptor in wild-type Src-expressing cells, but a strong reinforcement in the
Src-deficient fibroblasts. These authors also show selective association of kinase-defective Src–green fluorescent protein fusion with the a v integrin subunit of the
vitronectin receptor, but not with the fibronectin receptor. Possible interpretations of these results are that either Src is normally a selective inhibitor of reinforcement
of force generation through the vitronectin receptor or that Src promotes the turnover of links between cytoskeletal and integrin components of the focal adhesion
complex.
Investigators have used a b 1 integrin–green fluorescent protein chimera to follow focal adhesion cycling over the cell surface. 95 These experiments demonstrate that,
in stationary cells, focal adhesions were highly motile and moved in a linear fashion to the cell center. In motile cells, the focal adhesions remained stationary and only
moved at the trailing edge of the cell. These authors postulate a cellular “clutch-like mechanism” in which alteration in integrin affinity is seen in response to migratory
stimulus. Regulation of integrin-ligand interactions by inside-out signaling helps determine the nature of cellular responses to the ECM, such as whether a cell
becomes migratory or remains stationary. 96
The last step in integrin-mediated cell migration is the release of the ECM integrin-cytoskeletal attachments at the trailing edge of the cell. 88 Two mechanisms have
been identified in this detachment. The first involves the release of the integrins from the cell surface such that it is left on the substratum. Integrin release from the
cell membrane has been observed in fibroblast migration 97 and by tumor cell lines in vitro.98 A second mechanism that mediates release of the trailing edge of the cell
is destabilization of cytoskeletal linkages intracellularly by either proteolytic activity or phosphatase activity. Calpain is a Ca 2+-dependent protease that localizes to
focal adhesions and regulates retraction in Chinese hamster ovary cells migrating on fibronectin by destabilizing cytoskeletal linkages. 99
Cell motility is a critical component of the invasive phenotype. Understanding the molecular mechanisms that confer tumor cell motility should allow identification of
novel targets for disrupting this process and preventing tumor dissemination. Tumor cell motility can be correlated with metastatic behavior. When parameters such as
pseudopod extension, membrane ruffling, or vectorial translation are measured, a quantitative increase in highly invasive and metastatic tumor cells is seen when
compared with nonmetastatic counterparts. A variety of stimuli have been shown to stimulate tumor cell motility in vitro, including host-derived factors, growth factors,
and tumor-secreted factors that function in an autocrine fashion to stimulate tumor cell motility. Autocrine motility factor is a 60-kD glycoprotein produced by human
melanoma cells that stimulates tumor cell migration. Autocrine motility factor has been identified as neuroleukin/phosphohexose isomerase. 100,101 Autotaxin (ATX) is a
125-kD glycoprotein that elicits chemotactic and chemokinetic responses at picomolar to nanomolar concentrations in human melanoma cells. ATX contains a peptide
sequence identified as the catalytic site in type I alkaline phosphodiesterases (PDEs), and it possesses 5-nucleotide PDE [EC 3.1.4.1 (Enzyme Commission
designation for this enzymatic activity)] activity. 102,103 and 104 ATX binds adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and is phosphorylated only on threonine. Thr210 at the PDE
active site of ATX is required for phosphorylation, 5-nucleotide PDE, and motility-stimulating activities. ATX also has adenosine-5-triphosphatase (ATPase) and ATP
pyrophosphatase activities. ATX catalyzes the hydrolysis of GTP to guanosine diphosphate and guanosine monophosphate, of either adenosine monophosphate or
inorganic pyrophosphate to inorganic phosphate, and the hydrolysis of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide to adenosine monophosphate, and each of these substrates
can serve as a phosphate donor in the phosphorylation of ATX. ATX possesses no detectable protein kinase activity toward histone, myelin basic protein, or casein.
These results have led to the proposal that ATX is capable of at least two alternative reaction mechanisms—threonine (T-type) ATPase and 5-nucleotide PDE/ATP
pyrophosphatase—with a common site (Thr210) for the formation of covalently bound reaction intermediates, threonine phosphate and threonine adenylate,
respectively.103
PROTEASES IN TUMOR CELL INVASION
As has been noted, matrix proteolysis has been recognized as a key part of the mechanism of tumor cell invasion. Tumor cells must be able to move through
connective tissue barriers, such as the basement membrane, to spread from their site of origin. Although a variety of proteases have been implicated in this process,
the family of proteases that has received the most attention has been the matrixins or MMPs. Matrixins and their specific inhibitors, the TIMPs, play important roles in
normal physiology, because the ECM is a dynamic matrix of structural proteins, growth factors, and latent enzymes that is constantly being remodeled. Approximately
20 matrixins and four TIMPs have been characterized in humans and other animals. 105,106 The matrixins share a common domain structure (Fig. 8-5), although not all
domains are represented in all family members. All of the enzymes have a signal peptide sequence; a propeptide domain (prodomain); a catalytic domain, which
includes a highly conserved binding site for the catalytic zinc ion; and a hemopexin-like domain. Two family members, MMP-2 and MMP-9, have a gelatin binding
domain containing three fibronectin type II repeats inserted into the catalytic domain just on the amino side of the active site sequence. Five family members have a
carboxy-terminal transmembrane domain after the hemopexin domain. This subgroup is also known as the membrane-type MMPs. They reside on the cell surface, in
contrast to the other family members, which are all secreted as proenzymes into the extracellular milieu. The TIMPs also share a high level of homology, including 12
absolutely conserved cysteine residues that are all involved in intramolecular disulfide bonds. TIMPs are divided into two domains by the disulfide-bonding pattern. An
amino-terminal domain contains the inhibitory site, and a carboxy-terminal domain has other binding interactions. Because most of the MMP enzymes are secreted in
their proenzyme forms, activation is a key regulatory step. Many of the matrixins are activated by an initial protease cleavage within the prodomain by another matrixin
or by a serine protease, such as plasmin or urokinase-type plasminogen activator. This cleavage destabilizes the bond between a conserved prodomain cysteine
sulfhydryl group and the catalytic zinc in the active site. The bond breaks and the prodomain is released, which frees the active site for catalysis. Unlike the other
family members, which are typically activated outside the cell, MMP-13 and the membrane-type MMP subgroup are activated intracellularly by a furin-dependent
cleavage of a conserved RXKR sequence that lies between the prodomain and the catalytic domain. The activation mechanisms have been the subject of a review by
Murphy et al. 107

FIGURE 8-5. Simplified schematic domain structure of the matrixin family members. Most matrixins have the same basic domain structure, consisting of signal, pro,
catalytic, hinge, and hemopexin-like domains. Matrix metalloproteinase 7 (MMP-7) lacks the hemopexin-like domain, and the gelatinases and membrane-type (MT)
matrixins have additional domains. The arrow indicates the location of the furin RXKR cleavage site of MMP-11 and the MT matrixins. The length of each segment is
roughly proportional to the number of amino acids that comprise the domain.

An early indication of the importance of matrixins in tumor biology was the characterization in 1980 of a MMP secreted from a melanoma cell line that was able to
degrade basement membrane collagen.108,109 This finding was followed by numerous studies showing that secretion of matrixins enhanced tumor cell invasion in
experimental model systems and that inhibition of protease activity by TIMPs or by synthetic metalloproteinase inhibitors impeded invasion. For example, the invasion
of HT-1080 fibrosarcoma cells through Matrigel (a reconstituted basement membrane) is enhanced by addition of activated MMP-2 and inhibited by the addition of
TIMP-2 or by zinc chelators. 110In vitro evidence has been supported by the results of in vivo experiments using transfected cell lines. For example, when MYU3L
bladder carcinoma cells are transfected with mmp-2, they have enhanced metastatic potential, whereas transfecting the highly metastatic LMC19 cell line with timp-2
reduces its metastatic potential. 111,112 Mice genetically engineered to overexpress MMP-3 in breast epithelial cells develop spontaneous breast carcinomas, possibly
through the effects of MMP-3 on the E-cadherin/b-catenin system. 35
Although these experiments and many others like them have demonstrated the key role of matrixin-initiated degradation in tumor invasion and metastasis, the role of
these enzymes in this process is more complicated than an “degradation equals invasion” paradigm would suggest. Uninhibited matrix degradation would lead to
complete dissolution of matrix proteins and would prevent tumor cells from being able to form attachments to each other or to matrix proteins, which is a necessary
part of the tumor invasion mechanism. Thus, there is an implied balance between active proteases and inhibitors that results in an optimal invasive phenotype. As a
demonstration of this principle, when A2058 melanoma cells are transfected with either sense or antisense timp-2, the invasive potential is decreased. Increasing
TIMP-2 expression in this cell line enhances cell attachment and decreases motility, whereas decreasing expression decreases both cell attachment and motility.
Thus, although protease action in tumor cell invasion is abnormal, it cannot be totally unregulated.
Matrixins have been shown to have effects other than removal of structural barriers to invasion. As noted above, some matrixins act on other proteins to reveal hidden
activity. MMP-2 specifically degrades the g2 chain of laminin-5, a structural protein in basement membrane, to reveal a site on the a3 chain that has chemotactic
properties. 113 The physiologic role of this fragment may be to act as a wound-related chemoattractant; in tumors, however, this peptide may attract tumor cells to
breaks in the basement membrane. In an analogous situation, MMPs have been shown to degrade plasminogen into angiostatin, the angiogenesis inhibitor. 114,115
Research has focused on the interaction between cell surface adhesion molecules and the matrixin family. One obvious interaction is the simple degradation of cell
surface adhesion molecules. For example, MMP-3 degrades E-cadherin on mammary epithelial cells, inducing an increased expression of vimentin and decreased
expression of keratin. 34 The cell-matrix adhesion molecule CD44 is also cleaved by matrixins, permitting detachment from the matrix. 116 Decreased cell-cell or
cell-matrix adhesion can be a proinvasive phenotype. However, beyond mere degradation of adhesion molecules, cells may control the scope of degradative activity
by binding the soluble matrixins with cell surface adhesion molecules, thus limiting degradation to a zone in the immediate vicinity of the cell. On endothelial cells, the
integrin a vb3 binds MMP-2 through the matrixin's hemopexin domain in response to angiogenic stimuli. 117,118 Similarly, CD44 has been shown to bind MMP-9 to the
surface of breast carcinoma and melanoma cells. 60 Interestingly, stimulation of melanoma cells by antibodies to CD44 increased expression of MMP-2, 119 suggesting
that binding of matrixins to cell surface receptors might not only provide a mechanism for localizing protease activity but also may serve as an autocrine-stimulating
loop mechanism for increased expression of matrixins.

INTRAVASATION, EXTRAVASATION, AND ORTHOTOPIC EFFECT
The mechanisms of tumor cell intravasation have not been investigated as intensively as the other events in the metastatic cascade. This is due in part to the lack of
suitable model systems. A clear role for protease activity in tumor cell intravasation has been demonstrated using the chick chorioallantoic membrane system. 120 In
this model, human tumor cells are placed directly onto a chorioallantoic membrane in which the epithelium and basement membrane have been disrupted, allowing
tumor cells direct access to the underlying connective tissue that is highly vascularized. Tumor cell intravasation is then quantitated by using polymerase chain
reaction amplification of human-specific Alu genomic DNA sequences of tumor cells present in the chorioallantoic membrane on the other side of the chick embryo
from the initial tumor cell inoculation. These experiments demonstrate that MMPs, as well as urokinase-type plasminogen activator and the urokinase-type
plasminogen activator receptor, are involved in tumor cell intravasation.
Researchers121,122 have used intravital videomicroscopy to study the events and mechanisms involved in tumor cell extravasation from the circulation. The results of
these studies have profoundly changed our thinking about the metastatic process. It appears that a large number (80%) of circulating tumor cells remain viable in the
circulation and extravasate up to 3 days after their introduction into the circulation. Surprisingly, both metastatic and nonmetastatic cells extravasate, and this process
is not protease-dependent. However, only a small subset of cells (1 in 40) grow to form micrometastases, and even fewer (1 in 100) continue to grow, forming
macroscopic tumors. Almost 40% of injected tumor cells remained as dormant solitary cancer cells. These findings suggest that the control of postextravasation
growth of individual cancer cells is a dominant effect in metastatic inefficiency. More recent data suggest that the local environment of the target organ may profoundly
influence the growth potential of extravasated tumor cells. The importance of tissue microenvironment (host) on growth of the primary tumor is well known and is
referred to as orthotopic effect.123
Xenografts of human metastatic tumor cells in nude or SCID (severe combined immunodeficiency) mice infrequently recapitulate the behavior of the parent tumor to
show a spontaneously metastatic phenotype. When injected intravenously, however, many of these same human tumor cells are capable of experimental metastasis
formation in what are known as lung colonization assays. In pioneering experiments, 124,125 and 126 it has been demonstrated that this effect is due in part to important
tumor-host interactions that are not usually provided by models using subcutaneous injection of tumor xenografts. Using orthotopic implantation of tumor xenografts,
these investigators have demonstrated that the host microenvironment has a profound influence on a number of tumor cell parameters, 127 including tumor growth,
invasive behavior, 126 response to chemotherapeutic agents, 128,129 growth factor and cytokine production, 130,131 and protease profiles for both urokinase and
metalloproteinases. 132,133 and 134 An important host contribution to tumor progression is the frequent association of MMP production by stimulated stromal fibroblasts
adjacent to invading tumor cells. 135
During the 1990s, tremendous progress has been made in understanding the process of tumor cell invasion and metastasis formation, which is being revealed as a
complex cascade of both promoting agents and suppressors. Loss of function (suppressor inactivation) may occur not only in the tumor cell but also in the host. Such
tumor cell-host interactions are complex and difficult to examine in a controlled fashion. However, understanding these complexities is the future of research on
cancer metastasis and tumor dissemination. The goal of this research will be the development of new strategies for eradication of established metastases and
prevention of new metastatic growth.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Butler TP, Gullino P. Quantitation of cell shedding into efferent blood vessels of mammary adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res 1975;35:512.
2. Liotta LA, Kleinerman J, Saidel G. Quantitative relationships of intravascular tumor cells, tumor vessels and pulmonary metastasis. Cancer Res 1974;34:977.
3. Thorgeirsson UP, et al. NIH/3T3 cells transfected with human tumor DNA containing activated ras oncogenes express the metastatic phenotype in nude mice. Mol Cell Biol 1985;5:259.
4. Tuck AB, Wilson SM, Chambers AF. ras transfection and expression does not induce progression from tumorigenicity to metastatic ability in mouse LTA cells. Clin Exp Metastasis 1990;8:417.
5. Pozzatti R, et al. Primary rat embryo cells transformed by one or two oncogenes show different metastatic potentials. Science 1986;232:223.
6. Sreenath T, et al. Expression of matrix metalloproteinase genes in transformed rat cell lines of high and low metastatic potential. Cancer Res 1992;52:4942.
7. Gimbrone MAJ, et al. Tumor dormancy in vivo by prevention of neovascularization. J Exp Med 1972;136:261.
8. Brem S, et al. Prolonged tumor dormancy by prevention of neovascularization in the vitreous. Cancer Res 1976;36:2807.
9. Hanahan D, Folkman J. Patterns and emerging mechanisms of the angiogenic switch during tumorigenesis. Cell 1996;86:353.
10. Liotta LA, Saidel MG, Kleinerman J. The significance of hematogenous tumor cell clumps in the metastatic process. Cancer Res 1976;36:889.
11. Vermeulen PB, et al. Quantification of angiogenesis in solid human tumours: an international consensus on the methodology and criteria of evaluation. Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:2474.
12. Weidner N. Tumoural vascularity as a prognostic factor in cancer patients: the evidence continues to grow [Editorial]. J Pathol 1998;184:119.
13. Weidner N. Intratumoral vascularity as a prognostic factor in cancers of the urogenital tract. Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:2506.
14. Holash J, Maisonpierre PC, Compton D, et al. Vessel cooption, regression, and growth in tumors mediated by angiopoietins and VEGF. Science 1999;284:1994.
15. Dawson DW, et al. Pigment epithelium-derived factor: a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis. Science 1999;285:245.

16. O'Reilly MS, et al. Angiostatin: a novel angiogenesis inhibitor that mediates the suppression of metastases by a Lewis lung carcinoma [see comments]. Cell 1994;79:315.
17. O'Reilly MS, et al. Angiostatin induces and sustains dormancy of human primary tumors in mice. Nat Med 1996;2:689.
18. O'Reilly MS, et al. Endostatin: an endogenous inhibitor of angiogenesis and tumor growth. Cell 1997;88:277.
19. O'Reilly MS, et al. Antiangiogenic activity of the cleaved conformation of the serpin antithrombin [see comments]. Science 1999;285:1926.
20. Bergers G, et al. Effects of angiogenesis inhibitors on multistage carcinogenesis in mice. Science 1999;284:808.
21. Liotta LA, Steeg PS, Stetler-Stevenson WG. Cancer metastasis and angiogenesis: an imbalance of positive and negative regulation. Cell 1991;64:327.
22. Fidler IJ, Kripke ML. Metastasis results from preexisting variant cells within a malignant tumor. Science 1977;197:893.
23. Fidler IJ, Gersten DM, Hart IR. The biology of cancer invasion and metastasis. Adv Cancer Res 1978;28:149.
24. Fidler IJ, Hart IR. Biological diversity in metastatic neoplasms: origins and implications. Science 1982;217:998.
25. Waghorne C, et al. Genetic evidence for progressive selection and overgrowth of primary tumors by metastatic cell subpopulations. Cancer Res 1988;48:6109.
26. Kerbel RS, Cornil I, Korezak B. New insights into the evolutionary growth of tumors revealed by Southern gel analysis of tumors genetically tagged with plasmid or proviral DNA insertions. J
Cell Sci 1989;94(Pt 3):381.
27. Kerbel RS. Growth dominance of the metastatic cancer cell: cellular and molecular aspects. Adv Cancer Res 1990;55:87.
28. Stetler-Stevenson WG, Aznavoorian S, Liotta LA. Tumor cell interactions with the extracellular matrix during invasion and metastasis. Annu Rev Cell Biol, 1993;9:541.
29. Suzuki ST. Protocadherins and diversity of the cadherin superfamily. J Cell Sci 1996;109:2609.
30. Takeichi M. Morphogenic roles of classical cadherins. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1995;7:619.
31. Bracke ME, van Roy FM, Mareel MM. The E-cadherin/catenin complex in invasion and metastasis. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1996;213(Pt 1):123.
32. Birchmeier W, Behrens J. Cadherin expression in carcinomas: role in the formation of cell junctions and the prevention of invasiveness. Biochem Biophys Acta 1994;1198:11.
33. Graff JR. Distinct patterns of E-cadherin CpG island methylation in papillary, follicular, Hürthle's cell, and poorly differentiated human thyroid carcinoma. Cancer Res 1998;58:2063.
34. Lochter A, et al. Matrix metalloproteinase stromelysin-1 triggers a cascade of molecular alterations that lead to stable-epithelial-to-mesenchymal conversion and a premalignant phenotype in
mammary epithelial cells. J Cell Biol 1997;139:1861.
35. Sternlicht MD, et al. The stromal proteinase MMP3/stromelysin-1 promotes mammary carcinogenesis. Cell 1999;98:137.
36. Lee SW. H-cadherin, a novel cadherin with growth inhibitory functions and diminished expression in human breast cancer. Nat Med 1996;2:776.
37. He TC, et al. Identification of c-MYC as a target of the APC pathway. Science 1998;281:1509.
38. Tetsu O, McCormick F. b-Catenin regulated expression of cyclin D1 in colon carcinoma cells. Nature 1999;398:422.
39. Johnson JP. Identification of molecules associated with the development of metastasis in human malignant melanoma. Invasion Metastasis 1994;14:123.
40. St-Pierre Y, et al. Dissemination of T cell lymphoma to target organs: a post-homing event implicating ICAM-1 and matrix metalloproteinases. Leuk Lymphoma 1999;34:53.
41. Umansky V, Schirrmacher V, Rocha M. New insights into tumor-host interactions in lymphoma metastasis. J Mol Med 1996;74:353.
42. Johnson JP. Cell adhesion molecules of the immunoglobulin supergene family and their role in malignant transformation and progression to metastatic disease. Cancer Metastasis Rev
1991;10:11.
43. Pantel K, et al. Early metastasis of human solid tumours: expression of cell adhesion molecules. Ciba Found Symp 1995;189:157; discussion, 170.
44. Albelda SM. Role of integrins and other cell adhesion molecules in tumor progression and metastasis. Lab Invest 1993;68:4.
45. Paavonen T, et al. In vivo evidence of the roll of a4b1-VCAM interaction in sarcome, but carcinoma extravasation. Int J Cancer 1994;58:298.
46. Garofolo A, et al. Involvement of the very late antigen 4-integrin on melanoma in interleukin-1-augmented experimental metastasis. Cancer Res 1995;55:414.
47. Goodfellow PN, et al. The gene, MIC4, which controls expression of the antigen defined by monoclonal antibody F10.44.2, is on human chromosome 11. Eur J Immunol 1982;12:659.
48. Screaton GR, et al. Genomic structure of DNA encoding the lymphocyte homing receptor CD44 reveals at least 12 alternatively spliced exons. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:12160.
49. van Weering DH, Baas PD, Bos JL. A PCR-based method for the analysis of human CD44 splice products. PCR Methods Appl 1993;3:100.
50. Bennett KL, et al. Regulation of CD44 binding to hyaluronan by glycosylation of variably spliced exons. J Cell Biol 1995;131(Pt 1):1623.
51. Jalkanen S, et al. Lymphocyte homing and clinical behavior of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Invest 1991;87:1835.
52. Pals ST, et al. Expression of lymphocyte homing receptor as a mechanism of dissemination in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1989;73:885.
53. Sneath RJ, Mangham DC. The normal structure and function of CD44 and its role in neoplasia. Mol Pathol 1998;51:191.
54. Gunthert U, et al. A new variant of glycoprotein CD44 confers metastatic potential to rat carcinoma cells. Cell 1991;65:13.
55. Seiter S, et al. Prevention of tumor metastasis formation by anti-variant CD44. J Exp Med 1993;177:443.
56. Yu Q, Toole BP, Stamenkovic I. Induction of apoptosis of metastatic mammary carcinoma cells in vivo by disruption of tumor cell surface CD44 function. J Exp Med 1997;186:1985.
57. Sy MS, Guo YJ, Stamenkovic I. Distinct effects of two CD44 isoforms on tumor growth in vivo. J Exp Med 1991;174:859.
58. Bartolazzi A, et al. Interaction between CD44 and hyaluronate is directly implicated in the regulation of tumor development. J Exp Med 1994;180:53.
59. Culty M, et al. Binding and degradation of hyaluronan by human breast cancer cell lines expressing different forms of CD44: correlation with invasive potential. J Cell Physiol 1994;160:275.
60. Yu Q, Stamenkovic I. Localization of matrix metalloproteinase 9 to the cell surface provides a mechanism for CD44-mediated tumor invasion. Genes Dev 1999;13:35.
61. Giancotti FG, Ruoslahti E. Integrin signaling. Science 1999;285:1028.
62. Hynes RO, Lander AD. Contact and adhesive specificities in the associations, migrations, and targeting of cells and axons. Cell 1992;68:303.
63. Clark EA, Brugge JS. Integrins and signal transduction pathways: the road taken. Science 1995;268:233.
64. Yamada K. Integrin signaling. Matrix Biol 1997;16:137.
65. Zhang Z, et al. Integrin activation by R-ras. Cell 1996;85:61.
66. Hughes PE, et al. Suppression of integrin activation: a novel function of a Ras/Raf-initiated MAP kinase pathway. Cell 1997;88:521.
67. Howe A, et al. Integrin signaling and cell growth control. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1998;10:220.
68. Miyamoto S, Akiyama SK, Yamada KM. Synergistic roles for receptor occupancy and aggregation in integrin transmembrane function. Science 1995;267:883.
69. Porter JC, Hogg N. Integrins take partners: cross-talk between integrins and other membrane receptors. Trends Cell Biol 1998;8:390.
70. Klernke RL, et al. Regulation of cell motility by mitogen-activated protein kinase. J Cell Biol 1997;137:481.
71. Tamura M, et al. PTEN gene and integrin signaling in cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1820.
72. Schlaepfer DD, Broome MA, Hunter T. Fibronectin-stimulated signaling from a focal adhesion kinase-c-Src complex: involvement of the Grb2, p130cas, and Nck adaptor proteins. Mol Cell Biol
1997;17:1702.
73. Chen HC, et al. Phosphorylation of tyrosine 397 in focal adhesion kinase is required for binding phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. J Biol Chem 1996;271:26329.
74. Harder KW, et al. Protein-tyrosine phosphatase alpha regulates Src family kinases and alters cell-substratum adhesion. J Biol Chem 1998;273:31890.
75. Shen Y, et al. Direct association of protein-tyrosine phosphatase PTP-PEST with paxillin. J Biol Chem 1998;273:6474.
76. Angers-Loustau A, et al. Protein tyrosine phosphatase-PEST regulates focal adhesion disassembly, migration, and cytokinesis in fibroblasts. J Cell Biol 1999;144:1019.
77. Tamura M, et al. Inhibition of cell migration, spreading, and focal adhesions by tumor suppressor PTEN. Science 1998;280:1614.
78. Varner JA, Emerson DA, Juliano RL. Integrin alpha 5 beta 1 expression negatively regulates cell growth: reversal by attachment to fibronectin. Mol Biol Cell 1995;6:725.
79. Zutter MM, et al. Re-expression of the alpha 2 beta 1 integrin abrogates the malignant phenotype of breast carcinoma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:7411.
80. Danen EH, et al. Alpha v-integrins in human melanoma: gain of alpha v beta 3 and loss of alpha v beta 5 are related to tumor progression in situ but not to metastatic capacity of cell lines in
nude mice [published erratum appears in Int J Cancer 1995;62:365]. Int J Cancer 1995;61:491.
81. Albelda SM, et al. Integrin distribution in malignant melanoma: association of the beta 3 subunit with tumor progression. Cancer Res 1990;50:6757.
82. Mitjans F, et al. An anti-alpha v-integrin antibody that blocks integrin function inhibits the development of a human melanoma in nude mice. J Cell Sci 1995;108(Pt 8):2825.
83. Costantini RM, et al. Integrin (alpha 6/beta 4) expression in human lung cancer as monitored by specific monoclonal antibodies. Cancer Res 1990;50:6107.
84. Gaetano C, et al. Retinoic acid negatively regulates beta 4 integrin expression and suppresses the malignant phenotype in a Lewis lung carcinoma cell line. Clin Exp Metastasis 1994;12:63.
85. Liebert M, et al. The monoclonal antibody BQ16 identifies the alpha 6 beta 4 integrin on bladder cancer. Hybridoma 1993;12:67.
86. Van Waes C, Carey TE. Overexpression of the A9 antigen/alpha 6 beta 4 integrin in head and neck cancer. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1992;25:1117.
87. Van Waes C, et al. The A9 antigen associated with aggressive human squamous carcinoma is structurally and functionally similar to the newly defined integrin alpha 6 beta 4. Cancer Res
1991;51:2395.
88. Lauffenburger DA, Horowitz AF. Cell migration: a physically integrated molecular process. Cell 1996;84:359.
89. Gumbiner BM. Cell adhesion: the molecular basis of tissue architecture and morphogenesis. Cell 1996;84:345.
90. Mitchison TJ, Cramer LP. Actin-base cell motility and cell locomotion. Cell 1996;84:371.
91. Tapon N, Hall A. Rho, Rac and Cdc42 GTPases regulate the organization of the actin cytoskeleton. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1997;9:86.
92. Sheetz MP, Felsenfeld DP, Galbraith CG. Cell migration: regulation of force on extracellular-matrix-integrin complexes. Trends Cell Biol 1998;8:51.
93. Choquet D, Felsenfeld DP, Sheetz MP. Extracellular matrix rigidity causes strengthening of integrin-cytoskeleton linkages. Cell 1997;88:39.
94. Felsenfeld DP, et al. Selective regulation of integrincytoskeleton interactions by the tyrosine kinase Src. Nat Cell Biol 1999;1:200.
95. Smilenov LB, et al. Focal adhesion motility revealed in stationary fibroblasts. Science 1999;286:1172.
96. Palecek SP, et al. Integrin-ligand binding properties govern cell migration speed through cell-substratum adhesiveness [published erratum appears in Nature 1997;388:210]. Nature
1997;385:537.
97. Palecek SP, et al. Integrin dynamics on the tail region of migrating fibroblasts. J Cell Sci 1996;109(Pt 5):941.
98. Niggemann B, et al. Locomotory phenotypes of human tumor cell lines and T lymphocytes in a three-dimensional collagen lattice. Cancer Lett 1997;118:173.
99. Huttenlocher A, et al. Regulation of cell migration by the calcium-dependent protease calpain. J Biol Chem 1997;272:32719.
100. Niinaka Y, et al. Expression and secretion of neuroleukin/phosphohexose isomerase/maturation factor as autocrine motility factor by tumor cells. Cancer Res 1998;58:2667.
101. Watanabe H, et al. Tumor cell autocrine motility factor is the neuroleukin/phosphohexose isomerase polypeptide. Cancer Res 1996;56:2960.
102. Murata J, et al. cDNA cloning of the human tumor motility-stimulating protein, autotaxin, reveals a homology with phosphodiesterases. J Biol Chem 1994;269:30479.
103. Clair T, et al. Autotaxin is an exoenzyme possessing 5-nucleotide phosphodiesterase/ATP pyrophosphatase and ATPase activities. J Biol Chem 1997;272:996.
104. Lee HY, et al. Stimulation of tumor cell motility linked to phosphodiesterase catalytic site of autotaxin. J Biol Chem 1996;271:24408.
105. Kleiner DE, Stetler-Stevenson G. Matrix metalloproteinases and metastasis. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1999;43:S42.
106. Nagase H, Woessner JF. Matrix metalloproteinases. J Biol Chem 1999;274:21491.
107. Murphy G, et al. Mechanisms for pro matrix metalloproteinase activation. APMIS 1999;107:38.
108. Liotta LA, et al. Metastatic potential correlates with enzymatic degradation of basement membrane collagen. Nature 1980;284:67.
109. Salo T, Liotta LA, Tryggvason K. Purification and characterization of a murine basement membrane collagen-degrading enzyme secreted by metastatic tumor cells. J Biol Chem 1983;258:3058.
110. Albini A, et al. Tumor cell invasion inhibited by TIMP-2. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:775.
111. Kawamata H, et al. Marked acceleration of the metastatic phenotype of a rat bladder carcinoma cell line by the expression of human gelatinase A. Int J Cancer 1995;63:568.
112. Kawamata H, et al. Over-expression of tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMP1 and TIMP2) suppresses extravasation of pulmonary metastasis of a rat bladder carcinoma. Int J
Cancer 1995;63:680.
113. Giannelli G, et al. Induction of cell migration by matrix metalloprotease-2 cleavage of laminin-5. Science 1997;277:225.
114. O'Reilly MS, et al. Regulation of angiostatin production by matrix metalloproteinase-2 in a model of concomitant resistance. J Biol Chem 1999;274:29568.
115. Dong ZY, et al. Macrophage-derived metalloelastase is responsible for the generation of angiostatin in Lewis lung carcinoma. Cell 1997;88:801.
116. Okamoto I, et al. CD44 cleavage induced by a membrane-associated metalloprotease plays a critical role in tumor cell migration. Oncogene 1999;18:1435.
117. Brooks PC, et al. Disruption of angiogenesis by PEX, a noncatalytic metalloproteinase fragment with integrin binding activity. Cell 1998;92:391.

118. Brooks PC, et al. Localization of matrix metalloproteinase MMP-2 to the surface of invasive cells by interaction with integrin alpha v beta 3. Cell 1996;85:683.
119. Takahashi K, Eto H, Tanabe KK. Involvement of CD44 in matrix metalloproteinase-2 regulation in human melanoma cells. Int J Cancer 1999;80:387.
120. Kim J, et al. Requirement for specific proteases in cancer cell intravasation as revealed by a novel semiquantitative PCR-based assay. Cell 1998;94:353.
121. Chambers AF, et al. Steps in tumor metastasis: new concepts from intravital videomicroscopy. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1995;14:279.
122. Luzzi KJ, et al. Multistep nature of metastatic inefficiency: dormancy of solitary cells after successful extravasation and limited survival of early micrometastases. Am J Pathol 1998;153:865.
123. Naumov GN, et al. Cellular expression of green fluorescent protein, coupled with high-resolution in vivo videomicroscopy, to monitor steps in tumor metastasis. J Cell Sci 1999;112(Pt 12):1835.
124. Pettaway CA, et al. Selection of highly metastatic variants of different human prostatic carcinomas using orthotopic implantation in nude mice. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:1627.
125. Dinney CP, et al. Isolation and characterization of metastatic variants from human transitional cell carcinoma passaged by orthotopic implantation in athymic nude mice. J Urol 1995;154:1532.
126. Fabra A, et al. Modulation of the invasive phenotype of human colon carcinoma cells by organ specific fibroblasts of nude mice. Differentiation 1992;52:101.
127. Stephenson RA, et al. Metastatic model for human prostate cancer using orthotopic implantation in nude mice. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:951.
128. Wilmanns C, et al. Orthotopic and ectopic organ environments differentially influence the sensitivity of murine colon carcinoma cells to doxorubicin and 5-fluorouracil. Int J Cancer 1992;52:98.
129. Fidler IJ, et al. Modulation of tumor cell response to chemotherapy by the organ environment. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1994;13:209.
130. Gutman M, et al. Regulation of interleukin-8 expression in human melanoma cells by the organ environment. Cancer Res 1995;55:2470.
131. Singh RK, et al. Organ site-dependent expression of basic fibroblast growth factor in human renal cell carcinoma cells. Am J Pathol 1994;145:365.
132. Nakajima M, et al. Influence of organ environment on extracellular matrix degradative activity and metastasis of human colon carcinoma cells [see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:1890.
133. Gohji K, et al. Regulation of gelatinase production in metastatic renal cell carcinoma by organ-specific fibroblasts. Jpn J Cancer Res 1994;85:152.
134. Gohji K, et al. Organ-site dependence for the production of urokinase-type plasminogen activator and metastasis by human renal cell carcinoma cells. Am J Pathol 1997;151:1655.
135. Chambers AF, Matrisian LM. Changing views of the role of matrix metalloproteinases in metastasis. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1260.

CHAPTER 9 Biology of Cancer: Angiogenesis
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 9
Biology of Cancer: Angiogenesis
ISAIAH J. FIDLER
ROBERT S. KERBEL
LEE M. ELLIS
Introduction
Neoplastic Angiogenesis: The Balance of Proangiogenic and Antiangiogenic Molecules
Lymphoid Cell–mediated Angiogenesis
Regulation of Angiogenic Factor Expression in Tumors
Endogenous Inhibitors of Angiogenesis
Clinical Utility of Angiogenesis
The Prognostic Significance of Tumor Angiogenesis
Overview of Antiangiogenic Strategies
Tumor Endothelium (“Activated Endothelium”) as Distinct from Normal Endothelium
Antiangiogenic Activity of Interferon
Antiangiogenic Therapy: Issues and Expectations
Antiangiogenic Therapy as a Component of Other Antineoplastic Regimens
Conclusions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
One crucial step for the continuous growth of tumors and the development of metastasis is the induction of vasculature (i.e., angiogenesis). 1,2 and 3 A tumor mass that is
less than 0.5 mm in diameter can receive oxygen and nutrients by diffusion, but any increase in tumor mass beyond 0.5 mm requires the proliferation and
morphogenesis of vascular endothelial cells. 2 The process of angiogenesis consists of multiple, sequential, and interdependent steps. It begins with local degradation
of the basement membrane surrounding capillaries, which is followed by invasion of the surrounding stroma by the underlying endothelial cells in the direction of the
angiogenic stimulus. Endothelial cell migration is accompanied by the proliferation of endothelial cells and their organization into three-dimensional structures that join
with other similar structures to form a network of new blood vessels ( Fig. 9-1).4

FIGURE 9-1. The angiogenic process. The process of angiogenesis is a series of linked and sequential steps that ultimately lead to the development of a neovascular
blood supply to the tumor mass. Different steps in the angiogenic process may be occurring in different parts of the tumor at the same time. Tumor cells or host cells
(infiltrating immune cells or adjacent normal tissue) secrete angiogenic growth factors, which then bind to specific receptors on endothelial cells. This ligand-receptor
interaction leads to endothelial cell proliferation, migration, invasion and, eventually, capillary tube formation. Factors also affect endothelial cell survival under
adverse conditions that occur in tumors. The proangiogenic process is balanced by the activity of antiangiogenic molecules that are necessary for homeostatic
processes. When the activity of the proangiogenic molecules exceeds the activity of the antiangiogenic molecules, new blood vessel formation occurs. Proangiogenic
factors may be constitutively expressed, but their expression may be increased by certain stimuli, such as hypoxia, low pH, cytokines, growth factors, tumor size,
activated oncogenes, signal transduction pathways, or loss of tumor suppressor gene function.

NEOPLASTIC ANGIOGENESIS: THE BALANCE OF PROANGIOGENIC AND ANTIANGIOGENIC MOLECULES
The onset of angiogenesis involves an alteration in the balance between proangiogenic and antiangiogenic molecules. 1,5 These molecules may mediate multiple steps
in the process of angiogenesis and also may affect the function of diverse cell types not involved in angiogenesis. A more refined definition of an angiogenic factor is
a factor that selectively alters the characteristics of endothelial cells and associated perivascular structures (i.e., pericytes, vascular smooth muscle cells) but does not
affect the function of other cell types. Table 9-1 lists most of the proangiogenic and antiangiogenic factors that have been well characterized to date.

TABLE 9-1. Proangiogenic Growth Factors

Vascular endothelial growth factor–vascular permeability factor (VEGF/VPF) was initially detected as a factor secreted by tumor cells into tissue culture medium or
ascites fluid in vivo.6 The factor was identified as a heparin-binding protein of molecular weight 34 to 42 kD and was termed VPF. It was later demonstrated that VPF
also stimulated endothelial cell division. 7 Independently, several groups isolated a secreted protein that had selective mitogenic activity for cultured endothelial cells,
which they called VEGF.8,9 On the basis of amino acid and complementary DNA sequence analysis, it is now known that VEGF and VPF are the same protein, 10 and
VEGF is the term more commonly used to describe this angiogenic factor.
VEGF is a homodimeric heparin-binding glycoprotein that exists in at least four isoforms due to alternative splicing of the primary messenger RNA (mRNA) transcript.
The isoforms are designated VEGF121, VEGF165, VEGF189, and VEGF 205, according to the number of amino acids that each protein contains. 10 The vascular
permeability induced by VEGF is 50,000 times that induced by histamine, the standard for induction of permeability. 11 Induction of permeability by VEGF allows for the

diffusion of proteins into the interstitium on which endothelial cells migrate.
The receptors for VEGF are expressed almost exclusively on endothelial cells. Rarely, expression of the various VEGF receptors has been demonstrated on cells of
neural origin, Kaposi's sarcoma cells, hematopoietic precursor cells, and other rare tumor cell types. 12,13 Three VEGF/VPF receptors have been identified. The
fms-like tyrosine kinase (Flt-1) and fetal liver kinase 1/kinase insert domain–containing receptor (Flk-1/KDR) are high-affinity VEGF/VPF receptors with an
extracellular domain containing seven immunoglobulin-like domains and a split tyrosine kinase intracellular domain. 8 Flk-1 has 85% homology with the human
homologue, KDR. Both Flt-1 and Flk-1/KDR have been shown to be important regulatory systems for vasculogenesis and physiologic angiogenesis. 14 However, the
interaction of VEGF/VPF with Flk-1/KDR is believed to be the more important interaction for tumor angiogenesis, as it is essential for induction of the full spectrum of
VEGF/VPF functions.8 In fact, many compounds and molecules developed to block VEGF/VPF activities mediated by Flk-1/KDR have been shown to have
antiangiogenic activity in animal models. 14 Most recently, VEGFR-3 (Flt-4) has been shown to be the receptor for VEGF-C, which is most likely involved with lymph
angiogenesis. 14
There are at least four other members of the VEGF family. The above-referenced VEGF is referred to as VEGF-A. VEGF-B most likely plays an important role in
vasculogenesis but may have other functions such as activation of invasive enzymes on endothelial cells. 14,15VEGF-C is most commonly associated with lymph
angiogenesis but, more recently, its expression has been associated with tumor angiogenesis in several systems. 16,17,18 and 19 VEGF-C also binds preferentially to the
VEGFR-3. The role of VEGF-D is less well defined, but this protein may bind to VEGFR-2 and VEGFR-3 and may induce in vivo angiogenesis. 20,21 Little is known
about VEGF-E, except that it binds to VEGF-R2 and can induce endothelial cell mitosis and angiogenesis. 22,23
Another family of endothelial cell–specific molecules is the angiopoietin (Ang) family. At present, its members are designated angiopoietins 1 through 4. The best
characterized of these factors are Ang-1 and Ang-2. Ang-1 and -2 bind to the specific tyrosine kinase receptor Tie-2 on endothelial cells. Ang-1 acts as an agonist and
is involved in endothelial cell differentiation and stabilization. 24 In contrast, Ang-2 binds to Tie-2 and blocks the binding of Ang-1 to this receptor. 25 This blockade
leads to endothelial cell destabilization and vascular regression. 26 Although the receptor Tie-1 has been identified on endothelial cells, its ligand remains to be
identified.
An insightful method for studying the function of various angiogenesis-related molecules is to develop knockout mice for the gene under question. Homozygous
knockout of the genes for VEGF or any of the VEGF receptors lead to embryonic death in mice (reviewed in Gale and Yancopoulos 27). Study of these embryos at the
time of death reveals defective vascular development. Similarly, knockout of the genes for Ang-1, Ang-2, Tie-1, and Tie-2 also lead to embryonic lethality and
defective vascular development in mice. 28,29 Thus, these factors that are being controlled in such mice are critical for vasculogenesis and likely play an essential role
in tumor angiogenesis as well.
Numerous nonspecific angiogenic molecules affect not only the growth of endothelial cells but also the growth of other cell types. These factors include the fibroblast
growth factors (FGF), acidic and basic; transforming growth factor-a (TGF-a); and epidermal growth factor (EGF); platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF);
platelet-derived endothelial cell growth factor (PD-ECGF); angiogenin; and the CXC chemokines interleukin-8 (IL-8), macrophage inflammatory protein-1(MIP),
platelet factor-4(PF-4), and growth-related oucogene-a(GRO-a). 30
The process of angiogenesis is dynamic and complex. In fact, the development of a neovascular blood supply is a series of interlinked processes that eventually leads
to new blood vessel formation. Studies have demonstrated that different operations in the overall process of angiogenesis may be regulated by different angiogenic
factors. 31 For example, basic FGF (bFGF) is the most potent mitogen for endothelial cells, followed by VEGF and PD-ECGF. VEGF and bFGF are also the most
potent survival factors for endothelial cells. However, bFGF is the angiogenic factor most associated with increasing activity of degradative enzymes. Hepatocyte
growth factor enhances endothelial cell motility more than any other angiogenic factor studied. The more recent recognition of Ang-1 and -2 and their role in
endothelial cell stabilization suggests that these molecules are also important in endothelial cell survival. 26

LYMPHOID CELL–MEDIATED ANGIOGENESIS
Angiogenesis is essential to homeostasis, and its regulation by lymphoid cells, such as T lymphocytes, macrophages, and mast cells, is well recognized. 32,33,34 and 35 A
local inflammatory reaction consisting of T lymphocytes and macrophages often is associated with invasive cutaneous melanoma, and an intense inflammatory
reaction often is associated with an increased risk of metastasis, suggesting that angiogenesis induced by inflammation may contribute to melanoma progression and
metastasis.35
Immunologic mechanisms involved in physiologic angiogenesis are activated subsequent to wound healing. 33 Systemic chemotherapy has been shown to retard the
process of wound healing, possibly by decreasing the immune response; whether this is mediated by inhibition of angiogenesis is unclear. 36 We have investigated the
role of tumor vascularization and its effect on tumor growth in immunosuppressed mice. The growth of weakly immunogenic B16 melanoma was retarded in
myelosuppressed mice as compared with control mice. 35 Further evidence implicating myelosuppression in the retardation of tumor growth and vascularity was
obtained from doxorubicin-pretreated animals injected with normal spleen cells 1 day before tumor challenge. Tumor growth in these mice was comparable to that in
control mice.35 Similar results were obtained in athymic mice, suggesting that the tumor vascularization observed in doxorubicin-treated mice reconstituted with normal
splenocytes was not mediated solely by T lymphocytes. Because reconstitution with spleen cells enhanced vascularization of the B16 tumors, the results suggest that
myelosuppressive chemotherapeutic drugs (e.g., doxorubicin) can inhibit host-mediated vascularization and support the concept that developing tumors can usurp
homeostatic mechanisms to their advantage. 37
The role of infiltrating cells in the angiogenesis of human colon cancer has been reported. 38 High expression of PD-ECGF was found in infiltrating cells, mostly
macrophages and lymphocytes, though very little PD-ECGF was expressed in the cancer epithelium. The intensity of staining for PD-ECGF in infiltrating cells
correlated with vessel counts, suggesting the involvement of these cells in the angiogenesis of human colon cancer.
Macrophages have been recognized for a number of years as important angiogenesis effector cells. 32,33 They may influence new capillary growth by several different
mechanisms. First, macrophages produce factors that act directly to influence angiogenesis-linked endothelial cell functions. In vitro studies have shown that
macrophages produce in excess of 20 molecules that reportedly influence endothelial cell proliferation, migration, and differentiation in vitro32 and that are potentially
angiogenic in vivo. A second mechanism by which macrophages might modulate angiogenesis is by modifying the extracellular matrix (ECM). The composition of the
ECM has been shown to influence endothelial cell shape and morphology dramatically and may profoundly influence new capillary growth. 39 Macrophages can
influence the composition of the ECM either through the direct production of ECM components or through the production of proteases, which effectively alter the
structure and composition of the ECM. 33 A third mechanism is by producing substances that suppress angiogenesis. Macrophages have been shown to express the
angiogenesis inhibitor thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) when treated with the chemopreventive agent retinoic acid. 39,40 and 41
The generation of angiostatin by subcutaneous Lewis lung carcinoma 42 requires the presence of macrophages and is directly correlated with their metalloelastase
activity.43 For example, the addition of plasminogen to Lewis lung carcinoma (3LL) cells cultured in vitro did not result in generation of angiostatin, whereas the
addition of plasminogen to cocultures of macrophages and 3LL cells did. Elastase activity in macrophages was up-regulated by the cytokine granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). GM-CSF secreted by Lewis lung carcinoma cells significantly enhanced the production of elastase by macrophages and, hence,
the generation of angiostatin from plasminogen. 43 These data suggest that elastase released from tumor-infiltrating macrophages is responsible for the angiostatin
production in this tumor model and for the angiogenesis-inhibiting role of macrophages.

REGULATION OF ANGIOGENIC FACTOR EXPRESSION IN TUMORS
Tumor cells may constitutively overexpress angiogenic factors, or they may respond to external stimuli. The most potent external stimulus of angiogenic factor
expression is hypoxia. 44,45 Hypoxia is a consequence of tissue that is poorly perfused, and teleologically represents the appropriate response of a cell trying to
survive. Hypoxia typically increases angiogenic factor expression by inducing signal cascade pathways that eventually lead to an increase in transcription of VEGF as
well as stabilization of the mRNA transcript. The expression of other angiogenic factors such as angiogenin, PD-ECGF, and IL-8 may also be induced by hypoxia. 46,47
and 48
Other microenvironmental factors that increase the angiogenic response include various cytokines and growth factors. The cytokines, insulin growth factor-1,
insulin growth factor-2, EGF, hepatocyte growth factor, IL-1, and PDGF have all been shown to up-regulate VEGF. 49,50 and 51 Thus, antiangiogenic therapy may involve
down-regulation of upstream targets of the angiogenic factors rather than targeting of angiogenic factors themselves. 52,53 Furthermore, protein products of tumor

suppressor genes such as the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) or p53 gene also regulate angiogenesis. 54,55

ENDOGENOUS INHIBITORS OF ANGIOGENESIS
A large, growing, and structurally diverse family of endogenous protein inhibitors of angiogenesis has been discovered (e.g., TSP-1 56,57; the interferons IFN-a, -b, and
-g 58,59; the 16-kD fragment of prolactin 60; angiostatin42; endostatin61; VEGF or vascular endothelial cell growth inhibitor 62; vasostatin63; METH-1 and METH-264; and
cleavage products of platelet factor 4 65 or antithrombin III, 66 among many others (Table 9-2). Some of these are internal fragments of various proteins that normally
lack any antiangiogenic activity 67; for example, the active component of angiostatin comprises one or more fragments of plasminogen, 42 and endostatin is a fragment
of type XVIII collagen.61

TABLE 9-2. Some Endogenous Inhibitors of Angiogenesis

It is now thought that the tumor angiogenic switch is triggered as a result of a shift in the balance of stimulators to inhibitors. 5 When the ratio is low, tumor
angiogenesis is blocked or modest in magnitude; in contrast, when the ratio is high, the angiogenic switch is turned to the on position. 5 Of considerable interest is the
finding by Dameron et al. 56 that loss of wild-type p53 gene function resulted in a loss of TSP expression. Not only did this finding establish a possible critical link
between the genetic basis of cancer and tumor angiogenesis; it also opened up the now flourishing field of endogenous angiogenesis inhibitors. Furthermore, it is now
increasingly recognized that oncogenes, such as mutant ras or src, may also contribute to tumor angiogenesis by influencing (i.e., enhancing) the production of
proangiogenic molecules such as VEGF. 52,68,69 Such effects were slow to be uncovered in the oncogene and tumor suppressor gene fields, given the predominant use
of pure tumor cell culture systems to study the function of cancer-causing genetic alterations.

CLINICAL UTILITY OF ANGIOGENESIS
THE PROGNOSTIC SIGNIFICANCE OF TUMOR ANGIOGENESIS
With few exceptions, benign neoplasms are sparsely vascularized and tend to grow slowly, whereas malignant neoplasms are highly vascular and fast-growing. 1,2,4
The increase in vasculature also increases the probability that tumor cells will enter the circulation and possibly give rise to metastases. 3 Immunohistochemical
staining of breast cancer sections with antibodies against factor VIII, a protein expressed predominantly on the surface of endothelial cells, allowed Weidner et al. 70 to
determine the density of the microvasculature. The number of microvessels in microscopic fields selected from the most vascular areas (“hot spots”) of the sections
correlated directly with metastasis and inversely with survival.
Most recent studies have concluded that increased microvessel density in the areas of most intense neovascularization is a significant and independent prognostic
indicator in early-stage breast cancer. 70,71,72,73,74,75,76,77,78,79 and 80 Studies of other neoplasms such as prostate cancer, melanoma, ovarian carcinoma, gastric
carcinoma, and colon carcinoma also support the conclusion that the angiogenesis index is a useful prognostic factor. 81,82,83,84,85 and 86 However, the expectation that an
angiogenesis index can identify all patients with occult metastatic disease or those with probable distant metastases may be unrealistic for several reasons. 1,87 First,
human tumors are heterogeneous and consist of subpopulations of cells having different biologic properties. 88,89,90,91 and 92 Heterogeneity of angiogenic molecule
expression has recently been documented in human renal carcinomas and human colon. 93,94 Second, the process of cancer metastasis is sequential and selective,
consisting of a series of interlinked but independent steps. 89,92 To produce clinically relevant metastases, tumor cells must complete all the steps in this process.
Tumor cells that can induce intense angiogenesis but cannot survive in the circulation or proliferate in distant organs will not produce metastases. 89,92 Like all other
steps in the metastatic cascade, angiogenesis is necessary but not sufficient for the pathogenesis of a metastasis. Third, although not all large angiogenic tumors
metastasize, inhibition of angiogenesis prevents the growth of tumor cells at both the primary and secondary sites and thus can prevent the development of clinically
relevant metastases.42,61,67
To study angiogenesis in tumor specimens using current technology, it is necessary to obtain tissue for histologic evaluation. The criterion standard for evaluation of
human tumor specimens is to highlight the tumor endothelium with antibodies that differentiate endothelial cells from other cells within the tumor. 95 The first such
antibody used was factor VIII-RA (FVIII-RA), and this is still the antibody used in many studies reported in the literature. Other endothelial cell–specific antibodies that
are used in the study of angiogenesis include CD31/PECAM, CD34, CD36, TEC-11, and ulex europaeus(UEA). Currently, the antibodies most commonly used in the
study of angiogenesis are FVIII-RA, CD31, and CD34 antibodies. Once histologic preparation of a slide is complete, it is necessary to quantify the level of
angiogenesis within the tumor. It is essential that an investigator examine angiogenesis systematically. For example, investigators may choose the five most
vascularized areas in a tumor by scanning at low power and then count vessels in these areas under higher magnification. In certain tumors, such as colon cancer
and gastric cancer, it is necessary to define the location at which tumor counts are obtained, as counts made close to the invading edge of the tumor may be
significantly different from counts made further away from the invading edge. 82,83 The number of blood vessels in individual tumor specimens can be quantified either
as the number in a single high-power field or as the average number in several high-power fields.
In addition to counting blood vessels in a high-power field, it also is possible to grade the degree of vasculature on a scale of 0 to 3+, with 3+ being the most vascular.
Obviously, this approach is subjective and prone to problems of reproducibility. Another method of analyzing tumor angiogenesis involves highlighting the vessels with
an endothelial cell–specific antibody and, with the aid of computer imaging analysis, determining the area within a high-power field that is occupied by positively
stained cells. Access to imaging systems and computer software is necessary for this technique. A third method for quantifying the degree of angiogenesis is to count
the number of branch points in vessels within a tumor. Finally, a very common method employed in Europe is the Chalkley-Grid method. 96 In this methodology, an
eyepiece marked with overlapping crossbars is used to visualize the high-power field of a tumor stained with an endothelial cell–specific antibody. The areas where
an endothelial cell intersects a crossbar are counted, and the total sum in a high-power field of these counts is equal to the Chalkley score.
The recognition that tumors with a high angiogenic index may be associated with subsequent metastasis suggests that these patients may be the ones most likely to
benefit from adjuvant therapy. In a study evaluating the prognostic role of angiogenesis in late-stage lung carcinoma, adjuvant therapy improved survival in patients
with a high vessel count but not in patients with a low vessel count. 97 However, the observation that patients with highly angiogenic tumors benefit from adjuvant
therapy is not universal. In several studies of node-positive breast cancer patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy or hormonal therapy, those whose tumors had
a high microvessel density were found to have a worse prognosis than those whose tumors had a low microvessel density, despite adjuvant chemotherapy. 98,99 In fact,
one recent study suggested that patients with a low VEGF expression have a more favorable outcome secondary to adjuvant therapy. 100 Tumors with a high
angiogenic index may represent a biologically more aggressive variant of the disease, against which conventional adjuvant therapies are ineffective. Perhaps
antiangiogenic therapy is indicated in these patients. Obviously, well-controlled clinical trials should be designed to determine the efficacy of antiangiogenic therapy
as an adjunct in the treatment of patients with highly vascularized solid malignancies.
OVERVIEW OF ANTIANGIOGENIC STRATEGIES

Antiangiogenic agents currently used in the clinic can be categorized into several broad classes based on the biologic activity of the compounds used. The first class
of compounds, metalloproteinase inhibitors, blocks degradation of the basement membrane. Most of the studies on these agents reported to date have been phase I
studies in which major toxicity was associated with musculoskeletal and joint pain owing to defects in collagen remodeling.
A second class of antiangiogenic agents includes those designed to inhibit endothelial cell function. These include TNP-470, thalidomide, squalamine, combretastatin
A-4 prodrug, and endostatin. Less is known about the biologic effects of these drugs as compared to the first class, and most of these drugs are currently in phase I or
phase II trials. How these drugs exert their antiangiogenic activities in in vivo models is not fully elucidated at this time; perhaps well-designed clinical trials will shed
some light on their mechanisms of action.
A third class of antiangiogenic agents specifically targets an angiogenic factor or factors. These agents include tyrosine kinase inhibitors of the receptors of such
factors as VEGF, bFGF, and PDGF. In addition, antibodies directed against these receptors or the factors themselves are either in clinical trials or in the process of
being developed for clinical trials. In preclinical trials in animal models, most of these agents inhibited tumor growth, but very few have caused tumor regression. This
suggests that tumor regression, which is the typical end point for successful cytotoxic chemotherapy, may not be appropriate for antiangiogenic therapies. Thus, it is
necessary to redefine the end points for biologic therapy.
Because endothelial cell survival has recently been recognized as an important characteristic of the development of a neovascular blood supply, drugs that target
survival factors are beginning to be introduced into clinical trials. These drugs include antagonists to integrins that are present on the endothelial cell surface. In
addition, as VEGF currently is thought of as both a survival factor for endothelial cells and an angiogenic factor, anti-VEGF therapy may affect the survival of tumor
endothelial cells.
TUMOR ENDOTHELIUM (“ACTIVATED ENDOTHELIUM”) AS DISTINCT FROM NORMAL ENDOTHELIUM
The discovery of VEGF receptors and their up-regulation in newly formed blood vessels highlights the fact that there can indeed be major phenotypic differences
between mature, quiescent vessels and their newly formed counterparts. Such differences are essential to avoid unwanted toxicity to normal vessels when using
antiangiogenic drugs while still achieving a sufficient therapeutic index. A number of such differences in the phenotypes of endothelial cells in normal versus
malignant tissues are now known and include a significant elevation of expression of the integrins avb3 and avb5. 101,102 In breast cancer, it has been demonstrated
that antibodies to avb3 preferentially stain the tumor vasculature but not the normal vasculature, suggesting that avb3 is a marker for activated endothelium. 103
An important issue in antiangiogenic strategies is the fact that tumor endothelium at different sites and within different tumors may be phenotypically distinct. Tumor
endothelium is heterogeneous in terms of the ability to bind specific peptide sequences. 104 Other markers that are up-regulated in activated endothelial cells include
adhesion molecules such as E-selectin, 105 endoglin, 106 glycoproteins such as prostate-specific membrane antigen, 107 the ED-B domain of fibronectin, 108 and various
proteases.109 Many of these unique characteristics of the tumor endothelium can be exploited not only as potential therapeutic targets but also for detection of cancer
by various clinical imaging techniques. 108
ANTIANGIOGENIC ACTIVITY OF INTERFERON
The IFN family consists of three major glycoproteins that exhibit species specificity: leukocyte-derived IFN-a, fibroblast-derived IFN-b, and immune cell–produced
IFN-g. Although IFN-a and IFN-b share a common receptor (the type I IFN receptor) and induce a similar pattern of cellular responses, certain cellular reactions can
be stimulated only by IFN-b, probably by the phosphorylation of a receptor-associated protein that is uniquely responsive to IFN-b. 110 In addition to their
well-recognized activity as antiviral agents, IFNs regulate multiple biologic activities such as cell growth, 111 differentiation, 112 oncogene expression,113 host
immunity,114 and tumorigenicity. 115,116 and 117 IFNs can also inhibit a number of steps in the angiogenic process. IFN has antiproliferative properties, especially on tumor
cells, 118,119 an effect that has been demonstrated also on endothelial cells in vitro. IFN-a can inhibit FGF-induced endothelial proliferation 120; IFN-g also can inhibit
endothelial proliferation. 121 IFN-a and IFN-g have been shown to be cytostatic to human dermal microvascular endothelial cells 122 and human capillary endothelial
cells. 123
Systemic therapy using recombinant IFNs produces antiangiogenic effects in vascular tumors, including life-threatening infantile hemangioma, 59,124,125 Kaposi's
sarcoma,126 giant cell tumor of the mandible, 127 and bladder carcinoma.128 These tumors have also been documented as producing the high levels of bFGF often
detectable in the urine or serum of these patients. 129,130 IFN-a and IFN-b, but not IFN-g, down-regulate the expression of bFGF mRNA and protein in human carcinoma
cells. 58 Indeed, systemic administration of human IFN-a decreased the in vivo expression of bFGF, decreased blood vessel density, and inhibited tumor growth of a
human bladder carcinoma implanted orthotopically in nude mice. 131

ANTIANGIOGENIC THERAPY: ISSUES AND EXPECTATIONS
The understanding that angiogenesis is essential for tumor growth and metastasis formation has led to a large effort to discover effective antiangiogenic compounds.
It must be understood that angiogenesis occurs not only in pathologic processes but also in homeostasis. Physiologic angiogenesis is important in reproduction,
wound healing, menses, and vascular diseases such as coronary artery and peripheral vascular diseases. Thus, as always, a balance must be maintained between
limiting angiogenesis to the tumor and causing significant toxicity to the host.
In addition to the potential toxicity, another issue in antiangiogenic therapy is the chronic nature of this therapy. Because antiangiogenic therapy is designed to inhibit
the development of new blood vessels, the end points for success or failure must be redefined. For example, a desired response to standard chemotherapy is one that
decreases the cross-sectional area of a tumor by 50% within a few months. However, antiangiogenic therapy is likely to produce stable disease, which early on may
be considered a failure. Thus, in evaluating antiangiogenic therapy in the clinic or the laboratory, different criteria for effectiveness must be outlined.
Because antiangiogenic therapy may not decrease tumor growth, it is likely that this therapy will need to be delivered on a chronic basis. Hence, the agent must be
easily delivered (i.e., oral) and have few long-term side effects. One must also consider that the effect of antiangiogenic therapy may require a longer interval between
evaluations than does chemotherapy, as the stability of disease may be difficult to determine at short intervals.
There have, of course, been reports of complete regression of tumors in experimental models of angiogenesis. 61,132 However, these reports are few, and the vast
majority of studies in this field have demonstrated that antiangiogenic therapy leads to an inhibition of tumor growth. 133,134 Thus, it is critical that the reader be able to
interpret experimental studies appropriately and avoid creating unrealistic expectations. For example, the sites of tumor injection must be considered when
experimental antiangiogenic studies are being conducted. It is clear that endothelia from different organs are phenotypically distinct 104 and that therapy effective at
one site may be ineffective at another site. In addition, the growth and patterns of metastases depend on the site of injection. 135 Thus, the most relevant model for
evaluating antiangiogenic therapy is an orthotopic model in which the tumor is growing in the appropriate host environment. Moreover, in designing experiments or
reading the literature, it is important to determine whether antiangiogenic therapy is being designed as (1) a chemopreventive agent (delivered prior to or at the time
of tumor inoculation), (2) adjuvant therapy (delivered when the tumor is at a relatively small volume, such as shortly after tumor injection), or (3) a therapeutic modality
(delivered to animals with established tumors).
In evaluating responses to antiangiogenic therapy, one must define the end points prior to initiation of the study. Typically, tumor size or mass is determined at
initiation of therapy and at termination of the study. As a surrogate means of assessing drug activity, biopsies of accessible tumors can be obtained for
immunohistochemical staining to determine vessel counts, tumor cell proliferation and apoptotic rates, and endothelial cell proliferation and apoptotic rates. More
important, survival studies may better assess the effectiveness of antiangiogenic therapy.
Preclinical data suggest that the efficacy of a conventional cytotoxic drug can be improved by combination with an angiogenesis inhibitor. 136 Indeed, a number of
antiangiogenic clinical trials currently in progress have been designed to compare the effects of a particular cytotoxic agent alone with the effects of the same agent in
combination with an angiogenesis inhibitor. Clearly, the success of Herceptin in improving the effects of cytotoxic chemotherapy in a proportion of advanced-stage
breast cancer patients has enhanced the credibility of this strategy of evaluating cytostatic drugs. 137 This could allow conventional end points, such as tumor
shrinkage and prolonged survival of very sick patients, to be used, albeit indirectly, as a convenient means of more rapidly assessing the merit of antiangiogenic

drugs.
Another possible approach to effect tumor vascular growth could be the increased use of improved antivascular targeting strategies that can cause acute tumor
regression, as shown in various preclinical models. For example, certain tubulin-binding agents, 138 such as combretastatin A-4, can cause such an effect, 139,140 as can
antibodies that target tissue factor to newly formed blood vessels, thus causing an intravascular thrombogenic response in such vessels. 141 These drugs kill
endothelial cells of newly formed blood vessels by different mechanisms 139 that result in vascular collapse and the subsequent death of much larger numbers of tumor
cells. Clearly, the problem here will be to develop drugs that have this ability to cause such a dramatic tumor infarction 141 without major, perhaps even life-threatening,
toxic side effects. In this regard, a potentially significant development in the near future could be the use of genomics-based technologies to uncover a large number
of highly (or even totally) specific molecular markers for the activated endothelial cells of newly formed blood vessels. This could make antibody-based therapeutics
safer and more effective.
Cytostatic antiangiogenic agents have the desired biologic (i.e., antiangiogenic) effect in vivo. In experimental animal models, tumors can be resected and analyzed
for such changes as the extent of vascularization, vascular structure, and endothelial cell viability or apoptosis as well as for markers of angiogenic activity (e.g.,
expression of VEGF, bFGF, IL-8). Performing serial biopsies of metastatic tumors will not be practical; thus, reliable surrogate markers of tumor angiogenesis found in
serum or urine may be necessary. At present, few, if any such markers (at least of a reliable nature) exist. The use of noninvasive medical imaging strategies (e.g.,
magnetic resonance imaging, Doppler ultrasound) to monitor changes in tumor blood flow, vascular structure, and permeability may be helpful, and considerable
research efforts to determine their efficacy are under way. 142,143,144 and 145
Toxic effects associated with chronic antiangiogenic therapy may not show up in short-term early-phase clinical trials or in animal models but, rather, only after very
protracted courses of therapy. The development of spastic diplegia in some infants or children who had been treated previously and successfully over 1 year with
antiangiogenic (IFN-a2-B) therapy for their life-threatening hemangiomas 146 is an example of such delayed toxic side effects. This undoubtedly will increase the need
for targeting tumor blood vessels. The growing interrelationship between the clotting and fibrinolytic pathways and angiogenesis 66 raises the possibility of inciting
bleeding and coagulation disorders in patients who receive certain antiangiogenic drugs, as well as the possibility of causing or exacerbating existing cardiovascular
defects in older patients. In addition, there is the obvious concern about affecting physiologic forms of angiogenesis in various situations. Thus, wound healing may be
adversely affected in a cancer patient who is receiving antiangiogenic drugs, as reproductive angiogenesis would be (e.g., corpus luteum development in adult women
and development of the vasculature in embryos). Growth in neonates may also be compromised by angiogenesis inhibitor therapies. 147 However, given the unique
structural features of the tumor vasculature, some angiogenesis inhibitors may selectively block tumor angiogenesis without actually affecting other physiologic forms
of angiogenesis. This possibility could turn out to be an important factor in selecting the optimal angiogenesis inhibitors for clinical development and their use in
cancer patients.

ANTIANGIOGENIC THERAPY AS A COMPONENT OF OTHER ANTINEOPLASTIC REGIMENS
The combination of an antiangiogenic drug (or drugs), such as TNP-470, with a conventional cytotoxic agent, such as cisplatin, paclitaxel, or cyclophosphamide, can
significantly improve the antitumor efficacy of the cytotoxic drug. 136 These effects of combination therapy, which have also been observed for the combination of
radiation therapy and angiogenesis inhibitors, 148 could play a significant role in the clinical evaluation and effects of angiogenesis inhibitors.
A more rational, yet futuristic, approach to the treatment of patients with malignancies is to determine the molecular alterations that lead to the various processes
involved in tumor growth. Angiogenesis is but one component of the process of tumor growth and metastasis, and overexpression of other genes involved in
protection from apoptosis, cell proliferation, and cell invasion (i.e., an individual tumor's malignant fingerprint) must be examined. With the rapid development of gene
chip technology, it may be possible in the future to determine the malignant fingerprint of individual tumors and to develop therapies that specifically target the
molecular phenotype of an individual tumor. Antiangiogenic therapy may therefore be one component of diverse biologic therapy delivered in combination with
anti–growth factor therapy or with agents that induce apoptosis in tumor cells and tumor vessel endothelial cells.

CONCLUSIONS
Angiogenesis is a dynamic process essential for the growth of primary and metastatic malignancies as well as hematopoietic cancers. Understanding of the basic
principles of the biology of angiogenesis has led to the development of new prognostic factors, tumor markers, imaging techniques, and therapeutic modalities. The
challenge lies in integrating this knowledge into the care of patients with malignant diseases of all types and stages. An understanding of the basic biology of
angiogenesis and tumor biology ultimately will lead to the rational implementation of new paradigms for the treatment of patients with cancer.
A comprehensive review of current antiangiogenic clinical trials is not feasible, as this area of clinical research is in constant evolution. However, the U.S. National
Cancer Institute maintains an up-to-date Web site at which information on clinical trials can be accessed: http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov/news/angio/table.html . In
addition, an overview of antiangiogenesis can be found at http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov/news/angio/index.html .
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by Cancer Center Support Core grant CA16672 and grant R35-CA42107 (I.J.F.), grant CA41223 (R.S.K.), grant R01-CA74821
(L.M.E.) from the U.S. National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, and grant MT-5815 from the Medical Research Council of Canada (R.S.K.).
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Fidler IJ, Ellis LM. The implications of angiogenesis to the biology and therapy of cancer metastasis. Cell 1994;79:185.
2. Folkman J. Angiogenesis in cancer, vascular, rheumatoid and other disease. Nature Med 1995;1:27.
3. Liotta LA, Steeg PS, Settler-Stevenson WG. Cancer metastasis and angiogenesis: an imbalance of positive and negative regulation. Cell 1991;64:327.
4. Auerbach W, Auerbach R. Angiogenesis inhibition: a review. Pharmacol Ther 1994;63:265.
5. Hanahan D, Folkman J. Patterns and emerging mechanisms of the angiogenic switch during tumorigenesis. Cell 1996;86:353.
6. Senger DR, Galli SJ, Dvorak AM, et al. Tumor cells secrete a vascular permeability factor that promotes accumulation of ascites fluid. Science 1983;219:983.
7. Connolly DT, Heuvelman DM, Nelson R, et al. Tumor vascular permeability factor stimulates endothelial cell growth and angiogenesis. J Clin Invest 1989;84:1470.
8. Ferrara N, Henzel WJ. Pituitary follicular cells secrete a novel heparin-binding growth factor specific for vascular endothelial cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1989;161:851.
9. Gospodarowicz D, Abraham JA, Schilling J. Isolation and characterization of a vascular endothelial cell mitogen produced by pituitary-derived folliculo stellate cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1989;86:7311.
10. Thomas KA. Vascular endothelial growth factor, a potent and selective angiogenic agent. J Biol Chem 1996;271:603.
11. Dvorak HF, Nagy JA, Berse B, et al. Vascular permeability factor, fibrin, and the pathogenesis of tumor stroma formation. Ann NY Acad Sci 1992;667:101.
12. Ziegler BL, Valtieri M, Porada GA, et al. KDR receptor: a key marker defining hematopoietic stem cells. Science 1999;285:1553.
13. Ferrer FA, Miller LJ, Lindquist R, et al. Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor receptors in human prostate cancer. Urology 1999;53:567.
14. Veikkola T, Karkkainen, M, Claesson-Welsh L, Alitalo K. Regulation of angiogenesis via vascular endothelial growth factor receptors. Cancer Res 2000;60:203.
15. Olofsson B, Korpelainen E, Pepper MS, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor B (VEGF-B) binds to VEGF receptor-1 and regulates plasminogen activator activity in endothelial cells. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:11709.
16. Tsurusaki T, Kanda S, Sakai H, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor-C expression in human prostatic carcinoma and its relationship to lymph node metastasis. Br J Cancer 1999;80:309.
17. Veikkola T, Alitalo K. VEGFs, receptors, and angiogenesis. Semin Cancer Biol 1999;9:211.
18. Salven P, Lymboussaki A, Heikkila P, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factors VEGF-B and VEGF-C are expressed in human tumors. Am J Pathol 1998;153:103.
19. Lymboussaki A, Partanen TA, Olofsson B, et al. Expression of the vascular endothelial growth factor C receptor VEGFR-3 in lymphatic endothelium of the skin and in vascular tumors. Am J
Pathol 1998;153:395.
20. Marconcini L, Marchio S, Morbidelli L, et al. c-Fos-induced growth factor/vascular endothelial growth factor D induces angiogenesis in vivo and in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:9671.
21. Achen MG, Jeltsch M, Kukk E, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor D (VEGF-D) is a ligand for the tyrosine kinases VEGF receptor 2 (Flk1) and VEGF receptor 3 (Flt4). Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 1998;95:548.
22. Meyer M, Clauss M, Lepple-Wienhues A, et al. A novel vascular endothelial growth factor encoded by Orf virus, VEGF-E, mediates angiogenesis via signaling through VEGFR-2 (KDR) but not
VEGFR-1 (Flt-1) receptor tyrosine kinases. EMBO J 1999;18:363.
23. Ogawa S, Oku A, Sawano A, et al. A novel type of vascular endothelial growth factor, VEGF-E (NZ-7 VEGF), preferentially utilizes KDR/Flk-1 receptor and carries a potent mitotic activity
without heparin-binding domain. J Biol Chem 1998;273:31273.
24. Papapetropoulos A, Garcia-Cardena G, Dengler TJ, et al. Direct actions of angiopoietin-1 on human endothelium: evidence for network stabilization, cell survival, and interaction with other
angiogenic growth factors. Lab Invest 1999;79:213.
25. Davis S, Yancopoulos GD. The angiopoietins: Yin and Yang in angiogenesis. Curr Topics Microbiol Immunol 1999;237:173.
26. Holash J, Maisonpierre PC, Compton D, et al. Vessel cooperation, regression, and growth in tumors mediated by angiopoietins and VEGF. Science 1999;284:1994.
27. Gale NW, Yancopoulos GD. Growth factors acting via endothelial cellspecific receptor tyrosine kinases: VEGFs, angiopoietins, and ephrins in vascular development. Genes Dev 1999;13:1055.
28. Patan S. TIE1 and TIE2 receptor tyrosine kinases inversely regulate embryonic angiogenesis by the mechanism of intussusceptive microvascular growth. Microvasc Res 1998;56:1.

29. Suri C, Jones PF, Patan S, et al. Requisite role of angiopoietin-1, a ligand for the TIE2 receptor, during embryonic angiogenesis. Cell 1996;87:1171.
30. Moore BB, Arenberg DA, Addison CL, Keane MP, Strieter RM. Tumor angiogenesis is regulated by CXC chemokines. J Lab Clin Med 1998;132:97.
31. Kumar R, Yoneda J, Bucana CD, Fidler IJ. Regulation of distinct steps of angiogenesis by different angiogenic molecules. Int J Oncol 1998;12:749.
32. Polverini PJ, Leibovich JS. Induction of neovascularization in vivo and endothelial proliferation in vitro by tumor-associated macrophages. Lab Invest 1984;51:635.
33. Sunderkotter C, Steinbrink K, Goebeler M, et al. Macrophages and angiogenesis. J Leukoc Biol 1994;55:410.
34. Leek RD, Harris AL, Lewis CE. Cytokine networks in solid human tumors: regulation of angiogenesis. J Leukoc Biol 1994;56:423.
35. Gutman M, Singh RK, Yoon S, et al. Leukocyte-induced angiogenesis and subcutaneous growth of B16 melanoma. Cancer Biother 1994;9:163.
36. Noh R, Karp GI, Devereaux DF. The effect of doxorubicin and mitoxanthrone on wound healing. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1991;29:141.
37. Fidler IJ. Modulation of the organ microenvironment for the treatment of cancer metastasis [Editorial]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;84:1588.
38. Takahashi Y, Bucana CD, Liu W, et al. Platelet derived endothelial cell growth factor in human colon cancer angiogenesis: role of infiltrating cells. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1146.
39. Polverini PJ. How the extracellular matrix and macrophages contribute to angiogenesis-dependent diseases. Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:2430.
40. DiPietro LA, Polverini PJ. Angiogenic macrophages produce the angiogenic inhibitor thrombospondin 1. Am J Pathol 1993;143:678.
41. Lingen MW, Polverini PJ, Bouck N. Retinoic acid induces cells cultured from oral squamous cell carcinomas to become antiangiogenic. Am J Pathol 1996;149:247.
42. O'Reilly MS, Holmgren L, Shing Y, et al. Angiostatin: a novel angiogenesis inhibitor that mediates the suppression of metastases by a Lewis lung carcinoma. Cell 1994;79:315.
43. Dong Z, Kumar R, Yang X, Fidler IJ. Macrophage-derived metalloelastase is responsible for the generation of angiostatin in Lewis lung carcinoma. Cell 1997;88:801.
44. Shweiki D, Itin A, Stoffer D, Keshet E. Vascular endothelial growth factor induced by hypoxia may mediate hypoxia-initiated angiogenesis. Nature 1992;359:843.
45. Levy AP, Levy NS, Wegner S, Goldberg MA. Transcriptional regulation of the rat vascular endothelial growth factor gene by hypoxia. J Biol Chem 1995;270:13333.
46. Griffiths L, Dachs GU, Bicknell R, Harris AL, Stratford IJ. The influence of oxygen tension and pH on the expression of platelet-derived endothelial cell growth factor/thymidine phosphorylase in
human breast tumor cells grown in vitro and in vivo. Cancer Res 1997;57:570.
47. Hartmann A, Kunz M, Kostlin S, et al. Hypoxia-induced up-regulation of angiogenin in human malignant melanoma. Cancer Res 1999;59:1578.
48. Desbaillets I, Diserens AC, Tribolet N, Hamou MF, Meir EGV. Upregulation of interleukin 8 by oxygen-deprived cells in glioblastoma suggests a role in leukocyte activation, chemotaxis, and
angiogenesis. J Exp Med 1997;186:1201.
49. Akagi Y, Liu W, Xie K, Zebrowski B, Ellis LM. Regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor expression in human colon cancer by insulin-like growth factor-I. Cancer Res 1998;58:4008.
50. Akagi Y, Liu W, Xie K, et al. Regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor expression in human colon cancer by interleukin-1. Br J Cancer 1999;80:150b.
51. Tsai JC, Goldman CK, Gillespie GY. Vascular endothelial growth factor in human glioma cell lines: induced secretion by EGF, PDGF-BB, and bFGF. J Neurosurg 1995;82:864.
52. Ellis LM, Staley CA, Liu W, et al. Downregulation of vascular endothelial growth factor in a human colon carcinoma cell line transfected with an antisense expression vector specific for c-src. J
Biol Chem 1998;273:1052.
53. Bouvet M, Ellis LM, Nishizaki M, et al. Adenovirally mediated wild-type p53 gene transfer down-regulates vascular endothelial growth factor expression and inhibits angiogenesis in human colon
cancer. Cancer Res 1998;58:2288.
54. Pal S, Claffey KP, Dvorak HF, Mukhopadhyay D. The von Hippel-Lindau gene product inhibits vascular permeability factor/vascular endothelial growth factor expression in renal cell carcinoma
by blocking protein kinase C pathways. J Biol Chem 1997;272:27509.
55. Levy AP, Levy NS, Goldberg MA. Hypoxia-inducible protein binding to vascular endothelial growth factor mRNA and its modulation by the von Hippel-Lindau protein. J Biol Chem
1996;271:25492.
56. Dameron KM, Volpert OV, Tainsky MA, Bouk N. Control of angiogenesis in fibroblasts by p53 regulation of thrombospondin-1. Science 1994;265:1502.
57. Tolsma SS, Volpert OV, Good DJ, et al. Peptides derived from two separate domains of the matrix protein thrombospondin-1 have anti-angiogenic activity. J Cell Biol 1993;122:497.
58. Singh RK, Gutman M, Bucana CD, et al. Interferons alpha and beta downregulate the expression of basic fibroblast growth factor in human carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:4562.
59. Ezekowitz RAB, Mulliken JB, Folkman J. Interferon alpha-2a therapy for life-threatening hemangiomas of infancy. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1456-1463.
60. Clapp C, Martial JA, Guzman RC, Rentier-Delrue F, Weiner RI. The 16-kilodalton N-terminal fragment of human prolactin is a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis. Endocrinology 1993;133:1292.
61. O'Reilly MS, Boehm T, Shing Y, et al. Endostatin: an endogenous inhibitor of angiogenesis and tumor growth. Cell 1997;88:277.
62. Zhai Y, Ni J, Jiang GW, et al. VEGI, a novel cytokine of the tumor necrosis factor family, is an angiogenesis inhibitor that suppresses the growth of colon carcinomas in vivo. FASEB J
1999;13:181.
63. Pike SE, Yao L, Jones KD, et al. Vasostatin, a calretriculin fragment, inhibits angiogenesis and suppresses tumor growth. J Exp Med 1998;188:2349.
64. Vasquez F, Hastings G, Ortega MA, et al. METH-1, a human ortholog of ADAMTS-1, and METH-2 are members of a new family of proteins with angioinhibitory activity. J Biol Chem
1999;274:23349.
65. Gupta SK, Hassel T, Singh JP. A potent inhibitor of endothelial cell proliferation is generated by proteolytic cleavage of the chemokine platelet factor 4. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:7799.
66. O'Reilly MS, Pirie-Shepherd S, Lane WS, Folkman J. Antiangiogenic activity of the cleaved conformation of the Serpin antithrombin III. Science 1999;285:1926.
67. Folkman J. Angiogenesis inhibitors generated by tumors. Mol Med 1995;1:120.
68. Rak J, Mitsuhashi Y, Bayko L, et al. Mutant ras oncogenes upregulate VEGF/VPF expression: implications for induction and inhibition of tumor angiogenesis. Cancer Res 1995;55:4575.
69. Viloria-Petit AM, Rak J, Hung MC, et al. Neutralizing antibodies against EGF and ErbB-2/neu receptor tyrosine kinases downregulate VEGF production by tumor cells in vitro and in vivo:
angiogenic implications for signal transduction therapy of solid tumors. Am J Pathol 1997;151:1523.
70. Weidner N, Semple JP, Welch WR, Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis and metastasis-correlation in invasive breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1.
71. Gasparini G, Weidner N, Bevilacqua P, et al. Tumor microvessel density, p53 expression, tumor size, and peritumoral lymphatic vessel invasion are relevant prognostic markers in
node-negative breast carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:454.
72. Weidner N, Folkman J, Pozza F, et al. Tumor angiogenesis: a new significant and independent prognostic indicator in early-stage breast carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1875.
73. Toi M, Kashitani J, Tominaga T. Tumor angiogenesis is an independent prognostic indicator in primary breast carcinoma. Int J Cancer 1993;55:371.
74. Obermair A, Czerwenka K, Kurz C, Kaider A, Sevelda P. Tumoral vascular density in breast tumors and their effect on recurrence-free survival. Chirurg 1994;65:611.
75. Visscher DW, Smilanetz S, Drozdowicz S, Wykes SM. Prognostic significance of image morphometric microvessel enumeration in breast carcinoma. Anal Quant Cytol Histol 1993;15:88.
76. Horak ER, Leek R, Klenk N, et al. Angiogenesis, assessed by platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule antibodies, as an indicator of node metastases and survival in breast cancer. Lancet
1992;340:1120.
77. Bosari S, Lee AKC, DeLellis RA, et al. Microvessel quantitation and prognosis in invasive breast carcinoma. Hum Pathol 1992;23:755.
78. Axelsson K, Ljung BM, Moore DH 2nd, et al. Tumor angiogenesis as a prognostic assay for invasive ductal breast carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:997.
79. Hall N, Fish D, Hunt N, et al. Is the relationship between angiogenesis and metastasis in breast cancer real? Surg Oncol 1992;1:223.
80. Van Hoef ME, Knox WF, Dhesi SS, Howell A, Schor AM. Assessment of tumour vascularity as a prognostic factor in lymph node negative invasive breast cancer. Eur J Cancer 1993;29A:1141.
81. Weidner N, Carroll PR, Flax J, Flumenfeld W, Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis correlates with metastasis in invasive prostate carcinoma. Am J Pathol 1993;143:401.
82. Takahashi Y, Cleary KR, Mai M, et al. Significance of vessel count and vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptor (KDR) in intestinal-type gastric cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:1679.
83. Takahashi Y, Kitadai Y, Bucana CD, Cleary KR, Ellis LM. Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptor, KDR, correlates with vascularity, metastasis, and proliferation of
human colon cancer. Cancer Res 1995;55:3964.
84. Maeda K, Chung YS, Takatsuka S, et al. Tumour angiogenesis and tumour cell proliferation as prognostic indicators in gastric carcinoma. Br J Cancer 1995;72:319.
85. Hollingsworth HC, Kohn EC, Steinberg SM, Rothenberg ML, Meriono MJ. Tumor angiogenesis in advanced stage ovarian carcinoma. Am J Pathol 1995;147:33.
86. Graham CH, Rivers J, Kerbel RS, Stankiewicz KS, White WL. Extent of vascularization as a prognostic indicator in thin (<0.76 mm) malignant melanomas. Am J Pathol 1994;145:510.
87. Ellis LM, Fidler IJ. Angiogenesis and breast cancer metastasis. Lancet 1995;346:388.
88. Fidler IJ. Tumor heterogeneity and the biology of cancer invasion and metastasis. Cancer Res 1978;38:2651.
89. Fidler IJ. Critical factors in the biology of human cancer metastasis: twenty-eighth GHA Clowes Memorial Award Lecture. Cancer Res 1990;50:6130.
90. Fidler IJ, Hart IR. Biological diversity in metastatic neoplasms: origins and implications. Science 1982;217:998.
91. Liotta LA, Stetler-Stevenson WG. Tumor invasion and metastasis: an imbalance of positive and negative regulation [Review]. Cancer Res 1991;51:5054s.
92. Poste G, Fidler IJ. The pathogenesis of cancer metastasis. Nature 1979;283:139.
93. Kitadai Y, Ellis LM, Takahashi Y, et al. Multiparametric in situ mRNA hybridization analysis to detect metastasis-related genes in surgical specimens of human colon carcinomas. Clin Cancer
Res 1995;1:1095.
94. Singh RK, Bucana CD, Gutman M, et al. Organ site-dependent expression of basic fibroblast growth factor in human renal cell carcinoma cells. Am J Pathol 1994;145:365.
95. Vermeulen PB, Gasparini G, Fox SB, et al. Quantification of angiogenesis in solid human tumours: an international consensus on the methodology and criteria of evaluation. Eur J Cancer
1996;32A:2474.
96. Makris A, Powles TJ, Kakolyris S, et al. Reduction in angiogenesis after neoadjuvant chemoendocrine therapy in patients with operable breast carcinoma. Cancer 1999;85: 1996.
97. Angeletti CA, Lucchi M, Fontanini G, et al. Prognostic significance of tumoral angiogenesis in completely resected late stage lung carcinoma (stage IIIA-N2): impact of adjuvant therapies in a
subset of patients at high risk of recurrence. Cancer 1996;78:409.
98. Viens P, Jacquemier J, Bardou VJ, et al. Association of angiogenesis and poor prognosis in node-positive patients receiving anthracycline-based adjuvant chemotherapy. Breast Cancer Res
Treat 1999;54:205.
99. Gasparini G, Harris AL. Clinical importance of the determination of tumor angiogenesis in breast carcinoma: much more than a new prognostic tool. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:765.
100. Gasparini G, Toi M, Miceli R, et al. Clinical relevance of vascular endothelial growth factor and thymidine phosphorylase in patients with node-positive breast cancer treated with either adjuvant
chemotherapy or hormone therapy. Cancer J Sci Am 1999;5:101.
101. Brooks PC, Montgomery AMP, Rosenfeld M, et al. Integrin avb3 antagonists promote tumor regression by inducing apoptosis of angiogenic blood vessels. Cell 1994;79:1157.
102. Stromblad S, Cheresh DA. Cell adhesion and angiogenesis. Trends Cell Biol 1996;6:462.
103. Gasparini G, Brooks PC, Biganzoli E, et al. Vascular integrin alpha(v)beta3: a new prognostic indicator in breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:2625.
104. Pasqualini R, Ruoslahti E. Organ targeting in vivo using phage display peptide libraries. Nature 1996;380:364.
105. Bischoff J. Approaches to studying cell adhesion molecules in angiogenesis. Trends Cell Biol 1995;5:69.
106. Burrows FJ, Derbyshire EJ, Tazzari PL, et al. Upregulation of endoglin vascular endothelial cells in human solid tumors: implications for diagnosis and therapy. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:1623.
107. Chang SS, Reuter VE, Heston WD, et al. Five different anti-prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) antibodies confirm PSMA expression in tumor-associated neovasculature. Cancer Res
1999;59:3192.
108. Neri D, Carnemolla B, Nissim A, et al. Targeting by affinity-matured recombinant antibody fragments of an angiogenesis associated fibronectin isoform. Nat Biotechnol 1997;15:1271.
109. Hiraoka N, Allen E, Apel IJ, Gyetko MR, Weiss SJ. Matrix metalloproteinases regulate neovascularization by acting as pericellular fibrinolysins. Cell 1998;95:365.
110. Uze G, Lutgalla G, Morgensen KE. a and b Interferons and their receptors and their friends and relations. J Interferon Cytokine Res 1995;15:3.
111. Tamm I, Lin SL, Pfeffer LM, et al. Interferons alpha and beta as cellular regulatory molecules. In: Gresser I, ed. Interferon 9. London: Academic Press, 1987:13.
112. Rossi G. Interferons and cell differentiation. In: Gresser I, ed. Interferon 6. London: Academic Press, 1985:31.
113. Reznitzky D, Yarden A, Zipori D, et al. Autocrine b-related interferon controls c-myc suppression and growth arrest during hematopoietic cell differentiation. Cell 1986;46:31.
114. Strander H. Interferon treatment of human neoplasia: effects on the immune system. Adv Cancer Res 1986;46:36.
115. Ferrantini M, Proietti E, Santodonato L, et al. a1-Interferon gene transfer into metastatic Friend leukemia cells abrogated tumorigenicity in immunocompetent mice: antitumor therapy by means
of interferon-producing cells. Cancer Res 1993;53:1107.
116. Gresser I, Belardelli F, Maury C, et al. Injection of mice with antibody to interferon enhances the growth of transplantable murine tumors. J Exp Med 1983;158:2095.
117. Gutterman JU. Cytokine therapeutics: lessons from interferon a. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:1198.
118. Johns TG, Mackay IR, Callister KA, et al. Antiproliferative potencies of interferons on melanoma cell lines and xenografts: higher efficacy of interferon-b. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1185.
119. Sica G, Fabbroni L, Castagnetta L, et al. Antiproliferative effect of interferons on human prostate carcinoma cell lines. Urol Res 1989;17:111.

120. Heyns AP, Eldor A, Vlodavsky I, et al. The antiproliferative effect of interferon and the mitogenic activity of growth factors are independent cell cycle events. Exp Cell Res 1985;161:297.
121. Friesel R, Komoriya A, Maciag T. Inhibition of endothelial cell proliferation by gamma-interferon. J Cell Biol 1987;104:689.
122. Ruszczak Z, Detmar M, Imcke E, et al. Effects of rIFN-a, -b, -g on the morphology, proliferation, and cell surface antigen expression of human dermal microvascular endothelial cells in vitro. J
Invest Dermatol 1990;95:693.
123. Hicks C, Breit SN, Penny R. Response of microvascular endothelial cells to biological response modifiers. Immunol Cell Biol 1989;67:271.
124. Orchard PJ, Smith CM, Woods WG. Treatment of hemangioendotheliomas with interferon-alpha. Lancet 1989;2:565.
125. White CW, Sondheimer HM, Crouch EC, et al. Treatment of pulmonary hemangiomatosis with recombinant interferon-a-2a. N Engl J Med 1989;320:1197.
126. Mitsuyasu RT. Interferon alpha in the treatment of AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. Br J Haematol 1991;79:69.
127. Kaban LB, Mulliken JB, Ezekowitz RA, et al. Antiangiogenic therapy of a recurrent giant cell tumor of the mandible with interferon alpha-2a. Pediatrics 1999;103:1145.
128. Stadler WM, Kuzel TM, Raghavan D, et al. Metastatic bladder cancer: advances in treatment. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:23.
129. Nguyen M, Watanabe H, Budson AE, et al. Elevated levels of an angiogenic peptide, basic fibroblast growth factor, in the urine of patients with a wide spectrum of cancers. J Natl Cancer Inst
1994;86:356.
130. Nanus DM, Schmitz-Drager BJ, Motzer RJ, et al. Expression of basic fibroblast growth factor in primary human renal tumors: correlation with poor survival. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;85:1597.
131. Dinney CPN, Bielenberg DR, Reich R, et al. Inhibition of basic fibroblast growth factor expression, angiogenesis, and growth of human bladder carcinoma in mice by systemic interferon-alpha
administration. Cancer Res 1998;58:808.
132. Lode HN, Moehler T, Xiang R, et al. Synergy between an antiangiogenic integrin alpha antagonist and an antibody-cytokine fusion protein eradicates spontaneous tumor metastases. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:1591.
133. Warren RS, Yuan H, Matli MR, Gillett NA, Ferrara N. Regulation by vascular endothelial growth factor of human colon cancer tumorigenesis in a mouse model of experimental liver metastasis.
J Clin Invest 1995;95:1789.
134. Shaheen RM, Davis DW, Liu W, et al. Antiangiogenic therapy targeting the tyrosine kinase receptor for vascular endothelial growth factor receptor inhibits the growth of colon cancer liver
metastasis and induces tumor and endothelial cell apoptosis. Cancer Res 1999;59:5412.
135. Takahashi Y, Mai M, Wilson MR, et al. Site-dependent expression of vascular endothelial growth factor, angiogenesis and proliferation in human gastric carcinoma. Int J Oncol 1996;8:701.
136. Teicher BA. Potentiation of cytotoxic cancer therapies by antiangiogenic agents. In: Teicher BA, ed. Antiangiogenic agents in cancer therapy. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 1999:277.
137. Pegram MD, Lipton A, Hayes DF, et al. Phase II study of receptor-enhanced chemosensitivity using recombinant humanized anti-p185HER2/neu monoclonal antibody plus cisplatin in patients
with HER2/neu-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer refractory to chemotherapy treatment. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2659.
138. Chaplin DJ, Pettit GR, Parkins CS, Hill SA. Antivascular approaches to solid tumour therapy: evaluation of tubulin binding agents. Br J Cancer 1996;74[Suppl 27]:S86.
139. Dark GG, Hill SA, Prise VE, et al. Combretastatin A-4, an agent that displays potent and selective toxicity toward tumor vasculature. Cancer Res 1997;57:1829.
140. Iyer S, Chaplin DJ, Rosenthal DS, et al. Induction of apoptosis in proliferating human endothelial cells by the tumor-specific antiangiogenesis agent combretastatin A-4. Cancer Res
1998;58:4510.
141. Huang X, Molema G, King S, et al. Tumor infarction in mice by antibody-directed targeting of tissue factor to tumor vasculature. Science 1997;275:547.
142. Frouge C, Guinebretiere JM, Contesso G, Di Paola R, Blery M. Correlation between contrast enhancement in dynamic magnetic resonance imaging of the breast and tumor angiogenesis.
Invest Radiol 1994;29:1043.
143. Cohen FM, Kuwatsuru R, Shames DM, et al. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging estimation of altered capillary permeability in experimental mammary carcinomas after
X-irradiation. Invest Radiol 1994;29:970.
144. Pham CD, Roberts TP, van Bruggen N, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging detects suppression of tumor vascular permeability after administration of antibody to vascular endothelial growth
factor. Cancer Invest 1998;16:225.
145. Wu CC, Lee CN, Chen TM, et al. Incremental angiogenesis assessed by color Doppler ultrasound in the tumorigenesis of ovarian neoplasms. Cancer 1994;73:1251.
146. Barlow CF, Priebe CJ, Mulliken JB, et al. Spastic diplegia as a complication of interferon alfa-2a treatment of hemangiomas of infancy. J Pediatr 1998;132:527.
147. Gerber HP, Hillan KJ, Ryan AM, et al. VEGF is required for growth and survival in neonatal mice. Development 1999;126:1149.
148. Mauceri HJ, Hanna NN, Beckett MA, et al. Combined effects of angiostatin and ionizing radiation in antitumour therapy. Nature 1998;394:287.
149. Baird A, Klagsbrun M. The fibroblast growth factor family. Cancer Cells 1991;3:239.
150. Gimenez-Gallego G, Cuevas P. Fibroblast growth factors, proteins with a broad spectrum of biological activities. Neurol Res 1994;16:313.
151. Schmitt FC, Soares R. TGF-a and angiogenesis. Am J Surg Pathol 1999;23:358.
152. Mooradian DL, Diglio CA. Effects of epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor-b1 on rat heart endothelial cell anchorage-dependent and -independent growth. Exp Cell Res
1990;186:122.
153. Lamszus K, Laterra J, Westphal, M, Rosen EM. Scatter factor/hepatocyte growth factor (SF/HGF) content and function in human gliomas. Int J Dev Neurosci 1999;17:517.
154. Pepper MS. Transforming growth factor-beta: vasculogenesis, angiogenesis, and vessel wall integrity. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 1997;8:21.
155. Yoshida S, Ono M, Shono T, et al. Involvement of interleukin-8, vascular endothelial growth factor, and basic fibroblast growth factor in tumor necrosis factor alpha-dependent angiogenesis.
Mol Cell Biol 1997;17:4015.
156. Kuwabara K, Ogawa S, Matsumoto M, et al. Hypoxia-mediated induction of acidic/basic fibroblast growth factor and platelet-derived growth factor in mononuclear phagocytes stimulates growth
of hypoxic endothelial cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:4606.
157. Bussolino F, Ziche M, Wang JM, et al. In vitro and in vivo activation of endothelial cells by colony-stimulating factors. J Clin Invest 1991;87:986.
158. Choudhuri R, Zhang HT, Donnini S, Ziche M, Bicknell R. An angiogenic role for the neurokines midkine and pleiotrophin in tumorigenesis. Cancer Res 1997;57:1814.
159. Jackson D, Volpert OV, Bouck N, Linzer DI. Stimulation and inhibition of angiogenesis by placental proliferin and proliferin-related protein. Science 1994;266:1581.
160. Ramchandran R, Dhanabal M, Volk R, et al. Antiangiogenic activity of restin, NC10 domain of human collagen XV: comparison to endostatin. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999;255:735.
161. Sage EH. Pieces of eight: bioactive fragments of extracellular proteins as regulators of angiogenesis. Trends Biol Sci 1999;7:182.
162. Maisonpierre PC, Suri C, Jones PF, et al. Angiopoietin-2, a natural antagonist for Tie2 that disrupts in vivo angiogenesis. Science 1997;277:55.
163. Moore BB, Arenberg, DA, Addison CL, Keane MP, Strieter RM. Tumor angiogenesis is regulated by CXC chemokines. J Lab Clin Med 1998;132:97.
164. Dedhar S, Hannigan GE, Rak J, Kerbel RS. Extracellular environment and cancer. In: Tannock I, Hill RP (eds). Basic science of oncology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998:197.

SECTION 10.1 RNA Viruses
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 10.1
RNA Viruses
ERIC M. POESCHLA
GARY L. BUCHSCHACHER, JR.
FLOSSIE WONG-STAAL
Introduction
Retroviral Genetics: Selective Access to the Growth Control Genes of the Cell
Mechanisms of Retroviral Oncogenesis
Acutely Transforming (Transducing) Retroviruses and Gene Capture
Slowly Transforming (Cis-Activating) Retroviruses: Insertional Mutagenesis
Trans-Activating Retroviruses
Human T-Cell Leukemia Virus Type I
History and Epidemiology
The Viral Replication Cycle and Its Implications for Viral Spread and Evolution
Models for HTLV-I Leukemogenesis
Clinical Features of HTLV-I Disease
Human T-Cell Leukemia Virus Type II
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Hepatitis C Virus
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
RNA viruses, particularly retroviruses, have been studied as important causes of human cancer and as tools for understanding both viral and nonviral oncogenesis at
the molecular level. The retrovirus human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) is the causative agent of adult T-cell leukemia (ATL). Two other RNA viruses, human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV), are strongly associated with human malignancies. In addition, the discovery and characterization of
oncogenes and the subsequent elucidation of protooncogene functions have been closely intertwined with the study of retroviruses.
Retroviruses have been classified on the basis of pathogenic roles into Oncovirinae (tumor viruses), Lentivirinae (genetically complex agents, including HIV), and
Spumavirinae (foamy viruses, not known to be associated with human disease). Other classifications based on particle morphology (virus types A–D) and genetic
relatedness 1,2 also are used. To illustrate different molecular mechanisms of oncogenesis, this discussion is principally concerned with the Oncovirinae, including the
mammalian type C tumor viruses, the avian leukemia/sarcoma viruses, and HTLV-I and -II. The roles played by HIV in the various malignancies associated with
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and by HCV (a flavivirus) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) also are discussed. In all examples, although these virus
infections may play key initiating or contributory roles to carcinogenesis, additional, sequential alteration of cellular DNA is generally required to yield the fully
malignant phenotype. 3

RETROVIRAL GENETICS: SELECTIVE ACCESS TO THE GROWTH CONTROL GENES OF THE CELL
Special features of their replication cycle have made retroviruses useful for investigating the molecular basis of neoplasia. Retroviruses are unique among animal
viruses in having an RNA genome that replicates through a DNA intermediate. The virally encoded reverse transcriptase converts the single-stranded RNA genome
into a double-stranded DNA copy; a subsequent reaction catalyzed by the retroviral integrase covalently and irreversibly integrates this DNA molecule into a host
chromosome where it resides as a provirus. This process can result in mutagenesis, translocation, or altered regulation of any locus in the genome. 4,5
An integrated provirus resembles other multiexon cellular genes in that it is duplicated along with the cell's genome, passed on to daughter cells during mitosis, and
subsequently transcribed into full-length and spliced RNAs [messenger RNAs (mRNAs)]. The ends of the provirus are made up of identical genetic control regions
called long terminal repeats (LTRs), which are composed of U3 (unique 3' region), R (repeat), and U5 (unique 5' region). The promoter and enhancer functions
necessary for RNA polymerase II to initiate viral mRNA transcription reside within the LTR, primarily in U3. Transcription initiates just downstream of the TATA box at
the 5' U3/R junction and proceeds through to the polyadenylation (polyA) signal usually located in the R region of the 3' LTR ( Fig. 10.1-1).

FIGURE 10.1-1. Retrovirus genome organization. General genome structure of a typical replication-competent oncoretrovirus. The structure of the double-stranded
DNA copy (provirus) is shown below that of the genomic RNA. In the provirus, gag (encoding viral core proteins), pol (viral replication enzymes), and env (viral
envelope glycoproteins) genes are flanked on each end by the long terminal repeats (LTR). The viral promoter is located in the 5' U3 region, with transcription
termination and poly A signals located in the 3' LTR. The arrow indicates point and direction of transcription initiation. R, repeat.

The locations of transcription initiation and termination result in virion (genomic) RNA that carries the viral promoter (U3 element) downstream of the genes to be
transcribed (in contrast to the structure of the provirus). Because a genomic transcript possesses neither an upstream U3 nor a downstream U5, the essential
rearrangements that occur during the RNA template strand switching of reverse transcription are establishment of a 5' promoter and of integration-competent termini.
The retention of a duplicate U3 promoter element in the 3' LTR of the provirus, though generally not active, has implications for retroviral oncogenesis.
Retrovirus virions normally encapsidate a dimer of identical plus-sense RNA genomes, both of which are used as templates during reverse transcription. However, it
is possible for nonidentical transcripts (heterodimers) to be packaged together. Studies with dual selectable markers show that each infectious virion, even if
heterozygous, produces only one provirus. Heterodimer packaging plays an important role in the creation of oncogenic retroviruses because, after recombination and
reverse transcription, it can result in the creation of novel proviruses. Even when identical RNAs are packaged, aberrant strand transfers during reverse transcription
result in high rates of genetic recombination and rearrangement, including sequence deletions, duplications, and inversions. 1,5,6,7 and 8 Recombination can occur
between two viruses infecting the same cell or, less commonly, between viral and cellular sequences.

MECHANISMS OF RETROVIRAL ONCOGENESIS
In the case of acutely transforming retroviruses such as Rous sarcoma virus (RSV), virtually all infected cells are swiftly transformed, whereas for other retroviruses,
transformation is an unusual and much delayed outcome that often depends on the cell's accrual of additional alteration of its DNA. The latter group includes agents
such as HTLV-I and avian leukosis virus (ALV). Most transforming retroviruses are not cytopathic. Reverse transcription and integration of the viral genome into that

of the cell favor the three major mechanisms by which retroviruses may participate in the malignant transformation process ( Fig. 10.1-2):

FIGURE 10.1-2. Three types of oncogenic retroviruses. A: Acutely transforming retroviruses. Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) and simian sarcoma virus (SSV), retroviruses
that contain oncogenes, are shown. RSV is unique in that the oncogene, v-src, has been added to the viral genome without concomitant loss of replicative genes.
SSV, an example of the more common oncogene-containing retroviruses, is not replication-competent; the recombination that led to v-sis insertion resulted in deletion
of some viral sequences. B: Slowly transforming retroviruses. In the upper example, a provirus has integrated upstream of a cellular protooncogene. The viral
promoters may alter protooncogene expression directly [via read-through transcription originating from the 5' long terminal repeat (LTR) or from transcripts aberrantly
originating in the 3' LTR] or indirectly via the effect of viral enhancers increasing transcription from cellular promoters (the viral enhancer can also affect expression of
cellular genes 5' to, and in the opposite orientation of, the site of provirus integration). In the lower example, insertional mutagenesis is illustrated. This may lead to
inactivation of a tumor suppressor or to production of a mutant cellular protein that could lead to oncogenesis. In both cases, aberrant splicing could lead to
production of chimeric viral-cellular proteins. Arrows indicate points of initiation and direction of transcription. C:Trans-acting retroviruses. In addition to gag, pol, and
env, human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) encodes viral regulatory proteins. Tax is implicated in the genesis of adult T-cell leukemia through its interactions
with cellular transcription factors, resulting in alteration of expression of many growth-related genes.

1. Acutely transforming retroviruses (e.g., RSV) incorporate and exert control over cellular growth–related genes (protooncogene capture) and subsequently
transfer these deregulated genes into new cells.
2. Slowly transforming viruses (e.g., ALV) alter cellular gene expression by chance insertion of cis-acting viral regulatory sequences adjacent to these genes
(insertional mutagenesis).
3. Trans-acting retroviruses (e.g., HTLV-I) alter cellular gene expression and function through viral regulatory protein(s) that act in trans.
ACUTELY TRANSFORMING (TRANSDUCING) RETROVIRUSES AND GENE CAPTURE
Acutely transforming retroviruses provided evidence for viral oncogenesis even before the existence of viruses was recognized. A porcelain filtrate of tumor lysates
prepared from chicken sarcomas was shown to cause sarcomas when injected into animals. The causative agent, RSV, is a prototype of the acutely transforming
(transducing) retroviruses. It is the only replication-competent oncogene-carrying retrovirus; since oncogene insertions usually supplant essential viral sequences, all
other known acutely transforming retroviruses are defective for replication and require a helper virus to supply one or more viral proteins in trans. RSV contains the
full complement of replicative genes in addition to a transforming gene.
It was not until the 1940s that the first mammalian retrovirus, mouse mammary tumor virus, was isolated; later, a murine leukemia virus was isolated from neonatal
mice. Investigation of the actual physical nature of these agents awaited the advent of cell culture, elucidation of the genetic code, and the framework of the “central
dogma” (i.e., genetic information flow proceeds unidirectionally from DNA to RNA to protein). The term retrovirus was coined when Temin and Mizutani 9 and
Baltimore 10 overturned this dogma with their co-discovery of reverse transcriptase in 1970.
RSV mutants defective only for transformation but not for replication were isolated. The mutants were either conditional (temperature-sensitive) or nonconditional. The
latter had genomes roughly 20% shorter in length than the oncogenic strain of RSV. 11 Molecular hybridization experiments revealed that the missing “oncogenic”
sequences hybridized not only to DNA from infected chicken cells but also to normal chicken, human, and even invertebrate DNA. 11 The inference was that the
sequence (v-src) was not a native viral gene but rather an altered version of a normal cellular homologue ( c-src) that had been captured by RSV at some unknown
point in evolution. Such cellular genes are designated protooncogenes (or c-oncs). All retroviral v-oncs are dispensable for viral replication, and in all cases homology
exists to cellular genes conserved over long evolutionary distances.
The genetic mechanism whereby retroviruses captured and transduced oncogenes remained surprisingly ambiguous for more than a decade after the characterization
of RSV and other transforming retroviruses. Two prevailing models postulate that recombination, generally illegitimate (nonhomologous), occurs after a retrovirus
integrates in the vicinity of a protooncogene. Both models require co-packaging into one virion of an abnormal viral transcript containing cellular sequences with that
of another viral genome. They differ in the level at which the initial rearrangement takes place. The first model proposes two different events, with the first being a
presumably rare deletion of the 3' portion of an integrated provirus. The key feature is that deletion of the 3' LTR brings internal retroviral sequences in contiguity with
a downstream protooncogene. The hybrid transcript initiated in the 5' LTR is then processed (e.g., by splicing) and packaged into virions along with a wild-type
genome from another provirus infecting the same cell. After infection of another cell, illegitimate recombination during reverse transcription then provides the
oncogene-containing molecule with a 3' LTR that supports integration and, in some cases, subsequent replication. In the second model, no deletion of chromosomal
DNA is required. 12 Transduction of sequences downstream of the provirus is instead accomplished at the posttranscriptional level by packaging of RNA transcripts
generated when RNA polymerase II terminates inefficiently at the retroviral polyadenylation signal in the R repeat. The model postulates co-packaging of such
read-through transcripts, followed by illegitimate recombination during reverse transcription. Direct evidence has been obtained for such a mechanism by placing a
selectable drug marker transcriptional unit downstream of Rous-associated virus, with and without mutations of the viral polyadenylation signal. 12
Increased mutation is another dramatic consequence that arises from the transfer of cellular sequences from the host genome into the genome of retroviruses. The
point mutation rates of RNA viruses (10 –3 to 10–5 per nucleotide per replication cycle) are roughly 1 million–fold in excess of cellular DNA. 13 Like all RNA-dependent
polymerases so far studied, reverse transcriptase lacks efficient capability to proofread misincorporated bases. 14 One retroviral v-onc (v-mos) has been
experimentally documented to evolve at a rate 10 6-fold higher than its cellular homologue. 15 It is not surprising, then, that v-oncs frequently contain point mutations in
addition to other genetic changes compared to their protooncogene homologues. Such mutations are necessary preludes to cancer, because mere overexpression of
only a few protooncogenes can transform cells; most require genetic alteration for their oncogenic properties. Overexpressed c-src, for example, does not transform.16
SLOWLY TRANSFORMING (CIS-ACTIVATING) RETROVIRUSES: INSERTIONAL MUTAGENESIS
Genomic insertion of a provirus can itself be tumorigenic by leading to aberrant activity of adjacent cellular genes (see Fig. 10.1-2). This second mechanism by which
retroviruses activate the latent oncogenic potential of protooncogenes is the more common transforming process in nature. Retroviruses that act in this manner, such
as avian leukosis virus (ALV), have been termed chronic, or slow-acting tumor viruses. They do not transform cells in tissue culture. In vivo, long latency periods
between infection and tumorigenesis are typical, whereas acutely transforming retroviruses reliably transform cultured cells and cause tumors with high probability
shortly after infection. Also in contrast to acutely transforming retroviruses, the tumors are monoclonal for the site of insertion. In general, slowly transforming viruses
require a second mutagenic event for their transforming properties to become apparent.
In B-cell lymphomas associated with ALV, tumors arising from independent transformation events invariably have ALV proviruses clonally integrated in the vicinity of
the c-myc gene.17 These tumors illustrate two general ways in which insertional mutagenesis may operate: promoter insertion and enhancer insertion. In the former,
the ALV provirus integrates upstream of, and in the same orientation as, c-myc. 3' LTR-promoted c-myc transcripts are produced at up to 100-fold higher than normal
levels (the transcripts, however, encode a normal c-myc protein). Enhancer insertion, however, can occur if the provirus inserts downstream of c-myc, or upstream but
in opposite orientation to the gene. In this scenario, enhancer elements within the LTR may abnormally increase gene expression. These two roles of retroviruses in
studies of myc—gene capture and insertional mutagenesis—elegantly confirm the protooncogene hypothesis: The gene was first identified as a protooncogene not

from insertional mutagenesis studies, but from its mutant v-onc homologue in a transforming retrovirus. 2,4
A related transforming mechanism occurs when insertion of a retrovirus occurs within the c-onc itself or if the 5' LTR-promoted read-through RNAs result in
downstream protooncogene transcription. 18 In either case, viral-protooncogene hybrid spliced transcripts encoding novel proteins with transforming potential can then
be produced.
TRANS-ACTIVATING RETROVIRUSES
A third mechanism of transformation involves a trans-acting viral protein that regulates the expression or function of cellular growth and differentiation genes. This
mechanism is exemplified by HTLV-I, the first and only human retrovirus known to directly cause human cancer.

HUMAN T-CELL LEUKEMIA VIRUS TYPE I
HISTORY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Today, the concept of a pathogenic human retrovirus has become familiar. However, even in the mid-1970s, although retroviruses had been readily isolated from
many species, no human counterparts had been found despite intensive attempts. Soon, however, several technologic advances, combined with epidemiologic
insights, began to change the picture. 19,20
In 1978, a type C–like retrovirus now called HTLV-I was isolated from a CD4+ T-lymphoblastoid cell line established from a patient with a cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma,21 most probably adult T-cell leukemia (ATL). An aggressive malignancy of T cells bearing the CD4 marker, ATL had been characterized as a
clinicopathologic entity only in the preceding three years. 22,23 The disease was then believed confined to the southern islands of Japan, where, in contrast to most of
the world, it predominates over mature B-cell leukemia/lymphoma. The geographic clustering suggested an infectious etiology, and serologic testing of Japanese ATL
patients with antigens prepared from the newly discovered HTLV-I revealed nearly 100% seropositivity. 24,25 Other epidemiologic clusters consistent with an etiologic
role for endemic HTLV-I infection have since been documented, most notably in the Caribbean basin, the southeastern United States, northeastern South America,
Central Africa, and Papua New Guinea. Moreover, transmission of HTLV-I by blood transfusion (but, unlike HIV, not cell-free blood products), needle sharing, breast
feeding, and from male to female (rarely the reverse) by sexual intercourse has been well documented.
In addition to seroepidemiologic studies of patients and their close contacts, several lines of evidence support a direct causal role for HTLV-I in ATL. The virus can be
isolated reproducibly from ATL patients. Leukemic cells invariably contain an HTLV-I provirus, whereas other cells from these patients do not. Infected individuals
born in an endemic region carry their risk of developing ATL with them if they move elsewhere, suggesting that risk is not dependent on environmental cofactors
peculiar to endemic areas. Infection clearly precedes transformation, because the tumor cells carry monoclonal or oligoclonal insertions of HTLV-I DNA and have a
single T-cell antigen receptor-b gene rearrangement. 26,27 This monoclonality also provides additional evidence that transformation is a rare sequel to infection.
Primary T cells infected with HTLV-I do not senesce after a month in culture, as normal T cells do, but become immortalized, acquiring the ability to divide continually
in the presence of interleukin-2 (IL-2). Continued culture of immortalized cells eventually can result in selection of a transformed, IL-2–independent clone of cells.
There is evidence that, in addition to CD4+ T cells (the phenotype of the majority of ATLs), HTLV-I can also infect and transform CD8+ T cells, as well as immature
CD4– CD8– T-cell precursors in bone marrow. 28
THE VIRAL REPLICATION CYCLE AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR VIRAL SPREAD AND EVOLUTION
Although HTLV-I shares many features with the type C viruses, it is considerably more complex genetically and biologically. In addition to gag, pol, and env, the virus
genome contains several additional open reading frames (see Fig. 10.1-2). Of these, the two best characterized genes code the trans-regulating proteins Tax and
Rex. Both proteins are expressed early in the viral replication cycle and are important for expression of viral genes; as such, they are analogous to the HIV proteins
Tat and Rev. 29,30,31 and 32 Rex and Rev, through an interaction with a human nuclear export receptor, CRM-1, 33,34 act as adaptors for the nuclear export of unspliced
retroviral mRNA. Additional cellular proteins interfacing with the splicing/export pathways are also involved in mediating Rev/Rex function. 35 Tax is a nuclear protein
that activates transcription from the HTLV-I LTR in trans by associating with a number of cellular transcription factors. 36,37 and 38 A 21-base-pair repeat sequence within
the HTLV-I U3 is necessary for Tax activity and confers Tax inducibility to heterologous genes placed downstream. 39,40
Little, if any, HLTV-I replication or gene expression is detectable in vivo by analyzing primary leukemic cells from humans 41,42; significant viremia is not detected. The
molecular mechanisms that maintain viral latency in vivo are unclear. The in vivo latency and low levels of viremia in HTLV patients has important implications both for
virus spread and evolution. Unlike HIV, there is remarkably little genetic variability among HTLV-I isolates, 43 with 97% to 99% sequence identity among strains derived
from Japanese patients and generally 96% to 99% identity across widely diverse geographic regions. 41 Again, unlike HIV, cell-free transmission rarely occurs, either
in cell culture or in vivo. This property is one factor in the less efficient, endemic transmission of HTLV-I compared to the epidemic spread of HIV-1, even though the
same routes of infection appear to be operative.
When a cytopathic virus such as HIV rapidly destroys its host cell, continuous viral spread is imperative. The alternative adopted by HTLV-I is to keep virion burden
low but promote gradually accelerating amplification of cells harboring transcriptionally quiescent proviral DNA over the course of the host organism's lifetime.
Because infection is by cell transfer, spread in the population is thereby promoted and only in some cases does the process ultimately give rise to frank leukemia.
MODELS FOR HTLV-I LEUKEMOGENESIS
The most common outcome of HTLV-I infection is an asymptomatic carrier state; HTLV-I carriers have an estimated lifetime risk of developing ATL of approximately
5%. 44 Therefore, factors other than simple viral infection must be necessary for leukemogenesis. Despite the mono- or oligoclonality of HTLV-I proviral insertions in
ATL tumors, the sites of proviral insertion are random from patient to patient, indicating that cis-acting insertional mutagenesis does not play a role in tumorigenesis.
Nor does the virus appear to encode a host-derived oncogene: No homologies between human cellular genes and nonstructural HTLV-I genes have been observed.
A third genetic mechanism for tumorigenesis, which appears to be a multistep process, is thus implicated, with the Tax protein being central to transformation.
Tax promotes viral gene expression by indirectly activating the viral promoter in the LTR via interaction with cellular transcription proteins. However, the interaction of
Tax with various transcription factors also transactivates numerous cellular gene promoters. A molecular basis for the pleiotropism of Tax was shown to reside in its
interaction with the conserved basic regions of varied basic region–leucine zipper DNA-binding domains within such factors, thus altering both affinity and selectivity
of the factors for varied cellular promoters. 45,46 The numerous cellular transcription pathways activated by Tax in this way include activating transcription factor/cyclic
AMP-responsive element binding protein(ATF/CREB), nuclear factor (NF)-kB/c-Rel, and serum response factor. 47,48 Tax is able to bind directly to the TATA-binding
protein, a component of the transcriptional complex, and to p300 and CREB-binding protein, both of which are transcriptional coactivators. 49
Among the cellular genes transactivated by Tax, the most relevant are the IL-2 and IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) genes. 36,50,51 and 52 Unlike normal resting T cells, ATL cells and
T cells transformed in vitro by HTLV-I constitutively express the a chain of the IL-2 receptor at high levels that cannot be down-regulated. In this way, an autocrine
loop might arise, stimulating continuous proliferation of infected cells. The autocrine mechanism is not sufficient to explain leukemogenesis, however. For example, in
contrast to the invariable expression of IL-2R, not all HTLV-I immortalized cells express IL-2. 53 Possible interactions between another HTLV-I protein (p12I) and the
gamma subunit of IL-2R may contribute to the ligand-independent activation of this receptor, 54 resulting in stimulation and expansion of the pool of infected cells at
risk for further genetic alteration.
In regard to the latter process, Tax also has been shown to down-regulate expression of a cellular DNA repair enzyme, beta-DNA polymerase, 55 a potentially
straightforward link to accelerated accumulation of mutation. In addition, expression of a large number of genes involved in cell proliferation is transactivated by Tax.
These include granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), the protooncogenes c-fos and c-sis, HLA class I molecules,56 vimentin, and tumor
necrosis factor. 19,20,41,42
The IL-2 independence of HTLV-I–infected T cells involves a cell signaling pathway in which receptor-associated protein kinases in the Janus kinase (Jak) family

phosphorylate cytoplasmic transcription factors called STATS (for signal transducers and activators of transcription). 57 After phosphorylation, STATS translocate to
the cell nucleus and bind to specific DNA elements to modulate transcription. The Jak-STAT pathway is triggered by IL-2 in normal T cells; however, transition to IL-2
independence after HTLV-I infection was associated with constitutive activation of the pathway. 58,59
Tax also has been shown to interact with and presumably inactivate a number of cell-cycle–related proteins, including the cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) inhibitor
p16INK4A and the cell-cycle checkpoint protein MAD1. 47,60,61 Tax activates the promoter of p21waf1/cip1, also a cdk inhibitor, and through the activation of the ATF/CREB
pathway, suppresses the activity of p53, which can prevent p53-induced apoptosis. 47,54,60 It also has been suggested that constitutive action of the IL-2 receptor
pathway allows cells, through an unknown mechanism, to avoid apoptosis. 62
In summary, although the exact steps in HTLV-I–induced leukemogenesis are unclear, Tax seems to play a critical role by direct interaction with cellular proteins
involved in transcription, cell-cycle regulation, cell proliferation, and apoptosis. Whatever the role of the virus, however, it seems that a second mutational event is
necessary for the transition from cell immortalization to monoclonality and acute ATL. Immortalization and propagation of cells probably allows alterations in the cell
cycle and apoptosis pathways to accumulate, allowing a transformed clone to emerge.
CLINICAL FEATURES OF HTLV-I DISEASE
The clinical presentation, differential diagnosis, and treatment of ATL are discussed elsewhere in this volume, but are described briefly here. 44 In acute ATL, the tumor
aggressively infiltrates multiple organs, commonly involving lymph nodes, liver, spleen, skin, and lung. Median survival is measured in months. The age of onset
averages 58 years (range, 24 to 85 years), with a male to female ratio of 1.4:1. Either a leukemic or a non–Hodgkin's T-cell lymphoma presentation may predominate.
ATL has been classified into four stages: acute, chronic, smoldering, and lymphomatous. 63 Hypercalcemia is commonly seen in the acute and lymphomatous types;
death is often the result of opportunistic infection.
The differential diagnosis includes mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome, Hodgkin's disease, and T-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. HTLV-I seropositivity, negative
terminal deoxynucleotidal transferase(TdT) staining, and CD4 positivity are characteristic of ATL. Detection of a mono- or oligoclonally integrated HTLV-I provirus
makes the diagnosis definitive.
In addition to ATL, HTLV-I is also associated with tropical spastic paraparesis/HTLV-associated myelopathy (TSP/HAM), a chronic progressive neurologic disorder. 44

HUMAN T-CELL LEUKEMIA VIRUS TYPE II
HTLV-II is closely related to HTLV-I, sharing the same overall genetic organization and 70% homology at the amino acid level. Although it also infects and transforms
T cells in vitro, HTLV-II is preferentially tropic in vitro for the CD8+ subset.64 The virus was isolated in 1982 from a patient with atypical T-cell variant hairy cell
leukemia and subsequently from two other individuals. 65 Other disease associations have been reported; however, convincing epidemiologic data for an etiologic role
for HTLV-II in human disease are lacking. Most patients with either T- or B-cell hairy cell leukemia are not HTLV-II infected, and so far no disease has a demonstrated
increased incidence in HTLV-II–infected populations. In contrast to HTLV-I, HTLV-II is able to transform T cells in a manner not dependent on activation of the
Jak/STAT pathway,66 although the exact mechanism of cell transformation by HTLV-II remains unknown.
HTLV-II is transmitted by the same routes as HTLV-I. Like HTLV-I, and unlike HIV, the genome of HTLV-II is quite stable. Again, this is postulated to be due largely to
the latent infection and expansion of infected cells within a person and to transmission being mainly via infected cells, as opposed to free virus. 67 HTLV-II is
recognized to be endemic in African pygmies and in many indigenous New World populations, including the Navajo, Pueblo, and Seminole Indians in North America,
the Guyami Indians in Panama, and various quite widely separated and remote tribes in South America. 68

HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS
Although the annual incidence of HIV infection in the United States declined in the late 1990s, HIV disease remains a formidable global health problem. New
infections continue at a significant rate, particularly in parts of the world such as Southeast Asia. In addition, a large number of asymptomatic HIV-infected persons are
expected to develop AIDS. Newer pharmacologic therapies have slowed the rate of progression to AIDS, but do not eradicate infection. 69,70 Treatment failures due to
noncompliance or drug resistance are common, the drugs themselves have a number of potentially serious side effects, and the cost of lifelong therapy can be
prohibitive, particularly in underdeveloped countries.
HIV-1 and HIV-2 are members of the lentivirus subfamily of retroviruses. It is now known that both viruses became human pathogens after zoonotic (cross-species)
transmission to humans from primate reservoirs. Sooty mangabeys (Cercocebus atys) are the reservoir of simian immunodeficiency virus strain sm (SIVsm) and the
probable ancestor of HIV-2. 71 A subspecies of common chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes troglodytes) inhabiting west equatorial Africa is the reservoir of SIVcpz and the
source of at least three independent transmissions of this virus to humans, resulting in the evolution of HIV-1 groups M, N, and O. 72 The hunting and preparation of
chimpanzees for food, a common practice in equatorial Africa, provides the most likely mechanism by which the zoonotic infections occurred. Although HIV-2 can also
cause AIDS in humans and monkeys, the majority of AIDS cases worldwide are the result of HIV-1 infection. Therefore, this discussion focuses on HIV-1 disease.
As with HTLV-I, the HIV genome and replication cycle are complex ( Fig. 10.1-3). In sharp contrast to HTLV-I, however, HIV replicates actively after initial infection,
which results in high levels of viremia. 73,74 and 75 This high rate of replication, in concert with a high mutation rate, results in the extreme genetic variability that has
been documented for HIV-1. This variability occurs both within individual patients, among patients, and between definable geographic subtypes. 13,74 HIV, unlike
HTLV-I, is highly cytopathic for CD4+ T cells.

FIGURE 10.1-3. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) genome. Overall, the genomic organization of HIV is the same as for the simpler retroviruses, with gag, pol, and
env genes flanked on each end by long terminal repeats (LTR). HIV also encodes other proteins involved in the viral replication cycle.

HIV encodes two trans-acting proteins, Tat and Rev, that are analogous in function to the HTLV proteins Tax and Rex. 76 Like HTLV-I Tax, HIV Tat is necessary for
efficient expression from the viral promoter in the 5' LTR. At a molecular level, however, Tat and Tax act through different mechanisms. Instead of interacting indirectly
with a region of the proviral LTR via interactions with cellular transcription factors, Tat interacts directly with a 5' region of HIV RNA known as the trans-activating
region (TAR) and promotes processive transcription through further interactions with cellular factors that modify RNA polymerase II function.
In contrast, HTLV Rex and HIV Rev use similar mechanisms to promote expression of viral structural and enzymatic proteins. Rex and Rev bind to their respective
RNA response elements, rxre and rre, to mediate the export of full length and singly spliced viral transcripts from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. In addition to Tat and
Rev, HIV encodes a number of accessory proteins not found in other retroviruses. 76 These include Vif, Vpu, and Nef, the functions of which are not yet fully

elucidated. The protein Vpr contributes to the ability of HIV to infect nondividing cells, a property unique to lentiviruses.
The immunodeficiency resulting from HIV infection can contribute to tumor development and patient prognosis. There is, however, little evidence that HIV is directly
oncogenic.77 Although HIV infection may contribute to the pathogenesis or complicate the treatment of neoplastic diseases, no viral protein has been shown to be
directly transforming. Transduction of cellular oncogenes has not been observed. Despite rare reports of insertional mutagenesis resulting in T-cell lymphoma, 78 this
disease does not occur disproportionately in HIV infection.
In HIV infected persons, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), Hodgkin's disease, and cervical cancer are all AIDS-defining illnesses. Many of the
neoplasms common to AIDS patients are associated with infection by DNA viruses. These include human herpes virus-8 (HHV-8), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and
human papillomavirus. 79 These viruses and their associations with oncogenesis are discussed in detail elsewhere in this volume, but are mentioned briefly here.
The tumor biology of KS is not well understood. 80 Unlike most tumors that have readily identifiable neoplastic cells, KS tumors are histologically complex. The
predominant cell and the most likely candidate tumor cell of KS is the spindle cell, but other cells, including infiltrating leukocytes, are present in the tumor. It is
unclear how much of the tumor is made up of true neoplastic cells versus hyperplastic, secondary inflammatory, or angiogenic cells. Instead of monoclonality, a
polyclonal, multicentric proliferative process seems to occur, which is reflected in the frequently observed waxing and waning clinical course of KS. For example,
lesions may disappear in one region, only to be supplanted by new lesions elsewhere. Although evidence supports HHV-8 as the etiologic agent of KS, HIV is clearly
an important cofactor in KS development.
In addition to immunodeficiency induced by HIV-1 infection, the viral Tat protein also may be involved in the pathogenesis of KS. Tat increases the level of a variety of
cytokines, including interferon-g, tumor necrosis factor-a, IL-1, and IL-6. 81 These factors may promote growth of endothelial cells and production of angiogenic
substances, including basic fibroblast growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor. 82,83 Additionally, Tat protein that is released from HIV-infected cells can be
taken up by other cells, thereby widening its potential effects. 84 Thus, a complex interplay between HIV, the cytokines induced by HIV infection, and HHV-8 may
provide the microenvironment and stimulus for KS development. 80,85,86
AIDS patients are also at increased risk for the development of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. 87,88 and 89 The majority of these lymphomas are of B-cell origin, and many
are associated with EBV infection or with rearrangements of c-myc. In general, these malignancies carry a poor prognosis. An aggressive form of non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma seen in AIDS patients is primary central nervous system lymphoma, a malignancy that is rare in the general population. Unlike the systemic lymphomas,
primary central nervous system non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is nearly universally associated with EBV infection. In this respect it is similar to the posttransplant
lymphoproliferative disorder seen in organ transplant recipients. Another form of systemic non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, primary effusion lymphoma, has been associated
with infection by HHV-8; co-infection of cells with EBV also has been observed. 90,91 Multicentric Castleman's disease also is associated with HHV-8 infection. 92 The
role that HIV itself might play in the genesis of the AIDS-associated lymphoproliferative disorders is not clear. In addition to the immunosuppression caused by T-cell
depletion, it has been theorized that HIV may contribute to lymphomagenesis by affecting cytokine production and by altering B-cell regulation.
Cervical carcinoma and anal squamous cell carcinoma are two other malignancies seen in AIDS patients; both are associated with human papillomavirus infection.
These malignancies may present in a more advanced or invasive form than in non-HIV–infected patients. Immune suppression may support development of and
complicates treatment of these tumors, but at this time there is no evidence that HIV plays a more direct role in their genesis.

HEPATITIS C VIRUS
HCV infection is a well-established risk factor for the development of hepatocellcular carcinoma (HCC), although its role in oncogenesis may not be direct. 93,94 HCV
belongs to the Flaviviridae family of viruses. Virions consist of a single-stranded plus sense RNA molecule surrounded by a nucleocapsid and envelope. 95 The viral
genome is approximately 9500 nucleotides long and has a single, large open reading frame encoding viral proteins. The 5' leader sequence of the viral genome
contains stem-loop structures, one of which acts as an internal ribosome entry site (IRES). The 5' end of the large open reading frame encodes the capsid (C) protein
and envelope (E1,E2) glycoproteins, whereas the enzymatic proteins are encoded by the 3' end. These enzymatic proteins include a metalloprotease, a serine
protease and helicase, and the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase responsible for viral nucleic acid replication. The extreme 3' end of the RNA genome contains a
short untranslated region.
After entry into cells, the viral genome is replicated by the viral-encoded RNA-dependent RNA polymerase via a minus-strand RNA intermediate; no DNA copy is
made. Plus strand viral RNA molecules lack the usual CAP modification at the 5' end of mRNAs and are translated into a single polyprotein, making use of the IRES to
initiate translation. The polyprotein produced is processed to yield all HCV enzymatic and structural proteins, including the core and envelope proteins. Genomic RNA
and structural proteins associate to form progeny virus particles, which are released from cells, most likely through the endoplasmic reticulum and host cell secretory
pathways.
HCV is transmitted by contaminated blood products, by shared needles of intravenous drug users, perinatally, and via sexual routes, but in approximately 10% of
cases known risk factors for transmission are not identified. It is estimated that approximately 3 million people in the United States are chronically infected with HCV. 96
HCV infection is strongly associated with the development of cirrhosis and HCC, although the regional prevalence of HCV infection in HCC varies. 96,97 HCV infection
is chronic in 75% to 85% of cases, with a subset of people developing chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis. The rate of HCC development in those with cirrhosis is
estimated to be 1% to 4% per year. However, an individual patient's risk for progression to HCC development is difficult to assess because many additional factors
affect the likelihood of HCC development. For example, alcohol consumption or co-infection with hepatitis B virus greatly increases the relative risk for developing
HCC.98
The role of HCV in HCC pathogenesis is not entirely clear. There is a 20- to 30-year period after initial HCV infection before development of HCC. It has been
postulated that HCC largely develops indirectly as a result of the inflammatory responses that lead to hepatocyte destruction, regeneration, and fibrosis. Nevertheless,
the virus may play a more direct role in neoplastic transformation of hepatocytes. For example, growing evidence suggests that the HCV core protein may contribute
to tumor development.99,100 and 101 Infection by different strains of HCV may also pose different levels of risk for HCC development. Many groups have reported that
HCV genotype 1b confers an elevated risk for developing HCC. However, the observed effects were variable and not seen in all studies. 102,103 and 104
For those infected with HCV, interferon-a therapy is effective in a minority of cases in stably reducing viral load and improving histologic hepatic changes. 105,106 In this
subgroup of patients, the risk of HCC development appears to be decreased but not eliminated. 107,108,109 and 110 It is still not certain if this treatment can decrease
permanently the risk of developing HCV-associated HCC. Treatment with both interferon and ribavirin, a synthetic guanosine analogue, can increase the number of
sustained responders to treatment to 30% to 40%. 111 Unfortunately, attempts at early detection of HCV-associated HCC by ultrasound or a-fetoprotein levels have not
proven effective in reducing HCC-related mortality.
In addition to infecting hepatocytes, HCV can infect hematopoietic cells, including lymphocytes and CD34+ precursor cells. Patients infected with HCV are suggested
to be at increased risk for the development of B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. 112,113 This association, however, has not been observed in all studies. Further studies
are needed to resolve fully the potential contribution of HCV infection to the development of some subtypes of B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Coffin JM. Retroviridae and their replication. In: Fields BN, Knipe DM, eds. Fundamental virology. New York: Raven Press, 1991.
2. Weiss R, Teich N, Varmus H, Coffin J. RNA tumor viruses. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1985.
3. zur Hausen H. Viruses in human cancers. Science 1991;254:1167.
4. Varmus H. Retroviruses. Science 1988;240:1427.
5. Hu WS, Temin HM. Retroviral recombination and reverse transcription. Science 1990;250:1227.
6. Hu WS, Temin HM. Genetic consequences of packaging two RNA genomes in one retroviral particle: pseudodiploidy and high rate of genetic recombination. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1990;87:1556.
7. Temin HM. Sex and recombination in retroviruses. Trends Genet 1991;7:71.
8. Zhang J, Temin HM. Rate and mechanism of nonhomologous recombination during a single cycle of retroviral replication. Science 1993;259:234.
9. Temin HM, Mizutani S. RNA-dependent DNA polymerase in virions of Rous sarcoma virus. Nature 1970;226:1211.
10. Baltimore D. RNA-dependent DNA polymerase in virions of RNA tumour viruses. Nature 1970;226:1209.
11. Stehelin D, Varmus HE, Bishop JM, Vogt PK. DNA related to the transforming gene(s) of avian sarcoma viruses is present in normal avian DNA. Nature 1976;260:170.

12. Swain A, Coffin JM. Mechanism of transduction by retroviruses. Science 1992;255:841.
13. Domingo E, Holland J. Mutation rates and rapid evolution of RNA viruses. In: Morse S, ed. The evolutionary biology of viruses. New York: Raven Press, 1994:161.
14. Steinhauer DA, Domingo E, Holland JJ. Lack of evidence for proofreading mechanisms associated with an RNA virus polymerase. Gene 1992;122:281.
15. Gojobori T, Yokoyama S. Rates of evolution of the retroviral oncogene of Moloney murine sarcoma virus and of its cellular homologues. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1985;82:4198.
16. Parker RC, Varmus HE, Bishop JM. Expression of v-src and chicken c-src in rat cells demonstrates qualitative differences between pp60v-src and pp60c-src. Cell 1984;37:131.
17. Hayward WS, Neel BG, Astrin SM. Activation of a cellular onc gene by promoter insertion in ALV-induced lymphoid leukosis. Nature 1981;290:475.
18. Nilsen TW, Maroney PA, Goodwin RG, et al. c-erbB activation in ALV-induced erythroblastosis: novel RNA processing and promoter insertion result in expression of an amino-truncated EGF
receptor. Cell 1985;41:719.
19. Wong-Staal F, Gallo RC. Human T-lymphotropic retroviruses. Nature 1985;317:395.
20. Gallo RC. Human retroviruses: a decade of discovery and link with human disease. J Infect Dis 1991;164:235.
21. Poiesz BJ, Ruscetti FW, Reitz MS, Kalyanaraman VS, Gallo RC. Isolation of a new type C retrovirus (HTLV) in primary uncultured cells of a patient with Sézary T-cell leukaemia. Nature
1981;294:268.
22. Yodoi J, Takatsuki K, Masuda T. Two cases of T-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia in Japan [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1974;290:572.
23. Uchiyama T, Yodoi J, Sagawa K, Takatsuki K, Uchino H. Adult T-cell leukemia: clinical and hematologic features of 16 cases. Blood 1977;50:481.
24. Robert-Guroff M, Nakao Y, Notake K, et al. Natural antibodies to human retrovirus HTLV in a cluster of Japanese patients with adult T cell leukemia. Science 1982;215:975.
25. Kalyanaraman VS, Sarngadharan MG, Nakao Y, et al. Natural antibodies to the structural core protein (p24) of the human T-cell leukemia (lymphoma) retrovirus found in sera of leukemia
patients in Japan. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1982;79:1653.
26. Jarrett RF, Mitsuya H, Mann DL, et al. Configuration and expression of the T cell receptor beta chain gene in human T-lymphotrophic virus I-infected cells. J Exp Med 1986;163:383.
27. Matsuoka M, Hagiya M, Hattori T, et al. Gene rearrangements of T cell receptor beta and gamma chains in HTLV-I infected primary neoplastic T cells. Leukemia 1988;2:84.
28. Markham PD, Salahuddin SZ, Macchi B, Robert-Guroff M, Gallo RC. Transformation of different phenotypic types of human bone marrow T-lymphocytes by HTLV-1. Int J Cancer 1984;33:13.
29. Chen IS, Slamon DJ, Rosenblatt JD, et al. The x gene is essential for HTLV replication. Science 1985;229:54.
30. Felber BK, Paskalis H, Kleinman-Ewing C, Wong-Staal F, Pavlakis GN. The pX protein of HTLV-I is a transcriptional activator of its long terminal repeats. Science 1985;229:675.
31. Wachsman W, Cann AJ, Williams JL, et al. HTLV x gene mutants exhibit novel transcriptional regulatory phenotypes. Science 1987;235:674.
32. Seiki M, Hikikoshi A, Taniguchi T, Yoshida M. Expression of the pX gene of HTLV-I: general splicing mechanism in the HTLV family. Science 1985;228:1532.
33. Fornerod M, Ohno M, Yoshida M, Mattaj IW. CRM1 is an export receptor for leucine-rich nuclear export signals. Cell 1997;90:1051.
34. Neville M, Stutz F, Lee L, Davis LI, Rosbash M. The importin-beta family member Crm1p bridges the interaction between Rev and the nuclear pore complex during nuclear export. Curr Biol
1997;7:767.
35. Li J, Tang H, Mullen TM, et al. A role for RNA helicase A in post-transcriptional regulation of HIV type 1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:709.
36. Leung K, Nabel GJ. HTLV-1 transactivator induces interleukin-2 receptor expression through an NF-kappa Blike factor. Nature 1988;333:776.
37. Nyborg JK, Dynan WS, Chen IS, Wachsman W. Binding of host-cell factors to DNA sequences in the long terminal repeat of human T-cell leukemia virus type I: implications for viral gene
expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:1457.
38. Armstrong AP, Franklin AA, Uittenbogaard MN, Giebler HA, Nyborg JK. Pleiotropic effect of the human T-cell leukemia virus Tax protein on the DNA binding activity of eukaryotic transcription
factors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:7303.
39. Brady J, Jeang KT, Duvall J, Khoury G. Identification of p40x-responsive regulatory sequences within the human T-cell leukemia virus type I long terminal repeat. J Virol 1987;61:2175.
40. Fujisawa J, Seiki M, Sato M, Yoshida M. A transcriptional enhancer sequence of HTLV-I is responsible for trans-activation mediated by p40 chi HTLV-I. Embo J 1986;5:713.
41. Cann AJ, Chen ISY. Human T cell leukemia viruses types I and II. In: Fields BN, Knipe DM, eds. Virology. New York: Raven Press, 1990.
42. Feuer G, Chen IS. Mechanisms of human T-cell leukemia virusinduced leukemogenesis. Biochim Biophys Acta 1992;1114:223.
43. Wattel E, Vartanian JP, Pannetier C, Wain-Hobson S. Clonal expansion of human T-cell leukemia virus type Iinfected cells in asymptomatic and symptomatic carriers without malignancy. J
Virol 1995;69:2863.
44. Manns A, Hisada M, La Grenade L. Human T-lymphotropic virus type I infection. Lancet 1999;353:1951.
45. Perini G, Wagner S, Green MR. Recognition of bZIP proteins by the human T-cell leukaemia virus transactivator Tax. Nature 1995;376:602.
46. Baranger AM, Palmer CR, Hamm MK, et al. Mechanism of DNA-binding enhancement by the human T-cell leukaemia virus transactivator Tax. Nature 1995;376:606.
47. Bex F, Gaynor RB. Regulation of gene expression by HTLV-I Tax protein. Methods 1998;16:83.
48. Azimi N, Brown K, Bamford RN, et al. Human T cell lymphotropic virus type I Tax protein trans-activates interleukin 15 gene transcription through an NF-kappaB site. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1998;95:2452.
49. Kwok RP, Laurance ME, Lundblad JR, et al. Control of cAMP-regulated enhancers by the viral transactivator Tax through CREB and the co-activator CBP. Nature 1996;380:642.
50. Inoue J, Seiki M, Taniguchi T, Tsuru S, Yoshida M. Induction of interleukin 2 receptor gene expression by p40x encoded by human T-cell leukemia virus type 1. Embo J 1986;5:2883.
51. Maruyama M, Shibuya H, Harada H, et al. Evidence for aberrant activation of the interleukin-2 autocrine loop by HTLV-1-encoded p40x and T3/Ti complex triggering. Cell 1987;48:343.
52. Siekevitz M, Feinberg MB, Holbrook N, Wong-Staal F, Greene WC. Activation of interleukin 2 and interleukin 2 receptor (Tac) promoter expression by the trans-activator (tat) gene product of
human T-cell leukemia virus, type I. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987;84:5389.
53. Arya SK, Wong-Staal F, Gallo RC. T-cell growth factor gene: lack of expression in human T-cell leukemia-lymphoma virusinfected cells. Science 1984;223:1086.
54. Mulloy JC, Crownley RW, Fullen J, Leonard WJ, Franchini G. The human T-cell leukemia/lymphotropic virus type 1 p12I proteins bind the interleukin-2 receptor beta and gamma chains and
affects their expression on the cell surface. J Virol 1996;70:3599.
55. Jeang KT, Widen SG, Semmes OJ, Wilson SH. HTLV-I trans-activator protein, tax, is a trans-repressor of the human beta-polymerase gene. Science 1990;247:1082.
56. Mann DL, Popovic M, Sarin P, et al. Cell lines producing human T-cell lymphoma virus show altered HLA expression. Nature 1983;305:58.
57. Darnell JE Jr, Kerr IM, Stark GR. Jak-STAT pathways and transcriptional activation in response to IFNs and other extracellular signaling proteins. Science 1994;264:1415.
58. Migone TS, Lin JX, Cereseto A, et al. Constitutively activated Jak-STAT pathway in T cells transformed with HTLV-I. Science 1995;269:79.
59. Takemoto S, Mulloy JC, Cereseto A, et al. Proliferation of adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma cells is associated with the constitutive activation of JAK/STAT proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1997;94:13897.
60. Hollsberg P. Mechanisms of T-cell activation by human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1999;63:308.
61. Jin DY, Spencer F, Jeang KT. Human T cell leukemia virus type 1 oncoprotein Tax targets the human mitotic checkpoint protein MAD1. Cell 1998;93:81.
62. Cereseto A, Kislyakova T, Washington Parks R, Nicot C, Franchini G. Differential response to genotoxic stress in immortalized or transformed human T-lymphotropic virus type Iinfected
T-cells. J Gen Virol 1999;80:1575.
63. Shimoyama M. Diagnostic criteria and classification of clinical subtypes of adult T-cell leukaemia-lymphoma. A report from the Lymphoma Study Group (198487). Br J Haematol 1991;79:428.
64. Ijichi S, Ramundo MB, Takahashi H, Hall WW. In vivo cellular tropism of human T cell leukemia virus type II (HTLV-II). J Exp Med 1992;176:293.
65. Rosenblatt JD, Chen IS, Wachsman W. Infection with HTLV-I and HTLV-II: evolving concepts. Semin Hematol 1988;25:230.
66. Mulloy JC, Migone TS, Ross TM, et al. Human and simian T-cell leukemia viruses type 2 (HTLV-2 and STLV-2(pan-p)) transform T cells independently of Jak/STAT activation. J Virol
1998;72:4408.
67. Salemi M, Vandamme AM, Desmyter J, Casoli C, Bertazzoni U. The origin and evolution of human T-cell lymphotropic virus type II (HTLV-II) and the relationship with its replication strategy.
Gene 1999;234:11.
68. Manns A, Blattner WA. The epidemiology of the human T-cell lymphotrophic virus type I and type II: etiologic role in human disease. Transfusion 1991;31:67.
69. Flexner C. HIV-protease inhibitors. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1281.
70. Palella FJ Jr, Delaney KM, Moorman AC, et al. Declining morbidity and mortality among patients with advanced human immunodeficiency virus infection. HIV Outpatient Study Investigators. N
Engl J Med 1998;338:853.
71. Gao F, Yue L, White AT, et al. Human infection by genetically diverse SIVSM-related HIV-2 in West Africa. Nature 1992;358:495.
72. Gao F, Bailes E, Robertson DL, et al. Origin of HIV-1 in the chimpanzee Pan troglodytes troglodytes. Nature 1999;397:436.
73. Wei X, Ghosh SK, Taylor ME, et al. Viral dynamics in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection. Nature 1995;373:117.
74. Coffin JM. HIV population dynamics in vivo: implications for genetic variation, pathogenesis, and therapy. Science 1995;267:483.
75. Perelson AS, Neumann AU, Markowitz M, Leonard JM, Ho DD. HIV-1 dynamics in vivo: virion clearance rate, infected cell life-span, and viral generation time. Science 1996;271:1582.
76. Tang H, Kuhen KL, Wong-Staal F. Lentivirus replication and regulation. Annu Rev Genet 1999;33:133.
77. Sanguineti-Diaz C, Rodriguez-Tafur J, Patarca R. Primate retroviruses and oncogenesis. Crit Rev Oncog 1998;9:209.
78. Shiramizu B, Herndier BG, McGrath MS. Identification of a common clonal human immunodeficiency virus integration site in human immunodeficiency virusassociated lymphomas. Cancer Res
1994;54:2069.
79. Feigal EG. AIDS-associated malignancies: research perspectives. Biochim Biophys Acta 1999;1423:C1.
80. Gallo RC. The enigmas of Kaposi's sarcoma. Science 1998;282:1837.
81. Fiorelli V, Barillari G, Toschi E, et al. IFN-gamma induces endothelial cells to proliferate and to invade the extracellular matrix in response to the HIV-1 Tat protein: implications for
AIDS-Kaposi's sarcoma pathogenesis. J Immunol 1999;162:1165.
82. Samaniego F, Markham PD, Gendelman R, Gallo RC, Ensoli B. Inflammatory cytokines induce endothelial cells to produce and release basic fibroblast growth factor and to promote Kaposi's
sarcomalike lesions in nude mice. J Immunol 1997;158:1887.
83. Barillari G, Sgadari C, Fiorelli V, et al. The Tat protein of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 promotes vascular cell growth and locomotion by engaging the a5b1 and avb3 integrins and by
mobilizing sequestered basic fibroblast growth factor. Blood 1999;94:663.
84. Chang HC, Samaniego F, Nair BC, Buonaguro L, Ensoli B. HIV-1 Tat protein exits from cells via a leaderless secretory pathway and binds to extracellular matrixassociated heparan sulfate
proteoglycans through its basic region. AIDS 1997;11:1421.
85. Fiorelli V, Gendelman R, Sirianni MC, et al. g-Interferon produced by CD8+ T cells infiltrating Kaposi's sarcoma induces spindle cells with angiogenic phenotype and synergy with human
immunodeficiency virus-1 Tat protein: an immune response to human herpesvirus-8 infection. Blood 1998;91:956.
86. Barillari G, Sgadari C, Palladino C, et al. Inflammatory cytokines synergize with the HIV-1 Tat protein to promote angiogenesis and Kaposi's sarcoma via induction of basic fibroblast growth
factor and the avb3 integrin. J Immunol 1999;163:1929.
87. DeMario MD, Liebowitz DN. Lymphomas in the immunocompromised patient. Semin Oncol 1998;25:492.
88. Lyons SF, Liebowitz DN. The roles of human viruses in the pathogenesis of lymphoma. Semin Oncol 1998;25:461.
89. Aboulafia D. Epidemiology and pathogenesis of AIDS-related lymphomas. Oncology (Huntingt) 1998;12:1068; discussion 1081.
90. Nador RG, Cesarman E, Chadburn A, et al. Primary effusion lymphoma: a distinct clinicopathologic entity associated with the Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpes virus. Blood 1996;88:645.
91. Horenstein MG, Nador RG, Chadburn A, et al. Epstein-Barr virus latent gene expression in primary effusion lymphomas containing Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus/human
herpesvirus-8. Blood 1997;90:1186.
92. Soulier J, Grollet L, Oksenhendler E, et al. Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in multicentric Castleman's disease. Blood 1995;86:1276.
93. Di Bisceglie AM. Hepatitis C and hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 1997;26:34S.
94. Colombo M. The role of hepatitis C virus in hepatocellular carcinoma. Recent Results Cancer Res 1998;154:337.
95. Houghton M. Hepatitis C viruses. In: Fields BN, Knipe DM, Howley PM, et al., eds. Fields virology. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1996:1035.
96. El-Serag HB, Mason AC. Rising incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in the United States. N Engl J Med 1999; 340:745.
97. Recommendations for prevention and control of hepatitis C (HCV) infection and HCV-related chronic disease. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1998;47:1.
98. Donato F, Tagger A, Chiesa R, et al. Hepatitis B and C virus infection, alcohol drinking, and hepatocellular carcinoma: a case-control study in Italy. Brescia HCC Study. Hepatology
1997;26:579.

99. Moriya K, Fujie H, Shintani Y, et al. The core protein of hepatitis C virus induces hepatocellular carcinoma in transgenic mice. Nat Med 1998;4:1065.
100. Ray RB, Steele R, Meyer K, Ray R. Hepatitis C virus core protein represses p21WAF1/Cip1/Sid1 promoter activity. Gene 1998;208:331.
101. Ray RB, Steele R, Meyer K, Ray R. Transcriptional repression of p53 promoter by hepatitis C virus core protein. J Biol Chem 1997;272:10983.
102. Bruno S, Silini E, Crosignani A, et al. Hepatitis C virus genotypes and risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis: a prospective study. Hepatology 1997;25:754.
103. Tanaka H, Tsukuma H, Yamano H, et al. Hepatitis C virus 1b(II) infection and development of chronic hepatitis, liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma: a case-control study in Japan. J
Epidemiol 1998;8:244.
104. Reid AE, Koziel MJ, Aiza I, et al. Hepatitis C virus genotypes and viremia and hepatocellular carcinoma in the United States. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:1619.
105. Ikeda K, Saitoh S, Arase Y, et al. Effect of interferon therapy on hepatocellular carcinogenesis in patients with chronic hepatitis type C: a long-term observation study of 1,643 patients using
statistical bias correction with proportional hazard analysis. Hepatology 1999;29:1124.
106. International Interferon-alpha Hepatocellular Carcinoma Study Group. Effect of interferon-alpha on progression of cirrhosis to hepatocellular carcinoma: a retrospective cohort study [published
erratum appears in Lancet 1998:352:1230]. Lancet 1998;351:1535.
107. Shindo M, Ken A, Okuno T. Varying incidence of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with chronic hepatitis C responding differently to interferon therapy. Cancer 1999;85:1943.
108. Yoshida H, Shiratori Y, Moriyama M, et al. Interferon therapy reduces the risk for hepatocellular carcinoma: national surveillance program of cirrhotic and noncirrhotic patients with chronic
hepatitis C in Japan. Inhibition of Hepatocarcinogenesis by Interferon Therapy Study Group. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:174.
109. Kasahara A, Hayashi N, Mochizuki K, et al. Risk factors for hepatocellular carcinoma and its incidence after interferon treatment in patients with chronic hepatitis C. Osaka Liver Disease Study
Group. Hepatology 1998;27:1394.
110. Okanoue T, Itoh Y, Minami M, et al. Interferon therapy lowers the rate of progression to hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic hepatitis C but not significantly in an advanced stage: a
retrospective study in 1148 patients. Viral Hepatitis Therapy Study Group. J Hepatol 1999;30:653.
111. McHutchison JG, Gordon SC, Schiff ER, et al. Interferon alfa-2b alone or in combination with ribavirin as initial treatment for chronic hepatitis C. Hepatitis Interventional Therapy Group. N Engl
J Med 1998;339:1485.
112. Collier JD, Zanke B, Moore M, et al. No association between hepatitis C and B-cell lymphoma. Hepatology 1999;29:1259.
113. Silvestri F, Pipan C, Barillari G, et al. Prevalence of hepatitis C virus infection in patients with lymphoproliferative disorders. Blood 1996;87:4296.

SECTION 10.2 DNA Viruses
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 10.2
DNA Viruses
PETER M. HOWLEY
DON GANEM
ELLIOTT KIEFF

Introduction
Hepadnaviruses and Hepatocellular Carcinoma
Papillomaviruses and Human Cancer
Epstein-Barr Virus
Kaposi's Sarcoma–Associated Herpesvirus (Human Herpesvirus-8)
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Viral oncology has its foundations in scientific observations made at the turn of the twentieth century and defining the transmissibility of avian leukemia (in Denmark in
1908) and an avian sarcoma in chickens (in 1911). 1,2 These important discoveries were not appreciated at the time, and their impact on virology and medicine was not
recognized for decades. The importance of the work of Peyton Rous 2 demonstrating that cell-free extracts from a sarcoma in chickens could, within a few weeks,
induce tumors in injected chickens, even when the extracts were passed through filters that retained bacteria, finally was recognized by a Nobel prize in 1968. Rous's
original work pointed out that this infectious agent not only was capable of inducing tumors but also imprinted the phenotypic characteristics of the original tumor on
the recipient cell. At the time, this early work was relegated to the rank of avian curiosities, and its importance remained unrecognized for several decades.
In the 1930s, Richard Shope published a series of articles demonstrating cell-free transmission of tumors in rabbits. The first studies involved fibromatous tumors
found in the footpads of wild cottontail rabbits that could be transmitted by injecting cell-free extracts in either wild or domestic rabbits. 3 Subsequent studies have
shown that this virus, now referred to as the Shope fibroma virus, is a pox virus. Additional studies carried out by Shope demonstrated that cutaneous papillomatosis
in wild cottontail rabbits could also be transmitted by cell-free extracts. In a number of cases, these benign papillomas would progress spontaneously into squamous
cell carcinomas in infected domestic rabbits or in the infected cottontail rabbits. 4,5 In general, however, the field of viral oncology lay dormant until the early 1950s, with
the discovery of the murine leukemia viruses by Ludwig Gross 6 and of the mouse polyomavirus by Gross et al. 7,8 Such findings of tumor viruses in mice led many
cancer researchers and virologists to the field of viral oncology. These researchers hoped that these initial observations in mammals could be extended to humans
and that a fair proportion of human tumors might also be found to have a viral etiology. The Special Viral Cancer Program at the National Cancer Institute grew from
this intense interest in viral oncology and the hope that human tumor viruses would be identified.
Many of the most important developments in modern molecular biology derive from studies in viral oncology from the 1960s and 1970s. The discovery of reverse
transcriptase, the development of recombinant DNA technology, the discovery of messenger RNA (mRNA) splicing, and the discovery of oncogenes and, more
recently, tumor suppressor genes all are developments that derive directly from studies in viral oncology. Oncogenes were first recognized as cellular genes that had
been acquired by retroviruses through recombinational processes to convert them into acute transforming RNA tumor viruses. It is now recognized that oncogenes
participate in many different types of tumors and can be involved at different stages of tumorigenesis and viral oncology. This has contributed significantly to the
concepts of nonviral carcinogenesis. It is likely that the direct, transforming, oncogene-transducing retroviruses do not play a major causative role in naturally
occurring cancers in animals or in humans but rather represent laboratory-generated recombinants. A list of human viruses with oncogenic properties is presented in
Table 10.2-1. This list includes such viruses as the transforming adenoviruses, which are capable of transforming normal cells into malignant cells in the laboratory
but which have not been associated with any known human tumors. The list also includes viruses such as the papillomaviruses, which have been etiologically
associated with specific human cancers and which have been shown to encode transforming viral oncogenes. Finally, it includes such viruses as the hepatitis B and C
viruses, which have been closely linked with a specific human tumor, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), for which the evidence of a bona fide viral oncogene remains
unclear.

TABLE 10.2-1. Human Viruses with Oncogenic Properties

This chapter focuses primarily on the DNA viruses that have been associated with specific human cancers and discusses the biology and pertinent molecular biology
of these viruses. Chapter 10.1 deals with the RNA viruses, particularly the human retroviruses. The evidence pertaining to the association of each of these viruses
with specific types of human neoplasia is presented, and the mechanisms by which these viruses may contribute to malignant transformation are discussed.

HEPADNAVIRUSES AND HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA
HCC is one of the world's most common malignancies. Though rare in the West, the disease is highly prevalent in Southeast Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. In the
1970s, this distribution was recognized to mirror the distribution of chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. This fact, and the long-recognized histopathologic
association between HCC and chronic hepatitis in the surrounding nontumorous liver, led to the strong presumption that chronic HBV infection predisposes to hepatic
cancer. 9 This presumption has been strikingly validated in large prospective epidemiologic studies in Taiwan, in which chronically infected individuals were followed
for deaths due to this tumor. 10 These studies showed that chronic HBV infection is associated with a 100-fold increase in HCC risk over that of controls who are not
chronically infected.
HBV is a small DNA virus classified as a member of the hepadnavirus family (for hepatotropic DNA viruses); for review, see Ganem and Schneider. 11 HBV is the only
human virus in this family, which also includes related viruses of woodchucks [woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHV)], ground squirrels [ground squirrel hepatitis virus,
(GSHV)], and ducks [duck hepatitis B virus (DHBV)] (Table 10.2-2). Primary infection of susceptible hosts with HBV produces either a subclinical infection or acute
hepatitis B, depending on the age of the host and many other poorly understood factors. In adult hosts, 95% of such infections resolve, with clearance of virus from
liver and blood and the induction of lasting immunity to reinfection. However, 5% of these infections do not resolve but result in persistent hepatic infection and
viremia; most of the demonstrated HCC risk falls within this subgroup of infections. Persistent HBV infections usually last for the life of the host and can have a variety
of pathologic consequences. In many hosts thus affected, such infections are subclinical and accompanied by little hepatocellular injury. This asymptomatic carrier
state provides evidence that the HBV replication cycle is not directly cytopathic for host cells, an inference that has been strongly sustained by studies of viral
replication in cultured cells. 11 Nonetheless, 20% to 25% of persistently infected hosts display hepatocellular injury, in the form of either chronic persistent hepatitis

(inflammation limited to the periportal areas, with scant necrosis and no disruption of hepatic architecture) or chronic active hepatitis (necroinflammatory changes
extending from portal to central areas). The latter is considered a severe lesion with significant potential to progress to cirrhosis and liver failure.

TABLE 10.2-2. The Hepadnavirus Family

It is thought that in such hosts, the hepatocyte injury is due to host immune responses triggered by recognition of viral antigens presented on the surface of infected
cells. 12 Much has been learned recently about the mechanisms of such injury. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) appear to play a key role in this process. In
experiments with transgenic mice expressing viral antigens, transfer of CTLs specific for those antigens leads to a hepatitis, the severity of which depends on the
dose of transferred T cells. 13 Importantly, however, direct killing of the cells is only a part of the story. 14 Much of the injury produced in such experiments is due to
secondary, antigen-nonspecific responses triggered by the initial CTL activation and cytokine release 15: release of inflammatory molecules that recruit other
inflammatory cell types, production of toxic reactive oxygen radicals, and the like. In addition, infected cells displaying deregulated viral gene expression may display
enhanced sensitivity to tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and other inflammatory cytokines. 16
The induction of hepatocellular injury is believed to be important in HCC pathogenesis because it triggers in the liver a stereotypical proliferative response. Two types
of regenerative response are known in the liver, which depend to some extent on the nature of the hepatic insult. (The mechanisms by which these responses occur
remain obscure.) In classical liver regeneration (as observed, for example, after a partial liver resection), all mature hepatocytes in the liver—which, under normal
circumstances, are nondividing—synchronously reenter the cell cycle, resulting in the prompt restoration of normal hepatic mass. 17 A somewhat different proliferative
response is observed after treatment with certain toxic or carcinogenic chemicals. In this response, poorly characterized cells in the periductal areas (termed oval
cells, largely on the basis of their morphology) undergo expansion. These cells are thought to be precursor cells to both bile duct epithelium and hepatocytes. 18 They
also share many of the biochemical properties of cells seen in hepatic cancers (e.g., a-fetoprotein production) and, for this reason, are thought by some to be the
target cell for transformation in hepatic carcinogenesis by a variety of agents. Although it is likely that both forms of proliferative response are operative in chronic
hepatitis, considerable debate continues to surround this issue.
However, the fact that major liver cell proliferation is operative throughout the prolonged preneoplastic period is undisputed and is believed to be an important
precondition for carcinogenesis. Such proliferation increases opportunities for replicative errors (mutations) that, over time, can contribute to the loss of normal
cellular growth control; cells harboring such mutations will have a selective advantage that further perpetuates this cycle. Attesting to the importance of cellular injury
and turnover in HCC development is the fact that HCC usually is accompanied by pathologic signs of severe liver injury (chronic active hepatitis and cirrhosis) in the
nontumorous liver; it is distinctly uncommon to see hepatoma in hosts whose livers contain minimal evidence of injury.
In the preceding formulation, HBV serves as an agent of oncogenesis chiefly by (indirectly) provoking cellular proliferation in response to immune-mediated injury. In
this view, no direct genetic contribution is made by viral sequences acting in cis or viral gene products acting in trans. If this view is correct, then other agents, which
similarly provoke chronic liver cell injury and regeneration, should likewise be associated with hepatic cancer. In this connection, it is of interest that chronic infection
with hepatitis C virus, a genetically unrelated hepatotropic RNA virus that similarly produces chronic hepatitis, also confers an increased risk for HCC development. 19
Despite strong experimental support for the pathogenetic scheme just presented, there is reason to believe that hepadnaviruses may also make a more direct genetic
contribution to HCC. Phylogenetic analyses of hepadnaviral genome organization reveal that the structure of the oncogenic mammalian viruses differs from that of the
nononcogenic avian viruses in an important way. 11 The mammalian viruses all harbor an additional coding region, termed ORF X (for open reading frame X; Fig.
10.2-1), that encodes a small regulatory protein. 20 This open reading frame is absent in the avian viruses, which fail to induce HCC in their native hosts despite the
regular induction of persistent infection. Interestingly, in several lines of transgenic mice displaying constitutive hepatic expression of ORF X, HCC arises with
increased frequency. 21,22 Tumors in such mice do not begin until midlife, suggesting that additional genetic changes are necessary for loss of normal growth control.

FIGURE 10.2-1. Genomic and transcriptional organization of the human hepatitis B virus. The inner circle represents the partially double-stranded virion DNA, with
dashes specifying the single-stranded genomic region. The locations of the direct repeat (DR1 and DR2) regions are indicated. The boxed arcs specify the viral
coding regions, and the arrows indicate the direction of translation. The outermost wavy lines depict the viral RNAs identified in infected cells, with the arrows
indicating the direction of transcription and the AAAs indicating the polyadenylated 3' tails. ORF, open reading frame.

The sequence of ORF X reveals no homology to known oncogenes or growth regulatory loci, and little is known of its biochemical function. In transient cotransfection
assays, X expression up-regulates a wide variety of viral and cellular promoters, but the mechanism by which this activation is achieved has remained obscure. In
some situations, X appears to stimulate cytoplasmic signal transduction pathways (e.g., the ras-raf MAP kinase pathway), 23,24 whereas in other settings, it may
function as a nuclear transcriptional activator. 25,26 It has also been suggested that X protein might bind to and inactivate the tumor suppressor gene product p53, 27 but
such reports require confirmation. The relationship of all of these activities to the putative oncogenic function of ORF X is unproven.
Another class of more direct genetic contributions that HBV might make to HCC derives from the existence of integrated copies of viral DNA in the tumor cells. Unlike
retroviruses, hepadnaviruses do not specify genetic functions directing genomic integration, and such integration is not essential for HBV replication. 11 (HBV
replication actually proceeds from episomal DNA via reverse transcription of an RNA intermediate.) In fact, because every nucleotide of the viral genome is in a
coding region, integration of HBV DNA generally disrupts essential genes and is incompatible with replication. Yet most hepatoma cells arising in HBV-infected
patients harbor multiple integrated HBV genomes, and in general, active viral replication has been extinguished. 28 The tumors are clonal with respect to these viral
insertions: All cells of the tumor bear the same pattern of integrated sequences, indicating that integration preceded or accompanied the final transforming event.
However, close inspection of these integrated sequences indicates that they usually are highly rearranged, with multiple deletions, inversions, reduplications, or other
mutations typically present. 28 Although individual integrated sequences may retain certain coding functions, no one viral coding region is invariably preserved, as are

E6 and E7 of the human papillomaviruses (HPVs; see the section Papillomaviruses and Human Cancer).
These facts have led to interest in the model that the viral sequences might be contributing cis-acting regulatory signals rather than trans-acting proteins to the host
cell. Ample precedent for such a model exists in retroviral oncogenesis in animals, wherein insertion of powerful retroviral enhancer sequences into the chromosome
can activate the expression of growth-regulatory genes flanking the insert. Strong evidence that hepadnaviruses can mediate such activation events in cis has been
proffered for WHV. WHV is strikingly oncogenic in its native host: Virtually 100% of animals chronically infected from birth will develop HCC. 29 The oncogenic drive in
an infected animal is remarkably strong; many adult animals can be shown to harbor multiple independent HCCs. As in HBV-induced cancer, the tumors display
multiple viral insertions, often highly rearranged, and in a clonal pattern. However, here, remarkably, the vast majority of tumors can be shown to harbor at least one
viral insertion in cis to the protooncogene N-myc.30,31 and 32 This gene, normally silent in adult liver, is strongly up-regulated by this insertion, and such activation can be
seen early in the oncogenic sequence, even in premalignant lesions. 33 Many insertions are within a few kilobases of the N-myc locus, but insertions as far away as
250 kb appear to be activating. 31 Clearly, insertional activation of N-myc plays a major role in WHV oncogenesis.
Similar efforts to identify common integration sites for integrated HBV genomes in human HCC have not met with comparable success. Human hepatomas do not
harbor N-myc rearrangements and, although isolated examples of dramatic insertion events have been described (e.g., insertions near loci for retinoid receptors or
cyclin A homologues), none of these has been identified in more than one tumor, despite extensive searches. 34,35 The practitioner does well to remember that, despite
its many similarities to HBV, WHV differs strikingly in its oncogenic potency; it is possible that insertional activation of N-myc loci is responsible for this difference.

PAPILLOMAVIRUSES AND HUMAN CANCER
The viral nature of human warts was first demonstrated at the turn of the century by transmission using a cell-free filtrate. 36 This important group of viruses has
remained refractory to standard virologic studies, however, because propagating the papillomaviruses in the laboratory in tissue culture under standard conditions is
difficult. Although some advances have been made in propagating the virus using organotypic raft cultures of epithelial cells, most knowledge about the molecular
biology and genetics of the papillomaviruses has resulted from advances in basic research and the application of reverse genetics using cloned viral DNAs.
The papillomaviruses are found in many higher vertebrate species ranging from birds to humans. Although originally classified as papovaviruses because of their
icosahedral shape and circular, double-stranded DNA genome, the papillomaviruses now are recognized to be separate from the other papovaviruses such as
polyoma and simian virus 40 (SV40), on the basis of different biologic and genetic characteristics. The papillomaviruses contain a double-stranded circular DNA
genome of 8000 base pairs, which is larger than the polyomaviruses (5000 base pairs), and the virion particles have a correspondingly larger capsid diameter (55 nm
vs. 40 nm). The papillomaviruses have not yet been propagated in tissue culture under standard conditions.
More than 80 different HPV types have been described in detail to date, 37 and evidence exists that there may be as many as 30 to 40 additional viruses that have not
yet been as well characterized. Unlike some human viruses such as adenoviruses, it has not been possible to type the papillomaviruses by serologic methods, as
antisera that can distinguish between the different HPV types are currently not available. Through the 1970s and 1980s, the HPVs were typed by DNA hybridization
under stringent annealing conditions, but currently the DNA sequence of a portion of the L1 ORF (in the so-called late region of the HPV genome) is used to define
new HPV types. A list of many of the HPV types that have now been categorized, and the clinical syndromes with which they are associated or from which they have
been isolated, is presented in Table 10.2-3.

TABLE 10.2-3. The Human Papillomaviruses

The papillomaviruses are highly species-specific and induce squamous epithelial and fibroepithelial tumors in their natural hosts. These viruses have a specific
tropism for squamous epithelial cells, and their full productive cycle is supported only in squamous epithelial cells. The productive infection of cells by
papillomaviruses is divided into stages, and these stages are linked to the differentiation state of the epithelial cell. The specific tropism of the papillomaviruses for
squamous epithelial cells is evidenced by the restriction of the viral replication functions (vegetative viral DNA synthesis, the production of viral capsid proteins, and
the assembly of virions) to the most terminally differentiated keratinocytes.
In a normal squamous epithelium, the basal cell is the only cell normally capable of supporting cellular DNA synthesis and undergoing cellular division. The virus,
therefore, must infect the basal cell to establish a persistent lesion. In situ hybridization experiments have demonstrated that the papillomavirus DNA is indeed present
within the basal cell of a papilloma. 38 In a squamous epithelium, as the cells migrate upward through the stratum spinosum and into the granular layer, they undergo a
program of differentiation. The control of papillomavirus late gene expression is tightly linked to the differentiation state of the squamous epithelial cells. 39 Vegetative
viral DNA synthesis and expression of the capsid proteins occurs only in the more differentiated squamous epithelial cells.
All HPV types examined to date have a similar genomic organization. The DNA genomes of each of the HPVs sequenced, as well as of the other animal
papillomaviruses, are approximately 8000 base pairs in size. All of the ORFs that could serve to encode proteins are located on only one of the two viral DNA strands.
RNA studies have indicated that only one strand is transcribed. A more detailed description of the molecular biology of the papillomaviruses can be found in the
current edition of Field's Virology.40
The HPV genome can be divided into two distinct regions: an “early” region, which encodes the viral proteins involved in viral DNA replication, transcriptional
regulation, and cellular transformation, and a “late” region, which encodes the viral capsid proteins. This functional division is based largely on genetic studies that
were carried out with the bovine papillomavirus. 41 A diagram of the organization of a typical HPV-16 is shown in Figure 10.2-2. The genes located in the early region
of the genes are designated as E1, E2, and so on, and the genes located in the late region are designated as L1 and L2. Studies with the HPVs indicate that it is
likely that E4 encodes a “late” gene, which is expressed only in productively infected keratinocytes. 42 Thus, although this ORF is located with the early ORFs, its
function may be important only in the vegetative replication of the virus. A listing of the functions assigned to the HPV-16 ORFs is provided in Table 10.2-4.

FIGURE 10.2-2. The genomic map of human papillomavirus-16 (HPV-16) deduced from the DNA sequence. The nucleotide numbers are noted within the circular
maps, transcription proceeds clockwise, and the major open reading frames (E1 to E7, L1, and L2) are indicated. The only transcriptional promoter mapped to data for
HPV-16 is designated P97. The viral long control region (LCR) containing the putative viral transcriptional and replication regulatory elements is noted. The closed
circles on the genome represent the four E2 binding sites, which have been noted in the LCR. (From ref. 16, with permission.)

TABLE 10.2-4. HPV-16 Gene Functions

In productively infected tissue (i.e., tissue in which viral particles are made, such as a wart), mRNA is transcribed from the early and late regions of the genome.39
Nonproductive infection of host cells (as seen in the lower cells of the epithelium in a wart) is accompanied by transcription of mRNA from only the early region of the
genome. The restricted expression of the genome to only the early region involves regulation of transcription at the levels of the initiation of RNA synthesis, RNA
stability, and transcriptional termination.
The molecular biology of the papillomaviruses has been most extensively studied for the bovine papillomavirus (BPV-1), which is capable of transforming a variety of
rodent fibroblast cell lines in tissue culture. In these transformed cells, the DNA remains as a stable extrachromosomal plasmid, and this system has served as an
excellent model for studying latent infection by papillomavirus (reviewed in Spalholz and Howley 43). This virus has served as the prototype for unraveling many
aspects of the molecular biology of the papillomaviruses over the last 20 years. Two independent transforming activities have been mapped in BPV-1: one to the E5
gene and the other to the E6 and E7 genes. Transformation by the BPV-1 E5 oncoprotein appears to be mediated through activation by binding of the platelet-derived
growth factor-b (PDGF-b) receptor. 44 The mechanisms by which the E6 and E7 genes of BPV-1 transform have not yet been fully elucidated. BPV-1 E6 has been
shown to bind the focal adhesion protein paxillin, and the binding of E6 to paxillin has been implicated in the cellular transformation phenotype through the disruption
of the actin cytoskeleton. 45,46
The papillomavirus E2 proteins are regulatory proteins that have roles in viral DNA replication and in viral transcription. E2 is a DNA-binding protein that was first
described as a transcriptional activator 48; however, subsequent studies have shown that it can also function as a transcriptional repressor depending on the context of
the E2 binding sites within the promoter. 49 E2 has several roles in viral DNA replication and plasmid maintenance in infected cells. 50 E2 ensures viral DNA partitioning
in persistently infected cells by tethering the viral DNA to the mitotic chromosomes during mitosis. 51,52 E2 also binds to the viral E1 protein and cooperatively promotes
origin-dependent viral DNA replication. 53,54 The E1 gene encodes a protein necessary for extrachromosomal replication and has been shown to have DNA-binding,
DNA helicase, and adenosine triphosphatase activities. 55,56 No function has yet been found for the E3 or E8 ORFs of BPV-1. The L1 ORF of the papillomaviruses
encodes the major capsid protein, and the L2 ORF encodes a minor capsid protein. 57,58 The L1 and L2 ORFs are expressed only in the terminally differentiated
keratinocytes. 39
Although initial papillomavirus transformation studies focused on BPV-1 because it could effectively transform rodent cells in tissue culture, recent studies have
focused more on the high-risk HPVs, in particular HPV-16 and HPV-18, which are associated with human cervical cancer. Although the genomic organization of the
HPVs is quite similar to that of BPV-1, there appear to be important differences in the mechanisms by which they transform cells. The principal transforming genes for
the cancer-associated HPVs have been mapped to E6 and E7, as will be discussed later in this section. E7 alone is sufficient for the transformation of primary rodent
cells. 59,60 and 61 E7 also is capable of cooperating with an activated ras oncogene to transform primary rodent cells. 60 Expression of E6 and E7 together is sufficient for
the efficient immortalization of primary human cells, most notably primary human keratinocytes, which are the normal host cell for the HPVs. 62,63 Cellular targets for
the HPV E6 and E7 proteins have been identified, as discussed later in this section. HPV E5 may also have transforming activities, but it has not been studied as well
as has BPV E5 and does not appear to function through interaction with the PDGF-b receptor.
Only a subgroup of the papillomaviruses is associated with lesions that are at risk for progression to cancer. These viruses and their associated malignancies are
listed in Table 10.2-5. The papillomavirus that infects cottontail rabbits in nature (CRPV) was first identified by Shope as the etiologic agent of cutaneous
papillomatosis in rabbits. 4 CRPV has been extensively studied as a model for papillomavirus-induced carcinogenesis. 5,64 One of the features of carcinogenic
progression with the papillomaviruses is the synergy between the virus and carcinogenic external factors (see Table 10.2-3). In the case of CRPV, carcinomas
develop at an increased frequency in virus-induced papillomas that are painted with cool tar or methylcholanthrene. 65,66 These CRPV-associated carcinomas contain
copies of the viral DNA that are transcriptionally active, an observation which supports the hypothesis that these viruses play an active role in the cancers that
develop. There has been limited study of the molecular mechanisms involved in CRPV-associated carcinogenesis.

TABLE 10.2-5. Papillomaviruses Associated with Lesions That May Progress to Cancer

In cattle, BPV-4 has been associated with esophageal papillomatosis and also is associated with squamous cell carcinomas of the upper alimentary tract. 67,68
Interestingly, however, only those cattle from the highlands of Scotland that are infected with BPV-4 and that also feed on bracken fern (known to contain a
radiomimetic substance) have a high incidence of squamous cell carcinomas of the esophagus and of the foregut. 67 In contrast to the CRPV-associated carcinomas in
which the viral DNA can invariably be found, extensive analysis of the squamous cell carcinomas of the upper alimentary tract in these cattle infected with BPV-4 has
failed to reveal a consistent pattern of viral DNA sequences within the malignant tumors. 69 In the case of these alimentary tract tumors, possibly the continued
presence of BPV-4 DNA sequences is not required for maintenance of the cancer.

The first evidence that HPVs were associated with human cancer came from studies in patients with epidermodysplasia verruciformis (EV), a rare, lifelong disease in
humans that usually begins in infancy or childhood (reviewed in Jablonska and Majewski 70). The disease is characterized by disseminated, polymorphic cutaneous
lesions that resemble flat warts and by reddish macules sometimes referred to as pityriasis-like lesions.71 Approximately one-half of the patients with EV develop
multiple skin cancers, usually during the third or fourth decade of life. Papillomavirus particles have been detected within the benign lesions and not in the
carcinomas. EV is considered an autosomal recessive disorder, and genetic studies of affected families have led to the mapping of a susceptibility gene to 17q, the
same region that has been found to contain a dominant locus for the susceptibility to familial psoriasis. 72 It is thus tempting to speculate that distinct defects affecting
the same gene may be involved somehow in the pathogenesis of these two hyperproliferative skin conditions. Of interest is that the carcinomas that develop in these
patients arise in sun-exposed areas, and it is suspected that ultraviolet radiation plays a cocarcinogenic role with the papillomaviruses in the etiology of these
cancers. Although EV is a very rare disease, it has been under intense study by dermatologists and virologists. More than 20 different HPV types have now been
demonstrated in individual lesions in patients with this rare disease (see Table 10.2-3). Furthermore, recent studies have shown that these EV HPVs are widespread
and point to psoriasis as a potential reservoir for HPV-5, one of the HPVs commonly found in EV. 73 Whether the EV-associated HPVs also are involved in the
pathogenesis of psoriasis remains to be determined.
The cutaneous carcinomas in patients with EV can be bowenoid carcinomas, in situ carcinomas, or invasive squamous cell carcinomas. Of the HPV types found in
patients with EV, only a subset of them is associated with a risk of malignant progression, most notably HPV-5 and HPV-8, although other types occasionally are
found in EV cancers. The role of the HPVs in EV cancers is suggested by the presence of viral DNA of specific HPV types in the EV cancers. Although metastasis is
uncommon in the cancers in these patients, the presence of HPV-5 in the two metastatic lymph node lesions examined strengthens the agreement for an etiologic role
for HPV in these carcinomas. 74,75 Further studies have established that the viral genomes are transcriptionally active within these carcinomas 76 and that HPV-5 and
HPV-8 encode cellular transformation functions. 77 Little work has been done yet to establish the mechanisms by which the EV HPVs contribute to cancer.
The role of HPVs in cutaneous cancers in humans extends beyond EV patients to other patients, both immunosuppressed and immunocompetent. New HPV types
have been found in squamous and basal cell carcinomas of immunosuppressed patients and in some of the same tumors in immunocompetent patients. 78,79 However,
the cutaneous HPVs are very prevalent in the population, and it has not yet been determined whether the virus has a role in promoting these cancers in
immunosuppressed patients or whether it merely persists as a passenger.
The epidemiology of genital warts follows a pattern characteristic of a sexually transmitted disease (STD) with a high prevalence in populations of highly promiscuous
women.80,81 Two general types of genital wart viral infections—condylomata acuminata and squamous intraepithelial lesions (SILs)—are now recognized and can be
differentiated by their clinical appearance. Condylomata acuminata can be localized to the penis, the vulva, the perineum, the anus and, rarely, the uterine cervix, and
are caused by papillomaviruses. Papillomavirus particles have been demonstrated by the electron microscope. 82,83 HPV-6 and HPV-11 DNAs were directly cloned
from condylomata acuminata lesions, and the genomes of these HPV types can be demonstrated in more than 90% of the lesions of condylomata acuminata
examined.84,85 Less frequently, other HPV types can be found in condylomata acuminata. Malignant conversion of condylomata acuminata into squamous cell
carcinoma is uncommon. A lesion described by Buschke and Löwenstein and designated as a giant condyloma has characteristics similar to a locally invasive
squamous cell carcinoma. These tumors are also associated with HPV-6 and HPV-11. 84,85 The majority of cervical carcinomas and other genital tract carcinomas,
however, are negative for HPV-6 and HPV-11.
In the mid-1970s, zur Hausen 86 suggested an association between papillomaviruses and genital cancers. Compelling evidence linking an HPV infection with cervical
carcinoma came from the recognition that the morphologic changes previously interpreted on Papanicolaou smears and tissue sections of the cervix as cervical
dysplasia were due to a papillomavirus infection. 87,88 and 89 The characteristic cell that is diagnostic for a cervical papillomavirus infection is the koilocyte. 90 Electron
microscopy demonstrated papillomavirus particles in the koilocytotic cells supporting the papillomavirus etiology. 91,92 Subsequent studies found
papillomavirus-specific capsid antigens and HPV DNA within cervical dysplastic lesions, providing confirmation of the viral etiology of cervical dysplasia.
Epidemiologic studies had long implicated an infectious agent in the etiology of human cervical carcinoma. 93,94 Venereal transmission of a carcinogenic factor with a
long latency had been suggested by early epidemiologic studies. Sexual promiscuity, an early age of onset of sexual activity, and poor sexual hygiene are known risk
factors for cervical carcinoma. There is a correlation between the incidence rates of cervical cancer and penile carcinoma in various geographic areas, although the
incidence rates for penile carcinoma are 20-fold lower when compared to those of cervical carcinoma. The similar ratio of incidence between cervical carcinoma and
penile carcinoma is maintained, however, in areas of high, medium, or low prevalence, suggesting that the etiologic factors for penile and cervical carcinoma may be
the same. The “male factor” also appears to implicate a sexually transmitted agent. Women who are monogamous are at a higher risk for cervical carcinoma if their
spouses have multiple sexual partners.
The suggestion that an infectious agent might be involved in the etiology of cervical carcinoma has prompted many studies over the years, evaluating genital
pathogens as potential causative agents. Infections by trichomonads, chlamydiae, and bacteria, such as syphilis and gonorrhea, have not been linked to cervical
carcinoma. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, genital infection by herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) was considered as a possible etiologic candidate. 95,96 Support
for the notion that HSV might be a cancer-associated virus came from studies demonstrating the ability of HSV to transform certain rodent cells in the laboratory in
vitro and from some initial serologic studies that suggested a higher frequency of antibodies to HSV-2 in patients with cervical carcinoma. However, subsequent
carefully performed molecular studies, attempting to demonstrate HSV RNA or HSV DNA in cervical cancer tissues, could not provide convincing evidence for a role
for HSV in cervical cancer. 97 A large prospective epidemiologic study carried out by Vonka et al. 98,99 also failed to support the involvement of HSV-1 or HSV-2
infections in cervical cancer.
The association of an HPV with cervical dysplasia [also referred to as cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) and SIL] sparked an examination of cervical cancers for
HPV sequences. The natural history linking CIN to carcinoma in situ and to invasive squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix had already been well established. 100,101 and
102
Initial experiments from a number of laboratories revealed HPV sequences in occasional cases of cervical carcinoma and anogenital carcinoma, but no consistent
pattern of positivity emerged. Using radioactively labeled HPV-11 DNA under conditions of hybridization of low stringency, Durst et al. 103 and Boshart et al. 104
examined human cervical carcinoma DNAs for related HPV DNAs and, in the early 1980s, identified two new papillomavirus DNAs, HPV-16 and HPV-18. Using these
HPV DNAs as probes, HPV types 16 and 18 could be demonstrated in approximately 70% of cervical carcinomas. 105 The use of low-stringency hybridization and the
polymerase chain reaction with degenerative primers has led to the identification of approximately 20 different HPVs now associated with genital tract lesions (see
Table 10.2-3). HPV-31, -33, -39, -42, and other HPVs are each associated with a small percentage of cervical carcinomas. Specific HPVs can be found regularly in
85% to 90% of human cervical carcinoma tissues and in a lower percentage of other human genital carcinomas such as penile carcinomas, vulvar carcinomas, and
perianal carcinomas. The availability of HPV DNA probes has permitted the extensive analysis of specific clinical lesions. Bowenoid papulosis of the penis, also
referred to as penile intraepithelial neoplasia, is associated with HPV-16 and is the male counterpart of CIN in the female. 106,107 Approximately 20 HPVs are associated
with anogenital lesions. These can generally be further classified as either high-risk or low-risk on the basis of whether the genital tract lesions with which these HPVs
are associated are at significant risk for malignant progression. Such low-risk viruses as HPV-6 and -11 are associated with venereal warts, whereas such high-risk
viruses as HPV-16 and -18 are associated with SILs of the genital tract. The other high-risk viruses include HPV-31, -33, -35, -39, -45, -51, -52, and -56. The 85% to
90% of cervical carcinomas that are HPV-positive contain a high-risk DNA.
Studies of cervical cancers and derived cell lines that are HPV-positive have indicated that the DNA often is integrated, although in some cases the DNA is apparently
also extrachromosomal. In those cases in which the DNA is integrated, the pattern of integration is clonal, indicating that the association of the HPV preceded the
clonal outgrowth of the tumor. Integration of the viral DNA is not at specific sites in the host chromosome, although in some cell lines the integration event has
occurred in the vicinity of known oncogenes. For instance, in the HeLa cell line (which is an HPV-18-positive cervical carcinoma cell line), the integration of the viral
genome has occurred within approximately 50 kb of the c-myc locus on human chromosome 8. 108 It is not known whether such an integration event provides a
selective advantage for the progression of a preneoplastic lesion to a cancer. It does seem plausible that in some individual cancers, the integration of the viral DNA
could result in genetic changes such as the activation of a cellular oncogene or the inactivation of a tumor suppressor gene that could contribute to carcinogenic
progression.
In HPV-positive cancers, there appears to be a selection for the integrity of the E6–E7 coding region and the upstream regulatory region, which contains the promoter
elements that regulate E6 and E7 expression. Furthermore, the E6 and E7 genes are regularly expressed in HPV-positive cervical cancers. 108,109 and 110 Interestingly,
integration of the viral genome into the host chromosome in the cancers often is associated with disruption of the viral E1 or E2 genes.108,109 HPV E2 is an important
viral regulatory factor that can negatively regulate the transcriptional promoter directing the E6 and E7 genes.49,111 The manner of integration observed is such that it
results in an increase in the expression of the E6 and E7 viral genes. The disruption of the E2 gene by integration releases the viral promoter of the E6 and E7 genes

from the inhibitory activity of E2, increasing the expression of these genes. The reexpression of E2 in HPV-positive cervical cancer cells results in a cell-cycle arrest
due to repression of the viral promoter directing expression of the E6 and E7 oncoproteins. 112
The E6 and E7 proteins encoded by the high-risk HPVs are oncoproteins and contribute to cellular transformation by binding to the cell regulatory proteins p53 and
RB, respectively (Fig. 10.2-3). The E7 proteins encoded by the high-risk HPVs share sequence similarity to adenovirus E1A and to SV40 large T antigen, and in all
three proteins these regions are critical for the transformation properties of the respective viral oncoproteins. The regions of amino acid sequence similarity between
E7 and adenovirus E1A that are shared with SV40 large T antigen are regions that have been shown to participate in the binding of a number of important cellular
regulatory proteins, including the product of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor gene (pRB) and the related “pocket” proteins, p107 and p130. 113,114,115 and 116 The E7
proteins may function in carcinogenic progression, at least in part, through interaction with the product of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene, pRB. One
consequence of this interaction is the disruption of a complex between pRB and the E2F-1 transcription factor. 117 The E7-mediated release of E2F from these
complexes then activates the expression of genes in cell-cycle progression. Genetic studies indicate, however, that there must be other cellular targets of E7 and that
complex formation between E7 and the pocket proteins, including pRB, is not sufficient to account for the immortalization and transforming functions of this viral
oncoprotein. 118 Studies in several laboratories have identified additional targets, the physiologic significance of which must still be determined. One intriguing E7
target is the cellular cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 CIP, which appears to have a role in skin differentiation. 119

FIGURE 10.2-3. The transforming proteins encoded by three distinct groups of DNA tumor viruses target similar cellular proteins. The binding of human
papillomavirus E6 oncoproteins to p53 is mediated by a cellular protein called E6-AP.124 SV40, simian virus 40.

The immortalization-transformation properties of the E6 protein were first revealed by studies using primary human genital squamous epithelial cell. 62,63 Efficient
immortalization of primary human cells by HPV-16 or HPV-18 requires both the E6 and E7 genes. 62,63,120 The ability of the E6 and E7 proteins to cooperate and
efficiently immortalize primary human keratinocytes is a characteristic of the high-risk but not the low-risk HPVs. 121,122 Like SV40 large T antigen and the 55-kD protein
encoded by adenovirus E1B, the E6 proteins of the high-risk HPVs can enter into a complex with p53. 123 The interaction of E6 with p53 is not direct but is mediated by
a cellular protein, called the E6-associated protein (E6AP).124 E6AP is a ubiquitin protein ligase and, in the presence of E6, directly participates in the ubiquitination of
p53.125,126 Multiubiquitinated p53 then is recognized by the 26S proteasome for proteolysis. Consequently, the half-life and level of p53 are low in E6-immortalized cell
lines and in HPV-positive cancers. 127,128 Through its ubiquitination of p53, HPV-16 E6 can abrogate the transcriptional activation and repression properties of p53 129
and disrupt the ability of wild-type p53 to mediate cell-cycle arrest in response to DNA damage. 130 The p53 protein can sense DNA damage and prevent the
replication of mutated DNA through its transcriptional activation of the p21 cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor. Thus, the functional abrogation of p53 by high-risk HPV
E6 results in decreased genomic stability and accumulation of DNA abnormalities in high-risk HPV E6–expressing cells. Hence, E6 can be directly implicated in the
establishment and propagation of genomic instability, a hallmark in the pathology of malignant progression of cervical lesions. 131
The high-risk HPV E6 proteins also have other activities that are not linked to their ability to target p53. For instance, it has been shown that expression of the HPV E6
oncoprotein results in the activation of telomerase activity in infected cells. 132 Furthermore, E6 can interact with several additional cellular proteins, including a
putative calcium-binding protein referred to as the E6-binding protein133 and a novel GAP protein, E6TP1. 134 The high-risk HPV E6 proteins as well as the oncogenic
BPV E6 protein can complex with paxillin, a cellular focal adhesion protein that may serve as an adapter in transmitting signals from integrin molecules to the actin
cytoskeleton.46,135 The high-risk HPV E6 protein has also been reported to bind p300. 136 HPV-16 E6 can also bind and inhibit the transcription activation function of
interferon regulatory factor-3, an interaction that may have more to do with the virus-evading host cell defenses than cellular transformation. 137 It should be noted,
however, that the significance of the interaction of E6 with these cellular targets and others described in the literature, other than p53 through E6AP, has yet to be
fully established.
It is clear that infection by a specific HPV alone is not sufficient for the development of cervical cancer. Only a small fraction of those individuals who are infected by a
specific HPV will eventually develop cancer, and the time interval between infection and invasive cancer can be several decades. Thus, the genetic information
carried by the virus per se is not sufficient for malignant progression. Other factors must be involved in the progression of virus-associated lesions to these genital
tract cancers, and clearly additional genetic mutations in the infected cell are required for a cancer to arise. Epidemiologic studies have suggested that smoking is a
risk factor for developing cervical carcinoma. 138,139 and 140 The recognition that other factors are involved in the progression to cervical carcinomas suggests that
papillomavirus infections may work synergistically with these other factors. It has been suggested that tobacco condensate in women who smoke could accumulate in
the vaginal fluids, bathing the cervix and acting as a cofactor with the papillomavirus infection. 141 Likewise, it has been postulated that herpesvirus infection might act
synergistically with specific papillomaviruses to induce human cervical carcinoma. 142
The use of restriction fragment–length polymorphisms has revealed that a loss of heterozygosity on the short arm of chromosome 3p implicates a potential tumor
suppressor gene seen in cervical cancer, 143 which may be the recently described FHIT gene.144 The somatic cell hybrid work of Stanbridge 145 implicates a potential
tumor suppressor gene on human chromosome 11. A gene on human chromosome 11 can suppress the tumorigenicity of HPV-positive cervical carcinoma cells. It has
been proposed that the loss of this gene on chromosome 11 in HeLa cells results in loss of expression of the cellular interfering factor, which negatively regulates
HPV expression in these cells. 146 Further evidence that a negative regulator of HPV transcription is included on chromosome 11 is that fibroblasts with a deletion in
the short arm of chromosome 11 can be more efficiently immortalized by HPV-16 than can normal fibroblasts. 147 The identification of genes on human chromosome 11
involved in tumor suppression in cervical cancer cell lines will obviously be a very important advance. Tumor progression, however, is complex and may involve
additional loci. It should be noted that late stages of cervical carcinomas are associated with amplification and overexpression of the cellular oncogene myc. 148
The availability of specific HPV DNA probes has provided investigators the opportunity to carry out extensive screenings of a variety of human cancers for HPV
sequences. Based on the animal models, it seemed likely that any carcinomas of any squamous epithelium or an epithelium that can undergo squamous metaplasia
would be a potential candidate for association with an HPV. Studies examining oral, upper airway, and tonsillar carcinomas have revealed some HPV-positive
carcinomas.149,150 and 151 HPV DNA has been found in benign oral papillomas, 152,153,154 and 155 and oral focal epithelial hyperplasia has been firmly established as having
a papillomavirus etiology. 156,157 In addition, papillomavirus DNA sequences have been found associated with some cases of oral leukoplakia. 153,158 Esophageal
carcinomas in humans have not yet been convincingly shown to be associated with an HPV. The esophagus is lined by a squamous epithelium, and squamous cell
papillomas of the esophagus have been described in humans. 159,160 Additional studies would seem warranted to investigate a possible role of HPV in human
esophageal cancers. In addition, sporadic reports in the literature associate occasional human tumors, including colon cancer, ovarian cancer, prostate cancer, and
even melanomas, with the presence of HPV DNA. In general, it seems prudent to be skeptical of such reports until systematic and well-performed studies are
confirmed in multiple laboratories.
Significant advances have been made recently in the development of vaccines against papillomavirus infections. The expression in yeast and in insect cells of the
major capsid protein L1, either alone or together with L2, leads to the assembly of virus-like particles (VLPs) that are morphologically identical to native virion
particles. 161,162 Further, these VLPs present the conformational epitopes necessary for the development of a high-titer neutralizing antisera. Such VLPs now are being
used in clinical trials in humans. In addition, there is interest in the development of therapeutic vaccines directed against the E6 and E7 proteins expressed in cancers
and preneoplastic lesions. A variety of approaches have already been described in the literature, including the use of vaccinia virus vectors, DNA vaccines, and

chimeric VLPs containing additional epitopes fused to L1 for therapeutic vaccines. 163

EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS
In 1964, Epstein, Achong, and Barr discovered Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in electron micrographs of African Burkitt's lymphoma cells growing in culture; raising the
expectation that EBV is a human tumor virus.164 Burkitt's lymphoma cells in culture are mostly latently infected with EBV (for reviews, see Kieff 165 and Rickinson and
Kieff166). An occasional cell is permissive for virus replication, and large amounts of early and late virus replication–associated proteins are expressed. As with other
groups of herpesviruses, most early proteins are involved in viral DNA synthesis, whereas most late proteins are components of the virion. Lytic infection in cell
cultures can be increased by activation of protein kinase C with the phorbol ester tumor promoter (12-0-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate [TPA]). Viral early proteins
can be differentiated from late proteins by exposing TPA-treated cells to inhibitors of viral DNA synthesis, such as acyclovir; the cells then express only early
antigens. The staining patterns observed with human sera in microscopical analyses of latently infected Burkitt's lymphoma cells, Burkitt's lymphoma cells treated with
TPA and acyclovir, or Burkitt's lymphoma cells treated with TPA alone are the basis for the determination of antibody to latent EBV-encoded nuclear antigen (EBNA),
early antigens, and viral capsid antigen, respectively. EBV proteins are serologically distinct from proteins of other human herpesviruses. Early seroepidemiologic
studies established that antibody to EBV is prevalent in all human populations and that high titers of antibody correlate with specific malignancies; Burkitt's lymphoma,
nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and Hodgkin's disease ( Fig. 10.2-4).167,168 and 169

FIGURE 10.2-4. Schematic diagram of the events in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. Primary EBV infection begins at the oropharyngeal epithelium, where it can
produce symptomatic pharyngitis. B lymphocytes are infected as they traffic in close proximity to the oropharyngeal epithelium. EBV BCRF1 is a close homologue of
human interleukin-10 and blunts the initial natural killer (NK) CD8 T lymphocyte and gamma interferon responses, enabling EBV better to infect B lymphocytes. In
acutely infected B lymphocytes, EBV expresses all EBV-encoded nuclear antigens (EBNAs), latent infection–associated membrane proteins (LMPs), and EBV
encoded small RNA (EBERs), causing cell proliferation. In immunosuppressed patients, an acute lymphoproliferative disease may emerge, and the EBNAs, LMPs,
and EBERS are expressed in the tumor cells. An EBV-specific CD8+ T-lymphocyte response is demonstrable in normal people shortly after EBV infection and is
presumed to account for the fall in peripheral blood EBV-infected B-lymphocyte number from as much as 1 in 10 in acute infection to 1 in 10 5 to 106 with
convalescence from acute EBV infection. CD8 T lymphocytes recognize determinants from EBNA2, -3A, -3B, -3C or -LP or from LMP1 or LMP2 in the context of
specific class 1 major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. B lymphocytes expressing these proteins must continue to be present, as a high level of
EBV-immune CD8 T lymphocytes persists for life. EBV persists in some lymphocytes that express only EBNA1. Because CD8 responses to EBNA1 are rare,
EBNA1-expressing lymphocytes can escape immune surveillance. Lymphocytes probably carry virus to other organs and to epithelial surfaces, including the
oropharynx. LMP2 keeps the virus from reactivating as latently infected B lymphocytes circulate in the peripheral blood and tissues, where they encounter ligands for
surface immune globulin or for CD19 or class II MHC. Persistent replication in the oropharynx depends on activation of lytic infection in lymphocytes when they traffic
close to oropharyngeal epithelial cells. Years after primary EBV infection, Burkitt's lymphoma, Hodgkin's disease, and nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) tumors occur.
These tumors can initiate from a clone of EBV-infected cells. Most African Burkitt's lymphoma, 50% of Hodgkin's disease, and all anaplastic nasopharyngeal
carcinomas are composed of EBV-infected cells.

The host range of EBV, in vitro, is limited to primate B lymphocytes. B lymphocytes express large amounts of CD21, a surface glycoprotein for which the major EBV
envelope glycoprotein has high affinity. Consistent with the notion that EBV is a human tumor virus, infection of normal B lymphocytes confers an ability to proliferate
continuously, in vitro,170 in nude mouse brain after intracerebral inoculation or in the mesentery of severe combined immunodeficiency mice after intravenous
inoculation. 171 Infection of some new world primates with EBV reproducibly induces an acutely fatal lymphoproliferative disease. 172 A similar lymphoproliferative
disease can occur with primary EBV infection in male children with X-linked lymphoproliferative disease 173 or in profoundly immunosuppressed patients with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection or liver, heart, lung, or bone marrow transplantation. 174,175 Although EBV-transformed B lymphocytes have substantial capacity
for continuous proliferation, they remain fully differentiated and exhibit phenotypic markers similar to antigen-activated normal B lymphocytes.
In latently infected transformed B lymphocytes growing in vitro, in the peripheral blood of patients with primary EBV infection, or in polyclonal lymphoproliferative
disease, EBV encodes six EBNAs, two latent infection–associated membrane proteins (LMPs), and two small nonpolyadenylated RNAs (EBV encoded small RNA
[EBERs]). Molecular genetic analyses using specifically mutated EBV recombinants indicate that EBNA3B, LMP2, the small RNAs, and most of the viral genome that
is expressed in lytic infection can be mutated without a significant effect on the ability of the virus to transform primary B lymphocytes. The other EBNAs and LMP1 are
important for lymphocyte transformation. Although not a mediator of cell transformation, LMP2 is important in maintaining latency by preventing lytic infection in
response to lymphocyte activation signals. 176
EBNA1 is an EBV DNA replication origin-binding protein, which is important in latent infection for origin function in episome maintenance and transcriptional
activation. 177 The other EBNAs, the functions of which are established, are regulators of transcription of viral or cellular genes. EBNA2 is the best characterized of
these virally encoded transactivators and is an acidic type transactivator. 178 EBNA2 lacks DNA sequence–specific binding activity and is dependent on interactions
with sequence-specific cell proteins for recognition of enhancer elements. All known EBNA2 response elements have a sequence, which binds the cell protein Jk that,
in turn, recruits EBNA2. This interaction is not entirely sufficient for EBNA2 responsiveness; for example, PU.1 is essential for EBNA2 responsiveness of the LMP1
promoter. EBNA3A and EBNA3C also regulate transcription in lymphocyte transformation. Like EBNA2, EBNA3A and EBNA3C achieve specificity in their interaction
with viral and cellular promoters by interacting with the cell protein Jk. 179 The interaction of three different EBV proteins with Jk may indicate an importance for
Jk-mediated cell gene regulation in B-lymphocyte growth. This is reinforced by the recent findings that Notch, a T-cell leukemia gene, activates transcription through
Jk.180,181 From a different perspective, EBNA2 and EBNA3s can be viewed as usurpers of the Notch signaling pathway.
LMP1 is a key gene in EBV-mediated cell growth transformation. LMP1 can transform immortalized rodent fibroblasts to loss of contact inhibition, anchorage
independence, or nude mouse tumorigenicity. When expressed in normal resting B lymphocytes or in non–EBV-infected Burkitt's lymphoma cells that have a
nonactivated phenotype with regard to markers of normal B-lymphocyte activation, LMP1 induces most B-lymphocyte activation and adhesion markers, activates
NFkB, and induces Bcl2 and A20, proteins important in preventing apoptosis. In epithelial cells, LMP1 induces epidermal growth factor receptor expression and
inhibits differentiation. 176,182 Specific mutations in the LMP1 gene in EBV recombinants have provided direct evidence that LMP1 is essential for primary B-lymphocyte
growth transformation. 183 LMP1 has multiple transmembrane domains that enable it to aggregate in a patch in the plasma membrane, mimicking an activated growth
factor receptor. The first 45 amino acids of the LMP1 C-terminal cytoplasmic domain are essential for primary B-lymphocyte growth transformation, whereas the
N-terminal cytoplasmic domain and the more distal 155 amino acids of the LMP1 C-terminus are not necessary. The essential C-terminal 45–amino acid domain
interacts in the cytoplasm with cellular proteins that ordinarily transduce signals from the TNF receptor (TNFR) family. 184,185 TNF signaling is critical in normal
lymphoid development, and the B-lymphocyte TNFR family member, CD40, is remarkably similar to LMP1 in its growth-promoting and NFkB-activating effects ( Fig.
10.2-5).

FIGURE 10.2-5. The first 44 amino acids of latent infection–associated membrane protein type 1 (LMP1) engage tumor necrosis factor receptor–associated factors
(TRAF) 1, 2, and 3 and activate NFkB through interaction with TRAF1 and TRAF2. Activation is presumed to proceed by constitutive activation of a TRAF2-associated
kinase. It is known that phosphorylation of IkB leads to degradation of IkB and release of NFkB to the nucleus.

Primary EBV infection in most normal people causes clinically apparent or milder forms of acute infectious mononucleosis. Infection initiates in the oropharyngeal
epithelium186 and then spreads to B lymphocytes. As many as 10% of the circulating B lymphocytes may be EBV-infected and express EBNAs and LMPs. 187,188 These
infected cells engender a massive natural killer response, followed by a human leukocyte antigen class I and EBV antigen–specific, cytotoxic CD8+ T-cell
response.189,190 The number of responding cells substantially exceeds the number of infected B lymphocytes. As a consequence of the cellular response, the number
of infected B lymphocytes falls to 1 in 106 and remains at that level. Somewhat higher levels persist in tonsils. The persisting cells may express only EBNA1, EBNA1
and LMPs, or all of the EBNAs and LMPs.191 The EBNA1-only type latency appears to be undetectable by T-cell surveillance, whereas the other EBNAs are well
recognized by CD8+ T cells. 192,193 and 194 In normal people, high-level CD8+ T-cell recognition persists for life, restricting the growth of EBV-infected lymphocytes that
progress to expression of all EBNAs and LMPs. 195 The continuous presence of specific CD8+ T cells is unusual and indicates ongoing stimulation of the immune
response with EBNA- and LMP-expressing cells. Virus replication also persists in the oropharyngeal epithelium, although this requires reintroduction of virus from the
lymphocyte pool. With immunosuppression, latently infected cells in the peripheral blood and persistently infected cells in the oropharynx increase in number. 196
Long after primary infection, EBV is associated with endemic and nonendemic Burkitt's lymphoma, Hodgkin's disease, 197 neural and peripheral B lymphomas and
leiomyomas in immunocompromised patients,198,199,200 and 201 T-cell malignancies, 202 nasopharyngeal carcinoma,169,203 squamous tumors of the oropharynx, and gastric
epitheliomas.204,205 In most instances, the association is based on unusually high serologic reactivity to EBV proteins in a substantial number of patients with the
malignancy, on the finding that the tumor cells are infected with EBV, and on the finding that the resident EBV genome in tumors is uniclonal with regard to EBV
infection events.206 The finding of markers of the same infection event in all the EBV DNA molecules in tumor tissue and in metastases is evidence that the tumor cells
are progeny of a single infected cell and that EBV was present in the cell before the cell became malignant. 207 The EBERs are transcribed in high abundance in latent
EBV infection of nonepithelial cells, and in situ hybridization to EBERs has been useful in demonstrating the specific association of EBV with Hodgkin's disease tumor
cells. Hodgkin's cells express EBNA1 and high levels of LMP1; other EBNAs are not expressed. 208 EBNA1, LMP1, and LMP2 are the only EBV proteins expressed in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma and in preneoplastic lesions of the nasopharynx, consistent with a role for these proteins in the latent infection and associated cell growth
alteration.203
The role of EBV in Burkitt's lymphoma and in other late-onset malignancies is complicated. The presence of EBV in all the tumor cells and the uniclonality of the tumor
cells with regard to EBV infection indicate that the tumors arise in an EBV-infected cell. 207 Thus, EBV infection clearly sets the stage at the cellular level for
progression to malignancy. At the cellular level, EBV infection may enable further evolution of the malignancy by increasing NFkB, c-myc, immune globulin, and RAG
gene expression and by preventing apoptosis. Increased c-myc, Ig, and RAG gene expression may increase the frequency of c-myc/Ig translocation, which can result
in constitutive c-myc activation. 209,210 On the basis of transgenic models, constitutive c-myc activation can further expand the B-cell pool and predispose to subsequent
genetic changes that lead to more malignant phenotypes. EBV genes may initially complement c-myc in promoting cell growth but eventually become redundant. In
Africa and New Guinea, the very high-level predisposition of EBV to Burkitt's lymphoma appears to be due to holoendemic malaria; malaria infection stimulates B-cell
proliferation and depresses cytotoxic T-cell function. 211,212 In this regard, malarial infection has effects in endemic Burkitt's lymphoma that overlap with the effects of
HIV infection or high-level immunosuppressive therapy in EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disease. 213 The significance of the failure of T-cell immune surveillance
in the evolution of lymphoproliferative disease in immunosuppressed patients 213 has been experimentally confirmed by the beneficial effects of EBV-specific or
-nonspecific reconstitutive therapy or prophylaxis. 214 Cytotoxic T-cell failure rarely is complete, and Burkitt's lymphoma or similar uniclonal B lymphomas involving
EBV-infected cells that emerge in normal or immunocompromised patients frequently are characterized by the absence of cells that express EBV proteins other than
EBNA1. Thus, the current model for EBV-associated B-cell malignancy is that EBV causes B-lymphocyte proliferation. The number of EBV-infected cells can increase
as a result of CD8+ T-cell disorders. Given sufficient immunosuppression, several clones of EBV-infected B cells or the best-growing clone may emerge as a
lymphoproliferative disease. EBV infection also predisposes to c-myc translocation, and a more malignant cell clone can eventually emerge as a tumor cell in a host
with normal immune function.
EBV also causes oral hairy leukoplakia, a benign proliferation of epithelial cells that occurs in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients. The lesions are
sites of persistent EBV replication and disappear in response to suppression of EBV replication with acyclovir. 215 As no evidence exists for EBV latency in these
lesions, the pathogenesis of oral hairy leukoplakia may involve secretion of a cytokine from lytically infected cells. 216

KAPOSI'S SARCOMA–ASSOCIATED HERPESVIRUS (HUMAN HERPESVIRUS-8)
Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) is the most common neoplasm associated with AIDS.217,218 Initially described as a rare and indolent tumor of elderly Mediterranean men, it was
later recognized to occur at a higher frequency in Africa. 219 Still later, KS was documented among immunosuppressed organ transplant recipients. 220 In all cases, the
histologic picture of the disease is strikingly similar and highly distinctive. Unlike most tumors, which arise from the clonal outgrowth of a single cell, KS lesions
contain many cell types. 217 Advanced lesions contain a predominance of spindle-shaped cells (spindle cells), the histogenesis of which remains uncertain but which
are believed to arise from endothelial cells (or a more primitive mesenchymal precursor of such cells). In addition, there are infiltrating mononuclear cells (including
plasma cells and monocyte-macrophages) and a highly characteristic profusion of slit-like neovascular spaces. The vascularity of the lesion gives KS its distinctive
reddish or violaceous appearance.
This complex histology sets KS apart from most other tumors and raises important questions about its pathogenesis. Based on the properties of spindle cells
cultivated from AIDS-related KS specimens, many studies have pointed to a key role for growth factors and cytokines in the evolution of a KS lesion. 217,221,222 and 223 In
general, such cells are not fully tumorigenic: Most do not produce stable, transplantable tumors in nude mice or grow in soft agar. In fact, they are dependent on
exogenous growth factors for their proliferation 221,224,225 and, in turn, they produce an array of growth factors and angiogenic factors. 226 When transplanted into nude
mice,223,227 they survive only transiently, then involute. However, during their period of viability, they recruit host inflammatory cells and neovascular structures very
reminiscent of KS. When the human spindle cells involute, the entire lesion disappears. This suggests a model for KS in which the proliferating spindle cells drive the
rest of the lesion via the elaboration of growth and angiogenic factors. The central question then is: What drives the proliferation of the spindle cells?
One early model attempted to relate spindle cell growth to HIV infection. 217 Certainly, HIV infection is an enormous risk factor for KS development: The prevalence of
KS in AIDS patients is 20,000 times that in the general population and 300 times that observed in other immunosuppressed populations. 228 However, both in vivo and
in cell culture, spindle cells do not appear to carry the HIV genome, ruling out direct infection by HIV as the growth-promoting event. Rather, HIV infection is limited to
the smaller lymphoid and mononuclear cell components of KS. Such HIV-infected cells can be shown in vitro to release factors that promote cultured spindle cell
growth, including both cellular cytokines and the HIV tat gene product.229,230 These observations suggest a plausible mechanism by which HIV infection could drive KS
lesion formation without directly infecting the spindle cell.
However, doubts soon arose concerning the ability of HIV infection alone to account for the etiology of KS. First, of course, KS can certainly arise in HIV-negative
hosts. More important, even within the HIV-infected population, large differences in KS risk are not accounted for by the preceding formulation. 228,229,230 and 231 KS risk is

highest in homosexual men with AIDS: A full 20% to 30% of such individuals will develop KS in the course of their HIV disease. By contrast, fewer than 1% to 2% of
AIDS cases related to hemophilia (i.e., blood product administration) will be complicated by KS, and KS is rarer still among pediatric AIDS cases in which HIV
infection is acquired vertically from infected mothers. These and other data 231 suggest the possibility of a sexually transmitted cofactor in KS etiology or pathogenesis.
In 1994, Chang et al. 232 used a polymerase chain reaction–based method to identify DNA sequences that were present in DNA extracted from an AIDS-KS specimen
but absent from normal genomic DNA from the same patient. Two small DNA fragments emerged that were shown to be highly correlated with KS: Virtually all
AIDS-KS tumors were positive for these sequences, whereas available tissue specimens from a large number of HIV-negative hosts were negative, as were most
non-KS tissues from patients with KS. Interestingly, approximately 10% to 15% of lymphoid tissues from AIDS patients who did not have KS were also positive,
indicating that the sequences track with both KS and the risk for KS development. Sequence analysis of these two small DNA fragments reveals homology to two
known lymphotropic herpesviruses, human EBV and the simian herpesvirus saimiri (HVS). These seminal findings point to the existence of a novel herpesvirus,
termed KS-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) or human herpes virus-8 (HHV-8), and suggest it as a candidate for the exogenous cofactor earlier predicted by
epidemiologists.
Subsequent work has confirmed these findings and extended them in important ways, all of which are consistent with a role for this virus in KS development. First,
KSHV/HHV-8 sequences are present in virtually all KS specimens from HIV-negative patients with the disease, as well as their HIV-positive counterparts. 233,234,235,236
and 237 Because most HIV-negative KS patients are not grossly immunodeficient, it is unlikely that KSHV/HHV-8 is simply an opportunistic saprophyte that overruns the
profoundly immunodeficient host. In KS tumors, KSHV DNA is found primarily in the spindle cells 238— the key cell type in KS pathogenesis—and active but restricted
viral gene expression consistent with latent infection is demonstrable in the vast majority of these cells. 239,240 In addition, a small subset of the spindle cells appears to
harbor viral genomes undergoing lytic replication. Second, KSHV/HHV-8 sequences have been identified in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of 30%
to 50% of KS patients and a much smaller proportion (10% to 15%) of AIDS patients lacking clinical KS. 241 Importantly, in KS-negative AIDS patients, the risk of
subsequent KS development is much greater among patients whose initial PBMC sample harbored KSHV than among those whose PBMCs did not. 241 Thus, viral
infection precedes the development of KS, and prior infection appears to be predictive of increased KS risk.
These early inferences have been sustained by more recent seroepidemiologic studies, which have yielded the following important conclusions. First, KSHV infection
is not ubiquitous; among screened (low-risk) U.S. and European blood donors, only approximately 5% to 7% are seropositive. (This number probably slightly
underestimates the true prevalence of infection in the general population.) However, in HIV-positive populations, seroprevalence tracks very strikingly with KS risk:
While 30% to 60% of HIV-infected homosexual men are KSHV-seropositive, fewer than 5% of HIV-positive hemophiliacs or women show serologic evidence of KSHV
infection, and KSHV seroreactivity is surprisingly rare among U.S. children with AIDS. 242,243,244 and 245 In large prospective studies, KSHV seroreactivity was shown to
antedate the onset of the tumor (often by up to 10 years) and strongly predicted an increased risk of KS development. 246,247 and 248 Studies in male homosexuals in the
United States produced strong evidence for sexual transmission in this group: KSHV seroprevalence rises sharply with increasing numbers of sexual partners and
with histories of other STDs, for example. In a key study, Martin et al. 246 showed that the risk of subsequent KS among KSHV-seropositive individuals was the same
even after normalizing for the prevalence of other STDs. 246 This result indicates that it is KSHV infection itself, not some cotransmitted STD, that is responsible for KS
risk.
These data clearly indicate that KSHV is the agent predicted by KS epidemiology and strongly implicate KSHV in KS pathogenesis. The epidemiologic case for
involvement of KSHV in KS biogenesis now is as compelling as the cases for HBV and hepatoma or HPV and cervical cancer. Given the large number of subjects
studied to date, the evidence supports the assertion that KS is virtually never observed in the absence of documented KSHV infection. Accordingly, most experts in
the field now accept that KSHV is necessary for KS development. However, there is also strong consensus that it is not sufficient for this process. For example, 5% to
7% of the general population in the United States is infected by KSHV, yet this population has no significant KS risk. Clearly, therefore, one or more cofactors, in
addition to KSHV, are required to promote tumorigenesis. In the case of AIDS-KS, of course, that cofactor is HIV, although exactly what HIV contributes to
pathogenesis is much debated. Some argue that HIV's link to KS generation is simply the production of an immunodeficient state; others hypothesize that individual
HIV proteins released from infected cells (specifically tat or HIV-induced host cytokines) participate directly in spindle cell growth deregulation in a paracrine
fashion.226,249,250 Such notions need not, of course, be mutually exclusive. The nature of the cofactors in the HIV-negative forms of KS remains unknown.
Studies of KSHV seroepidemiology conducted in the developing world have yielded additional new insights. First, the prevalence of KSHV in the general population is
remarkably elevated in countries in which classic KS is common. For example, in southern Italy, Sicily, and Sardinia, KSHV antibodies are found in more than 20% of
the general population 251,252; in many populations in sub-Saharan Africa, where classic KS was common even in the pre-AIDS era, 60% to 80% of the population is
seropositive. 253,254,255 and 256 Thus, KS seroprevalence tracks with KS risk even outside of HIV-positive cohorts. However, these numbers also reflect major
epidemiologic differences between KSHV infection in Africa and the Mediterranean, on the one hand, and KS risk in Western Europe and America, on the other. In the
latter countries, homosexual men represent a major reservoir of infection, with much lower rates in women and very little infection in prepubertal children. 257,258 By
contrast, in Africa and the Mediterranean, seroconversions begin in childhood, and the seroprevalence rises nearly continuously throughout the first four to five
decades of life. Moreover, seroprevalence is equal in both genders, in sharp contrast to the developed world. The basis for this strikingly different epidemiology is not
yet understood. The frequent occurrence of infection in young children in the Mediterranean and Africa suggests the existence of nonsexual routes of spread, and the
equal infection rates in adult men and women also suggests different routes of spread from those observed in the West.
How does KSHV infection predispose to KS? Understanding of this association at the molecular level is still fragmentary. Because most KS tumor cells are latently
infected, efforts to identify and characterize KSHV latency genes have been made, presuming, as in EBV, that these genes will play strong roles in spindle cell growth
deregulation. To date, several interesting genes have been identified in this fashion. An important group of latency genes is clustered in one region of the viral
genome, where two transcription units have been mapped. 259,260 One expresses a set of three genes, including (1) LANA, an antigen that appears to function in KSHV
genomic maintenance in latency,261 (2) a viral homologue of cellular cyclin D1, and (3) a homologue of cellular inhibitors of caspase activation (Flice-inhibitory
protein). The viral cyclin can bind and activate cdk6, indicating that it is a functional cyclin. 262,263 It appears to display reduced sensitivity to the inhibitory effects of
certain cdk inhibitors. 264,265 and 266 It is easy to imagine how such a gene might figure in growth deregulation, especially given the known links between deregulation of
cellular cyclin D1 and several forms of human cancer. 267 The viral Flice-inhibitory protein presumably functions to block apoptosis—a potentially important activity, as
overexpression of viral cyclin sensitizes cells to apoptosis. 268 A second transcription unit encodes a family of related proteins, the kaposins, which are generated by a
complex translational strategy. 269 Their transcripts are used widely to identify latently infected cells, 270,271 but the functions of their gene products remain unknown.
Remote from these genes, at the right-hand terminus of the genome, is a coding region for a multiply spliced transcript encoding a series of transmembrane proteins
called latency-associated membrane proteins (LAMPs).272,273 These proteins contain a variety of motifs suggestive of roles in cellular signal transduction and can bind
tumor necrosis factor receptor–associated factors (TRAFs) 1, 2, and 3 in vitro, but their in vivo roles remain to be defined. 272
As noted, KS tumors also harbor smaller numbers of lytically infected cells. 270,274 The significance of lytic infection in KS tumorigenesis is unknown, but there are
reasons to believe that the lytic cycle may play a more profound role in KS than in other herpesvirus-induced malignancies. First, a recent clinical trial has shown that
even in patients with advanced AIDS, treatment with ganciclovir, which is active only against lytic herpesvirus infection, profoundly reduced the subsequent
development of KS over the ensuing 6 to 12 months. 275 Although this result might mean simply that lytic reactivation from the lymphoid reservoir is necessary for
spread to the endothelium to initiate latent infection there, it is also compatible with a requirement for ongoing KSHV replication in KS pathogenesis. The latter is an
attractive notion, because the virus contains numerous genes that are potent signaling molecules expressed principally during lytic growth. 276,277 and 278 Some of these
are secreted factors (e.g., homologues of interleukin-6, chemokines, and other factors), whereas others (e.g., the K1 protein and a virus-specific G protein–coupled
receptor) are transmembrane proteins that trigger deregulated signal transduction in the host, often leading to secretory products that can influence surrounding
cells. 279,280 and 281 For example, virus-specific G protein–coupled receptor expression induces the release of vascular endothelial growth factor, 282 a protein long
speculated to play a role in the angiogenic phenotype of KS. Some of the viral chemokines can trigger angiogenesis as well 283; moreover, these molecules would be
expected to contribute to the influx of inflammatory cells in the lesion, another hallmark of KS. Defining the relative contributions of latency and lytic growth to KS
pathogenesis will be a major focus of KSHV research in the coming decade.
The homologies to EBV and the simian herpesvirus saimiri place KSHV/HHV-8 within the lymphotropic herpesvirus subfamily, an assignment supported by the finding
of viral DNA in the B-cell compartment of the PBMC population. 237 This raises the possibility that the virus might participate in lymphoid neoplasia as well and, in
recent years, viral infection has in fact been associated with at least two lymphoproliferative conditions. The first is a rare B-cell lymphoma, termed body cavity–based
lymphoma, that has thus far been limited to HIV-positive hosts. 284 It presents as ascitic tumors in the pleural and peritoneal cavities, often without clinically evident
lymphadenopathy or bone marrow involvement. Body cavity–based lymphoma cells are uniformly latently infected with HHV-8; many (but not all) also bear latent EBV
genomes. Cultured B-cells derived from such tumors are latently infected and, in some of these cells, lytic viral replication can be induced in vitro with phorbol
esters.285 The other lesion associated with HHV-8 is multicentric Castleman's disease (MCD), a complex and poorly understood lymphoproliferative syndrome that can
occur in both HIV-positive and HIV-negative individuals. The HIV-positive form appears to be uniformly associated with KSHV/HHV-8, whereas only approximately half

of the HIV-negative forms can be shown to harbor this virus. 286 Although the role of the virus in this condition is unclear, it is interesting that an association of
Castleman's disease with KS has long been recognized, though little discussed.
Study of viral gene expression in MCD has revealed some provocative surprises. Within the involved tissue, viral DNA is confined to B cells in the mantle zones
surrounding the lymphoid follicles. There, both latently and lytically infected cells can be found, with a rather larger proportion of the infected cell population being in
the lytic cycle than there are in KS. 287,288 Interestingly, although MCD-involved nodes contain equal numbers of B cells bearing k and l light chains, all the infected
cells appear to bearl chains on their surface. Though this might simply indicate clonality of these cells, it is striking that among more than a dozen analyzed cases, no
KSHV-infected cells with surface k chains have yet been described. The meaning of this observation is not yet clear, but it may suggest a particular stage in B-cell
ontogeny is targeted by KSHV during MCD pathogenesis. Although the links of KSHV to primary effusion lymphoma and MCD are very strong, it bears noting that
formal epidemiologic evidence for causality—of the type that has been so compelling for KS—is lacking for these disorders, owing primarily to their rarity.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Ellermann V, Bang O. Experimentelle leukamie bei huhnern. Zentralbl Bakteriol Abt I 1908;46:595.
2. Rous P. A sarcoma of the fowl transmissible by an agent separable from the tumor cells. J Exp Med 1911;13:397.
3. Shope RE. A filtrable virus causing a tumor-like condition in rabbits and its relationship to virus myxomatosum. J Exp Med 1932;56:803.
4. Shope RE, Hurst EW. Infectious papillomatosis of rabbits; with a note on the histopathology. J Exp Med 1933;58:607.
5. Rous P, Beard JW. The progression to carcinoma of virus-induced rabbit papillomas (Shope). J Exp Med 1935;62:523.
6. Gross L. Pathogenic properties, and “vertical” transmission of the mouse leukemia agent. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1951;62:523.
7. Gross L. A filtrable agent, recovered from Akr leukemia extracts, causing salivary gland carcinomas in C3H mice. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1953;83:414.
8. Steward SE. Leukemia in mice produced by a filterable agent present in AKR leukemic tissues with notes on a sarcoma produced by the same agent. Anat Rev 1953;117:532.
9. Szmuness W. Hepatocellular carcinoma and the hepatitis B virus: evidence for a causal association. Prog Med Virol 1978;24:40.
10. Beasley RP. Hepatitis B virusthe major etiology of the hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 1988;61:1942.
11. Ganem D, Schneider RJ. Hepadnaviridae and their replication. In: Knipe DM, Howley PM, eds. Field's Virology. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000 (in press).
12. Chisari FV, Ferrari C. Hepatitis B virus immunopathogenesis. Annu Rev Immunol 1995;13:29.
13. Moriyama T, Guilhot S, Klopchin K, et al. Immunobiology and pathogenesis of hepatocellular injury in hepatitis B virus transgenic mice. Science 1990;248:361.
14. Ando K, Moriyama T, Guidotti LG, et al. Class I restricted cytotoxic T lymphocytes are directly cytopathic for their target cells in vivo. J Immunol 1994;152:3245.
15. Guidotti L, Ishikawa T, Hobbs M, et al. Intracellular inactivation of hepatitis B virus by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Immunity 1996;4:25.
16. Gilles PN, Guerrette DL, Ulevitch RJ, Schreiber RD, Chisari FV. HB sAg retention sensitizes the hepatocyte to injury by physiological concentrations of interferon-gamma. Hepatology
1992;16:655.
17. Michalopoulos G. Liver regeneration: molecular mechanisms of growth control. FASEB J 1990;4:176.
18. Sell S, Hunt JM, Knoll B, Dunsford H. Cellular events during hepatocarcinogenesis in rats and the question of premalignancy. Adv Cancer Res 1987;48:10.
19. Tsukuma H, Hiyama T, Tanaka S, et al. Risk factors for hepatocellular carcinoma among patients with chronic liver disease. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1797.
20. Yen TSB. Hepadnaviral X protein: review of recent progress. J Biomed Sci 1996;3:20.
21. Kim C-Y, Koike K, Saito I, Miyamura T, Jay G. HBx gene of hepatitis B virus induces liver cancer in transgenic mice. Nature 1991;351:317.
22. Koike K, Moriya K, Iino S, et al. High-level expression of hepatitis B virus HBx gene and hepatocarcinogenisis in transgenic mice. Hepatology 1994;19:810.
23. Benn J, Schneider R. Hepatitis B virus HBx protein activates ras-GTP complex formation and establishes a ras, raf, MAP kinase signaling cascade. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:10350.
24. Natoli G, Avantaggiati M, Chirillo P, et al. Ras and raf-dependent activation of cjun transcriptional activity by the hepatitis B virus transactivator pX. Oncogene 1994;9:2837.
25. Unger T, Shaul Y. The X protein of the hepatitis B virus acts as a transcription factor when targeted to its responsive element. EMBO J 1990;9:1889.
26. Williams J, Andrisani O. The hepatitis B virus X protein targets the basic region-leucine zipperdomain of CREB. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:3819.
27. Wang X, Forrester K, Yeh H, et al. Hepatitis B virus X protein inhibits p53 sequence-specific DNA binding, transcriptional activity and association with transcription factor ERCC3. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:2230.
28. Nagaya T, Nakamura T, Tokino T, et al. The mode of hepatitis B virus DNA integration in chromosomes of human hepatocellular carcinoma. Genes Dev 1987;1:773.
29. Popper H, Roth L, Purcell RH, Tennant BC, Gerin JL. Hepatocarcinogenicity of the woodchuck hepatitis virus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987;84:866.
30. Fourel G, Trepo C, Bougueleret L, et al. Frequent activation of N-myc genes by hepadnavirus insertion in woodchuck liver tumours. Nature 1990;347:294.
31. Fourel G, Couturier J, Wei Y, et al. Evidence for long-range oncogene activation by hepadnavirus insertion. EMBO J 1994;13:2526.
32. Hansen LJ, Tennant BC, Seeger C, Ganem D. Differential activation of myc gene family members in hepatic carcinogenesis by closely related hepatitis B virus. Mol Cell Biol 1993;13:659.
33. Yang D, Alt E, Rogler CE. Coordinate expression of N-myc 2 and insulin-like growth factor II in pre-cancerous altered hepatic foci in woodchuck hepatitis virus carriers. Cancer Res
1993;53:2020.
34. de The G, Zeng Y. Population screening for EBV markers: toward improvement of nasopharyngeal carcinoma control. In: Epstein MA, Achog BS, eds. The Epstein-Barr virus. New York: John
Wiley and Sons, 1986:237.
35. Wang J, Chenivesse X, Henglein B, Brechot C. Hepatitis B virus integration in a cyclin A gene in a hepatocellular carcinoma. Nature 1990;343:555.
36. Ciuffo G. Imnfesto positivo con filtrato di verruca volgare. Giorn Ital Mal Venereol 1907;48:12.
37. DeVilliers E-M. Human pathogenic papillomaviruses: an update. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1994;86:1.
38. Schneider A, Oltersdorf T, Schneider V, Gissmann L. Distribution of human papillomavirus 16 genome in cervical neoplasia by molecular in situ hybridization of tissue sections. Int J Cancer
1987;39:717.
39. Baker CC, Howley PM. Differential promoter utilization by the papillomavirus in transformed cells and productively infected wart tissues. EMBO J 1987;6:1027.
40. Howley PM. Papillomavirinae: the viruses and their replication. In: Fields BN, Knipe DM, Howley PM, eds. Field's Virology, vol 2. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1996:2045.
41. Lowy DR, Dvoretzky I, Shober R, et al. In vitro tumorigenic transformation by a defined subgenomic fragment of bovine papillomavirus DNA. Nature 1980;287:72.
42. Doorbar J, Campbell D, Grand RJA, Gallimore PH. Identification of the human papillomavirus-1a E4 gene products. EMBO J 1986;5:355.
43. Spalholz BA, Howley PM. Papillomavirus-host cell interactions. Adv Viral Oncol 1989;8:27.
44. DiMaio D, Petti L, Hwang E-S. The E5 transforming proteins of the papillomaviruses. Semin Virol 1994;5:369.
45. Tong X, Salgia R, Li J-L, Griffin JD, Howley PM. The bovine papillomavirus E6 protein binds to the LD motif repeats of paxillin and blocks its interaction with vinculin and the focal adhesion
kinase. J Biol Chem 1997;272:33373.
46. Vande Pol SB, Brown MC, Turner CE. Association of bovine papillomavirus type 1 E6 oncoprotein with the focal adhesion protein paxillin through a conserved protein interaction motif.
Oncogene 1998;16:43.
47. McBride AA, Romanczuk H, Howley PM. The papillomavirus E2 regulatory proteins. J Biol Chem 1991;266:18411.
48. Spalholz BA, Yang Y-C, Howley PM. Transactivation of a bovine papillomavirus transcriptional regulatory element by the E2 gene product. Cell 1985;42:183.
49. Thierry F, Yaniv M. The BPV1 E2 trans-acting protein can be either an activator or a repressor of the HPV18 regulatory region. EMBO J 1987;6:3391.
50. Ustav M, Stenlund A. Transient replication of BPV-1 requires two viral polypeptides encoded by the E1 and E2 open reading frames. EMBO J 1991;10:449.
51. Skiadopoulos MH, McBride AA. Bovine papillomavirus type 1 genomes and the E2 transactivator protein are closely associated with mitotic chromatin. J Virol 1998;72:2079.
52. Lehman CW, Botchan MR. Segregation of viral plasmids depends on tethering to chromosomes and is regulated by phosphorylation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:4338.
53. Mohr IJ, Clark R, Sun S, et al. Targeting the E1 replication protein to the papillomavirus origin of replication by complex formation with the E2 transactivator. Science 1990;250:1694.
54. Yang L, Li R, Mohr IJ, Clark R, Botchan MR. Activation of BPV-1 replication in vitro by the transcription factor E2. Nature 1991;353:628.
55. MacPherson P, Thorner L, Parker L, Botchan M. The bovine papillomavirus E1 protein has ATPase activity essential to viral DNA replication and efficient transformation in cells. Virology
1994;204:403.
56. Seo Y-S, Muller F, Lusky M, et al. Bovine papillomavirus (BPV)-encoded E2 protein enhances binding of E1 protein to the BPV replication origin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:2865.
57. Pilacinski WP, Glassman DL, Krzyzek RA, Sadowski PL, Robbins AK. Cloning and expression in Escherichia coli of the bovine papillomavirus L1 and L2 open reading frames. Biotechnology
1984;1:356.
58. Komly CA, Breitburd F, Croissant O, Streeck RE. The L2 open reading frame of human papillomavirus type 1a encodes a minor structural protein carrying type-specific antigens. J Virol
1986;60:813.
59. Bedell MA, Jones KH, Laimins LA. The E6-E7 region of human papillomavirus type 18 is sufficient for transformation of NIH 3T3 and rat-1 cells. J Virol 1987;61:3635.
60. Phelps WC, Yee CL, Münger K, Howley PM. The human papillomavirus type 16 E7 gene encodes transactivation and transformation functions similar to those of adenovirus E1A. Cell
1988;53:539.
61. Matlashewski G, Schneider J, Banks L, et al. Human papillomavirus type 16 DNA cooperates with activated ras in transforming primary cells. EMBO J 1987;6:1741.
62. Münger K, Phelps WC, Bubb V, Howley PM, Schlegel R. The E6 and E7 genes of the human papillomavirus type 16 together are necessary and sufficient for transformation of primary human
keratinocytes. J Virol 1989;63:4417.
63. Hawley-Nelson P, Vousden KH, Hubbert NL, Lowy DR, Schiller JT. HPV16 E6 and E7 proteins cooperate to immortalize human foreskin keratinocytes. EMBO J 1989;8:3905.
64. Rous P, Kidd JG, Smith WE. Experiments on the cause of the rabbit carcinomas derived from virus-induced papillomas. J Exp Med 1953;96:159.
65. Rous P, Kidd JG. The carcinogenic effect of a virus upon tarred skin. Science 1936;83:468.
66. Kidd JG, Rous P. Effect of the papillomavirus (Shope) upon tar warts of rabbits. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1937;37:518.
67. Jarrett WFH, McNeil PE, Grimshaw WIR, Selman IE, McIntyre WIM. High incidence area of cattle cancer with a possible interaction between an environmental carcinogen and a
papillomavirus. Nature 1978;274:215.
68. Jarrett WFH, Murphy J, O'Neill BW, Larid HM. Virus-induced papillomas of the alimentary tract of cattle. Int J Cancer 1978;22:323.
69. Campo MS, Moar MH, Sartirana ML, Kennedy IM, Jarrett WGF. The presence of bovine papillomavirus type 4 DNA is not required for the progression to, or maintenance of, the malignant state
in cancers of the alimentary tract in cattle. EMBO J 1985;4:1819.
70. Jablonska S, Majewski S. Epidermoplasia verruciformis: immunological and clinical aspects. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1994;186:157.
71. Lutzner M, Croissant O, Ducasse MF, et al. A potentially oncogenic human papillomavirus (HPV-5) found in two renal allograft recipients. J Invest Dermatol 1980;75:353.
72. Ramoz N, Rueda LA, Bouadjar B, Favre M, Orth G. A susceptibility locus for epidermodysplasia verruciformis, an abnormal predisposition to infection with the oncogenic human papillomavirus
type 5, maps to chromosome 17qter in a region containing a psoriasis locus. J Invest Dermatol 1999;112:259.
73. Favre M, Orth G, Majewski S, et al. Psoriasis: a possible reservoir for human papillomavirus type 5, the virus associated with skin carcinomas of epidermodysplasia verruciformis [see
comments]. J Invest Dermatol 1998;110:311.
74. Orth G. Epidermodysplasia verruciformis: a model for understanding the oncogenicity of human papillomaviruses. Ciba Found Symp 1986;120:157.
75. Ostrow RS, Bender M, Niimura M, et al. Human papillomavirus DNA in cutaneous primary and metastasized squamous cell carcinomas from patients with epidermodysplasia verruciformis.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1982;79:1634.
76. Yutsudo M, Hakura A. Human papillomavirus type 17 transcripts expressed in skin carcinoma tissue of a patient with epidermodysplasia verruciformis. Int J Cancer 1987;39:586.
77. Iftner T, Bierfelder S, Csapo Z, Pfister H. Involvement of human papillomavirus type 8 genes E6 and E7 in transformation and replication. J Virol 1988;62:3655.

78. Berkhout RJM, Tieben LM, Smits HL, et al. Nested PCR approach for detection and typing of epidermoplasia verruciformisassociated human papillomavirus types in cutaneous cancers from
renal transplant recipients. J Clin Microbiol 1995;33:690.
79. Shamanin V, Glover M, Rausch C, et al. Specific types of human papillomavirus found in benign proliferations and carcinomas of the skin in immunosuppressed patients. Cancer Res
1994;54:4610.
80. Underwood PB, Hester L. Diagnosis and treatment of premalignant lesions of the vulva. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1971;110:849.
81. Waugh M. Condylomata acuminata. Br Med J 1972;2:527.
82. Dunn AE, Ogilvie MM. Intranuclear virus particles in human genital wart tissue: observation on the ultrastructure of epidermal layer. J Ultrastruct Res 1968;22:282.
83. Oriel JD, Almeida JD. Demonstration of virus particles in human genital warts. Br J Vener Dis 1970;46:37.
84. Gissmann L, de Villiers EM, zur Hausen H. Analysis of human genital warts (condylomata acuminata) and other genital tumors for human papillomavirus type 6 DNA. Int J Cancer 1982;29:143.
85. Gissmann L, Wolnik L, Ikenberg H, et al. Human papillomavirus types 6 and 11 DNA sequences in genital and laryngeal papillomas and in some cervical cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1983;80:560.
86. zur Hausen H. Condylomata acuminata and human genital cancer. Cancer Res 1976;36:530.
87. Meisels A, Fortin R. Condylomatous lesions of the cervix and vagina: I. Cytologic patterns. Acta Cytol 1976;20:505.
88. Purola E, Savia E. Cytology of gynecologic condyloma acuminatum. Acta Cytol 1977;21:26.
89. Laverty CR, Russell P, Hills E, Booth N. The significance of noncondylomatous wart virus infection of the cervical transformation zone. Acta Cytol 1978;22:195.
90. Koss LG, Durfee GR. Unusual patterns of squamous epithelium of the uterine cervix: cytologic and pathologic study of poilocytotic atypia. Ann NY Acad Sci 1956;63:1245.
91. Della Torre G, Pilotti S, De Palo G, Rilke F. Viral particles in cervical condylomatous lesions. Tumori 1978;64:549.
92. Hills E, Laverty CR. Electron microscopic detection of papilloma virus particles in selected koilocytotic cells in a routine cervical smear. Acta Cytol 1979;23:53.
93. Kessler IL. Human cervical cancer as a venereal disease. Cancer Res 1976;36:783.
94. zur Hausen H. Human papillomaviruses and their possible role in squamous cell carcinomas. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1977;78:1.
95. Rawls WE, Tompkins WAF, Figueroa ME, Melnick JL. Herpes simplex virus type 2: association with carcinoma of the cervix. Science 1968;161:1255.
96. Nahmias AJ, Josey WE, Naib ZM, Luce CF, Guest BA. Antibodies to herpes virus hominus types 1 and 2 in humans: II. Women with cervical cancer. Am J Epidemiol 1970;91:547.
97. zur Hausen H. Herpes simplex virus in human genital cancer. Int Rev Exp Pathol 1983;25:307.
98. Vonka V, Kanda J, Hirsch I, et al. Prospective study on the relationship between cervical neoplasia and herpes simplex type-2 virus: II. Herpes simplex type-2 antibody presence in sera taken at
enrollment. Int J Cancer 1984;33:61.
99. Vonka V, Kanda J, Jelinek J, et al. Prospective study on the relationship between cervical neoplasia and herpes simplex type-2 virus: I. Epidemiological characteristics. Int J Cancer 1984;33:49.
100. Peterson O. Spontaneous course of cervical precancerous conditions. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1956;72:1063.
101. Kinlen LJ, Spriggs AI. Women with positive cervical smears but without surgical intervention: a follow-up study. Lancet 1978;2:463.
102. Richart RM, Barrow BA. A follow-up study of patients with cervical dysplasia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1969;105:386.
103. Durst M, Gissmann L, Idenburg H, zur Hausen H. A papillomavirus DNA from a cervical carcinoma and its prevalence in cancer biopsy samples from different geographic regions. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1983;80:3812.
104. Boshart M, Gissmann L, Ikenberg H, et al. A new type of papillomavirus DNA, its presence in genital cancer biopsies and in cell lines derived from cervical cancer. EMBO J 1984;3:1151.
105. Gissmann L, Schwarz E. Persistence and expression of human papillomavirus DNA in genital cancer. In: Evered D, Clark S, eds. Papillomaviruses. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons, 1986:190.
106. Ikenberg H, Gissmann L, Gross G, et al. Human papillomavirus type-16-related DNA in genital Bowen's disease and in Bowenoid papulosis. Int J Cancer 1983;32:563.
107. Gross G, Hagedorn M, Ikenberg H, et al. Bowenoid papulosis. Presence of human papillomavirus (HPV) structural antigens and of HPV-16 related DNA sequences. Arch Dermatol
1985;121:858.
108. Durst M, Croce C, Gissmann L, Schwarz E, Huebner K. Papillomavirus sequences integrate near cellular oncogenes in some cervical carcinomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987;84:1070.
109. Schwarz E, Freese UK, Gissmann L, et al. Structure and transcription of human papillomavirus sequences in cervical carcinoma cells. Nature 1985;314:111.
110. Yee CL, Krishnan-Hewlett I, Baker CC, Schlegel R, Howley PM. Presence and expression of human papillomavirus sequences in human cervical carcinoma cell lines. Am J Pathol
1985;119:361.
111. Dowhanick JJ, McBride AA, Howley PM. Suppression of cellular proliferation by the papillomavirus E2 protein. J Virol 1995;69:7791.
112. Francis DA, Schmid SI, Howley PM. Repression of the integrated papillomavirus E6/E7 promoter is required for growth suppression of cervical cancer cells. J Virol 2000;74:2679.
113. DeCaprio JA, Ludlow JW, Figge J, et al. SV40 large tumor antigen forms a specific complex with the product of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene. Cell 1988;54:275.
114. Whyte P, Williamson NM, Harlow E. Cellular targets for transformation by the adenovirus E1A proteins. Cell 1989;56:67.
115. Ewen MB, Ludlow JW, Marsilio E, et al. An N-terminal transformation-governing sequence of SV40 large T antigen contributes to the binding of both p110 RB and a second cellular protein,
p120. Cell 1989;58:257.
116. Münger K, Werness BA, Dyson N, Phelps WC, Howley PM. Complex formation of human papillomavirus E7 proteins with the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor gene product. EMBO J
1989;8:4099.
117. Chellappan S, Kraus VB, Kroger B, et al. Adenovirus E1A, simian virus 40 tumor antigen and human papillomavirus E7 protein share the capacity to disrupt the interaction between transcription
factor E2F and the retinoblastoma gene product. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:4549.
118. Jewers RJ, Hildebrandt P, Ludlow JW, Kell B, McCance DJ. Regions of human papillomavirus type 16 E7 oncoprotein required for immortalization of human keratinocytes. J Virol
1992;66:1329.
119. Jones DL, Alani RM, Münger K. The human papillomavirus E7 oncoprotein can uncouple cellular differentiation and proliferation in human keratinocytes by abrogating p21cip1-mediated
inhibition of cdk2. Genes Dev 1997;11:2101.
120. Hudson JB, Bedell MA, McCance DJ, Laimins LA. Immortalization and altered differentiation of human keratinocytes in vitro by the E6 and E7 open reading frames of human papillomavirus
type 18. J Virol 1990;64:519.
121. Barbosa MS, Vass WC, Lowy DR, Schiller JT. In vitro biological activities of the E6 and E7 genes vary among HPVs of different oncogenic potential. J Virol 1991;65:292.
122. Schlegel R, Phelps WC, Zhang YL, Barbosa M. Quantitative keratinocyte assay detects two biological activities of human papillomavirus DNA and identifies viral types associated with cervical
carcinoma. EMBO J 1988;7:3181.
123. Werness BA, Levine AJ, Howley PM. Association of human papillomavirus types 16 and 18 E6 proteins with p53. Science 1990;248:76.
124. Huibregtse JM, Scheffner M, Howley PM. A cellular protein mediates association of p53 with the E6 oncoprotein of human papillomavirus types 16 or 18. EMBO J 1991;10:4129.
125. Scheffner M, Huibregtse JM, Vierstra RD, Howley PM. The HPV-16 E6 and E6-AP complex functions as a ubiquitin-protein ligase in the ubiquitination of p53. Cell 1993;75:495.
126. Talis AL, Huibregtse JM, Howley PM. The role of E6AP in the regulation of p53 protein levels in human papillomavirus (HPV) positive and HPV negative cells. J Biol Chem 1998;273:6439.
127. Hubbert NL, Sedman SA, Schiller JT. Human papillomavirus type 16 E6 increases the degradation rate of p53 in human keratinocytes. J Virol 1992;66:6237.
128. Scheffner M, Munger K, Byrne JC, Howley PM. The state of the p53 and retinoblastoma genes in human cervical carcinoma cell lines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:5523.
129. Mietz JA, Unger T, Huibregtse JM, Howley PM. The transcriptional transactivation function of wild-type p53 is inhibited by SV40 large T-antigen and by HPV-16 oncoprotein. EMBO J
1992;11:5013.
130. Kessis TD, Slebos RJ, Nelson WG, et al. Human papillomavirus 16 E6 expression disrupts the p53-mediated cellular response to DNA damage. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90: 3988.
131. White A, Livanos EM, Tlsty TD. Differential disruption of genomic integrity and cell cycle regulation in normal human fibroblasts by the HPV oncoproteins. Genes Dev 1994;8:666.
132. Klingelhutz AJ, Foster SA, McDougall JK. Telomerase activation by the E6 gene product of human papillomavirus type 16. Nature 1996;380:79.
133. Chen JJ, Reid CE, Band V, Androphy EJ. Interaction of papillomavirus E6 oncoproteins with a putative calcium-binding protein. Science 1995;269:529.
134. Gao Q, Srinivasan S, Boyer SN, Wazer DE, Band V. The E6 oncoproteins of high-risk papillomaviruses bind to a novel putative GAP protein, E6TP1, and target it for degradation. Mol Cell Biol
1999;19:733.
135. Tong X, Howley PM. The bovine papillomavirus E6 oncoprotein interacts with paxillin and disrupts the actin cytoskeleton. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:4412.
136. Patel D, Huang SM, Baglia LA, McCance DJ. The E6 protein of human papillomavirus type 16 binds to and inhibits co-activation by CBP and p300. EMBO J 1999;18:5061.
137. Ronco LV, Karpova AY, Vidal M, Howley PM. The human papillomavirus 16 E6 oncoprotein binds to interferon regulatory factor-3 and inhibits its transcriptional activity. Genes Dev
1998;12:2061.
138. Clarke EA, Morgan RW, Newman AM. Smoking as a risk factor in cancer of the cervix: additional evidence from a case control study. Am J Epidemiol 1982;115:59.
139. Wigle DT. Smoking and cancer of the cervix: hypothesis. Am J Epidemiol 1980;111:125.
140. Winkelstein WJ. Smoking and cancer of the uterine cervix. Am J Epidemiol 1977;106:257.
141. Hoffmann D, Hecht SS, Haley NJ, et al. Tumorigenic agents in tobacco products and their uptake by chewers, smokers and nonsmokers. J Cell Biochem 1985;9C:33.
142. zur Hausen H. Human genital cancer: synergism between two virus infections or synergism between a virus infection and initiating events. Lancet 1982;2:1370.
143. Yokota J, Tsukada Y, Najajima T, et al. Loss of heterozygosity on the short arm of chromosome 3 in carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Cancer Res 1989;49:3598.
144. Ohta M, Inoue H, Cotticelli MG, et al. The FHIT gene, spanning the chromosome 3p14.2 fragile site and renal carcinoma-associated t(3;8) breakpoint, is abnormal in digestive tract cancers. Cell
1996;84:587.
145. Stanbridge EJ. Suppression of malignancy in human cells. Nature 1976;260:17.
146. zur Hausen H. Papillomavirus infectionsa major cause of human cancers. Biochim Biophys Acta 1996;1288:55.
147. Smits HL, Raadsmeer E, Rood I, et al. Induction of anchorage independent growth of human fibroblasts with a deletion in the short arm of chromosome 11 by human papillomavirus 16 DNA. J
Virol 1988;62:4538.
148. Riou G, Barrois M, Le MG, et al. C-myc proto-oncogene expression and prognosis in early carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Lancet 1987;1:761.
149. Kahn T, Schwarz E, zur Hausen H. Molecular cloning and characterization of the DNA of a new human papillomavirus from a laryngeal carcinoma. Int J Cancer 1986;37:61.
150. Loning T, Ikenberg H, Becker J, et al. Analysis of oral papillomas, leukoplakias, and invasive carcinomas for human papillomavirus type related DNA. J Invest Dermatol 1985;84:417.
151. Brandsma JL, Steinberg BM, Abromson AL, Winkler B. Presence of human papillomavirus type 16 related sequences in verrucous carcinoma of the larynx. Cancer Res 1986;46:2185.
152. Jenson AB, Lancaster WD, Hartmann DP, Shaffer EL. Frequency and distribution of papillomavirus structural antigens in verrucae, multiple papillomas, and condylomata of the oral cavity. Am
J Pathol 1982;107:212.
153. Lind PO, Syrjanen SM, Syrjanen KJ, Koppang HS, Aas E. Local immunoreactivity and human papillomavirus (HPV) in oral precancer and cancer lesions. Scand J Dent Res 1986;94:419.
154. DeVilliers E-M, Neumann C, Le JY, Weidauer H, zur Hausen H. Infection of the oral mucosa with defined types of human papillomaviruses. Med Microbiol Immunol (Berl) 1986;174:287.
155. Naghasfar Z, Sawada E, Kutcher MK, et al. Identification of genital tract papillomaviruses HPV-6 and HPV-16 in warts of the oral cavity. J Virol 1985;62:660.
156. Pfister H, Hettich I, Runne U, Gissmann L, Chilf GN. Characterization of human papillomavirus type 13 from lesions of focal epithelial hyperplasia Heck lesions. J Virol 1983;47:363.
157. Beaudenon S, Praetorius F, Kremsdorf D, et al. A new type of human papillomavirus associated with oral focal epithelial hyperplasia. J Invest Dermatol 1987;88:130.
158. Syrjanen S, Syrjanen K, Lambert MA. Detection of human papillomavirus DNA in oral mucosal lesions using in situ DNA hybridization applied on paraffin sections. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
Pathol 1986;62:660.
159. Syrjanen K, Pyrhonen S, Aukee S, Koskela E. A tumor probably caused by human papillomavirus (HPV). Diagn Histopathol 1982;5:291.
160. Winkler B, Capo V, Reumann W, et al. Human papillomavirus infection of the esophagus. Cancer 1985;55:149.
161. Zhou J, Stenzel DJ, Sun XY, Frazer IH. Synthesis and assembly of infectious bovine papillomavirus particles in vitro. J Gen Virol 1993;74:763.
162. Kirnbauer R, Booy F, Cheng N, Lowy DR, Schiller JT. Papillomavirus L1 major capsid protein self-assembles into virus-like particles that are highly immunogenic. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1992;89:12180.
163. Jochmus I, Schafer K, Faath S, Muller M, Gissmann L. Chimeric virus-like particles of the human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV 16) as a prophylactic and therapeutic vaccine. Arch Med Res
1999;30:269.
164. Epstein MA, Barr YM. Cultivation in vitro of human lymphoblasts from Burkitt's malignant lymphoma. Lancet 1964;1:252.
165. Kieff E. Epstein-Barr virus and its replication. In: Fields BN, Knipe DM, Howley PM, eds. Field's Virology. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1996:2343.

166. Rickinson A, Kieff E. Epstein-Barr virus. In: Fields BN, Knipe DM, Howley PM, eds. Field's Virology. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1996:2397.
167. Henle W, Henle G. Seroepidemiology of the virus. In: Epstein MA, Achong BG, eds. The Epstein-Barr Virus. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1979:61.
168. de The G, Geser A, Day NE, et al. Epidemiological evidence for causal relationship between Epstein-Barr virus and Burkitt's lymphoma from Ugandan prospective study. Nature 1978;274:756.
169. Zeng Y. Seroepidemiological studies on nasopharyngeal carcinoma in China. Adv Cancer Res 1985;44:121.
170. Henle W, Diehl V, Kohn G, zur Hausen H, Henle G. Herpes-type virus and chromosome marker in normal leukocytes after growth with irradiated Burkitt cells. Science 1967;157:1064.
171. Rowe M, Young LS, Crocker J, et al. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated lymphoproliferative disease in the SCID mouse model: implications for the pathogenesis of EBV-positive lymphomas
in man. J Exp Med 1991;173:147.
172. Shope TC, Dechairo D, Miller G. Malignant lymphoma in cotton-top marmosets after inoculation with Epstein-Barr virus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1973;70:2487.
173. Harrington DS, Weisenburger DD, Purtilo DT. Malignant lymphomas in the X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome. Cancer 1987;59:1419.
174. Shapiro RS, McClain K, Frizzera G, et al. Epstein-Barr virus-associated B cell lymphoproliferative disorders following bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1988;71:1234.
175. Young LS, Alfieri C, Hennessy K, et al. Expression of Epstein-Barr virus transformation-associated genes in tissues of patients with EBV lymphoproliferative disease. N Engl J Med
1989;321:1080.
176. Miller C, Burkhardt A, Lee J, et al. Integral membrane protein 2 (LMP2) of Epstein-Barr virus regulates reactivation from latency through dominant negative effects on protein tyrosine kinases.
Immunity 1995;2:155.
177. Reisman D, Sugden B. Trans-activation of an Epstein-Barr viral (EBV) transcriptional enhancer by the EBV nuclear antigen 1. Mol Cell Biol 1986;6:3838.
178. Tong X, Drabkin R, Yalamanchili R, Mosialos G, Kieff E. The Epstein-Barr virus nuclear protein 2 acidic domain interacts with a novel cellular coactivator that can associate with TFIIE. Mol Cell
Biol 1995;15:4735.
179. Robertson E, Grossman S, Johannsen E, et al. Epstein-Barr virus nuclear protein 3C modulates transcription through interaction with the sequence specific DNA binding protein J kappa. J Virol
1995;69:3108.
180. Ellisen LW, Bird J, West DC, et al. Tan-1, the human homolog of the Drosophila notch gene, is broken by chromosomal translocations in T lymphoblastic neoplasms. Cell 1991;66:649.
181. Fortini ME, Artavanis-Tsakonas S. The suppressor of hairless protein participates in notch receptor signaling. Cell 1994;79:273.
182. Wilson JB, Weinberg W, Johnson R, Yuspa S, Levine AJ. Expression of the BNLF-1 oncogene of Epstein-Barr virus in the skin of transgenic mice induces hyperplasia and aberrant expression
of keratin 6. Cell 1990;61:1315.
183. Kaye K, Izumi K, Mosialos G, Kieff E. The Epstein-Barr virus LMP1 cytoplasmic carboxy-terminus is essential for B lymphocyte transformation; fibroblast co-cultivation complements a critical
function within the terminal 155 residues. J Virol 1995;69:675.
184. Mosialos G, Birkenbach M, Yalamanchili R, et al. The Epstein-Barr virus transforming protein LMP1 engages signaling proteins for the tumor necrosis factor receptor family. Cell 1995;80:389.
185. Izumi KM, McFarland EC, Ting AT, et al. The Epstein-Barr virus oncoprotein latent membrane protein 1 engages the tumor necrosis factor receptorassociated proteins TRADD and
receptor-interacting protein (RIP) but does not induce apoptosis or require RIP for NF-kB activation. Mol Cell Biol 1999;19:5759.
186. Sixbey JW, Nedrud JG, Raab-Traub N, Hanes RA, Pagano JS. Epstein-Barr virus replication in oropharyngeal epithelial cells. N Engl J Med 1984;310:1225.
187. Robinson J, Smith D, Niederman J. Mitotic EBNA-positive lymphocytes in peripheral blood during infectious mononucleosis. Nature 1980;287:334.
188. Tierney RJ, Steven N, Young LS, Rickinson AB. Epstein-Barr virus latency in blood mononculear cells: analysis of viral gene transcription during primary infection and in the carrier state. J Virol
1994;68:7374.
189. Tomkinson BE, Maziarz R, Sullivan JL. Characterisation of the T cellmediated cellular cytotoxicity during acute infectious mononucleosis. J Immunol 1989;143:660.
190. Tosato G, Magrath I, Koski I, Dooley N, Blaese M. Activation of suppressor T cells during Epstein-Barr virusinduced infectious mononucleosis. N Engl J Med 1979;301:1133.
191. Babcock GJ, Decker LL, Volk M, Thorley-Lawson DA. EBV persistence in memory B cells in vivo. Immunity 1998;9:395.
192. Khanna R, Burrows SR, Kurilla MG, et al. Localization of Epstein-Barr virus cytotoxic T cell epitopes using recombinant vaccinia: implications for vaccine development. J Exp Med
1992;176:169.
193. Murray RJ, Kurilla MG, Brooks JM, et al. Identification of target antigens for the human cytotoxic T cell response to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV): implication for the immune control of EBV-positive
malignancies. J Exp Med 1992;176:157.
194. Shapiro A, Imreh M, Leonchiks A, Imreh S, Masucci MG. A minimal glycine-alanine repeat prevents the interaction of ubiquitinated IkB alpha with the proteasome: a new mechanism for
selective inhibition of proteolysis. Nature Med 1998;4:939.
195. Tan LC, Gudgeon N, Annels NE, et al. A re-evaluation of the frequency of CD8+ T cells specific for EBV in healthy virus carriers. J Immunol 1999;162:1827.
196. Preiksaitis JK, Diaz-Mitoma F, Mirzayons F, Roberts S, Tyrrell DLJ. Quantitative oropharyngeal Epstein-Barr virus shedding in renal and cardiac transplant recipients: relationship to
immunosuppressive therapy, serologic responses, and the risk of post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder. J Infect Dis 1992;166:989.
197. Anagnostopoulos I, Herbst H, Niedobitek G, Stein H. Demonstration of monoclonal EBV genomes in Hodgkin's disease and Ki-1-positive anaplastic large cell lymphoma by combined Southern
blot and in situ hybridisation. Blood 1989;74:810.
198. Hamilton-Dutoit S, Rea D, Raphael M, et al. Epstein-Barr viruslatent gene expression and tumour cell phenotype in acquired immunodeficiency syndromerelated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Correlation of lymphoma phenotype with three distinct patterns of viral latency. Am J Pathol 1993;143:1072.
199. Pelicci PG, Knowles DM, Arlin ZA, et al. Multiple monoclonal B-cell expansions and c-myc oncogene rearrangements in acquired immunodeficiency syndromerelated lymphoproliferative
disorders. J Exp Med 1986;164:2049.
200. McGrath MS, Shiramizu B, Meeker TC, Kaplan LD, Herndier B. AIDS-associated polyclonal lymphoma: identification of a new HIV-associated disease process. J AIDS 1991;4:408.
201. MacMahon EME, Glass JD, Hayward SD, et al. Epstein-Barr virus in AIDS-related primary central nervous system lymphoma. Lancet 1991;338:969.
202. Leyvraz S, Henle W, Chahinian AP, et al. Association of Epstein-Barr virus with thymic carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1985;312:1296.
203. Brooks L, Yao QY, Rickinson AB, Young LS. Epstein-Barr virus latent gene transcription in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells: coexpression of EBNA1, LMP1, and LMP2 transcripts. J Virol
1992;66:2689.
204. Nicholls JM, Pittaluga S, Chung LP, So KC. T he association between carcinoma of the tonsil and Epstein-Barr virus: a study using radiolabelled in situ hybridisation. Pathology 1994;26:94.
205. Shibata D, Weiss LM. Epstein-Barr virusassociated gastric adenocarcinoma. Am J Pathol 1992;140:769.
206. Raab-Traub N, Flynn K. The structure of the terminal of the Epstein-Barr virus as a marker of clonal cellular proliferation. Cell 1986;47:883.
207. Cleary ML, Nalesnik MA, Shearer WT, Sklar J. Clonal analysis of transplant-associated lymphoproliferations based on the structure of genomic termini of the Epstein-Barr virus. Blood
1988;72:349.
208. Herbst H, Dallenbach F, Hummel M, et al. Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein expression in Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:4766.
209. Altiok E, Klien G, Zech L, et al. Epstein-Barr virus transformed pro-B cells are prone to illegitimate recombination between the switch region of the m chain gene and other chromosomes. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:6333.
210. Dalla-Favera R, Bregni M, Erikson J, et al. Human C-myc oncogene is located on the region of chromosome 8 that is translocated in Burkitt lymphoma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1982;79:7824.
211. Kafuko GW, Burkitt DP. Burkitt's lymphoma and malaria. Int J Cancer 1970;6:1.
212. Whittle HC, Brown J, Marsh K, et al. T-cell control of Epstein-Barr virusinfected B-cells is lost during P. falciparum malaria. Nature 1984;312:449.
213. Savoie A, Perpete C, Carpentier L, Jonas J, Alfieri C. Direct correlation between the load of Epstein-Barr virusinfected lymphocytes in the peripheral blood of pediatric transplant patients and
risk of lymphoproliferative disease. Blood 1994;83:2715.
214. Papadopoulos EB, Ladanyi M, Emanuel D, et al. Infusions of donor leukocytes to treat Epstein-Barr virusassociated lymphoproliferative disorders after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.
N Engl J Med 1994;330:1185.
215. Greenspan D, De Souza YG, Conant MA, et al. Efficacy of desciclovir in the treatment of Epstein-Barr virus infection in oral hairy leukoplakia. J AIDS 1990;3:571.
216. Niedobitek G, Young LS, Lau R, et al. Epstein-Barr virus infection in oral hairy leukoplakia: virus replication in the absence of a detectable latent phase. J Gen Virol 1991;72:3035.
217. Ensoli B, Barillari G, Gallo RC. Pathogenesis of AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1991;5:281.
218. Ganem D. AIDS. Viruses, cytokines and Kaposi's sarcoma. Curr Biol 1995;5:469.
219. Ziegler J, Templeton AC, Voegel GL. KS: a comparison of classical, endemic and epidemic forms. Semin Oncol 1984;11:47.
220. Penn I. Kaposi's sarcoma in organ transplant recipients. Transplantation 1979;27:8.
221. Nakamura S, Salahuddin SZ, Bieberfeld P, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma cells: long term culture with growth factor from retrovirus-infected CD4+ T cells. Science 1988;242:426.
222. Ensoli B, Nakamura S, Salahuddin SZ, et al. AIDSKaposi's sarcomaderived cells express cytokines with autocrine and paracrine growth effects. Science 1989;243:223.
223. Salahuddin SZ, Nakamura S, Biberfeld P, et al. Angiogenic properties of Kaposi's sarcomaderived cells after long-term culture in vitro. Science 1988;242:430.
224. Miles SA, Rezai AR, Salazar-Gonzalez JF, et al. AIDSKaposi sarcomaderived cells produce and respond to interleukin 6. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:4068.
225. Nair BC, DeVico AL, Nakamura S, et al. Identification of a major growth factor for AIDSKaposi's sarcoma cells as oncostatin M. Science 1992;255:1430.
226. Ensoli B, Gendelman R, Markham P, et al. Synergy between basic fibroblast growth factor and HIV-1 tat protein in induction of Kaposi's sarcoma. Nature 1994;371:674.
227. Nakamura S, Sakaurada S, Salahuddin SZ, et al. Inhibition of development of Kaposi's sarcomarelated lesions by a bacterial cell wall complex. Science 1992;255:1437.
228. Beral V. Epidemiology of Kaposi's sarcoma. In: Beral V, Jaffe HW, Weiss R, eds. Cancer Surveys: 10. Cancer, HIV and AIDS. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Press, 1991:5.
229. Buonaguro L, Barillari G, Chang H, et al. Effects of HIV-1 tat protein on the expression of inflammatory cytokines. J Virol 1992;66:7159.
230. Barillari G, Gendelman R, Gallo RC, Ensoli B. The tat protein of HIV1, a growth factor for AIDS Kaposi's sarcoma and cytokine-activated vascular cells, induces adhesion of the same cell types
by using integrin receptors recognizing the RGD amino acid sequence. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:7941.
231. Beral V, Peterman T, Berkelman R, Jaffe HW. Kaposi's sarcoma among persons with AIDS: a sexually transmitted infection? Lancet 1990;335:123.
232. Chang Y, Cesarman E, Pessin MS, et al. Identification of herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. Science 1994;266:1865.
233. Moore P, Chang Y. Detection of herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in Kaposi's sarcoma patients with and those without HIV infection. N Engl J Med 1995;332:118.
234. Huang Y, Li JJ, Kaplan M, Friedman-Kien A. Human herpesvirus-like DNA sequence in various forms of Kaposi's sarcoma. Lancet 1995;345:759.
235. Schalling M, Eukman M, Kaaya E, Linde A, Biberfeld P. A role for a new herpesvirus (KSAV) in different forms of Kaposi's sarcoma. Nature Med 1995;1:707.
236. Chuck S, Grant RM, Katongole-Mbidde E, Conant M, Ganem D. Frequent presence of herpesviral-like DNA sequences in lesions of HIV-negative Kaposi's sarcoma. J Infect Dis 1996;173:248.
237. Ambroziak J, Blackbourn D, Herndier B, et al. Herpesvirus-like sequences in HIV-infected and uninfected Kaposi's sarcoma patients [technical comment]. Science 1995;268:582.
238. Boshoff C, Schulz TF, Kennedy MM, et al. Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus infects endothelial and spindle cells. Nature Med 1995;1:1274.
239. Zhong W, Wang H, Herndier B, Ganem D. Restricted expression of Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus genes in Kaposi's sarcoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996 (in press).
240. Staskus K, Zhong W, Gebhardt K, et al. Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus genes are expressed predominantly in the endothelial (spindle) tumor cells of Kaposi's sarcoma. Manuscript
submitted 1996.
241. Whitby D, Howard MR, Tenant-Flowers M, et al. Detection of Kaposi sarcoma associated herpesvirus in peripheral blood of HIV-infected individuals and progression to Kaposi's sarcoma.
Lancet 1995;346:799.
242. Kedes DH, Operskalski E, Busch M, et al. The seroepidemiology of human herpesvirus 8 (Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus): distribution of infection in KS risk groups and evidence for
sexual transmission. Nature Med 1996;2:918.
243. Gao SJ, Kingsley L, Hoover DR, et al. Seroconversion to antibodies against Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus-related latent nuclear antigens before the development of Kaposi's
sarcoma. N Engl J Med 1996;335:233.
244. Simpson GR, Schulz TF, Whitby D, et al. Prevalence of Kaposi's sarcoma associated herpesvirus infection measured by antibodies to recombinant capsid protein and latent
immunofluorescence antigen. Lancet 1996;348:1133.
245. Zhu L, Wang R, Sweat A, et al. Comparison of human sera reactivities in immunoblots with recombinant human herpesvirus (HHV)-8 proteins associated with the latent (ORF73) and lytic
(ORFs 65, K8.1A, and K8.1B) replicative cycles and in immunofluorescence assays with HHV-8-infected BCBL-1 cells. Virology 1999;256:381.
246. Martin JN, Ganem DE, Osmond DH, et al. Sexual transmission and the natural history of human herpesvirus 8 infection. N Engl J Med 1998;338:948.
247. Moore PS, Kingsley LA, Holmberg SD, et al. Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus infection prior to onset of Kaposi's sarcoma. AIDS 1996;10:175.

248. Renwick N, Halaby T, Weverling GJ, et al. Seroconversion for human herpesvirus 8 during HIV infection is highly predictive of Kaposi's sarcoma. AIDS 1998;12:2481.
249. Gallo RC. The enigmas of Kaposi's sarcoma. Science 1998;282:1837.
250. Ensoli B, Sirianni MC. Kaposi's sarcoma pathogenesis: a link between immunology and tumor biology. Crit Rev Oncog 1998;9:107.
251. Whitby D, Luppi M, Barozzi P, et al. Human herpesvirus 8 seroprevalence in blood donors and lymphoma patients from different regions of Italy. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:395.
252. Calabro ML, Sheldon J, Favero A, et al. Seroprevalence of Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus/human herpesvirus 8 in several regions of Italy. J Hum Virol 1998;1:207.
253. Ariyoshi K, Schim van der Loeff M, Cook P, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma in the Gambia, West Africa is less frequent in human immunodeficiency virus type 2 than in human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 infection despite a high prevalence of human herpesvirus 8. J Hum Virol 1998;1:193.
254. Gessain A, Mauclere P, van Beveren M, et al. Human herpesvirus 8 primary infection occurs during childhood in Cameroon, Central Africa. Int J Cancer 1999;81:189.
255. Mayama S, Cuevas LE, Sheldon J, et al. Prevalence and transmission of Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus (human herpesvirus 8) in Ugandan children and adolescents. Int J Cancer
1998;77:817.
256. Sitas F, Carrara H, Beral V, et al. Antibodies against human herpesvirus 8 in black South African patients with cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1863.
257. Blauvelt A, Sei S, Cook PM, Schulz TF, Jeang KT. Human herpesvirus 8 infection occurs following adolescence in the United States. J Infect Dis 1997;176:771.
258. Goedert JJ, Kedes DH, Ganem D. Antibodies to human herpesvirus 8 in women and infants born in Haiti and the USA. Lancet 1997;349:1368.
259. Dittmer D, Lagunoff M, Renne R, et al. A cluster of latently expressed genes in Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus. J Virol 1998;72:8309.
260. Sarid R, Wiezorek JS, Moore PS, Chang Y. Characterization and cell cycle regulation of the major Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus (human herpesvirus 8) latent genes and their
promoter. J Virol 1999;73:1438.
261. Ballestas ME, Chatis PA, Kaye KM. Efficient persistence of extrachromosomal KSHV DNA mediated by latency-associated nuclear antigen. Science 1999;284:641.
262. Godden-Kent D, Talbot SJ, Boshoff C, et al. The cyclin encoded by Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus stimulates cdk6 to phosphorylate the retinoblastoma protein and histone H1. J Virol
1997;71:4193.
263. Chang Y, Moore PS, Talbot SJ, et al. Cyclin encoded by KS herpesvirus. Nature 1996;382:410.
264. Swanton C, Mann DJ, Fleckenstein B, et al. Herpes viral cyclin/Cdk6 complexes evade inhibition by CDK inhibitory proteins. Nature 1997;390:184.
265. Ellis M, Chew YP, Fallis L, et al. Degradation of p27(Kip) cdk inhibitor triggered by Kaposi's sarcoma virus cyclin-cdk6 complex. EMBO J 1999;18:644.
266. Mann DJ, Child ES, Swanton C, Laman H, Jones N. Modulation of p27(Kip1) levels by the cyclin encoded by Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus. EMBO J 1999;18:654.
267. Motokura T, Bloom T, Kim HG, et al. A novel cyclin encoded by a bcl1-linked candidate oncogene. Nature 1991;350:512.
268. Schulz TF. Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus (human herpesvirus-8). J Gen Virol 1998;79:1573.
269. Sadler R, Wu L, Forghani B, et al. A complex translational program generates multiple novel proteins from the latently expressed kaposin (K12) locus of Kaposi's sarcomaassociated
herpesvirus. J Virol 1999;73:5722.
270. Staskus KA, Zhong W, Gebhard K, et al. Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus gene expression in endothelial (spindle) tumor cells. J Virol 1997;71:715.
271. Sturzl M, Wunderlich A, Ascherl G, et al. Human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8) gene expression in Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) primary lesions: an in situ hybridization study. Leukemia 1999;13:S110.
272. Glenn M, Rainbow L, Aurad F, Davison A, Schulz TF. Identification of a spliced gene from Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus encoding a protein with similarities to latent membrane
proteins 1 and 2A of Epstein-Barr virus. J Virol 1999;73:6953.
273. Poole LJ, Zong JC, Ciufo DM, et al. Comparison of genetic variability at multiple loci across the genomes of the major subtypes of Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus reveals evidence for
recombination and for two distinct types of open reading frame K15 alleles at the right-hand end. J Virol 1999;73:6646.
274. Orenstein JM, Alkan S, Blauvelt A, et al. Visualization of human herpesvirus type 8 in Kaposi's sarcoma by light and transmission electron microscopy. AIDS 1997;11:35.
275. Martin DF, Kuppermann BD, Wolitz RA, et al. Oral ganciclovir for patients with cytomegalovirus retinitis treated with a ganciclovir implant. Roche Ganciclovir Study Group. N Engl J Med
1999;340:1063.
276. Nicholas J, Zong JC, Alcendor DJ, et al. Novel organizational features, captured cellular genes, and strain variability within the genome of KSHV/HHV8. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1998;23:79.
277. Nicholas J, Ruvolo V, Zong J, et al. A single 13-kilobase divergent locus in the Kaposi sarcomaassociated herpesvirus (human herpesvirus 8) genome contains nine open reading frames that
are homologous to or related to cellular proteins. J Virol 1997;71:1963.
278. Neipel F, Albrecht JC, Fleckenstein B. Cell-homologous genes in the Kaposi's sarcoma associated rhadinovirus human herpesvirus 8: determinants of its pathogenicity? J Virol 1997;71:4187.
279. Lee H, Guo J, Li M, et al. Identification of an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif of K1 transforming protein of Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus. Mol Cell Biol 1998;18:5219.
280. Lee H, Veazey R, Williams K, et al. Deregulation of cell growth by the K1 gene of Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus. Nature Med 1998;4:435.
281. Lagunoff M, Majeti R, Weiss A, Ganem D. Deregulated signal transduction by the K1 gene product of Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:5704.
282. Bais C, Santomasso B, Coso O, et al. G-protein-coupled receptor of Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus is a viral oncogene and angiogenesis activator. Nature 1998;391:86.
283. Boshoff C, Endo Y, Collins PD, et al. Angiogenic and HIV inhibitory functions of KSHV-encoded chemokines. Science 1997;278:290.
284. Cesarman E, Chang Y, Moore PS, Said JW, Knowles D. Kaposi's sarcoma associated herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in AIDS-related body cavity based lymphomas. N Engl J Med
1995;332:1186.
285. Renne R, Zhong W, Herndier B, et al. Lytic growth of Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus (human herpesvirus 8) in a cultured B cell lymphoma line. Nature Med 1996;2:342.
286. Soulier J, Grollet L, Oksenhendler E, et al. Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in multicentric Castleman's disease. Blood 1995;86:1276.
287. Dupin N, Fisher C, Kellam P, et al. Distribution of human herpesvirus-8 latently infected cells in Kaposi's sarcoma, multicentric Castleman's disease, and primary effusion lymphoma. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:4546.
288. Parravicini C, Chandran B, Corbellino M, et al. Differential viral protein expression in KSVH-associated diseases: Kaposi's sarcoma, primary effusion lymphoma, and multicentric Castleman's
disease. Am J Pathol 2000;156:743.

CHAPTER 11 Etiology of Cancer: Chemical Factors
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 11
Etiology of Cancer: Chemical Factors
STUART H. YUSPA
PETER G. SHIELDS
Introduction
The Nature of Chemical Carcinogens: Chemistry and Metabolism
Animal Model Systems and Multistage Carcinogenesis
Protection Against Chemical Carcinogens: DNA Repair, Tumor Suppressor Genes, and Transforming Growth Factor-b
Genetic Susceptibility to Chemical Carcinogenesis in Experimental Models
Determination of Chemical Carcinogens for Humans and Population-Based Risk Assessment
Molecular Epidemiology of Cancer Risk from Chemicals
Exposure Assessment and Internal Dosimetry
Genetic Susceptibility
Mutational Spectrum of Human Cancers
Tobacco Smoking and Cancer Risk
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The chemical origin of human malignancies was recognized by observations of unusual cancer incidences in persons in certain occupational groups. The capacity for
chemicals to cause cancer was subsequently confirmed in numerous experimental animal studies. The extent to which chemical exposures contribute to cancer
incidence was not appreciated fully until population-based studies documented differing organ-specific cancer rates among geographically distinct populations.
Changes in cancer frequency among migrating ethnic groups, high cancer rates associated with specific occupations, and the high risk of smoking-associated cancers
confirmed that environmental and lifestyle exposures were major determinants of human cancer risk. Current data indicate that changing lifestyles and exposures can
modify cancer risk.1 Individual genetic factors also can influence cancer risk in several ways. In hereditary cancer syndromes, genetic factors dictate a very high
cancer risk for a small group of individuals. However, the general population carries hereditary susceptibility genes that increase cancer risk for particular exposures.
Thus, most human cancer is not simply a genetically determined sequela of aging but rather the manifestation of personal and cultural behavior superimposed on
individually determined hereditary susceptibility.
The experimental induction of tumors in animals, neoplastic transformation of cultured cells by chemicals, and analysis of environmentally induced human tumors
have revealed important concepts regarding the pathogenesis of cancer. 2,3,4 and 5 Often, chemical carcinogens are organ-specific, target epithelial cells, and cause
genetic damage (i.e., are genotoxic). Chemically related DNA damage can occur either directly from environmental exposures or indirectly by activation of
endogenous mutagenic pathways (e.g., nitric oxide and oxy radicals). 6 Most chemically induced tumors are clonal in origin and require an accumulation of genetic
changes in a multistage progression from normal to premalignant to carcinoma. The risk of developing a chemically induced tumor may be modified by nongenotoxic
exogenous and endogenous exposures and factors and by accumulated exposure to the same or different genotoxic carcinogens. Somatic mutations relevant to
cancer pathogenesis have been documented after carcinogen exposures in experimental animals and humans, and pathways for carcinogen metabolism have defined
a set of genetic variables that contribute to human cancer risk. Studies with cultured rodent and human cells 7 confirm the remarkable qualitative similarities among
mammalian species for responses to carcinogens but also have revealed some important quantitative differences that have enhanced our understanding of chemical
carcinogenesis in human populations.
Analysis of the chemical induction of cancer in animal models and human populations has had a major impact on human health. Experimental studies have been
instrumental in validating hypotheses generated from human studies. Animal experiments confirmed the carcinogenic and tumor-promoting properties of cigarette
smoke and identified the active chemical and gaseous components. 8 The transplacental carcinogenicity of diethylstilbestrol and the hazards of specific occupational
carcinogens [e.g., vinyl chloride, benzene, aromatic amines, and bis (chloromethyl) ether] led to the removal of the suspected human carcinogens from the
environment and reduction of the cancer rate. Dietary factors that enhance or inhibit cancer development have been identified in models of chemical carcinogenesis, 9
resulting in a reduction of cancer incidence through nutritional alterations. The application of cancer chemoprevention strategies, particularly retinoids, antiestrogens,
and inhibitors of the arachidonic acid cascade, are the direct result of studies conducted in models of chemical carcinogenesis 10 and are reducing the tumor incidence
in high-risk populations.

THE NATURE OF CHEMICAL CARCINOGENS: CHEMISTRY AND METABOLISM
A wide variety of chemicals and chemical classes can cause cancer in animals and humans, 11 yet the process is very specific. Most chemicals are not known to be
carcinogenic. Within chemical classes, stereoisomers may vary widely in carcinogenicity. Carcinogens can be genotoxic, nongenotoxic, or both. Sometimes, the
distinction is arbitrary. 12,13 Genotoxic carcinogens have high chemical reactivity (such as alkylating agents) or can be metabolized to reactive intermediates by the
host. They form covalent adducts with macromolecules and target DNA in the nucleus and mitochondria. 5,14 Because a good correlation exists between the ability to
form DNA adducts and the potency to induce tumors in laboratory animals, DNA is considered the ultimate target for most carcinogens. Genotoxic carcinogens may
transfer simple alkyl or complexed (aryl) alkyl groups to specific sites on DNA bases ( Fig. 11-1)5,14 These alkylating and arylalkyating agents include (but are not
limited to) N-nitroso compounds, aliphatic epoxides, aflatoxins, mustards, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and other combustion products of fossil fuels and
vegetable matter. Others transfer arylamine residues to DNA (see Fig. 11-1) as exemplified by aryl aromatic amines, aminoazodyes, and heterocyclic aromatic
amines; the latter are produced by overcooking meat, poultry, or fish at high temperatures. 15 For genotoxic carcinogens, the interaction with DNA is not random, and
each class of agents reacts selectively with purine and pyrimidine targets (see Fig. 11-1).14,16 Furthermore, targeting of carcinogens to particular sites in DNA is
determined by nucleotide sequence, 17 by host cell,18 and by selective DNA repair processes, rendering some genetic material at risk over others. As expected from
this chemistry, genotoxic carcinogens are potent mutagens, particularly adept at causing base mispairing or small deletions and leading to missense or nonsense
mutations.16 Others may cause macrogenetic damage, such as chromosome breaks and large deletions. 19 In all cases, mutations detected in tumors represent a
combination of the effect of the mutagenic change on the function of the protein product and the effect of the functional alteration on the behavior of the specific host
cell type.

FIGURE 11-1. A: Metabolic activation to yield DNA-reactive alkylating, arylaminating, and aralkylating agents. Ar is an aromatic residue, X is a leaving group, and SG
represents a glutathione residue. B: Sites of substitution of DNA bases by genotoxic carcinogens. Sites modified by alkylating agents are marked by the numeral I,
those modified by arylaminating agents are marked by a II, and those modified by polycyclic aralkylating agents are marked by a III. Because C8-substituted
arylamino adducts have been suggested to have arisen from N7-substituted precursors, the arylaminating agents are listed parenthetically at the 7-position of the
purines. (Reproduced by permission of the author, Dr. Anthony Dipple, and the publisher, Oxford University Press, from Carcinogenesis 1995;16:437.)

A number of chemicals that cause cancers in laboratory rodents are not demonstrably genotoxic. 12,13,20 Synthetic pesticides and herbicides fall within this group, as do
a number of natural products that are ingested. 21 In general, these agents are carcinogenic at high doses in laboratory animals and require prolonged exposure. The
mechanism of action by nongenotoxic carcinogens is controversial and may be related in some cases to toxic cell death and regenerative hyperplasia. 20,22 Induction of
endogenous mutagenic mechanisms, such as DNA oxy radical damage,23 depurination, and deamination of 5-methylcytosine by exposure to nongenotoxic
carcinogens, may contribute to carcinogenicity of these agents. In other cases, nongenotoxic carcinogens may have hormonal effects, influencing hormone-dependent
tissues directly. 24,25 Though the contribution of nongenotoxic carcinogens to human cancer causation is not certain, they may serve also as modifiers in concert with
genotoxic agents.
A number of metabolic pathways activate or detoxify carcinogens and procarcinogens (chemicals that can be transformed into active carcinogens). 5,26,27 These
pathways are complex and interactive (Table 11-1), and genetic polymorphisms in animal models and humans are thought to be major determinants of cancer
susceptibility. 28 In general, metabolic activation of carcinogens involves oxidation at carbon-carbon double bonds or saturated carbon atoms, in the latter case often
requiring a further esterification (see Fig. 11-1). Oxidation at nitrogen on aromatic amines or reduction at nitrogen of aromatic nitro compounds yields reactive
intermediates that transfer an arylamine residue to DNA. An esterified intermediate may be required, as in the case of heterocyclic amine carcinogens. 29 Conjugations
are also frequent intermediates of metabolism of many carcinogens and can be both activating and detoxifying pathways (see Fig. 11-1 and Table 11-1).14,27 The
importance of metabolic activation to carcinogenesis and the polymorphic nature of metabolic activity among individuals provides an approach to estimate individual
risk profiles for particular exposures. 30 Furthermore, a number of metabolic pathways are inducible (see Table 11-1) and modified by diet, hormones, and additional
exposures, adding further complexity to the process of carcinogenesis.

TABLE 11-1. Enzymatic Pathways of Carcinogen Metabolism in Experimental Animals and Humans

ANIMAL MODEL SYSTEMS AND MULTISTAGE CARCINOGENESIS
Virtually every major form of human cancer can be reproduced in experimental animals by exposure to specific chemical carcinogens. In many cases, the cell of
origin, morphogenesis, phenotypic markers, and genetic alterations are qualitatively identical to corresponding human cancers ( Table 11-2).2 Animal models have
demonstrated the modifying effect of tumor promoters and hormones or cofactors, such as asbestos or viral infections. Furthermore, animal models have revealed the
constancy of carcinogen-host interaction among mammalian species by reproducing organ-specific cancers in animals with chemicals identified as human
carcinogens, such as coal tar and squamous cell carcinomas; vinyl chloride and hepatic angiosarcomas; aflatoxin and hepatocarcinoma; and aromatic amines and
bladder cancer. These results validate the qualitative value of animal models in carcinogenesis research and support the extrapolation of data from experimental
studies to human applications with specific limitations. The introduction of genetically modified mice designed to reproduce specific human cancer syndromes has
accelerated both the understanding of the contributions of chemicals to cancer causation and the identification of potential exogenous carcinogens. 31,32

TABLE 11-2. Animal Models for Chemical Carcinogenesis

From analyses of both human cancer pathogenesis and experimental animal tumor induction by chemical carcinogens, specific stages that have been identified have
typical phenotypic, genetic, and biochemical characteristics ( Fig. 11-2). However, in reality, these stages are not distinct, and steps to cancer do not follow a straight
line. Mutations in single cells frequently “initiate” carcinogenesis. On clonal expansion, initiated cells form a premalignant lesion, often a benign tumor (e.g., an
adenoma) but also recognized as hyperplastic or dysplastic foci in some tissue sites. Agents that cause clonal expansion of initiated cells are called tumor promoters.
Tumor promotion may occur as a consequence of exogenous exposures, such as cigarette smoke or viral infections. Promotion may be an endogenous process, such
as hormonal stimulation in breast and prostate cancer or bile salts in colon cancer. Premalignant lesions undergo further phenotypic changes, often in a predictable
sequence and commonly multifocal within a single lesion. Some foci progress at a faster rate than others, and these are at highest risk for malignant conversion.
Premalignant progression encompasses the majority of the tumor latency period prior to malignant conversion, when the lesion shows invasive properties.

FIGURE 11-2. Factors influencing multistage carcinogenesis from environmental exposures. Early events reflect a balance of protective and initiating factors that
determine the long premalignant latency period. As the process proceeds, protective factors are superseded by phenotypic alterations in the emerging neoplasm,
whereas genetic instability accelerates selection of more deviant clones, even in the absence of exogenous exposures. The emerging cancerous clones are resistant

to most of the endogenous protective mechanisms.

Usually, initiation is a low-frequency genetic event and is directly dependent on carcinogen dose. The phenotype of initiated cells varies according to tissue site and
includes a defect in maturation, resistance to cytotoxicity, escape from senescence, and altered dependence on growth factors and hormones. 2 At the molecular level,
initiation involves an alteration in signal transduction pathways that regulate cellular responses to extracellular signals, and these are internally regulated by
protooncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. 33,34 and 35 Mutational activation of protooncogenes to oncogenes and inactivation of tumor suppressor genes contribute
to initiation in most tissue sites.
Usually, experimental tumor promoters are nongenotoxic and frequently are tissue-specific and have multiple mechanisms of action, generally resulting in a
disturbance of tissue homeostasis. 36,37 The mechanisms of tumor promotion include activation of cell-surface receptors; activation or inhibition of cytosolic enzymes
and nuclear transcription factors; stimulation of proliferation; inhibition of apoptotic cell death; and direct cytotoxicity. 2,38 Genotoxic carcinogens also can have
promoting properties, and repeated exposures to low concentrations of genotoxic carcinogens can induce tumors more effectively than do fewer exposures to the
same total dose in experimental carcinogenesis. 39 Exogenous tumor promoters can determine the target site for tumor formation when experimental animals are
initiated systemically with widely acting carcinogenic agents. 2,37 Thus, tumor promoters may contribute to target organ specificity when germline mutations produce an
initiated state in multiple cell types. In general, initiated cells respond differently than do normal cells to promoters, and this is the basis for a clonal selection of an
initiated population. 2,37 The contribution of exogenous tumor promoters to human cancer risk is clear only in a few cases, such as cigarette smoke and asbestos, 40
although other experimental promoting agents are found in the human environment (see Table 11-2).37 Any change that causes a selective outgrowth of a
preneoplastic cell, including additional genetic changes that selectively enhance growth of initiated cells, can be considered a promoting stimulus.
Premalignant progression in an initiated cell clone can occur spontaneously without further exposures, but this stage is accelerated by additional exposures to
genotoxic agents, including some cancer chemotherapeutic drugs. 41 Spontaneous premalignant progression has been attributed to genomic instability that is
constitutive in the premalignant phenotype. 42 Premalignant progression in most tumor models and in humans is associated with nonrandom, sequential chromosomal
aberrations, including duplications, deletions, and loss of heterozygosity, 43 suggesting repeated episodes of cell selection and producing modally dominant
chromosomal aberrations. Thus, at least one function of the relevant genetic events in premalignant progression must result in a growth advantage for the affected
cell. In rodent populations, the genetic background of specific strains is determinant for the rate of premalignant progression, suggesting that constitutional factors
influence both early and late events in cancer progression.
Frequently, malignant conversion is a multifocal change in premalignant lesions. Experimentally, malignant conversion has been linked to up-regulation of AP-1
transcriptional activity, gene amplification, and alterations in cell-cycle regulatory genes and secreted proteases. 44,45,46 and 47 Other studies have revealed gene splicing
changes with expression of modified cell-surface molecules. 48,49 Together, these changes could facilitate migration and invasion that characterize the malignant
phenotype. These observations also suggest that malignant conversion can be an epigenetic, high-frequency event during premalignant progression, perhaps related
to changes in gene expression. Alterations in methylation of DNA in tumor cells also could contribute to this stage of carcinogenesis. 50,51

PROTECTION AGAINST CHEMICAL CARCINOGENS: DNA REPAIR, TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENES, AND TRANSFORMING GROWTH
FACTOR-b
DNA repair defects have been identified in a number of cancer-prone individuals, and repair-deficient mammalian cells are susceptible to transformation by chemical
and physical carcinogens. 52,53,54 and 55 Commonly, nucleotide excision repair removes carcinogen-DNA adducts or ultraviolet photoproducts by a complex process
involving at least 10 gene products, each potentially associated with mutations leading to human DNA repair defect syndromes and increased cancer rates.
Nucleotide excision repair commonly favors adduct removal on the transcribed strand to protect protein synthesis, but damage from some mutagens does not exhibit
strand bias. 56 Genetically engineered mice deficient in genes involved in nucleotide excision repair are particularly sensitive to chemical and ultraviolet
carcinogenesis at particular organ sites. 54 The highly mutagenic O 6-methylguanine, a consequence of exposure to certain methylating agents (see Fig. 11-1), is
repaired by O6-alkyldeoxyguanine-DNA alkyltransferase. Overexpression of this enzyme in transgenic mice protects the host from thymic lymphomas, colonic
preneoplastic lesions, and colonic K- ras mutations after exposure to methylating agents. 57 O6-alkyldeoxyguanine-DNA alkyltransferase activity varies in different
tissues and cell types, and the enzyme can be inhibited by exogenous exposures that may act as cofactors in carcinogenesis. 58,59 Recently, interest has focused on a
multigenic nucleotide mismatch repair system designed to repair mismatched bases after replication. 60 Mutations in components of this pathway increase risk for colon
cancer in humans, and engineered mice that are null for a gene in this pathway are predisposed to develop tumors. 61
Tumor suppressor genes represent a growing family of regulators of the cell cycle, genomic stability, cell senescence, cell death, or cell-cell communication that are
inactivated during carcinogenesis. 4 Some may be direct targets of carcinogens, such as the P53 gene in liver and the K- ras gene in lung cancer, 8,18 whereas others
may become spontaneously altered during premalignant progression or may be suppressed by promoter methylation. 51 Suppressor genes can be inactivated by
structural gene changes, but genomic imprinting, reduction in stability of the protein product, or mutations with a dominant-negative effect that suppresses the function
of the product of the normal allele variously have been reported. 18,62 Inactivation of a single allele of a tumor suppressor gene (in which mutations at multiple sites may
cause inactivation) occurs commonly, because it is a higher-probability event than is activation of an oncogene (in which specific changes at a few selected sites are
required). However, a dominant effect of a tumor suppressor gene loss requires inactivation of both alleles (e.g., the combination of a point mutation in one allele and
chromosome loss of the second allele). Certain carcinogenic hazards, such as ionizing radiation, metals, carcinogenic hormones, and fibers, frequently cause
chromosomal abnormalities and may contribute to carcinogenesis through inactivation of suppressor genes.
A unique role in tumor suppression is developing for the growth inhibitory peptide, transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b). 63,64 Frequently, the regulation of this family of
homodimeric growth inhibitors is altered in tumors as they undergo premalignant progression. Dysregulation takes the form of loss of expression, inactivation of
required posttranslational processing of TGF-b precursor, or reduction in responsiveness of tumor cells. Inactivating mutations in the TGF-b type II receptor or the
intracellular signaling pathway it activates have been documented in human tumors. Transgenic targeting of TGF-b to the mammary gland and skin markedly inhibit
tumor development in response to carcinogen administration. These studies suggest a role for TGF-b in suppression of premalignant progression and offer a novel
approach to therapeutic intervention.

GENETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY TO CHEMICAL CARCINOGENESIS IN EXPERIMENTAL MODELS
The identification and characterization of genes that modify risks for cancer development have been facilitated by substantial variation among inbred strains of
rodents in their susceptibility to spontaneous and chemically induced carcinogenesis at specific tissue sites. 65 Furthermore, carcinogenesis experiments in
spontaneous mutant strains or genetically modified mice created by transgenic or knockout technology have identified specific loci that modify cancer risk. For a
variety of tissue sites, including lung, liver, breast, and skin, pairs of inbred mice that differ by 100-fold in risk for tumor development have been characterized.
Detailed analyses of these differences using backcross, recombinant inbred, and recombinant congenic breeding protocols have shown specific determinants for
initiation, promotion, premalignant progression, and metastatic stages. 66 In most cases, susceptibility or resistance is a property of the target tissue, not the host.
Genetically determined differences in the affinity for the aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase (Ah) receptor or other differences in metabolic processing of carcinogens is one
modifier that has a major impact on experimental cancer risk. 28,30 Other loci regulate the growth of premalignant foci, the response to tumor promoters, the immune
response to metastatic cells, and the basal proliferation rate of target cells. 65 In mice susceptible to colon cancer due to a constitutive mutation in the apc gene,67 a
locus on mouse chromosome 4 confers resistance to colon cancer. 68 Similarly, an autosomal dominant locus in the rat genome protects susceptible rats from
chemically induced mammary gland neoplasia. 69 Recent advances in mapping of the mouse and rat genome 70 now promise to provide precise localization and
identification of the loci involved in experimental genetic susceptibility, and translation of this information to syntenic loci of the human genome 71 should provide
important insights into human susceptibility traits.

DETERMINATION OF CHEMICAL CARCINOGENS FOR HUMANS AND POPULATION-BASED RISK ASSESSMENT
Current understanding of carcinogenesis and risk to human health comes from a variety of models and methods, including mutagenesis assays, mammalian
cell-culture experiments, animal studies, and both classic and molecular epidemiology. The goal of these studies is to elucidate cancer etiologies, to define cancer

risks in humans (population and individual), and to identify more rational cancer prevention methods. Physicians are challenged when they attempt to determine what
causes a cancer in a particular individual. The determination process requires an accurate history and physical examination and interpretation of research data.
Often, the latter are beyond the scope of the practitioner and, in many cases, beyond the current state of knowledge. Nevertheless, methods for cancer risk
assessment have been proposed and resources are available. 72 Several types of study models are used to assist in elucidating carcinogenic mechanisms and
identifying potential human carcinogens. The usefulness of each method for identifying carcinogenic mechanisms and for identifying cancer risk can be contrasted
with its limitations ( Table 11-3). A direct relationship of in vitro experimental studies (i.e., metabolic activation of chemicals by cytochrome P-450s), in vitro
mutagenicity tests, experimental animal studies, and human epidemiology has not been proved, but most chemicals that are positive in one method generally are
positive with other methods. Nevertheless, 100% concordance does not exist; though sensitivity is high, specificity is low. It may be that consideration of multiple
assays yields greater productivity, but this is not yet proved, and the concordance from animal to human experience is variable, although carcinogens that are more
potent in one species tend to be more potent in others, including humans.

TABLE 11-3. Testing for Carcinogenicity

Human investigations provide the most relevant data regarding human risk. Classic epidemiology measures the incidence or prevalence of disease in human
populations. Epidemiologic studies have identified such previously unknown risks as asbestos-related pleural mesothelioma, benzene-induced leukemia, and bladder
cancer in dye workers. Study design and controlling for confounding variables are important determinants of a true association. It must be realized that epidemiologic
methods, by themselves, do not demonstrate causation, and specific guidelines for assessing causation are available ( Table 11-4).73 The concordance between
different scientific methods for inferring human cancer risk is variable.

TABLE 11-4. Evaluating Cancer Etiology: Bradford-Hill Criteria 73

Physicians can look to various regulatory, governmental, or review organizations for extensive evaluation of the scientific literature. Some organizations generate
documents that report findings of experts who critically review the scientific literature, whereas others simply summarize data from other organizations. Several lists of
carcinogens also have been published, but the evaluations of the literature and the definitions can vary greatly among organizations. Physicians should be aware of
the purposes and goals of an organization when requesting its information. For example, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health and the American
Council of Governmental Industrial Hygienists are concerned primarily with occupational exposures. The Environmental Protection Agency is concerned primarily with
environmental exposures, quantitative risk assessments, and regulations relating to health hazard prevention for the entire population. The International Agency for
Research on Cancer and the National Toxicology Program do not limit themselves to occupational or environmental exposures. The Agency for Toxic Substances and
Disease Registry was created to study persons exposed to environmental toxins and to evaluate the adequacy of scientific literature. The known and potential human
carcinogens, as reported by various regulatory and research organizations, are listed in Table 11-5.

TABLE 11-5. Known or Suspected Chemical Carcinogens in Humans

A formal quantitative risk assessment is used by regulatory agencies to estimate the risk to a population exposed to a particular carcinogen at a specific dose. Risk
assessments serve public health interests as they attempt to predict the frequency of cancer in a population before epidemiologic investigations can be performed
(i.e., before significant exposure and adverse outcomes occur). Risk estimates are formulated for potential dietary, airborne, and workplace carcinogens. Several
mathematical models are used by various regulatory bodies to predict risks and to regulate allowable exposures. Risk assessments include four general steps: (1)
hazard assessment, which qualitatively reviews scientific literature to decide whether a hazard might exist; (2) dose-response assessment, which evaluates the doses
used in scientific studies and relates them to human exposures; (3) exposure assessment, which examines a population thought to be at risk regarding the quantity,
duration, and routes of exposure; and (4) risk characterization, which incorporates the foregoing information and evaluates the assumptions used and the
uncertainties to estimate risk. The modeling process requires many assumptions that are open to debate, and safety factors are incorporated to compensate for the
uncertainties. At the conclusion, an incidence of cancer will be predicted, such as one additional case in 1 million persons. Owing to methodological limitations and
uncertainties, wide confidence limits often prevail for the prediction.

MOLECULAR EPIDEMIOLOGY OF CANCER RISK FROM CHEMICALS

The field of molecular epidemiology seeks to identify cancer risk on the basis of individual exposures and genetically determined susceptibilities to cancer. Cancer
epidemiology differs from traditional epidemiology because of its complexity. Traditional epidemiology paradigms implicate single causative agents that cause specific
diseases (i.e., demonstrated through Koch's postulates). However, cancer is caused by multiple agents, and different combinations of agents can cause the same
cancer. Conversely, the same agents might contribute to the development of different cancers. Molecular approaches to epidemiology use a priori hypotheses and
biomarkers, rather than simply seeking associations between an exposure and disease ( Fig. 11-3). Two fundamental principles underlie current studies of molecular
epidemiology. First, carcinogenesis is a multistage process, and behind each stage are genetic events and complex pathways that may be responsible for these
events. Thus, characterizing a specific risk factor against a background of many risk factors is difficult for scientists and can limit statistical power. Second, wide
interindividual variation in response to carcinogen exposure and carcinogenic processes indicate that the human response to carcinogens is not homogeneous;
hence, other studies (e.g., the use of a single-cell clone to study a gene's effect experimentally or the assumption that the population responds similarly to the mean in
epidemiology studies) might not be representative of susceptible and resistant groups within a population.

FIGURE 11-3. Schematic model depicting the range (from exposure to effect) and types of biomarkers that might be used for cancer risk assessments. Aflatoxin-B 1 is
shown as a paradigm for the range of biomarkers. CAT, computer-aided tomography.

The carcinogenic process is driven by genetic events (mutations or epigenetic changes), and in most people they are triggered by environmental exposures modified
by host susceptibility. These are so-called gene-environment interactions. 74 Cancer-causing genes can be categorized into caretaker and gatekeeper genes. 75
Caretaker genes are involved in maintaining genomic integrity, such as those of DNA repair and carcinogen detoxification. Gatekeeper genes are involved in normal
cellular function, such as those that are involved in cell-cycle control or apoptosis. Also, given that cancers are caused by multiple exposures causing damage in
different genes, now the carcinogenic process is being considered as gene N-environmentN interactions. This new paradigm will lead to different perspectives of cancer
genetics and cancer risk factors, wherein some genetic effects will be modeled differently (see Fig. 11-2).
EXPOSURE ASSESSMENT AND INTERNAL DOSIMETRY
Chemicals cause genetic damage in different ways: formation of carcinogen-DNA adducts leading to base mutations or bringing about gross chromosomal changes.
Carcinogen-macromolecular adducts are formed when a mutagen, or part of it, irreversibly binds to DNA so that it can cause a base substitution, insertion, or deletion
during DNA replication. Gross chromosomal mutations are chromosome breaks, gaps, or translocations. The level of DNA damage is the biologically effective dose in
a target organ, 76 and reflects the net result of carcinogen exposure, activation, lack of detoxification, lack of DNA repair, and lack of programmed cell death or
necrosis.
A variety of assays are available to identify carcinogen-macromolecular adducts in human tissues. These assays include the 32P-postlabeling assay-nucleotide
chromatography, immunoassays that include immunohistochemistry, fluorescence spectroscopy, gas chromatography–mass spectroscopy, and electrical chemical
detection. Each has its usefulness and limitations, and all are challenged by sensitivity or specificity (or both). The effect of an individual's metabolism on
carcinogen-DNA adduct formation might be different at different levels of exposure—where adduct levels formed from lower exposures are relatively higher—and
similar to that of persons with decreased metabolic capacity but higher exposures. 77 The relationship of such surrogate markers as carcinogen-DNA adducts in blood
to the target organ has been studied partially 78,79 but is not yet well established, and the use of target organs 80,81 can provide specific information about potentially
carcinogenic effects.
The detection of gross chromosomal changes in normal-appearing cells is technically difficult. Presumed surrogate measures of chromosomal damage include the
estimate of sister chromatid exchanges or baseline gross chromosomal changes. The latter has been associated with increased cancer risk, but these studies have
significant limitations. 82,83
The effect of some potential carcinogens has been studied extensively using molecular epidemiological tools. 8,84,85 These carcinogens tend to be present in tobacco
smoke and, in some cases, diet and workplace.
Commonly, people are exposed to N-nitrosamine and other N-nitroso compounds from dietary 86 and tobacco exposures,8 which are associated with DNA adduct
formation and cancer in laboratory animals. 87 Exposure can occur through endogenous formation of N-nitrosamines from nitrates in food 88 or directly from dietary
sources, cosmetics, drugs, household commodities, and tobacco smoke. The greatest source of exposure in the United States is from processed meats and (until
recently) beer. Endogenous formation occurs in the stomach from the reaction of nitrosatable amines and nitrate, used as a preservative, which is converted to nitrites
by bacteria. Host capacity to form N-nitrosamines is associated with risk of stomach 89 and esophageal cancer. 90,91 It has been shown also that coadministration of
vitamin C can reduce the rate of endogenous nitrosation. N-nitrosamines undergo metabolic activation by cytochrome P-450s ( CYP2E1, CYP2A6, and CYP2D6) and
form DNA-adducts that have been identified in target tissues or have been associated with specific cancers. 92,93 and 94
Exposures to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) compounds are associated with an increased risk of lung and skin cancer. Industrial pollution, fossil fuels, and
tobacco smoke account for the major environmental sources, although diet is considered the major source. 95 DNA damage in white blood cells has been documented
for a variety of exposures. 85 PAH-adducts can be formed from the consumption of charcoal-broiled foods, where adduct levels exceed those from smoking. 96
Substantial data implicate aromatic amines and amides in human carcinogenesis. 77 Aryl aromatic amines have been implicated in bladder carcinogenesis, especially
in occupationally exposed cohorts (e.g., dye workers) and tobacco smokers. Some of the largest carcinogenic occupational exposures occur in the dye industry.
Initially, aryl aromatic amines are activated by CYP1A2, which ultimately leads to the formation of nitrenium ion that then forms a DNA adduct. N-acetyltransferase-1
and N-acetyltransferase-2 (NAT-2) play an activating or detoxifying role, depending on the aryl amine. Generally, internal dosimetry for the chemicals has focused on
hemoglobin rather than on DNA adducts. Levels are higher in smokers than in nonsmokers, and different types of tobacco can lead to higher adduct levels. 97
Other mutagenic aromatic amines are heterocyclic amines. They are formed from the cooking of meat, poultry, and fish as a result of the condensation of amino acids
and creatine during pyrolysis. 98 Some are present also in cigarette smoke. Levels of exposure typical for humans produce DNA adducts at the C8 position of guanine
and are associated with cancers in experimental animals. 99,100 Heterocyclic amines, estimated as consumption of well-done meat, have been associated with breast
and colon cancer.101
Aflatoxins are suspected human liver carcinogens and are considered to be a major contributor to liver cancer in China and parts of Africa. Aflatoxin remains one of
the best examples of the range and use of biomarkers for cancer risk (see Fig. 11-3). The primary adduct formed from aflatoxin exposure is to the N7 position of
guanine.102 The metabolic activation in humans is similar to that of sensitive laboratory animals. 103 Urinary aflatoxin adduct levels vary among regions of the world,
depending on dietary exposures. 104 Serum albumin adducts correlate with dietary intake and urinary excretion of the M1 metabolite. 105 Important is that urinary
aflatoxin adduct levels correlate with the incidence of hepatocellular carcinomas, and an interaction is seen with hepatitis B infection. 84

GENETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY
The cancer risk from genetic variation can range from small to large, depending on its penetrance. Highly penetrant cancer susceptibility genes cause familial cancers
and account for fewer than 1% of all cancers. 106 Low-penetrant genes cause common sporadic cancers, which have large public health consequences. Table 11-6
lists several investigated genetic polymorphisms and their association with cancer risk. A genetic polymorphism is defined as a genetic variant present in at least 1%
of the population.

TABLE 11-6. Selected Examples of Inherited Susceptibilities for Cancer

Lung cancer has been studied most extensively for gene-environment interactions. Among the low-penetrant genes studied most commonly are cytochrome P-450
(CYP)1A1 and glutathione S-transferase M1 (GSTM1). The CYP1A1 enzyme is the first step in the metabolic activation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, which are
known human lung and skin carcinogens. Studies of Japanese subjects indicated an interaction between a CYP1A1 polymorphism and smoking for lung cancer
risk,107 wherein the combination of the homozygous minor allele and smoking yielded odds ratios similar to having one of the other genotypes and a greater smoking
history. 108 Western studies, however, do not show the same association. 109,110,111 and 112 GSTM1 is a detoxifying enzyme that catalyzes the conjugation of PAHs to
glutathione. Expression of GSTM1 is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, and the cause of low GSTM1 activity is an entire gene deletion of GSTM1.
Phenotypically and genetically, this polymorphism has been related to lung cancer risk. 113,114 and 115 Gene-gene interactions for CYP1A1 and GSTM1 have been found
in ongoing Japanese studies of lung cancer. 116 Also, the “at-risk” genotype conferred a higher probability for presenting with more extensive cancer, and the combined
genotypes yielded a shorter survival time. 117 The lack of GSTM1 activity has been associated also with increased PAH-DNA adducts in human lung tissue, 81
increased sister chromatid exchange, 118,119 and production of mutagenic intermediates by lung microsomes. 120
Breast cancer clearly is related to endogenous and exogenous estrogens, but these factors explain less than one-half of the excess risk, 121 and certain reasons
implicate nonhormonal chemical etiologies. 122 Thus, the role of exogenous chemicals is being studied actively. For hormonal etiologies, variation in estrogen
metabolism by cytochrome P-450s (CYP1A1, CYP1B1, CYP1A2, CYP17) and other genes can be hypothesized to affect hormonal levels, resulting in altered cell
proliferation or DNA damage and subsequent cancer risk. One study has implicated cytochrome 17, 123 whereas others have provided conflicting evidence for
catechol-methyltransferase that detoxifies estradiol. 124,125 For chemical etiologies, aromatic amines have been implicated as potential human breast carcinogens. 122
These chemicals are detoxified by NAT-2, in which a genetic polymorphism governs the metabolism of isoniazid for tuberculosis treatments. 126 One study indicated
that tobacco smoking is associated with breast cancer in white postmenopausal women who have a decreased capacity to detoxify aromatic amines, because they are
NAT-2 slow acetylators. 127 Although a prospective study of nurses 128 seemingly provided conflicting data, differences were found in data analysis and study size.
Considering a specific role for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in breast cancer, some suggestions posit that one polymorphic variant of CYP1A1 might be a risk
factor for breast cancer in subsets of smokers, 129,130 whereas another polymorphism might be a risk factor in African Americans. 131 A nested case-control study from a
prospective cohort of women in Maryland found a 2.1-fold increased risk for women who lacked GSTM1, 132 although two studies have not found similar results. 129
The role for genetic determinants of carcinogen metabolism in cancer risk is established for other cancers, although this area of study is newer. 113 Several studies
have implicated deficient GSTM1 and NAT-2 detoxification of smoke-related or occupational carcinogens in bladder cancer. 77,133 For colon cancer, studies have
demonstrated that risk increases for NAT-2 rapid acetylators, 134,135 wherein, in contrast to its detoxification role in bladder and breast cancer, evidence suggests that
NAT-2 works to activate heterocyclic amines formed from the overcooking of meats. 136
Genetic polymorphisms for housekeeping genes controlling such cellular functions as cell-cycle control and DNA repair logically may affect cancer risk. 106 In the
general population, DNA repair capacity in humans decreases with aging, 137,138 which would make this decrease an acquired risk factor for cancer and might explain a
portion of the increased cancer risk in the elderly. 139 However, inherited susceptibilities via specific genetic polymorphisms that affect the efficiency of DNA repair ,
such as for nucleotide excision repair, are largely unknown. A nonspecific DNA repair assay that measures chromosomal aberrations in human cultured lymphocytes
after an in vitro challenge with a mutagen has shown initial promise. An increased mutagen-related aberration rate has been observed in persons with primary and
secondary upper aerodigestive tract cancers, 140 multiple primary cancers, 141 and lung cancer. 142

MUTATIONAL SPECTRUM OF HUMAN CANCERS
The study of mutations in human tumors and experimental models is elucidating important carcinogenic mechanisms. 143 In vitro studies using prokaryotic and simple
eukaryotic assays, including human cells (e.g., site-specific mutagenesis assays), indicate that human exposure to mutagens might result in a narrow spectrum of
mutations that are nonrandom. 18 Some carcinogenic agents produce a “fingerprint” of mutations. In eukaryotic studies, for example, examining the mutational spectra
in endogenous genes 144 or exogenous genes transfected into cell systems 145,146 have identified different phenotypes, depending on the exposures. These assays,
however, may underestimate the induced mutational frequency due to deletions, chromosomal nondysjunction, and frameshift mutations that cause loss of other
genes essential for cell survival and result in cytotoxicity or apoptosis. The data also show that the fingerprint hypothesis is likely the exception rather than the rule,
because most mutagens actually can form several types of mutations, depending in part on the conformation of DNA and the type and the location of the adduct. 143
Nonetheless, a comparison of the mutational spectrum at the aprt locus in Chinese hamster ovary cells induced by ionizing radiation, ultraviolet radiation, or
benzo[a]pyrene-diol-epoxide is consistent with the mutagenesis models for these exposures. 144 Promutagenic cyclobutane and pyrimidine-pyrimidone(6-4)
photoproducts are induced by ultraviolet light, whereas ionizing radiation frequently causes deletions, and benzo[a]pyrene-diol-epoxide causes the predicted
G:C®T:A transversion.
The study of mutations in the P53 tumor suppressor gene is suited uniquely for the study of cancer etiology, exposure, and susceptibility, because P53 is involved in
many cellular processes, including maintenance of genomic stability, programmed cell death, DNA repair, and others. 147 The P53 mutation frequency varies by organ
site and histological subtype, 18 indicating that cancers occur through different pathways and different exposures at the cellular level. Several examples of particular
carcinogenic exposures are linked to cancers via a P53 mutational mechanism, especially the demonstration that ultraviolet light exposure and skin cancer are
associated with cytosine-cytosine to thymine-thymine tandem transitions. 148 Another example is dietary aflatoxin B1 exposure and a consistent finding of mutations in
the third nucleotide pair of codon 249 of liver cancers in regions with endemic exposure to aflatoxin B1. 149,150 Combinations of exposures can lead also to different
outcomes in the same organ site. An interactive effect of alcohol drinking and cigarette use in oral cavity cancers yields different types of P53 mutations.151
Showing that the P53 mutation frequency is modulated by gene-environment interactions has been difficult because of the technical difficulties in determining the
mutational spectra in large numbers of cancer patients, but preliminary evidence exists. The mutational spectra of lung 18 and breast cancers 152 are different among
whites, African Americans, and Japanese, consistent with the hypothesis that differences exist in both exposure and the frequency of genetically determined
carcinogen metabolism and DNA repair. More specific evidence for a relationship of gene-environment interactions and mutations in the P53 gene can be found from
Japanese studies of CYP1A1, GSTM1, and lung cancer. 153

Among the most exciting areas in molecular epidemiology is the potential ability to identify mutations and preneoplastic lesions prior to the development of cancer or
as a diagnostic test for early cancer. Analyses of stool from cancer patients have found cells with the same K- ras mutations present in the cancer. 154 Similar findings
have been reported in sputum samples from patients with head and neck cancers. 155 Analysis of codon 12 mutations in the K-ras gene of bronchoalveolar cells has
shown a 33% rate of detection in cancer patients, with an acceptable specificity; many of the positive samples were cytologically negative for cancer. 156 Archived
sputum samples also have revealed, in K- ras, mutations that were matched later to a confirmed diagnosis of lung cancer. 157

TOBACCO SMOKING AND CANCER RISK
Tobacco smoking is the major cause of cancer and accounts for almost 96% of all male lung cancers in whites. Though the risk of lung cancer decreases after
smoking cessation, the risk never returns to that for nonsmokers. According to 1990 estimates, persons who died of smoking-related diseases would have lived an
additional 15 years if they had never smoked. Tobacco smoke contains more than 3500 chemicals, of which more than 20 are carcinogens. 8 Specific chemicals in
tobacco smoke include PAHs and N-nitrosamines, aromatic amines, ethylene oxide, 1,3-butadiene, and agents that cause oxy radical damage. For example,
tobacco-specific nitrosamines (TSN)—that is, 4-(methyl-nitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) and N'-nitrosonornicotine (NNN), which are potent carcinogens
in laboratory animals 158 result in the formation of hemoglobin adducts. 159 PAHs and TSNs are considered to be the most potent carcinogens in tobacco smoke. 8
During the last 40 years, the approximate threefold decrease in tar (containing PAHs) and nicotine content has been accompanied by an increase of other
carcinogens, including TSNs. 160
Convincing laboratory animal and human studies demonstrate a relationship between tobacco smoke constituents, carcinogen-DNA adduct formation, and cancer. 161
In humans, case-control studies find a positive relationship for lung and bladder cancer. 162,163 Also, studies of tobacco smoke exposure have shown increased adduct
formation in the lung, 78,164,165 blood,78,163,166 and larynx.167,168 and 169 However, wide interindividual variation for adduct levels is common, so several studies have failed
to show a direct relationship between smoking and adducts. 81,162,170,171
The P53 gene, in particular, has a unique spectrum of mutations in tobacco-associated lung cancers. 172 Also, an increased frequency of P53 tumor suppressor gene
mutations has been reported at non-CpG sites in smokers with head and neck cancers, especially in conjunction with alcohol consumption. 151 The decrease in
nicotine content in cigarettes has led to a paradoxical increase in smoking, owing to the drive for maintaining higher blood nicotine levels.
Several determinants of tobacco carcinogen exposure and cancer risk exist, including the number of cigarettes smoked per day, years smoked, cigarette type (e.g.,
tar content, which is the total dry particulate component of smoke), and smoking topography (e.g., how much smoke entering the lung is measured by puff volume,
number of puffs per cigarette, puff duration, and interpuff interval). 173
Also important is that not all smokers experience the same carcinogenic risks; only 1 in 10 heavy smokers develop lung cancer, and some heavy smokers live to their
90s. Thus, interindividual variation in host susceptibility likely is important for cancer risk (e.g., those related to carcinogen metabolism, DNA repair, or behavior). 174
Overall risk is related to dose, which is directly affected by nicotine addiction; more cigarettes are consumed to maintain nicotine blood levels, and cigarettes with
lower nicotine levels result in the need to smoke more, thereby increasing the exposure to tobacco carcinogens.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Wingo PA, Ries LA, Giovino GA, et al. Annual report to the nation on the status of cancer, 19731996, with a special section on lung cancer and tobacco smoking. J Natl Cancer Inst
1999;91:675.
2. Yuspa SH, Poirier MC. Chemical carcinogenesis: from animal models to molecular models in one decade. Adv Cancer Res 1988;50:25.
3. Harris CC. Chemical and physical carcinogenesis: advances and perspectives for the 1990s. Cancer Res 1991;51:5023s.
4. Stanley LA. Molecular aspects of chemical carcinogenesis: the roles of oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes. Toxicology 1995;96:173.
5. Lawley PD. Historical origins of current concepts of carcinogenesis. Adv Cancer Res 1994;65:17.
6. Wink DA, Vodovotz Y, Laval J, et al. The multifaceted roles of nitric oxide in cancer. Carcinogenesis 1998;19:711.
7. Harris CC. Human tissues and cells in carcinogenesis research. Cancer Res 1987;47:1.
8. Hecht SS. Tobacco smoke carcinogens and lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1194.
9. Kohlmeier L, Simonsen N, Mottus K. Dietary modifiers of carcinogenesis. Environ Health Perspect 1995;103[Suppl 8]:177.
10. Wattenberg LW. Inhibition of tumorigenesis in animals. IARC Sci Publ 1996;139:151.
11. Report on carcinogens, 8th ed. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, National Toxicology Program, Integrated Laboratory Systems, Inc,
1998.
12. Jackson MA, Stack HF, Waters MD. The genetic toxicology of putative nongenotoxic carcinogens. Mutat Res 1993;296:241.
13. Ashby J, Paton D. The influence of chemical structure on the extent and sites of carcinogenesis for 522 rodent carcinogens and 55 different human carcinogen exposures. Mutat Res
1993;286:3.
14. Dipple A. DNA adducts of chemical carcinogens. Carcinogenesis 1995;16:437.
15. Felton JS, Knize MG. Occurrence, identification, and bacterial mutagenicity of heterocyclic amines in cooked food. Mutat Res 1991;259:205.
16. Essigmann JM, Wood ML. The relationship between the chemical structures and mutagenic specificities of the DNA lesions formed by chemical and physical mutagens. Toxicol Lett 1993;67:29.
17. Levy DD, Groopman JD, Lim SE, et al. Sequence specificity of aflatoxin B 1-induced mutations in a plasmid replicated in xeroderma pigmentosum and DNA repair proficient human cells.
Cancer Res 1992;52:5668.
18. Greenblatt MS, Bennett WP, Hollstein M, et al. Mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene: clues to cancer etiology and molecular pathogenesis. Cancer Res 1994;54:4855.
19. Barrett JC. Mechanisms of multistep carcinogenesis and carcinogen risk assessment. Environ Health Perspect 1993;100:9.
20. Tennant RW. A perspective on nonmutagenic mechanisms in carcinogenesis. Environ Health Perspect 1993;101[Suppl 3]:231.
21. Ames BN, Gold LS. The causes and prevention of cancer: the role of environment. Biotherapy 1998;11:205.
22. Tennant RW. The genetic toxicity database of the National Toxicology Program: evaluation of the relationships between genetic toxicity and carcinogenicity. Environ Health Perspect
1991;96:47.
23. Guyton KZ, Kensler TW. Oxidative mechanisms in carcinogenesis. Br Med Bull 1993;49:523.
24. Davis DD, Bradlow HL, Wolff M, et al. Medical hypothesis: xenoestrogens as preventable causes of breast cancer. Environ Health Perspect 1993;101:372.
25. Dunnick JK, Elwell MR, Huff J, et al. Chemically induced mammary gland cancer in the National Toxicology Program's carcinogenesis bioassay. Carcinogenesis 1995;16:173.
26. Gonzalez FJ, Gelboin HV. Role of human cytochromes p450 in the metabolic activation of chemical carcinogens and toxins. Drug Metab Rev 1994;26:165.
27. Guengerich FP. Metabolic activation of carcinogens. Pharmacol Ther 1992;54:17.
28. Gonzalez F. Genetic polymorphism and cancer susceptibility: fourteenth Sapporo cancer seminar. Cancer Res 1995;55:710.
29. Ames BN, Gold LS, Willett WC. The causes and prevention of cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:5258.
30. Poulsen HE, Loft S, Wassermann K. Cancer risk related to genetic polymorphisms in carcinogen metabolism and DNA repair. Pharmacol Toxicol 1993;72[Suppl 1]:93.
31. Tennant RW, Spalding J, French JE. Evaluation of transgenic mouse bioassays for identifying carcinogens and noncarcinogens. Mutat Res 1996;365:119.
32. Macleod KF, Jacks T. Insights into cancer from transgenic mouse models. J Pathol 1999;187:43.
33. Cantley LC, Auger KR, Carpenter C, et al. Oncogenes and signal transduction. Cell 1991;64:281.
34. Hunter T. Cooperation between oncogenes. Cell 1991;64:249.
35. Weinberg RA. The molecular basis of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Ann NY Acad Sci 1995;758:331.
36. Slaga TJ. Mechanisms of tumor promotion, vols 13. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1983.
37. Yuspa SH. Tumor promotion. In: Fortner JF, Rhoads JE, eds. Accomplishments in cancer research, 1986. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1987:169182.
38. Marsman DS, Barrett JC. Apoptosis and chemical. Carcinogenesis Risk Anal 1994;14:321.
39. Iversen OH. The skin tumorigenic and carcinogenic effects of different doses, numbers of dose fractions and concentrations of 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene in acetone applied on hairless
mouse epidermis. Possible implications for human carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis 1991;12:493.
40. Willey JC, Harris CC. Cellular and molecular biological aspects of human bronchogenic carcinogenesis. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 1990;10: 181.
41. Hennings H, Shores RA, Poirier MC, et al. Enhanced malignant conversion of benign mouse skin tumors by cisplatin. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:836.
42. Loeb LA. Microsatellite instability: marker of a mutator phenotype in cancer. Cancer Res 1994;54:5059.
43. Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. Cell 1990;61:759.
44. Dong Z, Birrer MJ, Watts RG, et al. Blocking of tumor promoter-induced AP-1 activity inhibits induced transformation in JB6 mouse epidermal cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:609.
45. Gould MN. Cellular and molecular aspects of the multistage progression of mammary carcinogenesis in humans and rats. Semin Cancer Biol 1993;4:161.
46. Bianchi AB, Fischer SM, Robles AI, et al. Overexpression of cyclin D1 in mouse skin carcinogenesis. Oncogene 1993;8:1127.
47. Aznavoorian S, Murphy AN, Stetler-Stevenson WG, et al. Molecular aspects of tumor cell invasion and metastasis. Cancer 1993;71:1368.
48. Gunthert U, Hofman M, Rudy S, et al. A new variant of glycoprotein CD44 confers metastatic potential to rat carcinoma cells. Cell 1991;65:13.
49. Tennenbaum T, Belanger AJ, Glick AB, et al. A splice variant of a6 integrin is associated with malignant conversion in mouse skin tumorigenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:7041.
50. Jones PA, Laird PW. Cancer epigenetics comes of age. Nat Genet 1999;21:163.
51. Baylin SB, Herman JG, Graff JR, et al. Alterations in DNA methylation: a fundamental aspect of neoplasia. Adv Cancer Res 1998;72:141.
52. Rajewsky MF, Engelbergs J, Thomale J, et al. Relevance of DNA repair to carcinogenesis and cancer therapy. Recent Results Cancer Res 1998;154:127.
53. Yu Z, Chen J, Ford BN, et al. Human DNA repair systems: an overview. Environ Mol Mutagen 1999;33:3.
54. de Boer J, Hoeijmakers JH. Cancer from the outside, aging from the inside: mouse models to study the consequences of defective nucleotide excision repair. Biochimie 1999; 81:127.
55. Weeda G, de Boer J, Donker I, et al. Molecular basis of DNA repair mechanisms and syndromes. Recent Results Cancer Res 1998;154:147.
56. Leadon SA. Transcription-coupled repair of DNA damage: unanticipated players, unexpected complexities. Am J Hum Genet 1999;64:1259.

57. Zaidi NH, Pretlow TP, O'Riordan MA, et al. Transgenic expression of human MGMT protects against azoxymethane-induced aberrant crypt foci and G to A mutations in the K- ras oncogene of
mouse colon. Carcinogenesis 1995;16:451.
58. Grafstrom RC, Pegg AE, Trump BF, Harris CC. O 6-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase activity in normal human tissues and cells. Cancer Res 1984;44:2855.
59. Krokan H, Grafstrom RC, Sundqvist K, et al. Cytotoxicity, thiol depletion and inhibition of O 6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase by various aldehydes in cultured human bronchial
fibroblasts. Carcinogenesis 1985;6:1755.
60. Kolodner RD, Marsischky GT. Euxaryotic DNA mismatch repair. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1999;9:89.
61. Edelmann W, Yang K, Umar A, et al. Mutation in the mismatch repair gene Msh6 causes cancer susceptibility. Cell 1997;91:467.
62. Lane DP. P53 and human cancers. Br Med Bull 1994;50:582.
63. Akhurst RJ, Balmain A. Genetic events and the role of TGF-b in epithelial tumour progression. J Pathol 1999;187:82.
64. Reiss, M. Transforming growth factor-b and cancer: a love-hate relationship? Oncol Res 1997;9:447.
65. Drinkwater NR. Effect of genetic susceptibility on tumor induction. In: Arcos JC, Argus M, Woo Y, eds. Chemical induction of cancer: modulation and combination effects. Boston: Birkhauser,
1995:451-472.
66. Balmain A, Nagase H. Cancer resistance genes in mice: models for the study of tumour modifiers. Trends Genet 1998;14:139.
67. Moser AR, Pitot HC, Dove WF. A dominant mutation that predisposes to multiple intestinal neoplasia in the mouse. Science 1990;247:322.
68. Dietrich WF, Lander ES, Smith JS, et al. Genetic identification of Mom-1, a major modifier locus affecting Min-induced intestinal neoplasia in the mouse. Cell 1993;75:631.
69. Fernandez-Salguero P, Pineau T, Hilbert DM, et al. Immune system impairment and hepatic fibrosis in mice lacking the dioxin-binding Ah receptor. Science 1995;268:722.
70. Kelloff GJ, Crowell JA, Hawk ET, et al. Clinical development plan: 13- cis-retinoic acid. J Cell Biochem Suppl 1996;26:168.
71. Kelloff GJ, Crowell JA, Hawk ET, et al. Clinical development plan: vitamin A. J Cell Biochem Suppl 1996;26:269.
72. Shields PG, Harris CC. Environmental causes of cancer. Med Clin North Am 1990;74:263.
73. Hill AB. The environment and disease: association or causation. Proc R Soc Med 1965;58:295.
74. Khoury MJ. Genetic epidemiology and the future of disease prevention and public health. Epidemiol Rev 1997;19:175.
75. Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Cancer-susceptibility genes. Gatekeepers and caretakers [news; comment]. Nature 1997;386:761.
76. Perera FP. Molecular cancer epidemiology: a new tool in cancer prevention. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;78:887.
77. Vineis P, Pirastu R. Aromatic amines and cancer. Cancer Causes Control 1997;8:346.
78. Wiencke JK, Kelsey KT, Varkonyi A, et al. Correlation of DNA adducts in blood mononuclear cells with tobacco carcinogen-induced damage in human lung. Cancer Res 1995;55:4910.
79. Stone JG, Jones NJ, McGregor AD, et al. Development of a human biomonitoring assay using buccal mucosa: comparison of smoking-related DNA adducts in mucosa versus biopsies. Cancer
Res 1995;55:1267.
80. Dunn BP, Vedal S, San RH, et al. DNA adducts in bronchial biopsies. Int J Cancer 1991; 48:485.
81. Kato S, Bowman ED, Harrington AM, et al. Human lung carcinogenDNA adduct levels mediated by genetic polymorphisms in vivo. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:902.
82. Bonassi S, Abbondandolo A, Camurri L, et al. Are chromosome aberrations in circulating lymphocytes predictive of future cancer onset in humans? Preliminary results of an Italian cohort study.
Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1995;79:133.
83. Hagmar L, Brogger A, Hansteen IL, et al. Cancer risk in humans predicted by increased levels of chromosomal aberrations in lymphocytes: Nordic study group on the health risk of chromosome
damage. Cancer Res 1994;54:2919.
84. Groopman JD, Kensler TW. The light at the end of the tunnel for chemical-specific biomarkers: daylight or headlight? Carcinogenesis 1999;20:1.
85. Schoket, B. DNA damage in humans exposed to environmental and dietary polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Mutat Res 424: 143-153, 1999.
86. Bartsch H, Ohshima H, Pignatelli B, et al. Endogenously formed N-nitroso compounds and nitrosating agents in human cancer etiology. Pharmacogenetics 1992;2:272.
87. Hecht SS. Approaches to cancer prevention based on an understanding of N-nitrosamine carcinogenesis. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1997;216:181.
88. Lijinsky W. N-nitroso compounds in the diet. Mutat Res 1999;443:129.
89. Kamiyama S, Ohshima H, Shimada A, et al. Urinary excretion of N-nitrosamino acids and nitrate by inhabitants in high- and low-risk areas for stomach cancer in northern Japan. IARC Sci Publ
1987;84:497.
90. Lu SH, Ohshima H, Fu HM, et al. Urinary excretion of N-nitrosamino acids and nitrate by inhabitants of high- and low-risk areas for esophageal cancer in Northern China: endogenous formation
of nitrosoproline and its inhibition by vitamin C. Cancer Res 1986;46:1485.
91. Wu Y, Chen J, Ohshima H, et al. Geographic association between urinary excretion of N-nitroso compounds and oesophageal cancer mortality in China. Int J Cancer 1993;54:713.
92. Shields PG, Povey AC, Wilson VL, et al. Combined high-performance liquid chromatography/ 32P-postlabeling assay of N 7-methyldeoxyguanosine. Cancer Res 1990;50:6580.
93. Wilson VL, Weston A, Manchester DK, et al. Alkyl and aryl carcinogen adducts detected in human peripheral lung. Carcinogenesis 1989;10:2149.
94. Umbenhauer D, Wild CP, Montesano R, et al. O 6-methyldeoxyguanosine in oesophageal DNA among individuals at high risk of oesophageal cancer. Int J Cancer 1985;36:661.
95. Phillips DH. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in the diet. Mutat Res 1999;443:139.
96. Rothman N, Poirier MC, Baser ME, et al. Formation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-DNA adducts in peripheral white blood cells during consumption of charcoal-broiled beef.
Carcinogenesis 1990;11:1241.
97. Bryant MS, Vineis P, Skipper PL, et al. Hemoglobin adducts of aromatic amines: associations with smoking status and type of tobacco. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:9788-9791.
98. Keating GA, Layton DW, Felton JS. Factors determining dietary intakes of heterocyclic amines in cooked foods. Mutat Res 1999;443:149.
99. Turteltaub KW, Frantz CE, Creek MR, et al. DNA adducts in model systems and humans. J Cell Biochem Suppl 1993;17F:138.
100. Schut HA, Snyderwine EG. DNA adducts of heterocyclic amine food mutagens: implications for mutagenesis and carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis 1999;20:353.
101. Zheng W, Gustafson DR, Sinha R, et al. Well-done meat intake and the risk of breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1724.
102. Scholl P, Musser SM, Kensler TW, et al. Molecular biomarkers for aflatoxins and their application to human liver cancer. Pharmacogenetics 1995;5:S171.
103. Wild CP, Hasegawa R, Barraud L, et al. Aflatoxin-albumin adducts: a basis for comparative carcinogenesis between animals and humans. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1996;5:179.
104. Wild CP, Jiang YZ, Allen SJ, et al. Aflatoxin-albumin adducts in human sera from different regions of the world. Carcinogenesis 1990;11:2271.
105. Gan LS, Skipper PL, Peng XC, et al. Serum albumin adducts in the molecular epidemiology of aflatoxin carcinogenesis: correlation with aflatoxin B1 intake and urinary excretion of aflatoxin
M1. Carcinogenesis 1988;9:1323.
106. Fearon ER. Human cancer syndromes: clues to the origin and nature of cancer. Science 1997;278:1043.
107. Nakachi K, Imai K, Hayashi S, et al. Genetic susceptibility to squamous cell carcinoma of the lung in relation to cigarette smoking dose. Cancer Res 1991;51:5177.
108. Okada T, Kawashima K, Fukushi S, et al. Association between a cytochrome P-450 CYPIA1 genotype and incidence of lung cancer. Pharmacogenetics 1995;4:333.
109. Alexandrie A, Sundberg MI, Seidegard J, et al. Genetic susceptibility to lung cancer with special emphasis on CYP1A1 and GSTM1: a study on host factors in relation to age at onset, gender
and histological cancer types. Carcinogenesis 1994;15:1785.
110. Hirvonen A, Husgafvel-Pursiainen K, Karjalainen A, et al. Point-mutational MspI and Ile-Val polymorphisms closely linked in the CYP1A1 gene: lack of association with susceptibility to lung
cancer in a Finnish study population. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1992;1:485.
111. Shields PG, Caporaso NE, Falk RT, et al. Lung cancer, race, and a CYP1A1 genetic polymorphism. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1993;2:481.
112. Tefre T, Ryberg D, Haugen A, et al. Human CYP1A1 (cytochrome P(1)450) gene: lack of association between the Msp I restriction fragment length polymorphism and incidence of lung cancer
in a Norwegian population. Pharmacogenetics 1991;1:20.
113. Brockmoller J, Cascorbi I, Kerb R, et al. Polymorphisms in xenobiotic conjugation and disease predisposition. Toxicol Lett 1998;102103:173.
114. Kihara M, Noda K. Lung cancer risk of GSTM1 null genotype is dependent on the extent of tobacco smoke exposure. Carcinogenesis 1994;15:415.
115. Rebbeck TR. Molecular epidemiology of the human glutathione S-transferase genotypes GSTM1 and GSTT1 in cancer susceptibility. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1997;6:733.
116. Nakachi K, Imai K, Hayashi S, et al. Polymorphisms of the CYP1A1 and glutathione S-transferase genes associated with susceptibility to lung cancer in relation to cigarette dose in a Japanese
population. Cancer Res 1993;53:2994.
117. Goto I, Yoneda S, Yamamoto M, et al. Prognostic significance of germ line polymorphisms of the CYP1A1 and glutathione S-transferase genes in patients with non-small cell lung cancer.
Cancer Res 1996;56:3725.
118. Norppa H, Hirvonen A, Jarventaus H, et al. Role of GSTT1 and GSTM1 genotypes in determining individual sensitivity to sister chromatid exchange induction by diepoxybutane in cultured
human lymphocytes. Carcinogenesis 1995;16:1261.
119. Wiencke JK, Kelsey KT, Lamela RA, et al. Human glutathione S-transferase deficiency as a marker of susceptibility to epoxide-induced cytogenetic damage. Cancer Res 1990;50: 1585.
120. Bartsch H, Petruzzelli S, De Flora S, et al. Carcinogen metabolism and DNA adducts in human lung tissues as affected by tobacco smoking or metabolic phenotype: a case-control study on
lung cancer patients. Mutat Res 1991;250:103.
121. Madigan MP, Ziegler RG, Benichou J, et al. Proportion of breast cancer cases in the United States explained by well-established risk factors. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;87:1681.
122. Ambrosone CB, Shields PG. Molecular epidemiology of breast cancer. In: Aldaz CM, Gould MN, McLachlan J, et al., eds. Etiology of breast and gynecological cancers. New York: Wiley-Liss,
1997:83.
123. Feigelson HS, Coetzee GA, Kolonel LN, et al. A polymorphism in the CYP17 gene increases the risk of breast cancer. Cancer Res 1997;57:1063.
124. Lavigne JA, Helzlsouer KJ, Huang HY, et al. An association between the allele coding for a low activity variant of catechol-O-methyltransferase and the risk for breast cancer. Cancer Res
1997;57:5493.
125. Thompson PA, Shields PG, Freudenheim JL, et al. Genetic polymorphisms in catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), menopausal status and breast cancer risk. Cancer Res 1998;58:2107.
126. Evans DAP, Manley FA, McKusick VA. Genetic control of isoniazid metabolism in man. Br Med J 1960;2:485.
127. Ambrosone CB, Freudenheim JL, Graham S, et al. Cigarette smoking, N-acetyltransferase 2 genetic polymorphisms, and breast cancer risk. JAMA 1996;276:1494.
128. Hunter DJ, Hankinson SE, Hough H, et al. A prospective study of NAT2 acetylation genotype, cigarette smoking, and risk of breast cancer. Carcinogenesis 1997;18:2127.
129. Ambrosone CB, Freudenheim JL, Graham S, et al. Cytochrome P4501A1 and glutathione S-transferease (M1) genetic polymorphisms and postmenopausal breast cancer risk. Cancer Res
1995;55:3483.
130. Ishibe N, Hankinson SE, Colditz GA, et al. Cigarette smoking, cytochrome P450 1A1 polymorphisms, and breast cancer risk in the Nurses' Health Study. Cancer Res 1998;58:667.
131. Taioli E, Trachman J, Chen X, et al. A CYP1A1 restriction fragment length polymorphism is associated with breast cancer in African-American women. Cancer Res 1995;55:3757.
132. Helzlsouer KJ, Selmin O, Huang HY, et al. Association between glutathione S-transferase M1, P1, and T1 genetic polymorphisms and development of breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90:512.
133. Ross RK, Jones PA, Yu MC. Bladder cancer epidemiology and pathogenesis. Semin Oncol 1996;23:536.
134. Lang NP, Butler MA, Massengill J, et al. Rapid metabolic phenotypes for acetyltransferase and cytochrome P4501A2 and putative exposure to food-borne heterocyclic amines increase the risk
for colorectal cancer or polyps. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1994;3:675.
135. Vineis P, McMichael A. Interplay between heterocyclic amines in cooked meat and metabolic phenotype in the etiology of colon cancer. Cancer Causes Control 1996;7:479.
136. Sinha R, Rothman N. Exposure assessment of heterocyclic amines (HCAs) in epidemiologic studies. Mutat Res 1997;376:195.
137. Liu Y, Hernandez AM, Shibata D, et al. BCL2 translocation frequency rises with age in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:8910.
138. Wei Q, Matanoski GM, Farmer ER, et al. DNA repair and aging in basal cell carcinoma: a molecular epidemiology study. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:1614.
139. Simpson AJ. The natural somatic mutation frequency and human carcinogenesis. Adv Cancer Res 1997;71:209.
140. Cloos J, Spitz MR, Schantz SP, et al. Genetic susceptibility to head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:530.
141. Cloos J, Braakhuis BJ, Steen I, et al. Increased mutagen sensitivity in head-and-neck squamous-cell carcinoma patients, particularly those with multiple primary tumors. Int J Cancer
1994;56:816.
142. Spitz MR, Hsu TC, Wu X, et al. Mutagen sensitivity as a biological marker of lung cancer risk in African Americans. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1995;4:99.
143. Dogliotti E, Hainaut P, Hernandez T, et al. Mutation spectra resulting from carcinogenic exposure: from model systems to cancer-related genes. Recent Results Cancer Res 1998;154:97.

144. Skandalis A, Glickman BW. Endogenous gene systems for the study of mutational specificity in mammalian cells. Cancer Cells 1990;2:79.
145. Sarasin A. Shuttle vectors for studying mutagenesis in mammalian cells. J Photochem Photobiol [B] 1989;3:143.
146. Basu AK, Essigmann JM. Site-specifically alkylated oligodeoxynucleotides: probes for mutagenesis, DNA repair and the structural effects of DNA damage. Mutat Res 1990;233:189.
147. Levine AJ. P53, the cellular gatekeeper for growth and division. Cell 1997;88:323.
148. Brash DE, Rudolph JA, Simon JA, et al. A role for sunlight in skin cancer: UV-induced P53 mutations in squamous cell carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:10124.
149. Bressac B, Kew M, Wands J, et al. Selective G to T mutations of p53 gene in hepatocellular carcinoma from southern Africa. Nature 1991;350:429.
150. Hsu IC, Metcalf RA, Sun T, et al. Mutational hotspot in the p53 gene in human hepatocellular carcinomas. Nature 1991;350:427.
151. Brennan JA, Boyle JO, Koch WM, et al. Association between cigarette smoking and mutation of the p53 gene in squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med 1995;332:712.
152. Hartmann A, Baszyk H, Kovach JS, et al. The molecular epidemiology of p53 gene mutations in human breast cancer. Trends Genet 1997;13:27.
153. Kawajiri K, Eguchi H, Nakachi K, et al. Association of CYP1A1 germ line polymorphisms with mutations of the p53 gene in lung cancer. Cancer Res 1996;56:72.
154. Sidransky D, Tokino T, Hamilton SR, et al. Identification of ras oncogene mutations in the stool of patients with curable colorectal tumors. Science 1992;256:102.
155. Boyle JO, Mao L, Brennan JA, et al. Gene mutations in saliva as molecular markers for head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. Am J Surg 1994;168:429.
156. Mills NE, Fishman CL, Scholes J, et al. Detection of K-ras oncogene mutations in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid for lung cancer diagnosis. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1056.
157. Mao L, Hruban RH, Boyle JO, et al. Detection of oncogene mutations in sputum precedes diagnosis of lung cancer. Cancer Res 1994;54:1634.
158. Hecht SS, Hoffmann D. Tobacco-specific nitrosamines, an important group of carcinogens in tobacco and tobacco smoke. Carcinogenesis 1988;9:875.
159. Hecht SS, Haley NJ, Hoffman D. Monitoring exposure to tobacco products by measurement of nicotine metabolites and derived carcinogens. In: Groopman JD, ed. Molecular dosimetry and
human cancer. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1991:325.
160. Hoffmann D, Hoffmann I. The changing cigarette, 19501995. J Toxicol Environ Health 1997;50:307.
161. Nakayama J, Yuspa SH, Poirier MC. Benzo(a)pyrene-DNA adduct formation and removal in mouse epidermis in vivo and in vitro: relationship of DNA binding to initiation of skin carcinogenesis.
Cancer Res 1984;44:4087.
162. Peluso M, Airoldi L, Armelle M, et al. White blood cell DNA adducts, smoking, and NAT2 and GSTM1 genotypes in bladder cancer: a case-control study. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1998;7:341.
163. Tang D, Santella RM, Blackwood AM, et al. A molecular epidemiological case-control study of lung cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1995;4:341.
164. Cuzick J, Routledge MN, Jenkins D, et al. DNA adducts in different tissues of smokers and non-smokers. Int J Cancer 1990;45:673.
165. Schoket B, Phillips DH, Kostic S, et al. Smoking-associated bulky DNA adducts in bronchial tissue related to CYP1A1 MspI and GSTM1 genotypes in lung patients. Carcinogenesis
1998;19:841.
166. Vineis P, Bartsch H, Caporaso N, et al. Genetically based N-acetyltransferase metabolic polymorphism and low-level environmental exposure to carcinogens. Nature 1994;369:154.
167. Degawa M, Stern SJ, Martin MV, et al. Metabolic activation and carcinogen-DNA adduct detection in human larynx. Cancer Res 1994;54:4915.
168. Flamini G, Romano G, Curigliano G, et al. 4-Aminobiphenyl-DNA adducts in laryngeal tissue and smoking habits: an immunohistochemical study. Carcinogenesis 1998;19:353.
169. Romano G, Sgambato A, Boninsegna A, et al. Evaluation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-DNA adducts in exfoliated oral cells by an immunohistochemical assay. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 1999;8:91.
170. Grinberg-Funes RA, Singh VN, Perera FP, et al. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-DNA adducts in smokers and their relationship to micronutrient levels and the glutathione-S-transferase M1
genotype. Carcinogenesis 1994;15:2449.
171. van Schooten FJ, Hillebrand MJ, van Leeuwen FE, et al. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-DNA adducts in lung tissue from lung cancer patients. Carcinogenesis 1990;11:1677.
172. Bennett WP, Hussain SP, Vahakangas KH, et al. Molecular epidemiology of human cancer risk: gene-environment interactions and p53 mutation spectrum in human lung cancer. J Pathol
1999;187:8.
173. Hofer I, Nil R, Wyss F, et al. The contributions of cigarette yield, consumption, inhalation and puffing behaviour to the prediction of smoke exposure. Clin Invest 1992;70:343.
174. Harris CC. Interindividual variation among humans in carcinogen metabolism, DNA adduct formation and DNA repair. Carcinogenesis 1989;10:1563.
175. Yuspa SH. The pathogenesis of squamous cell cancer: lessons learned from studies of skin carcinogenesisThirty-third G.H.A. Clowes Memorial Award Lecture. Cancer Res 1994;54:1178.
176. DiGiovanni J. Multistage carcinogenesis in mouse skin. Pharmacol Ther 1992;54:63.
177. Dooley TP. Recent advances in cutaneous melanoma oncogenesis research. Oncol Res 1999;6:1.
178. Montesano R, Kirby GM. Chemical carcinogens in human liver cancer. In: Brechot C, ed. Primary liver cancer: etiological and progression factors. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1995:57.
179. Dragan YP, Pitot HC. The role of the stages of initiation and promotion in phenotypic diversity during hepatocarcinogenesis in the rat. Carcinogenesis 1992;13:739.
180. Witschi H. Modulation of lung tumor development in rats, hamsters and mice. In: Homburger F, ed. Progress in experimental tumor research. Basel: Karger, 1991:132.
181. McKenzie K, Sukumar S. Molecular mechanisms of chemical carcinogenesis in rodent models. Cancer Treat Res 1994;71:313.
182. Russo J, Gusterson BA, Rogers AE, et al. Comparative study of human and rat mammary tumorigenesis. Lab Invest 1990;62:244.
183. Galloway DJ. Animal models in the study of colorectal cancer. Cancer Surv 1989;8:169.
184. Pories SE, Ramchurren N, Summerhayes I, et al. Animal models for colon carcinogenesis. Arch Surg 1993;128:647.
185. Reddy J, Rao MS. Progress in pancreatic cancer: implications of phenotypic and molecular plasticity. Lab Invest 1995;72:383.
186. Chang KW, Laconi S, Mangold KA, et al. Multiple genetic alterations in hamster pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas. Cancer Res 1995;55:2560.
187. Cohen SM, Johansson SL. Epidemiology and etiology of bladder cancer. Urol Clin North Am 1992;19:421.
188. Yamamoto S, Konishi Y, Matsuda T, et al. Cancer induction by an organic arsenic compound, dimethylarsinic acid (cacodylic acid), in F344/DuCrj rats after pretreatment with five carcinogens.
Cancer Res 1995;55:1271.
189. Bosland MC. Animal models for the study of prostate carcinogenesis. J Cell Biochem Suppl 1992;16H:89.
190. Masui T, Shirai T, Imaida K, et al. Ki-ras mutations with frequent normal allele loss versus absence of p53 mutations in rat prostate and seminal vesicle carcinomas induced with
3,2'-dimethyl-4-aminobiphenyl. Mol Carcinog 1995;13:21.
191. Koestner A. Characterization of N-nitrosourea-induced tumors of the nervous system: their prospective value for studies of neurocarcinogenesis and brain tumor therapy. Toxicol Pathol
1990;18:186.
192. American Conference of Government Industrial Hygienists' threshold limit values for chemical substances and physical agents and biological exposure indices. Cincinnati: American Conference
of Government Industrial Hygienists, 1993.
193. IARC monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans. Overall evaluations of carcinogenicity: an updating of IARC monographs, vols 142. Lyon: International Agency for Research
on Cancer, 1987.
194. National Toxicology Program fifth annual report on carcinogens. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, 1989.
195. US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control. NIOSH pocket guide to chemical hazards. Cincinnati: National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health, 1990.
196. World Health Organization, International Agency for Research on Cancer. IARC monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans. Lyon: International Agency for Research on
Cancer, 1995.
197. Theriault G, Infante-Rivard C, Armstrong B, et al. Occupational neoplasia. In: Zenz C, Dickerson OB, Horvath EP Jr, eds. Occupational medicine, 3rd ed. Baltimore: Mosby, 1994:813.

CHAPTER 12 Etiology of Cancer: Physical Factors
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 12
Etiology of Cancer: Physical Factors
ROBERT L. ULLRICH
Introduction
Interactions of Radiation with Cells and Tissues
Ionizing Radiation
Ultraviolet Light
Ionizing Radiation and Cancer
History and Sources of Information
Radiation and Cancer Risks
Modifiers of Risk
Second Cancers
Radon
Mechanisms
Ultraviolet Light
Sunlight and Skin Cancer
Genetics and Risk
Mechanisms
Asbestos
Fiber Quality and Disease
Cancer Risk and Asbestos Exposure
Mechanisms
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
This chapter discusses the induction of cancer by three physical agents that are known to cause cancer in humans: radiation, UV light, and asbestos. Exposures to
ionizing radiation can come from both natural and man-made sources. We are continually exposed to naturally occurring radioisotopes contained in soil and rocks,
and, as a result, in building materials and even in our own bodies. In addition, we are exposed to cosmic rays from the sun and radon. The levels of this naturally
occurring environmental radiation, often referred to as background radiation, varies with altitude, geology, and types of building materials used to construct homes and
other buildings. One of the most important man-made sources of exposure is from imaging and therapy procedures in medicine. It is also one of the largest sources of
exposure. On average, the dose to the general population from medical exposures is similar to that received from background radiation.
UV light from the sun is responsible for an increasing number of skin cancers throughout the world. Risks for skin cancer vary with altitude, latitude, and pigmentation,
all of which modify exposure to UV light. UV light and certain types of ionizing radiation, such as x-rays and gamma rays, are all part of the electromagnetic spectrum,
which also includes static magnetic fields, fields generated by 50 or 60 cycle alternating current, radiowaves, microwaves, infrared light, and visible light. UV light and
electromagnetic forms of ionizing radiation have the highest frequencies and energies.
Asbestos is a third physical agent that is a well-known human carcinogen. Asbestos is a naturally occurring mineral silicone that results from fibrous crystallization.
Health effects, including lung cancer, arise from its commercial uses that lead to high occupational exposures. Health effects from low-level exposures, such as those
to the general population, are more controversial. The concern over the effects from occupational exposures and potential health risks in the general population has
markedly reduced the mining and use of asbestos worldwide.
Because their carcinogenic potential is well known, questions about these physical agents focus on the degree of risk to humans as a function of level of exposure
and on mechanisms of cancer development. These mechanistic studies can provide insight into potential risks at very low levels of exposure, for which effects cannot
be directly measured by epidemiologic studies. These studies also provide information about potential sensitive subpopulations, suggest ways to reduce risks, and
provide insight into fundamental mechanisms of cancer development.

INTERACTIONS OF RADIATION WITH CELLS AND TISSUES
Gamma rays, x-rays, and UV light are all part of the electromagnetic spectrum, which is shown in Figure 12-1.1 Their interactions with biologic material depend on the
frequency or wavelength of the radiation. At the short wavelengths of x-rays, electromagnetic radiation has sufficient energy to produce ionizations as a result of the
removal of electrons from atoms. At the longer wavelengths of the other forms of electromagnetic radiation, from UV light to low-level electric and magnetic fields, the
energy deposition is insufficient to produce ionizations, and these forms are often generally referred to as nonionizing radiations.

FIGURE 12-1. Electromagnetic spectrum.

IONIZING RADIATION
In addition to the electromagnetic forms of ionizing radiation (such as x-rays and gamma rays), electrons, protons, alpha particles, and neutrons are particulate forms
of ionizing radiation. The spatial distribution of the ionizations produced by these different forms of ionizing radiation provide a means of classification based on their
interactions in matter, including their interaction with biologic material. This spatial distribution of ionization is measured as the energy transferred per unit track length
[linear energy transfer (LET)] in units of keV/mm. 2 On this basis, x-rays, gamma rays, and electrons are classified as sparsely ionizing, whereas alpha particles (such
as those associated with radon) and neutrons are densely ionizing. The density of the ionization tracks can have a substantial impact on the biologic effects of the
radiation. These influences can be qualitative as well as quantitative. The quantitative differences in the effectiveness of different ionizing radiations are measured by
comparing the dose of the test radiation (e.g., neutrons) to produce a specific level of effect against the dose of x-rays (or sometimes gamma rays) to produce that
same level of effect. That ratio is the relative biologic effectiveness (RBE). For cell killing effects, RBEs for neutrons and alpha particles are often approximately 3 to
5; for cancer induction in animals, the RBE values can be 20 or higher (RBEs of 50 or more have been reported). 3 The RBE increases with increasing LET to a
maximum at approximately 100 keV/mm. At this LET, the average separation of ionizing events is approximately the diameter of the double helix. This results in a high
probability that a single track of radiation of this LET can produce a double-strand break. Qualitative differences between high and low LET radiation are suggested
by the fact that, for all effects observed, including cell killing, chromosome aberrations, mutations, and cancer induction, the radiation damage that induces these

effects appears to be less easily repaired by the cell or organism after exposure to high LET radiation. 2
Energy deposited in biologic material can produce ionizations in target molecules, such as DNA, directly or indirectly by interactions with water molecules that result in
the formation of free radicals. These free radicals can then produce damage to DNA. Because ionizing events from low LET radiation exposures are sparsely
distributed, damage to DNA and other targets from such radiation is principally a result of indirect mechanisms mediated by free radicals. High LET effects are more
generally mediated via direct effects on the target molecules. 2
Whether the effects are directly or indirectly produced, ionizing radiation results predominantly in base damage, and single- and double-strand breaks in DNA. As
already mentioned, for low LET radiations, these effects are mediated via reactive oxygen species much like those produced by normal cellular processes. The
reason that ionizing radiations are able to cause the degree of damage that they do is because of the different spatial distribution of energy that results in a markedly
different distribution of these reactive oxygen species than occurs during normal cellular processes. Ionizations from the deposition of ionizing radiation are highly
clustered, which results in localized areas of sites in DNA molecules with multiple and complex lesions consisting of a combination of base damage and single- and
double-strand breaks. 2,4 These more complex lesions are less easily repaired with fidelity than are the more simple forms of DNA damage. 4,5 For high LET radiations,
because of the density of the ionization clusters, the molecular damage can be particularly complex and difficult to repair.
ULTRAVIOLET LIGHT
UV radiation does not have sufficient energy to produce ionizations. Rather, its effects are the result of molecular excitation after absorption of energy by the
molecule. UV light can be categorized into three types, based on wavelength: UVC with wavelengths ranging from 240 to 290 nm, UVB ranging from 290 to 320 nm,
and UVA ranging from 320 to 400 nm. UVC is not in sunlight that reaches earth because it is readily absorbed by the atmosphere. It has proven to be useful, however,
for other reasons. It is produced by low-pressure mercury lamps commonly used for sterilization. In addition, because the peak wavelength of these lamps (254 nm) is
very close to the peak for absorption in DNA molecules (260 nm), it has been an important experimental tool for studies of UV light effects on DNA. UVB appears to
be primarily responsible for skin cancer induction after sunlight exposure via direct damage to DNA. The amount to which the population is exposed depends on many
factors, including the ozone layer. Effects of UVB and UVC appear to be mediated via effects on DNA. Interactions of UVB and UVC with DNA result in a number of
molecular changes, the most prevalent of which are dimers between adjacent pyrimidines. 6 The most biologically important of these are the cyclobutane dimer and the
6-4 photoproduct. Other products are less frequent, but these two, especially the cyclobutane dimers, appear to play a major role in the mutagenic and carcinogenic
effects of UVB. UVA is not absorbed by the atmosphere and penetrates deeper into the skin than UVB. Because of its wavelength, DNA and proteins only weakly
absorb UVA, but it has been shown to be carcinogenic. This carcinogenic effect appears to be due to the production of reactive oxygen species and free radicals
through its interactions with target chromophores. As a result, such products induce indirect damage to DNA. 7
For UVC and UVB, the distribution of specific changes in the genome depends on base sequence and secondary and tertiary genomic structure. For example,
cytosine absorbs higher wavelengths of UV radiation than thymine, resulting in dimers containing cytosine being more readily formed after UVB radiation. Data have
shown that methylation at specific sequences in the p53 molecule enhance formation of dimers in specific regions, resulting in mutations that are relatively specific for
UV damage.8 These specific mutations have been found quite early in skin tumors. 9,10

IONIZING RADIATION AND CANCER
HISTORY AND SOURCES OF INFORMATION
The benefits of ionizing radiation in the diagnosis and treatment of disease were recognized by the medical community very soon after the discovery of x-rays and
radioactivity. 11 Almost as quickly, the risks of exposure began to be recognized as well. The first cancers, detected a few years after the discovery of x-rays, were skin
cancers that developed after high skin doses received by early workers who often used their hands to test the output of x-ray tubes. These cases were followed by
cases of radiation-induced leukemias among radiologists and radioisotope workers. These early studies established that radiation could cause cancer in humans, but
the extent of the risk as a function of dose was not known. This began to change in the 1950s and 1960s with the study of the Japanese survivors of the atomic
bombs, the study of patient populations exposed to radiation for therapeutic and diagnostic procedures, and occupationally exposed populations, such as radiologists,
uranium miners, and nuclear industry workers. A partial list of the principal sources of information is shown in Table 12-1. These studies, which began in the 1950s
and continue today, have provided and continue to provide extensive quantitative information about radiation dose and cancer risk. In addition, such studies provide
information on tissue and organ sensitivity and risk-modifying factors, such as age and genetic background.

TABLE 12-1. Studies of Radiation-Exposed Populations

The largest population studied and the one that has served as the primary source for risk estimates are the populations in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan, who
survived the atomic bombings of these two cities. 12,13,14 and 15 The doses received were single acute exposures of a mixture of gamma rays and neutrons to the entire
body. The doses ranged from lethal to very small, depending on the location of the individuals at the time. The average dose received by the survivors was less than
0.3 Sv. The study of this group, which began a few years after the exposures, has provided extensive information on risk as a function of dose and provided insight
into variations in tissue and organ sensitivity. Because the age distribution of the population was wide, including the old and the very young (as well as children
exposed in utero), this study is also an important source of information about the effects of age on risk and on the time between radiation exposure and the
appearance of leukemias and solid cancers (latent period). This study is still ongoing, and a large fraction of the population exposed as children, adolescents, and
young adults are still living. Because of this fact, we are continuing to learn about the risks from radiation exposure, and this population will continue to provide new
information for many years to come.
Another major source of information is patient populations exposed to ionizing radiation as a result of therapeutic or diagnostic procedures. The numbers of patients in
each individual study are smaller than in the atomic bomb survivors, but the number of such studies is relatively large. 16 In spite of the large numbers of studies, only
a few have been useful for the quantification of risk as a function of dose. Because such populations generally receive localized exposures, these groups generally
provide information on cancer risks in specific organs and tissues. Such populations also have provided insight into modifying factors, such as age and genetic
background. Studies of second cancers after radiation therapy has become an increasingly important source of information. 17 This group is discussed in more detail
later in the section Second Cancers. In the past, radiation was used to treat a number of benign disorders, including enlarged thymus glands and tonsils, tinea capitis,
ankylosing spondylitis, and peptic ulcers. 16 Epidemiologic studies of such treated populations have provided information on radiation-induced leukemia, as well as
thyroid, breast, and stomach cancers. In general, diagnostic procedures result in very low radiation exposures; however, a few studies have provided evidence for
increased cancer risks. One of the most intensively studied of these is a group of tuberculosis patients who were subjected to multiple diagnostic fluoroscopies during
their treatment. 18,19 In these studies, female patients have been shown to be at an increased risk for breast cancer. Although individual doses were low, the number of
exposures resulted in the accumulation of relatively large doses.
As is the case for other carcinogenic agents, occupational exposures also have been a valuable source of information. Studies of uranium miners and other

underground miners have been a particularly valuable source of information on risks of lung cancer after exposure to radon. 20
RADIATION AND CANCER RISKS
Tissue Sensitivity and Latent Period
Although radiation can induce many different types of cancer, certain organs, tissues, and cell types are more sensitive than others. Chronic myelocytic leukemia and
acute leukemia are very sensitive to induction, whereas no evidence indicates that chronic lymphocytic leukemia, Hodgkin's disease, or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma can
be induced by radiation exposure. 14 Among solid cancers, cancers of the thyroid gland, female breast, and lung appear to be the most sensitive. 13 Evidence also
suggests increased risk for salivary gland tumors; colon cancer; stomach cancer; and cancers of the liver, ovary, bladder, esophagus, skin, and central nervous
system; however, these sites are not as sensitive. Most skin cancers are basal cell and squamous cell carcinomas, whereas there is little evidence for the induction of
melanomas. In general, bone sarcoma and cancer of connective tissues require relatively high doses before a significant increased risk can be detected. No clear
evidence exists for the induction of cancers of the pancreas, prostate, uterine cervix, small intestine, or most childhood cancers (except for acute leukemia).
Radiation-induced leukemias are the first to appear after radiation exposure. 21,22 Depending on dose, these leukemias can begin to appear as early as 2 years after
exposure, with peak incidence occurring between 4 and 8 years after irradiation. After this peak, the incidence begins to drop toward baseline levels. In general, solid
cancers do not appear until 10 or more years after the radiation exposure, and it is not unusual for the latent period to exceed 20 years. 16 The time between irradiation
can depend on the age at exposure, the dose, and a variety of host factors. For example, the appearance of breast cancer is greatly influenced by age at the time of
irradiation. The time between radiation exposure and the appearance of breast cancer is quite long for a prepubertal or adolescent girl, whereas for a woman in her
late twenties or early thirties, the latent period is generally shorter. A close look at the relationship between age at exposure and time of appearance for breast cancer
indicates that these radiation-induced cancers appear at a time when the natural incidence of these cancers is also rising. This is likely a result of host factors that
play an important role in breast cancer development and that also appear to strongly influence the expression of radiation-initiated cells. These data have important
implications for potential mechanisms of radiation carcinogenesis. These very long latent periods, particularly for younger individuals, are also important to remember
when assessing risks associated with specific treatment protocols.
Dose-Response Relationships
Understanding the relationship between cancer frequency, or risk, and radiation dose is important for providing insight into mechanisms underlying radiation
carcinogenesis. It is also important for estimating risks at low doses for which effects cannot be directly determined from experimental or epidemiologic studies.
Accurate risk estimates at low doses are essential in regulating environmental and occupational exposures. 21 It is also essential in decisions about medical uses of
radiation when weighing the benefits of the procedure versus its risks. 2 One of the most prominent examples of this issue has been the debate over mammography,
both with respect to its general use to screen women for breast cancer and with respect to the age at which such screening should be initiated and practiced routinely.
The question of whether the benefits of this screening outweigh the risks for inducing new breast cancers depends on many complex issues, but central to these
issues is the risk of breast cancer from the doses received. It is virtually impossible to observe an increase in risk in an epidemiologic study at the low doses received
as a result of a single mammographic procedure (or for that matter any diagnostic procedure) ( Table 12-2), so estimates must be based on models of dose-response
relationships that allow estimates to be derived. Mainly because of these low-dose risk issues, a substantial amount of effort in epidemiologic studies and in
experimental studies of radiation carcinogenesis has been to define dose-response relationships and test predictions of dose-response models.

TABLE 12-2. Approximate Doses from Common Diagnostic Procedures

From theoretical models of radiation interactions at the cellular and molecular level, and from experimental and epidemiologic studies, two dose-response models are
most prominent: the linear model and the linear-quadratic model. 21,23 As suggested by its name, with the linear model cancer risk (or I, incidence) is linearly related to
dose (I = aD). With the linear-quadratic model, risk at low doses is linearly related to dose, whereas at higher doses, the risk increases more rapidly as a function of
dose. In this region, risk increases as a function of the square of the dose. As a result, the dose response takes the form I = aD + bD 2. The linear-quadratic model is
based on biophysical theories of radiation interactions. The bD 2 component represents effects produced by the interaction of multiple ionization tracks, whereas the
aD component represents effects produced by single ionization tracks. For sparsely ionizing low LET radiation at low doses, the probability is that only a few
ionization tracks will traverse a cell (at very low doses perhaps only one such ionization track might traverse a cell). Therefore, any effects observed, such as a
double-strand break or a chromosome aberration, must have been a result of effects produced by such single tracks. At higher doses, in which multiple tracks would
be traversing a cell, such effects would be expected to be a result of interactions of damage produced by these multiple tracks. Because the probability of inducing a
complex type of damage, such as a double-strand break, is greater with multiple events occurring in close proximity, the dose response would be expected to rise
more rapidly than at low doses. For densely ionizing radiation, ionization tracks through a cell are few, but the density of the ionization is sufficient to produce complex
effects with single tracks with a high probability. As a result, the dose response is expected to be linear over a wide range of doses.
Irrespective of the model, the prediction at low doses is that the dose response is linear. This prediction implies that any dose of radiation received has a probability of
inducing damage and, therefore, results in some increased risk for cancer development. Although there is some argument about this assumption at very low doses
because of the repair and damage response capabilities of cells, current information about underlying mechanisms of cancer induction by ionizing radiation would
tend to support the view that any dose of radiation confers some degree of risk.
At high dose, the linear quadratic and linear models differ not only in form but also in predictions about risks at low dose rates and fractionated exposures. 24 Such
predictions impact lifetime risks for those exposed occupationally at low dose rates over many years and also impact estimates of risks from multiple medical
procedures, such as mammography, computed tomographic scans, fluoroscopies, or even dental x-rays over a lifetime. The linear model in its most simple form
predicts that lowering the dose rate or giving many small fractions confers the same cancer risk as the same dose delivered as a single, high dose-rate exposure. The
linear-quadratic model predicts that, at high total doses, reducing the rate at which the total dose is received or giving the dose in multiple small fractions reduces the
risk. This makes sense when considering acute effects of radiation. A dose of 4 Gy delivered instantaneously would have the chance of being lethal in a short time,
whereas that same dose accumulated over a lifetime would not produce such acutely lethal effects. But whether this same concept holds for the damage that results
in increased cancer risk is not certain. Theoretically, because effects are likely to be a result of the interaction of damages produced by independent tracks, lowering
the dose rate or fractionating the exposure reduces the probability of the interaction of damage because of cellular repair processes that rapidly respond to such
damage. If this theory applies to the damage responsible for radiation-induced cancers, the cancer risk at low dose rates and after low dose fractions would be lower
than that predicted from high dose, high dose-rate exposures. At very low dose rates and very low doses per fraction, this results in a predicted dose response that
simply is a continuation of the slope of the dose-response curve at low doses [i.e., the dose response would be linear (I = aD)]. 23 Because most epidemiologic studies
involve populations irradiated at high dose rates, the applicability of this model potentially impacts the accuracy of estimates of risk for low dose, low dose-rate, and
fractionated exposures derived from such studies. Whether this model is appropriate and the degree of the so-called dose-rate effect is a matter of debate and study.
Epidemiologic and experimental data are not adequate to resolve the issue at the present time.
Analyses of results from epidemiologic studies of the atomic bomb survivors suggest a linear quadratic dose response for the induction of all leukemia, although a

simple linear model also fits the data. 21,25 For all solid cancers combined, a linear dose response is suggested based on the data at hand. 21,25 Except for a few tumor
types, such as breast cancer, data for individual cancers are insufficient to address the issue of dose response. It must be remembered that the solid tumor data are
incomplete at present because of the late onset of these cancers and because a significant fraction of the population who were children and young adults at the time
of the bombing are still alive. Studies of radiation-induced breast cancer in the atomic bomb survivors support a linear dose response over a wide range of doses. 13,21
This linear response is supported by studies of other populations as well. 18,21,26
For breast cancer, limited data on fractionation effects are available from studies of tuberculosis patients who received multiple diagnostic fluoroscopies during their
course of treatment. Although the doses from the individual fluoroscopies were small, relatively large total doses were accumulated. Analysis of these data suggest
similar risks for radiation-induced breast cancer in this group compared with those derived from the atomic bomb survivors and other groups who received radiation at
a high dose rate. 18,19,21,23,26 The lack of an apparent fractionation effect is in contrast to results of analyses of the same tuberculosis patients for lung cancer.
Comparing the risk for lung cancer in the groups receiving fractionated exposures from fluoroscopy to the risk in the atomic bomb survivors indicates that fractionation
resulted in a markedly decreased risk for radiation-induced lung cancer. 27 Information on dose-response relationships for high LET radiation–induced cancer in
human populations is relatively limited but suggest linear dose-response relationships. 20 Some of the most extensive dose-response data are for lung cancer in
underground miners exposed to radon (see Radon, later in this chapter).
Experimental studies examining dose-response relationships for leukemia and a variety of solid cancers generally support the linear-quadratic model. 23,24,28,29 and 30 In
addition, most of these studies have found that reducing the dose rate or fractionating the dose into small fractions reduces the risk for development of
radiation-induced cancer in the manner predicted by the linear-quadratic model. The degree of the dose-rate effect appears to vary with tumor type. Interestingly, in
mice the dose-rate effect for the induction of lung cancer is greater than that for breast cancer. 24 Dose-response relationships for cancer induction after exposure to
high LET radiation are limited mainly to studies of neutrons and only a few tumor types, but the data available clearly demonstrate linear dose-response
relationships. 3,31,32 Fractionating the exposure or delivering the exposure at low dose rates has little effect on the dose response in most instances. However, data for
mammary tumors in mice, and for transformation in vitro, have shown a so-called inverse dose-rate effect in which doses delivered at low dose rates were seen to be
more effective with respect to cancer induction than single acute exposures. 32,33 and 34
MODIFIERS OF RISK
Age
Age has a significant impact on susceptibility to radiation-induced cancer. Increased risks for thyroid cancer are primarily found after exposure of children to radiation,
whereas the risk in adults after exposure to radiation is small. 13 For breast cancer, young children and adolescents are at the highest risk. 13,17,21,35,36,37 and 38 Risks,
although still increased, are lower for young adults in their twenties and thirties compared with younger individuals. For women older than 45 to 50 years of age,
radiation appears to have little influence on breast cancer risk. 17,39,40 Although not as dramatic, risks for acute leukemia, colon cancer, cancer of the central nervous
system, and skin cancer are all greater if the exposure occurs early in life. 13,17,22
Reports in the mid-1950s suggested for the first time an increased risk of childhood leukemia and all childhood solid cancers as a result of in utero radiation exposure
from diagnostic procedures. 41,42 Initial concerns of a selection bias that might have resulted in more in utero exposures because of an underlying medical problem that
was the actual risk factor were essentially dispelled by confirmation of these results in a study of twins in which such a selection bias could be minimized. 43,44 Similar
studies of effects from in utero exposure in atomic bomb survivors have not observed such an increased risk. However, it is generally accepted that an increased risk
exists for childhood cancers, including leukemia, from in utero exposure, which should be avoided. 45 Studies to date on risks of adult cancers after in utero exposure
are inconclusive. 46
Genetic Susceptibility
It has been recognized for many years that there are individuals within the population who have a higher risk for spontaneous cancer. Studies of these individuals and
their families have led to the discovery of several genes involved in heritable susceptibility to specific cancer. A number of these genes have now been cloned. In
individuals with such susceptibility, the probability of developing a tumor during their lifetime can exceed 50%, and in some instances the probability is higher. 47,48 and 49
However, such mutations are relatively rare in the population. The prevalence of currently known, high penetrance genes account for approximately 5% of the total
cancers in the population, and the prevalence of such genes in the total population is less than 1%. Because of this incidence, it is difficult to obtain adequate data to
assess the impact of such genes on susceptibility to radiation-induced cancer.
Most information has come from studies of second cancers after radiation therapy. Studies to date have demonstrated increased risks for radiation-induced
osteosarcoma and soft tissue sarcoma in patients with the hereditary form of retinoblastoma. 50 Studies of patients with basal cell nevus carcinoma syndrome have
been found to be at an increased risk for basal cell carcinoma and ovarian tumors in the irradiated field. 51 In addition, patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome appear to
be at an increased risk for radiation-induced cancer. 52,53 In each instance, these patients have defects in genes that are known to act as tumor suppressor genes, the
retinoblastoma gene (RB), the human homologue of the patched gene PTCH, and the p53 gene, respectively. It has also been proposed that the gene involved in
ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) may also influence susceptibility to radiation-induced cancer. 54 AT is a recessive inherited syndrome that results in hypersensitivity to acute
radiation effects, such as cell killing, because of mutations in the ATM gene, which is involved in DNA damage signaling and response pathways. 55,56 Patients
homozygous for mutated ATM are extremely sensitive to acute radiation effects and are at a high risk for the development of certain forms of cancer. It has been
suggested that individuals heterozygous for mutated ATM are also at an increased risk for radiation-induced cancer, in particular breast cancer. 54 The sensitivity of
these individuals to acute effects of radiation is generally within the normal range. This hypothesis has been difficult to definitively test, and the question of enhanced
susceptibility remains unresolved. Also unknown at the present time is the impact of the breast cancer genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 on susceptibility to
radiation-induced cancer.
A major area of uncertainty and increasing interest is the potential impact of low-penetrance mutations that are likely to be relatively common in the population. 48 Such
genes are difficult to identify in epidemiologic studies. Experimental studies in animal models and in human cells have provided evidence for such mutations and
provided data implicating such mutations in susceptibility to radiation-induced cancer. It is also likely that such low-penetrance mutations could be involved in other
delayed effects, such as radiation-induced fibrosis. The identification of such susceptible subpopulations is now a major research activity in radiation oncology.
SECOND CANCERS
As the treatment of cancer has improved, long-term survivors have begun to develop second cancers as a result of treatment. Studies of such populations can provide
information on the nature of potential risks and suggest new approaches to treatment that may reduce risks. Several studies have now been reported on risks of
second cancers from radiation therapy. The most extensive data are available from studies of second cancers arising after treatment for childhood cancer, cervical
cancer, Hodgkin's disease, and breast cancer. Data also are becoming available regarding risks of second cancers after whole body irradiation for bone marrow
transplantations.
Relatively little information has been reported on radiation-induced second cancers in long-term survivors of childhood cancer. 17 Interpretation of results are
complicated by the fact that many of these cancers are associated with germinal mutations that can influence susceptibility to the development of second cancers
independent of the radiation or perhaps enhance susceptibility to radiation exposure. Another complicating factor is that many of these patients received
chemotherapeutic agents as well. Furthermore, in many cases insufficient time has passed for risks for adult solid tumors to be properly assessed. The most common
second cancers appear after treatment of childhood cancers appears to be bone and soft tissue sarcomas. By far the largest source of information on these sarcomas
come from study of retinoblastoma patients, many of whom have an elevated risk for such cancers independent of the radiation exposure because of heritable
mutations in the RB gene. 17,50,57 In these children, risk after radiation therapy can be as high as 50%. Although genetic susceptibility of these children to the familial
form of these cancers can complicate interpretation, studies of retinoblastoma patients who do not have the familial form and studies of patients with other forms of
childhood cancer also show increased risks for these sarcomas. Not unexpectedly, based on the earlier discussion about age susceptibility (see Age, earlier in this
chapter), the risk for thyroid, breast, and skin cancers also are elevated after radiation therapy for a variety of childhood cancers, as are tumors of the central nervous
system and leukemias.17 It appears, however, that the effects of radiation are primarily on the induction of solid cancers. The relative increase in risk for leukemia

development after radiation therapy is lower than that for the development of a subsequent solid cancer.
A series of large studies have examined the development of second cancers in cervical cancer patients treated with high doses of ionizing radiation. 58,59 Increased
risks for second cancers have been difficult to detect, although a small (twofold) increased risk of leukemia was detected when the sample size was increased to
include several hundred thousand women. The reason for such a small increase in leukemia risk is likely a result of a number of factors. First, the high doses
delivered to a small volume likely resulted in cell killing in nearby target cells, and the dose outside the field was relatively low so that the fraction of target cell
irradiated may have been small. Second, the doses were protracted (brachytherapy), fractionated, or both. In spite of the small numbers of leukemias, a
dose-response curve was constructed that showed a rise in leukemia risk up to approximately 4 Gy, followed by a decline from the peak at higher doses. This decline
at higher doses was suggested to be a result of cell killing that could have reduced the number of transformed cells. With respect to time of occurrence, a minimum
latent period of approximately 2 years was seen, and the risk remained elevated for approximately 15 years before declining to normal levels. Within the field of
irradiation, cancers of the bladder and bone, as well as soft tissue sarcomas, were observed. Outside of this field, cancers of the stomach were seen, probably as a
result of scatter radiation of approximately 1 Gy.
In long-term survivors of Hodgkin's disease, the risk of leukemia appears to be mainly associated with the use of alkylating agents. Radiation in combination with
chemotherapeutic agents does not seem to markedly enhance the risk of leukemia over that associated with chemotherapy alone. 17,60,61 and 62 Although these data
would suggest that radiation is not a particularly effective leukemogenic agent, studies of second solid cancers indicate radiation is capable of increasing the risks of a
number of solid cancers, including cancers of the breast, thyroid, stomach, bone, and skin. 35,36,39 Second cancers of the breast are particularly pronounced in women
treated at young ages. 35 It has been reported that the relative risk for women treated when they were younger than 15 years is 136. For those treated between the
ages of 15 and 24, the relative risk was 19; for ages 25 to 29 years, a relative risk of 7.3 was reported. Women treated at older ages did not appear to be at an
increased risk. It is also important to note that the time between radiation exposure and the onset of breast cancer was long. The risk was higher at times beyond 15
years after treatment than before 15 years. Clearly, such patients should be identified as high risk and monitored carefully on a long-term basis.
In addition to breast cancer, an excess of lung cancer has been reported. 63,64 Unlike breast cancer, lung cancer has been reported to appear as early as 5 years after
treatment. As might be expected, a strong interaction between smoking and radiation with respect to lung cancer risk has been reported. An increased risk for thyroid
cancer has been found in patients treated at very young ages but not in adults, and an increased risk for bone cancer has been reported mainly in patients treated as
adolescents. 65,66 Concerns over these second cancer risks, particularly breast cancer, has led to treatment modifications but not to elimination of radiation as an
important tool in the treatment of Hodgkin's disease. 17 In spite of the risk, radiation is very effective, and the potential benefits of its continued use (a high probability
of long-term survival) is thought to outweigh the risks of a second cancer many years later.
On the basis of epidemiologic studies of breast cancer risks in other populations, the dose to the contralateral breast during radiation therapy for breast cancer is
sufficient to result in an increased risk for a second breast cancer. This potential risk has been shown to be the case in several studies. 39,40 An increase in risk has
been found in women irradiated before age 45 who survive longer than 10 years. For women older than 45 at the time of treatment, the risk does not appear to be
increased. In addition to breast cancer in the contralateral breast, an increased risk of lung cancer also has been reported. 67
Studies have been reported on patients receiving whole body irradiation for bone marrow transplantations who received radiation doses in the range of 10 to 15 Gy. It
was found that, in those patients who survived 10 or more years, the risk was 8.3 times higher than expected. Risks were elevated for cancer of the buccal cavity,
liver, brain and central nervous system, thyroid, bone, and connective tissue, as well as for malignant melanoma. Those treated at younger ages were at higher risk
than those treated at older ages. 68
RADON
Radon is a gas that comes from the naturally occurring uranium in rocks and soil. As a gas, it is able to flow from rocks and soil into the air, and because of this,
underground mines, especially uranium mines, often contain high levels of radon. Homes in many areas also contain measurable levels of radon because of the
makeup of the rocks and soil in the area. Radon, although radioactive, is chemically inert and uncharged. The spontaneous decay of radon results in radon progeny
that are also radioactive but are electrically charged. These charged particles can attach to dust particles and, when inhaled, can deposit in the lung, where decay of
these progeny results in irradiation of lung tissue with alpha particles.
Studies of underground miners exposed to high levels of radon have clearly demonstrated that radon and its progeny are responsible for an increased risk of lung
cancer. 20 The risk is specific for lung cancer, and an increased risk for leukemia and other cancers is not observed. Based on extensive studies of such miners, an
exposure-response relationship has been constructed that indicates a linear relationship between exposure and lung cancer risk, as would be expected for high LET
radiations, such as alpha particles. It has been more difficult to detect risks due to radon in homes, but newer analyses have provided evidence of such risks and
appear to confirm that the exposure-response relationship derived from the underground miner studies adequately projects risks at low radon levels as well. All of
these estimates are complicated because of the overwhelming risk associated with smoking that must be taken into account in many study groups. On the basis of
estimates from the uranium miners and studies of risks of radon in homes, it is currently estimated that approximately 10% to 15% of lung cancers in the U.S.
population each year could be attributed to radon exposure. 20
MECHANISMS
It is clear from the discussion in the previous section that a single dose of ionizing radiation can result in an increased risk of cancer from years to decades later.
Although it is generally assumed that these carcinogenic effects are somehow related to its mutagenic and clastogenic potential, the precise mechanisms through
which radiation results in this increased frequency of cancer is unknown. The long period between radiation exposure and cancer development and the multistage
nature of carcinogenesis make it particularly difficult to sort out radiation-induced changes from other alterations that occur once the process has been initiated.
Radiation-induced cancers do not appear to be unique or specifically identifiable. The mutations and the growth characteristics of tumors likely caused by radiation
are the same as those spontaneously occurring tumors of the same site. Attempts to identify radiation-specific changes have not been successful, despite fairly
extensive investigation. However, there are clues to possible underlying mechanisms that emerge from epidemiologic and experimental investigations.
Based on experimental studies, it is generally thought that the induction of complex forms of double-strand breaks is the most biologically important type of lesion
induced by ionizing radiation. That is, this type of double-strand break is likely to be responsible for subsequent molecular and cellular effects. 4 Attempts to repair
these complex lesions are likely to be error-prone, and it is thought that this error-prone repair process can lead to gross chromosomal effects and mutagenesis.
Molecular analyses of radiation-induced mutations have found a full range of mutations, including base pair substitutions, frameshift mutations, and deletions.
Importantly, the most common alterations are deletions rather than point mutations. Because mutations predominate, theories of radiation-induced cancer have
focused mainly on effects in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes that would be expected to occur through this mode of action rather than through the induction of
point mutations. Thus, mechanisms involving gene and chromosome rearrangements, loss of heterozygosity, and gene deletion are considered the most likely
radiation-induced events to initiate the process of cancer development. Some support for this view comes from the molecular analysis of radiation-induced cancers. In
the papillary form of thyroid cancer, rearrangements in the RET protooncogene are a common feature, 69 and it has been demonstrated that such rearrangements can
occur in thyroid cells after irradiation. 70,71 and 72 Radiation-induced myeloid leukemia in mice appears to be associated with specific deletions in chromosome 2 that
occur very early after irradiation. 73,74 and 75 In a murine model of p53 deficiency containing mice with one normal and one mutant allele of the p53 gene, it has been
shown that these mice are highly sensitive to radiation tumorigenesis. 76 Analysis of these tumors has demonstrated loss of the wild-type allele and duplication of the
mutant p53 allele. In patients with familial forms of RB, basal cell nevus carcinoma syndrome, and Li-Fraumeni syndrome, the pathogenesis of second cancers after
radiation therapy appears to involve a similar mechanism. In each case, the patient has a germline mutation in one allele at birth, and radiation appears to facilitate
the loss of the normal allele.
More recently, experimental studies have questioned whether the initiating events produced by radiation are direct effects on specific genes or whether the mutations
and chromosomal rearrangements result indirectly as a consequence of genomic instability induced by the radiation exposure. 77,78,79 and 80 The observation of genomic
instability is relatively recent. It had been generally believed that all the mutagenic and cytogenetic effects of radiation occurred in the first, or at least the first few, cell
divisions. It has now been shown that increased mutation rates and new cytogenetic damage can occur in a large proportion of the progeny of irradiated cells many
generations later ( Fig. 12-2). This has led to the hypothesis that this radiation-induced instability, which appears to be broadly based, is the initiating event
responsible for subsequent mutations and chromosomal rearrangements that ultimately lead to cancer. Interestingly, analyses of mutations arising in genomically
unstable cells indicate that they are more frequently point mutations rather than deletions. According to this hypothesis, this instability puts all genes at an increased

risk for mutations, and it is this increased mutation rate that ultimately results in cancer development ( Fig. 12-3).

FIGURE 12-2. Comparison of mutations and cytogenetic damage as a result of direct radiation damage or as a result of radiation-induced genomic instability. A:
Directly induced mutations or chromosome aberrations are passed to all progeny (i.e., the alterations are clonal). B: In contrast, mutations or aberrations arising as a
result of radiation-induced instability arise in the progeny of irradiated cells that have not been directly irradiated. This leads to a nonclonal, or mosaic, pattern.
Because the alterations arise in the progeny of the cells, another characteristic of instability is that the mutational or clastogenic effects are delayed with respect to the
radiation exposure.

FIGURE 12-3. Proposed role of radiation-induced cytogenetic instability in radiation-induced cancer. Radiation exposure induces instability in a high percentage of
the progeny of the irradiated cells ( striped cells represent unstable progeny). As a result of this instability, the rate of chromosome aberrations and mutations is
increased. Some mutations result in cell death ( black) or slow-growing cells (gray), whereas some occur in critical genes involved in the regulation of cell growth and
differentiation, or in the maintenance of the stability of the genome. These mutations result in the persistence and amplification of genomic instability or in cells with a
growth advantage. As these cells continue to develop into a clonal outgrowth, further mutations result in additional cellular changes, which lead to death or
progression toward neoplasia. Cells with other patterns represent cells with specific mutations or sets of mutations that arose subsequent to radiation exposure.

The mechanism for induction of radiation-induced instability is not known, but it does not appear to be a result of the induction of a mutation in a specific gene or set
of genes. The argument against a specific gene mutation is based on the high frequency of radiation-induced instability after relatively small doses. The probability of
a specific gene mutation after 1 Gy of ionizing radiation ranges from 1 in 10,000 to 1 in 100,000, whereas approximately one in five cells or more will express
radiation-induced instability. The strongest evidence to date in support of this hypothesis comes from mouse studies that have found a genetic association between
susceptibility to radiation-induced chromosomal instability and susceptibility to breast cancer. 81

ULTRAVIOLET LIGHT
Skin cancer is one of the most common forms of cancer, and its incidence is rising. 82,83 and 84 Although it is difficult to estimate overall incidence rates for nonmelanoma
skin cancer, it is estimated that the annual incidence in 1996 was on the order of 800,000 new cases. Approximately 80% of all nonmelanoma skin cancers are basal
cell carcinomas. Squamous cell carcinoma comprises the other 20%. Mortality rates for these nonmelanoma cancers are low. However, this is not the case for
melanoma, which has been increasing at a rate of approximately 3% per year in the United States. In 1998, an estimated 41,600 new cases of melanoma were
diagnosed, an estimated 7300 of which ultimately will be fatal. 85 A major cause of all forms of skin cancer is UV light from the sun.
SUNLIGHT AND SKIN CANCER
The evidence that UV light is responsible for a large proportion of skin cancer is considerable. Skin cancer is more frequent in populations in regions with high
ambient solar radiation and in individuals exposed to sunlight as a result of their occupations (e.g., farmers). Nonmelanoma skin cancer is most frequent in sites that
are the most exposed to sunlight, such as the head, neck, and arms. Pigmented skin is less susceptible to nonmelanoma skin cancer, and lack of pigmentation
increases the risk. A high incidence of skin tumors is seen in young individuals associated with sunlight exposure who have xeroderma pigmentosum, a disease that
is caused by a deficiency in the ability to repair UV light–induced DNA damage. In the United States, the incidence of basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma increase by approximately 2% to 3% for every 1% increase in ambient UV light, and melanoma incidence increases by approximately 0.5% to 1.0%. 86 On a
worldwide level, the incidence of skin cancer is extremely dependent on latitude, which equates with level of exposure to UV light; the closer to the equator, the
greater the risk. This is particularly true for countries in which a large proportion of the population is lightly pigmented, such as Australia. 87
Melanoma is also associated with sunlight exposure but is less dependent on total exposure, and it is not correlated with chronically exposed anatomic sites. Rather,
increased risk for melanoma appears to be related more to acute burns rather than accumulated dose. 82 Additional evidence for a role for sunlight in melanoma
development comes from the observation that children who move to countries with high ambient sunlight are at an increased risk of melanoma. 87 The same does not
appear to be true when individuals move at older ages. These finding suggest that both exposure factors and factors involved in age-dependent susceptibility are
involved. A greater risk for nonmelanoma skin cancer is seen in children and adolescents as well.
GENETICS AND RISK
One of the major discoveries that established a direct link between UV light to DNA damage and skin cancer was that patients with xeroderma pigmentosum are
defective in nucleotide excision repair. 89 Nucleotide excision repair is the repair pathway that removes the cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers produced in DNA by UV
light, as well as other large adducts, and replaces the damaged site. 90,91 This pathway is complex and involves a number of sequential steps, including recognition of
the lesion; assembly of the enzymes that make up the excision complex, which excises a 27- to 29-nucleotide region containing the photoproduct; removal of this
oligonucleotide containing the damage; and, finally, replacement and filling of the resulting gap by polymerization and ligation. Another pathway, base excision repair,
removes less complex base damage. Both pathways are complex processes that are influenced by many factors, including transcriptional activity, the sequence of
nucleotides surrounding the damaged site, and DNA conformation.
In addition to xeroderma pigmentosum, a number of other disorders result in increased acute sensitivity to UVC or UVB. 92 These include Cockayne's syndrome and
trichothiodystrophy. Both are related to disorders in genes involved in DNA damage repair, but neither has an increased sensitivity to UV-induced skin cancer.
Studies of these disorders are providing additional insights into details of underlying mechanisms of UV-induced skin cancer. For example, it has been found that cells
from Cockayne's syndrome patients are able to repair only transcriptionally inactive genes. 93 Perhaps repair of transcriptionally active genes is more important for the

prevention of mutagenesis and carcinogenesis.
MECHANISMS
Squamous Cell Carcinoma and Basal Cell Carcinoma
The development of squamous cell carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma is associated with chronic exposure to sunlight. In other words, multiple exposures of UV light
from the sun are necessary for the induction of these cancers. This finding is consistent with experimental evidence indicating that UV radiation (UVB and UVC) acts
both as an initiator and a promoter for squamous cell cancers. 85 UV-induced mutations in p53 appear to be an early event in this process. 94,95 Further exposures may
lead to additional mutations in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, but, in addition, these further exposures facilitate clonal expansion of initiated cells through
killing effects on normal but not p53 mutant cells. Exposure to UV light also has been shown to suppress the immune system's ability to suppress tumor growth. 96,97
High doses of UV radiation apparently affect the ability of Langerhans' cells to efficiently transfer antigenic signals to T cells in local lymph nodes.
Studies of patients with basal cell nevus carcinoma syndrome have provided insight into mechanisms of development of basal cell carcinomas. These patients are
highly susceptible to basal cell carcinoma as a result of exposure to both ionizing and UV radiation, but keratinocytes from these patients show no difference in
sensitivity to cell killing effects. 98 It has been shown that the gene associated with this syndrome is PTC, which is the human homologue of the Drosophila patched
gene (ptc). 99 In Drosophila, this gene plays a role in cell-cell communication and transforming growth factor-b signaling. The most common genetic alteration in
nonfamilial basal cell carcinoma is loss of heterozygosity at chromosome 9q22, which contains the PTC locus. This loss of heterozygosity has been observed even in
very small tumors, suggesting that alteration of PTC is an early event. 100
Melanoma
Epidemiologic evidence has established a causal relationship between sunlight exposure and melanoma that appears to be primarily a function of acute sunburn
rather than chronic exposure, as is the case for squamous cell and basal cell carcinoma. A history of five or more sunburns as an adolescent has been found to
double the risk for melanoma. 88 Experimental studies with a fish model suggest that the majority of melanomas are induced by UVA. 101 If this is the case, DNA
damage would be predicted to be a result of damage mediated through reactive oxygen species rather than the cyclobutane dimers and 6-4 photoproducts that are
associated with exposure to UVB and UVC. In the familial form of melanoma, susceptibility is associated with chromosome 9p21, which contains CDKN2A, the gene
encoding p16 and p19. 102 This gene is involved in cell-cycle regulation. In both sporadic and familial forms of melanoma, loss of heterozygosity is found in several
chromosomes, including 9p, 6, 8, and 10. 103,104 As yet, no evidence indicates that these changes are a direct result of damage produced by UV light.

ASBESTOS
Asbestos use has spanned many centuries. Major industrial use began in the late 1800s and became widespread during World War II. Use peaked in the 1970s, and
recognition of its health effects has led to major reductions in mining and use of asbestos, as well as programs aimed at removal of asbestos from existing structures.
The carcinogenic effects of asbestos have been clearly demonstrated in studies of individuals exposed in the mining and industrial use of asbestos. 105
FIBER QUALITY AND DISEASE
Asbestos is actually a group of fibers, with each type having a unique structure and chemical composition ( Table 12-3).106 Each type also appears to differ in its
chemical reactivity. Not unexpectedly, each type also appears to have differing biologic properties as well. There are two main subgroups. Chrysotile fibers are long,
curly snake-like fibers. Amphibole fibers are shorter and rod-like in structure. The most common amphibole types include crocidolite, amosite, and tremolite. Few
malignant mesotheliomas are associated with occupational exposure to chrysotile fibers, probably because they do not tend to persist in lung. The persistence of
amphibole fibers, which are more commonly linked with mesothelioma, is significantly greater.

TABLE 12-3. Characteristics of Asbestos Fibers

CANCER RISK AND ASBESTOS EXPOSURE
The most common form of cancer associated with asbestos exposure is malignant mesothelioma, but the risk of bronchogenic cancer is also significantly elevated.
Although lung cancer is generally associated with asbestos exposure, other cancers that have been reported to occur at an increased frequency include cancers of
the larynx, oropharynx, kidney, esophagus, and gallbladder/bile duct. 107,108
Because it is very rare, it has been relatively easy to link the risk of mesothelioma to asbestos exposure. Occupational exposure can be linked to 50% to 80% of all
patients with malignant mesotheliomas. 107,109 In a study of tile workers exposed to asbestos over a 50-year period, it was found that the incidence of mesothelioma
was as high as 2%. 110 A study of a large group of asbestos insulation workers found that mesothelioma was responsible for approximately 8% of all deaths. 111 The
latent period between exposure and development of malignant mesothelioma is usually long, typically 30 to 40 years. 107 Approximately one-half of malignant
mesotheliomas are epithelioid, and the other half are sarcomatoid or mesenchymal, or mixed. 112
A link between asbestos and bronchogenic carcinomas was first reported in the 1930s and has been subsequently confirmed in several investigations. 113 Although the
vast majority of bronchogenic carcinomas are related to smoking, it has been estimated that from 3% to 17% of such cancers are from occupational exposures,
including asbestos. 114 Asbestos and smoking appear to interact in a multiplicative manner, and risk is decreased when exposure to either agent is stopped. Whereas
the majority of smoking-related tumors are squamous cell carcinomas originating in the upper lobes of the lung, those associated with asbestos are more often
adenocarcinomas located in the lower lobes. 115,116 and 117 The asbestos-related tumors are also often associated with areas of fibrosis. 118
MECHANISMS
Asbestos fibers are cytotoxic and genotoxic. They have been shown to induce DNA damage, including double-strand breaks, mutations, and chromosomal
damage.119,120 Evidence also indicates that asbestos fibers can impair mitosis and chromosomal segregation, which can result in aneuploidy. The majority of these
effects are believed to be due to oxidoreductive processes that result in the formation of reactive oxygen species. 121,122 Support for this view comes from studies
showing that the amount of damage induced is increased if iron is present in the chemical structure of the fibers. Besides the direct induction of reactive oxygen
species, these effects may also be induced indirectly as a result of phagocytosis of the asbestos fibers. Fibers also tend to induce inflammatory responses, resulting
in the release of cytokines. 106 Such cytokines may facilitate the growth, selection, and expansion of initiated cells.

Loss of one copy of chromosome 22 is one of the most common chromosomal alteration in malignant melanoma. A wide range of other changes also are seen,
including deletions in chromosomes 1p, 3p, 6q, 9p, 13q, 15q, and 22q. Analysis of tumors with these chromosomal alterations have found deletions of CDKN2A,
located on chromosome 9p, and mutations in NF2 (the neurofibromatosis type 2 gene that is located on chromosome 22q), coupled with the loss of the normal NF2
allele associated with loss of one of an entire chromosome 22, as common features. 123
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Johns HE, Cunningham JR. The physics of radiology. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas Publisher, 1983.
2. Hall EJ. Radiobiology for the radiologist. New York: JB Lippincott Co, 1994.
3. National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements. Influences of radiation quality (LET) on relative biological effectiveness. NCRP report of Scientific Committee 40. Bethesda, MD:
National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, 1989.
4. Ward JF. Damage produced by ionizing radiation in mammalian cells: identities, mechanisms of formation and reparability. Prog Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol 1988;35:95.
5. Jeggo PA. Identification of genes involved in repair of DNA double strand breaks in mammalian cells. Radiat Res 1998;150:S80.
6. Niggli HJ, Cerutti PA. Cyclobutane-type pyrimidine photodimer formation and excision in human skin fibroblasts after irradiation with 313-nm ultraviolet light. Biochemistry 1983;22:1390.
7. Tyrrell RM, Pidoux M. Action spectra for human skin cells: estimates of the relative cytotoxicity of the middle ultraviolet, near ultraviolet, and violet regions of sunlight on epidermal
keratinocytes. Cancer Res 1987;47:1825.
8. Tommasi S, Denissenko MF, Pfeifer GP. Sunlight induces pyrimidine dimers preferentially at 5-mehylcytosine bases. Cancer Res 1997;57:4727.
9. Brash DE, Rudolph JA, Simon JA, et al. A role for sunlight in skin cancer: UV-induced p53 mutations in squamous cell carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:10124.
10. Ziegler A, Jonason AS, Leffell DJ, et al. Sunburn and p53 in the onset of skin cancer. Nature 1994;372:773.
11. Miller RW. Delayed efforts of external radiation exposure: a brief history. Radiat Res 1995;144:160.
12. Mabuchi K, Soda M, Ron E, et al. Cancer incidence in atomic bomb survivors. Part I: Use of the tumor registries in Hiroshima and Nagasaki for incidence studies in the atomic bomb survivors.
Radiat Res 1994;137:S1.
13. Thompson DE, Mabuchi K, Ron E, et al. Cancer incidence in atomic bomb survivors. Part II: Solid tumors, 19581987. Radiat Res 1994;137:S17.
14. Preston DL, Kusumi S, Tomonaga M, et al. Cancer incidence in atomic bomb survivors. Part III: Leukemia, lymphoma and multiple myeloma, 19501987. Radiat Res 1994;137:S68.
15. Ron E, Preston DL, Mabuchi K, Thompson DE, Soda M. Cancer incidence in atomic bomb survivors. Part IV: Comparison of cancer incidence and mortality. Radiat Res 1994;137:S98.
16. Boice JD. Radiation epidemiology: past and present. In: Proceedings of the Thirty-Second Meeting of the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, Washington, DC, 1997:7.
17. Inskip PD. Second cancers following radiotherapy. In: Neugut AI, Meadows AT, Robinson E, eds. Multiple primary cancers. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999:91.
18. Little MP, Boice JD Jr. Comparison of breast cancer incidence in the Massachusetts tuberculosis fluoroscopy cohort and in the Japanese atomic bomb survivors. Radiat Res 1999;151:218.
19. Howe GR, McLaughlin J. Breast cancer mortality between 1950 and 1987 after exposure to fractionated moderate-dose-rate ionizing radiation in the Canadian fluoroscopy cohort study and a
comparison with breast cancer mortality in the atomic bomb survivors study. Radiat Res 1996;145:694.
20. National Research Council, Committee on Health Effects of Exposure to Radon. B E I R VI report. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1999.
21. National Research Council, Committee on the Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiations. Health effects of exposure to low levels of ionizing radiation: BEIR V report. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press, 1990.
22. Boice JD Jr, Land CE, Preston DL. Ionizing radiation. In: Schottenfeld D, Fraumeni JF Jr, eds. Cancer epidemiology and prevention. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996:319.
23. National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements. Influence of dose and its distribution in time on dose-response relationships for low LET radiations. Report no. 64. Washington, DC:
National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, 1980.
24. Ullrich RL, Jernigan MC, Satterfield LC, Bowles ND. Radiation carcinogenesis: time-dose relationships. Radiat Res 1987;111:179.
25. UNSCEAR (United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation). Sources and effects of ionizing radiation. Publ. no. E.94.IX.11. New York: United Nations, 1994.
26. Land CE, Boice JD Jr, Shore RE, Norman JE, Tokunaga M. Breast cancer risk from low-dose exposures to ionizing radiation: results of parallel analysis of three exposed populations of women.
J Natl Cancer Inst 1980;65:353.
27. Howe GR. Lung cancer mortality between 1950 and 1987 after exposure to fractionated moderate-dose-rate ionizing radiation in the Canadian fluoroscopy cohort study and a comparison with
lung cancer mortality in the atomic bomb survivors study. Radiat Res 1995;142:295.
28. Upton AC, Randolph ML, Conklin JW. Late effects of fast neutrons and gamma rays in mice as influenced by the dose rate of irradiation: induction of neoplasia. Radiat Res 1970;41:467.
29. Ullrich RL, Storer JB. Influence of gamma ray irradiation on the development of neoplastic disease in mice. I. Reticular tissue tumors. Radiat Res 1979;80:303.
30. Ullrich RL, Storer JB. Influence of gamma ray irradiation on the development of neoplastic disease in mice. II. Solid tumors. Radiat Res 1979;80:317.
31. Ullrich RL, Jernigan MC, Cosgrove GE, et al. The influence of dose and dose rate on the incidence of neoplastic disease in RFM mice after neutron irradiation. Radiat Res 1976;68:115.
32. Ullrich RL, Jernigan MC, Storer JB. Neutron carcinogenesis: dose and dose rate effects in BALB/c mice. Radiat Res 1977;72:487.
33. Hill CK, Zhu L. Energy and dose-rate dependence of neoplastic transformation and mutations induced in mammalian cells by fast neutrons. Radiat Res 1991;128:S53.
34. Miller RC, Brenner DJ, Randers-Person G, Marino SA, Hall EJ. The effects of temporal distribution of dose on oncogenic transformation by neutrons and charged particles of intermediate LET.
Radiat Res 1990;124:S62.
35. Hancock SL, Tucker MA, Hoppe RT. Breast cancer after treatment of Hodgkin's disease. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:25.
36. Bhatia S, Robinson LL, Oberlin O, et al. Breast cancer and other second neoplasms after childhood Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1996;334:745.
37. Hildreth NG, Shore RE, Dvoretsky PM. The risk of breast cancer after irradiation of the thymus in infancy. N Engl J Med 1989;321:1281.
38. Aisenberg AC, Finkelstein DM, Doppke KP, et al. High risk of breast carcinoma after irradiation of young women with Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1997;79:1203.
39. Boice JD Jr, Harvey E, Blettner M, Stovall M, Flannery JT. Cancer in the contralateral breast after radiotherapy for breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1992;326:781.
40. Storm HH, Andersson M, Boice JD Jr, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy and risk of contralateral breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1245.
41. Stewart A, Web J, Giles D, Hewitt D. Malignant disease in childhood and diagnostic irradiation in utero. Lancet 1956;2:447.
42. Stewart A, Webb J, Hewitt D. A survey of childhood malignancies. BMJ 1958;1:1495.
43. Mole RH. Antenatal irradiation and childhood cancer: causation or coincidence? Br J Cancer 1974;30:199.
44. Harvery EB, Boice JD Jr, Honeyman M, Fannery JT. Prenatal x-ray exposure and childhood cancer in twins. N Engl J Med 1985;312:541.
45. Doll R, Wakeford R. Risk of childhood cancer from fetal irradiation. Br J Radiology 1997;70:130.
46. Boice JD Jr, Miller RW. Childhood and adult cancer following intrauterine exposure to ionizing radiation. Teratology 1999;59:227.
47. Harvard Report on Cancer Prevention. Causes of human cancer. Cancer Causes Control 1996;7[Suppl 1]:S3.
48. Sharp C, Cox R. Genetic susceptibility to radiation effects: possible implication for medical ionizing radiation exposures. Eur J Nucl Med 1999;26:425.
49. Sankaranarayanan K, Chakraborty R. Cancer predisposition, radiosensitivity and the risk of radiation induced cancers. I: Background [Review]. Radiat Res 1995;143:121.
50. Wong FL, Boice JD Jr, Abramson DH, et al. Cancer incidence after retinoblastoma: radiation dose and sarcoma risk. JAMA 1997;278:1262.
51. Strong LC. Theories of pathogenesis: mutation and cancer. In: Mulvihill JJ, Miller RW, Fraumeni JF Jr, eds. Genetics of human cancer. New York: Raven Press, 1977:401.
52. Li FP, Fraumeni JF Jr, Mulvihill JJ, et al. A cancer family syndrome in twenty-four kindreds. Cancer Res 1988;48:5358.
53. Srivastava S, Zou Z, Pirollo K, Blattner W, Chong EH. Germ-line transmission of a mutated p53 gene in a cancer prone family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Nature (Lond) 1990;348:747.
54. Swift M, Morrell D, Massey RB, Chase CL. Incidence of cancer in 161 families affected by ataxia-telangiectasia. N Engl J Med 1999;325:1831.
55. Lavin JF, Shiloh Y. The genetic defect in ataxia-telangiectasia. Ann Rev Immunol 1997;15:177.
56. Morgan SE, Kastan MB. P53 and ATM: cell cycle, death and cancer. Adv Cancer Res 1997;71:125.
57. Eng C, Li FP, Abramson DH, et al. Mortality from second tumors among long-term survivors of retinoblastoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1121.
58. Boice JD Jr, Engholm G, Kleinerman RA, et al. Radiation dose and second cancer risk in patients treated for cancer of the cervix. Radiat Res 1988;116:3.
59. Boice JD Jr, Blettner M, Kleinerman RA, et al. Radiation dose and leukemia risk in patients treated for cancer of the cervix. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;79:1295.
60. Van Leeuwen FE, Klokman WJ, Hagenbeek A, et al. Second cancer risk following Hodgkin's disease: a 20-year follow-up study. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:312.
61. Boivin JF, Hutchison GB, Zauber AG, et al. Incidence of second cancers in patients treated for Hodgkin's disease. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:732.
62. Swerdlow AJ, Barber JA, Horwich A, et al. Second malignancy in patients with Hodgkin's disease treated at the Royal Marsden Hospital. Br J Cancer 1997;75:116.
63. Van Leeuwen FE, Klokman WJ, Stovall M, et al. Roles of radiotherapy and smoking in lung cancer following Hodgkin's disease. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1530.
64. Kaldor JM, Day NE, Bell J, et al. Lung cancer following Hodgkin's disease: a case-control study. Int J Cancer 1992;52:677.
65. Tucker MA, Morris Jones PH, Bice JD Jr, et al. Therapeutic irradiation at a young age is linked to secondary thyroid cancer. Cancer Res 1991;51:2885.
66. Tucker MA, Meadows AT, Boice JD Jr, Hoover RN, Fraumeni JF Jr. Late Effects Study Group. Cancer risk following treatment of childhood cancer. In: Boice JD Jr, Fraumeni JF Jr, eds.
Radiation carcinogenesis: epidemilogy and biological significance. New York: Raven Press, 1984:211.
67. Inskip PD, Stovall M, Flannery JT. Lung cancer and radiation dose among women treated for breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:983.
68. Curtis RE, Rowlings PA, Deeg HJ, et al. Solid cancers after bone marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med 1997;336:897.
69. Zimmerman D. Thyroid neoplasia in children. Curr Opin Pediatr 1997;9:413.
70. Bongarzone I, Butti MG, Fugazzola L, et al. Comparison of the breakpoint regions of ELEI and RET genes involved in the generation of RET/PTC3 oncogene in sporadic and in
radiation-associated papillary thyroid carcinomas. Genomics 1997;42:252.
71. Klugbauer S, Lengerfelder E, Demidchik EP, et al. High prevalence of ret rearrangements in thyroid tumours of children from Belarus after the Chernobyl reactor accident. Oncogene
1995;11:2459.
72. Mizuno T, Kyoizumi S, Suzuki T, et al. Continued expression of a tissue specific activated oncogene in the early steps of radiation-induced human thyroid carcinogenesis. Oncogene
1997;15:1455.
73. Breckon G, Papworth D, Cox R. Murine radiation myeloid leukamogenesis: a possible role for radiation sensitive sites on chromosome 2. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1991;3:367.
74. Bouffler SD, Meijne EIM, Morris DJ, et al. Chromosome 2 hypersensitivity and clonal development in murine radiation acute myeloid leukemia. Int J Radiat Biol 1997;72:181.
75. Hayata I, Seki M, Yoshida K, et al. Chromosomal aberrations observed in 52 mouse myeloid leukemias. Cancer Res 1983;43:367.
76. Kemp CJ, Wheldon T, Balmain A. p53-deficient mice are extremely susceptible to radiation-induced tumorigenesis. Nat Genet 1994;8:66.
77. Selvanayagam CS, Cornforth MN, Ullrich RL. Latent expression of p53 mutations and radiation-induced mammary cancer. Cancer Res 1995;55:3310.
78. Little JB, Nagasawa H, Pfenning T, Vetrovs H. Radiation-induced genomic instability: delayed mutagenic and cytogenetic effects of x-rays and alpha particles. Radiat Res 1997;148:299.
79. Morgan WF, Day JP, Kaplan MI, McGhee EM, Limoli CL. Genomic instability induced by ionizing radiation. Radiat Res 1996;146:247.
80. Kadhim MA, MacDonald DA, Goodhead DT, et al. Transmission of chromosomal instability after plutonium alpha particle irradiation. Nature 1992;355:738.
81. Ponnaiya B, Corforth MN, Ullrich RL. Radiation-induced chromosomal instability in BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice: the difference is as clear as black and white. Radiat Res 1997;147:121.
82. Urbach F. Photocarcinogenesis: from the widow's coif to the p53 gene. Photochem Photobiol 1997;655:1295.
83. Leigh IM, Bishop JAN, Kripke ML, eds. Skin cancer. Cancer Surv 1996;26:1.
84. Marks R. An overview of skin cancers: incidence and causation. Cancer 1995;75[Suppl]:607.
85. International Commission on Radiological Protection. The biological basis for dose limitation in the skin. ICRP report 59. Ann ICRP 1999;22:1.
86. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics, 1998. CA Cancer J Clin 1998;48:6.
87. Armstrong BK, Kricker A. Epidemilogy of sun exposure and skin cancer. Cancer Surv 1996;26:133.

88. Weinstock MA. Controversies in the role of sunlight in the pathogenesis of cutaneous melanoma. Photochem Photobiol 1996;63:406.
89. Cleaver JE. Defective repair replication in xeroderma pigmentosum. Nature 1968;218:652.
90. Sancar A. Mechanisms of DNA excision repair. Science1994;266:1954.
91. Sancar A, Sancar GB. DNA repair enzymes. Ann Rev Biochem 1988;57:29.
92. Bootsma D, Kraemer KH, Cleaver JE, Hoeijmakers JHJ. Nucleotide excision repair syndromes: xeroderma pigmentosum, Cockayne syndrome, and trichothiodystrophy. In: Vogelstein B, Kinzler
KW, eds. The genetic basis of human cancer. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998:245.
93. Venema J, Mullenders JH, Natarajan AT, Zeeland AAV, Mayne LY. The genetic defect in Cockayne syndrome is associated with a defect in repair of UV-induced DNA damage in
transcriptionally active DNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:4707.
94. Brash D. Sunlight and onset of skin cancer. Trends Genetics 1997;13:410.
95. Berg JW, van Krauen H J, Rebel HG, et al. Early p53 alterations in mouse skin carcinogenesis by UVB radiation: immunohistochemical detection of mutant p53 protein in clusters of
preneoplastic epidermal cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:274.
96. Daynes RA, Bernhard EJ, Gurish MF, Lynch DH. Experimental photoimmunology: immunologic ramifications of UV-induced carcinogenesis. J Invest Dermatol 1981;77:77.
97. Kripke ML. Immunobiology of photocarcinogenesis. In: Parish JA, ed. Effect of ultraviolet radiation on the immune system. New Brunswick, NJ: Johnson and Johnson, 1983:87.
98. Stacey M, Thacker S, Taylor AMR. Cultured skin keratinocytes from both normal individuals and basal cell naevus syndrome patients are more resistant to gamma-rays and UV light compared
with cultured skin fibroblasts. Int J Radiat Biol 1989;56:45.
99. Gailani MR, Bale AE. Developmental genes and cancer: role of patched in basal cell carcinoma of the skin. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1103.
100. Gailani MR, Leffell DJ, Ziegler AM, et al. Relationship between sunlight exposure and a key genetic alteration in basal cell carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88-349.
101. Setlow RB. Spectral regions contributing to melanoma: a personal view. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc 1999;4:46.
102. Monzon J, Liu L, Brill H, et al. CDKN2A mutations in multiple primary melanomas. N Engl J Med 1998;338:879.
103. Bastian BC, LeBoit PE, Hamm H, Brocker EB, Pinkel D. Chromosomal gains and losses in primary cutaneous melanomas detected by comparative genome hybridization. Cancer Res
1998;58:2170.
104. Trent JM, Stanbridge EJ, McBride HL, et al. Tumorigenicity in human melanoma cell lines controlled by introduction of human chromosome 6. Science 1990;247:568.
105. Albin M, Magnani C, Krstev S, Rapiti E, Shefer I. Asbestos and cancer: an overview of current trends in Europe. Environ Health Perspect 1999;107[Suppl 2]:289.
106. Mossman BT, Kamp DW, Weitzman SA. Mechanisms of carcinogenesis and clinical features of asbestos-associated cancers. Cancer Invest 1996;14:466.
107. Mossman BT, Gee JBL. Asbestos-related diseases. N Engl J Med 1989;320:1721.
108. Selikoff KJ. Historical developments and perspectives in inorganic fiber toxicity in man. Environ Health Perspect 1990;88:269.
109. Light RW. Tumors of the pleura. In: Murray JF, Nadel JA, eds. Textbook of Respiratory Medicine, vol 2. New York: WB Saunders, 1994:2222.
110. Peto J, Doll R, Hermon C, et al. Relationship of mortality to measures of environmental asbestos pollution in an asbestos textile factory. Ann Occup Hyg 1985;29:305.
111. Selikoff I. Latency of asbestos disease among insulation workers in the United States and Canada. Cancer 1980;46:2736.
112. Hillerdal G. Malignant mesothelioma 1982: review of 4710 published cases. Br J Dis Chest 1983;77:321.
113. Enterline PE. Changing attitudes and opinions regarding asbestos and cancer. Am J Indust Med 1997;20:685.
114. Ernster VL, Mustacchi P, Osann K, Osann KE. Epidemiology of lung cancer. In: Murray JF, Nadel JA, eds. Textbook of respiratory medicine, vol 2. New York: WB Saunders, 1994:1504.
115. Byers TE, Vena JE, Rzepka TF. Predilection of lung cancers for the upper lobes: an epidemiologic inquiry. J Natl Cancer Inst 1984;72:1271.
116. Craighead JE, Abraham JL, Churg A, et al. The pathology of asbestos-associated diseases of the lungs and pleural cavities: diagnostic criteria and proposed grading schema. Arch Pathol Lab
Med 1982;106:540.
117. Raffin E, Lynge E, Korsgaard B. Incidence of lung cancer by histological type among asbestos cement workers in Denmark. Br J Indust Med 1993;50:85.
118. Kipen HM, Lilis R, Suzuki Y, et al. Pulmonary fibrosis in asbestos insulation workers with lung cancer: a radiological and histopathological evaluation. Br J Indust Med 1987;44:96.
119. Okayasu R, Takahashi S, Yamada S, Hei T, Ullrich RL. Asbestos and DNA double strand breaks. Cancer Res 1999;59:298.
120. Jaurand MC. Mechanisms of fiber-induced genotoxicity. Environ Health Perspect 1997;105[Suppl 5]:1073.
121. Walker C, Everitt J, Barrett JC. Possible cellular and molecular mechanisms for asbestos carcinogenicity. Am J Ind Med 1992;21:253.
122. Kamp DW, Graceffa P, Pryor WA, Weitzman, SA. The role of free radicals in asbestos-induced diseases. Free Radic Biol Med 1992;12:293.
123. Murthy SS, Testa JR. Asbestos, chromosomal deletions, and tumor suppressor gene alterations in human malignant mesothelioma. J Cell Phys 1999;180:150.

CHAPTER 13 Etiology of Cancer: Cancer Genetics
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 13
Etiology of Cancer: Cancer Genetics
Allen E. Bale
Suzanne J. Brown
Introduction
Cancer as a Genetic Disease
Mechanisms of Cancer Predisposition
Germline Tumor Suppressor Gene Inactivation
Germline Oncogene Activation
DNA Repair Defects
Ecogenetic Traits
Abnormal Tissue Architecture
Humoral Tumor Promoters and Repressors
Gatekeepers, Caretakers, and Landscapers
Clinical Characteristics of Cancer Families
Multisystem Genetic Syndromes with a High Risk of Cancer
Neurofibromatosis Type 1
Neurofibromatosis Type 2
Hereditary Wilms' Tumor and Related Syndromes
Li-Fraumeni Syndrome
Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome
Two Mechanisms Leading to Familial Colon Cancer
Nonsyndromic Hereditary Cancer
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Hundreds of genetic traits are associated with an increased risk of neoplasia. 1 The extent to which cancer risk is attributable to genetic factors varies among tumor
types. For rare childhood cancers up to 30% occur in genetically predisposed individuals, 2 whereas not more than 5% to 10% of common adult cancers arise in an
hereditary setting. 3 For those malignant tumors most closely associated with environmental carcinogens, the risk attributable to genetic factors is low; but genetic
variation may still influence the effect of environmental agents on the host (e.g., sun exposure is a major risk factor for skin cancer, but dark-skinned individuals are
virtually immune).4
Many of the genes underlying hereditary cancer predisposition are fundamentally involved in the control of cell growth and differentiation or in DNA repair and
maintenance of genomic integrity. Analysis of the molecular basis for cancer predisposition has contributed a great deal to our understanding of the biology of tumor
cells.

CANCER AS A GENETIC DISEASE
Cancer is a clonal disorder. All cells in a tumor arise from a single cell in which regulatory mechanisms for proliferation have been disrupted. Malignant cells have
several qualities that distinguish them from their normal counterparts. They are immortal, often grow more rapidly than normal cells of the same origin, and fail to
exhibit normal cell-cell interactions. This latter quality results in their ability to invade and to metastasize and grow in an abnormal cellular environment. 5 The transition
from completely normal to frankly malignant occurs through a series of steps or hits (e.g., a cell may first acquire one abnormal property, such as immortality, and then
become truly malignant when additional abnormal qualities develop) ( Fig. 13-1).6

FIGURE 13-1. Carcinogenesis is a multistep process. The transition from completely normal to frankly malignant occurs through a series of mutations in genes that
control cell growth and differentiation. Epigenetic phenomena, such as methylation, also play a role. Early hits may have little apparent phenotypic effect, but
ultimately growth patterns and cellular morphology are altered.

Hits are mutations or other alterations of genes involved in regulation of cell growth and cell interactions. They may occur by random chance during DNA synthesis
and cell replication, as the result of exposure to environmental carcinogens (chemical mutagens, ultraviolet or ionizing radiation, oncogenic viruses), or they may be
inherited as germline mutations. Regardless of the source of the genetic alterations, a cell must acquire two or more hits before becoming malignant, a process that
usually takes years to decades in humans.
Several types of genes are involved in carcinogenesis. 5 Normal cell regulation results from a balance between the function of growth-promoting genes and
growth-suppressing genes. When the former type of gene is activated through amplification or mutation to a hyperfunctioning form, it exerts a positive effect of cell
growth. Such genes are known as oncogenes. The latter type of gene is known as a tumor suppressor. Loss of function of both homologous copies of a tumor
suppressor gene has a powerful growth-promoting effect. Loss of just one copy typically has little effect. DNA repair genes are another class that may be mutated in
cancer cells and do not clearly fit into the categories of oncogene or tumor suppressor gene.

MECHANISMS OF CANCER PREDISPOSITION
Molecular analysis of inherited cancer susceptibility has elucidated a number of mechanisms by which germline mutations can lead to cancer predisposition. Several
categories can be distinguished based on the functional characteristics of the genes involved, and additional mechanisms may yet be discovered. The examples that
follow use rare genetics defects with a very high risk for cancer to illustrate mechanisms of cancer predisposition. Milder and more common defects in genes
belonging to any of these categories may account for a significant portion of cancer risk attributable to hereditary factors.
GERMLINE TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENE INACTIVATION
Tumor suppressor genes were identified through their role in familial predisposition to cancer. However, these genes are now known to be critically important in
growth control of both sporadic and hereditary tumors. It appears that the majority of hereditary cancer predisposition is attributable to germline mutations in tumor

suppressor genes. The retinoblastoma gene (RB1) was the first of this class to be isolated.
Retinoblastomas are eye tumors occurring in young children. Most are sporadic, occurring in one eye of children between the ages of 2 and 4 years. In 30% of
patients, multiple retinoblastomas arise in one or both eyes and occur before the age of 2 years. Such children often come from families in which retinoblastoma is
segregating as an autosomal dominant trait. Based on these observations Knudson 7 proposed that children with hereditary retinoblastoma have inherited a first
genetic hit that affects every cell in their bodies. Tumors arise from retinoblasts in which a somatic second hit has occurred. Given the large number of retinoblasts in
a child's eye, it is not surprising that retinoblastomas would arise from multiple cells of predisposed children at an early age. In sporadic retinoblastoma, both hits must
occur in a single somatic cell. Because of the much lower probability of two somatic hits, sporadic retinoblastomas are uncommon, occur later in childhood, and are
solitary. Knudson did not know the nature of the first and second hits. Mapping and cloning of the retinoblastoma gene proved the two-hit hypothesis and elucidated
the nature of tumor suppressor genes.
Clues to the location of the retinoblastoma gene came from studies of the constitutional karyotype of a group of patients with multifocal retinoblastoma plus other
physical abnormalities. It was hypothesized that such patients might have an abnormality of one copy of the retinoblastoma gene, but had other genetic defects as
well. The simplest explanation for this complex phenotype was an underlying deletion involving the retinoblastoma gene and surrounding genes. A variety of deletions
of chromosome 13 were found in such patients, the smallest region of overlap being 13q14 (the cytogenetic study of retinoblastoma tumors might have yielded the
same information, but as with many types of cancer, retinoblastoma cells show a great variety of chromosomal defects including but not limited to chromosome 13).
This putative location for the retinoblastoma gene was confirmed by linkage studies in heredity retinoblastoma families. 8 A polymorphic maker, esterase D (ESD), on
chromosome 13q14 was shown to map very close to the retinoblastoma locus. In a related study, a patient with bilateral retinoblastoma was described who had half
the normal levels of ESD in constitutional tissues but no visible deletion. 9 Presumably, a submicroscopic deletion in one copy of chromosome 13 had eliminated the
retinoblastoma gene and the ESD gene. Cytogenetic studies of tumor cells from this patient showed that one copy of chromosome 13 was consistently absent.
Biochemical studies of tumors found no ESD activity. Therefore, the first hit in this patient was a constitution deletion involving the retinoblastoma as well as ESD
genes. The second hit in tumor cells was loss of the copy of chromosome 13 containing the normal retinoblastoma and ESD homologue. This study indicated that
retinoblastomas arise only when both copies of the gene are defective or absent. Several mechanisms for first and second hits have been described. 10 Often the first
hit is a point mutation or tiny deletion. The second hit may be loss of the entire homologous chromosome by nondisjunction in mitosis, loss of a portion of the
homologous chromosome by deletion, point mutation of the second copy of the gene, or gene conversion through mitotic recombination ( Fig. 13-2). An epigenetic
mechanism involving methylation of one copy has been shown to play a role in inactivation of other tumor suppressor genes. 11

FIGURE 13-2. Germline mutation in a tumor suppressor gene gives cells a head start in multistep carcinogenesis. Homozygous inactivation of the gene in an
individual with an inherited mutation requires a single somatic hit. In a normal individual two hits in the same cell are required. In addition to point mutations, gross
chromosomal mechanisms such as deletion or nondisjunction may be involved in somatic hits.

The retinoblastoma gene (RB1) was one of the first to be positionally cloned 12 (i.e., the gene was isolated based on its location with no prior knowledge of its
sequence). RB1 extends over more than 100 kb of genomic DNA and encodes a nuclear phosphoprotein (pRb), 13 which is constitutively expressed in a large variety
of cell types during all phases of the cell cycle. However, its growth-suppressing activity seems to be modulated through varying levels of phosphorylation. It is
relatively dephosphorylated during the G 1 phase and phosphorylated during the remainder of the cell cycle. It appears that pRb normally maintains cells in a resting
state but can be overcome by signals from the cell-cycle machinery, particularly phosphorylation by cyclin-dependent kinases. The effect of pRb is probably mediated
through its ability to bind and sequester several transcription factors. The oncogene products of several DNA tumor viruses function by binding and inactivating the
pRb protein. Notably, reintroduction of wild-type RB1 into tumors lacking a functional copy of the gene results in reversion of the tumor cells to a less malignant
phenotype.
Homozygous inactivation of RB1 may be sufficient to transform a cell from completely normal to frankly malignant. However, additional genetic changes may enhance
the growth and invasiveness of retinoblastoma cells. 2 There is compelling evidence that homozygous inactivation of other tumor suppressors is not sufficient for
tumorigenesis (e.g., germline homozygous mutation of the CDKN2 gene 14 does not produce a more severe phenotype than heterozygous germline mutation). Other
alterations must be required for development of tumors or else tumors would be present in every cell of the relevant organs almost from the time of birth.
The RB1 gene is often inactivated in tumors other than retinoblastoma, such as breast cancer, lung cancer, and genitourinary cancer, but it may not play an essential
role in regulation of cell growth in many tissue types. Patients with germline mutation of RB1 are prone to osteosarcoma, soft tissue sarcoma, and perhaps melanoma
and brain tumors, but not breast, lung, and genitourinary cancers. 15 In the latter group of neoplasms, loss of RB1 may contribute to malignant characteristics, but
apparently is not essential to growth control in these tissues.
There is increasing evidence that inactivation of just one homologue of a tumor suppressor gene may have an effect on cell growth and differentiation. In the
heterozygous state, mutations in the FAP gene (familial adenomatous polyposis) may promote excessive proliferation of the colon epithelium. A more dramatic effect
is seen with heterozygous mutations in the WT1 (Wilms' tumor gene), which lead to congenital anomalies of the genitourinary system. 16,17
GERMLINE ONCOGENE ACTIVATION
Expression of protooncogenes in normal cells appears to be carefully regulated. 18 Different oncogenes are turned on and off at different steps of the cell cycle, at
different stages of embryologic development, and in different cell types. The biochemistry and molecular biology of oncogene function is a rapidly evolving field. In
general, protooncogenes function as messengers in the pathway by which external stimuli received at the cell surface lead to DNA synthesis, cell growth, and
division. It follows that activating mutations of such genes could lead to abnormal, unrestrained stimulation of cell proliferation in the absence of appropriate signals.
Although activating mutations of oncogenes have for many years been considered as a possible cause of hereditary cancer predisposition, extensive investigations of
a wide variety of disorders have until relatively recently yielded no positive results.
The first evidence for constitutional (but not germline) activation of an oncogene came from studies of McCune-Albright syndrome, 19 a sporadic disorder characterized
by precocious puberty, adenomas of several endocrine tissues, areas of bone dysplasia, and café au lait spots. Many of the endocrine tumors that can be seen in this
syndrome were known to arise with activating mutations of the gene encoding a G protein. G proteins resemble ras very closely and are known to function as
oncogenes. Analysis of a variety of normal and neoplastic tissues from patients with the syndrome showed that they are all mosaic for activating mutations in the a
subunit of the G(s) gene. These mutations are not inherited, but arise somatically at an early stage in embryogenesis.
The first disorders shown to be caused by true germline activation of an oncogene were multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2a and MEN 2b. 20,21,22 and 23 These
autosomal dominant syndromes are characterized by medullary thyroid carcinoma and pheochromocytoma. MEN 2b has additional features including mucosal
neuromas, blubbery lips, and marfanoid habitus; and MEN 2a can be complicated by hyperparathyroidism. The genes for both syndromes were mapped to the
centromeric region of chromosome 10, but the related tumors did not show allelic loss at this site, suggesting that a tumor suppresor mechanism did not underlie the

cancer predisposition. The ret protooncogene had previously been mapped to the same region as the MEN 2 genes, and analysis of RET revealed mutations in both
MEN 2a and MEN 2b kindreds. Ret encodes a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase. All MEN 2b cases have the same single base alteration in exon 16, a region
responsible for the tyrosine kinase activity of the protein product. Most MEN 2a patients have a mutation in codon 634 in exon 11, but mutations in exon 10 have been
identified as well. 24 All of the exon 10 and 11 alterations lead to substitution of another amino acid for the normal cysteine residue in an extracellular region
immediately adjacent to the transmembrane domain. There is a strong correlation between hyperparathyroidism and a cysteine to arginine change in codon 634.
That the spectrum of ret mutations is extremely limited and none is a stop signal suggests that they have a specific and probably activating effect on the gene product.
Transfection studies show that MEN 2a and MEN 2b mutations can indeed induce transformation of NIH3T3 cells. 25,26 Curiously, inactivating mutations of ret have
been shown to cause a completely different disorder, Hirschsprung disease. 27 The main clinical feature is pseudo-obstruction of the colon caused by lack of intestinal
parasympathetic ganglia. Apparently ret is required for the proper migration of ganglion precursors during embryogenesis.
Other disorders caused by germline activation of growth-promoting genes include hereditary papillary renal carcinoma (met oncogene) 28 and rare cases of familial
melanoma (CDK4).29
DNA REPAIR DEFECTS
In the context of cancer as a genetic disease, it is easy to see how disorders involving DNA repair defects would lead to malignancy because failure to repair DNA
damage would increase the risk of mutations in cancer-related genes.
A typical disorder of this type is xeroderma pigmentosum, an autosomal recessive disease characterized by extreme photosensitivity, premature aging of skin, and
neoplasia of skin and, to a lesser extent, other organs ( Fig. 13-3). The molecular basis for this disease is inability to repair the types of DNA damage caused by
ultraviolet light. Complementation studies performed by fusing cells from different individuals with xeroderma pigmentosum suggest that there are at least eight
different genes for this phenotype (genetic heterogeneity). The genes for several types of xeroderma pigmentosum have been cloned, and their activities include
photoproduct binding, helicase, and endonuclease. 30

FIGURE 13-3. DNA repair defects accelerate the process of multistep carcinogenesis because alterations in tumor suppressors and oncogenes are not corrected.
This 13-year-old girl with xeroderma pigmentosum and severe actinic changes (lentigines, atrophy, and ectropion) has had more than 10 epidermal malignancies.
Patients with xeroderma pigmentosum are prone to internal malignancies as well as skin cancer. (Courtesy of Drs. J. DiGiovanna and G. Peck.)

Other disorders with faulty DNA repair or replication include ataxia-telangiectasia (x-ray hypersensitivity; defect in a signal transduction protein that mediates multiple
responses to DNA damage such as cell-cycle checkpoint control, activation of DNA repair enzymes, and control of programmed cell death), 31,32 Fanconi pancytopenia
(sensitivity to DNA cross-linking agents, several genes of unknown function), 1 and Bloom's syndrome (high frequency of spontaneous chromosome breaks, helicase
defect).33 All of these syndromes are rare autosomal recessive disorders associated with an increased risk of cancer.
BRCA1 and BRCA2, which are responsible for approximately 5% of all breast cancers, are important members of this class. Germline mutations in these genes lead
to an autosomal dominant syndrome of breast and other cancers. The genes are homozygously inactivated in tumor tissue from patients with germline mutations, but
in contrast to typical tumor suppressors they are rarely mutated in sporadic tumors. There is little evidence that introduction of these genes into breast tumor cells
causes reversion of the malignant phenotype toward something more benign. Animal models with hypofunctioning versions of these genes exhibit a phenotype
reminiscent of ataxia-telangiectasia, 34 and both in vitro and in vivo studies indicate interactions with the DNA repair genes ATM and RAD51. 35,36 BRCA genes have
often been referred to as tumor suppressors in the scientific literature, but based on their role in coordinating recombination-based DNA repair, 37 these genes might
more properly be called mutation suppressors rather than tumor suppressors.
ECOGENETIC TRAITS
Although DNA repair disorders predispose to malignancies at some rate with or without exposure to aggravating environmental factors, they can be thought of as
extreme examples of ecogenetic traits (i.e., hereditary disorders predisposing to cancer through unusual sensitivity to common carcinogens). A more typical example
is epidermodysplasia verruciformis, in which papilloma virus and ultraviolet radiation act as cocarcinogens to produce squamous cell carcinoma of the skin in
genetically susceptible individuals. 38 This autosomal recessive disorder is characterized by widespread, scaly, red or brown macules that progress over many years to
in situ and invasive squamous cell carcinomas (Fig. 13-4). The macules are benign lesions containing papilloma virus particles. Decreased cellular immunity has been
demonstrated in a high percentage of patients. Malignant lesions occur in sun-exposed areas and are much more frequent in light-skinned individuals with
epidermodysplasia verruciformis than in black patients.

FIGURE 13-4. Benign skin lesions of epidermodysplasia verruciformis. Papilloma virus and ultraviolet light act as cocarcinogens in producing skin cancer in patients
with this ecogenetic trait. In the absence of these environmental agents, affected individuals are not predisposed to cancer. (Courtesy of Dr. D. Lowy.)

Genetic factors influencing host responses to environmental carcinogens may contribute to susceptibility to several common cancer types. Lung cancer has a strong
association with cigarette smoking, and the risk attributable to hereditary factors is small. Nevertheless, metabolism of the carcinogens in tobacco smoke may be
influenced by genetic variation in detoxifying enzymes. Numerous studies have related polymorphisms in CYP1A1, CYP2D6, and CYP2E1 to lung cancer
susceptibility. 39 Likewise aflatoxin B1 exposure contributes to the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma, and genetic variation in epoxide hydrolase (EPHX) may have an

important influence on susceptibility to this agent. 40
ABNORMAL TISSUE ARCHITECTURE
Juvenile polyposis (JPS) is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by hamartomatous polyps and predisposition to colorectal malignancy. JPS can be caused
by germline mutations in the PTEN gene on chromosome 10 r the SMAD4 gene on chromosome 18.41,42 and 43 The polyps in JPS are composed primarily of stromal
cells among which nests of epithelial cells become trapped. The growth of these epithelial cells in an abnormal environment is probably responsible for dysplasia and
eventual neoplasia. Presumably, the genetic alterations that contribute to malignant transformation of epithelial cells are similar to those that occur in any colon tumor.
Allelic loss of PTEN has been seen in the nonmalignant, stromal component of juvenile polyps 44 but not in the epithelial component of malignancies that arise in JPS
patients. The best interpretation of these data is that the JPS gene sets the stage for accumulation of other genetic alterations.
Another disorder that may follow this model is epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica, a genetically heterogeneous disease characterized by subdermal blistering that
results in chronic inflammation and scarring. 45 Aggressive squamous cell carcinoma of the skin is a well-known complication of this disease 46 and probably arises
through increased turnover of epidermal cells leading to a risk of genetic alterations during DNA replication. This mechanism is reminiscent of the carcinogenesis that
occurs in chronic, nonhealing burn wounds.
HUMORAL TUMOR PROMOTERS AND REPRESSORS
Circulating factors, such as hormones and components of the immune system, may play a role in tumor promotion or progression. Genetic disorders causing immune
deficiency or an abnormal hormonal milieu can lead to an increased risk of cancer. Polycystic ovary syndrome, for example, is a common disorder characterized by
hyperandrogenism and chronic anovulation. Associated malignancies, related to an abnormal balance between estrogen and androgen and possibly excess
luteinizing hormone, include endometrial and ovarian cancer. 47 The etiology of polycystic ovary syndrome is heterogeneous, but several studies support a strong
hereditary component. 48,49 Genetic alterations in three genes have been implicated in this disorder including luteinizing hormone, CYP11a (involved in the synthesis
of androgens), and the 21-hydroxylase gene (involved in synthesis of many steroids). 50,51 and 52

GATEKEEPERS, CARETAKERS, AND LANDSCAPERS
The term gatekeepers has been proposed to describe genes whose function is essential in control of growth and differentiation. 53 Gatekeepers directly prevent the
development of tumors by inhibiting growth or promoting terminal differentiation and cell death. In the original gatekeeper concept, it was proposed that each tissue
type had one key gene of this type, and mutation of the gatekeeper gene was necessary for the development of tumors. Hence, both sporadic and hereditary tumors
would be expected to bear mutations in gatekeepers. RB1 is a gatekeeper gene with tissue specificity primarily for the developing retina, and this gene is mutated in
all or nearly all retinoblastomas. Other genes serve this gatekeeper function in other tissue types. For some tissues, either inactivation of a gatekeeper or activation of
another member of the same biochemical pathway can lead to malignant transformation. Melanomas, for example, often arise with inactivating mutations in CDKN2A,
a negative regulator of cyclin-dependent kinases. An alternate route to melanoma is mutation of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 to an activated form that is resistant to
negative regulation by CDKN2A. Both inactivating mutations in CDKN2A and activating mutations in CDK4 can cause hereditary melanoma. 29,54,55 Other examples of
tissues that may arise with mutation in a gatekeeper or another member of the same pathway include colon carcinoma 56 and basal cell carcinoma of the skin. 57
Germline mutation of a gatekeeper leads to a risk of cancer at least 100 times greater than that in the general population.
Caretaker genes are involved in DNA repair and maintenance of genomic integrity. Inactivation of a caretaker does not directly promote tumor formation, but facilitates
the development of mutations in gatekeeper genes and other cancer-related genes. Caretakers, like gatekeepers, may be tissue specific, but mutation in a caretaker
is neither necessary nor sufficient for the development of cancer. The risk of cancer is modestly elevated in syndromes caused by germline caretaker mutations, and
sporadic tumors rarely have mutations in these genes. BRCA1 is an example of a gene in this class.
Landscaper genes,58 such as the genes for JPS, also act indirectly to cause cancer. Mutations in these genes lead to tissue dysplasia, but are not necessary for the
development of cancer and are rarely seen in sporadic tumors.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF CANCER FAMILIES
The hallmarks of hereditary cancer are relatively early age of onset compared with similar sporadic tumors, multiple and bilateral tumors, and a family history of
cancer. Some cancer predisposition syndromes also include birth defects or other distinctive physical features. An underlying hereditary disorder should be
considered when rare tumor types are encountered because a significant percentage of certain rare cancers are attributable to genetic factors (e.g., retinoblastoma).
The same applies to cancers that are common in one gender occurring in the other gender (e.g., male breast cancer). 59
Because the genes that underlie hereditary cancer predisposition may be important in a variety of tissues, germline mutation may lead to multisystem disease. The
production of multiple phenotypic effects by a single mutant gene is called pleiotropy.60 Often different members of a single kindred have different manifestations of
the same genetic defect, a phenomenon known as variable expressivity (Fig. 13-5). Development of cancer is a multistep process involving two or more independent
events. There is always some probability that no cell in a genetically cancer-prone individual will suffer sufficient somatic hits to become neoplastic. In this event a
gene carrier could escape all manifestations of disease and be a nonpenetrant carrier. Virtually all adult-onset cancer predisposition syndromes have age-dependent
penetrance because the probability of accumulating sufficient hits to develop cancer increases with age. Presumably nonpenetrant carriers would develop cancer if
they lived long enough.

FIGURE 13-5. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by parathyroid, pancreatic islet, and pituitary tumors. This kindred
demonstrates nonpenetrance (individual 3 is an obligate gene carrier because his mother and daughter are affected, yet he has no signs of the disease) and variable
expressivity (the three affected individuals have different constellations of neoplasia). Typically, few individuals in the younger generations have signs of the disorder
because multistep carcinogenesis may take years to decades even with one inherited hit.

In addition to the effects of random chance, perhaps coupled with environmental exposures, penetrance may be influenced by modifying genes. For example, women
who carry a mutation in the BRCA1 gene have a risk of ovarian cancer in the range of 30%. Why do some BRCA1 carriers get ovarian cancer whereas others do not?
Common variants in the HRAS gene appear to influence susceptibility to this malignancy. Women with both a BRCA1 mutation and an unfavorable HRAS variant are
twice as likely to get ovarian cancer as those without the variant. Susceptibility to breast cancer is not affected by the presence of these unfavorable variants. 61

MULTISYSTEM GENETIC SYNDROMES WITH A HIGH RISK OF CANCER
Many disorders involving cancer predisposition are characterized by a distinctive pattern of neoplasia involving several different organs or neoplasia plus unusual

physical features. These genetic syndromes often can be definitively diagnosed on the basis of medical and family history plus astute physical examination.
Hereditary retinoblastoma/osteosarcoma, MEN 2, and xeroderma pigmentosum fall into this group. Several other syndromes are worth mentioning because they are
fairly frequent or are responsible for a significant proportion of certain rare tumors.
NEUROFIBROMATOSIS TYPE 1
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant disorder affecting approximately 1 in 3000 individuals. The defining clinical features are café au lait spots of
the skin, benign Schwann cell tumors known as neurofibromas, and hamartomas of the iris known as Lisch nodules. Other manifestations include macrocephaly,
segmental hypertrophy, bone dysplasia leading to pseudoarthrosis, learning disability, and seizures. A variety of CNS tumors occur to excess including optic gliomas,
astrocytomas, and meningiomas. Malignant tumors such as neurofibrosarcomas, pheochromocytomas, and leukemia are also part of this syndrome. 62
The gene for this disease was mapped to chromosome 17 in 1987 63,64 and was cloned in 1990. 65,66 Its function involves interaction with the ras oncogene product. 67,68
and 69
Ras proteins have a role in growth regulation through adenylate cyclase activation. They are homologous to G proteins and like G proteins they bind guanosine
triphosphate (GTP) in response to signals from cell surface. The GTP-bound form is active in promoting cell growth and slowly inactivates itself by hydrolyzing the
bound GTP to guanosine diphosphate. The latter function is influenced by another protein known as the GTPase-activating protein. It follows that homozygous
inactivation of the GTPase-activating protein would result in unrestrained stimulation of adenylate cyclase by the activated ras protein. Portions of the NF gene are
highly homologous to GTPase-activating protein. Presumably the normal function of this gene is to negatively regulate cell stimulation by the ras gene product or
similar growth-promoting proteins. In both benign and malignant tumors related to neurofibromatosis, the NF1 gene is homozygously inactivated. 70,71 Other features of
the syndrome could be due to haploinsufficiency (i.e., loss of just one copy of the gene may produce abnormalities in some tissues).
No single clinical feature is sufficient for diagnosis of NF1; in particular, many individuals without NF1 have one or more café au lait spots. Until a valid, gene-based
test becomes available, the clinical criteria proposed by the 1988 National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Conference 72 should be used. The life
expectancy of patients with NF1 is reduced due to malignant complications, 73 and suggested clinical management includes annual evaluation of blood pressure, skin
examination, neurologic evaluation, and ophthalmologic examination. 74 In addition, children should be checked for growth and development, with particular attention
to learning disability, sexual maturation, skeletal abnormalities, and speech.
NEUROFIBROMATOSIS TYPE 2
Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) shares with NF1 several characteristics including café au lait spots, skin neurofibromas, and an autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance. The defining feature of this syndrome, however, is bilateral vestibular schwannomas (previously called acoustic neuromas). Schwannomas of other
cranial nerves and spinal nerve roots, meningiomas, and retinal hamartomas are also seen. Cataracts, particularly the posterior capsular type, are common. NF2 is far
less common than NF1, with a prevalence of approximately 1 in 35,000. 75 The gene for NF2 is related to the ezrin family of proteins that link the cell cytoskeleton to
cell membrane proteins, and its mode of action is not fully understood. 76
The diagnosis of NF2 should be considered in patients with bilateral vestibular schwannomas, unilateral schwannoma before the age of 40, or meningioma and any
other feature of the syndrome. In the setting of a family history of NF2, DNA-based testing of at-risk individuals is recommended. 77 Recommended follow-up studies in
gene carriers include gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging to detect early spine and CNS tumors. In the case of vestibular schwannomas, surgical
removal of small tumors can preserve some useful hearing. 78
HEREDITARY WILMS' TUMOR AND RELATED SYNDROMES
On the order of 1% of Wilms' tumor cases occur in a familial setting, following an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern with incomplete penetrance. 79 Twenty
percent of familial cases and 3% of sporadic cases are bilateral, consistent with a two-hit model for development of this neoplasm. 80 Rare cases have, in addition to
Wilms' tumor, aniridia, hemihypertrophy, genitourinary anomalies, and mental retardation (WAGR syndrome) 81; and cytogenetic analysis has revealed deletions of
chromosome 11p13 in such patients. 82,83 The WAGR complex qualifies as a contiguous gene syndrome (i.e., the multiple features are caused by loss of more than
one gene). Denys-Drash syndrome involves Wilms' tumor, genitourinary abnormalities similar to those in WAGR, pseudohermaphroditism, and nephropathy 84,85
without aniridia or mental retardation; and no chromosome abnormality has been identified.
The Wilms' tumor gene on chromosome 11p13 was isolated by positional cloning, and encodes a zinc finger protein 86,87 possibly involved in transcriptional regulation
of insulin-like growth factor-2 (IGF-2) and a variety of other growth factors. Additional motifs in the gene may have a role in RNA processing. 88 During development
WT1 is expressed specifically in the developing kidney and the genital ridge and fetal gonad, and point mutations in WT1 are capable of causing the genitourinary
abnormalities seen in the WAGR syndrome and Denys-Drash syndrome. 16,17 It seems clear that there is not a separate gene for the G part of the WAGR syndrome,
although there is a separate gene for aniridia and almost certainly for mental retardation.
WT1 mutations are not the only cause of genetic predisposition to Wilms' tumor. 79 Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, which maps to chromosome 11p15, is
characterized by a high frequency of Wilms' tumor. Other features of this disorder are large size at birth, disproportionately large tongue, omphalocele, and linear
creases in the earlobe. Several families have been described in which the gene causing predisposition to Wilms' tumor maps to neither chromosome 11p13 nor
11p15.
There is no clear consensus on appropriate screening studies in children at risk for Wilms' tumor. 89,90 and 91 Computed tomographic scanning is superior to ultrasound
in detecting early tumors. However, the low cost and lack of radiation exposure make ultrasound an attractive option for serial studies. Magnetic resonance imaging
may prove useful as a high-quality imaging tool that does not involve radiation exposure. In practice, abdominal ultrasound at 3- to 6-month intervals is the most
common screening method. The exact duration of screening is variable, but most tumors in genetically predisposed individuals occur between birth and the age of 5.
LI-FRAUMENI SYNDROME
In 1968, Miller 92 analyzed 21,659 death certificates of U.S. children who died of cancer and found an excess mortality from sarcomas and brain tumors in siblings. To
pursue the observation, Li and Fraumeni 93 reviewed several hundred hospital charts of children with rhabdomyosarcoma. There were four families with multiple
childhood sarcomas occurring in association with other childhood cancers and early-onset breast cancer. Subsequent studies established an autosomal dominant
pattern of occurrence of at least six tumors: premenopausal breast cancer and childhood soft tissue sarcomas, osteosarcoma, brain tumors, adrenal cortical
carcinomas, and acute leukemia. 94 Similar familial aggregates were identified by Strong 95,96 and Birch and colleagues 97 through studies of hospital-based and
population-based series of childhood sarcomas, respectively. Segregation analyses suggested that 50% of carriers in affected families would develop cancer by 35
years of age and 90% by age 70. 97 Penetrance appears to be higher in female subjects, who are at risk of breast cancer in adulthood. Patients who survive cancer are
prone to develop second primary neoplasms, often within the field of prior radiotherapy. 94
In 1990, germline mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene were identified in five families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, and the observation was soon confirmed by
several groups. 98 In addition, germline p53 mutations have been identified in a small fraction of unselected patients with early-onset multiple primary cancers,
multifocal brain tumors, childhood sarcoma, and childhood adrenal cortical carcinoma. 99,100 and 101 However, less than 1% of breast cancer patients have germline p53
mutations. The germline p53 mutational spectrum is similar to that for somatic p53 mutations in sporadic cancers and tends to occur in exons 5 through 9. 102 Germline
p53 mutations have not been detected in a substantial minority of Li-Fraumeni families, suggesting that other genes might produce the syndrome. 103 Genetic
heterogeneity is also indicated by exclusion of linkage to p53 for at least one affected family. 104
When germline p53 mutations were identified, the possibility of predictive testing to identify unaffected carriers became feasible. However, the risks and benefits of
predictive testing for a syndrome of multiple cancers are unknown. In particular, early detection at a curable stage is problematic for the component cancers of this
syndrome.105 Several small research programs of predictive genetic testing for p53 mutations have been offered to adults in families with a known alteration. Lessons
from p53 testing may be useful in developing testing programs for more common inherited susceptibility genes for breast and colon cancer. 106,107

NEVOID BASAL CELL CARCINOMA SYNDROME
The nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCC), also known as Gorlin syndrome and the basal cell nevus syndrome, is an autosomal dominant disorder that
predisposes to basal cell carcinomas of the skin, medulloblastomas, and ovarian fibromas. 108 Its prevalence has been estimated at 1 per 56,000, and 1% to 2% of
medulloblastomas and 0.5% of basal cell carcinomas are attributable to the syndrome. 109,110 Other neoplasms that probably occur to excess include fibrosarcomas,
meningiomas, rhabdomyosarcomas, and cardiac fibromas.
In addition to benign and malignant tumors, malformations are a striking component. The syndrome is associated with pits of the palms and soles, keratocysts of the
jaw and other dental malformations, cleft palate, characteristic coarse facies, strabismus, dysgenesis of the corpus callosum, calcification of the falx cerebri, spina
bifida occulta and other spine anomalies, bifid ribs and other rib anomalies, ectopic calcification, mesenteric cysts, macrocephaly, and generalized overgrowth. 111,112
and 113

The NBCC gene was mapped to chromosome 9114,115 and 116 and the demonstration that the exact same region is deleted in a high percentage of sporadic basal cell
carcinomas and other tumors related to the disorder provided strong evidence that the gene functions as a tumor suppressor. Positional cloning identified a human
homologue of Drosophila patched as the gene for this syndrome, 117 and subsequent studies showed that patched is mutated in a high percentage of sporadic basal
cell carcinomas. 118 Patched is a negative regulator of the hedgehog pathway, several members of which are known to function as oncogenes in skin and brain tumors.
Mutation of patched may be a necessary if not sufficient step in basal cell carcinoma development. Minute basal cell carcinomas are as likely as large tumors to have
patched mutations, and all histologic subtypes, whether primary or recurrent, have a high frequency of loss of patched. Tumors with allelic loss on chromosome 9
sometimes show additional areas of loss on other chromosomes, but no tumors have loss on other chromosomes without involvement of chromosome 9. 114 Patched
appears to function as a gatekeeper gene in the epidermal cell type from which basal cell carcinomas arise. 119
In contrast to many other disorders caused by tumor suppressors congenital anomalies are a prominent feature of NBCC. One hypothesis to explain at least some of
these anomalies is a two-hit mechanism in which a single fetal or embryonic cell that has lost the normal copy of the gene gives rise to a developmentally abnormal
clone.120 However, other symmetric generalized features of the syndrome (e.g., overgrowth, corpus callosum defects) suggest that loss of just one copy of the NBCC
gene exerts an effect on growth and differentiation.
The diagnosis of NBCC should be considered in anyone below the age of 30 with a single basal cell carcinoma and in older individuals with multiple basal cell
carcinomas. Medulloblastoma, keratocysts of the jaw, and typical skeletal anomalies should raise the suspicion of NBCC regardless of the presence or absence of
basal cell carcinomas. Palmar and plantar pits are pathognomonic. DNA-based testing is available for individuals at risk with a family history of NBCC and for
sporadic patients as well. The most important follow-up study in affected individuals is dermatologic examination for basal cell carcinomas at intervals of 6 months to 1
year. Yearly dental examinations, with particular attention to the possibility of jaw cysts, are also recommended. Because the frequency of medulloblastoma in this
syndrome probably does not exceed 5% and may be as low as 1%, screening studies for this tumor type in children are controversial. 111,113
TWO MECHANISMS LEADING TO FAMILIAL COLON CANCER
Familial aggregation of carcinomas of the colon and rectum have been reported in multiple studies in the literature. 121 Close relatives of an affected individual have
approximately twofold increased risk of the disease. 122 Risk increases with the number of affected members in the kindred. Some families develop colorectal
carcinoma in an autosomal dominant pattern, strongly suggesting the influence of highly penetrant gene(s).
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) was the first hereditary colorectal cancer syndrome to be clinically recognized. The inheritance pattern is autosomal dominant,
and the disorder accounts for approximately 1% of colorectal carcinoma. Affected individuals develop hundreds to thousands of colonic adenomas by the second
decade, and almost all develop colorectal carcinomas by age 45. 123 FAP carries a substantial risk for small intestine and gastric adenomas with a 5% lifetime risk of
small bowel or gastric carcinoma. 124 Although most families develop only polyposis and cancer of the colon and rectum, others have associated osteomas of the jaw
and skull, fibromas of the skin, and benign and malignant tumors of the ampulla of Vater and stomach (Gardner's syndrome). In addition, polyposis coli has been
reported in association with brain tumors, a condition called Turcot's syndrome. The association of brain tumors and colon cancer without polyps has also been
termed Turcot's syndrome but is genetically distinct. 125
Early efforts to identify the gene for adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) were unrevealing. Eventually, a case report of a patient with mental retardation, multiple
congenital anomalies, adenomatous polyposis of the colon, and a chromosome 5 deletion localized the APC gene to the long arm of chromosome 5(5q). 126 In 1991,
the APC gene was cloned and shown to have the characteristics of a tumor suppressor gene. 127,128 APC promotes the degradation of the b-catenin, which can function
as an oncoprotein in colon carcinoma. 57 Most APC germline mutations yield a truncated protein product, and correlations have been found between size of the APC
protein and phenotype. 129 Mutations in the 5'(proximal) end of the gene result in small protein products and attenuated manifestations of polyposis coli. Pigmented
lesions in the eye (congenital hypertrophy of retinal pigment epithelium) in polyposis cases are associated with APC mutations clustering around exons 10 through
14.130 An APC mutational hot spot is at codon 1309 (exon 15), and mutations in this region are associated with larger numbers of polyps of early onset. 131 These
patients have poor prognoses for survival when compared with those with mutations at other APC sites. I1307K, a common variant among Ashkenazi Jews, causes
genetic instability in the APC gene and a tendency toward somatic mutations. 132 This variant is associated with a small increase in the risk of colorectal cancer and
possibly an increased risk of other types of cancer as well, 133 but not with large numbers of colon polyps. A role for clinical testing for this mutation is not established.
The other major form of hereditary colorectal cancer is hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). In this autosomal dominant disorder, the colon is not
carpeted with polyps, but the lifetime risk of colon cancer is still very high. Other tumor types that occur in this syndrome include carcinomas of the endometrium,
stomach, ovary, small bowel, pancreas, hepatobiliary tract, ureter, and renal pelvis. 134 Muir-Torre syndrome is a variant of HNPCC with sebaceous adenomas,
carcinomas, and keratoacanthomas. 135 Because colorectal carcinoma is common in the general population, familial aggregates of two or three cases might be caused
by chance association or shared environmental influences. The International Collaborative Group on HNPCC has proposed that the diagnosis be based on the
following findings (called the Amsterdam criteria): three or more relatives with histologically diagnosed colorectal cancer, of whom one is a first-degree relative to the
other two; cancers involve at least two generations; at least one case diagnosed before age 50; and exclusion of FAP. 136
In 1993, an HNPCC gene was mapped to the short arm of chromosome 2 (2p16).137 Simultaneously, two studies described widespread genetic instability in short
repeated DNA markers (microsatellites) in cancers of the proximal colon, particularly within tumors of familial cases. 138,139 The widespread genetic instability raised the
possibility that the inherited defect in HNPCC might involve mutations in mismatch repair genes that had been well characterized in yeast and Escherichia coli. Fishel
and associates cloned several human homologues of yeast mismatch repair genes, and found that MSH2 is mapped to human chromosome 2p. 140 They then
demonstrated inherited MSH2 mutations in several families with HNPCC. Using a second approach, positional cloning, Leach and colleagues independently
demonstrated MSH2 as the colon cancer gene on chromosome 2. 141 Within months, a second HNPCC gene, MLH1, was mapped to the short arm of chromosome 3
and cloned. 142,143 MSH2 and MLH1 account for the large percentage of HNPCC families including cases of Muir-Torre syndrome. Other genes that can cause HNPCC
include MSH6 and PMS1 and PMS2, which are homologous to E coli MUTL and yeast PMS1. 144,145 Mutations in mismatch repair genes are found in a high percentage
of families that conform to the Amsterdam criteria, particularly if endometrial cancer is present in the family as well as colon cancer. 136
Management of hereditary colon cancer involves surveillance and preventive treatment of affected patients for colonic and extracolonic cancers, counseling of
patients and their families, and presymptomatic diagnostic testing of at-risk family members. 146,147 and 148 In FAP, prophylactic colectomy is recommended in all affected
patients during the second or third decade. Regular endoscopic checkup of the upper gastrointestinal tract is necessary to detect malignant transformation of
duodenal and gastric polyps. For HNPCC patients, only preventive measures such as regular colonoscopic and gynecologic examinations are recommended.
Prophylactic colectomy or hysterectomy are not considered to be routine procedures at present. On a research basis, trials of chemopreventive agents are under way.
Substances being explored in colorectal cancer prevention include (1) the nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, which inhibit the formation and evolution of adenomas
in animal models presumably by their inhibition of cyclooxygenase and prostaglandin synthesis; and (2) antioxidants, such as vitamin E or C, which may modulate
carcinogenic substances and correlate with lower colon cancer risk in epidemiologic studies. Dietary intervention with decreased fat intake and increased fiber
consumption has also been linked to a lower incidence of colon cancer in epidemiologic studies. 149

NONSYNDROMIC HEREDITARY CANCER
In the absence of a characteristic pattern of neoplasia or neoplasia plus developmental defects, diagnosis of hereditary cancer predisposition is far more difficult than
in the case of a distinctive genetic syndrome. Nevertheless, a family history of cancer, early age of onset, and multiple primaries strongly suggests an underlying
genetic disorder, particularly in the absence of known carcinogen exposure. Laboratory testing for mutations in cancer predisposition genes will become increasingly
important for diagnosis of site-specific, nonsyndromic cancer. Evaluation of patients with isolated, site-specific cancer predisposition is discussed elsewhere in this
book.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man, OMIM(TM). The Human Genome Data Base Project, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD. World Wide Web URL:
http://gdbwww.gdb.org/omim/docs/omimtop.html , 1995.
2. Haber DA, Housman DE. Rate-limiting steps: the genetics of pediatric cancers [Review]. Cell 1991;64:5.
3. Marx J. New colon cancer gene discovered. Science 1993; 260:751.
4. Scotto J, Fraumeni JF. Skin (other than melanoma). In: Schottenfeld D, Fraumeni JF, eds. Cancer epidemiology and prevention. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1982:254.
5. Bishop JM. Molecular themes in oncogenesis. Cell 1991;64:235.
6. Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. The multistep nature of cancer. Trends Genet 1993;9:138.
7. Knudson AG. Mutation and cancer: statistical study of retinoblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1971;68:820.
8. Sparkes RS, Murphree AL, Lingua RW, et al. Gene for hereditary retinoblastoma assigned to human chromosome 13 by linkage to esterase D. Science 1983;219:971.
9. Benedict WF, Murphree AL, Banerjee A, et al. Patient with 13 chromosome deletion: evidence that the retinoblastoma gene is a recessive cancer gene. Science 1983;219:973.
10. Cavenee WK, Dryja TP, Phillips RA. Expression of recessive alleles by chromosomal mechanisms in retinoblastoma. Nature 1983;305:779.
11. Laird PW, Jackson-Grusby L, Fazeli A, et al. Suppression of intestinal neoplasia by DNA hypomethylation. Cell 1995;81:197.
12. Friend SH, Bernards R, Rogel S, et al. A human DNA segment with properties of the gene that predisposes to retinoblastoma and osteosarcoma. Nature 1986;323:643.
13. Weinberg RA. The retinoblastoma protein and cell cycle control [Review]. Cell 1995; 81:323.
14. Gruis NA, Vandervelden PA, Sandkuijl LA, et al. Homozygotes for CDKN2 (P16) germline mutation in Dutch familial melanoma kindreds. Nat Genet 1995;10:351.
15. Eng C, Li FP, Abramson DH, et al. Mortality from second tumors among long-term survivors of retinoblastoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1121.
16. Pelletier J, Bruening W, Kashtan CE, et al. Germline mutations in the Wilms' tumor suppressor gene are associated with abnormal urogenital development in Denys-Drash syndrome. Cell
1991;67:437.
17. Pelletier J, Bruening W, Li FP, et al. WT1 mutations contribute to abnormal genital system development and hereditary Wilms' tumour. Nature 1991;353:431.
18. Cantley LC, Auger KR, Carpenter C, et al. Oncogenes and signal transduction. Cell 1991;64:281.
19. Weinstein LS, Shenker A, Gejman PV, et al. Activating mutations of the stimulatory G protein in the McCune-Albright syndrome. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1688.
20. Mulligan LM, Kwok JB, Healey CS, et al. Germ-line mutations of the RET proto-oncogene in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. Nature 1993;363:458.
21. Donis-Keller H, Sou S, Chi D, et al. Mutations in the RET proto-oncogene are associated with MEN 2A and FMTC. Hum Mol Genet 1993;2:851.
22. Hofstra RMW, Landsvater RM, Ceccherini I, et al. A mutation in the RET proto-oncogene associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B and sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma.
Nature 1994;367:375.
23. Carlson KM, Dou S, Chi D, et al. Single missense mutation in the tyrosine kinase catalytic domain of the RET protooncogene is associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B. Proc Natl
Accad Sci U S A 1994;91:1579.
24. Mulligan LM, Eng C, Healey CS, et al. Specific mutations of the RET proto-oncogene are related to disease phenotype in MEN 2A and FMTC. Nat Genet 1994;6:70.
25. Santoro M, Carlomagno F, Romano A, et al. Activation of RET as a dominant transforming gene by germline mutations of MEN2A and MEN2B. Science 1995;267:381.
26. Asai N, Iwashita T, Matsuyama M, Takahashi M. Mechanism of activation of the ret proto-oncogene by multiple endocrine neoplasia 2A mutations. Mol Cell Biol 1995;15:1613.
27. van Heyningen V. One genefour syndromes. Nature 1994;367:319.
28. Schmidt L, Duh FM, Chen F, et al. Germline and somatic mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the MET proto-oncogene in papillary renal carcinomas. Nat Genet 1997;16:68.
29. Zuo L, Weger J, Yang Q, et al. Germline mutations in the p16INK4a binding domain of CDK4 in familial melanoma. Nat Genet 1996;12:97.
30. Cleaver JE. It was a very good year for DNA repair [Review]. Cell 1994;76:1.
31. Savitsky K, Bar-Shira A, Gilad S, et al. A single ataxia telangiectasia gene with a product similar to Pl-3 kinase. Science 1995;268:1749.
32. Meyn MS. Ataxia-telangiectasia and cellular responses to DNA damage. Cancer Res 1995;55:5991.
33. Ellis NA, Groden J, Ye TZ, et al. The Bloom's syndrome gene product is homologous to RecQ helicases. Cell 1995;83:1.
34. Shen SX, Weaver Z, Xu X, et al. A targeted disruption of the murine Brca1 gene causes gamma-irradiation hypersensitivity and genetic instability. Oncogene 1998;17:3115.
35. Scully R, Chen J, Plug A, et al. Association of BRCA1 with RAD51 in mitotic and meiotic cells. Cell 1997;88:265.
36. Gowen LC, Avrutskaya AV, Latour AM, et al. BRCA1 required for transcription-coupled repair of oxidative DNA damage. Science 1998;281:1009.
37. Moynahan ME, Chiu JW, Koller BH, et al. Brca1 controls homology-directed DNA repair. Mol Cell 1999;4:511.
38. Jablonska S, Orth G, Jarzabek-Chorzelska M, et al. Twenty-one years of follow-up studies of familial epidermodysplasia verruciformis. Dermatologica 1979;158:309.
39. Rannug A, Alexandrie AK, Persson I, et al. Genetic polymorphism of cytochromes P450 1A1, 2D6, and 2E1: regulation and toxicological signficance. J Occup Environ Med 1995;37:25.
40. McGlynn KA, Rosvold EA, Lustbader ED, et al. Susceptibility to hepatocellular carcinoma is associated with genetic variation in the enzymatic detoxification of aflatoxin B1. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 1995;92:2384.
41. Olschwang S, Serova-Sinilnikova M, Lenoir GM, et al. PTEN germline mutations in juvenile polyposis coli. Nat Genet 1998;18:12.
42. Howe JR, Roth S, Ringold JC, et al. Mutations in the SMAD4/DPC4 gene in juvenile polyposis. Science 1998;280:1086.
43. Lynch ED, Ostemeyer EA, Lee MK, et al. Inherited mutations in PTEN that are associated with breast cancer, Cowden disease, and juvenile polyps. Am J Hum Genet 1997;61:1254.
44. Jacoby RF, Schlack S, Cole CE, et al. A juvenile polyposis tumor suppressor locus at 10q22 is deleted from nonepithelial cells in the lamina propria. Gastroenterology 1997;112:1398.
45. Uitto J, Pulkkinen L, McLean WH. Epidermolysis bullosa: a spectrum of clinical phenotypes explained molecular heterogeneity. Mol Med Today 1997;3:457.
46. Reed WB, College J, Francis MJO, et al. Epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica with epidermal neoplasms. Arch Dermatol 1974;110:894.
47. Schildkraut JM, Schwingl PJ, Bastos E, et al. Epithelial ovarian cancer risk among women with polycystic ovary syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 1996;88:554.
48. Legro RS, Driscoll D, Strauss JF 3rd, et al. Evidence for a genetic basis for hyperandrogenemia in polycystic ovary syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:14956.
49. Govind A, Obhrai MS, Clayton RN. Polycystic ovaries are inherited as an autosomal dominant trait: analysis of 20 polycystic ovary syndrome and 10 control families. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1999;84:38.
50. Azziz R, Slayden SM. The 21-hydroxylase-deficient adrenal hyperplasias: more than ACTH oversecretion. J Soc Gynecol Invest 1996;3:297.
51. Gharani N, Waterworth DM, Batty S, et al. Association of the steroid synthesis gene CYP11a with polycystic ovary syndrome and hyperandrogenism. Hum Mol Genet 1997;6:397.
52. Tapanainen JS, Koivunen R, Fauser BC, et al. A new contributing factor to polycystic ovary syndrome: the genetic variant of luteinizing hormone. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999;84:1711.
53. Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Gatekeepers and caretakers. Nature 1997;386:761.
54. Hussussian CJ, Struewing JP, Goldstein AM, et al. Germline p16 mutations in familial melanoma. Nat Genet 1994;8:15.
55. Kamb A, Gruis NA, Weaver-Feldhaus J, et al. A cell cycle regulator potentially involved in genesis of many tumor types. Science 1994;264:436.
56. Morin PJ, Sparks AB, Korinek V, et al. Activation of beta-catenin-tcf signaling in colon cancer by mutations in beta-catenin or APC. Science 1997;275:1787.
57. Xie J, Murone M, Luoh SM, et al. Activating Smoothened mutations in sporadic basal-cell carcinoma. Nature 1998;391:90.
58. Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Landscaping the cancer terrain. Science 1998;280:1036.
59. Everson RB, Fraumeni JF Jr, Wilson RE, et al. Familial male breast cancer. Lancet 1976;1:9.
60. Thompson MW, McInnes RR, Willard HF, eds. Genetics in medicine. 5th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1991.
61. Phelan CM, Rebbeck TR, Weber BL, et al. Ovarian cancer risk in BRCA1 carriers is modified by the HRAS1 variable number of tandem repeat (VNTR) locus. Nat Genet 1996; 12:309.
62. Riccardi VM. Von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis. N Engl J Med 1981;305:1617.
63. Seizinger BR, Rouleau GA, Ozelius LJ, et al. Genetic linkage of von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis to the nerve growth factor receptor gene. Cell 1987;49:589.
64. Barker D, Wright E, Nguyen K, et al. Gene for von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis is in the pericentromeric region of chromosome 17. Science 1987;236:1100.
65. Wallace MR, Marchuk DA, Andersen LB, et al. Type 1 neurofibromatosis gene: identification of a large transcript disrupted in three NF1 patients. Science 1990;249:181.
66. Cawthon RM, Weiss R, Xu GF, et al. A major segment of the neurofibromatosis type 1 gene: cDNA sequence, genomic structure, and point mutations. Cell 1990;62:193.
67. Xu GF, Lin B, Tanaka K, et al. The catalytic domain of the neurofibromatosis type 1 gene product stimulates ras GTPase and complements ira mutants of S. cerevisiae. Cell 1990;63:835.
68. Buchberg AM, Cleveland LS, Jenkins NA, et al. Sequence homology shared by neurofibromatosis type-1 gene and IRA-1 and IRA-2 negative regulators of the RAS cyclic AMP pathway. Nature
1990;347:291.
69. Ballester R, Marchuk D, Boguski M, et al. The NF1 locus encodes a protein functionally related to mammalian GAP and yeast IRA proteins. Cell 1990;63:851.
70. Colman SD, Williams CA, Wallace MR. Benign neurofibromas in type 1 neurofibromatosis (NF1) show somatic deletions of the NF1 gene. Nat Genet 1995;11:90.
71. Glover TW, Stein CK, Legius E, et al. Molecular and cytogenetic analysis of tumors in von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1991;3:62.
72. National Institutes of Health (NIH) Consensus Development Conference Statement: neurofibromatosis. Neurofibromatosis 1988;1:172.
73. Sorensen SA, Mulvihill JJ, Nielsen A. Long-term follow-up of von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis: survival and malignant neoplasms. N Engl J Med 1986;314:1010.
74. Committee on Genetics. Health supervision for children with neurofibromatosis. Pediatrics 1995;96:368.
75. Parry DM, Eldridge R, Kaiser-Kupfer MI, et al. Neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2): clinical characteristics of 63 individuals and clinical evidence for heterogeneity. Am J Med Genet 1994;52:450.
76. Trofatter JA, MacCollin MM, Rutter JL, et al. A novel moesin-, ezrin-, radaixin-like gene is a candidate for the neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor [published erratum appears in Cell 1993
19;75:826]. Cell 1993;72:791.
77. National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Conference Statement on Acoustic Neuroma, December 1113, 1991. The Consensus Development Panel [Review]. Arch Neurol
1994;51:201.
78. Briggs RJ, Brackmann DE, Baser ME, et al. Comprehensive management of bilateral acoustic neuromas. Current perspectives [Review]. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1994;120:1307.
79. van Heyningen V, Hastie ND. Wilms' tumour: reconciling genetics and biology. Trends Genet 1992;8:16.
80. Knudson AG, Strong LC. Mutation and cancer: a model for Wilms' tumor of the kidney. J Natl Cancer Inst 1972;48:313.
81. Miller RW, Fraumeni JF, Manning MD. Association of Wilms' tumor with aniridia, hemihypertrophy and other congenital malformations. N Engl J Med 1964;270:922.
82. Riccardi VM, Sujansky E, Smith AC, et al. Chromosomal imbalance in the aniridiaWilms' tumor association: 11p interstitial deletion. Pediatrics 1978;61:604.
83. Francke U, Riccardi VM, Hittner HM, et al. Interstitial del(11p) as a cause of the aniridia-Wilms tumor association: band localization and a heritable basis. Am J Hum Genet 1978;30: 81A(abst).
84. Denys P, Malvaux P, van den Berghe H, et al. Association d'un syndrome anatomo-pathologique de pseudohermaphrodisme masculin, d'une tumeur de Wilms, d'une nephropathie
parenchymateuse et d'un mosaicisme XX/XY. Arch Franc Pediatr 1967;24:729.
85. Drash A, Sherman F, Hartmann WH, et al. A syndrome of pseudohermaphroditism, Wilms' tumor, hypertension, and degenerative renal disease. J Pediatr 1970;76:585.
86. Call KM, Glaser T, Ito CY, et al. Isolation and characterization of a zinc finger polypeptide gene at the human chromosome 11 Wilms' tumor locus. Cell 1990;60:509.

87. Gessler M, Poustka A, Cavenee W, et al. Homozygous deletion in Wilms tumours of a zinc-finger gene identified by chromosome jumping. Nature 1990;343:774.
88. Larsson SH, Charlieu JP, Miyagawa K, et al. Subnuclear localization of WT1 in splicing or transcription factor domains is regulated by alternative splicing. Cell 1995;81:391.
89. Craft AW, Parker L, Stiller C, et al. Screening for Wilms' tumour in patients with aniridia, Beckwith syndrome, or hemihypertrophy. Med Pediatr Oncol 1995;24:231.
90. Green DM, Breslow NE, Beckwith JB, et al. Screening of children with hemihypertrophy, aniridia, and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome in patients with Wilms tumour: a report from the National
Wilms Tumour Study. Med Pediatr Oncol 1993;21:188.
91. White KS, Kirks DR, Bove KE. Imaging of nephroblastomatosis: an overview [Review]. Radiology 1992;182:1.
92. Miller RW. Deaths from childhood cancer in sibs. N Engl J Med 1968;279:122.
93. Li FP, Fraumeni JF Jr. Familial breast cancer, soft-tissue sarcomas, and other neoplasms. Ann Intern Med 1975;83:833.
94. Garber JE, Goldstein AM, Kantor AF. Follow-up study of twenty-four families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Cancer Res 1991;51:6094.
95. Strong LC. Cancer in survivors of childhood soft tissue sarcoma and their relatives. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;79:1213.
96. Strong LC, Williams WR, Tainsky MA. The Li-Fraumeni syndrome: from clinical epidemiology to molecular genetics. Am J Epidemiol 1992;135:190.
97. Birch JM, Hartley AL, Marsden HB. Excess risk of breast cancer in the mothers of children with soft tissue sarcomas. Br J Cancer 1984;49:325.
98. Malkin D, Li FP, Strong LC, et al. Germline p53 mutations in a familial syndrome of breast cancer, sarcomas, and other neoplasms. Science 1990;250:1233.
99. Malkin D, Jolly KW, Barbier N, et al. Germline mutations of the p53 tumor-suppressor gene in children and young adults with second malignant neoplasms. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1309.
100. Anton-Culver H, Lee-Feldstein A, Taylor T. The association of bladder cancer risk with ethnicity, gender, and smoking. AEP 1993;3:429.
101. Sameshima Y, Tsunematsu Y, Watanabe S, et al. Detection of novel germ-line p53 mutations in diverse-cancer-prone families identified by selecting patients with childhood adrenocortical
carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;9:703.
102. Caron de Fromentel C, Soussi T. TP53 tumor suppressor gene: a model for investigating human mutagenesis. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1992;4:1.
103. Frebourg T, Barbier N, Yan Y, et al. Germline p53 mutations in 15 families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Am J Hum Genet 1995;56:9.
104. Birch JM, Heighway J, Teare MD, et al. Linkage studies in a Li-Fraumeni family with increased expression of p53 protein but no germline mutation in p53. Br J Cancer 1994;70:1176.
105. Li FP, Garber JG, Friend SH, et al. Recommendations on predictive testing for germ line p53 mutations among cancer prone individuals. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1156.
106. Li FP, Fraumeni JF Jr. Meeting report: collaborative interdisciplinary studies of p53 and other predisposing genes in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1994;3:1.
107. Birch JM, Hartley AL, Tricker KJ, et al. Prevalence and diversity of constitutional mutations in the p53 gene among 21 Li-Fraumeni families. Cancer Res 1994;54;1298.
108. Gorlin RJ, Goltz RW. Multiple nevoid basal-cell epithelioma, jaw cysts and bifid rib. A syndrome. N Engl J Med 1962;262:908.
109. Evans DGR, Farndon PA, Burnell LD, et al. The incidence of Gorlin syndrome in 173 consecutive cases of medulloblastoma. Br J Cancer 1991;64:959.
110. Springate JE. The nevoid basal cell nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. J Pediatr Surg 1986;21:908.
111. Gorlin RJ. Nevoid basal-cell carcinoma syndrome. Medicine 1987;66:98.
112. Bale SJ, Amos CI, Parry DM, et al. The relationship between head circumference and height in normal adults and in the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome and neurofibromatosis type 1.
Am J Med Genet 1991;40:206.
113. Kimonis VE, Goldstein AM, Pastakia B, et al. Clinical manifestations in 105 persons with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Am J Med Genet 1997;69:299.
114. Gailani MR, Bale SJ, Leffell DJ, et al. Developmental defects in Gorlin syndrome related to a putative tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 9. Cell 1992;69:111.
115. Farndon PA, Del Mastro RG, Evans DGR, et al. Location of gene for Gorlin syndrome. Lancet 1992;339:581.
116. Reis A, Kuster W, Linss G, et al. Localization of gene for the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Lancet 1992;339:617.
117. Hahn H, Wicking C, Zaphiropoulos PG, et al. Mutations of the human homologue of Drosophila patched in the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Cell 1996;85:841.
118. Gailani MR, Stahle-Bäckdahl M, Leffell DJ, et al. The role of the human homologue of Drosophila patched in sporadic basal cell carcinomas. Nat Genet 1996;13:78.
119. Sidransky D. Is human patched the gatekeeper of common skin cancers? Nat Genet 1996;14:7.
120. Levanat S, Gorlin RJ, Fallet S, et al. A two-hit model for developmental defects in Gorlin syndrome. Nat Genet 1996;12:85.
121. Li FP. Familial cancer syndromes and clusters. Curr Probl Cancer 1990;14:75.
122. Fuchs CS, Giovannucci EL, Colditz GA, et al. A prospective study of family history and the risk of colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1669.
123. O'Sullivan MJ, McCarthy TV, Doyle CT. Familial adenomatous polyposis: from bedside to benchside. Am J Clin Pathol 1998;109:521.
124. Wallace MH, Phillips RK. Upper gastrointestinal disease in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. Br J Surg 1998;85:742.
125. Paraf F, Jothy S, Van Meir EG. Brain tumor-polyposis syndrome: two genetic diseases? J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2744.
126. Herrera L, Kakati S, Gibas L, et al. Gardner syndrome in a man with an interstitial deletion of 5q. Am J Med Genet 1986;25:473.
127. Kinzler KW, Nilbert MC, Su LK, et al. Identification of FAP locus genes from chromosome 5q21. Science 1991;253:661.
128. Groden J, Thliveris A, Samowitz W, et al. Identification and characterization of the familial adenomatous polyposis coli gene. Cell 1991;66:589.
129. Olschwang S, Laurent-Puig P, Groden J, et al. Germ-line mutations in the first 14 exons of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Am J Hum Genet 1993;52:273.
130. Olschwang S, Tiret A, Laurent-Puig P, et al. Restriction of ocular fundus lesions to a specific subgroup of APC mutations in adenomatous polyposis coli patients. Cell 1993;75:959.
131. Caspari R, Friedl W, Mandl M, et al. Familial adenomatous polyposis: mutation at codon 1309 and early onset of colon cancer. Lancet 1994;343:629.
132. Laken SJ, Petersen GM, Gruber SB, et al. Familial colorectal cancer in Ashkenazim due to a hypermutable tract in APC. Nat Genet 1997;17:79.
133. Woodage T, King SM, Wacholder S, et al. The APC I1307K allele and cancer risk in a community-based study of Ashkenazi Jews. Nat Genet 1998;20:62.
134. Lynch HT, Smyrk T. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (Lynch syndrome). An updated review. Cancer 1996;78:1149.
135. Lynch HT, Fusaro RM. Muir-Torre syndrome: heterogeneity, natural history, diagnosis, and management. Probl Gen Surg 1993;10:1.
136. Wijnen JT, Vasen HF, Khan PM, et al. Clinical findings with implications for genetic testing in families with clustering of colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1998;339:511.
137. Peltomaki P, Aaltonen L, Sistonen P, et al. Genetic mapping of a locus predisposing to human colorectal cancer. Science 1993;5:279.
138. Aaltonen LA, Peltomaki P, Leach FS, et al. Clues to the pathogenesis of familial colorectal cancer. Science 1993;260:812.
139. Thibodeau SN, Bren G, Schaid D. Microsatellite instability in cancer of the proximal colon. Science 1993;260:816.
140. Fishel R, Lescoe MK, Rao MRS, et al. The human mutator gene homolog MSH2 and its association with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. Cell 1993;75:1027.
141. Leach FS, Nicolaides NC, Papadopoulos N, et al. Mutations of a mutS homolog in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Cell 1993;75:1215.
142. Bronner CE, Baker SM, Morrison PT, et al. Mutation in the DNA mismatch repair gene homologue hMLH1 is associated with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. Nature 1994;368:258.
143. Papadopouls N, Nicolaids NC, Wei YF, et al. Mutation of a mutL homolog in hereditary colon cancer. Science 1994;263:1625.
144. Miyaki M, Konishi M, Tanaka K, et al. Germline mutation of MSH6 as the cause of hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. Nat Genet 1997;17:271.
145. Nicolaides NC, Papdopoulos N, Liu B, et al. Mutations of two PMS homologues in hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. Nature 1994;371:75.
146. Debinski HS, Spigelman AD, Hatfield A, et al. Upper intestinal surveillance in familial adenomatous polyposis. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:1149.
147. Luk GD. Diagnosis and therapy of hereditary polyposis syndromes. Gastroenterologist 1995;3:153.
148. Lynch HT, Lemon SJ, Karr B, et al. Etiology, natural history, management and molecular genetics of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (Lynch syndromes): genetic counseling
implications. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1997;6:987.
149. Garay CA, Engstrom PF. Chemoprevention of colorectal cancer: dietary and pharmacologic approaches. Oncology 1999;13:89.

SECTION 14.1 Epidemiologic Methods
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 14.1
Epidemiologic Methods
MARGARET A. TUCKER
Introduction
Observational Studies
Descriptive Studies
Analytic Studies
Cohort Studies
Case-Control Studies
Molecular Epidemiologic Studies
Genetic Epidemiologic Studies
Intervention Studies
Future Directions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Cancer epidemiology is the study of cancer patterns in populations and cancer causation. Through epidemiologic studies, we have learned about changing patterns of
cancer incidence and mortality worldwide, risk factors for specific cancers, potential prevention strategies, and the role of genetic variation in cancer etiology. Leads
from these studies have formed the basis of many laboratory investigations that have revealed biologic mechanisms for the associations first described in
epidemiologic studies. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to detail the complex methodology of epidemiologic studies. A number of excellent texts elucidate the
nuances of study design and conduct. 1,2,3,4 and 5 The object of this chapter is to provide clinicians with information about epidemiologic approaches and the strengths
and shortcomings of various study designs so that they may evaluate the literature more critically.
Similar to clinical trials, epidemiologic studies are of human populations and, therefore, are frequently multiple years in duration and subject to certain limitations.
Epidemiologic studies are usually observational and sometimes opportunistic, to learn as much as possible when humans are unexpectedly exposed to potentially
harmful substances. An example is the long-term study of the population of Seveso, Italy, after the 1976 explosion that exposed the local population to high levels of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-para-dioxin. 6 Another example involves the study of long-term toxicities of therapeutic irradiation and chemotherapy for cancer treatment
(one of the few instances in which humans are deliberately exposed to well-documented doses of carcinogens; see Chapter 55.7). These studies have greatly
enhanced our understanding of cancer biology and have affected treatment (e.g., less radiation therapy for heritable retinoblastoma). 7,8 The central distinction in
epidemiologic studies is between the observational and experimental approaches ( Fig. 14.1-1).2 The experimental approach controls exposures to some extent and,
therefore, presents different issues in design, conduct, and analyses of studies. This chapter focuses predominantly on observational studies, since the experimental
approach is covered in other chapters on prevention and clinical trials.

FIGURE 14.1-1. Schematic of types of epidemiologic studies.

OBSERVATIONAL STUDIES
Observational epidemiologic studies can be divided into two broad categories: descriptive studies and analytic studies. Descriptive studies are usually large,
population-level studies of patterns of disease based on demographic data, such as age, gender, race, geographic residence, calendar year, type of cancer, and
possibly other attributes. Descriptive studies provide important information for public health decisions and are often hypothesis-generating. Examples of these studies
are the comparison of cancer rates among migrants to a different country, such as the evaluation of breast and colon cancer in Asians after migration to Western
countries9,10 and the evaluation of melanoma among individuals of British origin in Australia. 11 Analytic studies are designed to test hypotheses by obtaining individual
information about potential risk factors for specific types of cancer. Examples would be the resultant investigation of the role of Western diet and lifestyle among Asian
migrants to the United States12,13 and the role of sun exposure in the development of melanoma among migrants to Australia. 11
Certain general concepts are important to the evaluation and interpretation of all epidemiologic studies. The inference of causation from epidemiologic studies is quite
complex; there are no fixed and agreed-on criteria to establish causation. 2,3 Most formulations, however, derive from the criteria originally proposed at the time of the
controversy about cigarette smoking and lung cancer. 14,15 Descriptive studies in general will not lead to causal inferences. No one analytic study, however large and
methodologically robust, is likely to “prove” a causal association. Because epidemiologic studies are largely observational, it is important to replicate findings from one
study in other groups or populations to evaluate the consistency of the results. The consistency of results should be interpreted taking into account the relative rigor of
both the study designs and the conduct of the investigations and the size and statistical power of the studies. Within appropriately designed and conducted studies,
the magnitude of the risks demonstrated and the statistical significance of the risks are important. The greater the magnitude of the risk, the stronger the evidence for
causation. Evidence of increasing risk of cancer with increasing exposure to a risk factor strengthens a postulated association. Data from studies must be interpreted
within the current body of knowledge of that exposure and that cancer. There needs to be sufficient time between the exposure and the development of cancer as well
as biologic plausibility of the exposure. Animal studies demonstrating carcinogenicity of an exposure lend credence to the hypothesis.
In trying to determine whether an association found in an investigation is plausible and valid, it is important to consider the possibility of bias in the data, confounding
factors, and chance associations. Bias can result from a flaw in the design of the study or in the collection of the data. For instance, the study could be designed such
that individuals with cancer are identified several months after the cancer is diagnosed. For individuals with a cancer for which there is high survival, this may not be a
problem. For individuals with a cancer for which the survival is poor and mortality is rapid, only a subset of better-prognosis individuals would be alive to participate.
This subset of individuals may fundamentally differ from those with more aggressive disease in host susceptibility or in risk factor exposures, if either is related to
more aggressive disease. Another type of problem could be in long-term follow-up of groups under study. If there is differential effort in locating individuals with
specific exposures or differential effort in locating individuals who may have become ill, there could be profound effects on the data. If interviewers know who has
cancer and who does not, they may be (even unconsciously) more persistent in prompting individuals with cancer for answers to specific questions. This could lead to
a systematic bias in data collection. These types of difficulties cannot be accommodated well in the data analyses and affect how one can interpret the results.
Confounders are variables associated with disease risk and with an exposure under investigation. 2 If confounder variables are not appropriately recognized and dealt
with in analyses, the risks associated with the exposure of interest may be altered, either increased or decreased. Confounder variables must demonstrate three
characteristics: (1) The confounder must be related to disease risk in individuals with and without the exposure of interest; (2) the confounder variable must be

associated with the exposure of interest in the group from which the study participants come; and (3) a confounding variable cannot be an intermediate end point in
the development of disease. 16 These relationships can be complex to disentangle but can frequently be handled by specific analytic techniques. An example of a
confounder would be cigarette smoking in participants in a case-control study that is investigating the role of alcohol consumption in the etiology of oral cancer. 17,18
Cigarette smoking is related to alcohol consumption and is a risk factor for oral cancer. If the level of cigarette smoking is not accounted for in the analysis, the risk
shown for alcohol consumption would be altered.
In interpreting results of epidemiologic studies, one must always also consider that a finding occurs by chance alone. These spurious associations are more likely in
large, complex analyses with multiple comparisons. Chance associations usually do not show evidence of a dose response and may or may not have biologic
plausibility. Evaluating the level of statistical significance of a finding is usually helpful also. Most risk estimates are accompanied either by a test of statistical
significance or by confidence intervals. Ninety-five percent confidence intervals that do not include 1.0 indicate significance of at least the 0.05 level. This can be
interpreted as a 1 in 20 likelihood of the observation occurring by chance alone. The more comparisons that are done, the more likely it is that a chance association
will occur.
In descriptive studies, most demographic data are collected from institutions, not individuals. In those data, the completeness of ascertainment of data and quality of
data from the relevant sources are important to evaluate. In analytic studies, response rates indicate the percentage of people approached who actually complete
components of an investigation. Especially in analytic studies, epidemiologists are dependent on the generosity of study participants to spend time, provide sensitive
or confidential information (or both), and donate biologic specimens. This is becoming an increasing problem. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, response rates in
excess of 90% were not uncommon. As individuals have become more concerned about privacy issues and as studies have become more demanding of time, biologic
specimens, and other impositions, response rates have dropped substantially. It is now common to have response rates of 50% or lower if biologic specimens are
requested. Lower response rates are of concern because it often is not clear that respondents are identical to nonrespondents in terms of risk factor exposures or
genetic susceptibility factors. Inferences about the entire group are quite limited if only a minority of individuals provide information. In addition, low response rates
affect the statistical power of the study to detect associations.

DESCRIPTIVE STUDIES
Descriptive studies are important for noting differences in patterns of cancer among different populations or over time. 19 Evaluating changes in cancer incidence has
been essential in determining public health priorities. To have equivalent data to compare across populations or time, crude data are adjusted to standard age
distributions. Crude incidence is the number of new cancer cases in a selected group that occur over a specified time period, divided by the total number of people in
that selected group (usually the number at the midpoint of the specified time period). Similarly, crude mortality is the total number of deaths from cancer in a selected
group that occur over a specified time period, divided by the total number of people in that selected group. For international comparisons, these crude rates usually
are adjusted to an age-standardized population, as the age structure of populations varies widely and cancer rates are age-dependent. In an equivalent manner, to
compare rates in the same population over different calendar periods, the crude rates need to be adjusted to a similar population structure.
Descriptive studies are highly dependent on the quality of data collected. The quality of incidence data varies substantially, depending on the medical care systems,
the thoroughness with which a diagnosis of a specific type of cancer is pursued, the completeness of reporting a new diagnosis of cancer to whatever institution is
collecting the data, and the accuracy of the population numbers. The percentage of histologic confirmation of new cancer diagnoses also varies widely among health
care systems and among tumor registries. 20,21 In some areas, where there is better reporting of causes of death than of new cases of cancer, mortality may be a more
reliable estimate of rates, particularly if the type of cancer is associated with poor survival. The ideal population for evaluating cancer rates would be a large, diverse
one in which there is little in or out migration, one health care system provides high-quality care from birth to death, and each individual has a unique identifier for life.
Maintaining the infrastructure for these descriptive studies is essential for monitoring trends in cancer incidence and mortality over time, which is necessary for
monitoring the health of the population. For instance, through evaluating data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program, it is clear that
lung cancer incidence has leveled overall for men. 21 For women, however, the rates are still increasing, and lung cancer now is the leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in women. The SEER data are now available on the National Cancer Institute (NCI) Web site http://www-seer.ims.nci.nih.gov/. These data provide
population-based incidence rates, survival, and mortality for the United States, based on information from 11 population-based registries and three supplemental
registries. These registries cover approximately 14% of the U.S. population, with measures of poverty and education similar to the U.S. population. The SEER
population tends to be more urban, with a higher percentage of foreign-born persons than the general U.S. population. 21 For international comparisons, the World
Health Organization's International Agency for Research on Cancer and the International Association of Cancer Registries publishes Cancer Incidence in Five
Continents.22 This volume is extremely useful in comparing the wide variation in cancer incidence. The Scandinavian countries have long-standing active cancer
registries. 23 Several years ago, the NCI and the Danish Tumor Registry collaborated on analyzing data regarding multiple primary tumors occurring in Connecticut
and Denmark over approximately a 50-year period. 24
The NCI has also published Atlas of Cancer Mortality in the United States 1950–94, which is available at Web site http://www.nci.nih.gov/atlas/.25 Two components
comprise this atlas: a static version and a dynamic version. These maps were used to show a substantial change in geographic patterns of lung cancer mortality over
time that correlates with changes in smoking patterns. 26 The mortality is higher for white male individuals in the Southeast ( Fig. 14.1-2), for white female subjects in
the West, and for African Americans in the urban North. 25 This is also an example of another variant in descriptive studies, a correlational or ecologic study, in which
statistics gathered for another purpose are correlated with cancer incidence. An earlier version of the mortality maps showed an excess of lung cancer in white men
along the southern seaboard. 25 A number of analytic studies were undertaken to evaluate potential risk factors that revealed that the excess was largely due to
asbestos exposure in shipyards during World War II. 27,28 and 29 In the recent maps, this coastal excess has essentially disappeared for white men (see Fig. 14.1-2).
These mortality maps can be used to generate many new hypotheses related to the geographic clustering. Newer technologies, such as satellite mapping that
provides data for geographic information systems, will likely become increasingly important in the future for ecologic or correlational studies.

FIGURE 14.1-2. Age-adjusted lung cancer mortality rates for white male population by state economic areas for the years 1970 to 1994. Overall, the age-adjusted
mortality was 69.4 per 100,000. The areas with the highest 10% of mortality are shown in black; the areas with the lowest 10% are shown in white. The midrange
areas are in shades of gray, with the darker areas denoting higher rates. The highest rates are generally in the Southeast.

ANALYTIC STUDIES
In contrast to descriptive studies, in which only demographic information is available, analytic studies obtain information on specific risk factors from individuals. Each
of the two broad categories of analytic studies—cohort studies 30 and case-control studies 31—has specific advantages and limitations.
COHORT STUDIES
Cohort studies are frequently prospective and longitudinal. A group is identified and defined and then followed prospectively for outcomes of interest. There are
multiple advantages of this type of design. Information on specific risk factors can be obtained before onset of disease. This is particularly important for risk factors

that may be altered in individuals who have become symptomatic from their disease. For example, the diet of a patient who has just had a colectomy for colon cancer
or a gastrectomy for stomach cancer will be quite different from that patient's diet before diagnosis. There may be recall bias in remembering previous dietary intakes.
Usually, updated information is collected at regular intervals, so that longitudinal patterns of exposure can be obtained (variations in smoking patterns, alcohol
consumption, etc.). Because information is collected on a large number of people at regular intervals, information is best collected on relatively common exposures. It
is impractical to expect participants to complete extensive questionnaires every year or two. Biologic samples can also be obtained, so that sequential patterns of
exposure (micronutrients, viral titers, nicotine metabolites) can be quantified and obtained, again, before alteration by disease status. Usually, as information is
collected from participants routinely before being affected with a specific type of cancer, there is much less problem with differential information from affected and
unaffected participants. Another advantage of cohort studies is that multiple outcomes (several different types of cancer, mortality from other causes, morbidity if data
are collected, etc.) can be evaluated.
In a prospective cohort, when part of the cohort has a specific exposure (e.g., cigarette smoking) and part does not, the relative risk of developing disease is
calculated by the ratio of the proportion of exposed individuals who develop cancer to the proportion of unexposed individuals who develop cancer. 2 This is a direct
comparison of the rate of cancers (or for mortality rate of death) in the exposed and unexposed groups. A relative risk of 2 means that the exposed group is twice as
likely to develop the cancer as the unexposed group; a relative risk of 0.5 means that the exposed group is half as likely to develop the cancer. The terms in these
calculations usually include the time interval over which the event occurred, usually person-years of observation. Relative risks are usually reported with 95%
confidence intervals. If the 95% confidence intervals do not include 1.0, the relative risk is considered statistically significant. One can also calculate other measures
of risk that reflect the percentage of disease attributable to the specific exposure, if it is causal.
Cohorts are sometimes defined by a previous “exposure,” which could be an occupational exposure, an occupational group, a specific disease, a type of vaccination,
a certain medication, and the like. In these retrospective studies, individuals are followed up from a specific time of exposure in the past to onset of disease, death, or
time of study. The rates of cancers (or death, if evaluating mortality) over the time period frequently are compared to the general population rates rather than to an
unexposed group (which may not be available). This comparison assumes that the group under study would have the same baseline rate of cancer as the general
population, absent the exposure under study.
In both the prospective and retrospective cohort designs, careful definition of study participants and exposition of follow-up procedures are crucial for interpreting
data. This includes how potential participants are identified (and contacted), initial and continuing participation rate, loss to follow-up, and refusal rate (which may
change over time). In evaluating the relationship of exposure to disease, methods and precision of quantification of exposure are important. Exposure measures can
range from industrial hygiene estimations of occupational exposures, to dietary histories (or diaries), smoking history, medication records, and biologic measures,
such as DNA adducts or metabolites of specific substances in specimens. The potential error in these measures must be considered in interpreting the data. An
advantage of cohort investigations is that when onset of exposures is well documented, one can evaluate latency of the exposure to disease diagnosis and the
duration of an effect after exposure. For instance, 20 years after the explosion in Seveso, detectable levels of dioxin persisted in the blood of heavily exposed
individuals. 32 As with all epidemiologic studies, confounding variables should be identified when possible.
A relative disadvantage of cohort studies is that they are usually large, long-term, complex, and very expensive endeavors. Outcomes in prospective cohorts may not
be apparent for decades, and it is extremely difficult to motivate study participants to continue. With increasing concerns about privacy and confidentiality of data,
fewer participants are willing to undertake the commitment. If a substantial part of the proposed cohort does not participate or if there is continuous loss of participants
due to refusal or withdrawal from the study, the results may become difficult to interpret. The participant group may no longer reflect the entire group from which they
were derived. Even with very large cohorts, it is difficult to study relatively rare diseases or uncommon exposures (unless the cohort was chosen because of the
exposure). Because of the limitations of imposition on cohort participants, detailed information on other exposures of interest may be lacking. This lack of focused
exposure information can be a problem when specific cancers are evaluated. To overcome these constraints, within larger cohort investigations, additional information
on other exposures of interest (including confounders) may be collected from smaller substudies of identified individuals with a specific cancer and a subgroup of the
cohort (either matched controls or a selected sample of the cohort). 2 These are called either nested case-control or case-cohortanalyses. These approaches may be
cost-effective mechanisms for evaluating specific cancers of interest free of selection bias if the participants with the cancer are still alive to provide the information.
Another approach within the cohort design for evaluating rare cancers is to combine data from several cohorts.
CASE-CONTROL STUDIES
Case-control studies, also called case-referentstudies, usually obtain data within a limited time frame on previous exposures of interest. They are, therefore,
considered retrospective. Cases (individuals with the cancer of interest) and controls (individuals similar to the cases but who do not have the cancer) are identified in
a systematic manner, and data are collected. These data are frequently collected using questionnaires, abstracting occupational or medical records, or examining
participants. Usually, there is not longitudinal follow-up. Several advantages accompany this design. The studies are much shorter in duration than cohort studies
and, therefore, are less costly. The amount of data collected at one time can be greater than in a cohort study because the investigators will not be imposing on the
participants repeatedly over many years. Questionnaires can be longer, with detailed information about more risk factors specific to the type of cancer being studied.
This may allow evaluation of interaction of risk factors. Because the cancers have already occurred, it is more feasible to identify a larger number of individuals with
relatively rarer tumors to include in the study than to wait to accrue a sufficient number in a large cohort. It is, therefore, more efficient and cost-effective to try to study
a rare tumor in a case-control study than in a cohort study.
Biologic specimens can also be collected relatively efficiently, often in close temporal proximity to extensive information about recent exposures. In contrast to cohort
studies, however, for the cases, this will be after the onset of disease. If the disease process directly or indirectly affects the exposure measure, there will be difficulty
in interpreting the results. (Biospecimen collection as part of case-control studies is discussed later in Molecular Epidemiologic Studies .) Other limitations in
case-control studies include recall bias, as individuals with cancer may have spent time already pondering the causes of their illness. In contrast to cohort studies, in
which multiple types of cancers can be evaluated as outcomes, in case-control studies, usually only one cancer type or a small number of closely related cancer types
is evaluated in one study.
The identification of cases and the selection of controls are crucial to the validity of the investigation. Two general approaches are used to identify cases. The first is
through population-based registries. Theoretically, this should lead to the least biased ascertainment of cases and should identify cases representative of the group
from which they are identified. For cancers associated with high survival, this technique can be highly successful. There is frequently a several-month delay between
the time the cancer is diagnosed and the time that the case is identified from the registry, however, which can cause a selection bias for cancers with high mortality.
This delay can also cause problems if biologic specimens to measure exposure or host characteristics are to be collected. Many of the bioassays would be profoundly
altered by interval treatment with radiation therapy or chemotherapy. In some instances, special efforts are made to identify cases rapidly. Although this is necessary
for some types of cancer, it is frequently very costly.
The second general approach is to identify the cases from a hospital or clinic setting. If essentially all cases from a defined area are treated in the hospital from which
the cases are identified, the cases may be essentially as representative of the population as the true population-based ascertainment. An advantage of hospital
ascertainment is that the cases may be more cooperative, and it is logistically easier to enroll them and to collect the data, including biospecimens. Again, if biologic
samples are collected, which could be affected by being in the hospital (dietary factors, smoking, occupational exposures, etc.), the results may be difficult to interpret.
For both of these methods of identification, it is important to evaluate closely how scrupulously the cases were identified.
Equally important to the validity of the study is the selection of the controls. The controls should be from the same population group as the cases. Controls are
frequently matched to the cases on characteristics that are important in determining risk of disease, such as gender, age, and ethnicity, or on potential confounder
variables (e.g., socioeconomic status or, possibly, smoking status). Controls may be population-based (i.e., identified from the same population by use of population
registries or lists, random-digit dialing if telephones are common in the population, neighborhood canvassing, or other methods). Although theoretically these methods
should yield controls that are most representative of the population from which the cases come, if only a small proportion of individuals approached agree to
participate in the study, this may not happen. The participants may differ from the nonparticipants in manners that are difficult to quantify and may not be
representative. True population-based controls are becoming increasingly difficult to enroll in studies, at least partially because of privacy concerns.
If the cases are identified from hospitals or clinics, an alternative control selection could be patients from the same hospital or clinic. Care must be taken to select
individuals who have the same likelihood of coming to that hospital or clinic if they developed the same disease as the cases (a surrogate may be the same catchment
area for the control disease as for the type of cancer the case has). Selecting individuals as possible controls who have a variety of diagnoses that do not include
conditions related to the development of the type of cancer of interest is also important to minimize bias. For instance, considering individuals being evaluated for skin
conditions in a dermatology clinic as controls for a melanoma case-control study would often be inappropriate, because the reason they were being seen may be
related to melanoma risk factors. 33 If there is a clinical component to the study, such as a structured physical examination, this is often best performed in a clinical

setting. Obtaining biologic specimens can also be facilitated in a clinical facility, but similar difficulties in interpreting results can occur as with cases. Cooperation and
participation are frequently higher among hospital- or clinic-based controls.
The measure of association in case-control studies is the odds ratio, which is an estimate of the relative risk. Unlike cohort studies, case-control studies cannot
directly evaluate the actual rate or risk associated with a specific exposure, because the rates in the unexposed and exposed populations are not known. This
estimate is the ratio of the odds of exposure among cases (number of exposed cases divided by number of unexposed cases) to the odds of exposure among
controls. 3 The odds ratio is a good approximation of the relative risk when cancer is uncommon in the population. Estimates can also be made for the attributable risk,
which also cannot be directly measured as in cohort studies. Similar to cohort studies, the odds ratio shows a positive association between exposure and disease
when it is greater than 1.0 and a negative association (or protective effect) when it is less than 1.0. Odds ratios usually are reported with 95% confidence intervals,
which are considered statistically significant when they do not include 1.0. In case-control studies, detailed exposure information may have been collected on several
exposures and potential confounders identified. The other risk factors and confounders should be considered in the analyses and dealt with appropriately. In large
studies, with sufficient numbers of participants exposed to two risk factors, interactions between two exposures, such as asbestos and smoking in lung cancer, can be
examined.26,27 and 28
In limited situations, a variant of a case-control design or analysis, a case-case design, may be appropriate. This type of analysis can be useful when attributes or risk
factors are not available or present in controls or when controls are not available. This design cannot evaluate main effects of specific genes or exposures but can
evaluate the interaction between a genotype and an environmental exposure. 34 Case-only or case-case studies are more efficient than case-control studies for
detecting interaction. These analyses require that the genotype and the exposure be independent. The inferences from this type of analysis are often difficult to
interpret and somewhat limited, because the risks do not reflect comparisons between affected and unaffected individuals but between affected individuals. An
example might be comparing cases with a specific genotype to cases without the genotype, when the genotype is rare in the control population. Another example
could be a study comparing somatic mutations in tumors to risk factors.
MOLECULAR EPIDEMIOLOGIC STUDIES
Two other variations of both cohort and case-control studies must be considered: molecular and genetic epidemiologic studies. Molecular epidemiologic studies have
been developed over the last decade or so to enhance exposure measurement methods. These have generally ranged in three large categories: (1) studies that
directly assay exposure to specific substances; (2) those that evaluate phenotype or genotype information about metabolic pathways that may alter effective dose of
an exposure or other host susceptibility factors; and (3) those that use markers of a specific effect to refine disease categories for analyses (of heterogeneity,
prognosis, etiology, etc.). The type of specimen collected is determined by the exposure of interest and the methods available to quantify that exposure. Some
investigations focus on directly measuring exposure, such as blood levels of substances (e.g., toxins, carcinogens, nutrients, micronutrients, viral titers), DNA adducts,
levels of metabolites in urine, and the like. These data are then correlated with measures of exposure from occupation records, questionnaire responses, medical
records, and other sources of data. If the metabolic pathways of the exposure of interest are known, often genes with variations (polymorphisms) are evaluated and
correlated with either biologic measurements of dose or historic measures or both. Other host susceptibility factors (e.g., immune response determinants) may be
related to time to progression, disease severity, or other parameters. 35,36
Molecular epidemiologic studies have all of the logistic and methodologic characteristics of conventional epidemiologic studies. They also have the added constraints
of laboratory components. 37,38 Molecular epidemiologic studies are, by definition, interdisciplinary and require investigators from highly divergent fields to collaborate
closely from study design to completion. The complexity of these investigations manifests in both the epidemiologic and the laboratory components.
Many of the early molecular epidemiologic investigations were relatively small, exploratory studies to determine the feasibility of this approach, to validate biologic
markers, and to estimate level of risk. 37 Even when assessing polymorphisms present in one-half of the population, these relatively small studies do not have power to
evaluate modest risks, especially in subgroup analyses. 39,40 and 41 With the advances in laboratory techniques and the identification of many genetic variations that
alter effective dose of exposure, much larger studies now are necessary to test adequately hypotheses involving complex exposures. 42,43 Careful estimates of sample
size to detect the level of risk expected, given the frequency of exposure expected and the variation in biologic measures, must be accomplished as part of the early
planning. The epidemiologic study design is directly affected by the sample size necessary for molecular studies. These investigations typically need to include
hundreds or thousands of study subjects to detect a significant difference in, for instance, the effect of a genetic polymorphism that occurs in one-third of the
population or a difference in adduct levels when one-half of the population is exposed. Even larger numbers are necessary to try to evaluate gene-exposure or
gene-gene interactions. The appropriate controls for these molecular epidemiologic studies have also been under extensive discussion. 37,44 The type and quantity of
biologic specimens to be collected has to be selected with the laboratory investigators. The specimens requested will have an effect not only on the study design and
cost but on the response rate of the potential participants. 45 Adequate consent procedures are complex and essential. Because many of the exact laboratory assays
may not have been selected (or developed) at the time the participant is enrolled in the study, specifying exactly what will be done with the specimen may be
somewhat problematic. Many investigators are now using a consent that allows for different levels of use of the specimen (e.g., for only the specified assays or for
other assays related to the disease of interest) or for any future use. Analytic methods to incorporate laboratory information as well as more standard epidemiologic
information must be carefully developed.
The additional complexity of the laboratory components begins with establishing appropriate collection, processing, and transportation of biologic specimens with
necessary quality control measures. Because many of the specimens must be stored for various lengths of time before being assayed, some type of repository system
is needed to locate and track specimens. As laboratory assays are completed for the samples, each sample becomes more valuable because of the laboratory
information in combination with the epidemiologic information connected to each sample. Repository functions, including proper identification and tracking of each
sample, remain essential. All the routine difficulties of validity and reproducibility of the laboratory techniques being used on the specimens must be resolved before
analysis of the samples. Many of the assays of particular interest may be technically challenging or quite complex. The laboratory collaborators often have to develop
the methods to conduct the assays or genotyping on large numbers of samples (hundreds or thousands). Despite the risk of these complex studies, they hold the
promise of more closely integrating biologic measures of exposure to the more traditional questionnaire and record abstraction of exposure information.
Many investigators conducting cohort studies try to collect biologic specimens for future use. One major advantage of these collections is that specimen collection
occurs before disease onset. Because, in large cohorts, a majority of individuals will not develop the diseases of interest, many specimens will not be informative
about the diseases the study was designed to investigate. With the sequential information gathered over time, new hypotheses and different outcomes can be
evaluated in these cohorts, however. Collection and storage of large numbers of specimens for decades is costly, especially because relatively few of the samples will
actually be assayed (in nested case-control or case-cohort analyses). Storage costs are proportional to volume of material and number of specimens collected. For
cohort studies with large numbers and continuing contact with the study participants, the type of specimen collected is a trade-off between imposition costs for the
participants, the storage needs and costs of the specimen, and the potential uses of those specimens. For low-cost blood storage for DNA, limited quantities of blood
(100 to 150 µL) can be stored on collection cards. 46 For noninvasive collection of genetic materials, buccal cell collection is a reasonable option with limitations. 47
Because, for most cohort studies, specimen collections will be relatively limited with finite quantities, extremely careful selective use of samples for assays is
essential. As new laboratory techniques develop that consume less of the total sample, these invaluable resources can be increasingly informative.
Case-control studies may offer more efficient collection and storage of specimens but, as noted earlier under Case-Control Studies, these samples may be altered by
the presence of disease in the cases or by hospital-related exposures or lack of exposures in cases and controls. A relative advantage is that the specimens will be
quickly informative. In contrast to cohort studies, there is not a long latency before cases occur and samples are potentially useful for proposed laboratory tests.
Greater volumes of specimens (e.g., blood) can possibly be collected and stored, because the participants are not being sequentially contacted and long-term storage
(for decades) before use is not anticipated. Storage issues for thousands of samples accrued over a several-year period are not trivial, however. Consent issues may
still be problematic, as with cohort studies, because new hypotheses or laboratory tests may be developed that were not originally anticipated when participants were
accrued. Case-control studies may be a more efficient design to investigate interactions between host susceptibility factors and exposures (gene-exposure and
gene-gene interactions), especially when the type of cancer being studied is relatively rare. 37
GENETIC EPIDEMIOLOGIC STUDIES
Genetic epidemiologic studies overlap substantially with molecular epidemiologic studies, particularly when the “molecular” component is evaluating variations in
genes. The field of genetic epidemiology has rapidly increased with the advent of gene identification and large-scale genotyping. Genetic epidemiology in its broad
context, however, includes family studies, molecular epidemiologic studies with genetic components, and more traditional cohort and case-control studies with family
history components. Similar to the molecular epidemiologic studies, genetic epidemiologic studies are multidisciplinary from the outset and involve clinicians,
geneticists, epidemiologists, and laboratory investigators. These studies include all the complications of molecular epidemiologic studies, often with the additional

complexity of having to deal with family dynamics. 48
Family studies have been essential for mapping and identifying the more than 20 major cancer susceptibility genes found in the late 1990s. 49 (The methods for
identifying and evaluating these genes are discussed in Chapter 13.) Once the contribution of genetic variation to disease within the families has been established,
however, these variations should be evaluated in relation to known exposure factors for the specific cancers of interest (parity, reproductive factors for breast cancer;
sun for melanoma, etc.). Complex analytic techniques that incorporate both genotype information and environmental risk factors into a regressive model have been
developed.50 Again, large numbers of families are necessary for these gene-environment and, potentially, gene-gene interactions. Care must be taken in these
analyses to account for familial relationships, as the observations within families are not necessarily independent. Families share not only genes but environmental
exposures and lifestyles. Within high-risk families, selected because there are many living members, penetrance (risk of developing disease associated with carrying
an altered gene) estimates will be high but useful for determining an upper limit on the risk associated with alteration of a specific gene.
Larger population studies are important for estimating the effect of an altered gene outside of high-risk families selected for linkage analyses. Because most cancers
are adult-onset, complex diseases, even when a major susceptibility gene is mutated, other factors may be important. Large epidemiologic studies are needed to
identify these additional risk factors so that the complex chain of events that results in a cancer development can be interrupted. One approach is to conduct a large
case-control study in which usual risk factors are obtained and large genes, such as BRCA1 or BRCA2 (each having hundreds of mutations throughout the gene), are
analyzed. 51 This is logistically challenging, laboratory time-intensive, and costly. Even though mutations in such genes as BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for a
percentage of familial breast cancer and are important for understanding the biology of breast cancer development, they account for only a small fraction of breast
cancer in the general population. 51 Sample sizes for these studies must, therefore, be large and, even then, the limitation is the number of mutation carriers in the
referent (control) population.
Another approach to understanding the role of mutations in the development of cancers is to take advantage of the opportunity afforded by relatively isolated
populations with so-called founder mutations, recurrent mutations prevalent in a specific group. Unlike other populations in which an entire gene needs to be
sequenced, these founder mutations can be more easily genotyped because the laboratory searches for one or a limited number of specific mutations. 52 It is thus
feasible to screen thousands of samples for the specific mutation. Founder mutations have been identified in a number of populations worldwide. For example, breast,
ovarian, and prostate cancer risk associated with prevalent mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 were estimated in volunteers from the Jewish community of Washington,
DC. 46 To estimate risk of cancer among mutation carriers, a novel analytic technique was devised, called the kin-cohort method.53 The risk of breast and ovarian
cancers could not be directly estimated among the genotyped participants because of the potential survival bias. Information on cancer history of first-degree relatives
of genotyped individuals was used to estimate penetrance of breast, ovarian, and prostate cancers. The cumulative risk of each type of cancer in relatives of carriers
was compared to that of noncarriers and found to be much lower than that in high-risk families. 46,53,54 Other novel analytic techniques will need to be developed for
other types of data sets to maximize the information gleaned from both genetic and environmental risk factors.
Family history data from case-control or cohort studies can be used to evaluate clustering of cancers in families. Information on first-degree relatives is usually
accurate among well-educated Americans, 55,56 but this type of information is culture-specific. In cultures where notification of cancer diagnoses is not routine,
obviously information on cancer diagnoses in relatives will not be accurate. One approach to identifying families with known ascertainment for clustering studies or
linkage analyses is to identify individuals from case-control or cohort studies with a family history of interest, contact the individual to ask for permission to contact
other family members, and then evaluate the family members who are willing to participate. Another approach to systematically identifying families at increased risk of
specific cancers is through population registries, 48 where genetic findings can be extrapolated to the population from which the cases are derived. 48,57 Individuals with
a disease of interest are identified at the time of registration, and family history is obtained. If the family meets the criteria, family members are invited to participate in
a family registry study. This approach is being developed to provide resources for the research community. 49
Genetic epidemiologic studies that investigate other genes not considered among the major susceptibility genes are similar to those described in molecular
epidemiology. There are some special issues for genetic epidemiologic studies, however. 48 Informed consent is complex. (The issues of consent in families are
discussed in Chapter 56.4.) A growing concern among potential participants in any type of genetic epidemiologic study is the implementation of confidentiality
practices to protect the privacy of genetic information. Another concern is notifying participants of results and the approach of this notification. If all identifiers are
removed, individual notification becomes impossible. In most large studies, it is not feasible to counsel participants individually about their genotype status, even if it
were possible to interpret the meaning of such variation. One approach is to notify participants about aggregate results, so that they can then pursue clinical, rather
than research, genetic testing with their physicians.

INTERVENTION STUDIES
In some senses, intervention studies represent the culmination of descriptive studies that reveal patterns of cancer and analytic studies that discover risk factors for
developing the cancers. The ultimate goal of both approaches is to identify individuals at high risk of developing cancer, to establish risk factors for the cancer, and to
develop rational approaches to interrupting the causal pathway in cancer development. Intervention studies are designed to test ways of disrupting the chain of events
that may lead to cancer causation. As such, some investigations are designed to evaluate intermediates in tumor development. The hypotheses in general are
developed from case-control and cohort studies. Intervention studies randomize individuals to a group receiving some type of prevention intervention and those not
receiving the intervention. The risk of cancer is compared in the two groups using similar analytic techniques as in the cohort studies. These intervention trials may be
dietary (e.g., giving supplementary micronutrients to individuals at risk of esophageal or stomach cancer) 58; chemopreventive (e.g., the tamoxifen trial for women at
increased risk of breast cancer) 59; vaccine trials (e.g., hepatitis B 60 or the papilloma virus 61 vaccination trials); medical screening (e.g., the NCI's Prostate, Lung,
Colon, and Ovary screening trial); or lifestyle-altering (e.g., sun exposure) programs. 62 When individuals are randomized, confounding factors should be equivalently
distributed between the groups. The baseline characteristics should also be equivalent among the randomized groups. Most of these trials are conducted with
participants who are considered to be at high risk for disease. An important consideration is that because participants are healthy individuals, prevention strategies
should not have substantial side effects: That is, toxicity should not outweigh potential benefit.
In the design of these trials, sample size estimates are crucial. Even among selected high-risk participants, cancer outcomes may be relatively rare, and a large
number of participants may have to be enrolled and followed up for decades. Oversight committees are not uncommon; they are quite useful in monitoring data and
helping with the ethical decision to stop a trial if a substantial benefit is shown in one group.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Epidemiologic studies have pointed to the direction of many fruitful avenues of cancer research in the basic sciences and have established the causes and major risk
factors for many cancers. Much needs to be done, however. The major progress in the next few years will likely emerge from large, interdisciplinary, highly
collaborative research programs with improved measures of host susceptibility and environmental exposure. A new era of chemopreventive studies, based on
identifying high-risk individuals and the biologic mechanisms of tumor progression, hold great promise for altering the natural history of disease. The identification of
genetic factors that may influence addiction to tobacco 63,64 and 65 could, in time, reduce the number of individuals who smoke.
Acknowledgments
I am deeply grateful to my husband, Dr. David Schlafer, for his support and help; to my colleagues, Drs. Neil Caporaso, Alisa Goldstein, and Patricia Hartge, for their
insightful comments; and to Dan Grauman for providing the mortality maps.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Gordis L. Epidemiology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1996.epidemiology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1998.
2. Rothman KJ, Greenland S, eds. Modern epidemiology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1998.
3. MacMahon B, Trichopoulos D. Epidemiology: principles and methods, 2nd ed. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1996.
4. Mausner JS, Kramer S. Mausner and Bahn epidemiology: an introductory text, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1985.
5. Schottenfeld D, Fraumeni JF Jr, eds. Cancer epidemiology and prevention, 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
6. Bertazzi PA, di Domenico A. Chemical, environmental, and health aspects of the Seveso, Italy, accident. In: Schecter A, ed. Dioxins and health. New York: Plenum Publishing, 1994:587.
7. Wong FL, Boice JD Jr, Abramson DM, et al. Cancer incidence after retinoblastoma: radiation dose and sarcoma risk. JAMA 1997;278:1262.
8. National Cancer Institute. PDQ. Curr Clin Trials Oncol 1999;6:158.
9. Shimizu H, Mack TM, Ross RK, Henderson BE. Cancer of the gastrointestinal tract among Japanese and white immigrants in Los Angeles County. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;78:223.

10. Shimizu H, Ross RK, Bernstein L, et al. Cancers of the prostate and breast among Japanese and white immigrants in Los Angeles County. Br J Cancer 1991;63:963.
11. Elwood JM, Gallagher RP. Sun exposure and the epidemiology of melanoma. In: Gallagher RP, Elwood JM, eds . Epidemiologic aspects of cutaneous malignant melanoma. Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1994:15.
12. Ursin G, Wu AH, Hoover RN, et al. Breast cancer and oral contraceptive use in Asian-American women. Am J Epidemiol 1999;150:561.
13. Le Marchand L. Combined influence of genetic and dietary factors in colorectal cancer incidence in Japanese Americans. Monogr Natl Cancer Inst 1999;26:101.
14. Hill AB. The environment and disease: association or causation? Proc R Soc Med 1965;58:295.
15. Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General. Smoking and health. Public Health Service publication no. 1103. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1964.
16. Rothman KJ. Modern epidemiology. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1986:92.
17. Jensen OM, Paine SL, McMichael AJ, Ewertz M. Alcohol. In: Schottenfeld D, Fraumeni JF Jr, eds. Cancer epidemiology and prevention, 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996:290.
18. Saracci R. The interactions of tobacco smoking and other agents in cancer etiology. Epidemiol Rev 1987;9:175.
19. Esteve J, Benhamou E, Raymond L. Statistical methods in cancer research. Descriptive epidemiology. IARC Sci Publ 1994;4(128):1.
20. Sobue T, Ajiki W, Tsukuma H, et al. Trends of lung cancer incidence by histologic type: a population-based study in Osaka, Japan. Jpn J Cancer Res 1999;90:6.
21. Ries LAG, Kossary CL, Mankey BF, eds. SEER cancer statistics review, 19731996. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, 1999.
22. Parkin DM, Wheland SL, Ferlay J, et al. Cancer incidence in five continents. IARC Sci Publ 1997;143.
23. Jensen OM, Carstensen B, Glattre E, et al. Atlas of cancer incidence in the Nordic countries. Nordic Cancer Union. Helsinki: Puna Musta, 1988.
24. Boice JD Jr, Storm HH, Curtis RE, eds. Multiple primary cancers in Connecticut and Denmark. National Cancer Institute monograph 68. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office,
1985.
25. Devesa SS, Grauman DJ, Blot WJ, et al. Atlas of cancer mortality in the United States, 19501994. NIH publication no. 99-4564. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, 1999.
26. Devesa SS, Grauman DJ, Blot WJ, Fraumeni JF Jr. Cancer surveillance series: changing geographic patterns of lung cancer mortality in the United States, 1950 through 1994. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1999;91:1040.
27. Blot WJ, Morris LE, Stroube R, et al. Lung and laryngeal cancers in relation to shipyard employment in coastal Virginia. J Natl Cancer Inst 1980;65:571.
28. Blot WJ, Harrington JM, Toledo A, et al. Lung cancer after employment in shipyards during World War II. N Engl J Med 1978;299:620.
29. Blot WJ, Davies JE, Morris LE, et al. Occupation and the high risk of lung cancer among men in northeast Florida. Cancer 1982;50:364.
30. Breslow NE, Day NE. Statistical methods in cancer research. The design and analysis of cohort studies. IARC Sci Publ 1987;2(82):1.
31. Breslow NE, Day NE. Statistical methods in cancer research. The analysis of case-control studies. IARC Sci Publ 1980;1(32):5.
32. Landi MT, Needham LL, Lucier G, et al. Concentrations of dioxin 20 years after Seveso. Lancet 1997;349:1811.
33. Tucker MA, Halpern A, Holly EA, et al. Clinically recognized dysplastic nevi: a central risk factor for cutaneous melanoma. JAMA 1997;277:1439.
34. Goldstein AM, Andrieu N. Detection of interaction involving identified genes: available study designs. Monogr Natl Cancer Inst 1999;26:49.
35. Hildesheim A, Schiffman M, Scott DR, et al. Human leukocyte antigen class I/II alleles and development of human papilloma virus-related cervical neoplasia: results from a case-control study
conducted in the United States. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1998;7:1035.
36. Ung A, Kramer TR, Schiffman M, et al. Soluble interleukin 2 receptor levels and cervical neoplasia: results from a population-based case-control study in Costa Rica. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 1999;8:249.
37. Caporaso N, Rothman N, Wacholder S. Case-control studies of common alleles and environmental factors. Monogr Natl Cancer Inst 1999;26:25.
38. Schaid DJ, Buetow K, Weeks DE, et al. Discovery of cancer susceptibility genes: study designs, analytic approaches, and trends in technology. Monogr Natl Cancer Inst 1999;26:1.
39. London SJ, Daly AK, Cooper J, et al. Polymorphism of glutathione S-transferase M1 and lung cancer risk among African-Americans and Caucasians in Los Angeles County, California. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1995;87:1246.
40. Jourenkova N, Reinikanen M, Bouchardy C, et al. Effects of glutathione S-transferases GSTM1 and GSTT1 genotypes on lung cancer risk in smokers. Pharmacogenetics 1997;7:515.
41. Le Marchand L, Sivaram L, Pierce L, et al. Associations of CYP1A1, GSTM1 and CYP2E1 polymorphisms with lung cancer suggest cell type specificities to tobacco carcinogens. Cancer Res
1998;58:4858.
42. Garcia-Closas M, Rothman N, Lubin J. Misclassification in case-control studies of gene-environment interactions: assessment of bias and sample size. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1999;8:1043.
43. Garcia-Closas M, Lubin J. Power and sample size calculations in case-control studies of gene-environment interactions: comments on different approaches. Am J Epidemiol 1999;149:689.
44. Thomas DC. Design of gene characterization studies: an overview. Monogr Natl Cancer Inst 1999;26:17.
45. Hunter DJ. Methodological issues in the use of biological markers in cancer epidemiology: cohort studies. IARC Sci Publ 1997;142:39.
46. Struewing JP, Hartge P, Wacholder S, et al. The risk of cancer associated with specific mutations of BRCA1 and BRCA2 among Ashkenazi Jews. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1401.
47. Lum A, Le Marchand L. A simple mouthwash method for obtaining genomic DNA in molecular epidemiologic studies. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1998;7:719.
48. Whittemore AS, Nelson LM. Study design in genetic epidemiology: theoretical and practical considerations. Monogr Natl Cancer Inst 1999;26:61.
49. Klausner RD. The nation's investment in cancer research: a budget proposal for fiscal year 2000. NIH publication no. 98-4373. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, 1998:40.
50. Demenais F, Lathrop M. REGRESS: a computer program including the regressive approach into the LINKAGE programs. Genet Epidemiol 1994;11:291.
51. Newman B, Mu H, Butler LM, et al. Frequency of breast cancer attributable to BRCA1 in a population-based series of American women. JAMA 1998;279:915.
52. Struewing JP, Abeliovich D, Peretz T, et al. T he carrier frequency of the BRCA1 185delAG mutation is approximately 1 percent in Ashkenazi Jewish individuals. Nat Genet 1995;11:198.
53. Wacholder S, Hartge P, Struewing JP, et al. The kin-cohort study for estimating penetrance. Am J Epidemiol 1998;148:623.
54. Gail MH, Pee D, Carroll R. Kin-cohort designs for gene characterization. Monogr Natl Cancer Inst 1999;26:55.
55. Bondy ML, Strom SS, Colopy MN, et al. Accuracy of family history of cancer obtained through interviews with relatives of patients with childhood sarcoma. J Clin Epidemiol 1994;47:89.
56. Novakovic B, Goldstein AM, Tucker MA. Validation of family history of cancer in deceased family members. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1492.
57. Hopper JL, Chenevix-Trench G, Jolley DJ, et al. Design and analysis issues in a population-based case-control-family study of the genetic epidemiology of breast cancer and the Co-operative
Family Registry for Breast Cancer Studies (CFRBCS). Monogr Natl Cancer Inst 1999;26:95.
58. Mark SD, Liu SF, Li JY, et al. The effect of vitamin and mineral supplementation on esophageal cytology: results from the Linxian Dysplasia Trial. Int J Cancer 1994;57:162.
59. Dunn BK, Kramer BS, Ford LG. Phase III, large-scale chemoprevention trials. Approach to chemoprevention clinical trials and phase III clinical trial of tamoxifen as a chemopreventive for
breast cancerthe U.S. National Cancer Institute experience. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1998;12:1019.
60. Oda T. Viral hepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma prevention strategy in Japan. Jpn J Cancer Res 1999;90:1051.
61. Murakami M, Gurski KJ, Steller MA. Human papillomavirus vaccines for cervical cancer. J Immunother 1999;22:212.
62. Lindholm LH, Isacsson A, Slaug B, Moller TR. Acceptance by Swedish users of a multimedia program for primary and secondary prevention of malignant melanoma. J Cancer Educ
1998;13:207.
63. Lerman C, Audrain J, Orleans CT, et al. Investigation of mechanisms linking depressed mood to nicotine dependence. Addict Behav 1996;21:9.
64. Lerman C, Shields PG, Audrain J, et al. The role of serotonin transporter gene in cigarette smoking. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1998;7:235.
65. Lerman C, Caporaso N, Main D, et al. Depression and self-medication with nicotine: the modifying influence of the dopamine D4 receptor gene. Health Psychol 1998; 17:56.

SECTION 14.2 Descriptive Epidemiology: Cancer Statistics
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 14.2
Descriptive Epidemiology: Cancer Statistics
PHILIP COLE
BRAD RODU
Introduction
Descriptive Epidemiology
USA
Cancer Entities
Incidence
Mortality
Sex Ratio
Race Ratio
Survivorship
Age Patterns, Time Trends
All Cancer
Cancer of the Lung and Bronchus
Cancer of the Colon
Cancer of the Breast
Cancer of the Prostate Gland
Cancer of the Pancreas
Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma
Leukemia
Cancer of the Stomach
Cancer of the Ovary
Cancer of the Nervous System
Liver and Biliary Tract
Urinary Bladder
Cancer of the Esophagus
Cancer of the Kidney and Renal Pelvis
Multiple Myeloma
Cancer of the Rectum
Cancer of the Oral Cavity and Pharynx
Malignant Melanoma of the Skin
Cancer of the Endometrium
Cancer of the Uterine Cervix
Relative Survival Rates
Perspectives
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The malignant diseases have both a descriptive and an analytic epidemiology. Descriptive epidemiology consists primarily of vital statistics, particularly incidence and
mortality rates. These usually relate to large populations divided according to age, gender and race. Differences in these statistics from one place or time to another
are part of descriptive epidemiology. Survivorship also is descriptive. The descriptive epidemiology of the malignancies is described in this Section.
Analytic epidemiology consists of the knowledge of suspect and known causes of disease. It is developed from disease-specific or cause-specific investigations. The
analytic epidemiology of the malignancies is described in Section 3 of this chapter.

DESCRIPTIVE EPIDEMIOLOGY
USA
Most data presented here pertain to the United States of America (USA). This is not limiting in that cancer patterns vary relatively little over the developed world.
Further, differences that occur reflect geographic and cultural variations in the distribution of the causes of cancer, not differences in the causes themselves.
However, in the developing world cancer patterns vary from that of the developed world and differ from one region to another. In many developing countries there are
high frequencies of cancers of the liver, stomach, cervix and, in parts of Asia, cancer of the nasopharynx. Cancer patterns in many newly industrialized societies are
changing rapidly towards those of the West. This reflects their recent large-scale adoption of cigarette smoking. 1 Global variations in the descriptive epidemiology of
cancer are reviewed in “Global cancer statistics” by Parkin, Pisani and Ferlay. 2
CANCER ENTITIES
Depending on the cancers of interest and on their grouping, there could be several dozen groups of malignancies for which statistics are available. This Section
describes “all cancer” and 20 specific cancers and groups of cancer that cause the largest numbers of deaths in the USA. These entities accounted for 88% of cancer
deaths in 1996. Table 14.2-1 ranks them by number of deaths. The names in the table were chosen for brevity. The cancers included in each group will be specified.

TABLE 14.2-1. Incidence and Mortality Data for Major Forms of Cancer. USA, Total Population 1996

INCIDENCE
The incidence (sometimes called the incident number) of a cancer is the number of cases of the disease diagnosed in a specified population, or group of people, over

a specified time, usually one year. The more commonly used measure, the incidence rate ( I), relates the incident number to the size of the population and to the
interval in which the cases were diagnosed. I is expressed as cases per 100,000 persons per year or, usually, as cases per 100,000 person-years (py). An I may
relate to an entire population (the I of lung cancer in the USA is 54 cases per 100,000 py), may be specific, e.g., as to gender (the I of lung cancer among males in the
USA is 70 per 100,000 py) or may be ever more specific, e.g., as to males of one race and of a narrow age range. Whether or not they are specific, I's that span a
broad age range usually are age-adjusted to facilitate comparison with one another. Age-adjustment nearly eliminates age as the explanation for any differences seen
among a group of I's. All I's and mortality rates in the remainder of this chapter are adjusted to the age distribution of the total USA population in 1970.
Cancer I data in the USA are provided mainly by population-based cancer registries. These vary in size and somewhat in the quality and completeness of their data.
Most of the incidence data come from a national system of cancer registries that has existed since 1973. This Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER)
Program now includes 11 registries. The incidence data reported for 1973 and later are from SEER's nine original registries which include about 10.5% of the USA
population.3
Data from a cancer registry less than 20 years old are viewed cautiously. As a registry matures its coverage will improve, possibly giving the false impression of a rise
in I's. There are other potential sources of distortion in I's, even those from established registries. 4,5 These include a population's increased use of cancer screening
services and improvements in access to medical care. Improvements in diagnostic capabilities and, rarely, changes in diagnostic categories also affect I's. All of these
advances may convey the false impression of a rise in cancer I's.
MORTALITY
Cancer mortality or the number of deaths, and the cancer mortality rate ( M) are analogous to the corresponding measures of incidence. Of course these measures
relate to deaths certified as due to cancer not to diagnosed cases of cancer. M usually is expressed as deaths per 100,000 py and may be made specific for
population subgroups just as is I.
M's are of very high quality in the USA, 6 especially for cancer. Nearly 90% of persons considered to have died from cancer, on the basis of autopsy, will have the
disease correctly listed on their death certificate. 7 Numbers of deaths and M's are available annually in great detail for the entire country. In this Section we usually
present mortality data for 1996. This is the latest year for which detailed information is available and it is the same as the year for most incidence data presented.
Preliminary mortality data are available for 1997 and 1998. This recent information extends all of the trends described in this Section. All of the mortality data come
from publications of the National Center for Health Statistics. 8,9,10
SEX RATIO
Males and females differ in their rates of most cancers. These male:female differences are expressed as the age-adjusted sex ratio, the ratio of the age-adjusted male
I or M to the corresponding female rate. Since this ratio is based on age-adjusted rates it accommodates the fact that the female population is larger and older than
the male.
RACE RATIO
For brevity I's and M's are presented for all races combined. However, we also present the ratio of age-adjusted I's and M's of Blacks to those of Whites. The ratio of
Black to White M's is typically higher than the I ratios and this discrepancy, for each cancer, may be an index, albeit a crude index, of the access to and use of
cancer-related services by the two races.
SURVIVORSHIP
Survivorship is described by the five-year relative survival rate (RSR-5). The RSR-5 is the proportion of persons with a particular form (and usually, stage) of cancer
who survive to the fifth anniversary of their diagnosis, divided by the proportion of the general population expected to live that long. The expectation is based on
mortality rates from all causes among persons with the same age, gender and race composition as the cancer patients. An RSR-5 of, say 75%, indicates that five
years after diagnosis the cancer group has 25% fewer survivors than does the comparable population. The RSR-5 is based on all deaths in the cancer group, so it
does not describe mortality from the specific cancer in question. Instead, it indicates the incremental mortality imposed by that cancer. Because RSR-5's are available
for specific stages of a cancer, they permit evaluation of long-term gains in patient survival.
AGE PATTERNS, TIME TRENDS
Patterns of I's and M's are described by age for men and women for each of the cancers addressed. For cancers of greatest public health importance and for several
others of special interest, the age-patterns are also presented graphically. Time trends are presented graphically for I's and M's for cancers of the greatest public
health significance and for those of interest for some other reason. Finally, RSR's are presented for 1950-1959, 1974-1976, 1979-1981 and 1989-1991, for all cancer
and the 20 cancers of major interest. The data come from the SEER program 3 and its predecessor, the End Results Group. 11
ALL CANCER
(This category includes all malignant neoplasms except non-melanoma cancers of the skin. It is not limited to the 20 cancer groups that follow.) Variation in the
causes and the descriptive patterns of malignancies make statistics for “all cancer” difficult to interpret. Moreover, lung cancer accounts for about 15% of all cancer
cases and 30% of deaths. As a result descriptive patterns for “all cancer” reflect those of lung cancer. Yet, an overview of the malignancies as a whole gives
perspective to national issues such as time trends, improvements in survivorship, the value of cancer screening, etc. Further, the public has an abiding interest in
“cancer” as a group.
Table 14.2-1 shows that the I of all cancers combined in the USA population in 1996 was 389 cases per 100,000 py. Table 14.2-2 shows that the rate was 455 for
males and 342 for females, an age-adjusted incidence sex ratio of 1.3. The Black:White (B/W) incidence ratio of 1.1 indicates that for all cancer combined, Blacks
have a slightly higher incidence rate than do Whites. Useful explanations of B/W ratios different from 1.0 are specific to each form of cancer and are beyond our
scope.

TABLE 14.2-2. Incidence and Mortality Data for Major Forms of Cancer by Gender. USA, Total Population 1996

The M of all cancer for the total population in 1996 was 167 deaths per 100,000 py, 207 for males and 139 for females. The age-adjusted mortality sex ratio is 1.5,
slightly higher than the corresponding ratio of 1.3 for incidence. This discrepancy does not indicate that females survive cancer better than do males since males
experience relatively more cases of the more fatal malignancies (lung, stomach, liver, esophagus). Actually, women do survive most cancers better than do men. But

this is best inferred from a comparison of the sex-specific RSR-5's of each form of cancer.
The B/W mortality ratio for all cancer is 1.3, larger than the 1.1 incidence ratio. The discrepancy between the incidence and the mortality ratio may reflect the fact that
Blacks have less access to, and use, medical care less than do Whites.
Figure 14.2-1 shows age patterns of I's and M's for all cancer for males and females, respectively, averaged for 1992-1996. These five years were combined because
age-specific I's are not available for any individual recent year. The pattern of I's shows an upward inflection during the late 40's for men. The rates start to rise earlier
and increase more gradually for women. The earlier rise of I's among women reflects the early onset of breast cancer and cervix cancer. For both genders, I's then
increase nearly linearly to about age 75 and peak in the early 80's. The “late-age decline” appearing in these data is common and is usually an artifact due to
underdiagnosis of cancer among the elderly and to overestimation of the size of the elderly population. For both genders the pattern of mortality lags that of incidence
by about 10 years and there is no late age decline seen for either gender.

FIGURE 14.2-1. Incidence rates and mortality rates for all cancer and for seven selected cancers. According to age.

Age-specific cancer I's were used to estimate the risk of developing cancer over a lifetime and over several age spans of interest. For a newborn in 1996, the overall
cancer I of 389 equates to a 45% risk of developing cancer through age 85. For persons aged 45 in 1996 the risk of developing cancer in the remaining lifetime is
44% while for persons aged 65 it is 35%. These risk projections pertain only to persons who develop cancer or live to age 85. More realistic, actuarial, estimates of
these risks are corrected for mortality from all causes and are about 15% lower, that is the 45% figure becomes 38%, etc. More important, cancer I's are declining
over time and the risks to be experienced in the future are likely to be lower, perhaps much lower, than even the actuarial projections.
Figure 14.2-2 shows time trends, from 1973 through 1996, of age-adjusted I's and M's for all cancer for males, females and for the genders combined. For men I's
rose gradually until 1987 and then sharply for several years before declining. The sharp rise reflects increases in prostate cancer. I's for women increased to 1991
and now are declining. For both genders, M's rose very gradually to 1990 or 1991 and now are declining. Reports in the literature suggest that the overall cancer M
peaked in the USA in 1990 12 or in 1991.13 The distinction reflects different standard populations used for age-adjustment and is of no practical significance.

FIGURE 14.2-2. Incidence rates and mortality rates for all cancer and for ten selected cancers. According to time. See Figure 14.2-1 for key.

Finally, discussions of All Cancer often reinforce a view that, “cancer is a disease of old people”. In two important ways, it is not. First, the leukemias and tumors of the
central nervous system (CNS) remain major threats to children. Young adults experience considerable illness due to Hodgkin's disease and testis cancer as well as
death from leukemia, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and CNS tumors. Second, the frequency of each major cause of death rises sharply with age. Among persons who die
from the major diseases, cancer decedents have a below average age at death. In 1996 the average age of all decedents in the USA was 72.0 years, but it was 70.7
years for those who died of cancer. Among deaths occurring after age 45, the average age of all decedents is 78.1 years but it is 72.5 for cancer decedents. Table
14.2-3 shows for each age group the percentage of deaths within it that are certified as due to cancer. In 1996 the proportional mortality for cancer peaked at 37% for
ages 55-64. Further, the average cancer decedent lived with his or her disease for more than eight years. Thus, while cancer's highest proportional mortality is at
about age 60 it afflicts many persons during their mid-50's. The below average age at death of cancer decedents and the peak of cancer's proportional mortality in
middle age are readily explained. The other major chronic diseases, especially cardiovascular diseases, also exact a considerable mortality in middle age but,
thereafter, their mortality rates rise more sharply than do those of cancer.

TABLE 14.2-3. The Proportion of All Deaths Within Each Age Group Attributed To Cancer. USA Total Population, 1996.

Although cancer decedents die relatively young, that age at death will increase gradually because the population's average age is increasing. Also, many recent
advances in cancer treatment, while effective are not necessarily curative. Such treatments postpone death and thereby raise the age of cancer decedents. 5
CANCER OF THE LUNG AND BRONCHUS
(This category includes cancers of the trachea, lung and bronchus and of the pleura. Less than one percent of cases or deaths in this category are cancers of the

pleura.) Lung cancer had an overall I of 54 cases per 100,000 py in 1996, 70 for males and 42 for females. The corresponding M's were 49, 68 and 34. Whether
based on I's or M's the condition is a predominantly male disease with sex ratios of 1.7 and 2.0, respectively. However, the sex ratios are declining. For incidence this
is occurring because the male rate is declining while that for females is stable. The declining mortality sex ratio reflects the ongoing steep drop in male M's.
The age pattern of I's and M's for lung cancer for males and for females is shown in Figure 14.2-1. For both genders, I's and M's start to rise at about age 40 and then
increase to a peak at about age 75. All four curves then show the late age decline which, for this disease occurs because persons, especially women, born before
1930, did not smoke in large numbers.
Figure 14.2-2 describes lung cancer I's and M's for 1973-1996. Both measures increased until 1991-1992 (incidence) or 1990-1994 (mortality). Both rates were level
briefly and now are declining. The incidence rate curve declines more steeply than the mortality curve. I's usually change earlier and more abruptly than do M's, as
the M in any year reflects I's of many prior years. The overall I curve for lung cancer should continue to decline even more steeply when I's among women begin to
decline. In fact, a leveling began in 1991 and a slight decline occurred in lung cancer I's for women in 1995 and 1996.
Cancer of the lung was for decades the most commonly diagnosed form of cancer in the USA. However, in 1984 the I of prostate cancer began to surge and by 1989
or 1990 more prostate cancers were diagnosed than lung cancers in men and women combined. Yet, lung cancer remains the principle cause of cancer deaths. In
fact, lung cancer causes nearly as many deaths as do the next four cancers (colon, breast, prostate and pancreas) combined. The singular importance of lung cancer
as a cause of death, combined with its strong association with smoking, continue to offer the greatest opportunity for cancer prevention.
Statistics for larynx cancer are not presented because as the cause of 3918 deaths in 1996, it ranks twenty-first among the malignancies. However, larynx cancer is
associated with smoking just as strongly as is lung cancer and so is amenable to prevention on that basis.
CANCER OF THE COLON
(This entity is restricted to cancer of the colon.) It is customary to consider cancers of the colon and rectum together but this is not appropriate from an epidemiologic
view. The two diseases eventually may be found to have part of their etiologies in common but they differ in their sex ratios, time trends and survivorship.
Colon cancer ranks fourth in incidence after cancers of the lung, breast and prostate gland with an I of 30 cases per 100,000 py, 35 for males and 27 for females. The
incidence sex ratio of 1.3 is typical for all cancer. However, in terms of mortality, colon cancer ranks second. The overall M of 14.4 deaths per 100,000 py is similar for
men and women. The mortality sex ratio of 1.0 is lowest among the major malignancies.
Age patterns for colon cancer are shown in Figure 14.2-1. Both for males and for females I's start to increase at about age 40 and rise sharply to peaks at the oldest
ages. M's lag I's by about 10 years and at first rise more gradually than do I's but then accelerate upward. Colon cancer's time trends appear in Figure 14.2-2. I's
peaked at about 38 cases per 100,000 py in 1987 and then began declining. Mortality has declined since at least 1979, the first year for which data specific to the
colon are available.
CANCER OF THE BREAST
(This entity is restricted to cancer of the breast in females.) The I of breast cancer was 111 cases per 100,000 woman-years (wy) in 1996 making it by far the most
frequently diagnosed cancer in women. However, with an M of 24 deaths per 100,000 wy, breast cancer kills about 30% fewer women than does lung cancer.
The age patterns of I's and M's for breast cancer for the 1992-1996 interval are given in Figure 14.2-1. I's start to rise in the late 20's and increase more-or-less
steadily to about 500 cases per 100,000 wy at age 70. M's rise more gradually with a peak at ages over 85. In data from many Western countries the age pattern
shows a notch, with I's declining at ages 45 to 54 before resuming their increase. That pattern does not occur in these data for unknown reasons. The typical bimodal
age-incidence pattern of breast cancer, with a trough at age 50, has been offered as evidence that breast cancer is two etiologic entities. In this view, the
premenopausal disease is related primarily to reproductive factors and the postmenopausal to body form and menopausal changes.
Figure 14.2-2 shows breast cancer's time trends. The I of breast cancer long was stable but began to rise in the early 1980's. The I peaked in 1987 at 113 and was
stable through 1996 at about that level. It is unclear whether the 1980's rise in breast cancer was due to the ever-greater use of breast cancer screening or to an
actual increase in the causes of the disease. An increase in I due to screening should be transitory, eventually declining to pre-screening levels even if screening
continues. In such a situation the stage distribution of cases detected in the screening era should be favorable relative to that of cases diagnosed in the previous era.
It remains to be seen whether the I of breast cancer will decline but earlier diagnosis is occurring: in 1965-1969 47% of cases were “local” when diagnosed but in
1989-1995 the figure was 62%.
Breast cancer's M shows a time trend different from that of its I. M was stable from the 1930's, or even earlier, through about 1990. It is now declining at about 3% per
year. This steep decline probably is due both to earlier diagnosis and to improved treatment.
CANCER OF THE PROSTATE GLAND
With an I of 136 per 100,000 man-years (my) this cancer is by far the most frequently diagnosed malignancy among men in the USA. With an M of 24, it ranks second
among men in mortality. Figure 14.2-1 shows the I's and M's of prostate cancer by age. The curves are remarkable for their steepness, with rates increasing almost
three-fold with every 10-year age increase.
Figure 14.2-2 shows the time trend in the I and M of prostate cancer for 1973-1996. A gradual increase in I was evident until about 1986 when a sharp increase
began. I peaked in 1992 and then declined, precipitously at first but then more gradually in recent years. The unique upward spike in I reflected the widespread
adoption of the prostate-specific-antigen (PSA) test to screen for the disease. 14 The decline in I since 1992 may reflect decreased PSA testing or, because of the
widespread screening, a reduction in the number of men with preclinical disease. The M's in the Figure show a plateau, at about 26 deaths per 100,000 my from 1990
to 1993 and then a very slow decline. The decline in mortality may result from the more effective treatment of cases diagnosed early by PSA screening, from actual
improvements in treatment per se or, possibly, from a gradual reduction in the unidentified causes of the disease. Whatever the full explanation of the mortality
decline may be, there is evidence of major treatment advances. This is addressed below in the discussion of the RSR-5. Beyond this we can indicate only that the
causes of prostate cancer are unknown and, while it seems reasonable that screening would lower M, it is uncertain that it has done so.
CANCER OF THE PANCREAS
The descriptive epidemiology of this disease presents a uniformly unfavorable, seemingly unchanging pattern. Pancreas cancer has an I of 8.6 per 100,000 py, 10.0
for males and 7.4 for females, an incidence sex ratio of 1.4. The overall M is 8.3 deaths per 100,000 py, 9.6 for men and 7.2 for women, a mortality sex ratio of 1.3,
similar to that of incidence. Pancreas cancer is the most highly fatal of all the malignancies.
Both among men and women, I's and M's of pancreas cancer begin to rise in the late 40's and reach a peak of about 110 cases or deaths per 100,000 py among men
and of about 90 among women in the oldest age group. For both genders, the two curves, I's and M's, are virtually identical, so highly fatal a disease is this.
The I's and M's of pancreas cancer have varied little over time. Perhaps this is changing, however. From 1973 to 1992 the I of pancreas cancer declined in no
consistent pattern by about seven percent from 10 cases per 100,000 py to 9.3. Over the next four years it dropped another eight percent. Mortality data are less
encouraging. Despite the declining I's, M's were essentially unchanged from 1973 to 1996.
NON-HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA
The I and M of this condition, or group of conditions, are higher than is generally recognized even by physicians. This disease is the sixth-ranked cause of death
among the malignancies. The overall I is 15.5 per 100,000 py, 19.2 in men and 12.2 in women, an incidence sex ratio of 1.6. The overall M is 6.9 per 100,000 py, 8.6
in men and 5.6 in women, a similar mortality sex ratio of 1.5.

NHL shows increased I's as early as the mid-20's. I's increase sharply after about age 50 and M's after about age 60 in men. For women the upward inflections occur
at ages 60 and 70. Figure 14.2-2 shows the time trends in I's and M's. I's now are rising sharply, increasing by 80%, from 8.6 cases per 100,000 py to 15.5 from 1973
to 1996. It has been suggested that some of this increase is an artifact due to changes in diagnostic classifications, which are bringing new entities into the lymphoma
family.15 However, such changes are unlikely to explain more than one-fourth of the increase seen. M's also are increasing but more slowly and may now be
stabilizing. The increase from 1973 (4.7 deaths per 100,000 py) to 1994 (6.9 deaths) was 47%. However, there was no further increase in 1995 or 1996.
LEUKEMIA
(Leukemia here refers collectively to the four major forms of the disease, acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL), acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) and chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML)). This discussion does not specifically address leukemia in children. Ninety percent of all leukemia cases
occur after age 20. The statistics presented are inclusive of all ages but the observations pertain to leukemia in adults.
The leukemias are a category of diseases combined under one label both by historical precedent and by practical considerations of contemporary diagnosis and
treatment. Nonetheless, while the leukemias eventually may be found to share some etiologic factors, this has been shown only for ionizing radiation and CLL is
exempt even from that.
The I of leukemia was 9.7 cases per 100,000 py, 12.3 in males and 7.7 in females, an incidence sex ratio of 1.6. M's were 6.3 deaths per 100,000 py overall and 8.2
and 4.8 for males and females, giving a nearly identical mortality sex ratio of 1.7.
The I of leukemia is relatively high at 6.8 cases per 100,000 under age 5. It is then steady at about 2 to 5 until about age 40 when it begins to rise at a constant rate.
The I of leukemia reaches a peak of 120 cases per 100,000 in men and 71 in women at ages 85 and over.
Leukemia M's are no longer particularly high in childhood; they remain under 1.3 deaths per 100,000 py through age 20 and then begin a steady increase to ages 85
and over.
Age-adjusted I's of leukemia were essentially unchanged at about 10.5 cases per 100,000 py from 1973 to 1995. In 1996 the I was 9.7, perhaps signaling the start of
a decline. M's have declined from 6.7 deaths per 100,000 in 1973 to 6.3 at present. This 6% decline is identical for males and females and largely reflects treatment
advances for the leukemias of childhood.
CANCER OF THE STOMACH
Although cancer of the stomach long has been declining, it remains the eighth-ranked cause of cancer death. The overall I is 6.6 per 100,000 py, 9.8 in men and 4.2
in women, a rather high incidence sex ratio of 2.3. The overall M is 4.0, with rates of 5.7 in men and 2.7 in women giving a sex ratio of 2.1.
I's of stomach cancer start to rise at about age 40. They rise progressively to age 85 and over, reaching a maximum of 119 cases per 100,000 py in men and 58 in
women. The age pattern of M's closely follows that of I's but is one-third lower.
The I of stomach cancer has declined one to two percent per year for as long as data have been available, that is, since the mid-1930's. Mortality data suggest that
the disease has been declining, at the same rate, since 1900. Stomach cancer was by far the most common cause of cancer death in men until surpassed by
colorectal cancer in the late-1940's. It was also the most common cause of cancer death in women until about 1937 when it declined to fourth place. The “intestinal”
type of stomach cancer declined two to three times faster than did the “diffuse” type of disease. 16,17 During the last 25 years or so, the long-term declines in stomach
cancer have continued unchanged ( Figure 14.2-2). I was 10.2 cases per 100,000 py in 1973 and declined about 1.5% per year to the 1996 level of 6.6, an overall
reduction of 35%. The decline was identical in both sexes. M's have declined more, the reduction being 43% from 7.0 deaths per 100,000 py in 1973 to 4.0 in 1996. It
was the same in both sexes.
The reason for the declining I of the intestinal type of stomach cancer is unknown. However, the decline extends over 90 years indicating that one or more causes of
the disease started downward before 1900. The similarity of the decline in both sexes is remarkable and suggests that the declining cause is closely tied to domestic
life or to residential, not occupational, settings. The favored hypothesis relates to the introduction of refrigeration and chemical food additives, several of which have
anti-oxidant properties. 18 These twentieth-century methods of food preservation gradually displaced older methods such as the smoking, salting and pickling of foods.
This hypothesis is supported by the fact that stomach cancer is strongly, and inversely, associated with economic status as the well-to-do adopted the newer methods
first. Some other unidentified aspect of improving living standards also may have played a role in the decline of this disease. For example, Helicobacter pylori, a
bacillus that colonizes the stomach of about 45% of Americans, was recognized as a cause of stomach cancer in 1994. 19 The prevalence of H.pylori infection also is
strongly and inversely related to economic well being.
CANCER OF THE OVARY
The I of cancer of the ovary is 14.1 cases per 100,000 wy while the M is 7.4. The I has been stable for 40 years. An apparent rise in I from 1945 to 1960 probably
resulted from improving ability to diagnose the condition. Despite the constancy of the I's, M's have declined recently from 8.4 in 1973 to 7.4 in 1996, about 0.3% per
year.
The age pattern of cancer of the ovary is exceptional in that I's start to increase in the late teens. Both I and M increase slowly until about age 40 or 45 and then rise
sharply to peaks at about age 80.
CANCER OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
(This entity includes cancers of the brain, spinal cord, other central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system. However, 97% of deaths due to malignancies
in this group are from tumors of the brain. We refer to this group as “CNS” cancer.) In 1996 CNS cancer had an overall I of 5.8 per 100,000 py in the USA, 7.2 in
males and 4.5 in females. The corresponding M's are 4.2 and 5.0 and 3.4 for men and women respectively. With age-adjusted sex ratios of 1.6 for incidence and 1.5
for mortality this disease has a typical male predilection.
The age patterns for CNS cancer are shown in Figure 14.2-1. They are unusual in the long, gradual rise that extends from about age 20 to age 60 followed by a
leveling, and then sharp declines. The leveling and decline in the statistics may result from a progressively greater underdiagnosis of cases and undercertification of
deaths due to CNS cancer with increasing age. This would occur because of confusion of the cancer's symptoms with those of the much more common condition,
stroke.20
The I's of CNS cancer long have been increasing. The rise during the middle of the century was probably due to improving diagnosis. More recently, I's rose from 5.0
cases per 100,000 py in 1973 to a peak of about 6.4 in 1987-1989. There has since been a gradual reduction to the current I of 5.8. The pattern of M's closely follows
that of I's with a short lag. M's rose from 3.7 deaths per 100,000 py in 1973 to a peak of 4.3 in 1990. M is now stable at about 4.1 deaths per 100,000 py.
LIVER AND BILIARY TRACT
(This entity includes all primary cancers of the liver, bile ducts and gall bladder. We refer to it as liver cancer.) Liver cancer had an I of 4.2 cases per 100,000 py in
1996, 6.4 for men and 2.4 for women, a high incidence sex ratio of 2.7. For mortality the corresponding figures are 3.6 deaths per 100,000 py overall, 5.3 and 2.3 for
men and women, a mortality sex ratio of 2.3.
Age patterns of liver cancer both among men and women are unremarkable. I's start to rise by the mid-30's among men and by the mid-40's among women and peak
at about age 80. M's are virtually identical to I's in every respect.
Since 1973 I's for liver cancer have been increasing steadily from 2.3 cases per 100,000 py to the 1996 figure of 4.2. This 80% increase in just 23 years is worrisome

but has attracted little attention. This is strange, since M's show a similar pattern, a 50% increase from 2.4 deaths per 100,000 py in 1973 to 3.6 in 1996. Moreover,
the increases are occurring both among men and women.
Liver cancer is caused by the carrier state of the hepatitis-B and -C virus and these agents are the overwhelming cause of the disease in much of the developing
world. Together, they probably account for about 50% of the disease in the USA. 21 In the USA there is also a clear association between abuse of alcoholic beverages
and liver cancer.
URINARY BLADDER
(This entity includes cancer of the urinary bladder and “other urinary organs”, essentially the ureter and urethra. Cancers of the kidney and renal pelvis are in a
separate category. Ninety-seven percent of cancers in this group are bladder cancers and we refer to the disease that way.) Bladder cancer is the number 12-ranked
cancer killer, responsible for 11,452 deaths in the USA in 1996. The overall I is 16.2 cases per 100,000 py. With I's of 27.7 for men and 7.4 for women, the incidence
sex ratio is a striking 3.7. This reflects men's higher prevalence of smoking and greater exposure to occupational carcinogens. The overall M is 3.2 deaths per
100,000 py. With M's of 5.5 and 1.7 for men and women, respectively, the sex ratio is also a remarkably high 3.2.
Bladder cancer I's begin rising at about age 40 in men and 45 in women. A peak of 297 cases per 100,000 py is reached in men at ages 85 and over. A much lower
peak of 75 appears at the same age in women. M's lag I's by about 10 years and peak at 139 and 42 deaths per 100,000 py for men and women, respectively.
I's for bladder cancer rose from 14.6 cases per 100,000 py in 1973 to a peak of 17.5 in 1987. A slow decline is now occurring with a rate of 16.2 in 1996. M's for
bladder cancer declined 25%, about 1% per year, from 4.2 deaths per 100,000 py in 1973 to 3.2 in 1996. The decline has been slightly greater for men than for
women.
CANCER OF THE ESOPHAGUS
This disease has an overall I of 4.0 per 100,000 py but for men the I is 6.8 while for women it is 1.7. The corresponding M's are 3.6 overall and 6.3 and 1.5 for men
and women respectively. With age-adjusted sex ratios of 4.0 for incidence and 4.2 for mortality, this disease is the most strongly male-associated malignancy.
I's start to rise at about age 35 in men and 45 in women. There is then a sharp rise to an I of 41 cases per 100,000 py in men, 15 in women, at ages over 80. M's are
virtually identical to I's. The I of esophagus cancer increased gradually from 3.4 cases per 100,000 py in 1973 to 4.0 in 1996. However, there was almost no change in
I's among women while rates among men increased about one percent per year from 5.5 in 1973 to 6.8 in 1996. The patterns of M's are virtually the same.
Cancer of the esophagus results from smoking, alcoholic beverage abuse and the combination of the two. Poor nutrition, particularly micronutrient deficiency may also
be involved in causing this disease, especially in regions of the world where rates are very high. 22 If there is some good news in this it is that the now ongoing long
term decline in smoking should bring reductions in I's of esophagus cancer in developed countries both directly and also by reducing the impact of alcohol abuse. In
developing countries the correction of micronutrient deficiencies, which is relatively practical, may produce reductions in the disease.
CANCER OF THE KIDNEY AND RENAL PELVIS
(This group includes cancers of the kidney and of the renal pelvis, an unfortunate combination with a historical basis. Kidney cancer nearly always is a renal cell
adenocarcinoma while renal pelvis cancer is a tumor of transitional or squamous cells. The renal pelvis is better seen as an extension of the bladder than of the
kidney and both the histology and epidemiology of its cancer reflect that. Ninety-eight percent of tumors in this group are kidney cancers and we will refer to it as
such.) The I of kidney cancer is 9.4 cases per 100,000 py, 12.9 among men and 6.5 among women. The corresponding M's are 3.5, 5.1 and 2.3. The respective sex
ratios are relatively high at 2.0 and 2.2.
Both for men and women the age patterns of cancer of the kidney are unremarkable. I's start to increase in the 30's and peak at about age 80. M's show a similar
pattern but lag I's by 5 to 10 years. The I of kidney cancer has undergone a 40% increase from 6.7 cases per 100,000 py in 1973 to 9.4 in 1996, nearly 1.7% per year.
The increase is somewhat higher for women (48%) than for men (38%). The time trend in M's is similar but less striking. For both genders there was about a 20%
increase from 2.9 deaths per 100,000 py in 1973 to 3.5 in 1996.
Kidney cancer and renal pelvis cancer are clearly though not strongly associated with smoking. This may explain why I's have been rising more sharply among
women than among men. The fact that I's of kidney cancer reached a peak among men of 13.3 cases per 100,000 py in 1994 and may now be declining also supports
the idea that long-term smoking patterns influence the disease's descriptive statistics. That is, the gender-specific time trends of I's for kidney cancer may duplicate,
later in time and at a lower level, those of lung cancer.
MULTIPLE MYELOMA
The I of multiple myeloma was 4.2 cases per 100,000 py in 1996, 5.3 in men and 3.4 in women, an incidence sex ratio of 1.6. The corresponding M's were 3.1 deaths
per 100,000 py, 3.8 for men and 2.6 for women, a mortality sex ratio of 1.5.
The age patterns, both of I's and M's for multiple myeloma are unexceptional. I's begin to rise in the early 40's and increase to a peak in the late 70's. M's lag I's by
about 5 years and both I's and M's rise more sharply among men than among women.
I's of multiple myeloma have changed on a long term basis moving from 3.8 cases per 100,000 py in 1973 to a peak of 4.8 in 1987. There has been some decline
since 1987 but the current I remains at 4.2. In contrast, M's have been increasing steadily. Both for men and for women the increase was about 35% from 1973 to
1996.
CANCER OF THE RECTUM
(This condition includes cancers of the rectum, rectosigmoid junction and anal canal.) Cancer of the rectum had an I of 12.5 cases per 100,000 py in 1996, 16.1 for
men and 9.6 for women, an incidence sex ratio of 1.7. In the same year, M's were 2.4 deaths per 100,000 py overall, 2.6 for men and 2.2 for women, a lower mortality
sex ratio of 1.2. These statistics are quite different from those of colon cancer which has lower sex ratios of 1.3 and 1.0.
Both for men and women I's rise in the 30's and rise sharply after age 45 to peaks at ages 75-79. For both genders, M's lag I's considerably and peak at 44 deaths
per 100,000 py among men and at 34 among women. The time trend for rectum cancer is shown in Figure 14.2-2. The I of cancer of the rectum peaked at 15.2 cases
per 100,000 py in 1981 and then declined slowly to 12.5 in 1996, a reduction of 18% in 15 years. This pattern was similar for males and females. M's have shown a
similar pattern.
CANCER OF THE ORAL CAVITY AND PHARYNX
(This entity includes cancers of the entire oral cavity and of the pharynx. We refer to it as OCC, oral cavity cancer.) In 1996 the I of OCC was 10.0 cases per 100,000
py, 14.8 for males and 5.9 for females. The corresponding M's were 2.6, 3.9 and 1.4. The respective sex ratios were 2.5 and 2.8.
I's of OCC rise sharply among men from about 2 cases per 100,000 py at age 30 to a near peak of 65 at ages 60-64 and then rise slowly to a peak of 77 at ages
80-84. The pattern for women is similar although more gradual with a peak I of 34 at ages 85 and over. For each gender the age pattern of mortality closely follows
that of incidence but M's typically are only about one-fourth of the corresponding I's. I's of OCC declined over the period 1973-1996, about 15% for men and 10% for
women. M's declined much more, about 30% both for men and women.
OCC shares much of its etiology with cancer of the esophagus, the lower sex ratio notwithstanding. It is not known whether the considerable decline in M's of OCC is
due to increased screening for the disease, especially by dentists, or to treatment advances. However, stage-specific increases in survival have been relatively small,

suggesting major benefits from earlier detection.
MALIGNANT MELANOMA OF THE SKIN
In 1996 melanoma had an I of 13.8 cases per 100,000 py, 17.0 for men and 11.4 for women, an incidence sex ratio of 1.5. For mortality, the corresponding rates were
2.3 deaths per 100,000 py, 3.2 and 1.5 for men and women, a mortality sex ratio of 2.1, much higher than that of incidence. The relatively poor survival of males
occurs because a high proportion of their lesions are on the trunk and carry a poorer prognosis than do those on the extremities. 23
I's of malignant melanoma begin to rise early in life, at about age 15 in both genders. There is a steep increase among men to a plateau of about 45 cases per
100,000 py at ages 70 and over. Among women the increase is more gradual to a lower plateau of about 30 cases per 100,000 py at ages 70 and over. For both
genders, M's lag I's considerably in age and reach peaks of 27 and 12 deaths per 100,000 py among men and women, respectively, at ages 85 and over. The I's of
melanoma have increased greatly, particularly over the last 25 years. This is shown in Figure 14.2-2. The increase from 1973 to 1996 was 140% overall, 178% and
110% for men and women respectively. However, M's have increased much less, 44% among men and only 15% among women. The increase in I's is due in part to
an increased awareness of the disease and efforts to find it by physical examination of the skin. Part of the increase is also real and possibly due to increases in
leisure time and sun exposure.
CANCER OF THE ENDOMETRIUM
(This entity includes cancer of the endometrium and cancer “of the uterus, not otherwise specified”. At least 78% of cancers of the uterus, not otherwise specified, are
cancers of the endometrium24 and we refer to the entity that way.)
As shown in Figure 14.2-1I's of endometrial cancer begin to rise at about age 30 and increase sharply to about 84 cases per 100,000 wy at age 64. They then
increase more gradually to a peak of 109 at ages 75-79 and then decline slowly. M's start to increase at age 45 and rise gradually to a peak of 36 deaths per 100,000
wy at ages 85 and over. The I of cancer of the endometrium is 21.1 cases per 100,000 while the M is 3.3.
As shown in Figure 14.2-2 the I of endometrial cancer peaked at 32 cases per 100,000 wy in 1975. This reflected the gradually increasing use of estrogens,
particularly conjugated equine estrogens, to manage symptoms of menopause. When that causal relation was recognized, 25 and this use of estrogens diminished, the
I began to drop sharply reaching 21 in 1986 and changing little since. M's for this condition declined from 4.6 deaths per 100,000 wy in 1973 to 3.4 in 1989 and are
now stable.
CANCER OF THE UTERINE CERVIX
This disease has an I of 7.7 cases per 100,000 wy and an M of 2.7 deaths per 100,000 wy. The exceptional age pattern of I's for cervix cancer is shown in Figure
14.2-1. The disease occurs among the young and I's rise sharply to age 35 and are then more-or-less steady for the remainder of the life span. This pattern strongly
suggests that the rate of exposure to the causal agent is constant after about age 30 or that the agent's carcinogenic potency is reduced after that age. The age
pattern of M's is unexceptional. The continued rise, long after I's have stabilized does, however, indicate that death can occur long after diagnosis.
I's of cervical cancer have declined since at least the 1940's. And, as shown in Figure 14.2-2, the recent decline was from 14.2 in 1973 to 7.9 in 1996, about 2% per
year. M's are also in a long-term downtrend from 5.2 deaths per 100,000 wy in 1973 to 2.8 in 1996, also 2% per year. Some of the decline, both in I and M, reflects
the gradually increasing proportion of women in the population who have had a hysterectomy. Also, this disease is strongly and inversely related to economic
well-being and so some general aspect of improving standards of living may play a protective role.
Screening for cervical cancer with the pap smear probably is responsible for some of the decline in I's and M's. However, the relationship is not straightforward. The
use of the pap smear increased greatly during the 1960's, 1970's and 1980's and, while this test is intended to detect dysplasia and in situ carcinoma, it also detects
invasive disease. Thus, the early effect of the gradually increasing use of the pap smear should have been to increase the apparent I. Eventually, the identification of
large numbers of in situ cases presumably would lower the I of invasive cases and M. Nonetheless, I's and M's of cervical cancer were declining long before pap
smear programs could have had any major effect. This is not to deny the value of these programs, especially among high-risk women. Whatever may be the full
explanation for the long-term declines of cervical cancer it seems likely that causes of the disease have been diminishing since at least the 1930's.
RELATIVE SURVIVAL RATES
Table 14.2-4 shows RSR-5's for all cancer and for the 20 major forms of cancer. The diagnosis intervals presented are 1950-1959, 1974-1976, 1979-1981 and
1989-1991; hereafter, 1955, 1975, 1980 and 1990. For most of these cancers, information is available for three stages of the disease: local, regional and all. These
categories allow reasonably valid comparisons of survival statistics from as long ago as 1975. The 1955 data are of good quality but are not fully comparable with the
subsequent data. They are provided for interest but are not discussed.

TABLE 14.2-4. Five-Year Relative Survival Rate, as Percent, for All Cancer and for Twenty Major Forms of Cancer, by Stage, According to Time Period of Diagnosis

For all cancer, no improvement is seen in survival for any stage from 1975 to 1980, possibly because of the short interval between the two periods. Substantial gains
occurred in each of the three stage groups from 1980 to 1990, a 15% increase (from 78% to 90%) for local disease and 25% for regional. The 16% improvement, from
an RSR-5 of 50% to 58% for all stages of all cancer is remarkable. It suggests a reduction in deaths of about 1.5% per year and conveys the magnitude of the gain
that occurred during this 10 to 15 year period.
The data for all 20 forms of cancer allow 104 stage-specific comparisons to be made from one time period to another, e.g., for colon cancer, regional, from 1975 to
1980. Of these 104 comparisons, 82 (79%) show an increase in the RSR-5, 10 show a decline and 12 were unchanged. This indicates the breadth of the gains that
have occurred. This breadth makes it unlikely that the gains over the last 20 years in the all cancer RSR-5's would be explained by any gradual increase in the
proportion of cancers that are inherently more benign.
In 1986 Bailar and Smith 26 indicated that cancer M's were still increasing and that gains in RSR-5's probably reflected earlier diagnosis or a “lead time” bias, not a
true increase in cures or delay of death. The statement regarding mortality rates was accurate but, if lung cancer had been excluded, M's for all other cancers
combined would have been seen to be declining as early as the mid 1950's. 27 It is more difficult to exclude lead time as the explanation of the small gains in RSR-5's
through 1980 or even of the larger gains thereafter. However, data for breast cancer and prostate cancer may be useful for addressing this. From 1975 to 1990 these
cancers became special targets for earlier diagnosis by screening and public education. Most of the lead time bias from screening, in terms of a seeming lengthening
of survival, results from advancing the time of diagnosis of local disease and little results from earlier diagnosis of regional disease. Therefore, we may infer that
survival gains for regional disease largely reflect actual treatment effects. Both for breast cancer and, especially for prostate cancer, for 1975 to 1990, large gains are

seen in the RSR-5's for regional disease in Table 14.2-4. These gains suggest that there has been real improvement from medical care advances above and beyond
any lead time effect. In another approach to this question, Cole and Rodu evaluated survival data for patients diagnosed from 1950-1991 and focussed on particular
stages of specific cancers for which lead time gains presumably would be minimal or absent. Even for these conditions they found gains of about 0.5% per year in
survival. They suggested that about one-half of the ongoing 1.0% per year decline in the overall cancer M that they reported for 1990-1995 was due to real advances
in medical care. 12 A gain of 0.5% per year due to improvements in all aspects of medical care may seem disappointing. But we should bear in mind that for gains to
occur each advance must favorably alter the course of ever more difficult cases, those that were resistant to prevailing diagnosis and treatment.

PERSPECTIVES
The descriptive epidemiology of the malignancies during the last quarter of the twentieth century provides five important observations:
First, the I's of the four major cancers (lung, colon, breast, prostate), and of all cancer combined are declining. 28 In fact, the I's of many forms of cancer, including
cancers of the stomach, cervix, endometrium, rectum and oral cavity, were declining during the 1980's or before.
Second, RSR-5 is increasing for most stages of many forms of cancer. It is unlikely that lead-time bias explains this because the improvements are occurring even for
conditions for which diagnostic advances probably have been minimal. 12 Further, practicing oncologists now report seeing survival gains on a regular basis among
patients with all stages of disease. These clinical observations can not be dismissed as anecdotal because they are nearly universal and because they are supported
by improved survival figures and by declining cancer M's.
Third, M's are declining for all cancer combined and for most forms of cancer and this has been true since 1991. 12 We must conclude that by 1996, there had been a
decline in mortality for many forms of cancer extending over a period of at least 35 years that was due at least in part to advances in medical care.
In 1997, Bailar and Gornick 29 repeated the suggestion that declining M's were unlikely to be due to advances in diagnosis and treatment. This was based primarily on
the view that the declines were minimal and that M's for most cancers were continuing upward. However, the decline in cancer mortality is accelerating downward
(from 1996 to 1998 alone, the decline amounted to four percent 8,10) and most forms of cancer are, in fact, declining. 14
Fourth, a national pattern of the breadth and depth of the ongoing cancer mortality reductions can neither start nor stop abruptly. The length of cancer induction
periods and the likely reduced exposure to carcinogens over the last 25 years make it reasonable to expect M's to continue down until at least 2010.
Fifth, we are winning but have not won the war on cancer. Bailar and Gornick 29 are correct in their view that more emphasis should be placed on prevention and
prevention-related research. Several of the malignancies, notably non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and malignant melanoma, continue to increase in incidence and others,
notably cancer of the esophagus and pancreas, remain resistant to diagnostic and treatment advances. Yet, to achieve the greatest overall reduction in cancer
deaths, the target remains clear and unchanging; anti-smoking efforts must be reinvigorated and, most especially, heavy smokers must be provided with alternative
ways to quit.30
Finally, the largest perspective. During the twentieth century cancer emerged from a minor position and became a major public health problem in the developed world.
Over the next 30 to 50 years it will resume a minor position. 31 This waxing and waning occurred for virtually all the great scourges of mankind and it will occur for
cancer. The descriptive epidemiology tells us that cancer's decline is now well established.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Peto R. Smoking and death: the past 40 years and the next 40. BMJ 1994;309:937.
2. Parkin DM, Pisani P, Ferlay J. Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:33.
3. Ries LA, Kosary CL, Hankey BF, et al., eds. SEER cancer statistics review, 19731996. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, 1999.
4. The cancer epidemic: fact or misinterpretation? Lancet 1992;340:399.
5. Cole P, Sateren W. The evolving picture of cancer in America. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995; 87:159.
6. Rosenberg H, Maurer J, Sorlie P, et al. Quality of death rates by race and Hispanic origin: a summary of current research, 1999. National vital statistics reports, vol 2, no. 128. Hyattsville, MD:
National Center for Health Statistics, 1999.
7. Kircher T, Nelson J, Burdo H. The autopsy as a measure of accuracy of the death certificate. N Engl J Med 1985;313:1263.
8. Peters KD, Kochanek KD, Murphy SL. Deaths: final data for 1996. National vital statistics reports, vol 47, no. 9. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics, 1998.
9. Hoyert DL, Kochanek KD, Murphy SL. Deaths: final data for 1997. National vital statistics reports, vol 47, no. 19 . Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics, 1999.
10. Martin JA, Smith BL, Mathews TJ, Ventura SJ. Births and deaths: preliminary data for 1998. National vital statistics reports, vol 47, no. 25. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics,
1999.
11. Axtell LM, Cutler SJ, Myers MH. End results in cancer, report No. 4. Bethesda, MD: U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, National Cancer Institute, 1972.
12. Cole P, Rodu B. Declining cancer mortality in the United States. Cancer 1996; 78:2045.
13. Wingo P, Ries L, Rosenberg H, Miller D, Edwards B. Cancer incidence and mortality: 19731995. A report card for the U.S. Cancer 1998;82:1197.
14. Devesa S, Blot W, Stone B, et al. Recent cancer trends in the United States. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:175.
15. Porcu P, Nichols C. Evaluation and management of the “new” lymphoma entities: mantle cell lymphoma, lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue, anaplastic large-cell lymphoma, and
primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma. Curr Probl Cancer 1998;22:283.
16. Muñoz N, Connelly R. Time trends of intestinal and diffuse types of gastric cancer in the United States. Int J Can 1979;8:158.
17. Sidoni A, Lancia D, Pietropaoli N, Ferri I. Changing patterns in gastric carcinoma. Tumori 1989;75:605.
18. National Academy of Sciences, National Research Council, Commission on Life Sciences, Food and Nutrition Board. Diet and health: implications for reducing chronic disease risk. Washington
DC: National Academy Press, 1989.
19. Infection with Helicobacter pylori. IARC Monogr Eval Carcinog Risks Hum 1994;61:177.
20. Schoenberg BS, Christine BW, Whisnant JP. The resolution of discrepancies in the reported incidence of primary brain tumors. Neurology 1978;28:817.
21. Ince N, Wands J. The increasing incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma [Editorial]. N Engl J Med 1999;340:798.
22. Chen F, Cole P, Mi Z, Xing L. Dietary trace elements and esophageal cancer mortality in Shanxi, China. Epidemiology 1992;3:402.
23. Vossaert K, Silverman M, Kopf A, et al. Influence of gender on survival in patients with stage I malignant melanoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;26:429.
24. Percy CL, Horm JW, Young JL, Asire AJ. Uterine cancers of unspecified origina reassessment. Public Health Rep 1983;98:176.
25. Ziel H, Finkle W. Increased risk of endometrial carcinoma among users of conjugated estrogens. N Engl J Med 1975;293:1167.
26. Bailar JC, Smith EM. Progress against cancer? N Engl J Med 1986;314:1226.
27. Wingo PA, Ries LA, Giovino GA, et al. Annual report to the nation on the status of cancer, 19731996, with a special section on lung cancer and tobacco smoking. J Natl Cancer Inst
1999;91:675.
28. Bailar J, Gornick H. Cancer undefeated. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1569.
29. Rodu B, Cole P. Nicotine maintenance for inveterate smokers. Technology 1999;6:17.
30. Cole P. Preface. In: Whelan E, ed. Preventing cancer. New York: Norton, 1977.

SECTION 14.3 Analytic Epidemiology: Cancer Causes
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 14.3
Analytic Epidemiology: Cancer Causes
PHILIP COLE
BRAD RODU
Introduction
Evaluating Carcinogenicity
Causes of Cancer
Environmental Factors
Lifestyle Factors
Occupational Factors
Pharmacologic/Iatrogenic Factors
Biologic Factors
Perspectives
Are More Cancers Now of Known Etiology
Have We Reduced Exposure to Recognized Causes of Cancer
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Most known causes of cancer of human beings became suspect because of observations made by physicians and surgeons treating cancer patients. These “alert
practitioners” noted unusual characteristics among several patients with the same disease. Investigations by themselves or others then identified a cause of the
cancer. An early example is the observation in 1895 by the German urologist, Rehn, that three men with bladder cancer had worked at a particular chemical facility, a
dyestuffs manufacturer. 1
Cancer causation also is studied in experimental settings. Such studies can be complex and difficult to perform but may permit a straightforward judgement of
causation to be made. When several investigators reproduce an experimental finding it is usually accepted as demonstrating causation.
Evaluating causality with epidemiologic research is more problematic. Epidemiology is not an experimental science. The epidemiologist observes heterogeneous,
free-living human beings and has no control over their exposures or any other aspect of their lives. Further, the observations may be distorted by the retrospective
nature of most epidemiologic research. That is, studies are made of exposures and of illnesses or deaths that occurred in the past, often in the distant past. For these
reasons and others epidemiologic studies of cancer causation may produce highly variable results. History shows that studies of true and moderately strong causal
associations will be reasonably consistently positive. However, a series of studies of a non-existent association will produce positive findings as well as the correct
negative ones.
In 1965 Hill advanced guidelines for evaluating causality in epidemiologic studies of diseases with a long induction period. 2 The “Hill criteria”, especially the major
ones, the strength, consistency and plausibility/coherence of associations remain useful. A recently-developed set of guidelines 3 are more detailed than Hill's and are
specific to the different circumstances in which causality is assessed. Several of these guidelines apply to the results of an individual study while others apply to a
general causal hypothesis. Yet others address causality in the exposure-illness experience of a specific person.

EVALUATING CARCINOGENICITY
Many considerations underlie the judgement that a suspect agent is or is not a carcinogen for human beings. An important factor is whether the determination is to
serve scientific or public health and regulatory purposes. The scientific focus addresses the question, “Is this agent, virtually certainly, a cause of cancer in man?” An
affirmative response could be based on strong, consistent evidence from epidemiologic studies or on overwhelming evidence of carcinogenicity in animals and the
absence of meaningful negative findings in human beings. In practice, a positive judgement usually rests on both consistent human and animal evidence.
When public health and regulatory purposes are the focus the question will be, “Is the probability that this agent is a human carcinogen sufficiently high that exposure
to it should be eliminated or restricted?” The evidence needed for a positive response is less than that needed for the scientific question. The use of a lower standard
means that a positive judgement does not imply that the agent is considered a carcinogen but only that society should act as if it is.
These different purposes partly explain why available lists of carcinogens are rather different. For example, the National Toxicology Program (NTP) of the USA lists 33
agents as “known to be human carcinogens” and an additional 274 as “reasonably anticipated to be” human carcinogens, 4 the “NTP-A” and “NTP-B” lists,
respectively. It is clear that the NTP, in compiling both lists, is addressing the scientific question. At the other extreme, the EPA of California attempts to serve a
regulatory purpose. It lists 456 “known” carcinogens, but there is no representation that the agents are known to cause cancer in human beings. 5
Agencies also produce differing lists of carcinogens because they evaluate different agents or group them differently. For example, while the NTP-A list includes 33
entries the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has a “Group 1” list of 75 items for which there is “sufficient evidence” of human carcinogenicity. 6 This
discrepancy seems surprising, since both agencies have a scientific mission. However, the IARC uses three categories: “agents”, “mixtures” and “exposure
circumstances”. The category “agents” includes 25 items and, considering variations in the way agents are grouped, is virtually identical to the NTP-A list. The NTP
recently has begun to evaluate “mixtures” and “exposure circumstances”. When we turn from “known” to “suspect” carcinogens, we find that the NTP-B list includes
274 agents while the IARC has a Group 2A (“probably carcinogenic to humans”) and a Group 2B (“possibly carcinogenic”) which include 59 and 227 listings
respectively, a total of 286. While the two lists are not directly comparable their similar lengths suggest correctly that their contents are very much alike.
There are important lessons in the 25-year experience of various agencies in classifying carcinogens. First, once suspicion falls on a true human carcinogen it usually
soon is recognized as such. In contrast, despite decades of research on them, hundreds of items languish on lists of suspect carcinogens, especially on those of
regulatory agencies. For example, the NTP-B list has included at least 274 agents since 1980. Only two of these ever were “promoted” to the NTP-A list, both in 1998.
During the same 18-year interval 12 compounds were added directly to the NTP-A list without appearing on the “B” list. Evidently, the probability that a suspect item
will come to be recognized as a human carcinogen is small. Second, the identification of “known” causes of human cancer has slowed. During the 1990's, the NTP
added only four agents to its “A” list of known carcinogens, including the two from the “B” list. Ten had been added during the 1980's. This slowdown occurred despite
ever more intensive searches for causes of cancer. The public health implication of this slowdown is that the extension of declines in cancer I's will require more effort
against the known causes of cancer. The clinical implication is that improved access to medical care and improved methods for the detection, diagnosis and treatment
of cancer will be needed to extend the ongoing increases in patient survival.

CAUSES OF CANCER
The causes of the malignancies are as diverse as the causes of disease in general. They include genetic defects, environmental and lifestyle factors, and chemical,
physical and biologic agents. We address primarily the known human carcinogens but will mention a few suspect agents in context. Our list of 72 causes, or groups of
causes Table 14.3-1 is adapted from the IARC's Group 1 list of 75 agents, mixtures and exposure circumstances for which there was judged to be sufficient evidence
of carcinogenicity for human beings. We organized related agents into groups and combined them into five major categories. We added a few lifestyle factors of the
type that the IARC does not consider. IARC does not list genetic causes of cancer and this Section does not address them. Finally, we indicate the NTP classification
for each agent.

TABLE 14.3-1. Known Causes of Cancer of Human Beings and the Major Cancers that They Cause

Many items in the table could be listed in more than one of the five categories. For example, solar radiation is an environmental factor but excessive sun exposure
could be a lifestyle choice. It also poses an occupational hazard for outdoor workers, especially farmers. We placed each agent in the category where it seemed that
most adverse exposure occurs. For each of the five categories, we estimated the attributable risk percent ( AR%) for the general population. This is the proportion of
cancer cases that would be prevented if the agents in the category were virtually entirely controlled. AR%'s were determined from estimates of the proportion of the
USA population exposed to each agent in a category and the relative risks of cancer for such persons. We also considered the related efforts of Doll and Peto, 7
Trichopoulos et al8 and of others. Collectively, a series of AR%'s provides an overview of the profile of cancer causation in a large population. But AR%'s are highly
variable from one population or time period to another.
Table 14.3-1 includes the major malignancies resulting from each of the causes listed. For cancers for which reasonably reliable data are available, we provide an
estimate of the relative risk (RR). This is the I of the cancer among persons with a typical exposure to the listed cause divided by the I among non-exposed.
We do not review the evidence relating to these established causal relationships but provide one or two references in support of each. In some instances we
referenced the IARC discussion itself. We describe some of the causal relationships that are of greatest public health significance and a few others because of some
biologic or epidemiologic feature that they exhibit. Reviews of known and suspected cause-effect relationships are available in two widely-used textbooks of cancer
epidemiology. 9,10
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS
For decades the mass media represented to the American public that the general environment was becoming polluted and that as a result cancer was increasing.
Little attention was given to the underlying issue: Are the carcinogens in the environment or our exposure to them increasing?
From an epidemiologist's view the “environment” includes both the general or shared environment and individual behaviors and lifestyles. Only in this inclusive sense
of the word is it correct that more than 90% of cancer is due to environmental, that is to all non-genetic, factors. On the other hand, in lay usage, the word
“environment” designates only the shared environment, i.e., the air, water, ground and food supplies. We have adopted this usual meaning of the word, but point out
that insofar as is known, individual behaviors are much more important causes of cancer than is the general environment.
All aspects of the long-term environmental deterioration in this country differ from place to place. There is no accurate way to summarize what the major contaminants
were, when their inappropriate discharge occurred or when there was human exposure to them. Nevertheless, in much of the country the accumulated contamination
had become consequential by about 1940. Most solid tumors of adults have an average induction period of about 20 years so it would be expected that cancers
caused by environmental contaminants would have started to occur in about the mid-1950's.
Public awareness of the large scale of America's environmental problems began in 1962 with the publication of Silent Spring.11 When Lake Erie and the Cuyahoga
River caught fire in 1969 there was a public outrage that led to the environmental regulations and the broad-based cleanup that continue to this day. But, despite the
cleanup the exposure of human beings to environmental contaminants probably continued to increase in much of the country until at least the mid-1970's and more
likely until about 1980. Thus, environmental cancers would have increased in frequency until about 2000 or later.
In reality, M's from all cancer were increasing in this country by the early 1900's. I's would have begun to increase even earlier. That is, the overall cancer I probably
had been increasing for fifty years before environmental pollution could have had any discernible effect. The overall I of cancer began declining in 1991 12 and many
forms of cancer began declining in the 1970's. This implies that many causes of cancer had begun to decline by 1970, that is, 30 or more years before an
environmental cleanup could have had a beneficial effect.
While our concern with environmental causes of cancer is focused on I's, there is reason to review M's as well. The principle reason is the superior quality and
representativeness of M's over I's when evaluating long-term, large-scale patterns of a relatively fatal disease. Excluding lung cancer, M's for “all other cancer” have
been declining continuously since 1950. 13 Mortality from all cancer, even including lung cancer, has been declining since 1991 14 and is now accelerating
downward.15,16 This overall decline reflects reductions in the M's of many specific forms of cancer, including the four major cancers. 17 In fact, the American cancer
experience, never static, is now changing favorably and profoundly: there was no meaningful increase in the number of cancer deaths from 1996 through 1998. 16 This
is impressive because the USA's population is increasing in size and age—two demographic changes that would increase the annual number of cancer deaths
substantially even if age-specific M's were constant.
We can not exclude agents in the environment as causes of some cancer. However, the study of general environments has led to the identification of only one cause
of cancer in human beings. In that instance, endemic pleural mesothelioma in three villages in Turkey was found to be due to erionite, a naturally-occurring mineral
which shares physical properties, including fiber size and shape, with asbestos. 18,19 Moreover, if an environmental agent were to cause cancer, cases probably would
first appear as a “cancer cluster” in a residential or social (e.g., school or house-of-worship) setting. Erionite came to attention in this way. However, none of the other
investigations of hundreds of cancer clusters by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 20 or by a state health department 21 identified a culpable agent, old or
new. There is no way to know how many such investigations have gone unpublished because they provided no useful clue to the identity of a carcinogen. These
considerations do not reduce the need to seek environmental carcinogens when their presence is suspected. And, they do not justify the environmental contamination
that occurred. But they do indicate that there are more fruitful arenas in which to seek human carcinogens.
Table 14.3-1 lists the four natural environmental agents that are on IARC's list of known carcinogens. Arsenic also could be listed here. Except for the inclusion of
radon gas, and occupations involving exposure to radon, IARC makes no mention of ionizing radiation and its sources, natural or man-made. Aflatoxins and erionite
cause little or no cancer in this country but aflatoxins are discussed because of scientific interest. Solar radiation is addressed elsewhere in this text. Man-made
environmental contaminants are addressed below.
Aflatoxins
Aflatoxins are a group of toxins formed by the fungus Aspergillus sps. which lives on peanuts, maize and animal fodder. The aflatoxins kill bacteria which compete with
the fungus for the vegetable material as food. Aflatoxin B1, produced by Aspergillus flavus, is a potent cause of several forms of cancer in many species. It is
considered a cause of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in man on the basis of animal and epidemiologic studies. 22 HCC caused by aflatoxin is a major public health
problem in Africa, in China and elsewhere in Asia. 23 In these regions it also may interact with hepatitis viruses to cause a large amount of HCC, probably the most
common cancer in the world, among men. The frequency of HCC caused by aflatoxin in developed countries probably is very low. 24
Concern over environmental carcinogens usually is focussed on agents discharged in large amounts into the air or water supplies or dumped inappropriately. Rarely
is there concern about naturally occurring geophysical factors or agents, even though the cancer burden imposed by natural agents is likely to exceed greatly that
imposed by artificial ones. 25 Only three agents on IARC's Group 1 list of known carcinogens were widely distributed in the environment by man. These are arsenic,

asbestos and benzene. These agents were distributed primarily through the application of pesticides (arsenic), use of insulation and automotive brake materials
(asbestos) and motor vehicle exhausts (benzene). Other Group 1 agents (e.g., the metals) also were dumped in large amounts but in limited areas.
How much cancer is caused by the three man-made, or man-distributed, agents in IARC's Group 1? That question can not be answered with precision. However,
several groups7,8 have suggested that less than four percent of cancer deaths in America are caused by known carcinogens that pollute the environment. Perhaps the
issue of greatest interest is that of general air pollution and lung cancer. Although this is not an established causal relationship, estimates of the AR% abound. For
example, in 1990 the EPA estimated that less than one percent of lung cancer in the USA was caused by all of the “toxic pollutants” in air. 26 However, the estimate
related to known, or suspect, carcinogens. Thus, the actual amount of lung cancer caused may be somewhat higher because of the possible additional effects of
unidentified agents. On the other hand, the actual percentage may be or soon may become lower if the environmental cleanup of the last 25 years produces benefits.
Benzene can be used to illustrate the effort to estimate the AR% of a widely-dispersed environmental carcinogen. In this example, we focus on benzene as a cause
only of leukemia and not of lymphomas as has been suggested by some persons. Several benzene-leukemia risk assessments 27,28 suggest that a benzene exposure
of 50 to 100 part-per-million years is needed to double a person's risk of leukemia. The higher estimate, implying that benzene is weaker, is probably superior but we
will use 50 ppm-years as the “first doubling dose” for leukemia. The “years” in the assessments refer to a year's work, that is 240 days at eight hours per day or about
22% of a full year. In highly contaminated public areas, e.g., a congested intersection in a major city, benzene levels in air rarely exceed 0.005 ppm. A person who
spent a 75 year lifespan (about 350 work years) in this highly contaminated environment would accumulate a benzene exposure of 1.8 ppm-years (350 years × 0.005
ppm). This is about four percent of the first doubling dose of leukemia. Members of a population living under this condition would have a lifetime probability of death
from leukemia of 1.04% instead of the usual 1.0%. This estimate may be too high as there is evidence that the benzene-leukemia relationship is a threshold
phenomenon in animals 29 and that benzene does not produce leukemia in human beings at cumulative doses below 50 ppm-yrs. 30
Benzene was used to illustrate the basis for the existing low estimates of the carcinogenic effects of environmental pollutants. Estimates for arsenic and asbestos are
even lower because of their limited dispersal. Thus, the suggestion that environmental pollutants cause an appreciable amount of cancer in the USA usually rests
upon conjectures: Unrecognized environmental pollutants are the culprits. Risk assessments such as that described are too general; concern should focus on local
areas where exposures are uniquely high. The risk assessments do not consider possible synergistic effects of combinations of carcinogens. Or, finally, the
population includes highly susceptible persons who will develop cancer at doses much lower than those experienced by the workers whose experience provides the
basis for most risk assessments. It is correct that IARC's Group 2A and 2B together include about two dozen agents and mixtures that are suspected to cause cancer
in human beings and are widespread. Trichloroethylene, polychlorinated biphenyls and diesel exhausts are relevant examples. But, whether these agents, alone or
combined, do cause cancer is unknown.
LIFESTYLE FACTORS
There are five “mixtures” on IARC's Group 1 list that are included as lifestyle factors in Table 14.3-1. Each except the third, betel quid with tobacco, is discussed. We
added reproductive factors. The NTP includes no lifestyle factor on its lists. We consider that about 45% of cancer in the USA is attributable to lifestyle factors but
two-thirds of this 45% results from smoking.
Smoking
Smoking was not the first cause of cancer identified in human beings but it is premiere in almost every other way. It was the first lifestyle factor shown to cause cancer
and probably the first established by epidemiologic means. Most important, smoking causes more cancer in the USA than do all other known causes combined .
A typical 50 year old smoker has a risk of dying from cancer that is three times as great as that of a nonsmoker. Smoking leads to at least 25% and perhaps 35% of
cancer deaths. Finally, smoking is preventable and its elimination would lower cancer mortality more than would the optimization of all other known preventive and
treatment strategies combined.
CANCER OF THE LUNG. Cigarette smoking began in about 1900 and increased among men during World War I and the “roaring” twenties. It continued upward through

the 1950's. Large numbers of women began to smoke during World War II and their smoking increased until the mid-1960's. 31 By the 1930's many physicians
suspected that the increase in lung cancer seen in their practices resulted from cigarette smoking. But this was contentious because many persons thought that the
undoubted rise was due to urban air pollution. The importance of smoking was established in 1950 when the earliest case-control studies 32,33 showed the strength of
its association with lung cancer. The association was widely accepted as causal by the public health and medical communities by the mid-1950's.
When the first Surgeon General's Report on Smoking and Health appeared in 1964, 34 smoking was a well-established cause of lung cancer. Interest had shifted to
estimating benefits from smoking cessation and from switching to filter-tipped and to “low tar” cigarettes. It is now known that the RR of lung cancer declines 60%
within 10 years of quitting smoking, and more thereafter. 35 However, a switch to filter-tipped and low tar cigarettes only minimally lowers risks. 36 Low tar cigarettes also
have a low nicotine level and so “switchers” practice compensatory smoking, largely negating potential benefits. 37 Recent concerns relate to the effects of
environmental tobacco smoke or “passive smoking”. Although lung cancer remains uncommon among nonsmokers, nonsmoking spouses and associates of smokers
have a 25% increased risk of the disease from environmental tobacco smoke. 38
The persistence of smoking-induced lung cancer requires that conventional public health approaches to smoking control be reconsidered. These 40 year old
programs have produced some beneficial effects. For example, the proportion of adults who smoke declined from about 50% in 1960 to 30% in 1990. However, it has
not declined further. Moreover, there is something of a puzzle: Anti-smoking campaigns reduced the prevalence of smokers substantially in the mid-1960's. Why,
then, did not lung cancer stabilize and begin to decline by the mid- to late 1970's? In fact, lung cancer stabilized (in men) only in the late 1980's and, so far, has
declined only about nine percent. The explanation is that it was almost exclusively light smokers who quit first. Yes, light smokers do experience elevated lung cancer
risks. However, it is the heavy or “inveterate” smokers, persons who are unable to quit, who suffer the greatest lung cancer mortality. 39 The prevalence of heavy
smokers has declined relatively little and only recently. 40 Moreover, this decline is occurring not because the heavy smokers are quitting, but because they are dying.
It still may be possible to save many of these heavy smokers, more than one-half of whom otherwise will die of a smoking-related illness, 41 by a harm reduction
strategy which switches them permanently from cigarettes to an alternative nicotine source. This strategy is distinct from the usual one in which alternative sources
(nicotine patch, gum) are employed only temporarily to assist conventional smokers to quit. No nicotine source is ideal for permanent use but, esthetic considerations
aside, smokeless tobacco packets come closest.39
CANCER OF THE LARYNX. Smoking's association with larynx cancer is as strong as that with lung cancer. However, the risk of the disease among nonsmokers is so low

that even the high RR among smokers produces rather few cases among them. The increased risk of larynx cancer from smoking is magnified by abuse of alcoholic
beverages. A similar interaction or synergy is seen for cancer of the oral cavity and of the esophagus.
CANCER OF THE ORAL CAVITY (OCC). This condition, including cancer of the pharynx, is caused by smoking with a RR of about 5.
CANCER OF THE ESOPHAGUS. The risk of this disease is increased in smokers with a RR of about 4. It is a strikingly male disease, uncommon even among women who

smoke.
URINARY TRACT CANCER. Renal cell cancer has a weak association with cigarette smoking with RR's rarely exceeding 2. However, the association is consistent and

widely accepted as causal. The disease presumably is caused by a urogenous agent(s), possibly the same as that, or those, which cause squamous and transitional
cell carcinomas of the lower urinary tract.
Smoking was causally linked to cancer of the bladder by the mid-1950's. 42 Smoking also is a likely cause of carcinomas of the other urinary passages, the renal
pelvis, ureter and urethra. 43 These associations are moderate, with RR's of 2-4 and are consistent. There is some evidence that aromatic amines, especially
4-aminobiphenyl, 44 created from tobacco proteins by the pyrolysis of smoking, explain these causal relationships. One of the largest studies found that persons who
quit smoking lowered their RR of bladder cancer by 20 to 30% within about four years. 45 This suggests that the urogenous carcinogen in cigarette smoke acts as a
late-stage carcinogen in producing bladder cancer, whether or not it also acts as an early-stage carcinogen.
OTHER CANCERS. IARC considers smoking a cause of pancreas cancer. Smoking is moderately to strongly suspect as a cause of cancer of the cervix and liver and of

leukemia.

Smokeless Tobacco
Use of smokeless tobacco imposes a moderate RR of 2 for OCC. However, this risk may be declining because the suspect carcinogens in smokeless tobacco,
naturally-occurring tobacco-specific nitrosamines (TSNAs), have been reduced over the past two decades. In Sweden, where per capita consumption of smokeless
tobacco is very high, TSNAs levels are undetectable and recent studies report no OCC attributable to the use of Swedish products. 46
Alcoholic Beverages
Four forms of cancer are caused by abuse of alcoholic beverages (AB), OCC and cancers of the larynx, esophagus and liver. RR's averaged over different levels of
AB abuse and from different studies are about 4 for these cancers. Thus, 75% of these cancers that occur among AB abusers is attributable to their drinking. In a
general population with a six percent prevalence of AB abusers, a typical figure for men and women combined, 31 about 20% of these cancers, and about 3% of all
cancers, is attributable to AB abuse. Similar estimates have been made by others. 7,8 However, none of these estimates includes the synergistic effects of smoking with
AB in causing OCC and larynx and esophagus cancer.
Smoking and alcohol show a strong synergy in causing OCC and cancers of the larynx and esophagus. For example, among men, the RR of OCC is 5 for smokers
and 5 for AB abusers. However, it is about 25 for men who have both exposures. 47 Each of these three cancers has a distinctly high incidence sex ratio: 4.1, 4.0 and
2.5 for cancers of the larynx, esophagus and OCC, respectively. These high sex ratios probably occur because the combination of heavy smoking and AB abuse is
four times as common among men as among women.47 A practical reality is that all three of the cancers would decline by 40% or so if AB abuse were to cease.
Despite its acceptance as a cause of four forms of cancer, the carcinogenic effect of AB abuse is unexplained. Ethanol is not carcinogenic in animals or in vitro.48 It
has been suggested that AB abuse is associated with cancer because of the poor diet, including micronutrient and vegetable deficiencies, that characterize AB
abusers. Another suggestion is that alcohol acts as a topical solvent on epithelial tissues and increases the amount of carcinogens in food or cigarette smoke or in the
AB themselves that penetrate cells. Both suggestions have existed for decades without becoming established or disproven.
Dietary Factors
Diet is widely seen as a cause of a high proportion of cancer in human beings. This perception has three major bases, the 1981 report by Doll and Peto, 7 a wealth of
seemingly incriminating research and an intuitive appeal. Doll and Peto estimated that 35% of cancer deaths in the USA might be attributable to diet (with a range of
10-70%). They wrote, “It must be emphasized that the figure chosen is highly speculative and chiefly refers to dietary factors which are not yet reliably identified.” This
qualification of the 35% estimate is as valid today as it was 20 years ago.
If the estimate is restricted to known and strongly suspect dietary causes of cancer it is much lower than 35%. IARC includes only one dietary item, Chinese style
salted fish, on its list of known carcinogens. It causes nasopharynx cancer where heavily salted fish is eaten in large amounts by persons of all ages, including
children. This item presumably causes almost no cancer in America.
Although not a dietary factor in the usual sense, caloric excess and the resultant obesity may be seen as a cause of cancer. This is virtually certain for cancer of the
endometrium49 and likely for breast cancer.
The items in the American diet often linked to cancer are red meat especially when charred, 50 animal fats51 and “pesticide residues” ingested on over-treated and
under-washed fruits and vegetables. The cancers related to these items are those of the stomach, colon, breast and prostate. None of these associations is
established as causal. Similarly, many dietary agents have been suggested as protective against one or another form of cancer. These include, as examples, zinc and
cancer of the larynx and esophagus, 52 fruits and vegetables and cancers of the gastrointestinal tract, lung and endometrium. 53 None of these associations is
established.
Reproductive Factors
Virtually every aspect of a woman's reproductive life is associated with alterations in her breast cancer risk. These include age at menarche (earlier, increased risk),
age at first delivery (later, including nulliparity, increased risk), parity (more children, lowered risk), lactation (longer, lowered risk), age at menopause (earlier, lowered
risk) and the use of exogenous estrogens (increased risk). Prolonged use of oral contraceptives (OCs) by younger women may increase breast cancer risk but this
relationship remains poorly understood. The observations seem consistent in suggesting that the duration of a woman's reproductive life is the primary risk
determinant.54 But, there also is evidence that much of a woman's breast cancer risk is determined in her youth and young adulthood. 54,55 And yet, there is no
accepted mechanism that links these reproductive features to a causal agent or to a means of preventing breast cancer.
Cancer of the endometrium and ovary share descriptive epidemiologic features with breast cancer and their risk is increased by nulliparity. But they share few of the
other reproductive correlates of risk. Endometrial cancer is caused by use of sequential but not of combined OCs. This is presumably due to the regimen of sequential
agents which involves two weeks per month of exposure to estrogens unmodified by a progestogen. Endometrial cancer also is caused by exogenous estrogens,
primarily estrone, that until 1975 were prescribed frequently and in relatively high doses for the control of menopausal symptoms. These observations suggest that
endogenous estrone is also a cause of the disease. In any event, some aberration of endogenous hormone production or metabolism is likely to cause endometrial
cancer. This is consistent with the correlation of endometrial cancer risk with male pattern (upper body) obesity in which hormonal aberrations commonly are seen. 50
Finally, endometrial cancer is caused by tamoxifen, anti-estrogenic for the breast but estrogenic for the endometrium. 56
There is no established cause of ovarian cancer except ionizing radiation, although several agents are suspect. These include asbestos, talc and hair dyes. Parity is
moderately protective with RR's declining gradually from 1.0 for nulliparas to about 0.4 for women with four or more children. Lactation may be moderately protective
with perhaps a 30% risk reduction from prolonged lactation. Five or more years of use of combined OCs may lower risk by 40%. Weiss et al 57 indicated that major
progress will require a massive study which evaluates demographic features and possible causes separately for each of the major types of ovarian tumor (germ cell,
sex cord and stromal and epithelial).
OCCUPATIONAL FACTORS
No area of epidemiologic research has identified as many human carcinogens as has occupational epidemiology. One-half of the 75 agents on the IARC Group 1 list
of known carcinogens were identified, or confirmed, by occupational investigations. Yet, only about four percent of cancer in the USA is due to occupational factors.
The discovery of new carcinogens in occupational settings has slowed but this research setting remains important for four reasons: 1) There are several strong
suspect occupational carcinogens. 2) For many agents thousands of workers are exposed in the USA and several hundred thousand worldwide. Thus, the hazard to
workers alone from an occupational carcinogen could pose a major public health problem. 3) Workers typically are exposed to high concentrations of the agents with
which they work and so serve as sentinels for the general population. 4) Almost all occupational studies are of the retrospective follow-up (also termed retrospective
cohort) type. This design permits all causes of death, or all major illnesses, to be identified. Thus, these studies may identify not only carcinogens but causes of other
diseases as well.
Only one occupational carcinogen, creosote, has been added to the NTP “A” list since 1981. More generally, the health of employed groups now is remarkably high
and is likely only to improve as advances in industrial hygiene and manufacturing efficiency make the workplace cleaner.
PHARMACOLOGIC/IATROGENIC FACTORS
The use of a carcinogen as a therapeutic agent is justified for treating a life-threatening condition and even for treating severe non-fatal conditions. At least one
known carcinogen, tamoxifen, is also a cancer preventative in women at high risk of breast cancer. 56 The need to evaluate carefully the risks from the therapeutic use
of a carcinogen in each patient is obvious. This is especially so for children since a child cured of a malignancy has a life expectancy much longer than the induction
period of any cancer. It is not so well recognized that the same issue applies to adults. Even a 60 year old person in the USA has a life expectancy of 20 years or

more, an adequate induction period for many forms of cancer and especially for the leukemias induced by oncolytic therapy.
IARC's Group 1 list of known carcinogens includes 18 agents and mixtures that are, or were, used in medical practice. There are nine alkylating agents (including as
one, MOPP and other combinations that include an alkylating agent), four hormone groups, 1 hormone antagonist, two immunosuppressants, and two additional
mixtures. They are listed in Table 14.3-1. Most of the agents are used to treat cancer and a few are used to treat other life-threatening conditions, e.g., transplanted
organ rejection. Several, such as the estrogen mixtures are, or were, used to treat relatively benign conditions and OCs are used without a therapeutic indication.
The carcinogenic effects of therapeutic agents can be difficult to recognize and to quantify. The reasons are best described if we consider first the agents used for
non-malignant conditions. The carcinogenic effect of these agents is difficult to evaluate because, although they are available only on prescription, the actual amounts
prescribed and consumed are uncertain as any patient (or member of the general public) may obtain the drugs. A patient, or another physician may change the drug
prescribed to another which has a similar biologic effect but which has a different carcinogenic potential, e.g., substitution of non-steroidal for steroidal estrogens.
Finally, if the patient is not under long-term observation at a single medical center a cancer that occurs will not be noted, much less be related to drug use.
Perhaps because of the difficulties just mentioned, as well as the low risk of cancer posed by agents that are not anti-neoplastic, Table 14.3-1 lists few such agents.
This dearth does not reflect a lack of suspicion or of searches for carcinogenic effects of pharmacologic agents. Many agents have been evaluated and not found to
be carcinogenic. For example, the IARC's Group 3 (“Unclassifiable as to carcinogenicity to humans”) includes, among other medications, chloral, acetaminophen (the
major metabolite of phenacetin), reserpine and spironolactone.
The causal relationship between DES exposure in utero and clear cell adenocarcinoma (CCA) of the vagina in young women warrants mention. DES is the only
non-oncolytic pharmacologic agent that imposes a massive RR of cancer on exposed persons. Although the association is strong with an RR >100 the disease is
nonetheless rare among exposed women; their lifetime risk of developing CCA is only 1 in 1000. 58
When we turn to the anti-neoplastic agents, most of the investigative problems mentioned above are reduced. The identity and dosage of the agents prescribed are
documented. Outpatient compliance with treatment is presumed to be good. The agents are not used by the general public and so the baseline number of cancers of
a particular type to be expected among treated patients can be estimated. However, there are three problems that complicate the study of the carcinogenicity of
anti-neoplastic agents: 1) The agents often are used in combinations both simultaneous and sequential or with radiation therapy. This makes it difficult to identify the
effect of any one agent and also introduces the possibility of synergistic effects. There is particular concern about synergy between pharmacologic agents and
radiation therapy. However, there is as yet no evidence of this synergy. 59 2) Many cancer patients survive relatively few years after receiving chemotherapy. This
makes it difficult to accumulate a substantial number of person-years at risk after the passage of a reasonable minimum induction period for a second cancer. 3)
Cancer patients are at increased risk of developing a second primary cancer for reasons unrelated to their treatment. These include the high risk of a second primary
of the same type as the first. The causes of one type of cancer also cause others, e.g., patients with lung cancer have an increased risk of bladder cancer, and vice
versa, because smoking causes both. Also, causes of cancer often cluster in an individual, e.g., smoking, AB abuse and poor diet. Finally, there is the possibility of a
“cancer diathesis”, the prospect that, for some constitutional reason, e.g., genetic makeup, a person who developed one cancer has an inherently increased risk of
developing another.
The many reasons why a cancer patient might develop a second primary tumor cause us to be skeptical of reports of an excess of second primaries following
anti-neoplastic treatment. This is especially so if the excess is minimal or is restricted to cancers of the same type or etiology as the first. However, as Table 14.3-1
indicates, a characteristic of the risk of second primaries following cancer treatment is that almost all of the RR's are 5 or greater. And, the second cancer commonly
is AML, irrespective of the cancer for which treatment was given. The associations in the table are virtually certainly attributable to the agents listed and not to any of
the other reasons why a cancer patient might develop a second tumor.
BIOLOGIC FACTORS
Oncogenic biologic agents long have challenged laboratory investigators and epidemiologists. For nearly a century one microbe after another that appeared to cause
cancer in man was identified but soon discarded. Few contemporary researchers will remember the “ Bacillus hodgkini” – the “cause” of Hodgkin's disease discovered
in 1915.60 More memorable, if only because of their recency, are the various “B” and “C” particles that were considered fragments of a virus which was thought to
cause breast cancer in women. Herpesvirus hominis, type 2, was virtually established in the mid-1970's as the cause of cervix cancer. But, by 1981, in their review of
known and suspect causes of cancer, Doll and Peto 7 indicated only that the EBV-Burkitt's lymphoma relationship seemed likely to be causal and they appeared to
accept the hepatitis-B virus and HCC association as causal. They suggested as, “a very uncertain best estimate” that 10% of cancer deaths in the USA might prove to
be due to infectious agents.
Now, the discovery of causes of cancer has slowed in virtually every area except that of biologic agents. Almost certainly as a direct result of advances in molecular
biology, there are nine biologic agents known to cause cancer in human beings ( Table 14.3-1). All nine agents are of considerable scientific and clinical interest but
only the hepatitis viruses, the human papilloma viruses (HPV) and H. pylori cause enough cancer to be considered public health problems in the USA. The hepatitis-B
and -C viruses together cause about 50% of the cases of HCC that occur 61 and so cause about 6000 deaths per year. HPV causes about 90% of cervical cancer or
4000 deaths per year.62 Both categories of agents produce much more disease in the developing world, as does EBV. H. pylori is estimated to cause 60% of stomach
cancer or about 7000 deaths per year in the USA. The other known infectious agents combined probably cause less than 500 cancer deaths per year. The total for
infectious agents is about 18,000 deaths per year or about four percent of cancer deaths. Doll and Peto's “best estimate” of 10% still seems reasonable as a virus
etiology may yet be found for several forms of cancer, especially in the leukemia-lymphoma group.
Cervical cancer is the most common cancer in the world, among women. It has a long and rich epidemiologic history. Its long-term declining I and M in developed
countries, its striking association with poverty, with “reproductive” factors, and the large-scale use of the pap smear all have caused this disease to receive
considerable attention from the cancer research community. Cancer of the cervix is the “epidemiologic opposite” of the other major cancers of women. It is associated
with early childbearing, high parity and poverty. However, the representation that cervix cancer is associated with “reproductive” factors is a euphemism. The disease
actually is associated largely with sexual practices. The more sexual partners a woman has had, especially before age 20, the higher her risk of cervical cancer. 63 We
now recognize that this association reflected a woman's probability of becoming infected with HPV. There may be small, independent associations of cervical cancer
risk with factors beyond those that are indices of exposure to HPV. These factors are use of OCs and micronutrient, especially vitamin, deficiencies.
A notable feature of the epidemiology of cervical cancer is the recent increase of adenocarcinomas. This condition has an epidemiology like that of cancer of the
endometrium and unlike that of the usual squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. 64

PERSPECTIVES
The year 2001 is the thirtieth anniversary of the National Cancer Act and of the USA's “War on Cancer”. These three decades brought major achievements. Since at
least 1972 M's of most forms of cancer have been declining; in 1991 the overall cancer M started to decline and is now accelerating downward. This favorable trend
probably will continue for many years. Thus, progress may now be described as, at the very least, substantial.
Cancer M's started to decline earlier and still decline more sharply than do I's. This is prima facie evidence of major improvements in medical care. And yet I's finally
are also declining indicating that prevention efforts are bringing results. This is what we address here. Do we now know, and protect against, the causes of more
cancers than we did 20 or 30 years ago?
ARE MORE CANCERS NOW OF KNOWN ETIOLOGY?
At the beginning of this Section we compared the 1998 NTP-A list of known carcinogens with its 1980 counterpart. The list increased from about 20 agents to about
33. However, the added items are almost all pharmacologic agents that, combined, cause less than three percent of cancer deaths.
In 1981 Doll and Peto estimated the percentage of cancer deaths in the USA attributable to each of 11 major causes or groups of causes of cancer. 7 The left column
of Table 14.3-2 is an adaptation of their summary estimates of AR%'s. (We made minor alterations in their format, described below.) The 97% figure of Doll and Peto
does not imply that they thought they were explaining nearly all cancer. The AR%'s listed are not mutually exclusive and the totals presented are only general
indicators of how much disease might be prevented if the causes listed were controlled. The right column in Table 14.3-2 shows our present estimates of the

all-cancer AR%'s for the same categories of agents. A comparison of the two sets of estimates seems to imply that there has been little progress. The total in the
second column is actually moderately lower than that in the first! Do we know the causes of fewer cancers than we did 20 years ago? No. The explanation of the
decline in the AR%'s lies in the different bases of the two sets of estimates. Doll and Peto addressed what reasonably might be true; we describe what is known or
highly probable. To clarify this we address several categories in the table.

TABLE 14.3-2. Percentage of Cancer Deaths Attributable to Agents in Eleven Categories

We labeled the third category “smoking” but Doll and Peto termed it “tobacco”. The distinction is important. During the last 20 years in the USA many anti-smoking
campaigns shifted their focus from preventing deaths caused by smoking to preventing tobacco use. If we refocus attention on deaths from smoking we can learn a
valuable lesson from Sweden, the only country which has met the World Health Organization's goal of a less than 20% prevalence of smokers. It also has Europe's
lowest rates of lung cancer, larynx cancer, OCC and bladder cancer. 65 How were these benchmarks attained? There may be several explanations, but it is certainly
relevant that Sweden has the highest per capita use in Europe of smokeless tobacco. 66
Whether we refer to “tobacco” or “smoking”, the situation has not changed in 20 years: smoking causes about 30% of cancer deaths. It will now change. Lung cancer
and other smoking-related cancers will decline sharply over the next decade. The impending decline in lung cancer deaths will occur because the number occurring
among inveterate, that is heavy, smokers at last has started down. These persons are literally a dying breed whose numbers, finally, are not being replaced fully by
equally heavy smokers. The misfortune is that the decline in smoking-related morbidity and mortality that is now beginning might have occurred 20 or more years ago
if our initial efforts against smoking had focussed on the heavy smokers.
Doll and Peto thought that dietary factors might cause about 35% of cancer. Yet, the evidence that dietary factors are carcinogens is as elusive today as it was 20
years ago. Our present estimate even of just five percent is defensible only as “strongly suspect”. Despite limitations and controversy the information on diet and
cancer is useful. Virtually all of the dietary alterations recommended today to reduce cancer risk are, at the least, prudent. The specific reason why people choose a
healthful diet and whether it is the “prudent” diet, 67 the Asian diet, or the Mediterranean diet 68 may matter little. Each of the diets, adopted not as a temporary regimen,
but as a part of one's lifestyle will contribute to weight control, reduce intake of animal fats and increase the intake of fruits and vegetables. This should lower the risks
of cardiovascular diseases and, perhaps, of cancer.
Doll and Peto considered only two of the virus-cancer relationships in Table 14.3-1 as “likely”. Today, none of the relationships in the table is controversial. However,
there is uncertainty over the RR's and AR%'s of cancer associated with infectious agents. Our summary estimate of four percent, developed above, is a reasonably
firm estimate of the minimum amount of cancer caused by infectious agents.
We consider Doll and Peto's estimate of one percent of cancer due to “medicines, procedures” and our analogous estimate of two percent as identical if only because
both are imprecise. The amount of cancer caused by these agents is unlikely to be increasing. In fact, in a carefully developed opinion in 1977 Jick and Smith
suggested two percent.69 Cancer due to pharmacologic and iatrogenic agents probably is declining because of their more guarded use.
No, we do not know the causes of fewer cancers today than we did 20 years ago. But, if we focus on what we know, as distinct from what may be true, we do not know
the causes of many more, either.
HAVE WE REDUCED EXPOSURE TO RECOGNIZED CAUSES OF CANCER?
Yes. The population's smoking, both active and passive, is diminishing, albeit slowly. Exposure to workplace carcinogens probably is declining and occupational
cancers are in decline. 8 H. pylori is treated widely, sunblockers are in common use and carcinogenic agents in medical practice are used carefully. Although obesity
unfortunately is increasing, 70 animal fat in the American diet is declining while the amount of fruit and vegetables is increasing. 71 Also, contaminants in the general
environment, possibly including carcinogens, are in decline. It is impractical to estimate the cancer reductions that these changes will bring. But, the reductions
already are evident and appear certain to increase.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Rehn L. Blasengeschwulste bei fuchsin-arbeitern. Arch Klin Chir 1895;50:588.
2. Hill AB. The environment and disease: association or causation? Proc R Soc Med 1965;293.
3. Cole P. Causality in epidemiology, health policy, and law. Environ Law Reporter 1997;27:10279.
4. US Department of Health and Human Services. National Toxicology Program. Eighth report on carcinogens 1998 summary. Also available at: http://ehis.niehs.nih.gov/roc/toc8.html .
5. California Regulatory Notice Register. Safe drinking water and toxic enforcement act of 1986 (Proposition 65): Notice to interested parties . August 20, 1999. Also available at:
www.oeha.org/prop65/899not.html.
6. IARC current website: http://www.iarc.fr.
7. Doll R, Peto R. The causes of cancer. New York: Oxford University Press, 1981.
8. Trichopoulos D, Li F, Hunter D. What causes cancer? Sci Am 1996;275:80.
9. Greenwald P, Kramer B, Weed D, eds. Cancer prevention and control. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1995.
10. Schottenfeld D, Fraumeni JF Jr, eds. Cancer epidemiology and prevention. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
11. Carson R. Silent spring. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1962.
12. Wingo P, Ries L, Giovino G, et al. Annual report to the nation on the status of cancer, 19731996, with a special section on lung cancer and tobacco smoking. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:675.
13. Rodu B, Cole P. The fifty year decline of cancer in America. J Clin Oncol 2000 (in press).
14. Cole P, Rodu B. Declining cancer mortality in the United States. Cancer 1996;78:2045.
15. Hoyert DL, Kochanek KD, Murphy SL. Deaths: final data for 1997. National Vital Statistics Reports. Vol 47, no. 19. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics, 1999.
16. Martin JA, Smith BL, Mathews TJ, Ventura SJ. Births and deaths: preliminary data for 1998. National Vital Statistics Reports. Vol 47, no. 25. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health
Statistics. 1999.
17. Wingo P, Ries L, Rosenberg H, Miller D, Edwards B. Cancer incidence and mortality: 19731995; a report card for the U.S. Cancer 1998;82:1197.
18. IARC Monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans: silica and some silicates. Lyon, France: IARC Monograph Vol. 42, 1987.
19. Simonato L, Baris R, Saracci R, Skidmore J, Winkelmann R. Relation of environmental exposure to erionite fibres to risk of respiratory cancer. IARC Scientific Publications 1989;90:398.
20. Caldwell GG. Twenty-two years of cancer cluster investigations at the Centers for Disease Control. Am J Epidemiol 1990;132:S43.
21. Devier JR, Brownson RC, Bagby JR Jr, Carlson GM, Crellin JR. A public health response to cancer clusters in Missouri. Am J Epidemiol 1990;132:S23.
22. IARC monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans: some naturally occurring substances: food items and constituents, heterocyclic aromatic amines and mycotoxins. Lyon,
France: IARC Monograph Vol. 56, 1993.
23. Montesano R, Hainaut P, Wild C. Hepatocellular carcinoma: from gene to public health. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1844.
24. Stoloff F. Aflatoxin as a cause of primary liver-cell cancer in the United States: a probability study. Nutr Cancer 1983;5:165.
25. Ames B, Magaw R, Gold L. Ranking possible carcinogenic hazards. Science 1987;236:271.
26. U.S. EPA. Cancer risk from outdoor exposure to air toxics. Vol. 1: final report. EPA-450/1-90-004a. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1990.
27. Austin H, Delzell E, Cole P. Benzene and leukemia: a review of the literature and a risk assessment. Am J Epidemiol 1988;127:419.
28. Paxton M. Leukemia risk associated with benzene exposure in the pliofilm cohort. Environ Health Perspect 1996;104:1461.
29. Cronkite E, Drew R, Inoue T, Hirabayashi Y, Bullis J. Hematotoxicity and carcinogenicity of inhaled benzene. Environ Health Perspect 1989;82:97.
30. Paxton M, Chincilli V, Brett S, Rodricks J. Leukemia risk associated with benzene distribution. Risk Analysis 1994;14:147.
31. National Center for Health Statistics. Health, United States, 1995. Hyattsville, MD: Public Health Service, 1996.

32. Doll R, Hill AB. Smoking and carcinoma of the lung. BMJ 1950;2:739.
33. Wynder EL, Graham EA. Tobacco smoking is a possible etiologic factor in bronchiogenic carcinoma. A study of six hundred eighty-four proved cases. JAMA 1950;143:329.
34. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Smoking and health. Report of the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service. Public Health Service
Publication No. 1103. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1964.
35. Halpern M, Gillespie B, Warner K. Patterns of absolute risk of lung cancer mortality in former smokers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:457.
36. Stellman S, Garfinkel L. Lung cancer risk and cigarette tar yield. Prev Med 1989;18:518.
37. Wilcox H, Schoenberg J, Mason T, Bill JS, Stemhagen A. Smoking and lung cancer: risk as a function of cigarette tar content. Prev Med 1988;17:262.
38. Fontham E, Correa P, Chen V. Passive smoking and lung cancer. J LA State Med Soc 1993;145:132.
39. Rodu B, Cole P. Nicotine maintenance for inveterate smokers. Technology 1999;6:17.
40. Surveillance for selected tobacco-use behaviors: United States, 19001994. MMWR 1994;43:1.
41. Thun MJ, Day-Lally CA, Calle EE, Flanders WD, Heath CW Jr. Excess mortality among cigarette smokers: changes in a 20-year interval. Am J Public Health 1995;85:1223.
42. Lilienfeld AM, Levin M, Moore GE. The association of smoking with cancer of the urinary bladder in humans. Arch Intern Med 1956;98:129.
43. Schmauz R, Cole P. Epidemiology of cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter. J Natl Cancer Inst 1974;52:1431.
44. Vineis P, Caporaso N, Tannenbaum S, Skipper P, et al. Acetylation phenotype, carcinogen-hemoglobin adducts, and cigarette smoking. Cancer Res 1990;50:3002.
45. Hartge P, Silverman D, Hoover R, Schairer C, et al. Changing cigarette habits and bladder cancer risk: a case-control study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;78:1119.
46. Lewin F, Norell S, Johansson H, Gustavsson P, et al. Smoking tobacco, oral snuff, and alcohol in the etiology of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: a population-based
case-referent study in Sweden. Cancer 1998;82:1367.
47. Blot W, McLaughlin J, Winn D, et al. Smoking and drinking in relation to oral and pharyngeal cancer. Cancer Res 1988;48:3282.
48. Rubin E. The questionable link between alcohol intake and cancer. Clin Chim Acta 1996;246:143.
49. Swanson C, Potischman N, Wilbanks G, Twiggs L, et al. Relation of endometrial cancer risks to past and contemporary body size and body fat distribution. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1993;2:321.
50. Augustsson K, Skog K, Jagerstad M, Dickman P, Steineck G. Dietary heterocyclic amines and cancer of the colon, rectum, bladder and kidney: a population-based study. Lancet 1999;353:703.
51. Kolonel L. Fat and cancer: the epidemiologic evidence in perspective. Adv Exper Med Biol 1997;422:1.
52. Rogers M, Thomas D, Dais S, Vaughan T, Nevissi A. A case-control study of element levels and cancer of the upper aerodigestive tract. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1993;2:305.
53. Steinmetz K, Potter J. Vegetables, fruit, and cancer prevention: a review. J Am Diet Assoc 1996;96:1027.
54. Henderson B, Pike M, Bernstein L, Ross R. Breast cancer. In: Schottenfeld D, Fraumeni JF Jr., eds. Cancer epidemiology and prevention. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
55. Adami H, Signorello L, Trichopoulos D. Towards an understanding of breast cancer etiology. Semin Cancer Biol 1998;8:255.
56. White I. The tamoxifen dilemma. Carcinogenesis 1999;20:1153.
57. Weiss N, Cook L, Farrow D, Rosenblatt K. Ovarian Cancer. In: Schottenfeld D, Fraumeni JF Jr., eds. Cancer epidemiology and prevention. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
58. Herbst A, Cole P, Colton T, et al. Age-incidence and risk of DES-related clear cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina and cervix. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1977;128:43.
59. Little J. Cellular, molecular and carcinogenic effects of radiation. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1993;7:337.
60. Yates J, Bunting C. The rational treatment of Hodgkin's disease. JAMA 1915;64:1953.
61. Ince N, Wands J. The increasing incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1999;340:798.
62. Schiffman M. Recent progress in defining the epidemiology of human papilloma virus infection and cervical neoplasia. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:394.
63. Schiffman M, Burk R. Human papilloma viruses. In: Evans A, Kaslow R, eds. Viral infections of humans. 4th ed. New York: Plenum, 1997.
64. Kjaer S, Brinton L. Adenocarcinomas of the uterine cervix: the epidemiology of an increasing problem. Epidemiol Rev 1993;15:486.
65. LaVecchia C, Lucchini F, Negri E, Boyle P, et al. Trends of cancer mortality in Europe, 19551989: II and IV. Eur J Cancer 1992;28:514 and 1992;28A:1210.
66. Schildt E, Eriksson M, Hardell L, Magnusson A. Oral snuff, smoking habits and alcohol in relation to oral cancer in a Swedish case-control study. Intl J Cancer 1998;77:341.
67. Wynder E. Nutrition and cancer. Fed Proc 1976;35:1309.
68. Jenkins N. The Mediterranean diet cookbook. New York: Bantam Books, 1994.
69. Jick H, Smith P. Regularly used drugs and cancer. In: Hiatt H, Watson J, Winsten J, eds. Origins of human cancer. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1977.
70. National Center for Health Statistics. Health, United States, 1999 with Health and Aging Chartbook. Hyattsville, MD: Public Health Service, 1999.
71. National Center for Health Statistics. Healthy People 2000 Review, 199899. Hyattsville, MD: Public Health Service, 1999.
72. Axelson O, Andersson K, Desai G, et al. Indoor radon exposure and active and passive smoking in relation to the occurrence of lung cancer. Scand J Work Environ Health 1988;14:286.
73. Elwood J, Jopson J. Melanoma and sun exposure: an overview of published studies. Int J Cancer 1997;73:198.
74. Moan J, Dahlback A, Setlow R. Epidemiological support for an hypothesis for melanoma induction indicating a role for UVA radiation. Photochem Photobiol 1999;70:243.
75. Doll R, Peto R. Mortality in relation to smoking: 20 years' observations on male British doctors. BMJ 1976;2:1525.
76. Falk RT, Pickle LW, Brown LM, Mason TJ, et al. Effect of smoking and alcohol consumption on laryngeal cancer risk in coastal Texas. Cancer Res 1989;49:4024.
77. Tuyns AJ, Esteve J. Pipe, commercial and hand-rolled cigarette smoking in oesophageal cancer. Intl J Epidemiol 1983;12:110.
78. McLaughlin JK, Mandel JS, Blot WJ, Schuman LM, et al. A populationnbased casencontrol study of renal cell carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1984;72:275.
79. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans: Tobacco smoking. Lyon, France: IARC Monograph Vol. 38, 1986.
80. Winn DM, Blot WJ, Shy CM, Pickle LW, et al. Snuff dipping and oral cancer among women in the southern United States. N Engl J Med 1981;304:745.
81. Gupta P, Pindborg J, Mehta F. Comparison of carcinogenicity of betel quid with and without tobacco: an epidemiological review. Ecol Dis 1982;1:213.
82. Jensen O, Paine S, McMichael A, Ewertz M. Alcohol. In: Schottenfeld D, Fraumeni JF Jr., eds. Cancer epidemiology and prevention. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
83. Yu MC, Huang TB, Henderson BE. Diet and nasopharyngeal carcinoma: a case-control study in Guangzhou, China. Intl J Cancer 1989;43:1077.
84. Madigan M, Ziegler R, Benichou J, Byrne C, Hoover R. Proportion of breast cancer cases in the United States explained by well-established risk factors. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1681.
85. Melick WF. Bladder carcinoma and xenylamine. N Engl J Med 1972;287:1103.
86. Meigs JW, Marrett LD, Ulrich FU, Flannery JT. Bladder tumor incidence among workers exposed to benzidine: a thirty-year follow-up. J Natl Cancer Inst 1986;76:1.
87. Schulte PA, Ringen K, Hemstreet GP, et al. Risk assessment of a cohort exposed to aromatic amines. Initial results. J Occup Med 1985;27:115.
88. Wong O. An industry wide mortality study of chemical workers occupationally exposed to benzene. I. General results. Br J Ind Med 1987;44:365.
89. Weiss W. Epidemic curve of respiratory cancer due to chloromethyl ethers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1982;69:1265.
90. Tamburro CH. Relationship of vinyl monomers and liver cancers: angiosarcoma and hepatocellular carcinoma. Semin Liver Dis 1984;4:158.
91. Wong O, Whorton MD, Foliart DE, Ragland D. An industry-wide epidemiologic study of vinyl chloride workers, 19421982. Am J Ind Med 1991;20:317.
92. Bisanti L, Maggini M, Raschetti R, et al. Cancer mortality in ethylene oxide workers. Br J Ind Med 1993;50:317.
93. Easton DF, Peto J, Doll R. Cancers of the respiratory tract in mustard gas workers. Br J Ind Med 1988;45:652.
94. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans: Polychlorinated dibenzo- para-dioxins and polychlorinated dibenzofurans. Lyon, France: IARC Monograph Vol. 69, 1997.
95. Brown KG, Boyle KE, Chen CW, Gibb HJ. A dose-response analysis of skin cancer from inorganic arsenic in drinking water. Risk Anal 1989;9:519.
96. Lee-Feldstein A. Cumulative exposure to arsenic and its relationship to respiratory cancer among copper smelter employees. J Occup Med 1986;28:296.
97. Hayes RB. The carcinogenicity of metals in humans. Cancer Causes Control 1997;8:371.
98. Davies JM, Easton DF, Bidstrup PL. Mortality from respiratory cancer and other causes in United Kingdom chromate production workers. Br J Ind Med 1991;48:299.
99. Doll R, Mathews JD, Morgan LG. Cancers of the lung and nasal sinuses in nickel workers: a reassessment of the period of risk. Br J Ind Med 1977;34:102.
100. Steenland K, Ward E. Lung cancer incidence among patients with beryllium disease: a cohort mortality study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:1380.
101. Seidman H, Selikoff IJ, Gelb SK. Mortality experience of amosite asbestos factory workers: dose-response relationships 5 to 40 years after onset of short-term work exposure. Am J Ind Med
1986;10:479.
102. Brown LM, Mason TJ, Pickle LW, et al. Occupational risk factors for laryngeal cancer on the Texas Gulf Coast. Cancer Res 1988;48:1960.
103. Amandus H, Costello J. Silicosis and lung cancer in U.S. metal miners. Arch Environ Hlth 1991;46:82.
104. Thomas TL, Stewart PA. Mortality from lung cancer and respiratory disease among pottery workers exposed to silica and talc. Am J Epidemiol 1987;125:35.
105. Boice J, Land C, Preston D. Ionizing radiation. In: Schottenfeld D, Fraumeni JF Jr., eds. Cancer epidemiology and prevention. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
106. Doll R, Vessey MP, Beasley RWR, Buckley AR, et al. Mortality of gasworkersfinal report of a prospective study. Br J Ind Med 1972;29:394.
107. Jarvholm B, Lavenius B. Mortality and cancer morbidity in workers exposed to cutting fluids. Arch Environ Health 1987;42:361.
108. Miller BG, Cowie HA, Middleton WG, Seaton A. Epidemiologic studies of Scottish oil shale workers: III. Causes of death. Am J Ind Med 1986;9:433.
109. Hogstedt C, Andersson K, Frenning B, Gustavsson A. A cohort study on mortality among long-time employed Swedish chimney sweeps. Scand J Work Environ Health 1982;8(Suppl 1):72.
110. Demers PA, Kogevinas M, Boffetta P, et al. Wood dust and sino-nasal cancer: pooled reanalysis of twelve case-control studies. Am J Ind Med 1995;28:151.
111. Spinelli JJ, Band PR, Svirchev LM, Gallagher RP. Mortality and cancer incidence in aluminum reduction plant workers. J Occup Med 1991;33:1150.
112. Vineis P, Pirastu R. Aromatic amines and cancer. Cancer Causes Control 1997;8:346.
113. Pippard EC, Acheson ED. The mortality of boot and shoe makers, with special reference to cancer. Scand J Work Environ Health 1985;11:249.
114. Loeb L, Ernster V, Warner K, et al. Smoking and lung cancer: an overview. Cancer Res 1984;44:5940.
115. Redmond CK. Cancer mortality among coke oven workers. Environ Health Perspect 1983;52:67.
116. Gerhardsson MR, Norell SE, Kiviranta HJ, Ahlbom A. Respiratory cancers in furniture workers. Br J Ind Med 1985;42:403.
117. Sorahan T, Cooke MA. Cancer mortality in a cohort of United Kingdom steel foundry workers: 194685. Br J Ind Med 1989;46:74.
118. Sathiakumar N, Delzell E, Amoateng-Adjepong Y, et al. Epidemiologic evidence on the relationship between mists containing sulfuric acid and respiratory tract cancer. Crit Rev Toxicol
1997;27:233.
119. Boyko RW, Cartwright RA, Glashan RW. Bladder cancer in dye manufacturing workers. J Occup Med 1985;27:799.
120. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Some organic solvents, resin monomers and related compounds, pigments and occupational exposures in pain
manufacture and painting. Lyon, France: IARC Monograph Vol. 47, 1989.
121. Delzell E, Monson RR. Mortality among rubber workers. III. Cause-specific mortality, 19401978. J Occup Med 1981;23:677.
122. Travis LB, Curtis RE, Stovall M, et al. Risk of leukemia following treatment for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1450.
123. Hass JF, Kittelmann B, Mehnert WH, et al. Risk of leukaemia in ovarian tumour and breast cancer patients following treatment by cyclophosphamide. Br J Cancer 1987;55:213.
124. Greene MH, Boice JD Jr, Greer BE, Blessing JA, Dembo AJ. Acute nonlymphocytic leukemia after therapy with alkylating agents for ovarian cancer: a study of five randomized clinical trials. N
Engl J Med 1982;307:1416.
125. Boice JD Jr, Greene MH, Killen JY Jr, et al. Leukemia and preleukemia after adjuvant treatment of gastrointestinal cancer with semustine (methyl-CCNU). N Engl J Med 1983;309:1079.
126. Boivin JF, Hutchison GB, Lyden M, Godbold J, et al. Second primary cancers following treatment of Hodgkin's disease. J Natl Cancer Inst 1984;72:233.
127. Stott H, Fox W, Girling DJ, Stephens RJ, Galton DA. Acute leukaemia after busulphan. BMJ 1977;2:1513.
128. Kaldor JM, Day NE, Pettersson F, et al. Leukemia following chemotherapy for ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1.
129. Thiede T, Christensen BC. Bladder tumours induced by chlornaphazine. A five-year follow-up study of chlornaphazine-treated patients with polycythaemia. Acta Med Scand 1969;185:133.
130. Kinlen LJ. Incidence of cancer in rheumatoid arthritis and other disorders after immunosuppressive treatment. Am J Med 1985;78:44.
131. Alexander JW, First MR, Hariharan S, et al. Recent contributions to transplantation at the University of Cincinnati. Clin Transplants 1991:159.
132. Colton T, Greenberg ER, Noller K, et al. Breast cancer in mothers prescribed diethylstilbestrol in pregnancy. Further follow-up. JAMA 1993;269:2096.
133. Depue RH, Pike MC, Henderson BE. Estrogen exposure during gestation and risk of testicular cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1983;71:1151.
134. Marrett LD, Meigs JW, Flannery JT. Trends in the incidence of cancer of the corpus uteri in Connecticut, 19641979, in relation to consumption of exogenous estrogens. Am J Epidemiol

1982;116:57.
135. Weiss NS, Sayvetz TA. Incidence of endometrial cancer in relation to the use of oral contraceptives. N Engl J Med 1980;302:551.
136. Neuberger J, Forman D, Doll R, Williams R. Oral contraceptives and hepatocellular carcinoma. BMJ 1986;292:1355.
137. Fisher B, Costantino JP, Redmond CK, Fisher ER, et al. Endometrial cancer in tamoxifen-treated breast cancer patients: findings from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project
(NSABP) B-14. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:527.
138. Stern RS, Laird N, Melski J, Parrish JA, et al. Cutaneous squamous-cell carcinoma in patients treated with PUVA. N Engl J Med 1984;310:1156.
139. Piper JM, Tonascia J, Matanoski GM. Heavy phenacetin use and bladder cancer in women aged 20 to 49 years. N Engl J Med 1985;313:292-5.
140. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Epstein-Barr virus and kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus/human herpesvirus 8. Lyon, France: IARC Monograph Vol. 70,
1997.
141. Forman D, Newell DG, Fullerton F, et al. Association between infection with Helicobacter pylori and risk of gastric cancer: evidence from a prospective investigation. BMJ 1991;302:1302.
142. London WT. + Hum Pathol 1981;12:1085.
143. Stroffolini T, Chiaramonte M, Tiribelli C, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection, HBsAg carrier state and hepatocellular carcinoma: relative risk and population attributable risk from a case-control
study in Italy. J Hepatol 1992;16:360.
144. Levine AM. AIDS-related malignancies: the emerging epidemic. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1382.
145. Hinuma Y, Nagata K, Hanaoka M, et al. Adult T-cell leukemia: antigen in an ATL cell line and detection of antibodies to the antigen in human sera. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1981;78:6476.
146. Schwartz DA. Cholangiocarcinoma associated with liver fluke infection: a preventable source of morbidity in Asian immigrants. Am J Gastroenterol 1986;81:76.
147. Vizcaino AP, Parkin DM, Boffetta P, Skinner ME. Bladder cancer: epidemiology and risk factors in Bulawayo, Zimbabwe. Cancer Causes Control 1994;5:517.

CHAPTER 15 Principles of Cancer Management: Surgical Oncology
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 15
Principles of Cancer Management: Surgical Oncology
STEVEN A. ROSENBERG
Introduction
Historical Perspective
Anesthesia for Oncologic Surgery
Determination of Operative Risk
Roles for Surgery
Prevention of Cancer
Diagnosis of Cancer
Treatment of Cancer
The Surgical Oncologist
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Surgery is the oldest treatment for cancer and, until recently, was the only treatment that could cure patients with cancer. The surgical treatment of cancer has
changed dramatically over the last several decades. Advances in surgical techniques and a better understanding of the patterns of spread of individual cancers have
allowed surgeons to perform successful resections for an increased number of patients. The development of alternate treatment strategies that can control
microscopic disease has prompted surgeons to reassess the magnitude of surgery necessary.
The surgeon who treats cancer must be familiar with the natural history of individual cancers and with the principles and potentialities of surgery, radiation therapy,
chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and other new treatment modalities. The surgeon has a central role in the prevention, diagnosis, and definitive treatment of the
disease and in palliation and rehabilitation of the cancer patient. The principles underlying each of these roles of the surgical oncologist are discussed in this chapter.

HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Although the earliest discussions of the surgical treatment of tumors are found in the Edwin Smith papyrus from the Egyptian Middle Kingdom (circa 1600 BC), the
modern era of elective surgery for visceral tumors began in frontier America in 1809. 1,2 Ephraim MacDowell removed a 22-pound ovarian tumor from a patient, Mrs.
Jane Todd Crawford, who survived for 30 years after the operation. This procedure, the first of 13 ovarian resections performed by MacDowell, was the first elective
abdominal operation and provided a great stimulus to the development of elective surgery.
The treatment of most tumors depended on two subsequent developments in surgery. The first of these was the introduction of general anesthesia by two dentists, Dr.
William Morton and Dr. Crawford Long. The first major operation using general ether anesthesia was an excision of the submaxillary gland and part of the tongue,
performed by Dr. John Collins Warren on October 16, 1846, at the Massachusetts General Hospital. The second major development stimulating the widespread
application of surgery resulted from the introduction of the principles of antisepsis by Joseph Lister in 1867. Based on the concepts of Pasteur, Lister introduced
carbolic acid in 1867 and described the principles of antisepsis in an article in the Lancet in that same year.
These developments freed surgery from pain and sepsis and greatly increased its use for the treatment of tumors. In the decade before the introduction of ether, only
385 operations were performed at the Massachusetts General Hospital. By the last decade of the nineteenth century, more than 20,000 operations per year were
performed at that same hospital. 3
Table 15-1 lists selected milestones in the history of surgical oncology. Although this list does not include all the important developments, it does provide the tempo of
the application of surgery to cancer treatment. 4 Major figures in the evolution of surgical oncology included Albert Theodore Billroth who, in addition to developing
meticulous surgical techniques, performed the first gastrectomy, laryngectomy, and esophagectomy. In the 1890s, William Stewart Halsted elucidated the principles of
en bloc resections for cancer, as exemplified by the radical mastectomy. Examples of radical resections for cancers of individual organs include the radical
prostatectomy by Hugh Young in 1904, the radical hysterectomy by Ernest Wertheim in 1906, the abdominoperineal resection for cancer of the rectum by W. Ernest
Miles in 1908, and the first successful pneumonectomy performed for cancer by Evarts Graham in 1933. Modern technical innovations continue to extend the
surgeon's capabilities. Recent examples include the development of microsurgical techniques that enable the performance of free grafts for reconstruction, automatic
stapling devices, sophisticated endoscopic equipment that allows for a wide variety of “incisionless” surgery, and major improvements in postoperative management
and critical care of patients that have extended the safety of major surgical therapy.

TABLE 15-1. Selected Historical Milestones in Surgical Oncology

Critics who believe that the application of surgery has reached a plateau beyond which it will not progress should remember the words of a famous British surgeon, Sir
John Erichsen, who, in his introductory address to the medical institutions at University College, said,
There must be a final limit to the development of manipulative surgery, the knife cannot always have fresh fields for conquest and although methods of practice
may be modified and varied and even improved to some extent, it must be within a certain limit. That this limit has nearly, if not quite, been reached will appear
evident if we reflect on the great achievements of modern operative surgery. Very little remains for the boldest to devise or the most dextrous to perform.
These comments, published in the Lancet in 1873, preceded most important developments in modern surgical oncology.

ANESTHESIA FOR ONCOLOGIC SURGERY
Modern anesthetic techniques have greatly increased the safety of major oncologic surgery. Regional and general anesthesia play important roles in a wide variety of
diagnostic techniques, in local therapeutic maneuvers, and in major surgery. These techniques should be understood by all oncologists.
Anesthetic techniques may be divided into those for regional and general anesthesia. Regional anesthesia involves a reversible blockade of pain perception by the
application of local anesthetic drugs. These agents generally work by preventing the activation of pain receptors or by blocking nerve conduction. Agents commonly

used for local and topical anesthesia for biopsies in cancer patients are shown in Table 15-2 and Table 15-3.5 Topical anesthesia refers to the application of local
anesthetics to the skin or mucous membranes. Good surface anesthesia of the conjunctiva and cornea, oropharynx and nasopharynx, esophagus, larynx, trachea,
urethra, and anus can result from the application of these agents.

TABLE 15-2. Infiltration Anesthesia

TABLE 15-3. Various Preparations Intended for Topical Anesthesia

Local anesthesia involves injecting anesthetic agents directly into the operative field. Field block refers to injection of local anesthetic by circumscribing the operative
field with a continuous wall of anesthetic agent. Lidocaine (Xylocaine) in concentrations from 0.5% to 1% is the most common anesthetic agent used for this purpose.
Peripheral nerve block results from the deposition of a local anesthetic surrounding major nerve trunks. It can provide local anesthesia to entire anatomic areas.
Major surgical procedures in the lower portion of the body can be performed using epidural or spinal anesthesia. Epidural anesthesia results from the deposition of a
local anesthetic agent into the extradural space within the vertebral canal. Catheters can be left in place in the epidural space, allowing the intermittent injection of
local anesthetics for prolonged operations. The major advantage of epidural over spinal anesthesia is that it does not involve puncturing the dura, and the injection of
foreign substances directly into the cerebrospinal fluid is avoided.
Spinal anesthesia involves the direct injection of a local anesthetic into the cerebrospinal fluid. Puncture of the dural sac generally is performed between the L-2 and
L-4 vertebrae. Spinal anesthesia provides excellent anesthesia for intraabdominal operations, operations on the pelvis, or procedures involving the lower extremities.
Because the patient is awake during spinal anesthesia and is breathing spontaneously, it often has been thought that spinal anesthesia is safer than general
anesthesia. There is no difference in the incidence of intraoperative hypotension with spinal anesthesia compared with general anesthesia, and there is no clear
benefit in using spinal anesthesia for patients with ischemic heart disease. 6 Because patients are awake during spinal anesthesia and can become agitated during the
surgical procedure, spinal anesthesia actually can cause more myocardial stress than general anesthesia. The health status of patients with preoperative evidence of
congestive heart failure is more likely to be worsened by general anesthesia than by spinal anesthesia. In one series, heart failure developed de novo in 4% of adults
older than age 40 who were undergoing major surgery and worsened in 22% of patients who had a history of heart failure. 6 Spinal anesthesia was not associated with
any new or worsened heart failure. Because of local irritating effects of general anesthesia on the lung, it has been suggested that spinal anesthesia may be safer for
patients with severe pulmonary disease.
General anesthesia refers to the reversible state of loss of consciousness produced by chemical agents that act directly on the brain. Most major oncologic
procedures are performed using general anesthesia, which can be induced using intravenous or inhalational agents. The advantages of intravenous anesthesia are
the extremely rapid onset of unconsciousness and improved patient comfort and acceptance. Ultra-short-acting barbiturates, such as sodium thiopental, or
tranquilizers, such as the benzodiazepines or droperidol, are the most frequently used intravenous agents for general anesthesia or for sedation during regional
anesthesia.
A variety of inhalational anesthetic agents are in clinical use. Nitrous oxide is popular, usually in combination with narcotics and muscle relaxants. This technique
provides a safe form of general anesthesia with the use of nonexplosive agents. Two other agents in widespread use are the fluorinated hydrocarbons, halothane
(Fluothane) and enflurane (Ethrane). Although they are used frequently, the fluorinated hydrocarbons have a variety of side effects. Halothane depresses myocardial
function, reduces cardiac output, causes significant vasodilation, and sensitizes the myocardium to endogenous and administered catecholamines that can lead to
life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias. In rare instances, halothane can cause severe hepatotoxicity, which begins 2 to 5 days after surgery. Enflurane also depresses
myocardial function but does not appear to sensitize the myocardium to catecholamines and has not been associated with hepatic toxicity. The newest of the
halogenated hydrocarbons is isoflurane, which was introduced in 1980. Isoflurane depresses the myocardium less than halothane or enflurane, but it has more potent
vasodilatory properties.
Virtually all general anesthetics affect biochemical mechanisms, including depression of bone marrow, alteration of the phagocytic activity of macrophages, and
exhibition of immunosuppressive properties. General anesthetic agents, such as cyclopropane and diethyl ether, rarely are used because of their explosive potential.
Intravenous neuromuscular blocking agents, called muscle relaxants, are commonly used during general anesthesia. These agents are nondepolarizing (e.g., curare),
preventing access of acetylcholine to the receptor site of the myoneural junction, or are depolarizing (e.g., succinylcholine), acting in a manner similar to that of
acetylcholine by depolarizing the motor end plate. These agents induce profound muscle relaxation during surgical procedures but have the disadvantage of inhibiting
spontaneous respiration because of paralysis of respiratory muscles. Succinylcholine is short-acting (3 to 5 minutes), with a rapid recovery phase. Curare-induced
paralysis lasts for 30 to 40 minutes after usual clinical doses of 0.3 to 0.5 mg/kg. Pancuronium has fewer side effects than curare but can induce tachycardia by
means of sympathetic stimulation.

DETERMINATION OF OPERATIVE RISK
As with any treatment, the potential benefits of surgical intervention in cancer patients must be weighed against the risks of surgery. The incidence of operative
mortality is of major importance in formulating therapeutic decisions and varies greatly in different patient situations ( Table 15-4). The incidence of operative mortality
is a complex function of the basic disease process that involves surgery, anesthetic technique, operative complications and, most important, the general health status
of patients and their ability to withstand operative trauma.

TABLE 15-4. Determinants of Operative Risk

In an attempt to classify the physical status of patients and their surgical risks, the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) has formulated a general
classification of physical status that appears to correlate well with operative mortality. 7 Patients are classified into five groups depending on their general health status
(as shown in Table 15-5).

TABLE 15-5. American Society of Anesthesiologists Classification of Physical Status

Operative mortality usually is defined as mortality that occurs within 30 days of a major operative procedure. In oncologic patients, the basic disease process is a
major determinant of operative mortality. Patients undergoing palliative surgery for widely metastatic disease have a high operative mortality rate even if the surgical
procedure can alleviate the symptomatic problem. Examples of these situations include surgery for intestinal obstruction in patients with widespread ovarian cancer
and surgery for gastric outlet obstruction in patients with cancer of the head of the pancreas. These simple palliative procedures are associated with mortality rates of
approximately 20% in most series because of the debilitated state of the patient and the rapid progression of the basic disease.
Mortality caused by anesthetic administration alone is related directly to the physical status of the patient. In a review of 32,223 operations, Dripps et al. 8 determined
the mortality thought to be related to anesthetic administration alone ( Table 15-6). It is extremely difficult to differentiate the mortality caused by anesthesia from that
resulting from other contributors to operative mortality. However, this analysis indicates that operative mortality due to anesthesia in physical status class 1 patients is
extremely low, fewer than 1 in every 16,000 operations. The anesthetic mortality increased with worsened physical status.

TABLE 15-6. Mortality Related to Physical Status

There is considerable evidence that anesthesia-related mortality has decreased in the last two decades, largely because of the development of rigid practice
standards and improved intraoperative monitoring techniques. 9,10 and 11 A summary of the specific intraoperative monitoring methods used to achieve improved
anesthetic safety is presented in Table 15-7.12 A study of 485,850 anesthetics administered in 1986 in the United Kingdom revealed the risk of death from anesthesia
alone in patients from all ASA classes to be approximately 1 in 185,000. 9 In a retrospective review encompassing cases from 1976 through 1988, Eichorn 10 estimated
anesthetic mortality in ASA class I and II patients to be 1 in 200,200. These are probably underestimates, since underreporting of anesthetic-related deaths is a
problem in all studies. Most cancer patients undergoing elective surgery fall between physical status I and II; thus, an anesthetic mortality rate of 0.01% to 0.001% is a
realistic estimate for this group.

TABLE 15-7. Summary of Specific Intraoperative Monitoring Methods

Anesthesia-related mortality is rare, and factors related to the patient's preexisting general health status and disease are far more important indicators of surgical
outcome. A study of the factors contributing to the risk of 7-day operative mortality after 100,000 surgical procedures is shown in Table 15-8.13 The 7-day
perioperative mortality in this study was 71.4 deaths per 10,000 cases, and the major determinants of death were the physical status of the patient, the emergent
nature of the procedure, and the magnitude of the operation.

TABLE 15-8. Risk Factors Associated with 7-Day Operative Mortality

Several specific health factors can increase the risks of the operative procedure. Using discriminant analysis, Goldman et al. 6 identified nine independent variables
that correlated with life-threatening and fatal cardiac complications in patients undergoing noncardiac surgical procedures. By assigning a point value to each
variable, a cardiac risk index could be computed ( Table 15-9) that separated patients into four categories of risk ( Table 15-10). The two risk factors most predictive of
life-threatening complications were the presence of a third heart sound (S 3) or jugular vein distention (11 points) or a myocardial infarction in the previous 6 months
(10 points).

TABLE 15-9. Computation of the Cardiac Risk Index

TABLE 15-10. Cardiac Risk Index

A recent myocardial infarction significantly increases the incidence of reinfarction and cardiac death associated with surgery ( Table 15-11). Significant improvements
have occurred as new techniques of anesthetic monitoring and hemodynamic support have been developed. 14,15 and 16

TABLE 15-11. Incidence of Perioperative Myocardial Infarction in Patients with a Previous Myocardial Infarction

The impact of general health status on operative mortality is seen when operative mortality as a function of age is analyzed. Palmberg Hirsjarvi 17 studied the
postoperative mortality of 17,199 patients undergoing general surgical procedures. The overall mortality rate of patients younger than age 70 was 0.25%, as
compared with 9.2% for patients older than 70. In these elderly patients, the operative mortality rate for emergency operations was 36.8%, as compared with 7.8% for
elective surgical procedures. The four leading causes of operative mortality that accounted for approximately 75% of all postoperative deaths in this age group were
pulmonary embolism, pneumonia, cardiovascular collapse, and the primary illness itself.
More recently, Hoskings et al. 18 reviewed the outcome of surgery performed on 795 patients aged 90 or older. Surgery was generally well tolerated. As with younger

patients, the ASA classification was an important predictor of outcome.
Cancer is often a disease of the elderly, and there is sometimes a tendency to avoid even curative major surgery for cancer in patients of advanced age. In the United
States and in most Western countries, life expectancies for the elderly have increased substantially. The average life expectancies for 80-year-old men and women in
the United States are 7 and 9.1 years, respectively. 19 The 5-year expected survival rates of 90-year-old men and women are 30% and 39.8%, respectively; for
95-year-olds, the rates are 16.5% and 23.2%, respectively. Thus, even in the very old cancer patient, aggressive curative surgery can be warranted.
Reports of most surgical series include an account of operative mortality and operative complications. These results, combined with a consideration of the general
health status of the patient, allow a reasonable estimate of the operative mortality for any given surgical intervention in the treatment of cancer.

ROLES FOR SURGERY
PREVENTION OF CANCER
Because surgeons are often the primary providers of medical care, they are responsible for educating patients about carcinogenic hazards and about direct surgical
intervention for the prevention of cancer. All surgical oncologists should be aware of the high-risk situations that require surgery to prevent subsequent malignant
disease.
Underlying conditions or congenital or genetic traits are associated with an extremely high incidence of subsequent cancer. When these cancers are likely to occur in
nonvital organs, it is necessary to remove the offending organ to prevent subsequent malignancy. 20 Examples of diseases associated with a high incidence of cancer
that can be prevented by prophylactic surgery are presented in Table 15-12. An excellent example is presented by patients with the genetic trait for multiple polyposis
of the colon. If colectomy is not performed in these patients, approximately one-half will develop colon cancer by the age of 40. By age 70, virtually all patients with
multiple polyposis will develop colon cancer. 20 It is, therefore, advisable for all patients containing the mutant gene for multiple polyposis to undergo prophylactic
colectomy before age 20 to prevent these cancers.

TABLE 15-12. Conditions in Which Prophylactic Surgery Can Prevent Cancer

In this situation, as for many of the other familial conditions associated with a high incidence of cancer, the surgeon has a responsibility for alerting the family to the
hereditary nature of the disorder and its possible occurrence in other family members. Another disease associated with a high incidence of cancer of the colon is
ulcerative colitis. Approximately 40% of patients with total colonic involvement ultimately die of colon cancer if they survive the ulcerative colitis. 21 Three percent of
children with ulcerative colitis develop cancer of the colon by the age of 10, and 20% develop cancer during each ensuing decade. 22 Colectomy is indicated for
patients with ulcerative colitis if the chronicity of this disease is well established.
Other disorders that require early treatment to prevent subsequent cancers include cryptorchidism and multiple endocrine neoplasia. Cryptorchidism is associated
with a high incidence of testicular cancer that probably can be prevented by early prophylactic surgery.
In the past, patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2a (MEN 2a) were screened for the presence of C-cell hyperplasia and calcitonin secretion using
pentagastrin stimulation tests to determine the possible need for prophylactic surgery to prevent the occurrence of medullary thyroid cancer. Recent studies using
polymerase chain reaction–based direct DNA testing for mutations in the RET protooncogene have shown it to be the preferred method for screening MEN 2a
kindreds to identify individuals in whom total thyroidectomy is indicated, regardless of the plasma calcitonin levels. 23
A more complex example of the role of surgery in cancer prevention involves women at high risk for breast cancer. Because the risk of cancer in some women is
increased substantially over the normal risk (but does not approach 100%), counseling is required. Women in this situation must carefully balance the benefits and
risks of prophylactic mastectomy. A careful understanding of the factors involved in increased breast cancer incidence is essential for the surgical oncologist to
provide sound advice in this area. Statistical techniques can provide approximations of the risk for patients, depending on the frequency of disease in the family
history, the age at the first pregnancy, and the presence of fibrocystic disease. For example, a woman who has a family history of breast cancer in a sister or mother,
has fibrocystic disease, and is nulliparous or had a first pregnancy at a late age has an 18% probability of developing breast cancer over a 5-year period. 20 These
estimates can be of value in advising women about prophylactic mastectomy.
DIAGNOSIS OF CANCER
The major role of surgery in the diagnosis of cancer lies in the acquisition of tissue for exact histologic diagnosis. The principles underlying the biopsy of malignant
lesions vary, depending on the natural history of the tumor under consideration. Various techniques exist for obtaining tissues suspected of malignancy, including
aspiration biopsy, needle biopsy, incisional biopsy, and excisional biopsy.
Aspiration biopsy involves the aspiration of cells and tissue fragments through a needle that has been guided into the suspect tissue. Cytologic analysis of this
material can provide a tentative diagnosis of the presence of malignant tissue. However, major surgical resections should not be undertaken solely on the basis of the
evidence of aspiration biopsy. Even the most experienced cytologist can mistake inflammatory or benign reparative changes for malignant cells. This error is inherent
in the uncertainties of an individual cell analysis and, even in the best of hands, provides an error rate substantially higher than that of standard histologic diagnosis.
Needle biopsy refers to obtaining a core of tissue through a specially designed needle introduced into the suspect tissue. The core of tissue provided by needle
biopsies is sufficient for the diagnosis of most tumor types. Soft tissue and bony sarcomas often present major difficulties in differentiating benign and reparative
lesions from malignancies and often cannot be diagnosed accurately. If these latter lesions are considered in the diagnosis, attempts should be made to obtain larger
amounts of tissue than are possible from a needle biopsy.
Incisional biopsy refers to removal of a small wedge of tissue from a larger tumor mass. Incisional biopsies often are necessary for diagnosing large masses that
require major surgical procedures for even local excision. Incisional biopsies are the preferred method of diagnosing soft tissue and bony sarcomas because of the
magnitude of the surgical procedures necessary to extirpate these lesions definitively. The treatment of many visceral cancers cannot be undertaken without an
incisional biopsy, but be aware of opening new tissue planes contaminated with tumor by performing excisional biopsies for large lesions. An inappropriately
performed excisional biopsy can compromise subsequent surgical excision. When this is a possibility, incisional biopsies should be performed.
In excisional biopsy, an excision of the entire suspected tumor tissue with little or no margin of surrounding normal tissue is done. Excisional biopsies are the
procedure of choice for most tumors if they can be performed without contaminating new tissue planes or further compromising the ultimate surgical procedure.

The following principles guide the performance of all surgical biopsies:
1. Needle tracks or scars should be placed carefully so that they can be conveniently removed as part of the subsequent definitive surgical procedure. Placement
of biopsy incisions is extremely important, and misplacement often can compromise subsequent care. Incisions on the extremity generally should be placed
longitudinally so as to make the removal of underlying tissue and subsequent closure easier.
2. Care should be taken not to contaminate new tissue planes during the biopsy. Large hematomas after biopsy can lead to tumor spread and must be
scrupulously avoided by securing excellent hemostasis during the biopsy. For biopsies on extremities, the use of a tourniquet may help in controlling bleeding.
Instruments used in a biopsy procedure are another potential source of contamination of new tissue planes. It is not uncommon to take biopsy samples from
several suspected lesions at one time. Care should be taken not to use instruments that may have come in contact with tumor when obtaining tissue from a
potentially uncontaminated area.
3. Choice of biopsy technique should be made carefully to obtain an adequate tissue sample for the needs of the pathologist. For the diagnosis of selected tumors,
electron microscopy, tissue culture, or other techniques may be necessary. Sufficient tissue must be obtained for these purposes if diagnostic difficulties are
anticipated.
4. Handling of the biopsy tissue by the pathologist is also important. When the orientation of the biopsy specimen is important for subsequent treatment, the
surgeon should mark distinctive areas of the tumor carefully to facilitate subsequent orientation of the specimen by the pathologist. Certain fixatives are best
suited to specific types or sizes of tissue. If all biopsy specimens are placed in formalin immediately, the opportunity to perform valuable diagnostic tests may be
lost. The handling of excised tissue is the surgeon's responsibility. Biopsy tissue obtained from breast cancer lesions, for example, should be saved for estrogen
receptor studies and placed in cold storage until ready for processing.
Surgery also has a role in diagnosing pathologic states in cancer patients that do not directly involve the diagnosis of cancer. Cancer patients often are
immunosuppressed by their disease or their treatment and are subject to opportunistic infections not commonly seen in most general surgical patients. Open lung or
liver biopsies are often important in diagnosing these lesions adequately and in planning suitable therapy.
Oncologists are becoming increasingly aware of the need for precise staging of patients when planning treatment. Lack of proper staging information can lead to poor
treatment planning and compromise the ability to cure patients. Staging laparotomy can be important in determining the exact extent of spread of lymphomas.
In performing accurate surgical staging, the surgeon must be familiar with the natural history of the disease under consideration. The development of ovarian cancer
treatment is an excellent example. The tendency of ovarian cancer to metastasize to the undersurface of the diaphragm is a good example of the need to obtain a
biopsy of an anatomic site that would not normally be subjected to biopsy by most surgeons. Extensive surgical staging may be required before undertaking other
major surgical procedures with curative intent. For example, biopsy of the celiac and paraaortic lymph nodes in patients with cancer of the esophagus is often
important so that unnecessary esophageal resections can be avoided.
Placement of radioopaque clips during biopsy and staging procedures is important to delineate areas of known tumor and as a guide to the subsequent delivery of
radiation therapy to these areas.
TREATMENT OF CANCER
Surgery can be a simple, safe method to cure patients with solid tumors when the tumor is confined to the anatomic site of origin. When patients with solid tumors
present to the physician for the first time, approximately 70% already have micrometastases beyond the primary site. The extension of the surgical resection to
include areas of regional spread can cure some of these patients, although regional spread often is an indication of undetectable distant micrometastases.
The emergence of effective nonsurgical therapies has had a profound impact on the treatment of cancer patients and on the role and responsibilities of the surgeon
treating the cancer patient. John Hunter, a brilliant eighteenth-century surgeon, characterized surgery as being “like an armed savage who attempts to get that by
force which a civilized man would get by strategem.”
Although surgery continues to be the most important aspect of the treatment of most patients presenting with solid tumors, modern clinical research in oncology has
been devoted to applying other adjuvant “strategems” to improve the cure rates of those 70% in whom surgical therapy alone ultimately fails. The role of surgery in the
treatment of cancer patients can be divided into six separate areas: (1) definitive surgical treatment for primary cancer, selection of appropriate local therapy, and
integration of surgery with other adjuvant modalities; (2) surgery to reduce the bulk of residual disease (e.g., Burkitt's lymphoma, ovarian cancer); (3) surgical
resection of metastatic disease with curative intent (e.g., pulmonary metastases in sarcoma patients, hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer); (4) surgery for the
treatment of oncologic emergencies; (5) surgery for palliation; and (6) surgery for reconstruction and rehabilitation. In each area, interactions with other treatment
modalities can be essential for a successful outcome.
Primary Cancer
There are three major challenges confronting the surgical oncologist in the definitive treatment of solid tumors: accurate identification of patients who can be cured by
local treatment alone; development and selection of local treatments that provide the best balance between local cure and the impact of treatment morbidity on the
quality of life; and development and application of adjuvant treatments that can improve the control of local and distant invasive and metastatic disease. The selection
of the appropriate local therapy to be used in cancer treatment varies with the individual cancer type and the site of involvement. In many instances, definitive surgical
therapy that encompasses a sufficient margin of normal tissue is sufficient local therapy. The treatment of many solid tumors falls into this category, including the wide
excision of primary melanomas in the skin that can be cured locally by surgery alone in approximately 90% of cases. The resection of colon cancers with a 5-cm
margin from the tumor results in anastomotic recurrences in fewer than 5% of cases.
In other instances, surgery is used to obtain histologic confirmation of diagnosis, but primary local therapy is achieved through the use of a nonsurgical modality, such
as radiation therapy. Examples include the treatment of Ewing's sarcoma in long bones and the treatment of selected primary malignancies in the head and neck. In
each instance, selection of the definitive local treatment involves careful consideration of the likelihood of cure balanced against the morbidity of the treatment
modality.
The magnitude of surgical resection is modified in the treatment of many cancers by the use of adjuvant treatment modalities. Rationally integrating surgery with other
treatments requires a careful consideration of all effective treatment options. The surgical oncologist must be thoroughly familiar with adjuncts and alternatives to
surgical treatment. It is a knowledge of this rapidly changing field that separates the surgical oncologist from the general surgeon most distinctly.
In some instances, effective adjuvant modalities have led to a decrease in the magnitude of surgery. The evolution of childhood rhabdomyosarcoma treatment is a
striking example of the successful integration of adjuvant therapies with surgery in the treatment of cancer. 24,25 Childhood rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common
soft tissue sarcoma in infants and children. Before 1970, surgery alone was used almost exclusively, and 5-year survival rates of 10% to 20% were commonly
reported. Local surgery alone failed in patients with rhabdomyosarcomas of the prostate and extremities because of extensive invasion of surrounding tissues and the
early development of metastatic disease. The failure of surgery alone to control local disease in patients with childhood rhabdomyosarcoma led to the introduction of
adjuvant radiation therapy. This resulted in a marked improvement in local control rates that was further improved dramatically by the introduction of combination
chemotherapy with vincristine, dactinomycin, and cyclophosphamide. Long-term cure rates are in the range of 80%. Many other examples of the integration of surgery
with other treatment modalities appear throughout this book.
Residual Disease
The concept of cytoreductive surgery has received much attention in recent years. 26,27 In some instances, the extensive local spread of cancer precludes the removal
of all gross disease by surgery. The surgical resection of bulk disease in the treatment of selected cancers may well lead to improvements in the ability to control
residual gross disease that has not been resected. Studies that suggest the merit of this approach are discussed in Chapter 45 and Chapter 36 ( Burkitt's lymphoma
and ovarian cancer,respectively).
Enthusiasm for cytoreductive surgery has led to the inappropriate use of surgery for reducing the bulk of tumor in some cases. Clearly, cytoreductive surgery is of
benefit only when other effective treatments are available to control the residual disease that is unresectable. Except in rare palliative settings, there is no role for

cytoreductive surgery in patients for whom little other effective therapy exists.
Metastatic Disease
The value of surgery in the cure of patients with metastatic disease tends to be overlooked. As a general principle, patients with a single site of metastatic disease
that can be resected without major morbidity should undergo resection of that metastatic cancer. Many patients with few metastases to lung or liver or brain can be
cured by surgical resection. This approach is especially true for cancers that do not respond well to systemic chemotherapy. The resection of pulmonary metastases
of soft tissue and bony sarcomas can cure disease in as many as 30% of patients. As effective systemic therapy is developed for the treatment of these diseases,
cure rates may increase. Studies have shown that similar cure rates occur in patients with adenocarcinomas when resected metastatic disease to the lung is the sole
clinical site of metastases. Small numbers of pulmonary metastases often are the only clinically apparent metastatic disease in patients with sarcomas. However, this
is rare in the natural history of most adenocarcinomas. If solitary metastases to the lung do occur in patients with carcinoma of the colon or other adenocarcinomas,
surgical resection is indicated.
Similarly, there is increasing enthusiasm for the resection of hepatic metastases, especially from colorectal cancer, in patients in whom the liver is the only site of
known metastatic disease. In patients with solitary hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer, resection can lead to long-term cure in approximately 25%. This far
exceeds the cure rates of any other available treatment.
The resection for cure of solitary brain metastases should also be considered when the brain is the only site of known metastatic disease. The exact location and
functional sequelae of resection should be considered when making this treatment decision.
Oncologic Emergencies
As in the treatment of all patients, emergencies arise for oncologic patients that require surgical intervention. These generally involve the treatment of exsanguinating
hemorrhage, perforation, drainage of abscesses, or impending destruction of vital organs. Each category of surgical emergency is unique and requires an individual
approach.
The oncologic patient often is neutropenic and thrombocytopenic and has a high risk of hemorrhage or sepsis. Perforations of an abdominal viscus can result from
direct tumor invasion or from tumor lysis resulting from effective systemic treatments. Perforation of the gastrointestinal tract after effective treatment for lymphoma
involving the intestine is not uncommon. The ability to identify patients at high risk for perforation may lead to the use of surgery to prevent this problem. Surgery to
decompress cancer invading the central nervous system represents another surgical emergency that can lead to preservation of function.
Palliation
Surgical resection often is required for the relief of pain or functional abnormalities. The appropriate use of surgery in these settings can improve the quality of life for
cancer patients. Palliative surgery may include the relief of mechanical problems, such as intestinal obstruction, or the removal of masses that are causing severe
pain or disfigurement.
Reconstruction and Rehabilitation
Surgical techniques are being refined that aid in the reconstruction and rehabilitation of cancer patients after definitive therapy. The ability to reconstruct anatomic
defects can substantially improve function and cosmetic appearance. The development of free flaps using microvascular anastomotic techniques is having a profound
impact on the ability to bring fresh tissue to resected or heavily irradiated areas. Lost function (especially of extremities) often can be rehabilitated by surgical
approaches. This includes lysis of contractures or muscle transposition to restore muscular function that has been damaged by previous surgery or radiation therapy.

THE SURGICAL ONCOLOGIST
Several factors have led to a recent increase in the development of surgical oncology and to the organization of separate sections of surgical oncology in large
hospitals and departments of surgery within universities. This enthusiasm derives from the recognition that modern oncologic management requires levels of expertise
in cancer surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy that are not common to most general surgeons and from a desire to use effectively the resources being
committed to cancer care and research by hospitals, private foundations, and the federal government. A sense of urgency has existed because some surgical leaders
believe that the surgeon is experiencing a declining intellectual role in modern cancer treatment and research and that steps must be taken to reassert the surgeon's
role in modern oncology.
Many surgeons have resisted the development of surgical oncology as a specialty area because of the fear of fragmenting the field of general surgery. A survey of
124 university surgery departments in the United States between January and July of 1985 revealed that 38% had formal divisions of surgical oncology, compared
with the divisions of medical oncology present in 95%, radiation oncology in 94%, pediatric oncology in 76%, and gynecologic oncology in 79%. 28 Of the 47 divisions
of surgical oncology that did exist, only 13 (28%) had formal clinical training programs in surgical oncology. 28 This lack of emphasis on surgical oncology at
universities may be a factor in the decreasing success of surgeons in obtaining grant support from the National Cancer Institute. From 1980 to 1985, an analysis of
6407 applications submitted from clinical departments of medical schools for peer-reviewed grants revealed that 44% were submitted from departments of medicine
and only 16% from departments of surgery. 29 Thirty-four percent of applications submitted from departments of medicine were awarded, compared with 25% from
departments of surgery. 29 The publication of research in major surgical journals appears to be decreasing. 30
The development of surgical oncology as a specialty area of surgery depends on a clear delineation of its role. There are six major areas in which the modern surgical
oncologist can play a valuable role in the care of cancer patients at major treatment centers 31:
Organizing surgical oncology teaching programs for staff, residents, and students
Providing expert consultation for unusual or difficult oncologic patient problems
Providing unique surgical expertise in surgical cases unfamiliar to general surgeons (e.g., major soft tissue resections, exenterations, head and neck resections,
isolation perfusions)
Organizing clinical research protocols for surgical oncology patients
Coordinating surgical oncology efforts with medical and radiation oncologists
Conducting experimental research programs in oncology where possible
The rapid development of new information in surgery, chemotherapy, and medical oncology and of newer disciplines of immunotherapy, hyperthermia, and
phototherapy requires the continuing education of all surgical staff. Surgical oncologists maintain close contact with all these areas and should be responsible for
teaching programs for general surgical staff, residents, and students.
Because of the unique training and exposure to oncologic problems, the surgical oncologist has expertise in dealing with unusual or difficult oncologic patient
problems and can provide expert consultation in these areas. The surgical oncologist is trained to perform many types of surgical procedures not commonly performed
by general surgeons. Although most surgeons are able to perform many of the standard cancer resections, some operations are not performed frequently by general
surgeons and can be performed better by a specialist in surgical oncology.
In most hospital settings, general surgeons operate on cancer patients. It is often essential, however, that patients receiving care for various cancers enter clinical
protocols that help to answer important questions related to the treatment of that cancer. The surgical oncologists can help to organize clinical research protocols for
surgical oncology patients treated by all surgeons at that institution. A large surgical group should have a surgical specialist capable of coordinating efforts with
medical and radiation oncologists. Successful coordination with these nonsurgical specialists requires expertise in medical oncology and radiation therapy that is not
common among most general surgeons.
The surgical oncologist can also be involved in administering and defining the need for adjuvant treatments. Adjuvant chemotherapy commonly is administered by
surgeons when the chemotherapy regimens use well-known single or combination agents. The future development of immunotherapies and other new adjuvant

treatments can be logically administered by surgical oncologists to their patients after recovery from the surgical procedure.
The surgical oncologist, when the situation allows, is in a position to perform experimental research in oncology that can lead to the introduction of new diagnostic and
treatment regimens in clinical care. Laboratory research programs that contribute to basic knowledge of cancer biology also provide an important source of stimulation
to residents and students.
The emergence of a subspecialty of surgical oncology within general surgery requires that special attention be given to the training of surgeons interested in pursuing
this area of clinical care. Although it is generally agreed that all surgical oncologists should be well-trained general surgeons, attempts have been made to define
additional areas of expertise that must be studied. In 1978, a group of surgical oncologists met under the sponsorship of the Society of Surgical Oncology and the
Division of Cancer Research, Resources, and Centers of the National Cancer Institute to develop guidelines for the training of surgical oncologists. The guidelines
adopted by this meeting include suggestions for such training 32,33:
Two-year training program on a surgical oncology service after completion of eligibility for general surgical certification by the American Board of Surgery or
other surgical specialty board
Training at an institution with a cancer program approved by the Commission on Cancer of the American College of Surgeons and whose clinical resources
provide a sufficient variety and volume of clinical material to ensure exposure to a broad variety of clinical cancer problems
Training at a center with sufficient basic science resources to provide education in these areas, with exposure to basic and clinical research
Training at an institution that provides adequate operative experience, including standard curative and palliative procedures, with broad exposure to surgical
procedures unique to the oncologic patient
A full-time assignment during the training period to radiation oncology and chemotherapy services to allow the trainee to gain confidence and knowledge in
these nonsurgical disciplines
These training recommendations are designed to provide general surgeons with the expertise in oncology and nonsurgical disciplines necessary to bring the best
aspects of all disciplines of modern oncology to the care of the cancer patient.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Brested JH. The Edwin Smith surgical papyrus. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1930.
2. Thorwald J. Science and the secrets of early medicine. New York: Harcourt, Brace, & World, 1962.
3. Wangensteen OH. Has medical history importance for surgeons? Surg Gynecol Obstet 1975;140:434.
4. Hill GJ. Historic milestones in cancer surgery. Semin Oncol 1979;6:409.
5. Strichartz GR, Berde CB. Local anesthetics. In: Miller RD, ed. Anesthesia. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1994.
6. Goldman L, Caldera DL, Nussbaum SR, et al. Multifactorial index of cardiac risk in noncardiac surgical procedures. N Engl J Med 1977;297:845.
7. Dripps RD, Eckenhoff JE, Vandam LD. Introduction to anesthesia, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1988.
8. Dripps RD, Lamont A, Eckenhoff JE. The role of anesthesia in surgical mortality. JAMA 1961;178:261.
9. Buck N, Devlin HB, Lunn JN. Report on the confidential enquiry into perioperative deaths. London: Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust, The Kings Fund Publishing House, 1987.
10. Eichhorn JH. Prevention of intraoperative anesthesia accidents and related severe injury through safety monitoring. Anesthesiology 1989;70:572.
11. Eichhorn JH. Documenting improved anesthesia outcome. J Clin Anesth 1991;3:351.
12. Ross AF, Tinker JH. Anesthesia risk. In: Miller RD, ed. Anesthesia. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1994.
13. Cohen MM, Duncan PG, Tate RB. Does anaesthesia contribute to operative mortality? JAMA 1988;260:2859.
14. Topkins MJ, Artusio JF. Myocardial infarction and surgery: a five year study. Anesth Analg 1964;43:715.
15. Tarhan S, Moffitt EA, Taylor WF, et al. Myocardial infarction after general anesthesia. JAMA 1972;199:318.
16. Rao TLK, Jacobs KH, El-Etr AA. Reinfarction following anesthesia in patients with myocardial infarction. Anesthesiology 1983;59:499.
17. Palmberg S, Hirsjarvi E. Mortality in geriatric surgery. Gerontology 1979;25:103.
18. Hoskings MP, Warner MA, Lobdell EM, Offord KP, Melton LJ. Outcomes of surgery in patients 90 years of age and older. JAMA 1989;261:1909.
19. Manton KC, Vaupel JW. Survival after the age of 80 in the United States, Sweden, France, England, and Japan. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1232.
20. Mulvihill JJ. Cancer control through genetics. In: Arrighi FE, Rao PN, Stubblefield E, eds. Genes, chromosomes, and neoplasia. New York: Raven Press, 1980.
21. MacDougall IPM. The cancer risk in ulcerative colitis. Lancet 1964;2:655.
22. Devroede GJ, Taylor WF, Sauer WG. Cancer risk and life expectancy of children with ulcerative colitis. N Engl J Med 1971;285:17.
23. Wells SA, Chi DD, Toshima K, et al. Predictive DNA testing and prophylactic thyroidectomy in patients at risk for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. Ann Surg 1994;220:237.
24. Kilman JW, Clatworthy HW Jr, Newton WA, et al. Reasonable surgery for rhabdomyosarcoma: a study of 67 cases. Ann Surg 1973;3:346.
25. Heyn RM, Holland R, Newton WA, et al. The role of combined chemotherapy in the treatment of rhabdomyosarcoma in children. Cancer 1974;34:2128.
26. Silberman AW. Surgical debulking of tumors. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1982;155:577.
27. Wong RJ, De Cosse JJ. Cytoreductive surgery. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1990;170:276.
28. Lawrence W Jr, Wilson RE, Shingleton WW, et al. Surgical oncology in university departments of surgery in the United States. Arch Surg 1986;121:1088.
29. Avis FP, Ellenberg S, Friedman MA. Surgical oncology research: a disappointing status report. Ann Surg 1988;207:262.
30. Nahrwold DL, Pereira SG, Dupuis J. United States research published in major surgical journals is decreasing. Ann Surg 1995;222:263.
31. Rosenberg SA. The organization of surgical oncology in university departments of surgery. Surgery 1984;95:632.
32. Leffall LD Jr. Presidential address: surgical oncologyexpectations for the future. Cancer 1980;42:2925.
33. Schweitzer RJ, Edwards MH, Lawrence W, et al. Training guidelines for surgical oncology. Cancer 1981;48:2336.

CHAPTER 16 Principles of Cancer Management: Radiation Therapy
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 16
Principles of Cancer Management: Radiation Therapy
SAMUEL HELLMAN
Introduction
Physical Considerations
Electromagnetic Radiation
Radiation Techniques
Beam-Modifying Devices
Radiation Treatment
Electron Therapy
Biologic Considerations
Radiation Interaction with Biologic Materials
Cell Survival Considerations
Transcriptional Activation, Gene Induction, and Regulation after Ionizing Radiation
Pharmacologic Modification of Radiation Effects
High Linear Energy Transfer Radiation
Relative Biologic Effectiveness
Tumor Radiobiology
Normal Tissue Radiation Biology
Adverse Effects of Radiation
Clinical Considerations
Fractionation
Continuous Radiation
Acute and Late Normal Tissue Effects
Altering the Therapeutic Index
Radiosensitivity
Radiation and Surgery
Radiation and Chemotherapy
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
To understand the practice of radiation therapy, one must seek its roots in principles derived from three separate areas. The first is practical radiation physics, which
must be understood much as the surgeon understands the use of the equipment available in the operating room and as the internist understands the pharmacologic
basis of therapeutics. The basic concepts of physics necessary to consider radiation therapy in the disease-related chapters of this textbook are introduced in this
chapter.
The second important discipline to be understood is cell, tissue, and tumor biology. This chapter describes the fundamental principles of radiation biology and cell
kinetics. These two discussions provide the rudiments of cell biology necessary to understand the uses of radiation.
A large clinical experience in radiation use has resulted in certain principles of treatment. These are discussed separately and are related to the physical and biologic
concepts that may underlie their success.

PHYSICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Only the most important concepts of the physics of ionizing radiation can be discussed in this chapter. If more detailed information is needed, a standard textbook of
radiation physics is a more appropriate source of information. 1
Ionizing radiation is energy that, during absorption, causes the ejection of an orbital electron. A large amount of energy is associated with ionization. Ionizing radiation
can be considered as a wave and as a packet of energy (a photon). The packet of energy is large enough to cause ionizations, and these are distributed unevenly
through tissue. Examples of particulate radiation are the subatomic particles: electrons, protons, a particles, neutrons, negative pi mesons, and atomic nuclei. All of
these have been experimentally considered or are being used in radiation therapy.
ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION
Electromagnetic radiation consists of roentgen and gamma radiation. They differ only in the way in which they are produced: Gamma rays are produced
intranuclearly, and roentgen rays are produced extranuclearly. In practice, this means that gamma rays used in radiation therapy are produced by the decay of
radioactive isotopes and that almost all of the roentgen rays used in radiation therapy are made by electrical machines. Exceptions are roentgen rays produced by
orbital electron rearrangements, as in the decay of iodine 125 ( 125I), which is a radioactive isotope but produces photons by extranuclear processes. 125I also emits a
small number of gamma rays from the nucleus.
The intensity of electromagnetic radiation dissipates as the inverse square of the distance from the source. The dose of radiation 2 cm from a point source is 25% of
the dose at 1 cm.
The relative prevalence of the three dominant absorption mechanisms of electromagnetic radiation depends on the energy of the radiation. The first is photoelectric
absorption, which predominates at lower energies. In this circumstance, the photon interaction results in the ejection of a tightly bound orbital electron. The vacancy
left in the atomic shell is then filled by another electron falling from an outer shell of the same atom or from outside the atom. All or most of the photon energy of the
transition is lost in this process. Photoelectric absorption varies with the cube of the atomic number ( Z3). This fact has significant practical implications because it
explains why materials with high atomic numbers, such as lead, are such effective shielding materials. It also means that bones absorb significantly more radiation
than soft tissues at lower photon energies, the basis for conventional diagnostic radiology.
The second type of radiation absorption is the Compton type. In this process, the photon interaction is with a distant orbital electron that has a low binding energy. In
this absorptive process, the photon does not give up all its energy to a single electron; an appreciable portion reappears as a secondary photon, which is created in
the interaction. In contrast to the photoelectric effect, the probability of Compton absorption does not depend much on atomic number, but rather on electron density.
This explains why films made at supervoltage energy do not show much difference between bone and soft tissue, but air cavities are clearly distinguished.
The third type of absorption is the pair production process. This type of absorption requires an incident photon energy greater than 1.02 MeV. In this process, positive
and negative electrons are produced at the same time.
The fundamental quantity necessary to describe the interaction of radiation with matter is the amount of energy absorbed per unit mass. This quantity is called
absorbed dose, and the rad was the most commonly used unit. Absorbed dose is measured in joules per kilogram; another name for 1 J/kg is the gray (1 Gy = 100
rad), which is now the recommended unit. The roentgen (R) is a unit of roentgen rays, or gamma rays, based on the ability of radiation to ionize air. At the energies
used in radiation therapy, 1 R of roentgen rays, or gamma rays, results in a dose of somewhat less than 1 rad (0.01 Gy) in soft tissue.
The different ranges of electromagnetic radiations used in clinical practice are superficial radiation, or roentgen rays from approximately 10 to 125 keV; orthovoltage

radiation, or electromagnetic radiation between 125 and 400 keV; and supervoltage, or megavoltage, radiation for energies of more than 400 keV. There are important
differences between these classes. As energy increases, the penetration of the roentgen rays increases ( Fig. 16-1), and at supervoltage energies, absorption in bone
is not higher than that in surrounding soft tissues, as is the case with lower energies. This is because at supervoltage energies, Compton absorption predominates.
Compared with orthovoltage, supervoltage radiation is skin sparing, meaning that the maximum dose is not reached in the skin, but instead occurs below the surface.
The electrons created in the interaction travel some distance and do not attain full intensity until they reach some depth, resulting in a reduced dose to the skin. With
orthovoltage radiation, the skin frequently is the dose-limiting normal tissue.

FIGURE 16-1. Relative dose at different depths for various types of ionizing radiation.

RADIATION TECHNIQUES
Two general types of radiation techniques are used clinically: brachytherapy and teletherapy. In brachytherapy, the radiation device is placed within or close to the
target volume. Examples of this are interstitial and intracavitary radiation used in the treatment of many gynecologic and oral tumors. Teletherapy uses a device
located at a distance from the patient, as is the case with supervoltage machines.
Because the radiation source is close to or within the target volume with brachytherapy, the dose is determined largely by inverse-square considerations. This means
that the geometry of the implant is important. Spatial arrangements have been determined for different types of applications based on the particular anatomic
considerations of the tumor and important normal tissues. An example of isodose distribution around an intracavitary application for carcinoma of the cervix is shown
in Figure 16-2. The dose decreases rapidly as the distance from the applicator increases. This emphasizes the importance of proper placement. The applicator
pictured is used to treat the cervix, uterus, and important paracervical tissues while limiting excessive irradiation of the bladder and rectum in front of and behind the
tumor.

FIGURE 16-2. Isodose distribution around an intrauterine radium (Ra) applicator. A: Anteroposterior view. B: Lateral view.

Historically, the removable interstitial and intracavitary sources used were radium and radon, the latter primarily for permanent implants. Marie Curie, the discoverer of
radium, recognized its importance early and championed the medical use of these isotopes. They were important tools in early cancer therapy but now have been
largely replaced by man-made isotopes, which overcome most of the disadvantages of the naturally occurring ones.
Initially, even removable isotopes were used by directly applying the isotope, thereby exposing the operator to significant radiation doses. This problem has largely
been circumvented through the use of cesium 137, iridium 192, and cobalt 60. The iridium and cesium have a lower energy and are much easier to shield.
Afterloading techniques are used for removable implants as often as possible. Receptacles for the radioactive material are placed in the patient in the form of needles,
tubes, or intracavitary applicators. When they have been satisfactorily placed, they are afterloaded with the radiation sources. Remote afterloading using
high-intensity sources whose dwell time is determined for a particular dose distribution is now a common treatment method. Permanent implants are primarily done
today with gold 198 and 125I and palladium 109.
Typical teletherapy isodose distributions are shown in Figure 16-3. The dose depends on inverse-square considerations and tissue absorption. The distribution of
radiation depends on characteristics of the machine and the patient. The isodose curve depends on the energy of radiation, the distance from the source of radiation,
and the density and atomic number of the absorbing material. The beam of radiation produced in typical radiation treatment may be modified to make isodose
distributions conform to the specific target volume, and individually designed shields are used to protect vital normal tissues.

FIGURE 16-3. Isodose distributions for 4 MeV without (A) and with (B) a wedge filter.

Figure 16-4 shows some radiation treatment plans in which the target volumes are depicted. This volume contains the tumor and the normal tissues intimately
involved with the tumor. The diagram also contains the transited normal tissues, or transit volume. The purpose of the treatment plan is to maximize the dose to the
target volume and minimize the dose to the transit volume. It is important that the tumor dose is relatively homogenous, because the maximum dose in the target
volume is often the cause of complications, and the minimum dose in the target volume determines the likelihood of tumor recurrence. The volumes of interest in the

patient have been specified as the: gross tumor volume (GTV), clinical tumor volume, and planning target volume. The GTV is the clinically evidenced tumor volume,
taking into account all diagnostic procedures. The clinical tumor volume is the GTV plus the volume considered at risk for microscopic extensions. The planning target
volume includes the GTV and a margin for physiologic organ motion.

FIGURE 16-4. Typical supervoltage treatment plans for opposing fields (A), rotation (B), three fields (C), and wedge rotation (D).

BEAM-MODIFYING DEVICES
In modern radiation therapy, teletherapy is given almost exclusively with supervoltage equipment. These radiations are produced by the decay of radioactive cobalt or
with the production of roentgen rays in the range of 2 to 35 MeV (the most common are 4 to 8 MeV). High-energy photons and electrons are made by linear
accelerators.
Regardless of the radiation source, the beam must be modified for clinical use. With electrical machines, the beam tends to have a much greater intensity in the
center than on the sides. Modification to give a uniform dose of radiation across the beam is done with a flattening filter (unnecessary in cobalt units). For the beam to
be limited to the designated size, collimators are placed in the head of the machine. These usually are made of materials that have a high Z value and can be varied
to conform to the exact rectangular beam dimensions desired.
It is sometimes desirable for the beam to be more intense on one side than the other. This is especially important when fields at angles to each other are to be used.
To modify the beam in this fashion, wedge filters are used (see Fig. 16-3B). These wedge-shaped pieces of metal absorb the beam differentially, depending on the
thickness that produces the desired angled isodose curves.
The primary radiation beam is rectangular. This rectangle may be varied for individual patients using the secondary collimators in the head of the machine. These can
then be further modified by individually constructed blocks shaped to the contour of the normal tissue ( Fig. 16-5). The newest equipment has multileaf collimators,
which permit the collimator to follow closely the desired portal contour, rather than being restricted to a rectangular shape. This type of collimator can be moved while
the radiation beam is on, allowing the physicist to shape the dose distribution within each radiation field in a desired fashion. The result of multiple fields treated in
such a fashion can greatly improve the dose distribution so that the transited normal tissue dose is greatly reduced. This is described in Chapter 29.4.

FIGURE 16-5. A: A film made on a therapy simulator on which outlines for shielding blocks are drawn. B: Supervoltage portal film with blocks in place. C: Technique
for checking accuracy of the blocks with simulator films.

RADIATION TREATMENT
Once the decision has been made to treat a patient with radiation, pretreatment procedures must be performed. First, the target volume must be accurately localized
and the dose-limiting, transited normal tissues must be determined. This localization requires physical examination, radiography, ultrasonography, computed
tomography (CT), and other diagnostic procedures. Before this step, the clinician must understand the natural history of the disease and its patterns of spread.
Once localization has been completed, the treatment planning process begins, in which alternative techniques of treatment are considered. The selection of the
appropriate treatment plan is made by the clinician in consultation with the radiologic physicist and dosimetrist. This team effort must consider the best beam
distribution, homogeneity within the target volume, and appropriate minimizing of dose in the transit volume.
Once the appropriate treatment plan has been accepted, the technique is tested using a radiation simulator. This device mimics the treatment machine but produces
superficial radiation that can be used for direct imaging with an image intensifier and for producing radiographs that delineate exactly the beam location. Treatment
simulation often causes modifications to be made in the treatment plan, allowing further sparing of normal tissues. Simulator films must be compared with the check,
or portal, films made with the supervoltage machine, which confirm the treatment plan (see Fig. 16-5). Image quality is poor because these films do not distinguish
bone from soft tissue. This is because supervoltage radiation is absorbed primarily by the Compton process, which does not depend on Z. In contrast, the simulator
films are made with radiations of 80 to 110 keV, which are in the photoelectric range and therefore dependent on Z3. Treatment planning and simulation are now
greatly facilitated using a CT simulator. This single device combines CT image acquisition with treatment planning in the treatment position.

FIGURE 16-6. Electron and superficial roentgen ray depth–dose curves.

For the treatment to be applied as designed on the radiation simulator, proper immobilization and marking techniques must be used. These also ensure that daily
treatments are given to the same volume. Markings on the patient's skin may be temporary or permanent. Usually, temporary marks are used to supplement the
permanent small dots, or “tattoos,” ensuring that the treatment is given to the same volume each day. Should the patient require further therapy at a later date, these
markings accurately indicate the location of previous treatment portals. Within the treatment room, light localizers describe the outline of the field, and small laser dots
are used to check whether the patient is in the correct position. Immobilization of the patient usually is achieved by devices made of foam, plastic, plaster, and other
materials that can be made to conform to each patient's anatomy. It is most important that the patient be put in a position that is comfortable and easily reproduced
from day to day.
ELECTRON THERAPY
Electrons differ greatly in their characteristic depth-dose distributions ( Fig. 16-6). The maximum dose is reached and followed by a prompt fall. Little skin sparing is
possible with electron beam therapy. It is the most useful radiation in the treatment of superficial tumors because the deeper tissue is spared by the prompt fall in the
radiation dose. With higher electron energy, the penetration is greater and the fall in depth dose not as steep. A major problem with electrons is that absorption can
be modified greatly by bone or air-containing tissues. Bone greatly reduces the depth dose because it absorbs much more of the radiation; the contrary is true for
air-containing spaces.
Currently there is a great deal of interest in proton therapy, which is discussed in more detail in Chapter 65.

BIOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
RADIATION INTERACTION WITH BIOLOGIC MATERIALS
Because mammalian cells may be considered dilute aqueous solutions, there are two possible mechanisms of interaction with biologically important molecules—the
direct effect of radiation on the important target molecule, and the indirect effect produced by intermediary radiation products. For most events, the important target
molecule is thought to be the DNA, and when considering the maintenance of reproductive integrity, it is useful to assume that DNA is the target. Whatever the critical
target, it can be affected directly by ionizing radiation that causes a change in the molecular structure of the biologically important molecule. This direct effect is most
common for high linear energy transfer (LET) radiation. Alternatively, the photon may interact with water, the predominant molecule in these dilute solutions, to
produce free radicals. All of these forms of radiation are short-lived; they can interact with biologically important material, causing a detrimental effect, or they can
react innocently and revert to their former state. The likelihood of interaction or reversion can be modified by reaction with molecular oxygen, which favors prolonging
the life of a reactive species, or by reaction with sulfhydryl compounds, which reduces the lifespan of the free radicals by combining with them to return to innocuous
substances.
CELL SURVIVAL CONSIDERATIONS
Radiation effects, whether direct or indirect, are random, an important principle in the general nature of cell killing. The biologically important effects of radiation
therapy are those concerned with reproductive integrity. It usually is assumed that DNA is the critical target for this radiation effect, although it has not been proved
with certainty. Other biologically important effects of radiation (e.g., edema) are far more likely to be caused by its action on membranes.
At least four possible consequences of radiation interaction with cells can affect long-term reproductive viability of the cell or its progeny: necrosis, apoptosis,
accelerated senescence, and terminal differentiation. Current research is focused on these different effects of radiation on cells.
A cell that is damaged by radiation and loses its reproductive integrity may divide once or more often before all the progeny are rendered reproductively sterile.
Possible consequences to the cell include the following:
1. Rapid death by apoptosis.
2. It may die while trying to divide.
3. It may produce unusual forms as a result of aberrant attempts at division.
4. It may stay as it is, unable to divide, but physiologically functional for a long period. Such functional but sterile cells do not appear different from fertile cells.
Some of these may be terminally differentiated cells.
5. It may divide, giving rise to one or more generations of daughter cells before some or all of the progeny become sterile. Those colonies in which some
reproductively viable progeny emerge may then regrow. 2
6. The cell may undergo no alterations in the divisional process or only minor ones.
Except for those cells undergoing apoptosis, some delay in division is usually produced, even in cells that are not damaged lethally.
Survival Curves
Survival curves plot the fraction of cells surviving radiation against the dose given. Survival is determined by the ability to form a macroscopic colony. The simplest
relation can be seen for bacteria in which survival is a constant exponential function of dose. The importance of this exponential relation is that, for a given dose
increment, a constant proportion (rather than a constant number) of cells is killed. Because of the randomness of radiation damage, if there is, on average, one lethal
lesion per cell, some cells have one lesion, some more than one, and some fewer than one. Under such circumstances, the proportion of cells that have fewer than
one (i.e., no lethal events) is e– 1, or a survival fraction of 0.37. The dose required to reduce the survival fraction to 37% on the exponential curve is known as the Do.
This term is related to the slope of the exponential survival curve. If a smaller dose is required to reduce the survival fraction to 37%, the cells are more sensitive to
radiation.
Survival curves of most mammalian cells differ from those of bacterial cells by having a “shoulder” in the low-dose region and the exponential relation at higher doses.
This shoulder indicates a reduced efficiency of cell killing. Such an idealized curve is shown in Figure 16-7, with the shorthand terminology used to describe survival
curves. The terminal exponential portion is described by the D o, whereas the initial shoulder region can be described by the extrapolation number n or the D q, the
quasi-threshold dose. The former is the number on the ordinate found when the exponential portion is extrapolated to O dose, whereas D q is the dose at which the
straight portion of the survival curve extrapolated backward intersects the line where the survival fraction is unity. If any two of these are known, the third can be
calculated. The survival curve is described as follows: log e n = Dq/Do. This curve is best described by a linear quadratic model with the following formula 3:

FIGURE 16-7. Idealized radiation survival curve. D o, dose required to reduce the survival fraction to 37% on the exponential curve, D q, the quasi-threshold dose, l/e,
dose energy divided by dose loss.

The a and b terms in this equation and their ratio are used to describe survival curve characteristics and to classify cellular response to radiation. Survival curves
have been determined for benign or neoplastic mammalian cells in culture. No general characteristics of tumor cells make them different from normal cells in culture.
The survival curves for various human tumors thought to be sensitive and resistant to radiation were studied by Weichselbaum and colleagues, 4 who did not show any
survival-curve characteristics that allow these two to be separated. Therefore, the differences in clinical response cannot be explained by simple acute differences in
survival curves, although recurrent tumors have the radiobiologic characteristics of the more resistant subclones of the primary tumor.
Normal tissues also have been studied using clonogenic survival as an end point, with survival curves determined analogously to those for cells in tissue culture. The
simplest clonal system, as originally described by Till and McCulloch, 5 is that used for murine bone marrow stem cells. When bone marrow cells are injected into
lethally irradiated recipient animals, colonies are formed in the animals' spleens. These can be used to assess the reproductive integrity of the injected cells. The
viability of the small intestinal clonogenic mucosal cells can be assessed by looking at sections of the small intestine at various times after irradiation and determining
the appearance of colonies derived from cells surviving this radiation. 6 Using these and other techniques, the general properties of survival curves of normal and
tumor cells are shown in Table 16-1. There are no characteristic differences in survival curves between normal tissues and tumors. Tumors generally resemble their
normal tissue of origin in this respect.

TABLE 16-1. Survival Curve Parameters for Some Mammalian Cells

Repair of Radiation Damage
When cells are irradiated, lethal damage can occur, or the damage may be modified and not lead irrevocably to cell death. Such amelioration of radiation damage is
called repair. Repair can be divided into potentially lethal damage repair and sublethal damage repair.
Potentially lethal damage, under certain circumstances, leads to cell death. If postirradiation conditions are modified to allow repair, cells that would have died can be
salvaged. In general, postirradiation conditions that suppress cell division are the ones most favorable to repair of potentially lethal damage. The simplest example of
this was shown first in bacteria for UV and x-radiation. 7 A similar effect was seen in mammalian cells and persists into the first few postirradiation generations. 8,9 and 10
Potentially lethal damage repair may be most important in relating the cell culture studies of human tumors to their clinical response. Weichselbaum and colleagues 11
have shown that osteogenic sarcoma, a tumor characteristically thought to be resistant to radiation, has a great capacity for potentially lethal damage repair compared
with tumors that may be much more responsive to radiation. After irradiation in the clinical circumstance, the tumor cell may not be faced with the necessity of rapid
cell division, and it may have the opportunity for potentially lethal damage repair.
One explanation for the shoulder of the radiation survival curve is that the cell can repair some of the radiation damage, including a great proportion of the damage
incurred with low doses of radiation. This is called sublethal damage. Elkind and Sutton12 have studied the shoulder and its return by using divided doses of radiation.
They have shown that if the dose of radiation is divided into two fractions and a few hours elapse between radiation doses, the shoulder will return. Therefore, two
doses of radiation separated in time are less effective than the same total dose given as a single dose. Both D q and the a/b ratio measure similar characteristics of the
survival curve. With the exception of the bone marrow stem cells, acutely responding normal tissues have a large D q and a large a/b ratio. This suggests that multiple
small fractions of radiation can preserve these tissues, but not bone marrow.
Varying the dose rate of radiation may be considered a form of radiation fractionation. When the dose rate is low, such as during interstitial or intracavitary irradiation,
it can be considered as a large number of small doses on the shoulder of the survival curve. 13 Therefore, differences between the dose-limiting normal tissues and the
tumor in their shoulder characteristics and differences in the break point between shoulder and steep exponential have great clinical implications for such continuous
radiation.
Apoptosis is an important response to radiation in many cells. 14 The relative proportion of cells undergoing apoptosis rather than pausing in the cell cycle to repair
radiation damage may be a very important determinant of the likelihood of the radiation curability of a tumor. Certain normal cells, such as lymphocytes and germ
cells, show apoptosis with very small doses of radiation. The reciprocal nature of radiation repair and apoptosis may explain the correlation between potentially lethal
damage repair and radiocurability; cells with a great capacity for potentially lethal damage repair have little apoptotic response to radiation. It may be the latter that is
the determining characteristic. The loss of the apoptotic response seems to be correlated to tumor progression. A number of genes associated with oncogenesis affect
the likelihood of a cell demonstrating programmed cell death after DNA damage, including Bcl-2, Bcl-x, and P53. 15,16 A variety of factors can induce or stimulate
apoptosis,16 including those stimulated by radiation. 17
Importance of Oxygen
The most important modifier of the biologic effect of ionizing irradiation is molecular oxygen. First noted in the 1920s, its importance was not realized until Mottram
studied it systematically. 18 The general scientific community became aware of this phenomenon with the publications by Read 19 and Gray et al. 20 in the early 1950s.
Figure 16-8 shows a survival curve for cells under aerobic and hypoxic conditions. 21 For equivalent cell killing at every level of survival, greater doses are required
under hypoxic conditions compared with oxic conditions. There is some disagreement in the literature as to whether the dose ratio is the same throughout the survival
curve. Most data suggest a smaller difference when low doses are used. A shorthand term, the oxygen enhancement ratio (OER), often is used. OER is the ratio of
dose required for equivalent cell killing in the absence of oxygen compared with the dose required in the presence of oxygen. This term has most relevance on the
exponential portion of the curve, because there appears to be a reduced shoulder on the survival curve of cells under hypoxic conditions. 21 Tumor cells allowed to

grow into physiologic hypoxia have reduced capacity to repair sublethal damage ( Fig. 16-9).

FIGURE 16-8. In vivo survival curves for oxic and hypoxic tumor cells. (From ref. 21, with permission.)

FIGURE 16-9. In vivo curves comparing two-dose survival to single-dose survival for oxic and hypoxic tumor cells. (From ref. 21, with permission.)

The OER range for different cells that have been studied varies from approximately 2.5 to 3.5. This means that, for reduction to a given survival level, three times as
much radiation is required under hypoxic conditions as under oxic conditions. Because the curves are exponential, the ratio of survival fractions increases with dose.
For example, in Figure 16-8, at 1000 rad the ratio of survival is 30.
Study of the phenomenon reveals that oxygen must be present during irradiation. Figure 16-10 shows the relative radiosensitivity of cells as a function of the oxygen
tension at the time of irradiation. A low oxygen tension must be reached before there is a protective effect of hypoxia. The exact mechanism of the oxygen effect has
not been determined definitively. It is believed that oxygen affects the initial chemical products of the interaction of radiation with biologic material. The important free
radicals have short half-lives. A useful way to think about them is that they may return to an innocuous state or remain highly reactive molecules. Oxygen appears to
favor the latter, whereas the presence of high levels of sulfhydryl compounds favors the former.

FIGURE 16-10. Radiation sensitivity as a function of ambient oxygen pressure. (Modified from Deschner EE, Gray LH. Influence of oxygen tension of x-ray induced
chromosomal damage in Ehrlich ascites tumor cells irradiated in vitro and in vivo. Radiat Res 1959;11:115, with permission.)

Thomlinson and Gray 22 recognized the importance of the oxygen effect in a classic paper in which they showed that tumors from humans frequently had anoxic
regions. Calculations of oxygen diffusion from capillaries and metabolism predicted that the oxygen tension would decrease to zero at approximately 150 µm. They
measured the width of tumor cords and showed that tumors can be modeled as shown in Figure 16-11. Those cells within approximately 100 µm of the capillary are
well oxygenated, those beyond 150 µm are anoxic and necrotic, and those between 100 and 150 µm are hypoxic at an oxygen tension that might protect cells from
radiation. This model has had a profound influence on radiobiologic and radiotherapeutic thinking. If all tumors look this way and such hypoxic regions contain cells
that ultimately could cause tumor regrowth, then no clinically apparent tumor would be cured by radiation therapy. Because this is not the case, this paradox must be
explained.

FIGURE 16-11. Diagrammatic representation of a tumor.

Laboratory experiments have indicated that immediately after a single dose of radiation, the surviving tumor cells are mainly the original hypoxic cells. After a period,
the proportion of hypoxic cells returns to the preradiation level. This process has been called reoxygenation.23 The term can be confusing because these are indirect
experiments and do not record the fate of individual cells. The results of these experiments can be explained by suggesting that tumor cells do reoxygenate for

several reasons: (1) reduced total tumor cell population relative to the surface area of tumor blood vessels; (2) reduced separation of hypoxic cells from the blood
vessels, resulting from preferential cell kill of oxygenated cells; (3) increased oxygen diffusion; and (4) decreased intratumoral pressure, which opens blood vessels.
Alternatively, a large number of these hypoxic cells might in fact be doomed because, with proliferation in the oxic regions, they are pushed outward, ultimately forced
to reside in the anoxic regions, and therefore die. Hypoxic cells, rather then being determinant in tumors surviving irradiation, may be on the way to anoxia and death,
thus having limited clinical importance. It is likely that different mechanisms pertain under different circumstances in the laboratory and in the clinic.
The clinical importance of the oxygen effect has led to clinical and laboratory experiments, including the use of high-pressure oxygen with radiation therapy to improve
results. These studies have indicated that, with a small number of radiation fractions, hyperbaric oxygen increases curability. If normal fractionation schemes are
used, hyperbaric oxygen often does not show an advantage. However, some reports of tumors of the head, neck, and uterine cervix indicate that hyperbaric oxygen
with 10 fractions of radiation results in greater cure than conventional daily fractionation. 24,25 and 26Table 16-2 depicts the results with head and neck cancers. Despite
these promising studies, the hyperbaric oxygen technique is cumbersome, difficult for the patient, and prohibits the use of the careful beam definition and beam
modification so important in radiation therapy. The technique has been abandoned in most radiotherapy centers.

TABLE 16-2. Results of a Randomized Prospective Trial of Hyperbaric Oxygen in the Radiation Treatment of Head and Neck Cancer

A more attractive alternative has been the development of hypoxic cell sensitizers. In the 1960s, Adams and colleagues 27,28 began searching for compounds that
would mimic oxygen in its effect. They sought agents that would be metabolized slowly and reach all portions of the tumor. This is an important distinction, because
high-pressure oxygen increases diffusion only slightly, whereas slowly metabolized sensitizers can reach all areas of the tumor. Although newer methods were based
on replacing molecular oxygen, other effects of the nitroimidazoles, the most well-studied class of these agents, have been described. They appear to be cytotoxic to
hypoxic cells and may sensitize cells to chemotherapeutic agents. 29,30 How important these last two points are in their use remains to be seen. However, this general
class of agents offers a whole new approach to the chemical treatment of tumors based on a known tumor–normal tissue difference (i.e., the presence of hypoxic cells
in tumors).
A practical clinical concern is whether the presence of anemia affects tumor response to radiation. Historic review and a prospective study from the Princess Margaret
Hospital (Table 16-3) appear to indicate that anemia results in an adverse effect on tumor curability by radiation, presumably because it increases the hypoxic
component of tumor cells. 31

TABLE 16-3. Effects of Anemia on Pelvic Recurrence in Stage IIB or III Cervical Cancer

A review of intercapillary distance and tissue oxygen tension correlates local recurrence with evidence of hypoxia using these parameters in studying carcinoma of the
cervix.32 These studies emphasize the promise of techniques that improve tissue oxygenation in the treatment of epithelial cancers. In vitro measurement of hypoxia
using radioactively labeled hypoxic sensitizers may alter selection of appropriate tumors for such therapeutic manipulation. 33,34
Variable Radiation Response during the Division Cycle
The cell cycle can be divided into four phases: G 1, S, G2, and M. Terasima and Tolmach 35 and Sinclair and Morton 36 studied synchronized populations to determine
whether there is a difference in response to radiation as a function of the cell's position in the division cycle. They found that, generally, the mitotic phase (M) is most
sensitive and G2 almost as sensitive. G1 is relatively sensitive in cells with a short G 1 phase. Cells gradually increase in resistance as they proceed through the late G 1
and S phases, reaching a maximum of resistance in the late S phase. In cells with a long G 1 phase, a peak of resistance is seen early in G 1. These findings in vitro
also seem to be true in vivo for normal and tumor cells. 37,38
The changes in radiation response are reflected in changes in the shoulder of the survival curve and in the terminal slope. These differences can be large. The
difference between the most resistant and the most sensitive can show slope ratios equal to that of the oxygen effect.
The clinical consequences of different fractional survival after 2 Gy can be seen in Table 16-4. Small differences in fractional survival when repeated have profound
consequences in the level of cell killing.

TABLE 16-4. Calculated Cumulative Survival Fraction a

A second consequence of differential cell killing and the mitotic delay induced by radiation is a tendency to partially synchronize the cells. The timing of the second
dose of a fractionated scheme may be critical. This synchronization is short-lived because cells desynchronize rapidly and redistribute themselves according to the
original cell age distribution. This phenomenon, which could pose a clinical problem or a clinical advantage, does not seem to be important unless an incomplete
redistribution between fractions exists.
Cell Proliferation
During a course of fractionated radiation, the ultimate response of the tumor and normal tissue depends on whether cell proliferation has taken place between the
fractions, thereby increasing the number of cells exposed to radiation. This cell increase may be caused by cell proliferation within the irradiated volume (i.e., within
the tumor or normal cell renewal tissue) or by cells that immigrate from unirradiated adjacent areas. The latter situation is seen in the skin, oral gastrointestinal
mucosa, or from great distances, as found with bone marrow and lymph node repopulation. The balance between radiation-induced cell killing and repopulation is
responsible for most of the clinical findings seen during fractionated radiotherapy treatment.
In addition to spontaneous repopulation, an induced cell proliferation, or recruitment of cells, may take place. 40,41 Physiologically, many tissues of the body respond to
trauma by being recruited into rapid proliferation (e.g., after a wound in the skin, a break in bone, or a partial hepatectomy). The reparative process requires
proliferation of the undamaged cells. Similarly, when the oral mucosa is irradiated, strong evidence indicates that the cell-cycle time is decreased and that net cell
proliferation increases. This also may occur in some tumors but appears to be of less magnitude than that in normal tissues. 42 If cell proliferation is greater in the
tumor, then fewer fractions will be desired. Part of the differential effect of fractionated radiation may lie in differential recruitment of normal versus tumor cells.
TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVATION, GENE INDUCTION, AND REGULATION AFTER IONIZING RADIATION
A new class of actions of ionizing radiation may explain a number of perplexing effects. Immediately after exposure to ionizing radiation, expression of genes such as
FOS, JUN, and EGR1 appear to take place. 43,44 This seems to occur in the presence of protein synthesis and is thought to be due to transcriptional activation and
inhibition of protein degradation. Radiation also induces tumor necrosis factor-a, 45,46 and 47 which may produce additive, synergistic, and distant cytotoxic effects of
radiation. Platelet-derived growth factor-a and fibroblast growth factor are induced and released from vascular endothelium. 48 It is suggested that this release
stimulates proliferation of smooth muscle cells in the smaller arterioles and contributes to the undesirable long-term vascular events associated with radiation
exposure.49
PHARMACOLOGIC MODIFICATION OF RADIATION EFFECTS
Pharmacologic agents can modify the basic parameters of radiation response. Figure 16-12 shows a radiation survival curve for cells that have semiconservatively
incorporated the halogenated pyrimidine bromodeoxyuridine into their DNA. Under such circumstances, these cells are more sensitive to radiation, their survival curve
having the slope and the shoulder modified. 50 This occurs only when the halogenated pyrimidines bromodeoxyuridine or iododeoxyuridine are incorporated into the
DNA; their presence at the time of radiation is not sufficient. Sublethal damage repair also is markedly inhibited under these circumstances.

FIGURE 16-12. Radiation survival curve for cells incorporating halogenated pyrimidines. (From ref. 50, with permission.)

A second class of agents includes those that primarily affect the shoulder and only slightly affect the slope. The two most important of these agents are dactinomycin
and doxorubicin. Sublethal damage apparently is inhibited by dactinomycin but not by doxorubicin. 51,52,53,54,55,56 and 57 Strong evidence suggests that these drugs can
and do modify radiation effects when given simultaneously. Furthermore, when given after radiation therapy, they can recall the irradiated volumes by erythema on the
skin or by producing pulmonary reactions. 52,55,58,59 Chemicals may also interact with radiation by preferentially killing cells that are more resistant to radiation. For
example, agents that, along with radiation, preferentially destroy cells in the most resistant phase of the cell cycle (S) increase the cell kill; an example of this is
hydroxyurea.60 Radioprotective agents, such as sulfhydryl-containing compounds, act in the reverse fashion and tend to make cells more resistant. 61 They also
reduce the chromosome abnormalities associated with radiation.
Agents with dose-limiting normal tissue toxicities different from radiation may be used effectively with radiation. This is one of the basic principles of multiple-drug
chemotherapy—add agents with nonoverlapping toxicities. This strategy also works well with radiation.
The combined effects of drugs and radiation, or of two drugs, can be divided into the following types:
1. Independent. The agents act independently, their mechanisms of action are independent, and their damage is independent.
2. Additivity. The agents act on the same loci, and therefore their sublethal damage and their lethal damage are additive. Because of additive sublethal damage,
the lethality of the two together may be greater than the lethality of each alone added together.
3. Synergism. The two agents have a result that is more effective than pure additivity.
4. Antagonism. The cell killing is less than independent action.
The most important parameter for the clinician is the therapeutic index. The sigmoid curve of tumor cure and that of dose-limiting toxicity are portrayed in Figure
16-13. If both curves are moved but their relative place (one to the other) is not changed, then the proportion cured for a given level of toxicity is unchanged.
Drug–roentgen ray interaction is useful only when the curves are separated and not merely displaced.

FIGURE 16-13. Sigmoid curves of tumor control and complications. Dose for tumor control with minimum complications ( A). Maximum tumor dose with significant
complications (B).

HIGH LINEAR ENERGY TRANSFER RADIATION
Most of the discussion so far has been concerned with sparsely ionizing radiation, such as that produced by photons or high-energy electrons. More densely ionizing
radiation is produced by larger atomic particles. The biologic actions of these two types of radiation are different and relate to the density of ionization. LET is the rate
of energy loss along the path of the particle (de/dl). High LET radiations are densely ionizing, with de/dl being high. In general, the density of ionization depends on
Z2/vn, where Z is the atomic number and v is the particle velocity. Photons and electrons are characterized by high energy and low mass. Therefore, the density of
ionization is low until the secondary electrons come to rest at the end of their path. Particulate radiation ionizes directly. Gamma particles and stripped nuclei have a
high LET; neutrons have an intermediate LET because of recoil protons. The Z2 is large for large particles, intermediate for protons, and low for photons. High LET
radiations have little or no shoulder on the survival curve ( Fig. 16-14).

FIGURE 16-14. Survival fractions for high and low linear energy transfer (LET) radiations. RBE, relative biologic effectiveness.

RELATIVE BIOLOGIC EFFECTIVENESS
Relative biologic effectiveness (RBE) is a commonly used parameter in radiation biology. It is the dose ratio of different average LET beams required to produce the
same biologic effect. If the biologic end point of interest is associated with a high survival fraction, then the RBE is large because it considers shoulder differences
and those of the terminal slope. If the biologic end point involves a low survival fraction, the RBE is less because it primarily considers slope differences. In general,
RBE increases as the dose decreases. Not only is the shoulder reduced, but other measures of sublethal damage repair or potentially lethal damage repair are
markedly reduced with high LET radiation.
A general explanation is that the ionization is so dense that, when a cell is hit, the damage is so great it cannot be repaired. It is also true that the oxygen effect
decreases as the LET increases. With very high LET radiation, no oxygen effect is seen. 62
Although this advantage in RBE and OER suggests the possible therapeutic use of these radiations, a cautionary note must be made. Increasing RBE in itself does
not afford a therapeutic advantage. It is the therapeutic gain factor that is important—the RBE of the tumor compared with the RBE of the normal tissue. This factor is
complicated and greatly depends on the specific tumor and the dose-limiting normal tissue being considered.
TUMOR RADIOBIOLOGY
Many experiments have been done using animal tumors. In general, these tumors are spontaneous tumors occurring with reasonably high frequency in certain strains
of mice (e.g., mammary carcinoma in C3H mice) or tumors induced by carcinogens. Such primary tumors of animals are difficult to use experimentally because their
production is time consuming, and numbers of tumors of the same size and location are limited, restricting some experimental designs. A much more common
technique is the use of transplanted tumors. These are tumors that may have occurred spontaneously or from the application of a carcinogen but have now been
transplanted from animal to animal. They grow with predictable and known kinetics. Although this is a great advantage in experimental work, it does increase the
likelihood that the application of the results may be somewhat limited. Because these tumors are selected for rapid growth and for the ability to transplant serially, they
may not represent tumors that occur spontaneously in the host animal. Currently, many laboratories study human tumors transplanted into “nude” mice. These
genetically immunosuppressed mice permit the growth of these xenographs, but interpretation of these experiments is limited by the artificiality of the experimental
circumstance.
Tumors can be used in radiobiologic experiments and assayed in a number of ways. The simplest is to study the likelihood for cure. A researcher implants a tumor
into animals, allows it to grow to palpable size, treats it with a specific regimen, and then determines how many tumors of this type in various host animals are cured. If
the dose of radiation is plotted against the likelihood for cure, a sigmoid curve is generated ( Fig. 16-15).64 There is insufficient cell kill to cause tumor cure at very low
doses. As the dose is raised (to approximately one lethal event per cell), the statistics of random cell kill become important. Occasionally, tumors have zero viable
cells and are cured. The likelihood of cure rises rapidly with dose at this portion of the curve; it starts to plateau when the maximum effect of the particular technique is
reached. The dose required to increase a 10% likelihood of tumor control to 90% is approximately three times the D o dose. This sigmoid relation is important, because
it is true not only for tumors in experimental animals but also for clinical situations. The steepness of the curve in the effective range emphasizes the importance of
small increases in dose.

FIGURE 16-15. Sigmoid curve of tumor control.

The shape and steepness of the sigmoid dose-response relation for tumors can be affected by many factors. If the D o is large, then the dose-response curve is also
shallow. It also is affected by host defense mechanisms. This curve is steep with nonimmunogenic tumors or in hosts with an abrogated immune response, but it is
significantly shallower in immunogenic tumors. 65 The shallowness means that occasional cures are found at low doses and occasional failures are noted at very high
doses.
A similar sigmoid relation is seen when plotting the likelihood for complications against tumor control. Figure 16-13 shows the two sigmoid curves, one for cure and
one for complications. This is presented optimistically—the important complication curve is placed to the right of the tumor cure curve. The difference between these
curves is a measure of therapeutic gain. Much of clinical medicine and research in cancer treatment is concerned with separating these curves. 63 After the curves are
separated, for a given level of complications, the likelihood of cure can be increased. Or, for a high likelihood of cure, the likelihood of complications can be
decreased. Some methods for separating these curves include better restriction of the radiation dose by using techniques such as intensity-modulated radiation
therapy (see Chapter 29.4). Combining agents with nonoverlapping toxicity, such as certain chemotherapeutic agents, antiangiogenic agents, or even gene therapy,
offer the promise of improved cure without increasing the radiation toxicity. It may also be possible to modify radiation toxicity without decreasing effectiveness.
Tumors, like normal tissues, have certain physiologic characteristics. We associate some of these with the definition of malignancy: continued growth and extension
into surrounding tissues, and the ability to metastasize. In addition, growing tumors must induce a blood supply to meet their increasing metabolic needs. The
production of these blood vessels appears to result from the release of substances described by Folkman and colleagues 66,67 and 68 as “tumor angiogenesis factors”
and may have important clinical implications. If tumors can be prevented from producing such substances, they cannot grow beyond a size supported by diffusion
alone. 66,67 and 68 From the radiobiologic point of view, it means that, when irradiating a tumor, the radiobiology of the tumor and the vascular endothelial cells are
important. Complete destruction of the ability of tumor blood vessels to proliferate effectively limits tumor growth.
As tumors grow, they often exceed their blood supply and develop areas of necrosis and hypoxia (see Fig. 16-11). The proportion of hypoxic cells in a tumor can be
determined by studying the radiation survival curves. In Figure 16-16, curve A represents a well-oxygenated cell population, curve B describes hypoxic cells, and
curve C represents a mixture of oxic and hypoxic cells (as in a tumor). Extrapolation of the curves to the ordinate gives the proportion of hypoxic cells within a tumor,
first described by Powers and Tolmach. 69 In most experimental tumors studied, the percentage of hypoxic cells is 10% to 20%.

FIGURE 16-16. Idealized survival curves for oxic tumor cells ( A), hypoxic tumor cells (B), and a tumor containing both oxic and hypoxic tumor cells ( C). Prop,
proportion.

There has been great interest in trying to determine whether appropriate laboratory correlates exist for clinical radiation treatment. 70,71Table 16-5 shows important
parameters found by in vitro survival determinations for six histologic groups of human tumor cells. 72 The first four parameters have already been described. S 2 and S8
are the survival fractions found with 2 Gy and 8 Gy, respectively. is the mean inactivation dose, a mathematically determined characteristic of the initial portion of
the survival curve. It appears that S 2 and correlate directly with clinical radiocurability, whereas a is inversely related. All of these are measures of the initial portion
of the radiation survival curve; S 2 is the most closely correlated with clinical practice, because doses between 1.5 and 2.5 Gy are used most often in patient care.

TABLE 16-5. Mean Values and Coefficients of Variation (in Parentheses) of the Survival Curve Parameters and of the Surviving Fractions at 2 Gy (S 2) and 8 Gy (S8)
for Human Tumor Cell Lines

Because in radiation therapy the dose is divided into many fractions, small differences in S 2 can have significant consequences. Table 16-4 shows that, in a typical
32-fraction radiation treatment, the difference between survival fractions of 0.45 and 0.60 results in an ultimate survival fraction of 10 –11 compared with 10–7,
respectively. Also, certain tumors that are known to be difficult to cure by radiation have been shown to have great capacity to repair radiation damage, as measured
by allowing the cells time for repair before plating them for in vitro growth. 73 That these two simple laboratory determinations correlate with clinical results gives hope
that in vitro techniques can be used to determine mechanisms of modifying clinical parameters. This does not mean that the other biologic parameters, such as
oxygenation, position in the cell cycle, and cell proliferation, are not important; no doubt, all of these factors add to the complexity of correlating the clinical response
with in vitro determinations.
NORMAL TISSUE RADIATION BIOLOGY
To understand normal tissue radiation biology, an appreciation of the cell kinetics of cell renewal tissues is vital. The effects on organ function depend on the
reproductive requirements of the irradiated cells. Tissues whose functional activity does not require cell renewal (e.g., muscle and neurologic tissue) are considered
resistant to radiation. Both muscle and neurologic tissue also have important vasculoconnective tissue stroma that support them. 74 These stromal cells may be
required to divide and, therefore, determine the organ response to radiation. The radiation response of endothelial cells demonstrates a D q = 340 rad, n = 7, and a Do
= 170 rad, values similar to those of epithelial cells. 75

Many tissues of the body require continued cellular proliferation for their function, and they promptly demonstrate the effects of radiation. These cell renewal tissues
include the skin and its appendages, the gastrointestinal mucosa, bone marrow, reproductive tissues, and many exocrine glands. Clonogenic survival curves for bone
marrow stem cells, gastrointestinal epithelial cells, and skin are all available.
Tissues such as the liver and bone require little or no proliferation during the steady state, and normal function can be maintained despite large doses of radiation.
However, both of these respond to injury with rapid cell renewal. If trauma (fracture or partial hepatectomy) occurs, then the cells die when they attempt repair.
Irradiation of the liver has few consequences in moderate doses, but if this is followed by a partial hepatectomy, hepatic failure can occur. This finding has been of
clinical importance in the preoperative irradiation of right-sided Wilms' tumors attached to the liver, in which a significant amount of liver must be removed. 76 Under
such circumstances, it is far better to operate, allow the liver to regenerate, and then irradiate.
Patients who have received large amounts of radiation to the bone do perfectly well unless the bone is fractured. The damaged bones fail to be reconstituted or heal
slowly, causing a significant deformity and disability to the patient. These examples are included to stress that it is not the different cells that have such great
differences in radiation response, but rather that the proliferative requirements of different tissues largely determine the radiation effects. If the proliferative
requirements are low, the organ is considered resistant to radiation. If the proliferative requirements are high, it is considered radiosensitive. Some common
limitations on all systems may apply, based on the radiosensitivity of the stromal support cells, such as connective tissue and endothelial cells. 74 Stem cells of the cell
renewal tissues may have a limited proliferative capacity, and stem cell exhaustion appears to be a cause of late organ failure after irradiation. 77
Many other effects of radiation that do not depend on reproductive viability may have clear clinical relevance. For example, radiation is damaging to the cell
membrane and changes membrane transport. Subsequent radiation-induced edema is seen with moderate doses of radiation. Damage to certain membrane lipids can
cause apoptosis without nuclear damage. These nonreproductive effects of radiation are far less well understood but may be important in understanding the effects of
radiation on nondividing tissue, especially on the central nervous system.
Large doses of whole body irradiation have obvious clinical consequences, which generally are not relevant to conventional radiation therapy. However, because
whole body irradiation has been used in low doses in treating the lymphomas and in high doses in treating metastatic carcinoma, this topic is discussed briefly.
After large doses of radiation, the prodromal syndrome of nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, cramps, fatigue, sweating, fever, and headache occurs. Three distinct modes of
death may occur. The first, with very high doses of radiation (more than 10,000 rad), is seen within hours and appears to result from neurologic and cardiovascular
damage. Because this occurs so quickly, it probably is not caused by failure of cell proliferation but rather by extranuclear events within these organs. At intermediate
doses of radiation (500 to 1000 rad), death occurs within days. It is associated with extensive gastrointestinal mucosal damage, resulting in prolonged, severe, bloody
diarrhea; dehydration; and secondary infection occurring as the gastrointestinal mucosa is denuded. At lower doses of radiation (near the LD 50), death is caused by
hematopoietic failure. This complication has a latency period because the formed blood elements are nondividing, and bone marrow failure does not occur until the
progeny of the proliferating cells are required to maintain the patient. The lymphocyte level falls promptly as some of these cells die by apoptosis. The granulocyte
level falls on approximately day 5 or 6, and thrombocytopenia occurs later. Anemia does not occur as a direct result of a failure of red blood cell production, because
of the long life of the red blood cell, but it may be caused by hemorrhage.
Whole body irradiation appears to have significant antitumor activity exceeding that seen when the same dose is given to the tumor alone. 78,79 Very low doses of
whole body radiation in humans (10 to 15 rad, two to three times per week for 6 to 10 fractions) may be effective treatment for lymphomas and may cause marked
depression of the formed blood elements. The mechanism of action of this type of treatment is not understood. The effects on tumor and normal tissue are greater
than can be explained by the typical survival curve. One possible explanation is the release of TNF-a after radiation. 45,46,48 Perhaps the release of this and other
factors may contribute to the general effects of low-dose whole body radiation and the abscopal (distant) effects of regional irradiation. Many of the effects of radiation
on both tumors and normal tissues may be mediated or modified by the release of cytokines. Their effect may be tissue specific; for example, basic fibroblast growth
factor protects against the apoptotic microvascular component of radiation pneumonitis but has no effect on other mediastinal organs. 49
ADVERSE EFFECTS OF RADIATION
Some biologic considerations of localized radiation may decrease the likelihood for tumor control. The first and most commonly discussed is the effect of radiation on
the immune response. High-dose, whole body irradiation has a well-known and profound effect on the immune response. This generalized treatment rarely is used in
clinical therapy, however, except as preparation for bone marrow transplantation.
Shortly after the discovery of roentgen rays, whole body irradiation before the administration of antigens was found to suppress the production of antibodies. After
whole body irradiation, a prompt fall in the lymphocyte count is seen. The lymphocytes appear to have two types of radiation response: Approximately 80% apoptose,
but some lymphocytes survive the radiation. When assayed on the basis of reproductive capacity by exposure to mitogens after irradiation or other functional end
points, their radiation survival curves looked similar to that of hematopoietic cells with a D o of approximately 70 to 80 rad and an n of approximately 1. 80 Response
depends on the classes of lymphocytes involved, the extent of cell proliferation required, cell traffic, and the balance between suppressor and helper systems. The
following conclusions concerning the effect of radiation on the immune response can be made 81:
1. B lymphocytes are radiosensitive and undergo interphase (apoptosis) and mitotic death after irradiation.
2. All functional T-cell subpopulations have sensitive precursor cells. Suppressor T-cell precursors may undergo interphase death.
3. The homing potential of cells is affected by radiation.
4. Resting cells are more sensitive to interphase death than are the same cells when stimulated to divide before irradiation. (In the latter case, they have an n and
D o similar to those of hematopoietic stem cells.)
5. The effects of whole body irradiation are qualitatively and quantitatively different from those caused by localized or regional irradiation.
Whole body irradiation is more effective in preventing response to new antigens than in modifying response to a previously encountered antigen. Survival of
second-set skin grafts are affected much less than are initial grafts. Localized radiation, as used in radiation therapy, affects the immune response by decreasing the
number of circulating lymphocytes, presumably by irradiating and destroying them as they pass through the irradiated volume and by the release of certain cytokines.
Other adverse effects of radiation on the patient may be seen in addition to those affecting host-defense mechanisms. Radiation-induced mutagenesis is of concern
for germline and somatic cells. If the gonads are irradiated, there is an increased likelihood of mutation with increasing doses, without any evidence of a threshold
dose or of an ameliorating effect of fractionation. At higher doses, significant cell killing takes place, and the dose-response curve is no longer linear, presumably
because the cells that mutated received sufficient radiation to become sterile. Abnormal live births are uncommon after gonadal irradiation because most
radiation-induced mutations are recessive. Furthermore, dominant mutations, when they occur, usually are lethal. In the mouse, some evidence indicates that the risk
of mutation decreases with time after ovarian irradiation. Whether this is true in humans and how the mechanism occurs in animals are not known. It does not appear
to be true for irradiation of the testes.
The mutagenic effects of radiation depend on the type of irradiation. The RBE for high LET radiation can be extremely high for mutations. It is difficult to quantify the
risk because experiments with mice indicate a large difference in the mutation rate for different loci, with as much as a 1000-fold variation in the mutation rate. 81 In
general, the prudent figure used is that the mutation rate doubles with approximately every 50 rad.
Perhaps of even greater concern are somatic mutations, especially those that may lead to tumors. A great deal of evidence indicates that low doses of radiation
increase the incidence of tumors after significant latent periods. This information comes largely from whole body exposures to the atomic bomb and experience with
patients irradiated for benign diseases. 82,83 and 84 In general, there appears to be a linear increase in tumor incidence with dose until high doses are reached, at which
point the incidence reaches a plateau or even falls. 85,86 Presumably, this is true, again, because of cell killing. Figure 16-17 is an example of this biphasic
dose-response curve. Such tumor induction is associated with a latent period of 3 to 5 years for leukemia but is much longer for solid tumors. There are different ages
at which tumor induction is most likely. For example, the induction of breast cancer by radiation appears primarily with exposure in the first and second decades of life
and decreases with radiation later in life.

FIGURE 16-17. Biphase curve of tumor incidence. (Adapted from refs. 85 and 86.)

CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS
It is often suggested that the goal of treatment is the greatest probability of uncomplicated cure. Although this goal is desirable, circumstances actually may dictate a
different policy. Consider Figure 16-13, in which the curve for complications is to the right of the sigmoid curve for tumor control. If tumor failure can be salvaged by
subsequent surgery but complications are severe, long-lived, and difficult to manage, then line A is the optimal line. 63 An example of this would be the treatment of T2
and T3 glottic cancer. On the other hand, if complications are not severe or are remediable but cancer failure is fatal, then line B would be appropriate. This is the
case in stage II and III carcinoma of the uterine cervix. There is no simple answer. Often, the worst complication of treatment is tumor recurrence.
Many clinical examples of sigmoid dose-response curves have been reported. An example for tumors of the head and neck is shown in Figure 16-18 and for
Hodgkin's disease in Figure 16-19.87,88 In Figure 16-18, the ordinate is arranged to convert a sigmoid curve to a straight line. An instructive clinical experience is
described by Stewart and Jackson90 in which a consistent ~10% change in dose was used. Figure 16-20 shows the results in tumor control and complications. The
small increase in dose markedly improved the curability of the larger tumors, presumably because this dose is on the steep portion of the sigmoid dose-response
curve. It did not change the cure rate for small tumors very much because, presumably, the dose already was large enough to be on the plateau of the dose-response
curve, where changes in dose do not affect the cure appreciably. Similarly, complications were not increased significantly. The point indicating complications is to the
right, still on the shallow portion of the curve. This is a good example of separation of response between tumor and normal tissues. It also shows displacement of the
curve for cure as a function of tumor size.

FIGURE 16-18. Tumor control versus dose for supraglottic carcinoma. (From ref. 87, with permission.)

FIGURE 16-19. Tumor control versus dose for Hodgkin's disease. (From ref. 88, with permission.)

FIGURE 16-20. Tumor control versus dose for cancer of the larynx (4 MeV given over 3 weeks for a treatment period of 5 years). (From ref. 89, with permission.)

Even though tumors have a very steep dose-response relationship, significant intertumor heterogeneity may cause great flattening in the radiation dose-control
curves. 90 Considerable heterogeneity exists between tumors of the same histologic type and location, and this consideration explains the shallower nature of the
clinical dose-response curves compared with those for experimental animals. These analyses further indicate that, when the tumor control probability is low, the major
reason is a high S 2. This fact emphasizes the importance of identifying prospectively tumors that have a high S 2. Changes in the likelihood of apoptosis after radiation
may have an important effect on S2.
FRACTIONATION

Early in the twentieth century, as the practice of radiation therapy evolved, the virtues of dividing the radiation into small fractions were noticed. The reasons given
were often incorrect, but the clear observation was that fractionation of the dose allowed more effective tumor cure without excessive complications.
Fractionation considers the size and number of radiation increments. Protraction considers the overall time during which the course of radiation therapy is given. Both
factors affect all radiation therapy plans. The fashioning of a plan for fractionated radiation therapy for carcinoma of the larynx by Coutard, 91 whose work was based
on the principles of Regaud, 92 laid the foundation for the development of radiation therapy. The principles of such treatment were as follows:
1. Fractionation is important.
2. A relation exists between the acute reaction of the skin and oropharyngeal mucosa to cure and to late effects.
The association between acute and late effects has sometimes led radiotherapists astray. This relation depends on the fractionation scheme, the energy of radiation
used, and other factors. In general, acute effects are much more dependent on time than late effects. Late effects are influenced primarily by the total dose and
fraction size.
CONTINUOUS RADIATION
Another important technique of radiation therapy that evolved in the early part of the twentieth century was the application of continuous radiation by interstitial or
intracavitary application. 93 If the dose rate was too high or the volume too large, unacceptable complications occurred. Rules for treatment were developed that
resulted in the cure of certain tumors without unacceptable complications. These rules required that the dose rate be kept moderate (less than 100 rad/hour) and an
attempt at a good implant geometry be made to avoid unnecessary hot and cold spots.
The whole question of homogeneity of dose is much more difficult with intracavitary and interstitial irradiation than with external-beam techniques. To a great extent,
the clinical use of radioactive isotopes, especially by implantation techniques, developed separately from external-beam radiation therapy. Some physicians only
practiced one or the other of these techniques. More recently, external-beam and interstitial treatment have been used together to take advantage of the virtues of
both modalities. Good examples of this combined treatment are described in the chapters dealing with tumors of the head and neck and uterine cervix (see Chapter
30.2 and Chapter 36.2). The increase in the use of high-dose-rate afterloading techniques, although having the practical and logistical advantages, eliminate the
dose-rate advantage of brachytherapy. It remains to be determined whether this will have significant clinical consequences (see Chapter 36.2).
ACUTE AND LATE NORMAL TISSUE EFFECTS
Acute radiation effects occur largely in renewing tissues, such as skin, oropharyngeal mucosa, small intestine, rectum, bladder mucosa, and vaginal mucosa. These
cell-renewing tissues are rapidly proliferating, and as they are confronted with fractionated radiation, the processes of repair, repopulation, and recruitment all obtain.
Because the response of rapidly renewing tissues depends on the balance between cell birth and cell death, acute tissue reaction is crucially affected by the time
allowed for repopulation and, therefore, is dependent on protraction. It also depends on the cell kill per fraction, so fraction size is important. The radiotherapist
observing an excessive reaction by the oral mucosa knows that a small decrease in fraction size or a small treatment break allows rapid resolution of the problem,
because these changes permit reconstitution of the normal tissue.
Late effects are really the dose-limiting factor in radiation therapy. These include necrosis, fibrosis, fistula formation, nonhealing ulceration, and damage to specific
organs, such as spinal cord transection and blindness. Although the mechanisms of these phenomena are not clear, they do not appear to depend primarily on the
rapid proliferation of cells. Clinically late effects appear to depend much more on the total dose of radiation and the size of the radiation fraction than on protraction.
Only if the same fractionation scheme is used with the same normal tissue end point, the same irradiated volume, and the same treatment technique, can acute and
late effects be correlated. If any of these parameters are varied, the acute reactions to radiation may be dissociated from eventual late effects and are misleading.
Two hypotheses for late effects are worth discussion. One theory holds that all late effects result from damage to vasculoconnective stroma. Because this tissue is
common throughout the body, it would suggest a common mechanism for the late effects in any organ. 74 A variation on this hypothesis is that it is damage to the
endothelial cells, ubiquitous throughout the body, that determines late effects. 75 An alternative hypothesis suggests that the acute and the late effects of radiation and
cytotoxic chemotherapy are caused by cell depletion of the targeted cell-renewal tissues. Acute effects depend on the balance between cell killing and compensatory
replication of the stem and proliferative cells. The development of late effects requires that stem cells have only a limited proliferative capacity. 94,95 Compensation for
extensive or repeated cell killing may exhaust this capacity, resulting in eventual tissue failure. 73,96
ALTERING THE THERAPEUTIC INDEX
Goodman and Gilman98 define the therapeutic index as the relation between desired and undesired effects of therapy. For the oncologist, separation of the sigmoid
curve of complications from that of local control (see Fig. 16-13) is the graphic representation of manipulation of the therapeutic index. Some techniques of time-dose
relations used by the radiation oncologist to take advantage of this are fractionation, protraction, split-course technique, interstitial treatment, and manipulation of the
target volume. Although fractionation has been discussed, the use of multiple small fractions two, three, or more times a day (hyperfractionation), is being explored,
with some good results.98,99 and 100
Another technique to reduce complications is the use of normal-size fractions given more than once a day. This is referred to as multifraction, multiple daily fractions,
or accelerated fractionation.101
When tumor cells are proliferating rapidly, accelerated fractionation makes sense. Waiting 24 hours between each fraction may allow significant proliferation. Perhaps
the best example of the changing therapeutic index obtained with accelerated fractionation is the enhanced success in treating Burkitt's lymphoma. 102
In general, most radiotherapists administer conventional radiation in fractions between 180 and 250 rad each day. This allows tumor control without excessive acute
or late effects. The fraction size that is tolerated in terms of acute effects depends on the volume irradiated (the larger the volume, the smaller the fraction size), the
amount and type of dose-limiting normal tissue, the age of the patient, and other clinical factors.
Small changes in fraction size make a big difference in tolerance. Patients often are given small breaks during the treatment. These rest periods usually are caused
by weekend interruptions of daily fractionation. This protraction of the treatment allows for repopulation and recruitment. The days of rest also allow amelioration of
many acute effects, and they may allow time for tumor regression, resulting in reoxygenation.
An attempt to formalize and extend treatment breaks is the so-called split course technique. 103,104 and 105 Two to 3 weeks are allowed in the middle of treatment for
recovery from the acute effects and to permit tumor regression. When the dose of radiation is not increased, accumulating evidence indicates that this treatment
(although better tolerated) may be associated with less tumor control. 106 When the split course is administered with an increase in total dose, the results seem to be
comparable to conventional fractionation but perhaps with greater late effects.
Interstitial irradiation is administered by permanently or temporarily placing radioactive material into tissues. It requires biologic and physical considerations. Great
inhomogeneity is found, even in the most geometrically perfect implant. There is large inhomogeneity of dose and a similar variation in dose rate; the dose rate of
radiation is greater in areas of high dose. The half-life of 125I is long (60 days), resulting in a significant amount of the dose being given so slowly that significant cell
division may occur in the tumor and some normal cells. Therefore, the important dose may not be the total dose, but rather the dose per cell cycle, which is different
for each cell type and different as the isotope decays. Also, 125I irradiates primarily by the emission of very low-energy photons, some of which are absorbed by the
seeds themselves, leading to further inhomogeneity. 107
When implants can be used alone or in combination with external irradiation, the results are often better in terms of the therapeutic index than with external-beam
techniques alone. The high local dose, continuous radiation, and even inhomogeneity allowing normal tissue regrowth all contribute to better cosmetic and functional
results and cure of the tumor. Examples are breast cancer and tumors of the tongue and other head and neck sites. 108,109 Tumor volume also is important in clinical
radiotherapy. Although the gross tumor extent can be determined, most clinicians recognize that a characteristic of tumors is to extend beyond those macroscopically

identifiable borders. Determination of the target volume must include this consideration, but if a larger volume must be irradiated, then a smaller dose is tolerated.
Conversely, if the volume of the tumor is larger, then a larger dose is required. This dilemma limited the success of early radiotherapy of certain tumors by reducing
the target volume, resulting in recurrences at the treatment margins, or by causing significant complications in the treatment of large target volumes. Today,
distinctions are made between gross tumor and the subclinical extensions into apparently normal tissues. Subclinical disease means small numbers of cells, perhaps
favorable to irradiation (well oxygenated), which can be controlled with modest doses of radiation ( Table 16-6). The large number of cells present in the clinically
evidenced tumor requires higher doses (see curves in Fig. 16-20 and Fig. 16-21). This difference has led to the development of techniques for administering different
doses to microscopic tumor extensions and to the gross tumor. These include shrinking-field techniques, boost treatments, and certain strategies of combined surgery
and radiotherapy.

TABLE 16-6. Control of Subclinical Disease

Shrinking-field technique means giving the largest potential tumor bed a moderate dose of radiation, then reducing the target volume to the tumor and its immediate
confines and raising the dose. This can be done by reducing the fields; changing the treatment technique and target volume; or using a treatment technique such as
intensity-modulated radiation therapy, which gives the desired moderate dose to the larger volume and a higher dose to the smaller volume. Attempts have been
made to consider fractionation, protraction, and even implantation used with external beam in some form of mathematical formulae, all of which tend to oversimplify
complex clinical circumstances and can be misleading.
The dose-limiting normal tissues are of two kinds: those transited by the radiation as a consequence of irradiating the target volume, and those normal tissues within
the target volume (e.g., the urethra in a prostatic target volume). Radiotherapy with detailed treatment planning, CT scanning, and computer-controlled radiation
therapy may reduce the dose to the transited volume, possibly changing the therapeutic index. 110 However, it is unlikely that significant physical techniques will be
available for reducing the dose to normal tissues in the target volume. This can be done only by some biologic mechanism that distinguishes tumor from normal
tissues.
RADIOSENSITIVITY
The term radiosensitivity is used in different ways in the literature and can mean what is defined as radiosensitivity, radioresponsiveness, or radiocurability. Each is a
somewhat different concept. To the radiation biologist, radiosensitivity means the innate sensitivity of the cells to radiation. For cells that die a reproductive death, this
is related to the slope of the survival curve, or the D o.
Radioresponsiveness means the clinical appearance of tumor regression promptly after moderate doses of radiation. This may be a function of the cell's
radiosensitivity, but it also may be a function of the active cell kinetics of a tumor. Bergonie and Tribondeau 114 first established an association between the rate of
proliferation and the response of normal tissues, although they considered this to be radiosensitivity. A similar relation was presumed to apply to tumors. Because
cells do not undergo a reproductive death until they face mitosis, some tumors that proliferate rapidly regress rapidly, but they also may regrow rapidly. This is often
confused with radiosensitivity.
Radiocurability means that the tumor–normal tissue relations are such that curative doses of radiation can be applied regularly without excessive damage to normal
tissues. Examples of such radiocurable tumors are carcinomas of the cervix, larynx, breast, and prostate, in addition to Hodgkin's disease and seminomas. Some of
these are radioresponsive, some are radiosensitive, and some are neither.
RADIATION AND SURGERY
Radiation and surgery can be combined in many different ways. The general rationale for combining surgery and radiation is that the mechanism of failure for the two
techniques is different. Radiation rarely fails at the periphery of tumors, where cells are small in number and well vascularized. When radiation fails, it usually does so
in the center of the tumor where there are large volumes of tumor cells, often under hypoxic conditions. Surgery, in contrast, is limited by the required preservation of
vital normal tissues adjacent to the tumor. In resectable cancers, the gross tumor can be removed, but it is these vital normal tissues that limit the anatomic extent of
the dissection. When surgery fails under these circumstances, it is usually because of microscopic tumor cells left behind. It seems logical, therefore, to consider
combining the two techniques.
Radiation can be given before or after surgery. Preoperative radiation has the advantages of sterilizing cells at the edges of the resection, sterilizing cells that
perhaps would be dislodged and seeded at the time of surgery and, in the special circumstance of unresectable tumors, reducing the tumor volume sufficiently to
allow resection. It is not clear how often this results in a cure, because it may only change gross tumor to microscopic tumor and still result in tumor recurrence. It
does seem to benefit selected cases of large unresectable cancers. 112
There are disadvantages in the use of preoperative irradiation. The pathology reports are not valuable because, if sufficient time is allowed between the radiation and
the surgery, the destruction of tumor caused by preoperative radiation prevents ascertainment of the tumor's initial anatomic extent. In contrast, if the tumor is
slow-growing or if the surgery is done shortly after the radiation, the consequences of the radiation will not be represented in the pathologic evaluation of the material
because sufficient time was not allowed for tumor destruction and regression.
Another disadvantage is that the patient is irradiated before the careful staging available at surgical exploration, and some patients who would not benefit from
preoperative radiation are given this treatment (e.g., preoperative radiation to a colorectal carcinoma in a patient with occult liver metastases). Metastases may be
found only at the time of surgery.
A disadvantage often mentioned is the delay before surgical resection. This may not be a disadvantage, because as long as the patient's tumor is being treated, the
order of treatments should make no difference. The radiation dose usually is moderate (40 to 50 Gy) and given in conventional 2-Gy fractions 5 days a week or in
smaller total doses given more quickly in larger fractions. If the total dose of radiation is kept small (less than or equal to 20 Gy), then the delay between radiation and
surgery is small. When the dose reaches approximately 40 Gy, it is valuable to delay the surgery (usually 4 to 6 weeks) to allow the tissues to recover from the
radiation. If the total dose is greater than 50 Gy, then the surgery often will be more difficult. However, with moderate doses of radiation and some time allowed
between radiation and surgery, the resection can proceed without difficulty.
Postoperative radiation has a number of advantages as well. The subgroup of patients who may be helped by radiation can be defined accurately as a consequence
of the surgical exploration and pathologic review. Unnecessary irradiation to patients who are not likely to benefit can be avoided, and the target volumes are tailored
to meet what is found at surgery. Time can be allowed for wound healing so that the radiation does not interfere with this process. A disadvantage of such treatment is
that it has no effect on seeding at the time of surgery. Surgery also may alter the physiology of the tumor left behind because of reduction of the vascular supply. Cells
that were well oxygenated may be rendered physiologically hypoxic and more resistant to radiation. Another disadvantage in the peritoneal cavity is that the surgery
causes loops of bowel to be fixed in specific positions and increases the likelihood of small intestinal damage by radiation.

Some uncertainty exists as to which technique is better for particular clinical circumstances. Both preoperative and postoperative radiation appear to be valuable, and
the choice of the method, the dose of radiation, and time between radiation and surgery should be considered in terms of the goals planned.
An additional technique for combining surgery with radiation is limited surgical removal of the gross tumor. Because the gross tumor limits the radiotherapeutic
treatment, new interest has been raised in using surgery as the boost technique. Full courses of radiation combined with tumorectomy are given. This surgery can be
done before or after the irradiation. An example of this strategy is the “lumpectomy” used in the treatment of breast masses before definitive radiation (see Chapter
37.2).113,114 In the latter there appears to be evidence to suggest that the removal of gross tumor displaces the sigmoid curve of cure to lower radiation doses and
makes it change more steeply with dose (see Fig. 16-21).

FIGURE 16-21. Tumor control versus dose for stage II and III breast cancer. (From Hellman S. Improving the therapeutic index in breast cancer treatment. Cancer
Res 1980;40:4335, with permission.)

RADIATION AND CHEMOTHERAPY
The purpose of combined radiation and chemotherapy treatment is not to decrease the dose of radiation to gain the same effect, but rather to increase the therapeutic
index. This may be achieved using techniques that take advantage of the different mechanisms of action of systemic chemotherapy and regional irradiation.
Chemotherapeutic agents that directly modify the radiation survival curve may be used. A good example of this is the use of dactinomycin in the treatment of
childhood rhabdomyosarcoma or Wilms' tumor. A second way to increase the therapeutic index is to use drugs that specifically affect tumor response to radiation; the
most exciting of these are the hypoxic sensitizers, because they affect hypoxic cells that usually are restricted to tumors.
A third mechanism is the combination of drugs and roentgen rays with independent action or additivity. This strategy is just beginning to be explored but appears to be
of value in increased local control achieved in head and neck cancer. Because the major advantage of chemotherapy is its wide distribution throughout the body, the
combination of radiation and chemotherapy may improve the therapeutic index because, like the combination of surgery and irradiation, the target volumes are
different. Adjuvant chemotherapy with radiation for breast cancer, or with surgery and radiation for colon cancer, may improve survival because the chemotherapy is
effective against occult micrometastases outside the radiation field. Similarly, radiation may be of value in the treatment of leukemia by chemotherapy because the
radiation can be applied to specific sanctuary sites, such as the central nervous system.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Johns HE, Cunningham JR. The physics of radiology. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1977.
2. Thompson LH, Suit HD. Proliferation kinetics of x-irradiated mouse L cells studied with timelapse photography, part II. Int J Radiat Biol 1969;15:347.
3. Elkind MM. The initial part of the survival curve: does it predict the outcome of fractionated radiotherapy? Radiat Res 1988;144:425.
4. Weichselbaum RR, Nove J, Little JB. X-ray sensitivity of human tumor cells in vitro. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:437.
5. Till JE, McCulloch EA. A direct measurement of the radiation sensitivity of normal mouse bone marrow cells. Radiat Res 1961;14:213.
6. Withers HR, Elkind MM. Microcolony survival assay for cells of mouse intestinal mucosa exposed to radiation. Int J Radiat Biol 1970;17:261.
7. Alper T, Gillies NE. Restoration of Escherichia coli strain B irradiation: its dependence on suboptimal growth conditions. J Gen Microbiol 1958;18:461.
8. Phillips RA, Tolmach LJ. Repair of potentially lethal damage in x-irradiated HeLa cells. Radiat Res 1966;29:413.
9. Little JB, Hahn GM, Frindel E, et al. Repair of potentially lethal radiation damage in vitro and in vivo. Radiology 1973;106:689.
10. Belli JA, Shelton M. Potentially lethal radiation damage: repair of mammalian cells in culture. Science 1969;165:490.
11. Weichselbaum R, Little JB, Nove J. Response of human osteosarcoma in vitro to irradiation: evidence for unusual cellular repair activity. Int J Radiat Biol 1977;31:295.
12. Elkind MM, Sutton H. Radiation response of mammalian cells grown in culture: part 1. Repair of x-ray damage in surviving Chinese hamster cells. Radiat Res 1960;13:556.
13. Hall EJ. Radiation dose-rate: a factor of importance in radiobiology and radiotherapy. Br J Radiol 1972;45:81.
14. Dewey WC, Ling CC, Meyn RE. Radiation-induced apoptosis: relevance to radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995:33:781.
15. Boise LH, González-Garcia M, Postema CE, et al. bcl-x, a bcl-2-related gene that functions as a dominant regulator of apoptotic cell death. Cell 1993:74:597.
16. Thompson CB. Apoptosis in the pathogenesis and treatment of disease. Science 1995:267:1456.
17. Fuks Z, Persaud RS, Alfieri A, et al. Basic fibroblast growth factor protects endothelial cells against radiation-induced programmed cell death in vitro and in vivo. Cancer Res 1994:54:2582.
18. Mottram JC. Factors of importance in radiosensitivity of tumors. Br J Radiol 1936;9:606.
19. Read J. The effect of ionizing radiation on the broad beam root: the dependence of the x-ray sensitivity on dissolved oxygen. Br J Radiol 1952;25:89.
20. Gray LH, Coger AD, Ebert M, et al. The concentration of oxygen dissolved in tissues at the time of irradiation as a factor in radiotherapy. Br J Radiol 1953;26:638.
21. Belli JA, Dicus GJ, Bonte FJ. Radiation response of mammalian tumor cells. I. Repair of sublethal damage in vivo. J Natl Cancer Inst 1967;38:673.
22. Thomlinson RH, Gray LH. The histological structure of some human lung cancers and possible implications for radiotherapy. Br J Cancer 1955;9:539.
23. Kallman RF. The phenomenon of reoxygenation and its implications for fractionated radiotherapy. Radiology 1972;105:135.
24. Henk JM, Kindler PB, Smith CW. Radiotherapy and head and neck cancer: final report of the first clinical trial. Lancet 1977;2:101.
25. Henk JM, Smith CW. Radiotherapy and head and neck cancer: interim report of second clinical trial. Lancet 1977;2:104.
26. Watson ER, Halman KE, Dische S, et al. Hyperbaric oxygen and radiotherapy: a Medical Research Council trial in carcinoma of the cervix. Br J Radiol 1978;51:879.
27. Adams GE, Dewez DL. Hydrated electrons and radiobiological sensitization. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1963;12:473.
28. Adams GE, Ahmed L, Fielden EM, et al. The development of some nitroimidazoles as hypoxic cell sensitizers. Cancer Clin Trials 1980;3:37.
29. Stratford LJ, Adams GE. Effect of hyperthermia on differential cytotoxicity of a hypoxic cell radiosensitizer RO-07-0582 on mammalian cells in vitro. Br J Cancer 1977;35:307.
30. Rose CM, Millar JL, Peacock JH, et al. Differential enhancement of toxicity in tumors and normal tissues by misonidazole. In: Proceedings of the Key Biscayne Conference on Hypoxic Cell
Sensitizers and Radioprotectors. New York: Masson, 1980.
31. Bush RS, Jenkin RP, Allt WE, et al. Definitive evidence for hypoxic cells influencing cure in cancer therapy. Br J Cancer 1978;37:302.
32. Kolstad P. Intercapillary distance, oxygen tension, and local recurrence in cervix cancer. Scan J Clin Lab Invest 1968;106[suppl]:145.
33. Urtasun RC, Koch CJ, Franko AJ, et al. A novel technique for measuring human tissue PO 2 at the cellular level. Br J Cancer 1986;54:453.
34. Urtasun RC, Chapman JD, Raleigh JA, Franko AJ, Koch CJ. Binding of 3H-misonidazole to solid human tumors as a measure of tumor hypoxia. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1263.
35. Terasima R, Tolmach LJ. X-ray sensitivity and DNA synthesis in synchronous populations of HeLa cells. Science 1963;140:490.
36. Sinclair WK, Morton RA. X-ray sensitivity during the cell generation cycle of cultured Chinese hamster cells. Radiat Res 1966;29:450.
37. Chaffey JT, Hellman S. Differing responses to radiation of murine bone marrow stem cells in relation to the cell cycle. Cancer Res 1971;31:1613.
38. Madoc-Jones H, Mauro F. Age response to x-rays vinca alkaloids and hydroxyurea of murine lymphoma cells synchronized in vivo. J Natl Cancer Inst 1970;45:1131.
39. Hellman S. Cell kinetics, models, and cancer treatment: some principles for the radiation oncologist. Radiology 1975;114:219.
40. Chaffey JT, Hellman S. Radiation fractionation as applied to murine colony-forming units in differing proliferative states. Radiology 1969;93:1167.
41. Chaffey JT, Hellman S. Studies on dose fractionation as measured by endogenous spleen colonies in the mouse. Radiology 1968;90:363.
42. Hermens AF, Barendson GW. Changes in cell proliferation characteristics in a rat rhabdomyosarcoma before and after x-irradiation. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1969;5:173.
43. Sherman ML, Datta R, Hallahan DE, et al. Ionizing radiation regulates expression of the c-jun proto-oncogene. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:5663.
44. Hallahan DE, Sukhatme VP, Sherman ML, et al. Protein kinase C mediates x-ray inducibility of nuclear signal transducers EGR1 and JUN. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:2156.
45. Hallahan DE, Spriggs DR, Beckett MA, et al. Increased tumor necrosis factor a mRNA after cellular exposure to ionizing radiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:10104.
46. Sherman ML, Datta R, Hallahan DE, et al. Tumor necrosis factor gene expression is transcriptionally and post-transcriptionally regulated by ionizing radiation in human myeloid leukemic cells
and peripheral blood monocytes. J Clin Invest 1991;87:1794.
47. Witte L, Fuks Z, Haimovitz-Friedman A, et al. Effects of radiation on the release of growth factors from cultured bovine, porcine and human endothelial cells. Cancer Res 1989;49:5066.
48. Weichselbaum RR, Hallahan DE, Sukhatme V, et al. Biological consequences of gene regulation after ionizing radiation exposure. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:480.
49. Fuks Z, Alfieri A, Haimovitz-Friedman A, Seddon A, Cordon-Cardo A. Intravenous basic fibroblast growth factor protects the lung but not mediastinal organs against radiation-induced apoptosis
in vivo. Cancer J Sci Am 1995:1:62.
50. Szybalski W. X-ray sensitization by halopyrimidines. Cancer Chemother Rep 1974;58:539.
51. Piro AJ, Taylor CC, Belli JA. Interaction between radiation and drug damage in mammalian cells, part 1. Delayed expression of actinomycin D/x-ray effects in exponential and plateau phase
cells. Radiat Res 1975;63:346.

52. D'Angio GJ, Farber S, Maddock CL. Potentiation of x-ray effects by actinomycin D. Radiology 1959;73:175.
53. Bases RE. Modification of the radiation response determined by single-cell techniques: actinomycin D. Cancer Res 1959;19:1223.
54. Elkind MM, Whitmore GF, Alescio T. Actinomycin D: suppression of recovery in x-irradiated mammalian cells. Science 1964;143:1454.
55. Pinkel D. Actinomycin D in childhood cancer: a preliminary report. Pediatrics 1959;23:342.
56. Hellman S, Hannon E. Effects of Adriamycin on the radiation response of murine hematopoietic stem cells. Radiat Res 1976;67:162.
57. Belli JA, Piro AJ. The interaction between radiation and Adriamycin damage in mammalian cells. Cancer Res 1977;37:1624.
58. Cassady JR, Richter MP, Piro AJ, et al. Radiation-Adriamycin interactions: preliminary clinical observations. Cancer 1975;36:946.
59. Donaldson SC, Glick JM, Wilbur JR. Adriamycin activating a recall phenomenon after radiation therapy. Ann Intern Med 1974;81:407.
60. Sinclair WK. Hydroxyurea: effects on Chinese hamster cells grown in culture. Cancer Res 1967;27:297.
61. Yuhas JM, Yurconic M, Kligerman MM, et al. Combined use of radioprotective and radiosensitizing drugs in experimental radiotherapy. Radiat Res 1977;70:433.
62. Barendsen GW. Response of cultured cells, tumours, and normal tissues to radiations of different linear energy transfer. Curr Top Radiat Res 1968;4:293.
63. Bloomer WD, Hellman S. Normal tissue responses to radiation therapy. N Engl J Med 1975;293:80.
64. Holthusen H. Erfahrungen über die Vertaglichkeitsgrenze fur Röntgenstrahler und deren Nutzanwendung zur Verhutung von Schaden. Strahlentherapie 1936;57:254.
65. Suit HD, Goitein M. Rationale for use of charged-particle and fast-neutron beams in radiation therapy. In: Meyn RE, Withers HR, eds. Radiation biology in cancer research. New York: Raven
Press, 1980.
66. Folkman J, Tyler K. Tumor angiogenesis: its possible role in metastasis and invasion. In: Day B, Myers WP, Stans Garattini S, et al., eds. Cancer invasion and metastasis: mechanisms and
therapy, Vol 5. New York: Raven Press, 1977:95.
67. Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis: a possible control point in tumor growth. Ann Intern Med 1975;82:96.
68. Folkman J, Langer R, Linhardt RJ, et al. Angiogenesis inhibition and tumor regression caused by heparin or a heparin fragment in the presence of cortisone. Science 1983;221:719.
69. Powers WE, Tolmach LV. A multicomponent x-ray survival curve for mouse lymphosarcoma cells irradiation in vitro. Nature 1963;197:710.
70. Fertil B, Malaise EP. Inherent cellular radiosensitivity as a basic concept for human tumor radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:621.
71. Deacon J, Peckham MJ, Steel GG. The radioresponsiveness of human tumours and the initial slope of the cell survival curve. Radiother Oncol 1984;2:317.
72. Malaise EP, Fertil B, Chavaudra N, et al. Distribution of radiation sensitivities for human tumor cells of specific histological types: comparison of in vitro to in vivo data. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1986;12:617.
73. Weichselbaum RR, Dahlberg W, Little JB. Inherently radioresistant cells exist in some human tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1985;82:4732.
74. Rubin P, Casarett GW. Clinical radiation pathology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1968.
75. Reinhold HS, Buisman GH. Radiosensitivity of capillary endothelium. Br J Radiol 1973;46:54.
76. Filler RM, Tefft M, Vawter GF, et al. Hepatic lobectomy in childhood: effects of x-ray and chemotherapy. J Pediatr Surg 1969;4:31.
77. Reincke U, Hannon EC, Rosenblatt M, Hellman S. Proliferative capacity of murine hematopoietic stem cells in vitro. Science 1982;215:1619.
78. Medinger FG, Craver LF. Total-body irradiation. Am J Roentgenol Radium Ther Nucl Med 1942;48:651.
79. Hellman S, Chaffey JT, Rosenthal DS, et al. Place of radiation therapy in the treatment of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Cancer 1977;39:843.
80. Anderson RE, Warner NL. Ionizing radiation and the immune response. Adv Immunol 1976;24:215.
81. Kohn HI, Melvold RW. Divergent x-ray-induced mutation rates in the mouse for Hand “7 locus” groups of loci. Nature 1976;259:209.
82. Folley JH, Borges W, Yamawaki T. Incidence of leukemia in survivors of the atomic bomb in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan. Am J Med 1952;13:311.
83. Smith PG, Doll R. Late effects of x-irradiation in patients healed for metropathia hemorrhagica. Br J Radiol 1976;49:224.
84. Court Brown WM, Doll R. Mortality from cancer and other causes after radiotherapy for ankylosing spondylitis. BMJ 1965;2:1327.
85. Gray LH. Radiation biology and cancer. In: Cellular radiation biologythe M. D. Anderson Hospital and Tumor Institute 18th Symposium on Fundamental Cancer Research. Baltimore: Williams &
Wilkins, 1965:7.
86. Upton AC, Randolph ML, Conklin JW. Late effects of fast neutrons and gamma rays in mice as influenced by the dose rate of irradiation: induction of neoplasia. Radiat Res 1970;41:467.
87. Shukovsky LJ. Dose, time, volume relationships in squamous cell carcinoma of the supraglottic larynx. Am J Roentgenol Rad Ther Nucl Med 1970;108:27.
88. Kaplan HS. Evidence for a tumoricidal dose level in the radiotherapy of Hodgkin's disease. Cancer Res 1966;26:1221.
89. Stewart JG, Jackson AW. The steepness of the dose-response curve both for tumor and normal tissue injury. Laryngoscope 1975;85:1107.
90. Zagars GK, Schultheiss TE, Peters LJ. Inter-tumor heterogeneity and radiation dose-control curves. Radiother Oncol 1987;8:353.
91. Coutard H. Roentgen therapy of epitheliomas of the tonsillar region, hypopharynx, and larynx from 1920 to 1926. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1932;28:313.
92. Regaud C, Ferroux R. Discordance des effets des rayons X, d'une part dans la peau, d'autre part dans le testicule par le fractionement de la dose: diminution de l'efficacite dans le peau,
maintien de l'efficacite dans le testicule. Compt Rend Soc Biol 1927;97:431.
93. Danlos H. Quelques considerations sur le traitement des dermatoses par le radium. J Physiotherapie (Paris) 1905;3:98.
94. Botnick L, Hannon EC, Hellman S. Multisystem stem cell failure after apparent recovery from alkylating agents. Cancer Res 1978;38:1942.
95. Hellman S, Botnick LE. Stem cell depletion: an explanation of the late effects of cytotoxins. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1977;2:181.
96. Harris JR, Recht A, Almaric R, et al. Time course and prognosis of local recurrence following primary radiation therapy for early breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:37.
97. Goodman LS, Gilman A. The pharmacological basis of therapeutics. London: Macmillan, 1970:21.
98. Withers HR, Peters LJ, Thames HD, et al. Hyperfractionation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8:1807.
99. Withers HR, Thames HA, Peters LJ. Dose fractionation and volume effects in normal tissues and tumors. Cancer Treat Symp 1984;1:75.
100. Shank B, Chu FCH, Dinsmore R, et al. Hyperfractionated total body irradiation for bone marrow transplantation: results in seventy leukemia patients with allogeneic transplants. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:1607.
101. Thames HD Jr, Peters LJ, Withers HR, et al. Accelerated fractionation vs hyperfractionation: rationales for several treatments per day. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:127.
102. Norin T, Onyango J. Radiotherapy in Burkitt's lymphoma: conventional or superfractionated regimeearly results. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1977;2:399.
103. Scanlon P. Split-dose radiotherapy: the original premise. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:527.
104. Sambrook DK. Split-course radiation therapy in malignant tumors. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1964;91:37.
105. Parsons JT, Thar TL, Bova FJ, et al. An evaluation of split-course irradiation for pelvic malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:175.
106. Parsons JT, Bova FJ, Million RR. A re-evaluation of the University of Florida split-course technique for squamous carcinoma of the head and neck. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:1645.
107. Ling CC, Anderson LL, Shipley WU. Dose inhomogeneity in interstitial implants using 125I seeds. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1979;5:419.
108. Pierquin B, Chassagne D, Baillet F, et al. Clinical observations on the time factor in interstitial radiotherapy using iridium-192. Clin Radiol 1973;24:506.
109. Beadle GF, Silver B, Botnick L, et al. Cosmetic results following primary radiation therapy for early breast cancer. Cancer 1984;54:2911.
110. Levene MB, Kijewski PK, Chin LM, et al. Computer controlled radiation therapy. Radiology 1978;129:769.
111. Bergonie J, Tribondeau L. Interpretation of some results of radiotherapy and an attempt at determining a logical technique of treatment. Radiat Res 1959;11:587.
112. Kligerman MM. Radiotherapy and rectal cancer. Cancer 1977;39:896.
113. Harris JR, Beadle GF, Hellman S. Clinical studies on the use of radiation therapy as primary treatment of early breast cancer. Cancer 1984;53:705.
114. Hellman S. Improving the therapeutic index in breast cancer treatment. Cancer Res 1980;40:4335.

CHAPTER 17 Principles of Cancer Management: Chemotherapy
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 17
Principles of Cancer Management: Chemotherapy
EDWARD CHU
VINCENT T. DEVITA, JR.
Introduction
History
Chemotherapy as Part of the Initial Treatment of Cancer
Clinical End Points in Evaluating Response to Chemotherapy
Induction Chemotherapy
Adjuvant Chemotherapy
Primary (Neoadjuvant) Chemotherapy
Principles Governing the Use of Combination Chemotherapy
Effect of the Biology of Tumor Growth on Response to Chemotherapy
Apoptosis, Cell-Cycle Control, and Resistance to Chemotherapy
Role of Bcl-2 Family in Apoptosis
Role of Stress-Activated Protein Kinase in Apoptosis
Death Executioner Pathway
Cell Survival Pathways
Development of Novel Therapeutic Strategies
Concept of Dose Intensity
In Vitro Drug-Response Assays
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The introduction of chemotherapy in the fifth and sixth decades of the twentieth century has resulted in the development of curative therapeutic interventions for
patients with several types of advanced solid tumors and hematologic neoplasms. These advances provided important proof of the principle that anticancer drugs
could cure cancer and subsequently resulted in their integration into treatment programs with surgery and radiation therapy in early stages of disease, with excellent
results. The important obstacles encountered in the use of chemotherapy have been toxicity to the normal tissues of the body and the development of cellular
resistance to these chemotherapeutic agents. During the 1990s, the application of molecular techniques for analysis of the DNA of normal and neoplastic cells began
to identify some of the critical mechanisms through which chemotherapy induces cell death. This modern-day technology has also provided insight into the changes
within these cells that can confer either sensitivity or resistance to drug treatment. This new level of understanding of the molecular pathways through which
chemotherapy works and by which genetic change can result in resistance to drug therapy has opened the door for novel therapeutic strategies in which molecular,
genetic, and biologic therapies can be used in combination to attack directly new and specific targets to increase the chemosensitivity of malignant cells to treatment
and to protect the normal tissues of the body from therapy-induced side effects. The implementation of such novel therapeutic approaches may provide an important
paradigm shift in the manner in which therapy is delivered as we move into the next millennium. Clearly, the long-term goal is to improve the outcome of cancer
patients undergoing treatment, especially in those with neoplasms that currently are resistant to conventional-dose therapy.

HISTORY
The systemic treatment of cancer has its roots in the work of Paul Ehrlich, who coined the word chemotherapy. Erlich's use of in vivo rodent model systems to develop
antibiotics for treatment of infectious diseases led George Clowes, at Roswell Park Memorial Institute in Buffalo, New York, in the early 1900s, to develop inbred
rodent lines bearing transplanted tumors that could be used to screen potential anticancer drugs. This in vivo system provided the foundation for mass screening of
novel compounds. 1 Alkylating agents represent the first class of chemotherapeutic drugs to be used in the clinical setting. Of note, they were a product of the secret
gas program of the United States in both world wars. The exposure of military seamen to mustard gas in World War II led to the observation that alkylating agents
caused marrow and lymphoid hypoplasia. 2,3 This observation then led to the direct application of such agents in humans with hematologic neoplasms, including
Hodgkin's disease and lymphocytic lymphomas, at the Yale Cancer Center in 1943. However, given the secret nature of the gas warfare program, this work was not
published until 1946. 1,4 The demonstration of dramatic regressions in advanced lymphomas with chemotherapy generated much excitement. At approximately this
same time, Sidney Farber reported that folic acid had a significant proliferative effect on leukemic cell growth in children with lymphoblastic leukemia. These
observations led to the development of folic acid analogs as cancer drugs to inhibit folate metabolism; thus, the era of cancer chemotherapy began in earnest.
The cure of childhood leukemias and Hodgkin's disease with combination chemotherapy in the 1960s proved the much- disputed point that a fraction of human
cancers, even in their advanced stages, could be cured by drugs. This seminal work laid the foundation for the application of chemotherapy in the treatment of solid
tumors. The most disappointing aspect of the work with solid tumors was the failure to cure more patients once it was shown that cancer cells might be more sensitive
to cytotoxic drugs than normal cells. This is an especially relevant issue in the adjuvant setting where, because of low tumor burden, cancer cells were thought to be
more sensitive to eradication by drug therapy. 5 In addition, a curious and perplexing distribution of responses to chemotherapy has been noted, in that nearly 90% of
all drug cures occur in only 10% of cancer types. 6
Chemotherapy failure was, at first, thought to be due to variations in tumor growth characteristics. Attention then shifted to the role of specific and permanent
mechanisms of resistance to individual chemotherapeutic agents that were either acquired after exposure to cancer drugs or were already present as a consequence
of intrinsic genetic mutations within the tumor. 7 During the 1980s, a new form of multidrug resistance (mdr gene) to a host of natural-product antitumor agents,
including the anthracyclines, the taxanes, the vinca alkaloids, and a few antifolate analogs, was identified. This resistance mechanism was believed to play a
significant role in the failure of cancer chemotherapy in vitro. The mdr gene encodes a 170-kD membrane glycoprotein that acts to extrude these various anticancer
agents from the cell, resulting in decreased intracellular drug accumulation. Recently, the mrp gene, a related family member, has been characterized in pleiotropic
drug-resistant cancer cells. This gene encodes a 190-kD protein that functions in a fashion similar to that of the p170 glycoprotein to mediate the rapid efflux of drug
from the cell. 8,9 Although mdr and mrp appear to play a key role in the development of drug resistance in vitro and in vivo, their actual relevance to clinical drug
resistance remains unclear.
The therapeutic emphasis in the design of early studies was on maximizing the interaction of the active component of cancer drugs with the cycling cancer cell. The
availability of tritiated thymidine, a DNA precursor taken up during the S phase of the cell cycle, made possible the study of the kinetics of cell proliferation. It was
quickly determined that cancer cells did not divide faster than normal cells; rather, a larger fraction of the population was dividing. 10 This capacity to enter the cell
cycle more frequently was referred to as the tumor growth fraction, and it is widely appreciated that cancers, in general, have a significantly higher growth fraction
than their normal cell of origin. 11 Though the molecular technology at the time was limited, it was clear even then that the essence of a malignant cell was a critical
defect in the ability to control its own growth.
Much of the early clinical work in cancer chemotherapy was based on the kinetic modeling of the drug therapy of the murine leukemia L1210 cell line. Cell kinetic
studies revealed this system to be an exponentially growing malignancy with a growth fraction approaching 100%. 12 Except for the rare Burkitt's lymphoma, however,
a growth fraction this high has no parallel in human solid tumors. For this reason, the mathematics of cell kill based on the L1210 murine leukemic model could never
properly account for the ability to cure some human cancers with a relatively small fraction of cycling cells. 5
The work with the L1210 model also was the basis for the long-held dogma that rapidity of growth and frequency of cycling in responsive tumors determined sensitivity
to chemotherapy. Thus, slowly growing tumors are not kinetically vulnerable, whereas faster-growing tumors are both responsive and curable. Largely because of
their good response to treatment, leukemias and lymphomas were considered to be rapidly growing. This observation led to the odd conclusion that solid tumors, such
as lung cancer, colon cancer, and other “resistant tumors,” were slow-growing, even though there was insufficient evidence for this. It also ran counter to another
important clinical observation: Certain human cancers that display a spectrum of growth patterns from indolent to aggressive become significantly more treatable as
well as potentially curable as the cell of origin becomes less differentiated and the growth rate, as measured by thymidine-labeling index, increases. When this same

tumor transforms, however, to a highly aggressive phenotype, paradoxically it often becomes almost totally incurable.
Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is an ideal example of this treatment paradox. Diffuse large cell lymphoma (DHL) is a more rapidly growing form of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
that is curable by combination chemotherapy in its advanced stages. Indolent, low-grade lymphomas are more slowly growing tumors than DHL and, while they are
highly responsive to treatment, they are generally incurable in their advanced form with conventional-dose chemotherapy. Thus, despite a similar cell of origin, the
more rapidly proliferating cells are subject to complete eradication by chemotherapy. However, further increases in growth rates within populations of patients with
diffuse aggressive lymphomas, as predicted by the degree of expression of the Ki-67 antigen, a nuclear antigen that closely parallels the labeling index, negatively
predict for both response to treatment and curability. 13 This finding suggests that, beyond a certain point, the emergence of drug resistance in some way accompanies
an increase in the growth rate of the tumor.
Another important and curious clinical observation not easily explained by the dogma on acquired drug resistance was that normal renewing tissue, such as the bone
marrow and gastrointestinal (GI) mucosa, never develop resistance to these drugs. These are the two host tissues that are most commonly affected by most
anticancer agents used in the clinic. It is a consistent and disconcerting clinical experience to have a patient's tumor respond to treatment with associated marrow
suppression, only to have the tumor grow back in the face of continued treatment while the sensitivity of the marrow to chemotherapy-induced toxicity remains
invariant. The same can be said for toxicity to GI mucosa. 6 It is now well-appreciated that the genetic machinery involved in the cell-cycle checkpoint and apoptosis is
preserved in normal host tissues. This fact most likely explains why normal host cells are constantly sensitized to the toxic effect of cytotoxic agents.

CHEMOTHERAPY AS PART OF THE INITIAL TREATMENT OF CANCER
Currently, chemotherapy has a role in four different clinical settings 14: (1) as induction treatment for advanced disease, (2) as an adjunct to local methods of treatment,
(3) as the primary treatment for some patients who present with localized disease, in whom local forms of therapy by themselves are inadequate, and (4) by direct
instillation into sanctuary sites or by site-directed perfusion of specific regions of the body directly affected by the cancer.
The term induction chemotherapy has been used to describe drug therapy given as the primary treatment for patients who present with advanced cancer for which no
alternative treatment exists.15 Adjuvant chemotherapy denotes the use of systemic treatment after the primary tumor has been controlled by an alternative modality,
such as surgery and radiation therapy. The selection of an adjuvant treatment program for a particular patient usually is based on response rates in separate groups
of patients with advanced cancers of the same histologic type. The determination of a population of patients as suitable for adjuvant treatment is based on available
data about their average risk of recurrence after local treatment alone. Currently, adjuvant chemotherapy is considered standard treatment for early-stage breast and
colorectal cancer. 16,17 There is also evidence to support the use of chemotherapy after surgical resection of anaplastic astrocytomas. 18
Primary (neoadjuvant) chemotherapy denotes the use of chemotherapy as the initial treatment for patients who present with localized cancer for which there is an
alternative but less than completely effective local treatment. 19,20 For chemotherapy to be used as the initial (primary) treatment of a cancer partially curable by either
surgery or radiation therapy, there must be considerable evidence for the effectiveness of the drug program in question against advanced disease of the same type.
At this time, neoadjuvant therapy has been effectively used in the treatment of anal cancer, bladder cancer, breast cancer, esophageal cancer, laryngeal cancer,
locally advanced non–small cell lung cancer, and osteogenic sarcoma. For some of these tumors, it has now been determined that chemotherapy, when given
concurrently with radiation therapy, is superior to sequencing chemotherapy before radiation therapy.

CLINICAL END POINTS IN EVALUATING RESPONSE TO CHEMOTHERAPY
INDUCTION CHEMOTHERAPY
In induction chemotherapy for patients with advanced cancer and measurable disease, it is possible to assess response to drugs on a case-by-case basis. Partial
response is usually defined as the fraction of patients who demonstrate at least a 50% reduction in measurable tumor mass. There is growing evidence to suggest
that quality-of-life indices are better in patients who show either a response to therapy or a minimal response as compared to supportive care, even if overall survival
is not improved. However, partial responses are also useful in the evaluation of new drugs or new drug regimens, to determine whether the particular experimental
approach is worthy of further clinical development.
It is clear, however, that the most important indicator of the effectiveness of chemotherapy is the complete response rate. No patient with advanced cancer has ever
been cured without first achieving a complete remission. When new programs consistently produce more than an occasional complete remission, they have invariably
been proven to be of significant practical value in medical practice. Thus, in clinical trials, complete and partial responses should always be reported separately. The
most important indicator of the quality of a complete remission is the relapse-free survival from the time treatment is discontinued. This criterion is the only clinical
counterpart of the quantifiable cytoreductive effect of drugs in the in vivo rodent system. The use of freedom from progression in patients who have attained a mixture
of complete and partial responses can be misleading when evaluating a new treatment. 20 This method of analyzing clinical outcomes is a relatively simple indicator of
the practical potential of a new treatment but, for experimental treatments, it obscures the value of a relapse-free survival of complete responders as the major
determinant of the quality of remission and the potential for cure. Other end points, such as median response duration and median survival, are also of little practical
value until treatment results have been refined so that the complete response rate is higher than 50%.
ADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY
There was initially great excitement with the concept of using chemotherapy as an adjunct to local treatment. The rationale for adjuvant chemotherapy was to treat
micrometastatic disease at a time when tumor bulk would be at a minimum, thereby enhancing the potential efficacy of drug treatment. It was assumed that drug
therapy, at this stage, would result in a much higher cure rate. 21,22
The major indicator of effectiveness of a chemotherapy program—the complete remission rate—is lost in the adjuvant setting because the primary tumor has already
been removed. In the clinic, treatment is selected for individual patients based on response rates in an entirely different population of patients with advanced disease
of the same histologic type. In adjuvant programs, relapse-free survival remains the major end point but, in each patient, micrometastases consist of a mixture of
tumor cells, some of which could have been expected to be sensitive to chemotherapy and others of which could have been expected to be resistant to chemotherapy.
The relapse-free survival in the adjuvant setting, therefore, measures time to regrowth to clinically detectable levels of cells unresponsive, partially responsive, or very
sensitive to chemotherapy and is the equivalent of the duration of remission of a combined group of complete responders, partial responders, and nonresponders. In
this sense, it is similar to the use of freedom from progression in patients with advanced disease.
PRIMARY (NEOADJUVANT) CHEMOTHERAPY
The unique feature of using chemotherapy in patients with localized tumor before or in place of purely local treatments, such as surgical excision or radiation therapy
(or both), is the preservation of the presenting tumor mass as a biologic marker of responsiveness to the drugs. Moreover, this approach has allowed the sparing of
vital normal organs, such as the larynx, the anal sphincter, and the bladder, as the primary tumor is reduced in size and rendered easier to deal with by traditional
local measures. As with induction chemotherapy for patients with advanced cancer, it is possible to determine, on an individual basis, the potential efficacy of a new
treatment program. A good response to chemotherapy identifies a patient who may benefit from further treatment. A poor response of the primary tumor to
chemotherapy identifies a patient for whom alternative methods of treatment should be seriously considered. Another feature of primary chemotherapy is the ability to
differentiate partial responders with varying degrees of prognosis. Removal of residual tumor masses and histologic examination of the tissue allow determination of
the viability and character of the remaining tumor cells. The response duration of complete and partial responders must be catalogued separately. Such an approach
could result in briefer, less morbid, and more effective treatment programs. 14 When chemotherapy is administered concurrently with radiation therapy, the
determinants of sensitivity to drugs are obviated unless compared to radiation alone in a control arm.
The use of chemotherapy as primary treatment is reviewed in each of the appropriate disease-oriented chapters. Table 17-1 lists the specific malignancies in which
primary chemotherapy for localized forms of the cancer in question already have been incorporated into clinical usage (first and second categories) and in which
current clinical trials show considerable promise (third category). 23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31 and 32

TABLE 17-1. Primary Chemotherapy

PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE USE OF COMBINATION CHEMOTHERAPY
With rare exceptions (e.g., choriocarcinoma and Burkitt's lymphoma), standard single drugs at clinically tolerable doses have been unable to cure cancer. In the early
years of cancer chemotherapy, drug combinations were developed based on known biochemical actions of available anticancer drugs rather than on their clinical
efficacy. These regimens were largely ineffective. 33,34,35,36 and 37 The era of effective combination chemotherapy began when an array of active drugs from different
classes became available for use in combination in the treatment of leukemias and lymphomas. Combination chemotherapy has now been extended to the treatment
of most solid tumors, as described throughout this book.
Combination chemotherapy using conventional cytotoxic agents accomplishes several important objectives not possible with single-agent treatment. First, it provides
maximal cell kill within the range of toxicity tolerated by the host for each drug as long as dosing is not compromised. Second, it provides a broader range of
interaction between drugs and tumor cells with different genetic abnormalities in a heterogeneous tumor population. Finally, it may prevent or slow the subsequent
development of drug resistance.
Certain principles have been useful in the selection of drugs in the most effective drug combinations, and they guide the development of new drug therapeutic
programs. First, only drugs known to be partially effective against the same tumor when used alone should be selected for use in combination. If available, drugs that
produce some fraction of complete remission are preferred to those that produce only partial responses. Second, when several drugs of a class are available and are
equally effective, a drug should be selected on the basis of toxicity that does not overlap with the toxicity of other drugs to be used in the combination. Although such
selection leads to a wider range of side effects, it minimizes the risk of a lethal effect caused by multiple insults to the same organ system by different drugs and
allows dose intensity to be maximized.
Additionally, drugs should be used in their optimal dose and schedule, and drug combinations should be given at consistent intervals. Because long intervals between
cycles negatively affect dose intensity (discussed in further detail later in Concept of Dose Intensity), the treatment-free interval between cycles should be the shortest
possible time necessary for recovery of the most sensitive normal target tissue, which is usually the bone marrow. Finally, there should be a clear understanding of
the biochemical, molecular, and pharmacokinetic mechanisms of interaction between the individual drugs in a given combination, to allow for maximal effect.
Omission of a drug from a combination may allow overgrowth by a cell line sensitive to that drug alone and resistant to other drugs in the combination. In addition,
arbitrary reduction in the dose of an effective drug to add other less effective drugs may dramatically reduce the dose of the most effective agent below the threshold
of effectiveness and destroy the capacity of the combination to cure disease in a given patient.
Most standard treatment programs were designed around the kinetics of recovery of the bone marrow in response to exposure to a cytotoxic agent. The introduction of
the colony-stimulating factors (CSFs) has been a significant advance for cancer therapy, as they help to accelerate bone marrow recovery and prevent the occurrence
of severe myelosuppression.38 They play an instrumental role in decreasing the incidence of infections and the need for hospitalizations and allow for maintenance of
optimal dose intensity of chemotherapy. Clearly, these cytokine growth factors have revolutionized the next generation of chemotherapy treatment.
Bone marrow has a storage compartment that supplies mature cells to the peripheral blood for 8 to 10 days after the stem cell pool has been damaged by cytotoxic
drugs. Events in the peripheral blood are usually a week behind events occurring in the bone marrow. In previously untreated patients not primed by CSFs,
leukopenia and thrombocytopenia are observed on the ninth or tenth day after initial dosing. Nadir blood counts are noted between days 14 and 18, with the onset of
recovery beginning by day 21 and usually completed by day 28 in patients who have not had prior treatment with drugs or x-irradiation. This sequence may be altered
in patients with previous therapy by depletion of the stem cell pool, shortening the time to the appearance of leukopenia and thrombocytopenia and prolonging the
recovery time. The interval of greatest importance in the clinic is the duration of the nadir level of leukocytes and platelets. The highest risk of infection or bleeding
occurs with granulocyte counts lower than 500/dL and platelet counts lower than 10,000/dL. If this nadir lasts only 4 to 7 days, it is tolerated by most patients without
the need for supplemental support. Increasing doses of most anticancer drugs within the range of the maximally tolerated standard dose does not usually ablate the
marrow or even prolong the time to recovery; however, it does usually influence the nadir count levels. Repeated dosing during the phase of early recovery of the
marrow (days 16 to 21) may result in more severe toxicity in the second treatment cycle in patients whose marrow is not the source of, or involved with, the tumor.
These clinical observations, coupled with the kinetic studies of bone marrow recovery in mice and humans, led to the now-familiar 2-week interval between cycles of
the most effective drug combinations, using standard doses without CSFs (new cycles begin on days 21 or 28 after the first dose) to accommodate the recovery time
of human bone marrow. Although this treatment schedule is suitable for some tumors, the rapid regrowth of others, such as DHLs, Burkitt's lymphoma, and leukemia,
often permit the tumor volume to return to pretreatment levels in the interval required for bone marrow recovery, and other approaches to cycling drug combinations
are being explored.
No rigid schedule can accommodate all the variables assumed to be important for maximum effectiveness of combination chemotherapy and the requirements of the
patients in the practice of medical oncology. Physicians must often adjust doses at intervals to allow for the safe administration of drugs. The certainty that the
therapeutic effect of a drug or drug combination can be lost if the dose or schedule is altered should temper these judgments. Reductions in dose rates also often
result in only minimal decreases in toxicity but major reduction in the capacity to attain a complete remission in patients with drug-responsive tumors. 6 Adherence to
the standard sliding scale for dose adjustments, usually published with most new treatments, or the prompt initiation of CSF adjunct therapy is the most appropriate
way to optimize the delivery of chemotherapy without compromising long-term outcome. The application of appropriate guidelines for dose reductions preserves the
intervals between treatment cycles, preserves the integrity of each drug combination and, finally, provides consistency between patients and various clinical studies. 39
For many years, clinical trial design has been dominated by the use of alternating cycles of combination chemotherapy. The basis for this study design came from the
translation of preclinical experimental data into a model for clinical treatment. In 1943, Luria and Delbruck 40 observed that the bacterium Escherichia coli developed
resistance to bacterial viruses (bacteriophage) not by surviving exposure but by expanding clones of bacteria that had spontaneously mutated to a type inherently
resistant to phage infection. This was a seminal principle in bacterial genetics that laid the framework for the understanding of the development of spontaneous
resistance to cancer chemotherapy. 40 In 1979, Goldie and Coldman 41 applied this principle to the development of resistance to anticancer drugs by cancer cells
without prior exposure to these drugs. They proposed that the nonrandom cytogenetic changes now known to be associated with most human cancers probably were
tightly associated with the development of the capacity to resist the action of certain types of anticancer drugs. They developed a mathematical model that predicted
that tumor cells mutate to drug resistance at a rate intrinsic to the genetic instability of a particular tumor. Their model predicted that such events would begin to occur
at population sizes between 10 3 and 106 tumor cells (1000 to 1 million cells), much lower than the mass of cells considered to be clinically detectable (10 9, or 1 billion
cells). The probability that a given tumor will contain resistant clones when a patient's disease is newly diagnosed would be a function of both tumor size and the
inherent mutation rate. If the mutation rate is as infrequent as 10 –6, a tumor composed of 109 cells (a 1-cm mass) would be predicted to have at least one
drug-resistant clone; however, the absolute number of resistant cells in a tumor composed of 10 9 cells would be relatively small. Therefore, in the clinic, such tumors
should initially respond to treatment with a partial or complete remission but would recur as the resistance clone expands to repopulate the tumor mass. Such a
pattern is commonly seen in the clinical setting with the use of chemotherapy in many drug-responsive tumors.
The Goldie-Coldman hypothesis, therefore, predicts that cellular drug resistance should be present even with small tumors and that the maximal chance for cure

occurs when all available effective drugs are given simultaneously. 41 Because this would involve using eight to 12 drugs simultaneously, this approach has not
generally been tested in the clinic for fear that the use of more than five cytotoxic drugs, at full doses, would not be possible. An alternative approach, using two
programs of equally effective, non–cross-resistant drug combinations in alternating cycles, has been under evaluation since the mid-1980s. However, many studies
purporting to test the Goldie-Coldman hypothesis have not been properly designed. First, in many instances, inadequate testing has been carried out to determine
whether the alternate combination is truly non–cross-resistant and is as effective as the primary treatment. In most instances, these requirements are not met.
Second, except in rare instances, dosing is usually not controlled properly. Doses of essential drugs are modified downward, a priori, without testing the potential
impact of such dose reductions on outcome. Finally, the requirement for symmetry in biologic characteristics of tumors in different patients is unrealistic. The use of
alternating cycles of combination chemotherapy has not yet proven to be more effective than full doses of a single effective combination program.
In 1986, Day42 and Norton and Day43 reanalyzed the Goldie-Coldman hypothesis and relaxed the requirement for symmetry in the model. Although it verified the basic
tenets of the Goldie-Coldman hypothesis, their model suggested a different approach to sequencing combinations: In many instances, the sequential use of
combinations should outperform alternating cycles, because no two combinations are likely to be strictly non–cross-resistant or have equal cell-killing capacity, the
symmetry assumed by Goldie and Coldman. Day formulated “the worst-drug rule,” which refers to any strategy using more or earlier doses of a treatment that is the
least effective of two or more available options. 6 The worst-drug rule has interesting implications. First, it is a nonintuitive approach. If two treatments—treatments A
and B—are available and B is known to be better, a physician is more likely to use B first. Cells that are resistant to the best treatment, B, must be eliminated by the
weaker program, A; however, because it is the weaker program, one cannot wait too long to use it or the overgrowth of the population resistant to B will place the
physician and patient in a situation that is difficult to overcome. The model predicts that if six cycles of A and B are planned, use of the weaker program, A, first offers
a better outcome. There have been clinical examples in which sequential therapies have outperformed alternating cyclic use of the same programs if the dose
intensity of the two regimens is carefully controlled. 44,45

EFFECT OF THE BIOLOGY OF TUMOR GROWTH ON RESPONSE TO CHEMOTHERAPY
Applying the principles of chemotherapy developed by Skipper et al. 12,46,47 in leukemia L1210 to the drug treatment of human cancers requires a clear understanding
of the differences between the growth characteristics of this rodent leukemia and of human cancers as well as an understanding of the differences in growth rates of
normal target tissues between mice and humans. For example, L1210 is a rapidly growing leukemia with a high percentage of cells synthesizing DNA, as measured
by the uptake of tritiated thymidine (the labeling index). Because L1210 leukemia has a growth fraction of 100% (i.e., all its cells are actively progressing through the
cell cycle), its life cycle is consistent and predictable. 48
The time to death of animals bearing L1210 leukemia is the interval required to achieve a population size of approximately 10 9 (1 billion) cells. With a growth fraction
of 100% and a doubling time of 12 hours, 10 9 cells accumulate by 19 days after the injection of a single cell, by 10 days after the injection of 10 5 cells, and by 5 days
after the administration of 10 8 cells. Skipper et al. 46,47 postulated that the increase in host life span after cytotoxic chemotherapy of L1210 leukemia was largely due to
the cytocidal effect of treatment on the tumor cell population. In these early elegant mouse experiments, they calculated the residual number of cells after treatment by
extrapolating back from the duration of prolongation of life after a single treatment. An increase of 2 days in life would be equivalent to a 90% destruction of tumor
cells (a 1-log kill), or a reduction in the cell number from 10 6 to 105. A 99.999% destruction of tumor cells, a number that seems enormous to most clinicians,
represents only a 5-log kill and does not cure disease in animals unless the initial inoculum is small, perhaps 10 4 cells or fewer. If multiple treatments are given, the
net tumor cell kill per treatment is the sum of the surviving cells plus the regrowth of the tumor cell population before the next treatment.
The cytotoxic effects of cancer drugs in this tumor model follow log cell-kill kinetics. Thus, if a particular dose of an individual drug kills 3 logs of tumor cells and
reduces tumor burden from 10 10 to 107 cells, the same dose used at a tumor burden of 10 5 cells reduces the tumor mass to 10 2. Cell kill, therefore, is proportional,
regardless of tumor burden. This model fits the response of L1210 murine leukemia to chemotherapy. When treatment failed in sensitive cell lines, it was because the
initial tumor burden was too high to allow the delivery of curative doses of chemotherapy to eradicate the last leukemia cell. The cardinal rule of chemotherapy—the
invariable inverse relation between cell number and curability—was established in this model and applies to other model systems. Skipper et al. 12 proceeded to show
that this rodent leukemia could be cured by specifically designing doses and schedules of administration that were based on tumor volume and growth characteristics.
Although growth of murine leukemias closely follows exponential cell kinetics, available data suggest that most human solid tumors do not grow in an exponential
fashion. For example, the concept of log kill would have predicted that some large tumors in the clinic should have been more sensitive to treatment than has been
experienced. In toto, the experimental data in human solid cancers support a Gompertzian model of tumor growth and regression. The critical distinction between
Gompertzian and exponential growth is that in Gompertzian kinetics, the growth fraction of the tumor is not constant but decreases exponentially with time
(exponential growth is matched by exponential retardation of growth). The growth fraction peaks when the tumor is approximately 37% of its maximum size. In a
Gompertzian model, when a patient with advanced cancer is treated, the tumor mass is larger, its growth fraction is low, and the fraction of cells killed is, therefore,
small. An important feature of Gompertzian growth is that response to chemotherapy in drug-sensitive tumors depends, in large measure, on where the tumor is in its
particular growth curve. Sensitive Gompertzian-growing tumors respond to cytotoxic drugs in a Gompertzian fashion.
Therefore, predictions can be made about the behavior of small tumors, such as the microscopic tumor burdens that might be present after primary surgical therapy.
When the tumor is clinically undetectable, its growth fraction would be at its largest and, although the numerical reduction in cell number is small, the fractional cell kill
from a known-to-be-effective therapeutic dose of chemotherapy would be higher than later in the tumor course. This observation was initially used to justify dose
reductions at lower tumor volumes. However, such an unnecessary dose reduction may account for some of the disappointment in the outcome of adjuvant studies in
breast cancer. The Gompertzian model for tumor growth is important for another reason: It affects the patterns of regrowth of residual tumor cells. In breast cancer,
Norton43,49 has analyzed the clinical data from multiple adjuvant studies and from available studies of untreated patients with localized disease. 6,50 In each clinical
study, the Gompertzian model precisely fit the growth curves of these tumors. In the adjuvant setting, the model showed that relapse-free survival and survival curves
are unable to discriminate between residual cell populations of only one cell and a residual population of 1 million cells, because the regrowth of residual cell
populations will be faster at smaller volumes than it will be at larger volumes, producing identical results sometimes at 5 years after diagnosis and treatment. These
findings suggest that short of total eradication of micrometastases (cure), varying residual volumes produce similar 5-year relapse-free survival and obscure the major
differences in tumor reduction by different programs. This information has been especially useful in the design of new adjuvant treatment protocols for early-stage
breast cancer.

APOPTOSIS, CELL-CYCLE CONTROL, AND RESISTANCE TO CHEMOTHERAPY
The kinetic models described are realistic only in the context of a tumor that is sensitive to chemotherapy. Only recently have we arrived at a new understanding of
the critical determinants of drug sensitivity and resistance. For more than 30 years, the classic view of anticancer drug action has involved the specific interaction
between a given drug and its respective target. Cell death arises as a direct consequence of this drug-receptor interaction. However, the critical molecular
mechanisms involved in facilitating the initial coupling of the stimulus to the final response of the cell were never clearly elucidated. With an enhanced understanding
of the molecular mechanisms underlying the control of the cell cycle and the process of programmed cell death (apoptosis), it is now clear that this very simplistic
model must be reevaluated. In contrast to the drug-target interaction directly leading to cell death as was viewed in the classic model, it is now well appreciated that
such an interaction acts as a stimulus to initiate a cascade of events eventually resulting in apoptosis. It is doubtful that cell death induced by chemotherapy occurs by
any other mechanism. This pathway involves some type of sensor that detects a death-inducing signal, a signal transduction network, and an execution machinery
that facilitates the process of cell death. Moreover, this entire process is exceedingly complex as it is highly dependent on the specific cell type under study, the
specific anticancer agent being tested, and the cellular context and environment in which the drug-target interaction is being considered.
In addition, it now appears that the capacity of certain cancers to resist the cytotoxic effects of cancer chemotherapy may be more closely connected to either
abnormalities in the genetic machinery of cancer cells or to alterations in the critical pathways of cell-cycle checkpoint control and apoptosis than to the specific
mechanisms of resistance unique to each agent. This observation is underscored by the general failure to overcome resistance to chemotherapy in the clinic with
approaches that attack only the classic biochemical or molecular mechanisms of resistance (or both). Although this section briefly reviews the complex
interrelationship between products of cell-cycle checkpoint genes, oncogenic viruses, transcription factors, apoptosis, and chemotherapy as they relate to drug
resistance, more detailed discussion of these topics are reviewed elsewhere. 51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58 and 59
As noted earlier in the History section of this chapter, normal tissues never develop resistance to chemotherapy. However, one of the most remarkable features of
both radiation therapy and chemotherapy, when used to treat sensitive tumors, is that their cytotoxic effects may be initially greater in neoplastic cells than in normal
host tissues, including the bone marrow and the GI tract. Doses that eradicate some sensitive tumors will not ablate the bone marrow or destroy the capacity of the GI
mucosa to regenerate. No molecular basis for this therapeutic selectivity was available until just recently. However, this difference in cytotoxic action between normal

and malignant cells appears to relate to mechanisms that allow normal renewing cell populations, such as bone marrow and GI precursor cells, to monitor and repair
damaged DNA or destroy cells with irreparable DNA, rather than allowing damaged cells to proceed through the cell cycle and potentially replicate their damaged
DNA. Because they express an intact genetic machinery, normal cells can almost always recover from exposure to DNA-damaging anticancer agents, except in the
case of high-dose chemotherapy, as used in transplantation programs. In this particular setting, the high doses of chemotherapy are able to overwhelm these
protective mechanisms or to destroy the DNA of exposed cells by direct necrosis (or both). Initially, sensitive cancer cells can be destroyed by effective chemotherapy
but, if not, they develop resistance to further treatment, perhaps in part because of drug-induced mutations in their DNA. This resistance may be linked to the
dysregulation of the same genetic and signaling pathways that control entry into the cell cycle and the process of programmed cell death.
p53
p53 (Fig. 17-1) is a tumor suppressor protein and critical transcriptional activator that causes both G 1 and G2 arrest of the cell cycle when cells are exposed to
DNA-damaging agents.51,52,53 and 54,57,60,61 and 62 This function is thought to be critical in preserving the integrity of the cellular genome in response to treatment with a
cytotoxic agent. In addition to its role in the cell-cycle checkpoint, p53 is a potent inducer of programmed cell death (apoptosis) within a cell in which DNA damage has
occurred.50 The basis for the cell's decision either to undergo growth arrest and repair DNA damage or to induce apoptosis remains unknown. Significant research
efforts are focused on elucidating the critical factors that determine the eventual cellular function of p53. This is undoubtedly a complex issue, however, that must take
into account the extent of DNA damage, the stage of the cell cycle at which the DNA damage occurs, the presence of other genetic abnormalities in either the
cell-cycle regulatory apparatus or the signaling machinery, or the specific cellular context. It is now clear that some cell types, such as lymphocytes and the tumors
derived from them, have a more rapid access to apoptotic mechanisms than the large majority of epithelial cancers.

FIGURE 17-1. Role of p53 in chemotherapy sensitivity in normal and neoplastic cells. Exposure of normal cells (A) to DNA-damaging agents results in increased
levels of p53, which induces an arrest of progression from the G 1 or quiescent phase to the S or DNA synthetic phase of the cell cycle. Exposure of cancer cells (B) to
DNA-damaging agents increases p53 but does not stop cell-cycle progression to S phase, owing to mutant Ras. This results in apoptosis. (From AB Deisseroth, VT
DeVita. The cell cycle: probing new molecular determinants of resistance and sensitivity to cytotoxic agents. Cancer J Sci Am 1995;1:15, with permission.)

Mutations in the p53 gene are among the most common genetic alterations observed in human tumor samples and have been estimated to occur in at least 50% of all
human tumors.63 The initial studies showing that loss of p53 function was associated with resistance to radiation therapy as well as chemotherapy came from in vivo
model systems using p53 knockout mice.64,65,66 and 67 Subsequent studies have confirmed that various malignant cell lines and tumors expressing mutant or deleted
p53 are chemoresistant to a wide range of anticancer agents. 68 However, loss of p53 function is not always associated with chemoresistance. Some studies suggest
that cells with impaired p53 function can become sensitized to various anticancer agents. 69 Thus, the relationship between p53 status and chemosensitivity is complex
and is presumably dependent on a number of factors, including the specific cytotoxic stimuli, tissue-specific differences, and the specific cellular context that
incorporates the overall genetic machinery and the various intracellular signaling pathways.
The specific cytotoxic treatment, the conditions of treatment, p53 status, and other cell-cycle regulatory elements may all contribute to the outcome of an exposure of
a cell to DNA-damaging agents. If the dose of the treatment is very high, nonapoptotic cell death (e.g., necrotic cell death due to DNA or other damage) may occur. At
an intermediate level of dose intensity, p53-dependent or p53-independent apoptotic cell death can occur. When p53 function is intact, the level of inhibitors of p53 is
not high, and the regulatory environment of the cell is such that the cell circumvents the interruption of the cell-cycle progression that occurs after DNA damage, the
cell will undergo p53-dependent apoptosis. However, in the setting of abnormal p53 function, whether through the acquisition of point mutations in the p53 gene,
posttranslation inactivation of p53 through binding to other protein partners (e.g., MDM2) or enhancement of the degradation (e.g., the E6 protein of the human
papilloma virus), or decreased translation of wild-type p53 messenger RNA by the folate-dependent enzyme thymidylate synthase, the cell is unable to undergo
cell-cycle arrest or apoptosis in response to DNA damage. In a tumor population, the functional inactivation of p53 through any of these regulatory mechanisms
facilitates genomic instability and contributes to the development of cellular resistance. Normal hematopoietic cells tend to be more genetically stable during
chemotherapy as a result of an intact p53 mechanism that provides an opportunity to repair DNA damage. In contrast, the malignant cell with functional p53 may be
more sensitive to chemotherapy than normal cells because of the fact that common transforming mutations in other proteins, such as ras, which tend to drive cells into
S phase, overcome the p53-dependent mechanisms that allow for repair. Because the p53-dependent apoptotic mechanisms, triggered by DNA damage, may remain
intact, the tumor cell dies after chemotherapy, whereas the normal cell survives. When the function of p53 is finally lost, the stability of the genome of the tumor cells
decreases, and the disease progresses rapidly to higher and higher levels of resistance to therapy and to a more advanced pattern of dysregulated growth and
metastasis.
Although it was initially thought that drug-curable tumors, in general, were less often found to have p53 mutations, this is not always the case. In addition to
p53-dependent mechanisms, it is well appreciated that p53-independent mechanisms also exist. In general, the presence of p53 mutations has been correlated with a
poor prognosis, even in such treatable tumors as lymphomas. 70 However, the issue of whether mutations determine cure or no cure will be addressed only by
reexamination of the tissue specimens of patients cured many years ago, to separate easily the impact of a damaged cell-cycle checkpoint control system on early
response to treatment rather than cure.
This is an important question. If drugs can kill only cells with an intact apoptotic mechanism, as expressed by a functioning p53 gene, the chemotherapy of cancer
may have gone as far as it can go in its present form, except for the increment of additional cures that may be attained by using high-dose regimens that overwhelm
these mechanisms. If cures are possible in tumors with mutant p53, responsiveness to treatment may relate more to the degree of dysregulation of the checkpoint
control system, which is downstream from p53 in the growth regulatory pathway, something that possibly can be manipulated as an approach to treatment.
How might dysregulation of this pathway increase drug resistance beyond the failure to induce apoptosis? p53 affects events within the cell by binding to p53
recognition sites located in the transcriptional regulatory regions of genes. 71,72,73,74,75 and 76 The acquisition of point mutations in the p53 gene can affect the
DNA-binding function and the transcriptional activation functions of p53 at these regulatory sites. 59
Some of the genes that are transcriptionally activated by p53 belong to a class of proteins known to inhibit the cyclin-dependent kinases ( Fig. 17-2). One of these
proteins, known as p21 (Waf-1, Cip-1), can form a complex with proliferating cell nuclear antigen or inhibit the full activation of the cyclin-dependent kinase. 76 When
the cyclin kinase is fully active, it acts on another tumor suppressor, the retinoblastoma (RB) gene, to phosphorylate it. 77 This causes the release of the E2F family of
transcription factors, which then bind to the regulatory regions of a number of genes that participate in the synthesis of DNA. These genes are shown in Figure 17-2
and include ribonucleotide reductase, dihydrofolate reductase, DNA-dependent RNA polymerase, thymidylate synthase, c-myc, c-fos, and c-myb.

FIGURE 17-2. Once its level is high within the cell, p53 can induce p21 expression to such an extent that the cyclin-dependent kinase activation complex does not
occur. The absence of this kinase activity permits the retinoblastoma protein to remain in its unphosphorylated form, in which it binds to the transcription factor E2F.
This, in turn, prevents the release of E2F and its binding to the transcriptional enhancers of the genes necessary for DNA synthesis to occur. DHFR, dihydrofolate
reductase; PCNA, proliferating cell nuclear antigen. (From AB Deisseroth, VT DeVita. The cell cycle: probing new molecular determinants of resistance and sensitivity
to cytotoxic agents. Cancer J Sci Am 1995;1:15, with permission.)

Activation of this family of proteins promotes and supports the entry of the cell into S phase. The activation of cyclin-dependent kinases and the consequent turning on
of the DNA synthetic machinery by release of E2F from RB occur in normal cells after growth factor stimulation, which probably provides the signal for the initiation of
the cyclin clock. 78 When normal p53 is activated after DNA damage, the levels of the p21, p27, and other gene products, such as MDM-2, an apparent feedback
regulator of p53, and GADD 45, a gene involved in DNA repair, may become very high. 79 When the expression of p21 is induced to high levels, it exerts an inhibitory
effect on the formation of the fully active cyclin kinase complex. This critical checkpoint function of p53, which restricts the procession of the cell into the DNA
synthetic phase of the cell cycle, also prevents the E2F-dependent expression of gene products related to rapid cell growth.
The mdr-1 gene has been added to the list of those potentially influenced by p53 because it has been shown that wild-type p53 suppresses the promoter of the mdr-1
gene, whereas the mutant protein can actually stimulate the promoter. 80,81 The biologic basis for this action is not readily apparent but, when the foregoing effects are
considered in toto, dysregulation of the p53 pathway, which would be expected to be associated with more rapid growth, might well be a prominent mechanism of drug
resistance due to the overproduction of gene products responsible for entry into S phase and rapid cell growth. The activation of these genes could theoretically
increase the resistance of cells to the following chemotherapeutic agents: methotrexate, 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine, hydroxyurea, fludarabine, cytosine arabinoside, and
5-fluorouracil. Furthermore, the action of an entire array of the most effective natural product antitumor agents could be suppressed through stimulation of the mdr-1
promoter directly by a mutant form of p53.
Thus, an active p53 in the setting of such DNA-damaging agents as chemotherapy or irradiation increases the levels of key gene products to levels that are sufficient
to inhibit the phosphorylation of the RB gene by cyclin-dependent kinase ( Fig. 17-3). This, in turn, prevents the expression of the gene products necessary for DNA
synthesis to occur.

FIGURE 17-3. DNA damage induced by anticancer drugs and irradiation and oncogene expression initiate pathways involved in apoptosis or cell-cycle arrest (or
both). CDKs, cyclin-dependent kinases; UV, ultraviolet. (From ref. 56, with permission.)

It is conceivable that increasing growth rates may be associated with increasing levels of drug resistance through the increased transcription of genes involved in
rapid cell growth and entry into the cell cycle. The high degree of resistance in more advanced tumors, including the spontaneous development of resistance, which
was the basis of the Goldie-Coldman hypothesis, and the development of multidrug resistance, appear more likely to be related to mutations in key genes in the
cell-cycle regulatory system than to drug-specific spontaneous mutations, as has been proposed in the past. Cell death in response to exposure to DNA-damaging
agents may require an intact p53-dependent apoptotic mechanism under some experimental circumstances. On the other hand, it also may depend on the activation
of alternative pathways of apoptosis or some degree of reregulation of the system which would ultimately lead to the reduced release of transcription factors from
genes such as RB, or a homologous gene, p107, and the production of lower levels of growth-related gene products, thereby sensitizing cells to chemotherapeutic
agents. An enhanced understanding of the complexities surrounding chemotherapy-induced cell death may shed light on critical insights with profound implications for
the design of future approaches to therapy that might couple standard cytotoxic agents to new biologic agents that attack specific molecular targets to reregulate the
cell-cycle checkpoint.
ROLE OF BCL-2 FAMILY IN APOPTOSIS
Because apoptosis is a genetically programmed event, inactivation of genes that induce the apoptotic program or activation of antiapoptotic genes can result in the
development of cellular drug resistance. Bcl-2 is a potent suppressor of apoptotic cell death, and a number of studies have shown that it is able to repress cell death
triggered by either g-irradiation or a variety of anticancer agents (see Fig. 17-3).54,56,82 In further support of the role of Bcl-2 as an inhibitor of cell death are studies
that show that treatment of certain human leukemia or lymphoma cells with an antisense strategy directed against bcl-2 leads to the reversal of chemoresistance.
Lymphoma cells treated with either antisense oligonucleotides or with plasmid constructs that overexpress antisense bcl-2 messenger RNA are sensitized to the
cytotoxic effects of methotrexate and cytosine arabinoside. 83 In addition, the phosphorylation status of bcl-2 may play an important role as a determinant of
chemosensitivity. It has been suggested that phosphorylated bcl-2 may interact less efficiently with its heterodimer protein partner bax, resulting in cell death. Some
work suggests that Bcl-xl , a functional and structural homologue of Bcl-2, is also able to confer protection against radiation-induced apoptosis as well as against a
wide number of anticancer agents, including bleomycin, cisplatin, etoposide, and vincristine. Recently, the antiapoptotic effects of Bcl-2 and Bcl-x l were compared.
Using FL5.12 lymphoid cells, it was shown that these two proteins have a differential ability to protect against chemotherapy-induced cell death. 84 This differential
effect depends more on the molecular mechanism targeted as opposed to the cell-cycle specificity of an individual drug. In contrast to Bcl-2 and Bcl-x l, other family
members, including Bax, Bcl-xs, and Bak, have been shown to promote apoptosis in response to either radiation or various anticancer drugs (or both). The underlying
mechanisms through which these Bcl-2 family members control apoptosis remains unknown at this time. However, the mitochondrial pathway with altered release of
cytochrome C presumably plays a critical role in this process.
ROLE OF STRESS-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE IN APOPTOSIS
The mitogen-activated protein kinase family of proteins is highly conserved among all eukaryotic species. 85 These kinases play a critical role in mediating signal
transduction pathways that are sensitive to extracellular stimuli. Stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK), also known as c-Jun N-terminal protein kinases, represents
one of the key mitogen-activated protein kinase–signaling pathways. It is now well appreciated that SAPK activation is necessary for cell death in response to

exposure to certain forms of cell stress and that defects in SAPK signaling promote cell survival. With regard to chemotherapy, SAPK functions are an important
mediator of apoptosis. 86,87 and 88 Inhibition of SAPK activation has a protective effect against cancer cells treated with various anticancer agents, including the
anthracyclines and etoposide. In addition, SAPK is required for ceramide-induced apoptosis, a key mediator of cytotoxicity induced by various cancer drugs. 89 Thus,
the SAPK-signaling pathway plays an essential role in facilitating chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. The precise mechanism by which the SAPK pathway is actually
activated remains the focus of much research. However, one potential clue rests with the observation that DNA damage induced by genotoxic stress is sensed by
kinases, including the DNA-dependent protein kinase or the ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated gene product (or both). 90,91 These proteins can then phosphorylate p53,
resulting in its activation. In addition, DNA-dependent protein kinase can stimulate c-Abl tyrosine kinase, which in turn leads to direct activation of SEK-1, an upstream
signal in the SAPK cascade. 92
DEATH EXECUTIONER PATHWAY
The molecular mechanisms and signal transduction pathways initiated by a given cellular stress may differ significantly. However, the final stage of these various
death pathways occurs through the activation and function of the caspases (see Fig. 17-3).59 The caspases represent a conserved family of cysteine proteases with
specificity for aspartic acid residues in their substrates. The cleavage of certain essential substrates then results in cell death. Exogenous inhibition of caspase
proteases by CrmA promotes the development of resistance of human leukemia cells to a broad array of anticancer agents. 93 In addition, some knockout mouse
models with germline disruptions of Apaf1, caspase-3, or caspase-9 have shown these genetically engineered mice to be resistant to g-irradiation and a wide number
of chemotherapeutic drugs. 59,94,95
CELL SURVIVAL PATHWAYS
It has been shown that a number of external stimuli, including various cytokines, tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), chemotherapy, and radiation, lead to activation of
the transcription factor NF-kB. 96 Paradoxically, activation of NF-kB results in potent suppression of the apoptotic potential of these stimuli. 97 Several studies have
demonstrated that inhibition of NF-kB in vitro leads to enhanced apoptosis in response to different stimuli. 98 Some in vivo work shows that the adenoviral delivery of a
modified form of IkBa, an inhibitor of NF-kB, results in inhibition of NF-kB expression. Moreover, the chemoresistant fibrosarcoma tumors derived from HT1080 cells
become sensitized to the apoptotic potential of TNF-a and the topoisomerase I compound, CPT-11, leading to significant tumor regression. 99 These findings suggest
that activation of NF-kB expression in response to chemotherapy may represent an important mechanism of inducible tumor chemoresistance. Moreover, they suggest
that strategies to inhibit NF-kB may lead to enhanced antitumor therapy through increased apoptosis.
DEVELOPMENT OF NOVEL THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES
Significant efforts continue to be placed on elucidating the critical intracellular signal transduction pathways required for cell-cycle control and the induction of
apoptosis and cell death. However, based on current knowledge, attempts are already being made to manipulate these intracellular programs so as to design and
develop novel therapeutic approaches to improve the efficacy of chemotherapy. Tumor suppressor genes were originally identified because of the ability of
transforming viruses to bind to the protein product of the tumor suppressor gene and induce the growth required for the virus lytic growth cycle. It has been shown that
some viral gene products, such as the adenovirus E1A protein, which by itself is nontransforming, can actually sensitize cells to agents that induce apoptosis. E1A is
involved in the release of E2F from the RB protein, which could be expected to facilitate entry of cells into S phase. It has been hypothesized that the transmission of
conflicting signals, which act both to slow and to stimulate growth simultaneously, may lead to E1A-induced apoptosis. 100 Thus, the identification of analogs of E1A to
be used in this setting is an attractive concept.
Clearly, it will be important to identify novel strategies that are selective in their targeting of malignant cells while preserving normal function of host tissues. Along
these lines, viral vectors expressing apoptotic genes can now be directly introduced into the tumor. Adenoviral vectors that express p53 have been injected into
human tumors, resulting in suppression of tumor growth. 101,102 Moreover, this gene therapy approach shows a synergistic interaction with various cytotoxic agents to
produce enhanced antitumor activity with minimal host toxicity. This strategy has been taken into the clinic where a phase I study was performed in patients with
non–small cell lung cancer. 103
TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand, or TRAIL, is a type II transmembrane protein that was initially identified based on the homology of its extracellular domain with
CD95L. Like TNF and Fas, TRAIL induces apoptosis in a wide range of tumor cells. 104 Walczak et al. 105 evaluated the ability of TRAIL as a therapeutic agent. They
created leucine zipper (LZ) forms of human (hu) and murine (mu) TRAIL to promote trimerization and found that these trimers of LZ-TRAIL effectively killed cultured
mammary adenocarcinoma cells but not normal, nontransformed mammary epithelial cells, fibroblasts, renal tubule cells, skeletal muscle cells, pulmonary epithelial
cells, and melanocytes. Administration of either the hu or mu TRAIL was nontoxic to the normal tissues of mice in vivo. Finally, repeated administration of LZ-huTRAIL
showed impressive antitumor activity against human mammary adenocarcinoma MDA-231 cells implanted in severe combined immunodeficient mice, and histologic
examination of tumors revealed clear areas of apoptosis within 9 to 12 hours of injection. These findings show that TRAIL exerts potent antitumor activity in vivo by
selectively and directly activating tumor cell death without affecting normal tissues. Studies are ongoing to determine whether TRAIL-based therapy may be used
either alone or in combination with other cytotoxic agents and whether these promising results can be effectively translated into the clinic.
It has been suggested that initiation of the cyclic production of cyclins in the cell is due, in part, to the effect of growth factors. Some cyclin classes, such as the D
cyclins, may indeed be the essential sensors for multiple growth factor signals. 60 In some experimental systems, a determining factor in the decision of a cell either to
undergo cell-cycle arrest and repair damaged DNA or to undergo apoptosis may be the presence of key growth factors within the cellular environment. 106,107 Thus, in
the absence of a growth signal, with growth factors serving as a survival factor, the cell becomes committed to the apoptotic pathway. It is presumed that apoptosis is
taking place within the context of an intact p53 mechanism. However, one issue is whether, even in the presence of mutations of p53 or other checkpoint genes (or
both), deprivation of critical growth factor signals would still result in enhanced sensitivity to chemotherapy.
Experiments using in vivo mouse models bearing human tumor xenografts suggest that this may be so. An antiepidermal growth factor receptor, monoclonal antibody
C225 targeted to the epidermal growth factor receptor, was used in combination with the anticancer agent doxorubicin against human A431 squamous carcinomas
and human MDA468 breast carcinomas. The effects of either the antibody or the drug alone are modest, with no long-term survivors. However, when the antibody is
administered before doxorubicin, the effects of the combination are dramatic, often leading to complete tumor regression and long-term survival. 108 Similar results
were observed in mice bearing human GEO colon cancer xenografts. Complete tumor regression was noted only in mice treated with the topoisomerase I inhibitor
topotecan and the C225 monoclonal antibody. 109 These effects at first seem paradoxical, as the cytotoxic effects of an anticancer drug are being enhanced by a
biologic agent that presumably is slowing down growth. However, an alternative explanation is that treatment with the antibody sensitizes the tumor to chemotherapy
by depriving it of a vital growth factor signal, thereby facilitating the process of apoptosis. The results are provocative enough that other monoclonal antibodies that
block key growth factor receptors have been coupled with chemotherapy and are being tested in the clinic. A similar approach is being taken with the use of the
anti-HER2 (Herceptin) antibody for the treatment of advanced breast cancer, in combination with either paclitaxel (Taxol) or with the combination of cyclophosphamide
(Cytoxan) and doxorubicin (Adriamycin). 110,111 Based on the promising clinical results, these combination regimens have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration for women with advanced breast cancer.

CONCEPT OF DOSE INTENSITY
Irrespective of the molecular mechanisms underlying the development of human cancers, a principal factor limiting the capacity to cure is proper dosing. The
dose-response curve in biologic systems is usually sigmoidal in shape, with a threshold, a lag phase, a linear phase, and a plateau phase. For radiation therapy and
chemotherapy, therapeutic selectivity is dependent on the difference between the dose-response curves of normal and tumor tissue that must be exploited during
treatment. In experimental models, the dose-response curve is usually steep in the linear phase. Almost without exception in rodents bearing transplantable tumors, a
reduction of dose in the linear phase of the dose-response curve usually results in a loss of the capacity to cure the tumor effectively before a diminution in the
response rate is seen. Thus, although complete remissions continue to be observed with a dose reduction as small as 20%, the residual tumor cells may not be
eliminated, allowing for eventual relapse to occur. There is an extremely important lesson in these animal data for clinicians who, in their daily practice, judge the
adequacy of their therapy by measuring the response rate of visible or palpable tumor masses and only much later are able to evaluate the treatment by survival
results. This point is nicely illustrated in Table 17-2, which summarizes data from numerous experiments conducted by Skipper112 at the Southern Research Institute
using the transplantable and palpable Ridgway osteosarcoma tumor model. Reduction in the average dose intensity of the two-drug combination of L-phenylalanine
mustard and cyclophosphamide causes a marked decrease in the cure rate before a significant reduction in the complete remission rate occurs. On average, a dose
reduction of approximately 20% leads to a loss of 50% of the cure rate. The converse is also true. In tumors with a high growth fraction, a twofold increase in dose
often leads to a tenfold increase (1-log) in tumor cell kill. Although in vivo systems are not the perfect model for human malignancies, the invariable nature of these

data indicates that the general principle may be applied to the clinic. Because anticancer drugs are toxic, it is often appealing to avoid acute but not life-threatening
toxicity by either reducing the dose or increasing the time interval between each cycle of treatment. This kind of empiric dose adjustment is a major reason for
treatment failure in patients with drug-sensitive tumors who are undergoing induction chemotherapy.

TABLE 17-2. Ridgway Osteogenic Sarcoma: Response to Different Dose Intensity of Two-Drug Combination of Cyclophosphamide and L-PAM

One problem facing clinicians is the difficulty in adequately comparing the impact of different dosing practices on the clinical efficacy of chemotherapy. To approach
this issue, Hryniuk et al. 113,114,115,116,117 and 118 analyzed treatment outcomes in various tumor types as a function of dose intensity. Dose intensity is defined as the
amount of drug delivered per unit of time, expressed as milligrams per square meter per week, regardless of the schedule or route of administration. Relative dose
intensity (RDI) is the amount of drug delivered per unit of time relative to an arbitrarily chosen standard single drug or, for a combination regimen, the decimal fraction
of the ratio of the average dose intensity of all drugs of the test regimen compared with the standard regimen. A sample calculation of the RDI for a commonly used
regimen, the cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil (CMF) combination for breast cancer, is provided in Table 17-3.73 To calculate the average RDI for a
regimen containing fewer drugs than the standard regimen, a dose intensity of zero is assigned to the missing drug, and the average RDI of the test regimen is
divided by the total number of drugs in the standard. 114 The dose intensity of each drug regimen is then determined based on the time period in which the treatment
program is administered. Specific calculations can be made of the intended dose intensity, the dose intensity as described in the treatment protocol, or the actually
received dose intensity. However, determination of the received dose intensity would seem to be the most clinically relevant as it reflects the direct impact of dose
reductions and treatment delays imposed in actual practice. 118 A positive relation between dose intensity and response rate has, in fact, been demonstrated in several
solid tumors, including advanced ovarian, breast, lung, and colon cancers, and in the lymphomas. 113,114,116117 and 118

TABLE 17-3. Sample Calculations: Dose Intensity, Relative Dose Intensity, and Average Relative Dose Intensity

Because dose intensity is determined based on the amount of drug given per week, regardless of schedule, treatment delays are given equal weight with dose
reductions. Calculations of the dose intensity, therefore, assume that differences in scheduling do not influence treatment outcome. Although this concept may at first
appear to be contradictory, close scrutiny of all available data in humans and rodents reveals that the schedule of administration influences outcome mainly by
affecting toxicity. In this way, higher doses of drug can be administered over the same time frame. As one example, daily administration of low doses of methotrexate
is extremely toxic and severely limits the dose and duration of therapy with this drug. However, a twice-weekly schedule, which is much more effective in rodents and
humans, allows much higher doses to be delivered over a longer period. Of note, this particular schedule is associated with significantly less host toxicity. As
calculated, the dose intensity of the twice-weekly schedule is much greater than that of the daily oral schedule. In practice, the impact of scheduling on the calculation
of dose intensity can be neutralized by comparing programs in which drugs with toxicities affected by scheduling, such as the antimetabolites, are given on similar
schedules.
One of the potential limitations of the dose-intensity concept is that calculations of an average RDI of a drug combination assume that each drug has equal efficacy
against the tumor being treated. In most clinical settings, this is usually not the case. However, the impact of a single drug or combinations of two or three drugs in a
multidrug combination can be assessed separately. Such an analysis has been performed to show the greater impact of cisplatin in a drug combination for ovarian
cancer113,114,115 and 116 and to show the importance of adequate doses of alkylating agents and vinca alkaloids in lymphoma treatment. The most active drug in a
combination regimen can be identified, and this information is important because such data can help to avoid dose adjustments that may radically alter the clinical
outcome. Moreover, by identifying the most essential drugs in a given regimen, protocols can focus on administering the optimal dose intensity of those specific
agents.
To judge adequately the dosing of a particular protocol, data on total dose of each drug used and cumulative doses of each drug are necessary. However, the
collection of such information is not part of the routine practice in medical oncology, and reports are not generally available in the literature. Therefore, for proper
assessment of the impact of dosing schedules in clinical trials, it is critical that such data be provided.
Calculations of the impact of dose intensity on outcome are particularly important in estimating the value and exploring some of the pitfalls of adjuvant chemotherapy.
The steep dose-response curve for anticancer drugs indicates that dose reductions in adjuvant drug treatment programs are likely to be associated with significantly
less therapeutic effect. Dose reduction, however, has been the norm in the design of adjuvant trials. One example is the standard CMF regimen for breast cancer
referred to in Table 17-3. The initial reports of this regimen revealed an impressive complete remission rate of approximately 30%, albeit at the expense of
considerable host toxicity. 119 When this regimen was advanced for use in the cooperative group setting, initially for advanced disease and later for adjuvant trials by
Bonadonna et al., 120 its doses were arbitrarily reduced without pretesting the potential impact of such reductions on clinical outcome. In addition, further reduction was
empirically made for patients older than 60 years, with the assumption that such a dose reduction would be required for age. When the effect of these reductions is
correlated with outcome, there is a strong suggestion of a negative impact. 120,121 In premenopausal women, the differences in relapse-free survival at both low and
high doses of CMF are statistically significant. The importance of dose effect was further confirmed by a large study in which a survival benefit was observed as a
result of increasing dose intensity in the adjuvant chemotherapy for women with stage II, node-positive breast cancer. 122
An increase in the dose intensity represents one approach to improve on the effect of specific drugs or drug combination, but it may not be useful in all clinical
circumstances. In the setting of large tumor burdens, the dose-response curve tends to shift to the right. At the low end of the curability curve (i.e., in the presence of
the highest tumor burdens), an increase in dose intensity may not improve treatment outcome, as the dose-response curve is flat, but most often leads to
unacceptable host toxicity. In addition, increasing the dose intensity of drug regimens that are already associated with curing nearly 100% of a subset of patients
would not be expected to be of clinical benefit. Such a scenario would hold for the treatment of germ cell cancer using the cisplatin, etoposide, bleomycin combination
and for Hodgkin's disease, using either the mechlorethamine, vincristine (Oncovin), procarbazine, and prednisone regimen; the doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine,
and dacarbazine regimen; or regimens derived from them, such as BEACOPP (see Chapter 45.3). However, for most drugs, there appears to be a threshold dose that

produces clinical response. The success of high-dose chemotherapy programs with stem cell support in refractory lymphomas, breast cancer, childhood sarcomas,
and neuroblastomas suggests that maximizing dose intensity can improve response rates or cure in drug-responsive tumors.
Frei et al. 123 and Hryniuk et al.124 have proposed the term summation dose intensity to reflect the relationship between dose and combination chemotherapy. As part of
this concept, they suggested that the final outcome of either a high-dose or combination treatment must be related in some manner to the sum of the dose intensities
of all the agents used in that treatment. The intrinsic chemosensitivity of a given tumor is critical for treatment success. An active agent is defined as one that, when
used alone, is associated with at least a 30% response rate for a given tumor. It is now well appreciated that for almost all malignancies, a combination regimen
incorporating at least three active drugs is necessary for cure. In the case of childhood leukemia, the cure rate increases linearly when the number of active drugs
increases from three to seven. The critical issue for this concept is that all active agents must be used at their full therapeutic doses. However, until the advent of the
various cytokine growth factors and autologous or peripheral stem cell transplantation (or both), the effective administration of maximal doses of chemotherapy has
not been possible. Although the concept of summation dose intensity is not new, it does offer a unified approach for the careful design and interpretation of clinical
trials.

IN VITRO DRUG-RESPONSE ASSAYS
Several methods have been developed since the 1950s to determine the in vitro drug sensitivities of human tumor cells to various anticancer
agents. 125,126,127,128,129,130,131,132,133,134,135,136,137,138 and 139 The advent of reliable in vitro drug-response assays has raised the possibility of selecting effective anticancer
agents to be used either alone or in combination to treat a patient's individual tumor. In this setting, identification of agents with an extremely low probability of
response makes it possible to eliminate the use of such agents and thus their potential for adverse events. A number of methods have been used to investigate the
sensitivity of tumors and tumor cell lines, including clonogenic, differential staining cytotoxicity assay; colorimetric, rapid 3H-thymidine incorporation assay; and
chemotherapeutic treatment of athymic nude mice with human tumor xenografts. Fruehauf and Bosanquet 140 reviewed the correlation between the results of in vitro
sensitivity testing and a patient's tumor response to chemotherapy and, in general, they found an overall sensitivity of 85% and an overall specificity of 80%.
In the mid-1950s, Black and Spear 134,135 were the first to report the use of an in vitro assay to predict patient response. Their studies compared the in vitro activity of
aminopterin with its clinical response. Their assay technology was based on the colorimetric detection of viable cells using a substrate for mitochondrial succinate
dehydrogenase. Although the predictive accuracy of their results was not particularly strong, the development of the clonogenic stem cell assay in the 1970s brought
in vitro testing of solid tumors into the mainstream. 137 However, the results of these studies indicated that there were significant technical issues to overcome. 138,139 As
illustrated in Table 17-4, further work to improve on the technology led to a variety of techniques and approaches with a pronounced ability to identify drug resistance
accurately. The major distinction among the differing assay methods is the end point used to measure cell viability. Assay end points include colony growth from
single stem cells, incorporation of tritiated thymidine, microscopic examination of cells with vital dyes, mitochondrial enzyme activity, cytosolic esterase activity, and
adenosine triphosphate content. Given the variety of assay types, it is remarkable that the predictive accuracy for the identification of chemosensitivity for most of
these approaches appears to be at least 90%. Several issues should be considered when evaluating an assay technology ( Table 17-5).125,127,140

TABLE 17-4. Correlations of In Vitro Test Results with Patient Response

TABLE 17-5. Factors Influencing the Utility of the In Vitro Assay

The clonogenic assay evaluates the ability of chemotherapeutic agents to inhibit tumor stem cell proliferation in agarose, a medium that precludes proliferation of
nontransformed cells. 133,134 Most of the in vitro drug-response techniques use similar methods for tumor preparation. Solid tumors are disaggregated into suspensions
of multicellular clumps with scissors and by passing the fragments through mesh or by stirring tissue fragments with collagenase. Single-cell suspensions then are
generated by passing the cellular aggregates through high-gauge needles. 133,138 Cell suspensions are incubated with drug for 1 hour, rinsed, and plated on an agar
base with growth media. After a period of 14 to 28 days, the number of colonies that have grown from the treated cells is compared with the number of colonies from
untreated control cells. The fraction of control growth provides an index of drug activity. Studies by the National Cancer Institute and the Southwest Oncology Group
indicate that the assay is reproducible among multiple laboratories. 138 Problems with assay interpretation arising from the initial plating of small cell clumps were
overcome with the use of chromomycin A3.138,139
The conventional clonogenic stem cell assay has suffered from a relatively low success rate (<50%) of specimens yielding results, rendering it difficult to accrue
adequate numbers of patients into clinical trials. 133 Although this factor initially dampened enthusiasm for this approach, a significant number of clonogenic assays
(>2500 cases) have now been performed by various groups, with an overall positive predictive value of 69% and a negative predictive value of 91% (see Table
17-4).120
Tritiated thymidine incorporation, as an assay end point, was introduced in part to eliminate the problem of discriminating between true colony growth from a single
cell and from a clump of cells plated at the outset. This technique also decreased the assay time from more than 14 days to less than 1 week and was associated with
an improved success rate of diagnostic yield to 85%. 125,126 and 127,141,142
Processing and plating of the tumor for the thymidine assay is similar to that for the clonogenic assay. However, in the thymidine assay, small clumps rather than
single cells are preferred to maintain cell-cell interactions. In addition, cells are grown in an agar suspension, which allows tumor growth in vitro to recapitulate the
three-dimensional in vivo morphology. Cell-cell interactions resulting from three-dimensional growth may be critical for the detection of acquired drug resistance,
which can be missed in monolayer cultures. 143

In contrast to the clonogenic assay, prolonged drug exposures are utilized in the thymidine-based system. Tumor suspensions are continuously exposed to drug for 5
days, and tritiated thymidine is added during the final 48 hours of the assay to label proliferating cells. Determination of drug action is based on a comparison of the
incorporation of labeled thymidine by untreated controls with incorporation by the groups treated with different drugs. Clinical correlations obtained using this assay
technique demonstrate a reasonable overall predictive accuracy (72%) and indicate that it is an accurate predictor of drug resistance (99%). 126 The prolonged drug
exposure in the thymidine assay results in a five- to 20-fold higher concentration × time factor than that used in the clonogenic assay, biasing assay accuracy toward
detection of drug resistance. Tumor growth after drug exposure in the thymidine assay is associated with multifold drug resistance, which led the authors of one article
to describe it as the “extreme drug resistance assay.” 126 Some paclitaxel-resistant tumors identified with this technique have been found to overexpress P170
glycoprotein, suggesting that this assay can be used to identify the activity of specific mechanisms of drug resistance in different tumor histologies. 144
Another promising assay is the differential staining cytotoxicity (DiSC) assay. 140,145 The DiSC assay relies on the structural integrity of cells. In the DiSC assay, cells
are incubated with drugs for 4 days. Dead cells are stained in suspension with fast green dye in the absence or presence of nigrosin, and duck red blood cells are
added as an internal standard for counting. The specimen is cytocentrifuged to deliver discs of cells onto microscope slides. Live cells then are stained with either
hematoxylin-eosin or Romanowsky stain. The end point of this test is the morphologic identification of tumor cell cytotoxicity as compared with the internal control of
fixed duck erythrocytes. The DiSC assay requires more than 10% tumor cells and measures cell kill in both dividing and nondividing tumor cell populations.
Microscopic identification of the cell population renders it possible to determine the differential kill of normal and tumor cells, and this is the therapeutic index for new
agents undergoing in vitro screening for activity. The DiSC assay (see Table 17-4) offers an overall predictive accuracy of 83%, with a sensitivity of 94% and a
specificity of 71%. 125,132,145
The potential efficacy of individualized chemotherapy selected by in vitro drug sensitivity testing for patients with cancer has been reviewed. 146,147 A number of issues
seriously limit the widespread use of this approach in the clinic. First, in vitro drug sensitivity testing is relatively expensive and time-consuming. Second, the efficient
procurement of tumor tissue remains a serious problem. In fact, only two studies, both from the National Cancer Institute, have evaluated the ability to obtain tumor
tissue from patients with limited- and extensive-stage small cell lung cancer. 147,148 Tumor tissue was obtained from 30% of patients with limited-stage disease, in
contrast to nearly 70% of patients with extensive-stage disease. Third, even with successful procurement of tumor tissue, a host of technical issues limits the ability for
efficient and successful drug testing. In fact, of 12 different trials reviewed, only slightly more than one-half of all tumor samples had sufficient cell numbers for drug
testing. Finally, only one-third of all patients entered in prospective trials of in vitro drug testing were actually treated with an in vitro best regimen. In those patients,
the response rates appear to be as good as, and perhaps even slightly better than, those achieved with empiric therapy. It is not surprising, then, that when all the
clinical studies are taken together, no potential benefit in survival is observed for this approach. Of note, however, is a survival advantage that has been reported, in a
small select series of studies, in patients treated with an individualized in vitro best regimen.148
The reliability of newer in vitro assay technologies to identify drug sensitivity suggests that such assays can help the clinician to avoid exposure of patients to the
toxicity of drugs with little clinical benefit. Although the promise of an in vitro sensitivity assay has not yet been met, there remains value in identifying inactive agents
before their administration and eliminating them from drug combinations. These tests render it possible to tailor drug combinations for the individual cancer patient.
They also offer a rational stopping point for both the patient and clinician in situations in which the patient's tumor demonstrates extreme resistance to all conventional
anticancer agents. An understanding of when to terminate therapy in hopeless situations is as important as any management issue facing the clinician. 149 Although
only a few hundred patients have been enrolled to date to evaluate the impact of in vitro assay-directed therapy on survival, it is intuitively obvious that there should
be a therapeutic advantage in the activity of agents to which a tumor is highly responsive in vitro as compared with agents that demonstrate significant in vitro drug
resistance.125 Further prospective, randomized studies are needed to define more properly the true role of in vitro drug testing in the selection of chemotherapy for
cancer patients in the adjuvant, induction, or salvage setting.
Although in vitro tissue culture studies serve as an important guide for selecting chemotherapy, they are inadequate at addressing the issues of tumor cell
heterogeneity, drug distribution, drug bioactivation, and host toxicity. In vivo model systems overcome some of these obstacles, and several have been developed,
including the subrenal capsule assay, a semipermeable membrane in the Millipore diffusion chamber as vessels for tumor implantation into mice, and the tumor
xenograft model, which is perhaps the most widely used method for drug testing. 140,150,151 and 152 However, each of these experimental systems has its unique
drawbacks. Recently, a novel system was developed using a semipermeable polysulfone fiber with a molecular weight cutoff of 30 kD. Human cancer cells derived
from tissue culture or from patient tumor specimens are injected directly into semipermeable fibers that are then implanted into immunocompetent rats. 153,154 Animals
are treated with the given drug and, after a defined period, they are sacrificed, the fibers are recovered, and the remaining viable cells are counted using the trypan
dye exclusion method. There are several advantages to this polysulfone fiber model. First, the entire process of tumor recovery, injection, and implantation of fibers,
drug treatment, fiber recovery, and cell analysis can be completed in less than 1 week. This short period minimizes the potential waiting time for selection of the
optimal drug, thereby rendering this model feasible for application in the clinical setting in treating a patient. Second, the results from this model system are
consistent, reliable, and highly reproducible. As many as six to seven fibers can be implanted into an individual rat; thus, each fiber can be injected with the same cell
type and the individual rat treated with the same drug. In addition, this reduces the unnecessary expense of using multiple animals for drug in vivo testing. Third,
because up to six to seven fibers can be implanted into an individual rat, cancer cells derived from different primary tumors can be tested simultaneously for drug
sensitivity, a process that can result in greater cost and time efficiency. Further testing and validation are required to determine whether such a novel in vivo system
can help to individualize and optimize the clinical therapy of cancer patients.
Finally, studies by Waldman et al. 155 have raised concerns regarding the validity of the in vitro colony formation assay as a measure of the cytotoxicity of
DNA-damaging agents in tumor cells with altered checkpoint response. Using the human colon cancer HCT116 cell line that expresses wild-type p53 and p21
(p21+/+) and a subline that was rendered p21-deficient (p21–/–) by homologous recombination, these researchers tested the effects of g-irradiation using the in vitro
colony formation assay and an in vivo xenograft model. Of note, they observed no differences in sensitivity to ionizing radiation, as determined by the in vitro colony
formation assay. However, using the nude mouse xenograft model, they found that tumors derived from the parent p21+/+ cell line were able to survive exposure to
ionizing radiation. In contrast, a significant fraction of the tumors deficient in p21 underwent apoptosis and were thus completely cured. Clearly, the in vitro assay was
unable to detect this significant difference in sensitivity, as both the processes of cell arrest and apoptosis preclude the outgrowth of colonies. Given the critical role of
checkpoint status as a determinant of chemosensitivity, these findings are important as they suggest that in vivo assays may represent a more relevant model system
to compare the effects of anticancer agents. 156 Moreover, such an in vivo model may be ideal for testing novel agents that specifically target cell-cycle control and the
pathways associated with the process of apoptosis.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Marchall EK Jr. Historical perspectives in chemotherapy. Adv Chemother 1964:1:1.
2. Hersh SM. Chemical and biological warfare: America's hidden arsenal. New York: Bobbs Merrill, 1968.
3. Alexander SF. Final report of Bari mustard casualties. Washington, DC: Allied Force Headquarters, Office of the Surgeon. APO 512, June 20, 1944.
4. DeVita VT. The evolution of therapeutic research in cancer. N Engl J Med 1978;298:907.
5. DeVita VT. Cell kinetics and the chemotherapy of cancer. Cancer Chemother Rep 1971;3:2323.
6. DeVita VT. The influence of information on drug resistance on protocol design: the Harry Kaplan Memorial Lecture given at the Fourth International Conference on Malignant Lymphoma, June
69, 1990, Lugano, Switzerland. Ann Oncol 1991;2:93.
7. Goldie JH, Coldman AJ. The genetic origin of drug resistance in neoplasms: implication for systemic therapy. Cancer Res 1984;44:3643.
8. Endicott JA, Ling V. The biochemistry of P-glycoprotein mediated multidrug resistance. Annu Rev Biochem 1989;58:137.
9. Chaudhary PM, Roninson IB. Expression and activity of P-glycoprotein, a multidrug efflux pump, in human hematopoietic stem cells. Cell 1992;66:85.
10. Young RC, DeVita VT. Cell cycle characteristics of human solid tumors in vivo. Cell Tissue Kinet 1970;3:285.
11. Mendelsohn ML. Autoradiographic analysis of cell proliferation in spontaneous breast cancer in C3H mice: III. The growth fraction. J Natl Cancer Inst 1962;28:1015.
12. Skipper HE, Schabel FM, Wilcox WS. Experimental evaluation of potential anti-cancer agents: XII. On the criteria and kinetics associated with “curability” of experimental leukemia. Cancer
Chemother Rep 1964;35:1.
13. Miller TP, Grogan TM, Dahlberg S, et al. Prognostic significance of the Ki-67-associated proliferative antigen in aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a prospective Southwest Oncology Group
trial. Blood 1994;83:1460.
14. DeVita VT. On the value of response criteria in therapeutic research. Colloque INSERM 1988;75:863.
15. Holland JF. Induction chemotherapy: an old term for an old concept. Colloque INSERM 1986;137:45.
16. Goldhirsch A, Wood WC, Senn HJ, et al. Meeting highlights: international consensus panel on the treatment of primary breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:14.
17. Fuchs CS, Mayer RJ. Adjuvant chemotherapy for colon and rectal cancer. Semin Oncol 1995;22:472.
18. Cokgor I, Friedman HS, Friedman AH. Chemotherapy for adults with malignant glioma. Cancer Invest 1999;17:264.
19. Frei A III, Clark JR, Miller D. The concept of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. In: Salmon SE, ed. Adjuvant therapy of cancer, 5th ed. Orlando, FL: Grune & Stratton, 1987:67.
20. Muggia FM. Primary chemotherapy: concepts and issues. In: Primary chemotherapy in cancer medicine. New York: Alan R. Liss, 1985:377.
21. DeVita VT. The relationship between tumor mass and resistance to treatment of cancer. Cancer 1983;51:1209.
22. Skipper HE. Critical variables in the design of combination chemotherapy regimens to be used alone or in adjuvant setting. Colloque INSERM 1986;137:11.
23. Goldie JH. Scientific basis for adjuvant and primary (neoadjuvant) chemotherapy. Semin Oncol 1987;14:1.

24. Bonadonna G, Veronesi U, Brambilla C, et al. Primary chemotherapy to avoid mastectomy in tumors with diameters of three centimeters or more. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:1539.
25. Jacobs C. Adjuvant and neoadjuvant treatment of head and neck cancers. Semin Oncol 1991;18:504.
26. Forastiere AA, Urba SG. Combined modality therapy for cancer of the esophagus. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Principles and practice of oncology, 5th ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1997;10:1.
27. Bosset JF, Gignoux M, Triboulet JP, et al. Chemoradiotherapy followed by surgery compared with surgery alone in squamous-cell cancer of the esophagus. N Engl J Med 1997;337:161.
28. Herr HN, Whitmore NF, Morse MJ, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy in invasive bladder cancer: the evolving role of surgery. J Urol 1990;144:1083.
29. Jacquillat C, Weil M, Baillet F, et al. Results of neoadjuvant chemotherapy and radiation therapy in the breast conserving treatment of 250 patients with all stages of infiltrative breast cancer.
Cancer 1990;66:119.
30. DeVita VT. Primary chemotherapy can avoid mastectomy but there is more to it than that [Editorial]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:1522.
31. Green MR. Chemotherapy and radiation in the nonoperative management of stage III non-small cell lung cancer. In: DeVita VT Jr, Rosenberg SA, eds. Important advances in oncology 1993.
Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1993:125.
32. Rusch VW, Albain KS, Crowley JJ, et al. Surgical resection of stage IIIA and stage IIIB non-small cell lung cancer after concurrent induction of chemoradiotherapy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
1993;105:97.
33. Nathanson L, Hall TC, Schilling AC, et al. Concurrent combination chemotherapy of human solid tumors: experience with three-drug regimen and review of the literature. Cancer Res
1969;29:419.
34. Potter VR. Sequential blocking of metabolic pathways in vivo. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1951;75:41.
35. Elion GB, Singer S, Hitchings GH. Antagonists of nucleic acid derivatives: VIII. Synergism in combinations of biochemically related antimetabolites. J Biol Chem 1954;208:477.
36. Sartorelli AC. Approaches to the combination chemotherapy of transplantable neoplasms. Prog Exp Tumor Res 1965;6:228.
37. DeVita VT, Schein PS. The use of drugs in combination for the treatment of cancer: rationale and results. N Engl J Med 1973;288:998.
38. Vose JM, Armitage JO. Clinical applications of hematopoietic growth factors. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1023.
39. DeVita VT. Only if you believe in magic. In: Jones SE, Salmon SE, eds. Adjuvant therapy of cancer, 4th ed. Orlando, FL: Grune & Stratton, 1984:3.
40. Luria SE, Delbruck M. Mutations of bacteria from virus sensitivity to virus resistance. Genetics 1943;28:491.
41. Goldie JH, Coldman AJ. A mathematical model for relating the drug sensitivity of tumors to the spontaneous mutation rate. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:1727.
42. Day RS. Treatment sequencing, asymmetry and uncertainty: protocol strategies for combination chemotherapy. Cancer Res 1986;46:3876.
43. Norton L, Day RS. Potential innovations in scheduling in cancer chemotherapy. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Important advances in oncology 1991. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1991:57.
44. Buzzoni R, Bonadonna G, Valagussa P, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy with doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil in the treatment of resectable breast cancer with
more than three positive axillary nodes. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:2134.
45. Bonadonna G, Zambetti M. Sequential or alternating doxorubicin and CMF regimens in breast cancer with more than three positive nodes. JAMA 1995;273:542.
46. Skipper HE. Reasons for success and failure in treatment of murine leukemias with the drugs now employed in treating human leukemias. In: Cancer chemotherapy. Ann Arbor, MI: University
Microfilms International, 1978:1.
47. Skipper HE, Schabel FM Jr, Mellet LB, et al. Implications of biochemical, cytokinetic, pharmacologic and toxicologic relationships in the design of optimal therapeutic schedules. Cancer
Chemother Rep 1950;54:431.
48. Yankee RA, DeVita VT, Perry S. The cell cycle of leukemia L1210 cells in vivo. Cancer Res 1968;27:2381.
49. Norton LA. A Gompertzian model of human breast cancer growth. Cancer Res 1988;48:7067.
50. Bloom H, Richardson M, Harris B. Natural history of untreated breast cancer (18041933): comparison of treated and untreated cases according to histologic grade of malignancy. Med J
1962;2:213.
51. Hickman JA. Apoptosis induced by anticancer drugs. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1992;11:121.
52. Leonard CJ, Canman CE, Kastan MB. The role of p53 in cell-cycle control and apoptosis: implications for cancer. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Important advances in oncology
1995. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1995:33.
53. Levine AJ. p53, the cellular gatekeeper for growth and division. Cell 1997;88:323.
54. Ko LJ, Prives C. p53: puzzle and paradigm. Genes Dev 1996;10:1054.
55. El-Deiry WS. Regulation of p53 downstream genes. Cancer Biol 1998;8:345.
56. Schmitt CA, Lowe SW. Apoptosis and therapy. J Pathol 1999;187:127.
57. Haq R, Zanke B. Inhibition of apoptotic signaling pathways in cancer cells as a mechanism of chemotherapy resistance. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1998;17:233.
58. McGill G, Fisher DE. p53 and cancer therapy: a double-edged sword. J Clin Invest 1999;104:223.
59. Green DR. Apoptotic pathways: the roads to ruin. Cell 1998;94:695.
60. Sherr CJ. Mammalian G1 cyclins. Cell 1993;73:1059.
61. Livingstone LR, et al. Altered cell cycle arrest and gene amplification potential accompany loss of wild-type p53. Cell 1993;70:923.
62. Keurbitz SJ, Plunkett BS, Walsh WV, Kastan MB. Wild-type p53 is a cell cycle checkpoint determinant following irradiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992;89:7492.
63. Hollstein M, Sidransky DE, Vogelstein B, Harris CC. p53 mutations in human cancers. Science 1991;253:49.
64. Lowe SW, Schmitt EM, Smith SW, et al. p53 is required for radiation-induced apoptosis in mouse thymocytes. Nature 1993;362:847.
65. Clarke AR, Purdie CA, Harrison DJ, et al. Thymocyte apoptosis induced by p53-dependent and independent pathways. Nature 1993;362:849.
66. Lowe SW, Ruley HE, Jacks T, Housman DE. p53-dependent apoptosis modulates the cytotoxicity of anticancer agents. Cell 1993;74:957.
67. Lowe SW, Bodis S, McClatchey A, et al. p53 status and the efficacy of cancer therapy in vivo. Science 1994;266:807.
68. Wu GS, El-Deiry WS. p53 and chemosensitivity. Nature Med 1996;2:255.
69. Wahl AF, Donaldson KL, Fairchild C, et al. Loss of normal p53 function confers sensitization to taxol by increasing G 2/M arrest and apoptosis. Nature Med 1996;2:72.
70. Piris MA, Pezzella F, Martinez-Montero JC, et al. p53 and bcl-2 expression in high-grade B-cell lymphomas: correlation with survival time. Br J Cancer 1994;69:337.
71. Kern SE, Kinzler KW, Bruskin A, et al. Identification of p53 as a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein. Science 1991;252:1708.
72. El-Deiry WS, Tokino T, Velculescu VE, et al. WAF1, a potential mediator of p53 tumor suppression. Cell 1993;75:817.
73. Funk WD, Pak DT, Karas RH, et al. A transcriptionally active DNA-binding site for human p53 protein complexes. Mol Cell Biol 1992;12:2866.
74. Zhang W, Funk WD, Wright WE, et al. Novel DNA binding of p53 mutants and their role in transcriptional activation. Oncogene 1993;8:2555.
75. Zhang H, Hannon GJ, Beach D. p21 containing cyclin kinases exist in both active and inactive states. Genes Dev 1994;8:1750.
76. Polyak K, Xia Y, Zweier JL, et al. A model for p53-induced apoptosis. Nature 1997;389:300.
77. Sherr CJ. G1 phase progression: cycling on cue. Cell 1994;79:551.
78. Ewen ME. The cell cycle and the retinoblastoma family. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1994;13:45.
79. Smith MD, Chen I-T, Zhan Q, et al. Interaction of the p53-regulated protein Gadd 45 with proliferating cell nuclear antigen. Science 1994;266:1376.
80. Wang Q, Beck WT. Transcriptional suppression of multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP) gene expression by wild-type p53. Cancer Res 1998;58:5762.
81. Zhou G, Kuo MT. Wild-type p53-mediated induction of rat mdr1b expression by the anticancer drug daunorobucin. J Biol Chem 1998;273:15387.
82. Miyashita T, Reed JC. Bcl-2 oncoprotein blocks chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in a human leukemia cell line. Blood 1993;81:151.
83. Kitada S, Takayuma S, Dak RK, et al. Reversal of chemoresistance of lymphoma cells by antisense-mediated reduction of bcl-2 gene expression. Antisense Res Dev 1994;4:71.
84. Simonian PL, Grillot DAM, Nunez G. Bcl-2 and bcl-xl can differentially block chemotherapy-induced cell death. Blood 1997;3:1208.
85. Davis RJ. The mitogen-activated protein kinase signal transduction pathway. Biol Chem 1993;268:14553.
86. Seimiya H, Mashima T, Toho M, Tsuruo T. c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase-mediated activation of interleukin-1beta converting enzyme/CED-3-like protease during anticancer drug-induced
apoptosis. J Biol Chem 1997;272:4631.
87. Osborn MT, Chambers TS. Role of the stress-activated/c-Jun NH2-terminal protein kinase pathway in the cellular response to adriamycin and other chemotherapeutic drugs. J Biol Chem
1996;271:30950.
88. Zanke BW, Boudreau K, Rubie E, et al. The stress-activated protein kinase pathway mediates cell death following injury induced by cis-platinum, UV radiation, or heat. Curr Biol 1996;6:606.
89. Verheil M, Bose R, Lin XH, et al. Requirement for ceramide-initiated SAPK/JNK signaling in stress-induced apoptosis. Nature 1996;380:75.
90. Woo RA, McLure KG, Lees-Miller SP, et al. DNA-dependent protein kinase acts upstream of p53 in response to DNA damage. Nature 1998;394:700.
91. Kharbanda S, Pandey P, Ren R, et al. c-Abl activation regulates induction of the SEK1/stress-activated protein kinase pathways in the cellular response to 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine. J
Biol Chem 1995;270:30728.
92. Kharbanda S, Ren R, Pandey P, et al. Activation of the c-Abl tyrosine kinase in the stress response to DNA-damaging agents. Nature 1995;376:785.
93. Kuida K, Haydar TF, Kuan CY, et al. Reduced apoptosis and cytochrome c-mediated caspase activation in mice lacking caspase 9. Cell 1998;94:325.
94. Antoku K, Liu Z, Johnson DE. Inhibition of caspase proteases by CrmA enhances the resistance of human leukemia cells to multiple chemotherapeutic agents. Leukemia 1997;11:1665.
95. Eastman A. Survival factors, intracellular signal transduction, and the activation of endonucleases in apoptosis. Semin Cancer Biol 1995;6:45.
96. Wang CY, Mayo MW, Baldwin AS. TNF- and cancer therapy-induced apoptosis: potentiation by inhibition of NF-kB. Science 1996;274:784.
97. Van Antwerp D, Martin SJ, Kafri T, et al. Suppression of TNF-a-induced apoptosis by NF-kB. Science 1996;274:787.
98. Wang CY, Cusack JC Jr, Liu R, Baldwin AS. Control of inducible chemoresistance: enhanced anti-tumor therapy through increase apoptosis by inhibition of NF-kB. Nature Med 1999;5:412.
99. Lowe SW, Ruley HE. Stabilization of the p53 tumor suppressor gene is induced by adenovirus 5 E1A and accompanies apoptosis. Genes Dev 1993;7:535.
100. Wu XW, Levine AJ. p53 and E2F-1 cooperate to mediate apoptosis. Mol Cell Biol 1994;14:2556.
101. Nielson LL, Maneval DC. p53 tumor suppressor gene therapy for cancer. Cancer Gene Ther 1998;5:52.
102. Spitz FR, Nguyen D, Skibber JM, et al. In vitro adenovirus-mediated p53 tumor suppressor gene therapy for colorectal cancer. Anticancer Res 1996;16:3415.
103. Roth JA, Swisher SG, Merritt JA, et al. Gene therapy for non-small cell lung cancer: a preliminary report of a phase I trial of adenoviral p53 gene replacement. Semin Oncol 1998;25[Suppl
8]:33.
104. French LE, Tschopp J. The TRAIL to selective tumor death. Nature Med 1999;5:146.
105. Walczak H, Miller RE, Ariail K, et al. Tumoricidal activity of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand in vivo. Nature Med 1999;5:157.
106. Shan B, Chang CY, Jones D, Lee WH. The transcription factor E2F-1 mediates autoregulation of RB expression. Mol Cell Biol 1994;12:299.
107. Shan B, Lee WH. Deregulated expression of E2F-1 induces S-phase entry and leads to apoptosis. Mol Cell Biol 1994;14:8166.
108. Baselga J, Norton L, Masui H, et al. Antitumor effects of doxorubicin in combination with anti-epidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibodies. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1327.
109. Ciardello F, Bianco R, Damiano V, et al. Antitumor activity of sequential treatment with topotecan and anti-epidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody C225. Clin Cancer Res
1999;5:909.
110. Baselga J, Norton L, Albanell J, et al. Recombinant anti-HER2 antibody (Herceptin) enhances the antitumor activity of paclitaxel and doxorubicin against HER2/neu overexpressing human
breast cancer xenografts. Cancer Res 1998;58:2825.
111. Slamon D, Leyland-Jones B, Shak W, et al. Addition of Herceptin (humanized anti-HER2 antibody) to first-line chemotherapy for HER2 overexpressing metastatic breast cancer (HER2+/MBC)
markedly increases anticancer activity: a randomized, multinational controlled phase III trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:98a.
112. Skipper H. Data and analysis having to do with the influence of dose intensity and duration of treatment (single drugs and combinations) on lethal toxicity and the therapeutic response of
experimental neoplasms. Birmingham, AL: Southern Research Institute, Booklets 13, 1986, and 213, 1987.
113. Hryniuk WM. The importance of dose intensity in the outcome of chemotherapy. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Important advances in oncology 1988. Philadelphia: JB
Lippincott, 1988:121.

114. Hryniuk W, Levine MN. Analysis of dose intensity for adjuvant chemotherapy trials in stage II breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1162.
115. Hryniuk WM. Average relative dose intensity and the impact on design of clinical trials. Semin Oncol 1987;14:65.
116. Levin L, Hryniuk W. Dose intensity analysis of chemotherapy regimens in ovarian carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:756.
117. Hryniuk W, Bush H. The importance of dose intensity in chemotherapy of metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:1281.
118. Hryniuk W, Goodyear M. The calculation of received dose intensity. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1935.
119. Canellos GP, DeVita VT, Gold GL, et al. Cyclical combination chemotherapy for advanced breast carcinoma. Br Med J 1974;1:218.
120. Bonadonna G, Brusamalino MP, Valagussa R, et al. Combination chemotherapy as an adjuvant treatment in operable breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1976;298:405.
121. Bonadonna G, Calagussa R. Dose-response effect of adjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1981;304:10.
122. Wood W, Korzan AH, Cooper R, et al. Dose and dose intensity of adjuvant chemotherapy for stage II node positive breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1994;330:1253.
123. Frei E III, Elias A, Wheeler C, et al. The relationship between high-dose treatment and combination chemotherapy: the concept of summation dose intensity. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:2027.
124. Hryniuk W, Frei E III, Wright FA. A single scale for comparing dose- intensity of all chemotherapy regimens in breast cancer: summation dose-intensity. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3137.
125. Bird MC, Godwin VA, Antrobus JH, Bosanquet AG. Comparison of an in vitro drug sensitivity by the differential staining cytotoxicity (DiSC) and colony-forming assays. Br J Cancer 1987;55:429.
126. Kern DH, Weisenthal LM. Highly specific prediction of antineoplastic drug resistance with an in vitro assay using suprapharmacologic drug exposures. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:582.
127. Kochli OR, Sevin BU, Averette HE, Haller U. Overview of currently used chemosensitivity test systems in gynecologic malignancies and breast cancer. Contrib Gynecol Obstet 1994;19:12.
128. Andreotti PE, Cree IA, Kurbacher CM, et al. Chemosensitivity testing of human tumors using a microplate adenosine triphosphate luminescence assay: clinical correlation for cisplatin
resistance of ovarian carcinoma. Cancer Res 1995;55:5276.
129. Schandendorf D, Worm M, Algermissen B, et al. Chemosensitivity testing of human malignant melanoma: a retrospective analysis of clinical response and in vitro drug sensitivity. Cancer
1994;73:103.
130. Elledge RM, Clark GM, Thant HM, et al. Rapid in vitro assay for predicting response to fluorouracil in patients with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:419.
131. Silber R, Degar B, Costin D, et al. Chemosensitivity of lymphocytes from patients with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia to chlorambucil, fludarabine, and camptothecin analogs. Blood
1994;84:3440.
132. Bosanquet AG. Short-term in vitro drug sensitivity tests for cancer chemotherapy: a summary of correlations of test result with both patient response and survival. Forum Trends Exp Clin Med
1994;4:179.
133. Von Hoff DD, Kronmal R, Salmon SE, et al. A Southwest Oncology Group study on the use of human tumor cloning assay for predicting response in patients with ovarian cancer. Cancer
1991;67:20.
134. Black MM, Spear FD. Effects of cancer chemotherapeutic agents on dehydrogenase activity of human cancer tissue in vitro. Am J Clin Pathol 1953;218.
135. Black MM, Spear FD. Further observations on the effects of cancer chemotherapeutic agents on the in vitro dehydrogenase activity of cancer tissue. J Natl Cancer Inst 1954;143:1147.
136. Puck TT, Marcus PI. A rapid method for viable titration and clone production with HeLa cells in tissue culture: the use of X-irradiated cells to supply conditioning factors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1955;41:432.
137. Salmon SE, Hamburger AW, Soehnlen B, et al. Quantitation of differential sensitivity of human tumor stem cells to anticancer drugs. N Engl J Med 1978;298:1321.
138. Clark GM, Von Hoff DD. Quality control of a multicenter human tumor cloning systems: the Southwest Oncology Group experience. In: Salmon SE, Trent JM, eds. Human tumor cloning.
Orlando, FL: Grune & Stratton, 1984:255.
139. Selby P, Buick RN, Tannock I. A critical appraisal of the “human tumor stem cell assay.” N Engl J Med 1983;308:129.
140. Fruehauf JP, Bosanquet AG. In vitro determination of drug response: a discussion of clinical application. In DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Principles and practice of oncology,
4th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1993;4:1.
141. Tanigawa N, Kern DH, Hikasa Y, Morton DL. Rapid assay for evaluating the chemosensitivity of human tumors in soft agar culture. Cancer Res 1982;42:2159.
142. Sondak VK, Bertelsen CA, Tanigawa N, et al. Clinical correlations with chemosensitivities measured in a rapid thymidine incorporation assay. Cancer Res 1984;44:1725.
143. Graham CH, Kobayashi H, Strankiewicz KS, et al. Rapid acquisition of multicellular drug resistance after a single exposure of mammary tumor cells to antitumor alkylating agents. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1994;86:975.
144. Fruehauf JP, Kyshtoobayeva A, Parker R, et al. Quantitative determination of breast cancer MDR-1 expression by image analysis demonstrates a direct relationship between MDR-1 levels and
in vitro resistance to taxol and doxorubicin. Br Cancer Treat Rep 1996;37[Suppl]:106.
145. Fruehauf JP, Manetta A. Use of the extreme drug resistance assay to evaluate mechanisms of resistance in ovarian cancer: taxol resistance and MDR-1 experience. Contrib Gynecol Obstet
1994;19:39.
146. Markman M. Chemosensitivity and chemoresistance assays: Are they clinically relevant? Cancer 1996;77:1020.
147. Cortazar P, Gazdar AF, Woods E, et al. Survival of patients with limited-stage small cell lung cancer treated with individualized chemotherapy selected by in vitro drug sensitivity testing. Clin
Cancer Res 1997;3:741.
148. Cortazar P, Johnson BE. Review of the efficacy of individualized chemotherapy selected by in vitro drug sensitivity testing for patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1625.
149. Benner SE, Fetting JH, Brenner MH. A stopping rule for standard chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer: lessons from a survey of Maryland medical oncologists. Cancer Invest
1994;12:451.
150. Phillip RM, Bibby MC, Double JA. Appraisal of the predictive value of in vitro chemosensitivity assays. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:1.
151. Griffin TW, Bogden AE, Reich SD, et al. Initial trials of the subrenal capsule assay as a predictor of tumor response to chemotherapy. Cancer 1983;52:2185.
152. Bennett JA, Pilon VA, MacDowell RT. Evaluation of growth and histology of human tumor xenografts implanted under the renal capsule of immunocompetent and immunodeficient mice.
Cancer Res 1985;45:4963.
153. Lipsky MH, Chu MY, Yee LK, et al. Predictive sensitivity of human cancer cells to anticancer agents in vivo. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1994;35:371.
154. Chu MY, Lipsky MH, Epstein J, et al. Predictive sensitivity of human cancer cells in vivo using semipermeable polysulfone fibers. Pharmacology 1998;56:318.
155. Waldman T, Zhang Y, Dillehay L, et al. Cell-cycle arrest versus cell death in cancer therapy. Nat Med 1997;3:1034.
156. Lamb JR, Friend SH. Which guesstimate is the best guesstimate? Predicting chemotherapeutic outcomes. Nat Med 1997;3:962.

CHAPTER 18 Principles of Cancer Management: Biologic Therapy
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 18
Principles of Cancer Management: Biologic Therapy
STEVEN A. ROSENBERG
Introduction
Basic Principles of Tumor Immunology
Cells of the Immune System
Immune Effector Mechanisms Resulting in Cell Destruction
Cytokines
Interleukin-1
Interleukin-2
Interleukin-3
Interleukin-4
Interleukin-5
Interleukin-6
Interleukin-7
Interleukin-8
Interleukin-9
Interleukin-10
Interleukin-11
Interleukin-12
Interleukin-13
Interleukin-14
Interleukin-15
Interleukin-16
Interleukin-17
Interleukin-18
Tumor Antigens
Immune Response to Tumors in Rodents
Identification of Human Cancer Antigens Restricted by Class I Major Histocompatibility Complex and Recognized by CD8+ T Cells
Cancer Antigens Restricted by Class II Major Histocompatibility Complex and Recognized by CD4+ T Cells
Human Cancer Antigens: General Principles
Antibodies for Detecting Tumor Antigens
Immunotherapy
Interleukin-2
Interferons
Development of Approaches to the Immunization of Humans Against Cancer Antigens
Adoptive Immunotherapy
Tumor-Infiltrating Lymphocytes and Interleukin-2
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Biologic therapy is cancer treatment that produces antitumor effects primarily through the action of natural host defense mechanisms or the administration of natural
mammalian substances. Biologic therapy has emerged as an important fourth modality for the treatment of cancer. * Its increased application is the result of a better
understanding of the basic aspects of host defense mechanisms against cancer and rapid biotechnologic developments that made molecules available in quantities
large enough for use in manipulating biologic processes in vivo. Although this field is still in its infancy, there are many examples of the successful application of
biologic therapy to the treatment of human cancers.

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF TUMOR IMMUNOLOGY
Most applications of biologic therapy for cancer have attempted to stimulate immune defense mechanisms. The immune system evolved as a means to detect and
eliminate molecules or pathogens that are recognized as “nonself” but not to react to host (self) tissues. Many immunotherapies attempted to cause the tumor to
appear more “foreign” compared with normal tissues or tried to magnify relatively weak host immune reactions to growing tumors.
The immune system differs from most other organ systems because its cells are not in constant contact with each other. They circulate freely throughout the body in
and out of the circulatory and lymphatic systems. Immune reactivity involves the integrated action of lymphocytes, monocytes, macrophages, basophils, eosinophils,
dendritic cells, endothelial cells, and many other cells throughout the body. Although separate functions have been assigned to these cell types, it is now clear that
they interact in many ways and can regulate one another's activities.
Immune cells secrete two major classes of soluble protein. The first of these lymphocyte products to be recognized was the antibody. Antibodies are a group of
proteins composed of one or several units, each of which is composed of two pairs of different polypeptide chains (i.e., heavy and light chains). Each unit possesses
two recognition sites, which are capable of combining with the immunizing antigen. The unique bond between antigen and antibody is part of the basis for the
exquisite specificity that is the hallmark of immunologic reactivity. The existence of circulating antibodies was first demonstrated in 1890, and until recently, scientific
studies of antibodies monopolized the study of immune reactions.
Since the 1970s, it has become clear that selected subpopulations of lymphoid cells can secrete a second (nonantibody) class of protein molecules. These molecules
are not biochemically similar to antibodies, are produced in tiny amounts, and are not normally detectable in the circulation. Collectively called cytokines, they
represent a new class of hormones with actions on many different target cells within and outside the immune system. Increasing knowledge of a wide variety of
cytokines has dramatically altered the understanding of the functions of the immune system and created new possibilities for cancer immunotherapy.

CELLS OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
The central cell in immune function is the lymphocyte. Lymphocytes constitute approximately 20% of blood leukocytes and fall into three major classes—B cells, T
cells, and null cells—on the basis of ontogeny and function. Basic aspects of modern cellular immunology are presented in Chapter 4. Analysis of cell surface
molecules, usually using monoclonal antibodies, revealed substantial heterogeneity in human leukocytes and lymphocytes. In 1982, the First International Workshop
on Human Leukocyte Differentiation Antigens was held in Paris to attempt to codify the proliferating number of cell surface determinants detected on leukocytes and
the antibodies used to detect them. As a result of the testing of large numbers of antibodies on target cells of many different leukocyte types, cluster analysis
permitted the definition of groups of antigens that are similar and those that are clearly different on each type of target cell. This workshop defined the clusters of
differentiation (CD), now used to describe cell surface components on leukocytes. A summary of selected CD classifications, the cells on which they are found, and
the principal antibodies that are used to detect them as assigned by the Fourth International Workshop in 1989 are shown in Table 18-1.

TABLE 18-1. Workshop Antigen Designation by the Nomenclature Committee of the Fourth International Workshop on Human Leukocyte Differentiation Antigens a

The results of the Fifth International Workshop on Human Leukocyte Differentiation Antigens were presented in November 1993 and represented the efforts of more
than 500 laboratories that analyzed 1450 antibodies. Based on these findings, 48 new CD clusters and subclusters were adopted and 14 previously established
clusters were redefined. These additions and changes are shown in Table 18-2. An updated source of detailed information concerning all CD molecules can be found
on the internet at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/prow/guide/45277084.htm.

TABLE 18-2. Modifications and Additions to CD Nomenclature by the Fifth International Workshop on Human Leukocyte Differentiation Antigens

IMMUNE EFFECTOR MECHANISMS RESULTING IN CELL DESTRUCTION
A variety of immune effector mechanisms can cause destruction of vascularized tissue or of circulating tumor cells (see Chapter 4).
Antibodies can mediate cell destruction by the binding of complement or by action as an opsonin to facilitate phagocytosis by macrophages or by other phagocytic
cells bearing Fc receptors.
The direct interaction of an immune cell with a target cell can also result in lysis, and a variety of immune cytotoxic cells have been described. The best-characterized
lytic immune cell is the cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL). These T cells can interact with specific cell surface antigens by an interaction with the T-cell receptor and a
class I or II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecule. This lysis appears to involve direct cell contact and can occur quickly, with the initial lytic events
initiated within minutes of the adhesion of the target cell to the lymphocyte. Although binding of the CTL to the tumor target occurs by means of the T-cell receptor,
other means for binding lytic cells to targets also produce lysis. One such mechanism is antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. In this lysis, antibody bound to
immune cells serves as a cross-link to a cytolytic cell bearing an Fc receptor. The Fc receptor on the immune effector binds to the free Fc portion of the antibody on
the target cell; after this cross-linkage, lysis of the target cell occurs. Similarly, the phenomenon of lectin-dependent cellular cytotoxicity involves the association of a
lytic cell with a target using a lectin such as concanavalin A or phytohemagglutinin as the cross-linking agent.
Natural killer (NK) cells can lyse selected cultured target cells without a prior sensitizing stimulus. The most common target for NK cells is the K562 leukemia cell line.
NK lymphocytes have little or no ability to kill fresh tumor cells, and their physiologic role as an antitumor effector mechanism is unclear.
Lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells are lymphocytes that acquire the ability to lyse a broad array of tumor cells after incubation in interleukin (IL)-2. The precursor
of LAK cells is a null lymphocyte, and most mature LAK cells do not bear T- or B-cell markers. However, one subpopulation of LAK cells has been shown to be CD3+,
and precursor and effector LAK cells appear to bear the Leu-19 cell surface marker. LAK cells can lyse a broad array of malignant, but not normal, fresh target cells in
4-hour chromium-release assays. LAK cells also can lyse normal and malignant cultured lines. LAK cells are capable of lysing most cells that have their membranes
perturbed by malignant transformation, culture, or other activation processes.
Activated macrophages also recognize and lyse tumor cells. Although most lymphocyte-mediated lysis can easily be detected in 4 hours, the measurement of
significant macrophage-mediated lysis often requires 48 to 72 hours.
Many of the cytokines secreted by immune cells can mediate toxicity of tissue directly or by the recruitment of other inflammatory processes. For example, tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) can interfere with the blood supply of tumors. Interferon (IFN)-g has an antiproliferative effect on some tumor cells. Many chemotactic and
vascular permeability factors that are involved in inflammatory responses also can indirectly mediate tumor destruction and may play a role in tumor immune
phenomena.

CYTOKINES
Cytokines are soluble proteins produced by mononuclear cells of the immune system (usually lymphocytes or monocytes) that have regulatory actions on other cells
of the immune system or target cells involved in immune reactions. Cytokines produced by lymphocytes are referred to as lymphokines, and cytokines produced by
monocytes are referred to as monokines. Cytokines are true hormones, acting on other cells at a distance from the secreting cells.
It has been known for more than two decades that the soluble substances produced by immune cells are involved in immune function and regulation. These cytokines
were first identified by the function they exhibit in in vitro assays. Lymphokines that inhibited the migration of macrophages were known as migration-inhibition factors,
and other factors that activated macrophages were known as macrophage-activation factors. This identification of cytokines on the basis of function led to a confusing
situation in which the same molecules were often described by various investigators using different assays for their detection.
Substantial progress in this field resulted from the use of molecular biologic techniques to clone the genes for these cytokines, express them in bacteria, purify them to
homogeneity, and produce large amounts of homogeneous cytokines for detailed study. A new nomenclature referring to cytokines as ILs (meaning “between
leukocytes”) has been introduced that supplants the acronyms based on functional properties. In 1979, a meeting of the Second International Lymphokine Workshop
in Ermatingen, Switzerland, reached a consensus that a variety of lymphokines that had been referred to as T-cell growth factor, thymocyte-stimulating factor,
thymocyte mitogenic factor, killer cell helper factor costimulator, and secondary CTL-inducing factor were all the same molecule and should be referred to as IL-2 . The
term IL-1 was adopted to refer to a monocyte product previously called lymphocyte-activating factor. Since that time, many cytokines have been described. This list is
rapidly expanding as new hormones produced by cells of the immune system are described.

Cytokines are proteins or glycoproteins, mostly with molecular weights in the range of 15,000 to 40,000, and many are glycosylated, although it appears that the
glycosylation is often not essential for function. In many cases, the cytokines described in mouse and human are structurally related. For example, IL-1a shows a 61%
to 65% amino acid homology among human, rabbit, and mouse. Some lymphokines exhibit species specificity; for example, IL-1, IL-2, IL-5, and IL-6 derived from
human are active on cells from mouse and human, but IL-3, IL-4, and IFN-g derived from humans are active only on human cells and not on mouse cells.
Most research on cytokines has involved in vitro studies or animal studies. Many cytokines, such as IFN-a, IFN-b, IFN-g, IL-2, TNF, and the colony-stimulating factors,
have reached clinical application in patients with cancer.
A summary of the major characteristics of IL-1 through IL-18 follows and is taken from S. K. Durum in Principles and Practice of Biologic Therapy of Cancer, S. A.
Rosenberg, ed. The characteristics of the IFN and colony-stimulating factors are shown in Table 18-3 and are further discussed in Chapter 20.1 and Chapter 53.4.

TABLE 18-3. Interferons, Colony-Stimulating Factors, and Tumor Necrosis Factor, with Their Biologic Activities

INTERLEUKIN-1
IL-1 1,2 was among the earliest cytokines identified because it has so many potent activities. Many features of the IL-1 system, however, are not particularly
representative of cytokines. IL-1 has an unusual mechanism of release from the cells that produce it. The two family members, a and b, are only distantly related but
act on the same receptor. It has two dedicated inhibitors that block ligand-receptor interaction. IL-1 is a powerful inducer of inflammatory processes, both local and
global, although knockout of the IL-1 system only modestly reduces these processes. Clinically, the main goals have been to block the IL-1 system in inflammatory
states, such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and septic shock.
Proteins
Three members of the IL-1 family exist: a, b, and the receptor antagonist, encoded by a cluster of genes. IL-1a 3 and -b4 have little homology to one another, but it is
accurate to term them both IL-1 because they act on the same receptor. Neither a nor b has a typical signal sequence, and both are released from the producing cell
by an unusual mechanism. Mature 17-kD IL-1a is produced from a biologically inactive 31-kD precursor by cleavage 5 with caspase 1. Mature 17-kD IL-1a is also
produced by cleavage from a different 31-kD precursor, which is biologically active. The receptor antagonist 6 is produced in two forms by alternative message
splicing: one secreted form with a signal peptide and a second intracellular form lacking a signal peptide.
Producers
The most prolific IL-1–producing cells are macrophages following stimulation with a variety of microbial products or other agents, including cytokines. Many other cell
types, such as keratinocytes, also produce IL-1. The IL-1 promoters are complex, perhaps accounting for the ability of these genes to respond to so many different
stimuli in different cell types. In macrophages, the mechanism of IL-1 induction is partly based on the PU-1 transcription factor in cooperation with other nuclear
factors. 7,8 IL-1 production is also regulated by message stability, message translation, and the release mechanism. The receptor antagonist is produced concurrently
with IL-1a and -b in many cell types, acting as a natural buffer to the action of IL-1.
Receptors and Cellular Response
Two IL-1 binding proteins exist: IL-1RI, which serves all known receptor function, 9 and IL-1RII, which serves as a “decoy” receptor. 10 These genes are also linked to
the IL-1 gene cluster in humans, but not in mice. IL-1RI is a member of the “toll” family of receptors. After IL-1 binding, IL-1 receptor accessory proteins, 11 a kinase
[IL-2 receptor–associated kinase (IRAK)] 12 and TRAF6,13 are recruited to the complex. IL-18 receptor forms a similar complex (see Interleukin-18, later in this
chapter). MyD88 serves as an adaptor protein, linking IRAK to the receptor complex. 14 Intracellular cascades lead to activation of several types of transcription
factors, including nuclear factor kB 15 and AP-1. 16 This results in the induction of many genes, including a number of other inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6. A wide
variety of cell types respond to IL-1. IL-18 signaling has many parallels with that of IL-1.
Activities
IL-1 is considered a key mediator of inflammation. 2 It has a broad spectrum of inflammatory activities, including local effects, such as induction of prostaglandins,
chemokines, and adhesion molecules. IL-1 also has global effects, such as fever, the acute-phase response, and hypotension. Knockout mice show deficiency in local
inflammation and delayed-type hypersensitivity and are resistant to collagen-induced arthritis. 17 The fact that IL-1 deficiency does not eliminate inflammation has been
interpreted to mean that other cytokines with overlapping activities, such as TNF and IL-6, are equally important.
Clinical Use
Trials were performed in cancer patients 18 with some benefit in preventing thrombocytopenia induced by chemotherapy, but significant toxic side effects, such as
hypotension, arrhythmia, and pulmonary-capillary leakage, occurred. Intratumoral injection in mouse cancers has shown promising responses. Blocking IL-1 activity
via receptor antagonist, soluble receptors, or newly tailored drugs shows promise in controlling inflammatory diseases, such as RA and septic shock, probably most
effectively if combined with blockade of other inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF and IL-6.
INTERLEUKIN-2
IL-2 was originally discovered as a growth factor for T cells in vitro and is one of the most extensively studied cytokines. Knockout of IL-2 in mice suggests complex
regulatory roles, perhaps in programming T cells for death. The IL-2 receptor complex shares components with receptors for IL-4, -7, -9, and -15. IL-2 has been used
clinically for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, cancer, and for ex vivo expansion of T cells directed against tumors and viruses.
Protein
IL-2 19,20 is a 15-kD protein, contains one internal disulfide bond, and is a member of a family of cytokines (IL-4, -7, -9, and -15) containing a helixes.
Producers
IL-2 is produced by T lymphocytes after activation by antigen-MHCs and costimulators on the surface of antigen-presenting cells. The T helper 1 (Th1) subset of

memory T cells retains the capacity to produce IL-2, whereas the Th2 subset loses this capacity, producing IL-4 instead. 21
Receptor and Cellular Response
The IL-2 receptor comprises three chains: a, 22 b,23 and gc.24 The b and g c chains are members of a cytokine receptor superfamily, whereas the a chain is related to
IL-15Ra. The b and g chains are essential for signaling, whereas the a chain increases affinity of the complex for IL-2 but is not required. After binding of IL-2, the
Janus kinase Jak3, 25,26 associated with the g c chain, phosphorylates tyrosines on the b chain, which serve as docking sites for signal transducers and activators of
transcription protein (STAT)3 and -5. The STATs 22,27 are then phosphorylated and translocate to the nucleus, where they serve as transcription factors. Many other
intracellular second messenger pathways are also triggered by IL-2 28 and involve lck, syk, ras, phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3-kinase), protein kinase C, and Akt. The
gc chain of the IL-2 receptor is shared by the receptors for IL-4, -7, -9, and -15. Jak3 is also a component of the signaling complex in these receptors.
Activities
The property that led to the discovery of IL-2 was its induction of activated T-cell proliferation. 19 Thus, IL-2 is widely used for propagating T-cell lines. Knockout of IL-2
in mice,29 however, resulted in excessive, uncontrolled T-cell proliferation, leading to the concept that IL-2 is not essential for growth in vivo, but is essential for
programming T cells to die. Other activities of IL-2 include stimulation of cytotoxicity in NK and T cells and acting as a cofactor in activating macrophages and B cells.
Clinical Use
IL-2 has been used clinically in several ways (see Chapter 20.2). Treatment of malignant melanoma renal cell carcinoma has shown efficacy. 30,31 A significant side
effect of IL-2 is the vascular leak syndrome. 32 IL-2 has been used for ex vivo expansion of LAK cells, tumor-infiltrating T cells, 33 and antiviral T cells, 34,35 and 36 which
are then returned to the patient. Anti–IL-2 receptor shows promise in blocking rejection of organ transplantations. 37
INTERLEUKIN-3
IL-3 is produced by activated T cells and induces hematopoiesis. Its receptor shares components with IL-5 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF). It is used clinically to sustain explanted hematopoietic stem cells before reinfusion.
Proteins
IL-3 38,39 is linked to IL-4, -5, -9, and -13 in humans.
Producers
Activated T cells are the major producers of IL-3. 40 Activated mast cells are also producers.
Receptors
Two chains that compose the IL-3 receptor exist in humans: IL-3Ra 41 and IL-3Rbc,42 which are shared by the receptors for GM-CSF and IL-5. In the mouse, two
different b chains exist. Both a and b are members of the cytokine receptor superfamily. Cross-linking of the a to the b chain triggers receptor activation. 43 The nature
of this cross-linking process is thought to resemble that of the IL-2 and IL-4 receptors, in that the ligand directly binds one chain with intermediate affinity. The second
receptor chain, which cannot bind ligand on its own, then recognizes some features of the complex formed by the ligand and the other receptor component. Jak2 is
associated with the b chain 44 and activates STAT5. 45 A number of other second messenger pathways are also activated. 46 The cellular response includes survival,
such as the pathway leading to disposal of BAD, the proapoptotic protein. 46,47
Activities
IL-3 stimulates production of macrophages, granulocytes, erythrocytes, and megakaryocytes from primitive pluripotential stem cells. Knockouts indicate that IL-3 is not
required during normal hematopoiesis, indicating its importance probably lies in the hematopoietic stimulation during immune responses. Mature
myelomonocytic-lineage cells also react to IL-3.
Clinical Use
IL-3 has been tested extensively for a variety of potential clinical uses. 48 In individuals with normal hematopoiesis, IL-3 treatment increased platelets, reticulocytes,
and leukocytes and showed only mild side effects. 49 To increase hematopoiesis, IL-3 has been tested in myelodysplastic syndrome, aplastic anemia,
Diamond-Blackfan anemia, chemotherapy, bone marrow transplantation, and stem cell mobilization. Although responses were observed, it has not been adopted as a
therapeutic agent. IL-3 is widely used, however, as part of a cytokine cocktail to sustain hematopoietic stem cells ex vivo for treatment after radiation or chemotherapy
(i.e., promoting introduction of recombinant constructs for gene therapy). 50,51
INTERLEUKIN-4
IL-4 is an important cofactor in B-lymphocyte activation, particularly for production of immunoglobulin E (IgE). One type of IL-4 receptor incorporates g c, as do IL-2, -7,
-9, and -15. IL-4 is closely related to IL-13 and can share some receptor components and signaling pathways. IL-4 is critical in directing activated T cells into the Th2
pathway. Overproduction is implicated in atopy.
Proteins
IL-4 52,53 and 54 is 20 kD, with six cysteines involved in intrachain disulfide bonds, and forms four a helices. The human IL-4 gene is found in a cluster together with
genes for IL-3, -5, -9, and -13.
Producers
Several types of T cells produce IL-4 after activation by antigen-MHC complexes and costimulators on the surface of antigen-presenting cells. 21 IL-4 is a key member
of the spectrum of cytokines produced by Th2 T cells. In mice, CD4 T cells that express NK1 are also producers, as are a subset of CD8 T cells. Mast cells and
basophils also produce IL-4. 55 The induction of Th2 cell development is dependent on IL-4 produced by T cells themselves. 56 Production of IL-4 requires the
transcription factor GATA3 57 and, possibly, c-maf. 58
Receptors
The primary binding chain, IL-4Ra, 59 forms two types of receptor complexes: IL-4Ra + gc and IL-4Ra + IL-13Ra. 60 These receptor chains are members of the cytokine
receptor superfamily. IL-4 first binds to IL-4Ra; g c is then recruited to the complex. The Janus kinase Jak3, bound to the intracellular domain of g c, is required for
many, but not all, IL-4 effects. 61 STAT6 is required for IL-4 signaling. 62 IRS-1 is an important adaptor molecule, coupling the receptor to second messenger pathways
other than the Jak-STAT pathway. 60,63
Activities

IL-4 was discovered as a growth factor for preactivated B cells and induces class II MHC expression on B cells. In macrophages, it suppresses production of
inflammatory cytokines and it has effects on endothelial cells and fibroblasts. Knockout mice show major defects in Th2 cell generation and in IgE production, 64
suggesting that the selective value of IL-4 may be immunity against parasitic infections.
Clinical Use
An overactive IL-4 pathway appears to be one component of atopy. 65,66 and 67 Therefore, IL-4 presents a therapeutic target for allergy. IL-4 itself could be used to divert
immunity away from autoimmune or inflammatory directions.
INTERLEUKIN-5
IL-5 induces production of eosinophils during immune responses, which probably contributes to protection against some kinds of parasites. It shares a receptor
component with IL-3 and GM-CSF.
Proteins
IL-5 68,69 is a disulfide-linked homodimer, which is unusual among the ILs, and is heavily glycosylated. Its crystal structure resembles that of two IL-4 molecules with
two bundles, each with four a helices. 70 It is genetically linked to IL-3, -4, -9, and -13 in humans. 68
Producers
IL-5 is produced by activated Th2 cells, 21 as well as mast cells and eosinophils.
Receptors
The receptors for IL-5 consist of two chains: IL-5Ra 71 and IL-5Rb c,42 which is shared by the receptors for GM-CSF and IL-3. Both chains are members of the cytokine
receptor superfamily. Cross-linking principles are similar to IL-3, as are the ensuing Jak2-STAT5 pathways and other second-messenger pathways. 46
Activities
IL-5 was initially identified as a T-cell factor that induced production of eosinophils. 72 Knockout of IL-5 eliminated the eosinophilia induced by helminth infection, 73
whereas baseline production of eosinophils was normal. IL-5 also promotes local accumulation 74 and sustains the life span and function of eosinophils in tissues, such
as the lung and bowel. Evidence exists that IL-5, presumably via its eosinophil activities, contributes to protection from helminth infections. 75,76
Clinical Use
IL-5 has long been implicated in allergic asthma. 77 Efforts are therefore being made to develop IL-5 antagonists. 78
INTERLEUKIN-6
IL-6 is a key inflammatory mediator produced by many cell types. It is the major inducer of the acute-phase response and fever. IL-6 receptor shares the gp130 chain
with several other cytokine receptors.
Proteins
IL-6 is a glycoprotein of 21 to 28 kD.
Producers
IL-6 is produced after stimulation by many cell types, including T and B lymphocytes, macrophages, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells.
Receptors
Two components of the IL-6 receptor exist: a ligand-specific a chain 79 and a signal-transducing gp130 chain, 80 which is shared by receptors for leukocyte inhibitory
factor (LIF), oncostatin M (OSM), ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF), IL-11, and CT-1. The a chain binds IL-6. This complex then cross-links multiple gp130 chains,
initiating signal transduction. Unlike many cytokine receptors, the a chain has no intracellular signaling function in this class of receptors. The Janus kinases Jak1,
Jak2, and Tyk2 are activated, as are the transcription factors STAT1, -3, and -5, as well as other signal transduction pathways, such as the ras–mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathway. 81
Activities
IL-6 82,83 was originally characterized based on its activity in inducing Ig synthesis by activating B cells. Knockout of IL-6 84,85 showed defects in a number of
inflammatory processes, including production of acute-phase reactants and bone loss after estrogen depletion. Fever responses depend on IL-6. 86 Hematopoietic
defects were also found in IL-6 knockouts. 87
Clinical Use
Blocking IL-6 may alleviate RA and may also be effective in other autoimmune, inflammatory, and bone-erosive diseases. In mice, IL-6 is required for development of
oil-induced plasmacytomas 88 and is involved in tumor cachexia. 89 In humans, IL-6 is a growth factor for myelomas,90 suggesting further applications of IL-6 blockers.
INTERLEUKIN-7
IL-7 is produced by stromal cells and is essential for T lymphopoiesis, partly because of a survival or “trophic” effect, a partial role in VDJ recombination. This is the
pathway deficient in X-linked, severe combined immunodeficiency in humans. IL-7 also has trophic effects on mature T and B lymphocytes and is therefore potentially
useful in the clinic as an adjuvant.
Proteins
IL-7 is a 25-kD protein predicted to contain four a helices and an internal disulfide bond. 91 After secretion, it binds to extracellular matrix via a
glycosaminoglycan-binding site, 92 which could be the form encountered by developing thymocytes.
Producers
Unlike most ILs, IL-7 is produced constitutively by nonhematopoietic cells. In the thymus, the IL-7 producer resembles the cortical epithelial cell. 93 In bone marrow, the
producer is a reticular stromal cell. 94 Other sources include the intestine, 95 skin,96 and follicular dendritic cells. 94

Receptors
The primary binding chain for IL-7 is IL-7Ra. 97 The IL-7–IL-7Ra complex then recruits g c,98,99 bearing Jak3 to the complex. TSLP, a homologue of IL-7, also binds the
IL-7Ra chain but does not recruit g c and Jak3.100 Jak1 and a number of other kinases are induced, 101 including PI3-kinase. STAT3 and -5 partly mediate the nuclear
effects. Because gc is also a component of the receptors for IL-2, -4, -9, and -15, some similarities appear to exist in the signal transduction pathways.
Activities
IL-7 was discovered based on its activity in inducing proliferation of murine pro-B cells. 91 B-cell development depends on IL-7 in mice, but not in humans. 102 Normal
T-cell development requires IL-7 based on the knockout phenotypes for IL-7 103 and its receptor, 104 which show a severe block at an early stage in T-cell development.
A related block is seen in X-linked, severe combined immunodeficiency in humans, which is in g c, a component of the IL-7 receptor. This requirement for IL-7 is partly
attributed to its trophic activity on lymphoid progenitors 105 and its promotion of VDJ recombination.106 In mice, the gs lineage is particularly dependent on IL-7, perhaps
not only during thymic generation, but also for survival in the intestine and skin. Pharmacologic activity of IL-7 has been observed in mice, inducing increases in B and
T cells. 107,108 Overexpression of IL-7 in mice can induce lymphomagenesis. 109 In human skin, IL-7 may provide trophic support for the survival of lymphoma cells. 110
Clinical Use
IL-7 has not been tested clinically. Potential clinical uses of IL-7 include boosting immunity to infectious diseases or prolonging the life of lymphocytes, as in acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome. Antagonists to IL-7 might be effective in treating autoimmune diseases, blocking rejection of allografted organs, or treating lymphoma.
INTERLEUKIN-8
IL-8 induces chemotaxis and activation of neutrophils. It is one of the chemokines, a large group of chemotactic cytokines. IL-8 signals through seven transmembrane
G protein–coupled receptors that are related to other chemokine receptors.
Proteins
IL-8 111,112,113 and 114 is a 6- to 8-kD glycoprotein containing two intrachain disulfide bonds. At high concentrations, IL-8 homodimerizes via hydrogen bonding. It is
presented to neutrophils on endothelial cell surfaces. 115 IL-8 was the first to be discovered of the family of cytokines known as chemokines.116 More than 50 members
have been identified; only IL-8 has the IL terminology. IL-8 is one of a subgroup termed CXC chemokines and is linked to a group of these genes. Mice lack a close
homologue to human IL-8. It is thought that IL-8's inflammatory roles are fulfilled in mice by other chemokines using the same receptor.
Producers
Many cell types produce IL-8 after stimulation with lipopolysaccharide, IL-1, or TNF, 117 including macrophages, endothelial cells, and keratinocytes.
Receptors
Two functional IL-8 receptors exist: CXCR1 118 and CXCR2.119,120 They are both members of the seven-transmembrane family of receptors that includes rhodopsin.
These receptors also respond to other chemokines. The two receptors induce some overlapping and distinct responses. 121 Receptors are coupled to G proteins,
including Gi2a, 122 which trigger downstream events involving phospholipase C, diacylglycerol, inositol triphosphate, release of calcium from intracellular stores, RhoA,
and the ras pathway.
Activities
IL-8 induces neutrophil chemotaxis, respiratory burst, and degranulation. In rabbits, blocking IL-8 with antibodies has potent inhibitory effects on some inflammatory
processes, particularly of the lung. 123,124 and 125 Knockouts in mice cannot directly address IL-8 function because no close IL-8 homologue exists in mice. Mice lack
CXCR1. Knockout of the receptor CXCR2, however, greatly affects neutrophil attraction to inflamed peritoneum, 126 which establishes that chemokines are involved in
neutrophil accumulation in vivo. IL-8 also induces angiogenesis. 127
Clinical Use
Increased IL-8 is detected in a variety of human clinical conditions, ranging from myocardial infarction to RA, 128 and suggests potential applications for IL-8 blockers.
In rabbits, a number of studies have shown that anti–IL-8 inhibits inflammation of various tissues. Despite the numerous chemokines that exist, blocking IL-8 alone
can be sufficient.
INTERLEUKIN-9
IL-9 is related to IL-2, -4, -7, and -15 and has some overlapping activities based most likely on sharing some receptor components. It is produced by T cells and acts
on lymphocytes and mast cells. It may be involved in Hodgkin's disease and lymphoma.
Proteins
IL-9 129,130 is predicted to have an a-helical topology like IL-2, -4, -7, and -15. The human IL-9 gene is found in a cluster together with genes for IL-3, -4, -5, -9, and -13.
This does not apply to mice. Ten cysteines exist, implying extensive intrachain disulfide bonding, heavy N-linked glycosylation, and a high isoelectric point
(approximately ten).
Producers
Memory helper T cells produce IL-9 after activation. 131 This induction involves a cascade of cytokines, including IL-2, -4, and -10, eventually leading to IL-9
production. 132 Murine Th2 clones are producers. 133
Receptors
The IL-9 receptor a chain 134 is a member of the hematopoietin superfamily. In humans, the IL-9 receptor a chain is unusual because it is encoded on chromosomes X
and Y.135 Four IL-9Ra pseudogenes also exist. The receptor complex shares the g c chain136 with receptors for IL-2, -4, -7, and -15. After receptor ligation, Jak3
(g c-associated) and Jak1 (IL-9Ra–associated) increase their tyrosine kinase activity, phosphorylating the IL-9Ra chain, adaptor protein IRS-1, 137 and transcription
factors STAT1, -3, and -5. 138,139
Activities
IL-9 was discovered as a growth factor for T-cell clones 129 and independently as a growth factor for mast cell lines. 130,140 It is not clear, however, whether a normal
T-cell growth role should be ascribed to IL-9, because normal T cells have not been found to proliferate in response to it until after 10 days or so of prior in vitro
stimulation. Some transformed T cells, however, can respond to IL-9, and human T-cell leukemia–transformed T cells produce it 141; overexpression of IL-9 as a
transgene induced T-cell transformation, 142 suggesting possible autocrine function. This was also suggested for Hodgkin's disease. 143 Mast cells and eosinophils, B

lymphocytes,144 and hematopoietic stem cells 145 also respond to IL-9. Because its receptor is a member of the g c family, overlapping activities are expected to be
present with other cytokines in this group.
Clinical Use
No extensive preclinical data on IL-9 are available. The possibility that it has autocrine activity in Hodgkin's disease and T lymphomas suggests potential uses for IL-9
antagonists.
INTERLEUKIN-10
IL-10 is a powerful inhibitor of inflammatory and immune responses, partly via its inhibition of some macrophage functions. It is produced by Th2 cells. Its receptor is
related to IFN receptors.
Proteins
Human IL-10 is an 18-kD monomer with little glycosylation and two presumed intrachain disulfide bonds.
Producers
Activated Th2 cells were the originally described IL-10 producers. Other cell types, including macrophages and keratinocytes, however, also produce IL-10.
Epstein-Barr virus encodes an active IL-10 homologue. 146
Receptors and Cellular Response
The first identified component of IL-10 receptor 147,148 is related to the IFN receptors. It is expressed by many types of hematopoietic cells. In mice, a second receptor
component, CRF2-4, has been identified, 149 which is related and linked to the IFN receptors. Jak1 and Tyk2 are activated by IL-10. 150 STAT3 mediates some
downstream effects in macrophages.151
Activities
IL-10 was originally discovered and cloned 152 as an inhibitor of the ability of Th1 cells to synthesize IFN. This inhibition occurs largely via effects on
antigen-presenting cells, such as macrophages, especially by inhibiting their IL-12 production. Other macrophage functions also are inhibited, such as synthesis of
inflammatory cytokines (i.e., IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF) and phagocytosis. IL-10 knockout mice show extensive pathology, particularly in the gut, which is thought to
arise from unattenuated immune responses to gut flora. 153 Receptor knockout mice have similar pathology. 149
Clinical Use
IL-10 has been shown to inhibit some lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammatory responses in humans. 154 Clinical trials are under way in inflammatory bowel disease,
RA, thoracic-abdominal aortic surgery, acute lung injury, multiple sclerosis, psoriasis, and human immunodeficiency virus infection. 155 Evidence exists that the
Epstein-Barr virus IL-10 homologue acts as an autocrine in B lymphomas, suggesting benefit in blocking IL-10. 156,157
INTERLEUKIN-11
IL-11 is a mesenchymal cell product with activity on hematopoietic cells. IL-11 has been used to promote hematopoiesis in patients. IL-11 receptor shares the gp130
component with IL-6, LIF, OSM, CNTF, and CT-1. IL-11 is required for embryonic implantation in the uterus.
Proteins
IL-11 158 is a 19-kD protein with no intrachain disulfide bonds. IL-11 is slightly homologous to IL-6, OSM, and LIF.
Producers
IL-11 is produced by a variety of mesenchymal cells, including keratinocytes, chondrocytes, osteoblasts, fibroblasts, and bone marrow stromal cells. 159
Receptors and Cellular Response
The IL-11 receptor includes a ligand-specific a chain and gp130, which is common to IL-6, LIF, OSM, CNTF, and CT-1. Two alternative a chains exist in the mouse.
The ligand-binding chains of this family do not contribute to signaling, which is wholly performed by gp130. Thus, the intracellular cascades should be the same for all
members (gp130 signaling is discussed in Interleukin-6, earlier in this chapter). As in the IL-6 system, soluble IL-11 receptor can capture its ligand and then associate
with cell-bound gp130 and signal. 160
Activities
IL-11 was identified based on promoting growth of a plasmacytoma line. 158,159 It stimulates multilineage hematopoiesis when administered to mice and humans and is
particularly effective in stimulating thrombopoiesis by inducing production of megakaryocytes. Knockout of the major receptor did not show a requirement in
hematopoiesis 161 but revealed an IL-11 requirement in the uterine response to implantation. 162
Clinical Use
Trials performed in breast cancer patients show that IL-11 can significantly restore suppressed hematopoiesis and alleviate thrombocytopenia induced by
chemotherapy.163 In mice, IL-11 also protects intestinal cells from damage induced by chemotherapy and radiotherapy. 164
INTERLEUKIN-12
IL-12 is produced by antigen-presenting cells. IL-12 promotes Th1 cell development and IFN production. It is required for development of some types of autoimmunity
in mice.
Proteins
IL-12 165,166 and 167 is a heterodimer consisting of disulfide-linked 35-kD and 40-kD subunits encoded by distinct genes. Both subunits are glycosylated and have
intrachain disulfide bonds. Homodimers of p40 also are observed 168 and, in mice, have receptor-antagonist activity. This does not apply to humans.
Producers
Macrophages, B lymphocytes, and dendritic cells are major producers of IL-12. In macrophages, this synthesis is stimulated by microbial products and during contact
with T cells via CD40L-CD40 interaction. 169 The two IL-12 chains associate intracellularly before secretion. The p35 subunit is expressed by a much wider range of

cell types than the p40 subunit. 166,170
Receptors and Cellular Response
Two components comprise the IL-12 receptor, the b1 and b2 chains. 171,172 Th2 cells fail to respond to IL-12 because they lack the b2 chain. 173 Many protein kinases
are triggered by the IL-12 receptor, including the Janus kinases tyk2 and Jak2, 174 which are associated with the b1 and b2 chains, respectively. 175 STAT3, STAT4,
and IRF-1 are implicated in gene induction by IL-12. 176,177
Activities
IL-12 was discovered as one factor promoting CTLs and as an independent factor for promoting NK cells. These activities include proliferation, differentiation, and
cytokine secretion, especially of IFN. The IFN-g–inducing activity of IL-12 is as a cofactor, such as with IL-18 (see Interleukin-18, later in this chapter). IL-12 knockout
mice178 showed greatly suppressed IFN production and revealed a requirement for IL-12 in development of Th1 cells in some settings but not in others. 179
Clinical Use
IL-12 has been tested in cancer patients in phase 1 trials with no major toxicity other than a decrease in circulating lymphocytes, which, nevertheless, showed
increased activity. 180 In preclinical studies, antitumor activity of IL-12 was detected, 181 and increased effects were seen in combination with a pulse of IL-2. 182 In mice,
IL-12 is a required component of some types of autoimmunity in tissues, including the bowel, joint, eye, pancreas, and central nervous system. 183
INTERLEUKIN-13
IL-13 is a T-cell product closely related to IL-4 and shares a receptor component. It elicits a subset of IL-4 responses and is implicated in Th2 cell generation and IgE
synthesis. IL-13 is antiinflammatory.
Proteins
IL-13 184 is a 12-kD protein, and it is structurally related to IL-4, although the homology is low. 185,186 The gene is clustered together with IL-3, -4, -5, and -9.
Producers
IL-13 is expressed in Th2 cells after activation by antigen-MHC complexes and costimulators on the surface of antigen-presenting cells. Unlike IL-4, IL-13 expression
is not strictly repressed in Th1 cells. IL-13 also is produced by dendritic cells.
Receptors and Cellular Response
The IL-13 receptor is comprised of IL-13Ra together with IL-4Ra. The same receptor complex also responds to IL-4. Two homologous IL-13Ra chains exist with
different affinities for IL-13 in the absence of IL-4Ra: a high-affinity a2 chain 187 and a low-affinity a1 chain. 188 Receptors are expressed on monocytes, macrophages,
eosinophils, basophils, mast cells, keratinocytes, and endothelial cells. Human B cells express the receptor, whereas mouse B cells do not. T cells have not been
found to express receptors or respond to IL-13. Jak1 and Tyk2 are activated by receptor ligation. Unlike IL-4, Jak3 is not activated, 189 because it is associated with g c,
which is not part of this receptor complex. STAT6 is phosphorylated and accounts for one set of responses, whereas IRS-2 is phosphorylated and initiates other
second-messenger pathways.
Activities
Knockout of IL-13190 revealed a requirement in Th2 development, which is perhaps indirect given the lack of receptors on T cells. IL-13 induces a subset of IL-4
effects, including effects on human B cells and macrophages, but not T cells. No apparently unique IL-13 effects have been noted. IL-13 activities include inducing
IgE synthesis in human B cells. Whereas an IL-4 requirement for B cells to produce IgE was verified by IL-4 knockout, the same logic cannot be applied to IL-13
because mouse B cells do not express IL-13 receptors and do not respond to IL-13. Although IL-13 knockout did reduce IgE production, this may have occurred
indirectly via decreased Th2 and IL-4 production. IL-13 184 is a potent inhibitor of inflammatory product synthesis by macrophages in vitro and an effective
antiinflammatory in vivo; it can also induce monocytes to differentiate into dendritic cells.
Clinical Use
The induction of IgE synthesis implicates blocking the IL-13 pathway as a potential target in atopy. Other applications are suggested by IL-13 inhibiting inflammatory
processes in mice.
INTERLEUKIN-14
Difficulties have occurred in reproducing the original observations regarding IL-14 and are therefore not discussed.
INTERLEUKIN-15
IL-15 resembles IL-2 in its activities on T cells and shares some receptor components with IL-2. It is essential for NK cell development. Unlike IL-2, the IL-15 gene is
expressed by many cell types, but little protein is produced.
Proteins
IL-15 191,192 and 193 is a 15-kD glycoprotein with two internal disulfide bonds. IL-15 is predicted to fold into a four-part a helix structure like IL-2 and IL-4. It is genetically
linked to IL-4, -5, and -9.
Producers
Unlike most of the ILs, many cell types constitutively transcribe the IL-15 gene. However, considerable constraints on translation imposed by the 5' and signal peptide
region of the message exist. 194
Receptors and Cellular Response
The IL-15 receptor shares the b and g c chains with the IL-2 receptor 195 but uses its own unique a chain that is expressed on more cell types than the IL-2Ra chain. 196
Mast cells appear to have a different receptor. 197 Jak1 and -3, and STAT3 and -5 are activated by the receptor in T cells, whereas Jak2 and STAT5 are activated in
mast cells.
Activities
IL-15 was discovered as a T-lymphocyte growth factor activity. NK cell development can be induced by IL-15. 198 The knockout of IL-15Ra verified its requirement for
NK development.199 Mast cells also respond to IL-15, as do mature T and B lymphocytes, which are also deficient in knockouts.

Clinical Use
IL-15 has not been tested clinically. It may find use in boosting innate or T-cell immunity, or in ex vivo expansion of NK and T cells before reinfusion. Antagonists
could be immunosuppressive.
INTERLEUKIN-16
IL-16 is a product of CD8 T cells that has activities on CD4 cells, including chemotaxis. It is implicated in airway inflammation in asthma.
Proteins
IL-16 200,201 and 203 is the C-terminal 17-kD peptide cleaved from a larger nonglycosylated precursor by caspase 3. 203 IL-16 lacks a typical signal peptide and is therefore
released from cells by an atypical process. It is not homologous or linked to other cytokines, has an unusual protein structure with a PDZ domain otherwise found in
intracellular proteins, and aggregates in solution. 204
Producers
IL-16 is constitutively transcribed and translated by CD8 T cells. Release of the active form is then induced by stimuli, such as T-cell antigen cross-linking, histamine,
and serotonin. 205 Other producers include eosinophils 206 and airway epithelial cells. 207
Receptors and Cellular Response
IL-16 binds to CD4, which it appears to cross-link, inducing signaling. 208 The second messenger pathway does not require lck, which is associated with CD4.
Implications of PI3-kinase and protein kinase C involvement exist.
Activities
IL-16 was discovered based on chemotactic activity for CD4 T cells. 200,201 and 203 It is also chemotactic for monocytes and eosinophils. IL-16 induces G 0 to G1 transition
in CD4 T cells, but not entry into S phase, which can be induced by IL-2. IL-16 inhibits the activation of T cells induced by the T-cell receptor, perhaps by sterically
inhibiting CD4 interaction with class II MHC. 209 It inhibits human immunodeficiency virus replication, not through competing with entry via CD4, but through the human
immunodeficiency virus promoter. 210
Clinical Use
IL-16 has been implicated as the attractant for CD4 T cells in asthmatic inflammation of airways in humans, 202 suggesting uses for antagonists. It could possibly be
used to induce T-cell blast transformation.
INTERLEUKIN-17
IL-17 is a product of memory T cells, with inflammatory, immunologic, and hematopoietic activities. IL-17 and its receptor bear little resemblance to other genes,
although they do bear resemblance to the IL-17 homologue in a herpesvirus.
Proteins
IL-17 211,212 and 213 is a 17-kD peptide that can dimerize via disulfide bridges. 214
Producers
IL-17 is produced by activated T cells, particularly the memory CD4 subset. 214 The gene was captured by Herpesvirus saimiri, whose product is biologically active.
Receptors and Cellular Response
One IL-17 receptor chain has been identified that bears remarkably little resemblance to other receptor types and results in nuclear factor kB activation. 215 This
receptor chain is expressed on many different cell types.
Activities
IL-17 was discovered as a complementary DNA (cDNA) of unknown function, homologous to a sequence in a herpesvirus also of unknown function. 211 It has been
shown to trigger several types of responses in cells, including IL-6 and IL-8 induction in fibroblasts. 214,215 It also has induced production of hemopoietic cytokines and
neutrophils in bone marrow cultures and in vivo.214 Blocking IL-17 suppresses T-cell proliferative responses. 215 This result may partly be because IL-17 promotes
dendritic cell differentiation. This, in turn, may explain how blocking IL-17 prolonged allografts in mice. 216 Preliminary IL-17 receptor knockout data have not shown
gross abnormalities. 217
Clinical Use
IL-17 appears to promote immune and inflammatory responses. Thus, blocking its activity in humans could be immunosuppressive, as it is in mice.
INTERLEUKIN-18
IL-18 was discovered based on its induction of IFN-g synthesis. Its own structure and that of its receptor system resemble IL-1. It promotes Th1 activities, inhibits Th2
activities, and induces macrophages to produce inflammatory cytokines.
Protein
IL-18 218,219 is a member of the IL-1 family. Like IL-1b, IL-18 is synthesized as a biologically inactive proform, which is cleaved by caspase 1, generating the active
mature form.220,221
Producers
Kupffer cells were the source that led to the cloning of murine IL-18. Blood and tissue macrophages are avid producers, but unlike most cytokines, IL-18 production
and release do not require stimulation of the macrophage. 222 Keratinocytes also produce IL-18 constitutively.
Receptors and Cellular Response
The organization of the cellular receptors for IL-18 is remarkably similar to that of IL-1. IL-18 initially associates with a binding chain, 223,224 which is encoded near IL-1

receptor225; this recruits a second signaling chain. 226 As with IL-1, a “decoy” receptor exists. 227 The active IL-18 receptor complex recruits the same kinase (IRAK) and
initiates the TRAF6 pathway, as does IL-1. 228 MyD88 serves as an adaptor that links IRAK to the IL-18 and IL-1 receptor complex. 14 The IL-18 receptor is expressed
on Th1 cells, but not on Th2 cells. Receptor expression is induced by IL-12 on both T and B cells. 229
Activities
IL-18 was discovered based on its activity in inducing IFN-g production. It has been verified in IL-18 knockout mice 230 that IFN-g production is greatly reduced after
inflammatory stimuli, although polyclonal T-cell activation induces IFN-g normally. This is probably explained by the observations that IL-18 primarily participates in
IFN-g induction as a cofactor together with IL-12; this synergy is partly based on IL-12 inducing expression of the IL-18 receptor. IL-18 promotes Th1 activities and
inhibits Th2 activities via IFN-g, such as IgE induction. IL-18 induces macrophages to synthesize secondary inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1, IL-6, and
chemokines.
Clinical Use
Possible clinical uses based on animal studies include giving IL-18 to promote IFN-g production during viral or mycobacterial infections. IL-18 may combat allergy or
asthma. Antagonizing IL-18 (i.e., by using the decoy receptor) could have antiinflammatory uses.

TUMOR ANTIGENS
IMMUNE RESPONSE TO TUMORS IN RODENTS
Early attempts to identify tumor antigens in mouse models by immunizing mice with spontaneous or carcinogen-induced tumors were confused by the immune
reactions that arose to normal transplantation antigens present on tumors. The development of inbred mouse strains made it possible to differentiate tumor antigens
from normal histocompatibility antigens and led to the first demonstrations that tumors did contain unique tumor-associated antigens on their surface.
In 1943, Gross231 demonstrated that the intradermal immunization of inbred mice against a methylcholanthrene-induced sarcoma could result in immunization of that
mouse against subsequent tumor challenge. These findings encouraged studies of the nature of the immune response to transplantable tumors in inbred mice, which
demonstrated that tumor-specific antigens did exist in a variety of murine tumors. 232,233,234,235,236 and 237 These tumor antigens could not be detected in the normal tissues
of mice, as demonstrated by studies showing that immunization with tumor cells did not immunize mice against normal tissue grafts from the mouse donating the
tumor.234 Immunity to tumor antigens existed in the same mice in which the tumors had originated, demonstrating that the tumor antigens were not the result of minor
allogeneic differences between the transplantable tumor and the host. 235 Tumor antigens were found on a variety of tumors induced with chemical or physical
carcinogens and on spontaneous tumors. 238,239,240,241,242,243,244,245,246,247,248 and 249
Tumors induced by chemical carcinogens appear to have limited cross-reactivity, as evidenced by immunization-challenge experiments: Even two sarcomas induced
in the same mouse do not cross-react.233,243,244 and 245,276 The uniqueness of tumor antigens on chemically induced tumors contrasts with the shared antigens that are
often found on virally induced tumors. 246,247 and 248 The sharing of antigens on tumors induced by RNA and DNA viruses has facilitated the study of the biologic and
molecular nature of these antigens. For example, studies performed with simian virus 40–induced tumors identified the large T antigen, which is expressed primarily in
the nucleus and is necessary to maintain the malignant phenotype of these tumor cells. 249,250 Similarly, the polyomavirus has a middle T antigen and small T antigen
localized in the nucleus that can be detected by serologic tests. Boon and coworkers 251 isolated the genes that code for murine tumor-associated antigens induced by
chemical mutagenesis. The isolated genes from several murine tumors bear little homology with one another or with other known genes.
In most animal studies of tumor immunity, tumor antigens are detected in experiments in which animals are immunized and then challenged with the same
transplantable tumor. Lack of growth of a tumor challenge after immunization is taken as evidence for the existence of tumor antigens. In vitro assays involving
reactivity of the tumor cell with antibodies or immune cells can also provide evidence for the existence of tumor antigens. Although tumors induced by high doses of
chemical carcinogens or by viruses often exhibit high levels of immunogenicity in mice, it has been thought that spontaneous murine cancers are far less
immunogenic. 252,253 The ability to detect tumor-associated antigens depends on the method used, and as more sensitive methods for detecting tumor antigens are
developed, unsuspected antigens are likely to be observed.
A significant difference exists in the nature of the antigens recognized by humoral and cellular detection systems. Humoral antibodies detect specific epitopes on
antigenic molecules, and it is the interaction of these molecules with the variable region of the antibody that produces recognition. In contrast, antigens recognized by
T-cell receptors recognize processed peptides on the surface of the tumor cell or on an antigen-presenting cell in conjunction with MHC molecules. CD4+
lymphocytes recognize small peptides bound to MHC class II molecules, and CD8+ cells recognize peptides attached to class I molecules. Monoclonal antibodies are
not capable of detecting the small processed peptides on MHC molecules on the cell surface, and the nature of the antigens recognized by humoral and cellular
immune responses are therefore very different.
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) provide a valuable reagent for detecting cellular immune responses to tumor antigens, revealing unique tumor antigens on a
variety of methylcholanthrene-induced sarcomas in inbred mice. 254,255,256,257 and 258 TILs can recognize tumor antigens based on direct lysis of tumor cells or by the
specific release of cytokines such as IFN-g, GM-CSF, or TNF-a when the TILs are cocultured with the specific tumor. These TILs are derived from animals bearing
established tumors and may differ from the cellular immune responses that are detected in animals that are highly immunized against the tumor as a result of artificial
manipulations.
The detection of tumor antigens on human cancers presents unique problems because of the inability to use the immunization-challenge experiments, which have so
effectively demonstrated tumor antigens on animal tumors. Attempts to detect human tumor antigens have relied almost exclusively on the availability of in vitro
assays that could detect humoral or cellular immune responses.
IDENTIFICATION OF HUMAN CANCER ANTIGENS RESTRICTED BY CLASS I MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX AND RECOGNIZED BY CD8+ T
CELLS
Attempts to apply the insights gained from increasing knowledge of cellular immunology to the development of effective immunotherapies for patients with cancer fall
into three main areas: (1) The identification of antigens on human cancers that are capable of mediating immune responses, (2) the development of techniques for
effective immunization of humans using tumor antigens, (3) and overcoming obstacles that enable the tumor to escape antitumor immune reactions. Significant
progress has been made in the identification of human tumor antigens, and extensive efforts to develop effective means of immunizing patients have begun. Although
substantial progress has been made, the clinical impact of these advances is still limited.
Much experimental evidence points to the importance of cellular immune reactions in mediating the regression of established tumors. Thus, considerable effort has
been devoted to identifying human cancer antigens that elicit cellular immune responses. Both class I and class II restricted antigens, mediated by CD8+ and CD4+
lymphocytes, respectively, appear to be important in mediating immune destruction.
Several techniques for cloning tumor antigens recognized by CD8+ cells and presented on MHC class I have been developed and are presented in Table 18-4. Most
class I–restricted antigens have been identified by screening cDNA libraries from tumor using MHC class I–restricted T cells to identify the relevant transfectants. 259,260
and 261
Alternatively, peptides have been eluted from tumor cells, pulsed onto target cells bearing the appropriate MHC class I antigen, and then tested by using the
MHC class I–restricted T cells to identify the appropriate peptide fractions. 262 By obtaining partial sequences from cDNA libraries or from eluted peptides, it has been
possible to identify a variety of class I–restricted tumor antigens.

TABLE 18-4. Techniques for Cloning Tumor Antigens Recognized by CD8+ Cells and Presented on Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) Class I

Both of these approaches, however, depend on the ability to generate T cells capable of recognizing antigens presented on the surface of tumor cells. It is often
difficult to generate these T cells in vitro, and thus a third approach, commonly referred to as reverse immunology, has been used. This approach attempts to
determine whether candidate antigens, presumed to have a high likelihood of being tumor antigens based on their biologic characteristics, are actually presented on
tumor cells. Class I–restricted T cells that work against these candidate antigens are raised by in vitro sensitization techniques. A variety of techniques have been
developed, including the use of protein-pulsed or transfected antigen-presenting cells, or in vitro sensitization against synthetic peptides from the candidate antigen. If
MHC class I–restricted T cells can be raised by these in vitro sensitization techniques, then the T cells are tested for the ability to recognize tumor cells and thus
confirm the ability of these putative antigens to act as immunotherapeutic targets.
By making use of these approaches, a variety of cancer antigens restricted by MHC class I and recognized by CD8+ T cells have been derived ( Table 18-5). The first
cancer antigens to be described were shared cancer-testes antigens. 263 These antigens are present on a subset of patients with a variety of tumor types and appear
to be expressed on cells in the testis but not on other normal cells. Several families of these cancer-testes antigens have been described and are presented in Table
18-6.264

TABLE 18-5. Cancer Antigens Restricted by Class I Major Histocompatibility Complex and Recognized by CD8+ T Cells

TABLE 18-6. Cancer-Testis Antigens

Another major class of tumor antigens are the shared melanocyte-differentiation antigens (see Table 18-5). These antigens are present on melanomas as well as on
normal melanocytes, the cells of origin of melanomas. At least six different shared melanocyte differentiation antigens have been described, including MART-1, 265,266
gp100,267 tyrosinase, 268,269 TRP1,270 TRP2,271 and MC1R.272 The identification of these differentiation antigens on melanomas has led to the conjecture that
differentiation antigens unique to other tissues might also be expressed on tumors arising from those tissues and thus serve as immunotherapeutic targets. Thus,
differentiation antigens present on the epithelial cells of a variety of organs not essential for life, such as testis, ovary, prostate, breast, and thyroid, might also serve
as tumor antigens.
Several tumor antigens such as beta-catenin, 273 CDK4,274 MUM1,275 caspase 8,276 and KIA,277 have been described and result from individual base mutations that give
rise to amino acid differences. These mutated proteins thus represent antigens expressed only on cancer cells and not normal cells. Because each of these antigens
is unique to the individual patient bearing the mutation, its use in the development of generally applicable cancer vaccines is limited.
Several unusual antigens with selective expression on cancer cells have been identified. Messenger RNA–encoding antigens, such as p15, 278 PRAME,279 and
SART-1,280 are presented as antigens in a variety of tissues, but the encoded proteins do not appear to be present on cells other than cancers.
Several viral epitopes are known to be expressed on tumors caused by these viruses. Examples in this category include antigens from the Epstein-Barr virus, 281,282
human T-cell leukemia virus type I, 283 the hepatitis B virus, 284 and the E6 and E7 proteins from human papillomavirus-16. Several other normal or mutant proteins that
are overexpressed in epithelial cells or represent mutated oncoproteins or fusion proteins have been hypothesized to be capable of acting as tumor antigens,
although convincing evidence to support this hypothesis is lacking.
CANCER ANTIGENS RESTRICTED BY CLASS II MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX AND RECOGNIZED BY CD4+ T CELLS
Three general techniques for identifying MHC class II–restricted antigens recognized by CD4+ T cells are presented in Table 18-7. The testing of known class
I–restricted antigens for the presence of class II–presented epitopes resulted in the identification of class II–restricted epitopes on tyrosinase 285 and gp100286
(Touloukian et al., unpublished data). CD4+ T cells can recognize antigen-presenting cells pulsed with tumor lysates or proteins. It has thus been possible to purify
proteins from tumor cell lysates that can elicit CD4 reactivity; the triosephosphate isomerase antigen was identified using this technique. 287 A general technique for the
identification of class II antigens present on cancers as well as on cells from a variety of other diseases has been described. 288 This technique involves the screening
of cDNA libraries transfected into antigen-presenting cells engineered to express the appropriate class II a and b molecules, the DMA and DMB molecules required
for antigen processing as well as invariant chain. This technique was based on the unique aspects of the presentation of class II antigens and the inability of normal

cytoplasmic proteins to be presented in the class II pathway. Using this genetic approach, several antigens, such as the CDC27 protein 30 and a mutated fusion
protein, were identified 289 (Table 18-8).

TABLE 18-7. Techniques for Cloning Tumor Antigens Recognized by CD4+ Cells and Presented on Major Histocompatibility Complex Class II

TABLE 18-8. Cancer Antigens Restricted by Class II Major Histocompatibility Complex and Recognized by CD4+ Tumor-Infiltrating Lymphocytes

HUMAN CANCER ANTIGENS: GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Tumor antigens can be derived from a variety of sources, including normal differentiation antigens, normal nonmutated antigens expressed on tumors and germ cells,
intronic sequences, single base mutations, chromosomal rearrangements, aberrant processing, or alternative open reading frames of normal genes ( Table 18-9).
Because of the large number of mutations and chromosomal abnormalities present in cancer cells, it appears likely that many, if not all, cancers contain unique
sequences capable of being recognized by human immune reactions. In support of this hypothesis are the examples that exist of individual patients who develop
immune reactions against multiple different antigens present on their tumor. Two examples of this are shown in Table 18-10. TIL 586 from patient B.C. developed
HLA-A31–restricted reactivity against four different epitopes, including one from an alternative open reading frame of TRP1, from the normal open reading frame of
TRP2, and from both the normal and alternative open reading frames of the NY-ESO-1 antigen. 271,290,291 Similarly, patient M.G., whose tumors gave rise to TIL 888
and 1290, developed HLA-A24–restricted epitopes from four completely different proteins, including tyrosinase, p15, b-catenin, and gp100. 269,273,278,292

TABLE 18-9. Sources of Human Tumor Antigens

TABLE 18-10. A Single Patient Can Develop Reactivity against Multiple Epitopes on Different Antigens

Of importance for the general application of tumor antigens in human immunization is the ability of individual tumor antigens to present immune epitopes on a variety
of HLA antigens (Table 18-11). Thus, the gp100 molecule has peptide epitopes that are presented on HLA A2, A3, A24, CDW8, and DR4. 286,292,293,294 and 295 Similarly,
tyrosinase has known epitopes presented on HLA A1, A2, A24, 285,296,297 and 298 DRB1*0401, DRB1*1501, and B*4402. Thus, individual antigens can potentially be
applicable to the immunization of a majority of patients with different HLA types.

TABLE 18-11. A Single Cancer Antigen Can Present Peptides on Multiple Class I and Class II Major Histocompatibility Complex Types

ANTIBODIES FOR DETECTING TUMOR ANTIGENS
Igs in all species have the same basic structure and consist of two polypeptide chains: the light chain, with a molecular weight of approximately 23,000, and the heavy
chain, with a molecular weight of 55,000 to 70,000 (reviewed in Chapter 4).
Five different classes of Igs have been identified based on structural differences within the heavy-chain constant regions: IgM, IgG, IgA, IgD, and IgE. IgG constitutes
the predominant Ig fraction in sera, and most antibody activity is associated with IgG antibodies. IgM constitutes approximately 5% to 10% of serum Igs and is the
largest of the Ig molecules. IgA is the predominant Ig in exocrine secretions, and IgE Igs are involved in allergic reactions. The exact function of IgD Igs is unknown.
Kohler and Milstein 299 were the first to demonstrate that somatic cells could be fused with murine myelomas and that monoclonal antibodies with unique specificities
could be produced. A vast array of monoclonal antibodies have now been produced against a wide variety of human tumor-associated antigens (reviewed in Chapter
20.5). Most hybridoma cell lines can produce between 1 and 10 µg of Ig per 1 mL in culture, and ascites fluids can produce between 1 and 10 mg of Ig per 1 mL. In
the generation of most monoclonal antibodies, mice are immunized against a specific antigen, and their cells are fused with the mouse myeloma cell. It is possible,
however, to use human lymph node or peripheral blood cells for fusion with human myelomas. These human monoclonal antibodies may be able to identify antigens
that are not immunogenic in the mouse and are less immunogenic in humans than murine monoclonal antibodies. It is possible to make recombinant chimeric
monoclonal antibodies that contain the variable region of murine origin and the constant region of human origin.
Virtually all monoclonal antibodies have at least some reactivity with normal tissues, although the degree of cross-reactivity can be minimal. The potential clinical
applications of monoclonal antibodies are summarized in Table 18-12 and Chapter 20.5.

TABLE 18-12. Clinical Applications of Monoclonal Antibodies (MoAbs)

IMMUNOTHERAPY
Strategies for the immunotherapy of cancer can be divided into active and passive approaches ( Table 18-13). Active immunotherapy refers to the immunization of the
tumor-bearing host with materials designed to elicit an immune reaction capable of eliminating or retarding tumor growth. Active immunotherapy can be subdivided
into nonspecific or specific immunization. Most early attempts at the immunotherapy of cancer used nonspecific active approaches to immune stimulation with
adjuvants such as bacillus Calmette-Guérin, Corynebacterium parvum, and levamisole. These early approaches were almost uniformly unsuccessful in humans and
have largely been abandoned.

TABLE 18-13. Classification of Cancer Immunotherapies

The advent of recombinant cytokines provided a more selective means for stimulating the immune system. Treatment with the IFNs or with IL-2 is a form of nonspecific
active immunotherapy, although the selective action of these purified lymphokines provides a greater ability to manipulate immune responses than was previously
possible.
INTERLEUKIN-2
Major progress in immunotherapy has resulted from the identification of the cytokine IL-2 that enabled the ex vivo growth of human T lymphocytes.19 The identification
of the gene encoding IL-2, 20 the biologic characterization of recombinant IL-2, 300 increasing information about the dominant role of IL-2 in regulating immune
reactions, and extensive studies of IL-2 administration to tumor-bearing mice 301 led to studies of the clinical use of this molecule in patients with advanced cancer (see
Chapter 20.2). IL-2 is now in common use for the treatment of patients with metastatic melanoma and renal cancer and has been instrumental for the conduct of in
vitro studies identifying human cancer antigens. IL-2 also has been used as an adjuvant for in vivo immunization protocols.

The best evidence that manipulation of the human immune system can result in the regression of advanced cancer in patients resulted from clinical studies in which
high-dose bolus IL-2 was administered to patients with metastatic melanoma and metastatic renal cancer. 5 IL-2 has no direct impact on cancer cells, and all of its
effects result from its ability to stimulate in vivo immune reactions. In the National Cancer Institute's Surgery Branch, 409 consecutive patients with either advanced
melanoma (n = 182) or renal cancer (n = 227) were treated with high-dose bolus IL-2 alone at a dose of 720,000 IU/kg every 8 hours. 30 The results of the treatment
are shown in Table 18-14 and Table 18-15. Seven percent of patients with melanoma underwent a complete response, and 9% underwent a partial response. In
patients with renal cancer the complete and partial response rates were 9% and 10%, respectively. Complete responses were most often durable. Of 12 patients with
metastatic melanoma who achieved a complete response, only two have recurred, with the remainder having ongoing complete responses of between 95 and 173
months. Of 21 patients with metastatic renal cell cancer who achieved a complete regression, four have recurred and 17 have ongoing responses between 46 and
159 months. The lack of recurrences after 5 years and the follow-up of several patients beyond 10 years indicate that these patients have probably been cured by the
administration of high-dose IL-2 ( Fig. 18-1).

TABLE 18-14. Response of Patients with Metastatic Cancer Treated with High-Dose Bolus Interleukin-2

TABLE 18-15. Duration of Response in Patients with Metastatic Cancer Treated with High-Dose Bolus Interleukin-2

FIGURE 18-1. Complete response to treatment with high-dose interleukin-2, with deaths due to other causes censored.

As experience with the use of IL-2 increased, improved methods for managing the side effects of its administration were developed, and the safety of IL-2
administration has improved dramatically. 302 A consecutive series of 1241 metastatic cancer patients who received 720,000 IU/kg IL-2 every 8 hours by intravenous
bolus infusion, either alone or in conjunction with other treatments, were evaluated for the incidence of treatment-related toxicities. 303 Significant decreases in the
incidence of grade III and IV toxicities were found as experience with the use of IL-2 increased over the 12 years of this study. Although a 1% to 3% treatment-related
mortality was seen in the first 4 years of the administration of IL-2, no treatment-related deaths were reported in this series between May 1989 and January 1997,
including the treatment of 809 consecutive patients. These trends suggested that high-dose IL-2 could be safety administered to metastatic cancer patients when
appropriate treatment guidelines were used and that the administration of IL-2 could result in durable responses in a small subset of patients with metastatic
melanoma and metastatic kidney cancer.

INTERFERONS
The IFNs are a family of proteins that are produced by cells in response to viral infection or stimulation with double-stranded RNA, antigens, or mitogens. The IFNs
can interfere with subsequent viral challenge, and they have many immunomodulatory and antiproliferative effects (see Chapter 20.1).
More than 20 closely related genes coding for IFN-a exist, and they have approximately 80% to 85% amino acid homology with one another. IFN-b is quite similar in
many of its properties to IFN-a. The gene for IFN-g has three introns, and there are no introns in the genes that code for IFN-a and IFN-b. IFN-a and IFN-b are stable
to pH 2, although IFN-g is labile at this pH. IFN-b and IFN-g are glycosylated, but most IFN-a species are not.
IFN-a can be produced by a variety of cells, including macrophages and lymphocytes. IFN-b is produced mainly by fibroblasts and epithelial cells. IFN-g can be
produced by a variety of lymphocyte subtypes, such as CD4+ or CD8+ cells, NK cells, and LAK cells. Secretion of IFN-g occurs after stimulation by mitogens or
antigens. IFNs have a variety of biologic properties, including immunomodulatory activities, antiviral activities, the ability to interfere with cell proliferation, inhibition of
angiogenesis, regulation of differentiation, and enhancement of the expression of a variety of cell surface antigens. Although the direct antiproliferative activity of the
IFNs is thought to play a major role in the antitumor effects of these compounds, other actions of the IFNs may also be important.
The IFNs have antitumor activity against a variety of tumor types, including hairy cell leukemia, chronic myelogenous leukemia, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, and
Kaposi's sarcoma.
The response rates of various solid tumors and hematologic malignancies to treatment with IFN-a are summarized in Table 18-16. IFN-a and IFN-b, but not IFN-g,
demonstrate direct antitumor activity. The side effects associated with IFN therapy include flu-like symptoms, rashes, gastrointestinal complaints, hepatic dysfunction,

neurologic complaints, and chronic fatigue, and they are highly dose and schedule dependent.

TABLE 18-16. Response of Various Cancers to Interferon-a

DEVELOPMENT OF APPROACHES TO THE IMMUNIZATION OF HUMANS AGAINST CANCER ANTIGENS
Although many human cancer antigens have now been identified, relatively little is known about the best methods for successful immunization of patients against
these antigens. The number of variables involved in determining optimal methods of immunization of humans presents a daunting challenge and are shown in Table
18-17.

TABLE 18-17. Variables Involved in the Immunization of Humans against Cancer Antigens

A variety of cancer antigens are available. Multiple vectors can be used to provide immunization, including peptides, proteins, DNA, and a variety of recombinant
viruses such as adenovirus, fowlpox virus, and vaccinia virus. When using these immunizing vectors, the vehicle can be important as well. It is possible to inject these
vectors in saline and in a variety of adjuvants, such as incomplete Freund's adjuvant, QS21, or others. Similarly, these antigens can be presented on professional
antigen-presenting cells, such as mature dendritic cells. The route of immunization is also a variable that must be considered (e.g., intradermal, subcutaneous,
intramuscular, or intravenous injection). Immune adjuvants may increase the immune response to these immunogens, and studies exploring the use of IL-2, IL-7,
IL-10, and IL-12 have been performed. Because of the myriad of possibilities for immunization of humans, substantial effort has been placed on elucidation in animal
models of the general principles for vaccination against cancer antigens. Four general principles resulting from these murine studies are presented in Table 18-18 and
have guided the work in humans. A detailed discussion of cancer vaccines is presented in Chapter 63.1 and Chapter 63.2.

TABLE 18-18. General Principles for Human Vaccination against Cancer Antigens Based on Animal Models

It is possible to immunize cancer patients against antigens present on their autologous cancers and raise high levels of circulating immune lymphocytes. 304,305 and 306
An example of one such series of experiments in which 11 patients with metastatic melanoma were immunized with a modification of the gp100:209–217 epitope, from
the gp100 melanoma antigens, which was modified with a methionine substitution in the 210 position, is shown in Table 18-19.306 The introduction of this amino acid
modification greatly increased the binding of this peptide to the HLA-A2 molecule and thus appeared to increase both its in vitro and in vivo immunogenicity.307
Despite the ability to reproducibly generate immune reactions against this tumor epitope, little antitumor effect was seen unless IL-2 was simultaneously injected. In
pilot human trials, it appeared that the response rate to immunization with the gp100 209–217 (210M) epitope plus the administration of IL-2 resulted in response
rates almost three times greater than that due to IL-2 alone. 308 However, the confirmation of this result will require evaluation in prospective randomized trials in which
patients are treated with either IL-2 alone or IL-2 plus the peptide immunogen.

TABLE 18-19. Reactivity of Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells from Patients Immunized with 209-2M Peptide in IFA

ADOPTIVE IMMUNOTHERAPY
Adoptive immunotherapy—the transfer to the tumor-bearing host of cells with antitumor activity—has substantial therapeutic attractiveness as an approach to treating
human cancer.308,309,310 and 311 Early cell-transfer experiments in animals demonstrated that the cellular arm of the immune response is crucial in mediating the rejection
of allogeneic grafts and syngeneic tumors. In most experimental systems, the transfer of immune cells, but not of antibody directed against cellular antigens, produces
immunity to tissue transplantations.
The major obstacle to the development of successful adoptive immunotherapies for the treatment of cancer in humans has been the inability to develop immune cells
with specific reactivity for human tumors that could be obtained in large enough numbers for transfer to tumor-bearing patients. However, several new approaches
have been developed for generating human cells with reactivity to tumor.
Beginning in 1980, Rosenberg and colleagues 312,313 and 314 described a technique for generating lymphoid cells from mice and humans that were capable of lysing fresh
tumor cells but not normal cells. The incubation of resting murine splenocytes or human peripheral blood lymphocytes with IL-2 for 3 to 4 days generates LAK cells
that can lyse fresh tumor cells.
The characteristics of LAK cells have been extensively studied. 314,315 and 316 These cells represent a lytic population distinct from NK cells or CTLs, and their phenotypic
surface markers are characteristic of non–MHC-restricted killer cells. LAK cells can be CD3+ or CD3–, are nonadherent, and bear NK-like markers such as CD16 and
CD56. The nature of the determinants recognized on fresh tumor targets by LAK cells is unknown, although the determinants appear to be broadly expressed on fresh
and cultured tumor cells and in cultured normal cells. Fresh normal cells do not appear to bear cell surface determinants recognized by LAK cells.
After the description of the LAK cell phenomenon, animal studies evaluated the use of LAK cells in the adoptive immunotherapy of established tumors. These studies
demonstrated that the adoptive transfer of LAK cells in conjunction with IL-2 could mediate the regression of established pulmonary, hepatic, and subdermal
metastases in a variety of animal models. 317,318 IL-2 stimulated in vivo expansion of LAK cells with maintenance of cellular function. 319
Based on these in vitro studies and animal models, clinical protocols were developed for the systemic administration of LAK cells plus IL-2 to patients with advanced
cancer. 309 Results from a prospective randomized trial in the National Cancer Institute's Surgery Branch comparing treatment of patients with metastatic melanoma or
renal cancer using either IL-2 or LAK cells plus IL-2 revealed no difference in survival.
TUMOR-INFILTRATING LYMPHOCYTES AND INTERLEUKIN-2
TILs are lymphocytes that infiltrate growing tumors and can be isolated by growing single-cell suspensions from the tumor in IL-2.
In animals, the adoptive transfer of TILs can be from 50 to 100 times as potent as LAK cells in mediating the regression of established micrometastases. 254 TILs have
been isolated from virtually all types of human tumors and can recognize tumor-associated
antigens.320,321,322,323,324,325,326,327,328,329,330,331,332,333,334,335,336,337,338,339,340,341,342,343,344,345 and 346 Based on these in vitro and in vivo studies, pilot trials of TILs for the treatment
of advanced cancers in humans have been conducted. 290,291 and 292 The results of a pilot trial studying patients with metastatic melanoma treated with TILs in the
National Cancer Institute's Surgery Branch are presented in Table 18-20.

TABLE 18-20. Treatment of Patients with Melanoma with Tumor-Infiltrating Lymphocytes

TILs traffic to and accumulate in tumor deposits. This finding led to attempts to genetically alter TILs to increase their antitumor activity at the tumor site. In an initial
phase of this effort, TILs transduced with the gene for neomycin phosphotransferase were infused into patients with advanced melanoma, as were TILs transduced
with the gene for TNF.310,347,348 This study and additional efforts to develop gene therapies for patients with cancer are considered in Chapter 62.1. Improved methods
for developing lymphocytes with antitumor activity by in vitro sensitization with tumor-specific peptides, as well as the use of cloned cells, are under development and
may provide valuable reagents for use in future adoptive immunotherapy studies. 349,350,351 and 352
*For a definitive compendium of information on the biologic therapy of cancer, refer to the companion volume, Rosenberg SA, ed. Principles and practice of the biologic therapy of cancer.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Gery I, Gershon RK, Waksman BH. Potentiation of the T-lymphocyte response to mitogens. I. The responding cell. J Exp Med 1972;136:128.
2. Dinarello CA. Interleukin-1, interleukin-1 receptors and interleukin-1 receptor antagonist. Int Rev Immunol 1998;16:457.
3. Lomedico PT, Gubler U, Hellmann CP, et al. Cloning and expression of murine interleukin-1 cDNA in Escherichia coli. Nature 1984;312:458.
4. Auron PE, Webb AC, Rosenwasser LJ, et al. Nucleotide sequence of human monocyte interleukin 1 precursor cDNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1984;81:7907.
5. Black RA, Kronheim SR, Cantrell M, et al. Generation of biologically active interleukin-1 beta by proteolytic cleavage of the inactive precursor. J Biol Chem 1988;263:9437.
6. Eisenberg SP, Evans RJ, Arend WP, et al. Primary structure and functional expression from complementary DNA of a human interleukin-1 receptor antagonist. Nature 1990;343:341.
7. Buras JA, Reenstra WR, Fenton MJ. NF beta A, a factor required for maximal interleukin-1 beta gene expression is identical to the ets family member PU.1. Evidence for structural alteration
following LPS activation. Mol Immunol 1995;32:541.
8. Kominato Y, Galson D, Waterman WR. Monocyte expression of the human prointerleukin 1 beta gene IL-1B is dependent on promoter sequences which bind the hematopoietic transcription
factor Spi-1/PU.1. Mol Cell Biol 1995;15:59.
9. Sims JE, Gayle MA, Slack JL. Interleukin 1 signaling occurs exclusively via the type I receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:6155.
10. Colotta F, Re F, Muzio M. Interleukin-1 type II receptor: a decoy target for IL-1 that is regulated by IL-4. Science 1993;261:472.
11. Greenfeder SA, Nunes P, Kwee L, et al. Molecular cloning and characterization of a second subunit of the interleukin 1 receptor complex. J Biol Chem 1995;270:13757.
12. Cao Z, Henzel WJ, Gao X. IRAK: a kinase associated with the interleukin-1 receptor. Science 1996;271:1128.
13. Cao Z, Xiong J, Takeuchi M, et al. TRAF6 is a signal transducer for interleukin-1. Nature 1996;383:443.
14. Adachi O, Kawai T, Takeda K, et al. Targeted disruption of the MyD88 gene results in loss of IL-1 and IL-18-mediated function. Immunity 1998;9:143.
15. Shirakawa F, Chedid M, Suttles J, et al. Interleukin-1 and cyclic AMP induce kappa immunoglobulin light-chain expression via activation of an NF-kappa Blike DNA-binding protein. Mol Cell Biol
1989;9:959.
16. Muegge K, Williams TM, Kant J, et al. Interleukin-1 costimulatory activity on the interleukin-2 promoter via AP-1. Science 1989;246:249.
17. Shornick LP, De Togni P, Mariathasan S, et al. Mice deficient in IL-1 beta manifest impaired contact hypersensitivity to trinitrochlorobenzone. J Exp Med 1996;183:1427.
18. Smith JW, Longo DL, Alvord WG, et al. The effects of treatment with interleukin-1 alpha on platelet recovery after high-dose carboplatin. N Engl J Med 1993;328:756.
19. Morgan DA, Ruscetti FW, Gallo R. Selective in vitro growth of T lymphocytes from normal human bone marrows. Science 1976;193:1007.
20. Taniguchi T, Matsui H, Fujita T, et al. Structure and expression of a cloned cDNA for human interleukin-2. Nature 1983;302:305.
21. Mosmann TR, Sad S. The expanding universe of T-cell subsets: Th1, Th2 and more. Immunol Today 1996;17:138.

22. Leonard WJ, Depper JM, Crabtree GR, et al. Molecular cloning and expression of cDNAs for the human interleukin-2 receptor. Nature 1984;311:626.
23. Hatakeyama M, Tsudo M, Minamoto S, et al. Interleukin-2 receptor beta chain gene: generation of three receptor forms by cloned human alpha and beta chain cDNA's. Science 1989;244:551.
24. Takeshita T, Asao H, Ohtani K, et al. Cloning of the gamma chain of the human IL-2 receptor. Science 1992;257:379.
25. Johnston JA, Kawamura M, Kirken RA, et al. Phosphorylation and activation of the Jak-3 Janus kinase in response to interleukin-2. Nature 1994;370:151.
26. Witthuhn BA, Silvennoinen O, Miura O, et al. Involvement of the Jak-3 Janus kinase in signalling by interleukins 2 and 4 in lymphoid and myeloid cells. Nature 1994;370:153.
27. Leonard WJ, O'Shea JJ. Jaks and STATs: biologic implications. Annu Rev Immunol 1998;16:293.
28. Gomez J, Gonzalez A, Martinez A, Rebollo A. IL-2-induced cellular events. Crit Rev Immunol 1998;18:185.
29. Schorle H, Holtschke T, Hunig T, Schimpl A, Horak I. Development and function of T cells in mice rendered interleukin-2 deficient by gene targeting. Nature 1991;352:621.
30. Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, White DE, Steinberg SM. Durability of complete responses in patients with metastatic cancer treated with high-dose interleukin-2: identification of the antigens
mediating response. Ann Surg 1998;228:307.
31. Davey JR, Chaitt DG, Albert JM, et al. A randomized trial of high- versus low-dose subcutaneous interleukin-2 outpatient therapy for early human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection. J
Infect Dis 1999;179:849.
32. Baluna R, Vitetta ES. Vascular leak syndrome: a side effect of immunotherapy. Immunopharmacology 1997;37:117.
33. Kawakami Y, Rosenberg SA. Immunobiology of human melanoma antigens MART-1 and gp100 and their use for immuno-gene therapy. Int Rev Immunol 1997;14:173.
34. Brodie SJ, Lewinsohn DA, Patterson BK, et al. In vivo migration and function of transferred HIV-1-specific cytotoxic T cells. Nat Med 1999;5:34.
35. Walter EA, Greenberg PD, Gilbert MJ, et al. Reconstitution of cellular immunity against cytomegalovirus in recipients of allogeneic bone marrow by transfer of T-cell clones from the donor [See
comments]. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1038.
36. O'Reilly RJ, Small TN, Papadopoulos E, et al. Biology and adoptive cell therapy of Epstein-Barr virusassociated lymphoproliferative disorders in recipients of marrow allografts. Immunol Rev
1997;157:195.
37. Waldmann TA, O'Shea J. The use of antibodies against the IL-2 receptor in transplantation. Curr Opin Immunol 1998;10:507.
38. Yokota T, Lee F, Rennick D, et al. Isolation and characterization of a mouse cDNA clone that expresses mast-cell growth-factor activity in monkey cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1984;81:1070.
39. Yang YC, Ciarletta AB, Temple PA, et al. Human IL-3 multi-CSF: identification by expression cloning of a novel hematopoietic growth factor related to murine IL-3. Cell 1986;47:3.
40. Schrader JW, Nossal GJ. Strategies for the analysis of accessory-cell function: the in vitro cloning and characterization of the P cell. Immunol Rev 1980;53:61.
41. Kitamura T, Sato N, Arai K, Miyajima A. Expression cloning of the human IL-3 receptor cDNA reveals a shared beta subunit for the human IL-3 and GM-CSF receptors. Cell 1991;66:1165.
42. Hayashida K, Kitamura T, Gorman DM, et al. Molecular cloning of a second subunit of the receptor for human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF): reconstitution of a
high-affinity GM-CSF receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:9655.
43. Stomski FC, Sun Q, Bagley CJ, et al. Human interleukin-3 (IL-3) induces disulfide-linked IL-3 receptor alpha- and beta-chain heterodimerization, which is required for receptor activation but not
high-affinity binding. Mol Cell Biol 1996;16:3035.
44. Quelle FW, Sato N, Witthuhn BA, et al. JAK2 associates with the beta c chain of the receptor for granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and its activation requires the
membrane-proximal region. Mol Cell Biol 1994;14:4335.
45. Mui AL, Wakao H, O'Farrell AM, Harada N, Miyajima A. Interleukin-3, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and interleukin-5 transduce signals through two STAT5 homologs.
EMBO J 1995;14:1166.
46. Guthridge MA, Stomski FC, Thomas D, et al. Mechanism of activation of the GM-CSF, IL-3, IL-5 family of receptors. Stem Cells 1998;16:301.
47. del Peso L, Gonzalez-Garcia M, Page C, Herrera R, Nunez G. Interleukin-3-induced phosphorylation of BAD through the protein kinase Akt. Science 1997;278:687.
48. Eder M, Geissler G, Ganser A. IL-3 in the clinic. Stem Cells 1997;15:327.
49. Ganser A, Lindemann A, Seipelt G, et al. Effects of recombinant human interleukin-3 in patients with normal hematopoiesis and in patients with bone marrow failure. Blood 1990;76:666.
50. Brugger W, Heimfeld S, Berenson RJ, Mertelsmann R, Kanz L. Reconstitution of hematopoiesis after high-dose chemotherapy by autologous progenitor cells generated ex vivo. N Engl J Med
1995;333:283.
51. Dzierzak EA, Papayannopoulou T, Mulligan RC. Lineage-specific expression of a human beta-globin gene in murine bone marrow transplant recipients reconstituted with retrovirus-transduced
stem cells. Nature 1988;331:35.
52. Yokota T, Otsuka T, Mosmann T, et al. Isolation and characterization of a human interleukin cDNA clone, homologous to mouse B-cell stimulatory factor 1, that expresses B-cell- and
T-cell-stimulating activities. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1986;83:5894.
53. Noma Y, Sideras P, Naito T, et al. Cloning of cDNA encoding the murine IgGl induction factor by a novel strategy using SP6 promoter. Nature 1986;319:640.
54. Lee F, Yokota T, Otsuka T, et al. Isolation and characterization of a mouse interleukin cDNA clone that expresses B-cell stimulatory factor 1 activities and T-cell- and mast-cell-stimulating
activities. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1986;83:2061.
55. Seder RA, Paul WE, Dvorak AM, et al. Mouse splenic and bone marrow cell populations that express high-affinity Fc epsilon receptors and produce interleukin-4 are highly enriched in
basophils. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:2835.
56. Schmitz J, Thiel A, Kuhn R, et al. Induction of interleukin 4 (IL-4) expression in T helper (Th) cells is not dependent on IL-4 from non-Th cells. J Exp Med 1994;179:1349.
57. Zheng W, Flavell RA. The transcription factor GATA-3 is necessary and sufficient for Th2 cytokine gene expression in CD4 T cells. Cell 1997;89:587.
58. Ho IC, Hodge MR, Rooney JW, Glimcher LH. The proto-oncogene c-af is responsible for tissue-specific expression of interleukin-4. Cell 1996;85:973.
59. Mosley B, Beckmann MP, March CJ, et al. The murine interleukin-4 receptor: molecular cloning and characterization of secreted and membrane bound forms. Cell 1989;59:335.
60. Nelms K, Huang H, Ryan J, Keegan A, Paul WE. Interleukin-4 receptor signalling mechanisms and their biologic significance. Adv Exp Med Biol 1998;452:37.
61. Oakes SA, Candotti F, Johnston JA, et al. Signaling via IL-2 and IL-4 in JAK3-deficient severe combined immunodeficiency lymphocytes: JAK3-dependent and independent pathways. Immunity
1996;5:605.
62. Kaplan MH, Schindler U, Smiley ST, Grusby MJ. Stat6 is required for mediating responses to IL-4 and for development of Th2 cells. Immunity 1996;4:313.
63. Keegan AD, Nelms K, White M, et al. An IL-4 receptor region containing an insulin receptor motif is important for IL-4-mediated IRS-1 phosphorylation and cell growth. Cell 1994;76:811.
64. Kuhn R, Rajewsky K, Muller W. Generation and analysis of interleukin-4 deficient mice. Science 1991;254:707.
65. Mitsuyasu H, Izuhara K, Mao XQ, et al. Ile50Val variant of IL4R alpha upregulates IgE synthesis and associates with atopic asthma [Letter]. Nat Genet 1998;19:119.
66. Song Z, Casolaro V, Chen R, et al. Polymorphic nucleotides within the human IL-4 promoter that mediate overexpression of the gene. J Immunol 1996;156:424.
67. Parronchi P, Maggi E, Romagnani S. Redirecting Th2 responses in allergy. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1999;238:27.
68. Kinashi T, Harada N, Severinson E, et al. Cloning of complementary DNA encoding T-cell replacing factor and identity with B-cell growth factor II. Nature 1986;324:70.
69. Azuma C, Tanabe T, Konishi M, et al. Cloning of cDNA for human T-cell replacing factor interleukin-5 and comparison with the murine homologue. Nucleic Acids Res 1986; 14:9149.
70. Milburn MV, Hassell AM, Lambert MH, et al. A novel dimer configuration revealed by the crystal structure at 2.4 Å resolution of human interleukin-5. Nature 1993;363:172.
71. Tavernier J, Devos R, Cornelis S, et al. A human high affinity interleukin-5 receptor (IL5R) is composed of an IL5-specific alpha chain and a beta chain shared with the receptor for GM-CSF.
Cell 1991;66:1175.
72. Sanderson CJ, Warren DJ, Strath M. Identification of a lymphokine that stimulates eosinophil differentiation in vitro. Its relationship to interleukin-3, functional properties of eosinophils produced
in cultures. J Exp Med 1985;162:60.
73. Kopf M, Brombacher F, Hodgkin PD, et al. IL-5-deficient mice have a developmental defect in CD5+ B-1 cells and lack eosinophilia but have normal antibody and cytotoxic T cell responses.
Immunity 1996;4:15.
74. Yamaguchi Y, Hayashi Y, Sugama Y, et al. Highly purified murine interleukin 5 (IL-5) stimulates eosinophil function and prolongs in vitro survival. IL-5 as an eosinophil chemotactic factor. J Exp
Med 1988;167:1737.
75. Matthaei KI, Foster P, Young IG. The role of interleukin-5 (IL-5) in vivo studies with IL-5 deficient mice. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 1997;92[Suppl 2]:63.
76. Sugaya H, Aoki M, Yoshida T, Takatsu K, Yoshimura K. Eosinophilia and intracranial worm recovery in interleukin-5 transgenic and interleukin-5 receptor alpha chain-knockout mice infected
with Angiostrongylus cantonensis. Parasitol Res 1997;83:583.
77. Okudaira H, Nogami M, Matsuzaki G, et al. T-cell-dependent accumulation of eosinophils in the lung and its inhibition by monoclonal anti-interleukin-5. Int Arch Allergy Appl Immunol
1991;94:171.
78. McKinnon M, Page K, Uings IJ, et al. An interleukin 5 mutant distinguishes between two functional responses in human eosinophils. J Exp Med 1997;186:121.
79. Yamasaki K, Taga T, Hirata Y, et al. Cloning and expression of the human interleukin-6 BSF-2/IFN beta 2 receptor. Science 1988;241:825.
80. Taga T, Hibi M, Hirata Y, et al. Interleukin-6 triggers the association of its receptor with a possible signal transducer, gp130. Cell 1989;58:573.
81. Nakashima K, Taga T. gp130 and the IL-6 family of cytokines: signaling mechanisms and thrombopoietic activities. Semin Hematol 1998;35:210.
82. Hirano T, Yasukawa K, Harada H, et al. Complementary DNA for a novel human interleukin BSF-2 that induces B lymphocytes to produce immunoglobulin. Nature 1986;324:73.
83. May LT, Helfgott DC, Sehgal PB. Anti-beta-interferon antibodies inhibit the increased expression of HLA-B7 mRNA in tumor necrosis factortreated human fibroblasts: structural studies of the
beta 2 interferon involved. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1986;83:8957.
84. Kopf M, Baumann H, Freer G, et al. Impaired immune and acute-phase responses in interleukin-6-deficient mice. Nature 1994;368:339.
85. Poli V, Balena R, Fattori E, et al. Interleukin-6 deficient mice are protected from bone loss caused by estrogen depletion. EMBO J 1994;13:1189.
86. Zetterstrom M, Sundgren-Andersson AK, Ostlund P, Bartfai T. Delineation of the proinflammatory cytokine cascade in fever induction. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1998;856:48.
87. Bernad A, Kopf M, Kulbacki R, et al. Interleukin-6 is required in vivo for the regulation of stem cells and committed progenitors of the hematopoietic system. Immunity 1994;1:725.
88. Hilbert DM, Kopf M, Mock BA, Kohler G, Rudikoff S. Interleukin 6 is essential for in vivo development of B lineage neoplasms. J Exp Med 1995;182:243.
89. Strassmann G, Kambayashi T. Inhibition of experimental cancer cachexia by anti-cytokine and anti-cytokine-receptor therapy. Cytokines Mol Ther 1995;1:107.
90. Hawley RG, Berger LC. Growth control mechanisms in multiple myeloma. Leuk Lymphoma 1998;29:465.
91. Namen AE, Lupton S, Hjerrild K, et al. Stimulation of B-cell progenitors by cloned murine interleukin-7. Nature 1988;333:571.
92. Kitazawa H, Muegge K, Badolato R, et al. IL-7 activates a4b1 integrin in murine thymocytes. J Immunol 1997;159:2259.
93. Oosterwegel MA, Haks MC, Jeffry U, Murray R, Kruisbeek AM. Induction of TCR gene rearrangements in uncommitted stem cells by a subset of IL-7 producing, MHC class-II-expressing thymic
stromal cells. Immunity 1997;6:351.
94. Funk PE, Stephan RP, Witte PL. Vascular cell adhesion molecule 1positive reticular cells express interleukin-7 and stem cell factor in the bone marrow. Blood 1995;86:2661.
95. Watanabe M, Ueno Y, Yajima T, et al. Interleukin-7 is produced by human intestinal epithelial cells and regulates the proliferation of intestinal mucosal lymphocytes. J Clin Invest 1995;
95:2945.
96. Kroncke R, Loppnow H, Flad HD, Gerdes J. Human follicular dendritic cells and vascular cells produce interleukin-7: a potential role for interleukin-7 in the germinal center reaction. Eur J
Immunol 1996;26:2541.
97. Goodwin RG, Friend D, Ziegler SF, et al. Cloning of the human and murine interleukin-7 receptors: demonstration of a soluble form and homology to a new receptor superfamily. Cell
1990;60:941.
98. Noguchi M, Nakamura Y, Russell SM, et al. Interleukin-2 receptor gamma chain: a functional component of the interleukin-7 receptor. Science 1993;262:1877.
99. Kondo M, Takeshita T, Higuchi M, et al. Functional participation of the IL-2 receptor gamma chain in IL-7 receptor complexes. Science 1994;263:1453.
100. Levin SD, Koelling RM, Friend SL, et al. Thymic stromal lymphopoietin: a cytokine that promotes the development of IgM+ B cells in vitro and signals via a novel mechanism. J Immunol
1999;162:677.
101. Foxwell BM, Beadling C, Guschin D, Kerr I, Cantrell D. Interleukin-7 can induce the activation of Jak 1, Jak 3 and STAT 5 proteins in murine T cells. Eur J Immunol 1995;25:3041.
102. Prieyl JA, LeBien TW. Interleukin 7 independent development of human B cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:10348.
103. von Freeden-Jeffry U, Vieira P, Lucian LA, et al. Lymphopenia in interleukin (IL)-7 gene-deleted mice identifies IL-7 as a nonredundant cytokine. J Exp Med 1995;181:1519.
104. Peschon JJ, Morrissey PJ, Grabstein KH, et al. Early lymphocyte expansion is severely impaired in interleukin-7 receptor-deficient mice. J Exp Med 1994;180:1955.
105. Kim K, Lee CK, Sayers TJ, Muegge K, Durum SK. The trophic action of IL-7 on pro-T cells: inhibition of apoptosis of pro-T1, -T2, -T3 cells correlates with Bcl-2 and Bax levels and is

independent of Fas and p53 pathways. J Immunol 1998;160:5735.
106. Muegge K, Vila MP, Durum SK. Interleukin-7: a cofactor for VDJ rearrangement of the T cell receptor beta gene. Science 1993;261:93.
107. Morrissey PJ, Conlon P, Charrier K, et al. Administration of IL-7 to normal mice stimulates B-lymphopoiesis and peripheral lymphadenopathy. J Immunol 1991;147:561.
108. Komschlies KL, Gregorio TA, Gruys ME, et al. Administration of recombinant human IL-7 to mice alters the composition of B-lineage cells and T cell subsets, enhances T cell function, induces
regression of established metastases. J Immunol 1994;152:5776.
109. Rich BE, Campos-Torres J, Tepper RI, Moreadith RW, Leder P. Cutaneous lymphoproliferation and lymphomas in interleukin-7 transgenic mice. J Exp Med 1993;177:305.
110. Dalloul A, Laroche L, Bagot M, et al. Interleukin-7 is a growth factor for Sézary lymphoma cells. J Clin Invest 1992;90:1054.
111. Yoshimura T, Matsushima K, Tanaka S, et al. Purification of a human monocyte-derived neutrophil chemotactic factor that has peptide sequence similarity to other host defense cytokines. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987;84:9233.
112. Walz A, Peveri P, Aschauer H, Baggiolini M. Purification and amino acid sequencing of NAF, a novel neutrophil-activating factor produced by monocytes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
1987;149:755.
113. Schroder JM, Mrowietz U, Morita E, Christophers E. Purification and partial biochemical characterization of a human monocyte-derived, neutrophil-activating peptide that lacks interleukin-1
activity. J Immunol 1987;139:3474.
114. Schmid J, Weissmann C. Induction of mRNA for a serine protease and a beta-thromboglobulin-like protein in mitogen-stimulated human leukocytes. J Immunol 1987;139:250.
115. Middleton J, Neil S, Wintle J, et al. Transcytosis and surface presentation of IL-8 by venularendothelial cells. Cell 1997;91:385.
116. Wang JM, Su S, Gong W, Oppenheim JJ. Chemokines, receptors, and their role in cardiovascular pathology. Int J Clin Lab Res 1998;28:83.
117. Baggiolini M, Dewald B, Moser B. Interleukin-8 and related chemotactic cytokinesCXC and CC chemokines. Adv Immunol 1994;55:97.
118. Murphy PM, Tiffany HL. Cloning of complementary DNA encoding a functional human interleukin-8 receptor. Science 1991;253:1280.
119. Holmes WE, Lee J, Kuang WJ, Rice GC, Wood WI. Structure and functional expression of a human interleukin-8 receptor. Science 1991;253:1278.
120. Murphy PM. Neutrophil receptors for interleukin-8 and related CXC chemokines. Semin Hematol 1997;34:311.
121. Jones SA, Wolf M, Qin S, Mackay CR, Baggiolini M. Different functions for the interleukin-8 receptors (IL-8R) of human neutrophil leukocytes: NADPH oxidase and phospholipase D are
activated through IL-8R1 but not IL-8R2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:6682.
122. Damaj BB, McColl SR, Mahana W, Crouch MF, Naccache PH. Physical association of Gi2alpha with interleukin-8 receptors. J Biol Chem 1996;271:12783.
123. Sekido N, Mukaida N, Harada A, et al. Prevention of lung reperfusion injury in rabbits by a monoclonal antibody against interleukin-8. Nature 1993;365:654.
124. Broaddus VC, Boylan AM, Hoeffel JM, et al. Neutralization of IL-8 inhibits neutrophil influx in a rabbit model of endotoxin-induced pleurisy. J Immunol 1994;152:2960.
125. Folkesson HG, Matthay MA, Hebert CA, Broaddus VC. Acid aspirationinduced lung injury in rabbits is mediated by interleukin-8-dependent mechanisms. J Clin Invest 1995;96:107.
126. Cacalano G, Lee J, Kikly K, et al. Neutrophil and B cell expansion in mice that lack the murine IL-8 receptor homolog. Science 1994;265:682.
127. Moore BB, Arenberg DA, Addison CL, Keane MP, Strieter RM. Tumor angiogenesis is regulated by CXC chemokines. J Lab Clin Med 1998;132:97.
128. Harada A, Mukaida N, Matsushima K. Interleukin-8 as a novel target for intervention therapy in acute inflammatory diseases. Mol Med Today 1996;2:482.
129. Van Snick J, Goethals A, Renauld JC, et al. Cloning and characterization of a cDNA for a new mouse T cell growth factor P40. J Exp Med 1989;169:363.
130. Hultner L, Druez C, Moeller J, et al. Mast cell growth-enhancing activity (MEA) is structurally related and functionally identical to the novel mouse T cell growth factor P40/TCGFIII interleukin-9.
Eur J Immunol 1990;20:1413.
131. Renauld JC, Goethals A, Houssiau F, et al. Human P40/IL-9. Expression in activated CD4+ T cells, genomic organization, and comparison with the mouse gene. J Immunol 1990;144:4235.
132. Houssiau FA, Renauld JC, Fibbe WE, Van Snick J. IL-2 dependence of IL-9 expression in human T lymphocytes. J Immunol 1992;148:3147.
133. Gessner A, Blum H, Rollinghoff M. Differential regulation of IL-9-expression after infection with Leishmania major in susceptible and resistant mice. Immunobiology 1993;189:419.
134. Renauld JC, Druez C, Kermouni A, et al. Expression cloning of the murine and human interleukin-9 receptor cDNAs. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:5690.
135. Vermeesch JR, Petit P, Kermouni A, et al. The IL-9 receptor gene, located in the Xq/Yq pseudoautosomal region, has an autosomal origin, escapes X inactivation and is expressed from the Y.
Hum Mol Genet 1997;6:1.
136. Kimura Y, Takeshita T, Kondo M, et al. Sharing of the IL-2 receptor gamma chain with the functional IL-receptor complex. Int Immunol 1995;7:115.
137. Yin T, Tsang ML, Yang YC. JAK1 kinase forms complexes with interleukin-4 receptor and 4PS/insulin receptor substrate-1-like protein and is activated by interleukin-4 and interleukin-9 in T
lymphocytes. J Biol Chem 1994;269:26614.
138. Demoulin JB, Uyttenhove C, Van Roost E, et al. A single tyrosine of the interleukin-9 (IL-9) receptor is required for STAT activation, antiapoptotic activity, growth regulation by IL-9. Mol Cell Biol
1996;16:4710.
139. Bauer JH, Liu KD, You Y, Lai SY, Goldsmith MA. Heteromerization of the gamma c chain with the interleukin-9 receptor alpha subunit leads to STAT activation and prevention of apoptosis. J
Biol Chem 1998;273:9255.
140. Yang YC, Ricciardi S, Ciarletta A, et al. Expression cloning of cDNA encoding a novel human hematopoietic growth factor: human homologue of murine T-cell growth factor P40. Blood
1989;74:1880.
141. Kelleher K, Bean K, Clark SC, et al. Human interleukin-9: genomic sequence, chromosomal location, sequences essential for its expression in human T-cell leukemia virus
(HTLV)-I-transformed human T cells. Blood 1991;77:1436.
142. Renauld JC, van der Lugt N, Vink A, et al. Thymic lymphomas in interleukin 9 transgenic mice. Oncogene 1994;9:1327.
143. Merz H, Houssiau FA, Orscheschek K, et al. Interleukin-9 expression in human malignant lymphomas: unique association with Hodgkin's disease and large cell anaplastic lymphoma. Blood
1991;78:1311.
144. Petit-Frere C, Dugas B, Braquet P, Mencia-Huerta JM. Interleukin-9 potentiates the interleukin-4-induced IgE and IgG1 release from murine B lymphocytes. Immunology 1993;79:146.
145. Donahue RE, Yang YC, Clark SC. Human P40 T-cell growth factor interleukin-9 supports erythroid colony formation. Blood 1990;75:2271.
146. Hsu DH, de Waal M, Fiorentino DF, et al. Expression of interleukin-10 activity by Epstein-Barr virus protein BCRF1. Science 1990;250:830.
147. Ho AS, Liu Y, Khan TA, et al. A receptor for interleukin 10 is related to interferon receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:11267.
148. Liu Y, Wei SH, Ho AS, de Waal M, Moore KW. Expression cloning and characterization of a human IL-10 receptor. J Immunol 1994;152:1821.
149. Spencer SD, Di Marco F, Hooley J, et al. The orphan receptor CRF2-4 is an essential subunit of the interleukin 10 receptor. J Exp Med 1998;187:571.
150. Finbloom DS, Winestock KD. IL-10 induces the tyrosine phosphorylation of tyk2 and Jak1 and the differential assembly of STAT1 alpha and STAT3 complexes in human T cells and monocytes.
J Immunol 1995;155:1079.
151. O'Farrell AM, Liu Y, Moore KW, Mui AL. IL-10 inhibits macrophage activation and proliferation by distinct signaling mechanisms: evidence for Stat3-dependent and -independent pathways.
EMBO J 1998;17:1006.
152. Moore KW, Vieira P, Fiorentino DF, et al. Homology of cytokine synthesis inhibitory factor IL-10 to the Epstein-Barr virus gene BCRFI. Science 1990;248:1230.
153. Kuhn R, Lohler J, Rennick D, Rajewsky K, Muller W. Interleukin-10-deficient mice develop chronic enterocolitis. Cell 1993;75:263.
154. Pajkrt D, Camoglio L, Tiel-van Buul MC, et al. Attenuation of proinflammatory response by recombinant human IL-10 in human endotoxemia: effect of timing of recombinant human IL-10
administration. J Immunol 1997;158:3971.
155. Opal SM, Wherry JC, Grint P. Interleukin-10: potential benefits and possible risks in clinical infectious diseases. Clin Infect Dis 1998;27:1497.
156. Beatty PR, Krams SM, Martinez OM. Involvement of IL-10 in the autonomous growth of EBV-transformed B cell lines. J Immunol 1997;158:4045.
157. Khatri VP, Caligiuri MA. A review of the association between interleukin-10 and human B-cell malignancies. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1998;46:239.
158. Paul SR, Bennett F, Calvetti JA, et al. Molecular cloning of a cDNA encoding interleukin 11, a stromal cell-derived lymphopoietic and hematopoietic cytokine. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1990;87:7512.
159. Du X, Williams DA. Interleukin-11: review of molecular, cell biology, clinical use. Blood 1997;89:3897.
160. Baumann H, Wang Y, Morella KK, et al. Complex of the soluble IL-11 receptor and IL-11 acts as IL-6-type cytokine in hepatic and non-hepatic cells. J Immunol 1996;157:284.
161. Nandurkar HH, Robb L, Tarlinton D, et al. Adult mice with targeted mutation of the interleukin-11 receptor IL11Ra display normal hematopoiesis. Blood 1997;90:2148.
162. Robb L, Li R, Hartley L, et al. Infertility in female mice lacking the receptor for interleukin-11 is due to a defective uterine response to implantation. Nat Med 1998;4:303.
163. Tepler I, Elias L, Smith JW, et al. A randomized placebo-controlled trial of recombinant human interleukin-11 in cancer patients with severe thrombocytopenia due to chemotherapy. Blood
1996;87:3607.
164. Du XX, Williams DA. Interleukin-11: a multifunctional growth factor derived from the hematopoietic microenvironment. Blood 1994;83:2023.
165. Gubler U, Chua AO, Schoenhaut DS, et al. Coexpression of two distinct genes is required to generate secreted bioactive cytotoxic lymphocyte maturation factor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1991;88:4143.
166. Wolf SF, Temple PA, Kobayashi M, et al. Cloning of cDNA for natural killer cell stimulatory factor, a heterodimeric cytokine with multiple biologic effects on T and natural killer cells. J Immunol
1991;146:3074.
167. Trinchieri G. Interleukin-12: a cytokine at the interface of inflammation and immunity. Adv Immunol 1998;70:83.
168. Mattner F, Fischer S, Guckes S, et al. The interleukin-12 subunit p40 specifically inhibits effects of the interleukin-12 heterodimer. Eur J Immunol 1993;23:2202.
169. Shu U, Kiniwa M, Wu CY, et al. Activated T cells induce interleukin-12 production by monocytes via CD40-CD40 ligand interaction. Eur J Immunol 1995;25:1125.
170. Schoenhaut DS, Chua AO, Wolitzky AG, et al. Cloning and expression of murine IL-12. J Immunol 1992;148:3433.
171. Chua AO, Chizzonite R, Desai BB, et al. Expression cloning of a human IL-12 receptor component. A new member of the cytokine receptor superfamily with strong homology to gp130. J
Immunol 1994;153:128.
172. Presky DH, Yang H, Minetti LJ, et al. A functional interleukin 12 receptor complex is composed of two beta-type cytokine receptor subunits. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:14002.
173. Szabo SJ, Dighe AS, Gubler U, Murphy KM. Regulation of the interleukin (IL)-12R beta 2 subunit expression in developing T helper 1 (Th1) and Th2 cells. J Exp Med 1997; 185:817.
174. Bacon CM, McVicar DW, Ortaldo JR, et al. Interleukin 12 (IL-12) induces tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2 and TYK2: differential use of Janus family tyrosine kinases by IL-2 and IL-12. J Exp
Med 1995;181:399.
175. Zou J, Presky DH, Wu CY, Gubler U. Differential associations between the cytoplasmic regions of the interleukin-12 receptor subunits beta1 and beta2 and JAK kinases. J Biol Chem
1997;272:6073.
176. Jacobson NG, Szabo SJ, Weber-Nordt RM, et al. Interleukin 12 signaling in T helper type 1 (Th1) cells involves tyrosine phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription Stat3
and Stat4. J Exp Med 1995;181:1755.
177. Coccia EM, Passini N, Battistini A, et al. Interleukin-12 induces expression of interferon regulatory factor-1 via signal transducer and activator of transcription-4 in human T helper type 1 cells. J
Biol Chem 1999;274:6698.
178. Magram J, Connaughton SE, Warrier RR, et al. IL-12-deficient mice are defective in IFN gamma production and type 1 cytokine responses. Immunity 1996;4:471.
179. Piccotti JR, Li K, Chan SY, et al. Alloantigen-reactive Th1 development in IL-12-deficient mice. J Immunol 1998;160:1132.
180. Robertson MJ, Cameron C, Atkins MB, et al. Immunological effects of interleukin 12 administered by bolus intravenous injection to patients with cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:9.
181. Brunda MJ, Luistro L, Warrier RR, et al. Antitumor and antimetastatic activity of interleukin 12 against murine tumors. J Exp Med 1993;178:1223.
182. Wigginton JM, Komschlies KL, Back TC, et al. Administration of interleukin-12 with pulse interleukin-2 and the rapid and complete eradication of murine renal carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst
1996;88:38.
183. Caspi RR. IL-12 in autoimmunity. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 1998;88:4.
184. de Vries JE. The role of IL-13 and its receptor in allergy and inflammatory responses. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1998;102:1657.
185. Brown KD, Zurawski SM, Mosmann TR, Zurawski G. A family of small inducible proteins secreted by leukocytes are members of a new superfamily that includes leukocyte and
fibroblast-derived inflammatory agents, growth factors, indicators of various activation processes. J Immunol 1989;142:679.
186. McKenzie AN, Culpepper JA, de Waal M, et al. Interleukin-13, a T-cell-derived cytokine that regulates human monocyte and B-cell function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:3735.
187. Aman MJ, Tayebi N, Obiri NI, et al. cDNA cloning and characterization of the human interleukin-13 receptor alpha chain. J Biol Chem 1996;271:29265.
188. Hilton DJ, Zhang JG, Metcalf D, et al. Cloning and characterization of a binding subunit of the interleukin-13 receptor that is also a component of the interleukin-4 receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U

S A 1996;93:497.
189. Keegan AD, Johnston JA, Tortolani PJ, et al. Similarities and differences in signal transduction by interleukin-4 and interleukin-13: analysis of Janus kinase activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1995;92:7681.
190. McKenzie GJ, Emson CL, Bell SE, et al. Impaired development of Th2 cells in IL-13-deficient mice. Immunity 1998;9:423.
191. Grabstein KH, Eisenman J, Shanebeck K, et al. Cloning of a T cell growth factor that interacts with the beta chain of the interleukin-2 receptor. Science 1994;264:965.
192. Burton JD, Bamford RN, Peters C, et al. A lymphokine, provisionally designated interleukin T and produced by a human adult T-cell leukemia line, stimulates T-cell proliferation and the
induction of lymphokine-activated killer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:4935.
193. Cosman D, Kumaki S, Anderson D, et al. Interleukin 15. Biochem Soc Trans 1997;25:371.
194. Bamford RN, DeFilippis AP, Azimi N, Kurys G, Waldmann TA. The 5' untranslated region, signal peptide, the coding sequence of the carboxyl terminus of IL-15 participate in its multifaceted
translational control. J Immunol 1998;160:4418.
195. Giri JG, Ahdieh M, Eisenman J, et al. Utilization of the beta and gamma chains of the IL-2 receptor by the novel cytokine IL-15. EMBO J 1994;13:2822.
196. Giri JG, Kumaki S, Ahdieh M, et al. Identification and cloning of a novel IL-15 binding protein that is structurally related to the alpha chain of the IL-2 receptor. EMBO J 1995;14:3654.
197. Tagaya Y, Burton JD, Miyamoto Y, Waldmann TA. Identification of a novel receptor/signal transduction pathway for IL-15/T in mast cells. EMBO J 1996;15:4928.
198. Williams NS, Klem J, Puzanov IJ, et al. Natural killer cell differentiation: insights from knockout and transgenic mouse models and in vitro systems. Immunol Rev 1998;165:47.
199. Lodolce JP, Boone DL, Chai S, et al. IL-15 receptor maintains lymphoid homeostasis by supporting lymphocyte homing and proliferation. Immunity 1998;9:669.
200. Center DM, Cruikshank W. Modulation of lymphocyte migration by human lymphokines. I. Identification and characterization of chemoattractant activity for lymphocytes from
mitogen-stimulated mononuclear cells. J Immunol 1982;128:2563.
201. Cruikshank W, Center DM. Modulation of lymphocyte migration by human lymphokines. II. Purification of a lymphotactic factor LCF. J Immunol 1982;128:2569.
202. Cruikshank WW, Kornfeld H, Center DM. Signaling and functional properties of interleukin-16. Int Rev Immunol 1998;16:523.
203. Zhang Y, Center DM, Wu DM, et al. Processing and activation of pro-interleukin-16 by caspase-3. J Biol Chem 1998;273:1144.
204. Muhlhahn P, Zweckstetter M, Georgescu J, et al. Structure of interleukin-16 resembles a PDZ domain with an occluded peptide binding site. Nat Struct Biol 1998;5:682.
205. Laberge S, Cruikshank WW, Kornfeld H, Center MD. Histamine-induced secretion of lymphocyte chemoattractant factor from CD8+ T cells is independent of transcription and translation.
Evidence for constitutive protein synthesis and storage. J Immunol 1995;155:2902.
206. Lim KG, Wan HC, Bozza PT, et al. Human eosinophils elaborate the lymphocyte chemoattractants. IL-16 lymphocyte chemoattractant factor and RANTES. J Immunol 1996;156:2566.
207. Bellini A, Yoshimura H, Vittori E, Marini M, Mattoli S. Bronchial epithelial cells of patients with asthma release chemoattractant factors for T lymphocytes. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1993;92:412.
208. Cruikshank WW, Greenstein JL, Theodore AC, Center DM. Lymphocyte chemoattractant factor induces CD4-dependent intracytoplasmic signaling in lymphocytes. J Immunol 1991;146:2928.
209. Theodore AC, Center DM, Nicoll J, et al. CD4 ligand IL-16 inhibits the mixed lymphocyte reaction. J Immunol 1996;157:1958.
210. Maciaszek JW, Parada NA, Cruikshank WW, et al. IL-16 represses HIV-1 promoter activity. J Immunol 1997;158:5.
211. Rouvier E, Luciani MF, Mattei MG, Denizot F, Golstein P. CTLA-8, cloned from an activated T cell, bearing AU-rich messenger RNA instability sequences, and homologous to a herpesvirus
saimiri gene. J Immunol 1993;150:5445.
212. Yao Z, Painter SL, Fanslow WC, et al. Human IL-17: a novel cytokine derived from T cells. J Immunol 1995;155:5483.
213. Yao Z, Timour M, Painter S, Fanslow W, Spriggs M. Complete nucleotide sequence of the mouse CTLA8 gene. Gene 1996;168:223.
214. Fossiez F, Djossou O, Chomarat P, et al. T cell interleukin-17 induces stromal cells to produce proinflammatory and hematopoietic cytokines. J Exp Med 1996;183:2593.
215. Yao Z, Fanslow WC, Seldin MF, et al. Herpesvirus Saimiri encodes a new cytokine, IL-17, which binds to a novel cytokine receptor. Immunity 1995;3:811.
216. Antonysamy MA, Fanslow WC, Fu F, et al. Evidence for a role of IL-17 in organ allograft rejection: IL-17 promotes the functional differentiation of dendritic cell progenitors. J Immunol
1999;162:577.
217. Spriggs MK. Interleukin-17 and its receptor. J Clin Immunol 1997;17:366.
218. Okamura H, Tsutsi H, Komatsu T, et al. Cloning of a new cytokine that induces IFN-gamma production by T cells. Nature 1995;378:88.
219. Fantuzzi G, Dinarello CA. Interleukin-18 and interleukin-1 beta: two cytokine substrates for ICE caspase-1. J Clin Immunol 1999;19:1.
220. Gu Y, Kuida K, Tsutsui H, et al. Activation of interferon-gamma inducing factor mediated by interleukin-1beta converting enzyme. Science 1997;275:206.
221. Ghayur T, Banerjee S, Hugunin M, et al. Caspase-1 processes IFN-gamma-inducing factor and regulates Lps-induced IFN-gamma production. Nature 1997;386:619.
222. Puren AJ, Fantuzzi G, Dinarello CA. Gene expression, synthesis, secretion of interleukin-18 and interleukin-1 beta are differentially regulated in human blood mononuclear cells and mouse
spleen cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:2256.
223. Parnet P, Garka KE, Bonnert TP, Dower SK, Sims JE. IL-1Rrp is a novel receptor-like molecule similar to the type I interleukin-1 receptor and its homologues T1/ST2 and IL-1R AcP. J Biol
Chem 1996;271:3967.
224. Torigoe K, Ushio S, Okura T, et al. Purification and characterization of the human interleukin-18 receptor. J Biol Chem 1997;272:25737.
225. Dale M, Nicklin MJ. Interleukin-1 receptor cluster: gene organization of IL-1R2, IL-1R1, IL-1RL2 IL-1Rrp2, IL-1RL1 T1/ST2, IL-18R1 IL-1Rrp on human chromosome 2q. Genomics 1999;57:177.
226. Born TL, Thomassen E, Bird TA, Sims JE. Cloning of a novel receptor subunit, AcPL, required for interleukin-18 signaling. J Biol Chem 1998;273:29445.
227. Novick D, Kim SH, Fantuzzi G, et al. Interleukin-18 binding protein: a novel modulator of the Th1 cytokine response. Immunity 1999;10:127.
228. Kojima H, Takeuchi M, Ohta T, et al. Interleukin-18 activates the IRAK-TRAF6 pathway in mouse EL-4 cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1998;244:183.
229. Xu D, Chan WL, Leung BP, et al. Selective expression and functions of interleukin-18 receptor on T helper (Th) type 1 but not Th2 cells. J Exp Med 1998;188:1485.
230. Takeda K, Tsutsui H, Yoshimoto T, et al. Defective NK cell activity and Th1 response in IL-18-deficient mice. Immunity 1998;8:383.
231. Gross L. Intradermal immunization of C3H mice against a sarcoma that originated in an animal of the same line. Cancer Res 1943;3:326.
232. Foley EJ. Antigenic properties of methylcholanthrene-induced tumors in mice of the strain of origin. Cancer Res 1953;13:835.
233. Baldwin RW. Immunity to methylcholanthrene-induced tumors in inbred rats following atrophy and regression of implanted tumors. Br J Cancer 1955;9:652.
234. Prehn RT, Main JM. Immunity to methylcholanthrene-induced sarcomas. J Natl Cancer Inst 1957;18:769.
235. Klein G, Sjögren HO, Klein E, Hellström KE. Demonstration of resistance against methylcholanthrene-induced sarcomas in the primary autochthonous host. Cancer Res 1960;20:1561.
236. Old LJ, Boyse EA, Clarke DA, Carswell EA. Antigenic properties of chemically induced tumors. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1962;101:80.
237. Globerson A, Feldmann M. Antigenic specificity of benzo[a]pyrene-induced sarcomas. J Natl Cancer Inst 1964;32:1229.
238. Vaage J. Nonvirus-associated antigens in virus-induced mouse mammary tumors. Cancer Res 1968;28:2477.
239. Morton DL, Miller GF, Wood DA. Demonstration of tumor-specific immunity against antigens unrelated to the mammary tumor virus in spontaneous mammary adenocarcinomas. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1969;42:289.
240. Carswell EA, Wanebo HJ, Old LJ, Boyse EA. Immunogenic properties of reticulum cell sarcomas of SJL/J mice. J Natl Cancer Inst 1970;44:1281.
241. Koch S, Zaleberg JR, McKenzie IFC. Description of a murine B lymphoma tumor-specific antigen. J Immunol 1984;133:1070.
242. Baldwin RW. Tumor-specific immunity to spontaneous rat tumors. Int J Cancer 1966;1:257.
243. Basombrio MA. Search for common antigenicity among twenty-five sarcomas induced by methylcholanthrene. Cancer Res 1970;30:2458.
244. Basombrio MA, Prehn RT. Studies on the basis for diversity and time of appearance of antigens in chemically induced tumors. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1972;35:117.
245. Baldwin RW, Price MR. Neoantigen expression in chemical carcinogenesis. In: Becker FF, ed. Cancer: a comprehensive treatise, vol 1, 2nd ed. New York: Plenum, 1982:507.
246. Defendi V. Effects of SV40 virus immunization on growth of transplantable SV40 and polyoma virus tumors in hamsters. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1963;113:12.
247. Khera KS, Ashkenazi A, Rapp F, Melnick JL. Immunity in hamsters to cells transformed in vitro among the papovaviruses. J Immunol 1963;91:604.
248. Sjögren HO, Hellström I, Klein G. Resistance of polyoma virusimmunized mice to transplantation of established polyoma tumors. Exp Cell Res 1961;23:204.
249. Chang CR, Martin RG, Livingston DM, et al. Relationship between T-antigen and tumor specific transplantation antigen in simian virus 40-transformed cells. J Virol 1979;29:69.
250. Livingston DM, Bradley MK. The simian virus 40 large T antigen. A lot packed into a little. Mol Biol Med 1987;4:63.
251. Boon T, Van Pel A, DePlaen E, et al. Genes coding for T-cell-defined tumor transplantation antigens: point mutations, antigenic peptides, and subgenic expression. Cold Spring Harbor Symp
Quant Biol 1989;1:587.
252. Hewitt HB, Blake ER, Walder AS. A critique of the evidence for active host defense against cancer based on personal studies of 27 murine tumors of spontaneous origin. Br J Cancer
1976;33:241.
253. Middle JG, Embleton MJ. Naturally arising tumors of the inbred WAB/Not rat strain. II. Immunogenicity of transplanted tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst 1981;67:637.
254. Rosenberg SA, Spiess P, Lafreniere R. A new approach to the adoptive immunotherapy of cancer with tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. Science 1986;233:1318.
255. Topalian SL, Rosenberg SA. Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL). Evidence for specific immune reactions against growing cancers in mice and humans. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg
SA, eds. Important advances in oncology. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1990:19.
256. Barth RJ, Mulé JJ, Asher AL. Identification of unique murine tumor associated antigens by tumor infiltrating lymphocytes using tumor specific secretion of interferon-gamma and tumor necrosis
factor. J Immunol Methods 1991;140:269.
257. Hellström I, Hellström KE, Sjögren HO, et al. Demonstration of cell-mediated immunity to human neoplasms of various histological types. Int J Cancer 1971;7:1.
258. Hellström I, Hellström KE, Shepard TH. Cell-mediated immunity against antigens common to human colonic carcinomas and fetal gut epithelium. Int J Cancer 1970;6:346.
259. Boon T, Coulie PG, Van den Eynde B. Tumor antigens recognized by T cells. Immunol Today 1997;18:267.
260. Rosenberg SA. A new era for cancer immunotherapy based on the genes that encode cancer antigens. Immunity 1999;10:281.
261. Rosenberg SA. Cancer vaccines based on the identification of genes encoding cancer regression antigens. Immunol Today 1997;18:175.
262. Cox AL, Skipper J, Chen Y, et al. Identification of a peptide recognized by five melanoma-specific human cytotoxic T cell lines. Science 1994;264:716.
263. Van der Bruggen P, Traversari C, Chomez P, et al. A gene encoding an antigen recognized by cytolytic T lymphocytes on a human melanoma. Science 1991;254:1643.
264. Van Den Eynde B, Peeters O, De Backer O, et al. A new family of genes coding for an antigen recognized by autologous cytolytic T lymphocytes on a human melanoma. J Exp Med
1995;182:689.
265. Kawakami Y, Eliyahu S, Delgado CH, et al. Cloning of the gene coding for a shared human melanoma antigen recognized by autologous T cells infiltrating into tumor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1994;91:3515.
266. Coulie PG, Brichard V, Van Pel A, et al. A new gene coding for a differentiation antigen recognized by autologous cytolytic T lymphocytes on HLA-A2 melanomas. J Exp Med 1994;180:35.
267. Kawakami Y, Eliyahu S, Delgado CH, et al. Identification of a human melanoma antigen recognized by tumor infiltrating lymphocytes associated with in vivo tumor rejection. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 1994;91:6458.
268. Brichard V, Van Pel A, Wolfel T, et al. The tyrosinase gene codes for an antigen recognized by autologous cytolytic T lymphocytes on HLA-A2 melanomas. J Exp Med 1993;178:489.
269. Robbins PF, El-Gamil M, Kawakami Y, Rosenberg SA. Recognition of tyrosinase by tumor infiltrating lymphocytes from a patient responding to immunotherapy. Cancer Res 1994;54:3124.
270. Wang RF, Robbins PF, Kawakami Y, Kang XQ, Rosenberg SA. Identification of a gene encoding a melanoma tumor antigen recognized by HLA-A31-restricted tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. J
Exp Med 1995;181:799.
271. Wang RF, Appella E, Kawakami Y. Identification of TRP-2 as a human tumor antigen recognized by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1996;184:2207.
272. Salazar-Onfray F, Nakazawa T, Chhajlani V, et al. Synthetic peptides derived from the melanocyte-stimulating hormone receptor MC1R can stimulate HLA-A2-restricted cytotoxic T
lymphocytes that recognize naturally processed peptides on human melanoma cells. Cancer Res 1997;57:4348.
273. Robbins PF, El-Gamil M, Li YF, et al. A mutated B-catenin gene encodes a melanoma-specific antigen recognized by tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1996;183:1185.
274. Wolfel T, Hauer M, Schneider J, et al. A p16INK4A-insensitive CDK4 mutant targeted by cytolytic T lymphocytes in a human melanoma. Science 1995;269:1281.
275. Coulie PG, Lehmann F, Lethe B, et al. A mutated intron sequence codes for an antigenic peptide recognized by cytolytic T lymphocytes on a human melanoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1995;92:7976.
276. Mandruzzato S, Brasseur F, Andry G. A CASP-8 mutation recognized by cytolytic T lymphocytes on a human head and neck carcinoma. J Exp Med 1997;186:785.
277. Gueguen M, Matard JJ, Gaugler B. An antigen recognized by autologous CTLs on a human bladder carcinoma. J Immunol 1998;160:6188.

278. Robbins PF, El-Gamil M, Li Y, et al. Cloning of a new gene encoding an antigen recognized by melanoma-specific HLA-A24-restricted tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. J Immunol 1995;154:5944.
279. Ikeda H, Lethe B, Lehmann F. Characterization of an antigen that is recognized on a melanoma showing partial HLA loss by CTL expressing an NK inhibitory receptor. Immunity 1999;6:199.
280. Shichijo S, Nakao M, Imai Y. A gene encoding antigenic peptides of human squamous cell carcinoma recognized by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1998;187:277.
281. Khanna R, Burrows SR, Kurilla MG, et al. Localization of Epstein-Barr virus cytotoxic T cell epitopes using recombinant vaccinia: implications for vaccine development. J Exp Med
1992;176:169.
282. Murray RJ, Kurilla MG, Brooks JM, et al. Identification of target antigens for the human cytotoxic T cell response to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV): implications for the immune control of
EBV-positive malignancies. J Exp Med 1992;176:157.
283. Kannagi M, Matsushita S, Shida HHS. Cytotoxic T cell response and expression of the target antigen in HTLV-1 infection. Leukemia 1994;8:S54.
284. Cerny A, Ferrari C, Chisari FV. The class Irestricted cytotoxic T lymphocyte response to predetermined epitopes in the hepatitis B and C viruses. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1994;189:169.
285. Topalian SL, Rivoltini L, Mancini M, et al. Human CD4+ T cells specifically recognize a shared melanoma-associated antigen encoded by the tyrosinase gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1994;91:9461.
286. Halder T, Pawelec G, Kirkin AF, et al. Isolation of novel HLA-DR restricted potential tumor-associated antigens from the melanoma cell line FM3. Cancer Res 1997;57:3238.
287. Pieper R, Christian RE, Gonzales MI, et al. Biochemical identification of a mutated human melanoma antigen recognized by CD4+ T cells. J Exp Med 1999;189:757.
288. Wang RF, Wang X, Atwood AL, Topalian SL, Rosenberg SA. Cloning genes encoding MHC class IIrestricted antigens: mutated CDC27 as a tumor antigen. Science 1999;284:1351.
289. Wang RF, Wang X, Rosenberg SA. Identification of a novel major histocompatibility complex class IIrestricted tumor antigen resulting from a chromosomal rearrangement recognized by CD4+
T cells. J Exp Med 1999;189:1659.
290. Wang RF, Parkhurst MR, Kawakami Y, Robbins PF, Rosenberg SA. Utilization of an alternative open reading frame of a normal gene in generating a novel human cancer antigen. J Exp Med
1996;183:1131.
291. Wang RF, Johnston SL, Topalian SL, Schwartzentruber DJ, Rosenberg SA. A breast and melanoma-shared tumor antigen: T cell responses to antigenic peptides translated from different open
reading frames. J Immunol 1998;161:3596.
292. Robbins PF, El-Gamil M, Li YF, et al. The intronic region of an incompletely spliced gp100 transcript encodes an epitope recognized by melanoma-reactive tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. J
Immunol 1997;159:303.
293. Kawkami Y, Eliyahu S, Jennings C. Recognition of multiple epitopes in the human melanoma antigen gp100 associated with in vivo tumor regression. J Immunol 1995;154:3961.
294. Kawakami Y, Robbins PF, Wang X, et al. Identification of new melanoma epitopes on melanosomal proteins recognized by tumor infiltrating T lymphocytes restricted by HLA-A1, -A2, and -A3
alleles. J Immunol 1998;161:6985.
295. Skipper JC, Kittlesen DJ, Hendrickson RC. Shared epitopes for HLA-A3-restricted melanoma-reactive human CTL include a naturally processed epitope from Pmel-17/gp100. J Immunol
1996;157:5027.
296. Kang XQ, Kawakami Y, Sakaguchi K. Identification of a tyrosinase epitope recognized by HLA-A24 restricted tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. J Immunol 1995;155:1343.
297. Kittlesen DJ, Thompson LW, Gulden PH, et al. Human melanoma patients recognize an HLA-A1-restricted CTL epitope from tyrosinase containing two cysteine residues: implications for tumor
vaccine development. J Immunol 1998;160:2099.
298. Wolfel T, Van Pel A, Brichard V, et al. Two tyrosinase nonapeptides recognized on HLA-A2 melanomas by autologous cytolytic T lymphocytes. Eur J Immunol 1994;24:759.
299. Kohler G, Milstein C. Continuous culture of fused cells secreting antibodies of predefined specificity. Nature 1975;256:495.
300. Rosenberg SA, Grimm EA, McGrogan M, et al. Biologic activity of recombinant human interleukin-2 produced in E. coli. Science 1984;223:1412.
301. Rosenberg SA, Mule JJ, Spiess PJ, Reichert CM, Schwarz S. Regression of established pulmonary metastases and subcutanous tumor mediated by the systemic administration of high-dose
recombinant IL-2. J Exp Med 1985;161:1169.
302. Schwartzentruber DJ. Interleukin-2: clinical applications: principles of administration and management of side effects. In: Rosenberg SA, ed. Principles and practice of biologic therapy of cancer.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 2000:32.
303. Kammula US, White DE, Rosenberg SA. Trends in the safety high-dose bolus interleukin-2 administration in patients with metastatic cancer. Cancer 1998;83:797.
304. Cormier JN, Salgaller ML, Prevette T, et al. Enhancement of cellular immunity in melanoma patients immunized with a peptide from MART-1/Melan A. Cancer J Sci Am 1997;3:37.
305. Salgaller ML, Marincola FM, Cormier JN, Rosenberg SA. Immunization against epitopes in the human melanoma antigen gp100 following patient immunization with synthetic peptides. Cancer
Res 1996;56:4749.
306. Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, Schwartzentruber DJ, et al. Immunologic and therapeutic evaluation of a synthetic vaccine for the treatment of patients with metastatic melanoma. Nature Med
1998;4:321.
307. Parkhurst MR, Salgaller ML, Southwood S, et al. Improved induction of melanoma reactive CTL with peptides from the melanoma antigen gp100 modified at HLA-A* 0210 binding residues. J
Immunol 1996;157:2539.
308. Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT, Muul LM, et al. Observations of the systemic administration of autologous lymphokine-activated killer cells and recombinant interleukin-2 to patients with metastatic
cancer. N Engl J Med 1985;313:1485.
309. Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT, Muul LM, et al. A progress report on the treatment of 157 patients with advanced cancer using lymphokine activated killer cells and interleukin-2 or high-dose
interleukin-2 alone. N Engl J Med 1987;316:889.
310. Rosenberg SA. The immunotherapy and gene therapy of cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;180.
311. Rosenberg SA, Terry W. Passive immunotherapy of cancer in animals and man. Cancer Res 1977;25:323.
312. Yron I, Wood TA Jr, Spiess PJ, Rosenberg SA. In vitro growth of murine T cells. V. The isolation and growth of lymphoid cells infiltrating syngeneic solid tumors. J Immunol 1980;125:238.
313. Lotze MT, Grimm E, Mazumder A, et al. In vitro growth of cytotoxic human lymphocytes. IV. Lysis of fresh and cultured autologous tumor by lymphocytes cultured in T cell growth factor
(TCGF). Cancer Res 1981;41:4420.
314. Grimm EA, Ramsey KM, Mazumder A, et al. Lymphokine-activated killer cell phenomenon. II. The precursor phenotype is serologically distinct from peripheral T lymphocytes, memory CTL,
and NK cells. J Exp Med 1983;157:884.
315. Roberts R, Lotze MT, Rosenberg SA. Separation and functional studies of the human lymphokine-activated killer cell. Cancer Res 1987;47:4366.
316. Phillips LL. Dissection of the LAK phenomenon. J Exp Med 1986;164:814.
317. Mulé JJ, Shu S, Schwartz SL, Rosenberg SA. Adoptive immunotherapy of established pulmonary metastases with LAK cells and recombinant interleukin-2. Science 1984; 225:1487.
318. Lafreniere R, Rosenberg SA. Adoptive immunotherapy of murine hepatic metastases with lymphokine activated killer (LAK) cells and recombinant interleukin-2 (RIL-2) can mediate the
regression of both immunogenic and non-immunogenic sarcomas and an adenocarcinoma. J Immunol 1985;135:4273.
319. Ettinghausen SE, Lipford EH III, Mulé JJ, et al. Recombinant interleukin-2 stimulates in vivo proliferation of adoptively transferred lymphokine activated killer (LAK) cells. J Immunol
1985;135:3623.
320. Topalian SL, Rosenberg SA. Adoptive cellular therapy: basic principles. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Biologic therapy of cancer. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1991:178.
321. Galili U, Vanky F, Rodriguez L, et al. Activated T lymphocytes within human solid tumors. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1979;6:129.
322. Whiteside TL, Miescher S, Hurlimann J, et al. Separation, phenotyping, and limiting dilution analysis of T-lymphocytes infiltrating human solid tumors. Int J Cancer 1986;38:803.
323. Whiteside TL, Miescher S, Hurlimman J, et al. Clonal analysis and in situ characterization of lymphocytes infiltrating human breast carcinomas. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1986;23:169.
324. Paine JT, Handa H, Yamasaki T, et al. Immunohistochemical analysis of infiltrating lymphocytes in central nervous system tumors. Neurosurgery 1986;18:766.
325. Itoh K, Tilden AB, Balch CM. Interleukin-2 activation of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte infiltrating into human metastatic melanomas. Cancer Res 1986;46:3011.
326. Kurnick JT, Kradin RL, Blumberg R, et al. Functional characterization of T lymphocytes propagated from human lung carcinoma. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 1986;38:367.
327. Rabinowich H, Cohen R, Bruderman J, et al. Functional analysis of mononuclear cells infiltrating into tumors; lysis of autologous human tumor cells by cultured infiltrating lymphocytes. Cancer
Res 1987;47:173.
328. Muul LM, Spiess PJ, Director EP, et al. Identification of specific cytolytic immune responses against autologous tumor in humans bearing malignant melanoma. J Immunol 1987;138:989.
329. Heo DL, Whiteside TL, Johnson JT, et al. Long-term interleukin-2-dependent growth and cytotoxic activity of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes from human squamous cell carcinomas of the head
and neck. Cancer Res 1987;47:6353.
330. Itoh K, Platsooucas CD, Balch CM. Autologous tumor-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in the infiltrate of human metastatic melanomas: activation by interleukin-2 and autologous tumor cells
and involvement of the T cell receptor. J Exp Med 1988;168:1419.
331. Kuppner MC, Hamou MF, de Tribolet N. Immunohistological and functional analyses of lymphoid infiltrates in human glioblastomas. Cancer Res 1988;48:6926.
332. Saito T, Tanaka R, Yoshida S, et al. Immunohistochemical analysis of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and major histocompatibility antigens in human gliomas and metastatic brain tumors. Surg
Neurol 1988;29:435.
333. Heo DS, Whiteside TL, Kanbour A, et al. Lymphocytes infiltrating human ovarian tumors. I. Role of Leu-19 (NKH1)-positive recombinant IL-2 activated cultures of lymphocytes infiltrating
human ovarian tumors. J Immunol 1988;140:4042.
334. Belldegrun A, Muul LM, Rosenberg SA. Interleukin-2 expanded tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in human renal cell cancer: isolation, characterization, and anti-tumor activity. Cancer Res
1988;48:206.
335. Radrizzani M, Gambacorti-Passerini C, Parmiani G, et al. Lysis by interleukin-2 stimulated tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes of autologous and allogeneic tumor target cells. Cancer Immunol
Immunother 1989;28:67.
336. Topalian SL, Solomon D, Rosenberg SA. Tumor-specific cytolysis by lymphocytes infiltrating human melanomas. J Immunol 1989;142:3714.
337. Tagaki S, Chen K, Schwarz R, et al. Functional and phenotypic analysis of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes isolated from human primary and metastatic liver tumors and cultured in recombinant
interleukin-2. Cancer 1989;63:102.
338. Balch CM, Riley LB, Bae TJ, et al. Patterns of human tumor infiltrating lymphocytes in 120 human cancers. Arch Surg 1990;125:200.
339. Haas GP, Solomon D, Rosenberg SA. Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes from non renal urological malignancies. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1990;30:342.
340. Rivoltini L, Avienti F, Orazi A, et al. Phenotypic and functional analysis of lymphocytes infiltrating pediatric tumors, with a characterization of the tumor phenotype. Cancer Immunol Immunother
1992;34:241.
341. Schwartzentruber DJ, Topalian SL, Mancini MJ, et al. Specific release of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, tumor necrosis factor- a, and IFN-g by human tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes after autologous tumor stimulation. J Immunol 1991;146:153.
342. Hom SS, Topalian SL, Simoni ST, et al. Common expression of melanoma tumor-associated antigens recognized by human tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes: analysis by HLA restriction. J
Immunother 1991;10:153.
343. Darrow TL, Slingluff CL, Seigler HF. The role of class 1 antigens in recognition of melanoma cells by tumor-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes: evidence for shared tumor antigens. J Immunol
1989;142:3329.
344. Stotter H, Wiebke EA, Tomita S, et al. Cytokines alter target cell susceptibility to lysis. II. Evaluation of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. J Immunol 1989;142:1767.
345. Kawakami Y, Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT. Interleukin-4 promotes the growth of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes cytotoxic for human autologous melanoma. J Exp Med 1988;168:2183.
346. Kawakami Y, Zakut R, Topalian SL, et al. Shared human melanoma antigens: recognition by tumor infiltrating lymphocytes in HLA-A2.1-transfected melanomas. J Immunol 1992;148:638.
347. Rosenberg SA, Aebersold P, Cornetta K, et al. Gene transfer into humansimmunotherapy of patients with advanced melanoma, using tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes modified by retroviral gene
transduction. N Engl J Med 1990;323:570.
348. Rosenberg SA. Gene therapy for cancer. JAMA 1992;268:2416.
349. Riddell SR, Watanabe KS, Goodrich JM, et al. Restoration of viral immunity in immunodeficient humans by the adoptive transfer of T cell clones. Science 1992;257:238.
350. Yee C, Gilbert MJ, Riddell SR. Isolation of tyrosinase-specific CD8+ and CD4+ T cell clones from the peripheral blood of melanoma patients following in vitro stimulation with recombinant
vaccinia virus. J Immunol 1996;157:4079.
351. Dudley ME, Nishimura MI, Czopik AK, Rosenberg SA. Anti-tumor immunization with a minimal epitope (G9-209-2M) leads to a functionally heterogeneous CTL response. J Immunother 1999 (in
press).
352. Yee C, Savage PA, Lee PP, Davis MM, Greenberg PD. Isolation of high avidity melanoma-reactive CTL from heterogeneous populations using peptide-MHC tetramers. J Immunol

1999;162:2227.

SECTION 19.1 Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 19.1
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
MARK J. RATAIN
Introduction
Pharmacokinetics: Fundamental Principles
Absorption
Distribution
Metabolism
Excretion
Pharmacokinetics: What's Important to the Clinician?
Clearance
Half-Life
Active Metabolites
Routes of Elimination
Basic Methodology of Pharmacokinetic Studies
Pharmacodynamics
Fundamental Principles
Methodologic Issues
Rational Use of Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic Data in Clinical Oncology
Dose Modification for Toxicity
Dose Modification for Impaired Clearance
Dose Modification for Altered Pharmacodynamics
Adaptive Control of Chemotherapy
Modulating Drugs
Oral Administration
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Medical oncologists prescribe and administer those drugs with the narrowest therapeutic index in all of medicine. Thus, understanding variability in toxicity and
response is of utmost importance. Such variability can be divided into two components, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Pharmacokinetics, the relationship
between time and plasma concentration (Fig. 19.1-1), is concerned with understanding issues such as metabolism and excretion. It can be simply described as “what
the body does to the drug.”

FIGURE 19.1-1. A representative pharmacokinetic profile relating time and concentration. The area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) is shaded.

The clinical interpretation of pharmacokinetic results requires another set of information, the relationship between plasma concentrations (or dose as a surrogate) and
effect, or pharmacodynamics (Fig. 19.1-2). This can be described as “what the drug does to the body.” The understanding of anticancer pharmacodynamics has
increased dramatically, although most studies that have successfully correlated concentration with effect have focused on toxicity end points. 1

FIGURE 19.1-2. A representative pharmacodynamic profile relating concentration and effect. The concentration at which there is half-maximal effect (EC 50) is
indicated. Note that the concentration-response curve is steepest around the EC 50 and is relatively flat at both low and high concentrations.

It has become fashionable to conduct clinical pharmacology studies in conjunction with early clinical trials of new anticancer agents, even in multiinstitution (i.e.,
Cooperative Group) studies. Such studies may have as their objectives pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic end points, or both. In phase I trials, the primary
pharmacologic objective is to define the pharmacokinetics to optimize scheduling and dosing for subsequent studies. Pharmacodynamic end points are generally
secondary, unless an adequate number of patients are studied at or near the recommended phase II dose. Phase II trials offer a different opportunity, because
generally all patients are treated at the same dose. Thus, variability in toxicity or response may potentially be related to variability in pharmacokinetics. 2 In addition,
population pharmacokinetic studies can be conducted at this phase, with a relatively large patient base, sparse sampling (one to four samples per patient), and the
implementation of sophisticated modeling programs.

PHARMACOKINETICS: FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES
The study of pharmacokinetics is classically considered to consist of four aspects: absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion. Each of these issues is

addressed in their general aspects, and specific examples are given as appropriate.
ABSORPTION
Because most anticancer drugs are administered intravenously, most oncologists have only infrequently dealt with those issues specific to the clinical pharmacology
of orally administered agents. 3 The term absorption has historically implied transport across the intestinal mucosa, although it has been recognized that the intestinal
mucosa is important in xenobiotic metabolism. 4,5
The degree of absorption can be expressed as the bioavailability, which in practice is determined by comparing the area under the concentration-time curve (AUC)
after oral administration to the AUC after intravenous administration. A low bioavailability can be due to either poor absorption per se, or high first-pass metabolism. 6,7
In addition, the presence of transport proteins in the gut, such as P glycoprotein, also impact on the oral bioavailability of anticancer agents. 8
Alteration in gastrointestinal absorptive capacity can be due to a variety of factors common in patients with cancer. Recent surgery may influence absorption, as
demonstrated in regard to UFT (tegafur, uracil, and 5-fluorouracil) administration in the early postoperative period after partial gastrectomy. 9 Prior chemotherapy can
be a major issue, and diminished absorption may be present in the absence of clinical gastrointestinal toxicity. 10 Concomitant medications affecting gastrointestinal
motility, such as opiates or metoclopramide, may also be a factor. 11 It also should be recognized that cytotoxic chemotherapy may alter plasma concentrations of other
medications given on a chronic basis, such as phenytoin or verapamil. 12,13
Absorption also must be considered in regard to subcutaneous or intramuscular dosing. Although bioavailability via these routes is usually close to 100%, there may
be decreased bioavailability due to local drug degradation or other factors. 14
DISTRIBUTION
Drugs usually distribute after administration from the plasma into extracellular and intracellular fluids. If a hypothetical drug were given as a 100-mg instantaneous
bolus, the initial concentration would be 100 mg divided by the volume of distribution (the higher the volume, the lower the initial concentration). Subsequent
concentrations would then be determined by the drug's rate of elimination. In the simplest pharmacokinetic model, the clearance is equal to the product of the volume
of distribution and the elimination rate constant.
In actuality, distribution is much more complex. A drug's pharmacokinetics can be described by one or more interconnected compartments, and distribution is then
represented by drug moving from the “central” compartment to a “peripheral” compartment ( Fig. 19.1-3). This description is important for several reasons.

FIGURE 19.1-3. A schematic diagram of a standard two-compartment pharmakokinetic model. V, volume.

Because the central compartment is usually plasma, the site of action is probably more closely related to a peripheral compartment (i.e., intracellular fluid). Thus,
plasma concentrations may be falling as the pharmacologic effect increases ( Fig. 19.1-4). This inverse relationship may be compounded further for anticancer drugs
by the known delay between the cytotoxic event and its clinical manifestations.

FIGURE 19.1-4. A reverse hysteresis loop representing the relationship between concentration, time, and pharmacologic effect (e.g., DNA damage). The plasma
concentration rises during the period of drug administration (i.e., 24-hour infusion). The plasma concentration falls immediately after the infusion ends, but the tumor
concentration continues to rise (due to distribution). Thus, the maximal effect occurs later than the end of the infusion (maximal plasma concentrations). Although the
same plasma concentration occurs both during infusion and after infusion, the effect is greater when the concentration is falling.

In general, drug that distributes to the peripheral compartments eventually redistributes back to the plasma or central compartment. Drugs that are extensively
distributed usually have a long terminal half-life, which can be highly dependent on the rate of redistribution. Such drugs are often highly protein-bound. This can have
important clinical ramifications for highly schedule-dependent agents such as methotrexate, which distributes to “third spaces” such as pleural effusions or ascites.
METABOLISM
Metabolism is the most critical and complex aspect of pharmacokinetics for most agents. The great majority of xenobiotic metabolism takes place in the liver, although
cytochrome P-450 enzymes and uridine diphosphate–glucuronosyltransferases are present in the small bowel, 5,15 and both carboxylesterases 16 and deaminases17 are
present in plasma and other tissues.
Xenobiotic metabolism can be divided into phase I and phase II reactions 18 (Table 19.1-1). Phase I reactions are oxidative, or reductive, reactions and include the
P-450 system. Phase II reactions are conjugative reactions, such as acetylation and glucuronidation. Phase I reactions usually make a drug more susceptible to
phase II reactions, which generally produce molecules amenable to biliary or renal excretion. These metabolic reactions evolved for the purpose of xenobiotic
detoxification, but can also result in drug activation.

TABLE 19.1-1. Selected Drug-Metabolizing Enzymes of Importance in Oncology

An area of rapidly increasing importance is genetically determined variability in drug-metabolizing enzymes. 19 Such genetic variability can result in enhanced toxicity
because of impaired detoxification, 20 enhanced activation, 21 or lack of desired effect due to impaired activation. 22 Furthermore, genetically determined variability may
also be a risk factor for carcinogenesis. 23 A number of distinct drug-metabolizing enzymes have been conclusively demonstrated to be polymorphic (see Table
19.1-1).
An individual's metabolic capacity can also be affected by a variety of other factors, such as hepatic dysfunction, nutrition, and other medications. 18 These are all
factors that are highly variable in patients receiving chemotherapy. 24,25
Phase I metabolism (i.e., the P-450 system) appears to be more sensitive to hepatic dysfunction than phase II enzymes (i.e., glucuronidation). 26,27 Although
oncologists generally monitor liver function tests during chemotherapy, the serum bilirubin (the most commonly used measure) is a very insensitive measure of
changes in plasma drug clearance. Malnutrition, like hepatic dysfunction, may result in decreased synthesis of drug-metabolizing enzymes, decreased clearance, and
enhanced toxicity. 25,28,29 and 30
One of the most important considerations with regard to the elimination of anticancer drugs is the effect of other medications. Cancer patients receive a large number
of medications that can affect metabolism (and excretion) of concomitant chemotherapy ( Table 19.1-2). Given the complexity of most treatment regimens (multiple
cytotoxic agents, antiemetics, analgesics, anticonvulsants, corticosteroids), relatively few specific data are available in this regard.

TABLE 19.1-2. Potential Drug Interactions with Chemotherapy

EXCRETION
There are two major routes of excretion, renal and biliary. Both are complex processes involving a chain of events, any of which can be modulated by disease
processes or other medications. 31,32,33 and 34
Xenobiotics may undergo filtration, secretion, and reabsorption on their journey from the glomeruli to the ureter. The creatinine clearance, either measured from a
timed urine specimen or calculated based on a variety of formulas, is often used as a surrogate for the glomerular filtration rate (GFR), although these formulas have
limited accuracy. 35,36 and 37 Furthermore, this surrogate may be used to describe an individual's overall renal function. Patients with reduced renal function should be
considered for dose reduction if renal excretion is a major component of the agent's clearance. 32
A great effort has been expended in trying to predict carboplatin pharmacokinetics. 31,38,39 and 40 The most accurate approach uses chromium-labeled EDTA
(ethylenediamine-tetraacetic acid). 41,42 Simpler techniques, such as using a measured or calculated creatinine clearance, have inconsistently been predictive,
because of the poor correlation between creatinine clearance and GFR. 35,36 and 37,43,44
Physicians also commonly use a measured or estimated creatinine clearance to guide cisplatin dosing, primarily as a determinant of dose modifications from a
standard body surface area (BSA)–adjusted dose. It is important to recognize that GFR is normally correlated with BSA, so that smaller patients appear to have
poorer renal function, unless the GFR is also adjusted for the BSA (mL/min/m 2 or mL/min/1.73 m2).
Tubular secretion and reabsorption may also be important in drug excretion. 45,46 and 47 As an example, it has been suggested that cisplatin's reabsorption is saturable,
resulting in enhanced proportional reabsorption when administered by infusion, potentially resulting in enhanced toxicity. 48,49 Methotrexate and topotecan50 also
undergo secretion and reabsorption in the renal tubules. Methotrexate's renal handling is highly influenced by the urinary pH, 51 and because it is a weak acid,
alkalinization results in enhanced excretion.
Biliary excretion involves a number of transport systems, including P glycoprotein, a known cause of multidrug resistance. 33,34,52,53 Another important system appears
to be the more recently described multifunctional organic anion transporter, cMOAT (canalicular multispecific organic anion transporter). 54
cMOAT is the primary transporter of SN-38, the active metabolite of irinotecan. 55 These systems can be inhibited by a variety of disease processes, as well as by
other drugs (cyclosporine A, PSC-833) or formulants (Cremophor). 56,57
After biliary excretion, reabsorption may take place in the small intestine, leading to an enterohepatic circulation. 58,59 This is particularly relevant for those drugs
whose primary metabolite is a glucuronide, because of the presence of bacterial b-glucuronidases in the gut, which cleave off the glucoronide. 60,61
The serum bilirubin is often used to determine dose modifications for hepatically cleared drugs. However, this is only a marker of impaired excretion, and it is poorly
correlated with impaired metabolism. (Metabolism may be better represented by measures of synthetic function, such as serum albumin.)

PHARMACOKINETICS: WHAT'S IMPORTANT TO THE CLINICIAN?

CLEARANCE
The generation of pharmacokinetic data is easy, but its interpretation can be quite overwhelming, especially to a clinician attempting to apply such data to a particular
patient or study. A good starting point is the assessment of total plasma clearance. Clearance can be calculated in one of two ways: either by measurement (or
estimation) of the AUC after a single dose (see Fig. 19.1-1), or by determination of the steady-state concentration (C ss) during continuous infusion.

or

Although the absolute value of the clearance may be of some interest to the pharmacologist, the clinician should be primarily concerned with variability in clearance,
best represented as the coefficient of variation (CV), the ratio of the standard deviation (not standard error) to the mean. The CV may be as low as 10% to 20% for
drugs with low variability, or as high as 75% to 100% for drugs with high variability. Most drugs have a CV in the 20% to 40% range.
After understanding the extent of variability, the next question is to explain it, particularly if the CV is quite large. This becomes even more relevant if patients with a
low clearance have an increased risk of toxicity. Drugs with a very high CV should be closely studied for genetically determined polymorphisms of the primary
metabolizing system.62,63
Another important source of variability is saturation of the major metabolic or excretory site. If saturation occurs at clinically relevant concentrations, the clearance
generally decreases dramatically at higher doses, and the drug is considered to have nonlinear pharmacokinetics. Optimal administration of such drugs requires a full
understanding of the complexities involved, as well as the potential effects of disease and other medications.
In assessing variability in AUC or clearance, variability in protein binding may be an important issue. The degree of protein binding may range from negligible to more
than 99%. Only the free (unbound) drug is active, whereas conventional assays quantitate the total (free plus bound) drug. If significant variability in protein binding is
found for a highly bound drug, it may be difficult to interpret plasma concentrations without directly measuring the free drug or extent of protein binding. For some
agents, however, such as etoposide, it may be possible to estimate protein binding from simple parameters, such as serum albumin, bilirubin, and age. 64,65
A potential source of variability that has been greatly exaggerated in oncology practice is variability in body size. Minimal data support the dosing of chemotherapy on
the basis of BSA in adults. Because size may have no significant correlation with clearance, this practice may even increase the extent of variability in AUC. 66,67,68 and
69
Further studies of this important issue are needed, if only to decrease the complexity of oncology practice.
HALF-LIFE
For highly schedule-dependent drugs, variability in half-life may be more important than variability in clearance. Although half-life and clearance are generally
inversely correlated, an increased half-life may also be a consequence of an increased volume of distribution. This may have significant consequences, as has been
well established for methotrexate's distribution into ascites or pleural effusions. 70
Variability in half-life influences variability in time above any specific plasma concentration. This finding is becoming increasingly well recognized as an important
factor in both toxicity and response. 71,72
Knowledge of the half-life may also be important for protocol designs, because schedule-dependent drugs with short half-lives (e.g., cytarabine, 5-fluorouracil) might
be best administered by continuous infusions or frequent dosing. It may also be critical to know the half-life for estimating when plasma cytotoxic activity is negligible
in the context of peripheral stem cell reinfusion or colony-stimulating factor administration. 73,74
ACTIVE METABOLITES
Although metabolism generally results in detoxification, some drugs may have active circulating metabolites ( Table 19.1-3). These include drugs that are true
prodrugs, having no intrinsic cytotoxic activity, and drugs that have metabolites with comparable or greater cytotoxicity to the parent. It is also important to understand
the pathways through which activation occurs. There may be theoretical advantages to enhancing or inhibiting formation of the active metabolites, which may have a
different “therapeutic index” (ratio of beneficial to harmful effects) than the parent drug. This alteration of active metabolite formation can potentially be accomplished
by the use of inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole) or inducers (i.e., phenobarbital) of specific drug-metabolizing enzyme systems. 75,76 Finally, an identifiable genetic basis for
differences in activation may exist, which leads to different effects in specific patient populations. 22

TABLE 19.1-3. Oncology Drugs with Active Circulating Metabolites

ROUTES OF ELIMINATION
Oncologists are generally well aware of the potential for drug elimination to be impaired in patients with end-organ dysfunction. However, relatively little information is
available to guide dose modifications. Even if a physician knew an individual's clearance before dosing, it would be difficult to predict the extent of toxicity because of
the risk of prolonged low concentrations (for schedule-dependent drugs) or concomitant pharmacodynamic factors (resulting in enhanced sensitivity, such as
malnutrition).
The only generalization that can be made is that variability increases as end-organ dysfunction develops. Formal phase I studies are warranted in patients with
end-organ dysfunction. 77,78 and 79

BASIC METHODOLOGY OF PHARMACOKINETIC STUDIES

The first pharmacokinetic studies of a new agent are almost always conducted in conjunction with phase I studies. Proper conduct of such studies requires a great
deal of planning, as well as technical and logistical expertise. Data from preclinical studies are critical in the design. These generally include evaluations of in vitro
cytotoxicity, preclinical pharmacokinetics, in vitro metabolism, in vitro toxicology (myelosuppression), and whole-animal toxicology.
Pharmacokinetic data can be collected using either intensive or sparse sampling strategies. In the first pharmacokinetic studies, intensive sampling is used to try to
model each individual's pharmacokinetics. Data from all patients can be combined in two basic ways: either with a simple descriptive summary (mean ± standard
deviation) of the fundamental parameters, or by pooling all data into a single analysis. The latter approach requires a high level of statistical and computational
sophistication, but may generate insights not available by other means. 80
It is also useful to begin to plan subsequent pharmacologic studies in the context of the initial pharmacokinetic analysis. These subsequent studies are often primarily
concerned with pharmacodynamic issues, relating toxicity or response to pharmacokinetic variables. Such studies benefit greatly from the use of optimal sampling
strategies, in which only a few samples are collected on each patient. 81,82,83,84,85,86 and 87

PHARMACODYNAMICS
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES
The fundamental objective of pharmacodynamic studies is understanding variability in effect. 24 In phase I trials, the primary objective is to understand variability in
effect (toxicity) as a function of dose. The investigator can also begin to understand the relationship between pharmacokinetic end points (i.e., AUC) and effect.
However, because phase I trials encompass multiple doses, dose is correlated with AUC (and other end points), and relationships between AUC and effect are
confounded if the dose range is wide. 88 Thus, phase II trials in which all patients receive a single drug at a fixed dose offer an important opportunity to correlate
pharmacokinetic end points (due solely to pharmacokinetic variability) and effect (both toxicity and response). 2
Since the 1980s, a progressively increasing number of studies have been published that have included pharmacodynamic end points. 1,24,88,89 Such studies primarily
have used AUC or Css as the pharmacokinetic parameter, and blood count nadirs as the pharmacodynamic end point. More recently, several studies have
demonstrated that time above a threshold concentration is an important pharmacokinetic parameter, which is consistent with the understanding that schedule is an
important determinant of antineoplastic drug action. 71,72,90
METHODOLOGIC ISSUES
The methodology for pharmacodynamic studies should use generally recognized outcomes. Historically, blood count nadirs have been used, although this approach
has several limitations. Nadir blood counts, by definition, measure the lowest observed blood count, which is highly dependent on the number of observations. In
addition, nadir blood counts are not useful in the context of high-dose chemotherapy. Thus, it is potentially desirable to incorporate all blood counts and to use a
methodology robust enough to properly analyze missing data. 91,92,93 and 94
Nonhematologic toxicity is an even more difficult problem, as it is often graded rather than continuous, and subjective rather than objective. Statistical methodologies
appropriate for such end points are necessary, such as logistic regression and its variants. 88
The “holy grail” of antineoplastic clinical pharmacologists is to correlate pharmacologic end points with response. Although examples of plasma clearance being
correlated with response are available, 95,96 and 97 it is likely that variability in response is primarily due to tumor factors (i.e., intrinsic drug resistance) rather than patient
factors (i.e., altered clearance). 98,99
Another major challenge is to expand the knowledge of anticancer pharmacodynamics from single agents to combinations. Such studies are logistically difficult,
because plasma samples must be collected at times appropriate for each of the drugs in the regimen. Some work in this area has been done with regard to the effect
of a second drug on carboplatin-induced thrombocytopenia. 100,101 and 102

RATIONAL USE OF PHARMACOKINETIC AND PHARMACODYNAMIC DATA IN CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Although oncologists may have difficulty exactly defining pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, many of the important principles are incorporated into oncology
clinical practice. By understanding that the principles are not foreign, the oncologist can better use principles of clinical pharmacology to optimize dosing of these
highly toxic agents.
DOSE MODIFICATION FOR TOXICITY
It is common practice to reduce drug dosages for excessive toxicity. But a variety of reasons may be responsible for excessive toxicity, which can generally be
categorized as either pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic ( Table 19.1-4). It is important to understand this distinction. If one assumes that decreasing drug
exposure (AUC) reduces the likelihood of response, then dose reduction may be inappropriate for patients with increased toxicity on a pharmacodynamic basis,
whereas patients with altered clearance can be dose-reduced yet maintain an acceptable AUC ( Fig. 19.1-5). Hypothetically, patients with normal clearance but
excessive toxicity might be best served by a change in treatment (or discontinuation of treatment if no alternative is available), rather than reduction to what might be
a subtherapeutic AUC.

TABLE 19.1-4. Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic Determinants of Chemotherapy Toxicity

FIGURE 19.1-5. Comparison of effect of altered pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics on toxicity and tumor concentrations. Alteration of pharmacokinetics (B)
compared to an average patient (A) results in enhanced toxicity due to an increased area under the concentration-time curve (AUC), whereas altered
pharmacodynamics (C) may result in enhanced toxicity at an average AUC. Dose reduction in the former case (B) results in an average tumor AUC, whereas in the
latter case (C), the tumor AUC may be subtherapeutic.

DOSE MODIFICATION FOR IMPAIRED CLEARANCE
It is common practice to assess hepatic and renal function (as appropriate for specific drugs) before initial (and subsequent) treatment. Such dose modifications are
encouraged but are generally empiric with a few exceptions (e.g., carboplatin, topotecan, paclitaxel). For other drugs, it may be obvious that a dose reduction is
necessary, but the appropriate degree of reduction may be unclear. It is also important to understand that the serum bilirubin, which is commonly used to screen for
hepatic dysfunction, is insensitive, and it should be complemented by measures of synthetic function, such as albumin.
DOSE MODIFICATION FOR ALTERED PHARMACODYNAMICS
It is well accepted that heavily pretreated patients have a lower chance of response. For the most part, this is due to altered pharmacodynamics (increased sensitivity
to myelosuppressive chemotherapy coupled with tumor resistance). If one proceeds with myelosuppressive therapy in this situation, a high degree of toxicity should
be expected. Thus, it is common to prospectively reduce doses to prevent such toxicity. It is also not surprising that achieving responses is very difficult in this setting,
because the patient's tolerance is less while the tumor's “tolerance” has increased.
Other situations may be much less clear. In such cases, determination of the patient's pharmacokinetics may be useful (in theory) in deciding whether dose
adjustment is appropriate, while aiming to avoid undertreatment (based on AUC) of the patient. Some evidence indicates that there are pharmacogenetic determinants
of cellular susceptibility to cytotoxic agents. Thus, one consideration in the management of patients with unexplained toxicity is to change the treatment (hypothesizing
that the patient has unique cellular susceptibility), rather than reducing the dosages.
ADAPTIVE CONTROL OF CHEMOTHERAPY
In most fields of medicine, the dosing of drugs with a relatively narrow therapeutic index is carefully monitored and controlled. 103,104 and 105 Examples include antibiotics
(e.g., aminoglycosides, vancomycin), psychotropic medications (e.g., lithium carbonate), anticonvulsants (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital),
cyclosporine A, and antiarrhythmics (e.g., digoxin, quinidine). Why has this approach not been widely implemented for cytotoxic chemotherapy, which inarguably has
a narrow therapeutic index?
The major difference is that cytotoxic drugs are administered infrequently and usually in combination (with overlapping side effects). It is generally believed that higher
doses are more effective; thus, any attempt to individualize dosing would attempt to deliver the maximal dose tolerated by each individual patient. This approach has
been applied in research settings, with varying degrees of success ( Table 19.1-5).

TABLE 19.1-5. Studies of Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (Adaptive Control) in Oncology

Investigators have used a variety of approaches to individualize dosing of cytotoxic drugs. These include using a target concentration or AUC, a target percentile,
individualization based on both concentration and pharmacodynamic factors, and individualization based on metabolism of a probe drug. These studies have yielded
important insights into the understanding of the potential importance of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic variability. However, adaptive control remains a
research tool. Analysis of methotrexate levels after high-dose methotrexate is still the only generally accepted use of plasma level monitoring in clinical oncology. 106
MODULATING DRUGS
The use of biochemical modulators of chemotherapy has a long history. Such an approach has been used to enhance the cytotoxicity of a specific agent (e.g.,
leucovorin with 5-fluorouracil) or to overcome drug resistance. Such modulators have generally been used to affect the pharmacodynamics of one or more agents. 107
Modulators can also be administered because of pharmacokinetic issues. Leucovorin is commonly dosed on the basis of methotrexate levels. 108 But drugs have not
yet been routinely used in oncology to specifically affect the pharmacokinetics of another agent.
The first decade of the twenty-first century will probably bring such approaches into mainstream oncology, driven both by technological and cost issues. For example,
ketoconazole is now widely used with cyclosporine to improve its bioavailability, thus reducing the overall cost of cyclosporine therapy. 109,110 A similar approach has
been applied to oral anticancer agents, using cyclosporine (an inhibitor of CYP3A4 and P glycoprotein) to increase the oral bioavailability of paclitaxel. 111 The ongoing
development of inhibitors of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase may allow 5-fluorouracil to be effectively administered orally. 112,113,114 and 115
Pharmacokinetic modulators may also be beneficial to reduce toxicity, if there is more than one route of elimination. As an example, it has been suggested that
cyclosporine A may ameliorate irinotecan-induced diarrhea by inhibiting biliary excretion of the toxic metabolite SN-38. 116,117
ORAL ADMINISTRATION

A resurgence of interest has been seen in oral administration of cytotoxic chemotherapy. If successful, this route of administration may be more acceptable to patients
and potentially be cost effective as well. 3 Prolonged oral administration will allow a more detailed evaluation of specific drugs, but will introduce new complexities
caused by diet, drug interactions, and compliance. Oncologists should become familiar with these issues and master a general understanding of interpatient and
intrapatient variability in bioavailability.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Kobayashi K, Jodrell DI, Ratain MJ. Pharmacodynamic-pharmacokinetic relationships and therapeutic drug monitoring. Cancer Surv 1993;17:51.
2. Ratain MJ, Rosner G, Allen SL, et al. Population pharmacodynamic study of amonafide: a Cancer and Leukemia Group B study. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:741.
3. DeMario MD, Ratain MJ. Oral chemotherapy: rationale and future directions. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2557.
4. Kolars JC, Schmiedlin-Ren P, Schuetz JD, et al. Identification of rifampin-inducible P450IIIA4 (CYP3A4) in human small bowel enterocytes. J Clin Invest 1992;90:1871.
5. Watkins PB. Drug metabolism by cytochromes P450 in the liver and small bowel. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1992;21:511.
6. Pond SM, Tozer TN. First-pass elimination. Basic concepts and clinical consequences. Clin Pharmacokinet 1984;9:1.
7. Weiss M. Use of metabolite AUC data in bioavailability studies to discriminate between absorption and first-pass extraction. Clin Pharmacokinet 1990;18:419.
8. Schinkel AH. The physiological function of drug-transporting P-glycoproteins. Semin Cancer Biol 1997;8:161.
9. Maehara Y, Takeuchi H, Oshiro T, et al. Effect of gastrectomy on the pharmacokinetics of tegafur, uracil, and 5- fluorouracil after oral administration of a 1:4 tegafur and uracil combination.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1994;33:445.
10. Choi KE, Ratain MJ, Williams SF, et al. Plasma pharmacokinetics of high-dose oral melphalan in patients treated with trialkylator chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow reinfusion. Cancer
Res 1989;49:1318.
11. Quijano RF, Ohnishi N, Umeda K, et al. Effect of atropine on gastrointestinal motility and the bioavailability of cyclosporine A in rats. Drug Metab Dispos 1993;21:141.
12. Neef C, de Voogd-van der Straaten I. An interaction between cytostatic and anticonvulsant drugs. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1988;43:372.
13. Kuhlmann J, Woodcock B, Wilke J, et al. Verapamil plasma concentrations during treatment with cytostatic drugs [published erratum appears in J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 1987;10:247]. J
Cardiovasc Pharmacol 1985;7:1003.
14. Salmonson T, Danielson BG, Wikstrom B. The pharmacokinetics of recombinant human erythropoietin after intravenous and subcutaneous administration to healthy subjects. Br J Clin
Pharmacol 1990;29:709.
15. Radominska-Pandya A, Little JM, Pandya JT, et al. UDP-glucuronosyltransferases in human intestinal mucosa. Biochim Biophys Acta 1998;1394:199.
16. Leinweber FJ. Possible physiological roles of carboxylic ester hydrolases. Drug Metab Rev 1987;18:379.
17. Thompson PW, Jones DD, Currey HL. Cytidine deaminase activity as a measure of acute inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis [see comments]. Ann Rheum Dis 1986;45:9.
18. Sitar DS. Human drug metabolism in vivo. Pharmacol Ther 1989;43:363.
19. Iyer L, Ratain MJ. Pharmacogenetics and cancer chemotherapy. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:1493.
20. Diasio RB, Beavers TL, Carpenter JT. Familial deficiency of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase. Biochemical basis for familial pyrimidinemia and severe 5-fluorouracil-induced toxicity. J Clin
Invest 1988;81:47.
21. Dalen P, Frengell C, Dahl ML, Sjoqvist F. Quick onset of severe abdominal pain after codeine in an ultrarapid metabolizer of debrisoquine. Ther Drug Monit 1997;19:543.
22. Sindrup SH, Brosen K. The pharmacogenetics of codeine hypoalgesia. Pharmacogenetics 1995;5:335.
23. Taningher M, Malacarne D, Izzotti A, et al. Drug metabolism polymorphisms as modulators of cancer susceptibility. Mutat Res 1999;436:227.
24. Ratain MJ, Schilsky RL, Conley BA, et al. Pharmacodynamics in cancer therapy. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1739.
25. Murry DJ, Riva L, Poplack DG. Impact of nutrition on pharmacokinetics of anti-neoplastic agents. Int J Cancer 1998;11[Suppl]:48.
26. Ghabrial H, Desmond PV, Watson KJ, et al. The effects of age and chronic liver disease on the elimination of temazepam. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1986;30:93.
27. Hoyumpa AM, Schenker S. Is glucuronidation truly preserved in patients with liver disease? Hepatology 1991;13:786.
28. Jung D. Pharmacokinetics of theophylline in protein-calorie malnutrition. Biopharm Drug Dispos 1985;6:291.
29. Tranvouez JL, Lerebours E, Chretien P, et al. Hepatic antipyrine metabolism in malnourished patients: influence of the type of malnutrition and course after nutritional rehabilitation. Am J Clin
Nutr 1985;41:1257.
30. Davis LE, Lenkinski RE, Shinkwin MA, et al. The effect of dietary protein depletion on hepatic 5-fluorouracil metabolism. Cancer 1993;72:3715.
31. Sorensen BT, Stromgren A, Jakobsen P, et al. Renal handling of carboplatin. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1992;30:317.
32. Kintzel PE, Dorr RT. Anticancer drug renal toxicity and elimination: dosing guidelines for altered renal function. Cancer Treat Rev 1995;21:33.
33. Meijer DK, Mol WE, Muller M, et al. Carrier-mediated transport in the hepatic distribution and elimination of drugs, with special reference to the category of organic cations. J Pharmacokinet
Biopharm 1990;18:35.
34. LeBlanc GA. Hepatic vectorial transport of xenobiotics. Chem Biol Interact 1994;90:101.
35. Van Lente F, Suit P. Assessment of renal function by serum creatinine and creatinine clearance: glomerular filtration rate estimated by four procedures. Clin Chem 1989;35:2326.
36. van Acker BA, Koomen GC, Koopman MG, et al. Creatinine clearance during cimetidine administration for measurement of glomerular filtration rate [see comments]. Lancet 1992;340:1326.
37. Hellerstein S, Alon U, Warady BA. Creatinine for estimation of glomerular filtration rate [see comments]. Pediatr Nephrol 1992;6:507.
38. Calvert AH, Newell DR, Gumbrell LA, et al. Carboplatin dosage: prospective evaluation of a simple formula based on renal function [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1748.
39. Newell DR, Pearson AD, Balmanno K, et al. Carboplatin pharmacokinetics in children: the development of a pediatric dosing formula. The United Kingdom Children's Cancer Study Group [see
comments]. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2314.
40. Chatelut E, Canal P, Brunner V, et al. Prediction of carboplatin clearance from standard morphological and biological patient characteristics [see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:573.
41. Martensson J, Groth S, Rehling M, et al. Chromium-51-EDTA clearance in adults with a single-plasma sample. J Nucl Med 1998;39:2131.
42. Martin L, Chatelut E, Boneu A, et al. Improvement of the Cockcroft-Gault equation for predicting glomerular filtration in cancer patients. Bull Cancer 1998;85:631.
43. Okamoto H, Nagatomo A, Kunitoh H, et al. Prediction of carboplatin clearance calculated by patient characteristics or 24-hour creatinine clearance: a comparison of the performance of three
formulae. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1998;42:307.
44. van Warmerdam LJ, Rodenhuis S, ten Bokkel Huinink WW, Maes RA, Beijnen JH. Evaluation of formulas using the serum creatinine level to calculate the optimal dosage of carboplatin.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1996;37:266.
45. Williams WM, Chen TS, Huang KC. Effect of penicillin on the renal tubular secretion of methotrexate in the monkey. Cancer Res 1984;44:1913.
46. Caterson R, Etheredge S, Snitch P, et al. Mechanisms of renal excretion of cisdichlorodiamine platinum. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol 1983;41:255.
47. Klein J, Bentur Y, Cheung D, et al. Renal handling of cisplatin: interactions with organic anions and cations in the dog. Clin Invest Med 1991;14:388.
48. Forastiere AA, Belliveau JF, Goren MP, et al. Pharmacokinetic and toxicity evaluation of five-day continuous infusion versus intermittent bolus cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) in head and
neck cancer patients. Cancer Res 1988;48:3869.
49. Reece PA, Stafford I, Russell J, et al. Nonlinear renal clearance of ultrafilterable platinum in patients treated with cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum (II). Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1985;15:295.
50. Zamboni WC, Houghton PJ, Johnson RK, et al. Probenecid alters topotecan systemic and renal disposition by inhibiting renal tubular secretion. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1998; 284:89.
51. Ferrazzini G, Sohl H, Robieux I, et al. Diurnal variation of methotrexate disposition in children with acute leukaemia. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1991;41:425.
52. Thalhammer T, Stapf V, Gajdzik L, et al. Bile canalicular cationic dye secretion as a model for P-glycoprotein mediated transport. Eur J Pharmacol 1994;270:213.
53. Smit JW, Duin E, Steen H, et al. Interactions between P-glycoprotein substrates and other cationic drugs at the hepatic excretory level. Br J Pharmacol 1998;123:361.
54. Ito K, Suzuki H, Hirohashi T, et al. Functional analysis of a canalicular multispecific organic anion transporter cloned from rat liver. J Biol Chem 1998;273:1684.
55. Chu XY, Kato Y, Sugiyama Y. Multiplicity of biliary excretion mechanisms for irinotecan, CPT-11, and its metabolites in rats. Cancer Res 1997;57:1934.
56. Speeg KV, Maldonado AL, Liaci J, et al. Effect of cyclosporine on colchicine secretion by a liver canalicular transporter studied in vivo. Hepatology 1992;15:899.
57. Song S, Suzuki H, Kawai R, et al. Effect of PSC 833, a P-glycoprotein modulator, on the disposition of vincristine and digoxin in rats. Drug Metab Dispos 1999;27:689.
58. Peris-Ribera JE, Torres-Molina F, Garcia-Carbonell MC, et al. General treatment of the enterohepatic recirculation of drugs and its influence on the area under the plasma level curves,
bioavailability, and clearance. Pharm Res 1992;9:1306.
59. Semmes RL, Shen DD. A reversible clearance model for the enterohepatic circulation of drug and conjugate metabolite pair. Drug Metab Dispos 1990;18:80.
60. Slattum PW, Cato AE III, Pollack GM, et al. Age-dependent intestinal hydrolysis of valproate glucuronide in rat. Xenobiotica 1995;25:229.
61. Gupta E, Lestingi TM, Mick R, et al. Metabolic fate of irinotecan in humans: correlation of glucuronidation with diarrhea. Cancer Res 1994;54:3723.
62. Meyer UA, Zanger UM, Skoda RC, et al. Genetic polymorphisms of drug metabolism. Prog Liver Dis 1990;9:307.
63. Boddy AV, Idle JR. The role of pharmacogenetics in chemotherapy: modulation of tumour response and host toxicity. Cancer Surv 1993;17:79.
64. Stewart CF, Fleming RA, Arbuck SG, et al. Prospective evaluation of a model for predicting etoposide plasma protein binding in cancer patients. Cancer Res 1990;50:6854.
65. Liu B, Earl HM, Poole CJ, et al. Etoposide protein binding in cancer patients. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1995;36:506.
66. Grochow LB, Baraldi C, Noe D. Is dose normalization to weight or body surface area useful in adults? J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:323.
67. Gurney H. Dose calculation of anticancer drugs: a review of the current practice and introduction of an alternative. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2590.
68. Gurney HP, Ackland S, Gebski V, et al. Factors affecting epirubicin pharmacokinetics and toxicity: evidence against using body-surface area for dose calculation [see comments]. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:2299.
69. Ratain MJ. Body-surface area as a basis for dosing of anticancer agents: science, myth, or habit? [Editorial; see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2297.
70. Chabner BA, Stoller RG, Hande K, et al. Methotrexate disposition in humans: case studies in ovarian cancer and following high-dose infusion. Drug Metab Rev 1978;8:107.
71. Clark PI, Slevin ML, Joel SP, et al. A randomized trial of two etoposide schedules in small-cell lung cancer: the influence of pharmacokinetics on efficacy and toxicity. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:1427.
72. Gianni L, Kearns CM, Giani A, et al. Nonlinear pharmacokinetics and metabolism of paclitaxel and its pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic relationships in humans. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:180.
73. Kohl P, Koppler H, Schmidt L, et al. Pharmacokinetics of high-dose etoposide after short-term infusion. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1992;29:316.
74. Mulder PO, de Vries EG, Uges DR, et al. Pharmacokinetics of carboplatin at a dose of 750 mg m-2 divided over three consecutive days. Br J Cancer 1990;61:460.
75. Gupta E, Wang X, Ramirez J, et al. Modulation of glucuronidation of SN-38, the active metabolite of irinotecan, by valproic acid and phenobarbital. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1997;39:440.
76. Yu LJ, Drewes P, Gustafsson K, et al. In vivo modulation of alternative pathways of P-450-catalyzed cyclophosphamide metabolism: impact on pharmacokinetics and antitumor activity. J
Pharmacol Exp Ther 1999;288:928.
77. O'Reilly S, Rowinsky E, Slichenmyer W, et al. Phase I and pharmacologic studies of topotecan in patients with impaired hepatic function. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:817.
78. O'Reilly S, Rowinsky EK, Slichenmyer W, et al. Phase I and pharmacologic study of topotecan in patients with impaired renal function [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:3062.
79. Venook AP, Egorin MJ, Rosner GL, et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic trial of paclitaxel in patients with hepatic dysfunction: Cancer and Leukemia Group B 9264. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1811.
80. Vozeh S, Steimer JL, Rowland M, et al. The use of population pharmacokinetics in drug development [see comments]. Clin Pharmacokinet 1996;30:81.
81. Ratain MJ, Vogelzang NJ. Limited sampling model for vinblastine pharmacokinetics. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:935.
82. Ratain MJ, Staubus AE, Schilsky RL, et al. Limited sampling models for amonafide (NSC 308847) pharmacokinetics. Cancer Res 1988;48:4127.
83. Ratain MJ, Robert J, van der Vijgh WJ. Limited sampling models for doxorubicin pharmacokinetics. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:871.
84. Launay MC, Milano G, Iliadis A, et al. A limited sampling procedure for estimating adriamycin pharmacokinetics in cancer patients. Br J Cancer 1989;60:89.
85. van Warmerdam LJ, ten Bokkel Huinink WW, Maes RA, et al. Limited-sampling models for anticancer agents. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1994;120:427.

86. Shaw LM, Bonner HS, Fields L, et al. The use of concentration measurements of parent drug and metabolites during clinical trials. Ther Drug Monit 1993;15:483.
87. Jodrell DI, Murray LS, Hawtof J, et al. A comparison of methods for limited-sampling strategy design using data from a phase I trial of the anthrapyrazole DuP-941. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol 1996;37:356.
88. Mick R, Ratain MJ. Statistical approaches to pharmacodynamic modeling: motivations, methods, and misperceptions. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1993;33:1.
89. Canal P, Chatelut E, Guichard S. Practical treatment guide for dose individualisation in cancer chemotherapy. Drugs 1998;56:1019.
90. Bruno R, Hille D, Riva A, et al. Population pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics of docetaxel in phase II studies in patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:187.
91. Karlsson MO, Port RE, Ratain MJ, et al. A population model for the leukopenic effect of etoposide. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1995;57:325.
92. Rosner GL, Muller P. Pharmacodynamic analysis of hematologic profiles. J Pharmacokinet Biopharm 1994;22:499.
93. Karlsson MO, Molnar V, Bergh J, et al. A general model for time-dissociated pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationship exemplified by paclitaxel myelosuppression. Clin Pharmacol Ther
1998;63:11.
94. Minami H, Sasaki Y, Saijo N, et al. Indirect-response model for the time course of leukopenia with anticancer drugs. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1998;64:511.
95. Evans WE, Crom WR, Abromowitch M, et al. Clinical pharmacodynamics of high-dose methotrexate in acute lymphocytic leukemia. Identification of a relation between concentration and effect.
N Engl J Med 1986;314:471.
96. Lilleyman JS, Lennard L. Mercaptopurine metabolism and risk of relapse in childhood lymphoblastic leukaemia. Lancet 1994;343:1188.
97. Evans WE, Relling MV, Rodman JH, et al. Conventional compared with individualized chemotherapy for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1998;338:499.
98. Johnston PG, Lenz HJ, Leichman CG, et al. Thymidylate synthase gene and protein expression correlate and are associated with response to 5-fluorouracil in human colorectal and gastric
tumors. Cancer Res 1995;55:1407.
99. Etienne MC, Cheradame S, Fischel JL, et al. Response to fluorouracil therapy in cancer patients: the role of tumoral dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase activity. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1663.
100. Belani CP, Egorin MJ, Abrams JS, et al. A novel pharmacodynamically based approach to dose optimization of carboplatin when used in combination with etoposide [see comments]. J Clin
Oncol 1989;7:1896.
101. Reyno LM, Egorin MJ, Canetta RM, et al. Impact of cyclophosphamide on relationships between carboplatin exposure and response or toxicity when used in the treatment of advanced ovarian
cancer. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1156.
102. Belani CP, Kearns CM, Zuhowski EG, et al. Phase I trial, including pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic correlations, of combination paclitaxel and carboplatin in patients with metastatic
non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:676.
103. Holt DW, Fashola TO, Johnston A. Monitoring cyclosporin: is it still important? Immunol Lett 1991;29:99.
104. McLeod HL, Evans WE. Pediatric pharmacokinetics and therapeutic drug monitoring. Pediatr Rev 1992;13:413.
105. Preskorn SH, Burke MJ, Fast GA. Therapeutic drug monitoring. Principles and practice. Psychiatr Clin North Am 1993;16:611.
106. Ackland SP, Schilsky RL. High-dose methotrexate: a critical reappraisal. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:2017.
107. O'Dwyer PJ. Biochemical modulation as an approach to reversal of antimetabolite resistance. Cancer Treat Res 1994;73:201.
108. Abelson HT, Fosburg MT, Beardsley GP, et al. Methotrexate-induced renal impairment: clinical studies and rescue from systemic toxicity with high-dose leucovorin and thymidine. J Clin Oncol
1983;1:208.
109. Keogh A, Spratt P, McCosker C, et al. Ketoconazole to reduce the need for cyclosporine after cardiac transplantation [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1995;333:628.
110. Gomez DY, Wacher VJ, Tomlanovich SJ, et al. The effects of ketoconazole on the intestinal metabolism and bioavailability of cyclosporine. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1995;58:15.
111. Meerum Terwogt JM, Beijnen JH, ten Bokkel Huinink WW, et al. Co-administration of cyclosporin enables oral therapy with paclitaxel [Letter; published erratum appears in Lancet
1998;352:824]. Lancet 1998;352:285.
112. Baccanari DP, Davis ST, Knick VC, et al. 5-Ethynyluracil (776C85): a potent modulator of the pharmacokinetics and antitumor efficacy of 5-fluorouracil. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1993;90:11064.
113. Cao S, Rustum YM, Spector T. 5-Ethynyluracil (776C85): modulation of 5-fluorouracil efficacy and therapeutic index in rats bearing advanced colorectal carcinoma. Cancer Res 1994;54:1507.
114. Naguib FN, Hao SN, el Kouni MH. Potentiation of 5-fluorouracil efficacy by the dihydrouracil dehydrogenase inhibitor, 5-benzyloxybenzyluracil. Cancer Res 1994;54:5166.
115. Tatsumi K, Yamauchi T, Kiyono K, et al. 3-Cyano-2,6-dihydroxypyridine (CNDP), a new potent inhibitor of dihydrouracil dehydrogenase. J Biochem (Tokyo) 1993;114:912.
116. Gupta E, Safa AR, Wang X, et al. Pharmacokinetic modulation of irinotecan and metabolites by cyclosporin A. Cancer Res 1996;56:1309.
117. Ratain MJ, Iyer L, Fagbemi S, et al. A phase I study of irinotecan with pharmacokinetic modulation by cyclosporine A and phenobarbital. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:202a.
118. Ratain MJ, Schilsky RL, Choi KE, et al. Adaptive control of etoposide administration: impact of interpatient pharmacodynamic variability. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1989;45:226.
119. Ratain MJ, Mick R, Schilsky RL, et al. Pharmacologically based dosing of etoposide: a means of safely increasing dose intensity. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1480.
120. Ratain MJ, Mick R, Janisch L, et al. Individualized dosing of amonafide based on a pharmacodynamic model incorporating acetylator phenotype and gender. Pharmacogenetics 1996;6:93.
121. Conley BA, Forrest A, Egorin MJ, et al. Phase I trial using adaptive control dosing of hexamethylene bisacetamide (NSC 95580). Cancer Res 1989;49:3436.
122. Conley BA, Egorin MJ, Sinibaldi V, et al. Approaches to optimal dosing of hexamethylene bisacetamide. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1992;31:37.
123. Santini J, Milano G, Thyss A, et al. 5-FU therapeutic monitoring with dose adjustment leads to an improved therapeutic index in head and neck cancer. Br J Cancer 1989;59:287.
124. Evans WE, Rodman J, Relling MV, et al. Individualized dosages of chemotherapy as a strategy to improve response for acute lymphocytic leukemia. Semin Hematol 1991;28:15.
125. Grochow LB. Busulfan disposition: the role of therapeutic monitoring in bone marrow transplantation induction regimens. Semin Oncol 1993;20:18.
126. Yeager AM, Wagner JE Jr, Graham ML, et al. Optimization of busulfan dosage in children undergoing bone marrow transplantation: a pharmacokinetic study of dose escalation. Blood
1992;80:2425.
127. Demirer T, Buckner CD, Appelbaum FR, et al. Busulfan, cyclophosphamide and fractionated total body irradiation for autologous or syngeneic marrow transplantation for acute and chronic
myelogenous leukemia: phase I dose escalation of busulfan based on targeted plasma levels. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;17:491.
128. Myers C, Cooper M, Stein C, et al. Suramin: a novel growth factor antagonist with activity in hormone-refractory metastatic prostate cancer [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1992; 10:881.
129. Jodrell DI, Reyno LM, Sridhara R, et al. Suramin: development of a population pharmacokinetic model and its use with intermittent short infusions to control plasma drug concentration in
patients with prostate cancer [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:166.
130. Eisenberger MA, Reyno LM, Jodrell DI, et al. Suramin, an active drug for prostate cancer: interim observations in a phase I trial [see comments; published erratum appears in J Natl Cancer Inst
1994;86:639]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:611.
131. Cooper MR, Lieberman R, La Rocca RV, et al. Adaptive control with feedback strategies for suramin dosing. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1992;52:11.
132. Scher HI, Jodrell DI, Iversen JM, et al. Use of adaptive control with feedback to individualize suramin dosing. Cancer Res 1992;52:64.
133. Thibault A, Cooper MR, Figg WD, et al. A phase I and pharmacokinetic study of intravenous phenylacetate in patients with cancer. Cancer Res 1994;54:1690.

SECTION 19.2.1 Cancer Drug Development: Identification and Screening of New Agents
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 19.2.1
Cancer Drug Development: Identification and Screening of New Agents
EDWARD CHU
MICHAEL R. GREVER
BRUCE A. CHABNER
Introduction
Drug Discovery
How Drugs are Discovered
Molecular-Targeted Screening
Drug Development
In Vivo Antitumor Assays Currently in Use
Preclinical Pharmacology
Formulation Studies
Toxicologic Investigation
Conclusion
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
More than five decades of research effort in cancer drug discovery and development have provided approximately six dozen approved products for the treatment of
malignancy.1,2 Although major advances have been made in the chemotherapeutic management of some patients, particularly in hematologic malignancies, one-half of
all cancer patients either do not respond to therapy or relapse from the initial response and ultimately die from their metastatic disease. Thus, the continued
commitment to the arduous task of discovering new cancer therapeutic agents remains critically important. 3 Many of the existing antineoplastic agents share a
common mechanism of action. Current research efforts are more diverse than ever, being driven by explosive discoveries in molecular biology and related areas to
fully elucidate the development of the malignant process (e.g., factors controlling tumor angiogenesis and metastatic potential). The hope for improvement in
treatment outcome for most patients with metastatic disease resides in continued research designed to discover novel therapeutic products that exploit differences in
molecular targets between normal and tumor cells and to use them in combination with biologic agents and immune therapies to eradicate systemic disease not
curable by surgery or irradiation.
Beyond the intellectual challenge of drug discovery, formidable effort, time, and expense are required for the complex development processes that move a new agent
from discovery to its ultimate approval for use in the treatment of malignancy. Numerous pitfalls may threaten the progress of a promising agent (e.g., excessive early
toxicity, ineffective route or schedule of administration, inappropriate formulation, long-term unpredicted toxicities, and delays in the execution of clinical trials).
Although the time to drug approval for the treatment of cancer has varied considerably, depending on the specific agent (e.g., 6 to 12 years from the time of initiation
of clinical trials), efforts are being made to expedite both the preclinical and clinical components of investigation. In other areas of medicine, the time to develop
specific drugs may be equally long and difficult. However, the potentially fatal consequences of unsuccessful treatment of this disease continue to impart urgency in
the discovery and development of novel anticancer agents.

DRUG DISCOVERY
HOW DRUGS ARE DISCOVERED
This section considers strategies for identifying new chemical entities, whether they be synthesized chemicals or compounds extracted or derived from plant,
microbial, and marine animal sources. The parallel process for discovery and development of biologic agents is discussed elsewhere in this text. (See Chapter 18.)
In establishing a program for drug discovery, cancer researchers must address two fundamental questions: What screening system should be used to detect a
compound of interest? What compounds should be tested in this system? The answers to these questions determine whether the research effort is empiric, with few
preconceived notions about where to search for compounds and what to use as the screen, or whether it focuses on a specific biologic target, such as an oncogene,
and tests a specific set of materials, such as natural products and rationally synthesized inhibitors of a target enzyme. The history of cancer drug discovery reflects an
evolution from highly empiric approaches, based on testing of randomly selected compounds against rapidly proliferating murine leukemia, to the current, more
focused testing of natural products, rationally synthesized agents, and biologic products against well-characterized tumor cell lines or molecular targets. Even in its
earliest days, however, cancer drug discovery attracted scientists who had a theoretical basis for testing certain types of compounds. Perhaps the two best examples
are the antifolates, initially tested by Farber et al., 4 and the fluoropyrimidines synthesized by Heidelberger and colleagues 5 (see Chapter 19.5).
The story of the discovery of antifolates is particularly instructive because it illustrates the important interplay between cancer biology and drug discovery. The earliest
uses of an antifolate as a chemotherapeutic agent resulted from the astute observations of Farber and associates, 4 who observed an acceleration of the leukemic
process in patients being treated with folic acid. A series of folic acid antagonists were provided to Farber and colleagues by the medicinal chemists at Lederle
Laboratories. Although structure-activity relations of antifolates and the intracellular target of these compounds were unknown at that time, it was clear from laboratory
studies that modified folates could inhibit tumor cell growth. The initial clinical trial involved the administration of pteroylaspartic acid (an analogue of folic acid, or
pteroylglutamate) to a moribund patient with progressive acute myelogenous leukemia, which resulted in a markedly hypocellular bone marrow without actually
producing clinical benefit. The investigators were sufficiently encouraged, however, to administer a more powerful folic acid antagonist, aminopterin
(2,4-diaminopteroylglutamate), to children with advanced stages of acute leukemia. Substitution of an amino group at the 4 position of the folate pteridine ring created
a tight-binding inhibitor of dihydrofolate reductase and yielded drugs with the potential to induce remissions. Approximately 10 of the first 16 patients treated with
aminopterin demonstrated evidence of hematologic and clinical improvement. These early clinical experiences provided the foundation for medicinal chemists to
synthesize a number of agents with structural similarities to naturally occurring folates. Moreover, these studies revealed that various substitutions resulted in different
sites of action, in addition to inhibition of dihydrofolate reductase ( Fig. 19.2-1).

FIGURE 19.2-1. Structure of tetrahydrofolate and clinically useful antifolate compounds. (From Chabner BA, Collins JM, eds. Cancer chemotherapy and biotherapy:
principles and practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott–Raven, 1996:112, with permission.)

From these relatively primitive beginnings, rational design efforts have progressed to the use of computer modeling of drug-enzyme interactions as the basis for

cancer drug discovery. Advances in x-ray crystallographic and nuclear magnetic resonance structural characterization of ligands and their target molecules have
significantly enhanced the potential for rational design and, as is described later (see the section Molecular-Targeted Screening ), such research efforts are now
beginning to identify effective small molecules with efficacy against various human malignancies. Symmetric inhibitors of the protease of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 that were designed on the basis of the three-dimensional symmetry of the active enzyme site are currently in clinical use, thus demonstrating the
feasibility and merit of such an approach. 6
In most current drug discovery efforts, the rational and empiric approaches are being combined. Lead compounds are identified as inhibitors for molecular targets
through molecular screening. 7 The lead compound can then be modified or enhanced by chemical analogue synthesis based on a variety of considerations, including
a detailed study of target-inhibitor interaction. The complete characterization of the target and its interaction with the lead agent provides the basis for enhancing
drug-target interaction. A key decision in this approach is the selection of a suitable target that is likely to have an impact on clinical outcome (enzyme, growth factor
receptor, or oncogene product). The next challenge is the development of an appropriate and practical assay to identify the actual lead agents.
Although early efforts in cancer drug discovery tested agents either from the broad universe of synthetic chemicals or from a more targeted rational effort, attention
increasingly has focused on natural products as an important, untapped source of promising lead compounds with unique sites of action as antineoplastic drugs. 8 The
enormous diversity and complexity of chemical entities that have evolved as part of nature's chemical warfare cannot be readily duplicated by compounds synthesized
in the laboratory and be made available for screening. However, the technological advances in combinatorial approaches for synthesizing large numbers of complex
substances have provided an entire new source for novel antineoplastic agents. 9,10 Combinatorial chemistry can provide two different kinds of libraries that can then
be used for further drug development. 11,12 and 13 The first is a generic library, which is used to discover a novel structural motif or feature that possesses a certain
biologic activity. The goal of such an unbiased library is to identify a completely novel lead compound. The second type is a focused, biased library that serves to
fine-tune the properties and biologic activity of an existing lead compound. In this case, the objective is to identify new lead compounds based on known structures
that have already proven to be biologically active.
Approximately 30% of the currently effective antineoplastic agents are from natural sources or are derivatives of a natural product lead. 14 Certain themes run through
the efforts to discover and develop natural products. Active compounds often have exceedingly complex structures that complicate efforts at total synthesis. Problems
of supply and dependence on a natural resource, therefore, must be anticipated. Structure-activity relations are difficult to elucidate because of the basic problems
presented by the unusual chemistry of these compounds and by the multiple chiral centers in these molecules ( Fig. 19.2-2). However, the overall contribution of these
complex chemical entities to the management of patients has been extremely rewarding.

FIGURE 19.2-2. Structure of Taxol. (From Chabner BA, Collins JM, eds. Cancer chemotherapy and biotherapy: principles and practice. Philadelphia:
Lippincott–Raven, 1996, with permission.)

Among the natural products, microbial antibiotics have been the most important source of cytotoxic agents. As a result of the great advances in the field of
microbiology during the 1940s and the dawn of effective antibiotic therapy, potent anticancer drugs were sought in fermentation broths obtained from soil microbes,
including bacteria, fungi, and related organisms. The discoveries of the actinomycins, anthracyclines, bleomycin, deoxycoformycin, and other agents have contributed
valuable new entities to the repository of effective antineoplastic agents. Natural product drug discovery, however, must be complemented by efforts to improve leads
through chemical modification and analogue synthesis. The discovery and subsequent clinical development of anthracyclines highlights the need for the close
interplay of chemistry, biology, and clinical pharmacology in producing improved anticancer agents.
Daunorubicin, isolated from a colony of Streptomyces in 1957, eventually was demonstrated to have significant antileukemic activity in patients. 15 Additional research
to induce mutant strains of the fungus Streptomyces resulted in the isolation of doxorubicin. Although the difference between these two anthracyclines is limited
chemically to a single hydroxyl group, a marked difference exists in their spectrum of antitumor activity. Doxorubicin has been more effective than daunorubicin in the
treatment of metastatic solid tumors and sarcomas. The cardiac toxicity associated with the chronic administration of both these agents, however, has provided
impetus to design a new generation of anthracycline analogues. The long-term assessment of clinical outcome for children successfully treated for malignancy further
substantiates the concerns regarding anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity. 16 None of these anthracycline analogues is devoid of cardiac toxicity, but closely related
molecules may have significant advantages. For example, the anthraquinones (e.g., mitoxantrone) demonstrate less cardiotoxicity and have remission-inducing
activity in acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. 17 Thus, in modifying the chemical structure of a natural product in an attempt to enhance its therapeutic selectivity, the
synthetic organic chemist plays a critical role in this process of drug development.
Natural product research has yielded other effective antineoplastic drugs. Although most of these agents have been identified in fermentation broths of microbial
organisms, plants also have provided a number of active antineoplastic agents. One of the earliest plant-derived drugs resulted from a chance observation. In the
1950s, Noble and colleagues 18 were investigating interesting plant extracts used by primitive peoples. This attempt to take advantage of tribal medications, primarily
natural products, represented an early entree into the discipline known as ethnopharmacology.
The leaves of the Jamaican periwinkle plant, Vinca rosea, were used to make a tea that was reported to be of benefit in diabetes. 18 During the initial animal
investigations, the extract of these leaves was administered orally to both rats and rabbits without any observed effect on blood sugar levels. Subsequent
administration of the aqueous extract of the periwinkle plant by injection to rats had a dramatic lethal effect within a week. Postmortem examination of the animals
demonstrated that the rats had died of sepsis related to bone marrow suppression. Isolation and chemical characterization of the responsible chemical factors were
accomplished using a bioassay-guided approach (i.e., granulocytopenia in the treated animals) for identifying the effective component of this aqueous extract of the
plant. The compound was determined to be an organic base and subsequently was called vincaleukoblastine. This agent demonstrated carcinostatic activity against
both a transplanted murine mammary adenocarcinoma and a rat-transplanted sarcoma. 18 The mechanism of action (i.e., inhibition of microtubule formation) proved to
be unique and provided the basis for an entirely new area of research for cancer drug development.
In contrast to using the complicated biologic end point of the peripheral blood granulocyte count from an intact animal, simple and more rapid screens (e.g., molecular
target–based or in vitro cell cytotoxicity assays) currently are used to guide fractionation of extracts for isolation and characterization of active components. After final
chemical identification of the plant-derived chemical antineoplastic entity, validation of antitumor activity in an in vivo tumor model is still required. Sufficient supplies
of the active agents isolated from natural product sources are needed to conduct adequate in vivo confirmatory studies. Adequate supply was a problem with the
periwinkle extract in its early development, and it remains problematic for many natural product agents now being isolated.
Several new plant-derived natural products have proven to be of extreme interest in the treatment of cancer. Taxol was isolated from the bark of the Pacific yew tree in
1971,19 and it has a unique mechanism of antitumor activity that involves stabilization of microtubule assembly with resultant inhibition of the normal dynamics of
microtubule formation.20 This agent has a broad spectrum of antitumor activity, and it is active against a number of human tumor xenografts, including breast cancer,
ovarian cancer, and other malignancies. Subsequent clinical studies have confirmed the high degree of activity in patients with a wide range of solid tumors, including
breast, ovary, head and neck, esophagus, testes, and lung malignancies. 21 Initially, a major obstacle to defining the role of Taxol in cancer therapy related to the
difficulties encountered with drug supply. 14 Semisynthesis from 10-acetyl baccatin III, was eventually accomplished, and new sources of Taxol from nursery species
have been identified. The supply issue has now been fully resolved with the successful total synthesis of this complex molecule. 22,23 Moreover, advances in the

chemistry of isoserines and taxoid anticancer agents have facilitated the synthesis of second-generation taxoid compounds with activity against drug-resistant cancer
cells. 24 The history of the development of Taxol is important because it highlights the complexities involved with development of any cancer drug—namely challenges
in supply of drug, difficulties with synthesis of drug, issues of drug formulation, and obstacles associated with the implementation of successful clinical studies.
Another natural product that has been under investigation for many years, but only now found to have broad activity against various human malignancies, is derived
from the bark of Camptotheca accuminata, a tree prized for its medicinal properties in traditional Chinese medicine. 25 The camptothecin derivatives are unique
because they inhibit topoisomerase I, a key enzyme that maintains DNA in a torsionally relaxed state. 26,27 Both topotecan and CPT-11, which are derivatives of
camptothecin, have significant activity in patients with advanced malignancies, including colorectal cancer, esophageal cancer, non–small cell and small cell lung
cancer, and cervical cancer. 28,29 and 30 Significant efforts continue to focus on developing novel analogues of camptothecin with enhanced biophysical and biologic
activity. 9-Nitroaminocamptothecin and 9-aminocamptothecin are currently in advanced stages of clinical testing. 31
Marine organisms represent a largely unexplored and untapped source of unique toxic chemicals. These toxins are elaborated by sponges and other sessile saltwater
organisms as defenses against their predators. Several highly potent agents demonstrate interesting antitumor activity against unique molecular targets in preclinical
models, and some examples include the bryostatins (which inhibit protein kinase C), the dolastatins and halichondrins (which bind to microtubules), and the
tunicate-derived ecteinascidins (which bind in the minor groove of DNA). 8,14,32,33,34,35 and 36 Although the marine environment represents an untapped potential source
for interesting new chemical entities, certain unique problems affect this biosphere. Scale-up procurement of bulk material from marine sources presents a special
challenge in biomass collection. The potency of many of these agents may ameliorate this supply problem, but selectivity against the tumor (and not the normal host)
must first be demonstrated. In addition, the highly potent natural products present additional challenges for clinical investigators conducting phase I studies. For
example, clinical pharmacologic studies may be impossible if the active species is present in such low levels that detection by even very sensitive analytic methods is
not feasible at clinically tolerated doses. The rich diversity of chemical structures found in nature provides the impetus for continued research in this area. Moreover,
the use of combinatorial chemistry technology may be incorporated into the process once novel therapeutic leads are identified from these natural products.
Cancer drug discovery may also result from a totally fortuitous experimental observation. The discovery of platinum complexes as antiproliferative agents with
remarkable clinical activity demonstrates the importance of enlightened empiricism combined with dogged persistence in clinical testing and development. In 1965,
Rosenberg37 observed that an electric current passing through platinum electrodes could inhibit Escherichia coli bacterial cell division. This discovery was confirmed
by the subsequent testing of platinum complexes in murine tumor model systems. Cisplatin inhibited the development of sarcomas, and other platinum complexes also
were found to be effective in the preclinical models. The early clinical trials demonstrated antitumor activity in patients with advanced malignancies, but the excessive
initial toxicity (nephrotoxicity) raised serious concern among the clinical investigators. The demonstration that adequate hydration and slow infusion reduce the degree
of renal toxicity permitted further evaluation of the agent. The responses observed in testicular cancer and ovarian cancer led to approval of the drug approximately 6
years after the initial clinical trial. This excellent anticancer drug might have been discarded in error without the foresight of both preclinical and clinical investigators
who were convinced of the drug's potential, were committed to the systematic testing of the drug, and were clever enough to find ways to deal with its toxicity. Most of
the antineoplastic agents have been discovered though empiric screening efforts or represent chemical modifications of lead compounds discovered in cancer
screenings.
Screening methods can either be simple, such as a well-characterized cell line or a defined enzymatic target, or complex, such as an in vivo animal tumor. In general,
current efforts favor simple systems that accommodate high volumes of unknown compounds. The end point of the cancer screen may be a biologic target (e.g., tumor
cell cytotoxicity, growth inhibition, differentiation) or a biochemical-molecular target that is known to be important for the survival of cancer cells. The advantages and
disadvantages of each of these approaches is presented in Table 19.2-1. Both the cell line and molecular approach may be combined through the use of genetically
engineered cell lines that express a specific molecular target.

TABLE 19.2-1. Comparison of Cancer Screening Devices

The evolution of strategies at the National Cancer Institute (NCI) illustrates the changes in screening that have resulted from the advances in cancer biology and
cancer genetics. The early NCI cancer screening efforts used murine leukemias (L1210 and P388) as the index tumors in an in vivo screening effort. 38 The screen
identified agents that had efficacy in humans in the treatment of leukemias and lymphoproliferative malignancies, such as hydroxyurea and the nitrosoureas.
However, the failure of this screen to identify active drugs for the major solid tumors resulted in a significant change in 1975 in the approach of the NCI when animal
solid tumor and human tumor xenografts were added as a secondary in vivo tumor panel.38 In 1985, a second major change was made.38,39 The increasing availability
of a growing number of cell lines derived from human solid tumors and well characterized with respect to drug response patterns, growth factor dependence,
oncogene expression, and other biochemical and molecular features presented an opportunity to focus screening efforts on the unique biology of human solid tumors.
A number of human solid tumor cell lines were selected to provide a disease-oriented approach to drug discovery in contrast with the previous compound-oriented
drug discovery methods. A total of 60 human tumor cell lines derived from seven cancer types (e.g., lung, colon, melanoma, kidney, ovary, brain, leukemia) formed the
original cell line panel. Breast cancer cell lines were subsequently added. The initial concept proposed that leads demonstrating disease specificity would be
identified, and activity could be further examined by in vivo testing in nude mice, using the most sensitive in vitro index tumor cell lines.
In the current NCI anticancer screen, each candidate agent is tested over a broad concentration range against every cell line in the panel. 2,3,38,39 and 40 Active
compounds are selected for further testing based on several different criteria: disease-type specificity in the in vitro assay, unique structure, potency, and
demonstration of a unique pattern of cellular cytotoxicity or cytostasis, indicating a unique mechanism of action or intracellular target. The agents selected for further
investigation are then subjected to additional testing to assess their in vivo therapeutic index. 3,41 The current version of the cancer drug screening program of the NCI
has been in operation since 1990, and a number of novel chemical entities have been identified for further evaluation. This high-capacity screen was designed to
accommodate approximately 10,000 individual chemicals tested annually, with additional capacity for screening natural product extracts. Approximately 5% of the
compounds tested in the initial screen show sufficient activity to warrant further evaluation in in vivo screens or biochemical-molecular assays. More than 60,000
agents have been screened against a panel of 60 human cancer cell lines. The tumors that are represented in this cell line panel include melanomas; leukemias; and
cancers of the breast, prostate, colon, ovary, kidney, and central nervous system. To date, this approach has identified five novel agents (e.g., a tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, a protein kinase C inhibitor, and several disease-specific agents) for further testing in clinical trials. It is hoped that an overall assessment of the clinical
usefulness of this novel cell line screening approach will be feasible in the near future.
The concept of cancer drug discovery that is based on high-volume screens, whether oriented toward a cell line–based or molecular target, relies on the acquisition of
a large source of diverse materials for examination. In the case of the NCI, an extensive program for acquiring both defined chemical entities and diverse natural
products has been pursued. Enormous effort was initially invested to standardize the in vitro assay, and sufficient time should be provided to fully evaluate the clinical
utility of its early findings.
The pharmaceutical industry is also actively engaged in the procurement of large numbers of interesting chemical structures and natural products for testing in their
respective cancer screens, many of which focus on specific molecular targets. Difficult decisions must be made to choose among the large number of unknown
entities for initial testing and to aid in the prioritization of known active compounds for further development. Computer programs have been developed to assist in this

prioritization and to enhance the diversity of potential chemical entries and crude natural products introduced into the screening process. 40,42 For example, there are
significant challenges in representing, analyzing, and storing the vast amount of experimental data generated by the substances tested in the in vitro screen of the
NCI. In Figure 19.2-3, drug testing data are represented as a mean graph presenting growth inhibition in a standard bar graph. 38 The mean graph is constructed by
projecting bars to the right or left of the mean, depending on whether an individual cell line is more or less sensitive than the average line in the panel. Furthermore,
the length of each bar is proportional to the relative sensitivity of the cell lines. Thus, each agent can be represented by a characteristic fingerprint of cell line
responsiveness.

FIGURE 19.2-3. Mean graph representation of antitumor effects in the National Cancer Institute's (NCI) cancer screen. The effects of a specific agent on the tumor
cell lines in the NCI cancer screen are shown by the construction of a mean graph presentation of the data. Screening results for two anthracyclines are charted. A
mean concentration of the agent that produces the same level of response for all the cell lines in the screen forms an anchor point for this graphic presentation. The
individual response of each cell line to the agent is then depicted by a bar graph extending to the right or left of the mean, depending on whether the cell line was
either more or less sensitive than the average response, respectively. The length of each bar is proportional to the relative sensitivity when compared with the mean
determination. CNS, central nervous system; Leuk, leukemia; NSCLC, non–small cell lung carcinoma; Misc, miscellaneous; SCLC, small cell lung carcinoma.

After an agent has been tested in the cancer screen, its unique response pattern can be compared with the results from all other agents within the database. A
computer program called COMPARE uses a simple algorithm for aligning and contrasting the patterns for each compound with the patterns of other compounds in the
database.43,44 A compound is entered into the program as a seed, and the computer database elicits a list of those agents that have similar patterns of tumor cellular
responsiveness. In Table 19.2-2, an example is presented for the introduction of a seed compound and the resulting list of agents that had similar patterns of cellular
cytotoxicity. A correlation coefficient is also expressed, relating the closeness of the seed to those agents listed by the computer program. Close correlations between
agents appear to have biologic and pharmacologic importance, implying a common intracellular target despite a dissimilarity in structure (e.g., tubulin-binding agents,
topoisomerase-interactive agents). The COMPARE program has several important features. 44 It can identify the intracellular target or mechanism of action of a new
compound through a comparison of its fingerprint with known agents. It can search for compounds previously tested in the cancer screen that have a fingerprint
similar to that of a lead compound known to inhibit a unique target. It also has the power to detect inhibition of integrated biochemical and molecular pathways that are
not adequately represented by a single molecule or molecular interaction. The comparison also allows recognition of a new agent that does not match with
compounds of known mechanisms of action. Given the critical roles of an intact cell-cycle checkpoint and apoptotic pathways in determining chemosensitivity, it is
clear that such an algorithmic approach may help identify candidate anticancer drugs that are not dependent on an intact checkpoint and apoptosis function. Finally,
this strategy provides the rational basis for future pharmacophore development.

TABLE 19.2-2. The COMPARE Programa

Computer approaches to data analysis similar to that described by the NCI are being developed by industry to search for agents interacting with specific molecular
targets. In addition, the NCI has conducted an elaborate characterization of specific molecular targets expressed by the existing tumor cell lines within its screen. For
example, because certain cell lines are known to contain a mutated or overexpressed oncogene, such as k-ras or HER-2/neu, it is possible to search the existing
database for agents active against only those particular cell lines. This process may ultimately combine the advantages of both cell line–based and molecular
screens, but will require separate validation to confirm that identified leads do indeed interact with the purported molecular target in specific assays directed at that
entity. Although the NCI cell line screen represents a carefully constructed system for obtaining and analyzing voluminous data on diverse compounds, alternative
screening systems in academic centers and industry increasingly rely on high throughput assays based on specific molecular targets, against which combinatorial
chemistry inventories are tested. A good example of this approach is the potent antimitotic agent monastrol, isolated by Mayer et al. 45 This agent targets kinesin Eg5,
a mitotic protein required for spindle bipolarity and, thus, acts to inhibit the process of mitosis.
MOLECULAR-TARGETED SCREENING
From a scientific perspective, a compelling argument can be made for focusing on a well-defined molecular target and for using computer-based approaches to
design small molecules that would specifically interact with this target.
With the rapid advances being made in defining the molecular pathology of neoplastic cells, specific oncogenes have been identified that are expressed uniquely in
malignant tissue. The discovery of inappropriately expressed or mutated genes has provided an impetus for the establishment of numerous screens designed to
detect specific inhibitors or modulators of the products of these abnormal genes. Intracellular signaling pathways that mediate the actions of growth factors and
oncogenes on cell proliferation, such as protein kinases, G proteins, and transcription activators, provide additional novel targets for anticancer drugs. However, given
the considerable overlap of access to various growth-factor signaling pathways (many signals use the same distal steps), signal transduction inhibitors may lack
specificity for the neoplastic cells. 46
As an alternative to targeting these intracellular pathways, significant attention has focused on strategies to inhibit the process of angiogenesis. 47 This concept stems
from the seminal work of Folkman and colleagues 47a who proposed that the growth of a tumor mass is dependent on the formation of a vascular network that supplies
the tumor with essential nutrients. The targeting of the tumor vasculature has two potential advantages over conventional biochemical and molecular targets. The first
is that this approach does not require tailoring of therapy to the unique genetic makeup of the tumor, because it appears that all solid tumors are dependent, to some
extent, on angiogenesis for growth. In addition, the target of this approach is the normal vascular endothelial cells that are genetically stable and, thus, less likely to
become drug-resistant.
Advocates for the use of mechanistic-based approaches to novel drug discovery have emphasized the potential for selectivity that may result from the use of
molecular targeting. 7,48,49 and 50 The expression of identical or closely related molecular or biochemical targets in normal tissue must always be considered. Mutant

oncogenes and their corresponding protein products appear to be the most attractive targets for drug design. Two examples include the fusion protein that results
from the BCR-ABL translocation in chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) and the interference with tumor suppression resulting from the binding of papillomavirus
proteins to the RB (retinoblastoma) gene in cervical carcinoma.
In CML and in approximately 20% of adult patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL), a characteristic reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22 is
observed. The protooncogene (ABL) from chromosome 9 is translocated at the breakpoint cluster region (BCR) on chromosome 22. This translocation encodes the
Bcr-Abl protein, which expresses constitutively activated tyrosine kinase function. It is a 210-kD oncoprotein, and expression of p210 BCR-Abl induces a disease in
mice resembling CML, confirming the critical role of this oncoprotein in the development of CML. 51,52 The p210 Bcr-Abl protein is present in 95% of patients with CML
and in 5% to 10% of adults with ALL for whom there is no evidence of CML. A second fusion protein of 185 kD is found in 10% of adult cases and 5% to 10% of
pediatric cases of ALL, but not in CML.
It is clear that expression of this genetic rearrangement is essential for maintaining the malignant phenotype. 53 In addition, transfection of the specific DNA for the
BCR-ABL–encoded protein kinase into the hematopoietic stem cells of mice results in the induction of a malignant disorder in vivo with similarities to the clinical
illness in humans. 54 Modification of these murine models could provide a potential opportunity to test promising new therapeutic products in vivo. Moreover, the
aberrant tyrosine kinase resulting from these abnormal genetic rearrangements (BCR-ABL) within the hematopoietic stem cells does not exist in normal host cells.
This abnormal gene provides an ideal molecular target for therapeutic intervention. The crystal structure of several protein kinases has been solved, and a number of
compounds have been designed based on the structure of the adenosine triphosphate (ATP) binding site or the active site of the enzyme. In screening against the
recombinant BCR-ABL kinase protein, the 2-phenylaminopyrimidine derivative known as CGP 57148 (STI 571) proved to be a potent and selective inhibitor, targeting
the ATP binding pocket. 55 This compound inhibits all ABL tyrosine kinases at submicromolar concentrations in vitro, and it has minimal to no inhibitory effect on the
colony-forming potential of normal bone marrow cells. CGP 57148 appears to be selectively toxic to cells expressing the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase. 56,57 A phase I
clinical trial has been completed in CML patients who were unsuccessful with interferon therapy. 58,59 CGP 57148 was given orally on a daily basis, and treatment was
well tolerated, with the most common toxicities being only mild nausea (grade 1), muscle cramps, and arthralgias. With regard to its clinical activity, significant
hematologic responses have been observed, with 100% clinical complete response at daily doses greater than 300 mg and a 40% to 50% cytogenetic response.
Clinical investigations are in progress to validate the clinical efficacy of this novel agent. Studies have shown that the drug also has potent activity against the
platelet-derived growth factor receptor, and in experimental studies, it inhibits tumors that overexpress this receptor. Thus, this compound may have broader
application than just for CML.
Another potential target for therapeutic intervention has evolved from an enhanced understanding of the role of aberrant tumor suppressor protein function in the
malignant process. It is appreciated that more than 80% of cervical carcinomas have evidence of integrated DNA sequences from papillomaviruses. 60 Human
papillomavirus-16 has been implicated frequently as a causal role of this malignancy. Extensive molecular investigation of the association of human papillomavirus
with cervical carcinoma has identified specific nuclear proteins that interact with the tumor suppressor gene RB. 61 In fact, the complex protein-protein interaction
between the E7 protein from human papillomavirus-16 and the retinoblastoma suppressor protein (pRB) is believed to be important in the cellular transformation that
leads to cervical carcinoma. Expression of the E7 protein apparently occurs both within cells from patients with cervical carcinoma and from cell lines derived from this
malignancy. The inactivation of the RB tumor suppressor gene by this protein appears to be reversible. There is significant interest in identifying agents that could
selectively interfere with this deleterious E7-RB interaction.

DRUG DEVELOPMENT
There is an urgent need to move promising new therapies into clinical trials. However, important and clinically relevant information may be lost by proceeding
immediately from a primary in vitro screen to a clinical trial without defining the in vivo activity of an agent, its pharmacokinetics and schedule dependency in animals,
and its profile of toxicity for normal and malignant cells and tissues. Each of these issues is important and must be addressed in a timely manner to provide safe and
reasonable starting doses for implementing phase I trials in patients. The steps required in the development of a cancer agent for clinical practice are complex, and as
outlined in Figure 19.2-4, they are both time- and resource-intensive.

FIGURE 19.2-4. Steps in cancer drug development. FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

Secondary in vitro studies to optimize the exposure time to an agent and to define mechanisms of resistance are useful for the investigators planning in vivo studies.
Examination of the dose-response data for several tumor cell lines should permit a selection of the optimal tumor system for subsequently evaluating in vivo efficacy.
Furthermore, preliminary pharmacologic studies in non–tumor-bearing animals provide useful information about the plasma concentrations achievable and an
estimate of the acute toxicity after systemic administration of a new agent. Success in identifying new therapies relies on the expeditious, yet careful, conduct of those
studies pertinent to developing a promising in vitro observation (derived from either the cell line screen or the molecular models) into an actual drug candidate. 62,63,64
and 65

IN VIVO ANTITUMOR ASSAYS CURRENTLY IN USE
In the current NCI development schema, the human tumor cell line most sensitive to an active candidate in vitro is selected for testing as a xenograft in a
subcutaneous implant site in a nude mouse. Compounds identified in molecular screens are usually tested against human or murine tumors engineered to
overexpress the specific drug target.
Failure to demonstrate in vivo efficacy for agents that display strong in vitro evidence of antitumor activity should prompt additional studies to determine whether a
pharmacokinetic or metabolic explanation exists for the loss of activity. The initial lead, either discovered by an empiric screen or as a result of rational chemical
design, is usually not the optimal chemical entity for clinical investigation. Lead optimization and an iterative process between chemists and tumor biologists may be
required to enhance the in vivo therapeutic index. Factors such as poor solubility and rapid in vivo metabolism may be corrected by analogue development. More
potent and less toxic derivatives can often be subsequently developed (i.e., provided the molecule is amenable to modification).
PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
Preclinical studies in mice, rats, and dogs provide essential information about pharmacokinetics and provide a basis for rational schedule development for the new
drugs in humans. Factors such as bioavailability (for agents administered by the oral route), metabolism, renal excretion, and penetration into the central nervous
system contribute to the understanding of how best to test a new drug in humans. Although there is no guarantee that human subjects will handle a new drug in the
same way as the animal species, in most instances the major pathways for drug metabolism and excretion are qualitatively, if not quantitatively, the same across
species.
Pharmacokinetic information in animals can also provide a rational basis for dose escalation in humans. Collins and associates 66 have hypothesized that dose-limiting
toxicity in mice and humans is a function of drug exposure, as measured by the area under the drug concentration in plasma × time curve (C × T). They predict that

animals and humans encounter dose-limiting toxicity at the same C × T for any given drug and that the experimentally determined dose-limiting C × T can be used as
a target for dose escalation in humans. An analysis of experience with phase I drug trials suggested that for most, but not all, drugs, the relationship of C × T to
toxicity holds across species. This work potentially allows the clinical investigator to base initial dose escalation steps on measurements of C × T. Dose escalation can
proceed in a more rapid fashion than formerly possible using empiric schemes, and wasteful multiple steps in dose escalation can be avoided. This approach,
although apparently valid in retrospective studies, still requires broader validation in a prospective manner.
Drugs that demonstrate substantial interspecies variation in patterns of target tissue activation are not good candidates for this approach. For example, drugs
activated by deoxycytidine kinase, such as fludarabine phosphate, are much more toxic to human marrow cells than to mouse bone marrow, presumably as a result of
the higher levels of this activating enzyme in human cells. 67 In this instance, toxicity in humans would not be accurately predicted by the C × T approach. Furthermore,
drug candidates that are excessively potent (e.g., several of the marine natural products) may have biologic effects at plasma concentrations lower than the level of
reproducible detection. Consequently, such agents are not acceptable candidates for pharmacologically guided dose escalation.
FORMULATION STUDIES
Although the preliminary pharmacologic and toxicologic studies may begin before a decision on the final formulation of a product, the Investigational New Drug
(IND)–directed toxicology should be performed with the final formulation. In addition, other critical studies may be influenced by the formulation (e.g., bioavailability of
an oral formulation, insolubility of an agent demonstrating interesting antitumor activity in the cancer screen). Three important factors that have an impact on
formulation studies include solubility, stability, and dosage requirements. 68
Because the route of drug administration for antineoplastic agents has primarily been through the intravenous approach, the issue of solubility has provided a
substantial challenge for a number of agents with limited aqueous solubility. Efforts to improve the solubility of an agent have primarily involved physical measures,
including the use of various mixed solvent systems. Novel approaches, including the use of micronization, liposomal encapsulation, and other unique delivery systems
(e.g., cyclodextrins and coacervate systems), have been investigated in an effort to improve methods of drug delivery to tissues. Major efforts are needed to expand
the vehicles that are available for intravenous drug delivery of agents with limited aqueous solubility and stability.
The prodrug approach uses chemical modification to solve the difficulty associated with drug insolubility. The most recent example of a simple prodrug approach is
the synthesis of the monophosphate of 2-fluoro-adenine arabinoside (fludarabine). 69 In essence, the halogenated nucleoside was poorly soluble in aqueous solution.
In contrast, the monophosphate (fludarabine) was more soluble and readily cleaved enzymatically in vivo to the 2-fluoro-adenine arabinoside. The nucleoside is
rapidly rephosphorylated after transport to the intracellular compartment and, thus, can be effective as an anticancer agent.
Unique opportunities exist to use monoclonal antibodies to selectively deliver antineoplastic agents to targeted tumor cells. New methods of prodrug administration
(e.g., ADEPT) are being evaluated that couple the administration of an anthracycline glucuronide and the use of a human b-glucuronidase conjugated to a monoclonal
antibody for selected delivery to a tumor-bearing animal. It is hoped that this novel approach will enhance the selectivity of anticancer agents, and it may have
particular utility in the case of highly potent compounds.
TOXICOLOGIC INVESTIGATION
Preclinical toxicology is frequently the final step in the progression of a new chemotherapeutic drug from discovery to initial phase I testing in humans (see Fig.
19.2-4). The major objectives of the preclinical toxicologic studies include (1) the definition of the qualitative and quantitative organ toxicities (including dose and
schedule dependencies), (2) the reversibility of these effects, and (3) the initial safe starting dose proposed for humans. In general, the ideal approach is to ensure
that the preclinical toxicologic studies accurately reflect the intended clinical investigations in humans (i.e., identical formulation, schedules, and routes of drug
administration, and dose levels anticipated to reflect the likely experience in patients).
The protocols for performing the preclinical toxicology at the NCI have changed dramatically since the late 1970s. 70,71 Numerous schedules of drug administration
were examined in a variety of animal species in the era before 1980. The emphasis later focused on mouse lethality studies for the initial dose-range–finding studies
[i.e., lethal dose in 10% of mice (LD 10), LD50, and LD90]. The subsequent toxicologic studies were performed on fixed schedules to refine the doses associated with
lethal and nonlethal toxicities. The preclinical toxicities reported correlated reasonably well with the subsequent clinical observations. 70,72,73 and 74 However, the extent
of useless information relating to highly lethal murine doses (LD 50 and LD90) led to a redesign of the toxicologic studies.
The current toxicologic investigations accepted by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration involve a simplified two-step approach. The initial step focuses on acute
toxicity in small animals (e.g., mice), and the major end point is a determination of the LD 10 level. The second phase of preclinical toxicologic investigation is more
extensive. In this case, emphasis is placed on a careful qualitative and quantitative characterization of the organ-specific toxicities in rodents associated with the
schedule and route of administration that is to be used in the initial clinical trial. Attention is given to defining accurately those toxicities that are likely to be observed
at doses slightly higher than the highest nontoxic dose. Careful investigation of the doses in the animals that approximate the highest projected tolerable dose in the
model should provide data that are more relevant to the anticipated clinical experience in patients.
In the past, most new antineoplastic agents were tested clinically on two relatively fixed schedules of drug administration—that is, single-bolus intravenous dose once
every 3 to 4 weeks, and 5 consecutive days of treatment repeated at 3- to 4-week intervals. The most frequently used toxicologic protocols reflect each of these
schedules. Some newer agents entering preclinical evaluation for cancer therapy are being proposed for weekly intravenous administration, continuous intravenous
infusion, or oral dosing. It is critically important that the preclinical toxicologic protocol simulates the planned therapeutic approach in patients.
Because substantial variation may exist between species in their tolerance to a given drug, the safety of a projected starting dose in humans is confirmed by
examining the preclinical toxicities in at least two species. Both the qualitative and the quantitative toxicities are usually well defined after investigation of a small
animal model (e.g., mouse) and a larger animal (e.g., dog). Only occasionally is testing needed in an additional large animal (e.g., monkey), although this species has
been shown to be especially useful for defining central nervous system pharmacokinetics.
Certain organ-specific toxicities are reliably detected with the current toxicologic models (e.g., myelosuppression and gastrointestinal toxicity). In contrast, hepatic and
renal toxicities are often missed or falsely positive in animal testing. Toxicities involving the heart, lung, nervous system, pancreas, and integument are even less
reliably appreciated. At best, the preclinical evaluation can establish a safe starting dose for humans and predict acute organ toxicity. A complete definition of the
toxicologic profile of a new agent usually emerges only after extensive clinical experimentation.

CONCLUSION
The discovery and development of novel anticancer agents involves substantial time, effort, and resources. The strategies used for drug discovery range from empiric
screening (the source of most of the current active drugs) to rational drug design based on an enhanced understanding of the various biochemical and molecular
targets. As outlined in this chapter, an extensive series of preclinical investigations are necessary before the decision to enter clinical trials is made. Significant efforts
are then required for the successful completion of clinical studies, in which an individual agent is taken from the initial phase I testing through to the randomized
phase III and IV settings (Table 19.2.-3). The effective development of new cancer agents demands the close cooperation of a multidisciplinary team that includes
basic research scientists, clinical pharmacologists, clinical research nurses, data managers, and clinical investigators. The combined resources of government,
academic centers, and the pharmaceutical industry are needed for successfully dealing with the formidable task of identifying effective new therapeutic agents for
cancer patients.

TABLE 19.2-3. Stages in Clinical Testing of New Anticancer Agents

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Kaufman D, Chabner BA. Clinical strategies for cancer treatment: the role of drugs. In: Chabner BA, Longo DL, eds. Cancer chemotherapy and biotherapy. New York: LippincottRaven, 1996:1.
2. Grever MR. Cancer drug screening. In: Schilsky RL, ed. Principles of antineoplastic drug development and pharmacology. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1996:1.
3. Grever MR, Schepartz S, Chabner BA. The National Cancer Institute: cancer drug discovery and development program. Semin Oncol 1992;19:622.
4. Farber S, Diamond LK, Mercer RD, Sylvester RF, Wolff JA. Temporary remissions in acute leukemia in children produced by folic acid antagonist, 4-aminopteroyl-glutamic acid (aminopterin).
N Engl J Med 1948;238:787.
5. Heidelberger C, Chaudhari NK, Danneberg P, et al. Fluorinated pyrimidines. A new class of tumor-inhibitory compounds. Nature 1957;179:663.
6. Erickson J, Neidhart DJ, VanDrie J, et al. Design, activity, and 2.8 A crystal structure of a C2 symmetric inhibitor complexed to HIV-1 protease. Science 1990;249:527.
7. Johnson RK. Screening methods in antineoplastic drug discovery. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:1082.
8. Suffness M, Newman DJ, Snader K. Discovery and development of antineoplastic agents from natural sources. Bioorg Marine Chem 1989;3:131.
9. Salmon SE, Lam KS, Felder S, et al. One bead, one chemical compound: use of the selectide process for anticancer drug discovery. Acta Oncol 1994;33:127.
10. Lam KS, Wu J, Lou Q. Identification and characterization of a novel synthetic peptide substrate specific for Src-family protein kinases. Int J Pept Protein Res 1995;45:587.
11. Amzel LM. Structure-based drug design. Curr Opin Biotechnol 1998;9:366.
12. Cargill JF, Lebl M. New methods in combinatorial chemistryrobotids and parallel synthesis. Curr Opin Chem Biol 1997;1:67.
13. Spaller MR, Burger MT, Fardis M, Bartlett PA. Synthetic strategies in combinatorial chemistry. Curr Opin Chem Biol 1997;1:47.
14. Cragg GM, Newman DJ, Weiss RB. Coral reefs, forests, and thermal vents: the worldwide exploration of nature for novel antitumor agents. Semin Oncol 1997;24:156.
15. Weiss RB, Sarosy G, Clagett-Carr K, Russo M, Leyland-Jones B. Anthracycline analogs: the past, present, and future. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1986;18:185.
16. Steinherz LJ, Steinherz PG, Tan C. Cardiac failure and dysrhythmias 619 years after anthracycline therapy: a series of 15 patients. Med Pediatr Oncol 1995;24:352.
17. Smith IE. Mitoxantrone (Novantrone): a review of experimental and early clinical studies. Cancer Treat Rev 1983;10:103.
18. Noble RL, Beer CT, Cutts JH. Role of chance observations in chemotherapy: Vinca rosea. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1958;76:882.
19. Wani MC, Taylor HL, Wall ME, Coggon P, McPhail AT. Plant antitumor agents. VI. The isolation and structure of Taxol, a novel antileukemic and antitumor agent from Taxus brevifolia. J Am
Chem Soc 1971;93:2325.
20. Schiff PB, Fant J, Horwitz SB. Promotion of microtubule assembly in vitro by Taxol. Nature 1979;277:665.
21. Rowinsky EK, Donehower RC. Drug therapy: paclitaxel (Taxol). N Engl J Med 1995;332:1004.
22. Mann J. Steps to a successful synthesis. Nature 1994;367:594.
23. Gordon M. Taxol supply problem? What problem? Nat Biotechnol 1996;14:1635.
24. Ojima I, Lin S, Wang T. Recent advances in the medicinal chemistry of taxoids with novel beta-amino acid side chains. Curr Med Chem 1999;6:927.
25. Wall ME, Wani MC, Cook CE, et al. Plant antitumor agents. I. The isolation and structure of camptothecin, a novel alkaloidal leukemia and tumor inhibitor from Camptotheca accuminata. J Am
Chem Soc 1966;88:3888.
26. Hsiang YH, Hertzberg R, Hecht S, Liu LF. Camptothecin induces protein-linked DNA breaks via mammalian DNA topoisomerase I. J Biol Chem 1985;260:14873.
27. Hsiang YH, Liu LF. Identification of mammalian DNA topoisomerase I as an intracellular target of the anticancer drug camptothecin. Cancer Res 1988;48:1722.
28. Rothenberg ML, Blanke CD. Topoisomerase I inhibitors in the treatment of colorectal cancer. Semin Oncol 1999;26:632.
29. Cunningham D. Setting a new standardirinotecan (Campto) in the second-line therapy of colorectal cancer: final results of two phase III studies and implications for clinical practice. Semin
Oncol 1999;26:1.
30. Ilson DH, Saltz L, Enzinger P, et al. Phase II trial of weekly irinotecan plus cisplatin in advanced esophageal cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3270.
31. Giovanella BC, Stehlin JS, Wall ME, et al. DNA topoisomerase Itargeted chemotherapy of human colon cancer in xenografts. Science 1989;246:1046.
32. Pettit GR, Herald CL, Doubek DL, et al. Isolation and structure of bryostatin I. J Am Chem Soc 1982;104:6846.
33. Bai R, Pettit GR, Hamel E. Dolastatin 10, a powerful cytostatic peptide derived from a marine animal. Inhibition of tubulin polymerization mediated through the vinca alkaloid binding domain.
Biochem Pharmacol 1990;39:1941.
34. Bai RL, Paul KD, Herald CL, et al. Halichondrin B and homohalichondrin B, marine natural products binding in the vinca domain of tubulin: discovery of tubulin-based mechanism of action by
analysis of differential cytotoxicity data. J Biol Chem 1991;266:15882.
35. Bonfanti M, LaValle E, Fernandez JM, et al. Effect of ecteinascidin-743 on the interaction between DNA binding proteins and DNA. Anticancer Drug Des 1999;14:179.
36. Rinehart KL. Antitumor compounds from tunicates. Med Res Rev 2000;20:1.
37. Rosenberg B. Fundamental studies with cisplatin. Cancer 1985;55:2303.
38. Boyd MR. Status of the NCI preclinical antitumor drug discovery screen. PPO Updates 1989;3:1.
39. Skehan P, Storeng R, Scudiero D, et al. New colorimetric cytotoxicity assay for anticancer drug screening. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:1107.
40. Chabner BA. In defense of cell-line screening. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:1083.
41. Double JA, Bibby MC. Therapeutic index: a vital component in selection of anticancer agents for clinical trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:988.
42. Hodes L. Computer-aided selection of compounds for antitumor screening: validation of a statistical-heuristic method. J Chem Inf Comput Sci 1981;21:123.
43. Paull KD, Shoemaker RH, Hodes L, et al. Display and analysis of patterns of differential activity of drugs against human tumor cell lines: development of mean graph and COMPARE algorithm.
J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:1088.
44. Weinstein JN, Myers TG, O'Connor PM, et al. An information-intensive approach to the molecular pharmacology of cancer. Science 1997;275:343.
45. Mayer TU, Kapoor TM, Haggerty SJ, et al. Small molecule inhibitor of mitotic spindle bipolarity identified in a phenotype-based screen. Science 1999;29:971.
46. Gibbs JB. Anticancer drug targets: growth factors and growth factor signaling. J Clin Invest 2000;105:9.
47. Keshet E, Ben-Sasson SA. Anticancer drug targets: approaching angiogenesis. J Clin Invest 1999;104:1497.
47a. Hanahan D, Folkman J. Patterns and emerging mechanisms of the angiogenic switch during tumorigenesis. Cell 1996;86:353.
48. Kaelin WG. Choosing anticancer drug targets in the postgenomic era. J Clin Invest 1999;104:1503.
49. Sellers WR, Fisher DE. Apoptosis and cancer drug targeting. J Clin Invest 1999;104:1655.
50. Shapiro GI, Harper JW. Anticancer drug targets: cell cycle and checkpoint control. J Clin Invest 1999;104:1645.
51. Kelliher M, Knott A, McLaughlin J, Wittee ON, Rosenberg N. Differences in oncogenic potency but not target cell specificity distinguish the two forms of the bcr/abl oncogene. Mol Cell Biol
1991;11:4710.
52. Daley GQ, Van Etten RA, Baltimore D. Induction of chronic myelogenous leukemia by the P210bcr/abl gene of the Philadelphia chromosome. Science 1990;247:824.
53. Szczylik C, Skorski T, Nicholaides NC, et al. Selective inhibition of leukemia cell proliferation by BCR-ABL antisense oligodeoxynucleotides. Science 1991;253:562.
54. Kelliher MA, McLaughlin J, Wittee ON, Rosenberg N. Induction of a chronic myelogenous leukemia-like syndrome in mice with v-ABL and BCR/ABL. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:6649.
55. Druker BJ, Tamura S, Buchdunger E, et al. Effects of a selective inhibitor of the ABL tyrosine kinase on the growth of BCR-ABL positive cells. Nature Med 1996;2:561.
56. Deininger MW, Goldman JM, Lydon N, Melo JV. The tyrosine kinase inhibitor CGP57148B selectively inhibits the growth of BCR-ABL-positive cells. Blood 1997;90:3691.
57. LeCoutre P, Mologni L, Cleris L, et al. In vivo eradication of human BCR-ABL-positive leukemia cells with an ABL kinase inhibitor. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:163.
58. Druker BJ, Sawyers CL, Talpaz M, et al. Phase I trial of a specific abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor, CGP 57148, in interferon refractory chronic myelogenous leukemia patients. Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1999;18:24(abst).
59. Druker BJ, Lydon NB. Lessons learned from the development of an Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor for chronic myelogenous leukemia. J Clin Invest 2000;105:3.
60. zur Hausen H. Molecular pathogenesis of cancer of the cervix and its causation by specific human papillomavirus types. In: zur Hansen H, ed. Human pathogenic papillomavirus. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, 1994:131.
61. Jones RE, Wegrzyn RJ, Patrick DR, et al. Identification of HPV-16 E7 peptides that are potent antagonists of E7 binding to the retinoblastoma suppressor protein. J Biol Chem 1990;265:12782.
62. Corbett TH, Wozniak A, Gerpheide S, Hanka L. In vitro and in vivo models for detection of new antitumor drugs. In: Hanka IJ, Kondo T, White RJ, eds. Proceedings of a workshop at the 14th
International Congress of Chemotherapy at Kyoto. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1985:5.
63. Grindey GB. Current status of cancer drug development: failure or limited success? Cancer Cells 1990;2:163.
64. Bogden AE. The subrenal capsule assay and its use as a drug screening system. In: Hellman K, Carter SK, eds. Fundamentals of cancer chemotherapy. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1987:173.
65. Corbett TH, Valeriote FA, Baker LH. Is the P388 murine tumor no longer adequate as a drug discovery model? Invest New Drugs 1987;5:3.
66. Collins JH, Grieshaber CK, Chabner BA. Pharmacologically guided phase I clinical trials based upon preclinical drug development. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:1321.
67. DeSouza JJV, Leiby JM, Staubus AE, Grever MR, Malspeis L. Altered pharmacokinetics of fludarabine phosphate by 2'-deoxycoformycin in the dog and analysis of a route of fludarabine
activation. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1985;26:1413.
68. Davignon JP, Craddock JC. The formulation of anticancer drugs. In: Hellman K, Carter SK, eds. Fundamentals of cancer chemotherapy. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1987:212.
69. Brockman RW, Cheng YC, Schabel FM, Montgomery JA. Metabolism and chemotherapeutic activity of 9-B- D-arabinofuranosyl-2-fluoroadenine against murine leukemia L1210 and evidence for
its phosphorylation by deoxycytidine kinase. Cancer Res 1980;40:3610.
70. Grieshaber CK, Marsoni S. Relation of preclinical toxicology to findings in early clinical trials. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:65.
71. Lowe MC, Davis RD. The current toxicology protocol of the National Cancer Institute. In: Hellman K, Carter SK, eds. Fundamentals of cancer chemotherapy. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1987:228.

72. Schein P, Anderson T. The efficacy of animal studies in predicting clinical toxicity of cancer chemotherapeutic drugs. Int J Clin Pharmacol 1973;8:228.
73. Lowe M. Large animal toxicological studies of anticancer drugs. In: Hellman K, Carter SK, eds. Fundamentals of cancer chemotherapy. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1987:238.
74. Schurig JE, Bradner WT. Small animal toxicology of cancer drugs. In: Hellman K, Carter SK, eds. Fundamentals of cancer chemotherapy. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1987:248.

SECTION 19.2.2 Cancer Drug Development: Combinatorial Chemistry
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 19.2.2
Cancer Drug Development: Combinatorial Chemistry
DAVID J. AUSTIN
Principles of Combinatorial Chemistry
Revolution in Synthetic and Medicinal Chemistry
What is Combinatorial Chemistry and How Does it Relate to Chemical Diversity?
The History of Combinatorial Chemistry
Technical Advances That Enabled Combinatorial Synthesis
High-Throughput Screening and Combinatorial Chemistry
The Benefit of Solid-Phase Synthesis
Parallel versus Combinatorial Synthesis
The Practice of Combinatorial Chemistry
Identifying an Inhibitor for a Specific Receptor
Natural Peptides as a Starting Point for Chemical Diversity
Natural Products as a Starting Point for Chemical Diversity
The Mathematics of Diversity
Combinatorial Chemistry in Pharmaceutical Drug Development
“Hit” Generation and “Hit to Lead”Development
Combinatorial Chemistry and Lead Development
Cancer-Related Targets
Combinatorial Biology: Nature's Biologic Diversity
The Future of Chemical Diversity in Drug Development
Chapter References

PRINCIPLES OF COMBINATORIAL CHEMISTRY
REVOLUTION IN SYNTHETIC AND MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
The field of combinatorial chemistry represents a revolution in both the concepts and construction of chemical entities. This revolution has not only changed the fields
of chemical catalysis, materials science, and methods development, but also has impacted the field of drug development. The impact of combinatorial chemistry is
likely to be as significant to drug development as the polymerase chain reaction was in advancing cloning techniques for molecular biology. The postgenomic era is
predicted to present us with between 50,000 and 150,000 unique genes, each encoding a protein product that is potentially a therapeutic target. 1 Between 1000 and
3000 unique members are predicted to exist within the protein kinase family, which is an important class of therapeutic targets. 2 Because the average medicinal
chemist can synthesize approximately 100 molecules per year, it is difficult to envision the identification of unique inhibitors for thousands of proteins using traditional
techniques.
This chapter introduces the field of combinatorial chemistry and describes how it has impacted drug development and how it will likely impact future drug
development. The aim of this introduction is to serve as a primer for researchers wishing to incorporate chemical diversity into their research program.
WHAT IS COMBINATORIAL CHEMISTRY AND HOW DOES IT RELATE TO CHEMICAL DIVERSITY?
To properly understand what combinatorial chemistry is, the concept of chemical diversity must first be addressed. If diversity is defined as that which represents all
possible permutations of a given set, then chemical diversity can be described as the atomic representation of all possible permutations of molecular structure or
functional space. The concept of chemical diversity has been recognized since the early days of drug development, when natural products (biologically active
chemical entities found in nature) were the main focus of the pharmaceutical industry. At that point, the methods of achieving chemical diversity—in other words, the
techniques required to synthesize 10 3 to 106 molecules—were unknown, and researchers depended on nature for diversity. Combinatorial chemistry is a collective
term referring to those techniques that are used to achieve chemical diversity. A collection of diverse molecules is referred to as a chemical library or, often, a
combinatorial library.

THE HISTORY OF COMBINATORIAL CHEMISTRY
TECHNICAL ADVANCES THAT ENABLED COMBINATORIAL SYNTHESIS
The chemical techniques for generating diversity have their origin in the solid-phase synthesis of peptides and nucleotides, both of which had a major impact on the
growing field of molecular biology and biotechnology. These technical developments in combinatorial chemistry can be grouped into three major categories: the
development of solid-phase chemical synthesis techniques, the development of deconvolution and encoding strategies for combinatorial library construction, and the
development of arrayed technologies and chemical synthesizers for the rapid synthesis of molecules. A search of literature reference databases for the keywords
combinatorial chemistry or solid-phase organic synthesis provides interesting insight into the rapidity of growth in the field of combinatorial chemistry. By plotting the
number of literature citations as a function of year, an almost logarithmic growth is seen in the number of references between the years 1993 and 1996. Most of the
major technical achievements in combinatorial chemistry were made before 1990 and were largely influenced by the demands of the pharmaceutical industry.
It should also be noted that the decrease in references to combinatorial chemistry that begins in 1997 is most likely not a function of the field slowing down, but rather
a function of the acceptance of combinatorial chemistry in science as a whole. This can be thought of as keyword disappearance. In an analogous fashion, every
paper mentioning the polymerase chain reaction technique shortly after its development would contain the phrase in the title or abstract. After its acceptance as a
common technique, however, it was relegated to the experimental section of papers. As the technique of combinatorial chemistry becomes more widespread in the
literature, it will cease to be the main focus of papers, becoming merely the technique used to solve much greater research problems. This is likely the trend that is
taking place now, as illustrated in Figure 19.2-5.

FIGURE 19.2-5. Graphic representation of the number of literature articles containing the keywords combinatorial chemistry or solid-phase organic synthesis, from
1979 to 1999.

HIGH-THROUGHPUT SCREENING AND COMBINATORIAL CHEMISTRY
Since its inception, high-throughput screening has become a major source of novel drug leads in the pharmaceutical industry. After the existing pharmaceutical
chemical stocks had been processed, however, a need for more screening materials emerged. This need far outweighed the potential efforts of the medicinal and
natural product isolation chemists. The initial technical advances required for combinatorial chemistry were already in place (see Figure 19.2-5) and promised to be a
potential source for large quantities of new chemical entities. Initial libraries were composed mainly of natural peptides. Later, as newer and more general coupling
techniques became available, libraries of peptides with unnatural amino acids became commonplace. In general, peptides and peptide-like molecules are usually not
a direct source of drugs because of their susceptibility to proteases, poor pharmacodynamics, and potential for antigenic response; therefore, they require extensive
chemical development. This fact prompted a large effort in the development of novel chemistry that would be compatible with solid-phase resins. The growth of
solid-phase organic synthesis began with the development of solid-phase protocols of known solution-phase reactions. As solid-phase synthetic efforts became more
sophisticated, the emergence of complex, even pharmacologically proven, molecules (such as the benzodiazepine core) became commonplace. 3
THE BENEFIT OF SOLID-PHASE SYNTHESIS
The development of solid-phase techniques for the manipulation of peptides and nucleotides preceded the development of combinatorial library techniques and thus
paved the way for automation by allowing the synthesis of biopolymers in a reproducible format. 4 As mentioned earlier, solid-phase synthesis was an important factor
in the development of consistent, high-yielding syntheses of polynucleotides and polypeptides. The concept of solid-phase synthesis is summarized in Figure 19.2-6.
A solid-phase resin is a beaded form of polystyrene, or any polymeric material, that is chemically functionalized to allow the synthesis of molecules while they are
attached to the bead. As is shown in Figure 19.2-6A, each new component can be attached to the previous one in a processive manner, allowing both the automation
of the synthesis procedure and a reduced need for chemical purification. Because reagents can be used in large excess, then simply washed away, the only
purification step that is required is the last one, after resin cleavage. Developments in solid-phase chemistry involve the development of new resins, more advanced
chemistry, and improvement in linking strategies. More advanced approaches to solid-phase synthesis involve improvements in the cleavage step (see Fig. 19.2-6B),
in which the final transformation in a synthesis alters the nature of the connection to the solid support. In this manner, a selective resin cleavage is achieved, thereby
removing the need for purification altogether. This has been demonstrated in many cases, including cyclic peptides, 5,6 metathesis reactions,7,8 and 9 and
cycloaddition-cycloreversion reactions. 10,11

FIGURE 19.2-6. Solid-phase synthesis and selective resin cleavage. A: The major benefit of solid-phase synthesis is a reduced need for chromatographic separation,
because only the last step requires purification. B: Through synthetic design, some solid-phase synthesis techniques eliminate chromatography altogether.

PARALLEL VERSUS COMBINATORIAL SYNTHESIS
It should be pointed out that the term combinatorial, which is often used as a general term for the entire field, has a specific meaning in terms of library synthesis. The
field is collectively known as chemical diversity; however, the term combinatorial chemistry is still largely ingrained in the literature. Two types of synthetic procedures
are used in chemical diversity: parallel and combinatorial synthesis. Figure 19.2-7A shows an example of a combinatorial synthesis. In this method, each reaction
takes place in a separate reaction vessel. After the first step, the beads are combined and split apart again. Each mixture is then subjected to a second chemical
reaction, pooled, and then split apart again. This process is commonly referred to as the split-pool technique. Each bead travels through a different path in the overall
scheme, and ultimately, each possible combination is made. In parallel synthesis ( Fig. 19.2-7B), the pools are never recombined and the syntheses proceed
independently. The benefits, drawbacks, and required technical advances for each of these synthetic protocols are discussed in the next two sections, Combinatorial
Chemical Libraries and Parallel Chemical Libraries .

FIGURE 19.2-7. Combinatorial versus parallel library synthesis. A: Combinatorial synthesis involves the combination of library components during the synthetic
sequence. B: Parallel synthesis involves the spatial segregation of library members during each reaction scheme.

Combinatorial Chemical Libraries
The major difficulty with the implementation of a combinatorial synthesis strategy is the identification of active molecules. Because the strategy involves the pooling of
beads, all of the molecules are mixed together in solution, and individual library members must somehow be characterized once they are identified as having biologic
activity. For this reason, early developments in combinatorial synthesis focused on deconvolution strategies. Later, methods were developed that involved the
encoding of individual beads. The combinatorial deconvolution procedure involves a split-pool synthesis, as seen in Figure 19.2-7A. However, the last set of mixtures
are not pooled together, but rather are tested as a mixture. The active “pool” is then resynthesized, but during the resynthesis, the final mixtures are not pooled. This
method is called serial deconvolution.12 A related method, referred to as recursive deconvolution, has been developed, in which a fraction of each reaction mixture is
saved at each stage of synthesis. 13 In this manner, resynthesis involves only adding the last monomer at each stage of deconvolution. This method works best when
evaluating a combinatorial library in cell-based assays, because the mixtures can be cleaved off the resin and tested as a whole.
Another type of combinatorial synthesis is referred to as the “one bead, one molecule” approach.14 This procedure also uses the split-pool technique; however,
instead of relying on a deconvolution strategy, each bead is chemically tagged after it has been chemically modified. These tags are chemically orthogonal to the
growing chemistry chain and have proven useful for the on-bead analysis of protein affinity 15 and in off-bead strategies using spatial arrays of beads. 16 Once a bead
has been identified to contain an active component, the tag is removed and “read” to determine the identity of the molecule. Some of the tagging strategies that have
been used include nucleotides, 16,17 gas-chromatography (GC)–detectable electrophoric molecules, 18 and high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC)–detectable

secondary amines.19 Modern mass spectrometry methods are becoming powerful enough to allow the direct detection of the molecules attached to the solid-phase
resin. 20 The split-mix technology remains the best method for the construction of libraries of more than 10 3 members.21
Parallel Chemical Libraries
The need for technical advances in the development of parallel synthetic techniques is much less than for combinatorial approaches, because the major requirement
involves the spatial arraying of each molecule. Two early developments in this field involve the pin 22 and teabag methods.23 In pin-based library synthesis, the
molecules are synthesized on the head of functionalized pins, which serve as probes that can be inserted into any number of solvent or reagent wells. The
randomization process takes place by the nature of the fact that each pin is exposed to a different set of reagents or monomers. The teabag approach is similar, in
that each separate bag is moved from one reagent or reaction mixture to another. In this case, the molecules are spatially arrayed in the individual bags. A popular
advance on this technique involves the use of radiolabels to tag each bead, thus allowing a rapid handling of each bag. 24 Microarray chip technology also allows the
spatial arraying of a combinatorial library and has proven useful in library synthesis. More recent developments involve synthesis in multiwell plates on automated
synthesizers. In general, the pharmaceutical industry has turned to this technique, using discrete molecules in a high-throughput format. This technique has been
facilitated by the development of large-scale machine-based organic synthesizers.

THE PRACTICE OF COMBINATORIAL CHEMISTRY
IDENTIFYING AN INHIBITOR FOR A SPECIFIC RECEPTOR
Once a protein is identified as a potential therapeutic target, the major goal is to evaluate a biologic system in the absence of the protein activity. Gene technology
has been developed to generate knockout mice that lack a specific protein of interest; however, the mouse must reach development without the aid of this protein and
often this gene is required for proper development. Furthermore, it is often more desirable to study the biologic effect in a cell line before proceeding to an animal
model.
A number of methods have been developed for identifying inhibitors of receptors. The most common, often used in the pharmaceutical industry, is high-throughput
screening. This method often involves an automated assay based on affinity or some related in vitro cell-based or cell-free phenotype and a large library of chemical
compounds. These chemicals may originate from a natural product isolation, combinatorial synthesis, or an in-house library grown over many years of chemical
development. Such a library can be a great place to start to determine whether a molecule or class of molecules with affinity for either the receptor of interest or a
closely related receptor from the same family has already been identified.
In the case in which no known inhibitor exists for the class of receptor of study, or for identifying a novel inhibitor for a specific receptor, then access to chemical
diversity is essential. There are two ways of obtaining chemical diversity: It can be made or bought. Because this chapter is intended for a nonchemical audience, we
discuss methods of buying chemical diversity.
NATURAL PEPTIDES AS A STARTING POINT FOR CHEMICAL DIVERSITY
The presentation of peptides on the surface of bacteriophage particles is known as phage display.25 Phage display of peptide libraries has become a common method
for quickly obtaining large libraries of natural peptides. 26 The benefit of a natural peptide is that it can elucidate the type of functionality that binds to the receptor of
interest, and many peptide phage display libraries are commercially available. Once a natural peptide inhibitor is identified, peptidomimetic strategies can be used to
identify nonpeptide inhibitors. The development of nonpeptide inhibitors is usually performed by the further analysis of molecules that mimic the functional nature of
the peptide, yet eliminate the poor drug-like qualities of the peptides. One popular and potentially very powerful modification of peptides to improve function and
biologic activity is the cyclization of the peptide, which results in a cyclic peptide with a limited number of ground-state conformations and a reduced susceptibility to
proteases. However, the cyclization may result in locking the peptide in an inactive conformation, limiting the success of the method. For this reason, many individuals
begin screening with cyclized libraries rather than cyclizing a linear peptide. This can even be achieved in phage display by using a randomized peptide sequence
that is flanked by cysteine residues. Once the phage is secreted from the cell, the flanking cysteine residues form a disulfide bond and create a cyclic structure.
Peptidomimetics has become one of the most studied areas of molecular recognition. 27 Indeed, many natural products themselves are mimics of biologically active
peptides.28
NATURAL PRODUCTS AS A STARTING POINT FOR CHEMICAL DIVERSITY
Natural products have a rich history in the elucidation of biologic processes and in drug development. 29 Even in those cases in which the natural product itself is not a
potential drug, it can offer a glimpse as to what kinds of molecules will be effective in drug development. It is often found that the product of nature lacks the specificity
that is desired for therapeutic activity. Combinatorial chemistry offers the possibility of developing a more specific inhibitor using the chemical nature of the natural
product as a good starting point for diversity. However, the modification of a natural product or the construction of a novel library based on a natural product is
chemically intensive and usually requires collaboration with a chemistry laboratory or pharmaceutical company.
THE MATHEMATICS OF DIVERSITY
One issue that must be addressed when designing a chemical library or evaluating a combinatorial phage peptide library is the total number of individual molecules in
that library. Table 19.2-4 shows the diversity that one might expect from different chemical and biologic libraries. The formula for diversity, in any library, can be
described as the number of monomer units raised to the power of the number of variable positions. For example, if we chemically synthesize a heptapeptide library
using all 20 natural amino acids, our library will contain 20 7 or 1.28 billion different molecules. If we use phage display to create the same heptapeptide library, we
must account for the redundancy of the genetic code and consider each codon as a monomer unit. In this case, the diversity increases to 64 7, or 4.4 × 10 12, library
members, which is an unmanageable number of clones. Proper design of the library and use of the wobble position can reduce the required number of codons to 32,
reducing the diversity to 32 7, or 3.4 × 10 10, library members. This is still a very large number but is slightly more realistic.

TABLE 19.2-4. The Mathematics of Chemical Diversity a

It is important to consider the size and chemical diversity of the library. There is increasing data to suggest that it is more important for a library to be diverse than to
be large. Permutational libraries, such as peptides, do not have to cover their diversity. In all likelihood, the epitope is likely to be smaller than the total positions
varied. For example, a peptide sequence such as RGD, a common motif in integrin recognition, would come up many times in a heptapeptide library. Some phage
display libraries contain 12 randomized amino acids, with no hope of containing that diversity. Yet these libraries are very useful for the identification of discontinuous
epitopes within the same peptide. In summary, phage display offers the most accessible first entry into chemical diversity, but often it must be followed up with a
synthetic library.

COMBINATORIAL CHEMISTRY IN PHARMACEUTICAL DRUG DEVELOPMENT
“HIT” GENERATION AND “HIT TO LEAD”DEVELOPMENT
Modern drug development often begins with the screening of thousands of molecules to generate chemical “hits” against a therapeutic target or cell line. A hit is
defined as a molecule that shows activity in an assay below a certain activity level. High-throughput screening of chemical compounds emerged in the early 1990s to
aid the rapid evaluation of the large chemical stocks that were being amassed in the pharmaceutical industry. The high-throughput assay is usually an in vitro assay,
although it is not necessarily cell-free. Once a molecule has been identified as a hit, it is evaluated by a medicinal chemist who begins a synthetic effort to obtain a
structure activity relationship for the molecule. If the activity of the initial hit can be optimized for in vitro activity, the molecule becomes a “lead” molecule. This process
is known as “hit to lead” development. Although each pharmaceutical company and, indeed, each therapeutic target has different criteria for the categorization of a
lead molecule, the development process is basically the same. Once a lead is identified, a series of in vivo tests and further development take place to determine
whether the chemical lead has the proper pharmacologic properties and in vivo efficacy to become an actual drug.
COMBINATORIAL CHEMISTRY AND LEAD DEVELOPMENT
Although the desire for large numbers of compounds led to the rapid growth of combinatorial chemistry and solid-phase synthetic techniques, it was quickly
recognized that a combinatorial approach to lead generation could also be developed. This approach involves the synthesis of secondary libraries, synthesized in a
manner that allow the randomization of chemical functionality that was not, or could not be, addressed in the first library. In this manner, an entire library is not
synthesized, but rather a small sample of the library is synthesized, and that hit is used as a starting point for a subsequent library generation. This is a convenient
method of evaluating a library that has more diversity than can be synthesized. Consider, for example, a library with six potential sites of randomization (see Figure
19.2-6). If twenty monomers were chosen to construct this library, 64 million molecules would have to be synthesized. This diversity is much higher than that which
could ever be achieved with a parallel synthesis approach, and it is even outside the limit of a combinatorial synthesis. The premise of this approach is that an actual
drug resides within the design of the library and that an activity-driven search of diversity space will pick it out. This is analogous to the needle in the haystack
dilemma.
CANCER-RELATED TARGETS
Combinatorial chemistry is still in its adolescent stage with regard to drug development. However, many cancer-related targets have been discovered with
combinatorial approaches. Farnesyl transferase, responsible for targeting the oncoprotein p21ras to the cellular membrane, was one of the first targets explored with
combinatorial chemistry because of the well-defined CAAX nature of the farnesylation site. 30 Cell surface receptors such as vitronectin, implicated in the complex
mechanism of cellular metastasis, have been the target of attempts to inhibit tumor cell adhesion. 31 The receptor tyrosine kinases and cellular kinases have been
implicated as therapeutic cancer targets, and the development of kinase inhibitors is a very active area with many combinatorial library approaches. 32 In addition to
the active site of kinases, the SH2 recognition and SH3 regulation domains, also involved in kinase activation, are targets of cancer intervention. 33,34 Their peptide
nature makes them excellent targets for combinatorial development.
COMBINATORIAL BIOLOGY: NATURE'S BIOLOGIC DIVERSITY
Herceptin,35 an antibody targeted against the her-2/neu/erb-B2 receptor, is an example of biologic products developed for cancer treatment. Peptide phage display is
an efficient and convenient method of obtaining a self-encoded combinatorial library of natural peptides, both linear and cyclic. It is also a convenient method for
obtaining combinatorial mixtures of randomized proteins. Although in vivo techniques are still the primary source for antibody production, phage display offers the
potential for accessing nonantibody proteins for the development of biologic cancer chemotherapeutics. Although this technique has been used mainly for the
investigation of basic biology, combinatorial antibodies against a malignant melanoma have been reported. 36 An interesting combination of biologic techniques for the
construction of chemical libraries involves polyketide synthase gene swapping. It has been demonstrated that small-molecule diversity can be achieved by
randomizing the order of polyketide synthase genes in bacterial systems. This method is unique, because it offers the promise of a biologic synthesis format once an
active molecule is identified.

THE FUTURE OF CHEMICAL DIVERSITY IN DRUG DEVELOPMENT
The need for a large numbers of molecules for high-throughput screening has led to the rapid growth of combinatorial chemistry; however, only now are scientists
recognizing the need for the development of chemical diversity. 37 As the field of combinatorial chemistry matures, it is becoming more apparent that library design is
more important than library size. Although large chemical libraries may provide the potential for hit generation, it is not yet established that such libraries will replace
the use of natural products for hit generation. At a minimum, it should be expected that natural products, peptides, and signaling molecules will continue to be a
source of inspiration for the design of chemical libraries.
In addition to natural product leads, structural biology is continually providing insight into the structural nature of biologic macromolecules. The combination of
chemical diversity with structural and molecular biology and computational chemistry will undoubtedly provide the greatest advance in modern drug development. 37
The use of chemical diversity to address genomic diversity is likely to be the single most important effort for chemical diversity in the postgenomic era. 38 Proteomics
has already emerged as a field in need of small-molecule probes. Biologic techniques, such as expression cloning, complementary DNA phage display, and cellular
display systems, offer the opportunity to probe protein function with small molecule diversity. Indeed, if the potential of combinatorial diversity can be realized, we
envision a small-molecule inhibitor for every protein encoded by the human genome.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Schuler GD, Boguski MS, Stewart EA, et al. A gene map of the human genome. Science 1996;274:540.
2. Hunter T. 1001 protein kinases reduxtowards 2000. Semin Cell Biol 1994;5:367.
3. Bunin BA, Plunkett MJ, Ellman JA. The combinatorial synthesis and chemical and biological evaluation of a 1,4-benzodiazepine library. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:4708.
4. Merrifield RB. Solid phase peptide synthesis. I. The synthesis of a tetrapeptide. J Am Chem Soc 1963;85:2149.
5. Mihara H, Yamabe S, Niidome T, Aoyagi H, Kumagai H. Efficient preparation of cyclic peptide mixtures by solid phase synthesis and cyclization cleavage with oxime resin. Tetrahedron Lett
1995;36:4837.
6. Lee BH. Solid-phase synthesis of cyclooctadepsipeptide PF1022A analogs using a cyclization-cleavage method with oxime resin. Tetrahedron Lett 1997;38:757.
7. vanMaarseveen JH, denHartog JAJ, Engelen V, et al. Solid phase ring-closing metathesis: cyclization/cleavage approach towards a seven membered cycloolefin. Tetrahedron Lett
1996;37:8249.
8. Nicolaou KC, Winssinger N, Pastor J, et al. Synthesis of epothilones A and B in solid and solution phase. Nature (London) 1997;387(6630):268.
9. Piscopio AD, Miller JF, Koch K. Solid phase heterocyclic synthesis via ring closing metathesis: traceless linking and cyclative cleavage through a carbon-carbon double bond. Tetrahedron Lett
1997;38(41):7143.
10. Whitehouse DL, Nelson KH, Savinov SN, Austin DJ. A chemoselective rhodium (II) mediated solid phase 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition and its application to a thermally self-cleaving furan scaffold.
Tetrahedron Lett 1997;38:7139.
11. Whitehouse DL, Nelson KH Jr, Savinov SN, Lowe RS, Austin DJ. A metathetical cycloaddition-cycloreversion approach to the formation of furan scaffold libraries. Bioorg Med Chem
1998;6:1273.
12. Houghten RA, Pinilla C, Blondelle SE, et al. Generation and use of synthetic peptide combinatorial libraries for basic research and drug discovery. Nature 1991;354:84.
13. Erb E, Janda KD, Brenner S. Recursive deconvolution of combinatorial chemical libraries. 1994;91:11422.
14. Lam KS, Lebl M, Krchák V. The “one-bead-one-compound” combinatorial library method. Chemical Reviews 1997;97(2):411.
15. Lam KS, Salmon SE, Hersh EM, et al. A new type of synthetic peptide library for identifying ligand-binding activity. Nature 1991;354:82.
16. Chen CL, Strop P, Lebl M, Lam KS. One beadone compound combinatorial peptide library: different types of screening. Methods Enzymol 1996;267:211.
17. Needels MC, Jones DG, Tate EH, et al. Generation and screening of an oligonucleotide-encoded synthetic peptide library. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:10700.
18. Burbaum JJ, Ohlmeyer MHJ, Reader JC, et al. A paradigm for drug discovery employing encoded combinatorial libraries. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:6027.
19. Ni Z, Maclean D, Holmes C, et al. Versatile approach to encoding combinatorial organic syntheses using chemically robust secondary amine tags. J Med Chem 1996;39:1601.
20. Brown BB, Wagner DS, Geysen HM. A single-bead decode strategy using electrospray ionization mass spectrometry and a new photolabile linker: 3-amino-3-(2-nitrophenyl)propionic acid. Mol
Divers 1995;1:4.
21. Furka A, Bennett WD. Combinatorial libraries by portioning and mixing. Comb Chem High Throughput Screen 1999;2:105.
22. Geysen HM, Meloen RH, Barteling SJ. Use of peptide synthesis to probe viral antigens for epitopes to a resolution of a single amino acid. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1984;81:3998.
23. Houghten RA. General method for the rapid solid-phase synthesis of large numbers of peptides: specificity of antigen-antibody interaction at the level of individual amino acids. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1985;82:5131.

24. Nicolaou KC, Xiao XY, Parandoosh Z, Senyei A, Nova MP. Radiofrequency encoded combinatorial chemistry. Angew ChemInt Ed Engl 1995;34:2289.
25. Smith GP. Fimentous fusion phage: novel expression vectors that display cloned antigens on the viron surface. Science 1985;228:1315.
26. Scott JK, Smith GP. Searching for peptide ligands with an epitope library. Science 1990;249:386.
27. Qabar M, Urban J, Sia C, Klein M, Kahn M. Pharmaceutical applications of peptidomimetics. Lett Pept Sci 1996;3:25.
28. Barrow CJ, Thompson PE. Natural product peptidomimetics. Adv Amino Acid Mimetics Peptidomimetics 1997;1:251.
29. Rosen MR, Schreiber SL. Natural products as probes of cellular function: studies of immunophilins. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 1992;31:384.
30. Buday L, Downward J. Epidermal growth factor regulates p21ras through the formation of a complex of receptor, Grb2 adapter protein, and Sos nucleotide exchange factor. Cell 1993;73:611.
31. Hoekstra WJ, Poulter BL. Combinatorial chemistry techniques applied to nonpeptide integrin antagonists. Curr Med Chem 1998;5:195.
32. Lloyd AW. Combinatorial chemistryhydroxystilbene kinase inhibitor library. Drug Discov Today 1997;2:556.
33. Combs AP, Kapoor TM, Feng S, et al. Protein structure-based combinatorial chemistry: discovery of non-peptide binding elements to src SH3 domain. J Am Chem Soc 1996;118:287.
34. Feng S, Kapoor TM, Shirai F, Combs AP, Schreiber SL. Molecular basis for the binding of SH3 ligands with non-peptide elements identified by combinatorial synthesis. Chem Biol 1996;3:661.
35. Baselga J, Norton L, Albanell J, Kim YM, Mendelsohn J. Recombinant humanized anti-HER2 antibody (Herceptin) enhances the antitumor activity of paclitaxel and doxorubicin against
HER2/neu overexpressing human breast cancer xenografts. Cancer Res 1998;58:2825.
36. Pereira S, VanBelle P, Elder D, et al. Combinatorial antibodies against human malignant melanoma. Hybridoma 1997;16:11.
37. Borman S. Reducing time to drug discovery. Chem Eng News 1999;77:33.
38. Veber DF, Drake FH, Gowen M. The new partnership of genomics and chemistry for accelerated drug development. Curr Opin Chem Biol 1997;1:151.

SECTION 19.3 Antitumor Alkylating Agents
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 19.3
Antitumor Alkylating Agents
OLIVER MICHAEL COLVIN
History of the Alkylating Agents
Chemistry and Cytotoxicity of Alkylating Agents
Classes of Alkylating Agents and Their Properties
Nitrogen Mustards
Aziridines and Epoxides
Alkyl Sulfonates: Busulfan
Nitrosoureas
Hydrazine and Triazine Derivatives
Mechanisms of Toxicity and Drug Resistance
Reaction with Cellular Molecules
Enhanced DNA Repair: O6 Alkylation
Cross-Link Repair
In Vivo Resistance
Common Toxicities
Hematopoietic Toxicity
Gastrointestinal Toxicity
Gonadal Toxicity
Pulmonary Toxicity
Alopecia
Teratogenicity
Carcinogenesis
Immunosuppression
Chapter References

HISTORY OF THE ALKYLATING AGENTS
A nitrogen mustard alkylating agent was the first nonhormonal chemical that demonstrated significant clinical antitumor activity. The clinical evaluation of nitrogen
mustards as antitumor agents evolved from the observed clinical effects of sulfur mustard gas used as a weapon in World War I. This gas was used because of its
vesicant effect on the skin and mucous membranes, especially the eyes and respiratory tract. 1 However, in addition to this deadly effect, depression of the
hematopoietic and lymphoid systems was observed in victims and experimental animals. 2 These observations led to further studies that used the less volatile nitrogen
mustards (Fig. 19.3-1). Studies published in 1946 demonstrated regression of tumors, especially lymphomas 3,4 and 5 and led to the introduction of the compound
nitrogen mustard (mechlorethamine, Mustargen) into clinical practice. Subsequently, less toxic and more clinically effective nitrogen mustard derivatives and other
types of alkylating agents have been developed.

FIGURE 19.3-1. Structures and alkylation mechanisms for sulfur mustard and the nitrogen mustard, Mustargen (mechlorethamine).

CHEMISTRY AND CYTOTOXICITY OF ALKYLATING AGENTS
The alkylating agents react with (or “alkylate”) many electron-rich atoms in cells to form covalent bonds. The most important reactions with regard to their antitumor
activities are reactions with DNA bases. Some alkylating agents are monofunctional and react with only one strand of DNA. Others are bifunctional and react with an
atom on each of the two strands of DNA to produce a “cross-link” that covalently links the two strands of the DNA double helix. Unless repaired, this lesion will prevent
the cell from replicating effectively. The lethality of the monofunctional alkylating agents results from the recognition of the DNA lesion by the cell and the response of
the cell to that lesion. Analogous cellular reactions may occur to the interstrand cross-links, but such reactions have not been definitively established.

CLASSES OF ALKYLATING AGENTS AND THEIR PROPERTIES
NITROGEN MUSTARDS
Mustargen
Mustargen is currently used in the MOPP [Mustargen, vincristine (Oncovin), procarbazine, prednisone] regimen for the treatment of Hodgkin's disease 6 but rarely for
other purposes. The other nitrogen mustards in significant clinical use are cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, melphalan, and chlorambucil ( Fig. 19.3-2). All these
compounds produce cytotoxicity by forming covalent interstrand cross-links in DNA (as shown in Fig. 19.3-3 for Mustargen). The nitrogen mustard cross-link has been
demonstrated to occur in the G-X-C/C-Y-G configuration, 7 as opposed to the G-C/C-G cross-link that had previously been predicted. 8 The formation of the
G-X-C/C-X-G cross-link has been postulated to occur on the basis of the greater frequency of approximation of the N7 atoms of the two guanylates in the
G-X-C/C-X-G configuration, as opposed to the G-C/C-G configuration. 9

FIGURE 19.3-2. Nitrogen mustards in frequent clinical use.

FIGURE 19.3-3. Alkylation of DNA and formation of interstrand cross-link by nitrogen mustard.

Mustargen is available only as an intravenous preparation that can also be used topically for cutaneous malignancies. In the MOPP regimen, Mustargen is used at a
dose of 6 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8 of the monthly schedule. Toxicities unique to the agent are topical irritation and pain on injection if given too rapidly. The clearance
of the drug is very rapid, but pharmacokinetics have not been performed with modern techniques.
Cyclophosphamide
The most frequently used alkylating agent, cyclophosphamide, is used for the treatment of breast cancer in combination with doxorubicin (Adriamycin) 10 or with
methotrexate and 5-fluorouracil 11 and for the treatment of lymphomas,12,13 childhood tumors,14,15 and many solid tumors.16 High doses of cyclophosphamide are
frequently used in conjunction with bone marrow transplantation 17,18 and 19 and for the treatment of autoimmune diseases. 20,21
Cyclophosphamide is inactive in vitro and is metabolized by P-450 enzymes in the liver to active species, as shown in Figure 19.3-4. The initial product is
4-hydroxycyclophosphamide (4-HC), which is released from the liver into the circulation. 22 This compound is in equilibrium with an open-ring tautomer,
aldophosphamide. Aldophosphamide spontaneously eliminates acrolein to produce phosphoramide mustard, 23 which is an active bifunctional alkylating species. 24
Phosphoramide mustard is zwitterionic at physiologic pH 25 and enters cells poorly. 4-HC-aldophosphamide is not charged and enters cells facilely. While
phosphoramide mustard is toxic to cells in vitro at concentrations of 100 µM and higher, 4-HC is cytotoxic in the range of 10 µM. 26 Thus, 4-HC-aldophosphamide
serves as an efficient delivery system for phosphoramide mustard, which has been demonstrated to produce an interstrand DNA cross-link analogous to the cross-link
produced by mechlorethamine.7 Recent studies by Shulman-Roskes et al.27 have demonstrated that phosphoramide mustard readily eliminates chloroethylaziridine, 27
which probably also plays a role in the cross-linking of DNA in cells exposed to 4-HC.

FIGURE 19.3-4. Metabolism of cyclophosphamide.

As shown in Figure 19.3-4, 4-HC is a substrate for the enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase. 28 In cells that contain this enzyme, the bulk of the 4-HC is oxidized to
carboxyphosphamide, which is not an active alkylating agent. Consequently, cells with high aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) content are resistant to the metabolites
of cyclophosphamide.29,30 Early hematopoietic stem cells and megakaryocytes contain high levels, as do the epithelial stem cells in the small intestine and mucous
membranes.30,31 These observations explain why cyclophosphamide administration produces a shorter period of hematopoietic depression, 32 is relatively sparing of
platelets, and is associated with less gastrointestinal toxicity and mucositis than other alkylating agents. 33
4-HC is too unstable to be used as a reagent, but the compound 4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide (see Fig. 19.3-4) is spontaneously converted in aqueous solution to
4-HC and can be used for invitro studies of cell sensitivity. 34,35 This compound has also been used for the invitro treatment of autologous bone marrow to reduce the
number of tumor cells returned to the patient. 36
Cyclophosphamide is available as tablets for oral administration or as an intravenous preparation. The drug is used at a variety of doses and schedules. Oral
administration is particularly used for autoimmune diseases at a daily dose of approximately 100 mg. Because of its rapid absorption and high bioavailability, even
very high doses can be given orally, but high intermittent doses are usually given intravenously. In moderate-dose combination chemotherapy, doses of
cyclophosphamide in the range of 750 mg are usually used. For high-dose therapy in conjunction with hematopoietic cell transplantation, doses of up to 50 mg/kg for
2 or 4 days in combination with other agents are used.
The bulk (nearly 70%) of a dose of cyclophosphamide is excreted in the urine as the inactive carboxyphosphamide. 37,38 At high doses (approximately 50 mg/kg),
plasma concentrations of up to 400 µM of cyclophosphamide are achieved, 38 and clearance depends on the renal clearance and the rate of microsomal metabolism in
the liver. With improved and more facile techniques to measure 4-HC concentrations accurately, the clinical pharmacology of cyclophosphamide and this critical
transport intermediate are being more carefully defined. Studies in patients receiving high-dose therapy have demonstrated considerable variation in the rates of
clearance of cyclophosphamide between patients, with consequent differences in the peak concentrations (1 to 15 µM) and total exposure of the patient to 4-HC (60

to 140 µM.hours). 39,40 The total exposure to 4-HC is probably the major determinant of therapeutic effect. Currently, several programs are evaluating dose adjustment
regimens based on the initial pharmacokinetics of cyclophosphamide and 4-HC. While it is known that substantial concentrations of phosphoramide mustard are
present in plasma (up to 10 µM after 60 mg/kg of cyclophosphamide 38), this concentration is well below the concentrations needed for invitro cytotoxicity of
phosphoramide mustard. 26
A unique toxicity of cyclophosphamide and other oxazophosphorines is a characteristic hemorrhagic cystitis 41,42 due to irritation of the bladder mucosa from urinary
metabolites. Acrolein has been identified as the metabolite most responsible for this effect, 43 but phosphoramide mustard and chloracetaldehyde may contribute to
this toxicity. Careful hydration and emptying of the bladder are crucial to avoiding this toxicity, which has produced massive and even fatal hemorrhage. Another
toxicity that has been associated with cyclophosphamide is an antidiuretic effect, especially at high doses. 44 This effect may produce marked fluid retention and
electrolyte abnormalities, particularly low sodium, and seizures and fatalities have been seen. 45 It is important to avoid low-sodium-containing fluids after high-dose
cyclophosphamide, and the fluid retention syndrome has been treated with furosemide to promote free water clearance. 46 The most severe dose-limiting toxicity of
cyclophosphamide is a fulminant cardiac toxicity, 47 which is often fatal when seen clinically. This toxicity is seen only after the high doses used in bone marrow
transplantation. It was initially seen in patients receiving 60 mg/kg/d of cyclophosphamide for 4 days, and the incidence has decreased since lower doses have been
used. The syndrome usually presents with severe cardiac failure, beginning approximately 10 days after drug administration, with a dilated heart and low
electrocardiogram voltage. There is a characteristic pathologic picture of edema, interstitial hemorrhage, and cardiac necrosis. 47
Ifosfamide
Ifosfamide is a structural isomer of cyclophosphamide that is often used in the treatment of sarcomas and pediatric tumors (see Fig. 19.3-2). There is more chloroethyl
side chain oxidation of ifosfamide (up to 50%) than of cyclophosphamide (<10%), and the degree of such metabolism is more variable than with cyclophosphamide. 48
Oxidation of the chloroethyl groups produces chloroacetaldehyde, which is probably responsible for the neurotoxicity 49 and renal toxicity 50 that have been seen with
ifosfamide therapy. Since the oxidation of a chloroethyl side chain produces a much less toxic monofunctional agent, higher doses of ifosfamide than
cyclophosphamide must be used clinically. The studies of the clinical pharmacology of ifosfamide have been more limited than those of cyclophosphamide but have
demonstrated large intrapatient variability in the pharmacokinetics and metabolism of the agent during repeated administrations. 51,52
Melphalan
Melphalan is now used principally for the treatment of multiple myeloma, 53 for high-dose myeloablative therapy in conjunction with bone marrow transplantation, 54 and
for the isolated limb perfusion of localized tumors, 55 especially malignant melanoma and sarcomas (see Fig. 19.3-2). Melphalan is an amino acid analogue and is
actively transported into cells by amino acid transport systems. 56,57 It has been demonstrated that cellular uptake 58 and transport into the central nervous system
(CNS)59 of melphalan can be modulated by the amino acid content in the extracellular fluid.
Melphalan is available both as tablets and as an intravenous preparation. For the treatment of multiple myeloma, melphalan is usually used orally at a dose of 0.25
mg/kg for 4 days, with prednisone on the same schedule every 4 to 6 weeks. At these doses, peak plasma concentrations of 0.625 µM are found, but absorption is
variable. 60 For bone marrow transplantation, doses of melphalan of 100 to 140 mg/m 2 are used. 61 At these doses, peak concentrations of melphalan of 40 to 50 µM
are reached. 61,62
Chlorambucil
Chlorambucil is used for the treatment of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia 63 and lymphomas64 and for the immunosuppressive therapy of autoimmune diseases. 65
It is administered orally and is well tolerated when given either by daily administration or intermittent high-pulse doses. 64 Chlorambucil is well tolerated by most
patients and can be used successfully for patients who have severe nausea and vomiting with cyclophosphamide or melphalan.
Chlorambucil is available only in an oral formulation. For chronic leukemia and immunosuppression, daily doses of 3 to 6 mg are given for a number of weeks, or 12
mg/m2 may be given monthly. Pulsed dose pulse chlorambucil for lymphoma is given orally at a dose of 16 mg/m 2 daily for 5 consecutive days each month. 64
Chlorambucil is metabolized to a less active derivative—phenylacetic acid mustard—and the clinical pharmacology of chlorambucil is very similar to that of
melphalan.66
AZIRIDINES AND EPOXIDES
The aziridine agents are related to the nitrogen mustards but contain uncharged aziridine rings that are less reactive than the aziridinium rings formed by most of the
nitrogen mustards. The two aziridine agents that are frequently used clinically are thiotepa and mitomycin C ( Fig. 19.3-5). The diepoxide dianhydrogalactitol reacts
with DNA in a similar fashion to the aziridines but has been succeeded in clinical use by dibromodulcitol, which spontaneously generates dianhydrogalactitol insitu
(Fig. 19.3-6).

FIGURE 19.3-5. Aziridine agents.

FIGURE 19.3-6. Structures of dianhydrogalactitol and its prodrug, dibromodulcitol.

Thiotepa
Thiotepa is now used most frequently in combination with other alkylating agents in high-dose therapy with stem cell support. 39,67 Thiotepa has been demonstrated to
react with the N7 position of guanylic acid in DNA 68 and to cross-link DNA,69 indicating that it is acting similarly to the nitrogen mustards. Thiotepa is desulfurated by
cytochrome P-450 enzymes70 to produce tepa. Tepa is less toxic than thiotepa and has been demonstrated to produce alkali-labile sites in DNA, rather than
cross-links. 69 These findings suggest that tepa reacts differently from thiotepa and produces monofunctional alkylation of DNA.
In combination with cyclophosphamide for high-dose therapy, thiotepa has been given as a continuous infusion for 4 days, at a daily dose of 200 mg/m 2. Under these
conditions, steady-state levels of 2 to 6 µM of thiotepa are rapidly achieved. 71 Thiotepa is also used at a dose of 900 mg/m 2 in combination with high-dose
cyclophosphamide and cisplatin. 72
Mitomycin C
Mitomycin C is an antibiotic extracted from a Streptomyces species and is used for the treatment of breast cancer, 73 esophageal cancer, 74 and gastrointestinal
tumors.75 As seen in Figure 19.3-5, this compound contains an aziridine ring. Particularly under hypoxic conditions, mitomycin C is reduced, with activation of the C1
position of the aziridine ring. This carbon then reacts in the minor groove with the extracyclic N2 amino group of a guanylic acid, 76,77 positioning the 10 carbon of the
carbamate moiety to react with the N2 of a guanylic acid residue in an adjacent base pair in the complementary DNA strand. Mitomycin C and its reduced metabolites
can also produce intrastrand guanylic acid–guanylic acid cross-links that produce bending of the DNA. 78
In combination regimens, mitomycin C is given at doses of 10 to 15 mg/m 2 every 4 to 6 weeks. After a dose of 15 mg/m2, peak plasma concentrations of 3 µM are
seen.79
Dianhydrogalactitol
Dianhydrogalactitol (see Fig. 19.3-6) is a hexitol derivative that contains two epoxide groups and cross-links DNA through the N7 atoms of guanylic acid, 80
presumably through the nucleophilic attack of the N7 atoms on the strained-ring epoxide groups. This compound was evaluated in clinical trials and demonstrated
modest antitumor activity.81,82 However, the structurally related dibromodulcitol (see Fig. 19.3-6) has demonstrated more antitumor activity 83,84 and is still being used in
combination chemotherapy of breast cancer, cervical cancer, and brain tumors. Dibromodulcitol is hydrolyzed to dianhydrogalactitol, and its better antitumor activity is
presumably due to more effective localization of the reactive agent in tumor cells. 85 Dibromodulcitol is usually administered at a dose of 1 g/m 2, which produces a
maximum plasma concentration of approximately 50 µM.86
ALKYL SULFONATES: BUSULFAN
Busulfan (Myeleran), other alkyl sulfonates, and the related sulfamates react with DNA by a direct displacement reaction (as shown in Fig. 19.3-7). Busulfan has been
demonstrated to cross-link DNA,87 but the structure of the cross-link has not been established. A chemically related agent, hepsulfam, with seven methylene units
between the reactive groups, has been demonstrated to form a DNA G-X-C/C-X-G interstrand cross-link analogous to those formed by the nitrogen mustards. 88
Haddow and Timmis89 reported in 1953 that busulfan was active against chronic myelogenous leukemia. Busulfan was for many years the principal agent used to treat
this disease, before being replaced by the use of hydroxyurea 90 and interferon-a, 91 both of which have proved to be more effective than busulfan. The most frequent
use of busulfan in cancer therapy today is in high-dose therapy for many tumors, including chronic myelogenous leukemia, in conjunction with bone marrow or stem
cell transplantation. For this application, high doses of busulfan are combined with cyclophosphamide, total body irradiation, or other agents. 18,92,93 and 94 The
effectiveness of busulfan for this purpose is undoubtedly related to its marked myeloablative properties, 95 the mechanistic bases of which are not understood.

FIGURE 19.3-7. Alkylation of guanylate in DNA by busulfan through S N2 alkylation. A second displacement reaction with the N7 of a guanylate in the complementary
strand creates a G-X-C/C-X-G interstrand cross-link.

Until recently, busulfan was available only as an oral preparation, but intravenous preparations are now available. For hematopoietic transplantation, busulfan is
usually given as 1 mg/kg every 6 hours for 4 days, for a total dose of 16 mg/kg. Peak concentrations of busulfan after each dose are approximately 10 µM. 96 High
doses of busulfan have been associated with venoocclusive disease of the liver. This syndrome consists of hepatomegaly, jaundice, ascites, and hepatic failure with a
high mortality rate.97 Grochow et al. 96 have demonstrated that pharmacokinetic monitoring and dose adjustment of the busulfan can markedly reduce the incidence of
venoocclusive disease.
NITROSOUREAS
The members of the nitrosourea group of therapeutic alkylating agents are related to the alkylnitrosoamines and similar compounds that have long been known to be
carcinogenic. Methylnitrosoguanidine and methylnitrosourea are monofunctional alkylating agents and were found to have modest antitumor activity. 98,99
Montgomery100 and others101,102 evaluated a number of analogues of these compounds and demonstrated remarkable antitumor effects of bischloroethylnitrosourea
(BCNU; Fig. 19.3-8) against mouse tumors, and particularly against intracerebral tumors, which had been refractory to most agents because of the blood–brain
barrier. 100,101 and 102 BCNU was found to produce interstrand cross-linking of DNA, 103 which has been demonstrated to occur through the spontaneous generation of a
chloroethyldiazonium species 104 and the series of reactions illustrated in Figure 19.3-9.105 As illustrated, this interstrand cross-link occurs between a guanylate in DNA
and the base-paired cytidylate in the other strand of the DNA. 106

FIGURE 19.3-8. Nitrosoureas.

FIGURE 19.3-9. Reaction of BCNU with DNA to produce a G-C interstrand cross-link.

Bischloroethylnitrosourea
BCNU (carmustine; see Fig. 19.3-8) demonstrated activity against brain tumors clinically 107 and has continued to be used in the treatment of gliomas and other brain
tumors. BCNU has also been used in the treatment of multiple myeloma 108 and in high-dose therapy in conjunction with bone marrow and stem cell transplantation. 109
BCNU can also be administered to brain tumors by direct injection 110 and by the implantation of biodegradable polymers containing BCNU into the brain. 111
Cyclohexylchloroethylnitrosourea
Cyclohexylchloroethylnitrosourea (CCNU, lomustine; see Fig. 19.3-8) is a more lipid-soluble nitrosourea. It is administered orally and is used in the treatment of brain
tumors.112,113
Methylcyclohexylchloroethylnitrosourea
Methylcyclohexylchloroethylnitrosourea (semustine; see Fig. 19.3-8) is an oral investigational drug that has been used in the treatment of gastrointestinal tumors. 114
N'-[(4-amino-2-methyl-5-pyrimidinyl)methyl]-N-(2-chloroethyl)-N-nitrosourea
N'-[(4-amino-2-methyl-5-pyrimidinyl)methyl]-N-(2-chloroethyl)-N-nitrosourea (nimustine; see Fig. 19.3-8) is more water-soluble than the other chloroethylnitrosoureas
and has been used for the treatment of CNS tumors by the intraarterial 115 and intrathecal routes. 116
Clinical Pharmacology
As a single agent, BCNU is usually used in a dose of 125 to 200 mg/m 2 every 6 to 8 weeks. In combination with doxorubicin for multiple myeloma, a dose of 30 mg/m 2
every 3 to 4 weeks has been used. 117 After doses in the range of 100 mg/m2, peak plasma concentrations are in the range of 5 µM. 118 For high-dose therapy of breast
cancer, BCNU is given at a dose of 600 mg/m 2 in combination with cyclophosphamide and cisplatin. 119 After this dose of BCNU, the peak plasma levels of BCNU have
been shown to be approximately 5 µM. 120 Phenobarbital has been demonstrated to increase the clearance of BCNU 121 and to decrease the toxic and therapeutic
effects. CCNU is administered in doses similar to those of BCNU. The parent CCNU has not been detected, but the peak concentrations of the ring hydroxylated
metabolites are approximately 3 µM after doses of 130 mg/m2.122
Specific Toxicities
Hematopoietic toxicity of the nitrosoureas is severe and is delayed, with the nadir of the granulocytes occurring approximately 5 to 6 weeks after administration. 123
This finding indicates that these agents selectively damage a very primitive hematopoietic precursor.
HYDRAZINE AND TRIAZINE DERIVATIVES
The hydrazine and triazene derivative compounds are analogous to the nitrosoureas in that they decompose spontaneously or are metabolized to produce an alkyl
carbonium ion, which alkylates DNA. Hydrazine and its substituted analogues are known carcinogens 124 that inhibit gluconeogenesis in cells 125 and have been
promoted as antitumor agents.126 However, objective preclinical and clinical studies have not supported a significant antitumor effect 127,128 for hydrazine analogues in
general.
Procarbazine
Procarbazine is a phenylhydrazine derivative that was initially developed as an inhibitor of monoamine oxidase but was found to have significant antitumor activity in
preclinical models and clinically ( Fig. 19.3-10).129 Procarbazine was one of the components of the first effective combination chemotherapy regimen, MOPP, for
Hodgkin's disease. 6 The agent is currently used for the treatment of Hodgkin's disease 6,130 and for the treatment of primary brain tumors.113,131 Procarbazine has been
demonstrated to be metabolized to a DNA-methylating agent, 132,133 and 134 which is most likely methylazoxyprocarbazine. 135,136 Since procarbazine is a monoamine
oxidase inhibitor, patients can experience CNS depression 137 or stimulation138 and acute hypertension, especially after the ingestion of tyramine-rich foods.

FIGURE 19.3-10. Procarbazine .

Dacarbazine
Dacarbazine , or DTIC [(dimethyltriazeno)imidazole-carboxamide], is a triazene derivative that is metabolized by microsomal N-demethylation, predominantly in the
liver, to an intermediate that spontaneously decomposes to release a methyldiazonium that methylates DNA ( Fig. 19.3-11).139,140 and 141 Dacarbazine is used in the
regimen of doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine for the treatment of Hodgkin's disease 130,142 and for the treatment of malignant melanoma.119,143

FIGURE 19.3-11. Generation of methyl diazonium from the triazenes dacarbazine and temozolomide.

Temozolomide
Temozolomide is a triazene analogue that spontaneously decomposes to produce a methyl diazonium ion, as illustrated in Figure 19.3-11.144,145 This compound may
produce a more homogeneous distribution of the short-lived MITC [(methyltriazeno)- imidazole-carboxamide], which is spontaneously generated from temozolomide at
all sites, than does dacarbazine, which is metabolized to MITC in the liver. The principal toxicities seen in phase I trials have been neutropenia and thrombocytopenia,
and tumor responses were seen in those trials 146,147 in patients with glioma and melanoma. Phase II trials in patients with gliomas have shown response rates of 20%
to 30%,148,149 but phase II trials in patients with sarcomas 150 and pancreatic cancer 151 did not demonstrate significant responses.
These agents exert their toxicity predominantly through the methylation of the O 6 position of guanylic acid in DNA. Therefore, cells that contain significant
O6-alkyltransferase or are deficient in mismatch repair will be resistant to them (as discussed in the section Mechanisms of Toxicity and Drug Resistance).
Procarbazine is an oral preparation and used in the MOPP regimen for Hodgkin's disease at a dose of 100 mg/m 2/d for 14 days.142 Because of its complex
metabolism, pharmacokinetic studies have been limited. Dacarbazine is an intravenous preparation and is used in the regimen of doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine,
dacarbazine for Hodgkin's disease at a dose of 375 mg/m 2/d for 15 days.142 For the treatment of malignant melanoma, a dose of 200 to 250 mg/m2/d for 5 days is used
and, at this dose, peak plasma concentrations of dacarbazine are approximately 30 µM. 152 This agent has been used as a single agent with bone marrow
transplantation at a dose of 2000 mg/m 2.153 At this dose, the maximum plasma concentration of dacarbazine was 800 µM. 153 Temozolomide is usually given orally at
150 to 250 mg/m2/d for 5 days. Reid et al. 154 measured peak concentrations of MTIC of 0.5 to 5 µM after administration of these doses of temozolomide. 154 Baker et
al.155 studied the pharmacokinetics of 14C-labeled temozolomide and found peak concentrations of temozolomide of approximately 30 µM and peak concentrations of
MTIC of approximately 1 µM.
MECHANISMS OF TOXICITY AND DRUG RESISTANCE
REACTION WITH CELLULAR MOLECULES
The alkylating agents are potent electrophiles and react with many electron-rich molecules within the cell to be inactivated. The principal such molecule is glutathione
(GSH), a tripeptide with a free cysteine sulfhydryl that is present at millimolar concentrations in cells ( Fig. 19.3-12). This small nucleophile is known to react with and
inactivate virtually all the therapeutic alkylating agents, and a correlation between elevated cellular GSH concentrations and resistance to nitrogen mustards has been
demonstrated.156,157 The GSH S-transferase enzymes catalyze the conjugation of GSH with electrophiles, and increased activity of this class of enzymes enhances
GSH-mediated resistance.158,159 and 160 The GSH conjugates of specific alkylating agents have been characterized, 161,162 and 163 and the specific isoenzymes of GST that
catalyze their formation have been characterized. 164,165,166,167 and 168

FIGURE 19.3-12. Structure of glutathione.

Buthionine sulfoximine is an inhibitor of gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase, the rate-limiting enzyme in the GSH synthesis pathway, and decreases the GSH
concentration in cells. 169 Exposure to this compound sensitizes both normal and tumor cells to alkylating agents. 156,170,171 In a phase I clinical trial, buthionine
sulfoxime has been shown to increase the hematologic toxicity of melphalan 172 and is currently in further clinical trials to determine whether this agent can increase
the clinical antitumor efficacy of melphalan.
Cells can also be sensitized to alkylating agents by exposure to inhibitors of GSH S-transferases, 173,174 and a clinical trial of the GSH S-transferase inhibitor
sulfasalazine with melphalan demonstrated increased nausea and vomiting but no increase in hematopoietic toxicity. 175 The membrane transporter multidrug
resistance protein is known to mediate the efflux of GSH conjugates from the cell, 176 and Barnouin et al. 177 have demonstrated that this system can transport the GSH
conjugates of chlorambucil and melphalan from cells. The observations suggest that modulation of these systems could enhance the efficacy of alkylating agents.
Kelley et al. 178 demonstrated that transfection of metallothionein into cells produced increased resistance to chlorambucil and melphalan. Subsequently, Yu et al. 179
have demonstrated that the thiol groups of metallothionein will bind melphalan and phosphoramide mustard. 180 It has also been demonstrated that exposure of cells to
zinc will increase metallothionein concentration in the cell and increase resistance of the cells to melphalan, doxorubicin, and cisplatin. 181
ENHANCED DNA REPAIR: O6 ALKYLATION

Another mechanism of cellular resistance to alkylating agents is repair of the DNA damage that the agents produce. The most defined mechanism of cellular repair of
alkylating agent damage is that of the enzyme O 6-alkylguanine-alkyltransferase. As illustrated in Figure 19.3-13, this enzyme can remove an alkyl group from the O6
position of guanine, and the alkylated enzyme is then rapidly degraded. 182 This mechanism has been shown to be effective in protecting normal and tumor cells from
the carcinogenic and toxic effects of DNA methylating agents, such as temozolomide and procarbazine. 183 Erickson et al.184 demonstrated that this enzyme would also
remove the 6-chloroethyl lesion produced by the alkylation of guanine by the chloroethylnitrosoureas and produce resistance to these compounds, and this
observation has been confirmed and extended. 185

FIGURE 19.3-13. Interactions of O 6-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase. Pathway A: Repair of O 6 alkylation by O 6AT. Pathway B: Inactivation of O 6AT by
benzylguanine.

It has been shown that such compounds as O 6-benzylguanine will be acted on by O 6-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase (see Fig. 19.3-13) to remove the benzyl
group186 and that the enzyme will be rapidly degraded and depleted. Such compounds have been demonstrated to reverse tumor resistance due to O 6AT to the O 6
alkylating agents invitro and invivo,187,188 and clinical trials of the combination of such agents and O 6-methylguanine are currently in progress. 189,190
However, inhibitors of O 6AT enhance the hematopoietic toxicity of O 6 alkylating therapeutic agents. Hematopoietic stem cells have been successfully transfected with
O6AT variants that are resistant to O 6-benzylguanine and related compounds. 191 The hematopoietic systems of animals populated with these cells are resistant to the
combination of O 6-benzylguanine and BCNU, 192 and clinical trials of this approach to improve the efficacy of chloroethylnitrosoureas and methylating agents are
planned.
CROSS-LINK REPAIR
The use of alkaline elution and other techniques ( Fig. 19.3-14) has demonstrated that DNA interstrand cross-links produced by nitrogen mustards can be removed in
bacteria193 and mammalian cells.194 The mechanism of such repair has not been elucidated, but nucleotide excision repair 195 and poly(adenosine diphosphate–ribose)
polymerase196 appear to play a role.

FIGURE 19.3-14. DNA lesions produced by alkylating agents.

Caffeine and related compounds have been demonstrated to enhance the cytotoxicity of nitrogen mustard. 197 This effect was associated with abrogation of G 2 arrest.
O'Connor et al. 198,199 demonstrated that the G2 arrest associated with nitrogen mustard resistance was associated with decreased activity of cdc2 kinase in the
resistant cells. Caffeine has also been shown to inhibit nucleotide excision repair by binding to the subunit that recognizes the damage and helps to mediate this
repair activity. 200 Elevated Bcl-2 has also been associated with nitrogen mustard resistance. 201
A medulloblastoma cell line has been demonstrated to be resistant to activated cyclophosphamide (4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide) on the basis of increased
removal of DNA interstrand cross-links. 34,202 This cell does not appear to repair cross-links produced by BCNU and busulfan, indicating that the recognition of the
nitrogen mustard cross-link is fairly specific.
IN VIVO RESISTANCE
Kobayashi et al. 203 and St. Croix et al.204 have described resistance to alkylating agents and other antitumor agents that is associated with aggregation of tumor cells.
This resistance is present when the tumor cells are growing invivo or in three-dimensional invitro culture with adherence between the cells but is not present when the
cells are dispersed in two-dimensional culture. This type of resistance has also been associated with increased metastatic potential. 205

COMMON TOXICITIES
Toxicities that are associated with specific alkylating agents are described in the discussions of the individual agents. The toxicities common to the alkylating agents
as a class are described here.
HEMATOPOIETIC TOXICITY
The usual dose-limiting toxicity for an alkylating agent is hematopoietic toxicity. As described, cyclophosphamide usually produces a relatively rapid nadir of the
granulocytes, with recovery within 3 weeks after a single dose or short course. 32,33,206 Cyclophosphamide is also relatively platelet-sparing. The reason for the relative
hematopoietic sparing properties of cyclophosphamide is the high concentrations of the enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase in hematopoietic stem cells and
megakaryocytes. 30,31
The nitrosoureas produce an unusual delayed hematopoietic toxicity, with nadirs of both granulocytes and platelets at 5 to 6 weeks after administration. 123 Severe
granulocytopenia and thrombocytopenia are also characteristic of busulfan. 207 An interesting characteristic of busulfan is its relative sparing of lymphocytes. The
different hematopoietic effects of alkylating agents, except for the characteristics of cyclophosphamide, are not explained but suggest significant differences in

selectivity of the agents for hematopoietic precursors.
GASTROINTESTINAL TOXICITY
The alkylating agents frequently produce nausea and vomiting, although this effect is usually not as severe as with the platinum agents. Cyclophosphamide produces
severe nausea and vomiting in some patients, but these patients usually tolerate chlorambucil, which is clinically less emetogenic. The nausea and vomiting produced
by alkylating agents are known to be mediated significantly through the CNS. 208,209 With the higher doses of alkylating agents used in bone marrow transplantation,
increased nausea and vomiting are seen but can usually be controlled by corticosteroids and the newer antiserotonin antiemetics. 210,211 and 212 The alkylating agents
can cause significant toxicity to the gastrointestinal mucosa and produce mucositis, stomatitis, and diarrhea, especially with the high doses of melphalan and thiotepa
used in bone marrow transplantation. 213
GONADAL TOXICITY
The alkylating agents can produce significant gonadal toxicity. The characteristic testicular lesion in men is depletion of germ cells without damage to the Sertoli cells,
which was first described with nitrogen mustard in 1948. 214 This lesion is also seen, often in association with oligospermia or aspermia, after treatment with other
alkylating agents. 215,216 Spermatogenic dysfunction is reversible in some patients. 217,218
Women treated with alkylating agents may develop amenorrhea associated with a marked decrease in ovarian follicles. 215,219,220 This complication and its irreversibility
increase with the age of the woman.221
PULMONARY TOXICITY
Interstitial pneumonitis and fibrosis were initially reported as a consequence of busulfan therapy but have subsequently been reported to occur after therapy with
melphalan,222 but have subsequently been reported to occur after therapy with melphalan, 223 chlorambucil,224 cyclophosphamide,225,226 mitomycin C,227 and
BCNU.228,229 The clinical manifestations of this toxicity are dyspnea and a nonproductive cough, which can progress to cyanosis, pulmonary insufficiency, and death.
The syndrome has particularly been associated in frequency and severity with high doses of BCNU. 230,231 The greater pulmonary toxicity of BCNU may be due to the
spontaneous decomposition of BCNU, which produces chloroethyl isocyanate in addition to the alkylating chloroethyl diazonium moiety described. 232 Chloroethyl
isocyanate is an analogue of methyl isocyanate, a known pulmonary toxin that produced many deaths when released in an industrial accident in Bhopal, India. 233
ALOPECIA
Alopecia from chemotherapy was first described after administration of dimethylmyeleran, an analogue of busulfan. 234 The alkylating agents now most associated with
alopecia are cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide. Feil and Lamoureux 235 examined the alopecia-producing effects of metabolites and analogues of cyclophosphamide
and proposed that the alopecic effect was due to the facile entry of a lipophilic metabolite (now known to be 4-HC) into the hair follicles. This hypothesis is consistent
with the fact that vincristine, doxorubicin, and the taxanes, all associated with alopecia, are fairly lipophilic.
TERATOGENICITY
All the therapeutically used alkylating agents are teratogenic in animal studies. 236,237,238 and 239 A review of the literature in 1968 found that 4 of 25 children born to
mothers who received alkylating agents during the first trimester of pregnancy had fetal malformations. 240 On the basis of the limited information available, women
treated with an alkylating agent during the first trimester of pregnancy may have a risk as high as 15% of having a malformed infant. Administration of alkylating
agents during the second and third trimesters has not been associated with increased fetal malformations. 241,242 More recent reviews support the lack of malformations
produced by treatment during the second and third trimesters, 243,244 and one review cites 19 women treated during the first trimester with no infant malformations. 244
CARCINOGENESIS
In the 1970s, there were reports of acute leukemia occurring in patients who had been treated with alkylating agents, 245,246,247,248 and 249 and subsequent experience has
confirmed the occurrence of this complication. The incidence of leukemia is difficult to estimate because of the variety of agents, doses, and combinations used but is
probably approximately 5%. In one group of 12 ovarian cancer patients receiving a high dose of melphalan, 4 developed acute leukemia. 248 In one report, the
incidence of leukemia was found to be higher after melphalan treatment than after cyclophosphamide therapy. 250 This observation may be related to the stem
cell–sparing properties of cyclophosphamide. 30 An increased frequency of solid tumors also occurs after alkylating agent therapy. 251,252
IMMUNOSUPPRESSION
In 1921, Hektoen and Corper 253 reported an inhibitory effect of sulfur mustard on antibody production. While all the alkylating agents produce some degree of
immunosuppression, cyclophosphamide is the most immunosuppressive. 254 Cyclophosphamide and chlorambucil are the alkylating agents most commonly used for
the treatment of autoimmune diseases. 255,256,257,258 and 259
Selective inhibition of immunosuppressor cells with low doses of an activated analogue of cyclophosphamide and with melphalan has been demonstrated in
vitro260,261,262 and 263 and in vivo263,264 and enhancement of the immune response has been shown in vivo.263 For this reason, low doses of cyclophosphamide have been
used in conjunction with immunotherapy.265,266 Because of its potent immunosuppressive properties, cyclophosphamide has long been used in preparative regimens
for allogeneic stem cell transplantation for malignancy 267 and more recently for the autologous transplantation of autoimmune disease. 268,269 The use of high doses of
cyclophosphamide without stem cell support has now been reported to produce complete remissions in autoimmune diseases. 21,270,271
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Rhodes R. The making of the atomic bomb. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1986.
2. Adair CPJ, Bogg HJ. Experimental and clinical studies of the treatment of cancer by dichloroethylsulfide (mustard gas). Ann Surg 1931;93:190.
3. Rhoads C. Nitrogen mustards in treatment of neoplastic disease. JAMA 1946;131:6568.
4. Goodman LS, Wintrobe MM, Dameshek W, et al. Use of methyl-bis(beta-chlorethyl)amine hydrochloride for Hodgkin's disease, lymphosarcoma, leukemia. JAMA 1946;132:126.
5. Jacobson LP, Spurr C, Barron E, et al. Studies of the effect of methyl-bis(beta-chloroethyl)amine hydrochloride on neoplastic diseases and allied disorders of the hematopoietic system. JAMA
1946;132:263.
6. DeVita VT Jr, Serpick AA, Carbone PP. Combination chemotherapy in the treatment of advanced Hodgkin's disease. Ann Intern Med 1970;73(6):881.
7. Millard JT, Raucher S, Hopkins PB. Mechlorethamine cross links deoxyguanosine residues at 5' GNC sequences in duplex DNA sequences in duplex DNA fragments. J Am Chem Soc
1990;112:2459.
8. Brookes P, Lawley PD. The reaction of mono- and difunctional alkylating agents with nucleic acids. Biochem J 1961;80:486.
9. Dong Q, Barsky D, Colvin ME, et al. A structural basis for a phosphoramide mustard-induced DNA interstrand cross-link at 5'-d(GAC). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92(26):12170.
10. Fisher B, Anderson S, Wickerham DL, et al. Increased intensification and total dose of cyclophosphamide in a doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide regimen for the treatment of primary breast
cancer: findings from National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-22. J Clin Oncol 1997;15(5):1858.
11. Falkson G, Tormey DC, Carey P, Witte R, Falkson HC. Long-term survival of patients treated with combination chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer. Eur J Cancer 1991;27(8):973.
12. DeVita VT Jr, Chabner B, Schein P, Hubbard SP, Young RC. Advanced diffuse histiocytic lymphoma, a potentially curable disease. Lancet 1975;1:248.
13. Chao NJ, Rosenberg SA, Horning SJ. CEPP(B): an effective and well-tolerated regimen in poor-risk, aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1990;76(7):1293.
14. Carpenter PA, White L, McCowage GB, et al. A dose-intensive, cyclophosphamide-based regimen for the treatment of recurrent/progressive or advanced solid tumors of childhooda report from
the Australia and New Zealand Children's Cancer Study Group. Cancer 1997;80(3):489.
15. McCowage G, Tien R, McLendon R, et al. Successful treatment of childhood pilocytic astrocytomas metastatic to the leptomeninges with high-dose cyclophosphamide. Med Pediatr Oncol
1996;27(1):32.
16. Colvin OM. Drug resistance in the treatment of sarcomas. Semin Oncol 1997;24(5):580.
17. Santos GW, Tutschka PJ, Brookmeyer R, et al. Marrow transplantation for acute nonlymphocytic leukemia after treatment with busulfan and cyclophosphamide. N Engl J Med
1983;309(22):1347.
18. Blazar BR, Ramsay NK, Kersey JH, et al. Pretransplant conditioning with busulfan (Myleran) and cyclophosphamide for nonmalignant diseases. Assessment of engraftment following
histocompatible allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Transplantation 1985;39(6):597.
19. Antman K, Ayash L, Elias A, et al. High-dose cyclophosphamide, thiotepa, and carboplatin with autologous marrow support in women with measurable advanced breast cancer responding to

standard dose therapy: analysis by age. J Natl Cancer InstMonogr 1994;16:91.
20. Ferrara F, Copia C, Annunziata M, et al. Complete remission of refractory anemia following a single high dose of cyclophosphamide. Ann Hematol 1999;78(2):87.
21. Brodsky RA, Petri M, Smith BD, et al. Immunoablative high-dose cyclophosphamide without stem-cell rescue for refractory, severe autoimmune disease. Ann Intern Med 1998;129(12):1031.
22. Colvin M, Hilton J. Pharmacology of cyclophosphamide and metabolites. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;3:89.
23. Colvin M, Padgett CA, Fenselau C. A biologically active metabolite of cyclophosphamide. Cancer Res 1973;33(4):915.
24. Colvin M, Brundrett RB, Kan MN, Jardine I, Fenselau C. Alkylating properties of phosphoramide mustard. Cancer Res 1976;36(3):1121.
25. Gamcsik MP, Ludeman SM, Shulman-Roskes EM, et al. Protonation of phosphoramide mustard and other phosphoramides. J Med Chem 1993;36(23):3636.
26. Hilton J. Deoxyribonucleic acid cross-linking by 4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide in cyclophosphamide-sensitive and -resistant L1210 cells. Biochem Pharmacol 1984;33(12):1867.
27. Shulman-Roskes EM, Noe DA, Gamcsik MP, et al. The partitioning of phosphoramide mustard and its aziridinium ions among alkylation and P-N bond hydrolysis reactions. J Med Chem
1998;41(4):515.
28. Hilton J. Role of aldehyde dehydrogenase in cyclophosphamide-resistant L1210 leukemia. Cancer Res 1984;44(11):5156.
29. Russo JE, Hilton J. Characterization of cytosolic aldehyde dehydrogenase from cyclophosphamide resistant L1210 cells. Cancer Res 1988;48(11):2963.
30. Kastan MB, Schlaffer E, Russo JE, et al. Direct demonstration of elevated aldehyde dehydrogenase in human hematopoietic progenitor cells. Blood 1990;75(10):1947.
31. Russo JE, Hilton J, Colvin OM. The role of aldehyde dehydrogenase isozymes in cellular resistance to the alkylating agent cyclophosphamide. Prog Clin Biol Res 1989;290:65.
32. Nissen-Meyer R, Host H. A comparison between the hematological side effects of cyclophosphamide and nitrogen mustard. Cancer Chemother Rep 1960;9:51.
33. Mullins GM, Colvin M. Intensive cyclophosphamide (NSC-26271) therapy for solid tumors. Cancer Chemother Rep 1975;59(2):411.
34. Dong Q, Bullock N, Aliosman F, et al. Repair analysis of 4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide induced DNA interstrand cross-linking in the C-Myc gene in
4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide-sensitive and -resistant medulloblastoma cell lines. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1996;37(3):242.
35. Gamcsik MP, Millis KK, Colvin M. Noninvasive detection of elevated glutathione levels in Mcf-7 cells resistant to 4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide. Cancer Res 1995;55(10):2012.
36. Rowley SD, Jones RJ, Piantadosi S, et al. Efficacy of ex vivo purging for autologous bone marrow transplantation in the treatment of acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1989;74(1):501.
37. Bakke JE, Feil VJ, Fjelstul CE, Thacker EJ. Metabolism of cyclophosphamide by sheep. J Agric Food Chem 1972;20(2):384.
38. Jardine I, Fenselau C, Appler M, et al. Quantitation by gas chromatographychemical ionization mass spectrometry of cyclophosphamide, phosphoramide mustard, and nornitrogen mustard in
the plasma and urine of patients receiving cyclophosphamide therapy. Cancer Res 1978;38(2):408.
39. Chen TL, Kennedy MJ, Anderson LW, et al. Nonlinear pharmacokinetics of cyclophosphamide and 4-hydroxycyclophosphamide/aldophosphamide in patients with metastatic breast cancer
receiving high-dose chemotherapy followed by autologous bone marrow transplantation. Drug Metab Dispos 1997;25(5):544.
40. Ren S, Kalhorn TF, McDonald GB, et al. Pharmacokinetics of cyclophosphamide and its metabolites in bone marrow transplantation patients. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1998;64(3):289.
41. Phillips FS, Sternberg SS, Cronin AP, PM V. Cyclophosphamide and urinary bladder toxicity. Cancer Res 1961;21:1577.
42. Forni AM, Koss LG, Geller W. Cytological study of the effect of cyclophosphamide on the epithelium of the urinary bladder in man. Cancer 1964;17:1348.
43. Cox PJ. Cyclophosphamide cystitisidentification of acrolein as the causative agent. Biochem Pharmacol 1979;28(13):2045.
44. DeFronzo RA, Braine H, Colvin M, Davis PJ. Water intoxication in man after cyclophosphamide therapy. Time course and relation to drug activation. Ann Intern Med 1973;78(6):861.
45. Harlow PJ, DeClerck YA, Shore NA, et al. A fatal case of inappropriate ADH secretion induced by cyclophosphamide therapy. Cancer 1979;44(3):896.
46. Green TP, Mirkin BL. Prevention of cyclophosphamide-induced antidiuresis by furosemide infusion. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1981;29(5):634.
47. Slavin RE, Millan JC, Mullins GM. Pathology of high dose intermittent cyclophosphamide therapy. Hum Pathol 1975;6(6):693.
48. Colvin M. The comparative pharmacology of cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide. Semin Oncol 1982;9(4)[Suppl 1]:2.
49. Pratt CB, Green AA, Horowitz ME, et al. Central nervous system toxicity following the treatment of pediatric patients with ifosfamide/mesna. J Clin Oncol 1986;4(8):1253.
50. Pratt CB, Meyer WH, Jenkins JJ, et al. Ifosfamide, Fanconi's syndrome, and rickets. J Clin Oncol 1991;9(8):1495.
51. Boddy AV, Yule SM, Wyllie R, et al. Intrasubject variation in children of ifosfamide pharmacokinetics and metabolism during repeated administration. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1996;38(2):147.
52. Boddy AV, Proctor M, Simmonds D, Lind MJ, Idle JR. Pharmacokinetics, metabolism and clinical effect of ifosfamide in breast cancer patients. Eur J Cancer 1995;1:69.
53. Cuttner J, Wasserman LR, Martz G, et al. The use of low-dose prednisone and melphalan in the treatment of poor-risk patients with multiple myeloma. Med Pediatr Oncol 1975;1(3):207.
54. Vesole DH, Crowley JJ, Catchatourian R, et al. High-dose melphalan with autotransplantation for refractory multiple myeloma: results of a southwest oncology group phase II trial. J Clin Oncol
1999;17(7):2173.
55. Norda A, Loos U, Sastry M, Goehl J, Hohenberger W. Pharmacokinetics of melphalan in isolated limb perfusion. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1999;43(1):35.
56. Goldenberg GJ, Lee M, Lam HY, Begleiter A. Evidence for carrier-mediated transport of melphalan by L5178Y lymphoblasts in vitro. Cancer Res 1977;37(3):755.
57. Begleiter A, Lam HY, Grover J, Froese E, Goldenberg GJ. Evidence for active transport of melphalan by two amino acid carriers in L5178Y lymphoblasts in vitro. Cancer Res 1979;39(1):353.
58. Vistica DT, Rabon A, Rabinovitz M. Amino acid conferred protection against melphalan: comparison of amino acids which reduce melphalan toxicity to murine bone marrow precursor cells
(CFU-C) and murine L1210 leukemia cells. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol 1979;23(1):171.
59. Groothuis DR, Lippitz BE, Fekete I, et al. The effect of an amino acidlowering diet on the rate of melphalan entry into brain and xenotransplanted glioma. Cancer Res 1992;52(20):5590.
60. Pallante SL, Fenselau C, Mennel RG, et al. Quantitation by gas chromatographychemical ionizationmass spectrometry of phenylalanine mustard in plasma of patients. Cancer Res
1980;40(7):2268.
61. Hersh MR, Ludden TM, Kuhn JG, Knight WA 3rd. Pharmacokinetics of high dose melphalan. Invest New Drugs 1983;1(4):331.
62. Pinguet F, Martel P, Fabbro M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of high-dose intravenous melphalan in patients undergoing peripheral blood hematopoietic progenitor-cell transplantation. Anticancer
Res 1997;17(1B):605.
63. Han T, Rai KR. Management of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1990;4(2):431.
64. Portlock CS, Fischer DS, Cadman E, et al. High-dose pulse chlorambucil in advanced, low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71(11):1029.
65. Branten AJW, Reichert LJM, Koene RAP, Wetzels JFM. Oral cyclophosphamide versus chlorambucil in the treatment of patients with membranous nephropathy and renal insufficiency. QJM
1998;91(5):359.
66. Alberts DS, Chang SY, Chen H-SG, Larcom BJ, Evans TL. Comparative pharmacokinetics of chlorambucil and melphalan in man. Recent Results Cancer Res 1980;74:124.
67. Przepiorka D, Khouri I, Thall P, et al. Thiotepa, busulfan and cyclophosphamide as a preparative regimen for allogeneic transplantation for advanced chronic myelogenous leukemia. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1999;23(10):977.
68. Andrievsky GY, Sukhodub LF, Pyatigorskaya TL, et al. Direct observation of the alkylation products of deoxyguanosine and DNA by fast atom bombardment mass spectrometry. Biol Mass
Spectrom 1991;20(11):665.
69. Cohen NA, Egorin MJ, Snyder SW, et al. Interaction of N,N',N''-triethylenethiophosphoramide and N,N',N''-triethylenephosphoramide with cellular DNA. Cancer Res 1991;51(16):4360.
70. Chang TK, Chen G, Waxman DJ. Modulation of thiotepa antitumor activity in vivo by alteration of liver cytochrome P450-catalyzed drug metabolism. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1995;274(1):270.
71. Kennedy MJ, Armstrong DK, Huelskamp AM, et al. Phase I and pharmacologic study of the alkylating agent modulator novobiocin in combination with high-dose chemotherapy for the treatment
of metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13(5):1136.
72. Hussein AM, Petros WP, Ross M, et al. A phase I/Il study of high dose cyclophosphamide, cisplatin, and thiotepa followed by autologous bone marrow and granulocyte colony stimulating
factor-primed peripheral blood progenitor cells in patients with advanced malignancies. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1996;37(6):561.
73. Lyss AP, Luedke S, Einhorn L, Luedke DW, Raney M. Vindesine and mitomycin C in metastatic breast cancer. A Southeastern Cancer Study Group Trial. Oncology 1989;46(6):357.
74. Hong RL, Sheen TS, Ko JY, et al. Induction with mitomycin C, doxorubicin, cisplatin and maintenance with weekly 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin for treatment of metastatic nasopharyngeal
carcinoma: a phase II study. Br J Cancer 1999;80(12):1962.
75. Arbuck SG, Silk Y, Douglass HO Jr, et al. A phase II trial of 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, mitomycin C, and leucovorin in advanced gastric carcinoma. Cancer 1990;65(11):2442.
76. Borowy-Borowski H, Lipman R, Chowdary D, Tomasz M. Duplex oligodeoxyribonucleotides cross-linked by mitomycin C at a single site: synthesis, properties, and cross-link reversibility.
Biochemistry 1990;29(12):2992.
77. Tomasz M, Lipman R, Chowdary D, et al. Isolation and structure of a covalent cross-link adduct between mitomycin C and DNA. Science 1987;235(4793):1204.
78. Rink SM, Lipman R, Alley SC, Hopkins PH, Tomasz M. Bending of DNA by the mitomycin C-induced, GpG intrastrand cross-link. Chem Res Toxicol 1996;9(2):382.
79. den Hartigh J, McVie JG, van Oort WJ, Pinedo HM. Pharmacokinetics of mitomycin C in humans. Cancer Res 1983;43(10):5017.
80. Institoris E, Tamas J. Alkylation by 1,2:5,6-dianhydrogalactitol of deoxyribonucleic acid and guanosine. Biochem J 1980;185(3):659.
81. Haas CD, Baker L, Thigpen T. Phase II evaluation of dianhydrogalactitol in lung cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65(1):115.
82. Edmonson JH, Frytak S, Letendre L, Kvols LK, Eagan RT. Phase II evaluation of dianhydrogalactitol in advanced head and neck carcinomas. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63(11):2081.
83. Levin VA, Edwards MS, Gutin PH, et al. Phase II evaluation of dibromodulcitol in the treatment of recurrent medulloblastoma, ependymoma, and malignant astrocytoma. J Neurosurg
1984;61(6):1063.
84. Nguyen HN, Nordqvist SR. Chemotherapy of advanced and recurrent cervical carcinoma. Semin Surg Oncol 1999;16(3):247.
85. Horvath IP, Csetenyi J, Kerpel-Fronius S, et al. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of dianhydrogalactitol DAG in patients: a comparison with the human disposition of dibromodulcitol DBD. Eur
J Cancer Clin Oncol 1986;22(2):163.
86. Kelley SL, Peters WP, Andersen J, et al. Pharmacokinetics of dibromodulcitol in humans: a phase I study. J Clin Oncol 1986;4(5):753.
87. Hartley JA, Berardini MD, Souhami RL. An agarose gel method for the determination of DNA interstrand cross-linking applicable to the measurement of the rate of total and “second-arm”
cross-link reactions. Anal Biochem 1991;193(1):131.
88. Streeper RT, Cotter RJ, Colvin ME, Hilton J, Colvin OM. Molecular pharmacology of hepsulfam, NSC 3296801: identification of alkylated nucleosides, alkylation site, and site of DNA
cross-linking. Cancer Res 1995;55(7):1491.
89. Haddow A, Timmis GM. Myeleran in chronic myeloid leukemia-chemical constitution and biological action. Lancet 1953;1:207.
90. Hehlmann R, Heimpel H, Hasford J, et al. Randomized comparison of busulfan and hydroxyurea in chronic myelogenous leukemia: prolongation of survival by hydroxyurea. The German CML
Study Group. Blood 1993;82(2):398.
91. Ohnishi K, Tomonaga M, Kamada N, et al. A long term follow-up of a randomized trial comparing interferon-alpha with busulfan for chronic myelogenous leukemia. The Kouseisho Leukemia
Study Group. Leuk Res 1998;22(9):779.
92. Nevill TJ, Barnett MK, Klingemann HG, et al. Regimen-related toxicity of a busulfan-cyclophosphamide conditioning regimen in 70 patients undergoing allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.
J Clin Oncol 1991;9(7):1224.
93. Santos GW. Busulfan and cyclophosphamide versus cyclophosphamide and total body irradiation for marrow transplantation in chronic myelogenous leukemiaa review. Leuk Lymph
1993;1:201.
94. Chao NJ, Stein AS, Long GD, et al. Busulfan/etoposideinitial experience with a new preparatory regimen for autologous bone marrow transplantation in patients with acute nonlymphoblastic
leukemia. Blood 1993;81(2):319.
95. Elson LA. Hematologic effects of the alkylating agents. Ann NY Acad Sci 1958;68:826.
96. Grochow LB, Jones RJ, Brundrett RB, et al. Pharmacokinetics of busulfan: correlation with veno-occlusive disease in patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol 1989;25(1):55.
97. Jones RJ, Lee KS, Beschorner WE, et al. Venoocclusive disease of the liver following bone marrow transplantation. Transplantation 1987;44(6):778.
98. Leiter J, Schneiderman MA. Screening data from the Cancer Chemotherapy National Service Center Screening Laboratories. Cancer Res 1959;19(2):31.
99. Johnston TP, McCaleb GS, Montgomery JA. The synthesis of antineoplastic agents: XXXII. N-nitrosoureas. J Med Chem 1963;6:669.
100. Montgomery JA. Chemistry and structure-activity studies of the nitrosoureas. Cancer Treat Rep 1976;60(6):651.
101. Schabel FM Jr. Nitrosoureas: a review of experimental antitumor activity. Cancer Treat Rep 1976;60(6):665.
102. Schepartz SA. Early history and development of the nitrosoureas. Cancer Treat Rep 1976;60(6):647.
103. Kohn KW. Interstrand cross-linking of DNA by 1,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea and other 1-(2-haloethyl)-1-nitrosoureas. Cancer Res 1977;37(5):1450.

104. Colvin M, Brundrett RB, Cowens W, Jardine I, Ludlum DB. A chemical basis for the antitumor activity of chloroethylnitrosoureas. Biochem Pharmacol 1976;25(6):695.
105. Tong WP, Kirk MC, Ludlum DB. Mechanism of action of the nitrosoureas: V. Formation of O 6-(2-fluoroethyl)guanine and its probable role in the cross-linking of deoxyribonucleic acid. Biochem
Pharmacol 1983;32(13):2011.
106. Fischhaber PL, Gall AS, Duncan JA, Hopkins PB. Direct demonstration in synthetic oligonucleotides that N,N'-bis(2-chloroethyl)-nitrosourea cross-links N-1 of deoxyguanosine to N-3 of
deoxycytidine on opposite strands of duplex DNA. Cancer Res 1999;59(17):4363.
107. Walker MD, Alexander E Jr, Hunt WE, et al. Evaluation of BCNU and/or radiotherapy in the treatment of anaplastic gliomas. A cooperative clinical trial. J Neurosurg 1978;49(3):333.
108. Blade J, Rozman C, Montserrat E, et al. Treatment of alkylating resistant multiple myeloma with vincristine, BCNU, doxorubicin and prednisone (VBAP). Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol
1986;22(10):1193.
109. Eder JP, Antman K, Peters W, et al. High-dose combination alkylating agent chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow support for metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1986;4(11):1592.
110. Garfield J, Dayan AD, Weller RO. Postoperative intracavitary chemotherapy of malignant supratentorial astrocytomas using BCNU. Clin Oncol 1975;1(3):213.
111. Brem H, Piantadosi S, Burger PC, et al. Placebo-controlled trial of safety and efficacy of intraoperative controlled delivery by biodegradable polymers of chemotherapy for recurrent gliomas.
Lancet 1995;345(8956):1008.
112. Paleologos NA, Macdonald DR, Vick NA, Cairncross JG. Neoadjuvant procarbazine, CCNU, and vincristine for anaplastic and aggressive oligodendroglioma. Neurology 1999;53(5):1141.
113. Prados MD, Scott C, Curran WJ, et al. Procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine (PCV) chemotherapy for anaplastic astrocytoma: a retrospective review of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group
protocols comparing survival with carmustine or PCV adjuvant chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1999;17(11):3389.
114. Clark JL, Barcewicz P, Nava HR, Goodwin PS, Douglass HO Jr. Adjuvant 5-FU and MeCCNU improves survival following curative gastrectomy for adenocarcinoma. Am Surg 1990;56(7):423.
115. Paccapelo A, Piana C, Rychlicki F, et al. Treatment of malignant gliomas: a new approach. Tumori 1998;84(5):529.
116. Arita N, Ushio Y, Hayakawa T, et al. Intrathecal ACNUa new therapeutic approach against malignant leptomeningeal tumors. J Neurooncol 1988;6(3):221.
117. Alberts DS, Durie BG, Salmon SE. Doxorubicin/B.C.N.U. chemotherapy for multiple myeloma in relapse. Lancet 1976;1(7966):926.
118. Levin VA, Hoffman W, Weinkam RJ. Pharmacokinetics of BCNU in man: a preliminary study of 20 patients. Cancer Treat Rep 1305;62(9):1305.
119. Meisenberg BR, Ross M, Vredenburgh JJ, et al. Randomized trial of high-dose chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow support as adjuvant therapy for high-risk, multi-node-positive
malignant melanoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85(13):1080.
120. Henner WD, Peters WP, Eder JP, et al. Pharmacokinetics and immediate effects of high-dose carmustine in man. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70(7):877.
121. Levin VA, Stearns J, Byrd A, Finn A, Weinkam RJ. The effect of phenobarbital pretreatment on the antitumor activity of 1,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea (BCNU),
1-(2-chloroethyl)-3-cyclohexyl-1-nitrosourea (CCNU) and 1-(2-chloroethyl)-3-(2,6-dioxo-3-piperidyl-1-nitrosourea (PCNU), and on the plasma pharmacokinetics and biotransformation of BCNU.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1979;208(1):1.
122. Lee FY, Workman P, Roberts JT, Bleehen NM. Clinical pharmacokinetics of oral CCNU (lomustine). Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1985;14(2):125.
123. DeVita VT, Carbone PP, Owens AH Jr, et al. Clinical trials with 1,3-Bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea, NSC-409962. Cancer Res 1965;25:1876.
124. Toth B. Synthetic and naturally occurring hydrazines as possible cancer causative agents. Cancer Res 1975;35(12):3693.
125. Silverstein R, Bhatia P, Svoboda DJ. Effect of hydrazine sulfate on glucose-regulating enzymes in the normal and cancerous rat. Immunopharmacology 1989;17(1):37.
126. Gold J. Use of hydrazine sulfate in terminal and preterminal cancer patients: results of investigational new drug (IND) study in 84 evaluable patients. Oncology 1975;32(1):1.
127. Herndon JE, Fleishman S, Kosty MP, Green MR. A longitudinal study of quality of life in advanced non-small cell lung cancerCancer and Leukemia Group B 8931. Control Clin Trials
1997;18(4):286.
128. Kamradt JM, Pienta KJ. The effect of hydrazine sulfate on prostate cancer growth. Oncol Rep 1998;5(4):919.
129. Spies SK, Snyman HW. Procarbazine (Natulan) in the treatment of Hodgkin's disease and other lymphomas. S Afr Med J 1966;40(44):1061.
130. Glick JH, Young ML, Harrington D, et al. MOPP/ABV hybrid chemotherapy for advanced Hodgkin's disease significantly improves failure-free and overall survival: the 8-year results of the
intergroup trial. J Clin Oncol 1998;16(1):19.
131. Brandes AA, Ermani M, Turazzi S, et al. Procarbazine and high-dose tamoxifen as a second-line regimen in recurrent high-grade gliomas: a phase II study. J Clin Oncol 1999;17(2):645.
132. Fink D, Aebi S, Howell SB. The role of DNA mismatch repair in drug resistance. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4(1):1.
133. Friedman HS, Johnson SP, Dong Q, et al. Methylator resistance mediated by mismatch repair deficiency in a glioblastoma multiforme xenograft. Cancer Res 1997;57(14):2933.
134. Bianchini F, Weiderpass E, Kyrtopoulos S, et al. Detection of DNA methylation adducts in Hodgkin's disease patients treated with procarbazine. Biomarkers 1996;1(4):226.
135. Erikson JM, Tweedie DJ, Ducore JM, Prough RA. Cytotoxicity and DNA damage caused by the azoxy metabolites of procarbazine in L1210 tumor cells. Cancer Res 1989;49(1):127.
136. Swaffar DS, Horstman MG, Jaw JY, et al. Methylazoxyprocarbazine, the active metabolite responsible for the anticancer activity of procarbazine against L1210 leukemia. Cancer Res
1989;49(9):2442.
137. Massie MJ, Holland JC. Diagnosis and treatment of depression in the cancer patient. J Clin Psychiatry 1984;45(3):25.
138. Pfefferbaum B, Pack R, van Eys J. Monoamine oxidase inhibitor toxicity. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1989;28(6):954.
139. Farina P, Benfenati E, Reginato R, et al. Metabolism of the anticancer agent 1-(4-acetylphenyl)-3,3-dimethyltriazene. Biomed Mass Spectrom 1983;10(8):485.
140. Skibba JL, Beal DD, Ramirez G, Bryan GT. N-demethylation the antineoplastic agent4(5)-(3,3-dimethyl-1-triazeno)imidazole-5(4)-carboxamide by rats and man. Cancer Res 1970; 30(1):147.
141. Vaughan K, Tang Y, Llanos G, et al. Studies of the mode of action of antitumor triazenes and triazines: 6. 1-Aryl-3-(hydroxymethyl)-3-methyltriazenes: synthesis, chemistry, and antitumor
properties. J Med Chem 1984;27(3):357.
142. DeVita VT, Mauch PM, Harris NL. Hodgkin's disease. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg S, eds. Cancer: principles & practice of oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers,
1997:2268.
143. Falkson CI, Ibrahim J, Kirkwood JM, et al. Phase III trial of dacarbazine versus dacarbazine with interferon alpha-2b versus dacarbazine with tamoxifen versus dacarbazine with interferon
alpha-2b and tamoxifen in patients with metastatic malignant melanoma: an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16(5):1743.
144. Lowe PR, Sansom CE, Schwalbe CH, Stevens MF, Clark AS. Antitumor imidazotetrazines: 25. Crystal structure of 8-carbamoyl-3-methylimidazo[5,1-d]-1,2,3,5-tetrazin-4(3H)-one
(temozolomide) and structural comparisons with the related drugs mitozolomide and DTIC. J Med Chem 1992;35(18):3377.
145. Denny BJ, Wheelhouse RT, Stevens MF, Tsang LL, Slack JA. NMR and molecular modeling investigation of the mechanism of activation of the antitumor drug temozolomide and its interaction
with DNA. Biochemistry 1994;33(31):9045.
146. Nicholson HS, Krailo M, Ames MM, et al. Phase I study of temozolomide in children and adolescents with recurrent solid tumorsa report from the Children's Cancer Group. J Clin Oncol
1998;16(9):3037.
147. Hammond LA, Eckardt JR, Baker SD, et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic study of temozolomide on a daily-for-5-days schedule in patients with advanced solid malignancies. J Clin Oncol
1999;17(8):2604.
148. Paulsen F, Hoffmann W, Becker G, et al. Chemotherapy in the treatment of recurrent glioblastoma multiforme: ifosfamide versus temozolomide. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1999;125(7):411.
149. Newlands ES, Oreilly SM, Glaser MG, et al. The Charing Cross Hospital experience with temozolomide in patients with gliomas. Eur J Cancer 1996;13:2236.
150. Woll PJ, Judson I, Lee SM, et al. Temozolomide in adult patients with advanced soft tissue sarcoma: a phase II study of the EORTC Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group. Eur J Cancer
1999;35(3):410.
151. Moore MJ, Feld R, Hedley D, Oza A, Siu LL. A Phase II study of temozolomide in advanced untreated pancreatic cancer. Invest New Drugs 1998;16(1):77.
152. Breithaupt H, Dammann A, Aigner K. Pharmacokinetics of dacarbazine (DTIC) and its metabolite 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide (AIC) following different dose schedules. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol 1982;9(2):103.
153. Adkins DR, Irvin R, Kuhn J, et al. A phase I clinical and pharmacological profile of dacarbazine with autologous bone marrow transplantation in patients with solid tumors. Invest New Drugs
1993;11(2):169.
154. Reid JM, Stevens DC, Rubin J, Ames MM. Pharmacokinetics of 3-methyl-(triazen-1-yl)imidazole-4-carboximide following administration of temozolomide to patients with advanced cancer. Clin
Cancer Res 1997;3(12):2393.
155. Baker SD, Wirth M, Statkevich P, et al. Absorption, metabolism, and excretion of 14C-temozolomide following oral administration to patients with advanced cancer. Clin Cancer Res
1999;5(2):309.
156. Friedman HS, Colvin OM, Kaufmann SH, et al. Cyclophosphamide resistance in medulloblastoma. Cancer Res 1992;52(19):5373.
157. Suzukake K, Petro BJ, Vistica DT. Reduction in glutathione content of L-PAM resistant L1210 cells confers drug sensitivity. Biochem Pharmacol 1982;31(1):121.
158. Buller AL, Clapper ML, Tew KD. Glutathione S-transferases in nitrogen mustard-resistant and -sensitive cell lines. Mol Pharmacol 1987;31(6):575.
159. Puchalski RB, Fahl WE. Expression of recombinant glutathione S-transferase pi, Ya, or Yb1 confers resistance to alkylating agents. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87(7):2443.
160. Townsend AI, Fields WR, Haynes RL, et al. Chemoprotective functions of glutathione S-transferases in cell lines induced to express specific isozymes by stable transfection. Chem Biol Interact
1998;112:389.
161. Dulik DM, Colvin OM, Fenselau C. Characterization of glutathione conjugates of chlorambucil by fast atom bombardment and thermospray liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry. Biomed
Environ Mass Spectrom 1990;19(4):248.
162. Dulik DM, Fenselau C, Hilton J. Characterization of melphalan-glutathione adducts whose formation is catalyzed by glutathione transferases. Biochem Pharmacol 1986;35(19):3405.
163. Yuan ZM, Fenselau C, Dulik DM, et al. Laser desorption electron impact: application to a study of the mechanism of conjugation of glutathione and cyclophosphamide. Anal Chem
1990;62(8):868.
164. Bolton MG, Colvin OM, Hilton J. Specificity of isozymes of murine hepatic glutathione S-transferase for the conjugation of glutathione with L-phenylalanine mustard. Cancer Res
1991;51(9):2410.
165. Ciaccio PI, Tew KD, LaCreta FP. The spontaneous and glutathione S-transferase-mediated reaction of chlorambucil with glutathione. Cancer Commun 1990;2(8):279.
166. Dirven HA, van Ommen B, van Bladeren PI. Involvement of human glutathione S-transferase isoenzymes in the conjugation of cyclophosphamide metabolites with glutathione. Cancer Res
1994;54(23):6215.
167. Pallante SL, Lisek CA, Dulik DM, Fenselau C. Glutathione conjugates. Immobilized enzyme synthesis and characterization by fast atom bombardment mass spectrometry. Drug Metab Dispos
1986;14(3):313.
168. Horton JK, Roy G, Piper JT, et al. Characterization of a chlorambucil-resistant human ovarian carcinoma cell line overexpressing glutathione S-transferase mu. Biochem Pharmacol
1999;58(4):693.
169. Anderson ME. Glutathione: an overview of biosynthesis and modulation. Chem Biol Interact 1998;112:1.
170. Smith AC, Liao JT, Page JG, Wientjes MG, Grieshaber CK. Pharmacokinetics of buthionine sulfoximine (NSC 326231) and its effect on melphalan-induced toxicity in mice. Cancer Res
1989;49(19):5385.
171. Friedman HS, Colvin OM, Griffith OW, et al. Increased melphalan activity in intracranial human medulloblastoma and glioma xenografts following buthionine sulfoximinemediated glutathione
depletion. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81(7):524.
172. Bailey HH, Ripple G, Tutsch KD, et al. Phase I study of continuous-infusion L-S,R-buthionine sulfoximine with intravenous melphalan. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89(23):1789.
173. Morgan AS, Ciaccio PI, Tew KD, Kauvar LN. Isozyme specific glutathione S-transferase inhibitors potentiate drug sensitivity in cultured human tumor cell lines. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1996;37(4):363.
174. Zhang K, Yang EB, Wong KP, Mack P. GSH, GSH-related enzymes and GS-X pump in relation to sensitivity of human tumor cell lines to chlorambucil and adriamycin. Int J Oncol
1999;14(5):861.
175. Gupta V, Jani JP, Jacobs S, et al. Activity of melphalan in combination with the glutathione transferase inhibitor sulfasalazine. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1995;36(1): 13.
176. Keppler D, Leier I, Jedlitschky G, Konig J. Atp-dependent transport of glutathione S-conjugates by the multidrug resistance protein Mrp1 and its apical isoform Mrp2. Chem Biol Interact
1998;112:153.
177. Barnouin K, Leier I, Jedlitschky G, et al. Multidrug resistance protein-mediated transport of chlorambucil and melphalan conjugated to glutathione. Br J Cancer 1998;77(2):201.
178. Kelley S, Basu A, Teicher BA, et al. Overexpression of metallothionein confers resistance to anticancer drugs. Science 1988;241(4874):1813.
179. Yu X, Wu Z, Fenselau C. Covalent sequestration of melphalan by metallothionein and selective alkylation of cysteines. Biochemistry 1995;34(10):3377.

180. Wei D, Fabris D, Fenselau C. Covalent sequestration of phosphoramide mustard by metallothioneinan in vitro study. Drug Metab Dispos 1999;27(7):786.
181. Satoh M, Cherian MG, Imura N, Shimizu H. Modulation of resistance to anticancer drugs by inhibition of metallothionein synthesis. Cancer Res 1994;54(20):5255.
182. Pegg AE, Boosalis M, Samson L, et al. Mechanism of inactivation of human O 6-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase by O 6-benzylguanine. Biochemistry 1993;32(45):11998.
183. Pegg AE. Mammalian O 6-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase: regulation and importance in response to alkylating carcinogenic and therapeutic agents. Cancer Res 1990;50(19):6119.
184. Erickson LC, Laurent G, Sharkey NA, Kohn KW. DNA cross-linking and monoadduct repair in nitrosourea-treated human tumour cells. Nature 1980;288(5792):727.
185. Bodell WJ, Tokuda K, Ludlum DB. Differences in DNA alkylation products formed in sensitive and resistant human glioma cells treated with N-(2-chloroethyl)-N-nitrosourea. Cancer Res
1988;48(16):4489.
186. Dolan ME, Moschel RC, Pegg AE. Depletion of mammalian O 6-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase activity by O 6-benzylguanine provides a means to evaluate the role of this protein in
protection against carcinogenic and therapeutic alkylating agents. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87(14):5368.
187. Gerson SL, Berger SI, Varnes ME, Donovan C. Combined depletion of O 6-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase and glutathione to modulate nitrosourea resistance in breast cancer. Biochem
Pharmacol 1994;48(3):543.
188. Cussac C, Rapp M, Mounetou E, et al. Enhancement by O 6-benzyl-N-acetylguanosine derivatives of chloroethylnitrosourea antitumor action in chloroethylnitrosourea-resistant human malignant
melanocytes. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1994;271(3):1353.
189. Friedman HS, Kokkinakis DM, Pluda J, et al. Phase I trial of O-6-benzylguanine for patients undergoing surgery for malignant glioma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16(11):3570.
190. Spiro TP, Gerson SL, Liu LL, et al. O-6-benzylguanine: a clinical trial establishing the biochemical modulatory dose in tumor tissue for alkyltransferase-directed DNA repair. Cancer Res
1999;59(10):2402.
191. Allay JA, Dumenco LL, Koc ON, Liu L, Gerson SL. Retroviral transduction and expression of the human alkyltransferase cDNA provides nitrosourea resistance to hematopoietic cells. Blood
1995;85(11):3342.
192. Koc ON, Reese JS, Davis BM, et al. Delta MGMT-transduced bone marrow infusion increases tolerance to O-6-benzylguanine and 1,3-bis(2-chloroethy1)-1-nitrosourea and allows intensive
therapy of 1,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea-resistant human colon cancer xenografts. Hum Gene Ther 1999;10(6):1021.
193. Kohn KW, Steigbigel NH, Spears CL. Cross-linking and repair of DNA in sensitive and resistant strains of E. coli treated with nitrogen mustard. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1154;53(5):1154.
194. Crathorn AR, Roberts JJ. Mechanism of the cytotoxic action of alkylating agents in mammalian cells and evidence for the removal of alkylated groups from deoxyribonucleic acid. Nature
1966;211(45):150.
195. Sancar A. Mechanisms of DNA excision repair. Science 1994;266(5193):1954.
196. Stevnsner T, Ding R, Smulson M, Bohr VA. Inhibition of gene-specific repair of alkylation damage in cells depleted of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Nucleic Acids Res 1994;22(22):4620.
197. Das SK, Lau CC, Pardee A. Comparative analysis of caffeine and 3-aminobenzamide as DNA repair inhibitors in Syrian baby hamster kidney cells. Mutat Res 1984;131(2):71.
198. O'Connor PM, Ferris DK, White GA, et al. Relationships between cdc2 kinase, DNA cross-linking, and cell cycle perturbations induced by nitrogen mustard. Cell Growth Differ 1992;3(1):43.
199. O'Connor PM, Ferris DK, Hoffmann I, et al. Role of the cdc25C phosphatase in G2 arrest induced by nitrogen mustard. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91(20):9480.
200. Selby CP, Sancar A. Molecular mechanisms of DNA repair inhibition by caffeine. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87(9):3522.
201. Walton MI, Whysong D, O'Connor PM, et al. Constitutive expression of human Bcl-2 modulates nitrogen mustard and camptothecin induced apoptosis. Cancer Res 1993;53(8):1853.
202. Dong Q, Johnson SP, Colvin OM, et al. Multiple DNA repair mechanisms and alkylator resistance in the human medulloblastoma cell line D-283 Med (4-HCR). Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1999;43(1):73.
203. Kobayashi H, Man S, Graham CH, et al. Acquired multicellular-mediated resistance to alkylating agents in cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90(8):3294.
204. St Croix B, Man S, Kerbel RS. Reversal of intrinsic and acquired forms of drug resistance by hyaluronidase treatment of solid tumors. Cancer Lett 1998;131(1):35.
205. Kerbel RS, Kobayashi H, Graham CH. Intrinsic or acquired drug resistance and metastasis: are they linked phenotypes? J Cell Biochem 1994;56(1):37.
206. Mullins GM, Anderson PN, Santos GW. High dose cyclophosphamide therapy in solid tumors. Therapeutic, toxic, and immunosuppressive effects. Cancer 1950;36(6):1950.
207. Fried W, Kedo A, Barone J. Effects of cyclophosphamide and of busulfan on spleen colony-forming units and on hematopoietic stroma. Cancer Res 1977;37(4):1205.
208. Borison HL, Brand ED, Orland RK. Emetic action of nitrogen mustard in dogs and cats. Am J Physiol 1968;192:410.
209. Fetting JH, McCarthy LE, Borison HL, Colvin M. Vomiting induced by cyclophosphamide and phosphoramide mustard in cats. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66(8):1625.
210. Spitzer TR, Grunberg SM, Dicato MA. Antiemetic strategies for high-dose chemoradiotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Support Care Cancer 1998;6(3):233.
211. Perez EA. 5-HT3 antiemetic therapy for patients with breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1999;57(2):207.
212. Bauduer F, Coiffier B, Desablens B. Granisetron plus or minus alprazolam for emesis prevention in chemotherapy of lymphomas: a randomized multicenter trial. Leuk Lymph 1999;34(3-4):341.
213. Antman K, Eder JP, Elias A, et al. High-dose thiotepa alone and in combination regimens with bone marrow support. Semin Oncol 1990;17[Suppl 3]:33.
214. Spitz S. The histological effects of nitrogen mustards on human tumors and tissues. Cancer 1948;1:383.
215. Miller DG. Alkylating agents and human spermatogenesis. JAMA 1971;217(12):1662.
216. Sherins RJ, DeVita VT Jr. Effect of drug treatment for lymphoma on male reproductive capacity. Studies of men in remission after therapy. Ann Intern Med 1973;79(2):216.
217. Blake DA, Heller RH, Hsu SH, Schacter BZ. Return of fertility in a patient with cyclophosphamide-induced azoospermia. Johns Hopkins Med J 1976;139(1):20.
218. Hinkes E, Plotkin D. Reversible drug-induced sterility in a patient with acute leukemia. JAMA 1490;223(13):1490.
219. Galton DAG, Till M, Wiltshaw E. Busulfan (1,4-dimethanesulfonyloxybutane, Myeleran): summary of clinical results. Ann NY Acad Sci 1958;68:967.
220. Rose DP, Davis TE. Ovarian function in patients receiving adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. Lancet 1977;1(8023):1174.
221. Koyama H, Wada T, Nishizawa Y, Iwanaga T, Aoki Y. Cyclophosphamide-induced ovarian failure and its therapeutic significance in patients with breast cancer. Cancer 1403;39(4):1403.
222. Oliner H, Schwartz R, Rubio FJ. Interstitial pulmonary fibrosis following busulfan therapy. Am J Med 1961;31:134.
223. Codling BW, Chakera TM. Pulmonary fibrosis following therapy with melphalan for multiple myeloma. J Clin Pathol 1972;25(8):668.
224. Cole SR, Myers TJ, Klatsky AU. Pulmonary disease with chlorambucil therapy. Cancer 1978;41(2):455.
225. Mark GJ, Lehimgar-Zadeh A, Ragsdale BD. Cyclophosphamide pneumonitis. Thorax 1978;33(1):89.
226. Patel AR, Shah PC, Rhee HL, Sassoon H, Rao KP. Cyclophosphamide therapy and interstitial pulmonary fibrosis. Cancer 1976;38(4):1542.
227. Orwoll ES, Kiessling PJ, Patterson JR. Interstitial pneumonia from mitomycin. Ann Intern Med 1978;89(3):352.
228. Bailey CC, Marsden HB, Jones PH. Fatal pulmonary fibrosis following 1,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea (BCNU) therapy. Cancer 1978;42(1):74.
229. Holoye PY, Jenkins DE, Greenberg SD. Pulmonary toxicity in long-term administration of BCNU. Cancer Treat Rep 1976;60(11):1691.
230. Litam JP, Dail DH, Spitzer G, et al. Early pulmonary toxicity after administration of high-dose BCNU. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65(1):39.
231. Wilczynski SW, Erasmus JJ, Petros WP, Vredenburgh JJ, Folz RJ. Delayed pulmonary toxicity syndrome following high-dose chemotherapy and bone marrow transplantation for breast cancer.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157(2):565.
232. Colvin M, Cowens JW, Brundrett RB, Kramer BS, Ludlum DB. Decomposition of BCNU (1,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea) in aqueous solution. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
1974;60(2):515.
233. Vijayan VK, Sankaran K. Relationship between lung inflammation, changes in lung function and severity of exposure in victims of the Bhopal tragedy. Eur Respir J 1977;9(10):1977.
234. Bierman HR, Kelly KH, Knudson AG Jr, Maekawa T, Timmis GM. The influence of 1,4-dimethylsulfonoxy-1,4-dimethylbutane (CB 2348, dimethylmyeleran) in neoplastic disease. Ann NY Acad
Sci 1968;68:1211.
235. Feil VJ, Lamoureux CH. Alopecia activity of cyclophosphamide metabolites and related compounds in sheep. Cancer Res 1974;34(10):2596.
236. Bodenstein D, Goldin A. A comparison of the effects of various nitrogen mustard compounds on embryonic cells. J Exp Zool 1948;108:75.
237. Murphy ML, Del Moro A, Lacon C. The comparative effects of five polyfunctional alkylating agents on the rat fetus, with additional notes on the chick embryo. Ann NY Acad Sci 1958;68:762.
238. Hales BF. Effects of phosphoramide mustard and acrolein, cytotoxic metabolites of cyclophosphamide, on mouse limb development in vitro. Teratology 1989;40(1):11.
239. Mirkes PE. Cyclophosphamide teratogenesis: a review. Teratog Carcinog Mutagen 1985;5(2):75.
240. Nicholson HO. Cytotoxic drugs in pregnancy. Review of reported cases. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Comm 1968;75(3):307.
241. Lergier JE, Jimenez E, Maldonado N, Veray F. Normal pregnancy in multiple myeloma treated with cyclophosphamide. Cancer 1974;34(4):1018.
242. Ortega J. Multiple agent chemotherapy including bleomycin of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma during pregnancy. Cancer 1977;40(6):2829.
243. Reichman BS, Green KB. Breast cancer in young women: effect of chemotherapy on ovarian function, fertility, and birth defects. J Natl Cancer InstMonogr 1994;16:125.
244. Aviles A, Diaz-Maqueo JC, Talavera A, Guzman R, Garcia EL. Growth and development of children of mothers treated with chemotherapy during pregnancy: current status of 43 children. Am J
Hematol 1991;36(4):243.
245. Hochberg MC, Shulman LE. Acute leukemia following cyclophosphamide therapy for Sjögren's syndrome. Johns Hopkins Med J 1978;142(6):211.
246. Rosner F, Grunwald H. Multiple myeloma terminating in acute leukemia. Report of 12 cases and review of the literature. Am J Med 1974;57(6):927.
247. Rosner F, Grunwald H. Hodgkin's disease and acute leukemia. Report of eight cases and review of the literature. Am J Med 1975;58(3):339.
248. Einhorn N. Acute leukemia after chemotherapy (melphalan). Cancer 1978;41(2):444.
249. Reimer RR, Hoover R, Fraumeni JF Jr, Young RC. Acute leukemia after alkylating-agent therapy of ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med 1977;297(4):177.
250. Greene MH, Harris EL, Gershenson DM, et al. Melphalan may be a more potent leukemogen than cyclophosphamide. Ann Intern Med 1986;105(3):360.
251. Einhorn N, Eklund G, Lambert B. Solid tumours and chromosome aberrations as late side effects of melphalan therapy in ovarian carcinoma. Acta Oncol 1988;27(3):215.
252. Tucker MA, Coleman CN, Cox RS, Varghese A, Rosenberg SA. Risk of second cancers after treatment for Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1988;318(2):76.
253. Hektoen L, Corper HJ. The effect of mustard gas (dichloroethylsulphide) on antibody formation. J Infect Dis 1921;28:279.
254. Makinodan T, Santos GW, Quinn RP. I mmunosuppressive drugs. Pharmacol Rev 1970;22(2):189.
255. Barratt TM, Soothill JF. Controlled trial of cyclophosphamide in steroid-sensitive relapsing nephrotic syndrome of childhood. Lancet 1970;2(7671):479.
256. Laros RKJ, Penner JA. “Refractory” thrombocytopenic purpura treated successfully with cyclophosphamide. JAMA 1971;215(3):445.
257. Kleta R. Cyclophosphamide and mercaptoethane sulfonate therapy for minimal lesion glomerulonephritis. Kidney Int 1999;56(6):2312.
258. Bargman JM. Management of minimal lesion glomerulonephritis: evidence-based recommendations. Kidney Int 1999;55[Suppl 70]:S3.
259. Viallard JF, Pellegrin JL, Vergnes C, et al. Three cases of acquired von Willebrand disease associated with systemic lupus erythematosus. Br J Haematol 1999;105(2):532.
260. Ozer H, Cowens JW, Colvin M, Nussbaum-Blumenson A, Sheedy D. In vitro effects of 4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide on human immunoregulatory T subset function: I. Selective effects on
lymphocyte function in T-B cell collaboration. J Exp Med 1982; 155(1):276.
261. Smith JJ, Mihich E, Ozer H. In vitro effects of 4-hydroxyperoxycyclophosphamide on human immunoregulatory T subset function. Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol 1987;9(9):555.
262. Mokyr MB, Colvin M, Dray S. Cyclophosphamide-mediated enhancement of antitumor immune potential of immunosuppressed spleen cells from mice bearing a large MOPC-315 tumor. Int J
Immunopharmacol 1985;7(1):111.
263. Dray S, Mokyr MB. Cyclophosphamide and melphalan as immunopotentiating agents in cancer therapy. Med Oncol Tumor Pharmacother 1989;6(1):77.
264. Berd D, Mastrangelo MJ. Effect of low dose cyclophosphamide on the immune system of cancer patients: depletion of CD4+, 2H4+ suppressor-inducer T-cells. Cancer Res 1988;48(6):1671.
265. Berd D, Mastrangelo MJ. Active immunotherapy of human melanoma exploiting the immunopotentiating effects of cyclophosphamide. Cancer Invest 1988;6(3):337.
266. Mitchell MS, Kempf RA, Harel W, et al. Effectiveness and tolerability of low-dose cyclophosphamide and low-dose intravenous interleukin-2 in disseminated melanoma. J Clin Oncol
1988;6(3):409.
267. Santos GW, Sensenbrenner LL, Anderson PN, et al. HL-A-identical marrow transplants in aplastic anemia, acute leukemia, and lymphosarcoma employing cyclophosphamide. Transplant Proc
1976;8(4):607.
268. Burt RK, Traynor AE. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: a new therapy for autoimmune disease. Stem Cells 1999;17(6):366.
269. Wulffraat N, van Royen A, Bierings M, et al. Autologous haemopoietic stem-cell transplantation in four patients with refractory juvenile chronic arthritis. Lancet 1999;353(9152):550.
270. Brodsky RA, Sensenbrenner LL, Jones RJ. Complete remission in severe aplastic anemia after high-dose cyclophosphamide without bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1996;87(2):491.
271. Nousari HC, Brodsky RA, Jones RJ, Grever MR, Anhalt GJ. Immunoablative high-dose cyclophosphamide without stem cell rescue in paraneoplastic pemphigus: report of a case and review of
this new therapy for severe autoimmune disease. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999;40(5):750.

SECTION 19.4 Cisplatin and Its Analogues
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 19.4
Cisplatin and Its Analogues
STEVEN W. JOHNSON
JAMES P. STEVENSON
PETER J. O'DWYER
Introduction
Platinum Chemistry
Evolution of Novel Platinum Complexes
Carboplatin
1,2-Diaminocyclohexane Derivatives
Platinum (IV) Structures
Multinuclear Platinum Complexes
Other Platinum Complexes
Mechanism of Action
DNA Adduct Formation
Platinum-DNA Damage–Recognition Proteins
Platinum Drug–Induced Cell Death
Mechanisms of Resistance
Reduced Accumulation
Inactivation
Increased DNA Repair
Increased DNA Damage Tolerance
Clinical Pharmacology
Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacodynamics
Formulation and Administration
Toxicity
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The platinum drugs represent a unique and important class of antitumor compounds. Alone or in combination with other chemotherapeutic drugs,
cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) (cisplatin) and its analogues have made a significant impact on the treatment of a variety of solid tumors. The realization that
platinum complexes exhibit antitumor activity arose somewhat serendipitously in a series of experiments carried out by Rosenberg and colleagues beginning in 1961. 1
These studies involved determining the effect of electromagnetic radiation on the growth of bacteria in a chamber equipped with a set of platinum electrodes.
Exposure of the bacteria to an electric field resulted in a profound change in their morphology and, in particular, the appearance of long filaments that were several
hundred times longer than that of their untreated counterparts. This effect was not due to the electric field directly, but to the electrolysis products produced from the
platinum electrodes. An analysis of these products revealed that the predominant species was ammonium chloroplatinate [NH 4]2[PtCl6]. This compound was inactive at
reproducing the filamentous growth originally observed; however, Rosenberg and colleagues 1 soon discovered that the conversion of this complex to a neutral
species by UV light resulted in an active species. Attempts to synthesize the active neutral platinum complex failed. They realized, however, that the neutral
compound could exist in two isomeric forms, cis or trans, and that the latter species is the one they had synthesized. Subsequently, the cis isomer was synthesized
and shown to be the active compound.
The observation that cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) and cis-diamminetetrachloroplatinum (IV) inhibited bacterial growth led to the testing of four neutral platinum
compounds for antineoplastic activity in mice bearing the Sarcoma-180 solid tumor and L1210 leukemia cells. 2 All four compounds showed significant antitumor
activity, with cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) exhibiting the most efficacy. Further studies in other tumor models confirmed these results and indicated that cisplatin
exhibited a broad spectrum of activity. Although early clinical trials demonstrated significant activity against several tumor types, particularly testicular tumors, the
severe renal and gastrointestinal toxicity caused by the drug nearly led to its abandonment. Cvitkovic et al. 3,4 showed that these effects could be ameliorated, in part,
by aggressive prehydration, which rekindled interest in its clinical use. Currently, cisplatin is curative in testicular cancer and significantly prolongs survival in
combination regimens for ovarian cancer. The drug also has therapeutic benefit in head and neck, bladder, and lung cancer. 5
The unique activity and toxicity profile observed with cisplatin has fueled the development of platinum analogues that are less toxic and more effective against a
variety of tumor types, including those that have developed resistance to cisplatin. Two other platinum drugs are widely used: cis-diamminecyclobutanedicarboxylato
platinum (II) (carboplatin) and 1,2-diaminocyclohexaneoxalato platinum (II) (oxaliplatin). Several new analogues with unique activities are currently in various stages
of clinical development. Continued progress in the development of superior analogues requires a thorough understanding of the chemical, biological,
pharmacokinetic, and pharmacodynamic properties of this important class of drugs. A review of these properties is the focus of this chapter.

PLATINUM CHEMISTRY
Platinum exists primarily in either a 2+ or 4+ oxidation state. These oxidation states dictate the stereochemistry of the carrier ligands and leaving groups surrounding
the platinum atom. Platinum (II) compounds exhibit a square planar geometry, whereas platinum (IV) compounds exhibit an octahedral geometry. Interconversion of
the two oxidation states may readily occur. However, the kinetics of this reaction depend on the nature of the bound ligands. The nature of the ligands also determines
the stability of the complex and the rate of substitution. For platinum (II) compounds, the rate of substitution of a ligand is strongly influenced by the type of ligand
located opposite to it. Therefore, ligands that are bound more strongly stabilize the moieties that are situated trans to it. For cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II), the two
chloride ligands are prone to substitution, whereas substitution of the amino groups is thermodynamically unfavorable. 6 The stereochemistry of platinum complexes is
critical to their antitumor activity, as evidenced by the significantly reduced efficacy observed with trans-diamminedichloroplatinum (II).
In aqueous solution, the chloride leaving groups of cisplatin are subject to mono- and diaqua substitution, particularly at chloride concentrations below 100 mmol,
which exist intracellularly. The equilibria may be described by the following two equations:

where equilibria constants for each reaction may be written

These descriptions illustrate the key role of ambient chloride concentrations in determining aquation rates. In weakly acidic solutions, the monochloromonoaqua and

diaqua complexes become deprotonated to form the neutral dihydroxo species. The monohydroxo and dihydroxo complexes are the predominant species present in
low chloride-containing environments, such as the nucleus. A detailed analysis of the equations and rate constants that govern these reactions has been published. 7
Based on studies of the reaction of cisplatin metabolites with inosine, the predominant cisplatin species that react with DNA are likely to be the chloroaqua and
hydroxoaqua species.7

EVOLUTION OF NOVEL PLATINUM COMPLEXES
Cisplatin therapy has two major limitations: an undesirable toxicity profile and the development of resistance by tumor cells. Therefore, substantial effort has gone into
developing analogues that are less toxic, with a different spectrum of antitumor activity. Progress in understanding the chemistry and pharmacokinetics of cisplatin
has guided the development of new analogues. In general, modification of the chloride leaving groups of cisplatin results in compounds with different
pharmacokinetics, whereas modification of the carrier ligands alters the activity of the resulting complex. This section summarizes the features of the more important
platinum analogues that have been developed, which are shown in Figure 19.4-1.

FIGURE 19.4-1. Structures of platinum complexes.

CARBOPLATIN
The search for a less toxic platinum drug, pursued at the Institute for Cancer Research in the United Kingdom, led to the development of carboplatin. 8,9 It was
hypothesized that modification of cisplatin to contain a more stable leaving group could alter toxicity without necessarily influencing the cytotoxicity profile. Using a
murine screen for nephrotoxicity, it was discovered that substituting a cyclobutanedicarboxylate moiety for the two chloride ligands of cisplatin resulted in a complex
with reduced renal toxicity. Instead, myelosuppression was dose-limiting, a toxicity that is not associated with cisplatin therapy. At effective doses, carboplatin
produces less nausea, vomiting, nephrotoxicity, and neurotoxicity than cisplatin and has demonstrated essentially equivalent survival rates in ovarian cancer patients.
Similar findings have been observed in other solid tumors. Therefore, based on its superior therapeutic index, greater ease of administration, and more predictable
individualized dosing, carboplatin has replaced cisplatin in many chemotherapeutic regimens.
1,2-DIAMINOCYCLOHEXANE DERIVATIVES
The example of carboplatin provided a paradigm for the development of other platinum coordination compounds with modified leaving groups. However, the antitumor
activity of these drugs generally overlap, and they are not considered effective for the treatment of cisplatin-resistant disease. Therefore, the development of platinum
analogues that produce responses in cisplatin/carboplatin-resistant tumors became necessary, and it was hypothesized that modifying the carrier ligands might
achieve this. The antitumor activity of a series of platinum compounds containing the 1,2-diaminocyclohexane (DACH) carrier ligand was initially described by
Connors et al. 10 in 1972. Several of these compounds exhibited a significantly higher therapeutic index compared with cisplatin using a murine ADJ/PC6A tumor
model. Kidani et al. 11 also reported significant antitumor activity of DACH platinum complexes. Burchenal and colleagues 12 selected several DACH derivatives for
preclinical development based on their activity in cisplatin-resistant murine leukemias. Subsequent in vitro studies supported the idea that DACH-based platinum
complexes were non–cross-resistant in cisplatin-resistant cell lines. 12,13 In support of these studies, Rixe et al. 14 showed that DACH derivatives exhibited a unique
cytotoxicity profile compared with cisplatin and carboplatin using the National Cancer Institute 60 cell line screen. Several DACH-platinum compounds have been
tested in clinical trials; however, each has had limitations that prevented their continued use.
Interest in DACH compounds has been rekindled by the clinical development of oxaliplatin. 15 Oxaliplatin has demonstrated activity alone or in combination with
5-fluorouracil/leucovorin in colon cancer, a disease that was previously considered to be unresponsive to platinum drugs. Like cisplatin, oxaliplatin preferentially forms
adducts at the N7 position of guanine and, to a lesser extent, adenine. However, evidence suggests that the three-dimensional structure of the DNA adducts and
biological response(s) they elicit are different from that of cisplatin.
PLATINUM (IV) STRUCTURES
The octahedral stereochemistry adopted by platinum (IV) compounds has led investigators to speculate that they may exhibit a different spectrum of activity than that
of platinum (II) drugs. Two compounds that have been tested clinically without much success are ormaplatin and iproplatin. Ormaplatin was neurotoxic in phase I
trials, and iproplatin did not demonstrate activity in phase II trials. 16,17 and 18 Two platinum (IV) compounds, JM216 [bis(acetato)amminedichloro(cyclohexylamine)
platinum (IV)] and JM335 [trans-ammine(cyclohexylamine)dichlorodihydroxo platinum (IV)], have been developed in the United Kingdom and contain several unique
features.19 These compounds may also be classified as mixed amines or ammine/amine platinum (IV) complexes. JM216 is the first orally active platinum compound
and is currently undergoing phase II testing. A response rate of 38% was observed in patients with small cell lung cancer 20; however, no significant antitumor activity
was observed in patients with non–small cell lung cancer. 21 Based on the lack of antitumor activity of transplatin [ trans-diamminedichloroplatinum (II)], it has been
generally believed that most, if not all, trans platinum compounds were inactive. Renewed interest in trans compounds has occurred, however, with the observation
that JM335 and a related group of complexes exhibited significant antitumor activity in murine ADJ/PC6 and human ovarian cancer models. 19 Khokhar and
colleagues 22 also have produced trans-platinum (IV) compounds containing the DACH moiety that they demonstrated to be non–cross-resistant to cisplatin.
MULTINUCLEAR PLATINUM COMPLEXES
The synthesis and preclinical studies of multinuclear platinum compounds was first reported by Farrell et al. 23 These compounds are unique in that their interaction
with DNA is considerably different from that of cisplatin, particularly in the abundance of interstrand cross-links formed. Also, the observation that multinuclear
platinum complexes containing the trans geometry exhibit antitumor activity contradicts the original dogma that platinum drugs containing the trans geometry are
inactive. Currently, the lead compound in this class of drugs is BBR3464. Its structure is described as two trans-[PtCl(NH3)2]+ units linked together by a noncovalent
tetraamine [Pt(NH3)2[H2N(CH2)6NH2]2]2+ unit. Preclinical testing of BBR3464 shows it to be significantly more potent than cisplatin and to be active in cisplatin-resistant
xenografts and p53 mutant tumors. Preliminary data from a phase I clinical trial of BBR3464 have indicated that diarrhea and myelosuppression are dose-limiting (P.
Calvert, H. Calvert, C. Sessa, G. Camboni, personal communication, 1999). In this study, a partial response was observed in a patient with metastatic pancreatic
cancer.
OTHER PLATINUM COMPLEXES
Another approach for the design of novel platinum analogues is to identify compounds that can circumvent specific cisplatin resistance mechanisms. An example of
this is ZD0473 (AMD473) [cis-amminedichloro(2-methylpyridine) platinum (II)], which is a sterically hindered platinum complex that was designed to preferentially react
with nucleic acids instead of thiol-containing molecules such as glutathione. 19 ZD0473 exhibits activity against acquired cisplatin-resistant cell lines and is active when
administered by oral or intraperitoneal routes in human ovarian cancer xenografts. 24,25 The results of a phase I clinical trial have indicated that myelosuppression is
dose-limiting and that nephrotoxicity, neuropathy, and ototoxicity are not prominent. 26 Antitumor activity was observed in previously platinum-treated head and neck

and ovarian cancer patients.

MECHANISM OF ACTION
DNA ADDUCT FORMATION
The observation by Rosenberg 2 that cisplatin induces filamentous growth in bacteria without affecting RNA and protein synthesis implicated DNA as the cytotoxic
target of the drug. Evidence from several subsequent experiments supported this idea. 27,28,29,30 and 31 The differential cytotoxic effects observed with platinum drugs are
determined, in part, by the structure and relative amount of DNA adducts formed. Cisplatin and its analogues react preferentially at the N7 position of guanine and
adenine residues to form a variety of monofunctional and bifunctional adducts. 32 The first step of the reaction involves the formation of monoadducts. These
monoadducts may then react further to form intrastrand or interstrand cross-links. The predominant bidentate lesions that are formed with DNA in vitro or in cultured
cells are the d(GpG)Pt, d(ApG)Pt, and d(GpNpG)Pt intrastrand cross-links. In a study of cisplatin-treated Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, these lesions were
determined to account for approximately 60%, 15%, and 20% of the total platinum DNA adducts, respectively. 33 Cisplatin also forms interstrand cross-links between
guanine residues located on opposite strands that account for less than 5% of the total DNA bound platinum. These adducts may contribute to the drug's cytotoxicity,
because they impede certain cellular processes that require the separation of both DNA strands, such as replication and transcription.
The adducts that are formed between the reaction of carboplatin with DNA in cultured cells are essentially the same as that of cisplatin. However, higher
concentrations of carboplatin are required (20- to 40-fold for cells) to obtain equivalent total platinum-DNA adduct levels because of cisplatin's slower rate of
aquation. 34 The relative amounts of each lesion are different, with the d(GpNpG)Pt intrastrand adduct being the most prevalent (approximately 40%) followed by the
d(GpG)Pt (approximately 30%) and d(ApG)Pt (approximately 15%) intrastrand adducts, respectively. 33 As with cisplatin, a relatively low number of monoadducts and
interstrand cross-links are observed. The relative amounts and frequencies of the DNA adducts formed in cultured cells by oxaliplatin have also been examined.
Oxaliplatin intrastrand adducts form more slowly because of a slower rate of conversion from monoadducts; however, they are formed at similar DNA sequences and
regions as cisplatin adducts. Saris et al. 35 reported that oxaliplatin forms predominantly d(GpG)Pt and d(ApG)Pt intrastrand cross-links in vitro and in cultured cells. At
equitoxic doses, however, oxaliplatin forms fewer DNA adducts compared with cisplatin. This suggests that oxaliplatin lesions are more cytotoxic than those formed by
cisplatin.
The differences observed in cytotoxicity between the diamine (e.g., cisplatin, carboplatin) and DACH platinum compounds is not dependent on the type and relative
amounts of the adducts formed, but more likely due to the overall three-dimensional structure of the adduct and its recognition by various cellular proteins. Structural
analysis of the cisplatin d(GpG)Pt intrastrand cross-link has been accomplished by both x-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. These
studies revealed that the binding of platinum to DNA causes a variety of perturbations in the double helix, including a roll of 26 to 50C between the cross-linked
guanine bases, displacement of platinum from the planes of the guanine rings, a bend of the helical axis toward the major groove, and an unwinding of the DNA. 36
Scheef et al.37 used computer modeling to demonstrate that oxaliplatin produces a similar DNA bend, base rotation, and base propeller as cisplatin. The major
difference, however, is the protrusion of the DACH moiety of oxaliplatin into the major groove of DNA, thus producing a bulkier adduct than that of cisplatin. This
bulkier, more hydrophobic adduct may be recognized differently by a host of cellular proteins involved in sensing DNA damage. 38 The functional consequence of
these effects are twofold: Proteins, such as polymerases, that recognize and participate in reactions on DNA under normal circumstances may be perturbed, whereas
processes that are controlled by proteins that recognize damaged DNA may become activated. The latter group of proteins may function in the DNA repair process or
in the initiation of programmed cell death.
PLATINUM-DNA DAMAGE–RECOGNITION PROTEINS
Several damage-recognition proteins have been identified that preferentially bind to DNA damaged by cisplatin, but not to the inactive transplatin isomer. 39,40 The first
of these to be discovered were the HMG1 (high mobility group 1) and HMG2 proteins. These proteins are capable of bending DNA as well as recognizing bent DNA
structures, such as that produced by cisplatin binding. The HMG domain, which consists of a highly basic 80 amino acid motif, has been found in other proteins, most
of which are involved in gene expression. 41 Although many theories exist as to how HMG proteins may influence cisplatin sensitivity, relationships between HMG
protein function and expression have not yet been clearly established. Recognition of platinum-DNA adducts by the mismatch repair (MMR) complex also has been
implicated in cisplatin sensitivity. 42 For example, the MSH2 (MutS homologue) and MLH1 (MutL homologue) proteins participate in the recognition of DNA adducts
formed by cisplatin. 43,44 The presence of a platinum lesion results in a continuous futile cycle of repair synthesis on the DNA strand opposite the lesion, possibly
causing the accumulation of DNA strand breaks that may result in cell death. Interestingly, oxaliplatin adducts are not recognized by this MMR protein complex, which
may account for differences in the cytotoxic mechanism of the two platinum compounds.
PLATINUM DRUG–INDUCED CELL DEATH
The sequence of events that lead to cell death after the formation of platinum-DNA adducts have not yet been elucidated. However, cells treated with platinum drugs
display the biochemical and morphologic features of apoptosis. 45 These features are common to cells treated with other cytotoxic and biological agents. Therefore,
understanding the pathway(s) that are involved in the early stages of programmed cell death, including the detection/initiation and decision/commitment phases, are
important for understanding the unique activities of platinum drugs. The sensitivity of a cell to a platinum drug depends, in part, on cell cycle. For example,
proliferating cells are relatively sensitive, whereas quiescent cells or cells in G 0/G1 are relatively insensitive. 46 Thus, it is possible that programmed cell death initiated
at various cell-cycle checkpoints is governed by different proteins and signal transduction pathways.
A model for cisplatin-induced cell death in CHO cells has been provided by Sorrenson and Eastman. 47 In this study, cisplatin-treated CHO/AA8 cells experienced slow
progression through S phase and accumulated in G 2. At low drug concentrations, the cells recovered and continued to cycle. At high drug concentrations, the cells
died after a protracted G 2 arrest. An aberrant mitosis was observed before apoptosis. Further studies with G 2-synchronized cells revealed that passage through S
phase is necessary for G 2 arrest and cell death, suggesting that DNA replication on a damaged template may result in the accumulation of further damage, ultimately
causing the cells to die. Cisplatin-induced accumulation of human tumor cells in G 2 also has been observed in mice. Abrogating the G 2 checkpoint with pharmacologic
agents, such as caffeine or 7-hydroxystaurosporine, have been shown to enhance the cytotoxicity of cisplatin. 48 It is not yet clear how these events specifically
transduce a proapoptotic signal. However, the observations provide a valuable framework to begin to elucidate the initial steps.
The decision/commitment phase of apoptosis hinges on the balance between survival and death signals. Each cell contains a damage threshold that, once
surpassed, results in the onset of apoptosis. It is not clear what signaling pathways influence the response of cells to platinum drugs. However, it has been shown that
activators or inhibitors of known signal transduction pathways can influence platinum drug sensitivity. For example, treatment of various cell lines with tamoxifen,
epidermal growth factor, interleukin-1a, tumor necrosis factor-a bombesin, and rapamycin enhance cisplatin cytotoxicity. 49,50,51,52 and 53 Also, the expression of certain
protooncogenes, including Ha-Ras, v-abl, and Her2/neu, has been shown in some instances to promote cell survival after cisplatin exposure. 54,55,56 and 57 This is an
area of investigation that requires further study, and the overall balance of cell survival and cell death signals may be critical in determining the response of tumors to
chemotherapy.
In addition to the mounting evidence supporting the existence of programmed cell death pathways, substantial evidence indicates that cell death is influenced by
cellular signal transduction pathways such as those that control growth, differentiation, and stress response. These signals are mediated primarily by small guanosine
triphosphatases and protein serine-threonine kinases. Members of the extracellular signal-related kinase/mitogen-activated kinase family, as well as their upstream
activators, have been implicated in these events. The c-JUN amino-terminal kinase (JNK)/stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK) and p38 kinase pathways have been
shown to be activated by a variety of environmental stimuli and inflammatory cytokines. 58 JNK/SAPK and p38 phosphorylate and regulate the activity of the ATF2
(alcohol acetyltransferase II) and Elk-1 transcription factors. JNK/SAPK also phosphorylates c-JUN, a component of the AP-1 (activating protein 1) transcription factor
complex, on serine residues 63 and 73. Considerable evidence suggests that these protein kinases are involved in transmitting a drug-induced cell death signal. For
example, Zanke et al. 59 demonstrated that, in mouse fibroblasts, the inhibition of JNK phosphorylation by the stable transfection of a dominant-negative
complementary DNA encoding SEK1, the protein kinase responsible for activating JNK, resulted in reduced sensitivity to cisplatin. Sanchez-Perez et al. 60 observed a
prolonged activation of JNK by cisplatin that was related to cell death. Modulating the activity of kinases upstream of JNK, including c-Abl, MKK3/MKK6, MEKK1, and
ASK1, also influences cellular drug sensitivity. 61 For example, Chen et al.62 demonstrated that overexpression of a dominant-negative ASK1, which inhibits activation
of JNK, resulted in an inhibition of cisplatin-induced apoptosis. Clearly, activation of these pathways occurs after drug exposure in some cells, and it is important to
understand the contribution of these intracellular signaling events to overall platinum drug sensitivity. Within these pathways may reside the key to understanding the

molecular basis for platinum drug–induced cell death.

MECHANISMS OF RESISTANCE
The major limitation to the successful treatment of solid tumors with platinum-based chemotherapy is the emergence of drug-resistant tumor cells. 63 Platinum drug
resistance may be intrinsic or acquired and may occur through multiple mechanisms. These mechanisms may be classified into two major groups: (1) those that limit
the formation of cytotoxic platinum-DNA adducts and (2) those that prevent cell death from occurring after platinum-DNA adduct formation. The first group of
mechanisms includes decreased drug accumulation and increased drug inactivation by cellular protein and nonprotein thiols. The second group of mechanisms
includes increased platinum-DNA adduct repair and increased platinum-DNA damage tolerance. These mechanisms have been described previously in in vitro
resistance models, and their relevance to clinical resistance is unknown ( Table 19.4-1).

TABLE 19.4-1. Correlation Coefficients Derived from the Relationships between Cisplatin-Sensitivity and Cisplatin-Resistance Mechanisms in Two Human Ovarian
Cancer Model Systems

REDUCED ACCUMULATION
The majority of cell lines that have been selected for cisplatin resistance in vitro exhibit a decreased platinum accumulation phenotype, and it is generally believed
that this is due to decreased drug uptake rather than enhanced drug efflux. Cisplatin and its analogues may accumulate within cells by passive diffusion or facilitated
transport. 64 Cisplatin uptake has been shown to be nonsaturable, even up to its solubility limit, and not inhibited by structural analogues. Carrier-mediated transport is
supported by the observation that uptake is partially energy-dependent, ouabain-inhibitable, sodium-dependent, and influenced by membrane potential and cyclic
adenosine monophosphate levels. Although no specific drug transporters have been implicated in the reduced platinum accumulation phenotype, some insight into a
possible pathway has been provided. Using two different acquired cisplatin resistance model systems, Shen et al. 65 reported that the loss of the folate binding protein
(FBP) was associated with decreased cellular accumulation of cisplatin, methotrexate, arsenate, and arsenite. Although the loss of FBP was not shown to be directly
responsible for reduced cisplatin accumulation, the regulatory mechanism responsible for the reduction in FBP gene expression may be linked to the expression of a
transport protein that may influence cisplatin uptake.
The prospect of an active efflux mechanism for platinum drugs has been rekindled by the discovery of a group of multidrug resistance protein (MRP)-related transport
proteins. MRP is a member of the adenosine triphosphate–binding cassette family of transport proteins that participates in the extrusion of glutathione-coupled and
unmodified anticancer drugs out of cells. 66 Overexpression of MRP confers resistance to a variety of drugs, but not to cisplatin. For platinum complexes, the formation
of a glutathione-platinum drug conjugate may be the rate-limiting step for producing an MRP substrate. The MRP homologue cMOAT (canalicular multispecific organic
anion transporter) shares 49% amino acid sequence identity and a similar substrate specificity with that of MRP. Taniguchi et al. 67 has shown that cMOAT (MRP2) is
overexpressed in some cisplatin-resistant human cancer cell lines exhibiting a decreased platinum accumulation phenotype. These investigators also demonstrated
that transfection of an antisense cMOAT complementary DNA into HepG2 cells results in decreased cMOAT protein levels and a fivefold increase in cisplatin
sensitivity. 68 Kool et al. 69 examined the expression of MRP, cMOAT, and three other MRP homologues (MRP3, MRP4, MRP5) in a set of cell lines selected for
cisplatin resistance in vitro. MRP1 and MRP4 messenger RNA levels were not increased in any of the cisplatin-resistant sublines. MRP3 and MRP5 were
overexpressed in a few cell lines, but the messenger RNA levels were not associated with cisplatin resistance. In contrast, cMOAT was substantially overexpressed in
some of the cisplatin-resistant cell lines. An immunohistochemical analysis of the expression of P glycoprotein, MRP1, and MRP2 revealed that none of these
transporters was associated with response to platinum-based chemotherapy in ovarian cancer. 70
INACTIVATION
As mentioned above, the formation of conjugates between glutathione (GSH) and platinum drugs may be an important step for their inactivation and elimination from
the cell. For many years, investigators have attempted to make positive correlations between platinum drug sensitivity, GSH levels, and the relative expression of the
enzymes involved in GSH metabolism. There have been many reports showing a strong association between platinum drug sensitivity and GSH levels. 71,72,73 and 74
However, reducing intracellular GSH levels with drugs such as buthionine sulfoximine has resulted in only low to modest potentiation of cisplatin sensitivity. 75,76 Part of
the reason for this may be due to the fact that the formation of GSH-platinum conjugates is a slow process. 77 The formation of a GSH-platinum complex, however, has
been reported to occur in cultured cells, and GSH has been shown to quench platinum-DNA monoadducts in vitro, preventing them from being converted to potentially
cytotoxic cross-links. 78,79 and 80 These findings raise the question of whether the intracellular reaction is catalyzed by glutathione S-transferases (GSTs). In support of
this theory, a threefold increase in cisplatin resistance was reported in CHO cells transfected with the GSTp isoenzyme. 81 In contrast, transfection of NIH3T3 cells with
GSTp resulted in hypersensitivity to cisplatin. 82 Studies attempting to associate GST activity with cisplatin sensitivity in cell lines and tumor biopsies have not
consistently shown a positive correlation between GST expression or activity and cisplatin sensitivity. 72,73 and 74,83
Inactivation of the platinum drugs may also occur through binding to the metallothionein (MT) proteins. The MTs are a family of sulfhydryl-rich, small-molecular-weight
proteins that participate in heavy metal binding and detoxication. In vitro, cisplatin binds stoichiometrically to metallothionein, and up to ten molecules of cisplatin can
be bound to one molecule of metallothionein. 84 Kelley et al. 85 demonstrated that overexpression of the full-length MT-II A in mouse C127 cells conferred a fourfold
resistance to cisplatin. Furthermore, this group showed that embryonic fibroblasts isolated from MT-null mice were hypersensitive to cisplatin. 86 These studies clearly
show that modulating MT levels can alter cisplatin sensitivity. However, the contribution of MT to clinical platinum drug resistance is unclear. In some cell lines,
elevated MT levels have been shown to be associated with cisplatin resistance, whereas in others, they have not. 72,87 Studies with human tumors have shown that, in
some instances, metallothionein expression level is associated with response to chemotherapy. For example, a significant correlation between MT overexpression
and response or survival was reported in urothelial transitional cell carcinoma patients. 88 Overexpression of MT also has been observed in bladder tumors from
patients that were unsuccessful with cisplatin chemotherapy. 89
INCREASED DNA REPAIR
Once platinum-DNA adducts are formed, cells must either repair or tolerate the damage to survive. The capacity to rapidly and efficiently repair DNA damage clearly
plays a role in determining a tumor cell's sensitivity to platinum drugs and other DNA damaging agents. Evidence suggests that cell lines derived from tumors that are
unusually sensitive to cisplatin, such as testicular nonseminomatous germ cell tumors, are deficient in their ability to repair platinum-DNA adducts. 90 Increased repair
of platinum-DNA lesions in cisplatin-resistant cell lines as compared with their sensitive counterparts has been shown in several human cancer cell lines, including
ovarian,91,92 breast,93 glioma,94 and murine leukemia cell lines. 95 Evidence for increased repair of cisplatin interstrand cross-links in specific gene and nongene
regions in cisplatin-resistant cell lines also has been demonstrated. These studies have been done using a variety of in vivo methods, including unscheduled DNA
synthesis, host cell reactivation of cisplatin-damaged plasmid DNA, atomic absorption spectrometry, quantitative polymerase chain reaction, and renaturing agarose
gel electrophoresis.
The repair of platinum-DNA adducts occurs predominantly by nucleotide excision repair (NER). However, the molecular basis for the increased repair activity

observed in cisplatin-resistant cells is unknown. 96 Because the rate-limiting step in this process is platinum-adduct recognition/incision, increased expression of the
proteins that control this step are likely to enhance nucleotide excision repair activity. Using an in vitro assay, Ferry et al.97 demonstrated that the addition of the
ERCC1/XPF (excision repair) protein complex increased the platinum-DNA adduct excision activity of an ovarian cancer cell extract. Circumstantial evidence also
implicates ERCC1 expression with increased NER and cisplatin resistance. For example, expression levels of the ERCC1 and XPA genes have been shown to be
higher in malignant tissue from ovarian cancer patients resistant to platinum-based therapy compared with those responsive to treatment. 98ERCC1 expression also
has been shown to correlate with NER activity and cisplatin resistance in human ovarian cancer cells. 97 Increased levels of XPE, a putative DNA repair protein that
recognizes many DNA lesions, including platinum-DNA adducts, has been observed in tumor cell lines resistant to cisplatin. 99 It should be noted, however, that XPE is
not a necessary component for the in vitro reconstitution of NER. 96,100 Increased expression of DNA polymerases a and b have been observed in cisplatin-resistant
cell lines, and increased expression of these polymerases, as well as DNA ligase, has been described in human tumors after cisplatin exposure in vivo.94 The possible
significance of these findings is unclear because the primary polymerases involved in NER are thought to be DNA polymerases d or e. 96 Although it is probably not
involved in NER, DNA polymerase b may be involved in translesion DNA synthesis. 101
Inhibiting DNA repair activity to enhance platinum drug sensitivity has been an active area of investigation. Agents that have been used include nucleoside
analogues, such as gemcitabine, fludarabine, and cytarabine; the ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor hydroxyurea; and the inhibitor of DNA polymerases a and g,
aphidicolin. All of these agents interfere with the repair synthesis stage of various repair processes, including nucleotide excision repair, and it should be noted that
these compounds are also likely to affect DNA replication and, as such, should not be strictly characterized as repair inhibitors. The potentiation of cisplatin
cytotoxicity by treatment with aphidicolin has been studied extensively in human ovarian cancer cell lines. Although some studies have demonstrated a clear
synergism with this drug combination, 102,103 others have not. 104 In an in vivo mouse model of human ovarian cancer, the combined treatment of cisplatin and
aphidicolin glycinate, a water-soluble form of the drug, was found to be significantly more effective than cisplatin alone. 105 The combination of cytarabine and
hydroxyurea was found to demonstrate cytotoxic synergy with cisplatin in a human colon cancer cell line 106 and in rat mammary carcinoma cell lines. 107 Moreover, the
modulatory effect of cytarabine and hydroxyurea on cisplatin was associated with an increase in DNA interstrand cross-links in both cellular systems. Similarly, the
drugs gemcitabine108 and fludarabine 109 have both been shown to synergize with cisplatin in causing cell death in in vitro systems, and both of these drugs have been
shown to interfere with the removal of cisplatin-DNA adducts. The likelihood of a significant improvement in the therapeutic index of cisplatin in refractory patients by
the coadministration of a repair inhibitor, however, is limited by the multifactorial nature typical of resistant tumor cells. The combination of an inhibitor of the repair
process with other modulators of resistance may be a more viable avenue in treating patients with recurrent disease. Furthermore, a modest change in drug sensitivity
may bring some refractory tumors into a range that is treatable with conventional chemotherapy.
INCREASED DNA DAMAGE TOLERANCE
Platinum-DNA damage tolerance is a phenotype that has been observed in both cisplatin-resistant cells derived from chemotherapy-refractory patients and cells
selected for primary cisplatin resistance in vitro. The contribution of this mechanism to resistance is significant, and it has been shown to correlate strongly with
cisplatin resistance as well as to resistance to other drugs in two ovarian cancer model systems (see Table 19.4-1).92,110 Like other cisplatin resistance mechanisms,
this phenotype may result from alterations in a variety of cellular pathways.
One component of DNA damage tolerance that has been observed in cisplatin-resistant cells involves the loss of function of the DNA MMR system. The main function
of the MMR system is to scan newly synthesized DNA and to remove mismatches that result from nucleotide incorporation errors made by the DNA polymerases. In
addition to causing genomic instability, it has been reported that loss of MMR is associated with low-level cisplatin resistance and that the selection of cells in culture
for resistance to this drug often yields cell lines that have lost a functional MMR system. 111 MMR deficiency may create an environment that promotes the
accumulation of mutations in drug-sensitivity genes. Another hypothesis is that the MMR system serves as a detector of platinum-DNA adducts. MSH2 alone, and in
combination with MSH6, has been shown to bind to cisplatin 1,2-d(GpG)Pt intrastrand adducts with high efficiency. 44,112 Additionally, MSH2- and MLH1-containing
protein-DNA complexes have been observed when nuclear extracts of MMR-proficient cell lines were incubated with DNA preincubated with cisplatin, but not with
oxaliplatin. These data suggest that MMR recognition of damage may trigger a programmed cell death pathway, rendering cells with intact MMR more sensitive to
DNA damage.43 Another possibility is that the cytotoxicity involves repeated rounds of synthesis past the platinum-DNA lesions followed by recognition and
subsequent removal of the newly synthesized strand by the MMR system. This futile cycling may generate DNA strand gaps and breaks that trigger programmed cell
death. 113 Loss of MMR thus increases the cell's ability to tolerate platinum-DNA lesions.
Another possible tolerance mechanism related to MMR is enhanced replicative bypass, which is defined as the ability of the replication complex to synthesize DNA
past a platinum adduct. 101,114 Increased replicative bypass has been shown to occur in cisplatin-resistant human ovarian cancer cells. 114 These cells are also
MMR-deficient, and it has been shown that in steady-state chain elongation assays, a 2.5- to 6.0-fold increase in replicative bypass of cisplatin adducts occurred.
Oxaliplatin adducts are not recognized by the MMR complex, and no significant differences in bypass of oxaliplatin adducts in MMR-proficient and -defective cells
were observed. DNA polymerase b, the most inaccurate of the DNA polymerases, may also function in this process. 101 The activity of this enzyme was found to be
significantly increased in cells derived from a human malignant glioma resistant to cisplatin compared with its drug-sensitive counterpart. 94
The tolerance mechanisms just mentioned are related primarily to cisplatin resistance. Because the platinum-DNA damage tolerance phenotype is often associated
with cross-resistance to other unrelated chemotherapeutic drugs, 110 the existence of a more general resistance mechanism must be considered. One possible
explanation is that the platinum-DNA damage tolerance phenotype is the result of decreased expression or inactivation of one or more components of the
programmed cell death pathway. As mentioned above in Platinum Drug–Induced Cell Death, a number of pro- and antiapoptotic signaling pathways have been
implicated in cisplatin sensitivity. The possibility exists that cells containing defective or constitutively down-regulated stress signaling pathways, such as SAPK/JNK,
may exhibit resistance to platinum drugs. A number of other proteins that regulate these pathways may also have the capacity to influence drug sensitivity. In addition,
cell death may also be influenced by expression of members of the bcl-2 gene family. This group of pro- and antiapoptotic proteins regulates mitochondrial function,
and they serve as a cell survival/cell death rheostat by forming homo- and heterodimers with one another. The antiapoptotic bcl-2 and bcl-X L proteins are localized in
the outer mitochondrial membrane and may be involved in the formation of transmembrane channels. Overexpression of bcl-2 or bcl-X L has been shown to prevent
disruption of the mitochondrial transmembrane potential and to prolong cell survival in some cells after exposure to cisplatin and other anticancer drugs. 115,116 The
activity of these proteins is negated, however, in the presence of high levels of the proapoptotic protein BAX, another bcl-2 family member. Therefore, the relative
intracellular levels of these proteins may also confer resistance to platinum drugs. An interesting connection between the bcl-2 gene family and SAPK/JNK has been
reported by Kharbanda et al. 117 They found that, after genotoxic stress, SAPK/JNK is translocated to the mitochondria, where it phosphorylates bcl-X L, presumably
rendering it inactive.

CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
PHARMACOKINETICS
The pharmacokinetic differences observed among platinum drugs may be attributed to the structure of their leaving groups. Platinum complexes containing leaving
groups that are less easily displaced exhibit reduced plasma protein binding, longer plasma half-lives, and higher rates of renal clearance. These features are evident
in the pharmacokinetic properties of cisplatin, carboplatin, and oxaliplatin, which are summarized in Table 19.4-2. Platinum drug pharmacokinetics also have been
reviewed elsewhere. 118,119 and 120

TABLE 19.4-2. Comparative Pharmacokinetics of Platinum Analogues after Bolus or Short Intravenous Infusion

Cisplatin
After intravenous infusion, cisplatin rapidly diffuses into tissues and is covalently bound to plasma protein. More than 90% of platinum is bound to plasma protein at 4
hours postinfusion. 121 The disappearance of ultrafilterable platinum is rapid and occurs in a biphasic fashion. Half-lives of 10 to 30 minutes and 0.7 to 0.8 hours have
been reported for the initial (T 1/2a) and terminal phases (T1/2g), respectively. 122,123 Cisplatin excretion is dependent on renal function, which accounts for the majority of
its elimination. The percentage of platinum excreted in the urine has been reported to be between 23% and 40% at 24 hours postinfusion. 124,125 Only a small
percentage of the total platinum is excreted in the bile. 126
Carboplatin
The differences in pharmacokinetics observed between cisplatin and carboplatin depend primarily on the slower rate of conversion of carboplatin to a reactive
species. Thus, the stability of carboplatin results in a low incidence of nephrotoxicity. Carboplatin diffuses rapidly into tissues after infusion, but it is considerably more
stable in plasma. Only 24% of a dose was reported to be bound to plasma protein at 4 hours postinfusion. 127
The disappearance of platinum from plasma after short intravenous infusions of carboplatin has been reported to occur in a biphasic or triphasic manner. The initial
half-lives for total platinum, which vary considerably among several studies, are listed in Table 19.4-2. The T1/2a ranges from 12 to 98 minutes and ranges from 1.3 to
1.7 hours during the second phase (T 1/2b). Half-lives reported for the T 1/2g range from 8.2 to 40.0 hours. The disappearance of ultrafilterable platinum is biphasic, with
T1/2a and T1/2b values ranging from 7.6 to 87.0 minutes and 1.7 to 5.9 hours, respectively. Carboplatin is excreted predominantly by the kidneys, and cumulative
urinary excretion of platinum is 54% to 82%, most as unmodified carboplatin. The renal clearance of carboplatin is closely correlated with the glomerular filtration rate
(GFR).127 This observation enabled Calvert et al. 128 to design a carboplatin dosing formula based on an individual patient's GFR.
Oxaliplatin
After oxaliplatin infusion, platinum accumulates into three compartments: plasma-bound platinum, ultrafilterable platinum, and platinum associated with erythrocytes.
Approximately 85% of the total platinum is bound to plasma protein at 2 to 5 hours postinfusion. 129 Plasma elimination of total platinum and ultrafiltrates is biphasic.
The T 1/2a and T1/2g are 26 minutes and 38.7 hours, respectively, for total platinum and 21 minutes and 24.2 hours, respectively, for ultrafilterable platinum (see Table
19.4-2).120 Thus, as with carboplatin, substantial differences between total and free drug kinetics are not observed. Similar to cisplatin, a prolonged retention of
oxaliplatin is observed in red blood cells. Unlike cisplatin, however, oxaliplatin does not accumulate to any significant level after multiple courses of treatment. 129 This
may explain why neurotoxicity associated with oxaliplatin is reversible. Oxaliplatin is eliminated predominantly by the kidneys, with more than 50% being excreted in
the urine at 48 hours.
PHARMACODYNAMICS
Pharmacodynamics relates pharmacokinetic indices of drug exposure to biological measures of drug effect, which is usually defined by toxicity to normal tissues or by
amount of tumor cell kill. Two issues to be addressed in such efforts are whether the effectiveness of the drug can be enhanced or the toxicity attenuated by
knowledge of the platinum pharmacokinetics in an individual. These questions are appropriate to the use of cytotoxic agents with relatively narrow therapeutic indices.
Toxicity to normal tissues can be quantitated as a continuous variable when the drug causes myelosuppression. Thus, the early studies of carboplatin demonstrated a
close relationship of changes in platelet counts to the area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) in the individual. The AUC was itself closely related to renal
function, which was determined as creatinine clearance. Based on these observations, Egorin et al. 130 and Calvert et al. 128 derived formulas based on creatinine
clearance to predict either the percent change in platelet count or a target AUC. More recently, Chatelut and colleagues 131 have derived a formula that relies on serum
creatinine as well as morphometric determinants of renal function. Application of pharmacodynamically guided dosing algorithms for carboplatin has been widely
adopted as a means of avoiding overdosage (by producing acceptable nadir platelet counts) and of maximizing dose intensity in the individual. Good evidence
suggests that this approach can decrease the risk of unacceptable toxicity. Accordingly, a dosing strategy based on renal function is recommended for the use of
carboplatin.
A key question is whether maximizing carboplatin exposure in an individual can measurably increase the probability of tumor regression or survival. In an analysis by
Jodrell et al., 132 carboplatin AUC was a predictor of response, thrombocytopenia, and leukopenia. The likelihood of a tumor response increased with increasing AUC
up to a level of 5 to 7 mg × hr/mL, after which a plateau was reached. Similar results were obtained with carboplatin in combination with cyclophosphamide, and
neither response nor survival rates were determined by the carboplatin AUC in a cohort of ovarian cancer patients. 133
The relationship of pharmacokinetics to response may also be explored by investigating the cellular pharmacology of these agents. 134 As discussed above in DNA
Adduct Formation, platinum compounds form various types of DNA adducts. The formation and repair of these adducts in human cells are not easily measured. One
approach is to measure specific DNA adducts (using antibody-based assays); another is to measure total platinum bound to DNA. The formation and repair of
platinum-DNA adducts has been studied in white blood cells obtained from various groups of patients. Ma et al. 135 have reevaluated the pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic interactions of cisplatin administered as a single agent. In a series of patients with head and neck cancer, they found that cisplatin exposure
(measured as the AUC) closely correlated with both the peak DNA adduct content in leukocytes and the area under the DNA-adduct–time curve. 136 These measures
were important predictors of response, both individually and in logistic regression analysis. An adaptive dosing study in which the dose of cisplatin is modified based
on DNA-adduct levels is in progress.
Based on the variability of both pharmacokinetics in individuals and of tumor genotype determinants of susceptibility to platinum agents, it seems most likely that
direct investigations of these factors will elucidate how best to use these drugs. Single-nucleotide polymorphism associations with toxicity and tumor gene expression
profiles determining susceptibility will, it is hoped, further enhance the therapeutic index by prospectively identifying sensitive and resistant populations.
FORMULATION AND ADMINISTRATION
Cisplatin
Cisplatin is administered in a chloride-containing solution intravenously over 0.5 to 2.0 hours. To minimize the risk of nephrotoxicity, patients are prehydrated with at
least 500 mL of salt-containing fluid. Immediately before cisplatin administration, mannitol (12.5 to 25.0 g) is given parenterally to maximize urine flow. A diuretic, such
as furosemide, may also be used, along with parenteral antiemetics, which currently include dexamethasone together with a 5-hydroxytryptamine 3 (5-HT3) antagonist.
A minimum of 1 L of posthydration fluid is usually given. 137 The intensity of hydration varies somewhat with the dose of cisplatin. High-dose cisplatin (up to 200 mg/m 2
per course) may be administered in a formulation containing 3% sodium chloride, but this method is no longer widely used. Cisplatin may also be administered
regionally to increase local drug exposure and to diminish side effects. Its intraperitoneal use was defined by Ozols et al. 138 and by Howell and colleagues. 139
Measured drug exposure in the peritoneal cavity is some 50-fold higher than levels achieved with intravenous administration. 139 At standard doses in ovarian cancer
patients with low-volume disease, a randomized intergroup trial suggested that intraperitoneal administration is superior to intravenous cisplatin in combination with
intravenous cyclophosphamide. 140 The development of combinations of carboplatin with paclitaxel has, however, superseded this technique in ovarian cancer, and the
intraperitoneal route is now infrequently used. Regional use also includes intraarterial delivery (as for hepatic tumors, melanoma, and glioblastoma), but none has
been adopted as a standard method of treatment. There is growing interest in chemoembolization for the treatment of tumors confined to the liver, and cisplatin is a
component of many popular regimens.141
Oxaliplatin

Oxaliplatin is also uncomplicated in its clinical administration. For bolus infusion, the required dose is administered in 500 mL of chloride-free diluent over a period of
2 hours. In studies of colorectal cancer, oxaliplatin has been administered as a 5-day continuous infusion, during which the dosage rate has been modified to observe
principles of chronopharmacologic administration. 145 Oxaliplatin is more frequently given as a single dose every 2 weeks (85 mg/m 2) or every 3 weeks (130 mg/m2),
alone or with other active agents. It is common to pretreat patients with active antiemetics, such as a 5-HT 3 antagonist, but the nausea is not as severe as with
cisplatin. No prehydration is required. The predominant toxicity of oxaliplatin is neurotoxicity. The development of an oropharyngeal dysesthesia, often precipitated by
exposure to cold, requires prolongation of the duration of administration to 6 hours.
Carboplatin
Cisplatin treatment over 3 to 6 hours is burdensome for clinical resources and tiring for cancer patients. Previously given as in-hospital treatment, it is now usually
administered in the outpatient setting. The exigencies of the modern health care environment have contributed to the expanding use of carboplatin as an alternative to
cisplatin, except in circumstances in which cisplatin is clearly the superior agent. Carboplatin is substantially easier to administer. Extensive hydration is not required
because of the lack of nephrotoxicity at standard doses. 142 Carboplatin is reconstituted in chloride-free solutions (unlike cisplatin, because chloride can displace the
leaving groups) and administered over 30 minutes as a rapid intravenous infusion. Carboplatin has been incorporated in high-dose chemotherapy regimens at doses
more than threefold higher than those of the standard regimens. 143 In some regimens, continuous infusion has been substituted for a rapid intravenous infusion;
however, it is doubtful that there is an advantage to this approach. Carboplatin doses up to 20 mg × min/mL may be safely administered in 200 mL of D5W over 2
hours. 144
TOXICITY
A substantial body of literature documents the side effects of platinum compounds. The nephrotoxicity of cisplatin almost led to its abandonment, until Cvitkovic and
colleagues 3,4 introduced aggressive hydration, which prevented the development of acute renal failure. As already noted, the toxicity of cisplatin was a driving force
both in the search for less toxic analogues and for more effective treatments for its side effects, especially nausea and vomiting. The toxicities associated with
cisplatin, carboplatin, and oxaliplatin are described in detail in the next three sections and are summarized in Table 19.4-3.

TABLE 19.4-3. Toxicity Profiles of Platinum Analogues in Clinical Use

Cisplatin
The side effects associated with cisplatin (at single doses of more than 50 mg/m 2) include nausea and vomiting, nephrotoxicity, ototoxicity, neuropathy, and
myelosuppression. Rare effects include visual impairment, seizures, arrhythmias, acute ischemic vascular events, glucose intolerance, and pancreatitis. 137 The
nausea and vomiting stimulated a search for new antiemetics. These symptoms are currently best managed with 5-HT 3 antagonists and usually given with a
glucocorticoid, although other combinations of agents are still widely used. In the weeks following treatment, continuous antiemetic therapy may be required.
Nephrotoxicity is ameliorated but not completely prevented by hydration. The renal damage to both glomeruli and tubules is cumulative, and after cisplatin treatment,
serum creatinine is no longer a reliable guide to the measurement of glomerular filtration rate. An acute elevation of serum creatinine may follow a cisplatin dose, but
this index returns to normal with time. Tubule damage may be reflected in a salt-losing syndrome that also resolves with time.
Ototoxicity is a cumulative and irreversible side effect of cisplatin treatment that results from damage to the inner ear. Therefore, audiograms are recommended every
2 to 3 cycles.137 The initial audiographic manifestation is loss of high-frequency acuity (4000 to 8000 Hz). When acuity is affected in the range of speech, cisplatin
should be discontinued under most circumstances and carboplatin substituted where appropriate. Peripheral neuropathy is also cumulative, although less common
than with agents such as vinca alkaloids. This neuropathy usually is reversible, although recovery is often slow. A number of agents with the potential for protection
from neuropathy have been developed, but none is yet used widely. 146
Carboplatin
Myelosuppression, which is not usually severe with cisplatin, is the dose-limiting toxicity of carboplatin. 142 The drug is most toxic to the platelet precursors, but
neutropenia and anemia are frequently observed. The lowest platelet counts after a single dose of carboplatin are observed 17 to 21 days later, and recovery usually
occurs by day 28. The effect is dose-dependent, but individuals vary widely in their susceptibility. As shown by Egorin et al. 130 and Calvert et al., 128 the severity of
platelet toxicity is best accounted for by a measure of the drug exposure in an individual, the AUC. Both groups derived pharmacologically based formulas to predict
toxicity and guide carboplatin dosing. That of Calvert and colleagues targets a particular exposure to carboplatin:

This formula has been widely used to individualize carboplatin dosing, and it permits targeting at an acceptable level of toxicity. Patients who are elderly or have a
poor performance status or a history of extensive pretreatment have a higher risk of toxicity, even when dose is calculated with these methods, 128,130 but the safety of
drug administration has been enhanced. In the combination of carboplatin and paclitaxel, AUC-based dosing has helped to maximize the dose intensity of
carboplatin. 147 Doses some 30% higher than a dosing strategy based solely on body surface area may safely be used. A determination of whether this approach to
dosing improves outcome requires a randomized trial, which is in progress.
The other toxicities of carboplatin are generally milder and better tolerated than those of cisplatin. Nausea and vomiting, although frequent, are less severe, shorter in
duration, and more easily controlled with standard antiemetics (i.e., Compazine, dexamethasone, lorazepam) than those symptoms typical after cisplatin treatment.
Renal impairment is infrequent, although alopecia is common, especially with the paclitaxel-containing combinations. Neurotoxicity is also less common than with
cisplatin, although it is observed more frequently with the increasing use of high-dose regimens. Ototoxicity is also less common.
Oxaliplatin
The dose-limiting toxicity of oxaliplatin is sensory neuropathy, a characteristic of all DACH-containing platinum derivatives. The severity of the toxicity is dramatically
less than that observed with another DACH-containing analogue, ormaplatin. This side effect takes two forms. First, a tingling of the extremities, which may also
involve the perioral region, occurs early and usually resolves within a few days. With repeated dosing, symptoms may last longer between cycles but do not appear to
be of long duration or cumulative. Laryngopharyngeal spasm and cold dysesthesias also have been reported but are not associated with significant respiratory
symptoms; they can be prevented by prolonging the duration of infusion. A second neuropathy, more typical of that seen with cisplatin, affects the extremities and

increases with repeated doses. Definitive physiologic characterization of oxaliplatin-induced neuropathy has proven difficult in large studies. Electromyograms
performed in six patients treated by Extra et al. 148 revealed an axonal sensory neuropathy, but nerve conduction velocities were unchanged. Peripheral nerve biopsies
performed in this study showed decreased myelinization and replacement with collagen pockets. The neurologic effects of oxaliplatin appear to be cumulative in that
they become more pronounced and of greater duration with successive cycles. Unlike those with cisplatin, however, they are reversible with drug cessation. In a
review of 682 patient experiences, Brienza et al. 149 reported that 82% of patients who experienced grade 2 or higher neurotoxicity had their symptoms regress within 4
to 6 months. Ototoxicity is not observed with oxaliplatin. Nausea and vomiting do occur and generally respond to 5-HT 3 antagonists. Myelosuppression is uncommon
and is not severe with oxaliplatin as a single agent, but it is a feature of combinations including this drug. Oxaliplatin therapy is not associated with nephrotoxicity.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Rosenberg B, VanCamp L, Trosko J, Mansour V. Platinum compounds: a new class of potent antitumor agents. Nature 1969;222:385.
2. Rosenberg B. Platinum complexes for the treatment of cancer: why the search goes on. In: Lippert B, ed. Cisplatin : chemistry and biochemistry of a leading anticancer drug. Zurich,
Switzerland: Verlag Helvetica Chimica Acta, 1999:3.
3. Cvitkovic E, Spaulding J, Bethune V, Martin J, Whitmore W. Improvement of cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum (NSC 119875): therapeutic index in an animal model. Cancer 1977;39: 1357.
4. Hayes D, Cvitkovic E, Golbey R, et al. High dose cis-platinum diammine dichloride: amelioration of renal toxicity by mannitol diuresis. Cancer 1977;39:1372.
5. O'Dwyer P, Stevenson J, Johnson S. Clinical status of cisplatin, carboplatin and other platinum-based antitumor drugs. In: Lippert B, ed. Cisplatin : chemistry and biochemistry of a leading
anticancer drug. Zurich, Switzerland: Verlag Helvetica Chimica Acta, 1999:31.
6. Roberts J, Thomson A. The mechanism of action of antitumor platinum compounds. Prog Nucleic Acids Res 1979;22:71.
7. Martin R. Platinum complexes: hydrolysis and binding to N(7) and N(1) of purines. In: Lippert B, ed. Cisplatin : chemistry and biochemistry of a leading anticancer drug. Zurich, Switzerland:
Verlag Helvetica Chimica Acta, 1999:183.
8. Harrap K. Preclinical studies identifying carboplatin as a viable cisplatin alternative. Cancer Treat Rev 1985;12:A21.
9. Harrap K. Initiatives with platinum- and quinazoline-based antitumor molecules. Fourteenth Bruce F. Cain memorial award lecture. Cancer Res 1995;55:2761.
10. Connors T, Jones M, Ross W, et al. New platinum complexes with anti-tumour activity. Chem Biol Interact 1972;5:415.
11. Kidani Y, Inagaki K, Tsukagoshi S. Examination of antitumor activities of platinum complexes of 1,2-diaminocyclohexane isomers and their related complexes. Gann 1976;67:921.
12. Burchenal J, Kalaker K, Dew K, Lokyst L. Rationale for development of platinum analogs. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:1493.
13. Burchenal J, Irani G, Kern K, Lokys L, Turkevich J. 1,2-Diaminocyclohexane platinum derivatives of potential clinical value. Recent Results Cancer Res 1980;74:146.
14. Rixe O, Ortuzar W, Alvarez M, et al. Oxaliplatin, tetraplatin, cisplatin, and carboplatin: spectrum of activity in drug-resistant cell lines and in the cell lines of the National Cancer Institute's
anticancer drug screen panel. Biochem Pharmacol 1996;52:1855.
15. Cvitkovic E, Bekradda M. Oxaliplatin: a new therapeutic option in colorectal cancer. Semin Oncol 1999;26:647.
16. Hubbard K, Pazdur R, Ajani J, et al. Phase II evaluation of iproplatin in patients with advanced gastric and pancreatic cancer. Am J Clin Oncol 1992;15:524.
17. Murphy D, Lind M, Prendiville J, et al. Phase I/II study of intraperitoneal iproplatin in patients with minimal residual disease following platinum-based systemic therapy for epithelial ovarian
carcinoma. Eur J Cancer 1992;28A:870.
18. Schilder R, LaCreta F, Perez R, et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic study of ormaplatin (Tetraplatin, NSC 363812) administered on a day 1 and day 8 schedule. Cancer Res 1994;54:709.
19. Kelland L. The development of orally active platinum drugs. In: Lippert B, ed. Cisplatin : chemistry and biochemistry of a leading anticancer drug. Zurich, Switzerland: Verlag Helvetica Chimica
Acta, 1999:497.
20. Fokkema E, Groen HJ, Bauer J, et al. Phase II study of oral platinum drug JM216 as first-line treatment in patients with small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3822.
21. Judson I, Cerny T, Epelbaum R, et al. Phase II trial of the oral platinum complex JM216 in non-small-cell lung cancer: an EORTC early clinical studies group investigation. Ann Oncol
1997;8:604.
22. Khokhar A, al-Baker S, Shamsuddin S, Siddik Z. Chemical and biological studies on a series of novel (trans-(1R,2R)-, trans-(1S,2S)-, and cis-1,2-diaminocyclohexane)platinum(IV) carboxylate
complexes. J Med Chem 1997;40:112.
23. Farrell N, Qu Y, Bierbach U, Valsecchi M, Menta E. Structure-activity relationships within di- and trinuclear platinum phase-I clinical anticancer agents. In: Lippert B, ed. Cisplatin : chemistry and
biochemistry of a leading anticancer drug. Zurich, Switzerland: Verlag Helvetica Chimica Acta, 1999.
24. Holford J, Sharp S, Murrer B, Abrams M, Kelland L. In vitro circumvention of cisplatin resistance by the novel sterically hindered platinum complex AMD473. Br J Cancer 1998;77:366.
25. Raynaud F, Boxall F, Goddard P, et al. cis-Amminedichloro(2-methylpyridine) platinum(II) (AMD473), a novel sterically hindered platinum complex: in vivo activity, toxicology, and
pharmacokinetics in mice. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:2063.
26. Trigo J, Beale P, Judson I, et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic (PK) study of cis-amminedichloro (2-methylpyridine) platinum (II) (ZD0473), a novel sterically hindered platinum complex, in
patients (pts) with advanced solid malignancies. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:169a.
27. Harder H, Rosenberg B. Inhibitory effects of anti-tumor platinum compounds on DNA, RNA and protein syntheses in mammalian cells in vitro. Int J Cancer 1970;6:207.
28. Howle J, Gale G. Cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum (II). Persistent and selective inhibition of deoxyribonucleic acid synthesis in vivo. Biochem Pharmacol 1970;19:2757.
29. Reslova S. The induction of lysogenic strains of Escherichia coli by cis-dichloro-diammineplatinum (II). Chem Biol Interact 1971;4:66.
30. Poll EHA, Abrahams PJ, Arwert F, Eriksson AW. Host cell reactivation of cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II)-treated SV40 DNA in normal human, Fanconi anaemia and xeroderma pigmentosum
fibroblasts. Mutat Res 1984;132:181.
31. Fraval HNA, Rawlings CJ, Roberts JJ. Increased sensitivity of UV-repair deficient human cells to DNA bound platinum products which unlike thymine dimers are not recognized by an
endonuclease extracted from Micrococcus luteus. Mutat Res 1978;51:121.
32. Eastman A. The formation, isolation and characterization of DNA adducts produced by anticancer platinum complexes. Pharmacol Ther 1987;34:155.
33. Blommaert F, van Kijk-Knijnenburg H, Dijt F, et al. Formation of DNA adducts by the anticancer drug carboplatin: different nucleotide sequence preferences in vitro and in cells. Biochemistry
1995;34:8474.
34. Knox R, Friedlos F, Lydall D, Roberts J. Mechanism of cytotoxicity of anticancer platinum drugs: evidence that cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) and
cis-diammine-(1,1-cyclobutanedicarboxylato)platinum(II) differ only in the kinetics of their interaction with DNA. Cancer Res 1986;46:1972.
35. Saris C, van de Vaart P, Rietbroek R, Blommaert F. In vitro formation of DNA adducts by cisplatin, lobaplatin and oxaliplatin in calf thymus DNA in solution and in cultured cells. Carcinogenesis
1996;17:2763.
36. Zamble D, Lippard S. The response of cellular proteins to cisplatin-damaged DNA. In: Lippert B, ed. Cisplatin : chemistry and biochemistry of a leading anticancer drug. Zurich, Switzerland:
Verlag Helvetica Chimica Acta, 1999:73.
37. Scheef E, Briggs J, Howell S. Molecular modeling of the intrastrand guanine-guanine DNA adducts produced by cisplatin and oxaliplatin. Mol Pharmacol 1999;56:633.
38. Raymond E, Faivre S, Woynarowski J, Chaney S. Oxaliplatin: mechanism of action and antineoplastic activity. Semin Oncol 1998;25:4.
39. Toney J, Donahue B, Kellett P, et al. Isolation of cDNAs encoding a human protein that binds selectively to DNA modified by the anticancer drug cis-diamminedichloroplatinum. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1989;86:8328.
40. Bruhn S, Pil P, Essigmann J, Housman D, Lippard S. Isolation and characterization of human cDNA clones encoding a high mobility group box protein that recognizes structural distortions to
DNA caused by binding of the anticancer agent cisplatin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;89:2307.
41. Grosschedl R, Giese K, Pagel J. HMG domain proteins: architectural elements in the assembly of nucleoprotein structures. Trends Genet 1994;10:94.
42. Fink D, Zheng H, Nebel S, et al. In vitro and in vivo resistance to cisplatin in cells that have lost DNA mismatch repair. Cancer Res 1997;57:1841.
43. Fink D, Nebel S, Aebi S, et al. The role of DNA mismatch repair in platinum drug resistance. Cancer Res 1996;56:4881.
44. Mello J, Acharya S, Fishel R, Essigmann J. The mismatch-repair protein hMSH2 binds selectively to DNA adducts of the anticancer drug cisplatin. Chem Biol 1996;3:579.
45. Sorenson C, Barry M, Eastman A. Analysis of events associated with cell cycle arrest at G2 phase and cell death induced by cisplatin. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:749.
46. Evans D, Dive C. Effects of cisplatin on the induction of apoptosis in proliferating hepatoma cells and nonproliferating immature thymocytes. Cancer Res 1993;53:2133.
47. Sorrenson C, Eastman A. Mechanism of cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II)-induced cytotoxicity: role of G2 arrest and DNA double-strand breaks. Cancer Res 1988;48:4484.
48. Bunch R, Eastman A. 7-Hydroxystaurosporine (UCN-01) causes redistribution of proliferating cell nuclear antigen and abrogates cisplatin-induced S-phase arrest in Chinese hamster ovary cells.
Cell Growth Differ 1997;8:779.
49. McClay EF, Albright KD, Jones JA, et al. Modulation of cisplatin resistance in human malignant melanoma cells. Cancer Res 1992;52:6790.
50. Kroning R, Jones JA, Hom DK, et al. Enhancement of drug sensitivity of human malignancies by epidermal growth factor. Br J Cancer 1995;72:615.
51. Chang MJ, Yu WD, Reyno LM, et al. Potentiation by interleukin 1 alpha of cisplatin and carboplatin antitumor activity: schedule-dependent and pharmacokinetic effects in the RIF-1 tumor
model. Cancer Res 1994;54:5380.
52. Isonishi S, Jekunen AP, Hom DK, et al. Modulation of cisplatin sensitivity and growth rate of an ovarian carcinoma cell line by bombesin and tumor necrosis factor-alpha. J Clin Invest
1992;90:1436.
53. Shi Y, Frankel A, Radvanyi L, et al. Rapamycin enhances apoptosis and increases sensitivity to cisplatin in vitro. Cancer Res 1995;55:1982.
54. Sklar M. Increased resistance to cis-diamminedichloro platinum (II) in NIH3T3 cells transformed by ras oncogenes. Cancer Res 1988;48:793.
55. Isonishi S, Hom DK, Thiebaut FB, et al. Expression of the c-Ha-ras oncogene in mouse NIH 3T3 cells induces resistance to cisplatin. Cancer Res 1991;51:5903.
56. Chapman RS, Whetton AD, Chresta CM, Dive C. Characterization of drug resistance mediated via the suppression of apoptosis by Abelson protein tyrosine kinase. Mol Pharmacol 1995;48:334.
57. Benz CC, Scott GK, Sarup JC, et al. Estrogen-dependent, tamoxifen-resistant tumorigenic growth of MCF-7 cells transfected with HER2/neu. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1993;24:85.
58. Ip YT, Davis RJ. Signal transduction by the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)from inflammation to development. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1998;10:205.
59. Zanke B, Boudreau K, Rubie E, et al. The stress-activated protein kinase pathway mediates cell death following injury induced by cis-platinum, UV irradiation or heat. Curr Biol 1996;6:606.
60. Sanchez-Perez I, Murguia J, Perona R. Cisplatin induces a persistent activation of JNK that is related to cell death. Oncogene 1998;16:533.
61. Jarpe M, Widmann C, Knall C, et al. Anti-apoptotic versus pro-apoptotic signal transduction: checkpoints and stop signs along the road to death. Oncogene 1998;17:1475.
62. Chen Z, Seimiya H, Naito M, et al. ASK1 mediates apoptotic cell death induced by genotoxic stress. Oncogene 1999;18:173.
63. Johnson S, Ferry K, Hamilton T. Recent insights into platinum drug resistance in cancer. Drug Resistance Updates 1998;1:243.
64. Gately DP, Howell SB. Cellular accumulation of the anticancer agent cisplatin: a review. Br J Cancer 1993;67:1171.
65. Shen DW, Pastan I, Gottesman M. Cross-resistance to methotrexate and metals in human cisplatin-resistant cell lines results from a pleiotropic defect in accumulation of these compounds
associated with reduced plasma membrane binding proteins. Cancer Res 1998;58:268.
66. Borst P, Kool M, Evers R. Do cMOAT (MRP2), other MRP homologues, and LRP play a role in MDR? Semin Cancer Biol 1997;8:205.
67. Taniguchi K, Wada M, Kohno K, et al. A human canalicular multispecific organic anion transporter (cMOAT) gene is overexpressed in cisplatin-resistant human cancer cell lines with decreased
drug accumulation. Cancer Res 1996;56:4124.
68. Koike K, Kawabe T, Tanaka T, et al. A canalicular multispecific organic anion transporter (cMOAT) antisense cDNA enhances drug sensitivity in human hepatic cancer cells. Cancer Res
1997;57:5475.
69. Kool M, de Haas M, Scheffer G, et al. Analysis of expression of cMOAT (MRP2), MRP3, MRP4, and MRP5, homologues of the multidrug resistanceassociated protein gene (MRP1), in human
cancer cell lines. Cancer Res 1997;57:3537.
70. Arts H, Katsaros D, Vries ED, et al. Drug resistanceassociated markers P-glycoprotein, multidrug resistanceassociated protein 1, multidrug resistanceassociated protein 2, and lung resistance
protein as prognostic factors in ovarian carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:2798.
71. Godwin A, Meister A, O'Dwyer P, et al. High resistance to cisplatin in human ovarian cancer cell lines is associated with marked increase in glutathione synthesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1992;89:3070.

72. Hosking LK, Whelan RDH, Shellard SA, Bedford P, Hill BT. An evaluation of the role of glutathione and its associated enzymes in the expression of differential sensitivities to antitumor agents
shown by a range of human tumour cell lines. Biochem Pharmacol 1990;40:1833.
73. Mistry P, Kelland L, Abel G, Sidhar S, Harrap K. The relationships between glutathione, glutathione-S-transferase and cytotoxicity of platinum drugs and melphalan in eight human ovarian
carcinoma cell lines. Br J Cancer 1991;64:215.
74. Britten RA, Green JA, Broughton C, et al. The relationship between nuclear glutathione levels and resistance to melphalan in human ovarian tumour cells. Biochem Pharmacol 1991;41:647.
75. Hamilton T, Winker M, Louie K, et al. Augmentation of Adriamycin, melphalan and cisplatin cytotoxicity in drug-resistant and -sensitive human ovarian cancer cell lines by buthionine
sulfoximine mediated glutathione depletion. Biochem Pharmacol 1985;34:2583.
76. Smith E, Brock AP. An in vitro study comparing the cytotoxicity of three platinum complexes with regard to the effect of thiol depletion. Br J Cancer 1988;57:548.
77. Dedon P, Borch R. Characterization of the reactions of platinum antitumor agents with biologic and nonbiologic sulfur-containing nucleophiles. Biochem Pharmacol 1987;36:1955.
78. Ishikawa T, Ali-Osman F. Glutathione-associated cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) metabolism and ATP-dependent efflux from leukemia cells. J Biol Chem 1993;268:20116.
79. Mistry P, Loh S, Kelland L, Harrap K. Effect of buthionine sulfoximine on PtII and PtIV drug accumulation and the formation of glutathione conjugates in human ovarian carcinoma cell lines. Int
J Cancer 1993;55:848.
80. Eastman A. Cross-linking of glutathione to DNA by cancer chemotherapeutic platinum coordination complexes. Chem Biol Interact 1987;61:241.
81. Miyazaki M, Kohno K, Saburi Y, et al. Drug resistance to cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) in Chinese hamster ovary cell lines by transfection with glutathione S-transferase pi gene. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 1990;166:1358.
82. Nakagawa K, Saijo N, Tsuchida S, et al. Glutathione S-transferase p as a determinant of drug resistance in transfectant cell lines. J Biol Chem 1990;265:4296.
83. Hrubisko M, McGown AT, Fox BW. The role of metallothionein, glutathione, glutathione S-transferases and DNA repair in resistance to platinum drugs in a series of L1210 cell lines made
resistant to anticancer platinum agents. Biochem Pharmacol 1993;45:253.
84. Pattanaik A, Bachowski G, Laib J, et al. Properties of the reaction of cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum(II) with metallothionein. J Biol Chem 1992;267:16121.
85. Kelley S, Basu A, Teicher B, et al. Overexpression of metallothionein confers resistance to anticancer drugs. Science 1988;241:1813.
86. Kondo Y, Woo ES, Michalska AE, Choo KHA, Lazo JS. Metallothionein null cells have increased sensitivity to anticancer drugs. Cancer Res 1995;55:2021.
87. Kojima M, Kikkawa F, Oguchi H, et al. Sensitisation of human ovarian carcinoma cells to cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) by amphotericin B in vitro and in vivo. Eur J Cancer 1994;30A:773.
88. Siu L, Banerjee D, Khurana F, et al. The prognostic role of p53, metallothionein, P-glycoprotein, and MIB-1 in muscle-invasive urothelial transitional cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res
1998;4:559.
89. Wood D, Klein E, Fair W, Chaganti R. Metallothionein gene expression in bladder cancer exposed to cisplatin. Mod Pathol 1993;6:33.
90. Koberle B, Grimaldi K, Sunters A, et al. DNA repair capacity and cisplatin sensitivity of human testis tumour cells. Int J Cancer 1997;70:551.
91. Johnson S, Perez R, Godwin A, et al. Role of platinum-DNA adduct formation and removal in cisplatin resistance in human ovarian cancer cell lines. Biochem Pharmacol 1994;47:689.
92. Johnson S, Swiggard P, Handel L, et al. Relationship between platinum-DNA adduct formation and removal and cisplatin cytotoxicity in cisplatin-sensitive and -resistant human ovarian cancer
cells. Cancer Res 1994;54:5911.
93. Yen L, Woo A, Christopoulopoulos G, et al. Enhanced host cell reactivation capacity and expression of DNA repair genes in human breast cancer cells resistant to bi-functional alkylating
agents. Mutat Res 1995;337:179.
94. Ali-Osman F, Berger M, Rairkar A, Stein D. Enhanced repair of a cisplatin-damaged reporter chloramphenicol-O-acetyltransferase gene and altered activities of DNA polymerases a and b, and
DNA ligase in cells of a human malignant glioma following in vivo cisplatin therapy. J Cell Biochem 1994;54:11.
95. Eastman A, Schulte N. Enhanced DNA repair as a mechanism of resistance to cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II). Biochemistry 1988;27:4730.
96. Wood R. Nucleotide excision repair in mammalian cells. J Biol Chem 1997;272:23465.
97. Ferry K, Hamilton T, Johnson S. Increased nucleotide excision repair in cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer cells: role of ERCC1-XPF. Biochem Pharmacol 2000;60:1305.
98. Dabholkar M, Vionnet J, Bostick-Bruton F, Yu J, Reed E. Messenger RNA levels of XPAC and ERCC1 in ovarian cancer tissue correlate with response to platinum-based chemotherapy. J Clin
Invest 1994;94:703.
99. Chu G, Chang E. Cisplatin-resistant cells express increased levels of a factor that recognizes damaged DNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:3324.
100. Mu D, Park CH, Matsunaga T, et al. Reconstitution of human DNA repair excision nuclease in a highly defined system. J Biol Chem 1995;270:2415.
101. Hoffmann JS, Pillaire MJ, Maga G, et al. DNA polymerase beta bypasses in vitro a single d(GpG)-cisplatin adduct placed on codon 13 of the HRAS gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1995;92:5356.
102. Masuda H, Tanaka T, Matsuda H, Kusaba I. Increased removal of DNA-bound platinum in a human ovarian cancer cell line resistant to cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II). Cancer Res
1990;50:1863.
103. Katz E, Andrews P, Howell S. The effect of DNA polymerase inhibitors on the cytotoxicity of cisplatin in human ovarian carcinoma cells. Cancer Commun 1990;2:159.
104. Dempke WCM, Shellard SA, Fichtinger-Schepman AMJ, Hill BT. Lack of significant modulation of the formation and removal of platinum-DNA adducts by aphidicolin glycinate in two
logarithmically growing ovarian tumour cell lines in vitro. Carcinogenesis 1991;12:525.
105. O'Dwyer P, Moyer J, Suffness M, et al. Antitumor activity and biochemical effects of aphidicolin glycinate (NSC 303812) alone and in combination with cisplatin in vivo. Cancer Res
1994;54:724.
106. Albain K, Swinnen L, Erickson L, et al. Cytotoxic synergy of cisplatin with concurrent hydroxyurea and cytarabine: summary of an in vitro model and initial clinical pilot experience. Semin Oncol
1992;19:102.
107. Alaoui-Jamali M, Loubaba BB, Robyn S, Tapiero H, Batist G. Effect of DNA-repair-enzyme modulators on cytotoxicity of L-phenylalanine mustard and cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) in
mammary carcinoma cells resistant to alkylating agents. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1994;34:153.
108. Peters GJ, Bergman AM, Ruiz van Haperen VW, Veerman G, Kuiper CM. Interaction between cisplatin and gemcitabine in vitro and in vivo. Semin Oncol 1995;22:72.
109. Li L, Keatin M, Plunkett W, Yang LY. Fludarabine-mediated repair inhibition of cisplatin-induced DNA lesions in human chronic myelogenous leukemia-blast crisis K562 cells: induction of
synergistic cytotoxicity independent of reversal of apoptosis resistance. Mol Pharm 1997;52:798.
110. Johnson S, Laub P, Beesley J, Ozols R, Hamilton T. Increased platinum-DNA damage tolerance is associated with cisplatin resistance and cross-resistance to various chemotherapeutic agents
in unrelated human ovarian cancer cell lines. Cancer Res 1997;57:850.
111. Aebi S, Kurdi-Haidar B, Gordon R, et al. Loss of DNA mismatch repair in acquired resistance to cisplatin. Cancer Res 1996;56:3087.
112. Duckett D, Drummond J, Murchie A, et al. Human MutSalpha recognizes damaged DNA base pairs containing O6-methylguanine, O4-methylthymine, or the cisplatin-d(GpG)adduct. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:6443.
113. Karran P, Bignami M. DNA damage tolerance, mismatch repair and genome instability. Bioessays 1994;16:833.
114. Mamenta E, Poma E, Kaufmann W, et al. Enhanced replicative bypass of platinum-DNA adducts in cisplatin-resistant human ovarian carcinoma cell lines. Cancer Res 1994;54:3500.
115. Miyashita T, Reed JC. Bcl-2 oncoprotein blocks chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in a human leukemia cell line. Blood 1993;81:151.
116. Minn A, Rudin C, Boise L, Thompson C. Expression of Bcl-x l can confer a multidrug resistance phenotype. Blood 1995;86:1903.
117. Kharbanda S, Saxena S, Yoshida K, et al. Translocation of SAPK/JNK to mitochondria and interaction with Bcl-x( L) in response to DNA damage. J Biol Chem 2000;275:322.
118. Duffull S, Robinson B. Clinical pharmacokinetics and dose optimisation of carboplatin. Clin Pharmacokinet 1997;33:161.
119. van der Vijgh W. Clinical pharmacokinetics of carboplatin. Clin Pharmacokinet 1991;21:242.
120. Extra J, Marty M, Brienza S, Misset J. Pharmacokinetics and safety profile of oxaliplatin. Semin Oncol 1998;25:13.
121. DeConti R, Toftness B, Lange R, Creasey W. Clinical and pharmacological studies with cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II). Cancer Res 1973;33:1310.
122. Himmelstein K, Patton T, Belt R, et al. Clinical kinetics on intact cisplatin and some related species. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1981;29:658.
123. Vermorken J, van der Vijgh WVD, Klein I, et al. Pharmacokinetics of free and total platinum species after short-term infusion of cisplatin. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:505.
124. Gormley P, Bull J, LeRoy A, Cysyk R. Kinetics of cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1979;25:351.
125. Belt R, Himmelstein K, Patton T, et al. Pharmacokinetics of non-protein-bound platinum species following administration of cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum(II). Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:1515.
126. Casper E, Kelsen D, Alcock N, Young C. Platinum concentrations in bile and plasma following rapid and 6-hour infusions of cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum(II). Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:2023.
127. Harland S, Newell D, Siddik Z, et al. Pharmacokinetics of cis-diammine-1,1-cyclobutane dicarboxylate platinum(II) in patients with normal and impaired renal function. Cancer Res
1984;44:1693.
128. Calvert A, Newell D, Gumbrell L, et al. Carboplatin dosage: prospective evaluation of a simple formula based on renal function. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1748.
129. Gamelin E, Bouil A, Boisdron-Celle M, et al. Cumulative pharmacokinetic study of oxaliplatin, administered every three weeks, combined with 5-fluorouracil in colorectal cancer patients. Clin
Cancer Res 1997;3:891.
130. Egorin M, Echo DV, Olman E, et al. Prospective validation of a pharmacologically based dosing scheme for the cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) analogue
diamminecyclobutanedicarboxylatoplatinum. Cancer Res 1985;45:6502.
131. Chatelut E, Canal P, Brunner V, et al. Prediction of carboplatin clearance from standard morphological and biological patient characteristics. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:573.
132. Jodrell D, Egorin M, Canetta R, et al. Relationships between carboplatin exposure and tumor response and toxicity in patients with ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:520.
133. Reyno L, Egorin M, Canetta R, et al. Impact of cyclophosphamide on relationships between carboplatin exposure and response or toxicity when used in the treatment of advanced ovarian
cancer. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1156.
134. O'Dwyer P, Hamilton T, Yao K, Ozols R, Gallo J. Cellular pharmacodynamics of anticancer drugs. In: Schilsky R, Milano G, Ratain M, eds. Cancer pharmacology. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc,
1996:329.
135. Ma J, Verweij J, Planting A, et al. Current sample handling methods for measurement of platinum-DNA adducts in leucocytes in man lead to discrepant results in DNA adduct levels and DNA
repair. Br J Cancer 1995;71:512.
136. Schellens J, Ma J, Planting A, et al. Relationship between the exposure to cisplatin, DNA-adduct formation in leucocytes and tumour response in patients with solid tumours. Br J Cancer
1996;73:1569.
137. Loehrer P, Einhorn L. Drugs five years later. Cisplatin. Ann Intern Med 1984;100:704.
138. Ozols R, Corden B, Jacob J, et al. High-dose cisplatin in hypertonic saline. Ann Intern Med 1984;100:19.
139. Howell S, Pfeifle C, Wung W, Olshen R. Intraperitoneal cis-diamminedichloroplatinum with systemic thiosulfate protection. Cancer Res 1983;43:1426.
140. Alberts D, Liu P, Hannigan E, et al. Intraperitoneal cisplatin plus intravenous cyclophosphamide versus intravenous cisplatin plus intravenous cyclophosphamide for stage III ovarian cancer. N
Engl J Med 1996;335:1950.
141. Solomon B, Soulen M, Baum R, et al. Chemoembolization of hepatocellular carcinoma with cisplatin, doxorubicin, mitomycin-C, ethiodol, and polyvinyl alcohol: prospective evaluation of
response and survival in a U.S. population. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1999;10: 793.
142. Evans B, Raju K, Calvert A, Harland S, Wiltshaw E. Phase II study of JM8, a new platinum analog, in advanced ovarian carcinoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:997.
143. Ozols R, Behrens B, Ostchega Y, Young R. High dose cisplatin and high dose carboplatin in refractory ovarian cancer. Cancer Treat Rev 1985;12:59.
144. Schilder R, Johnson S, Gallo J, et al. Phase I trial of multiple cycles of high-dose chemotherapy supported by autologous peripheral-blood stem cells. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2198.
145. Levi F, Giacchetti S, Adam R, et al. Chronomodulation of chemotherapy against metastatic colorectal cancer. International Organization for Cancer Chronotherapy. Eur J Cancer
1995;31A:1264.
146. McMahon S, Priestley J. Peripheral neuropathies and neurotrophic factors: animal models and clinical perspectives. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1995;5:616.
147. Langer C, Leighton J, Comis R, et al. Paclitaxel and carboplatin in combination in the treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a phase II toxicity, response, and survival analysis. J
Clin Oncol 1995;13:1860.
148. Extra J, Espie M, Calvo F, et al. Phase I study of oxaliplatin in patients with advanced cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1990;25:299.
149. Brienza S, Vignoud J, Itzhaki M, Krikorian A. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:209.

SECTION 19.5 Antimetabolites
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 19.5
Antimetabolites
EDWARD CHU
AUGUSTO C. MOTA
MIKLOS C. FOGARASI
Methotrexate
Mechanism of Action
Mechanisms of Resistance
Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacokinetics
Schedules of Administration
Toxicity
New Antifolates
Trimetrexate
Tomudex
Other Antifolates
5-Fluoropyrimidines
Strategies to Permit Oral Administration of Fluoropyrimidines
Tegafur, Uracil, 5-Fluorouracil
Capecitabine (Xeloda)
S1
5-Ethynyluracil
Cytarabine
Gemcitabine
6-Thiopurines
6-Thioguanine
Fludarabine
Cladribine
2'-Deoxycoformycin
Chapter References

METHOTREXATE
Aminopterin was the first antimetabolite to demonstrate clinical activity in the treatment of patients with malignancy. This antifolate analogue was used to induce
remissions in children with acute leukemia in the 1940s. 1 Aminopterin has since been replaced by methotrexate (MTX), the 4-amino, 10-methyl analogue of folic acid.
MTX remains the most widely used antifolate in cancer chemotherapy, with documented activity against a wide range of human malignancies, including leukemia,
breast cancer, colorectal cancer, head and neck cancer, lymphoma, osteogenic sarcoma, urothelial cancer, and choriocarcinoma. Antifolates have also been used to
treat a host of nonmalignant disorders, including psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, graft-versus-host disease, bacterial and plasmodial infections, and parasitic infections
associated with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. 2 This class of agents represents the best-characterized and most versatile of all chemotherapeutic drugs in
current clinical use.
MECHANISM OF ACTION
MTX is a tight-binding inhibitor of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), a critical enzyme in folate metabolism ( Fig. 19.5-1).2 The importance of DHFR stems from its role in
maintaining the intracellular folate pool in its fully reduced form as tetrahydrofolates. These compounds serve as one-carbon carriers required for the synthesis of
thymidine-5'-monophosphate (thymidylate), purine nucleotides, and certain amino acids. Thymidylate synthase (TS) catalyzes the formation of
thymidine-5'-monophosphate from 2'-deoxyuridine 5'monophosphate (deoxyuridylate, dUMP) ( Fig. 19.5-2). This reaction uses 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate as a
methyl donor and results in the oxidation of the reduced folate to dihydrofolate. The activity of the TS reaction thus creates the requirement for DHFR to maintain the
intracellular reduced folate pool needed for one-carbon transfer reactions. The reduced folate, 10-formyltetrahydrofolate, serves as a substrate for two
folate-dependent enzymes of de novo purine synthesis, glycinamide ribonucleotide (GAR) transformylase and aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide
transformylase. An intact DHFR pathway is therefore necessary for continued de novo thymidylate and purine nucleotide biosynthesis.

FIGURE 19.5-1. Sites of action of methotrexate (MTX), its polyglutamated metabolites [MTX(Glu n)], and folate by-products of the inhibition of dihydrofolate reductase,
including dihydrofolate (FH 2) and 10-formyl-dihydrofolate (10-CHO-FH 2). Also shown are 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (CH 2FH4), the folate cofactor required for
thymidylate synthesis, and 10-formyltetrahydrofolate (10-CHO-FH 4), the required cofactor for de novo purine synthesis. AICAR, aminoimidazole carboxamide
ribonucleotide transformylase; AMP, adenosine monophosphate; dTMP, thymidylate; dUMP, deoxyuridylate; GAR, glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase; GMP,
guanine monophosphate; IMP, inosine monophosphate.

FIGURE 19.5-2. The thymidylate synthase enzyme pathway. dTDP, thymidine diphosphate; dTMP, thymidylate; dTTP, thymidine triphosphate; dUMP, deoxyuridylate;
FdUMP, 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine monophosphate.

The precise mechanism by which MTX produces metabolic inhibition remains a subject of ongoing debate. The long-held view has been that inhibition of DHFR
results in an accumulation of oxidized folates at the expense of reduced folates owing to the continued synthetic function of TS. Ultimate depletion of the required
reduced folates would result in cessation of de novo thymidylate and purine biosynthesis as well as inhibition of protein synthesis. However, several investigators
have demonstrated that after exposure of malignant cells to inhibitory concentrations of MTX, intracellular reduced folates are depleted by only 50% to 70%, a level
presumably insufficient to account for the observed inhibition of DNA synthesis. 2,3 Additional metabolic effects of MTX result from its transformation to polyglutamate
forms (see Fig. 19.5-1). MTX and physiologic folate polyglutamates are formed by the enzyme folylpolyglutamyl synthetase, which adds up to five to seven glutamyl
groups in a g-peptide linkage. Polyglutamation is a time- and concentration-dependent process that occurs in tumor cells and, to a lesser extent, in normal tissues. 4
These polyglutamate metabolites have a prolonged intracellular half-life and allow for prolonged drug action in malignant cells. The relative difference in
polyglutamate formation in normal versus malignant cells may account for the selective activity of the drug. As much as 80% of MTX found in malignant tissues is in
the polyglutamated forms, and these metabolites are potent, direct inhibitors of several folate-dependent enzymes, including DHFR, TS, and aminoimidazole
carboxamide ribonucleotide and GAR transformylases. 1,2 and 3,5,6 Thus, metabolic inhibition resulting from MTX exposure is a multifactorial process and may depend on
several factors, including partial depletion of reduced folates and direct inhibition of folate-dependent enzymes by the polyglutamates of both MTX and dihydrofolate
that accumulate after inhibition of DHFR.
The precise mechanism by which MTX induces cytotoxicity remains an area of continued investigation. MTX-induced depletion of thymidine triphosphate (dTTP) and
purine nucleotides interferes with the cellular capacity to repair DNA, resulting in DNA strand breaks. 7,8 Furthermore, the need for repair is accentuated by an
intracellular accumulation of dUMP resulting from the inhibitory effects of MTX on TS. dUMP can be converted to the triphosphate nucleotide form (dUTP), which is
then incorporated into DNA, resulting in inhibition of chain elongation and DNA synthesis. Excision repair of the DNA containing these misincorporated dUTP moieties
by the enzyme uracil DNA glycosylase results in further DNA fragmentation.
Novel mechanisms by which MTX may exert its cytotoxic action have been described. Treatment with MTX results in a significant dose-dependent reduction in
methionine synthase enzyme activity.9,10 This enzyme catalyzes the folate-dependent reaction in which 5-methyltetrahydrofolate serves as a critical one-carbon carrier
methyl donor and mediates the conversion of homocysteine to methionine. Thus, inhibition of methionine synthase leads to inhibition of a number of key downstream
pathways, including transmethylation reactions, polyamine biosynthesis, protein synthesis, or all three. 11 Treatment of cultured Ehrlich ascites tumor cells with MTX
resulted in up to a 3.5-fold increase in 5'-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP) levels, which was associated with a significant suppression in the rate of glucose
transport. Coadministration of MTX and hypoxanthine completely protected against the growth-inhibitory action of MTX and reversed the effect on PRPP production
and on the rate of glucose transport. 12 Thus, MTX may exert its anticancer effect, in part, through inhibition of critical glucose transport mechanisms, thereby starving
the cancer cell of essential nutrients required to maintain cellular metabolism and growth.
MTX is most active against rapidly proliferating cells, as its cytotoxic effects occur primarily during the S phase of the cell cycle. During longer periods of drug
exposure, a higher fraction of cells can enter the S phase of the cell cycle, resulting in greater cell kill. In addition, MTX polyglutamate formation is substantially
enhanced with longer periods of drug exposure, thereby increasing cytotoxicity. The cytotoxic effects of MTX are also greater with increasing drug concentrations.
Therefore, MTX cytotoxicity is highly dependent on the absolute drug concentration and the duration of drug exposure.
MTX enters cells by the same active transport mechanisms used by physiologic reduced folates. In general, intracellular drug concentrations reach steady state in
less than 30 minutes. Folate transport is a complex process with at least two carrier-mediated, energy-dependent mechanisms existing in mammalian cells. The first is
the classic reduced folate carrier (RFC) system that has a relatively low affinity for MTX and reduced folates such as leucovorin (LV), with affinity constants in the
micromolar range. 2,13,14,15,16 and 17 The RFC system has a large capacity and is primarily responsible for transport of MTX into cells at pharmacologic concentrations.
The human RFC gene has been mapped to the long arm of chromosome 1, and it encodes a protein with a predicted molecular weight of 59 to 68 kD.
A second folate transport system involves a high-affinity, membrane-bound folate receptor-binding protein with affinity constants for reduced folates and folic acid in
the nanomolar range. 18,19 MTX is a relatively poor substrate for this folate-binding protein, and its affinity is 10- to 30-fold lower than that of physiologic reduced
folates. The human folate receptor protein (FR) is a 38- to 40-kD glycoprotein bound to the cellular membrane via a C-terminal, glycosylphosphatidylinositol tail. 20 It is
expressed on the surface of various normal tissues, including human placenta, choroid plexus, renal tubules, and fallopian tubes. Of note, this receptor is also highly
expressed on the surface of a number of epithelial tumors, including ovarian cancer, but not on normal ovarian tissue, making it an attractive target for
antigen-directed anticancer therapies. 21 Alterations in the tissue expression of FR can be induced by changes in the exogenous folate concentration or by alteration in
normal physiology such as in pregnancy. At least three different isoforms of the human FR have been described to date, and they are classified as FR-a, FR-b, and
FR-g.17,22 These isoforms have unique folate-binding affinities and variable expression in specific tissues. FR-a is highly expressed in human epithelial tissues and in
some cancers such as ovarian cancer, whereas FR-b is expressed in human placenta and other nonepithelial tissues. Although the FR-a and FR-b isoforms share
70% to 80% amino acid sequence homology, they differ significantly in their respective affinities and stereospecificities for reduced folates. Human FR-g lacks a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol tail, and this isoform most likely represents a secretory protein.
An additional MTX transport system has been described in murine L1210 leukemic cells that is completely distinct from either the RFC or the FR systems. 23,24 Further
studies are under way to characterize the role of this transporter as a determinant of MTX cytotoxicity. It is likely that the relative function of each of these distinct
transport systems depends on the extracellular folate concentration, and their expression may vary significantly among different cell lines. Their interrelationship and
role in MTX transport remains an active area of research. Nonclassic antifolate compounds, such as trimetrexate and trimethoprim, do not rely on specific transport
systems for cellular entry. Such analogues are active against various malignant cell lines resistant to MTX on the basis of decreased transport capacity. In addition to
these transport systems, two energy-dependent MTX efflux transport systems have been described in murine leukemic L1210 cells using inside out membrane
vesicles.25 These two systems appear to be functionally distinct and sensitive to a different range of chemical inhibitors. The major efflux transporter is identical to a
glutathione conjugate membrane pump and accounts for nearly 70% of MTX efflux.
Reduced folates, such as 5-formyltetrahydrofolate (LV), prevent, rescue, or both prevent and rescue cells from the toxic effects of MTX. The predominant species of
reduced folate in human plasma, 5-methyltetrahydrofolate, circulates with levels in the range of 5 to 50 n M, a concentration inadequate to rescue cells. Administration
of appropriate doses of LV after high-dose MTX therapy can prevent toxicity to the bone marrow and gastrointestinal epithelium, the two most rapidly dividing cells in
the body. The dose of LV required to rescue normal tissues is dependent on the antifolate concentration at the time of antidote administration. 26 The competitive
nature of this rescue suggests that LV does more than simply replete intracellular reduced folate pools. LV is converted to intracellular folates that can compete with
both MTX and dihydrofolate polyglutamates to overcome the inhibition of TS and de novo purine synthesis. In addition, MTX and reduced folates compete with one
another for transport into cells and for subsequent intracellular polyglutamation. Presumably, rescue from MTX-associated metabolic inhibition occurs only when
adequate levels of dihydrofolate have accumulated after LV administration. The administration of exogenous thymidine may also be used to decrease MTX toxicity.
This approach appears to be less effective than LV, as inhibition of the de novo purine pathway by MTX remains unaffected by its use. Administration of the
recombinant bacterial enzyme carboxypeptidase G 2, which hydrolyzes MTX to inactive metabolites, is currently undergoing clinical testing as an alternative strategy to
rescue from high-dose MTX therapy.27
MECHANISMS OF RESISTANCE
The development of cellular resistance to MTX remains a major obstacle to its effective clinical use. In experimental systems, resistance to antifolates may result from
several mechanisms, including an alteration in antifolate transport due to either a defect in the RFC or FR systems, 28,29,30 and 31 decreased capacity to polyglutamate
MTX through either decreased expression of folylpolyglutamyl synthetase or increased expression of the catabolic enzyme gamma-glutamyl hydrolase, 32,33,34 and 35 and
alterations in the target enzyme DHFR through either increased expression of the wild-type protein or overexpression of a mutant protein with reduced binding affinity
for MTX.2,36,37
Amplification of the DHFR gene is one of the most common forms of MTX resistance observed in experimental systems. 2 The amplified gene may be stably integrated
into chromosomal DNA in the form of a homogeneously staining region, or it may exist in extrachromosomal pieces of DNA known as double-minute chromosomes.38
Homogeneously staining region–mediated gene amplification is associated with the development of stable resistance to MTX. In contrast, double-minute
chromosomes are unequally distributed during cell division, and, in the absence of continued selective pressure of MTX, cells eventually revert to a sensitive
phenotype with wild-type levels of DHFR expression. It was shown that resistant human leukemic HL-60 cells coamplify both DHFR and hMSH3, the human mutS

homologue 3 gene. 39 Overproduction of hMSH3 results in virtually complete sequestration of the nuclear hMSH2 mismatch repair (MMR) protein. The net effect of this
protein-protein interaction is a marked reduction in the efficiency of base-base MMR. As MMR deficiency has been implicated as a potential mechanism of resistance
to the platinum analogues cisplatin and carboplatin, DNA methylating agents, and doxorubicin (Adriamycin), it is conceivable that this same resistance phenotype may
contribute to the development of resistance to MTX and other antifolate analogues.
An alternative mechanism of resistance has been ascribed to mutations that result in a DHFR protein product with an altered binding affinity for MTX. There is
evidence that naturally occurring DHFR alleles with differing affinities to MTX may exist in cells and provide a mechanism for the rapid emergence of MTX
resistance.40 In several in vitro experimental model systems, the levels of DHFR enzyme activity acutely increase after exposure to MTX, other antifolate analogue
compounds, or both. 41,42 This acute induction of DHFR in response to drug exposure is mediated, in part, by a translational regulatory mechanism. 43 DHFR protein, in
its unbound or free state, is capable of specifically repressing the translation of its own messenger RNA (mRNA). However, when DHFR protein is bound to an
antifolate inhibitor, it is unable to repress DHFR mRNA translation, and the rate of new DHFR protein synthesis increases. 43,44 Thus, induction of DHFR may represent
a clinically relevant mechanism for the acute development of cellular drug resistance.
Apoptosis, the process of programmed cell death, is a critical event during normal development and in the pathogenesis of several disease states, including cancer,
autoimmune disorders, viral infection, and neurodegenerative diseases. Bcl-2 can repress cell death triggered by a wide array of stimuli, including chemotherapy and
gamma-irradiation. Bcl-XL, a structural homologue of Bcl-2, has also been shown to provide protection against a wide range of anticancer agents. These prosurvival
proteins presumably act at some common final step to prevent or overcome the cell death pathway induced by various anticancer agents. It has been shown that
murine lymphoid FL5.12 cells transduced with Bcl-XL as compared with another antiapoptotic gene Bcl-2, become resistant to the cytotoxic effects of MTX. 45 Thus,
the expression of Bcl-XL may represent an important indicator for predicting chemosensitivity to MTX and other antifolate analogues.
Despite many years of active investigation, the relative contribution of each of these mechanisms as a determinant of MTX resistance remains unclear. However,
there is growing evidence to support the concept that the emergence of MTX resistance, in the clinical setting, is a multifactorial process. In fact, DHFR gene
amplification, defective transport, and decreased polyglutamate formation have all been observed in clinical specimens taken from MTX-resistant patients. 46,47,48 and 49
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY AND PHARMACOKINETICS
Accurate monitoring of MTX concentrations in plasma is essential for the safe and optimal use of this agent in cancer chemotherapy, particularly with high-dose
regimens. At least four methods are presently available for the clinical monitoring of MTX drug levels, including the DHFR enzyme inhibition assay, a competitive
protein-binding assay, a fluorescence-polarization radioimmunoassay technique, and an enzyme-multiplied immunoassay system. 2
The absorption of oral MTX is saturable and erratic at higher doses, such that oral doses should be kept to less than 25 mg/m 2. The drug is usually administered
intravenously. The volume of distribution of MTX approaches that of total body water, and approximately 60% of the drug is bound to serum albumin at pharmacologic
drug concentrations. 2 Although plasma pharmacokinetics are variable, MTX metabolism generally follows a three-phase pattern. The initial distribution phase, which
lasts for only a few minutes, is followed by a second phase lasting 12 to 24 hours, during which time the drug is eliminated with a half-life of 2 to 3 hours. The final
phase of drug clearance has a half-life of 8 to 10 hours. The last two phases of drug elimination are considerably lengthened in patients with renal dysfunction. There
is substantial evidence that a more rapid systemic clearance of drug is associated with a high risk of relapse in children receiving MTX for maintenance therapy of
acute lymphocytic leukemia.
The distribution of MTX into third-space fluid collections, such as pleural effusions and ascitic fluid, can substantially alter MTX pharmacokinetics. The slow release of
accumulated MTX from these third spaces over time prolongs the terminal half-life of the drug, leading to potentially increased clinical toxicity. 50 Although no strict
guidelines exist for the treatment of patients with ascites or pleural effusions, it is advisable to evacuate these fluid collections before treatment and monitor plasma
drug concentrations closely. In addition, patients with bladder cancer who have undergone cystectomy and ileal conduit loop diversion may experience a significant
increase in toxicity secondary to MTX treatment. 51 Thus, caution should be given when beginning therapy with MTX in this particular subset of patients.
Elimination of MTX occurs primarily through renal excretion. MTX is filtered by the glomerulus and is actively secreted in the proximal tubule. Renal clearance usually
equals or exceeds creatinine clearance. However, rates of drug clearance may vary widely, and they do not precisely parallel renal function. Renal excretion of MTX
is inhibited by probenecid, penicillins, cephalosporins, aspirin, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. 2 The combination of MTX and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs has been associated with severe toxicity in patients receiving high-dose MTX. Patients with impaired renal function (creatinine clearance less than 60 mL/min)
should not be treated with high-dose MTX. Moreover, standard doses of MTX should be reduced in proportion to reductions in creatinine clearance.
The introduction of high-dose MTX regimens led to the identification of at least two MTX metabolites. 7-Hydroxymethotrexate (7-OH-MTX) constitutes 20% to 46% of
drug excreted in urine from 12 to 24 hours after the start of a high-dose infusion. It is formed through the action of aldehyde oxidase in the liver and is a weak inhibitor
of DHFR. 7-OH-MTX is a substrate for folylpolyglutamyl synthetase, and the resulting polyglutamate metabolites are inhibitors of the folate-dependent enzymes TS
and aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide transformylase, with a potency similar to that of MTX polyglutamates. 52 A second metabolite, 2,4 diamino-N10-methyl
pteroic acid (DAMPA), a product of bacterial degradation of MTX in the gut lumen, is inactive and constitutes approximately 25% of the excreted drug at 24 to 48
hours after drug infusion. The exact role of these metabolites in producing MTX toxicity or enhancing therapeutic activity remains uncertain.
Biliary excretion of MTX represents approximately 10% of overall MTX drug clearance. 53 However, in the presence of renal dysfunction, enterohepatic circulation may
represent an important pathway of drug elimination. Most MTX excreted in bile is reabsorbed as intact drug, but an undefined fraction is converted by intestinal flora to
DAMPA. Intestinal binding of drug with oral charcoal or the anion-exchange resin cholestyramine enhances nonrenal drug excretion. Given the relatively minor role of
biliary excretion in drug elimination, no adjustments in MTX dose are necessary for patients with hepatic dysfunction.
SCHEDULES OF ADMINISTRATION
The safe use of high-dose MTX with LV rescue requires a thorough understanding of MTX pharmacokinetics. High-dose MTX therapy is used in the treatment of
high-grade lymphomas, osteogenic sarcoma, and acute leukemia. These regimens use otherwise lethal infusions of MTX given over 6 to 42 hours in doses of 500
mg/m2 or higher. High-dose MTX can be safely administered to patients provided that careful attention is paid to intravenous fluid hydration, urinary alkalinization,
plasma drug level monitoring, and adequate administration of LV.
During infusion of high-dose MTX, rapid renal excretion results in high urinary drug concentrations. Urinary MTX concentrations approaching 10 mM exceed solubility,
resulting in intratubular precipitation and acute renal failure with potentially disastrous consequences. This complication can be avoided by vigorous hydration (3 L
fluid/m2/24 hours, beginning 12 hours before infusion and continuing for 36 hours), and urinary alkalinization to increase drug solubility. Administration of MTX should
not begin until urine flow is 100 mL/h and urine pH is 7 or greater, and these parameters should be carefully monitored during the course of therapy. High-dose MTX
therapy should not be used in patients with impaired renal function (creatinine clearance less than 60 mL/min).
Close monitoring of MTX plasma levels is essential for guiding the duration and amount of LV required to prevent severe MTX-associated toxicity. Given the
competitive interaction between MTX and LV, the dose of the rescue agent must be increased in proportion to the plasma concentration of MTX. If the MTX level
exceeds 0.5 µM 48 hours from the start of the infusion, the LV dose may be adjusted to 15, 100, or 200 mg/m 2 every 6 hours for MTX levels of 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 µM,
respectively. Drug levels should be rechecked every 24 hours and the LV dose adjusted until the drug concentration is less than 50 n M. However, clinicians should be
aware that overzealous use of LV may counteract the cytotoxic effects of MTX in tumor cells as well as in host cells. 54 For this reason, it is important to use doses of
LV that are adequate but not excessive, so that normal but not tumor cells will be rescued. In patients with delayed MTX excretion, LV is usually given intravenously,
because its oral bioavailability is decreased at total doses higher than 40 mg.
Despite careful attention to detail, persistent elevations of plasma MTX levels may sometimes occur. Plasma MTX levels higher than 10 µM at 48 hours are poorly
rescued even with high doses of LV. Hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis are ineffective in removing MTX, with clearance rates of only 35 to 40 mL/min. Experimental
approaches to reduce toxic levels of MTX include hemoperfusion over a charcoal column, oral administration of activated charcoal or cholestyramine to increase
enterohepatic drug loss, and intravenous infusion of the degradative enzyme carboxypeptidase G 2.27,55
MTX penetrates poorly into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and CSF levels are 30-fold lower than plasma levels at equilibrium. 56 However, after high-dose MTX

therapy, peak CSF levels greater than the therapeutic threshold of 1 µM can be achieved. Systemic high-dose MTX therapy has been used to prevent meningeal
leukemia and lymphoma. Intrathecal injection of MTX can also be used for prophylaxis. For treatment of meningeal carcinomatosis, injection of MTX through an
indwelling Ommaya reservoir is recommended because drug administered into the CSF via the lumbar space circulates poorly into the ventricles, resulting in
inadequate CSF drug levels. A total intrathecal dose of 12 mg is advised for all persons older than 3 years of age. In normal patients, the CSF half-life is
approximately 12 hours, but it may be prolonged in patients with active meningeal disease. Delayed clearance from the CSF has been associated with an increased
risk of MTX neurotoxicity.
TOXICITY
The primary toxic effects of MTX therapy are myelosuppression and gastrointestinal mucositis. The occurrence of these adverse effects and other toxicities depends
on the dose, schedule, and route of drug administration. Mucositis usually appears 3 to 7 days after MTX therapy and precedes the decrease in granulocyte and
platelet count by several days. Myelosuppression and mucositis are usually completely reversed within 14 days, unless drug elimination mechanisms are impaired. In
patients with compromised renal function, even small doses of MTX may result in serious toxicity.
MTX-induced nephrotoxicity is thought to result from the intratubular precipitation of MTX and its metabolites, 7-OH-MTX and DAMPA, in acidic urine. Antifolates may
also exert a direct toxic effect on the renal tubules. Vigorous hydration and urinary alkalinization have greatly reduced the incidence of renal failure in high-dose
regimens.2
MTX is associated with both acute and chronic hepatotoxicity. Acute elevations in hepatic enzyme levels, as well as hyperbilirubinemia, are often observed during
high-dose therapy, but these usually return to normal within 10 days. Chronic administration of daily oral MTX, as has been used in the treatment of psoriasis, is
associated with the development of hepatic fibrosis in as many as 25% of patients. Cirrhosis of the liver has also been described in this group. Intermittent, weekly
MTX therapy, rather than continuous daily treatment, is associated with a lower incidence of hepatotoxicity. Although the precise mechanism of MTX hepatotoxicity is
not known, liver biopsies of patients with drug-induced liver disease reveal increased lipid deposition in the liver.
MTX causes a poorly defined, self-limited pneumonitis characterized by fever, cough, and interstitial pulmonary infiltrates. Lung biopsies have not revealed consistent
pathologic findings. Although a hypersensitivity reaction has been proposed as a possible explanation, rechallenge with MTX does not uniformly result in a return of
symptoms. With the increasing use of chronic, low-dose MTX therapy for rheumatoid arthritis, there is now a growing number of cases of MTX-associated lung
damage. No specific therapy for MTX pneumonitis is recommended other than withholding MTX therapy during the acute episode.
Three distinct neurotoxic syndromes are associated with intrathecal MTX therapy. 57 The most common syndrome is an acute chemical arachnoiditis that arises
immediately after intrathecal drug administration. This syndrome is characterized by severe headaches, nuchal rigidity, vomiting, fever, and an inflammatory cell
infiltrate in the CSF. A subacute form of neurotoxicity is seen in approximately 10% of patients and usually occurs after the third or fourth course of intrathecal
therapy. It is most common in adults with active meningeal leukemia and consists of motor paralysis, cranial nerve palsies, and seizures or coma, or both. A change in
therapy is absolutely indicated, because continued intrathecal MTX therapy may result in death. The third syndrome is a chronic, demyelinating encephalopathy,
typically occurring in children months to years after receiving intrathecal MTX. Patients present with dementia, limb spasticity, and, in advanced cases, coma.
Computed tomography scan reveals ventricular enlargement, cortical thinning, and diffuse intracerebral calcifications. 83
High-dose systemic MTX therapy is occasionally associated with an acute, transient cerebral dysfunction with symptoms of paresis, aphasia, and behavioral
abnormalities, and seizures have also been described in 4% to 15% of patients receiving high-dose MTX. 58 Symptoms occur within 6 days of MTX treatment and
usually completely resolve within 48 to 72 hours. In addition, a chronic form of neurotoxicity is manifested as an encephalopathy with dementia and motor paresis
developing in the second or third month after treatment. At present, the underlying mechanism of CNS toxicity from MTX remains unknown. There is no evidence to
support the therapeutic use of LV in patients who develop neurotoxic symptoms.
True anaphylactic reactions to MTX are exceedingly rare. There have been a few reported cases of toxic skin erythema and desquamation of the hands after
high-dose MTX therapy. In men treated with high-dose MTX, a reversible defect in spermatogenesis may occur. However, no alterations in reproductive function have
been reported in women treated with MTX.

NEW ANTIFOLATES
TRIMETREXATE
In the 1990s, several new antifolates were developed in an attempt to circumvent some of the known mechanisms of resistance to MTX, to target folate-dependent
enzymes other than DHFR, or both. The more lipid-soluble quinazoline antifolate trimetrexate (TMTX, Neutrexin) differs from MTX by not requiring the RFC system for
cellular transport and by lacking the potential for polyglutamation. Like MTX, it is a potent inhibitor of DHFR and produces metabolic inhibition through mechanisms
similar to MTX. It was thought that malignant cells that had become resistant to MTX, by virtue of either reduced membrane transport or deficient polyglutamation,
would remain sensitive to this antifolate analogue. Because TMTX is not polyglutamated, its intracellular half-life is shorter than MTX, necessitating frequent or
continuous dosing schedules. In contrast to MTX, TMTX can serve as a substrate for the P-glycoprotein-associated efflux pump. As a result, cross-resistance to
TMTX and a host of natural products, including anthracyclines, taxanes, and vinca alkaloids, can develop in multidrug resistant cancer cells overexpressing the P170
glycoprotein.
TMTX has been tested using a variety of dose schedules. It is highly protein bound (more than 90%) and cleared principally from the body by hepatic metabolism. 59
The terminal plasma half-life of the drug ranges from 12 to 20 hours. TMTX has been tested in the phase II setting for the treatment of a variety of malignancies,
principally with a regimen of 8 to 12 mg/m 2 daily for 5 days every 3 weeks. 60,61 The dose-limiting toxicity has been myelosuppression. Other toxicities include rash,
mucositis, fever, nausea and vomiting, and reversible transaminasemia. Antitumor responses have ranged from 13% to 26%, with the highest rates in head and neck
(26%) and non–small cell lung (19%) cancers. As a single agent, the compound has shown little activity against gastrointestinal cancers. However, when used in
combination with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and LV, response rates on the order of 30% to 35% have been reported in patients with previously untreated metastatic
colorectal cancer. 62
TOMUDEX
Raltitrexed (ZD1694, Tomudex) is a quinazoline antifolate that is a potent and specific inhibitor of TS. Like MTX, raltitrexed is transported into the cell via the RFC. To
exert its cytotoxic activity, this compound needs to be metabolized to its higher polyglutamated forms. The polyglutamates of raltitrexed are approximately 100-fold
more potent than the parent compound with regard to their affinity for TS, and they exhibit prolonged intracellular retention. 63 The principal mechanism of action of this
compound is inhibition of TS, resulting in depletion of key nucleotide precursors required for DNA repair and synthesis. Mechanisms of resistance to raltitrexed
include reduced transport, decreased polyglutamation, and overexpression of the target enzyme, TS. 64,65
Raltitrexed has undergone phase I testing, and the recommended dosing schedule is 3 mg/m 2 given as a 15-minute intravenous infusion every 3 weeks. 60,61 The drug
is cleared from the body principally by renal excretion, and its clearance follows a three-compartment elimination model with a terminal half-life of 10 to 22 hours. The
major toxicities include an anorexia and fatigue syndrome, diarrhea, myelosuppression, and reversible transaminasemia. Several phase II clinical trials have
investigated the activity of this drug in patients with a wide spectrum of malignancies, including advanced colorectal, breast, hepatocellular, platinum-resistant ovarian,
non–small cell lung, gastric, and pancreas cancers. 66 Response rates have ranged from 14% for patients with pancreas cancer to 25% for those with breast cancer.
The largest reported experience has been for first-line treatment of patients with advanced colorectal carcinoma. An overall response rate of 26% was observed in a
phase II trial involving 176 patients. Randomized, phase III trials to compare the efficacy of raltitrexed versus LV-modulated 5-FU have been completed. 67,68
Raltitrexed has comparable response rates and similar palliative and survival benefits when compared with 5-FU/LV. Reduced toxicity was observed with this novel
antifolate analogue, however, and it was associated with a more convenient administration schedule. This drug is approved as first-line therapy for patients with
advanced colorectal cancer in Australia, Canada, and several European countries. Further studies are ongoing to determine the role of this antifolate TS inhibitor
compound, either alone or in combination with other anticancer agents, in the therapy of colorectal cancer in North America.

OTHER ANTIFOLATES

Several pteroyl glutamate analogues have shown superior preclinical activity compared with MTX, and this enhanced effect is thought to be due to enhanced
transport, more avid polyglutamation, or a unique site of action. 10-Ethyl-5-deaza-aminopterin (Edatrexate), a potent inhibitor of DHFR with enhanced transport and
more efficient polyglutamation relative to MTX, has demonstrated activity against non–small cell lung cancer. 60,61,69 Mucositis is the dose-limiting toxicity.
5,10-Dideazatetrahydrofolate (Lometrexol) is a new antifolate that impairs de novo purine synthesis by virtue of its direct inhibitory effects on GAR transformylase.
Phase I studies have been performed, and this agent is currently undergoing phase II clinical investigation.
LY231514 was originally developed as a pure antifolate inhibitor of TS. However, preclinical studies suggest that it is not entirely specific for TS and that it inhibits
other folate-dependent enzymes, including DHFR and GAR transformylase. 60,61,70 Like raltitrexed, this analogue requires polyglutamation for its potent inhibitory
effects on TS, and it uses the RFC for entry into cells. This compound has been investigated in several phase I studies, and the major toxicities include neutropenia,
anorexia and fatigue syndrome, gastrointestinal toxicity, and reversible transaminasemia. 71 Promising antitumor activity has been noted in a wide variety of tumor
types, and phase II studies have confirmed activity against non–small cell lung cancer and mesothelioma. 72
5-FLUOROPYRIMIDINES
The rationale for the synthesis of the fluoropyrimidines stemmed from the observation that rat hepatoma cells use uracil more efficiently than normal rat intestinal
mucosa.73 This finding suggested that uracil metabolism might represent a potential target for cancer chemotherapy.
The chemical structures of the fluoropyrimidines in common clinical practice are shown in Figure 19.5-3. 5-FU has a fluorine atom substituted in place of hydrogen at
the carbon-5 position of the pyrimidine ring (see Fig. 19.5-3). The deoxyribonucleoside derivative, 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine (FUdR) is limited in its clinical use because
of its rapid degradation in normal and tumor tissues. It has mainly been used for hepatic arterial infusions. Ftorafur and 5'-deoxyfluorouridine represent two
fluoropyrimidine analogues that have been incorporated in oral prodrug forms of 5-FU, and they both demonstrate promising clinical activity.

FIGURE 19.5-3. Structures of fluoropyrimidines of clinical interest.

5-FU has antitumor activity against a wide spectrum of solid tumors, including epithelial malignancies arising in the breast, gastrointestinal tract, head and neck, and
ovary, with single-agent response rates of 10% to 30%. 74 Significant efforts have focused on identifying agents that can biochemically modulate the cytotoxic effects
of 5-FU. Such modulators of 5-FU include other antineoplastic agents such as MTX, cisplatin, and CPT-11, ionizing radiation, cytokines such as the interferons, and
agents that by themselves have little to no activity such as LV and 5-ethynyluracil (EU). 74,75 Thus, in the clinical setting, 5-FU is most often incorporated as part of a
combination regimen.
Intracellular Metabolism and Mechanism of Action
Intracellular activation is required for the fluoropyrimidines to exert their cytotoxic effects. 5-FU readily enters cells via the facilitated uracil transport mechanism,
whereas FUdR is a substrate for the facilitated nucleoside transport system. These compounds are anabolized to cytotoxic forms by several biochemical pathways
(Fig. 19.5-4). 5-FU is converted to FUdR by thymidine phosphorylase. Subsequent phosphorylation of FUdR by thymidine kinase results in formation of the active
5-FU metabolite, 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine monophosphate (FdUMP). In the presence of the reduced folate cofactor, 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate, FdUMP forms a
stable covalent complex with TS. 76 TS catalyzes the sole intracellular de novo formation of thymidine-5'-monophosphate from dUMP (see Fig. 19.5-2). Inhibition of TS
leads to depletion of dTTP, thus interfering with DNA biosynthesis and repair. 5-FU may be anabolized to fluorouridine monophosphate through the sequential action
of uridine phosphorylase and uridine kinase. In the presence of PRPP, orotic acid phosphoribosyltransferase directly converts 5-FU to fluorouridine monophosphate.
This metabolite is further metabolized to fluorouridine diphosphate and then to the triphosphate form (FUTP), which is subsequently incorporated into RNA. An
alternate pathway for FdUMP synthesis is via conversion of fluorouridine diphosphate to fluorodeoxyuridine diphosphate (FdUDP) by ribonucleotide reductase (RR).

FIGURE 19.5-4. Metabolism of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). 5-FdUMP, 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine monophosphate; 5-FUDP, fluorouridine diphosphate; 5-FUdR,
5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine; FUMP, fluorouridine monophosphate; 5-FUR, fluorouridine; 5 FUTP, fluorouridine triphosphate.

Inhibition of TS by FdUMP is one of the principal mechanisms of 5-FU action. The TS-FdUMP-folate ternary complex is slowly dissociable, and the intracellular level
of 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate is critical for ternary complex formation as well as for maintaining enzyme inhibition. Depletion of intracellular reduced folate pools
prevents ternary complex formation in various tissue culture systems. 74 Pharmacologic concentrations of LV enhance the cytotoxicity of 5-FU by expanding the
intracellular pools of 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate, thereby increasing the extent and duration of TS inhibition. Randomized clinical trials in advanced colorectal
cancer indicate that the addition of LV to bolus 5-FU significantly improves the response rate compared with bolus 5-FU alone. 77,78 However, the actual benefit in
patient survival is marginal and on the order of only 2 to 3 months.
5-FU is extensively incorporated into both nuclear and cytoplasmic RNA species, and this process interferes with normal RNA processing and function. 79,80,81,82,83 and 84
The extent of 5-FU-RNA incorporation correlates with cytotoxicity in some in vitro tissue culture and in vivo models. The following effects have been described as a
consequence of 5-FU-RNA incorporation: alteration of the secondary structure of RNA; inhibition of mRNA polyadenylation, which decreases mRNA stability;
inhibition of the conversion of high-molecular-weight nuclear RNA species to lower molecular-weight ribosomal RNA; quantitative and qualitative changes in protein
synthesis; and incorporation into uracil-rich small nuclear RNA species, which interferes with normal splicing. 5-FU–containing transfer RNA forms covalent
complexes with enzymes involved in posttranslational modification of uracil residues, thereby inhibiting their function. Despite the significant progress made in this

area of research, it remains unclear as to how these 5-FU–mediated RNA effects translate into cytotoxicity.
Inhibition of TS leads not only to depletion of dTTP, but to accumulation of dUMP. Both FdUMP and dUMP may be subsequently metabolized to their respective
triphosphate forms. Incorporation of dUTP and FdUTP into cellular DNA, with resultant inhibition of DNA synthesis and function, may represent another mechanism of
cytotoxicity. Two enzymatic mechanisms limit the DNA incorporation of (F)dUTP: dUTP nucleotidohydrolase degrades the triphosphate forms, and uracil-DNA
glycosylase removes uracil residues from DNA. 85,86 The combined effects of dTTP depletion and (F)dUTP-DNA incorporation are associated with inhibition of nascent
DNA chain elongation, altered DNA stability, production of DNA single-strand breaks, and interference with DNA repair. The genotoxic stress resulting from TS
inhibition may activate programmed cell death pathways in susceptible cells, resulting in induction of parental DNA fragmentation. Both internucleosomal DNA
laddering typical of classic apoptosis and very high-molecular-weight DNA fragmentation (50 kb or greater) have been described. 87 Factors operating downstream
from TS (e.g., bcl-2 and p53 status) may influence the cellular response to such genotoxic stress. 88,89 Some studies suggest that in some human colon cancer cells,
the process of thymineless death resulting from 5-FU therapy may be mediated via the Fas-signaling pathway. 90
The relative contribution of each of these mechanisms of action to the cytotoxicity of 5-FU remains unclear and may depend on the specific patterns of intracellular
5-FU metabolism, which vary among different normal tissues and tumor types. The concentration of drug and the duration of exposure play crucial roles in determining
the ultimate mechanism of cytotoxicity. However, there is now increasing support for the critical role of TS as a therapeutic target. The specific lines of evidence for
this view include the enhanced activity of LV-modulated 5-FU in the therapy of both early stage and advanced colorectal cancer, the strong correlation between low
TS content in tumor tissue and response to 5-FU–based therapy, the correlation between level of TS enzyme inhibition in tumors after 5-FU administration and
response to 5-FU therapy, and the clinical activity of selective TS inhibitors such as Tomudex. 74,91,92
Mechanisms of Resistance
Given the multiple sites of cytotoxic action of 5-FU and the various metabolic pathways required for its activation, it is not surprising that several mechanisms of
resistance have been identified in experimental and clinical settings. 74,92 However, the relative contribution of each of these mechanisms in the development of cellular
resistance to 5-FU in the actual clinical setting remains unclear.
In human and murine tumor cells selected in vitro for resistance to 5-FU, a variety of mechanisms have been described. Deletion or diminished activity of thymidine or
uridine kinase, thymidine or uridine phosphorylase, and orotate phosphoribosyl transferase interferes with metabolic activation. Decreased accumulation of FUTP,
FdUMP, and (F)dUTP may result from increased activity of catabolic enzymes [acid and alkaline phosphatases, dUTP hydrolase, and dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase (DPD)]. 93 Expansion of intracellular cytidine triphosphate (CTP) pools associated with elevated CTP synthase activity results in feedback inhibition of
uridine kinase, thus decreasing the metabolism of 5-FU to ribonucleotide forms. Decreased incorporation of 5-FU into both RNA and DNA may result in decreased
sensitivity. 92,94 A relative deficiency of the reduced folate substrate 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate may also compromise the cytotoxic action of FdUMP on TS. This
may result from low extracellular levels of reduced folates, decreased membrane transport of reduced folates, or reduced activity of folylpolyglutamate synthase,
thereby preventing its polyglutamation. 95
Alterations in the target enzyme TS represent the most commonly described mechanism of resistance to 5-FU. A decrease in binding affinity of the 5-FU metabolite
FdUMP to the TS target has resulted from point mutations in the protein-coding region of the TS gene. 96In vitro, in vivo, and clinical model systems have shown a
strong correlation between the levels of TS enzyme activity and TS protein and chemosensitivity to 5-FU. In this regard, cell lines, tumors with higher levels of TS, or
both are relatively more resistant to 5-FU. This increase in TS protein content is usually associated with amplification of the TS gene. 97 In cell lines made resistant to
cisplatin or doxorubicin, cross-resistance to 5-FU may develop on the basis of increased TS expression as a consequence of increased transcription of the TS gene. 98
In several in vitro and in vivo model systems, the levels of TS enzyme activity and TS protein have been shown to acutely increase after exposure to 5-FU, other
specific TS inhibitor compounds, or both. 74,99,100 Moreover, acute increases in the expression of TS protein have been identified in the clinical setting in paired tumor
tissue biopsies obtained from patients before and during therapy with 5-FU. 101 This acute induction of TS protein in response to drug exposure is mediated by a
translational regulatory mechanism. 102 TS protein, in its unbound or free state, is capable of specifically repressing the translation of its own mRNA. However, when
TS protein is bound to either nucleotide, antifolate inhibitors, or both, it is unable to repress TS mRNA translation, and the rate of new TS protein synthesis
increases.103 Thus, induction of TS may represent an efficient and clinically relevant mechanism for the acute development of drug resistance.
Clinical Pharmacology
An understanding of 5-FU pharmacokinetics is important given the wide choice of routes and schedules of administration available, each of which has advantages in
terms of differing spectrum of host toxicity. The most widely used methods for quantitating 5-FU in biologic fluids are high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) and
gas chromatography–mass spectrometry. 104 Nuclear magnetic resonance imaging with 19F offers the potential for noninvasive monitoring of intratumoral accumulation
of 5-FU; trapping of 5-FU within tumor tissue has been associated with clinical response.
5-FU is administered by either intravenous bolus or continuous infusion. The volume of distribution is slightly larger than the extracellular space, and 5-FU readily
penetrates into tissues, CSF, and extracellular third-space accumulations such as ascites or pleural effusions. After intravenous bolus doses of 370 to 720 mg/m 2,
peak plasma concentrations reach 300 µM to 1 mM; thereafter, metabolic elimination is rapid, with a primary half-life of 8 to 14 minutes. Plasma levels of 5-FU fall
below 1 µM within 2 hours, an approximate threshold for cytotoxic effects. A prolonged third elimination phase of 5-FU after intravenous bolus (half-life, approximately
5 hours), detected by a sensitive gas chromatography–mass spectrometry method, may reflect release of 5-FU from tissues. Less than 10% of parent drug is excreted
in the urine, whereas the balance is cleared through metabolic pathways (catabolism is greater than intracellular anabolism). 5-FU is enzymatically inactivated to
dihydrofluorouracil by DPD. 105 Although the liver expresses the highest levels of DPD in the body, this enzyme is widely distributed in other tissues, including
gastrointestinal mucosa and peripheral lymphocytes. Dihydropyrimidinase subsequently converts dihydrofluorouracil to a-fluoro-ureidopropionic acid, then b-alanine
synthase catalyzes the irreversible formation of a-fluoro-b-alanine with the release of ammonia and CO 2. 5-FU and its catabolites undergo biliary excretion and
enterohepatic circulation.
5-FU clearance is saturable; total body clearance decreases with increasing doses and deviates from a linear relationship above a certain dose (depending on
schedule of administration). For example, clearance ranges from approximately 350 to 850 mL/min/m 2 with bolus doses of 720 and 370 mg/m 2. It may be difficult to
predict plasma concentrations or the risk of severe toxicity at high doses.
Rare patients with inherited DPD deficiency may have life-threatening or fatal toxicity if treated with fluoropyrimidine-based chemotherapy. 106,107 Because affected
individuals are otherwise in good health, the first indication of the presence of this inborn error of metabolism usually follows an unexpectedly severe reaction to 5-FU
chemotherapy. Careful testing of DPD-deficient patients has revealed an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. It is now estimated that as many as 3% to 5% of
adult cancer patients may have this pharmacogenetic syndrome. Several molecular defects, including point mutations and deletions due to exon skipping, have been
identified in DPD-deficient patients who experience severe toxicity to 5-FU. Further studies are in progress to establish the precise relationship between the level of
DPD activity and 5-FU host toxicity.
Frequently used continuous infusion schedules include protracted venous infusion (300 mg/m 2/d when given alone), 96- to 120-hour infusion every 3 weeks (1000
mg/m2/d), and a weekly 24-hour infusion (2600 mg/m 2/d). 5-FU clearance is faster with constant infusion, varying from approximately 2000 to 3000 mL/min/m 2
depending on the dose rate. The incidence of serious clinical toxicity tends to increase with higher systemic exposure (steady-state plasma concentrations during
constant infusion and total area under the concentration time curve with bolus administration). Pharmacologic monitoring with intracycle dose modifications offers the
potential to avoid serious toxicity. Variation in 5-FU steady-state plasma levels according to time of day have been reported during constant infusion, although the
time of day at which peak and trough plasma values occurred has not been consistent between studies.
Hepatic metastases obtain their blood supply predominantly from the arterial circulation via the hepatic artery. In patients with metastases confined to the liver,
hepatic arterial infusion of 5-FU or FUdR provides high local drug concentrations to the tumor. The first-pass extraction of FUdR by the normal hepatic parenchyma
approaches 95%, and little drug enters the systemic circulation. In contrast, the first-pass extraction of 5-FU ranges from 20% to 50%. 108 The recommended dosage of
FUdR is 0.2 mg/kg/d for up to 14 days (7 mg/m 2/d), whereas 440 to 555 mg/m2/d of 5-FU may be given for up to 14 days; lower 5-FU doses (total of 300 mg/d) may be
tolerated for longer periods. The response rates reported for previously untreated colorectal carcinoma approach 50% in selected series. 109 Although the time to
hepatic disease progression is significantly longer compared with systemic therapy with single-agent 5-FU or 14-day intravenous infusion of FUdR, the time to
extrahepatic disease progression and overall survival remain unchanged. Approximately 30% of patients with liver-only metastases who have failed to respond to

systemic 5-FU may respond to hepatic arterial infusion FUdR. Systemic toxicities are usually dose limiting with hepatic arterial infusion of 5-FU, presumably because
a higher concentration of drug reaches the systemic circulation. These side effects include oral mucositis and gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea, vomiting,
and diarrhea. Myelosuppression occurs less often. Local and regional toxicities include peptic ulceration and chemical hepatitis (usually mild). In contrast, systemic
toxicities are less common with FUdR, whereas local and regional toxicities predominate. Hepatic toxicity is dose limiting, and gastritis, duodenitis, or frank ulcers
occur in 20% to 25% of patients.
5-FU and FUdR may also be given by the intraperitoneal route. Both drugs are absorbed primarily through the portal circulation and are subject to first-pass clearance
in the liver before reaching the systemic circulation. In early trials, dialysate concentrations of 5 mM or less 5-FU maintained by intermittent exchanges of fluid for up
to 5 days were tolerated, and the ratio of intraperitoneal to plasma 5-FU levels was approximately 300. 5-FU clearance is slower from the peritoneal cavity than from
plasma (half-life approximately 1.5 hours). Up to 20 mM 5-FU given intraperitoneally for 4 hours with 90 mg/m 2 cisplatin every 4 weeks is tolerated, except for mild
nausea and vomiting and sometimes diarrhea, whereas granulocytopenia occurs with higher dialysate concentrations. FUdR, 3000 mg given in 2 L of dialysate for 4
hours daily for 3 days, is well tolerated. The major systemic toxicity is nausea and vomiting, and this is usually well controlled. The peritoneal to plasma FUdR ratio is
approximately 2700, suggesting a potential pharmacologic advantage for the use of intraperitoneal FUdR over 5-FU.
Clinical Toxicity
The primary effects of 5-FU are exerted on rapidly dividing tissues, specifically gastrointestinal mucosa and bone marrow. The spectrum of toxicities associated with
5-FU varies considerably according to the dose, schedule, and route of administration. The most frequently used dose and schedules of single-agent 5-FU given by
bolus injection are 600 mg/m 2/week and 425 mg/m2/d for 5 days every 3 to 4 weeks. The dose of 5-FU generally should be reduced when used in combination with
LV, the magnitude of which varies according to the schedule and LV dose. Epithelial ulceration may occur throughout the gastrointestinal tract and may manifest as
mucositis, pharyngitis, dysphagia, esophagitis, gastritis, colitis, or proctitis. Diarrhea may be watery or bloody, and the combination of nausea, vomiting, and profuse
diarrhea can lead to profound dehydration and hypotension. Disruption of the integrity of the gut lining may permit access of enteric organisms into the blood stream,
with the potential for overwhelming sepsis, particularly if the granulocyte nadir coincides with diarrhea. 5-FU should be withheld in the face of ongoing mucositis or
diarrhea, even if mild, and subsequent doses should be reduced when the patient has fully recovered. If diarrhea occurs, supportive care and vigorous hydration
should be given. Antidiarrheal agents, such as diphenoxylate and loperamide, may help control mild diarrhea, but they are generally ineffective in controlling diarrhea
of greater severity. 110 In this setting, the somatostatin analogue octreotide seems to have greater efficacy. Mouth cooling (oral cryotherapy) with oral ice chips for 30
minutes starting immediately before bolus 5-FU substantially reduces the severity of mucositis. Nausea and vomiting may occur but are usually controlled with
antiemetics. Myelosuppression may also be observed, with granulocytopenia occurring more than thrombocytopenia. With the schedule of a daily dose for 5 days, the
granulocyte and platelet nadirs tend to occur during the second or third week of treatment. In contrast, myelosuppression generally occurs after the fourth weekly
dose of the weekly bolus 5-FU schedule.
Continuous intravenous infusion of 5-FU at doses of 1000 mg/m 2/d for 5 days every 3 weeks results in only minor myelosuppression, whereas stomatitis and diarrhea
are the principal dose-limiting toxicities. With protracted venous infusion of 5-FU (300 mg/m 2/d), serious myelosuppression is less common. The infusion can be
interrupted at the first signs of mouth soreness or diarrhea, thus limiting the severity of toxicity. However, palmar-plantar erythrodysesthesia (hand-foot syndrome) is a
more subacute toxicity that may eventually be dose limiting. 111 With a weekly 24-hour infusion of 2600 mg/m 2 5-FU, neurotoxicity and gastrointestinal toxicity are dose
limiting.
Other dermatologic toxicities associated with 5-FU therapy include alopecia, changes in the fingernails, and dermatitis that varies from a pruritic erythematous rash
followed by scaling to more severe cases with vesicle formation. 5-FU enhances the cutaneous toxicity of radiation, and reactions usually occur within 7 days of
radiation. Photosensitivity reactions, increased pigmentation over the veins into which 5-FU has been administered, as well as more generalized hyperpigmentation,
and atrophy are possible. Hand-foot syndrome most often occurs with protracted infusion schedules of 5-FU, but may also be seen in patients receiving LV-modulated
5-FU. Ocular toxicity includes blepharitis, epiphora, tear duct stenosis, and acute and chronic conjunctivitis. The acute inflammatory response is reversible when the
drug is discontinued early in the treatment course, but progression may require surgical correction of ectropion and tear duct stenosis.
Acute neurologic symptoms, including somnolence, cerebellar ataxia, and upper motor signs, are primarily seen in patients receiving intracarotid infusions for head
and neck tumors, but neurologic toxicity may also occur with weekly schedules (24-hour infusion is greater than bolus). The premise that 5-FU catabolites play a role
in the neurotoxicity is supported by preclinical models of neurotoxicity. However, patients with DPD deficiency may experience severe neurologic toxicity in the
absence of myelosuppression and gastrointestinal toxicity after 5-FU therapy. 112 Thus, the exact 5-FU metabolite responsible for 5-FU neurotoxicity remains unclear.
A syndrome of chest pain, cardiac enzyme elevations, and electrocardiographic changes consistent with myocardial ischemia may be seen in temporal association
with 5-FU administration. In some patients, coronary angiography revealed no abnormalities, suggesting vasospasm as a possible mechanism. This toxicity has been
attributed to parent drug and to the catabolites, fluoro-b-alanine and fluoroacetate. Concentration-dependent vasoconstriction occurs when isolated vascular smooth
muscle rings are exposed in vitro to 5-FU, and this can be reversed with nitrates.
Intrahepatic administration of FUdR is complicated mainly by cholestatic jaundice and biliary sclerosis. These adverse side effects are thought to result from direct
perfusion of the blood supply to the gallbladder and upper bile duct with high local drug concentrations. Of note, this complication occurs much less frequently with
hepatic arterial infusion of 5-FU. Biliary sclerosis typically occurs by the third cycle of treatment. Therapy with FUdR may be reinstituted at a lower dose after
normalization of serum hepatic enzyme levels, but most patients become progressively less tolerant. Catheter-related complications include thrombosis of the
catheterized vessel, hemorrhage or infection at the site of insertion, and slippage of the catheter into the gastroduodenal artery with resultant necrosis of the intestinal
epithelium, hemorrhage, and perforation.
Drug Interactions
A host of drug interactions have been investigated in an attempt to enhance the cytotoxicity and therapeutic selectivity of fluoropyrimidine chemotherapy. The
interaction of 5-FU with MTX is of particular interest as both drugs are often used in combination chemotherapy for breast and colorectal cancer. When given before
5-FU, MTX-mediated inhibition of DHFR results in accumulation of PRPP. 74 Increased availability of PRPP promotes formation of fluorouridine monophosphate via the
reaction catalyzed by orotic acid phosphoribosyltransferase, with enhanced FUTP incorporation into RNA. In contrast, administration of 5-FU before MTX antagonizes
the antipurine effects of MTX by preventing the accumulation of dihydrofolate and maintaining the pool of reduced folates needed for de novo purine synthesis. A
24-hour interval is superior to a 1-hour interval in some preclinical and clinical studies. 113 The dose of MTX in clinical trials has varied, but doses of 100 mg/m 2 or
more are usually followed by LV rescue. A metaanalysis of randomized trials of MTX and 5-FU revealed a higher response rate compared with single-agent bolus
5-FU.114
Synergy between 5-FU and cisplatin has been noted in several preclinical models. Possible mechanisms of interaction include cisplatin-mediated increases in the
intracellular content of the reduced folate pool, enhanced DNA damage, and interference with repair of cisplatin-DNA adducts. In some preclinical models, concurrent
exposure to both drugs produces synergy, whereas other models suggest that preexposure to 5-FU before cisplatin administration is superior to the opposite
sequence. Clinical synergy between infusional 5-FU and cisplatin is evident in tumor types that are sensitive to both drugs, such as squamous cell cancers of the
head and neck and esophagus, whereas randomized trials in colorectal cancer show no benefit with the addition of cisplatin. The influence of sequence of cisplatin
and 5-FU on therapeutic outcome has not been carefully studied in clinical trials.
The salvage enzyme thymidine kinase converts thymidine to thymidine monophosphate, thereby bypassing the TS-mediated inhibition of de novo thymidylate
production. In tissue culture models, thymidine (10 to 20 µM) is frequently used to replete dTTP pools and thus negate its potential contribution to toxicity. In some
models, pharmacologic concentrations of thymidine promote 5-FU RNA incorporation (by feedback inhibition of thymidine kinase and RR). 74In vivo, however,
thymidine (and its catabolite thymine) increased the half-life of 5-FU by interfering with the catabolism of 5-FU to dihydrofluorouracil, leading to a marked increase in
5-FU toxicity with no improvement in antitumor activity. Simultaneous exposure to pharmacologic concentrations of uridine may antagonize the RNA-directed
cytotoxicity of 5-FU by decreasing its activation to the ribonucleotide level by uridine kinase; furthermore, expanded UTP pools may decrease FUTP incorporation into
RNA. Delayed administration of uridine increases the rate of recovery from 5-FU–associated inhibition of both RNA and DNA synthesis in some models. 115 Delayed
administration of oral uridine to patients decreases the myelosuppression associated with weekly bolus 5-FU, but the effect on therapeutic activity has yet to be
determined.116
Interferons (IFNs) enhance the in vitro and in vivo activity of 5-FU and FUdR in a cell-line–dependent manner. 117 Heterogeneity exists among cancer cell lines as to
the specific type of IFN that enhances fluoropyrimidine toxicity. IFN-a may increase the activity of thymidine and uridine phosphorylases, and increased FdUMP

formation has been reported in some cell lines. In other models, IFN-a may enhance fluoropyrimidine-mediated DNA damage in the absence of a direct effect on
FdUMP pools or the extent of TS inhibition. In a human colon cancer cell line, IFN-g abrogated the acute increase in TS protein accompanying 5-FU exposure, and in
so doing, enhanced the cytotoxic effects of 5-FU. 118 IFN-a may decrease the clearance of 5-FU in some individuals in a dose- and schedule-dependent manner,
particularly with consecutive daily administration of IFN-a in conjunction with bolus 5-FU. Initial clinical trials appeared promising, although the toxicity of
IFN-a–modulated 5-FU was substantial. The final results from several randomized trials evaluating IFN-a–modulated 5-FU alone or with LV in advanced colorectal
cancer reveal no benefit of IFN to 5-FU therapy in terms of overall response rate and survival. 119,120 Moreover, toxicity was significantly increased with the addition of
IFN. A large randomized trial testing the contribution of IFN-a to a daily schedule for 5 days of bolus 5-FU/LV has been conducted by the National Surgical Adjuvant
Breast and Bowel Project in the adjuvant treatment of colon cancer. The results from this trial have been published, and as in the case of advanced disease, IFN-a
therapy is of no added benefit in the adjuvant setting. 121
Preexposure to inhibitors of de novo pyrimidine synthesis, such as N-(phosphonoacetyl)- L-aspartic acid and brequinar, results in depletion of UTP, CTP, dUMP, and
dCTP pools. These biochemical effects are associated with enhanced anabolism of 5-FU to FUTP, increased 5-FU-RNA incorporation, and enhanced DNA-directed
cytotoxicity. Although promising results were initially reported with a weekly schedule of low-dose N-(phosphonoacetyl)- L-aspartic acid (250 mg/m2 intravenously)
given 1 day before a 24-hour infusion of 5-FU (2600 mg/m 2), a randomized phase II trial conducted by the Southwest Oncology Group failed to demonstrate an
improvement in response rate compared with the same schedule of 5-FU alone. 122 Results from other multiinstitutional phase III trials are pending.
Preclinical studies show that 5-FU enhances the cytotoxicity of ionizing radiation, and both preclinical and clinical studies have revealed that radiosensitization
appears to be enhanced with prolonged exposure. The underlying mechanisms for this synergistic interaction may include increased DNA damage, inhibition of DNA
repair, and accumulation of cells in S phase. 74,123,124 Some work suggests that the G1/S checkpoint may play a critical role in determining the ability of 5-FU to
enhance the cytotoxic effects of radiation therapy. Moreover, this effect may not depend on normal p53 function, but instead, may rely on intact cyclin E-dependent
kinase activity. One example highlighting the successful clinical application of this approach is the use of protracted infusional 5-FU during pelvic radiation in the
adjuvant treatment of rectal cancer. 125

STRATEGIES TO PERMIT ORAL ADMINISTRATION OF FLUOROPYRIMIDINES
TEGAFUR, URACIL, 5-FLUOROURACIL
Administration of 5-FU by the oral route has generally been avoided because of erratic bioavailability. Several strategies to allow oral dosing by decreasing the
catabolism of 5-FU are being explored. One approach involves the drug tegafur, uracil, 5-fluorouracil (UFT), a combination of Ftorafur
(1-[2-tetrahydrofuryl]-5-fluorouracil, tegafur; see Fig. 19.5-3), a 5-FU prodrug, in a 1:4 molar ratio with uracil. Preclinical studies indicated that UFT resulted in
significantly higher tumor-to-serum 5-FU ratios than Ftorafur alone. UFT is administered orally in divided doses, and it has been given daily for 5 to 28 days. With oral
doses ranging from 50 to 300 mg/m2, maximum plasma levels of Ftorafur and 5-FU occur between 0.6 and 2.1 hours. Ftorafur levels (2.7 to 20.0 µg/mL) exceed 5-FU
levels (0.025 to 0.9 µg/mL, 0.2 to 7.0 µM), and Ftorafur clearance is approximately 70 mL/min. Combined phase II data from 438 patients treated with UFT in Japan
reveal the drug has single-agent activity (19% to 32% response rate) in adenocarcinomas arising in the gastrointestinal tract and breast. Hematologic toxicity is mild.
Gastrointestinal toxicity includes anorexia (24%), nausea and vomiting (12.5%), and diarrhea (12%). UFT in combination with LV has been tested here in the United
States in both phase I and phase II studies. When UFT was used at a dose of 300 mg/m 2/d with 150 mg/d LV in patients with advanced colorectal cancer, an overall
response rate of 42% was observed.126 This treatment was well tolerated, and there was only a 24% incidence of grade 3 gastrointestinal toxicity, as manifested by
diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal cramps, and asthenia and fatigue. The results of two randomized, phase III studies comparing oral UFT (300 mg/m 2/d) and oral LV
(75 or 90 mg/d) for 28 days every 35 days with the Mayo Clinic regimen of 5-day bolus 5-FU (425 mg/m 2/d) and LV (20 mg/m2/d) given every 35 days in previously
untreated patients with metastatic colorectal cancer show that the oral and intravenous regimens have similar response rates, time to disease progression, and overall
survival. However, the oral regimen was associated with a significantly lower incidence of severe neutropenia and need for hospitalization. 127 Thus, UFT/LV is an
acceptable alternative to intravenous 5-FU/LV for treatment of advanced colorectal cancer. Studies are ongoing to determine its potential role in the adjuvant therapy
of early-stage colorectal cancer.
CAPECITABINE (XELODA)
Capecitabine (Xeloda) represents another oral prodrug of 5-FU that was designed with the rationale of generating selective 5-FU activation in tumor tissue. 128 When
administered orally, it is absorbed intact through the intestinal mucosa, metabolized by a carboxylesterase enzyme in the liver to 5'-deoxy-5-fluorocytidine, and then
converted to 5'-deoxy-5-fluorouridine by cytidine deaminase, an enzyme principally located in the liver. 5'-Deoxy-5-fluorouridine is then converted directly at the tumor
site by the thymidine-metabolizing enzyme, thymidine phosphorylase, a protein that has been shown to function as an angiogenic factor.
Preclinical studies have shown that tumor 5-FU concentrations are significantly higher than those measured in plasma. Moreover, this oral prodrug has shown activity
against a broad spectrum of human tumor xenografts with relatively mild host toxicity. Currently, this agent is approved for use as a third-line agent in the treatment of
anthracycline- and taxane-resistant advanced breast cancer. 129 Studies are ongoing to determine the role of this compound in the therapy of advanced colorectal
cancer. Preliminary results of a randomized phase III North American trial comparing capecitabine (2500 mg/mg 2/d for 14 days every 3 weeks) with a Mayo Clinic
regimen of a daily dose for 5 days show that overall response rates are significantly higher for capecitabine (23.2%) versus 5-FU/LV (15.5%). 130 Both the duration of
response and progression-free survival are similar. Although survival data remains immature at this time, capecitabine appears to have a more favorable toxicity
profile than intravenous 5-FU/LV and the most common toxicities observed were hand-foot syndrome (17.7%) and diarrhea (16.3%), with myelosuppression being
relatively uncommon.
S1
S1 is an oral formulation composed of the 5-FU prodrug Ftorafur, the DPD inhibitor 5-chloro-2,4-dihydroxypyridine, and oxonic acid. 75 5-Chloro-2,4-dihydroxypyridine
is a competitive, reversible inhibitor of DPD that helps to significantly prolong the half-life of 5-FU and improve oral bioavailability. Oxonic acid is an inhibitor of
pyrimidine phosphoribosyltransferase, and it acts to prevent 5-FU phosphorylation and subsequent incorporation of 5-FU metabolites into the RNA of normal tissues
in the gastrointestinal tract. Given its mechanism of action, the goal of oxonic acid is to protect against 5-FU–mediated gastrointestinal toxicity. Phase I studies
revealed that the dose-limiting toxicity was myelosuppression mainly in the form of neutropenia. In Japan, where this drug was initially developed, phase II trials have
been conducted in several malignancies, including gastric, colorectal, breast, and head and neck cancer. Response rates have ranged between 30% and 50%, and
toxicity has been generally mild, with myelosuppression predominating. Phase I and II studies are under way in the United States to confirm its clinical activity.
5-ETHYNYLURACIL
The uracil analogue 5-ethynyluracil (Eniluracil, EU, GW776, 776C85) is a potent, mechanism-based inhibitor of DPD. 75 On binding of EU to DPD (apparent K m
approximately 2 µM), an unstable intermediate is formed, following which the drug becomes covalently linked to the enzyme. Administration of EU to both animals and
humans results in complete inhibition of total body DPD, as evidenced by inhibition of DPD enzyme activity in peripheral mononuclear cells and by up to 100-fold
elevations of plasma uracil levels. 131,132 Treatment with EU completely inhibits DPD enzyme activity in both the tumors and peripheral lymphocytes of patients with
colorectal cancer, a finding that confirms the use of peripheral mononuclear cells as an accurate and reliable surrogate marker for tumoral DPD activity. Preclinical
studies in vivo show that treatment with EU significantly improves 5-FU pharmacokinetics, resulting in a marked elevation of both the plasma half-life and area under
the concentration time curve of 5-FU.
This work has been extended to the clinical setting in which phase I studies investigating the combination of 5-FU and EU have been performed. EU significantly
increased 5-FU plasma half-life by up to 20-fold and decreased 5-FU clearance by 18-fold, leading to a prolonged half-life of 4 to 6 hours. 133 Moreover, in the
presence of EU, the oral bioavailability of 5-FU approaches 100%. This then allows for effective oral administration of 5-FU. The 5-FU/EU combination has
subsequently been advanced to the phase II setting in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. When 5-FU and EU were administered for 28 days on an every
35-day cycle at the respective doses of 1.0 and 10.0 mg/m 2/d, a 29% objective response rate was observed. Treatment was relatively well tolerated, and grade 3 to 4
diarrhea was noted in 16% of patients, stomatitis and mucositis in 4%, and neutropenia in 4%.
EU is a promising biochemical modulator of 5-FU, and clinical studies suggest that it may help to improve the antitumor activity and host toxicity profile of 5-FU
chemotherapy. Currently, there are two large randomized, phase III studies comparing 5-FU and EU with either the Mayo Clinic daily for 5 days regimen of 5-FU and

LV or with protracted infusional 5-FU. The results from these studies will provide critical insights as to the precise role of the 5-FU and EU combination in the
therapeutic armamentarium of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Moreover, this combination may find clinical application in the treatment of other solid tumors
such as advanced breast cancer. 133a
CYTARABINE
Cytarabine (1-b-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine, Ara-C) is one of several arabinose nucleosides isolated from the sponge Cryptothethya crypta,134 differing from its
physiologic counterpart by virtue of a stereotypic inversion of the 2'-hydroxyl group of the sugar moiety ( Fig. 19.5-5). Ara-C is regarded as one of the most important
drugs in the treatment of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). A regimen of Ara-C combined with an anthracycline, given as a 5- or 7-day continuous infusion is
considered the standard induction treatment for AML. Furthermore, Ara-C is used in the treatment of other hematologic malignancies, such as non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma, chronic myelogenous leukemia, and acute lymphocytic leukemia.

FIGURE 19.5-5. Structures of deoxycytidine analogues of clinical interest.

Intracellular Metabolism and Mechanism of Action
As with other nucleoside analogues and their physiologic counterparts, Ara-C enters cells via nucleoside-specific transmembrane transport proteins, the most
important one being the es (equilibrative inhibitor-sensitive) receptor. Studies with blasts from patients with acute leukemias have shown a strong correlation between
expression of es transporters and in vitro sensitivity to Ara-C.135
Once within the cytoplasm, Ara-C requires activation for its cytotoxic effects. The first metabolic step is the conversion of Ara-C to ara-cyyidine monophosphate
(Ara-CMP) by the enzyme deoxycytidine kinase (dCK) ( Fig. 19.5-6). This enzyme is the rate-limiting step in intracellular anabolism of Ara-C. This metabolic step is
saturable, and the K m is approximately 20 µM. 136 Ara-CMP is subsequently phosphorylated to ara-cytidine diphosphate (Ara-CDP) and Ara-CTP by the enzymes
pyrimidine monophosphate kinase and pyrimidine diphosphate kinase, respectively. Ara-CTP competes with the native substrate deoxycytidine triphosphate (dCTP)
for DNA incorporation by DNA-directed DNA polymerase (K i approximately 1 µM). The incorporated Ara-CTP residue is a potent inhibitor of DNA polymerase a
(involved in Okazaki fragment synthesis on the lagging strand of the replication fork), DNA polymerase d (the leading strand replicase), and DNA polymerase b
(involved in the repair of chemically induced DNA damage). 137,138 and 139 Inhibition of DNA polymerases, in turn, interferes with DNA chain elongation during both
semiconservative DNA replication and DNA repair. 140 The incorporated Ara-CTP residue functions as a relative DNA chain terminator, and interference with chain
elongation is influenced by sequence specificity of the DNA template. 138,140 Initiation of new DNA replication intermediates continues, however, with accumulation of
nascent DNA fragments.140 This process may result in abnormal duplication of limited portions of DNA, thus increasing the possibility of recombination, crossover, and
gene amplification. Over time, the nascent DNA strand can be extended beyond the arabinosylnucleotide residue, and digestion of DNA reveals the presence of
Ara-CMP in the internucleotide (internal) position. 138,139 and 140 In some human leukemic cell lines, Ara-C–mediated DNA damage is accompanied by a pattern of
internucleosomal DNA fragmentation typical of apoptosis (programmed cell death). 141 There is evidence suggesting that Ara-C metabolism in AML blasts differs from
that in normal bone marrow mononuclear cells and CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells. 142 The total levels of phosphorylated Ara-C metabolites, including Ara-CMP,
Ara-CDP, Ara-CTP, Ara-CDP-choline, and Ara-UMP, were two- to fourfold higher in leukemic blast cells when compared with normal bone marrow cells, both at
standard and high doses of Ara-C. The most striking difference was found with the Ara-CDP-choline metabolite in the setting of Ara-C dose escalation. The level of
this metabolite was 4.3-fold higher in leukemic blast cells. 142

FIGURE 19.5-6. Metabolism of Ara-C. Gemcitabine shares the same metabolic pathway as Ara-C. Ara-CDP, ara-cytidine diphosphate; Ara-CTP, ara-cytidine
triphosphate; Ara-U, ara-uridine; Ara-UMP, ara-uridine monophosphate; dCMP, deoxycytidine monophosphate.

In animal studies, Ara-CMP inhibits transfer of galactose, N-acetylglucosamine, and sialic acid to cell surface glycoproteins. Ara-CTP (0.1 to 1.0 mM) inhibits
synthesis of CMP-acetylneuraminic acid, and Ara-CDP choline can be incorporated into membranes. These effects on phospholipid synthesis and incorporation into
membranes may possibly affect membrane structure and function.
Catabolism of Ara-C involves two key enzymes, cytidine deaminase and deoxycytidylate deaminase. They convert Ara-C and Ara-CMP into their respective nontoxic
two metabolites, Ara-U and Ara-UMP. Other catabolic enzymes that may affect Ara-C metabolism include dCTP pyrophosphatase, 5'-nucleotidase, and alkaline and
acid phosphatases. The balance between intracellular activation and degradation is critical in determining the amount of drug that is ultimately converted to Ara-CTP
and, thus, its subsequent cytotoxic and antitumor activity (see Fig. 19.5-6).
Mechanisms of Resistance
Ara-C is most active during the S phase of the cell cycle. 134 The rate of DNA synthesis influences Ara-C cytotoxicity, with maximum effects observed when cells are
exposed to Ara-C during periods of rapid DNA synthesis. Longer exposures allow a greater proportion of cells to enter S phase and are associated with enhanced
incorporation of Ara-CTP into DNA. 143 Therefore, the duration of Ara-C exposure seems to be a critical determinant of its cytotoxicity.
Several mechanisms of resistance to Ara-C have been described. Impaired transmembrane transport, decreased rate of anabolism, increased rate of catabolism, or
all three may result in the development of Ara-C resistance. In vitro studies have demonstrated that amplification of the cytidine deaminase gene with resultant
overexpression of the corresponding protein product leads to Ara-C resistance. 144 The level of cytidine deaminase enzyme activity has been shown to correlate with

clinical response in patients with AML undergoing induction chemotherapy with Ara-C–containing regimens. 145 Blasts from patients who attained complete remission
and from those with previously untreated leukemia had significantly higher levels of cytidine deaminase than blasts from patients with refractory disease.
Deletion of the gene encoding deoxycytidine kinase, expansion of CTP and dCTP pools, overexpression of bcl-2, and decreased intracellular half-life of Ara-CTP after
drug removal are mechanisms that have been implicated in Ara-C resistance. 143,146,147 The cytotoxicity of Ara-C in leukemic cells isolated from patients correlates well
with both the extent of DNA incorporation and the intracellular retention of Ara-CTP after drug exposure. 148
Cellular sensitivity to Ara-C can also be influenced by the concomitant use of other drugs. For example, all- trans-retinoic acid was found to enhance Ara-C
cytotoxicity, as well as Ara-C–induced apoptosis in HL-60 human leukemia cells. 149 However, the mechanism by which this sensitization is mediated remains
unknown. The sensitivity of human leukemic cell lines to Ara-C has also been tested in the presence of stem cell factor. The addition of stem cell factor to a
suspension culture system leads to a significant increase in the toxicity of Ara-C to self-renewing blast progenitors, especially when associated with high
concentrations of Ara-C. 150 Although limited in its current clinical application, 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) has shown a positive interaction with Ara-C. By inhibiting
cytidine deaminase enzyme activity in L1210 murine leukemic cells, 6-MP is able to maintain high concentrations of Ara-C in the culture medium. This effect results in
enhanced incorporation of Ara-C into cells and subsequent activation to Ara-CTP. 141
Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacokinetics
Ara-C has poor oral bioavailability (approximately 20%) due to extensive deamination within the gastrointestinal tract. Consequently, Ara-C is administered via the
intravenous route. The drug can also be given subcutaneously. After intravenous bolus administration, Ara-C is rapidly cleared with biphasic elimination: The initial
half-life is approximately 12 minutes, whereas the terminal half-life is approximately 2 hours. Within 24 hours, 78% of a bolus dose is excreted in the urine (71% as
Ara-U, 7% as Ara-C). During continuous intravenous infusion, steady-state plasma levels of Ara-C increase linearly to 5 to 10 µM, and drug clearance is
approximately 1000 mL/min/m2. Thereafter, deamination is saturated, and plasma levels can increase unpredictably. 151 With continuous infusion of doses from 100 to
200 mg/m2/d, steady-state plasma levels range from 0.2 to 1.0 µM, and CSF levels are approximately 50% of the plasma levels. 134,152
When administered as a high-dose (greater than 2 g/m 2) intravenous infusion over 1 to 3 hours, the plasma elimination is triphasic: a, b, and g half-lives are 16
minutes, 1.8 hours, and 6 hours, respectively. 152,153 The mean plasma concentration at the end of infusion ranges from approximately 60 to 150 µM, but 12 hours later
falls to less than 0.5 µM. Ara-C crosses the blood–brain barrier when used at high doses, with CSF levels between 7% to 14% of plasma levels, reaching peak levels
of up to 10 µM. Because cytidine deaminase enzyme activity is nearly completely absent in CSF, the drug displays a longer half-life in the CSF (approximately 2 to 4
hours). 153
Ara-C can also be given intrathecally as prophylaxis against CNS tumor involvement and to treat leptomeningeal disease of both hematologic and solid malignancies.
The usual dose is anywhere from 30 to 60 mg in 5 to 10 mL diluent twice weekly until documentation of three consecutively negative CSF cytology results. Intrathecal
administration of 50 mg/m2 Ara-C yields peak concentrations of 1 mM, and cytotoxic concentrations (0.4 µM or above) are maintained for 24 hours. 134 Of note, the
diluent supplied with commercial formulations of Ara-C contains 0.945% benzyl alcohol. Given the potential toxicity of benzyl alcohol, diluents containing this
preservative should not be used for intrathecal administration in neonates or with high-dose regimens. In these situations, preservative-free 0.9% sodium chloride
injection or other isotonic buffered diluents should be used to reconstitute the drug. Finally, Ara-C can also be used intraperitoneally. This approach is commonly used
as second-line treatment for ovarian cancer patients presenting primarily with intraperitoneal disease, and it is usually given in combination with cisplatin.
Toxicity
The toxicity profile of Ara-C is highly dependent on the dose and schedule of administration. Myelosuppression is the dose-limiting toxicity with a standard regimen of
100 to 200 mg/m2/d for 7 days. Leukopenia and thrombocytopenia are the most severe cytopenias, with the nadir occurring between days 7 and 14 after drug
administration. However, the duration of the nadir can be significantly influenced by the concomitant use of other cytotoxic agents and also by previous treatment with
chemotherapy.
Gastrointestinal toxicity commonly manifests as a mild to moderate degree of anorexia, nausea, and vomiting. Mucositis, diarrhea, ileus, and abdominal pain can also
be observed. Less commonly, epithelial ulceration can occur, ranging from superficial ulceration to intramural hematoma formation and perforation. Transient hepatic
dysfunction, manifested as elevation of liver enzymes, may also occur with Ara-C given at conventional doses. Acute pancreatitis has been associated with Ara-C,
mostly when given as a continuous infusion. The Ara-C syndrome has been described in pediatric patients receiving Ara-C for hematologic malignancies and is
characterized by fever, myalgia, bone pain, maculopapular rash, conjunctivitis, malaise, and occasional chest pain. These symptoms usually begin within 12 hours
after Ara-C infusion. This syndrome most likely represents an allergic reaction to Ara-C, as patients usually develop symptoms months after the first dose, and
corticosteroids can prevent its onset. 154
Administration of Ara-C at high doses (2 to 3 g/m 2 intravenously over 1 to 3 hours, every 12 hours; 100 mg/m 2/h for 24 hours) produces severe myelosuppression,
sometimes with prolonged nadirs. Severe gastrointestinal toxicity in the form of mucositis, diarrhea, or both, is also frequently observed. Neurologic toxicity is
significantly more common with high-dose Ara-C than with standard doses. The clinical manifestations of neurologic toxicity are diverse and include seizures, cerebral
and cerebellar dysfunction, peripheral neuropathy, bilateral rectus muscle palsy, aphasia, and Parkinsonian symptoms. 155 Clinical signs of cerebellar dysfunction
occur in up to 15% of patients within 8 days and include dysarthria, dysdiadochokinesia, dysmetria, and ataxia. 156 Change in alertness and cognitive ability, memory
loss, and frontal lobe release signs reflect cerebral toxicity. Despite discontinuation of therapy, clinical recovery is incomplete in up to 30% of affected patients. The
severity of peripheral neuropathy increases with higher cumulative Ara-C doses. Electromyography and nerve conduction test results suggest a demyelinating
polyneuropathy with axonal degeneration. Significant neurotoxicity appears uncommon at cumulative doses of 36 g/m 2 or less. Neurotoxicity may also be reduced by
prolonged intravenous administration (over 3 hours or more). Patients older than 50 years and patients with elevated serum creatinine levels are particularly
susceptible to neurologic toxicity.
Other side effects are less commonly seen. Pulmonary complications may include noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, acute respiratory distress, and pneumonia,
resulting from Streptococcus viridans infection. 157 Other side effects associated with high-dose Ara-C include conjunctivitis (often responsive to topical
corticosteroids), a painful hand-foot syndrome, and, rarely, anaphylactic reactions. A fatal case of toxic epidermal necrolysis has been described. Neutrophilic eccrine
hydradenitis, an unusual cutaneous reaction manifested as plaques or nodules, can occur during the second week after high-dose Ara-C.
Intrathecal administration of Ara-C is usually uneventful. However, it may produce fever, seizures, and alterations in mental status within the first 24 hours of
administration. Ara-C is teratogenic in animals. Although Ara-C produces chromosomal breaks in both cultured cells and bone marrow, it is not an established
carcinogen in humans.
Drug Interactions
In vitro studies and animal tumor model systems have provided evidence for synergistic activity between Ara-C and alkylating agents, platinum compounds, purine
analogues, antifolates, and fluoropyrimidines. More recently, synergism has also been observed with Ara-C and other agents, such as bryostatin 1, fludarabine, and
paclitaxel. The use of IFN-a combined with Ara-C in low doses is useful in the treatment of patients with early chronic phase chronic myelogenous leukemia, despite
the existence of in vitro data suggesting a negative interaction for these two drugs. 158 Specific biochemical, cellular, or both, kinetic mechanisms have been described
for each of these interactions, and the sequence of drug administration seems to be critical in some cases. Ara-C enhances the cytotoxicity of various DNA-damaging
agents, including alkylating agents (cyclophosphamide, carmustine), topoisomerase II inhibitors (amsacrine, etoposide), cisplatin, and ionizing radiation. The
mechanism underlying these positive interactions appears to be interference by Ara-C with the process of DNA repair, resulting in enhanced DNA damage.
The metabolism of Ara-U, the main catabolic by-product of Ara-C, is important for the metabolism and toxicity of Ara-C. Ara-U is mainly excreted in the urine. High
concentrations of Ara-U can decrease deamination of Ara-C through feedback inhibition of cytidine deaminase, thus resulting in increased intracellular levels of
Ara-CTP.146,178 Ara-U also increases the fraction of murine leukemic cells entering S phase, thereby enhancing Ara-C cytotoxicity. 159 Accumulation of high levels of
Ara-U may occur in both plasma and CSF in patients receiving high-dose Ara-C, with a possible increase in Ara-CTP formation in brain tissue. 153,160 These
observations may explain the increased risk of neurotoxicity with high-dose Ara-C, especially in those with impaired renal function.

Interference with the DNA incorporation of Ara-C (e.g., by pretreatment with TS inhibitors) may antagonize its cytotoxicity. 161 MTX pretreatment, however, may
increase Ara-CTP formation. Antimetabolites that decrease the competing pools of dCTP may enhance Ara-C anabolism, DNA incorporation, and its subsequent
cytotoxicity. Such agents include inhibitors of RR (fludarabine, hydroxyurea, and high-dose thymidine), and inhibitors of CTP synthase (the investigational drugs
acivicin, cyclopentenol cytosine, and 3-deazauridine).
Interactions between various cytokines and Ara-C may have potential clinical implications. A 24-hour exposure of human myeloid leukemic cells to pIXY 321, a fusion
protein combining granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and interleukin-3, enhances high-dose Ara-C–mediated induction of apoptosis. 162
GEMCITABINE
Gemcitabine (2',2'-difluorodeoxycytidine, dFdC, Gemzar) is a difluorinated analogue of deoxycytidine (see Fig. 19.5-5). This compound has shown significant
preclinical and clinical activity against several human solid tumors, including cancer of the pancreas, small cell and non–small cell lung cancer, and bladder cancer. In
contrast to Ara-C, the spectrum of antitumor activity of gemcitabine is much broader, despite the similarities in structure, metabolism, and mechanism of action. 163 The
most commonly used schedule in clinical practice is 1000 mg/m 2 intravenously administered weekly for 3 weeks, followed by a 1-week rest. This schedule seems to
provide the most acceptable toxicity profile with the greatest dose intensity. This compound has been moved rapidly from phase I/II studies into phase III studies,
mostly in combination with other established anticancer agents.
Intracellular Metabolism and Mechanism of Action
Transport of gemcitabine into cells requires the nucleoside transporter system. Nucleoside transport–deficient cells are highly resistant to the drug. Furthermore, the
specific type of nucleoside transporter expressed on the cell surface may be an important determinant of drug sensitivity. 164,165 The intracellular concentration of
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) may also be an additional sign of the sensitivity to gemcitabine. In head and neck cancer cell lines, ATP-replete cells accumulated
significantly less gemcitabine, when compared with ATP-deplete cells. This finding suggests the existence of an active efflux mechanism for gemcitabine. 166
Gemcitabine is fivefold more lipophilic than Ara-C, a feature that is thought to contribute to the 65% greater rate of accumulation of gemcitabine in cells when
compared with Ara-C.
Gemcitabine requires intracellular activation for its cytotoxic effects. The steps involved in its metabolic activation of gemcitabine are similar to those observed with
Ara-C, with both drugs being activated by the same enzymatic machinery. Deoxycytidine kinase converts dFdC into dFdCMP. 166,167 The drug is subsequently
phosphorylated by nucleoside monophosphate and diphosphate kinases to the respective 5'-diphosphate (dFdCDP) and 5'-triphosphate derivatives (dFdCTP). 166,167
dFdCTP is the major cellular metabolite of dFdC. The intracellular concentration of dFdCTP determines to a large extent its subsequent metabolism. In cells with
lower concentrations of this metabolite (less than 100 µmol/L) the main route of elimination is by deamination, whereas in cells with higher concentrations (greater
than 100 µmol/L) dephosphorylation and urinary excretion predominate. Furthermore, dFdCTP, by inhibiting dCMP deaminase, establishes a mechanism of
self-potentiation, with a marked prolongation of its terminal half-life from 3.6 hours to 19.0 hours. This phenomenon may explain, at least in part, the differences
observed between Ara-C and dFdC in their spectrum of clinical activity.
dFdCDP is an inhibitor of RR, and thus decreases the intracellular pools of deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs). Depletion of dCTP, as a consequence of RR
inhibition, leads to decreased feedback inhibition of deoxycytidine kinase and increased phosphorylation of dFdC. dFdCTP directly inhibits deoxycytidylate
deaminase; as dCTP is a required activator of this enzyme, dFdCDP-mediated depletion of dCTP also diminishes deoxycytidylate deaminase activity. dFdCTP
competes with dCTP for incorporation into DNA by DNA polymerase, and depletion of dCTP favors incorporation of dFdCTP. Inhibition of DNA synthesis may result
from both perturbations of deoxynucleotide pools and interference with DNA chain elongation. 168,169 The majority of incorporated residues are found in the
internucleotide linkage (internal position). Incorporation of [ 3H]dFdC into purified RNA has also been reported. 170 At equimolar concentrations of Ara-C and dFdC,
dFdCTP formation is greater than Ara-CTP, and dFdCTP is retained for a much longer period after drug removal. 166
In vitro primer extension studies indicate that dFdCTP competes with dCTP for incorporation into growing DNA strands by purified DNA polymerases a and e (involved
in DNA replication and repair). 168 The exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase e is unable to remove the incorporated dFdC residue, and a major pause in the
polymerization process occurs once the primer is extended by one deoxynucleotide beyond the dFdC residue. Incorporation of dFdC into a synthetic DNA template
strand interferes with base insertion by bacterial DNA polymerase (Klenow fragment). Thermal denaturation measurements show that dFdCMP•dGMP base pairs are
less stable than dCMP•dGMP base pairs. In intact HL-60 cells, dFdC markedly slowed nascent DNA chain elongation as monitored by pH step alkaline elution. 170
Pulse-chase experiments with [3H]dFdC indicate that a nascent DNA fragment containing [ 3H]dFdC progressed over time into larger DNA intermediates and ultimately
into genomic-length DNA.170 Thus, dFdC does not function as an absolute chain terminator in intact cells. Cytidine deaminase converts dFdC to the inactive uridine
metabolite, dFdU. The drug is cell-cycle specific, and blocks cells in the G 1/S interface. Cytotoxicity is schedule dependent and increases with increasing duration of
exposure. In a T-cell lymphoblastoid line, dFdC-DNA incorporation was necessary for induction of apoptosis.
Mechanisms of Resistance
Several mechanisms of resistance to gemcitabine in cell lines have been described. Nucleoside transport–deficient cells are highly resistant to gemcitabine. 164
Furthermore, the efficiency of gemcitabine uptake can vary significantly according to the specific nucleoside transporter expressed on the cell surface. 164
Several enzymes involved in the intracellular metabolism of gemcitabine have been implicated in the development of resistance to this drug. Initial in vitro studies
suggested that dCK enzyme activity deficiency was the most important cause of resistance to gemcitabine. Gemcitabine-sensitive human ovarian carcinoma cell lines
express tenfold higher dCK enzyme activity than gemcitabine-resistant cells. 171 However, experiments using human epidermoid carcinoma KB cells suggest that the
enzyme RR may play an important role as well. RR is an S-phase–specific, rate-limiting enzyme of the DNA synthesis pathway. Cells exhibiting resistance to
gemcitabine demonstrated a ninefold overexpression of RR mRNA, a twofold overexpression of RR protein, and a 2.3-fold higher RR enzyme activity when compared
with gemcitabine-sensitive cells. 172 The potential role of RR as a determinant of drug resistance has been confirmed in the human erythroleukemia K562 cell line,
where high RR enzyme activity was directly correlated with resistance. 173
The pattern of cross-resistance between various nucleoside analogues may have potential clinical implications. For example, gemcitabine was found to have higher
antitumor activity than Ara-C in both Ara-C–sensitive (L1210 and BCLO) and Ara-C–resistant (LA46 and Bara-C) cell lines. 174 In another in vitro experiment, human
promyelocytic leukemia HL-60 cells were made cladribine resistant, resulting in two resistant sublines (R13 and R23). Neither subline was found to have
cross-resistance to gemcitabine. 175 Enzymatic characterization of these sublines revealed that both dCK and 5'-nucleotidase enzymatic activities are likely to be
involved. The ratio of dCK to 5'-nucleotidase activity was reduced by approximately 65% in both sublines.
Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacokinetics
dFdC can be measured in plasma samples by HPLC and an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. As dFdC is rapidly deaminated, blood collection tubes must
contain tetrahydrouridine for accurate determination of plasma drug levels. After a 30-minute intravenous infusion of dFdC at doses ranging from 50 to 1000 mg/m 2,
the plasma concentration versus time curve (area under the concentration time curve) increases in a linear fashion. 176 The compound is rapidly eliminated from
plasma, mainly by deamination. The median half-life and clearance of dFdC are 8 minutes and 119 L/h/m 2, respectively. 176 Renal clearance of parent drug is less than
10% of the systemic clearance. dFdU, the main catabolic by-product, is eliminated by biphasic kinetics characterized by a long terminal phase (half-life of 14 hours).
The pharmacokinetics and toxicity of dFdC in patients with impaired hepatic and renal function has not yet been determined. The accumulation of dFdCTP in
circulating mononuclear cells appears to be saturated when plasma levels exceeded 15 to 20 µM; the median half-life for intracellular retention was 4.7 hours. 176
A phase I trial of dFdC in cancer patients explored the maximally tolerated duration of dFdC infused at a dose rate of 10 mg/m 2/min, calculated to produce
steady-state levels of 20 µM. The maximally tolerated duration was 8 hours (total dose of 4800 mg/m 2), with mean steady-state plasma levels of approximately 26 µM
and median clearance of 149 L/h. Cellular pharmacokinetics of dFdCTP in circulating leukemic cells vary considerably among patients. In eight patients with linear
dFdCTP elimination, the median half-life was 4.6 hours. In seven patients with biphasic dFdCTP elimination, the median initial and terminal phase half-life values
were 2.5 hours and 6.8 hours.

Toxicity
Although gemcitabine is a relatively well-tolerated drug when used as a single agent, its toxicity profile can vary significantly according to the schedule of
administration. The most commonly used schedule is a weekly dose of 800 to 1250 mg/m 2, administered intravenously over 30 minutes, for 3 weeks on an every
4-week cycle. With this schedule, myelosuppression is the dose-limiting toxicity, and all three lineages can be affected. A published series of more than 3000 patients
treated with gemcitabine for pancreatic carcinoma revealed that nonhematologic side effects are relatively uncommon. They include fever (7.3%), pain (6.8%),
asthenia (6.0%), abdominal pain (5.5%), dyspnea (5.0%), vomiting (3.9%), anorexia (3.6%), and deep venous thrombosis (3.2%). 177 A particularly unusual side effect
of dFdC is anal pruritus, which may be prevented with the use of corticosteroids.
Although dyspnea is a relatively uncommon side effect of gemcitabine, its development during the treatment with the drug may require discontinuation of the
treatment. Continuation of treatment once dyspnea develops may lead to a fatal outcome. 178 Patients usually present with a clinical picture consistent with acute
respiratory distress syndrome, with hypoxemia, pulmonary infiltrates, and no evidence of left ventricular failure. The onset of acute respiratory distress syndrome in
these patients can take place anywhere between 2 and 40 days after the first dose of the drug. Thus, close monitoring of patients for any change in baseline
respiratory status is crucial.
A rare yet potentially fatal complication of dFdC is hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS). 179 The incidence of this complication has been estimated to be less than 1%.
Early recognition of HUS is important and should prompt the immediate discontinuation of therapy to prevent death from HUS-related complications.
Drug Interactions
Gemcitabine has been combined with various chemotherapeutic agents in the treatment of several solid tumors. Preclinical in vitro studies have provided evidence of
synergism between gemcitabine and various anticancer agents to support these associations. Cisplatin is one of the agents most commonly used in combination with
gemcitabine. In vitro studies with different human cancer cell lines have shown synergistic interaction between gemcitabine and cisplatin. 179,180 and 181 This synergism is
thought to be mainly due to an increase in platinum-DNA adduct formation, which in turn results from dFdC incorporation into DNA. 180 Synergism has also been
demonstrated between gemcitabine and etoposide in human ovarian and lung cancer cell lines. 182 Moreover, sequencing of agents in this combination is important as
the synergism is maximum when cells are exposed first to etoposide and then to gemcitabine. 182 This may be due to the fact that cells exposed first to etoposide have
low levels of dCTP in the cytoplasm, which then allow for enhanced phosphorylation of dFdC and subsequent incorporation of dFdCTP into DNA. 182
6-THIOPURINES
The development of the purine analogues in cancer chemotherapy began in the early 1950s with the synthesis of the thiopurines. For this seminal work, Hitchings and
Elion received the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1988. The purine analogues, 6-MP and 6-thioguanine (6-TG) continue to be used principally in the management of
acute leukemia.183 6-MP has an important role in the maintenance therapy of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), whereas 6-TG is active in remission induction and
in the maintenance therapy of AML. These analogues have a single substitution of a thiol group in place of the 6-hydroxyl group of the purine base ( Fig. 19.5-7). 6-MP
is a structural analogue of hypoxanthine, whereas 6-TG is an analogue of guanine. Azathioprine is a derivative of 6-MP and acts as a prodrug to provide sustained
release of 6-MP.

FIGURE 19.5-7. Purine analogues and their physiologic counterparts, hypoxanthine and guanine.

Intracellular Metabolism and Mechanism of Action
6-MP and 6-TG act similarly with regard to their cellular biochemistry. In their respective monophosphate nucleotide form, they inhibit de novo purine synthesis and
purine interconversion reactions, whereas the nucleotide triphosphate metabolites are incorporated directly into nucleic acids. The relative contribution of each of
these actions to the mechanism of cytotoxicity of these agents is unclear. 183 Both 6-MP and 6-TG are converted to their respective monophosphate forms by
hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase (HGPRT) ( Fig. 19.5-8). These ribonucleotide monophosphates inhibit the first step of de novo purine synthesis
catalyzed by glutamine phosphoribosylpyrophosphate aminotransferase and block the conversion of inosinic acid to adenylic acid or to guanylic acid. Inhibition of
purine nucleotide synthesis leads to the build-up of PRPP, which facilitates the activation of 6-MP and 6-TG to their active nucleotide forms by HGPRT.

FIGURE 19.5-8. Metabolic pathways for activation and degradation of 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP). HGPRT, hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase; TPMT,
6-thiopurine methyltransferase.

Inhibitors of de novo purine biosynthesis, such as MTX, interact in a synergistic manner with 6-thiopurines because the MTX-induced block in purine synthesis
expands the PRPP pool required for thiopurine activation. Both ribonucleotide and deoxyribonucleotide metabolites of the thiopurines are formed, which can then be
incorporated into cellular RNA and DNA. Incorporation of fraudulent nucleotides into DNA interferes with DNA replication and results in the formation of DNA strand
breaks. 184 In some model systems, incorporation of thiopurine nucleotides into DNA correlates with cytotoxicity.
In addition to 6-MP effects on DNA biosynthesis, there is now evidence that the glycolytic pathway may also be affected. 6-Phosphofructo-2-kinase, an essential
enzyme for carbohydrate metabolism, is inhibited by 6-MP. 185 Finally, this class of compounds may inhibit the process of angiogenesis, as studies have shown in vivo

antiangiogenic activity of a thiopurine metabolite, methylmercaptopurine riboside, in a human endometrial adenocarcinoma xenograft model. 186
Mechanisms of Resistance
Biochemical resistance to 6-thiopurines results from a decreased ability to form cytotoxic nucleotide metabolites. In experimental systems, resistant cells express
either a complete or partial deficiency of HGPRT. 187 An alteration in the affinity of HGPRT for 6-thiopurines has also been described. 188 Studies have shown that
decreased transmembrane transport of 6-TG can also result in drug resistance. 189 In the HHUA, DLD-1, and HCT 166 human cancer cell lines, MMR-defective cells
exhibited higher levels of drug resistance and increased mutagenic response at the HGPRT locus to 6-TG when compared with their MMR-proficient counterparts.
Thus, the inability to properly repair damaged or mutant DNA may provide a selective growth advantage for MMR-defective cells. Moreover, this finding may provide a
mechanism by which 6-TG treatment results in the development of secondary malignancies. 190
In clinical samples derived from patients with AML, drug resistance has also been associated with either increased concentrations of a membrane-bound alkaline
phosphatase or a conjugating enzyme, 6-thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT). 191 Patients who express high levels of TPMT activity are unable to form sufficiently
high levels of active nucleotide metabolites after treatment with 6-MP. As such, they may be more likely to benefit from treatment with 6-TG. 192
Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacokinetics
HPLC analysis using the phenylmercury or sulfonated derivatives of the thiopurines is able to detect plasma drug levels as low as 0.1 mM. An HPLC method was
developed to measure thiopurine levels in erythrocytes in the 18 to 20 pmol range. 193 Oral doses of 6-MP of 70 to 100 mg/m2/d are commonly used in the maintenance
therapy of ALL. Oral absorption of 6-MP is highly erratic, with only 16% to 50% of the administered dose reaching the systemic circulation. This effect is mainly due to
rapid first-pass metabolism in the liver. 194 Food intake and coadministration with the antibiotic cotrimoxazole significantly reduce drug absorption. The variable
bioavailability of oral 6-MP may be an important determinant of therapeutic outcome, because low plasma drug concentration over time measurements correlate with
an increased risk of relapse in children with ALL. 195 6-MP bioavailability is increased when combined with high-dose (2 to 5 g/m 2 intravenous) MTX. 196 Studies have
shown that MTX inhibits xanthine oxidase, an enzyme important in the catabolism of thiopurines. 197
Oral 6-MP is well distributed into most body compartments, with the exception of the CSF. With high-dose intravenous 6-MP (200 mg/m 2 bolus followed by 800 mg/m2
over 8 hours), a CSF to plasma ratio of 0.15 is achieved. This schedule is currently being used to prevent CNS relapse in ALL. 198 Approximately 30% of the drug
binds weakly to plasma proteins. The plasma half-life is approximately 50 minutes after intravenous injection and 90 minutes after oral administration. When studied in
children with ALL, plasma concentrations and erythrocyte thioguanine nucleotide levels are highly variable and independent from dose. 199
The major route of drug elimination is via metabolism by several enzymatic pathways. 6-MP is oxidized to the inactive metabolite 6-thiouric acid by xanthine oxidase.
Enhanced 6-MP toxicity may result from the concomitant administration of both oral and intravenous 6-MP and the xanthine oxidase inhibitor allopurinol. 200 In patients
receiving both 6-MP and allopurinol, the 6-MP dose should be reduced by at least 50–75%.
6-MP also undergoes S-methylation by the enzyme TPMT to yield 6-methylmercaptopurine. After further phosphorylation, 6-methylmercaptopurine nucleotides are,
themselves, capable of inhibiting de novo purine biosynthesis, but to a lesser extent than thioguanine nucleotides (TGNs). TPMT plays a similar role in 6-TG and
azathioprine metabolism. 201 It has been shown that TPMT enzyme activity may vary considerably between patients. Moreover, the levels of TPMT enzyme activity
correlate inversely with intracellular levels of TGNs and with the duration of 6-MP–induced cytopenia, suggesting that the level of inherited TPMT activity may affect
directly 6-MP cytotoxicity and host toxicity. 191 Due to an autosomal codominant genetic polymorphism, a series of TPMT phenotypes, with alleles of differing enzymatic
activity, are present in the general population. Point mutations or loss of alleles of TPMT resulting in altered enzyme activity correlate with a defect in thiopurine
metabolism, thus defining a true pharmacogenetic syndrome. 202 A polymerase chain reaction–based method is widely used for the genetic detection of these TPMT
mutations.203 Approximately 0.3% of the white population expresses either a homozygous deletion or mutation of both alleles of the TPMT gene. In these patients,
grossly elevated TGN concentrations, profound myelotoxicity with pancytopenia, and extensive gastrointestinal symptoms are seen after only a brief course of
thiopurine treatment. 201 An estimated 10% of patients may be at increased risk for toxicity due to heterozygous loss of the gene or a mutant allele coding for a less
enzymatically active TPMT. 202,203 Drug interactions affecting TPMT activity have also been reported with aspirin, sulfasalazine, 5-aminosalicylic acid, furosemide, and
disulfiram.201
Renal excretion of 6-MP is minimal, but at high doses, as much as 20% to 40% of the drug is removed by the kidneys. 204 Exceedingly high doses of 6-MP (more than
1 g/m2) in children may cause renal precipitation of drug with hematuria and crystalluria. In patients with renal dysfunction, dose reductions of 6-MP should be
considered.
6-THIOGUANINE
The main intracellular pathway for 6-TG activation is catalyzed by HGPRT, with resultant formation of ribonucleotide monophosphates. Although the main metabolites
of 6-TG are TGNs, thioinosine nucleotides are formed as well. However, the clinical significance of these respective metabolites as determinants of 6-TG cytotoxicity
remains unclear.205 Although higher erythrocyte levels of TGNs are detected after treatment with maximum tolerated dose levels of 6-TG than 6-MP, this
pharmacodynamic parameter does not clearly correlate with the myelosuppression associated with 6-TG. 206
6-TG is administered orally in doses of 75 to 200 mg/m 2/d for 5 to 7 days in the treatment of AML. Its oral bioavailability is erratic, with peak plasma levels occurring 2
to 4 hours after ingestion. The median plasma half-life of 6-TG is approximately 90 minutes. The catabolism of 6-TG differs from 6-MP in that S-methylation with
subsequent removal of the sulfur atom is an important pathway of drug elimination. 183 In a second catabolic pathway, 6-TG undergoes deamination by the enzyme
guanine deaminase (guanase), resulting in 6-thioxanthene, which is then oxidized by xanthine oxidase to 6-thiouric acid. In contrast to 6-MP, 6-TG is not a direct
substrate for xanthine oxidase. Because the inhibition of xanthine oxidase results in the accumulation of 6-thioxanthene, an inactive metabolite, adjustments in 6-TG
dosage are not required for patients receiving allopurinol.
Toxicity
The major dose-related toxicities of 6-MP are myelosuppression and gastrointestinal toxicity. Leukopenia and thrombocytopenia are maximal 7 days after treatment.
Full hematologic recovery usually occurs after 14 days. In TPMT-deficient patients, dose reduction to 5% to 25% of the standard dose (75 mg/m 2/d) is necessary to
prevent excessive toxicity. 207 Gastrointestinal toxicities include nausea and vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, and stomatitis. 6-MP hepatotoxicity occurs in up to 30% of
adult patients and is manifested as mainly cholestatic jaundice, although elevations of hepatic transaminases may also be seen. Hepatotoxicity is usually mild and
reversible after discontinuation of 6-MP, but frank hepatic necrosis can occur after high doses of the drug. Combinations of 6-MP with other known hepatotoxic agents
should be avoided, and liver function test results should be closely monitored. The mechanism of liver toxicity is not known, but may relate to the P-450–dependent
metabolism of 6-MP to a hepatotoxic metabolite or accumulation of 6-MP metabolites in the liver. 183 6-TG also causes dose-limiting bone marrow suppression but is
associated with fewer gastrointestinal side effects and less hepatotoxicity than 6-MP.
As a class of drugs, the 6-thiopurine analogues are potent suppressors of cell-mediated immunity. As such, prolonged therapy results in an increased predisposition
to bacterial and parasitic infections. Given their immunosuppressive effects, these agents have been used to prevent rejection of transplanted organs and to treat
autoimmune diseases, such as Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, and rheumatoid arthritis. Therapeutic immunosuppression occurs at 100 mg/d, a dose associated
with only mild leukopenia. Long-term immunosuppressive therapy with azathioprine increases the risk of squamous carcinoma of the skin, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma,
and Kaposi's sarcoma. Chronic 6-MP treatment is associated with teratogenic effects during the first trimester of pregnancy, and AML has been reported as a
secondary malignancy after 6-MP treatment for Crohn's disease. 208
FLUDARABINE
Fludarabine (9-b-D-arabinosyl-2-fluoroadenine, Fludara) was synthesized as part of a rational process to develop more active analogues of cytarabine ( Fig.
19.5-9).209 The first compound in this series was adenine arabinoside (vidarabine; Ara-A). However, this compound was deaminated to its inactive form to a significant
extent, thereby negating its clinical application. The 2'-fluoro derivative of Ara-A was subsequently found to be relatively resistant to deamination, but was difficult to
formulate and poorly soluble. Addition of a 5'-monophosphate moiety to the sugar group yielded fludarabine, which is relatively resistant to deamination and displays

enhanced solubility.

FIGURE 19.5-9. Structures of adenosine analogues.

Mechanism of Action
After intravenous administration, F-Ara-adenosine monophosphate (F-Ara-AMP) is rapidly dephosphorylated to F-Ara-A, which enters cells by nucleoside-specific
membrane transport mechanisms. The es and ei nucleoside transporter systems facilitate the cellular uptake of the hydrophilic nucleoside analogues. 210 F-Ara-A is
then rephosphorylated by dCK to F-Ara-AMP, which is subsequently metabolized to the triphosphate form. This nucleotide is the active metabolite of the drug. It
competes with deoxyadenosine triphosphate (dATP) for incorporation into DNA, and serves as a highly effective chain terminator. In addition, F-Ara-ATP directly
inhibits DNA polymerases involved in DNA synthesis and repair, such as DNA polymerase a and b, and inhibits other enzymes involved in DNA synthesis, such as
DNA primase, DNA ligase I and RR. DNA polymerase e is unable to remove F-Ara-AMP from the 3'-end of DNA even in the presence of excess enzyme and substrate
nucleotides, resulting in the formation of dead-end complexes. 211
Fludarabine is also incorporated into RNA, causing inhibition of RNA function, processing, and mRNA translation. 212 In contrast to other antimetabolites, fludarabine is
also active against nondividing lymphocytes. In fact, the primary effect of fludarabine may result from activation of apoptosis, as evidenced by the presence of typical
apoptotic fragmentation of DNA into high-molecular-weight fragments, after drug treatment. 213 The induction of apoptosis may explain the activity of this drug in
indolent lymphoproliferative diseases with relatively low S-phase fractions. 214
Mechanisms of Resistance
Fludarabine -resistant cell lines, such as JOK-1 [human hairy cell leukemia (HCL)], K562 (human erythroleukemia), and L1210 (murine leukemia) have been
established. In these resistant lines, nucleoside transport of F-Ara-A is intact, and no alterations in intracellular drug accumulation or multidrug-resistant (mdr 1)
expression are observed. However, decreased dCK activity with diminished intracellular formation of F-Ara-ATP is the principal mechanism of resistance in each of
these cell lines. 215 Subsequent work has shown that deletion of one allele of deoxycytidine kinase is sufficient to result in decreased expression of dCK. Of note, a
high degree of cross-resistance develops to multiple nucleoside analogues requiring activation by dCK, including Ara-C, 2-CdA, and gemcitabine. 216 Fludarabine
resistance in WSU-CLL xenografts in SCID mice can be decreased by pretreatment with bryostatin, a macrocyclic lactone. 217 Although the underlying mechanisms for
this interaction remain to be defined, preliminary studies suggest that bryostatin may induce differentiation of B-CLL cells into HCL-like cells, with expression of
CD11c, CD25, and tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP), markers typically seen in HCL.
Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacokinetics
Peak concentrations of F-Ara-A are reached 3 to 4 hours after intravenous or oral administration. Mean plasma levels are proportional to dose. After intravenous
administration, the decline in plasma levels has been reported to be bi-exponential, with a distribution half-life of 0.6 to 2.0 hours and a terminal half-life of 6.9 to 19.7
hours. However, other reports describe a three-compartment model with a terminal half-life between 10 and 30 hours. 212,218 The rate-limiting step in elimination is
release from tissues and renal function affecting clearance. Dose adjustment in the setting of renal impairment is recommended, and a 30% dose reduction in patients
with a serum creatinine above 1.5 mg/dL or creatinine clearance below 70 mL/min should be considered.
The median peak concentration of F-Ara-ATP in lymphocytes of leukemic patients occurs approximately 4 hours after the start of a 30-minute intravenous infusion of
25 mg/m2. Intracellular F-Ara-ATP elimination exhibits a single phase with a dose-dependent terminal phase. The oral bioavailability of liquid fludarabine is 60% to
80%, leading to approximately two-thirds of the intracellular F-Ara-ATP levels in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells achieved with intravenous administration. 219
Treatment
Fludarabine is the most active single agent in the treatment of CLL. 220,221 and 222 It is also active against indolent non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, 223,224 prolymphocytic
leukemia, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, and Waldenström's macroglobulinemia. 225 This agent has shown promising activity in approximately one-third of patients with
mantle cell lymphoma, albeit with relatively brief response. 226 In contrast to its activity in hematologic malignancies, this compound displays minimal activity against
common solid tumors.
Toxicity
In initial trials, fludarabine, when administered as a single 260 mg/m 2 dose or 112 mg/m2 given daily for 5 days, resulted in profound myelosuppression. This effect
was not initially predicted from preclinical in vivo studies in mice and beagle dogs, given the extensive tissue binding and relatively low renal excretion in humans. In
addition, a dose range of 75 to 150 mg/m 2 four times a day for 5 to 7 days resulted in severe prohibitive neurotoxicity characterized by delayed onset cortical
blindness, seizures, coma, and death. 227 Subsequent trials demonstrated that fludarabine could be safely administered at much lower doses of 25 to 30 mg/m 2 daily
for 5 days every 28 days. At standard doses, neurotoxicity occurs in approximately 15% of patients. This toxicity is rarely severe, generally reversible, and usually
presents as headache, somnolence, or peripheral neuropathy. 228
At currently used doses, myelosuppression and immunosuppression are the major side effects of fludarabine. 229 Dose-limiting and possibly cumulative lymphopenia
and thrombocytopenia are well established. 218 Suppression of the immune system affects T-cell more than B-cell function. Fevers, often in the setting of neutropenia,
occur in 20% to 30% of patients. Lymphocyte counts, particularly CD4+ cells, decrease rapidly after initiation of therapy, and levels can drop to as low as 150/µL by
approximately 6 months.230 CD4+ cell recovery is slow and may take longer than 1 year to recover to normal levels. Common opportunistic pathogens include herpes
zoster, Candida, and Pneumocystis carinii.229 The addition of prednisone to fludarabine does not improve the response rate or survival, but significantly increases the
risk of opportunistic infections, notably listeriosis and Pneumocystis carinii.230 If concurrent corticosteroids are necessary, such as in patients with autoimmune anemia
or thrombocytopenia, long-term prophylaxis against Pneumocystis carinii is mandatory. Hemolytic anemia has been observed, and in some instances, has resulted in
death on rechallenge with fludarabine. 231 Thrombocytopenia, precipitation of Evan's syndrome, and fulminant fatal myelofibrosis have also been reported. The
prolonged immunosuppression experienced with fludarabine has raised the possibility of an increased incidence of secondary malignancies. However, this increased
risk is now thought to be due to the underlying immune defects of the malignancy and not to the carcinogenic effects of the nucleoside analogue. 232
Tumor lysis syndrome occurs in less than 1% of patients, and in some cases, it can be fatal. However, this event does not usually recur on retreatment with
fludarabine. Prophylaxis is not uniformly effective. Other uncommon toxicities include rash, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, stomatitis, anorexia, increased salivation,
abdominal cramps, a metallic taste, transient elevations in hepatic enzymes, and renal dysfunction. Treatment-associated disseminated skin rash, progressing to
pemphigus-like epidermal necrolysis, has been described. Pulmonary toxicity, in the form of interstitial pneumonitis, can develop after multiple courses of treatment. At
times, the pulmonary sequelae may be difficult to distinguish from those associated with opportunistic infections. This toxicity usually responds to corticosteroids and

does not tend to recur on retreatment.
Drug Interactions
Purine analogues achieve significant response rates in low-grade lymphomas, presumably due to their ability to induce apoptosis in these otherwise drug-resistant
malignancies. The responses seen, however, are mostly partial and of short duration. This fact has fostered interest in identifying drug regimens incorporating
fludarabine with enhanced activity. Fludarabine inhibits the nucleotide excision repair used by cells to remove the DNA cross-links induced by alkylating agents
(cyclophosphamide, cisplatin). 233 Complete response rates of nearly 90% have been observed when fludarabine and cyclophosphamide are used in combination for
patients with previously untreated low-grade lymphomas. 234 The combination of fludarabine with the anthracycline analogue mitoxantrone in the presence or absence
of dexamethasone (FN and FND regimens) has been successfully used to treat indolent non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. 235,236 In fact, response rates in excess of 90%,
with half of these being complete responses, are seen with the triple combination, FND. This compares favorably with the 60% to 70% response rate observed with
single-agent fludarabine. 224
Fludarabine-induced dCTP depletion increases deoxycytidine kinase activity in K562 human leukemic cells. This enzyme, in addition to playing a key role in
generating active fludarabine metabolites, is also capable of phosphorylating Ara-C into its active metabolite, Ara-CTP. The resulting synergistic effect of fludarabine
on Ara-C is now established both in vitro237 and in vivo in leukemic blast cells derived from patients with AML. 238 This combination has clinical efficacy in childhood
AML in combination with idarubicin, 239 in adult CLL, 240 in refractory or relapsed AML, 241,242 and perhaps in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.
The immunosuppressive effect of fludarabine is being used in a novel, nonmyeloablative bone marrow transplant preparative regimen called transplant lite. The goal
of this approach is to achieve allogeneic stem cell engraftment and graft-versus-leukemia/lymphoma effect in patients with CLL and low-grade lymphomas. In a pilot
study, engraftment was achieved in 11 of 15 patients, with eight showing complete response. 243
CLADRIBINE
2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine (Cladribine, 2-CdA) is a deoxyadenosine purine nucleoside analogue. A single substitution of a chlorine atom for a hydrogen atom at the 2
position of the purine ring of deoxyadenosine renders this compound resistant to adenosine deaminase (ADA) (see Fig. 19.5-9). It was developed initially as an
immunosuppressive agent. 2-CdA exhibits a dose-dependent in vitro inhibition of lymphoid neoplasms and human leukemic cell lines, 244 but has no activity against
solid tumors. Currently, it is the drug of choice in HCL with activity in low-grade lymphoproliferative disorders as well.
Mechanism of Action
Deoxyadenosine is cleaved within cells by the enzyme ADA, to the deoxyinosine form. A deficiency of this enzyme leads to toxic accumulation of deoxyadenosine in
lymphocytes, manifesting as the severe combined immunodeficiency clinical syndrome. 2-CdA enters cells via the nucleoside transporter system. 245 Given its
resistance to deamination by ADA, an ADA-deficiency-like state develops, in which 2-CdA accumulates within cells, eventually reaching lymphotoxic levels. On entry
into the cell, it first undergoes conversion to cladribine-monophosphate (Cld-AMP), which is then eventually metabolized to the active metabolite,
cladribine-triphosphate (Cld-ATP). 246 The rate-limiting step is catalyzed by dCK. In contrast, catabolism of 2-CdA is mediated by a 5'-nucleotidase. The greatest
accumulation of Cld-ATP is observed in cells with high levels of dCK and low 5'-nucleotidase activity. Cld-ATP competitively inhibits incorporation of the normal
nucleotide dATP into DNA, a process that results in termination of chain elongation. 213 Progressive accumulation of Cld-ATP leads to an imbalance in
deoxyribonucleotide pools, thereby inhibiting further DNA synthesis and repair. 247 At concentrations of 0.3 µM, 2-CdA inhibits DNA synthesis by 90% within 30
minutes.248 The accumulation of unrepaired DNA breaks over time may initiate the apoptosis of quiescent, nondividing lymphocytes. Activation of the caspase-3
proteolytic cascade has been implicated as a potential mechanism for the onset of apoptosis. 249 Finally, 2-CdA is a potent inhibitor of RR, and in so doing, it may
further inhibit the synthesis of key nucleotide substrates required for DNA biosynthesis.
Mechanisms of Resistance
Resistance to 2-CdA has been attributed to altered intracellular metabolism of the drug. A reduction in dCK activity, the enzyme responsible for generating cytotoxic
nucleotide metabolites, is a major determinant of acquired resistance. 250 Cld-AMP and Cld-ATP are dephosphorylated by the cytoplasmic enzyme, 5'-nucleotidase.
WSU-CLL cells, derived from a patient with CLL, exhibit both low levels of dCK expression, and high-levels of 5'-nucleotidase, and accordingly, they are resistant to
2-CdA. Interestingly, restoration of 2-CdA chemosensitivity by pretreatment of WSU-CLL cells in vitro with bryostatin has been reported. Bryostatin may induce
differentiation of CLL cells into a hairy cell–like phenotype, evidenced by the induced expression of TRAP, CD11c, and CD25 in WSU-CLL cells. 251
Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacokinetic analysis suggests a two-compartment model, with mean a and b half-lives of 35 ± 12 minutes and 6.5 ± 2.5 hours, respectively. The steady-state
concentration after a 2- or 24-hour infusion of 0.14 mg/kg was 22.5 ± 11.1 n M. After a 2-hour infusion of 0.14 mg/kg, the mean maximum plasma concentrations were
in the range of 100 to 400 nmol/L. The disposition of 2-CdA in plasma remains linear over a dose range of 0.2 to 2.5 mg/m 2, with limited interindividual variability. 252
Although there seems to be a close relationship between dose and plasma steady-state concentrations, the relationship between dose and clinical activity remains to
be defined. 253 When mean plasma concentrations were fitted to a three-compartment model, the half-lives of the a, b, and g phases ranged between 3 and 12
minutes, 0.7 to 1.5 hours, and 5.7 to 19.0 hours, respectively.
The dose of 2-CdA used in early clinical trials was 0.09 to 0.10 mg/kg/d administered as a 7-day continuous infusion. As the long terminal half-life suggested the
feasibility of intermittent infusions, 2-CdA has also been tested as a 2-hour infusion of 0.09 to 0.10 mg/kg/d for 5 to 7 days or a 1-hour infusion at 6 mg/m 2 for 5 days
with a 28-day cycle. A dose-escalation study of bolus daily cladribine established no dose-limiting nonhematologic toxicity up to 21.5 mg/m 2/d, given on a daily 1-hour
intravenous bolus infusion for 5 days to patients with advanced hematologic malignancies. At higher dose levels, prolonged cytopenias and severe infections define
the upper dose limit of the drug. 254 In a small series of patients with HCL, no significant difference in response rate or toxicity was observed between a 7-day
continuous infusion and a daily 2-hour bolus for 5 days. The daily dose for 5 days appears to be better suited as an outpatient regimen. After a 2-hour or a continuous
infusion of 0.12 mg/kg in patients with CLL, mean intracellular concentrations of 2-CdA nucleotides are 12.2 and 10.8 µmol/L, respectively. Intracellular concentrations
of phosphorylated CdA derivatives thus exceed plasma concentrations of the metabolites by several hundredfold. 255
In circulating leukemic cells of CLL patients treated with 2-CdA for 10 mg/m 2/d for 3 days, Cld-AMP and Cld-ATP median half-lives of 15 and 10 hours were observed,
respectively. While maximum plasma 2-CdA and intracellular Cld-AMP concentrations correlate well, no clear relationship exists between the level of deoxycytidine
kinase activity, the levels of the intracellular metabolites (Cld-AMP, Cld-ATP), and response to treatment. 253 These findings indicate that other, as yet, unknown
determinants of clinical efficacy may be present.
2-CdA is effectively cleared by the kidneys. Renal clearance is approximately 50%, while 20% to 35% of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine. 252 2-CdA is able
to cross the blood–brain barrier and penetrates into the CSF. While CSF concentrations in patients, in the absence of meningeal disease, reach only 25% of detected
plasma levels, CSF levels exceed plasma levels in patients with meningeal involvement. 252
The bioavailability of the drug is almost 100% when given at a dose of 0.14 mg/kg via the subcutaneous route. The area under the curve achievable with
subcutaneous administration is almost identical to that of the intravenous route. 256 Oral 2-CdA reaches lower, but clinically relevant levels of bioavailability at 37% to
51%. Absorption of the oral form is decreased by gastric pH values below 2, an effect that cannot be prevented or reversed with concomitant proton pump inhibitor
use. The bioavailability of oral 2-CdA correlated linearly with dosing in a small study with oral and intravenous cross-over design. 257 Oral dosing showed no
cumulative peak concentration or toxicity, and its pharmacokinetics are well-described by a three-compartment model. An oral dose of 0.28 mg/kg achieved similar
peak concentrations and area under the concentration time curve as 0.14 mg/kg given either intravenously or subcutaneously. 256 The overall feasibility of intermittent
intravenous, subcutaneous, or oral dosing suggests that these different routes of administration may compete with and possibly replace continuous infusional
schedules.
Treatment

A single course of CdA achieves durable complete remissions in 65% to 91% of patients with HCL. 258,259 and 260 Salvage treatment of patients previously treated with
IFN-a or splenectomy is as effective as first-line treatment. Maintenance therapy is not required. Although minimal residual disease is often found on reexamination of
bone marrow specimens of HCL patients in clinical complete response, relapse rates are low. Retreatment with cladribine results in complete response in up to 60%
of relapsing patients. 261 However, it remains unclear whether cladribine offers any significant long-term survival benefit over another nucleoside analogue, pentostatin.
Responses in patients with CLL and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma tend to be brief, and salvage of relapsed or refractory disease is less efficacious than in HCL. 262,263
2-CdA achieves high response rates in pediatric patients with AML, but not in adult patients. 2-CdA has minimal activity against solid tumors.
Toxicity
At conventional doses, myelotoxicity is dose limiting. Decreased counts in all three cell lines are typically observed. Thrombocytopenia usually recovers within 2 to 4
weeks, and neutropenia in 3 to 5 weeks, after a single course of the drug. Severe, prolonged myelotoxicity is reported, however, after repeated cycles of cladribine
used in the treatment of CLL or low-grade lymphomas. 229 Severe autoimmune hemolytic anemia with fatal bone marrow aplasia has been described in CLL patients
receiving repeated cycles of the drug, as CdA-induced lymphopenia may exacerbate autoimmune hemolysis. Of note, foci of bone marrow hypoplasia are seen in
cladribine-treated patients, although the long-term clinical significance of this effect remains unclear.
Immunosuppression accounts for the late morbidity observed in CdA-treated patients. Lymphocyte counts, particularly CD4+ cells, decrease within 1 to 4 weeks of
drug administration and may remain depressed for several years. 264 After discontinuation of cladribine, a median time of up to 40 months may be required for
complete recovery of normal CD4+ counts.229 Fevers occur in 40% to 50% of patients, typically correlating with the duration of granulocytopenia. These episodes may
be profound, prolonged, and cumulative. 259 Opportunistic infections are common, although usually seen less frequently than with fludarabine. Herpes zoster is most
typical, and a variety of other pathogens are also seen, including Candida, Pneumocystis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Listeria monocytogenes, Cryptococcus
neoformans, Aspergillus, cytomegalovirus, and common bacterial infections. Infectious complications correlate with decreases in CD4+ count, and they are more
frequent with repeated courses of therapy. 229 Treatment-related deaths have been reported in more than 30% of patients. 265
In patients with HCL and CLL, long-term studies have failed to identify an increase in drug-related mortality. Specifically, initial concerns about an increased risk for
secondary malignancies have not been confirmed, as the incidence of second cancers is not higher than what would be expected from the underlying hematologic
disorder.232,266
Severe neurotoxicity was encountered at high doses of 2-CdA in phase I trials, with quadriparesis and paraparesis, proximal neuromyopathy, and rarely,
Brown-Séquard and Guillain-Barré syndromes. At currently recommended doses, mild to moderate neurotoxicity occurs in 15% of patients and is, at least, partly
reversible with discontinuation of the drug. 228
Tumor lysis syndrome is rare, tends to occur after the first course, and is generally mild and reversible. However, in rare instances, this process may be fatal, even in
patients with prior therapy. Cardiotoxicity is uncommon, but cardiac deaths have been reported, mainly in patients with a prior cardiac history. Pulmonary
complications of 2-CdA therapy are uncommon, but in some cases, they have been fatal. Rashes, although uncommon, may be severe and can present as fatal toxic
epidermal necrolysis. Mild to severe gastrointestinal toxicities occur in 15% of patients, with nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, and there have been rare reports of
anorexia, severe mucositis, or both. Transient elevations in hepatic enzymes may occur, with exacerbation of hepatitis B, which may be fatal. Renal failure occurs only
at high doses.
Drug Interactions
Inhibition of RR by 2-CdA depletes intracellular dCTP pools. This effect leads to compensatory increases in intracellular dCK activity. dCK activity plays a critical role
in the formation of the active intracellular Ara-C metabolite, Ara-CTP. Synergistic interaction between 2-CdA and Ara-C was observed in leukemic blast cells isolated
from patients with AML, in which 2-CdA pretreatment led to increases of intracellular Ara-CTP pools by up to 40%, with sustained inhibition of DNA synthesis in the
circulating leukemia blasts. 267 Studies are ongoing to translate the positive interaction between Ara-C and 2-CdA into the clinical setting.
2'-DEOXYCOFORMYCIN
2'-Deoxycoformycin (Pentostatin), a fermentation product of Streptomyces antibioticus, was developed as a potent inhibitor of ADA (see Fig. 19.5-9).268 ADA is present
in high concentrations in lymphoid tissues, and this enzyme plays a vital role in the differentiation of both T and B cells. Genetic absence of ADA leads to severe
combined immunodeficiency disorder in children, and this syndrome is characterized by profound T- and B-cell lymphopenia. Inhibition of this enzyme leads to an
accumulation of deoxyadenosine as there is no alternate route for its metabolic conversion to deoxyinosine and uric acid. Deoxyadenosine is subsequently
phosphorylated by deoxycytidine kinase to deoxyadenosine monophosphate, which is then further metabolized to the triphosphate form. This metabolite accumulates
within cells and inhibits RR, a key enzyme in DNA synthesis. 212,268
Mechanism of Action
Pentostatin enters cells via the nucleoside transport system, and once within the cell, it forms a tight inhibitory complex with ADA. 268 Exposure of both murine L1210
leukemic cells and normal resting human lymphocytes results in progressive accumulation of DNA breaks along with a decrease in RNA synthesis. In response to
drug treatment, DNA repair is activated, resulting in depletion of critical intracellular nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide levels. This then leads to exhaustion of ATP
pools, resulting in eventual cell death.
Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacokinetics
After rapid intravenous infusions (1 to 9 minutes), pentostatin shows dose-independent first-order elimination, with a biphasic decay characteristic of a
two-compartment open model. The rapid disposition phase is short, with a mean half-life of 8.72 minutes and a mean terminal half-life of 4.93 hours. The mean
volume of distribution is 23.1 ± 6.16 L/m 2, and the mean steady-state volume of distribution is 20.0 ± 5.31 L/m 2. Nearly 100% of an administered dose is excreted in
the urine, and there is a significant correlation between plasma levels and creatinine clearance. 269
Treatment
Initial clinical trials with high doses of pentostatin in patients with ALL and HCL revealed prohibitive myelosuppression and neurotoxicity, the latter manifesting as
somnolence, lethargy, confusion, seizures, and coma. 270 Current standard regimens consist of 4 mg/m 2 doses every 1 or 2 weeks. 271 With this schedule, pentostatin
exhibits remarkable activity against HCL. In phase II studies, durable response rates over 90% are routinely achieved, and maintenance treatment is not required. On
relapse, retreatment with the drug can be effective. 272 In a large, prospective phase III trial, pentostatin achieved significantly higher response rates (79% vs. 38%)
and relapse-free-survival than IFN-a 2a. However, this effect was not translated into overall survival benefit. 273 Although a small number of pentostatin-pretreated
patients show good response to cladribine, pentostatin use in patients who have progressed on cladribine has not been investigated in a systematic manner. Minimal
residual disease on immunohistochemical examination of bone marrow specimens is detectable in 20% to 40% of HCL patients, who achieve complete response after
pentostatin treatment. Although minimal residual disease may be associated with an increased risk of relapse, it remains unclear whether treatment of asymptomatic
patients with minimal residual disease provides clinical benefit. 274
Pentostatin is also active in CLL, prolymphocytic leukemia, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, indolent non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, chronic myelogenous leukemia, and
Langerhans' cell histiocytosis. 268,275 Overall response rates in these malignancies are less than that achieved with either fludarabine and cladribine or that observed
with pentostatin in HCL. No significant activity is seen in multiple myeloma or in solid tumors.
Toxicity
The profound immunosuppression associated with pentostatin may persist for several years after therapy is discontinued. 276 T-cell function is affected more than
B-cell or natural killer cell function, perhaps because of higher baseline levels of ADA in T cells. A standard course of pentostatin is associated with more prolonged

immunosuppression than that observed with a single-course of cladribine treatment in patients with HCL. The mean time of recovery of CD4+ cells to normal levels is
up to 50 months after completion of treatment. 277 Myelosuppression with neutropenia and thrombocytopenia is commonly described. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura and HUS and persistent bone marrow failure with myelodysplastic features have been reported. Neutropenic fever is seen in up to 30% of cases, and
opportunistic infections occur with Candida, herpes zoster, Pneumocystis carinii, and a variety of other pathogens. 229 Although an increased incidence of second
cancers is noted in pentostatin-treated patients, the relative risk is similar to that observed with the underlying disease in the absence of nucleoside analogue
treatment.232
Ocular complications include conjunctivitis, desquamative keratitis, or periorbital edema. Dermatologic toxicity in the form of skin rash, photosensitivity reactions, and
a case of fatal erythroderma have been reported. Nausea and vomiting with pentostatin are dose dependent. Other uncommon side effects include stomatitis,
constipation, diarrhea, cardiac toxicity, pulmonary toxicity, renal insufficiency, urate nephropathy, and allergic reactions. Transient and reversible increases in hepatic
enzymes and fulminant hepatic failure have been described.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Farber S, Diamond LK, Mercer RD, Sylvester RF, Wolff JA. Temporary remissions in acute leukemia in children produced by folic acid antagonist, 4-aminopteroylglutamic acid (aminopterin). N
Engl J Med 1948;238:787.
2. Chu E, Allegra CJ. Antifolates. In: Chabner BA, Longo DL, eds. Cancer chemotherapy and biotherapy: principles and practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1996:109.
3. Chu E, Drake JC, Boarman D, et al. Mechanism of thymidylate synthase inhibition by methotrexate in human neoplastic cell lines and normal human myeloid progenitor cells. J Biol Chem
1990;256:8470.
4. Jolivet J, Chabner BA. Intracellular pharmacokinetics of methotrexate polyglutamates in human breast cancer cells: selective retention and less dissociable binding of
4-N-10-CH3-pteroylglutamate 4 and 4-NH2-10-CH3-pteroylglutamate 5 to dihydrofolate reductase. J Clin Invest 1983;72:773.
5. Winick NJ, Kamen BA, Balis FM, et al. Folate and methotrexate polyglutamate tissue levels in rhesus monkeys following chronic low-dose methotrexate. Cancer Drug Deliv 1987;4:25.
6. Allegra CJ, Hoang K, Yeh GC, et al. Evidence for direct inhibition of de novo purine synthesis in human MCF-7 breast cells as a principal mode of metabolic inhibition by methotrexate. J Biol
Chem 1987;262:13520.
7. Goulian M, Bleile B, Tseng BY. Methotrexate-induced misincorporation of uracil into DNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1980;77:1956.
8. Smith SG, Lehman NL, Moran RG. Cytotoxicity of antifolate inhibitors of thymidylate synthase and purine synthesis to WiDr colonic carcinoma cells. Cancer Res 1993;1993:5697.
9. Fiskerstrand T, Ueland PM, Refsum H. Folate depletion induced by methotrexate affects methionine synthase activity and its susceptibility to inactivation by nitrous oxide. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther 1997;202:1305.
10. Schalinske KL, Steele RD. Methotrexate alters carbon flow through the hepatic folate-dependent one-carbon pool in rats. Carcinogenesis 1996;17:1695.
11. Nesher G, Osborn TG, Moore TL. In vitro effects of methotrexate on polyamine levels in lymphocytes from rheumatoid arthritis patients. Clin Exp Rheumatol 1996;14:395.
12. Fung KP, Lam WP, Choy YM, Lee CY. Effect of methotrexate on the intracellular phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate level and glucose transport of Ehrlich ascites tumor cells in vitro. Oncology
1996;53:27.
13. Murray RC, Williams FMR, Flintoff WF. Structural organization of the reduced folate carrier gene in Chinese hamster ovary cells. J Biol Chem 1996;271:19174.
14. Zhao R, Seither R, Brigle KE, et al. Impact of overexpression of the reduced folate carrier (RFC1), an anion exchanger, on concentrative transport in murine L1210 leukemia cells. J Biol Chem
1997;272:21207.
15. Jansen G, Mauritz RM, Assaraf YG, et al. Regulation of carrier-mediated transport of folates and antifolates in methotrexate-sensitive and resistant leukemia cells. Adv Enzyme Regul
1997;37:59.
16. Dixon KH, Lanpher BC, Chiu J, et al. A novel cDNA restores reduced folate carrier activity and methotrexate sensitivity to transport-deficient cells. J Biol Chem 1994;269:17.
17. Antony AC. The biological chemistry of folate receptors. Blood 1992;79:2807.
18. Page ST, Owen WC, Price K, Elwood PC. Expression of the human placental folate receptor transcript is regulated in human tissues. Organization and full nucleotide sequence of the gene. J
Mol Biol 1993;229:1175.
19. Shen F, Ross JF, Wang X, Ratnam M. Identification of a novel folate receptor, a truncated receptor, and receptor type b in hematopoietic cells: cDNA cloning, expression, immunoreactivity,
and tissue specificity. Biochemistry 1994;33:1209.
20. Wang X, Janses G, Fan J, et al. Variant GPI structure in relation to membrane-associated functions of a murine folate receptor. Biochemistry 1996;35:16305.
21. Weitman SD, Lark RH, Coney LR, et al. Distribution of the folate receptor GP38 in normal and malignant cell lines and tissues. Cancer Res 1992;52:3396.
22. Ross JF, Chaudhuri PK, Ratnam M. Differential regulation of folate receptor isoforms in normal and malignant tissues in vivo and in established cell lines. Physiologic and clinical implications.
Cancer 1994;73:2432.
23. Spinella MJ, Brigle KE, Freemantle SJ, et al. Comparison of methotrexate polyglutamylation in L1210 leukemia cells when influx is mediated by the reduced folate carrier or the folate receptor.
Lack of evidence for influx route-specific effects. Biochem Pharmacol 1996;52:703.
24. Sierra EE, Brigle KE, Spinella MJ, Goldman ID. pH dependence of methotrexate transport by the reduced folate carrier and the folate receptor in L1210 leukemia cells. Further evidence for a
third route mediated at low pH. Biochem Pharmacol 1997;53:223.
25. Saxena M, Henderson GB. Identification of efflux systems for large anions and anionic conjugates as the mediators of methotrexate efflux in L1210 cells. Biochem Pharmacol 1996;51:974.
26. Pinedo HM, Zaharko DS, Bull JM, et al. The reversal of methotrexate cytotoxicity to mouse bone marrow cells by leucovorin and nucleosides. Cancer Res 1976;36:4418.
27. Widemann BC, Balis FM, Murphy RF, et al. Carboxypeptidase-G2, thymidine, and leucovorin rescue in cancer patients with methotrexate-induced renal dysfunction. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2125.
28. Hsueh C-T, Dolnick BJ. Regulation of folate-binding protein gene expression by DNA methylation in methotrexate-resistant KB cells. Biochem Pharmacol 1994;47:1019.
29. Moscow JA, Connolly T, Myers TG, et al. Reduced folate carrier gene (RFC1) expression and anti-folate resistance in transfected and non-selected cell lines. Int J Cancer 1997;72:184.
30. Flintoff WF, Bertino JR. Defective transport is a common mechanism of acquired methotrexate resistance in acute lymphocytic leukemia and is associated with decreased reduced folate carrier
expression. Blood 1997;89:1013.
31. Wong SC, McQuade R, Proefke SA, et al. Human K562 transfectants expressing high levels of reduced folate carrier but exhibiting low transport activity. Biochem Pharmacol 1997;53:199.
32. Cowan KH, Jolivet J. A methotrexate-resistant human breast cancer cell line with multiple defects, including diminished formation of methotrexate polyglutamates. J Biol Chem 1984;259:10793.
33. Pizzorno G, Mini E, Coronnello M, et al. Impaired polyglutamylation of methotrexate as a cause of resistance in CCRF-CEM cells after short-term, high-dose treatment with this drug. Cancer
Res 1989;48:2149.
34. Rhee MS, Wang Y, Nair MG, et al. Acquisition of resistance to antifolates caused by enhanced gamma-glutamyl hydrolase activity. Cancer Res 1993;53:2227.
35. Li W-W, Lin TJ, Tong WP, et al. Intrinsic resistance to methotrexate in human soft tissue sarcoma cell lines. Cancer Res 1992;52:3908.
36. Dicker AP, Waltham MC, Volkenandt M, et al. Methotrexate resistance in an in vivo mouse tumor due to a non-active-site dihydrofolate reductase mutation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1993;90:11797.
37. Morris JA, McIvor RS. Saturation mutagenesis at dihydrofolate reductase codons 22 and 31: a variety of amino acid substitutions conferring methotrexate resistance. Biochem Pharmacol
1994;47:1207.
38. Haber DA, Schimke RT. Unstable amplification of an altered dihydrofolate reductase gene associated with double-minute chromosomes. Cell 1981;26:355.
39. Drummond JT, Genschel J, Wolf E, Modrich P. DHFR/MSH3 amplification in methotrexate-resistant cells alters the hMutSa/hMutSb ratio and reduces the efficiency of base-base mismatch
repair. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:10144.
40. Melera PW, Davide JP, Oen H. Antifolate-resistant Chinese hamster cells: molecular basis for the biochemical and structural heterogeneity among DHFRs produced by drug-sensitive and
drug-resistant cell lines. J Biol Chem 1987;262:1978.
41. Domin BA, Grill SP, Bastow KF, Cheng YC. Effect of methotrexate on dihydrofolate reductase activity in methotrexate resistant human KB cells. Mol Pharmacol 1982;21:478.
42. Cowan KH, Goldsmith ME, Ricciardone MD, et al. Regulation of dihydrofolate reductase in human breast cancer cells and in mutant hamster cells transfected with a human dihydrofolate
reductase minigene. Mol Pharmacol 1986;30:69.
43. Chu E, Takimoto CH, Voeller D, et al. Specific binding of human dihydrofolate reductase protein to dihydrofolate reductase messenger RNA in vitro. Biochemistry 1993;32:4756.
44. Ercikan-Abali EA, Banerjee D, Waltham MC, et al. Dihydrofolate reductase protein inhibits its own translation by binding to dihydrofolate reductase mRNA sequences within the coding region.
Biochemistry 1997;36:12317.
45. Simonian PL, Grillot DAM, Nunez G. Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL can differentially block chemotherapy-induced cell death. Blood 1997;90:1208.
46. Curt GA, Jolivet J, Carney DN, et al. Determinants of the sensitivity of human small-cell lung cancer cell lines to methotrexate. J Clin Invest 1985;76:1323.
47. Horns RC Jr, Dower WJ, Schimke RT. Gene amplification in a leukemic patient treated with methotrexate. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:2.
48. Galpin AJ, Schuetz JD, Mason E, et al. Differences in folylpolyglutamate synthetase and dihydrofolate reductase expression in human B-lineage versus T-lineage leukemic lymphoblasts:
mechanisms for lineage differences in methotrexate polyglutamylation and cytotoxicity. Mol Pharmacol 1997;52:155.
49. Matherly LH, Taub JW, Wong SC, et al. Increased frequency of expression of elevated dihydrofolate reductase in T-cell versus B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children. Blood
1997;90:578.
50. Chabner BA, Stoller RG, Hande KR, et al. Methotrexate disposition in humans: case studies in ovarian cancer and following high-dose infusion. Drug Metab Rev 1978;8:107.
51. Fossa SD, Heilo A, Bormer O. Unexpectedly high serum methotrexate levels in cystectomized bladder cancer patients with an ileal conduit treated with intermediate doses of the drug. J Urol
1990;143:498.
52. Sholar PW, Baram J, Seither R, et al. Inhibition of folate-dependent enzymes by 7-OH-methotrexate. Biochem Pharmacol 1988;37:3531.
53. Calvert AH, Bondy PK, Harrap KR. Some observations on the human pharmacology of methotrexate. Cancer Treat Rep 1977;61:1647.
54. Browman GP, Goodyear MDE, Levine MN, et al. Modulation of the antitumor effect of methotrexate by low dose leucovorin in squamous cell head and neck cancer: a randomized
placebo-controlled clinical trial. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:203.
55. DeAngelis LM, Tony WP, Lin S, et al. Carboxypeptidase-G2 rescue after high-dose methotrexate. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2145.
56. Shapiro WR, Young D, Mehta BM. Methotrexate distribution in cerebrospinal fluid after intravenous ventricular and lumbar injections. N Engl J Med 1975;293:161.
57. Bleyer WA. The clinical pharmacology of methotrexate. Cancer 1978;41:36.
58. Walker RW, Allen JC, Rosen G, et al. Transient cerebral dysfunction secondary to high-dose methotrexate. Cancer 1984;53:1849.
59. Marshall JL, DeLap RJ. Clinical pharmacokinetics and pharmacology of trimetrexate. Clin Pharmacokinet 1994;26:190.
60. Takimoto CH, Allegra CJ. New antifolates in clinical development. Oncology 1995;9:649.
61. Takimoto CH. Antifolates in clinical development. Semin Oncol 1997;24(Suppl 18):S18.
62. Punt CJA, Keizer HJ, Douma J, et al. Multicenter randomized trial of 5-fluorouracil (5FU) and leucovorin (LV) with or without trimetrexate (TMTX) as first line treatment in patients with
advanced colorectal cancer (ACC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:262.
63. Jackman AL, Taylor GA, Gibson W, et al. ICI D1694, a quinazoline antifolate thymidylate synthase inhibitor that is a potent inhibitor of L1210 tumor cell growth in vitro and in vivo. Cancer Res
1991;51:5579.
64. Jackman AL, Kelland LR, Kimbell R, et al. Mechanisms of acquired resistance to the quinazoline thymidylate synthase inhibitor ZD1694 (Tomudex) in one mouse and three human cell lines. Br
J Cancer 1995;71:914.
65. Lu K, Yin MB, McGuire JJ, et al. Mechanisms of resistance to N-[5-[N-(3,4-dihydro-2-methyl-4-oxoquinazolin-6-ylmethyl)-N-methylamino]-2-thenoyl]-L-glutamic acid (ZD1694), a folate-based

thymidylate synthase inhibitor, in the HCT-8 human ileocecal adenocarcinoma cell line. Biochem Pharmacol 1995;50:391.
66. Blackledge G. New developments in cancer treatment with the novel thymidylate synthase inhibitor raltitrexed (‘Tomudex'). Br J Cancer 1998;77:29.
67. Cunningham D. Mature results from three large controlled studies with raltitrexed (‘Tomudex'). Br J Cancer 1998;77:15.
68. Cocconi G, Cunningham D, Van Custem E, et al. Open, randomized, multicenter trial of raltitrexed versus fluorouracil plus high-dose leucovorin in patients with advanced colorectal cancer.
Tomudex Colorectal Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2943.
69. Grant SC, Kris MG. New antineoplastic agents in lung cancer. Cancer Treat Res 1995;72:323.
70. Shih C, Chen VJ, Gosset LS, et al. LY231514, a pyrollo[2,3-d]pyrimidine-based antifolate that inhibits multiple folate-requiring enzymes. Cancer Res 1997;57:1116.
71. McDonald AC, Vasey PA, Adams L, et al. A phase I and pharmacokinetic study of LY231514, the multitargeted antifolate. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:605.
72. Postmus PE, Green MR. Overview of MTA in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer. Semin Oncol 1999;26:31.
73. Heidelberger C, Chandhari NK, Dannenberg P, et al. Fluorinated pyrimidines: a new class of tumor inhibitory compounds. Nature 1957;179:663.
74. Sotos GA, Grogan L, Allegra CJ. Preclinical and clinical aspects of biomodulation of 5-fluorouracil. Cancer Treat Rev 1994;20:11.
75. Lamont EB, Schilsky RL. The oral fluoropyrimidines in cancer chemotherapy. Clin Cancer Res 1999:5:2289.
76. Santi DV, McHenry CS, Raines RT, Ivanetich KM. Kinetics and thermodynamics of the interaction of 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridylate and thymidylate synthase. Biochemistry 1987; 26:8606.
77. Piedbois P, Buyse M, Rustum Y, et al. for the Advanced Colorectal Cancer Meta-Analysis Project. Modulation of fluorouracil by leucovorin in patients with advanced colorectal cancer: evidence
in terms of response rate. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:896.
78. Bleiberg H. Role of chemotherapy for advanced colorectal cancer: new opportunities. Semin Oncol 1996:23;42.
79. Kufe DW, Major PP. 5-Fluorouracil incorporation into human breast carcinoma RNA correlates with cytotoxicity. J Biol Chem 1981;256:9802.
80. Will CL, Dolnick BJ. 5-Fluorouracil inhibits dihydrofolate reductase precursor mRNA processing and/or nuclear mRNA stability in methotrexate-resistant KB cells. J Biol Chem 1989;264:21413.
81. Doong SL, Dolnick BJ. 5-Fluorouracil substitution alters pre-mRNA splicing in vitro. J Biol Chem 1988;263:4467.
82. Patton JR. Ribonucleoprotein particle assembly and modification of U2 small nuclear RNA containing 5-fluorouridine. Biochemistry 1993;32:8939.
83. Wu XP, Dolnick BJ. 5-Fluorouracil alters dihydrofolate reductase pre-mRNA splicing as determined by quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Mol Pharmacol 1993;44:22.
84. Ghoshal K, Jacob ST. An alternative molecular mechanism of action of 5-fluorouracil a potent anticancer drug. Biochem Pharmacol 1997;53:1569.
85. Canman CE, Lawrence TS, Shewach DS, et al. Resistance to fluorodeoxyuridine-induced DNA damage and cytotoxicity correlates with an elevation of deoxyuridine triphosphatase activity and
failure to accumulate deoxyuridine triphosphate. Cancer Res 1993;53:5219.
86. Mauro DJ, De Riel JK, Tallarida RJ, Sirover MA. Mechanisms of excision of 5-fluorouracil by uracil DNA glycosylase in normal human cells. Mol Pharmacol 1993;43:854.
87. Canman CE, Tang HY, Normolle DP, et al. Variations in patterns of DNA damage induced in human colorectal tumor cells by 5-fluorodeoxyuridine: implications for mechanisms of resistance
and cytotoxicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:10474.
88. Lowe SW, Ruley HE, Jacks T, Housman DE. p53-Dependent apoptosis modulates the cytotoxicity of anticancer agents. Cell 1993;74:957.
89. Fisher TC, Milner AE, Gregory CD, et al. Bcl-2 modulation of apoptosis induced by anticancer drugs: resistance to thymidylate stress is independent of classical resistance pathways. Cancer
Res 1993;53:3321.
90. Houghton JA, Harwood FG, Tillman DM. Thymineless death in colon carcinoma cells is mediated via Fas signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:8144.
91. Leichman L, Lenz H-J, Leichman CG, et al. Quantitation of intratumoral thymidylate synthase expression predicts for response to protracted infusion of 5-fluorouracil and weekly leucovorin in
disseminated colorectal cancers: preliminary report from an ongoing trial. Eur J Cancer 1995;31:1306.
92. Chu E, Allegra CJ. Mechanisms of clinical resistance to 5-FU chemotherapy. In: Hait WN, ed. Advances in cancer research. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic, 1996:175.
93. Beck A, Etienne MC, Chéradame S, et al. A role for dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase and thymidylate synthase in tumour sensitivity to fluorouracil. Eur J Cancer 1994;30:1517.
94. Aschele C, Sobrero A, Faderan MA, Bertino JR. Novel mechanisms of resistance to 5-fluorouracil in human colon cancer (HCT-8) sublines following exposure to two different clinically relevant
dose schedules. Cancer Res 1992;52:1855.
95. Wang F-S, Aschele C, Sobrero A, Chang Y-M, Bertino JB. Decreased folylpolyglutamate synthetase expression: a novel mechanism of fluorouracil resistance. Cancer Res 1993;53:3677.
96. Barbour KW, Berger SH, Berger FG. Single amino acid substitution defines a naturally occurring genetic variant of human thymidylate synthase. Mol Pharmacol 1990;37:515.
97. Copur S, Aiba K, Drake JC, Allegra CJ, Chu E. Thymidylate synthase gene amplification in human colon cancer cell lines resistant to 5-fluorouracil. Biochem Pharmacol 1995:49;1419.
98. Chu E, Drake JC, Koeller DM, et al. Induction of thymidylate synthase associated with multidrug resistance in human breast and colon cancer cell lines. Mol Pharmacol 1991;39:136.
99. Chu E, Koeller DM, Johnston PG, Zinn S, Allegra CJ. Regulation of thymidylate synthase in human colon cancer cells treated with 5-fluorouracil and interferon-gamma. Mol Pharmacol
1993;43:527.
100. Keyomarsi K, Samet J, Moinar G, Pardee AB. The thymidylate synthase inhibitor, ICI D 1694, overcomes translational detainment of the enzyme. J Biol Chem 1993;268:15142.
101. Swain SM, Lippman ME, Chabner BA, et al. Fluorouracil and high-dose leucovorin in previously treated patients with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:890.
102. Chu E, Koeller DM, Casey JL, et al. Autoregulation of human thymidylate synthase messenger RNA translation by thymidylate synthase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:8977.
103. Chu E, Allegra CJ. The role of thymidylate synthase as an RNA binding protein. BioEssays 1996;18:191.
104. Van Groeningen CJ, Pinedo HM, Heddes J, et al. Pharmacokinetics of 5-fluorouracil assessed with a sensitive mass spectrometric method in patients on a dose escalation schedule. Cancer
Res 1988;48:6956.
105. Harris BE, Carpenter JT, Diasio RB. Severe 5-fluorouracil toxicity secondary to dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency as a potentially more common pharmacogenetic syndrome. Cancer
1993;68;499.
106. Diasio RB, Lu ZH. Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase activity and fluorouracil chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1994; 12:2239.
107. Ridge SA, McLeod HL, Gonzalez FJ, et al. Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase pharmacogenetics in patients with colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer 1998;77:497.
108. Ensminger WD, Rosowsky A, Raso VO, et al. A clinical pharmacological evaluation of hepatic arterial infusion of 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine and 5-fluorouracil. Cancer Res 1978;38:3784.
109. Kemeny NE. Regional chemotherapy of colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer 1975;31:1271.
110. Wadler S, Benson III AB, Engelking C, et al. Recommended guidelines for the treatment of chemotherapy-induced diarrhea. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3169.
111. Lokich JJ, Ahlgren JD, Gullo JJ, et al. A prospective randomized comparison of continuous infusion fluorouracil with a conventional bolus schedule in metastatic colorectal carcinoma: a
Mid-Atlantic Oncology Program Study. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:425.
112. Takimoto CH, Lu ZH, Zhang R, et al. Severe neurotoxicity following 5-fluorouracil-based chemotherapy in a patient with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase activity. Clin Cancer Res 1995;2:477.
113. Marsh JC, Bertino JR, Katz KH, et al. The influence of drug interval on the effect of methotrexate and fluorouracil in the treatment of advanced colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:371.
114. Piedbois P, Buyse M, Blijham G, et al. Meta-analysis of randomized trials testing the biochemical modulation of fluorouracil by methotrexate in metastatic colon cancer for the Advanced
Colorectal Cancer Meta-Analysis Project. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:960.
115. Nord LK, Stolfi RL, Martin DS. Biochemical modulation of 5-fluorouracil with leucovorin or delayed uridine rescue. Biochem Pharmacol 1992;43:2543.
116. Van Groeningen CJ, Peters GJ, Pinedo HM. Reversal of 5-fluorouracil-induced toxicity by oral administration of uridine. Ann Oncol 1993;4:317.
117. Wadler S, Schwartz E. Antineoplastic activity of the combination of interferon and cytotoxic agents against experimental and human malignancies: a review. Cancer Res 1990;50:3473.
118. Chu E, Zinn S, Boarman D, Allegra CJ. Interaction of interferon and 5-fluorouracil in the H630 human colon carcinoma cell line. Cancer Res 1990;50:5834.
119. Hill M, Norman A, Cunningham D, et al. Royal Marsden Phase III trial of fluorouracil with or without interferon alfa-2b in advanced colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1297.
120. Corfu-A Study Group. Phase III randomized study of two fluorouracil combinations with either interferon alfa-2a or leucovorin for advanced colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:921.
121. Wolmark N, Bryant J, Smith R, et al. Adjuvant 5-fluorouracil and leucovorin with or without interferon alfa-2a in colon carcinoma: National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project Protocol
C-05. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1810.
122. Leichman CG, Fleming TR, Muggia FM, et al. Phase II study of fluorouracil and its modulation in advanced colorectal cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. J Clin Oncol 1995;131:1303.
123. Lawrence TS, Tepper JE, Blackstock AW. Fluoropyrimidine-radiation interactions in cells and tumors. Semin Radiat Oncol 1997;7:260.
124. Rich TA. Irradiation plus 5-fluorouracil: cellular mechanisms of action and treatment schedules. Semin Radiat Oncol 1997;7:267.
125. O'Connell MJ, Martenson JA, Wieand HS, et al. Improving adjuvant therapy for rectal cancer by combining protracted infusion fluorouracil with radiation therapy after curative surgery. N Engl J
Med 1994;331:502.
126. Pazdur R, Lassere Y, Rhodes V, et al. Phase II trial of uracil and tegafur plus oral leucovorin: an effective oral regimen in the treatment of metastatic colorectal carcinoma. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:2296.
127. Pazdur R, Douillard JY, Skillings JR, et al. Multicenter phase III study of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) or UFT in combination with leucovorin (LV) in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Proc Am
Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:263a.
128. Budman DR, Meropol NJ, Reigner B, et al. Preliminary studies of a novel oral fluoropyrimidine carbamate: capecitabine. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1795.
129. Blum JL, Buzdar AU, Lorusso PM, et al. A multicenter phase II trial of Xeloda (capecitabine) in paclitaxel-refractory metastatic breast cancer (MBC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;17;476.
130. Cox JV, Pazdur R, Thibault A, et al. A phase III trial of XELODA (Capecitabine) in previously untreated advanced/metastatic colorectal cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:265a.
131. Baccanari DP, Davis ST, Knick V, Spector T. 5-Ethynyluracil (776C85): a potent modulator of the pharmacokinetics and antitumor efficacy of 5-fluorouracil. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1993;90:11064.
132. Ahmed FY, Johnston SJ, Cassidy J, et al. Eniluracil treatment completely inactivates dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase in colorectal tumors. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2439.
133. Schilsky R, Hohneker J, Ratain MJ, et al. Phase I clinical and pharmacology study of eniluracil plus fluorouracil in patients with advanced cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1450.
133a. Burris HA, Ravdin P, Gutheil J, et al. Eniluracil/5-FU in anthracycline and taxane refractory breast cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:107a.
134. Chabner BA. Cytidine analogues. In: Chabner BA, Longo DL, eds. Cancer chemotherapy and biotherapy: principles and practice, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1996:213.
135. Gati WP, Paterson AR, Belch AR, et al. Es nucleoside transporter content of acute leukemia cells: role in cell sensitivity to cytarabine (araC). Leuk Lymphoma 1998;32:45.
136. Plunkett W, Liliemark JO, Estey E, Keating MJ. Saturation of ara-CTP accumulation during high-dose ara-C therapy: pharmacologic rationale for intermediate-dose araC. Semin Oncol
1987;14(Suppl 1):159.
137. Townsend AJ, Cheng Y-C. Sequence-specific effects of ara-5-aza-CTP and ara-CTP on DNA synthesis by purified human DNA polymerases in vitro: visualization of chain elongation on a
defined template. Mol Pharmacol 1987;32:330.
138. Ohno Y, Spriggs D, Matsukage A, et al. Effects of 1-b-D-arabino furanosylcytosine incorporation on elongation of specific DNA sequences by DNA polymerase. Cancer Res 1988;48:1494.
139. Mikita T, Beardsley GP. Functional consequences of the arabinosylcytosine structural lesion in DNA. Biochemistry 1988;27:4698.
140. Ross DD, Cuddy DP, Cohen N, Hensley DR. Mechanistic implications of alterations in HL-60 cell nascent DNA after exposure to 1-b-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1992;31:61.
141. Nakamura T, Takauji R, Kamiya K, et al. Intracellular pharmacodynamics of ara-C and flow cytometric analysis of cell cycle progression in leukemia chemotherapy. Leukemia 1997;11(Suppl
3):548.
142. Braess J, Wegendt C, Feuring-Buske M, et al. Leukaemic blasts differ from normal bone marrow mononuclear cells and CD34+ haematopoietic stem cells in their metabolism of cytosine
arabinoside. Br J Haematol 1999;105:388.
143. Grem JL, Geoffroy F, Politi P, et al. Determinants of sensitivity to 1-b-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine in human colon carcinoma cell lines. Mol Pharmacol 1995;48:305.
144. Momparler RL, Laliberte J, Eliopoulos N, et al. Transfection of murine fibroblast cells with human cytidine deaminase cDNA confers resistance to cytosine arabinoside. Anticancer Drugs
1996;7:266.
145. Schroder JK, Kirch C, Seeber S, Schutte J. Structural and functional analysis of the cytidine deaminase gene in patients with acute myeloid leukemia. Br J Haematol 1998;103:1096.
146. Richel DJ, Colly LP, Arkesteijn GJA, et al. Substrate-specific deoxycytidine kinase deficiency in 1-b-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine-resistant leukemic cells. Cancer Res 1990;50:6515.
147. Kufe DW, Spriggs D, Egan EM, Munroe D. Relationships among ara-CTP pools, formation of (ara-C)DNA, cytotoxicity of cytosine arabinoside in human leukemic cells. J Clin Invest
1987;79:380.

148. Plunkett W, Iacoboni S, Estey E, Lilliemark JO, Keating MJ. Pharmacologically directed ara-C therapy for refractory leukemia. Semin Oncol 1985;12(Suppl 3):20.
149. Freund A, Rossig C, Lanvers C, et al. All-trans-retinoic acid increases cytosine arabinoside cytotoxicity in HL-60 human leukemia cells in spite of decreased cellular ara-CTP accumulation. Ann
Oncol 1999;10:335.
150. Viallard JF, Grosset C, Lacombe F, et al. Effect of stem cell factor on leukemic progenitor cell growth and sensitivity to cytosine-arabinoside. Leuk Res 1996;20:915.
151. Donehower RC, Karp JE, Burke PJ. Pharmacology and toxicity of high-dose cytarabine by 72-hour continuous infusion. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:1059.
152. Capizzi RL, White JC, Powell BL, Perrino F. Effect of dose on the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic effects of cytarabine. Semin Hematol 1991;28(Suppl 4):54.
153. Damon LE, Plunkett W, Linker CA. Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid pharmacokinetics of 1-b-arabinofuranosylcytosine and 1-b-D-arabino-furanosyluracil following the repeated intravenous
administration of high- and intermediate dose 1-b-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine. Cancer Res 1991;51:4141.
154. Castleberry RP, Crist WM, Holbrook T, et al. The cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C) syndrome. Med Pediatr Oncol 1981;9:257.
155. Baker WJ, Royer GL, Weiss RB. Cytarabine and neurologic toxicity. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:679.
156. Herzig RH, Hines JD, Herzig GP, et al. Cerebellar toxicity with high-dose cytosine arabinoside. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:927.
157. Kern W, Kurrle E, Schmeiser T. Streptococcal bacteremia in adult patients with leukemia undergoing aggressive chemotherapy: a review of 55 cases. Infection 1990;18:138.
158. Hassan HT, Grell S, Borrmann-Danso U, Freund M. Interferon-alpha enhances the cytotoxic and cytostatic activities of chemotherapeutic drugs in human myeloid leukemia cells. J Interferon
Cytokine Res 1996;16:139.
159. Yang JL, Cheng EH, Capizzi RL, Cheng Y-C, Kute T. Effect of uracil arabinoside on metabolism and cytotoxicity of cytosine arabinoside in L5178Y murine leukemia. J Clin Invest 1985;75:141.
160. Capizzi RL, Yang J-L, Cheng E, et al. Alteration of the pharmacokinetics of high-dose ara-C by its metabolite ara-U in patients with acute leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1983;12:763.
161. Grem JL, Allegra CJ. Sequence-dependent interaction of 5-fluorouracil and arabinosyl-5-azacytosine or 1-b-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine. Biochem Pharmacol 1991;42:409.
162. Bhalla K, Tang C, Ibrado AM, et al. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor/interleukin-3 fusion protein (pIXY 321) enhances high-dose ara-C-induced programmed cell death or
apoptosis in human myeloid leukemia cells. Blood 1992;80:2883.
163. Plunkett W, Huang P, Searcy CE, Gandhi V. Gemcitabine: preclinical pharmacology and mechanisms of action. Semin Oncol 1996;23(Suppl 10):3.
164. Mackey JR, Mani RS, Selner M, et al. Functional nucleoside transporters are required for gemcitabine influx and manifestation of toxicity in cancer cell lines. Cancer Res 1998; 58:4349.
165. Hammond JR, Lee S, Ferguson PJ. [ 3H]gemcitabine uptake by nucleoside transporters in a human head and neck squamous carcinoma cell line. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1999;288:1185.
166. Heinemann V, Hertel LW, Grindey GB, Plunkett W. Comparison of the cellular pharmacokinetics and toxicity of 2',2'-difluorodeoxycytidine and 1-b-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine. Cancer Res
1988;48:4024.
167. Heinemann V, Xu Y-Z, Chubb S, et al. Cellular elimination of 2',2'-difluorodeoxycytidine 5'-triphosphate: a mechanism of self-potentiation. Cancer Res 1992;52:533.
168. Huang P, Chubb S, Hertel LW, et al. Action of 2',2'-difluorodeoxycytidine on DNA synthesis. Cancer Res 1991;51:6110.
169. Ross DD, Cuddy DP. Molecular effects of 2'-2'-difluorodeoxycytidine (gemcitabine) on DNA replication in intact HL-60 cells. Biochem Pharmacol 1994;48:1619.
170. Ruiz van Haperen VWT, Veerman G, Vermorken JB, Peters GF. 2',2'-difluorodeoxycytidine (gemcitabine) incorporation into RNA and DNA of tumour cell lines. Biochem Pharmacol
1993;46:762.
171. Ruiz van Haperen VW, Veerman G, Eriksson S, et al. Development and molecular characterization of a 2',2'-difluorodeoxycytidine-resistant variant of the human ovarian carcinoma cell line
A2780. Cancer Res 1994;54:4138.
172. Goan YG, Zhou B, Hu E, et al. Overexpression of ribonucleotide reductase as a mechanism of resistance to 2,2-difluorodeoxycytidine in the human KB cancer cell line. Cancer Res
1999;59:4204.
173. Bergman AM, Pinedo HM, Jongsma AP, et al. Decreased resistance to gemcitabine (2',2'-difluorodeoxycitidine) of cytosine arabinoside-resistant myeloblastic murine and rat leukemia cell lines:
role of altered activity and substrate specificity of deoxycytidine kinase. Biochem Pharmacol 1999;57:397.
174. Schirmer M, Stegmann AP, Geisen F, Konwalinka G. Lack of cross-resistance with gemcitabine and cytarabine in cladribine-resistant HL60 cells with elevated 5' nucleotidase activity. Exp
Hematol 1998;26:1223.
175. Abbruzzese JL, Grunewald R, Weeks AE, et al. A Phase I clinical, plasma, and cellular pharmacology study of gemcitabine. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:491.
176. Storniolo AM, Enas NH, Brown CA, et al. An investigational new drug treatment program for patients with gemcitabine. Results for over 3000 patients with pancreatic carcinoma. Cancer
1999;85:1261.
177. Kaye SB. G emcitabine: current status of phase I and II trials. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1527.
178. Pavlakis N, Bell DR, Millward MJ, Levi JA. Fatal pulmonary toxicity resulting from treatment with gemcitabine. Cancer 1997;80:286.
179. Fung MC, Storniolo AM, Nguyen B, et al. A review of hemolytic uremic syndrome in patients treated with gemcitabine therapy. Cancer 1999;85:2023.
180. Van Moorsel CJA, Pinedo HM, Veerman G, et al. Mechanisms of synergism between cisplatin and gemcitabine in ovarian and non-small cell lung cancer cell lines. Br J Cancer 1999;80:981.
181. Bergman AM, Ruiz van Haperen VW, Veerman G, et al. Synergistic interaction between cisplatin and gemcitabine in vitro. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:521.
182. van Moorsel CJ, Pinedo HM, Veerman G, et al. Combination chemotherapy studies with gemcitabine and etoposide in non-small cell lung and ovarian cancer cell lines. Biochem Pharmacol
1999;57:407.
183. Hande KR, Garrow GC. Purine antimetabolites. In: Chabner BA, Longo DL, eds. Chemotherapy and biotherapy: principles and practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1996:235.
184. Christie NT, Drake S, Meyn RE, et al. 6-Thiopurine-induced DNA damage as a determinant of cytotoxicity in cultured Chinese hamster ovary cells. Cancer Res 1984;44:3665.
185. Mojena M, Bosca L, Rider MH, et al. Inhibition of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase activity by mercaptopurines. Biochem Pharmacol 1992;43:671.
186. Presta M, Rusnati M, Belleri M, et al. Purine analogue 6-methylmercaptopurine riboside inhibits early and late phases of the angiogenesis process. Cancer Res 1999;59:2417.
187. Van Diggelen OP, Donahue TF, Shin SI. Basis for differential cellular sensitivity to 8-azaguanine and 6-thioguanine. J Cell Physiol 1979;98:59.
188. Calabresi P, Chabner BA. Chemotherapy of neoplastic diseases. In: Gilman AG, Rall TW, Nies AS, Taylor P, eds. The pharmacologic basis of therapeutics. New York: Pergamon Press,
1990:1202.
189. Bemi V, Turchi G, Margotti E, et al. 6-thioguanine resistance in a human colon carcinoma cell line with unaltered levels of hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase activity. Int J Cancer
1999;82:556.
190. Glaab WE, Risinger JI, Umar A, et al. Resistance to 6-thioguanine in mismatch-repair deficient human cancer cell lines correlates with an increase in induced mutations at the HPRT locus.
Carcinogenesis 1998;19:1931.
191. Lennard L, Lillyman JS. Are children with lymphoblastic leukemia given enough 6-mercaptopurine? Lancet 1987;2:785.
192. Lennard L, Lilleyman JS. Individualizing therapy with 6-mercaptopurine and 6-thioguanine related to the thiopurine methyltransferase genetic polymorphism. Ther Drug Monitoring 1996;18:328.
193. Mawatari H, Kato Y, Nishimura S, et al. Reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatographic assay method for quantitating 6-mercaptopurine and its methylated and non-methylated
metabolites in a single sample. J Chromatography 1998;716:392.
194. Zimm S, Collins JM, Riccardi R, et al. Variable bioavailability of oral 6-mercaptopurine: is maintenance chemotherapy in acute lymphoblastic leukemia being optimally delivered? N Engl J Med
1983;308:1005.
195. Koren G, Ferrazini G, Sulh H, et al. Systemic exposure to mercaptopurine as a prognostic factor in acute lymphocytic leukemia in children. N Engl J Med 1990;323:17.
196. Innocenti F, Danesi R, Di Paolo A, et al. Clinical and experimental pharmacokinetic interaction between 6-mercaptopurine and methotrexate. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1996;37:409.
197. Lewis AS, Murphy L, McCalla C. Inhibition of mammalian xanthine-oxidase by folate compounds and amethopterin. J Biol Chem 1984;259:12.
198. Jacqz-Aigrain E, Nafa S, Medard Y, et al. Pharmacokinetics and distribution of 6-mercaptopurine administered intravenously in children with lymphoblastic leukemia. Eur J Clin Pharm
1997;53:71.
199. Balis FM, Holcenberg JS, Poplack DG, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of oral methotrexate and mercaptopurine in children with lower risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a
Joint Children's Cancer Group and Pediatric Oncology Branch Study. Blood 1998;92:3569.
200. Keuzenkamp-Jansen CW, DeAbreu RA, Bokkerink JP, et al. Metabolism of intravenously administered high-dose 6-mercaptopurine with and without allopurinol treatment in patients with
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1996;18:145.
201. Lennard L. Clinical implications of thiopurine methyltransferaseoptimization of drug dosage and potential drug interactions. Ther Drug Monit 1998;20:527.
202. Krynetski EY, Evans WE. Pharmacogenetics as a molecular basis for individualized drug therapy: the thiopurine S-methyltransferase paradigm. Pharm Res 1999;16:342.
203. Yates CR, Krynetski EY, Loennechen T, et al. Molecular diagnosis of thiopurine S-methyltransferase deficiency: genetic basis for azathioprine and mercaptopurine intolerance. Ann Intern Med
1997;126:608.
204. Coffey JJ, White CA, Lesk AB, et al. Effect of allopurinol on the pharmacokinetics of 6-mercaptopurine (NSC 755) in cancer patients. Cancer Res 1972;32:1283.
205. Erb N, Harms DO, Janka-Schaub G. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of thiopurines in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia receiving 6-thioguanine versus 6-mercaptopurine. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol 1998;42:266.
206. Lancaster DL, Lennard L, Rowland K, et al. Thioguanine versus mercaptopurine for therapy of childhood lymphoblastic leukemia: a comparison of haematological toxicity and drug metabolite
concentrations. Br J Haematol 1998;102:439.
207. Andersen JB, Szumlanski C, Weinshilboum RM, Schmiegelow K. Pharmacokinetics, dose adjustments, and 6-mercaptopurine/methotrexate drug interactions in two patients with thiopurine
methyltransferase deficiency. Acta Pediatr 1998;87:108.
208. Heizer WD, Peterson JL. Acute myeloblastic leukemia following prolonged treatment of Crohn's disease with 6-mercaptopurine. Digest Dis Sci 1998;43:1791.
209. Montgomery JA, Hewson K. Nucleosides of 2-fluoroadenine. J Med Chem 1969;12:498.
210. Belt JA. Heterogeneity of nucleoside transport in mammalian cells. Two types of activity in L1210 and other cultured neoplastic cells. Mol Pharmacol 1983;24:479.
211. Kamiya K, Huang P, Plunkett W. Inhibition of the 3'®5' exonuclease of human DNA polymerase epsilon by fludarabine-terminated DNA. J Biol Chem 1996;271:19428.
212. Plunkett W, Gandhi V. Cellular metabolism of nucleoside analogs in CLL: implications for drug development. In: Cheson BD, ed. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia: scientific advances and clinical
developments. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1993:197.
213. Huang P, Robertson LE, Wright S, Plunkett W. High molecular weight DNA fragmentation: a critical event in nucleoside analog-induced apoptosis in leukemia cells. Clin Cancer Res
1995;1:1005.
214. Dighiero G. Adverse and beneficial immunological effects of purine nucleoside analogues. Hematol Cell Ther 1996;38(Suppl 2):S75.
215. Bai L, Yamaguchi M, Tatsumi M, et al. Mechanisms responsible for resistance of sublines derived from leukemia cell lines to an antitumor agent, 9-b-D-arabinofuranosyl-2-fluoroadenine. J
Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1998;124:367.
216. Dumontet C, Fabianowska-Majewska K, Mantincic D, et al. Common resistance mechanisms to deoxynucleoside analogs in variants of the human erythroleukaemic line K562. Br J Haematol
1999;106:78.
217. Mohammad RM, Limvarapuss C, Hamdy N, et al. Treatment of a de novo fludarabine-resistant CLL xenograft model with bryostatin 1 followed by fludarabine. Int J Oncol 1999;14:945.
218. Malspeis L, Grever MR, Staubus AE, Young D. Pharmacokinetics of 2-F-ara-A (9-b-D-arabinofuranosyl-2-fluoroadenine) in cancer patients during the phase I clinical investigation of fludarabine
phosphate. Semin Oncol 1990;17(Suppl 8):18.
219. Kemena A, Keating MJ, Plunkett W. Plasma and cellular bioavailability of oral fludarabine. Blood 1991;78(Suppl 1):52.
220. Hiddemann W, Johnson S, Smith A, et al. Fludarabine versus cyclophosphamide, adriamycin, prednisone (CAP) for the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemiaresults of a multinational
prospective randomized trial. Blood 1993;82(Suppl 1):199a.
221. Keating MJ, O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia treated with fludarabine as a single agent. Blood 1993;81:2878.
222. Rai KR, Peterson B, Kolitz J, et al. Fludarabine induces high complete remission rate in previously untreated patients with active chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL): a randomized inter-group
study. Blood 1995;86(Suppl 1):607.
223. Hochster HS, Kim K, Green MD, et al. Activity of fludarabine in previously treated non-Hodgkin's low-grade lymphoma: results of an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol
1992;10:28.
224. Solal-Celigny P, Brice P, Brousse N, et al. Phase II trial of fludarabine monophosphate as first-line treatment in patients with advanced follicular lymphoma: a multicenter study by the Groupe
d'Etude des Lymphomes de l'Adulte. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:514.
225. Chun HG, Leyland-Jones B, Cheson BD. Fludarabine phosphate: a synthetic purine antimetabolite with significant activity against lymphoid malignancies. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:175.

226. Foran JM, Rohatiner AZ, Coiffier B, et al. Multicenter phase II study of fludarabine phosphate for patients with newly diagnosed lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma, Waldenström's
macroglobulinemia, and mantle-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:546.
227. Spriggs DR, Stopa E, Mayer RJ, Schoene W, Kufe DW. Fludarabine phosphate (NSC 312878) infusions for the treatment of acute leukemia: phase I and neuropathological study. Cancer Res
1986;46:5953.
228. Cheson BD, Vena D, Foss F, Sorensen JM. Neurotoxicity of purine analogs: a review. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2216.
229. Cheson B. Immunologic and immunosuppressive complications of purine analogue therapy. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2431.
230. O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, Beran M, et al. Results of fludarabine and prednisone therapy in 264 patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia with multivariate analysis derived prognostic model for
response to treatment. Blood 1993;82:1695.
231. Weiss RB, Freiman J, Kweder SL, et al. Hemolytic anemia after fludarabine therapy for chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1885.
232. Cheson BD, Vena DA, Barrett J, Freidlin B. Second malignancies as a consequence of nucleoside analog therapy for chronic lymphocytic leukemias. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2454.
233. Li L, Liu X, Glassman AB, et al. Fludarabine triphosphate inhibits nucleotide excision repair of cisplatin-induced DNA adducts in vitro. Cancer Res 1997;57:1487.
234. Hochster H, Oken M, Bennett J, et al. Efficacy of cyclophosphamide (CYC) and fludarabine (FAMP) as first-line therapy of low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHL) ECOG 1491. Blood
1994;84(Suppl 1):383.
235. McLaughlin P, Hagemeister FB, Romaguera JE, et al. Fludarabine, mitoxantrone, and dexamethasone: an effective new regimen for indolent lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1262.
236. Emmanouilides C, Rosen P, Rasti S, et al. Treatment of indolent lymphoma with fludarabine/mitoxantrone combination: a phase II trial. Hematol Oncol 1998;16:107.
237. Gandhi V, Huang P, Chapman AJ, et al. Incorporation of fludarabine and 1-b-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine-5'-triphosphates by DNA polymerase alpha: affinity, interaction, and consequences.
Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:1347.
238. Gandhi V, Estey E, Du M, et al. Minimum dose of fludarabine for the maximal modulation of 1-b-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine phosphate in human leukemia blasts during therapy. Clin Cancer
Res 1997;3:1539.
239. Dinndorf PA, Avramis VI, Wiersma S, et al. Phase I/II study of idarubicin given with continuous infusion fludarabine followed by continuous infusion cytarabine in children with acute leukemia: a
report from the Children's Cancer Group. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2780.
240. Gandhi V, Robertson LE, Keating MJ, Plunkett W. Combination of fludarabine and arabinosylcytosine for treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia: clinical efficacy and modulation of
arabinosylcytosine pharmacology. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1994;34:30.
241. Estey E, Plunkett W, Gandhi V, et al. Fludarabine and arabinosylcytosine therapy of refractory and relapsed acute myelogenous leukemia. Leuk Lymphoma 1993;9:343.
242. Visani G, Tosi P, Zinzani PL, et al. FLAG (fludarabine, high-dose cytarabine, G-CSF): an effective and tolerable protocol for the treatment of poor risk acute myeloid leukemia. Leukemia
1994;8:1842.
243. Khouri IF, Keating M, Korbling M, et al. Transplant-lite: induction of graft-versus-malignancy using fludarabine-based nonablative chemotherapy and allogeneic blood progenitor-cell
transplantation as treatment for lymphoid malignancies. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2817.
244. Carson DA, Wasson DB, Beutler E. Antileukemic and immunosuppressive activity of 2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1984;81:2252.
245. Griffiths M, Beaumont N, Yao SYM, et al. Cloning of a human nucleoside transporter, implicated in the cellular uptake of adenosine and chemotherapeutic drugs. Nat Med 1997;3:89.
246. Kawasaki H, Carrera CJ, Piro LD, et al. Relationship of deoxycytidine kinase and cytoplasmic 5'-nucleotidase to the chemotherapeutic efficacy of 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine. Blood 1993;81:597.
247. Seto S, Carrera CJ, Kubota M, Wasson DB, Carson DA. Mechanism of deoxyadenosine and 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine toxicity to nondividing human lymphocytes. J Clin Invest 1985;75:377.
248. Griffig J, Koob R, Blakley RL. Mechanisms of inhibition of DNA synthesis by 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine in human lymphoblastic cells. Cancer Res 1989;49:6923.
249. Leoni LM, Chao Q, Cottam HB, et al. Induction of an apoptotic program in cell-free extracts by 2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine 5'-triphosphate and cytochrome C. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1998;95:9567.
250. Talbot DC, Orr RM, Serafinowski P, Harrap KR. Characteristics of acquired resistance to 2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine in lymphoid cell lines. Proc Am AssocCancer Res 1993;305.
251. Mohammad RM, Katato K, Almatchy VP, et al. Sequential treatment of human chronic lymphocytic leukemia with bryostatin 1 followed by 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine: preclinical studies. Clin
Cancer Res 1998;4:445.
252. Liliemark J. The clinical pharmacokinetics of cladribine. Clin Pharmacokinet 1997;32:120.
253. Albertioni F, Lindemalm S, Reichelova V, et al. Pharmacokinetics of cladribine in plasma and its 5'-monophosphate and 5'-triphosphate in leukemic cells of patients with chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:653.
254. Larson RA, Mick R, Spielberger RT, et al. Dose-escalation trial of cladribine using five daily intravenous infusions in patients with advanced hematologic malignancies. J Clin Oncol
1996;14:188.
255. Liliemark J, Juliusson G. Cellular pharmacokinetics of 2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine nucleotides: comparison of intermittent and continuous intravenous infusion and subcutaneous and oral
administration in leukemia patients. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:385.
256. Liliemark J, Albertioni F, Hassan M, et al. On the bioavailability of oral and subcutaneous 2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine in humans; alternative routes of administration. J Clin Oncol
1992;10:1514.
257. Saven A, Cheung WK, Smith I, et al. Pharmacokinetic study of oral and bolus intravenous 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine in patients with malignancy. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:978.
258. Piro LD, Carrera CJ, Carson DA, Beutler E. Lasting remissions in hairy cell leukemia induced by a single infusion of 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1117.
259. Estey EH, Kurzrock R, Kantarjian HM, et al. Treatment of hairy cell leukemia with 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine (2-CdA). Blood 1992;79:882.
260. Juliusson G, Heldal D, Hippe E, et al. Subcutaneous injections of 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine for symptomatic hairy cell leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:989.
261. Saven A, Burian C, Koziol JA, Piro LD. Long-term follow-up of patients with hairy cell leukemia after cladribine treatment. Blood 1998;92:1918.
262. Saven A, Lemon RH, Kosty M, Beutler E, Piro LD. 2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine activity in patients with untreated chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:570.
263. Tallman MS, Hakimian D, Zonzig C, et al. Cladribine in the treatment of relapsed or refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:983.
264. Betticher DC, Fey MF, von Rohr A, et al. High incidence of infections after 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine (2-CDA) therapy in patients with malignant lymphomas and chronic and acute leukaemias.
Ann Oncol 1994;5:57.
265. Juliusson G, Liliemark J. High complete remission rate from 2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine in previously treated patients with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia: response predicted by rapid
decrease in blood lymphocyte count. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:679.
266. Kurzrock R, Strom SS, Estey E, et al. Second cancer risk in hairy cell leukemia: analysis of 350 patients. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1803.
267. Gandhi V, Estey E, Keating ML, et al. Chlorodeoxyadenosine and arabinosylcytosine in patients with acute myelogenous leukemia: pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, and molecular
interactions. Blood 1996;87:256.
268. Dillman RO. A new chemotherapeutic agent: deoxycoformycin (pentostatin). Semin Hematol 1994;31:16.
269. Malspeis L, Weinrib AB, Staubus AE, et al. Clinical pharmacokinetics of 2'-deoxycoformycin. Cancer Treat Symp 1984;2:7.
270. Cassileth PA, Chenwart B, Spiers AS, et al. Pentostatin induces durable remissions in hairy-cell leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:243.
271. Tallman MS, Peterson LC, Hakimian D, et al. Treatment of hairy-cell leukemia: current views. Semin Hematol 1999;36:155.
272. Ribeiro P, Bouaffia P, Peaud PY, et al. Long term outcome of patients with hairy cell leukemia treated with pentostatin. Cancer 1999;85:65.
273. Flinn IW, Kopecky KJ, Foucar MK, et al. Long-term results in hairy cell leukemia (HCL) treated with pentostatin. Blood 1997;90:578a.
274. Tallman MS, Hakimian D, Kopecky KJ, et al. Minimal residual disease in patients with hairy cell leukemia in complete remission treated with 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine or 2-deoxycoformycin and
prediction of early relapse. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:1665.
275. Cortes J, Kantarjian H, Talpaz M, et al. Treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia with nucleoside analogs deoxycoformycin and fludarabine. Leukemia 1997;11:788.
276. Kraut EH, Neff JC, Bouroncle BA, Gochnour D, Grever MR. Immunosuppressive effects of pentostatin. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:848.
277. Seymour JF, Talpaz M, Kurzrock R. Response duration and recovery of CD4+ following deoxycoformycin in interferon-resistant hairy-cell leukemia: 7-year follow-up. Leukemia 1997;11:42.

SECTION 19.6 Topoisomerase Interactive Agents
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 19.6
Topoisomerase Interactive Agents
CLINTON F. STEWART
MARK J. RATAIN
Introduction
Mechanism of Action of Topoisomerase Interactive Agents
E pipodophyllotoxins
Etoposide and Teniposide
Etoposide Phosphate
Camptothecin Analogues
Anthracyclines and Related Compounds
Mitoxantrone and Losoxantrone
Dactinomycin (Actinomycin D)
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Isolation and characterization of the topoisomerase enzymes have provided a basis for development of anticancer drugs that contribute to the treatment of patients
with a wide range of malignancies. 1 Simply stated, the topoisomerase enzymes control and modify the topologic states of DNA. 2 The mechanisms of these enzymes
involve DNA cleavage and strand passage through the break, followed by religation of the cleaved DNA. The precise manner by which these complicated events
occur in a single cell is the source of intense research, and the results of this research promise to provide additional targets for anticancer drug therapy.
The length and intricate structure of DNA in eukaryotic cells requires efficient organization to fit in the nucleus. This organization presents a challenge to the cell to
access and segregate portions of DNA required for cellular functions, especially because it is done within an extremely complex and dense intracellular milieu. The
DNA topoisomerases are nuclear enzymes that assist in these cellular functions. These enzymes reduce DNA twisting and supercoiling that occur in selected regions
of DNA as a result of essential cellular processes such as transcription, replication, and repair recombination. All known DNA topoisomerases possess two
characteristics: to cleave and reseal the phosphodiester backbone of DNA; and to form a covalent enzyme-DNA linkage, which allows the passage of another singleor double-strand DNA through the nicked DNA. Thus, topoisomerases enable the DNA within a cell to be tightly packed and yet still accessible for processes
necessary for proper cellular function.
The first DNA topoisomerase was discovered in the early l970s. 3 Since then, many different DNA topoisomerases have been found in eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells.
In mammalian cells, these enzymes have been differentiated into two types—type I and type II—based on their mechanistic and physical properties. The
characteristics of each topoisomerase are summarized and compared in Table 19.6-1.4

TABLE 19.6-1. Characteristics and Comparison of Mammalian DNA Topoisomerases

The type I topoisomerase (top I) found in mammals is a monomeric protein encoded by a single-copy gene located on chromosome 20; its activity is adenosine
triphosphate (ATP)–independent. 5 This enzyme binds preferentially to double-stranded DNA and cleaves one of the DNA strands of the duplex, simultaneously
forming an enzyme-DNA covalent bond between a tyrosine residue and the 3'-phosphate of the cleaved DNA. Through a swivel mechanism, the unbroken strand can
pass through this enzyme-mediated nick and release the torsional stress of the DNA double helix. 6 Top I has been shown to be regulated at the transcriptional,
translational, and posttranslational levels. Phosphorylation-dephosphorylation and poly(adenosine-diphosphoribo)sylation are important mechanisms of top I
regulation in vitro, but the therapeutic implications of these findings are not known.
Numerous reports have shown malignant tissue to contain higher levels of top I than its normal counterpart. Specifically, this was observed for colon and ovarian
carcinoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and diffuse histiocytic lymphoma. 7,8 This initial observation of increased levels of top I in malignant tissues suggested to
investigators that use of top I interactive agents might lead to a selective antitumor effect; however, results from subsequent clinical trials have not supported this
hypothesis. In fact, more recent studies in vitro suggest that the apparent high level of top I in malignant tissue might be related to differences in malignant compared
to normal tissue. Other factors, such as rate of DNA synthesis, repair of drug-induced double-strand breaks, or presence of drug transporters, are also potential
determinants of drug activity in the cell.
Two top II isoenzymes have been identified in humans. 9 The a form, which has an apparent molecular weight of 170 kd, is encoded by a single-copy gene located on
chromosome 17q21-22. The b form has a molecular weight of 180 kd and has been mapped to chromosome 3p4. Top II a and b have different subnuclear
distributions and DNA binding patterns, supporting the hypothesis that each isoform has a specific cellular function, but these precise functions are not known.
Whereas top IIb is relatively constant over cell and growth cycles, top IIa increases in rapidly proliferating cells. 10
In contrast to type I topoisomerase, the function of type II topoisomerases is ATP-dependent. 11 Once top II binds to duplex DNA, nucleophilic reactions sequentially
cleave the two complementary strands of DNA 4 base pairs apart, and the resulting 5'-phosphoryl groups become covalently linked to a pair of tyrosine groups, one in
each half of the dimeric top II enzyme. Once the double-strand break has been made, the cleaved ends must be moved apart by at least 2 nm (the diameter of a
double-stranded DNA helix) and a second double-strand segment of DNA passed through the break. DNA strand passage is completely dependent on the binding of
magnesium and ATP. Once strand passage is complete, the cleaved DNA is religated. As with top I, top II is a phosphoprotein, and casein kinase II and protein
kinase C can phosphorylate it in vitro, resulting in an enhancement of enzyme activity.

MECHANISM OF ACTION OF TOPOISOMERASE INTERACTIVE AGENTS
Although much is known about the biochemical effects of the topoisomerase interactive agents, very little is known about the actual mechanism by which cell death
mediated by these agents occurs. Presumably, the damage done to DNA ultimately leads to necrosis or apoptosis through a series of cellular processes, such as cell
cycle perturbations (possibly involving cyclins or cyclin-dependent kinases) or DNA repair deficiency. Figure 19.6-1 is a diagrammatic depiction of the normal activities
of the topoisomerases and the effect of topoisomerase interactive agents.

FIGURE 19.6-1. Diagrammatic representation of the normal activities of type I and type II topoisomerases, the effects of specific topoisomerase interactive agents,
and the cellular consequences of trapping topoisomerase-DNA complexes. ATP, adenosine triphosphate. (From ref. 152, with permission.)

Top I interactive agents, thus far consisting primarily of camptothecin analogues, interact with the enzyme-DNA complex. 12 This interaction prevents the resealing of
the top I–mediated DNA single-strand breaks. However, these breaks result in cell death only if DNA synthesis is ongoing. A collision between the advancing
replication fork and the drug-stabilized single-strand break in DNA results in replication fork breakage and double-strand breaks in the DNA. Treatment of mammalian
cells with top I inhibitors induces inhibition of DNA synthesis, cell cycle arrest in G 2, and cell death by apoptosis. Drug-induced G 2 arrest has been associated with a
failure to activate cdc2 kinase. Because the cytotoxicity associated with top I interactive agents is highly dependent on DNA synthesis, any deregulation of cyclins,
cell cycle–regulated kinases, or phosphatases may influence the cytotoxicity of top I interactive agents (see Fig. 19.6-1). Several other types of chemotherapeutic
agents, such as doxorubicin or actinomycin D, inhibit both top I and top II by a similar mechanism, but at different sites in the DNA.
Top II is the molecular target for many anticancer drugs, such as the aminoacridines, anthracyclines, and epipodophyllotoxins. 13 These drugs inhibit religation of DNA
cleaved by top II and induce protein-linked breaks in the DNA, as documented by DNA alkaline elution assays. When drug is removed, these breaks are reversible.
The demonstration that drug-induced, protein-associated strand breaks were mediated through interaction with top II occurred when Chen and Liu 3 were able to show
that the protein covalently bound to DNA fragments induced by these drugs was top II. They used the term cleavable complex to refer to these lesions because the
enzyme-DNA complex could be isolated (cleaved) after protein denaturation. The cleavable complex in situ is a covalent topoisomerase-DNA complex.
In addition to the top II interactive agents that stabilize top II–DNA complexes, other inhibitors apparently inhibit the enzyme before covalent binding to DNA occurs.
However, these agents have not yet proven useful clinically. Except for the epipodophyllotoxins, all mammalian top II inhibitors are DNA intercalators that insert a
planar moiety between two adjacent base pairs in duplex DNA. However, as more is learned about the biochemical mechanisms of the top II interactive agents, it
becomes clear that the historical characterization of top II interactive agents based simply on DNA-binding properties is no longer an appropriate means of classifying
their mechanism of action. Further study is required to understand the molecular mechanisms by which DNA strand breaks lead to antitumor activity.

EPIPODOPHYLLOTOXINS
ETOPOSIDE AND TENIPOSIDE
The historical details of the development of the epipodophyllotoxins for clinical use have been reviewed. 14 The path that led to the final development of etoposide and
teniposide began in 1820 with the inclusion of podophyllin in the United States Pharmacopeia Drug Information. Although extracts of the Podophyllum peltatum (May
apple, mandrake plants) had been used for years by natives of the Himalayas and the Americas as cathartics and anthelminthics, it was not until 1942, when the
curative effect of podophyllin in condylomata acuminata was demonstrated, that a number of derivatives were isolated and synthesized. Early clinical trials of
constituents of the resinous extract of podophyllin included the derivative podophyllotoxin, but clinical responses were poor, with excessive toxicity. Further chemical
modification of podophyllotoxin by addition of the carbohydrate moiety b- D-thenylidene glucoside led to the compound teniposide, which was first introduced into
clinical trials in 1970 ( Fig. 19.6-2). The second derivative formed by addition of b- D-ethylidene glucoside to the podophyllotoxin molecule led to the compound
etoposide, which, because of advantages in formulation, has been studied more thoroughly. The differences in physicochemical properties of these two compounds
are presented in Table 19.6-2.

FIGURE 19.6-2. Structures of etoposide and teniposide.

TABLE 19.6-2. Physicochemical Properties of Etoposide and Teniposide

Etoposide (VP-16-213), a semisynthetic podophyllotoxin derivative, was introduced into clinical trials in 1973 and within 1 year had a major role in the treatment of
small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and lymphoma. Clinical trials of teniposide began in the United States in 1967 and, because antitumor effects were seen in early trials,
generated enthusiasm. Since then more aggressive teniposide dosing regimens have been evaluated, and teniposide has shown activity as a single agent in the
treatment of SCLC. In 1983 etoposide was approved in the United States for combination therapy of refractory testicular tumors and SCLC; however, it is now used in
frontline combination therapy for many malignancies. In 1993, teniposide was approved for use in combination with other approved anticancer drugs for induction
therapy in patients with refractory acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The enhanced role of epipodophyllotoxins in anticancer therapy has resulted primarily from an
improved understanding of their clinical pharmacology. Through rational application of pharmacologic principles, the role of these agents in cancer therapy can be

further refined. Future clinical studies must include biochemical pharmacology studies to identify and exploit potential pharmacologic differences between teniposide
and etoposide. These studies should also focus on schedule dependency, rational drug combinations, new disease targets, central nervous system (CNS)
penetration, and toxicity considerations. 15
Therapeutic success with oral epipodophyllotoxin therapy, primarily etoposide, has stimulated an increase in the understanding of etoposide and teniposide oral
absorption (Table 19.6-3). Because of solubility concerns, the commercially available form of etoposide has a special formulation; however, in some pediatric studies
of oral etoposide and all studies of oral teniposide, the injectable formulation has been used orally. Although delayed absorption of etoposide (e.g., longer than 4
hours) has been observed in patients receiving concurrent narcotics, the basis for this observation is unknown. 16 Marked intrapatient and interpatient variability
characterizes both etoposide and teniposide oral bioavailability. 17 Oral absorption of etoposide and teniposide is nonlinear, with less than a proportional increase in
etoposide in the area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) with increased oral dose. The cause for these findings is unknown, but they suggest that more
frequent oral administration of low doses are preferable to less frequent administration of high doses to increase dose intensity.

TABLE 19.6-3. Comparison of Oral Absorption between Etoposide and Teniposide

Etoposide and teniposide have comparable distribution properties within the body ( Table 19.6-4); however, the extent of plasma protein binding is different between
the two drugs. Etoposide is highly bound to plasma proteins, with approximately 6% to 8% of the total drug concentration not bound to plasma proteins; 18,19 whereas
less than 1% of the total teniposide concentration is unbound. 20 The etoposide binding ratio measured in patients correlated directly with serum albumin
concentration, consistent with in vitro studies that show etoposide primarily binds to albumin. 21 Hyperbilirubinemia (e.g., total bilirubin >10 mg/dL) is associated with
an increased etoposide percent unbound. In vitro studies confirmed that bilirubin displaces etoposide from binding sites on albumin, leading to an increased percent
unbound. A model to predict etoposide percent unbound, based on serum albumin and total bilirubin, has been prospectively validated in cancer patients. 22 This
model provides clinicians and investigators with a method of estimating a patient's etoposide plasma protein binding using easily accessible patient data.

TABLE 19.6-4. Comparison of Clinical Pharmacokinetic Parameters between Etoposide and Teniposide

The activity of etoposide against tumors of the CNS in preclinical and clinical studies is intriguing because etoposide penetrates poorly into the cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) after standard and high intravenous doses or oral doses (e.g., CSF to plasma concentration ratio of approximately 2%). 23 The CSF penetration of teniposide is
lower (i.e., CSF to plasma concentration ratio of 0.03% to 0.55%) 24; however, after intravenous doses of 50 to 100 mg/m 2 significant amounts of teniposide were found
in cerebral tumor samples. Teniposide demonstrated a greater penetration into tumor tissue than peritumoral tissue, suggesting further evaluation of teniposide for
use in treatment of patients with brain tumors, 25,26 although more recent work suggests that presence of blood in tissue specimens may hinder the accurate
assessment of teniposide penetration into brain tumor tissue. 27
Nonrenal clearance accounts for 70% to 90% of etoposide and teniposide elimination, respectively. The exact extent and clinical relevance of this route of elimination
are unknown. Numerous metabolites of etoposide have been identified, although they comprise only a minor percentage of the administered dose and have little, if
any, inherent cytotoxic activity. Similarly, only trace quantities of teniposide metabolites have been found in humans. 28 More recent work with in vitro incubation of
etoposide or teniposide with human liver microsomes has shown that O-demethylation by cytochrome P-450 enzymes leads to formation of a catechol metabolite. 29
Further studies with a panel of prototypical substrates and inhibitors demonstrated the catechol formation is catalyzed by human CYP3A4. 30 Formation of these
reactive metabolites may have important clinical consequences because they covalently bind to DNA and cellular protein and have intrinsic cytotoxic activity. 31,32
Renal clearance of etoposide is greater than teniposide. Approximately 10% or 50% of an administered dose is recovered in the urine as unchanged teniposide or
etoposide, respectively.
The disposition of etoposide in patients with renal and hepatic dysfunction has been extensively studied, whereas little is known about the effect of organ dysfunction
on teniposide. 33,34,35,36,37,38 and 39 From early reports, etoposide clearance in patients with chronic renal failure was not altered by hemodialysis 40,41; however, this may
be attributed to poor dialyzer efficiency, lack of penetration of etoposide into the dialysis membrane, or high protein binding. Etoposide systemic clearance is
significantly correlated with creatinine clearance 42; however, few of these studies have reported the clinical relevance of altered renal function on etoposide toxicity. In
a study of patients with normal albumin and hepatic transaminases, an increase in etoposide AUC was seen in patients with serum creatinine greater than 1.4
mg/dL.43 Based on increased myelosuppression seen in the patients with elevated creatinine, the authors recommend a 30% decrease in etoposide dose for patients
with serum creatinine greater than 1.4 mg/dL. Other approaches to adjusting etoposide dosage for altered renal function include use of measured renal function [e.g.,
51Cr-EDTA clearance],44,45 or adaptive control dosing based on measured plasma concentrations. 46 These approaches provide more accurate methods of determining
patient-specific dose reductions for renal dysfunction; furthermore, they allow for dose escalation in patients with unusually rapid renal function. Thus far, all dosage
adjustment recommendations for etoposide in patients with renal dysfunction are based on hematopoietic toxicity; whether adjusting etoposide dosage compromises
antitumor efficacy is unknown.
Although etoposide is renally excreted (approximately 50%), a significant nonrenal or metabolism component exists (primarily etoposide glucuronide formed in the
liver and excreted in the urine). 47 However, data from three studies show that total etoposide clearance and half-life are not significantly altered in patients with
hepatic dysfunction (i.e., total bilirubin 2 to 32 mg/dL and elevated transaminases) compared with controls. This seeming contradiction of no change in etoposide total
systemic clearance in patients with hepatic dysfunction could be explained by concomitant increases in unbound drug (e.g., bilirubin displacement or
hypoalbuminemia) countering a reduction of nonrenal clearance (e.g., hepatocellular metabolism of unbound drug). The relationship between reduced unbound
clearance and increased fraction unbound, leading to offsetting changes in total drug clearance, is depicted in Figure 19.6-3.

FIGURE 19.6-3. Bar graphs relating changes in etoposide total systemic clearance (CL), unbound clearance, and fraction unbound for patients with total bilirubin
levels of more than 1.0 mg/dL (striped bar), and patients with total bilirubin levels of less than 1.0 mg/dL ( solid bar). Statistically significant differences were noted
(asterisks) for unbound etoposide clearance and fraction unbound ( t test P <.05). (From ref. 37, with permission.)

Etoposide dosage adjustment in patients with organ dysfunction should not be made solely on changes in etoposide pharmacokinetics, although they can aid in the
understanding of altered drug toxicity and therapeutic efficacy associated with impairment of renal and hepatic function. Quantitation of the relation between
pharmacokinetics and clinical outcome (pharmacodynamics) provides the clinician with a model to optimize etoposide dosage for an individual patient. The three
primary determinants of etoposide disposition, and presumably pharmacologic effect, include excretion (renal), metabolism (hepatic), and protein binding. In a clinical
situation in which excretion or metabolism is altered, the pharmacologic effect of etoposide could also be affected. In the absence of prospectively validated dosing
recommendations, any recommendations for dosage alterations can only be considered as guidelines for initial dosing. Clinical effects and patient tolerance should
guide subsequent etoposide dosing. Other clinical considerations include the current condition of the patient (e.g., performance status), previous cytotoxic
chemotherapy, and the therapeutic goal (palliation vs. cure). Arbitrary reductions in etoposide dosage based solely on estimates of renal and hepatic function without
regard to pharmacologic effect may lead to overdosing and toxicity or to underdosing and inadequate antitumor effects. Table 19.6-5 summarizes what effect different
clinical conditions may have on etoposide protein binding and suggested dosage adjustments.

TABLE 19.6-5. Examples of Clinical Conditions in Which Etoposide Elimination, Metabolism, or Protein Binding Are Affected, and the Anticipated Pharmacologic
Effecta

The results of in vitro cell culture studies and murine tumor models have firmly established a relation between epipodophyllotoxin exposure and cytotoxicity 48;
however, most clinical pharmacodynamic studies focus on the relation between etoposide exposure (e.g., AUC, steady-state drug concentration (Cp ss), time above a
particular concentration, or trough concentration) and toxicity (e.g., neutropenia or thrombocytopenia). One clinical pharmacodynamic study of continuous infusion
teniposide in children with acute leukemia, lymphoma, or neuroblastoma, showed the median Cp ss was higher in responding patients (24 vs. 8 µ M), presumably due to
a greater teniposide clearance in the nonresponder group. 49 From this study, a range of teniposide systemic exposure associated with a high probability of response
and an acceptable degree of reversible myelotoxicity was defined. In another study, teniposide unbound systemic exposure was significantly correlated with percent
decrease in white blood cell count (WBC), whereas total systemic exposure was not as well correlated. 50
Inclusion of patient-specific variables, such as serum albumin in pharmacodynamic models, 51,52 provides indirect evidence for the importance of protein binding to
etoposide pharmacodynamics. Because only unbound drug is active, systemic exposure to unbound drug should be more informative of response in a patient
population in which protein binding might be considered to be variable. In a number of clinical trials, a statistically significant mathematical relation between systemic
exposure to unbound etoposide and myelosuppression has been observed. 53,54 and 55 Thus, in patients with anticipated variable etoposide protein binding (e.g.,
hypoalbuminemia), measured unbound etoposide systemic exposure could be a more informative measure of drug effect than total systemic exposure.
The effect of schedule on etoposide activity has been the source of intense investigation. Although an early study 56 suggested prolonged schedules of etoposide were
more effective in patients with SCLC, convincing evidence for schedule dependency came from two studies of single-agent intravenous etoposide in previously
untreated SCLC. 57,58 In the first study, 500 mg/m2 was given either as a 24-hour infusion or in five daily 2-hour infusions. The systemic exposure to total etoposide was
identical between the two treatment arms, but the duration of exposure to putatively cytotoxic concentrations (1 µg/mL) was 95 hours in the daily arm compared to 46
hours in the 24-hour infusion arm. Furthermore, the overall response rate in the 5-day arm was 89%, compared with only 10% in the 24-hour arm. Confirmation of this
observation was derived from a randomized trial of 500 mg/m 2 given intravenously over either a 5-day or an 8-day schedule. 58 No difference in antitumor activity was
noted between the two schedules, although hematologic toxicity was more severe in the 5-day schedule.
Etoposide total systemic clearance is increased in the presence of the anticonvulsants (e.g., phenytoin or phenobarbital) often administered with high-dose
chemotherapy. Because etoposide undergoes hepatic metabolism, induction of hepatic enzymes by anticonvulsants may be of clinical relevance. Median etoposide
systemic clearance in adults receiving phenytoin was approximately 40% greater than in patients not receiving anticonvulsants as part of their bone marrow
conditioning regimen. 59 In children, median etoposide systemic clearance was 77% higher in those receiving phenobarbital or phenytoin than in those not taking
anticonvulsants. 60 The increased systemic clearance associated with anticonvulsant coadministration translates into a lower systemic exposure at the same dose.
Thus, patients receiving anticonvulsants or other drugs known to induce hepatic enzymes need a higher dose of etoposide to achieve a similar systemic exposure to
that attained in the absence of this interaction. In contrast, etoposide systemic clearance is decreased in patients receiving cyclosporine 61 or its analogue valspodar, 62
suggesting inhibition of P-450 metabolism, disruption of P glycoprotein function, or modulation of other mechanisms of etoposide elimination. 63
Etoposide and cisplatin are widely used to treat solid tumors. Because cisplatin causes both acute and chronic decreases in renal function, numerous studies have
investigated the potential for it to alter etoposide excretion. The concurrent infusion of cisplatin with high-dose etoposide (i.e., 350 mg/m 2/d for 5 consecutive days) did
not alter the pharmacokinetics of cisplatin or etoposide. 64,65 However, etoposide systemic clearance was significantly lower in the first 48 hours after cisplatin, as
compared to 21 days later. 66 Early studies suggested cumulative cisplatin exposure was associated with lower etoposide systemic clearance 67; however, data from
more patients have failed to demonstrate a persistent decrease in clearance with up to 360 mg/m 2 cisplatin. Whether etoposide excretion would be affected by larger
cumulative cisplatin doses remains to be determined.
Phenylbutazone and sodium salicylate (at pharmacologic concentrations) were able to displace etoposide from plasma protein binding sites. 68 Other drugs (e.g.,
ifosfamide, indomethacin, nafcillin) were able to displace etoposide, but only at suprapharmacologic plasma concentrations. Unpublished data suggest that
therapeutically relevant concentrations of tolbutamide, sodium salicylate, and sulfamethiazole can displace protein-bound teniposide in fresh human serum. The
clinical relevance of this displacement is unknown.

Myelosuppression is the dose-limiting toxicity for etoposide and teniposide, and only at very high doses is mucositis dose-limiting (i.e., >1000 mg/m 2). Granulocyte
nadir counts occur between 5 and 15 days after intravenous drug administration, and recovery is usually complete by day 28. After continuous oral administration, the
nadir granulocyte count occurs between day 21 and 28, and in most patients, recovery is sufficient by day 35 for retreatment. 69,70 and 71 Thrombocytopenia occurs less
often, with nadir counts observed within 9 to 16 days after drug administration. Regardless of route of administration, myelosuppression is reversible and usually not
cumulative. To avoid the potential of severe myelosuppression, consideration should be given to reducing the etoposide dosage for patients who have received
extensive prior myelosuppressive chemotherapy or radiation to marrow-bearing areas of the skeleton. Mild to moderate nausea and vomiting occur in approximately
30% to 40% of patients and may be more frequent with oral than intravenous administration. Other gastrointestinal toxicities, including constipation, diarrhea,
stomatitis, and anorexia, have been reported but are infrequent at standard intravenous doses; however, with divided-dose oral etoposide, diarrhea and mucositis
were dose-limiting. At etoposide dosages used in bone marrow transplantation regimens, mucositis occurs more frequently, and as the dosage increases, the severity
also increases. Two patients receiving high-dose etoposide (cumulative dose at least 6.8 g/m 2) had elevations in bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and
aminotransferase levels that reversed within 12 weeks. 72
Hypersensitivity reactions (including vasomotor changes), symptoms related to the gastrointestinal tract, and pulmonary symptoms are observed after therapy with
etoposide. Although the rate reported in adults is less than 3%, children with acute lymphocytic leukemia have an incidence as high as 51% 73; however, children
appear to develop more frequent reactions to etoposide than adults. 74 Premedication with histamine (H 1 and H2) blockers and a slower infusion rate may reduce the
risk of further hypersensitivity reactions upon rechallenge with etoposide, although patients developing bronchospasm, urticaria, and severe hypotension or in whom
symptom resolution was slow probably should not be rechallenged.
Therapy-associated acute nonlymphocytic leukemia (t-ANLL) has been described after epipodophyllotoxin-containing therapy for both solid tumors and acute
lymphocytic leukemia. 75,76,77,78,79 and 80 The incidence of t-ANLL varies widely from 1.6% to as high as 25%. These leukemias appear relatively early after diagnosis of
the primary tumor (<5 years), present in overt leukemia without preceding myelodysplasia, and are usually French-American-British (FAB) subtypes of M4 and M5.
Relationships between the cumulative dose and schedule of etoposide therapy and development of t-ANLL have been described. Cumulative etoposide doses greater
than 2 g/m 2 or 3 g/m2 have been associated with a greater incidence of t-ANLL, although this association has not been found in all studies. A relationship between
schedule of administration and development of t-ANLL also has been suggested, with frequent administration of high-dose intravenous epipodophyllotoxin associated
with an increased incidence of t-ANLL. Reports suggest that t-ANLL may also occur with oral etoposide therapy. 81,82 If the metabolism of the epipodophyllotoxins has
prognostic significance to the development of t-ANLL, as suggested by some investigators, 83 then pharmacogenetic differences may be important. 84
A somewhat unexpected adverse event associated with teniposide is characterized by somnolence, hypotension, and metabolic acidosis and has been described in
three children receiving more than 500 mg/m 2 of intravenous teniposide over 4 hours. 85 Due to poor water solubility, teniposide is formulated with polyoxyethylated
castor oil (Cremophor EL) and 42.7% (volume to volume ratio) dehydrated ethanol, and in these patients, clinically significant (i.e., >60 mg/dL) ethanol concentrations
were detected at the time of the adverse event. To avoid high ethanol and teniposide concentrations, teniposide doses of more than 500 mg/m 2 should be given over
8 hours. With the exception of this acute, vehicle-related reaction, the pattern of toxicity for teniposide and etoposide are identical.
ETOPOSIDE PHOSPHATE
Because of poor water solubility, etoposide is formulated with modified polysorbate 80 (Tween 80), polyethylene glycol 300, and ethanol. Preparation of an etoposide
prodrug by modification of the etoposide molecule to add a phosphate group at the 4 position in the E ring led to a more water-soluble compound. 86 Etoposide
phosphate is rapidly and completely converted by endogenous phosphatases to etoposide. Initial studies have evaluated parenteral administration, but etoposide
phosphate can also be given orally. 87,88 and 89
In early phase I studies, etoposide generated from etoposide phosphate showed the same pharmacokinetic and toxicity pattern as etoposide, but with a number of
advantages over the parent compound. 90,91 and 92 Excipients known to be toxic are not found in etoposide phosphate. The drug can be given by intravenous bolus (i.e.,
5 minutes vs. 30 to 60 minutes), reducing the cost of drug preparation and increasing patient convenience. Etoposide phosphate is more stable and can be given at
high concentrations, making it ideal for high-dose therapy or continuous infusion regimens. Whether these advantages will translate into improved clinical efficacy
remains to be answered.

CAMPTOTHECIN ANALOGUES
The antitumor activity of 20(S)-camptothecin, a plant alkaloid isolated from Camptotheca acuminata, has been recognized for more than 20 years. 93,94 Although
10-hydroxycamptothecin demonstrated activity in studies conducted primarily in China, its use was associated with severe and unpredictable toxicity. Several
camptothecin derivatives have been evaluated in clinical trials, including 9-amino-20(S)-camptothecin (9-AC), 9-nitrocamptothecin (rubitecan), lurtotecan (GI 147211),
9-dimethylaminomethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin (topotecan), and 7-ethyl-10-(4-[1-piperidino]-1-piperidino)-carbonyloxy-camptothecin (irinotecan) ( Fig. 19.6-4). The
two camptothecin analogues approved for clinical use (topotecan and irinotecan) contain the camptothecin pentacyclic structure with a lactone (closed ring) moiety in
the E ring. This lactone is essential for cytotoxicity because the open ring, or hydroxy acid form, is inactive. Because of logistical difficulties in stabilizing the lactone
ring before analysis, many investigators have chosen to acidify the plasma sample, which makes all hydroxy acid convert back to the lactone form. Thus, these
investigators measure the sum of lactone and hydroxy acid, or total drug. The clinical pharmacokinetics of the camptothecin analogues are summarized in Table
19.6-6. Many different doses, routes, and schedules of administration have been evaluated for the camptothecin analogues, and controversy exists over which is
optimal.

FIGURE 19.6-4. Camptothecin analogues.

TABLE 19.6-6. Comparison of Clinical Pharmacokinetic Parameters between Topotecan and Irinotecan

Studies of low-dose, protracted topotecan in mice bearing xenografts of human tumors have shown less toxicity and equal or greater antitumor activity over shorter,
more intense courses,95,96 and 97 stimulating interest in oral administration of camptothecin analogues. Clinical studies of oral topotecan show a variable time to peak
concentration 98,99 and have marked interpatient variability. However, in a study of either 15 or 21 days of oral topotecan in children, intrapatient variability for the oval
topotecan AUC and bioavailability (F) was smaller than interpatient variability. 100 In most clinical trials, topotecan is administered on an empty stomach, although in
one study, co-administration of topotecan gelatin capsules with a high-fat meal led to a small decrease in the rate, but not extent, of absorption. 101 Pharmacokinetic
data from a study of the oral absorption of intravenous irinotecan showed that irinotecan was rapidly absorbed, and peak irinotecan concentrations were observed
within 1 to 2 hours of adminstration. 102 The relative extent of conversion of irinotecan to SN-38 was high, with mean ratios of 0.8 and 0.7 on days 1 and 5,
respectively. This compares with values of 0.02 and 0.07 after intravenous administration 103 and suggests that presystemic formation of SN-38 occurs after oral
administration. Preliminary results of a small pediatric study suggest that the absolute bioavailability of intravenous irinotecan administered orally is approximately
10%, which is in agreement with preclinical studies in the mouse. 104
Topotecan and irinotecan both have a large steady-state volume of distribution (Vd ss), consistent with either extensive plasma protein or tissue binding. Topotecan
and irinotecan are approximately 20% and 50% bound to plasma protein, respectively, thus the high Vd ss is most likely due to extensive tissue binding; SN-38 is
approximately 98% bound to plasma proteins. 105 The impact of human serum albumin on the conversion of the lactone to carboxylate form is an important aspect of
camptothecin drug-protein interactions. 106,107 Variations in the camptothecin molecular structure may alter these interactions, with SN-38 lactone having enhanced
stability in the presence of human serum albumin, compared with irinotecan or topotecan. The d-lactone ring moiety of 9-aminocamptothecin hydrolyzes almost
immediately (more than 99.5%) in the presence of human serum albumin, substantially reducing the pharmacologically active lactone form in human blood. In
contrast, topotecan does not associate with human serum albumin, resulting in a higher level of lactone stability in human plasma. 108 The clinical significance of
variability in serum albumin concentrations on camptothecin toxicity and antitumor activity is presently unknown.
Topotecan CSF penetration in children was determined from the ratio of CSF to plasma AUC during a 24- and 72-hour continuous topotecan infusion. 109 The median
CSF penetration of topotecan lactone was 29% (range, 10% to 59%) and 42% (range, 11% to 97%) for the 24- and 72-hour continuous infusions, respectively. The
degree of penetration is consistent with that reported for the nonhuman primate model. 110
The primary route of elimination from the body varies between topotecan and irinotecan. For topotecan, 50% to 65% of a dose is recovered in the urine; thus, renal
excretion is a major route of elimination. 111,112 and 113 Although topotecan has been measured in human bile, the importance of biliary excretion is unknown.
Approximately 30% to 40% of topotecan is eliminated by nonrenal pathways, and the N-desmethyl metabolite of topotecan has been isolated from urine of patients
receiving topotecan. 114 This metabolite has antitumor activity equal to that of the parent compound, and its formation is catalyzed by the cytochrome P-450 system.
The maximum plasma concentration of total (sum of lactone and hydroxy acid) N-desmethyl topotecan is only 0.5% of total topotecan, and the average urinary
recovery is less than 5% of the administered dose. Two other metabolites, topotecan O-glucuronide and N-desmethyl topotecan O-glucuronide have been reported;
however, they accounted for only 13.5% of the urinary recovery of the administered dose. Thus, other nonrenal routes (e.g., metabolism) of topotecan elimination are
yet to be identified. 115
In contrast, irinotecan itself has little in vitro cytotoxicity116 and requires conversion, by the carboxylesterase enzyme, to 7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin (SN-38) for
antitumor activity. In vitro studies have shown decreased carboxylesterase activity may be a mechanism of cellular resistance to irinotecan. 117 Furthermore,
transfection of carboxylesterases into tumor cells increases the activation and cytotoxicity of irinotecan. 118,119 SN-38 is conjugated to glucuronic acid at the C 10 position
by UGT1A1, and this metabolite has no intrinsic antitumor activity. 120 The extent of conversion of SN-38 to its glucuronide has been inversely correlated with the risk
of severe diarrhea, because the other major route of SN-38 excretion is biliary excretion by canalicular multispecific organic anion transporter (cMOAT) 121,122
(presumably leading to mucosal injury). 123 In addition to SN-38 and SN-38 glucuronide, 7-ethyl-10-[4-N-(5-aminopentanoic
acid)-1-piperidino]carbonyloxycamptothecin (APC) and 7-ethyl-10-(4-amino-1-piperidino)carbonyloxycamptothecin (NPC) are oxidative metabolites of irinotecan
formed by CYP3A4.124,125 Renal excretion is a minor route of elimination for irinotecan and SN-38.
The disposition of topotecan in patients with renal and hepatic dysfunction has been studied in adults receiving intravenous topotecan daily for 5 consecutive
days.126,127 and 128 Patients with renal dysfunction were placed into three groups according to their creatinine clearance (20 or below, 21 to 40, or 41 to 60 mL/min), and
hepatic dysfunction was defined as a total bilirubin greater than 1.5 mg/dL. A control group of patients with normal renal and hepatic function was also studied.
Topotecan disposition and hematologic toxicity were not significantly altered in patients with hepatic dysfunction (as defined by elevated total bilirubin); therefore, no
dosage alteration is recommended for these patients. Severe neutropenia was observed in patients with moderate to severe renal dysfunction treated at one-third of
the adult maximal tolerated dosage (i.e., 0.5 mg/m2/d). Based on the results of this study, the investigators recommended an initial topotecan dosage of 0.75 mg/m 2/d
when given daily for 5 consecutive days to patients with moderate renal dysfunction (i.e., creatinine clearance <39 mL/min). In another study of patients with renal
dysfunction, no correlation was found between total topotecan clearance and a more specific measure of glomerular filtration rate [technetium Tc 99m DPTA
clearance]. Furthermore, one patient studied with a technetium clearance of 19 mL/min/m 2 had a normal topotecan total clearance, suggesting topotecan may undergo
renal tubular secretion in addition to glomerular filtration. Results of a study in mice showed that probenecid would inhibit renal tubular secretion of topotecan and
decrease topotecan renal and systemic clearance, leading to an increase in topotecan lactone systemic exposure. 129 Irinotecan undergoes significant hepatic
metabolism, and preliminary pharmacokinetic and toxicity results of a study of irinotecan administration in adults with liver dysfunction suggest that the irinotecan
dosage should be reduced by one-third in patients with total bilirubin more than three times the upper limit of normal. 130
As with the epipodophyllotoxins, results of preclinical studies of the camptothecin analogues show a definite relationship between dose and antitumor effect in mice
bearing human tumor xenografts. These studies have evaluated a variety of schedules and routes of administration, and the results suggest that the camptothecin
analogues are highly schedule-dependent. 131 Early clinical studies of the relationship between systemic exposure and pharmacologic effect reported a statistically
significant and clinically relevant relationship between drug exposure and myelosuppression (i.e., percentage change in absolute neutrophil count and platelets). 132,133
A significant correlation was reported between systemic exposure to 9-aminocamptothecin lactone and the extent of neutropenia observed after a 72-hour continuous
infusion. 134 Few studies have looked at the relationship between drug exposure and antitumor efficacy; however, one study of continuous infusion topotecan in
children with relapsed acute leukemia found a correlation between topotecan lactone systemic exposure and toxicity and topotecan lactone systemic exposure and
oncolytic effect (Fig. 19.6-5).135

FIGURE 19.6-5. Plot of topotecan lactone systemic exposure (C ss; steady-state concentration) versus proportion of courses of therapy with either an oncolytic
response (upper curve; square) or grade 2 to 4 mucositis (lower curve; triangle). Twelve courses of topotecan were associated with an oncolytic response, defined as
greater than 75% reduction in circulating blast count or a complete or partial response based on bone marrow aspirate. In this figure, the number of courses
associated with a response or mucositis is shown in the numerator over the total number of courses at each level of systemic exposure. (From ref. 135, with

permission.)

The presence of the pH-sensitive lactone ring present in the two commercially available camptothecin analogues, topotecan and irinotecan, raises the question of
whether lactone or total systemic exposure is a better representation of pharmacologic effect. The advantage of measuring total drug is the elimination of the more
cumbersome determination of the lactone concentrations, which require immediate sample processing. Total concentrations (lactone plus hydroxy acid) may be
determined without immediate processing, and assays may be performed several weeks or months later, thus, making it feasible to do large population studies. Use of
total drug as a surrogate for systemic exposure to the active lactone has potential drawbacks (e.g., presence of active metabolites, intrapatient variability), although
the lactone and hydroxy acid exist in a pH-dependent equilibrium that varies little at physiologic pH.
Reversible myelosuppression, with both neutropenia and thrombocytopenia, is the dose-limiting toxicity observed with topotecan. After intravenous dosing of
topotecan, the neutrophil nadir occurs between 8 and 10 days, and recovery is usually complete by day 21. On a schedule of extremely high doses given daily for 5
days, hemolytic anemia was observed as a dose-limiting toxicity. 136 Reversible moderate to severe anemia also has been reported with topotecan. The use of growth
factors to further escalate the topotecan dose has been used with mixed success. 137 With oral topotecan, prolonged oral administration (i.e., twice daily for 21 days
every 28 days) resulted in gastrointestinal side effects as the dose-limiting toxicity, whereas, when given in the short term (i.e., once daily for 5 days every 21 days),
myelosuppression was the dose-limiting toxicity. 138 For topotecan, the only nonhematologic dose-limiting toxicity reported is mucositis, but only after a 120-hour
continuous topotecan infusion. 139,140
The major dose-limiting toxicities for irinotecan are myelosuppression and diarrhea. Irinotecan-induced diarrhea is generally of two types. The first type has an early
onset, beginning during or immediately after the irinotecan infusion. This is often accompanied by facial flushing and abdominal cramping characteristic of diarrhea
associated with vasoactive compounds. Standard-dose anticholinergic drugs, such as scopolamine or atropine, can be used to control this diarrhea, which is caused
by the cholinergic effects of irinotecan. The second type of diarrhea, a cholera-like syndrome unresponsive to loperamide or codeine, is often dose-limiting. Many
therapeutic approaches have been tried to ameliorate or prevent the diarrhea associated with irinotecan, including the use of the cyclooxygenase inhibitor
indomethacin and the enkephalinase inhibitor acetorphan, but none has been universally successful. 141,142 Modulation of irinotecan pharmacokinetics by inhibitors of
SN-38 biliary excretion or inducers of SN-38 glucuronidation may be another method to reduce the severity of irinotecan-associated diarrhea. 143,144 and 145
Other nonhematologic toxicities seen with the camptothecin analogues are generally reversible and not dose-limiting. Mild nausea and vomiting have occurred in
approximately 20% to 30% of patients. Low-grade fever has been observed in approximately 20% of patients, and alopecia occurs at higher doses. Other mild
toxicities observed include fatigue, anorexia, and skin rash. Top I interactive agents have not been in clinical use long enough for therapy-associated malignancies to
be reported; however, sister chromatid exchanges and gene deletions or rearrangements have been induced in vitro.146
Topotecan systemic clearance and the formation of the N-desmethyl topotecan metabolite are increased in the presence of enzyme-inducing anticonvulsants (e.g.,
phenytoin). 147 Although hepatic metabolism is a relatively minor component of topotecan disposition, the steep exposure-response relationship observed with
topotecan makes this interaction clinically relevant. Patients concomitantly administered enzyme-inducing anticonvulsants may require an increase in topotecan dose
to achieve a similar pharmacologic effect as a patient not receiving anticonvulsants. This interaction with anticonvulsants was also observed in a group of patients
receiving 9-aminocamptothecin, a camptothecin analogue that has no known hepatic metabolism. In this study, patients receiving 9-aminocamptothecin and
anticonvulsants did not have the expected extent of myelosuppression. On further study of 9-aminocamptothecin pharmacokinetics, it was found that the median
steady-state 9-aminocamptothecin plasma concentrations in patients on anticonvulsants (25.3 n M) was significantly lower than patients not receiving anticonvulsants
(76.5 nM).148 Anticonvulsants also increased irinotecan clearance in a study of patients with glioma, which led to a decrease in the mean irinotecan and SN-38
AUC.149 Although the numbers of patients studied were small, it appears that phenobarbital may have a different effect from carbamazepine and phenytoin, in that
phenobarbital increased SN-38 glucuronide and APC AUC by 1.6- and 2.6-fold, respectively. In another study of adults with malignant glioma receiving irinotecan and
anticonvulsants and dexamethasone, the irinotecan clearance was twofold and the systemic exposure to irinotecan, SN-38, and SN-38 glucuronide was statistically
lower compared with a historical control group of patients with non-CNS tumors. 150

ANTHRACYCLINES AND RELATED COMPOUNDS
Anthracyclines, anticancer agents consisting of a pigmented aglycone, an amino sugar, and a lateral chain ( Fig. 19.6-6), have been in clinical practice since the
1960s and represent one of the most commonly used classes of anticancer drugs. 151 The first anthracyclines in clinical use, doxorubicin and daunorubicin, were
produced by the Streptomyces species, and the anthracyclines have thus been classified as antitumor antibiotics; however, classification by mechanism of action is
more rational, especially because the second-generation anthracyclines (e.g., idarubicin, epirubicin) are synthetic. The first anthracycline, doxorubicin, still remains
the most widely used and is the benchmark against which new analogues are compared.

FIGURE 19.6-6. Structures of the four anthracyclines in current clinical use. Epirubicin differs from doxorubicin in the steric position of the 4'-OH group, whereas
idarubicin differs from daunorubicin in lacking an A-ring methoxy substitution.

The anthracyclines induce formation of covalent topoisomerase-DNA complexes and prevent the enzyme from completing the religation portion of the
ligation-religation reaction. These agents are also DNA intercalators that insert part of their planar structures between two adjacent base pairs in DNA, causing
single-stranded and double-strand breaks. The anthracyclines can undergo chemical reduction through enzymatically catalyzed or iron-catalyzed pathways to yield
reactive free radical intermediates. Through hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl radicals, these free radical intermediates can cause oxidative damage to cellular
proteins. Under hypoxic conditions, these free radicals can rearrange to form metabolites capable of covalently binding to DNA. Although the anthracyclines are
associated with all of these reactions, it is their interaction with top II that is the most important mechanism of cytotoxicity. 152
With the exception of idarubicin, none of the anthracyclines are administered orally. Idarubicin, a synthetic analogue of daunorubicin, has increased lipophilicity
compared to daunorubicin, which allows it to be readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. 153 Absorption of idarubicin is erratic and incomplete ( Table 19.6-7);
however, higher concentrations of its active metabolite, idarubicinol, are achieved after oral than intervenous administration because of first-pass hepatic metabolism.

TABLE 19.6-7. Comparison of Clinical Pharmacokinetic Parameters between Doxorubicin, Daunorubicin, Epirubicin, and Idarubicin

Anthracyclines as a class are unable to cross the blood–brain barrier either because of low lipophilicity, the presence of P glycoprotein in the cells of brain endothelial
vessels, or both. 154 However, after intravenous administration of idarubicin, its metabolite, idarubicinol, can be detected in the CSF (1% to 13% simultaneous plasma
concentration) at concentrations associated with in vitro cytotoxicity. The plasma protein binding for the anthracyclines is probably not clinically relevant, with the
exception of idarubicin and idarubicinol, as hypoalbuminemia may increase systemic exposure to unbound idarubicin and idarubicinol.
Several metabolic pathways have been reported for the anthracyclines. Reduction of the ketone on carbon 13 yields 13S-dihydro derivatives, which are then named
after the parent anthracycline with the suffix - ol (e.g., doxorubicinol). This reaction is catalyzed by the ubiquitous aldoketoreductases, which in general convert
daunorubicin and idarubicin more rapidly than doxorubicin and epirubicin. Thus, plasma concentrations of daunorubicinol and idarubicinol rapidly exceed those of the
parent drug (AUC ratio of metabolite to parent drug, 2 to 5), compared with doxorubicinol and epirubicinol (AUC ratio, 0.3 to 0.5). Most 13-dihydro metabolites of the
anthracyclines do not have antitumor activity; however, idarubicinol is an exception, primarily due to its lipophilicity, which allows entry into the cell. At one time,
deglycosylation was thought to represent a metabolic pathway, but now the clinical significance of the anthracycline aglycones is unknown. Epirubicin, an epimer of
doxorubicin, is characterized by a unique metabolic step present only in humans. The equatorial position of the 4' hydroxyl group allows epirubicin to be conjugated to
glucuronic acid. The glucuronide AUC is similar to that of the parent compound, potentially explaining the lower myelotoxic and cardiotoxic properties of epirubicin
compared with doxorubicin; however, the exact clinical significance of this metabolic step is unknown.
Elimination of the anthracyclines proceeds primarily through the bile, with urinary excretion accounting for less than 10% of the total dose administered. No evidence
for enterohepatic recirculation has been observed. Although epirubicin is excreted in the bile, a larger proportion of an injected dose is recovered in the urine relative
to the other anthracyclines, due to formation of soluble glucuronides. 155
In patients with hyperbilirubinemia or reduced renal function, dose reduction recommendations for daunorubicin and doxorubicin are provided in the package
literature. These dose reductions are based on retrospective data and have not been prospectively validated. The results of a study of patients with hyperbilirubinemia
receiving doxorubicin raise questions about the validity of adjusting doses in patients with hyperbilirubinemia. 156 The systemic clearance of epirubicin and idarubicin in
patients with liver disease is decreased, and although a dosage reduction is recommended based on bilirubin or serum aspartate, as with doxorubicin, it is unclear if a
dosage reduction is clinically indicated. Whereas renal impairment reduces the clearance of epirubicin and idarubicin, only idarubicin has been adequately studied to
provide dosing guidelines.
As with other anticancer drugs, few clinical studies have related exposure to anthracyclines and antitumor effect. Early studies suggested doxorubicin concentration,
peak or 3 hours after end of infusion, was associated with outcome of remission induction or reduction of tumor mass, respectively. These findings have led
investigators to speculate that improved tumor response might be linked to high initial plasma doxorubicin concentrations. The contribution of the anthracycline
metabolite to the overall effect depends on the anthracycline under study. As discussed previously, idarubicinol has significant cytotoxic activity; patients with a low
rate of epirubicin glucuronidation had a lower percent change in neutrophils and better tumor response. The only pharmacodynamic relation between doxorubicin
systemic exposure and toxicity (e.g., decrease in WBC) was noted after continuous doxorubicin infusion. 157 A positive correlation was noted between the AUC for
epirubicin, or epirubicin and epirubicinol, and logarithm of the WBC survival fraction. 158
Although a number of drugs have been reported to interact with doxorubicin, most of these have been in experimental systems, so their clinical significance is
unknown. Of the drug interactions reported in patients with cancer, only a few are of clinical consequence. Despite numerous studies showing pharmacologic
prevention of anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity, only dexrazoxane has been able to significantly retard development of cardiotoxicity. The reversal of
doxorubicin-induced multidrug resistance has been attempted using a variety of pharmacologic modulators, such as trifluoperazine, verapamil, and cyclosporine, and
has met with mixed success.
The dose-limiting acute toxicity of the anthracyclines is myelosuppression, primarily affecting the neutrophils; in the treatment of leukemia, however, this may be
considered a desirable side effect. The onset of myelosuppression is usually 7 days after administration, with maximum effect seen at approximately day 10 to 14.
Recovery is usually complete by day 21 to 28. Gastrointestinal toxicities are common, including nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, and mucositis. Although not
dose-limiting, alopecia also occurs in almost all patients. Although not always readily apparent when it occurs, extravasation of the anthracyclines can lead to severe
local tissue damage and deep ulcerations that progress over weeks. These lesions are slow to heal and often require skin grafting, although the graft is not always
successful. Once an extravasation has been discovered, the optimal method of management is unknown, although most agree that local measures such as ice packs
and subcutaneous injections of saline, steroids, or bicarbonate may be useful. Topical dimethylsulfoxide has been suggested to be a safe and effective approach to
reducing the tissue damage associated with anthracycline-induced extravasation. 159,160 The best approach to avoiding extravasation is to take all possible precautions
when administering an anthracycline, such as ensuring good blood return on the intravenous line, monitoring the intravenous site carefully, and good patient
education.
The anthracyclines are associated with both acute and chronic cardiac toxicity. The less common acute cardiac toxicity includes nonspecific electrocardiographic
changes that may be observed during or immediately after the infusion. In its extreme form, this acute toxicity can include a pericarditis-myocarditis syndrome with
onset of fever, pericarditis, and congestive heart failure. 161 No association between the acute toxicity and later development of chronic toxicity has been shown.
Besides symptomatic management, no specific therapy is recommended for this relatively rare syndrome.
Anthracyclines also produce a dose-dependent congestive myopathy that often leads to congestive heart failure. This typically becomes apparent 4 to 8 weeks after
the last anthracycline dose, although it may occur during treatment or years later. The clinical significance of this chronic toxicity has been its inability to treat it,
leading to a drug-induced mortality ranging in early reports from 33% to 70%, and in more recent reports to less than 30%. If a sufficiently high cumulative dose is
administered, all anthracyclines can cause cardiac toxicity; however, idarubicin and epirubicin are associated with a lower incidence than doxorubicin and
daunorubicin. The mechanisms of the chronic cardiotoxicity have been reviewed extensively. To summarize, they include enzymatic-mediated formation of oxygen
free radicals that initiate lipid peroxidation and a nonenzymatic pathway for free radical formation. 162 Iron is central to both pathways; it is required to begin hydroxyl
radical production in the first pathway, and to form an iron-drug complex in the second. The risk of anthracycline-associated congestive heart failure is increased by
the presence of preexisting heart disease or hypertension, prior radiation to the heart or mediastinum, age (generally, children younger than 4 years are more
susceptible), prior cyclophosphamide therapy (questionable), and cumulative anthracycline dose. For doxorubicin, a cumulative dose of less than 450 mg/m 2, in the
absence of other risk factors, is rarely associated with cardiomyopathy, whereas as the cumulative dose increases to 550, 600, and 700 mg/m 2, the incidence
increases to 7%, 15%, and 30%, respectively. For daunorubicin, the overall incidence of congestive heart failure is low (approximately 1.2% in a population of 5613
patients), and the incidence was related to the cumulative daunorubicin dose administered. 163 At daunorubicin doses of 550 mg/m2, the incidence of congestive heart
failure was 4%, whereas at a total dose of 1050 mg/m 2, the incidence increased to 14%. A retrospective study of idarubicin cardiotoxicity found few clinically
significant symptoms at cumulative doses of 290 mg/m 2, although left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) decreased during therapy. A metaanalysis of studies
comparing epirubicin and doxorubicin found epirubicin as active as doxorubicin (1:1) and less cardiac toxic (1:1.8). 164
Patients receiving anthracyclines should be monitored for the onset of cardiomyopathy. The most useful noninvasive test is serial radionuclide angiocardiography,
which provides a reproducible measure of LVEF and is sensitive to subclinical cardiac dysfunction. This technique and others have done much to allow earlier
detection of subclinical cardiac toxicity and to reduce the mortality associated with it. Management of the cardiomyopathy involves bed rest and afterload reduction.

With continued conservative management, patients may experience a gradual improvement; this improvement, however, may take more than 1 year.
Many different approaches have been tried to prevent anthracycline-induced cardiac toxicity, including analogue synthesis, altering dosing schedules, and the use of
biochemical antagonists. Although many of the anthracycline analogues are associated with a lower incidence of toxicity, they still are associated with decreased
LVEF, albeit asymptomatic. The use of continuous infusion schedules of anthracyclines has reduced the incidence of cardiac toxicity somewhat, providing a
pharmacokinetic basis for the hypothesis that high peak concentrations are associated with an increased incidence of cardiotoxicity. 165 However, this approach is not
widely used because of concern over compromising antitumor efficacy, unpredictable toxicities, and logistical issues.
Dexrazoxane (ICRF-187) is the first biochemical antagonist shown in a randomized clinical trial to dramatically reduce the incidence of cardiac toxicity in patients with
breast cancer, without altering the antitumor activity of the doxorubicin combination regimen. Although its mechanism is not fully elucidated, dexrazoxane either acts
as a free radical scavenger or prevents formation of free radicals.
In addition to oral and intravenous administration, doxorubicin and epirubicin have been administered via the intraarterial route for well-defined, nonresectable
metastatic and primary tumors of the liver. Consistent with their metabolic profile, the systemic toxicity for doxorubicin was not reduced using this route of
administration, whereas relatively low levels of epirubicin were produced because of substantial first-pass effect. Intrapleural doxorubicin has been used to treat
malignant pleural effusions, and intravesical administration is an effective therapy for recurrent, superficial transitional cell bladder carcinoma.

MITOXANTRONE AND LOSOXANTRONE
Cumulative cardiotoxicity limits the clinical use of the anthracyclines, and much work has been directed at synthesizing related compounds less prone to undergo
reductive metabolism to form free radicals. 166,167 and 168 Mitoxantrone, a member of the anthracenedione class of synthetic antitumor compounds, is an example of one
effort. It lacks the sugar moiety of the anthracycline drugs, but retains the planar polycyclic aromatic ring structure that permits its intercalation into DNA. More
important, mitoxantrone lacks the ability to produce the quinone-type free radicals thought to be responsible for anthracycline-associated cardiac toxicity.
Losoxantrone (biantrazole; CI-941) is a member of theanthrapyrazolegroup of antitumor agents, which are structurally similar to the anthracyclines. The
anthrapyrazoles were synthesized to have antitumor activity similar to the anthracyclines, but without cardiotoxicity. The rationale underlying the development of the
anthrapyrazoles was to make the electron-deficient quinone chromophore of the anthracyclines more resistant to enzymatic reduction by forming a
quasi-iminoquinone. The planar conformation and cationic nature of the anthracyclines, necessary for intercalative binding to DNA, is retained in the anthrapyrazoles.
Losoxantrone can also cause cytotoxicity by inhibition of top II. 169 Preclinical studies demonstrated that a number of anthrapyrazoles had a spectrum of activity and
potency similar to doxorubicin and were superior to mitoxantrone.
The clinical pharmacokinetics of mitoxantrone and losoxantrone are summarized in Table 19.6-8. Both compounds have very large distribution volumes and are highly
protein bound (percentage unbound, <5%). 170,171 Both compounds undergo hepatic metabolism, but the clinical relevance of these metabolites is unknown, as is
whether the dosage of either compound should be reduced in patients with hepatic dysfunction. The low urinary recovery for both compounds suggests no dosage
adjustment is necessary for patients with mild to moderate renal dysfunction.

TABLE 19.6-8. Comparison of Clinical Pharmacokinetic Parameters between the Two Anticancer Drugs Mitoxantrone and Losoxantrone

The primary dose-limiting toxicity of both compounds is myelosuppression, primarily neutropenia, although thrombocytopenia has been reported. 172,173 Cumulative
myelosuppression was not noted. At higher doses, moderate nausea and vomiting have been reported, but only mild nausea and vomiting at lower doses. Although
mitoxantrone is associated with less cardiotoxicity than the anthracyclines, it can cause decreases in LVEF. For losoxantrone, data for 183 patients showed mild to
severe cardiotoxicity in 25 and congestive heart failure in 2 patients.

DACTINOMYCIN (ACTINOMYCIN D)
Dactinomycin is a member of a class of compounds first isolated from Streptomyces parvullus. The only member to be clinically useful, dactinomycin is highly effective
in the treatment of Wilms' tumor, Ewing's sarcoma, embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, and gestational choriocarcinoma. Responses have also been reported in testicular
cancer, Kaposi's sarcoma, and lymphoma. 174
Dactinomycin is composed of a planar tricyclic ring chromophore (phenoxazone) to which two identical cyclic polypeptides are attached. 175 The compound binds to
DNA by intercalation, depending on a specific interaction between the polypeptide chains and deoxyguanosine. This interaction blocks the ability of DNA to act as a
template for RNA and DNA synthesis in a concentration-dependent manner. Low drug concentrations inhibit RNA synthesis more than higher drug concentrations,
which block both RNA and DNA syntheses. Dactinomycin can also cause topoisomerase-mediated single-strand breaks in DNA, although the contribution of these
breaks to cytotoxicity is unclear. 176In vitro studies suggest that concomitant actinomycin D and hyperthermia (e.g., 42° or 43°C) resulted in an increased uptake and
prolonged retention of actinomycin D. 177
After an intravenous bolus, dactinomycin has a rapid disappearance phase followed by a long elimination half-life of 36 hours. 178 Dactinomycin is minimally
metabolized, is concentrated in nucleated red blood cells, and does not cross the blood–brain barrier. Dactinomycin is primarily eliminated by renal and biliary
excretion, although only 30% has been recovered in the urine and stool over the week after a dose. Inadequate data exist to formulate dosage recommendations for
use of dactinomycin in patients with renal or hepatic dysfunction.
The dose-limiting toxicity for dactinomycin is myelosuppression, affecting both platelets and neutrophils. Severe nausea and vomiting occur during the first few hours
after administration, but these side effects are responsive to antiemetic therapy. Gastrointestinal toxicity manifests primarily as stomatitis, accompanied by pain, and
diarrhea may occur. Extravasation of this drug after intravenous use may result in severe soft tissue damage and ulceration. Dactinomycin is a radiation sensitizer,
leading to enhanced skin and gastrointestinal toxicity when administered concurrently with radiation. 179 In addition, late radiation damage to lung and liver appears
increased, potentially because of the ability of dactinomycin to block repair of radiation-mediated DNA damage. This recall reaction can be observed even when
months separate radiation therapy and dactinomycin administration.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Cumming J, Smyth JF. DNA topoisomerase I and II as targets for rational design of new anticancer drugs. Ann Oncol 1993;4:533.
2. Wang JC. DNA topoisomerases. Annu Rev Biochem 1996;65:635.
3. Chen AY, Liu LF. DNA topoisomerases: essential enzymes and lethal targets. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1994;34:191.
4. Pommier Y, Leteurtre F, Fesen MR, et al. Cellular determinants of sensitivity and resistance to DNA topoisomerase inhibitors. Cancer Invest 1994;12:530.
5. Gupta M, Fujimori A, Pommier Y. Eukaryotic DNA topoisomerases I. Biochim Biophys Acta 1995;1262:1.
6. Berger JM. Structure of DNA topoisomerases. Biochim Biophys Acta 1998;1400:3.
7. Husain I, Mohler JL, Seigler HF, Besterman JM. Elevation of topoisomerase I messenger RNA, protein, and catalytic activity in human tumors: demonstration of tumor-type specificity and

implications for cancer chemotherapy. Cancer Res 1994;54:539.
8. Giovanella BC, Stehlin JS, Wall ME, et al. DNA topoisomerase Itargeted chemotherapy of human colon cancer in xenografts. Science 1989;246:1046.
9. Takano H, Kohno K, Matsuo K, Matsuda T, Kuwano M. DNA topoisomerase-targeting antitumor agents and drug resistance. Anticancer Drugs 1992;3:323.
10. Burden DA, Osheroff N. Mechanism of action of eukaryotic topoisomerase II and drugs targeted to the enzyme. Biochim Biophys Acta 1998;1400:139.
11. Wigley DB. Structure and mechanism of DNA topoisomerases. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 1995;24:185.
12. Pommier Y. Diversity of DNA topoisomerases I and inhibitors. Biochimie 1998;80:255.
13. Corbett AH, Osheroff N. When good enzymes go bad: conversion of topoisomerase II to a cellular toxin by antineoplastic drugs. Chem Res Toxicol 1993;6:585.
14. Stahelin HF, von Wartburg A. The chemical and biological route from podophyllotoxin glucoside to etoposide: ninth Cain memorial award lecture. Cancer Res 1991;51:5.
15. Muggia FM. Teniposide: overview of its therapeutic potential in adult cancers. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1994;34:127.
16. Sonnichsen DS, Ribeiro RC, Luo X, Mathew P, Relling MV. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 21-day continuous oral etoposide in pediatric patients with solid tumors. Clin Pharmacol
Ther 1995;58:99.
17. Hande K, Messenger M, Wagner J, Krozely M, Kaul S. Inter- and intrapatient variability in etoposide kinetics with oral and intravenous drug administration. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:2742.
18. Liu B, Earl HM, Poole CJ, Dunn J, Kerr DJ. Etoposide protein binding in cancer patients. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1995;36:506.
19. Stewart CF, Pieper JA, Arbuck SG, Evans WE. Altered protein binding of etoposide in patients with cancer. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1989;45:49.
20. Petros WP, Rodman JH, Relling MV, et al. Variability in teniposide plasma protein binding is correlated with serum albumin concentrations. Pharmacotherapy 1992;12:273.
21. Fleming RA, Evans WE, Arbuck SG, Stewart CF. Factors affecting in vitro protein binding of etoposide in humans. J Pharm Sci 1992;81:259.
22. Stewart CF, Fleming RA, Arbuck SG, Evans WE. Prospective evaluation of a model for predicting etoposide plasma protein binding in cancer patients. Cancer Res 1990;50:6854.
23. Relling MV, Mahmoud H, Pui CH, et al. Etoposide achieves potentially cytotoxic concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid of children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:399.
24. Holthuis JJM, de Vries EGE, Postmus PE. Pharmacokinetics of high-dose teniposide. Cancer Treatment Rep 1987;71:599.
25. Zuchetti M, Rossi C, Knerich R, et al. Concentrations of VP16 and VM26 in human brain tumors. Ann Oncol 1991;2:63.
26. Stewart DJ, Richard MT, Hugenholtz H, et al. Penetration of teniposide (VM-26) into human intracerebral tumors. J Neuro-Oncol 1984;2:315.
27. van Tellingen O, Boogerd W, Nooijen WJ, Beijnen JH. The vascular compartment hampers accurate determination of teniposide penetration into brain tumor tissue. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol 1997;40:330.
28. Splinter TAW, Holthuis JJM, Kok TC, Post MH. Absolute bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of oral teniposide. Semin Oncol 1992;19:28.
29. Relling MV, Evans R, Dass C, Desiderio DM, Nemec J. Human cytochrome P450 metabolism of teniposide and etoposide. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1992;261:491.
30. Relling MV, Nemec J, Schuetz EG, et al. O-Demethylation of epipodophyllotoxins is catalyzed by human cytochrome P450 3A4. Mol Pharmacol 1994;45:352.
31. Mans DRA, Lafleur MVM, Westmijze EJ, et al. Reactions of glutathione with the catechol, the ortho-quinone and the semi-quinone free radicals of etoposide. Biochem Pharmacol 1992;43:1761.
32. van Maanen JMS, deVries J, Pappie D, et al. Cytochrome P450-mediated O-demethylation: a route in the metabolic activation of etoposide. Cancer Res 1987;47:4658.
33. Arbuck SG, Douglass HO, Crom WR, et al. Etoposide pharmacokinetics in patients with normal and abnormal organ function. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1690.
34. D'Incalci M, Rossi C, Zucchetti M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of etoposide in patients with abnormal renal and hepatic function. Cancer Res 1986;46:2566.
35. Hande KR, Wolff SN, Greco FA, et al. Etoposide kinetics in patients with obstructive jaundice. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1101.
36. Pfluger KH, Schmidt L, Merkel M, Jungclas H, Havemann K. Drug monitoring of etoposide (VP 16-213): correlation of pharmacokinetic parameters to clinical and biochemical data from patients
receiving etoposide. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1987;20:59.
37. Stewart CF, Arbuck SG, Fleming RA, Evans WE. Changes in the clearance of total and unbound etoposide in patients with liver dysfunction. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1874.
38. English MW, Lowis SP, Peng B, et al. Pharmacokinetically guided dosing of carboplatin and etoposide during peritoneal dialysis and haemodialysis. Br J Cancer 1996;73:776.
39. Suzuki S, Koide M, Sakamoto S, Matsuo T. Pharmacokinetics of carboplatin and etoposide in a haemodialysis patient with Merkel-cell carcinoma. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1997;12:137.
40. Brindley CJ, Antoniw P, Newlands ES, Bagshawe KD. Pharmacokinetics and toxicity of the epipodophyllotoxin derivative etoposide (VP 16-213) in patients with gestational choriocarcinoma and
malignant teratoma. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1985;15:66.
41. Holthuis JJM, Van de Vyver FL, van Oort WJ, et al. Pharmacokinetic evaluation of increasing dosages of etoposide in a chronic hemodialysis patient. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:1279.
42. Pfluger KH, Hahn M, Holz JB, et al. Pharmacokinetics of etoposide: correlation of pharmacokinetic parameters and clinical conditions. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1993;31:350.
43. Joel SP, Shah R, Slevin ML. Etoposide dosage and pharmacodynamics. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1994;34:S69.
44. Lowis SP, Pearson ADJ, Newell DR, Cole M. Etoposide pharmacokinetics in children: the development and prospective validation of a dosing equation. Cancer Res 1993;53:4881.
45. Kintzel PE, Dorr RT. Anticancer drug renal toxicity and elimination: dosing guidelines for altered renal function. Cancer Treat Rev 1995;21:33.
46. Ratain MJ, Schilsky RL, Choi KE, et al. Adaptive control of etoposide administration: impact of interpatient pharmacodynamic variability. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1989;45:226.
47. Hande KR, Bennett R, Hamilton R, Grote T, Branch R. Metabolism and excretion of etoposide in isolated, perfused rat liver model. Cancer Res 1988;48:5692.
48. Wolff SN, Grosh WW, Prater K. In vitro pharmacodynamic evaluation of VP-16-213 and implications for chemotherapy. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1987;19:246.
49. Rodman JH, Abromowitch M, Sinkule JA, et al. Clinical pharmacodynamics of continuous infusion teniposide: systematic exposure as a determinant of response in a phase I trial. J Clin Oncol
1987;5:1007.
50. Evans WE, Rodman JH, Relling MV, et al. Differences in teniposide disposition and pharmacodynamics in patients with newly diagnosed and relapsed acute lymphocytic leukemia. J Pharmacol
Exp Ther 1992;260:71.
51. Ratain MJ, Mick R, Schilsky RL, Vogelzang NJ, Berezin F. Pharmacologically based dosing of etoposide: a means of safely increasing dose intensity. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1480.
52. Karlsson MO, Port RE, Ratain MJ, Sheiner LB. A population model for the leukopenic effect of etoposide. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1995;57:325.
53. Stewart CF, Arbuck SG, Fleming RA, Evans WE. Relation of systemic exposure to unbound etoposide and hematologic toxicity. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1991;50:385.
54. Aita P, Robieux I, Sorio R, et al. Pharmacokinetics of oral etoposide in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1999;43:287.
55. Nguyen L, Chatelut E, Chevreau C, et al. Population pharmacokinetics of total and unbound etoposide. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1998;41:125.
56. Cavalli F, Sonntag RW, Jungi F. VP-16-213 monotherapy for remission induction of small cell lung cancer: a randomised trial using three dosage schedules. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:473.
57. Slevin ML, Clark PI, Joel SP, et al. A randomized trial to evaluate the effect of schedule on the activity of etoposide in small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1333.
58. Clark PI, Slevin ML, Joel SP, et al. A randomized trial of two etoposide schedules in small-cell lung cancer: the influence of pharmacokinetics on efficacy and toxicity. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:1427.
59. Mross K, Bewermeier P, Kruger W, et al. Pharmacokinetics of undiluted or diluted high-dose etoposide with or without busulfan administered to patients with hematologic malignancies. J Clin
Oncol 1994;12:1468.
60. Rodman JH, Murry DJ, Madden T, Santana VM. Altered etoposide pharmacokinetics and time to engraftment in pediatric patients undergoing autologous bone marrow transplantation. J Clin
Oncol 1994;12:2390.
61. Lum BL, Kaubisch S, Yahanda AM, et al. Alteration of etoposide pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics by cyclosporine in a phase I trial to modulate multidrug resistance. J Clin Oncol
1992;10:1635.
62. Advani R, Saba HI, Tallman MS, et al. Treatment of refractory and relapsed acute myelogenous leukemia with combination chemotherapy plus the multidrug resistance modulator PSC 833
(Valspodar). Blood 1999;93:787.
63. Lum BL, Fisher GA, Brophy NA, et al. Clinical trials of modulation of multidrug resistance. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic considerations. Cancer 1993;72:3502.
64. Gouyette A, Deniel A, Pico JL, et al. Clinical pharmacology of high-dose etoposide associated with cisplatin. Pharmacokinetic and metabolic studies. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1987;23:1627.
65. Holthuis JJM, Postmus PE, van Oort WJ. Pharmacokinetics of high dose etoposide (VP16-213). Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1986;22:1149.
66. Relling MV, McLeod HL, Bowman LC, Santana VM. Etoposide pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics after acute and chronic exposure to cisplatin. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1994;56:503.
67. Sinkule JA, Hutson P, Hayes FA, Etcubanas E, Evans WE. Pharmacokinetics of etoposide (VP-16) in children and adolescents with refractory solid tumors. Cancer Res 1984;44:3109.
68. Gaver RC, Deeb G. The effect of other drugs on the in vitro binding of 14C-etoposide to human serum proteins. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1989;30:536(abst).
69. Shaklai S, Bairey O, Blickstein D, et al. Severe myelotoxicity of oral etoposide in heavily pretreated patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma or chronic lymphatic leukemia. Cancer 1996;77:2313.
70. Ashley DM, Meier L, Kerby T, et al. Response of recurrent medulloblastoma to low-dose oral etoposide. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1922.
71. Johnson DH, Greco FA, Strupp J, Hande KR, Hainsworth JD. Prolonged administration of oral etoposide in patients with relapsed or refractory small-cell lung cancer: a phase II trial. J Clin
Oncol 1990;8:1613.
72. Johnson DH, Greco FA, Wolff SN. Etoposide-induced hepatic injury: a potential complication of high-dose therapy. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:1023.
73. Kellie SJ, Crist WM, Pui CH, et al. Hypersensitivity reactions to epipodophyllotoxins in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Cancer 1991;67:1070.
74. de Souza P, Friedlander M, Wilde C, Kirsten F, Ryan M. Hypersensitivity reactions to etoposide. A report of three cases and review of the literature. Am J Clin Oncol 1994;17:387.
75. van Leeuwen FE, Chorus AMJ, van den Belt-Dusebout AW, et al. Leukemia risk following Hodgkin's disease: relation to cumulative dose of alkylating agents, treatment with teniposide
combinations, number of episodes of chemotherapy, and bone marrow damage. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1063.
76. Pui CH, Ribeiro RC, Hancock ML, et al. Acute myeloid leukemia in children treated with epipodophyllotoxins for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1682.
77. Chak LY, Sikic BI, Tucker MA, Horns RC, Cox RS. Increased incidence of acute nonlymphocytic leukemia following therapy in patients with small cell carcinoma of the lung. J Clin Oncol
1984;2:385.
78. Ratain MJ, Kaminer LS, Bitran JD, et al. Acute nonlymphocytic leukemia following etoposide and cisplatin combination chemotherapy for advanced nonsmall cell carcinoma of the lung. Blood
1987;70:1412.
79. Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Daugaard G, Hansen SW, et al. Increased risk of myelodysplasia and leukaemia after etoposide, cisplatin, and bleomycin for germ-cell tumors. Lancet 1991;338:359.
80. Froelich-Amon SJ, Osheroff N. Topoisomerase poisons: harnessing the dark side of enzyme mechanisms. J Biol Chem 1995;270:21429.
81. Goto H, Shimazaki C, Tatsumi T, et al. Acute myelomonocytic leukemia after treatment with chronic oral etoposide: are MLL and LTG9 genes targets for etoposide? Int J Hematol 1994;60:145.
82. Yagita M, Ieki Y, Onishi R, et al. Therapy-related leukemia and myelodysplasia following oral administration of etoposide for recurrent breast cancer. Int J Oncol 1998;13:91.
83. Relling MV, Yanishevski Y, Nemec J, et al. Etoposide and antimetabolite pharmacology in patients who develop secondary acute myeloid leukemia. Leukemia 1998;12:346.
84. Felix CA, Walker AH, Lange BJ, et al. Association of CYP3A4 genotype with treatment-related leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:13176.
85. McLeod HL, Baker DK, Pui CH, Rodman JH. Somnolence, hypotension, and metabolic acidosis following high-dose teniposide treatment in children with leukemia. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol 1991;29:150.
86. Schacter LP, Igwemezie LN, Seyedsadr M, et al. Clinical and pharmacokinetic overview of parenteral etoposide phosphate. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1994;34:S58.
87. de Jong RS, Mulder NH, Uges DR, et al. Randomized comparison of etoposide pharmacokinetics after oral etoposide phosphate and oral etoposide. Br J Cancer 1997;75:1660.
88. Sessa C, Zucchetti M, Cerny T, et al. Phase I clinical and pharmacokinetic study of oral etoposide phosphate. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:200.
89. Chabot GG, Armand JP, Terret C, et al. Etoposide bioavailability after oral administration of the prodrug etoposide phosphate in cancer patients during a phase I study. J Clin Oncol
1996;14:2020.
90. Fields SZ, Igwemezie LN, Kaul S, et al. Phase I study of etoposide phosphate (Etopophos) as a 30-minute infusion on days 1, 3, and 5. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:105.
91. Thompson DS, Greco FA, Miller AA, et al. A phase I study of etoposide phosphate administered as a daily 30-minute infusion for 5 days. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1995;57:499.
92. Budman DR, Igwemezie LN, Kaul S, et al. Phase I evaluation of a water-soluble etoposide prodrug, etoposide phosphate, given as a 5-minute infusion on days 1, 3, and 5 in patients with solid
tumors. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1902.
93. Potmesil M. Camptothecins: from bench research to hospital wards. Cancer Res 1994;54:1431.
94. Wall ME, Wani MC. Camptothecin and taxol: discovery to clinic. Thirteenth Bruce F. Cain Memorial Award Lecture. Cancer Res 1995;55:753.
95. McCabe FL, Johnson RL. Comparative activity of oral and parenteral topotecan in murine tumor models: efficacy of oral topotecan. Cancer Invest 1994;12:308.
96. Thompson J, Stewart CF, Houghton PJ. Animal models for studying the action of topoisomerase I targeted drugs. Biochim Biophys Acta 1998;1400:301.
97. Houghton PJ, Cheshire PJ, Hallman JD, et al. Efficacy of topoisomerase I inhibitors, topotecan and irinotecan, administered at low dose levels in protracted schedules to mice bearing
xenografts of human tumors. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1995;36:393.

98. Schellens JHM, Creemers GJ, Beijnen JH, et al. Bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of oral topotecan: a new topoisomerase I inhibitor. Br J Cancer 1996;73:1268.
99. Gerrits CJ, Burris H, Schellens JH, et al. Five days of oral topotecan (Hycamtin), a phase I and pharmacological study in adult patients with solid tumours. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:1030.
100. Zamboni WC, Bowman LC, Tan M, et al. Interpatient variability in bioavailability of the intravenous formulation of topotecan given orally to children with recurrent solid tumors. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol 1999;43:454.
101. Herben VM, Rosing H, ten Bokkel Huinink WW, et al. Oral topotecan: bioavailability and effect of food co-administration. Br J Cancer 1999;80:1380.
102. Drengler RL, Kuhn JG, Schaaf LJ, et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic trial of oral irinotecan administered daily for 5 days every 3 weeks in patients with solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:685.
103. Rivory LP, Haaz MC, Canal P, et al. Pharmacokinetic interrelationships of irinotecan (CPT-11) and its three major plasma metabolites in patients enrolled in phase I/II trials. Clin Cancer Res
1997;3:1261.
104. Stewart CF, Zamboni WC, Crom WR, Houghton PJ . Disposition of irinotecan and SN-38 following oral and intravenous dosing in mice. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1997;40:259.
105. Zamboni WC, Crom WR, Houghton PJ, Thompson JC, Stewart CF. Plasma protein binding of SN-38: the active metabolite of irinotecan. Pharmacotherapy 1996;16:500(abst).
106. Burke TG, Munshi CB, Mi Z, Jiang Y. The important role of albumin in determining the relative human blood stabilities of the camptothecin anticancer drugs. J Pharm Sci 1995;84:518.
107. Burke TG, Mi Z. The structural basis of camptothecin interactions with human serum albumin: impact on drug stability. J Med Chem 1994;37:40.
108. Mi Z, Malak H, Burke TG. Reduced albumin binding promotes the stability and activity of topotecan in human blood. Biochemistry 1995;34:13722.
109. Baker SD, Heideman RL, Crom WR, et al. Cerebrospinal pharmacokinetics and penetration of continuous infusion topotecan in children with central nervous system tumors. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol 1996;37:195.
110. Blaney SM, Cole DE, Balis FM, Godwin K, Poplack DG. Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid pharmacokinetic study of topotecan in nonhuman primates. Cancer Res 1993;53:725.
111. Rowinsky EK, Grochow LB, Hendricks CB, et al. Phase I and pharmacologic study of topotecan: a novel topoisomerase I inhibitor. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:647.
112. van Warmerdam LJ, Verweij J, Schellens JH, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of topotecan administered daily for 5 days every 3 weeks. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1995;35:237.
113. Stewart CF, Baker SD, Heideman RL, et al. Clinical pharmacodynamics of continuous infusion topotecan in children: systemic exposure predicts hematologic toxicity. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:1946.
114. Rosing H, Herben VMM, van Gortel-van Zomeren DM, et al. Isolation and structural confirmation of N-desmethyl topotecan, a metabolite of topotecan. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1997;39:498.
115. Rosing H, van Zomeren DM, Doyle E, Bult A, Beijnen JH. O-glucuronidation, a newly identified metabolic pathway for topotecan and N-desmethyl topotecan. Anticancer Drugs 1998;9:587.
116. Tanizawa A, Fujimori A, Fujimori Y, Pommier Y. Comparison of topoisomerase I inhibition, DNA damage, and cytotoxicity of camptothecin derivatives presently in clinical trials. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1994;86:836.
117. Ogasawara H, Nishio K, Kanzawa F, et al. Intracellular carboxyl esterase activity is a determinant of cellular sensitivity to the antineoplastic agent KW-2189 in cell lines resistant to cisplatin and
CPT-11. Jpn J Cancer Res 1995;86:124.
118. Danks MK, Morton CL, Pawlik CA, Potter PM. Overexpression of a rabbit liver carboxylesterase sensitizes human tumor cells to CPT-11. Cancer Res 1998;58:20.
119. Danks MK, Morton CL, Krull EJ, et al. Comparison of activation of CPT-11 by rabbit and human carboxylesterases for use in enzyme/prodrug therapy. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:917.
120. Iyer L, King CD, Whitington PF, et al. Genetic predisposition to the metabolism of irinotecan (CPT-11): role of uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase isoform 1A1 in the glucuronidation of
its active metabolite (SN-38) in human liver microsomes. J Clin Invest 1999;101:847.
121. Chu XY, Kato Y, Niinuma K, et al. Multispecific organic anion transporter is responsible for the biliary excretion of the camptothecin derivative irinotecan and its metabolites in rats. J Pharmacol
Exp Ther 1997;281:304.
122. Sugiyama Y, Kato Y, Chu X. Multiplicity of biliary excretion mechanisms for the camptothecin derivative irinotecan (CPT-11), its metabolite SN-38, and its glucuronide: role of canalicular
multispecific organic anion transporter and P-glycoprotein. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1998;42[Suppl]:S44.
123. Gupta E, Lestingi TM, Mick R, et al. Metabolic fate of irinotecan in humans: correlation of glucuronidation with diarrhea. Cancer Res 1994;54:3723.
124. Rivory LP, Riou JF, Hazz MC, et al. Identification and properties of a major plasma metabolite of irinotecan (CPT-11) isolated from the plasma of patients. Cancer Res 1996;56:3689.
125. Dodds HM, Haaz MC, Riou JF, Robert J, Rivory LP. Identification of a new metabolite of CPT-11 (irinotecan): pharmacological properties and activation to SN-38. J Pharmacol Exp Ther
1998;286:578.
126. O'Reilly S, Rowinsky EK, Slichenmeyer W, et al. Phase I and pharmacologic study of topotecan in patients with impaired renal function. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:3062.
127. O'Reilly S, Rowinsky E, Slichenmyer W, et al. Phase I and pharmacologic studies of topotecan in patients with impaired hepatic function. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:817.
128. Slichenmyer WJ, Rowinsky EK, Grochow LB, Kaufmann SH, Donehower RC. Camptothecin analogues: studies from The Johns Hopkins Oncology Center. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1994;34:S53.
129. Zamboni WC, Houghton PJ, Johnson RK, et al. Probenecid alters topotecan systemic and renal disposition by inhibiting tubular secretion. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1998;284:89.
130. Raymond E, Vernillet L, Boige V, et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic (PK) study of irinotecan (CPT-11) in cancer patients (pts) with hepatic dysfunction. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:165a(abst).
131. Houghton PJ, Stewart CF, Zamboni WC, et al. Schedule dependent efficacy of camptothecins in models of human cancer. N Y Acad Sci 1996;803:188.
132. Haas NB, LaCreta FP, Walczak J, et al. Phase I/pharmacokinetic study of topotecan by 24-hour continuous infusion weekly. Cancer Res 1994;54:1220.
133. Wall JG, Burris HA III, Von Hoff DD, et al. A phase I clinical and pharmacokinetic study of topoisomerase I inhibitor topotecan (SK&F 104864) given as an intravenous bolus every 21 days.
Anticancer Drugs 1992;3:337.
134. Takimoto CH, Dahut W, Harold N, et al. Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of a 72-hour infusion of 9-aminocamptothecin in adult cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1492.
135. Furman WL, Baker SD, Pratt CB, et al. Escalating systemic exposure to topotecan following a 120-hr continuous infusion in children with relapsed acute leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1504.
136. Rowkinsky EK, Kaufmann SH, Baker SD, et al. A phase I and pharmacological study of topotecan infused over 30 minutes for five days in patients with refractory acute leukemia. Clin Cancer
Res 1999;2:1921.
137. Saltz L, Sirott M, Young C, et al. Phase I clinical and pharmacology study of topotecan given daily for 5 consecutive days to patients with advanced solid tumors, with attempt at dose
intensification using recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor [published erratum appears in J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1777]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1499.
138. Gerrits CJ, Schellens JH, Burris H, et al. A comparison of clinical pharmacodynamics of different administration schedules of oral topotecan (Hycamtin) [see comments]. Clin Cancer Res
1999;5:69.
139. Kantarjian HM, Beran M, Ellis A, et al. Phase I study of Topotecan, a new topoisomerase I inhibitor, in patients with refractory or relapsed acute leukemia. Blood 1993;81:1146.
140. Rowinsky EK, Adjei A, Donehower RC, et al. Phase I and pharmacodynamic study of the topoisomerase I-inhibitor topotecan in patients with refractory acute leukemia. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:2193.
141. Sakai H, Diener M, Gartmann V, Takeguchi N. Eicosanoid-mediated Cl secretion induced by the antitumor drug, irinotecan (CPT-11), in the rat colon. Arch Pharmacol 1995;351:309.
142. Conclaves E, Da Costa L, Abigerges D, Armand JP. A new enkephalinase inhibitor as an alternative to loperamide in the prevention of diarrhea induced by CPT-11. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2144.
143. Gupta E, Wang X, Ramirez J, Ratain MJ. Modulation of glucuronidation of SN-38, the active metabolite of irinotecan, by valproic acid and phenobarbital. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1997;39:440.
144. Ratain MJ, Goh BC, Iyer L, et al. A phase I study of irinotecan with pharmacokinetic modulation by cyclosporine A and phenobarbital. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:202a(abst).
145. Gupta E, Safa AR, Wang X, Ratain MJ. Pharmacokinetic modulation of irinotecan and metabolites by cyclosporin A. Cancer Res 1996;56:1309.
146. Hashimoto H, Chatterjee S, Berger NA. Mutagenic activity of topoisomerase I inhibitors. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:369.
147. Zamboni WC, Gajjar AJ, Heideman RL, et al. Phenytoin alters the disposition of topotecan and N-desmethyl topotecan in a patient with medulloblastoma. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:783.
148. Grossman SA, Hochberg F, Fisher J, et al. Increased 9-aminocamptothecin (9-AC) dose requirements in patients on anticonvulsants (AC). Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1997;42:118.
149. Reid J, Buckner J, Schaaf L, et al. Pharmacokinetics of irinotecan (CPT-11) in recurrent glioma patients: results of an NCCTG phase II trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:141a(abst).
150. Friedman HS, Petros WP, Friedman AH, et al. Irinotecan therapy in adults with recurrent or progressive malignant glioma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1516.
151. Robert J, Gianni L. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of anthracyclines. Cancer Surv 1993;17:219.
152. Smith PJ, Soues S. Multilevel therapeutic targeting by topoisomerase inhibitors. Br J Cancer 1994;23:S47.
153. Robert J. Clinical pharmacokinetics of idarubicin. Clin Pharmacokinet 1993;24:275.
154. Cersosimo RJ. Idarubicin: an anthracycline antineoplastic agent. Am J Hosp Pharm 1992;11:152.
155. Robert J. Clinical pharmacokinetics of epirubicin. Clin Pharmacokinet 1994;26:428.
156. Johnson PJ, Dobbs N, Kalayci C, et al. Clinical efficacy and toxicity of standard dose Adriamycin in hyperbilirubinaemic patients with hepatocellular carcinoma: relation to liver tests and
pharmacokinetic parameters. Br J Cancer 1992;65:751.
157. Ackland SP, Ratain MJ, Vogelzang NJ. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of long-term continuous infusion doxorubicin. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1989;45:340.
158. Jakobsen P, Steiness E, Bastholt L, et al. Multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of epirubicin at four different dose levels: studies in patients with metastatic breast cancer. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol 1991;28:63.
159. Lawrence HJ, Walsh D, Zapotowski KA, et al. Topical dimethylsulfoxide may prevent tissue damage from anthracycline extravasation. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1989;23:316.
160. Olver IN, Aisner J, Hament A, et al. A prospective study of topical dimethyl sulfoxide for treating anthracycline extravasation. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1732.
161. Basser RL, Green MD. Strategies for prevention of anthracycline cardiotoxicity. Cancer Treat Rev 1993;19:57.
162. Allen A. The cardiotoxicity of chemotherapeutic drugs. Semin Oncol 1992;19:529.
163. Von Hoff DD, Layard M. Risk factors for development of daunorubicin cardiotoxicity. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65[Suppl 4]:19.
164. Launchbury AP, Habboubi N. Epirubicin and doxorubicin: a comparison of their characteristics, therapeutic activity and toxicity. Cancer Treat Rev 1993;19:197.
165. Workman P. Infusional anthracyclines: is slower better? If so, why? Ann Oncol 1992;3:591.
166. Graham MA, Newell DR, Butler J, Hoey B, Patterson LH. The effect of the anthrapyrazole antitumour agent CI941 on rat liver microsome and cytochrome P-450 reductase mediated free radical
processes. Biochem Pharmacol 1987;36:3345.
167. Fisher GR, Patterson LH. Lack of involvement of reactive oxygen in the cytotoxicity of mitoxantrone, CI941 and ametantrone in MCF-7 cells: comparison with doxorubicin. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol 1992;30:451.
168. Herman EH, Zhang J, Hasinoff BB, et al. Comparison of the chronic toxicity of piroxantrone, losoxantrone and doxorubicin in spontaneously hypertensive rats. Toxicology 1998;128:35.
169. Leteurtre F, Kohlhagen G, Paull KD, Pommier Y. T opoisomerase II inhibition and cytotoxicity of the anthrapyrazoles DuP 937 and DuP 941 (Losoxantrone) in the National Cancer Institute
preclinical antitumor drug discovery screen. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1239.
170. Graham MA, Newell DR, Foster BJ, et al. Clinical pharmacokinetics of the anthrapyrazole CI-941: factors compromising the implementation of a pharmacokinetically guided dose escalation
scheme. Cancer Res 1992;52:603.
171. Shenkenberg TD, Von Hoff DD. Mitoxantrone: a new anticancer drug with significant clinical activity. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:67.
172. Allan SG, Cummings J, Evans S, et al. Phase I study of the anthrapyrazole biantrazole: clinical results and pharmacology. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1991;28:55.
173. Talbot DC, Smith IE, Mansi JL, et al. Anthrapyrazole CI941: a highly active new agent in the treatment of advanced breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:2141.
174. Farber S, Selman A. Waksman Conference on Actinomycins: their potential for cancer chemotherapy. Opening remarks. Cancer Chemother Rep 1974;58:5.
175. Anton DL, Friedman PA. Actinomycin. Cancer Growth Prog 1989;10:131.
176. Ross WE, Bradley MO. DNA double-strand breaks in mammalian cells after exposure to intercalating agents. Biochim Biophys Acta 1981;654:129.
177. Matsuoka H, Abe R, Furusawa M, et al. Increased uptake and prolonged retention of actinomycin D by concomitant hyperthermia related to cytotoxic enhancement. Int J Hyperthermia
1993;9:403.
178. Tattersall NHM, Sodergren JE, Segupta SK. Pharmacokinetics of actinomycin D in patients with malignant melanoma. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1975;17:701.
179. Cohen JJ, Loven D, Schoenfeld T. Dactinomycin potentiation of radiation pneumonitis: a forgotten interaction. Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1991;8:187.

SECTION 19.7 Antimicrotubule Agents
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 19.7
Antimicrotubule Agents
ERIC K. ROWINSKY
ANTHONY W. TOLCHER
Introduction
Microtubules
Microtubule-Associated Proteins and Microtubule Motors
Vinca Alkaloids
Mechanism of Action
Mechanisms of Resistance
Pharmacology
Drug Interactions
Toxicity
Administration
The Taxanes
Mechanisms of Action
Mechanisms of Resistance
Pharmacology
Drug Interactions
Toxicity
Administration, Dose, and Schedule
Estramustine Phosphate
Mechanisms of Action
Mechanisms of Resistance
Pharmacology
Drug Interactions
Toxicity
Administration, Dose, and Schedule
Novel Compounds Targeting Microtubules
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The microtubule is increasingly recognized as a strategic subcellular target against which to direct therapeutic efforts, owing to the widespread use of the vinca
alkaloids in both curative and palliative chemotherapeutic regimens and the successful incorporation of the taxanes in cancer chemotherapeutics. This chapter
reviews the vinca alkaloids, taxanes, and estramustine and other novel antimicrotubule agents in early development.

MICROTUBULES
Microtubules are integral components of the mitotic spindle, which can be disrupted by the vinca alkaloids, taxanes, and an increasing number of both natural
products and synthetic compounds, resulting in metaphase arrest in dividing cells. 1,2 and 3 However, they are also involved in nonmitotic functions, such as chemotaxis,
membrane and intracellular scaffolding, transport, secretory processes, anchorage of subcellular organelles and receptors, cell adhesion, and locomotion
transmission of receptor signaling. Antimicrotubule agents may disrupt a range of these nonmitotic functions. 1,2 and 3
Microtubules are polymers of dimeric subunits of a- and b-tubulin (each tubulin subunit consisting of approximately 450 amino acids with a molecular weight of 50,000
D) that are arranged into 13 protofilaments ( Fig. 19.7-1).1,2,3 and 4 The dimers are aligned side by side around an apparently hollow core with the b subunit of one dimer
in contact with the a-tubulin subunit of the next. The microtubule polymer is in a dynamic equilibrium with the intracellular pool of tubulin dimers, which results in the
simultaneous incorporation of free dimers into the polymerized structures and release of dimers into the soluble tubulin pool. The direction of the equilibrium—toward
polymerization or depolymerization—is influenced by several cofactors, including guanosine triphosphate (GTP), the ionic environment, and microtubule-associated
proteins (MAPs), which is a family of proteins that regulate tubulin polymerization and microtubule function (discussed later in the section Microtubule-Associated
Proteins and Microtubule Motors ). Microtubule growth occurs spontaneously at the plus end, resulting in the hydrolysis of GTP, which weakens the binding affinity of
tubulin for adjacent molecules. This, in turn, favors the opposing process: depolymerization. Net shortening occurs at the opposite minus end. In essence,
microtubules are under the control of two dynamic processes. The first is dynamic instability, which is the process whereby microtubule ends switch spontaneously
and stochastically between slowly growing and rapidly shrinking states. 4 The rate of dynamic instability is accelerated during some processes, such as mitosis, so that
chromosomes can readily be “captured” by growing microtubules, thereby leading to the formation of mitotic spindles; dynamic instability is suppressed, perhaps by
MAPs, during nonproliferative processes (e.g., differentiation). When both these actions occur simultaneously, the microtubule is said to be treadmilling, which plays a
role in the polar movement of the chromosomes during anaphase. 5

FIGURE 19.7-1. Microtubles are composed mainly of dimeric subunits of a- and b-tubulin that are arranged into protofilaments. The cylindric microtubule is
approximately 25 nm in diameter and may reach several micrometeres in length. (From I Ringel, IR Horwitz, Paclitaxel affects microtuble dynamics and apoptosis. Adv
Oncol 1999;15:1, with permission.)

There are at least six isotypes of both a- and b-tubulin in humans; they are distinguished by slightly different amino acid sequences and appear to be encoded by
different genes.6,7,8 and 9 The C-terminal amino acid sequence of b-tubulin is the most variable in terms of amino acid composition, and both posttranslational
modifications, including phosphorylation and glutamylation (which may account in part for their structural diversity) have been described. 9,10 Equivalent isotypes
expressed in specific tissues of different species are highly conserved, indicating that expression of tubulin isotypes may be important in specific microtubule
functions. 7,8,9 and 10 Analysis of tubulin isotype expression in various tissues has demonstrated a complex pattern of isotype distribution, suggesting functional
specificity. 7,8,9 and 10 In neurons, for example, isotype segregation within cells, and both differential isotype synthesis and posttranslational modification during neurite
outgrowth, suggest functional specialization. A third member of the tubulin superfamily, g-tubulin, which is less abundant than the a and b forms, completes the
microtubule-organizing center (MTOC) or centrosome. 11 Although tubulin can polymerize into microtubules in acellular preparations, they are polymerized from, and
nucleated by, the MTOC, with minus ends located at the MTOC. 12 The MTOC in the cytoplasm of mammalian cells duplicates and separates before cell division,

forming the two poles of the mitotic spindle.
MICROTUBULE-ASSOCIATED PROTEINS AND MICROTUBULE MOTORS
The dynamic behavior of microtubules is regulated by a variety of MAPs. 1,2 and 3 The number of MAPs identified is increasing rapidly, and these proteins appear to be
diverse, differing from species to species and cell type to cell type. Among the best characterized MAPs are those that come from mammalian brain, including the tau
proteins, MAP1, MAP1c (an adenosine triphosphatase), MAP2, MAP4, and dynein (a GTPase), which promote tubulin polymerization and microtubule stability. Some
MAPs, such as the dyneins and kinesins, function as microtubule motors, transmitting chemical energy to mechanical sliding force and moving various solutes and
subcellular organelles along the microtubule. 1,2 and 3,13 Motor proteins function in many types of cellular events, such as mitosis, premeiotic events, and organelle
transport.
VINCA ALKALOIDS
The vinca alkaloids are naturally occurring or semisynthetic compounds that are found in minute quantities in the periwinkle plant Catharanthus roseus g.
Don.14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22 and 23 The early medicinal uses of this plant led to the screening of these compounds for their hypoglycemic activity, which was of little
importance as compared to their cytotoxic effects. Although many vinca alkaloids have been investigated clinically, only vincristine (VCR), vinblastine (VBL), and
vinorelbine (VRL) are approved for use in the United States. The vinca alkaloids are dimeric molecules composed of two multiringed units ( Fig. 19.7-2), an indole
nucleus (catharanthine) and a dihydroindole nucleus (vindoline). VCR and VBL are structurally identical except for a single substitution on the vindoline nucleus,
where VCR and VBL possess formyl and methyl groups, respectively. Despite this small difference, these two agents significantly differ in their antitumor and
toxicologic profiles. VCR is used more commonly in pediatric oncology than in adults with cancer, most likely owing to the higher level of sensitivity of pediatric
malignancies to VCR and to the better tolerance of higher VCR doses in children. VCR is an essential part of the combination chemotherapeutic regimens used for
acute lymphocytic leukemia and lymphoid blast crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia and plays an important role in the treatment of both Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas. The agent also plays a role in the multimodality therapy of Wilms' tumor, Ewing's sarcoma, neuroblastoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma in children, as well
as in the treatment of multiple myeloma and small cell lung cancer in adults. VBL has been an integral component of chemotherapeutic regimens for germ cell
malignancies and advanced lymphoma and is used in combination with other agents to treat Kaposi's sarcoma and bladder, brain, and breast cancers. 14,15,16 and 17

FIGURE 19.7-2. Structural modifications of the vindoline and catharanthine rings in various vinca alkaloids.

Deacetyl VBL (vindesine, or VDS), initially identified as a metabolite of VBL, was introduced in the 1970s. 18 VDS is registered in many countries but available only for
investigational purposes in the United States. The agent is most commonly used in combination with other agents, particularly the platinating agents or mitomycin C
(or both), in treating non–small cell lung cancer, but it is also active in several hematologic and solid neoplasms. 17,18 The semisynthetic VBL derivative VRL
(5'-norhydro-VBL), which is structurally modified on its catharanthine nucleus, is approved in the United States for treating non–small cell lung cancer as either a
single agent or in combination with cisplatin and has been registered for advanced breast cancer in many other countries. 19,20 VRL has also demonstrated anticancer
activity in advanced ovarian carcinoma and lymphoma; however, a unique role in the therapy of these malignancies has not been defined.
MECHANISM OF ACTION
The principal mechanism of cytotoxicity of the vinca alkaloids is by interacting with tubulin and disrupting microtubule function, particularly of microtubules that
compose the mitotic spindle apparatus, leading to metaphase arrest. 21,22,23,24 and 25 However, they are also capable of many other biochemical and biologic activities
that may or may not be related to their effects on microtubules. 26 In support of antimicrotubule actions or, more specifically, antimitotic actions as the principal
cytotoxic effect of the vinca alkaloids is that the dissolution of the mitotic spindle apparatus, appearance of mitotic figures, and cytotoxicity strongly correlate with both
the duration and concentration of drug treatment. 26 Nevertheless, the vinca alkaloids and other antimicrotubule agents also affect both nonmalignant and malignant
cells in the nonmitotic cell cycle, which is not surprising, as microtubules are involved in many nonmitotic functions.
The vinca alkaloids bind to sites on tubulin that are distinct from the binding sites of the taxanes, colchicine, podophyllotoxin, and GTP. 20,21,22,23,24 and 25 Binding is rapid
and readily reversible. There appear to be two binding sites per mole of tubulin dimer. Vinca alkaloid binding to tubulin induces tubulin to self-associate into
nonmicrotubule polymers and ordered aggregates through a self-association pathway, which in turn increases the affinity of one of the binding sites for the drug. The
vinca alkaloid self-association of tubulin can lead to the formation of paracrystalline structures in vitro, which generally occurs at high drug concentrations. The vinca
alkaloids bind to their binding sites in intact microtubules with different affinities, depending on whether the binding sites are located at the microtubule ends or
situated along the microtubule surface. 25 There are approximately 16 to 17 high-affinity binding sites per microtubule (K d, 1 to 2 µmol) located at the ends of each
microtubule. Binding of the vinca alkaloids to these sites disrupts microtubule assembly. The main effect of low drug concentrations is to decrease the rates of both
growth and shortening at the assembly end of the microtubule, which in effect produces a “kinetic cap” and suppresses function. 21,22,23,24 and 25 The potent kinetic
suppression of tubulin exchange that occurs at low vinca alkaloid concentrations (<1 µmol) is almost certainly due to drug binding at the high-affinity sites at the
microtubule ends. This action suppresses dynamic instability and increases the time that microtubules spend in a state of attenuated activity, neither growing nor
shortening. The disruptive effects of the vinca alkaloids on microtubule dynamics, particularly at the ends of the mitotic spindle, which leads to metaphase arrest,
occur at drug concentrations below those that decrease microtubule mass. There are also one to two low-affinity binding sites per mole of tubulin dimer (K d, 0.25 to
3.0 mmol) along the microtubule surface. 25 Binding of the vinca alkaloids to these sites appears to be responsible for the splaying of microtubules into spiral
aggregates or spiral protofilaments, which leads to microtubule disintegration. This effect occurs at high drug concentrations (>1 to 2 µmol) by a self-propagated
mechanism, initially involving drug binding to a limited number of sites, which progressively weakens the lateral interactions between the protofilaments and thereby
exposes new sites. Spiral protofilaments may then associate to form paracrystals.
Despite the wide range of sensitivities of different tissues to the actions of the vinca alkaloids in vivo, the qualitative effects of these agents on tubulin, as well as both
tubulin-binding and inhibitory constants, are similar. The differential sensitivities of various tissues appear to be multifactorial. One of the most likely explanations is
that each tissue type has a distinct tubulin isotype composition and that vinca alkaloid sensitivity is, in part, tubulin isotype–dependent. In addition, differences in the
tissue content of cofactors, such as MAPs and GTP, which may influence drug interactions with tubulin, and variability in cellular permeation and retention may
influence the formation and stability of vinca alkaloid-tubulin complexes. 26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35 and 36 Differences in the pharmacokinetics between the vinca alkaloids
may also contribute to differential tissue sensitivity.
The vinca alkaloids are rapidly taken up into cells and then accumulate intracellularly, with intracellular-extracellular concentration ratios as high as 5- to 500-fold,
depending on the cell type. 37,38 and 39 In murine leukemia cells, the intracellular concentrations of VCR are 5- to 20-fold higher than the extracellular concentrations,
and this ratio has been reported to range from 150- to 500-fold for other vinca alkaloids in human leukemia cell lines. 40 In isolated human hepatocytes, VRL is more
rapidly taken up and metabolized than other vinca alkaloids. 39,40 There are also marked differences in cellular retention between the vinca alkaloids. 31,39,41,42,43 VBL is
retained to a much greater degree than either VCR or VDS. Overall, the most important determinant of the rates of drug accumulation and retention is lipophilicity. 39
Drug uptake and retention may also be tissue-specific as well as drug-specific, as illustrated by studies indicating that the accumulation and retention of VRL in

neurons are much less than with other vinca alkaloids. 31
It was originally believed that the vinca alkaloids entered cells by both energy-dependent and temperature-dependent transport processes. 39 However, it appears that
temperature-independent, nonsaturable mechanisms, analogous to simple diffusion, account for the majority of drug transport, and temperature-dependent, saturable
processes are less important. 39,40 and 41 Although the drug concentration and duration of treatment are important determinants of both drug accumulation and
cytotoxicity, the duration of drug exposure above a critical threshold concentration appears to be the most important determinant. 41,42
MECHANISMS OF RESISTANCE
Two mechanisms of resistance to the vinca alkaloids in vitro have been well characterized. The first is pleiotropic or multidrug resistance (MDR), which can be innate
or acquired. MDR-mediating proteins include permeability glycoprotein (P-gp), MDR protein, and lung resistance protein, which are overexpressed in resistant cells
and function as drug efflux pumps. 43,44,45,46,47,48,49 and 50 The best characterized mechanism is mediated by the 170-kD P-gp drug efflux pump that is encoded by the
mdr1 gene and results in decreased drug accumulation. The MDR phenotype confers varying degrees of cross-resistance to other structurally bulky natural products,
such as the taxanes, anthracyclines, epipodophyllotoxins, and colchicine. 44,45,46,47,48,49 and 50 The amino acid sequence of the specific P-gp associated with resistance to
the vinca alkaloids differs slightly from P-gp of cells selected for resistance to other agents. 47,48 These proteins also undergo posttranslational modifications, resulting
in further structural diversity, which may explain the greater degree of resistance for the specific agent, in which resistance was selected against, and the variable
degrees of resistance to agents aside from that specific agent. The composition of membrane gangliosides in VCR-resistant cells has also been demonstrated to be
different from wild-type cells, which may have functional significance. 49 The clinical ramifications of these mechanisms are not entirely known. In one study in
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia, VCR resistance measured in vitro did not correlate with P-gp overexpression. 50 Although many types of agents reverse
resistance conferred by P-gp in vitro and the role of MDR modulators has been a source of great contemporary interest, the interpretation of clinical studies of
resistance modulation has been confounded by the fact that MDR modulators also enhance drug uptake in normal cells, decrease biliary elimination and drug
clearance, and lead to enhanced toxicity. 51,52 Overall, strategies aimed at reversing resistance to the vinca alkaloids in the clinic with pharmacologic modulators of
MDR have been disappointing. 52
Structural and functional alterations in a- and b-tubulins, resulting from either genetic mutations or posttranslational modifications, have also been identified in tumor
cells with acquired resistance to the vinca alkaloids. 53,54 and 55 Tubulin alterations may result in either decreased drug-binding affinity of the altered tubulin or increased
resistance to microtubule disassembly. These “hyperstable” microtubules are collaterally sensitive to the taxanes, which inhibit microtubule disassembly (discussed
later in Taxanes, Mechanisms of Resistance). Although the precise mechanisms that lead to cell death after treatment with the vinca alkaloids are not entirely clear,
these mechanisms appear similar to those that have been elucidated for the taxanes and involve the action of such genes as p53, bcl-2, and bcl-x and gene products
that trigger programmed cell death or apoptosis after significant microtubule disruption. 56,57
PHARMACOLOGY
General Overview
The vinca alkaloids are usually administered intravenously as a brief infusion, and their pharmacokinetic behavior in plasma is optimally described by
three-compartment models. Table 19.7-1 displays several pertinent pharmacokinetic features of these agents. At conventional adult doses, peak plasma
concentrations range from 100 to 500 nmol, but levels of this magnitude are sustained in plasma for only short periods (alpha half-lives, <5 minutes). 15,17,18 and
19,40,58,59,60 and 61
The vinca alkaloids share many pharmacokinetic characteristics, including large volumes of distribution, high clearance rates, and long terminal
half-lives, which reflect the high magnitude and avidity of drug binding in peripheral tissues. There is also great interindividual and intraindividual variability in their
pharmacologic behaviors, which has been attributed to many factors, including differences in protein binding and both hepatic and biliary clearance. 40 Although it has
been proposed that prolonged infusion schedules may avoid excessive toxic peak concentrations and increase the duration of drug exposure in plasma above
biologically relevant threshold concentrations for any given tumor, there is little (if any) evidence to support the notion that prolonged infusion schedules are more
effective than bolus schedules. This approach has primarily been directed at achieving plasma concentrations that likely underestimate drug concentrations in
peripheral tissues where binding is high and avid, owing to the ubiquitous nature of tubulin.

TABLE 19.7-1. Vinca Alkaloids: Comparative Pharmacokinetic and Toxicologic Characteristics

In comparative studies of the vinca alkaloids, VCR had the longest terminal half-life and the lowest clearance rate, VBL had the shortest terminal half-life and the
highest clearance rate, and VDS had intermediate characteristics. 15,18,19 and 20,59,60 Comparable values for VLR overlap with those of VDS and VBL. The longest half-life
and lowest clearance rate of VCR may account for its greater propensity to induce neurotoxicity, 58,59 but there are many other nonpharmacologic determinants of
tissue sensitivity (discussed earlier in the section Mechanism of Action under Vinca Alkaloids).
Vincristine
After conventional doses of VCR (1.4 mg/m2) given as brief infusions, peak plasma levels approach 0.4 µmol. 15,17,18,62,63 VCR binds extensively to both plasma
proteins (48%) and formed blood elements, particularly platelets, which contain high concentrations of tubulin and led, in the past, to the use of VCR-loaded platelets
for treating disorders of platelet consumption, such as idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura. 17 The platelet count inversely has been demonstrated to influence drug
exposure.17,64 Penetration of VCR across the blood–brain barrier is poor, probably because of its large size and the fact that it is an avid substrate for the multidrug
transporter pumps that maintain the integrity of the blood–brain barrier. 15,18,40,64,65,66,67,68 and 69 Plasma clearance is slow, and terminal half-lives range from 23 to 85
hours. 15,17,18,40,58,59,62
VCR is metabolized and excreted primarily by the hepatobiliary system. Seventy-two hours after the administration of radiolabeled VCR, approximately 12% of the
radiolabel is excreted in the urine (50% of which consists of metabolites), and approximately 70% is excreted in the feces (40% of which consists of
metabolites). 15,18,40,63,65,69,70 The nature of the VCR metabolites identified to date, as well as the results of metabolic studies in vitro, indicate that VCR metabolism is
mediated by hepatic cytochrome P-450 CYP3A.15,18,40 There has been conflicting, albeit sparse, evidence indicating that peak VCR plasma concentration or systemic
exposure correlates positively with the degree of neurotoxicity. 15
VINBLASTINE
The clinical pharmacology of VBL is similar to that of VCR. Binding of VBL to plasma proteins and formed elements of blood is extensive. 40,71,72 Peak plasma drug
concentrations are approximately 0.4 µmol after rapid intravenous injections of VBL at standard doses. Distribution is rapid, and terminal half-lives range from 20 to 24
hours. 17,40,58,59,66,72,73 Tissue sequestration appears to be greater for VBL than VCR, with 73% of radioactivity retained in the body 6 days after treatment with

radiolabled drug. 72 Like VCR, VBL disposition is principally through the hepatobiliary system. 40 Fecal excretion of the parent compound is low, indicating that the
metabolism is significant. In vitro studies indicate that the cytochrome P-450 CYP3A isoform is primarily responsible for the drug biotransformation. 40,73 Although the
metabolic fate of VBL has not been fully characterized, 4-deacetyl-VBL, or VDS, which appears to be as active as the parent compound, is the principal metabolite of
VBL.72
VINDESINE
VDS is rapidly distributed to tissues, and terminal half-lives range from 20 to 24 hours. 18,40,58,59,69,74,75,76,77,78 and 79 The large volume of distribution, low renal clearance,
and long terminal half-life of VDS suggest that it undergoes extensive tissue binding and delayed elimination and that drug accumulation may occur with repeated
administration at short intervals. Although peak VDS concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 1.0 µmol are achieved with rapid injections, levels typically decline to less
than 0.1 µmol in 1 to 2 hours after treatment. Plasma levels achieved with rapid injections are approximately 16-fold higher than those achieved with protracted
infusions; however, prolonged periods of exposure above concentrations resulting in cytotoxicity in vitro (0.01 to 0.1 µmol) are readily achieved using protracted
infusions (1.2 to 2.0 mg/m2/d for 2 to 5 days). 18,40,62,76,77,78,79 and 80 Renal clearance is negligible, accounting for 1% to 12% of drug disposition. 18,40,77,79 Similar to the
other vinca alkaloids, VDS disposition is primarily by hepatic metabolism and biliary clearance, and the cytochrome P-450 isoform CYP3A plays a major role in drug
metabolism.18,40,67,81,82
VINORELBINE
The pharmacologic behavior of VRL is essentially similar to that of the other vinca alkaloids, with plasma concentrations declining in either a biexponential or
triexponential manner.17,19,20,40,83,84 and 85 After intravenous administration, there is a rapid decay of VRL concentrations followed by a much slower elimination phase
(terminal half-life, 18 to 49 hours). Plasma protein binding has been reported to range from 80% to 91%, with binding primarily to a 1-acid glycoprotein, albumin, and
lipoproteins, 19,20,40,86 and drug binding to platelets is also extensive. The unbound fraction has been reported to range from 0.09 to 0.20. 19
VRL is widely distributed, and high concentrations are found in virtually all tissues, except brain. 19,20,40,87,88 The wide distribution of VRL reflects the agent's
lipophilicity, which is among the highest of the vinca alkaloids. 22 In fact, drug concentrations in human lung have been demonstrated to be 300-fold greater than
plasma levels and 3.4- to 13.8-fold higher than lung concentrations achieved with VDS and VCR, respectively. 87 As with other vinca alkaloids, the liver is the principal
excretory organ, and 33% to 80% of the drug is excreted in the feces, whereas urinary excretion represents only 16% to 30% of total drug disposition, the bulk of
which is unmetabolized VLR. 18,19,40,89,90 Studies in humans indicate that 4-O-deacetyl-VRL, 3,6-epoxy-VRL, and several hydroxy-VRL isomers are the principal
metabolites.19,20,90 Although most metabolites are inactive, deacetyl-VRL may be as active as VRL. The cytochrome P-450 CYP3A isoenzyme appears to be
principally involved in biotransformation. 19,20,40 Human studies of powder- and liquid-filled gelatin capsules have shown that bioavailability of the parent compound is
43% for the powder-filled and 27% for the liquid-filled capsules. 85,91 Plasma concentrations peak within 1 to 2 hours after oral treatment, and interindividual variability
is moderate.
DRUG INTERACTIONS
Methotrexate accumulation in tumor cells is enhanced in vitro by the presence of VCR or VBL, an effect mediated by a vinca alkaloid–induced blockade of drug efflux;
however, the minimal concentrations of VCR required to achieve this effect occur only transiently in vivo.92,93 and 94 The vinca alkaloids also inhibit the cellular influx of
the epipodophyllotoxins in vitro, resulting in less cytotoxicity, but the clinical ramifications of this effect are unknown. 95L-Asparaginase may reduce the hepatic
clearance of the vinca alkaloids, particularly VCR, which may result in increased toxicity. To minimize the possibility of this interaction, VCR should be given 12 to 24
hours before L-asparaginase.
Treatment with the vinca alkaloids has precipitated seizures associated with subtherapeutic plasma phenytoin concentrations. 94,96,97 Reduced plasma phenytoin levels
have been noted from 24 hours to 10 days after treatment with both VCR and VBL. Because of the importance of the cytochrome P-450 CYP3A isoenzyme in vinca
alkaloid metabolism, administration of the vinca alkaloids with erythromycin and other inhibitors of CYP3A may lead to severe toxicity. 98 Concomitantly administered
drugs, such as pentobarbital and H 2-receptor antagonists, may also influence VCR clearance by modulating hepatic cytochrome P-450 metabolic processes. 94,99
Another potential drug interaction may occur in patients who have Kaposi's sarcoma related to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and are receiving
concurrent treatment with 3' azido-3'-deoxythymidine (AZT) and the vinca alkaloids, as the vinca alkaloids may inhibit glucuronidation of AZT to its 5'-O-glucuronide
metabolite.100
TOXICITY
Despite close similarities in structure, the vinca alkaloids differ significantly in their toxicologic profiles. VCR principally induces neurotoxicity characterized by a
peripheral, symmetric mixed sensory-motor, and autonomic polyneuropathy. 15,17,18,19 and 20,101,102,103,104 and 105 The primary pathologic effects are axonal degeneration and
decreased axonal transport due to interference with microtubule function. Initially, only symmetric sensory impairment and paresthesias in a length-dependent manner
(distal extremities first) usually are encountered. Neuritic pain and loss of deep tendon reflexes may develop with continued treatment, which may be followed by foot
drop, wrist drop, motor dysfunction, ataxia, and paralysis. Back, bone, and limb pains occasionally occur. Nerve conduction velocities are usually normal, although
diminished amplitude of sensory and motor nerve action potentials and prolonged distal latencies, suggesting axonal degeneration, may be noted. 15,101,104,105 Cranial
nerves may be affected rarely, resulting in hoarseness, diplopia, jaw pain, and facial palsies. The uptake of VCR into the brain is low, and central nervous system
effects, such as confusion, mental status changes, depression, hallucinations, agitation, insomnia, seizures, coma, inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone
(SIADH), and visual disturbances, are rare. 15,65,66 and 67,106 Acute, severe autonomic neurotoxicity is uncommon but may arise as a consequence of high-dose therapy
(>2 mg/m2) or in patients with altered hepatic function. Toxic manifestations include constipation, abdominal cramps, paralytic ileus, urinary retention, orthostatic
hypotension, and hypertension. 107,108 and 109 Laryngeal paralysis has also been reported. 110
In adults, neurotoxic effects may begin with cumulative doses as little as 5 to 6 mg, and manifestations may be profound after cumulative doses of 15 to 20 mg.
Children may be less susceptible than adults, but the elderly are particularly prone. However, the apparent influence of age may, in fact, be due to previously
inadequate dose calculation by body weight in children and adults and by body surface area in infants. 103,104,111,112 In infants, VCR doses are calculated now according
to body weight. Patients with antecedent neurologic disorders, such as Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, hereditary and sensory neuropathy type 1, Guillain-Barré
syndrome, and childhood poliomyelitis, are highly predisposed. 113,114 VCR treatment in patients with hepatic dysfunction or obstructive liver disease is associated with
an increased risk of developing neuropathy because of impaired drug metabolism and delayed biliary excretion.
The only known treatment for VCR neurotoxicity is discontinuation of the drug or reduction of the dose or frequency of treatment. 116 Although a number of antidotes,
including thiamine, vitamin B 12, folinic acid, and pyridoxine, have been used, these treatments have not been clearly shown to be effective. 15,17,116 However, results
with several other protective agents appear promising. 15,17,115,116 In one randomized, double-blind trial, coadministration of glutamic acid and VCR has been
demonstrated to decrease neurotoxicity. 15,117 The adrenocorticotropic hormone (4-9) analogue ORG 2766 has also been shown to protect against VCR-induced
neuropathy both in an animal model and in cancer patients in a double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study. 15 However, the younger age of the ORG 2766–treated
group as compared to the placebo group may have accounted for this result. Experimental results indicate that several other agents, such as nerve growth factor,
insulin-like growth factor I, and amifostine, might alter the natural course of drug-induced neurotoxicity. 15
The manifestations of neurotoxicity are similar for the other vinca alkaloids; however, they are typically less common and severe. 15,17,18,19 and 20 Severe neurotoxicity is
observed infrequently with both VBL and VDS. VRL has been shown to have a lower affinity for axonal microtubules than either VCR or VBL, which seems to be
confirmed by clinical observations. 31,118 Mild to moderate peripheral neuropathy, principally characterized by sensory effects, occurs in 7% to 31% of patients, and
constipation and other autonomic effects are noted in 30% of subjects, whereas severe toxicity occurs in 2% to 3%. Muscle weakness, jaw pain, and discomfort at
tumor sites may also occur. In a study in patients with non–small cell lung cancer randomly assigned to treatment with either VRL alone, VRL plus cisplatin, or VDS
plus cisplatin, the rate of severe neurotoxicity was lower in both the single-agent VRL and VRL plus cisplatin arms than in the VDS plus cisplatin arm. 119 Furthermore,
the addition of cisplatin did not significantly increase the incidence of severe toxicity in excess of that observed with VRL alone.
Neutropenia is the principal dose-limiting toxicity of VBL, VDS, and VRL. Thrombocytopenia and anemia are usually less common and less severe. The onset of

neutropenia is usually 7 to 11 days after treatment, and recovery is generally by days 14 to 21. Myelosuppression is not typically cumulative.
Gastrointestinal toxicities, aside from those caused by autonomic dysfunction, may be caused by all the vinca alkaloids. 15,16,17,18,19 and 20,120 Gastrointestinal autonomic
dysfunction, as manifested by bloating, constipation, ileus, and abdominal pain, occur most commonly with VCR or high doses of the other vinca alkaloids. Mucositis
occurs more frequently with VBL than with VRL or VDS and is least common with VCR. Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may also occur to a lesser extent. Pancreatitis
has also been reported with VRL. 121
All vinca alkaloids are potent vesicants and may cause significant tissue damage if extravasation occurs. If extravasation occurs or is suspected, treatment should be
discontinued, and aspiration of any residual drug remaining in the tissues should be attempted. 122,123 The application of local heat and the injection of hyaluronidase,
150 mg subcutaneously, in a circumferential manner around the needle site are thought to minimize both discomfort and latent cellulitis. Phlebitis may also occur
along the course of an injected vein, with resultant sclerosis. The risk of phlebitis may increase if veins are not adequately flushed after treatment.
Mild and reversible alopecia occurs in approximately 10% and 20% of patients treated with VLR and VCR, respectively. Acute cardiac ischemia, chest pains without
evidence of ischemia, fever without an obvious source, acute pulmonary effects (alone or in combination with mitomycin C), Raynaud's phenomenon, hand-foot
syndrome, and both pulmonary and liver toxicity have also been reported with the vinca alkaloids. 124,125,126,127,128,129,130 and 131 All the vinca alkaloids have been
implicated as a cause of SIADH, and patients who are receiving intensive hydration are particularly prone to severe hyponatremia secondary to SIADH. 15,17,18,19 and 20
This entity has been associated with elevated plasma levels of antidiuretic hormone and usual remits in 2 to 3 days. Hyponatremia generally responds to fluid
restriction, as with hyponatremia associated with SIADH due to other causes.
ADMINISTRATION
VCR is commonly administered to children weighing more than 10 kg as a bolus intravenous injection at a dose of 1.5 to 2.0 mg/m 2 weekly, whereas 0.05 to 0.65
mg/kg weekly is commonly used in smaller children. For adults, the conventional weekly dose is 1.4 mg/m 2. A restriction of the absolute dose of VCR to 2.0 to 2.5 mg
in children and 2.0 mg in adults (often called capping) has been adopted based on early reports of substantial gastrointestinal toxicity in small numbers of patients
treated at higher doses. However, this practice is largely unfounded, and available evidence suggests that it should be reconsidered, particularly in light of the wide
interpatient variability in pharmacokinetic behavior and tolerance. 103 There is significant interpatient variability in the clearance of VCR (as much as 11-fold), and
some patients are able to tolerate much higher doses with little or no toxicity. Moreover, the safety and efficacy of treatment regimens that do not employ capping at
2.0 mg have been documented in adults.132 In any case, doses should not be reduced for mild peripheral neurotoxicity, particularly if the agent is being used in a
potentially curative setting. Instead, doses should be modified for manifestations indicative of more serious neurotoxicity, including severe symptomatic sensory
changes, motor and cranial nerve deficits, and ileus, until toxicity resolves. In clearly palliative situations, dose reductions, lengthened dosing intervals, or selection of
an alternative agent may be justified in the event of moderate neurotoxicity. A routine prophylactic regimen to prevent severe autonomic toxicity, particularly severe
constipation, is also recommended.
The most common schedule for VBL in combination chemotherapeutic regimens uses a rapid intravenous injection at a dose of 6 mg/m 2 weekly. Approved dosing
recommendations for weekly dosing are 2.5 and 3.7 mg/m 2 for children and adults, respectively, followed by gradual escalation in increments of 1.8 and 1.25 mg/m 2
weekly based on hematologic tolerance. It is recommended that weekly VBL doses of 18.5 mg/m 2 in adults and 12.5 mg/m 2 in children not be exceeded as a single
agent; however, these doses are substantially higher than most patients can tolerate because of myelosuppression, even on less-frequent schedules of
administration. Because the severity of leukopenia that may occur with identical VBL doses varies widely, VBL should probably not be given more frequently than
once each week.
VDS has been administered intravenously on many schedules, including weekly and biweekly bolus and prolonged infusion schedules. The agent has also been
given in fractionated doses as either an intermittent or a continuous infusion over 1 to 5 days. VDS is most commonly administered as a single intravenous dose of 2
to 4 mg/m2 every 7 to 14 days. Intermittent or continuous infusion schedules usually employ VDS doses of 1 to 2 mg/m 2/d for 1 to 2 days or 1.2 mg/m2/d for 5 days
every 3 to 4 weeks. 62
VRL is usually administered at a dose of 30 mg/m 2 on a weekly or biweekly schedule as a 6- to 10-minute intravenous injection through a side-arm port into a running
infusion (alternatively, a slow bolus injection followed by flushing the vein with 5% dextrose or 0.9% sodium chloride solutions) or as a short infusion over 20
minutes.17,18,19 and 20 It appears that the more rapid infusions are associated with less local venous toxicity. Oral doses of 80 to 100 mg/m 2 given weekly are generally
well tolerated, but an acceptable oral formulation has not yet been approved. Other dosing schedules that have been evaluated include chronic oral administration of
low doses, intermittent high dose, and prolonged intravenous infusion schedules.
The vinca alkaloids are potent vesicants and should not be administered intramuscularly, subcutaneously, intravesically, or intraperitoneally. Direct intrathecal
injection of VCR and other vinca alkaloids, which has occurred as an inadvertent clinical mishap, induces a severe myeloencephalopathy characterized by ascending
motor and sensory neuropathies, encephalopathy, and rapid death. 133
Although it has not been carefully evaluated, the major role of the liver in the disposition of the vinca alkaloids implies that dose modifications should be considered
for patients with hepatic dysfunction. 134 However, firm guidelines have not been established. A 50% dose reduction is often recommended for patients with total
bilirubin levels between 1.5 and 3.0 mg/dL (50% dose reduction for bilirubin levels between 2.0 and 3.0 mg/dL is recommended for VRL), and at least a 75% dose
reduction for plasma total bilirubin levels greater than 3.0 mg/dL. Dose reduction for renal dysfunction is not indicated.

THE TAXANES
The unique chemical structure and mechanism of action of the taxanes, coupled with their antitumor activities against a broad range of cancers, has rendered the
taxanes one of the most important new classes of anticancer agents. Interest in the taxanes began in 1963, when a crude extract of the bark of the Pacific yew tree,
Taxus brevifolia, was shown to have broad activity in preclinical tumor models. In 1971, paclitaxel was identified as the active constituent of the bark extract. 135,136 The
initial development of paclitaxel was hampered by the limited supply of its primary source; the difficulties inherent in large-scale isolation, extraction, and preparation
of bulk compound for a natural product; and its poor aqueous solubility. 135,136 and 137 Interest was maintained during this time by the characterization of its novel
mechanism of cytotoxic action and the availability of an adequate drug supply for requisite preclinical and limited clinical evaluations. The early search for taxanes
derived from more abundant and renewable resources led to the development of docetaxel, which is synthesized by the addition of a side chain to
10-deacetylbaccatin III, an inactive taxane precursor found in the needles and other components of more abundant yew species. 137,138 The supply of paclitaxel is no
longer a limiting issue because the agent is also produced semisynthetically from 10-deacetylbaccatin III and other abundant precursors.
The structures of paclitaxel, docetaxel, and their precursor 10-deacetylbaccatin III are shown in Figure 19.7-3. The taxanes are complex esters consisting of a
15-member taxane ring system linked to an unusual 4-member oxetan ring. The taxane rings of both paclitaxel and docetaxel (but not 10-deacetylbaccatin III) are
linked to an ester side chain attached to the C13 position of the ring, which is essential for antimicrotubule and antitumor activity. The structures of paclitaxel and
docetaxel differ in substitutions at the C10 taxane ring position and on the ester side chain attached at C13.

FIGURE 19.7-3. Structures of paclitaxel, docetaxel, and a precursor 10-deacetylbaccatin III.

The most impressive clinical activity of paclitaxel has been in patients with ovarian and breast cancers. 135,136,137,138,139,140 and 141 Paclitaxel initially received regulatory
approval in the United States and many other countries for the treatment of patients with ovarian cancer after failure of first-line or subsequent chemotherapy. It
subsequently received regulatory approval for patients with advanced breast cancer after failure of combination chemotherapy or at relapse within 6 months of
adjuvant chemotherapy. Its use in combination with a platinum compound as primary induction therapy in suboptimally debulked stage III or IV ovarian cancer and as
a component of adjuvant chemotherapy after primary local treatment in high-risk patients with early-stage breast cancer has demonstrated a survival advantage in
randomized phase III studies.139,141Paclitaxel has also received regulatory approval in the United States for second-line treatment of Kaposi's sarcoma associated with
AIDS, in combination with cisplatin as primary treatment of non–small cell lung cancer, and as a component of adjuvant chemotherapy in high-risk lymph
node–positive breast cancer. 139,140,141,142 and 143
Docetaxel initially received regulatory approval in the United States for patients with metastatic breast cancer that has progressed on or relapsing after
anthracycline-based chemotherapy, which was later broadened to a general second-line indication. 137,138 Its role as a component of adjuvant and neoadjuvant
chemotherapy after local treatment of early-stage breast cancer and first-line chemotherapy for locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer is being evaluated.
Furthermore, docetaxel has received regulatory approval in many countries for treatment of locally advanced or metastatic non–small cell lung carcinoma and in the
United States for treatment of non–small cell lung cancer after failure of cisplatin-based therapy. The clinical antitumor spectra for paclitaxel and docetaxel are similar,
with activity noted in many other diverse tumor types that are generally refractory to conventional therapies, including lymphoma, and small cell lung, head and neck,
esophageal, endometrial, bladder, and germ cell carcinomas.
MECHANISMS OF ACTION
Schiff et al., 144 Schiff and Horwitz, 145 and Manfredi et al.146 initially identified the unique mechanism of action for paclitaxel in 1979. The taxanes bind to tubulin
polymers (microtubules) at binding sites that are distinct from exchangeable GTP, colchicine, podophyllotoxin, and the vinca alkaloids. Paclitaxel binds preferentially
to the N-terminal 31 amino acids of the b-tubulin subunit, although additional sites of interaction on b-tubulin and a-tubulin may also be involved. 147,148 The binding of
paclitaxel to polymerized tubulin is reversible, with a binding constant of approximately 1 µmol. 146,149 Docetaxel, which most likely shares the same tubulin-binding site
as paclitaxel, appears to have a 1.9-fold higher affinity for the site. 149 Tubulin assembly induced by docetaxel also proceeds with a critical protein concentration that is
2.1-fold lower than that of paclitaxel. 149 However, these differences may not translate into greater therapeutic indices for docetaxel in the clinic, as greater potency
may also portend more severe toxicity at identical drug concentrations in vivo. Nevertheless, the results of both preclinical and clinical studies suggest that the
taxanes may not be completely cross-resistant. 150,151
The taxanes stabilize the microtubule against depolymerization, thereby disrupting normal microtubule dynamics. 2,25,144,145 and 146,152,153,154,155,156 and 157 They profoundly
alter the tubulin dissociation rate constants at both ends of the microtubule, suppressing both treadmilling and dynamic instability. Association rate constants are not
appreciably affected. The ability of the taxanes to induce polymerization is associated with stoichiometric drug binding to microtubules, which occurs at submicromolar
concentrations that are readily achieved in the clinic. At substoichiometric concentrations, the taxanes suppress microtubule dynamics without increasing the amount
of polymerized tubulin. 152 Taxane-treated microtubules are very stable, resisting depolymerization by cold, calcium ions, dilution, and other mitotic drugs. This stability
inhibits the dynamic reorganization of the microtubule network, which is essential for normal function during both mitosis and interphase.
Both stoichiometric and substoichiometric binding of the taxanes inhibit the proliferation of cells, principally by inducing a sustained mitotic block at the
metaphase-anaphase boundary; however, the taxanes also affect interphase microtubules in nonproliferating cells. 25,144,152 Distinct morphologic evidence that the
taxanes affect microtubules during interphase and mitosis include the formation of microtubule bundles during the nonmitotic cell cycle phases and multiple mitotic
spindle asters during mitosis. 154 Many taxane-induced disturbances in cellular processes lead to apoptosis or programmed cell death (discussed later in the section
Taxanes, Drug Resistance, and in Chapter 7).56,57,157,158,159,160,161,162,163,164,165 and 166 On removal of the drug after treatment, even at substoichiometric concentrations that
do not increase microtubule mass, cells exit from mitosis but do not continue to proliferate. Instead, the cells undergo apoptosis, and cell death ensues in 2 to 3 days.
Although the precise mechanism by which microtubule disturbances lead to apoptosis has not been determined, the taxanes interact with numerous substances,
including regulatory molecules and oncogenes that bind to the mitotic apparatus. Paclitaxel has been reported to induce transcription factors and enzymes that govern
proliferation, apoptosis, and inflammation and, interestingly, some of these effects, such as the induction of tumor necrosis factor-a. 157,167 The taxanes also inhibit
angiogenic activity at concentrations below those that induce cytotoxicity. 165,168,169
Both paclitaxel and docetaxel have been shown to enhance the effects of ionizing radiation in vitro at clinically achievable concentrations (<50 nmol) and in vivo,
which may related to the inhibition of cell-cycle progression in the G 2 phase, which is the most radiosensitive phase of the cell cycle. 170,171 and 172
MECHANISMS OF RESISTANCE
The best characterized mechanism of resistance to the taxanes is the MDR phenotype, mediated by the 170-kD P-gp efflux pump, encoded by the mdr1 gene
(discussed previously in the section Vinca Alkaloids, Mechanisms of Resistance).44,45,46,47,48 and 49,173,174 The MDR protein has been shown to be an efficient transporter
of the vinca alkaloids but not of the taxanes. 45,175,176 The results of early studies evaluating the role of MDR in the clinic indicate that cross-resistance to the taxanes
and anthracycline is incomplete, which has significant clinical ramifications in treating breast cancer. 140 Strategies aimed at reversing drug resistance in the clinic with
various types of P-gp substrates and inhibitors are also being evaluated, but the interpretation of the results is confounded by the effects of P-gp modulators on
taxane clearance.177,178
Several taxane-resistant mutant cell lines that have structurally altered a- and b-tubulin proteins and an impaired ability to polymerize into microtubules also have
been identified (discussed previously in the section Vinca Alkaloids, Mechanisms of Resistance).54,157,179 These mutants lack normal interpolar mitotic spindles and
have an inherently slow rate of microtubule assembly, which is normalized in the presence of the drug. Mutants with “hypostable” microtubules exhibit collateral
sensitivity to the vinca alkaloids. A number of cell lines resistant to tubulin-binding agents, including the taxanes, have been shown to have alterations in tubulin
content, expression of tubulin isotypes, tubulin polymerization dynamics, or tubulin isotype content. 180,181,182,183,184 and 185 Mutations of tubulin isotype genes have also
been reported in taxane-resistant cell lines, and b-tubulin gene mutations have been reported to be a strong determinant of paclitaxel resistance in a series of patients
with non–small lung cancer. 186
The regulation and integrity of genes that regulate apoptosis, such as p53, bcl-2, and bcl-x, may be determinants of sensitivity to the taxanes. 56,57,157,162,163 and 164,187,188
MAPs are also likely to be involved in these mechanisms of resistance to drug-induced apoptosis, as illustrated by the fact that MAP4, which is negatively regulated
by wild-type p53, has been shown to increase the sensitivity to paclitaxel. 189,190 It has been proposed that paclitaxel induces apoptosis through two different
mechanisms—a p53-independent pathway in cells blocked in prophase and a p53-dependent mechanism in cells that accumulate in the G 1 cell-cycle phase—and
requires functional p53.157,191 However, there are conflicting experimental data as to the role of p53 as a determinant of cell sensitivity to paclitaxel and other antitumor
agents. Several lines of experimental evidence suggest that the induction of p53 in cells treated with paclitaxel represents a mechanism of drug resistance. 192,193 The
taxanes have been also shown to modulate the function of genes involved in apoptotic regulation and in the disruption of microtubule dynamics by paclitaxel and other
antimicrotubule drugs, and docetaxel results in the phosphorylation of such regulatory proteins as Bcl-x L and Bcl-2, thereby annulling the antiapoptotic functions of
these regulators. 194,195
Interestingly, paclitaxel-resistant cell lines, which have mutations in tubulin and fail to exhibit phosphorylation of Bcl-x L after paclitaxel treatment, have been
described. 56 These cells demonstrate Bcl-xL phosphorylation in the presence of other antimicrotubule agents, suggesting that apoptosis mediated by paclitaxel is
related to the drug's ability to interact with microtubules.

PHARMACOLOGY
The taxanes are commonly administered by intravenous infusion at doses ranging from 175 to 225 mg/m 2 over 3 hours (for paclitaxel) or 75 to 100 mg/m 2 over 1 hour
(for docetaxel) every 3 weeks. Various other administration schedules have been evaluated (discussed later in the section Administration, Dose, and Schedule ). The
oral bioavailability of both paclitaxel and docetaxel is poor, owing in part to the constitutive overexpression of P-gp by enterocytes or first-pass metabolism in the liver
or intestines (or both). However, biologically relevant plasma concentrations are transiently achieved if the taxanes are administered orally after treatment with oral
cyclosporin or other modulators of P-gp and cytochrome P-450 mixed-function oxidases. 196,197 As shown in Table 19.7-2, paclitaxel and docetaxel share the following
pharmacologic characteristics: large volumes of distribution, rapid and avid binding to all tissues except for the unperturbed central nervous system, long terminal
half-lives and substantial hepatic metabolism, biliary excretion, and fecal elimination.

TABLE 19.7-2. Taxanes: Comparative Pharmacokinetic and Toxicologic Characteristics

Paclitaxel
Pharmacologic studies of paclitaxel on both long and short administration schedules have been performed (discussed later in the section Administration, Dose,
Schedule). In early studies that principally evaluated prolonged (6- and 24-hour) schedules, substantial interpatient variability was noted, and nonlinear,
dose-dependent behavior was not observed. 136,137,198 In these studies, drug disposition was characterized as a biphasic process, with values for alpha and beta
half-lives averaging approximately 20 minutes and 6 hours, respectively. However, more recent studies of paclitaxel administered on shorter schedules, particularly as
a 3-hour infusion, indicate that the pharmacokinetic behavior of paclitaxel is nonlinear. 199,200,201,202 and 203 Nonlinearity occurs with all administration schedules, but it is
more apparent with shorter infusions that result in higher plasma paclitaxel concentrations that more effectively saturate both drug elimination and tissue distribution
processes. Both saturable distribution and elimination processes may be, in part, responsible for paclitaxel's nonlinear behavior, with tissue distribution becoming
effectively saturated at lower drug concentrations (achieved with paclitaxel doses <175 mg/m 2 over 3 hours) compared to elimination processes that are effectively
saturated at higher concentrations (achieved with paclitaxel doses >175 mg/m 2 over 3 hours). The use of shorter infusion schedules also results in higher plasma
concentrations of paclitaxel's polyoxyethylated castor oil vehicle, which may also be responsible for this nonlinearity. 202 This nonlinear profile may have several
important clinical implications, particularly regarding dose modifications, because dose escalation may result in a disproportionate increase in drug exposure and
hence toxicity, whereas dose reductions may result in a disproportionate decrease in drug exposure, thereby decreasing antitumor activity.
Paclitaxel's volume of distribution is much larger than the volume of total body water, indicating extensive drug binding to plasma proteins or other tissue elements,
probably tubulin. Plasma protein binding is high (>95%) and readily reversible. 198 Drug binding to platelets is extensive and saturable, and animal distribution studies
with radiolabeled paclitaxel indicate extensive drug uptake and retention by virtually all tissues, except for the normal brain and testes. 204 In humans, peak plasma
concentrations achieved with 3- to 96-hour schedules (>0.05 to 10 µmol) and drug concentrations in third-space fluid collections, such as ascites (>0.1 µmol), are
capable of inducing significant biologic effects in vitro, but drug penetration into the normal central nervous system is negligible. 198,204,205
The liver is the principal organ involved with paclitaxel clearance, which metabolizes and excretes both paclitaxel and metabolites into the bile. 198,206,207,208 and 209
Ninety-eight percent of radioactivity is recovered from feces collected for 6 days after rats are treated with radiolabeled paclitaxel, and approximately 71% of an
administered dose of paclitaxel is excreted in the feces over 5 days as either parent compound or metabolites in humans, with 6a-hydroxypaclitaxel being the largest
component and accounting for 26% of the dose. Only 5% is unchanged paclitaxel. Renal clearance of paclitaxel and metabolites is minimal, accounting for 14% of the
administered dose. 198 In humans, cytochrome P-450 mixed-function oxidases are responsible for the bulk of drug disposition, specifically the isoenzymes CYP2C8,
and CYP3A4, which metabolize paclitaxel to hydroxylated 6a-hydroxypaclitaxel (major) and another hydroxylated metabolite, both of which are inactive.
Pharmacodynamic analyses as part of individual phase I and II trials demonstrated that several pharmacokinetic indices of drug exposure can be related to the
various toxicities of paclitaxel, the most important and consistent of which is the relationship between the severity of neutropenia and the duration of drug exposure
above biologically relevant plasma concentrations ranging from 0.05 to 0.1 µmol. 198,199,200 and 201,210 However, a prospective analysis of pharmacokinetic determinants of
outcome in several hundred patients with advanced non–small cell lung cancer treated with the combination of cisplatin and paclitaxel at either 135 or 250 mg/m 2 over
24 hours demonstrated that the magnitude of the steady-state plasma paclitaxel concentration correlated poorly with antitumor activity, disease-free survival, and
overall survival. 211
Docetaxel
The pharmacokinetics of docetaxel on a 1-hour schedule are linear at doses of 115 mg/m 2 or less and optimally fit a three-compartment model. 137,138,212,213,214,215 and 216
Terminal half-lives ranging from 11.1 to 18.5 hours have been reported. In one population study, plasma concentration data were optimally fit by a three-compartment
model, and the following pharmacokinetic parameters were generated: t½gof 12.4 hours, clearance of 1 L/h/m 2, and steady-state volume of distribution of 74 L/m 2.212,213
and 214 The most important determinants of docetaxel clearance were the body surface area, hepatic function, and plasma a1–acid glycoprotein concentration, whereas
age and albumin level had significant (albeit minor) influences on clearance. As with paclitaxel, plasma protein binding is high (>80% to 90%), and binding is primarily
to a1–acid glycoprotein, albumin, and lipoproteins. 213 Docetaxel is also distributed to all tissues except the central nervous system. 212,217 In both dogs and mice
treated with radiolabeled drug, fecal excretion accounts for 70% to 80% of total radioactivity, whereas urinary excretion accounts for 10% or less. 212,217 The hepatic
cytochrome P-450 mixed-function oxidases, particularly isoforms CYP3A4 and CYP3A5, are primarily involved in biotransformation that, in contrast to paclitaxel,
principally affects the C13 side chain and not the taxane ring. 212,213,218,219 and 220
The main pharmacokinetic determinants of toxicity, particularly the principal toxicity neutropenia, are drug exposure and the time that plasma concentrations exceed
biologically relevant concentrations. 213,214 A population pharmacodynamic analysis of determinants of outcome in phase II trials of docetaxel revealed that the most
important determinants of the time to progression in patients with metastatic breast cancer are the pretreatment plasma concentration of a1–acid glycoprotein, number
of prior chemotherapeutic regimens, and number of disease sites, whereas both drug exposure and the pretreatment plasma concentration of a1–acid glycoprotein
were strong positive determinants of time to progression in patients with advanced lung cancer treated with docetaxel. 214 Conversely, the pretreatment plasma level of
a1–acid glycoprotein was negatively—albeit significantly—related to the probability of experiencing both severe neutropenia and febrile neutropenia.
DRUG INTERACTIONS
Both sequence-dependent pharmacokinetic and toxicologic interactions between paclitaxel and several other chemotherapy agents have been noted. 198 The
sequence of cisplatin followed by paclitaxel (24-hour schedule) induces more profound neutropenia than the reverse sequence, which is explained by a 33%
reduction in the clearance of paclitaxel after cisplatin. 221 The least toxic sequence—paclitaxel before cisplatin—was demonstrated to induce more cytotoxicity in vitro;
therefore, this drug sequence was selected for further clinical development. 222 However, sequence dependence does not appear to be a clinically relevant

phenomenon on shorter schedules. Treatment with paclitaxel on either a 3- or 24-hour schedule followed by carboplatin has been demonstrated to produce equivalent
neutropenia and less thrombocytopenia as compared to carboplatin as a single agent, which is not explained by pharmacokinetic interactions. 223,224 Although
sequence dependence has not been noted with carboplatin and paclitaxel in clinical studies, this phenomenon has been noted with other paclitaxel-based
chemotherapy combinations, the most important of which involve the anthracyclines. 225 Both neutropenia and mucositis are more severe when paclitaxel on a 24-hour
schedule is administered before doxorubicin, compared to the reverse sequence, which is most likely due to an approximately 32% reduction in the clearance of
doxorubicin and doxorubicinol when it is administered after paclitaxel. 225,226 Although neither sequence-dependent pharmacologic interactions nor toxicologic
interactions between doxorubicin and paclitaxel on a shorter (3-hour) schedule have been noted, pharmacologic interactions occur with both sequences, and
combined treatment with paclitaxel (3-hour schedule) and doxorubicin as a bolus infusion has been associated with a higher frequency of congestive cardiotoxicity
than would have been expected from an equivalent cumulative doxorubicin dose given without paclitaxel (discussed later in the section Toxicity).227 Similar
decrements in the clearance of epirubicin and its metabolites have also been noted in studies of paclitaxel combined with epirubicin, but a similar enhancement of
cardiotoxicity has not been observed. 228 The precise etiology for these interactions is unclear; however, competition for the hepatic or biliary P-gp transport of the
anthracyclines with paclitaxel or its polyoxyethylated castor oil vehicle (or both) is a logical explanation. 226,229 The vehicle is suspected because similar effects have
not been noted with docetaxel, which is not formulated in polyoxyethylated castor oil. Hematologic toxicity has been more profound with the sequence of
cyclophosphamide before paclitaxel (24-hour schedule) than the reverse sequence. 230 In human tumor xenografts, both paclitaxel and docetaxel have been
demonstrated to induce thymidine phosphorylase activity, which may increase the metabolic activation of the oral fluoropyrimidine prodrug capecitabine. 231
Drug interactions may also result from the effects of other classes of drugs on the cytochrome P-450–dependent metabolism of the taxanes. Various inducers of
cytochrome P-450 mixed-function oxidases, such as the anticonvulsants phenytoin and phenobarbital, accelerate in the metabolism of both paclitaxel and docetaxel in
human microsomal studies and in both children and adults who are concurrently receiving treatment with these anticonvulsants, as manifested by rapid drug
clearance and tolerance of high drug doses. 209,219,232,233 and 234 Conversely, many types of agents that inhibit cytochrome P-450 mixed-function oxidases, such as
orphenadrine, erythromycin, cimetidine, testosterone, ketoconazole, fluconazole, midazolam, polyoxyethylated castor oil, and corticosteroids, interfere with the
metabolism of paclitaxel and docetaxel in human microsomes in vitro; however, the inhibitory concentrations of these agents exceed those achieved in clinical
practice, and the clinical relevance of these findings is not known. 207,208 and 209,217,218,219 and 220,235 Although there has been concern that the use of corticosteroids and
different H 2-receptor antagonists with variable cytochrome P-450 inhibitory activities as components of premedication regimens may differentially affect drug
clearance and hence toxicity, neither toxicologic nor pharmacologic differences between the agents were noted in a randomized clinical trial. 236
TOXICITY
Myelosuppression is the principal toxicity of paclitaxel and docetaxel. However, despite similar structures, these agents differ modestly in their toxicity spectra.
Paclitaxel
Neutropenia is the principal toxicity of paclitaxel. The onset is usually on days 8 to 10, and recovery is generally complete by days 15 to 21. The main clinical
determinant for the severity of neutropenia is the extent of prior myelosuppressive therapy. Neutropenia is noncumulative, and the duration of severe neutropenia,
even in heavily pretreated patients, is usually brief. The most important pharmacologic determinant of the severity of neutropenia is the duration that plasma
concentrations are maintained above biologically relevant levels (0.05 to 0.10 µmol; discussed earlier in the section Pharmacology), which may explain why
neutropenia is more severe with longer infusion schedules. 237 This does not necessarily mean that longer schedules will portend optimal antitumor activity in the
clinic. Instead, most randomized clinical data do not indicate that there is an optimal schedule for any particular tumor, although treatment with higher doses should be
considered if shorter schedules are used. 238 At paclitaxel doses exceeding 175 mg/m2 on a 24-hour schedule and 225 mg/m2 on a 3-hour schedule, nadir neutrophil
counts are typically less than 500 µL for fewer than 5 days in most courses, even in untreated patients. Even patients who have received extensive prior therapy can
usually tolerate paclitaxel doses of 175 to 200 mg/m 2 over 3 or 24 hours. More frequent administration schedules (e.g., weekly treatment) have been associated with
less severe neutropenia as compared to single-dose schedules (discussed later in the section Administration, Dose, and Schedule ). Severe thrombocytopenia and
anemia are unusual, except in heavily pretreated patients.
Although the incidence of major hypersensitivity reactions in early phase I trials approached 30%, the incidence is 1% to 3% with effective prophylaxis. 135,136,237,239,240
Most major reactions, which are characterized by dyspnea with bronchospasm, urticaria, and hypotension, occur within the first 10 minutes after the first (and less
frequently after the second) treatment and resolve completely after stopping treatment and occasionally occur after treatment with antihistamines, fluids, and
vasopressors. Patients who have major reactions have been rechallenged successfully after receiving high doses of corticosteroids, but this approach has not always
been successful. 241,242 Although minor reactions, such as flushing and rashes, have been noted in as many as 40% of patients, minor hypersensitivity reactions do not
portend the development of major reactions. The hypersensitivity reactions are most likely caused by a nonimmunologically mediated release of histamine or
histamine-like substances, owing to the taxane moiety or, more likely, its polyoxyethylated castor oil vehicle, possibly through complement activation. 243 Although the
incidence of major hypersensitivity reactions is reduced with lower administration rates and longer infusion durations, the rates of major reactions are low on both 3and 24-hour schedules when patients are premedicated with corticosteroids and both H 1- and H 2-receptor antagonists (discussed later in the section Administration,
Dose, and Schedule).237 In an assessment of the relative safety of two different paclitaxel schedules (3 vs. 24 hours), the rates of major reactions were low and similar
(2.1% vs. 1.0%) in patients receiving paclitaxel for 3 or 24 hours, respectively, with premedication. 237
Paclitaxel induces a peripheral neuropathy characterized by sensory symptoms, such as numbness in a symmetric glove-and-stocking distribution. 244,245 and 246
Neurologic examination reveals sensory loss and loss of deep tendon reflexes. Neurophysiologic studies support a primary disruption of neuronal microtubules
resulting in axonal degeneration and demyelination as the primary pathogenic mechanism; however, manifestations suggestive of microtubule disruption resulting in a
neuronopathy may be noted, particularly at higher doses or when combined with other neurotoxic agents, such as cisplatin. 245 Severe neurotoxicity is uncommon
when paclitaxel is given alone at doses below 200 mg/m 2 on a 3- or 24-hour schedule every 3 weeks or below 100 mg/m 2 on a continuous weekly schedule, but
almost all patients experience mild or moderate effects. Symptoms may begin as soon as 24 to 72 hours after treatment with higher doses (250 mg/m 2 or greater) but
usually occur only after multiple courses at 135 to 250 mg/m 2 every 3 weeks. Neurotoxicity is generally more pronounced when paclitaxel is administered on short
infusion schedules, indicating that peak plasma concentration is a principal determinant. The combination of paclitaxel on a 3-hour schedule and cisplatin is
particularly neurotoxic. Motor and autonomic dysfunction may occur, especially at high doses and in patients with preexisting neuropathies due to diabetes mellitus
and alcoholism. Transient myalgia, usually noted 24 to 48 hours after therapy, is also common, and a myopathy has been described in patients receiving high doses
with cisplatin. Although several measures, such as the administration of amifostine, glutamate, and pyridoxine, appear to reduce the neurotoxic effects of paclitaxel in
experimental models, there is no convincing clinical evidence that any specific measure is effective at ameliorating existing manifestations or preventing the
development or worsening or neurotoxicity. 244,246 Optic nerve disturbances, manifested by scintillating scotoma, may also occur. 247,248 Acute encephalopathy, which
can progress to coma and death, has been reported after treatment with high doses (600 mg/m 2 or greater). 249
Paclitaxel causes cardiac rhythm disturbances, but the clinical relevance of these effects is not known. 239,250,251 and 252 The most common rhythm disturbance, a
transient bradycardia, was noted in 29% of patients in one trial. 239,250,251 Isolated asymptomatic bradycardia without hemodynamic effects does not appear to be an
indication for discontinuing paclitaxel. More important bradyarrhythmias, including Mobitz type I (Wenckeback syndrome), Mobitz type II, and third-degree heart block,
have been noted, but the incidence in a large National Cancer Institute database was only 0.1%. 251 Most documented episodes have been asymptomatic. These
events primarily occurred in patients enrolled in early trials that required continuous cardiac monitoring, indicating that second- and third-degree heart block are likely
underreported because such monitoring is not usually performed. These bradyarrhythmias are probably caused by paclitaxel, as related taxanes affect cardiac
automaticity and conduction, and similar disturbances have occurred in humans and animals who have ingested various species of yew plants. Myocardial infarction,
cardiac ischemia, atrial arrhythmias, and ventricular tachycardia have been noted, but whether there is a causal relationship between paclitaxel and these events is
uncertain.
There is no evidence that chronic, long-term treatment with paclitaxel causes progressive cardiac dysfunction. Routine cardiac monitoring during paclitaxel therapy is
not necessary but is advisable for patients who may not be able to tolerate bradyarrhythmias, such as those with atrioventricular conduction disturbances or
ventricular dysfunction. Although patients with a wide range of cardiac abnormalities and cardiac histories were broadly and empirically restricted from participating in
early clinical trials, paclitaxel treatment has been reported to be well tolerated in a small series of gynecologic cancer patients with major cardiac risk factors. 252 On
the other hand, repetitive treatment of patients with the combined regimen of paclitaxel on a 3-hour schedule and doxorubicin as a brief infusion is associated with a
higher frequency of congestive cardiotoxicity than would be expected to occur with the same cumulative doxorubicin dose given without paclitaxel (discussed
previously in the section Drug Interactions).226,227 In one study of previously untreated women with advanced breast cancer treated with escalating doses of paclitaxel
as a 3-hour infusion and doxorubicin, 60 mg/m 2 to a cumulative dose of 480 mg/m2, which would be predicted to result in a less than 5% incidence of congestive

cardiotoxicity in patients treated with doxorubicin alone, the incidence of congestive cardiotoxicity was approximately 25%. 227 However, the incidence of cardiotoxicity
was less than 5% when similar patients received identical schedules of paclitaxel and doxorubicin, but the cumulative doxorubicin dose did not exceed 360 mg/m 2.
Both experimental and early clinical results suggest that dexrazoxane may reduce the cardiotoxicity of the doxorubicin and paclitaxel combination. 253,254 The incidence
of congestive heart failure was also significantly higher in breast cancer patients treated with the combination of trastuzumab and paclitaxel than paclitaxel alone in a
phase III trial; therefore, careful monitoring of patients receiving this combination is warranted. 255
Drug-related gastrointestinal effects, such as vomiting and diarrhea, are uncommon. Higher paclitaxel doses may cause mucositis, especially in patients with leukemia
who may be more prone to mucosal barrier breakdown or in patients receiving 96-hour infusions. 256,257 Rare cases of neutropenic enterocolitis and gastrointestinal
necrosis have been noted, particularly in patients given high doses of paclitaxel in combination with doxorubicin or cyclophosphamide. 230,239,258,259 Severe
hepatotoxicity and pancreatitis have also been noted, but these events are rare. 260,261 Acute bilateral pneumonitis has been reported in fewer than 1% of patients
treated on a 3-hour schedule in one series, and both interstitial and parenchymal pulmonary toxicity have been reported, but clinically significant pulmonary effects
are uncommon.262,263
Paclitaxel also induces reversible alopecia of the scalp, but all body hair is usually lost with cumulative therapy. Although the agent is often not considered a vesicant,
extravasation of large volumes can cause moderate soft tissue injury. Inflammation at the injection site and along the course of an injected vein may occur. Alopecia
occurs in most patients. Nail disorders have been reported, particularly in patients treated on weekly schedules. 264 Recall reactions in previously irradiated sites have
also been noted.
Docetaxel
Neutropenia is the principal toxicity of docetaxel. 137,138,265 At a dose of 100 mg/m2, neutrophil counts are below 500/µL in most patients. Similar to paclitaxel, the onset
of neutropenia occurs on approximately day 8, and complete resolution typically occurs by days 15 to 21. As with paclitaxel, neutropenia is significantly less when low
doses are administered frequently (i.e., on a weekly schedule; discussed later in the section Administration, Dose, and Schedule ). The most important determinant of
neutropenia is the extent of prior treatment. Significant effects on platelets and red blood cells are uncommon.
Although docetaxel is not formulated in polyoxyethylated castor oil, hypersensitivity reactions have been reported in approximately 31% of patients receiving
docetaxel without premedications in early phase II studies. 137,138,265 As with paclitaxel, major reactions characterized by dyspnea, bronchospasm, and hypotension
typically occur during the first two courses and within minutes after the start of treatment. Signs and symptoms generally resolve within 15 minutes after cessation of
treatment, and docetaxel is usually able to be reinstituted without sequelae, occasionally after treatment with an H 1-receptor antagonist. However, most
hypersensitivity reactions are minor. Both the incidence and severity of hypersensitivity reactions appear to be reduced by premedication with corticosteroids and H 1and H2-receptor antagonists (discussed later in the section Administration, Dose, and Schedule ). Like paclitaxel, patients who experience major reactions have been
retreated successfully after the resolution of symptoms and after treatment with corticosteroids and H 1-receptor antagonists.
Docetaxel induces a unique fluid retention syndrome characterized by edema, weight gain, and third-space fluid collection. 137,138,265,266 and 267 Fluid retention is
cumulative and does not appear to be due to hypoalbuminemia or cardiac, renal, or hepatic dysfunction. Instead, several lines of evidence indicate that it is due to
increased capillary permeability. 266 Capillary filtration studies in patients who were not receiving corticosteroid premedication have revealed a two-stage process, with
progressive congestion of the interstitial space by proteins and water starting between the second and fourth course, followed by insufficient lymphatic drainage. 266 In
early studies in which prophylactic medication was not used, fluid retention was not usually significant at cumulative docetaxel doses below 400 mg/m 2; however, the
incidence and severity of fluid retention increased sharply at cumulative doses of 400 mg/m 2 or greater and often resulted in the delay or termination of treatment.
Prophylactic treatment with corticosteroids with or without H 1- and H2-receptor antagonists have been demonstrated to reduce the overall incidence of fluid retention
and increase the number of courses and cumulative docetaxel dose before the onset of this toxicity (discussed later in the section Administration, Dose, and
Schedule).267 Fluid retention typically resolves slowly after docetaxel is stopped, with complete resolution occurring several months after treatment in patients with
severe toxicity. Aggressive and early treatment with progressively more potent diuretics starting with potassium-sparing diuretics has been successfully used to
manage fluid retention. The incidence of fluid retention appears to be lower in studies using lower doses (60 to 75 mg/m 2) of docetaxel during each course, but this
may be due to the administration of lower overall cumulative doses, and the effects of lower doses on antitumor activity are unknown.
Skin toxicity may occur in as many as 50% to 75% of patients 137,138,265,268; however, premedication may reduce the overall incidence of this effect. An erythematous
pruritic maculopapular rash that affects the forearms, hands, or feet is typical. Other cutaneous effects include desquamation of the hands and feet, palmar-plantar
erythrodysesthesia that may respond to pyridoxine or cooling, 269,270 and onychodystrophy characterized by brown discoloration, ridging, onycholysis, soreness, and
brittleness and loss of the nail plate.
Both neurosensory and neuromuscular effects are generally less frequent and less severe with docetaxel as compared to paclitaxel. Mild to moderate peripheral
neurotoxicity occurs in approximately 40% of previously untreated patients, 137,138,265,271,272 and patients who were previously treated with cisplatin appear to be
particularly susceptible, with the incidence approaching 74% in one trial. 273 The neurotoxicity is qualitatively similar to that of paclitaxel. Patients typically complain of
paresthesia and numbness, but peripheral motor effects may also occur. Severe toxicity has been unusual after repetitive treatment with docetaxel doses less than
100 mg/m2, except in patients with antecedent disorders, such as alcohol abuse. Transient arthralgia and myalgia are occasionally noted within days after treatment.
Malaise or asthenia have been prominent complaints in patients who have been treated with large cumulative doses, particularly when docetaxel is administered on a
continuous weekly schedule. 137,138,265,274 Stomatitis appears to occur more frequently with docetaxel than paclitaxel, particularly with prolonged infusions, which are
utilized rarely. Mild to moderate conjunctivitis, which is responsive to topical corticosteroids, may also occur, particularly with weekly administration. Nausea, vomiting,
and diarrhea have also been observed, but severe gastrointestinal toxicity is rare.
ADMINISTRATION, DOSE, AND SCHEDULE
Paclitaxel
Many investigations have focused on optimal dosing and scheduling since the regulatory approval of paclitaxel. 238 Early clinical studies were limited to the 24-hour
schedule, largely owing to an apparent increased rate of severe hypersensitivity reactions on shorter schedules, but the development of effective premedication
regimens has facilitated evaluations of a broad range of dosing schedules. Although paclitaxel, 135 mg/m 2 on a 24-hour schedule, was initially approved for patients
with refractory and recurrent ovarian cancer, regulatory approval was subsequently obtained for paclitaxel, 175 mg/m 2 on a 3-hour schedule. In patients with
advanced breast and ovarian cancers, the cumulative body of randomized study results indicate that both schedules are equivalent, particularly with regard to
event-free survival and overall survival, although response rates have occasionally been superior with the 24-hour infusion. 238,275
Intriguing results were initially obtained with more protracted schedules, such as a 96-hour infusion schedule in patients with advanced breast cancer. 140,238,276 The
development of such schedules was based on the observation that duration of exposure above a biologically relevant threshold is one of the most important
determinants of cytotoxicity in vitro (discussed earlier in the section Pharmacology), but there has been no clear evidence that protracted infusion schedules are
superior to shorter schedules with regard to clinical efficacy or toxicity. 238,276,277 and 278 The extensive and rapid distribution of the taxanes to peripheral tissues and the
avid and protracted tissue binding of these agents may explain the lack of substantial differences in antitumor activity between short and more protracted
administration schedules despite substantial differences in vitro. There has also been considerable interest in intermittent schedules, particularly those in which
paclitaxel is administered as a 1-hour infusion weekly, which results in substantially less myelosuppression than conventional 3- and 24-hour every 3-week
schedules. 279,280 However, the reports that antitumor activity on weekly schedules is superior to that noted with less frequent schedules are largely anecdotal, and
randomized trials are in progress. Nevertheless, the weekly schedule may be advantageous for patients who are at high risk of developing severe myelosuppression.
Paclitaxel is generally administered every 3 weeks at a dose of 175 mg/m 2 over 3 hours or 135 to 175 mg/m 2 over 24 hours. Several phase III studies in patients with
advanced lung, head and neck, and ovarian cancers have consistently failed to show that paclitaxel doses greater than 135 to 175 mg/m 2 on a 24-hour schedule are
superior to conventional doses. 143,238,281 Nearly identical results have been obtained in a phase III study in patients with metastatic breast cancer, in which efficacy
was not increased in patients treated with paclitaxel doses greater than 175 mg/m 2 on a 3-hour schedule. 155,277,326 The following doses have been recommended on
less conventional schedules: 200 mg/m 2 over 1 hour as either a single dose or 3 divided doses every 3 weeks; 140 mg/m 2 over 96 hours every 3 weeks; and 80 to 100

mg/m2 weekly. The most common schedules evaluated in patients with AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma are paclitaxel, 135 mg/m 2 over 3 or 24 hours every 3
weeks, and 100 mg/m2 every 2 weeks.142 Paclitaxel has also been administered into the pleural and peritoneal cavities. 282,283 Biologically relevant plasma
concentrations have been achieved with intraperitoneal administration, and concentrations in the peritoneal cavity are several orders of magnitude greater than
plasma concentrations. 282
The following premedication is recommended to prevent major hypersensitivity reactions: dexamethasone, 20 mg orally or intravenously, 12 and 6 hours before
treatment; an H1-receptor antagonist (such as diphenhydramine, 50 mg intravenously) 30 minutes before treatment; and an H 2-receptor antagonist (such as
cimetidine, 300 mg; famotidine, 20 mg; or ranitidine, 150 mg intravenously) 30 minutes before treatment. A single dose of a corticosteroid (dexamethasone, 20 mg
intravenously) administered 30 minutes before treatment has been reported to confer very effective prophylaxis of major hypersensitivity reactions. 284,285 Contact of
paclitaxel with plasticized polyvinyl chloride equipment or devices must be avoided because of the risk of patient exposures to plasticizers that may be leached from
polyvinyl chloride infusion bags or sets. Paclitaxel solutions should be diluted and stored in glass or polypropylene bottles or suitable plastic bags (polypropylene or
polyolefin) and administered through polyethylene-lined administration sets that include an in-line filter with a microporous membrane not greater than 0.22 µm.
The extensive involvement of hepatic metabolism and biliary excretion in the disposition of paclitaxel—similar to that of other anticancer drugs, such as the vinca
alkaloids—in which dose modifications are required indicates that doses should be modified in patients with hepatic dysfunction. Official recommendations have not
been formulated, but prospective evaluations indicate that patients with moderate to severe elevations in serum concentrations of hepatocellular enzymes or bilirubin
(or both) are more likely to develop severe toxicity than patients without hepatic dysfunction. 286,287 Therefore, it would be prudent to reduce paclitaxel doses by at least
50% in patients with moderate or severe hepatic excretory dysfunction (hyperbilirubinemia) or significant elevations in hepatic transaminases. Renal clearance
contributes minimally to overall clearance (5% to 10%), and patients with severe renal dysfunction do not appear to require dose modification. 288 Based on the
pharmacologic behavior, particularly the wide distributive properties of the taxanes, dose modifications are not required solely for peripheral edema and third-space
fluid collections.
Docetaxel
In the United States, docetaxel is indicated at a dose range of 60 to 100 mg/m 2 and 75 mg/m2 over 1 hour in patients with breast and non–small cell lung cancers,
respectively, but most early clinical trials in advanced breast, ovarian, and non–small cell lung cancers evaluated doses in the higher end of this range (75 to 100
mg/m2), with scant data available for patients treated at 60 mg/m 2.137,138,265 Although some untreated or minimally pretreated patients generally tolerate docetaxel at a
dose of 100 mg/m2 without severe toxicity, emerging data indicate poorer tolerance in more heavily pretreated patients in whom 75 mg/m 2 appears to be more
reasonable from a toxicologic perspective. 289 Like paclitaxel, docetaxel has also been administered as a 1-hour infusion weekly. Although there are no clear benefits
of chronic weekly drug administration in terms of antitumor activity, hematologic toxicity is much less than with conventional dose schedules, with a high incidence of
cumulative asthenia and neurotoxicity noted with docetaxel doses exceeding 36 mg/m 2/wk.274 Despite the use of a polysorbate 80 formulation instead of
polyoxyethylated castor oil, which is used to formulate paclitaxel, a relatively high rate of hypersensitivity reactions and profound fluid retention in patients who did not
receive premedication has led to the use of several effective premedication regimens, the most popular of which is dexamethasone, 8 mg orally twice daily for 3 or 5
days starting 1 or 2 days, respectively, before docetaxel, with or without both H 1- and H2-receptor antagonists given 30 minutes before docetaxel. 267
A retrospective review of docetaxel pharmacokinetics in patients without hyperbilirubinemia demonstrated that docetaxel clearance is reduced by approximately 25%
in patients with elevations in serum concentrations of both hepatic transaminases (1.5-fold or greater) and alkaline phosphatase (2.5-fold or greater), regardless of
whether the elevations are due to hepatic metastases. 212,213 and 214 Therefore, dose reductions by at least 25% are recommended for such individuals. More substantial
reductions (50% or greater) may be required in patients who have moderate or severe hepatic excretory dysfunction (hyperbilirubinemia). 287 As with paclitaxel
(discussed previously in the section Administration, Dose, and Schedule , Paclitaxel), there is no rationale for dose modification solely for renal deficiency or
third-space fluid accumulation (or both). Also similar to the case with paclitaxel, glass bottles or polypropylene or polyolefin plastic products should be used for
preparation and storage, and docetaxel should be administered through polyethylene-lined administration sets.

ESTRAMUSTINE PHOSPHATE
Estramustine phosphate (Fig. 19.7-4) is a conjugate of the alkylating agent nornitrogen mustard linked to 17b-estradiol by a carbamate ester. This agent was
originally designed so that estramustine would accumulate specifically in estrogen receptor–bearing breast cancer cells via the 17b-estradiol component followed by
degradation of the carbamate ester and release of the alkylating nor-nitrogen mustard moiety. Estramustine phosphate, however, did not demonstrate useful
anticancer activity in clinical trials in breast cancer and, thereafter, it was determined that alkylation of DNA did not occur. 290 Further investigations later established
that preferential accumulation of radiolabeled estramustine phosphate in the ventral prostate of rats occurred unrelated to the estrogen receptor. 291 This selective
accumulation was mediated by the presence of a specific protein in prostate tissue, subsequently labeled estramustine -binding protein (EMBP).291,292 Clinical studies
of estramustine phosphate were initiated in advanced prostate cancer based on this unique pattern of drug distribution. 293,294 Anticancer activity was subsequently
demonstrated in prostate cancer patients with disease refractory to diethylstilbestrol.

FIGURE 19.7-4. Structure of estramustine phosphate undergoing dephosphorylation to estramustine.

MECHANISMS OF ACTION
Several mechanisms of cytotoxic activity have been attributed to estramustine phosphate. The preponderance of data indicates that cell death is principally mediated
through a direct effect on microtubules. Estramustine is known to inhibit mitotic microtubule networks and to depolymerize interphase microtubules. 296,297 Consonant
with other antimicrotubule agents, estramustine-treated cells arrest in the G 2/M phase of the cell cycle and then undergo apoptosis. Estramustine inhibits microtubule
function through direct binding to b-tubulin independent of MAPs while also inhibiting microtubule function through an interaction with MAPs. 298,299,300,301 and 302 Once
bound to tubulin, estramustine inhibits the dynamic growth and shortening of microtubules. Like the taxanes, estramustine can also exert an antiproliferative effect via
stabilization of spindle microtubules. 300 The binding of estramustine to b-tubulin, however, occurs at a unique site distinct from those of the taxanes, colchicine, and
vinca alkaloids. 303 Finally, the antimicrotubule effects of estramustine are mediated by the intact conjugate and not the individual nor-nitrogen or estradiol
components. 304
The specific binding of estramustine and its metabolite, estromustine, to EMBP permits tissue selectivity for estramustine accumulation and action. 304,305 After
exposure to estramustine, cell lines that contain high levels of EMBP exhibit a greater fraction of cells arresting in the G 2/M phase as compared to those with low
levels of EMBP expression.304,305 and 306 Proteins similar to EMBP have also been found in other tumors, including gliomas and astrocytomas. 307,308 and 309 Because
estramustine phosphate induces a G 2/M block, crosses the blood–brain barrier, and accumulates in gliomas and astrocytomas, the potential for estramustine
selectively to sensitize central nervous system tumor cells to irradiation is an area of active investigation. 310,311

Other proposed mechanisms of action attributed to estramustine include interaction and disruption of the nuclear matrix, alterations of the actin microfilaments of the
cytoskeleton, and alterations of ion flux across the plasma membrane. 312,313 and 314
MECHANISMS OF RESISTANCE
Investigations with cell lines made resistant to estramustine have characterized several mechanisms of acquired drug resistance. Consistent with its antimicrotubule
mechanism of action, resistance to estramustine can be mediated by alterations at the site of estramustine-tubulin interaction, increased microtubule stability through
overexpression of specific tubulin isotypes, or alterations in MAPs. A drug efflux mechanism, distinct from classical MDR has been described.
The targets of estramustine—b-tubulins—are composed of multiple isotypes encoded by separate cellular genes. An increase in b III- and b IVa-tubulin isotypes relative
to other b-tubulin isotypes occurs in human prostate cancer cells rendered eight- to ninefold resistant to estramustine. 301 Although the precise site of estramustine
binding is not known, microtubules containing b III-tubulin isotypes appear to bind estramustine less efficiently as compared to either other b-tubulins or a-tubulin. 301
Furthermore, tubulin isotypes differ from one another principally at MAP binding sites. Because the binding of different b-tubulin subtypes to a-tubulin alters the
dynamic properties of microtubule growth and stability, a change in the relative b-tubulin isotypes may counter the inhibitory and destabilizing effects of estramustine
on microtubule assembly.315,316
Some prostate cancer cell lines with acquired resistance to estramustine overexpress the MAP tau. The capacity to maintain microtubule stability and kinetics involves
the interaction of tubulin with MAPs. Exposure to estramustine induces both quantitative and qualitative changes in tau, leading to a sevenfold increase in
estramustine resistance in some cell lines. 317 To what extent alterations in tau or other altered MAPs contribute to clinical estramustine resistance is not known.
Although estramustine can bind to the classical MDR efflux pump, P-gp-overexpressing cells are not cross-resistant to estramustine. 318,319 and 320 Estramustine may, in
fact, act as a competitive inhibitor of P-gp action, reducing the efflux of other cytotoxic agents subject to P-gp-mediated resistance. 318,320 A drug efflux mechanism
distinct from P-gp has been described that is distinct from P-gp and can mediate estramustine resistance. 321 Some cell lines with acquired estramustine resistance
exhibit a sixfold resistance to estramustine commensurate with the degree of overexpression of the gene encoding this new efflux pump.
PHARMACOLOGY
After oral administration, estramustine phosphate undergoes rapid dephosphorylation within the gastrointestinal tract, as shown in Figure 19.7-4. The bioavailability of
oral estramustine phosphate is 37% to 75%. 322,323 The majority of absorbed estramustine is rapidly metabolized to an oxidized isomer, estromustine, which is the
principal component detected in the plasma. 324 Maximal estromustine plasma concentrations are reached within 2 to 4 hours after oral consumption, and the mean
elimination half-life is 14 hours. 322 Estromustine pharmacokinetics are linear over the usual administered oral doses of estramustine phosphate. Peak plasma
concentrations in patients treated chronically with oral estramustine phosphate at 560 mg/d have been 227 ng/mL for estromustine, 23 ng/mL for estramustine, 95
ng/mL for estrone, and 9.3 ng/mL for estradiol. 324
Further hydrolysis of the estromustine and estramustine carbamate linker in the liver yields estrone and estradiol, respectively, and the nor-nitrogen group. Studies of
oral and intravenously administered radiolabeled estramustine phosphate indicate that estromustine and estramustine and their metabolites are largely excreted in
the feces, with only small amounts of conjugated estrone and estradiol found in the urine (<1%). 322,323,324 and 325
In contrast to oral administration, intravenous estramustine phosphate delivers significantly higher plasma concentrations of estramustine phosphate and metabolites
while reducing the marked interpatient variability noted for the oral route. 322,323,324 and 325 Intravenous estramustine phosphate is currently investigational in the United
States.
DRUG INTERACTIONS
Coadministration of food or dairy products significantly impairs the absorption of estramustine phosphate. 326 Calcium-rich foods appear to lead to the formation of a
poorly absorbable calcium complex. Current recommendations include fasting before the oral administration of estramustine phosphate and avoidance of calcium-rich
foods and calcium antacids. 326
Preliminary evidence suggests that oral estramustine phosphate, when coadministered with intravenous docetaxel, significantly delays the clearance of docetaxel,
with disproportionate increases in docetaxel concentrations. 327 This has led to a reduction in the recommended dose for docetaxel when combined with estramustine
phosphate despite the fact that, for the most part, these two agents have nonoverlapping toxicities. The mechanism by which estramustine impairs docetaxel
clearance is not known.
TOXICITY
Nausea and vomiting, which are the principal toxicities encountered with oral estramustine phosphate, may infrequently necessitate discontinuation. At conventional
dosing schedules, nausea and vomiting can be prevented by antiemetic therapy. Diarrhea has also been observed in some patients with chronic use.
Myelosuppression is not associated with estramustine phosphate when administered as a single agent.
Commonly observed estrogenic side effects of estramustine therapy include gynecomastia, nipple tenderness, and fluid retention. Caution should be exercised in
prescribing estramustine phosphate to patients with congestive heart failure because of the risk for fluid retention and edema. Thromboembolic complications
represent the most hazardous toxicity of estramustine phosphate therapy and may occur in as many as 10% of patients. These include venous thrombosis, pulmonary
emboli, and cerebrovascular and coronary thrombotic events. Transient elevations in hepatic transaminases occur in approximately one-third of patients receiving
estramustine phosphate therapy. The rate of hepatic toxicity is similar to that described for diethylstilbestrol in a randomized study of estramustine phosphate versus
diethylstilbestrol. 328
ADMINISTRATION, DOSE, AND SCHEDULE
Estramustine phosphate is approved for the treatment of metastatic prostate cancer, particularly hormone-refractory disease. The recommended daily dose of
estramustine phosphate (available as a 140-mg capsule) is 14 mg/kg of body weight given in three to four divided doses, though most patients are usually treated in
the dosing range of 10 to 16 mg/kg. Patients should be instructed to take estramustine phosphate with water at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after meals. Patients are
generally treated for 30 to 90 days before assessment of therapeutic benefit. Chronic oral therapy can be maintained for months or even years as long as the
favorable response continues. Abbreviated 5-day courses of oral estramustine phosphate have been proposed for use with such chemotherapy agents as docetaxel.
This schedule allows for the concurrent administration of estramustine phosphate with intravenous chemotherapeutic agents while reducing some of the toxicity of
chronic oral administration.

NOVEL COMPOUNDS TARGETING MICROTUBULES
Many other structurally—and functionally—unique antimicrotubule compounds are the focus of discovery efforts, preclinical development, and clinical evaluations.
Although the majority of efforts are being directed toward agents that interfere with tubulin, other potential strategic components of the microtubule, including motor
proteins, are the focus of discovery and developmental efforts. 13
The successes with the taxanes have provided the impetus to discover new chemotypes that work by a similar mechanism but yet have higher therapeutic indices.
Several natural products that are structurally dissimilar to the taxanes, share their mechanism of action, and show comparable activities have been identified. For
example, rhazinilam, like paclitaxel, originates from tree bark but is the first nontaxane identified that induces cold-stable tubulin polymerization in vitro and
microtubule bundling in cells. 329 Unlike paclitaxel, rhazinilam is capable of inducing tubulin polymerization at 0°C; however, the resulting polymerized product is
unstable. In contrast, discodermolide, which originates from a marine sponge, polymerizes tubulin at 37°C in vitro more potently and rapidly than does paclitaxel,

yielding polymerization products that are cold-stable, and it polymerizes tubulin almost as rapidly at 0°C. 330 Unlike rhazinilam, discodermolide-induced tubulin
polymers are completely stable to treatment with calcium ions and are composed of very short microtubules instead of tubulin spirals. The epothilones A and B, which
are derived by microbial fermentation, appear to be more like the taxanes in their polymerization products. 331,332 The microtubules they induce are relatively long, rigid,
and resistant to destabilization by cold temperature and calcium ions. These epothilones and their analogues are at least as potent as paclitaxel and cause mitotic
arrest and microtubule bundling. Epothilone B analogues are currently undergoing clinical evaluation. The marine soft coral–derived natural products—sarcotidicytins
A and B and eleutherobin also promote tubulin polymerization in a manner analogous to that of paclitaxel. 333
All the aforementioned compounds are likely substrates for P-gp to some extent, expressing varying degrees of cross-resistance against P-gp–expressing cells.
However, other marine-derived, microtubule-stabilizing cytotoxins, such as laulimalide and isolaulimalide, appear to be poor substrates for the P-gp drug efflux
pump.334 Because eleutherobin, epothilones A and B, and discodermolide competitively inhibit [ 3H]paclitaxel binding to microtubules, a common pharmacophore has
been sought and identified and may enable the development of hybrid constructs with more desirable biologic characteristics. 335
Other natural products and semisynthetic antimicrotubule compounds under evaluation interact with tubulin in the vinca alkaloid– or colchicine-binding domains.
Among the most potent are the cryptophycins, which are a family of cyanobacterial macrolides that deplete microtubules in intact cells, including cells with the MDR
phenotype. 336,337 The cryptophycins compete for the binding of [ 3H]VBL, but neither for radiolabeled paclitaxel nor for colchicine, and inhibit GTP hydrolysis by isolated
tubulin. They also have excellent activity against several types of tumor xenografts, including tumors resistant to the vinca alkaloids. One semisynthetic analogue,
cryptophycin-52, is currently undergoing initial clinical evaluation. 336 The dolastatins constitute a series of oligopeptides isolated from the sea hare, Dolabela
auricularia.337,338,339 and 340 Two of the most potent dolastatins, dolastatin-10 and -15, noncompetitively inhibit the binding of vinca alkaloids to tubulin, inhibit tubulin
polymerization and tubulin-dependent GTP hydrolysis, stabilize the colchicine-binding activity of tubulin, and possess cytotoxic activity in the picomolar to low
nanomolar range. Dolastatin-10 and semisynthetic dolastatin analogues are undergoing preclinical development and clinical evaluation. 340 Phomopsin A, halichondrin
B, homohalichondrin B, and spongistatin 1, which interact with tubulin in the vinca alkaloid–binding domain and with the natural products combretastatin and
steganacin and the synthetic compounds pyridine and pyridazine, and the pentafluorophenylsulfonamides, which interact with tubulin at the colchicine-binding
domain, are currently being evaluated in preclinical or early clinical evaluations. 341,342
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Gelfand VI, Bershadsky AD. Microtubule dynamics: mechanism, regulation, and function. Annu RevCell Biol 1991;7:93.
2. Hyams JF, Lloyd CW. Microtubules. New York: Wiley-Liss, 1993.
3. Nogales E, Whittaker M, Milligan RA, Downing KH. High-resolution model of the microtubule. Cell 1999;96:78.
4. Mitchison T, Kirchner M. Dynamic instability of microtubule growth. Nature 1984;312:237.
5. Margolis RL, Wilson L. Microtubule treadmilling: what goes around comes around. Bioessays 1998;20:830.
6. Raff EC. Genetics of microtubule systems. J Cell Biol 1984;99:1.
7. Ludena RF. Are tubulin isotypes functionally significant? Mol Biol Cell 1983;4:445.
8. Luduena RF. Multiple forms of tubulin: different gene products and covalent modifications. Int RevCytol 1998;178:207.
9. Raff, EC. The role of multiple tubulin isoforms in cellular microtubule function. In: Hyams JF, Lloyd CD, eds. Microtubules. New York: Wiley-Liss, 1993:89.
10. Olmsted JB. Microtubule-associated proteins. Annu Rev Cell Biol 1986;2:421.
11. Zheng Y, Jung MK, Oakley BR. Gamma-tubulin is present in Drosophila melanogaster and Homo sapiens and is associated with the centrosome. Cell 1991;65:817.
12. Kellogg DR, Moritz M, Alberts BM. The centrosome and cellular organization. Annu Rev Biochem 1994;63:639.
13. Vale RD. Microtubule motors: many new models off the assembly line. Trends Biochem Sci 1992;17:300.
14. Johnson IS. Historical background of vinca alkaloid research and areas of future interest. CancerChemother Rep 1968;52:455.
15. Gidding CE, Kellie SJ, Kamps WA, de Graaf SS. Vincristine revisited. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 1999;29:267.
16. Johnson IS, Armstrong JG, Gorman M, et al. The vinca alkaloids: a new class of oncolytic agents. Cancer Res 1963;23:1390.
17. Rowinsky EK, Donehower RC. The clinical pharmacology and use of antimicrotubule agents in cancer chemotherapeutics. Pharmacol Ther 1992;52:35.
18. Joel S. The comparative clinical pharmacology of vincristine and vindesine: Does vindesine offer any advantage in clinical use? Cancer Treat Rev 1995;21:513.
19. Budman DR. Vinorelbine (Navelbine): a third-generation vinca alkaloid. Cancer Invest 1997;15:475.
20. Johnson SA, Harper P, Hortobagyi GN, Pouillart P. Vinorelbine: an overview. Cancer Treat Rev 1996;22:127.
21. Himes RH. Interactions of the catharanthus (vinca) alkaloids with tubulin and microtubules. PharmacolTher 1991;51:256.
22. Jordan MA, Thrower D, Wilson L. Mechanism of inhibition of cell proliferation by the vinca alkaloids. Cancer Res 1991;51:2212.
23. Donoso RJ, Jordan MA, Farrell KW, Matsumoto B, Wilson L. Kinetic stabilization of the microtubule dynamic instability in vitro by vinblastine. Biochemistry 1993;32:1285.
24. Jordan MA, Thrower D, Wilson L. Effects of vinblastine, podophyllotoxin and nocodazole on mitotic spindles. Implications for the role of microtubule dynamics in mitosis. J Cell Sci
1992;102:401.
25. Wilson L, Jordan MA. Pharmacological probes of microtubule function. In: Hyams JF, Lloyd CD, eds. Microtubules. New York: Wiley-Liss, 1993:59.
26. Howard SMH, Theologides A, Sheppard JR. Comparative effects of vindesine, vinblastine, and vincristine on mitotic arrest and hormone response of L1210 leukemia cells. Cancer Res
1980;40:2695.
27. Beck WT. Alkaloids. In: Fox BW, Fox M, eds. Antitumor drug resistance. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1984:589.
28. Ferguson PJ, Cass CE. Differential cellular retention of vincristine and vinblastine by cultured human promyelocytic leukemia HL-60/C-1 cells: the basis of differential toxicity. Cancer Res
1985;45:5480.
29. Himes RH, Kersey RN, Heller-Bettinger I, Sampson FE. Action of the vinca alkaloids, vincristine and vinblastine, and desacetyl vinblastine amide on microtubules in vitro. Cancer Res
1976;36:3798.
30. Jordan MA, Himes RH, Wilson L. Comparison of the effects of vinblastine, vincristine, vindesine, and vinepidine on microtubule dynamics and cell proliferation in vitro. Cancer Res
1985;45:2741.
31. Ferguson PJ, Philips JR, Seiner M, Cass CE. Biochemical effects of Navelbine on tubulin and associated proteins. Cancer Res 1984;44:3307.
32. Gout PW, Wijck LL, Beer CT. Differences between vinblastine and vincristine in distribution in the blood of rats and binding by platelets and malignant cells. Eur J Cancer 1978;14:1167.
33. Gout PW, Noble RL, Bruchovsky N, Beer CT. Vinblastine and vincristine growth-inhibitory effects correlate with their retention by cultured Nb2 node lymphoma cells. Int J Cancer 1984;34:245.
34. Lobert S, Vulevic B, Correria JJ. Interaction of vinca alkaloids with tubulin: a comparison of vinblastine, vincristine, and vinorelbine. Biochemistry 1996;35:6806.
35. Bowman LC, Houghton JA, Houghton PJ. GTP influences the binding of vincristine in human tumor cytosols. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1986;135:695.
36. Bowman LC, Houghton JA, Houghton PJ. Formation and stability of vincristine-tubulin complex in kidney cytosols. Role of GTP and GTP hydrolysis. Biochem Pharmacol 1988;37:1251.
37. Lengfeld AM, Dietrich J, Schultze-Maurer B. Accumulation and release of vinblastine and vincristine in HeLa cells: light microscopic, cinematographic, and biochemical study. Cancer Res
1982;42:3798.
38. Bleyer WA, Frisby SA, Oliverio VT. Uptake and binding of vincristine by murine leukemia cells. Biochem Pharmacol 1975;24:633.
39. Zhou XJ, Placidi M, Rahmani R. Uptake and metabolism of vinca alkaloids by freshly isolated human hepatocytes in suspension. Anticancer Res 1994;14:1017.
40. Rahmani R, Zhou XJ. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of vinca alkaloids. In: Workman P, Graham, M, eds. Cancer surveys, vol 17: pharmacokinetics and cancer chemotherapy. Plainview,
NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1993:269.
41. Ferguson PJ, Cass CE. Differential cellular retention of vincristine and vinblastine by cultured human promyelocytic leukemia HL-60/C-1 cells: the basis of differential toxicity. Cancer Res
1985;45:5480.
42. Jackson DV, Bender RA. Cytotoxic thresholds of vincristine in a murine and human leukemia cell line in vitro. Cancer Res 1979;39:4346.
43. Inaba M, Fujikura R, Sakurai Y. Active efflux common to vincristine and daunorubicin in vincristine-resistant P388 leukemia. Biochem Pharmacol 1981;30:1863.
44. Safa AR, Glover CJ, Meyers MB, et al. Vinblastine photoaffinity labeling of a high molecular weight surface membrane glycoprotein specific for multidrug-resistant cells. Biochemistry
1987;262:13685.
45. Grant CE, Validmarsson G, Hipfner R, et al. Overexpression of multidrug resistanceassociated protein (MRP) increases resistance to natural product drugs. Cancer Res 1994;54:356.
46. Scheper RJ, Broxterman HJ, Scheffer GL. Overexpression of a Mr 110000 vesicular protein in non-P-glycoprotein-mediated multidrug resistance. Cancer Res 1993;53:1475.
47. Greenberger LM, Williams SS, Horwitz SB. Biosynthesis of heterogeneous forms of multidrug resistance associated glycoproteins. J Biol Chem 1987;262:13685.
48. Choi K, Chen C, Kriegler M, Roninson IB. An altered pattern of cross-resistance in multidrug-resistant human cells results from spontaneous mutations in the mdr1 (P-glycoprotein) gene. Cell
1988;53:519.
49. Peterson RHF, Meyers MB, Spengler BA. Alterations of plasma membrane glycopeptides and gangliosides of Chinese hamster cells accompanying development of resistance to daunorubicin
and vincristine. Cancer Res 1983;43:222.
50. Pieters R, Hongo T, Loonen AH, et al. Different types of non-P-glycoprotein mediated multiple drug resistance in children with relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Br J Cancer
1992;65:691.
51. Betrand Y, Capdeville R, Balduck N, et al. Cyclosporin A used to reverse drug resistance increases vincristine neurotoxicity. Am J Hematol 1992;40:158.
52. Pinkerton CR. Multidrug resistance reversal in childhood malignanciespotential for a real step forward? Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:641.
53. Houghton JA, Houghton PJ, Hazelton BJ, Douglas EC. In situ selection of a human rhabdomyosarcoma resistant to vincristine with altered a-tubulins. Cancer Res 1985;45:2706.
54. Cabral FR, Barlow SB. Resistance to the antimitotic agents as genetic probes of microtubule structure and function. Pharmacol Ther 1991;52:159.
55. Reichle A, Diddens H, Altmayr F, et al. Beta-tubulin and P-glycoprotein: major determinants of vincristine accumulation in B-CLL cells. Leukemia Res 1995:19:823.
56. Poruchynsky MS, Wang EE, Rudin CM, Blagosklonny MV, Fojo T. Bcl-xL is phosphorylated in malignant cells following microtubule disruption. Cancer Res 1998;58:3331.
57. Wang LG, Liu XM, Kreis W, Budman DR. The effect of antimicrotubule agents on signal transduction pathways of apoptosis: a review. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1999;44:355.
58. Nelson RL, Dyke RW, Root MA. Comparative pharmacokinetics of vindesine, vincristine, and vinblastine in patients with cancer. Cancer Treat Rev 1980;7[Suppl]:17.
59. Nelson RL. The comparative clinical pharmacology and pharmacokinetics of vindesine, vincristine, and vinblastine in human patients with cancer. Med Pediatr Oncol 1982;10:115.
60. Rahmani R, Bruno R, Iliadis A, et al. Clinical pharmacokinetics of the antitumor drug Navelbine (5'-noranhydrovinblastine). Cancer Res 1987;47:5796.
61. Jehl F, Quoix E, Leveque D, et al. Pharmacokinetic and preliminary metabolic fate of Navelbine in humans as determined by high performance liquid chromatography. Cancer Res
1991;51:2073.
62. Jackson DV Jr. The periwinkle alkaloids. In: Lokich JJ, ed. Cancer Chemotherapy by Infusion. Chicago: Precept Press Inc, 1990:155.
63. Bender RA, Castle MC, Margileth DA, Oliverio VT. The pharmacokinetics of [ 3H]-vincristine in man. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1977;22:430.
64. Sethi VS, Jackson DV, White CT, et al. Pharmacokinetics of vincristine sulfate in adult cancer patients. Cancer Res 1981;41:3551.
65. Castle MC, Margileth DA, Oliverio VT. Distribution and excretion of [ 3H]vincristine in the rat and the dog. Cancer Res 1976;36:3684.

66. Jackson DV, Sethi VS, Spurr CL, McWhorter JM. Pharmacokinetics of vincristine in the cerebrospinal fluid of humans. Cancer Res 1981;41:1466.
67. Rahmani R, Zhou XJ, Placidi M, et al. In vivo and in vitro pharmacokinetics and metabolism of vinca alkaloids in rat. I. Vindesine (4-deacetyl-vinblastine 3-carboxyamide). Eur J Drug Metab
Pharmacokinet 1990;15:49.
68. Zhou XJ, Martin M, Placidi M, et al. In vivo and in vitro pharmacokinetics and metabolism of vinca alkaloids: II. Vinblastine and vincristine. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet 1990;15:323.
69. Owellen RJ, Root MA, Hains FO. Pharmacokinetic of vindesine and vincristine in humans. Cancer Res 1977;37:2603.
70. Jackson DV, Castle MC, Bender RA. Biliary excretion of vincristine. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1978;24:101.
71. Owellen RJ, Hartke CA, Hains FO. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of vinblastine in humans. CancerRes 1977;37:2597.
72. Owellen RJ, Hartke CA. The pharmacokinetics of 4-acetyl tritium vinblastine in two patients. Cancer Res 1975;35:975.
73. Zhou-Pan XR, Seree E, Zhou XJ, et al. Involvement of human liver cytochrome P450 3A in vinblastine metabolism: drug interactions. Cancer Res 1993;53:5121.
74. Hande K, Gay J, Gober J, Greco FA. Toxicity and pharmacology of bolus vindesine injection and prolonged vindesine infusion. Cancer Treat Rev 1980;7:25.
75. Nelson RL, Dyke RW, Root MA. Clinical pharmacokinetics of vindesine. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1979;2:243.
76. Jackson DV Jr, Sethi VS, Long TR, et al. Pharmacokinetics of vindesine bolus and infusion. CancerChemother Pharmacol 1994;13:114.
77. Ohnuma T, Norton L, Andrejczuk A, Holland JF. Pharmacokinetics of vindesine given as an intravenous bolus and 24-hour infusion in humans. Cancer Res 1985;45:464.
78. Dyke RW, Nelson RL, Brade WP. Vindesine: a short review of preclinical and first clinical data. CancerChemother Pharmacol 1979;2:229.
79. Rahmani R, Kleisbauer JP, Cano JP, et al. Clinical pharmacokinetics of vindesine infusion. Cancer TreatRep 1985;69:839.
80. Rahmani R, Martin M, Favre R, et al. Clinical pharmacokinetics of vindesine: repeated treatments by intravenous bolus injections. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1984;20:1409.
81. Culp HW, Daniels WD, McMahon RE. Disposition and tissue levels of [ 3H]-vindesine in rats. CancerRes 1977;37:3053.
82. Zhou XJ, Zhou-Pan XR, Gauthier T, et al. Human liver microsomal cytochrome P450 3A isoenzymes mediated vindesine biotransformation: metabolic drug interactions. Biomed Pharmacol
1993;4:853.
83. Levêque D, Jehl F. Clinical pharmacokinetics of vinorelbine. Clin Pharmacokinet 1996;31:184.
84. Jehl F, Quoix E, Levêque D, et al. Pharmacokinetic and preliminary metabolic fate of Navelbine in humans as determined by high performance liquid chromatography. Cancer Res
1991;51:2073.
85. Rowinsky EK, Noe DA, Lucas VS, et al. A phase I, pharmacokinetic and absolute bioavailability study of oral vinorelbine (Navelbine) in solid tumor patients. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1754.
86. Urien S, Bree F, Breillout F, et al. Vinorelbine high-affinity binding to human platelets and lymphocytes: distribution in human blood. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1988;23:247.
87. Levêque D, Quoiz E, Dumont P, et al. Pulmonary distribution of vinorelbine in patients with non-small lung cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1993;33:176.
88. Rahmani R, Gueritte F, Martin M, et al. Comparative pharmacokinetics of antitumor vinca alkaloids: intravenous bolus injections of Navelbine and related alkaloids to cancer patients and rats.
CancerChemother Pharmacol 1986;16:223.
89. Levêque D, Merle-Melet M, Bresler L, et al. Biliary elimination and pharmacokinetics of vinorelbine in micropigs. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1993;32:487.
90. Krikorian A, Rahmani R, Bromet M, et al. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of Navelbine. Semin Oncol 1989;16[Suppl 4]:21.
91. Favre R, Delgado J, Besenval M, et al. Phase I trial of escalating doses of orally administered Navelbine (NVB): II. Clinical results. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1989;8:246(abst).
92. Bender RA, Bleyer WA, Frisby SA. Alteration of methotrexate uptake in human leukemia cells by other agents. Cancer Res 1975;35:1305.
93. Zager RF, Frisby SA, Oliverio VT. The effects of antibiotics and cancer chemotherapeutic agents on the cellular transport and antitumor activity of methotrexate in L1210 murine leukemia.
Cancer Res 1973;33:1670.
94. Chan JD. Pharmacokinetic drug interactions of vinca alkaloids. Summary of case reports. Pharmacotherapy 1998;18:1304.
95. Yalowich JC. Effect of microtubule inhibition on etoposide accumulation and DNA damage in human K562 cells in vitro. Cancer Res 1987;47:1010
96. Bollini R, Riva R, Albani R, et al. Decreased phenytoin levels during antineoplastic therapy: a case report. Epilepsia 1983;24:75.
97. Jarosinski PF, Moscow JA, Alexander MS, et al. Altered phenytoin clearance during intensive chemotherapy for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Pediatr 1988;112:996.
98. Tobe SW, Siu LL, Jamal SA, et al. Vinblastine and erythromycin: an unrecognized serious drug interaction. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1995;35:188.
99. Crom WR, De Graaf SSN, Synold T, et al. Pharmacokinetics of vincristine in children and adolescents with acute lymphocytic leukemia. J Pediatr 1994;125:642.
100. Rajaonarison JF, Lacarelle B, Catalin J, et al. Effect of anticancer drugs on the glucuronidation of 3'azido-3'-deoxythymidine in human liver microsomes. Drug Metab Dispos 1993;21:823.
101. Legha SS. Vincristine neurotoxicity. Pathophysiology and management. Med Toxicol 1986;1:421.
102. Tuxen MK, Hansen SW. Neurotoxicity secondary to antineoplastic drugs. Cancer Treat Rev 1994;20:191.
103. Sulkes A, Collins JM. Reappraisal of some dosage adjustment guidelines. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:229.
104. Bradley WG, Lassman LP, Pearce GW. The neuromyopathy of vincristine in man: clinical electrophysiological and pathological studies. J Neurol Sci 1970;10:107.
105. Casey EB, Jellife AM, Le Quesne PM, Millett YL. Vincristine neuropathy, clinical and electrophysiological observations. Brain 1973;96:69.
106. Greig NH, Soncrant TT, Shetty HU, et al. Brain uptake and anticancer activities of vincristine and vinblastine are restricted by their low cerebrovascular permeability and binding to plasma
constituents in rat. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1990;26:263.
107. Hironen HE, Saknu TT, Heinonen E, et al. Vincristine treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia induces transient autonomic cardioneuropathy. Cancer 1988;64:801.
108. Gottlieb RJ, Cuttner J. Vincristine-induced bladder atony. Cancer 1971;28:674.
109. Carmichael SM, Eagleton L, Ayers CR, Mohler D. Orthostatic hypotension during vincristine therapy. Arch Intern Med 1970;126:290.
110. Burns BV, Shotton JC. Vocal fold palsy following vinca alkaloid treatment. J Laryngol Otol 1998;112;485.
111. Morgan E, Baum E, Breslow N, et al. Chemotherapy-related toxicity in infants treated according to the second national Wilms' tumor study. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:51.
112. Woods WG, O'Leary M, Nesbit ME. Life-threatening neuropathy and hepatotoxicity in infants during induction therapy for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Pediatr 1981;98:642.
113. Griffiths JD, Stark RJ, Ding JC, Cooper IA. Vincristine neurotoxicity in Charcot-Marie Tooth syndrome. Med J Aust 1985;143:305.
114. McGuire SA, Gospe SM Jr, Dahl G. Acute vincristine neurotoxicity in the presence of hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type I. Med Pediatr Oncol 1989;17:520.
115. Desai ZR, Van den Berg HW, Bridges JM, et al. Can severe vincristine neurotoxicity be prevented? Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1982;8:211.
116. Boyle FM, Wheeler HR, Shenfield GM. Glutamate ameliorates experimental vincristine neuropathy. JPharmacol Exp Ther 1996;279:410.
117. Jackson DV, Wells HB, Atkins JN, et al. Amelioration of vincristine neurotoxicity by glutamic acid. AmJ Med 1988;84:1016.
118. Binet S, Fellous A, Lataste H, et al. In situ analysis of the action of Navelbine on various types of microtubules using immunofluorescence. Semin Oncol 1989;16[Suppl 4]:5.
119. Le Chevalier T, Brisgand D, Douillard J-Y, et al. Randomized study of vinorelbine and cisplatin versus vindesine and cisplatin versus vindesine and cisplatin versus vinorelbine alone in
non-small cell lung cancer: results of a European multicenter trial including 612 patients. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:360
120. Sharma RK. Vincristine and gastrointestinal transit. Gastroenterology 1988;95:1435.
121. Tester W, Forbes W, Leighton J. Vinorelbine-induced pancreatitis: a case report. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1631.
122. Dorr RT, Alberts DS. Vinca alkaloid skin toxicity: antidote and drug disposition studies in the mouse. JNatl Cancer Inst 1985;74:113.
123. Bellone JD. Treatment of vincristine extravasation. JAMA 1981;245:343.
124. Hoff PM, Valero V, Ibrahim N, Willey, Hortobagyi GN. Hand-foot syndrome following prolonged infusion of high doses of vinorelbine. Cancer 1998;85:965.
125. Karminsky N, Merimsky O, Kovner F, Inbar M. Vinorelbine-related acute cardiopulmonary toxicity. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1999;43:180.
126. Tassinari D, Sartori S, Gianni L, Pasguini E, Ravaioli A. Is acute dyspnea a rare side effect of vinorelbine? Ann Oncol 1997;8:503.
127. Kouroukis C, Hings I. Respiratory failure following vinorelbine tartrate infusion in a patient with non-small cell lung cancer. Chest 1997;112:846.
128. Subar M, Muggia FM. Apparent myocardial ischemia associated with vinblastine administration. CancerTreat Rep 1986;70:690.
129. Hantel A, Rowinsky EK, Donehower RC. Nifedipine and oncologic Raynaud's phenomenon. Ann InternMed 1988;108:767.
130. Israel RH, Olson JP. Pulmonary edema associated with intravenous vinblastine. JAMA 1978;240:1585.
131. Raderer M, Kornek G, Hejna M, et al. Acute pulmonary toxicity associated with high-dose vinorelbine and mitomycin C. Ann Oncol 1996;7:973.
132. Sweet DL, Golumb HM, Ultmann JE, et al. Cyclophosphamide, vincristine, methotrexate with leukovorin rescue, and cytarabine (COMLA) combination sequential chemotherapy for advanced
diffuse histiocytic lymphoma. Ann Intern Med 1980;92:785.
133. Meggs WJ, Hoffman RS. Fatality resulting from intraventricular vincrisitine administration. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1998;36:243.
134. Shibata SI, Synold TW, Carroll M, et al. A pilot study of the tolerability and pharmacokinetics of vinorelbine in patients with varying degrees of liver dysfunction. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:190a(abst).
135. Rowinsky EK, Donehower RC. Drug therapy: paclitaxel (Taxol). N Engl J Med 1996;332:1004.
136. Rowinsky EK, Cazenave LA, Donehower RC. Taxol: a novel investigational antineoplastic agent. J NatlCancer Inst 1990;82:1247.
137. Eisenhauer EA, Vermorken JB. The taxoids. Comparative clinical pharmacology and therapeutic potential. Drugs 1998;55:5.
138. Cortes JE, Pazdur R. Docetaxel. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2643.
139. McGuire WP, Hoskins WJ, Brady MF, et al. Cyclophosphamide and cisplatin compared with paclitaxel and cisplatin in patients with stage III and IV ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med 1996;334:1.
140. Seidman AD. The emerging role of paclitaxel in breast cancer therapy. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:247.
141. Henderson IC, Berry D, Demetri G, et al. Improved disease-free survival and overall survival from the addition of sequential paclitaxel, but not from the escalation of doxorubicin dose level in
the adjuvant chemotherapy of patients with node-positive primary breast cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17;101a(abst).
142. Jie C, Tulpule A, Zheng T, et al. Treatment of epidemic AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. Curr Opin Oncol 1997;9:433.
143. Bonomi P, Kim K, Fariclough D, et al. Comparison of survival and quality of life in advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients treated with two dose levels of paclitaxel combined with cisplatin
versus etoposide with cisplatin: results from an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group trial. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:623.
144. Schiff PB, Fant J, Horwitz SB. Promotion of microtubule assembly in vitro by taxol. Nature 1979;22:665.
145. Schiff PB, Horwitz SB. Taxol stabilizes microtubules in mouse fibroblast cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1980;77:1561.
146. Manfredi JJ, Parness J, Horwitz SB. Taxol binds to cellular microtubules. J Cell Biol 1982;94:688.
147. Rao S, Krauss NE, Heerding JM, et al. 3'-(p-Azidobenzamido)taxol photolabels the N-terminal 31 amino acids of b-tubulin. J Biol Chem 1994;269:3132.
148. Rao S, Orr GA, Chaudhary AG, et al. Characterization of the Taxol binding site on the microtubule: 2-(m-azidobenzoyl)taxol photolabels a peptide (amino acids 217-231) of beta tubulin. J Biol
Chem 1995;270:20235.
149. Diaz JF, Andreu JM. Assembly of purified GDP-tubulin into microtubules induced by taxol and taxotere: reversibility, ligand stoichiometry and competition. Biochemistry 1993;32:2747.
150. Vanhoerfer U, Cao S, Harstrict A, Seeber S, Rustum YM. Comparative antitumor efficacy of docetaxel and paclitaxel in nude mice bearing human tumor xenografts that overexpress the
multidrug resistant protein. Ann Oncol 1997;8:1221.
151. Valero V, Jones SE, Von Hoff DD, et al. A phase II study of docetaxel in patients with paclitaxel-resistant metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3362.
152. Jordan MA, Toso RJ, Thrower D, Wilson L. Mechanism of mitotic block and inhibition of cell proliferation by taxol at low concentrations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:9552.
153. Ringel I, Horwitz SB. Studies with RP56976 (Taxotere): a semisynthetic analogue of taxol. J Natl CancerInst 1991;83:288.
154. Rowinsky EK, Donehower RC, Jones RJ, Tucker RW. Microtubule changes and cytotoxicity in leukemic cell lines treated with taxol. Cancer Res 1988;48:4093.
155. Jordan MA, Wilson L. Use of drugs to study the role of microtubule assembly dynamics in living cells. Methods Enzymol 1998;298:252.
156. Jordan A, Hadfield JA, Lawrence NJ, McGowan AT. Tubulin as a target for anticancer drugs which interact with the mitotic spindle. Med Res Rev 1998;18:259.
157. Dumontet C, Sikic B. Mechanism of action and resistance to antitubulin agents: microtubule dynamics, drug transport, and cell death. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1061.
158. Bhalla K, Ibrado AM, Tourkina E, et al. Taxol induces internucleosomal DNA fragmentation associated with programmed cell death in human myeloid leukemia cells. Leukemia 1993;7:563.
159. Jordan MA Wendell K, Gardiner S, et al. Mitotic block induced in HeLa cells by low concentrations of paclitaxel (Taxol) results in abnormal mitotic exit and apoptotic cell death. Cancer Res
1996;56:816.
160. Zhang CC, Yang JM, Bash-Babula J, et al. DNA damage increases sensitivity to vinca alkaloids and decreases sensitivity to taxanes through p53-dependent repression of
microtubule-associated protein 4. Cancer Res 1999;59:3663.

161. Strobel T, Swanson L, Korsmeyer S, Cannistra SA. BAX enhances paclitaxel-induced apoptosis through a p53-independent pathway. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:14094.
162. Strobel T, Kraeft SK, Chen LB, Cannistra SA. BAX expression is associated with enhanced intracellular accumulation of paclitaxel: a novel role for BAX during chemotherapy-induced cell
death. Cancer Res 1998;58:4776.
163. Scatena CD, Stewart ZA, Mays D, et al. Mitotic phosphorylation of Bcl-2 during normal cell cycle progression and Taxol-induced cell growth arrest. J Biol Chem 1998;273:30777.
164. Torres K, Horwitz SB. Mechanisms of Taxol-induced cell death are concentration dependent. CancerRes 1998;58:3620.
165. Griffon-Etienne G, Boucher Y, Brekken C, et al. Taxane-induced apoptosis decompresses blood vessels and lowers interstitial fluid pressure in solid tumors: clinical implications. Cancer Res
1999;59:776.
166. Moos PJ, Fitzpatrick FA. Taxane-mediated gene induction is independent of microtubule stabilization: induction of transcription regulators and enzymes that modulate inflammation and
apoptosis. Proc NatlAcad Sci USA 1998;95:3896.
167. Burkhart CA, Berman JW, Cwindell CS, et al. Relationship between taxol and other taxanes on induction of tumor necrosis factor-a gene expression and cytotoxicity. Cancer Res 1994;54:5779.
168. Belotti D, Vergani V, Drudis T, et al. The microtubule-affecting drug paclitaxel has antiangiogenic activity. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:1843.
169. Klauber N, Paragni S, Flynn E, Hamel E, D'Amato RJ. Inhibitor of angiogenesis and breast cancer in mice by the microtuble inhibitors 2-methoxyestradiol and taxol. Cancer Res 1997;57:81.
170. Tishler RB, Geard CR, Hall EJ, Schiff PB. Taxol sensitizes human astrocytoma cells to radiation. Cancer Res 1992;52:3595.
171. Niero A, Emiliani E, Monti G, et al. Paclitaxel and radiotherapy: sequence-dependent efficacya preclinical model. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:2213.
172. Mason KA, Hunter NR, Milas M, Abbruzzese JL, Milas L. Docetaxel enhances tumor radioresponse in vivo. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:2431.
173. Horwitz SB, Cohen D, Rao S, et al. Taxol: mechanisms of action and resistance. MonogrNatl Cancer Inst 1993;15:63.
174. Roy SN, Horwitz SB. A phosphoglycoprotein with taxol resistance in J774.2 cells. Cancer Res 1985;45:3856.
175. Cole SPC, Sparks KE, Fraser K, et al. Pharmacological characterization of multidrug resistant MRP-transfected human tumor cells. Cancer Res 1994;54:5902.
176. Lorico A, Rappa G, Flavell RA, et al. Double knockout of the MRP gene leads to increased drug sensitivity in vitro. Cancer Res 1996;56:5351.
177. Rowinsky EK, Smith L, Chaturvedi P, et al. Pharmacokinetic and toxicologic interactions between the multidrug resistance reversal agent VX-710 and paclitaxel in cancer patients. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:2964.
178. Patnaik A, Oza AM, Warner E, et al. A phase I dose-finding and pharmacokinetic study of paclitaxel and carboplatin with oral PSC 833 in patients with advanced solid tumors. J ClinOncol 2000
(in press).
179. Cabral F, Wible L, Brenner S, Brinkley BR. Taxol-requiring mutants of Chinese hamster ovary cells with impaired mitotic spindle activity. J Cell Biol 1983;97:30.
180. Kavallaris M, Kuo DYS, Burkhart CA, et al. Taxol-resistant ovarian tumors are associated with altered expression of specific beta-tubulin isotypes. J Clin Invest 1997;100:1282.
181. Haber M, Burkhart CA, Regl DL, et al. Altered expression of Mb2, the class II b-tubulin isotype, in a murine J774.2 cell line with a high level of taxol resistance. J Biol Chem 1995;270:31269.
182. Blade K, Menick DR, Cabral F. Overexpression of class I, II, or IVb beta-tubulin isotypes in CHO cells is insufficient to confer resistance to paclitaxel. J Cell Sci 1999;112:2213.
183. Kavallaris M, Burkhart CA, Horwitz SB. Antisense oligonucleotides to class III beta-tubulin sensitize drug resistant cells to Taxol. Br J Cancer 1999;80:1020.
184. Dumontet C, Jaffrezou JP, Tsuchiya E, et al. Resistance to microtubule-targeted cytotoxins in a K562 leukemia cell variant associated with altered tubulin expression and polymerization. Elec J
Oncol 1998;2:44.
185. Giannakakou P, Sackett DL, Kang YK, et al. Paclitaxel-resistant human ovarian cancer cells have mutant beta-tubulins that exhibit impaired paclitaxel-driven polymerization. J Biol Chem
1997;272:17118.
186. Monzo M, Rosell R, Sánchez JJ, et al. Paclitaxel resistance in nonsmall cell lung cancer associated with beta tubulin gene mutations. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1786.
187. Liu Q-Y, Stein CA. Taxol and estramustine-induced modulation of human prostate cancer cell apoptosis via alteration in bcl-x L and bax expression. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:2039.
188. Tang C, Willingham MC, Reed JC, et al. High levels of p26BCL-2 oncoprotein related Taxol-induced apoptosis in human pre-B leukemia cells. Leukemia 1994;8:1960.
189. Murphy M, Hinmann A, Levine AJ. Wild-type p53 negatively regulates the expression of a microtubule-associated protein. Genes Dev 1996;10:2971.
190. Zhang CC, Yang JM, White E, et al. The role of MAP4 expression in the sensitivity to paclitaxel and resistance to vinca alkaloids in p53 mutant cells. Oncogene 1998;16:1617.
191. Woods CM, Zhu J, McQueney PA, et al. Taxol-induced mitotic block triggers rapid onset of a p53-independent apoptotic pathway. Mol Med 1995;1:506.
192. Blagosklonny MV, Schulte TW, Nguyen P, et al. Taxol-induction of p21 WAF1 and p53 requires c-raf-1. Cancer Res 1995;55:4623.
193. Tisher RB, Lamppu DM, Park S, et al. Microtubule-active drugs Taxol, vinblastine, and nocodazole increase the level of transcriptionally active p53. Cancer Res 1995;55:6021.
194. Srivastava RK, Srivastava AR, Korsmeyer SJ, et al. Involvement of microtubules in the regulation of Bcl2 phosphorylation and apoptosis through cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase. Mol Cell
Biol 1998;18:3509.
195. Haldar S, Basu A, Croce CM. Bcl-2 is the guardian of microtubule integrity. Cancer Res 1997;57:229.
196. Van Asperen J, van Tellingen O, van der Valk M, et al. Enhanced oral absorption and decreased elimination of paclitaxel in mice cotreated with cyclosporin A. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:2293.
197. Meerum Terwogt JM, Malingre MM, Beokmem JH, et al. Co-administration of oral cyclosporin enables therapy with paclitaxel. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:3379.
198. Rowinsky EK. Pharmacology and metabolism. In: McGuire WG, Rowinsky EK, eds. Paclitaxel incancer treatment. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1995:91.
199. Huizing MT, Keung ACF, Rosing H, et al. Pharmacokinetics of paclitaxel and metabolites in a randomized comparative study in platinum-pretreated ovarian cancer patients. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:2127.
200. Gianni L, Kearns C, Gianni A. et al. Nonlinear pharmacokinetics and metabolism of paclitaxel and its pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic relationships in humans. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:180.
201. Sonnichsen D, Hurwitz C, Pratt C, Relling MV. Saturable pharmacokinetics and paclitaxel pharmacodynamics in children with solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:532.
202. Van Tellingen O, Huizing MT, Panday VR, et al. Cremophor EL causes (pseudo) nonlinear pharmacokinetics of paclitaxel in patients. Br J Cancer 1999;81:330.
203. Ohtsu T, Sasaki Y, Tamura T, et al. Clinical pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of paclitaxel: a 3-hour infusion versus a 24-hour infusion. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:599.
204. Lesser G, Grossman SA, Eller S, Rowinsky EK. The neural and extra-neural distribution of systemically administered [ 3H]paclitaxel in rats: a quantitative autoradiographic study. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol 1995;34:173.
205. Glantz MJ, Choy H, Kearns CM, et al. Paclitaxel disposition in plasma and central nervous systems of humans and rats with brain tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1077.
206. Monsarrat B, Alvinerie P, Dubois J, et al. Hepatic metabolism and biliary clearance of taxol in rats and humans. Monograph Natl Cancer Inst 1993;15:39.
207. Cresteil T, Monsarrat B, Alvinerie P, et al. Taxol metabolism by human liver microsomes: identification of cytochrome P450 isoenzymes involved in its biotransformation. Cancer Res
1994;54:386.
208. Walle T, Walle UK, Kumar GN, Bhalla KN. Taxol metabolism and disposition in cancer patients. DrugMetab Dispos 1995;23:506.
209. Harris JW, Rahman A, Kim B-R, Guengerich P, Collins JM. Metabolism of taxol by human hepatic microsomes and liver slices: participation of cytochrome P450 3A4 and an unknown P450
enzyme. Cancer Res 1994:15:4026.
210. Kerns CM, Gianni L, Egorin M. Paclitaxel pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Semin Oncol 1995;22:16.
211. Rowinsky EK, Bonomi P, Jiroutek M, et al. Paclitaxel steady-state plasma concentration as a determinant of disease outcome and toxicity in lung cancer patients treated with paclitaxel and
cisplatin. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:767.
212. Bruno R, Sanderink GJ. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of Taxotere (docetaxel). In: Workman P, Graham MA, eds. Cancer surveys, vol 17: pharmacokinetics and cancer chemotherapy.
New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1993.
213. Clarke SJ, Rivory LP. Clinical pharmacokinetics of docetaxel. Clin Pharmacokinet 1999;36:99.
214. Bruno R, Hille D, Riva A, et al. Population pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamics of docetaxel in phase II studies in patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:186.
215. Baille P, Bruno R, Schellens JHM, et al. Optimal sampling strategies for Bayesian estimation of docetaxel (Taxotere) clearance. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:1535.
216. McLeod HL, Kearns CM, Kuhn JG, Bruno R. Evaluation of the linearity of docetaxel pharmacokinetics. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1998;42:155.
217. Marland M, Gaillard C, Sanderink G, et al. Kinetics, distribution, metabolism and excretion of radiolabeled Taxotere ( 14 C-RPR 56976) in mice and dogs. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res
1993;34:393(abst).
218. Sparreboom A, Van Tellingen O, Scherrenburg EJ, et al. Isolation, purification and biological activity of major docetaxel metabolites from human feces. Drug Metab Dispos 1996;24:655.
219. Royer I, Bonsarrat B, Sonnier M, Wright M, Cresteil T. Metabolism of docetaxel by human cytochromes P450: interactions with paclitaxel and other antineoplastic agents. Cancer Res
1996;56:58.
220. Shou M, Martinet M, Korzekwa KR, et al. Role of cytochrome P450 3A4 and 3A5 in the metabolism of taxotere and its derivatives: enzyme specificity, interindividual distribution and metabolic
contribution in human liver. Pharmacogenetics 1998;8:391.
221. Rowinsky EK, Gilbert M, McGuire WP, et al. Sequences of taxol and cisplatin: a phase I and pharmacologic study. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1692.
222. Rowinsky EK, Citardi M, Noe DA, Donehower RC. Sequence-dependent cytotoxicity between cisplatin and the antimicrotubule agents taxol and vincristine. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
1993;119:737.
223. Kearns CM, Egorin MJ. Considerations regarding the less-than-expected thrombocytopenia encountered with combination paclitaxel/carboplatin chemotherapy. Semin Oncol 1997;24[Suppl
2]:S2.
224. Belani CP, Kearns CM, Zuhowski EG, et al. Phase I trial, including pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic correlations, of combination paclitaxel and carboplatin in patients with metastatic
non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:676.
225. Holmes FA, Madden T, Newman RA, et al. Sequence-dependent alteration of doxorubicin pharmacokinetics by paclitaxel in a phase I study of paclitaxel and doxorubicin in patients with
metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2713.
226. Gianni L, Vigano L, Locatelli A, et al. Human pharmacokinetic characterization and in vitro study of the interactions between doxorubicin and paclitaxel in patients with breast cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1997;15:1906.
227. Gianni L, Munzone E, Capri G, et al. Paclitaxel by 3-hour infusion in combination with bolus doxorubicin in women with untreated metastatic breast cancer: high antitumor efficacy and cardiac
effects in a dose- finding and sequence-finding study. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2688.
228. Gennari A, Salvadori B, Donati S, et al. Cardiotoxicity of epirubicin/paclitaxel-containing regimens: role of cardiac risk factors. J Clin Oncol 1999;11:3596.
229. Webster LK, Cosson EJ, Stokes KH, Millward MJ. Effect of the paclitaxel vehicle, Cremophor EL, on the pharmacokinetics of doxorubicin and doxorubicinol in mice. Br J Cancer 1996;73:522.
230. Kennedy MJ, Zahurak ML, Donehower RC, et al. Phase I and pharmacologic study of sequences of paclitaxel and cyclophosphamide supported by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in
women with previously treated metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;14:783.
231. Sarvada N, Ishikawa T, Fukase Y, et al. Induction of thymidine phosphorylase activity and enhancement of capecitabine efficacy by taxol/taxotere in human cancer xenografts. Clin Cancer Res
1998;4:1013.
232. Fettel MR, Grossman SA, Fisher J, et al. Pre-irradiation paclitaxel in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM): efficacy, pharmacology, and drug interactions. J ClinOncol 1997;15:3121.
233. Prados MD, Schold SC, Spence AM, et al. Phase II study of paclitaxel in patients with recurrent malignant glioma. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2316.
234. Monsarrat B, Chatelut E, Royer I, et al. Modification of paclitaxel metabolism in a cancer patient by induction of cytochrome P450 3A4. Drug Metab Dispos 1998;26:229.
235. Desai PB, Duan JZ, Zhu YW, Kouzi S. Human liver microsomal metabolism of paclitaxel and drug interactions. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet 1998;23:417.
236. Slichenmyer W, McGuire W, Donehower R, Chen T-L, Rowinsky EK. Pretreatment H2 receptor antagonists that differ in P450 modulation activity: comparative effects on paclitaxel clearance
rates. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1995;36:227.
237. Eisenhower E, ten Bokkel Huinink W, Swenerton KD, et al. European-Canadian randomized trial of taxol in relapsed ovarian cancer: high vs low dose and long vs. short infusion. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:2654.
238. Rowinsky EK. The taxanes: dosing and scheduling considerations. Oncology 1997; 11[Suppl 2]:1.
239. Rowinsky EK, Eisenhauer EA, Chaudhry V, Arbuck SA, Donehower RC. Clinical toxicities encountered with taxol. Semin Oncol 1993;20[Suppl 3]:1.
240. Weiss R, Donehower RC, Wiernik PH, et al. Hypersensitivity reactions from taxol. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1263.
241. Peereboom D, Donehower RC, Eisenhauer EA, et al. Successful retreatment with taxol after major hypersensitivity reactions. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:885.
242. Olson JK, Sood AK, Sorosky JI, Anderson B, Buller RE. Taxol hypersensitivity: rapid retreatment is safe and cost effective. Gynecol Oncol 1998;68:25.
243. Szebeni J, Muggia FM, Alving CR. Complement activation by Cremophor EL as a possible contributor to hypersensitivity to paclitaxel: an in vitro study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90;300.
244. Rowinsky EK, Chaudhry V, Cornblath DR, Donehower RC. The neurotoxicity of taxol. Monogr NatlCancer Inst 1993;15:107.

245. Chaudhry V, Rowinsky EK, Sartorious SE, Donehower RC, Cornblath DR. Peripheral neuropathy from taxol and cisplatin combination chemotherapy: clinical and electrophysiological studies.
Ann Neurol 1994;35:490.
246. Gelmon K, Eisenhauer E, Bryce C, et al. Randomized phase II study of high-dose paclitaxel with or without amifostine in patients with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3038.
247. Capri G, Munzone E, Tarenzi E, Fulgaro F, Gianni L. Optic nerve disturbances: a new form of paclitaxel neurotoxicity. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1099.
248. Hofstra LS, de Vries EG, Willemse PH. Ophthalmic toxicity following paclitaxel infusion. Ann Oncol 1997;8:1053.
249. Nieto Y, Cagnoni PJ, Bearman SI, Shpall EJ. Acute encephalopathy: a new toxicity associated with high-dose paclitaxel. Clin Cancer Res 1999:5:501.
250. Rowinsky EK, McGuire WP, Guarnieri T, Christian MA, Donehower RC. Cardiac disturbances during the administration of taxol. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1704.
251. Arbuck SG, Strauss H, Rowinsky EK, et al. A reassessment of the cardiac toxicity associated with taxol. Monogr Natl Cancer Inst 1993;15:117.
252. Markman M, Kennedy A, Webser K, et al. Paclitaxel administration to gynecologic cancer patients with major cardiac risk factors. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3483.
253. Sparano JA, Speyer J, Gradishar WJ, et al. Phase I trial of escalating doses of paclitaxel plus doxorubicin and dexrazoxane in patients with advanced breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:880.
254. Della Torre P, Imondi AR, Bernardi C, Podesta A, et al. Cardioprotection by dexrazoxane in rats treated with doxorubicin and paclitaxel. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1999;44:138.
255. Jeriah S, Keegan P. Cardiotoxicity associated with paclitaxel/trastuzumab combination chemotherapy. JClin Oncol 1999;17:1647.
256. Rowinsky EK, Burke PJ, Karp JE, et al. Phase I and pharmacodynamic study of taxol in refractory adult acute leukemia. Cancer Res 1989;49:4640.
257. Wilson WH, Berg S, Bryant G, et al. Paclitaxel in doxorubicin-refractory or mitoxantrone-refractory breast cancer: a phase I/II trial of 96 hour infusion. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1621.
258. Pestalozzi BC, Sotos GA, Choyke PL, et al. Typhlitis resulting from treatment with taxol and doxorubicin in patients with metastatic breast cancer. Cancer 1993;71:1797.
259. Seewaldt VL, Cain JM, Goff BA, et al. A retrospective review of paclitaxel-associated gastrointestinal necrosis in patients with epithelial ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1997;67:137.
260. Feenstra J, Vermeer RJ, Stricker BH. Fatal hepatic coma attributed to paclitaxel. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;16;582.
261. Hoff PM, Valero V, Homes FA, Whealin Hudis C, Hortobagyi GN. Paclitaxel-induced pancreatitis: a case report. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:91.
262. Ramanathan RK, Belani CP. Transient pulmonary infiltrates: a hypersensitivity reaction to paclitaxel. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:278.
263. Ayoub JP, North L, Greer J, Cabanillas F, Younes A. Pulmonary changes in patients with lymphoma who receive paclitaxel. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2476.
264. Luftner D, Flath B, Akrivakis C, et al. Dose-intensified weekly paclitaxel induces multiple nail disorders. Ann Oncol 1998;9:1139.
265. Schrijvers D, Wanders J, Dirix L, et al. Coping with toxicities of docetaxel (Taxotere). Ann Oncol 1993;4:610.
266. Semb KA, Aamdal S, Oian P. Capillary protein leak syndrome appears to explain fluid retention in cancer patients who receive docetaxel treatment. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3426.
267. Piccart MJ, Klijn J, Paridaens R, et al. Corticosteroids significantly delay the onset of docetaxel-induced fluid retention: final results of a randomized study of the European Organization for
Research and Treatment of Cancer, Investigational Drug Branch for Breast Cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:149.
268. Zimmerman GC, Keeling JH, Barris HA, et al. Acute cutaneous reactions to docetaxel, a new chemotherapeutic agent. Arch Dermatol 1995;131:202.
269. Vukeljia SJ, Baker WJ, Burris HA III, Keeling JH, Von Hoff DD. Pyridoxine therapy for palmar-plantar erythrodysesthesia associated with Taxotere. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1432.
270. Zimmerman GC, Keeling JH, Lowry M, et al. Prevention of docetaxel-induced erythrodysesthesia with local hypothermia. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:557.
271. New PZ, Jackson CE, Rinaldi D, Burris H, Barohn RJ. Peripheral neurotoxicity secondary to docetaxel. Neurology 1996;46:108.
272. Hilkens PH, Verweij J, Stoter G, et al. Peripheral neurotoxicity induced by docetaxel. Neurology 1996;46:104.
273. Frances P, Schneider J, Hann L, et al. Phase II trial of docetaxel in patients with platinum-refractory advanced ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2201.
274. Hainsworth JD, Burris HA, Greco FA. Weekly administration of docetaxel (Taxotere): summary of clinical data. Semin Oncol 1999;26[Suppl 10]:19.
275. Smith RE, Brown AM, Mamounas EP, et al. Randomized trial of 3-hour versus 24-hour infusion of high-dose paclitaxel in patients with metastatic or locally advanced breast cancer: National
Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project Protocol B-26. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3403.
276. Seidman AD, Hochhauser D, Gollub M, et al. Ninety-six-hour paclitaxel infusion after progression during short taxane exposure: a phase II pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic study in
metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1877.
277. Markman M, Rose PG, Jones E, et al. Ninety-six-hour infusional paclitaxel as salvage therapy of ovarian cancer patients previously failing treatment with 3-hour or 24-hour paclitaxel infusion. J
Clin Oncol 1998;16:1849.
278. Holmes FA, Valero V, Buzdar AU, et al. Final results: randomized phase III trial of paclitaxel by 3-hr versus 96-hr infusion in patients with metastatic breast cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:110a(abst).
279. Seidman AD, Hudis CA, Albanel J, et al. Dose-dense therapy with weekly 1-hour paclitaxel infusions in the treatment of metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3353.
280. Greco FA, Thomas M, Hainsworth JD. One-hour paclitaxel infusions: review of the safety and efficacy. Cancer Sci Am 1999;5:179.
281. Winer E, Berry D, Duggan D, et al. Failure of higher dose paclitaxel to improve outcome in patients with metastatic breast cancerresults from CALGB 9342. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1998;17:101a(abst).
282. Francis P, Rowinsky E, Schneider J, et al. Phase I feasibility and pharmacologic study of intraperitoneal paclitaxel: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J ClinOncol 1995;13:2961.
283. Markman M, Brady MF, Spirtos NM, Hanjani P, Rubin SC. Phase II trial of intraperitoneal paclitaxel in carcinoma of the ovary, tube, and peritoneum: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J
Clin Oncol 1998;16:2620.
284. Bookman MA, Kloth DD, Kover PE, Smolinski S, Ozols RF. Short-course intravenous prophylaxis for paclitaxel-related hypersensitivity reactions. Ann Oncol 1997;8:611.
285. Rosenberg P, Andersson H, Boman K, et al. A randomized multicenter study of single agent paclitaxel (Taxol) given weekly versus every three weeks to patients with ovarian cancer previously
treated with platinum therapy. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:368a(abst).
286. Venock AP, Egorin MJ, Rosner GL, et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic trial of paclitaxel in patients with hepatic dysfunction. Cancer and leukemia group B 9264. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1811.
287. Baker SD, Ravdin P, Aylesworth, C, et al. A phase I and pharmacokinetic study of docetaxel in cancer patients with liver dysfunction due to malignancies. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1998;17:192(abst).
288. Woo MH, Gregornik D, Shearer PD, Meyer WH, Relling MV. Pharmacokinetics of paclitaxel in an anephric patient. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1999;43:92.
289. Salminen E, Bergman M, Huhtala S, et al. Docetaxel: standard recommended dose of 100 mg/m 2 is effective but not feasible for some metastatic breast cancer patients heavily pretreated with
chemotherapy-A phase II single-center study. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1127.
290. Fex H, Hogberg B, Konyves I. Estramustine phosphatehistorical overview. Urology 1984;23:4.
291. Forsberg JG, Hoisaeter PA. Effects of hormone-cytostatic complexes on the rat ventral prostate in vivo and in vitro. Vitam Horm 1975;33:137.
292. Forsgren B, Bjork P, Carlstrom K, et al. Purification and distribution of a major protein in rat prostate that binds estramustine, a nitrogen mustard derivative of estradiol-17 beta. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1979;76:3149.
293. Lindberg B. Treatment of rapidly progressing prostatic carcinoma with estracyt. J Urol 1972;108:303.
294. Nilsson T, Muntzing J. Initial clinical studies with estramustine phosphate. Urology 1984;23:49.
295. Hartley-Asp B. Estramustine-induced mitotic arrest in two human prostatic carcinoma cell lines DU 145 and PC-3. Prostate 1984;5:93.
296. Kanje M, Deinum J, Wallin M, et al. Effect of estramustine phosphate on the assembly of isolated bovine brain microtubules and fast axonal transport in the frog sciatic nerve. Cancer Res
1985;45:2234.
297. Stearns ME, Tew KD. Antimicrotubule effects of estramustine, an antiprostatic tumor drug. Cancer Res 1985;45:3891.
298. Stearns ME, Wang M, Tew KD, Binder LI. Estramustine binds a MAP-1-like protein to inhibit microtubule assembly in vitro and disrupt microtubule organization in DU 145 cells. J Cell Biol
1988;107:2647.
299. Stearns ME, Tew KD. Estramustine binds MAP-2 to inhibit microtubule assembly in vitro. J Cell Sci 1988;89:331.
300. Panda D, Miller HP, Islam K, Wilson L. Stabilization of microtubule dynamics by estramustine by binding to a novel site in tubulin: a possible mechanistic basis for its antitumor action. Proc Natl
AcadSci USA 1997;94:10560.
301. Laing N, Dahllof B, Hartley-Asp B, Ranganathan S, Tew KD. Interaction of estramustine with tubulin isotypes. Biochemistry 1997;36:871.
302. Friden B, Wallin M. Dependency of microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) for tubulin stability and assembly: use of estramustine phosphate in the study of microtubules. Mol Cell Biol
1991;105:149.
303. Dahllof B, Billstrom A, Cabral F, Hartley-Asp B. Estramustine depolymerizes microtubules by binding to tubulin. Cancer Res 1993;53:4573.
304. Walz PH, Bjork P, Gunnarsson PO, Edman K, Hartley-Asp B. Differential uptake of estramustine phosphate metabolites and its correlation with the levels of estramustine binding protein in
prostate tumor tissue. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:2079.
305. Eklov S, Mahdy E, Wester K, et al. Estramustine-binding protein (EMBP) content in four different cell lines and its correlation to estramustine induced metaphase arrest. Anticancer Res
1996;16:1819.
306. Yoshida D, Cornell-Bell A, Piepmeier JM. Selective antimitotic effects of estramustine correlate with its antimicrotubule properties on glioblastoma and astrocytes. Neurosurgery 1994;34:863.
307. Bjork P, Borg A, Ferno M, Nilsson S. Expression and partial characterization of estramustine-binding protein (EMBP) in human breast cancer and malignant melanoma. Anticancer Res
1991;11:1173.
308. Johansson M, Bergenheim AT, D'Argy R, et al. Distribution of estramustine in the BT4C rat glioma model. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1998;41:317.
309. Vallbo C, Bergenheim AT, Bergstrom P, Gunnarsson PO, Henriksson R. Apoptotic tumor cell death induced by estramustine in patients with malignant glioma. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:87.
310. Yoshida D, Piepmeier J, Weinstein M. Estramustine sensitizes human glioblastoma cells to irradiation. Cancer Res 1994;54:1415.
311. Bergenheim AT, Zackrisson B, Elfverson J, Roos G, Henriksson R. Radiosensitizing effect of estramustine in malignant glioma in vitro and in vivo. J Neurooncol 1995;23:191.
312. Pienta KJ, Lehr JE. Inhibition of prostate cancer growth by estramustine and etoposide: evidence for interaction at the nuclear matrix. J Urol 1993;149:1622.
313. Stearns ME, Jenkins DP, Tew KD. Dansylated estramustine, a fluorescent probe for studies of estramustine uptake and identification of intracellular targets. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1985;82:8483.
314. Sandstrom PE, Jonsson O, Grankvist K, Henriksson R. Identification of potassium flux pathways and their role in the cytotoxicity of estramustine in human malignant glioma, prostatic
carcinoma and pulmonary carcinoma cell lines. Eur J Cancer 1994;30A:1822.
315. Ranganathan S, Dexter DW, Benetatos CA, et al. Increase of beta(III)- and beta(IVa)-tubulin isotopes in human prostate carcinoma cells as a result of estramustine resistance. CancerRes
1996;56:2584.
316. Ranganathan S, Dexter DW, Benetatos CA, Hudes GR. Cloning and sequencing of human betaIII-tubulin cDNA: induction of betaIII isotype in human prostate carcinoma cells by acute
exposure to antimicrotubule agents. Biochim Biophys Acta 1998;1395:237.
317. Sangrajrang S, Denoulet P, Millot G, et al. Estramustine resistance correlates with tau over-expression in human prostatic carcinoma cells. Int J Cancer 1998;77:626.
318. Yang CP, Shen HJ, Horwitz SB. Modulation of the function of P-glycoprotein by estramustine. J NatlCancer Inst 1994;86:723.
319. Speicher LA, Sheridan VR, Godwin AK, Tew KD. Resistance to the antimitotic drug estramustine is distinct from the multidrug resistant phenotype. Br J Cancer 1991;64:267.
320. Speicher LA, Barone LR, Chapman AE, et al. P-glycoprotein binding and modulation of the multidrug-resistant phenotype by estramustine. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:688.
321. Laing NM, Belinsky MG, Kruh GD, et al. Amplification of the ATP-binding cassette 2 transporter gene is functionally linked with enhanced efflux of estramustine in ovarian carcinoma cells.
Cancer Res 1998;58:1332.
322. Gunnarsson PO, Andersson SB, Johansson SA, Nilsson T, Plym-Forshell G. Pharmacokinetics of estramustine phosphate (Estracyt) in prostatic cancer patients. Eur J Clin Pharmacol
1984;26:113.
323. Forshell GP, Muntzing J, Ek A, Lindstedt E, Dencker H. The absorption, metabolism, and excretion of Estracyt (NSC 89199) in patients with prostatic cancer. Invest Urol 1976;14:128.
324. Dixon R, Brooks M, Gill G. Estramustine phosphate: plasma concentrations of its metabolites following oral administration to man, rat and dog. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol
1980;27:17.
325. Gunnarsson PO, Forshell GP. Clinical pharmacokinetics of estramustine phosphate. Urology 1984;23:22.
326. Gunnarsson PO, Davidsson T, Andersson SB, Backman C, Johansson SA. Impairment of estramustine phosphate absorption by concurrent intake of milk and food. Eur J Clin Pharmacol
1990;38:189.
327. Petrylak DP, Macarthur RB, O'Connor J, et al. Phase I trial of docetaxel with estramustine in androgen-independent prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:958.
328. Smith PH, Suciu S, Robinson MR, et al. A comparison of the effect of diethylstilbestrol with low dose estramustine phosphate in the treatment of advanced prostatic cancer: final analysis of a

phase III trial of the European Organization for Research on Treatment of Cancer. J Urol 1986;136:619.
329. Bruno D, Sevenet T, Morgat M, et al. Rhazinilam mimics the cellular effects of Taxol by different mechanisms of action. Cell Motil Cytoskelton 1994;28:317.
330. Kowalski RJ, Giannakakou P, Gunasekera SP, et al. The microtubule-stabilizing agent discodermolide competitively inhibits the binding of paclitaxel (Taxol) to tubulin polymers, enhances
tubulin nucleation reactions more potently than paclitaxel, and inhibits the growth of paclitaxel-resistant cells. Mol Pharmacol 1997;52:613.
331. Kowalski RJ, Giannakakou P, Hamel E. Activities of the microtubule-stabilizing agents epothilones A and B with purified tubulin and in cells resistant to paclitaxel (Taxol). J Biol Chem
1997;272:2534.
332. Chou TC, Zhang XG, Harris CR, et al. Desoxyepothilone B is curative against human tumor xenografts that are refractory to paclitaxel. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:15798.
333. Hamel E, Sackett DL, Vourloumis D, Nicolaou KC. The coral-derived natural products eleutherobin and sarcodictyins A and B: effects on the assembly of purified tubulin with and without
microtubule-associated proteins and binding at the polymer taxoid site. Biochemistry 1999;38:5490.
334. Mooberry SL, Tien G, Hernandez AH, et al. Laulimalide and isolaulimalide, new paclitaxel-like microtubule-stabilizing agents. Cancer Res 1999;59:653.
335. Ojima I, Chakravarty S, Inoue T, et al. A common pharmacophore for cytotoxic natural products that stablize microtubules. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:4256.
336. Panda D, DeLuca K, Williams D, Jordan MA, Wilson L. Antiproliferative mechanism of action of cryptophycin-52: kinetic stabilization of microtubule dynamics of high-affinity binding to
microtubule ends. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:9313.
337. Bai R, Schwartz, RE, Kepler JA, et al. Characterization of the interaction of cryptophycin 1 with tubulin: binding in the vinca domain, competitive inhibition of dolastatin 10 binding, and an
unusual aggregation reaction. Cancer Res 1996;56;4398.
338. Aherne GW, Hardcastle A, Valenti M, et al. Antitumour evaluation of dolastatins 10 and 15 and their measurements in plasma by radioimmunoassay. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1996;38:225.
339. Pitot HC, McElroy AE Jr, Reid JM, et al. Phase I trial of dolastatin-10 (NSC 376128) in patients with advanced solid tumors. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:525.
340. Villalona-Calero MA, Baker SD, Hammond L, et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic study of the water soluble dolastatin-15 analog LU103793 in patients with advanced solid malignancies. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:2770.
341. Hamel E. Natural products which interact with tubulins in the vinca domain: maytansine, rhizoxin, phomopsin A, dolastatin 10-15 and halicondrin B. Pharmacol Ther 1992;55:31.
342. Shan B, Medina JC, Santha E, et al. Selective, covalent modification of beta-tubulin residue Cys-239 by T138067, an antitumor agent with in vivo efficacy against multidrugresistant tumors.
Proc NatlAcad Sci U S A 1999;96:5686.

SECTION 19.8 Miscellaneous Chemotherapeutic Agents
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 19.8
Miscellaneous Chemotherapeutic Agents
BRUCE D. CHESON
Homoharringtonine
Suramin
Clinical Pharmacology
Dose and Schedule
Toxicity
Bleomycin
Cellular Pharmacology
Clinical Pharmacology
Toxicity
L-Asparaginase

Clinical Pharmacology
Toxicities
Amifostine
Chemotherapy-Related Nephrotoxicity
Neurologic Toxicities and Ototoxicity
Neutropenia and Thrombocytopenia
Additional Observations
Radioprotection
Toxicities
Drug Administration
Myelodysplastic Syndromes
Recommendations for the Use of Amifostine
Chapter References

HOMOHARRINGTONINE
Homoharringtonine (HHT) and its congener, harringtonine, are cephalotaxine esters isolated from the evergreen tree Cephalotaxus fortunei Hook F, which is
distributed throughout southern and northeastern China. The two esters differ by only a single methylene group, and they have similar activity against murine
leukemia.1 The greater availability of HHT led to its further testing in the United States.
The primary action of HHT appears to be inhibition of protein synthesis, with degradation of polyribosomes, delayed inhibition of initiation of protein synthesis, and
inhibition of chain elongation by interference with peptide bond formation. 2 DNA effects may also be important, with a block in progression of cells from G 1 into S
phase and from G2 phase into M phase. 3 Prolonged drug exposure is necessary for maximal antileukemic effect in vitro. Preclinical toxicology identified toxicities of the
bone marrow, gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, and heart. 4,5
Radiolabeled HHT exhibits a triphasic plasma decay, with a terminal half-life of 65.3 hours and an apparent volume of distribution of 2.4 L/kg. 6 In early phase I
studies, HHT was administered as a daily 10- to 360-minute infusion for up to 10 days. 7 Dose-limiting cardiovascular toxicity with hypotension began 4 or more hours
after drug administration, which is presumed secondary to vasodilatation with a compensatory increase in cardiac output. Hypotension is ameliorated by interrupting
the infusion or by fluid administration, or both, and prolonging the duration of administration. The major dose-limiting toxicity with currently used infusion schedules is
myelosuppression.
Initial clinical studies with HHT conducted in China identified activity against acute myeloid leukemia and chronic-phase chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). 8
Clearing of central nervous system blasts occurred after intrathecal administration. Variable activity was observed in the initial series of phase II trials in U.S. pediatric
and adult patients with acute leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome. 8,9 and 10 In late chronic-phase CML, a continuous intravenous infusion of HHT, 2.5 mg/m 2/d, for 10
to 14 days each month induces complete hematologic remission in 72% of cases, with cytogenetic response in 31%. 11 HHT is being combined with interferon or
cytarabine in early chronic-phase CML. O'Brien et al. 12 reported that HHT followed by interferon did not achieve a higher cytogenetic response rate than previously
observed with HHT alone.
Nonmyelosuppressive toxicities have been minimal, including diarrhea, hyperglycemia, nausea and vomiting, tachycardia, chest pain, headache, and fatigue.

SURAMIN
Suramin is a polysulfonated napthylurea first used for the treatment of onchocerciasis and trypanosomiasis in the 1920s. Its use against parasites and discoid lupus
erythematosus was abandoned because of the availability of more effective drugs. Its inhibition of reverse transcriptase and other RNA polymerases led to trials in
patients with autoimmune deficiency syndrome. 13 However, initial clinical enthusiasm was not substantiated by additional study. 14,15
The precise mechanism of suramin's antitumor action is unknown. The drug binds nonspecifically to a wide variety of plasma proteins and enzymes. It inhibits the
binding and mitogenic action of many polypeptide autocrine growth factors, including platelet-derived growth factor, fibroblast growth factor, transforming growth
factor-a and -b, epidermal growth factor, insulin-like growth factor-1 and -2, interleukin-2, transferrin, and nerve growth factor. 16 It is capable of dissociating growth
factors from their receptors, with higher affinity to heparin binding growth factors. It interferes with glycosaminoglycan catabolism, leading to an accumulation in the
liver and blood of heparan sulfate and dermatan sulfate, which are thought to be related to cell proliferation. Suppression of bone resorption may contribute to the
decreased pain reported in patients with prostate cancer.
Suramin exhibits antitumor activity against a number of cell lines, notably growth factor–responsive tumors, but low doses induce proliferation in some cell lines. It
inhibits the growth of malignant, but not normal, prostate cells. Early clinical trials suggested activity against adrenal, renal, and other cancers. 16 Activity in prostate
cancer has led to phase III studies.
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
Suramin has limited absorption from the gastrointestinal tract. The intravenous route is recommended because of better bioavailability.
The original dosing schedule of 1 g weekly for 6 weeks resulted in plasma concentrations that fell over the first few hours after administration but gradually increased
over time, with increasing trough levels before each injection. 17 The pharmacokinetics were described by a two-compartment model, with an initial (distribution) half
life (t 1/2a) of 2 days and an elimination half life (t 1/2b) of 48 days (range, 44 to 54 days). Suramin is 99.7% protein bound, primarily to albumin, and may persist in the
blood for 3 months after administration, with no evidence of metabolism and 80% renal clearance. The total body clearance is only 0.41 mL/min, with little interpatient
variability. Suramin does not cross the blood–brain barrier. It may displace other highly protein-bound drugs.
DOSE AND SCHEDULE
The optimal schedule of administration is still being determined. 18,19,20,21,22,23 and 24 Earlier schedules used adaptive control feedback 25 in which the timing and
calculated dose were pharmacologically computed for individual patients to maintain plasma concentrations in the range of 200 to 300 µg/mL. Labor-intense

pharmacologic monitoring was used because of concern that the severe neurologic toxicity with suramin was directly correlated with high blood levels. More recently,
other pharmacokinetic correlations have been postulated, including time above a threshold concentration, total dose, and others. 26 The relative importance of free
drug concentration is unknown. However, several phase I studies have determined that concentrations in the 200 to 300 µg/mL range are better tolerated overall.
Phase I studies have demonstrated little pharmacokinetic variability, making complex adaptive control algorithms unnecessary. This observation has led to
investigation of a wide variety of schedules, including a 14-day continuous infusion, intermittent short infusions, and intermittent bolus administration. 20,27,28 and 29
Suramin has modest activity in patients with prostate cancer. 19,27,28,30,31 Combinations with other agents have been studied in prostate cancer and other solid tumors,
but without clear additive benefit. 32,33,34,35,36 and 37 The future of this drug is uncertain.
TOXICITY
The most serious toxic effect of suramin is a polyneuropathy, which may begin within several weeks of therapy and peaks in severity 3 to 6 months after the drug is
discontinued. It ranges from mild stocking-glove paresthesia to paralysis requiring mechanical ventilation, and it is an indication to discontinue treatment. 38,39 At 350
mg/m2/d by continuous infusion, a Guillain-Barré syndrome occurred in 11% of patients; the incidence increased to 40% with levels of more than 350 µg/mL . 38
Suramin may lead to a progressive, reversible myopathy; hyperesthesia of palms and soles; headache; and altered taste. Adrenal insufficiency is very common and
may be irreversible. All patients receive concurrent corticosteroids until normal adrenal function can be documented.
Infections are frequent with suramin therapy because the drug induces lymphocytotoxicity and myelosuppression and inhibits phagocytosis and bacterial killing, which
is compounded by the addition of hydrocortisone.
Other common toxicities include renal dysfunction, transaminase elevations, and coagulopathy. 40,41 Prophylactic vitamin K has been used to minimize the contribution
from other causes. Bleeding is managed by replacement of blood and plasma. Heparin can be given safely using careful monitoring. An increase in serum creatinine
or the development of a coagulopathy necessitates interruption of therapy. Other serious toxicities include supraventricular arrhythmias, especially atrial fibrillation,
pericardial effusions, and deep venous thromboses.
Rash has been reported, occasionally with desquamation or toxic epidermolysis as well as keratoacanthomas and superficial actinic keratoses. Vortex keratopathy,
which resolves after therapy, also has been reported. Metabolic consequences include hyponatremia, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, hypermagnesemia,
hypophosphatemia, hypouricemia, and elevations in amylase and lipase. Rash and renal dysfunction may not recur if the drug is resumed.

BLEOMYCIN
The bleomycins are a group of glycopeptides originally extracted from a strain of Streptomyces verticillus from culture broths obtained from the soil of a Japanese coal
mine.42 The most active agent was a mixture of peptides now known as bleomycin , with a molecular weight of 1200.
The primary action of bleomycin is to produce single- and double-strand DNA breaks, which result from the production of free radicals by an Fe(II)-bleomycin complex
intercalated between opposing strands of DNA. It is ineffective in producing strand breaks of native RNA or synthetic ribonucleotide polymers. Cells are most sensitive
to bleomycin during the G 2 and M phases and least sensitive in the G 1 phase.43 Noncycling cells may be more sensitive than cycling cells. The observation that cells
were killed during G 2 suggested an advantage for a continuous infusion, which was not supported by clinical trials.
CELLULAR PHARMACOLOGY
Bleomycin is taken up by cells slowly and inactivated by an aminohydrolase found in normal and malignant cells. 44 Hydrolase levels are higher in animal species
resistant to the pulmonary toxicity of bleomycin and is low in lung and skin, the two organs most susceptible to bleomycin toxicity. Levels in tumor cell lines do not
appear to correlate with drug resistance.
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
Using a 4- to 5-day continuous intravenous infusion, the steady-state concentration is approached approximately 12 hours after initiation of infusion and ranged from
0.132 to 0.312 mµ/mL. After an intravenous bolus of 15 U/m 2, peak plasma concentrations reach 1 to 10 mµ/mL, with a rapid two-phase disappearance from plasma
with a half-life of elimination of approximately 3 hours. Approximately two-thirds of excretion is renal, and the half-life increases rapidly in patients with a creatinine
clearance of less than 25 to 35 mL/min. There is increased pulmonary toxicity with renal insufficiency, but no formal guidelines for dose reduction have been
determined. Bleomycin is absorbed rapidly after intramuscular administration, resulting in peak plasma concentrations approximately one-third to one-half of those
obtained after rapid intravenous administration. One hour after intramuscular injection, maximum serum levels range from 0.13 to 0.35 mµ/ml, with no drug detectable
in the serum 24 hours after injection. Absorption after subcutaneous injection has not been clearly defined. Intracavitary administration of bleomycin achieves levels
10- to 22-fold higher than simultaneous plasma levels and is effective in the control of malignant effusions. 45,46,47,48 and 49 Approximately 45% of the intracavitary dose is
absorbed into systemic circulation. Bleomycin also has been applied topically. 50 No pharmacologic advantage to intraperitoneal administration has been reported.
TOXICITY
A test dose of 1 mg of bleomycin is generally administered before a weekly or twice-weekly dose of 5 to 15 U/m 2 because of the risk of hypersensitivity with urticaria,
periorbital edema, and bronchospasm. The dose-limiting toxicity of bleomycin is pulmonary fibrosis of uncertain pathogenesis, which occurs in 10% of patients and is
more common in patients older than 70 years, with doses of more than 400 U, or in those with a history of chest radiotherapy and in the postoperative
period.51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58 and 59 The onset is usually delayed, and the initial physical examination and chest x-ray may be normal. Eventually, rales, rhonchi, and pleural
friction rubs are noted, and abnormal pulmonary function, with decreased lung capacity and increased lung stiffness, is seen. Clinical parameters better predict
outcome than pulmonary function studies. Chest x-ray may reveal increased interstitial markings, patchy reticulonodular infiltrates, consolidation, or nodules
indistinguishable from metastatic lesions, which may cavitate. Biopsy findings are nonspecific. After the drug is discontinued, reversal may take months, and fibrosis
may be only partially reversible and may be fatal. A number of investigational approaches are being evaluated to prevent or reduce the severity of this
complication.54,55,60,61 and 62
Myelosuppression and immunosuppression are not prominent. Fevers occur in 20% to 50% of patients, occasionally with hyperpyrexia. Mucocutaneous toxicities are
common, with mucositis; alopecia; and hyperpigmentation, erythema, induration, hyperkeratosis, and peeling that may progress to ulceration. The digits, hands, joints,
and areas of prior radiation or surgery are most affected. Acute arthritis may occur.
L-ASPARAGINASE
The growth of malignant and normal cells depends on the availability of specific nutrients and cofactors required for protein synthesis. Some nutrients can be
synthesized within the cell, whereas others, such as essential amino acids, require exogenous sources. L-asparagine is a nonessential amino acid synthesized by the
transamination of L-aspartic acid by a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme L-asparagine synthetase. The ability to synthesize asparagine is notably lacking in
malignancies of lymphoid origin. In 1953, Kidd 63 first reported that the growth of transplantable lymphomas of rat and mouse was inhibited by guinea pig serum, and
subsequent experiments demonstrated that the responsible factor was L-asparaginase. Subsequent purification from Escherichia coli and Erwinia carotovora permitted
production of large quantities of the enzyme for clinical use. The purified bacterial enzyme has a molecular weight of 133,000 to 141,000 daltons and is composed of
four subunits, each with one active site. The enzymes are specific for the L-isomer. Asparaginase catalyzes the conversion of L-asparagine to aspartic acid and
ammonia. The enzyme does not enter cells, instead degrading circulating asparagine to aspartic acid, which cannot be converted to asparagine by the cancer cell. In
contrast, most normal cells can synthesize asparagine from aspartic acid by induction of asparagine synthetase. This metabolic difference is not absolute, as
demonstrated by the toxicity profile of the agent. Resistance occurs through increased expression of the asparagine synthetase gene, which is transcriptionally silent
in most tissues and leads to increased enzyme synthesis in response to a decrease in intracellular L-asparagine levels. 64 Resistance may also be mediated by the
formation of asparaginase antibodies that alter asparaginase pharmacokinetics.

CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
L-asparaginase is administered either intravenously or intramuscularly. The intramuscular route produces peak blood levels 50% lower than the intravenous route, but
the former may be less immunogenic and is more commonly used. Three preparations of L-asparaginase are in clinical use. The most widely used is derived from E

coli, and an Erwinia preparation is available for patients who develop hypersensitivity to the E coli– derived agent. The usual doses are 6000 IU/m 2 three times weekly
for 3 to 4 weeks, or daily doses of 5000 to 20,000 IU/m 2 for 10 to 20 days. The optimal dose and schedule are unknown. Intermittent schedules with less frequent
administration are associated with reduced efficacy and increased anaphylaxis. An E coli preparation modified by the covalent attachment of polyethylene glycol
(PEG) has a prolonged half-life, thus permitting lower doses and less frequent administration. 65 The approved dose of PEG-asparaginase is 2500 IU/m 2 every 14
days, either intravenously or intramuscularly.
L-asparaginase concentration in plasma is proportional to a total dose up to 200,000 IU/m

2

and falls with a primary half-life of 14 to 22 hours after administration.
Blood levels of the E coli enzyme are detectable for 1 to 2 weeks after a single dose, and concentrations of L-asparagine fall below 1 mmol within minutes of enzyme
injection and remain low for 7 to 10 days after completion of therapy. The half-life is independent of the dose administered, disease status, renal or hepatic function,
age, or gender. The pharmacokinetics of asparaginase depend on the preparation. 66,67 and 68 With E coli–derived enzyme, the t 1/2 (1.14 to 1.35 days) administered by
the intramuscular route is the same irrespective of dose (2500 or 25,000 IU/mL) or with repeated doses. Peak serum levels are reached in 24 to 48 hours and are no
longer detectable in serum by 10 to 14 days. Extremely low levels are found in the urine at 24 hours, suggesting clearance of L-asparaginase by mechanisms other
than urinary excretion. Cerebrospinal fluid levels disappear rapidly. The serum t 1/2 for Erwinia is 0.65 days, and enzyme was no longer detectable by 7 days. This
value is shorter than the E coli preparation, although similar schedules are often used. The serum t 1/2 of PEG-modified l-asparaginase as an initial dose was 5.73
days, which is significantly longer than after subsequent doses. 66
Patients who experience a hypersensitivity reaction to E coli asparaginase have a decreased t 1/2 subsequently with PEG asparaginase. 66,69 Serum L-asparaginase
activity is undetectable in the week after an anaphylactoid reaction. And even a “silent” anaphylactoid reaction to E coli may result in neutralizing antibodies and
reduced drug efficacy. 70
TOXICITIES
L-asparaginase has no effect on bone marrow function. Hypersensitivity is the most serious toxicity, and it occurs in fewer than 10% of patients. It is manifested by

urticaria, nausea, vomiting, and chills, and less often by a serum sickness–like reaction or by anaphylaxis with hypotension, laryngospasm, and cardiac arrest, which
is fatal in fewer than 1% of patients. Reactions generally occur during the second week of treatment or later, and they mandate a change to another preparation. The
risk of hypersensitivity is greater when the drug is used as a single agent than with concurrent immunosuppressive agents (steroids, 6-mercaptopurine), at doses
higher than 6000 IU/m2/d administered by the intravenous route and with repeated courses of treatment. Neither skin testing nor antibody levels have been sufficiently
predictive. The PEG formulation is the least immunogenic 71,72 and may be more cost-effective.73 The development of an allergic reaction does not appear to
compromise the efficacy of the agent. 74
Decreased protein synthesis leads to reduced albumin and serum lipoprotein concentrations. A reduction in vitamin K–dependent clotting factors, a fall in fibrinogen
levels, and decreased platelet aggregation to collagen may lead to bleeding. Decreases in antithrombin III, proteins C and S, and increased endogenous thrombin
generation are associated with venous thrombosis and embolism. 75,76,77,78,79,80 and 81 Other toxic effects include confusion, aphasia, stupor, or coma in 25% to 33% of
patients82,83; hyperlipidemia 84,85; and abnormal liver enzymes with fatty metamorphosis. L-asparaginase is contraindicated in patients with a history of pancreatitis
because of the risk of acute pancreatitis. 86

AMIFOSTINE
Amifostine is a phosphorylated aminothiol prodrug analogue of cysteamine. It was developed by the Walter Reed Army Medical Institute (thus the military code name
WR-2721) during the cold war as part of a classified research project to identify an agent that would protect military personnel from radiation in the event of nuclear
war. Amifostine was found to afford greater protection against radiation than more than 4000 other compounds screened. Nevertheless, the army terminated
development of this compound in 1988 because of its poor oral bioavailability and the prohibitive nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal cramps noted with the
oral formulation.
When administered intravenously, the pharmacokinetics (PK) of amifostine varies somewhat with dose. 87 The clearance from plasma is rapid (distribution and
elimination phases in humans of t 1/2a, less than 1 minute; t 1/2b, 8.8 minutes), with a plasma half-life of 1 minute and almost all drug cleared by the plasma within 10
minutes. Bioavailability from the subcutaneous route is high but variable. 87,88
Amifostine is dephosphorylated at the tissue level to its active metabolite, the free thiol WR-1065, by membrane-bound alkaline phosphatase. WR-1065 is rapidly
taken up by cells and is thought to be the major cytoprotective metabolite. WR-1065 protects normal cells by acting as a free radical scavenger and by hydrogen
donation to repair damaged target molecules. 89,90
Preclinical studies with amifostine suggested that the agent could protect normal tissues from radiation and chemotherapy toxicity without protecting
tumors.91,92,93,94,95,96 and 97 Phosphorylation of the aminothiol contributes substantially to the selective uptake of WR-1065 by normal kidneys, bone marrow, heart, and
salivary glands compared with tumor tissues. Several explanations have been postulated for this preferential uptake, such as that concentrations of alkaline
phosphatase are higher in normal tissues compared with malignant tissues. The hypovascular, hypoxic nature of tumors results in anaerobic metabolism and a low
interstitial pH, which are associated with a low rate of prodrug activation by alkaline phosphatase.
Separate phase I trials of amifostine were conducted in conjunction with radiotherapy or chemotherapy. A true maximum tolerated dose was not identified in either
setting, but the recommended dose ranges from 740 mg/m2 to 910 mg/m2.98,99,100 and 101 No clear therapeutic advantage to the higher doses has been
determined.100,102,103 Drug-related toxicity appears to correlate with the duration of the infusion. 104
CHEMOTHERAPY-RELATED NEPHROTOXICITY
Amifostine has been evaluated for its ability to prevent chemotherapy-related nephrotoxicity, especially that induced by cisplatin. 100,101 and 102,105 In the only phase III
trial, Kemp et al. 106 randomized 242 women with advanced ovarian cancer to six cycles of chemotherapy, with or without amifostine, 910 mg/m 2, before each cycle.
The severity of renal toxicity was reported to be lower in the group receiving amifostine. Fewer patients discontinued therapy on the amifostine arm because of
toxicity. The response rates and survival durations were comparable between the two arms. However, the doses of cisplatin used in this study are higher than the
dose currently recommended, and this regimen is less commonly used than other less nephrotoxic programs.
NEUROLOGIC TOXICITIES AND OTOTOXICITY
Several small phase II studies and one phase III trial suggest that amifostine may offer modest protection against the neurologic toxicities of cisplatin, but with no
effect on ototoxicity. 101,105,106
NEUTROPENIA AND THROMBOCYTOPENIA
Various phase I, II, and III trials suggest a myeloprotective effect from amifostine. Glover et al. 103 conducted a phase II trial of amifostine in combination with
cyclophosphamide with 21 patients used as their own controls; 90% had an improved white blood cell count with the second course of cyclophosphamide compared
with the first course. Whether these findings are clinically meaningful is questionable. 103,106,107 In a study conducted by the Cancer and Leukemia Group B, 108 patients
with solid tumors were treated with high-dose cyclophosphamide with amifostine alone or with amifostine and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. No

additional protection was noted with the combination.
Preliminary phase I data suggest less thrombocytopenia in patients treated with carboplatin and amifostine. 109 However, the aggregate data from subsequent studies
provide less support for clinically meaningful benefit. 108,110,111,112 and 113
ADDITIONAL OBSERVATIONS
Limited data suggest that amifostine may modulate the cardiotoxicity of doxorubicin and the pulmonary toxicity of bleomycin. 54,55,114
RADIOPROTECTION
Amifostine has been evaluated in combination with radiation therapy or combined modality treatment for patients with head and neck and lung
cancers.111,115,116,117,118,119,120,121,122,123 and 124 The suggestion has been made of a reduction in esophagitis in lung cancer patients and less xerostomia and loss of taste
with amifostine, but with no clear impact on mucositis or salivary gland function. 117,118 and 119 There is no clear radioprotective effect in patients with rectal cancer. 98,125
TOXICITIES
The major toxicities associated with amifostine include nausea and vomiting, hypotension, hypocalcemia, and allergic reactions. The onset of nausea and vomiting is
generally within 15 to 30 minutes of the start of the infusion, and they resolve spontaneously. Pretreatment with dexamethasone and a 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor
antagonist is recommended.
Hypotension is a potentially serious side effect. It is generally systolic, lasting 5 to 15 minutes, without central nervous system, renal, or cardiovascular consequences.
Administration issues that influence the frequency and severity of hypotension include patient hydration, infusion duration, position of patient, and antiemetic
pretreatment. Patients should not be receiving agents that potentiate the potential for hypotension, and the drug should not be administered to patients who cannot be
without antihypertensive medications for at least 24 hours. Dehydrated patients should not receive the drug until the problem has been corrected. Patients should be
hydrated before administration of amifostine. Patients should remain supine or reclining during amifostine therapy.
Hypocalcemia is clinically significant in approximately 1% of patients and can be managed with oral calcium carbonate and vitamin D. The drug has been used
successfully to treat hypercalcemia. 126
Allergic reactions occur in fewer than 1% of patients and are successfully treated with diphenhydramine.
DRUG ADMINISTRATION
Amifostine should be administered over 15 minutes, 5 to 30 minutes before cytotoxic chemotherapy. The patient should be well hydrated and in a reclining position,
with frequent blood pressure monitoring. The recommended dose with radiation therapy is 200 mg/m 2/d, as a slow intravenous push over 3 minutes, 15 to 30 minutes
before each radiation fraction. Bolus schedules have been studied as well. 127
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES
Amifostine stimulates hematopoiesis in animal models, and in in vitro studies it stimulates the formation of hematopoietic progenitors from myelodysplastic syndrome
bone marrow.128 In a phase I/II study, 129,130 the drug was administered at doses of 100, 200, or 400 mg/m 2 three times per week, or 740 mg/m2 weekly for 3 weeks.
Hematologic improvement was observed in 83% of patients with the thrice-weekly schedule, including either an increase in neutrophils or a reduction in red blood cell
transfusion requirements. More than 40% of patients had a rise in their platelet counts. Acceleration to acute myeloid leukemia was noted in several patients with
RAEB-T (refractory anemia with excess of blasts in transformation). In a subsequent multicenter trial, 131 there was single or multilineage improvement in 35%. A poor
response rate was reported using a continuous schedule of eight uninterrupted thrice-weekly doses of 300 to 450 mg/m 2.132 The role of this agent in myelodysplastic
syndrome is being elucidated.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE USE OF AMIFOSTINE
Based on a careful review of the data, the American Society of Clinical Oncology made the following recommendations regarding the use of amifostine 133:
It may be considered for the reduction of nephrotoxicity in patients receiving cisplatin-based chemotherapy.
Although it may be considered for the reduction of neutropenia in patients receiving alkylating agents, chemotherapy dose reduction or growth factor use should
be considered as an alternative to the use of amifostine.
Present data are insufficient to recommend the use of amifostine for protection against thrombocytopenia or the routine use of amifostine to prevent
cisplatin-associated neurotoxicity or ototoxicity. Similarly, the data were felt to be insufficient to support the use of amifostine for the prevention of
paclitaxel-associated neurotoxicity.
The use of amifostine may be considered to decrease the incidence of acute and late xerostomia in certain patients undergoing fractionated radiation therapy in
the head and neck region, although the present data are insufficient to recommend the use of amifostine to prevent radiation therapy–associated mucositis.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Powell RG, Weisleder D, Smith CR Jr, Rohwedder WK. Structures of harringtonine, isoharringtonine, and homoharringtonine. Tetrahedron Lett 1970;11:815.
2. Huang MT. Harringtonine, an inhibitor of initiation of protein biosynthesis. Mol Pharmacol 1975;11:511.
3. Baaske DM, Heinstein P. Cytotoxicity and cell cycle specificity of homoharringtonine. Antimocrob Agents Chemother 1977;12:298.
4. Hacker MP, Stewart JA, Newman RA, et al. Toxicologic studies of homoharringtonine in humans and rats. Proc AACR 1983;24:325.
5. O'Dwyer PJ, King SA, Hoth DF, Suffness M, Leyland-Jones B. Homoharringtonineperspectives on an active new natural product. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1563.
6. Savaraj N, Lu K, Dimery I, et al. Clinical pharmacology of homoharringtonine. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:1403.
7. Neidhart JA, Young DC, Kraut E, Howinstein B, Metz EN. Phase I trial of homoharringtonine administered by prolonged continuous infusion. Cancer Res 1986;46:967.
8. Grem JL, Cheson BD, King SA, Leyland-Jones B, Suffness M. Cephalotaxine esters: antileukemic advance or therapeutic failure? J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:1095.
9. Feldman E, Arlin Z, Ahmed T, et al. Homoharringtonine is safe and effective for patients with acute myelogenous leukemia. Leukemia 1992;6:1185.
10. Feldman E, Deiter KP, Ahmed T, Baskind P, Arlin ZA. Homoharringtonine in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and MDS evolving to acute myeloid leukemia. Leukemia
1996;10:40.
11. O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, Keating M, et al. Homoharringtonine therapy induces responses in patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia in late chronic phase. Blood 1995;86:3322.
12. O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, Koller C, et al. Sequential homoharringtonine and interferon-alpha in the treatment of early chronic phase chronic myelogenous leukemia. Blood 1999;93:4149.
13. De Clercq E. Suramin: a potent inhibitor of the reverse transcriptase of RNA tumor viruses. Cancer Lett 1979;8:9.
14. Broder S, Yarchoan R, Collins JM, et al. Effects of suramin on HTLV-III/LAV infection presenting as Kaposi's sarcoma or AIDS-related complex: clinical pharmacology and suppression of virus
replication in vivo. Lancet 1985;2:627.
15. Cheson BD, Levine AM, Mildvan D, et al. Suramin therapy in AIDS and related disorders. Report of the U.S. Suramin Working Group. JAMA 1987;258:1347.
16. Stein CA, LaRocca RV, Thomas R, McAtee N, Myers CE. Suramin: an anticancer drug with a unique mechanism of action. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:499.
17. Collins JM, Klecker RW Jr, Yarchoan R, et al. Clinical pharmacokinetics of suramin in patients with HTLV-III/LAV infection. J Clin Pharmacol 1986;26:22.
18. Vogelzang NJ, Small EJ, Halabi S, et al. A phase III trial of three different doses of suramin (SUR) in metastatic hormone refractory prostate cancer (HRPC): safety profile of CALGB 9480.
Proc ASCO 1998;17:347a(abst 1339).
19. Sinibaldi VJ, Long GS, Chaudry V, et al. Phase I and pharmacologic evaluation of a monthly, daily times five days (D), schedule (SCH) of suramin (S) in patients with hormone refractory
prostate cancer (HRPC). Proc ASCO 1998;17:218a(abst 841).
20. Reyno LM, Egorin MJ, Eisenberger MA, et al. Development and validation of a pharmacokinetically based fixed dosing scheme for suramin. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2187.
21. Kobayasi K, Vokes EE, Vogelzang NJ, et al. Phase I study of suramin given by intermittent infusion without adaptive control in patients with advanced cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2623.
22. Kobayashi K, Vokes EE, Vogelzang NJ, Janisch L, Ratain MJ. Suramin (SUR) without adaptive control: three different intermittent infusion (II) schedules (sched) are equally safe. Proc ASCO
1999;16:211a(abst 738).
23. Jodrell DI, Reyno LM, Sridhara R, et al. Suramin: development of a population pharmacokinetic model and its use with intermittent short infusions to control plasma drug concentration in
patients with prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:166.
24. Eisenberger MA, Sinibaldi VJ, Reyno LM, et al. Phase I and clinical evaluation of a pharmacologically guided regimen of suramin in patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1995;13:2174.

25. Eisenberger MA, Sinibaldi VJ, Reyno LM, et al. Phase I and clinical evaluation of a pharmacologically guided regimen of suramin in patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1995;13:2174.
26. Bitton RJ, Figg WD, Venzon DJ, et al. Pharmacologic variables associated with the development of neurologic toxicity in patients treated with suramin. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2223.
27. Kelly WK, Curley T, Leibretz C, et al. Prospective evaluation of hydrocortisone and suramin in patients with androgen-independent prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2208.
28. Kelly WK, Scher HI, Mazumbdar M, et al. Suramin and hydrocortisone: determining drug efficacy in androgen-independent prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2214.
29. Kobayashi K, Vokes EE, Vogelzang NJ, et al. Phase I study of suramin given by intermittent infusion without adaptive control in patients with advanced cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2196.
30. Garcia-Schurmann JM, Schultze H, Haupt G, et al. Suramin treatment in hormone- and chemotherapy-refractory prostate cancer. Urology 1999;53:535.
31. Eisenberger M, Meyer M, Lenehan P, et al. Suramin induced decrease in PSA is associated with prolonged objective progression-free (OPFS) and overall survival in hormone-refractory
prostate cancer (HRPC). Proc ASCO 1999;18:314a(abst 1208).
32. Dawson NA, Figg WD, Cooper MR, et al. Phase II trial of suramin, leuprolide, and flutamide in previously untreated metastatic prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1470.
33. Dawson N, Figg WD, Brawley OW, et al. Phase II study of suramin plus aminoglutethimide in two cohorts of patients with androgen-independent prostate cancer: simultaneous antiandrogen
withdrawal and prior antiandrogen withdrawal. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:37.
34. Falcone A, Antonuzzo A, Danesi R, et al. Suramin in combination with weekly epirubicin for patients with advanced hormone-refractory prostate carcinoma. Cancer 1999;86:470.
35. Long GS, Sinibaldi VJ, O'Reilly S, et al. Phase I and pharmacologic study of suramin (S) and topotecan (T) in patients (PTS) with hormone refractory prostate cancer (HRPC). Proc ASCO
1998;17:247a(abst 948).
36. Miglietta L, Canobbio L, Granetto C, et al. Suramin/epidoxorubicin association in hormone-refractory prostate cancer: preliminary results of a pilot phase II study. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
1997;123:407.
37. Tu SM, Pagliaro LC, Banks ME, et al. Phase I study of suramin combined with doxorubicin in the treatment of androgen-independent prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:1193.
38. La Rocca RV, Cooper MR, Stein CA, et al. A pilot study of suramin in the treatment of progressive refractory follicular lymphomas. Ann Oncol 1992;3:571.
39. Bitton RJ, Figg WD, Venzon DJ, et al. Pharmacologic variables associated with the development of neurologic toxicity in patients treated with suramin. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2223.
40. Horne MK III, Stein CA, LaRocca RV, Myers CE. Circulating glycosaminoglycan anticoagulants associated with suramin treatment. Blood 1988;71:273.
41. Horne MK III, Wilson OJ, Cooper M, Gralnick HR, Myers CE. The effect of suramin on laboratory tests of coagulation. Thromb Haemost 1992;67:434.
42. Umezawa H, Maeda K, Takeuchi T, Okami Y. New antibiotics, bleomycin A and B. J Antibiot (Tokyo) 1966;19:200.
43. Barlogie B, Drewinko B, Schumann J, Freireich EJ. Pulse cytophotometric analysis of cell cycle perturbation with bleomycin in vitro. Cancer Res 1976;36:1182.
44. Yoshioka O, Amano N, Takahashi K, Matsuda A, Umezawa H. Intracellular fate and activity of bleomycin. In: Carter SK, Crooke ST, eds. Bleomycin : current status and new developments.
New York: Academic Press, 1978:35.
45. Emad A, Rezaian GR. Treatment of malignant pleural effusions with a combination of bleomycin and tetracycline. A comparison of bleomycin or tetracycline alone versus a combination of
bleomycin and tetracycline. Cancer 1996;78:2498.
46. Martinez-Moragon E, Aparicio J, Rogado MC, et al. Pleurodesis in malignant pleural effusions: a randomized study of tetracyclines versus bleomycin. Eur Respir J 1997;10:2380.
47. Moffett MJ, Ruckdeschel JC. Bleomycin and tetracycline in malignant pleural effusions: a review. Semin Oncol 1992;19[Suppl 2]:62.
48. Noppen M, Degreve J, Mignolet M, Vincken W. A prospective randomised study comparing the efficacy of talc slurry and bleomycin in the treatment of malignant pleural effusions. Acta Clin
Belg 1998;52:258.
49. Zimmer PW, Hill M, Casey K, Harvey E, Low DE. Prospective randomized trial of talc slurry vs bleomycin in pleurodesis for symptomatic malignant pleural effusions. Chest 1997; 112:430.
50. Epstein JB, Gorsky M, Wong FL, Millner A. Topical bleomycin for the treatment of dysplastic oral leukoplakia. Cancer 1998;83:629.
51. Blum RH, Carter SK, Agre K. A clinical review of bleomycina new antineoplastic agent. Cancer 1973;31:903.
52. Parvinen LM, Kilkku P, Makinen E, Liukko P, Gronroos M. Factors affecting the pulmonary toxicity of bleomycin. Acta Radiol Oncol 1983;22:417.
53. Bloor AJ, Seale JR, Marcus RE. Two cases of fatal pneumonitis complicating the treatment of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Clin Lab Haematol 1998;20:119.
54. Nici L, Santos-Moore A, Kuhn C, Calabresi P. Modulation of bleomycin-induced pulmonary toxicity in the hamster by the antioxidant amifostine. Cancer 1998;83:2008.
55. Nici L, Calabresi P. Amifostine modulation of bleomycin-induced lung injury in rodents. Semin Oncol 1999;26[Suppl 7]:28.
56. Sato E, Koyama S, Masubuchi T, et al. Bleomycin stimulates lung epithelial cells to release neutrophil and monocyte chemotactic activities. Am J Physiol 1999;276(Pt 1):L941.
57. Saxman SB, Nichols CR, Einhorn LH. Pulmonary toxicity in patients with advanced-stage germ cell tumors receiving bleomycin with and without granulocyte colony stimulating factor. Chest
1997;111:657.
58. Simpson AB, Paul J, Graham J, Kaye SB. Fatal bleomycin pulmonary toxicity in the west of Scotland 19911995: a review of patients with germ cell tumors. Br J Cancer 1998; 78:1061.
59. Takamizawa A, Koyama S, Sato E, et al. Bleomycin stimulates lung fibroblasts to release neutrophil and monocyte chemotactic activity. J Immunol 1999;162:6200.
60. Keane MP, Belperio JA, Moore TA, et al. Neutralization of the CXC chemokine, macrophage inflammatory protein-2, attenuates bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. J Immunol
1999;162:5511.
61. Tran PL, Weinbach J, Opolon P, et al. Prevention of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis after adenovirus-mediated transfer of the bacterial bleomycin resistance gene. J Clin Invest
1997;99:608.
62. Wang Q, Wang Y, Hyde DM, et al. Reduction of bleomycin induced lung fibrosis by transforming growth factor beta soluble receptors in hamsters. Thorax 1999;54:805.
63. Kidd JG. Regression of transplanted lymphomas induced in vivo by means of normal guinea pig serum. I. Course of transplanted cancers of various kinds given guinea pig serum, horse serum,
or rabbit serum. J Exp Med 1953;98:565.
64. Haskell CM, Canellos GP. L-asparaginase resistance in human leukemiaasparagine synthetase. Biochem Pharmacol 1969;18:2578.
65. Ho DH, Brown NS, Yen A, et al. Clinical pharmacology of polyethylene glycol- L-asparaginase. Drug Metab Dispos 1986;14:349.
66. Asselin BL, Whitin JC, Coppola DJ, et al. Comparative pharmacokinetic studies of three asparaginase preparations. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1780.
67. Boos J, Werber G, Ahlke E, et al. Monitoring of asparaginase activity and asparagine levels in children on different asparaginase preparations. Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:1544.
68. Boos J. Pharmacokinetics and drug monitoring of L-asparaginase treatment. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther 1997;35:96.
69. Kurtzberg J, Asselin B, Poplack D, et al. PEG- L-asparaginase (PEG-ASP) pharmacology in pediatric patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Proc ASCO 1994;13:144(abst 370).
70. Kurtzberg J, Asselin B, Poplack D, et al. Antibodies to asparaginase alter pharmacokinetics and decrease enzyme activity in patients on asparaginase therapy. Proc AACR 1993;34:304.
71. Koerholz D, Brueck M, Nuernberger W, et al. Chemical and immunological characteristics of four different L-asparaginase preparations. Eur J Haematol 1989;42:417.
72. Ettinger LJ, Kurtzberg J, Voute PA, Jurgens H, Halpern SL. An open-label, multicenter study of polyethylene glycol- L-asparaginase for the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Cancer
1995;75:1176.
73. Peters BG, Goeckner BJ, Ponzillo JJ, Velasquez WS, Wilson AL. Pegespargase versus asparaginase in adult ALL: a pharmacoeconomic assessment. Formulary 1995;30:388.
74. Larson RA, Fretzin MH, Dodge RK, Schiffer CA. Hypersensitivity reactions to L-asparaginase do not impact on the remission duration of adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemia
1998;12:660.
75. Homans AC, Ryback ME, Baglini RL, et al. Effect of L-asparaginase administration on coagulation and platelet function in children with leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:811.
76. Vigano'D'Angelo S, Gugliotta L, Mattioli Belmonte M, et al. L-asparaginase treatment reduces the anticoagulant potential of the protein C system without affecting vitamin Kdependent
carboxylation. Thromb Res 1990;59:985.
77. Mitchell L, Hoogendoorn H, Giles AR, Vegh P, Andrew M. Increased endogenous thrombin generation in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia: risk of thrombotic complications in
L-asparaginase-induced antithrombin III deficiency. Blood 1994;83:386.
78. Nowak-Gottl U, Ahlke E, Klosel K, Jurgens H, Boos J. Changes in coagulation and fibrinolysis in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia re-induction therapy using three different asparaginase
preparations. Eur J Pediatr 1997;156:848.
79. Oner AF, Gurgey A, Kirazli S, Okur H, Tunc B. Changes in hemostatic factors in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia receiving combined chemotherapy including high dose
methylprednisolone and L-asparaginase. Leuk Lymphoma 1999;33(34):361.
80. Alberts SR, Bretscher M, Wiltsie JC, et al. Thrombosis related to the use of L-asparaginase in adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a need to consider coagulation monitoring and clotting
factor replacement. Leuk Lymphoma 1999;32(56):489.
81. Nowak-Gottl U, Wermes C, Junker R, et al. Prospective evaluation of the thrombotic risk in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia carrying the MTHFR TT 677 genotype, the prothrombin
G20210A variant, and further prothrombotic risk factors. Blood 1999;93:1595.
82. Feinberg WM, Swenson MR. Cerebrovascular complications of L-asparaginase therapy. Neurology 1988;38:127.
83. Kingma A, Tamminga RY, Kamps WA, Le Coultre R, Saan RJ. Cerebrovascular complications of L-asparaginase therapy in children with leukemia: aphasia and other neuropsychological
deficits. Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1993;10:303.
84. Tozuka M, Yamauchi K, Midaka H, et al. Characterization of hypertriglyceridemia induced by L-asparaginase therapy for acute lymphoblastic leukemia and malignant lymphoma. Ann Clin Lab
Sci 1997;27:351.
85. Hoogerbrugge N, Jansen H, Hoogerbrugge PM. Transient hyperlipidemia during treatment of ALL with L-asparaginase is related to decreased lipoprotein lipase activity. Leukemia 1997;11:1377.
86. Sahu S, Saika S, Pai SK, Advant SH. L-asparaginase (Leunase) induced pancreatitis in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1998;15:533.
87. Shaw LM, Bonner HS, Schuchter L, Schiller J, Lieberman R. Pharmacokinetics of amifostine: effects of dose and method of administration. Semin Oncol 1999;26[Suppl 7]:34.
88. Shaw LM, Turrisi AT, Glover DJ, et al. Human pharmacokinetics of WR-2721. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1501.
89. DeNeve WJ, Everett CK, Suminski JE, et al. Influence of WR-2721 on DNA cross-linking by nitrogen mustard on normal mouse bone marrow and leukemia cells in vivo. Cancer Res
1988;48:6002.
90. Treskes M, Nijtmans LG, Fichtinger-Schepman AM, van der Vijgh WJ. Effects of the modulating agent WR2721 and its main metabolites on the formation and stability of cisplatin-DNA adducts
in vitro in comparison to the effects of thiosulphate and diethyldithiocarbamate. Biochem Pharmacol 1992;43:1013.
91. Yuhas JM, Storer JB. Differential chemoprotection of normal and malignant tissues. J Natl Cancer Inst 1969;42:331.
92. Yuhas JM. Differential protection of normal and malignant tissues against the cytotoxic effects of mechlorethamine. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:971.
93. Yuhas JM, Culo F. Selective inhibition of the nephrotoxicity of cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum (II) by WR-2721 without altering its antitumor properties. Cancer Treat Rep 1980;64:57.
94. Yuhas JM. Active versus passive absorption kinetics as the basis for selective protection of normal tissues by S-2-(3-aminopropylamino)-ethylphosphorothioic acid. Cancer Res 1980;40:1519.
95. Yuhas JM, Spellman JM, Culo F. The role of WR-2721 in radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy. Cancer Clin Trials 1980;3:211.
96. Yuhas JM, Spellman JM, Jordan SW, et al. Treatment of tumors with the combination of WR-2721 and cisdichlorodiammineplatinum. Br J Cancer 1980;42:574.
97. Grdina DJ, Hunter N, Kataoka Y, Murley JS, Milasz L. Chemopreventive doses of amifostine confers no cytoprotection to tumor nodules growing in the lungs of mice treated with
cyclophosphamide. Semin Oncol 1999;26[Suppl 7]:22.
98. Kligerman MM, Liu T, Liu Y, et al. Interim analysis of a randomized trial of radiation therapy of rectal cancer with/without WR-2721. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992; 22:799.
99. Blumberg AL, Nelson DF, Gramkowski M, et al. Clinical trials of WR-2721 with radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8(34):561.
100. Glover D, Glick J, Weiler C, Yuhas J, Kligerman MM. Phase I trials of WR-2721 and cis-platinum. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:1781.
101. Glover D, Glick JH, Weiler C, et al. Phase I/II trials of WR-2721 and cis-platinum. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1509.
102. Glover DJ, Glick JH, Weiler C, Fox K, Guerry D. WR-2721 and high dose cisplatin: an active combination in the treatment of metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:574.
103. Glover D, Glick JH, Weiler C, Hurowitz S, Kligerman MM. WR-2721 protects against the hematologic toxicity of cyclophosphamide: a controlled phase II trial. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:584.
104. Turrisi AT, Glover DJ, Hurwitz S, et al. Final report on phase I trial of WR-2721 [S-2-(3-aminopropylamino)ethylphosphorothiotic acid]. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:1389.
105. Mollman JE, Glover DJ, Hogan WM, Furman RE. Cisplatin neuropathy: risk factors, prognosis, and protection by WR-2721. Cancer 1988;61:2192.
106. Kemp G, Rose P, Lurain J, et al. Amifostine pretreatment for protection against cyclophosphamide-induced and cisplatin-induced toxicities: results of a randomized control trial in patients with
advanced ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:201.
107. Glick JH, Glover D, Weiler C, et al. Phase I controlled trials of WR-2721 and cyclophosphamide. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:1777.
108. Budman DR, Rosner GL, Lichtman SM, et al. Evaluation of amifostine as a chemoprotective agent in combination with cyclophosphamide and melograstim. Cancer Ther 1998;1:164.
109. Budd GT, Ganapathi R, Bauer L, et al. Phase I study of WR-2721 and carboplatin. Eur J Cancer 1993;29A:1122.

110. Shpall EJ, Stemmer SM, Hami L, et al. Amifostine (WR-2721) shortens the engraftment period of 4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide-purged bone marrow in breast cancer patients receiving
high-dose chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow support. Blood 1994;83:3132.
111. Betticher DC, Anderson H, Ranson M, et al. Carboplatin combined with amifostine, a bone marrow protectant, in the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer: a randomized phase II study. Br J
Cancer 1995;72:1551.
112. Budd GT, Ganapathi R, Adelstein DJ, et al. Randomized trial of carboplatin plus amifostine versus carboplatin alone in patients with advanced solid tumors. Cancer 1997; 80:1134.
113. Budd GT, Ganapathi R, Wood L, et al. Approaches to managing carboplatin-induced thrombocytopenia: focus on the role of amifostine. Semin Oncol 1999;26[Suppl 7]:41.
114. De Lana M, Catino A, Lorusso V, et al. Amifostine (AMF) protects against doxorubicin (D) toxicity with preservation of therapeutic activity in advanced breast cancer (ABC) patients. Proc ASCO
1998;17:137a(abst 521).
115. Brizel D, Sauer R, Wannenmacher M, et al. Randomized phase III trial of radiation amifostine with head and neck cancer. Proc ASCO 1998;17:386a(abst 1487).
116. Buntzel J, Kuttner K, Russell L, et al. Selective cytoprotection by amifostine in the treatment of head and neck cancer with simultaneous radiochemotherapy. Proc ASCO 1997;16: 393a(abst).
117. McDonald S, Meyerowitz C, Smudzin T, et al. Amifostine preserves the salivary gland function during irradiation of the head and neck. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A[Suppl 5]:415(abst).
118. Giglio R, Mickiewicz E, Pradier E, et al. Alternating chemotherapy + radiotherapy (RT) with amifostine (A) protection for head and neck cancer (HN). Early stop of a randomized trial. Proc
ASCO 1998;16:1369(abst).
119. Buntzel J, Glatzel M, Kuttner K, et al. Selective cytoprotection with amifostine in concurrent radiochemotherapy of head and neck cancer. Ann Oncol 1998;9:505.
120. Sauer R, Wannenmacher M, Wasserman T, et al. Randomized phase III trial of radiation amifostine in patients with head and neck cancer. Proc ASCO 1999;18:392a(abst 1516).
121. Anderson H, Mercer V, Russell L, Oster W, Thatcher N. A phase III randomized study of carboplatin and amifostine vs carboplatin and G-CSF in patients with inoperable nonsmall cell lung
cancer. Blood 1996;88[Suppl 1]:350a(abst 1387).
122. Schiller JH, Storer B, Berlin J, et al. Amifostine, cisplatin, and vinblastine in metastatic nonsmall cell lung cancer. A report of high response rates and prolonged survival. J Clin Oncol
1996;14:1913.
123. Tannehill SP, Mehta MP, Larson M, et al. Effect of amifostine on toxicities associated with sequential chemotherapy and radiation therapy for unresectable non-small-cell lung cancer. Results
of a phase II trial. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2850.
124. Fishman DA, Calhoun E, Golub R, et al. Cost-utility assessment of amifostine in first-line therapy for ovarian cancer. Proc ASCO 1998;17:417a(abst 1608).
125. Liu T, Liu Y, He S, et al. Use of radiation with or without WR-2721 in advanced rectal cancer. Cancer 1992;69:2820.
126. Glover DJ, Shaw L, Glick JH, et al. Treatment of hypercalcemia in parathyroid cancer with WR-2721, S-2-(3-aminopropylamino)ethyl-phosphorothioic acid. Ann Intern Med 1985;103:55.
127. Wagner W, Radmard A, Schonekaes KG. A new administration schedule for amifostine as a radioprotector in cancer therapy. Anticancer Res 1999;19(3B):2281.
128. List AF, Heaton R, Glinsmann-Gibson B, et al Amifostine stimulates formation of multipotent and erythroid bone marrow progenitors. Leukemia 1998;12:1596.
129. List AF, Heaton R, Glinsmann-Gibson B, Capizzi R. Amifostine stimulates formation of multipotent progenitors and generates macroscopic colonies in normal and myelodysplastic bone
marrow. Proc ASCO 1996;15:449(abst 1403).
130. List AF, Brasfield F, Heaton R, et al. Stimulation of hematopoiesis by amifostine in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome. Blood 1997;90:3364.
131. List AF, Holmes H, Vempaty H, Greenberg PL, Bennett JM. Phase II study of amifostine in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS): impact on hematopoiesis. Proc ASCO
1999;18:51a(abst 190).
132. Bowen DT, Denzlinger C, Brugger W, et al. Poor response rate to a continuous schedule of amifostine therapy for “low/intermediate risk” myelodysplastic patients. Br J Haematol 1998;103:785.
133. Hensley ML, Schucter LM, Lindley C, et al. American Society of Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice guidelines for the use of chemotherapy and radiotherapy protectants. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:3333.

SECTION 20.1 Interferons
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 20.1
Interferons
JOHN M. KIRKWOOD
Rationale for Investigation of Interferons: Direct Regulation of Cell Growth, Differentiation, Antigen Expression; Indirect Effects Mediated through Modulation of the Host Immune Response
Interferons of Type I: Interferon-a, -b, -t, and -w
Interferon-Binding Receptor of Type II: Interferon-g
Mechanisms Relevant to Antitumor Action
Direct Effects on Tumor Cell Proliferation and Enzyme and Signaling Pathways
Composite (Antigenic) Antitumor Mechanisms: Modulation of Melanoma-Associated Cell Surface Antigens
Indirect Immunomodulatory Effects
Role of Interferon-g as a Mediator of Clinical Effects of other Cytokines
Dendritic Cell Modulation
Clinical Evaluation
Toxicity and Pharmacokinetics of the Interferons
Pharmacology and Dosage
Antibodies
Clinical Efficacy of Interferons Administered Systematically
Regional Therapy with Interferon-a
Combinations
Adjuvant Trials of Interferon-a2 in Melanoma
Chapter References

RATIONALE FOR INVESTIGATION OF INTERFERONS: DIRECT REGULATION OF CELL GROWTH, DIFFERENTIATION, ANTIGEN
EXPRESSION; INDIRECT EFFECTS MEDIATED THROUGH MODULATION OF THE HOST IMMUNE RESPONSE
The interferons (IFNs) are a complex family of inducible natural host proteins that have been traced in phylogeny to prevertebrate species. The physical and chemical
immunologic and biologic differences among the IFNs have served as a basis for speciation of these molecules, long before the knowledge of intracellular signaling
pathways that have been more recently elucidated was known. 1,2 These intercellular pathways activated by the IFNs (signal transducers and activators of
transcription) 3,4 are triggered by a large number of signaling polypeptides, but are activated in different patterns by different signaling polypeptides, to induce precise
cellular responses in mammalian (as well as insect and slime mold) cells, demonstrating critical roles in different phases of cell biology. Disruption of the STAT genes
in the mouse has shown roles in viral/bacterial defense (STAT 1). 5,6 Early lethality has been reported for STAT 2 and 3 lesions, whereas disruption of TH1 has been
identified as a consequence of disruption of STAT 4, 7,8 and TH2 function has been assigned to STAT 6. 9,10 and 11 The role of IFN-induced gene regulation in many
diverse tissues is likely to account for the effects of IFNs on a variety of neoplastic, viral, and angiogenic conditions in which IFN therapeutic activity has been
clinically observed since the 1980s.
The IFNs have been empirically tested as therapies for a multitude of hematologic and solid neoplasms, demonstrating therapeutic benefits in more than a dozen
cancers, leading to regulatory approval in multiple countries across the world. This chapter reviews the biology and preclinical effects of the IFNs, discussing the
multiple mechanisms of potential relevance to cancer and the therapeutic advances that have been made with IFNs as single agents and combined with
chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and other biologic agents, including vaccines, particularly as these relate to the solid tumors.
INTERFERONS OF TYPE I: INTERFERON-a, -b, -t, AND -w
Human IFN-a comprises a complex array of subspecies, each of approximately 165 to 166 amino acids encoded by a superfamily of closely related genes located with
the IFN-a and -b genes on the short arm of human chromosome 9 that are variably modified by posttranslational glycosylation. 12,13and14 In the human, 14 nonallelic
IFN-a genes and four pseudogenes are clustered together with genes for IFN-a. A variable mixture of IFN-a species is induced in leukocytes and other host cells by a
range of stimuli classically including virus or nucleic acids. The biologic effects of the many subspecies are overlapping in large part, despite differences in relative
antiviral, antiproliferative, antigen-modulating, and immunomodulating effects to be discussed later in this chapter. 15,16
IFN-a and -b bind with high affinity (dissociation constant of 10 –10 to 10–12 mol/L) to a single receptor of 110 kD specified on chromosome 21, 17,18 ranging in density
from 100 to 10,000 receptors per cell. A range of cellular processes induced by IFNs follow the production of a new set of proteins, after binding and internalization.
Knowledge of the events that occur after binding of IFN to its receptor has advanced significantly. 1,19,20 and 21 A multimeric transcription activator ISGF3 is stimulated to
translocate to the nucleus, where it binds cis to the IFN response element of DNA and induces genes that make up the array of IFN-stimulated genes. 21,22,23,24and25 The
cytoplasmic and nuclear components of the transcription-activating factor ISGF3 associated with IFN-a are activated, such that ISGF3-g (the component of the
complex specifically recognizing the ISRE) and ISGF3-a (which contains three polypeptides activated specifically on phosphorylation) interact and translocate to the
nucleus without the requirement of protein synthesis to activate the IFN response element.
INTERFERON-BINDING RECEPTOR OF TYPE II: INTERFERON-g
IFN-g binds a receptor that is discrete from that bound by type I IFNs. Evidence for two classes of receptors, one with low (10 –9 mol/L) and one with high (10–11 mol/L)
affinity, has been reported. 26 The in vitro and in vivo immunomodulatory activity of IFN-g in experimental animals as well as the human has been one of the most
potent of all IFNs, 27 leading to expectations that IFN-g would also be the most therapeutically active of all IFNs against cancer. Trials of IFN-g in patients with
advanced metastatic melanoma and renal cell carcinoma, as well as adjuvant trials in patients with a high risk of relapse, have been conducted, but have not shown
therapeutic effects equivalent to the IFN-a 2 molecule. Reasons for this may relate to effect on antigen presumption and the proteosome complex.
The pleiotropism of the IFNs has posed significant challenges in their quantification and the definition of mechanism of action. The specific activity of various IFN
preparations may be expressed in terms of differing functions (e.g., antiviral, antiproliferative, differentiating, effector cell activating, antigen augmenting, and enzyme
inducing). Antiviral activity has been accepted as the basis of IFN standardization, although it is far from clear that this function is related to the effects of IFN-g in
cancer therapy. Units of antiviral activity determined against reference standards of the Center for Biologics (Washington, DC) are commonly used to quantify IFN-a
and -b, but recombinant IFN-g and newer polyethylene glycol (PEG) bound forms of IFN-a 2 are generally reported in terms of mass. The various species, subspecies,
and molecular variants (muteins) of IFNs argue for adoption of functional standardization in terms of alternative mechanisms relevant to antitumor activity for clinical
trials.
MECHANISMS RELEVANT TO ANTITUMOR ACTION
The pleiotropic actions of IFNs may be separated into several categories that are useful in analyzing preclinical and clinical data, as summarized in Table 20.1-1.
Direct effects of the IFNs include antiproliferative and differentiating effects that may be demonstrated against fresh melanoma tissues or cultured cell lines in vitro.
Effects have been designated as composite that result in alterations in tumor cell surface antigen expression without direct effect on tumor cell growth, invasion, and
metastasis. These effects may permit host recognition and response in vivo. Each of three major categories of IFN effects that are potentially relevant to melanoma
has been studied in some detail and may provide a basis for understanding the outcome of therapeutic trials (as discussed). Indirect effects of the IFNs are those that
are mediated by the host immune system, including the cellular elements such as the large granular lymphocyte or natural killer (NK)/lymphokine-activated killer cell,
macrophage/dendritic cell, neutrophil, and T and B cells. 28,29,30and31

TABLE 20.1-1. Pleiotropy of Interferons: Direct, Composite, and Indirect Effects

DIRECT EFFECTS ON TUMOR CELL PROLIFERATION AND ENZYME AND SIGNALING PATHWAYS
The actual mechanism(s) responsible for the antitumor action of IFNs in human cancer remain uncertain. Nonrecombinant IFN-a and -b and recombinant subspecies
of IFN-a 2, -b, and -g have been evaluated in vitro for their antiproliferative activity against cultured and fresh solid tumor cells. These demonstrate comparable
growth-inhibitory activity, and one may draw the general observations that (1) there exists a direct dose-response tumor-inhibiting relationship for each species; (2)
there is considerable heterogeneity among different tumors regarding sensitivity to inhibition; and (3) solid tumors are generally sensitive to IFNs in vitro if exposed to
high levels (greater than 500 µ/mL) of IFN-a 2. Molecular pathways of IFN signaling have been defined, allowing analysis of the proximate intracellular pathways of
action, which may prove more informative than the measurement of IFN-induced enzymes such as oligoadenylate synthetase, and more distal effects such as
induction of major histocompatability complex (MHC) antigen expression. Studies of cultured in vitro tumor cells have suggested acquired defects in the STAT
signaling pathway and the absence of STAT that may be associated with IFN resistance. By contrast, studies of human tumor tissues in vivo have revealed the
constitutive activation of STAT pathways and nuclear correlation of STAT, in melanocytic nevi tissues of patients untreated with IFN as well as in solid tumor tissues
(squamous carcinoma of the upper aerodigestive tract). The analysis of signal transduction intermediates of the IFNs in tumor cells of patients undergoing therapy
with the IFNs is now feasible. The prospective evaluation and correlation of these intermediate end points of IFN action with clinical evidence of response,
progression, or both will be of interest in future trials. 32
Enzyme Induction
A number of enzyme pathways are activated after induction of the IFN response element, including some that have been evaluated in clinical trials. These include 2'5'
oligoadenylate synthetase (2'5' oligo-As) and protein kinase (p67). 33 Two molecular forms of 2'5' oligo-As of 33 kD and 110 kD have been identified differing in
subcellular localization and activation requirements. 34,35 The role of the different forms of 2'5' oligo-As as in relation to antitumor effects of IFNs has yet to be
established. Indoleamine 2,3, dioxygenase is induced by IFNs in a dose- and time-dependent fashion; this enzyme alters tryptophan metabolism 36 and with xanthine
oxidase generates superoxides that may relate to both therapeutic and toxic effects of IFN, as well as depression of cytochrome P-450 enzymes levels. 37,38 Neopterin
production induced by IFN-g may provide an additional biochemical tool for the analysis of intermediate effects of IFN-g in vivo.
Antiproliferative Effects of Interferons in Combination with Chemotherapy and Other Biologic Agents In Vitro
The presence of additive or synergistic effects of chemotherapeutic agents has been examined with IFNs in vitro using isobologram plots to compare various
combinations for synergistic, additive, or subadditive effects against tumor cells. 39 Although synergism and additive effects have been identified with some
combinations40,41,42,43and44 and negative interactions 40 for others, there is no compelling evidence that these in vitro effects have been useful in the development of
therapeutic regimens for the clinic.
IFN-g has been shown to potentiate apoptotic cell death and DNA fragmentation induced by tumor necrosis factor (TNF), 45 whereas IFN-a and -g potentiate the
tumor-cytotoxic activity of TNF in clonogenic stem cell assays. 46
Differentiation In Vitro and In Vivo
Differentiative and growth regulatory or apoptotic effects of the IFNs have become focal points of interest in multiple solid and hematopoietic neoplasms. A number of
adhesion molecules, growth factors, and receptors have been identified in the process of malignant progression that are subject to IFN regulation. The receptor-ligand
pairs may serve as paracrine or autocrine growth-stimulating circuits 47,48 that may be interrupted at various stages. IFN-a and retinoic acid inhibit epidermal growth
factor receptor expression, and retinoids as well as IFNs are under study as potential inhibitors of progression.
COMPOSITE (ANTIGENIC) ANTITUMOR MECHANISMS: MODULATION OF MELANOMA-ASSOCIATED CELL SURFACE ANTIGENS
The antitumor effects of IFNs have been attributed to their effects on cell surface antigens of several tumors. The histocompatability complex is among the most
consistent and sensitive targets of the IFNs. It is well established that MHC class I antigens are inducibly type I IFNs, whereas MHC class II antigens are the target of
type II IFNs (IFN-g). 49,50,51,52,53and54In vivo studies have suggested an even broader pleiotropy type of the IFNs than in vitro, in which induction of both MHC class I
(ABC) and II (DR, DP, DQ) antigens have been reported with IFN-a 2.55,56
IFNs modulate the expression of many cell surface molecules, not all of which have been assigned physiologic functions, and a number of which play roles in the
progression from neoplastic to invasive neoplastic disease. 51,57,58,59,and60
The clinical implications of altered MHC antigen expression relate to their pivotal function in intercellular immunologic recognition and communication at multiple
levels. Antigen presentation to T cells by Langerhans'/dendritic cells of the macrophage monocyte lineage and B cells is associated with the expression of MHC class
I and II antigens, adhesion molecules, and costimulating molecules (B7.1/7.2, CD80, CD86). Antitumor effects of IFNs may thus occur through MHC class I and II
antigens even if the tumor antigens recognized by the immune system are not themselves up-regulated. 61,62 Decreased susceptibility to NK cells is associated with
induction of class I major histocompatability antigen expression, 63,64 and IFN-g protects human tumor cells that are otherwise susceptible to NK cell lysis within
hours. 65,66
The induction of MHC class I and II antigens by IFNs may increase the immunogenicity of tumor cells used for vaccination, outweighing effects on susceptibility to
NK/lymphokine-activated killer effector cells in experimental models. 67,68 Thus, induction of increased MHC class I and II tumor cell surface antigen expression may
account for the enhanced efficacy of host T-cell–mediated immunity or tumor cell elimination by means of a composite mechanism, irrespective of the modulation of
effector cell functions. To date, studies have not resolved these issues in human clinical trials.
INDIRECT IMMUNOMODULATORY EFFECTS
Natural Killer, Macrophage, and Dendritic Cells
The macrophage is a key target of IFN-g, which was earlier described as macrophage activating factor 69,70 and 71 (see Table 20.1-1). The large granular lymphocyte
known as the NK cell is a well-recognized target of the type I and II IFNs. 72,73 Clinical relevance of the effects of IFNs on NK activity has been sought for many years,
both in vitro and in vivo for IFN-a, -b, and -g. NK activity measurements performed in the context of multiple trials has depended on assay conditions, effector cell
manipulation, and the delay from blood-drawing to assay ( rest period). To date, no convincing evidence of a relationship between NK cell activity in vivo and the
therapeutic activity of IFNs in patients with solid tumors has been documented. 74,75,76and77 Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity of peripheral blood lymphocytes is

mediated in part by NK cells and augmented in vitro and in vivo by IFN-a, as well as interleukin-2 (IL-2). 78 As trials of antitumor antibodies are further developed, the
optimization of NK activity and antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity with IFNs, IL-2, as well as IL-12, and other newer biologic agents will continue to be important.
The dendritic cell, a central antigen-presenting cell, is influenced by multiple cytokines, including granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, IL-4, IL-12, and
IFN-a. The immunomodulatory effects of IFN-a may thus be due to altered numbers or functional capacities of dendritic cells, 79 although studies in vivo during IFN
therapy have yet to be performed to evaluate this potential mechanism.
T Cell
Specific T-cell–mediated immunity has been implicated as the basis of antitumor effects of the IFNs in many solid tumors. Durable complete responses have been
reported in multiple clinical trials of IFN-a for chemotherapy-refractory solid tumors, including renal cell carcinoma and melanoma. Shifts in T-cell subsets (CD4 to
CD8 ratio increased) have been correlated with clinical antitumor response to IFN-a and -g. 80,81,82,83,84,85,86,87and88 IFN-a modulates mixed leukocyte reactions in vitro,89
and the modulation of specific cytotoxic T-cell immune responses to solid tumors by IFN-a 2 remains a leading hypothetical basis for the durable antitumor effects
observed clinically with IFN-a 2 in melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, and other solid tumors. This is prospectively being evaluated in the context of current trials for
several solid tumors. 29,30,90,91,92,93,94and95 The prognostic importance of CD4+ T-cell infiltrates in predicting response of melanoma and other solid tumors has been
suggested by Hakansson et al. 87 and is now being tested prospectively as a means to select a more IFN-responsive population. The definition of both MHC class
I–restricted and MHC class II (DR)–restricted epitopes recognized by CD4+ T cells in melanoma, renal cell carcinoma/H/N cancer, and other solid tumors adds a new
dimension to the expanse of CD8+ T-cell–defined MHC class I–restricted epitopes for analysis of IFN-modulated effector functions. 96
In preclinical systems, Belardelli and Gresser et al. 97,98and99 have shown that IFN prevents the outgrowth of experimental murine tumors that does not correlate with the
tumor cell susceptibility to direct tumor growth inhibition by IFN. This effect depends critically on the presence of an intact immune system in the host and particularly
the CD4 T cell. Tumor response suggesting that tumor regression induced by IFN in this system is dependent on immunologic effects of IFN on the tumor and host.
B Cell
IFN-g increases production of IgG2a and decreases that of IgG3, IgG1, IgG2b, and IgE by human B cells. 100 Several tumor vaccines have been evaluated in
conjunction with IFN-a2 to evaluate the immunomodulatory role (and possible inhibitory effects) of IFN-a 2b administered together with or following GM2 vaccine
(Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group trial E2696: GMK, Progenics, Tarrytown, NY). The results of these trials have established the feasibility of this combination and
the absence of inhibitory interactions between ganglioside GM2 vaccination and high-dose IFN-a 2b in regard to serologic IgM and IgG response and pave the way for
IFN combinations in other disease settings.
The specific effects of IFN-a, -b, and -g on specific immune function against autologous solid tumors have not been examined due to the complexity of measuring
immune responses to autologous tumor cell surface antigens in clinical trials. Analyses of specific immune responses to tumor-associated antigens will be essential to
interpret therapeutic responses to IFN, much as it is critical to the analysis of an array of vaccine trials underway for many solid tumors.
ROLE OF INTERFERON-g AS A MEDIATOR OF CLINICAL EFFECTS OF OTHER CYTOKINES
IFN-g induction by IL-2 and IL-12 has been documented in vivo in humans.101,102 Ambient levels of 1 to 7 U/mL have been demonstrated after continuous intravenous
infusion of IL-2 and are likely to be a major component of the dose-limiting toxicity of IL-12. 102,103 The IFN-g induced during therapy with IL-2, IL-12, and other
cytokines may play a role in therapeutic as well as toxic effects of a number of biologic agents.
DENDRITIC CELL MODULATION
A cell that has taken center stage and is central to antigen presentation is the dendritic antiangiogenic actions of the IFN-a cell 104; this cell, regulated by a series of
cytokines, including granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, IL-4, IL-12, and IFN-a, has the ability to promote T-cell immune responses in naive subjects.
IFN-a is one of the earliest antiangiogenic agents established in clinical trials in experimental and human systems. Angiogenesis associated with tumor progression 105
is a logical mechanism for evaluation, although direct evidence of a role for antiangiogenic effects of IFNs in the clinical therapy of human solid tumors has yet to be
documented. The observation that IFN-a is able to cause regression of hemangiomas of childhood remains a clinical foundation for the exploration of antitumor
antiangiogenic effects of IFN in malignant neoplasms. 106 A balance between proangiogenic (basic fibroblast growth factor) and antiangiogenic (IFN-a) effects has
been proposed on the basis of preclinical studies that may have implications for the optimal administration of IFN-a in bladder cancer, ovarian cancer, and melanoma,
among other solid tumors. 107,108

CLINICAL EVALUATION
TOXICITY AND PHARMACOKINETICS OF THE INTERFERONS
General
The clinical toxicity of the different species of IFNs involves a similar range of target organs, although the relative components of toxicity differ from species to species
and in the human from individual to individual 109,110 (Table 20.1-2). Acutely, a flu-like constitutional syndrome with fever, chills, headache, malaise, myalgias,
arthralgias, and fatigue occurs in the majority of patients and diminishes over time with continued daily or alternate-daily administration. For this reason, therapy is
best tolerated in many patients at bedtime. Low back pain and headache with severe rigors have been associated with IFN-a in particular. Metabolic alterations in the
blood lipid profile have been noted with hypertriglyceridemia, and elevated low-density lipoprotein is seen due to inhibition of lipoprotein lipase. 111 IFN-a may depress
the plasma cholesterol in 15% to 40% of patients, with a parallel decrement in both high- and low-density cholesterol, without alteration of very low-density
lipoproteins. 112,113and114 Long-term toxicity of IFN consists in constitutional flu-like symptoms compounded by anorexia, weight loss, and fatigue. These late toxicities
are the result of dysgeusia, low-grade fever, and nutritional compromise and may be difficult to differentiate from the appearance of thyroid dysfunction or other
endocrine pathology on the basis of autoimmune processes associated with IFN-a (as for IL-2). Neuropsychiatric toxicity ranges from mild cognitive deficits to frank
depression and psychosis (see Neurologic Effects, later in this chapter).

TABLE 20.1-2. Toxicities of Interferons

Hematologic Effects
Hematologic toxicities of the IFNs include leukopenia and, less frequently, thrombocytopenia and anemia; infections are a recognized complication of the leukopenia,
but bleeding complications have been rare. Diminished colony-forming capacity and hypocellularity have been noted in the bone marrow, which are rapidly reversible
on withdrawal of IFN.115,116
Hepatic Effects
Hepatotoxicity observed at high doses frequently includes elevated circulating transaminase enzyme levels that are dose related and reversible on withdrawal of the
agent, without evidence of cholestasis. Rarely, subacute hepatic necrosis and cholestatic liver failure with death have been observed when IFN has been
administered in the face of hepatotoxicity with hyperbilirubinemia or a history of antecedent viral or alcoholic liver disease. Careful observation of hepatic function
generally permits the avoidance of such problems, with treatment modification according to signs and symptoms of toxicity. 29,117 Indeed, after the initial report of two
cases of fatal hepatotoxicity of high-dose IFN in the pivotal E1684 adjuvant trial for high-risk melanoma, 118 the confirmatory intergroup trial E1690 was completed
without any instance of life-threatening hepatotoxicity, and the only two toxic fatalities noted were cardiovascular and cerebrovascular, occurring with low-dose IFN.
Cardiac and Renal Effects
Cardiovascular, renal, and CNS toxicity are less common. Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias noted with the IFNs may be direct effects or the consequence of fever or
nutritional and fluid imbalances. Complex conduction disturbances have been observed with IFN-g, including bradycardia with high-grade heart block. 93 Cardiotoxicity
is increased among elderly patients and patients with underlying heart disease or prior exposure to cardiotoxic agents, but the mechanism has not been defined. 119,120
Hypotension occurs through at least two separate mechanisms: acute hypotension, occurring 1 to 2 hours after administration of IFNs, may be related to peripheral
vasodilatation and responds to fluid repletion or rarely may require pressors. Hypotension during chronic administration of IFNs is related to subclinical low-grade
fever with insidious fluid losses, anorexia, dysgeusia, and diminished fluid intake. Proteinuria is the most common renal manifestation of the IFNs and is generally
reversible on withdrawal of IFN. 121,122,123and124 Rarely, interstitial nephritis and nephrotic syndrome have been reported with IFN-a and -g. 119,125
Neurologic Effects
CNS toxicity associated with global changes in mentation is often subtle. The cognitive dysfunction induced by IFN may be documented in formal testing, but is often
more apparent to family and friends of patients. 126 Stupor and coma with diffuse slowing of the electroencephalographic pattern have infrequently been reported and
are reversible on discontinuation of IFN. 120,127 Mild peripheral neuropathy has also been noted, with paraesthesia and slowing of nerve conduction velocity. Most
recently, reversible retinal microvascular toxicity has been noted during studies of IFN-a administered for macular degeneration, which may indicate the need for
ophthalmologic evaluation of patients with visual changes during IFN-a therapy in other settings. 128
Musculoskeletal Effects
Rhabdomyolysis has rarely been reported in association with IFN-a 2 at high dosages. 129 However, the significance and even the attribution of such occurrences is
difficult to resolve at this time, as this complication has been reported as early as the first week into IFN-a 2 therapy in postoperative patients in whom it is difficult to
exclude other contributory factors. Although monitoring for elevations in creatine phosphokinase enzymes has been suggested, this has not been adopted in practice
because of the rarity of the event and the early occurrence of the event, which would preclude use of laboratory values to monitor treatment and supportive care.
PHARMACOLOGY AND DOSAGE
Recombinant Interferon of the First Generation
The maximum tolerated dose for IFN-a lies between 10 and 20 µ/m~ daily and 50 µ/m 2 on alternating days for periods of weeks to months, regardless of subspecies.
The half-life of IFN-a 2 is 6 hours in the blood and has allowed alternate-daily schedules of outpatient administration by intramuscular and subcutaneous routes. The
maximum tolerated dose for IFN-a varies according to the industrial preparation used, schedule, and route; acceptable absorption and activity have been reported
with IFN-g administered intravenously or intramuscularly. 130,131 Early pharmacokinetic studies of IFN-a 2 have demonstrated that peak levels at 5 µ/m 2 obtained by the
intravenous route do not reach 100 µ/mL, whereas by the intramuscular and subcutaneous routes generally adopted for therapy they remain under 50 µ/mL. By
contrast, the administration of doses of 20 µ/m 2 (or 36 µ/dose in early pharmacodynamic studies) achieves serum levels approaching 10,000 µ/mL. 132 This difference
in the pharmacodynamics and peak levels has been the focus of considerable interest, as the positive results of trials using the intravenous administration of 20 µ/m 2
have shown the first survival benefits in melanoma, whereas lower dosages administered by alternative routes have yielded antitumor effects in terms of delayed
recurrence (during therapy) without significant survival prolongations.
Recombinant Interferons of the Second Generation
A second generation of recombinant IFN-a 2 therapy is currently unfolding, with intense exploration of linear polyethylene glycol–conjugated IFN-a 2b (PEG-Intron,
Schering Plough Corporation, Kenilworth, NJ) and larger branched chain formulations of IFN-a 2a (Pegasys, Roche Laboratories Inc., Nutley, NJ) entering multicenter
trials in the United States, Canada, and Europe. The half-life of these species is substantially prolonged, allowing twice weekly and weekly administration, with
concentration time products that are significantly higher than can be achieved with the first-generation recombinant IFN-a 2 species as initially formulated, regardless
of route. Clinical studies, accompanied by more sophisticated molecular laboratory corollaries, are under way in the context of these trials in leukemia (chronic
myelogenous leukemia), solid tumors (melanoma, renal cell carcinoma), and viral diseases (hepatitis).
ANTIBODIES
The development of anti-IFN neutralizing serum antibodies has been correlated with loss of toxicity and antitumor effects in chronic myelogenous leukemia. The role
of anti-IFN antibodies appears to vary with the disease state as well as the species of IFN used. In representative series, antibodies have been detected in from 0% to
5% of subjects after 2 to 6 months of therapy 133,134 without demonstrable adverse consequences for therapeutic effects in patients with most solid tumors to date.
Strategies to reduce the immunogenicity and increase the likelihood of tolerance to recombinant IFN-a have included the initial use of intravenous, as opposed to
subcutaneous or intramuscular, routes and continuous as opposed to interrupted schedules. Despite the delayed release and depot-like behavior of polyethylene
glycol–bound IFN-a 2, the immunogenicity of polyethylene glycol–bound IFN formulations appears to be less than that of the parent recombinant IFN-a 2 species.
CLINICAL EFFICACY OF INTERFERONS ADMINISTERED SYSTEMATICALLY
Nonrecombinant IFN-a was initially brought to clinical trial against several solid tumors in 1978, when the American Cancer Society began a series of trials of buffy
coat leukocyte IFN produced by Cantell with the Finnish Red Cross. These trials were limited by the extremely short supply of the agent (the trials lasted for only 6
weeks) from which no firm conclusions can be drawn. The trials served as an important impetus for the pharmaceutical industry to begin commercial production of
IFN-a, as well as IFN-b, -g, and other biologic agents, using recombinant DNA technology. The large-scale production of IFNs by recombinant DNA technology
enabled the first systematic evaluation of appropriate dose, route, and schedule of IFN-a 2, as well as the other major subspecies of IFN-a, -b, and -g.
Phase II trials have documented the antitumor activity of recombinant IFN-a 2 in many solid tumors as documented elsewhere in this volume. Table 20.1-3 lists the
applications of IFN-a that have received approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in the United States. 80,109,134,135,136,137,138,139,140and141 General principles that
can be drawn from this experience are that the hematologic neoplasms appear to respond to lower dosages than the solid tumors and to respond on the basis of
direct effects that are either antiproliferative, prodifferentiative, or proapoptotic. The mechanism for IFN-a 2 antitumor activity in solid tumors appears to be indirect, as
the result of antigenic modulation (MHC), modulation of host immune responses (CD4/CD8 T cell), or both, or antigen presentation (dendritic cell), although vascular

effects may also be implicated.

TABLE 20.1-3. Efficacy of Interferon-a 2 in Human Cancer

REGIONAL THERAPY WITH INTERFERON-a
Intralesional administration of IFN-a 142 at 6 to 10 Mu twice or three times weekly has been used for refractory solid tumors such as melanoma, 143 but offers little
advantage over systemic therapy. Regional in-transit disease of the extremity is an infrequent manifestation of melanoma that continues to be studied with
hyperthermic isolated limb perfusion using combinations of chemotherapy (melphalan) and two cytokines (TNF, together with IFN-g). IFN-g was given for the original
theoretical purpose of modulating TNF receptor expression for subsequent isolated limb perfusion with TNF. The role of IFN-g in this combination is debated, but the
reported response rates of 90% with the original combination have been confirmed by investigators in the United States 144,145 and the Netherlands. 146,147 TNF given
alone at comparable doses has shown only brief and limited antitumor activity, 148 suggesting that melphalan, or melphalan and IFN-g, may be critical to the
therapeutic effects of the triple combination. Fraker and colleagues are undertaking a controlled study of isolated limb perfusion that will allow more definitive
conclusions. 144,149
COMBINATIONS
Phase II Trials of Combinations of Biologic Agents: Types I and II, Interferon-a 2 Plus Interferon-g
Combinations of IFNs of types I and II (IFN-a 2 or -b, and -g, respectively) have been of theoretical interest, given the potential synergism of IFNs interacting through
the two separate classes of IFN receptor. The modulation of receptors for IFN-a 2 by IFN-g and elucidation of signal transduction pathways through which IFN-g and
IFN-a act at a molecular level 22 provide a further impetus for exploration of combined IFN therapy. The molecular synergism of IFN-g and IFN-a through signal
transducer and transcriptional activators of IFN summarized by Darnell is currently under investigation with IFN-a 2 and IL-12 (an inducer of
IFN-g). 19,21,22,23,24and25,150,151and152
Clinical studies of combinations of IFN-a and -g have previously followed two strategies: concurrent and sequenced administration. Increased toxicity without apparent
therapeutic benefit was seen with concurrent regimens, 153,154,155and156 whereas sequenced regimens have improved therapeutic and immunomodulatory activity in renal
cell carcinoma. 85,157
Modulation of Antitumor and Immunologic Effects of Interferons by Biologic Agents, Cytotoxic Drugs, and Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs
The pleiotropic effects of IFN-a 2 include the induction of a variety of feedback mechanisms of immunosuppression that may be associated with prostaglandins for
which nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs might be of benefit. In addition, it has been hoped that these agents might alleviate some of the significant constitutional
toxicity and flu-like symptoms of IFN therapy.
Miller et al. 158 have conducted a randomized controlled trial of indomethacin with IFN-a 2, demonstrating neither clinical nor immunologic untoward interactions.
Dexamethasone has been assiduously avoided in most trials of IFN-a, -b, and -g as a consequence of its potent immunosuppressive effects. IFN-a has been used
with corticosteroids for multiple myeloma and lymphoma, diseases in which corticosteroids have an established role. Corticosteroids abrogate the benefit of IFN in
experimental animals, and it appears prudent to avoid corticosteroids during IFN-a 2 therapy for solid tumors. 158,159
Combinations of Interferon-a and Retinoids
Broad interest exists in the potential applications of retinoids for therapy and prevention of squamous carcinomas of aerodigestive tract skin, carcinoma of the cervix,
and other epithelial neoplasms. There have been unexpected and dramatic clinical responses of acute promyelocytic leukemia with the retinoids, and this disorder is
associated with a lesion in the chromosomal region coding for the retinoic acid receptor. The retinoic acid receptors exhibit sequence homology with the corticosteroid
hormone receptor superfamily, suggesting that both may function through the regulation of gene transcription, although the mechanism and optimal combination of
retinoids and IFN-a have not been established. 160,161and162
Combined Modality Therapy
Given the differing presumed mechanisms and nonoverlapping toxicities of cytotoxic chemotherapy and IFN regimens available for hematologic neoplasms and solid
tumors as well as the lack of a survival effect of previous combination chemotherapy, 163 the combination of chemotherapy and IFN-a 2 has been an obvious one. The
combination has shown mixed results. 164,165,166,167,168,169,170and171 The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group has tested combinations of tamoxifen, IFN-a, or both versus
dacarbazine in a factorial two-by-two study that demonstrates a lack of any advantage of IFN (high-dose) (or hormonal combination therapy with tamoxifen) over
standard chemotherapy in melanoma. 172 Combinations of IFN-a and chemotherapy have suggested improved duration of response in myeloma 173 and non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma.174,175
In melanoma, combination chemotherapy has been found to induce complete responses in a small fraction (less than 5%), and IL-2 has been shown to achieve a
durable complete response in 6%. 176 IFN-a2 with IL-2 and combination chemotherapy has been associated with complete responses in more than 10%, and overall
complete and partial responses in more than 50% of patients in multiple single-institution trials, leading to exploration of the role of IFN-a 2 plus IL-2 with cisplatin,
vinblastine, and dacarbazine, as opposed to polychemotherapy alone, in the current intergroup E3695 trial for metastatic melanoma. 177,178
A number of regimens have evaluated the role of IFN-a 2 in combination with complex cisplatin-based polychemotherapy regimens, with or without IL-2. These
regimens have generally exacted greater toxicity than the binary regimens, requiring hospitalization for administration of IL-2 when administered by continuous
intravenous infusion or high-dose bolus schedules. 179,180and181
More complex regimens using multiple cytotoxic agents, IFN-a 2, and IL-2 have been reported from multiple centers in the United States and Europe. 177,178 Regimens
known collectively as biochemotherapy have consistently achieved response rates greater than 50% with complete response in 10% or greater, at the cost of
significant toxicity and hospitalization for metastatic melanoma. Intergroup study E3695 of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group and Southwest Oncology Group
is evaluating whether IL-2 as a continuous infusion at high dosage for 4 days and IFN-a 2b at a daily dosage of 5 µ/m2 subcutaneously prolongs the survival of patients

with metastatic melanoma over cisplatin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine polychemotherapy.
The application of IFN as systemic adjuvant therapy is currently focused on melanoma, in which the precision of prognostic assessment for regional lymph node
disease has advanced substantially. The risk category of patients with nodal metastasis defined using sentinel node mapping has improved substantially. 182
Melanoma risk may be categorized as very high, high, intermediate, and low, according to 5-year relapse and mortality. The prognosis of clinically localized primary
melanoma may be estimated rather precisely by the Breslow depth of primary tumor invasion (in millimeters) at the site of origin, the presence or absence of
ulceration, and sentinel lymph node status. The poor prognosis for cure for deep or ulcerated primary disease, or node-positive patients has provided the rationale for
postoperative adjuvant therapy of these categories of high-risk patients. 183,184
ADJUVANT TRIALS OF INTERFERON-a2 IN MELANOMA
On the basis of the antitumor activity of IFN-a 2 in metastatic melanoma and the gradient of response with patients having the smallest size and number of metastases
exhibiting the highest response rates, multiple trials of IFN-a 2 for prevention of melanoma relapse were commenced in the United States and international cooperative
groups during the 1980s. The three largest and most mature studies of IFN-a 2 conducted to date adopted similar entry criteria, including patients with deep (T4)
primary lesions or pathologically proven involvement of regional lymph nodes. The groups that have undertaken these studies were the Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group, North Central Cancer Treatment Group, and the World Health Organization.
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
E1684 accrued 287 patients between 1984 and 1990, was unblinded and reported to the American Society of Clinical Oncology in 1993 185 at 5 years of median
follow-up, and published in 1996 at 6.9 years median follow-up. This trial used an aggressive therapy of 1 year's duration, 20 µ/m 2 intravenously daily for 5 days a
week for 1 month, then 10 µ/m2 subcutaneously t.i.w. for the balance of the year with IFN-a 2b or observed as the reference standard of care. Risk groups were defined
by lymph node pathology (reviewed in all cases) and stratified to allow the analysis of therapeutic effect in homogeneous groups of patients whose susceptibility to
this therapy was postulated to be potentially related to tumor burden and disease extent. 186,187
The analysis of treatment effect for high-dose IFN-a 2b on relapse for the overall trial revealed a highly significant reduction of relapse rate ( P2 = .004) and a significant
survival benefit in the intention-to-treat analysis ( P2 = .046). A Cox multivariate analysis demonstrated significant improvement in the disease-free and overall survival
(P = .001 to .01) and estimated the relative improvement in continuous relapse-free survival to be 50%.
The median interval to relapse with IFN-a 2b adjuvant therapy was prolonged from 0.9 to 1.6 years, whereas the median survival of treated patients has been
prolonged from 2.62 to 3.78 years. A retrospective quality-adjusted analysis of time spent without symptoms or toxicity (Q-TWiST) study has been conducted in the
context of this trial. 188,189 After 84 months, the group of patients receiving IFN-a 2b gained a mean of 8.9 months quality-adjusted time without relapse ( P = .03) and 7
months of overall survival time ( P = .02) compared with the observation group.
Economic analyses of the E1684 regimen 190,191and192 projected incremental cost comparable with other accepted adjuvant therapies of breast and colorectal cancer.
This therapy has been approved for resected high-risk melanomas by regulatory authorities across North and South America, Europe, and Australia.
To confirm and extend the preliminary results of the E1684 trial, the two intergroup trials were initiated: E1690, comparing the high-dose regimen of IFN-a 2b with a
low-dose regimen of 3 µm subcutaneous IFN-a 2b three times a week, which accrued 642 patients between 1990 and 1995, with 608 evaluable at 52 months' median
follow-up, as the study was recently reported. An improvement in relapse-free survival for the high-dose IFN-a 2b was noted that is significant ( P2 = .03 by Cox
analysis) only for high-dose IFN-a 2b. Neither the high-dose arm nor the low-dose arm showed an improvement in overall survival, as compared with observation, in
this trial, which included a substantial fraction (25%) who had deep primary melanoma, most of whom were not surgically and pathologically staged at elective lymph
node dissection (as had been mandated in the first trial E1684). Postrelapse salvage surgery was feasible in these patients, followed by extensive use of IFN in
patients who had relapsed after initial assignment to observation. The systematic and unbalanced pursuit of IFN salvage therapy in observation patients, more than
IFN-assigned patients (P = .004), was associated with prolonged survival that may have confounded efforts to detect differences between survival of those who were
assigned originally to high-dose IFN, not observation. The World Health Organization trial 16 of low-dose IFN showed no significant survival or relapse-intense
prologation in a study of similar size. 193 Most recently, the intergroup E1694 trial has been concluded, in which the overall survival and relapse-free survival benefit of
the high-dose E1684 IFNa 2 1 year regimen, with P = .009 and P = .0015, in the largest study of high-dose IFNa 2 conducted to date (u = 880).
Vaccine: Interferon Contributions as Adjuvant Therapy for Melanoma
The attractiveness of vaccines for melanoma is broad and theoretically compelling, although no randomized controlled trial of vaccine has yet shown benefit in
melanoma. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group trial E2696 has tested the anti-GM2 antibody IgG and IgM response induced by the vaccine alone, in comparison
with the vaccine combined with or followed by IFN-a 2b at high dosage as in E1684/E1690. This trial has been completed and analyzed, demonstrating no significant
inhibition of the immunogenicity of the GMK vaccine in terms of anti-GM2 antibody immunoglobulin G and immunoglobulin M. 194 Thus, it is reasonable to consider the
combined use of vaccine, and high-dose IFN-a 2b in future adjuvant trials, as any vaccine has been demonstrated to be of benefit in appropriate randomized controlled
trials, alone.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Darnell JE Jr. STATs and gene regulation. Science 1997;277:1630.
2. Leaman DW, Leung S, Li X, Stark GR. Regulation of stat-dependent pathways by growth factors and cytokines. FASEB J 1996;10:1578.
3. Darnell JE Jr, Kerr IM, Stark GR. Jak-stat pathways and transcriptional activation in response to IFNs and other extracellular signaling proteins. Science 1994;264:1415.
4. Schindler C, Darnell JE. Transcriptional responses to polypeptide ligands: the JAK-STAT pathway. Annu Rev Biochem 1995;64:621.
5. Meraz M, White JM, Sheehan K, et al. Targeted disruption of stat1 gene in mice reveals unexpected physiologic specificity in the JAK-STAT signaling pathway. Cell 1996;84:431.
6. Durbin JE, Hackenmiller R, Simon M, Levy DE. Targeted disruption of the mouse Stat1 gene results in compromised innate immunity to viral disease . Cell 1996;84:443.
7. Kaplan MH, Sun Y, Hoey T, Gruss JG. Impaired IL-12 responses and enhanced development of Th2 cells in Stat4-deficient mice. Nature 1996;382:174.
8. Thierfelder W, van Deursen J, Yamamoto K, et al. Requirement for Stat4 in interleukin-12-mediated responses of natural killer and T cells. Nature 1996;382:171.
9. Kaplan MH, Schindler U, Smiley S, Grusby MJ. Stat6 is required for mediating responses to IL-4 and for development of Th2 cells. Immunity 1996;4:313.
10. Takeda K, Tanaka T, Shi W, et al. Essential role of STAT 6 in IL-4 signalling. Nature 1996;380:627.
11. Wakao H, Gouilleaux F, Groner B. Mammary gland factor (MGF) is a novel member of the cytokine regulated transcription factor gene family and confers the prolactin response. EMBO J
1994;13:2182.
12. Zoon KC, Bekisz J, Miller D. Human interferon alpha family: protein structure and function. In: Baron S, Coppenhaver DH, Dianzani F, et al., eds. Interferon:principles and medical applications,
1st ed. Galveston, TX: The University of Texas Medical Branch, 1992:95.
13. Dron M, Tovey MG. Interferon a/b, gene structure and regulation. In: Baron S, Coppenhaver DH, Dianzani F, et al., eds. Interferon: principles and medical applications, 1st ed. Galveston, TX:
The University of Texas Medical Branch, 1992:33.
14. Mariano TM, Donnelly RJ, Soh J, Pestka S. Structure and function of the type I interferon receptor. In: Baron S, Coppenhaver DH, Dianzani F, et al., eds. Interferon: principles and medical
applications, 1st ed. Galveston, TX: The University of Texas Medical Branch, 1992:129.
15. DeGrado WF, Wasserman ZR, Chowdry V. Sequence and structural homologies among type I and II interferons. Nature 1982;300:379.
16. Revel M. The interferon system in man: nature of the interferon molecules and mode of action. In: Becker Y, ed. Antiviral drugs and interferon. Amsterdam: Martinus Nijhoff, 1988:358.
17. Epstein LB, Epstein CJ. Localization of the gene AVG for the antiviral expression of immune and classical interferon to the distal part of the long arm of chromosome 21. J Invest Dermatol
1976;133(Suppl):56.
18. Weil J, Tucker G, Epstein LB, Epstein CJ. Interferon induction of (2'-5') oligoisoadenylate synthetase in diploid and trisomy 21 human fibroblasts: relation to dosage of the interferon receptor
gene (IRFC). Hum Genet 1983;65:108.
19. Levy DE. Cytoplasmic events in signal transduction leading to IFN a-induced gene expression. In: Baron S, Coppenhaver DH, Dianzani F, et al., eds. Interferon: principles and medical
applications, 1st ed. Galveston, TX: The University of Texas Medical Branch, 1992:161.
20. Fuchs E. Clues to b-cell memory. Nat Med 1996;2:743.
21. Darnell JE Jr. STATs and gene regulation. Science 1997;277:1630.
22. Schindler C, Shuai K, Prezioso VR, Darnell JE Jr. Interferon-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of a latent cytoplasmic transcription factor. Science 1992;257:809.
23. Pine R, Decker T, Kessler DS, Levy DE, Darnell JE. Purification and cloning of interferon-stimulated gene factor 2 (ISGF2): ISGF2 (IRF-1) can bind to the promoters of both beta interferon- and
interferon-stimulated genes but is not a primary transcriptional activator of either. Mol Cell Biol 1990;10:2448.
24. Fu X-Y, Kessler DS, Veals SA, Levy DE, Darnell JE Jr. ISGF3, the transcriptional activator induced by interferon a, consists of multiple interacting polypeptide chains. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

1990;87:8555.
25. Levy D, Darnell JE Jr. Interferon-dependent transcriptional activation: signal transduction without second messenger involvement? New Biol 1990;2:923.
26. Aiyer RA, Serrano LE, Jones PP. Interferon-gamma binds to high and low affinity receptor components on murine macrophages. J Immunol 1986;136:3329.
27. Kirkwood JM, Bryant J, Schiller JH, et al. Immunomodulatory function of interferon gamma in patients with metastatic melanoma: results of a phase I trial in subjects with metastatic melanoma
(EST 4987). J Immunother 1997;20:146.
28. Herberman RB. Natural cell-mediated immunity against tumors. New York: Academic, 1980.
29. Müllbacher A. The long-term maintenance of cytotoxic T cell memory does not require persistence of antigen. J Exp Med 1994;179:317.
30. Ernstoff MS, Fusi S, Kirkwood JM. Parameters of interferon action: II. Immunological effects of recombinant leukocyte interferon (IFN alpha-2) in phase I/II trials. J Biol Resp Mod 1983;2:540.
31. Ortaldo JR, Woodhouse C, Morgan AC, et al. Analysis of effector cells in human antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity with murine monoclonal antibodies. J Immunol 1987;138:3566.
32. Kirkwood JM, Farkas DL, Chakraborty A, et al. Systemic interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) treatment leads to Stat3 inactivation in melanoma precursor lesions. Mol Med 1999;5:11.
33. Merritt JA, Borden EC, Ball LA. Measurement of 2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase in patients receiving interferon-alpha. Journal of Interferon Research 1985;5:191.
34. St.Laurent G, Yoshie U, Floyd-Smith G. Interferon action: two (2'5') A (A)n synthetase specified by distinct mRNAs in Erhlich ascites tumor cells treated with interferon. Cell 1983;33:95.
35. Ilson DH, Torrence PF, Vilcek J. Two molecular weight forms of human 2'5'-oligoadenylate synthetase have different activation requirements. J Interferon Res 1986;6:5.
36. Yoshida R, Imanishi J, Oku T, Kishida T, Hayaishi O. Induction of pulmonary indoleamine 2,3, dioxegenase by interferon. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1981;78:129.
37. Yasui H, Takai K, Yoshida R, Hayaishi O. Interferon enhances tryptophan metabolism by inducing pulmonary indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase: its possible occurrence in cancer patients. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1986;83:6622.
38. Ghezzi P, Bianchi M, Montovani A, Spreaficio F, Salmona M. Enhanced xanthine oxidase activity in mice treated with interferon and interferon inducers. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
1984;119:144.
39. Berens ME, Saito T, Welander CE, Modest EJ. Antitumor activity of new anthracycline analogues in combination with interferon alfa. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1987;19:301.
40. Saito T, Berens ME, Welander EC. Characterization of the indirect antitumor effect of gamma-interferon using ascites-associated macrophages in a human tumor clonogenic assay. Cancer
Res 1987;47:673.
41. Fleischmann WR. Potentiation of the direct anticellular activity of mouse interferons: mutual synergism and interferon concentration dependence. Cancer Res 1982;42:869.
42. Czarniecki CW, Fennie CW, Powers DB, Estell DA. Synergistic antiviral and antiproliferative activities of Escherichia coli-derived human alpha, beta, and gamma interferons. J Virol
1984;49:490.
43. Schiller JH, Willson JKV, Bittner G, et al. Antiproliferative effects of interferons on human melanoma cells in the human tumor colony-forming assay. J Interferon Res 1986;6:615.
44. Nachbaur DM, Denz HA, Gastl G, et al. Combination effects of human recombinant interferon (alpha-2-arg, gamma) and cytotoxic agents on colony formation of human melanoma and
hypernephroma cell lines. Cancer Lett 1989;44:49.
45. Dealtry GB, Naylor MS, Fiers W, Balkwill FR. DNA fragmentation and cytotoxicity caused by tumor necrosis factor is enhanced by interferon-gamma. Eur J Immunol 1987;17:689.
46. Bregman MD, Meyskens FL Jr. Human recombinant alpha- and gamma-interferons enhance the cytotoxic properties of tumor necrosis factor on human melanoma. J Biol Resp Mod
1988;7:384.
47. Wang Y, Rao U, Mascari R, et al. Molecular analysis of melanoma precursor lesions. Cell Growth Differ 1996;7:1733.
48. Elder DE, Rodeck U, Thurin J, et al. Antigenic profile of tumor progression in human melanocytic nevi and melanomas. Cancer Res 1989;49:5091.
49. Giacomini P, Aguzzi A, Pestka S, Fisher PB, Ferrone S. Modulation by recombinant DNA leukocyte (a) and fibroblast (b) interferons of the expression and shedding of HLA- and
tumor-associated antigens by human melanoma cells. J Immunol 1984;133:1649.
50. Giuffré L, Isler P, Mach J-P, Careel S. A novel IFN-gamma regulated human melanoma associated antigen gp33-38 defined by monoclonal antibody Mel4-D12. I. Identification and
immunochemical characterization. J Immunol 1988;141:2072.
51. Matsui M, Temponi M, Ferrone S. Characterization of a monoclonal antibody-defined human melanoma-associated antigen susceptible to induction by immune interferon. J Immunol
1987;139:2088.
52. Audette M, Carrel S, Hayoz D, et al. A novel interferon-gamma regulated human melanoma-associated antigen, gp33-38, defined by monoclonal antibody Me14-D12. II. Molecular cloning of a
genomic probe. Mol Immunol 1989;26:515.
53. Dolei A, Ameglio F, Capobianchi MR, et al. Human b-type interferon enhances the expression and shedding of Ia-like antigens, comparison to HLA-A, B, C and b s -microglobulin. Antivir Res
1981;1:367.
54. Basham TY, Bourgeade MF, Creasey AA, Merigan TC. Interferon increases HLA synthesis in melanoma cells: interferon-resistant and -sensitive cell lines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1982;79:3265.
55. von Stamm U, Bröcker EB, von Depka Prondzinski M, et al. Effects of systemic interferon-a (IFN-a) on the antigenic phenotype of melanoma metastases. EORTC melanoma group cooperative
study No. 18852. Melanoma Res 1993;3:173.
56. Kirkwood JM, Sosman J, Ernstoff M, et al. E2690: a study of the mechanism of IFN alfa-2b in high risk melanoma in the ECOG/intergroup trial E1690. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1995;36:641.
57. Graf LH Jr, Rosenberg CD, Mancino VA, Ferrone S. Transfer and co-amplification of a gene encoding a 96-kDa immune IFN-inducible human melanoma-associated antigen. Preferential
expression by mouse melanoma host cells. J Immunol 1988;141:1054.
58. Friess GG, Brown TD, Wrenn RC. Improvement in cardiac ectopy during gamma interferon infusion: a case report. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:1463.
59. Murray JL, Stuckey SE, Pillow JK, Rosenblum MG, Gutterman JU. Differential in vitro effects of recombinant a-interferon and recombinant gamma-interferon alone or in combination on the
expression of melanoma-associated surface antigens. J Biol Resp Mod 1988;7:152.
60. Maio M, Gulwani B, Langer JA, et al. Modulation for interferons of HLA antigen, high-molecular-weight melanoma-associated antigen, and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 expression by
cultured melanoma cells with different metastatic potential. Cancer Res 1989;49:2980.
61. Houghton AN, Thomson TM, Gross D, Oettgen HF, Old LJ. Surface antigens of melanoma and melanocytes. Specificity of induction of Ia antigens by human gamma-interferon. J Exp Med
1984;160:255.
62. Anichini A, Castelli C, Sozzi G, Fossati G, Parmiani G. Differential susceptibility to recombinant interferon-gamma-induced HLA-DQ antigen modulation among clones from a human metastatic
melanoma. J Immunol 1988;140:183.
63. Taniguchi K, Petersson M, Höglund P, et al. Interferon gamma induces lung colonization by intravenously inoculated B16 melanoma cells in parallel with enhanced expression of class I major
histocompatibility complex antigens. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987;84:3405.
64. Gorelik E, Gunji Y, Herberman RB. H-2 antigen expression and sensitivity of BL6 melanoma cells to natural killer cell cytotoxicity. J Immunol 1988;140:2096.
65. Taramelli D, Fossati G, Mazzocchi A, et al. Classes I and II HLA and melanoma-associated antigen expression and modulation on melanoma cells isolated from primary and metastatic lesions.
Cancer Res 1986;46:433.
66. De Fries RU, Golub SH. Characteristics and mechanism of IFN-gamma-induced protection of human tumor cells from lysis by lymphokine-activated killer cells. J Immunol 1988;140:3686.
67. Zöller M, Strubel A, Hämmerling G, et al. Interferon gamma treatment of B16 melanoma cells: opposing effects for non-adaptive and adaptive immune defense and its reflection by metastatic
spread. Int J Cancer 1988;41:256.
68. Zoller M. IFN-treatment of B16-F1 versus B16-F10: relative impact of non-adaptive and T-cell-mediated immune defense in metastatic spread. Clin Exp Metast 1988;6:411.
69. Kleinschmidt WJ, Schultz RM. Similarities of murine gamma interferon and the lymphokine that renders macrophages cytotoxic. J Interferon Res 1982;2:291.
70. Talmadge KW, Gallati H, Sinigaglia F, Walz A, Garotta G. Identity between human interferon-gamma and “macrophage-activating factor” produced by human T lymphocytes. Eur J Immunol
1986;16:1471.
71. Spear GT, Paulnock DM, Jordan RL, et al. Enhancement of monocyte class I and II histocompatibility antigen expression in man by in vivob-interferon. Clin Exp Immunol 1987;69:107.
72. Sayers TJ, Mason AT, Ortaldo JR. Regulation of human natural killer cell activity by interferon-gamma: lack of a role in interleukin 2-mediated augmentation. J Immunol 1986;136:2176.
73. Platsoucas CD. Regulation of natural killer cytotoxicity by Escherichia coli-derived human interferon gamma. Scand J Immunol 1986;24:93.
74. Maluish AE, Ortaldo JR, Conlon JC, et al. Depression of natural killer cytotoxicity after in vivo administration of recombinant leukocyte interferon. J Immunol 1983;131:503.
75. Silver HK, Connors JM, Kong S, Karim KA, Spinelli JJ. Survival, response and immune effects in a prospectively randomized study of dose strategy for alpha-N1 interferon. Br J Cancer
1988;58:783.
76. Kirkwood JM, Bryant J, Schiller J, et al. Determination of phenotypic and functional correlates of interferon gamma (IFNg) therapy of metastatic melanoma in a multi-institutional phase Ib trial
(ECOG 4987/4687). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1991;10:218.
77. Seitz DE. Trimetrexate: a critical appraisal of the phase II clinical trial experience: evidence of drug discoveryclinical development disjunction. Cancer Invest 1994;12:657.
78. Herberman RB, Ortaldo JR, Bonnard GD. Augmentation by interferon of human natural and antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Nature 1979;227:221.
79. Chakrabarti D, Hultgren B, Stewart TA. IFN-a induces autoimmune T cells though the induction of intracellular adhesion molecule- and B7.2. J Immunol 1996;157:522.
80. Hersey P, Hasic E, MacDonald M, et al. Effects of recombinant leukocyte interferon (rIFN-aA) on tumour growth and immune responses in patients with metastatic melanoma. Br J Cancer
1985;51:815.
81. Mittleman A, Krown SE, Cirrincione C, et al. Analysis of T cell subsets in cancer patients treated with interferon. Am J Med 1983;75:966.
82. Kirkwood JM, Ernstoff MS. The role of interferons in the management of melanoma. In: Nathanson L, ed. Management of advanced melanoma. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1986:209.
83. Creagan ET, Ahmann DL, Frytak S, Long HJ, Itri LM. Recombinant leukocyte A interferon (rIFN-aA) in the treatment of disseminated malignant melanoma: Analysis of complete and long-term
responding patients. Cancer 1986;58:2576.
84. Neefe JR, Phillips EA, Treat J. Augmentation of natural immunity and correlation with tumor response in melanoma patients treated with human lymphoblastoid interferon. Diagn Immunol
1986;4:299.
85. Ernstoff MS, Nair S, Bahnson RR, et al. A phase IA trial of sequential administration recombinant DNA-produced interferons: combination recombinant interferon gamma and recombinant
interferon alfa in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1637.
86. Fuchs HJ, Debs R, Patton JS, Liggitt HD. The pattern of lung injury induced after pulmonary exposure to tumor necrosis factor-a depends on the route of administration. Diag Microbiol Infect
Dis 1990;13:397.
87. Hakansson A, Gustafsson B, Krysander L, Hakansson L. Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in metastatic malignant melanoma and response to interferon alpha treatment. Br J Cancer
1996;74:670.
88. Hakansson A, Gustafsson B, Krysander L, et al. On down-regulation of the immune response to metastatic malignant melanoma. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1999;48:253.
89. Chen BP, Sondel PM. Recombinant DNA-derived interferons-a and -b modulate the alloactivated proliferative response of bulk and cloned human lymphocytes. J Biol Resp Mod 1985;4:287.
90. Laszlo J, Huang AT, Brenckman WD, et al. Phase I study of pharmacological and immunological effects of human lymphoblastoid interferon given to patients with carcinoma. Cancer Res
1983;43:4458.
91. Maluish AE, Ortaldo JR, Sherwin SA, Oldham RK, Herberman RB. Changes in immune function in patients receiving natural leukocyte interferon. J Biol Resp Mod 1983;2:418.
92. Edwards BS, Merritt JA, Fuhlbrigge RC, Borden EC. Low doses of interferon alpha result in more effective clinical natural killer cell activation. J Clin Invest 1985;75:1908.
93. Ernstoff MS, Trautman T, Davis CA, et al. A randomized phase I/II study of continuous versus intermittent intravenous interferon gamma in patients with metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol
1987;5:1804.
94. Zarour H, Richards T, Whiteside T, et al. E2690: intergroup immunological evaluation of IFNa2b dose-response in patients (Pts) with high-risk melanoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18.
95. Kirkwood JM, Ibrahim J, Sondak V, et al. Preliminary analysis of the E1690/S9111/C9190 Intergroup postoperative adjuvant trial of high - and low-dose IFNa2b (HDI and LDI) in high-risk
primary or lymph node metastatic melanoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:537A.
96. Creagan ET, Ahmann DL, Green SJ, et al. Phase II study of recombinant leukocyte A interferon (rIFN-aA) in disseminated malignant melanoma. Cancer 1984;54:2844.
97. Belardelli F, Gresser I, Maury C, Maunoury MT. Antitumor effects of interferon in mice injected with interferon-sensitive and interferon-resistant Friend leukemia cells. II. Role of host
mechanisms. Int J Cancer 1982;30:821.
98. Gresser I, Maury C, Belardelli F. Anti-tumor effects of interferon in mice injected with interferon-sensitive and interferon-resistant Friend leukemia cells. VI. Adjuvant therapy after surgery in the
inhibition of liver and spleen metastases. Int J Cancer 1987;39:789.
99. Gresser I, Maury C, Carnaud C, et al. Anti-tumor effects of interferon in mice injected with interferon-sensitive and interferon-resistant friend erythroleukemia cells. VIII. Role of the immune

system in the inhibition of visceral metastases. Int J Cancer 1990;46:468.
100. Snapper CM, Paul WE. Interferon-gamma and B cell stimulatory factor-1 reciprocally regulate Ig isotype production. Science 1987;236:944.
101. Konrad MW, DeWitt SK, Bradley ED, et al. Interferon-gamma induced by administration of recombinant interleukin-2 to patients with cancer: kinetics, dose dependence, and correlation with
physiological and therapeutic response. J Immunother 1992;12:55.
102. Atkins MB. Interleukin-2 in metastatic melanoma: establishing a role. CA Cancer J 1998;3:S7.
103. Atkins MB, Lotze M, Wiernick P, et al. High-dose IL-2 therapy alone results in long-term durable complete responses in patients with metastatic melanoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1997;16:494a.
104. Steinman RM. Dendritic cells and immune-based therapies. Exp Hematol 1996;24:859.
105. Hanahan D, Folkman J. Patterns and emerging mechanisms of the angiogenic switch during tumorigenesis. Cell 1996;86:353.
106. Folkman J. Successful treatment of an angiogenic disease. N Engl J Med 1989;320:1211.
107. Yoneda J, Kuniyasu H, Crispens MA, et al. Expression of angiogenesis-related genes and progression of human ovarian carcinomas in nude mice. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;90:447.
108. Dinney CPN, Bielenberg DR, Perrotte P, et al. Inhibition of basic fibroblast growth factor expression, angiogenesis, and growth of human bladder carcinoma in mice by systemic interferon-a
administration. Cancer Res 1998;58:808.
109. Legha SS, Papadopoulos NEJ, Plager C, et al. Clinical evaluation of recombinant interferon alfa-2a (Roferon-a) in metastatic melanoma using two different schedules. J Clin Oncol
1987;5:1240.
110. Creagan ET, Ahmann DL, Frytak S, et al. Phase II trials of recombinant leukocyte A interferon in disseminated malignant melanoma: results in 96 patients. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:619.
111. Creagan ET, Buckner JC, Hahn RG, et al. An evaluation of recombinant leukocyte A interferon with aspirin in patients with metastatic renal cell cancer. Cancer 1988;61:1787.
112. Massaro ER, Borden EC, Hawkins MJ, Wiebe DA, Shrago E. Effects of recombinant interferon-alpha 2 treatment upon lipid concentrations and lipoprotein composition. J Interferon Res
1986;6:655.
113. Ehnholm C, Aho K, Huttunen JK, et al. Effect of interferon on plasma lipoproteins and on the activity of postheparin plasma lipases. Arteriosclerosis: A Journal of Vascular Biology and
Thrombosis 1982;2:68.
114. Dixon RM, Borden EC, Keim NL, et al. Decreases in serum high-density-lipoprotein cholesterol and total cholesterol resulting from naturally produced and recombinant DNA derived leukocyte
interferons. Metabolism 1982;2:68.
115. Ernstoff MS, Kirkwood JM. Changes in the bone marrow of cancer patients treated with recombinant interferon alpha-2. Am J Med 1984;76:593.
116. Ernstoff MS, Gallicchio V, Kirkwood JM. Analysis of granulocyte macrophage progenitor cells in patients treated with recombinant interferon alpha-2. Am J Med 1985;79:167.
117. Krown SE, Burk MW, Kirkwood JM, et al. Human leukocyte (alpha) interferon in metastatic malignant melanoma: the American Cancer Society phase II trial. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:723.
118. Kirkwood JM, Strawderman MH, Ernstoff MS, et al. Interferon alfa-2b adjuvant therapy of high-risk resected cutaneous melanoma: the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Trial EST 1684. J
Clin Oncol 1996;14:7.
119. Kirkwood JM, Ernstoff MS. Interferons in the treatment of human cancer. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:336.
120. Mattson K, Niiranen A, Levanainen M, et al. Neurotoxicity of interferon. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:958.
121. Sumpio BE, Ernstoff MS, Kirkwood JM. Urinary excretion of interferon, albumin, and b 2- microglobulin during interferon treatment. Cancer Res 1984;44:3599.
122. Ault BH, Stapleton FB, Gaber L, et al. Acute renal failure during therapy with recombinant human gamma interferon. N Engl J Med 1988;319:1397.
123. Taylor AE, Wiltshaw E, Gore ME, Fryatt I, Fisher C. Long-term follow-up of the first randomized study of cisplatin versus carboplatin for advanced epithelial ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:2066.
124. Kurzrock R, Quesada JR, Rosenblum MG, Sherwin SA, Gutterman JU. Phase I study of iv administered recombinant gamma interferon in cancer patients. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:1357.
125. McDermott DF, Mier JW, Lawrence DP, et al. A phase II pilot trial of concurrent biochemotherapy with cisplatin, vinblastine, dacarbazine (CVD), interleukin-2 (IL-2) and interferon alpha-2b
(IFN) in patients with metastatic melanoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:490a.
126. Bender CM, Yasko JM, Kirkwood JM, et al. Cognitive function and quality of life in interferon therapy for melanoma. Clin Nursing Res 2000;9:350.
127. Rohatiner AZS, Balkwill FR, Griffin DB, et al. A phase I study of human lymphoblastoid interferon administered by continuous intravenous infusion. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1982;9:97.
128. Guyer DR, Tiedeman J, Yannuzzi LA, et al. Interferon-associated retinopathy. Arch Opthalmol 1993;111:350.
129. Reinhold U, Hartl C, Hering R, Hoeft A, Kreysel HW. Fatal rhabdomyolsis and multiple organ failue associated with adjuvant high-dose interferon alfa in malignant melanoma. Lancet
1997;349:540.
130. Thompson JA, Cox WW, Lindgren CG, et al. Subcutaneous recombinant gamma interferon in cancer patients: toxicity, pharmacokinetics, and immunomodulatory effects. Cancer Immunol
Immunother 1987;25:47.
131. Wagstaff J, Smith D, Nelmes P, Loynds P, Crowther D. A phase I study of recombinant interferon gamma administered by s.c. injection three times per week in patients with solid tumours.
Cancer Immunol Immunother 1987;25:54.
132. Wheeler A, Rubenstein EB. Current management of disseminated intravascular colgulation. Oncology 1994;8:69.
133. Breslow A. Thickness, cross-sectional areas and depth of invasion in the prognosis of cutaneous melanoma. Ann Surg 1970;172:902.
134. Coates A, Rallings M, Hersey P, Swanson C. Phase II study of recombinant alpha 2-interferon in advanced malignant melanoma. J Interferon Res 1986;6:1.
135. Creagan ET, Ahmann DL, Green SJ, et al. Phase II study of low-dose recombinant leukocyte A interferon in disseminated malignant melanoma. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:1002.
136. Sertoli MR, Bernengo MG, Ardizzoni A, et al. Phase II trial of recombinant alpha-2b interferon in the treatment of metastatic skin melanoma. Oncology 1989;46:96.
137. Elsasser-Beile U, Drees N, Neumann HA, Schopf E. Phase II trial of recombinant leukocyte A interferon in advanced malignant melanoma. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1987;113:273.
138. Steiner A, Wolf C, Pehamberger H. Comparison of the effects of three different treatment regimens of recombinant interferons (r-IFN alpha, r-IFN gamma, and r-IFN-alpha + cimetidine) in
disseminated malignant melanoma. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1987;113:459.
139. Kirkwood JM, Ernstoff MS, Davis CA, et al. Comparison of intramuscular and intravenous recombinant alpha-2 interferon in melanoma and other cancers. Ann Intern Med 1985;103:32.
140. Dorval T, Palangie T, Jouve M, et al. Clinical phase II trial of recombinant DNA interferon (interferon alfa 2b) in patients with metastatic malignant melanoma. Cancer 1986;58:215.
141. Robinson WA, Mughal TI, Thomas MR, Johnson M, Spiegel RJ. Treatment of metastatic malignant melanoma with recombinant interferon alpha-2. Immunobiology 1986;172:275.
142. Fogler WE, Sun LK, Klinger MR, Ghrayeb J, Daddona PE. Biological characterization of a chimeric mouse-human IgM antibody directed against the 17-1A antigen. Cancer Immunol
Immunother 1989;30:43.
143. von Wussow P, Block B, Hartmann F, Deicher H. Intralesional interferon-alpha therapy in advanced malignant melanoma. Cancer 1988;61:1071.
144. Fraker DL, Alexander HR. The use of tumor necrosis factor in isolated limb perfusions for melanoma and sarcoma. Cancer Principles and Practice of Oncology 1993;7:1.
145. Lejeune FJ. Administration of high-dose tumor necrosis factor alpha by isolation perfusion of the limbs: rationale and results. Journal of Infusional Chemotherapy 1994.
146. Lienard D, Eggermont AM, Schrafford T, Koops H, Lejeune FJ. High dose of rTNF-alpha, rINF-gamma and melphalan in isolation perfusion produce 90% CR in melanoma in-transit metastasis.
Ann Oncol 1992;3(Suppl 5):160(abst).
147. Buzaid AC, Bedikian A, Houghton AN. Systemic chemotherapy and biochemotherapy. In: Balch CM, Houghton AN, Sober AJ, et al., eds. Cutaneous melanoma, 3rd ed. St. Louis: Quality
Medical Publishing, 1998:405.
148. Posner MC, Lienard D, Lejeune FJ, Rosenfelder D, Kirkwood JM. Hypothermic isolated limb perfusion with tumor necrosis factor alone for melanoma. Cancer J 1995;1:274.
149. Thom AK, Alexander HR, Andrich MP, et al. Systemic toxicity and cytokine levels in patients undergoing isolated limb perfusion (LIP) with dose TNF, IFN gamma and melphalan. Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1993;12:389.
150. Carson JJ, Gold LH, Barton AB, Biss RT. Fatality and interferon a for malignant melanoma. Lancet 1998;352:1443.
151. Knost JA, Reynolds V, Greco FA, Oldham RK. Adjuvant chemoimmunotherapy stage I/II malignant melanoma. J Surg Oncol 1982;19:165.
152. Fisher RI, Terry WD, Hodes RJ, et al. Adjuvant immunotherapy or chemotherapy for malignant melanoma: preliminary report of the National Cancer Institute randomized clinical trial. Surg Clin
North Am 1981;61:1267.
153. Schiller JH, Storer B, Bittner G, Willson JKV, Borden EC. Phase II trial of a combination of interferon-b ser and interferon-g in patients with advanced malignant melanoma. J Interferon Res
1988;8:581.
154. Creagan ET, Loprinzi CL, Ahmann DL, Schaid DJ. A phase I-II trial of the combination of recombinant leukocyte A interferon and recombinant human interferon-gamma in patients with
metastatic malignant melanoma. Cancer 1988;62:2472.
155. Osanto S, Jansen R, Naipal AMIH, et al. In vivo effects of combination treatment with recombinant interferon-gamma and -alpha in metastatic melanoma. Int J Cancer 1989;43:1001.
156. Kurzrock R, Rosenblum MG, Quesada JR, et al. Phase I study of a combination of recombinant interferon-alpha and recombinant interferon-gamma in cancer patients. J Clin Oncol
1986;4:1677.
157. Ernstoff MS, Gooding W, Nair S, et al. Immunological effects of treatment with sequential administration of recombinant interferon gamma and alpha in patients with metastatic renal cell
carcinoma during a phase I trial. Cancer Res 1992;52:851.
158. Miller RL, Steis RG, Clark JW, et al. Randomized trial of recombinant a2b-interferon with or without indomethacin in patients with metastatic malignant melanoma. Cancer Res 1989;49:1871.
159. Eddy B, Ernstoff MS, Logan T, et al. A randomized phase I trial of recombinant interferon gamma (IFNg, Biogen, Inc. Cambridge, MA) with indomethacin (I), dexamethasone (D) or
acetaminopen (A) in patients (PT) with melanoma (M) and renal cell carcimona (RCC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1987;6:243.
160. Gambacorti-Passerini C, Hank JA, Albertini MR, et al. A pilot phase II trial of continuous-infusion interleukin-2 followed by lymphokine-activated killer cell therapy and bolus-infusion
interleukin-2 in renal cancer. J Immunother 1993;13:43.
161. Izzo J, Khuri FR, Hong WK. Adjuvant biological therapy of head and neck cancer. In: Kirkwood JM, ed. Strategies in adjuvant therapy. Malden, MA: Martin Dunitz, 2000:153.
162. Dhingra K, Papadopoulos N, Lippman S, Lotan R, Legha SS. Phase II study of alpha-interferon and 13-cis-retinoic acid in metastatic melanoma. Invest New Drugs 1993;11:39.
163. Kirkwood JM, Agarwala S. Systemic cytotoxic and biologic therapy melanoma. Cancer Principles and Practice of Oncology 1993;7:1.
164. Kirkwood JM, Ernstoff MS, Guiliano A, et al. Clinical trials of interferon alfa-2B (Intron A, alpha-IFN) in melanoma: review of phase I, II, and III studies. Proceedings of the XIV International
Cancer Congress (Budapest) August 1986.
165. Kirkwood JM, Ernstoff MS, Guiliano A, et al. Interferon a-2a and dacarbazine in melanoma [letter]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:1062.
166. Thompson D, Adena M, McLeod GRC, et al. Interferon alpha-2a does not improve response or survival when added to dacarbazine in metastatic melanoma: results of a multi-institutional
Anstrahan randomized trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11:343.
167. Bajetta E, Negretti E, Giannotti B, et al. Phase II study of interferon a-2a and dacarbazine in advanced melanoma. Am J Clin Oncol 1990;13:405.
168. Gundersen S, Flokkmann A. Interferon plus dacarbazine in advanced malignant melanoma: a phase I-II study. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:220.
169. Mulder NH, deVries EGE, Sleijfer DTH, et al. Dacarbazine (DTIC), human recombinant interferon alpha 2a (roferon) and 5-fluorouracil for disseminated malignant melanoma. Br J Cancer
1992;65:303.
170. Sertoli MR, Queirolo P, Bajetta E, et al. Dacarbazine with or without recombinant interferon alpha-2a at different dosages in the treatment of stage IV melanoma patients. Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1992;11:345.
171. Bajetta E, Zampino MG, Di Leo A, et al. A phase III study with dacarbazine (DTIC) r-interferon alpha-2a (r-IFN) at different doses in advanced melanoma. Ann Oncol 1992;3:612.
172. Falkson CI, Ibrahim J, Kirkwood JM, et al. Phase III trial of dacarbazine versus dacarbazine with interferon a-2b versus dacarbazine with tamoxifen versus dacarbazine with interferon a-2b and
tamoxifen in patients with metastatic malignant melanoma: an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Study (E3690). J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1743.
173. Oken MM, Kyle RA, Greipp PR, et al. Complete remission induction with combined VBMCP chemotherapy and interferon (rIFN alpha 2b) in patients with multiple myeloma. Leukemia
Lymphoma 1996;20:447.
174. Solal-Celigny P, Lepage E, Brousse N, et al. Doxorubicin-containing regimen with or without interferon alfa-2b for advanced follicular lymphomas: final analysis of survival and toxicity in the
Groupe d'Etude des Lymphomes Folliculaires 86 Trial. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2332.
175. Smalley RV, Andersen JW, Hawkins MJ, et al. Interferon alfa combined with cytotoxic chemotherapy for patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1992;327:1336.
176. Agarwala SS, Atkins MB, Kirkwood JM. Current approaches to advanced and high-risk melanoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2000.

177. Richards JM, Mehta N, Ramming K, et al. Sequential chemoimmunotherapy in the treatment of metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol 1992;8:1338.
178. Pyrhonen S, Hahka-Kemppinen M, Muhonen T. A promising interferon plus four-drug chemotherapy regimen for metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1919.
179. Khayat D, Borel C, Tourani JM, et al. Sequential chemoimmunotherapy with cisplatin, interleukin-2, and interferon alfa-2a for metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2173.
180. Nordlund JJ, Kirkwood JM, Forget BM. Vitiligo in patients with metastatic melanoma: a good prognostic sign. J Am Acad Dermatol 1983;9:689.
181. Harris J, Bines S, Das Gupta T. Therapy of disseminated malignant melanoma with recombinant alfa-2b interferon and piroxicam: clinical results with a report of an unusual
response-associated feature (vitiligo) and unusual toxicity (diffuse pulmonary interstitial fibrosis). Med Pediatr Oncol 1994;22:103.
182. Figlin RA. Biotherapy with interferon in solid tumors. Oncol Nurs Forum 1987;14:23.
183. Karjalainen S, Hakulinen T. Survival and prognostic factors of patients with skin melanomas. Cancer 1988;62:2274.
184. Ryan L, Kramar A, Borden E. Prognostic factors in metastatic melanoma. Cancer 1993;71:2995.
185. Kirkwood J, Hunt M, Smith T, et al. A randomized controlled trial of high-dose IFN alfa-2b for high-risk melanoma: the ECOG trial EST-1684. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1993;12:390.
186. Day CL Jr, Lew RA, Mihm MC Jr, et al. A multivariate analysis of prognostic factors for melanoma patients with lesions 3.65 mm in thickness: the importance of revealing alternate Cox models.
Ann Surg 1982;195:44.
187. Day CL Jr, Sober AJ, Lew RA, et al. Malignant melanoma patients with positive nodes and relatively good prognoses: microstaging retains prognostic significance in clinical stage I melanoma
patients with metastases to regional nodes. Cancer 1981;47:955.
188. Cole BF, Gelber RD, Kirkwood JM, et al. A quality-of-life-adjusted survival analysis of interferon alfa-2b adjuvant treatment for high-risk resected cutaneous melanoma: an Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group Study (E1684). J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2666.
189. Kilbridge KL, Sock D, Kirkwood J, et al. Patient utilities for adjuvant interferon (IFN) treatment for high-risk melanoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999.
190. Hillner BE, Kirkwood JM, Atkins MB, Johnson ER, Smith TJ. Economic analysis of adjuvant interferon alfa-2b in high-risk melanoma based on projections from ECOG 1684. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:2351.
191. Messori A, Becagli P, Trippoli S, Tendi E. A retrospective cost-effectiveness analysis of interferon as adjuvant therapy in high-risk resected cutaneous melanoma. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:1373.
192. Messori A, Becagli P, Trippoli S. Cost-effectiveness of interferon-alpha as maintenance therapy in chronic myelogenous leukemia. Ann Intern Med 1997;126:664.
193. Cascinelli N, Bufalino R, Morabito A, MacKie R. Results of adjuvant interferon study in WHO melanoma programme. Lancet 1994;343:913.
194. Chapman PB, Morrissey D, Ibrahim J, et al. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group phase II randomized adjuvant trial of GM2-KLH + QS21 (GMK) vaccine high dose interferon-a 2b (HD IFN) in
melanoma (MEL). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;538a.

SECTION 20.2
Interleukin-2
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 20.2
Interleukin-2
JAMES W. MIER
MICHAEL B. ATKINS
Introduction
Isolation, Characterization, and Cloning of Interleukin-2
Interleukin-2 Receptor
Interleukin-2 –Activated Signaling Pathways
In Vitro Effects of Interleukin-2
Preclinical Studies with Interleukin-2 in Tumor-Bearing Mice
Clinical Applications of Interleukin-2
Clinical Investigations Involving High-Dose Interleukin-2
Toxicity of High-Dose Interleukin-2 Administration
Management of Patients Receiving High-Dose Interleukin-2
Lower-Dose or Alternative Interleukin-2 Regimens
Biology and Pharmacokinetics of Interleukin-2
Attempts to Improve Activity of Interleukin-2–Based Therapy
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) is the first agent available for the treatment of metastatic cancer that functions solely through the activation of the immune system. Originally
described as a growth factor for activated T cells, IL-2 was subsequently found to exert multiple effects on cellular immune function and to induce tumor regression in
mice. Subsequent clinical trials in patients with renal cell carcinoma and malignant melanoma demonstrated sufficient efficacy to establish IL-2 as a U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA)-approved treatment for both of these malignancies.

ISOLATION, CHARACTERIZATION, AND CLONING OF INTERLEUKIN-2
In 1976, Morgan et al.1 demonstrated the existence of a growth factor present in the conditioned medium of lectin-stimulated human peripheral blood mononuclear
cells that could sustain indefinitely the ex vivo proliferation of human T cells. This initial report was followed in short order by the isolation, biochemical
characterization, and, ultimately, the cloning of what was then termed T-cell growth factor.2,3 Subsequently designated IL-2, this factor was shown to be a 15-kD
polypeptide made up of 153 amino acids, the first 20 of which form a signal sequence that is proteolytically cleaved during secretion. Natural IL-2 is glycosylated,
although the attachment of sugar moieties is not essential for biologic activity. The molecule has cysteine residues at positions 58, 105, and 125, the first two of which
form an intramolecular disulfide bridge. The third cysteine is not essential for biologic activity and can be replaced with alternative amino acids to minimize
polymerization and increase shelf life. Crystallographic analysis indicates that IL-2 is a spherical molecule comprised of six a helical regions.

INTERLEUKIN-2 RECEPTOR
The various biologic effects of IL-2 are the result of the binding of the lymphokine to specific surface receptors. 4 As with IL-2 itself, the expression of high-affinity IL-2
receptors is induced as a result of signaling through the T-cell antigen receptor. With the exception of a minor population of memory T cells that presumably were
activated in vivo by a prior antigen exposure, freshly isolated peripheral blood T cells do not constitutively express high-affinity IL-2 receptors. 5
The high-affinity IL-2 receptor consists of three distinct subunits designated the a, b, and g chains ( Fig. 20.2-1). The a chain 6 is a 251 amino acid polypeptide with a
large extracellular domain, a transmembrane span, and a short 13-residue cytoplasmic tail. The extracellular domain of this protein binds IL-2 with low affinity. The
cytoplasmic domain of this receptor has no known biologic function and is dispensable for IL-2–induced signaling.

FIGURE 20.2-1. The high-affinity interleukin-2 receptor and associated signaling pathways. The cytoplasmic domains of the b and g chains contain several tyrosines
that, when phosphorylated, provide docking and activation sites for numerous downstream kinases that affect cell proliferation, gene expression, and cell motility.
GTPases, guanosine triphosphatases; JAK, Janus kinase; PI3K, phosphoinositide 3 kinase; STAT, signal transduction and activators of transcription.

The IL-2 receptor b chain has a 214 amino acid extracellular domain, a transmembrane motif, and a large 286-residue cytoplasmic tail. 7 In contrast to the cytoplasmic
domain of the a chain, that of the b chain is essential for IL-2 signaling. The IL-2 receptor b chain has paired cysteines at two sites within the extracellular domain and
a perimembrane WSXWS motif characteristic of the members of an enlarging cytokine receptor superfamily that includes the receptors for IL-3, IL-4, IL-6, IL-7,
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, prolactin, erythropoietin, and growth hormone.
The g chain is a novel 64-kD protein that physically associates with the b chain. Like the b chain, the g chain is a member of the cytokine receptor superfamily. 8 These
two together bind IL-2 with intermediate affinity. When cotransfected along with the complementary DNAs of the a and b chains, the complementary DNA encoding the
g chain yields a high-affinity IL-2 receptor that transduces signals and is internalized in response to IL-2 binding. More recent studies have demonstrated that this
receptor chain is shared by the receptors for several lymphokines, including IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, and IL-15, as well as IL-2. 9 Mutations in the gene encoding this receptor
chain account for most, if not all, cases of X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency. 10 Using antibodies against these receptor chains, resting T cells were found
to constitutively express low levels of the IL-2 receptorg chain, but not the a or b chains. All three chains are up-regulated as a result of antigenic stimulation. Resting
natural killer cells constitutively express the b chain, and both the a and g chains are induced in these cells by exposure to IL-2 or IL-12. 11

INTERLEUKIN-2 –ACTIVATED SIGNALING PATHWAYS
The binding of IL-2 to its receptor induces the tyrosine phosphorylation of numerous cellular proteins, including the IL-2 receptor b chain itself. Because all three
chains of the IL-2 receptor lack intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity, these events must be transduced through kinases that physically associate with the cytoplasmic
domains of the receptor subunits (see Fig. 20.2-1). Indeed, the src family member p56lck has been shown to associate with the b chain, and its kinase activity is
augmented by IL-2. 12 IL-2 also induces the recruitment and subsequent tyrosine phosphorylation of the adapter protein Shc to the IL-2R b chain. This particular
association is thought to be largely responsible for the activation of p21 ras and the downstream mitogen-activated protein kinases erk-1 and erk-2 in response to

IL-2.13 The IL-2 receptor g chain is also essential for IL-2–induced signaling, because T-cell lines expressing the a and b chains and a mutant version of the g chain
lacking the C-terminal 68 residues fail to express the protooncogenes c-fos, c-jun, and c-myc when stimulated with IL-2.14
In addition to the association with src family tyrosine kinases, both the b and g receptor chains associate with members of the Janus kinase family of tyrosine
kinases.15 Janus kinase family member JAK3 associates with the C-terminus of the IL-2 receptor g chain, and both JAK1 and JAK2 associate with the b chain. JAK1
has been shown to bind to a specific serine-rich domain present in the membrane-proximal region of the b chain. Janus kinases activate various members of the
signal transduction and activators of transcription (STAT) family of transcription factors. The binding of IL-2 to its receptor results in the activation of STAT1, STAT3,
and STAT5 in T cells, and an additional member, STAT4, in natural killer (NK) cells. 16

IN VITRO EFFECTS OF INTERLEUKIN-2
IL-2 was originally isolated based on its ability to induce the growth of previously activated T cells. 1 In addition to its proliferative effects, IL-2 induces the synthesis of
an array of secondary cytokines, such as IL-1, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), IL-6, and lymphotoxin. 17 Several of these secondary cytokines are detectable in the
circulation of cancer patients receiving IL-2 immunotherapy (see later, Toxicity of High-Dose Interleukin-2 Administration ) and are thought by many investigators to
contribute to the side effects of IL-2. 18
The biologic effect of IL-2 arguably most pertinent to its use as an antitumor agent may be its ability to enhance the cytolytic activity of antigen-specific cytotoxic T
lymphocytes and NK cells.19,20 The biochemical basis for this enhanced cytolytic function is currently unclear, but it is thought to be due in part to the increased
expression of genes encoding the lytic components of cytotoxic granules (e.g., perforin, granzymes) as well as adhesion molecules (lymphocyte function-associated
antigen 1) that facilitate the binding of activated leukocytes to tumor endothelium and the tumor cells themselves. In addition to increasing the HLA-restricted cytolytic
activity of cytotoxic T lymphocytes for cells expressing a particular antigen and that of NK cells for susceptible tumor cell targets, IL-2 markedly diversifies the range of
target cells susceptible to killing by these effectors. 21,22 Indeed, human peripheral blood lymphocytes exposed only to high concentrations of IL-2 without prior
exposure to tumor cells are able to kill virtually all tumor cell lines and most freshly isolated tumor cells in vitro, regardless of the particular HLA class I alleles
expressed by the target cell. Some nontransformed cells, in particular cultured endothelial cells, are similarly susceptible to IL-2–primed peripheral blood lymphocytes
in isotope release assays. 23 The cells responsible for this HLA-unrestricted killing in response to IL-2 have been termed lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells.21,22
LAK cells appear to be a mixture of activated NK cells and CD3+/CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, the relative contributions of which depend on the duration of culture in IL-2
and whether human peripheral blood lymphocytes or murine spleen suspensions are used as a LAK cell source. As described below, these ex vivo–activated LAK
cells featured prominently in the early clinical trials carried out with IL-2 in cancer patients.

PRECLINICAL STUDIES WITH INTERLEUKIN-2 IN TUMOR-BEARING MICE
The results of the in vitro studies demonstrating that IL-2 could enhance the cytolytic activity of NK cells and tumor-specific cytotoxic T cells suggested that
systemically administered IL-2 might induce tumor regression in tumor-bearing mice. IL-2 has since undergone extensive evaluation as an antitumor agent in a variety
of murine tumor models. IL-2 has been used alone, in combination with other cytokines, and in conjunction with the adoptive transfer of various ex vivo–activated
lymphoid preparations to eradicate a wide range of local and metastatic tumors. Early studies demonstrated that IL-2 used alone could reduce or eliminate pulmonary
metastases from methylcholanthrene-induced sarcoma and melanoma cell lines and that this antitumor effect was strictly dependent on the dose of IL-2
administered.24 In another early study, IL-2 was able to cure 50% of mice inoculated with FBL-3 leukemia cells. 25 In this study, mice cured of leukemia by IL-2 were
resistant to the subsequent inoculation of the same tumor cell line, suggesting that IL-2 treatment had effectively immunized the tumor-bearing mice against this
particular tumor. In more recent studies in which mice were immunized with dendritic cells pulsed with tumor lysates, the concurrent systemic administration of IL-2
was shown to enhance the efficacy of the vaccine. 26
In several studies, the effects of IL-2 could be enhanced by the concurrent administration of LAK cells generated by culturing splenocytes ex vivo in IL-2–containing
media.27 Mice bearing hepatic micrometastases from poorly immunogenic MCA-105 or MCA-102 sarcomas or MCA-38 adenocarcinoma cells, for example, were
highly responsive to treatment with the combination of IL-2 and LAK cells but were unresponsive to LAK cells alone and only partially responsive to IL-2.
Lymphocytes present within tumor infiltrates are presumably enriched for effector cells capable of killing tumor cells. 28 When isolated and tested in vitro for cytolytic
activity against autologous tumor cells, these tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) are 50- to 100-fold more potent than IL-2–activated splenocytes (LAK cells). This
apparent superiority was also evident in vivo. The infusion of 2 × 10 6 TILs with IL-2, for example, completely eradicated the pulmonary metastases of mice previously
inoculated with MCA-105 sarcoma cells. 29 As many as 2 × 108 LAK cells were required for a comparable effect.

CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF INTERLEUKIN-2
The potent immunomodulatory and antitumor effects of IL-2 in the in vitro experiments and preclinical animal tumor models described in the previous two sections
prompted the rapid movement of IL-2 into the clinical setting. Early clinical trials involving the brief administration of modest doses of purified, cell-derived IL-2
produced only transient fever and lymphopenia, but no sustained ill effects or tumor responses. 30 Because preclinical trials had shown that tumor responses were
dose-dependent and maximal when IL-2 was combined with LAK cells, the advent of recombinant IL-2 led quickly to a series of trials using higher doses of IL-2, with
and without LAK cells.
CLINICAL INVESTIGATIONS INVOLVING HIGH-DOSE INTERLEUKIN-2
Investigators at the National Cancer Institute (NCI) Surgery Branch developed a regimen that involved the administration of high-dose intravenous bolus IL-2. 31,32 In
this regimen, IL-2 [aldesleukin (Proleukin); Cetus/Chiron, Emeryville, CA] was administered at 600,000 to 720,000 IU/kg intravenously every 8 hours on days 1 to 5
and 15 to 19 of a treatment course. A maximum of 28 to 30 doses per course was administered; however, doses were frequently withheld for excessive toxicity.
Treatment courses were repeated at 8- to 12-week intervals in responding patients. During initial studies, patients underwent daily leukaphereses on days 8 to 12,
during which large numbers of lymphocytes were obtained to be cultured in IL-2 for 3 to 4 days to generate LAK cells; these LAK cells were then reinfused into the
patient during the second 5-day period of IL-2 administration.
This high-dose IL-2 regimen, with or without LAK cells, produced overall tumor responses in 15% to 20% of patients with metastatic melanoma or renal cell cancer in
clinical trials conducted at either the NCI Surgery Branch or within the Cytokine Working Group (formerly the Extramural IL-2 and LAK Working Group). 32,33and34
Complete responses were noted in 4% to 6% of patients with each disease and were frequently durable. Rare responses, usually partial and of shorter duration, were
also noted in patients with either Hodgkin's or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, 35 or non–small cell lung, colorectal, or ovarian carcinoma. 36 Randomized and sequential
clinical trials comparing IL-2 plus LAK cells with high-dose IL-2 alone did not show sufficient benefit for the addition of LAK cells to justify their continued use. 37,38and39
The quality and durability of tumor responses to this high-dose IL-2 regimen led to IL-2 receiving FDA approval for the treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma in
1992 and metastatic melanoma in 1998. 40,41
TOXICITY OF HIGH-DOSE INTERLEUKIN-2 ADMINISTRATION
The utility of high-dose IL-2 has been limited by toxicity, many features of which resemble bacterial sepsis. Side effects are dose-dependent and largely predictable
and rapidly reversible. Common side effects include fever, chills, lethargy, diarrhea, nausea, anemia, thrombocytopenia, eosinophilia, diffuse erythroderma, hepatic
dysfunction, and confusion. 42,43 Myocarditis also occurs in approximately 5% of patients. IL-2 therapy also commonly produces a “capillary leak syndrome,” leading to
fluid retention, hypotension, early adult respiratory distress syndrome, prerenal azotemia, and, occasionally, myocardial infarction. As a consequence of these side
effects, few patients are able to receive all of the proposed therapy. IL-2 also has been shown to produce a neutrophil chemotactic defect that predisposes patients to
infection with gram-positive and, occasionally, gram-negative bacteria. 44,45 Early high-dose IL-2 studies were associated with 2% to 4% mortality, largely related to
infection or cardiac toxicity. 40,41,42and43 The routine use of antibiotic prophylaxis, more extensive cardiac screening, and more judicious IL-2 administration have greatly
enhanced the safety of this therapy; since 1990, the mortality rates at experienced treatment centers have been less than 1% 46 (Table 20.2-1). Nonetheless, the
considerable toxicity of the high-dose IL-2 regimen has continued to limit its application to highly selected patients with excellent performance status and adequate
organ function treated at medical centers with considerable experience with this approach.

TABLE 20.2-1. Safety of High-Dose Intravenous Bolus Recombinant Interleukin-2 Therapy a: The National Cancer Institute Experience b

Laboratory studies have suggested that IL-2 toxicity appears to be mediated, at least in part, by the release of secondary cytokines such as TNF-a, IL-1, and IL-6 and
the generation of nitric oxide. 47,48and49 Nonetheless, attempts to block the toxicity of IL-2 by the co-administration of selective inhibitors of the biologic effects of these
secondary cytokines have been largely unsuccessful to date. 50,51and52
MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS RECEIVING HIGH-DOSE INTERLEUKIN-2
The management of patients undergoing high-dose IL-2 therapy begins at the time of patient selection. This therapy should be limited to patients without significant
cardiac disease (prior myocardial infarction, angina, congestive heart failure, or serious cardiac arrhythmias). Patients older than age 40 years should have a normal
cardiac stress test. In addition, patients should have no evidence of central nervous system metastases; adequate pulmonary, renal, and hepatic function (forced
expiratory volume in 1 second of more than 2 L, serum creatinine less than 1.6 mg/dL, serum bilirubin less than 1.5 mg/dL); and good performance status (Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group scale, 0 or 1).
Concomitant therapy typically includes acetaminophen and indomethacin to prevent rigors and fever, H 2 blockers to prevent gastritis, and prophylactic antibiotics to
prevent catheter-related infections. Patients should also receive antiemetics, antidiarrheals, and skin care on an as-needed basis. Steroids should be avoided
because they interfere with immune activation. Patients typically require fluid administration to support their blood pressure. Hypotension unresponsive to fluid
administration is treated with intravenous dopamine hydrochloride and, when necessary, intravenous phenylephrine hydrochloride. Sodium bicarbonate administration
is often necessary to keep the serum HCO 3 concentration higher than 18 mEq/L. Severe toxicities, such as hypotension requiring multiple pressor agents, confusion,
cardiac arrhythmias or myocarditis, metabolic acidosis, or dyspnea, are usually managed by withholding doses of IL-2. Once these problems resolve, treatment
usually can be resumed (omitted doses of IL-2 are not replaced).
With careful patient selection and judicious treatment of toxicity, most patients can safely receive an adequate amount of high-dose IL-2; however, because of the
unusual nature and potential severity of these side effects, the use of this therapy by inexperienced physicians and nurses should be discouraged.
LOWER-DOSE OR ALTERNATIVE INTERLEUKIN-2 REGIMENS
Because of the significant toxicity associated with high-dose intravenous bolus IL-2 regimens and the expense involved with the necessary hospitalization and
intensive monitoring, various investigators have attempted to establish active regimens using lower doses of IL-2. In these regimens, IL-2 was administered either by
lower-dose intravenous bolus, continuous intravenous infusion, or subcutaneous injection in an effort to maintain or enhance antitumor effects while decreasing
toxicity. Table 20.2-2 lists a variety of the more commonly used lower-dose IL-2 regimens. 53,54,55,56,57,58and59

TABLE 20.2-2. Commonly Used Treatment Regimens of Interleukin-2 (IL-2) Alone

The maximum tolerated dose for IL-2 when administered by a 5-day (120-hour) continuous infusion was shown to be 18 MIU/m 2/d or only approximately one-fifth the
total amount of IL-2 tolerated by intravenous bolus IL-2 regimens. 53 Although continuous infusion IL-2 regimens were shown to produce response rates similar to the
high-dose intravenous bolus IL-2 regimen, the toxicity was also generally comparable. 53,54and55 Other regimens, such as those using lower doses of IL-2 administered
either by intravenous bolus or subcutaneous injection, are much better tolerated, enabling treatment to be provided in a routine ward or even an outpatient setting.
The side effects are generally limited to the flu-like symptoms and constitutional symptoms already described, allowing treatment to be provided safely, even to
patients with more limited cardiac, pulmonary, and renal function. These regimens have produced roughly comparable response rates in patients with renal cell
carcinoma; however, the quality and durability of these responses have yet to be shown to be comparable to the responses observed with high-dose intravenous
regimens.56,57 Lower-dose IL-2 regimens have been largely inactive in patients with metastatic melanoma. 60

BIOLOGY AND PHARMACOKINETICS OF INTERLEUKIN-2
Although only the recombinant IL-2 manufactured by Chiron (Proleukin) is currently FDA approved for clinical use, several different IL-2 preparations have been used
in clinical trials. These preparations differ in potency and, in some instances, biologic activity. By convention, 60 the following conversion factors are used: 1 Cetus unit
= 6 IU; 1 Hoffman-LaRoche unit = 1 Biologic Response Modifier Program = 2.6 IU. It has become apparent, however, that many other differences may exist between
these preparations 61 and, therefore, these simple conversions may not be entirely valid.
Yang et al. 56 examined the pharmacokinetics of IL-2 (Proleukin) administered to patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma on three distinct treatment regimens ( Fig.
20.2-2). Patients undergoing treatment with high-dose intravenous IL-2 (720,000 IU/kg) achieved peak serum concentrations of 4680 ± 1188 IU/mL shortly after the
first injection. Subsequent clearance was biphasic, with an initial half-life of 12.6 ± 5.4 minutes and a terminal half-life of 1.6 ± 0.4 hours. Patients receiving low-dose
intravenous IL-2 (72,000 IU/kg) exhibited peak levels of 486 ± 198 IU/mL after the first injection, with a similar clearance pattern and rates. Those patients receiving
IL-2 administered subcutaneously at a dose of 250,000 IU/kg had peak serum levels of 61 ± 34 IU/mL 2 to 3 hours after the injection, with a half-life of 5.3 ± 1.9 hours.
Levels in excess of 18 IU/mL were maintained between injections in patients receiving either the high-dose intravenous or the subcutaneous regimen cited, but not the
low-dose intravenous regimen. The relationship of these differing pharmacokinetic profiles to the biologic and antitumor effects of IL-2 remains to be determined.

FIGURE 20.2-2. Examples of pharmacokinetic studies on representative patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma measuring biologically active serum interleukin
(IL)-2 levels after the first administration of recombinant IL-2 at (A) 720,000 IU/kg by intravenous bolus, (B) 72,000 IU/kg by intravenous bolus, or (C) 250,000 IU/kg
by subcutaneous injection. (From ref. 56, with permission.)

ATTEMPTS TO IMPROVE ACTIVITY OF INTERLEUKIN-2–BASED THERAPY
A number of approaches have been tried in an effort to improve the activity of IL-2–based therapy. These are listed in Table 20.2-3. Although preclinical laboratory
and animal studies provided a strong rationale for the clinical investigations involving the combination of IL-2 and interferon-a (IFN-a), 62 and early clinical studies
appeared promising, 63 subsequent clinical trials have not shown superiority for this combination relative to high-dose IL-2. 64,65and66 Nonetheless, combinations of
low-dose IL-2 with IFN have been developed that can be administered safely in an outpatient setting, and they appear to possess sufficient antitumor activity to
enable them to be considered by many as an alternative to high-dose IL-2. 67,68and69 In addition, low-dose IL-2 and IFN regimens have been better able to
accommodate the addition of other potentially active agents, such as chemotherapy or cellular therapy.

TABLE 20.2-3. Approaches to Improve the Activity of Interleukin-2

Efforts to combine IL-2 with other potentially active cytokines, such as IFN-g, TNF, and IL-4, have been largely unsuccessful to date, 70 whereas clinical trials involving
combinations of IL-2 and IL-12 are ongoing. Likewise, combinations of IL-2 with a variety of monoclonal antibodies directed either against tumor antigens (GD2 or
GD3 gangliosides) or T-cell activation antigens (CD3) have been disappointing. 71 Although IL-2 and TIL combinations were extremely promising in animal tumor
models, results of human investigations with this approach have been mixed. Although preliminary studies involving IL-2 and TILs in melanoma or IL-2/IFN and
selected CD8+ TILs in renal cell carcinoma produced encouraging response rates, selection bias could not be excluded as an explanation. 72,73and74 A randomized trial
of low-dose IL-2, with or without CD8+ TILs, in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma produced a disappointingly low response rate for both treatment arms 75; a
similar study has yet to be performed in patients with metastatic melanoma.
Despite their limited therapeutic utility, TILs have proven to be a valuable tool for identifying melanoma-associated tumor regression antigens. 76 Extensive research at
the NCI Surgery Branch and elsewhere has identified HLA-restricted melanocyte lineage–specific antigens that are recognized by the cellular immune system in
patients exhibiting a response to IL-2–based therapy. 77 Active immunization trials with immunodominant peptides derived from these tumor regression antigens have
produced some encouraging results. 78,79 For example, vaccination with a mutated version of the gp100 peptide antigen, together with high-dose IL-2, produced tumor
responses in more than 40% of patients. 80 Confirmatory trials examining either a variety of schedules of peptide vaccination and IL-2 administration or comparing this
combination to high-dose IL-2 alone are currently under way. In addition, trials examining combinations of similarly HLA-restricted antigens or antigen-presenting cells
pulsed with these peptides together with IL-2 have been initiated.
Another promising approach has involved the combination of IL-2–based immunotherapy and cytotoxic chemotherapy—so called biochemotherapy. Efforts in renal
cell cancer patients have focused on the addition of 5-fluorouracil–based chemotherapy, 79 whereas in melanoma, investigations have primarily examined IL-2 together
with cisplatin- and dacarbazine-based cytotoxic chemotherapy. 81,82 Response rates as high as 40% in patients with renal cell carcinoma and 50% to 60% in patients
with metastatic melanoma have been reported with these regimens. These encouraging results from multiple phase II trials and metaanalyses 83,84 await confirmation
in ongoing large-scale phase III clinical trials. If biochemotherapy proves superior to chemotherapy alone in either disease, it might conceivably provide a rationale for
examining IL-2–based biochemotherapy regimens in other 5-fluorouracil– or cisplatin-sensitive malignancies. In addition, these or other approaches mentioned here
might show sufficient activity in the metastatic setting to justify their being examined in the high-risk adjuvant setting in which tumor burden and associated immune
suppression may be less and, consequently, the potential for clinical impact may be greatly enhanced.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Morgan D, Ruscetti FW, Gallo R. Selective in vitro growth of T-lymphocytes from normal bone marrows. Science 1976;193:1007.
2. Mier J, Gallo R. Purification and some characteristics of human T cell growth factor (TCGF) from PHA-stimulated lymphocyte conditioned media. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1980;77:6134.
3. Taniguchi T, Matsui H, Fujita T, et al. Structure and expression of a cloned cDNA for human interleukin-2. Nature 1983;302:305.
4. Taniguchi T, Minami Y. The IL-2/IL-2 receptor system: a current overview. Cell 1993;73:5.
5. Gootenberg J, Ruscetti F, Mier J, Gazdar A, Gallo R. Human cutaneous T-cell lymphoma and leukemia cell lines produce and respond to T-cell growth factor. J Exp Med 1981;154:1403.
6. Leonard WJ, Depper J, Uchiyama T, et al. A monoclonal antibody that appears to recognize the receptor for T cell growth factor: partial purification of the receptor. Nature 1982;300:267.
7. Hatakeyama M, Tsudo M, Minamoto S, et al. Interleukin-2 receptor beta chain gene: generation of three receptor forms by cloned human alpha and beta chain cDNAs. Science 1989;244:551.
8. Takeshita T, Asao H, Ohtani K, et al. Cloning of the gamma-chain of the human IL-2 receptor. Science 1992;257:379.
9. Lodolce JP, Boone DL, Chai S, et al. IL-15 receptor maintains lymphoid homeostasis by supporting lymphocyte homing and proliferation. Immunity 1998;9:669.
10. Noguchi M, Yi H, Rosenblatt HM, et al. Interleukin-2 receptor gamma chain mutation results in X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency in humans. Cell 1983;73:147.
11. Nakarai T, Robertson MJ, Streuli M, et al. Interleukin-2 receptor gamma chain expression on resting and activated lymphoid cells. J Exp Med 1994;180:241.
12. Hatakeyama M, Kono T, Kobayashi N, et al. Interaction of the IL-2 receptor with the src-family kinase p56 lck: identification of novel intermolecular association. Science 1991;252:1523.
13. Friedmann MC, Migone TS, Russell SM, Leonard WJ. Different interleukin-2 receptor beta chain tyrosines couple to at least two signaling pathways and synergistically mediate
interleukin-2-induced proliferation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:2077.
14. Asao H, Takeshita T, Ishii N, et al. Reconstitution of functional interleukin 2 receptor complexes on fibroblastoid cells: involvement of the cytoplasmic domain of the gamma chain in two distinct
signaling pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:4127.
15. Russell SM, Johnston JA, Noguchi M, et al. Interaction of IL-2 receptor beta and gamma c chains with JAK1 and JAK3: implications for XSCID and XCID. Science 1994;266:1042.
16. Wang KS, Ritz J, Frank DA. IL-2 induces STAT4 activation in primary NK cells and NK cell lines, but not in T cells. J Immunol 1999;162:299.
17. Numerof R, Aronson F, Mier J. Interleukin-2 stimulates the production of interleukin-1 alpha and interleukin-1 beta by human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J Immunol 1988;141:4250.
18. Gemlo BT, Palladino MA, Jaffe HS, Espevik TP, Rayner AA. Circulating cytokines in patients with metastatic cancer treated with recombinant interleukin-2 and lymphokine-activated killer cells.
Cancer Res 1988;48:5864.
19. Strasser JL, Rosenberg SA. In vitro growth of cytotoxic human lymphocytes. I. Growth of cells sensitized in vitro to alloantigens. J Immunol 1978;121:1951.
20. Lotze MT, Grimm EA, Mazumder A, Strausser JL, Rosenberg SA. Lysis of fresh and cultured autologous tumor by human lymphocytes cultured in T-cell growth factor. Cancer Res

1981;41:4420.
21. Grimm EA, Mazumder A, Zhang HZ, Rosenberg SA. Lymphokine-activated killing phenomenon: lysis of natural killer resistant fresh solid tumor cells by interleukin-2 activated autologous
human peripheral blood lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1982;155:1823.
22. Grimm EA, Robb RJ, Roth JA, et al. The lymphokine activated killer cell phenomenon. III. Evidence that IL-2 alone is sufficient for direct activation of PBL into lymphokine-activated killer cells.
J Exp Med 1983;158:1356.
23. Aronson F, Libby P, Brandon E, Janicka M, Mier J. Interleukin-2 rapidly induces natural killer cell adhesion to human endothelial cells: a potential mechanism for endothelial injury. J Immunol
1988;141:158.
24. Rosenberg SA, Mule JJ, Spiess PJ, Reichert CM, Schwarz SL. Regression of established pulmonary metastases and subcutaneous tumors mediated by the systemic administration of
high-dose recombinant interleukin-2. J Exp Med 1985;161:1169.
25. Thompson JA, Peace DJ, Klarnet JP, et al. Eradication of disseminated murine leukemia by treatment with high dose interleukin-2. J Immunol 1986;137:3675.
26. Shimizu K, Fields RC, Giedlin M, Mule JJ. Systemic administration of interleukin-2 enhances the therapeutic efficacy of dendritic cell-based tumor vaccines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1999;96:2268.
27. Lafreniere R, Rosenberg SA. Adoptive immunotherapy of murine hepatic metastases with lymphokine activated killer (LAK) cells and recombinant interleukin-2 (RIL-2) can mediate the
regression of both immunogenic and nonimmunogenic sarcomas and an adenocarcinoma. J Immunol 1985;135:4273.
28. Belldegrun A, Muul LM, Rosenberg SA. Interleukin-2 expanded tumor infiltrating lymphocytes in human cancer: isolation, characterization and antitumor activity. Cancer Res 1988;48:206.
29. Spiess PJ, Yang JC, Rosenberg SA. In vivo antitumor activity of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes expanded in recombinant interleukin-2. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;79:1067.
30. Lotze MT, Frana LW, Sharrow SO, et al. In vivo administration of purified human interleukin 2. I. Half-life and immunologic effects of the Jurkat cell line-derived interleukin 2. J Immunol
1985;134:157.
31. Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT, Muul LM, et al. Observations on the systemic administration of autologous lymphokine-activated killer cells and recombinant interleukin-2 to patients with metastatic
cancer. N Engl J Med 1985;313:1485.
32. Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, Topalian SL, et al. Treatment of 283 consecutive patients with metastatic melanoma or renal cell cancer using high-dose bolus interleukin-2. JAMA 1994;271:907.
33. Parkinson D, Abrams J, Wiernik P, et al. Interleukin-2 therapy in patients with metastatic malignant melanoma: a phase II study. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1650.
34. Dutcher JP, Creekmore S, Weiss GR, et al. A phase II study of interleukin-2 and lymphokine activated killer (LAK) cells in patients with metastatic malignant melanoma. J Clin Oncol
1989;7:477.
35. Benyunes MC, Fefer A. Interleukin-2 in the treatment of hematologic malignancies. In: Atkins MB, Mier JW, eds. Therapeutic applications of interleukin-2. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc,
1993:163.
36. Sznol M, Hawkins MJ. Interleukin-2 in malignancies other than melanoma and renal cell carcinoma. In: Atkins MB, Mier JW, eds. Therapeutic applications of interleukin-2. New York: Marcel
Dekker Inc, 1993:177.
37. Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT, Muul LM, et al. A progress report on the treatment of 157 patients with advanced cancer using lymphokine-activated killer cells and interleukin-2 or high dose
interleukin-2 alone. N Engl J Med 1987;316:889.
38. McCabe MS, Stablein D, Hawkins MJ, et al. The modified group C experience phase III randomized trials of IL-2 vs. IL-2/LAK in advanced renal cell carcinoma and advanced melanoma. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1991;10:213(abst).
39. Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT, Yang JC, et al. Prospective randomized trial of high-dose interleukin-2 alone or in conjunction with lymphokine-activated killer cells for the treatment of patients with
advanced cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;8:622.
40. Fyfe G, Fisher RI, Rosenberg SA, et al. Results of treatment of 255 patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma who received high-dose recombinant interleukin-2 therapy. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:688.
41. Atkins MB, Lotze M, Dutcher J, et al. High-dose recombinant interleukin-2 therapy for metastatic melanoma: analysis of 270 patients treated from 19851993. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2105.
42. Schwartzentruber DJ. Biologic therapy with interleukin-2. Clinical applications: principles of administration and management of side effects. In: DeVita V, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds.
Biologic therapy of cancer, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1995;235.
43. Margolin K. The clinical toxicities of high-dose interleukin-2. In: Atkins MB, Mier JW, eds. Therapeutic applications of interleukin-2. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1993:331.
44. Klempner M, Noring R, Mier J, Atkins MB. An acquired neutrophil chemotactic defect in patients receiving immunotherapy with interleukin-2. N Engl J Med 1990;322:959.
45. Snydman DR, Sullivan B, Gill M, et al. Nosocomial sepsis associated with interleukin-2. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:102.
46. Kammula US, White DE, Rosenberg SA. Trends in the safety of high dose bolus interleukin-2 administration in patients with metastatic cancer. Cancer 1998;83:797.
47. Numerof RP, Aronson FR, Mier JW. IL-2 stimulates the production of IL-1 alpha and IL-1 beta by human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J Immunol 1988;141:4250.
48. Mier J, Vachino G, Van der Meer J, et al. Induction of circulating tumor necrosis factor (TNF) as the mechanism for the febrile response to interleukin-2 (IL-2) in cancer patients. J Clin Immunol
1988;8:426.
49. Hibbs JB, Westenfelder C, Taintor R, et al. Evidence for cytokine inducible nitric oxide synthesis from L-arginine in patients receiving interleukin-2 therapy. J Clin Invest 1992;89:867.
50. Margolin K, Atkins M, Sparano J, et al. Prospective randomized trial of lisophylline for the prevention of toxicities of high-dose interleukin 2 therapy in advanced renal cancer and malignant
melanoma. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:565.
51. DuBois J, Trehu EG, Mier JW, et al. Randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial of high-dose interleukin-2 (IL-2) in combination with the soluble TNF receptor IgG chimera (TNFR:Fc). J Clin
Oncol 1997;15:1052.
52. McDermott D, Trehu E, DuBois J, et al. Phase I clinical trial of the soluble IL-1 receptor either alone or in combination with high-dose IL-2 in patients with advanced malignancies. Clin Cancer
Res 1998;5:1203.
53. West WH, Tauer KW, Yannelli JR, et al. Constant-infusion recombinant interleukin-2 in adoptive immunotherapy of advanced cancer. N Engl J Med 1987;16:898.
54. Dillman RO, Church C, Oldham RK, et al. In patient continuous infusion IL-2 in 788 patients with cancer. The national biotherapy study group experience. Cancer 1993;71:2358.
55. Legha SS, Gianan MA, Plager C, et al. Evaluation of interleukin-2 administered by continuous infusion in patients with metastatic melanoma. Cancer 1996;77:89.
56. Yang JC, Rosenberg SA. An ongoing prospective randomized comparison of interleukin-2 regimens for the treatment of metastatic renal cell cancer. Cancer J Sci Am 1997;3:S79.
57. Sleijfer DT, Janssen RAJ, Buter J, et al. Phase II study of subcutaneous interleukin-2 in unselected patients with advanced renal cell cancer on an outpatient basis. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1119.
58. Keilholz U, Scheibenbogen C, Tilgen W, et al. Interferon-a and interleukin-2 in the treatment of metastatic melanoma: comparison of two phase II trials. Cancer 1993;72:607.
59. Caligiuri MA, Murray C, Robertson MJ, et al. Selective modulation of human natural killer cells in vivo following prolonged infusion of low-dose recombinant interleukin 2. J Clin Invest
1993;91:123.
60. Atkins MB, Shet A, Sosman JA. IL-2 clinical applications: melanoma. In: Rosenberg SA, ed. Principles and practice of biologic therapy of cancer, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 2000.
61. Hank JA, Surfus J, Gan J, et al. Distinct clinical and laboratory activity of two recombinant interleukin-2 preparations. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:281.
62. Cameron RB, McIntosh JK, Rosenberg SA. Synergistic anti-tumor effects of combination immunotherapy with recombinant interleukin-2 and a recombinant hybrid alpha-interferon in the
treatment of established murine hepatic metastases. Cancer Res 1988;48:5810.
63. Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT, Yang JC, et al. Combination therapy with interleukin-2 and interferon for the treatment of patients with advanced cancer. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1863.
64. Atkins MB, Sparano J, Fisher RI, et al. A randomized phase II trial of high dose IL-2 either alone or in combination with interferon alpha 2B in advanced renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:661.
65. Sparano JA, Fisher RI, Sunderland M, et al. Randomized phase III trial of treatment with high dose interleukin-2 either alone or in combination with alfa-2A in patients with advanced melanoma.
J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1969.
66. Marcinola FM, White DE, Wise AP, Rosenberg SA. Combination therapy with interferon alfa-2A and interleukin-2 for the treatment of metastatic cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1110.
67. Karp SE. Low-dose intravenous bolus interleukin-2 with interferon-alpha therapy for metastatic melanoma and renal cell carcinoma. J Immunotherapy 1998;21:56.
68. Atzpodien J, Lopez HE, Kirchner H, et al. Multi-institutional home therapy trial of recombinant human interleukin-2 and interferon alfa-2 in progressive metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Clin
Oncol 1995;13:497.
69. Dutcher JP, Fisher RI, Weiss G, et al. Outpatient subcutaneous interleukin-2 plus alpha interferon in metastatic renal cell cancer: three-year follow-up of the Cytokine Working Group study.
Cancer J Sci Am 1997;3:157.
70. Atkins MB, Trehu EG, Mier JW. Combination cytokine therapy. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Biologic therapy of cancer principles and practice, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: JB
Lippincott, 1995:443.
71. Sosman J, Weiss G, Margolin K, et al. Phase 1B clinical trial of anti-CD3 followed by high dose interleukin-2 in patients with metastatic melanoma and advanced renal cell carcinoma: clinical
and immunologic effects. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1496.
72. Rosenberg SA, Schwartz SL, Spiess PJ. Combination immunotherapy for cancer: synergistic antitumor interactions of interleukin-2, alfa interferon, and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1988;80:1393.
73. Figlin RA, Pierce WC, Kaboo R, et al. Treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma with nephrectomy, interleukin-2 and cytokine-primed or CD8(+) selected tumor infiltrating lymphocytes from
primary tumor. J Urology 1997;158:740.
74. Atkins MB. Immunotherapy and experimental approaches for metastatic melanoma. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1998;12:877.
75. Figlin RA, Thompson JA, Bukowski RM, et al. Multicenter, randomized, phase III trail of CD8+ tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in combination with recombinant interleukin-2 in metastatic renal
cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2521.
76. Kawakami Y, Eliejahu S, Jennings C, et al. Recognition of multiple epitopes in the human melanoma antigen gp100 by tumor infiltrating T-lymphocytes associated with in vivo tumor regression.
J Immunol 1995;154:3461.
77. Zhai Y, Yang JC, Kawakami Y, et al. Antigen-specific tumor vaccines: development and characterization or recombinant adenovirus encoding MART-1 or gp100 for cancer therapy. J Immunol
1996;156:700.
78. Parkhurst MR, Salgaller ML, Southwood S, et al. Improved induction of melanoma-reactive CTL with peptides from the melanoma antigen gp100 modified at HLA-A* 0201-binding residues. J
Immunol 1996;157:2539.
79. Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, Schwartzentruber DJ, et al. Immunologic and therapeutic evaluation of a synthetic peptide vaccine for the treatment of patients with metastatic melanoma. Nat Med
1998;4:321.
80. Atzpodien J, Kirchner H, Hanninen EL, et al. Interleukin-2 in combination with interferon-a and 5-fluorouracil for metastatic renal cell cancer. Eur J Cancer 1993;29A[Suppl 5]:S6.
81. Atkins MB. The role of cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents either alone or in combination with biological response modifiers. In: Kirkwood JM, ed. Molecular diagnosis, prevention and therapy of
melanoma. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1998:219.
82. Legha SS, Buzaid AC. Role of recombinant interleukin-2 in combination with interferon-alfa and chemotherapy in the treatment of advanced melanoma. Semin Oncol 1993;2[Suppl 9]:27.
83. Allen IE, Kupelnick B, Kumashiro M, et al. Efficacy of interleukin-2 in the treatment of metastatic melanoma: systematic review and meta-analysis. Cancer Ther 1998;1:168.
84. Keilholz U, Conradt C, Legha SS, et al. Results of interleukin-2 based treatment in advanced melanoma: a case record-based analysis of 631 patients. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2921.

SECTION 20.3 Hormonal Therapies
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 20.3
Hormonal Therapies
CHARLES ERLICHMAN
CHARLES L. LOPRINZI
Introduction
Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators
Tamoxifen
Toremifene
Raloxifene
Medroxyprogesterone and Megestrol
Pharmacology
Aromatase Inhibitors
Aminoglutethimide
Letrozole and Anastrozole
Vorozole
Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone Analogues
Pharmacology
Antiandrogens
Flutamide
Bicalutamide (Casodex)
Nilutamide
Fluoxymesterone
Pharmacology
Diethylstilbestrol and Estradiol (Estrace)
Pharmacology
Octreotide
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
There are many hormonal agents used in the treatment of patients with cancer. The primary use of these agents is in hormonally responsive cancers such as breast,
prostate, or endometrial carcinomas. Other uses for some hormonal therapies include paraneoplastic syndromes, such as carcinoid syndrome, or symptoms caused
by cancer, including anorexia. This chapter discusses the major hormonal agents for such therapy, first with a general overview of their use in practice, then with more
detailed pharmacologic information regarding them.

SELECTIVE ESTROGEN RECEPTOR MODULATORS
TAMOXIFEN
Tamoxifen is most frequently used in the adjuvant treatment of women with resected breast cancer. There is general consensus, at present, that tamoxifen should be
continued for 5 years. Tamoxifen is also used for treating patients with metastatic breast cancer if their disease has characteristics that would suggest hormonal
responsiveness. 1,2 In addition, tamoxifen has undergone prospective evaluation as a potential breast cancer chemoprevention drug. 3 The study reported that
tamoxifen decreased the incidence of breast cancer by approximately 50%. Nonetheless, this treatment has not been widely used to date in clinical practice for
several reasons, including: (1) the vast majority of treated patients do not get benefit; (2) there is not yet any significant effect on patient survival; (3) the economic
cost of the drug is high; (4) toxicities occur from this drug; and (5) the findings of this study have not been confirmed by two ongoing European trials (which underwent
interim analyses).
The standard dose of tamoxifen is 20 mg. The long terminal half-life of the drug indicates that this can be given once daily. Tamoxifen is among the least toxic
antineoplastic agents. Randomized, placebo-controlled trials have demonstrated that it does not cause any more gastrointestinal symptoms than placebo. The most
prominent toxicity from tamoxifen is hot flashes, which affect approximately one-half of women. These hot flashes are of varying intensity and varying duration.
Tamoxifen-induced hot flashes appear to increase over the first 3 months of therapy and then plateau. 1 They appear to be more prominent in women with a prior
history of hot flashes or a prior history of using estrogen replacement. They can be ameliorated by the concurrent use of low doses of megestrol. 4,5
The estrogenic properties of tamoxifen are responsible for both beneficial and deleterious side effects. The most prominent deleterious one, endometrial cancer, is
increased approximately threefold in incidence over the general population. It has not yet been determined if progestins can prevent this toxicity of tamoxifen as they
do with estrogen treatment. Beneficial estrogenic effects from tamoxifen include a decrease in total cholesterol, 6,7 a suggestion of decreased cardiovascular disease, 8
and a preservation of bone density in postmenopausal women. 9,10 In premenopausal women, tamoxifen appears to have a negative effect on bone density. 11 Although
most patients do not complain of vaginal symptoms, a few complain of vaginal dryness, whereas others have increased vaginal secretions with a resultant vaginal
discharge. An uncommon effect from tamoxifen is retinal toxicity. This has usually been associated with high drug doses or prolonged drug use. 12 Tamoxifen may
predispose to thromboembolic phenomena, especially if used with concomitant chemotherapy. Depression has also been described, but this association with
tamoxifen is not clear. Although liver cancers have been noted in laboratory animals, there is no clear-cut association between tamoxifen and liver cancers in humans.
Pharmacology
The chemical structure of tamoxifen is shown in Figure 20.3-1. It acts by blocking estrogen stimulation of breast cancer cells, inhibiting both translocation and nuclear
binding of the estrogen receptor. This alters transcriptional and posttranscriptional events mediated by this receptor. 13,14In vivo, tamoxifen activity is complicated by
the potential actions of the metabolite trans-4-hydroxy-tamoxifen, which is a potent antiestrogen. Tamoxifen has agonistic, partial agonistic, or antagonistic effects
depending on the species, target, or end points that have been assessed. Other effects that have been attributed to tamoxifen include inhibition of the conversion of
estrone sulfate to estradiol, 15 inhibition of protein kinase C, 16 and reversal of multidrug resistance. 17,18

FIGURE 20.3-1. Structure of tamoxifen.

Resistance to tamoxifen develops with resultant recurrence or progression of metastatic breast cancer. 19 Several mechanisms for this resistance have been
proposed. 20,21 At each step of the signal transduction pathway with which tamoxifen interferes, there is potential for an alteration in response. Tamoxifen binds to the
estrogen receptor, and subsequent translocation of this complex to the nucleus and binding to the estrogen response element occur. This binding prevents
transcriptional activation of estrogen-responsive genes. Decreased tamoxifen metabolism to the potent antiestrogen trans-4-hydroxy-tamoxifen and increased
metabolism to estrogenic compounds such as metabolite E have been proposed as possible mechanisms of resistance. 22,23and24 In some cases resistance occurs after
loss of estrogen receptor-positive cells. 25,26 Although estrogen receptor mutation has been suggested as a mechanism of resistance, two groups have found little
evidence for such changes in the estrogen receptor. 27,28 Phosphorylation of the estrogen receptor can mediate the hormone binding, DNA binding, and ultimately
transcriptional activation. Alterations in this phosphorylation mediated by changes in protein kinase A and C could lead to resistance. Finally, modifications of the
estrogen-response element such as sequence alteration or element duplication may lead to binding of the tamoxifen-estrogen receptor complex with increased
transcription of the estrogen-response genes. At present, the primary mechanisms of tamoxifen action remain unknown, and further studies are needed.
The carcinogenic potential of tamoxifen has been recognized in rat studies 29,30and31 and in humans.32 Although the mechanism of these carcinogenic effects is not
understood, it has been proposed that generation of reactive intermediates that bind covalently to macromolecules underlies the process. Such reactive intermediates
have been demonstrated in vitro.33,34and35 In addition, induction of covalent DNA adducts in rat livers treated with tamoxifen has been reported. 36 Both constitutive and
inducible cytochrome P-450 enzymes have been implicated in the formation of metabolites with tamoxifen, 37,38 and the flavine-containing monooxygenase has been
implicated in the formation of the N-oxide of tamoxifen. Reactive intermediates from such metabolic steps are being evaluated for their carcinogenic potential in vitro
and in vivo.
The pharmacokinetics of tamoxifen have not been fully elucidated despite clinical use of the drug for more than 20 years. The oral bioavailability is not known. Results
from animal studies suggest that the drug is well absorbed. 39 Oral administration of [ 14C]tamoxifen results in only 30% of radioactive material detectable in feces and
approximately 11% in urine. 40 Whereas oral absorption may be good, first-pass metabolism may significantly alter exposure in vivo. The metabolic pathway of
tamoxifen outlined in Figure 20.3-2 is dependent on the cytochrome P-450 3A subfamily-mediated demethylation and hydroxylation (possibly by an as yet
undetermined cytochrome P-450 isoenzyme) followed by glucuronidation and biliary excretion. 4-Hydroxy-tamoxifen, which exists as two stereoisomers, is a potent
antiestrogen 41 as the trans-isomer, but is much less potent as the cis-isomer.42,43 The predominant species in serum are N-desmethyl-tamoxifen and
N-desdimethyl-tamoxifen whereas 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen and 4-hydroxy-N-desmethyl-tamoxifen and metabolite Y, which are more hydrophilic, are found in lower
concentrations. Metabolism affects the actions of tamoxifen because the hydroxylated metabolites have higher affinity for the estrogen receptor than the parent
compound.44 Tamoxifen is 98% bound to human serum albumin.45,46a1-acid glycoprotein binding by tamoxifen may have an impact on its clinical activity because the
presence of a1-acid glycoprotein in tissue cultures abolishes the inhibitory effect of tamoxifen and toremifene on P glycoprotein. 17

FIGURE 20.3-2. Tamoxifen metabolism.

Peak plasma levels of tamoxifen (Cmax) are seen 3 to 7 hours after oral administration. Assuming an oral bioavailability of 30%, the volume of distribution has been
calculated to be 20 L/kg, and plasma clearance ranges from 1.2 to 5.1 L/h. 60 The terminal half-life of tamoxifen has been reported to range between 4 and 11
days.47,48 The elimination half-life of tamoxifen increases with successive doses. 47,49 This finding is consistent with tamoxifen inhibition of its own metabolism. The
drug's distribution in tissues is extensive. Levels of the parent drug and metabolites have been reported to be higher in tissue than in plasma in animal studies. 50,51
Reports of tamoxifen concentrations 10- to 60-fold higher than plasma concentrations in liver, lung, brain, pancreas, skin, and bone have appeared. 52,53
Concentrations of tamoxifen in pleural, pericardial, and peritoneal effusions approach those in plasma, with effusion to serum ratios ranging between 0.2 and 1.0.
These findings are consistent with the large calculated volume of distribution. Elevated levels of tamoxifen with biliary obstruction have been reported. 54
Tamoxifen has been reported to interact with coumadin, 55,56,57and58 digitoxin, phenytoin, 59 and medroxyprogesterone.58 Lien et al. 60 have reported that tamoxifen serum
concentrations and those of metabolites Y, 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen, 4-hydrox-N-desmethyl-tamoxifen, N-desmethyl-tamoxifen, and N-desdimethyl-tamoxifen are markedly
reduced after aminoglutethimide administration. The mean increase in tamoxifen clearance was 249% when administered with aminoglutethimide. Each of these
clinical drug interactions is consistent with an effect at the level of cytochrome P-450 3A. Inasmuch as progestational agents, such as megestrol acetate, are
cytochrome P-450 3A substrates, these agents may also alter tamoxifen metabolism and ultimately elimination. This indicates that administration of tamoxifen to
individuals taking medication dependent on cytochrome P-450 3A metabolism may alter drug levels extensively, and careful consideration of this should be made
when prescribing tamoxifen.
TOREMIFENE
Toremifene , an agent similar to tamoxifen, is thought to be a more pure antiestrogen. It has become available in the United States for the treatment of patients with
metastatic breast cancer. A randomized comparison of toremifene and tamoxifen in metastatic breast cancer suggested that these two medications were equivalent. 61
Clinical trials in postmenopausal women with metastatic breast cancer concluded that there is major cross-resistance between tamoxifen and toremifene. 62,63
Pharmacology
Toremifene is an antiestrogen with a chemical structure that differs from that of tamoxifen by the substitution of a chlorine for a hydrogen atom that is retained when
toremifene undergoes metabolism. 64 Like tamoxifen, toremifene is metabolized by cytochrome P-450 3A. 65 Toremifene and its 4-hydroxylated metabolite both bind to
the estrogen receptor. 66 Although the oral bioavailability has not been defined, toremifene's oral absorption appears to be good. The time to peak plasma
concentrations after oral administration ranges from 1.5 to 6.0 hours, 67 with the terminal half-lives for toremifene and one metabolite, 4-hydroxy toremifene, being 5 to
6 days. 68,69 The apparent clearance is 5.1 L/h. The terminal half-life for the major metabolite, N-desmethyltoremifene, is 21 days. 70 Time to reach plasma steady-state
concentrations is 1 to 5 weeks. Plasma protein binding is more than 99%. As with tamoxifen, toremifene tissue distribution in rats has been studied and found to be
extensive and in high concentrations. Consistent with this is the high apparent volume of distribution, 958 L. Seventy percent of the drug is excreted in feces as
metabolites. Studies in patients with impaired liver function secondary to alcoholic cirrhosis and in patients on anticonvulsants known to induce cytochrome P-450 3A
have been undertaken.70 Those patients with hepatic dysfunction had decreased clearance of toremifene and N-desmethyl-toremifene, whereas those patients on
anticonvulsants had an increased clearance. Interestingly, toremifene appears to be less carcinogenic than tamoxifen in preclinical models. 35,71,72
RALOXIFENE
Raloxifene is an estrogen agonist and antagonist that was initially developed as an anti–breast cancer agent. Initial studies were not promising regarding this
approach, but large placebo-controlled randomized studies have reported that this drug does retard osteoporosis in women at risk for such. These studies
demonstrated an apparent reduction in breast cancer in treated women, leading to the development of a second-generation breast cancer chemoprevention trial in
which it will be compared with tamoxifen in high-risk postmenopausal women. Although this drug is relatively well tolerated, it can produce hot flashes. A potential

advantage for raloxifene over tamoxifen is that it does not appear to induce endometrial cancer.
Pharmacology
Raloxifene is partially estrogenic in bone 73 and lowers cholesterol. 74 It is antiestrogenic in mammary tissue 75,76 and uterine tissue. 77 The mechanism whereby
raloxifene exerts tissue-selective effects is not clear. Several hypotheses have been proposed. Coactivators and corepressor proteins are involved in the transcription
complex when estrogen receptor is bound. There may be differential distribution of these coactivators or corepressors, which are responsible for the changes in
estrogenicity seen in tissue. The discovery of a second estrogen, estrogen receptor-b, with 55% homology between it and estrogen receptor-a raises the possibility
that there is a differential expression of these two estrogen receptors in different tissue. 78 This presence of two forms of the receptor also raises the possibility that
there are different downstream effectors when one or the other estrogen receptor is activated. 79,80
The pharmacokinetics of raloxifene have been studied principally in postmenopausal women. 81,82,83and84 Pharmacokinetic parameters of raloxifene show considerable
interindividual variation. Limited information is available on the pharmacokinetics of raloxifene in individuals with hepatic impairment, renal impairment, or both.
Raloxifene is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Because raloxifene undergoes extensive first-pass glucuronidation, oral bioavailability of unchanged
drug is low. While approximately 60% of an oral dose is absorbed, absolute bioavailability as unchanged raloxifene is only 2%. However, systemic availability of
raloxifene may be greater than that indicated in bioavailability studies because circulating glucuronide conjugates are converted back to the parent drug in various
tissues.
Following oral administration of a single 120- or 150-mg dose of raloxifene hydrochloride, peak plasma concentration of raloxifene and its glucuronide conjugates are
achieved at 6 and 1 hours, respectively. Plasma concentrations of raloxifene's glucuronide conjugates exceed those of the parent drug, and the time to achieve
maximum concentrations of the drug and glucuronide metabolites depends on the extent and rate of systemic interconversion and enterohepatic circulation. Following
oral administration of radiolabeled raloxifene, less than 1% of total circulating radiolabeled material in plasma represents parent drug.
Area under the curve (AUC) for plasma concentration-time of raloxifene following a single dose is the same as the AUC following multiple doses of the drug.
Increasing the dose of raloxifene hydrochloride over a range of 30 to 150 mg results in a slightly less than proportional increase in the AUC of raloxifene.
Administration of raloxifene with a standardized high-fat meal increases the raloxifene peak plasma concentration by 28% and AUC by 16%, when compared with
administration on an empty stomach, but does not result in clinically important changes in systemic exposure.
Results of a single-dose study in patients with cirrhosis of the liver (Child-Pugh class A) and total serum bilirubin concentrations of 0.6 to 2.0 mg/dL indicate that
plasma raloxifene concentrations correlate with serum bilirubin concentrations and are 2.5 times higher in such individuals compared with individuals with normal
hepatic function. In postmenopausal women receiving raloxifene in clinical trials, plasma concentrations of raloxifene and the glucuronide conjugates in those with
renal impairment (i.e., estimated creatinine clearance values as low as 23 mL/min) were similar to values in women with normal renal function.
Distribution of raloxifene into body tissues and fluids has not been fully characterized. Raloxifene and raloxifene 4'-glucuronide have been detected in saliva following
oral administration of radiolabeled drug. In studies in rats given radiolabeled raloxifene 6-glucuronide, the liver contained the highest concentration of radioactivity,
followed by serum, lung, and kidney. While bone and the uterus contained relatively low concentrations of radiolabeled metabolite, 24% of the radioactivity in bone,
14% in the uterus, and 23% in the liver represented raloxifene. Results of this study indicate that the conversion of metabolite to parent drug occurs readily in a
variety of tissues including the liver, lung, spleen, kidney, bone, and uterus. The apparent volume of distribution following oral administration of single doses of
raloxifene hydrochloride, 30 to 150 mg, is 2348 L/kg, suggesting extensive tissue distribution. The volume of distribution is not dose dependent over a dosage range
of 30 to 150 mg daily.
Raloxifene and its monoglucuronide conjugates are more than 95% bound to plasma proteins. Raloxifene binds to albumin and a 1-acid glycoprotein.
Raloxifene undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism to the glucuronide conjugates raloxifene 4'-glucurone, 6-glucuronide, and 6,4'-diglucuronide. Metabolism of
raloxifene does not appear to be mediated by cytochrome P-450 enzymes, since metabolites other than glucuronide conjugates have not been identified.
The plasma elimination half-life of raloxifene at steady state averages 32.5 hours (range, 15.8 to 86.6 hours).
Raloxifene is excreted principally in feces as unabsorbed drug and via biliary elimination as glucuronide conjugates, which subsequently are metabolized by bacteria
in the gastrointestinal tract to the parent drug. Following oral administration, less than 0.2% of a raloxifene dose is excreted as parent compound and less than 6% as
glucuronide conjugates in urine.

MEDROXYPROGESTERONE AND MEGESTROL
Medroxyprogesterone and megestrol are 17-OH-progesterone derivatives differing in a double bond between C6 and C7 positions in megestrol. Megestrol has been
most commonly used as a hormonal agent for patients with advanced breast cancer; usually at a total daily dose of 160 mg/d. It has also been used frequently for the
treatment of hormonally responsive metastatic endometrial cancer, at a dosage of 320 mg/d. In addition, dosages of 160 mg/d are occasionally used as a hormonal
therapy for prostate cancer. 85 Megestrol has also been extensively evaluated for the treatment of anorexia-cachexia related to cancer or acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome.86,87,88and89 Various dosages ranging from 160 to 1600 mg/d have been used. Prospective studies have demonstrated dose-response relationship with doses
up to 800 mg/d.90 Low dosages of megestrol (40 mg/d) have been shown to be an effective means of reducing hot flashes in women with breast cancer and in men
who have undergone androgen ablation therapy. 5 Although megestrol historically had been commonly administered four times per day, the long terminal half-life
supports that once per day dosing is reasonable.
Megestrol is a relatively well-tolerated medication, with its most prominent side effect being appetite stimulation and resultant weight gain. While this may be a
beneficial effect in patients with anorexia-cachexia, it can be an important problem in patients with breast or endometrial cancers. Another side effect of megestrol
acetate is the marked suppression of adrenal steroid production by suppression of the pituitary-adrenal axis. 91 While this appears to be an asymptomatic state in the
majority of patients, reports suggest that this adrenal suppression can cause clinical problems in some patients. 92 This drug has been abruptly stopped for decades
without recognizing untoward sequelae in patients, and it seems reasonable to continue this practice. Nonetheless, if Addisonian signs or symptoms develop after
drug discontinuation, corticosteroids should be administered. Furthermore, if patients receiving megestrol have a significant infection, experience trauma, or undergo
surgery, then corticosteroid coverage should be administered. There may be a slight increased incidence of thromboembolic phenomena in patients receiving
megestrol alone.90 This risk appears to be higher if megestrol is administered with concomitant cytotoxic therapy. 93 There are conflicting reports regarding megestrol
causing edema. 94 If it does, it is generally minimal and easily handled with a mild diuretic. Megestrol may cause impotence in some men. 95 The incidence of this is
controversial, although it is generally agreed that this is a reversible situation. Megestrol can cause menstrual irregularities, the most prominent of which is withdrawal
menstrual bleeding within a few weeks of drug discontinuation. 5 Although nausea and vomiting have been attributed as a toxicity, there are good data to demonstrate
that this drug has antiemetic properties. 86,89,93 In terms of magnitude, megestrol appears to decrease both nausea and vomiting in advanced-stage cancer patients by
approximately two-thirds.
Medroxyprogesterone has many of the same properties, clinical uses, and toxicities as megestrol acetate. It is not used commonly in the United States, but has been
used more in Europe. Medroxyprogesterone is available in 2.5- and 10.0-mg tablets and in injectable formulations of 100 and 400 mg/L. Dosing for treatment of
metastatic breast or prostate cancer is 400 mg/wk or more and for metastatic endometrial cancer, 1000 mg/wk or more. Smaller injectable or daily oral doses have
been used for controlling hot flashes.
PHARMACOLOGY
The exact mechanism of antitumor effect of medroxyprogesterone and megestrol is unclear. These drugs have been reported to suppress adrenal steroid synthesis, 96
suppress estrogen receptor levels, 97 alter tumor hormone metabolism,98 enhance steroid metabolism,99 and directly kill tumor cells. 100 In addition to this, progestins
may influence some growth factors,101 suppress plasma estrone sulfate formation, and, at high concentrations, inhibit P glycoprotein.

The oral bioavailability of these progestational agents is unknown, although absorption appears to be poor for medroxyprogesterone relative to megestrol.
The terminal half-life for megestrol is approximately 14 hours 102,103 with a tmaxof 2 to 5 hours after oral ingestion. 104 The AUC for a single megestrol dose of 160 mg is
between 2.5- and 8-fold higher than that for single-dose medroxyprogesterone at 1000 mg. Of the radioactive dose of megestrol, 50% to 78% is found in the urine
after oral administration, and 8% to 30% in the feces. Three glucuronide metabolites of megestrol have been identified in the urine: megestrol hydroxylated in the 2
position and the 6-methyl position, or both. They account for only 5% to 8% of the radioactive dose administered.
Metabolism and excretion of medroxyprogesterone have been incompletely characterized. In humans, 20% to 50% of a [3H] medroxyprogesterone dose is excreted in
the urine and 5% to 10% in the stool following intravenous administration. 105,106,107and108 Metabolism of medroxyprogesterone occurs via hydroxylation, reduction,
demethylation, and combinations of these different reactions. 109 The major urinary metabolite is a glucuronide. Less than 3% of the dose is excreted as unconjugated
medroxyprogesterone in humans. Clearance of medroxyprogesterone has been reported to range between 27 and 70 L/h. 108 The initial volume of distribution is
between 4 and 8 L in humans. The mean terminal half-life is 60 hours. The tmax for medroxyprogesterone occurs 2 to 5 hours after oral administration.
Medroxyprogesterone appears to be concentrated in small intestine, colon, and adipose tissue in human autopsy studies. 110 Drug interactions of
medroxyprogesterone have been reported with aminoglutethimide, which decreases plasma medroxyprogesterone levels. 111 Medroxyprogesterone may reduce the
concentration of the N-desmethyl-tamoxifen metabolite concentration. Progestational agents also may increase plasma coumadin levels. 112 These reports are
consistent with cytochrome P-450 3A being the site of interaction.

AROMATASE INHIBITORS
AMINOGLUTETHIMIDE
Aminoglutethimide was the first clinically used aromatase inhibitor. When it became available, it was used to cause a medical adrenalectomy. A 32% response rate in
metastatic breast cancer113 has been reported. Aminoglutethimide is infrequently used for treating metastatic breast cancer because there are other available
hormonal treatments with less toxicity. Aminoglutethimide has also occasionally been used to try to reverse excess hormone production by adrenocortical cancers. 114
For treatment of metastatic breast cancer before other aromatase inhibitors became available, aminoglutethimide commonly was started at a dose of 250 mg/d,
increasing doses every couple of days to twice a day, then three times a day, and sometimes four times a day. Replacement hydrocortisone was often started at 100
mg/d for a week and then decreased to 40 mg/d. Aminoglutethimide doses less than 500 mg/d did not require corticosteroid replacement. 115 For suppression of
hormone production by adrenocortical cancers, doses may be increased to 2 g/d.
Toxicities most frequently associated with aminoglutethimide are lethargy, orthostatic hypertension, nausea, vomiting, hypothyroidism, reversible agranulocytosis, and
rash. 116,117 The rash is generally self-limited and usually disappears despite the continuation of aminoglutethimide. However, a severe rash leading to a
Stevens-Johnson syndrome can occur.
Pharmacology
Aminoglutethimide (Fig. 20.3-3) suppresses postmenopausal estrogen synthesis by inhibiting the conversion of circulating androgens into estrogens.
Androstenedione is peripherally converted to estrone by cytochrome P-450 aromatase. Estrone can be further converted to estradiol by the enzyme, hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase. Aromatase inhibitors block estrogen production in postmenopausal women or oophorectomized premenopausal women by 90% inhibition of
peripheral conversion of androstenedione to estrone, whereas ovarian estrogen synthesis is maintained by gonadotropin release in the premenopausal women with
intact ovarian function. Another biochemical effect of aminoglutethimide includes the inhibition of several enzymes in adrenal steroid synthesis, which may lead to
mineralocorticoid deficiency. 118,119 Aminoglutethimide effect on adrenal steroid synthesis is complex. 120 Suppression of circulating plasma cortisol may occur, 121 but a
compensatory increase in pituitary corticotropin (previously adrenocorticotropic hormone) levels may overcome this suppression. Because aminoglutethimide is a
competitive inhibitor of aromatase, increased adrenal steroid synthesis may compete with aminoglutethimide at the level of the aromatase. Concomitant replacement
doses of hydrocortisone addresses both potential effects on adrenal steroid synthesis. Aminoglutethimide is administered as a racemic mixture with different biologic
effects. 121 The d form is the more potent inhibitor of adrenal steroid synthesis and aromatase activity. The pharmacokinetic characteristics of the separate
enantiomers have not been characterized. Aminoglutethimide is absorbed well, with 80% to 98% of a radioactive dose recovered in the urine within 72 hours. Only 1%
of the drug is excreted unchanged in the feces. Of the administered aminoglutethimide dose, 12% to 20% is excreted unmetabolized in the urine, and 3% to 7% is
excreted as the N-acetyl-aminoglutethimide. 122 The Cmax occurs 0.5 to 4.0 hours after oral administration in fasting patients. The clearance of the drug ranges from 1.5
to 6.0 L/h with a mean of 3 L/h. The volume of distribution is 66 to 70 L. Aminoglutethimide undergoes acetylation 123 and is cleared more rapidly in fast acetylators
[half-life (t 1/2) = 12.6 hours] than in slow acetylators (t 1/2 = 19.5 hours). After 7 days of treatment, the half-life in slow acetylators decreased from 19.5 to 14.3 hours and
in fast acetylators, from 12.6 to 8.6 hours. This was associated with an increased apparent systemic clearance of chronically administered aminoglutethimide and
indicates autoinduction of this drug's metabolism. 122,124 Lønning and associates 125 have reported a decrease in volume of distribution on repeated dosing, which may
also contribute to the decreased terminal half-life. Aminoglutethimide is approximately 25% bound to plasma proteins. Little is known about aminoglutethimide tissue
distribution in humans. The erythrocyte to plasma concentration ratio is 0.83:1. Aminoglutethimide induces mixed function oxidases, enhancing the metabolism of
coumadin, dexamethasone, theophylline, and digitoxin. Also, aminoglutethimide has been reported to decrease concentrations of progestational agents and
tamoxifen.60,99 These drug interactions implicate cytochrome P-450 3A in aminoglutethimide metabolism. The increased clearance of progestational agents and
tamoxifen in the presence of aminoglutethimide makes the interpretation of studies that combine this aromatase inhibitor with tamoxifen or progestins difficult.
Alterations in the blood levels of antiestrogen or progestational agents may have decreased their contribution to any therapeutic benefit.

FIGURE 20.3-3. Structure of aminoglutethimide.

A series of second-generation aromatase inhibitors have been synthesized and many are undergoing clinical trials. These include rogletimide, formestane, fadrozole,
letrozole, exemestane, vorozole, and anastrozole. 120,126,127
LETROZOLE AND ANASTROZOLE
Letrozole and anastrozole are available in the United States for women with metastatic breast cancer. These second-generation aromatase inhibitors have basically
replaced aminoglutethimide for breast cancer given their better toxicity profile. Headaches were the most common toxicity in a phase I trial. 128 It is not necessary to
give replacement doses of corticosteroids as was previously done with aminoglutethimide. Letrozole and anastrozole appear to be similar drugs in clinical practice.
Randomized trials have demonstrated that they are better hormonal agents for treating tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer than is megestrol acetate.

Letrozole is a nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor with a high specificity for inhibition of estrogen production. Letrozole is 180 times more potent than aminoglutethimide
as an inhibitor of aromatase in vitro. Aldosterone production in vitro is inhibited by concentrations 10,000 times higher than those required for inhibition of estrogen
synthesis. 129,130 In a normal male volunteer study, letrozole was shown to decrease estradiol and serum estrone levels to 10% of baseline with a single 3-mg dose. In
phase I studies, 131,132 letrozole caused a significant decline in plasma estrone and estradiol within 24 hours of a single oral dose of 0.1 mg. Following 2 weeks of
treatment, the blood levels of estradiol, estrone, and estrone sulfate were suppressed 95% or more from baseline. This continued over the 12 weeks of therapy. There
was no apparent alteration in plasma levels of cortisol and aldosterone with letrozole or following corticotropin stimulation. 131 In postmenopausal women with
advanced breast cancer, the drug did not have any effect on follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), thyrotropin (previously thyroid-stimulating
hormone), cortisol, 17-a-hydroxyprogesterone, androstenedione, or aldosterone blood levels. 128,133,134
Anastrozole is an aromatase inhibitor that is 200-fold more potent than aminoglutethimide. 135 No effect on the adrenal glands has been detected. In human studies,
the tmax is 2 to 3 hours after oral ingestion. 136 Elimination is primarily via hepatic metabolism, with 85% excreted by that route and only 10% excreted unchanged in
urine. The main circulating metabolite is triazole after cleavage of the two rings in anastrozole by N-dealkylation. Linear pharmacokinetics have been observed in the
dose range of 1 to 20 mg and do not change with repeat dosing. The terminal half-life is approximately 50 hours and steady-state concentrations are achieved in
approximately 10 days with once a day dosing and are three to four times higher than peak concentrations after a single dose. Plasma protein binding is
approximately 40%.137 Anastrozole 1 mg and 10 mg daily inhibits in vivo aromatization by 96.7% and 98.1%, respectively, and plasma estrone and estradiol levels
were suppressed 86.5% and 83.5% regardless of dose. 138 Thus, 1 mg of anastrozole achieves near maximal aromatase inhibition and plasma estrogen suppression in
breast cancer patients.
VOROZOLE
Vorozole is another aromatase inhibitor that is not currently available for clinical use, but is undergoing clinical trial evaluation.
Pharmacology
Vorozole, a racemic mixture of (+) and (–) enantiomers, is approximately 1000 times more effective than aminoglutethimide in the inhibiting human placental
aromatase. The aromatase inhibitory activity is primarily due to the (+) enantiomer. 139 This drug does not appear to affect cytochrome P-450–dependent cholesterol
synthesis, cholesterol side-chain cleavage, 7-a-hydroxylation of cholesterol, or 21-hydroxylase. 140 In rat ovarian, testicular, and adrenal cell cultures, vorozole affects
progesterone, androgen, and glucocorticoid production at concentrations at least 1000 times greater than that required to inhibit aromatase. 139,141 In initial human
studies, doses of 5 mg of the racemic mixture of vorozole resulted in 94.4% inhibition of peripheral aromatization, and, in healthy male volunteers, a single dose of the
racemic mixture lowered plasma estradiol levels to the detection limits of the assay between 4 and 8 hours after drug administration. Johnston and associates 142
reported a similar inhibition of plasma estradiol, estrone, and estrone sulfate with no significant effect on aldosterone, testosterone, androstenedione,
17-a-hydroxyprogesterone, or thyroid-stimulating hormone. Vorozole is rapidly absorbed, with peak plasma concentrations obtained 1 hour after oral intake. Peak
plasma concentrations and AUC of vorozole increase proportionately with the dose. Vorozole displays a biphasic disposition curve with a mean terminal half-life
ranging from 4.7 to 7.5 hours. The total body clearance ranges from 6.1 to 11.8 L/h in a single dose study in normal healthy male volunteers. 143

GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE ANALOGUES
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues result in a medical orchiectomy in men and are used as a means of providing androgen ablation for metastatic
prostate cancer. 144 Because the initial agonist activity of GnRH analogues can cause a tumor flare from temporarily increased androgen levels, concomitant use of the
antiandrogen, flutamide, has been used to prevent this effect. GnRH analogues can also cause tumor regressions in hormonally responsive breast cancers 145 and
have recently received U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval for treatment of metastatic breast cancer in premenopausal women. Emerging data suggest that
these drugs may be useful as adjuvant therapy of premenopausal women with resected breast cancer. 146
The primary toxicities of GnRH analogues are secondary to the ablation of sex steroid concentrations and include hot flashes, sweating, and nausea. 147 These
symptoms can be reversed with low doses of progestational analogues. 5
GnRH analogues available for clinical use include goserelin 148,149 and leuprolide. 150 Both are available in depot intramuscular preparations to be given at monthly
intervals. The recommended monthly dose of leuprolide is 7.5 mg and for goserelin is 3.6 mg. There are also longer acting depot preparations that only need to be
administered every 3 months.
PHARMACOLOGY
Analogues of the decapeptide GnRH 149,150and151 have been synthesized by modifications of position 6 in which the L-glycine has been exchanged for a D-amino acid
and the C-terminal amino acid has been either replaced by an ethylamide or substituted for a modified amino acid. These changes increase the affinity of the
analogue for the GnRH receptor and decrease the susceptibility to enzymatic degradation. There is an amino acid structure of GnRH with the substitutions for
leuprolide and goserelin. Initial administration of these compounds results in stimulation of gonadotropin release. However, prolonged administration has led to
profound inhibition of the pituitary-gonadal axis. 152 Plasma estradiol and progesterone are consistently suppressed to postmenopausal or castrate levels after 2 to 4
weeks of treatment with goserelin or leuprolide. 153,154and155 These drugs are administered intramuscularly or subcutaneously in a parenteral sustained-release
microcapsule preparation because parenteral administration of the parent drug otherwise is associated with rapid clearance. The GnRH analogues are metabolized in
the liver, kidney, hypothalamus, and pituitary gland by neutral peptidase cleavage of the peptide bond between the tyrosine in the 5 position and the amino acid in
position 6, and a postproline cleaving enzyme that cleaves the peptide bond between proline in the 9 position and the glycine-NH 2 in the 10 position. Substitutions at
the glycine 6 position and modification of the C-terminal make these analogues more resistant to this enzymatic cleavage.
Leuprolide is approximately 80 to 100 times more potent than endogenous GnRH. It induces castrate levels of testosterone in men with prostate cancer within 3 to 4
weeks of drug administration after an initial sharp increase in LH and FSH. The mechanisms of action include pituitary desensitization following reduction in pituitary
GnRH receptor-binding sites and possibly a direct antitumor effect in estrogen receptor-positive human breast cancer cells. 150 The depo form results in a dose rate of
210 µg of leuprolide per day. Peak concentrations of the depo form that are achieved at approximately 3 hours after drug administration have been reported to range
between 13.1 and 54.5 µg/L. There appears to be a linear increase in the AUC for doses of 3.75, 7.5, and 15.0 mg in the depo form. The parenteral bioavailability of
subcutaneously injected leuprolide is 94%. The volume of distribution ranges from 27.4 to 37.1 L. In human studies, leuprolide urinary excretion as a metabolite was
the primary route of clearance.
Goserelin is approximately 100 times more potent than the naturally occurring GnRH. Like leuprolide, it causes stimulation of LH and FSH acutely, and with
subsequent administration, GnRH receptor numbers decrease and the pituitary becomes desensitized with decreasing LH and FSH levels. Castrate levels of
testosterone are achieved within 1 month. In women, goserelin inhibits ovarian androgen production, but serum levels of dihydroepiandrosterone sulfate, and to a
lesser extent androstenedione, are preserved. In vitro, goserelin has demonstrated antitumor activity in estrogen-dependent MCF-7 human breast cancer cells and
LNCaP-2 prostate cancer cells. The drug is released at a continuous mean rate of 120 µg/d in the depo form, with peak concentrations in the range of 2 to 3 µg/L
achieved. The mean volume of distribution in six patients has been reported to be 13.7 L, 156 consistent with extracellular fluid volume. Goserelin is principally excreted
in the urine, with a mean total body clearance of 8 L/h in patients with normal renal function. The total body clearance is reduced by approximately 75%, with renal
dysfunction and the elimination half-life increased two- or threefold. However, dose adjustment for renal insufficiency does not appear to be necessary. The 5 to 10
hexapeptide and the 4 to 10 hexapeptide were detected in urine in animal studies. 157 The terminal half-life of goserelin is approximately 5 hours after subcutaneous
injection. Protein binding is low, and no known drug interactions have been documented.

ANTIANDROGENS
FLUTAMIDE
The antiandrogen flutamide is used in men with metastatic prostate cancer either as initial therapy, combined with GnRH analogue administration, or when the

metastatic prostate cancer is unresponsive despite androgen ablation therapy. The recommended dosage is 250 mg orally three times a day. In patients whose
prostate cancer is growing despite flutamide use, stopping flutamide can clearly cause a flutamide-withdrawal response.
The most common toxicity seen with flutamide is diarrhea with or without abdominal discomfort. Gynecomastia, which can be tender, frequently occurs in men who are
not receiving concomitant androgen ablation therapy. 158 Flutamide can rarely cause hepatotoxicity, a condition that is reversible if detected early, but can also be
fatal.159 There is no accepted clinically recommended testing schedule to screen forflutamide-induced hepatotoxicity other than being aware of this phenomenon and
testing for liver function if hepatic symptoms develop.
Pharmacology
Flutamide is a pure antiandrogen with no intrinsic steroidal activity. 160 Flutamide's mechanism of action is as an androgen-receptor antagonist. This binding prevents
the dihydrotestosterone binding and subsequent translocation of the androgen-receptor complex into the nuclei of cells. Because it is a pure antiandrogen, it acts only
at the cellular level with no progestational effects. Administration by flutamide alone leads to increased LH and FSH production and a concomitant increase in plasma
testosterone and estradiol levels. Plasma protein binding of flutamide ranges between 94% and 96%, and for 2-hydroxy-flutamide, its major metabolite ranges
between 92% and 94%. When the drug is administered three times a day, steady-state levels are achieved by day 6. The steady-state Cmax is 112.7 ng/L and occurs
at approximately 1.13 hours after drug administration. The steady-state C maxis between three and five times higher than after the first dose. The elimination half-life at
steady state is 7.8 hours. 2-Hydroxy-flutamide achieves concentrations 50 times higher than the parent drug at steady state and has a potency equal to or greater
than that of flutamide. 160 The mean C maxaveraged 1719 ng/mL at steady state and was achieved 1.9 hours after drug administration. The elimination half-life for the
metabolite is 9.6 hours. The high plasma concentrations of 2-hydroxyflutamide, as compared with flutamide, suggest that the therapeutic benefits of flutamide are
mediated primarily through its active metabolite. 161
BICALUTAMIDE (CASODEX)
Casodex is another nonsteroidal antiandrogen that has been approved by the U. S. Food and Drug Administration for use in the United States. The recommended
dose is one 50-mg tablet per day. One randomized trial reported that Casodex compared favorably with flutamide in patients with advanced prostate cancer. 162
Casodex appears to be relatively well tolerated and is associated with a lower incidence of diarrhea than is flutamide.
Pharmacology
Casodex163,164 has a binding affinity to the androgen receptor in the rat prostate that is four times greater than that of 2-hydroxy-flutamide. In vivo, Casodex caused
marked inhibition of growth of accessory sex organs in rats with a potency five to ten times greater than flutamide. Unlike flutamide, Casodex did not cause a
significant increase in LH or testosterone in rats. Casodex bioavailability in humans has not been defined. The drug has a long plasma half-life of 5 to 7 days such
that the drug may be administered on a weekly schedule. Pharmacokinetics of the drug showed a dose-dependent increase in mean peak plasma concentrations, and
the AUC increased linearly with dose. The half-life of Casodex in humans was approximately 6 days, and the drug clearance was not saturable at plasma
concentrations up to 1000 ng/mL. Daily dosing of the drug led to an approximately ten-fold accumulation after 12 weeks of administration. In contrast to rats, serum
concentrations of testosterone and LH increased significantly from baseline at all dose levels tested in humans. Whereas serum FSH concentrations remained
essentially unchanged, the median serum estradiol concentrations increased significantly. 165
NILUTAMIDE
Nilutamide represents the third variation of antiandrogens available for use in patients with prostate cancer. Although it may be less expensive than the other
antiandrogens, it has two unique toxicities, night blindness and pulmonary toxicity, which limit its utility.
Pharmacology
Nilutamide 166,167 is a newer nonsteroidal antiandrogen that has a high bioavailability with moderate plasma protein binding. It is extensively metabolized with less than
2% of parent drug administered isolated in urine over 5 days. Oxidation of a methyl group forms two stereoisomeric metabolites whose pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics are not characterized. Sixty-two percent of oral drug is eliminated in the urine as metabolites. The terminal half-life varies from 38 to 59 hours.
Steady-state levels are achieved in 2 to 4 weeks with 150 mg given twice a day with approximately a twofold accumulation of drug over that time.

FLUOXYMESTERONE
Fluoxymesterone is an androgen that has been used in women with metastatic breast cancer who have hormonally responsive cancers and who have progressed on
other hormonal therapies such as tamoxifen, an aromatase inhibitor, and megestrol acetate. The usual dose is 10 mg given twice daily. Although the overall response
rate is low for fluoxymesterone used in this clinical situation, 168 there are some patients who have substantial antitumor responses lasting for months or even years.
Toxicities associated with fluoxymesterone are those that would be expected with an androgen: hirsutism, male-pattern baldness, voice lowering (hoarseness), acne,
enhanced libido, and erythrocytosis. Fluoxymesterone can also cause elevated liver function test results in some patients and rarely has been associated with hepatic
neoplasms.
PHARMACOLOGY
Fluoxymesterone is a chlorinated synthetic analogue of testosterone with potent androgenic and anabolic activity in humans. Limited pharmacologic information is
available on this agent. Colburn, 169 using a radioimmunoassay, studied two subjects after a single oral administration of a 50-mg dose. Peak serum concentrations
were achieved between 1 and 3 hours after administration, with the average peak concentrations being 335 ng/mL. By 5 hours after drug administration, serum levels
had declined to approximately 50% of the peak concentration. Urinary excretion of a 10-mg dose can be detected for 24 hours; and at least 6-hydroxy, 4 ene, 3 b, and
11 hydroxy metabolites of fluoxymesterone have been detected. 170

DIETHYLSTILBESTROL AND ESTRADIOL (ESTRACE)
Diethylstilbestrol (DES) used to be the primary hormonal therapy for postmenopausal metastatic breast cancer. Randomized comparative trials demonstrated that it
had a similar response rate as tamoxifen. 171,172 However, based on these trials, DES use was supplanted by tamoxifen primarily because DES has more toxicity. DES
is occasionally used in metastatic breast cancer patients who have hormonally sensitive cancers that have failed to respond to multiple other hormonal therapies. The
usual dose in this situation is 15 mg/d (either as a single dose or as divided doses). DES was also used as androgen ablation therapy in men with metastatic prostate
cancer. 173 Doses of approximately 3 mg/d result in testosterone levels that are seen in an anorchid state.
In women, DES may cause a number of toxicities. One of the most common is nausea and vomiting. It also can cause breast tenderness and a darkening of the
nipple-areolar complex. DES increases the risk of thromboembolic phenomenon, and this may result in life-threatening complications. In men, DES results in
increased thromboembolic events and mortality, thus limiting its use. It also causes painful gynecomastia. Although breast irradiation before DES administration
appears to prevent this toxicity, it does not appear to help if it is given after the toxicity develops.
DES has not been clinically available in the United States in recent years but similar antitumor effects and toxicities are seen with Estrace, 1 mg orally three times a
day.
PHARMACOLOGY
DES disposition studies in humans have been limited. 174 In animal studies, the oral absorption is approximately 20%. The drug undergoes hepatic metabolism and is
excreted as dienestrol and hydroxydienestrol in urine. 175 The parent compound has been detected in feces. After administration of a radioactive dose of DES,

approximately 40% of the drug was found in urine in the first 24 hours, with 87% of this being in the form of glucuronides. The peak plasma concentrations were
achieved approximately 20 hours after ingestion and the terminal half-life for the radioactivity ranged between 2 and 3 days.
Estrace is a micronized form of estradiol. The pharmacology of estradiol has been extensively described in other texts. 176,177

OCTREOTIDE
Octreotide is a somatostatin analogue that has revolutionized the therapy of carcinoid syndrome and other hormonal excess syndromes associated with some
pancreatic islet cell cancers and acromegaly. Response rates are high and, on average, last for several months, sometimes for years. Occasionally, antitumor
responses temporarily related to octreotide are seen with these tumors. Octreotide is being investigated as a potential therapy for other cancers such as breast or
pancreas, but is not recommended for routine treatment of these tumors. Finally, octreotide appears to help to alleviate 5-fluorouracil–induced severe diarrhea in
some patients.178,179
Octreotide can be administered intravenously or subcutaneously. Initial doses of 50 µg are given two to three times on the first day. The dose is titrated upward with a
usual daily dose of 300 to 450 µg/d for most patients. At times, doses up to 1500 µg/d have been given. A depot preparation is available, allowing doses to be
administered at monthly intervals. Octreotide is generally well tolerated overall. It appears to cause more toxicity in acromegalic patients, with such problems as
bradycardia, diarrhea, hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, hypothyroidism, and cholelithiasis.
Pharmacology
Octreotide is an 8 amino acid synthetic analogue of the 14 amino acid peptide somatostatin. 21 Octreotide has a similar high affinity for somatostatin receptors as does
its parent, with a concentration that inhibits the receptor by 50% (IC 50) in the subnanomolar range. Octreotide inhibits insulin, glucagon, pancreatic polypeptide,
gastric inhibitory polypeptide, and gastrin secretion. It has a much longer duration of action than the parent compound because of its greater resistance to enzymatic
degradation. Its absorption following subcutaneous administration is rapid, and bioavailability is 100% after subcutaneous injection. Peak concentrations of 4 µg/L
after a 100-µg dose occur within 20 to 30 minutes of subcutaneous injection and are 20% to 40% of the corresponding intravenous injection. Both peak concentration
and AUC for octreotide increase linearly with dose. The total body clearance in healthy volunteers is 9.6 L/h. Hepatic metabolism of octreotide accounts for 30% to
40% of the drug's disposition, and 11% to 20% is excreted unchanged in the urine. The volume of distribution ranges between 18 and 30 L and the terminal half-life is
reported to be between 72 and 98 minutes. Sixty-five percent of the drug is protein bound primarily to the lipoprotein fraction. 180,181 Because of the short half-life,
classic octreotide is administered subcutaneously two or three times per day. 182 A slow-release form of octreotide, designed for once per month administration, is now
evaluable.183
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Kiang DT, Kennedy BJ. Tamoxifen (antiestrogen) therapy in advanced breast cancer. Ann Intern Med 1977;87:687.
2. Mouridsen H, Palshof T, Patterson J, et al. Tamoxifen in advanced breast cancer. Cancer Treat Rev 1978;5:131.
3. Fisher B, Constantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Tamoxifen for prevention of breast cancer: report of the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project P-1 study. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90:1371.
4. Love RR, Cameron L, Connell B. Symptoms associated with tamoxifen treatment in postmenopausal women. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:1842.
5. Loprinzi CL, Michalak JC, Quella SK, et al. Megestrol acetate for the prevention of hot flashes. N Engl J Med 1994;33:347.
6. Dewar JA, Horobin JM, Preece PE, et al. Long term effects of tamoxifen on blood lipid values in breast cancer. BMJ 1992;305:225.
7. Love RR, Weibe DA, Newcomb PA, et al. Effects of tamoxifen on cardiovascular risk factors in postmenopausal women. Ann Intern Med 1991;115:860.
8. McDonald CC, Stewart HJ for the Scottish Breast Cancer Committee. Fatal myocardial infarction in the Scottish adjuvant tamoxifen trial. BMJ 1991;303:435.
9. Love RR, Mazess RB, Tormey DC, et al. Bone mineral density in women with breast cancer treated with adjuvant tamoxifen for at least two years. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1988;12:297.
10. Ward RL, Morgan G, Dalley D, et al. Tamoxifen reduces bone turnover and prevents lumbar spine and proximal femoral bone loss in early postmenopausal women. Bone Miner 1993;22:87.
11. Powles TJ, Hickish TF, Kanis JA, Ashley S. Tamoxifen preserves bone mineral density in postmenopausal women but causes loss of bone density in premenopausal women. Program/Proc Am
Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:165(abst).
12. Kaiser-Kupfer MI, Lippman ME. Tamoxifen retinopathy. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:315.
13. Jaiyesimi IA, Buzdar AU, Decker DA, et al. Use of tamoxifen for breast cancer: twenty-eight years later. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:513.
14. Tonetti DA, Jordan VC. Possible mechanisms in the emergence of tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer. Anticancer Drugs 1995;6:498.
15. Gelly C, Pasqualini JR. Effect of tamoxifen and tamoxifen derivatives on the conversion of estronesulfate to estradiol in the R-27 cells, a tamoxifen-resistant line derived from MCF=n7 human
breast cancer cells. J Steroid Biochem 1988;30:321.
16. Horgan K, Cooke E, Hallett MB, et al. Inhibition of protein kinase C mediated signal transduction by tamoxifen. Biochem Pharmacol 1986;35:4463.
17. Chatterjee M, Harris AL. Reversal of acquired resistance to adriamycin in CHO cells by tamoxifen and 4-hydroxy tamoxifen-role of drug interaction with alpha-1 acid glycoprotein. Br J Cancer
1990;62:712.
18. DeGregorio MW, Ford JM, Benz CC, et al. Toremifene: pharmacologic and pharmacokinetic basis of reversing multidrug resistance. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1359.
19. Wiebe VJ, Osborne CK, Fuqua SA, et al. Tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 1993;14:173.
20. Osborne CK, Fuqua SA. Mechanisms of tamoxifen resistance. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1994;32:49.
21. Reid AD, Horobin JM, Newman EL, et al. Tamoxifen metabolism is altered by simultaneous administration of medroxyprogesterone acetate in breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res Treat
1992;22:153.
22. Osborne CK. Mechanisms for tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer: possible role of tamoxifen metabolism. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1993;47:83.
23. Osborne CK, Jarman M, McCague R, et al. The importance of tamoxifen metabolism in tamoxifen-stimulated breast tumor growth. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1994;34:89.
24. Osborne CK. Tamoxifen metabolism as a mechanism for resistance. Endocr Relat Cancer 1995;2:53.
25. Encarnacion CA, Fuqua SA. Estrogen receptor variants in breast cancer. Cancer Treat Res 1994;71:97.
26. Encarnacion CA, Ciocca DR, McGuire WL, et al. Measurement of steroid hormone receptors in breast cancer patients on tamoxifen. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1993;26:237.
27. Watts CKW, Handel ML, King RJB. Oestrogen receptor gene structure and function in breast cancer. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1992;41:529.
28. Karnik PS, Kulkarni S, Liu XP, et al. Estrogen receptor mutations in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer. Cancer Res 1994;54:349.
29. Williams GM. Tamoxifen experimental carcinogenicity studies: implications for human effects. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1995;208:141.
30. Williams GM, Iatropoulos MJ, Djordjevic MV, et al. The triphenylethylene drug tamoxifen is a strong liver carcinogen in the rat. Carcinogenesis 1993;14:315.
31. Fendl KC, Zimniski SJ. Role of tamoxifen in the induction of hormone-independent rat mammary tumors. Cancer Res 1992;52:235.
32. Rutqvist LE, Johansson H, Signomklao T, et al. Adjuvant tamoxifen therapy for early stage breast cancer and second primary malignancies. Stockholm Breast Cancer Study Group. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1995;87:645.
33. Mani C, Kupfer D. Cytochrome p-450-mediated activation and irreversible binding of the antiestrogen tamoxifen to proteins in rat and human liver: possible involvement of flavin-containing
monooxygenases in tamoxifen activation. Cancer Res 1991;51:6052.
34. Mani C, Pearce R, Parkinson A, et al. Involvement of cytochrome P4503A in catalysis of tamoxifen activation and covalent binding to rat and human liver microsomes. Carcinogenesis
1994;15:2715.
35. Styles JA, Davies A, Lim CK, et al. Genotoxicity of tamoxifen, tamoxifen epoxide and toremifene in human lymphoblastoid cells containing human cytochrome P450s. Carcinogenesis
1994;15:5.
36. Han XL, Liehr JG. Induction of covalent DNA adducts in rodents by tamoxifen. Cancer Res 1992;52:1360.
37. Mani C, Gelboin HV, Park SS, et al. Metabolism of the antimammary cancer antiestrogenic agent tamoxifen. I. Cytochrome P-450-catalyzed N-demethylation and 4-hydroxylation. Drug Metab
Dispos 1993;21:645.
38. Mani C, Hodgson E, Kupfer D. Metabolism of the antimammary cancer antiestrogenic agent tamoxifen. II. Flavin-containing monooxygenase-mediated N-oxidation. Drug Metab Dispos
1993;21:657.
39. Fromson JM, Pearson S, Bramah S. The metabolism of tamoxifen (I.C.I. 46474) part I: in laboratory animals. Xenobiotica 1973;3:693.
40. Fromson JM, Pearson S, Bramah S. The metabolism of tamoxifen (I.C.I. 46,474) part II: in female patients. Xenobiotica 1973;3:711.
41. Jordan VC, Collins MM, Rowsby L, et al. A monohydroxylated metabolite of tamoxifen with potent antiestrogenic activity. J Endocrinol 1977;75:305.
42. Robertson DW, Katzenellenbogen JA, Long DJ, et al. Tamoxifen antiestrogens: a comparison of the activity, pharmacokinetics, and metabolic activation of the cis and trans isomers of
tamoxifen. J Steroid Biochem 1982;16:1.
43. Katzenellenbogen JA, Carlson KE, Katzenellenbogen BS. Facile geometric isomerization of phenolic non-steroidal estrogens and antiestrogens: limitations to the interpretation of experiments
characterizing the activity of individual isomers. J Steroid Biochem 1985;22:589.
44. Robertson DW, Katzenellenbogen JA, Long DJ, et al. Tamoxifen antiestrogens: a comparison of the activity, pharmacokinetics, and metabolic activation of the cis and trans isomers of
tamoxifen. J Steroid Biochem 1982;16:1.
45. Lien EA, Solheim E, Lea OA, et al. Distribution of 4-hydroxy-N-desmethyltamoxifen and other tamoxifen metabolites in human biological fluids during tamoxifen treatment. Cancer Res
1989;49:2175.
46. Shah IG, Parsons DL. Human albumin binding of tamoxifen in the presence of a perfluorochemical erythrocyte substitute. J Pharm Pharmacol 1991;43:790.
47. Adam HK, Patterson JS, Kemp JV. Studies on the metabolism and pharmacokinetics of tamoxifen in normal volunteers. Cancer Treat Rep 1980;64:761.
48. Patterson JS, Settatree RS, Adam HK, et al. Serum concentrations of tamoxifen and major metabolite during long term Nolvadex therapy, correlated with clinical response. In: Mouridsen HT,
Palshof T, eds. Breast cancer; experimental and clinical aspects. Oxford: Permagon Press, 1980:89.
49. Camaggi CM, Strocchi E, Pannuti F. Tamoxifen pharmacokinetics in advanced breast cancer patients. In: Pannuti F, ed. Anti-oestrogens in oncology, past: present and prospects. Amsterdam:
Excerpta Medica, 1985:90.
50. Lien EA, Solheim E, Ueland PM. Distribution of tamoxifen and its metabolites in rat and human tissues during steady-state treatment. Cancer Res 1991;51:4837.
51. Lien EA, Wester K, Lønning PE, Solheim E, Ueland PM. Distribution of tamoxifen and metabolites into brain tissue and brain metastases in breast cancer patients. Br J Cancer 1991;3:641.
52. Daniel CP, Gaskell SJ, Bishop H, et al. Determination of tamoxifen and biologically active metabolites in human breast tumours and plasma. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1981;17:1183.

53. Robinson SP, Langan-Fahey SM, Johnson DA, et al. Metabolites, pharmacodynamics, and pharmacokinetics of tamoxifen in rats and mice compared to the breast cancer patient. Drug Metab
Dispos 1991;19:36.
54. DeGregorio MW, Wiebe VJ, Venook AP, et al. Elevated plasma tamoxifen levels in a patient with liver obstruction [Letter]. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1989;23:194.
55. Lodwick R, McConkey B, Brown AM, et al. Life threatening interactions between tamoxifen and warfarin. BMJ 1987;295:1141.
56. Ritchie LD, Grant SMT. Tamoxifen-warfarin interaction: the Aberdeen hospitals drug file. BMJ 1989;298:1253.
57. Tenni P, Lalich DL, Byrne MJ. Life threatening interaction between tamoxifen and warfarin. BMJ 1989;298:93.
58. Camaggi CM, Strocchi E, Canova N, et al. Medroxyprogesterone acetate (map) and tamoxifen (tmx) plasma levels after simultaneous treatment with ‘low' tmx and ‘high' map doses. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol 1985;14:229.
59. Rabinowicz AL, Hinton DR, Dyck P, et al. High-dose tamoxifen in treatment of brain tumorsinteraction with antiepileptic drugs. Epilepsia 1995;36:513.
60. Lien EA, Anker G, Lønning PE, et al. Decreased serum concentrations of tamoxifen and its metabolites induced by aminoglutethimide. Cancer Res 1990;50:5851.
61. Hayes DF, Vanzyl JA, Hacking A, et al. Randomized comparison of tamoxifen and two separate doses of toremifene in postmenopausal patients with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:2556.
62. Stenbygaard LE, Herrstedt J, Thomsen JF, et al. Toremifene and tamoxifen in advanced breast cancera double-blind cross-over trial. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1993;25:67.
63. Vogel CL, Shemano I, Schoenfelder J, et al. Multicenter phase II efficacy trial of toremifene in tamoxifen-refractory patients with advanced breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:345.
64. Kangas L. Review of the pharmacological properties of toremifene. J Steroid Biochem 1990;36:191.
65. Berthou F, Dreano Y, Belloc C, et al. Involvement of cytochrome P450 3A enzyme family in the major metabolic pathways of toremifene in human liver microsomes. Biochem Pharmacol
1994;47:1883.
66. Simberg NH, Murai JT, Siiteri PK. In vitro and in vivo binding of toremifene and its metabolites in rat uterus. J Steroid Biochem 1990;36:197.
67. Kohler PC, Hamm JT, Wiebe VJ, et al. Phase I study of the tolerance and pharmacokinetics of toremifene in patients with cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1990;16(Suppl):19.
68. Wiebe VJ, Benz CC, Shemano I, et al. Pharmacokinetics of toremifene and its metabolites in patients with advanced breast cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1990;25:247.
69. Tominaga T, Abe O, Izuo M, et al. A phase I study of toremifene. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1990;16(Suppl):27.
70. Anttila M, Laakso S, Nylanden P, et al. Pharmacokinetics of the novel antiestrogenic agent toremifene in subjects with altered liver and kidney function. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1995;57:628.
71. Montandon F, Williams GM. Comparison of DNA reactivity of the polyphenylethylene hormonal agents diethylstilbestrol, tamoxifen and toremifene in rat and hamster liver. Arch Toxicol
1994;68:272.
72. Hard GC, Iatropoulos MJ, Jordan K, et al. Major difference in the hepatocarcinogenicity and DNA adduct forming ability between toremifene and tamoxifen in female Crl: CD(BR) rats. Cancer
Res 1993;53:4534.
73. Delmas PD, Bjarnason NH, Mitlak BH, et al. Effects of raloxifene on bone mineral density, serum cholesterol concentrations, and uterine endometrium in postmenopausal women. N Engl J Med
1997;337:1641.
74. Draper MW, Flowers DE, Huster WJ, et al. A controlled trial of raloxifene (LY139481) HCl: impact on bone turnover and serum lipid profile in healthy postmenopausal women. J Bone Miner
Res 1996;11:835.
75. Gottardis MM, Jordan VC. Antitumor actions of keoxifene and tamoxifen in the N-nitrosomethylurea-induced rat mammary carcinoma model. Cancer Res 1987;47:4020.
76. Anzano MA, Peer CW, Smith JM, et al. Chemoprevention of mammary carcinogenesis in the rat: combined use of raloxifene and 9-cis-retinoic acid. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:123.
77. Black LJ, Jones CD, Falcone JF. Antagonism of estrogen action with a new benzothiophene derived antiestrogen. Life Sci 1983;32:1031.
78. Kuiper GG, Carlsson B, Grandien K, et al. Comparison of the ligand binding specificity and transcript tissue distribution of estrogen receptors alpha and beta. Endocrinology 1997;138:863.
79. Paech K, Webb P, Kuiper GG, et al. Differential ligand activation of estrogen receptors ER-alpha and ER-beta at AP1 sites. Science 1997;277:1508.
80. Webb P, Lopez GN, Uht RM, et al. Tamoxifen activation of the estrogen receptor/AP-1 pathway: potential origin for the cell-specific estrogen-like effects of antiestrogens. Mol Endocrinol
1995;9:443.
81. Forgue ST, Rudy AC, Knadler MP, et al. Rasloxifene pharmacokinetics in healthy postmenopausal women. Pharmaceut Res 1996;13:S429.
82. Ni L, Allerheiligen SRB, Basson R, et al. Pharmacokinetics of raloxifene in men and postmenopausal women volunteers. Pharmaceut Res 1996;13:S430.
83. Allerheilgen S, Geiser J, Knadler M, et al. Rasloxifene (RAL) pharmacokinetics and the associated endocrine effects in premenopausal women treated during the follicular, ovulatory and luteal
phases of the menstrual cycle . Pharmaceut Res 1996;13:S430.
84. Hochner-Celnikier D. Pharmacokinetics of raloxifene and its clinical application. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1999;85:23.
85. Bonomi P, Pessis D, Bunting N, et al. Megestrol acetate used as primary hormonal therapy in stage D prostatic cancer. Semin Oncol 1985;12:36.
86. Loprinzi CL, Ellison NM, Schaid DJ, et al. Controlled trial of megestrol acetate for the treatment of cancer anorexia and cachexia. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:1127.
87. Bruera E, Macmillan K, Kuehn N, et al. A controlled trial of megestrol acetate on appetite, caloric intake, nutritional status, and other symptoms in patients with advanced cancer. Cancer
1990;66:1279.
88. Feliu J, Gonzalez-Baron M, Berrocal A, et al. Usefulness of megestrol acetate in cancer cachexia and anorexia. Am J Clin Oncol 1992;15:436.
89. Tchekmedyian NS, Hickman M, Siau J, et al. Megestrol acetate in cancer anorexia and weight loss. Cancer 1992;69:1268.
90. Loprinzi CL, Michalak JC, Schaid DJ, et al. Phase III evaluation of four doses of megestrol acetate as therapy for patients with cancer anorexia and/or cachexia. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:762.
91. Loprinzi CL, Jensen MD, Jiang NS, et al. Effect of megestrol acetate on the human pituitary-adrenal axis. Mayo Clin Proc 1992;67:1160.
92. Leinung MC, Liporace R, Miller CH. Induction of adrenal suppression by megestrol acetate in patients with AIDS. Ann Intern Med 1995;122:843.
93. Rowland KM Jr, Loprinzi CL, Shaw EG, et al. Randomized double-blind placebo controlled trial of cisplatin and etoposide plus megestrol acetate/placebo in extensive stage small cell lung
cancer: a North Central Cancer Treatment Group Study. J Clin Oncol 1995;14:135.
94. Loprinzi CL, Johnson P, Jensen M. Megestrol acetate for anorexia and cachexia. Oncology 1992;49(Suppl 2):46.
95. Von Roenn JH, Armstrong D, Kotler DP, et al. Megestrol acetate in patients with AIDS-related cachexia. Ann Intern Med 1994;121:393.
96. Alexieva-Figusch J, Blankenstein MA, Hop WC, et al. Treatment of metastatic breast cancer patients with different dosages of megestrol acetate; dose relations, metabolic and endocrine
effects. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1984;20:33.
97. Tseng L, Gurpide E. Effect of progestins on estradiol receptor levels in human endometrium. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1975;41:402.
98. Gurpide E, Tseng L, Gusberg SB. Estrogen metabolism in normal and neoplastic endometrium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1977;129:809.
99. Gordon GG, Altman K, Southren AL, et al. Human hepatic testosterone A-ring reductase activity: effect of medroxyprogesterone acetate. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1971;32:457.
100. Allegra JC, Kiefer SM. Mechanism of action of progestational agents. Semin Oncol 1985;12:3.
101. Ewing TM, Murphy LJ, Ng ML, et al. Regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor by progestins and glucocorticoids in human breast cancer cell lines. Int J Cancer 1989;44:744.
102. Martin F, Adlercreutz H. Aspects of megestrol acetate and medroxyprogesterone acetate metabolism. In: Garattini S, Berendes HW, eds. Pharmacology of steroid contraceptive drugs. New
York: Raven Press, 1977:99.
103. Adlercreutz H, Eriksen PB, Christensen MS. Plasma concentration of megestrol acetate and medroxyprogesterone acetate after a single oral administration to healthy subjects. J Pharm Biomed
Anal 1983;1:153.
104. Gaver RC, Pittman KA, Reilly CM, et al. Bioequivalence evaluation of new megestrol acetate formulation in humans. Semin Oncol 1985;12:17.
105. Fotherby K, Kamyab S, Littleton P, et al. Metabolism of synthetic progestational compounds in humans. J Reprod Fertil 1968;5(Suppl):51.
106. Fukushima DK, Levin J, Liang JS, et al. Isolation and partial synthesis of a new metabolite of medroxyprogesterone acetate. Steroids 1979;34:57.
107. Slaunwhite WR, Sandberg AA. Disposition of radioactive 17a-hydroxyprogesterone, 6a-methyl-prednisolone in human subjects. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1961;21:753.
108. Utaaker E, Lundgren S, Kvinnsland S, et al. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of medroxyprogesterone acetate in patients with advanced breast cancer. J Steroid Biochem 1988;31:437.
109. Sturm G, Haberlein H, Bauer T, et al. Mass spectrometric and high-performance liquid chromatographic studies of medroxyprogesterone acetate metabolites in human plasma. J Chromatogr
1991;562:351.
110. Pannuti F, Camaggi CM, Strocchi E, et al. Medroxyprogesterone acetate pharmacokinetics. In: Pelligrini A, et al., eds. Role of medroxyprogesterone in endocrine related tumors. New York:
Raven Press, 1984:43.
111. Lundgren S, Lønning PE, Aakvaag A, et al. Influence of aminoglutethimide on the metabolism of medroxyprogesterone acetate and megestrol acetate in post-menopausal patients with
advanced breast cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1990;27:101.
112. Lundgren S, Kvinnsland S, Utaaker E, et al. Effect of oral high-dose progestins on the disposition of antipyrine, digitoxin, and warfarin in patients with advanced breast cancer. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol 1986;18:270.
113. Santen RJ. Suppression of estrogens with aminoglutethimide and hydrocortisone (medical adrenalectomy) as treatment of advanced breast carcinoma: a review. Breast Cancer Res Treat
1981;1:183.
114. Schteingart DE, Cash R, Coon JW. Aminoglutethimide and metastatic adrenal cancer. JAMA 1966;198:1007.
115. Hoffken K, Kempf H, Miller AA, et al. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:1153.
116. Santen RJ, Worgul TJ, Samojlik E, et al. A randomized trial comparing surgical adrenalectomy with aminoglutethimide plus hydrocortisone in women with advanced breast cancer. N Engl J
Med 1981;305:545.
117. Lawrence B, Santen RJ, Lipton A, et al. Pancytopenia induced by aminoglutethimide in the treatment of breast cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:1581.
118. Lønning PE, Kvinnsland S. Mechanisms of action of aminoglutethimide as endocrine therapy of breast cancer. Drugs 1988;35:685.
119. Santen RJ, Worgul TJ, Lipton A, et al. Aminoglutethimide as treatment of postmenopausal women with advanced breast carcinoma. Ann Intern Med 1982;96:94.
120. Goss PE, Gwyn KM. Current perspectives on aromatase inhibitors in breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2460.
121. Graves PE, Salhanick HA. Stereoselective inhibition of aromatase by enantiomers of aminoglutethimide. Endocrinology 1979;105:52.
122. Adam AM, Rogers HJ, Amiel SA, et al. The effect of acetylator phenotype on the disposition of aminoglutethimide. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1984;18:495.
123. Coombes RC, Foster AB, Harland SJ, et al. Polymorphically acetylated aminoglutethimide in humans. Br J Cancer 1982;46:340.
124. Murray FT, Santner S, Samojlik E, et al. Serum aminoglutethimide levels studies of serum half-life, clearance, and patient compliance. J Clin Pharmacol 1979;19:704.
125. Lønning PE, Schanche JS, Kvinnsland S, et al. Single-dose and steady-state pharmacokinetics of aminoglutethimide. Clin Pharmacokinet 1985;10:353.
126. Coombes RC, Jarman M, Dowsett M, et al. New endocrine agents for the treatment of breast cancer. Recent Results Cancer Res 1993;127:267.
127. Dowsett M, Smithers D, Moore J, et al. Endocrine changes with the aromatase inhibitor fadrozole hydrochloride in breast cancer. Eur J Cancer 1994;30A:1453.
128. Iveson TJ, Smith IE, Ahern J, et al. Phase I study of the oral nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor CGS 20267, in post menopausal patients with advanced breast cancer. Cancer Res 1993;53:266.
129. Bhatnagar AS, Hausler A, Schieweck K, et al. Highly selective inhibition of estrogen biosynthesis by cgs 20267, a new nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol
1990;37:1021.
130. Bhatnagar AS, Hausler A, Schieweck K. Inhibition of aromatase in vitro and in vivo by aromatase inhibitors. J Enzym Inhib 1990;4:179.
131. Demers LM. Effects of Fadrozole (CGS 16949A) and Letrozole (CGS 20267) on the inhibition of aromatase activity in breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1994;30:95.
132. Lipton A, Demers LM, Harvey HA, et al. Letrozole (CGS 20267). A phase I study of a new potent oral aromatase inhibitor of breast cancer. Cancer 1995;75:2132.
133. Bhatnagar AS, Hausler A, Trunet P, et al. Inhibitors of estrogen biosynthesis: CGS 16949 and CGS 20267, preclinical and clinical endocrine effects, in aromatase inhibition: past, present, and
future, symposium. 15th International Cancer Congress, Hamburg, Germany, 1990:13.
134. Trunet P, Muller PH, Bhatnagar A, et al. Phase I study in healthy male volunteers with the non-steroidal aromatase inhibitor GCS 20267. Eur J Cancer 1990;26:173.
135. Dukes M, Edwards PN, Large M, et al. The preclinical pharmacology of “Arimidex” (anastrozole; ZD1033)a potent, selective aromatase inhibitor. J Steroid Biochem Molec Biol 1996;58:439.
136. Yates RA, Dowsett M, Fisher GV, et al. Arimidex (ZD1033): a selective, potent inhibitor of aromatase in postmenopausal female volunteers. Br J Cancer 1996;73:543.
137. Lønning PE, Geisler J, Dowsett M. Pharmacological and clinical profile of anastrozole. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1998;49(Suppl 1):S53.
138. Geisler J, King N, Dowsett M, et al. Influence of anastrozole (Arimidex), a selective, non-steroidal aromatase inhibitor, on in vivo aromatization and plasma oestrogen levels in postmenopausal
women with breast cancer. Br J Cancer 1996;74:1286.

139. Wouters W, De Coster R, Beerens D, et al. Potency and selectivity of the aromatase inhibitor R 716713. A study in human ovarian, adipose, stromal, testicular and adrenal cells. J Steroid
Biochem 1990;36:57.
140. Vanden Bossche H, Willemsens G, Roels I, et al. R 76713 and enantiomers: selective, nonsteroidal inhibitors of the cytochrome P450-dependent oestrogen synthesis. Biochem Pharmacol
1990;40:1707.
141. Wouters W, Van Ginckel R, Krekels M, et al. Pharmacology of vorozole. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1993;44:617.
142. Johnston SR, Smith IE, Doody D, et al. Clinical and endocrine effects of the oral aromatase inhibitor vorozole in postmenopausal patients with advanced breast cancer. Cancer Res
1994;54:5875.
143. Wouters W, Snoeck E, De Coster R. Vorozole, a specific non-steroidal aromatase inhibitor [Review]. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1994;30:89.
144. Ahmann FR, Citrin DL, deHaan HA, et al. Zoladex: a sustained-release, monthly luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone analogue for the treatment of advanced prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol
1987;5:912.
145. Corbin A. From contraception to cancer: a review of the therapeutic applications of LHRH analogues as antitumor agents. Yale J Biol Med 1982;55:27.
146. Davidson N, O'Neill A, Vukov A, et al. Effect of chemohormonal therapy in premenopausal, node (+), receptor (+) breast cancer: an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group phase III intergroup
trial (E5188, INT-0101). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:67a.
147. Harvey HA, Lipton A, Max DT, et al. Medical castration produced by the GnRh analogue Leuprolide to treat metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1068.
148. Vogelzang NJ, Chodak GW, Soloway MS, et al. Goserelin versus orchiectomy in the treatment of advanced prostate cancer: final results of a randomized trial. Zoladex Prostate Study Group.
Urology 1995;46:220.
149. Brogden RN, Faulds D. Goserelina review of its pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties and therapeutic efficacy in prostate cancer. Drugs Aging 1995;6:324.
150. Plosker GL, Brogden RN. Leuprorelin: a review of its pharmacology and therapeutic use in prostatic cancer, endometriosis and other sex hormone-related disorders. Drugs 1994;48:930.
151. Brogden RN, Buckley MM, Ward A. Buserelin: a review of its pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties, and clinical profile. Drugs 1990;39:399.
152. Nillius SJ. The therapeutic uses of gonadotropin-releasing hormone and its analogues. In: Beardwell C, Robertson GL, eds. Clinical endocrinology 1: the pituitary. London: Butterworth,
1981:211.
153. Harvey H, Lipton A, Max DT. LH-RH agonist treatment breast cancer: a phase II study in the USA. In: Klijn JGM, et al. eds. Hormonal manipulation of cancer. New York: Raven Press,
1987:321.
154. Klign JGM, DeJong FH, Blankenstein MA, et al. Anti-tumor and endocrine effects of chronic LHRH agonist treatment (buserelin) with or without tamoxifen in premenopausal metastatic breast
cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1984;4:209.
155. Nicholson RI, Walker KJ. Use of LH-RH agonists in the treatment of breast cancer. Proc R Soc Edinburgh 1989;95B:271.
156. Clayton RN, Bailey LC, Cottam J, et al. A radioimmunoassay for GnRH agonist analogue in serum patients with prostate cancer treated with D-Ser (tBu) AZA Gly 10 GnRH. Clin Endocrinol
1985;22:453.
157. Chrisp P, Goa KL. Goserelin: a review of its pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties, and clinical use in sex hormone-related conditions. Drugs 1991;41:254.
158. Brogden RN, Clissold SP. Flutamide: a preliminary review of its pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties, and therapeutic efficacy in advanced prostatic cancer. Drugs 1989;38:185.
159. Wysowski DK, Freiman JP, Tourtelot JB, et al. Fatal and nonfatal hepatotoxicity associated with flutamide. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:860.
160. Brogden RN, Chrisp P. Flutamide: a review of its pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties, and therapeutic use in advanced prostatic cancer. Drugs Aging 1991;1:104.
161. Radwanski E, Perentesis G, Symchowicz S, et al. Single and multiple dose pharmacokinetic evaluation of flutamide in normal geriatric volunteers. J Clin Pharmacol 1989;29:554.
162. Schellhammer P, Sharifi R, Block N, et al. A controlled trial of bicalutamide versus flutamide, each in combination with luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone analogue therapy, in patients with
advanced prostate cancer. Urology 1995;45:745.
163. Furr BJ. Casodex: preclinical studies. Eur Urol 1990;18(Suppl 3):2.
164. Furr BJ. “Casodex” (ICI 176,334)a new, pure, peripherally-selective anti-androgen: preclinical studies. Horm Res 1989;32(Suppl 1):69.
165. Kennealey GT, Furr BJA. Use of the nonsteroidal anti-androgen casodex in advanced prostatic carcinoma. Urol Clin North Am 1991;18:99.
166. Mahler C, Verhelst J, Denis L. Clinical pharmacokinetics of the antiandrogens and their efficacy in prostate cancer. Clin Pharmacokinet 1998;34:405.
167. Dole EJ, Holdsworth MT. Nilutamide: an antiandrogen for the treatment of prostate cancer. Ann Pharmacother 1997;31:65.
168. Kennedy BJ. Hormonal therapies in breast cancer. Semin Oncol 1974;1:119.
169. Colburn WA. Radioimmunoassay for fluoxymesterone (Halotestin). Steroids 1975;25:43.
170. Kammerer RC, Merdink JL, Jagels M, et al. Testing for fluoxymesterone (Halotestin) administration to man: identification of urinary metabolites by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. J
Steroid Biochem 1990;36:659.
171. Ingle JN, Ahmann DL, Green SJ, et al. Randomized clinical trial of diethylstilbestrol versus tamoxifen in post menopausal women with advanced breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1981;304:16.
172. Stewart HJ, Forrest APM, Gunn JM, et al. The tamoxifen trial: a double-blind comparison with stilboestrol in postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer. In: Mouridsen HT, Palshof T,
eds. Breast cancer: experimental and clinical aspects. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1980:83.
173. Byar DP. Proceedings: the Veterans Administration Cooperative Urological Research Group's studies of cancer of the prostate. Cancer 1973;32:126.
174. Marselos M, Tomatis L. Diethylstilboestrol. I. Pharmacology, toxicology and carcinogenocity in humans. Eur J Cancer 1992;28A:1182.
175. Metzler M. Metabolic activation of carcinogenic diethylstilbestrol in rodents and humans. J Toxicol Environ Health 1976;(Suppl 1):21.
176. Williams CL, Stancel GM. Estrogens and progestins. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996.
177. Hardman, Linbud, Molinoff, et al., eds. Good and Gilman's The pharmacologic basis of therapeutics. 9th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996.
178. Cascinu S, Fedeli A, Luzi Fedeli S, et al. Control of chemotherapy induced diarrhea with octreotide in patients receiving 5-fluorouracil. Eur J Cancer 1992;28:482.
179. Cascinu S, Fedeli A, Fedeli SL, et al. Octreotide versus loperamide in the treatment of fluorouracil-induced diarrhea: a randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:148.
180. Chanson P, Timsit J, Harris AG. Clinical pharmacokinetics of octreotide. Therapeutic applications in patients with pituitary tumours. Clin Pharmacokinet 1993;25:375.
181. Harris AG. Somatostatin and somatostatin analogues: pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamic effects. Gut 1994;35:S1.
182. Marbach P, Briner U, Lemaire M, et al. From somatostatin to Sandostatin: pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. Digestion 1993;54(Suppl 1):9.
183. Rubin J, Ajani J, Schirmer W, et al. Octreotide acetate long-acting formulation versus open-label subcutaneous octreotide acetate in malignant carcinoid syndrome. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:600.

Chabner: Cancer Chemotherapy and Biotherapy Principles and Practice, Third Ed.

SECTION 20.4 Differentiation Agents
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 20.4
Differentiation Agents
RAYMOND P. WARRELL, JR.
Introduction
Retinoids
All-Trans Retinoic Acid
13-Cis Retinoic Acid
Other Retinoids
Adverse Effects of Retinoids
Arsenic Trioxide
Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors
Butyrates and other Fatty Acids
Hybrid Polar Compounds
Vitamin D
Cytokines and other Proteins
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Chemotherapy treatment of certain tumors (notably germ cell cancers and neuroblastoma) is occasionally associated with persistence of residual tumors that on
biopsy reveal only differentiated cells. These clinical observations, combined with in vitro data that morphologic differentiation can be induced in many cancer cell
lines, have led to a resurgence of interest in the concept of induced cytodifferentiation as a means of cancer treatment. The identification of drugs that can induce an
irreversible commitment to terminal differentiation (and consequently programmed cell death) has yielded some noteworthy successes.

RETINOIDS
Retinoids, which are natural or synthetic derivatives of vitamin A (retinol), induce cellular differentiation, suppress carcinogenesis, or inhibit proliferation of a number
of cell lines, including epithelial cancers, melanoma, neuroblastoma, leukemia, germ cell, bone, and breast cancers. 1 These findings have generated widespread
interest in these agents for cancer treatment and prevention. Several retinoids (all- trans retinoic acid [RA] and 9-cis RA) are normally found in plasma at nanomolar
concentrations. Most retinoids bind to nuclear proteins that are RA receptors (RARs). 2,3 Cofactors, called retinoid X receptors (RXRs),4 dimerize with RARs (Fig.
20.4-1), as well as receptors for thyroid hormone, vitamin D, and peroxisome proliferation activators. These receptor dimers bind specific DNA segments within target
genes known as retinoid response elements. Activation of the receptor requires binding of its ligand, which then regulates transcription in part via recruitment of
histone acetyltransferases. 5 Importantly, nonactivated receptors have important roles in silencing basal transcription of target genes via interaction with nuclear
corepressor proteins that recruit histone deacetylases. 6

FIGURE 20.4-1. Metabolism of all-trans retinoic acid (RA). RA enters the cell by simple diffusion or by conversion from retinol (vitamin A) that has been absorbed from
the gastrointestinal tract, bound in circulating form to retinol-binding proteins (RBP), and rebound intracellularly to cellular retinol-binding proteins (CRBP). RA can be
immediately metabolized on binding to cellular retinoic acid–binding proteins (CRABP) and oxidized by cytochrome P-450 enzymes located in smooth endoplasmic
reticulum. Alternatively, RA (or its isomers) enter the cell nucleus and bind to retinoic acid receptors (RARs) or retinoid X receptors (RXRs). On dimerization of these
receptors (i.e., formation of a RAR-RXR heterodimer or RXR-RXR homodimer), RA-activated receptors bind with high affinity to specific DNA segments [the retinoic
acid response element (RARE)] and effect messenger RNA (mRNA) transcription. Ultimately, the retinoid response is mediated by primary target genes, by
interference with other transcription factors, or by control of certain posttranscriptional actions. (From ref. 1, with permission.)

ALL-TRANS RETINOIC ACID
The most striking success of the clinical application of differentiation therapy has been in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) 7 (see Chapter 46.2) where all-trans RA
induces complete remission in a high proportion of patients with APL. Resistance to all- trans RA in a previously untreated patient is exceptionally rare, and failure is
almost exclusively because of early death. 7,8 In APL, reciprocal translocations between the long arms of chromosomes 15 and 17 result in a fusion between genes that
encode a RAR (RAR-a) and a transcription factor known as PML. 9,10 The resulting fusion protein, PML-RAR- a, blocks myeloid differentiation at the promyelocyte stage,
which is relieved by pharmacologic (but not physiologic) concentrations of all- TRANS RA.
The initial response to all- trans RA in APL is associated with induced differentiation of leukemic cells. 11 This process is obvious, both in the bone marrow and in the
peripheral blood, with the appearance of cells that are intermediate in maturation between promyelocytes and neutrophils. Prominent features of these intermediate
cells are indented nuclei, loss of azurophilic granularity, and nuclear and cytoplasmic vacuolation. 7 Cell surface immunophenotyping of the neoplastic cells shows
progression from a pattern of immature antigen expression at presentation toward the appearance of mature granulocytic markers during remission. 11
The plasma half-life of all- trans RA is approximately 40 minutes, 12 and continuous dosing induces a progressive decrease in the plasma drug concentration. 13
Remissions induced by all- trans RA in patients with APL who do not receive additional anticancer therapy are brief and average 3 to 5 months in duration. 14 The
mechanisms of clinically acquired retinoid resistance may be multifactorial, 15 but point mutations in the ligand-binding domain of the PML-RAR-a have been described
in a few patients. 16 Combined sequential treatment programs that use all- trans RA (with or without chemotherapy) for induction, followed by anthracycline-based
chemotherapy for consolidation, have yielded a two- to threefold increase in the proportion of patients cured of this disease. 17,18and19 Further administration of all- trans
RA as maintenance therapy during the first year of remission makes a further, albeit modest, 8,17 contribution to relapse-free survival. Regrettably, the high
single-agent activity of all- trans RA observed in APL has not been replicated in other neoplastic diseases.
13-CIS RETINOIC ACID
Of all retinoids, 13- cis RA has undergone the most extensive clinical examination; however, the single-agent activity of this drug in established cancer is quite limited.
In the hematologic cancers, modest single-agent activity has been observed in patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides) 20,21; however, responses
are usually partial and limited in duration. Studies of 13- cis RA in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes 22,23; chronic myelocytic leukemia 24; germ cell cancer and

neuroblastoma 25,26; and carcinomas of the head and neck, lung, and bladder 27,28and29 have had negative results. Modest activity has been observed in patients with
epidermoid skin cancers, alone and in combination with interferon-a. 30,31and32
The drug has also been explored as a means of cancer prevention, either as primary (to prevent an initial cancer) or secondary (to reduce the risk of recurrence)
therapy. Treatment with 13-cis RA (1 to 2 mg/kg/d for 3 months) in heavy tobacco users reverses oral leukoplakia, 33 a known precursor to squamous carcinoma of the
oral cavity. Because this dose causes considerable mucocutaneous toxicity, follow-up studies have used a high-dose induction course followed by a lower dose (0.5
mg/kg/d) maintenance program.34 However, the duration of the clinical response is frequently brief, and most patients relapse when the drug is withdrawn. In an
important preliminary study, adjuvant treatment with 13-cis RA (1 mg/kg/d) in patients who had undergone primary surgical excision, radiation treatment, or both for
head and neck cancer significantly reduced the incidence of second primary tumors of the aerodigestive tract. 35 However, a large randomized multicenter study has
not confirmed these findings.
OTHER RETINOIDS
The natural ligand of the RXRs is 9- cis RA, an isomer of all-trans RA36 (see Fig. 20.4-1). Because 9-cis RA also binds to RARs, this property as a receptor
pan-agonist suggested potentially broad biologic effects. Early clinical trials of 9- cis RA showed activity comparable with all-trans RA in APL, but the drug has not
reversed clinically acquired retinoid resistance in this disease. 37 Toxicity of the two compounds has also been similar (see Adverse Effects of Retinoids, later in this
chapter). 38,39 The drug was recently approved for topical use in patients with Kaposi's sarcoma related to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. A number of relatively
selective retinoid receptor agonists have also been synthesized 39 and are under active development. In contrast, fenretinide (N-[4-hydroxyphenyl], Retinamide) is a
synthetic retinoid whose receptor has not yet been identified, but that has exhibited some chemopreventive activity against carcinomas of the breast, prostate, oral
cavity, and bladder. 40 A large Italian study showed that fenretinide did not reduce the incidence of contralateral breast cancer, although an unexpected reduction of
ovarian carcinoma was observed. 41 Fenretinide lowers serum retinol levels, which can cause temporary night blindness. 42
ADVERSE EFFECTS OF RETINOIDS
Retinoids share many common side effects (Table 20.4-1). Most reactions are relatively mild; however, serious and occasionally fatal reactions have occurred.
Headache that occurs several hours after drug ingestion is the most common side effect of all- trans and 9-cis RA.7,38,43,44 This effect is less prominent with 13- cis RA in
which mucositis is the most common reaction. Although narcotics are occasionally required, mild analgesics generally control the headaches, and tolerance to this
effect develops within the first week of dosing. Pseudotumor cerebri has been documented in several patients (especially children) 44 who have required treatment with
lumbar punctures and high-dose corticosteroids.

TABLE 20.4-1. Adverse Clinical Effects of the Retinoids

Dry skin, itching, flaking, nasal stuffiness, xerostomia, and cheilitis are relatively common with both all- trans and 13-cis RA. These reactions have been managed with
topical lubricants and moisturizing agents, but some patients may require a decrease in drug dose. Genital ulcerations have been observed with all- trans RA. Bone
pain occurs in 10% to 20% of APL patients receiving all- trans RA.7 Like headache, this effect tends to occur early, remits with continued therapy, but can be quite
severe, requiring parenteral narcotics for relief. Although bone pain is less common with 13- cis RA, protracted treatment with that agent has caused formation of bone
spurs on vertebral bodies and the calcaneus. 45 Hypercalcemia has been reported with many RA isomers. 46
Hypertriglyceridemia has been observed with all- trans RA, 9-cis and 13-cis RA, and also with RXR-selective agonists 7,38; hypercholesterolemia is less striking.
Cardiovascular consequences specifically related to hyperlipidemia have not yet been described, although acute pancreatitis has been reported. 38 These
complications may assume increasing importance as retinoids are used in more patients for extended periods. Hepatic toxicity, usually manifested by a transient
increase in serum transaminase, alkaline phosphatase, or bilirubin, is a well-known side effect of all retinoids. Generally, this reaction occurs during the first several
weeks of therapy and reverses after the drug is stopped. As with vitamin A itself, 47 retinoids are exceptionally potent teratogens, but this reaction is more important
during treatment of nonmalignant conditions. The risk of fetal malformation (usually craniofacial abnormalities) appears to be highest in the first trimester and quite low
in the third trimester. 48,49
Leukocytosis (peripheral blood leukocytes greater than or equal to 10,000 cells/mm 3) occurs in approximately one-half of APL patients treated with all- trans RA50 who
do not receive concurrent cytotoxic chemotherapy. This finding is usually the first clinical sign of a biologic response. Cytotoxic therapy specifically directed toward
lowering the leukocyte count is not required; however, patients who present with leukocyte counts greater than or equal to 5000 cells/mm 3 should be treated with
full-dose chemotherapy (including an anthracycline) rather than low-dose chemotherapy (e.g., hydroxyurea or cytosine arabinoside), as the latter can trigger the onset
of a lethal coagulopathy. 50
More than one-half of patients with APL treated with all- trans RA experience the RA syndrome, a disorder characterized by fluid retention, weight gain, respiratory
distress, radiographic pulmonary infiltrates, hectic fever, and pleural or pericardial effusions. 51 Leukocytosis is frequently but not invariably associated with this
syndrome, and chemotherapy does not reduce the risk of this problem. 8,17,50,51and52 Early recognition of the syndrome before the onset of dyspnea (especially fever or
weight gain) is critical. These signs should prompt immediate treatment with corticosteroids (dexamethasone, 10 mg intravenously every 12 hours for 3 or more days),
which halts progression of the syndrome in most patients. RA need not be discontinued, but recurrence of the syndrome is common, requiring an additional course of
corticosteroids.

ARSENIC TRIOXIDE
After a resurgence of interest owing to studies in China, 53,54 intravenous arsenic trioxide has been shown to induce complete remissions in a high proportion of
patients with APL.55 In APL, the drug is given intravenously as a 1- to 2-hour infusion at a dose of 0.15 mg/kg once per day until visible evidence of leukemic cells has
been eliminated from the bone marrow. The duration of treatment in relapsed patients has ranged from 12 to 60 days, with a median of approximately 32 days. 55,56
Recovery of the peripheral leukocyte and platelet counts usually follows cessation of drug therapy. One or more additional treatment courses, each of a fixed duration
of 25 cumulative days, is usually started approximately 3 weeks after discontinuing the initial series of infusions. These later infusions have been administered on a
weekdays-only schedule without any apparent decrease in efficacy to date.
Arsenic trioxide has proved surprisingly potent in APL; indeed, the proportion of patients who achieve a molecular remission (as manifest by a negative reverse
transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction result for the PML-RAR-a rearrangement) considerably exceeds that of patients on all- trans RA.56 In APL, the drug is
associated with induction of partial nonterminal differentiation, degradation of the PML-RAR-a fusion protein, and caspase activation. 55 The drug is currently being
studied in other conditions and in different dosing schedules. 57,58

When administered in the low-dose daily schedule described previously, the drug has generally been well tolerated. Fatigue is common. Lightheadedness during the
infusion can be ameliorated by increasing its duration. A characteristic maculopapular skin eruption over the neck and torso occasionally occurs that resolves on
discontinuation of the drug. Arsenic can cause peripheral neuropathy when administered for prolonged periods or higher doses, and severe neuropathic reactions,
including quadriparesis, 59 have been reported from overdosage. Prolongation of the QT interval may occur, which may require treatment with parenteral potassium
and magnesium supplements, especially in patients after amphotericin B therapy. APL patients treated with arsenic trioxide may also develop leukocytosis and the RA
syndrome.60 Management of these problems is identical to that described previously.

HISTONE DEACETYLASE INHIBITORS
The enzymatic addition of acetyl groups to histones, nuclear proteins closely associated with DNA, is known to have a permissive effect for messenger RNA
transcription. 61 Histone hyperacetylation may induce site-specific conformational relaxation of tightly coiled DNA that facilitates binding of transcription factors. 62
Conversely, histone deacetylation has been linked to gene repression, and a number of oncogenes (as well as normal genes) silence transcription by recruiting
histone deacetylases. 63,64 Furthermore, a link between gene methylation, a recognized mechanism of transcriptional repression, and histone deacetylation has now
been established 65 (Fig. 20.4-2). Thus, DNA demethylation and inhibition of histone deacetylation offer potential targets for anticancer therapy. Azacytidine is the
best-studied agent that induces demethylation, and the drug has shown modest single-agent activity in patients with various myelodysplastic syndromes. 66
Trichostatin A is the prototypic inhibitor of histone deacetylase, 67 but the agent has not been used clinically. In addition to the drugs noted in the following sections,
other inhibitors include the trapoxins, 67 depudecins, 68 and depsipeptides. 69

FIGURE 20.4-2. Mechanism of transcriptional repression by DNA methylation and histone deacetylation. In a transcriptionally inactive state, DNA is tightly coiled
around core histones in the nucleosome. To activate transcription, the compact inactive nucleosome must undergo conformational relaxation, which may facilitate the
binding of transcription factors (TF). Chromatin relaxation is associated with histone acetylation by histone acetyltransferases (HAT). A variety of normal DNA-binding
proteins or oncogene products can complex with other proteins, and these complexes recruit histone deacetylases (HDACs), which cleave acetyl groups from
histones, thereby preventing chromatin relaxation and blocking gene transcription. Treatment with a HDAC may prevent such cleavage, thereby yielding a loose
accessible nucleosome whose DNA is then accessible for gene activation and transcription. Last, gene methylation (Me) in the promoter region has long been known
to suppress gene activation in cancer. These two processes (i.e., gene methylation and histone deacetylation) have now been linked by the discovery of a protein
(MeCP2) that forms a bridge between HDAC and methylated DNA. Inhibition of both processes may be required in cases wherein inhibition of only one process is
insufficient to activate the target gene.

BUTYRATES AND OTHER FATTY ACIDS
Butyric acid induces differentiation in various cell lines, 70 but high concentrations (0.3 mM) have been required to reliably induce these effects. Butyrates have been
widely studied as a treatment for thalassemia 71 and certain hyperammonemic states in children. 72 Several clinical studies have suggested that sodium phenylbutyrate
has little single-agent activity in patients with advanced cancer or myelodysplasia. 73,74
Histone deacetylase was shown to mediate transcriptional repression in APL, 75,76and77 as well as other cancers. 78,79,80,81,82and83 One report has shown that sodium
phenylbutyrate reversibly induced histone hyperacetylation in leukemic cells and induced a complete remission in a child with retinoid-resistant APL when used in
combination with all- trans RA.84 Studies have suggested that these drugs act synergistically to induce cytodifferentiation, 85,86 and this combination is currently
undergoing additional clinical testing. The major side effects of sodium phenylbutyrate are fluid overload and central nervous system depression, including transient
somnolence and confusion.
Phenylbutyrate exhibits pleiotropic effects, and the agent is a prodrug for phenylacetate, 87 which promotes in vitro differentiation of certain cell lines. 88 High doses of
phenylacetate itself (250 to 550 mg/kg/d) have been used clinically 89 with low single-agent activity in malignant gliomas 90 and prostate cancer. 91 Tributyrin is a major
constituent of dietary butterfat, which yields three molecules of butyrate after hydrolysis. The relatively high butyrate concentrations that are achievable in the colon
have suggested a potential chemopreventive utility for colon cancer. 92
HYBRID POLAR COMPOUNDS
Certain hybrid polar compounds have broad in vitro activity as differentiating agents. The prototype compound of this class, hexamethylene bisacetamide, 93 has
required relatively high concentrations (1 to 5 mM). Renal insufficiency, central nervous system toxicity, and thrombocytopenia were dose-limiting in early studies, 94
but some responses were observed in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes using 10-day infusion schedules. 95 Newer synthetic derivatives have more potent
activity than hexamethylene bisacetamide, and several are potent inhibitors of histone deacetylase. 96

VITAMIN D
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3, the active form of the hormone, facilitates differentiation in a variety of cell types. 97 Vitamin D receptors have been identified in a variety of
cell types. 98,99 Circumstantial evidence has suggested that vitamin D can decrease the incidence of some tumor types. 100,101 Vitamin D decreases growth of
leukemia,102,103 breast,104 colon, 105 and prostate106 cancer cell lines. In HL60 cells, vitamin D induces differentiation into monocytes and macrophages, 107 unlike
retinoids and dimethyl sulfoxide, which induce granulocytoid differentiation.
Few clinical trials of vitamin D have been conducted. Several responses were observed in a study of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes treated at a dose of 2
mg/d, but intolerable hypercalcemia proved limiting. 102 New analogues of vitamin D3 have become available that retain differentiating activity while causing minimal
effects on calcium metabolism.108,109

CYTOKINES AND OTHER PROTEINS
Colony-stimulating factors induce a variety of responses in their target cells, including a commitment to terminal differentiation. 110 Both granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor (filgrastim) and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (sargramostim) have been studied clinically. Neither agent has proved dramatically effective
in either myelodysplastic syndromes or acute myeloid leukemias; however, mature populations of granulocytes and monocytes can be regularly increased in many
patients, sometimes with clinical benefit (e.g., reduced infectious complications). 111
CHAPTER REFERENCES

1. Warrell RP Jr. Retinoids in cancer. In: Kimball ES, ed. Immunopharmaceutical. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1995:101.
2. Petkovich M, Brand NJ, Krust A, et al. A human retinoic acid receptor which belongs to the family of nuclear receptors. Nature 1987;330:444.
3. Giguere V, Ong ES, Segui P, et al. Identification of a receptor for the morphogen retinoic acid. Nature 1987;330:624.
4. Mangelsdorf DJ, Ong ES, Dyck JA, et al. Nuclear receptor that identifies a novel retinoic acid response pathway. Nature 1990;345:224.
5. Wolffe AP, Pruss D. Targeting chromatin disruption: transcription regulators that acetylate histones. Cell 1996;84:817.
6. Ptashne M, Gann A. Transcriptional activation by recruitment. Nature 1997;386:569.
7. Chen JD, Evans RM. A transcriptional co-repressor that interacts with nuclear hormone receptors. Nature 1995;377:454.
8. Warrell RP Jr, de Thé H, Wang Z-Y, et al. Acute promyelocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1993;329:177.
9. Tallman MS, Andersen JW, Schiffer CA, et al. All- trans retinoic acid in acute promyelocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1021.
10. de Thé H, Chomienne C, Lanotte M, et al. The t(15;17) translocation of acute promyelocytic leukaemia fuses the retinoic acid receptor a gene to a novel transcribed locus. Nature
1990;347:558.
11. Warrell RP Jr, Frankel SR, Miller WH Jr, et al. Differentiation therapy of acute promyelocytic leukemia with tretinoin (all- trans retinoic acid). N Engl J Med 1991;324:1385.
12. Muindi J, Frankel S, Huselton C, et al. Clinical pharmacology of oral all- trans retinoic acid in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia. Cancer Res 1992;52:2138.
13. Muindi J, Frankel SR, Miller WH Jr, et al. Continuous treatment with all- trans retinoic acid results in a progressive decrease in plasma concentrations: implications for relapse and retinoid
“resistance” in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Blood 1992;79:299.
14. Warrell RP Jr, Maslak P, Eardley A, et al. All- trans retinoic acid for treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia: an update of the New York experience. Leukemia 1994;8:929.
15. Warrell RP Jr. Acquired retinoid resistance in acute promyelocytic leukemia: new mechanisms, strategies, and implications. Blood 1993;82:1949.
16. Ding W, Li Y-P, Nobile LM, et al. Leukemic cellular retinoic acid resistance and missense mutations in the PML-RARa fusion gene after relapse of acute promyelocytic leukemia from treatment
with all-trans retinoic and intensive chemotherapy. Blood 1998;92:1172.
17. Fenaux P, Chastang C, Sanz M, et al. Effect of ATRA in newly diagnosed acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL): validation of short term effect in a large multicenter trial (APL 93 trial) and
assessment of long term benefit (APL 91 trial). Blood 1996;88(Suppl 1):209a.
18. Mandelli F, Diverio D, Avvisati G, et al. Molecular remission in PML/RAR alpha-positive acute promyelocytic leukemia by combined all- trans retinoic acid and idarubicin (AIDA) therapy. Blood
1997;90:1014.
19. Soignet S, Fleischauer A, Polyak T, et al. All- trans retinoic acid significantly increases 5-year survival in acute promyelocytic leukemia: an updated analysis of the New York study. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol 1997;40(Suppl):S25.
20. Warrell RP Jr, Coonley CJ, Kempin SJ, et al. Isotretinoin in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Lancet 1983;1:629.
21. Molin L, Thomsen K, Volden G, et al. Oral retinoids in mycosis fungoides and Sezary syndrome: a comparison of isotretinoin and etretinate. A study from the Scandinavian Mycosis Fungoides
group. Acta Derm Venereol 1987;67:232.
22. Picozzi VJ, Swanson GF, Morgan R, et al. 13- Cis retinoic acid treatment for myelodysplastic syndromes. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:589.
23. Koeffler HP, Heitjan D, Mertelsmann R, et al. Randomized study of 13- cis retinoic acid v placebo in the myelodysplastic disorders. Blood 1988;71:703.
24. Arlin ZA, Mertelsmann R, Berman E, et al. 13- Cis retinoic acid does not decrease the true response rate and the duration of true remission (induced by cytotoxic chemotherapy) in patients with
chronic myelogenous leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1987;3:473.
25. Gold EJ, Bosl GJ, Itri LM. Phase II trial of 13- cis retinoic acid in patients with advanced nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:1287.
26. Finklestein JZ, Krailo MD, Lenarsky C, et al. 13- cis retinoic acid (NSC 122578) in the treatment of children with metastatic neuroblastoma unresponsive to conventional chemotherapy: report
from the Children's Cancer Study Group. Med Pediatr Oncol 1992;20:307.
27. Lippman SM, Kessler JF, Al-Sarraf M, et al. Treatment of advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck with isotretinoin: a phase II randomized trial. Invest New Drugs 1988;6:13.
28. Grunberg S, Itri L. Phase II study of isotretinoin in the treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:1097.
29. DiSilverio F, Concolino G, Tenaglia R, et al. Retinoids in recurrences of superficial bladder tumors . Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on the Adjuvant Therapy of Cancer, Tucson,
AZ, March 1114, 1987:75.
30. Lippman SM, Meyskens FM Jr. Treatment of advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the skin with isotretinoin. Ann Intern Med 1987;107:499.
31. Lippman SM, Parkinson DR, Itri LM, et al. 13- Cis-retinoic acid and interferon a-2a: effective combination therapy for advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. J Natl Cancer Inst
1992;84:235.
32. Lippman SM, Kavanagh JJ, Paredes-Espinosa M, et al. 13- Cis retinoic acid plus interferon-alpha 2a: highly active systemic therapy for squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1992;84:241.
33. Hong WK, Endicott J, Itri LM, et al. 13- Cis-retinoic acid in the treatment of oral leukoplakia. N Engl J Med 1986;315:1501.
34. Lippman SM, Batsakis JG, Toth BB, et al. Comparison of low-dose isotretinoin with beta carotene to prevent oral carcinogenesis. N Engl J Med 1993;328:15.
35. Hong WK, Lippman SM, Itri LM, et al. Prevention of second primary tumors with isotretinoin in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med 1990;323:795.
36. Heyman R, Mangelsdorf D, Dyck J, et al. 9 -Cis retinoic acid is a high affinity ligand for the retinoid X receptor. Cell 1992;68:397.
37. Miller WH Jr, Jakubowski A, Benedetti F, et al. 9- Cis retinoic acid induces complete remission in acute promyelocytic leukemia but does not reverse clinically acquired resistance to all- trans
retinoic acid. Blood 1995;85:3021.
38. Miller VA, Rigas JR, Benedetti FM, et al. Initial clinical trial of the retinoid receptor pan-agonist, 9- cis retinoic acid. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:471.
39. Boehm MF, Zhang L, Zhi L, et al. Design and synthesis of potent retinoid X receptor selective ligands that induce apoptosis in leukemia cells. J Med Chem 1995;38:3146.
40. Moon RC, Mehta RG. Chemoprevention of experimental carcinogenesis. Prev Med 1989;18:576.
41. De Palo G, Camerini T, Marubini E, et al. Chemoprevention trial of contralateral breast cancer with fenretinide: rational, design, methodology, organization, data management, statistics, and
accrual. Tumori 1997;83:884.
42. Formelli F, Clerici M, Campa T, et al. Five-year administration of fenretinide: pharmacokinetics and effects on plasma retinol concentrations. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2036.
43. Lee JS, Newman RA, Lippman SM, et al. Phase I evaluation of all- trans retinoic acid in adults with solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:959.
44. Smith MA, Adamson PC, Balis FM, et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic evaluation of all- trans retinoic acid in pediatric patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1666.
45. DiGiovanna J, Helfgott R, Gerber L, et al. Extraspinal tendon and ligament calcification associated with long-term therapy with etretinate. N Engl J Med 1986;315:1177.
46. Niesvizky R, Siegel DS, Busquets X, et al. Hypercalcaemia and increased serum interleukin-6 levels induced by all- trans retinoic acid in patients with multiple myeloma. Br J Haematol
1995;89:217.
47. Rothman KJ, Moore LL, Siinger MR, et al. Teratogenicity of high vitamin A intake. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1369.
48. Dai WS, LaBraico JM, Stern RS. Epidemiology of isotretinoin exposure during pregnancy. J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;26:599.
49. Stentoft J, Nielsen JL, Hvidman LE. All- trans retinoic acid in acute promyelocytic leukemia in late pregnancy. Leukemia 1994;8:1585.
50. Vadhat L, Eardley A, Maslak P, et al. Early mortality and the “retinoic acid syndrome” in acute promyelocytic leukemia: impact of leukocytosis, low-dose chemotherapy, PML/RAR-a isoform,
and CD13 expression in patients treated with all- trans retinoic acid. Blood 1994;84:3843.
51. Frankel SR, Eardley A, Lauwers G, et al. The “retinoic acid syndrome” in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:292.
52. Tallman MS, Andersen JW, Schiffer CA, et al. Clinical description of 44 patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia who developed the retinoic acid syndrome. Blood 2000;95:90.
53. Zhang P, Wang SY, Hu XH. Arsenic trioxide treated 72 cases of acute promyelocytic leukemia. Chin J Hematol 1996;17:58.
54. Shen Z-X, Chen G-Q, Ni J-H, et al. Use of arsenic trioxide (As 2O3)in the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL): II. clinical efficacy and pharmacokinetics in patients at relapse. Blood
1997;89:3354.
55. Soignet SL, Maslak P, Wang Z-G, et al. Complete remission after induction of non-terminal differentiation and apoptosis in acute promyelocytic leukemia by arsenic trioxide. N Engl J Med
1998;339:1341.
56. Soignet S, Kantarjian H, Frankel S, et al. Arsenic trioxide in acute promyelocytic leukemia: results of initial U.S. pilot and multicenter trials. Blood 1998;92(Suppl):483a.
57. Soignet S, Calleja E, Cheung N-K, et al. A phase 1 study of arsenic trioxide in patients with solid tumors. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:228a.
58. Soignet S, Wang Z-G, Nagy J, et al. Dose-ranging study of arsenic trioxide in advanced hematologic cancers: clinical pharmacokinetic and biological effects. Blood 1998;92(Suppl):598a.
59. Westervelt P, Pollock J, Haug J, et al. Response and toxicity associated with dose escalation of arsenic trioxide in the treatment of resistant acute promyelocytic leukemia. Blood 1997;90(Suppl
1):249b.
60. Warrell RP Jr, Chanel S, Ho R, Soignet S. Leukocytosis and “retinoic acid syndrome” in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia treated with arsenic trioxide. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:21a.
61. Grunstein M. Histone acetylation in chromatin structure and transcription. Nature 1997;389:349.
62. Lee DY, Hayes JJ, Pruss D, et al. A positive role for histone acetylation in transcription factor access to DNA. Cell 1993;72:73.
63. Alland L, Muhle R, Hou H Jr, et al. Role for N-CoR and histone deacetylase in Sin3-mediated transcriptional repression. Nature 1997;387:49.
64. Heinzel T, Lavinsky RM, Mullen TM, et al. A complex containing N-CoR, mSin3 and histone deacetylase mediates transcriptional repression. Nature 1997;387:43.
65. Nan X, Ng H-H, Johnson CA, et al. Transcriptional repression by the methyl-CpG-binding protein MeCP2 involves a histone deacetylase complex. Nature 1998;393:386.
66. Zagonel V, Lo Re G, Marotta G, et al. 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (decitabine) induces trilineage response in unfavourable myelodysplastic syndromes. Leukemia 1993;7(Suppl 1):30.
67. Yoshida M, Horinouchi S, Beppu T. Trichostatin A and traopoxin: novel chemical probes for the role of histone deacetylation in chromatin structure and function. Bio Essays 1995;17:423.
68. Kwon HJ, Owa T, Hassig CA, et al. Depudecin induces morphological reversion of transformed fibroblasts via the inhibition of histone deacetylase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:3356.
69. Nakajima H, Kim YB, Terano H, et al. FR901228, a potent antitumor antibiotic, is a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor. Exp Cell Res 1998;241:126.
70. Samid D, Yeh A, Prasanna P. Induction of erythroid differentiation and fetal hemoglobin production in human leukemic cells treated with phenylacetate. Blood 1992;80:1576.
71. Dover GJ, Brusilow S, Samid D. Increased fetal hemoglobin in patients receiving sodium 4-phenylbutyrate. N Engl J Med 1992;327:569.
72. Maestri NE, Brusilow SW, Clissold DB, et al. Long-term treatment of girls with ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency. N Engl J Med 1996;335:855.
73. Gore SD, Miller CB, Weng L-J, et al. Improved hematopoiesis in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) following administration of the putative
differentiating agent sodium phenylbutyrate (SPB). Blood 1996;88(Suppl):582a.
74. Carducci M, Bowling M, Eisenberger M, et al. Oral sodium phenylbutyrate (PB) for refractory solid tumors: phase 1 and bioavailability assessment. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:215a.
75. Lin RJ, Nagy L, Inoue S, et al. Role of the histone deacetylase complex in acute promyelocytic leukaemia. Nature 1998;391:811.
76. Grignani F, De Matteis S, Nervi C, et al. Fusion proteins of the retinoic acid receptor-a recruit histone deacetylase in promyelocytic leukaemia. Nature 1998;391:815.
77. He L-Z, Guidez F, Tribioli C, et al. Distinct interactions of PML-RARa with co-repressors determine differential responses to RA in APL. Nature Genet 1998;18:126.
78. Borrow J, Stanton VP Jr, Andresen JM, et al. The translocation t(8;16)(p11;p13) of acute myeloid leukaemia fuses a putative acetytransferase to the CREB-binding protein. Nature Genet
1996;14:33.
79. Sobulo OM, Borrow J, Tomek R, et al. MLL is fused to CBP, a histone acetyltransferase, in therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia with a t(11;16)(q23;p13.3). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1997;94:8732.
80. Dhordain P, Albagli O, Lin RJ, et al. Corepressor SMRT binds the BTB/POZ repressing domain of the LAZ3/BCL6 oncoprotein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:10762.
81. Ayer DE, Lawrence QA, Eisenman RN. Mad-max transcriptional repression is mediated by ternary complex formation with mammalian homologs of yeast repressor Sin3. Cell 1995;80:767.
82. Schreiber-Agus N, Chin L, Chen K, et al. An amino-terminal domain of Mxil mediates anti-Myc oncogenic activity and interacts with a homolog of the yeast transcriptional repressor Sin3. Cell
1995;80:777.
83. Laherty CD, Yang WM, Sun JM, et al. Histone deacetylases associated with the mSin3 corepressor mediate Mad transcriptional repression. Cell 1997;83:349.
84. Warrell RP Jr, He L-Z, Richon V, et al. Therapeutic targeting of transcription in acute promyelocytic leukemia using an inhibitor of histone deacetylase. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1621.
85. Weng LJ, Yu K, Fu S, et al. Synergy between retinoic acid (RA) and the putative differentiating agent sodium phenylbutyrate (SPB) promotes maximal cytostasis and differentiation of myeloid

cells at clinically achievable doses of SPB. Blood 1996;90(Suppl):329a.
86. Sidell N, Chang B, Yamashiro JM, et al. Transcriptional upregulation of retinoic acid receptor b (RARb) expression by phenylacetate in human neuroblastoma cells. Exp Cell Res 1998;239:169.
87. Samid D, Shack S, Sherman LT. Phenylacetate: a novel nontoxic inducer of tumor cell differentiation. Cancer Res 1992;52:1988.
88. Shack S, Liu L, Miller A, et al. Differentiation therapy using the aromatic fatty acids phenylacetate and phenylbutyrate as an alternative treatment for multiple drug resistant tumors. Proc Am
Assoc Cancer Res 1995;36:319.
89. Thibault A, Cooper MR, Figg WD, et al. A phase I and pharmacokinetic study of intravenous phenylacetate in patients with cancer. Cancer Res 1994;54:1690.
90. Samid D, Ram Z, Hudgins WR, et al. Selective activity of phenylacetate against malignant gliomas: resemblance to fetal brain damage in phenylketonuria. Cancer Res 1994;54:891.
91. Olsson IL, Breitman TR. Induction of differentiation of the human histiocytic lymphoma cell line U-937 by retinoic acid and cyclic adenosine 3':5'-monophosphate-inducing agents. Cancer Res
1982;42:3924.
92. Freeman JJ. Effects of differing concentrations of sodium butyrate on 1,2-dimethylhydrazine-induced rat intestine neoplasia. Gastroenterology 1986;91:596.
93. Marks PA, Richon VM, Kiyokawa H, et al. Inducing differentiation of transformed cells with hybrid polar compounds: a cell-cycle-dependent process. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:10251.
94. Young CW, Fanucchi MP, Walsh TD, et al. Phase I trial and clinical pharmacological evaluation of hexamethylene bisacetamide administration by ten-day continuous intravenous infusion at
twenty-eight-day intervals. Cancer Res 1988;48:7304.
95. Andreeff M, Stone R, Michael J, et al. Hexamethylene bisacetamide in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myelogenous leukemia (AML): a phase II clinical trial with a differentiation
inducing agent. Blood 1992;80:2604.
96. Richon VM, Emiliani S, Verdin E, et al. A class of hybrid polar inducers of transformed cell differentiation are potent inhibitors of histone deacetylases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:3003.
97. Reichel H, Koeffler HP, Norman AW. The role of vitamin D endocrine system in health and disease. N Engl J Med 1989;320:980.
98. Kizaki M, Norman AW, Bishop JE, et al. 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 receptor RNA: expression in hematopoietic cells. Blood 1991;77:1238.
99. Evans SRT, Nolla J, Hanfelt J, et al. Vitamin D receptor expression as a predictive marker of biological behavior in human colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:1591.
100. Garland C, Shekelle RB, Barrett-Connor E, et al. Dietary vitamin D and calcium and risk of colorectal cancer: a 19 year prospective study in men. Lancet 1985;1:307.
101. Corder EH, Guess HA, Hulka BS, et al. Vitamin D and prostate cancer: a prediagnostic study with stored sera. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1993;2:467.
102. Koeffler HP, Hirji K, Itri L, et al. 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3: in vivo and in vitro effects on human preleukemic and leukemic cells. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:1399.
103. Elstner E, Lee YY, Hashiya M, et al. 1a,25-dihydroxy-20-epi-vitamin D 3: an extraordinarily potent inhibitor of leukemic cell growth in vitro. Blood 1994;84:1960.
104. Elstner E, Linker-Israeli M, Said J, et al. 20-epi-vitamin D 3 analogues: a novel class of potent inhibitors of proliferation and inducers of differentiation of human breast cancer cell lines. Cancer
Res 1995;55:2822.
105. Wali RK, Bissonnette M, Khare S, et al. 1a,25-dihydroxy-16-ene-23-yne-26,27-hexafluorocholecalciferol, a noncalcemic analogue of 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3, inhibits azoxymethane-induced
colonic tumorigenesis. Cancer Res 1995;55:3050.
106. Miller GJ, Stapleton GE, Hedlund TE, et al. Vitamin D receptor expression 24-hydroxylase activity, and inhibition of growth by 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 in seven human prostatic carcinoma
cell lines. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:997.
107. Manglesdorf DJ, Koeffler HP, Donaldson CA, et al. 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin-D 3-induced differentiation in a human promyelocytic leukemia cell (HL-60): receptor-mediated maturation to
macrophage-like cells. J Cell Biol 1984;98:391.
108. Wilkerson CL, Darjatmoko SR, Lindstrom MJ, et al. Toxicity and dose-response studies of 1,25-(OH) 2-16ene-23-yne vitamin D 3 in transgenic mice. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:2253.
109. Asou H, Koike M, Elstner E, et al. 19-nor vitamin-D analogs: a new class of potent inhibitors of proliferation and inducers of differentiation of human myeloid leukemia cell lines. Blood
1998;92:2441.
110. Metcalf D. The molecular control of cell division, differentiation commitment and maturation in haemopoietic cells. Nature 1989;339:27.
111. Estey E, Thall PF, Kantarjian H, et al. Treatment of newly diagnosed acute myelogenous leukemia with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) before and during
continuous infusion high-dose ara-C + daunorubicin: comparison to patients treated without GM-CSF. Blood 1992;79:2246.

SECTION 20.5 Therapeutic Monoclonal Antibodies: General Principles
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 20.5
Therapeutic Monoclonal Antibodies: General Principles
LOUIS M. WEINER
GREGORY P. ADAMS
MARGARET VON MEHREN
Introduction
Immunoglobulin Structure: Structural and Functional Domains
Factors Regulating Antibody-Based Tumor Targeting
Impaired Distribution and Delivery of Antibody to Tumor Site
Tumor Antigens
Immunologic Responses to Monoclonal Antibodies
Unconjugated Antibodies
Antibody-Dependent Cellular Cytotoxicity
Bispecific Antibodies
Promotion of Tumor Inflammation
Growth Factor Receptor Signaling Perturbation
Antiidiotype Antibodies
Immunoconjugates
Radioimmunoconjugates
Immunotoxins
Chemoimmunoconjugates
Therapeutic Applications
Hematologic Malignancies
Campath-1
Solid Tumors
Future Directions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Antibody-based therapeutics are coming of age. Antibodies have provided an important means to exploit the capacity of the immune system to specifically recognize
and direct antitumor responses. Antibody therapy studies were among the earliest attempts to explicitly target cancers based on the structural and biologic properties
that distinguish neoplastic cells from their normal counterparts. Although the early clinical studies yielded inconsistent and often disappointing clinical results, more
recent work has identified a number of important and useful applications for antibody-based cancer therapy. Unconjugated antibodies directed against the lymphocyte
antigen CD20 have significant clinical activity in patients with low-grade lymphomas. 1 The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved one of these
antibodies, rituximab, for clinical use. Radioimmunoconjugates directed against CD20 demonstrate significant clinical activity in patients with chemotherapy-pretreated
lymphomas as well.2,3 A chemoimmunoconjugate containing an anti-CD33 antibody and calicheamicin has impressive activity in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). 4
Finally, the anti-HER2/neu antibody trastuzumab has single-agent activity in metastatic breast cancer and potentiates the antitumor effects of Taxol chemotherapy. 5,6
This antibody also received FDA approval for clinical use. These results provide ample evidence that a number of strategies using unconjugated antibodies or
antibody conjugates carrying toxic payloads, such as radiation or chemotherapy agents, have clinical benefits. At this time, the mechanisms underlying the clinical
benefits of rituximab and trastuzumab are not understood, but both antibodies mediate antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) in vitro and may do so in the
clinical setting as well. 7
Antibodies are produced by B cells. These proteins arise in response to exposure to a variety of structures, termed antigens, as a result of a series of recombinations
of V, D, and J germline genes. Somatic hypermutation occurs with each subsequent exposure to the antigen and introduces further variation that can increase binding
affinity or alter target antigen specificity. The resulting proteins exhibit selective targeting of a variety of potential antigens and can direct the clearance or immune
recognition of such antigens. Various isotypes of antibodies have specialized functions [e.g., immunoglobulin A (IgA) molecules play important roles in mucosal
immunity, and IgE molecules are involved in anaphylaxis]. IgG molecules are most commonly used as the working backbones of current therapeutic monoclonal
antibodies (MABs).
Before 1975, the ability of antibodies to specifically target immunogens for therapeutic applications was inconsistently exploited because the available antibody
preparations were derived from polyclonal antisera obtained from immunized animals. The advent of hybridoma technology by Kohler and Milstein 8 made it possible to
produce large quantities of antibodies with high purity and monospecificity for a single binding region (epitope) on an antigen.

IMMUNOGLOBULIN STRUCTURE: STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL DOMAINS
IgG antibodies are comprised of two identical light chains and two identical heavy chains. The variable region contains hypervariable regions, or complementarity
determining regions (CDRs), in which the antigen-contact residues reside. Antibodies achieve diversity due to variations in the amino acid sequences of the CDRs
resulting from the VDJ recombinations and somatic hypermutations previously described. The Fc domain is composed of the CH2 and CH3 regions of the antibody's
heavy chains. This portion of the antibody mediates its effector functions, transport across cellular barriers, and biologic half-life. The different isotypes of
immunoglobulins are defined by the structure and function of their Fc domains. The types of immune effector cells that interact with IgG and the results of the
interactions are dictated by cellular Fc receptor expression patterns. Developments in the field of molecular biology have led to the production of a wide variety of
novel antibody-based targeting structures ( Fig. 20.5-1). These include chimeric human-murine antibodies with human constant regions and murine variable regions, 9
humanized antibodies in which murine CDR sequences have been grafted into human IgG molecules and entirely human antibodies derived from human hybridomas
and more recently from transgenic mice expressing human immunoglobulin genes. 10 Additionally, a large number of recombinant immunoglobulin-based structures
have been produced from the variable or constant domains of antibodies. These range in size from CDR-based peptides 11 to bispecific antibodies (BsAb) with dual
antigen specificities. Some of the more promising structures include monovalent single-chain Fv (scFv), derived from murine hybridomas 12,13 and 14 or phage-display
libraries, 15,16 and multivalent dimeric Fv [(scFv) 2],17 diabodies, 18,19 triabodies,20 and minibodies. 21 This technology also has resulted in the creation of a number of
antibody-based fusion proteins designed to target cytokines [e.g., interleukin (IL)-2] to the tumor. 22

FIGURE 20.5-1. Antibody-based targeting proteins. Ag, target antigen; C, constant; Fab, fragment (of IgG involved in) antigen binding; F(ab') 2, fragment (of IgG) after
digestion with the enzyme pepsin; H, heavy chain; IgG, immunoglobulin G; L, light chain; scFv, single-chain Fv; (scFv) 2, dimeric scFv; V, variable.

FACTORS REGULATING ANTIBODY-BASED TUMOR TARGETING
Although great progress has been made since initial treatment trials of MAB therapy, a number of obstacles to treatment efficacy have been identified in preclinical
studies and in clinical trials. It is not surprising that obstacles have been identified for a concept that attempts to introduce an unprecedented degree of targeting
specificity while using large proteins whose sizes greatly exceed those of conventional pharmaceuticals. It should be emphasized that the identification of obstacles is
not a reason for discouragement, but rather is a necessary prelude to the cycles of molecular and strategy refinements that are inherent in the development of any
new therapeutic modality.
IMPAIRED DISTRIBUTION AND DELIVERY OF ANTIBODY TO TUMOR SITE
IgG molecules are large proteins of approximately 150 kD in mass; most chemotherapy agents have a molecular weight of less than 1 kD. Accordingly, MABs would
be expected to have significantly slower kinetics of distribution and severely limited tissue penetration properties as compared to small molecules. Indeed, nonuniform
uptake of systemically administered antibody is generally observed in biopsied specimens of solid tumors. Although inhomogenous tumor antigen expression can be a
factor, physiologic barriers to MAB penetration bear the greatest responsibility for the limited distribution of MABs within a tumor mass. Heterogeneous tumor blood
supply limits uniform antibody delivery to tumors, and elevated interstitial pressures in the centers of tumors oppose inward diffusion. 23 Furthermore, the relatively
large transport distances in the tumor interstitium combine with the above factors to increase the time required for these large macromolecules to reach target cells.
For example, the diffusion of an intact IgG molecule into a solid tumor is limited to 100 µm in 1 hour, 1 mm in approximately 2 days, and 1 cm in approximately 7 to 8
months.24 These physiologic barriers pose substantial obstacles to antibody penetration in the majority of solid tumors and bulky lymphomas. Thus, it can be
anticipated that the therapy of patients with large tumors using MABs will be compromised. These concepts also hold true for potentially cytotoxic leukocytes to
accumulate at tumor sites; as a result, physiologic barriers can represent a major limitation to the effective clinical exploitation of ADCC.
The poor tumor penetration of MABs has been addressed by using the smaller antibody-based constructs and fragments (discussed earlier in Immunoglobulin
Structure: Structural and Functional Domains ). As shown in Figure 20.5-1, commonly used antibody-based structures include F(ab') 2 [fragment (of IgG) after digestion
with the enzyme pepsin], Fab [fragment (of IgG involved in) antigen binding], and scFv molecules. These derivative structures usually exhibit binding affinity for target
antigen that is of the same order of magnitude as the intact parental immunoglobulin. These molecules exhibit systemic clearance that accelerates with decreasing
size. In general, the smaller molecules have the advantages of improved tumor penetration, rapid systemic clearance, and improved specificity of tumor targeting
during the terminal phases of elimination. These advantages are counterbalanced by decreased quantitative tumor targeting. 25,26 The ideal size of tumor-targeting
antibodies will most probably depend on the intended therapeutic application. When prolonged inhibition of a tumor-associated function is intended, larger molecules
with slow clearance might be preferred, whereas the administration of a highly potent immunotoxin might be facilitated if the molecule is small and rapidly clears from
normal organs.
TUMOR ANTIGENS
The properties of the tumor antigen can be a major factor in regulating the success or failure of antibody-based therapies. Heterogeneity of antigen expression by
tumor cells can restrict the percentage of cells that can be reliably targeted by antibodies. This is manifested not only as the presence or absence of antigen on a cell,
but also by the degree of its expression on a given cell. The density of antigen expression may be a critical determinant of therapeutic effect for a variety of
antibody-based applications. The ultimate fate of a cell surface antigen (e.g., whether it is shed from the membrane or internalized) can also impact on the degree of
targeting and therapeutic efficacy of an antibody. For example, large concentrations of shed antigen in the tumor microenvironment may saturate the antibody's
binding sites and prevent binding to the cell surface. In contrast, a rapidly internalized antigen may deplete the quantity of cell surface MABs capable of initiating
ADCC or cytotoxic signal transduction events. Finally, additional obstacles relate to the tumor specificity of the targeted antigens. Antibody targets may be
tumor-associated or tumor-specific. Tumor-associated targets have most frequently been identified and typically are oncofetal antigens or overexpressed growth
factor receptors with extracellular membrane domains. Tumor-associated antigens usually are relatively overexpressed on tumor cells but are found to a lesser extent
on normal cellular counterparts and by other normal cells. Potential consequences of targeting this class of antigens with toxic immunoconjugates can include
decreased targeting specificity and unacceptable normal tissue cytotoxicity. Tumor-specific antigens that exhibit high levels of expression limited to malignant tissue
are both highly desirable and rare. Typically, these antigens arise as a result of unique genetic recombinations that are the cause or consequence of oncogenic
transformation. Examples of tumor-specific antigens include clonal immunoglobulin idiotypes expressed on the surface of B-cell lymphomas 27 and tumor-specific
mutations, such as the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-VIII deletion mutant of the EGFR that is present in a small proportion of tumors, including
glioblastoma and non–small cell lung carcinoma. 28,29 The advent of new techniques for identifying genetic abnormalities in malignancies will no doubt uncover
numerous tumor-specific mutations, some of which will provide accessible protein targets for antibody therapy.
IMMUNOLOGIC RESPONSES TO MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES
The initial clinical trials of MABs used murine proteins produced by hybridoma technology. Treatment with murine MABs and their derivatives often induces human
antimouse antibody (HAMA) responses within 2 to 3 weeks after the initial infusion. These responses, which are directed to any portion of the antibody, can impair
targeting and accelerate MAB clearance. The induction of HAMA has precluded the continued successful application of MAB therapy in several instances. 30
Considerable effort has been expended to overcome HAMA by creating human or nearly human antibodies (discussed earlier in Immunoglobulin Structure: Structural
and Functional Domains) or by suppressing the human immune response to the mouse MAB. As a result, the majority of the MABs currently entering the clinic bear
human or humanized structures.
Although the field of antibody therapy is progressing beyond murine MABs and their associated drawbacks, analysis of the HAMA responses in clinical trials has led
to the development of a novel therapeutic strategy. Although most of the HAMAs generated during these immune responses recognize conserved sequences, a small
percentage of the antibodies are specific for the idiotypic or hypervariable sequences that comprise the active binding site of the antibody. Some of these antiidiotypic
antibodies mimic the original antigen completely enough to be capable of inducing an immune response that is capable of reacting with the original tumor antigen. 31
Stimulation of this “idiotypic network,” originally postulated by Jerne, 31 offers some specificity advantages when compared with immunization strategies that directly
make use of the tumor antigens.

UNCONJUGATED ANTIBODIES
ANTIBODY-DEPENDENT CELLULAR CYTOTOXICITY
In the process of ADCC, the antibody Fab domains engage tumor antigen and the Fc domain binds to cellular Fc receptors to bridge effector and target cells. This
bridging induces effector cell activation and natural killer (NK) cell–mediated cytotoxicity or phagocytosis by neutrophils, monocytes, or macrophages. 10
In addition to rituximab and trastuzumab, many other antibodies have been clinically tested to exploit their ADCC properties, but without consistent clinical benefit in
the setting of advanced disease. 32 ADCC continues to be a potent in vitro phenomenon that should provide a powerful antitumor mechanism, if it can be replicated or
mimicked in the in vivo setting. Advances in the understanding of human Fc receptor and T-cell receptor structures and functions have made it possible to refine
antibody-directed cellular activation strategies, particularly given the improved flexibility afforded by antibody engineering techniques. Human Fcg and Fc a receptors
can trigger cellular cytotoxicity, 33,34 and 35 as can elements of the T-cell receptor/CD3 complex, 36,37 CD28 on T cells, 38 and CD44 on NK cells.39 It is now possible to
create a wide variety of recombinantly produced antibody binding site–based targeting proteins, including IgG, F(ab') 2, Fab, and scFv formats, with an equally
formidable choice of approaches to create multimeric, monospecific, or bispecific binding proteins. The affinity properties of the binding sites can be manipulated
through chain-shuffling or site-directed mutagenesis. 40 The HAMA response can be circumvented by the production of chimeric antibodies or by the use of human
antibodies prepared by fusion techniques or from human phage display libraries. 41
BISPECIFIC ANTIBODIES
In the years since the pioneering work of Segal and colleagues, 42 numerous BsAb targeting tumor antigens and effector cell trigger molecules have been developed
and shown to redirect cellular cytotoxicity. For example, BsAb can target tumor antigens and human effector cell trigger molecules on T cells via CD3/TcR 39,40,42 and

CD28.41 BsAb directed against FcgRI 36 trigger tumor cytotoxicity by neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages. BsAb targeting FcgRIII 37,43 promote tumor lysis by
macrophages and NK cells, and BsAb targeting CD44 42 promote tumor cytotoxicity by NK cells. Typically, BsAb promote in vitro cytotoxicity at low concentrations and
have been shown to cause either growth delays or tumor regressions in appropriate animal models. 44,45 and 46 These properties have led to the testing of several BsAb
in human clinical trials.
Several early reports of CD3-directed BsAb suggested possible applications in glioblastoma 46 and ovarian cancer.47 However, subsequent trials of a number of intact
CD3-directed BsAb have yielded few objective responses, and treatment has been limited by toxicities reminiscent of the first-dose effect seen with OKT3 antibody
therapy. The first-dose effect is characterized by the release of massive amounts of cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a). Treatment with an F(ab') 2
anti-CD3 BsAb, which is bereft of Fc domains and Fc domain–dependent cellular cross-linking properties, also has led to toxicities at low BsAb doses. This finding
indicates that the engagement of some T-cell activating molecules on circulating T cells can produce unacceptable dose-limiting toxicity. 48 A series of clinical trials
used the BsAb 2B1, a murine IgG that is dually specific for extracellular domain epitopes on the human tumor antigen HER2/ neu and the human Fc receptor FcgRIII.
Whereas therapy with 2B1 yielded a handful of objective responses, BsAb-induced cross-linking of Fc receptors on circulating leukocytes led to massive cytokine
release and associated toxicities. 2B1-promoted antigen presentation led to the induction of anti-HER2/ neu antibodies, but only in patients treated with 2B1 doses
exceeding the ultimate maximum tolerated dose.49,50
The clinical experience with the MDX-210 BsAb provides a useful additional perspective to the results previously described. MDX-210 targets the same epitope on
HER2/neu as does 2B1, and it targets human FcgRI on neutrophils and mononuclear phagocytes. In contrast to 2B1, MDX-210 is a chemically conjugated F(ab') 2.
Because it lacks an Fc domain, MDX-210 cannot activate leukocyte Fcg receptors in the absence of tumor antigen engagement. Like 2B1, MDX-210 is a potent
mediator of in vitro cytotoxicity and phagocytosis. Because much higher doses of this BsAb can be given safely in comparison with 2B1, monomeric FcgRI
engagement may have different consequences than do FcgR aggregation or CD3 engagement. 51 Like 2B1, MDX-210 therapy leads to antigen presentation and the
induction of anti-HER2/neu antibodies. Again, as with 2B1, clinical responses have been seen with BsAb targeting FcgRI, and the results obtained with MDX-210
indicate that the Fc domain of a BsAb is not required for Fc receptor–dependent antigen presentation.
PROMOTION OF TUMOR INFLAMMATION
A number of strategies can be considered to promote selective tumor inflammation. Experiences with systemic cytokines have shown that the selectivity of effects at
tumor sites is usually low, as evidenced by work with high-dose IL-2. 52 With IL-2 and other cytokines, such as TNF-a, toxicities caused by systemic leukocyte
activation have limited the doses that can safely be administered. Several groups have attempted to address this fact by producing immunocytokines, which are
composed of engineered antibodies fused to cytokines. Antibody/IL-2 fusion proteins have exhibited promising preclinical results. 25,53 However, a potential limitation to
this strategy is that these large (e.g., greater than 150-kD) proteins will have relatively prolonged half-lives. As a result, functionally intact IL-2 will circulate
predominantly in the vasculature, leading to systemic leukocyte activation that at least partially offsets any targeting advantages conferred by the antibody binding
property. Less progress has been reported regarding the creation of antibody-targeted vasoactive or chemotactic conjugates or fusion proteins. Conjugates containing
antibody binding sites and F-M-L-P 54 and RANTES55 have been reported but have not undergone extensive preclinical testing or clinical trials.
Several antibodies that have been used clinically are capable of fixing serum complement, and this mechanism of action has been postulated to be relevant to the in
vivo mechanisms of action of antibodies directed against gangliosides and against CD20 as well, as discussed in the section on Antiganglioside Antibodies .
GROWTH FACTOR RECEPTOR SIGNALING PERTURBATION
Antibodies directed against selected growth factor receptors, such as the EGFR, directly inhibit the growth of receptor-bearing tumors in vitro and in vivo, and they
synergize with a number of antineoplastic agents. EGFR is overexpressed on many cancers. The receptor and its ligands, EGF and TGF-a, act in an autocrine loop to
stimulate the growth of breast cancer cells. In vitro, some anti-EGFR antibodies have been shown to inhibit the binding of the receptor ligands. 56,57 Antibodies that
block the binding of EGFR ligands limit receptor activation by tyrosine kinases and inhibit growth of normal fibroblasts, 58 as well as tumor cells in culture. 59 Also,
combining anti-EGFR antibodies with cisplatin leads to a significant decrease in the IC 50 (concentration that inhibits 50%) of cisplatin, 60 and cures of established
tumors are seen when anti-EGFR antibodies are combined with cisplatin 61 or doxorubicin. 62In vitro and in vivo studies also have suggested anti-EGFR antibodies may
lead to terminal differentiation of squamous cell carcinoma cells, with accumulation of cells in G 0 to G1 phases of the cell cycle and expression of cell surface markers,
such as involucrin and cytokeratin-10. 63
The anti-EGFR antibody MAB225 blocks in vitro phosphorylation of the EGFR and induces receptor internalization, as occurs with binding of the natural ligand. 64
However, receptor processing is slower with antibody engagement than with natural ligand engagement. 65 Smaller bivalent F(ab') 2 and univalent Fab forms of this
antibody also inhibit growth and decrease receptor phosphorylation, although the bivalent form is superior to the monovalent form. 66 Because the smaller fragments
lead to tumor regressions, the efficacy of antibody therapy is not dependent on ADCC, as these smaller fragments lack the Fc portion of the antibody required for
ADCC. Rather, the efficacy of this antibody is due to its ability to inhibit binding of the natural ligand, limit receptor phosphorylation, and thus downstream signals, and
induce receptor internalization.
The chimeric form of MAB225, C225, has been evaluated in vitro and in vivo in hormone-sensitive and hormone-refractory prostate cancer. 67 EGF is a strong
chemoattractant for prostate cancer cells. Blocking the EGFR receptor with C225 in vitro results in decreased migration of prostate cancer cells in a dose-dependent
manner due to decreased phosphorylation of the EGFR. 68 This antibody also has been shown to lead to cell-cycle arrest and decreased proliferation of prostate
cancer cells.69,70 The binding of C225 to the EGFR results in multiple events leading to a decrease in proliferation and, possibly, decreased metastatic potential in
prostate cancer. Preclinical animal models also have suggested a potential therapeutic role for anti-EGF antibodies in combination with radiation therapy for the
treatment of gliomas.71 Other studies have demonstrated increased efficacy with topotecan, 72 antisense oligonucleotides targeting CRIPTO 73 and protein kinase A, 74
and Trastuzomab. 75 C225 also has been shown to have antiangiogenic properties. 76
C225 has been tested in phase I studies in recurrent head and neck cancer in combination with cisplatin. Four of seven patients exhibited clinical responses. 77 The
safety of C225 in combination with radiation therapy has been documented in head and neck carcinoma in preliminary reports. 78
ICR62, a rat monoclonal IgG, has been shown in vitro to block binding of the ligands of EGFR, inhibit growth of tumor cell lines that overexpress EGFR, and to cause
differentiation of malignant cells to a normal phenotype. This antibody was evaluated in a phase I trial of patients with squamous head and neck and lung cancer.
Evidence was found of localization of antibody to tumor sites at doses of 40 to 100 mg, accompanied by the development of anti-rat antibodies. 79 Another anti-EGFR
antibody, RG 83853, has been used to treat patients with non–small cell lung cancer and head and neck cancer in a phase I setting. In this study, patients received
up to 600 mg/m2 by continuous infusion over 5 days without significant toxicity. 80 Saturation of at least 50% of the EGFR was noted at doses of 200 mg/m 2 or more.
EGFR-expressing tumor cells demonstrate increased sensitivity to chemotherapy 81 and to radiation therapy 82 in the presence of EGF. In two of five patients with preand posttherapy biopsies of tumor, evidence was found for increased tyrosine kinase activity of EGFR, providing a rationale for combined modality therapy.
Similar strategies have been developed for MAB directed against another member of the EGFR family, the HER2/ neu (c-erbB-2) receptor, as discussed later in the
section Breast Cancer. It has been shown that intracellular antibodies can interfere with the expression of proteins that are critical for the maintenance of the
neoplastic phenotype. For example, Curiel and coworkers 83 have packaged the gene for an anti–c-erbB-2 antibody in viral vectors and infected c-erbB-2–expressing
tumor cells in vitro and in vivo. The infected cells express the encoded antibody, which is engineered to contain signals for its retention in the endoplasmic reticulum
of the target cells. This approach efficiently inhibits c-erbB-2 expression and exhibits potent antitumor activity in preclinical models. 83
ANTIIDIOTYPE ANTIBODIES
MAB can be used as the basis for creating tumor vaccines by inducing the idiotypic network. The antigen-combining site of each antibody, the idiotype, is a unique,
clonally derived structure that stimulates the production of a series of host antibodies, some of which bind to the idiotype. Accordingly, an idiotype-containing antibody
(i.e., Ab1) that binds to a tumor antigen induces the production of antiidiotype antibodies (i.e., Ab2). 36 Ab1 can be used to immunize mice and create Ab2-secreting
hybridomas. The resulting Ab2, a portion of which contains a surrogate tumor epitope recognized by the Ab1, can be used to immunize patients, leading to the
production of anti-antiidiotype antibodies (i.e., Ab3) that in part bind to the tumor epitope against which the Ab1 was directed. Based on this idiotypic network put forth
by Lindenmann and Jerne, 31 various investigators have created antiidiotypic antibodies to serve as vaccines. 84,85 and 86 Antiidiotype antibody strategies that mimic a

number of tumor antigens have been generated and are under investigation as cancer vaccines. This approach offers the practical advantages of an abundant supply
of highly purified immunogen that stimulates an immune response against carefully defined tumor antigen epitopes. This approach may be preferable to immunization
with tumor antigens, because the immune response to the whole antigen may include reactivity with epitopes on the antigen that are shared by other structures that
are not selectively expressed by tumors.
Results are available for several clinical trials of antiidiotype antibodies. Herlyn and colleagues 87 treated 30 patients with advanced colorectal carcinoma with serial
injections of polyclonal goat antibody induced by immunizations with murine 17-1A MAB. Six patients experienced brief clinical responses, and all 30 developed
antibodies directed against the immunizing goat antibody. 87 Mittelman and colleagues 88 treated 15 patients with metastatic melanoma using a murine antiidiotype
MAB directed against an antibody recognizing a high-molecular-weight human melanoma–associated antigen. Seven of these patients developed Ab3, and three
patients exhibited partial responses (PRs) to therapy. 88 Similar findings have been observed using antibodies directed against the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
system.89 It is noteworthy that these strategies induce not only the desired immunologic responses, but also possess clinical activity in some patients with advanced
solid tumors. If these results hold up with further testing, this general strategy will merit testing in the adjuvant, high-risk setting.
An antiidiotypic antibody, created using an antibody directed against the gp72 antigen, has been used to treat patients with advanced colorectal cancer, 90 as well as
rectal cancer patients in an adjuvant setting. 91 The antibody 105AD7 was produced by fusion of plasma cells from patients treated with an anti-gp72 antibody 791T/36
with EL41, a mouse-human heterohybrid. The 105AD7 hybridoma was found to produce a human IgG1 that bound to the binding site of the 791T/36 antibody. In 13
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer treated with the vaccine, survival was 12 months as compared to 4 months for patients in a contemporary control cohort; the
significance of this increase in survival is unknown because this was not a prospectively randomized study. In vitro immunologic correlates demonstrated evidence of
cellular responses as indicated by lymphocyte proliferation to gp72-expressing tumor cells and IL-2 production. In the adjuvant setting, six patients were vaccinated
preoperatively. In a follow-up study, the immunologic responses and progression-free survival rate in patients were superior in patients who received a 100-µg versus
a 200-µg dose of vaccine. 92
Foon 89,93 has evaluated an anti-idiotypic vaccine strategy for CEA expressing tumors. The antiidiotypic antibody 3H1 was derived from a murine antibody that targets
a highly restricted epitope of CEA, which is not found on normal adult tissues or hematopoietic cells. Patients with advanced colorectal cancer treated with 3H1
injections developed both humoral and cellular responses against CEA. 89 This response was not abrogated by concurrent chemotherapy. 93 An ongoing phase II
randomized study is evaluating 3H1 plus granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), or alum-precipitated 3H1 antibody with GM-CSF, in patients
with stage II or stage III colorectal cancer. This trial is the first to evaluate an antibody as a vaccine in the adjuvant setting. Patients were found to have a cellular, but
not a humoral, response to the immunization.
The impact of antiidiotypic vaccines remains to be clarified. Most of the vaccines use nonhuman antibodies for the vaccine, which may help stimulate an immune
response against the antibody. However, as has been seen with intravenously administered antibodies, multiple administrations of the antiidiotype vaccine may be
limited by the immune response against the constant regions of the antibody (e.g., HAMA response). Also, although in vitro data supporting the induction immune
responses have been demonstrated, no clear evidence exists for the induction of clinically meaningful responses. Clinical trials with various antibodies have
demonstrated antiidiotypic cascades after therapy. 53 There are also examples of antibodies with specificity for the tumor antigen that are being used as vaccines. 94,95
and 96 The infused antibody may allow for in vivo immunization, and the induction of these antiidiotypic antibodies may serve to amplify the antigenic stimulus to the
immune system. For example, ovarian and breast cancer patients receiving high-dose chemotherapy followed by stem cell transplantation have been immunized with
Theratope STn-KLH, an antibody directed against a MUC-1 epitope. Eleven of 26 patients developed STn-specific T-cell responses. 97 It remains to be determined if
such responses are components of therapeutic responses.

IMMUNOCONJUGATES
The use of antibodies as “magic bullets” has captured the scientific and public imagination for some time. In contrast to the immunologically oriented strategies
already described, antibodies used in immunoconjugates are designed to provide targeting specificity to cytotoxic processes. The toxic payloads used in clinically
tested immunoconjugates have included catalytic toxins, chemotherapy agents, and radionuclides.
RADIOIMMUNOCONJUGATES
To a large extent, both immunotoxins and drug immunoconjugates kill by single-cell mechanisms. Thus, less opportunity exists for the destruction of “innocent
bystander” antigen-negative tumor cells at the tumor site. Radioimmunoconjugates address this potential deficiency by virtue of the long track lengths of many of the
commonly used radionuclides, so that toxic effects can extend over several cell diameters from the radiation source. Most radioimmunoconjugates do not require
internalization to be effective, and the cytotoxic effects do not require the presence of an intact, functional immune system. Radioimmunotherapy (RIT) has been the
most extensively studied immunoconjugate treatment strategy and has been the source of several exciting clinical results, particularly in the treatment of
chemotherapy-refractory lymphomas. In the past, most RIT studies used iodine 131, but improvements in chelation technology have enabled the study of yttrium 90
conjugates. 90Y is preferred because of its long track length, high-energy b-emissions, lack of volatility, and the relative ease and safety of its conjugation to
antibodies and subsequent patient administration.
Early studies of RIT have shown that partial, short-lived clinical responses can be achieved in some patients with advanced, solid tumors. Hematologic neoplasms are
more responsive than are solid tumors. Bone marrow suppression is the common dose-limiting toxicity of RIT. The HAMA response can limit the use of multiple
rounds of RIT in some patients. Lymphomas and leukemias remain the most sensitive tumor targets for RIT, presumably because of their intrinsic sensitivity to
radiation and the relatively good access of radioimmunoconjugates to the malignant cells that comprise these neoplasms. Patients with hematologic neoplasms are
less likely to mount HAMA responses and frequently can be re-treated with MAB.
IMMUNOTOXINS
One approach to immunoconjugates involves coupling MAB (or fragments) to highly lethal cellular toxins. A number of plant and bacterial catalytic toxins have been
used, but most clinical trials to date have been conducted using immunotoxins containing either the plant toxin ricin or the bacterially derived Pseudomonas exotoxin.
These toxins require transport and intracellular processing to exert their effects and, generally, act by inhibiting protein synthesis via interruption of ribosomal
elongation factor-2. Toxins of this type are extremely efficient and potent and usually contain two chains. One chain facilitates cell binding and intracellular transport,
whereas the other chain is responsible for the catalytic activity of the toxin. Substituting an antibody binding domain for the cell binding chain of the toxin creates
immunotoxins. The antibody specificity directs the cellular targeting of the catalytic chain of the toxin. Immunotoxins have been prepared by chemical conjugation of
antibodies or their fragments to the catalytic toxin chains, or by the creation of recombinant fusion proteins linking either Fab or sFv antibody fragments to native or
modified catalytic toxin chains. Nanomolar concentrations of immunotoxins are capable of eradicating tumor cells in vitro, and low doses are extremely effective in
preclinical animal models.
Clinical trials have been performed using immunotoxins in patients with breast cancer, ovarian cancer, colorectal cancer, melanoma, and lymphoproliferative
disorders. In a landmark study, Vitetta and colleagues 98 treated 14 patients with B-cell lymphoma using an anti-CD22 MAB conjugated to ricin A chain and observed
clinical responses in five patients. In a separate study, patients with B-cell lymphomas were treated using a continuous infusion of an immunotoxin composed of an
anti-CD19 MAB conjugated to whole ricin with a blocked B chain, so that the toxin's entrance into cells was conferred solely by the antibody binding specificity. In 34
patients with B-cell neoplasms, two complete and three PRs were noted. 99
The results of trials in patients with solid tumors have been less impressive. Toxicities have limited the doses of immunotoxins that have been used, and such dose
limits must be overcome before the full therapeutic benefit of this highly potent therapy approach can be obtained. These toxicities include vascular leak syndrome,
fevers, rigors, malaise, occasional hepatotoxicity, rhabdomyolysis, and rare but potentially devastating central nervous system effects. These effects are thought to
arise from unintended uptake of the toxins by normal cells and can be caused by low levels of targeted antigen expression by such cells, or by poorly understood
nonspecific uptake. Further improvements in toxin selection and design, coupled with more knowledgeable selections of tumor antigen targets and the development of
recombinant antibody-based proteins, are likely to address many of the impediments to effective therapy that have been observed to date. 100 It may prove more
difficult to overcome the potent human antitoxin immune response that these plant or bacterial proteins elicit. However, overcoming this response is necessary to
permit multiple cycles of therapy.

CHEMOIMMUNOCONJUGATES
One of the major potential advantages of immunotoxins is that such toxins work catalytically, so that the antitumor effects can be amplified in situ. Paradoxically, the
potent toxicity of these molecules may make it difficult to identify an appropriate therapeutic window that permits efficacy within the tolerable host range. An alternate
strategy is to use antibody-based targeting to deliver conventional chemotherapy agents to tumor sites. These molecules have well-understood pharmacology and
can be administered safely in native form, so that it should be feasible to administer high, tumor-cytotoxic doses of antibody-conjugated agent within acceptable host
toxicity ranges. For example, promising preclinical results were obtained using the immunoconjugate BR96-doxorubicin, with exceptional activity in vitro and in a
variety of preclinical rodent models. 101 This agent has been examined in a series of phase I clinical trials, and the dose-limiting toxicity was gastritis, possibly related
to the Fc domain of the intact IgG BR96 molecule. 102 More recently, highly potent calicheamicin-antibody conjugates have been tested in leukemia and other cancers
and are undergoing clinical evaluation. 103,104

THERAPEUTIC APPLICATIONS
HEMATOLOGIC MALIGNANCIES
Initial studies using antibodies directed against B-cell determinants showed that the passive administration of these antibodies led to clearance of circulating tumor
cells and rare objective clinical responses. 105 In a series of landmark studies, Levy and colleagues 106 prepared customized antibodies reactive with a given lymphoma
patient's idiotype that was uniquely expressed on the surface of the malignant B-cell clone. Each patient's idiotype served as a tumor-specific signature that could be
targeted by a customized MAB. The procedures for preparing such antibodies for each patient were laborious, but approximately 50% of treated patients experienced
significant clinical responses, with some patients achieving durable complete remissions. 106 The addition of chemotherapy agents, interferon (IFN), or other cytokines
did not appreciably improve treatment outcomes. Effective therapy had to overcome circulating lymphoma idiotype proteins that diverted antibodies from their cellular
targets, and resistance to therapy resulted in part from the emergence of idiotype-negative variants. The mechanisms underlying responses to these antibodies have
not been completely elucidated, but may include mechanisms such as ADCC and perturbation of signal transduction through idiotype engagement. 107 Because of the
immunosuppression of lymphoma patients, relatively few patients developed HAMAs that interfered with repeated therapeutic antibody administration. This exciting
approach was very cumbersome, because it required the generation of patient-customized reagents. These results could not be replicated by using antibodies that
recognize shared idiotypes expressed by a large proportion of lymphoma patients. 108 Despite this set of impediments, these important observations have informed
much of the subsequent work in this field.
Other antibodies directed against B-cell surface determinants have been developed and clinically tested. For example, Lym-1 recognizes an HLA-DR10 determinant
and promotes ADCC. Clinical trials with this antibody have shown interesting response profiles in low-, intermediate-, and high-grade lymphoma, respectively. 109

CAMPATH-1
The CAMPATH-1 antibody has specificity for CD52, a glycopeptide that is highly expressed on T and B lymphocytes. It has been tested as a therapeutic agent for
chronic lymphocytic and promyelocytic leukemias, as well as other non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, and as a means to deplete T cells from allogeneic transplantation
grafts. One-half of the patients with fludarabine-resistant chronic lymphocytic leukemia or B-prolymphocytic leukemia exhibited clinical responses to CAMPATH-1. 110
A phase II multicenter study of CAMPATH-1H in previously treated patients with low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphomas has been reported. 111 Fifty patients with
relapsed or refractory disease were treated with 30 mg of CAMPATH-1H three times weekly for up to 12 weeks. Infection, anemia, and thrombocytopenia were
common, and myocardial infarction occurred in a patient with a prior history of angina and congestive heart failure. A 16% PR rate and a 4% complete response (CR)
rate were reported, for an overall response rate of 20%. Responses were short in duration, with a median time to progression of 4 months. Patients with mycosis
fungoides responded more frequently and had a longer time to progression (10 months) than did patients with low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (4 months).
Treatment was associated with reactivation of herpes simplex, oral candidiasis, Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, cytomegalovirus pneumonitis, pulmonary
aspergillosis, disseminated tuberculosis, and seven cases of pneumonia and septicemia.
CAMPATH-1 has been used to deplete T cells from allogeneic transplantation grafts in patients with hematologic malignancies. 112,113 The initial study suggested that
the addition of CAMPATH-1 can significantly decrease graft rejection and graft-versus-host disease compared with conventional therapy. However, the frequency of
graft rejection and graft failure may be higher. A retrospective review of patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia or AML who underwent allogeneic transplantation
with CAMPATH-1–purged marrow suggested no impact on the graft-versus-leukemia effect, because no increase in leukemia relapse was found. 114 Additionally, the
development of Epstein-Barr virus–related lymphoproliferative disorders was decreased in allogeneic transplantation patients who had T-cell depletion with
CAMPATH-1 therapy compared with other methods of T-cell depletion (e.g., E-rosettes or other MABs). 115 CAMPATH-1 eliminates B cells within the graft, thus
eliminating a potential reservoir of Epstein-Barr virus or targets for subsequent infection.
Anti-CD20 Antibodies
The testing and evaluation of the chimeric anti-CD20 antibody, IDEC-C2B8, also known as rituximab , has led to significant excitement within the field. 116,117 Rituximab
was the first antibody therapy approved by the FDA for use in treating human malignancy. Other anti-CD20 antibodies had demonstrated responses of low-grade
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas; however, therapy was limited because of the induction of HAMAs. By reducing immunogenicity through the substitution of human for
murine constant domain sequences, rituximab allows for the safe administration of multiple doses of therapy. The phase I study that set out to determine the maximum
tolerated dose used four weekly infusions. 119 Thrombocytopenia and B-cell lymphocytopenia were observed. The lymphocytopenia persisted for 3 to 6 months. Six of
18 patients (33%) demonstrated PRs. Phase II studies using the maximum tolerated dose, 375 mg/m 2, confirmed the efficacy of this therapy, demonstrating 46% and
48% response rates in two separate studies. 118,119 Although the numbers of circulating B cells were reduced by therapy, no changes were documented in serum
immunoglobulin levels. Bacterial and viral infections were seen in patients with relapsed indolent lymphomas, but in contrast to the CAMPATH-1 experience,
treatment with rituximab did not result in significant morbidity due to infections. However, patients with small lymphocytic B-cell lymphoma had lower response rates,
likely related to the lesser expression of CD20 on these tumor cells. A different multiinstitutional phase II study using a 375-mg/m 2 dose for eight weekly treatments in
low-grade or follicular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with relapsed or primary refractory disease also demonstrated minimal toxicity, with an overall response rate of
57%.120
In another phase II trial, 54 patients with relapsing or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, mantle cell lymphoma, or other intermediate- or high-grade B-cell
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas were treated. 121 The study randomized patients to either eight weekly treatments of 375 mg/m 2 intravenous rituximab, or to 375 mg/m2
rituximab intravenously in week 1 followed by seven weekly intravenous infusions of 500 mg/m 2. Five CRs and 12 PRs were observed, for an overall response rate of
31%; no evidence of superiority of either treatment regimen was demonstrated. Patients with refractory disease and those with histologies other than diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma appeared to have lower response rates.
Peak levels of circulating antibody inversely correlate with pretreatment B-cell counts and the bulk of tumor. 121,122 Greater numbers of peripheral lymphocytes or larger
tumor bulk serve as an antigen sink and therefore remove antibody from the circulation. For patients with bulky disease, future consideration of a higher antibody
dose or a greater number of cycles may be warranted, because patients with lower serum antibody concentrations have had statistically significant lower response
rates. In some patients with circulating blood tumor cells, however, rituximab therapy has induced an infusion-related syndrome characterized by fever, rigors,
thrombocytopenia, tumor lysis, bronchospasm, and hypoxemia requiring discontinuation of the antibody infusion. Symptoms typically resolve with supportive care, and
patients may continue further therapy without sequelae. 122 Another case report has documented rapid tumor lysis in a patient with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia
with a pretreatment lymphocytosis of more than 100 × 10 9 cells per liter. 123
Rituximab therapy rarely selects for the emergence of an antigen-negative population of tumor cells. This phenomenon has been documented in a patient with a
follicular mixed small and large cell lymphoma treated with rituximab after progression through multiple chemotherapy regimens. 124
Rituximab has been tested in conjunction with chemotherapy. 125 Preclinical data have shown this antibody can sensitize chemotherapy-resistant cell lines to the
cytotoxic effects of chemotherapy. 126 Forty patients with low-grade or follicular B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma received six cycles of the cyclophosphamide,

doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (CHOP) regimen every 21 days, with six infusions of rituximab at a dose of 375 mg/m 2 given before, during, and after the
completion of chemotherapy. Thirty-eight patients received therapy, with three patients not completing treatment because of intercurrent infections (n = 2) and patient
choice (n = 1). The overall response rate was 95% (38 of 40) with a 55% CR and a 40% PR, with fewer CRs noted in patients with bulky disease. Median response
duration and time to progression had not been reached after more than 29 months of follow-up. Seven of eight patients initially positive for the bcl-2 translocation
became negative for the translocation by polymerase chain reaction assay after therapy; this finding has not been seen previously with CHOP chemotherapy alone. 127
Unconjugated antibodies directed against CD20 and other B-lymphocyte antigens have exhibited exciting and clinically important antitumor activity in patients with
low-grade lymphomas (Table 20.5-1).128

TABLE 20.5-1. Antibody Therapy of B-Cell Lymphomas: Selected Results

Radiolabeled Antibodies
Press and colleagues 2,129 used high, marrow-ablative RIT doses in patients with biodistributions that predicted favorable tumor dosimetry within tolerable host toxicity
ranges in the setting of autologous bone marrow transplantation. In a group of 42 patients with chemotherapy-refractory lymphomas, 24 had favorable biodistributions
and 19 received high-dose RIT. A remarkable 84% of these patients experienced complete remissions, and an additional 11% had partial remissions. More recent
updates suggest that many of the complete remissions are durable, with a 62% progression-free survival rate at 2 years. Preliminary studies in patients with AML
suggest that RIT may be useful as a conditioning regimen before bone marrow transplantation. 130
These exciting results illustrate the potential of RIT in appropriately selected patients, and they certainly contradict any pessimism regarding the role of
antibody-based targeted therapeutics in the management of cancer. Further advancements in antibody design, chelation chemistry, choice of radioligand, and
selection of appropriate candidates and clinical setting for therapy can be safely predicted to expanded indications for antibody-based RIT in the treatments of
patients with hematologic neoplasms.
131

I-B1 (anti-CD20) treatment has caused 50% and 79% CR rates for patients with chemotherapy-refractory B-cell lymphoma treated with low-dose
nonmyeloablative 3,131 and high-dose ablative 2,132 RIT followed by autologous transplantation, respectively. The median CR duration of a single nonmyeloablative dose
was 16.5 months. Patients were pretreated with unlabeled anti-CD20 to enhance the targeting of 131I-B1 to tumor by prolonging blood and whole body radioisotope
clearance through the saturation of nonspecific binding sites, nonmalignant B cells, and other potential antigenic sinks. 3 CD20 antigen does not internalize after
antibody binding, allowing for extended retention of intact 131I-B1 at the targeted cell. Minimal myelosuppression was observed in all patients treated at
nonmyeloablative doses. 3,134 Toxicity in the high-dose trials 2,132 was modest compared to total body irradiation. The myeloablative doses delivered less than 27.25 Gy
to dose-limiting normal organs. Further dose escalation was limited by cardiopulmonary toxicity. Sixty percent of patients have developed elevated thyroid-stimulating
hormone levels, and 2 of 29 patients have developed second malignancies (bladder and colon cancer) several years after therapy. Acute leukemias or
myelodysplastic syndromes have been documented at a median of 42 months after therapy. 132 Responses have been attributed to the tumoricidal effects of the MAB
itself and to the selective delivery of irradiation by the radiolabeled MAB. The murine anti-CD20 antibody C2B8, which was chimerized to create rituximab, has been
conjugated to 90Y, and the resulting radioimmunoconjugate has shown impressive antitumor activity in patients with chemotherapy-refractory B-cell lymphomas. 133
Therapy with 131I Lym-1 in phase I/II clinical trials has shown significant antitumor activity as well. Low-dose fractionated treatment of 30 patients (25 with
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, five with chronic lymphocytic leukemia) resulted in three CRs and 14 PRs. 134 At the nonmyeloablative maximally tolerated dose of 100
mCi/m2, 11 of 21 patients exhibited clinical responses. 135
CD33 is expressed on most myeloid leukemic blasts and leukemic progenitor cells. This tumor-associated antigen is also present on committed normal
myelomonocytic and erythroid progenitor cells and is expressed at low levels on early hematopoietic stem cells. M195, a murine anti-CD33 MAB, has been used to
deliver therapeutic doses of 131I in combination with busulfan or cyclophosphamide to eliminate residual leukemia before bone marrow transplantation. 136 More
recently, a humanized form of M195, HuM195, has been radiolabeled and used as a single agent in the treatment of AML and chronic myeloid leukemia. In these
studies, 8 of 12 patients treated with 90Y-conjugated MAB and 13 of 18 patients treated with bismuth 213–conjugated MAB exhibited minor responses. 137,138
Other Approaches
CD15 and CD33 have been used as targets in AMLs. 139,140 PM-81, or MDX-11, is an IgM with specificity for CD15. 133 It was evaluated before induction therapy in
patients with AML. The number of peripheral blasts decreased transiently. Two patients at the highest dose level, 1.5 mg/m 2, had grade 4 toxicities of hypotension or
rhabdomyolysis. Unconjugated HuM195 recognizes CD33. 142 Patients with persistent disease after chemotherapy were treated with daily infusions 4 days a week for 2
weeks. One of ten patients had a CR. More recently, this antibody has been conjugated to a recombinant form of gelonin, a single-chain plant catalytic toxin that
inactivates the 60S ribosomal subunit. 141In vitro experiments using HuM195-rGel with CD33-expressing AML cell lines, as well as primary cultures of human AML
blasts, demonstrated effective cell killing. There was also enhanced killing of AML blasts after exposure to HuM195-rGel for 24 hours followed by freeze thawing of
cells compared with freeze thawing alone. This approach may have applicability in purging autologous bone morrow products for transplantation, particularly because
CD33 is not expressed on stem cells. 142
Anti-Tac is a MAB that recognizes the IL-2 receptor. Infection with human T-cell leukemia virus type I can result in the development of adult T-cell leukemia. The
majority of leukemic blasts in adult T-cell leukemia have been found to express large numbers of IL-2 receptor. Waldmann and colleagues 143 reported on the use of
anti-Tac for treatment of patients with adult T-cell leukemia. Of 19 treated patients, four PRs, two CRs, and seven mixed responses were reported. Responding
patients also demonstrated a lowering of elevated calcium levels. The Tac receptor can be shed in the serum and decrease the available unbound anti-Tac antibody
available for binding at the tumor site. 143 However, the antibody can be exchanged from soluble Tac to tumor-bound Tac. 144 This antibody may have therapeutic
potential in other hematologic disorders, such as T- and B-cell leukemia, myelogenous leukemia derived from monocytes and granulocytes, hairy cell leukemia,
Hodgkin's disease, and histiocytic and mixed cell diffuse lymphoma, all of which overexpress IL-2 receptors.
SOLID TUMORS
Breast Cancer
HER-2/neu (c-erbB-2), a member of the EGFR family, has been targeted for antibody therapy because it is overexpressed on 25% of adenocarcinomas. Recombinant
human MAB (rhuMAB) HER-2145, also known as trastuzumab , is a humanized antibody derived from 4D5, a murine MAB that recognizes HER-2/ neu. In a phase II trial
in women with metastatic breast cancer, Basegla and associates 5 reported an objective response rate of 11.6%, with responses seen in the liver, mediastinum, lymph
nodes, and chest wall metastases. Patients typically received ten or more treatments with the antibody, and none developed an antibody response against
trastuzumab.5 Cobleigh and coworkers 146 treated 222 women with metastatic breast cancer, finding an objective response rate of 16%. The median response duration

was 9.1 months with a median overall survival rate of 13 months, which is superior to results reported for second-line chemotherapy in metastatic breast cancer. 146
Preclinical data with trastuzumab suggested enhanced clinical activity in combination with cisplatin chemotherapy. A phase II study in patients with
chemotherapy-refractory breast cancer that overexpressed HER2/ neu has been completed. 147 Nine of 37 assessable patients achieved a PR, and nine additional
patients exhibited a minor response or stable disease. The median response duration was 3.3 months. Toxicities were largely attributable to cisplatin. No evidence
was found for cisplatin-related alteration of antibody pharmacokinetics.
A large, randomized, phase III trial comparing cytotoxic chemotherapy alone or with trastuzumab (anti-HER-2/ neu) has been completed.148 Patients receiving initial
therapy for metastatic breast cancer were treated with doxorubicin or epirubicin and cyclophosphamide, or with paclitaxel if they had received an anthracycline in the
adjuvant setting. Patients were randomized to receive chemotherapy alone or in combination with weekly antibody therapy. The addition of trastuzumab improved
response rates for combination therapy from 42.1% to 64.9% for the anthracycline-based regimens and from 25.0% to 57.3% for the taxane regimen. Myocardial
dysfunction seen with anthracycline therapy was observed with increased frequency in patients receiving antibody alone 149 or with doxorubicin or epirubicin, and
therefore trastuzumab is not recommended in combination with anthracyclines.
Colorectal Cancer
Ep-CAM is a glycoprotein normally found on the basolateral surface of the nonsquamous epithelium of the lung, gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, ovary, kidney, sweat
glands, biliary tract, and thymus. Most recently it has been detected in prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and prostatic adenocarcinoma. 17-1A, a murine antibody that
targets an extracellular epitope of this antigen, has undergone extensive clinical trials in metastatic colorectal cancer and pancreatic cancer as a single
agent, 150,151,152,153 and 154 or in combination with GM-CSF155 or IFN-g. 156
The therapeutic administration of 17-1A also has been shown to induce potentially effective antiidiotypic antibodies 157,158 and 159 with increased titers when GM-CSF
was coadministered with the 17-1A. 160 T-cell responses against antiidiotypic epitopes have been demonstrated by in vitro proliferation assays, IFN-g production, and
in vivo delayed-type hypersensitivity responses. 161 In a small study of ten patients, those with T-cell proliferation against antiidiotypic antibodies demonstrated clinical
responses, contrasting with patients without a T-cell response who had no clinical response. 159
Initial phase I studies with 17-1A demonstrated occasional responses in metastatic cancers of the gastrointestinal tract after only one intravenous dose of antibody.
Therapy was well tolerated, with mild side effects of nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. Phase II studies in colon and pancreatic cancers were less encouraging ( Table
20.5-2). The overall lack of efficacy seen in these studies may have resulted from the large tumor burden or the associated immunosuppression seen in these patients
with metastatic disease.

TABLE 20.5-2. Selected 17-1A Clinical Trials

Riethmuller and colleagues 162 have evaluated 17-1A in the adjuvant setting in patients with colorectal cancer. Patients with lymph node–positive cancers were
randomized to observation or to therapy with 17-1A for 5 months. After 5 years, the death rate in the 17-1A group was 36% versus 51% in the observation group. 162
The decreased death rate persisted at 7 years—43% versus 63%. 163 This result translated to a 30% reduction in death ( P = .04) and a 27% reduction in recurrence ( P
= .03). This study has been criticized for the higher than expected death rate in the observation group and the lack of adjuvant chemotherapy. Currently, a clinical
trial is comparing 17-1A to observation in patients with lymph node–negative cancers. Another ongoing study is evaluating lymph node–positive colorectal cancer
patients, randomizing patients to standard adjuvant chemotherapy alone or in conjunction with 17-1A. These trials will define the role of this antibody therapy in the
adjuvant setting. If the encouraging outcomes of the original randomized study are confirmed, it will signify a paradigm shift. In this new paradigm, high objective
response rates in patients with metastatic disease will not be required to provide an activity signal that warrants testing in the adjuvant setting when the agent involved
acts to stimulate immune responses.
Ovarian Cancer
The majority of patients with ovarian cancer relapse even after receiving adjuvant chemotherapy and even when they present with limited disease. RIT using HMFG1,
which recognizes a polymorphic epithelial mucin, has been evaluated in patients with stage Ic to IV ovarian cancer after standard chemotherapy. 164 The radiolabeled
antibody was given once as an intraperitoneal injection. Compared with a retrospective matched control group, the estimated survival at 10 years was superior for the
patients treated with RIT. Further prospective studies are needed to confirm this initial observation.
Antiganglioside Antibodies
Significant promise has been associated with MAB directed against ganglioside antigens in patients with melanoma and neuroblastoma. 165,166 and 167 In these trials, the
induction of complement-mediated cytotoxicity has been suggested as a possible mechanism of response. Gangliosides have a limited distribution within the body
and normally can be found only on peripheral nerves at low densities. In contrast, gangliosides (GD2) are overexpressed on melanomas, neuroblastomas,
osteosarcoma, and small cell lung cancers. Antibodies targeting gangliosides have unique toxicities resulting from peripheral nerve tissue targeting, and treatment is
associated with severe pain, often requiring narcotic analgesia. Long-term neurologic deficits have been observed, although rarely. Murray et al. 167 treated 18 patients
who demonstrated GD2 tumor expression by prior radionuclide imaging using the murine MAB 14.G2a. Toxicities included pain, fever, hyponatremia, paresthesias,
and postural hypotension. Treatment with the anti-GD2 ganglioside antibodies 3F8 and Ch14.18 has been associated with lesser toxicities, although pain during
infusion has been described. All studies have demonstrated responses in patients with neuroblastoma. Cheung and colleagues 168 have evaluated 3F8 in metastatic
neuroblastoma, observing PRs as well as long-term, unmaintained remissions and survivals of 79 to 130 months. More recently, this group reported on the use of 3F8
in patients with metastatic disease treated in conjunction with chemotherapy at the time of relapse. 169 Two-thirds of patients with occult disease had evidence of
response after 3F8 treatment. One-third of the patients are progression-free 40 to 130 months after completion of therapy. Treatment with 3F8 antibody, alone or
radiolabeled, has not resulted in the selection of GD2-negative tumor clones. Ongoing studies with 3F8 are evaluating its effectiveness as a consolidation therapy
after bone marrow transplantation.
The human chimeric antibody Ch14.18 has been tested in neuroblastoma and osteosarcoma. 168,169 The first study168 reported on nine patients with previously treated
stage IV neuroblastoma. Pain in the abdomen and joints controlled by intravenous morphine defined the maximally tolerated dose of 50 mg/m 2. Two patients with bone
and paravertebral disease had complete remissions lasting 2 months and more than 14 months, respectively. Two other patients with bone and adrenal metastases
had PRs, and one other patient had a minor response of an adrenal metastasis. These results were essentially replicated in a second phase I trial, 169 in which five of
seven patients with metastases to bone marrow had evidence of minor to CRs in the bone marrow as assessed by repeated bone marrow biopsies. This agent also
has been used as consolidation therapy after bone marrow transplantation following high-dose chemotherapy and 131I-metaiodobenzylguanidine with encouraging
preliminary results. 170

GD3 ganglioside has been targeted by the R24 antibody, which promotes ADCC and complement deposition. Therapy with R24 has induced occasional tumor
regressions in patients with metastatic melanoma. 171 Soiffer and associates 172 reported on a trial in metastatic melanoma combining IL-2 at both high and low doses
with R24. Treatment was limited by IL-2–related toxicities, particularly catheter-related infections. Treatment led to the expansion and activation of NK cells and T
lymphocytes. In spite of this in vitro immune activation, only one PR was observed.
IFN-a given in an adjuvant setting may decrease the risk of melanoma recurrence in patients free of disease after the resection of lymph node–positive primary
disease. The combination of IFN-a, R24, and IL-2 was studied in patients with metastatic melanoma. 173 Patients were treated with R24 by continuous intravenous
infusion, followed by approximately 3 weeks of therapy with IL-2 and IFN-a. The cytokine therapy was designed to enhance the proliferation and cytotoxicity of T
lymphocytes infiltrating melanoma lesions after R24 MAB therapy. However, pre- and posttreatment biopsies of these lesions showed no evidence of augmentation in
the composition or biologic features of the effector cell population after the combination therapy in comparison with cytokine or MAB therapy alone. No objective tumor
responses were observed. M-CSF also has been administered in combination with R24. 174 In this study, M-CSF was given as a 14-day continuous intravenous
infusion, adding R24 on days 6 to 10. Three of 19 treated patients had a minor tumor response in metastases to the breast, liver, and lymph nodes. In yet another
study evaluating combination therapies with R24, treatment combining R24 and GM-CSF demonstrated increased ADCC in vitro after therapy.175 Two PRs were seen
in 20 patients treated. Similar results have been obtained with ch14.18. 176,177

FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The initial clinical studies using antibodies and their derivatives have identified a number of applications that promise to make significant impacts in the management
of patients with cancer. Patience was required to acquire the results, understand the reasons for disappointment or success, and refine the treatment strategies to
obtain results that provide legitimate causes for encouragement. These promising results represent the most advanced clinical antibody therapy programs, but a
wealth of innovative strategies using recombinantly prepared antibody molecules with novel effector functions are in earlier stages of clinical evaluation. Some of
these approaches, such as modulating growth factor receptor functions or inducing immune responses using BsAb, show considerable promise and are expected to
add to the list of novel agents available for the treatment of malignancies in which previously conventional therapeutic strategies have proven inadequate.
In the past, antibody development has focused on identification of targets on the cancer cell itself. There are now an increasing number of targets in the extracellular
matrix and local tumor environment. The most developed approach targets the vascular endothelial growth factor, a mediator of tumor neovascularization. An
antibody-targeting tenascin, a class of extracellular matrix proteins, has been tested in a RIT trial in patients with primary or metastatic brain tumors. 178 Antibodies
against osteoclast integrins can prevent osteoclastic bone resorption. 179 Such approaches offer additional causes for optimism about antibody-based therapeutics.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Maloney DG, Liles TM, Czerwinski DK, et al. Phase I clinical trial using escalating single-dose infusion of chimeric anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (IDEC-C2B8) in patients with recurrent B-cell
lymphoma. Blood 1994;84:2457.
2. Press OW, Eary JF, Appelbaum FR, et al. Radiolabeled-antibody therapy of B-cell lymphoma with autologous bone marrow support. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1219.
3. Kaminski MS, Zasady KR, Francis IR, et al. Radioimmunotherapy of B-cell lymphoma with 131I-anti-B1 (anti-CD20) antibody. N Engl J Med 1993;329:459.
4. Sievers EL, Bernstein JD, Spielberger RT, et al. Dose escalation phase I study of recombinant engineered human anti-CD33 antibody-calicheamicin drug conjugate (CMA-676) in patients with
relapsed or refractory acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Proc ASCO 1997;16:A8.
5. Baselga J, Tripathy D, Mendelsohn J, et al. Phase II study of weekly intravenous recombinant humanized anti-p185 HER2 monoclonal antibody in patients with HER2/ neu-overexpressing
metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:737.
6. Slamon DJ, Leyland-Jones B, Shak S, et al. Addition of Herceptin (humanized anti-HER2 antibody) to first line chemotherapy for HER2 overexpressing metastatic breast cancer (HER2+/MBC)
markedly increased anticancer activity: a randomized, multinational controlled phase III trial. Proc ASCO 1998;17:A377.
7. Sliwkowski MX, Lofgren JA, Lewis GD, et al. Nonclinical studies addressing the mechanism of action of Trastuzomab (Herceptin). Semin Oncol 1999;26[Suppl 12]:60.
8. Kohler G, Milstein C. Continuous cultures of fused cells secreting antibody of predefined specificity. Nature 1975;256:495.
9. LoBuglio AF, Wheeler RH, Trang J, et al. Mouse/human chimeric monoclonal antibody in man: kinetics and immune response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:4220.
10. Kudo T, Saeki H, Tachibana T. A simple and improved method to generate human hybridomas. J Immunologic Methods 1991;145:119.
11. Hussain R, Courtenay-Luck NS, Siligardi G. Structure-function correlation and biostability of antibody CDR-derived peptides as tumour imaging agents. Biomed Pept Proteins Nucleic Acids
1996;2:67.
12. Huston JS, Levinson D, Mudgett-Hunter M, et al. Protein engineering of antibody binding sites: recovery of specific activity in an anti-digoxin single-chain Fv analogue produced in Escherichia
coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:5879.
13. Begent RH, Verhaar MJ, Chester KA, et al. Clinical evidence of efficient tumor targeting based on single-chain Fv antibody selected from a combinatorial library. Nat Med 1996;2:979.
14. Mack M, Riethmuller G, Kufer P. A small bispecific antibody construct expressed as a functional single-chain molecule with high tumor cell cytotoxicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:7021.
15. Schier R, Marks JD, Wolf EJ, et al. In vitro and in vivo characterization of a human anti-c-erbB-2 single-chain Fv isolated from a filamentous phage antibody library. Immunotechnology
1995;1:73.
16. Clackson T, Hoogenboom HR, Griffiths AD, Winter G. Making antibody fragments using phage display libraries. Nature 1991;352:624.
17. Pluckthun A, Pack P. New protein engineering approaches to multivalent and bispecific antibody fragments. Immunotechnology 1997;3:83.
18. Hollinger P, Prospero T, Winter G. “Diabodies”: small bivalent and bispecific antibody fragments. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:444.
19. Adams GP, Schier R, McCall AM, et al. Prolonged in vivo tumor retention of a human diabody targeting the extracellular domain of human HER2/neu. Br J Cancer 1998;77:1405.
20. Iliades P, Kortt AA, Hudson PJ. Triabodies: single chain Fv fragments without a linker form trivalent trimers. FEBS Lett 1997;409:437.
21. Hu S, Shively L, Raubitschek A, et al. Minibody: a novel engineered anti-carcinoembryonic antigen antibody fragment (single-chain Fv-CH3) which exhibits rapid, high-level targeting of
xenografts. Cancer Res 1996;56:3055.
22. Gillies SD, Reilly EB, Lo KM, Reisfeld RA. Antibody-targeted interleukin 2 stimulates T-cell killing of autologous tumor cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:1428.
23. Jain RK. Transport of molecules in the tumor interstitium: a review. Cancer Res 1987;47:3039.
24. Jain RK. Transport of molecules across tumor vasculature. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1987;6:559.
25. Colcher DR, Bird R, Roselli M, et al. In vivo tumor targeting of a recombinant single-chain antigen-binding protein. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:1191.
26. Adams GP, McCartney JE, Tai MS, et al. Highly specific in vivo tumor targeting by monovalent and divalent forms of 741F8 anti-c-erbB-2 single-chain Fv. Cancer Res 1993;53:4026.
27. Miller RA, Maloney DG, et al. Treatment of B-cell lymphoma with monoclonal anti-idiotype antibody. Med Intelligence 1982;306:517.
28. Humphrey PA, Wong AJ, Vogelstein B, et al. Anti-synthetic peptide antibody reacting at the fusion junction of deletion-mutant epidermal growth factor receptors in human glioblastoma. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:4207.
29. Garcia de Palazzo IE, Adams GP, Sundareshan P, et al. Expression of mutated epidermal growth factor receptor by nonsmall cell lung carcinomas. Cancer Res 1993;53:3217.
30. Khazaeli MB, Conry RM, LoBuglio AF. Human immune response to monoclonal antibodies. J Immunother 1994;15:42.
31. Jerne NK. Towards a network theory of the immune system. Ann Immunol 1974;125:373.
32. Yang XD, Jia XC, Corvalan JR, et al. Eradication of established tumors by a fully human monoclonal antibody to the epidermal growth factor receptor without concomitant chemotherapy.
Cancer Res 1999;59:1236.
33. Shen L, Guyre PM, Anderson CL, Fanger MW. Heteroantibody-mediated cytotoxicity: antibody to the high affinity Fc receptor for IgG mediates cytotoxicity by human monocytes that is
enhanced by interferon-g and is not blocked by human IgG. J Immunol 1986;137:3378.
34. Garcia de Palazzo I, Gercel-Taylor C, Kitson J, Weiner LM. Potentiation of tumor lysis by a bispecific antibody that binds to CA19-9 antigen and the Fcg receptor expressed by human large
granular lymphocytes. Cancer Res 1990;50:7123.
35. Valerius T, Stockmeyer B, van Spriel AB, et al. FcalphaRI (CD89) as a novel trigger molecule for bispecific antibody therapy. Blood 1997;90:4485.
36. Lanzavecchia A, Scheidegger D. The use of hybrid hybridomas to target human cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Eur J Immunol 1987;17:105.
37. Link BK, Weiner GJ. Production and characterization of a bispecific IgG capable of inducing T-cell-mediated lysis of malignant B cells. Blood 1993;81:3343.
38. Renner C, Jung W, Sahin U, van Lier R, Pfreundschuh M. The role of lymphocyte subsets and adhesion molecules in T celldependent cytotoxicity mediated by CD3 and CD28 bispecific
monoclonal antibodies. Eur J Immunol 1995;25:2027.
39. Sconocchia G, Titus JA, Segal DM. CD44 is a cytotoxic triggering molecule in human peripheral blood NK cells. J Immunol 1994;153:5473.
40. Schier R, McCall A, Adams GP, et al. Isolation of picomolar affinity anti-c-erbB-2 single-chain Fv by molecular evolution of the complementarity determining regions in the center of the
antibody binding site. J Mol Biol 1996;263:551.
41. Schier R, Marks JD, Wolf EJ, et al. In vitro and in vivo characterization of a human anti-c-erbB-2 single-chain Fv isolated from a filamentous phage antibody library. Immunotechnology
1995;1:73.
42. Segal DM, Wunderlich JR. Targeting of cytotoxic cells with heterocrosslinked antibodies. Cancer Invest 1988;6:83.
43. Hombach A, Jung W, Pohl C, et al. A CD16/CD30 bispecific antibody induces lysis of Hodgkin cells by unstimulated natural killer in vitro and in vivo. Int J Cancer 1993;55:830.
44. Weiner LM, Holmes M, Adams GP, et al. A human tumor xenograft model of therapy with a bispecific monoclonal antibody c-erbB-2 and CD-16. Cancer Res 1993;53:94.
45. Weiner GJ, Kostelny SA, Hillstrom JR, et al. The role of T cell activation in anti-CD3 x antitumor bispecific antibody therapy. J Immunol 1994;152:2385.
46. Nitta T, Sato K, Yagita H, Okumura K, Ishii S. Preliminary trial of specific targeting therapy against malignant glioma. Lancet 1990;335:368.
47. Canevari S, Stoter G, Arienti F, et al. Regression of advanced ovarian carcinoma by intraperitoneal treatment with autologous T lymphocytes retargeted by a bispecific monoclonal antibody. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1463.
48. Tibben JG, Boerman OC, Claessens RAMJ, et al. Cytokine release in an ovarian carcinoma patient following intravenous administration of bispecific antibody OC/TR F(ab') 2. J Natl Cancer Inst
1993;85:1003.
49. Weiner LM, Clark JI, Davey M, et al. Phase I trial of 2B1, a bispecific monoclonal antibody targeting c-erbB-2 and FcgRIII. Cancer Res 1995;55:4586.
50. Clark JI, Alpaugh RK, von Mehren M, et al. Induction of multiple anti-c-erbB2 specificities accompanies a classical idiotypic cascade following 2B1 bispecific monoclonal antibody treatment.
Cancer Immunol Immunother 1997;44:265.
51. Valone FH, Kaufman PA, Guyre PM, et al. Phase Ia/Ib trial of bispecific antibody MDX-210 in patients with advanced breast or ovarian cancer that overexpresses the proto-oncogene
HER-2/neu. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2281.

52. Fyfe G, Fisher RI, Rosenberg SA, et al. Results of treatment of 255 patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma who received high-dose recombinant interleukin-2 therapy. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:688.
53. Sabzevari H, Gillies SD, Mueller BM, Pancook JD, Reisfeld RA. A recombinant antibody-interleukin 2 fusion protein suppresses growth of hepatic neuroblastoma metastases in severe
combined immunodeficiency mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:9626.
54. Obrist R, Schmidli J, Obrecht JP. Chemotactic monoclonal antibody conjugates: a comparison of four different f-Met-peptide-conjugates. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1988;155:1139.
55. Chalitta-Eid P, Abboud CA, Morrison SL, et al. A RANTES-antibody fusion protein retains antigen specificity and chemokine function. J Immunol 1998;161:3729.
56. Modjtahedi H, Komurasaki T, Toyoda H, Dean C. Anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies which act as EGF, TGF alpha, HB-EGF, and BTC antagonists block the binding of epiregulin to
EGFR-expressing tumours. Int J Cancer 1998;75:310.
57. Teramoto T, Onda M, Tokunaga A, Asano G. Inhibitory effect of an anti-epidermal growth factor receptor antibody on human gastric cancer. Cancer 1996;77:1639.
58. Sato JD, Kawamoto T, Le AD, et al. Biologic effect in vitro of monoclonal antibodies to human EGF receptors. Mol Biol Med 1983;1:511.
59. Artega CL, Corondo E, Osbore CK. Blockade of the epidermal growth factor receptor inhibits transforming growth factor ainduced but not estrogen-induced growth of hormone-dependent
human breast cancer. Mol Endocrinol 1988;2:1064.
60. Hoffman T, Hafner D, Ballo H, Haas I, Bier H. Antitumor activity of anti-epidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibodies and cisplatin in ten human head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma lines. Anticancer Res 1997;17:4419.
61. Fan Z, Baselga J, Masui H, Mendelsohn J. Antitumor effect of antiepidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibodies plus cis-diamminedichloroplatinum on well established A431 cell
xenografts. Cancer Res 1993;53:4637.
62. Baselga J, Norton L, Masui H, et al. Antitumor effects of doxorubicin in combination with antiepidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibodies. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1327.
63. Modjtahedi H, Eccles S, Sandle J, et al. Differentiation or immune destruction: two pathways for therapy of squamous cell carcinomas with antibodies to the epidermal growth factor receptor.
Cancer Res 1994;54:1695.
64. Sunada H, Magun G, Mendelsohn J, et al. Monoclonal antibody against the EGF receptor is internalized without stimulating receptor phosphorylation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1986;83:3825.
65. Sunada H, Yu P, Peacock JS, et al. Modulation of tyrosine serine and threonine phosphorylation and intracellular processing of the epidermal growth factor receptor by anti-receptor monoclonal
antibody. J Cellular Physiol 1990;142:284.
66. Fan Z, Masui M, Altas I, Mendelsohn J. Blockade of the epidermal growth factor receptor function by bivalent and monovalent fragments of 225 antiepidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal
antibodies. Cancer Res 1993;53:4322.
67. Prewett M, Rockwell RF, Giorgio NA, et al. The biologic effects of C225, a chimeric monoclonal antibody to the EGFR, on human prostate carcinoma. J Immunother Emphasis Tumor Immunol
1996;19:419.
68. Zolfaghari A, Djakiew D. Inhibition of chemomigration of a human prostatic carcinoma cell (TSU-pr1) line by inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor function. Prostate 1996;28:232.
69. Peng D, Fan Z, Lu Y, et al. Antiepidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody 225 up-regulates p27KIP1 and induces G1 arrest in prostatic cancer cell line DU145. Cancer Res
1996;56:3666.
70. Wu X, Rubin M, Fan Z, et al. Involvement of p27KIP1 in G1 arrest mediated by an antiepidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody. Oncogene 1996;12:1397.
71. Raben D, Buchsbaum DJ, Gillepsie Y, Saleh M, Waksal H. Treatment of human intracranial gliomas with chimeric monoclonal antibody against the epidermal growth factor receptor increases
survival of nude mice when treated concurrently with irradiation. Proc AACR 1999;40:A1224.
72. Ciardiello F, Bianco R, Damiano V, et al. Antitumor activity of sequential treatment with topotecan and antiepidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody C225. Clin Cancer Res
1999;5:909.
73. Normanno N, Tortora G, De Luca A, et al. Synergistic growth inhibition and induction of apoptosis by a novel mixed backbone antisense oligonucleotide targeting CRIPTO in combination with
C225 anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody and 8-Cl-cAMP in human GEO colon cancer cells. Oncol Rep 1999;6:1105.
74. Tortora G, Caputo R, Pomatico G, et al. Cooperative inhibitory effect of novel mixed backbone oligonucleotide targeting protein kinase A in combination with docetaxel and antiepidermal
growth factor-receptor antibody on human breast cancer cell growth. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:875.
75. Ye D, Mendelsohn J, Fan Z. Augmentation of a humanized anti-HER2 mAb 4D5 induced growth inhibition by a human-mouse chimeric anti-EGF receptor mAb C225. Oncogene 1999;18:731.
76. Perrotte P, Matsumoto T, Inoue K, et al. Antiepidermal growth factor receptor antibody C225 inhibits angiogenesis in human transitional cell carcinoma growing orthotopically in nude mice. Clin
Cancer Res 1999;5:257.
77. Mendelsohn J, Shin DM, Donato N, et al. A phase I study of chimerized antiepidermal growth factor receptor (EGFr) monoclonal antibody, C225, in combination with cisplatin (CDDP) in patient
(PTS) with recurrent head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Proc Am Assoc Clin Oncol 1999;18:A1502.
78. Ezekiel MP, Robert F, Merideth RF, et al. Phase I study of antiepidermal growth factor receptor antibody C225 in combination with irradiation in patients with advanced squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck. Proc ASCO 1998;17:A1522.
79. Modjtahedi H, Hickish T, Nicolson M, et al. Phase I trial and tumour localisation of the anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody ICR62 in head and neck or lung cancer. Br J Cancer 1996;73:228.
80. Perez-Soler R, Donato NJ, Shin DM, et al. Tumor epidermal growth factor receptor studies in patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer or head and neck cancer treated with monoclonal antibody
RG83852. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:730.
81. Christen RD, Hom DK, Porter DC, et al. Epidermal growth factor regulates the in vitro sensitivity of human ovarian carcinoma cells to cisplatin. J Clin Invest 1990;86:1632.
82. Kwok TT, Sutherland RM. Differences in EGF related radio-sensitization of human squamous carcinoma cells with high and low numbers of EGF receptors. Br J Cancer 1991;64:251.
83. Deshane J, Cabrera G, Grim JE, et al. Targeted eradication of ovarian cancer mediated by intracellular expression of anti-erbB-2 single-chain antibody. Gynecol Oncol 1995;59:8.
84. Austin EB, Robins RA, DurRant LG, Price MR, Baldwin RW. Human monoclonal anti-idiotypic antibody to the tumour-associated antibody 791T/36. Immunology 1989;67:525.
85. Herlyn D, Wettendorff M, Schmoll E, et al. Anti-idiotype immunization of cancer patients: modulation of the immune response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987;84:8055.
86. Munn RK, Hutchins L, Garrison J, et al. Immune responses in patients with breast cancer treated with an anti-idiotype antibody that mimics the human milk fat globule (HMFG) antigen. Proc Am
Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:A1648.
87. Herlyn D, Wettendorf M, Schmoll E, et al. Anti-idiotype immunization of cancer patients: modulation of the immune response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987;84:8055.
88. Mittelman A, Chen ZJ, Kageshita T, et al. Active specific immunotherapy in patients with melanoma: a clinical trial with mouse antiidiotypic monoclonal antibodies elicited with syngeneic
anti-high-molecular-weight-melanoma-associated antigen monoclonal antibodies. J Clin Invest 1990;86:2136.
89. Foon KA, Chalaraborty M, John WJ, et al. Immune response to the carcinoembryonic antigen in patients treated with an anti-idiotype antibody vaccine. J Clin Invest 1995;96:334.
90. Denton GW, Durrant LG, Hardcastle JD, et al. Clinical outcome of colorectal cancer patients treated with human monoclonal anti-idiotypic antibody. Int J Cancer 1994;57:10.
91. Durrant LG, Buckley TJ, Denton GW, et al. Enhanced cell-mediated tumor killing in patients immunized with human monoclonal anti-idiotypic antibody 105AD7. Cancer Res 1994;54:4837.
92. Durrant LG, Buckley DJ, Spendlove I, Robins RA. Low doses of 105AD7 cancer vaccine preferentially stimulate anti-tumor T-cell immunity. Hybridoma 1997;16:23.
93. Foon KA, John WJ, Chakraborty M, et al. Clinical and immune responses in surgically resected colorectal cancer (CRC) patients treated with an anti-idiotype (ID) monoclonal antibody that
mimics carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) with or without 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:A1678.
94. Madiyalakan R, Yang R, Schultes BC, Baum RP, Noujaim AA. OVAREX MAb-B43, 13:IFN-gamma could improve the ovarian tumor cell sensitivity to CA125-specific allogenic cytotoxic T cells.
Hybridoma 1997;16:41.
95. Livingston P. Ganglioside vaccines with emphasis on GM2. Semin Oncol 1998;25:636.
96. MacLean GD, Reddish MA, Koganty RR, Longenecker BM. Antibodies against mucin-associated sialyl-Tn epitopes correlate with survival of metastatic adenocarcinoma patients undergoing
active specific immunotherapy with synthetic STn vaccine. J Immunother 1996;19:59.
97. Sandmaier BM, Oparin DV, Holmberg LA, et al. Evidence of a cellular immune response against sialyl-Tn in breast and ovarian cancer patients after high-dose chemotherapy, stem cell rescue,
and immunization with Theratope STn-KLH cancer vaccine. J Immunother 1999;22:54.
98. Vitetta ES, Stone M, Amlot P, et al. Phase I immunotoxin trial in patients with B-cell lymphoma. Cancer Res 1991;51:4052.
99. Grossbard ML, Lambert JM, Goldmacher VS, et al. Anti-B4-blocked ricin: a phase I trial of 7-day continuous infusion in patients with B-cell neoplasms. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:726.
100. Fitzgerald D, Pastan I. Targeted toxin therapy for the treatment of cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:1455.
101. Trail PA, Willner D, Lasch SJ, et al. Cure of xenografted human carcinomas by BR96-doxorubicin immunoconjugates. Science 1993;261:212.
102. Tolcher AW, Sugarman S, Gelmon KA, et al. Randomized phase II study of BR96-doxorubicin conjugate in patients with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:478.
103. Hinman LM, Hamann PR, Wallace R, et al. Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibody conjugates of the calicheamicins: a novel and potent family of antitumor antibiotics. Cancer
Res 1993;53:3336.
104. Sievers EL, Bernstein ID, Spielberger RT, et al. Dose escalation phase I study of recombinant engineered human anti-CD33 antibody-calicheamicin drug conjugate (CMA-676) in patients with
relapsed or refractory acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Proc ASCO 1997;16:A8.
105. Nadler LM, Stashenko P, Hardy R, et al. Serotherapy of a patient with a monoclonal antibody directed against a human lymphoma-associated antigen. Cancer Res 1980;40:3147.
106. Miller RA, Maloney DG, Levy R, et al. Treatment of B-cell lymphoma with monoclonal anti-idiotype antibody. Med Intelligence 1982;306:517.
107. Vuist WM, Levy R, Maloney DG. Lymphoma regression induced by monoclonal anti-idiotypic antibodies correlates with their ability to induce Ig signal transduction and is not prevented by tumor
expression of high levels of bcl-2 protein. Blood 1994;83:899.
108. Swisher EM, Shawler DL, Collins HA, et al. Expression of shared idiotypes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and small lymphocytic lymphoma. Blood 1991;77:1977.
109. DeNardo GL, DeNardo SJ, Goldstein DS, et al. Maximum-tolerated dose, toxicity, and efficacy of (131)I-Lym-1 antibody for fractionated radioimmunotherapy of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:3246.
110. Bowen AL, Zomas A, Emmett E, et al. Subcutaneous CAMPATH-1H in fludarabine-resistant/relapsed chronic lymphocytic and B-prolymphocytic leukaemia. Br J Haematol 1997;96:617.
111. Lundin J, Osterborg A, Brittinger G, et al. CAMPATH-1H monoclonal antibody in therapy for previously treated low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: a phase II multicenter study. J Clin Oncol
1988;16:3257.
112. Hale G, Zhang MJ, Bunjes D, et al. Improving the outcome of bone marrow transplantation by using CD52 monoclonal antibodies to prevent graft-versus-host disease and graft rejection. Blood
1998;92:4581.
113. Naparstek E, Delukina M, Or R, et al. Engraftment of marrow allografts treated with Campath-1 monoclonal antibodies. Exp Hematol 1999;27:1210.
114. Novitzky N, Thomas V, Hale G, Waldmann H. Ex-vivo depletion of T-cells from bone marrow grafts with Campath-1 in acute leukemia: graft-versus-host disease and graft-versus-leukemia
effect. Transplantation 1999;67:620.
115. Hale G, Waldmann H. Risks of developing Epstein-Barr virusrelated lymphoproliferative disorders after T-cell-depleted marrow transplants. Blood 1998;91:3079.
116. Maloney DG, Grillo-López AJ, Bodkin DJ, et al. IDEC-C2B8: results of a phase I multiple-dose trial in patients with relapsed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:3266.
117. Maloney DG, Grillo-López AJ, White CA, et al. IDEC-C2B8 (rituximab) anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody therapy in patients with relapsed low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood
1997;90:2188.
118. McLaughlin P, Grillo-López AJ, Link B, et al. Rituximab chimeric anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody therapy for relapsed indolent lymphoma: half of patients respond to a four-dose treatment
program. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2825.
119. Berinstein NL, Grillo-López AJ, White CA, et al. Association of serum rituximab (IDEC-C2B8) concentration and anti-tumor response in the treatment of recurrent low-grade or follicular
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Ann Oncol 1998;9:995.
120. Piro LD, White CA, Grillo-López AJ, et al. Extended rituximab (anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody) therapy for relapsed or refractory low-grade or follicular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Ann Oncol
1999;10:619.
121. Coiffier B, Haioun C, Ketterer N, et al. Rituximab (anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody) for the treatment of patients with relapsing or refractory aggressive lymphoma: a multicenter phase II study.
Blood 1998;92:1927.
122. Byrd JC, Wasenko JK, Maneatis TA, et al. Rituximab therapy in hematologic malignancy patients with increased circulating blood tumor cells: association with increased infusion-related side
effects and rapid tumor lysis. Blood 1998;92[Suppl 1]:106a.
123. Jensen M, Winkler U, Manze O, Diehl V, Engert A. Rapid tumor lysis in a patient with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia and lymphocytosis treated with an anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody
(IDEC-C2B8, rituximab). Ann Hematol 1998;77:89.
124. Davis TA, Czerwinski DK, Levy R. Therapy of B-cell lymphoma with anti-CD20 antibodies can result in the loss of CD20 antigen expression. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:611.

125. Czuczman MS, Grillo-López AJ, White CA, et al. Treatment of patients with low-grade B-cell lymphoma with the combination of chimeric anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody and CHOP
chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:268.
126. Demidem A, Lam T, Alas S, et al. Chimeric anti-CD20 (IDEC-C2B8) monoclonal antibody sensitizes a B cell lymphoma cell line to cell killing by cytotoxic drugs. Cancer Biother Radiopharm
1997;12:177.
127. Gribben J, Freedman A, Woo S, et al. All advanced stage non-Hodgkin's lymphomas with a polymerase chain reaction amplifiable breakpoint of bcl-2 have residual cells containing the bcl-2
rearrangement at evaluation and after treatment. Blood 1991;78:3275.
128. Shih LB, Lu HH, Xuan H, Goldenberg DM. Internalization and intracellular processing of an anti-B-cell lymphoma monoclonal antibody, LL2. Int J Cancer 1994;56:538.
129. Press OW, Eary JF, Appelbaum FR, et al. Phase II trial of 131I-B1 (anti-CD20) antibody therapy with autologous stem cell transplantation for relapsed B cell lymphomas. Lancet 1995;346:336.
130. Nikula TK, McDevitt MR, Finn RD, et al. Alpha-emitting bismuth cyclohexylbenzyl DTPA constructs of recombinant humanized anti-CD33 antibodies: pharmacokinetics, bioactivity, toxicity and
chemistry. J Nucl Med 1999;40:166.
131. Kaminski MS, Zasadny KR, Francis IR, et al. Iodine-131-anti-B1 radioimmunotherapy for B-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1974.
132. Liu SY, Eary JF, Petersdorf SH, et al. Follow-up of relapsed B-cell lymphoma patients treated with iodine-131 labeled anti-CD20 antibody and autologous stem cell rescue. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:3270.
133. Knox SJ, Goris ML, Trisler K, et al. Yttrium-90-labeled anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody therapy of recurrent B-cell lymphoma. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:457.
134. DeNardo GL, DeNardo SJ, Lamborn KR, et al. Low-dose fractionated radioimmunotherapy for B-cell malignancies using 131I-Lym-1 antibody. Cancer Biother Radiopharm 1998;13:239.
135. DeNardo GL, DeNardo SJ, Goldstein DS, et al. Maximum-tolerated dose, toxicity, and efficacy of (131)I-Lym-1 antibody for fractionated radioimmunotherapy of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:3246.
136. Jurcic JG, Caron PC, Nikula TK, et al. Radiolabeled anti-CD33 monoclonal antibody M195 for myeloid leukemia. Cancer Res 1995;55[Suppl]:5908s.
137. Jurcic JG, Divgi CR, McDevitt MR, et al. Potential for myeloablation with yttrium-90-labeled HuM195 (anti-CD33): a phase I trial in advanced myeloid leukemias. Blood 1998;92:613A.
138. Jurcic JG, McDevitt MR, Sgouros G, et al. Phase I trial of targeted alpha-particle therapy for myeloid leukemias with bismuth-213-HuM195 (anti-CD33). Proc ASCO 1999;18:7A.
139. Ball ED, Selvaggi K, Hurd D, et al. Phase I clinical trial of serotherapy in patients with acute myeloid leukemia with an immunoglobulin M monoclonal antibody to CD15. Clin Cancer Res
1995;1:965.
140. Caron PC, Dumont L, Scheinberg DA. Supersaturating infusional humanized anti-CD33 monoclonal antibody HuM195 in myelogenous leukemia. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:1421.
141. Stirpe F, Olsnes SE, Phil A. Gelonin, a new inhibitor of protein synthesis, nontoxic to intact cells. J Biol Chem 1980;255:6947.
142. Pagilaro LC, Liu B, Munker R, et al. Humanized M195 monoclonal antibody conjugated to recombinant gelonin: an anti-CD33 immunotoxin with antileukemic activity. Clin Cancer Res
1998;4:1971.
143. Waldmann TA, White JD, Goldman CK, et al. The interleukin-2 receptor: a target for monoclonal antibody treatment of human T-cell lymphotrophic virus Iinduced adult T-cell leukemia. Blood
1993;82:1701.
144. Junghans RP, Carrasquillo JA, Waldmann TA. Impact of antigenemia on the bioactivity of infused anti-Tac antibody: implication for dose selection in antibody immunotherapies. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1998;95:1752.
145. Carter P, Presta L, Gorman CM, et al. Humanization of an anti-p185HER2 antibody for human cancer therapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:4285.
146. Cobleigh MA, Vogel CL, Tripathi D, et al. Efficacy and safety of Herceptin (humanized anti-HER2 antibody) as a single agent in 222 women with HER2 overexpression who relapsed following
chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer. Proc ASCO 1998;17:A376.
147. Pegram MD, Lipton A, Hayes DF, et al. Phase II study of receptor-enhanced chemosensitivity using recombinant humanized anti-p185 HER2/neu monoclonal antibody plus cisplatin in patients with
HER2/neu-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer refractory to chemotherapy treatment. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2659.
148. Slamon D, Shak S, Paton V, et al. Addition of Herceptin (humanized anti-HER2 antibody) to first line chemotherapy for HER2 overexpressing metastatic breast cancer (HER2+/MBC) markedly
increases anticancer activity: a randomized multinational controlled phase III trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:A377.
149. Ewer MS, Gibbs HR, Swafford J, Benjamin RS. Cardiotoxicity in patients receiving Trastuzomab (Herceptin): primary toxicity, synergistic or sequential stress, or surveillance artifact? Semin
Oncol 1999;26[Suppl 12]:96.
150. Sears HF, Herlyn D, Steplewski Z, Koprowski H. Effects of monoclonal antibody immunotherapy on patients with gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma. J Biol Response Mod 1984;3:138.
151. Paul AR, Engstrom PF, Weiner LM, et al. Treatment of advanced measurable or evaluable pancreatic carcinoma with 17-1A murine monoclonal antibody alone or in combination with
5-fluorouracil, Adriamycin, and mitomycin (FAM). Hybridoma 1986;5[Suppl 1]:S171.
152. Sindelar WF, Maher MM, Herlyn D, et al. Trial of therapy with monoclonal antibody 17-1A in pancreatic carcinoma: preliminary results. Hybridoma 1986;5[Suppl 1]:125.
153. Sears HF, Herlyn D, Steplewski Z, Koprowski H. Phase II clinical trial of a murine monoclonal antibody cytotoxic for gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res 1985;45:5910.
154. Weiner LM, Harvey E, Padavic-Shaller K, et al. Phase II multicenter evaluation of prolonged murine monoclonal antibody 17-1A therapy in pancreatic carcinoma. J Immunother 1993;13:110.
155. Ragnhammar P, Fragerberg J, Frodin JE, et al. Effect of the monoclonal antibody 17-1A and granulocyte monocyte colony stimulating factor in patients with colorectal carcinoma. Long lasting
complete remissions can be induced. Int J Cancer 1993;53:751.
156. Tempero MA, Sivinski C, Steplewski Z, et al. Phase II trial of interferon gamma and monoclonal antibody 17-1A in pancreatic cancer: biologic and clinical effects. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:2019.
157. Frodin JE, Faxas ME, Hagstrom B, et al. Induction of anti-idiotypic (ab2) and anti-anti-idiotypic (ab3) antibodies in patients treated with the mouse monoclonal antibody 17-1A (ab1). Relation to
the clinical outcomean important antitumoral effector function? Hybridoma 1991;10:421.
158. Hanzawa Y, Tsujisaki M, Tokuchi S, et al. Detection of xenogeneic anti-idiotypic antibodies specific to murine monoclonal antibody 17-1A in patients with gastrointestinal cancer. Tumour Biol
1992;13:226.
159. Fagerberg J, Frodin JE, Wigzell H, Mellstedt H. Induction of an immune network cascade in cancer patients treated with monoclonal antibodies (ab1). I. May induction of ab-1 reactive T cells
and anti-anti-idiotypic antibodies (ab3) lead to tumor regression after mAb therapy? Cancer Immunol Immunother 1993;37:264.
160. Ragnhammar P, Fagerberg J, Frodin JE, et al. Granulocyte monocyte colony stimulating factor augments the induction of antibodies, especially anti-idiotypic antibodies to therapeutic
monoclonal antibodies. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1995;40:367.
161. Fagerberg J, Frodin JE, Ragnhammar P, et al. Induction of an immune network cascade in cancer patients treated with monoclonal antibodies (ab1). II. Is induction of anti-idiotype reactive T
cells (T3) of importance for tumor response to mAb therapy? Cancer Immunol Immunother 1994;38:149.
162. Reithmuller G, Schneider-Gadicke E, Schlimok G, et al. Randomized trial of monoclonal antibody for adjuvant therapy of resected Dukes' C colorectal carcinoma. Lancet 1994;343:1177.
163. Reithmuller G, Holz E, Schlimok G, et al. Monoclonal antibody therapy for resected Dukes' C colorectal cancer: seven-year outcome of a multicenter randomized trial. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:1788.
164. Nicholson S, Gooden CS, Hird V, et al. Radioimmunotherapy after chemotherapy compared to chemotherapy alone in the treatment of advanced ovarian cancer: a matched analysis. Oncol
Rep 1998;5:223.
165. Handgretinger R, Anderson K, Lang P, et al. A phase I study of human/mouse chimeric anti-ganglioside GD2 antibody ch 14.18 in patients with neuroblastoma. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:261.
166. Yu AL, Uttenreuther-Fischer MM, Huang CS, et al. Phase I trial of human-mouse chimeric anti-disialoganglioside monoclonal antibody ch14.18 in patients with refractory neuroblastoma and
osteosarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2169.
167. Murray JL, Cunningham JE, Brewer H, et al. Phase I trial of murine monoclonal antibody 14.G2a administered by prolonged intravenous infusion in patients with neuroectodermal tumors. J Clin
Oncol 1994;12:184.
168. Cheung NK, Kushner BH, Yeh SDJ, Larson SM. 3F8 monoclonal antibody treatment of patients with stage 4 neuroblastoma: a phase II study. Int J Oncol 1998;12:1299.
169. Cheung NK, Kushner BH, Cheung IY, et al. Anti-G(D2) antibody treatment of minimal residual stage 4 neuroblastoma diagnosed at more than 1 year of age. J Clin Oncol 1998; 16:3053.
170. Klingebiel T, Bader P, Bares R, et al. Treatment of neuroblastoma stage 4 with 131I-meta-iodobenzylguanidine high-dose chemotherapy and immunotherapy. A pilot study. Eur J Cancer
1998;34:1398.
171. Vadhan-Raj S, Cordon-Cardo C, Carswell E, et al. Phase I trial of a mouse monoclonal antibody against GD3 ganglioside in patients with melanoma: induction of inflammatory responses at
tumor sites. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1636.
172. Soiffer RJ, Chapman PB, Murray C, et al. Administration of R24 monoclonal antibody and low-dose interleukin 2 for malignant melanoma. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:17.
173. Alpaugh RK, von Mehren M, Palazzo I, et al. Phase IB trial for malignant melanoma using R24 monoclonal antibody, interleukin-2/a-interferon. Med Oncol 1998;15:191.
174. Minasian LM, Yao TJ, Steffens TA, et al. A phase I study of anti-GD3 ganglioside monoclonal antibody R24 and recombinant human macrophage-colony stimulating factor in patients with
metastatic melanoma. Cancer 1995;75:2251.
175. Chachoua A, Oratz R, Liebes L, et al. Phase Ib trial of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor combined with murine monoclonal antibody R24 in patients with metastatic melanoma.
J Immunother 1994;16:132.
176. Albertini MR, Hank JA, Schiller JH, et al. Phase IB trial of chimeric antidisialoganglioside antibody plus interleukin 2 for melanoma patients. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:1277.
177. Murray JL, Kleinerman ES, Jia SF, et al. Phase Ia/Ib trial of anti-GD2 chimeric monoclonal antibody 14.18 (ch 14.18) and recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(rhGM-CSF) in metastatic melanoma. J Immunother 1996;19:206.
178. Bigner DD, Brown MT, Friedman AH, et al. Iodine-131-labeled antitenascin monoclonal antibody 81C6 treatment of patients with recurrent malignant gliomas: phase I trial results. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:2202.
179. Helfrich MH, Nesbitt SA, Lakkakorpi PT, et al. Beta 1 integrins and osteoclast function: involvement in collagen recognition and bone resorption. Bone 1996;19:317.
180. Weiner LM, Moldofsky P, Gatenby R, et al. Antibody delivery and effector cell activation in a phase II trial of recombinant interferon-gamma and the murine monoclonal antibody CO17-1A in
advanced colorectal carcinoma. Cancer Res 1988;48:2568.

SECTION 20.6 Antiangiogenesis Agents
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 20.6
Antiangiogenesis Agents
JUDAH FOLKMAN
Introduction
Guidelines to the Biologic Basis of Antiangiogenic Therapy
Tumors and their Metastases are Angiogenesis-Dependent
Microvascular Endothelial Cells Control a Tumor's Supply of Oxygen, Nutrients, and Growth Factors
Antiangiogenic Therapy Operates over a Wide Therapeutic Window
Total Angiogenic Output of a Tumor May Determine its Response to Antiangiogenic Therapy
Antiangiogenic Therapy May Bypass Acquired Drug Resistance
Antiangiogenic Therapy is Independent of Tumor Cell Cycle
Microvessel Density is a Useful Prognostic Indicator but May Not be a Useful Indicator of Efficacy of Antiangiogenic Therapy
Stable Disease or Tumor Dormancy can be Sustained by Blocked Angiogenesis
Leukemia is Angiogenesis Dependent
Clinical Patterns of Metastasis Presentation May Be Angiogenesis Dependent
Cytotoxic Chemotherapy May be Angiogenesis-Dependent
Clinical Trials of Angiogenesis Inhibitors
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The second half of the twentieth century witnessed an explosion of knowledge about the cause and development of cancer at the biochemical, genetic, and molecular
levels. Numerous studies have revealed the elegant wiring plan of the normal cell and have uncovered the subtle but complex events that transform normal cells into
the neoplastic state. Virtually all of these studies have focused on the cancer cell. Therapy also has been directed almost exclusively against the cancer cell. When
taken together, these results give hope that eventually molecular solutions to the cancer problem will be found. An example of such a molecular therapy would be
some manipulation that would revert cancer cells to normal cells or would selectively cause cancer cells to undergo apoptosis without damage to normal cells.
However, no one knows how far off such therapy is, or if it is even possible. I do not believe that we can ever paint a complete picture of cancer by the reductionist
approach alone.
Therefore, it has seemed prudent to explore the cancer problem at a different level. Linus Pauling taught his students that an intractable problem may yield to a
change in the level of exploration. 1 Furthermore, Alvin Feinstein emphasizes that, in medical practice, a disconnect often exists between understanding the cause of a
disease and having effective therapy for it. 2 Compare, for example, appendicitis to sickle cell anemia. In the former, epidemiology, genetics, and direct cause are
poorly understood, but the cure rate is very high. In the latter, a precise molecular cause is known, but therapy is unsatisfactory.
To examine the cancer problem at a different level, consider a cancer cell that has progressed through numerous checkpoints and through a long series of mutations
so that many of its oncogenes are overexpressed and its suppressor genes are mutated or deleted. Assuming that this cancer cell is immortal in vitro and tumorigenic
in vivo, we can ask, Are these neoplastic properties necessary and sufficient for a cancer cell to expand into a population that is detectable, symptomatic, or lethal?
Experimental evidence now argues that these neoplastic properties may only be necessary, but not sufficient for a cancer cell to be lethal. This evidence shows that
the microvascular endothelial cell acts as a critical control point in tumor growth and dictates to a microscopic in situ population of tumor cells whether they can
continue to expand the primary tumor, metastasize, or kill their host. 3,4 and 5 In the final analysis, the capacity of a tumor to switch to the angiogenic phenotype and to
recruit its own private blood supply determines whether a tumor remains undetectable or becomes symptomatic and potentially lethal. Nonangiogenic tumor cells may
not be inherently dangerous; they usually remain in situ.
Because it is now understood that the microvascular endothelial cell is a critical determinant of tumor growth in vivo, this cell has become a second target for cancer
therapy. It is the target for which novel angiogenesis inhibitors have been developed as therapeutic anticancer agents. At this writing, at least 20 angiogenesis
inhibitors are currently in clinical trials in the United States, and seven of them are in phase III (see Clinical Trials of Angiogenesis Inhibitors , later in this chapter) ( Fig.
20.6-1).

FIGURE 20.6-1. Angiogenesis inhibitors in clinical trial in the United States as of April 2000. bFGF, basic fibroblast growth factor; EGF, epidermal growth factor; FGF,
fibroblast growth factor; IFN, interferon; IP-10, interferon-g–inducible protein-10; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; NCI, National Cancer Institute; VEGF, vascular
endothelial growth factor. (Data from the National Cancer Institute.)

GUIDELINES TO THE BIOLOGIC BASIS OF ANTIANGIOGENIC THERAPY
Because a wide variety of different angiogenesis inhibitors are currently being evaluated in clinical trials for patients with advanced cancer in the United States, the
United Kingdom, and Europe, it is important for clinicians to understand certain fundamental principles of the angiogenic process that form the scientific basis of this
translation from laboratory to clinical application.
TUMORS AND THEIR METASTASES ARE ANGIOGENESIS-DEPENDENT
I first proposed the hypothesis that tumor growth is angiogenesis-dependent in 1971. 6,7 In its simplest terms, this hypothesis predicted that, beyond the size of a
microscopic in situ cancer in humans or after “tumor take” in experimental animals, every further increase in tumor population must be preceded by the growth of new
microvessels that converge on the tumor. Since 1971, many experiments that support this hypothesis have been reported. The first evidence was mostly indirect,
because it was based on in vitro studies of tumor spheroids, measurements of the prevascular stage of tumors in vivo, and mechanical separation of tumors from their
vascular bed. 8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25 and 26 Direct experimental evidence did not appear until the late 1980s, when it first became possible to inhibit
angiogenesis by biochemical and molecular methods. These experiments were based on: (1) administration of molecules that inhibited angiogenesis specifically or
selectively, (2) blockade of tumor-derived angiogenic factors, (3) transfection of dominant-negative receptors for an angiogenic factor into endothelial cells in the
tumor bed, (4) transfection of angiogenesis inhibitor proteins into tumor cells, and (5) antiangiogenic therapy of spontaneous tumors in transgenic

mice.27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37, 38,39,40 and 41
Three decades after publication of the hypothesis that tumors are angiogenesis-dependent, elegant proofs continue to be published. Two such studies appeared in
1999. One of these is a gene knockout experiment. 42 Mice deficient in one allele of Id1 and two alleles of Id3 are unable to mount an angiogenic response to 100
million inoculated tumor cells. The tumors take, but remain dormant and nonangiogenic and do not metastasize. Placental angiogenesis is unaffected. In a second
experiment, human cancer cells are transfected with thrombospondin-1 and/or thrombospondin-2, both of which inhibit angiogenesis. The transfected cells are then
inoculated into immunodeficient mice. 43 Tumor growth is inhibited in direct proportion to the level of thrombospondin secreted. Tumor cell apoptosis is inversely
proportional to tumor angiogenesis (i.e., apoptosis increases as angiogenesis decreases). Tumor cell proliferation, however, is independent of angiogenesis and
apoptosis (Fig. 20.6-2).

FIGURE 20.6-2. Transfection of squamous cell carcinoma cells by thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), thrombospondin 2 (TSP-2), or both. PCNA, proliferating cell nuclear
antigen. (From ref. 43, with permission.)

MICROVASCULAR ENDOTHELIAL CELLS CONTROL A TUMOR'S SUPPLY OF OXYGEN, NUTRIENTS, AND GROWTH FACTORS
Oxygen and Nutrients
Virtually every cell in the body lives adjacent to a capillary endothelial cell, or at least a distance no greater than the oxygen diffusion limit of 100 to 200 µm. 20 This
arrangement permits perfused vessels to deliver oxygen and nutrients and to remove catabolites over short distances. This proximity of tissue cells to microvessels is
accomplished by at least three common configurations and some rare configurations ( Fig. 20.6-3). One category includes cells such as pancreatic islet cells, fat cells,
and certain skeletal muscle cells, which are surrounded by two or more microvessels. A second category includes hepatic cells and cells of other solid organs. Each
hepatic cell abuts a microvessel on one side and another hepatocyte on the other side. Epithelial cells exposed to the environment make up a third category (e.g.,
keratinocytes in the skin; mucosal cells in the gastrointestinal tract and bladder; and cells that line a wide variety of ducts, such as those in the breast or prostate).
These cells exist in an avascular compartment (e.g., epidermis) separated from underlying microvessels (e.g., in the dermis) by a basement membrane. The basal
cells lying on the basement membrane are closest to the microvessels beneath it and receive oxygen and nutrients across a short distance defined by the limits of
oxygen diffusion (100 to 200 µm). However, the cells in the upper layers lie beyond the oxygen diffusion limit and are undergoing apoptosis. In contrast, tumor cells
form multiple layers that encircle a microvessel until these cell layers (three to six or more), reach the absolute limits of oxygen diffusion. In the outermost cell layer,
tumor cells are completely anoxic and are dying. This has been quantified by infrared spectroscopy in transparent skin chambers in experimental animals. 20 A
gradient of tumor cell proliferation also is present in these multiple layers. The highest rate of proliferation is found in tumor cells closest to the microvessel. 19 Tumor
cells may continue to proliferate and die in this in situ configuration, but they cannot expand the tumor mass beyond 0.2 to 2.0 mm until they have induced endothelial
cell migration, proliferation, and sprout formation. 44,45 Therefore, a general rule is that any expansion of tumor mass beyond a microscopic size is dependent on two
cell compartments growing in tandem: tumor cells and microvascular endothelial cells.

FIGURE 20.6-3. Common patterns of normal tissue cells (A,B,C) illustrating how they are apposed to capillaries in comparison to tumor cells ( D).

Growth Factors and Antiapoptotic Factors
Endothelial cells not only guard the entry of oxygen and nutrients as well as the exit of catabolites, these cells also elaborate mitogens and survival factors for tumor
cells. This paracrine activity of microvascular endothelial cells includes the mobilization of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), platelet-derived growth factor,
insulin-like growth factor-1 and -2, and cytokines such as interleukin-6 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. At least 20 paracrine factors are known
to be produced by vascular endothelial cells. 46,47,48,49,50,51 and 52
Antiangiogenic therapy can cause either arrest or regression of growing blood vessels, 39,53 which would shut down the supply of endothelial-derived paracrine factors
and contribute to tumor cell apoptosis. In an in vitro experiment, the withdrawal of insulin-like growth factor-1 from myc-dependent lymphoma cells caused them to
undergo apoptosis. 54 Because one microvascular endothelial cell can support up to 5 to >100 tumor cells, antiangiogenic therapy directed solely against endothelial
cells is amplified in contrast to conventional chemotherapy, which attacks tumor cells directly. 55,56
ANTIANGIOGENIC THERAPY OPERATES OVER A WIDE THERAPEUTIC WINDOW
In animal studies and in human clinical trials, antiangiogenic therapy generally has fewer side effects than conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy. Endostatin, for
example, showed no detectable side effects in tumor-bearing animals. At this writing, no significant side effects have been reported during the first 6 months of a
phase I clinical trial of endostatin in five cancer centers.
Turnover Times of Endothelium in a Tumor Bed versus Endothelium in Other Regions of the Vasculature
One reason for this predicted lack of toxicity in antiangiogenic therapy is that, under normal conditions, vascular endothelial cells, which form a monolayer of
approximately 1000 m2, are not dividing. Their turnover time is more than 1000 days. 57,58 In contrast, bone marrow cells and mucosal cells in the gastrointestinal tract
are among the most rapidly proliferating cells in the body. Bone marrow cells undergo approximately 6 billion cell divisions per hour, and the entire bone marrow is
turned over in 5 days. During ovulation and in wound healing, microvascular endothelial cells may grow almost as rapidly as bone marrow cells, but for short periods
(days). During tumor angiogenesis, microvascular endothelial cells undergo sustained rapid proliferation that persists for as long as the tumor is present. In Figure

20.6-4, proliferation rates of cells in various human tissues are plotted as turnover times on the horizontal axis. Relative size of tissue mass is plotted on the vertical
axis. The tissues turning over most rapidly, in descending order, are gut mucosa, bone marrow, and skin. Cancer of the esophagus (depicted in blue) contains a
subset of tumor cells that are rapidly cycling, as well as tumor cells with slower cycling times and some tumor cells that are not cycling. Conventional cytotoxic
chemotherapy targets proliferating cells in a tumor but is limited by coincidental injury to normal tissues according to their individual proliferation rates. Rapidly cycling
tissues succumb first, then more slowly cycling tissues, as cytotoxic therapy continues.

FIGURE 20.6-4. Turnover times of various tissues plotted against tissue mass. (From ref. 58, with permission.)

A second limitation of conventional cytotoxic therapy is that only a small fraction of tumor cells are in cycle when chemotherapy is administered (e.g., in human
prostate cancer, fewer than 2% of cells are in cycle). 59 After these cells are killed, they may be replaced by cycling cells. Thus, repeated therapy is required, followed
by intervals off of the drug to recover bone marrow and gut. In contrast, antiangiogenic therapy, which either selectively or specifically targets the microvascular
endothelial cells in a tumor bed, restricts growth of all tumor cells, regardless of their cycling state.
Differences in Specificity of Angiogenesis Inhibitors
Because a drug is an angiogenesis inhibitor per se does not guarantee its freedom from side effects. Certain synthetic small molecules designed to inhibit an
angiogenic target (such as a receptor for an angiogenic factor), may induce side effects that are related to the structure of the molecule and not to its antiangiogenic
function.
The more specifically that an angiogenesis inhibitor targets growing endothelial cells to the exclusion of resting endothelium or other cell types, such as smooth
muscle or fibroblasts, the less is the risk of side effects. Although the pharmaceutical industry generally prefers to develop small synthetic molecules instead of
proteins as therapeutic anticancer agents, certain proteins are advantageous because they inhibit angiogenesis specifically. Endostatin is an example. This 20-kD
internal fragment of the carboxy-terminus of collagen XVIII is one of the most highly specific and least toxic of the known angiogenesis inhibitors. 37,39,60 Doses of
endostatin that produce tumor dormancy or tumor regression have no effect on pregnant mice. Normal babies are born and their growth is not delayed by treating
them with endostatin (R. Rohan and R. D'Amato, personal communication, 1998). Furthermore, wound healing is not delayed by endostatin (J. Marler, personal
communication, unpublished data, 1999). Therefore, endostatin is not only a specific angiogenesis inhibitor, but it also appears to be a selective inhibitor of tumor
neovascularization. Not all angiogenesis inhibitors are free of effects on healing wounds. For example, the fumagillin analogue TNP-470 slows tumor growth by
approximately 65% to 75% in a wide variety of tumor-bearing mice, 28 but it also delays wound healing by at least 15% to 17%. 61 In addition, it causes 5% weight loss.
Differences in Types of Angiogenesis Generated by the Host
Why should tumor and wound vessels respond differently to a specific angiogenesis inhibitor such as endostatin? A possible explanation is that these two types of
neovascular beds may be controlled in part by different ratios of certain endothelial regulatory proteins, such as the angiopoietins. Angiopoietin-1 is a 70-kD ligand
that binds to a specific tyrosine kinase expressed only on endothelial cells, called Tie2 (also called Tek).62,63,64,65 and 66 (A ligand for Tie1 has not been elucidated.) Like
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), angiopoietin-1 is an endothelial cell–specific growth factor. Angiopoietin-1 is not a direct endothelial mitogen in vitro, but it
induces endothelial cells to recruit pericytes and smooth muscle cells to appose themselves to the wall of a microvessel. This process can convert a capillary vessel
to a venule. Pericyte and smooth muscle recruitment are mediated by endothelial production of platelet-derived growth factor-BB (and probably other factors) when
Tie2 is activated by angiopoietin-1. 67 In mice that overexpress angiopoietin-1 in the skin, increased vascularization is noted. 65 The vessels are significantly larger than
normal and the skin is reddened. The vessels are not leaky and no skin edema is present, in contrast to dermal vessels of mice overexpressing VEGF. In transgenic
mice expressing both angiopoietin-1 and VEGF in the skin, dermal angiogenesis is increased in an additive manner, but the vessels do not leak. 68 This model closely
approximates angiogenesis in healing wounds (i.e., relatively nonleaky vessels coated by pericytes and some perivascular smooth muscle cells). In contrast, tumor
vessels are leaky and thin-walled with a paucity of pericytes. Angiopoietin-2 blocks the Tie-2 receptor on endothelial cells, 66 which initiates a chain of events so that
pericytes and smooth muscle cells are repelled. Angiopoietin-2 is produced by vascular endothelium in a tumor bed, but a putative “angiopoietin-inducing factor” from
tumor cells is unknown. Nevertheless, tumor vessels remain as thin “endothelial-lined tubes,” even though some of these microvessels reach the diameter of venules.
Angiopoietin-2 and VEGF acting together increase angiogenesis. However, if VEGF is antagonized or withdrawn at this point, endothelial cells may undergo
apoptosis and new microvessels can regress. 68 In summary, endostatin may regress tumor neovascularization that is under the control of angiopoietin-2, but it may
have little or no effect on wound neovascularization regulated by angiopoietin-1.
Differences in Angiogenic Response at Different Sites in the Host
In animals, it has been shown that the same tumor type may elicit different intensities of angiogenesis when implanted at different sites in the body. For example,
subcutaneous tumors implanted on the dorsum between the scapulae may grow at four times the rate of tumor implanted more caudally between the iliac crests. 69
Human colon cancers implanted subcutaneously (in immunodeficient mice) do not become neovascularized and remain dormant at a microscopic size. In contrast,
when these tumors are transplanted to the surface of the colon, they become neovascularized and grow to a large size. 70 This tumor uses bFGF as its major
angiogenic mediator but is unable to induce angiogenesis in the subcutaneous position because of high levels of interferon-b in the keratinocytes, which is not found
in the colon wall. Interferon-b, like its commercially available relative interferon-a, down-regulates bFGF messenger RNA and protein production by colon cancer
cells, 70 thus acting as a natural suppressor of any angiogenesis mediated by bFGF. In this experiment, the colon cancer cells lacked a receptor for bFGF. If these
findings apply to patients, metastases in different sites (e.g., lung vs. bone), may respond differently to a given dose of angiogenesis inhibitor. Conversely, different
doses of inhibitor may be required for inhibition of metastases at different organ sites.
Genetic Differences in Host Angiogenic Response
D'Amato and Rohan in our department of surgery at Children's Hospital, Boston, demonstrated that certain strains of mice (e.g., 129/SvImJ) produce an intense
angiogenic response to the same dose of an angiogenic protein (bFGF) that induces a low angiogenic response in mice of a different genetic background (SJL/J). 71
At least a tenfold difference is seen between the high and low responders, with other strains of mice responding in the middle range ( Fig. 20.6-5).

FIGURE 20.6-5. Genetic heterogeneity of angiogenesis in different genetic strains of mice. bFGF, basic fibroblast growth factor. (From ref. 71, with permission.)

TOTAL ANGIOGENIC OUTPUT OF A TUMOR MAY DETERMINE ITS RESPONSE TO ANTIANGIOGENIC THERAPY
When taken together, the experimental findings cited above indicate that the total angiogenic output of a tumor may be a sum of (1) the balance of positive and
negative angiogenic regulators that the tumor cells generate, (2) the genetic heterogeneity of angiogenic responsiveness in the host, and (3) the angiogenic
heterogeneity at the tumor site. If these results are extrapolated to cancer patients, metastases in one site (e.g., lungs) may respond to a given angiogenesis inhibitor
before metastases at another site (e.g., bone) in the same patient. Furthermore, two patients with the same tumor type may respond differently to a given dose of an
angiogenesis inhibitor. Therefore, in principle, optimal therapeutic efficacy would be achieved by administering antiangiogenic therapy at a dose that would match the
total angiogenic output of the tumor. In practice, however, it is not currently feasible to determine the total angiogenic output of a tumor. Therefore, those
angiogenesis inhibitors that have little or no side effects could possibly be increased to whatever dose level causes a tumor response (i.e., stable disease or tumor
regression).
ANTIANGIOGENIC THERAPY MAY BYPASS ACQUIRED DRUG RESISTANCE
The genetic instability and high mutation rate of tumor cells is responsible, in part, for the frequent emergence of acquired drug resistance with conventional cytotoxic
anticancer therapy. However, vascular endothelial cells, like bone marrow cells, are genetically stable and have a low mutation rate. Therefore, Kerbel 72 proposed a
hypothesis in 1991 that antiangiogenic therapy would be a strategy to bypass drug resistance. Subsequently, my laboratory validated this concept in tumor-bearing
mice treated with endostatin.39
ANTIANGIOGENIC THERAPY IS INDEPENDENT OF TUMOR CELL CYCLE
Conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy is generally cell cycle–dependent. Indolent tumors with a low percentage of cycling tumor cells are more refractory to cytotoxic
chemotherapy than are rapidly growing tumors. This property is thought to explain the high efficacy of chemotherapy in fast-growing mouse tumors compared to the
relatively low efficacy in adult human tumors, with success against pediatric tumors viewed as somewhere in between. It has been widely assumed that antiangiogenic
therapy would be similar to chemotherapy. Experimental studies, however, reveal just the opposite. Slowly growing tumors in mice require lower doses of
antiangiogenic therapy to bring them to dormancy than do faster growing tumors, which require higher doses ( Fig. 20.6-6).73

FIGURE 20.6-6. The effect of antiangiogenic therapy on slowly growing (RT4) (A,B) versus rapidly growing (MGH-U1) (C,D) human bladder cancer in mice.

Furthermore, during tumor inhibition by antiangiogenic therapy, tumor cell proliferation usually remains unchanged from the pretreated state. 14,44 When mice bearing
drug-sensitive tumors were treated with cyclophosphamide on a “conventional” schedule, tumor cell proliferation was significantly decreased 74 (see Cytotoxic
Chemotherapy May Be Angiogenesis Dependent, later in this chapter). However, when the same tumor was made highly resistant to cyclophosphamide, the tumor
cell proliferation rate did not decrease, despite the fact that tumors regressed under an “antiangiogenic” schedule of the same drug.
MICROVESSEL DENSITY IS A USEFUL PROGNOSTIC INDICATOR BUT MAY NOT BE A USEFUL INDICATOR OF EFFICACY OF ANTIANGIOGENIC THERAPY
The first quantitative method for histologic grading of tumor angiogenesis was reported by Steven Brem and colleagues 75 from my laboratory in 1972. They correlated
neovascularization in human brain tumors with tumor grade. It was not until 13 years later that a second report describing histologic quantification of tumor
angiogenesis was published. 76 This report was followed 3 years later by the first report of the use of tumor vascularity as a prognostic marker (cutaneous
melanoma).77 In 1991, Noel Weidner and I used specific antiendothelial antibodies to highlight tumor vasculature and showed that microvessel density was a
prognostic marker for human breast cancer. 78 Since then, the majority of reports (52 different studies) have confirmed that microvessel density is a powerful and often
an independent prognostic indicator for many different types of human cancer. However, other reports fail to show that microvessel density is a prognostic indicator
(seven studies), especially for certain types of tumors. Many of the negative reports may be methodological. Others may result from poorly understood biologic
differences, such as the possible coexistence of angiogenesis inhibitors and stimulators in certain tumors. Gasparini and Harris 79 analyzed the variables in
quantitation of tumor angiogenesis in histologic sections, and they have summarized the reports up to 1999. These reports are also summarized in tabular form. 4 The
basis of the prognostic value of quantifying the areas of highest microvessel density (“hot spots”) in a tumor may be that these areas represent the most angiogenic
clones of tumor cells. Such clones have the highest probability of being angiogenic metastases.
However, because microvessel density of a tumor is a prognostic marker for the risk of metastasis or death of a patient does not necessarily make it a useful indicator
of efficacy of antiangiogenic therapy. Microvessel density is largely determined by intercapillary distance, which itself is governed by the thickness of the cuff of tumor
cells surrounding a microvessel (50 to 200 µm). In experimental animals, microvessel density may remain constant as a tumor is regressing under antiangiogenic
therapy. Despite ongoing capillary dropout in a shrinking tumor mass, residual tumor cells can assemble around the remaining microvessels, thus leaving the
microvessel density relatively unchanged. Furthermore, microvessel density may not distinguish between certain benign and malignant tumors. For example, normal
human pituitary has a higher microvessel density than a pituitary adenoma, which has a higher microvessel density than a pituitary carcinoma. 80 One explanation of
this apparent paradox is that, in most normal tissues, the perivascular cuff is usually one or two cells thick. In some normal tissues, therefore, intercapillary distance is
small, leading to a high microvessel density. In contrast, in many tumors the perivascular cuff thickness increases as tumor cells adapt to lower oxygen tension and
survive at an increasing distance from the nearest open capillary. The cuff thickness of a murine breast carcinoma (MCa-IV) reaches 100 µm or more, which
approaches the limit of oxygen diffusion. 81 For other tumors, such as breast carcinoma, microvessel density is significantly higher in the cancer than in normal
breast.78,82 In certain animal tumors, angiogenic output appears to exceed the growth capacity of the tumor cells so that treatment with an angiogenesis inhibitor
initially induces a significant decrease in microvessel density as tumor growth is inhibited or arrested. Because all of these variables are not fully understood, it may

not be prudent at this time to use microvessel density as a surrogate marker for efficacy of antiangiogenic therapy.
STABLE DISEASE OR TUMOR DORMANCY CAN BE SUSTAINED BY BLOCKED ANGIOGENESIS
Increasing evidence shows that experimental tumors can be maintained at a stable size or at a microscopic dormant size by uninterrupted antiangiogenic therapy or
by blocked angiogenesis. 35,36 and 37,39,42,43 For the purpose of this chapter, stable disease may be defined as tumor that has stopped expanding but is grossly visible or
radiologically detectable. A definition of tumor dormancy is nonexpanding tumor that can be detected only microscopically. In either event, recruitment of new vessels
is sufficiently restricted that tumor cells surviving on residual vessels exist in a steady state of proliferation and apoptosis that prohibits further expansion of tumor
mass, regardless of whether it is a primary tumor or a metastasis. It is too early to say whether prolonged stable disease or durable tumor dormancy can be achieved
by antiangiogenic therapy in cancer patients. Nevertheless, it may be prudent to include these states as possible end points in clinical protocols for antiangiogenic
therapy. A close approximation to tumor dormancy in experimental animals may be the regression of a recurrent giant cell tumor of the mandible by interferon-a
administered at a low dose of 3 million units per day for 1 year. 83 Interferon-a is an angiogenesis inhibitor by virtue of its ability to block overproduction of bFGF. 53,70
LEUKEMIA IS ANGIOGENESIS DEPENDENT
The conventional wisdom has been that, because leukemia is regarded as a liquid tumor, it does not require angiogenesis. However, in children with newly diagnosed
untreated acute lymphoblastic leukemia, bone marrow biopsies revealed a six- to sevenfold increase in microvessel density in the leukemic marrows in contrast to
control bone marrows from children undergoing staging evaluations at the time of diagnosis of solid tumor. 84 Microvessels in leukemic bone were surrounded by a
perivascular cuff of tumor cells not unlike solid tumors. This configuration was best observed by confocal microscopy. bFGF was approximately sevenfold higher in the
leukemic children than in controls. Interestingly, acute myeloid leukemia in adults is also associated with intense bone marrow neovascularization. 85,86,87 and 88 Cellular
levels of the angiogenic factor VEGF are abnormally elevated and provide an independent predictor of outcome. 89 The myeloproliferative diseases polycythemia vera,
chronic myelocytic leukemia, and myelofibrosis also have significantly increased neovascularity. 90 The close configuration of bone marrow cells and microvessels may
permit a two-way paracrine pathway between vascular endothelial cells, which can release granulocyte colony-stimulating factor 52 (a mitogen for bone marrow cells),
and bone marrow cells, which release bFGF (a mitogen for vascular endothelial cells). 91
These results show that leukemia (and other proliferative diseases of the bone marrow) are angiogenic. They do not, however, prove that leukemia is angiogenesis
dependent. The first experimental evidence in support of this concept is by Browder and colleagues, 74 who demonstrated that L1210 leukemia can be eradicated by
an antiangiogenic schedule of chemotherapy, but not by the conventional schedule of maximum tolerated dosing. Unpublished preliminary data by Browder suggests
that endostatin, a specific angiogenesis inhibitor, can significantly prolong survival of mice bearing murine leukemias.
These observations provide a conceptual basis for the potential future use of angiogenesis inhibitors in leukemia, perhaps first in patients for whom all conventional
therapy has been unsuccessful, and later as an adjunct to conventional therapy.
CLINICAL PATTERNS OF METASTASIS PRESENTATION MAY BE ANGIOGENESIS DEPENDENT
Cancer metastases may present at least four common clinical patterns and one rare pattern ( Fig. 20.6-7). These clinical observations have previously been unrelated
to each other, but we can now propose that they may all be explained on the basis of angiogenic principles. 92

FIGURE 20.6-7. Clinical presentation of metastases.

1. The patient whose metastases appear a few months after surgical removal of a primary tumor may have undergone a decrease in a circulating angiogenesis
inhibitor that was generated by the primary tumor. A murine Lewis lung carcinoma that generates angiostatin is a model of this type of clinical presentation. 35
2. When metastases are already present at the first diagnosis of a primary tumor (i.e., parallel tumor growth), the primary tumor may have lost or down-regulated
its ability to generate a circulating angiogenesis inhibitor and therefore is incapable of suppressing distant metastases. The experimental analogue would be a
subline of Lewis lung carcinoma that has lost the ability to generate angiostatin. 35
3. When metastases present in the absence of a primary tumor (i.e., a pattern known as the occult primary),93 this finding may be similar to mice in which tumor
cells are injected intravenously and are allowed to take as lung metastases before a primary tumor is implanted subcutaneously. 94 In this experiment, growth of
the subcutaneous tumor appears to be inhibited by the extensive metastatic growth. However, it has not yet been ascertained whether the inhibition was
mediated by a circulating inhibitor. In a patient presenting with this metastatic pattern, the total mass of metastases would need to expand faster than the primary
tumor to produce sufficient quantities of circulating angiogenesis inhibitor that could suppress the primary tumor.
4. The patient whose metastases do not appear until years after removal of the primary tumor may harbor dormant metastases that are not angiogenic for many
years but eventually switch to the angiogenic phenotype. This is more than just speculation, because we have developed an animal model that behaves exactly
in this way. The surgical removal of a B-16 melanoma from C57Bl/6 mice leaves numerous viable lung metastases of approximately 0.1 to 0.2 mm diameter that
are nonangiogenic and do not expand further throughout the life of the animal. However, the microscopic metastases can be stimulated to grow by trauma to the
lung or by transplanting a piece of lung to the subcutaneous tissue of another mouse (M. O'Reilly, unpublished data, 1998).
5. A rare event is for metastases to disappear completely or to undergo partial regression after removal of a renal cell carcinoma. An animal model that most
closely resembles this clinical pattern is V2 carcinoma in the rabbit. Lung metastases grow in parallel with a primary tumor in the thigh. However, lung
metastases regress after the primary is completely resected (H. Verheul, R. D'Amato, and D. Panigrahy, unpublished data, 1998). This finding does not appear
to be an immune reaction, because fresh tumor can be successfully grown in the same rabbit. One explanation may be that the metastases were dependent on
high production of a circulating angiogenic factor(s), such as the high tissue levels of bFGF that have been found to correlate with high mortality in renal
cancer.95
By describing these patterns of metastatic presentation in patients, I have tried to provide a possible unifying mechanism to explain them. The experimental evidence
for the animal models is discussed in more detail by Holmgren et al. 14 It must be emphasized that the similarity of such animal models to human patterns of metastatic
presentation does not prove that the human patterns are based on the same angiogenic principles as the animal models. However, this arrangement of the human
metastatic patterns will hopefully stimulate other investigators to find additional clinical or experimental evidence to support or refute the general hypothesis. Thus, the
heuristic value of Figure 20.6-7 is its potential inclusion in the design of clinical trials of angiogenesis inhibitors. These observations also provide an alternative to the
widely held assumption that tumor cells in a dormant microscopic tumor are not cycling and remain in G 0. In fact, dormant animal tumors with blocked angiogenesis
maintain a high apoptosis rate balanced by a high proliferation rate in the tumor cells. 14
CYTOTOXIC CHEMOTHERAPY MAY BE ANGIOGENESIS-DEPENDENT
Conventional cytotoxic chemotherapeutic drugs target tumor cells, but the effect of these drugs on microvascular endothelial cells has received little attention until the
1990s. Baguley et al. 96 demonstrated in 1991 that vinblastine caused more than 90% necrosis of drug-resistant solid tumors within hours but had no direct effect on
the tumor cells as demonstrated when the cells were grown as ascites. In 1992, Steiner showed that vincristine, vinblastine, doxorubicin, mitoxantrone, and etoposide

had short-term antiangiogenic activity in the chick embryo. 97 Also, in vitro antiendothelial effects have been reported for cyclophosphamide, 98 5-fluorouracil, 99 and
mitomycin C.99,100 Short-term in vivo antiangiogenic effects have been reported for paclitaxel, 101,102 and 103 6-methylmercaptopurine,104 tegafur,105
9-amino-20(S)-camptothecin, 106 topotecan,106 and combretastatin A-4.107,108
The question was raised by Browder as to why those cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents with antiangiogenic activity still induced acquired drug resistance. Specific
angiogenesis inhibitors do not usually induce drug resistance. 39,72 Vascular endothelial cells, like bone marrow cells, do not develop drug resistance, in part because
of their low mutation rate. Browder hypothesized that the usual dose-schedule regimen for chemotherapeutic agents is not conducive to sustained blockade of
angiogenesis. Conventional chemotherapy is traditionally administered at maximum tolerated doses followed by an extended treatment-free interval to permit recovery
of hematopoietic progenitors and gastrointestinal tract mucosa. Browder proposed, however, that during this off-therapy interval, microvascular endothelial cells in the
tumor bed could also resume growth and nourish tumor recurrence . Virtually all animal experiments show that antiangiogenic therapy is most successful when it is
given over short intervals (e.g., daily or every other day) without off-therapy gaps. Browder demonstrated that 5-fluorouracil and 6-mercaptopurine are nearly devoid
of antiangiogenic activity when given as bolus injections, but they reveal potent antiangiogenic efficacy when the same dose is given as a continuous infusion. 74
He further showed that a standard cytotoxic agent, cyclophosphamide, can be administered to animals bearing Lewis lung carcinoma at a dose and schedule that is
optimized for more sustained apoptosis of endothelial cells but not of tumor cells. This was named the antiangiogenic schedule. The conventional schedule is a
maximum tolerated dose administered every other day for three doses followed by 21 days off-therapy to rescue bone marrow. The antiangiogenic schedule consists
of a lower dose administered every 6 days. A drug-sensitive Lewis lung carcinoma became drug resistant on the conventional schedule and killed all mice, but it was
eradicated on the antiangiogenic schedule. No detectable tumor was detected after 657 days, when the animals reached the end of their natural lifespan. When the
tumor was made drug resistant before therapy, the antiangiogenic schedule suppressed tumor growth three times more effectively than the conventional schedule.
When an angiogenesis inhibitor, TNP-470, was added at a dose 86% lower than its effective dose alone, the drug-resistant tumor was eradicated in 84% of mice. 74
This finding is provocative because TNP-470 alone, even at its full dose, slows Lewis lung carcinoma by only 65% and cannot cause regression. Thus, a cytotoxic
chemotherapeutic agent administered in an antiangiogenic dose schedule can more effectively control tumor growth in mice, whether or not its tumor cells are drug
resistant, an improvement that has come from using new logic for an old drug. In summary, the new logic is that the antiangiogenic properties of certain conventional
cytotoxic agents are not revealed unless the drugs are administered frequently, without a prolonged off-therapy period. Frequent administration requires lower doses.
Klement et al. 109 in Robert Kerbel's laboratory have demonstrated this new logic with a different experimental system. For a commentary on antiangiogenic
chemotherapy, see Hanahan et al. 110 They showed that continuous low-dose therapy with vinblastine and an antibody to VEGF receptor-2 induced sustained
regression of neuroblastoma without overt toxicity. No evidence of acquired drug resistance was found throughout the 6 months' course of treatment.
When taken together, these results in mice may help to explain why some patients who are receiving long-term maintenance or even palliative chemotherapy continue
to have stable disease beyond the time that the tumor cells would have been expected to develop drug resistance. However, because conventional schedules of
combination chemotherapy have led to profound increases in the survival of children with cancer and have improved the survival of adults with certain types of cancer,
we do not believe that these clinical protocols should be changed for the sake of increasing the antiangiogenic efficacy of any given drug. 74 Formal clinical trials with
patients whose tumor has become refractory to conventional chemotherapy or radiotherapy will be necessary to find an optimum antiangiogenic dose and schedule
and to demonstrate whether it is an improvement over conventional chemotherapy dose schedules.

CLINICAL TRIALS OF ANGIOGENESIS INHIBITORS
At this writing, 20 angiogenesis inhibitors produced by the biotechnology and pharmaceutical industry are in clinical trial for patients with advanced metastatic cancer,
and seven are in phase III trials (see Fig. 20.6-1).
Three general strategies have been used to develop these inhibitors. A target molecule in the angiogenic pathway is identified and then is counteracted by a synthetic
inhibitor or by an antibody (e.g., an antibody to the angiogenic factor VEGF or its receptor). A second approach is to identify antiangiogenic activity in a drug
previously used for a different effect. Examples are thalidomide and interferon-a. Slamon showed that Herceptin has antiangiogenic activity in addition to its direct
antitumor effect on breast cancer cells: It interferes with the activity of at least three angiogenic proteins produced by breast cancer cells (D. Slamon, Plenary Address
before the American Association of Cancer Research, San Francisco, April 2000). A third approach is to discover specific endogenous angiogenesis inhibitors that
are already in the circulation or in matrix. In fact, several of these are internal fragments of larger proteins that have different functions. Some examples are
thrombospondin-1, a 140-kD protein under the control of p53 111; angiostatin, a 38-kD fragment of plasminogen 35; endostatin, a 20-kD fragment of collagen XVIII 37;
pigment epithelium-derived factor, a 50-kD serine protease inhibitor 112; antiangiogenic antithrombin III, a 53-kD cleaved or latent conformation of the 58-kD
antithrombin III 40; restin, a 22-kD internal fragment of collagen XV 113; canstatin, a 24-kD fragment of the a 2-chain of type IV collagen 114; and maspin, a 42-kD gene
product of normal breast epithelium, also under the control of p53 and silenced during breast cancer progression. 115,116 A longer list would include SPARC (secreted
protein acidic and rich in cysteine), 117 VEGI (vascular endothelial cell growth inhibitor),118 IP-10 (interferon- g–inducible protein-10), 119 interleukin-18, 120 and 16-kD
prolactin.121
The angiogenesis inhibitors operate by quite different mechanisms, which reveal that multiple pathways in the angiogenic process are vulnerable to attack. 4 As of this
writing, it is too soon to say which of the angiogenesis inhibitors currently in clinical trial will receive U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval. However, because
angiogenesis inhibitors can be added to chemotherapy, radiotherapy, immunotherapy, or gene therapy, as well as to each other, there is likely to be a future need for
a group of angiogenesis inhibitors from which physicians can choose. The eventual possibility also exists that antiangiogenic therapy may be used as long-term
maintenance therapy, like tamoxifen, to reduce the risk of recurrences.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Hager T. Force of nature: the life of Linus Pauling. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995.
2. Feinstein A. The intellectual crisis in clinical science: medaled models and muddled mettle. Perspect Biol Med 1987;30:215.
3. Folkman J. Angiogenesis in breast cancer. In: Bland KI, Copeland EM III. The breast, comprehensive management of benign and malignant diseases, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders,
1998:586.
4. Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis. In: Holland JF, Frei E III, Bast RC, et al., eds. Cancer medicine, 5th ed. Hamilton, Ontario: BC Decker, 2000.
5. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 2000;100:57.
6. Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis: therapeutic implications. N Engl J Med 1971;285:1182.
7. Folkman J. Anti-angiogenesis: new concept for therapy of solid tumors. Ann Surg 1972;175:408.
8. Algire GH, Chalkely HW, Legallais FY, Park H. Vascular reactions of normal and malignant tumors in vivo. I. Vascular reactions of mice to wounds and to normal and neoplastic transplants. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1945;6:73.
9. Folkman J. What is the evidence that tumors are angiogenesis dependent? J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:4.
10. Folkman J, Hochberg M. Self-regulation of growth in three dimensions. J Exp Med 1973;138:745.
11. Adam JA, Maggelakis AA. Diffusion of regulated growth characteristics of a spherical prevascular carcinoma. Bull Math Biol 1990;52:549.
12. Sutherland RM. Cell and environment interactions in tumor microregions: the multicell spheroid model. Science 1988;240:177.
13. Sutherland RM, McCredie JA, Inch WR. Growth of multicell spheroids in tissue culture as a model of nodular carcinomas. J Natl Cancer Inst 1971;46:113.
14. Holmgren L, O'Reilly MS, Folkman J. Dormancy of micrometastases: balanced proliferation and apoptosis in the presence of angiogenesis suppression. Nat Med 1995;1:149.
15. Gimbrone MA Jr, Cotran R, Leapman S, Folkman J. Tumor growth and neovascularization: an experimental model using rabbit cornea. J Natl Cancer Inst 1974;52:413.
16. Gimbrone MA Jr, Leapman S, Cotran RS, Folkman J. Tumor dormancy in vivo by prevention of neovascularization. J Exp Med 1972;136:261.
17. Brem S, Brem H, Folkman J, Finkelstein D, Patz A. Prolonged tumor dormancy by prevention of neovascularization in the vitreous. Cancer Res 1976;36:2807.
18. Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis factor. Cancer Res 1974;34:2109.
19. Tannock IF. Population kinetics of carcinoma cells, capillary endothelial cells, and fibroblasts in a transplanted mouse mammary tumor . Cancer Res 1970;30:2470.
20. Helmlinger G, Yuan F, Dellian M, Jain RK. Interstitial pH and pO 2 gradients in solid tumors in vivo: high-resolution measurements reveal a lack of correlation. Nat Med 1997;3(2):177.
21. Knighton D, Ausprunk D, Tapper D, Folkman J. Avascular and vascular phases of tumour growth in the chick embryo. Br J Cancer 1977;35:347.
22. Lien W, Ackerman NB. The blood supply of experimental liver metastases. II. A microcirculatory study of normal and tumor vessels of the liver with the use of perfused silicone rubber. Surgery
1970;68:334.
23. Folkman J, Watson K, Ingber D, Hanahan D. Induction of angiogenesis during the transition from hyperplasia to neoplasia. Nature 1989;339:58.
24. Thompson WD, Shiach KJ, Fraser RA, Mintosh LC, Simpson JG. Tumors acquire their vasculature by vessel incorporation, not vessel ingrowth. J Pathol 1987;151:323.
25. Skinner SA, Tutton PJ, O'Brien PE. Microvascular architecture of experimental colon tumors in the rat. Cancer Res 1990;50:2411.
26. Holash J, Maisonpierre PC, Compton D, et al. Vessel cooption, regression, and growth in tumors mediated by angiopoietins and VEGF. Science 1999;284:1994.
27. Ingber DM, Fujita T, Kishimoto S, et al. Synthetic analogues of fumagillin that inhibit angiogenesis and suppress tumour growth. Nature 1990;348:555.
28. Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis. In: Wells SA Jr, Sharp PA, eds. Accomplishments in cancer research. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1998:32.
29. Hori A, Sasada R, Matsutani E, et al. Suppression of solid tumor growth by immuno-neutralizing monoclonal antibody against human basic fibroblast growth factor. Cancer Res 1991;51:6180.
30. Kim KJ, Li B, Winer J, et al. Inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factorinduced angiogenesis suppresses tumour growth in vivo. Nature 1993;362:841.
31. Plate KH, Breier G, Millauer B, Ullrich A, Risau W. Up-regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor and its cognate receptors in a rat glioma model of tumor angiogenesis. Cancer Res

1993;53:5822.
32. Millauer B, Shawver LK, Plate KH, Risau W, Ullrich A. Glioblastoma growth inhibited in vivo by a dominant-negative Flk-1 mutant. Nature 1994;367:576.
33. Dameron KM, Volpert OV, Tainsky MA, Bouck N. Control of angiogenesis in fibroblasts by p53 regulation of thrombospondin-1. Science 1994;265:1582.
34. Brooks PC, Montgomery AMP, Rosenfeld M, et al. Integrin alpha v beta 3 antagonists promote tumor regression by inducing apoptosis of angiogenic blood vessels. Cell 1994;79:1157.
35. O'Reilly MS, Holmgren L, Shing Y, et al. Angiostatin: a novel angiogenesis inhibitor that mediates the suppression of metastases by a Lewis lung carcinoma. Cell 1994;79:315.
36. O'Reilly MS, Holmgren L, Chen C, Folkman J. Angiostatin induces and sustains dormancy of human primary tumors in mice. Nat Med 1996;2:689.
37. O'Reilly MS, Boehm T, Shing Y, et al. Endostatin: an endogenous inhibitor of angiogenesis and tumor growth. Cell 1997;88:277.
38. O'Reilly MS, Brem H, Folkman J. Treatment of murine hemangioendotheliomas with the angiogenesis inhibitor AGM-1470. J Pediatr Surg 1994;30:325.
39. Boehm T, Folkman J, Browder T, O'Reilly MS. Antiangiogenic therapy of experimental cancer does not induce acquired drug resistance. Nature 1997;390:404.
40. O'Reilly MS, Pirie-Shepherd S, Lane WS, Folkman J. Antiangiogenic activity of the cleaved conformation of the serpin antithrombin. Science 1999;285:1926.
41. Cao Y, O'Reilly MS, Marshall B, et al. Expression of angiostatin cDNA in a murine fibrosarcoma suppresses primary tumor growth and produces long-term dormancy of metastases. J Clin Invest
1998;101:1055.
42. Lyden D, Young AZ, Zagzag D, et al. Id1 and Id3 are required for neurogenesis, angiogenesis and vascularization of tumour xenografts. Nature 1999;401:670.
43. Streit M, Riccardi L, Velasco P, et al. Thrombospondin-2: a potent endogenous inhibitor of tumor growth and angiogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:14888.
44. Li CY, Shan S, Huang Q, et al. Initial stages of tumor cellinduced angiogenesis: evaluation via skin window chambers in rodent models. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000;92:143.
45. Folkman J. Incipient angiogenesis. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000;92:94.
46. Nicosia RF, Tchao R, Leighton J. Interactions between newly formed endothelial channels and carcinoma cells in plasma clot culture. Clin Exp Metastasis 1986;4:91.
47. Hamada J, Cavanaugh PG, Lotan O, Nicolson GL. Separable growth and migration factors for large-cell lymphoma cells secreted by microvascular endothelial cells derived from target organs
for metastasis. Br J Cancer 1992;66:349.
48. Rak JW, St. Croix BD, Kerbel RS. Consequences of angiogenesis for tumor progression, metastasis and cancer therapy. Anticancer Drugs 1995;6:3.
49. Schweigerer L, Neufeld G, Friedman J, et al. Capillary endothelial cells express basic fibroblast growth factor, a mitogen that promotes their own growth. Nature 1987;25:257.
50. Motro B, Itin A, Sachs L, Keshet E. Pattern of interleukin 6 gene expression in vivo suggests a role for this cytokine in angiogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:3092.
51. Podor TJ, Jirik FR, Loskutoff DJ, Carson DA, Lotz M. Human endothelial cells produce IL-6. Lack of responses to exogenous IL-6 . Ann N Y Acad Sci 1989;557:374.
52. Zsebo KM, Yuschenkoff VN, Schiffer S, et al. Vascular endothelial cells and granulopoiesis: interleukin-1 stimulates release of G-CSF and GM-CSF. Blood 1988;71:99.
53. Folkman J, Mulliken JB, Ezekowitz RAB. Antiangiogenic therapy of haemangiomas with interferon A. In: Stuart-Harris R, Penny R, eds. The Clinical applications of the interferons. London:
Chapman & Hall Medical, 1997:255.
54. Evans GI. Old cells never die, they just apoptose. Trends Cell Biol 1994;4:191.
55. Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis and tissue factor. Nat Med 1996;2:167.
56. Modzelewski RA, Davies P, Watkins SC, et al. Isolation and identification of fresh tumor-derived endothelial cells from a murine RIF-1 fibrosarcoma. Cancer Res 1994;54:336.
57. Denekamp J. Vascular attack as a therapeutic strategy for cancer. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1990;3:267.
58. Folkman J, Hahnfeldt P, Hlatky L. The logic of anti-angiogenic gene therapy. In: Friedman T, ed. The development of human gene therapy. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press, 1998:527.
59. Berges JR, Vukanovic J, Epstein JI, et al. Implication of cell kinetic changes during the progression of human prostatic cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:473.
60. Ding YH, Javaherian K, Lo KM, et al. Zinc-dependent dimers observed in crystals of human endostatin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:10443.
61. Brem H, Folkman J. Analysis of experimental antiangiogenic therapy. J Pediatr Surg 1993;28:445.
62. Davis S, Aldrich TH, Jones PF, et al. Isolation of angiopoietin-1, a ligand for the TIE2 receptor, by secretion-trap expression cloning. Cell 1996;87:1161.
63. Sato TN, Tozawa Y, Deutsch U, et al. Distinct roles of the receptor tyrosine kinases Tie-1 and Tie-2 in blood vessel formation. Nature 1995;376:70.
64. Koblizek TI, Weiss C, Yancopoulos GD, Deutsch U, Risau W. Angiopoietin-1 induces sprouting angiogenesis in vitro. Curr Biol 1998;8:529.
65. Suri C, McClain J, Thurston G, et al. Increased vascularization in mice overexpressing Angiopoietin-1. Science 1998;282:468.
66. Maisonpierre PC, Suri C, Jones PF, et al. Angiopoietin-2, a natural antagonist for Tie2 that disrupts in vivo angiogenesis. Science 1997;277:55.
67. Folkman J, D'Amore P. Blood vessel formation: what is its molecular basis? Cell 1996;87:1153.
68. Thurston G, Suri C, Smith K, et al. Leakage-resistant blood vessels in mice transgenically overexpressing angiopoietin-1. Science 1999;286:2511.
69. Auerbach R, Auerbach W. Regional differences in the growth of normal and neoplastic cells. Science 1982;215:127.
70. Singh RK, Gutman M, Bucana CD, et al. Interferons alpha and beta down-regulate the expression of basic fibroblast growth factor in human carcinomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1995;92:4562.
71. Rohan RM, Fernandez A, Udagawa T, Yuan J, D'Amato RJ. Genetic heterogeneity of angiogenesis in mice. FASEB J 2000;14:871.
72. Kerbel RS. Inhibition of tumor angiogenesis as a strategy to circumvent resistance to anti-cancer therapeutic agents. Bioessays 1991;1:31.
73. Beecken WDC, Fernandez A, Joussen AM, et al. Effect of antiangiogenic therapy on slow growing, poorly vascularized tumors in mice. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000 (in press).
74. Browder T, Butterfield CE, Kraling BM, et al. Antiangiogenic scheduling of chemotherapy improves efficacy against experimental drug-resistant cancer. Cancer Res 2000;60:1878.
75. Brem S, Cotran R, Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis: a quantitative method for histologic grading. J Natl Cancer Inst 1972;48:347.
76. Mlynek M, van Beunigen D, Leder LD, Streffer C. Measurement of the grade of vascularization in histological tumour tissue sections. Br J Cancer 1985;52:945.
77. Srivastava A, Laidler P, Davies RP, Horfan K. The prognostic significance of tumor vascularity in intermediate-thickness (0.764.0 mm thick) skin melanoma. A quantitative histologic study. Am
J Pathol 1988;133:419.
78. Weidner N, Semple JP, Welch WR, Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis correlates with metastasis in invasive breast carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1.
79. Gasparini G, Harris AL. Prognostic significance of tumor vascularity. In: Teicher BA, ed. Antiangiogenic agents in cancer therapy. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 1999:317.
80. Turner HE, Nagy Z, Gatter KC, et al. Angiogenesis in pituitary adenomas and the normal pituitary gland. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2000;85:1159.
81. Hashizume H, Baluk P, Morikawa S, et al. Openings between defective endothelial cells explain tumor vessel leakiness. Am J Pathol 2000;156:1363.
82. Weidner N. Current pathologic methods for measuring intratumoral microvessel density within breast carcinoma and other solid tumors. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1995;36:169.
83. Kaban LB, Mulliken JB, Ezekowitz RA, et al. Antiangiogenic therapy of a recurrent giant cell tumor of the mandible with interferon alfa-2a. Pediatrics 1999;103:1145.
84. Perez-Atayde AR, Sallan SE, Tedrow U, et al. Spectrum of tumor angiogenesis in the bone marrow of children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Am J Pathol 1997;150:815.
85. Vacca A, Ribatti D, Roncali L, et al. Bone marrow angiogenesis and progression in multiple myeloma. Br J Haematol 1994;87:503.
86. Vacca A, Ribatti D, Roncali L, Dammacco F. Angiogenesis in B cell lymphoproliferative diseases: biological and clinical studies. Leuk Lymphoma 1995;20:27.
87. Munshi N, Wilson CS, Penn J, et al. Angiogenesis in newly diagnosed multiple myeloma: poor prognosis with increased microvessel density (MVD) in bone marrow biopsies. Blood
1998;92[Suppl 1]:98A(abst).
88. Vacca A, Ribatti D, Presta M, et al. Bone marrow neovascularization, plasma cell angiogenic potential and matrix metalloproteinae-2 secretion parallel progression of human multiple myeloma.
Blood 1999;93:3064.
89. Aguayo A, Estey E, Kantarjian H, et al. Cellular vascular endothelial growth factor is a predictor of outcome in patients with acute myeloid leukemia. Blood 1999;94:3717.
90. Lundberg LG, Lerner R, Sundelin P, et al. Bone marrow in polycythemia vera, chronic myelocytic leukemia and myelofibrosis has an increased vascularity. Am J Pathol 2000; 157:15.
91. Brunner G, Metz CN, Nguyen H, et al. An endogenous glycosylphosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase D releases basic fibroblast growth factorheparan sulfate proteoglycan complexes from
human bone marrow cultures. Blood 1994;83:2115.
92. Folkman J. Angiogenesis in cancer, vascular, rheumatoid and other disease. Nat Med 1995;1:27.
93. Hess KR, Abbruzzese MC, Lenzi R, Raber MN, Abbruzzese JL. Classification and regression tree analysis of 1000 consecutive patients with unknown primary carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res
1999;5:3403.
94. Yuhas JM, Pazmino NH. Inhibition of subcutaneously growing line 1 carcinoma due to metastatic spread. Cancer Res 1974;34:2005.
95. Nanus DM, Schmitz-Drager BJ, Motzer RJ, et al. Expression of basic fibroblast growth factor in primary human renal tumors: correlation with poor survival. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1597.
96. Baguley BC, Holdaway KM, Thomsen LL, Zhuang L, Zwi LJ. Inhibition of growth of colon 38 adenocarcinoma by vinblastine and colchicine: evidence for a vascular mechanism. Eur J Cancer
1991;27:482.
97. Steiner R. Angiostatic activity of anticancer agents in the chick embryo chorioallantoic membrane (CHE-CAM) assay. In: Steiner R, Weisz PB, Langer R, eds. Angiogenesis. Key
principles—science—technology—medicine. Basel, Switzerland: Birkhauser Verlag, 1992:449.
98. Kachel DL, Martin WJ II. Cyclophosphamide-induced lung toxicity: mechanism of endothelial cell injury. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1994;268:42.
99. Nuyts RMMA, Pels E, Greve EL. The effects of 5-fluorouracil and mitomycin C on the corneal endothelium. Curr Eye Res 1992;11:565.
100. Hoorn C, Wagner JG, Petry TW, Roth RA. Toxicity of mitomycin C toward cultured pulmonary artery endothelium. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1995;130:87.
101. Belotti D, Vergani V, Drudis T, et al. The microtubule-affecting drug paclitaxel has antiangiogenic activity. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:1843.
102. Klauber N, Parangi S, Hamel E, Flynn E, D'Amato RJ. Inhibition of angiogenesis in vivo by the microtubule inhibitors 2-methoxyestradiol and Taxol. Cancer Res 1997;57:81.
103. Lau DH, Xue L, Young LJ, Burke PA, Cheung AT. Paclitaxel (Taxol): an inhibitor of angiogenesis in a highly vascularized transgenic breast cancer. Cancer BiotherRadiopharm 1999;14:31.
104. Presta M, Rusnati M, Belleri M, et al. Purine analogue 6-methylmercaptopurine riboside inhibits early and late stages of the angiogenesis process. Cancer Res 1999;59:2417.
105. Yonekura K, Basaki Y, Chikahisa L, et al. UFT and its metabolites inhibit the angiogenesis induced by murine renal cell carcinoma, as determined by a dorsal air sac assay in mice. Clin Cancer
Res 1999;5:2185.
106. O'Leary JJ, Shapiro RL, Ren CJ, et al. Antiangiogenic effects of camptothecin analogues 9-amino-20(S)-camptothecin, topotecan, and CPT-11 studied in the mouse cornea model. Clin Cancer
Res 1999;5:181.
107. Iyer S, Chaplin DJ, Rosenthal DS, et al. Induction of apoptosis in proliferating human endothelial cells by the tumor-specific antiangiogenesis agent combretastatin A-4. Cancer Res
1998;58:4510.
108. Chaplin DJ, Pettit GR, Hill SA. Anti-vascular approaches to solid tumour therapy: evaluation of combretastatin A4 phosphate. Anticancer Res 1998;58:4510.
109. Klement G, Baruchel S, Rak J, et al. Continuous low-dose therapy with vinblastine and VEGF receptor-2 antibody induces sustained tumor regression without overt toxicity. J Clin Invest
2000;105:R15.
110. Hanahan D, Bergers G, Bergsland E. Less is more, regularly: metronomic dosing of cytotoxic drugs can target tumor angiogenesis in mice. J Clin Invest 2000;105:1045.
111. Rastinejad F, Polverini P, Bouck NP. Regulation of the activity of a new inhibitor of angiogenesis by a cancer suppressor gene. Cell 1989;56:345.
112. Dawson DW, Volpert OV, Gillis P, et al. Pigment epithelium-derived factor: a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis. Science 1999;285:245.
113. Ramchandran R, Dhanabal M, Volk R, et al. Antiangiogenic activity of restin, NC10 domain of human collagen XV: comparison to endostatin. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999;255:735.
114. Kamphaus GD, Colorado PC, Panka DJ, et al. Canstatin, a novel matrix-derived inhibitor of angiogenesis and tumor growth. J Biol Chem 2000;275:1209.
115. Zhang M, Volpert O, Shi YH, Bouck N. Maspin is an angiogenesis inhibitor. Nat Med 2000;6:196.
116. Hendrix MJ. De-mystifying the mechanism(s) of maspin. Nat Med 2000;6:374.
117. Jendraschak E, Sage EH. Regulation of angiogenesis by SPARC and angiostatin: implications for tumor cell biology. Semin Cancer Biol 1996;7:139.
118. Zhai Y, Yu J, Iruela-Arispe L, et al. Inhibition of angiogenesis and breast cancer xenograft tumor growth by VEGI, a novel cytokine of the TNF superfamily. Int J Cancer 1999;82:131.
119. Angiolillo AL, Sgadari C, Tosato G. A role for the interferon-inducible protein 10 in inhibition of angiogenesis by interleukin-12. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1996;795:158.
120. Cao R, Farnebo J, Kurimoto M, Cao Y. Interleukin-18 acts as an angiogenesis and tumor suppressor. FASEB J 1999;13:2195.
121. Clapp C, Weiner RI. A specific, high affinity, saturable binding site for the 16-kilodalton fragment of prolactin on capillary endothelial cells. Endocrinology 1992;130:1380.

SECTION 21.1 Design and Analysis of Clinical Trials
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 21.1
Design and Analysis of Clinical Trials
RICHARD SIMON
Introduction
Phase I Clinical Trials
Phase II Clinical Trials
Patient Selection
Trials of Single Agents
Trials of Combination Regimens
Design of Phase III Clinical Trials
Randomization
Stratification
Sample Size
Factorial Designs
Therapeutic Equivalence Trials
Analysis of Phase III Clinical Trials
Intention-to-Treat Analysis
Interim Analyses
Significance Levels, Hypothesis Tests, and Confidence Intervals
Calculation of Survival Curves
Multiple Comparisons
Reporting Results of Clinical Trials
Epidemiology of Clinical Trials
Metaanalysis
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Clinical trials are experiments to determine the value of treatments. There are two key components to the experimental approach. First, results rather than plausible
reasoning are required to support conclusions. Second, experiments should be prospectively planned and conducted under controlled conditions in order to provide
definitive answers to well-defined questions. Comparing the survival rates (based on tumor registry data) of prostate cancer patients treated with surgery to those of
patients receiving radiotherapy is an example of an observational study, not a clinical trial. In an observational study, the investigators are passive observers.
Treatment assignments, staging workup, and follow-up procedures are out of the control of the investigators and are conducted with no considerations about the
validity of the subsequent attempt at comparison. The statistical associations resulting from such studies are, consequently, a weak basis for causal inferences about
relationships between the treatments administered and the outcomes observed. Treatments usually are selected on the basis of subjective assessment of the
prognosis of the patient, specialties of the physician, and various diagnostic evaluations. Unknown patient selection factors generally are more important determinants
of patient outcome than are differences between treatments.
Observational studies are generally the only feasible approach for epidemiologic assessment of disease etiology. Acute observations in poorly structured therapeutic
settings can also lead to the development of valuable ideas that can be tested in the laboratory and in clinical trials. However, observational studies rarely are
satisfactory substitutes for clinical trials. 1,2 and 3 As pointed out by MacMahon and Pugh 4:
“Only a minority of statistical associations are causal. . . . Once a statistical association has been demonstrated, how can it be determined whether or not it is
causal. . . . The most satisfactory procedure is a direct experiment. . . . The evaluation of the causal nature of a relationship, in the absence of direct experiment, is
neither easy nor objective. . . . The field of cancer therapy is replete with examples of new modalities that were taken up with enthusiasm and proved worthless
only after they had resulted in many years of futile cost and suffering.”
Clinical trials require careful planning. The first result of the planning process is a written protocol. Typical subject headings for the protocol are shown in Table
21.1-1. The protocol should define treatment and evaluation policies for a well-defined set of patients. It also should define the specific questions to be answered by
the study and should directly justify that the number of patients and the nature of the controls are adequate to answer these questions. Some clinical trials are really
only guidelines for clinical management supplemented by lofty objectives with no scientific meaning and no realistic chance of providing a reliable answer to a
well-defined medical question. Such studies do not warrant the expenditure of limited clinical research dollars and represent a disservice to the patients who may be
willing to undergo some inconvenience in order to contribute to the welfare of future patients. In this section, we attempt to provide information that will help to avoid
such clinical trials.

TABLE 21.1-1. Subject Headings for a Protocol

PHASE I CLINICAL TRIALS
The objective of a phase I trial is to determine a dose that is appropriate for use in phase II trials. Patients with advanced disease that is resistant to standard therapy
are included in such trials, but it is important that the patients have normal organ function.
There are several different types of phase I trials. The most common is the phase I trial of a new cytotoxic drug. Such studies usually are performed by starting with a
low dose not expected to produce serious toxicity in any patients. A starting dose of one-tenth the lethal dose (expressed as milligrams per square meter of body
surface area) in the most sensitive species usually is used. 5 The dose is increased for subsequent patients according to a series of preplanned steps. Dose escalation
for subsequent patients occurs only after sufficient time has passed to observe acute toxic effects for patients treated at lower doses. Cohorts of three to six patients
are treated at each dose level. Usually, if no dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) is seen at a given dose level, the dose is escalated for the next cohort. If the incidence of DLT
is 33%, then three more patients are treated at the same level. If no further cases of DLT are seen in the additional patients, then the dose level is escalated for the
next cohort. Otherwise, dose escalation stops. If the incidence of DLT is greater than 33% at a given level, then dose escalation also stops. The phase II
recommended dose often is taken as the highest dose for which the incidence of DLT is less than 33%. Usually, six or more patients are treated at the recommended

dose.
The dose levels themselves commonly are based on a modified Fibonacci series. 6 The second level is twice the starting dose; the third level is 67% greater than the
second; the fourth level is 50% greater than the third; the fifth is 40% greater than the fourth; and each subsequent step is 33% greater than that preceding it.
Escalating doses for subsequent courses in the same patient is generally not done, except at low doses before any DLT has been encountered.
There is no compelling scientific basis for the approach just outlined, except that experience has shown it to be safe. Traditional phase I trials have three limitations:
(1) They sometimes expose too many patients to subtherapeutic doses of the new drug; (2) the trials may take a long time to complete; and (3) they provide very
limited information about interpatient variability and cumulative toxicity. New trial designs have been developed to address these problems. One class of designs,
accelerated titration designs, permit within-patient dose escalation and use only one patient per dose level until grade 2 or greater toxicity is seen. 7 Doses are titrated
within patients to achieve grade 2 toxicity. The analysis consists of fitting a statistical model to the full set of data that includes all grades of toxicity for all courses of a
patient's treatment. The model includes parameters that represent the steepness of the dose-toxicity curve, the degree of interpatient variability in the location of the
dose-toxicity curve, and the degree (if any) of cumulative toxicity. All these parameters are estimated from the data.
In developing the accelerated titration designs, Simon et al. 7 fit a stochastic model to data from 20 phase I trials of nine different drugs. New data then were simulated
using the model with the parameters estimated from the actual trials, and the performance of alternative phase I designs on this simulated data was evaluated. Four
designs were evaluated. Design 1 was a conventional design using cohorts of three to six patients with 40% dose-step increments and no intrapatient dose
escalation. Designs 2 through 4 included only one patient per cohort until one patient experienced dose-limiting toxicity or two patients experienced grade 2 toxicity
(during their first course of treatment for designs 2 and 3 or during any course of treatment for design 4). Designs 3 and 4 use 100% dose steps during this initial
accelerated phase. After the initial accelerated phase, designs 2 through 4 resort to standard cohorts of three to six patients with 40% dose-step increments. Designs
2 through 4 use intrapatient dose escalation if the worst toxicity is grade 0 to 1 in the previous course for that patient.
Only three of the actual trials showed any evidence of cumulative toxicity. The average number of patients required was reduced from 39.9 for design 1 to 24.4, 20.7,
and 21.2 for designs 2, 3, and 4, respectively. The average number of patients who had grade 0 to 1 toxicity as their worst toxicity grade over three cycles of treatment
was 23.3 for design 1 but only 7.9, 3.9, and 4.8 for designs 2, 3, and 4, respectively. The average number of patients with a worst toxicity grade of 3 increased from
5.5 for design 1 to 6.2, 6.8, and 6.2 for designs 2, 3, and 4, respectively. The average number of patients with a worst toxicity grade of 4 increased from 1.9 for design
1 to 3.0, 4.3, and 3.2 for designs 2, 3, and 4, respectively. Accelerated titration designs appear to be effective in reducing the number of patients who are
undertreated, speeding the completion of phase I trials, and providing increased information. These advantages are achieved with some increase in the number of
patients experiencing grade 3 and 4 toxicities.
Some phase I trials are very complex in that they involve the simultaneous escalation of two or more drugs. The design of such trials has been discussed by Korn and
Simon.8
So-called phase IB trials attempt to determine the relationship between dose of a biologic agent and both toxicity and immunologic effect. Such trials often suffer from
two flaws. One is that it is assumed that cohorts of three to six patients are sufficient for relating dose to immunologic effects, without consideration of interpatient
variability and measurement error of the immunologic assays. The second problem is that there is often little information about what immunologic end points actually
are relevant for antitumor effects. Such studies have little potential for producing meaningful information about the dose of a biologic that should be used for
subsequent trials.
Some phase I trials attempt to answer comparative questions. For example, should paclitaxel be administered before or after doxorubicin in a two-drug combination?
Because of the small sample sizes of phase I trials, the maximum tolerated doses (MTDs) generally are determined imprecisely. This, combined with the
nonrandomized nature of such trials, means that reliable comparative conclusions can be expected only if the differences are large.

PHASE II CLINICAL TRIALS
PATIENT SELECTION
Whereas phase I trials need not be performed separately by tumor type, this is not the case for phase II trials, because the biologic response of interest is that of the
tumor itself. When a drug enters phase II trials, it should be tested in the patient group that is most likely to show a favorable effect but for whom no effective therapy
is available. This is best accomplished by patients with maximum performance status and a minimum amount of prior chemotherapy. Full-dose chemotherapy is often
impossible in patients debilitated by prior treatment, and lack of chemotherapeutic activity in previously treated patients may not indicate lack of clinical usefulness in
earlier disease. This issue was well illustrated by etoposide in small cell lung carcinoma. 9,10 For the less chemosensitive cancers, chemotherapy offers little or no
palliative benefit, and initial phase II trials should be conducted in patients with no prior chemotherapy. In more sensitive tumors, such as breast, small cell lung, or
ovarian carcinoma or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, it is desirable to evaluate new drugs in patients with no more than one prior treatment for advanced disease. For very
chemosensitive tumors, the window-of-opportunity design sometimes is used, in which patients not previously treated are given one or two courses of a phase II drug
and then are switched to a standard combination. In general, agents should be shown to be active in a favorable population of patients before they are given to a less
favorable group. Adherence to this principle saves patients with advanced disease from exposure to inactive agents for which the likelihood of toxicity is much greater
than the likelihood of benefit.
TRIALS OF SINGLE AGENTS
There is much confusion about the appropriate objectives of phase II trials. It often is useful to distinguish between phase II trials of single agents and phase II trials of
combinations. Both are called phase II trials because eligibility is limited to patients with a specific diagnosis and there is no internal control group. For most
single-agent phase II trials, however, the objective is simply to determine whether the drug has activity against the tumor type in question. For this objective, response
rate is an appropriate end point for evaluating the question posed by the trial. It is important to recognize, however, that tumor response is not a direct measure of
patient benefit and, hence, it cannot be assumed that response rate is an appropriate end point for drawing conclusions about treatment efficacy. A treatment that
causes partial responses is not necessarily beneficial to the patient, and analyses that demonstrate that responders live longer than nonresponders are invalid for
concluding that a treatment extended survival. 11,12 First, responders, by definition, have lived long enough to achieve that status. Second, responders may have more
favorable prognostic factors. Finally, treatment may shorten survival of nonresponders while not influencing survival of responders. To demonstrate that treatment
extends survival, it must be demonstrated that the treated group as a whole lives longer than an appropriate control group. Phase II trials do not have an internal
control group and, hence, drawing conclusions about survival from such trials is very problematic.
A variety of statistical accrual plans and sample size methods that have been developed for phase II trials have been reviewed by Simon. 13 One of the most popular
approaches is the optimal two-stage design. 14 A number (n1) of evaluable patients is entered into study in the first stage of the trial. If fewer than a specified r1
responses are obtained among these n 1 patients, then accrual terminates and the drug is rejected as being of little interest. Otherwise, accrual continues to a total of n
evaluable patients. At the end of the second stage, the drug is rejected if the observed response rate is less than or equal to r/n, where r and n are determined by the
design employed.
Tables 21.1-2 and 21.1-3 illustrate some of these optimized designs. To select a design, researchers must specify a target activity level of interest, p1, and also a
lower activity level, p0. The first row of each triplet of optimal designs provides designs with probability £.10 of accepting drugs worse than p 0 and probability £.10 of
rejecting drugs better than p1. Subject to these two constraints, the optimal designs minimize the average sample size. The average sample size is calculated at the
lower activity level p0 in order to optimize protection of patients from exposure to inactive drugs. The tables show for each design the optimal values of r1, n1, r, and n,
the average sample size, and the probability of stopping after the first stage for a drug with activity level p0.

TABLE 21.1-2. Simon Two-Stage Phase II Designs for p1 – p 0 = .20a

TABLE 21.1-3. Simon Two-Stage Phase II Designs for p1 – p 0 = .15a

These tables also show the “minimax” designs, which provide the smallest maximum sample size n that satisfies the two constraints just described. Although minimax
designs have somewhat larger average sample sizes than do optimal designs, in some instances they are preferable because the small increase in average sample
size is more than compensated for by a large reduction in maximum sample size.
The designs shown in Tables 21.1-2 and 21.1-3 are two-stage designs with the potential for early stopping for lack of activity. Other two-stage designs have been
described that provide for early termination for inactivity or for early evidence for activity. 15 Also, optimized three-stage designs have been described. 16
When sufficient numbers of patients and several treatments are available to test, there are advantages to randomized phase II trials. 17 Although phase II trials are not
comparative, in selecting the most promising treatment or schedule to pursue, it is advantageous to evaluate the candidates on comparable patients. Table 21.1-4
shows the number of patients per treatment arm required to ensure that the best treatment will have the highest observed response rate. This calculation assumes
that the true response probability for the best treatment is 10 percentage points better than for the others. Simon et al. 17 provide similar tables for 15% differences.
This selection approach is useful when one treatment will be carried forward and the treatments are similar with regard to cost and toxicity.

TABLE 21.1-4. Number of Patients per Treatment Group for Selecting Better Treatment When True Response Probabilities Differ by 10 Percentage Points a

TRIALS OF COMBINATION REGIMENS
Many so-called phase II trials of combination regimens are conducted. The objectives of such trials are often unclear. One reasonable objective is sometimes merely
to ensure that the combination is feasible and tolerable when used in a multiinstitution setting before embarking on a phase III trial. Achieving this objective does not
require many patients. An alternative objective is to determine whether the new regimen is promising enough to warrant a phase III trial. Achieving this objective
requires considerable planning. Consequently, many phase II trials of this type are not adequately planned and analyzed to serve any real scientific objective.
Investigators often do not distinguish between phase II trials of combinations of active agents and phase II trials of new single agents. Consequently, protocols often
are written to distinguish between inactivity of the combination (e.g., p 0 = .05 or .10) and some modest level of activity (e.g., p1= .20 or .25). Since the drugs being
combined are generally already known to be active, this makes little sense. If response rate is the primary end point, then the level of no interest ( p0) should generally
represent the level of activity of the most active single-agent component or the level of activity of previously studied combination regimens (as presumably the new
regimen would be considered promising only if it is promising relative to other existing regimens).
With the lower limit of activity, p0, defined as described earlier, Tables 21.1-2 and 21.2-3 can be used for the design of phase II trials of combination regimens. One
problem with this approach, however, is the uncertainty in specifying a meaningful value of p0 to be used for trial design and analysis. Because the conclusions of
phase II trials of combinations are essentially comparative, it is important that the comparison be based on a prognostically similar group of patients given standard
treatment. Hence, the planning of such a trial should include the prospective identification of such a group of patients. Although such historical control comparisons
are not considered reliable enough to eliminate the need for phase III trials, if done carefully they will provide better decisions about which new regimens are worthy of
phase III evaluation. For comparative trials of response rates using historical controls, appropriate tables for sample size planning are given by Makuch and Simon 18
and are summarized in Table 21.1-5. This table is for achieving 80% power with a one-sided 5% significance level. If the historical control group of 50 patients
showed a response rate of 30%, and the target level of improvement is a 50% response rate, then 69 patients should be treated with the experimental regimen. If
there were 100 appropriate historical control patients, then only 48 new patients are required. If there were only 30 historical control patients, then 137 new patients
are needed for the experimental treatment. If the uncertainty in the level of response achievable with standard treatment is substantial because of the limited number
of appropriate historical controls, then it is not efficient to conduct a phase II trial of the new regimen. It would be more efficient to conduct a randomized phase II or
phase III trial of the new regimen and the standard treatment.

TABLE 21.1-5. Number of Patients Needed in an Experimental Group for 80% Power to Detect (One-Sided a = 0.05) a Specified Difference in Success Rates

Thall et al. 19,20 have developed Bayesian methods for planning and conducting trials in which the precision in the response probability p0 is quantified by a “prior
probability distribution.” These Bayesian designs provide for continual analysis of results after evaluation of response for each patient. This is difficult logistically for
multiinstitution trials but provides a valid statistical basis for the intensive monitoring of cancer center or pharmaceutical industry trials in which patients may be limited
or time may be critical. One begins with a prior probability distribution of response for p1that is flat over the range 0 to 1. After each patient is evaluated on the
experimental regimen, the “posterior probability distribution” for p1 is updated. This permits calculation of the posterior probability distribution for p1 – p0.
Let d denote the difference in response probabilities that is of interest. If, at some point during the trial, the posterior probability that p1 – p0³d becomes small—say
less than 0.05—one might terminate the trial and conclude that the new regimen is not promising. If, at some point during the trial, the posterior probability that p1 –
p0³0 becomes large—say greater than 0.95—one might terminate the trial and conclude that the new regimen appears better than the historical control. In this case,
one could continue entry of patients if it were desirable to study the regimen further in a phase II setting.
The trial is designed with a maximum number of patients, n max, that limits sample size even if neither early termination condition occurs. Table 21.1-6 shows an
example of the operating characteristics of a design of this type. In this example, the historical data indicate that the expected response probability for the control
regimen is .20 and that the width of the 90% confidence interval around .20 for the true value is approximately 0.20. The table also represents targeting a
20–percentage point improvement in response probability (d = 0.20). The maximum sample size is set at 65, and it is assumed that the trial is arbitrarily not terminated
before ten patients are evaluated. As can be seen from the table, the median number of patients required is 12 under the null hypothesis that the response probability
for the experimental regimen is .20 and is only 13 under the alternative hypothesis. The table also indicates that 75% of the time the trial will terminate by the
evaluation of 20 to 22 patients. Bayesian continuing-monitoring phase II designs have also been developed for simultaneously monitoring multiple end points,
including efficacy and toxicity. Designs of this type used in actual clinical trials have been illustrated in the work of Thall et al. 19

TABLE 21.1-6. Thall-Simon Bayesian Phase II Design

Some investigators and statisticians do not like to use approaches based on explicit comparison to historical controls. Phase II trials of combinations are inherently
comparative, however. Going through the exercise of explicitly quantifying the basis of comparison, which these methods require, clarifies beforehand whether the
uncertainty in outcome for the control group is so great that a phase II trial is not useful. Phase II trials of combinations are problematic. Only by using methods that
provide more careful statistical planning of such trials can we streamline the drug development process.
Many reports in the literature of phase II trials of combination regimens conclude that the treatment is effective. As noted, response rates generally are not a measure
of patient benefit. Such reports generally fail to make any meaningful attempt at determining outcome on standard treatment for a prognostically comparable set of
patients. Often these trials are not conducted as a prelude to a phase III evaluation, and hence their value to clinical therapeutics is difficult to identify.
For some diseases, it has been noted that combination regimens that produce high response rates in phase II trials do not result in improved survival in phase III trials
as compared to standard treatment. This has led to interest in using survival directly as an end point for phase II trials to evaluate the promise of a regimen. In some
types of cancer, response rate is difficult to measure, and many patients do not have measurable disease (e.g., brain, ovarian, gastric, and prostate cancer). Dixon
and Simon21 have developed tables for planning historically controlled phase II comparative studies with a survival or time-to-progression end point.

DESIGN OF PHASE III CLINICAL TRIALS
Good clinical therapeutic research requires asking important questions and getting reliable answers. This chapter attempts to provide guidance on the components
necessary for getting reliable answers. As noted earlier in Trials of Combination Regimens, many phase II trials of combination regimens do not provide reliable
answers. Some phase III trials, however, do not ask important questions. The most important clinical trials are often the most difficult to conduct. 22 They may involve
withholding a treatment established by tradition, potentially transferring patient management responsibility across specialties, standardizing procedures among
physicians who believe that their way is best, and sharing recognition with a large group of collaborators.
Phase III trials attempt to provide guidance to practicing physicians to help them make treatment decisions with their patients. Consequently, the trials should provide
reliable information concerning end points of relevance to the patients. The major end points for evaluating the effectiveness of a treatment should be direct measures
of patient welfare. Survival and symptom control are two such end points. The latter is not routinely used because of the difficulty of measuring it reliably and because
it may be influenced by concomitant treatments. As stated, tumor shrinkage usually is not an appropriate end point for phase III trials because it may have little or no
relation to patient benefit. Torri et al. 23 performed a metaanalysis of the relationship between difference in response rates and difference in median survivals for
randomized clinical trials of advanced ovarian carcinoma. They found that large improvements in response rates corresponded to very small improvements in median
survival. Hence, use of response rate as an end point results in giving patients increasingly intensive and toxic therapy with little or no net benefit to them.
It is usually important that the results of phase III trials be applicable to patients seen in the community outside of clinical research settings. This is accomplished by
conducting the trials in multiinstitution settings that include community physician participation. The eligibility criteria established for the trial also has a bearing on the
generalizability of the conclusions; trials conducted with narrow eligibility criteria tend to be less generalizable. Narrow eligibility criteria also complicate trials
logistically. Narrow eligibility criteria tend to require extensive and expensive patient workups and thereby do not facilitate broad participation, especially in an era of
closely monitored medical costs. For these and other reasons, there is a trend toward broadened eligibility criteria for phase III clinical trials. In the United Kingdom,
many trials are designed using the uncertainty principle, an approach that leaves much of the decision making about eligibility to the treating physician. There may be
guidelines for eligibility, but the ultimate decision will be made by the treating physician; if he or she is uncertain about which treatment is more appropriate for the

patient, then the patient is eligible.
RANDOMIZATION
To determine whether a new treatment cures any patients with a disease that is uniformly and rapidly fatal, history is a satisfactory control. Once we leave this setting
of complete determinism, however, the definition of an adequate nonrandomized control group becomes problematic. In studies using nonrandomized controls, often
diagnostic and staging procedures, supportive care, secondary treatments, and methods of evaluation and follow-up are different for the controls and for the new
patients. There is generally differential bias in the selection of patients to be treated resulting from judgments by the physicians, self-selection by the patients, and
differences in referral patterns. There may be bias in treatment ineligibility rates. Current patients sometimes are excluded from analysis for not meeting eligibility
criteria, not receiving “adequate” treatment, refusing treatment, or committing a major protocol violation. The control group, on the other hand, generally contains all
the patients. There may be differences in the distribution of known and unknown prognostic factors between the controls and the current treatment group. Often there
is inadequate information to determine whether such differences are present, and current known prognostic factors may not have been measured for the controls. It
generally is difficult or impossible to determine whether the controls would have been eligible for the current study and in what way they represent a selection of all
eligible patients.
Formation of the control group by random treatment assignment as an integral part of the planned study can avoid most of the systematic biases just
mentioned.24,25,26,27,28 and 29 Randomization does not ensure that the study will include a representative sample of all patients with the disease, but it does help to
ensure an unbiased evaluation of the relative merits of the two treatments for the types of patients entered.
It is sometimes said that randomization is unnecessary because matched historical or concurrent controls can be selected. However, matching can be done only with
regard to known prognostic factors, and these generally are not sufficient for the construction of prognostically homogeneous groups of patients. 30 Matching with
regard to known factors gives no assurance that the distributions of unknown factors are similar between the groups. It also is sometimes said that randomization is
not effective in ensuring that the treatment groups are similar with regard to unknown prognostic factors unless the number of patients is large. This is true but reflects
a misunderstanding of the purpose of randomization. Randomization does not ensure that the groups are medically equivalent, but it distributes the unknown biasing
factors according to a known random distribution so that their effects can be rigorously allowed for in significance tests and confidence intervals. This is true
regardless of the study size. A significance level represents the probability that differences in outcome can be the result of random fluctuations. Without a randomized
treatment allocation, a “statistically significant difference” may be the result of a nonrandom difference in the distribution of unknown prognostic factors.
Many investigators today see a useful role for both nonrandomized and randomized clinical trials. The nonrandomized format is used for determining which regimens
are sufficiently promising for randomized phase III evaluation and for use in clinical settings where outcome is uniformly poor. For major questions of public health
importance, unless the treatment effects are huge, the need for reliable answers dictates the use of randomized phase III trials.
Randomization of a patient should be performed after the patient has been found eligible and has consented to participate in the trial and to accept either of the
randomized options. A truly random and nondecipherable randomization procedure should be used and implemented by calling a central randomization office staffed
by individuals who are independent of participating physicians.
STRATIFICATION
When important prognostic factors are known for patients in a randomized trial, it is often advisable to stratify the randomization to ensure equal distribution of these
factors. This is usually accomplished by preparing a separate randomization list (or set of cards in sealed envelopes) for each stratum of patients. Each list must be
balanced so that after each block of four to ten patients within the stratum, the treatment groups contain equal numbers of patients. Within the blocks, the sequence of
treatment assignments is random. The stratification factors must be known for each patient at the time of randomization.
It generally is best to limit stratification to those factors definitely known to have important independent effects on outcome. If two factors are closely correlated, only
one need be included. Peto 31,32 believes that stratification is an unnecessary complication because adjustment for imbalances of known factors can be made in the
analysis. This is true for large trials. Stratification helps to ensure balance for interim analyses when the sample sizes may be limited and provides the medical
audience with confidence in the results, which often is not available when depending on complex adjustment methods to deal with prognostic imbalances.
Stratification also is a convenient way of specifying a priori what are considered the important prognostic factors. Subsequent “subset analyses” can then be limited to
the patient subsets determined by the stratification factors.
Many clinical trials use adaptive stratification methods. These methods permit effective balancing by many prognostic factors, although they typically require a
computer program for their use. Simon 33 and Kalish and Begg 34 have reviewed the various stratification methods that are available. Kalish and Begg 35 have also
studied analytic aspects of adaptive stratification methods.
SAMPLE SIZE
The protocol for a phase III trial should specify the number of patients to be accrued and the duration of follow-up after the close of accrual when the final analysis will
be performed. Methods of sample size planning are based on the assumption that at the conclusion of the follow-up period, a statistical significance test will be
performed comparing the experimental treatment to the control treatment with regard to a single primary end point. A statistical significance level of .05 has the
following meaning: If there is no true difference in treatment effectiveness, the probability of obtaining a difference in outcomes as extreme as that observed in the
data is .05. The significance level does not represent the probability that the null hypothesis is true; it represents a probability of an observed difference, assuming
that the null hypothesis is true. Conventional statistical theory ascribes no probabilities to hypotheses, only to data.
A one-sided significance level represents the probability, by chance alone, of obtaining a difference as large as and in the same direction as that actually observed. A
two-sided significance level represents the probability of obtaining by chance a difference in either direction as large in absolute magnitude as that actually observed.
The two-sided significance level is usually twice the one-sided significance level. Controversy exists over the appropriateness of one-sided or two-sided significance
levels. Although this is a somewhat trivial issue, a two-sided significance level of .05 has become widely accepted as a standard level of evidence.
With few patients in the trial, the difference in observed outcomes must be extreme in order to obtain statistical significance. Consequently, the probability of obtaining
a statistically significant result may be low even when a substantial true difference in effectiveness exists. The probability of obtaining a statistically significant result
when the treatments differ in effectiveness is called the power of the trial. As the sample size and extent of follow-up increases, the power increases. The power
depends critically, however, on the size of the true difference in effectiveness of the two treatments. Generally, one sizes the trial so that the power is either .80 or .90
when the true difference in effectiveness is the smallest size that is considered medically important to detect.
A number of statisticians have developed useful methods for planning sample size to compare survival curves or disease-free survival curves in phase III trials. Table
21.1-7 demonstrates results that are valid whenever the hazard ratio, the ratio of forces of mortality for the two treatment groups, is constant over time. 36,37 The table
shows the total number of deaths that must occur in a given cohort to reflect 90% power for detecting a specified reduction in the hazard for the experimental
treatment relative to the control treatment. For exponential distributions, the percentage reduction in hazard of death can be expressed as a ratio of median survivals,
which is displayed in the second column of Table 21.1-7. For comparing disease-free survival curves, deaths should be replaced by events, wherein death, disease
recurrence, or development of second cancer usually are considered events. The translation of the number of deaths or events required among the number of
patients depends on the actual shape of the survival distributions, the rate of accrual, and the duration of follow-up after close of accrual. Generally, however, it is
best to specify the time of the final analysis as the time when the specified number of deaths or events are obtained, not in terms of absolute calendar time.

TABLE 21.1-7. Number of Events Needed for Comparing Survival Curves

In some cases, it may be convenient to think in terms of specifying the smallest medically important improvement—for instance, an increase in the proportion of
patients who survive beyond some landmark time, such as 5 years. Tables 21.1-8 and 21.1-9 provide required numbers of patients for clinical trials planned on this
basis. This approach is less flexible for studies in which survival or disease-free survival is the end point, as it presumes that all patients will be followed for the
landmark time as a minimum. These tables can, however, be used generally for detecting differences in a binary end point, denoted success rate in the tables. Table
21.1-8 is for one-sided significance tests, and Table 21.1-9 is for two-sided tests. For comparing treatments, differences of more than 15 percentage points usually are
unrealistic.

TABLE 21.1-8. Number of Patients in Each of Two Treatment Groups (One-Sided Test)

TABLE 21.1-9. Number of Patients in Each of Two Treatment Groups (Two-Sided Test)

Sample size planning with good statistical power for detecting realistically expected treatment improvements is important. Numerous published “negative” results are
actually uninterpretable because the sample sizes are too small. 38 For trials comparing a standard treatment to a more conservative or less invasive therapy, small
reductions in effectiveness will be medically important because survival time or cure probability is being traded for convenience or cosmesis. High statistical power for
detecting small differences requires large trials. False acceptance of the null hypothesis of equivalence may result in erroneous adoption of a new, more conservative,
and less effective therapy. The burden of proof for therapeutic equivalence trials should generally be on showing that results are similar, not on demonstrating that
they are different. These trials should be planned using the specialized methods described later in the section Therapeutic Equivalence Trials . If standard frequency
methods are used to analyze such trials, rather than the Bayesian methods described in the section Therapeutic Equivalence Trials, confidence intervals rather than
statistical significance tests should be used. The confidence interval for the true difference of effectiveness gives a much clearer picture of which differences are
consistent with the data. Makuch and Simon39 and Durrleman and Simon40 discuss this approach for planning and monitoring therapeutic equivalence trials.
FACTORIAL DESIGNS
In a two-by-two factorial design, there are actually four treatment groups. The first factor represents two alternative interventions, such as amputation and resection.
The second factor represents two other alternatives superimposed on the first factor, such as adjuvant chemotherapy and no chemotherapy. In another example, the
first factor might be chemotherapy regimen A or B, and the second factor might be the duration of treatment, 6 or 12 months. Although there are actually four
treatment groups, the average effect of each treatment factor can be evaluated using all of the patients and pooling with regard to the other factor (or by accounting
for the influence of the other factor in the analysis by stratification, but not by separate analyses for each level of the other factor). 41,42 The usefulness of this analysis
of average effects is proportional to whether the comparison between the two levels of one factor depends in any important way on the level of the other factor. If the
effects of the two factors do interact, then the analysis of main effects may not be meaningful. Usually, the sample size for a two-by-two factorial trial is computed
assuming that there is no interaction between the effects of the factors. This sample size will not provide enough patients to test adequately the assumption of no
interaction between the factors. Consequently, the factorial design offers the possibility of answering two questions for the cost of one, but there is a risk of ambiguity
in the interpretation of results. 43,44 and 45 For situations in which interactions are unlikely or in which it is unlikely that both factors will have substantial effects, the
factorial design can provide a substantial improvement in the efficiency of clinical trials.
The use of a factorial design for a clinical trial is often controversial. Proponents sometimes indicate that factorial designs are ideal for studying interactions. Others
have questioned how factorial trials can provide meaningful information about interactions when the trials are sized only to detect main effects. Brittain and Wittes 45
noted that the power for detecting an effect of treatment A is substantially impaired by a negative interaction with treatment B, as compared to an experiment wherein
all the patients are randomly allocated to either treatment A or placebo, with no use of treatment B. Consequently, factorial designs often are used only when one can
assume with confidence that there will be no interactions between the effects of the factors and can determine sample size on the basis of that assumption.
Simon and Freedman46 developed a Bayesian method for the design and analysis of factorial clinical trials. Their approach avoids the need to dichotomize one's
assumptions that interactions either do or do not exist and provides a flexible approach to the design and analysis of such clinical trials. The Bayesian method
encourages the quantification of prior belief about the size of interactions that may exist. Rather than forcing the investigator to adopt one of two extreme positions
regarding interactions, it provides for the specification of intermediate positions. The Bayesian approach also avoids a preliminary test of interaction having poor

power.
The Bayesian model suggests that in planning a factorial trial where interactions are unlikely but cannot be excluded, the sample size should be increased by at least
30% as compared to a simple two-arm clinical trial for detecting the same size of treatment effect. This is less extreme than doubling the sample size but is a
recommendation that differs greatly from current usage. The 30% figure allows for a 5% prior probability of a medically important, qualitative interaction between the
treatment effects.
Factorial designs can also be useful in phase II trials when an internal control is needed. For example, consider the investigation of antiangiogenic agents A and B for
patients in partial remission after induction chemotherapy. With a factorial design, there would be four treatment groups. One group would receive neither agent, one
would receive A, one group would receive B, and one group would receive both A and B. Patients are randomized to the four groups. For analyzing the effect of A, the
time to progressive disease for the two arms that received A are compared to the time to progressive distribution for the two arms that did not receive A. Analyzing the
effect of B is performed analogously. The single-arm phase II trial is problematic when the end point is disease stabilization or time to progression. It is easy to come
up with a definition of disease stabilization, but just defining it does not make it valid for measurement of treatment effect. Data are needed that demonstrate that such
stabilization does not occur in the absence of treatment in a comparable group of patients. This is difficult to do reliably because of the usual difficulties of identifying
comparable historical controls and because of special difficulties involved with documenting stabilization or measuring time to disease progression in a consistent
manner, comparable to the way it was done with historical controls. Consequently, the use of disease stabilization or time to progression as an end point in single-arm
phase II trials is particularly problematic. A better approach is use of the factorial design, because the factorial design is internally controlled for evaluating the effects
of the factors and, hence, the use of time to progression is not problematic.
THERAPEUTIC EQUIVALENCE TRIALS
The objective of a therapeutic equivalence trial is generally to demonstrate that a new treatment is equivalent to a standard therapy with regard to a specified clinical
end point. This is contrasted to bioequivalence trials in which the objective is to demonstrate equivalence of serum concentrations of the active moiety. In some cases,
investigators would like to demonstrate that the new treatment is effective as compared to no treatment but, because use of a no-treatment arm is not feasible, they
attempt to demonstrate therapeutic equivalence to a standard treatment.
Therapeutic equivalence trials are problematic because it is impossible to demonstrate equivalence. If the outcomes for the two treatments are similar, one can only
conclude that results are consistent with differences within specified limits.
In conventional trials, rejection of the null hypothesis leads to change in the treatment of future patients. The implications of failure to reject the null hypothesis are
more difficult to interpret. Failure to reject the null hypothesis often is interpreted as a demonstration of therapeutic equivalence and grounds for adoption of the new
regimen but may merely reflect inadequate sample size or ineffectiveness of the standard treatment for the patients in the clinical trial.
Large sample sizes often are needed for meaningful therapeutic equivalence trials. For example, consider a cancer trial evaluating tumor resection as an alternative
to amputation of the organ containing the tumor in a setting in which amputation is the standard therapy known to be curative in a large number of cases. Tumor
resection may have clear advantages with regard to quality of life, but few patients would be interested in these advantages unless they were assured that any
reduction in the chance of cure would be very small. Hence, the appropriate trial should focus on distinguishing the null hypothesis in which the difference in efficacy
is expressed as D = 0 from that in which the difference in efficacy is expressed as D = d, where d is very small. Consequently, this trial would have to be very large.
In a therapeutic equivalence trial, there is no internal validation of the assumption that the control treatment C is actually effective for the patient population at hand. It
is not enough for the experimental treatment E to be therapeutically equivalent to C; we want equivalence coupled with the effectiveness of E and C relative to no
treatment or to whatever was standard before the adoption of C.
None of the conventional approaches to the design and analysis of therapeutic equivalence trials is satisfactory. These approaches depend on the specification of a
minimal difference (d) in efficacy that one is willing to tolerate but do not address how d should be determined. Simon 47 has recently developed a general Bayesian
approach to the utilization of information from previous trials in the design and analysis of therapeutic equivalence trials. The effectiveness of the control treatment C
relative to no treatment or to the previous standard before C was adopted is represented by a parameter b. We will denote the previous standard by P. The
effectiveness of C relative to P will not be known with certainty and may vary among trials. The information about b is summarized by a prior distribution, which is
normal with mean µb and standard deviation s b. The parameter g represents the effectiveness of the new experimental treatment E relative to P. Usually, it is assumed
that there is no prior information about g.
The result of the therapeutic equivalence trial is summarized by a value y, which estimates the effectiveness of E relative to C.
Two major objectives of active controlled trials can be distinguished. The first is to determine whether the experimental treatment is effective relative to P. This
requires explicit use of prior information about outcomes of trials comparing P to the active control. Meaningful interpretation of active control trials is impossible
without consideration of such information. Establishing whether or not the experimental treatment is effective relative to P is a first requirement. The second objective
is to determine whether any medically important portion of the treatment effect for the active control is lost with the experimental treatment. In some cases, this
objective is unrealistic because the size of the treatment effect (relative to P) for the active control is imprecisely determined.
If there is no prior information about the effectiveness of E relative to P(g), then after the equivalence trial is completed g has a posterior normal distribution with mean
mb+ y. This is the expected effectiveness of C relative to P plus the estimate of the effectiveness of E relative to C based on the therapeutic equivalence trial. The
variance of the posterior distribution of g is s b2 + s2, where sb2 is the variance of the prior distribution of b and s is the standard error of y. The size of the trial may be
planned in this case using the result

where z is mb/sb, which is the z value for comparison of the active control C to P in the previous trial (or metaanalysis of previous trials), with a positive value of z
corresponding to superiority of C. The parameter r represents the ratio of the required sample size of the therapeutic equivalence trial to the effective sample size of
the previous trials demonstrating the superiority of C to P. When the z value is 3 (corresponding to a two-sided significance level of .0027 for the effectiveness of C
relative to P), the ratio r equals 1.25, indicating that the therapeutic equivalence trial needs to be 25% larger than the previous trial. If, however, the z value is only 2
(corresponding to a two-sided significance level of approximately .05), then the ratio r equals 10, indicating that the therapeutic equivalence trial needs to be ten times
as large as the previous trial that established the effectiveness of C. Consequently, unless the evidence for the effectiveness of C is highly statistically significant, the
therapeutic equivalence trial is not feasible or appropriate.
An important implication of the new approach is that reliable therapeutic equivalence trials are not practical unless evidence of the effectiveness of the control
treatment is substantial and consistent. Conventional methods for planning therapeutic equivalence trials often miss this point, because they take the maximum
likelihood estimate of the effectiveness of the control treatment as if it were a value known with certainty. This ignores the fact that the degree of effectiveness of the
control treatment is known only imprecisely unless the effect is overwhelmingly significant. For example, if the effect is of borderline significance, then the confidence
interval for the size of the effect almost includes zero. Consequently, many planned therapeutic equivalence trials, even large multicenter trials, cannot demonstrate
clinically relevant objectives. Superiority trials, rather than therapeutic equivalence trials with marginally effective control treatments, are strongly preferred whenever
possible.

ANALYSIS OF PHASE III CLINICAL TRIALS
INTENTION-TO-TREAT ANALYSIS
One of the important principles in the analysis of phase III trials is called the intention-to-treat principle. This indicates that all randomized patients should be included
in the primary analysis of the trial. For cancer trials, this has often been interpreted to mean all “eligible” randomized patients. Because eligibility requirements
sometimes are vague and unverifiable by an external auditor, excluding “ineligible” patients can itself result in bias. However, excluding patients from analysis

because of treatment deviations, early death, or patient withdrawal can severely distort the results. 32,48,49 Often, excluded patients have poorer outcomes than do
those who are not excluded. Investigators frequently rationalize that the poor outcome experienced by a patient was due to lack of compliance to treatment, but the
direction of causality may be the reverse. For example, in the Coronary Drug Project, the 5-year mortality for poor adherents to the placebo regimen was 28.3%,
significantly greater than the 15.1% experienced by good adherents to the placebo regimen. 50 In randomized trials, there may be poorer compliance in one treatment
group than the other, or the reasons for poor compliance may differ. Excluding patients, or analyzing them separately (which is equivalent to excluding them), for
reasons other than eligibility is generally considered unacceptable. The intention-to-treat analysis with all eligible randomized patients should be the primary analysis.
If the conclusions of a study depend on exclusions, then these conclusions are suspect. The treatment plan should be viewed as a policy to be evaluated. The
treatment intended cannot be delivered uniformly to all patients, but all eligible patients should generally be evaluable in phase III trials.
INTERIM ANALYSES
If statistical significance tests are performed repeatedly, the probability that the difference in outcomes will be found to be statistically significant (at the .05 level) at
some point may be considerably greater than 5%. This probability is called the type I error of the analysis plan. Fleming et al. 51 have shown that the type I error can be
as great as 26% if a statistical significance test is performed every 3 months of a 3-year trial that compares two identical treatments. Many trials are published without
stating the target sample size, without indicating whether a target sample size was stated in the protocol, and without describing whether the published analysis
represented a planned final analysis or was one of multiple analyses performed during the course of the trial. In such cases, one must suspect that the investigators
were not aware of good statistical practices and the dangers of informal multiple analyses. Consequently, the statistical significance reported in such trials must be
discounted as uninterpretable.
Interim analyses can be very misleading, and the significance levels of interim analyses cannot be taken at face value. Nevertheless, the random trends often seen in
interim analyses can destroy accrual to a clinical trial and interfere with a physician's attempt to state honestly to the patient that there is no reliable evidence
indicating that one treatment option or the other is preferable. For these reasons, it has become standard in multicenter clinical trials to have a data-monitoring
committee review interim results, rather than having the monitoring done by participating physicians. This approach helps to protect patients by having interim results
carefully evaluated by an experienced group of individuals and helps to protect the study from damage that ensues from misinterpretation of interim results. Generally,
interim outcome information is available to only the data-monitoring committee. The study leaders are not part of the data-monitoring committee, because they may
have a perceived conflict of interest in continuing the trial. The data-monitoring committee determines when results are mature and should be released. These
procedures are used only for phase III trials.
A number of useful statistical designs have been developed for monitoring interim results. The simplest is that of Haybittle. 32,52 Interim differences are discounted
unless the difference is statistically significant at the two-sided P <.0025 level. If the interim differences are not significant at that level, the trial continues until its
originally intended size. The final analysis is performed without regard to the interim analyses, and the type I error is almost unaffected by the monitoring.
Others have developed group-sequential methods for interim monitoring based on a prespecified number of planned interim analyses. 53,54 and 55 The critical P value for
determining whether an interim difference should be judged statistically significant depends on the number of analyses that will be performed during the trial. For a
five-stage trial—four interim analyses and one final analysis—the critical P values are shown in Table 21.1-10.

TABLE 21.1-10. Nominal Two-Sided Significance Levels for Interim Monitoring Methods That Maintain an Overall Type I Error Level of .05

Extreme treatment differences at an interim analysis are unusual in cancer clinical trials. It is more common to find that interim results do not support the hypothesis
that the experimental treatment is substantially better than the control. The method of stochastic curtailment 56 was developed for evaluating such a circumstance. At
any interim analysis, the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis at the end of the trial is computed. This probability is calculated as being conditional on the data
already obtained and on the assumption that the alternative hypothesis of superiority of the experimental treatment used initially in planning the sample size for the
trial is true. If this conditional power is less than approximately 0.20, then the trial may be terminated with acceptance of the null hypothesis. The 0.20 cutoff can be
raised substantially to at least 0.40 if this type of interim analysis is performed only a few times during the course of the trial. With stochastic curtailment, interim
analyses need not be equally spaced, and the number of interim analyses need not be specified in advance.
Several investigators have developed other designs for early termination of the clinical trial if results are not promising for the experimental treatment. 57,58,59 and 60 For
example, Table 21.1-11 shows some of the two-stage designs developed by Thall et al. 59 for clinical trials with dichotomous end points. The first two columns show
the hypothesized success rates for the control and experimental treatments. The remaining columns show the first-stage sample size per treatment and the maximum
sample size per treatment. In all instances, the clinical trial is terminated after the first stage, and the experimental treatment is rejected as superior, if the one-sided
significance level for comparing success rates is no less than approximately .38. If the one-sided significance level is less than .38, then a second stage of patient
accrual is conducted to give the maximum sample size per group shown. When the treatments are equivalent, the chance of early termination is generally 60% to 65%
with this design.

TABLE 21.1-11. Two-Stage Early Termination Designs

Schaid et al. 57 and Wieand et al. 61 developed designs for early termination when results are not promising in survival studies. Schaid's design provides for multiple
experimental treatment arms, as do the designs of Thall et al. 62,63 Such designs have been reviewed by Simon.43 Jennison and Turnbull 64 have presented methods for
calculating confidence intervals for treatment differences at interim analyses. Such confidence intervals can be useful in deciding when to terminate the trial.

Stochastic curtailment is based on computing the conditional probability of rejection of the null hypothesis calculated under the alternative hypothesis of the trial. 56
The probability is conditioned on the data available at that point but, because the probability is computed under the originally specified alternative hypothesis that the
new regimen E is superior, stochastic curtailment is conservative. Bayesian biostatisticians have argued that the conditional probability should be computed under a
distribution of the treatment difference that itself reflects the data available at that point. That distribution is called the posterior distribution. The Bayesian predictive
probability is the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis if the trial is continued to its target number of events, conditional on the data available at that point and
computed and averaged with regard to a range of hypotheses about the true difference d as determined by the posterior distribution of d given the data at that point.
Computing the posterior distribution of d, however, requires specification of a prior distribution for d before the trial begins. The need to specify a prior distribution in a
satisfactory manner has limited the applicability of Bayesian methods in clinical trials.
Phase III trials are supposed to be definitive and objective; if we could believe the subjective opinions of experts, we would not need to conduct phase III clinical trials.
Recently, it has been recognized that a single prior distribution is not necessary for using Bayesian monitoring. It has been found useful to think in terms of one prior
distribution of d for “enthusiasts” for the experimental regimen E and a different prior distribution for “skeptics.” 65 The investigators conducting the trial often are
enthusiasts, whereas other investigators or practicing physicians may be more skeptical. If a trial is to terminate early with a claim that E is more effective than C, then
the data from the trial should be strong enough to convince skeptics. On the other hand, if the trial is to terminate early with a claim that E is not more effective than C,
then the data from the trial should be strong enough to convince enthusiasts. Although this is a somewhat oversimplified view (some enthusiasts or skeptics will never
be convinced), it serves as a useful basis for interim monitoring. For computing the Bayesian predictive probability of rejection of the null hypothesis at the end of the
trial if it is continued, it would be useful to use an enthusiast's prior distribution to ensure that the data are sufficiently compelling.
Stopping trials when the experimental regimen E is not appearing more effective than C but is not statistically significantly worse than C is sometimes controversial.
Statisticians tend to want data as definitively as possible. One must also be cautious that with survival or disease-free survival end points, early parts of the survival
curve may not reflect latter parts. Another argument for continuing such trials even if it is clear that E will not be found to be significantly better than C is that additional
data will provide narrower confidence intervals for the true difference d. The alternative point of view is that it is not appropriate to continue to expose patients to a
more toxic and debilitating treatment E if the essential outcome of the trial is well assured. Data-monitoring committees are charged with helping to make these
difficult judgments. 66
SIGNIFICANCE LEVELS, HYPOTHESIS TESTS, AND CONFIDENCE INTERVALS
Medical decision making is complicated, and clinicians frequently misinterpret statistical significance tests in search of clear-cut answers from ambiguous data. A
statistical significance level for comparing outcomes represents the probability of obtaining a difference as large as that actually observed if the treatments were
actually of equal efficacy and differences occur merely by chance. If differences in either direction as large in absolute value as the one actually obtained are
included, the significance level is called two-sided. If the probability is calculated only for differences in the same direction as that actually obtained, the significance
level is called one-sided. Generally, the two-sided significance level is twice the one-sided level.
After significance tests had been used for many years, Neyman and Pearson 67 formalized a mathematical theory of hypothesis testing. In this theory, a study must
prespecify a null hypothesis, an alternative hypothesis, and a decision rule for accepting one hypothesis and rejecting the other based on the data obtained. The
theory has appealed to clinicians because it simplifies complex medical decision making by providing yes or no answers; either the difference is statistically significant
or it is not. The distinction between one- and two-sided decision rules becomes crucial because a one-sided P = .05 is simply nonsignificant if a type I error of .05
based on a two-sided decision rule is prespecified.
The concept of prespecification of hypotheses is important for medical experimentation. However, the accept-reject nomenclature of the Neyman-Pearson theory
provides an oversimplified and sometimes misleading interpretation of the data. Significance levels can serve as useful aids to interpretation of results, but quibbling
about whether a one-sided P = .04 is significant makes little sense. Significance levels are influenced by sample sizes, and failure to reject the null hypothesis does
not mean that the treatments are equivalent. There is no simple index of truth for interpreting results. Some attempt to use the notion of statistical significance in this
way, but thorough presentation, skeptical evaluation, and cautious interpretation of results always are required.
Confidence intervals are generally much more informative than are significance levels. A confidence interval for the size of the treatment difference provides a range
of effects consistent with the data. The significance level tells nothing about the size of the treatment effect because it depends on the sample size. However, it is the
size of the treatment effect, as communicated by a confidence interval, that should be used in weighing the costs and benefits of clinical decision making. Many
so-called negative results are actually noninformative, and confidence intervals help to determine when this is the case. Simon 68 has presented a nontechnical
discussion of how to calculate confidence intervals for treatment differences with the types of end points commonly used in cancer clinical trials.
CALCULATION OF SURVIVAL CURVES
Most cancer clinical trials display results by showing survival curves or disease-free survival curves. Survival curves display the probability of surviving beyond any
specified time, with time shown on the horizontal axis. In disease-free survival curves, it is the time until recurrence or death that is shown. Other time-to-event
distributions can be similarly represented using the same methods. The usual statistical methods are not appropriate for analyzing survival because they ignore the
fact that surviving patients have a limited follow-up period after which their survivals are “censored.”
The most satisfactory way of representing such data is to estimate the survival function S(t). This function represents the probability of surviving more than t time
units. Time t is measured from diagnosis, start of treatment, or some other meaningful time point. For randomized studies, it is best to measure time from the date of
randomization. There are basically two satisfactory methods for estimating S(t). The first is the life-table or actuarial method. It frequently is attributed to Berkson and
Gage69 or Cutler and Ederer 70 and is appropriate when the number of patients is large. The other method is the product limit method of Kaplan and Meier. 71 This
method is appropriate for any number of patients, but it involves more effort than the life-table method when the number of patients is large.
The first step in the application of either method is the calculation of survival time for all patients. Survival is the duration from the chosen baseline (e.g., date of
randomization) until death or date last known to be alive for patients who are not known to have died. To use the life-table method, intervals for the grouping of
survival times are determined. The life table, shown in Table 21.1-12, is then filled out. This sample life table is prepared with yearly intervals in the first column. The
number of patients alive at the beginning of the interval is entered in column 2. The number who died in the interval is entered in column 4. Patients dying exactly at a
time that represents a boundary between two intervals (e.g., 365 days) are considered to have died in the preceding interval (e.g., 0 to 1 year). Column 3 contains the
number of patients who are lost to follow-up during the interval or who are alive with maximum follow-up duration included in the interval. These latter patients are
referred to as withdrawn alive in the conventional life-table terminology. The life-table method assumes that patients lost to follow-up or withdrawn alive during the
interval are at risk of death for half of the interval. Hence, column 5, the number alive at the start of the interval minus half the number lost or withdrawn during the
interval, represents an approximate number of patients at risk of death during the interval. Column 6 gives the ratio of the number of patients who died during the
interval to the number at risk during the interval. Column 7 gives the estimated probability of surviving the interval for patients alive at the start of the interval.

TABLE 21.1-12. Life-Table Method for Estimating a Survival Distribution

Column 8 should be studied carefully, because it provides the life-table estimate of the survival distribution and indicates the logic behind the method. The probability
of surviving more than 3 years after randomization, for example, equals the entry in the third row of column 8 (0.50). The logic is as follows: To survive 3 full years, the
patients must survive through the first year; and given that they have survived the first year, they must survive the second year; and given that they have survived the
second year, they must survive the third year. Consequently, the probability of surviving for at least 3 years is estimated by the product P1¥P2¥P3 of factors in column
7. By using this product, the life-table method takes maximal advantage of the mortality experience of patients with limited follow-up. The entry Sx in column 8, row x,
represents the life-table estimate of the probability of surviving more than x years from randomization. Computational shortcuts to observe are those for column 8— Sx
= Px¥Sx–1—and for column 2—lx+1 = lx – wx – dx.
The product limit method of Kaplan and Meier 71 is similar in concept to the life-table method. With the Kaplan-Meier approach, however, the intervals are defined by
the actual survival times of patients who have died. Suppose, for example, that the survivals are 3, 3, 3+, 5, 6, 8+, 8+, 10, 10, and 12+ months, where a plus sign
follows survivals for patients still alive. Then the intervals are 0 to 3, 3 to 5, 5 to 6, and 6 to 10 months, as shown in Table 21.1-13. With the Kaplan-Meier method,
deaths occur only at the ends of intervals. The entry in column 5 equals l x – wx rather than l x – 2wx for the life-table method. This is because deaths occur only at the
ends of intervals here, and the number of patients at risk of death just before the interval end is l x – w x. In the entry w x in column 3 for the Kaplan-Meier method,
patients who are lost to follow-up or withdrawn alive at the end of an interval are considered not lost or withdrawn until the following interval. These differences
between the Kaplan-Meier and life-table methods render the former more appropriate for studies with fewer patients.

TABLE 21.1-13. Kaplan-Meier Method for Estimating a Survival Distribution

Once the values Sx have been calculated for the Kaplan-Meier method, they may be graphed with time on the horizontal axis. The graph is a step function that starts
at time zero and ordinate 1.0. It drops to value Sx at time x, where x is the time at the right end of an interval. The survival curve corresponding to Table 21.1-14 is
shown in Figure 21.1-1. The tic marks are placed on the curve at 3, 8, and 12 months to represent the follow-up times of living patients. The step function can be
extended horizontally out to 12 months to represent follow-up of the last patient, but the right-hand end of the curve usually is very imprecisely estimated, and
concluding that a plateau exists at the level shown on the curve is often erroneous.

TABLE 21.1-14. Probability of Obtaining at Least One Statistically Significant ( P <.05) Difference by Chance Alone in Multiple Comparisons of Two Equivalent
Treatments

FIGURE 21.1-1. Example of estimated survival distribution.

For any time t, the Kaplan-Meier curve is an estimator of the true unknown value of S(t). The estimator is approximately normally distributed in large samples. If m
patients remain alive at time x, the standard error of the estimate can be conservatively estimated 32 as

The Kaplan-Meier estimate of a survival distribution is based on the assumption that censoring is noninformative, which means that the censoring time is independent
of the prognosis of the patient. Most censoring in a randomized clinical trial results from the fact that some patients are alive and still being followed at the time of
analysis. This is noninformative censoring. However, if patients are lost to follow-up, if they fail to return to clinic when they are too sick to travel, then the censoring is
informative and all the usual methods of survival analysis are invalidated. Consequently, it is essential to obtain follow-up information actively on all patients before
analysis. If some patients have not been contacted for many months and their status is unknown, that information should be obtained before any analysis is
performed. Examining the distribution of time since the last contact for patients not known to have died is a good way to examine the adequacy of follow-up.
The issue of informative censoring also arises in considering end points other than death. For example, one may be attempting to estimate the distribution of time until
tumor recurrence in the central nervous system (CNS) in a pediatric leukemia trial. How should one handle patients whose disease recurs in the marrow without

evidence of CNS recurrence? One may be tempted to censor the time to CNS recurrence of such patients at their time of marrow recurrence, but that implicitly
assumes that the censoring is noninformative. Because CNS and marrow recurrence may be biologically linked, the assumption of noninformative censoring may not
be valid. Other issues of informative censoring can be similarly problematic. Clearly, one should never censor patients because of lack of compliance with therapy, as
this can severely bias results.
More extensive, but fairly nontechnical, discussions of statistical methods for the analysis of clinical trial data are given by Anderson et al. 72 and by Harrington and
Anderson.73
MULTIPLE COMPARISONS
Table 21.1-14 shows the probability of obtaining one statistically significant ( P <.05) difference by chance alone as a function of the number of independent
comparisons of two equivalent treatments. With only five comparisons, the chance of at least one false-positive conclusion is 22.6%. When the number of end points,
interim analyses, and patient subsets are considered in the analysis of clinical trials, these results are disturbing. 74 The comparisons performed in clinical trials are not
entirely independent, but this does not have much effect on ameliorating the problem. Fleming and Watelet 75 performed a computer simulation to determine the
chance of obtaining a statistically significant treatment difference when two equivalent treatments in six subsets determined by three dichotomous variables are
compared. The chance of a statistically significant difference between treatments in at least one subset was 20% at the final analysis and 39% in the final or one of
the three interim analyses. Subset analysis, comparison of treatments with regard to multiple end points, and multiple interim analyses are common sources of
erroneous conclusions. The primary end point should be defined in the protocol. Subset analyses and analyses with regard to secondary end points should be
specified in advance, and statistical significance should be declared only for significance levels much more extreme than the conventional .05. The simplest approach
to multiple comparisons is to declare statistical significance only if the P value is less than .05/n, where n denotes the number of comparisons to be made. For
example if n = 10, then .005 should be the threshold for declaring significance for a secondary analysis. The number of comparisons planned in the protocol is
represented by n. Comparisons not preplanned should not be considered significant in any case and represent hypothesis generation to be tested in subsequent
trials.
Interaction tests are statistical procedures that test for lack of homogeneity of treatment effect across subsets of patients. A statistically significant interaction should
be documented before claiming that treatment effects vary among subsets. Such tests are described by Simon 76,77 and by Gail and Simon. 78
Generally, it is not valid to adjust the analysis by characteristics measured after the start of treatment (e.g., compliance, dose delivered, toxicity). New approaches to
subset analysis and multiple end point analysis using Bayesian methods have been described by Simon et al. 79,80
REPORTING RESULTS OF CLINICAL TRIALS
Effective reporting of results is an integral part of good research. Unfortunately, numerous reviews have indicated that the quality of reporting of clinical trial results is
poor. 49,81,82 and 83 Pocock et al.84 concluded that “overall, the reporting of clinical trials appears to be biased toward an exaggeration of treatment differences.” Barr and
Tannock48 have given a clear illustration of how this is easily done. Simon and Wittes 85 developed a set of methodologic guidelines for reports of clinical trials, and
these guidelines have been adopted by major cancer journals. These nine guidelines are summarized below:
1. Authors should discuss briefly the quality control methods used to ensure that the data (including response assessments) are complete and accurate.
2. All patients registered on study should be accounted for.
3. The study should not have an inevaluability rate of greater than 15% for major end points.
4. In randomized trials, the report should include a comparison of survival and other major end points for all eligible patients as randomized, with no exclusions
other than those not meeting eligibility criteria.
5. The sample size should be sufficient to establish or conclusively rule out the existence of effects of clinically important magnitude. For “negative” conclusions in
therapeutic comparisons, the adequacy of sample size should be demonstrated by presenting confidence limits for the true treatment differences.
6. The report should indicate the initial target sample size. It should specify how many interim analyses were performed and how the decisions to stop accrual and
report results were made.
7. Claims of therapeutic efficacy should not be made based on nonrandomized phase II trials, unless the disease is so rare or the prognosis so poor that properly
controlled randomized trials are not possible. In the latter case, nonrandomized trials should use explicit historical controls for which comparability of patients
can be thoroughly evaluated. Comparison of survival between responders and nonresponders is not a valid way of establishing therapeutic efficacy. 11,12,86
8. The patients studied should be adequately described. Applicability of conclusions to the general population of patients should be carefully discussed. Claims of
subset-specific treatment differences should be carefully documented statistically as more than the random result of multiple significance testing. 74
9. The methods of statistical analysis should be described in detail sufficient that a knowledgeable reader could reproduce the analyses if the data were available.

EPIDEMIOLOGY OF CLINICAL TRIALS
Several authors have pointed out that many of the positive results reported from small trials are expected to be false-positive results. 76,87,88 In 100 trials, suppose that
there are 10 in which the experimental treatment is sufficiently better than the control such that there is an 80% chance of the difference being detected in a small or
moderate-sized clinical trial. Of these 10 trials, obtaining a statistically significant difference in 8 cases (0.80 ¥ 10) is expected. Of the remaining 90 trials, it is
assumed that the treatments are approximately equivalent to the control. We would expect to obtain a statistically significant difference in 5% (4.5) of these cases.
Hence, of the 12.5 (8 + 4.5) trials that yield statistically significant results, the finding is false-positive in 4.5 or 36% of the cases (4.5/12.5). The 36% false-positive
result is striking. It depends on the assumption that only 10% of the trials represent important advances, but this assumption does not seem overly pessimistic.
An additional factor to consider is that of publication bias, 89 which denotes the preference of journals to publish positive rather than negative results. A negative result
may not be published at all, particularly from a small trial. If it is published, it is likely to appear in a less widely read journal than it would if the result were positive.
These observations emphasize that results in the medical literature often cannot be accepted at face value. It is essential to recognize that “positive” results need
confirmation, particularly positive results of small studies, before they can be believed and applied to the general population.

METAANALYSIS
A metaanalysis is a quantitative summary of research in a particular area. It is distinguished from the traditional literature review by its emphasis on quantifying results
of individual studies and combining results across studies. Key components of this approach are to include only randomized clinical trials, to include all relevant
randomized clinical trials that have been initiated, regardless of whether they have been published, to exclude no randomized patients from the analysis, and to
assess therapeutic effectiveness based on the average results pooled across trials. 90
Attention is restricted to randomized trials, because the bias from nonrandomized comparisons may be larger than the small to moderate therapeutic effects likely to
be present. Including all relevant randomized trials that have been initiated in a geographic area (e.g., the world, or the Americas and Europe) represents an attempt
to avoid publication bias. Avoiding exclusion of any randomized patients also functions to avoid bias. Assessing therapeutic effectiveness based on average pooled
results is an attempt to make the evaluation on the totality of evidence rather than on extreme isolated reports. In calculating average treatment effects, a measure of
difference in outcome between treatments is calculated separately for each trial. For example, an estimate of the logarithm of the hazard ratio can be computed for
each trial. A weighted average of these study-specific differences then is computed, and the statistical significance of this average is evaluated. This approach to
metaanalysis requires access to individual patient data for all randomized patients in each trial. It also requires collaboration of the leaders of all the relevant trials
and is very labor-intensive. Nevertheless, it represents the gold standard for metaanalysis methodology.
A major issue of concern in metaanalyses is whether the individual trials are sufficiently similar to make calculation of average effects medically meaningful. If the
therapeutic interventions or control treatments differ too greatly or if the patient populations are too different, then the results may not be medically meaningful as a
basis for making treatment decisions for individual patients. Often in cancer therapeutics, the studies will not be identical in their treatment regimens or their patient
populations, but they will not be so different as to make the results meaningless. In this case, the metaanalysis may be useful for answering important questions about
a class of treatments that the individual trials cannot address reliably. For example, trials evaluating adjuvant treatment of primary breast cancer often are designed to
detect differences in disease-free survival, and a metaanalysis is often required to evaluate survival. Similarly, subset analysis can usually be meaningfully evaluated

only in the context of a metaanalysis, because individual trials are not sized for this objective.
Metaanalysis is not an alternative to properly designed and sized randomized clinical trials. Some have suggested that one need not be concerned about computing
sample size in the traditional ways, as small randomized trials can be pooled for metaanalysis. Because most investigators would prefer to “do their own thing,” this
would lead to a proliferation of diverse trials of inconsequential individual size that were too heterogeneous to permit a meaningful metaanalysis. Given that sufficient
large, randomized clinical trials of very similar treatment regimens have been conducted, metaanalysis can provide supplemental information about a given class of
treatments that is not available from the individual trials.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Bull JP. The historical development of clinical therapeutic trials. J Chronic Dis 1959;10:218.
2. Byar DP. Why data bases should not replace randomized clinical trials. Biometrics 1980; 36:337.
3. Dambrosia JM, Ellenberg JH. Statistical considerations for a medical data base. Biometrics 1980;26:323.
4. MacMahon B, Pugh TF. Epidemiology: principles and methods. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1970.
5. Leventhal BG, Wittes RE. Research methods in clinical oncology. New York: Raven Press, 1988.
6. Schneiderman MA. Mouse to man: statistical problems in bringing a drug to clinical trial. In: Proceedings of the fifth Berkeley symposium on mathematical statistical probability. Berkeley:
University of California, 1967:855.
7. Simon R, Freidlin B, Rubinstein L, et al. Accelerated titration designs for phase I clinical trials in oncology. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1138.
8. Korn EL, Simon R. Using the tolerable-dose diagram in the design of phase I combination chemotherapy trials. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:794.
9. Ettinger DS. Evaluation of new drugs in untreated patients with small-cell lung cancer: its time has come. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:374.
10. Wittes RE, Marsoni S, Simon R, et al. The phase II trial. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:1235.
11. Anderson JR, Cain KC, Gelber RD. Analysis of survival by tumor response. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:710.
12. Simon R, Makuch RW. A nonparametric graphical representation of the relationship between survival and the occurrence of an event: application to responder versus non-responder bias. Stat
Med 1984;3:1.
13. Simon R. How large should a phase II trial of a new drug be? Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:1079.
14. Simon R. Optimal two-stage designs for phase II clinical trials. Control Clin Trials 1989;10:1.
15. Fleming TR. One sample multiple testing procedure for phase II clinical trials. Biometrics 1982;38:143.
16. Ensign L, Gehan EA, Kamen D, Thall PF. An optimal three-stage design for phase II clinical trials. Stat Med 1994;13:1727.
17. Simon R, Wittes RE, Ellenberg SS. Randomized phase II clinical trials. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:1375.
18. Makuch RW, Simon R. Sample size considerations for nonrandomized comparative studies. J Chronic Dis 1980;33:171.
19. Thall PF, Simon R, Estey E. Bayesian sequential monitoring designs for single-arm clinical trials with multiple outcomes. Stat Med 1995;14:357.
20. Thall P, Simon R, Estey E. New statistical strategy for monitoring safety and efficacy in single-arm clinical trials. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:296.
21. Dixon DO, Simon R. Sample size considerations for studies comparing survival curves using historical controls. J Clin Epidemiol 1988;41:1209.
22. Simon R. Randomized clinical trials in oncology: principles and obstacles. Cancer 1994;74:2614.
23. Torri V, Simon R, Russek-Cohen E, Midthune D, Friedman M. Relationship of response and survival in advanced ovarian cancer patients treated with chemotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst
1992;84:407.
24. Pocock SJ. Randomized clinical trials. Br Med J 1977;1:1161.
25. Byar DP, Simon RM, Friedewald WT, et al. Randomized clinical trials: perspectives on some recent ideas. N Engl J Med 1976;295:74.
26. Chalmers TC, Block JB, Lee S. Controlled studies in clinical cancer research. N Engl J Med 1972;287:75.
27. Lasagna L. The controlled clinical trial: theory and practice. J Chronic Dis 1955;1:353.
28. Hill AB. The clinical trial. Br Med J 1951;7:278.
29. Saks H, Chalmers TC, Smith H. Randomized versus historical controls for clinical trials. Am J Med 1982;72:233.
30. Simon R. The importance of prognostic factors in cancer clinical trials. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:185.
31. Peto R, Pike MC, Armitage P, et al. Design and analysis of randomized clinical trials requiring prolonged observation of each patient: I. Introduction and design. Br J Cancer 1976;34:585.
32. Peto R, Pike MC, Armitage P, et al. Design and analysis of randomized clinical trials requiring prolonged observation of each patient: II. Analysis and examples. Br J Cancer 1977;35:1.
33. Simon R. Restricted randomization designs in clinical trials. Biometrics 1979;35:503.
34. Kalish LA, Begg CB. Treatment allocation methods in clinical trials: a review. Stat Med 1985;4:129.
35. Kalish LA, Begg CB. The impact of treatment allocation procedures on nominal significance levels and bias. Control Clin Trials 1987;8:121.
36. George SL, Desu MM. Planning the size and duration of a clinical trial studying the time to some critical event. J Chronic Dis 1974;27:15.
37. Rubenstein LV, Gail MH, Santner TJ. Planning the duration of a comparative clinical trial with loss to follow-up and a period of continued observation. J Chronic Dis 1981;34:469.
38. Frieman JA, Chalmers TC, Smith HJ. The importance of beta, the type II error, and sample size in the design and interpretation of the randomized control trial: survey of 71 “negative” trials. N
Engl J Med 1978;299:690.
39. Makuch R, Simon R. Sample size requirements for evaluating a conservative therapy. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:1037.
40. Durrleman S, Simon R. Planning and monitoring of equivalence studies. Biometrics 1990;46:329.
41. Peto R. Clinical trial methodology. Biomedicine 1978;28:24.
42. Byar DP, Piantadosi S. Factorial designs for randomized clinical trials. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:1055.
43. Simon R. Designs for efficient clinical trials. Oncology 1989;3:34.
44. Simon R. A critical assessment of approaches to improving the efficacy of cancer clinical trials. In: Baum M, Kay R, Scheurlen H, eds. Recent results in cancer research, vol 3. Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag, 1988:18.
45. Brittain E, Wittes J. Factorial designs in clinical trials: the effects of non-compliance and subaddictivity. Stat Med 1989;8:161.
46. Simon R, Freedman LS. Bayesian design and analysis of 2 by 2 factorial clinical trials. Biometrics 1997;53:456.
47. Simon R. Bayesian design and analysis of active control clinical trials. Biometrics 1999;55:484.
48. Barr J, Tannock I. Analyzing the same data two ways: a demonstration model to illustrate the reporting and misreporting of clinical trials. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:969.
49. Tannock I, Murphy K. Reflections on medical oncology: an appeal for better clinical trials and improved time of their results. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:66.
50. Group CDR. Influence of adherence to treatment and response of cholesterol on mortality in the coronary drug project. N Engl J Med 1980;302:1038.
51. Fleming TR, Green SJ, Harrington DP. Considerations of monitoring and evaluating treatment effects in clinical trials. Control Clin Trials 1984;5:55.
52. Haybittle JL. Repeated assessment of results in clinical trials of cancer treatment. J Radiol 1971;44:793.
53. Pocock SJ. Interim analyses for randomized clinical trials. Biometrics 1982;38:153.
54. O'Brien PC, Fleming TR. A multiple testing procedure for clinical trials. Biometrics 1979;35:549.
55. Fleming TR, Harrington DP, O'Brien PC. Designs for group sequential tests. Control Clin Trials 1984;5:348.
56. Lan KKG, Simon R, Halperin M. Stochastically curtailed tests in long-term clinical trials. Commun Stat Sequen Anal 1982;1:207.
57. Schaid DJ, Wieand S, Therneau TM. Optimal two-stage screening designs for survival comparisons. Biometrics 1990;77:507.
58. Storer BE. A sequential phase II/III trial for binary outcomes. Stat Med 1990;9:229.
59. Thall PF, Simon R, Ellenberg SS, Shrager R. Optimal two-stage designs for clinical trials with binary response. Stat Med 1988;7:571.
60. Wieand S, Therneau T. A two-stage design for randomized trials with binary outcomes. Control Clin Trials 1987;8:20.
61. Wieand S, Schroeder G, O'Fallon JR. Stopping when the experimental regimen does not appear to help. Stat Med 1994;13:1453.
62. Thall PF, Simon R, Ellenberg SS. Two-stage selection and testing designs for comparative clinical trials. Biometrics 1988;75:303.
63. Thall PF, Simon R, Ellenberg SS. A two-stage design for choosing among several experimental treatments and a control in clinical trials. Biometrics 1989;45:537.
64. Jennison C, Turnbull BW. Repeated confidence intervals for group sequential clinical trials. Control Clin Trials 1984;5:33.
65. Spiegelhalter D, Freedman L, Parmar M. Bayesian approaches to randomized trials. J R Stat Soc [A] 1994;157:357.
66. Smith M, Ungerleider R, Korn E, Rubinstein L, Simon R. The role of independent data monitoring committees in randomized clinical trials sponsored by the National Cancer Institute. J Clin
Oncol 1997;15:2736.
67. Neyman J, Pearson ES. On the use and interpretation of certain test criteria. Biometrika 1928;201:175.
68. Simon R. Confidence intervals for reporting results from clinical trials. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:429.
69. Berkson J, Gage RP. Calculation of survival rates for cancer. Proc Mayo Clin 1950;25:270.
70. Cutler SJ, Ederer F. Maximum utilization of the life table method in analyzing survival. J Chronic Dis 1958;8:699.
71. Kaplan EI, Meier P. Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observations. J Am Stat Assoc 1958;53:457.
72. Anderson JR, Crowley JJ, Propert KJ. Interpretation of survival date in clinical trials (with discussion by R Simon). Oncology 1991;5:104.
73. Harrington DP, Anderson JW. Common methods of analyzing response data in clinical trials (with discussion by R Simon). Oncology 1990;4:95.
74. Tannock IF. False-positive results in clinical trials: multiple significance tests and the problem of unreported comparisons. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:206.
75. Fleming TR, Watelet L. Approaches to monitoring clinical trials. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:188.
76. Simon R. Randomized clinical trials and research strategy. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:1083.
77. Simon R. Statistical tools for subset analysis in clinical trials. In: Baum M, Kay R, Scheurlen H, eds. Recent results in cancer research, vol 3. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1988:55.
78. Gail M, Simon R. Testing for qualitative interactions between treatment effects and patient subsets. Biometrics 1985;41:361.
79. Dixon DO, Simon R. Bayesian subset analysis. Biometrics 1991;47:871.
80. Simon R. Discovering the truth about Tamoxifen: problems of multiplicity in the evaluation of biomedical data. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:627.
81. Zelen M. Guideline for publishing papers on cancer clinical trials: responsibilities of editors and authors. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:164.
82. Begg CB, Pocock SJ, Freedman L, Zelen M. State of the art in comparative cancer clinical trials. Cancer 1987;60:2811.
83. Begg CB. Quality of clinical trials. Ann Oncol 1990;1:319.
84. Pocock SJ, Hughes MD, Lee RJ. Statistical problems in the reporting of clinical trials: a survey of three medical journals. N Engl J Med 1987;317:426.
85. Simon R, Wittes RE. Methodologic guidelines for reports of clinical trials. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:1.
86. Weiss GB, Hokanson JA. Comparing survival of responders and non-responders after treatment: a potential source of confusion in interpreting cancer clinical trials. Control Clin Trials
1983;4:43.
87. Staquet MJ, Rosencweig M, Hoff DDV. The delta and epsilon errors in the assessment of cancer clinical trials. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;63:1917.
88. Zelen M. Strategy and alternative randomized designs in cancer clinical trials. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:1095.
89. Begg CB, Berlin JA. Publication bias and dissemination of clinical research. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:107-115.
90. Collins R, Gray R, Godwin J, Peto R. Avoidance of large biases and large random errors in the assessment of moderate treatment effects: the need for systematic overviews. Stat Med

1987;6:245.

SECTION 21.2 Research Data Management
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 21.2
Research Data Management
DOUGLAS HAGEMAN
DIANNE M. REEVES
Introduction
Protocol Development
Phase of Protocol
Study Objectives
Study Design
Treatment Administration and Schema
Procedural Issues
Patient Recruitment, Screening, and Registration
Protocol Implementation
Data Collection
Protocol Questions and End Points
Quality Control
Monitoring and Audits
Analysis and Publication
Information Technology
Basic Concepts
Internet Technologies
Data Classification
U.S. Food and Drug Administration Recommendations
Data Validation
Direct Data Capture
Security
Summary
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Historically, discussions of data management have focused on an inherently manual process. Questions pertaining to data collection form layout, transport of
information, and the role of computers were paramount. Now the questions relate to information technology's assumed role in research data management. Data can
be collected in real time from study sites worldwide. Data quality can be verified at time of input or collection. The human interface between clinical care data (the
hospital-clinic systems) and clinical research data (the subset of clinical data dictated by protocol) can be significantly assisted by the electronic interchange of data
between computers. Still, the fundamentals of data management remain fairly constant and can be applied throughout the steps in the clinical trial life cycle. The
clinical trial life cycle begins with protocol development and continues through patient recruitment, screening and registration, protocol implementation, and analysis
and publication.

PROTOCOL DEVELOPMENT
Data management begins with the protocol document and the events prescribed in that document. The protocol defines study objectives, patient selection and
eligibility, and the temporal sequence of events. Data to be collected must be prospectively identified. Common elements in treatment protocols include a précis or
summary of the protocol, schema, protocol objectives, study design, definition of patient population, the protocol intervention, drug information, toxicities and dosage
modifications, methods of evaluation against study end points, data collection, and statistical considerations (see protocol outline in Table 21.2-1).1,2 Each component
has an impact on research data management and defines requirements to be carried out during the study. In fact, data management begins with the process of
authoring, reviewing, and approving the protocol document itself. This process often depends on coordination with associate investigators, internal review committees,
institutional review boards, and external sponsors. It is often time-consuming and driven by multiple levels of review. Document templates, electronic document
routing, electronic signature, and the use of structured text in the protocol-authoring step of the life cycle could mean that protocols can be conducted more quickly
with higher-quality information at every level. The National Cancer Institute (NCI) is pursuing development of information systems that may help to evolve this lengthy
process into a faster one. 3

TABLE 21.2-1. Protocol Outline, National Cancer Institute Division of Clinical Sciences, Bethesda, MD

PHASE OF PROTOCOL
The protocol phase determines the type of data collected to evaluate study end points. Phase I is not disease-specific. Major end points are maximum tolerated dose
of the treatment. The data collection will be focused on measurement and categorization of toxicities. The study size will be small, composed of groups (usually fewer
than six participants) at each dose level until maximum tolerated dose is reached.
Phase II is tumor- and diagnosis-specific. The major end points are response of the tumor to the intervention. Phase II studies do not require a control group. The data
collection will be to evaluate biologic effect and tumor response.
Phase III is disease- and diagnosis-specific, and its major end points are efficacy, survival, and symptom control. Phase III studies yield results that can be
generalized to the population. This imposes the need for a dramatically larger sample size and, possibly, randomization of study subjects to create a control group.
The implications for data management are huge: To achieve protocol accrual in a reasonable time, phase III studies are usually conducted in multiple centers. 1,4 A
coordinating center is responsible for the management and monitoring of study accrual and conduct of the randomization process. Phase IV studies are designed for
postmarketing surveillance of approved drugs.
STUDY OBJECTIVES

This section includes scientific background and defines study. The end points will drive study conduct as well as determine the data required.
STUDY DESIGN
The study design specifies study population, sample size, enrollment, treatment administration and schema, data collection, and analysis. Each component will
require specific data management events or tasks.
The study population is determined by the use of inclusion and exclusion criteria: what patient diagnoses or characteristics are required to participate in the study
(inclusion) and which will eliminate someone from participating (exclusion). Data management tasks include the evaluation and recording of these criteria for each
prospective patient.
TREATMENT ADMINISTRATION AND SCHEMA
Treatment administration and schema outline the study intervention and the temporal sequence in which events must occur. The impact on data management is the
resultant schedule sequence for data collection. Schedule delays and intervention modification will be described in sufficient detail to render these directives
operational.
PROCEDURAL ISSUES
The protocol should identify procedural issues for the study conduct, such as documentation of eligibility, enrollment and registration procedures, study schedule, and
detailed data collection and handling methods. The tools (forms, procedures, computer applications) for data collection will be included, as well as documentation
about computerized systems used to handle trial data. 5 All processes, data requirements, sequence of events, data collection instruments, database, and electronic
system usage in a study should be identified prospectively as intended, to support only the stated study objectives. 6
PATIENT RECRUITMENT, SCREENING, AND REGISTRATION
Once the protocol is approved and ready for patient accrual, the life cycle moves to the step of patient recruitment. The goal here is to apply the study population
parameters—inclusion and exclusion criteria—to potential patients. Matching eligibility criteria with a particular patient requires that criteria be expressed in a
standard way. As appropriate within the study design, rendering the entrance criteria as nonspecific as possible will facilitate study accrual. 6 An additional challenge is
the display of protocol information based on very specific patient characteristics. Without this capability, information may not narrow study choices sufficiently for
patients and their physicians to make informed preliminary decisions. For example, one test using the NCI's Physician Data Query protocol search at
http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/trialsrch.shtml to enter a search for breast cancer trials returned 140 trials, but when the search was limited to only phase III trials for
stage II breast cancer, the return dropped significantly. To the extent that the patient population specified in the protocol can be expressed via minimal criteria, the
study-patient matching can be facilitated.
Prospective registration (before study intervention) ensures that the patient selection process does not bias the results. Given the methodologic issues and the
administrative challenges associated with tracking study accrual, an independent registration office or coordinating center is recommended. A common model is for a
coordinating center to record patient registration to a study. After registration, notification to the pharmacy allows study agents to be released to the patient.
Additionally, randomization assignments can be made by the coordinating center at time of registration, independently of the study team.

PROTOCOL IMPLEMENTATION
The protocol life cycle approach allows the researcher to reap the benefit of advance planning at the point of protocol implementation ( Table 21.2-2). Study design
and questions drive the collection of research data and the creation of study-specific data management tools, 1 while U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
recommendations and international guidelines define good clinical practices (GCPs) that must be operational in clinical research. 7

TABLE 21.2-2. Data Management for Support of the Protocol Life Cycle

Clinical research data constitute a subset of the patient's medical information, so the requirement in the design of data management tools and processes is to be
selective. The desire to capture interesting but unused data will dilute the ability to answer the study's scientific questions and will overwhelm study personnel with
unnecessary workloads.
A data management approach that supports the protocol life cycle will reuse elements identified in the concept and protocol documents, maintaining focus on the
study design. It also supports minimal redundancy of data entry, using data harmonization to add standardized meaning to terminology. Researchers understand the
strength of this approach in their long-term ability to share information with other investigators and to apply the same analytic procedures across protocols, and in
their ability to enroll patients and conduct clinical trials across organizational and geographic constraints.
The heart of data management is the effort of personnel using a set of tools and work processes. Processes must support the sophistication of the tools (electronic or
paper-based) used and facilitate the collection and entry of clinical research data.
DATA COLLECTION
Case report forms (CRFs) represent the industry's standard approach that has been adopted by most research institutions for the collection of clinical research data.
The CRF is a layout, or template, of the data elements that are to be captured by personnel working with clinical research data. Items may be categorized and
grouped in a logical work flow and order. 8 Items collected or abstracted from source documents should be contiguous on the forms, 9 encouraging the capture of
complete data sets and lessening the risk of missing elements. Consistency across protocols will be reflected in a similar display of generic items on forms, use of the
same coding conventions across studies, and standardized definition of terms across protocols and across forms for a single study. Figure 21.2-1 is an example of a
CRF used for collecting a patient's prior therapy information. Notice that acceptable choices for certain categories (prior therapy type and response) are identified at
the top of the form, in addition to other specific instructions supplied at the bottom of the form.

FIGURE 21.2-1. Sample case report form: prior therapy.

In recent years, many institutions have moved to the use of electronic CRFs to enter, view, and monitor clinical research data. The automated approach offers such
advantages as the ability to aggregate data for reports, the ability to search for patient-specific data as needed, and the ability to share information rapidly. The use of
paper CRFs as retrievable, auditable signs of data abstraction is a powerful reminder of the benefits of a paper approach.
Electronic CRFs that are customized for a protocol yet retain some measure of generic content to support cross-study aggregate views of the data are appealing to
investigators and clinical trial teams. A presentation of data collection needs that is driven by the study, and not a cloned set of data points used for all trials, supports
principles of data integrity. The electronic replacement of paper CRFs and data discrepancy forms with computers requires the same attention to coding conventions,
work flow, and consistency as do approaches with paper tools. Additionally, the electronic approach permits front-end validation processes, such as range checking,
simple edit checks, and cross-validation between variables measured on repeated occasions. 8,10
The decision to move from paper to electronic CRFs and automated data management processes requires an organizational commitment to reengineer work
processes. Hammer and Champy11 noted that most organizations view technology through the “lens of existing processes.” They should not ask how they can use
technology to do what they are doing now but rather how they can improve what they are doing now and achieve entirely new goals. 12 Electronic CRFs may enable
organizations to streamline their work flow, introduce new data quality practices, or prepare auditors before monitoring visits. In 1996, 95% of all clinical trials still
used paper. 12 Moving to the electronic arena requires personnel to overcome fears about change, to reengineer processes, and to create radically new goals. 13 It is
possible to redefine data management to make the paper CRF obsolete and create electronic access for personnel to enter clinical data directly from the source
document into the computer. Auditors could review an activity log and electronic CRFs as well as view aggregate data before a site visit. Data abstracted in a
paper-based system could be replaced by direct data entry without abstraction onto CRFs. 12 These technologic advancements must be accompanied by process
reengineering, so that personnel are comfortable with these changes and the benefits they offer. They may enable geographically distant sites, patients, and
researchers to collaborate on clinical trial accrual, using Internet-based technologies and multisite-consistent work practices. 14
Data Collection Instruments
A collection of data values from the conduct of clinical research is a logically coherent, meaningful collection of related data. It is designed and populated for a
specific purpose. Data are entered and stored so that they may be retrieved and used in meaningful ways. Clinical research data are composed of discrete pieces of
raw material gathered through investigation. If the data are ambiguous, incomplete, or erroneous, processing cannot turn the data into valid information. There are
strategies an institution can adapt to validate data at the point of abstraction and entry.
Data Standards
Data must be accurate, precise, current, and complete. CRFs (electronic or paper) must be constructed to encourage correct entries, supplying user instructions and
cues. Instructions should be unambiguous and written in terminology useful for personnel completing the forms. Form identifiers and landmarks must be consistent
and clearly define required items. When choice lists are used to code or list items, they must be readily available for review. The sequence of items on a form must be
logical and mimic source documents or work processes used to capture these items. 8,10 Elements captured together must be contiguous on the CRFs, to enter a
complete set of data points.
Duplication must be avoided. To increase efficiency and eliminate the need to cross-check items across forms, data should be collected without redundancy. Data
should be entered once and reused, not reentered. To indicate the presence of mandatory items, elements can be set in bold-face type or displayed in some
consistent manner.
PROTOCOL QUESTIONS AND END POINTS
Data must be targeted to answer protocol questions. Forms must focus on the data needed to answer questions central to the study conduct. Study end points must
be defined with specificity and then decomposed to yield the components needing collection on a defined schedule. Element definitions and coding conventions must
be recorded consistently across the protocol, to ensure that outcomes can be replicated and results generalized and to attest to the proper conduct of the protocol.
Data harmonization and standardization should be reflected in data validation approaches that focus on the interpretation of results across single or multiple
protocols. The use of a data dictionary or inventory of well-defined data elements could help to impose standards critical for study outcomes.
Whether in paper or electronic form, data collection instruments combined with quality control offer an integrated approach to the capture and entry of clinical
research data.
QUALITY CONTROL
GCPs are codes, regulations, and guidelines that supply structure and requirements to the clinical research process. Scientific questions and data that must be
collected add the direction and level of detail required for personnel to conduct clinical research. International standards have emerged from the International
Conference on Harmonisation, a union of the United States, the European Union, and Japan. This group has formulated global standards for the conduct of clinical
research7 that have been adopted by many industry and academic groups worldwide.
The International Conference on Harmonisation defines a GCP as “A standard for the design, performance, monitoring, auditing, recording, analyses, and reporting of
clinical trials to provide assurance that the data and reported results are credible and accurate.” 15 Study performance, monitoring, and auditing are components of
quality control activities pivotal to the conduct of clinical research. Long impugned as undesirable or even noncontributing measures of research integrity, quality
control topics have found new disciples in an environment sensitized to the disasters that can occur when they are missing.
Quality control activities merit a plan for each level of personnel to handle clinical research data according to guidelines. Clinical data systems and processes have
the potential to improve the quality and costs of research by influencing medical decisions at the point they are being made. 16 Quality control processes must be
integrated into daily work assignments, not approached as an additional requirement. This approach views quality control within an organizational philosophy, a
continuum of events resulting in process improvement and the professional development of personnel.
MONITORING AND AUDITS
Monitoring and audit activities fit the traditional profile of quality assurance activities. Whether it is the submission of current data or the retrospective audit of source
documents and forms, these activities reflect an ongoing process and the expectation of never reaching perfect compliance. Monitoring activities reflect the scientific
and administrative rigor an organization imposes on itself to measure the quality of its research programs.

Monitoring is a primary means of quality control for clinical research studies. It is an activity performed by the study monitor of a clinical research organization with the
formal responsibility of monitoring the conduct of research trials. Monitoring visits can focus on a variety of protocol-centered elements. Data can be inspected for
their completeness and comparison to expected values. Values that fall outside the range of acceptance as well as missing values will generate data clarification
forms for the submitting organization. The creation of clarifications or data discrepancy reports and the resolution of clarifications with resultant resubmission of
corrected and validated data back to the monitoring agency creates a continual loop for process improvement at the organizational level. Monitoring activities can
focus on protocol administrative and regulatory aspects, the availability and completeness of standard operating procedures, institutional and regulatory approvals
and reviews, and adverse-event reporting or can even compare electronic data entry screens to reports submitted by the institution. 17
An audit is one means of quality assurance, to assess the quality of the research process, and must be conducted by personnel independent of a clinical trial. 17 While
the terms audit and monitoring often are used interchangeably, most literature conveys the relationship to be many audits or auditing activities within the realm of a
monitoring plan.
ANALYSIS AND PUBLICATION
Data management tasks associated with analysis and publication in the life cycle are centered on data retrieval. An investigator or clinical research team will have
predetermined and preformatted views or reports that they use to examine data, producing validated views of the data as important data management tasks. More
flexible queries or simple graphic plots may be required. Report creation on an ad hoc, as-needed basis is a common requirement. However, producing reports and
views of the research data does not in any way replace the efforts of appropriate biostatistical support and analysis. One of the primary data management tasks for
this step may be simply exporting clean, validated data in a format requested by the biostatistician.

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
The information technology architecture required to support clinical trials will depend on the research portfolio and the number of studies and centers involved.
Supporting a single study can be accomplished using commercially available office automation software, such as desktop database applications or spreadsheets.
There are also applications specifically for management of clinical trials well suited for a single trial or a small study portfolio. More common is the clinical trial portfolio
of multiple studies coordinated through a cooperative group or a cancer center. In this case, the burden of managing multiple studies and patients at multiple centers
increases the challenges, both administratively and from the clinical data collection and management perspectives. Data management tools available over a Web
browser can assist the coordination of multicenter trials.
Information technology is the key to producing better information faster and to finding the answers to research questions more rapidly. If we step away from the view
of data management as one step in a process and toward the protocol life cycle model, information technology can be more broadly applied and important to the
success of the studies.
BASIC CONCEPTS
To the extent possible, software applications for clinical research should support work processes, not dictate the process. They should provide study-specific display
and collection of information. To support ease of use as well as enforce security, research data management systems should render information and functions based
on the role of the user. For example, a registered system user would see only the functions appropriate for a role (e.g., data collection, accrual monitoring, audit,
report generation). This role should allow access to only those protocols and patients for which there is an appropriate need to know. Rules-based validation must be
technologically supported. As studies are conducted in large or multiple institutions, remote data entry can speed data collection and assimilation. This is increasingly
being accomplished via Internet-based technologies.
INTERNET TECHNOLOGIES
Web-based data collection and management for single and multicenter trials is being increasingly used. 14,18 This approach supports the collection and display of
complex medical information unconstrained by geographic location. Additionally, it permits display of complex medical information textually or graphically, managed
from a central database. 19 Since it can operate from any site that has an Internet connection and a Web browser, it may be the best answer for large randomized
multicenter trial data collection and administration. It can be platform-independent and stores system logic and data centrally. 20 Given the match of flexible and almost
universally available Internet technology with the requirement for collecting data from multiple sites, use of Web technology will continue to increase exponentially in
the next few years. Lowe 14 describes this as a paradigm shift in medicine toward Internet-based solutions for information management. “Perhaps the two most
important applications to emerge in the next decade will be Internet-based clinical trials (in which patients and researchers, though geographically distributed, will be
linked via secure Internet-based data collection, review and reporting systems) and the Internet-based multimedia electronic medical record.” 14

DATA CLASSIFICATION
As information is collected from multiple studies, sites, investigators, and the like, the issues of data standards and data classification become more important. If data
are to be collected or aggregated across multiple patients at different centers or multiple studies over time, concepts and terms must be expressed with as little
ambiguity as possible. While there is still no consensus on national or international standards for medical vocabularies, there are some dominant candidates to
consider, depending on the medical concept being described. 21 One example is the NCI Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program's adverse event reporting requirement,
which uses Common Toxicity Criteria (CTC) and the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA). Classification of diagnoses, procedures, morphology, and
medications are areas in which fairly mature internationally or commercially maintained vocabularies exist.
Realizing that there is much change occurring in classification of medical terminology, there is no guarantee that a standard used today will be the universally
accepted standard tomorrow. However, implementation of a current classification standard is highly recommended over using a home-grown standard or no standard
at all. Using an existing standard brings a high likelihood that it will be accounted for should a master thesaurus, such as the Unified Medical Language System,
become the standard. Whichever particular scheme is used for data classification on one or a group of studies, adherence to the chosen classifications, enforced by a
system data dictionary, will ensure consistent use.

U.S. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION RECOMMENDATIONS
The FDA has adopted guidelines for clinical trial computer systems that report data to that agency. 5 While only guidelines, they are a benchmark against which data
management systems can be measured. Areas to underscore include a recommendation that standard operating procedures be established for system setup, system
maintenance, data collection, data backup and recovery, and data security. Systems should use electronic signatures to verify that persons entering, viewing, or
updating data are authorized to do so. This also ensures attribution so that data entered under electronic signature can be tracked back to the person entering or
updating the data.
Audit trails allow recreation of the data history. 5 By viewing the audit trail, a user can determine what was recorded at any point in time and who changed the data.

DATA VALIDATION
Systems should provide validation logic to be applied to data at time of entry or in batch edit, a process that records data that fail built-in validation rules. Validation
can be simple range checking or algorithms that alert users when certain conditions are present. One example of this is the application of the NCI Common Toxicity
Criteria; the software prompts the user to file an adverse event report based on a laboratory value falling sufficiently out of range. Data corrections or other actions
taken at time of entry are enforced in real time, but this may or may not be desirable. If the person entering data does not have the expertise or documentation to
answer computer-driven queries, a preferred process would be to record queries centrally and ensure that they be addressed later (i.e., batch edit). Several types of
validation can be easily applied in a computer-based system. These include detection of missing data, data artifacts (outside the usual range), data that contradict
other data, and data trends (conflicting data from one encounter to the next). 2

Validation checks for the presence of data in these fields should be displayed to personnel using clear instructions. When using electronic CRFs, data that fail
validation attempts should generate a message in natural language that will identify delinquent items.
Simple edit checks can verify that text fields are not filled with numbers or dates, that future dates are detected, and that values fall within specified acceptable
ranges. Because it is difficult to apply edit check logic to free text, responses translated into coding lists can help in the application of edit check rules.
Cross-checks can be used in the context of relationships between data points. The value in one field may constrain the entry of a value in another field, so that the
content of these fields can be compared. There can also be cross-validation between variables expected to correlate. For example, if the response to “Prior
Chemotherapy?” is yes, the CRF may require that details of a chemotherapy treatment regimen be entered on the CRF. Other cross-validation would occur between
variables measured on repeated occasions (e.g., lesion measurements on repeated cycle visits) and other context-specific checks.
Double data entry is another form of validation used to minimize data entry. However, double entry procedures may not be sufficient or even necessary for the
production of high-quality clinical research data. Day et al. 10 used exploratory data analysis techniques on simulated clinical data measurements and found that while
the double entry approach does detect some errors, many others occur during the transcription process that are not detectable by double entry processes. The use of
systems with computerized CRFs to enter data directly from source documents also lessens the benefit of a double entry approach. While the double data entry
practice may offer some benefit, other methods to validate data integrity and validity should be mandatory.

DIRECT DATA CAPTURE
Electronic transfer of data from hospital laboratory or other systems into the research data management system is known as direct data capture. When direct data
capture is used, it can result in higher-quality data through reduction of the errors produced when data are rekeyed. Where this model is used, the data management
system must be able to indicate whether and where data have been changed after import. 5

SECURITY
Data management systems should control security at the physical and logical levels. Physical security applies to controlling and safeguarding the physical computer
resources and data storage, enforced via off-site storage of backup data and fire walls that prevent unauthorized access to data and computing resources. Logical
access refers to those persons who have access to data through the assignment of system-based roles. 5 Spriet and Dupen-Spriet 2 described required security as (1)
operational (proper maintenance, virus protection, and proper use); (2) physical (protection against physical harm by fire, water damage, and the like and
safeguarding backup data); and (3) malice (protection against theft, piracy, or sabotage). 2

SUMMARY
Each step of the clinical trial life cycle creates distinct data management tasks and processes specified during protocol development. Supporting these tasks can be
accomplished with manual (paper-based) processes, completely automated with computer systems, or through some combination of both. The model chosen at the
organizational level will depend on principles of good clinical practice and quality control need. The acceptance and use of Internet systems is increasing the
acceptance of computer systems as data management facilitators. The product of clinical research is data, and proper data management can help to turn the data into
information.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Simon RM. Clinical trials in cancer. In DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg S, eds. Cancer: principles and practices of oncology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1997:513.
2. Spriet A, Dupen-Spriet T. Good practice of clinical drug trials. Farmington, CT: Karger, 1997.
3. Silva JS. Fighting cancer in the information age. An architecture for national scale clinical trials. MD Comput 1999;16(3):43.
4. Friedman LM, Furberg CD, DeMets DL. Fundamentals of clinical trials. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1998.
5. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry, computerized systems used in clinical trials. April 1999.
6. Knatterud GL, Rockhold FW, George SL, et al. Guidelines for quality assurance on multicenter clinical trials: a position paper. Control Clin Trials 1998;19:477.
7. International Conference on Harmonisation. Good clinical practice: consolidated guideline. Fed Reg 1997;62(90):1.24.
8. Rotmensz N, ed. Data management and clinical trials. EORTC Study Group on Data Management. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 1989.
9. FitzHenry F, Snyder J. Improving organizational processes for gains during implementation. Comput Nurs 1996;14(3):171.
10. Day S, Fayers P, Harvey D. Double data entry: what value, what price? Control Clin Trials 1998;19:15.
11. Hammer M, Champy J. Reengineering the corporation. New York: HarperCollins, 1993.
12. Vogel R. Remote data capture. Appl Clin Trials 1997;6(5):36.
13. Bartruff B. Issues in clinical trials management: I. Clean data: the mark of excellence. Res Nurs 1999;5(2):12.
14. Lowe HJ. Transforming the cancer center in the 21st century. MD Comput 1999;16(3):40.
15. Hawkins K. Defining good clinical practice. Res Nurs 1999;5:(5):1.
16. Classen D. Clinical decision support systems to improve clinical practice and quality of care. JAMA 1998;280:1360.
17. Bohaychuk W, Ball G. Conducting GCP-compliant clinical research. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1999.
18. Santoro E, Nicolis E, Franzosi MG, Tognoni G. Internet for clinical trials: past, present, and future. Control Clin Trials 1999;19:194.
19. Vissers MC, Hasman A, Stapert JW. Presenting treatment protocols with Web technology. Med Inf 1998;9(1):521.
20. Sippel H, Ohmann C. A Web-based data collection system for clinical studies using Java. Med Inf 1998;23(3):223.
21. Degoulet P, Fieschi M. Introduction to clinical informatics. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1997.

CHAPTER 22 Cancer Prevention: Preventing Tobacco-Related Cancers
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 22
Cancer Prevention: Preventing Tobacco-Related Cancers
HOWARD K. KOH
CHRISTINE KANNLER
ALAN C. GELLER
Introduction
Tobacco and Nicotine Addiction
Health Effects
Smoking Rates and Trends
Adults
Children, Adolescents, and College Students
Cigarette Product Modification
Spit Tobacco
Cigars
Environmental Tobacco Smoke
Tobacco Industry Advertising Strategies
Strategies for Tobacco Control
Individual Approaches
Clinicians' Role
Nicotine Replacement Therapy
Community Level and State Interventions
Restricting Youth Access
Restricting Smoking in Public Places
Tobacco Taxes That Fund Dedicated, Comprehensive Statewide Tobacco Control Programs
California
Massachusetts
Other States
Mass Media and Counter-advertising
Tobacco Litigation and Tobacco Settlement
Proposed U.S. Food and Drug Administration Regulation
Conclusion
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Tobacco addiction ranks as the greatest public health catastrophe of our time. The practice of inhaling cigarette smoke, which gained widespread acceptance only
during the twentieth century, has generated devastating cancer outcomes for our society. Specifically, lung cancer, previously rare, has risen to become the leading
cancer killer in American men and women. 1,2 Worldwide estimates suggest that the annual deaths attributable to smoking, currently 2.5 million, will rise to 12 million
by the year 2050.3,4 and 5 Future medical historians undoubtedly will recall the 1900s as the Tobacco and Cancer Century. 2
A healthier twenty-first century requires a societal commitment to reducing and eradicating tobacco addiction. This chapter reviews the impact of tobacco on cancer
and individual and societal strategies for tobacco control.

TOBACCO AND NICOTINE ADDICTION
Tobacco and tobacco smoke contain at least 4000 chemicals, of which 55 are known carcinogens identified by the International Agency for Research on Cancer. 6 The
most notable carcinogen classes include polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), N-nitrosamines, and miscellaneous organic compounds. Of the PAHs,
benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) is the most extensively studied lung carcinogen. Of the N-nitrosamines, 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) is best known.
Metabolic activation of these agents can incite DNA adduct formation, gene mutations, and a sequence of events that can lead to cancer. The balance between
detoxification and metabolic activation determines, in part, the susceptibility of smokers to cancer. 6
Though nicotine in tobacco is itself not carcinogenic, addiction to nicotine exposes the user to carcinogens, which increases the likelihood of cancer. Nicotine
addiction fulfills the physiologic, behavioral, and social characteristics of a dependence syndrome. 7 The American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM, third edition) requires a minimum of three of seven diagnostic symptoms for drug dependency: (1) tolerance, (2) withdrawal, (3)
greater use than intended, (4) persistent desire to quit, (5) great amounts of time spent smoking, (6) activities given up or reduced due to smoking, and (7) continued
smoking despite knowledge of having persistent physical or psychological problems with the substance. 7 The 1988 Surgeon General's report focused on the concept
of nicotine addiction and its clinical ability to produce brief, pleasurable psychoactive effects; its continued use despite known adverse health outcomes; development
of tolerance during early usage; and occurrence of withdrawal symptoms on cessation of use. 8 Withdrawal symptoms include nervousness, restlessness, anxiety,
impaired cognition, headache, drowsiness, gastrointestinal disturbances, nicotine cravings, increased appetite and weight gain, and anxiety. 7,8 and 9

HEALTH EFFECTS
As early as 1928, Lombard and Doering 10 reported higher smoking rates among patients with cancer than among controls. Later, the pioneering epidemiologic work of
Doll and Hill, 11 Wynder and Graham, 12 and Hammond and Horn13 led to further investigations, which culminated in the 1964 U.S. Surgeon General's report on
smoking and health. 14 This report concluded that cigarette smoking was the major cause of lung cancer in men and was causally related to laryngeal cancer and oral
cancer in men.14
In total, more than 60,000 studies and two dozen additional reports of the Surgeon General have confirmed the devastating impact of tobacco use on human health.
Tobacco use, causing approximately 30% of all deaths and more than 400,000 deaths annually, is the leading cause of preventable death in this country ( Fig.
22-1).1,15,16 Tobacco use kills more Americans each year than do alcohol, cocaine, crack, heroin, homicide, suicide, car accidents, firearms, and the acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) combined.17

FIGURE 22-1. 430,000 U.S. deaths are attributable each year to cigarette smoking.

Smoking causes more than 85% to 90% of lung cancers, with a clear dose-response relationship between risk and daily cigarette consumption. 18 People who smoke
more than a pack of cigarettes per day have a risk that is as much as 20 times that of nonsmokers. 18 In smokers exposed to other carcinogens in the workplace (e.g.,
pipefitters exposed to asbestos; uranium workers exposed to radon), the risk for lung cancer is raised in a synergistic fashion. 19,20,21 and 22
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality in both men and women. U.S. estimates for 2000 include approximately 157,000 lung cancer deaths. Lung
cancer incidence rates vary widely by race and ethnicity, from a high of 73.9 per 100,000 in African Americans to a low of 27.6 among Hispanics. 1 Gender differences
exist as well. Male lung cancer incidence rates peaked in 1984 (86.5 per 100,000) and have decreased since then. Similarly, male lung cancer mortality rates peaked
in 1990 at 75.2 per 100,000. 1 In contrast, female lung cancer incidence and mortality continue to rise. Of note, in the late 1980s, lung cancer surpassed breast cancer
as the leading cause of cancer death among U.S. women. 1 The histologic profile of lung cancer has shifted, with declining rates of squamous cell carcinoma but
increasing rates of adenocarcinoma. 23
In addition, smoking is accepted as the major cause of cancers of the larynx, pharynx, oral cavity, and esophagus, and is a contributory factor in cancers of the
pancreas, bladder, kidney, stomach, colon, and uterine cervix and in acute leukemia. 24,25 A synergistic, multiplicative effect appears to exist between smoking and
drinking. 26 For example, the risk for developing cancer of the larynx is as much as 75% higher in people who use tobacco and alcohol as compared with people using
either substance alone. 24,26
The use of pipes, cigars, and spit tobacco in its various forms (plug tobacco, loose-leaf tobacco, twist tobacco, and moist snuff) also causes cancers of the oral
cavity.18,24,25,26,27 and 28 Tobacco use is responsible for more than 90% of tumors of the oral cavity among men and 60% among women. 27 Spit tobacco is a significant
cause of leukoplakia, 27,28,29 and 30 an abnormal thickening and keratinization of the oral mucosa that is recognized as a precursor of malignancy. Even after cessation of
tobacco exposure, the “field cancerization effect” elevates the risk of cancer of the entire epithelium of the upper aerodigestive tract for years. 31
Other adverse health outcomes from tobacco addiction include increased risks of cardiovascular disease. 32,33 and 34 The Nurses' Health Study found a 2.5-fold
increased risk of fatal coronary heart disease and nonfatal myocardial infarction and up to three times the risk of cerebrovascular disease in smokers as compared to
nonsmokers. Smoking also contributes to peripheral vascular disease, aortic aneurysm, impotence, Buerger's disease (thromboangiitis obliterans), and skin aging. 32,33
and 34

Americans spend an estimated $50 billion annually on direct medical care for smoking-related illnesses. 35 Lost productivity and forfeited earnings due to
smoking-related disability account for another $47 billion per year. 36

SMOKING RATES AND TRENDS
With the vigorous promotion of the blended cigarette in the twentieth century, the annual adult per capita consumption of cigarettes has skyrocketed from 54
cigarettes in 1900 to 4345 cigarettes in 1963, the peak of American consumption per individual smoker. 35 Although consumption has declined, approximately 500
billion cigarettes were sold in the United States in 1995. 6 Historically, smoking rates in men have far exceeded those in women, but the gender difference has
narrowed as male rates declined and female rates rose. 1,35 Rates for most races and ethnic groups have decreased since 1978, although the rate of decrease
recently has ebbed ( Fig. 22-2).37 The tobacco industry's attempts to recruit women range from the American Tobacco Company's advertising campaign, “To keep a
slender figure, reach for a Lucky Strike instead of a sweet” (1920s) to Philip Morris's Virginia Slims slogan, “You've come a long way, baby.” 38

FIGURE 22-2. Current cigarette smoking among adults, National Health Interview Surveys, United States 1978–1995 aggregate data.

ADULTS
Approximately 1 billion smokers are found worldwide. 39 According to the 1995 National Health Interview Study, in the United States, nearly 47 million adults (24.7%)
currently smoke, either daily (20.1%) or on some days (4.6%). 37 Currently, men (27.0%) are more likely to smoke than are women (22.6%). Among racial and ethnic
groups, American Indians and Alaskan natives had the highest prevalence (36.2%), whereas Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders had the lowest (16.6%). 37
Educational level is the most important predictor of smoking prevalence. 9 High school dropouts had the highest prevalence (41.9% and 33.7% for men and women,
respectively), whereas college graduates had the lowest (14.3% and 13.7%, respectively). 37
Since the landmark 1964 Surgeon General's report, overall U.S. smoking prevalence has declined by half, from 50.2% (1965) to 25% (1998), although adult smoking
rates reached a plateau in the 1990s. 1 Declines in smoking prevalence were greater among African American, Hispanic, and white men who were high school
graduates than among those with less education. 1 In fact, in the United States during 1965 through 1994, smoking prevalence in adults younger than 65 years
declined in every demographic category except those with less than 12 years of education. 7
CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS, AND COLLEGE STUDENTS
Tobacco use qualifies as a pediatric disease. 40 Its current prevalence among adolescents (cigarettes, cigars, or smokeless tobacco) is an astonishing 42.7%. 1,41 The
1997 Youth Risk Behavior Survey showed smoking rates for girls and boys as 69.3% and 70.9% for lifetime cigarette use and 34.7% and 37.7% for current cigarette
use.41 Nearly 90% of adult smokers begin smoking by the age of 18 years. Even by grade 9, 67% of children have experimented with cigarettes. 41 It is estimated that
of nearly 3000 young people who start smoking each day, 1 in 3 will die prematurely. 42,43 At least 3 million American teenagers smoke regularly. 9
Numerous surveys document increased smoking among children and adolescents in recent years. 41 The national 1997 Youth Risk Behavior Survey indicated that
cigarette smoking prevalence among U.S. high school students increased from 27.5% in 1991 to 36.4% in 1997. 41 This rise occurred in all racial and ethnic groups
[e.g., whites (30.9% to 39.7%), African Americans (12.6% to 22.7%), and Hispanics (25.3% to 34.0%)]. In 1997, the prevalence of current cigar use was 22.0%.
Monitoring the Future Project data (an analysis of high school seniors from 1976 to 1995) show that the smoking rate among high school seniors (defined as smoking
in the past 30 days) rose from 28.3% in 1991 to 34% in 1996, and rates for grades 8 and 10 show similar or larger increases. 43
Notably, the age of smoking initiation has declined over the past four decades, for both whites (by 2.4 years) and African Americans (by 1 to 3 years). The decline is
particularly striking for girls (5.4 years and 4.6 years for whites and African Americans, respectively). 9 Also, half of the nation's 6 million smokeless tobacco users were
younger than 21 years, and several national surveys show an increase in prevalence, especially among boys. 9
Predictors of future tobacco use include a number of behavioral risk factors. 42,43,44,45,46,47 and 48 These factors include the child's own certainty about smoking or not

smoking in the future, low self-image, poor academic career, receptivity to tobacco advertising, peer pressure, and the use of promotional items. 42,43,44,45,46,47,48 and 49
Individual personality traits such as risk taking and deviant behaviors and perceptions of maturity, attractiveness, and independence also play a role in a child's
susceptibility to tobacco use. In white youngsters, peer pressure (estimated by the number of friends who smoke) and a low grade point average were important risk
factors. Among African Americans, a greater risk-taking attitude was an important predictor of tobacco use. 48 Acculturation or integration into American society is
associated with increased smoking by Latin and Asian women. 48
Tobacco use in children is linked to alcohol and illegal drug use. 44,45 Among boys especially, aggressive or disruptive classroom behavior as early as first grade has
been found to predict later tobacco and other heavy drug use, as well as antisocial behavior and criminality. 44 The National Household Study on Drug Abuse from
1985 showed children who smoke are 3 times more likely to drink alcohol, 8 times more likely to smoke marijuana, and 22 times more likely to use cocaine. 48
Children's tobacco and alcohol use also were associated with less effective parenting behaviors in the children's families and with parental use of tobacco and
alcohol. 45
Newer data point to increasing smoking rates among college students. 50 In serial surveys of nearly 15,000 randomly selected college students, Wechsler et al. 50
found that the prevalence of current cigarette smoking rose by 27.8% (from 22.3% to 28.5% during the period 1993 through 1997). Defying earlier trends, 11% of
college smokers had their first cigarette and 28% began to smoke regularly at or after age 19 years. Half of current college smokers tried to quit in the previous year;
18% had made five or more attempts to quit.50

CIGARETTE PRODUCT MODIFICATION
In the 1950s, confronted with declining cigarette sales after studies linked smoking to lung cancer, tobacco companies began producing filter-tip brands designed to
remove certain smoke components that manufacturers had not heretofore acknowledged to be harmful. 51 Methods used to decrease the tar and nicotine content in
cigarettes were filter tips, porous cigarette paper, reconstituted tobacco, and filter-tip ventilation. 52 Today, almost all cigarettes on the market have filters, most with
perforations to dilute tar, nicotine, and carbon monoxide, thereby decreasing their delivery to a smoker's lungs. 53 As a result, in 1995, 72.7% of cigarettes delivered no
more than 15 mg of tar, as compared to only 3.6% of cigarettes in 1970. 1 Cigarettes contain 6 to 11 mg of nicotine, of which a smoker typically absorbs 1 to 3 mg,
irrespective of nicotine yield ratings. To satisfy the level of nicotine needed, smokers modified their smoking behavior by inhaling more deeply and blocking filter vents
with their fingers or lips to increase nicotine yield. These behaviors now are suspected to be linked to rising rates of adenocarcinoma of the lung, which currently is
the most common type of lung cancer in the United States. 23 Nevertheless, the tobacco industry has continued to suggest health benefits to consumers through the
creation and promotion of “light,” “ultralight,” “mild,” “medium,” “slim,” and “superslim” cigarettes. 25

SPIT TOBACCO
Spit tobacco (smokeless tobacco), available as snuff or chewing tobacco, has gained great popularity over the last few decades. 54,55,56,57 and 58 Snuff dipping, the
practice of sucking on a pinch of powdered, flavored tobacco in the cavity between gum and cheek, has increased. Consumption of snuff products nearly tripled
between 1972 and 1991. 56 The 1997 Youth Risk Behavior Survey documented a 9.3% prevalence of current spit tobacco use among high school students, with 21%
of boys ages 11 to 19 defined as experimenters. 57 The consumption of chewing tobacco, which involves a “chaw” held in the inner cheek area, has also increased. 56,58
Use of both snuff and chewing tobacco requires continual expectoration—hence the term spit tobacco.55 Manufacturers prefer the term smokeless tobacco, to imply a
safe alternative to smoking. However, the nicotine in snuff is 2 times the dose in cigarettes, whereas the nicotine in chewing tobacco is 15 times that found in
cigarettes. 58 Users tend to be white male adolescents aged 18 to 24 years, persons of low socioeconomic status, current cigarette smokers, residents of the southern
United States, baseball players, and American Indians. 57
Spit tobacco can accelerate a litany of destructive oral changes, from local nonmalignant effects (gingival recession, loss of periodontal attachments, periodontal bone
and soft tissue destruction, halitosis, tooth staining, tooth abrasion) to leukoplakia and frank oral cancer. Leukoplakia typically occurs on the cheek mucosa, alveolar
ridge, and gingiva, where the snuff is placed. In contrast, tobacco chewers tend to have bilateral lesions of leukoplakia, which is associated with a 3% to 6%
progression to squamous cell carcinoma. 58

CIGARS
Cigar smoke, which contains the same carcinogenic and toxic compounds as cigarettes, also increases risk of cancer, coronary heart disease, and pulmonary
pathologic processes. 8,59,60 and 61 Cigar smoking is potentially addicting and is associated with cancers of the oral cavity, larynx, esophagus, and lung. 8,59,61 Reversing a
20-year decline, cigar sales increased by 50% from 1993 to 1997, 61 prompted by industry marketing and the belief that cigars are less dangerous than cigarettes.
Young to middle-aged men of high socioeconomic status, teenagers, and women are the groups responsible for the increased consumption of cigars. 60 The overall
prevalence of current cigar use among high school students was 22% in 1997. Teenagers most at risk of smoking cigars were male and those students who smoke
cigarettes. 60

ENVIRONMENTAL TOBACCO SMOKE
The 1986 U.S. Surgeon General's report defined environmental tobacco smoke (ETS), also called secondhand smoke, as the combination of sidestream smoke
(released from a burning cigarette between puffs) and the fraction of mainstream smoke exhaled by the smoker. 62 The more hazardous sidestream smoke has double
the amount of nicotine than mainstream smoke and a higher concentration of carcinogens. 62 Most people spend 90% of their time in the two microenvironments of
home and work, where ETS exposure usually occurs. 63 Those at greatest risk for harm from ETS are those who live with smokers in homes where smoking is allowed.
Levels of serum cotinine, a nicotine metabolite, are increased in nonsmokers who live with smokers and are correlated to the number of cigarettes smoked. 64
An increasing number of studies have documented the health risks of the nonsmoker exposed to ETS. 62,63,64,65,66,67 and 68 Case-control studies first noted that
nonsmoking wives of smoking husbands had increased risk of lung cancer. 64 In 1992, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), in the most thoroughly
documented analysis ever undertaken of the effects of exposure to ETS, concluded that secondhand smoke can cause lung cancer in nonsmoking adults and can
impair the respiratory systems of children. The EPA classified ETS as a group A carcinogen, a designation reserved for agents such as asbestos. Of 30 studies
analyzed in the EPA report, 24 found an increased risk of lung cancer for nonsmoking wives of husbands who smoked, and each of the 17 studies that examined risk
based on exposure level reported increased lung cancer among those most exposed. 67
The EPA report and other ETS studies now attribute approximately 3000 deaths to lung cancer, up to 62,000 deaths to ischemic heart disease, and up to 2700 deaths
to sudden infant death syndrome. 67 The 1997 California Environmental Protection Agency Report also notes that ETS is responsible for new cases of low-birth-weight
infants (up to 18,600 cases per year), new cases of childhood asthma (up to 26,000 new cases per year), exacerbation of childhood asthma (up to 1 million new cases
per year), and bronchitis or pneumonia in children aged 18 months and younger (up to 300,000 cases per year). Workers at great risk for harm from ETS include flight
attendants, casino workers, and restaurant and bar workers, among others. 68

TOBACCO INDUSTRY ADVERTISING STRATEGIES
Tobacco companies have dedicated considerable resources to corner new markets, because an estimated 3500 Americans quit smoking and an additional 1200
customers die of smoking-related illness each day. During the last two decades, the tobacco industry has nearly quadrupled its marketing expenditures ( Fig. 22-3).69,70
The 1994 U.S. Surgeon General's report, “Preventing Tobacco Use Among Young People,” summarized the research on the impact of tobacco advertising and
promotional activities on youth 71:

FIGURE 22-3. Cigarette advertising and promotion expenditures in the United States have more than quadrupled in 22 years.

Young people constitute a highly strategic market for the tobacco industry.
Young people are continuously exposed to cigarette messages through print media and promotional activities.
Cigarette advertising uses images, not information, to portray the attractiveness of smoking.
Cigarette advertisements capitalize on the disparity between an ideal and actual self-image, implying that smoking may close the gap.
Cigarette advertising appears to affect young people's perceptions of the pervasiveness, image, and function of smoking. Such misperceptions increase young
people's risk of smoking.
Most adolescents now experiment with tobacco almost as a rite of passage and have high recollection of tobacco industry promotional messages. Nearly 70% of
children aged 13 reported at least moderate receptivity to marketing materials, indicating susceptibility. 72 Adolescents and youth are susceptible to image advertising
and promotional themes as they seek to find their own identities. 49 One study found 6-year-old children were as likely to identify Joe Camel as they were Mickey
Mouse.73
In addition, adolescents smoke the most heavily advertised brands. 49 Pierce et al.49 provided the first longitudinal evidence that tobacco promotional activities are
causally related to the onset of smoking. A total of 1752 adolescents who had never smoked and who were not susceptible to smoking when first interviewed in 1993
were reinterviewed in 1996. Nearly 50% progressed toward smoking, by becoming susceptible, by experimenting, or by consuming at least 100 cigarettes. The
authors attributed 34% of all adolescent tobacco experimentation in California from 1993 through 1996 to industry promotional activities. 49
Tobacco marketing strategies include magazine and newspaper advertising, outdoor advertising, sponsorship of sporting events and public entertainment, and
distribution of free samples of cigarettes in public places. Promotions and specialty items include mailings and giveaways of multiple packs (buy one, get one free)
and coupon reductions for attractive specialty items (such as T-shirts, caps, calendars, and sporting goods). 9,42,74 Surveys have found that half of all adolescent
smokers and one-fourth of adolescent nonsmokers owned at least one tobacco promotional item. 42 Tobacco companies also pay retailers for shelf space and engage
them to promote point-of-sale advertising, a technique that places the tobacco products in convenient visible (usually self-service) racks and in point-of-purchase
displays.9,42
One of the first studies to examine systematically the relationship between cigarette brand–specific advertising and youth readership found that youth brands were
more likely than adult brands to be advertised in magazines having a higher percentage of young readers (ages 12 to 17 years). The authors recommended that
cigarette advertising in all youth magazines be eliminated. 75
The tobacco industry also uses its considerable financial and legal resources to influence local and national policy. 35,76,77 and 78 Industry magnates frame the increasing
public debate about smoking regulations around rights and liberty rather than health, portray adversaries as extremists, and invest millions of dollars in campaign
contributions to the leading political parties. 35,76,77,78 and 79 They successfully solicit allies (including advertisers, civil libertarians, and restaurant owners) to help lobby
or advance arguments that oppose regulation. 77
The tobacco industry has generally escaped strong government legislation. Federal legislation, including the Controlled Substances Act (1970), Consumer Product
Safety Act (1972), and Toxic Substances Control Act (1976) all exclude tobacco from regulation. 78 The landmark 1965 Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act,
the first federal statute enacting labeling requirements for cigarette packages, contained a federal preemption clause preventing individual states from making laws to
regulate tobacco advertising. 78

STRATEGIES FOR TOBACCO CONTROL
For decades, the concept of tobacco control focused solely on cessation strategies for individual smokers. More recently, the emphasis has broadened to encompass
prevention strategies that stress denormalization of tobacco use for the entire community. Hence, key dimensions now include individual approaches that expand the
role of the clinician in smoking cessation services, which include pharmacologic cessation therapies; community and state interventions; policy strategies; tobacco
taxes that fund comprehensive statewide tobacco control programs; mass media and counter-advertising; and tobacco litigation and the tobacco settlement. 78
INDIVIDUAL APPROACHES
Each year, approximately 20 million (of the 50 million smokers in the United States) try to quit smoking. 79,80 and 81 In addition, 77% of smokers would like to quit, and
65% have made at least one serious attempt at quitting. Yet, studies indicate that one-third relapse after 24 hours and another third relapse after 48 hours. 79,80 and 81 Of
all smokers that attempt to quit each year, fewer than 10% are successful. Cigarette smokers who have successfully quit made, on average, seven serious attempts
before achieving abstinence. 79,80 and 81
Even young smokers want to quit.42,82,83 The 1989 and 1993 Teenage Attitudes and Practice Surveys did show that nearly 75% of 12- to 18-year-olds had seriously
thought about quitting smoking; more recent surveys found that 73% of young smokers had tried to quit smoking. 42,82,83
Smoking cessation restores a chance of living a full, healthy life. 84 Quitting smoking reduces the risk of lung cancer by 50% at 5 years, and by 10 years, lung cancer
risk drops almost to the rate for nonsmokers. 35 After a year, mortality from heart disease decreases by half, and by 5 years it equals the rate for nonsmokers.
CLINICIANS' ROLE
Physicians and health professionals should view smoking cessation as a cornerstone of their practice. 85 Providing a brief physician intervention to all smokers could
more than double annual quit rates. 86 Seventy percent of smokers see their doctors at least once annually, thereby granting physicians ample opportunity for smoking
cessation counseling. 87 If only one-half of all U.S. physicians gave brief advice to their patients regarding smoking cessation, leading to success in 10%, clinician
intervention would account for 2 million new nonsmokers in the United States each year. 88,89
The Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (AHCPR) smoking cessation guidelines incorporate the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) four As: ask, advise,
assist, and arrange. 85 The physician should ask each patient about his or her smoking status; advise the patient to stop and educate him or her regarding the
long-term health consequences of smoking; assist by helping the patient to set a stop date, prescribing pharmacologic interventions, and supplying self-help
pamphlets; and arrange follow-up.90 This NCI manual provides good reasons for quitting smoking, targeted to different groups ( Table 22-1).90 Other groups
recommend the four Rs: The physician discusses with the patient the relevance of a stop-smoking program to health, the smoking risks, and the rewards of quitting,
and continues repetition of the stop-smoking message.91

TABLE 22-1. Good Reasons to Stop Smoking

Clinicians should determine and document the tobacco use status of every patient treated in a health care setting. 85 To remind physicians, Fiore 92 has recommended
that smoking status be included as part of a routine patient vital sign assessment. Other researchers recommend flagging smokers' charts to ensure necessary
smoking interventions (Fig. 22-4).36 Ahluwalia et al. 93 have found that placing a smoking stamp on patients' charts significantly increases (from 45.6% to 78.4%) the
likelihood that a physician will ask patients whether they smoke.

FIGURE 22-4. Smoking status included in the vital signs (a proposal by Fiore 92).

The AHCPR guidelines also stipulate that effective cessation treatments should be offered to every patient who smokes. 85 Brief cessation treatments are effective. At
least a minimal intervention should be provided for every patient who uses tobacco.
As described in the AHCPR guidelines, a dose-response relationship exists between the intensity and duration of treatment and its effectiveness. 85 In general, more
intense intervention leads to more effective long-term abstinence from tobacco. The success of an intervention also is maximized by proper training and education of
physicians and medical students, by increasing the number of modalities used and the number of professionals involved, and by the creation of office-based
systems.36,92,93,94,95 and 96 Although only 2% to 3% of smokers become nonsmokers each year,81 some studies report that up to 15% of patients seen by trained
physicians have quit smoking. 96
Finally, three particularly effective elements of smoking cessation treatment are (1) nicotine replacement therapy (NRT), (2) social support (clinician-provided
encouragement and assistance), and (3) skills training and problem-solving techniques for achieving and maintaining abstinence. 36 Individualizing the message to the
patient increases the likelihood for success. 25 Studies have shown that 3 minutes or less of advice increased quit rates from 7.9% to 10.2%. 96 For example, quit rates
of 50% to 63% 6 months after a myocardial infarction can increase to 65% to 75% for those patients who received other interventions in addition to physician contact.
Blum25 recommends that physicians ask nonthreatening questions, such as “What brand do you buy?” and “How much do you spend on cigarettes?” The term
inhalation count can remind a pack-a-day patient that he or she will breathe in as many as 1 million doses of cyanide, ammonia, carcinogens, and carbon monoxide in
less than 15 years. To the construction worker, the physician could link smoking cessation to the likelihood of fewer lost paydays, greater physical strength, and
greater ability to work. A high school student, unresponsive to discussions of future emphysema and lung cancer, might be more receptive to the cosmetic
unattractiveness of yellow teeth, bad breath, loss of athletic ability, or the financial drain of cigarettes (with costs for a pack-a-day smoker in excess of $1460 a year,
calculated at $4 per pack). 25
Also, the physician needs to tailor the message to the patient's readiness to change, according to the Prochaska and DiClemente 97 model: precontemplation,
contemplation, action, and maintenance. During precontemplation, the patient has not considered quitting. During the contemplation phase, the patient is thinking
about quitting. In the action phase, the patient is preparing and attempting to quit, and, during maintenance, the patient is avoiding relapse. Patients do not
necessarily pass through each stage in orderly fashion; they may skip a stage or regress. 97
NICOTINE REPLACEMENT THERAPY
Approximately 300 cessation methods are reported in the literature, ranging from group therapy, hypnosis, and self-help manuals to acupuncture. 25 The introduction
of nicotine-based medications in the form of chewing gum or a transdermal patch, combined with counseling, now provides cessation rates roughly double that of a
control group (a factor of 1.4 to 2.6) as compared to placebo treatments. However, 70% to 80% of smokers who use these therapies still start to smoke again. 98,99
By providing a substitute source of nicotine, NRT lessens the withdrawal symptoms associated with quitting and improves the cessation process. As dozens of
published studies have demonstrated its efficacy, safety, and utility, the Smoking Cessation Clinical Practice Guideline of AHCPR recommends NRT as a first-line
treatment for tobacco dependence “except in the presence of special circumstances.” 85 Most commonly, NRT is used in the form of nicotine (polacrilex) gum [first
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1984] or the transdermal nicotine patch (FDA-approved in 1991). In 1996, both of these medications
became available as over-the-counter products, 79,80 greatly increasing access. In a metaanalysis, Fiore et al. 99 studied 42 randomized controlled trials of nicotine gum,
as well as trials with fewer subjects using a transdermal patch and nasal spray inhaled nicotine. From their studies of nearly 18,000 persons, the authors concluded
that NRT was effective, either as a sole therapy or as an adjunct to other therapeutic approaches. 99,100 Dosing of nicotine gum should initially be titrated by the level of
nicotine dependence and then adjusted if withdrawal symptoms are not relieved. The Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence (which features such questions as
“How soon after you wake up do you smoke your first cigarette?”) helps guide dosing decisions. 81
Other agents also show promising results. Recent attention has focused on bupropion, an antidepressant, in combination with the nicotine patch. A recent
double-blind, placebo-controlled smoking cessation trial found 12-month abstinence rates of 15.6% for placebo, 16.4% for the nicotine patch alone, 30.3% for
sustained-release bupropion (Zyban) alone, and 35.5% for bupropion in conjunction with the nicotine patch. Treatment consisted of 9 weeks of bupropion (150 mg/d)
for the first 3 days and then 150 mg twice daily. 98

COMMUNITY LEVEL AND STATE INTERVENTIONS
The Community Intervention Trial for Smoking Cessation (COMMIT) and the American Stop Smoking Intervention Study for Cancer Prevention (ASSIST), two
NCI-funded efforts to change social norms regarding tobacco use in the community, marked a societal shift toward viewing tobacco control as a public health

prevention issue. 101,102,103 and 104 The 4-year COMMIT study involved 11 matched pairs of communities, randomly assigning one community to active intervention while
the other served as the control site. The hypothesis was that a community-level, multichannel intervention (involving media, public education, work-site intervention,
and other means) would increase quit rates among smokers, particularly heavy smokers. In 1995, the trial concluded with equal smoking prevalence rates in both
groups of communities. Although no increase in the quit rates of heavy smokers was documented, a testament to the powerful nature of nicotine addiction, a
statistically significant decrease was realized in the smoking rates of the light to moderate smokers in intervention communities. 101,102
From 1991 through 1999, the NCI (with logistic support from the American Cancer Society) conducted ASSIST, a nonrandomized study. The project funded health
departments in 17 states to implement tobacco control programs that included cessation classes, mass media campaigns, and public policy such as clean indoor air
campaigns, efforts to prohibit youth access to tobacco products, and tax increases. Though the goal of reducing adult smoking prevalence to 15% by the year 2000
was not reached, the ASSIST initiative helped public health officials to gain valuable knowledge in statewide tobacco control planning and to move toward statewide
denormalization of tobacco use. 103,104
RESTRICTING YOUTH ACCESS
Preventing youth access to tobacco products should affect youth smoking rates. 105,106 and 107 All states prohibit the sale and distribution of tobacco products to minors
under the age of 18. In several dozen states, additional laws prevent youth access by designating enforcement authorities, enforcing license suspension or revocation
for sales to minors, banning vending machines in areas accessible to minors, or restricting advertising. However, one study found that even when 82% of merchants
complied with laws banning sales to minors, teenagers reported only a small decrease in their ability to purchase tobacco and no decline in its use. 107 More data are
needed to verify the effectiveness of reducing sales to minors in actually limiting adolescents' access.
RESTRICTING SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
Restricting smoking in workplaces has the potential to decrease greatly human exposure to ETS. Data show that in 1994, of 122 million full-time workers in the United
States, nearly 100 million worked indoors. 108 The 1994 National Health Interview Survey showed that smoking prevalence of indoor workers was 26%, and 59% of
workers (59 million) worked in buildings where smoking was not permitted. 108 A review of 19 studies of the impact of smoke-free workplaces found that almost all
reported declines in daily smoking rates and smoking prevalence. Approximately 13% of the national decline in cigarette consumption in the United States between
1988 and 1994 was attributed to smoke-free workplaces. 108
An ongoing challenge is to guarantee that smoke-free policies have strength at the local level and are not subject to preemption (i.e., legislation that prevents any
local jurisdiction from enacting restrictions that are more stringent than the state law). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), by including tobacco
control laws and policies as part of their surveillance efforts, note that from 1993 through 1996, the number of tobacco control laws with a preemption provision
increased significantly to cover 30 states currently. 109

TOBACCO TAXES THAT FUND DEDICATED, COMPREHENSIVE STATEWIDE TOBACCO CONTROL PROGRAMS
Many public health experts regard tobacco taxes to be the single most effective measure for decreasing tobacco consumption. 78 Economic research documents price
elasticity (i.e., a 10% increase in cigarette price generally reduces overall consumption by 4%). 110 Studies show that youth, lower-income smokers, young adults, and
minority smokers are more likely than others to be encouraged by a price increase to quit smoking. 111 Government has traditionally taxed tobacco to fund government
services, but public health professionals support increased taxes on tobacco products to deter consumption. The Canadian tobacco tax experience in the 1980s and
early 1990s demonstrated the potential health impact. The combined average federal and provincial tax reached close to $3.00, pushing the average price per pack to
more than $4.00. As a result, per capita cigarette consumption (adjusted for estimates of tobacco smuggling) dropped by 38% (1982 to 1992). 110,112
In contrast, among the world's industrialized countries, the United States has one of the lowest cigarette tax rates, with an average combined federal and state tax on
cigarettes in 1993 of 53¢ per pack, as compared to countries such as Denmark and Norway, where taxes exceed $3.00 per pack. U.S. federal cigarette taxes,
currently 24¢ per pack, will rise to 39¢ by 2002. Other forms of tobacco such as snuff, chewing tobacco, and pipe tobacco also are taxed. 113
To some degree, the state's dependence on tobacco production determines the level of state tax, which currently ranges from 2.5¢ in Virginia to $1.00 per pack in
Alaska and Hawaii (nationwide average, 38.9¢ per pack). The cigarette tax–to–price ratio, which assesses the relative contribution of the total (state and federal)
taxes to the full price of cigarettes, has declined from 49.8% in 1960 to 29.6% in 1997. 113
In general, the public is willing to increase tobacco taxes if those extra revenues are earmarked for specific purposes such as health programs. 114 To date, four
states—Arizona, California, Massachusetts, and Oregon—have passed tobacco tax initiatives and used the revenue to develop statewide comprehensive tobacco
control programs. 115,116 The CDC recently studied state experiences and disseminated best practices for comprehensive tobacco control programs. 117
CALIFORNIA
California voters approved a 1988 ballot initiative that increased the state cigarette tax by 25¢, allocating 20% of the revenue to establish a comprehensive statewide
tobacco education and prevention program. 118,119 The initiative also funded mass media antitobacco campaigns, assistance to local health agencies for providing
technical support and monitoring adherence to antismoking laws, community-based interventions, smoking cessation services (including a statewide quit-smoking
telephone hot line), and enhancement of school-based prevention programs. 118,119 As a result, an analysis of per capita cigarette consumption indicated that the start
of the California Tobacco Control Program in 1989 was associated with a 50% more rapid rate of decline in cigarette consumption than was seen in the rest of the
country. Both the tax increase and the funded tobacco control program contributed to this decline. However, the post-1993 rate of decline, while still significantly more
rapid in California than in the rest of the United States (where the decline in consumption halted), slowed to less than one-third of the rate seen in 1989 through 1993.
Pierce et al. 120 attributed the slowing to reduced program funding, increased tobacco industry expenditures for advertising and promotion, industry pricing, and
political activities.
MASSACHUSETTS
Massachusetts voters approved a special 25¢ tax that helped to fund the Massachusetts Tobacco Control Program (MTCP). 114 The MTCP had three major goals: to
prevent onset of tobacco use by children, to assist smokers in quitting, and to guard against the harm of ETS. Like California's program, the MTCP consisted of
funding for local cessation efforts and local coalitions, a statewide quit-smoking telephone hot line, funding of local boards of health, a statewide public awareness
and counter-advertising campaign, and comprehensive school-based programs. 121 Adult per capita tobacco consumption in Massachusetts declined by 20% from the
program's inception in 1992 through 1996, reflecting a threefold increase over the reduction observed at the national level. 122 The number of cities and towns that
have adopted ordinances restricting youth access to cigarette vending machines has doubled. Recently, data showed the prevalence of current smoking among
adults in Massachusetts was 19.1% in 1999, down from 23% in 1993, one of the lowest rates in all the 50 states. 123
OTHER STATES
Similar results accompanied a successful 1996 ballot measure in Oregon that increased the excise tax by 30¢ per pack of cigarettes. After passage, per capita
consumption has declined 11.3% in Oregon, or the equivalent of 200 cigarettes per capita. 124 Arizona's ballot initiative in 1994 raised cigarette prices by 40¢. 116 Funds
from a settled Medicaid lawsuit launched the Florida Pilot Program on Tobacco Control, which is credited with sparking significant declines in tobacco use among
middle school and public high school students, declines attributed primarily to a youth-oriented, counter-advertising media campaign, community partnerships in all 67
Florida counties, and enhanced enforcement of youth access laws. 125 From 1998 to 1999, the prevalence of cigarette use among middle school students declined
from 18.5% to 15.0% (P <.01); among high school students, use declined from 27.4% to 25.2% (P = .02).125

MASS MEDIA AND COUNTER-ADVERTISING
All the statewide tobacco control programs just cited have incorporated counter-advertising efforts through mass media. Minnesota (1986) and Michigan (1994) also

have initiated limited tax-funded media campaigns. 116 Such efforts counter the tobacco industry's efforts to normalize a lethal product through advertising and
promotional cigarette sales. A counter-advertising public health approach aims to reduce tobacco use by deglamorizing and denormalizing use of the product. To be
effective, such mass media antismoking campaigns should provide consistent messages from multiple sources, repeatedly and over a long period, and should work in
concert with other interventions and policies, with the goal of changing societal norms. 74
The effects of these counter-advertising media campaigns, especially those in California and Massachusetts, have been striking. Of the California Tobacco Control
Program's decline in cigarette consumption, approximately 20% was estimated to be attributable to the media campaign. 74,126,127 One study of California adults who
successfully quit smoking (1990 and 1991) found that in 41%, the media counter-advertising campaign had influenced their decision to stop. 128
The effectiveness of counter-advertising first emerged in 1967 when the Federal Communications Commission invoked the Fairness Doctrine to require broadcasters
to air one antismoking message for every three cigarette commercials aired. 74 When such antismoking advertising prompted a decline in per capita cigarette
consumption of at least 5%, the tobacco industry then agreed (in 1970) to Congressional legislation to ban all tobacco advertising on television and radio, thereby
eliminating the need for free antismoking ads. 74
Later, research in Vermont and Minnesota showed that community- and school-based interventions highlighted by prominent mass media campaigns could reduce
smoking in young persons by up to 40%. 74,129,130 However, such mass media campaigns before 1988 usually occurred on a sporadic basis. Also, institutionalizing
counter-advertising campaigns has posed a public health challenge, as funding for such campaigns can be subjected to legislative diversion. 74 Typically, public
service announcements on television did not air during prime time and therefore reached smaller audiences. 74
Goldman and Glantz131 have concluded that messages challenging social norms are more successful than are those aimed at changing individual behavior to improve
health. Focus groups analysis by these researchers found that the most effective themes stressed the tobacco industry's manipulation of young persons, the negative
impact of secondhand smoke, and the burden of cigarette addiction. Such advertisements can be controversial yet memorable and, ultimately, effective. 74,131

TOBACCO LITIGATION AND TOBACCO SETTLEMENT
Public health lawyers have advocated bringing suits against tobacco companies as a cancer prevention strategy. 132 The last half century of tobacco litigation can be
divided into three waves. Wave 1 (1954 through 1973) featured a number of individual lawsuits against an industry that maintained that tobacco products had never
been proven to cause disease. The industry claimed that smokers chose to smoke, hence assuming risk for themselves. In essence, the 1965 Federal Cigarette
Labeling and Advertising Act, which requires warning labels on all cigarette packaging and labeling, ironically served as a shield from liability. Wave 2 (1983 through
1992) featured Cipollone v. Liggett Group Inc., a suit brought by a smoker and continued by her husband after her death. Although the original jury verdict of $400,000
favored the plaintiff, it was reversed on appeal and the case finally was dropped after years of litigation.
Wave 3 (1994 to the present) capitalizes on the release of internal industry documents and subsequent industry concessions that tobacco is addictive and causes
cancer and that tobacco companies had consciously marketed their products to children. From this ensued an increasing number of individual lawsuits and class
action suits. Among the class action suits is Broin v. Philip Morris, which was brought on behalf of flight attendants injured by ETS and was settled for $349 million.
The money realized from this suit will establish a foundation for the study of diseases associated with tobacco. 133,134 and 135Engle v. R.J. Reynolds is a suit brought on
behalf of addicted and sick smokers in Florida. In the first phase of this massive class action suit, the industry was found liable for punitive damages, with the award
potentially in the hundreds of billions of dollars. 136 In addition, in 1999, the Justice Department filed a $20 billion lawsuit against the nation's tobacco companies to
recover federal costs of treating smoking-related illness.
The most notable litigation to date has been lawsuits brought by states' attorneys general against the tobacco industry to recoup Medicaid costs for the treatment of ill
smokers.137,138 In a remarkable turn of events, the major tobacco manufacturers first settled individually with Mississippi, Texas, Minnesota, and Florida at a cost of
$40 billion over 25 years. Then the industry signed a Master Settlement Agreement with 46 state attorneys general in November 1998, agreeing to pay $206 billion
over 25 years in exchange for no future state litigation. Other conditions included some advertising restrictions (e.g., bans on billboard advertisements) and the
establishment of a national foundation to reduce teen smoking.
As the twentieth century ends, states are embroiled in historic discussions of how best to spend the settlement money. The Master Settlement Agreement expressly
states that parties “have agreed to settle their respective lawsuits and potential claims pursuant to terms which will achieve for the Settling States and their citizens
significant funding for the advancement of public health, the implementation of important tobacco-related public health measures, including the enforcement of
mandates and restrictions related to such measures, as well as funding for a national foundation dedicated to significantly reducing the use of tobacco products by
youth.”138 However, to date, in most states, the debate has been dominated by proposals to fund civic projects such as debt reduction, school construction, teacher
retirement funds, prison construction, and sidewalk repair. 137 As the suits were launched and settled for reasons of tobacco and health, the most fitting outcome would
be to dedicate such funds to tobacco control and health programs.

PROPOSED U.S. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION REGULATION
Under Commissioner David Kessler, the FDA first investigated whether to regulate nicotine as a drug. The Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act defines a drug as
“an article (except for food) intended to affect the structure and function of the body.” 135 Universal scientific consensus indicates that nicotine is an addictive drug.
Evidence of the intent of the industry had been supported by the release of internal documents showing that tobacco manufacturers knew that nicotine caused
significant pharmacologic effects and designed their products to provide pharmacologically active doses. 80,135 In 1996, the FDA proposed strategies to restrict access
to tobacco products and advertising to youth. The first step, effected in part in 1997, involved stricter enforcement of laws affecting minors. The remaining proposed
steps included banning free samples, restricting advertising within 1000 feet of schools and playgrounds, and limiting to black and white text print advertising in youth
publications. The U.S. Supreme Court recently rejected these proposals, saying the FDA had never received authority from congress to regulate tobacco products. 139

CONCLUSION
The dawn of the twenty-first century offers us a new opportunity to create a smoke-free society. All health care professionals, and indeed all citizens, can work to
achieve this goal and prevent cancer. At the individual level, we must maximize access to cessation services for all smokers and promote further research into
improving nicotine replacement therapies and other pharmacologic approaches. Health care professionals can raise awareness and promote cessation with every
clinical opportunity. Reducing and even eliminating nicotine from cigarettes is also technically feasible and may hold the future to eradicating the potential for
addiction.
On a broader societal level, communities can commit to changing permanently to a nonsmoking social norm. Such efforts include restricting tobacco advertising and
promotion to children, prohibiting tobacco access by youth and teenagers, enhancing public education, raising tobacco excise taxes, and controlling tobacco exports.
Dedication of tobacco settlement funds to statewide tobacco control programs nationwide can reduce cigarette consumption and promote prevention, as has been
done in California and Massachusetts. Key to such comprehensive programs are broad-scale counter-advertising programs that deglamorize tobacco use.
On the legal front, multiple individual and class action suits ultimately may change the tobacco industry's ability to conduct business as usual. In light of the U.S.
Supreme Court's decision as to the authority of the FDA to regulate tobacco, we now await study of this issue by the U.S. Congress.
It is hoped that all these combined efforts will cause the decline and prevention of tobacco-related cancers in the new millennium. Medical historians then can mark
the end of the so-called Tobacco and Cancer Century and celebrate the beginning of a new smoke-free chapter in public health.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Wingo PA, Ries LA, Giovino GA, et al. The annual report to the nation on the status of cancer 19731996 with a special section on lung cancer and tobacco smoking. J Natl Cancer Inst
1999;91:675.
2. Koh HK. The end of the “Tobacco and Cancer” century. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:60.
3. Peto R, Lopez AD, Boreham J, et al. Mortality from tobacco in developed countries: indirect estimation from national vital statistics. Lancet 1996;39:1268.

4. Peto R. Smoking and death: the past 40 years and the next 40. BMJ 1994;309:937.
5. Peto R, Lopez AD, Boreham J, et al. Mortality from smoking worldwide. Br Med Bull 1996;52:12.
6. Hecht SS. Tobacco smoke carcinogens and lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1194.
7. Bergen AW, Caporaso N. Cigarette smoking. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1365.
8. Report of the surgeon general: the health consequences of smoking: nicotine addiction. Pub. No. CDC 88-8406. Washington, DC: Department of Health and Human Services, 1988.
9. Novotny TE, Shane P, Daynard RA, Connolly GN. Tobacco use as a sociologic carcinogen: the case for a public health approach. Cancer Prev 1992:1.
10. Lombard HL, Doering CR. Cancer studies in Massachusetts: habits, characteristics, and environment of individuals with and without cancer. N Engl J Med 1928;198:481.
11. Doll R, Hill AB. Lung cancer and other causes of death in relation to smoking: second report on mortality of British doctors. Br Med J 1956;2:1071.
12. Wynder EL, Graham EA. Tobacco smoking as a possible etiologic factor in bronchogenic carcinoma. JAMA 1950;143:329.
13. Hammond EL, Horn D. Smoking and death rates: report on forty-four months of follow-up of 187,783 men. JAMA 1958;166:1294.
14. US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare . Smoking and health: report of the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control (Public Health Service),
1964.
15. Average annual number of deaths, 19901994. MMWR 1997;46:448.
16. Cigarette brand use among adult smokersUnited States, 1986. MMWR 1990;39:665.
17. Epps RP, Manley MW, Glynn TJ. Tobacco use among adolescents. Pediatr Clin North Am 1995;42:389.
18. US Department of Health and Human Services. The health consequences of smoking: cancer. A report of the surgeon general, 1982. DHHS Pub. No. (PHS)82-50179. Rockville, MD: US
Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Office of Smoking and Health, 1982.
19. Steenland K. Age specific interactions between smoking and radon among United States uranium miners. Occup Environ Med 1994;51:192.
20. Berry G, Newhouse ML, Antonis P. Combined effect of asbestos and smoking on mortality from lung cancer and mesothelioma in factory workers. Br J Med 1985;42:12.
21. Selikoff IJ, Seidman H, Hammond EC. Mortality effects of cigarette smoking among amosite asbestos factory workers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1980;65:507.
22. US Department of Health and Human Services. The health consequences of smoking: cancer and chronic lung disease in the workplace. A report of the surgeon general. DHHS Pub. No.
(PHS)85-50207. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, Office of Smoking and Health, 1985.
23. Thun M, Lally C, Flannery J, et al. Cigarette smoking and changes in the histopathology of lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1580.
24. US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Smoking and health: a report of the surgeon general. DHEW(PHS) 79-50066. Washington, DC: Public Health Service, Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Health, Office on Smoking and Health, 1979.
25. Blum A. Cancer prevention: preventing tobacco-related cancers. In: DeVita C, Hellman S, Rosenberg S, eds. Cancer principles and practice of oncology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven
Publishers, 1997.
26. Flanders WD, Rothman KJ. Interaction of alcohol and tobacco in laryngeal cancer. Am J Epidemiol 1982;115:371.
27. US Department of Health and Human Services. The health consequences of smokeless tobacco: a report of the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General. NIH Publication No. 86-2874.
Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, 1986.
28. US Department of Health and Human Services. Reducing the health consequences of smoking: 25 years of progress. A report of the surgeon general. DHHS(CDC)89-8411,1989. Washington,
DC: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, Office of Smoking and Health, 1989.
29. Banoczy J, Sugar L. Progressive and regressive changes in Hungarian oral leukoplakias in the course of longitudinal studies. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 1975;3:194.
30. Roed-Petersen B, Banoczy J, Pindborg JJ. Smoking habits and histological characteristics of oral leukoplakia in Denmark and Hungary. Br J Cancer 1973;28:575.
31. Hays GL, Lippman SM, Flaitz CM, et al. Cocarcinogenesis and field cancerization: oral lesions offer first signs. J Am Dent Assoc 1995;126:47.
32. Bartecchi CE, MacKenzie TD, Schrier RW. The human costs of tobacco use, part 1. N Engl J Med 1994;330:907.
33. MacKenzie TD, Bartecchi CE, Schrier RW. The human costs of tobacco, part 2. N Engl J Med 1994;330:975.
34. Davis B, Koh HK. Faces going up in smoke. Arch Dermatol 1992;128:1106.
35. Bartecchi CE, MacKenzie TD, Schrier RW. The global tobacco epidemic. Sci Am May 1995.
36. US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Agency for Health Care Policy and Research. Smoking cessation: a systems approach. A guide for health care
administrators, insurers, managed care organizations, and purchasers. AHCPR Pub. No. 97-0698. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, April
1997.
37. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Cigarette smoking among adultsUnited States, 1995. MMWR 1997;46:1217.
38. Ernster VL. Mixed messages for women: a social history of cigarette smoking and advertising. NY State J Med 1985;85:335.
39. World Health Organization. The tobacco epidemic: a global public health emergency. Tobacco alert. Geneva: World Health Organization, April 1998.
http://www.who.int/archives/tobalert/apr96/fulltext.htm
40. Kessler DA, Natanblut SL, Wilkenfield JP, et al. Nicotine addiction: a pediatric disease. J Pediatr 1997;130:518.
41. Tobacco use among high school studentsUnited States, 1997. MMWR 1998;47:229.
42. Growing up tobacco free: preventing nicotine addiction in children and youths. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine, National Academy Press, 1994.
43. An LC, O'Malley PM, Schulenberg JE, et al. Changes at the high end of risk in cigarette smoking among US high school seniors, 19761995. Am J Public Health 1999;89:699.
44. Kellam SG, Anthony JC. Targeting early antecedents to prevent tobacco smoking: findings from an epidemiologically based randomized field trial. Am J Public Health 1998;88:1490.
45. Jackson C, Henriksen L, Dickinson D, et al. The early use of alcohol and tobacco: its relation to children's competence and parents' behavior. Am J Public Health 1997;87:59.
46. Coogan PF, Adams M, Geller AC, et al. Factors associated with smoking among children and adolescents in Connecticut. Am J Prev Med 1998;15:17.
47. Jackson C, Henriksen L, Dickinson D, et al. A longitudinal study predicting patterns of cigarette smoking in late childhood. Health Educ Behav 1998;25:436.
48. Bachman JG, Wallace JM, O'Malley PM, et al. Racial/ethnic differences in smoking, drinking, and illicit drug use among American high school seniors, 19761989. Am J Public Health
1991;81:372.
49. Pierce JP, Choi WS, Gilpin EA, et al. Tobacco industry promotion of cigarettes and adolescent smoking. JAMA 1998;279:511.
50. Wechsler H, Rigotti NA, Gledhill-Hoyt J, et al. Increased levels of cigarette use among college students. JAMA 1998;280:1673.
51. Miller GH. The ‘less hazardous' cigarette: a deadly delusion. NY State J Med 1985;85:313.
52. Hoffmann D, Djordjevic MV, Hoffman I. The changing cigarette. Prev Med 1997;26:427.
53. Filter ventilation levels in selected U.S. cigarettes, 1997. MMWR 1997;46:1043.
54. State-specific prevalence among adults of current cigarette smoking and smokeless tobacco use and per capita tax-paid sales of cigarettesUnited States, 1997. MMWR 1998;47:922.
55. Blum A. Smokeless tobacco. JAMA 1980;244:192.
56. Spangler J, Salisbury P. Smokeless tobacco: epidemiology, health effects and cessation strategies. Am Fam Physician 1995;52:1421.
57. Tomar S, Giovino G. Incidence and predictors of smokeless tobacco use among U.S. youth. Am J Public Health 1998;88:20.
58. Smokeless (spit) tobacco: a review of the state of the science. Proceedings of a symposium during the seventy-fourth general session of the International Association for Dental Research, San
Francisco, CA, March 13, 1996. Adv Dent Res 1997;11:305.
59. Iribarren C, Tekaiva I, Sidney S, et al. Effect of cigar smoking on the risk of cardiovascular disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and cancer in men. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1773.
60. Cigar smoking among teenagersUnited States, Massachusetts, and New York, 1996. MMWR 1997;46:433.
61. Satcher D. Cigars and public health. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1829.
62. US Department of Health and Human Services. The health consequences of involuntary smoking: a report of the surgeon general. Pub. No. (CDC)87-8398. Washington, DC: Public Health
Service, Centers for Disease Control, Office on Smoking and Health, Department of Health and Human Services, 1986.
63. Davis RM. Exposure to environmental tobacco smoke: identifying and protecting those at risk. JAMA 1998;280:1947.
64. Brownson RC, Eriksen MP, Davis RM, et al. Environmental tobacco smoke: health effects and policies to reduce exposure. Annu Rev Public Health 1997;18:163.
65. National Research Council, National Academy of Sciences. Environmental tobacco smoke: measuring exposures and assessing health effects. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1986.
66. California Environmental Protection Agency. Health effects of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke. Tob Control 1997;6:346.
67. US Environmental Protection Agency. Respiratory health effects of passive smoking: lung cancer and other disorders. Environmental Protection Agency Pub. EPA/600/6-90/006F. Washington,
DC: Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air and Radiation, 1992.
68. California Environmental Protection Agency. Health effects of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke. Sacramento: California Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Environmental
Health Hazard Assessment, 1997.
69. Federal Trade Commission. Report to Congress for 1991: pursuant to the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act. Washington DC: Federal Trade Commission, 1994.
70. Federal Trade Commission. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education Act of 1986. Washington, DC: Federal Trade Commission, 1993.
71. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Preventing tobacco use among young people: a report of the surgeon general, 1994. S/N 017-001-004901-0. Washington, DC: US Government
Printing Office, 1994:175.
72. Feighery E, Borzekowski DL, Schooler C, et al. Seeing, wanting, owning: the relationship between receptivity to tobacco marketing and smoking susceptibility in young people. Tob Control
1998;7:123.
73. Difranza JR, Richards JW, Paulman PM, et al. RJR Nabisco's cartoon camel promotes camel cigarettes to children. JAMA 1991;266:3149.
74. Siegel M. Mass media antismoking campaigns: a powerful tool for health promotion. Ann Intern Med 1998;129:128.
75. King C, Siegel M, Celebucki C, et al. Adolescent exposure to cigarette advertising in relation to youth readership. JAMA 1998;279:516.
76. Bloch M, Daynard R, Roemer R. A year of living dangerously: the tobacco control community meets the global settlement. Public Health Rep 1998;113:488.
77. Arno PS, Brandt AM, Gostin LO, et al. Tobacco industry strategies to oppose federal regulation. JAMA 1996;275:1258.
78. Emmons KM, Kawachi I, Barclay G. Tobacco control: a brief review of its history and prospects for the future. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1997;11:177.
79. Cincirpini PM, McClure JB. Smoking cessation: recent developments in behavioral and pharmacologic interventions. Oncology 1998;12:249.
80. Cinciripini PM, Hecht SS, Henningfield JE, et al. Tobacco addiction: implications for treatment and cancer prevention. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1852.
81. Henningfield J. Nicotine medication for smoking cessation. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1196.
82. Zhu SH, Sun J, Billings S, et al. Predictors of smoking cessation in US adolescents. Am J Prev Med 1999;16:202.
83. Selected cigarette smoking initiation and quitting behaviors among high school studentsUnited States, 1997. MMWR 1998;47:386.
84. Skaar K, Tsoh J, Cinciripini P, et al. Current approaches in smoking cessation. CurrOpin Oncol 1996;8:434.
85. Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, Smoking Cessation Clinical Practice Guideline Panel and Staff. Smoking cessation clinical practice guideline. JAMA 1996;275:1270.
86. Fiore MC, Bailey WC, Cohen SC, et al. Smoking cessation: clinical practice guideline no. 18. AHCPR Pub. No. 96-0692. Rockville, MD: Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, April
1996.
87. Sherin K. Smoking cessation: the physician's role. Postgrad Med 1982;11:71.
88. Fiore MC, Novotny TE, Pierce JP, et al. Methods used to quit smoking in the United States. JAMA 1990;263:2760.
89. Glynn TJ. Methods of smoking cessationfinally, some answers. JAMA 1990;263:2795.
90. Glynn TJ, Manley MW. How to help your patients stop smoking: a National Cancer Institute manual for physicians. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public
Health Service, National Institutes of Health, 1993.
91. US Department of Health and Human Services. The health benefits of smoking cessation: a report of the surgeon general. DHHS CDC 90-8416. Atlanta: US Department of Health and Human
Services, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Centers for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office of Smoking and Health,1990.
92. Fiore MC. The new vital sign. Assessing and documenting smoking status. JAMA 1991;266:3183.
93. Ahluwalia JS, Gibson CA, Kenney RE, et al. Smoking status as a vital sign. J Gen Intern Med 1999;14:402.
94. Ferry LH, Grissino LM, Runfola PS. Tobacco dependence curricula in US undergraduate medical education. JAMA 1999;282:825.
95. Fiore MC, Epps RP, Manley MW. A missed opportunity: teaching medical students to help their patients successfully quit smoking. JAMA 1994:271:624.

96. Ockene JK, Zapka JG. Physician-based smoking intervention: a rededication to a five-step strategy to smoking research. Addict Behav 1997;22:835.
97. Prochaska JO, DiClemente CC, Norcross JC. In search of how people change. Applications to addictive behaviors. Am Psychol 1992;47:1102.
98. Jorenby DE, Leischow SJ, Nides MA, et al. A controlled trial of sustained-release bupropion, a nicotine patch, or both for smoking cessation. N Engl J Med 1999;340:685.
99. Fiore MC, Bailey WC, Cohen SJ, et al. Smoking cessation, Clinical Practice guideline no. 18. Rockville, MD: AHCPR Publ. No. 96-0692.
100. Shiffman S, Mason KM, Henningfield JE. Tobacco dependence treatments: review and prospects. Annu Rev Public Health 1998;19:335.
101. Community Intervention Trial for Smoking Cessation (COMMIT): I. Cohort results from a four-year community intervention. Am J Public Health 1995;85:183.
102. Fisher E Jr. The results of the COMMIT trial [Editorial]. Am J Public Health 1995;85:159.
103. Eyre H. Building on the foundation of ASSIST. Tob Control 1997;6:341.
104. Manley M, Pierce JP, Gilpin EA, et al. Impact of the American Stop Smoking Intervention Study on cigarette consumption. Tob Control 1997;6[Suppl 2]:S12.
105. Fishman JA, Allison H, Knowles SB, et al. State laws on tobacco controlUnited States, 1998. MMWR 1999;48(SS-3):22.
106. Forster JL, Wolfson M. Youth access to tobacco: policies and politics. Annu Rev Public Health 1998;19:203.
107. Rigotti N, DiFranza J, Chang Y, et al. The effect of enforcing tobacco-sales laws on adolescents: access to tobacco and smoking behavior. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1044.
108. Chapman S, Borland R, Scollo M, et al. The impact of smoke-free workplaces on declining cigarette consumption in Australia and the U.S. Am J Public Health 1999;89:1018.
109. Preemptive state tobacco-control lawsUnited States, 19821998. MMWR 1999;47:1112.
110. Grossman M, Chaloupka FJ. Cigarette taxes. The straw to break the camel's back. Public Health Rep 1997;112:290.
111. Farrelly M, Bray J. Response to increases in cigarette prices by race/ethnicity, income and age groups, United States 19761993. MMWR 1998;47:605.
112. Kaiserman MJ, Rogers B. Tobacco consumption declining faster in Canada than in the US. Am J Public Health 1991;81:902.
113. Pierce-Lavin C, Geller AC, Hyde J, et al. Creating statewide tobacco control programs after passage of a tobacco tax. Cancer 1998;83[Suppl]:2666.
114. Koh HK. An analysis of the successful 1992 Massachusetts tobacco tax initiative. Tob Control 1996;5:220.
115. Pierce-Lavin C, Geller AC. Creating statewide tobacco control programs after passage of a tobacco tax: executive summary. Cancer 1998;83[Suppl]:2659.
116. Nicholl J. Tobacco tax initiatives to prevent tobacco use. A study of eight statewide campaigns. Cancer 1998;83[Suppl]:2666.
117. Best practices for comprehensive tobacco control programs. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Prevention and Control, Office of Smoking and Health, August 1999.
118. Bal DG, Kizer KW, Felten PG, et al. Reducing tobacco consumption in California. Development of a statewide anti-tobacco use campaign. JAMA 1990;264:1570.
119. Flewelling RL, Kenney E, Elder JP, et al. First-year impact of the 1989 California cigarette tax increase on cigarette consumption. Am J Public Health 1992;82:867.
120. Pierce JP, Gilpin EA, Emery SL, et al. Has the California Control Program reduced smoking? JAMA 1998;280:893.
121. Connolly G, Robbins H. Designing an effective statewide tobacco control programMassachusetts. Cancer 1998;83[Suppl]:2722.
122. Cigarette smoking before and after an excise tax increase and an antismoking campaignMassachusetts, 19901996. MMWR 1996;45:966.
123. Beiner L. Personal communication, 1999.
124. Decline in cigarette consumption following implementation of a comprehensive tobacco prevention and education programOregon, 19961998. MMWR 1999;48:140.
125. Tobacco use among middle and high school studentsFlorida, 1998 and 1999. MMWR 1999;48:248.
126. Hu T, Keeler TE, Sung H, et al. The impact of California anti-smoking legislation on cigarette sales, consumption, and prices. Tob Control 1995;4[Suppl 1]:S34.
127. Hu T, Sung HY, Keeler TE. Reducing cigarette consumption in California: tobacco taxes versus an anti-smoking media campaign. Am J Public Health 1995;85:1218.
128. Popham WJ, Potter LD, Bal DG, et al. Do anti-smoking media campaigns help smokers quit? Public Health Rep 1993;108:510.
129. Secker-Walker RH, Worden JK, Holland RR, et al. A mass media program to prevent smoking among adolescents: costs and cost effectiveness. Tob Control 1997;6:207.
130. Flynn BS, Worden JK, Secker-Walker RH, et al. Mass media and school interventions for cigarette smoking prevention: effects 2 years after completion. Am J Public Health 1994;84:1148.
131. Goldman LK, Glantz SA. Evaluation of antismoking advertising campaigns. JAMA 1998;279:772.
132. Kelder GE, Daynard RA. Tobacco litigation as a public health and cancer control strategy. J Am Med Womens Assoc 1996;51:57.
133. Glantz SA, Barnes DE, Bero L, et al. Looking through a keyhole at the tobacco industry. The Brown and Williamson documents. JAMA 1995;274:219.
134. Hurt R, Robertson CR. Prying open the door to the tobacco industry's secrets about nicotine: the Minnesota tobacco trial. JAMA 1998;280:1173.
135. Kessler DA, Barnett PS, Witt A, et al. The legal and scientific basis for FDA's assertion of jurisdiction over cigarettes and smokeless tobacco. JAMA 1997;277:405.
136. Broder J. Cigarette maker concedes smoking can cause cancer. New York Times 1998 Nov 14:1.
137. Meier B. Tobacco windfall begins tug-of-war among lawmakers. New York Times 1999 Jan 10:1.
138. Multistate Master Settlement Agreement, November 23, 1998. National Association of Attorneys General website: http://www.naag.org/cigna.rtf
139. Greenhouse L. High court holds FDA can't impose rules on tobacco. New York Times 2000 March 22:1.

SECTION 23.1 Fat
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 23.1
Fat
WALTER C. WILLETT
Introduction
Fat and Breast Cancer
Case-Control Studies
Cohort Studies
Different Types of Fat
Fat and Age at Puberty
Fat and Breast Cancer Survival
Fat and Colon Cancer
Fat and Prostate Cancer
Other Cancers
Summary
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
In recent years, reduction in dietary fat has been at the center of cancer prevention efforts. In the landmark 1982 National Academy of Sciences review of diet,
nutrition, and cancer, 1 reduction in fat intake to 30% of calories was the primary recommendation; this objective has been echoed in subsequent dietary
recommendations as well. 2
Interest in dietary fat as a cause of cancer began in the first half of the twentieth century when studies by Tannenbaum and colleagues 3,4 indicated that diets high in
fat could promote tumor growth in animal models. In this early work, energy (caloric) restriction also profoundly reduced the incidence of tumors. A vast literature on
dietary fat and cancer in animals has subsequently accumulated (reviewed elsewhere). 1,5,6,7 and 8 Dietary fat has a clear effect on tumor incidence in many models,
although not in all 9,10; however, a central issue has been whether this is independent of the effect of energy intake. An independent effect of fat has been seen in
some animal models,5,7,11 but this has been either weak 12 or nonexistent13 in some studies designed specifically to address this issue.
In the 1970s, the possible relation of dietary fat intake to cancer incidence gained greater attention as the large international differences in rates of many cancers
were noted to be strongly correlated with apparent per capita fat consumption. 14,15 Particularly strong associations were seen with cancers of the breast, colon,
prostate, and endometrium, which include the most important cancers in affluent countries not caused by smoking. 16 These correlations were observed to be limited to
animal, not vegetable, fat. 17 Complementing these correlational observations, studies of populations migrating from low- to high-incidence areas indicated that the
migrating groups adopted the cancer rates of the new environment. This provided powerful evidence that the large international differences in cancer incidence were
not due to genetic factors and therefore that the high rates of specific cancers in affluent countries were potentially avoidable. Although such evidence did not directly
implicate dietary factors, the animal studies noted previously made the area of diet a strong suspect.
A principal limitation of both the international correlational and migrant studies is the potential for confounding; many other differences besides dietary fat exist
between the low-fat (less affluent) and high-fat (more affluent) countries. Indeed, the correlations with gross national product are similar to those for fat intake. 15
Among the many factors that differ between low- and high-fat countries, reproductive behaviors, physical activity level, and body fatness are particularly notable and
are strongly associated with specific cancers. 18,19 The quality of dietary data used in the international correlations has also been problematic; this information is not
based on actual intakes, but rather on estimated production figures.
Despite their limitations, the suggestive findings of at least some animal models as well as the international correlations and migrant studies have clearly indicated the
need for more detailed studies in humans. In particular, studies that can control for the confounding influences of lifestyle factors other than fat intake are important.
Two general approaches, discussed elsewhere in detail, 20 are available: case-control or cohort epidemiologic studies and randomized trials. Both case-control and
cohort studies are dependent on a reasonably valid assessment of dietary intake. Although for some nutrients, biochemical measurements can be used to assess
intake, for total fat consumption a useful biochemical indicator does not exist. Since 1980, considerable effort has been given to the development of standardized
questionnaires for measuring intake of fat and other dietary factors and numerous studies have been conducted to assess the validity of these methods. 20,21,22 and 23
These investigations have clearly demonstrated that an informative range of fat exists within the populations of the United States and other countries and that
standardized food frequency questionnaires can reasonably measure differences among subjects. Although the range of fat intake that can be studied is restricted to
the range of diets in the study population, this typically includes both the levels that have often been recommended (less than 30% of energy) as well as more
traditional U.S. levels (more than 40% of energy). 24 Moreover, by combining the data from multiple large prospective studies, the range of fat has been extended from
less than 20% of energy to more than 45% of energy), which is similar to the current range observed internationally. 25
In principle, the most definitive approach to evaluate the relation between fat intake and cancer is to conduct a large randomized trial. However, many practical
problems exist in conducting such a trial, the most important being the need to maintain a difference in fat intake between the intervention and control groups for many
years; the experience of the Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial heart disease prevention study and the pilot studies for the Women's Health Initiative 26,27 indicates
this may be difficult. Moreover, the necessary duration for such a trial is not known; much evidence suggests that factors acting from childhood through
postmenopausal years can influence breast cancer risk. Because trials of cancer prevention require tens of thousands of subjects to be randomized and the costs of
instruction in dietary change is high, such studies are extremely expensive; for example, the Women's Health Initiative will cost well over half a billion dollars. 26
Since 1985 information on fat intake and cancer has grown rapidly and will continue to accrue exponentially as the populations of ongoing cohort studies age and as
recently started cohort studies begin to report their findings. In the following sections, current data on the relation of fat intake to cancers of the breast, colon, and
prostate are briefly reviewed as these are the cancers for which the current evidence is most abundant.

FAT AND BREAST CANCER
Breast cancer is the most frequent malignancy among women in Western countries, and incidence rates have been increasing for decades. 28,29 Rates in most parts of
Asia, South America, and Africa have been only approximately one-fifth as high as that of the United States, 30,31 but in almost all these areas rates of breast cancer
are also increasing. Populations that migrate from low- to high-incidence countries develop breast cancer rates that approximate those of the new host country. 32,33
However, among Japanese immigrants to the United States, not until the second or third generation do rates approach those of the general U.S. population. 34 This
slower rate of change for Japanese immigrants may indicate delayed acculturation, although a similar delay in increase is not observed for colon cancer.
A major rationale for the dietary fat hypothesis has been the international correlation between fat consumption and national breast cancer mortality. 15 However, in a
study of 65 Chinese counties, 35 in which both dietary assessment and mortality were measured using standardized methods, and per capita fat intake varied from 6%
to 25% of energy, only a weak positive association was seen between fat intake and breast cancer mortality. Notably, four counties consumed approximately 25% of
energy from fat, yet experienced rates of breast cancer far below those of U.S. women with similar fat intake, 24 thus providing strong evidence that factors other than
fat intake account for the large international differences.
Breast cancer incidence rates increased substantially in the United States during the twentieth century, as have the estimates of per capita fat consumption based on
food disappearance data.
However, surveys based on reports of individual actual intake, rather than food disappearance, indicate that consumption of energy from fat, either as absolute intake

or as a percentage of energy, has actually declined in the last several decades, 36,37 a time during which breast cancer incidence has increased. 38
CASE-CONTROL STUDIES
A number of case-control studies have been performed to investigate the dietary fat effect on breast cancer. The largest study so far is that of Graham et al., 39 who
used a food frequency questionnaire to compare the fat intake of 2024 women with breast cancer with that reported by 1463 women controls entering the hospital with
benign conditions. Both animal fat and total fat intake were essentially identical in the two groups. The results from 12 smaller case-control studies have been
summarized in a metaanalysis by Howe et al., 40 which included 4312 cases and 5978 controls. The pooled relative risk was 1.35 ( P <.0001) for a 100-g increase in
daily total fat intake, although the risk was somewhat stronger for postmenopausal women (relative risk = 1.48; P <.001). This magnitude of association, however,
could potentially be compatible with biases due to recall of diet or the selection of controls. 41
COHORT STUDIES
A substantial body of data from cohort studies is now available to assess the relation between dietary fat intake and breast cancer in developed countries. Because of
the prospective design, most of the methodologic biases of case-control studies are avoided. In a pooled analysis of the seven prospective studies with more than 200
cases of breast cancer, which included 337,000 women who developed 4980 incident cases of breast cancer, 25 no overall association was seen for fat intake over the
range of less than 20% to greater than 45% of energy ( Fig. 23.1-1). A similar lack of association was seen among postmenopausal women only and for specific types
of fat. Only among the small number of women consuming less than 15% of energy from fat was a significant association seen; breast cancer risk was elevated
twofold in this group. An update of the Nurses' Health Study included 14 years of follow-up, during which 2956 women developed breast cancer. 42 Because repeated
assessments of diet were obtained at 2- to 4-year intervals, this provided a particularly detailed evaluation of the fat intake over an extended period in relation to
breast cancer risk. For total fat intake, the overall association was weakly inverse and statistically significant. There was no suggestion of any reduction in risk at
intakes below 25% of energy. These cohort findings therefore do not support the hypothesis that dietary fat is an important cause of breast cancer.

FIGURE 23.1-1. Pooled relative risks and 95% confidence intervals for various levels of energy from fat. A level of 30% to less than 35% of total energy from fat was
designated as the reference category. (From ref. 25, with permission.)

Estrogen level in blood has now been established as a factor for breast cancer. 43 Thus, the effects of fat and other dietary factors on estrogen levels are of potential
interest. Vegetarian women, who consume higher amounts of fiber and lower amounts of fat, have lower blood levels and reduced urinary excretion of estrogens,
apparently due to increased fecal excretion. 44 A metaanalysis has suggested that reduction in dietary fat may reduce plasma estrogen levels, 45 but the studies
included were plagued by the lack of concurrent controls, short duration, and confounding by negative energy balance. 46 In a large randomized trial among
postmenopausal women with a previous diagnosis of breast cancer, reduction in dietary fat did not affect estradiol levels when appropriately analyzed. 47,48
DIFFERENT TYPES OF FAT
In animal mammary tumor models, the tumor-promoting effect of fat intake has been observed primarily for polyunsaturated fats when fed in the presence of high-fat
diets containing approximately 45% of energy. 6,49,50 In a metaanalysis of animal studies, monosaturated fat had no significant effect on mammary carcinogenesis, and
the effect of saturated fat was weak.6
In several prospective cohort studies, an inverse association between monounsaturated fat and breast cancer has been present. 24,51 This is an intriguing observation
because of the relatively low rates of breast cancer in Southern European countries with high intakes of monounsaturated fats due to the use of olive oil as the
primary fat. In case-control studies in Spain, Greece, and Italy, women who used more olive oil had reduced risks of breast cancer. 52,53 and 54 Also, olive oil has been
protective relative to other sources of fats in several animal studies. 5,6 Further examination is needed of the hypothesis that monounsaturated fats, and perhaps olive
oil in particular, may protect against breast cancer.
FAT AND AGE AT PUBERTY
An earlier age at menarche is an established risk factor for breast cancer. Although the relative risks associated with early menarche are generally modest, usually
less than approximately 1.5 for the earliest compared with the latest age groups within a population, this is likely to be due to the limited range of age at menarche
within a population. For example, in the United States, the average age is between 12 and 13 years, 55 but in rural China the typical age is approximately 17 to 18
years. 56 Further, the average age at menarche has been declining worldwide for the last 200 years, 55 thus suggesting that increasing breast cancer rates that occur
with increasing industrialization are in part due to a decreasing average age at menarche.
For this reason, nutritional factors that influence age at menarche are of particular interest. Nutritional factors have been examined as potential predictors of age at
menarche in several prospective cohort studies. Body mass index, height, and weight have consistently been strong determinants of age at menstruation. 57,58 and 59 In
the United States, 57 as well as in the Canadian cohorts, 59 no association was found between the fat composition of the diet and occurrence of menarche, but a
suggestion of earlier onset with higher fat intake was seen in the German study. 58 Collectively, these studies provide strong evidence that rapid growth rates before
puberty play an important role in determining future risk of breast cancer, but that overall energy balance rather than fat intake is most important.
FAT AND BREAST CANCER SURVIVAL
High intake of dietary fat has been hypothesized to affect survival adversely in patients with breast cancer, in part because of observations that, adjusted for stage,
survival is lower in the United States than in Japan. 60 However, obesity has often been associated with adverse survival from breast cancer, which provides an
alternative hypothesis as Japanese women tend to be substantially leaner than U.S. women, and other dietary and lifestyle factors have differed substantially between
the United States and Japan.
At present, studies of dietary fat intake and survival from breast cancer are few and have substantial limitations. Most were not specifically designed for this purpose,
but instead are based on the follow-up of the control series of case-control or cohort studies of breast cancer incidence. Thus, they usually refer to premorbid diet
assessed either before or at about the time of diagnosis rather than to diet after diagnosis and, moreover, most studies have been small in terms of the failure end
points. Mixed results have been seen in the published work; positive associations have been seen in several studies, 61,62,63,64,65 and 66 but not in others.67,68,69 and 70 In a
report from the Nurses' Health Study, 71 fat intake after diagnosis was not significantly associated with survival, but a modest effect could not be excluded.
Unexpectedly, higher protein intake was associated with improved survival. A randomized trial has been started to evaluate the effect of a diet low in fat (15% of
energy from fat is the dietary goal) on survival of breast cancer patients. 72

FAT AND COLON CANCER
In comparisons among countries, rates of colon cancer are strongly correlated with national per capita disappearance of animal fat and meat, with correlation
coefficients ranging between 0.8 and 0.9. 15,17 Rates of colon cancer rose sharply in Japan after World War II, paralleling a 2.5-fold increase in fat. 31 Based on these
epidemiologic investigations and animal studies, a hypothesis has developed that dietary fat increases excretion of bile acids, which can be converted to carcinogens
or promoters.73 However, more recent evidence from many studies that obesity and low levels of physical activity increase risk of colon cancer risk means that at least
part of the high rates in affluent countries previously attributed to fat intake are probably due to sedentary lifestyle.
With some exceptions, 74,75,76 and 77 case-control studies have generally shown an association between risk of colon cancer and intake of fat 78,79,80,81,82,83,84 and 85 or red
meat.86,87,88,89,90 and 91 However, in many of these studies, a positive association between total energy intake and risk of colon cancer has also been observed, 78,79,80,81
and 82,84,85
raising the question of whether it is general overconsumption of food or the fat composition of the diet that is etiologically important. A metaanalysis by Howe
of 13 case-control studies found a significant association between total energy and colon cancer, but saturated, monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated fat were not
associated with colon cancer independently of total energy. 92
Prospective cohort studies of colon cancer are less prone to selection and recall bias. Earlier prospective data have shown positive, 93,94 inverse, 95,96 and null
associations 97,98 with fat or meat consumption. These studies were limited by small number of cases or crude assessments of diet. More recent cohort studies have
largely avoided these limitations ( Table 23.1-1). The Nurses' Health Study showed approximately a twofold higher risk of colon cancer among women in the highest
compared with those in the lowest quintile of animal fat intake. 99 In a multivariate analysis of these data, which included red meat and animal fat intakes in the same
model, red meat intake remained significantly predictive of risk of colon cancer, whereas the association with animal fat was eliminated. A cohort study from the
Netherlands showed a significant direct association between intake of processed meats and risk of colon cancer, but no relationship was observed for fresh meats or
overall fat intake. 100 A cohort study in Iowa women also found a direct association with processed meats, although this was not statistically significant. 101 Among a
large cohort study of men, a direct association between red meat consumption and risk of colon cancer was seen, but no association was observed with other sources
of fat.102 In this study, no overall relationship existed between total or saturated fat and colon cancer despite a substantial range in fat intake. A similar association
was noted for colorectal adenomas in the same cohort of men. 73 In the large American Cancer Society Cohort, 103 little relation was seen between either meat or fat
intake and mortality caused by colon cancer, but the dietary questionnaire was brief and of uncertain validity. As noted in Table 23.1-1, other cohort studies have also
failed to support an association with fat intake, even though positive associations with red meat were usually observed.

TABLE 23.1-1. Large Prospective Studies of Colon Cancer: Energy, Fat, and Meat

The apparently stronger association with red meat compared with fat intake in most recent cohort studies needs further confirmation, but could result if the fatty acids
or nonfat components of meat (e.g., the heme iron or carcinogens created by cooking) were the primary etiologic factors. This issue does have major practical
implications as current dietary recommendations 104 support the daily consumption of red meat as long as it is lean. Virtually no data exist on the relation of dietary fat
to survival from colon cancer.

FAT AND PROSTATE CANCER
Consumption of animal fat, but not vegetable fat, is strongly correlated with prostate cancer mortality internationally. 15 Associations with fat intake have been seen in
many case-control studies,105,106,107,108,109,110,111,112,113 and 114 but sometimes only in subgroups. In a large case-control study among various ethnic groups within the
United States, 115 consistent associations with prostate cancer risk were seen for saturated fat, but not with other types of fat.
The association between fat intake and prostate cancer risk has been assessed in only a few cohort studies ( Table 23.1-2). In a cohort of 8000 Japanese men living
in Hawaii, no association was seen between intake of total or unsaturated fat. 116 However, diet was assessed with a single 24-hour recall in this study so the lack of
association may not be informative. In a study of 14,000 Seventh-Day Adventist men living in California, a positive association between the percentage of calories
from animal fat and prostate cancer risk was seen, but this was not statistically significant. 117 More recently, three large prospective studies have been published. In
the Health Professionals Follow-up Study of 51,000 men, a positive association was seen with intake of red meat and total and animal fat, which was largely limited to
aggressive prostate cancers. 118 No association was seen with vegetable fats. In another cohort from Hawaii, increased risks of prostate cancer were seen with
consumption of beef and animal fat. 119 In contrast, no relation was seen between intakes of either total or saturated fat and incidence of prostate cancer in a large
Dutch cohort. 120

TABLE 23.1-2. Prospective Studies of Dietary Fat and Prostate Cancer Risk

Although further data are desirable, the evidence from international correlations, case-control, and cohort studies provides some support for an association between
consumption of fat-containing animal products and prostate cancer incidence. This evidence does not generally support a relation with intake of vegetable fat, which
suggests that either the type of fat or other components of animal products are responsible. Some evidence also suggests that animal fat consumption may be most
strongly associated with aggressive prostate cancer, which suggests an influence on the transition from the widespread indolent form to the more lethal form of this
malignancy. No data are available on fat intake in relation to the probability of survival after the diagnosis of prostate cancer.

OTHER CANCERS
Rates of other cancers that are common in affluent countries, including those of the endometrium and ovary, are, of course, also correlated with fat intake
internationally. Although these have been studied in a small number of case-control investigations, consistent associations with fat intake have not been
seen.121,122,123,124,125,126,127,128,129 and 130 In a prospective study among Iowa women,131 no evidence of a relation between fat intake and risk of endometrial cancer was
observed. Positive associations have been hypothesized between fat intake and risks of skin cancer 132 and lung cancer, but relevant data in humans are limited.

SUMMARY
Based largely on the results of animal studies, international correlations, and a few case-control studies, great enthusiasm developed in the 1980s that modest
reductions in fat intake would have a major effect on breast cancer incidence. However, as the findings from large prospective studies have become available, support
for this relationship has weakened considerably. For colon cancer, the associations seen with animal fat internationally have been supported in numerous
case-control and cohort studies. However, more recent evidence has suggested that this might be explained by factors in red meat other than simply its fat content.
Further, the importance of physical activity and leanness as protective factors against colon cancer indicates that international correlations probably overstate the
contribution of diet to differences in colon cancer incidence. At present, the available evidence most strongly suggests an association between animal fat consumption
and risk of prostate cancer, particularly the aggressive form of this disease. As with colon cancer, the possibility remains that other factors in animal products
contribute to risk.
Despite the large body of data on dietary fat and cancer that has accumulated since 1985, any conclusions should be regarded as tentative because we are dealing
with disease processes that are poorly understood, but that are likely to take many decades to develop. As almost all of the reported literature from prospective
studies is based on less than 15 years of follow-up, further evaluation of the effects of diet earlier in life and at longer intervals of observation will be needed to
understand fully these complex relationships. Nevertheless, persons interested in reducing their risk of cancer could be advised, as a prudent measure, to minimize
their intake of foods high in animal fat, particularly red meat. Such a dietary pattern is also likely to be beneficial from the standpoint of cardiovascular disease. On the
other hand, unsaturated fats (with the exception of trans fatty acids) reduce blood low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels and risk of cardiovascular disease 133 and
little evidence suggests that they adversely affect cancer risk. Thus, efforts to reduce unsaturated fat intake do not appear to be warranted at this time and may have
adverse effects on cardiovascular disease. As excess adiposity adversely affects risks of several cancers and cardiovascular disease, balancing calories from any
source with adequate physical activity is extremely important.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Committee on Diet Nutrition and Cancer, Assembly of Life Sciences, National Research Council. Diet, nutrition, and cancer. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1982.
2. U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Nutrition and your health: dietary guidelines for Americans. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office,
1995.
3. Tannenbaum A. The genesis and growth of tumors. III. Effects of a high fat diet. Cancer Res 1942;2:468.
4. Tannenbaum A, Silverstone H. Nutrition in relation to cancer. Adv Cancer Res 1953;1:451.
5. Welsch CW. Relationship between dietary fat and experimental mammary tumorigenesis: a review and critique. Cancer Res 1992;52(Suppl 7):2040S.
6. Fay MP, Freedman LS. Meta-analyses of dietary fats and mammary neoplasms in rodent experiments. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1997;46:215.
7. Birt DF. Dietary fat and experimental carcinogenesis: a summary of recent in vivo studies. Adv Exp Med Biol 1986;206:69.
8. Albanes D. Total calories, body weight, and tumor incidence in mice. Cancer Res 1987;47:92.
9. Sonnenschein E, Glickman L, Goldschmidt M, et al. Body conformation, diet, risk of breast cancer in pet dogs: a case-control study. Am J Epidemiol 1991;133:694.
10. Appleton BS, Landers RE. Oil gavage effects on tumor incidence in the National Toxicology Program's 2-year carcinogenesis bioassay. Adv Exp Med Biol 1986;206:99.
11. Freedman LS, Clifford C, Messina M. Analysis of dietary fat, calories, body weight, and the development of mammary tumors in rats and mice: a review. Cancer Res 1990;50:5710.
12. Ip C. Quantitative assessment of fat and calorie as risk factors in mammary carcinogenesis in an experimental model. In: Mettlin CJ, Aoki K, eds. Recent progress in research on nutrition and
cancer. Proceedings of a workshop sponsored by the International Union Against Cancer, Nagoya, Japan, November 13, 1989. New York: Wiley-Liss, l990:107.
13. Boissonneault GA, Elson CE, Pariza MW. Net energy effects of dietary fat on chemically induced mammary carcinogenesis in F344 rats. J Natl Cancer Inst 1986;76:335.
14. Carroll MD, Abraham S, Dresser CM. Dietary intake source data: United States, 19761980. Series 11. National Center for Health Statistics, 1983.
15. Armstrong B, Doll R. Environmental factors and cancer incidence and mortality in different countries, with special reference to dietary practices. Int J Cancer 1975;15:617.
16. Prentice RL, Sheppard L. Dietary fat and cancer. Consistency of the epidemiologic data, and disease prevention that may follow from a practical reduction in fat consumption. Cancer Causes
and Control 1990;1:81.
17. Rose DP, Boyar AP, Wynder EL. International comparisons of mortality rates for cancer of the breast, ovary, prostate, and colon, and per capita food consumption. Cancer 1986;58:2263.
18. Giovannucci E, Ascherio A, Rimm EB, et al. Physical activity, obesity, and risk for colon cancer and adenoma in men. Ann Intern Med 1995;122:327.
19. Harris JR, Lippman ME, Veronsei U, et al. Breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1992;327:319.
20. Willett WC. Nutritional epidemiology. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.
21. Rimm EB, Giovannucci EL, Stampfer MJ, et al. Reproducibility and validity of an expanded self-administered semiquantitative food frequency questionnaire among male health professionals.
Am J Epidemiol 1992;135:1114.
22. Pietinen P, Hartman AM, Haapa E, et al. Reproducibility and validity of dietary assessment instruments. I. A self-administered food use questionnaire with a portion size picture booklet. Am J
Epidemiol 1988,128:655.
23. Block G. A review of validations of dietary assessment methods. Am J Epidemiol 1982;115:492.
24. Willett WC, Hunter DJ, Stampfer MJ, et al. Dietary fat and fiber in relation to risk of breast cancer: an 8-year follow-up. JAMA 1992;268:2037.
25. Hunter DJ, Spiegelman D, Adami HO, et al. Cohort studies of fat intake and the risk of breast cancer: a pooled analysis. N Engl J Med 1996;334:356.
26. Michels KB, Willett WC. The Women's Health Initiative: daughter of politics or science? Principles and Practices of Oncology 1992;6:1.
27. Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial Research Group. Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial: risk factor changes and mortality results. JAMA 1982;248:1465.
28. Sondik EJ. Breast cancer trendsincidence, mortality, and survival. Cancer 1994;74 (Suppl S):995.
29. Garfinkel L, Boring CC, Heater CW. Changing trendsan overview of breast cancer incidence and mortality. Cancer 1994;74(Suppl s):222.
30. Anonymous. Cancer incidence on five continents. In: International Agency for Research on Cancer. Lyon, France: IARC Scientific, 1987;5:882.
31. Aoki K, Hayakawa N, Kurihara M, et al. Death rates for malignant neoplasms for selected sites by sex and five-year age group in 33 countries, 195357 to 198387. International Union Against
Cancer. Nagoya, Japan: University of Nagoya Coop Press, 1992.
32. Staszewski J, Haenszel W. Cancer mortality among the Polish-born in the United States. J Natl Cancer Inst 1965;35:291.
33. Adelstein AM, Staszewski J, Muir CS. Cancer mortality in 19701972 among Polish-born migrants to England and Wales. Br J Cancer 1979;40:464.
34. Buell P. Changing incidence of breast cancer in Japanese-American women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1973;51:1479.
35. Marshall JR, Qu Y, Chen J, et al. Additional ecological evidence: lipids and breast cancer mortality among women aged 55 and over in China. Eur J Cancer 1992;28A:1720.
36. Stephen AM, Wald NJ. Trends in individual consumption of dietary fat in the United States, 19201984. Am J Clin Nutr 1990;52:457.
37. McDowell MA, Briefel RR, Alaimo K, et al . Energy and macronutrient intakes of persons ages 2 months and over in the United States : third national health and nutrition examination survey,
phase I 19881991. National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control, Public Health Service, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Hyattsville, MD, 1994.
38. American Cancer Society. Cancer facts and figures. Atlanta, GA: American Cancer Society, 1994.
39. Graham S, Marshall J, Mettlin C, et al. Diet in the epidemiology of breast cancer. Am J Epidemiol 1982;116:68.
40. Howe GR, Hirohata T, Hislop TG, et al. Dietary factors and risk of breast cancer: combined analysis of 12 case-control studies. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:561.
41. Giovannucci E, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, et al. A comparison of prospective and retrospective assessments of diet in the study of breast cancer. Am J Epidemiol 1993;137:502.
42. Holmes MD, Hunter DJ, Colditz GA, et al. Association of dietary intake of fat and fatty acids with risk of breast cancer. JAMA 1999;281:914.
43. Hankinson SE, Willett WC, Manson JE, et al. Plasma sex steriod hormone levels and risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1292.
44. Goldin BR, Aldercreutz H, Gorbach SL, et al. Estrogen excretion patterns and plasma levels in vegetarian and omnivorous women. N Engl J Med 1982;307:1542.
45. Wu AH, Pike MC, Stram DO. Meta-analysis: dietary fat intake, serum estrogen levels, and the risk of breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:529.
46. Holmes MD, Schisterman EF, Spiegelman D, et al. Re: Meta-analysis: dietary fat intake, serum estrogen levels, and the risk of breast cancer [Letter]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1511.
47. Rose DP, Connolly JM, Chlebowski RT, et al. The effects of a low fat dietary intervention and tamoxifen adjuvant therapy on the serum estrogen and sex hormone-binding globulin
concentrations of postmenopausal breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1993;27:253.
48. Willett WC. Dietary fat and breast cancer. Nutritional epidemiology. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford Press, 1998.
49. Hopkins GJ, Carroll KK. Relationship between amount and type of dietary fat in promotion of mammary carcinogenesis induced by 7,12-dimethylbenz (a) anthracene. J Natl Cancer Inst
1979;62:1009.
50. Hopkins GJ, Kennedy TG, Carroll KK. Polyunsaturated fatty acids as promoters of mammary carcinogenesis induced Sprague-Dawley rats by 7,12 dimethylbenz[a]anthracene. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1981;66:517.
51. Wolk A, Bergstrom R, Hunter D, et al. A prospective study of association of monounsaturated and other types of fat with risk of breast cancer. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:41.
52. Martin-Moreno JM, Willett WC, Gorgojo L, et al. Dietary fat, olive oil intake and breast cancer risk. Int J Cancer 1994;58:774.
53. Trichopoulou A, Katsouyanni K, Stuver S, et al. Consumption of olive oil and specific food groups in relation to breast cancer risk in Greece. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:110.
54. La Vecchia C, Negri E, Franceschi S, et al. Olive oil, other dietary fats, and the risk of breast cancer (Italy). Cancer Causes Control 1995;6:545.
55. Wyshak G, Frisch RE. Evidence for a secular trend in age of menarche. N Engl J Med 1982;306:1033.
56. Chen J, Campbell TC, Junyao L, et al. Diet, life-style, and mortality in China: a study of the characteristics of 65 Chinese counties. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 1990.
57. Maclure M, Travis LB, Willett WC, et al. A prospective cohort study of nutrient intake and age at menarche. Am J Clin Nutr 1991;54:649.
58. Merzenich H, Boeing H, Wahrendorf J. Dietary fat and sports activity as determinants for age at menarche. Am J Epidemiol 1993;138:217.
59. Moisan J, Meyer F, Gingras S. Diet and age at menarche. Cancer Causes Control 1990;1:149.
60. Chlebowski RT, Rose D, Buzzard IM, et al. Adjuvant dietary fat intake reduction in postmenopausal breast cancer patient management. The Women's Intervention Nutrition Study (WINS).
Breast Cancer Res Treat 1992;20:73.
61. Nomura AMY, Marchand LL, Kolonel LN, et al. The effect of dietary fat on breast cancer survival among Caucasian and Japanese women in Hawaii. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1991;18:S135.

62. Gregorio DI, Emrich LJ, Graham S, et al. Dietary fat consumption and survival among women with breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1985;75:37.
63. Verreault R, Brisson J, Deschenes L, et al. Dietary fat in relation to prognostic indicators in breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:819.
64. Holm LE, Nordevang E, Hjalmar ML, et al. Treatment failure and dietary habits in women with breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:32.
65. Jain M, Miller AB, To T. Premorbid diet and the prognosis of women with breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1390.
66. Zhang S, Folsom AR, Sellers TA, et al. Better breast cancer survival for postmenopausal women who are less overweight and eat less fat. Cancer 1995;76:275.
67. Newman SC, Miller AB, Howe GR. A study of the effect of weight and dietary fat on breast cancer survival time. Am J Epidemiol 1986;123:767.
68. Rohan TE, Hiller JE, McMichael AJ. Dietary factors and survival from breast cancer. Nutr Cancer 1993;20:167.
69. Ewertz M, Gillanders S, Meyer L, et al. Survival of breast cancer patients in relation to factors which affect the risk of developing breast cancer. Int J Cancer 1991;49:526.
70. Kyogoku S, Hirohata T, Nomura Y, et al. Diet and prognosis of breast cancer. Nutr Cancer 1992;17:271.
71. Holmes MD, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, et al. Dietary factors and the survival of women with breast carcinoma. Cancer 1999;86:826.
72. Chlebowski RT, Blackburn GL, Buzzard IM, et al. Adherence to a dietary fat intake reduction program in postmenopausal women receiving therapy for early breast cancerthe Women's
Intervention Nutrition Study. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2072.
73. Giovannucci E, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, et al. Relationship of diet to risk of colorectal adenoma in men. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:91.
74. Macquart-Moulin G, Riboli E, Cornee J, et al. Case-control study on colorectal cancer and diet in Marseilles. Int J Cancer 1986;38:183.
75. Berta JL, Coste T, Rautureau J, et al. Diet and rectocolonic cancers. Results of a case-control study. Gastroenterol Clin Biol 1985;9:348.
76. Tuyus AJ, Haelterrnan M, Kaaks R. Colorectal cancer and the intake of nutrients: oligosaccharides are a risk factor, fats are not. A case-control study in Belgium. Nutr Cancer 1987;10:181.
77. Meyer F, White E. Alcohol and nutrients in relation to colon cancer in middle-aged adults. Am J Epidemiol 1993;138:225.
78. Jain M, Cook GM, Davis FG, et al. A case-control study of diet and colo-rectal cancer. Int J Cancer 1980;26:757.
79. Potter JD, McMichael AJ. Diet and cancer of the colon and rectum: a case-control study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1986;76:557.
80. Lyon JL, Mahoney AW, West DW, et al. Energy intake: its relationship to colon cancer risk. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;78:853.
81. Graham S, Marshall J, Haughey B, et al. Dietary epidemiology of cancer of the colon in western New York. Am J Epidemiol 1988;128:490.
82. Bristol JB, Emmett PM, Heaton KW, et al. Sugar, fat, and the risk of colorectal cancer. BMJ (Clin Res Ed) 1985;291:1467.
83. Kune GA, Kune S, Watson LF. The nutritional causes of colorectal cancer: an introduction to the Melbourne Study. Nutr Cancer 1987;9:5.
84. West DW, Slattery ML, Robison LM, et al. Dietary intake and colon cancer: sex- and anatomic site-specific associations. Am J Epidemiol 1989;130:883.
85. Peters RK, Pike MC, Garabrandt D, et al. Diet and colon cancer in Los Angeles County, California. Cancer Causes Control 1992;3:457.
86. Manousos O, Day NE, Trichopoulos D, et al. Diet and colorectal cancer: a case-control study in Greece. Int J Cancer 1983;32:1.
87. La Vecchia C, Negri E, Decarli A, et al. A case-control study of diet and colo-rectal cancer in northern Italy. Int J Cancer 1988;41:492.
88. Miller AB, Howe GR, Jain M, et al. Food items and food groups as risk factors in a case-control study of diet and colo-rectal cancer. Int J Cancer 1983;32:155.
89. Young TB, Wolf DA. Case-control study of proximal and distal colon cancer and diet in Wisconsin. Int J Cancer 1988;42:167.
90. Benito E, Obrador A, Stiggelbout A, et al. A population-based case-control study of colorectal cancer in Majorca. I. Dietary factors. Int J Cancer 1990,45:69.
91. Lee HP, Gourley L, Duffy SW, et al. Colorectal cancer and diet in an Asian populationa case-control study among Singapore Chinese. Int J Cancer 1989;43:1007.
92. Howe GR. Meeting Presentation. Advances in the biology and therapy of colorectal cancer. M.D. Anderson's Thirty-seventh Annual Clinical Conference. M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX, 1993.
93. Gerhardsson M, Floderus B, Norell SE. Physical activity and colon cancer risk. Int J Epidemiol 1988;17:743.
94. Bjelke E. Epidemiology of colorectal cancer, with emphasis on diet. In: Davis W, Harrup KR, Stathopoulos G, eds. Human cancer. Its characterization and treatment. Amsterdam, Congress
Series No. 484: Exerpta Medica, 1980:158.
95. Stemmermann GN, Nomura AM, Heilbrun LK. Dietary fat and the risk of colorectal cancer. Cancer Res 1984;44:4633.
96. Hirayama T. A large-scale study on cancer risks by dietwith special reference to the risk reducing effects of green-yellow vegetable consumption. In: Hayashi Y, Magao M, Sugimura T, et al.,
eds. Diet, nutrition, and cancer. Tokyo: Japan Scientific Societies Press, 1986:41.
97. Garland C, Shekelle RB, Barrett-Conner E, et al. Dietary vitamin D and calcium and risk of colorectal cancer: a 19-year prospective study in men. Lancet 1985;1:307.
98. Phillips RL, Snowdon DA. Association of meat and coffee use with cancers of the large bowel, breast, and prostate among Seventh-Day Adventists: preliminary results. Cancer Res
1983;43(Suppl):2403S.
99. Willett WC, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, et al. Relation of meat, fat, and fiber intake to the risk of colon cancer in a prospective study among women. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1664.
100. Goldbohm RA, van den Brandt PA, vans Veer P, et al. A prospective cohort study on the relation between meat consumption and the risk of colon cancer. Cancer Res 1994;54:718.
101. Bostick RM, Potter JD, Kushi LH, et al. Sugar, meat, and fat intake, and non-dietary risk factors for colon cancer incidence in Iowa women (United States). Cancer Causes Control 1994;5:38.
102. Giovannucci E, Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ, et al. Intake of fat, meat, and fiber in relation to risk of colon cancer in men. Cancer Res 1994;54:2390.
103. Thun MJ, Calle EE, Namboodiri MM, et al. Risk factors for fatal colon cancer in a large prospective study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1491.
104. U.S. Department of Agriculture. The food guide pyramid. Home and Garden Bulletin 252. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1992:30.
105. Talamini R, La Vecchia C, Decarli A, et al. Nutrition, social factors, and prostatic cancer in a Northern Italian population. Br J Cancer 1986;53:817.
106. Rotkin ID. Studies in the epidemiology of prostatic cancer: expanded sampling. Cancer Treat Rep 1977;61:173.
107. Mishina T, Watanabe H, Araki H, et al. Epidemiological study of prostate cancer by matched-pair analysis. Prostate 1985;6:423.
108. Talamini R, Franceschi S, La Vecchia C, et al. Diet and prostatic cancer: a case-control study in Northern Italy. Nutr Cancer 1992;18:277.
109. Schuman LM, Mandel JS, Radke A, et al. Some selected features of the epidemiology of prostatic cancer: Minneapolis-St. Paul, Minnesota case-control study, 19761979. In: Magnus K, ed.
Trends in cancer incidence: causes and practical implications. Washington, DC: Hemisphere Publishing, 1982:345.
110. Graham S, Haughey B, Marshall J, et al. Diet in the epidemiology of carcinoma of the prostate gland. J Natl Cancer Inst 1983;70:687.
111. Ross RK, Shimizu H, Paganini-Hill A, et al. Case-control studies of prostate cancer in Blacks and Whites in Southern California. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;78:869.
112. West DW, Slattery ML, Robison LM, et al. Adult dietary intake and prostate cancer risk in Utah: a case-control study with special emphasis on aggressive tumors. Cancer Causes Control
1991;2:85.
113. Kolonel LN, Yoshizawa CN, Hankin JH. Diet and prostatic cancer: a case-control study in Hawaii. Am J Epidemiol 1988;127:999.
114. Heshmat MY, Kaul L, Kovi J, et al. Nutrition and prostate cancer: a case-control study. Prostate 1985;6:7.
115. Whittemore AS, Kolonel LN, Wu AH, et al. Prostate cancer in relation to diet, physical activity, and body size in blacks, whites, and Asians in the United States and Canada. Natl Cancer Inst
1995;87:652.
116. Severson RK, Nomura AMY, Grove JS, et al. A prospective studydemographics, diet, and prostate cancer among men of Japanese ancestry in Hawaii. Cancer Res 1989;49:1857.
117. Mills PK, Beeson WL, Phillips RL, et al. Cohort study of diet, lifestyle, and prostate cancer in Adventist men. Cancer 1989;64:598.
118. Giovannucci E, Rimm EB, Colditz GA, et al. A prospective study of dietary fat and risk of prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1571.
119. Le Marchand L, Kolonel LN, Wilkens LR, et al. Animal fat consumption and prostate cancer: a prospective study in Hawaii. Epidemiology 1994;5:276.
120. Schuurman AG. Association of energy and fat intake with prostate carcinoma risk. American Cancer Society, 1999:1019.
121. Cramer DW, Welch WR, Hutchison GB, et al. Dietary animal fat in relation to ovarian cancer risk. Obstet Gynecol 1984;63:833.
122. La Vecchia C, Decarli A, Negri E, et al. Dietary factors and the risk of epithelial ovarian cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;79:663.
123. Shu XO, Gao YT, Yuan JM, et al. Dietary factors and epithelial ovarian cancer. Br J Cancer 1989;59:92.
124. Byers T, Marshall J, Graham S, et al. A case-control study of dietary and nondietary factors in ovarian cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1983;71:681.
125. Slattery ML, Schuman KL, West DW, et al. Nutrient intake and ovarian cancer. Am J Epidemiol 1989;130:497.
126. Risch HA, Jain M, Marrett LD, Howe GR. Dietary fat intake and risk of epithelial ovarian cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1409.
127. Levi F, Franceschi S, Negri E, et al. Dietary factors and the risk of endometrial cancer. Cancer 1993;71:3575.
128. Barbone F, Austin H, Partridge EE. Diet and endometrial cancer: a case-control study. Am J Epidemiol 1993;137:393.
129. Potischman N, Swanson CA, Brinton LA, et al. Dietary associations in a case-control study of endometrial cancer. Cancer Causes Control 1993;4:239.
130. Shu XO, Zheng W, Potischamn N, et al. A population based case-control of dietary factors and endometrial cancer in Shanghai, People's Republic of China. Am J Epidemiol 1993;137:155.
131. Zheng W, Kushi LH, Potter JD, et al. Dietary intake of energy and animals foods and endometrial cancer incidence. Am J Epidemiol 1995;142:388.
132. Black HS, Herd JA, Goldberg LH, et al. Effect of a low-fat diet on the incidence of actinic keratosis. N Engl J Med 1994;330:1272.
133. Willett WC. Diet and coronary heart disease. In: Willett WC, ed. Nutritional epidemiology. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.
134. Gaard M, Tretli S, Løken EB. Dietary factors and risk of colon cancer: a prospective study of 50,535 young Norwegian men and women. Eur J Cancer Prev 1996;5:445.
135. Kato I, Akhmedkhanov A, Koenig K, et al. Prospective study of diet and female colorectal cancer: the New York University Women's Health Study. Nutr Cancer 1997;28:276.
136. Hsing AW, McLaughlin JK, Chow W-H, et al. Risk factors for colorectal cancer in a prospective study among U.S. white men. Int J Cancer 1998;77:549.
137. Singh PN, Fraser GE. Dietary risk factors for colon cancer in a low-risk population. Am J Epidemiol 1998;148:761.

SECTION 23.2 Dietary Fibers
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 23.2
Dietary Fibers
PETER GREENWALD
Introduction
Sources and Types of Dietary Fiber
Dietary Fiber and Colorectal Cancer
Summary of Epidemiologic and Experimental Evidence
Potential Influences of Dietary Fiber on Genetically Linked Colorectal Cancers
Proposed Mechanisms of Action
Dietary Fiber and Colorectal Cancer at Specific Sites
Dietary Fiber and Calcium: Potential Interactions
Ongoing National Cancer Institute Clinical Trials
Dietary Fiber and Breast Cancer
Summary of Epidemiologic and Experimental Research
Proposed Mechanisms
Dietary Fiber and Other Cancers
Public Health Implications
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The hypothesis linking high intakes of dietary fiber with reduced risk of colorectal cancer in humans was advanced in the early 1970s by Burkitt, who observed that
certain chronic diseases common to westernized societies, including colon cancer, diverticular disease, gallstones, and ischemic heart disease, were rare among
African populations whose diets consisted predominantly of high-fiber foods. 1 Since that time, a compelling body of epidemiologic evidence, experimental data, and
clinical research has found that diets high in fiber, grains, cereals, and fresh vegetables and fruits are associated with reduced risk of several cancers, including
cancers of the colon, rectum, and breast, and possibly with lowered risk for additional cancers of the alimentary canal (mouth, esophagus, pharynx, stomach) and
other hormone-sensitive cancers (ovarian, endometrial, and prostate cancers). 2,3,4,5,6,7,8 and 9
Despite a substantial body of research suggesting that diets high in fiber-rich foods protect against certain cancers, results from epidemiologic and animal studies
investigating the effect of dietary fiber on cancer risk are not entirely consistent. 6,9,10,11 and 12 The type or source of fiber consumed, temporal nature of consumption
(current versus past intake), overall eating patterns, familial predisposition to certain cancers, cancer site, and other nutrients found in high-fiber foods (e.g., folate;
antioxidants such as vitamins C and E and selenium; and phytochemicals such as carotenoids, phytoestrogens, organosulfides, and isothiocyanates) may all
influence cancer risk. 5,8,10,13 Also at issue are the complexities of fiber and the lack of standardized analytical methods for extracting and quantifying the fiber content
of food; the differential effects of the various types of fiber on gut physiology; the effect of storage, processing, and food preparation on the physical and chemical
nature of fiber; the lack of comprehensive food composition data on types of dietary fiber and total fiber; and problems with dietary assessment methods, such as
recall bias. 14,15 Inconsistencies in animal studies may be related to the species and strain of animal used; the type (i.e., an initiator versus promoter) and amount of
carcinogen administered; the type and amount of fiber; the overall composition of the animal's diet; the timing of administration of fiber, in relation to the carcinogenic
process; and the length of the study. 16

SOURCES AND TYPES OF DIETARY FIBER
Dietary fiber is a heterogeneous mixture of complex, plant-based carbohydrates that are resistant to digestion by human intestinal enzymes. High-fiber foods include
whole grains, vegetables, fruits, beans, nuts, and seeds ( Table 23.2-1). The skins of many vegetables and fruits and the bran layers of grains also are good sources
of fiber. Components of dietary fiber in plant foods vary with plant species, stages of maturity, and parts of the plant. Further, although one or two types of fiber may
predominate in a particular food, most plants contain a variety of fiber types or components. Grains, roots, green leafy vegetables, legumes, and some fruits such as
apples contain high levels of cellulose and hemicelluloses. Another component of fiber, lignin, is found in the walls of plant cells and increases as the plant matures.
Most fruits contain pectin, but citrus fruits and apples contain the highest amounts of this fiber component.

TABLE 23.2-1. Dietary Fiber Content of Commonly Consumed Vegetables, Fruits, and Whole-Grain Products

The two primary types of fiber are categorized as soluble and insoluble, according to their degree of solubility in water. 5,17 Fibers also are described in terms of their
fermentability characteristics ( Table 23.2-2). Soluble fibers attract water, form a gel during digestion, and generally are fermentable. Insoluble fibers, in contrast, are
insoluble in water and usually are nonfermentable. Different types of dietary fibers in commonly consumed plant foods are grouped further according to their chemical
structure, as nonstarch polysaccharides and lignin, a polymer of aromatic alcohols. Nonstarch polysaccharide plant fibers include cellulose, hemicelluloses, pectins,
gums, mucilages, and other miscellaneous polysaccharides. Soluble, fermentable gel-forming fibers include pectins, gums, starches, some hemicelluloses, and other
polysaccharides and are present at the highest levels in fruits, oats, beans, and vegetables. Whole grains and whole-grain foods are primary sources of insoluble,
nonfermentable structural fibers such as cellulose, most hemicelluloses, and lignins. 5

TABLE 23.2-2. Benefits and Examples of Good Sources of Both Soluble and Insoluble Fiber

The type and characteristics of the fiber contained in different foods influence normal gut activity and appear to have a differential effect on cancer risk, as discussed
in the following sections. 5,11,17,18

DIETARY FIBER AND COLORECTAL CANCER
SUMMARY OF EPIDEMIOLOGIC AND EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE
International colon cancer incidence rates vary by a factor of 20 or more, and a large proportion of that difference is believed to be a result of various dietary factors,
including certain types of fiber. 8,10 Overall, results of international comparisons and correlation and case-control studies support the hypothesis that high-fiber intakes
reduce risk for colorectal cancer. In these studies, total dietary fiber intake and consumption of cereal fiber and whole grains show a consistent reduction in risk for
colorectal cancer. 3,7 A metaanalysis of data from 13 case-control studies reported a 50% reduction in risk for colorectal cancer when the highest versus lowest
quintiles of fiber intake were compared. 19 Results of prospective cohort studies are mixed, with most showing either only weak protective associations 20,21 or no
statistically significant relationship 22,23 between fiber intake and risk of cancers of the colon or rectum. Differences in the findings of these and other epidemiologic
studies likely result in part not only from the heterogeneous nature of fiber, the way in which fiber is measured, and the problems associated with collection of dietary
intake data, but also with the relatively homogeneous fiber intakes across the study cohorts. 8
Data from both epidemiologic and basic research studies suggest that the various types of fiber confer a differential effect on colorectal cancer risk. One international
study of 20 populations in 12 countries reported a strong inverse relationship between starch consumption and risk for colorectal cancer. 24 Another study found that
soluble but not insoluble fiber, and fiber from fruits but not vegetables, had a protective effect on the development of distal colon adenoma in men. 25 Results of a
case-control study of nearly 2000 patients with confirmed colorectal cancer and more than 4100 controls with no history of cancer indicated that total fiber intake, and
particularly intake of cellulose, soluble noncellulose polysaccharides, and fiber of vegetable and fruit origin, was associated with a reduction in the risk of cancers of
the colon and rectum. 26 Reviews of animal studies investigating the effect of different types of dietary fiber on colon tumorigenesis generally report that the greatest
protective effect, as measured by lowered incidence (number of animals with tumors) and multiplicity (number of tumors per animal with tumors) of small intestine and
colon tumors, is conferred by insoluble fibers, in particular wheat bran, whereas soluble fibers may increase risk. 5,8,16,27
The growing interest in the potential effect of wheat bran fiber on colorectal cancer risk has been the focus of several reviews. 16,28,29 Wheat bran, which contains more
than 70% of the fiber of the whole grain, is rich in lignin and polysaccharides. 29 Numerous animal studies show wheat bran fiber to be as or more effective than other
fiber sources, such as corn and oat, in inhibiting or preventing colon tumor growth. 16,27,29,30 In some studies, however, dietary wheat bran fiber either had no effect on
the development of colon tumors in rats or increased colon tumorigenesis. 16,27 Several epidemiologic studies and clinical interventions also have investigated the
effect of different dietary fibers, including wheat bran, on factors associated with increased risk for colorectal cancer, including colonic or rectal cell proliferation, bile
acid excretion, fecal mutagens, and activity of several intestinal bacterial enzymes linked with the production of carcinogenic substances. 16 Results of these studies
indicate that wheat bran has a favorable, and sometimes more favorable, effect when compared with other sources of fiber, on these factors. The cancer-protective
effects of wheat bran may be the result, at least in part, of various compounds, including the fermentation product butyrate 16 and certain constituents of wheat bran,
including phytic acid, 31,32 phenolic acids, 29 and phytoestrogens,33,34 all of which have shown a cancer-protective effect in either, or both, epidemiologic and animal
studies.
POTENTIAL INFLUENCES OF DIETARY FIBER ON GENETICALLY LINKED COLORECTAL CANCERS
Approximately 10% to 15% of all cases of colorectal cancers are believed to result from genetic predisposition to these cancers. 35,36 Two inherited genetic forms of
colorectal cancer, familial adenomatous polyposis and hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, are associated with up to an 80% lifetime risk of developing the disease.
The potential of a high-fiber diet, or fiber supplementation, to modulate cancer risk in at-risk or high-risk individuals who have a genetic predisposition to colorectal
cancer has been studied and further investigations are under way. One clinical trial found that supplementing the diet with at least 11 g of wheat bran fiber per day
significantly reduced the recurrence of rectal adenomas in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. 37 Results of the Australian Polyp Prevention Project indicated
that consuming high levels of dietary fiber supplementation (25 g wheat bran fiber per day) or a low-fat diet (25% of total calories) for 2 to 4 years reduced risk (but not
to a level of statistical significance) of developing new, large adenomas (diameter greater than or equal to 10 mm) in healthy individuals who had had at least one
colonic polyp removed before the start of the study. 38 Participants following a combined low-fat, high-fiber diet had no large adenomas at both 2 and 4 years, a finding
that was statistically significant ( P <.03). The European Concerted Action Polyp Prevention studies are examining the role of a variety of preventive strategies,
including daily dietary supplementation with resistant starch, in high-risk persons with a family history of either familial adenomatous polyposis or hereditary
nonpolyposis colon cancer. 35,36
PROPOSED MECHANISMS OF ACTION
Several mechanisms by which dietary fiber may protect against colon cancer have been proposed. 5,18,29,39 These mechanisms include both direct and indirect actions
on the alimentary and gastrointestinal canals that are related to properties of fiber, such as solubility and fermentability; actions may occur at the physical, chemical,
cellular, and/or molecular levels.
One direct mechanism by which fiber may reduce the risk of colorectal cancer is through the absorption of water by insoluble dietary fiber; this action increases fecal
bulk, diluting the concentration of carcinogens in the feces, and decreases transit time, reducing the effective interaction of carcinogens with colonic mucosal
cells. 5,11,17,18 The direct binding of carcinogens to insoluble dietary fibers, such as wheat bran, cellulose, and lignin, similarly reduces the potential interaction between
carcinogens and cells within the bowel. 5,40 Indirect mechanisms by which dietary fiber may lower colorectal cancer risk include stimulation of microbial growth, which
increases fecal bulk and the production of short chain fatty acids (SCFAs); alteration of bile acid production; influence on the production of factors that affect cell
proliferation, such as diacylglycerol, p21, and protein kinase C; and reduction of luminal pH, largely as a result in increases in SCFAs, especially butyrate. 5,16,39,40,41,42
and 43

Products of fiber fermentation, particularly butyrate, appear to have a beneficial, antineoplastic effect in the bowel. 44 Several studies suggest that, compared with
other SCFAs, butyrate most consistently protects against the development of colon tumors in the rat by acting through a variety of mechanisms, including blocking the
proliferative action of carcinogens and other cancer-promoting agents such as bile acids, inducing cell differentiation, lowering concentrations of secondary bile acids,
reducing the mutagenicity of fecal water, and enhancing programmed cell death (apoptosis) in human colorectal cancer cell lines. 5,16,18,36,39,44,45 Acting at the molecular
level, butyrate stimulates histone acetylation by inhibiting the enzyme histone deacetylase, which, in turn, makes certain sections of the DNA molecule more
accessible to factors (e.g., proteins known as transcription factors) that control gene expression. 46 The effects of butyrate on histones appear to be through induction
of the p21 gene and subsequent production of the p21 protein, which slows the growth of cancer cells. 46,47 Butyrate also decreases the expression of the transcription
factors c-fos and c-jun, acting, in turn, to reduce proliferative activity. 5,36,39
Experimental data show that dietary wheat bran fiber reduces the formation of early markers of colon cancer associated with carcinogen-induced disease, such as the
number of aberrant crypts or foci, and alters the colonic environment in several other ways, such as increasing fecal bulk, decreasing transit time, adsorbing to
carcinogens, and stimulating the production of butyric acid. 27,29,45 In epidemiologic and clinical intervention studies, wheat bran fiber supplementation favorably
modified several putative makers of colorectal cancer, including fecal mutagenicity, 48 concentrations of total and secondary fecal bile acids, 49,50 the activity of bacterial
enzymes associated with the production of carcinogenic substances, 49 and rectal proliferation in high-risk individuals. 28,51

DIETARY FIBER AND COLORECTAL CANCER AT SPECIFIC SITES
The incidence of cancers at different colon subsites varies by geographic region, with higher proportions of proximal tumors found in less developed countries that
have low rates of colorectal cancer and higher proportions of distal and right-sided tumors reported in developed, affluent countries where colorectal cancer rates are
high.8,41 Such observations suggest the possibility of differences in risk factors for colonic tumors at different anatomic subsites. Although data are limited, some
studies report that certain dietary constituents may contribute to this variable, site-specific risk.
A possible role for dietary fiber in differential risk for cancers in the proximal versus distal colon is suggested primarily from animal studies. 45,52 Soluble fibers, such as
guar gum, oat bran, and pectin, are fermented by anaerobic bacteria in the proximal colon, producing large amounts of SCFAs, which are absorbed almost entirely in
the proximal colon. In contrast, insoluble and poorly soluble fibers, such as wheat bran, cellulose, and lignin, are fermented along the length of the gut, providing a
more continuous supply of SCFAs throughout the intestine, which, in turn, assists in maintaining normal colonocyte proliferation and differentiation. Such fiber-related
maintenance of normal cell function and activity likely contributes to the inhibition of tumors in the distal colon in rats fed wheat bran compared with other fiber
sources, such as oat bran.52
Results of dietary epidemiologic studies have not consistently found similar associations. One case-control study found no difference in risk of cancers of the right
colon, transverse and descending colon, sigmoid colon, rectosigmoid junction, or rectum according to total fiber intake. 26 Another case-control study reported the
strongest inverse associations between consumption of dietary fiber, whole grains, and vegetables and risk of proximal tumors in both men and women; and between
soluble fiber, insoluble fiber, and pectin intake and risk of proximal tumors in women. 53 In contrast, a prospective study of 16,448 men from the Health Professionals
Follow-up Study reported a reduced risk of distal colon adenoma as intake of fiber from fruit increased ( P <.03 for trend) and an inverse association between soluble,
but not insoluble, fiber intake and distal colon adenoma ( P for trend, .007). 25 This study did not examine or compare associations according to other intestinal
subsites.
DIETARY FIBER AND CALCIUM: POTENTIAL INTERACTIONS
An association between dietary calcium or calcium supplementation and reduced colorectal cancer risk has been suggested from the results of epidemiologic, clinical,
and experimental research studies. 18,54,55,56 and 57 Mechanisms by which calcium may inhibit colorectal carcinogenesis are similar to those of dietary fiber and include
the ability of calcium to bind potentially carcinogenic compounds, such as secondary bile acids; slow proliferation of colonic epithelial cells; and enhance cell
differentiation. 54,55,57,58 and 59 These effects of calcium have been reported in both animal and human studies and in in vitro experiments.54,58 Animal experiments further
suggest that calcium and fiber may act synergistically in their effect on the colonic environment. 56
The roles of calcium and fiber on markers for colorectal cancer risk are being studied in several clinical trials. The multicenter European Cancer Prevention Calcium
Fibre Polyp Prevention Study is testing the efficacy of oral calcium (2 g/d) or oral dietary fiber supplements (as 3.8 g ispaghula husk, a mucilaginous substance) on
adenoma recurrence, colonic cell proliferation, and stool bile acid and sterol concentration. 60,61 Participants include patients from nine European countries who are
between 35 and 75 years old at study entry and have at least two adenomas greater than 5 mm in diameter. Preliminary results of another clinical trial showed that
high doses of wheat bran fiber (13.5 g/d) or calcium (1500 mg/d), or high doses of fiber plus high doses of calcium, increased both fecal bile acid concentrations and
excretion rates.50 The strongest statistical effect, reflecting an approximate 50% reduction in fecal concentrations of total bile acids and deoxycholic acid, was seen in
the high-fiber group. The effect of the combined high-fiber and high-calcium diet on mean fecal bile acid parameters was less than that for either factor alone; the
reason for this lack of additivity between the two supplements is not clear but may be caused by cross-interference with each agent's putative effects on bile acids. A
subsequent analysis of the same study reported that neither level of wheat bran fiber or calcium supplementation significantly reduced [ 3H]thymidine labeling index
percentages in rectal mucosal crypts. 62 These preliminary findings suggest that a primary mechanism by which wheat bran fiber and calcium may protect against
colon cancer is through reducing fecal bile acid concentrations.
ONGOING NATIONAL CANCER INSTITUTE CLINICAL TRIALS
The National Cancer Institute (NCI) is evaluating the role of dietary fiber in the prevention of colorectal cancer in humans through several clinical trials. The Polyp
Prevention Trial, for example, allows for the simultaneous investigation of the effect of three dietary components on recurrence of polyps in the large bowel. 63,64 and 65
Polyp Prevention Trial study participants include men and women at least 35 years old who have had one or more adenomas removed within 3 months of
randomization. The primary objective of the Polyp Prevention Trial is to determine whether a diet that is low in fat (20% of calories from fat), high in fiber (18 g
fiber/1000 calories), and high in vegetable and fruit intake (five to eight daily servings) will decrease the recurrence of large bowel polyps. The trial also is evaluating
the relationship between dietary modification and biochemical markers in the blood and validating promising intermediate endpoint markers of large bowel
carcinogenesis with respect to polyp recurrence.
Another NCI-supported study, the Women's Health Initiative Clinical Trial and Observational Study, is investigating several strategies for the prevention and control of
cancer, cardiovascular disease, and osteoporotic fractures in postmenopausal women 50 to 79 years old. 66 The Clinical Trial, which anticipates an enrollment of
64,500 participants, is a randomized, controlled evaluation of three interventions: (1) a goal of a low-fat (20% of calories) eating pattern that includes at least five
servings of vegetables and fruits and six or more servings of grain products per day, hypothesized to prevent breast cancer and colorectal cancer and, secondarily,
coronary heart disease; (2) hormone replacement therapy; and (3) calcium (1000 mg/d) and vitamin D3 (400 IU/d) supplementation (or placebo), hypothesized to
prevent hip fractures and, secondarily, other fractures and colorectal cancer. A prospective surveillance (the Observational Study) will enroll an additional 100,000
women to identify new etiologic factors and biologic predictors of disease and community-based interventions. The Women's Health Initiative was initiated in 1992
and is scheduled to end in 2007.
The double-blind, placebo-controlled Arizona Phase III cancer prevention trial, also funded by NCI, is examining how supplementing the diet with large versus small
doses of wheat bran fiber (13.5 vs. 2.0 g/d) alters the molecular genetics of polyp tissue in patients with previously resected adenomatous colon polyps. 67,68 Genetic
changes will be compared with dietary factors and bile acid profiles. Approximately 945 participants have fulfilled all aspects of the study protocol in this 3-year dietary
intervention, which is nearing completion.

DIETARY FIBER AND BREAST CANCER
SUMMARY OF EPIDEMIOLOGIC AND EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH
Evidence from both epidemiologic and experimental studies suggests a protective role for fiber in the prevention of breast cancer, although the exact role of fiber on
breast cancer development is not yet clear. 2,12,69 One review, a metaanalysis of the original data from 12 case-control studies of populations with widely varying breast
cancer risks and dietary habits, reported a significant reduction in breast cancer risk among women in the highest versus lowest quintiles of fiber intake, both before
and after adjusting for fat intake. 70 A more recent review found that four of four ecological studies and nine of ten case-control studies showed an inverse correlation
between either cereal consumption or fiber intake and breast cancer risk; in the five case-control studies reporting a statistically significant decrease in breast cancer
risk among women consuming a high-fiber diet, the odds ratios ranged from 0.46 to 0.60. All four prospective cohort studies included in this review reported either no
change in breast cancer risk or a nonsignificant decrease in risk in association with cereal or fiber intake. 9 Another study of international breast cancer mortality data
and dietary intake data found that both current and past cereal intake were inversely correlated ( P <.0001) with breast cancer mortality. 12 Further evidence suggests
that diets rich in fruits and vegetables, particularly green vegetables, protect against the development of breast cancer. 8
The combination of a high-fiber, low-fat diet also has been associated with reduced risk for breast cancer, with evidence from both epidemiologic and animal studies
suggesting that the proposed protective effect of fiber may occur independently of dietary fat content. 8,71,72 It also has been postulated that a high-fiber diet may
modulate the risk of breast cancer associated with a high-fat diet. 73 Experiments in rats support the hypotheses that dietary fiber, including wheat bran and
psyllium,74,75 protects against breast cancer and that dietary fiber may block the promotion of mammary tumors by fat. 72
PROPOSED MECHANISMS

Research indicates that reproductive hormones, especially estrogens, are involved in the development of breast cancer. 8,76 The mechanisms by which fiber alters
hormone production, metabolism, and bioavailability focus on the ability of fiber to bind estrogen in the small intestine, thereby both increasing the excretion and
reducing the enterohepatic circulation of hormones, 9,77,78 and on the biologic activity of phytoestrogens, compounds present in fiber-rich foods that possess weak
estrogenic and antiestrogenic activity. 33,77,79
High-fiber intake and diets rich in fiber and low in fat or high in vegetables, fruits, and soy-based foods are associated with low plasma levels of all major biologically
active sex hormones, including free estradiol and testosterone; high levels of sex-hormone binding globulin; and low urinary and high fecal estrogen and androgen
excretion.9,80,81 In one intervention study, the diets of 62 premenopausal women were supplemented with 15 g of wheat, corn, or oat bran per day, essentially doubling
daily intake of fiber. 82 Luteal phase serum levels of both estrone and estradiol were significantly reduced following addition of fiber to the diet. A subsequent study
found that supplementing the diet of premenopausal women with 10 or 20 g of wheat bran fiber per day for 1 to 2 months significantly reduced serum estrone during
both the luteal and follicular phases of the menstrual cycle; serum sex-hormone binding globulin concentrations were unaffected. 83
Dietary phytoestrogens (i.e., isoflavonoids and plant lignans) are found in a variety of high-fiber foods such as fruits, berries, seeds, soy products, and flaxseed and in
grain and vegetable fibers. 33 Two common isoflavonoids are genistein and daidzein; two mammalian lignans, enterolactone and enterodiol, are formed from plant
lignans by the action of intestinal bacteria. Urinary concentrations of these lignans have been found to correlate directly with consumption of foods containing
phytoestrogens. 79,84,85 A review of 26 animal studies in which the animals' diets were supplemented with soy or soybean isoflavonoids found a cancer-protective effect
in 65% of the studies, as reflected by reductions in tumor incidence, latency, or number. 34 Results of both in vitro and in vivo animal studies suggest that
phytoestrogens mimic the activity of and compete with endogenous estrogens by binding to estrogen receptors. 33 Although the affinity of phytoestrogens to estrogen
receptors is tens to thousands of times lower than that of endogenous estrogens, the ability of these plant-based compounds to bind to estrogen receptors permits a
dual, dose-dependent effect on mammary tumor initiation and growth. At lower doses, in vitro experiments show that phytoestrogens can increase the mitogenic
activity of breast cancer cells. 86 In contrast, higher doses of phytoestrogens inhibit mammary tumor development, 77 suppress the growth of established tumors, 77 and
inhibit the proliferation of human breast cancer cells that require estrogen to replicate. 33,34 Phytoestrogens also induce the production of sex-hormone binding globulin
in the liver and inhibit the enzyme aromatase, which catalyzes the conversion of androstenedione to estrogen and testosterone to estradiol; through these two actions,
phytoestrogens indirectly reduce the concentration and availability of circulating sex hormones and possibly contribute to reduced risk for breast cancer. 77

DIETARY FIBER AND OTHER CANCERS
Limited epidemiologic evidence suggests that high-fiber intake, consumption of fiber-rich foods, or both may lower risk of cancers of the mouth, esophagus, pharynx,
larynx, stomach,6,8,87 ovary, endometrium, and prostate.6,7,88,89 The evidence for a cancer-protective role of fiber at these sites is not as strong as for colorectal or
breast cancer, however.8 Dietary fiber may protect against these alimentary canal cancers through many of the same mechanisms suggested for the modulation of
colorectal cancer risk and influence risk of these hormone-dependent cancers by affecting the bioavailability of both estrogens and androgens. 5

PUBLIC HEALTH IMPLICATIONS
In addition to its proposed protective effects against colorectal cancer, breast cancer, and possibly other cancers, dietary fiber as total fiber, whole grains, cereal fiber,
soluble fiber, undigested fiber, fiber-rich foods, psyllium, or dietary flavonoids has been associated with reduced risk of other conditions important to public health,
including cardiovascular diseases 90,91 and type II diabetes. 90 Because of the significant health benefits afforded by fiber-rich foods, individuals and the public at large
are encouraged to consume a diet that includes a wide variety of vegetables, fruits, and whole grains, with a goal of meeting the NCI's recommended 20 to 30 g of
fiber per day. 92 Results of the 1992 National Health Interview Survey, cosponsored by the Census Bureau, the National Center for Health Statistics, and the NCI,
indicate that adult Americans consume an average of 10.4 g of fiber per day. The U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) Nationwide Food Consumption Survey
found a higher overall consumption rate for fiber among American adults, with a mean intake of 14 g/d. 93 Although these values are well below the recommended
intake levels, it is encouraging that fiber intake increased among all Americans and in all subgroups in the National Health Interview Survey between 1987 and 1992 94
and among all surveyed in the USDA's Continuing Survey of Food Intake by Individuals between 1989 through 1991 and 1994. 95
Several national programs have been instituted to increase both fiber intake and consumption of fiber-rich fruits and vegetables. For example, the 5 A Day for Better
Health Program, sponsored by the NCI in partnership with the Produce for Better Health Foundation, includes retail, community, and research components as well as
a national media campaign that encourages Americans to eat five or more servings of vegetables and fruits each day as part of a low-fat, high-fiber diet. 96,97 and 98 The
USDA's Food Guide Pyramid suggests that fiber-containing breads and grains, followed by vegetables and fruits, should form the foundation of an individual's diet.
Recommended are 6 to 11 servings of breads and grains per day, 2 to 4 servings of fruits per day, and 3 to 5 servings of vegetables per day. 99 The 1989 through
1991 USDA Continuing Survey of Food Intakes in Individuals found that, overall, Americans met the minimum basic recommended intakes for breads and grains
(mean, 5.7 servings per day) and vegetables (mean, 3.3 servings per day), but failed to meet the recommended intake for fruits (mean, 1.3 servings per day). 100 The
subsequent 1994 USDA survey reported significant ( P <.0005) increases in intakes of vegetables, fruits, and grains when compared with data from the 1989 through
1991 survey. 95 A comprehensive review of seven nationally representative surveys of food and nutrient consumption among Americans similarly reported significant
(P <.0001) increases in per capita intakes of vegetables (19%), fruits (22%), and grain products (47%) during the 24-year period from 1970 to 1994. 95
To help consumers increase fiber intake, the Food and Drug Administration required fiber content to be included on the nutrition facts panel on food labels. In
addition, foods containing 10% of the daily value for fiber (i.e., 2.5 g of fiber per serving) may be labeled a “good source” of fiber, and products containing 20% or
more of the daily value for fiber (at least 5 g of fiber per serving) can claim to be “high in,” “rich in,” or “an excellent source” of fiber. 90 The Food and Drug
Administration also allows manufacturers to make certain health claims related to fiber intake and lowered risk of cancer and other health conditions for foods meeting
specific eligibility criteria. 91
Results of successful nutritional intervention programs incorporating components of the 5 A Day for Better Health Program and other similar guidance, in conjunction
with data from national dietary intake surveys, suggest that Americans are receiving and implementing messages designed to promote healthier eating patterns that
include increased consumption of fiber, vegetables, fruits, and whole grains. Research, including ongoing clinical trials, will continue to augment current knowledge
and refine recommendations. While such research is being conducted, the complement of data indicates that a varied diet that is low in fat and high in plant-based
foods likely protects against several cancers, most notably colorectal cancer, as well as other major diseases, including cardiovascular diseases and diabetes.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Burkitt DP. Epidemiology of cancer of the colon and rectum. Cancer 1971;28:3.
2. Steinmetz KA, Potter JD. Vegetables, fruit, and cancer prevention: a review. J Am Diet Assoc 1996;96:1027.
3. Hill MJ. Cereals, cereal fibre and colorectal cancer risk: a review of the epidemiological literature. Eur J Cancer Prev 1998;7:S5.
4. Caygill CPJ, Hill MJ. Fish, n-3 fatty acids and human colorectal and breast cancer mortality. Eur J Cancer Prev 1995;4:329.
5. Moore MA, Park CB, Tsuda H. Soluble and insoluble fiber influences on cancer development. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 1998;27:229.
6. La Vecchia C, Chatenoud L. Fibres, whole-grain foods and breast and other cancers. Eur J Cancer Prev 1998;7:S25.
7. Jacobs DR Jr, Marquart L, Slavin J, et al. Whole-grain intake and cancer: an expanded review and meta-analysis. Nutr Cancer 1998;30:85.
8. World Cancer Research Fund. Food, nutrition and the prevention of cancer: a global perspective. Washington, DC: American Institute for Cancer Research, 1997.
9. Gerber M. Fibre and breast cancer. Eur J Cancer Prev 1998;7:S63.
10. Potter JD. Nutrition and colorectal cancer. Cancer Causes Control 1996;7:127.
11. Kritchevsky D. Dietary fibre and cancer. Eur J Cancer Prev 1997;6:435.
12. Caygill CPJ, Charlett A, Hill MJ. Relationship between the intake of high-fibre foods and energy and the risk of cancer of the large bowel and breast. Eur J Cancer Prev 1998;7:S11.
13. Block G, Patterson BH, Subar AF. Fruit, vegetables, and cancer prevention: a review of the epidemiological evidence. Nutr Cancer 1992;18:1.
14. Kaaks R. The epidemiology of diet and colorectal cancer: review and perspectives for future research using biologic markers. Annali Dell Istituto Superiore 1996;32:111.
15. Willett WC. Nutritional epidemiology. In: Rothman KJ, Greenland S, eds. Modern epidemiology. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven, 1998:623.
16. Reddy BS. Role of dietary fiber in colon cancer: an overview. Am J Med 1999;106:16S.
17. Greenwald P, Clifford C. Fiber and cancer: prevention research. In: Kritchevsky D, Benfield C, eds. Dietary fiber in health and disease. St.Paul: Eagen Press, 1995:159.
18. Chaplin MF. Bile acids, fibre and colon cancer: the story unfolds. J R Soc Health 1998;118:53.
19. Howe GR, Enrique B, Castelleto R, et al. Dietary intake of fiber and decreased risk of cancers of the colon and rectum: evidence from the combined analysis of 13 case-control studies. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1992;84:1887.
20. Giovannucci E, Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ, et al. Intake of fat, meat, and fiber in relation to risk of colon cancer in men. Cancer Res 1994;54:2390.
21. Sellers TA, Bazyk AE, Bostick RM, et al. Diet and risk of colon cancer in a large prospective study of older women: an analysis stratified on family history (Iowa, United States). Cancer Causes

Control 1998;9:357.
22. Fuchs CS, Giovannucci EL, Colditz GA, et al. Dietary fiber and the risk of colorectal cancer and adenoma in women. N Engl J Med 1999;340:169.
23. Kato I, Akhmedkhanov A, Koenig K, et al. Prospective study of diet and female colorectal cancer: the New York University Women's Health Study. Nutr Cancer 1997;28:276.
24. Cassidy A, Bingham SA, Cummings JH. Starch intake and colorectal cancer risk: an international comparison. Br J Cancer 1994;69:937.
25. Platz EA, Giovannucci E, Rimm EB, et al. Dietary fiber and distal colorectal adenoma in men. Cancer Epidemiol Biomark Prev 1997;6:661.
26. Negri E, Tzonou A, Beral V, et al. Hormonal therapy for menopause and ovarian cancer in a collaborative re-analysis of European studies. Int J Cancer 1999;80:848.
27. Kritchevsky D. Protective role of wheat bran fiber: preclinical data. Am J Med 1999;106:28S.
28. Macrae F. Wheat bran fiber and development of adenomatous polyps: evidence from randomized, controlled clinical trials. Am J Med 1999;106:38S.
29. Ferguson LR, Harris PJ. Protection against cancer by wheat bran: role of dietary fibre and phytochemicals. Eur J Cancer Prev 1999;8:17.
30. Chapkin RS, Clark AE, Davidson LA, et al. Dietary fiber differentially alters cellular fatty acid-binding protein expression in exfoliated colonocytes during tumor development. Nutr Cancer
1998;32:107.
31. Jenab M, Thompson LU. The influence of phytic acid in wheat bran on early biomarkers of colon carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis 1998;19:1087.
32. Owen RW, Spiegelhalder B, Bartsch H. Phytate, reactive oxygen species and colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer Prev 1998;7:S41.
33. Barrett J. Phytoestrogens. Environ Health Perspect 1996;104:478.
34. Wiseman H. Role of dietary phyto-oestrogens in the protection against cancer and heart disease. Biochem Soc Trans 1996;24:795.
35. Burn J, Chapman PD, Mathers J, et al. The protocol for a European double-blind trial of aspirin and resistant starch in familial adenomatous polyposis: the CAPP study. Eur J Cancer
1995;31A:1385.
36. Burn J, Chapman PD, Bishop DT, et al. Diet and cancer prevention: the Concerted Action Polyp Prevention (CAPP) studies. Proc Nutr Soc 1998;57:183.
37. DeCosse JJ, Miller HH, Lesser ML. Effect of wheat fiber and vitamins C and E on rectal polyps in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:1290.
38. MacLennan R, Macrae F, Bain C, et al. Randomized trial of intake of fat, fiber, and beta carotene to prevent colorectal adenomas. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1760.
39. Kritchevsky D. Cereal fibres and colorectal cancer: a search for mechanisms. Eur J Cancer Prev 1998;7:S33.
40. Nagengast FM, Grubben MJAL, Van Munster IP. Role of bile acids in colorectal carcinogenesis. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:1067.
41. Kanazawa K, Konishi F, Mitsuoka T, et al. Factors influencing the development of sigmoid colon cancer. Cancer 1996;77:1701.
42. Pickering JS, Lupton JR, Chapkin RS. Dietary fat, fiber, and carcinogen alter fecal diacylglycerol composition and mass. Cancer Res 1995;55:2293.
43. Assert R, Kotter R, Bisping G, et al. Anti-proliferative activity of protein kinase C in apical compartments of human colonic crypts: evidence for a less activated protein kinase C in small
adenomas. Int J Cancer 1999;80:47.
44. Scheppach W, Bartram HP, Richter F. Role of short-chain fatty acids in the prevention of colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:1077.
45. Lupton JR, Turner ND. Potential protective mechanisms of wheat bran fiber. Am J Med 1999;106:24S.
46. Hassig CA, Tong JK, Schreiber SL. Fiber-derived butyrate and the prevention of colon cancer. Chem Biol 1997;4:783.
47. Archer MC, Bruce WR, Chan CC, et al. Aberrant crypt foci and microadenoma as markers for colon cancer. Environ Health Perspect 1992;98:195.
48. Reddy BS, Engle A, Katsifis S, et al. Biochemical epidemiology of colon cancer: effects of types of dietary fiber on fecal mutagens, acid, and neutral sterols in healthy subjects. Cancer Res
1989;49:4629.
49. Reddy BS, Engle A, Simi B, et al. Effect of dietary fiber on colonic bacterial enzymes and bile acids in relation to colon cancer. Gastroenterology 1992;102:1475.
50. Alberts DS, Ritenbaugh C, Story JA, et al. Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of effect of wheat bran fiber and calcium on fecal bile acids in patients with resected
adenomatous colon polyps. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:81.
51. Alberts DS, Einspahr J, Rees-McGee S, et al. Effects of dietary wheat bran fiber on rectal epithelial cell proliferation in patients with resection for colorectal cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst
1990;82:1280.
52. Zoran DL, Turner ND, Taddeo SS, et al. Wheat bran diet reduces tumor incidence in a rat model of colon cancer independent of effects on distal luminal butyrate concentrations. J Nutr
1997;127:2217.
53. Slattery ML, Potter JD, Coates A, et al. Plant foods and colon cancer: an assessment of specific foods and their related nutrients (United States). Cancer Causes Control 1997;8:575.
54. Szilagyi A. Altered colonic environment, a possible predisposition to colorectal cancer and colonic inflammatory bowel disease: rationale of dietary manipulation with emphasis on disaccharides.
Can J Gastroenterol 1998;12:133.
55. Bostick RM. Human studies of calcium supplementation and colorectal epithelial cell proliferation. Cancer Epidemiol Biomark Prev 1997;6:971.
56. Kleibeuker JH, Cats A, van der Meer R, et al. Calcium supplementation as prophylaxis against colon cancer? Dig Dis 1994;12:85.
57. Govers MJAP, Termont DSML, Lapré JA, et al. Calcium in milk products precipitates intestinal fatty acids and secondary bile acids and thus inhibits colonic cytotoxicity in humans. Cancer Res
1996;56:3270.
58. Lipkin M, Newmark H. Calcium and the prevention of colon cancer. J Cell Biochem Suppl 1995;22:65.
59. Newmark HL, Lipkin M. Calcium, vitamin D, and colon cancer. Cancer Res 1992;52(Suppl 7):2067s.
60. Faivre J, Couillault C, Kronborg O, et al. Chemoprevention of metachronous adenomas of the large bowel: design and interim results of a randomized trial of calcium and fibre. Eur J
CancerPrev 1997;6:132.
61. Faivre J, Giacosa A. Primary prevention of colorectal cancer through fibre supplementation. Eur J Cancer Prev 1998;7:S29.
62. Alberts DS, Einspahr J, Ritenbaugh C, et al. The effect of wheat bran fiber and calcium supplementation on rectal mucosal proliferation rates in patients with resected adenomatous colorectal
polyps. Cancer Epidemiol Biomark Prev 1997;6:161.
63. Schatzkin A, Lanza E, Ballard-Barbash R. The case for a dietary intervention study of large bowel polyps. Cancer Prev 1990;1:84.
64. Schatzkin A, Lanza E, Freedman LS, et al. The Polyp Prevention Trial I: rationale, design, recruitment, and baseline participant characteristics. Cancer Epidemiol Biomark Prev 1996;5:375.
65. Lanza E, Schatzkin A, Ballard-Barbash R, et al. The Polyp Prevention Trial II: dietary intervention program and participant baseline dietary characteristics. Cancer Epidemiol Biomark Prev
1996;5:385.
66. The Women's Health Initiative Study Group. Design of the Women's Health Initiative clinical trial and observational study. Controlled Clin Trials 1998;19:61.
67. Earnest DL, Sampliner RE, Roe DJ, et al. Progress report: the Arizona Phase III study of the effect of wheat bran fiber on recurrence of adenomatous colon polyps. Am J Med 1999;106:43S.
68. Martinez ME, Reid ME, Guillen-Rodriguez J, et al. Design and baseline characteristics of study participants in the Wheat Bran Fiber trial. Cancer Epidemiol Biomark Prev 1998;7:813.
69. Wiseman H, Lim P, O'Reilly J. Inhibition of liposomal lipid peroxidation by isoflavonoid type phyto-oestrogens from soybeans of different countries of origin. Biochem Soc Trans 1996;24:392S.
70. Howe GR, Hirohata T, Hislop TG, et al. Dietary factors and risk of breast cancer: combined analysis of 12 case-control studies. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:561.
71. Hannah JS. Beyond calories: other benefits of macronutrient substituteseffects on chronic disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1997;819:221.
72. Cohen LA, Kendall ME, Zang E, et al. Modulation of N-nitrosomethylurea-induced mammary tumor promotion by dietary fiber and fat. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:496.
73. Rose DP. Dietary fiber and breast cancer. Nutr Cancer 1990;13:1.
74. Cohen LA, Zhao Z, Zang EA, et al. Wheat bran and psyllium diets: effects on N-methylnitrosourea-induced mammary tumorigenesis in F344 rats. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:899.
75. Zile MH, Welsch CW, Welsch MA. Effect of wheat bran fiber on the development of mammary tumors in female intact and ovariectomized rats treated with 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene
and in mice with spontaneously developing mammary tumors. Int J Cancer 1998;75:439.
76. Jones LA, Gonzalez R, Pillow PC, et al. Dietary fiber, Hispanics, and breast cancer risk? Ann N Y Acad Sci 1997;837:524.
77. Rose DP. Dietary fiber, phytoestrogens, and breast cancer. Nutrition 1992;8:47.
78. Lewis SJ, Heaton KW, Oakey RE, et al. Lower serum oestrogen concentrations associated with faster intestinal transit. Br J Cancer 1997;76:395.
79. Adlercreutz H. Phytoestrogens: epidemiology and a possible role in cancer protection. Environ Health Perspect 1995;103:103.
80. Ross JK, Pusateri DJ, Shultz TD. Dietary and hormonal evaluation of men at different risks for prostate cancer: fiber intake, excretion, and composition, with in vitro evidence for an association
between steroid hormones and specific fiber components. Am J Clin Nutr 1990;51:365.
81. Dorgan JF, Judd JT, Longcope C, et al. Effects of dietary fat and fiber on plasma and urine androgens and estrogens in men: a controlled feeding study. Am J Clin Nutr 1996;64:850.
82. Rose DP, Goldman M, Connolly JM, et al. High-fiber diet reduces serum estrogen concentrations in premenopausal women. Am J Clin Nutr 1991;54:520.
83. Rose DP, Lubin M, Connolly JM. Effects of diet supplementation with wheat bran on serum estrogen levels in the follicular and luteal phases of the menstrual cycle. Nutrition 1997;13:535.
84. Hutchins AM, Lampe JW, Martini MC, et al. Vegetables, fruits, and legumes: effect on urinary isoflavonoid phytoestrogen and lignan excretion. J Am Diet Assoc 1995;95:769.
85. Hutchins AM, Slavin JL, Lampe JW. Urinary isoflavonoid phytoestrogen and lignan excretion after consumption of fermented and unfermented soy products. J Am Diet Assoc 1995;95:545.
86. Martin PM, Horwitz KB, Ryan DS, et al. Phytoestrogen interaction with estrogen receptors in human breast cancer cells. Endocrinology 1978;103:1860.
87. Jacobs DR Jr, Meyer KA, Kushi LH, et al. Whole-grain intake may reduce the risk of ischemic heart disease death in postmenopausal women: the Iowa Women's Health Study. Am J Clin Nutr
1998;68:248.
88. Goodman MT, Hankin JH, Wilkens LR, et al. Diet, body size, physical activity, and the risk of endometrial cancer. Cancer Res 1997;57:5077.
89. Goodman MT, Wilkens LR, Hankin JH, et al. Association of soy and fiber consumption with the risk of endometrial cancer. Am J Epidemiol 1997;146:294.
90. Papazian R. Bulking up fiber's healthful reputation: more benefits of “roughage” are discovered. FDA Consum 1998;31.
91. Kurtzweil P. Staking a claim to good health: FDA and science stand behind health claims on foods. FDA Consum 1998;32:16.
92. Butrum RR, Clifford CK, Lanza E. NCI dietary guidelines: rationale. Am J Clin Nutr 1988;48:888.
93. Krebs-Smith SM, Cleveland LE, Ballard-Barbash R, et al. Characterizing food intake patterns of American adults. Am J Clin Nutr 1997;65:1264.
94. Norris J, Harnack L, Carmichael S, et al. U.S. trends in nutrient intake: the 1987 and 1992 National Health Interview Surveys. Am J Public Health 1997;87:740.
95. Krebs-Smith SM. Progress in improving diet to reduce cancer risk. Cancer 1998;83:1425.
96. Subar AF, Heimendinger J, Patterson BH, et al. Fruit and vegetable intake in the United States: the Baseline Survey of the Five A Day for Better Health program. Am J Health Promot
1995;9:352.
97. Havas S, Heimendinger J, Reynolds K, et al. 5 A Day for Better Health: a new research initiative. J Am Diet Assoc 1994;94:32.
98. Heimendinger J, Van Duyn MA, Chapelsky D, et al. The national 5 A Day for Better Health Program: a large-scale nutrition intervention. J Public Health Manag Pract 1996;2:27.
99. Slavin JL. Implementation of dietary modifications. Am J Med 1999;106:46S.
100. Cleveland LE, Cook DA, Krebs-Smith SM, et al. Method for assessing food intakes in terms of servings based on food guidance. Am J Clin Nutr 1997;65:1254.

SECTION 23.3 Retinoids, Carotenoids, and Micronutrients
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 23.3
Retinoids, Carotenoids, and Micronutrients
SUSAN TAYLOR MAYNE
SCOTT M. LIPPMAN
Introduction
Historical Perspective
Retinoid Biology and Pharmacology
Carotenoid Biology and Actions
Clinical Trials
Head and Neck Trials: Premalignancy
Head and Neck Trials: Malignancy
Lung Trials: Premalignancy
Lung Trials: Malignancy
Breast Trials
Skin Trials
Bladder Trials
Cervical Trials
Esophagus and Stomach Trials
Colorectal Trials
Translational and Intermediate End Point Studies in Retinoid Chemoprevention
New Retinoids and Carotenoids
Conclusions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Cancer chemoprevention can be defined as pharmacologic intervention with specific nutrients or other chemicals to suppress or reverse carcinogenesis and to
prevent the development of invasive cancer. 1 Two basic concepts support this cancer control strategy: multistep and field carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis is a chronic,
multistep process characterized by the accumulation of specific genetic and phenotypic alterations that can evolve over a 10- to 20-year period from the first initiating
event. The premise of human chemoprevention is that one can intervene (and suppress) at many steps in the carcinogenic process and over many years. Field
carcinogenesis is a concept that was first described in the early 1950s in the head and neck site as field cancerization and subsequently found to apply to many
epithelial sites. The concept is that patients at high risk for an epithelial cancer have a wide surface area of carcinogenic tissue change that can be detected at the
gross (oral premalignant lesions, polyps), microscopic (metaplasia, dysplasia), and molecular (gene loss or amplification) levels. More recent molecular studies
detecting profound genetic alterations in histologically normal tissue from high-risk individuals have provided strong support for the field carcinogenesis concept. The
implication is that multifocal, genetically distinct premalignant lesions can progress over a broad tissue region. The clinical importance is best illustrated in head and
neck squamous cancer, for which both synchronous and metachronous second primary tumors are common. The latter develop at an annual rate of 5% to 7% in
prospective studies 2 and account for the principal cause of cancer death in early-stage disease and in long-term survivors of head and neck cancer, regardless of
stage of diagnosis of the first cancer. The essence of chemoprevention, then, is intervention within the multistep carcinogenic process and throughout a wide field.
To date, retinoids (the natural derivatives and synthetic analogues of vitamin A) and one member of the carotenoid class, b-carotene, are among the best-studied
agents in human chemoprevention (Fig. 23.3-1). This review focuses on these compounds, with a brief discussion of other micronutrients that have often been
evaluated for chemopreventive efficacy along with the retinoids and carotenoids, namely vitamins E and C and the trace mineral selenium.

FIGURE 23.3-1. Structures of selected retinoids and the carotenoid, b-carotene. Retinol, 13- cis retinoic acid, and b-carotene are naturally occurring; 4HPR and
etretinate are synthetic retinoids.

HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Vitamin A was first recognized as an essential nutrient in 1913 and has been the subject of considerable research in the ensuing years. In 1925, Wolbach and Howe
described the histopathologic changes in epithelia associated with vitamin A deficiency. 3 This led to the identification of retinol and some of its naturally occurring
retinoid derivatives (see Fig. 23.3-1) and a large body of research aimed at understanding the role of vitamin A and retinoids in cellular differentiation and in
neoplastic transformation. Epidemiologic studies of vitamin A and cancer began to emerge in the 1970s, when it was shown that computed indices of total vitamin A
intake were associated significantly with lower cancer risk, particularly for lung cancer. 4
Vitamin A is a nonspecific term embracing two families of dietary factors: preformed vitamin A (chiefly retinyl esters, but also retinol and retinal) and the other family
consisting of the various provitamin A carotenoids (b-carotene and those other carotenoids that can be metabolic precursors of retinol). Preformed vitamin A is found
predominantly in foods of animal origin, whereas provitamin A carotenoids are found predominantly in fruits and vegetables.
Epidemiologic studies conducted in the 1980s and 1990s evaluated the independent associations of preformed retinol and provitamin A carotenoids with cancer in
humans. Dietary intake of provitamin A carotenoids, such as b-carotene, but not of retinol, was associated with a lower risk of cancer. 4,5 Interpretation of observational
epidemiologic studies is difficult as carotenoids are consumed in the form of fruits and vegetables, which contain numerous other substances, many of which may
have cancer preventive properties. 6 In contrast, the primary dietary sources of retinol are animal products, consumption of which tends to be associated positively with
cancer risk. Also, blood levels of carotenoids increase with increasing dietary intake, whereas blood levels of retinol are regulated homeostatically. Thus, in evaluating
the chemopreventive efficacy of carotenoids and retinoids, one must consider evidence from epidemiologic studies, clinical trials, animal models, and mechanistic
considerations. This chapter reviews briefly the biology and pharmacology of retinoids and carotenoids and then focuses on randomized cancer prevention clinical
trials involving carotenoids, retinoids, and other selected micronutrients.

RETINOID BIOLOGY AND PHARMACOLOGY
Retinoids are required for the maintenance of normal cell growth, differentiation, and loss within epithelial tissues. Various retinoids have been shown to suppress or
reverse epithelial carcinogenesis and prevent the development of invasive cancer in many animal systems, including skin, lung, oral cavity, esophagus, bladder,

mammary gland, cervix, stomach, prostate, pancreas, and liver. Retinoids act primarily in the postcarcinogen (postinitiation) phases of promotion and progression,
which are most relevant to human cancer chemoprevention. Significant single-agent activity has been observed with natural [e.g., all- trans-retinoic acid (ATRA),
13-cis retinoic acid (13cRA), 9-cis retinoic acid (9cRA), retinyl palmitate] and synthetic [e.g., N-(4-hydroxyphenyl) retinamide or fenretinide (4HPR)] retinoids. Additive
to synergistic increases in chemopreventive activity have been achieved by combining retinoids with other agents, 7,8,9,10 and 11 such as the combination of 4HPR or
9cRA with tamoxifen in mammary carcinogenesis systems.
The term retinoid was redefined in 1985 by Sporn and Roberts 12 to include a substance that binds and activates one or more specific receptors, the latter producing a
biologic response. Much has been learned about the specific receptors and mechanisms of action for the retinoids. The retinoid molecular mechanism of action is
similar to that of steroid/thyroid hormones in that retinoid nuclear receptors are members of the steroid receptor superfamily. 13,14 These elusive nuclear receptors were
discovered simultaneously by two groups of investigators and reported in 1987. The subsequent studies indicate that retinoid receptors are unique from other
members of the steroid receptor family in that there are two receptor classes, RARs and RXRs. Each receptor contains a, b, and g subtypes, and several of these
subclasses have multiple isoforms. These receptors are DNA-binding transcription factors that can activate or suppress the expression of many genes, the products of
which mediate retinoid effects on cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis. Different retinoids bind to the different receptor classes and subclasses with different
affinities. This receptor complexity and great diversity in ligand binding, activation, and receptor function has important preventive and therapeutic implications.
As with other members of the steroid family, retinoid receptors are active only as dimers. Two retinoid receptor dimer types have been identified: RAR-RXR
heterodimers, and RXR-RXR homodimers (RAR-RAR homodimers have not been identified). Part of the retinoid receptor binds to the ligand, and part binds to specific
DNA sequences (RARE or RXRE) and either induces or suppresses gene transcription. The best characterized pathway involves RAR-RXR heterodimers. RXRs have
been shown to form heterodimers with other members of the steroid receptor family, including the vitamin D receptor and thyroid hormone receptor. RXRs and their
ligands, therefore, can modulate the activities of other steroid hormones. 15 The different ligand-binding patterns can be illustrated with the three major natural retinoic
acid derivatives, 13cRA, ATRA, and 9cRA, which are found endogenously in human plasma, albeit at low physiologic levels. RARs bind ATRA and 9cRA, and RXRs
bind only 9cRA. 13cRA does not bind directly to nuclear receptors, but is rapidly isomerized to ATRA. Ligand binding stabilizes the receptor dimers and activates
gene transcription. 13,14
The retinoid receptor distribution pattern in normal and neoplastic human tissue is under intense study. The tissue distribution of these receptor classes, subclasses,
and isoforms varies greatly in normal and pathologic conditions and in different sites within the human body. In normal tissue, RAR-a is expressed in most tissues,
RAR-b expression is more limited (e.g., not expressed in the skin), and RAR-g is expressed predominantly in the skin. In cancer, these normal tissue patterns can
change (e.g., RAR-b is lost in aerodigestive tract carcinogenic progression).
More than 1000 retinoids have been synthesized. 7,12,16,17 and 18 Current intensive efforts to develop more active and less toxic retinoids for cancer prevention and
therapy are directed to the study of which retinoid receptors mediate retinoid effects on cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis in different systems and the
synthesis of new receptor-selective ligands to obtain the desired retinoid pharmacologic effect. 17,18 An exciting development for chemoprevention is the finding that
certain retinoids can interfere with the activity of certain transcription factors such as AP-1 and, therefore, inhibit neoplastic cell proliferation. 17 Mechanistic studies of
retinoid pharmacology provide a basis for rational retinoid development programs for chemoprevention. 18

CAROTENOID BIOLOGY AND ACTIONS
As described by Krinsky, 19 carotenoids have both biologic functions and actions. Carotenoids function as accessory pigments in photosynthesis, via singlet excited
carotenoid; offer protection against photosensitization, via triplet excited carotenoid; and some serve as provitamin A compounds, via central and eccentric cleavage.
Mechanisms for these functions are reasonably well characterized. Carotenoids also have been reported to have a number of biologic actions, including antioxidant
activity, immunoenhancement, inhibition of mutagenesis and transformation, and regression of premalignant lesions. In contrast to the carotenoid functions,
mechanisms of carotenoid action are far from clear. Some of the actions of carotenoids, such as regression of premalignant lesions, are shared by the retinoids, with
the potential for a similar mechanism of action. The identification of retinoid cleavage products from carotenoids 20 certainly suggests that retinoids and carotenoids
may share not only structural similarities and vitamin A activity, but perhaps other mechanisms of action that are not fully appreciated at present. However,
carotenoids and retinoids also have distinct differences in action, the most notable of which includes antioxidant activity.
Many carotenoids including b-carotene have the ability to quench singlet oxygen, a highly reactive form of oxygen. The quenching involves a physical reaction in
which the energy of the excited oxygen is transferred to the carotenoid, forming an excited state molecule. 19 Quenching of singlet oxygen is the basis for b-carotene's
well-known therapeutic efficacy in erythropoietic protoporphyria, a photosensitivity disorder. 21 The ability of b-carotene and other carotenoids to quench excited
oxygen, however, is limited, because the carotenoid itself can be oxidized during the process (auto-oxidation). Burton and Ingold 22 and others have shown that
b-carotene auto-oxidation in vitro is dose dependent and dependent on oxygen concentrations.
In addition to singlet oxygen, carotenoids are also thought to quench oxygen free radicals. A relatively large body of literature has linked oxygen free radicals with
carcinogenesis, 23 thus there is considerable interest in antioxidant compounds and antioxidant activity as a mechanism for cancer prevention. Despite the focus on
antioxidants and cancer and clear evidence of chemopreventive efficacy of b-carotene in some animal carcinogenesis models, 24 it is not clear that antioxidant activity
is responsible for the chemoprotective effects observed in the animal studies. For example, b-carotene–induced immunologic enhancement could have a significant
role in tumor inhibition by increasing natural killer cells and activating immunoregulatory lymphocytes important in host defense. 25 Various carotenoids have been
reported to affect gap junctional communication, related to their ability to up-regulate the expression of the connexin43 gene. 26 This activity was not related to the
antioxidant activities of the various carotenoids. Supplementary b-carotene also has been reported to increase the expression of transforming growth factor-b 1 in
cervical biopsy specimens. 27 These and other potential mechanisms reviewed elsewhere 24 suggest that it is biologically plausible that carotenoids may have
chemopreventive activity, although we know far less about mechanisms of action for the carotenoids than the retinoids.
Given the interest in antioxidant activity as a potential mechanism for chemopreventive effects, it is not surprising that other dietary antioxidants have been studied for
chemopreventive efficacy, particularly vitamins E and C and selenium. These agents are often evaluated in combination. However, as is the case with b-carotene,
these micronutrients may have biologic actions independent of antioxidant activity.

CLINICAL TRIALS
A number of randomized cancer prevention trials involving carotenoids and retinoids and a few of other micronutrients are ongoing or have been completed.
Completed trials involving retinoids are summarized in Table 23.3-1 and those involving carotenoids in Table 23.3-2. Retinoid trials have tested efficacy of several
retinoids, including retinol, retinyl palmitate, ATRA, 13cRA, etretinate, and 4HPR. Cancer prevention trials with carotenoids, however, are limited to b-carotene at
present. The focus on b-carotene, one of more than 600 carotenoids thus far identified, is based on practical considerations:b-carotene has been the only carotenoid
that is commercially available in large quantities for which human data supporting safety existed. Several other carotenoids (e.g., lycopene) have been suggested to
have chemopreventive efficacy in animal models, but are only beginning to be evaluated in human chemoprevention studies (see New Retinoids and Carotenoids ,
later in this chapter).

TABLE 23.3-1. Randomized Trials of Retinoids in Human Cancer Chemoprevention a

TABLE 23.3-2. Randomized Trials of b-Carotene in Human Cancer Chemoprevention a

HEAD AND NECK TRIALS: PREMALIGNANCY
Oral premalignant lesions include leukoplakias and erythroplakias. Small hyperplastic leukoplakia lesions have a 30% to 40% spontaneous regression rate, and less
than a 5% risk of malignant transformation. Erythroleukoplakia and dysplastic leukoplakia lesions, however, are associated with a low rate of spontaneous regression
and a 30% to 40% long-term risk of oral cancer. 2,28,29 High-risk, diffuse, and multifocal disease, accounting for 10% to 15% of all oral premalignant lesions, often is not
controlled adequately by local therapy. Oral premalignant lesions are markers of field carcinogenesis, since patients with oral premalignancy develop squamous
cancers at the site of the lesions as well as in distant sites within the upper aerodigestive tract. Thus, regression of oral premalignant lesions can be used to screen
agents that may have utility in the prevention of upper aerodigestive tract cancers. The frequency of micronuclei (an indicator of genotoxic damage) in exfoliated cells
from buccal mucosa is another premalignant end point that has been used in head and neck chemoprevention trials. 28
Studies in the 1980s in populations at high risk of oral cancer (tobacco chewers, betel quid chewers) demonstrated that supplemental b-carotene and retinol
significantly reduced the frequency of oral micronuclei. 30,31 and 32 As for premalignant lesions, nine trials have investigated the effects of supplemental b-carotene,
alone or in combination with other agents, on regression of oral leukoplakia. Six nonrandomized studies 33,34,35,36,37 and 38 reported response rates ranging from 44% to
97%. The response rates from these uncontrolled studies, however, must be interpreted cautiously for three reasons: (1) leukoplakias can regress spontaneously; (2)
varying response criteria were used; and (3) there was no apparent dose-response relationship. Three placebo-controlled trials of b-carotene and oral leukoplakia are
available. Stich et al. 32 reported that the combination of b-carotene plus retinol produced complete remissions in 27.5%, b-carotene alone in 14.8%, and placebo in
3.0% of subjects (partial remissions were not reported) with a 6-month intervention. Sankaranarayanan et al. 39 got better response rates with an even longer duration
of intervention (12 months), consisting of 33% complete regression with b-carotene and 52% with retinyl palmitate versus 10% in the placebo arm. In a trial in
Uzbekistan, 40 6 months of treatment with the combination of retinol, b-carotene, and vitamin E led to a significant reduction in the prevalence odds ratio of oral
leukoplakia [odds ratio = 0.62; 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.39 to 0.98]. The risk of progression or no change versus regression also was reduced by 40% by this
intervention, although not statistically significant (odds ratio = 0.60; 95% CI = 0.23 to 1.63). Vitamin E was evaluated by itself in a single-arm trial in oral leukoplakia in
which both clinical and histologic responses were observed. 41
Retinoids have been studied extensively in the reversal of oral premalignant lesions. 2,28,29 One of the first such trials, reported in 1986, 42 was a 3-month
placebo-controlled study of 13cRA (2 mg/kg/d). The complete plus partial response rate in the 44 evaluable patients was 67% in the retinoid arm and 10% in the
placebo arm (P = .0002). The histopathologic improvement rate (e.g., reversal of dysplasia) was also higher in the retinoid arm (54% vs. 10%, P = .01). There were
two major problems, however, with this high-dose, short-term approach. First, high-dose 13cRA toxicity was substantial and not acceptable in this clinical setting.
Second, over one-half of the responders had recurrences or developed new lesions within 3 months of stopping the intervention.
Based on the results of this placebo-controlled trial, a randomized maintenance trial was designed. 43 In this trial, patients initially received a 3-month induction course
of high-dose 13cRA (1.5 mg/kg/d), followed by a 9-month maintenance course with low-dose 13cRA (0.5 mg/kg/d) or b-carotene (30 mg/d) in patients with responding
or stable lesions during the high-dose induction phase. The induction-phase response rate was 55% (95% CI = 42% to 67%). During the maintenance phase, 2 (8%)
of the patients in the retinoid group progressed versus 16 (55%) in the b-carotene group ( P <.001). Toxic effects of low-dose 13cRA maintenance therapy were mild,
although greater than for b-carotene, with no patients discontinuing therapy because of toxicity.
4HPR, a promising new retinoid, is also being evaluated in oral premalignancy. A randomized study was begun in 1988 at the Milan Cancer Institute to evaluate the
efficacy of 52 weeks of systemic 4HPR maintenance therapy (vs. no intervention) after complete laser resection of oral premalignant lesions. The most recent report
on this ongoing study included data from 153 randomized patients. 44,45 A 3-day drug holiday at the end of each month was prescribed to avoid the adverse effects
(night blindness) of lowering serum retinol by 4HPR treatment. The rate of treatment failure (recurrence plus new lesion rate) among those patients who completed the
12-month intervention was 6% in the 4HPR group and 30% in the control group.
Two other randomized studies involving retinol 39,46 and another involving the retinoid N-4-(hydroxycarbophenyl) retinamide (4HCR) 47 have been reported; all observed
significant retinoid chemopreventive activity.
HEAD AND NECK TRIALS: MALIGNANCY
There have been only two phase III adjuvant chemoprevention trials of retinoids in head and neck cancer. The first, reported by Hong et al., tested high-dose 13cRA
in 103 head and neck cancer patients. 48 Following definitive local therapy of stage I to IV (M0) disease with surgery, radiotherapy, or both, patients were assigned
randomly to 12 months of 13cRA (50 to 100 mg/m2/d) or placebo. At a median follow-up of 32 months, there were no significant differences in primary disease
recurrence (local, regional, or distant) or survival. The rate of second primary tumors, however, was significantly lower in the retinoid arm than in the placebo group,
developing in two (4%) of the 13cRA-treated patients compared with 12 (24%) of the placebo-treated patients ( P = .005). More than 70% of second primary tumors
occurred in the carcinogen-exposed aerodigestive tract fields of the head and neck, lungs, and esophagus. Side effects were substantial and included skin dryness
and peeling, cheilitis, conjunctivitis, and hypertriglyceridemia. Approximately 30% of the retinoid-treated patients required dose reduction and 18% did not complete
the 12-month intervention because of toxicity.
This trial has been reanalyzed with a longer median follow-up of 55 months. 49 With the additional follow-up, each group had one more second primary tumor in the
aerodigestive tract, resulting in a cumulative total of three of the retinoid group and 13 of the placebo group ( P = .008).
Based on this high-dose adjuvant trial 48,49 and the low-dose 13cRA trial in oral premalignancy, 43 a multicenter large-scale phase III National Cancer Institute trial was
designed and is ongoing to evaluate low-dose 13cRA as adjuvant chemoprevention in stage I and II head and neck cancer. 50
The other randomized trial studied the synthetic retinoid etretinate in 316 patients following definitive therapy of stage I to III (T1,2, N0,1) squamous cell carcinoma of
the oral cavity and oropharynx. 51 In this French trial, the etretinate dose was 50 mg/d for 1 month, then 25 mg/d for 2 years. The etretinate was well tolerated. At a
median follow-up of 41 months, the rate of second primary tumor development in the two arms was not significantly different. The lack of a retinoid effect on second
primary tumors in this trial is in contrast to the result of the earlier high-dose 13cRA trial and could be attributable to differences in the patient populations and differing
dose levels. A more likely reason for the difference, however, involves the pharmacokinetics and mechanisms of action of the two retinoids studied. 13cRA leads to
transcriptional activation via rapid isomerization to ATRA. In contrast, etretinate is known not to be transcriptionally active and is not known to isomerize to ATRA or

any other transcriptionally active retinoid.
The most recently reported trial (Euroscan) included head and neck and lung cancer–associated second primary tumors and is discussed in detail in a following
section called Lung Trials: Malignancy.
Two trials involving b-carotene and head and neck cancer prevention have completed intervention, but results have not yet been released, one in the United States 52
and one in Italy (Dr. S. Toma, unpublished data). Both are designed to determine whether supplemental b-carotene reduces the incidence of second malignant
cancers of the oral cavity, pharynx, larynx, esophagus, and lung in patients who have been “cured” of an early-stage head or neck cancer. A total of 264 patients were
randomized in the U.S. trial and 211 in the Italian trial. Results are expected shortly.
LUNG TRIALS: PREMALIGNANCY
The Tyler (Texas) Chemoprevention Trial randomized 755 asbestos workers to receive b-carotene (50 mg/d) and retinol (25,000 IU every other day) versus placebo,
to see if the nutrient combination could reduce the prevalence of atypical cells in sputum. After a mean intervention period of 58 months, there was no difference in
the two groups in the prevalence of sputum atypia. 53 In another randomized, placebo-controlled trial, 14 weeks of supplemental b-carotene (20 mg/d) significantly
reduced micronuclei counts in sputum from heavy smokers. 54b-Carotene was not found, however, to reduce oxidative damage as measured by urinary excretion of
8-oxo-7, 8-dihydro-2'-deoxyguanosine, 55 suggesting that antioxidant activity was not responsible for the reduction in micronuclei.
In a French trial, chronic smokers with squamous metaplasia of the bronchial epithelium detected in initial bronchoscopy specimens were treated with etretinate (25
mg/d) for 6 months.56 In this uncontrolled trial, a decline in the extent of squamous metaplasia was observed in most treated patients. The positive result of this
French study led to three randomized trials: one of etretinate in Canada and one of 13cRA and one of 4HPR in the United States. The Canadian study evaluated the
ability of 25 mg of etretinate per day for 6 months to reverse sputum atypia in chronic smokers. 57 Toxicity was mild and the number of subjects requiring dose
reductions or dropping out was small and similar in both arms. No difference in the degree of atypia occurred between the etretinate and placebo groups. In the U.S.
13cRA study, chronic smokers underwent bronchoscopy with endobronchial biopsies taken from six specific anatomic sites within the proximal lung field, 58 as reported
in the earlier single-arm French study. 56 Ninety-three of the 152 chronic smokers who underwent bronchoscopic biopsies had squamous metaplasia or dysplasia.
Eligible smokers with metaplasia or dysplasia were randomized to 6 months of 13cRA or placebo. The extent of metaplasia decreased similarly (in approximately 50%
of subjects) in both study arms. Only smoking cessation (confirmed biochemically), which occurred in 16 patients (ten in the 13cRA group and six in the placebo
group), was associated significantly with a reduction in the metaplasia index during the 6-month intervention. 4HPR was involved in the most recent study (reported in
abstract only 59). This study was similar to the earlier isotretinoin study with respect to overall design (excepting the drug) and the negative primary result. 58 Although
the retinoid arm results were consistent with the French findings in showing a decline in metaplasia with treatment, the use of a placebo control group in the
randomized trials suggested no specific retinoid effect. These findings underscore the critical importance of placebo-controlled designs to establish drug activity in
chemoprevention trials using intermediate end points.
LUNG TRIALS: MALIGNANCY
Two large trials using incident lung cancer as a primary end point have now been completed. The first involved 29,133 men aged 50 to 69 years old from Finland, 60
who were heavy cigarette smokers at entry (average one pack per day for 36 years). The study design was a two-by-two factorial with participants randomized to
receive either supplemental b-carotene (20 mg/d), a-tocopherol (50 mg/d), the combination, or placebo for 5 to 8 years. Unexpectedly, participants receiving
b-carotene (alone or in combination with a-tocopherol) had a statistically significant 18% increase in lung cancer incidence (relative risk [RR] = 1.18; 95% CI = 1.03 to
1.36) and 8% increase in total mortality (relative risk [RR] = 1.08; 95% CI = 1.01 to 1.16) relative to participants receiving placebo. Supplemental b-carotene did not
appear to affect the incidence of other major cancers occurring in this population. Although not the primary outcome of this trial, an interesting observation was made
with regard to vitamin E and prostate cancer: Men randomized to receive a-tocopherol had a 32% decrease in prostate cancer incidence and a 41% decrease in
prostate cancer mortality.61 This promising finding will be followed up in future trials (see Conclusions, later in this chapter).
The finding of an increased incidence of lung cancer in b-carotene–supplemented smokers was apparently replicated in another major trial. The Carotene and Retinol
Efficacy Trial was a multicenter lung cancer prevention trial of supplemental b-carotene (30 mg/d) plus retinol (25,000 IU/d) versus placebo in asbestos workers and
smokers.62 The Carotene and Retinol Efficacy Trial was terminated nearly 2 years early in January 1996, because interim analyses of the data indicated that should
the trial have continued for its planned duration, it is highly unlikely that the intervention would have been found to be beneficial. Furthermore, the interim results
indicated that the supplemented group was developing more lung cancer, not less, consistent with the results of the Finnish trial. Overall, lung cancer incidence was
increased by 28% in the supplemented subjects (RR = 1.28; 95% CI = 1.04 to 1.57) and total mortality was also increased (RR = 1.17; 95% CI = 1.03 to 1.33). The
increase in lung cancer following supplementation with b-carotene and retinol was observed for current but not former smokers. Major findings of one additional trial,
the Physicians' Health Study of supplemental b-carotene versus placebo in 22,071 male U.S. physicians, are also now available. 63 There was no significant effect,
positive or negative, of 12 years of supplementation of b-carotene (50 mg every other day) on total cancer, lung cancer, or cardiovascular disease. The relative risk
for lung cancer in current smokers randomized to b-carotene was 0.90 (95% CI = 0.58 to 1.40). Among nonsmokers, the relative risk was 0.78 (95% CI = 0.34 to 1.79).
The apparent lack of an effect of long-term supplementation of b-carotene on lung cancer incidence, even in baseline smokers who took the supplements for up to 12
years, is noteworthy and is discussed further here. A similar lack of effect of supplemental b-carotene on overall cancer incidence was seen in the Women's Health
Study, although the duration of intervention was short (median, 2.1 years). 64
In contrast, more encouraging results for lung cancer prevention come from an esophageal and gastric cancer prevention trial in China (see Esophagus and Stomach
Trials, later in this chapter). The relative risk of death from lung cancer was 0.55 (95% CI = 0.26 to 1.14) among those receiving the combination of b-carotene,
a-tocopherol, and selenium. 65 However, this result is not statistically significant, based on only 31 total lung cancer deaths.
A clear mechanism to explain the apparent enhancement of lung carcinogenesis by supplemental b-carotene, alone or in combination with retinol, in smokers has yet
to emerge. As detailed elsewhere, 66 it should be noted that the two trials that observed this enhancing effect had higher median plasma b-carotene concentrations in
their intervention groups than did the trials that did not observe an enhancing effect. Thus, it is possible that high tissue concentrations of b-carotene in the presence
of strongly oxidative tobacco smoke cause an interaction that affects carcinogenesis. Wang et al. have used the ferret to model b-carotene/tobacco interactions in
lung and noted a relative lack of both retinoic acid and RAR-b expression in the lung of smoke-exposed ferrets given high-dose b-carotene. 67 The authors suggested
that oxidative metabolites of b-carotene might cause diminished retinoid signaling and thus increase tumorigenesis. Other groups are also studying b-carotene
oxidation products, for example Salgo et al. 68 reported that under some conditions b-carotene oxidation products, but not b-carotene, enhanced binding of cytochrome
P-450–catalyzed metabolites of benzo[a]pyrene to DNA. While mechanistic studies continue, 69 it is prudent to recommend that heavy smokers, particularly those from
well-nourished populations, should avoid high-dose supplements of b-carotene for lung cancer chemoprevention.
Retinoids have not been tested as single agents in primary prevention trials of lung cancer; however, one trial of retinyl palmitate in adjuvant chemoprevention of lung
cancer is available. 70 Following surgery, patients with stage I non–small cell lung cancer (n = 307) were assigned randomly to treatment with retinyl palmitate (300,000
IU) for 1 year of observation. At a median follow-up of 46 months, survival trends favored retinyl palmitate over no therapy in estimated 5-year disease-free survival
(64% vs. 51%, P = .054) and overall survival (62% vs. 54%, P = .44). Eighteen patients in the retinyl palmitate arm developed a second primary tumor compared with
29 patients developing 33 second primaries in the control group. Reduction of tobacco-associated second primary tumors was more pronounced. At a median
follow-up of 46 months, tobacco-associated second primary tumors developed in 13 patients in the retinyl palmitate arm compared with 25 control patients. The time
to development of tobacco-related second primary tumors also favored the retinyl palmitate arm ( P = .045). Retinyl palmitate toxicity was frequent, occurring in the
majority of treated patients; however, more than 80% of patients maintained regular drug intake during the first 12 months, indicating that the intervention was
tolerable.
Based on the encouraging second primary tumor results and retinoid activity in related carcinogenic systems, two large-scale phase III retinoid trials were
implemented in the setting of second primary tumor prevention. One of these trials, called Euroscan, has been completed in Europe. Euroscan 71 was an open-label
multicenter trial employing a two-by-two factorial design to test 2 years of retinyl palmitate and N-acetylcysteine in preventing second primary tumors in 2592 patients.
Patients had completed definitive therapy of early-stage head and neck cancer (larynx Tis, T1 to 3, N0 to 1; oral cavity T1 to 2, N0 to 1) and non–small cell lung
cancer (T1 to 2, N0 to 1, and T3, N0). Retinyl palmitate, N-acetylcysteine, or both produced no improvement in event-free survival, survival, or incidence of second
primary tumors. The other related trial is still ongoing in the United States. This is a multicenter trial (intergroup NCI I91-0001) of low-dose isotretinoin to prevent
second primary tumors after definitive therapy of stage I non–small cell lung cancer. 72 Currently, new phase III chemoprevention trials in the non–small cell and small
cell lung cancer settings are being designed. 73 In addition, new retinoid formulations and delivery systems (e.g., aerosolized) and potential secondary lung benefits

are under active study. 74,75
BREAST TRIALS
The retinamide 4HPR is a potent apoptosis-inducing retinoid with retinoid receptor-dependent and receptor-independent activities. Moon and colleagues first showed
that 4HPR was among the most active cancer chemopreventive agents for the breast, having a high therapeutic index and synergistic interaction with tamoxifen in
mammary carcinogenesis model studies.7 This laboratory work led to a large-scale randomized trial of 4HPR (vs. no treatment) for 5 years to prevent contralateral
breast cancer in women aged 30 to 70 years with a history of resected early breast cancer and no prior adjuvant therapy. 76 The intervention produced no significant
overall effect. Subset analyses suggested that reduced contralateral and ipsilateral breast cancer rates occurred in premenopausal women and that an opposite trend
occurred in postmenopausal women.76 Promising new retinoids for breast cancer prevention include other potent apoptosis-inducing retinoids and
RAR-subtype-selective, RXR-selective, and anti-AP-1 retinoids. 77
As for b-carotene, observational data have suggested that higher intake of b-carotene from foods is an important prognostic factor in breast cancer. 78,79 Given this,
randomized trials aimed at increasing vegetable intake to prevent breast cancer recurrence are under way. 80 These interventions clearly influence circulating
carotenoid concentrations and illustrate a food-based approach to investigate potential chemopreventive efficacy.
SKIN TRIALS
Data suggest that topical ATRA has significant dose-related activity in reversing premalignant skin lesions (e.g., actinic keratoses, which undergo a malignant
transformation rate of 5%). 81 Systemic retinoid therapy has produced significant activity in the two reported randomized trials. 82,83 Several small, single-arm studies
have found that 13cRA and etretinate can reduce skin cancer incidence significantly in high-risk patients with xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) and in renal transplant
recipients, respectively. 84,85
The XP trial, published in 1988, was a landmark trial for the field of chemoprevention in general in that it was the first human trial to establish a significant reduction in
tumor development.84 Although including only five XP patients, the extremely high rate of skin cancer development and rigorous documentation of skin tumor rates
before, during, and after the 2-year high-dose (2 mg/kg/d) 13cRA intervention provided statistically valid results. The overall average reduction in skin cancer
incidence during therapy was 63% (P = .019). Two major problems were evident from this trial: Severe, acute mucocutaneous toxicity occurred with this high 13cRA
dose, and the preventive effect of the retinoid was lost after stopping retinoid therapy, as indicated by a mean 8.5-fold increase in the annual rate of skin tumor
development (P = .007). The retinoid chemopreventive effect in this study was greatest in the XP patients with the highest frequency of de novo skin tumor
development, and, in subsequent studies, was found to be dose related.
Based on positive single-arm retinoid data, 85 a randomized, placebo-controlled trial of the retinoid acitretin (30 mg/d for 6 months) was conducted in 38 renal
transplant recipients. 86 The retinoid group had significant reductions in (1) premalignant lesions ( P = .008); (2) the number of patients with skin cancer ( P = .01); and
(3) the cumulative number of skin cancers (P = .009). Nine of the 19 placebo patients developed a total of 18 skin cancers and 2 of the 19 retinoid patients developed
skin cancer, one cancer each. After completing the intervention, the rate of skin cancer development in the retinoid arm increased and became similar to that of the
placebo arm. Toxicity in the retinoid group was frequent but mild in degree, and the retinoid had no adverse effect on renal function.
Three large-scale randomized phase III trials of retinoids and skin cancer have been reported. A trial of very low-dose 13cRA (10 mg/d) 87 and one of retinol (25,000
IU/d) or 13cRA (5 to 10 mg/d) versus placebo in patients with prior skin cancers 88 were negative. The third trial, involving retinol in patients with prior actinic
keratoses, did see a significant reduction of squamous but not basal skin cancers in the retinoid arm. 89 The contrasting results of the phase III retinoid trials in skin
cancer chemoprevention suggest the importance of retinoid dose, biologic timing of intervention, and target histopathology.
Greenberg and colleagues 90 conducted a large randomized clinical trial of supplemental b-carotene (50 mg/d for 5 years) in 1805 persons with a previous
nonmelanoma skin cancer. There was no difference between the two groups in the rate of occurrence of the first new nonmelanoma skin cancer (RR = 1.05; 95% CI =
0.91 to 1.22).
Selenium is another nutrient that has been evaluated for efficacy in the prevention of second skin cancers. 91 Clark et al. randomized a total of 1312 patients with a
history of nonmelanoma skin cancer to 200 µg selenium per day or placebo. Selenium did not affect the incidence of second skin cancers (RR = 1.10 for basal cell
carcinoma and RR = 1.14 for squamous cell carcinoma). However, there was a significant reduction in total cancer mortality (RR = 0.50; 95% CI = 0.31 to 0.80),
mainly due to reductions in incident lung, colorectal, and prostate cancers. Other selenium trials are now getting under way (see Conclusions, later in this chapter),
given these promising results.
BLADDER TRIALS
Data from in vivo animal, in vitro, and epidemiologic studies suggested efficacy of retinoids for bladder cancer prevention. Three randomized clinical trials have tested
the retinoid etretinate in patients following resection of their superficial (noninvasive) bladder tumors, which recur in 40% to 90% of cases. All three studies were
limited substantially because of mucocutaneous toxicity. 92,93 and 94 However, in two of the three trials, prolonged (greater than 1 year) low-dose etretinate (25 mg/d)
apparently was effective. These positive results require a cautious reading, because of small patient numbers and short-term follow-up.
Another chemoprevention trial randomized 65 patients with biopsy-confirmed transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder to a multivitamin (recommended dietary
allowance levels) alone or supplemented with 40,000 IU of retinol, 100 mg of pyridoxine, 2000 mg of ascorbic acid, 400 IU of a-tocopherol, and 90 mg of zinc. 95 The
5-year estimate of tumor recurrence was 91% in the recommended dietary allowance arm versus 41% in the megadose arm (P = .0014). These results are promising
in that the intervention was essentially nontoxic, with only one patient (3%) requiring dose reduction for mild stomach upset. Further research is needed to identify
which vitamin(s) were responsible for chemopreventive efficacy.
Studies in the bladder of newer synthetic retinoids with better therapeutic ratios are also anticipated. One such leading candidate is 4HPR, 7,10 which tests as one of
the strongest anticarcinogenic retinoids in the rodent bladder, is less toxic than either etretinate or isotretinoin in humans, and has produced promising results in a
phase IIA trial.96
CERVICAL TRIALS
Many randomized and nonrandomized chemoprevention studies have been conducted in cervical dysplasia. Randomized trials include two studies of folic acid, four of
interferons, three of b-carotene, and one of ATRA. Only one of these trials, using topical ATRA, 97 found a significant treatment effect. Three hundred one patients with
moderate (cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 2) and severe (cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 3) dysplasia were randomly assigned to topical ATRA versus placebo.
This trial administered a 0.372% b-ATRA solution by collagen sponge in a cervical cap delivery system for 4 days initially, then for 2 days at months 3 and 6. Patients
were evaluated by serial colposcopy, Pap cytology, and cervical biopsy. The ATRA dose, schedule, and delivery system were determined by prior single-arm phase I
and II studies. The major finding was a higher complete response rate in the ATRA group (43%) than in the placebo group (27%; P = .041) among the 141 patients
with moderate dysplasia. No significant differences in dysplasia regression rates between the two study arms were detected in patients with severe dysplasia. Acute
toxicity was infrequent, mild, and reversible consisting primarily of local (vaginal and vulvar) irritation occurring in less than 5% of treated subjects. Major problems
with compliance (e.g., 52 patients lost to follow-up), however, have limited somewhat the interpretation of this trial.
Three randomized trials involving b-carotene have been published. The first was a trial from the Netherlands that randomized women with a histologic diagnosis of
cervical dysplasia to either 10 mg of b-carotene per day for 3 months or placebo. After 3 months of intervention, there was no detectable effect of supplemental
b-carotene on the regression and progression of cervical dysplasia. 98 Romney et al.99 randomized women with cervical dysplasia to 30 mg of b-carotene per day (n =
39) or placebo (n = 30). After 9 months of intervention, there was no beneficial effect of b-carotene supplementation. An Australian trial used a factorial design to
investigate the effects of supplemental b-carotene (30 mg/d) or vitamin C (500 mg/d) in 141 women with minor cervical abnormalities. 100 There was no significant
effect of either agent in this trial. In contrast are results from a nonrandomized phase II intervention trial of cervical dysplasia 101 that reported a striking 70% response
rate following 6 months of supplementation with 30 mg of b-carotene per day. The results of the randomized trials suggest that this impressive response rate may

reflect spontaneous regression rather than an effect of the b-carotene.
ESOPHAGUS AND STOMACH TRIALS
Certain regions of China (Huixian and Linxian) have strikingly high incidence rates of esophageal and gastric cancers; moreover, intake and blood levels of various
micronutrients are consistently low in these populations. These observations have led to three esophageal and esophageal and gastric cancer prevention trials in
China.102,103 and 104 The first was in high-risk Chinese subjects from Huixian and tested the combination of retinol, riboflavin, and zinc for 13.5 months. After the
intervention, there was no overall difference between the two arms in the occurrence of premalignant lesions or the prevalence or severity of dysplasia. 102 However,
esophageal (but not oral) micronuclei frequency decreased in the intervention arm. 105
Two more recent trials were done in Linxian county. The first trial was conducted in residents from the general population. 103 Nearly 30,000 men and women aged 40
to 69 took part in the study, which tested the efficacy of four different nutrient combinations at inhibiting the development of esophageal and gastric cancers. The
nutrient combinations included retinol plus zinc, riboflavin plus niacin, ascorbic acid plus molybdenum, and the combination of b-carotene, selenium, and
a-tocopherol. After a 5-year intervention period, those who were given the combination of b-carotene, vitamin E, and selenium had a 13% reduction in total cancer
deaths (RR = 0.87; 95% CI = 0.75 to 1.00), a 4% reduction in esophageal cancer deaths (RR = 0.96; 95% CI = 0.78 to 1.18), and a 21% reduction in gastric cancer
deaths (RR = 0.79; 95% CI = 0.64 to 0.99). None of the other nutrient combinations reduced gastric or esophageal cancer deaths significantly in this trial. The finding
that vitamin supplements reduced cancer deaths in this population provides compelling data supporting the concept of cancer prevention via nutrients; however, the
applicability of these results for populations with adequate nutritional status and for other tumor sites may be limited. Also, it is unclear which nutrient(s) (b-carotene,
vitamin E, or selenium) was responsible for the observed protection. It is perhaps of interest that selenium was not deficient in this population.
The other Linxian trial was done to determine whether a multivitamin and multimineral preparation plus b-carotene (15 mg) reduced esophageal and gastric cardia
cancers in 3318 residents with esophageal dysplasia. 104 Cumulative esophageal and gastric cardia death rates after the 6-year intervention period were 8% lower (RR
= 0.92; 95% CI = 0.67 to 1.28), esophageal cancer mortality was 16% lower (RR = 0.84; 95% CI = 0.54 to 1.29), and total cancer mortality was 4% lower (RR = 0.96;
95% CI = 0.71 to 1.29) in the supplemented group. Surprisingly, stomach cancer mortality was 18% higher (RR = 1.18; 95% CI = 0.76 to 1.85) in the supplemented
group. None of the results were statistically significant.
Repeat endoscopic surveys were carried out 2 and 6 years after randomization in a subsample of participants in the dysplasia trial. 106 At baseline (1983, 2 years
before randomization), all of the subjects had a cytologic diagnosis of dysplasia (98% squamous). In the 1987 survey (n = 768), 61.3% of the participants who were
endoscoped and on the active arm were found to have normal cytology, compared with 57.6% of those on the placebo arm. In the 1991 survey (n = 396), 17.8% of the
participants who were endoscoped and on the active arm were found to have normal cytology, compared with 20.6% on the placebo arm. The striking degree of
apparent regression observed in the placebo arm, particularly in the 1987 survey, again underscores the importance of placebo controls in trials of intermediate end
points.
In addition to the Chinese trials, a trial from Uzbekistan used a factorial design to study the combination of b-carotene, retinol, and a-tocopherol, with and without
riboflavin, in subjects with chronic esophagitis. 40 The risk of progression or no change versus regression was nonsignificantly decreased by 34% in those receiving
retinol, b-carotene, and a-tocopherol (OR = 0.66; 95% CI = 0.37 to 1.16) versus those who did not receive these agents.
COLORECTAL TRIALS
Three randomized trials aimed at the prevention of recurrent colorectal adenomas with supplemental b-carotene have been completed. The largest trial studied 751
patients who had had an adenoma diagnosed and removed within the previous 3 months. 107 Participants were randomized using a two-by-two factorial design, with
the active treatments being b-carotene (25 mg/d), and the combination of 1 g of vitamin C plus 400 mg of vitamin E. There was no evidence that either b-carotene or
vitamins C and E reduced the incidence of adenomas in this 4-year trial. The relative risk for b-carotene was 1.01 (95% CI = 0.85 to 1.20); for vitamins C and E it was
1.08 (95% CI = 0.91 to 1.29). The Australian Polyp Prevention Project evaluated the efficacy of reducing dietary fat to 25% of total calories, and supplementing the
diet with 25 g of wheat bran, 20 mg of b-carotene, or both daily, in a factorial design. 108b-Carotene did not reduce the incidence of adenomas; at 24 months 50
patients on the b-carotene arm had adenomas versus 36 patients on the placebo arm. However, patients taking b-carotene had a statistically significantly lower
proportion of positive nuclei in the upper rectal crypt compartments than those taking placebo, suggesting that b-carotene modified preneoplastic mucosal proliferation
rather than adenoma growth. Another trial (n = 291) using a lower dose of 15 mg of b-carotene per day also failed to see a reduction in adenomas with
supplementation. 109

TRANSLATIONAL AND INTERMEDIATE END POINT STUDIES IN RETINOID CHEMOPREVENTION
Clinical-laboratory translational research is critical for developing new and better chemopreventive agents and for moving them more quickly into standard care; the
oral premalignancy model appears to be an excellent model for translational studies. 28,110,111 and 112 Advanced oral lesions can be visualized, biopsied, and monitored
prospectively; they are linked to carcinogenesis throughout the aerodigestive tract; and activity of retinoids and b-carotene has been demonstrated in randomized
trials. Work in the retinoid oral premalignancy system offers a paradigm for clinical and laboratory collaboration in other tumor sites and with other agents. One aspect
relates to an understanding of the predictive value of biomarker modulation in terms of clinical outcome and correlation of various markers within the same system.
Basic research in the retinoid oral premalignancy model will increase our knowledge of the biology of epithelial carcinogenesis and agent mechanisms, and, it is
hoped, will lead to valid intermediate end point biomarkers. As reviewed in detail elsewhere, intermediate end point biomarkers are short-term markers of
chemopreventive agent activity. Criteria include (1) differential expression in high- and low-risk tissue, (2) pattern and degree of expression correlating with
histopathologic stage (e.g., hyperplasia, degree of dysplasia, cancer), (3) low rate of spontaneous change, (4) ability to be modulated, and (5) technical and logistic
feasibility. 1,111 The most substantial work in the retinoid oral premalignancy model involves RAR-b and p53.
The discovery and early descriptions of nuclear receptors came from molecular in vitro studies in several systems. These receptors are also being studied intensively
in clinical specimens from many cancer types and sites. The best-studied site in chemoprevention is the head and neck. Xu and colleagues employed a
nonradioactive RNA in situ hybridization method to study the expression of all six human retinoid receptors in squamous cell carcinoma and surrounding premalignant
and normal tissue contained in surgical resection specimens. 113 All six receptors were strongly expressed in 100% of oral tissue from normal, nonsmoking volunteers.
In premalignant and malignant specimens, however, there was a selective, histopathologic stage-dependent loss of RAR-b mRNA expression, with expression
detected in 72% of histologically normal and hyperplastic tissue adjacent to squamous cell carcinomas, 56% of dysplastic tissue, and 35% of squamous cell
carcinomas (P <.05).
This finding, suggesting an apparent tumor suppressor function in carcinogenic progression, led to a translational study of RAR-b that had three major findings. 114
First, in contrast to 100% expression in normal controls, RAR-b mRNA was detected in only 40% (21 of 52) of oral premalignant lesions ( P = .003). The expression of
the other five receptors, detected in 70% (RXR-b) to 100% (RXR-a) of oral premalignant lesions did not differ significantly from normal controls. RAR-b loss in oral
premalignant lesions was not associated significantly with tobacco use. Second, there was a striking retinoid up-regulation of RAR-b expression after 3 months of
high-dose 13cRA, from 40% to 90%. Third, RAR-b up-regulation was associated with clinical response: Receptor up-regulation was observed in 82% of responding
lesions (including all four complete responses) and 47% of nonresponding lesions ( P = .039). The early and progressive loss of RAR-b in premalignant tissues and
significant 13cRA up-regulation (in association with lesion response) meets several major criteria for a potential intermediate end point. Similar findings have been
reported in the lung in two randomized studies in smokers. 115,116 Future long-term validation trials will determine if early RAR-b up-regulation is associated with late
lesion response and a reduction in cancer incidence.
These translational RAR-b findings in the retinoid and oral premalignant system are consistent with in vitro data. The RAR-b promoter has a DR5 response element
and is the most tightly retinoid-regulated receptor. Mutations, deletions, or structural changes in the RAR-b gene or its promoter, however, have not been identified.
More recent data suggest that loss of RAR-b expression in oral premalignant lesion is related to a defect in intracellular vitamin A metabolism (and reduced levels of
retinoic acid in premalignant cells), which can be corrected by pharmacologic doses of retinoic acid. 117 These translational findings are consistent with preclinical data
in vitamin A–deficient animals.
The available in vitro and in vivo data suggest a molecular model of retinoid chemoprevention in the head and neck ( Fig. 23.3-2). In vitro transfection studies in lung
cancer and other experimental systems suggest that RAR-b, which is located on chromosome 3p, may have tumor suppressor activity, 118,119 contributing to

suppression of the premalignant phenotype. RAR-b loss may enhance the progression of carcinogenesis by rendering the epithelium resistant to physiologic retinoic
acid levels. Pharmacologic doses of retinoic acid, administered systemically, can enter premalignant cells and, via residual retinoic acid receptors (e.g., RAR-g),
induce the synthesis of RAR-b via heterodimer binding to the RAR-b promoter and subsequent activation of RAR-b gene transcription. Although 13cRA does not bind
directly to RARs, it is isomerized to ATRA. 13cRA can activate RAR-b RARE transcription in vitro at levels comparable with ATRA. This model of RAR-b up-regulation
and tumor suppressor activity may represent the basis of retinoid chemoprevention in the head and neck.

FIGURE 23.3-2. Molecular model of retinoid chemoprevention. ATRA, all- trans-retinoic acid; 13cRA, 13- cis retinoic acid; RAR-b, retinoic acid receptor beta.

p53 chromosome instability and loss of heterozygosity are also under intensive study in aerodigestive tract carcinogenesis. 120,121 and 122 As indicated previously,
translational research in the retinoid oral premalignancy model is a paradigm for chemoprevention research in general. Future goals include increasing our knowledge
of the biology of carcinogenesis and agent mechanisms of action, establishing effective screens for response and resistance to agents, and establishing valid
intermediate end point biomarkers. Valid intermediate markers will be necessary for reducing the size and duration, and therefore, the tremendous costs, of future
chemoprevention trials. Perhaps of greater importance, valid intermediate markers will help focus limited research resources on only the most promising candidate
agents.
NEW RETINOIDS AND CAROTENOIDS
The retinamide 4HPR is a promising new retinoid now in clinical trials for human chemoprevention. 1,2,7,8,9 and 10,44,45,76,96,123,124,125,126,127,128,129,130,131,132,133 and 134 It has a
unique mechanism of action and a favorable toxicity profile and has already generated significant chemopreventive activity in several animal carcinogenesis systems
including mammary, bladder, lung, and prostate models. Several clinical chemoprevention trials targeting cervix, skin, bladder, and lung are currently in progress.
4HPR has potent apoptosis-inducing activity in several neoplastic systems (including leukemia, neuroblastoma, melanoma, small cell lung cancer, and cervical and
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma) including those resistant to ATRA and 9cRA. 123,124,125,126,127 and 128 The finding that 4HPR is a potent inducer of apoptosis has
exciting clinical implications. 135 Eliminating premalignant, genetically damaged cells by apoptosis may be more effective in cancer prevention than suppressing
proliferation. Clinical effects of current chemopreventive agents, most of which primarily suppress proliferation, cease on stopping the drug. Apoptosis-inducing agents
such as 4HPR, on the other hand, could allow shorter term effective chemoprevention with less toxicity. An understanding of the mechanism(s) by which 4HPR
induces apoptosis is not yet available, but would facilitate the design of future preventive approaches, using rational combinations of 4HPR with other agents.
Clinical and translational study of other new retinoids is less advanced. This area of research currently is focused on ligands that are selective for RAR subtypes,
RXRs, or the downstream target AP-1.77,136,137 Data support RXR-selective ligands for use in cancer prevention. RXRs have a unique role in controlling apoptosis and
as obligate heterodimer partners for RARs and many other intracellular receptors (e.g., vitamin D receptor and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors). Via
versatile dimer-partnering behavior and other complex effects, RXR agonists can modulate other endocrine-signaling pathways. The potential importance of RXRs in
breast carcinogenesis was first illustrated by mammary carcinogenesis studies suggesting that the RAR-RXR panagonist 9cRA is more active than RAR agonists.
Findings of subsequent prevention studies of selective RXR agonists in a rat mammary carcinoma model were as follows: less toxic and more active than 9cRA;
inhibited estrogen- and tamoxifen-stimulated uterine proliferation; activity in tamoxifen-resistant disease and similar to that of tamoxifen; and supra-additive effects
when combined with tamoxifen. This study of RXR agonists has led to intensive study of their combination with selective estrogen receptor modulators. 77
Several carotenoids also appear to have promising chemopreventive activity. For example, epidemiologic as well as preclinical ( in vitro and in vivo) studies suggest
that a-carotene may have chemopreventive efficacy. Lycopene, a carotenoid found primarily in tomato and tomato products, is of great interest as a potential agent for
the prevention of prostate 138 and other cancers.139 In one article, 57 of 72 studies reviewed reported inverse associations between tomato intake or blood lycopene
levels and the risk of cancer; 35 of these inverse associations were statistically significant. 139 Small intervention trials of lycopene in men with prostate cancer have
been initiated. 140 Other carotenoids including crocetin, canthaxanthin, fucoxanthin, and a-carotene have been found to inhibit tumorigenesis in animal models. 19 While
there is considerable interest in these and other carotenoids for cancer prevention, large-scale human trials should be undertaken with great caution, given the lack of
a clear understanding of the apparent mechanism of b-carotene in promoting lung carcinogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS
A number of chemoprevention trials involving retinoids and the carotenoid b-carotene are ongoing or have been completed. Although many of the trials have reported
chemopreventive efficacy for various retinoids and for b-carotene, particularly in oral premalignancy, other trials have been negative or have even suggested
promotional effects. This suggests that the patient population, tumor site, histopathology, choice of agent(s), dose, duration, and timing of intervention may be critical
in determining efficacy. Although our understanding of mechanisms of action for retinoids has increased dramatically in the last decade, the same is not true for the
carotenoids, and additional research is needed in this area. Nonrandomized phase I and II trials provide useful information regarding toxicity, feasibility, and
suggestions of drug activity; however, randomized phase IIB and III trials 1 are clearly necessary for rigorous evaluation of efficacy. This is particularly true for trials
using intermediate end points, as uncontrolled trials are difficult to interpret and may produce spurious findings. Several large randomized trials of retinoids in the
prevention of cancer will be concluded by 2003. Others involving b-carotene, alone or in combination with other agents such as vitamins E, C, and selenium, also are
ongoing. Trials will soon be initiated to evaluate single-agent efficacy of some of the less-studied micronutrients, such as the planned Selenium and Vitamin E
Chemoprevention Trial (select), which will examine selenium and vitamin E in a factorial design aimed at the prevention of prostate cancer in 32,400 healthy male
participants in the United States. In the meantime, the use of retinoids, carotenoids, vitamins E, C, and selenium for cancer prevention remains investigational.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Lippman SM, Benner SE, Hong WK. Cancer chemoprevention. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:851.
2. Lippman SM, Spitz MR, Huber M, Hong WK. Strategies for chemoprevention study of premalignant lesions and second primary tumors in the head and neck. Curr Opin Oncol 1995;7:234.
3. Wolbach SB, Howe PR. Tissue changes following deprivation of fat soluble A vitamin. J Exp Med 1925;42:753.
4. Ziegler RG, Mayne ST, Swanson CA. Diet and lung cancer. Cancer Causes and Control 1996;7:157.
5. Mayne ST, Graham S, Zheng T. Dietary retinol: prevention or promotion of carcinogenesis in humans? Cancer Causes and Control 1991;2:443.
6. Dragsted LO, Strube M, Larsen JC. Cancer protective factors in fruits and vegetables: biochemical and biologic background. Pharmacol Toxicol 1993;72(Suppl):s116.
7. Moon RC, Mehta RG, Rao KV. Retinoids and cancer in experimental animals. In: Sporn MB, Roberts AB, Goodman DS, eds. The retinoids. 2nd ed. New York: Raven Press, 1994:573.
8. Pollard M, Luckert PH, Sporn MB. Prevention of primary prostate cancer in Lobund-Wistar rats by N-(4-hydroxyphenyl) retinamide. Cancer Res 1991;51:3610.
9. Slawin K, Kadmon D, Park SH, et al. Dietary fenretinide, a synthetic retinoid, decreases the tumor incidence and the tumor mass of ras+myc-induced carcinomas in the mouse prostate
reconstitution model system. Cancer Res 1993;19:4461.
10. Kelloff GJ, Crowell JA, Boone CW, et al. N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide (4HPR): clinical development plan. J Cell Biochem 1994;(Suppl 20):176.
11. Anzano MA, Byers SW, Smith JM, et al. Cancer Res 1994;54:4614.
12. Sporn MB, Roberts AB. What is a retinoid? CIBA Foundation Symposium 1985;113:1.
13. Mangelsdorf DJ, Umesono K, Evans RM. The retinoid receptors. In: Sporn MB, Roberts AB, Goodman DS, eds. The retinoids. 2nd ed. New York: Raven Press, 1994:319.
14. Chambon P. The retinoid signaling pathway: molecular and genetic analyses. Semin Cell Biol 1994;5:115.
15. Demirpence E, Balaguer P, Trousse F, et al. Antiestrogenic effects of all-trans-retinoic acid and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 in breast cancer cells occur at the estrogen response element level
but through different molecular mechanisms. Cancer Res 1994;54:1458.

16. Lippman SM, Kessler JF, Meyskens FL Jr. Retinoids as preventive and therapeutic anticancer agents. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:391,493.
17. Fanjul A, Dawson MI, Hobbs PD, et al. A new class of retinoids with selective inhibition of AP-1 inhibits proliferation. Nature 1994;372:107.
18. Lippman SM, Heyman RA, Kurie JM, Benner SE, Hong WK. Retinoids and chemoprevention: clinical and basic studies. J Cell Biochem 1995;22:1.
19. Krinsky NI. Actions of carotenoids in biologic systems. In: Olsen RE, Bier DM, McCormick DB, eds. Annual review of nutrition. Palo Alto: Annual Reviews, 1993;13:561.
20. Wang X-D, Krinsky NI, Benotti PN, Russell RM. Biosynthesis of 9-cis-retinoic acid from 9-cis-beta-carotene in human intestinal mucosa in vitro. Arch Biochem Biophys 1994;313:150.
21. Mathews-Roth MM. Carotenoids in erythropoietic protoporphyria and other photosensitivity diseases. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1993;691:127.
22. Burton GW, Ingold KU. Beta-carotene: an unusual type of lipid antioxidant. Science 1984;224:569.
23. Floyd RA. Role of free radicals in carcinogenesis and brain ischemia. FASEB J 1990;4:2587.
24. International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). IARC handbooks of cancer prevention. Carotenoids. Vol. 2. North Carolina: Oxford University Press, 1998.
25. Watson RR, Rybski J. Immunomodulation by retinoids and carotenoids. In: Chandra RK, ed. Nutrition and immunology. New York: Alan R. Liss, 1988:87.
26. Zhang LX, Cooney RV, Bertram JS. Carotenoids up-regulate connexin43 gene expression independent of their provitamin A or antioxidant properties. Cancer Res 1992;52:5707.
27. Comerci JT, Runowicz CD, Fields AL, et al. Induction of transforming growth factor beta-1 in cervical intraepithelial neoplasia in vivo after treatment with beta-carotene. Clin Cancer Res
1997;3:157.
28. Lippman SM, Hong WK. Retinoid chemoprevention of upper aerodigestive tract carcinogenesis. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Important advances in oncology. Philadelphia:
Lippincott, 1992:93.
29. Vokes EE, Weichselbaum RR, Lippman SM, Hong WK. Head and neck cancer. N Engl J Med 1993;328:184.
30. Stich HF, Rosin MP, Vallejera MO. Reduction with vitamin A and beta-carotene administration of proportion of micronucleated buccal mucosal cells in Asian betel nut and tobacco chewers.
Lancet 1984;1:1204.
31. Stich HF, Hornby AP, Dunn BP. A pilot beta-carotene intervention trial with Inuits using smokeless tobacco. Int J Cancer 1985;36:321.
32. Stich HF, Rosin MP, Hornby P, et al. Remission of oral leukoplakias and micronuclei in tobacco/betel quid chewers treated with beta-carotene and with beta-carotene plus vitamin A. Int J
Cancer 1988;42:195.
33. Garewal HS, Meyskens FL, Killen D, et al. Response of oral leukoplakia to beta-carotene. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1715.
34. Toma S, Benso S, Albanese E, et al. Treatment of oral leukoplakia with beta-carotene. Oncology 1992;49:77.
35. Garewal H, Katz RV, Meyskens F, et al. Beta-carotene produces sustained remissions in patients with oral leukoplakiaresults of a multicenter prospective trial. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
1999;125:1305.
36. Malaker K, Anderson BA, Beecroft WA, Hodson DI. Management of oral mucosal dysplasia with beta-carotene and retinoic acid: a pilot cross-over study. Cancer Detect Prev 1991;15:335.
37. Kaugars GE, Silverman S Jr, Lovas JGL, et al. A clinical trial of antioxidant supplements in the treatment of oral leukoplakia. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1994;78:462.
38. Barth TJ, Zoller J, Kubler A, Born IA, Osswald H. Redifferentiation of oral dysplastic mucosa by the application of the antioxidants beta-carotene, alpha-tocopherol and vitamin C. Int J Vit Nutr
Res 1997;67:368.
39. Sankaranarayanan R, Mathew B, Varghese C, et al. Chemoprevention of oral leukoplakia with vitamin A and beta carotene: an assessment. Oral Oncol 1997;33:231.
40. Zaridze D, Evstifeeva T, Boyle P. Chemoprevention of oral leukoplakia and chronic esophagitis in an area of high incidence of oral and esophageal cancer. Ann Epidemiol 1993;3:225.
41. Benner SE, Winn RJ, Lippman SM, et al. Regression of oral leukoplakia with alpha-tocopherol: a community clinical oncology program chemoprevention study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:44.
42. Hong W, Endicott J, Itri LM, et al. 13-cis retinoic acid in the treatment of oral leukoplakia. N Engl J Med 1986;315:1501.
43. Lippman SM, Batsakis JG, Toth BB, et al. Comparison of low-dose isotretinoin with beta carotene to prevent oral carcinogenesis. N Engl J Med 1993;328:15.
44. Chiesa F, Tradati N, Marazza M, et al. 4HPR in chemoprevention of oral leukoplakia. J Cell Biochem Suppl 1993;17F:255.
45. Costa A, Formelli F, Chiesa F, et al. Prospects of chemoprevention of human cancers with the synthetic retinoid fenretinide. Cancer Res 1994;54:2032.
46. Stich HF, Hornby AP, Mathew B, et al. Response of oral leukoplakias to the administration of vitamin A. Cancer Lett 1988;40:93.
47. Han J, Lu Y, Sun Z, et al. Evaluation of N-4-(hydroxycarbophenyl) retinamide as a cancer prevention agent and as a cancer chemotherapeutic agent. In Vivo 1990;4:153.
48. Hong WK, Lippman SM, Itri LM, et al. Prevention of second primary tumors with 13cRA in squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med 1990;323:795.
49. Benner SE, Pajak TF, Lippman SM, Earley C, Hong WK. Prevention of second primary tumors with isotretinoin in patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: long term
follow-up. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:140.
50. Khuri FR, Lee JJ, Winn RJ, et al. Interim analysis of randomized chemoprevention trial of HNSCC. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:389a(abst).
51. Bolla M, Lefur R, Ton Van J, et al. Prevention of second primary tumours with etretinate in squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity and oropharynx. Results of a multicentric double-blind
randomised study. Eur J Cancer 1994;30A:767.
52. Mayne ST, Zheng T, Janerich DT, et al. A population-based trial of beta-carotene chemoprevention of head and neck cancer. In: Newell GR, Hong WK, ed. The biology and prevention of
aerodigestive tract cancers. New York: Plenum Press, 1992:119.
53. McLarty JW, Holiday DB, Girard WM, et al. Beta-carotene, vitamin A and lung cancer chemoprevention: results of an intermediate endpoint study. Am J Clin Nutr 1995;62(Suppl):1431S.
54. Van Poppel G, Kok FJ, Hermus RJ. Beta-carotene supplementation in smokers reduces the frequency of micronuclei in sputum. Br J Cancer 1992;66:1164.
55. Van Poppel G, Poulsen H, Loft S, Verhagen H. No influence of beta carotene on oxidative DNA damage in male smokers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:310.
56. Misset JL, Mathe G, Santelli G, et al. Regression of bronchial epidermoid metaplasia in heavy smokers with etretinate treatment. Cancer Detect Prev 1986;9:167.
57. Arnold AM, Browman GP, Levine MN, et al. The effect of the synthetic retinoid etretinate on sputum cytology: results from a randomized trial. Br J Cancer 1992;65:737.
58. Lee JS, Lippman SM, Benner SE, et al. Randomized placebo-controlled trial of isotretinoin in chemoprevention of bronchial squamous metaplasia. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:937.
59. Kurie JM, Lee JS, Khuri FR, et al. 4-Hydroxyphenylretinamide (4-HPR) in the reversal of bronchial metaplasia and dysplasia in smokers. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:473a(abst).
60. The Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group. The effect of vitamin E and beta carotene on the incidence of lung cancer and other cancers in male smokers. N Engl J
Med 1994;330:1029.
61. Heinonen OP, Albanes D, Virtamo J, et al. Prostate cancer and supplementation with alpha-tocopherol and beta-carotene: incidence and mortality in a controlled trial. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90:440.
62. Omenn GS, Goodman GE, Thornquist MD, et al. Effects of a combination of beta carotene and vitamin A on lung cancer and cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med 1996;334:1150.
63. Hennekens CH, Buring JE, Manson JE, et al. Lack of effect of long-term supplementation with beta carotene on the incidence of malignant neoplasms and cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med
1996;334:1145.
64. Lee IM, Cook NR, Manson JE, Buring JE, Hennekens CH. Beta-carotene supplementation and incidence of cancer and cardiovascular disease: the Women's Health Study. J Natl Cancer Inst
1999;91:2102.
65. Blot WJ, Li J-Y, Taylor PR, Li B. Lung cancer and vitamin supplementation [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1994;331:614.
66. Mayne ST. Beta-carotene, carotenoids, and cancer prevention. Principles and Practice of Oncology Updates 1998;12:1.
67. Wang XD, Liu C, Bronson RT, et al. Retinoid signaling and activator protein-1 expression in ferrets given beta-carotene supplements and exposed to tobacco smoke. J Natl Cancer Inst
1999;91:60.
68. Salgo MG, Cueto R, Winston GW, Pryor WA. Beta carotene and its oxidation products have different effects on microsome mediated binding of benzo[a]pyrene to DNA. Free Radical Biol Med
1998;26:162.
69. Paolini M, Cantelli-Forti G, Peroccot P, et al. Co-carcinogenic effect of b-carotene [Letter]. Nature 1999;398:760.
70. Pastorino U, Infante M, Maioli M, et al. Adjuvant treatment of stage I lung cancer with high-dose vitamin A. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1216.
71. van Zandwijk N, Pastorino U, De Vries N, et al. Randomized trial of chemoprevention with vitamin A and N-acetylcysteine in patients with cancer of the upper and lower airways: the Euroscan
study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:464a(abst).
72. Lippman SM, Lee JJ, Karp DD, et al. Phase III Intergroup trial of 13-cis-retinoic acid to prevent second primary tumors in stage I non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): Interim Report of NCI
#I19-0001. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:456a(abst):1753.
73. Lippman SM. Not yet standard: retinoids versus second primary tumors. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1204.
74. Parthasarathy R, Gilbert B, Mehta K. Aerosol delivery of liposomal all-trans-retinoic acid to the lungs. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1999;43:277.
75. Massaro GD, Massaro D. Retinoic acid treatment abrogates elastase-induced pulmonary emphysema in rats. Nat Med 1997;3:675.
76. Veronesi U, De Palo G, Marubini E, et al. Randomized trial of fenretinide to prevent second breast malignancy in women with early breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1847.
77. Lippman M, Brown PH. Tamoxifen prevention of breast cancer: an instance of the fingerpost. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1809.
78. Ingram D. Diet and subsequent survival in women with breast cancer. Br J Cancer 1994;69:592.
79. Jain M, Miller AB, To T. Premorbid diet and the prognosis of women with breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1390.
80. Pierce JP, Faerber S, Wright FA, et al. Feasibility of a randomized trial of a high-vegetable diet to prevent breast cancer recurrence. Nutr Cancer 1997;28:282.
81. Kligman AM, Thorne EG. Topical therapy of actinic keratosis with tretinoin. In: Marks R, ed. Retinoids in cutaneous malignancy. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Scientific, 1991:66.
82. Moriarty M, Dunn J, Darragh A, et al. Etretinate in treatment of actinic keratosis: a double blind crossover study. Lancet 1982;1:364.
83. Watson AB. Preventative effect of etretinate therapy on multiple actinic keratoses. Cancer Detect Prev 1986;9:161.
84. Kraemer KH, DiGiovanna JJ, Moshell AN, et al. Prevention of skin cancer in xeroderma pigmentosum with the use of oral isotretinoin. N Engl J Med 1988;318:1633.
85. Kelly JW, Sabto J, Gurr FW, Bruce F. Retinoids to prevent skin cancer in organ transplant recipients. Lancet 1991;338:1407.
86. Bouwes Bavinck JN, Tieben LM, Van Der Woude FJ, et al. Prevention of skin cancer and reduction of keratotic skin lesions during acitretin therapy in renal transplant recipients: a double-blind,
placebo-controlled study. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1933.
87. Tangrea JA, Edwards BK, Taylor PR, et al. Long-term therapy with low-dose isotretinoin for prevention of basal cell carcinoma: a multicenter clinical trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:328.
88. Levine N, Moon TE, Cartmel B, et al. Trial of retinol and isotretinoin in skin cancer prevention: a randomized, double-blind, controlled trial. Southwest Skin Cancer Prevention Study Group
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1997;6:957.
89. Moon TE, Levine N, Cartmel B, et al. Effect of retinol in preventing squamous cell skin cancer in moderate-risk subjects: a randomized, double-blind, controlled trial. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 1997;6:949.
90. Greenberg ER, Baron JA, Stukel TA, et al. and the Skin Cancer Prevention Study Group. A clinical trial of beta carotene to prevent basal cell and squamous cell cancers of the skin. N Engl J
Med 1990;323:789.
91. Clark LC, Combs GF, Tumbull BW, et al. Effects of selenium supplementation for cancer prevention in patients with carcinoma of the skin. JAMA 1996;24:1957.
92. Pedersen H, Wolf H, Jensen SK, et al. Administration of a retinoid as prophylaxis of recurrent non-invasive bladder tumors. Scand J Urol Nephrol 1984;18:121.
93. Alfthan O, Tarkkanen J, Grohn P, et al. Tigason (etretinate) in prevention of recurrence of superficial bladder tumors. Eur Urol 1983;9:6.
94. Studer UE, Biedermann C, Chollet D, et al. Prevention of recurrent superficial bladder tumors by oral etretinate: preliminary results of a randomized, double blind multicenter trial in Switzerland.
J Urol 1984;131:47.
95. Lamm DL, Riggs DR, Shriver JS, et al. Megadose vitamins in bladder cancer: a double-blind clinical trial. J Urol 1994;151:21.
96. Decensi A, Bruno S, Costantini M, et al. Phase IIa study of fenretinide in superficial bladder cancer, using DNA flow cytometry as an intermediate end point. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:138.
97. Meyskens FL, Surwit E, Moon TE, et al. Enhancement of regression of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia II (moderate dysplasia) with topically applied all-trans-retinoic acid: a randomized trial. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:539.
98. DeVet HCW, Knipschild PG, Willebrand D, Schouten HJA, Sturmans F. The effect of beta-carotene on the regression and progression of cervical dysplasia: a clinical experiment. J Clin
Epidemiol 1991;44:273.
99. Romney SL, Ho GYF, Palan PR, et al. Effects of beta-carotene and other factors on outcome of cervical dysplasia and human papillomavirus infection. Gynecol Oncol 1997; 65:483.
100. Mackerras D, Irwig L, Simpson JM, et al. Randomized double-blind trial of beta-carotene and vitamin C in women with minor cervical abnormalities. Br J Cancer 1999;79:1448.
101. Meyskens FL Jr, Manetta A. Prevention of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and cervical cancer. Am J Clin Nutr 1995;62:1417S.

102. Munoz N, Wahrendorf J, Bang LJ, et al. No effect of riboflavin, retinol and zinc on prevalence of precancerous lesions of oesophagus: randomized double-blind intervention study in high-risk
population of China. Lancet 1985;2:111.
103. Blot WJ, Li J-Y, Taylor PR, et al. Nutrition intervention trials in Linxian, China: supplementation with specific vitamin/mineral combinations, cancer incidence, and disease-specific mortality in
the general population. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1483.
104. Li J-Y, Taylor PR, Li B, et al. Nutrition intervention trials in Linxian, China: multiple vitamin/mineral supplementation, cancer incidence, and disease-specific mortality among adults with
esophageal dysplasia. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1492.
105. Munoz N, Hayashi M, Bang LJ, et al. Effect of riboflavin, retinol and zinc on micronuclei of buccal mucosa and of esophagus: a randomized double-blind intervention study in China. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1987;79:687.
106. Dawsey SM, Wang G-Q, Taylor PR, et al. Effects of vitamin/mineral supplementation on the prevalence of histological dysplasia and early cancer of the esophagus and stomach: results from
the dysplasia trial in Linxian, China. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1994;3:167.
107. Greenberg ER, Baron JA, Tosteson TD, et al. and the Polyp Prevention Study Group. A clinical trial of antioxidant vitamins to prevent colorectal adenoma. N Engl J Med 1994;331:141.
108. MacLennan R, Macrae F, Bain C, et al. Randomized trial of intake of fat, fiber and beta carotene to prevent colorectal adenomas. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1760.
109. Kikendall JW, Mobarhan S, Nelson R, Burgess M, Bowen PE. Oral beta carotene does not reduce the recurrence of colorectal adenomas. Am J Gastroenterol 1991;36:1356(abst).
110. Hong WK, Lippman SM, Hittelman WN, Lotan R. Retinoid chemoprevention of aerodigestive cancer: from basic research to the clinic. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:677.
111. Lippman SM, Lee JS, Lotan R, et al. Biomarkers as intermediate end points in chemoprevention trials. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:555.
112. Hong WK, Lippman SM, Wolf GT. Recent advances in head and neck cancer-larynx preservation and cancer chemoprevention. Cancer Res 1993;53:5113.
113. Xu X-C, Ro JY, Lee JS, et al. Differential expression of nuclear retinoic acid receptors in normal, premalignant, and malignant head and neck tissues. Cancer Res 1994;54:3580.
114. Lotan R, Xu X-C, Lippman SM, et al. Suppression of retinoic acid receptor-b in premalignant oral lesions and its upregulation by isotretinoin. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1405.
115. Xu X-C, Lee JS, Lee JJ, et al. Nuclear retinoid receptor beta in bronchial epithelium of smokers before and during chemoprevention. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1317.
116. Ayoub J, Jean-Francois R, Cormier Y, et al. Placebo-controlled trial of 13-cis-retinoic acid activity on retinoic acid receptor-beta expression in a population at high risk: implications for
chemoprevention of lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3546.
117. Xu X-C, Zile MH, Lippman SM, et al. Anti-retinoic acid (RA) antibody binding to human premalignant oral lesions, which occurs less frequently than binding to normal tissue, increases after
13-cis-RA treatment in vivo and is related to RA receptor beta expression. Cancer Res 1995;55:5507.
118. Houle B, Rochette-Egly C, Bradley WE. Tumor-suppressive effect of the retinoic acid receptor beta in human epidermoid lung cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:985.
119. Frangioni JV, Moghal N, Stuart-Tilley A, et al. The DNA binding domain of retinoic acid receptor b is required for ligand-dependent suppression of proliferation: application of general purpose
mammalian co-expression vectors. J Cell Sci 1994;107:827.
120. Lippman SM, Shin DM, Lee JJ, et al. p53 and retinoid chemoprevention of oral carcinogenesis. Cancer Res 1995;55:16.
121. Mao L, Lee JS, Fan YH, et al. Frequent microsatellite alterations at chromosome 9p21 and 3p14 in oral premalignant lesions and its value in cancer risk assessment. Nat Med 1996;2:682.
122. Mao L, Lee JS, Kurie JM, et al. Clonal genetic alterations in the lungs of current and former smokers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:857.
123. Delia D, Aiello A, Lombardi L, et al. N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide induces apoptosis of malignant hemopoietic cell lines including those unresponsive to retinoic acid. Cancer Res
1993;53:6036.
124. Delia D, Aiello A, Formelli F, et al. Regulation of apoptosis induced by the retinoid N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide and effect of deregulated Bcl-2. Blood 1995;85:359.
125. Oridate N, Lotan D, Xu X-C, Hong WK, Lotan R. Differential induction of apoptosis by all-trans-retinoic acid and N-(4-hydroxyphenyl) retinamide in human head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma cell lines. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:855.
126. Ponzoni M, Bocca P, Chiesa V, et al. Differential effects of N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide and retinoic acid on neuroblastoma cells: apoptosis versus differentiation. Cancer Res 1995;55:853.
127. Mariotti A, Marcora E, Bunone G, et al. N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide: a potent inducer of apoptosis in human neuroblastoma cells. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1245.
128. Kalemkerian GP, Slusher R, Ramalingam S, Gadgeel S, Mabry M. Growth inhibition and induction of apoptosis by fenretinide in small-cell lung cancer cell lines. J Natl Cancer Inst
1995;87:1674.
129. Newton DL, Henderson WR, Sporn MB. Structure-activity relationships of retinoids in hamster tracheal organ culture. Cancer Res 1980;40:3413.
130. Veronesi U, De Palo G, Costa A, et al. Chemoprevention of breast cancer with retinoids. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;12:93.
131. Rotsmensz N, De Palo G, Formelli F, et al. Long-term tolerability of fenretinide (4-HPR) in breast cancer patients. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:1127.
132. De Palo G, Costa A, Veronesi U. Five-year administration of fenretinide: pharmacokinetics and effects on plasma retinol concentrations. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2036.
133. Dowlatshahi K, Mehta RG, Thomas CF, et al. Therapeutic effect of N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide on N-methyl-N-nitrosourea-induced rat mammary cancer. Cancer Lett 1989;47:187.
134. Formelli F, Carsana R, Costa A, et al. Plasma retinol level reduction by the synthetic retinoid fenretinide: a one year follow-up study of breast cancer patients. Cancer Res 1989;49:6149.
135. Lotan R. Retinoids and apoptosis: implications for cancer chemoprevention and therapy. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1655.
136. Lippman SM, Lee JJ, Sabichi AL. Cancer chemoprevention: progress and promise. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1514.
137. Hong WK, Sporn MB. Recent advances in chemoprevention of cancer. Science 1997;278:1073.
138. Giovannucci E, Ascherio A, Rimm EB, et al. Intake of carotenoids and retinol in relation to risk of prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1767.
139. Giovannucci E. Tomatoes, tomato-based products, lycopene, and cancer: review of the epidemiologic literature. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:317.
140. Kucuk O, Sakr W, Sarkar F, et al. Lycopene supplementation in men with localized prostate cancer (PCa) modulates grade and volume of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) and tumor,
level of serum PSA and biomarkers of cell growth, differentiation and apoptosis. Proc Am AssocCancer Res 1999;40:2706(abst).

SECTION 23.4 Naturally Occurring Dietary Anticarcinogens
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 23.4
Naturally Occurring Dietary Anticarcinogens
PETER GREENWALD
Introduction
Carotenoids
Phytoestrogens
Isoflavonoids
Lignans
Organosulfur and Organoselenium Compounds
Phenolic Compounds
Simple Phenol and Phenolic Acids
Flavonoids
Green Tea Polyphenols
Curcuminoids
Monoterpenes
Isothiocyanates and Indoles
Protease Inhibitors
Implications for Cancer Prevention
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Experimental research has identified hundreds of food-derived compounds as having inhibitory effects on carcinogens. 1 In humans, these cancer-protective
compounds are typically consumed as components within a complex diet, rather than as high-dose supplements. Because the variety and complexity of the diet of
free-living humans limits direct experimental intervention of food intake, observational studies of eating patterns are often used to infer the role of particular dietary
components. Epidemiologic studies emphasizing overall dietary intake or consumption of specific foods, rather than investigation of a particular nutrient or dietary
supplement, do, however, provide consistent evidence that populations consuming higher levels of fruits and vegetables are at decreased risk of various cancers
relative to populations with lesser intakes. 2 A growing body of research indicates that certain nonnutritive phytochemicals, including those found in the everyday diet,
have marked cancer-preventive properties. This chapter examines some of the current evidence for the link between dietary anticarcinogens and cancer risk, with
particular emphasis on selected nonnutritive phytochemicals.

CAROTENOIDS
Commonly consumed green, yellow-red, and yellow-orange vegetables and fruits contain more than 40 carotenoids, including b-carotene, lutein, lycopene, and the
xanthins.3 Various carotenoids may serve as cancer-preventive agents, 4 and a comprehensive review of experimental and epidemiologic studies examining their
properties has been published. 5 Among the most promising of these carotenoids is lycopene, commonly found in tomatoes and tomato-based products; the
biochemical and metabolic characteristics of lycopene have been summarized. 6 Epidemiologic studies have found an inverse relationship between intake of tomatoes
or plasma lycopene level and risk of cancer at various sites, particularly the prostate, lung, and stomach. 7 In vitro studies have found a synergistic inhibitory effect of
lycopene and a-tocopherol on growth of two human prostate carcinoma cell lines. 8 Mechanisms of action of carotenoids that may explain their potential
cancer-preventive effects include antioxidant activity; modulation of carcinogen metabolism; and effects on cell transformation, differentiation, and communication. 5
More definitive conclusions regarding the role of lycopene in cancer prevention await controlled clinical trials.
Lutein displays anticarcinogenic properties that include enhancement of immune function, inhibition of the auto-oxidation of cellular lipids, and protection against
oxidant-induced cell damage. In mice, dietary lutein inhibited mammary tumor growth, 9 and, among humans, high plasma lutein is associated with increased
expression of estrogen receptors in breast cells and better survival rates and response to hormone therapy. 10

PHYTOESTROGENS
Sources for two major categories of phytoestrogens, isoflavonoids and lignans, include legumes, whole grains, fruits, and berries. 11 Phytoestrogens exhibit both weak
estrogenic and antiestrogenic effects. 11,12 Evidence for the role of phytoestrogens as cancer-preventive agents, from experimental and epidemiologic studies, has
been the subject of a number of reviews.12,13,14 and 15
ISOFLAVONOIDS
Isoflavonoids, common in soy-based foods, inhibit angiogenesis, cell-cycle progression, and aromatase enzyme; stimulate sex hormone–binding globulin synthesis;
and have antioxidant properties. 14 The primary isoflavonoid associated with cancer prevention is genistein. 16 Although the specific molecular mechanisms have yet to
be elucidated, genistein displays multiple biochemical properties that inhibit the proliferation of cancer cells in various tissue cultures. 17,18 Genistein also possesses
nonestrogenic properties, including inhibition of ribosomal S6 kinase activity and induction of differentiation of malignant cells. 19 Epidemiologic studies of populations
that regularly consume soy-based foods reveal markedly lower incidence rates for breast, colon, and prostate cancer, when compared with populations with lesser
intake of soy products. 12,17,19
LIGNANS
In addition to their estrogen-like properties, lignans possess a wide range of other biologic activities, including antioxidant, antiproliferative, antiangiogenic,
antiaromatase, antiestrogenic, antimitotic, and antiviral properties. High-fiber diets in Western countries provide a substantial proportion of lignan precursors, and the
lower incidence of cancer in countries consuming high vegetarian or semi-vegetarian diets may be partially attributable to such fiber-associated substances. Flaxseed
flour is a particularly good source of certain lignans, and dietary flaxseed is being investigated as a potential anticancer agent in humans. 20
The relationship between phytoestrogens and breast cancer has been of particular interest, given the ability of phytoestrogens to mimic the properties of natural
estrogens and the hormonal factors determining disease risk, respectively. Numerous animal and human studies indicate that increased consumption of
phytoestrogens, particularly soy-based products, is associated with decreased breast cancer risk. 13 The traditional Western diet, having as a component low soy
consumption, may adversely affect risk of certain hormone-dependent cancers. For example, the risk of breast cancer is less among Asian women born in Asia, where
soy consumption is higher, relative to Asian women born in the United States, where soy consumption is lower. 21 In experimental studies, soy positively affects
various physiologic parameters (e.g., menstrual cycle length, hormone levels of follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone), and inhibits the proliferation of
human breast cancer cells. 12 One potential mechanism for the protective effect of phytoestrogens involves inhibition of ras gene expression.13
Like breast cancer, prostate cancer risk also may be influenced by dietary consumption of phytoestrogens. Men living in Asian countries where consumption of
soy-based foods is higher display a lesser risk of disease relative to men in Western countries where soy consumption is lower. 13 More research into the molecular
and biochemical characteristics of the various phytoestrogens, and valid data on their consumption in the typical diet, are required.

ORGANOSULFUR AND ORGANOSELENIUM COMPOUNDS
Both experimental and epidemiologic studies support the cancer-preventive ability of certain organosulfur compounds. 22,23 Garlic, a member of the genus Allium, is
rich in organosulfides, and diallyl sulfide (DAS) is the most frequently investigated sulfur compound found in garlic. In animals and humans, DAS and related
compounds inhibit chemical carcinogenesis through an array of mechanisms, in various tissues, and against a variety of specific carcinogens. For example, studies

have demonstrated protective effects of DAS against human colon tumor cells 24 and murine skin carcinogenesis. 25 Studies of the related compound diallyl disulfide
(DADS) have noted that it suppresses human colon, skin, and lung tumor cell proliferation; the effect possibly being attributable to the ability of DADS to induce G 2/M
arrest and depress p34 cdc2 kinase activity. 24 Epidemiologic studies have found an inverse association between garlic consumption and risk of gastric cancer, possibly
a result of the antibacterial properties of garlic that inhibit conversion of nitrate to nitrite in the stomach, thereby limiting formation of carcinogenic nitrosamines. 23
Organosulfide preventive agents also are present in Brassica vegetables (e.g., broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower, and Brussels sprouts). Sulphoraphane, for example,
inhibits carcinogen-induced mammary tumorigenesis in rats, 26 and induced phase 2 enzymes in murine hepatoma cells. 27 Selenium inhibits various types of tumors in
rodents, 28 and, in humans, low plasma levels of selenium are associated with increased risk of polyps 29 and possibly prostate cancer. 30,31 A sampling of additional
studies of organosulfur and organoselenium compounds is found in Table 23.4-1.

TABLE 23.4-1. Studies of the Anticarcinogenic Effect of Organosulfur and Organoselenium Products

PHENOLIC COMPOUNDS
Almost all fresh fruits, vegetables, and grains contain measurable amounts of natural plant phenolics, some of which display cancer-inhibitory properties. 32,33 The
metabolic, bioavailability, antioxidant, and chemical properties of phenolic compounds have been reviewed, 34 as have potential mechanisms accounting for their
anticarcinogenic activity. 33 For example, resveratrol, a triphenolic common in grapes, displays strong antioxidant and antiinflammatory properties and has received
considerable attention as a potential cancer-preventive agent in humans. 35 Although the exact mechanism(s) for its antitumorigenic effects are not fully known, its
growth inhibitory and antiproliferative properties may be attributable to induction of apoptotic cell death. 36 Resveratrol exhibits a chemical structure similar to
diethylstilbestrol, and thus may also be classified as a phytoestrogen. Resveratrol has shown variable amounts of estrogen receptor agonism in different test
systems.37 Resveratrol inhibited the development of preneoplastic lesions in carcinogen-treated mouse mammary glands in culture, and inhibited tumorigenesis in a
mouse skin cancer model.35
SIMPLE PHENOL AND PHENOLIC ACIDS
The simple phenols include the monophenols, found in fruits (e.g., raspberry, blackberry); the diphenols; and vanillin. Ellagic acid, a phenolic acid found in nuts and
berries, possesses a number of anticarcinogenic properties, and different parts of the ellagic acid molecule may be responsible for assorted putative anticarcinogenic
effects. 38 In animal studies, ellagic acid inhibited DNA-carcinogen adduct formation 39; lung tumorigenesis induced by nicotine-derived nitrosamine in mice 40; and
development of an esophageal-specific carcinogen. 41 Other phenolics also have shown antioxidant, antimutagenic, and anticarcinogenic effects ( Table 23.4-2).

TABLE 23.4-2. Studies of the Anticarcinogenic Effect of Phenolic Compounds

FLAVONOIDS
Flavonoids represent the most important single group of phenolics in food 33; more than 4000 different types have been identified. 42 Potential mechanisms for the
anticancer effects of flavonoids include interaction with the cytochrome P-450 mixed function oxidase system and inhibition of tyrosine protein kinase activity and
phosphoinositide phosphorylation. 43,44 and 45 Like phytoestrogens, flavonoids display structural properties that allow them to bind to estrogen receptors, potentially
decreasing the risk of certain estrogen-dependent cancers. 46
Experimental and epidemiologic studies of quercetin, the most common and biologically active dietary flavonol, have been reviewed. 42 Quercetin has multiple
biochemical effects in mammalian cells and has shown antiproliferative activity against ovarian, breast, and stomach cancer cell lines in vitro44 and against human
ovarian cancer primary cultures ex vivo.43 In a phase I clinical trial, quercetin inhibited tyrosine kinase activity and showed evidence of antitumor activity. 44 Other
flavonoids, particularly tangeretin and nobiletin, appear to inhibit proliferation of the human breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-435 and MCF-7. 43
Long-term studies of the preventive ability of silymarin, a flavonoid isolated from artichoke or milk thistle, indicate its ability to protect against tumor promotion in
mouse skin models of carcinogenesis. 47 Protective effects of common citrus flavonoids (e.g., naringen, hesperitin, hesperidin) include actions against B16F10
melanoma cells in mice, in vitro inhibition of MDA-MB-435 human breast cell cancer proliferation, and a preventive effect against oral carcinogenesis in rats. 48
Additional studies involving the anticarcinogenic properties of the flavonoids are summarized in Table 23.4-2.
GREEN TEA POLYPHENOLS
Experimental studies supporting the antimutagenic and anticarcinogenic activities of tea polyphenols, and epidemiologic data indicating an association between tea
consumption and cancer risk, have been reviewed. 49 Studies on the catechin (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate, the primary green tea polyphenol (GTP), indicate that its
growth inhibitory effects are selective, operating on cancerous but not on normal cells. 50 Although various GTPs individually exhibit inhibitory effects, 51 certain
catechins act synergistically to reduce cancer risk, indicating that green tea is a more effective protective agent than any of its individual components. 52 Studies of the
anticarcinogenic properties of green tea and its constituents are summarized in Table 23.4-2.
Characteristics of GTPs that may account for their anticarcinogenic properties include scavenging of carcinogenic electrophiles, inhibitory action against nitrosation,
modulation of carcinogen-metabolizing enzymes, trapping of ultimate carcinogens, inhibition of growth-related signal transduction pathways, modulation of enzymes

associated with cell proliferation, and stimulation of phase II detoxifying enzymes. 53,54 Epidemiologic studies support the potential preventive effect of green tea
against cancer at a number of sites, including the lung, esophagus, stomach, and skin. 54 Although GTPs have been the focus of most studies, black tea is consumed
more commonly in the West; its potential cancer-protective properties, however, have yet to be fully explored. Animal studies indicate that certain black tea
polyphenols, the theaflavins, are associated with significant inhibition of lung adenomas, both in vivo55 and in vitro.56 Additional research involving black tea
polyphenols may be warranted.57
CURCUMINOIDS
Curcumin, the major yellow pigment in turmeric and curry, is a common spice, coloring agent, and herbal drug, particularly in Asia. Curcumin has multiple effects on
the carcinogenic process, including antioxidant activity, reduction in polyamine synthesis, 58 and inhibition of tumor initiation and promotion. 59 The molecular
mechanism explaining the action of curcumin is complex and varied, but it is known to inhibit cyclooxygenase- and lipoxygenase-dependent metabolism of arachidonic
acid to prostaglandins and hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids and to moderately enhance interleukin-4 production. 58 Additional work has shown that curcumin inhibits
colon carcinogenesis during the postinitiation phase 60 and has a cytostatic effect at G 2/M against MCF-7 human breast tumor cells. 61

MONOTERPENES
Monoterpenes are found in the essential oils of citrus fruits and other edible plants. 62 The most common monocyclic monoterpene, d-limonene, and its metabolite
perillyl alcohol have shown effectiveness as cancer-protective agents against rodent cancers of the mammary, skin, liver, lung, forestomach, pancreas, and
prostate.22,62 In human breast cancer cell lines, limonene-related monoterpenes exhibited a dose-dependent inhibition on cell proliferation. 63 Multiple mechanisms may
account for the actions of the monoterpenes, depending on tumor type. 62 The blocking effects of d-limonene and other monoterpenes during the initiation phase of
mammary carcinogenesis may result from induction of phase II carcinogen-metabolizing enzymes and subsequent carcinogen detoxification; in the postinitiation
phase, tumor-suppressive activity may be a result of induction of apoptosis and inhibition of the posttranslational isoprenylation of proteins that regulate cell growth. 64
Other cancer-preventive mechanisms include actions on the mevalonate 62 and ras signal transduction pathways. 65

ISOTHIOCYANATES AND INDOLES
Epidemiologic studies have consistently found strong, inverse relationships between high consumption of cruciferous vegetables and cancer incidence. 66 Cruciferous
vegetables contain three groups of glucosinolate-derived compounds likely to be cancer-protective: indole-3-carbinol (I3C) and related indole compounds; phenylethyl
isothiocyanate (PEITC) and related isothiocyanates, such as benzyl isothiocyanate (BITC); and dithiolthione and other thiol-containing compounds. 67 The
mechanisms by which cruciferous vegetables exert their anticarcinogenic effects have been reviewed. 68 The isothiocyanates and indoles have shown promising
results against cancer at a number of sites, in both animals and humans. For example, indoles reduce mammary tumor formation in laboratory animals 67; PEITC
inhibits nitrosamine-induced esophageal cancer in rats 69 and may be protective against lung cancer among smokers 70; and dithiolthiones reduce mammary and
pulmonary tumorigenesis in rodents. 71 Mechanisms for the cancer-preventive actions of the isothiocyanates and indoles include induction of phase II detoxifying
enzymes.71,72

PROTEASE INHIBITORS
In vivo, in vitro, and epidemiologic studies examining the suppression of neoplastic growth by soy-based protease inhibitors (PIs) have been summarized. 15,73 Actions
of protease inhibitors include alteration of the expression of certain oncogenes and proteolytic activities that are elevated in carcinogen-exposed tissues; interference
with oxyradical formation by neutrophils; and modulation of adenosine diphosphate ribosyltransferase, 74 possibly through the induction of synthesis and distribution of
endogenous PIs by dietary PIs. 73 The soybean-derived Bowman-Birk inhibitor (BBI), a major protease inhibitor, may be at least partially responsible for the differences
noted in cancer incidence between Asian and Western populations. 75 BBI and its concentrated form (BBIC) have exhibited suppressive effects in a number of
carcinogenic models, including animals with a known genetic susceptibility to cancer. 75

IMPLICATIONS FOR CANCER PREVENTION
Primary prevention represents the most desirable and cost-effective means of decreasing cancer incidence. Toward this end, the human diet contains anticarcinogens
capable of reducing cancer risk, but substantial basic science research will be required to elucidate the mechanisms by which any particular phytochemical exerts its
anticancer effect. In the absence of specific knowledge of anticarcinogenic dietary components and their mechanisms, consumption of a wide variety of fruits and
vegetables is highly encouraged, 1 because several agents having weak effects in vitro may, in combination, prove more effective than any single agent. 76 Such a
“polypharmaceutical” approach to cancer prevention is most likely to minimize cancer risk. 77
Because phytochemicals are consumed, not in the form of high-dose supplements, but rather as constituents within a complex matrix of nutrients, the difficulty in
identifying any particular component as being “a” primary preventive agent can be profound, particularly given the attendant problems of valid dietary assessment,
confounding, and interaction with other factors. This is not to say, however, that such research cannot, or should not, be conducted. The further elucidation of
naturally occurring dietary anticarcinogens represents a key element in efforts to decrease cancer incidence through primary preventive means. Additional
epidemiologic and experimental research involving dietary anticarcinogens holds great potential for future cancer prevention efforts.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Committee on Comparative Toxicity of Naturally Occurring Carcinogens, Estabrook RW, Birt D, et al. Conclusion, recommendations, and future directions. In: Carcinogens and anticarcinogens
in the human diet: a comparison of naturally occurring and synthetic substances. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1996;335.
2. Potter JD. Cancer prevention: epidemiology and experiment. Cancer Lett 1997;114:7.
3. Khachik F, Nir Z, Ausich RL, et al. Distribution of carotenoids in fruits and vegetables as a criterion for the selection of appropriate chemopreventive agents. In: Ohigashi H, Osawa T, Terao J,
et al., eds. Food factors for cancer prevention. New York: Springer-Verlag New York, 1997;204.
4. Krinsky NI. Overview of lycopene, carotenoids, and disease prevention. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1998;218:95.
5. IARC Working Group on the Evaluation of Cancer-Preventive Agents. IARC handbooks of cancer preventioncarotenoids. Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1998.
6. Clinton SK. Lycopene: chemistry, biology, and implications for human health and disease. Nutr Rev 1998;56:35.
7. Giovannucci E. Tomatoes, tomato-based products, lycopene, and cancer: review of the epidemiologic literature. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:317.
8. Pastori M, Pfander H, Boscoboinik D, Azzi A. Lycopene in association with a-tocopherol inhibits at physiological concentrations proliferation of prostate carcinoma cells. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 1998;250:582.
9. Park JS, Chew BP, Wong TS. Dietary lutein from marigold extract inhibits mammary tumor development in BALB/c mice. J Nutr 1998;128:1650.
10. Rock CL, Saxe GA, Ruffin MT IV, et al. Carotenoids, vitamin A, and estrogen receptor status in breast cancer. Nutr Cancer 1996;25:281.
11. Clarke R, Hilakivi-Clarke L, Cho E, et al. Estrogens, phytoestrogens, and breast cancer. In: American Institute for Cancer Research, ed. Dietary phytochemicals in cancer prevention and
treatment. New York: Plenum Publishing, 1996:63.
12. Wiseman H. Role of dietary phyto-oestrogens in the protection against cancer and heart disease. Biochem Soc Trans 1996;24:795.
13. Bingham SA, Atkinson C, Liggins J, et al. Phyto-oestrogens: where are we now? Br J Nutr 1998;79:393.
14. Murkies AL, Wilcox G, Davis SR. Clinical review 92: phytoestrogens. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998;83:297.
15. Fournier DB, Erdman JW Jr, Gordon GB. Soy, its components, and cancer prevention: a review of the in vitro, animal, and human data. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1998; 7:1055.
16. Fritz WA, Coward L, Wang J, Lamartiniere CA. Dietary genistein: perinatal mammary cancer prevention, bioavailability and toxicity testing in the rat. Carcinogenesis 1998;19:2151.
17. Onozawa M, Fukuda K, Ohtani M, et al. Effects of soybean isoflavones on cell growth and apoptosis of the human prostatic cancer cell line LNCaP. Jpn J Clin Oncol 1998;28:360.
18. Davis JN, Singh B, Bhuiyan M, Sarkar FH. Genistein-induced upregulation of p21 WAFI , downregulation of Cyclin B, and induction of apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. Nutr Cancer 1998;32:123.
19. Shao ZM, Wu J, Shen ZZ, Barsky SH. Genistein exerts multiple suppressive effects on human breast carcinoma cells. Cancer Res 1998;58:4851.
20. Harris RK, Greaves J, Alexander D, et al. Development of stability-indicating analytical methods for flaxseed lignans and their precursors. In: Ho CT, Osawa T, Huang MT, Rosen RT, eds. Food
phytochemicals for cancer prevention IIteas, spices, and herbs. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society, 1994:295.
21. Wu AH, Ziegler RG, Horn-Ross PL, et al. Tofu and risk of breast cancer in Asian-Americans. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1996;5:901.
22. Wargovich MJ. Experimental evidence for cancer preventive elements in foods. Cancer Lett 1997;114:11.
23. Block E. Recent results in the organosulfur and organoselenium chemistry of genus Allium and Brassica plants. Relevance for cancer prevention. In: American Institute for Cancer Research, ed.
Dietary phytochemicals in cancer prevention and treatment. New York: Plenum Publishing, 1996:155.
24. Knowles LM, Milner JA. Depressed p34cdc2 kinase activity and G 2/M phase arrest induced by diallyl disulfide in HCT-15 cells. Nutr Cancer 1998;30:169.
25. Singh A, Shukla Y. Antitumour activity of diallyl sulfide on polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-induced mouse skin carcinogenesis. Cancer Lett 1998;131:209.
26. Fahey JW, Zhang Y, Talalay P. Broccoli sprouts: an exceptionally rich source of inducers of enzymes that protect against chemical carcinogens. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:10367.
27. Zhang Y, Talalay P. Mechanism of differential potencies of isothiocyanates as inducers of anticarcinogenic phase 2 enzymes. Cancer Res 1998;58:4632.

28. Davis CD, Feng Y, Hein DW, Finley JW. The chemical form of selenium influences 3,2'-dimethyl-4-aminobiphenyl-DNA adduct formation in rat colon. J Nutr 1999;129:63.
29. Bartram HP, Draenert R, Dusel G, et al. Effects of sodium selenite on deoxycholic acid-induced hyperproliferation of human colonic mucosa in short-term culture. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers
Prev 1998;7:1085.
30. Clark LC, Combs GF Jr, Turnbull BW, et al. Effects of selenium supplementation for cancer prevention in patients with carcinoma of the skin. JAMA 1996;276:1957.
31. Yoshizawa K, Willett WC, Morris SJ, et al. Study of prediagnostic selenium level in toenails and the risk of advanced prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1219.
32. Kaul A, Khanduja KL. Polyphenols inhibit promotional phase of tumorigenesis: relevance of superoxide radicals. Nutr Cancer 1998;32:81.
33. Newmark HL. Plant phenolics as potential cancer prevention agents. In: American Institute for Cancer Research, ed. Dietary phytochemicals in cancer prevention and treatment. New York:
Plenum Publishing, 1996:25.
34. Bravo L. Polyphenols: chemistry, dietary sources, metabolism, and nutritional significance. Nutr Rev 1998;56:317.
35. Jang M, Cai L, Udeani GO, et al. Cancer chemopreventive activity of resveratrol, a natural product derived from grapes. Science 1997;275:218.
36. Surh YJ, Hurh YJ, Kang JY, et al. Resveratrol, an antioxidant present in red wine, induces apoptosis in human promyelocytic leukemia (HL-60) cells. Cancer Lett 1999;140:1.
37. Gehm BD, McAndrews JM, Chien PY, Jameson JL. Resveratrol, a polyphenolic compound found in grapes and wine, is an agonist for the estrogen receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1997;94:14138.
38. Barch DH, Rundhaugen LM, Stoner GD, Pillay NS, Rosche WA. Structure-function relationships of the dietary anticarcinogen ellagic acid. Carcinogenesis 1996;17:265.
39. Constantinou A, Stoner GD, Mehta R, et al. The dietary anticancer agent ellagic acid is a potent inhibitor of DNA topoisomerases in vitro. Nutr Cancer 1995;23(2):121.
40. Castonguay A, Boukharta M, Jalbert G. Comparative study of ellagic acid and its analogues as chemopreventive agents against lung tumorigenesis. In: Huang MT, Osawa T, Ho CT, Rosen RT,
eds. Food phytochemicals for cancer prevention Ifruits and vegetables. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society, 1994:294.
41. Stoner GD, Morse MA. Isothiocyanates and plant polyphenols as inhibitors of lung and esophageal cancer. Cancer Lett 1997;114:113.
42. Wang HK, Xia Y, Yang ZY, et al. Recent advances in the discovery and development of flavonoids and their analogues as antitumor and anti-HIV agents. In: Manthey JA, Buslig BS, eds.
Flavonoids in the living system. New York: Plenum Publishing, 1998:191.
43. Guthrie N, Carroll KK. Inhibition of mammary cancer by citrus flavonoids. In: Manthey JA, Buslig BS, eds. Flavonoids in the living system. New York: Plenum Publishing, 1998:227.
44. Ferry DR, Smith A, Malkhandi J, et al. Phase I clinical trial of the flavonoid quercetin: pharmacokinetics and evidence for in vivo tyrosine kinase inhibition. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:659.
45. Rodgers EH, Grant MH. The effect of flavonoids, quercetin, myricetin and epicatechin on the growth and enzyme activities of MCF7 human breast cancer cells. Chem Biol Interact
1998;116:213.
46. Le Bail JC, Varnat F, Nicolas JC, Habrioux G. Estrogenic and antiproliferative activities on MCF-7 human breast cancer cells by flavonoids. Cancer Lett 1998;130:209.
47. Lahiri-Chatterjee M, Katiyar SK, Mohan RR, Agarwal R. A flavonoid antioxidant, Silymarin, affords exceptionally high protection against tumor promotion in the SENCAR mouse skin
tumorigenesis model. Cancer Res 1999;59:622.
48. Montanari A, Chen J, Widmer W. Citrus flavonoids: a review of past biologic activity against disease. In: Manthey JA, Buslig BS, eds. Flavonoids in the living system. New York: Plenum
Publishing, 1998:103.
49. Kuroda Y, Hara Y. Antimutagenic and anticarcinogenic activity of tea polyphenols. Mutation Res 1999;436:69.
50. Chen ZP, Schell JB, Ho CT, Chen KY. Green tea epigallocatechin gallate shows a pronounced growth inhibitory effect on cancerous cells but not on their normal counterparts. Cancer Lett
1998;129:173.
51. Valcic S, Timmermann BN, Alberts DS, et al. Inhibitory effect of six green tea catechins and caffeine on the growth of four selected human tumor cell lines. Anticancer Drugs 1996;7:461.
52. Suganuma M, Okabe S, Kai Y, et al. Synergistic effects of (-)-epigallocatechin gallate with (-)-epicatechin, sulindac, or tamoxifen on cancer-preventive activity in the human lung cancer cell line
PC-9. Cancer Res 1999;59:44.
53. Yu R, Jiao JJ, Duh JL, et al. Activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases by green tea polyphenols: potential signaling pathways in the regulation of antioxidant-responsive element-mediated
phase II enzyme gene expression. Carcinogenesis 1997;18:451.
54. Yang CS, Chen L, Lee MJ, Landau JM. Effects of tea on carcinogenesis in animal models and humans. In: American Institute for Cancer Research, ed. Dietary phytochemicals in cancer
prevention and treatment. New York: Plenum Publishing, 1996:51.
55. Yang GY, Liu Z, Seril DN, et al. Black tea constituents, theaflavins, inhibit 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK)-induced lung tumorigenesis in A/J mice. Carcinogenesis
1997;18:2361.
56. Sazuka M, Imazawa H, Shoji Y, et al. Inhibition of collagenases from mouse lung carcinoma cells by green tea catechins and black tea theaflavins. Biosci Biotech Biochem 1997; 61:1504.
57. Blot WJ, McLaughlin JK, Chow WH. Cancer rates among drinkers of black tea. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 1997;37:739.
58. Man-Ying M, Fong D. Anti-inflammatory and cancer-preventive immunomodulation through dieteffects of curcumin and T lymphocytes. In: Ho CT, Osawa T, Huang MT, Rosen RT, eds. Food
phytochemicals for cancer prevention IIteas, spices, and herbs. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society, 1994:222.
59. Lin JK, Huang TS, Shih CA, Liu JY. Molecular mechanism of action of curcumin. Inhibition of 12- O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced responses associated with tumor promotion. In: Ho
CT, Osawa T, Huan MT, Rosen RT, eds. Food phytochemicals for cancer prevention IIteas, spices, and herbs. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society, 1994:196.
60. Kawamori T, Lubet R, Steele VE, et al. Chemopreventive effect of curcumin, a naturally occurring anti-inflammatory agent, during the promotion/progression stages of colon cancer. Cancer
Res 1999;59:597.
61. Simon A, Allais DP, Duroux JL, et al. Inhibitory effect of curcuminoids on MCF-7 cell proliferation and structure-activity relationships. Cancer Lett 1998;129:111.
62. Crowell PL. Antitumorigenic effects of limonene and perillyl alcohol against pancreatic and breast cancer. In: American Institute for Cancer Research, ed. Dietary phytochemicals in cancer
prevention and treatment. New York: Plenum Publishing, 1996:131.
63. Bardon S, Picard K, Martel P. Monoterpenes inhibit cell growth, cell cycle progression, and cyclin D1 gene expression in human breast cancer cell lines. Nutr Cancer 1998;32:1.
64. Crowell PL. Prevention and therapy of cancer by dietary monoterpenes. J Nutr 1999;129:775S.
65. Hohl RJ. Monoterpenes as regulators of malignant cell proliferation. In: American Institute for Cancer Research, ed. Dietary phytochemicals in cancer prevention and treatment. New York:
Plenum Publishing, 1996:137.
66. Steinmetz KA, Potter JD. Vegetables, fruit, and cancer prevention: a review. J Am Diet Assoc 1996;96:1027.
67. Michnovicz JJ, Bradlow HL. Dietary cytochrome P-450 modifiers in the control of estrogen metabolism. In: Huang MT, Osawa T, Ho CT, Rosen RT, eds. Food phytochemicals for cancer
prevention Ifruits and vegetables. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society, 1994:282.
68. Verhoeven DTH, Verhagen H, Goldbohm RA, et al. A review of mechanisms underlying anticarcinogenicity by brassica vegetables. Chem Biol Interact 1997;103:79.
69. Stoner GD, Adams C, Kresty LA, et al. Inhibition of N'-nitrosonornicotine-induced esophageal tumorigenesis by 3-phenylpropyl isothiocyanate. Carcinogenesis 1998;19:2139.
70. Hecht SS. Chemoprevention of cancer by isothiocyanates, modifiers of carcinogen metabolism. J Nutr 1999;129:768S.
71. Kohlmeier L, Simonsen N, Mottus K. Dietary modifiers of carcinogenesis. Environ Health Perspect 1995;103(suppl 8):177.
72. Huang C, Ma W, Li J, et al. Essential role of p53 in phenethyl isothiocyanate-induced apoptosis. Cancer Res 1998;58:4102.
73. Clawson GA. Protease inhibitors and carcinogenesis: a review. Cancer Invest 1996;14:597.
74. Kennedy AR. Prevention of carcinogenesis by protease inhibitors. Cancer Res 1994;54:1999S.
75. Kennedy AR. The Bowman-Birk inhibitor from soybeans as an anticarcinogenic agent. Am J Clin Nutr 1998;68(suppl):1406S.
76. Chesson A, Collins A. Assessment of the role of diet in cancer prevention. Cancer Lett 1997;114:237.
77. Potter JD. Cancer prevention: epidemiology and experiment. Cancer Lett 1997;114:7.
78. Chen GW, Chung JG, Hsieh CL, Lin JG. Effects of the garlic components diallyl sulfide and diallyl disulfide on arylamine N-acetyltransferase activity in human colon tumour cells. Food Chem
Toxicol 1998;36:761.
79. Martinez ME, Reid ME, Guillen-Rodriguez J, et al. Design and baseline characteristics of study participants in the Wheat Bran Fiber Trial. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1998;7:813.
80. Rosa JGV, Prokopczyk B, Desai DH, et al. Elevated 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine levels in lung DNA of A/J mice and F344 rats treated with 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone and
inhibition by dietary 1,4-phenylenebis(methylene)selenocyanate. Carcinogenesis 1998;19:1783.
81. Hatono S, Jimenez A, Wargovich MJ. Chemopreventive effect of S-allylcysteine and its relationship to the detoxification enzyme glutathione S-transferase. Carcinogenesis 1996;17:1041.
82. Michaluart P, Masferrer JL, Carothers AM, et al. Inhibitory effects of caffeic acid phenethyl ester on the activity and expression of cyclooxygenase-2 in human oral epithelial cells and in a rat
model of inflammation. Cancer Res 1999;59:2347.
83. Chaumontet C, Droumaguet C, Bex V, et al. Flavonoids (apigenin, tangeretin) counteract tumor promoter-induced inhibition of intercellular communication of rat liver epithelial cells. Cancer
Lett 1997;114:207.
84. Drees M, Dengler WA, Roth T, et al. Flavopiridol (L86-8275): selective antitumor activity in vitro and activity in vivo for prostate carcinoma cells. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:273.
85. Berkarda B, Koyuncu H, Soybir G, Baykut F. Inhibitory effect of hesperidin on tumour initiation and promotion in mouse skin. Res Exp Med 1998;198:93.
86. Webster RP, Gawde MD, Bhattacharya RK. Protective effect of rutin, a flavonol glycoside, on the carcinogen-induced DNA damage and repair enzymes in rats. Cancer Lett 1996;109:185.
87. Yang CS, Yang GY, Landau JM, et al. Tea and tea polyphenols inhibit cell hyperproliferation, lung tumorigenesis, and tumor progression. Exp Lung Res 1998;24:629.
88. Paschka AG, Butler R, Young CYF. Induction of apoptosis in prostate cancer cell lines by the green tea component, (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate. Cancer Lett 1998;130:1.

SECTION 23.5 Dietary Carcinogens
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 23.5
Dietary Carcinogens
PETER GREENWALD
Introduction
Naturally Occurring Dietary Carcinogens
Natural Pesticides
Mycotoxins
Products of Food Preparation and Processing
Heterocyclic Aromatic Amines
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
N-Nitrosocompounds
Synthetic Carcinogens in the Diet
Future Research Needs
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
With the exception of tobacco, no environmental exposure to potential carcinogens is comparable to sources in the diet. 1 Although the public often attributes the
source of carcinogens in the food supply to food additives, synthetic pesticides, and various environmental contaminants, these chemicals are estimated to represent
less than 1% of the carcinogens found in foods. In fact, most known dietary carcinogens either occur naturally in plants or are produced during food preparation. 2,3
Dietary carcinogens in both groups are discussed, with a review of common food sources, mechanisms of action, human exposure, and degree of human risk. A brief
overview of issues regarding synthetic carcinogens in the diet is also provided.
In many cases, current knowledge is incomplete and does not allow reliable estimates of risk. First, no concentration data exist for many potentially carcinogenic
constituents of foods. In addition, determining human exposure levels is difficult and sometimes inconclusive. 4 Dietary assessment tools are subjective and often
biased, 5 the food levels of some substances can vary from year to year, 6 and exposure to mixtures of substances at low doses might be more important than exposure
to single agents. 4 High-dose animal testing has been used to approximate human risk, and the Carcinogenic Potency Database currently includes results for
approximately 1298 chemicals tested in long-term animal experiments ( http://potency.berkeley.edu/app14.html). However, this information cannot predict human risk
with a high degree of confidence. 7,8 Extrapolation from the near-toxic doses used in animal tests to human risk at low-dose exposure is difficult, and some critics
believe its use has sometimes led to overemphasis of potentially minimal risks. 1 One challenge relates to differences in the carcinogenic mechanisms involved. For
example, mitogens likely act by increasing cell proliferation, but only at near-toxic levels, whereas mutagens can damage DNA at low doses. As a result, animal tests
involving mutagens may have more significance for human risk. 7,8
To increase the reliability of exposure estimates, biomarkers are being developed to mark internal dose, putative early response, and susceptibility. For example,
DNA-carcinogen adducts have been used as measurable end points in laboratory studies and, to a more limited extent, in humans, to assess dietary carcinogen
exposure, carcinogen metabolism, mutagenesis, and tumorigenesis. 9,10 In addition, genetic and acquired susceptibility traits have been shown to affect carcinogen
metabolism, DNA damage, and repair.11 In fact, more than a dozen polymorphic gene/phenotypes related to the metabolism of dietary carcinogens are possible actors
in the complex process of carcinogenesis at many sites. 12,13 and 14 Although related technology is just emerging and more study is needed, 4,15 approaches such as
these have already affected understanding of the substances discussed in the following sections.

NATURALLY OCCURRING DIETARY CARCINOGENS
Most naturally occurring dietary carcinogens are either “natural pesticides,” produced by plants for protection against fungi, insects, and animal predators, or
mycotoxins, secondary metabolites produced by molds in foods. Table 23.5-1 lists some of the most common substances in both categories.

TABLE 23.5-1. Food Sources of Naturally Occurring Dietary Carcinogens

NATURAL PESTICIDES
Animal studies have provided evidence for the carcinogenicity of a large number of individual plant constituents fed at high doses. However, no firm conclusions can
be drawn about the overall effects of most of these substances on human health. Plant foods contain thousands of phytochemicals representing various chemical
classes and exhibiting diverse molecular structures, and only a small fraction of potential carcinogens produced by plant foods have been tested systematically. 3 In
addition, the difficulties previously described in assessing human risk are well illustrated by naturally occurring pesticides. Caffeic acid, which has been shown to
cause forestomach squamous cell carcinomas in rats as well as renal tubular cell hyperplasia and adenomas in mice, is a good example. The relevance of the animal
findings to humans is uncertain, because data are not available on carcinogenicity in humans, very high doses were used in the animal studies, humans do not have a
forestomach, and the renal lesions were related to toxic lesions. 16 In addition, in vitro, caffeic acid may act either as a pro- or antioxidant, and it has been observed to
be both protective and enhancing when administered orally in combination with known carcinogens. 16 Another confounding factor is the fact that many foods
containing caffeic acid also contain compounds believed to be protective, which might affect its ultimate human impact.
Despite such challenges, with additional information on factors such as exposure levels, concentration levels, mechanisms of action, and human clinical experience,
researchers can draw conclusions on human risk from natural pesticides. For example, studies of coumarin—a substance with many food sources (particularly
cinnamon) that has been found to be carcinogenic in rats and mice—have concluded that it poses no health risk to humans. Known exposure levels and differences in
coumarin metabolism between susceptible rodent species and humans contributed to this finding. 17 Other studies are elucidating some of the important factors in
assessing human risk, particularly regarding mechanisms of action in animals. For instance, researchers rationalized the restriction of allyl isothiocyanate–related
bladder tumors to male rats compared with female rats and both sexes of mice on the basis of a species difference in metabolism and a sex difference in exposure to
allyl isothiocyanate metabolites. 18 Other studies have found that the hepatocarcinogenicity of hydrazine is linked to the hypomethylation of total target organ DNA that
occurs with chronic exposure and that the hypomethylation is dose-related to the development of liver cancer. 19 Methylation is believed to be a factor in aberrant gene
expression and the development of tumors.

From a public health perspective, dietary exposure to natural pesticides can generally be controlled by selecting genetic strains of plants that produce lower
concentrations and by reducing plant stress during the growing season. Particular natural pesticides that are carcinogenic in animals might be bred out of crops if
research indicates they could be hazardous to humans. 8 Increasing the level of natural pesticides by breeding as an alternative to synthetic pesticides must be
considered cautiously in view of their potential health effects. Consumers also could be informed of the relative risks associated with food products such as herbal
teas, for which both protective and toxic effects have been documented. 20
MYCOTOXINS
Mycotoxins are structurally diverse toxic fungal metabolites that are common contaminants of ingredients in animal feed and human food; to date, more than 300
mycotoxins have been identified. 21 The mycotoxins listed in Table 23.5-1 are among those shown to have carcinogenic potential in animals. However, only aflatoxin B 1
(AFB1) and naturally occurring mixtures of aflatoxins are known to be genotoxic and carcinogenic to humans. Fumonisins and ochratoxin A have been shown to be
possibly carcinogenic to humans. 22
Aflatoxins
AFB1 is a potent carcinogen in many species of animals, including rodents, nonhuman primates, and fish. Epidemiologic studies show a strong direct association
between AFB1 intake in Africa and China and risk for primary liver and lung cancer in humans. 23,24 Synergistic interactions of AFB 1 with both viral B hepatitis and
alcohol consumption in humans also have been demonstrated. 23 High levels of AFB 1, produced by the Aspergillus species, are found in regions of Africa, southeast
Asia, and southern China, where the foods they contaminate are dietary staples for humans and animals. In fact, human exposure to AFB 1 in southern China (either
directly or through eating the products of animals that ate contaminated feed) can be as high as 75 to 250 µg/d, compared with 25 to 75 ng/d in the United States,
where aflatoxin contamination levels are lower. 25
The aflatoxins have been extensively characterized with respect to chemistry, biology, and toxicology. Like most other mycotoxins with the exception of fumonisins,
aflatoxins are genotoxic agents, and substantial research has been conducted on the genetic damage created by AFB 1 in liver and lung tumors. A key biomarker, the
predominant AFB1-DNA adduct (AFB1-N7-Gua), has been identified and correlated with the incidence of hepatic tumor in trout and rats. 21 Formation of the AFB 1-DNA
adduct requires metabolic activation of AFB 1 to its carcinogenic form, the 8,9-epoxide. 26 A review of data from animal and human studies that measured urinary
excretion of aflatoxin-DNA adducts by molecular dosimetry suggested that these adducts are useful markers of exposure. 15 For instance, a prospective study of more
than 18,000 men in Shanghai, China, demonstrated a significant increase in risk [relative risk (RR) = 3.4] for liver cancer in individuals in whom urinary aflatoxin-DNA
adducts were detected.23
Striking species differences exist in the oncogenic mutations involving AFB 1. For example, a considerable amount of evidence shows that dietary AFB 1 exposure can
produce codon 249 (AGG to AGT) p53 tumor suppressor gene mutations during human liver carcinogenesis. 27 In rat liver tumors, however, codon 12 of K- ras appears
to be the “hot spot” for AFB 1-induced mutations.28 In mice exposed to AFB1, preneoplastic lesions contained mutations in codon 61 of the Ha- ras gene, and in vitro
studies show that metabolically activated AFB 1 in humans is capable of mutating this prooncogene to its oncogenic form, although no such mutations have been
reported in vivo.26 Thus, although these mutations are clearly associated with exposure, their significance in terms of mechanistic involvement in tumorigenesis needs
further elucidation. 29
Elimination of exposure to aflatoxins is not possible given the ubiquitous nature of the molds that produce them. Primary prevention methods have included
developing aflatoxin-resistant plants, building better storage facilities for grains, and establishing regulatory and testing programs around the world. 23
Fumonisins and Ochratoxin A
Of the six fumonisins identified, fumonisin B 1 has been shown to be carcinogenic in rats and mice at high doses, primarily targeting the liver and kidneys. It also has
been linked in ecologic studies to esophageal cancer in humans in high corn-consuming regions of China and Africa where high levels of contamination are
documented, but no convincing evidence of causality has been presented to date. 30
Fumonisins, which are produced by Fusarium moniliforme, do not appear to be genotoxic, but they may induce cancer through disturbing the signal transduction
pathways.21 As with other dietary carcinogens, difficulties exist with available technologies for assessing exposure, and the search for biomarkers is a rapidly growing
area of research. Fumonisins in urine and altered sphingolipid metabolism (sphinganine-sphingosine ratio) in urine and blood are two potential markers currently
under investigation. 30,31 The co-occurrence of fumonisins and aflatoxins in corn-based foods has been demonstrated and a synergistic effect postulated. 30
Ochratoxins are produced by Aspergillus ochraceus and related species. Ochratoxin A (OA) has induced renal adenomas and kidney cancers in mice and rats.
Carcinogenic effects in humans are suspected based on findings of high levels of OA in the blood of patients with Balkan endemic nephropathy, who also have a high
incidence of varied carcinomas. 21 The search for DNA adducts as biomarkers of OA also is ongoing. 21 The relative lack of information on fumonisins, ochratoxins, and
other mycotoxins compared with aflatoxins does not mean that their public health risk is necessarily less. Rather, it indicates that more investigation of these
mycotoxins is needed.

PRODUCTS OF FOOD PREPARATION AND PROCESSING
Food preparation and preservation are major sources of dietary carcinogens, including heterocyclic aromatic amines (HAA), formed during frying, broiling, and grilling
high-protein foods and more prevalent in well-done meats; polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), formed during broiling and smoking food; and
N-nitrosocompounds (NOC), formed in smoked, salted, and pickled foods cured with nitrate or nitrite. 32,33 NOCs are also formed endogenously at sites such as the
stomach from nitrites and amines in the diet. 34 Table 23.5-2 lists common carcinogens produced during food preparation and related food sources and cooking
methods. Although human risk from these compounds is not always well understood, it may be prudent to minimize exposure by modifying meat cooking methods and
eating fewer foods containing NOCs.

TABLE 23.5-2. Dietary Carcinogens Produced During Food Preparation: Sources and Cooking Methods

HETEROCYCLIC AROMATIC AMINES
HAAs are potent mutagens and animal carcinogens, causing cancers of the liver, colon, mammary gland, skin, Zymbal gland, large intestine, prostate, lymphoid

tissues, oral cavity, lung, and clitoral gland in rodent models. 35,36 Approximately 20 HAAs have been isolated 33; the major subclass found in the human diet comprises
the aminoimidazoazaarenes (AIA). Four of these are possibly carcinogenic to humans, including 2-amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5- f]quinoline (IQ);
2-amino-3,4-dimethylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoline (MeIQ); 2-amino-3,8-dimethylimidazo[4,5- f]quinoxaline (8-MeIQx); and 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5- b]pyridine
(PhIP).33,37 However, the etiologic role of HAAs in human cancer is unclear, in part because of a lack of information on the effect of typical cooking methods and
degree of doneness on concentrations of HAAs as well as on variation in exposure. 38,39 and 40
Animal studies have demonstrated formation of HAA-DNA adducts in numerous tissues, and a review reports that all of the AIAs studied adduct to the guanine base,
with the major adduct being formed at the C8 atom of guanine. Two AIAs, IQ and MeIQx, also form minor adducts at the N 2 position of guanine. 35 Studies of animal
tumors have begun to relate AIA-DNA adduct-induced mutagenic events with the mutations found in critical genes associated with oncogenesis, and AIA-DNA adduct
levels in target tissues are strongly related to tumor incidence. 35 Dietary fat also has been implicated as a promotional factor in HAA-related carcinogenesis in animal
studies, but the data remain difficult to interpret. 41,42
Although HAA-DNA adducts can be useful biomarkers, their detection in humans has proved difficult. Some adducts have been documented, however. 35 For example,
one report indicates that MeIQx forms DNA adducts in the human colon at a low dose and that the human colon may be more sensitive to MeIQx than the colon of
mice or rats.43 In addition, using accelerator mass spectrometry, it has been possible to detect AIA-DNA adducts in tissues after dosing animals with amounts
equivalent to human dietary exposures. Such studies confirm that AIAs are potentially genotoxic and carcinogenic at specific target sites at doses derived from the
human diet. 35
Metabolic activation is necessary to the formation of HAA-DNA adducts in animals and humans and is critical to the mutagenicity and carcinogenicity of HAAs. 4,35 The
metabolic activation of HAAs varies among species, but activation in humans appears to occur via N-oxidation to form N-hydroxy metabolites followed by
O-acetylation to form N-acetoxy arylamines that bind to DNA. These steps are catalyzed by cytochrome P-450A2 and N-acetyltransferase-2 (NAT-2), respectively. 39,44
There is wide interindividual variation in the capacity of human tissues to activate HAAs, and polymorphisms of related enzymes in humans have been investigated for
potential relationship to cancer risk. In some studies, but not in others, individuals who were both rapid N-oxidizers and rapid acetylators had a greater risk of colon
cancer than those who were both slow N-oxidizers and slow acetylators. 4,45,46 and 47 In one study, rapid acetylators had an increased risk only with a high intake of
meat.41 Some data suggest that variations in susceptibility to pancreatic and prostate cancer also are associated with genetic differences of carcinogen-metabolizing
enzymes, although these areas require further investigation. 48,49 In breast cancer, differential susceptibility in rapid versus slow acetylators has been found in some
studies, but not in others. 50,51,52 and 53
Urinary excretion of cooking-associated HAAs and their metabolites is being investigated as a possible biomarker of human exposure, and studies have shown
measurable excretion of MeIQx and its metabolites after consumption of proteins cooked at high temperatures. 15,54 Although researchers found a dose-response
relationship between the bacon intake of African American, white, and Asian American men and MeIQx excretion, 55 no such relationship was seen in the same group
of men for consumption of any type of cooked meat and PhIP.54
POLYCYCLIC AROMATIC HYDROCARBONS
PAHs, several of which have been found to be carcinogenic in animal studies, have a widespread distribution throughout the environment, both as a by-product of
cooking meats over an open flame and as a contaminant in animal and human foods. 56,57 However, available exposure and carcinogenicity data are insufficient to
allow a reliable estimate of dietary PAH risk for humans at this time.
It is clear that fat dripping onto the coals and the subsequent deposition of PAHs that rise with smoke onto the meat contribute significantly to PAH exposure. 15
Benzo(a)pyrene, the most carcinogenic PAH, has been reported at levels of up to 50 µg/kg in charbroiled steaks and ground beef, five times greater than levels in
some less fatty pork cuts and chicken. 58
In addition, several studies have demonstrated a consistent association between recent consumption of charbroiled foods and increased PAH-DNA adduct
concentrations in peripheral white blood cells and excretion of 1-hydroxypyrene in urine. 15,59,60 One review suggests a correlation between PAH-DNA adducts and ras
oncogene mutations. 61 Some evidence points to an antioxidant response element playing a significant role in PAH carcinogenesis. 62 It also has been suggested that
the hGSTP1 gene, which has been shown to be polymorphic in humans, may be an important factor in differential susceptibility to PAH-related cancers, although
study conclusions differ. The chemical composition of the PAH mixtures to which humans are exposed can include cigarette smoke and industrial emissions as well as
dietary sources, and differences in mixtures may affect the involvement of the hGSTP1 gene.63
N-NITROSOCOMPOUNDS
NOCs administered orally in animals, including nonhuman primates, consistently elicit carcinogenic responses. 64 These compounds also may be a significant risk
factor for human cancers of the stomach, esophagus, colon and rectum, nasopharynx, urinary bladder, and liver. 22,65,66 One review found that, although the
epidemiologic evidence overall remains inconclusive, an association between NOCs and human cancer cannot be ruled out. The author postulated that inadequate
available data may be obscuring a small to moderate carcinogenic effect of NOCs. 34
The formation of endogenous NOCs may be inhibited by naturally occurring compounds in foods, such as ascorbic acid, tocopherols, retinoids, phenolic compounds,
sulfhydryl compounds, tea, orange peel, and certain fruits and vegetables. 67 This may in part explain the generally protective effect of vegetables and fruits
consistently observed in epidemiologic studies. 68,69

SYNTHETIC CARCINOGENS IN THE DIET
Animals and humans also are exposed to a variety of synthetic chemicals in their foods from food additives. Direct (intentional) synthetic additives include
antioxidants, colorants, flavor ingredients, artificial sweeteners, solvents, and humectants. Regulation of synthetic or natural chemicals intentionally added to food has
led to extensive data on exposure. Indirect (unintentional) synthetic additives include pesticides, solvents, and packaging-derived chemicals. These chemicals, which
number more than 2000, enter the food supply during production, processing, packaging, and storage from a variety of sources. Very little data exist on exposure to
these chemicals. Pesticides are of major concern to the public and regulatory agencies compared with other indirect food additives. Most, if not all, pesticides have
possible human toxicity, including carcinogenic potential. In general, levels encountered are below allowable tolerances, although actual estimates of risk are
problematic. 16 Packaging materials, including vinyl chloride, and several phthalate esters used as plasticizers have gained attention from researchers as another
possible unintentional addition to packaged foods with potential risks to human health.
Synthetic chemical contamination of water has been another concern, principally focused on trihalomethanes, which are disinfection by-products, in public water
supplies and pesticides in well water. 70,71 and 72
The National Research Council classifies synthetic chemicals as genotoxic, which directly affect DNA, form DNA adducts, and increase cancer risk, and
nongenotoxic, which do not directly affect DNA, but which may affect carcinogenesis through other posited mechanisms. 16 Some synthetic chemicals can exhibit both
genotoxic and nongenotoxic activity.
The metabolic pathways involved in the biotransformation of both synthetic and naturally occurring chemicals are similar, and evidence to date suggests that the
processes of carcinogenesis also are similar, if not identical. Not surprisingly, the difficulties that complicate risk prediction for naturally occurring dietary carcinogens
also apply to the synthetic carcinogens. 16

FUTURE RESEARCH NEEDS
It is clear from human epidemiologic data that diet contributes to an appreciable portion of cancer; however, continuing research is needed for better identification of

the risk to humans from specific carcinogens in the diet. Although we have begun to understand some of the key factors affecting risk estimation for some of the
phytochemicals in plant foods, both naturally occurring and synthetic chemicals are numerous and diverse. The National Research Council suggests that new
concepts and methods must be developed and extensive research conducted before results obtained in various model systems can be extrapolated with greater
reliability to humans. 16
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Lindsay DG. Dietary contribution to genotoxic risk and its control. Food Chem Toxicol 1996;34:423.
2. Scheuplein RJ. Perspectives on toxicological riskan example: foodborne carcinogenic risk. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 1992;32:105.
3. Ames BN, Gold LS. Dietary carcinogens, environmental pollution, and cancer: some misconceptions. Med Oncol Tumor Pharmacother 1990;7:69.
4. Vineis P. Biomarkers, low-dose carcinogenesis and dietary exposures. Eur J Cancer Prev 1997;6:147.
5. Egan KM, Giovannucci E. Dietary mutagens and the risk of breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1687.
6. Omer RE, Bakker MI, van't Veer P, et al. Aflatoxin and liver cancer in Sudan. Nutr Cancer 1998;32:174.
7. Abbott PJ. Carcinogenic chemicals in food: evaluating the health risk. Food Chem Toxicol 1992;30:327.
8. Ames BN, Gold LS. Animal cancer tests and cancer prevention. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1992;12:125.
9. Eder E. Intraindividual variations of DNA adduct levels in humans. Mutat Res 1999;424:249.
10. Otteneder M, Lutz WK. Correlation of DNA adduct levels with tumor incidence: carcinogenic potency of DNA adducts. Mutat Res 1999;424:237.
11. Hirvonen A. Polymorphisms of xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes and susceptibility to cancer. Environ Health Perspect 1999;107:37.
12. Sinha R, Caporaso N. Diet, genetic susceptibility and human cancer etiology. J Nutr 1999;129:556S.
13. Lai C, Shields PG. The role of interindividual variation in human carcinogenesis. J Nutr 1999;129:552S.
14. Lunn RM, Langlois RG, Hsieh LL, et al. XRCC1 polymorphisms: effects on aflatoxin B 1-DNA adducts and glycophorin A variant frequency. Cancer Res 1999;59:2557.
15. Strickland PT, Groopman JD. Biomarkers for assessing environmental exposure to carcinogens in the diet. Am J Clin Nutr 1995;61:710S.
16. Committee on Comparative Toxicity of Naturally Occurring Carcinogens, Board on Environmental Studies and Toxicology, Commission on Life Sciences, National Research Council.
Carcinogens and anticarcinogens in the human diet. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1996.
17. Lake BG. Coumarin metabolism, toxicity and carcinogenicity: relevance for human risk assessment. Food Chem Toxicol 1999;37:423.
18. Bollard M, Stribbling S, Mitchell S, Caldwell J. The disposition of allyl isothiocyanate in the rat and mouse. Food Chem Toxicol 1997;35:933.
19. FitzGerald BE, Shank RC. Methylation status of DNA cytosine during the course of induction of liver cancer in hamsters by hydrazine sulfate. Carcinogenesis 1996;17:2703.
20. Manteiga R, Park DL, Ali SS. Risks associated with consumption of herbal teas. Rev Environ Contam Toxicol 1997;150:1.
21. Wang JS, Groopman JD. DNA damage by mycotoxins. Mutat Res 1999;424:167.
22. International Agency for Research on Cancer Working Group. IARC monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans, vol. 56. Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on
Cancer, 1993.
23. Groopman JD, Scholl P, Wang JS. Epidemiology of human aflatoxin exposures and their relationship to liver cancer. Prog Clin Biol Res 1996;395:211.
24. Wang LY, Hatch M, Chen CJ, et al. Aflatoxin exposure and risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in Taiwan. Int J Cancer 1996;67:620.
25. Gonzalez FJ. Genetic polymorphism and cancer susceptibility: fourteenth Sapporo Cancer Seminar. Cancer Res 1995;55:710.
26. Riley J, Mandel HG, Sinha S, et al. In vitro activation of the human Harvey- ras proto-oncogene by aflatoxin B 1. Carcinogenesis 1997;18:905.
27. Hussain SP, Harris CC. Molecular epidemiology of human cancer. Toxicol Lett 1998;102/103:219.
28. Donnelly PJ, Devereux TR, Foley JF, et al. Activation of K- ras in aflatoxin B 1-induced lung tumors from AC3F1 (A/JxC3H/HeJ) mice. Carcinogenesis 1996;17:1735.
29. Stanley LA, Mandel HG, Riley J, et al. Mutations associated with in vivo aflatoxin B 1-induced carcinogenesis need not be present in the in vitro transformations by this toxin. Cancer Lett
1999;137:173.
30. Turner PC, Nikiema P, Wild CP. Fumonisin contamination of food: progress in development of biomarkers to better assess human health risks. Mutat Res 1999;443:81.
31. Wang E, Riley RT, Meredith FI, Merrill AH Jr. Fumonisin B 1 consumption by rats causes reversible, dose-dependent increases in urinary sphinganine and sphingosine. J Nutr 1999; 129:214.
32. Zheng W, Gustafson DR, Sinha R, et al. Well-done meat intake and the risk of breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1724.
33. Skog KI, Johansson MAE, Jagerstad MI. Carcinogenic heterocyclic amines in model systems and cooked foods: a review on formation, occurrence and intake. Food Chem Toxicol 1998;36:879.
34. Eichholzer M, Gutzwiller F. Dietary nitrates, nitrites, and n-nitroso compounds and cancer risk: a review of the epidemiologic evidence. Nutr Rev 1998;56:95.
35. Schut HAJ, Snyderwine EG. DNA adducts of heterocyclic amine food mutagens: implications for mutagenesis and carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis 1999;20:353.
36. Shirai T, Sano M, Tamano S, et al. The prostate: a target for carcinogenicity of 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5- b]pyridine (PhIP) derived from cooked foods. Cancer Res 1997;57:195.
37. De Stefani E, Ronco A, Mendilaharsu M, et al. Meat intake, heterocyclic amines, and risk of breast cancer: a case-control study in Uruguay. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1997; 6:573.
38. Augustsson K, Skog K, Jägerstad M, et al. Dietary heterocyclic amines and cancer of the colon, rectum, bladder, and kidney: a population-based study. Lancet 1999;353:703.
39. Adamson RH, Thorgeirsson UP, Sugimura T. Extrapolation of heterocyclic amine carcinogenesis data from rodents and nonhuman primates to humans. Arch Toxicol Suppl 1996;18:303.
40. Byrne C, Sinha R, Platz EA, et al. Predictors of dietary heterocyclic amine intake in three prospective cohorts. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1998;7:523.
41. Roberts-Thomson SJ, Snyderwine EG. Effect of dietary fat on codon 12 and 13 Ha- ras gene mutations in 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo-[4,5- b]pyridine-induced rat mammary gland
tumors. Mol Carcinog 1997;20:348.
42. Pence BC, Landers M, Dunn DM, et al. Feeding of a well-cooked beef diet containing a high heterocyclic amine content enhances colon and stomach carcinogenesis in
1,2-dimethylhydrazine-treated rats. Nutr Cancer 1998;30:220.
43. Mauthe RJ, Dingley KH, Leveson SH, et al. Comparison of DNA-adduct and tissue-available dose levels of MeIQx in human and rodent colon following administration of a very low dose. Int J
Cancer 1999;80:539.
44. Lang NP, Butler MA, Massengill J, et al. Rapid metabolic phenotypes for acetyltransferase and cytochrome P4501A2 and putative exposure to food-borne heterocyclic amines increase the risk
for colorectal cancer or polyps. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1994;3:675.
45. Kampman E, Slattery ML, Bigler J, et al. Meat consumption, genetic susceptibility, and colon cancer risk: a United States multicenter case-control study. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1999;8:15.
46. Hubbard AL, Moyes C, Wyllie AH, et al. N-acetyl transferase 1: two polymorphisms in coding sequence identified in colorectal cancer patients. Br J Cancer 1998;77:913.
47. Rafter J, Glinghammar B. Interactions between the environment and genes in the colon. Eur J Cancer Prev 1998;7:S69.
48. Bartsch H, Malaveille C, Lowenfels AB, et al. Genetic polymorphism of N-acetyltransferases, glutathione S-transferase M1 and NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase in relation to malignant and
benign pancreatic disease risk. Eur J Cancer Prev 1998;7:215.
49. Fukutome K, Watanabe M, Shiraishi T, et al. N-acetyltransferase 1 genetic polymorphism influences the risk of prostate cancer development. Cancer Lett 1999;136:83.
50. Stone EM, Williams JA, Grover PL, et al. Interindividual variation in the metabolic activation of heterocyclic amines and their N-hydroxy derivatives in primary cultures of human mammary
epithelial cells. Carcinogenesis 1998;19:873.
51. Gertig DM, Hankinson SE, Hough H, et al. N-acetyl transferase 2 genotypes, meat intake and breast cancer risk. Int J Cancer 1999;80:13.
52. Huang CS, Chern HD, Shen CY, et al. Association between N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) genetic polymorphism and development of breast cancer in post-menopausal Chinese women in
Taiwan, an area of great increase in breast cancer incidence. Int J Cancer 1999;82:175.
53. Dubuisson JG, Gaubatz JW. Bioactivation of the proximal food mutagen 2-hydroxyamino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5- b]pyridine (N-OH-PhIP) to DNA-binding species by human mammary
gland enzymes. Nutrition 1998;14:683.
54. Kidd LCR, Stillwell WG, Yu MC, et al. Urinary excretion of 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5- b]pyridine (PhIP) in white, African-American, and Asian-American men in Los Angeles County.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1999;8:439.
55. Ji H, Yu MC, Stillwell WG, et al. Urinary excretion of 2-amino-3,8-dimethylimidazo[4,5- f]quinoxaline in white, black, and Asian men in Los Angeles County. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1994;3:407.
56. Dipple A, Peltonen K, Cheng SC, et al. Chemical and mutagenic specificities of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon carcinogens. Adv Exp Med Biol 1994;354:101.
57. Schoket B. DNA damage in humans exposed to environmental and dietary polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Mutat Res 1999;424:143.
58. Lijinsky W. The formation and occurrence of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons associated with food. Mutat Res 1991;259:251.
59. Dingley KH, Curtis KD, Nowell S, et al. DNA and protein adduct formation in the colon and blood of humans after exposure to a dietary-relevant dose of
2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5- b]pyridine. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1999;8:507.
60. Rothman N, Correa-Villaseñor A, Ford DP, et al. Contribution of occupation and diet to white blood cell polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-DNA adducts in wildland firefighters. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 1993;2:341.
61. Ross JA, Nesnow S. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons: correlations between DNA adducts and ras oncogene mutations. Mutat Res 1999;424:155.
62. Burczynski ME, Lin HK, Penning TM. Isoform-specific induction of a human aldo-keto reductase by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), electrophiles, and oxidative stress: implications for
the alternative pathway of PAH activation catalyzed by human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase. Cancer Res 1999;59:607.
63. Hu X, Xia H, Srivastava SK, et al. Catalytic efficiencies of allelic variants of human glutathione S-transferase P1-1 toward carcinogenic anti-diol epoxides of benzo[c]phenanthrene and
benzo[g]chrysene. Cancer Res 1998;58:5340.
64. Thorgeirsson UP, Dalgard DW, Reeves J, Adamson RH. Tumor incidence in a chemical carcinogenesis study of nonhuman primates. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 1994;19:130.
65. Knekt P, Jarvinen R, Hakulinen T. Risk of colorectal and other gastro-intestinal cancers after exposure to nitrate, nitrite and N-nitroso compounds: a follow-up study. Int J Cancer 1999;80:852.
66. De Stefani E, Boffetta P, Mendilaharsu M, et al. Dietary nitrosamines, heterocyclic amines, and risk of gastric cancer: a case-control study in Uruguay. Nutr Cancer 1998;30:158.
67. Xu GP, Song PJ, Reed PI. Effects of fruit juices, processed vegetable juice, orange peel and green tea on endogenous formation of N-nitrosoproline in subjects from a high-risk area for gastric
cancer in Moping County, China. Eur J Cancer Prev 1993;2:327.
68. Steinmetz KA, Potter JD. Vegetables, fruit, and cancer prevention: a review. J Am Diet Assoc 1996;96:1027.
69. World Cancer Research Fund. Food, nutrition and the prevention of cancer: a global perspective. Washington, DC: American Institute for Cancer Research, 1997.
70. Paulu C, Aschengrau A, Ozonoff D. Tetrochloroethylene-contaminated drinking water in Massachusetts and the risk of colon-rectum, lung, and other cancers. Environ Health Perspect
1999;107:265.
71. Boorman GA, Dellarco V, Dunnick JK, et al. Drinking water disinfection byproducts: review and approach to toxicity evaluation. Environ Health Perspect 1999;107:207.
72. Cantor KP. Drinking water and cancer. Cancer Causes Control 1997;8:292.
73. Wagstaff DJ. Dietary exposure to furocoumarins. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 1991;14:261.
74. Tricker AR, Preussmann R. Carcinogenic N-nitrosamines in the diet: occurrence, formation, mechanisms and carcinogenic potential. Mutat Res 1991;259:277.
75. Stavric B. An update on research with coffee/caffeine (19891990). Food Chem Toxicol 1992;30:533.

SECTION 23.6 Aspirin and Other Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs and the Risk of Cancer Development
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 23.6
Aspirin and Other Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs and the Risk of Cancer Development
MICHAEL J. THUN
CHARLES H. HENNEKENS
Introduction
Pharmacology and Toxicity of Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs
Historical Evolution of the Hypothesis That Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs Inhibit Cancer
Eicosanoids in Human Tumors
Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs and Chemically Induced Cancer in Rodents
Uncontrolled Clinical Studies of Sulindac in Patients with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
Epidemiologic Studies of Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs in the General Population
Completed and Ongoing Randomized Trials
Studies of Mechanism
Cellular Mediators of Tumor Inhibition
Enhanced Apoptosis
Inhibition of Angiogenesis
Effects on Metastasis
Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs and Cancers Other than Colorectal Cancer
Dose and Duration Issues in Chemoprevention
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Since the late 1970s, researchers have been interested in whether regular ingestion of aspirin or other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can decrease
the risk of cancer, especially colorectal cancer. 1 This hypothesis was stimulated by basic research 2,3,4 and 5 and uncontrolled clinical observations 6 beginning in the
mid-1970s. Further support derives from numerous observational epidemiologic studies 7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33 and 34 and mechanistic
insights in the 1990s, and from several randomized clinical trials showing that the aspirin-like prodrug sulindac 35,36,37 and 38 and the novel selective cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2) inhibitor celecoxib 39 suppress adenomatous polyps among patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). More recent data indicate that NSAIDs
increase apoptosis, 40,41,42 and 43 inhibit angiogenesis, 44,45 and reduce metastasis in various experimental models of carcinogenesis. 46,47
No randomized trials have been completed to test whether aspirin or other NSAIDs inhibit colorectal cancer. The Physician's Health Study, a randomized trial of
aspirin designed to evaluate the primary prevention of cardiovascular end points, 48 found no reduction in colorectal cancer among male physicians randomized to 325
mg aspirin or placebo every other day for 5 years and followed for 12 years. 49 However, the short duration and low dose of randomized treatment limit the
interpretability of this finding. At least five ongoing randomized clinical trials are testing whether nonselective NSAIDs, such as aspirin and sulindac, or novel selective
inhibitors of inducible COX reduce the recurrence of adenomatous polyps among patients with previous sporadic polyps. Trials of intermediate end points in high-risk
populations have the advantage of decreasing the necessary sample size and duration of treatment but have the disadvantage of not directly measuring the effect of
NSAIDs on cancer.
This chapter reviews the experimental, clinical, epidemiologic, and randomized trial evidence relevant to NSAIDs and cancer, particularly colorectal cancer. We also
consider the limited evidence available on lowest effective dose, treatment criteria, and the balance of potential benefits to risk of prolonged NSAID treatment.
Although extensive evidence now indicates that NSAIDs inhibit neoplasia in several experimental settings and in the clinical context of FAP, we believe that aspirin
and other NSAIDs are presently promising but unproven candidates for the chemoprevention of colorectal and perhaps other cancers in high-risk populations.

PHARMACOLOGY AND TOXICITY OF NONSTEROIDAL ANTIINFLAMMATORY DRUGS
NSAIDs are a chemically diverse group of drugs effective in the relief of pain, inflammation, and fever. 50 The analgesic, antiinflammatory, and antipyretic properties of
salicylate in willow bark and other plant extracts were recognized in ancient Egypt and Greece. 51 NSAIDs also have dose-related toxicity to the gastrointestinal (GI)
tract and kidney. The chemist Felix Hoffman was reportedly motivated to synthesize aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) from sodium salicylate in the late nineteenth century
because of the GI toxicity experienced by his father during treatment with salicylate for arthritis. 52 NSAIDs can also affect hemostasis, reproduction, childbirth, and
asthma.50 Efforts to minimize stomach irritation and to prolong the half-life of these drugs have motivated the development of many new NSAIDs in addition to
aspirin. 53 Nonselective NSAIDs, such as ibuprofen, indomethacin, naproxen, piroxicam, and sulindac, now compete with novel, selective COX inhibitors that are
reputed to lack major GI toxicity. 54
The common pharmacologic action of NSAIDs is to inhibit COX, the initial and rate-limiting enzymatic step in the metabolism of arachidonic acid into a complex group
of signaling proteins termed prostaglandins.55,56 and 57 Arachidonic acid derives from meat or linoleic acid in the diet. It is normally tightly bound to cell membranes until
being hydrolyzed by phospholipases as free arachidonic acid (arachidonate). Arachidonate can then be metabolized through COX pathways into prostaglandins and
thromboxane; through lipoxygenase into leukotrienes and other lipid mediators; or by nonenzymatic pathways. Metabolites of arachidonic acid are called eicosanoids.
Prostaglandins and their derivatives modulate many functions within cells (autocrine) or across neighboring tissues (paracrine). 58 They differ from systemic hormones
in that they are produced and destroyed almost instantaneously. Most tissues produce only a few prostaglandins in abundance. The function of the same
prostaglandin may differ in different organs. Thromboxane-A 2 (TXA2) produced by platelets enhances platelet aggregation, clot formation, and hemostasis;
prostacyclin (prostaglandin I 2) from vascular endothelial cells enhances vasodilatation and prevents the aggregation of platelets. Prostaglandin E 2 (PGE2) is a potent
vasodilator in most vascular beds and also relaxes tracheobronchial and uterine muscle and protects gastric epithelium from acid. Prostaglandin G and prostaglandin
D contract smooth muscle and modulate renal blood flow and sodium and water retention by the kidney. 58
The diverse homeostatic and reactive functions of prostaglandins have prompted pharmacologists to seek drug and treatment regimens that improve NSAID
specificity. One such strategy is to use low-dose aspirin (40 to 100 mg daily) to inhibit COX activity and TXA 2 production by platelets as they pass through the
enterohepatic circulation. 59 Aspirin is the only NSAID that covalently acetylates and permanently inhibits COX. Platelets lack a nucleus and cannot synthesize new
enzyme during their 7- to 10-day lifespan. At antiplatelet doses, virtually all of the absorbed aspirin is metabolized by the liver and does not reach the systemic
circulation.
A second strategy is to develop new NSAIDs that selectively target a single isoform of the COX enzyme. 53 Until 1991, only one isoform of COX was recognized. Then
a second isoform was identified 57 that increased in many tissues during inflammation, wound healing, and neoplasia. 60,61,62,63 and 64 These isoforms were named COX-1
and COX-2, reflecting the sequence with which their structure was characterized by x-ray crystallography. The original enzyme, COX-1, 65 is expressed constitutively
in most tissues of the body. It plays a central role in gastric cytoprotection and platelet aggregation and contributes to vascular dilatation, renal sodium and water
balance, and other homeostatic functions. 66 The second isoform, COX-2, 67 has substantial sequence homology with COX-1 68 but is encoded by a different gene.
COX-2 is not expressed under basal conditions in many tissues, but is up-regulated by inflammatory cytokines, growth factors, tumor promoters, and other physiologic
stimuli. 54,69
The paradigm that COX-2 is merely a “bad” enzyme that causes inflammatory and neoplastic processes, whereas COX-1 is a “good” enzyme essential for
homeostasis now appears to be oversimplified. 54 COX-2 is expressed constitutively in the brain and kidney. It is known to be essential in ovulation and fertilization
and implantation of the embryo, and it has as yet poorly understood homeostatic functions in the kidney, brain, cartilage, and bone. 66 The main distinction between
the COX isoforms is that COX-1 is expressed constitutively in most tissues, whereas COX-2 is more often induced on demand. 66

Most conventional NSAIDs inhibit both COX-1 and COX-2 with variable potency. 61,62 Aspirin is a relatively selective COX-1 inhibitor, except at antiinflammatory doses
of 1 g/d or more. Novel selective COX-2 inhibitors have been introduced that cause GI symptoms but are thought not to cause serious GI ulceration. 70,71 Prototypes of
these, such as celecoxib (SC-58635) and rofecoxib, are considerably more expensive than conventional NSAIDs. These drugs are proving informative in mechanistic
studies to identify the enzymatic target(s) by which NSAIDs inhibit carcinogenesis in experimental models.

HISTORICAL EVOLUTION OF THE HYPOTHESIS THAT NONSTEROIDAL ANTIINFLAMMATORY DRUGS INHIBIT CANCER
EICOSANOIDS IN HUMAN TUMORS
The hypothesis that certain cancers might overproduce specific prostaglandins and thereby promote their own growth arose in the mid-1970s when Bennett and
colleagues 3,4 observed higher concentrations of PGE 2 in some human colorectal carcinomas than in surrounding normal mucosa. Subsequent studies confirmed that
certain human colon cancer cell lines 72 and tumor tissues2,56,73 overproduce PGE2. The idea that tumor prostaglandins might accelerate the growth and invasion of the
cancer was further supported by the observation of Narisawa et al. 74 that PGE2 in venous blood draining human colorectal carcinomas is higher in vivo when the
cancers are large and locally invasive.
NONSTEROIDAL ANTIINFLAMMATORY DRUGS AND CHEMICALLY INDUCED CANCER IN RODENTS
Extensive experimental evidence confirms that many NSAIDs suppress tumor development in animal models and cell culture. More than 40 experiments in rodents
show that aspirin, other nonaspirin NSAIDs, and selective COX-2 inhibitors suppress intestinal tumorigenesis in rats and mice exposed to chemical carcinogens. 39,47
Colorectal cancers produced in these rodent experiments 75,76,77,78,79,80,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90,91,92,93,94,95,96,97,98,99,100,101,102,103,104,105,106 and 107 resemble human cancer,
except for a lower tendency to metastasize.108 Tumor inhibition is greatest when NSAID treatment is begun before exposure to the carcinogen and continued without
interruption throughout the experiment.
UNCONTROLLED CLINICAL STUDIES OF SULINDAC IN PATIENTS WITH FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS
The early rodent experiments prompted Waddell and Loughry 6 to test whether the prodrug sulindac inhibits adenomatous polyps in the rare hereditary condition of
FAP. Adenomatous polyps are the precursor to most human colorectal cancers. Patients with FAP inherit a germline mutation inactivating one allele of the
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Loss of the remaining functional APC allele results in hundreds to thousands of adenomatous polyps by the second or third
decade of life. Patients who do not undergo prophylactic colectomy almost invariably develop colorectal cancer by the age of 40 to 50 years. 109,110 FAP patients who
have undergone total colectomy still have increased risk of adenomatous polyps; cancer of the rectal stump and small intestine; and nonmalignant, primitive desmoid
tumors.
In FAP, sulindac reduces the number and size of new polyps and even causes existing polyps to regress. This finding has been reported in thirteen case studies 1 and
in three small randomized crossover trials. 35,37,38 Sulindac also suppresses the formation of desmoid tumors in these reports. However, sulindac does not prevent all
polyp growth in FAP patients, just as conventional NSAIDs do not inhibit all chemically induced colorectal cancer in the rodent model. Some polyps may grow during
treatment 111 or be transformed into carcinoma.112,113 Most adenomatous polyps typically increase in number and size after sulindac is discontinued.
EPIDEMIOLOGIC STUDIES OF NONSTEROIDAL ANTIINFLAMMATORY DRUGS IN THE GENERAL POPULATION
At least 25 observational epidemiologic studies have compared people who regularly use aspirin or other NSAIDs to those who do not with respect to colorectal
cancer7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33 and 34 (Table 23.6-1 and Table 23.6-2) or colorectal adenomatous polyps. 16,18,23,31,32,33 and 34,114 All but one of
the published studies finds 30% to 50% lower incidence or mortality rates from colorectal cancer ( Fig. 23.6-1) or lower incidence of adenomatous polyps (Fig. 23.6-2).
The consistency of these observational studies is striking, despite different researchers using varied study designs in different parts of the world. Interestingly, the
single observational study that did not find reduced risk of colorectal cancer or adenomatous polyps among aspirin users also did not find reduced risk of myocardial
infarction among the elderly subjects (median age of 70 years at enrollment) who reported taking one aspirin daily. 10,11

TABLE 23.6-1. Cohort Studies on the Use of Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs and the Risk for Colorectal Cancer in General Populations

TABLE 23.6-2. Case-Control Studies on the Use of Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) and the Risk for Colorectal Cancer in the General Population

FIGURE 23.6-1. Epidemiologic studies of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and colorectal cancer. A: Prospective cohort trials. B: Retrospective case-control trials.

FIGURE 23.6-2. Epidemiologic studies of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and adenomatous polyps.

Several observational studies report a dose-response gradient of decreasing risk of colorectal cancer or adenomatous polyps among individuals who report more
prolonged 18,26,30,115 or frequent 12,20,23,30,114 NSAID use. Factors that influence self-selection for or against NSAID use could, in principle, confound this observation.
Perhaps a more important limitation of the analyses by dose and duration is that none of the studies have simultaneously taken into account both aspirin and
nonaspirin NSAIDs, prescription and nonprescription medications, and changes in the frequency or dose of NSAID use over time. Two large prospective studies 18,115
and one case-control study 30 found the largest reductions in colorectal cancer in persons who have used aspirin for at least 10 or even 20 years. Another large
prospective study based on prescription drug records in the United Kingdom between 1994 and 1997 found reduced risk of colorectal cancer in patients prescribed at
least 300 mg aspirin daily compared to nonusers, but not among current users of less than 300 mg aspirin daily. 20 The U.K. study lacked information on long-term use
of aspirin or other NSAIDs. It is important to define the lowest effective dose and optimal duration, because the GI toxicity of NSAIDs increase with dose, and risk
accumulates with duration. The use of antiplatelet doses of aspirin (100 mg or less) to prevent cardiovascular events did not begin until the late 1980s and cannot yet
be evaluated with respect to colorectal cancer. However, even antiplatelet doses of aspirin (80 to 100 mg/d) causes some increase in GI 116 and intracerebral
bleeding,117 especially with prolonged treatment of large numbers of healthy people. If NSAIDs are proven to be effective in preventing colorectal cancer in the future,
it is likely that long-term prophylaxis could produce a net benefit only in persons with substantially increased risk of colorectal cancer, or because of a combination of
other factors that may affect individual risk and benefit. 118
COMPLETED AND ONGOING RANDOMIZED TRIALS
Several randomized clinical trials show that sulindac 35,36,37 and 38 and the novel selective COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib 39 reduce the number and size of adenomatous
polyps in FAP patients and causes existing polyps to regress. Only one randomized clinical trial of aspirin in the primary prevention of cardiovascular end points has
been sufficiently large to measure incidence or death rates from colorectal cancer, although the aspirin arm of this trial was terminated after 5 years. The Physicians'
Health Study showed no reduction in either invasive or in situ colorectal cancer incidence, nor a reduction in colorectal cancer mortality among 22,071 male
physicians randomized to 325 mg aspirin or placebo every other day for 5 years and followed for 12 years. 48 The short duration of randomized treatment and relatively
low dose of aspirin limit the interpretability of these results.
Several randomized clinical trials are now testing whether aspirin or other NSAIDs inhibit adenomatous polyps among patients with previous sporadic polyps or FAP.
Trials of intermediate end points in high-risk populations have the advantage of decreasing the necessary sample size and duration of treatment, but have the
disadvantage of not directly measuring the effect of NSAIDs on cancer.
STUDIES OF MECHANISM
Debate is ongoing over the mechanisms by which NSAIDs inhibit carcinogenesis in various experimental and clinical models. This debate is further complicated in
that NSAIDs may affect several stages in the adenoma-carcinoma sequence, perhaps by different mechanisms. Most evidence suggests that COX, particularly the
inducible COX-2 isoform, is probably the major enzymatic target by which NSAIDs inhibit cancer in various models. Effects mediated through COX could explain why
numerous NSAIDs with diverse chemical structures all inhibit COX activity and nearly all suppress colorectal carcinogenesis. There is also debate about which
cellular targets and functions may be most relevant to NSAID tumor inhibition in humans.
Studies Implicating Cyclooxygenase-2
Circumstantial evidence that the inducible isoform of COX contributes to colorectal neoplasia is that COX-2 is up-regulated as normal intestinal mucosa progresses to
invasive colorectal cancer in humans. 47 COX-2 protein and messenger RNA are undetectable in normal colonic mucosa, yet are present in approximately 40% of
human adenomatous polyps 119 and more than 80% of colorectal cancers. 119,120 and 121 COX-1, in contrast, is expressed at constant basal levels in all of these tissues.
COX-2 is expressed constitutively by at least one human colon cancer cell line (HT-116) and can be induced in four other human tumor cell lines by exogenous
agonists.122 COX-2 concentration in human colorectal carcinomas has been reported to increase with larger tumor size and deeper invasion, although not with
evidence of metastases. 123 In rodent models, COX-2 expression is up-regulated after exposure of rats to azoxymethane (AOM). 124 COX-2 is also expressed at an
early stage in APC min and APCD716 mice.125 Intestinal cells from murine models of FAP overproduce COX-2 and PGE 2, even in mucosa in which no adenomatous
polyps are visible. 126
Direct laboratory evidence that COX-2 affects colorectal cancer comes from genetic knockout studies that eliminate specific isoforms of COX in Min mice and from
selective drug inhibition in several rodent models. Min mice that have been genetically altered to lack COX-2 activity develop 70% to 80% fewer intestinal tumors than
do Min mice with normal activity of both isoforms. AOM-exposed rats treated with the selective COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib (1500 ppm) develop virtually no intestinal
tumors102 and 50% fewer aberrant crypt foci than those exposed to the chemical carcinogen alone. 127,128 Celecoxib also reduces the number and size of intestinal
tumors in Min129 and variant Apc–deficient mice, 130 and in mice implanted with human colon cancer transplants. 131
Studies Implicating Cyclooxygenase-1
More limited experimental and epidemiologic evidence suggests that COX-1 activity may also contribute to the development of colorectal and other cancers. 132
Homozygous inactivation of either COX-1 or COX-2 produces an equivalent 70% to 80% reduction in intestinal tumors compared to Min mice with both COX isoforms
intact.132 No experimental studies have tested selective COX-1 inhibitors in various rodent models of carcinogenesis. However, participants in several epidemiologic

studies who report taking 365 mg of aspirin daily experience fewer adenomatous polyps or colorectal cancers than those who do not take NSAIDs. 18,20 Aspirin is
predominantly a COX-1 inhibitor at this dosage. Epidemiologic studies cannot yet assess whether prolonged use of aspirin at doses of 100 mg or less is also
associated with reduced incidence of colorectal cancer or adenomatous polyps. Clinical studies report that people given low-dose aspirin (80 mg) for up to 3
months,133,134 or 325 mg daily for 60 days, 135 have lower concentrations of PGE 2 and PGF2a in rectal mucosa than were present in biopsy specimens taken before
aspirin administration. These studies are limited in interpretability, however, in that rectal epithelial specimens are likely to have been contaminated by platelets,
possibly accounting for the observed changes in eicosanoid levels.
Evidence for Noncyclooxygenase Mechanisms
Some research suggests that NSAIDs may inhibit neoplasia through pathways other than COX or that a mix of prostaglandin-independent and -dependent
mechanisms may exist.1 Sulindac sulfone, the sulfone metabolite of sulindac, is believed to have little inhibitory activity against COX, 136,137 yet high oral concentrations
(1000 and 2000 ppm in food) inhibit intestinal tumors 106,107 and aberrant crypt formation 138 in AOM-exposed rats, and inhibit chemically induced mammary cancer in
mice.139 In one of these studies, 107 no suppression was found in PGE 2 or the activity of COX, lipoxygenase, and phospholipase A 2. In other studies, supraphysiologic
concentrations of sulindac sulfone in cell culture inhibit the growth of human HT-29 tumor cells, 140 as well as other human cell lines that do not express COX or
produce prostaglandins. 41,141 NSAIDs also have been postulated to inhibit colorectal cancer by influencing nitric oxide metabolism 142 or binding with the peroxisome
proliferator–activated receptor d (PPAR d). 143 The latter is postulated to be a common target by which NSAIDs can mimic the effects of the APC gene and
down-regulate transcription. 143 The relevance of these mechanistic studies to human colorectal cancer remains uncertain.

CELLULAR MEDIATORS OF TUMOR INHIBITION
ENHANCED APOPTOSIS
Accumulating evidence suggests that loss of apoptosis (programmed cell death) contributes to the development of human colorectal cancer and that NSAID treatment
can restore normal apoptosis in several clinical and experimental settings. Apoptosis is impaired in adenomatous polyps from FAP patients, in sporadic colorectal
polyps,144 and in human intestinal epithelial cells altered to overexpress COX-2. 145 Normal apoptosis can be restored in FAP patients by a 3-month treatment with
sulindac. 40 Apoptosis can also be increased in cultured HT-29 human colon cancer cells by salicylate, 41 sulindac or sulindac sulfide, 146 and by other conventional
NSAIDs.146 NSAIDs increase apoptosis in rats exposed to chemical carcinogens 42 and in nontransformed rat intestinal epithelial cells altered to overexpress COX-2
constitutively. 145 Although the mechanisms by which NSAIDs affect apoptosis are unknown, Taketo 47 proposes that they may involve some critical interaction between
the induction of COX-2 and homozygous loss of function of the APC gene. Apoptosis can be induced in HT-29 human colorectal cancer cells that lack APC activity by
restoring APC function in these cells. 43
Additional evidence that apoptosis may be an important cellular mediator of the anticancer effects of NSAIDs is that the combination of NSAIDs and lovastatin is a
more potent stimulus for apoptosis, experimentally, than either agent alone. 147 Lovastatin is a cholesterol-reducing hepatic 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A
(HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitor. The combination of lovastatin and sulindac amplifies several-fold the stimulatory effect of sulindac alone on apoptosis in three human
colon cancer cell lines (HCT-116, SW 480, and LoVo) and in AOM-exposed rodents. 147 Agarwal et al.147 suggest that combining NSAIDs with an HMG-CoA reductase
inhibitor may increase the effectiveness of chemoprevention or allow the use of lower, less toxic doses of NSAID.
Furthermore, experimental evidence suggests that NSAIDs cause cell-cycle arrest and accumulation of cells in the G 0/G1 phase, potentially contributing to
enhancement of apoptosis. 41,146 Indomethacin has long been known to induce reversible cell-cycle arrest in the G 1 phase in cultured, transformed rat hepatoma and
nontransformed human fibroblast cells. 148,149 NSAIDs such as sulindac and sulindac sulfide also reduce the level and activity of several cyclin-dependent kinases that
regulate cell-cycle progression and induction of apoptotic cell death in human HT-29 colon cancer cells. 146 These effects on cell-cycle progression require
concentrations of salicylate between 1 and 5 mmol/L 41; thus, the extent to which these effects are relevant to human colon cancer remains unclear.
INHIBITION OF ANGIOGENESIS
Another cellular function by which NSAIDs may inhibit cancer involves the suppression of angiogenesis and neovascularization. 44,45 A selective COX-2 inhibitor
(NS-398) suppresses production of angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor, basic fibroblast growth factor, transforming growth factor-b,
platelet-derived growth factor, and endothelin-1 by human cultured colon cancer cells that express COX-2. COX-2 expression greatly increases the production of
angiogenic factors by these cells. In the same experiment, aspirin at concentrations thought to inhibit COX-1 selectively suppressed endothelial tube formation by
human umbilical endothelial cells exposed to these growth factors. The inhibitory effect of NSAIDs on angiogenesis may involve several mechanisms, such as a
COX-2 pathway that affects the production of angiogenic factors by tumor cells and a COX-1 pathway involving the endothelial cell response.
EFFECTS ON METASTASIS
Relatively little research has examined the effect of NSAIDs on cancer metastases, although this area of experimental research has been active. Also limited has
been research on the potential of aspirin or other NSAIDs as adjuvant therapy in treating cancers. A small randomized clinical trial found no improvement in the
survival of 66 patients with Duke's class B2 or C invasive colorectal cancer with aspirin treatment of 600 mg twice daily. 150

NONSTEROIDAL ANTIINFLAMMATORY DRUGS AND CANCERS OTHER THAN COLORECTAL CANCER
A few studies have examined the relationship between the use of aspirin and other NSAIDs and the digestive tract cancers other than that of the large intestine. Table
23.6-3 lists the studies pertaining to cancers of the esophagus and stomach. In the American Cancer Society study, aspirin use was inversely associated with fatal
cancers of the esophagus and stomach as well as colon and rectum, but not generally with fatal cancers outside the GI tract. 13 The limited evidence that NSAIDs may
inhibit cancers throughout the digestive tract is interesting in light of the common embryologic derivation of GI tissues 47 and observations that COX-2 is also
prominently expressed in cancers of the esophagus 151,152 and stomach.153,154

TABLE 23.6-3. Cohort Studies of Use of Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs and Risks for Esophageal and Gastric Cancers a

The results of nonrandomized studies relating breast cancer to NSAID use have been less consistent, with two case-control studies reporting some reduction in risk,
but other large prospective studies finding no association ( Fig. 23.6-3). Extensive evidence indicates that eicosanoids affect several aspects of carcinogenesis in
mouse models of mammary carcinoma155 and that both COX-1 and COX-2 are moderately up-regulated in some human breast tumors. 156 However, the current

evidence that NSAIDs may be useful in the prevention or treatment of breast cancer in humans is limited.

FIGURE 23.6-3. Epidemiologic studies of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and breast cancer. occ., occasional.

DOSE AND DURATION ISSUES IN CHEMOPREVENTION
Because the GI toxicity of NSAIDs is dose-dependent, at least two strategies have emerged for minimizing the toxicity of NSAID treatment while maintaining
therapeutic effectiveness. One has been the development of “designer” drugs, such as the novel selective COX-2 inhibitors that are thought to be less ulcerogenic
than conventional NSAIDs. A second approach, used effectively in preventing cardiovascular disease with aspirin, has been to identify a sufficiently low dose of
NSAID that is effective therapeutically yet has minimal GI toxicity. Antiplatelet doses not exceeding 100 mg aspirin daily have the largest absolute benefit in
populations at high risk of cardiovascular events, because the large, immediate reduction in cardiovascular risk far outweighs the small increase in GI bleeding that
occurs even with low-dose aspirin.
With respect to the chemoprevention of colon cancer, researchers have not yet identified the lowest effective dose or optimal NSAID treatment regimen. Resolving
these uncertainties becomes critically important when large numbers of people might consider taking a chemopreventive drug for several decades. In this context, the
balance of cumulative benefit to risk is highly susceptible to the lowest effective dose of the drug, the toxicity at this dosage, the probability of serious adverse effects
in a particular individual, 154 and the probability of the event being prevented. None of these clinical questions has yet been adequately answered with respect to
NSAIDs and colorectal or other cancers.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. International Agency for Research on Cancer. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. IARC Handbooks of Cancer Prevention, vol 1. Lyon, France: IARC Press, 1997.
2. Jaffe BM. Prostaglandins and cancer: an update. Prostaglandins 1974;6:453.
3. Bennett A, del Tacca M. Proceedings: prostaglandins in human colonic carcinoma. Gut 1975;16:409.
4. Bennett A, Tacca MD, Stamford IF, Zebro T. Prostaglandins from tumors of human large bowel. Br J Cancer 1977;35:881.
5. Bennett A, Civier A, Hensby CN, et al. Measurement of arachidonate and its metabolites extracted from human normal and malignant gastrointestinal tissues. Gut 1987;28:315.
6. Waddell WR, Loughry RW. Sulindac for polyposis of the colon. J Surg Oncol 1983;24:83.
7. Isomaki HA, Hakulinen T, Joutsenlahti U. Excess risk of lymphomas, leukemia and myeloma in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. J Chronic Dis 1978;31:691.
8. Gridley G, McLaughlin JK, Ekbom A. Incidence of cancer among patients with rheumatoid arthritis. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:307.
9. Paganini-Hill A, Chao A, Ross RK, Henderson BE. Aspirin use and chronic diseases: a cohort study of the elderly. BMJ 1989;299:1247.
10. Paganini-Hill A, Hsu G, Ross RK, Henderson BE. Aspirin use and incidence of large-bowel cancer in a California retirement community [Letter]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:1182.
11. Paganini-Hill A. s The Leisure World cohort revisited. Prev Med 1995;24:113.
12. Thun MJ, Namboodiri MM, Heath CW Jr. Aspirin use and reduced risk of fatal colon cancer. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1593.
13. Thun MJ, Namboodiri MM, Calle EE, Flanders WD, Heath CW Jr. Aspirin use and risk of fatal cancer. Cancer Res 1993;53:1322.
14. Thun MJ. Aspirin, NSAIDs, and digestive tract cancers. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1994;13:269.
15. Schreinemachers DM, Everson RB. Aspirin use and lung, colon, and breast cancer incidence in a prospective study. Epidemiology 1994;5:138.
16. Giovannucci E, Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ, et al. Aspirin use and the risk for colorectal cancer and adenoma in male health professionals. Ann Intern Med 1994;121:241.
17. Giovannucci E, Willett WC. Dietary factors and risk of colon cancer. Ann Intern Med 1994;26:443.
18. Giovannucci E, Egan KM, Hunter DJ, et al. Aspirin and the risk of colorectal cancer in women. N Engl J Med 1995;333:609.
19. Giovannucci E, Rimm EB, Ascherio A, et al. Alcohol, low-methionine and low-folate diets, and risk of colon cancer in men. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:265.
20. Garcia Rodriguez LA, Huerta-Alvarez C. Reduced risk of colorectal cancer among long-term users of aspirin and non-aspirin nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: a pooled analysis of
epidemiologic studies and a new population based study. JAMA 1999 (in press).
21. Kune GA, Kune S, Watson LF. Colorectal cancer risk, chronic illnesses, operations, and medications: case control results from the Melbourne Colorectal Cancer Study. Cancer Res
1988;48:4399.
22. Rosenberg L, Palmer JR, Zauber AG, et al. A hypothesis: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs reduce the incidence of large-bowel cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:355.
23. Suh O, Mettlin C, Petrelli NJ. Aspirin use, cancer, and polyps of the large bowel. Cancer 1993;72:1171.
24. Peleg II, Maibach HT, Brown SH, Wilcox CM. Aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use and the risk of subsequent colorectal cancer. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:394.
25. Muller AD, Sonneberg A, Wasserman IH. Diseases preceding colon cancer: a case-control study among veterans. Dig Dis Sci 1994;39:2480.
26. Muscat JE, Stellman SD, Wynder EL. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and colorectal cancer. Cancer 1994;74:1847.
27. Reeves MJ, Newcomb PA, Trentham-Diez A, Storer BE, Remington PL. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use and protection against colorectal cancer in women. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 1996;5:955.
28. Bansal P, Sonnenberg A. Risk factors of colorectal cancer in inflammatory bowel disease. Am J Gastroenterol 1996;91:44.
29. Coogan PF, Rosenberg L, Louik C, et al. NSAIDs and risk of colorectal cancer according to presence or absence of family history of the disease. Cancer Causes Control 2000;11:249.
30. Collet JP, Sharpe C, Belzile E, et al. Colorectal cancer prevention by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: effects of dosage and timing. Br J Cancer 1999;81:62.
31. Greenberg ER, Baron JA, Freeman DH Jr, Mandel JS, Haile R. Reduced risk of large-bowel adenomas among aspirin users. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:912.
32. Logan RFA, Little J, Hawtin PG, Hardcastle JD. Effect of aspirin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on colorectal adenomas: case-control study of subjects participating in the
Nottingham faecal occult blood screening programme. BMJ 1993;307:285.
33. Martinez ME, McPherson RS, Levin B, Annegers JF. Aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and risk of colorectal adenomatous polyps among endoscoped individuals. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1995;4:703.
34. Garcia Rodriguez LA, Huerta-Alvarez C. Reduced incidence of colorectal adenoma among long-term users of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: a pooled analysis of published studies and a
new population based study. Epidemiology 2000;11:376.
35. Labayle D, Fischer D, Vielh P, et al. Sulindac causes regression of rectal polyps in familial adenomatous polyposis. Gastroenterology 1991;101:635.
36. Rigau J, Pique JM, Rubio E, Tarrech JM, Bordas JM. Effects of long-term sulindac therapy on colonic polyposis. Ann Intern Med 1991;115:952.
37. Giardiello FM, Hamilton SR, Krush AJ, et al. Treatment of colonic and rectal adenomas with sulindac in familial adenomatous polyposis. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1313.
38. Nugent KP, Farmer KC, Spigelman AD, Williams CB, Phillips RK. Randomized controlled trial of the effect of sulindac on duodenal and rectal polyposis and cell proliferation in patients with
familial adenomatous polyposis. Br J Surg 1993;80:1618.
39. New drug approvals—Celebrex. U.S. Food and Drug Administration Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. World Wide Web URL: http://www.fda.gov/cder/foi/label/1999/2156lbl.pdf , 1999.
40. Pasricha PJ, Bedi A, O'Connor K, et al. The effects of sulindac on colorectal proliferation and apoptosis in familial adenomatous polyposis. Gastroenterology 1995;109:994.
41. Elder DJ, Hague A, Hicks DJ, Paraskeva C. Differential growth inhibition by the aspirin metabolite salicylate in human colorectal tumor cell lines: enhanced apoptosis in carcinoma and in
vitro-transformed adenoma relative to adenoma cell lines. Cancer Res 1996;56:2273.
42. Samaha HS, Kelloff GJ, Steele V, Rao CV, Reddy BS. Modulation of apoptosis by sulindac, curcumin, phenylethyl-3-methylcaffeate, and 6-phenylhexyl isothiocyanate: apoptotic index as a
biomarker in colon cancer chemoprevention and promotion. Cancer Res 1997;57:1301.
43. Morin PJ, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. Apoptosis and APC in colorectal tumorigenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:7950.
44. Tsujii M, Kawano S, Tsuji S, Hori M, DuBois R. Cyclooxygenase regulates angiogenesis induced by colon cancer cells. Cell 1998;93:705.
45. Jones MK, Wang H, Peskar BM, et al. Inhibition of angiogenesis by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: insights into mechanisms and implications for cancer growth and ulcer healing. Nat
Med 1999;5:1418.
46. Taketo M. Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors in tumorigenesis (part I). J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1529.
47. Taketo M. Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors in tumorigenesis (part II). J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1609.
48. Steering Committee of the Physicians' Health Study Research Group. Final report on the aspirin component of the ongoing Physicians' Health Study. N Engl J Med 1989;321:129.
49. Sturmer T, Glynn RJ, Lee IM, Buring JE, Hennekens CH. Aspirin use and colorectal cancer: post-trial follow-up data from the Physicians' Health Study. Ann Intern Med 1998;128:713.
50. Insel PA. Analgesic-antipyretics and antiinflammatory agents; drugs employed in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and gout. In: Goodman L, Gilman A, eds. Pharmacological basis of
therapeutics. London: Macmillian Co, 1995:638.
51. Vane JR, Flower RJ, Botting RM. History of aspirin and its mechanism of action. Stroke 1990;21[suppl 4]:12.
52. Jack DB. One hundred years of aspirin. Lancet 1997;350:437.
53. Vane J. Pharmacology: towards a better aspirin. Nature 1994;367:215.
54. Hawkey CJ. Cox-2 inhibitors. Lancet 1999;353:307.
55. Vane JR. Inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis as a mechanism of action for aspirin-like drugs. Nat New Biol 1971;231:232.

56. Marnett LJ. Aspirin and the potential role of prostaglandins in colon cancer. Cancer Res 1992;52:5575.
57. Smith WL, Garavito RM, DeWitt DL. Prostaglandin endoperoxide H synthases (cyclooxygenases)-1 and -2. J Biol Chem
58. Campbell WB. Lipid-derived autacoids: eicosanoids and platelet-activating factor. In: Goodman L, Gilman A, eds. Pharmacological basis of therapeutics. London: Macmillan Co, 1995:600.
59. Patrono C. Aspirin as an antiplatelet drug. N Engl J Med 1994;330:1287.
60. Xie W, Robertson DL, Simmons DL. Mitogen-inducible prostaglandin G/H synthase: a new target for nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. Drug Dev Res 1992;25:249.
61. Meade EA, Smith WL, DeWitt DL. Differential inhibition of prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase (cyclooxygenase) isozymes by aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. J Biol
Chem 1993;268:6610.
62. Mitchell JA, Akarasereenont P, Thiemermann C, Flower RJ, Vane JR. Selectivity of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs as inhibitors of constitutive and inducible cyclooxygenase. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:11693.
63. Masferrer JL, Isakson PC, Seibert K. Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors: a new class of anti-inflammatory agents that spare the gastrointestinal tract. Gastroenterology Clin North Am 1996;25:363.
64. Chan CC, Boyce S, Brideau C, et al. Pharmacology of a selective cyclooxgenase-2 inhibitor, L-745,337: a novel nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent with an ulcerogenic sparing effect in rat
and nonhuman primate stomach. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1995;274:1531.
65. Picot D, Loll PJ, Garavito RM. The x-ray crystal structure of the membrane protein prostaglandin H2 synthase-1. Nature 1994;367:243.
66. Lipsky PE, Abramson SB, Crofford SB, et al. The classification of cyclooxygenase inhibitors. J Rheumatol 1998;25:2298.
67. Luong C, Miller A, Barnett J, et al. The structure of human cylooxygenase-2; conservation and flexibility of the NSAID binding site. Nat Struct Biol 1996;3:927.
68. Kujubu DA, Fletcher BS, Varnum BC, Lim RW, Herschman HR. TIS10, a phorbol ester tumor promoterinducible mRNA from Swiss 3T3 cells, encodes a novel prostaglandin
synthase/cyclooxygenase homologue. J Biol Chem 1991;266:12866.
69. Smalley WE, DuBois RN. Colorectal cancer and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Adv Pharmacol 1997;39:1.
70. Lanza FL, Rack MF, Callison DA, et al. A pilot endoscopic study of the gastroduodenal effect of SC-58635, a novel COX-2-selective inhibitor. Gastroenterology 1997;112[suppl 4]:A194.
71. Kalgutkar AS, Crews BC, Rowlinson SW, et al. Aspirin-like molecules that covalently inactivate cyclooxygenase-2. Science 1998;280:1268.
72. Hubbard WC, Alley MC, McLemore TL, et al. Profiles of prostaglandin biosynthesis in sixteen established cell lines derived from human lung, colon, prostate and ovarian tumors. Cancer Res
1988;48:4770.
73. Rigas B, Goldman IS, Levine L. Altered eicosanoid levels in human colon cancer. J Lab Clin Med 1993;122:518.
74. Narisawa T, Kusaka H, Yamazaki Y, et al. Relationship between blood plasma prostaglandin E 2 and liver and lung metastases in colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1990;33:840.
75. Pollard M, Luckert PH. Indomethacin treatment of rats with dimethylhydrazine-induced intestinal tumors. Cancer Treat Rep 1980;64:1323.
76. Pollard M, Luckert PH. Effect of indomethacin on intestinal tumors induced in rats by the acetate derivative of dimethylnitrosoamine. Science 1981;214:558.
77. Pollard M, Luckert PH. Treatment of chemically-induced intestinal cancers with indomethacin. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1981;167:161.
78. Pollard M, Luckert PH. Prolonged antitumor effect of indomethacin on autochthonous intestinal tumors in rats. J Natl Cancer Inst 1983;70:1103.
79. Pollard M, Luckert PH, Schmidt MA. The suppressive effect of piroxicam on autochthonous intestinal tumors in the rat. Cancer Lett 1983;21:57.
80. Pollard M, Luckert PH. Effect of piroxicam on primary intestinal tumors induced in rats by N-methylnitrosourea. Cancer Lett 1984;25:117.
81. Pollard M. Antitumor effect of indomethacin in rats with autochthonous intestinal tumors. In: Levin B, Riddell R, eds. Frontiers in gastrointestinal cancer. New York: Elsevier, 1984:91.
82. Pollard M, Luckert PH. Prevention and treatment of primary intestinal tumors in rats by piroxicam. Cancer Res 1989;49:6471.
83. Kudo T, Narisawa T, Abo S. Antitumor activity of indomethacin on methylazoxymethanol-induced large bowel tumors in rats. Gann 1980;71:260.
84. Narisawa T, Sato M, Tani M, Takahashi T, Goto A. Inhibition of development of methylnitrosourea-induced rat colon tumors by indomethacin treatment. Cancer Res 1981;41:1954.
85. Narisawa T, Sato M, Sano M, Takahashi T. Inhibition of development of methylnitrosourea-induced rat colonic tumors by peroral administration of indomethacin. Gann 1982;73:377.
86. Narisawa T, Satoh M, Sano M, Takahashi T. Inhibition of initiation and promotion by N-methylnitrosourea-induced colon carcinogenesis in rats by non-steroid anti-inflammatory agent
indomethacin. Carcinogenesis 1983;4:1225.
87. Narisawa T, Hermanek P, Habs M, Schmahl D. Reduction of carcinogenicity of N-nitrosomethylurea by indomethacin and failure of resuming effect of prostaglandin E 2 (PGE2) against
indomethacin. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1984;108:239.
88. Metzger U, Meier J, Uhlschmid G, Weihe H. Influence of various prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors on DMH-induced rat colon cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1984;27:366.
89. Nigro ND, Bull AW, Boyd ME. Inhibition of intestinal carcinogenesis in rats: effect of difluoromethylornithine with piroxicam or fish oil. J Natl Cancer Inst 1986;77:1309.
90. Reddy BS, Maruyama H, Kelloff G. Dose related inhibition of colon carcinogenesis by dietary piroxicam, a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug, during different stages of rat colon tumor
development. Cancer Res 1987;47:5340.
91. Reddy BS, Nayini J, Tokumo K, al et. Chemoprevention of colon carcinogenesis by concurrent administration of piroxicam, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug with
D,L,-difluoromethylornithine decarboxylase inhibitor, in diet. Cancer Res 1990;50: 2562.
92. Reddy BS, Tokumo K, Kulkarni N, Aligia C, Kelloff G. Inhibition of colon carcinogenesis by prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors and related compounds. Carcinogenesis 1992;13:1019.
93. Reddy BS, Rao CV, Rivenson A, Kelloff G. Inhibitory effect of aspirin on azoxymethane-induced colon carcinogenesis in F344 rats. Carcinogenesis 1993;14:1493.
94. Craven P, DeRubertis FR. Effects of aspirin on 1,2-dimethylhydrazine-induced colonic carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis 1992;13:541.
95. Moorghen M, Ince P, Finney KJ, et al. A protective effect of sulindac against chemically induced primary colonic tumors in mice. J Pathol 1988;156:341.
96. Moorghen M, Ince P, Finney KJ, et al. The effect of sulindac on colonic tumor formation in dimethylhydrazine-treated mice. Acta Histochem Suppl 1990;39:195.
97. Skinner SA, Penney AG, O'Brien PE. Sulindac inhibits the rate of growth and appearance of colon tumors in the rat. Arch Surg 1991;126:1094.
98. Rao CV, Tokumo K, Rigotty J, et al. Chemoprevention of colon carcinogenesis by dietary administration of piroxicam a-difluoromethylornithine, 16-fluoro-5-androsten-17-one, and ellagic acid
individually and in combination. Cancer Res 1991;51:4528.
99. Rao CZ, Rivenson A, Simi B, et al. Chemoprevention of colon carcinogenesis by sulindac, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent. Cancer Res 1995;55:1464.
100. Davis AE, Patterson F. Aspirin reduces the incidence of colonic carcinoma in the dimethylhadrazine rat animal model. Aust N Z J Med 1994;24:301.
101. Hursting S, Velasco M, Woods C, Wang K, Wargovich M. Chemoprevention of azoxymethane-induced aberrant crypt foci and colon tumors in p53-deficient mice by sulindac. Am Soc Prev
Oncol 1998 (abst).
102. Kawamori T, Rao CV, Seibert K, Reddy BS. Chemopreventive activity of celecoxib, a specific cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, against colon carcinogenesis. Cancer Res 1998;58:409.
103. Li H, Kramer PM, Steele VE, et al. Effect of duration of treatment with piroxicam on azoxymethane-induced colon cancer, aberrant crypt foci, apoptosis and cell proliferation in rats. Proc Am
Assoc Cancer Res 1998;39:23(abst).
104. Li H, Schut HAJ, Conran P, et al. Prevention by aspirin and its combination with a-difluoromethylornithine of azoxymethane-induced tumors, aberrant crypt foci and prostaglandin E 2 levels in rat
colon. Carcinogenesis 1999;20:425.
105. Barnes CJ, Lee M. Determination of an optimal dosing regimen for aspirin chemoprevention of 1,2-dimethylhydrazine-induced colon tumours in rats. Br J Cancer 1999; 79:1646.
106. Reddy BS, Kawamori T, Lubet RA, et al. Chemopreventive efficacy of sulindac sulfone against colon cancer depends on time of administration during carcinogenic process. Cancer Res
1999;59:3387.
107. Piazza GA, Alberts DS, Hixson LJ, et al. Sulindac sulfone inhibits azoxymethane-induced colon carcinogenesis in rats without reducing prostaglandin levels. Cancer Res 1997;57:2909.
108. Weisburger JH, Reddy BS, Joftes DL. Colorectal cancer. UICC Technical Report 19. Geneva, Switzerland: Union Internationale Contre le Cancer, 1975.
109. Smalley W, Ray WA, Daugherty J, Griffin MR. Use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and incidence of colorectal cancer. Arch Intern Med 1999;159:161.
110. Thun MJ. NSAIDs use and decreased risk of gastrointestinal cancers. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1996;25:333.
111. Tonelli F, Valanzano R. Sulindac in familial adenomatous polyposis [Letter]. Lancet 1993;342:1120.
112. Lynch HT, Thorson AG, Smyrk T. Rectal cancer after prolonged sulindac chemoprevention. Cancer 1995;75:936.
113. Thorson AG, Lynch HT, Smyrk TC. Rectal cancer in FAP patient after sulindac. Lancet 1994;343:180.
114. Peleg II, Lubin MF, Cotsonis GA, Clark WS, Wilcox CM. Long-term use of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and other chemopreventors and risk of subsequent colorectal neoplasia. Dig Dis
Sci 1996;41:1319.
115. Thun MJ, Heath CW. Aspirin use and reduced risk of gastrointestinal tract cancers in the American Cancer Society prospective studies. Prev Med 1995;24:116.
116. Gutthann SP, Garcia Rodriguez LA, Raiford DS. Individual nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and other risk factors for upper gastrointestinal bleeding and perforation. Epidemiology
1997;8:18.
117. He J, Whelton PK, Vu B, Klag MJ. Aspirin and risk of hemorrhagic strokea meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. JAMA 1998;280:1930.
118. Thun MJ. Beyond willow barkaspirin in the prevention of chronic disease. Epidemiology 2000;11:376.
119. Eberhart CE, Coffey RJ, Radhika A, et al. Up-regulation of cyclooxygenase 2 gene expression in human colorectal adenomas and adenocarcinomas. Gastroenterology 1994;107:1183.
120. Kargman SL, O'Neill GP, Vickers PJ, et al. Expression of prostaglandin G/H synthase-1 and -2 protein in human colon cancer. Cancer Res 1995;55:2256.
121. Sano H, Kawahito Y, Wilder RL, et al. Expression of cyclooxygenase-1 and -2 in human colorectal cancer. Cancer Res 1995;55:3785.
122. Kutchera W, Jones DA, Matsunami N, et al. Prostaglandin H synthase 2 is expressed abnormally in human colon cancer: evidence for a transcriptional effect. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1996;93:4816.
123. Fujita T, Matsui M, Takaku K, et al. Size- and invasion-dependent increase in cyclooxygenase 2 levels in human colorectal carcinomas. Cancer Res 1998;58:4823.
124. DuBois RN, Radhika A, Reddy BS, Entingh AJ. Increased cyclooxygenase-2 levels in carcinogen-induced rat colonic tumors. Gastroenterology 1996;110:1259.
125. Williams CS, Luongo C, Radhika A, et al. Elevated cyclooxygenase-2 levels in Min mouse adenomas. Gastroenterology 1996;111:1134.
126. Boolbol SK, Dannenberg AJ, Chadburn A, et al. Cyclooxygenase-2 overexpression and tumor formation are blocked by sulindac in a murine model of familial adenomatous polyposis. Cancer
Res 1996;56:2556.
127. Reddy BS, Rao CV, Seibert K. Evaluation of cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor for potential chemopreventative properties in colon carcinogenesis. Cancer Res 1996;56:4566.
128. Takahashi M, Fukutake M, Yokota S, et al. Suppression of azoxymethane-induced aberrant crypt foci in rat colon by nimesulide, a selective inhibitor of cyclooxygenase 2. J Cancer Res Clin
Oncol 1996;122:219.
129. Jacobasch G, Schmehl K, Schmidt U. Influence of meloxicam on loss of apoptotic activity during carcinogenesis. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1998;39:197.
130. Oshima M, Dinichuk JE, Kargman SL, et al. Suppression of intestinal polyposis in ApcD716 knockout mice by inhibition of cyclooxygenase (COX-2). Cell 1996;87:803.
131. Sheng H, Shao J, Kirkland SC, et al. Inhibition of human colon cancer cell growth by selective inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2. J Clin Invest 1997;99:2254.
132. Langenbach R, Loftin C, Lee C, Tiano H. Cyclooxygenase knockout mice: models for elucidating isoform-specific functions. Biochem Pharm 1999;58:1237.
133. Ruffin MT, Krishnan K, Rock CL, et al. Suppression of human colorectal mucosal prostaglandins: determining the lowest effective aspirin dose. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1152.
134. Barnes CJ, Hamby-Mason RL, Hardman WE, et al. Effect of aspirin on prostaglandin E 2 formation and transforming growth factor a expression in human rectal mucosa from individuals with a
history of adenomatous polyps of the colon. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1999;8:311.
135. Frommel TO, Dyavanapalli M, Oldham T, et al. Effect of aspirin on prostaglandin E 2 and leukotriene B 4 production in human colonic mucosa from cancer patients. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:209.
136. Shen TY, Winter CA. Chemical and biological studies of indomethacin, sulindac and their analogs. Adv Drug Res 1977;12:90.
137. Duggan DE, Hare LE, Ditzler CA, Lei BW, Kwan KC. The disposition of sulindac in man. Clin Pharmacol Exp Ther 1977;21:326.
138. Charalambous D, O'Brien PE. Inhibition of colon cancer precursors in the rat by sulindac sulphone is not dependent on inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis. J Gastoenterol Hepatol 1996;11:307.
139. Thompson HJ, Briggs S, Paranka NS, et al. Sulfone metabolite of sulindac inhibits mammary carcinogenesis. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1259.
140. Piazza GA, Rahm AL, Krutzsch M, et al. Antineoplastic drugs sulindac sulfide and sulfone inhibit cell growth by inducing apoptosis. Cancer Res 1995;55:3110.
141. Hanif R, Pittas A, Feng Y, et al. Effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on proliferation and on induction of apoptosis in colon cancer cells by a prostaglandin-independent pathway.
Biochem Pharmacol 1996;52:237.
142. Bak AW, McKnight W, Li P, et al. Cyclooxygenase-independent chemoprevention with an aspirin derivative in a rat model of colonic adenocarcinoma. Life Sci 1998;62:367.
143. He TC, Chan TA, Vogelstein B, Kinzler K. PPAR is an APC-regulated target of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Cell 1999;99:335.

144. Bedi A, Pasricha PJ, Akhtar AJ, et al. Inhibition of apoptosis during development of colorectal cancer. Cancer Res 1995;55:1811.
145. Tsujii M, DuBois RN. Alterations in cellular adhesion and apoptosis in epithelial cells overexpressing prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase 2. Cell 1995;83:493.
146. Shiff SJ, Qiao L, Tsai LL, Rigas B. Sulindac sulfide, an aspirin-like compound, inhibits proliferation, causes cell cycle quiescence, and induces apoptosis in HT-29 colon adenocarcinoma cells. J
Clin Invest 1995;96:491.
147. Agarwal B, Rao CV, Bhendwal S, et al. Lovastatin augments sulindac-induced apoptosis in colon cancer cells and potentiates chemopreventive effect of sulindac. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res
1999;40:380(abst).
148. Bayer BM, Beaven MA. Evidence that indomethacin reversibly inhibits cell growth in the G 1 phase of the cell cycle. Biochem Pharmacol 1978;28:441.
149. Bayer BM, Kruth HS, Vaughn M, Beaven MA. Arrest of cultured cells in the G 1 phase of the cell cycle by indomethacin. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1979;210:106.
150. Lipton A, Scialla S, Harvey H, al et. Adjuvant antiplatelet therapy with aspirin in colorectal cancer. J Med 1982;23:419.
151. Wilson KT, Fu S, Ramanujam KS, Meltzer SJ. Increased expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase and cyclooxygenase-2 in Barrett's esophagus and associated adenocarcinomas. Cancer
Res 1998;58:2929.
152. Zimmermann KC, Sarbia M, Weber AA, et al. Cyclooxygenase-2 expression in human esophageal carcinoma. Cancer Res 1999;59:198.
153. Ristimaki A, Honkanen N, Jankala H, Sipponen P, Harkonen M. Expression of cyclooxygenase-2 in human gastric carcinoma. Cancer Res 1997;57:1276.
154. Shimakura S, Boland CR. Eicosanoid production by the human gastric cancer cell line AGS and its relation to cell growth. Cancer Res 1992;52:1744.
155. Kawamori T, Nakatsugi S, Ohta T, Sugimura T, Wakabayashi K. Chemopreventive properties of a selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, nimesulide on PhIP-induced mammary carcinogenesis
in rats. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1999;40:2373(abst).
156. Hwang D, Scollard D, Byrne J, Levine E. Expression of cyclooxygenase-1 and cyclooxygenase-2 in human breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:455.
157. Pinczowski D, Ekbom A, Baron J, Yuen J, Adami H-O. Risk factors for colorectal cancer in patients with ulerative colitis: a case-control study. Gastroenterology 1994;107:117.
158. La Vecchia C, Negri E, Franceschi S, et al. Aspirin and colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer 1997;76:675.
159. Rosenberg L, Louik C, Shapiro S. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug use and reduced risk of large bowel carcinoma. Cancer 1998;82:2326.
160. Funkhouser EM, Sharp GB. Aspirin and reduced risk of esophageal carcinoma. Cancer 1995;76:1116.
161. Friedman GD, Ury HK. Initial screening for carcinogenicity of commonly used drugs. J Natl Cancer Inst 1980;65:723.
162. Egan KM, Stampfer MJ, Giovannucci E, Rosner BA, Colditz, GA. Prospective study of regular aspirin use and the risk of breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:988.
163. Harris RE, Namboodiri KK, Farrar WB. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and breast cancer. Epidemiology 1996;7:203.

SECTION 23.7 Physical Activity and Body Weight
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 23.7
Physical Activity and Body Weight
GRAHAM A. COLDITZ
Introduction
Colon Cancer
Physical Activity
Breast Cancer
Obesity
Relationship between Obesity and Carcinoma
Conclusions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The 1994 report of the U.S. Surgeon General concludes that lack of physical activity is causally related to increased risk of coronary heart disease, diabetes, and
colon cancer. 1,2 Other cancers are listed as having a suggestive relation, including breast cancer, whereas there is lack of evidence for a relation between activity and
either rectal or prostate cancers. The evidence for colon and breast cancers is therefore summarized in detail.

COLON CANCER
Numerous studies have illustrated a relation between physical activity and colon cancer. Higher levels of physical activity are related to lower rates of colon cancer, 1,3
the fourth most common cancer diagnosed in the United States.
The rates of colon cancer vary considerably among countries. During the 1960s and 1970s, there was a gradual increase in colon cancer in most industrialized
countries, and in European countries with low rates there was an increase in the rates observed in high-risk countries, such as the United States and England. Low
incidence is reported from India and China, whereas high rates are observed in the United States, Australia, and Western Europe. 4 Numerous lifestyle factors have
been proposed to explain this large international variation. 5
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
Epidemiologic studies have measured activity in two ways: by occupation and by leisure-time activities. These measures may represent somewhat different patterns of
energy expenditure. Activity demanded by employment in a certain occupation may be relatively constant from week to week and year to year, whereas leisure-time
activity is far more labile, changing from week to week, season to season, and year to year. In the epidemiologic study of a disease like colon cancer, long-term
patterns of activity may be the relevant factor in determining disease risk. Therefore, occupational activity may be a better marker of cancer-determining activity level
than is self-reported leisure-time activity. Both the methods used to measure activity and the validity or accuracy of the methods vary considerably. Similar
methodologic issues arose in the study of heart disease 6: When poor measures of activity were used, studies tended to underestimate the true impact of activity on
health. In other words, studies using poor measures of physical activity fail to measure true activity levels and then fail to provide data showing a strong association
with activity, even though physical activity is, in truth, protective against heart disease. 1
Likewise for colon cancer, when less accurate measures of physical activity are used, the estimated benefit from this activity is smaller than its probable true benefit.
Thus, the protection by physical activity is underestimated. Nonetheless, as summarized in the following section, the most precise studies using validated measures of
physical activity have shown, overall, that higher levels of physical activity are related to lower levels of colon cancer.
Validity of Activity Measures
The validity of activity measures has been assessed and is quite variable. 7,8 Among the better measures, one observes a correlation between the self-reported
measure of activity and an independent gold standard (such as 28 days of activity diary) in the range of 0.5 to 0.7. Thus, the epidemiologic associations observed with
these measures of activity and disease outcome are considerably attenuated, perhaps by as much as one-half. For example, Giovannucci et al. 9 reported a relative
risk that was 0.88 [95% confidence interval (CI), 0.81 to 0.95] per 10 metabolic equivalent of task (MET) increase in physical activity. After correcting for measurement
error, the relative risk was strengthened to 0.65 (0.48 to 0.88).
A systematic review of published literature through March 1997 identified studies that reported a measure of physical activity and outcomes of colon cancer or
colorectal cancer. A review of these studies presents summary data for each, including the relative risk for each level of activity. 2
CASE-CONTROL STUDIES. Overall, the published case-control studies suggest a consistent inverse relation between both occupational and leisure-time activity and

colon cancer risk among men and women. These results have been replicated across a wide range of countries, including China, Japan, New Zealand, Spain,
Sweden, Turkey, and the United States.
COHORT STUDIES. Cohort studies generally enroll healthy individuals to assess elements of lifestyle, behavior, environment, and occupation that are thought to

influence later development of disease. The initial follow-up of college athletes by Polednak 10 did not show any protection against colon cancer, although data were
not available on lifestyle characteristics (including family history, diet, smoking, etc.). The other 17 studies through 1997 show a reduction in risk similar to that
observed in the case-control studies. Higher activity in adult life is generally related to reduced risk of colon cancer, although the cohort results are less consistent
than are those from the case-control studies. Inconsistency may, in part, be attributed to studies that focused on college activity and cancer risk many years later, 10,11
or that included both colon and rectal cancer in a single outcome category. 11,12 (An inverse association between activity and rectal cancer is generally not seen when
rectal cancer is analyzed as a separate outcome variable.) When occupation was used to categorize activity in a study of Swedish men, those with higher activity had
a lower risk of colon cancer [relative risk (RR) = 0.8]. 13 In that study, the strongest contrast was based on a joint classification of occupation and recreational activity.
Men in the highest activity group for both occupation and recreation had a relative risk that was 0.3 (0.1 to 0.8) representing a 70% reduction in risk compared with
men who were inactive at work and engaged in little recreational activity.
Leisure-time activity is addressed separately in the Harvard Alumni Study, a cohort of graduates from Harvard College followed since 1960 to study activity and
chronic diseases; Lee and colleagues observed a strong inverse association among men who were active both in the 1960s and in 1977 when surveys were
administered.14 Men expending more than 2500 kcal per week in leisure activity had a 50% reduction in risk of colon cancer compared with those expending less than
1000 kcal per week.
Overall, the cohort studies conducted in Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United States support a dose-response relation across increasing activity
levels: Higher activity levels are related to lower levels of colon cancer risk. Those in the highest activity category have approximately a 40% to 50% reduction in risk
of colon cancer compared to the least active category. 2
Although historically data have suggested that the association between physical activity and reduced risk of colon cancer is stronger in men than in women, this
finding may, in part, reflect the small number of women in the high-activity category. Data from Norway show a stronger relation between total physical activity and
colon cancer among women than among men,15 and data from the Nurses' Health Study show similar magnitude of reduction in risk in women as observed among
men in a parallel study using comparable methods for activity assessment. 16
SITE-SPECIFIC RISK. Studies that examined activity in relation to site of cancer in the colon suggest that the relation between higher activity and lower risk of cancer

may be stronger for the left than for the right colon. One large case-control study shows no difference in the strength of association between vigorous activity and
proximal or distal colon cancer. 17 The association is stronger for the colon than it is for the rectum, for which activity is at best only very weakly associated.
Interpretation
Despite the variable and often poor measures of activity used, a consistent reduction in risk is observed across different study design and different populations and
across occupational and leisure-time activity. A consistent dose-response relation emerges, indicating that those at higher levels of activity are at reduced risk of
colon cancer. Across the studies, the evidence suggests that the relation is stronger for the left colon and weaker or absent for rectal cancer. Few studies have
addressed the relation between specific activities and cancer risk (e.g., Is swimming less protective than jogging?) or the importance of the age at which a person is
active in determining the likelihood of cancer (e.g., Is activity more protective in youth, middle age, or years immediately before the diagnosis of cancer?). Three
studies that address physical activity during early adulthood show no relation. 10,11,18 Although these studies failed to control for several colon cancer risk factors, the
results are consistent with an effect of activity later in the pathway to cancer. Evidence from Lee and colleagues 14 also supports a role later in the pathway to cancer.
Men who had increased their level of activity during follow-up of the cohort had a suggestion of lower risk of colon cancer during subsequent follow-up. More data are
needed, however, to refine the understanding of the time course between change in physical activity and change in risk of cancer. In general, the studies based on
classification of activity by occupation show a stronger dose response than those based on leisure-time activity and support a protective effect across the wide range
of activities encompassed by the high-activity occupations.
How do we know that physical activity is actually protecting subjects from developing colon cancer? Is it possible that active men and women are also healthier in
other ways (e.g., eating less red meat and more folate) and that these factors are the real reason for the observed protection from physical activity? Several studies
have reported analyses that address the independent relation between activity and colon cancer risk—that is, they control for other lifestyle factors [body mass index
(BMI), alcohol, and diet] that may be related to higher levels of physical activity and could therefore bias or distort the protection attributed to physical activity. Activity
is independent of dietary fat and fiber intake in these studies and is also independent of BMI, a measure of adiposity. Although not all studies examined for the
independence of activity from other lifestyle factors, the magnitude of the inverse relation is not materially altered when investigators have controlled for diet, BMI, and
other factors. The one exception is the analysis by Whittemore et al., 19 who saw a shift in the magnitude of association after control for diet in the case-control data
from the People's Republic of China, but no substantial change in effect after control for diet in the United States. In a detailed analysis of the Health Professionals
Follow-Up Study, a cohort of some 50,000 men followed to study relations between diet and chronic diseases, Giovannucci et al. showed that individuals with higher
physical activity were more likely to use multivitamins, had lower intake of saturated fat, higher intake of fiber, lower prevalence of cigarette smoking, and lower BMI
(men were leaner).9 After controlling for these risk factors, as well as use of aspirin and family history, the protection was reduced from 56% to 47% [the relative risk
changed from 0.4 (0.3 to 0.7) to 0.5 (0.3 to 0.9)]. In other words, the protectionremained at almost 50% despite controlling for all the other factors known to relate to
colon cancer risk. The inverse trend in risk with increasing activity remained statistically significant. Thus, we conclude that activity is not merely a marker of healthier
lifestyle, but exerts an independent protective effect.
Mechanisms
Several biologic mechanisms have been proposed for the protective effect of physical activity, reflecting changes in physiologic measures after physical activity.
Among these is the bowel transit time that decreases with physical activity. It is then proposed that the reduced transit time alters the environment within the colon and
thereby reduces exposure to carcinogens. 20,21
A second mechanism may be that abdominal obesity and low physical activity are independently related to insulin resistance. Across a gradient of physical activity,
insulin sensitivity improves with exercise. 22 Furthermore, insulin is a strong growth factor for colon mucosal cells in laboratory studies and an animal model of colon
cancer. 23 Thus, it is possible that activity exerts its protective effect through reduced insulin levels. 24,25
Another possible mechanism is the effect of prostaglandins on colon cell proliferation. Physical activity produces an increase in prostaglandin F 2a, which increases
intestinal motility, and a decrease in prostaglandin E 2, which in cell culture can act to stimulate colon cell proliferation. Further support for this possible mechanism
comes from laboratory studies on rats and evidence in humans that aspirin and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, also inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis, reduce
risk of colon cancer. 26,27
With this large body of epidemiologic data and supporting laboratory studies, it appears that low levels of physical activity are causally related to increased risk of
colon cancer. Causal considerations include a consistent decrease in risk with higher levels of physical activity, either measured as occupational activity or
leisure-time activity, a dose-response relation with hours of activity per week or level of occupational physical activity, specificity for the relation with colon and not
rectum, and a temporal relation such that activity measures precede the onset of colon cancer by years, although relations are stronger for more recent activity rather
than distant past activity.

BREAST CANCER
Regular physical activity has been hypothesized to prevent breast cancer, largely by reducing circulating levels of sex hormones. The mechanisms by which physical
activity reduces exposure to hormones vary by period of life. Young girls participating in strenuous athletic training such as running and ballet dancing have delayed
menarche, 28,29 and 30 which is known to reduce the risk of breast cancer, and even moderate-intensity physical activity may also delay menstruation. 31 A later menarche
is associated with a later onset of regular ovulatory cycles and lower serum estrogen concentrations during adolescence. 32 Once menstruation has been established,
anovulatory and irregular menstrual cycles may be more frequent among moderately and strenuously active women than among inactive women, 28,33,34 although there
is disagreement regarding the degree to which the intensity of physical activity influences menstrual abnormalities. 35 Among older women, levels of past and current
physical activity influence fat stores, 29,30,36,37,38 and 39 which after menopause are the locus of conversion of androstenedione to estrogen. 40,41
Despite the evidence that higher levels of physical activity are associated with lower levels of circulating ovarian hormones, epidemiologic studies relating physical
activity to risk of breast cancer are inconsistent. 42 Methodologic differences in physical activity assessment are likely to have contributed to these inconsistencies.
Studies have differed in the ages at which physical activity was assessed; methods for measuring intensity, frequency, and duration of physical activity; definition and
categorization of physical activity levels; and age of breast cancer diagnosis. Furthermore, the ranges of physical activity that are typically studied are very limited in
comparison with the levels of hard labor typically practiced by women in traditional agrarian societies.
To date, the strongest reduction in breast cancer risk associated with increased physical activity has been reported in a population-based case-control study of
women younger than age 40 years in Southern California. 43 The RR was 0.42 (95% CI, 0.27 to 0.64) when comparing women with a lifetime average of 3.8 hours or
more of physical activity per week to those with an average of 0 hours per week. This has been the only study explicitly devoted to the relationship between physical
activity and breast cancer, and it used a detailed physical activity assessment instrument to quantify the average number of hours per week of recreational physical
activity over the reproductive life span, beginning at menarche. Activities such as housework, gardening, and easy walking not for the explicit purpose of physical
exercise were not counted in the measure of physical activity. Bernstein et al. 43 concluded from their various analyses that lifelong physical activity is the critical
exposure of interest with regard to breast cancer risk.
In contrast to the detailed measurement instrument previously described, a relatively simple measure of physical activity was used in a prospective cohort study of
Norwegian women aged 20 to 54 years at baseline. 44 Over a period of 3 to 5 years, women were administered two surveys about their patterns of physical activity
during leisure hours. The RR was 0.63 (95% CI, 0.42 to 0.95) for consistently active women compared to consistently sedentary women, which is the
second-strongest inverse association reported in the literature. This study is also the only prospective cohort study of the five reported to date 12,44,45,46 and 47 to find a
substantial inverse association between physical activity and breast cancer risk.
Most studies fall between these two studies 43,44 with regard to the detail of physical activity measurement and categorization. For instance, in two population-based
case-control studies 48,49 conducted among younger women, physical activity both early in life and in the period immediately before the interview was assessed.
However, neither of these studies found an inverse association between physical activity (in either period) and breast cancer risk, despite defining physical activity
categories in various ways.
Because of the potential public health significance of an association between a modifiable lifestyle risk factor such as physical activity and breast cancer, future

studies will need to address important methodologic issues surrounding physical activity measurement.
Although the relation between physical activity and risk of breast cancer remains unsettled, indirect evidence relating higher physical activity to risk of
postmenopausal breast cancer is strong because of the important role of activity in controlling weight gain, an important cause of postmenopausal breast cancer.
This, in addition to many other benefits of staying lean and fit, provide sufficient justification for including regular physical activity in daily life.

OBESITY
A strong and consistent relation has been reported between obesity and mortality from all cancers among men and women. 50 Due to the relationship of obesity with
postmenopausal breast cancer and endometrial cancer, the relation is stronger among women than among men. 51
Attained weight and weight change in adults provide sensitive measures of the balance between long-term energy intake and expenditure. Although the relation
between these variables and breast cancer risk has been complex and confusing, findings provide a coherent picture and indicate a major contribution of weight gain
to risk of postmenopausal breast cancer risk. Two reproducible findings have been particularly enigmatic: (1) In affluent Western populations with high rates of breast
cancer, measures of body fatness have been inversely related to risk of premenopausal breast cancer, and (2) body fatness has been only weakly related to
postmenopausal breast cancer risk despite strong associations between body fat and endogenous estrogen levels.
The inverse relation between body weight (typically determined as BMI, calculated as weight in kg divided by height in meters, 2 to account for variation in height) and
incidence of premenopausal breast cancer has been consistently seen in recent prospective studies, 52 and in a metaanalysis of both case-control and cohort
studies. 53 Little relation between BMI and breast cancer mortality has been observed in premenopausal women, probably because delayed detection and diagnosis in
heavier women counterbalances the lower incidence among heavier women. Heavier premenopausal women, even at the upper limits of what are considered to be
healthy weights, have more irregular menstrual cycles and increased rates of anovulatory infertility, 54 suggesting that their lower risk may be due to fewer ovulatory
cycles and less exposure to ovarian hormones. Increased rates of menstrual irregularity and anovulatory infertility also are seen among very lean women, but such
women are uncommon in Western populations. In case-control studies, a consistent relation between menstrual cycle regularity and breast cancer risk has not
emerged, which could cast doubt on this explanation, but this may be due to the indirect relation between menstrual regularity and ovulation and to difficulties in
remote recall. In a prospective study among younger women, compared with regular cycles of approximately 28 days, both short and longer or irregular cycles were
associated with reduced risk of breast cancer, 55 lending support to irregular anovulation as the explanation for the lower risk in heavier women.
In both case-control and prospective studies conducted in affluent Western countries, the association between BMI and risk of breast cancer among postmenopausal
breast cancer has been only weakly positive or nonexistent. 56,57 The lack of a stronger association has been surprising because obese postmenopausal women have
plasma levels of endogenous estrogens nearly twice as high as lean women, due to conversion of androstenedione to estrogens in adipose tissue and also lower
levels of sex-hormone binding globulin. 58 However, the lack of a stronger positive association now appears to be due to two factors.
First, like the protective effect of early pregnancy, the reduction in breast cancer risk associated with being overweight in early adult life appears to persist throughout
later life. 52,59 Thus, an elevated BMI in a postmenopausal woman represents two opposing risks: a protective effect due to the correlation between early weight and
postmenopausal weight and an adverse effect due to elevated estrogens after menopause. For this reason, weight gain from early adult life to after menopause
should be more strongly related to postmenopausal breast cancer risk than would attained weight. Indeed, the relation between weight gain and risk of
postmenopausal breast cancer has been consistently supported by both case-control 60 and prospective studies. 52,59,61
A second reason for failing to appreciate a greater adverse effect of excessive weight or weight gain on risk of postmenopausal breast cancer is that the use of
postmenopausal hormones obscures the variation in endogenous estrogens due to adiposity and elevates breast cancer risk regardless of body weight. 52 To
appreciate fully the impact of weight or weight gain, an analysis should be limited to women who never used postmenopausal hormones. Thus, among women who
never used postmenopausal hormones in the Nurses' Health Study, those who gained 25 kg or more after age 18 years had double the risk of breast cancer
compared with women who maintained their weight within 2 kg. 52 In this population, the combination of either using postmenopausal hormones or gaining weight after
age 18 years accounted for one-third of postmenopausal breast cancer cases.
The relation between body weight and breast cancer risk among lower risk, mainly non-Western, countries has been observed to be somewhat different in higher risk
countries.62 In general, the inverse relation between weight and premenopausal breast cancer risk has not been observed, and the association between weight and
postmenopausal risk has been stronger. This difference is likely to be due to the lower prevalence of obesity among premenopausal women in these low-risk
countries; few women are likely to be sufficiently overweight so as to cause anovulation and a reduction in premenopausal breast cancer risk. As a result, BMI after
menopause would only reflect the adverse effects of high endogenous estrogens, unopposed by a residual protective effect due to correlation with overweight in early
adult life.

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OBESITY AND CARCINOMA
As in animal studies, energy balance appears to play an important but complex role in the causation of human breast cancer. During early adult life, obesity is
associated with a lower incidence of breast cancer before menopause, but no reduction in breast cancer mortality. However, weight gain after age 18 years is
associated with a graded and substantial increase in postmenopausal breast cancer that is seen most clearly in the absence of hormone replacement therapy.
The relationship between obesity and risk of endometrial cancer follows from the excess exposure to estrogen that is associated with adiposity. This direct relation
has been long observed.
The relationship between obesity and colon cancer has been observed among both women and men and persists even after control for physical activity and dietary
patterns.9,16 It is postulated that excess weight gain may act through increased insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia to promote colon carcinogenesis. 24,25
Evidence for a relationship between obesity and prostate cancer is less consistent. At this time, the inconclusive evidence precludes a definite assertion of any
important relation.

CONCLUSIONS
Lack of physical activity and adult weight gain are harbingers of our Western culture and both act to increase risk of major malignancies. Through numerous
mechanisms, these two lifestyle factors contribute substantially to the risk of colon and breast cancer. The evidence is strong for obesity and endometrial cancer, and
less consistent for other major malignancies.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, The President's Council
on Physical Fitness and Sports. Physical activity and health: a report of the surgeon general. Washington, DC: Office of the Surgeon General, 1996.
2. Colditz G, Cannuscio C, Frazier A. Physical activity and reduced risk of colon cancer: implications for prevention. Cancer Causes Control 1997;8:649.
3. Macfarlane G, Lowenfels A. Physical activity and colon cancer. Eur J Cancer Prev 1994;3: 393.
4. Muir C, Waterhouse J, Mack T, et al., eds. Cancer incidence in five continents (IARC scientific publications, no. 88). Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1987.
5. Potter JD, Slattery ML, Bostick RM, Gapstur SM. Colon cancer: a review of the epidemiology. Epidemiol Rev 1993;15:499.
6. Berlin J, Colditz G. A meta-analysis of physical activity in the prevention of coronary heart disease. Am J Epidemiol 1990;132:612.
7. Wolf A, Hunter D, Colditz GA, et al. Reproducibility and validity of a self-administered physical activity questionnaire. Int J Epidemiol 1994;23:991.
8. Chasan-Taber S, Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ, et al. Reproducibility and validity of a self-administered physical activity questionnaire for male health professionals. Epidemiology 1996;7:81.
9. Giovannucci E, Ascherio A, Rimm EB, et al. Physical activity, obesity, and risk for colon cancer and adenoma in men. Ann Intern Med 1995;122:327.
10. Polednak AP. College athletics, body size, and cancer mortality. Cancer 1976;38:382.
11. Paffenbarger RSJ, Hyde RT, Wing AL. Physical activity and incidence of cancer in diverse populations: a preliminary report. Am J Clin Nutr 1987;45(suppl):312.
12. Albanes D, Blair A, Taylor PR. Physical activity and risk of cancer in the NHANES I population. Am J Public Health 1989;79:744.
13. Gerhardsson M, Floderus B, Norell SE. Physical activity and colon cancer risk. Int J Epidemiol 1988;17:743.
14. Lee IM, Paffenbarger RS Jr, Hsieh CC. Physical activity and risk of developing colorectal cancer among college alumni. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:1324.

15. Thune I, Lund E. Physical activity and risk of colorectal cancer in men and women. Br J Cancer 1996;73:1134.
16. Martinez ME, Giovannucci E, Spiegelman D, et al. Leisure-time physical activity, body size, and colon cancer in women. Nurses' Health Study Research Group. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:948.
17. Slattery M, Potter J, Caan B, et al. Energy balance and colon cancerbeyond physical activity. Cancer Res 1997;57:75.
18. Marcus P, Newcomb P, Storer B. Early adulthood physical activity and colon cancer risk among Wisconsin women. Cancer Epidemiol Biomark Prev 1994;3:641.
19. Whittemore AS, Wu-Williams AH, Lee M, et al. Diet, physical activity and colorectal cancer among Chinese in North America and China. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:915.
20. Reddy BS, Wynder EL. Metabolic epidemiology of colon cancer. Fecal bile acids and neutral sterols in colon cancer patients and patients with adenomatous polyps. Cancer 1977;39:2533.
21. Zaridze DG. Environmental etiology of large-bowel cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1983;70:389.
22. Kriska A, Bennett P. An epidemiologic perspective on the relationship between physical activity and NIDDM: from activity assessment to intervention. Diabetes Metab Rev 1992;8:355.
23. Tran T, Medline A, Bruce W. Insulin promotion of colon tumors in rats. Cancer Epidemiol Biomark Prev 1996;5:1013.
24. Giovannucci E. Insulin and colon cancer. Cancer Causes Control 1995;6:164.
25. McKeown-Eyssen G. Epidemiology of colorectal cancer revisited: are serum triglycerides and/or plasma glucose associated with risk? Cancer Epidemiol Biomark Prev 1994;3:687.
26. Giovannucci E, Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ, et al. Aspirin use and the risk for colorectal cancer and adenoma in male health professionals. Ann Intern Med 1994;121:241.
27. Giovannucci E, Egan KM, Hunter DJ, et al. Aspirin and the risk of colorectal cancer in women. N Engl J Med 1995;333:609.
28. Malina R, Spirduso E, Tate C, Baylor A. Age at menarche and selected menstrual characteristics in athletes at different competitive levels and in different sports. Med Sci Sports Exer
1978;10:218.
29. Frisch RE, Wyshak G, Vincent L. Delayed menarche and amenorrhea in ballet dancers. N Engl J Med 1980;303:17.
30. Frisch RE, Gotz-Welbergen AV, McArthur JW, et al. Delayed menarche and amenorrhea of college athletes in relation to age of onset of training. J Am Med Assoc 1981;246:1559.
31. Merzenich H, Boeing H, Wahrendorf J. Dietary fat and sports activity as determinants for age at menarche. Am J Epidemiol 1993;138:217.
32. Apter D, Vihko R. Early menarche, a risk factor for breast cancer, indicates early onset of ovulatory cycles. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1983;57:82.
33. Bernstein L, Ross R, Lobo R, et al. The effects of moderate physical activity on menstrual cycle patterns in adolescence: implications for breast cancer prevention. Br J Cancer 1987;55:681.
34. Harlow S, Matanoski G. The association between weight, physical activity and stress and variation in the length of the menstrual cycle. Am J Epidemiol 1991;133:38.
35. Cumming D, Wheeler G, Harber V. Physical activity, nutrition, and reproduction. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1994;709:55.
36. Broocks A, Pirke KM, Schweiger U, et al. Cyclic ovarian function in recreational athletes. J Appl Physiol 1990;68:2083.
37. Feicht CB, Johnson TS, Martin BJ, et al. Secondary amenorrhoea in athletes [Letter]. Lancet 1978;2:1145.
38. Bullen BA, Skrinar GS, Beitins IZ, et al. Induction of menstrual disorders by strenuous exercise in untrained women. N Engl J Med 1985;312:1349.
39. Russell JB, Mitchell D, Musey PI, Collins DC. The relationship of exercise to anovulatory cycles in female athletes: hormonal and physical characteristics. Obstet Gynecol 1984;63:452.
40. Siiteri PK. Adipose tissue as a source of hormones. Am J Clin Nutr 1987;45(suppl):277.
41. Cauley JA, Gutai JP, Kuller LH, et al. The epidemiology of serum sex hormones in postmenopausal women. Am J Epidemiol 1989;129:1120.
42. Brinton L, Bernstein L, Colditz G. Summary of workshop on physical activity and breast cancer, November 1314, 1997. Cancer 1998;83(suppl):595.
43. Bernstein L, Henderson BE, Hanisch R, et al. Physical exercise and reduced risk of breast cancer in young women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1403.
44. Thune I, Brenn T, Lund E, Gaard M. Physical activity and the risk of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1269.
45. Rockhill B, Willett WC, Hunter DJ, et al. Physical activity and breast cancer risk in a cohort of young women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1155.
46. Dorgan JF, Brown C, Barrett M, et al. Physical activity and risk of breast cancer in the Framingham Heart Study. Am J Epidemiol 1994;139:662.
47. Paffenbarger RS Jr, Lee IM, Wing AL. The influence of physical activity on the incidence of site-specific cancers in college alumni. In: Jacobs MM, ed. Exercise, calories, fat and cancer. New
York: Plenum Publishing, 1992:7.
48. Chen CL, White E, Malone KE, Daling JR. Leisure-time physical activity in relation to breast cancer among young women (Washington, United States). Cancer Causes Control 1997;8:77.
49. Gammon MD, Schoenberg JB, Britton JA. Recreational physical activity and breast cancer risk among women under age 45 years. Am J Epidemiol 1998;147:273.
50. Lew EA, Garfinkel L. Variations in mortality by weight among 750,000 men and women. J Chronic Dis 1979;32:563.
51. Calle E, Thun M, Petrelli J, et al. Body-mass index and mortality in a prospective cohort of U.S. adults. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1097.
52. Huang Z, Hankinson SE, Colditz GA, et al. Dual effects of weight and weight gain on breast cancer risk. JAMA 1997;278:1407.
53. Ursin G, Longnecker MP, Halies RW, Greenland S. A meta-analysis of body mass index and risk of premenopausal breast cancer epidemiology. Epidemiology 1995;6:137.
54. Rich-Edwards JW, Goldman MB, Willett WC, et al. Adolescent body mass index and ovulatory infertility. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;171:171.
55. Garland M, Hunter DJ, Colditz GA, et al. Menstrual cycle characteristics and history of ovulatory infertility in relation to breast cancer risk in a large cohort of women. Am J Epidemiol
1998;147:636.
56. Howe GR, Hirohata T, Hislop TG, et al. Dietary factors and risk of breast cancer: combined analysis of 12 case-control studies. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:561.
57. Hunter DJ, Willett WC. Diet, body size, and breast cancer. Epidemiol Rev 1993;15:110.
58. Hankinson SE, Willett WC, Manson JE, et al. Alcohol, height, and adiposity in relation to estrogen and prolactin levels in postmenopausal women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1297.
59. Barnes-Josiah D, Potter JD, Sellers TA, Himes JH. Early body size and subsequent weight gain as predictors of breast cancer incidence (Iowa, United States). Cancer Causes Control
1995;6:112.
60. Ziegler RG, Hoover RN, Nomura AMY, et al. Relative weight, weight change, height, and breast cancer risk in Asian-American women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:650.
61. Le Marchand L, Kolonel LN, Earle ME, Mi MP. Body size at different periods of life and breast cancer risk. Am J Epidemiol 1988;128:137.
62. Pathak DR, Whittemore AS. Combined effects of body size, parity, and menstrual events on breast cancer incidence in seven countries. Am J Epidemiol 1992;135:153.

CHAPTER 24 Cancer Prevention: Role of Surgery in Cancer Prevention
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 24
Cancer Prevention: Role of Surgery in Cancer Prevention
RICHARD M. SHERRY
Introduction
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia 2 and Familial Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma
Barrett's Esophagus and Esophageal Cancer
Barrett's Esophagus without Dysplasia
Barrett's Esophagus with Low-Grade Dysplasia
Barrett's Esophagus with High-Grade Dysplasia
Breast Cancer
Lobular Carcinomain Situ
Ovarian Cancer
Colorectal Cancer
Ulcerative Colitis
Hereditary Colorectal Cancer
Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer
Testicular Cancer and Cryptorchidism
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Prophylactic is a word derived from Greek (pro- “before” and phylassin- “to guard”) meaning “advanced guard.” The current status of prophylactic surgery to prevent
malignant disease is limited and often controversial. Clinicians have long recognized that certain conditions, such as inflammatory bowel disease and cryptorchidism,
confer on patients an increased risk of developing fatal organ-specific malignancies. Advances in molecular biology coupled with an increased appreciation that
cancer is a genetic disorder have made accurate risk evaluation with genetic screening a reality for certain malignancies. As our understanding of cancer
susceptibility has advanced, so too has our appreciation of the complexity of the associated social and clinical issues. Progress in the laboratory has often outpaced
our ability to use these new insights in the clinic. These factors have created a new impetus to develop practical strategies to prevent cancer.
That surgery can and should be used to prevent cancer is obvious ( Table 24-1). The fact that colonoscopic polypectomy can help prevent colorectal cancer is now
accepted and largely taken for granted. 1 However, the efficacy of many other interventions is not as convincing. Although the role of prophylactic surgery is largely
undefined, it is certain to evolve. The focus of this chapter is the current use of surgery to prevent cancer.

TABLE 24-1. Prophylactic Surgery for the Prevention of Cancer

MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA 2 AND FAMILIAL MEDULLARY THYROID CARCINOMA
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) is characterized by the development of multiple tumors in endocrine organs in a patient and close relatives. The syndrome is
divided into three types: MEN 1, MEN 2a, and MEN 2b. MEN 2 is defined by the combination of tissues affected and the presence of developmental abnormalities and
has been the focus of extensive genetic analysis. MEN 2a is associated with medullary carcinoma of the thyroid and with hyperparathyroidism. Individuals with MEN
2b have medullary carcinoma of the thyroid, pheochromocytoma, and developmental abnormalities involving hyperplasia of intestinal autonomic nerve plexuses and
growth of nerve axons in the lips, oral mucosa, and conjunctiva, which give rise to the characteristic facies. A syndrome related to MEN 2 is familial medullary thyroid
carcinoma, in which patients have only medullary carcinoma of the thyroid. MEN 2a, MEN 2b, and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma have an autosomal dominant
pattern of inheritance and account for approximately 25% of all cases of medullary carcinoma of the thyroid. 2
In 1993, it was established that mutations in the RET protooncogene were responsible for the hereditary predisposition to medullary thyroid cancer. 3,4 This genetic
breakthrough has allowed accurate identification of kindreds at high risk for developing medullary carcinoma of the thyroid and has permitted families to consider the
risks and benefits of prophylactic thyroidectomy.
In 1994, Wells et al. 5 reported the first experience with prophylactic thyroidectomy based on identification of RET protooncogene mutations. Thirteen patients were
confirmed to carry a mutation in the RET protooncogene in association with MEN 2a and underwent immediate thyroidectomy. In each patient, the resected thyroid
gland demonstrated C-cell hyperplasia. No metastases were found in regional nodes, and all patients had normal postoperative stimulated plasma calcitonin levels.
Subsequent reports have confirmed the validity of this approach, and prophylactic thyroidectomy is now recommended for these patients at approximately 6 years of
age.
Kebebew et al. 6 reported a review of ten published series of patients that had prophylactic thyroidectomy for RET protooncogene germline mutations. Two hundred
and nine patients were included in this review, and only 3.4% of these patients had normal thyroid histology. A central node dissection was performed on 139 of these
patients, and 12 individuals (8.6%) were found to have cervical node metastases. These 12 patients ranged in age from 14 to 70 years. Overall, the morbidity from
total thyroidectomy was low. These investigators have recommended that a central node dissection be included when prophylactic total thyroidectomy is performed for
patients with RET protooncogene mutations.
A second technical issue is whether to include the routine use of total parathyroidectomy and parathyroid autotransplantation in asymptomatic children with MEN 2a.
Decker et al. 7 reported on the strategy of leaving parathyroid tissue preserved in situ. These authors recommended this approach because only 10% to 20% of these
individuals develop parathyroid disease, and when parathyroid disease does develop in this population, it is usually focal. 7
Prophylactic thyroidectomy has become the treatment of choice for patients with RET protooncogene mutations and, if done at an early age, the cure rate should be
100%. The identification and management of these patients is perhaps the best example of prophylactic surgery in patients known to be at risk for an inherited
malignancy. Genetic testing allows the accurate identification of patients at high risk of developing an invasive cancer, and the organ at risk is removed surgically with
low morbidity.

BARRETT'S ESOPHAGUS AND ESOPHAGEAL CANCER
Barrett's esophagus is a premalignant condition in which the stratified squamous epithelium in the distal esophagus is replaced to a variable extent by metaplastic
columnar epithelium. It is significant from an oncologic perspective because of the close association between Barrett's esophagus and the development of
adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. Barrett's esophagus develops as a sequela of chronic inflammation caused by reflux of gastric contents, including acid, pepsin,
and bile acids. Esophageal motility studies and pH monitoring suggest that these patients exhibit weak lower esophageal sphincter tone and slow clearance of gastric
acid. 8,9,10,11 and 12 Although Barrett's esophagus can be recognized or suspected by its appearance on endoscopy, a definitive diagnosis of Barrett's esophagus must be
based on biopsy and histologic analysis. The histologic features of Barrett's esophagus should include a demonstration of goblet cells interspersed among mucin-type
columnar cells. This represents the so-called specialized columnar epithelium and is pathognomonic of the process. 13
It is difficult to determine the incidence of Barrett's esophagus. The majority of individuals with Barrett's esophagus in the general population are probably
asymptomatic and therefore do not seek medical attention. 14
Historically, Barrett's esophagus has been taken to mean specialized columnar epithelium that was determined to be more than 3 cm in length, and consequently,
much of the published information regarding the incidence and natural history was generated by analyzing patients with long segments of the disease. It is now
recognized that intestinal metaplasia of less than 3 cm in length should be classified as Barrett's. It has been reported that up to 33% of all patients undergoing upper
endoscopy may have histologic evidence of Barrett's esophagus. 15,16,17 and 18 Approximately 10% of patients with frequent reflux symptoms will have a long segment of
Barrett's esophagus identified. 19
Numerous reports have confirmed that patients with Barrett's esophagus are at increased risk to develop adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. 20,21,22 and 23 In a review of
18 published series, Tytgat 22 estimated the median incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma in patients with the disease to be approximately 1 cancer per 100
patient-years of follow-up. The overall risk was approximately 40 times higher than that of the general population. 22 The annual rate of cancer development in these
patients is estimated to be approximately 0.8%. 23 Information on the risk of developing adenocarcinoma in short segments (less than 3 cm) of Barrett's esophagus is
more limited, but the available data suggest it is associated with significant potential for malignant degeneration. 20,21
The detection of esophageal epithelial dysplasia is an important clinical factor used to stratify patients with Barrett's esophagus. Dent et al. 24 reviewed eight published
series and reported the outcome of 50 patients with high-grade dysplasia in Barrett's esophagus. These individuals were followed for up to 5 years, and
adenocarcinoma developed in 16 patients (32%). Eleven patients had a resection for dysplasia where no malignancy was found in the specimen. 24 Hameeteman et
al.25 published a prospective study of 50 patients with Barrett's esophagus. All patients were without carcinoma at entrance to the study and were followed for a mean
of 5.2 years. Six patients had low-grade dysplasia, and one patient had high-grade dysplasia at the start of the study. By the end of the observation period, five
patients had developed adenocarcinoma, ten scored as low-grade dysplasia, and three were scored as high-grade dysplasia. 25 Thus, it is suggested that low-grade
dysplasia may be helpful in identifying individuals who are likely to progress to high-grade dysplasia or adenocarcinoma. It is clear, however, that not all high-grade
dysplasia progresses to cancer, and regression of a short segment of Barrett's esophagus that contained high-grade dysplasia has been reported. 26,27
The optimal management of Barrett's esophagus has not been established. No prospective randomized trials have compared alternative treatment strategies.
Comparing published series can be problematic because of biopsy sampling errors, differences in pathologic interpretation, and variations and improvements in
endoscopic and surgical techniques. Although complete agreement has not been reached regarding the best approach for these patients, most experts depend on the
degree of dysplasia associated with Barrett's esophagus to guide treatment recommendations.
BARRETT'S ESOPHAGUS WITHOUT DYSPLASIA
No role for esophagectomy has been established in patients with Barrett's esophagus and no evidence of dysplasia. The clinical issues surrounding these patients
involve questions about the efficacy of screening and the effects of medical or surgical therapy to prevent progression to dysplasia. The exact risk of a patient with
Barrett's esophagus without dysplasia for developing cancer is unknown, but it has been estimated to be 0.2% to 2.1% per year, which is an incidence 30 to 125 times
that of the general population. 28 Consequently, most patients who are surgical candidates are enrolled into surveillance programs. Currently, most patients are treated
medically with weight reduction, head of bed elevation, and H 2-receptor antagonists or protein pump inhibitors. The goal of therapy is symptomatic relief of
gastroesophageal reflux. Although symptoms of reflux often improve with therapy, no evidence suggests that medical therapy consistently induces regression of the
metaplastic columnar epithelium. 2,29,30 In addition, there is little evidence to suggest that antireflux surgery has an important impact on this process. DeMeester 31
reported a review of 11 published series that followed patients with Barrett's esophagus after an antireflux procedure. A total of 340 patients were followed for a mean
of 4.4 years. Seventy-four percent of these patients showed no change in their Barrett's mucosa, 17% showed progression, 12% showed partial regression, and only
4% achieved a complete regression of Barrett's esophagus.
The current recommendation for patients with Barrett's esophagus without dysplasia is to have endoscopic surveillance and biopsy performed every 1 to 2 years. This
recommendation assumes that the patient is a satisfactory surgical candidate. 23,24
BARRETT'S ESOPHAGUS WITH LOW-GRADE DYSPLASIA
There is no role for esophagectomy in patients with low-grade dysplasia associated with Barrett's esophagus. Clearly, the risks of developing severe dysplasia or
adenocarcinoma of the esophagus are significant. Medical therapy and antireflux procedures do not appear to influence the natural history of the condition. The
current recommendation for healthy patients with low-grade dysplasia associated with Barrett's esophagus is to undergo histologic surveillance every 6 to 12 months.
Innovative techniques, such as mucosal ablation, photodynamic therapy, and chemoprevention, are under active investigation.
BARRETT'S ESOPHAGUS WITH HIGH-GRADE DYSPLASIA
The treatment of patients with high-grade dysplasia associated with Barrett's esophagus is controversial. Most experts recommend that healthy patients undergo
esophagectomy by an experienced surgeon. The pathologic diagnosis should be independently confirmed. 23,24,31,32 Because a wide spectrum of mortality has been
reported after esophagectomy (1.4% to 21.0%) and because not all patients with high-grade dysplasia develop adenocarcinoma, some experts have made a case for
aggressive surveillance for these patients. Levine et al. 3,34 described and reported on an aggressive biopsy protocol with up to 12 biopsy specimens per centimeter of
Barrett's mucosa in patients with high-grade dysplasia. Seventy patients with high-grade dysplasia were followed, and 12 were found to have early-stage
adenocarcinomas of the esophagus within an average of 2 months after the diagnosis. In the remaining 58 patients, 15 (23%) progressed to early-stage cancer after
an average of 1.1 years of follow-up. None of the remaining 43 patients (74%) developed cancer when followed an average of 2.5 years. These results have not been
confirmed at other institutions. It should be noted that more than 25% of these patients developed esophageal adenocarcinoma. In addition, the described
surveillance protocol may be impractical for most physicians to follow. Physicians managing healthy patients with severe dysplasia associated with Barrett's
esophagus should seriously consider prophylactic esophagectomy.
The recommendation for surgery or surveillance should take into account the mortality and morbidity of esophagectomy weighed against the risk and expected
prognosis associated with invasive cancer. Most surgical series report an operative mortality of less than 10% when esophagectomy is performed for malignant
disease. The mortality for prophylactic esophagectomy may be less than the mortality associated with surgery for malignant disease, because many patients with
malignant disease are debilitated. In addition, prophylactic esophagectomy does not require an extensive nodal dissection. Either a transhiatal or multiincisional
approach with cervical anastomosis appears to be appropriate. The reported 5-year survival rate for patients undergoing esophagectomy for known invasive cancer is
estimated to be 18% to 32%. 35 The survival of patients with invasive adenocarcinoma detected during a rigorous surveillance program may be higher.

BREAST CANCER
It has been estimated that 5% to 10% of women with breast cancer have hereditary breast cancer. 36,37,38 and 39 BRCA1 was identified on the long arm of chromosome
17 (17q21) in 1990, and more than 500 different mutations in this gene have been identified. 37,38 and 39 BRCA1 is transmitted as an autosomal dominant gene with high
penetrance, so that 50% of the children of carriers inherit the trait. It has been estimated that women with a BRCA1 gene mutation have between a 56% to 85%

lifetime risk of developing breast cancer. 39,40 Frequently, these patients develop invasive cancer before the age of 50. 41
A second breast cancer susceptibility gene, BRCA2, was identified and localized to the long arm of chromosome 13 (13q12-13). 42,43 and 44 Women with BRCA2
germline mutations are estimated to have a lifetime risk of breast cancer that is similar to that of BRCA1 carriers.
The optimal management strategy for patients with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations has not been established. The clinical options for managing a patient known to
have a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation are obvious and include increased surveillance or prophylactic bilateral total mastectomy. No prospective trials have compared
these options. Furthermore, serious questions remain regarding the efficacy of both surveillance and prophylactic mastectomy in this patient population.
Chemoprevention using tamoxifen has been shown to reduce the incidence of breast cancer in women at high risk for breast cancer, but the results in women with an
inherited susceptibility to breast cancer are not known. Clearly, counseling regarding any option must take into account the uncertainties associated with the
estimation of cancer risk; the lack of definitive research regarding risk; and the social, medical, and psychological status of the patient. Ideally these factors should be
reviewed during counseling that occurs before genetic screening.
The most obvious management strategy, and one that appears currently to be most popular among clinicians, is for patients with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations to
depend on increased surveillance. This strategy is based on the assumption that an invasive cancer will be detected at an early stage, which is associated with a
good prognosis. The current recommendations for surveillance in these women include monthly self-examination beginning by age 18, annual or semiannual clinician
breast examination, and annual mammography beginning at age 25 to 35 years. 45
These recommendations reflect a commonsense approach to attempt to reduce the risk of breast cancer–related mortality. However, the evidence to support such a
strategy is limited. The one randomized trial that assessed the efficacy of breast self-examination showed no difference in the stage of detected cancers and no
reduction in mortality from breast cancer in the trained cohort. 46 The sensitivity of clinician breast cancer examination varies widely based on tumor size, breast
density, and experience of the clinician. 47,48 Palpation of a breast mass of less than 10 mm is problematic, even for the most experienced clinician.
Mammography has been firmly established to reduce breast cancer mortality by up to 30% to 40% when used for women 50 to 70 years of age. 49 For women 40 to 49
years of age, the benefit of mammography has been inconsistent. 50,51 and 52 Screening mammography has not been effective in younger women, because the density of
their breast tissue limits the quality of x-rays. The sensitivity and specificity of mammography for detecting nonpalpable breast cancers in young women with BRCA1
or BRCA2 mutations is unknown.
Prophylactic mastectomy is a second option for reducing breast cancer risk. This procedure had fallen out of favor because of multiple case reports of breast cancer
after prophylactic mastectomy, combined with a lack of credible evidence to support the efficacy of the intervention. Breast tissue can be detected in the chest wall,
axilla, and abdomen, which are distant to the typical surgical field during subcutaneous or total mastectomy. Residual breast tissue remains after mastectomy, with
larger amounts of breast tissue presumed to be present after subcutaneous mastectomy compared to total mastectomy. 53,54 and 55
Hartmann et al.56 published a retrospective study based on the Mayo Clinic experience with prophylactic mastectomy ( Table 24-2). This report represents the first
indication that prophylactic mastectomy may reduce the incidence of breast cancer in women at high risk for developing invasive cancer. The study included 639
women that had undergone prophylactic mastectomy between 1960 and 1993. Patients were assigned into either a high- or moderate-risk group based on family
history. The high-risk cohort had a family history that suggested an autosomal dominant predisposition to breast cancer. All other women were considered to be at
moderate risk for developing breast cancer. A control study group of sisters was used for the analysis of the high-risk probands. The Gail model was used to predict
the expected number of breast cancers and breast cancer–related deaths for women in the moderate-risk group. The authors found that four breast cancers
developed in the 425 moderate-risk patients, although the Gail model predicted 37.4 cases of cancer. In the high-risk group, 3 of 214 women developed breast cancer
after prophylactic mastectomy. Among their 403 sisters who had not undergone a prophylactic mastectomy, 115 cases of breast cancer were diagnosed before their
sibling's decision for prophylactic surgery, 38 cases were diagnosed after their sibling's decision for prophylactic surgery, and the time of diagnosis was unknown in
three. The authors concluded that bilateral prophylactic mastectomy was associated with at least a 90% reduction in the incidence of breast cancer for these women.
Women in both the high-risk and moderate-risk cohorts appeared to have a significant reduction in the risk of dying from breast cancer after prophylactic surgery.
Interestingly, all seven women who developed breast cancer after prophylactic surgery had undergone bilateral subcutaneous mastectomy. No patient who had
bilateral total mastectomy developed breast cancer (7 of 575 vs. 0 of 64; P = .38). Most experts recommend bilateral total mastectomy as the procedure of choice for
patients who choose prophylactic mastectomy.

TABLE 24-2. Efficacy of Bilateral Prophylactic Mastectomy (BPM) in Women with a Family History of Breast Cancer—The Mayo Clinic Experience, 1960–1993

Additional support for preventative surgery can be found in a report by Robson et al. 57 These investigators followed women of Ashkenazi Jewish descent who
underwent lumpectomy and radiation therapy for invasive breast cancer. Outcomes were compared for women with or without BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. Women
with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations were more likely to develop ipsilateral local cancer recurrence, although this finding was not statistically significant. Women with
mutations were also significantly more likely to have cancer before the age of 50, were more likely to develop contralateral breast cancer, and were more likely to
have metastatic nodal involvement. Distant disease-free survival and breast cancer–specific survival rates were shorter at 10 years for women with BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutations.
Two reports of the estimated benefit of prophylactic mastectomy for women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations have been based on decision analysis using a Markov
model to determine survival. Grann et al. 58 estimated the probability of developing breast cancer based on a literature review of women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene
mutations and based on the mortality rates associated with breast cancer from Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results data. They assumed a 90% reduction of
risk with the procedure and concluded that a 30-year-old woman would improve her survival by 2.8 to 3.4 years. 58 Schrag et al.,59 using a similar model, estimated an
85% reduction in breast cancer incidence with prophylactic mastectomy and concluded that a 30-year-old woman with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation would gain 2.9 to
5.3 years of life expectancy from the surgery.
The psychological effects of prophylactic surgery in patients have not been thoroughly evaluated. Reconstructive surgical techniques that include autologous tissue
transfer have dramatically improved the cosmetic results of breast surgery. Although the surgical morbidity associated with bilateral mastectomy is low, it is inevitably
increased when breast reconstruction is added. There is a clear need to define the efficacy of surveillance strategies, as well as the efficacy of chemoprevention and
prophylactic surgery in this challenging population. Until more accurate clinical information is available, women must be counseled based on the limited information
available.
LOBULAR CARCINOMA IN SITU
Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) is a histopathologic entity characterized by cellular proliferation originating in the lobules and terminal ducts of the breast. Women
found to have LCIS on breast biopsy are known to be at increased risk of developing invasive ductal and lobular carcinoma of the breast. The critical clinical features
of LCIS are that it is a noninvasive process, frequently found to be multifocal and bilateral, and it generally lacks clinical and mammographic signs. The precise

incidence of LCIS is unknown, but it is estimated to be identified in approximately 0.5% to 1.5% of all benign breast biopsies and in approximately 2% of breast
specimens obtained for mammographic abnormalities. 60,61 and 62
Women with LCIS are clearly at increased risk for developing subsequent invasive carcinoma. Six series of women with LCIS who were followed for an average of at
least 15 years have been published. These series reported that between 12.5% and 34.5% of women with LCIS developed invasive breast cancers. 60,61,62,63,64 and 65 A
metaanalysis of 389 cases of LCIS followed for a mean of 10.9 years noted that invasive breast cancers developed in 16.4% of these women, and the breast cancer
mortality rate was 2.8%.66
Treatment options for patients with LCIS remain controversial. Close observation with or without tamoxifen is currently the most popular choice. Evidence from the
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast Project tamoxifen prevention trial noted that women with LCIS treated with tamoxifen demonstrated a decrease in the incidence of
invasive cancer from 12.99 per 1000 to 5.69 per 1000. 67 Bilateral prophylactic mastectomy is an appropriate choice for healthy women who are unwilling to accept the
risks associated with LCIS or with tamoxifen chemoprevention.

OVARIAN CANCER
Women identified as carrying the BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation are at high risk for developing ovarian cancer as well as breast cancer. The lifetime risk of developing
ovarian cancer for a woman with a BRCA1 mutation is approximately 30% to 60%, although some estimates are as high as 85%. 39,41,67,68 Patients with BRCA2
mutations have an estimated lifetime ovarian cancer risk of approximately 10% to 20%. 42,69
The optimal management strategy for a woman with an inherited susceptibility to ovarian cancer is unclear. To date, no convincing evidence demonstrates that
surveillance for ovarian cancer is effective. This may reflect the low ovarian cancer incidence of approximately 1 in 70 women in the general population. 70 Screening
for ovarian carcinoma has been hampered by the low sensitivity and specificity of the available techniques, which include pelvic examination, serum CA-125
determinations, and transvaginal ultrasound. In addition, a laparoscopy or a laparotomy is required to make the diagnosis. Currently, routine screening in the general
population has not been shown to impact on the morbidity and mortality associated with ovarian cancer, and it is not recommended. The utility of increased
surveillance for patients with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations has not been thoroughly investigated. It is known, however, that approximately 70% of patients diagnosed
with ovarian cancer have stage III or IV disease and that these patients generally have poor 5-year median survival rates.
Faced with a lack of effective screening for ovarian cancer and the poor prognosis of advanced disease, prophylactic oophorectomy has been suggested as a
reasonable alternative for women considered to be at high risk for invasive cancer. The National Institutes of Health Consensus Panel on Ovarian Cancer 70 and the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 71 have concluded that prophylactic bilateral oophorectomy should be recommended to women older than 35 or
after childbearing is completed if there is an inherited predisposition for ovarian cancer. The Cancer Genetics Consortium reviewed the same information and
concluded that the evidence is insufficient to recommend for or against prophylactic oophorectomy as a measure to reduce ovarian cancer risks. 45
It is clear that prophylactic bilateral oophorectomy does not completely eliminate the risk of developing abdominal carcinomatosis that histologically resembles ovarian
cancer. Tobarman et al. 72 reported that, among the 16 potentially inherited ovarian cancer families studied at the National Cancer Institute, prophylactic oophorectomy
had been performed on 28 women. Three of these women developed ovarian-like carcinomatosis 1 to 11 years after oophorectomy. 72 This finding may reflect the fact
that the peritoneum has the same embryologic origin as the ovarian epithelium and that the entire peritoneum may be at risk for malignant degeneration. Alternatively,
occult ovarian cancer may have been present at the time of surgery. Struewing et al. 73 reported an analysis of 12 families with inherited breast/ovarian cancers and
noted a reduction in ovarian cancer in oophorectomized women compared with women who had not undergone surgery. Compared with adjusted Connecticut Tumor
Registry data, a 24-fold excess of ovarian cancer was found among nonoophorectomized women, and a 13-fold excess of “ovarian-like” cancer was found among the
women who had undergone oophorectomy.73 These results were not statistically significant.
Patients with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations are obviously at risk for both breast and ovarian cancer. Clinical decisions regarding prophylactic surgery are difficult
when breast and ovary are considered independently, and the decisions become more challenging when they are considered together. Rebbeck et al. 74 analyzed 43
women with BRCA1 mutations who underwent bilateral prophylactic oophorectomy and had not had bilateral prophylactic mastectomy. Control subjects included
women with BRCA1 mutations who had not had oophorectomy and had no prior history of breast or ovarian cancer. These authors reported a statistically significant
reduction in breast cancer risk after oophorectomy when compared to the control cohort. The reduction in breast cancer risk appeared to increase over time. The use
of hormone replacement therapy did not negate the reduction in breast cancer risk after oophorectomy in these patients. 74
Evidence indicates that the use of oral contraceptives is associated with a decreased risk of ovarian cancer. The use of oral contraceptives has not been analyzed in
patients with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, and what effect, if any, these medications would have on the incidence of breast cancer in these patients is unknown.

COLORECTAL CANCER
Approximately 75% of all colorectal cancers occur in patients with no known risk factors for colon cancer. Individuals with ulcerative colitis, familial adenomatous
polyposis (FAP), and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) are at increased risk for developing the disease, but these patients probably account for
fewer than 10% of all colorectal cancer cases. Despite the low incidence of these conditions in the general population, understanding and managing these patients
has provided insights into the etiology of cancer and the potential role of surgery in the prevention of cancer.
ULCERATIVE COLITIS
Ulcerative colitis is a nonspecific inflammatory bowel disease of unknown etiology that involves the rectum, usually all or part of the colon, and, frequently, the distal
terminal ileum as a result of colonic reflux. The clinical course of ulcerative colitis is variable, ranging from intermittent to chronic, and the severity of attacks also vary
widely from mild to fulminant. The incidence of ulcerative colitis is relatively low at approximately 8 to 15 cases per 100,000 people. 75,76,77 and 78 From an oncologic
perspective, ulcerative colitis is important because of its association with colorectal cancer. Although only a small fraction of colon cancer occurs in the setting of
ulcerative colitis, colorectal cancer is the major cause of the increased morbidity and mortality of patients with this inflammatory disease. 78,79 and 80
It is difficult to precisely determine the risk of colorectal cancer in patients with ulcerative colitis. Most but not all 81,82 studies have noted a significant increase in the
risk of colorectal cancer in this population. The duration of disease and the extent of colonic involvement at the time of diagnosis are the two most important clinical
factors that determine the degree of increased cancer risk. In patients with pancolitis, the cancer risk is approximately 0.5% to 1.0% per year after 10 years of
disease. 83 A disease duration of 20 years in patients with pancolitis is associated with an estimated cumulative incidence of malignancy of between 5% and
35%.78,84,85 The cumulative risk of malignancy increases over time and is reported to be as high as 75% after 40 years of disease. 86
Patients with pancolitis are known to be at higher risk of developing cancer compared with patients with left-sided colitis. Ulcerative colitis, when limited to the left
colon, is associated with an estimated cumulative incidence of cancer of between 1% and 5% at 20 years. 78,85,87 Patients with only proctitis appear to be at only
average risk for colorectal cancer compared with the general population. 85 The impact of other related clinical factors, including the age of onset of the disease and
family history of colon cancer, is not known. 88
The optimal management strategy for patients with long-standing ulcerative colitis remains controversial and varies from prophylactic colectomy after 10 to 20 years of
disease to vigilant surveillance with colonoscopic examination and multiple random biopsies to exclude dysplasia. In the latter strategy, colectomy is recommended
based on the presence and degree of dysplasia. The differences in management strategies is not surprising given the heterogeneous nature of inflammatory bowel
disease and the patient population and the absence of randomized clinical trials to support one strategy over another.
There is widespread agreement that colonic dysplasia is a strong but imperfect marker for identifying patients likely to develop colorectal cancer. Colonic surveillance
is performed with the assumption that a dysplastic lesion can be detected before invasive cancer has developed. Invasive cancer can be found in approximately 10%
of patients with ulcerative colitis at initial screening. Patients with no dysplasia identified on biopsy have a 3% cumulative risk of developing cancer when followed
over time. Patients found to have indefinite or low-grade dysplasia are thought to progress to invasive cancer or severe dysplasia between 16% and 54% at the time.
Forty percent to 45% of patients with ulcerative colitis identified to have high-grade dysplasia or dysplasia associated with a mucosal mass develop colorectal cancer.

Many of these patients already have evidence of nodal metastasis. 89,90 and 91 It is also important to recognize that although the risk of developing colorectal cancer if
there is no histologic evidence of dysplasia appears to be low, up to 25% of patients with ulcerative colitis–associated invasive cancer demonstrate no dysplasia in
the resected specimens.90,92,93
No well-controlled trials have been conducted that confirm the efficacy of colonic surveillance to reduce the mortality of ulcerative colitis–associated colorectal cancer.
Lennard-Jones 94 reported a review of four published series that included 423 patients who were screened regularly by colonoscopy over a period of 12 to 15 years.
Eleven patients were operated on for precancerous lesions, and only three Duke's class A lesions and one Duke's class B lesion were found. No cancer deaths were
reported during the surveillance period. The author suggested that surveillance colonoscopy should be performed only in individuals with long-standing ulcerative
colitis involving the entire colon. 94
Despite the limitations and lack of data to support surveillance for colonic dysplasia, physicians appear reluctant to recommend prophylactic colectomy for patients
with long-standing ulcerative colitis. The fact that surgery eliminates the symptoms of ulcerative colitis, including bleeding, diarrhea, anemia, steroid dependence, and
cyclosporin therapy, as well as eliminating the risk of colorectal cancer may be underappreciated. Several surgical alternatives are available for patients undergoing
colectomy, and the operation should be tailored to the individual and the clinical situation. In the setting of acute colitis, for example, most surgeons recommend a
subtotal colectomy and ileostomy. In the elective surgical setting, many options are available, including protocolectomy and ileostomy, colectomy and ileorectal
anastomosis (assuming the rectum is free of inflammation), protocolectomy and Kock continent ileostomy, or ileal pouch–anal anastomosis. Each procedure is
associated with reported complications; however, surgery for ulcerative colitis is extremely safe for most patients, and the reported operative mortality is less than 1%,
even in the emergency setting. 95 Although comparing the outcomes of each procedure is difficult and controlled studies do not exist, most patients report a high
quality of life regardless of the procedure performed.
It is evident that some consideration of colectomy should be taken 10 years after the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis in patients with pancolitis. After a 20-year disease
interval, a stronger case for prophylactic colectomy can be made for patients, even in the absence of dysplasia. Colonic surveillance for dysplasia is an option favored
by many clinicians, and it is most appropriate for patients with disease limited to the left colon or rectum and for patients with a short duration of disease. Any
surveillance strategy that recommends colectomy based on histologic evidence of dysplasia will miss some patients with invasive cancer. The precise number of
patients in this situation is unknown. If surveillance is the adopted strategy, then it is recommended that, in the absence of dysplasia, colonoscopy and multiple
biopsies should be performed every 2 years until 20 years of disease. At 20 years of disease, surveillance colonoscopy should be performed annually. 91
HEREDITARY COLORECTAL CANCER
It is estimated that up to 20% of patients with colorectal cancer may have some form of inherited susceptibility. 96 Hereditary colon cancer currently includes FAP and
HNPCC. Although many of the clinical issues surrounding these syndromes are similar, each syndrome is considered separately because of differences in the
genetics, in the phenotypic presentations, and in the accepted management strategy.
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS
FAP is a rare autosomal dominant inherited disease in which patients develop hundreds to thousands of adenomatous polyps. The clinical diagnosis is based on the
histologic confirmation of at least 100 adenomas. These polyps are similar on histologic examination to sporadic adenomatous polyps and usually appear during the
second or third decade of life. 97 The genetic cause of FAP is a mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene located on chromosome 5 (5q21). 98 The
genetic alterations found in patients with FAP are similar to those identified in sporadic colon cancer, except an APC mutation is present as a germline mutation. 99
Genetic tests for APC mutations are commercially available.
The obvious phenotypic appearance of FAP coupled with the fact that more than 90% of patients with FAP develop colon cancer by age 40 has helped to establish
standard treatment for this disease. 100 Elective prophylactic colectomy is the current mainstay of therapy and has been performed for FAP since the 1930s. No trials
have compared surgery with surveillance. The current recommendations for treatment of this genetic disorder include annual sigmoidoscopy beginning by age 10
years and prophylactic colectomy in the teen years or when colonic polyps are detected at endoscopy. 101 Patients that elect to have colectomy and ileorectal
anastomosis face the risk of subsequently developing rectal cancer. Estimates of the risk of rectal cancer after subtotal colectomy vary widely and have been reported
to be as high as 55% at 30 years. Patients with ileorectal anastomosis require lifelong endoscopic surveillance.
The choice of operations for patients with FAP includes proctocolectomy with ileostomy, proctocolectomy with ileal distal rectal anastomosis, and proctocolectomy with
ileal-anal anastomosis. Each of these operations has strengths and weaknesses. Overall, these procedures are performed with low morbidity. The choice of
operations should be tailored to patient preference and the experience of the operating surgeon.
FAP is associated with extracolonic manifestations of disease, which can include desmoid tumors and osteomas. Polyps may occur at other intestinal locations, and
carcinomas of the upper intestine have been reported as the most common fatal malignancy in patients after prophylactic colectomy. 102 It is recommended that these
patients undergo upper endoscopy every 6 months to 3 years starting by age 20. 101 Many agents, including sulindac, vitamin C, and indomethacin, have been
investigated as chemopreventive agents. Although some agents have shown promise, none has been proven to be effective in reducing the number of polyps or the
risk of cancer in FAP patients. 103
HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS COLORECTAL CANCER
HNPCC describes a clinical syndrome of colorectal cancer that occurs with early onset and in multiple family members. In contrast to FAP, HNPCC has no antecedent
phenotype, and malignancy develops in the absence of adenomatosis of the colon and rectum. The expression of disease may be limited to the colorectum (Lynch
syndrome I) or coexist with extracolonic tumors, typically endometrial cancer (Lynch syndrome II). Other associated malignancies include stomach, small intestine,
hepatobiliary, pancreas, breast, ovary, brain, and skin cancers. 103,104,105 and 106
In 1991, the International Collaborative Group on HNPCC established the minimum clinical criteria required to help identify families with HNPCC. The so-called
Amsterdam criteria are: (1) colorectal cancer in three or more relatives, one of whom is the first-degree relative of the other two; (2) at least two generations of
affected individuals with colorectal cancer; and (3) one or more of the cancers has been diagnosed before the age of 50. FAP must be excluded. 107 One genetic cause
of the syndrome was identified in 1993. Peltomaki et al. 108 identified a locus on chromosome 2 that was linked to HNPCC in several families. The genetic basis of
HNPCC has been identified as a germline mutation in one of a set of genes responsible for DNA mismatch repair. 109,110,111,112 and 113 Additional loci have since been
identified. More than 90% of the identified mutations are in two genes, MSH2 (MutS homologue 2) and MLH1 (MutL homologue 1), located on chromosome 2p and 3p,
respectively.114 These genes are dominantly inherited, with a penetrance of approximately 90%. Consequently, gene carriers have a 90% likelihood of developing
colorectal cancer. 115 Patients suspected of carrying an APC mutation can be tested for at least two mismatch repair gene mutations in commercial laboratories.
HNPCC gene carriers develop colorectal cancer at an average age of 45 years. These tumors occur more commonly in the right colon and tend to be more poorly
differentiated. 116,117 Synchronous and metachronous cancers are frequent, and should a segmental colectomy be performed for a primary cancer, there is a 45% risk
for a new primary cancer within 10 years. 115 Lynch and Smyrk118 have reported that colonic polyps can be identified in up to 17% of first-degree relatives during
colonoscopic screening. Adenomas are more likely to grow and progress to invasive cancer in this patient population than in the general population. 119,120
The optimal management strategy for HNPCC gene carriers has yet to be established. Substantial evidence from uncontrolled studies suggests that surveillance
colonoscopy and polypectomy are effective in reducing the risk of invasive cancer in these patients. Jarvinen et al. 120 reported a 62% decrease in the diagnosis of
colorectal cancer in HNPCC patients in a screening program at a medium follow-up of 117 months compared with patients not followed by colonoscopy at 10 years.
Bulow et al.121 reported a decreased incidence of cancer and improved survival rate of patients with HNPCC who had surveillance and experiments compared with
probands. Therefore, it has been recommended that surveillance colonoscopy be performed on gene carriers starting at age 20 and be repeated every 1 to 2 years.
Patients older than 35 years of age should have annual colonoscopy. 115,122
Currently, no consensus among experts has been reached regarding the role of prophylactic subtotal colectomy for patients with HNPCC. 115,123 Given the high
penetrance of the disorder and the high rate of synchronous and metachronous disease among mutation carriers, a strong case can be made for prophylactic surgery
in patients with this disease. A subtotal colectomy is currently the procedure of choice, and it can be performed with minimal morbidity and mortality. Patients who

elect to undergo a subtotal colectomy require colonoscopic surveillance of the remaining rectum. Patients undergoing prophylactic surgery may still face the risk of
extracolonic cancers. Patients electing not to consider prophylactic surgery must commit to lifelong surveillance, and should a colon cancer be detected, a subtotal
colectomy is then indicated. No prospective clinical trials in patients with HNPCC have been conducted, and given our current understanding of the increased risk of
colorectal and extracolonic malignancy in these patients, the suggested benefit of surveillance colonoscopy, and the low morbidity of prophylactic subtotal colectomy,
either vigilant surveillance or prophylactic surgery are reasonable management strategies.

TESTICULAR CANCER AND CRYPTORCHIDISM
Cryptorchidism, or undescended testis, is characterized by absence of at least one testis in the scrotum and is the most common genitourinary disorder of childhood.
Approximately 3% of children born at full term and up to 30% of children born prematurely will have an undescended testis. 124 A well-known but poorly understood
association has been made between cryptorchidism and testicular cancer. In 1929, Cooper 125 noted that the longer a testis remained cryptorchid and the higher the
testis lay from the scrotum, the more likely it was to be histologically abnormal. The reported risk for malignancy in cryptorchidism is 48.9 per 100,000, which is more
than 20 times the risk of testicular cancer in the general population. 126 It has been estimated that approximately 10% of testicular tumors arise from an undescended
testis. 127
Either orchiopexy in association with observation or observation alone is recommended for patients with cryptorchidism. There are multiple reasons for correcting an
undescended testis in a child, including the desire to correct a visible defect, to prevent psychological problems associated with the defect, to enhance the possibility
of future fertility, and to place the testis in a site where it can be easily examined. Correction of an undescended testicle may be achieved using hormonal therapy or
surgery. Most experts agree that this should be accomplished as early as 12 months of age. 128
It is not clear that correction of an undescended testicle alters the risk of developing testicular cancer. Reports in the literature conflict regarding the protective effects
of correcting cryptorchidism, and virtually no information is available on patients who had an undescended testicle corrected at younger than 2 years of age. 129,130 and
131
Most reports are population-based case-controlled studies. It is known that patients with unilateral cryptorchidism have been found to have an increased risk of
testicular cancer in both the undescended and the normally descended testis. 132,133
Management of an undescended testis in a postpubertal patient population has been extensively addressed by Farrer et al. 133 These authors completed a statistical
analysis that compared the estimated risk of death from a germ cell testis tumor in patients with cryptorchidism to the risk of death from an orchiectomy. They
concluded that the risk of death from orchiectomy is greater than the risk of death from testicular cancer in patients older than 32 years of age. The authors
recommended that orchiectomy be considered only for patients younger than 32 years with postpubertal unilateral cryptorchidism. 133 Other experts recommend
orchiopexy or observation in older patients, depending on patient preference and assuming the testicle is palpable. 134 General agreement exists that a nonpalpable
undescended testicle should be removed.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Winawer SJ, Zauber AG, Ho MN, et al. Prevention of colorectal cancer by colonoscopic polypectomy. N Engl J Med 1993:329:1977.
2. Marsh DJ, Leagroyd DL, Robinson BG. Medullary thyroid carcinoma: recent advances and management update. Thyroid 1995;5:407.
3. Mulligan LM, Kwok JBJ, Healey CS, et al. Germ-line mutations of the RET proto-oncogene in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. Nature 1993;363:458.
4. Donis-Keller H, Dou S, Chi D, et al. Mutations in the RET proto-oncogene are associated with MEN 2A and FMTC. Hum Mol Genet 1993;2:851.
5. Wells SA Jr, Chi DD, Toshima K, et al. Predictive DNA testing and prophylactic thyroidectomy in patients at risk for multiple endocrine endoplasia type 2A. Ann Surg 1994;220:237.
6. Kebebew E, Tresler PA, Siperstein AE, et al. Normal thyroid pathology in patients undergoing thyroidectomy for finding a RET gene germ line mutation: a report of three cases and review of the
literature. Thyroid 1999;9:127.
7. Decker RA, Geiger JD, Cox CE, et al. Prophylactic surgery for multiple endocrine neoplasia type IIA after genetic diagnosis: is parathyroid transplantation indicated? World J Surg 1996;20:814.
8. Iascone C, DeMeester TR, Little AG, Skinner DB. Barrett's esophagus: functional assessments, proposed pathogenesis and surgical therapy. Arch Surg 1983;118:543.
9. Gillen P, Keeling P, Byrne PJ, Hemmess JPJ. Barrett's esophagus: profile. Br J Surg 1987;74:774.
10. Vaaezi MF, Richter JC. Role of acid and duodenal-gastroesophageal reflux in gastroesophageal reflux disease. Gastroenterology 1996;111:1192.
11. Fiorucli S, Santucci L, Farroni F, Peli MA, Movelli A. Effect of omeprazole on gastroesophageal reflux in Barrett's esophagus. Am J Gastroenterol 1989;84:1263.
12. Dent J, Holloway RH, Toouli J, Dodds WJ. Mechanism of lower esophageal sphincter incompetence in patients with symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux. Gut 1988;29:1020.
13. Antonioli DA, Wang HH. Morphology of Barrett's esophagus and Barrett's associated dysplasia and adenocarcinoma. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1997;26:495.
14. Cameron AJ, Zinsmeister AR, Ballard DJ, et al. Prevalence of columnar-lined esophagus, comparison of population-based clinical and autopsy findings. Gastroenterology 1990;99:918.
15. Cameron AJ, Kamath PS, Carpenter HE. Barrett's esophagus: the prevalence of short and long segments in reflux patients. Gastroenterology 1996;108:A65.
16. Johnston MH, Hammond AS, Lasker W, et al. The prevalence and clinical characteristics of short segments of specialized intestinal metaplasia in the distal esophagus on routine endoscopy.
Am J Gastroenterol 1996;91:1507.
17. Nandurkar S, Ng T, Adams S, et al. Short segment Barrett's esophagus: prevalence, diagnosis and association. Gastroenterology 1996;110:A27.
18. Heies SK, Seif F, Webber S, et al. Short segment Barrett's esophagus: clinical and histologic findings. Gastroenterology 1996;99:110:A132.
19. Cameron AJ. Management of Barrett's esophagus. Mayo Clin Proc 1998;73:457.
20. Clark GWB, Ireland AP, Peters JH, et al. Short segment Barrett's esophagus: a prevalent complication of gastroesophageal reflux disease with malignant potential. J Gastrointest Surg
1997;1:113.
21. Sharma P, Movales TG, Samplings RE. Short segment Barrett's esophagusthe need for standardization of the definition of endoscopic criteria. Am J Gastroenterol 1998;93:1033.
22. Tytgat GN. Does endoscopic surveillance in esophageal columnar metaplasia have any real value? Endoscopy 1995;27:19.
23. Spechler SJ. Barrett's esophagus. Semin Oncol 1994;21:431.
24. Dent J, Bremner CG, Collon MJ, et al. Working party report to the world congress of gastroenterology: Barrett's esophagus. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1991;6:1.
25. Hameeteman W, Tatgat GN, Houthoff HJ, et al. Barrett's esophagus: development of dysplasia and adenocarcinoma. Gastroenterology 1989;96:1249.
26. Levine DS, Haggitt RC, Irvine S, et al. Natural history of high grade dysplasia in Barrett's esophagus. Gastroenterology 1996;110:A550.
27. Levine DS, Haggin RC, Radinovitch PS, et al. Complete regression of high grade dysplasia, DNA content abnormalities, and Barrett's esophagus. Gastroenterology 1995;108:A496.
28. Provenzale D, Kemp A, Arora S, et al. A guide for surveillance of patients with Barrett's esophagus. Am J Gastroenterol 1994;89:670.
29. Gore S, Healey CJ, Sutton R, et al. Regression of columnar-lined esophagus with continuous omeprazole therapy. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1993;7:623.
30. Galmiche JP, Dumas R, Boyer J, et al. Long-term omeprazole effects on Barrett's mucosa. Gastroenterology 1993;104:A85.
31. DeMeester SR, DeMeester TR. The diagnosis and management of Barrett's esophagus. Adv Surg 1999;33:29.
32. DeMeester TR. The surgical treatment of dysplasia and adenocarcinoma. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1997;26:669.
33. Levine DS, Hagg HRC, Blount PL, et al. An endoscopic biopsy protocol can differentiate high grade dysplasia from early adenocarcinoma in Barrett's esophagus. Gastroenterology 1993;105:40.
34. Levine DS. Management of dysplasia in the columnar-lined esophagus. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1997;26:613.
35. Naunheim KS. Barrett's esophagus. In: Cameron JL, ed. Current surgical therapy. St. Louis: Mosby, 1998:62.
36. Newman B, Austin MA, Lee M, King MC. Inheritance of breast cancer: evidence for autosomal dominant transmission in high risk families. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:3044.
37. Hall JM, Lee MK, Newana B, et al. Linkage of early asset breast cancer to chromosome 17q21. Science 1990;250:1684.
38. Miki Y, Swensen J, Shattuck E, et al. A strong candidate for the breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene BRCA1. Science 1994;226:66.
39. Ford D, Easton DF, Stratton M, et al. Genetic heterogenicity and penetrance analysis of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in breast cancer families. Am J Hum Genet 1998;62:676.
40. Strauewing JP, Hartge P, Waholder S, et al. The risk of cancer associated with specific mutation of BRCA1 and BRCA2 among Ashkenazi Jews. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1401.
41. Easton DF, Ford D, Bishop DT, et al. Breast and ovarian cancer incidence in BRCA1 mutation carriers. Am J Hum Genet 1995;56:265.
42. Wooster R, Bignell G, Lancaster J, et al. Identification of the breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA2. Nature 1995;378:789.
43. Phelum CM, Lancaster JM, Tonin P, et al. Mutational analysis of BRCS2 gene in 49 site specific breast cancer families. Nat Genet 1996;13:120.
44. Tavtigian SV, Simard J, Rommens J, et al. The BRCA2 gene and mutation in chromosome 12q-linked kindreds. Nat Genet 1996;12:333.
45. Burke W, Daly M, Garber J, et al. Recommendations for follow-up care of individuals with an inherited predisposition to cancer. II. BRCA1 and BRCA2. Cancer Genetics Studies Consortium.
JAMA 1997;277:997.
46. Thomas DB, Gao DE, Self SQ, et al. Randomized trial of breast self examination in Shanghai: methodology and preliminary results. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:355.
47. Miller AB, Baines CJ, Turnball C. The role of the nurse examiner in the National breast screening study. Can J Public Health 1991;82:162.
48. Campbell HS, Fletcher SW, Liu S, et al. Improving physicians and nurses clinical breast examination. Am J Prev Med 1991;7:1.
49. Kerlikowske E, Grady D, Rubin SM, et al. Efficacy of screening mammography: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1995;273:149.
50. Elwood JM, Cox B, Richardson AK. The effectiveness of breast cancer screening by mammography in younger women. Online J Curr Clin Trials 1993;32:93.
51. Eckhardt S, Badellino F, Murphy GP. Breast cancer screening in pre menopausal women in developed countries. Int J Cancer 1994;56:1.
52. Smart CR, Hendrick RE, Rutledge JH, Smith RA. Benefit of mammography in women ages 40 to 49 years current evidence from randomized trials. Cancer 1995;75:1619.
53. Eldar S, Meguid MM, Beatty JD. Cancer of the breast after prophylactic subcutaneous mastectomy. Am J Surg 1984;148:6932.
54. Goodnight JE, Quagliana JM, Monton DL. Failure of subcutaneous mastectomy to prevent the development of breast cancer. J Surg Oncol 1984;26:198.
55. Ziegler LD, Kroll SS. Primary breast cancer after prophylactic mastectomy. Am J Clin Oncol 1991;14:451.
56. Hartmann LC, Schaid DJ, Woods JE, et al. Efficacy of bilateral prophylactic mastectomy in women with a family history of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;340:77.
57. Robson M, Levin D, Federici M, et al. Breast conservation therapy for invasive breast cancer in Ashkenazi women with BRCA gene founder mutations. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:2112.
58. Grann VR, Pamageas KS, Whang W, et al. Decision analysis of prophylactic mastectomy and oophorectomy in BRCA1 or BRCA2 position patients. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:979.
59. Schrage D, Kuntz KM, Gardaz JE, Weeks JC. Decision analysiseffects of prophylactic mastectomy and oophorectomy a life expectancy among women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. N
Engl J Med 1997;336:1465.
60. Anderson JA. Lobular carcinoma in situ of the breast: an approach to rational treatment. Cancer 1977;39:2597.
61. Page SL, Kidd TE Jr, Puport UD, et al. Lobular neoplasia of the breast: higher risk for subsequent invasive cancer predicted by more extensive disease. Hum Pathol 1991;22:1232.
62. Fryberg ER, Bland KI. In situ breast carcinoma. Adv Surg 1993;26:29.

63. Wheeler JE, Enterline HT, Roreman JM, et al. Lobular carcinoma in situ of the breast: long term follow up. Cancer 1974;34:554.
64. Rosen PP, Kosloff C, Lieberman PH, et al. Lobular carcinoma in situ of the breast. Detailed analysis of 99 patients with average follow up of 24 years. Am J Surg Pathol 1978;3:225.
65. Bodian CA, Perizin KH, Luttes R. Lobular neoplasia long-term risk of breast cancer and related to other forms. Cancer 1996;78:1024.
66. Bradley SJ, Weaver DW, Bouwman DE. Alternatives on the surgical management of in situ breast cancer. A meta analysis of outcome. Am Surg 1990;56:428.
67. Fisher B, Costantino JP, Wickerham DE, et al. Tamoxifen for the prevention of breast cancer: report of the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project P-1 study. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90:1271.
68. Ford D, Easton DF, Bishop DT, et al. Risks of cancer in BRCA1 mutation carriers. Breast cancer linkage consortium. Lancet 1994;363:692.
69. Ford D, Easton DF. The genetics of breast and ovarian cancer. Br J Cancer 1995;72:805.
70. NIH Consensus Development Panel on Ovarian Cancer. Ovarian cancer: screening, treatment, and follow up. JAMA 1995;273:491.
71. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists committee on quality assessment. ACOQ criteria set for prophylactic bilateral oophorectomy to prevent epithelial carcinoma. Int J Gynecol
Obstet 1996;52:101.
72. Tobarman JK, Greene MH, Tucker MA, et al. Intraabdominal carcinomatosis after prophylactic oophorectomy in ovarian cancer prone families. Lancet 1982;2:795.
73. Struewing JP, Watson P, Easton DF, et al. Prophylactic oophorectomy in inherited breast/ovarian cancer families. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1995;17:33.
74. Rebbeck TR, Levin AM, Eisen A, et al. Breast cancer risk after bilateral prophylactic oophorectomy in BRCA1 mutation carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1475.
75. Stonnington CM, Phillips SF, Melton LJ III, Zinsmeister AR. Chronic ulcerative colitis: incidence and prevalence in a community. Gut 1997;28:402.
76. Langhel B, Munlcholm P, Neilsen GH, et al. Incidence and prevalence of ulcerative colitis in Copenhagen County from 1962 to 1987. Scand J Gastroenterol 1991;26:1247.
77. Kitalosa T, Ulsunomiya T, Yakota A. Epidemiological study of ulcerative colitis in Japan: incidence and familial occurrence. J Gastroenterol 1995;30[Suppl 8]:5.
78. Devroede GJ, Taylor UF, Saucer WG, et al. Cancer risk and life expectancy of children with ulcerative colitis. N Engl J Med 1971;285:17.
79. Ekbom A, Helmick CG, Zack M, Adam HO. Extra colonic malignancies in inflammatory bowel disease. Cancer 1991;67:2015.
80. Eekbom A, Helmick CG, Zack M, et al. Survival and causes of death in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. A population based study. Gastroenterology 1992;103:954.
81. Bonnevie O, Binder V, Anthonisen P, Riis P. The prognoses of ulcerative colitis. Scand J Gastroenterol 1974;9:81.
82. Langholtz E, Munkholm P, Davidsen M, Binder V. Colorectal cancer and mortality in patients with ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 1992;103:1444.
83. Kornbluth A, Sachar DB. Ulcerative colitis practice guidelines in adults. Am J Gastroenterol 1997;92:204.
84. Lennard-Jones JE, Melville DM, Moison BC, et al. Precancer and cancer in extensive colitis: findings among 401 patients over 22 years. Gut 1990;31:800.
85. Ekbom A, Helmick C, Zack M, et al. Ulcerative colitis and colorectal cancer: a population-based study. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1228.
86. Devroede G. Risk of cancer in inflammatory bowel disease. In: Winawer SJ, Schottenfeld D, Sherlock P, eds. Colorectal cancer: prevention, epidemiology, and screening. New York: Raven
Press, 1980;325.
87. Gyde S, Prior P, Dew MJ, et al. Mortality in ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterol 1982;83(Pt 1):36.
88. SSAT, AGA, ASCD, ASGE, AHPBA Consensus Panel. Ulcerative colitis and colon carcinoma: epidemiology surveillance, diagnosis and treatment. J Gastroenterol Surg 1998;2:305.
89. Bernstein CN, Shanahan F, Weinstein WM. Are we telling patients the truth about surveillance colonoscopy in ulcerative colitis? Lancet 1994;343:71.
90. Connell UR, Lennard-Jones JE, William CB, et al. Factory affecting the outcome of endoscopic surveillance for cancer in ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 1994;107:934.
91. Bernstein CN. How do we assess the values of surveillance techniques in ulcerative colitis? J Gastroenterol Intest Surg 1998;2:318.
92. Ranshoff DF, Riddell RH, Levin B. Ulcerative colitis and colonic cancer problems in assessing the diagnostic usefulness of mucosal dysplasia. Dis Colon Rectum 1985;28:383.
93. Taylor BA, Pembertory JH, Carpenter HA, et al. Dysplasia in chronic ulcerative colitis. implications for surveillance. Dis Colon Rectum 1992;35:950.
94. Lennard-Jones JE. Is colonoscopic cancer surveillance in ulcerative colitis essential for every patient? Eur J Cancer 1995;31A(78):1178.
95. Mcleod RS. Chronic colitis. In: Cameron JL, ed. Current surgical therapy. St. Louis: Mosby, 1998:179.
96. Peterson SM, Brensinger JD, Johnson KA, Giardiello FM. Genetic testing and counseling for hereditary form of colorectal cancer. Cancer 1999;86[Suppl]:2540.
97. Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Colorectal tumors. In: The genetic bases of human cancers. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998:565.
98. Kinzler KW, Nilbert MC, Su LK, et al. Identification of FAP locus genes from chromosome 5q21. Science 1991;253:661.
99. Powell SM. Clinical application of molecular genetics in colorectal cancer. Semin Colon Rectal Surg 1995;6:2.
100. Lindor NM, Greene MH. The cancer handbook of family cancer syndromes. Mayo familial cancer program. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1039.
101. Tardiman JP, Conrad PG, Sleisenger MH. Gastric testing in hereditary colorectal cancer: indication and procedures. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:2344.
102. Spigelman AD, Williams CB, Talbot IC, et al. Upper gastrointestinal cancer in patients with familial adenomatous polyposes. Lancet 1989;2:783.
103. Hawk E, Lubet R, Limburg P. Chemoprevention in hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes. Cancer 1999;86[Suppl]:2551.
104. Lynch HT, Lynch PM, Pestar J, Fusaro RM. The cancer family syndrome: rare cutaneous phenotypic linkage of Toss's syndrome. Arch Intern Med 1981;141:607.
105. Vasen HFA, Offerhaus GJA, den Hartog Jager FCA, et al. The tumor spectrum in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer: a study of 24 kindreds in the Netherlands. Int J Cancer 1990;46:31.
106. Lynch HT, Smyrk TC, Watson P, et al. Genetics, natural history, tumor spectrum, and pathology of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer: an updated review. Gastroenterology
1993;104:1535.
107. Watson P, Lynch HT. Extracolonic cancer in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Cancer 1993;71:677.
108. Vasen HF, Mecklin JP, Khan PM, Lynch HT. The international collaborative group on hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer: an international cooperative study of 165 families. Dis Colon
Rectum 1993;36:1.
109. Peltomaki P, Aaltonen LA, Sistenen P, et al. Genetic mapping of a locus predisposing to human colorectal cancer. Science 1993;290:610.
110. Fishel R, Lescoe MK, Rao MR, et al. The human mutator gene homolog MSH2 and its association with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. Cell 1993;75:1027.
111. Leach FS, Nicolaides NC, Papadopoulos N, et al. Mutation of a mut S homolog in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancers. Cell 1993;75:215.
112. Bronner CE, Baker SM, Mossison PT, et al. Mutation in the DNA mismatched repair gene homologous hMLH1 is associated with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. Nature 1994;368:258.
113. Nicolaides NC, Papadopoulos N, Liu B, et al. Mutation of two PMS homologous in hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. Nature 1994;371:75.
114. Miyaki M, Konishi M, Tanaka K, et al. Germline mutations of MSH6 on the cancer of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Nat Genet 1997;17:271.
115. Peltomaki P, Vasen HF. Mutations predisposing to hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Data and results of a collaborative study. The international collaborative group or hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 1997;113:140.
116. Lynch HT. Is there a role for prophylactic subtotal colectomy among hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer germ line mutation carriers? Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:109.
117. Jass JR, Smyrk TC, Stewart SM, et al. Pathology of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancers. Anticancer Res 1994;14:1631.
118. Merklin JT, Jarvinen H. Treatment and follow-up strategies in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinomas. Dis Colon Rectum 1993;36:927.
119. Lynch HT, Smyrk T. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (Lynch syndrome): an updated review. Cancer 1996;78:1149.
120. Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Lessons from hereditary colorectal cancer. Cell 1996;87:159.
121. Jarvinen HJ, Mecklin JP, Sistonen P. Screening reduces colorectal cancer in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer families. Gastroenterology 1995;108:1405.
122. Bulow S, Bulow C, Nielson TF, et al. Centralized registration results in improved prognosis in familial adenomatosis polyposis. Scand J Gastroenterol 1995;30:989.
123. Burtz W, Peterson G, Lynch HT, et al. Recommendation for follow-up care for individuals with an inherited predisposition to cancer. Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. JAMA 1997;277:915.
124. Rodriguez-Bigas MA. Prophylactic colectomy for gene carriers in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Has the time come? Cancer 1996;78:199.
125. Scorer CG. The descent of the testis. Arch Dis Child 1964;39:605.
126. Cooper ER. The histology of the retained testis in the human subject at different sizes and its comparison with the testis. J Anat 1929;64:5.
127. Gill B, Kogan S. Cryptorchidism: current concepts. Pediatr Clin North Am 1997;44:1211.
128. Abratt RP, Reddi VB, Sarembock LA. Testicular cancer and cryptorchidism. Br J Urol 1992;70:656.
129. Action Committee Report of the Urology Section, American Academy of Pediatrics. Timing of elective surgery on the genitalia of male children with particular reference to the risks, benefits and
psychological effects of surgery and anesthesia. Pediatrics 1997;97:590.
130. United Kingdom Testicular Cancer Study Group. A etiology of testicular cancer association with congenital abnormalities, age of puberty, infertility and exercise. BMJ 1994;308:1393.
131. Pike MC, Chilvers C, Peckham MHJ. Effects of age at orchiopexy on risk of testicular cancer. Lancet 1986;1:1246.
132. Depue RH, Pike MC, Henderson BE. Cryptorchidism and testicular cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1986;77:830.
133. Chilvers C, Pike MC. Epidemiology of undescended testis. In: Oliver RTD, Blandy JP, Hope-Stone HF, eds. Urological and genital cancer. Oxford: Blackwell Science, 1989:306.
134. Farrer JH, Walker AH, Rajfer J. Management of the post-pubertal cryptorchid testis: a statistical review. J Urol 1985;134:1071.
135. Rajfer J. Congenital anomalies of the testis and scrotum. In: Walsh PC, Retik AB, Vaughan ED, Wein AJ, eds. Campbell's urology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1998;2172.

CHAPTER 25 Cancer Screening
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 25
Cancer Screening
Barbara K. Rimer
Joellen Schildkraut
Robert A. Hiatt
Introduction
What Is Cancer Screening?
Evaluation of a Screening Test
Measures Of Effectiveness
Positive and Negative Consequences of Screening
Breast Cancer Screening
Randomized Clinical Trials
Nonrandomized Clinical Trials
Evidence for Mammography
Breast Cancer Screening Guidelines
Cervical Cancer Screening
Skin Cancer Screening
Prostate Cancer Screening
Screening Tests for Prostate Cancer
Prostate Cancer Screening Recommendations
Colorectal Cancer Screening
Screening Tests for Colorectal Cancer
Lung Cancer Screening
The Future of Screening
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The goal of cancer screening is a very practical one—to detect cancer at an early stage when it is treatable and curable. However, the reality is quite complex. For a
screening test to be useful, the test or procedure should detect cancer earlier than would occur otherwise and there should be evidence that earlier diagnosis results
in an improved outcome. 1 Advances in genetics and molecular biology herald the era when it may be possible to detect cancer at earlier and earlier stages along the
carcinogenesis pathway. Because of this progress, the line between prevention and screening may narrow further. Moreover, screening will be used to detect
susceptibility as well as early markers of disease. Yet, in spite of the promises of molecular diagnostics, screening still must be evaluated according to its present
reality, which is to detect asymptomatic disease when it is potentially curable.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an overview of cancer screening—what it is, key terms, measures of effectiveness, and consequences. We also review
briefly the status of screening for several prevalent cancers (breast, cervical, skin, prostate, colorectal, and lung). The recommendations are for the general
population, but not for people with identified mutations in cancer susceptibility genes. Currently, no randomized clinical trial data are available to guide practice in this
area. However, the Cancer Genetics Studies Consortium, sponsored by the National Human Genome Research Institute, issued provisional recommendations for
individuals who are known to carry the breast cancer gene mutations BRCA1 or BRCA2.2 Generally, it is recommended that people with these and other relevant
mutations (e.g., HNPCC, p53) be screened at an earlier age, and more frequently, for the cancers to which they are predisposed.
This chapter cannot provide comprehensive information on any of the cancer sites reviewed, because the literature for each is vast. Rather, the chapter provides a
succinct summary of the field and a perspective for clinicians to use in determining the efficacy of particular screening tests. Several texts provide good overviews of
the issues related to screening for specific kinds of cancer. 3 The National Cancer Institute's (NCI) Physician Data Query (PDQ) [World Wide Web site
http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/pdq.htm] also is an excellent source for the latest data on the specific screening tests discussed here.

WHAT IS CANCER SCREENING?
Appropriate cancer screening should lead to the early detection of asymptomatic or unrecognized disease by the application of acceptable, inexpensive tests or
examinations in a large number of persons. 4,5 The results of a screening test should then be applied expeditiously to separate apparently well persons who probably
have disease from those who probably do not. The main objective of cancer screening is to reduce the morbidity and mortality from a particular cancer among the
persons screened. The screening procedure itself is not diagnostic, and positive or suspicious findings must be evaluated further to determine diagnosis and
appropriate treatment. Characteristics that distinguish screening tests from diagnostic tests are listed in Table 25-1.

TABLE 25-1. Characteristics of Screening Tests versus Diagnostic Tests

Several characteristics make particular cancers suitable for screening. These include (1) substantial morbidity and mortality; (2) a high prevalence in a detectable
preclinical state; (3) the possibility of effective and improved treatment because of early detection; and (4) the availability of a good screening test with high sensitivity
and specificity, low cost, and little inconvenience and discomfort. Although there are more than 100 different cancers, most of them lack proven screening
interventions. Only cancers of the breast, cervix, skin, colon-rectum, prostate, and testes have widely accepted screening interventions, 6 and there is controversy over
some aspects of each. Only breast, cervical, and colorectal screening have met the rigorous criteria of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. 7
The benefits of the investment in cancer screening occur over many years. 8 Cancer screening affords both benefits and disadvantages; therefore, it is important to
evaluate the effectiveness of screening programs by specifying criteria to meet the program's objectives. For screening to be a benefit, treatment given during the
detectable preclinical phase must result in a better prognosis than therapy given after symptoms develop, thereby possibly requiring less radical treatment. Cervical
cancer is a good example of a disease with a preclinical phase that can be detected in a preinvasive stage, in this case, using the Papanicolaou (Pap) smear. 9 Finally,
there are economic costs associated with cancer screening, and these should be evaluated before a cancer screening test is recommended on a population basis.

EVALUATION OF A SCREENING TEST
In the evaluation of a screening test, it is essential to answer questions concerning the test's ability to accurately predict the presence or absence of disease. If the

test is abnormal, what are the chances that disease is present? If the test result is normal, what are the chances that the disease is absent? The validity of a
screening test is measured by its ability to classify correctly those persons who have preclinical disease as test-positive and those without the preclinical disease as
test-negative.
Sensitivity and specificity address the validity of the test. Sensitivity is the probability of testing positive if the disease is truly present. As the sensitivity of the test
increases, the number of persons with the disease who are classified as test-negative (false-negative) decreases. Specificity is the probability of screening negative if
the disease is truly absent. A highly specific test rarely is positive in the absence of disease and therefore results in a lower proportion of persons without disease who
are incorrectly classified as test-positive (false-positive). Two measures that directly address the estimation of probability of disease are the positive predictive value
(PV+) and the negative predictive value (PV–). The PV+ is an estimate of the accuracy of the test in predicting the presence of disease, and the PV– is an estimate of
the accuracy of the test in predicting the absence of disease. The predictive value is a function of the sensitivity, specificity, and prevalence of disease. The accuracy
of a test is a measure of the percent of all results that are true results, whether positive or negative, or the total correct test results. Table 25-2 summarizes the
relationship between results of a screening test and the actual presence of disease as determined by an appropriate diagnostic test.

TABLE 25-2. Definitions of Criteria for Evaluating a Screening Test

Sources of bias are of particular importance in the evaluation of a screening program. People who choose to participate in screening programs (volunteers) are likely
to be different from the general population in ways that pertain to survival; thus, volunteer bias is a concern. 4Lead-time bias is defined as the interval between
diagnosis of disease at screening and when it would have been detected due to the development of symptoms. 4 If lead-time bias is not taken into account, survival
may appear to be erroneously increased among screen-detected cases as compared to unscreened cases. Finally, length bias is the overrepresentation among
screen-detected cases of those with a long preclinical period (thus less rapidly fatal), leading to the incorrect conclusion that screening was beneficial. 4
MEASURES OF EFFECTIVENESS
Several measures have been used to judge the effectiveness of screening. The most definitive measure of the efficacy of a breast cancer screening program and
least subject to bias is breast cancer mortality as determined by the comparison of screened and unscreened groups in a randomized clinical trial. 4,10 There are
excellent epidemiology texts 4,11 and reviews 10 that discuss the measures in more detail than can be presented here.
Other outcome measures have been proposed, including case finding and survival. Each has limitations. The problem with case finding is that it is subject to lead-time
bias. Survival may appear to have been advanced, but only because cancer is found earlier in the screened group. 11 Because of length bias, screening may appear
effective, but in fact, it has not made a difference in mortality; slow-growing cancers may contribute to the apparent success of the screened group. Thus, length bias
limits the value of survival data as outcome measures. Survival, in itself, does not establish that the natural history of the disease has been altered or that mortality
has been reduced. 12
Another potential outcome is improved quality of life (QOL). 13 However, none of the international breast cancer screening trials have good QOL data. These data are
being collected as part of the NCI's Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, Ovarian Cancer (PLCO) screening trial. This is an important area for further exploration and, in future
trials, QOL should be measured. Cost per quality-adjusted life-years saved would be a good measure, but it has been used rarely. 14 QOL may include a reduction in
psychologic morbidity for a woman and her family. 15 QOL also may be enhanced by providing better or more acceptable treatment choices. For example, Tabar and
colleagues 16 have argued that even if mammography does not reduce breast cancer mortality for women in their 40s, it may be beneficial because it avoids disfiguring
and debilitating surgery. And de Koning and colleagues 17 showed that breast cancer screening could reduce health care costs and improve QOL by preventing
advanced disease, which also could be true for cervical and colorectal cancer screening. However, Harris 18 has expressed concern that a woman's QOL could be
diminished by living longer with breast cancer.
In assessing the effectiveness of screening technologies, the randomized clinical trial (RCT) has been the gold standard. It is the most powerful methodology for
demonstrating the value of screening in comparison to an unscreened group. 19 RCTs overcome the biases inherent in other designs. The RCT with the end point of
mortality avoids the two most important biases noted earlier, lead-time and length bias, 19 as well as selection bias and overdiagnosis. 20 However, case-control studies
also can provide useful information, and at less cost than RCTs, and may be used to supplement RCT data. In addition, increasingly sophisticated statistical modeling
techniques may be appropriate to assess the impact of screening, especially in situations where large RCTs cannot be conducted. The U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force,7 the PDQ system,21 and others have ranked levels of evidence; the RCT is uniformly regarded as the highest level of evidence.
POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE CONSEQUENCES OF SCREENING
Every medical activity has positive and negative consequences, and screening is no exception. The benefits include (1) improved prognosis for those with
screen-detected cancers, (2) the possibility of less radical treatment, (3) reassurance for those with negative test results, and (4) resource savings if treatment costs
are reduced because of less radical diagnosis. The optimal outcome is a reduction in cancer mortality. The assumption is that screening can detect cancer when it is
early and curable, if cancer is present, or indicate that cancer is not present, if that indeed is the case. But because no medical test is perfect, there are several
potential negative consequences of screening that also must be considered. These include the economic and psychologic consequences of false-positives 22,23,24,25 and
26 and false-negatives, 27,28 the potential for overdiagnosis, 29,30,31 and 32 the potential carcinogenic effects of screening, and the labeling phenomenon.
Screening in the community usually means that many people will require additional tests for what will later be recognized as false-positives. 33 This is one of the
predictable costs of cancer screening. A consideration of the negative consequences of screening is essential, 34 because screening is offered to presumably healthy
people. 8,11 The negative consequences should not override the potential benefits. However, accumulating evidence in the area of breast cancer screening suggests
that although there are negative psychologic consequences of abnormal test results, they appear to be relatively short-lived. 35 On the plus side, abnormal results may
increase the likelihood that women will be screened in the future. 24,36,37 However, the data regarding negative psychological consequences are still sparse and related
primarily to breast cancer. More data are needed in other areas, such as colorectal cancer screening. Overdiagnosis is an important area that has not been well
studied. As understanding of cancer biology increases, it will become easier to classify overdiagnosis.
For all kinds of cancer screening, physicians should engage patients in discussions of the risks and benefits of cancer screening. Because most people overestimate
the risks for certain types of cancers (e.g., breast), 38 they may inflate both the need for screening and the potential benefits. 39 For some cancers, such as colorectal
cancer, people may underestimate their personal susceptibility and may need encouragement to consider screening, with both the positive and negative
consequences. In the case of prostate cancer, where the evidence is still equivocal and population-based screening is not recommended, it is especially important
that men understand the limitations of screening. 40 Harris39 encouraged that screening discussions begin with the possible outcomes of screening, making sure the
patient's information is accurate. Then, the physician should define and clarify the patient's perceptions and values. Together, the patient and physician then weigh
the benefits of screening versus the costs and benefits. This has been called shared decision making.41

Austoker42 outlined the topics that should be included when helping patients to make informed decisions about cancer screening. These include the purpose of
screening; the likelihood of positive and negative findings and the possibility of false-positive or false-negative results; the uncertainties and risks involved; any
significant medical, social, or financial implications of screening; and follow-up plans.

BREAST CANCER SCREENING
In 1999, 176,000 new invasive cases of breast cancer and approximately 43,700 deaths due to the disease were reported in the United States. 43 Widely accepted
techniques for breast cancer screening, but with differing levels of evidence, include mammography, clinical breast exam (CBE), and breast self-examination (BSE).
As with other screening techniques, the purpose of breast cancer screening is to find breast cancer early, while the disease is curable, to reduce mortality for breast
cancer. As Tabar et al. 44 and others have shown, tumor size, lymph node status, and malignancy grade are major prognostic factors in survival. No cancer screening
test has been studied more than mammography (with or without CBE). Yet, after more than 35 years of trials, many questions remain regarding at what age and at
what interval women should be screened. The breast cancer screening trials provide clear evidence of benefit for screening women older than age 50 until
approximately age 70, and increasing evidence of a small but statistically significant benefit of mammography for women aged 40 to 49 years.
Eight randomized trials have been conducted over more than 35 years to assess the impact of mammography. Together, these trials have included more than 500,000
women, with 180,000 women aged 40 to 49.
The eight international randomized clinical trials have varied greatly 27 (Table 25-3). Most trials have included women in their 40s, although two trials began accrual at
45, and one of the Canadian trials [the first National Breast Cancer Screening Study (NBSS1)] was designed to examine mammography and CBE versus usual care
for women in their 40s, with a separate study (NBSS2) to assess mammography and CBE versus CBE only for women aged 50 to 59. The studies also varied in (1)
whether they used one-view or two-view mammography; (2) the screening interval, which varied from 12 to 24 months; and (3) the level of compliance achieved. The
problems in the trials also have varied. For example, cluster randomization resulted in socioeconomic status differences with the study groups in the Edinburgh trial. 45
Other trials experienced higher than desired contamination, most often because of higher than expected levels of screening in the control groups. For most of the
studies, women's breast cancer risk factors were not known; only the Health Insurance Plan of New York (HIP) and NBSS assessed and published data on the breast
cancer risk factors for women in the study. 46

TABLE 25-3. Selected Characteristics of Eight Randomized Controlled Trials of Breast Cancer Screening

RANDOMIZED CLINICAL TRIALS
Although mammography was first reported in 1913, it was not until 1963 that the first RCT—and the only U.S. RCT—commenced at HIP. HIP included women aged 40
to 64 at entry. Nearly 62,000 women were randomized to the study (two-view mammography and CBE) or control group (usual care). Two-view mammography and
physical examination were offered every 12 months during the 4-year study period, and follow-up was continued for 18 years. 27
The Swedish Two-County Trial in Kopparberg and Ostergotland began in 1977–1978 with an enrollment of almost 135,000 women randomized to one-view
mammography every 24 months (younger than age 50) or 33 months (older than age 50). Within those geographic areas, all women were invited to enroll by letters of
invitation, using the population registry list. Screening continued for four rounds for younger women and three rounds for older women. 47 The Kopparberg arm used
single-view mammography without grids; Ostergotland used a grid. 48
The Malmö Trial was begun in 1976 in one city in Sweden. 27,28,49 It was one of only two trials that began screening at age 45, and it stopped entry at age 69. It used
two-view mammography every 18 to 24 months for five rounds; randomization was by cluster based on birth cohort. Approximately 59,000 women were enrolled in this
trial.
The Stockholm Study began in 1981 and enrolled approximately 43,000 women aged 40 to 64 who received single-view mammography every 28 months. Like the
Malmö trial, randomization was by birth cohort within clusters. 27
The final Swedish study was conducted in Gothenburg, starting in 1982. The trial began with nearly 50,000 women aged 40 to 59 who received two-view
mammography every 18 months. Randomization of women aged 40 to 49 was by individual, whereas clustered randomization was used for women aged 50 to 59.
Verified results have not yet been published, 47 but additional data were provided in 1997 for the National Institutes of Health Consensus Conference on Breast
Cancer Screening in women aged 40 to 49.
The Edinburgh Trial began in 1978 as a randomized component of the larger, nonrandomized United Kingdom trial of The Early Detection of Breast Cancer.
Approximately 25,000 women aged 45 to 64 were randomized to two-view mammography plus CBE on either a 12- or 24-month schedule. The purpose was to assess
the impact of mammography and CBE in reducing mortality from breast cancer. 50,51 and 52
The National Breast Cancer Screening Study (NBSS1) was designed to examine the value of two-view mammography and CBE compared to usual care in women
aged 40 to 49. Nearly 53,000 women were enrolled, starting in 1980, and received follow-up yearly for 5 years. Unlike the other trials, the women were recruited as
volunteers and then randomized. As Miller and colleagues 53 have reported, these women were different from the Canadian population in several ways—for example,
they were less likely to smoke, and they had higher levels of education.
The second Canadian study, the NBSS2, also begun in 1980, enrolled nearly 43,000 women aged 50 to 59 and was designed to compare two-view mammography
and CBE against CBE only. In other words, the question was whether there is a benefit of mammography over and above CBE in this age group. This is the only trial
planned to assess the additive impact of mammography in addition to CBE. 32 Critiques of this trial have appeared by several authors. 54,55 The criticisms are probably
overstated, and the results should not be discounted.
NONRANDOMIZED CLINICAL TRIALS
A number of nonrandomized trials have been conducted around the world. Much can be learned from these studies. However, because of a number of design
limitations, they should not be used alone in establishing screening guidelines and policies. 56 The largest study of mammography and CBE was the U.S. Breast
Cancer Detection Demonstration Project (BCDDP): 280,000 women aged 35 and older were recruited and screened in 28 centers annually with mammograms and
CBE during the 1970s. 20,49 The BCDDP was sponsored jointly by the NCI and the American Cancer Society (ACS). Because the BCDDP participants were not a
random sample of the population, there were some important differences from women in the general population. Most notably, the BCDDP population was at much
higher risk, with a substantially higher incidence of breast cancer. Moreover, because it was not an RCT, the case fatality rate was used to assess the impact of

screening. A subset of women were followed as part of a case-control study conducted by Morrison and colleagues 57 to examine case fatality rates within the BCDDP.
Breast cancer mortality was approximately 20% less than expected from national data. 57 There was a benefit for younger women, but it was less than for older women.
EVIDENCE FOR MAMMOGRAPHY
More than 3.5 million women-years of observation have been recorded for women of all ages, and more than 2.7 million women-years for women aged 40 to 49 at
entry from the breast cancer screening RCTs. 27,58 One of the challenging aspects of tracking these trials is the constantly shifting nature of the data. The trialists
provide updates at different points in time, and some reports use nonverified data. Thus, at any given point, review articles may vary substantially in the numbers they
report. Figure 25-1 and Figure 25-2 illustrate the mortality outcomes for women of all ages and for those younger than age 50, with 18 years of follow-up for HIP, 46 14
years for the Edinburgh trial, 45 10.5 years for the Canadian trials, 59 and 7 to 13 years for the Swedish trials.

FIGURE 25-1. Mortality impact of the randomized clinical trials (all ages) by relative risk and upper and lower confidence intervals. Adjusted for socioeconomic status
differences. 45 HIP, Health Insurance Plan of New York; NBSS2, second Canadian National Breast Cancer Screening Study.

FIGURE 25-2. Mortality impact of the randomized clinical trials (women aged 40 to 49 years at entry) by relative risk and upper and lower confidence intervals.
Adjusted for socioeconomic status differences. 45 HIP, Health Insurance Plan of New York; NBSS1, first Canadian National Breast Cancer Screening Study. 58

In 1993, the International Workshop on Breast Cancer Screening 27 created considerable controversy when it concluded that for women aged 40 to 49, randomized
controlled trials consistently demonstrated no benefit from screening in the first 5 to 7 years after entry and a marginal benefit after that. More recently, in reviewing
the same trials, Kerlikowske and colleagues 60 confirmed this conclusion and suggested that the same benefit could be achieved by screening women after age 50.
However, several years later, with most of the international RCTs now having more than 10 years of follow-up, the trends are clearer: Six of the trials show reductions
in mortality for women who were in their 40s at entry. But a large variability remains in the relative risk of dying from breast cancer for women younger than 50. There
also is significant controversy over many of the reported numbers.
Although the randomized trials have included too few women older than age 70 to offer guidance about screening for older women, the Forum on Breast Cancer
Screening61 recommended regular mammograms for women aged 70 years who are otherwise healthy. A case-control analysis in the Nijmegen study 62 confirmed the
benefit of mammography for women older than 70.
Six different published metaanalyses, including the two mentioned earlier, have examined the effect of the mammography trials on women aged 40 to 49 ( Table 25-4).
When Elwood and colleagues 19 conducted a metaanalysis and included all the data except for the controversial Canadian study, they found an overall relative risk of
0.99, suggesting no difference between the screened and control groups. With the Canadian data included, there was a slight increase in the relative risk for the
experimental group (relative risk, 1.08). The overall relative risks found in the metaanalyses have ranged from 0.85 to 0.99 without the NBSS data and 0.93 to 1.08
with the NBSS data. Eckhardt and colleagues 63 found a nonsignificant 7% reduction in mortality. In a 1995 metaanalysis, Smart and colleagues 64 found a significant
24% mortality reduction for women in their 40s. Hendrick et al. 58 combined recent follow-up data on women aged 40 to 49 at entry. They found a statistically
significant 18% mortality reduction. This is similar to the 18% reduction Berry 8 found when an assumption of homogeneity was made. However, the benefit was not
statistically significant when he assumed heterogeneity. The benefit occurs approximately 15 years after the start of screening. 21 The benefit for women in their 50s is
larger and also significant: an approximately 25% to 30% reduction in mortality. It is reasonable to conclude that there is a small but statistically significant reduction
in mortality for women in their 40s. Nevertheless, most of the benefit actually is achieved when they are in their 50s. 65 For women in their 50s and 60s, there is
general agreement about the benefits of mammography.

TABLE 25-4. Metaanalyses of Trials for Women Aged 40 to 49 Years

BREAST CANCER SCREENING GUIDELINES
The question, “At what age should women begin getting regular mammograms?” has been one of the most contentious in science and medicine. The issue became
even more inflamed after a 1997 National Institutes of Health Consensus Conference on Breast Cancer Screening for Women Aged 40 to 49. 66 The report, contrary to

expectations, found insufficient data to recommend that women in their 40s get regular mammograms. Disagreement still exists over whether the modest reduction in
mortality warrants a recommendation that all women in their 40s be screened. 67 The argument turns primarily on the small population benefit achieved. Most of the
benefit occurs when the screened women are in their 50s. As Ransohoff and Harris 67 noted, only 1 to 2 women's lives would be extended per 1000 women of 40 to 50
years of age who are screened annually for 10 years. However, in agreeing on a reduction in breast cancer mortality of 18%, both the ACS and the NCI changed their
screening recommendations, with the ACS now advising annual mammograms for women aged 40 and older. Annual screening for women in their 40s is based on the
assumption of a shorter lead time for younger women.44 The NCI recommends mammograms every 1 to 2 years for average-risk women aged 40 and older. 68 For the
first time since 1993, however, the recommendations are compatible; both organizations now endorse regular mammograms for women older than age 40 ( Table
25-5).

TABLE 25-5. Screening Guidelines for Breast, Colorectal, Prostate, and Cervical Cancers for Selected Health Care Organizations

The evidence suggests that a 5% to 20% additional benefit in mortality reduction can be achieved by adding a high-quality CBE. 19,27 Although the recommendations of
different medical organizations vary, it seems prudent to encourage women to have a CBE yearly (see Table 25-3).

CERVICAL CANCER SCREENING
In 1999, an estimated 12,800 new cases of invasive disease and 4800 deaths resulted from cervical cancer. 43 A steady decline in mortality was observed after the
initiation of widespread Pap testing in the mid-twentieth century. 69 From 1970 through 1995, mortality continued to decrease by 40%. 69 This decline represents a
major success in cancer control in the United States. Mortality associated with invasive cervical cancer is no longer common compared to other cancers. However,
cervical cancer is the second most common cancer worldwide, 70 and fatalities from this disease in developed countries should be entirely avoidable with currently
available technology. Continued efforts to improve cervical cancer screening practices are, therefore, well justified both nationally and internationally.
Dr. George Papanicolaou introduced the test that bears his name in the 1930s. An RCT has never been conducted to confirm its efficacy because wide-scale
adoption and diffusion of the Pap test into medical practice made assignment to a nonscreened control group unethical and, therefore, untenable. Nevertheless, one
would expect screening to be effective because cervical cancer is accessible and has a relatively long preclinical detectable phase. Numerous observational studies
have demonstrated its efficacy beyond a reasonable doubt. Large national screening programs in Nordic countries, Canada, and the United States have been
associated with marked drops in mortality from cervical cancer. 69,71,72 Analysis of these studies and others suggested that the probability of invasive cancer could be
reduced up to 90% for frequencies up to every 3 years. 73,74 Case-control studies of women with invasive cervical cancer in varied geographic areas, including Italy,
Columbia, Scotland, and Denmark, have documented risks three to ten times greater associated with women who have not been screened. 75,76,77 and 78
Controversy remains about the appropriate screening interval for Pap testing. Guidelines from major expert groups have continued to recommend annual screening,
with less frequent intervals after three normal smears (at the discretion of the physician). However, after its review of the evidence, the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force left the interval from 1 to 3 years 7 (see Table 25-5). The literature that bears on this question is limited.
Inadequate data are available to recommend an upper age limit for regular screening. Because mortality increases with advancing age and 40% to 50% of all women
who die from cervical cancer are older than 65 years of age, 79 it seems prudent to screen older women. However, national survey data document a marked fall-off in
regular screening for older women. 80 There is concern that Pap testing is less sensitive in older women who have a receded squamocolumnar junction of the cervix.
However, it is likely that the primary reason for invasive cervical cancer in older women is lack of screening.
For women who have had hysterectomies, the practice of cytologic screening with vaginal smears is still common. However, at least for women who have had a
hysterectomy for benign conditions, the likelihood of detecting vaginal dysplasia is extremely low and the false-positive rate is high, 81 thus suggesting that the practice
is unnecessary.

SKIN CANCER SCREENING
The incidence of skin cancer has increased worldwide, with U.S. incidence data mirroring this trend. 82,83 In the United States, the incidence rate of melanoma has
increased approximately 4% per year since the early 1970s, with a 162% increase in male melanoma cases and 95% in women. 43,84 It is unclear whether this increase
is due to actual changes in prevalence or is a function of increased awareness with subsequent diagnosis, improved reporting by tumor registries, or both. In 1999,
54,000 new cases of skin cancer were projected, with 44,200 new cases of melanoma and 7300 deaths. 43 Melanoma now ranks sixth in incidence among cancers in
males and seventh in incidence among cancers in females. 43 Approximately 800,000 nonmelanoma skin cancers are diagnosed each year. 43,85 The United States lags
behind many other countries in the creative application of interventions to reduce the incidence of and mortality from melanoma and other skin cancers. Australia,
which has the highest reported incidence of melanoma anywhere, has mounted successful population-based programs that have had dramatic effects. 86,87
Although national data are lacking on either population or health professional behavior, at least one study suggests that most physicians do not examine the areas of
the skin where melanoma is likely to occur, and most people do not routinely examine their skin for changes. Skin cancer screening consists of a medical history and
a whole body examination under strong lighting. 85,88,89,90 and 91 There is a lack of consensus about the routine provision of preventive services in dermatologists'
offices.92 Although no randomized trials proving the impact of skin cancer screening have been performed to date, research results from the efficacy studies that have
been conducted suggest that skin cancer screening may lower mortality from skin cancer, especially melanoma, by improving rates of early detection. 93,94,95,96,97,98 and 99
However, more evidence is needed.
Experts have not agreed about screening guidelines for skin cancer. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends “routine screening for individuals at high
risk” (e.g., those having a family or personal history of skin cancer, clinical evidence of precursor lesions, and increased exposure to sunlight). The Task Force neither
defines what is meant by routine screening nor reports on the specific recommendations for skin self-examination. 7,85,100,101 The ACS recommends a cancer-related
checkup, including a skin examination, every 3 years and “more frequently” for persons at risk. 43,101 The ACS further suggests that “screening for the presence of skin
cancer is well within the domain of the well-trained generalist.” 101 The NCI also recognizes the benefits of skin cancer screening, but offers no specific guidelines for
such screening. 102 Other experts recommend yearly skin cancer screenings, 90,97,99 regular screening for the elderly, 87,103,104 and skin cancer screening for every new
patient seen by a dermatologist. 105

PROSTATE CANCER SCREENING
Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer among men in the United States and is the second leading cause of male cancer deaths. In 1999, 179,000
new cases of prostate cancer were identified, and there were 37,000 deaths. However, consensus is lacking concerning recommendations for prostate cancer
screening. There are several reasons for the controversy surrounding screening tests for prostate cancer. First, no definitive evidence suggests that prostate cancer

screening results in improved clinical outcomes, especially a reduction in mortality from the disease. 106,107,108 and 109 Second, the incidence of prostate cancer is on the
rise largely due to the detection of latent, asymptomatic cases with uncertain clinical relevance, thus putting the value of screening in doubt. 110,111
SCREENING TESTS FOR PROSTATE CANCER
The three main screening modalities for prostate cancer include digital rectal examination (DRE), serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA), and endorectal (transrectal)
ultrasonography (TRUS). The most widely used and oldest technique for detection of prostate cancer is the DRE. Wide ranges in estimates of sensitivity (33% to
69%) and specificity (49% to 97%) of the DRE have been reported. Ultimately, only one in three patients with a positive DRE has prostate cancer. 112,113,114,115 and 116
With the development and application of intraluminal (rectal) probes with high resolution, studies have shown that small, nonpalpable malignant lesions of the
prostate could be detected. 117,118 and 119 TRUS has fallen short of expectations, with a large variation in reports of sensitivity and specificity, both ranging from 41% to
79%.119,120 Despite this, TRUS is considered an excellent ancillary modality to increase accuracy of biopsy over the digital guidance alone. 112 The PSA test is a blood
test that allows for earlier detection of many prostate cancers. Interest in the PSA grew in the late 1980s. Impressively, PSA levels were shown to drop to undetectable
levels after prostatectomy. 121,122 However, normal PSA values are found in approximately one-third of men with localized cancers, and PSA levels are often elevated
in men with noncancerous conditions, such as benign prostatic hyperplasia. 112,122,123 Some investigators have argued that integration of the DRE with determination of
PSA levels and the use of TRUS in selected cases would improve prostate cancer detection. 122,124 A new approach for using PSA based on age-dependent thresholds
has been suggested and may be promising.125
Nonrandomized Studies
Two nonrandomized studies are ongoing to evaluate screening tests for prostate cancer (the ACS National Prostate Cancer Detection Project 126 and a multicenter
study headquartered at Washington University 127 involving six university medical centers). Results of these trials will not be available until the first decade of the
twenty-first century. Thus, clinicians and patients must make decisions in the absence of RCT data. Table 25-6 summarizes the sensitivity, specificity, and predictive
value of these data.

TABLE 25-6. Estimates of Screening Test Performance for Prostate Cancer

Randomized Clinical Trials
The NCI's PLCO trial is a 16-year randomized control study that began on November 16, 1993. 131 It is accruing 74,000 men 60 to 74 years of age and has a design
power of 90% to determine 20% reduction of prostate cancer mortality. This trial will provide important information about the efficacy of screening.
Trends and What They Mean
National data from 1990 to 1996 show that prostate cancer incidence peaked in 1992 at 190.8 per 100,000 and declined at an average rate of 8.5% from 1992 to
1996.130 A series of related reports in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, based on data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results Cancer
Registry Program, indicates a decline in the incidence of distant stage disease, 107 as well as a decline in incidence-based mortality of distant stage disease and flat
incidence-based mortality trends of localized and distant-stage disease. 108 Statistical methods were applied to consider the effect of screening by limiting some
analyses to the contribution from cases diagnosed since 1987 when widespread screening using the PSA test had begun. Thus, some evidence shows improved
prognosis for the screen-detected cases. However, alternative interpretations, such as the possibility that cause-of-death misclassification could explain these
findings, cannot be ruled out.
PROSTATE CANCER SCREENING RECOMMENDATIONS
In light of the limitations of prostate cancer screening, it is important to consider the natural history of this disease and subgroups of men at high risk for developing
prostate cancer. These considerations are critical for determining public health policy. 132,133
Not surprisingly, no consensus has been reached about prostate cancer screening (see Table 25-5). Several groups, including the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force,7 American College of Physicians, 132 and Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health Examination, 133 have recommended against routine PSA screening. The
NCIPDQ does not recommend PSA screening to the general population. 1 The ACS43 has modified its guidelines and now recommends that men age 50 and older who
have at least a 10-year life expectancy should talk with their health care professionals about having a DRE of the prostate gland and a PSA blood test every year.
Men who are at high risk for prostate cancer (African Americans or men who have a history of prostate cancer in close family members) should consider beginning
these tests at an earlier age.

COLORECTAL CANCER SCREENING
Increased emphasis on the importance of screening for colorectal cancer during the 1990s has followed studies documenting the efficacy of both fecal occult blood
testing (FOBT) and sigmoidoscopy. Cancers of the colon and rectum account for the third largest number of new cancer cases after lung, with 94,700 and 34,700
cases estimated, respectively, in 1999. 43 Substantially fewer people now die from the disease, indicating the promise of screening and treatment (47,900 and 8700
estimated deaths in 1999 for colon and rectum, respectively). 43 A slow decrease has been seen in both incidence and mortality since the late 1970s. Incidence has
decreased at a rate of approximately 1.4% per year for the period from 1991 to 1995.
As with cervical and prostate cancers, the long preclinical and detectable phase makes colorectal cancer ideal for screening. Like cervical (but unlike prostate)
cancer, the specificity of existing screening procedures minimizes the necessity of additional procedures necessary for the follow-up of false-positives. Increased risk
for colorectal cancer is found for persons with personal histories of colorectal cancer, adenomatous polyps, or inflammatory bowel disease, as well as those with
family histories of adenomas, 134 colorectal cancer, or hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes (i.e., familial adenomatous polyposis and hereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer. 135,136
SCREENING TESTS FOR COLORECTAL CANCER
Four tests are currently in use for colon cancer screening: FOBT, sigmoidoscopy, colonoscopy, and high-contrast barium enema. RCT data are not available for
colonoscopy or barium enema. A fifth test, the DRE, is a low-cost, low-harm practice that is well ingrained into routine medical evaluation, but no evidence from
controlled studies indicates that it is useful in preventing mortality from rectal cancer. 137 The FOBT, based on the use of guaiac to detect heme in the stool, can detect
occult bleeding from early-stage colorectal cancers. Flexible sigmoidoscopy involves the use of a 60-cm fiber-optic endoscope that can view up to the splenic flexure

of the colon and at the same time provide access for biopsy and removal of polyps. 138 A comprehensive review of colorectal cancer screening with clinical guidelines
has been developed by a multidisciplinary panel under the aegis of the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research. 139
Fecal Occult Blood Test
Support for the use of FOBT comes from several large randomized controlled trials, including a Minnesota trial of 46,501 participants between the ages of 50 and 80
years of age. 140,141 This study found that annual FOBT with rehydration of the samples decreased the 13-year cumulative mortality from colorectal cancer by 33% and
biennial screening by 21%. 140,141 Most (75% to 84%) of this reduction resulted from the test rather than from incidental discovery of cancers by follow-up
colonoscopy.142 Earlier RCTs in England of 152,850 individuals, 143 as well as a large study of 62,000 persons in Denmark, 144 demonstrated that biennial FOBT without
rehydration reduced mortality by 15% to 18%. An additional study of 27,000 persons in Sweden, aged 60 to 64 years of age, is ongoing. 145 A fifth trial in the United
States evaluated FOBT as a supplement to annual rigid sigmoidoscopy in 21,756 subjects and found a nonsignificant decrease in colorectal cancer mortality. 146 Data
from case-control studies are generally consistent with the conclusions of these trials. In a health plan population, a decreased mortality of 31% was associated with
having had at least one screening FOBT in the previous 5 years. 147,148 Other case-control studies in Japan and Washington also have demonstrated protective effects
on mortality. 149,150
When used in unscreened populations the FOBT is positive in 1% to 5%; 2% to 10% of these have cancer and 20% to 30% have adenomas. 151,152 Concern remains
about the lack of specificity of FOBT and the necessity to follow positive results with colonoscopic examination or barium enema. 153 However, the evidence is
mounting that FOBT saves lives from colorectal cancer. Physicians must weigh the benefits of possible early detection of colorectal cancer against the possible
complications and expense of follow-up procedures. 138
Flexible Sigmoidoscopy
The advantage of sigmoidoscopy screening over FOBT is that it frequently includes the actual removal of cancer or a precancerous lesion in a biopsied polyp, thus
combining prevention (through removal of polyps), screening, and treatment in one step. 146 Another advantage is that it needs to be performed infrequently, perhaps
every 5 to 10 years. 147,148
At least two large randomized trials of flexible sigmoidoscopy screening are in progress. The NCI's PLCO trial is evaluating the efficacy of examinations every 3 years
in 74,000 men and women, 55 to 74 years of age, with an equal number of controls. 154 A trial in the United Kingdom, with 200,000 men and women aged 55 to 64
years, is evaluating the efficacy of one sigmoidoscopy delivered for reducing colorectal cancer mortality. 155
Meanwhile, supporting evidence for efficacy comes from several case-control studies. In the first, screening sigmoidoscopy, primarily with the rigid sigmoidoscope,
reduced mortality from cancer of the rectum and distal colon by 60% (adjusted odds ratio, 0.41; 95% confidence interval, 0.25 to 0.69) in a large Kaiser Permanente
California health plan population. 148 Confirmation came from a smaller second study of 66 cases and 196 controls in another health plan population in Wisconsin. 156 A
third large case-control study in American veterans, with 4358 cases and 16,199 matched controls, reported a 59% reduction in mortality from any prior colorectal
procedure. 157 The first two case-control studies were judged sufficiently convincing that the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force upgraded the evidence and
recommends screening with sigmoidoscopy or FOBT annually for persons older than 50. 7

LUNG CANCER SCREENING
Lung cancer screening is not currently recommended due to lack of evidence that any available screening procedure, even for smokers, can identify tumors early
enough to reduce mortality. This remains a major challenge to research and technology because of the tremendous burden caused by this cancer. In 1999, an
estimated 171,600 new cases of disease and 158,900 deaths were due to lung cancer, making it by far the most common killer from cancer in both men and women
and accounting for 28% of all cancer deaths. 43
The decision to actively discourage lung cancer screening by x-ray was made based on the results of RCTs performed in the 1970s. 158 None of four randomized trials
showed any benefit of reducing mortality from lung cancer. 159,160,161 and 162 The Mayo Lung Project, the primary trial contributing to this evidence, demonstrated that
screening with either chest x-rays or chest x-rays plus sputum cytology could lower the stage at presentation and increase survival. Neither approach had any effect
on lung cancer mortality. 162 The lack of connection between improved survival and the absence of a mortality benefit can be attributed to lead-time and length biases.
This study and its contemporaries have, however, been criticized because of study design and analytic issues, including a lack of statistical power. 163 Recent
preliminary results from the Early Lung Cancer Action Project in New York indicated that low-dose spiral computed tomography used in 1000 symptom-free former
smokers older than age 60 detected 27 cancer cases versus 7 cases detected by chest radiograph. 164 Although this is not an RCT and, therefore, susceptible to
lead-time and length-time bias, these preliminary results suggest that newer noninvasive imaging technologies may hold promise. Efforts to prevent initiation of
smoking, especially by young people, and cessation of tobacco use remain the physician's main tools for combating this most common of all cancers.

THE FUTURE OF SCREENING
Many challenges lie ahead for cancer screening. Better detection methods are urgently needed, and molecular detection methods may surpass current techniques. At
the same time, more effort is required to encourage adherence to the proven cancer screening modalities. Adherence to screening is less than optimal for all the
major recommended screening techniques.165 With the discovery of mutations in susceptibility genes that predispose for cancer, new challenges in cancer screening
arise with the need for appropriate screening recommendations and programs for high-risk subgroups. Not only are those who have inherited a mutation for cancer
susceptibility at higher risk for developing some cancers, but often the age at onset among such individuals is younger than the age at onset in the general
population. This creates challenges for those who recommend and promote screening regimens. The example of the BRCA1 susceptibility gene for breast cancer
illustrates a perplexing situation in which recommendations for screening with mammography do not address the early age at onset of this disease. Moreover, there
are no good population data on which to base guidelines. Further study is needed to establish efficacious screening protocols for those who are genetically
predisposed to cancer. Finally, there are new screening modalities on the horizon, such as low-dose helical computed tomography scans for detecting early lung
cancers.164 Among the challenges of the future is how to evaluate new screening technologies in a world where large RCTs may be increasingly difficult to conduct. In
screening, as in other areas of medicine and public health, the inclination to recommend screening tests on the basis of an intriguing and promising study must be
balanced by a careful assessment of the evidence.
Acknowledgements
Support was provided in part by 1-RO1-CA-63781-03, 1-P50CA-68438-01, and CA720-99.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Kramer BS. The screening editorial board of the physician data query: NCI state-of-the-art statements on cancer screening. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, 1995.
2. Burke W, Daly M, Garber J, et al., for the Cancer Genetics Studies Consortium. Recommendations for follow-up care of individuals with an inherited predisposition to cancer. II. BRCA1 and
BRCA2. JAMA 1997;277:997.
3. Kramer BS, Gohagan JK, Prorok PC, eds. Cancer screening: theory and practice. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1999.
4. Hennekens CH, Buring JE. Epidemiology in medicine. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1987.
5. Hulka BS. Screening for cancer: lessons learned. J Occup Med 1986;28:687.
6. Rimer BK, Demark-Wahnefried W, Egert JR. Acceptance of cancer screening. In: Handbook of health behavior research: provider determinants. New York: Plenum Publishing, 1997.
7. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Guide to clinical preventive services. Alexandria, VA: International Medical Publishing, 1996.
8. Berry DA. Benefits and risks of screening mammography for women in their forties: a statistical appraisal. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1431.
9. Koss LG. The Papanicolaou test for cervical cancer detection: a triumph and a tragedy. JAMA 1989;261:737.
10. Hurley SF, Kaldor JM. The benefits and risks of mammographic screening for breast cancer. Epidemiol Rev 1992;14:101.
11. Greenberg RS, Daniels SR, Flanders D, Eley JW, Boring JR. Medical epidemiology. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1993.
12. Baines CJ. The Canadian National Breast Screening Study: a perspective on criticisms. Ann Intern Med 1994;120:326.
13. Hakama M, Elovainio L, Kajantie R, Louhivuori K. Breast cancer screening as public health policy in Finland. Br J Cancer 1991;64:962.
14. Ellman R. Clinical cost-benefit of screening programs. In: Stoll B, ed. Women at high risk to breast cancer. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991.
15. Swanson GM. May we agree to disagree, or how do we develop guidelines for breast cancer screening in women? [Commentary]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:903.

16. Tabar L, Fagerberg G, Duffy S, Day N. The Swedish two-county trial of mammographic screening for breast cancer: recent results and calculation of benefit. J Epidemiol Community Health
1989;43:107.
17. de Koning HJ, van Ineveld BM, de Haes JC, et al. Advanced breast cancer and its prevention by screening. Br J Cancer 1992;65:950.
18. Harris R. Breast cancer among women in their forties: toward a reasonable research agenda. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:410.
19. Elwood JM, Cox B, Richardson AK. The effectiveness of breast cancer screening by mammography in younger women. Online J Curr Clin Trials 1993;Doc. No. 32.
20. Miller A. Mammography: reviewing the evidence. Epidemiology aspect. Can Fam Physician 1993;39:85.
21. Physicians Data Query. Cancer screening. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, 1997.
22. Eddy DM, Hasselblad V, McGivney W, Hendee W. The value of mammography screening in women under age 50 years. JAMA 1988;259:1512.
23. Kuni CC. Mammography in the 1990s: a plea for objective doctors and informed patients. Am J Prev Med 1993;9:185.
24. Lerman C, Trock B, Rimer BK, et al. Psychological and behavioral implications of abnormal mammograms. Ann Intern Med 1991;114:657.
25. Paskett E, Rimer BK. Psychosocial effects of abnormal Pap tests and mammograms: a review. J Women's Health 1995;4:73.
26. Fletcher SW. False-positive screening mammograms: good news, but more to do. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:60.
27. Fletcher SW, Black W, Harris R, Rimer BK, Shapiro S. Report of the International Workshop on Screening for Breast Cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1644.
28. Andersson I, Aspegren K, Janzon L, et al. Mammographic screening and mortality from breast cancer: the Malmö mammographic screening trial. BMJ1988;297:943.
29. Peeters PH, Verbeek AL, Straatman H, et al. Evaluation of overdiagnosis of breast cancer in screening with mammography: results of the Nijmegen programme. Int J Epidemiol 1989;18:295.
30. National Cancer Institute. Greenwald P, Kramer BS, Weed DL, eds. Cancer prevention and control. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1995.
31. Donovan D, Middleton J, Ellis D. Edinburgh trial of screening for breast cancer [Letter]. Lancet 1990;335:1298.
32. Miller AB, Baines CJ, To T, Wall C. Canadian National Breast Screening Study. 2. Breast cancer detection and death rates among women aged 50 to 59 years. Can Med Assoc J
1992;147:1477.
33. Sjonell G, Stahle L. Mammography screening does not significantly reduce breast cancer mortality in Swedish daily practice. Lakartidningen 1999;96:904, 908.
34. Feig SA. Low-dose mammography: assessment of theoretical risk. In: Feig A, McLelland R. Breast carcinoma: current diagnosis and treatment. New York: Masson Publishing, 1983.
35. Rimer BK, Bluman LG. The psychosocial consequences of mammography. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1997;22:131.
36. Pisano ED, Earp J, Schell M, Vokaty K, Denham A. Screening behavior of women after a false-positive mammogram. Radiology 1998;208:245.
37. Burman ML, Taplin SH, Herta DF, Elmore JG. Effect of false-positive mammograms on interval breast cancer screening in a health maintenance organization. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:1.
38. Lipkus IM, Rimer BK, Strigo TS. Relationships among objective and subjective risk for breast cancer and mammography stages of change. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1996;5:1005.
39. Harris R. Decision-making about screening: individual and policy levels. In: Kramer BS, Gohagan JK, Prorok PC, eds. Cancer screening: theory and practice. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc,
1999.
40. Volk RJ, Cass AR, Spann SJ. A randomized controlled trial of shared decision making for prostate cancer screening. Arch Fam Med 1999;8:333.
41. Deber RB. Shared decision making in the real world. J Gen Intern Med 1996;11:377.
42. Austoker J. Gaining informed consent for screening is difficultbut many misconceptions need to be undone. BMJ 1999;319:722.
43. American Cancer Society. Cancer facts & figures: 1999. Atlanta: American Cancer Society, 1999.
44. Tabar L, Duffy SW, Vitak B, Chen HH, Prevost TC. The natural history of breast carcinoma: what have we learned from screening? Cancer 1999;86:449.
45. Alexander FE, Anderson TJ, Brown HK, et al. 14 years of follow-up from the Edinburgh randomised trial of breast-cancer screening. Lancet 1999;353:1903.
46. Shapiro S. Periodic screening for breast cancer: the HIP randomized controlled trial. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1997;22:27.
47. Tabar L, Fagerberg G, Duffy S, et al. Update of the Swedish two-county program of mammographic screening for breast cancer. Radiol Clin North Am 1992;30:187.
48. Tabar L, Duffy SW, Burhenne LW. New Swedish breast cancer detection results for women aged 4049. Cancer 1993;72:1437.
49. Smart C. The role of mammography in the prevention of mortality from breast cancer. Cancer Prev 1989;1.
50. Roberts MM, Alexander FE, Anderson TJ, et al. Edinburgh trial of screening for breast cancer: mortality at seven years. Lancet 1990;335:241.
51. Alexander F, Roberts M, Lutz W, Hepburn W. Randomisation by cluster and the problem of social class bias. J Epidemiol Community Health 1989;43:29.
52. Alexander FE, Anderson TJ, Brown HK, et al. The Edinburgh randomised trial of breast cancer screening: results after 10 years of follow-up. Br J Cancer 1994;70:542.
53. Miller AB, Baines CJ, To T, Wall C. Canadian National Breast Screening Study. 1: Breast cancer detection and death rates among women aged 40 to 49 years. Can Med Assoc J
1992;147:1459.
54. Burhenne LJ, Burhenne HJ. The Canadian National Breast Screening Study: a Canadian critique. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1993;161:761.
55. Kopans DB. The Canadian screening program: a different perspective [Commentary]. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1990;155:748.
56. Prorok PC, Kramer BS, Gohagan JK. Screening theory and study design: the basics. In: Cancer screening: theory and practice. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1999.
57. Morrison AS, Brisson J, Khalid N. Breast cancer incidence and mortality in the breast cancer detection demonstration project. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:1540.
58. Hendrick RE, Smith RA, Rutledge JH III, Smart CR. Benefit of screening mammography in women aged 4049: a new meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr
1997;22:87.
59. Miller AB, To T, Baines CJ, Wall C. The Canadian National Breast Screening Study: update on breast cancer mortality. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1997;22:37.
60. Kerlikowske K, Grady D, Barclay J, et al. Positive predictive value of screening mammography by age and family history of breast cancer. JAMA 1993;270:2444.
61. Costanza ME. The extent of breast cancer screening in older women. Cancer 1994;74[Suppl 7]:2046.
62. Van Dijck JA, Holland R, Verbeek AL, Hendriks JH, Mravunac M. Efficacy of mammographic screening of the elderly: a case-referent study in the Nijmegen program in the Netherlands. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1994;86:934.
63. Eckhardt S, Badellino F, Murphy GP. UICC meeting on breast-cancer screening in pre-menopausal women in developed countries. Int J Cancer 1994;56:1.
64. Smart CR, Hendrick RE, Rutledge JH, Smith RA. Benefit of mammography screening in women ages 40 to 49 years: current evidence from randomized controlled trials. Cancer 1995;75:1619.
65. Dickersin K. Breast screening in women aged 4049 years: what next? Lancet 1999;353:1896.
66. National Institutes of Health. Proceedings of the National Institutes of Health Consensus Conference on Breast Cancer Screening for Women Ages 4049, Bethesda, MD, January 2123, 1997. J
Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1997;22:vii, 1.
67. Ransohoff DF, Harris RP. Lessons from the mammography screening controversy: can we improve the debate? Ann Intern Med 1997;127:1029.
68. National Cancer Institute. National Cancer Advisory Board (NCAB) mammography recommendations for women ages 40 to 49 . Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, 1997.
69. Ries LA, Kosary CL, Hankey BF, et al., eds. SEER cancer statistics review 19731995. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, 1998.
70. Bosch FX, Manos MM, Munoz N, et al. Prevalence of human papillomavirus in cervical cancer: a worldwide perspective. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:796.
71. Laara E, Day NE, Hakama M. Trends in mortality from cervical cancer in the Nordic countries: association with organised screening programmes. Lancet 1987;1:1247.
72. Miller AB, Lindsay J, Hill GB. Mortality from cancer of the uterus in Canada and its relationship to screening for cancer of the cervix. Int J Cancer 1976;17:602.
73. Eddy DM. Screening for cervical cancer. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:214.
74. International Agency for Research on Cancer. Working Group on Evaluation of Cervical Cancer Screening Programmes: Screening for squamous cervical cancer: duration of low risk after
negative results of cervical cytology and its implications for screening policies. BMJ 1986;293:6599.
75. Aristizabal N, Cuello C, Correa P, Collazos T, Haenszel W. The impact of vaginal cytology on cervical cancer risks in Cali, Colombia. Int J Cancer 1984;34:5.
76. Clarke EA, Anderson TW. Does screening by “Pap” smears help prevent cervical cancer? A case-control study. Lancet 1979;2:1.
77. La Vecchia C, Franceschi S, Decarli A, et al. “Pap” smear and the risk of cervical neoplasia: quantitative estimates from a case-control study. Lancet 1984;2:779.
78. Herrero R, Brinton LA, Reeves WC, et al. Screening for cervical cancer in Latin America: a case-control study. Int J Epidemiol 1992;21:1050.
79. Remington P, Lantz P, Phillips JL. Cervical cancer deaths among older women: implications for prevention. Wis Med J 1990;89:30, 32.
80. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Use of cervical and breast cancer screening among women with and without functional limitationsUnited States, 19941995. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 1998;47:853.
81. Pearce KF, Haefner HK, Sarwar SF, et al. Cytopathological findings on vaginal Papanicolaou smears after hysterectomy for benign gynecologic disease. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1559.
82. Burton RC, Coates MS, Hersey P, et al. An analysis of a melanoma epidemic. Int J Cancer 1993;55:765.
83. Miller DL, Weinstock MA. Nonmelanoma skin cancer in the United States: incidence. J Am Acad Dermatol 1994;30:774.
84. National Cancer Institute. SEER cancer statistics review 19731995. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, 1999.
85. Ferrini RL, Perlman M, Hill L. American College of Preventive Medicine policy statement: screening for skin cancer. Am J Prev Med 1998;14:80.
86. Hill D, White V, Marks R, Borland R. Changes in sun-related attitudes and behaviours, and reduced sunburn prevalence in a population at high risk of melanoma. Eur J Cancer Prev
1993;2:447.
87. Marks R. Two decades of the public health approach to skin cancer control in Australia: why, how and where are we now? Australas J Dermatol 1999;40:1.
88. Emmett EA. Dermatological screening. J Occup Med 1986;28:1045.
89. Mihm MC Jr, Fitzpatrick TB. Early detection of malignant melanoma. Cancer 1976;37[Suppl]:597.
90. Friedman RJ, Rigel DS, Kopf AW. Early detection of malignant melanoma: the role of physician examination and self-examination of the skin. CA Cancer J Clin 1985;35:130.
91. Mackie R. Screening for skin cancer. Occup Health (Lond) 1992;44:202, 206.
92. Polster AM, Lasek RJ, Quinn LM, Chren MM. Reports by patients and dermatologists of skin cancer preventive services provided in dermatology offices. Arch Dermatol 1998;134:1095.
93. Koh HK, Caruso A, Gage I, et al. Evaluation of melanoma/skin cancer screening in Massachusetts: preliminary results. Cancer 1990;65:375.
94. Koh HK, Mackie RM, Reintgen DS. The prevention and early detection of melanoma: screening for melanoma. Cancer Screening 1993;18:72.
95. Koh HK, Geller AC, Miller DR, et al. Who is being screened for melanoma/skin cancer? Characteristics of persons screened in Massachusetts. J Am Acad Dermatol 1991;24:271.
96. Cummings SR, Tripp MK, Herrmann NB. Approaches to the prevention and control of skin cancer. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1997;16:309.
97. Wolfe JT. The role of screening in the management of skin cancer. Curr Opin Oncol 1999;11:123.
98. Balanda KP, Lowe JB, Stanton WR, Gillespie AM. Enhancing the early detection of melanoma within current guidelines. Aust J Public Health 1994;18:420.
99. Koh HK, Geller AC. Public health interventions for melanoma. Prevention, early detection, and education. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1998;12:903.
100. Hill L, Ferrini RL. Skin cancer prevention and screening: summary of the American College of Preventive Medicine's practice policy statements. CA Cancer J Clin 1998;48:232.
101. McDonald CJ. American Cancer Society perspective on the American College of Preventive Medicine's policy statements on skin cancer prevention and screening. CA Cancer J Clin
1998;48:229.
102. National Cancer Institute. PDQ cancer screening/prevention summary: skin cancer screening. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, 1994.
103. Beers MH, Fink A, Beck JC. Screening recommendations for the elderly. Am J Public Health 1991;81:1131.
104. Girgis A, Clarke P, Burton RC, Sanson-Fisher RW. Screening for melanoma by primary health care physicians: a cost-effectiveness analysis. J Med Screen 1996;3:47.
105. Howell JB. Spotting sinister spots: a challenge to dermatologists to examine every new patient at increased risk for signs of early melanoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986;15:722.
106. Woolf SH. Public health perspective: the health policy implications of screening for prostate cancer. J Urol 1994;152:1685.
107. Hankey BR, Feuer EJ, Clegg LX, et al. Cancer surveillance series: interpreting trends in prostate cancerPart I. Evidence of the effects of screening in recent prostate cancer incidence,
mortality, and survival rates. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1017.
108. Feuer EJ, Merrill RM, Hankey BF. Cancer surveillance series: interpreting trends in prostate cancerPart II. Cause of death misclassification and the recent rise and fall in prostate cancer
mortality. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1025.
109. Etzioni R, Legler JM, Feuer EJ, et al. Cancer surveillance series: interpreting trends in prostate cancerPart III. Quantifying the link between population prostate-specific antigen testing and
recent declines in prostate cancer mortality. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1033.
110. Waterbor JW, Bueschen AJ. Prostate cancer screening (United States). Cancer Causes Control 1995;6:267.
111. Walther PJ. Prostate cancer screening: why the controversy? Surg Oncol Clin North Am 1995;4:315.

112. Jenson CB, Shahon DB, Wangensteen OH. Evaluation of annual examinations in the detection of cancer. JAMA 1960;174:91.
113. Gilbertsen VA. Cancer of the prostate gland. Results of early diagnosis and therapy undertaken for cure of the disease. JAMA 1971;215:81.
114. Chodak GW, Schoenberg HW. Early detection of prostate cancer by routine screening. JAMA 1984;252:3261.
115. Thompson IM, Ernst JJ, Gangai MP, Spence CR. Adenocarcinoma of the prostate: results of routine urological screening. J Urol 1984;132:690.
116. Lee R, Littrup PJ, Torp-Pedersen ST, et al. Prostate cancer: comparison of transrectal US and digital rectal examination for screening. Radiology 1988;168:389.
117. Rifkin MD. Ultrasound of the prostate. New York: Raven Press, 1988.
118. Carter HB, Hamper UM, Sheth S, et al. Evaluation of transrectal ultrasound in the early detection of prostate cancer. J Urol 1989;142:1008.
119. Cupp MR, Oesterling JE. Prostate-specific antigen, digital rectal examination, and transrectal ultrasonography: their roles in diagnosing early prostate cancer. Mayo Clin Proc 1993;68:297.
120. Stamey TA, Yang N, Hay AR, et al. Prostate-specific antigen as a serum marker for adenocarcinoma of the prostate. N Engl J Med 1987;317:909.
121. Lange PH, Ercole CJ, Lightner DJ, Fraley EE, Vessell R. The value of serum prostate specific antigen determinations before and after radical prostatectomy. J Urol 1989;141:873.
122. Catalona WJ, Smith DS, Ratliff TL, et al. Measurement of prostate-specific antigen in serum as a screening test for prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1156.
123. Cooner WH, Mosley BR, Rutherford CL Jr, et al. Prostate cancer detection in a clinical urological practice by ultrasonography, digital rectal examination and prostate specific antigen. J Urol
1990;143:1146.
124. Mettlin C, Murphy GP, Lee F, et al. Characteristics of prostate cancer detected in the American Cancer Society National Prostate Cancer Detection Project. J Urol 1994;152:1737.
125. Oesterling JE, Jacobsen SJ, Chute CG, et al. Serum prostate-specific antigen in a community-based population of healthy men. Establishment of age-specific reference ranges. JAMA
1993;270:860.
126. Babaian RJ, Mettlin C, Kane R, et al. The relationship of prostate-specific antigen to digital rectal examination and transrectal ultrasonography. Findings of the American Cancer Society
National Prostate Cancer Detection Project. Cancer 1992;69:1195.
127. Catalona WJ, Richie JP, Ahmann FR, et al. Comparison of digital rectal examination and serum prostate specific antigen in the early detection of prostate cancer: results of a multicenter
clinical trial of 6,630 men. J Urol 1994;151:1283.
128. Mueller EJ, Crain TW, Thompson IM, Rodriguez F. An evaluation of serial digital rectal examinations in screening for prostate cancer. J Urol 1988;140:1445.
129. Mettlin C, Lee F, Drago J, Murphy GP. The American Cancer Society National Prostate Cancer Detection Project. Findings on the detection of early prostate cancer in 2425 men. Cancer
1991;67:2949.
130. Wingo PA, Ries LAG, Giovino GA, et al. Annual report to the nation on the status of cancer, 19731996, with a special section on lung cancer and tobacco. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:675.
131. Gohagan JK, Prorok PC, Kramer BS, Cornett JE. Prostate cancer screening in the prostate, lung, colorectal and ovarian cancer screening trial of the National Cancer Institute. J Urol
1994;152:1905.
132. Clinical Efficacy Assessment Project. Screening for prostate cancer: American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 1997;126:480.
133. Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health Examination. Periodic health examination, 1991 update: 3. Secondary prevention of prostate cancer. CMAJ 1991;145:413.
134. Ahsan H, Neugut AI, Garbowski GC, et al. Family history of colorectal adenomatous polyps and increased risk for colorectal cancer. Ann Intern Med 1998;128:900.
135. Fuchs CS, Giovannucci EL, Colditz GA, et al. A prospective study of family history and the risk of colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1669.
136. Byers T, Levin B, Rothenberger D, et al. American Cancer Society guidelines for screening and surveillance for early detection of colorectal polyps and cancer: update 1997. CA Cancer J Clin
1997;47:154.
137. Herrinton LJ, Selby JV, Friedman GD, et al. Case-control study of digital-rectal screening in relation to mortality from cancer of the distal rectum. Am J Epidemiol 1995;142:961.
138. Toribara NW, Sleisenger MH. Screening for colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1995;332:861.
139. Winawer SJ, Fletcher RH, Miller L, et al. Colorectal cancer screening: clinical guidelines and rationale. Gastroenterology 1997;112:594.
140. Mandel JS, Bond JH, Church TR, et al. Reducing mortality from colorectal cancer by screening for fecal occult blood. Minnesota Colon Cancer Control Study. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1365.
141. Mandel JS, Church TR, Ederer F, et al. Colorectal cancer mortality: effectiveness of biennial screening for fecal occult blood. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:434.
142. Ederer F, Church TR, Mandel JS. Fecal occult blood screening in the Minnesota study: role of chance detection of lesions. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1423.
143. Hardcastle JD, Chamberlain JO, Robinson MH, et al. Randomised, controlled trial of faecal occult blood screening for colorectal cancer. Lancet 1996;348:1472.
144. Kronborg O, Fenger C, Olsen J, et al. Randomised study of screening for colorectal cancer with faecal-occult-blood test. Lancet 1996;348:1467.
145. Kewenter J, Bjork S, Haglind E, et al. Screening and rescreening for colorectal cancer: a controlled trial of fecal occult blood testing in 27,700 subjects. Cancer 1988;62:645.
146. Winawer SJ, Flehinger BJ, Schottenfeld D, Miller DG. Screening for colorectal cancer with fecal occult blood testing and sigmoidoscopy. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1311.
147. Selby JV, Friedman GD, Quesenberry CP, Weiss NS. Effect of fecal occult blood testing on mortality from colorectal cancer. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:1.
148. Selby JV, Friedman GD, Quesenberry CP Jr, Weiss NS. A case-control study of screening sigmoidoscopy and mortality from colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1992;326:653.
149. Saito H, Soma Y, Koeda J, et al. Reduction in risk of mortality from colorectal cancer by fecal occult blood screening with immunochemical hemagglutination test. A case-control study. Int J
Cancer 1995;61:465.
150. Lazovich DA, Weiss NS, Stevens NG, et al. A case-control study to evaluate efficacy of screening faecal occult blood. J Med Screen 1995;2:84.
151. Allison JE, Tekawa IS. Hemoccult screening in detecting colorectal neoplasm: sensitivity, specificity, and predictive value: long-term follow-up in a large group practice setting. Ann Intern Med
1990;112:328.
152. Eddy DM. Screening for colorectal cancer. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:373.
153. Levin B. Colorectal cancer screening: sifting through the evidence. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:399.
154. Gohagan JK, Prorok PC, Kramer BS, et al. The Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial of the National Cancer Institute. Cancer 1995;75[Suppl 7]:1869.
155. Atkin WS, Hart A, Edwards R, et al. Uptake, yield of neoplasia and adverse effects of flexible sigmoidoscopy screening. Gut 1998;42:560.
156. Newcomb PA, Norfleet RG, Storer BE, Surawicz TS, Marcus PM. Screening sigmoidoscopy and colorectal cancer mortality. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1572.
157. Muller AD, Sonnenberg A. Protection by endoscopy against death from colorectal cancer. A case-control study among veterans. Arch Intern Med 1995;155:1741.
158. Eddy DM. Screening for lung cancer. Ann Intern Med 1989;111:232.
159. Melamed MR, Flehinger BJ, Zaman MB, et al. Screening for early lung cancer: results of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Study in New York. Chest 1984;86:44.
160. Tockman MS, Levin ML, Frost JK, et al. Screening and detection of lung cancer. In: Aisner J, ed. Lung cancer. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1985:25.
161. Kubik A, Parkin DM, Khlat M, et al. Lack of benefit from semi-annual screening for cancer of the lung: follow-up report of a randomized controlled trial on a population of high-risk males in
Czechoslovakia. Int J Cancer 1990;45:26.
162. Fontana RS. Screening for lung cancer: recent experience in the United States. In: Hansen HH, ed. Lung cancer: basic and clinical aspects. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1986:91.
163. Smith IE. Screening for lung cancer: time to think positive. Lancet 1999;354:86.
164. Henschke CI, McCauley DI, Yankelevitz DF, et al. Early Lung Cancer Action Project: overall design and findings from baseline screening. Lancet 1999;354:99.
165. Breen N, Kessler L. Trends in cancer screeningUnited States, 1987 and 1992. Oncology 1996;10:328.

CHAPTER 26 Cancer Diagnosis: Molecular Pathology
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 26
Cancer Diagnosis: Molecular Pathology
José Costa
Carlos Cordon-Cardo
Introduction
Role of Molecular Pathology in Clinical Oncology and Translational Research
Use of Human Tissue Samples for Molecular Analyses
Overview of the Technological Approaches to Molecular Diagnostics
Low-Throughput Techniques
High-Throughput Techniques
Applications of Molecular Markers: Diagnostic Molecular Pathology
Risk Assessment
Diagnosis
Molecular Grading and Staging
Detection of Minimal Disease
Recurrence versus Second Primary
Considerations for the Future
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The traditional role of the surgical pathologist has been the morphologic evaluation of human tumors in a search for clues of their histogenesis and anticipated
behavior. Over the years, this quest has benefited from the application of specialized techniques, which have become part of the pathologist's armamentarium. The
diagnosis of cancer involves the analysis of tissue and cytology samples for features correlated with malignant transformation. Specimens of tissues and cells are
obtained through several procedures, including surgical biopsy, endoscopic biopsy, core or aspirational needle biopsy, venipuncture, spinal tap, scraping of tissue
surfaces, and collection of exfoliative cells from urine or sputum. The acquired tissue or cell specimens are subjected to a series of analytic modalities for diagnostic
purposes.
Light microscopy, assessing morphologic features of the procured specimens, was used as almost the sole approach for many years, and it remains the standard
diagnostic method to which all novel methods must be compared. The use of enzyme histochemistry and electron microscopy expanded the primary microanatomic
evaluation to include biochemical and subcellular structural features. More recently, cytogenetics, analysis of DNA content, molecular genetic assays, and
immunohistochemistry (IHC) have been added as valuable adjuncts to light microscopy in cancer diagnosis. These methods, particularly the latter, have greatly
enhanced our ability to precisely define the lines of differentiation of human tumors, which constitutes the basis for the current classification schemes. As important as
the “histogenetic” categorization provided by these techniques is, it addresses only indirectly other aspects of human neoplasia that are more relevant to their biologic
behavior and response to therapy. These include rate of proliferation, capacity for invasion and metastases, and development of resistance mechanisms to certain
treatment agents. This chapter reviews the contributions of novel approaches to the diagnosis and classification of tumors.

ROLE OF MOLECULAR PATHOLOGY IN CLINICAL ONCOLOGY AND TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH
Molecular pathology studies the origins and pathogenesis of disease at the molecular level. Because cancer is a hereditary disease of the cell, much of the
mechanistic studies of the cancer cell are based on the characterization of acquired or somatic mutations and subsequent structural or regulatory alterations of the
gene products. In this regard, it differs from medical genetics, in which the main objective is to determine the genetic abnormalities associated with inherited disorders
and carried as germline mutations. Molecular pathology of neoplasia aims at identifying and understanding those aberrations involved in the development and
progression of neoplastic diseases. Clinically relevant objectives include (1) establishing a definitive diagnosis and classification of tumors based on the recognition of
complex profiles (“fingerprints”) or unique molecular alterations that occur in specific tumor types; (2) providing early detection of tumor cells using sensitive molecular
techniques, thus anticipating therapeutic intervention; (3) rendering prognostic information of clinical relevance through the assessment of molecular predictors of
outcome; and (4) assisting in the selection of individualized treatment regimens, saving unnecessary drug toxicity. Protocols based on molecular markers increase the
chances for cure by opting for the right management approach, and they improve the quality of life of patients with cancer.
Molecular pathology also serves as a bridge between clinical and basic biomedical sciences. The translational aspects of research in molecular pathology are
bidirectional, involving both the active transfer of relevant observations that are the result of the analysis of primary tumors and clinicopathologic correlations to basic
laboratory studies, as well as the effective transfer of laboratory findings into clinical analyses and protocols. In promoting such transfers, molecular biology facilitates
and maximizes the transfer of biologic discoveries into diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic applications.
The use of molecular techniques has led to remarkable progress in the understanding of cell growth, differentiation, maintenance of genomic integrity, and
programmed cell death, these being key issues in tumor development and progression. Biologic markers, such as alterations of TP53, which correlate with tumor
behavior when detected in specific tumor types, await validation studies. Similarly, prospective clinical analyses using well-characterized cohorts of patients and
properly selected pairs of normal and tumor samples are needed to better delineate the role of mutations occurring in these genes, because they may impact on the
management of patients affected with cancer. The implementation of objective predictive assays to the diagnostic and prognostic tools will enhance the ability to
assess tumor biologic activities and to design effective treatment regimens.

USE OF HUMAN TISSUE SAMPLES FOR MOLECULAR ANALYSES
Discrepancies of reported results aimed at the identification of gene mutations and altered patterns of gene expression in primary tumors could be explained by the
use of distinct probes and methods. Critical caveats include assurance for the presence of viable tumor, extent of necrosis, normal cell to tumor cell ratio, and the
stage and grade of the lesion being studied. Often, distinct methods are available to detect a given marker, these approaches differing in specificity, sensitivity, speed
and cost, and appropriateness for particular clinical situations.
Strategies have been developed whereby, from a single tissue sample, different techniques can be performed in search of the molecular phenotype and genotype. 1,2
One of these strategies is illustrated in Figure 26-1. Briefly, using consecutive tissue sections cut at different thicknesses and deposited either on glass slides or
microtubes, one can (1) evaluate morphology (i.e., hematoxylin and eosin staining), (2) perform expression assays [i.e., IHC and in situ hybridization (ISH)], (3)
identify molecular alterations [i.e., Southern blot, polymerase chain reaction/single-strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP), and sequencing], and (4) conduct
high-throughput assays (i.e., expression array technologies). Tissue microdissection assays can be implemented to remove normal contaminating cells, enriching the
neoplastic cell content of the tumor sample when needed. 3 This method can also be used to study low-grade and high-grade tumor foci in a single tissue sample or to
analyze minimal lesions, such as carcinoma in situ. Evaluation of gene mutations and altered patterns of expression can be performed using a combination of
techniques, including deletion studies by restriction fragment length polymorphism and comparative multiplex PCR, point mutation screening by PCR-SSCP and
confirmation by direct sequencing, and assessment of altered expression by IHC and ISH. More recently, the introduction of microchips and other technologies allows
the detection of missense mutations in certain genes with great sensitivity. 4

FIGURE 26-1. Use of tissue for research and diagnostic purposes can be prepared to yield a variety of tissue-derived products that can be treated using different
technological approaches. The ability to analyze nucleic acids and proteins from small numbers of cells makes it possible to obtain a comprehensive profile of the
tissue. These data can then be correlated to the histopathologic appearance and to clinical characteristics of the lesion. Properly annotated samples stored in a tissue
bank constitute a precious resource to test the efficacy of newly discovered biomarkers and diagnostic or predictive tests. F/U, follow-up; H&E, hematoxylin and eosin;
IHC, immunohistochemical; NB, Northern blot; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RFLP, restriction fragment length polymorphism; Rx, medication; SB, Southern blot;
WB, Western blot.

Manual microdissection of tumor samples, to enrich neoplastic cell aliquots to be used in specific techniques, is achieved by the use of a magnifying lens and
sterilized scalpels. It can be also performed using scraping devices mounted on specially designed stereotactic microscopes. More refined, laser-based
microdissection instruments have been developed and are commercially available ( Fig. 26-2). One of the strategies, the laser-capture method, is based on adhering
cells to a material after it is thermally activated by a laser beam. 3 Tissues to be microdissected are viewed through a video microscope, and the position of the slide is
adjusted so that the desired cells are under the targeting light. Activation of the laser causes the desired cells to adhere to the special coverslip, which is mounted on
a plastic cap and positioned over the targeted cells. The cap is then separated from the tissue section, pulling the desired cells for study. The dissected material can
be reviewed for morphology and nonspecific transfers before placing it in a tube containing the appropriate digestion buffer for nucleic acid extraction. Protocols for
the dissection of tumor cells from frozen and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue have been developed that allow the extraction of nucleic acids, mainly DNA. It is
possible to select cell populations based on their phenotypic features determined by IHC. Isolation of intact RNA transcripts is difficult, if not impossible, to achieve
through this procedure. The distortion produced during the application of the laser beam appears to be responsible for the partial degradation of most RNA species.

FIGURE 26-2. Laser microdissection enables researchers to capture and characterize microscopic normal or pathologic structures. The efficacy of the approach can
be appreciated in genotyping a single crypt obtained from colonic epithelium. Verification of the donor section after capture clearly demonstrates the ability to
precisely capture well-defined groups of cells making up a structure. In this manner, specific regions from the DNA from cells constituting a single crypt profile can be
amplified and analyzed.

The application of the full spectrum of molecular-based methods to the evaluation of tissue and cell specimens, and the implementation of novel therapeutic
modalities aimed at specific molecular targets, has led to changes in the established patterns of tissue procurement, processing, and tissue banking. Advanced
diagnostic technology should be included in tissue analysis carried out during the diagnostic investigation of any potentially neoplastic lesion. Diagnosticians should
“think molecular.” Protocols should be implemented and constantly updated to guarantee that samples are handled in a way that will not preclude optimal application
of molecular testing. In daily practice, this means that part of the specimen, whenever possible, should be set aside prospectively for advanced diagnostics. The
advent of advanced diagnostics is forcing operational changes that ensure fast delivery of specimens to the laboratory, where pathologists can select an aliquot of
tissue or cells that will be used to resolve questions pertinent to the management of the lesion or set aside a sample “in reserve” for molecular analysis if necessary.
One of the most common ways to preserve samples is by snap freezing in liquid nitrogen. However, this procedure does not allow for preservation of microanatomic
detail. Rapid freezing of tissue in a block with cryopreservative solution maintains morphology and yields frozen sections that can be used for different assays. This
method is favored in building frozen tumor banks from which enough genomic DNA or complementary DNA (cDNA) can be generated from a thick section to produce
useful reagents for subsequent analyses. In addition, monoclonal antibodies, purified antisera, and riboprobes can easily be used on thin sections, usually 5 µm, by
implementing IHC or ISH protocols. In today's practice, one of the ideal moments to procure tissue is at the time of an intraoperative consultation, when tissue is
sampled for diagnostic frozen section examination. It is important to realize that the tissue procured for advanced diagnostics remains usable when and if required for
routine morphologic analysis. Tissue procurement and tissue banking are different tasks that should be well delineated if this kind of valuable resource is to be
implemented with maximum efficiency.
When using archival tissue for research, including both discovery and validation studies, issues of patient confidentiality and informed consent should be carefully
considered and resolved through established institutional and national guidelines. Institutional review boards and human investigation committees must be made
aware of the ever-growing complexities involved in the use of human tissues for research. These issues grow in complexity because of the rapid development of new
technology and bioinformatics. The existence of large databanks containing comprehensive information on disease susceptibility, pharmacogenomics, and other
biologic data that can be potentially linked to an individual are of obvious concern to researchers and ethicists.

OVERVIEW OF THE TECHNOLOGICAL APPROACHES TO MOLECULAR DIAGNOSTICS
The value of molecular markers for cancer diagnosis and patient management depends on their accessibility to detection by various analytic methods. Often, several
strategies are available to detect the same marker, and these strategies differ in several aspects, including specificity, sensitivity, and appropriateness for particular
clinical situations. With the exception of DNA content, there are two broad categories of strategies for the detection of molecular markers: biochemical molecular
techniques that can be applied to analyze carefully chosen tissue samples or, alternatively, reagents can be applied in situ on tissues, cells, or chromosomes to detect
and demonstrate the presence and spatial distribution of the marker. At present, the development of new clinical tests depends mainly on low-throughput assays, but
it seems likely that the high-throughput, comprehensive analytic techniques described in the following sections will have a major impact in the near future. Some
understanding of these techniques is central for the appreciation of their capabilities, advantages, and limitations when analyzing clinical material.
LOW-THROUGHPUT TECHNIQUES
DNA Content and Flow Cytometry
Individual cells harboring many genetic alterations, including genes regulating growth and apoptosis programs, often contain an abnormal amount of nuclear DNA that
can be measured by flow cytometry. Deviations in cell DNA content relative to normal cells (DNA index) may indicate duplications or losses of individual chromosomes

(aneuploidy) or extra haploid sets of chromosomes (polyploidy). In addition, the profile of DNA content among the cells of a tissue reflects the fraction of cells in S and
G2 phases of the cycle. A high number of cells in these fractions correlate with poorer prognosis in certain cancers. 5,6 The amount of DNA per cell can also be
measured by static image cytometry on cell smears and be combined with other morphometric parameters, such as nuclear contour and shape. 7 Flow cytometry
allows for simultaneous measurement of several parameters, whereas a suspension of cells flows by stationary detectors at a rate of approximately 10,000 cells per
second. To measure DNA content per cell, flow cytometry is performed on disaggregated cells or on nuclear suspensions. The latter can be obtained fresh or from
paraffin blocks. 8 In either case, the cells are stained with dyes that bind stoichiometrically to DNA—fluorescent dyes for flow cytometry, and Feulgen dyes for static
measurements through a specially equipped light microscope. The data acquired from each individual cell are compiled in a histogram, indicating the distribution of
the DNA content among the cells in the tissue. Total DNA measurements permit the evaluation of ploidy and an estimation of the fraction of cells traversing the S
phase of the cell cycle. Both parameters have been found to be of prognostic relevance in certain tumors, such as breast cancer, and aneuploidy has been reported
as a favorable prognostic feature in neuroblastoma. 9
DNA Alterations and Detection Assays
Native DNA extracted from either tissues or cells can be directly sequenced or analyzed by Southern blotting, restriction fragment length polymorphism, and
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). These techniques are capable of detecting alterations present in the genome of neoplastic cells that serve as markers,
including point mutations, translocations, amplifications, deletions, microsatellite length instability, and altered methylation. Point mutations are the most common
dominant oncogene alterations found in human cancer. The amino acid change produced by the mutations causes the gain of function that contributes to the
transformed state of the cell. Amplification of an oncogene is usually associated with protein overexpression and is another mechanism for gain of function.
Amplification constitutes an easily detectable and measurable change; thus, it is a good diagnostic and potential prognostic marker. In translocations, protooncogenes
are subjected to a strong promoter-enhancer or removed from a physiologic regulatory control element. The net effect is an inappropriate increase in product that
provides excess function.
Alternatively, a translocation can produce a novel gene by fusion of the two partners participating in the translocation and generate a chimeric product with aberrant
function. Missense or nonsense point mutations can cause loss of function of tumor suppressor genes that are important in maintaining control of cell growth and
differentiation. In the case of a dominant-negative tumor suppressor gene, the product of the allele inactivated by mutation suffices to contribute to the neoplastic state
by binding and abrogating the function of the wild-type product. For the majority of tumor suppressor genes, however, inactivation of the second allele is necessary to
completely lose function. The second hit is often effected by the deletion of genomic information, often registered by loss of heterozygosity assays. Loss of function
can also be produced by hypermethylation of the promoter or intragenic regions, resulting in silencing or extinction of its expression. The genetic instability inherent to
many cancer cells can be manifested by microsatellite instability. Changes in the length of repeats can be caused by lesions in the DNA repair genes (i.e., hMSH1,
hMSH2, hPMS1, hPMS2) giving rise to the so-called mutator phenotype.
An additional category of markers is based on the clonal nature of neoplastic proliferations. When there is a question about whether abnormal cells are the
consequence of nontumoral tissue response (regenerative atypia) or represent a neoplastic proliferation, clonality assays may provide the answer. If the suspicious
cells or tissues can be shown to be clonal, they are likely to represent a neoplastic process, because cells in hyperplastic or reactive lesions are polyclonal. Assays of
clonal markers measure the fraction of cells within a tissue or cytology sample that carry the same form of the marker and are thus presumed to be issued from a
single cell. Prime examples of diagnostically useful clonal markers are antigen receptor gene rearrangements in lymphoid proliferations. 10 Inactivation of the X
chromosomes in females heterozygous for some X-linked genes have been widely used to confirm the clonality of tumors by the examination of isotypes of proteins or
the analysis of methylation in X chromosome DNA. 11 If a tumor is known to harbor a specific mutation in a given gene, the altered sequence can, under some
conditions, also serve as a marker for clonality. The fundamental requirements are (1) that the sequence be altered early in the genesis of the tumor; (2) that the
sequence should not be further altered or lost during tumor progression; and (3) that there be enough diversity in the observed mutations of the specific gene to make
it unlikely that two diverse populations of cells, arising from two independent metachronous tumors, would harbor the same mutated sequence.
Southern blotting 12 is the procedure that identifies a specific DNA by using a complementary sequence (probe) that hybridizes to a fragment of the DNA after it has
been transferred from an agarose gel to a nitrocellulose filter. This technique was one of the first used for diagnostic testing. It still provides a robust way for detecting
changes in DNA nucleotide sequence, particularly when these differences involve rearrangements of sizable stretches of DNA (translocations, large deletions, or
amplifications). The major drawback of the Southern blot is its relative lack of sensitivity, because it can detect only 1 cell in 100. Another limitation is the requirement
of several micrograms of DNA per test. The term restriction fragment length polymorphism defines the use of specific restriction enzymes to cut recognizable DNA
fragments, followed by a blotting procedure, and it is mainly used for deletion analysis.
Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) overcomes many of the practical problems of conventional cytogenetics by permitting the specific staining of any given
region of the genome.13,14 In addition, the staining can be done using metaphases or interphase nuclei. ISH of DNA probes to metaphase chromosomes deposited on
microscope slides or to chromatin within intact interphase cells in smears or tissue sections is usually monitored by fluorescence, and it is therefore referred to as
FISH. The DNA probes used for FISH may consist of mixtures of DNA fragments covering whole chromosomes, fragments containing chromosome-specific repeated
sequences, or fragments containing unique nonrepetitive sequences. The lower limit of fragment size for unique sequence fragments is approximately 4 kilobases
(kb), but in practice, fragments of approximately 25 kb, such as those propagated in bacterial cosmids or in yeast artificial chromosomes, give the most consistent
results. The probes hybridized to specific chromosomal sequences are tagged with a marker (digoxigenin or biotin) that can be detected with an antibody specific to
the tag and labeled with a fluorochrome. Up to seven probes can be used simultaneously, and changes not detectable in expanded banding preparations can be
identified with this approach. The number of simultaneous probes that can be applied is growing, and with the aid of confocal microscopy and image processing, this
method can be carried out in paraffin-embedded tissue sections. Used on histologic sections, FISH allows for correlation of genetic findings with the histology, a
feature not shared by the analysis of metaphase chromosomes. FISH is well suited for the detection of numerical changes in chromosomes or regions of
chromosomes, including microdeletions. In addition, chromosomal translocations can be detected by the simultaneous use of two probes containing DNA sequences
known to reside on either side of a translocation breakpoint in one of the two reciprocal translocation products. Apposition of two of the four dots present in diploid
cells indicates the presence of a translocation. Identification of such a result is facilitated by labeling the two probes with different tags that are recognized with
antibodies conjugated to two different fluorochromes. When used in interphase cells, for the diagnostic or monitoring purposes discussed in the following section,
FISH has the advantage over PCR that it is a quantitative technique, because the results can be expressed as the percentage of a class of cells containing the
diagnostic abnormality. 15
The limitation of FISH—providing information only on the regions covered by the probe(s) used—is partially overcome by CGH. 16,17 In this procedure, tumor DNA
ultimately recognized by a red fluorochrome and normal DNA recognized by a green fluorescent dye are mixed at equimolar concentrations and then allowed to
compete for hybridizing to a normal metaphase spread. If a region of the genome is equally represented in the tumor and in the normal DNA, the chromosomal region
appears painted in an orange-yellow signal. If a gene is missing in the tumor, it is painted green. In contrast, if a region of the genome is amplified many-fold in the
tumor, this region appears in red. CGH allows assessment of the entire genome, albeit at a relatively rough scale, but it is a technically demanding and lengthy
procedure. Although it constitutes a powerful research and discovery tool, it is unlikely to receive widespread diagnostic application as a clinical test.
The simultaneous use of probes labeled with different fluorochromes and cameras capable of sensing and computing different spectra have made it possible to paint
each chromosome (or chromosomal regions) with a different color attributed to the individual spectra. This technique, known as spectral karyotypic analysis,18 adds
considerable ease, specificity, and potential automation to the detection and identification of translocations and other chromosomal anomalies (see Chapter 5).
The application of molecular techniques to diagnosis has been greatly facilitated by the introduction of the PCR. 19,20 and 21 PCR-based approaches make it possible to
use very small samples of tissue, and therefore, well-defined microscopic lesions can be used as the source of nucleic acid to be analyzed. The products of PCR can
be investigated by a variety of methods. PCR can be designed to demonstrate (1) genetic alterations, including microsatellite instability (i.e., using single-strand
conformation polymorphism or PCR-SSCP, which reveals band shifts in tumor lanes when compared to normal tissue lanes); (2) point mutations (i.e., using PCR
products in sequencing assays); and (3) loss of genetic material (i.e., using multiplex PCR). PCR combined with Southern blot analysis is capable of detecting a
unique target sequence within the total DNA of approximately 100,000 human genes in a single reaction. These numbers are only limited by the amount of DNA
(approximately 2 mg, equivalent to 2 × 10 6 cells) that can be tested in a single amplification reaction; selection procedures to restrict the target DNA to the genomic
fragment of interest allows a significant expansion of the sample to be analyzed. The extreme sensitivity of PCR-based techniques constitutes their main drawback.
Because a single template can give rise to a positive result, contamination of the reaction by exogenous amplifiable sequences can be a problem, even in laboratories
that exercise the greatest care to guard against such occurrences. In most instances, the source of contamination is the inadvertent transfer of small amounts of
product from one reaction to the ingredients of another reaction that uses the same primers. Measures taken to prevent artifactual results caused by contamination

include ultraclean and separate rooms for pre-PCR, PCR, and post-PCR manipulation of the samples; use of pipetting devices containing aerosol barriers; and UV
irradiation of the reaction mixture before addition of the polymerase and template DNA. Additionally, control reactions from which template DNA is omitted should
always be performed and analyzed in parallel with any PCR test to ensure that the reagents, other than the template, are not contaminated. Products can also be
precisely sized on gels, analyzed by Southern blot hybridization, or subjected to nucleotide sequence analysis to distinguish bona fide products expected for a
specific amplification reaction from artifactual products that may have been amplified during the reactions. The advantages of PCR, however, far outweigh the
disadvantages. The amplification capabilities of the procedure mean that very small numbers of total cells are sufficient for analysis. The small size of the
amplification target (as small as 40 to 50 base pairs) makes PCR possible on partially degraded DNA or on the highly fragmented DNA normally obtained when
extracting from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. PCR is a fast procedure, because standard amplifications that comprise 25 to 30 cycles can be completed in
a few hours, facilitating timely turnaround of tests. Furthermore, if maximum sensitivity is not a concern, analysis can be carried out with nonradioactive probes. For all
these reasons, PCR has been used in most of the molecular diagnostic tests relevant to cancer. It is the sensitivity of PCR that makes it the method of choice for the
staging of cancer, as well as for the monitoring of residual disease after therapy.
A productive application of PCR has been to amplify specific genomic sequences obtained from paraffin sections by microdissection ( Fig. 26-3). By using random
primers, the entire DNA extracted from a small number of cells can be amplified in an unbiased fashion. Efficient protocols for “whole genomic amplification” make it
possible to perform CGH experiments, starting from a microscopic lesion. 22

FIGURE 26-3. Cytologic samples that are suspicious but not diagnostic of cancer can be resolved when known genetic alterations are found in a significant proportion
of the cell population examined. In the proper clinical context, a mutation in a tumor gene present at the 10% level or higher is a reliable indicator of tumor. DNA
obtained from a portion of the cytology sample has been extracted, and exons 5 to 7 of the p53 gene amplified and examined by single-strand confirmation
polymorphism (SSCP). A mutation in exon 7 (ATG ®AGG transversion) is confirmed by repeating the procedure and sequencing the anomalous migrating band.

RNA-Based Methods
ISH is performed to detect RNA transcripts within cells deposited on microscope slides or on tissue sections. 22,23 and 24 The probe can be radiolabeled or linked to a
molecular tag, such as biotin. The main diagnostic application is for the tissue typing of neoplasms, revealing the specific transcript for a determined cell product, or
demonstrating viral nucleic acids. In the tumors known to be associated with viruses, viral nucleic acids, as well as their encoded proteins, can be used as tumor
markers. The most significant viruses in this context are human T-cell leukemia virus type I (associated with adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma), Epstein-Barr virus
(associated with Burkitt's lymphoma and with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in immunosuppressed patients and those with Hodgkin's disease), and papillomavirus strains
associated mainly with cervical cancer. Viral proteins synthesized in the tumor cell contribute to the transformation process, and infection with the virus precedes the
development of the tumor. In some instances, such as the case of Epstein-Barr virus infection in nasopharyngeal cancer, the viral integration site serves as a clonal
marker for the tumor cells.
A more quantitative estimation of a specific message is obtained by Northern blotting. 25,26 In an analogous way to the Southern procedure, Northern blots identify
specific RNA sequences by hybridization against a panel of RNA molecules spread on a gel. The synthesis of cDNA from messenger RNA (mRNA) using reverse
transcriptase makes it possible to analyze the messenger molecules after PCR amplification, a procedure known as reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR).27,28 This
technique makes possible the detection of few transcripts coding for a specific message against a large background of mRNAs. In this fashion, a few circulating tumor
cells can be detected in peripheral blood. The mRNA coding a cell-specific protein serves as a target that can be used to detect a specific cell type in a background of
10 million cells. This strategy has been used to detect circulating melanoma cells by demonstrating tyrosinase transcripts in peripheral blood, circulating prostatic
cells (detecting prostate-specific antigen mRNA), thyroid cells (identifying thyroglobulin mRNA), and breast cancer (finding mRNA for keratin 19). 29,30 and 31 The advent
of real-time PCR instrumentation has brought quantitative PCR to the laboratory and obviates one of the shortcomings of this kind of amplification technology. 32
Analysis of Proteins
One of the most favored techniques for unraveling the phenotype, based on detection of specific protein sequences and preserving the microanatomic detail, is IHC.
The ever-increasing number of commercially available antisera and monoclonal antibodies is expanding the resolution capabilities of this assay by demonstrating the
presence of antigenic determinants in cells and tissue components ( Table 26-1). Everything from surface receptors to intercellular matrix components to hormones
can now be determined with relative ease and used to pinpoint the cell type, the degree of immunophenotypic differentiation, and even the functional state of the cell.
IHC has greatly reduced the number of undifferentiated or unclassified tumors and has been of major assistance in defining metastatic tumors of unknown primary
site. The category of unclassified sarcomas has been reduced from approximately 15% of cases to less than 5%. A relatively simple battery of antibodies recognizing
intermediate filaments and surface antigens is very effective in sorting out undifferentiated carcinomas from anaplastic lymphomas, melanomas, and sarcomas, thus
reducing the number of undifferentiated malignant tumors. Perhaps the best-established use of IHC has been in the diagnosis and classification of lymphomas. The
demonstration of surface lymphoid determinants continues to be important in the everyday practice of diagnostic hematopathology. For example, the demonstration of
the CD5 surface determinant is helpful in distinguishing mantle cell tumors (positive) from nodular lymphoma (negative). 33 In solid tumors, such as breast carcinomas,
IHC is becoming a required complement of predictive clinical value, determining estrogen and progesterone receptor status, and, more recently, with the advent of
antibody-based anti-Her-2/Neu therapy, also assessing the expression pattern of this tyrosine-kinase receptor. 34,35

TABLE 26-1. Selected Antigens Analyzed by Immunohistochemistry in the Diagnosis and Characterization of Tumors

IHC is a powerful tool to dissect the different cell components present in tumoral tissues. It can show two different phenotypes of tumor cell differentiation most
dramatically when two antigens specific for each cell type are shown simultaneously on the same slide, and thus, it has contributed to the elucidation of the
composition of tumors showing diverse lines of differentiation. It can also separate reactive cells infiltrating the tumor when distinction of tumor cells from reactive cells

is unreliable using routine histologic stains. Such an instance is seen in the so-called T-cell–rich B-cell lymphomas, which consist of neoplastic lymphocytes of B
lineage accompanied by a heavy infiltrate of nonneoplastic T cells. The latter sometimes constitute the majority of the cellular elements visible on a slide. At least
some of the cases classified as malignant histiocytosis on the basis of finding neoplastic cells admixed with “atypical” histiocytes demonstrating erythrophagocytosis
have been shown to be T-cell lymphomas infiltrated by activated histiocytes. 36
IHC can sometimes contribute to the distinction between benign and malignant tumors. The demonstration of the ectopic chorionic gonadotropin-b subunit in islet cell
tumors of the pancreas strongly suggests malignancy. 37 Many tumor markers can be localized in tumoral tissues, contributing to both tumor classification and
identification of tumor cells in distant sites. Demonstration of cells containing neuron-specific enolase antigenic determinants in their cytoplasm has increased the
sensitivity of detecting bone marrow involvement in neuroblastoma, thus improving the precision of the staging of children with this tumor. Pathologic staging has
become more precise when the involvement of lymph nodes is established using IHC to detect breast tumor cells in axial lymph nodes. IHC is a very useful diagnostic
adjunct to resolve controversial cases in cell type and to unequivocally identify the presence of small numbers of tumor cells. To maximize the efficiency and
usefulness of IHC in clinical practice, it is best to use batteries of antisera chosen to solve specific problems in a critical and systematic fashion. Together with the
availability of automated staining devices, this algorithmic approach helps manage the laboratory and facilitates periodic evaluation of test performance and efficiency
of operations.
With the explosion of molecular medicine, IHC used mostly to investigate disease in a correlative mode is progressively being applied to attack mechanistic questions.
Monoclonal antibodies are capable of recognizing subtle structural changes that are directly related to the function of the molecule and are thus excellent tools for
molecular analysis. An example of dissection of molecular function using antibodies is provided by monoclonal antibodies directed to the phosphorylated peptides of
growth factor receptors. The erbB-2 receptor is phosphorylated on activation. Antibodies that discriminate between the phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated
protein provide an accurate assessment of the number of activated molecules present in a cell. Preliminary data suggest that this measurement will provide a better
predictor of prognosis than the estimation of total erbB-2 in the tumor cells of patients with breast cancer. 38
Antibodies directed against the proteins involved in the regulation of the cell cycle are playing an increasing role in the pathologic evaluation of tumors. Antibodies to
cyclins D1 and E have been reported to be of interest in the evaluation of breast carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. 39,40 IHC also has
been used to assess the status of tumor suppressor genes, such as p53 and RB (retinoblastoma). Numerous studies suggest the relevance of determining the
patterns of expression of these genes to determine the prognosis in a variety of tumors. We are near to being able to determine the status (overexpression or
absence) of many of the key proteins controlling the progression through the cell cycle, and thus we are poised to extensively characterize tumors and guide therapy
accordingly.
The expression patterns of gene products involved in accessing apoptotic pathways can also be investigated by IHC. Such an evaluation is likely to be relevant,
because drugs and radiation therapy cause apoptotic cell death. Hence, the inability of a cell to access the pathway after DNA damage can cause resistance to
certain therapies. Data are beginning to accumulate and indicate that the status of p53 as assessed by IHC in several tumor types, such as breast and bladder
carcinomas, correlates with the ability to respond to therapy. Bcl-2, a protooncogene that extends cell survival, is overexpressed in many tumor types, and its
detection has been associated with lack of response to therapy and poor outcome. 41
All the advantages of IHC can be nullified if it is used with lack of technical rigor and in an uncritical fashion. Strict adherence to laboratory practices must also be
observed. Results must always be interpreted in the appropriate context, and the use of antibody panels is recommended when first characterizing a diagnostically
problematic lesion. Technical advances in antigen retrieval augment the power of tissue immunohistology but also increase the potential for false-positive results. The
possibility of antigenic loss that is known to occur in precut preparations is sometimes ignored as a cause of false-negative results.
Another method that allows quantitation and verification of the antigen being identified is Western blotting, also known as immunoblotting.42 This technique combines
the resolution of gel electrophoresis with the specificity of immunochemical detection. In this procedure, proteins are first extracted from cells or tissue samples and
resolved in an electrophoresis gel. The products are then transferred to a membrane support, usually nitrocellulose membranes or nylon sheets. After blocking
nonspecific binding sites, membranes are incubated with appropriately diluted primary antibodies, which are detected by the subsequent application of labeled
secondary antibodies. The major limitation of this method, when using clinical samples, is that it requires a significant amount of tissue to obtain a suitable quantity of
extracted proteins.
Assessment of Apoptotic Index
Apoptotic cell death can be demonstrated at the microanatomic levels by the application of the terminal transferase to elongate and label the double-stranded DNA
cut at the internucleosomal regions. The incorporated labeled nucleotides are detected with an immunoenzymatic approach. This type of assay, also known as in situ
DNA nick end labeling,43,44 can quantitate the fraction of cells in apoptosis and may serve to predict behavior or response to therapy.
HIGH-THROUGHPUT TECHNIQUES
The manual sequencing method most widely used is the Sanger dideoxy sequencing technique. 45 This procedure uses base-specific termination during in vitro
synthesis of DNA and is also known as the chain termination method. The basis for terminating the elongation of the DNA chain is the use of a nucleoside
triphosphate containing a reduced ribose sugar termed dideoxyribonucleoside triphosphate (ddNTP). When such ddNTPs are mixed with the four normal dNTPs at the
appropriate concentrations, chain termination occurs. The four normal dNTPs are mixed with the respective ddNTPs in four different test tubes, and reactions are
compared for the growing DNA chain. In these reactions, the normal dNTPs are labeled at the a position, usually with phosphorus 32, to incorporate the radioactive
signal needed for detection. These products are separated using acrylamide gel electrophoresis. The gels are dried and then imaged using autoradiography,
producing a ladder sequence. Besides the technological restraints, this procedure has several drawbacks, including the resolution of the bands and the “compressed”
or clustered migrated bands in the top and bottom of the gel. New, automated high-throughput technologies have been developed to increase the sensitivity and
speed the analysis of gene sequencing. Incorporating a fluorescent-labeled nucleotide in the newly synthesized DNA strand and coupling a fluorescence emission
detector next to gel, fluorescence can be identified while the gel runs. Instead of a photographic image, electropherograms are automatically read and printed. The
use of capillary machines and four-color automated fluorescent sequencing produce well-defined peaks in a highly sensitive and reliable fashion. Several genetic
analyzers, or automated sequence detection systems, are commercially available that greatly enhance the analytical ability with respect to mutation detection.
Moreover, the use of fluorescent-labeled dNTPs allows laboratories to move away from radioactive, gel-based systems. Using fluorescent-labeled microsatellite
markers, some of these apparatus also have the capability of detecting genetic losses. 46
The main technological revolution of more recent years has been the development and implementation of DNA and expression microchip technologies. 47,48
Oligonucleotide microchips are miniaturized devices that enable large genomic studies. These systems allow sequencing analysis of determined genes and
expression analysis of mRNA transcripts, including genes or expressed sequence tags. Expression studies can monitor quantitatively and simultaneously the
expression of thousands of genes and sequences. Each transcript is typically represented on a microarray by multiple probe pairs, which differentiate among closely
related members of gene families. These thousands of oligonucleotide-selected probes hybridize with complementary genetic information provided by the mRNA
extracted from the target tissue or cell sample to be analyzed. Expression arrays typically use 20 pairs of specific oligonucleotide probes to interrogate each
transcript, minimizing the effects of nonspecific hybridization and background signal. Probe arrays identify mRNA expression changes of greater than twofold between
experiments and are able to detect transcript levels, even if only a few copies per cell are present. 49,50 and 51 The software linked to such automated systems allows
processing and analysis of data, thus enabling control of the whole procedure and providing high quality and reproducible results. 52,53 and 54 These programs often
interface raw data with online databases, such as GenBank, converting data acquired to expression levels, base calls, or genotype. The inclusion of reference
standard genes as intraassay and interassay controls normalizes data, allowing comparison of multiple different experiments on a quantitative level. The gene-chip
arrays (Affimetrix) are constructed so as to allow quantitative and robust monitoring of the expression level of thousands of genes simultaneously. These arrays are
made using a combination of semiconductor-based lithography and solid-phase chemical synthesis. Specific DNA probes are synthesized, and then each probe is
affixed to a predefined position in the array. An alternative process that brings great flexibility to the construction of cDNA microarrays is the spotting of PCR-prepared
arrayable DNA or the spotting of synthetic oligonucleotides on glass slides that are then used for hybridization with labeled RNAs. The synthesis of oligonucleotide
probes bypasses the need for handling a large number of clones and PCR products. In addition, probes can be specifically designed to detect alternatively spliced
species of mRNA.55,56 The construction of oligonucleotide arrays lends itself as a target for “artificial CGH.” Instead of using normal metaphase chromosomes as a
target, an array of DNA, such as provided by yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs) or bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs), can be used as the target for
competition between normal and genomic DNA. The option of using thousands of synthetic oligonucleotides will no doubt be reduced to practice in the near future.

The acquisition and processing of hybridization intensity data obtained by probe arrays is being applied in multiple areas, including the study of differential expression
patterns and genotyping or analysis of polymorphisms. The potential for generating a novel molecular nosology of tumors, selecting the most effective therapy for an
individual patient, determining molecular staging and grading, and discovering new therapeutic strategies is great and, to many, self-evident. For the data to be
analyzed, correlated, and exchanged, however, a unified informatics platform must exist for collecting, storing, retrieving, and interrogating the databases. The
development of a specific branch of bioinformatics designed to handle a large volume of data, create appropriate clusters to define entities, and find ways to display
the results is common to many of the comprehensive technologies, such as proteomics and even tissue arrays.
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis of proteins has held the promise of comprehensive analysis of the protein constituents of a tissue or a population of living cells.
The development of immobilized pH gradients lowered the barrier to the widespread application of two-dimensional gel analysis to tumors. 57,58 The potential value of
proteomics for the accurate classification of tumors was well demonstrated in the mid-1980s by the use of polypeptide phenotyping of acute leukemia in children. 59
Advances in two-dimensional gel analysis and biophysical instrumentation suggest that comprehensive analysis of the proteins expressed in a tissue or population of
cells will yield information capable of differentiating different tumor types. As in the case of mRNA profiling, it is hoped that this technique may help select therapies
and identify novel targets for therapy. A promising advance is the use of MALDI-TOF (matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization–time of flight) technology and
variations thereof to construct “protein chips” that detect and identify proteins at the femtomole scale directly from their native environments. 60,61 By using modified
surfaces to capture molecules on the basis of specific binding kinetics, this type of approach can probe the function of some molecules in an exquisite way, thus
significantly contributing to the knowledge of functional genomics. Technological platforms for nucleic acid identification can be modified to greatly enhance the
sensitivity of IHC, and molecular counting can be made possible on the basis of rolling circle amplification (RCA) technology.
As a consequence of genomics and proteomics, antibodies will be raised against a very large number of novel antigenic determinants. The task of characterizing the
patterns of tissue reactivity and the prevalence of the potential marker in even the most common tumor types appears out of reach of most laboratories. Although still
in its early stages of development, tissue microarrays may enable investigators to rapidly characterize novel antisera. Tissue microarrays ( Fig. 26-4) make it possible
to analyze hundreds, even thousands, of tissue specimens from patients in different stages of disease and to assess the diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic
importance of emerging cancer gene candidates. 62In situ detection of DNA, RNA, and protein can be performed on consecutive sections of tissue microarrays. In this
fashion, hundreds to thousands of samples can be analyzed simultaneously. Although the labor needed to construct a tissue microarray is considerable, and many
issues in array design, image acquisition, and data storage are yet to be resolved, it is clear that all barriers will be lowered to facilitate the widespread use of this
approach. One of the advantages of tissue arrays is that each human tissue sample is greatly expanded. A regular paraffin block can easily yield twenty 0.2-mm
cores, and 300 sections can be obtained from a microarray master block. Thus, 6000 sections can be analyzed from each tumor block. Mutation detection in cytologic
specimens and in tissues is now a possibility using a new reporter system, the RCA. 63 RCA is an isothermal amplification driven by a polymerase that replicates
circularized oligonucleotide probes. The reaction can be set up to take place with either linear or geometric kinetics and is amenable to use in a variety of formats
ranging from surface immobilized DNA to cytologic specimens ( Fig. 26-5).

FIGURE 26-4. Microdissection of preneoplastic lesions makes it possible to test whether demonstration of genetic lesions accumulated in the somatic cells enhances
the microscopic interpretation of the lesion and allows a more accurate prediction of its potential for progression. Core needle biopsy of a mammographically detected
lesion with the phenotypic features of “atypical ductal hyperplasia” shows an abnormal acquired genotype. Microdissection and analysis of stromal cells showing a
normal genotype rules out the possibility of an inherited germline mutation. PCR, pathologically confirmed complete remission; SSCP, single-strand conformation
polymorphism; WT, wild-type. (Courtesy of Dr. Deborah Dillon, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.)

FIGURE 26-5. Schematic representation of the potential application of rolling circle amplification (RCA) for the demonstration of mutations by in situ hybridization. It is
relatively simple to construct two independent reporter systems for two sequences differing by a single nucleotide. The fact that the RCA reaction is tethered to the
target renders the system ideal for the topologic demonstration of mutations. C, circle; Mu, mutant; oligos, oligonucleotides; Wt, wild-type. (Courtesy of Dr. Paul
Lizardi, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.)

APPLICATIONS OF MOLECULAR MARKERS: DIAGNOSTIC MOLECULAR PATHOLOGY
Molecular markers and the techniques to demonstrate them in cells and tissues can be exploited for a series of paradigmatic clinical purposes that are succinctly
discussed in the following paragraphs. As knowledge of the basic pathogenesis of human tumors advances and technology develops, new applications will come to
the fore and molecular diagnosis can be truly described as a rapidly evolving and expanding field.
RISK ASSESSMENT
A significant number of inherited predispositions to develop tumors has been identified, and the genetic defect underlying the predisposition has been fully
characterized for many of the inherited tumor syndromes (see Chapter 13). Assessing inherited risk of developing a tumor because of a germline mutation is the
province of clinical geneticists and of cancer prevention programs. Many of the genetic defects causing inherited tumor syndromes are also the rate-limiting initiating
events for the sporadic tumors of the same histotype. The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene altered in familial polyposis is found mutated in more than 90% of
sporadic adenomatous polyps of the colon. An analogous situation exists for the Rb gene responsible for initiating the mutation of both inherited and sporadic retinal
neoplasms. Thus, finding these genes mutated in acquired preneoplastic conditions could possibly contribute to assessing the risk of a given tissue for developing a
tumor. Evidence is emerging that lesions preceding adenocarcinoma of the lung harbor cells that show loss of alleles in chromosomes 3p and 9p and that these
events are followed by mutations in the ras gene that occur at more advanced morphologic stages (carcinoma in situ).64 Studies in Barrett's esophagus suggest that
the subset of patients showing an increased G 2 fraction or aneuploidy is at increased risk for progression to high-grade dysplasia and cancer and should therefore be
under closer surveillance. It will be of interest to see if patients known to be at increased risk for certain tumors can be screened to detect the lesions at an early
stage. Studies suggest that detection of microsatellite expansion in cells sloughed from transitional epithelium lining the urinary tract may fulfill this goal. 65 For patients

with severe, long-standing ulcerative colitis, microsatellite instability has been more prevalent than for patients with dysplasia.
DIAGNOSIS
In the proper hands, cytology and histopathology are highly efficient diagnostic tests, but in a number of instances, these tests do not provide a decisive answer as to
whether a lesion is a tumor or not. In many instances, determining the specific tumor type is facilitated by IHC; however, because of suboptimal material in some
cases, the interpretation of the test results may be rendered difficult. Molecular markers can in many instances contribute to the reliable characterization and
diagnosis of a sample.
Among the most useful markers are the different translocations that are specific for certain tumor types. Among the cancers on which molecular diagnostics has had
the greatest impact is chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). The marker of this disease has been the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph1) t(9;22) (q34;q11),
demonstrable in 95% of cases of CML. 66,67 The translocation is demonstrable by conventional cytogenetics, FISH, Southern blot hybridization, and PCR. The
Philadelphia translocation joins the 5' portion of the BCR gene located on chromosome 22 to the 3' portion of the ABL gene on chromosome 9. The chimeric gene is
transcribed into a novel 8.5-kb mRNA, which in turn is translated into a 210-kD protein. The precise position of the breakpoints within the DNA varies considerably
from case to case. This is due to the fact that the breaks occur within introns, the sequence of which is excised from the initial forms of the BCR-ABL transcript to
produce a mature 8.5-kb mRNA. The variability in the positions of the breaks in DNA preclude the use of a single pair of primers to amplify DNA across the
breakpoint. To circumvent this problem, investigators have devised the so-called reverse PCR. In the first step of the procedure, BCR-ABL mRNA is transcribed with
an ABL primer into single-stranded cDNA using reverse transcriptase. Nucleotide sequences in the cDNA are then amplified with primers for the BCR and ABL exons.
It is important to perform control amplifications using primers for an omnipresent mRNA to ensure that the quality of the RNA to be tested is adequate.
Up to 6% of children and 20% of adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) also have a Ph1 chromosome indistinguishable cytogenetically from the one found in
CML. However, the precise position of the breakpoints in DNA differ between CML and ALL, and molecular techniques are the only way to reliably distinguish a
lymphoid blast crisis of CML from de novo ALL. Other practical contributions of the demonstration of the Ph chromosome in ALL is that ALL patients with the
translocation seem to have a poorer prognosis than those with Ph-negative ALL. Protocols for the demonstration of an increasing number of translocations linked to
the pathogenesis of hematolymphoid neoplasms are available and constantly being improved. 68
A group of tumors that very often presents a diagnostic challenge is the so-called small round cell tumors of childhood. By light microscopy, it is often very difficult to
distinguish rhabdomyosarcoma from lymphoma and from primitive neuroectodermal tumors or Ewing's sarcoma. Translocations that are specific for a number of
malignant tumors of the soft tissues (Table 26-2) are beginning to bring the resolutive power of molecular diagnostics to this area. Defining the underlying genetic
defects in these tumors not only clarifies their pathogenesis, but also provides the tool for a precise and decisive classification. 69,70

TABLE 26-2. Selected Molecular Genetic Markers in Cancer Diagnosis Listed by Disease

The demonstration that a mass lesion is composed of cells issued from a single progenitor cell is the single most reliable sign that the mass is a tumor. Hence,
methods to demonstrate clonality are important adjuncts to the morphologic evaluations of bioptic tissues. The first tumor in which clonality as assessed by molecular
methods had a significant diagnostic impact was lymphoma. Clonal rearrangement of B- and T-cell receptors indicates that a lymphoid mass is a tumor, although not
necessarily malignant, and also provides information as to the lymphoid cell lineage of the neoplasm. PCR protocols to demonstrate monoclonal populations are
available for both B- and T-cell receptors. 71 This technique makes it possible to determine clonality in small tissue samples, and the demonstration of monoclonality
helps to establish the neoplastic nature of lymphoid proliferations of the stomach.
Clonality assays applied to cell smears promise to greatly enhance the diagnostic efficiency of cytology. The differential diagnosis between reactive mesothelial cells
and mesothelioma can be resolved by showing clonality of the cells by FISH.
Demonstration of point mutations in the Ki-RAS gene can be an important diagnostic feature of malignant pancreatic tumors. Determining that mutated alleles of the
Ki-ras gene are present in cells aspirated from a pancreatic mass strongly suggests a malignant tumor, and the efficiency of diagnosis of pancreatic masses by
fine-needle aspiration is significantly increased by the simultaneous use of Ki-ras assessment and carcinoembryonic antigen levels.
Microsatellite DNA markers are useful clonal markers for the detection of cancer, and microsatellite changes matching those found in the primary tumor can be
detected in the urine sediment of 95% of patients diagnosed with bladder cancer. It is of interest that, in the same series of patients, conventional cytology was
positive in only 50% of the patients. Thus, microsatellite analysis might possibly be a viable method to screen for bladder cancer. 72
MOLECULAR GRADING AND STAGING
The purpose of grading is to predict the risk for local and distant spread of a tumor. Improving the capacity to predict whether a tumor has metastasized will have a
significant impact on therapy and prognosis. The concept that neoplasia is accumulation of mutations makes it possible to think that, if the molecular pathways of
tumor progression are defined, determining the alterations present in a tumor could provide accurate indication of the stage of progression and, thus, complement and
refine the prognosis based on conventional grading and staging. It has been suggested that a certain class of mutations of the Ki-ras gene encountered in colorectal
cancer could identify the more aggressive neoplasms. 73
Evaluation of the expression of proteins linked to cell division, such as Ki-67 (MB) and PECAN, have been extensively used to evaluate the percentage of proliferating
tumor cells in biopsies or resection specimens. In lymphomas, for example, when the percentage of Ki-67–positive cells is high, the prognosis is significantly worse.
For many tumors, a high percentage of cycling cells correlates with bad prognosis. This finding is not surprising and is in keeping with the number of mitotic figures,
one of the classic parameters used for tumor grading.
Genotypic characteristics can sometimes predict the behavior of a lesion, as illustrated in the case of fibromatosis. Trisomy of chromosome 8 is found in lesions that
recur, whereas lesions with low potential for recurrence have a balanced genetic complement. The status of TP53 (wild-type vs. mutated) has been found to contribute
prognostic information in bladder, colon, and breast carcinoma. 74,75 and 76 Abrogation of TP53 function can lead to a loss of G 1 arrest in response to DNA damage or
can interfere with apoptosis. In the first instance, mitosis without repair could fix mutations contributing to the cumulation of genetic lesions in the same cell. Loss of
apoptosis could contribute to an increase in cell number and lack of responsiveness to therapy. The concept that loss of competence for apoptosis could contribute to
tumor formation has led to investigation of the pathogenetic role of genes involved in cell survival, such as BCL-2. 77 Overexpression of BCL-2 has been found to
correlate with lymph node metastases in ductal carcinoma of the breast.
Neuroblastoma is perhaps the tumor that is most often graded by molecular means in many centers. The status of N-MYC amplification and the level of expression of
TRK-A are among the most significant prognostic parameters for tumors of matched stage and morphology. Together with ploidy and loss of chromosome 1p, they

complete the molecular staging and grading of neuroblastoma. 78,79
Gene expression array profiling studies are being reported, disclosing the potential contributions they may be able to make in the molecular classification of
neoplastic diseases. They also offer significant novel information regarding differentiation states; global alterations affecting particular cellular programs, such as
growth regulation; and host response mechanisms. If current classification schemes still lump together different diseases with distinct clinical phenotypes, differential
gene expression will distinguish molecular heterogeneity and produce biologically more accurate, and probably clinically more useful, diagnostic and predictive
information.
Few original studies have been reported as proof of principle for the approach using specific entities as “test cases.” For example, Golub et al. 80 attempted to produce
a molecular classification of acute leukemias based on gene expression monitoring by DNA microarrays and containing 6817 human genes. After producing a
teaching set of genes highly correlated with acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML)-ALL class distinction, these investigators then tested the validity of such a class of
predictors. The final 50-gene set of predictors derived from cross-validation tests correctly assigned 36 of 38 samples as either AML or ALL, the remaining two cases
resulting in “uncertain” phenotypes. 80 The authors concluded that class prediction provides an unbiased general approach to prognostic tests. They also cautioned
that sample collection, appropriate histopathologic documentation, and integrity of data sets are critical requirements for reaching robust conclusions. In a more recent
study, Alizadeh et al. 81 reported the distinct molecular nature of diffuse, large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs), an aggressive malignancy of mature B lymphocytes. This
group of investigators had previously produced a specialized microarray, the so-called lymphochip, which holds selected genes preferentially expressed in lymphoid
cells and their derived malignancies. Using a modification of this basic tool, they were able to molecularly subclassify DLBCLs into two groups: germinal-center B-like
tumors and activated peripheral B-like cell neoplasms. Moreover, this molecular classification not only pointed out what was previously an ill-defined histogenesis, but
it also incorporated novel data relating to proliferation and state of differentiation. Patients with germinal-center B-like DLBCL had a significant prolonged overall
survival when compared to those with activated B-like DLBCL, revealing the clinical significance of molecular subtyping of neoplastic diseases. 81
To reach acceptance and clinical applicability, individual tumor markers and “class prediction sets” of biologic determinants must undergo methodical analysis.
However, stringent criteria for the development of such studies, which should bring basic laboratory findings to clinical investigations and finally to standard of care,
have not been well delineated. Certain groups of clinical investigators have proposed using a strategy similar to the one used by drug discovery programs for
evaluating and implementing new therapeutic agents. In this exercise, phases of development and clinical application are well defined (see Chapter 17). Briefly,
phase I deals with toxicity, phase II determines dose escalation and definition of therapeutic index, phase III is designed to ascertain efficacy, and phase IV is the final
validation before commercialization and routine use. A similar analogy could be implemented that would take into account the process of discovery through validation
of any given biologic predictor. Phase I should deal with issues regarding biologic properties of the marker and the methodologies that could better identify the marker
in the context of using clinical material. Phase II should include pilot studies aimed at determining the specificity and sensitivity of such an assay; the definition of the
cutoff value, if needed; and the potential clinical significance of detecting the marker as an adjunct to the already available clinicopathologic information. Phase III
studies should aim at validating the marker by using (if possible) set(s) of well-characterized, prospectively accrued cases in specific clinical protocols designed for
such a purpose. Finally, phase IV studies should incorporate multiinstitutional efforts to delineate intra- and interlaboratory variability, define and implement a
standardized assay (using the selected cutoff value, if required), and demonstrate the clinical usefulness of the marker. This does not signify a final proposal of the
sequential steps that must be fulfilled by a potentially clinical significant tumor marker or set of markers. It is just meant to draw attention to the lack of specific criteria
for such an exercise and the need to reach some generally approved system if it is thought that such applications deserve to be translated to the routine clinical
practice.
DETECTION OF MINIMAL DISEASE
Detection of minimal disease has benefited greatly from the availability of molecular markers and, perhaps with diagnosis, is one of the most fruitful areas of
expansion in molecular diagnostics. It plays a role in three clinical circumstances: (1) evaluation of minimal residual disease, (2) early detection of recurrence, and (3)
evaluation of local extension. These applications are based on the high specificity of the molecular markers and the very high sensitivity afforded by the PCR-based
techniques.
Detection of circulating cells harboring the bcl-2 translocation is an important prognostic predictor of relapse in patients with t(14:18)-positive B-cell lymphoma treated
with high-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow or peripheral blood stem cell support. 82 A correlation exists between the relapse rate and both the degree
of contamination of the autograft and the efficacy of purging, suggesting that contamination is in part responsible for treatment failures. Similar strategies are being
explored for other malignancies. 83,84 and 85 Detection of cytokeratin 19 transcripts by RT-PCR in a sample of bone marrow, peripheral stem cells, or peripheral blood,
indicates the presence of epithelial cells for patients with breast carcinoma. 82 Other tumor-specific transcripts, such as tyrosinase for melanoma, 83 prostate-specific
antigen for prostate cancer, 84 and thyroglobulin for thyroid cancer, 85 also have been exploited for the detection of circulating cells. In general, these assays achieve
the detection of one tumor cell in a background of 10 10 cells. Circulating soluble Ki-RAS DNA bearing the same mutated sequences as the primary tumor can be
detected in plasma and other fluids of patients with pancreatic carcinoma or ovarian cancer. 86 The clinical significance of these findings is not yet established, but
when quantitative assays become available, the level of circulating tumor-specific DNA can perhaps be used as a marker to follow therapy and for early detection of
recurrence.
A different use of the ability to detect tumor cells with high sensitivity is the analysis of tissues for the presence of a specific mutation that identifies the primary tumor
being treated. It is indeed possible to verify the local spread of a tumor by testing the surgical margins, not just by light microscopy but also using the sensitive
PCR-based approach. Proof of the worthiness of this strategy is provided by studies in head and neck cancer that show that “molecular margins” are superior in
predicting local recurrence when compared to the conventional approach of assessing resection margins by intraoperative frozen section. 87 Should sequencing of
short cDNA fragments in minutes become feasible, intraoperative molecular assessment of margins for tumors genotyped at the time the first diagnostic biopsy is
obtained may possibly become a real option.
RECURRENCE VERSUS SECOND PRIMARY
With cure rates and survival rates of patients with malignant tumors increasing, it is more important in clinical practice to identify second primary tumors. When a
second tumor has its presentation in the same organ system as the first, the question invariably arises about distinguishing between a recurrence and a second
primary. Morphologic comparison and an extended immunophenotypical profile of the two lesions can sometimes resolve the question, but the presence of a clonal
mutation or a broader constellation of genetic alterations is the most direct way to establish a link between the two lesions or to strongly suggest that the
metachronous tumors represent independent events. An adenocarcinomatous lesion in the lung of a patient in long-term remission for a primary adenocarcinoma
elsewhere is another situation that benefits from a molecular approach to distinguish between a second primary and a metastasis. Clearly, it is best not to rely on the
alterations present on a single gene but to attempt to establish a broad genotypic characterization of the two lesions to maximize the effectiveness of the interpretation
of the results. Microsatellite alterations at multiple loci can be useful. Relying on differences or similarities in gene sequence in genes that show a wide spectrum of
mutations (e.g., TP53) clearly is more effective than using genes exhibiting a limited repertoire of mutations (e.g., Ki-RAS). Molecular analysis of multiple tumors of
the transitional epithelium in the urinary bladder has demonstrated that the multiple lesions arise from a single progenitor cell that seeds the bladder mucosa,
explaining the high risk for recurrence encountered in these patients. 88,89

CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE FUTURE
The practice of conventional histopathology based on light microscopy was changed and complemented in the second half of the twentieth century by three
technological advances: ultrastructure, IHC, and molecular diagnostics. The first two represented incremental gains in diagnostic power and efficiency but did not
force substantial changes in the practice of morphologic tissue analysis. However, molecular medicine is profoundly changing the approach to tissue analysis.
Perhaps more important, molecular medicine is altering the pathway for advancement. The elucidation of the molecular pathogenesis of tumors has led directly to the
discovery and application of molecular tumor markers. Diagnosis and prognosis have, in many cases, been enhanced by the use of the marker(s). Finally, the marker
(e.g., Her-2/neu) may constitute a therapeutic target. With the advances in biotechnology and bioinformatics, the preceding sequence of events can be predicted to
change. Rather than elucidating a molecular pathway, we will have a complete view of the molecular biology of a given tumor type. This comprehensive understanding
will lead to the development of specific therapies and to the rational selection of therapeutic modalities for a specific patient. Molecular tests will allow an accurate
assessment of the response and modification of therapy when required. The detailed molecular knowledge of the natural history of tumors will yield markers for
inherited and acquired risks, and these, in turn, will make improved design and monitoring of prevention a reality.

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Slamon DJ, Godolphin W, Jones LA, et al. Studies of the HER-2/neu proto-oncogene in human breast and ovarian cancer. Science 1989;244:707.
2. Cordon-Cardo C, Dalbagni D, Saez GT, et al. TP53 mutations in human bladder cancer: genotypic versus phenotypic patterns. Int J Cancer 1994;56:347.
3. Emmert-Buck MR, Bonner RF, Smith PD, et al. Laser capture microdissection. Science 1996;274:998.
4. Cheng J, Fortina P, Surrey S, Kricka LJ, Wilding P. Microchip-based devices for molecular diagnosis of genetic diseases. Mol Diagn 1996;1:183.
5. Wheeless LL, Badalament RA, de Vere White RW, Fradet Y, Tribukait B. Consensus review of the clinical utility of DNA cytometry in bladder cancer. Report of the DNA Cytometry Consensus
Conference. Cytometry 1993;14:478.
6. Bauer KD, Bagwell CB, Giaretti W, et al. Consensus review of the clinical utility of DNA flow cytometry in colorectal cancer. Cytometry 1993;14:486.
7. Stephenson RA, Gay H, Fair WR, Melamed MR. Effect of section thickness on quality of flow cytometric DNA content determinations in paraffin-embedded tissues. Cytometry 1986;7:41.
8. Halvorsen OJ, Hostmark J, Haukaas S, Hoisaeter PA, Akslen LA. Prognostic significance of p16 and CDK4 proteins in localized prostate carcinoma. Cancer 2000;88:416.
9. Askin FB, Perlman EJ. Neuroblastoma and peripheral neuroectodermal tumors. Am J Clin Pathol 1998;109:23.
10. Medeiros LJ, Carr J. Overview of the role of molecular methods in the diagnosis of malignant lymphomas. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1999;123:1189.
11. Gale RE. Evaluation of clonality in myeloid stem-cell disorders. Semin Hematol 1999;36:361.
12. Southern EM. Detection of specific sequences among DNA fragments separated by gel electrophoresis. J Mol Biol 1975;98:503.
13. Ilson DH, Motzer RJ, Rodriguez E, Chaganti RS, Bosl GJ. Genetic analysis in the diagnosis of neoplasms of unknown primary tumor site. Semin Oncol 1993;20:229.
14. Glassman AB. Cytogenetics, in situ hybridization and molecular approaches in the diagnosis of cancer. Ann Clin Lab Sci 1998;28:324.
15. Ried T. Interphase cytogenetics and its role in molecular diagnostics of solid tumors. Am J Pathol 1998;152:325.
16. Kallioniemi OP, Kallioniemi A, Piper J, et al. Optimizing comparative genomic hybridization for analysis of DNA sequence copy number changes in solid tumors. Genes Chromosomes Cancer
1994;10:231.
17. Isola J, DeVries S, Chu L, Ghazvini S, Waldman F. Analysis of changes in DNA sequence copy number by comparative genomic hybridization in archival paraffin-embedded tumor samples.
Am J Pathol 1994;145:1301.
18. Schrock E, Veldman T, Padilla-Nash H, et al. Spectral karyotyping refines cytogenetic diagnostics of constitutional chromosomal abnormalities. Hum Genet 1997;101:255.
19. Mullis K, Faloona F, Scharf S, et al. Specific enzymatic amplification of DNA in vitro: the polymerase chain reaction. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 1986;51(Pt 1):263.
20. Bustin SA, Dorudi S. Molecular assessment of tumour stage and disease recurrence using PCR-based assays. Mol Med Today 1998;4:389.
21. Appelbaum FR. Molecular diagnosis and clinical decisions in adult acute leukemia. Semin Hematol 1999;36:401.
22. Kim SH, Godfrey T, Jensen RH. Whole genome amplification and molecular genetic analysis of DNA from paraffin-embedded prostate adenocarcinoma tumor tissue. J Urol 1999;162:1512.
23. Capodieci P, Magi-Galluzzi C, Moreira G Jr, Zeheb R, Loda M. Automated in situ hybridization: diagnostic and research applications. Diagn Mol Pathol 1998;7:69.
24. Fletcher JA. DNA in situ hybridization as an adjunct in tumor diagnosis. Am J Clin Pathol 1999;112:11.
25. Bartow SA. Diagnostic and prognostic applications of oncogenes in surgical pathology. Am J Surg Pathol 1990;14:5.
26. Scarpa A, Tognon M. Molecular approach in human tumor investigation: oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes and DNA tumor polyomaviruses. Int J Mol Med 1998;1:1011.
27. van Dongen JJ, Macintyre EA, Gabert JA, et al. Standardized RT-PCR analysis of fusion gene transcripts from chromosome aberrations in acute leukemia for detection of minimal residual
disease. Report of the BIOMED-1 Concerted Action: investigation of minimal residual disease in acute leukemia. Leukemia 1999;13:1901.
28. Ghossein RA, Carusone L, Bhattacharya S. Review: polymerase chain reaction detection of micrometastases and circulating tumor cells: application to melanoma, prostate, and thyroid
carcinomas. Diagn Mol Pathol 1999;8:165.
29. Millon R, Jacqmin D, Muller D, et al. Detection of prostate-specific antigen- or prostate-specific membrane antigen-positive circulating cells in prostatic cancer patients: clinical implications. Eur
Urol 1999;36:278.
30. Ringel MD, Ladenson PW, Levine MA. Molecular diagnosis of residual and recurrent thyroid cancer by amplification of thyroglobulin messenger ribonucleic acid in peripheral blood. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 1998;83:4435.
31. Zach O, Kasparu H, Krieger O, et al. Detection of circulating mammary carcinoma cells in the peripheral blood of breast cancer patients via a nested reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction assay for mammaglobin mRNA. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2015.
32. Raggi CC, Bagnoni ML, Tonini GP, et al. Real-time quantitative PCR for the measurement of MYCN amplification in human neuroblastoma with the TaqMan detection system. Clin Chem
1999;45:1918.
33. Campo E, Raffeld M, Jaffe ES. Mantle-cell lymphoma. Semin Hematol 1999;36:115.
34. Osborne CK. Steroid hormone receptors in breast cancer management. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1998;51:227.
35. Ross JS, Fletcher JA. HER-2/neu (c-erb-B2) gene and protein in breast cancer. Am J Clin Pathol 1999;112:53.
36. Diaz JI, Muro-Cacho CA. Macrophage expression of interleukin-1 in lymphoepithelioid cell (“Lennert's”) lymphoma. Leuk Lymphoma 1996;21:305.
37. Taylor H, Heaton N, Farrands P, Kirkham N, Fletcher M. Elevated human chorionic gonadotrophin levels in a patient with pancreatic carcinoma presenting with a testicular metastasis. Postgrad
Med J 1990;66:1073.
38. Bangalore L, Tanner AJ, Laudano AP, Stern DF. Antiserum raised against a synthetic phosphotyrosine-containing peptide selectively recognizes p185neu/erbB-2 and the epidermal growth
factor receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:11637.
39. Porter PL, Malone KE, Heagerty PJ, et al. Expression of cell-cycle regulators p27Kip1 and cyclin E, alone and in combination, correlate with survival in young breast cancer patients. Nat Med
1997;3:222.
40. Nishimura G, Tsukuda M, Zhou LX, Furukawa S, Baba Y. Cyclin D1 expression as a prognostic factor in advanced hypopharyngeal carcinoma. J Laryngol Otol 1998;112:552.
41. Cordon-Cardo C. Molecular alterations in bladder cancer. Cancer Surv 1998;32:115.
42. Monni O, Franssila K, Joensuu H, Knuutila S. BCL2 overexpression in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Leuk Lymphoma 1999;34:45.
43. Sola B, Salaun V, Ballet JJ, Troussard X. Transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms induce cyclin-D1 over-expression in B-chronic lymphoproliferative disorders. Int J Cancer
1999;83:230.
44. Gorczyca W, Bedner E, Burfeind P, Darzynkiewicz Z, Melamed MR. Analysis of apoptosis in solid tumors by laser-scanning cytometry. Mod Pathol 1998;11:1052.
45. Sanger F, Nicklen S, Coulson A. DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1977;74:5463.
46. Eisenbarth I, Beyer K, Krone W, Assum G. Toward a survey of somatic mutation of the NF1 gene in benign neurofibromas of patients with neurofibromatosis type 1. Am J Hum Genet
2000;66:393.
47. Lander ES. Array of hope. Nat Genet 1999;21:3.
48. Khan J, Saal LH, Bittner ML, et al. Expression profiling in cancer using cDNA microarrays. Electrophoresis 1999;20:223.
49. Pollack JR, Perou CM, Alizadeh AA, et al. Genome-wide analysis of DNA copy-number changes using cDNA microarrays. Nat Genet 1999;23:41.
50. Sgroi DC, Teng S, Robinson G, et al. In vivo gene expression profile analysis of human breast cancer progression. Cancer Res 1999;59:5656.
51. Khan J, Simon R, Bittner M, et al. Gene expression profiling of alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma with cDNA microarrays. Cancer Res 1998;58:5009.
52. Loftus SK, Chen Y, Gooden G, et al. Informatic selection of a neural crestmelanocyte cDNA set for microarray analysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:9277.
53. Bubendorf L, Kolmer M, Kononen J, et al. Hormone therapy failure in human prostate cancer: analysis by complementary DNA and tissue microarrays. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1758.
54. Bassett DE Jr, Eisen MB, Boguski MS. Gene expression informaticsit's all in your mine. Nat Genet 1999;21:51.
55. Sun L, Goodman PA, Wood CM, et al. Expression of aberrantly spliced oncogenic ikaros isoforms in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3753.
56. Kraus A, Neff F, Behn M, et al. Expression of alternatively spliced mdm2 transcripts correlates with stabilized wild-type p53 protein in human glioblastoma cells. Int J Cancer 1999;80:930.
57. Celis JE, Celis P, Ostergaard M, et al. Proteomics and immunohistochemistry define some of the steps involved in the squamous differentiation of the bladder transitional epithelium: a novel
strategy for identifying metaplastic lesions. Cancer Res 1999;59:3003.
58. Ryu DD, Nam DH. Recent progress in biomolecular engineering. Biotechnol Prog 2000;16:2.
59. Hanash SM, Teichroew D. Mining the human proteome: experience with the human lymphoid protein database. Electrophoresis 1998;19:2004.
60. Melis R, White R. Characterization of colonic polyps by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Electrophoresis 1999;20:1055.
61. Garvin AM, Parker KC, Haff L. MALDI-TOF based mutation detection using tagged in vitro synthesized peptides. Nat Biotechnol 2000;18:95.
62. Moch H, Schraml P, Bubendorf L, et al. High-throughput tissue microarray analysis to evaluate genes uncovered by cDNA microarray screening in renal cell carcinoma. Am J Pathol
1999;154:981.
63. Lizardi PM, Huang X, Zhu Z, et al. Mutation detection and single-molecule counting using isothermal rolling-circle amplification. Nat Genet 1998;19:225.
64. Euhus DM, Maitra A, Wistuba II, et al. Use of archival fine-needle aspirates for the allelotyping of tumors. Cancer 1999;87:372.
65. Steiner G, Schoenberg MP, Linn JF, Mao L, Sidransky D. Detection of bladder cancer recurrence by microsatellite analysis of urine. Nat Med 1997;3:621.
66. Pasternak G, Hochhaus A, Schultheis B, Hehlmann R. Chronic myelogenous leukemia: molecular and cellular aspects. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1998;124:643.
67. Sinclair PB, Nacheva EP, Leversha M, et al. Large deletions at the t(9;22) breakpoint are common and may identify a poor-prognosis subgroup of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. Blood
2000;95:738.
68. Morgan GJ, Pratt G. Modern molecular diagnostics and the management of haematological malignancies. Clin Lab Haematol 1998;20:135.
69. Rowley JD. Cytogenetic and molecular analysis of pediatric neoplasms: diagnostic and clinical implications. Pediatr Pathol 1994;14:167.
70. Ladanyi M. The emerging molecular genetics of sarcoma translocations. Diagn Mol Pathol 1995;4:162.
71. Sharp JG, Chan WC. Detection and relevance of minimal disease in lymphomas. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1999;18:127.
72. Mao L, Schoenberg MP, Scicchitano M, et al. Molecular detection of primary bladder cancer by microsatellite analysis. Science 1996;271:659.
73. Ahnen DJ, Feigl P, Quan G, et al. Ki-ras mutation and p53 overexpression predict the clinical behavior of colorectal cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group study. Cancer Res 1998;58:1149.
74. Sarkis AS, Dalbagni G, Cordon-Cardo C, et al. Nuclear overexpression of p53 protein in transitional cell bladder carcinoma: a marker for disease progression. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:53.
75. Esrig D, Elmajian D, Groshen S, et al. Accumulation of nuclear p53 and tumor progression in bladder cancer. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1259.
76. Bergh J, Norberg T, Sjogren S, Lindgren A, Holmberg L. Complete sequencing of the p53 gene provides prognostic information in breast cancer patients, particularly in relation to adjuvant
systemic therapy and radiotherapy. Nat Med 1995;1:1029.
77. Pui CH, Evans WE. Genetic abnormalities and drug resistance in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Adv Exp Med Biol 1999;457:383.
78. Kramer K, Cheung NK, Gerald WL, et al. Correlation of MYCN amplification, Trk-A and CD44 expression with clinical stage in 250 patients with neuroblastoma. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:2098.
79. Gallego S, Parareda A, Munell F, Sanchez de Toledo J, Reventos J. Clinical relevance of molecular markers in neuroblastoma: results from a single institution. Oncol Rep 1999;6:891.
80. Golub TR, Slonim DK, Tamayo P, et al. Molecular classification of cancer: class discovery and class prediction by gene expression monitoring. Science 1999;286:531.
81. Alizadeh AA, Eisen MB, Davis RE, et al. Distinct types of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma identified by gene expression profiling. Nature 2000;403:503.
82. Akasaka T, Akasaka H, Yonetani N, et al. Refinement of the BCL2/immunoglobulin heavy chain fusion gene in t(14;18)(q32;q21) by polymerase chain reaction amplification for long targets.
Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1998;21:17.
83. Ghossein RA, Coit D, Brennan M, et al. Prognostic significance of peripheral blood and bone marrow tyrosinase messenger RNA in malignant melanoma. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:419.
84. Ghossein RA, Osman I, Bhattacharya S, et al. Detection of prostatic specific membrane antigen messenger RNA using immunobead reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Diagn Mol
Pathol 1999;8:59.
85. Ringel MD, Balducci-Silano PL, Anderson JS, et al. Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction of circulating thyroglobulin messenger ribonucleic acid for monitoring patients
with thyroid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999;84:4037.
86. Minamoto T, Mai M, Ronai Z. K-ras mutation: early detection in molecular diagnosis and risk assessment of colorectal, pancreas, and lung cancers. Cancer Detect Prev 2000;24:1.

87. Brennan JA, Mao L, Hruban RH, et al. Molecular assessment of histopathological staging in squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med 1995;332:429.
88. Dalbagni G, Presti J, Reuter V, et al. Genetic alterations in bladder cancer. Lancet 1993;324:469.
89. Tsai YC, Simoneau AR, Spruck CH 3rd, et al. Mosaicism in human epithelium: macroscopic monoclonal patches cover the urothelium. J Urol 1995;153:1697.

SECTION 27.1 Computed Tomography
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 27.1
Computed Tomography
ELLIOT K. FISHMAN
BRUCE A. URBAN
Introduction
Liver
Pancreas
Kidney
Adrenal Gland
Small Bowel And Colon
Esophagus And Stomach
Lungs And Mediastinum
Musculoskeletal System
Central Nervous System
Summary
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Computed tomography (CT) has long been a mainstay of diagnostic imaging in cancer patients. CT offers noninvasive and accurate results for most disease
processes and is both widely available and relatively low in cost. The number of CT examinations performed in the United States continues to increase at a rate of
approximately 10% per year.1 CT has remained a vital and important imaging modality because it has continued to evolve, with spiral (helical) CT, multiphase
imaging, and multidetector scanning being the notable recent innovations. 2,3 and 4 The current diagnostic capabilities and the accuracy of CT continue to improve. With
spiral CT, data acquisition can be timed with the administration of contrast material during multiple phases of enhancement, optimizing cancer detection and
diagnosis. In addition, new techniques centered on three-dimensional (3D) and virtual CT imaging are being refined to take advantage of some of the capabilities of
spiral CT. 5,6 and 7 These techniques will prove valuable in planning surgical procedures and radiation therapy. CT is also ideally suited for the guidance of interventional
procedures often necessary to confirm malignancy and allow subtyping of tumors. 1 This section reviews some of the key current applications of CT scanning and
defines its role in patient treatment and management.

LIVER
Spiral CT currently is the study of choice for the evaluation of the liver and biliary tree. Spiral CT can both detect and characterize hepatic pathology by providing
detailed information as to the presence, extent, and vascularity of a lesion. Accurate localization of tumor to specific hepatic segments can be performed when key
vascular structures are defined. The enhancement pattern, as well as lesion attenuation values, allow specific classification of a lesion as benign (cyst or
hemangioma) or malignant (primary vs. metastases) in most cases. Specific CT characteristics may also suggest whether a lesion is a primary or metastatic lesion,
although there is significant overlap in many cases. 8,9,10 and 11 Identification of the characteristics that differentiate benign from malignant lesions is critical because
many smaller liver lesions (1 cm or less), even in oncology patients, are benign ( Fig. 27.1-1, Fig. 27.1-2).12,13

FIGURE 27.1-1. Adenocarcinoma of the liver. Cystic tumor mass grows through the liver capsule. Ascites is also seen.

FIGURE 27.1-2. Cholangiocarcinoma of the liver. A: A 10-cm intrahepatic mass is partially calcified on non–contrast-enhanced scans. B: After infusion of contrast, the
vascularity and necrotic nature of the tumor are best defined.

There has been much discussion over the last several years, with various conclusions, as to the optimum imaging protocol for the detection of hepatic tumors. Before
the introduction of spiral CT, the optimal CT technique for imaging the liver was CT during arterial portography. 14,15 The limitations of that technique include the need
for catheterization of the superior mesenteric artery as well as problems with flow-related defects in up to 25% of patients. Newer CT techniques have essentially the
same detection rate (or better) but without the related limitations. Kuszyk et al. 16 found that with portal-phase contrast-enhanced spiral CT, 91% of lesions larger than
1 cm can be detected. Hollett et al. 17 found that by using a dual-phase CT technique, almost 10% more lesions were detected than with portal-phase images only. As
CT technology is constantly evolving, the prospect of greater accuracy in the ability to detect lesions is fairly optimistic. The most recent work, utilizing multidetector
spiral CT scanning, uses very narrow collimation (2.5 mm) for optimal lesion detection, with excellent results. 4
In addition to the detection of tumor, CT coupled with 3D reconstruction of data represents the next step in CT imaging. The image data are presented in a form that
combines the best of angiography and CT scanning. 18 These 3D images can be displayed in real time and can be supplemented by stereoscopic displays to optimize
lesion definition and extent. The information generated can help with surgical planning. By combining a vascular map from the arterial phase with a venous map from
the portal phase, the radiologist can generate key road maps and vascular anatomy in a noninvasive format. With technical advances such as this, curative resection
of some primary and metastatic tumors is now possible. In addition, the number of relatively invasive preoperative studies often needed to document tumor
resectability, including conventional angiography and CT portography, have been markedly reduced. 1

CT is also valuable in monitoring patient treatment. Accurate tumor volumetrics can be accomplished and captured to measure and quantify therapeutic response
accurately. Three-dimensional size measurements have been shown to be reproducible and clinically useful for following up response of liver tumors to treatment. 19
Enhancement pattern changes as well as changes in normal liver volumes also are often helpful in assessing treatment success. New techniques to measure liver
enhancement after intravenous (IV) injection of contrast material can be used to quantify arterial blood flow to the liver and may be useful in determining which
patients are at risk for subsequent development of liver metastases. 20

PANCREAS
The role of CT in the evaluation of the pancreas typically centers on the detection and staging of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Although the 5-year survival rate for
pancreatic cancer in general remains poor, in selected patients, survival can be increased. Patients with a mass of 2 cm or less limited to the pancreatic head or
patients without major vessel encasement or spread to lymph nodes who are treated with a pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure) have a 30% or greater
5-year survival. 21 The key roles for CT in this patient population are accurate staging and triage.
The use of spiral CT has increased the accuracy of CT in staging pancreatic cancer by allowing detection of smaller lesions and by its ability to improve definition of
vascular encasement.22,23 and 24 With modern spiral CT scanners, tumor detection approaches 96%. 24 The number of indeterminate cases (i.e., the inability to
distinguish between glandular enlargement due to inflammation and carcinoma) based on spiral CT findings has also decreased substantially. Pancreatic
adenocarcinoma is usually a hypodense lesion relative to the normally enhancing pancreatic gland. 25 In the past, a pancreatic mass was typically detected based on a
gross contour change within the pancreatic gland. However, such an obvious contour change usually indicated a relatively large mass. With the optimal IV contrast
delivery of spiral CT, smaller lesions can now be detected. The key roles for CT in this patient population are accurate staging and triage.
Optimal IV contrast enhancement also provides for better assessment of key arterial and venous structures, such as the portal vein, celiac axis, and superior
mesenteric artery, to help to determine their patency and relation to tumor extension ( Fig. 27.1-3). The degree of major vascular involvement by pancreatic cancer is
useful in predicting which patients will have surgically resectable tumors. Major vessels with less than one-fourth of their circumference involved by tumor are almost
always resectable; tumors that surround more than three-fourths of the circumference are almost always unresectable. 23 Hommeyer et al.26 analyzed the caliber of the
peripancreatic veins and found that dilation of these vessels to more than 7 mm also suggests early vascular invasion and unresectability. 26 Conventional
angiography is no longer necessary for preoperative planning in most cases, since the sensitivity of CT and that of angiography are nearly identical, and 3D imaging
can produce angiography-like images ( Fig. 27.1-4). Metastatic disease to the liver and lymph nodes is easier to detect, particularly for lesions that are hypodense and
measure at least 1 cm in diameter. The characteristic CT appearance of other pancreatic masses may allow a diagnosis on the basis of appearance alone. CT can
also be used to monitor response to adjuvant therapy and to detect any potential sites of tumor recurrence.

FIGURE 27.1-3. Adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Sequence of spiral computed tomography scans demonstrate a 2.5-cm low-density mass in the body of the
pancreas, with a dilated distal pancreatic duct.

FIGURE 27.1-4. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Three-dimensional image reveals narrowing of the confluence of the portal vein and superior mesenteric vein
(arrowheads) from an unresectable cancer.

KIDNEY
One of the major roles of CT in the oncology patient is in detecting, classifying, and staging renal tumors ( Fig. 27.1-5, Fig.27.1-6, and Fig.27.1-7).27 Common
diagnostic problems in renal imaging are the detection and the characterization of a renal mass. Spiral CT has been shown to be accurate for the evaluation of renal
masses and accurately can distinguish between a simple cyst and a solid tumor. In a small percentage of cases, there is an overlap, and an indeterminate diagnosis
is made. In these cases, ultrasonography or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be helpful, although usually these techniques are subject to the same limitations
as CT.

FIGURE 27.1-5. Renal cell carcinoma. Computed tomography demonstrates a vascular tumor of the left kidney, with paraaortic nodes. Metastases to the mediastinal
nodes are also seen.

FIGURE 27.1-6. Renal cell carcinoma. Sequence of computed tomography scans demonstrates tumor extension into the renal vein and the inferior vena cava. Tumor
extends up to but does not involve the right atrium.

FIGURE 27.1-7. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma involving the kidneys. Multiple solid bilateral renal masses are due to lymphoma. The kidneys are not enlarged.

One of the current controversies in imaging the kidney is the timing of data acquisition in relation to contrast injection. 28,29 and 30 Specific acquisitions can be obtained
during the arterial phase, nephrogenic phase, or delayed phase of renal enhancement. Most authors now agree that scans during two, if not all three, of these phases
are necessary for optimal CT imaging of renal masses. 31 Lesion detection approaches 100% with modern CT scanners. 31 Arterial-phase images (20 to 30 seconds
after IV contrast administration) are crucial for evaluating renal artery and tumor vascularity. Nephrogenic phase imaging (90 to 120 seconds after IV contrast
administration) is ideal for lesion detection in the central portions of the kidney. Suspected renal vein or inferior vena cava involvement and collecting system
opacification require a more delayed scan (3 to 5 minutes after IV contrast administration).
In addition, spiral CT serves as an excellent modality for multiplanar reconstruction and 3D imaging of the kidneys. These techniques are important if such procedures
as partial nephrectomy are being considered. 32 The 3D spiral CT study provides a valuable tool to define the location of the renal mass and its relationship to the
renal vasculature and perinephric tissues ( Fig. 27.1-8). The 3D images assist the surgeon by providing preoperative information in a flexible display that aids in
determining whether nephron-sparing surgery is possible. 32

FIGURE 27.1-8. Renal cell carcinoma. Three-dimensional image demonstrates mass in the upper pole of the right kidney ( curved arrow). The renal vein
(straightarrow) is patent. Three-dimensional images such as this are valuable for preoperative planning.

CT is also useful for evaluation of tumors in the renal pelvis and collecting system, such as transitional cell carcinoma. 33 In these cases, delayed CT scans are
necessary to define accurately the true extent of tumor infiltration. Metastases to the kidney from such processes as lymphoma or lung cancer are best detected on
these delayed scan examinations, especially since these tumors may not distort the renal outline and are best seen only with differential contrast enhancement.

ADRENAL GLAND
CT scanning can clearly identify the adrenal glands in nearly all patients. The normal adrenal has two limbs, which have a maximum thickness of 3 to 4 mm. Adrenal
enlargement can be due to a wide range of pathologies, from adrenal adenoma and hyperplasia to primary and metastatic adrenal tumors. 34,35 and 36 The specific
clinical criteria used to characterize an adrenal mass include patient history, age, medical history, and the presence of any biochemical or physiologic abnormalities.
The specific CT criteria used include mass size, whether it is unilateral or bilateral, the density of the mass, the presence of calcification or fat within the lesion, and
the presence of other signs suggestive of malignancy.
Even in the oncology patient, the most common adrenal mass is a benign adrenal adenoma. Adenomas range in size from 1 to 5 cm and are typically of low CT
attenuation (–20 to 20 Hounsfield units) values. Several articles have reported successfully differentiating benign from malignant adrenal masses based on CT
attenuation of the mass.37,38 In these studies, all small adrenal masses with CT attenuation below 18 HU on noncontrast evaluation were benign. In practice, then,
adrenal masses that are 4 cm or less and are of low CT attenuation can be followed up conservatively with follow-up CT scanning. In the remaining patients with a
potentially significant indeterminate adrenal mass, chemical shift MR imaging can be used to characterize the lesion confidently. 39 Percutaneous biopsy may still be
necessary in some patients.
Malignant adrenal lesions can be divided into primary and metastatic lesions ( Fig. 27.1-9, Fig. 27.1-10).34,35 and 36 It may be impossible to distinguish a primary adrenal
carcinoma from a metastatic lesion based on its CT appearance alone. Other adrenal tumors that can be confused with a primary adrenal malignancy include
pheochromocytoma (which is malignant in up to 10% of cases), neuroblastoma (usually in younger patients), and myelolipoma (usually containing fat and
calcification).

FIGURE 27.1-9. Primary adrenal carcinoma. A 12-cm, left upper quadrant mass with foci of calcification can be seen. The left kidney (not shown) was displaced
inferiorly.

FIGURE 27.1-10. Bilateral adrenal metastases from a non–small cell lung cancer. The masses are unusually cystic.

SMALL BOWEL AND COLON
CT is typically not the first study to suggest the presence of a small bowel or colon neoplasm. Nevertheless, with the increased use of CT as the initial study for bowel
obstruction or an acute abdomen, there has been an increased detection rate of primary gastrointestinal tract tumors. 40,41 In most cases, CT is used in tumor staging
to define the extent of the primary mass and to define spread to adjacent structures. Although the CT appearances of small bowel tumors may overlap, several signs
are indicative of the etiology of the mass. Small bowel carcinoid tumor, for example, will typically present with an associated calcified mesenteric mass with a
desmoplastic reaction. 42 Small bowel adenocarcinoma is variable in appearance and may be an infiltrating lesion, a bulky mass, or an ulcerating lesion. Lymphoma of
the small bowel also varies in appearance but is usually bulkier and more extensive than an adenocarcinoma ( Fig. 27.1-11).

FIGURE 27.1-11. Small bowel lymphoma. Large ulcerating mass involves the proximal jejunum. The differential diagnosis would include a small bowel
adenocarcinoma.

Adenocarcinoma of the colon is a diagnosis usually made by colonoscopy or barium enema, with CT typically reserved for staging spread of disease ( Fig. 27.1-12). In
some centers, double-contrast CT of the colon is performed, to stage better the extent of tumor locally and local spread. In other centers, the key role of CT is the
detection of extracolonic disease, particularly to the liver or lung. 43

FIGURE 27.1-12. Adenocarcinoma of the transverse colon. Large necrotic left upper quadrant mass invaded the stomach, producing a gastrocolic fistula.

Recent advances in rapid volumetric CT scanning, combined with 3D imaging and computer graphics, have extended CT imaging into the “virtual” realm. Perhaps no
other area has generated as much clinical interest and promise as that of virtual colonoscopy. 44,45 With this technique, CT combined with 3D visualization provides a
virtual endoscopic view of the mucosal surface of the colon ( Fig. 27.1-13). This rapidly growing application has gained attention as a noninvasive test for screening of
colon polyps and cancer. It has also proven effective in evaluating portions of the colon not accessible or readily seen at conventional colonoscopy. 46 Authors have
reported 84% to 100% sensitivity for the detection of polyps larger than 10 mm and 70% to 95% sensitivity for polyps ranging from 6 to 9 mm. 44 Sensitivity remains
poor for polyps measuring less than 5 mm but, with such technologic innovations as rapid-speed multidetector CT scanning and improved computer processing, there
is great hope for improvement in the detection of tiny polyps.

FIGURE 27.1-13. Virtual colonoscopy. Data from spiral computed tomography can be manipulated with three-dimensional imaging to produce images that simulate
the appearance of a barium enema (A) or colonoscopy (B). The virtual colon view demonstrates a small polyp ( arrow).

ESOPHAGUS AND STOMACH
The role of CT in evaluating the upper gastrointestinal tract is somewhat controversial. Published results on the accuracy of CT for staging esophageal and gastric
cancer have been variable and depend in large part on the extent of disease and the specific parameter evaluated. 47,48 For example, in the evaluation and staging of
esophageal cancer, CT has been shown to be fairly accurate in detecting invasion of the trachea and airway as well as in detecting nodes in the region of the
gastrohepatic ligament. Recently, CT has been used increasingly for the follow-up and monitoring of patient status after therapy for esophageal cancer, whether with
surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy. Recent progress suggests that CT can be used not only to monitor response but for treatment planning.
Technologic advances have expanded the clinical role of CT in evaluation of the stomach ( Fig. 27.1-14, Fig. 27.1-15, and Fig. 27.1-16). The use of double-contrast
spiral CT produces a more detailed evaluation of the stomach than conventional CT. Initial studies suggest that this technique permits earlier detection and more
accurate staging of small gastric tumors. 49 The most commonly encountered stomach tumor is adenocarcinoma. Less common malignancies include lymphoma,
leiomyosarcoma, and metastases.50,51 The CT appearance of each of these lesions has findings that are often helpful for diagnosis. Despite these features, there may
be some overlap between all these tumors and other malignancies, such as metastatic disease to the stomach, or benign processes, such as Helicobacter pylori,
which can simulate a malignant process. 52

FIGURE 27.1-14. Adenocarcinoma of the stomach. The patient presented with gastric outlet obstruction. Tumor encases the gastric antrum, with carcinomatosis seen.

FIGURE 27.1-15. Gastric lymphoma. Computed tomography demonstrates diffuse involvement of the gastric fundus extending into the gastroesophageal junction.

FIGURE 27.1-16. Gastric leiomyosarcoma. Large necrotic mass arises off the gastric fundus. A small focus of calcification is seen in the mass.

LUNGS AND MEDIASTINUM
CT remains the study of choice for a wide range of oncology challenges in the thorax. 53,54,55,56,57 and 58 Spiral CT has further enhanced the potential of CT in thoracic
studies because of the single breath-hold capability, which essentially eliminates the problem of patient motion and breathing misregistration responsible for
suboptimal examination. 59,60 and 61 There are four major indications for CT scanning in the oncology patient with thoracic pathology: (1) staging a known tumor, such as
lung cancer, lymphoma, or thymoma; (2) detecting possible lung metastases from an extrathoracic primary tumor, such as a renal cell carcinoma; (3) evaluating a
known or suspected mediastinal mass (i.e., widened mediastinum on a routine chest radiograph); and (4) evaluating by high-resolution CT the lung parenchyma in
suspected complications of therapy, including radiation injury, drug reactions, and such secondary infections as in the immunosuppressed bone marrow

transplantation patient.
For staging most chest tumors, IV contrast material is required ( Fig. 27.1-17, Fig. 27.1-18, and Fig. 27.1-19). Contrast delineates the normal vascular structures and
defines the presence and extent of tumor and lymphadenopathy. Spiral CT can accurately depict the hilar lymph nodes and their major anatomic relationships. 62 In
lung cancer staging, we can determine the extent of disease, including vascular encasement or chest wall involvement. CT scans can also be used as a guide for
fiber-optic bronchoscopy to optimize tissue sampling. CT combined with 3D visualization can provide a virtual endoscopic view of the trachea and can be useful for
evaluating areas beyond high-grade tumor stenoses ( Fig. 27.1-20).63

FIGURE 27.1-17. Superior vena cava syndrome due to small cell lung cancer. Spiral computed tomography demonstrates tumor encasement of the superior vena
cava. The azygous vein is enlarged.

FIGURE 27.1-18. Hodgkin's lymphoma. Computed tomography demonstrates right hilar adenopathy. Vascular enhancement optimizes definition of the nodes.

FIGURE 27.1-19. Metastatic breast cancer. Computed tomography demonstrates lymphangitic spread of tumor into the right upper lung.

FIGURE 27.1-20. Virtual bronchoscopy. Three-dimensional image from spiral computed tomography data can produce images that can see the inside of the trachea
and bronchi.

CT evaluation of primary mediastinal masses is useful in defining the extent of disease and can suggest a specific diagnosis in many cases. Specific CT findings,
including location of the mass (anterior, middle, or posterior mediastinum), the presence of fat or calcification, enhancement characteristics, and mass size and other
sites of disease are often helpful in diagnosis. 64,65 Clinical history (e.g., myasthenia gravis), patient age, and medical history are also critical for achieving the correct
diagnosis. CT can stage most of these processes and is a useful guide for planning appropriate therapy, such as surgery, radiation therapy, or chemotherapy. CT also
plays a major role in monitoring response to therapy.
Another major advantage of CT is the ability to display an entire cross section of anatomy. This is especially important when staging such disease processes as
lymphoma. Studies have shown a change in therapy or treatment protocol in approximately 10% of patients based on information from chest CT, as compared with
information from chest radiographs only. 66,67,68 and 69
Spiral CT provides a more accurate detection rate for pulmonary nodules than conventional chest radiography. Small nodule detection is important clinically, as
lesions 1 cm or smaller are malignant in a large percentage of patients, especially in patients with a history of previous malignancy. 70 Spiral CT also allows for
accurate density readings of lesions to aid in detecting the presence of fat or calcification, which is helpful in determining the nature of any given nodule.
Enhancement characteristics of pulmonary nodules can also be used to characterize and predict their malignant potential. 71 Recently, much attention has been
focused on the use of “low-dose” spiral CT as a screening test for patients at high risk for the development of lung cancer. Spiral CT with dose reduction to 10% to
25% of standard CT has been shown to be very accurate in the detection of pulmonary nodules and can be used to exclude or confirm the presence of a nodule in a

patient with an equivocal chest radiograph. 72
Finally, the use of what is commonly referred to as high-resolution CT scanning is particularly valuable in detecting and defining the presence of parenchymal lung
injury, whether from radiation therapy (radiation pneumonitis) or from infections, such as invasive pulmonary aspergillosis after a bone marrow transplant. This CT
technique uses very thin sections and a high spatial resolution algorithm. It is important to remember that the high-resolution CT scanning may be positive for disease
even with a “normal” plain radiograph.

MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
The role of CT in the musculoskeletal system changed significantly with the introduction of MRI. It became the dominant examination for staging musculoskeletal
tumors, largely because of its superior soft tissue definition and evaluation of the bone marrow. CT, however, has continued to have specific advantages, especially
when evaluation of the bony skeleton is required. CT is particularly useful when there is a conflict between radiographic studies (i.e., plain radiographs and bone
scans) or between radiology studies and the clinical examination or patient complaints. CT is especially good at defining bone destruction in purely lytic lesions where
lesion aggressiveness may produce less than optimal bone scans. Specific areas where CT is invaluable are the bony pelvis, scapula, and the shoulder girdle ( Fig.
27.1-21). Similarly, imaging the thoracic and lumbar spine can be successfully performed with CT. Three-dimensional volumetric reconstruction can be useful for
preoperative planning and surgical simulation.

FIGURE 27.1-21. Giant cell tumor. A large lytic lesion involves both the right iliac wing and the sacrum. The study was conducted to emphasize bony detail.

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
CT became the dominant force in neurooncologic imaging in the early 1980s, before the introduction of clinical MRI. However, with the diffusion of MR technology,
MRI is now the dominant force in imaging the central nervous system. CT, however, still has specific applications, particularly when a detailed analysis of the
calvarium or spine is required. CT, with high-resolution bone detail algorithms, provides an optimal look at a complex anatomic region, such as the base of the skull,
the temporal bone, or the maxillofacial region. Subtle destruction or invasion by adjacent tumor is easily defined on these studies. Similarly, involvement of the spine
by primary or metastatic disease may be detected with CT. In these cases, CT may be used when there is a question as a result of bone scan findings or when clinical
symptoms and other study results are contradictory.

SUMMARY
CT scanning is a mainstay in oncology imaging because of its ability to survey multiple organs and organ systems in a single examination with both high sensitivity
and specificity. The introduction of spiral CT that is coupled with rapid advancements in 3D imaging technology ensures that CT will continue to remain a key study in
both the detection and staging of diseases. Future progress likely will center on organ-specific contrast agents as well as blood pool agents. Newer technologies,
such as real-time 3D imaging and virtual reality displays, will surely expand the role of CT and move it from a diagnostic to a therapeutic modality.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Federle, MP. Opening Plenary Session: 1997. Current status and future trends in abdominal CT. Radiographics 1998;18:1555.
2. Kalendar WA, Seissler W, Klotz E, et al. Spiral volumetric CT with single-breath hold technique, continuous transport, and continuous scanner rotation. Radiology 1990;176:181.
3. Heiken JP, Brink JA, Vannier MW. Spiral (helical) CT. Radiology 1993;189:647.
4. Weg N, Scheer MR, Gabor MP. Liver lesions: improved detection with dual-detector-array CT and routine 2.5-mm thin collimation. Radiology 1998; 209:417.
5. Dunco DM. Virtual reality imaging: new techniques in diagnostic imaging. Appl Radiol 1996;25:51.
6. Rubin GD, Dake MD, Napel SA, McDonnell CH, Jeffrey RB Jr. Three-dimensional spiral CT angiography of the abdomen: initial clinical experience. Radiology 1993;186:147.
7. Johnson PT, Heath DG, Bliss DF, Cabral B, Fishman EK. Computers in radiology. Three-dimensional CT: real-time interactive volume rendering. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1996;167:581.
8. Heiken JP, Weyman PJ, Lee JKT, et al. Detection of hepatic masses: prospective evaluation with CT, delayed CT, CT during arterial portography, and MR imaging. Radiology 1989;171:47.
9. Soyer P, Bluemke DA, Hruban RH, Sitzmann JV, Fishman EK. Hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer: detection and false-positive findings with helical CT during arterial portography.
Radiology 1994;193:71.
10. Baker ME, Palley R. Hepatic metastases. Basic principles and implications for radiologists. Radiology 1995;197:329.
11. Soyer P, Elias D, Zeiton G, Roche A, Levesque M. Surgical treatment of hepatic metastases: impact of intraoperative sonography. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1993;160:511.
12. Jones EC, Chezmar JL, Nelson RC, Bernardino ME. The frequency and significance of small (15 mm) hepatic lesions detected by CT. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1992;158:535.
13. Schwartz LH, Gandras EJ, Colangelo SM, Ercolani MC, Panicek DM. Prevalence and importance of small hepatic lesions found at CT in patients with cancer. Radiology 1999; 210:71.
14. Soyer P, Bluemke DA, Hruban RH, Sitzmann JV, Fishman EK. Primary malignant neoplasms of the liver: detection with helical CT during arterial portography. Radiology 1994;192:389.
15. Soyer P, Lacheheb D, Levesque M. False-positive CT portography: correlation with pathologic findings. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1993;160:285.
16. Kuszyk BS, Bluemke DA, Urban BA, et al. Portal-phase contrast-enhanced helical CT for the detection of malignant hepatic tumors: sensitivity based on comparison with intraoperative and
pathologic findings. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1996;166:91.
17. Hollett MD, Jeffrey RB Jr, Nino-Murcia M, Jorgensen MJ, Harris DP. Dual-phrase helical CT of the liver; value of arterial phase scans in the detection of small (1.5 cm) malignant hepatic
neoplasms. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1995;164:879.
18. Fishman EK, Kuszyk BS, Heath DG, Cabral B, Gao L. Surgical planning for liver resection. Computer 1996;29(1):64.
19. Van Hoe L, Van Cutsem E, Vergote I, et al. Size quantification of liver metastases in patients undergoing cancer treatment: reproducibility of one-, two-, and three-dimensional measurements
determined with spiral CT. Radiology 1997;202:671.
20. Platt JF, Francis IR, Ellis JH, Reige KA. Liver metastases: early detection based on abnormal contrast material enhancement at dual-phase helical CT. Radiology 1997;205:49.
21. Bluemke DA, Cameron JL, Hruban RH, et al. Potentially resectable adenocarcinoma: spiral CT assessment with surgical and pathologic correlation. Radiology 1995;197:381.
22. Nishiharu T, Yamashita Y, Abe Y, et al. Local extension of pancreatic carcinoma: assessment with thin-section helical CT versus with breath-hold fast MR imagingROC analysis. Radiology
1999;212:445.
23. O'Malley ME, Boland GWL, Wood BJ, et al. Adenocarcinoma of the head of the pancreas: determination of surgical unresectability with thin-section pancreatic-phase helical CT. AJR Am J
Roentgenol 1999;173:1513.
24. Tabuchi T, Itoh K, Ohshio G, et al. Tumor staging of pancreatic adenocarcinoma using early- and late-phase helical CT. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1999;173:375.
25. Freeny PC, Traverso LW, Ryan JA. Diagnosis and staging of pancreatic adenocarcinoma with dynamic computed tomography. Am J Surg 1993;165:600.
26. Hommeyer SC, Freeny PC, Crabo LG. Carcinoma of the head of the pancreas: evaluation of the pancreaticoduodenal veins with dynamic CT-potential for improved accuracy in staging.
Radiology 1995;196:233.
27. Zagoria RJ, Bechtold RE, Dyer RB. Staging of renal adenocarcinoma: role of various imaging procedures. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1995;164:363.
28. Silverman SG, Lee BY, Seltzer SE, et al. Small renal masses: correlation of spiral CT features and patient findings. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1994;163:597.
29. Cohan RH, Sherman LS, Korobkin M, Bass JC, Francis IR. Renal masses: assessment of corticomedullary-phase and nephrographic phase CT scans. Radiology 1995;196:445.
30. Urban BA. The small renal mass: what is the role of multiphasic helical CT? Radiology 1997;202:22.
31. Kopka L, Fischer U, Zoeller G, et al. Dual-phase helical CT of the kidney: value of the corticomedullary and ephrographic phase for evaluation of renal lesions and preoperative staging of renal
cell carcinoma. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1997;169:1573.
32. Smith PA, Marshall FF, Corl FM, Fishman EK. Planning nephron-sparing renal surgery using 3D helical CT angiography. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1999;23(5):649.
33. Buckley J, Urban BA, Soyer P, Scherrer A, Fishman EK. Transitional cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis: a retrospective look with pathologic correlation. Radiology 1996;201:194.
34. Oliver TW Jr, Bernardino ME, Miller JI, Mansour K, Greene D, Davis WA. Isolated adrenal masses in non small-cell bronchogenic carcinoma. Radiology 1984;153:217.
35. Dunnick NR, Heaston D, Halvorsen R, Moore AV, Korobkin M. CT appearance of adrenal cortical carcinoma. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1982;6:978.
36. Fishman EK, Deutch BM, Hartman DS, et al. Primary adrenocortical carcinoma: CT evaluation with clinical correlation. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1987;148:531.
37. Korobkin M, Brodeur FJ, Francis IR, et al. CT time-attenuation washout curves of adrenal adenomas and nonadenomas. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1998;170:747.
38. Korobkin M, Brodeur FJ, Yutzy GG, et al. Differentiation of adrenal adenomas from nonadenomas using CT attenuation values. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1996;166:531.

39. Korobkin M, Lombardi TJ, Aisen AM, et al. Characterization of adrenal masses with chemical shift and gadolinium-enhanced MR Imaging. Radiology 1995;197:411.
40. Megibow AJ, Balthazar EJ, Cho KC, et al. Bowel obstruction: evaluation with CT. Radiology 1991;180:313.
41. Gulliver DJ, Baker KA. CT of the small bowel. Appl Radiol 1994;11:39.
42. Pantongrag-Brown L, Buetow PC, Carr NJ, Lichtenstein JE, Buck JL. Calcification and fibrosis in mesenteric carcinoid tumor: CT findings and pathologic correlation. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1995;164:387.
43. Balthazar EJ, Megibow AJ, Hulnick D, Naidich DP. Carcinoma of the colon: detection and preoperative staging by CT. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1988;150:301.
44. Fenlon HM, Ferrucci JT. First international symposium on virtual colonoscopy. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1999;173:565.
45. McFarland EG, Brink JA. Helical CT colonography (virtual colonoscopy): the challenge that exists between advancing technology and generalizability. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1999;173:549.
46. Macari M, Berman P, Dicker M, Milano A, Megibow AJ. Usefulness of CT colonography in patients with incomplete colonoscopy. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1999;173:561.
47. Noh HM, Fishman EK, Forastiere AA, Bliss DF, Calhoun PS. CT of the esophagus: spectrum of disease with emphasis on esophageal carcinoma. Radiographics 1995;15:1113.
48. Balthazar EJ, Siegel SE, Megibow AJ, Scholes J, Gordon R. CT in patients with scirrhous carcinoma of the GI tract: imaging findings and value for tumor detection and staging. AJR Am J
Roentgenol 1995;165:839.
49. Tsuda K, Hori S, Muasrakami T, et al. Intramural invasion of gastric cancer: evaluation by CT with water-filling method. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1995;19(6):941.
50. Kleinhaus U, Militianu D. Computed tomography in the preoperative evaluation of gastric carcinoma. Gastrointest Radiol 1988;13:97.
51. Dorfman RE, Alpern MB, Gross BH, Sandler MA. Upper abdominal lymph nodes: criteria for normal size determined by CT. Radiology 1991;180:319.
52. Urban BA, Fishman EK, Hruban RH. Helicobacter pylori gastritis mimicking gastric carcinoma at CT evaluation. Radiology 1991;179:689.
53. Hirakata K, Nakata H, Nakagawa T. CT of pulmonary metastases with pathological correlation. Semin Ultrasound CT MR 1995;16(5):379.
54. Fishman EK, Kuhlman JE, Jones RJ. CT of lymphoma: spectrum of disease. Radiographics 1991;11:647.
55. Cabanillas F, Fuller LM. The radiologic assessment of the lymphoma patient from the standpoint of the clinician. Radiol Clin North Am 1990;28:683.
56. Fishman EK, Kuhlman JE, Schuchter LM, Miler JA III, Magid D. CT of malignant melanoma in the chest, abdomen, and musculoskeletal system. Radiographics 1990;10:603.
57. Kawashima A, Fishman EK, Kuhlman JE, Nixon MS. CT of posterior mediastinal masses. Radiographics 1991;11:1045.
58. Sones PJ Jr, Torres WE, Colvin RS, et al. Effectiveness of CT in evaluating intrathoracic masses. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1982139:469.
59. Zeiberg AS, Silverman PM, Sessions RB, et al. Helical (spiral) CT of the upper airway with three-dimensional imaging: technique and clinical assessment. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1996;166:293.
60. Remy-Jardin M, Remy J, Giraud F, Marquette CH. Pulmonary nodules: detection with thick-section spiral CT versus conventional CT. Radiology 1993;187:513.
61. Buckley JA, Scott WW Jr, Siegelman SS, et al. Pulmonary nodules: effect of increased data sampling on detection with spiral CT and confidence in diagnosis. Radiology 1995;196:395.
62. Remy-Jardin M, Duyck P, Remy J, et al. Hilar lymph nodes: identification with spiral CT and histologic correlation. Radiology 1995;196:387.
63. Fleiter T, Merkle EM, Aschoff AJ, et al. Comparison of real-time virtual and fiberoptic bronchoscopy in patients with bronchial carcinoma: opportunities and limitations. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1997;169:1591.
64. David R, Lamki N, Fan S, et al. The many faces of neuroblastoma. Radiographics 1989;9:859.
65. Rosado-de-Christenson ML, Templeton PA, Moran CA. Mediastinal germ cell tumors: radiologic and pathologic correlation. Radiographics 1992;12:1013.
66. Castelino RA. Imaging techniques for staging abdominal Hodgkin's disease. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:697.
67. Castelino RA, Blank N, Hoppe RT, Cho C. Hodgkin disease: contributions of chest CT in the initial staging evaluation. Radiology 1986;160:603.
68. Khoury MB, Godwin JD, Halvorsen R, Hanun Y, Putman CE. Role of chest CT in non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Radiology 1986;158:659.
69. Aronberg DJ, Glazer HS, Sagel SS. MRI and CT of the mediastinum: comparisons, controversies, and pitfalls. Radiol Clin North Am 1985;23:439.
70. Munden RF, Pugatch RD, Liptay MJ, Sugarbaker DJ, Le LU. Small pulmonary lesions detected at CT: clinical importance. Radiology 1997;202:105.
71. Zhang M, Kono M. Solitary pulmonary nodules: evaluation of blood flow patterns with dynamic CT. Radiology 1997;205:471.
72. Diederich S, Lenzen H, Windmann R, et al. Pulmonary nodules: experimental and clinical studies at low-dose CT. Radiology 1999;213:289.

SECTION 27.2 Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 27.2
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
ARTHUR E. LI
DAVID A. BLUEMKE
Basic Principles
Brain
Spine
Head and Neck
Breast
Liver
Adrenal Glands
Kidney
Uterus
Cervix
Ovary
Prostate
Bladder
Musculoskeletal System
Chapter References

BASIC PRINCIPLES
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is based on the effect of large magnetic fields on the spinning motion of certain nuclei within biologic tissues. Due to the laws of
electromagnetics, spinning nuclei with odd mass numbers have a net charge and align themselves in the presence of an external magnetic field. In the human body,
the hydrogen nucleus (mass number of 1) is most often used in clinical MRI due to its abundance in water and lipid tissues. When a patient is placed in the bore of a
magnet, the hydrogen nuclei partially align themselves with the direction of the external magnet, which generates the net magnetization vector (NMV) of the patient. In
addition, these hydrogen molecules are spinning (a process called precession) at a specific frequency that varies with the strength of the external magnetic field. This
frequency is called the Larmor frequency. Based on the principle of resonance, a radiofrequency pulse emitted by a transmitter at the Larmor frequency can displace
the alignment of the hydrogen nuclei NMV through a flip angle that depends on the amplitude and duration of the radiofrequency pulse. Once the pulse is turned off,
the hydrogen nuclei relax back into their previous alignment with the external magnetic field. It is during this process of relaxation that the spinning hydrogen nuclei
produce a radiofrequency electromagnetic signal, which can be detected by a receiver coil placed on or around the patient. The information from this signal can be
processed by a computer to generate an image via a mathematical algorithm known as a Fourier transform.
The magnetization of the NMV exists in the planes of three-dimensional space. When the NMV is aligned with the external magnetic field, the magnetization is said to
be in the longitudinal plane. After a radiofrequency pulse, the NMV is usually flipped into the transverse plane. When the pulse is turned off, the relaxation of the NMV
back into the longitudinal plane is called T1 relaxation. The decay of transverse plane magnetization is called T2 relaxation. Different tissues in the body relax at
different rates. Fat has very short T1 and T2 relaxation times, whereas water has considerably longer T1 and T2 relaxation times. Neoplastic tissue also generally
relaxes at rates different from the tissues surrounding it. The varying relaxation times of tissues generate different strengths of signal at specific points in
measurement times. Hence, it is the difference in relaxation between tissues and the varying strength of the signals they generate that determine the contrast between
tissues on MR images. Tissues that appear bright on MR images are said to have high signal intensity, whereas dark-appearing tissues demonstrate low signal
intensity. In addition to relaxivity times, the strength of tissue signal also depends on the number of hydrogen nuclei present in the tissue (i.e., “proton density”). The
ability of MRI to demonstrate superior contrast between different tissue types ( Table 27.2-1) constitutes a major advantage over other cross-sectional imaging
modalities, such as computed tomography (CT).

TABLE 27.2-1. Relative Signal Intensities of Tissues

It is possible to “weight” an image by varying the repetition time (TR) between radiofrequency pulses and varying the time to sample the signal, called the echo time
(TE) (Fig. 27.2-1). One can choose the weighting of an image to emphasize the T1 relaxivity properties of tissues, the T2 relaxivity, or the proton density. Tissues with
short T1 relaxivity times, such as fat, appear brighter on T1-weighted images. Tissues exhibiting long T2 relaxivity, such as water, appear brighter on T2-weighted
images (Table 27.2-2). In general, T1 weighting is useful for demonstrating anatomic detail, whereas T2 weighting may be preferred when imaging pathology, such as
neoplastic tissue.

FIGURE 27.2-1. The basis of T1 and T2 weighting. A: Because fat has a shorter T1 relaxivity than does water, a short repetition time (TR) can maximize the T1 signal
difference between fat and water, prior to full recovery of longitudinal magnetization. Hence, a short TR [and a short echo time (TE), which minimizes T2 effects]
results in T1 weighting of a magnetic resonance image. B: The T2 signal decay of fat is faster than that of water; hence, a long TE can maximize signal differences
from T2 signal between fat and water. As a result, a long TE (in combination with a long TR, which minimizes T1 effects) results in T2 weighting of an image.

TABLE 27.2-2. Characteristics of Image Weighting

The use of contrast agents can also improve the detection of tumors and other pathology by MRI. The most commonly used agent is gadolinium, a paramagnetic rare
earth metal that slows the tumbling of adjacent hydrogen molecules. This results in a large reduction in the T1 and T2 relaxivities of the tissues that take up the
contrast. Hence, tissues into which gadolinium diffuses appear bright on T1-weighted images. MRI of tumors exploits this property of gadolinium because tumors are
often hypervascular and demonstrate increased contrast agent uptake relative to the surrounding normal tissues. Further, tumor vessels are disorganized and “leaky,”
so that there is increased extracellular fluid in the tumor. Hence, many tumors “enhance” after contrast administration. The distinct enhancement pattern of some
tumors on sequential images taken at multiple time points after contrast administration (known as dynamic MRI) can also separate tumor from surrounding tissues.
The risks and side effects of gadolinium are minimal as compared with those of iodinated contrast agents used for CT.
An ever-increasing number of different radio frequency pulse sequences are available for use in MRI. The gold standard for most imaging is the spin-echo pulse
sequence, in which an initial variable flip-angle pulse is rephased by a magnetic gradient to produce an echo signal. Gradient echo sequences reduce scan times and
are particularly useful for demonstrating flow on MR angiograms. The most recent advances have been made in developing very fast pulse sequences that can
acquire several image slices in a single breath hold. Faster imaging reduces artifacts from breathing and other movements, and new ultrafast sequences are
continually expanding the applications and widening the range of anatomy that can be accurately imaged by MRI.
The basic MR imager consists of the gantry, operating console, and computer with software that coordinates the acquisition and processing of images. During
imaging, the patient is placed inside the gantry, surrounded by the primary magnetic coils that generate the main external magnetic field and by the secondary
magnetic coils that generate various magnetic field gradients. These magnetic gradients are what allow signal to be localized to precise locations within the patient.
The use of gradients also allows MR images to be obtained in multiple planes, including coronal, axial, sagittal, and oblique. Most commercially available “high-field”
MRI magnets use field strengths of 1.0 or 1.5 tesla. “Low-field” and “open” MRIs use magnetic strengths from 0.2 to 0.5 tesla. Different radiofrequency receiver coils
are available, depending on the anatomy to be imaged, and commonly include shoulder, body, or head coils placed on the patient. Exposure to the magnetic fields of
an MR imager is generally considered much safer than exposure to the ionizing radiation of some other imaging modalities. However, MRI is contraindicated in
patients with pacemakers and may pose problems for patients with aneurysm clips made prior to 1980 and with several other ferromagnetic implants.

BRAIN
MRI is the imaging technique of choice for evaluating brain tumors. MRI has significant advantages over CT, such as multiplanar capabilities, which allow better
assessment of the origin of tumors and their involvement of adjacent structures. In addition, MRI offers both better imaging detail of posterior fossa tumors and
superior tissue contrast. MRI can also show the secondary effects of some brain tumors, such as hydrocephalus, hemorrhage, and edema. MRI is also useful in
identifying the best location for surgical biopsy. Two disadvantages of MRI are difficulties in detecting calcifications that occur in some tumors, such as
oligodendrogliomas, and decreased ability to delineate tumor invasion into bone. In such cases, a CT scan, which can detect these phenomena, can be
complementary to MRI.
The characteristic MRI appearance of the majority of brain tumors is a hyperintense signal on T2-weighted images. In addition, gadolinium contrast is used in every
MRI workup of brain tumors. Most normal brain tissue does not take up contrast, owing to the integrity of the blood–brain barrier. However, with malignancy, there is
breakdown of the blood–brain barrier and neovascularity and, hence, most tumors enhance. Some tumors would not be seen without contrast administration.
Gadolinium contrast administration can also help to distinguish tumor margins from surrounding edema on T1-weighted images. The intensity of contrast
enhancement correlates in a rough sense with the tumor grade, probably because generally higher-grade lesions have increased neovascularity. Therefore,
higher-grade lesions may enhance more intensely than well-differentiated brain tumors. In addition, the amount of vasogenic edema and hemorrhage adjacent to
tumor may roughly correlate with the degree of malignancy. Hence, a low-grade fibrillary astrocytoma may demonstrate little contrast enhancement and no edema or
hemorrhage, whereas a high-grade glioblastoma may show intense heterogeneous contrast enhancement, with prominent edema and hemorrhage. However, this rule
is not always reliable. An exception is low-grade pilocytic astrocytoma, which shows a paradoxical marked contrast enhancement ( Fig. 27.2-2). Hence, MRI can help
to assess the aggressiveness of brain tumors, but tumor diagnosis and grading must depend on the histopathologic analysis of surgical material.

FIGURE 27.2-2. Pilocytic astrocytoma. A large enhancing mass is present, arising from the region of the hypothalamus. Gadolinium contrast has been administered,
resulting in heterogeneous enhancement of the mass. The extent of the tumor is well depicted on magnetic resonance imaging, as is the adjacent mass effect on the
brain, with mild dilatation of the lateral ventricles.

Other brain tumors may demonstrate some distinguishing characteristics on MRI. Meningiomas are isointense to normal brain on all pulse sequences but enhance
intensely with contrast administration. Meningiomas can also demonstrate a focal thickened collar of enhancement adjacent to the tumor's dural attachment, known as
the dural tail sign.1 Ependymomas and choroid plexus papillomas may be associated with hydrocephalus seen on MRI. Metastatic lesions often appear at the
gray-white interface, enhance intensely, and can demonstrate edema. MRI is the most sensitive modality for imaging brain metastasis, 2 and single lesions on CT can
sometimes be revealed as multiple intracranial lesions when imaged with contrast-enhanced MRI.
MRI is also useful in assessing patients after surgery, irradiation, or chemotherapy. However, changes secondary to both surgery and irradiation can cause findings
that may mimic residual or recurrent tumor.3 One solution is to reimage the postoperative patient within 4 days after surgery to establish a baseline prior to the
development of postoperative processes simulating tumor. 4 In addition, positron emission tomography scanning may be able to differentiate recurrent tumor from the
changes of radiation injury. 5

SPINE

MRI is the primary imaging technique used to evaluate neoplastic disease of the spine. MRI is preferred over CT and plain-film myelography and does not require the
infusion of intrathecal contrast. Intramedullary tumors appear with decreased signal intensity relative to cord on T1-weighted images. Cord expansion by tumor can
also be seen. Contrast enhancement aids in the detection and characterization of tumors and is also helpful in detecting “drop metastases” that have spread from
intracranial and extracranial tumors to the spine via the subarachnoid space. Common extramedullary-intradural tumors (e.g., schwannomas and meningiomas) and
extradural tumors (e.g., osseous hemangioma, myeloma) can also be detected on images. MRI accurately assesses for the presence of spinal cord compression by
neoplasm (Fig. 27.2-3), with a reported sensitivity of 92% and specificity of 90%. 6

FIGURE 27.2-3. Breast cancer metastatic to spine. The T2-weighted sagittal view of the spine shows areas of increased signal intensity diffusely throughout the
spine, owing to metastatic disease (e.g., small arrows). In the lower thoracic spine, a pathologic compression fracture has occurred ( large arrow), resulting in mild
compression of the spinal cord at this level.

HEAD AND NECK
MRI is now a primary imaging modality for evaluating many tumors of the head and neck, including tumors of the sinuses, oropharynx, nasopharynx, salivary glands,
and larynx. The abilities of MRI to image in multiple planes and to detect subtle differences in soft tissue boundaries render MRI superior to CT in staging and
localizing many tumors for guidance in therapeutic decision making. The main advantage of MRI of the sinuses is that malignant tissue can be distinguished from
adjacent inflammatory disease and secretions in the sinuses. 7 This is because on T2-weighted images, most sinus tumors have little intercellular and intracellular free
water and appear hypointense, whereas inflammatory tissues are high in free water and appear hyperintense. Squamous cell carcinomas of the sinuses can erode
into bone, a critical finding that affects treatment choices. MRI can demonstrate bony erosion by the absence of signal void normally present within cortical bone.
However, in evaluating certain critical areas, such as the orbit, pterygopalatine fossa, and central skull base, a CT should be ordered to improve detection of small
focal bony erosions. 8 In the oropharynx, MRI can image without artifacts from dental amalgam and without beam-hardening artifacts from the mandible, both of which
limit CT examination of this area. In the nasopharynx, MRI is superior to CT at identifying tumor infiltration beyond the pharyngobasilar fascia, detecting enlarged
retropharyngeal lymph nodes, and demonstrating possible intracranial involvement. 9 MRI has replaced CT for imaging major salivary glands. 10 MRI is often used to
determine the location of salivary gland tumors relative to the facial nerve so as to optimize treatment approaches that will preserve facial nerve function. The larynx
and hypopharynx are regions that are readily accessed by clinical examination, which makes possible the diagnosis of malignancy through endoscopy and biopsy.
However, coronal MRI images can complement clinical examination by delineating the depth of extension and submucosal involvement of laryngeal and
hypopharyngeal tumors.11

BREAST
Contrast-enhanced MRI is the most sensitive imaging modality for detecting breast pathology and can improve the detection of breast cancer in selected patient
populations. The majority of invasive carcinomas are hypervascular and demonstrate intense enhancement with contrast administration. When morphologic criteria
are combined with characteristic tumor enhancement patterns, MRI in many studies demonstrates greater than 90% sensitivity for detecting invasive breast
carcinomas.12,13 Despite the improved sensitivities of MRI over mammography for detecting breast cancer, MRI should not be used for cancer detection in unselected
patient populations, owing to false-positive rates and the higher cost of the examination. Instead, MRI is primarily indicated for detecting malignancy in high-risk
patients when mammography is compromised owing to radiographically dense breasts, silicone-augmented breasts, or scarring due to remote surgery or trauma. MRI
can detect many tumors that mammography may miss in these patients. When combined MRI and conventional imaging are used in these patients, sensitivities
greater than 98% can be routinely achieved for detecting invasive breast carcinomas. 14 MRI may also be useful in the search for a primary tumor when a patient
presents with positive axillary nodes but no evidence of breast cancer on conventional imaging or physical examination ( Fig. 27.2-4).15

FIGURE 27.2-4. Breast cancer. On a sagittal image of the breast, an intensely enhancing focus of invasive ductal carcinoma is present. This patient had enlarged
lymph nodes in the axilla, which were subjected to biopsy and were found to be positive for breast cancer. However, mammogram results were negative. In this
circumstance, magnetic resonance imaging is useful for detecting the primary lesion. Although magnetic resonance imaging should not be used for screening for
breast cancer, it is useful in younger patients with dense breast tissue and, in certain cases, in determining the extent of the lesion before planned lumpectomy versus
mastectomy.

There are also a number of emerging indications for the use of MRI in the preoperative staging and posttreatment monitoring of breast cancer, based on preliminary
investigations. In considering breast conservation therapy, it is important to determine preoperatively whether a detected breast malignancy is unifocal, multifocal, or
multicentric, as multicentric disease is a contraindication for breast conservation therapy. MRI appears to be markedly more sensitive than mammography in detecting
multifocality or multicentricity within breast carcinomas. 16,17 and 18 The preoperative staging of breast cancer by MRI in one study was shown to alter the subsequent
treatment in 18% of cases.18 MRI also has shown promise in assessing the results of induction chemotherapy in reducing tumor burden prior to breast conservation
surgery. 19 A recent review has suggested using MRI prior to lumpectomy to help to decrease the number of reexcisions due to positive pathologic margins. 20 In
addition, the use of high-resolution RODEO (rotating delivery of off resonance) MRI has recently been demonstrated to improve the evaluation of ductal carcinoma in
situ.21 After conservative breast surgery, MRI has been shown to be superior to mammography in diagnosing recurrent malignant foci. In one study, 4 of 11 local
recurrences were detected only by MRI. 22 However, MRI should be performed not less than 6 months after surgery and 12 months after irradiation to reduce
false-positive rates. 23

LIVER

With the development of fast breath-hold scanning techniques that reduce motion artifact, the role of MRI in detecting and characterizing focal hepatic lesions has
advanced greatly. MRI may be superior to CT and sonography in detecting hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), as T2-weighted images may demonstrate characteristic
morphologic features of HCC, such as mosaic or nodules-in nodule patterns of signal intensity. 24 In addition, HCC demonstrates a pattern of dynamic signal
enhancement distinct from the surrounding liver after bolus injection of contrast agents, owing to a prominent arterial blood supply for HCC. MRI can also detect early
HCC arising within regenerating nodules associated with cirrhosis, even when the a-fetoprotein level is normal and biopsy is negative for tumor. 25
Metastatic lesions can appear mildly hypointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images ( Fig. 27.2-5) and can contain areas of central
necrosis of different intensity from the surrounding tumor. New contrast agents containing superparamagnetic iron oxide particles have recently been approved for
clinical use and have improved the accuracy of hepatic metastasis detection. 26 These particles are taken up selectively by Kupffer cells within the liver, causing
dropout in the signal of normal liver. Metastatic lesions, which do not contain Kupffer cells and do not take up the particles, appear as high-intensity signal against the
low signal of the surrounding liver.

FIGURE 27.2-5. Metastatic colon cancer to the liver. In the right lobe of the liver, there is a rounded lesion ( arrow) with an internal area of high signal intensity
characteristic of metastatic disease in the liver for presurgical evaluation as well as to evaluate indeterminate lesions on computed tomography scan. In addition,
patients with parenchymal liver disease, such as cirrhosis, benefit by magnetic resonance imaging scans of the liver, owing to increased detection rate of
hepatocellular cancer, compared to other noninvasive imaging modalities.

Cavernous hemangiomas are the most common benign tumors of the liver. They are often incidentally discovered on various abdominal imaging studies and must be
distinguished from malignant lesions. MRI can make this distinction with greater than 90% sensitivity and specificity, owing to the inherently higher T2 values of
hemangiomas (Fig. 27.2-6) and to the characteristic appearance of hemangiomas on dynamic gadolinium-enhanced images. 27

FIGURE 27.2-6. Hemangioma of the liver. In the left lobe of the liver, there is an intensely bright lobulated lesion on this T2-weighted image ( arrow). Hemangiomas
are extremely common, present in approximately 5% of patients. Frequently, these present diagnostic dilemmas on computed tomography scans of the liver. On
magnetic resonance imaging, the appearance is characteristic and diagnostic, so biopsy of these lesions can be avoided.

ADRENAL GLANDS
With the use of chemical shift imaging, MRI has become the most effective noninvasive method for distinguishing between commonly found benign adrenal adenomas
and malignant masses. MRI can accurately make this distinction, owing to the fact that, unlike malignant adrenal tumors, most adrenal adenomas contain a large
amount of cytoplasmic lipid. On application of chemical shift imaging techniques to MRI of the adrenals, tissues that contain both lipid and water demonstrate low
signal intensity relative to other tissues containing mostly water. This is because fat and water protons have different precessional frequencies, owing to the size
differences in the electron clouds surrounding them. When the appropriate TE is chosen, fat and water are maximally out of phase, and their radiofrequency waves
cancel each other, resulting in signal loss. Most adenomas, which contain both fat and water, demonstrate signal loss on chemical shift imaging ( Fig. 27.2-7), whereas
both primary adrenal malignancies and metastatic lesions, which do not contain fat, have signal intensities similar to other organs, such as liver and spleen. Exploiting
this difference, chemical shift MRI has been reported to have a sensitivity for identifying benign adrenal lesions of 80% and a specificity of 100%. 28

FIGURE 27.2-7. Adrenal adenoma. A 3-cm left adrenal mass is present (arrows). On the left-hand images, the mass shows similar signal intensity as compared to the
spleen. On the right-hand image, chemical shift imaging was used. In areas that contained fat and water at the cellular level, there is decreased signal using this
technique. On the right-hand image, the adrenal lesion is now seen to have lower signal intensity as compared to the spleen. This method is chemically specific for
intracellular lipid and is diagnostic of adrenal adenoma. The specificity of this technique approaches 100%.

MRI is particularly useful for characterizing incidental adrenal masses found in patients with known malignancies. In these patients, the finding of a metastatic lesion
to the adrenals may profoundly influence treatment of the primary tumor. To date, no lesion metastatic to the adrenals has demonstrated signal loss with chemical
shift imaging comparable to that demonstrated by benign lesions. This allows accurate differentiation of metastases from adenomas. In the case of fat detected on
chemical shift MRI, an adrenal biopsy is unnecessary. In addition to this application, MRI is the imaging modality of choice in localizing pheochromocytoma and

extraadrenal paraganglioma and for evaluating vascular invasion by adrenal carcinoma.

KIDNEY
In staging renal cell carcinoma (RCC), CT and MRI are comparably accurate, their accuracy ranging from 67% to 96%. 29 Hence, given its lower cost, CT is generally
the preferred modality for staging RCC. However, because of its high tissue contrast and multiplanar imaging capabilities, MRI offers improvement over CT for
delineation of RCC extension into the renal veins, inferior vena cava, and right atrium ( Fig. 27.2-8).30 MRI can also distinguish tumor thrombus from bland thrombus in
the inferior vena cava 31 and offers improved detection of venous wall invasion. Hence, MRI is the preferred modality for RCC staging when iodine contrast is
contraindicated, CT results are inconclusive, or it is necessary to determine the extent of venous invasion by tumor to guide surgical approaches for thrombectomy.

FIGURE 27.2-8. Renal cell cancer. A large mass obscuring the normal anatomy of the left kidney is present. In addition, there is adenopathy surrounding the aorta.
However, there is no evidence of linear or tubular involvement of the left renal vein, and the inferior vena cava is not involved by the tumor. Magnetic resonance
imaging is very sensitive for detecting renal vein involvement by renal cell cancer. Staging examinations can depict the extent of tumor in the inferior vena cava if
present, to determine surgical management of the patient.

UTERUS
T2-weighted images depict three distinct zones of signal intensity within the uterus. A central hyperintense stripe corresponds to the endometrium. This is surrounded
by a hypointense zone representing the junctional zone, which is the inner myometrial layer. The remaining segment of the myometrium is of intermediate signal
intensity. Endometrial carcinoma can be identified as tissue with signal intensity intermediate between normal endometrium and myometrium. By use of MRI, tumor
can be seen confined to the endometrium (Fig. 27.2-9), extending into the junctional zone, or invading into the deep myometrium.

FIGURE 27.2-9. Endometrial cancer. Within the uterus, the central signal due to high signal glandular tissue is markedly thickened ( small arrow). The darker ring
around the inner portion of the uterus, termed the junctional zone, is intact, indicating that the cancer has not spread into the superficial layer of the myometrium.
Additionally, there is a large mass in the left adnexa due to endometriosis involving the left ovary ( large arrow). MRI has been found to be useful for staging
endometrial cancer. For ovarian tumors, lesions containing fat, such as dermoids, can be specifically identified and determined to be benign in certain cases.

The primary indication for MRI in patients with proven uterine carcinoma is preoperative staging. Importantly, the presence of greater than 50% myometrial invasion
predicts poorer prognosis and requires more extensive surgery, including paraaortic lymphadenectomy. MRI can make this determination with an accuracy of 75% to
95%.32,33 In addition to determining the depth of myometrial invasion, MRI accurately depicts the extension of endometrial carcinoma to endocervical glands and to
cervical stroma. However, MRI staging accuracy is limited when the zonal architecture of the uterus is distorted by uterine anomalies or leiomyomas or when the
junctional zone is absent, which can occur in postmenopausal women. 34 Because the MRI appearance of noninvasive endometrial carcinoma is nonspecific, MRI
cannot be used as a screening technique. 35

CERVIX
On T2-weighted images, the normal cervix demonstrates an inner hyperintense signal zone representing the endocervical canal. Adjacent to this is a hypointense
zone that corresponds to the cervical stroma. The outer zone, which is continuous with the myometrium, is isointense to myometrium. Parametrial tissues (composed
of vessels, ligaments, and fat) surround the cervix and are hyperintense. Most cervical carcinomas have at least intermediate or high signal intensity on T2-weighted
images, which provides good contrast between tumor and the hypointense cervical stroma.
MRI is considered the most reliable imaging modality for staging cervical cancer and planning its treatment. In a comparative study, the overall staging accuracy of
MRI (83%) was higher than CT (63%) or clinical staging (70%). 36 Although preinvasive microscopic disease (stage IA) is not well identified on T2-weighted images,
MRI can accurately depict the depth of stromal invasion (stage IB), the presence of parametrial extension (stage IIB), invasion of the vagina or pelvic wall (stages IIA
and III), and bladder or rectal invasion (stage IV). 37 Of particular importance is determining whether tumor has extended to the parametrium, as patients who present
with parametrial invasion are not usually surgical candidates. The presence of a completely intact ring of hypointense cervical stroma excludes parametrial
involvement. 38 However, there are false-positive outcomes associated with disruption of the stromal ring. MRI is also useful for distinguishing recurrent tumor from
fibrosis if imaged 12 months or more after treatment. The use of MRI has been shown to decrease the number of procedures and invasive studies ordered (e.g.,
excretory urography, barium enema, lymphography), with a resultant cost benefit. 39

OVARY
In the evaluation of ovarian masses, MRI is useful in delineating the internal architecture of ovarian tumors. MRI can depict complex tumor structures, such as
irregular mural thickening, septations, and solid components, as well as associated findings, such as ascites, visceral lesions, adenopathy, and peritoneal implants. 40
Such findings can be associated with malignancy. However, these findings can be nonspecific; hence, the differentiation of benign from malignant ovarian masses can
be difficult for all cross-sectional imaging modalities, including MRI. Accuracy rates for contrast-enhanced MRI in identifying malignancy have ranged from 78% to
95%.41,42 MRI can accurately identify some benign ovarian masses, such as dermoid cysts, endometriomas, and fibromas. MRI identifies dermoid cysts with an
accuracy of 99% by demonstrating the presence of intraluminal fat. 43 In addition, MRI can determine whether a mass is truly ovarian in origin and can accurately
differentiate subserosal leiomyomas from ovarian masses. In the preoperative staging of ovarian malignancy, MRI and CT demonstrate generally equivalent accuracy;
hence, CT is the primary imaging modality for preoperative staging, given its lower cost and ready availability. Regarding postoperative monitoring, MRI can often

detect macroscopic recurrent tumors larger than 2 cm (considered nonresectable), thus eliminating the need for second-look surgery in such patients. 44 However, MRI
is less successful in detecting smaller implants or microscopic disease.

PROSTATE
The most common indication for MRI of the prostate is for staging prostate cancer after a biopsy diagnosis has been made ( Fig. 27.2-10). The use of an endorectal
surface coil alone or with anterior phased-array coils allows MRI identification of the tumor, the prostate capsule, the neurovascular bundles, and the seminal vesicles.
Capsular penetration is demonstrated on MRI with the finding of gross tumor extension into the periprostatic fat or with capsular thickening, irregularity, or bulging. 45
Tumor invasion of the neurovascular bundles can manifest as asymmetric enlargement of the bundle. Signs of seminal vesicle invasion on T2-weighted images
include a low-signal-intensity mass within the seminal vesicle or wall thickening. MRI can also screen for the presence of enlarged pelvic lymph nodes and bone
metastases but cannot detect the presence of tumor in normal-sized nodes. Because MRI offers superior anatomic detail, owing to improved soft tissue contrast, it is
considered by some to be superior to CT and ultrasonography in staging prostate cancer. 46 However, there have been wide ranges of sensitivities and specificities
reported for MRI staging of prostate cancer, with accuracy ranging from 51% to 92%. 47,48 These variations are in part dependent on the experience of the radiologist
performing the readings. 49 Some have proposed that MRI data are best used in combination with other clinical parameters, such as patient's age, prostate-specific
antigen, digital rectal examination, and the biopsy Gleason score. In particular, D'Amico et al. 50 have reported that MRI improves staging accuracy for patients at
intermediate clinical risk for invasive disease, as indicated by prostate-specific antigen levels of 10 to 20 ng/mL and Gleason scores of 5 to 7. Similar to CT and
ultrasonography, MRI is not recommended for initial cancer detection and screening because of its low sensitivity for demonstrating central zone cancers and its
difficulty in distinguishing malignant from benign lesions.

FIGURE 27.2-10. Prostate cancer. T2-weighted magnetic resonance image of the pelvis showed low signal intensity in the peripheral zone of the prostate, owing to
multifocal cancer (arrows). The tumor is contained within the capsule of the prostate.

BLADDER
The use of dynamic imaging after the administration of gadolinium has improved the evaluation of bladder carcinoma with MRI. The tumor usually enhances prior to
enhancement of the remainder of normal bladder wall after contrast administration. MRI is the most accurate imaging modality for staging bladder carcinoma and has
superior ability to detect perivesical spread and to assess the penetration of tumor through the deep muscle layers of the bladder ( Fig. 27.2-11).51 Precise staging is
critical to the selection of the therapy most appropriate for bladder cancer. Recent studies have demonstrated MRI staging accuracy of 84% to 93%. 52,53 A challenge
for MRI has been the differentiation between postbiopsy or irradiation changes and tumor. However, the use of dynamic, fast gradient-echo sequences has recently
improved the ability of MRI to make this distinction. 54

FIGURE 27.2-11. Bladder cancer. T2-weighted image of the base of the bladder shows a large mass ( arrow) primarily within the bladder. There is a high degree of
contrast between the fluid in the bladder, which is bright, and the darker surrounding cancer. The margins of the bladder are obscured at the 12-o'clock to 3-o'clock
position, indicating extension of cancer into the perivesical fat.

MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
Plain film, MRI, and nuclear medicine play complementary roles in the evaluation of bone tumors. When a bone tumor is suspected, plain film is the initial study to
show the lesion and its origin, location, morphology, and aggressivity. After plain film, if the lesion may be something other than an inactive asymptomatic benign
tumor, MRI can confirm the initial plain-film findings and add additional diagnostic information. In known malignant lesions, MRI is the best study to determine
accurate tumor localization and staging, 55 which is critical to optimizing the success of limb salvage techniques and other surgery. MRI can accurately determine the
intraosseous extent of lesions, as bone marrow demonstrates high contrast with tumor. MRI can delineate tumor from adjacent fascia and muscle. “Skip” lesions,
which can occur with osteosarcomas, can be detected with sagittal and coronal views that image long bones in their entirety. The detection of neurovascular bundle
involvement and the determination of lesion distance from the joint are also MRI capabilities useful in surgical planning. MRI can show the response of tumor to
adjuvant chemotherapy prior to resection and can detect residual or recurrent tumor after resection. T1-weighted images are very accurate for detecting metastatic
lesions within the marrow compartment (Fig. 27.2-12). Hence, MRI is indicated in symptomatic patients with suspected bony metastases or positive bone scans but
with negative or inconclusive plain films. MRI is also extremely sensitive in detecting marrow replacement by myeloma, leukemia, or lymphoma on T1-weighted
images and can differentiate these lesions from osteoporosis. 56 MRI is, however, similar to CT in that it is generally nonspecific in determining tumor cell type. A
common pitfall of MRI is that it is possible for some bony lesions to appear benign when, in actuality, the lesion represents a high-grade malignancy. This is
particularly true in patients older than 40, in whom even benign-appearing lesions commonly represent metastases or myeloma. 57 In younger patients, however, lesion
morphology correlates in a very rough sense with its malignancy potential, though MRI still at times over- or underestimates tumor malignancy.

FIGURE 27.2-12. Bone metastasis. This patient had a primary leiomyosarcoma in the abdomen and presented with pelvic pain. T1-weighted magnetic resonance
images show a large lesion (arrows) involving the left iliac bone as well as extension to the adjacent iliacus and gluteal muscles. The extent of bone involvement is
precisely delineated on the magnetic resonance images. T1-weighted images are extremely sensitive for bone metastasis in adult patients and are frequently used in
conjunction with nuclear medicine bone scan to determine precisely the extent and location of metastatic bone lesions. Magnetic resonance imaging is particularly
useful in the pelvis, where overlapping structures can render diagnosis on plain radiographs difficult.

Owing to excellent soft tissue contrast, MRI displays outstanding anatomic detail of soft tissue lesions and is, therefore, the imaging modality of choice for evaluating
soft tissue tumors. 55 Plain films, however, should still be additionally obtained. MRI is diagnostic of several common benign tumors, including lipomas ( Fig. 27.2-13),
ganglion cysts, some hemangiomas, and simple neurofibromas.58 There is some debate about whether MRI can consistently distinguish lipoma from liposarcoma. 59,60
In general, a thin-rimmed homogeneous high signal on T2-weighted images may represent a simple cyst. Heterogeneous high internal signal on T2-weighted images
may indicate a solid lesion with high water or mucin content, a complex thick-walled lesion, calcification, necrosis, or hemorrhage, all of which can be associated with
malignancy. MRI can be indeterminate in many of these cases, and MRI is helpful in determining the need for biopsy in suspicious-appearing lesions. In cases of
known sarcoma, MRI is the best imaging modality to stage the mass accurately, determining its location relative to fascial planes and muscular structures, invasion
into neurovascular or osseous tissues, and the distance of lesions from joints. 55 It is possible for some high-grade sarcomas, however, to display a nonaggressive,
benign appearance.

FIGURE 27.2-13. Lipoma of the posterior thigh. This patient felt an enlarging mass in the thigh, which was palpable on clinical examination. Magnetic resonance
imaging examination showed a high-signal-intensity mass ( arrow) on this T1-weighted image. The appearance on magnetic resonance imaging is chemically specific
for lipoma due to the presence of macroscopic fat. In the case of a characteristic soft tissue mass, such as lipoma, a biopsy is not necessary for diagnosis, given the
magnetic resonance imaging findings.

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Goldsher D, Litt AW, Pino RS, et al. Dural “tail” associated with meningiomas on Gd-DTPA-enhanced MR images: characteristics, differential diagnostic value and possible implications of
treatment. Radiology 1990;176:547.
2. Yokoi K, Kaniya N, Matsuguma H, et al. Detection of brain metastasis in potentially operable non-small cell lung cancer: a comparison of CT and MRI. Chest 1999;115:714.
3. Sherman JL. Evaluation of the postoperative brain. In: Bradley WG, Muroff LR, eds. MRI of brain tumors and tumor mimics. Tampa: Gilham Press, 1994:14.
4. Forsting M, Albert F, Kunze S, et al. Extirpation of glioblastoma: MR and CT follow up of residual tumor and regrowth patterns. Am J Neuroradiol 1993;14:77.
5. Shwartz RB, Carvalho PA, Alexander E, et al. Radiation necrosis versus recurrent glioma: dual isotope SPECT. Am JNeuroradiol 1991;12:1187.
6. Carmody R, Yang P, Seeley GW, et al. Spinal cord compression due to metastatic disease: diagnosis with MR imaging versus myelography. Radiology 1989;173:225.
7. Som PM, Shapiro MD, Biller HF, et al. Sinonasal tumors and inflammatory tissues: differentiation with MR imaging. Radiology 1988;167:803.
8. Chow JM, Leonetti JP, Matee MF. Epithelial tumors of the paranasal sinus and nasal cavity. Radiol Clin North Am 1993;31(1):61.
9. Tenesi L, Lufkin RB, Vimela F, et al. MR imaging of the nasopharynx and floor of the middle crania fossa: II. Malignant tumors. Radiology 1987;164:817.
10. Casselman JW, Mancuso AA. Major salivary gland masses: comparison of MR imaging and CT. Radiology 1987;165:183.
11. Castelijns JA, Geritsen GJ, Kaiser MC, et al. MRI of normal or cancerous laryngeal cartilages: histopathological correlation. Laryngoscope 1987;97:1085.
12. Harms SE, Flamig DP, Hesley KL, et al. MR imaging of the breast with rotating delivery of excitation off resonance: clinical experience with pathologic correlation. Radiology 1993;187:493.
13. Kacl GM, Liu P, Debatin JF, et al. Detection of breast cancer with conventional mammography and contrast enhanced MRI. Eur Radiol 1998;8:194.
14. Heywang-Kobrunner SH, Viehweg P, Heinry A, et al. Contrast-enhanced MRI of the breast: accuracy, values, controversies, solutions. Eur J Radiol 1997;24:94.
15. Schorn C, Fischer U, Luftner-Nagel S, et al. MRI of the breast in patients with metastatic disease of unknown primary. Eur Radiol 1999;9:470.
16. Harms SE, Flamig DP, Evans WP, et al. MR imaging of the breast: current status and future potential. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1994:163:1039.
17. Esserman L, Hylton N, Yassa L, et al. Utility of MRI in the management of breast cancer: evidence for improved preoperative staging. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:110.
18. Tan JE, Orel SG, Schnall MD, et al. Role of MRI and MRI-guided surgery in the evaluation of patients with early stage breast cancer for breast conservation treatment. Am J Clin Oncol
1999;22:414.
19. Tsuboi N, Ogawa Y, Inomata T, et al. Changes in the findings of dynamic MRI by preoperative CAF chemo for patients with breast cancer of stage II and III: pathologic correlation. Oncol Rep
1999;6:727.
20. Harms SE. Breast magnetic imaging. Semin Ultrasound CT MR 1998;19(1):104.
21. Soderstrom CE, Harms SE, Farrell RS, et al. Three-dimensional RODEO breast MRI of lesions containing ductal carcinoma in situ. Radiology 1996;20:427.
22. Heywang-Kobrunner SH, Shlegel A, Beck R, et al. Contrast-enhanced MRI of the breast after limited surgery and radiation therapy. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1993;17(6):891.
23. Viehweg P, Hernig A, Lampe D, et al. Retrospective analysis for evaluation of the value of CE-MRI in patients treated with breast conservative treatment. Magma 1998;7:141.
24. Choi BI, Lee GK, Kim ST, et al. Mosaic pattern of encapsulated hepatocellular carcinoma: correlation of MRI and pathology. Gastrointest Radiol 1990;15:238.
25. Mitchell DG, Plazzo J, Hann HYL, et al. Hepatocellular tumors with high signal on T 1-weighted MR images: chemical shift MRI and histologic correlation. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1991;15;762.
26. Ros PR, Freeny PC, Harms SE, et al. Hepatic MR imaging with ferrumoxides: a multicenter clinical trial of the safety and efficacy in the detection of local hepatic lesions. Radiology
1995;196:481.
27. MacFarland EG, Mayo-Smith WW, Saini S, et al. Hepatic hemangiomas and malignant tumors: improved differentiation with heavily T 2-weighted conventional spin echo MR imaging. Radiology
1994;193:43.
28. Schwartz LH, Panicek PM, Koutcher J, et al. Adrenal masses in patients with malignancy: a prospective comparison of echo-planar fast spin echo and chemical shift MR imaging. Radiology
1995;197:421.
29. Zagoria RJ, Bechtold RE. The role of imaging in staging renal adenocarcinoma. Semin Ultrasound CT MR 1997;18(2):91.
30. Kallman DA, King BF, Hattery RR, et al. Renal vein and inferior vena cava tumor thrombus in renal cell carcinoma: CT, US, MRI and vena cavography. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1992;16:240.
31. Zagoria RJ, Wolfman NT, Karstaedt N, et al. CT features of renal cell carcinoma with emphasis on relation to tumor size. Invest Radiol 1990;25:261.
32. Hricak H, Rubenstein LV, Gherman GM, et al. MRI evaluation of endometrial carcinoma: results of an NCI cooperative study. Radiology 1991;179:829.
33. Sironi S, Taccagni GL, Gorancini P, et al. Myometrial invasion by endometrial carcinoma: assessment by MRI. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1992;158:565.
34. Scoutt LM, McCarthy S, Long F, et al. Pitfalls in staging of endometrial cancer in MR imaging. Radiology 1992;185:183.
35. Hricak H, Stern JL, Fisher MR, et al. Endometrial carcinoma staging by MR imaging. Radiology 1987;162:297.
36. Subak LL, Hricak H, Powell CB, et al. Cervical carcinoma: computed tomography and MR imaging for preoperative staging. Obstet Gynecol 1995;86:43.
37. Togashi K, Morikawa K, Kataoka ML, Konishi J. Cervical cancer. J Magn Reson Imaging 1998;8:391.
38. Kim SH, Choi BI, Han JK, et al. Preoperative staging of uterine cervical carcinoma: comparison of CT and MRI in 99 patients. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1993;17:633.
39. Hricak H, Powell CB, Yu KK, et al. Invasive cervical carcinoma: role of MR imaging in pretreatment work-up: cost minimization and diagnostic efficacy analysis. Radiology 1996;198:403.
40. Outwater EK, Dunton CJ. Imaging of the ovary and adnexa: clinical issues and applications of MR imaging. Radiology 1995;194:1.
41. Stevens SK, Hricak H, Stern JL. Ovarian lesions: detection and characterization with gadolinium-enhanced MR imaging at 1.5 T. Radiology 1991;181:481.

42. Yamashita Y, Torashima M, Hatanaka K, et al. Adnexal masses: accuracy of characterization with transvaginal US and precontrast and postcontrast MR imaging. Radiology 1995;194:557.
43. Scoutt LM, McCarthy SM, Lange R, et al. MR evaluation of clinically suspected adnexal masses. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1994;18:609.
44. Prayer L, Kainz C, Kramer J, et al. CT and MR accuracy in the detection of tumor recurrence in patients treated for ovarian cancer. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1993;17:626
45. Yu KK, Hricak H, Alagappan R, et al. Detection of extracapsular extension of prostate carcinoma with endorectal and phased-array coil MR imaging: multivariate feature analysis. Radiology
1997;202:697.
46. Bates TS, Gillett DA, Cavanagh PM. A comparison of endorectal MRI and TRUS in the local staging of prostate cancer with histopathological correlation. Br J Urol 1997;79:927
47. Rifkin MD, Zerhouni EA, Gatsonis CA, et al. Comparison of magnetic resonance imaging and ultrasonography in staging early prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 1990;323:621.
48. Bezzi M, Kressel HY, Allen KS, et al. Prostate carcinoma: staging with MR imaging at 1.5 T. Radiology 1989;169:339.
49. Seltzer SE, Getty DJ, Tampany CMC, et al. Staging prostate cancer with MR imaging: a combined radiologist-computer system. Radiology 1997;202:219.
50. D'Amico A, Whittington R, Schnall M, et al. The impact of the inclusion of endorectal coil magnetic resonance imaging in a multivariate analysis to predict clinically unsuspected extraprostatic
cancer. Cancer 1995;75:2368.
51. Tanimoto A, Yuasa Y, Imai Y, et al. Bladder tumor staging: comparison of conventional and gadolinium-enhanced dynamic MR imaging and CT. Radiology 1992;85:741.
52. Barentsz JO, Jager GJ, Mugler JP II, et al. Staging urinary bladder cancer: value of T 1-weighted 3D MP-Rage and 2D SE sequences. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1995;164:109.
53. Barentsz JO, Jager GJ, Van Vierzen PBJ, et al. Staging urinary bladder after transurethral biopsy: value of fast dynamic CE-MRI. Radiology 1996;201:185.
54. Barentsz JO, Jager GJ, Van Vierzen PBJ, et al. Staging urinary bladder cancer: value of fast dynamic contrast-enhanced MR imaging. Radiology 1996;201:185.
55. Ma LD. Magnetic resonance imaging of musculoskeletal tumors: skeletal and soft tissue masses. Curr Probl Diagn Radiol 1999;34.
56. Bobman SA, Riederer SJ, Lee JN, et al. Synthesized MR images: comparison with acquired images. Radiology 1985;155:731.
57. Ma LD, Frassica FJ, Scott WW, et al. Differentiation of benign and malignant musculoskeletal tumors: potential pitfalls with MR imaging. Radiographics 1995;15:349.
58. Van Slyke MA, Moser RP, Madewell JE. MR imaging of periarticular soft tissue lesions in musculoskeletal soft tissue imaging. Magn Reson Imaging Clin N Am 1995;3:651.
59. Haggar AM, Froelich JW. MR imaging strategies in primary and metastatic malignancy. Radiol Clin North Am 1998;26:689.
60. Bolen JW Jr, Delange EE, Frierson HF Jr. Infiltrating angiolipoma of skeletal muscle: MR findings. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1988;12:681.

SECTION 27.3 Functional and Metabolic Imaging
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 27.3
Functional and Metabolic Imaging
MARTIN G. POMPER
Introduction
Techniques for Functional and Metabolic Imaging
Positron Emission Tomography
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Specific Magnetic Resonance Based Techniques
Future Developments in Oncologic Magnetic Resonance Imaging
New Functional and Metabolic Imaging Modalities
Summary
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Unique to functional imaging is the provision of unperturbed physiologic information. While pathologists increasingly apply the highly sensitive and accurate
techniques of molecular biology to histologic examination, those techniques, when applied to functional imaging, promise even more relevant and timely data.
Together with advances in molecular biology, advances in the generation of new imaging agents and in imaging science compel us to rethink cancer diagnosis and
treatment. Soon, cancer patients will no longer be categorized according to the primary organ involved; rather, their disease will be diagnosed and treated according
to their predominant underlying genetic abnormality. In this fashion and in the spirit of molecular medicine (i.e., the idea that human disease proceeds from
biochemical imbalance), the diagnosis and staging of cancer will be tailored to each patient. Tumor characterization will consequently become more accurate and
treatment more effective.
The uses of functional imaging in current cancer practice include (1) detection of malignancy, particularly if the primary site is unknown; (2) differential diagnosis of
lesions found on anatomic imaging studies; (3) tumor grading; (4) disease staging; (5) assessing for recurrence; and (6) therapeutic monitoring. 1Table 27.3-1 lists
metabolic processes amenable to measurement in humans by functional imaging. Only [ 18F]fluorodeoxyglucose–positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) and proton
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) are used in routine clinical practice for oncology. Optical imaging techniques are also being developed but have been
applied to humans on a limited basis to date.

TABLE 27.3-1. Physiologic Processes Accessible in Humans by Functional and Metabolic Imaging

TECHNIQUES FOR FUNCTIONAL AND METABOLIC IMAGING
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY
Technical Considerations and Imaging Protocol
PET is the most sensitive functional imaging technique used in clinical practice, with the ability to quantify processes that occur at subnanomolar concentrations.
Although its resolution is an order of magnitude inferior to that of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), that obtained with current PET scanners approaches 4 mm. As
with many other functional techniques, the initial application of PET was to the study of brain physiology and pathology. 2 PET relies on the detection of coincident
photons that result from the annihilation of a positron and an electron. 3 Because the annihilation event occurs up to several millimeters away from the site of decay
and the coincident photons do not separate at an angle of precisely 180degrees, physical and geometric constraints limit the resolution of imaging with PET. 4
Nevertheless, neither clinical nor even high-resolution small-animal imaging systems have reached the resolution limit imposed by those constraints. 5 Radionuclides
most commonly used include 11C, 13N, 15O, and 18F, all of which are isotopes of atoms that are found in molecules of biologic importance ( 11C, 13N, and 15O) or that
can be substituted without significant disruption of molecular structure ( 18F). Because the physical half-lives of radionuclides for PET range from 2 minutes ( 15O) to
110 minutes (18F), a premium is placed on synthetic efficiency. Images are generally reconstructed using algorithms, such as filtered back-projection. PET imaging is
performed increasingly frequently on dual-head coincidence (DHC) gamma cameras. 6 Although FDG-DHC imaging is less expensive than is dedicated FDG-PET, the
resolution of the former system is lower (13.5 mm vs. 4 mm), suggesting that FDG-DHC not be recommended for detection of lesions less than 1.5 cm in size.
FDG is the mainstay of PET oncologic imaging. As with all radiopharmaceuticals, distribution of FDG throughout the body obeys the tracer principle: It is administered
in such small amounts (<10 µg) that while portraying the pathway of interest, it leaves that pathway completely intact. There is no pharmacologic or toxic effect.
Neoplastic cells undergo accelerated glycolysis, even under aerobic conditions, a phenomenon known as the Warburg effect.7 That metabolic difference between
normal and cancer cells is exploited in FDG-PET imaging. Increased levels of glucose transporters and hexokinase and decreased levels of glucose-6-phosphatase
contribute to the relatively increased glucose metabolism of cancer cells. 8 Unlike glucose, because FDG lacks a hydroxyl group at the 2 position, it cannot undergo
further metabolism (phosphorylation) and remains trapped within the cell.
Because glucose competes with FDG for glucose transporters and hexokinase, elevated blood glucose levels tend to decrease FDG uptake. 9 Patients are fasted for 4
hours before intravenous administration of FDG (370 MBq, 10 mCi) and for 12 hours to reduce interfering myocardial uptake when searching for mediastinal
adenopathy. The study is not performed if blood glucose levels exceed 200 mg/dL. Careful measurement and titration of blood glucose levels with insulin are
unnecessary and may actually confound the study, owing to propagation of errors in blood glucose measurement. 10 Patients are scanned approximately 1 hour after
FDG administration.
Deep organs may experience a 50-fold attenuation in photon detection relative to those at the surface. 11 Transmission scans using a 68Ge source are accordingly
performed to account for such geometric distortions. Transmission scans are time-consuming, particularly for whole body imaging that requires 10 gantry positions (for
a 15-cm axial field-of-view scanner), each in turn requiring an 8- to 10-minute transmission scan. Transmission scans are not generally obtained for whole body
imaging, and their use is controversial. Nevertheless, attenuation correction is necessary for coregistration of PET images with other modalities and for application of
semiquantitative measurements, such as the standard uptake value (SUV). 12 True quantification of FDG-PET data, including kinetic modeling and arterial blood
sampling or other surrogate methods for determining the input function, is noted frequently in the recent literature. 13,14 and 15 For those reasons, attenuation correction
will likely be applied increasingly to clinical imaging. Furthermore, acquiring postinjection transmission scans or using iterative reconstruction methods, such as

ordered-subset expectation maximum,16 on both the emission and transmission scans may save time.
An important issue in clinical PET imaging centers around the necessity of reporting quantitative information (i.e., regional glucose metabolic rate). Currently, PET
images are interpreted in a fashion similar to that of other nuclear medicine studies (i.e., areas of increased radiopharmaceutical uptake are reported as abnormal,
accounting for the known physiologic distribution of tracer). Along with its high sensitivity, the quantitative capabilities of PET are constantly showcased, but the latter
are seldom used clinically, particularly in oncology. As suggested, truly quantitative data are difficult to acquire because tracer uptake reflects more than merely what
can be seen and measured by the PET scanner. The images produced also depend on blood flow to the organ of interest, metabolism of the tracer, dispersion of the
activity bolus, and the compartmental residence of the tracer (i.e., blood pool vs. target receptor vs. nonspecific binding). To uncover the true concentration of tracer
in the region of interest (ROI) requires arterial blood from the patient, which is nontrivial to obtain. Quantitative PET techniques were originally developed for the
brain, a homogeneous structure as compared to a tumor. Tissue heterogeneity renders quantification more challenging in tumors. Zasadny and Wahl 12 developed the
SUV as somewhat of a compromise between the extremes of true quantification and visual inspection. The SUV is the activity in the lesion (expressed in milliCuries
per milliliter) divided by the weight of the patient (in kilograms) and the dose of FDG (in milliCuries). Because of initial concerns over its inappropriate use, the SUV
has been refined to account for lean body mass, since FDG distribution differs between fat and muscle. 17 Also, using the maximum intensity pixel, rather than the
average value distributed throughout an ROI, and carefully accounting for the time after injection at which the ROI was analyzed, have improved use of the SUV as an
objective, semiquantitive measurement. As long as a baseline study is obtained, quantitative PET data may not be necessary for therapeutic monitoring. 18
Clinical Applications
FDG-PET is superior to anatomic imaging for a variety of tumors and indications ( Table 27.3-2).19,20,21 and 22 Notable is that PET can identify metastatic deposits in
lymph nodes that are still small (<1 cm) and considered benign by computed tomography (CT). In contrast, PET may recognize large masses, such as posttherapy
fibrotic tissue, as benign if minimal FDG uptake is demonstrated. The most serious limitation to tumor detection with PET is that increased FDG uptake can also be
demonstrated in inflammatory tissue. 23 In areas endemic to fungal infections of the lung, the specificity of PET for detecting malignancy is decreased. 24

TABLE 27.3-2. Comparison of [18F] Fluorodeoxyglucose-Positron Emission Tomography and Anatomic Techniques

PET has proved capable of differentiating high- and low-grade brain tumors, of assessing prognosis in patients with brain tumors, and may be useful in guiding
stereotactic brain biopsy. 25 PET may be used in therapeutic monitoring after chemotherapy or radiotherapy, with a classic indication being assessment for recurrent
tumor versus radiation necrosis. 19 Conventional imaging cannot differentiate recurrent tumor from radiation necrosis. Although the specificity for PET in this regard
may seem unacceptably low (see Table 27.3-2), an earlier report indicated a sensitivity of 94%. 26 Combining PET with MR techniques, such as perfusion-weighted
imaging and magnetic resonance spectroscopy–spectroscopic imaging [MRS(I)], will likely improve the specificity of detecting recurrent brain tumors.
PET is the most accurate noninvasive technique for detecting and staging lung cancer ( Fig. 27.3-1; see Table 27.3-2).20 Accordingly, it was initially for lung cancer
that PET was reimbursed.22 Low background activity in the thorax renders the chest ideal for study, and visual analysis tends to be equivalent to calculating SUVs. 27
By improving staging, unnecessary thoracotomies, estimated at 30%, may be avoided. 28 The management of their disease is changed after whole body PET in 41% of
patients with lung cancer. 27

FIGURE 27.3-1. Coronal (A) and sagittal (B) whole body [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose–positron emission tomography images in a patient with lung cancer and left upper
lobe atelectasis (white arrow in A). The patient was originally thought to have had left hilar and left apical lung masses on CT and was to undergo radiation therapy to
the left upper lobe and mediastinum; however, subsequent [ 18F]fluorodeoxyglucose–positron emission tomography confirmed absence of tumor in the left apex and
detected a metastasis in the right mediastinum ( diagonal arrow in A). Horizontal arrows in A and B depict the left hilar masses. After positron emission tomography,
the patient was treated with a different radiation port that spared the left apex but included the left and right mediastinum. (Courtesy of Richard L. Wahl, M.D., Ann
Arbor, MI.)

FIGURE 27.3-2. Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) images of a patient with head and neck cancer. CT: 160 mAs; 130 kV; pitch = 1.6;
5-mm slice thickness. PET: 7 mCi [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG); 2 × 15 min; 3.4-mm slice thickness. False color ( yellow) depicts the increased FDG uptake on PET.
A: Sagittal image depicts increased FDG uptake in the anterior larynx ( arrow). B: Axial image depicts increased FDG uptake in the right neck ( arrow) due to
adenopathy. Tumor is also present to a small extent in the left laryngeal mucosa ( curved arrow). C: Axial image at the level of the true vocal cords shows tumor in the
right larynx (arrow) and, to a lesser extent, in the midline involving thyroid cartilage ( curved arrow). (Courtesy of David Townsend, Ph.D., Pittsburgh, PA.)

PET has changed surgical management in 28% of patients with colorectal cancer by identifying resectable or unresectable metastasis not identified on clinical
examination or CT. 22 PET is of higher sensitivity (see Table 27.3-2) than is CT arterial portography (80% to 90%) in detecting intrahepatic metastases. 29
PET has not proved as useful for breast cancer as for lung cancer, primarily owing to lower glucose utilization in the breast and background activity from concurrent
mastopathy.20 Although PET demonstrates the highest accuracy for axillary staging of breast cancer for any noninvasive test (see Table 27.3-2), node dissection is
still required for planning adjuvant therapy. 20
Anatomic complexity in the head and neck region, particularly after surgery, renders PET evaluation of this area a boon to therapeutic monitoring. Tumors as small as
4 mm have been detected in the head and neck with PET. 30 Detection and localization of head and neck tumors may be improved by applying SUVs and anatomic
coregistration (Fig. 27.3-2), in part because significant amounts of FDG are distributed to the salivary glands and adenoids. 31 Care must be taken when applying PET
after radiation therapy because of false-positive results due to inflammation and false-negative results due to metabolic “stunning” that might occur. Postirradiation
PET is, therefore, recommended 40 days to 4 months or longer after therapy. 31,32
PET has been successfully applied to detecting subclinical involvement of lymph nodes in melanoma (see Table 27.3-2).20 It has proved somewhat less fruitful when
applied to pancreatic cancer, likely owing to the presence of concurrent inflammation and high blood glucose levels; however, correction for serum glucose did not
significantly improve the accuracy of PET in several studies. 22 PET was more accurate than CT for pancreatic cancer, and surgical management was altered in 43%
of cases when PET and CT were used together. 33 PET has also proved useful, even superior to gallium imaging, in staging lymphoma and detecting residual disease
after therapy.20 PET may be useful to evaluate adjuvant therapy in osteosarcoma 34 and in assessing prognosis in malignant pleural mesothelioma. 35 It has proved less
useful for genitourinary cancers, primarily because of high background activity in the bladder. 20 Nevertheless, recent applications of PET to cervical and prostate
cancers, primarily for detecting local disease recurrence (cervix) and for staging (prostate), show promise. 36,37
Tracers Other Than FDG
As stated, FDG has limitations. Its tissue uptake may be dictated by factors other than viable tumor cell fraction, such as degree of hypoxia, 38 inflammation, 23 and
recent therapy. 32 High FDG levels in cerebral cortex can cloak tumors and metastases. Processes germane to cancer other than glucose uptake (e.g., blood flow,
proliferation rate, protein synthesis rate, or tissue oxygenation) may be sought, as they may have prognostic and therapeutic implications as well. For those reasons,
new tracers have been developed and include radiolabeled amino acid analogs, 20,39,40 and 41 thymidine analogs, 42,43 markers of tissue oxygenation (imidazoles and
thiosemicarbazones), 44,45 and 46 substrates for multidrug resistance efflux pumps, 47 and such metabolites as choline 48 and acetate. 49 Radiolabeled analogs of
chemotherapeutic agents, such as [ 18F]fluorouracil, have been synthesized to assess for their pharmacokinetics and metabolism. The concentration of [ 18F]fluorouracil
in metastatic colorectal cancer correlated with patient survival. 50 Sex steroid receptor–based imaging agents enable measurement of estrogen receptor status in vivo
and may be useful in therapeutic monitoring of certain subtypes of breast and prostate cancers. 43
Among the amino acid analogs, [11C]methionine (MET) and [ 11C]tyrosine (TYR) have received the most attention. MET may be superior to FDG for brain tumor
imaging, particularly for low-grade tumors, owing to minimal brain background activity. 51 Recent studies compared MET and FDG in a variety of tumors. 52,53 and 54 MET
demonstrates a high negative predictive value (94%) for mediastinal node staging of lung cancer. 55 Because it undergoes less metabolism than MET, TYR may be
used to measure protein synthesis rate and has been applied to head and neck cancers and soft tissue sarcomas. 31,56 For metastases due to head and neck cancer,
TYR demonstrated higher specificity than FDG.
Developed in search of a noninvasive marker of tumor proliferation, carbon 11–labeled thymidine analogs, particularly those labeled at the 5-methyl moiety, undergo
extensive, rapid metabolism, thereby prohibiting routine use. 43 More stable 18F-labeled analogs have been synthesized and have shown promise in an initial study
(Fig. 27.3-3).57

FIGURE 27.3-3. Computed tomography (A) and 3'-deoxy-3'-[18F]fluorothymidine–positron emission tomography (FLT-PET) ( B) images in a patient with breast cancer
metastatic to the mediastinal lymph nodes ( arrows in A, arrowheads in B). The FLT-PET image was obtained 30 to 60 minutes after injection. FLT is retained in
normal sternal and vertebral marrow (top, bottom arrows, respectively, in B) and ribs as well as within mediastinal tumor. (Courtesy of Anthony F. Shields, M.D.,
Detroit, MI.)

Future Developments in Oncologic Positron Emission Tomography
Chemists have synthesized a vast array of selective, high-affinity radiopharmaceuticals in positron-emitting form; however, combinatorial chemistry and phage display
libraries will generate even more promising lead molecules for oncologic imaging. More generalized use of old probes, such as [ 18F]fluoroethylspiperone, may enable
gene transcription imaging in tumors with a variety of genetic perturbations. 5 Based on a principle similar to imaging with FDG (i.e., metabolic trapping), radiolabeled
herpes simplex virus (HSV) thymidine kinase substrates for imaging gene transfer and expression are nearing clinical trials. 58 Generator-produced PET radionuclides,
such as 62Cu, which can render PET available to imaging facilities without a cyclotron on site, have been incorporated into appropriate ligands and used for tumor
imaging.59 Improvements in whole body PET are being sought by performing three-dimensional acquisition, routine attenuation correction, and application of
statistical, iterative methods to reconstruct imaging data. If PET is to reach its true potential in oncologic imaging (i.e., measuring genomic events), quantitative
techniques developed over the last 15 years for brain imaging must be adapted to tumor imaging. Concurrent recent advances in other imaging modalities and in
understanding the microenvironment of tumors (Fig. 27.3-4) are serving to demystify the heterogeneity problem and will facilitate quantitative PET for oncology in the
future.

FIGURE 27.3-4. Multimodality, functional radiologic-pathologic correlation of the mammary tumor model MDA-MB-435 in the mammary fat pad of a severe combined
immunodeficiency mouse. A: Hematoxylin-eosin stain shows a pink hue centrally indicative of dead and dying cells. B: Vascular volume map [snapshot–fast
low-angle shot (FLASH) magnetic resonance image] with gadolinium-albumin contrast (40 mL/g) shows decreased volume centrally in the area of necrosis. C:
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) map generated from polyclonal antibodies to VEGF depicts increased VEGF protein in areas of necrosis. VEGF is a potent
modulator of vascular permeability. D: Vascular permeability map (snapshot-FLASH magnetic resonance image; 1.27 mL/g/min shows increased vascular
permeability (arrow) where vascular volume is lowest (i.e., centrally). Such multimodality correlation enables better understanding of the tumor microenvironment.
(Courtesy of Dmitri Artemov, Ph.D., Meiyappan Solaiyappan, B.E., and Zaver M. Bhujwalla, Ph.D., Baltimore, MD.)

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
MR-based techniques are less well established for functional imaging than are those based on PET. 60 They include diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), perfusion or
cerebral blood volume imaging, MRS(I), and functional MR imaging (fMRI). In many ways, those techniques complement PET and attempt to measure similar
physiologic phenomena (see Table 27.3-1). Apart from the obvious advantages related to logistics (e.g., no need for synthesis of short-lived radiotracers or for an
on-site cyclotron), the MR techniques benefit from not needing anatomic coregistration. The resolution of clinical MR is submillimeter, at least one order of magnitude
superior to clinical PET. Quantification of the MR-based techniques is in its infancy, but progress is being made, particularly in the assessment of blood flow 61 and
metabolite concentrations. 62 As was the case for PET, the brain has been the primary organ of initial inquiry for MR-based techniques, and most of that work, except
for MRS(I), has been dedicated to hemodynamics and stroke rather than cancer.
SPECIFIC MAGNETIC RESONANCE–BASED TECHNIQUES
MRS(I) is applied in medicine to determine the concentrations of a relatively few metabolites that are altered in disease. 63,64,65 and 66 In MRS(I), the high-resolution
morphologic imaging capabilities of MRI are sacrificed to provide metabolic data that, in many cases, precede structural abnormality. Molecules containing a limited
number of nuclei may be imaged, including 31P, 23Na, 19F, and 1H. Among those, 31P-MRS and especially 1H-MRS(I), or MRS(I) have found the most applications in
oncology.
Early work focused on 31P-MRS; however, owing to large volumes (voxels) required for analysis, reducing sensitivity, MRS(I) has been developed and used to a
greater extent more recently. 31P-MRS still finds applications in oncology because 31P is incorporated into adenosine triphosphate, phosphocreatine, and pyridine
dinucleotides (i.e., molecules that reflect tumor energetics). Intracellular tumor pH can be derived from 31P-MRS spectra. Tumors have elevated phosphomonoesters
and phosphodiesters. 31P-MRS may find its greatest application in therapeutic monitoring of soft tissue sarcomas, where metabolite changes, which occur soon after
the initiation of treatment, correlate with clinical response. 6731P-MRS has also been used to detect non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, 68 to study liver metabolism in cancer
patients, 69 and to follow up after therapy in patients with breast cancer. 70
MRS(I) is the most commonly used MR spectroscopic technique because of the high natural abundance of protons. Key metabolites include choline and lactate, which
tend to be elevated in tumors. Choline is a membrane constituent, its increase hypothesized to be due to increased cell membrane synthesis in rapidly proliferating
tissue. Lactate is generally present only in pathologic tissue, such as necrotic tumors and abscesses, and reflects abnormal carbohydrate metabolism. Preoperative
diagnosis and grading are the goals of brain tumor MRS(I); however, MRS(I) currently is best at merely differentiating normal from malignant tissue. Preul et al. 71
obtained remarkable success in grading gliomas by using pattern-recognition analysis rather than simply peak ratios. 71 Nevertheless, that technique is rather
sophisticated mathematically and not widely available. MRS(I) is becoming useful in therapeutic monitoring, challenging PET for diagnosis of recurrent tumor versus
radiation necrosis in patients with gliomas. 72,73 One recent study showed no false-positive results when using MRS(I) to assess for radiation injury ( Fig. 27.3-5).74
MRS(I) has more recently been applied to head and neck, 75 breast,76,77 and prostate78,79 and 80 cancers (Fig. 27.3-6). Each of those tumor types displays increased
choline that, in the case of head and neck tumors, 75 reflects tissue oxygenation status. Cystic ovarian tumors demonstrated higher levels of lactate and amino acids
than their benign counterparts. 81 The high-resolution, multivoxel capabilities of MRS(I) are important in prostate tumor assessment, because the lesions tend to be
small and their precise intraglandular location has important therapeutic implications. Difficulty in suppression of lipid peaks outside of the ROI and in shimming
continue to challenge extracranial MRS(I).

FIGURE 27.3-5. Patient with partial resection of a grade III astrocytoma in 1996 followed by radiotherapy (60 Gy) and chemotherapy. In February 1999, imaging
showed a large butterfly-like enhancing mass on magnetic resonance imaging. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy–spectroscopic imaging [MRS(I)] [single slice
point-resolved spectroscopy (PRESS) sequence; repetition time = 1500; echo time = 136; slice thickness = 20 mm, nominal resolution of 2 mL (field of view = 160 ×
160; matrix 16 × 16)] demonstrated that the enhancing areas contained large lipid peaks; there were no areas of abnormally elevated choline within or outside the
lesion. The diagnosis of radiation necrosis was made, and 1 year later, the lesion remained stable by magnetic resonance imaging and MRS(I). (Courtesy of Alberto
Bizzi, M.D., Bologna, Italy.)

FIGURE 27.3-6. Patient with stage pT3a prostate cancer (Gleason score, 5). A: Fast spin-echo T2-weighted (repetition time = 5000; echo time = 102) axial magnetic
resonance image through the midprostate obtained using an endorectal coil. A tumor focus ( arrows in A) is seen as an area of decreased signal intensity in the
peripheral zone of the right gland. B: Histopathologic section (hematoxylin-eosin stain) confirmed tumor in the peripheral zone of the right midgland that abuts the
inked prostatic margin (a) and is interspersed between normal prostatic glands (b). C: 0.24-cm3 spectrum obtained from area 1 in the image in A demonstrates
elevated choline and reduced citrate, consistent with cancer. D: Magnetic resonance spectrum within the normal left peripheral zone, area 2 in the image in A, that
shows dominant citrate, as expected. (Modified from ref. 80, with permission.)

Clinical studies using 19F-MRS have centered around studying the tumor pharmacokinetics of 5-fluorouracil analogs and effects of other chemotherapeutic agents on
5-fluorouracil tumor uptake. 82 Those studies are performed with a view to individualizing chemotherapeutic regimens for specific patients. Several groups have used
23Na imaging to characterize brain tumors, 83,84 with new pulse sequences and high-field systems contributing to furthering the sensitivity and resolution for this
nucleus. 85
DWI is among the triad of functional MRI techniques, a triad that also includes perfusion imaging and fMRI. 86,87 Water diffusion is a random event; however, certain
structures, such as intracellular organelles and white matter tracts within the brain, may impede diffusion. Applying appropriate pulse sequences and magnetic field
gradients, those differences in diffusion may be detected. Resembling free water, necrotic or cystic portions of brain tumors display high apparent diffusion constants
(ADCs), while the solid (enhancing) portions have lower ADCs, demonstrating the ability of DWI to distinguish various portions of a single heterogeneous lesion. 88,89
Coupled with the high resolution of MR systems, that finding suggests that DWI may direct biopsies, an important function, as sampling errors now lead to
approximately 25% of brain tumors being undergraded. 90 Huang et al.91 used DWI in conjunction with MRS and perfusion imaging to assess the effects of intracarotid
chemotherapy on brain tumors in patients with gliomas or primary central nervous system lymphoma, showing a normalization of ADC values after treatment. In the
periphery, hemangiomas (high ADC) can be differentiated from hepatocellular carcinomas (low ADC) of the liver using a turbo-fast low-angle shot sequence with
DWI. 92 That technique enabled differentiation of malignant (low-ADC) from benign (high-ADC) ovarian cysts. 93 Other fast MR techniques, such as echo-planar
imaging, are beginning to be applied to extracranial regions, further allowing the calculation of ADC values in abdominal organs. 94
Once only a function of PET, perfusion imaging is now possible, in some cases quantitatively, with MRI. 95 Perfusion imaging enables calculation of blood volume,
which is likely related to tumor angiogenesis, or new blood vessel formation ( Fig. 27.3-7). Angiogenesis is a strong indicator of tumor grade. 96 Biopsy of tumor
subregions with increased perfusion may prove superior to biopsy of regions of enhancement, the current practice. Areas of perfusion and enhancement often do not
coincide, the latter being due to breakdown of the blood–brain barrier in the case of brain tumors. Extracranial studies using perfusion imaging are rare, although
several studies of cervical cancer have appeared recently. 97,98 and 99 In the latter study, the cervical microcirculatory parameters determined with perfusion imaging did
not always correlate with histology; however, they did correlate with patient outcome. Several groups have performed dynamic contrast-enhanced imaging of the
breast 100 or prostate101 in attempting to take advantage of the temporal signature of contrast uptake in tumors relative to neighboring tissue. Dynamic CT with Patlak
analysis enabled measurement of perfusion in prostate tumors during therapy. 102

FIGURE 27.3-7. Patient with a left parietal glioma. Postgadolinium T1-weighted image ( A) [repetition time (TR) = 415; echo time (TE) = 18] demonstrates minimal
enhancement (arrow) in the left posterior parietal lobe, where a large region of high signal intensity is identified ( B, arrow) on the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
(FLAIR) image [TR = 8800; TE = 130; inversion time(TI) = 2200]. The diffusion-weighted image ( C) (TR = 9999; TE = 99; B = 1000), calculated apparent diffusion
constants map (D), and cerebral blood volume perfusion image ( E) all demonstrate increased signal in the region of the mass favoring the diagnosis of tumor. The
time–to–peak perfusion image (F) shows delayed perfusion of the mass relative to the neighboring gray matter.

fMRI detects signals based on the difference in blood oxygen tension that occurs between active and inactive brain regions (i.e., the blood oxygen level dependence
effect).103 Several centers are beginning to use fMRI for preoperative planning of brain tumors because eloquent, or essential, brain regions, such as motor cortex or
language areas, may be mapped preoperatively and avoided during surgery for tumors and other lesions. 104,105 Similarly, the nonrandom orientation (anisotropy) of
white matter tracts in the brain may be exploited by diffusion tensor imaging, 106 a variant of DWI, for preoperative planning. In diffusion tensor imaging, deep
structures, such as the corticospinal tract, well beyond the domain of intraoperative cortical mapping, may be delineated and, consequently, avoided during tumor
surgery. 107,108
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS IN ONCOLOGIC MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
In a preliminary study, Enochs et al. 109 used a contrast agent based on long-circulating superparamagnetic iron oxide particles to delineate brain tumors that may
differentiate between tumor and postoperative scar tissue. “Smart” MR contrast agents, which may be activated only within the vicinity of an enzyme of interest, are
being developed and may prove useful if issues related to pharmacokinetics and metabolism can be resolved. 110 Further application of echo-planar imaging and other
rapid MR techniques may enable multiple MR studies [e.g., MRS(I) and perfusion imaging] to be performed within a single 1-hour clinical time slot, permitting
collection of correlative data.

NEW FUNCTIONAL AND METABOLIC IMAGING MODALITIES
Optical imaging techniques are entering the clinical arena. Optical coherence tomography is already being applied to microsurgery 111,112 and cervical cancer 113 (Fig.
27.3-8). Rather than functional imaging, however, those techniques are more akin to ultrasonography, except that light is used to obtain the image. Optical coherence
tomography may almost be considered a cellular imaging technique, owing to its exquisite resolution, approaching cellular dimensions (1 to 15 µm) and one to two
orders of magnitude superior to conventional ultrasonography. It is expected to prove invaluable for directed biopsy, decreasing sampling errors.

FIGURE 27.3-8. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) images were obtained from fresh tissue samples, within 5 minutes of excision by a loop electrosurgical excision
procedure. Image acquisition time was 2.5 seconds. The instrument used delivers and collects 850-nm broadband light via an optical fiber probe that is placed in
contact with the sample. Shown is a clinically normal site in the tissue sample. From the top down, the image shows a dark band corresponding to the quartz shield
(S) of the optic fiber probe. Next, the surface of the sample is observed (1), followed by a layer of low-scattering epithelial tissue (E) 150 µm deep in this image.
Immediately below, approximately 325 µm deep in the image, is the interface with a layer of highly scattering connective (C) tissue (2). This layer occupies the rest of
the image, and the signal fades approximately 400 to 500 µm into the tissue. This technique may also be used to demonstrate the optical properties of tissue in situ.

(Courtesy of Rebecca Richards-Kortum, Ph.D., Austin, TX.)

Either endogenous or exogenous fluorophores may be used to detect fluorescence of malignant tissues. Inaguma and Hashimoto 114 recently applied the former to
characterizing oral carcinomas, demonstrating that tumors vary in the amount of a porphyrin-like substance responsible for fluorescence. 114 Andersson-Engels et al. 115
used a porphyrin to delineate basal cell carcinomas. Schantz et al. 116 exploited the endogenous fluorescence of head and neck cancers and demonstrated a
correlation between fluorescence maxima and tumor grade and likelihood of recurrence. Tromberg et al. 117 accomplished quantitative functional imaging of breast
tumors using near-infrared light in conjunction with photon migration spectroscopy. Low-resolution (0.5- to 1-cm) images of tissue hemoglobin concentration, oxygen
saturation, blood volume, and water and fat contents are capable with that technique.
Subtle differences in redox status, oxygenation, and intracellular pH separate normal and malignant tissues. 118 Redox status and oxygenation can be measured by
electron paramagnetic resonance. 119 The detection of nitroxides, redox-sensitive probes, has been accomplished using electron paramagnetic resonance–enabled
imaging of tumor heterogeneity in a rodent model, with clinical studies on the horizon. 118

SUMMARY
The use and cost-effectiveness of PET are finally being recognized in the clinic. 120 The proliferation of satellite suppliers of FDG to sites that use DHC gamma
cameras and reimbursement for an increasing number of indications may account for the anticipated 30% increase in PET 121 use over the next 5 years. MR
techniques are largely replacing PET for indications other than receptor- or enzyme-based imaging (i.e., blood flow) and can provide important complementary
information to PET. Recent initiatives of the National Cancer Institute promote the development of research projects and centers dedicated to functional and molecular
imaging of cancer. Through synergism of technologic advances, interdisciplinary research, and public support, functional imaging will soon ensure the ultimate goal of
the noninvasive characterization of cancer.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Wagner HN. The future. Semin Nucl Med 1996;26:194.
2. Di Chiro G, DeLaPaz RL, Brooks RA, et al. Glucose utilization of cerebral gliomas measured by F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose and positron emission tomography. Neurology 1982;32: 1323.
3. Chandra R. Introductory physics of nuclear medicine. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1992:185.
4. Budinger TF, Brennan KM, Moses WW, et al. Advances in positron tomography for oncology. Nucl Med Biol 1996;1996:659.
5. Gambhir SS, Herschman HR, Cherry SR, et al. Imaging transgene expression with radionuclide imaging technologies. Neoplasia 2000;2:118.
6. Patton JA, Turkington TG. Coincidence imaging with a dual-head scintillation camera. J Nucl Med 1999;40:432.
7. Dang CV, Semenza GL. Oncogenic alterations of metabolism. Trends Biochem Sci 1999;24:68.
8. Smith TAD. FDG uptake, tumour characteristics, and response to therapy: a review. Nucl Med Commun 1998;19:97.
9. Lindholm P, Minn H, Leskinen-Kallio S, et al. Influence of the blood glucose concentration on FDG uptake in cancer: a PET study. J Nucl Med 1993;34:1.
10. Weber WA, Ziegler SI, Thodtmann R, et al. Reproducibility of metabolic measurements in malignant tumors using FDG PET. J Nucl Med 1999;40:1771.
11. Wahl RL. To AC or not to AC: that is the question. J Nucl Med 1999;40:2025.
12. Zasadny KR, Wahl RL. Standardized uptake values of normal tissues at PET with 2-[fluorine-18]-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose: variations with body weight and a method for correction. Radiology
1993;189:847.
13. Hays MT, Segall GM. A mathematical model for the distribution of fluorodeoxyglucose in humans. J Nucl Med 1999;40:1358.
14. Sugawara Y, Zasadny KR, Grossman HB, et al. Germ cell tumor: differentiation of viable tumor, mature teratoma and necrotic tissue with FDG PET and kinetic modeling. Radiology
1999;211:249.
15. Wahl LM, Asselin MC, Nahmias C. Regions of interest in the venous sinuses as input functions for quantitative PET. J Nucl Med 1999;40:1666.
16. Lonneux M, Borbath I, Bol A, et al. Attenuation correction in whole-body FDG oncological studies: the role of statistical reconstruction. Eur J Nucl Med 1999;26:591.
17. Keyes JW. SUV: standard uptake or silly useless value? J Nucl Med 1995;36:1836.
18. Hoh CK, Schiepers C, Seltzer MA, et al. PET in oncology: will it replace other modalities? Semin Nucl Med 1997;27:94.
19. Hustinx R, Alavi A. SPECT and PET imaging of brain tumors. Neuroimaging Clin N Am 1999;9:751.
20. Weber WA, Avril N, Schwaiger M. Relevance of positron emission tomography (PET) in oncology. Strahlenther Onkol 1999;175:356.
21. Delbeke D. Oncological applications of FDG PET imaging: brain tumors, colorectal cancer lymphoma and melanoma. J Nucl Med 1999;40:591.
22. Delbeke D. Oncological applications of FDG PET imaging. J Nucl Med 1999;40:1706.
23. Kubota R, Yamada S, Kubota K, et al. I ntratumoral distribution of fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose in vivo: high accumulation in macrophages and granulation tissues studied by
microautoradiography. J Nucl Med 1992;33:1972.
24. Lowe VJ, Naunheim KS. Positron emission tomography in lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;65:1821.
25. Patronas NJ, Di Chior G, Kufta C, et al. Prediction of survival in glioma patients by means of positron emission tomography. J Neurosurg 1985;62:816.
26. Kim EE, Chung SK, Haynie TP, et al. Differentiation of residual or recurrent tumors from post-treatment changes with F-18 FDG PET. Radiographics 1992;12:269.
27. Coleman RE. PET in lung cancer. J Nucl Med 1999;40:814.
28. Hubner KF. Can11 C-methionine play a role in lung cancer staging? J Nucl Med 2000;41:291.
29. Soyer P, Levesque M, Elias D, et al. Detection of liver metastases from colorectal cancer: comparison of intraoperative US and CT during arterial portography. Radiology 1992;183:541.
30. Braams JW, Pruim J, Kole AC, et al. Detection of unknown primary head and neck tumors by positron emission tomography. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1997;26:112.
31. Chisin R. Nuclear medicine in head and neck oncology: reality and perspectives. J Nucl Med 1999;40:90.
32. Kitagawa Y, Sadato N, Azuma H, et al. FDG PET to evaluate combined intra-arterial chemotherapy and radiotherapy of head and neck neoplasms. J Nucl Med 1999;40:1132.
33. Delbeke D, Rose DM, Chapman WC, et al. Optimal interpretation of FDG PET in the diagnosis, staging and management of pancreatic carcinoma. J Nucl Med 1999;40:1784.
34. Schulte M, Brecht-Krauss D, Werner M, et al. Evaluation of neoadjuvant therapy response of osteogenic sarcoma using FDG PET. J Nucl Med 1999;40:1637.
35. Benard F, Sterman D, Smith RJ, et al. Prognostic value of FDG PET imaging in malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Nucl Med 1999;40:1241.
36. Sugawara Y, Eisbruch A, Kosuda S, et al. Evaluation of FDG PET in patients with cervical cancer. J Nucl Med 1999;40:1125.
37. Heicappell R, Muller-Mattheis V, Reinhardt M, et al. Staging of pelvic lymph nodes in neoplasms of the bladder and prostate by positron emission tomography with 2-[(18)F]-2-deoxy-D-glucose.
Eur Urol 1999;36:582.
38. Minn H, Clavo AC, Wahl RL. Influence of hypoxia on tracer accumulation in squamous-cell carcinoma: in vitro evaluation for PET imaging. Nucl Med Biol 1996;23:941.
39. Cook GJ, Maisey MN, Fogelman I. Normal variants, artefacts and interpretative pitfalls in PET imaging with 18-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose and carbon-11 methionine. Eur J Nucl Med 1999;26:1363.
40. Wester HJ, Herz M, Weber W, et al. Synthesis and radiopharmacology of O-(2-[18F]fluoroethyl)-L-tyrosine for tumor imaging. J Nucl Med 1999;40:205.
41. Shoup TM, Olson J, Hoffman J, et al. Synthesis and evaluation of [18F]1-amino-3-fluorocyclobutane-1-carboxylic acid to image brain tumors. J Nucl Med 1999;40:331.
42. Shields AF, Mankoff DA, Link JM, et al. Carbon-11-thymidine and FDG to measure therapy response. J Nucl Med 1998;39:1757.
43. Mankoff DA, Dehdashti F, Shields AF. Characterizing tumors using metabolic imaging: PET imaging of cellular proliferation and steroid receptors. Neoplasia 2000;2:71.
44. Rasey JS, Hofstrand PD, Chin LK, et al. Characterization of [18F]fluoroetanidazole, a new radiopharmaceutical for detecting tumor hypoxia. J Nucl Med 1999;40:1072.
45. Hustinx R, Eck SL, Alavi A. Potential applications of PET imaging in developing novel cancer therapies. J Nucl Med 1999;40:995.
46. Evans SM, Kachur AV, Shiue C-Y, et al. Noninvasive detection of tumor hypoxia using the 2-nitroimidazole [ 18 F]EF1. J Nucl Med 2000;41:327.
47. Hendrikse NH, Franssen EJF, van der Graaf WTA, et al. Visualization of multidrug resistance in vivo. Eur J Nucl Med 1999;26:283.
48. Roivainen A, Forsback S, Gronroos T, et al. Blood metabolism of [methyl-11C]choline: implications for in vivo imaging with positron emission tomography. Eur J Nucl Med 2000;27:25.
49. Shreve PD, Gross MD. Imaging of the pancreas and related diseases with PET carbon-11-acetate. J Nucl Med 1997;38:1305.
50. Moehler M, Diitrakopoulou-Strauss A, Gutzler F, et al. 18F-labeled fluorouracil positron emission tomography and the prognosis of colorectal carcinoma patients with metastases to the liver
treated with 5-fluorouracil. Cancer 1998;83:245.
51. Kaschten B, Stevenaert A, Sadzot B, et al. Preoperative evaluation of 54 gliomas by PET with fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose and/or carbon-11-methionine. J Nucl Med 1998;39:778.
52. Sasaki M, Kuwabara Y, Yoshida T, et al. A comparative study of thallium-201 SPET, carbon-11 methionine PET and fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose PET for the differentiation of astrocytic
tumours. Eur J Nucl Med 1998;25:1261.
53. Kubota K, Tada M, Yamada S, et al. Comparison of the distribution of fluorine-18 fluoromisonidazole, deoxyglucose and methionine in tumour tissue. Eur J Nucl Med 1999;26:750.
54. Sasaki M, Kuwabara Y, Ichiya Y, et al. Differential diagnosis of thymic tumors using a combination of 11C-methionine PET and FDG PET. J Nucl Med 1999;40:1595.
55. Yasukawa T, Yoshikawa K, Aoyagi H, et al. Usefulness of PET with 11C-methionine for the detection of hilar and mediastinal lymph node metastasis in lung cancer. J Nucl Med 2000;41:283.
56. Plaat B, Kole A, Mastik M, et al. Protein synthesis rate measured with L-[1- 11C]tyrosine positron emission tomography correlates with mitotic activity and MIB-1 antibody-detected proliferation in
human soft tissue sarcomas. Eur J Nucl Med 1999;26:328.
57. Shields AF, Grierson JR, Dohmen BM, et al. Imaging proliferation in vivo with [F-18]FLT and positron emission tomography. Nat Med 1998;4:1334.
58. Tjuvajev JG, Chen SH, Joshi A, et al. Imaging adenoviral-mediated herpes virus thymidine kinase gene transfer and expression in vivo. Cancer Res 1999;59:5186.
59. Welch MJ, McCarthy TJ. The potential role of generator-produced radiopharmaceuticals in clinical PET. J Nucl Med 2000;41:314.
60. Pomper MG, Port JD. New techniques in MR imaging of brain tumors. MRI Clin North Am 2000 (in press).
61. Hoge RD, Atkinson J, Gill B, et al. Investigation of BOLD signal dependence on cerebral blood flow and oxygen consumption: the deoxyhemoglobin dilution model. Magn Reson Med
1999;42:849.
62. Soher BJ, Hurd RE, Sailasuta N, et al. Quantitation of automated single-voxel proton MRS using cerebral water as an internal reference. Magn Reson Med 1996;36:335.
63. Negendank W. Studies of human tumors by MRS: a review. NMR Biomed 1992;5:303.
64. Robinson SP, Barton SJ, McSheehy PMJ, et al. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of cancer. Br J Radiol 1997;70:S60.
65. Castillo M, Kwock L, Scatliff J, et al. Proton MR spectroscopy in neoplastic and non-neoplastic brain disorders. MRI Clin North Am 1998;6:1.
66. Rand SD, Prost R, Li S-J. Proton MR spectroscopy of the brain. Neuroimaging Clin N Am 1999;9:379.
67. Sijens PE. Phosphorus MR spectroscopy in the treatment of human extremity sarcomas. NMR Biomed 1998;11:341.
68. Negendank WG, Padavic-Shaller KA, Li C-W, et al. Metabolic characterization of human non-Hodgkin's lymphomas in vivo with the use of proton-decoupled phosphorus magnetic resonance

spectroscopy. Cancer Res 1995;55:3286.
69. Dagnelie PC, Sijens PE, Kraus DJ, et al. Abnormal liver metabolism in cancer patients detected by (31)P MR spectroscopy. NMR Biomed 1999;12:535.
70. Leach MO, Verrill M, Glaholm J, et al. Measurements of human breast cancer using magnetic resonance spectroscopy: a review of clinical measurements and a report of localized 31P
measurements of response to treatment. NMR Biomed 1998;11:314.
71. Preul MC, Caramanos Z, Collins DL, et al. Accurate, noninvasive diagnosis of human brain tumors by using proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Nat Med 1996;2:323.
72. Nelson SJ, Nat DR. Imaging of brain tumors after therapy. Neuroimaging Clin N Am 1999;9:801.
73. Nelson SJ, Vigneron DB, Dillon WP. Serial evaluation of patients with brain tumors using volume MRI and 3D 1H MRSI. NMR Biomed 1999;12:123.
74. Milanesi I, Erbetta A, Silvani A, et al. H-MRSI is reliable in directing therapy of suspected relapsing neoplasms. Proceedings of the Thirty-Seventh Annual Meeting of the American Society of
Neuroradiology, San Diego, 1999; 302(abst):231.
75. Star-Lack JM, Adalsteinsson E, Adam MF, et al. In vivo 1H MR spectroscopy of human head and neck lymph node metastasis and comparison with oxygen tension measurements. AJNR Am J
Neuroradiol 2000;21:183.
76. Gribbestad IS, Singstad TE, Nilsen G, et al. In vivo 1H MRS of normal breast and breast tumors using a dedicated double breast coil. J Magn Reson Imaging 1998;8:1191.
77. Roebuck JR, Cecil KIM, Schnall MD, et al. Human breast lesions: characterization with proton MR spectroscopy. Radiology 1998;209:269.
78. Kaji Y, Kurhanewicz J, Hricak H, et al. Localizing prostate cancer in the presence of postbiopsy changes on MR images: role of proton MR spectroscopic imaging. Radiology 1998;206:785.
79. Scheidler J, Hricak H, Vigneron DB, et al. Prostate cancer: localization with three-dimensional proton MR spectroscopic imagingclinicopathologic study. Radiology 1999;213:473.
80. Kurhanewicz J, Vigneron DB, Nelson SJ. Three-dimensional magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging of brain and prostate cancer. Neoplasia 2000;2:166.
81. Massuger LF, van Vierzen PB, Engelke U, et al. 1H-magnetic resonance spectroscopy: a new technique to discriminate benign from malignant ovarian tumors. Cancer 1998;82:1726.
82. Ikehira H, Girard F, Obata T, et al. A preliminary study for clinical pharmacokinetics of oral fluorine anticancer medicines using the commercial MRI system 19F-MRS. Br J Radiol 1999;72:584.
83. Hashimoto T, Ikehira H, Fukuda H, et al. In vivo sodium-23 in brain tumors: evaluation of preliminary clinical experience. Am J Physiol Imaging 1991;6:74.
84. Schuierer G, Ladebeck R, Barfuss H, et al. Sodium-23 MR-imaging of supratentorial lesions at 4.0 T. Magn Reson Med 1991;22:1.
85. Hancu I, Boada FE, Shen GX. Three-dimensional triple-quantum-filtered (23)Na imaging of in vivo human brain. Magn Reson Med 1999;42:1146.
86. Gray L, MacFall J. Overview of diffusion imaging. MRI Clin North Am 1998;6:125.
87. Mori S, Barker PB. Diffusion magnetic resonance imaging: its principles and applications. Anat Rec 1999;257:102.
88. Aprile I, Iaiza F, Lavaroni A, et al. Analysis of cystic intracranial lesions performed with fluid-attenuated inversion recovery MR imaging. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1999;20:1259.
89. Brunburg JA, Chenevert TL, McKeever PE, et al. In vivo MR determination of water diffusion coefficients and diffusion anisotropy: correlation with structural alteration in gliomas of the cerebral
hemispheres. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1995;16:371.
90. Sorensen AG, Tievsky AL, Ostergaard L, et al. Contrast agents in functional MR imaging. J Magn Reson Imaging 1997;7:47.
91. Huang W, Roche P, Madajewicz S, et al. Evaluation of brain tumor response to intracarotid chemotherapy using 1H MRS, diffusion and perfusion MRI. Proceedings of the Seventh Scientific
Meeting of the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, Philadelphia, 1999(abst 903).
92. Moteki T, Ishizaka H, Horikoshi H, et al. Differentiation between hemangiomas and hepatocellular carcinomas with the apparent diffusion coefficient calculated from turboFLASH MR images. J
Magn Reson Imaging 1995;5:187.
93. Moteki T, Ishizaka H. Evaluation of cystic ovarian lesions using apparent diffusion coefficient calculated from reordered turboflash MR images. Magn Reson Imaging 1999;17:955.
94. Yamada I, Aung W, Himeno Y, et al. Diffusion coefficients in abdominal organs and hepatic lesions: evaluation with intravoxel incoherent motion echo-planar MR imaging. Radiology
1999;210:617.
95. Lev MH, Rosen BR. Clinical applications of intracranial perfusion imaging. Neuroimaging Clin N Am 1999;9:309.
96. Aronen HJ, Gazit IE, Louis DN, et al. Cerebral blood volume maps of gliomas: comparison with tumor grade and histologic findings. Radiology 1994;191:41.
97. Mayr NA, Yuh WT, Magnotta VA, et al. Tumor perfusion studies using fast magnetic resonance imaging technique in advanced cervical cancer: a new noninvasive predictive assay. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:623.
98. Van Vierzen PB, Massuger LF, Ruys SH, et al. Fast dynamic contrast enhanced MR imaging of cervical carcinoma. Clin Radiol 1998;53:183.
99. Mayr NA, Hawighorst H, Yuh WTC, et al. MR microcirculation assessment in cervical cancer: correlations with histomorphological tumor markers and clinical outcome. J Magn Reson Imaging
1999;10:267.
100. Parker GJM, Suckling J, Tanner SF, et al. MRIW: parametric analysis software for contrast-enhanced dynamic MR imaging in cancer. Radiographics 1998;18:497.
101. Turnbull LW, Buckley DL, Turnbull LS, et al. Differentiation of prostatic carcinoma and benign prostatic hyperplasia: correlation between dynamic Gd-DTPA-enhanced MR imaging and
histopathology. J Magn Reson Imaging 1999;9:311.
102. Harvey C, Dooher A, Morgan J, et al. Imaging of tumour therapy responses by dynamic CT. Eur J Radiol 1999;30:221.
103. Thulborn KR, Waterton JC, Mathews PM, et al. Oxygen dependence of the transverse relaxation time of water protons in whole blood at high field. Biochim Biophys Acta 1982;714:265.
104. Achten E, Jackson GD, Cameron JA, et al. Presurgical evaluation of the motor hand area with functional MR imaging in patients with tumors and dysplastic lesions. Radiology 1999;210:529.
105. Lurito JT, Lowe MJ, Sartorius C, et al. Comparison of fMRI and intraoperative direct cortical stimulation in localization of receptive language areas. J Comput Assist Tomogr 2000;24:99.
106. Ulug AM, van Zijl PCM. Orientation-independent diffusion imaging without tensor diagonalization: anisotropy definitions based on physical attributes of the diffusion ellipsoid. J Magn Reson
Imaging 1999;9:804.
107. Nakada T, Nakayama N, Fujii Y, et al. Clinical application of three-dimensional anisotropy contrast magnetic resonance axonography [Technical note]. J Neurosurg 1999;90:791.
108. Inoue T, Shimizu H, Yoshimoto T. I maging the pyramidal tract in patients with brain tumors. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 1999;101:4.
109. Enochs WS, Harsh G, Hochberg F, et al. Improved delineation of human brain tumors on MR images using a long-circulating superparamagnetic iron oxide agent. J Magn Reson Imaging
1999;9:228.
110. Louie AY, Huber MM, Ahrens ET, et al. I n vivo visualization of gene expression using magnetic resonance imaging. Nat Biotechnol 2000;18:321.
111. Boppart SA, Bouma BE, Pitris C, et al. Intraoperative assessment of microsurgery with three-dimensional optical coherence tomography. Radiology 1998;208:81.
112. Fujimoto J, Pitris C, Boppart SA, et al. Optical coherence tomography: an emerging technology for biomedical imaging and optical biopsy. Neoplasia 2000;2:9.
113. Follen M, Richards-Kortum R. Emerging technologies and cervical cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000;92:363.
114. Inaguma M, Hashimoto K. Porphyrin-like fluorescence in oral cancer: in vivo fluorescence spectral characterization of lesions by use of a near-ultraviolet excited autofluorescence diagnosis
system and separation of fluorescent extracts by capillary electrophoresis. Cancer 1999;86:2201.
115. Andersson-Engels S, Canti G, Eker CU, et al. Preliminary evaluation of two fluorescence imaging methods for the detection and the delineation of basal cell carcinomas of the skin. Lasers Surg
Med 2000;26:76.
116. Schantz SP, Kolli V, Savage HE, et al. In vivo native cellular fluorescence and histological characteristics of head and neck cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:1177.
117. Tromberg BJ, Shah N, Lanning R, et al. Non-invasive in vivo characterization of breast tumors using photon migration spectroscopy. Neoplasia 2000;2:26.
118. Kuppusamy P, Afeworki M, Shankar RA, et al. In vivo electron paramagnetic resonance imaging of tumor heterogeneity and oxygenation in a murine model. Cancer Res 1998;58:1562.
119. Swartz HM, Clarkson RB. The measurement of oxygen in vivo using EPR techniques. Phys Med Biol 1998;43:1957.
120. Scott WJ, Shepherd J, Gambhir SS. Cost-effectiveness of FDG-PET for staging non-small cell lung cancer: a decision analysis. Ann Thoracic Surg 1998;66:1876.
121. Kritz FL. PET scanning moves into community hospitals. J Nucl Med 1999;40:11N.

SECTION 27.4 Interventional Radiology
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 27.4
Interventional Radiology
JEAN-FRANCOIS H. GESCHWIND
Introduction
Diagnostic Procedures
Percutaneous Biopsy in the Thorax
Biopsy of Other Organ Systems
Visceral Angiography
Portal Venous Sampling
Therapeutic Interventions
Liver Cancer
Cancers of the Biliary Tract and Pancreas
Genitourinary Tract Tumors
Superior Vena Cava Syndrome
Pulmonary Thromboembolic Disease and Inferior Vena Cava Filters
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The field of interventional radiology has continued its rapid expansion into the world of clinical medicine and oncology. In doing so, its focus has shifted from an
essentially diagnostic to a primarily therapeutic subspecialty. The interventional radiologist is now involved in direct patient care and, in many instances, has become
the patient's primary care physician. This growth of interventional radiology is especially extraordinary in the field of clinical oncology, where many procedures, such
as placement of tunneled central venous catheters for infusion of chemotherapy or nutritional support, inferior vena cava (IVC) filters to prevent pulmonary embolism,
and catheterization of the biliary or urinary tract to decompress obstructed systems, are now performed by interventional radiologists. In addition, new procedures
developed by interventional radiologists, such as transarterial chemoembolization of liver tumors, percutaneous ethanol infusion, radiofrequency ablation, or
embolization techniques, have become suitable therapeutic alternatives to other traditional forms of therapy, including systemic chemotherapy, irradiation, or surgery
and, in some instances, have become the mainstay of therapy. A wide range of cancer patients benefit from the services of interventional radiology. This chapter first
reviews some of the well-established procedures still performed to help diagnose cancer and then addresses the many contributions of interventional radiology in the
treatment of cancer patients.

DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
Percutaneous and intraluminal biopsies of suspicious lesions are relatively easy and reliable methods of obtaining tissue for histologic or cytopathologic diagnosis.
The lungs, breast, liver, pancreas, adrenal glands, kidney, and retroperitoneum (especially lymph nodes) are the most commonly targeted organs. Ultrasonography,
magnetic resonance imaging, and computed tomography (CT) provide excellent image guidance and have made it possible to safely sample focal lesions as small as
5 mm.1 The majority of percutaneous biopsies can be performed on an outpatient basis. By alleviating the need for diagnostic surgery, biopsy is cost-effective and can
have a great impact on patient management. 1 Numerous types and sizes of biopsy needles are commercially available. They vary from the small aspiration needle
(19- to 23-gauge), which provides a cellular slurry for cytologic examination when confirmatory diagnosis of malignancy is sought, to the large-core biopsy cutting
needle and biopsy gun (18-gauge or less), which provide an actual piece of tissue for cytologic and histopathologic analysis. 2,3 and 4 The choice of a specific needle
should be made according to the type of tissue to be sampled. Other considerations include the type and vascularity of the target organ, the coagulation status of the
patient, and the anticipated course of the needle. Percutaneous biopsy is most commonly performed to provide a definitive diagnosis of malignancy. It can also be
used for tumor staging and assessment of tumor response to therapy.
PERCUTANEOUS BIOPSY IN THE THORAX
Despite persistent controversy about its usefulness, transthoracic needle biopsy is still commonly performed to diagnose both benign and malignant disease of the
thorax.5,6 and 7 Aspiration or cutting needles can be used to evaluate suspicious lesions adequately in the lung parenchyma, pleura, or mediastinum. Although cutting or
core needles generally provide better quality samples than those provided by aspiration needles, they are usually not required to sample parenchymal abnormalities
or lung nodules and, in most instances, provide no substantial advantage over needle aspiration. 2,8,9,10 and 11 Only when the diagnosis of malignancy cannot reliably be
established by fine-needle aspiration is the use of core needles indicated. 5,7 It is helpful to have the pathologist in attendance during the procedure to determine
whether the collected sample can yield a definitive diagnosis. 12 If the initial biopsy sample is negative, the positioning of the needle tip should be checked to ensure
that it is within the lesion. Once the needle tip is appropriately redirected, further samples should be collected. Both established and more recent series have shown
the sensitivity of transthoracic needle aspiration for the detection of pulmonary parenchymal, hilar, or pleural malignancy to vary between 74% and 97%, its diagnostic
accuracy to range from 76% to 99%, and its specificity to approach 100%. 1,2,5,6,7,8,9,10 and 11 Core biopsy marginally increases the diagnostic yield over that obtained with
fine-needle aspiration. On the other hand, despite the increased risk of the procedure owing to the larger size of the needle, it is extremely useful when a diagnosis of
lymphoma is suspected or to establish a definitive diagnosis of malignancy within the mediastinum. 13,14,15 and 16
Fluoroscopy, CT scanning, and ultrasonography are the preferred imaging modalities for guidance of needle biopsy in the thorax. All available radiographic studies of
the lesion to undergo biopsy should be reviewed before the procedure. For lung nodules, fluoroscopy is the imaging guidance of choice because it provides
immediate identification and, thus, rapid sampling of the lesion. If the lesion cannot be identified by fluoroscopy, CT scanning guidance should be used. CT images
provide exquisite anatomic details, and vital structures, such as major blood vessels, can thus be avoided. 2 These attributes render CT scanning the imaging
guidance of choice for lesions involving the mediastinum, hila, or pleura. Finally, the use of ultrasonography should be reserved for superficial chest wall masses.
Although no absolute contraindications to percutaneous pulmonary biopsy exist, there are several relative contraindications, such as an uncooperative patient,
pulmonary hypertension, coagulopathy, and severe bullous emphysematous disease. Severe complications from transthoracic pulmonary biopsy are extremely rare,
and the overall mortality ranges from 0.01% to 0.05%. 17,18 and 19 On the other hand, the incidence of pneumothorax (by far the most common complication) varies
between 14% and nearly 60%, but only 4% to 13% of these cases require treatment by placement of a chest tube. 17,18,19,20 and 21 Note that the incidence or size of a
pneumothorax is not related to either the size of the biopsy needle or the number of passes made during the biopsy. 11 Other complications include hemoptysis (5% of
cases) and pleural pain, especially if a pneumothorax is present. 17,18,19,20 and 21
BIOPSY OF OTHER ORGAN SYSTEMS
With the advent of high-quality cross-sectional imaging, percutaneous biopsy of suspicious abdominal masses has become a relatively easy, safe, and reliable
method of obtaining definitive tissue diagnosis. CT guidance remains by far the most common imaging guidance modality, because it provides superb anatomic
details and excellent evaluation of internal structures, thus allowing the operator to plan and choose the safest approach to a biopsy. 22 It is clearly the modality of
choice for biopsy of the pancreas, adrenals, lymph nodes, retroperitoneal masses, and liver lesions not seen well by ultrasonography. On the other hand,
ultrasonography is the guidance modality of choice for biopsy of the thyroid and breast and is frequently used for biopsy of the liver (especially if the lesions are
relatively large and superficial), the pancreas, kidneys, and pelvic organs. 23,24 Ultrasonography offers the advantage of real-time, multiplanar imaging as well as
Doppler analysis, which makes it very practical and improves safety by allowing the operator to identify and thus avoid major vessels. 23,24 The role of magnetic
resonance imaging in biopsy guidance remains limited by the high cost of nuclear medicine examinations and the need for specialized biopsy needles owing to the
magnetic field. Although both fine-needle aspiration and larger cutting needles can theoretically be used for biopsy of abdominal lesions, a fine needle is often
preferred because the risk of injury to adjacent vital structures is minimized. Indeed, such structures as the liver, stomach, small bowel, and colon can safely be
traversed by a fine needle. Cutting needles should be used if a definitive diagnosis cannot be established with fine-needle aspiration and only if a clear, safe pathway

to the target lesion can be established.
Percutaneous biopsy of abdominal or pelvic masses generally yields high diagnostic accuracy rates. In the liver, it ranges from 60% to 84% with fine aspiration
needles to 90% to 100% with core or cutting needles. 25,26,27 and 28 In the pancreas, diagnostic accuracy has greatly improved over the last 10 years and now ranges
between 85% using fine-needle aspiration and 92% using core needles. 29,30 The diagnostic accuracy for biopsy of the kidney 31 and adrenals is greater than 90%. 32,33
and 34
The use of large cutting needles for biopsy of the adrenal glands is not recommended because major vital structures, which surround the adrenal glands, could
be transgressed during the procedure, thus causing major complications. For abdominal biopsies, the diagnostic accuracy is directly related to the number of needle
passes made during the biopsy.
The complication rate for percutaneous biopsy in the abdomen is low (1% to 3%). 29,32,35,36 and 37 It is lowest in the liver (0.1%) and highest in the adrenals
(8.4%). 29,32,35,36 and 37 Major complications, though extremely rare, include hepatic or renal hemorrhage, pancreatitis, and pneumothorax. They can usually be treated
effectively by transcatheter or tract embolization (hemorrhage) 38 or insertion of a drainage catheter (pancreatitis or pneumothorax). 37
More invasive techniques, such as transjugular liver biopsy 39 and percutaneous transhepatic biopsy of the biliary tree 40 can also be performed to obtain tissue
diagnosis in the liver. In cancer patients, transjugular liver biopsy is used mainly to obtain core-like samples of liver tissue to establish the diagnosis of
graft-versus-host disease. It is performed via a right internal jugular approach and requires selective hepatic vein catheterization. Once seeded within the hepatic
vein, either a biopsy gun or forceps is directed inferiorly and advanced through a vascular sheath directly into the liver parenchyma to collect tissue samples. This
technique is especially useful in coagulopathic patients with diffuse liver disease.
Traditional image-guided percutaneous biopsy or endoscopic brush biopsy of the biliary tract have diagnostic yields ranging only from 40% to 70%. 41,42 Benign and
malignant biliary strictures have similar cholangiographic appearances, and distinguishing between the two entities can be extremely difficult. Percutaneous
transhepatic biliary drainage allows direct access to the biliary tract once satisfactory decompression of the biliary tree has been achieved. Biopsy forceps catheters
can then be used through the existing tract to obtain tissue samples of suspicious areas within the biliary tree. Sensitivity and specificity with this technique hover near
85% and 95%, respectively, and are highest when a scope, introduced percutaneously through the established tract, provides direct visualization of the biliary tree.
VISCERAL ANGIOGRAPHY
The role of angiography in the diagnostic evaluation of hepatobiliary or pancreatic neoplastic disease has greatly diminished in the last decades. The advent of
sophisticated noninvasive fast imaging modalities, such as CT, ultrasonography, and nuclear medicine, has fulfilled most of the clinician's diagnostic needs. However,
angiography continues to be important not only as a visceral diagnostic test but as it provides the basis for many therapeutic interventional procedures. Visceral
angiography requires selective catheterization of the celiac axis and superior mesenteric artery after which digital subtraction imaging is performed. Filming should be
carried out long enough to visualize the portal venous phase. Visceral angiography is used for detailed evaluation of the splanchnic arterial anatomy, particularly the
numerous potential anatomic variations in the arterial supply to the liver ( Fig. 27.4-1); documenting patency of the portovenous system; and determination of vascular
encasement. When intraarterial chemotherapy administered via a surgically placed pump is being considered for treatment of liver metastases, thorough evaluation of
the hepatic arterial anatomy is especially important to ensure appropriate delivery of the chemotherapy to all segments of the liver involved by the tumor. 43 In cases of
pancreatic cancer or cholangiocarcinoma, if surgical resection is contemplated, assessment of vascular encasement is critical, since surgery offers the only hope for
cure. 44,45,46,47 and 48 Encasement of the celiac axis, the superior mesenteric artery, portal vein, or superior mesenteric vein ( Fig. 27.4-2) usually indicate that the tumor is
not amenable to surgical resection for cure, although in some cases and, depending on the surgeon's experience, such findings may not preclude surgical
exploration. 44,45,46,47 and 48

FIGURE 27.4-1. Diagnostic visceral arteriogram: variant arterial anatomy. A: Replaced right hepatic artery ( arrow) off the superior mesenteric artery. B: Replaced left
hepatic artery (black arrow) off the left gastric artery (open arrow).

FIGURE 27.4-2. Diagnostic visceral arteriogram in a patient with pancreatic adenocarcinoma: venous encasement. A: Venous phase from splenic arterial injection
demonstrates narrowing of the main portal vein consistent with encasement ( arrow). B: Venous phase from superior mesenteric arterial injection demonstrates
encasement of main portal vein (arrow).

PORTAL VENOUS SAMPLING
Islet cell tumors of the pancreas can be elusive, and their detection by noninvasive imaging or by conventional angiography often fails. Percutaneous transhepatic
portal venous sampling is used to localize islet cell tumors by measuring hormonal levels in the superior mesenteric, splenic, and portal veins. This method has a
sensitivity exceeding 95% for localization of islet cell tumors. 49,50,51,52,53 and 54 Detection and localization of islet cell tumors is important because patients can be cured
once the tumor is resected. Precise anatomic mapping of the hormonal collections is, therefore, essential to accurately locate the tumor, thereby avoiding blind
surgical resection and enabling the surgeon to resect the affected segment (head, body, or tail) of the pancreas. 49,50,51,52,53 and 54 When the sampling procedure is
completed, the transhepatic tract should be embolized with Gelfoam pledgets to prevent excessive bleeding. 49,54

THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTIONS
The second part of this chapter focuses on the most important contributions of interventional radiology in the treatment and management of hepatic, pancreatic, and

biliary malignancies; other gastrointestinal tract cancers; genitourinary tumors; superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome; as well as pulmonary thromboembolic disease.
LIVER CANCER
The management of primary and secondary malignancies of the liver constitutes one of the most difficult challenges for oncologists. First, primary hepatic
malignancies frequently escape detection because most patients remain asymptomatic for long periods. Then, if clinical symptoms are present, they may be masked
by the patient's underlying liver disease and may, therefore, be difficult to attribute to a malignancy. In addition, clinical outcome is typically poor, with median survival
of less than 1 year for all patients and between 3 and 6 months for unresectable presentations. 55,56,57,58 and 59 Hepatocellular carcinoma (hepatoma) is one of the most
common fatal cancers in the world (1.2 million deaths per year) and accounts for approximately 90% of all liver cancers. It is most commonly encountered in Asia and
sub-Saharan Africa, where it constitutes 20% to 40% of all malignancies. The high incidence of hepatoma in these regions can be attributed to hepatitis B, which is
endemic in these regions of the world. In Europe and North America, the incidence of hepatoma is markedly lower (10,000 to 14,000 cases per year in the United
States) and largely related to alcoholic cirrhosis, but it is climbing rapidly and expected to increase further given the recent rise in hepatitis C and its association with
hepatoma. 55,56,57,58,59 and 60
Metastatic malignant tumors of the liver are by far the most common type of hepatic malignancies in the United States (at least 20 times that of hepatoma) and occur
most often secondary to colorectal carcinoma (155,000 cases and 60,000 deaths per year in the United States), 61 followed by ocular melanoma, neuroendocrine
tumors of the pancreas, including carcinoid tumors, as well as both functional and nonfunctional islet cell tumors, and some sarcomas. 62,63 and 64 In many of these
conditions, the liver is the only site of metastatic involvement, thus justifying a role for locoregional therapy.
Although rare, carcinoid tumor represents the most common of all endocrine tumors of the gastrointestinal tract, and the incidence of metastatic carcinoid tumor is
0.32 to 0.7 per 100,000 with the majority arising from the small bowel. 62,63 The tumor is usually slow growing and, therefore, associated with longer survival than
hepatoma or colorectal metastatic disease, but patients can be plagued by severe symptoms due to excessive secretion of serotonin and bradykinin as part of the
carcinoid syndrome (4% to 9% of cases). In cases of carcinoid syndrome, the liver is almost always involved, and locoregional palliative therapy with
chemoembolization constitutes the only therapeutic option. 62,63
Ocular melanoma is a very aggressive and highly lethal disease. It usually progresses very rapidly and commonly metastasizes to the liver. Once the liver is involved,
fatal hepatic disease ensues. Median survival ranges from 2 to 6 months. 55,64 As for the other tumors involving the liver, locoregional therapy offers the best option.
For both primary and metastatic liver cancers, such surgical options as resection or transplantation offer the only hope for cure and, at the very least, have a definite
impact on survival in operative candidates, with survival rates ranging from 55% to 80% at 1 year and 25% to 50% at 5 years. 61,65,66,67 and 68 Yet, only a minority of
patients are surgical candidates (15% to 20% of all patients with either primary or secondary liver cancers). 55,66,67 and 68 Criteria used to determine unresectability
include the size, location, and volume of the lesion to be resected; multilobar involvement; as well as the presence of limited hepatic reserve due to advanced
cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis and significant concurrent disease (especially cardiac or pulmonary disease). 55 In addition, surgical resection continues to be plagued by
fairly high morbidity and mortality rates, especially when surgery is performed in patients with underlying liver failure (15% to 30% perioperative mortality), as well as
high recurrence rates (75% of patients). 66,67 and 68 Liver transplantation remains limited by the scarcity of liver donors (although the development of living-related liver
transplantation could remedy this problem) and by a surprisingly high recurrence rate. 67,68 Other therapeutic options, such as systemic chemotherapy and
external-beam radiotherapy, have been disappointing. The response rate from single-agent or multidrug chemotherapy is poor, as it does not exceed 15% to 20% and
a clear survival benefit has not been demonstrated. 55,67 External-beam irradiation is limited by the extensive damage it causes to the radiosensitive hepatocytes. 55,67
The limitations of the traditional weapons against cancer (surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy), combined with the fact that the immense majority of patients
afflicted by primary or metastatic liver cancer have liver-only disease, have led to the hunt for and development of various locoregional therapies. In addition, patients
afflicted by hepatoma usually die of hepatic failure and cachexia as a result of local growth and resultant liver tissue destruction but not of extrahepatic metastatic
disease. 66,67 and 68 Thus, control of the tumor at the regional level is essential.
The goal of locoregional therapy is to destroy the tumor while preserving as much of the normal liver tissue as possible. This can be accomplished either by direct
percutaneous ablative methods, such as percutaneous ethanol injection and radiofrequency ablation, or by intraarterial delivery of embolic material with or without
chemotherapeutic agents, such as transcatheter arterial chemoembolization, which is by far the most widely performed procedure in the treatment of unresectable
liver cancers.
Transcatheter Arterial Chemoembolization
Transcatheter arterial chemoembolization has truly become the mainstay of therapy for unresectable hepatoma and carcinoid tumors and has shown great promise
against colorectal metastases. 55 The concept of chemoembolization evolved from practical experience obtained with two partially effective therapies, intraarterial
chemotherapy and embolotherapy. Although many different chemoembolization regimens can be used, the principles and theoretic advantages of chemoembolization
are identical and are based on combined infusion of a concentrated dose of chemotherapeutic drugs mixed with iodized oil and an embolic agent directly into the
hepatic artery. It is well established that the normal liver draws most of its blood supply from the portal vein (approximately 75%), whereas primary or metastatic liver
tumors draw most of their oxygen supply from the hepatic artery (>90%). 69,70 Targeting the hepatic artery for regional delivery with a mixture of chemotherapeutic
agents and embolic material is, therefore, not only safe and possible but also extremely attractive to destroy the tumor. The theoretic beneficial effects of
chemoembolization include delivery of a high concentration of chemotherapy to the tumor bed, marked increase in contact time between the drugs and the tumor
cells, and high first-pass extraction. 55,71,72 These factors combine to increase the drug concentration and the retention rate within the tumor even further (100- to
400-fold increases in drug concentration have been reported), thereby minimizing the systemic toxicity of the chemotherapeutic drugs. 55,71,72,73 and 74 Although many
different chemoembolization protocols are being used throughout the world without any compelling evidence of the superiority of one over the other, a generally
accepted rule is that the chemoembolization infusion should include a mixture of iodized oil (Ethiodol) and chemotherapeutic agents. Doxorubicin is most commonly
used alone in Europe, whereas the combination of cisplatin, doxorubicin, and mitomycin C is favored in the United States. Ethiodol plays a key role in the process
since it not only acts as a carrier for the chemotherapeutic agents by creating an emulsion with the agents but it also prolongs contact time between the tumor cells
and the agents by clogging the presinusoid arterioportal shunts, thus allowing the agents to slowly diffuse into the tumor. 55,73 Particulate embolization materials
(Gelfoam or Ivalon) should also be injected toward the end of the procedure to reduce arterial inflow and, thus, prevent washout of the chemotherapeutic agents.
Since chemoembolization is currently only used as a palliative therapy, its impact on patients' quality of life should be given high priority. The benefits of the
procedure should be weighed against the potential complications that could worsen patients' quality of life. Thus, proper patient selection should be conducted to
exclude patients who could be adversely affected by the procedure, such as those with clinically apparent jaundice, hepatic encephalopathy, extensive extrahepatic
metastases, poor liver function (combination of >50% liver replacement by tumor, aspartate transaminase >100, markedly elevated lactate dehydrogenase, and
hyperbilirubinemia), or biliary obstruction. 55
Patients scheduled to undergo chemoembolization are required to fast overnight. The day of the procedure, vigorous hydration with normal saline, prophylactic
antibiotics, antiemetics, and sedatives are administered. A visceral arteriogram is then performed to define the arterial anatomy and to assess portal venous patency.
With the advent of hydrophilic guidewires and catheters as well as coaxial systems with smaller diameter catheters, it is now possible to perform superselective
catheterization of third- or fourth-order branches. Once the catheter has been advanced beyond the gastroduodenal artery to avoid nontarget embolization and is
located within striking distance of the tumor, the chemoembolization material can be injected ( Fig. 27.4-3). The infusion should be stopped before thrombosis of the
hepatic artery occurs. Patients are then admitted for pain management, continued antibiotic coverage, and hydration. The vast majority of patients requires only a 24to 48-hour hospital stay. Although most patients experience some degree of pain, nausea, vomiting, and fever as part of the embolization syndrome, which typically
lasts 3 to 10 days, chemoembolization is generally relatively well tolerated. True complications, such as liver failure, liver infarction, abscess formation, cholecystitis,
nontarget embolization to the gastrointestinal tract, and biliary necrosis, are rare (3% to 4% of cases). 55

FIGURE 27.4-3. Transhepatic arterial chemoembolization in a patient with multifocal hepatocellular carcinoma. A: Extensive staining of the tumor foci after
chemoembolization indicating excellent uptake of the chemoembolization material by the tumor. B: Superselective catheterization. The catheter has been advanced
to within striking distance of the tumor.

Initial enthusiasm for chemoembolization was generated by early reports 75,76,77,78,79,80,81 and 82 from Kanematsu,75 Okamura,79 and others, 76,77 and 78,80,81 and 82 who
demonstrated that extensive tumor necrosis (60% to 90%) and high radiographic response rates (up to 80%) could be produced in patients with hepatoma.
Nonrandomized, retrospective studies followed. 83,84,85,86 and 87 These studies by Nakamura,83 Shimamura,84 Nakao,85 and others86,87 compared chemoembolization to
other therapies, such as hepatic artery embolization alone (without added chemotherapeutic agents or iodized oil), using historic controls. They showed that a clear
advantage in survival could be established with chemoembolization. Indeed, cumulative probability of survival after chemoembolization ranged from 54% to 88% at 1
year, 33% to 64% at 2 years, and 18% to 51% at 3 years, whereas embolization alone yielded cumulative survival of 44% at 1 year, 29% at 2 years, and 15% at 3
years. These results also compared very favorably with a 1-year survival rate of 13% achieved with systemic chemotherapy. This improvement in survival was
accompanied by a decrease in the level of serum a-fetoprotein (AFP) in most cases. These impressive results helped to establish chemoembolization as the treatment
of choice for unresectable hepatoma.
Recent prospective randomized trials conducted by Pelletier et al., 88 Madden et al., 89 the Groupe d'Etude et de Traitement du Carcinome Hepatocellulaire, 90 and Bruix
et al.91 (the only four randomized trials to date) failed to show a significant survival advantage of chemoembolization over supportive care, although a trend to
prolonged survival was detected (63% vs. 44% at 1 year). Each of these studies had significant flaws in their methodology and design, severely limiting their validity.
However, they managed to question the utility of chemoembolization in prolonging survival. In a landmark article published in 1991, Vetter 92 reported a case-control
study comparing chemoembolization to supportive care, which clearly demonstrated the superiority of chemoembolization over supportive care. Survival at 1 and 2
years was 59% and 30%, respectively, in the treatment arm, whereas it was 0% at 1 year in the supportive care group. Another study by Bartolozzi et al. 93 confirmed
the survival benefits of chemoembolization in a group of 53 patients with 93%, 70%, and 43% overall survival rate at 1, 2, and 3 years, respectively. Ngan et al. 60
measured survival as a function of tumor size and found that patients with tumor less than 9 cm had a better survival than those with tumor greater than 9 cm. Overall
survival at 1 and 4 years was 67% and 31%, respectively. Solomon et al. 58 focused on the effectiveness of chemoembolization in an exclusively Western population
and found cumulative survival of 60% at 1 year, 41% at 2 years, and 16% at 3 years similar to that obtained by studies in Asian populations.
Despite the impact of these studies, the search is still on for one or more specific niches that would help to establish chemoembolization as an uncontested treatment
option for hepatoma. For example, the issue of high recurrence after liver transplantation or surgical resection is perplexing, and adequate therapy against such
recurrence is lacking. Recent studies 94,95,96 and 97 exploring the role of chemoembolization as a neoadjuvant treatment modality have shown markedly improved
disease-free survival when chemoembolization was performed before surgery. Patients treated with chemoembolization before surgical resection had survival rates of
87%, 70%, and 39%, at 1, 3, and 5 years, respectively, whereas patients treated with surgical resection alone had survival rates of 79%, 38%, and 19%. Disease-free
survival was also better in the chemoembolization than in the surgery-only group (40% and 28% vs. 20% and 11% at 3 and 5 years, respectively). When
chemoembolization was used before liver transplantation, the 1- and 2-year disease-free survival rates were 91% and 84%, respectively. 98 Survival was also
significantly improved when chemoembolization was used to treat intrahepatic tumor recurrence that had occurred postoperatively ( Fig. 27.4-4, Fig. 27.4-5).99 The 1-,
3-, and 5-year survivals were 75%, 46%, and 30%, respectively, as opposed to 20%, 4%, and 0% when no chemoembolization was administered. 99

FIGURE 27.4-4. Transhepatic arterial chemoembolization in a patient with recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma in the left lobe of the liver 1 year after wedge
resection of a solitary hepatocellular carcinoma in the right lobe of the liver. A: Two low-density nodules are clearly identified within the left lobe of the liver, consistent
with recurrent hepatoma. B: Arterial phase from a celiac arteriogram demonstrates hypervascular tumor foci within the left lobe of the liver ( arrows) consistent with the
computed tomography findings.

FIGURE 27.4-5. Computed tomography scan of the abdomen without contrast 1 day after chemoembolization in the patient from Figure 27.4-4. Excellent distribution
of the chemoembolization material throughout the two tumor nodules ( arrows).

Patients with hepatoma experience a wide spectrum of diseases directly related to the extent of tumor involvement and preexisting nonneoplastic liver disease. There
is no doubt that outcome and survival are primarily directly related to these factors, regardless of whether treatment is administered and regardless of the form of
therapy selected. 100 However, the available data published to date have clearly helped to define a role for chemoembolization as an effective adjuvant therapy either

preoperatively or postoperatively and establish its efficacy as a palliative therapy against unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma.
No controversies exist about the use of chemoembolization in the treatment of metastatic neuroendocrine tumors, such as carcinoid and islet cell tumors, with survival
ranges from 27 to 48 months from the time of therapy.101,102,103,104 and 105 These tumors are usually hypervascular, thus making them ideal candidates for treatment with
chemoembolization; and, unlike patients with hepatoma, patients affected by neuroendocrine tumors are frequently symptomatic. The goal of therapy is clear and
consists of alleviating symptoms (pain, anorexia, early satiety) related both to hormonal release and the tumor bulk itself resulting from intrahepatic involvement.
Multiple studies by Therasse, 62 Winkelbauer, 101 Mavligit, 102 Stokes,103 and Perry 104 have clearly demonstrated the effectiveness of chemoembolization against such
tumors. Therasse and Stokes reported a 100% symptomatic response, which lasted for an average of 28 months, and a 90% decrease in hormonal levels after
treatment with chemoembolization. Although earlier reports with embolization alone demonstrated high response rates, symptom-free intervals of 5 to 10 months
achieved with embolization do not compare favorably with chemoembolization.
The role of chemoembolization in the treatment of colorectal liver metastases is still under investigation at several centers in the United States, and published studies
remain sparse. Colorectal carcinoma is especially lethal once it has metastasized to the liver. Indeed, median survival is only 6 months after the diagnosis of hepatic
metastasis is made.61 Systemic chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil or combination regimens have produced mediocre response rates rarely exceeding the 20% range
and have caused significant systemic toxicity. 61 Hepatic artery infusion of chemotherapy with either 5-fluorouracil or 5-fluorodeoxyuridine has been shown to improve
response rates to 45%. 61 However, despite encouraging response rates, seven separate randomized phase III studies failed to show survival benefit.
Chemoembolization has, therefore, become a sort of last-resort therapy for patients who have liver-dominant disease and have failed to respond to systemic
chemotherapy. Enrolling patients with such a deadly disease into clinical trials to demonstrate the worth of chemoembolization is, thus, understandably difficult. Tellez
et al.106 conducted a phase II clinical trial in which 30 patients with colorectal metastases to the liver were treated with chemoembolization. Median survival was 9
months after the initiation of chemoembolization and 29 months after the initial diagnosis of liver metastasis was made. In the largest study to date involving 52
patients, Daniels et al. 107 reported a 78% response rate using biologic criteria (decrease in carcinoembryonic antigen) accompanied by median survival of 11 months
from the time of treatment. Despite evidence of promising response rates with chemoembolization, the survival benefit of the procedure is still in question. Only
well-designed randomized clinical trials comparing chemoembolization to systemic chemotherapy can answer this question. Such a multicenter trial is now under way
in the United States.
Percutaneous Ethanol Injection
Since 1983, when it was first described, 108 percutaneous ethanol injection has been used primarily against unresectable hepatoma 109,110,111,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,120
and 121
and occasionally against colorectal metatases. 111,122,123 Ethanol diffuses into the tumor cells, where it causes cellular dehydration and induces coagulative
necrosis.108,109 and 110 Ethanol is more effective against hepatoma lesions because they are usually softer than colorectal lesions, thus allowing greater diffusion of the
ethanol throughout the tumor. 109,110 Although no specific limitations to the size or number of lesions exists, percutaneous ethanol injection is most effective against
tumors measuring less than 3 cm in diameter 109,110,111,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,120 and 121 in patients with three or fewer lesions. 113,114,116 The presence of multifocal or
diffuse hepatoma, extrahepatic metastases, or severe coagulopathy constitutes absolute contraindications to treatment with percutaneous
ethanol.109,110,111,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,120 and 121
The procedure is usually performed under ultrasonography or CT guidance. A 20- to 22-gauge needle is inserted directly into the tumor, and tumor volume (estimated
from the formula on the volume of a sphere) is then calculated to determine the exact amount of ethanol required ( Fig. 27.4-6). Once adequate needle placement is
confirmed, sterile 95% absolute ethanol is slowly infused. The total volume of ethanol to be injected is determined by the size of the tumor. 124 Volumes of 30 to 40 ml
are usually required for tumors greater than 3 cm. 111,125,126 As ethanol diffuses throughout the tumor, the tumor becomes hyperechoic on ultrasonography owing to the
presence of microbubbles within the ethanol. Nontarget injection into blood vessels or biliary ducts must be avoided. The procedure can be performed over multiple
sessions if necessary, depending on the size of the tumor and the number of lesions to treat. Typically, 4 to 12 sessions are required to treat solitary lesions
measuring less than 5 cm. Because the procedure is minimally invasive and highly specific to the tumor, the normal liver is usually preserved. These features render
percutaneous ethanol injection especially attractive in the setting of advanced liver disease. Postprocedure imaging and tumor markers should be obtained at 1 month
and then every 4 to 6 months to assess tumor response and potential recurrence. Side effects from the procedure, such as localized pain at the injection site, fever,
and alcohol intoxication, are highly variable and can usually be managed conservatively. 109,112,121 Pleural effusion and intraperitoneal hemorrhage are the most
commonly reported serious complications but are still very uncommon. In fact, the incidence of severe complications remains less than 2%. 109,111,121

FIGURE 27.4-6. Percutaneous ethanol injection into liver tumor. (Courtesy of Matrix Pharmaceutical, Inc., Fremont, CA.)

Large series mostly from Japan and Italy (where percutaneous ethanol injection is most commonly used) have demonstrated that percutaneous ethanol injection can
be very effective against hepatoma. 109,110,111,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,120,121,122,123,124,125 and 126 These studies have also helped to establish clear prognostic factors, such
as the number of lesions, tumor size, and the degree of underlying liver disease that have a direct impact on long-term survival rates. In the largest series to date (746
patients) published by Livraghi et al., 109 survival at 1, 3, and 5 years was 99%, 86%, and 48%, respectively, in patients with a solitary lesion measuring less than 5 cm
and minimal underlying liver disease. On the other hand, survival in patients with larger tumors and more severe underlying liver disease fell sharply to 64% at 1 year,
12% at 2 years, and 0 thereafter. Ishii et al. 127 reported similar results in 177 patients with 348 lesions measuring less than 4 cm. Survival rates were 97%, 71%, and
30% at 1, 3, and 5 years, respectively. Another factor that influences survival is the AFP level. Lencioni et al. 128 found long-term survival to be inversely proportional to
the initial AFP levels. Percutaneous ethanol injection is, therefore, most potent and effective when used against solitary and small lesions (<3 cm) rather than multiple
and large lesions. In addition, patients with the least underlying liver disease fare best in terms of long-term
survival. 109,110,111,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,120,121,122,123,124,125,126,127 and 128
When comparison between percutaneous ethanol injection and supportive care or surgery was made, survival rates achieved with percutaneous ethanol injection
were found to be markedly better than those obtained with supportive care and nearly equal to those obtained at surgery. These studies, although retrospective and
thus not randomized, attempted to closely match patients between groups based on tumor size, number of lesions, and underlying liver condition. For example,
Livraghi et al. 129 found no significant difference in 3-year survival between ethanol injection (79%) and surgical resection (71%) in 391 patients who all had a solitary
lesion measuring less than 5 cm. Similar results were reported by Castells et al. 120 who compared clinical outcomes between surgery and ethanol injection in 63
patients with solitary lesions measuring up to 4 cm. Patients treated with ethanol injection had overall survival rates at 1 and 4 years (83% and 34%) nearly equal to
those treated with surgical resection (81% and 44%). The high rate of recurrence, which typically varies between 64% and 98% within a 5-year period and is actually
similar to recurrence rate after surgery, constitutes a nagging problem. 109,130,131 and 132 However, when recurrence does occur, these tumors can be treated repeatedly
with ethanol injection (unlike surgery) without damaging liver functions.
The effects of percutaneous ethanol injection and chemoembolization on liver tumors can be synergistically enhanced when the two techniques are combined.
Several recent reports have demonstrated the efficacy and potential benefits of such tandem therapy. In a study by Lencioni et al., 133 86 patients with mild cirrhosis
and a large hepatoma (3 to 8 cm in diameter) were treated with a single cycle of chemoembolization followed by percutaneous ethanol injection. Survival rates were
92% at 1 year, 70% at 3 years, and 47% at 5 years. Tanaka et al. 134 reported 100% and 75% survivals at 3 and 5 years, respectively, in patients with a 3- to 5-cm

solitary hepatoma lesion and minimal cirrhosis. Finally, Allgaier et al. 68 compared percutaneous ethanol alone to combined administration of ethanol and
chemoembolization and found that patients treated with both therapies had significantly better outcome than those treated with ethanol alone.
Percutaneous ethanol injection has been much less successful against colorectal metastases, and its role in managing these lesions remains, therefore, limited.
Recent studies showed that ethanol achieved only 50% necrosis, presumably because of the hard nature of colorectal metastases, which limits the diffusion of
ethanol throughout the tumor. 122,123 The impact of ethanol therapy on survival was also somewhat disappointing, as 3-year survival only reached 39%. 122,123
Percutaneous Radiofrequency Ablation
Radiofrequency ablation, used percutaneously or intraoperatively, offers an alternative method of local tissue destruction by coagulative necrosis. This technique
causes frictional heat within the tissue. When the temperature reaches 41°C, a cytotoxic effect is produced, but when the temperature reaches 90°C, immediate
coagulative necrosis takes place. 135 The monopolar design of the radiofrequency probe, which could deliver heat only to a small area and, thus, severely restricted
the area of tissue destruction, constituted an early limitation of this technique. 136,137 Since then, the design of the probe has been changed to a multipolar one, and
extensive research in animals has also been performed to maximize the destructive effects of the probe and increase the volume of tissue necrosis. However,
problems inherent to the properties of radiofrequency ablation persist, such as the influence of nearby vessels on heat generation (large vessels can act as a heat
sink and prevent the generation of enough heat to destroy the tumor) as well as the creation of excessive heat, which can cause tumor charring.
The procedure is usually performed under ultrasonography or CT guidance ( Fig. 27.4-7A), and the technical steps are similar to those used for percutaneous ethanol
injection. The radiofrequency needle, which generally varies between a 15- and 18-gauge needle, is inserted into the tumor (see Fig. 27.4-7B,Fig. 27.4-7C). Once
within the lesion, multiple electrodes are deployed, and the generator is activated to reach a temperature of 90° to 110°C. Treatment may last up to 15 minutes. The
probe can then be moved to a different region of the tumor before further activation of the radiofrequency probe. Complications are rare and, despite a few reported
cases of peritoneal hemorrhage, pleural effusion, and fever, the procedure is generally well tolerated. 138,139 and 140 Follow-up imaging is similar to that of percutaneous
ethanol injection (1 month after procedure and 3 to 4 months thereafter).

FIGURE 27.4-7. Radiofrequency ablation in a patient with a solitary hepatocellular carcinoma. A: Computed tomography scan of the abdomen demonstrates a
low-density lesion located in the posterior segment of the right lobe. B: Illustration of the radiofrequency probe being advanced into the tumor. C: Radiograph of the
patient in (A), with the probe deployed within the tumor.

Since radiofrequency ablation is a relatively new technique—its use in patients was first described by Rossi 136 in 1993—its impact on long-term survival has not yet
been assessed. However, several recent studies have shown promising results. Solbiati et al. 139 treated 16 patients with liver metastases of various sizes. Near
complete necrosis (80%) was achieved in 84% of lesions, 2-year survival reached 66%, and lesions measuring less than 3 cm responded best to treatment. Livraghi
et al.138 compared percutaneous ethanol injection to radiofrequency ablation in 86 patients with 122 small (3 cm) hepatomas. Radiofrequency ablation achieved a
greater rate of necrosis (90%) and required fewer treatment sessions (1.2 sessions) than percutaneous ethanol injection (80% necrosis and 4.8 sessions). In addition,
these preliminary studies suggest a lower recurrence rate than with percutaneous ethanol injection. In a recent article, Curley et al. 141 used intraoperative
radiofrequency ablation to treat primary and metastatic liver lesions and reported the lowest recurrence rate (1.8%) for any sizable clinical series using radiofrequency
ablative technique. Such results have yet to be duplicated. Although the data remain scarce and its impact on survival is undetermined, radiofrequency ablation may
have a role to play against small primary or metastatic lesions.
Other Techniques
A number of other methods are currently under investigation. These techniques are performed percutaneously and consist of delivering thermal energy via various
sources into tumor tissue. They include percutaneous hot saline injection, interstitial laser photocoagulation, percutaneous microwave coagulation, and high-intensity
focused ultrasonography. None has shown great promise over the other currently available therapeutic options used to treat liver cancer.
Another method, consisting of direct injection of cisplatin gel into the tumor, offers a radically new approach to the treatment of liver cancer. The injectable gel is
actually composed of cisplatin, epinephrine, and a protein carrier matrix, which confers unique diffusion properties to the mixture. The gel is injected percutaneously
into the tumor under ultrasonographic or CT guidance and can be used for tumors measuring up to 7 cm in diameter ( Fig. 27.4-8). This treatment is currently
undergoing a multicenter phase II clinical trial to assess its efficacy against hepatoma in the United States, Europe, and Asia. Early results are promising both in terms
of tumor necrosis and impact on survival. 142

FIGURE 27.4-8. Percutaneous administration of cisplatinum gel (Intra Dose) into a liver tumor. (Courtesy of Matrix Pharmaceutical, Inc., Fremont, CA.)

CANCERS OF THE BILIARY TRACT AND PANCREAS
Cancers of the biliary tract, which include gallbladder and bile duct carcinoma or cholangiocarcinoma, are the second most common primary hepatobiliary cancers
after hepatocellular carcinoma. 143 Cholangiocarcinoma is more common in men, whereas gallbladder carcinoma is seen more frequently in women. 144 These
differences can be explained by the higher incidence of sclerosing cholangitis in men and gallstones in women, which are well-known risk factors for
cholangiocarcinoma and gallbladder carcinoma, respectively. 144 Although gallbladder carcinoma is encountered twice as frequently as cholangiocarcinoma (7500 vs.
2000 to 3000 new cases per year), most patients requiring interventional radiology procedures experience cholangiocarcinoma. 143

Cholangiocarcinoma is a slow-growing tumor with a peak incidence in the sixth and seventh decades. The tumor is notorious for invading the liver parenchyma as well
as hepatic arteries and portal venous system, which renders surgical resection especially difficult. 145 As a result of its infiltrating growth pattern within the biliary ductal
system,146,147 and 148 patients with cholangiocarcinoma usually present with symptoms (jaundice, pruritus, and color-altered stools and urine) caused by obstruction of
the biliary tree. 149,150 When the tumor involves the common hepatic duct, the common bile duct, or the ampulla, symptoms will occur early in the course of the disease.
On the other hand, when the tumor involves the perihilar region, which is the most common area of tumor involvement (approximately two-thirds of the cases), the
occurrence of symptoms may be delayed significantly. Other symptoms, such as pain, fatigue, general malaise, and weight loss, are typically seen in advanced
disease. Surgical resection is the only therapeutic option associated with improved survival in patients with cholangiocarcinoma. Systemic chemotherapy and
external-beam radiotherapy have not significantly improved survival or quality of life. 151 Therefore, palliative therapy plays a critical role in the management of patients
who are not surgical candidates.
Carcinoma of the exocrine pancreas carries a dismal prognosis, with median survival from time of diagnosis approaching 6 months. 152 There are no curative
treatments, and even surgery, which can be performed only in 10% to 20% of patients with pancreatic carcinoma, does not appear to increase survival. 152 Thus, as for
cholangiocarcinoma, the need for effective palliation is critical.
The diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma or pancreatic carcinoma is usually established by cross-sectional imaging (ultrasonography and CT scanning). Diagnostic
visceral angiography and cholangiography are reserved for determining tumor resectability. Depending on the location of the tumor, cholangiography can be
performed from a percutaneous transhepatic or an endoscopic approach. The cholangiographic appearance of cholangiocarcinoma is again directly related to the
infiltrating-scirrhous nature of its growth pattern. 146,147 and 148,153 Thus, cholangiocarcinoma generally presents as a focal stricture, often without a mass, 153 which may
mimic sclerosing chol angitis if tumor involvement is diffuse ( Fig. 27.4-9).146 The cholangiographic appearance of pancreatic carcinoma is similar to that of
cholangiocarcinoma with a short and irregular stricture, resembling a rat tail, causing massive biliary ductal dilatation ( Fig. 27.4-10).154 Access into the biliary tree also
provides an avenue for collection of biopsy samples, which can be extremely useful to differentiate benign from malignant disease. This diagnostic technique is
especially useful to distinguish biliary ductal strictures caused by pancreatic carcinoma from those due to pancreatitis. 42 However, in the case of bile duct tumors,
establishing a definitive diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma can be difficult owing to the intense desmoplastic reaction that the tumor generates. 155,156 The use of brush
biopsies and cytologic examination has increased the diagnostic yield to approximately 40% to 70%. 42,155,156

FIGURE 27.4-9. Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram in a patient with diffuse cholangiocarcinoma resembling the appearance of sclerosing cholangitis. A: Initial
cholangiogram. B: Magnified view of the biliary system as the guidewire is being advanced into the biliary tree to secure access.

FIGURE 27.4-10. Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram in a patient with pancreatic adenocarcinoma. A: Complete obstruction of the common hepatic duct
(arrow). An internal-external biliary stent has been successfully placed across the obstruction. B: Magnification view of the common hepatic duct as the guidewire is
being manipulated across the stricture. Note the occluded endoscopically placed plastic stent ( arrow).

The goal of palliative therapy is to relieve the symptoms associated with biliary tract obstruction. This can be accomplished via endoscopic placement of plastic stents
or via percutaneous transhepatic placement of internal-external biliary drains or metallic stents. Given the less invasive nature of endoscopic techniques, endoscopic
stent placement is preferred as the first line of therapy, especially when the tumor involves the extrahepatic biliary tree, and is successful in 80% to 90% of the
cases.151,157,158 However, it is usual for these endoscopic stents to become occluded fairly quickly after placement, thus requiring frequent stent replacement
(approximately every 3 months).
Percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage is the procedure of choice in cases of unsuccessful endoscopic stent placement, prior biliary-enteric surgical
reconstruction, or high level of biliary obstruction (i.e., above the confluence of the ductal systems). In some centers, such as the Johns Hopkins Hospital,
percutaneous biliary drainage is also routinely performed preoperatively to facilitate surgical reconstruction of the biliary tract. 159,160,161,162 and 163 Indeed, these biliary
drainage catheters aid in the creation of biliary-enteric anastomoses by providing anatomic landmarks of the intra- and extrahepatic biliary ducts during surgery, which
can be particularly helpful in patients with extensive tumor involvement. Several studies have shown that preoperative percutaneous biliary drainage reduces
operative time as well as operative morbidity and mortality. 159,160,161,162 and 163 One of the critical benefits offered by percutaneous biliary drainage remains the possibility
of rapid intervention to decompress the biliary tree ( Fig. 27.4-11). The procedure can even be life-saving in cases of acute cholangitis or biliary sepsis.
Reestablishment of bile flow usually causes rapid recovery of hepatic function, with decrease in liver enzymes, which in turn leads to relief in patient's
symptomatology and improvement in overall health of the patient. 164 Percutaneous biliary drainage can also relieve obstruction in patients with occluded
endoscopically placed plastic stents. These stents either can be removed percutaneously (snare technique) ( Fig. 27.4-12) or can be pushed into the small bowel (Fig.
27.4-13A). Once access into the biliary tree is secured, either internal-external biliary stents or permanent self-expanding metallic internal stents (see Fig. 27.4-13B)
can be placed to maintain biliary-enteric flow. 151

FIGURE 27.4-11. Percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage performed emergently secondary to biliary sepsis. A: Initial cholangiogram demonstrates complete
obstruction of the biliary tree due to cholangiocarcinoma located at the confluence of the hepatic ducts (Klatskin tumor) ( arrow). B: Successful biliary drainage across
the obstruction. The patient improved clinically.

FIGURE 27.4-12. Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram in a patient with pancreatic adenocarcinoma. A: Initial cholangiogram demonstrates complete obstruction
of the biliary tree. The endostent placed endoscopically is occluded ( arrow). B: Using a snare (arrow), the endostent is removed percutaneously ( arrow).

FIGURE 27.4-13. Placement of a permanent metallic self-expanding biliary stent (Wallstent) in a patient with pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The tumor was found to be
unresectable, and the decision was made, therefore, to place a metallic stent. A: Successful percutaneous biliary drainage demonstrating the classic appearance of
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. B: Successful permanent stent placement. Note that the endoscopic stent was pushed into the small bowel ( arrow).

Internal-external biliary stents are preferred if surgical resection or debulking of the tumor is contemplated, because they provide immediate access to the surgical site
for evaluation of possible complications during the perioperative period and prevent stricture formation at the biliary-enteric anastomosis, which can occur during the
late postoperative period. Internal-external biliary stents offer several other advantages, such as allowing for the careful monitoring at the surgical site for possible
tumor recurrence in those patients who underwent curative surgery and the exchange of stents when they become occluded. In fact, patients with internal-external
stents generally have to undergo routine biliary tube changes every 2 to 3 months to maintain biliary-enteric flow and prevent biliary sepsis. On the other hand,
placement of permanent metallic stents is recommended for patients with a limited life expectancy and for whom no surgical options exist. 165 Debilitated or
nursing-home patients who cannot care for their internal-external biliary tubes should also be treated with permanent stents if at all possible. These patients usually
experience marked improvement in their quality of life owing to the absence of external tubes and their associated risk of skin infection, pericatheter bile leakage, and
catheter obstruction or dislodgment. Metallic stents can be deployed atraumatically, since they go through small delivery systems. Once released from the guiding
catheter, they self-expand to reach a diameter approximately three times that of plastic stents. Thus, with their larger diameter and inherent radial expansile force,
metallic self-expanding stents are favored over endoscopic plastic stents because they tend to stay open longer than endoscopic stents (see Fig. 27.4-13B). Several
series by Boguth et al., 166 Schima et al.,165 and others have reported patency rates for metallic stents of approximately 6 months. 165,166,167,168 and 169 In addition, metallic
stents are very flexible, rendering them especially well suited for tortuous courses. This is particularly useful when the tumor involves the confluence of hepatic ducts
(Klatskin tumor). In such cases, massive dilatation of both the right and left intrahepatic bile ducts occurs, and bilateral access into the biliary tree is necessary to
properly relieve the obstruction. Effective palliation with internal stents can then be provided only by self-expanding, flexible stents deployed from above the level of
obstruction and extending into the common hepatic duct. 165,166,167,168 and 169
Patients scheduled to undergo percutaneous biliary drainage should receive prophylactic broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage, and any coagulopathy should be
corrected. Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography is first performed via a 22-gauge needle inserted from a right midaxillary line. Contrast opacification of the
biliary tree provides invaluable information about the nature, location, and extent of the obstructing tumor. After having successfully delineated the anatomy of the
biliary tree, a duct within the right posterior ductal system is selected based on its position and course relative to the location of the tumor and accessed using a
slightly larger needle (21-gauge). A guidewire is then advanced through the needle into the biliary tree to secure access into the biliary system. Steerable guidewires
are then used to cross the obstruction and, thus, gain access into the duodenum. To maintain adequate biliary-enteric flow, a multi-side-hole catheter is placed across
the obstruction, with side holes above and below the obstruction. The tube is typically left to external drainage for 12 to 24 hours before it is capped and functions as
an internal drainage catheter. Two major types of biliary drainage catheters are available, a plastic (Percuflex), somewhat stiffer catheter, which is necessary for initial
placement, or a softer, silastic catheter, which is much more comfortable for the patient and is generally favored if long-term intubation is required. If access into the
duodenum cannot be achieved, the biliary tube must be connected to a drainage bag indefinitely, and oral bile salt replacement must be initiated.
Percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage performed for palliation is markedly safer than surgical decompression. The mortality rate associated with biliary drainage
varies between 0.5% and 3%, as opposed to 20% to 30% for surgery. 170,171,172 and 173 However, the complication rate is not insignificant, since it ranges from 5% to
25%. The most common complications include tube occlusion, tube dislodgment, cholangitis-sepsis, hemobilia, and pseudoaneurysm. Biliary tubes become occluded
because of continued tumor growth, blood clots, or bile. As a result, biliary ductal dilatation ensues, leading to bile stasis and cholangitis or sepsis. This process,
which has been reported to occur in 23% of cases, constitutes the major indication for performing biliary tube exchange.
GENITOURINARY TRACT TUMORS
Obstruction of the urinary tract is a common urologic problem that requires prompt intervention to avoid permanent damage to the kidney. 174,175,176,177 and 178 Renal
obstruction may be caused by the tumor itself (transitional cell carcinoma), blood clots, fungal infection, fibrotic changes that can occur after radiotherapy,

retroperitoneal fibrosis ( Fig. 27.4-14), or extrinsic compression due to either enlarged lymph nodes or a tumor mass, such as lymphoma. In these instances,
percutaneous interventional techniques play a significant role to alleviate some of the symptoms and, more important, relieve the obstruction. In fact, percutaneous
drainage of the kidney or percutaneous nephrostomy is the treatment of choice for malignant obstruction of the urinary tract and has completely replaced surgical
nephrostomy.174,175,176,177 and 178 The diagnosis of obstruction, which can be somewhat challenging to establish, is usually made with CT scanning or ultrasonography.
Cross-sectional imaging studies also provide information about the level of obstruction, the anatomy of the retroperitoneal space, and whether the obstruction is
unilateral or bilateral. 174,175,176,177 and 178

FIGURE 27.4-14. Successful percutaneous nephrostomy in a patient with retroperitoneal fibrosis. The antegrade nephrostogram demonstrates complete obstruction
at the level of the proximal ureter.

There are no absolute contraindications to percutaneous nephrostomy other than noncorrectable coagulopathy. Prophylactic antibiotic therapy should be
administered before the procedure and continued for at least 24 hours after the procedure. However, in cases of known pyonephrosis or urinary sepsis, antibiotic
therapy should be continued for 5 to 7 days. Whether performed under CT, ultrasonography, or fluoroscopy guidance, the goal of the procedure remains the same
and consists of gaining access into the renal collecting system via a posterior calyx. Entering the kidney via the posterior calyx is critical to avoid major bleeding
complications, since the posterior calyx is less well vascularized than the other calyces. Once the needle is placed within the posterior calyx, an antegrade
nephrostogram is performed to define the nature of the obstructing lesion and determine the precise level and extent of the obstruction or stricture. A small-caliber
guidewire is then inserted through the needle to secure access into the renal collecting system. Eventually, after successive dilatation of the tract, a pigtail-type
nephrostomy catheter is placed and locked into position within the renal pelvis. Initially, a small catheter (8 to 10 Fr.) is typically placed, but it can be safely up-sized
to a larger caliber catheter (up to 16 Fr.) if necessary. The nephrostomy catheter usually requires minimal care and drains the urine directly into an external drainage
bag, which should be emptied three to six times per day, depending on urine output. Since nephrostomy catheters provide adequate urinary decompression, they can
be used indefinitely in chronically obstructed patients without damaging the kidney or altering renal function (see Fig. 27.4-14). However, conversion to a
nephroureteral stent, which extends from the renal pelvis through the ureter into the bladder, is desirable and should be attempted whenever possible. The main
advantage of nephroureteral stents is that they can function as an internal-external system similar to that described in the biliary system and, therefore, do not require
an external bag. These stents can be used only if the obstruction is successfully crossed and require a functioning bladder or reconstructed bladder, such as an ileal
loop.179 The main portion of the stent is located within the patient, and the small portion of catheter residing outside the patient is usually capped off. Multiple side
holes exist throughout the entire length of the catheter, allowing urine to bypass the obstruction and collect in the bladder. If fever or flank pain develops, it usually
indicates stent occlusion. In such cases, the stent can first be externalized (by attaching a drainage bag) to relieve the symptoms prior to exchanging it for a new one.
Common indications for the placement of nephroureteral stents include (1) ureteral strictures, which may develop after pelvic or retroperitoneal surgery or
radiotherapy or at the anastomosis after creation of a neobladder and ureteral reimplantation; (2) ureteral fistulae; (3) healing of ureteral injuries postoperatively or
after radiotherapy; and (4) reestablishment of urine flow from kidney to bladder in patients with urinary tract obstruction scheduled for definitive surgical repair. 179,180
Internal-external nephroureteral stents can also be converted to internal double-J nephroureteral stents. These internal stents can be placed from a percutaneous
approach via the kidney or from a cystoscopic approach. They offer the advantage of being entirely within the patient, thus relieving the patient of any catheter care
and reducing the risk of local or systemic infection. On the other hand, when occluded, they are much more difficult to exchange than internal-external stents.
Placement of double-J stents is mostly indicated when long-term drainage of the urinary system is required, such as patients with unresectable malignant urinary tract
obstruction, or ureteral injury from surgery or radiotherapy. Internal stents should also be used when patients cannot tolerate or care for them.
Percutaneous nephrostomy is performed successfully in 85% to 98% of the cases and is generally well tolerated, with an incidence of major complications ranging
from 4% to 6%. The mortality rate is low (0.2%) as opposed to that of surgical nephrostomy (6%). The most common complications are due to massive hemorrhage
requiring surgical treatment or transcatheter embolotherapy (1%), pneumothorax (1%), and peritonitis. 174,175,176,177 and 178 Minor complications occur in 10% to 28% of
the cases and include microscopic or gross hematuria, which usually clears within 24 to 48 hours, unsuspected retroperitoneal or perirenal hematoma, extravasation
of urine (<2%), and infection (1.4% to 21%). Infection can be caused by inadequate drainage due to occlusion of the catheter secondary to encrustations or a
preexisting urinary tract infection. Flushing the catheter routinely with normal saline solution is useful in preventing catheter occlusion. Finally, if the catheter becomes
dislodged, the track should stay open for 72 hours, thus allowing successful reaccess into the renal collecting system.
SUPERIOR VENA CAVA SYNDROME
Venous thrombosis or occlusion is not an uncommon occurrence in cancer patients. It may be due to direct tumor involvement, extrinsic compression by tumor, or
lymphadenopathy, fibrosis secondary to radiotherapy, or long-term indwelling central venous catheters, which are often needed for systemic chemotherapy or
nutritional support. 181,182,183,184 and 185 The central veins, such as the subclavian, inominate, SVC, and IVC, are most commonly affected. The severity of symptoms is
directly related to the degree of venous obstruction. In the SVC syndrome, most often caused by lung carcinoma with extension into the mediastinum, symptoms are
often dramatic. Patients typically present with swelling of the face and neck as well as dilated collateral venous channels readily visible coursing throughout the upper
thorax.181,182,183,184 and 185 If the degree of obstruction is severe, additional symptoms may be encountered, such as respiratory distress, edema of the conjunctiva, and
neurologic disturbances. 181,182,183,184 and 185 Radiotherapy is the treatment of choice for SVC syndrome, and most patients respond well to therapy. 186 However, when
radiotherapy is unsuccessful (failure to clear symptoms, recurrence of symptoms, or presence of benign postirradiation fibrotic changes), percutaneous venous
interventions, such as percutaneous transluminal angioplasty or stenting, become the treatment of last resort. 186,187 A diagnostic study, such as central venogram or
magnetic resonance venography should first be performed to delineate the extent of the thrombosed or stenosed segment of SVC ( Fig. 27.4-15A). If concurrent
thrombosis of the SVC is present, catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy can be used to reduce the clot burden and allow for better evaluation of the unmasked
underlying stenosis. Once the stenosis is successfully crossed, angioplasty of the stenosis is usually first performed (see Fig. 27.4-15B). Although some success has
been reported with angioplasty alone, 188,189 the recurrence or failure rate after percutaneous transluminal angioplasty is quite high because of the elastic recoil that
takes place secondary to the compressing tumor or fibrosis. Therefore, stenting has become the most reliable method of establishing venous continuity. Two types of
stent, a self-expandable and a balloon expandable, exist for this purpose. Because of its expansile radial force, the self-expandable stent is more commonly used
(Fig. 27.4-16). Improvement in patients' symptomatology may be dramatic and usually occurs within 24 hours of therapy, with complete resolution taking place within 3
days.184,186,187,190,191 and 192 Complications include stent migration or thrombosis and vessel injury or perforation during placement.

FIGURE 27.4-15. Superior vena cava syndrome. A: Multiple filling defects are visualized within the superior vena cava consistent with metastatic implants from lung
carcinoma. The patient was symptomatic, with extensive venous collateral channels identified throughout the torso. B: Initial angioplasty is performed to open a
channel.

FIGURE 27.4-16. Superior vena cava syndrome treated with a self-expanding stent (Wallstent). A: Venogram performed before stent placement. B: After stent
placement, venogram demonstrates torrential flow across the obstruction into the right atrium. Symptoms resolved within hours.

Although the technical success rate approaches 100%, long-term results are difficult to evaluate since many of these patients have advanced malignant disease and
a limited life expectancy. Percutaneous venous stenting should, therefore, be regarded as a palliative therapy and a successful outcome viewed as a patent SVC at
the time of death.
PULMONARY THROMBOEMBOLIC DISEASE AND INFERIOR VENA CAVA FILTERS
The association between venous thrombosis and malignancy has been known for more than a century and is strongest in cancers of the lung, breast, pancreas, colon,
stomach, prostate, and uterus. 193,194,195 and 196 When venous thrombosis involves the deep system of the lower extremities, the risk of pulmonary embolism is markedly
increased. In fact, the incidence of pulmonary embolism in cancer patients is three times that in the general population. 193,194,195,196 and 197 There are approximately
570,000 to 630,000 cases of pulmonary embolism annually in the United States, nearly one-third of which are fatal events. 198,199 Despite initial management with
anticoagulation, a significant number of cancer patients develop recurrent pulmonary thromboemboli. Furthermore, anticoagulation therapy is contraindicated in many
cancer patients because of the associated risk of hemorrhage. It is for these reasons that the use of IVC filters, which prevent thrombi from reaching the lungs, is
strongly advocated in cancer patients. 197,198,199,200,201,202 and 203
Multiple IVC filter designs are commercially available, including the Greenfield stainless steel and titanium filters, the Vena-Tech, the Simon Nitinol, and the Bird's
Nest. These filters can be deployed from a femoral or internal jugular approach. A venogram is first performed to measure the diameter of the IVC, to determine the
location of the renal veins, and to detect the presence of potential thrombus within the IVC. Filters should be placed immediately below the lowermost renal vein, but
they can also be placed above the renal veins if thrombus extends to the level of the renal veins. If the diameter of the IVC exceeds 30 mm, the Bird's Nest filter is the
only filter that can be placed; otherwise any of the other filters can be used. Each filter has advantages and disadvantages, and selection of a specific filter often
depends on the filter availability and experience of the radiologist. Note that the Simon Nitinol filter is the most versatile of the filters since, because of its small
delivery system, it can be deployed from virtually any peripheral access site. 204,205
IVC patency rates vary between 91% and 97% after filter placement. Recurrence of pulmonary embolism occurs in approximately 2% to 4% of the cases. Other
complications include filter migration (0% to 30%) and perforation of the IVC (0% to 40%).
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Westcott JL, Rao N, Colley DP. Transthoracic needle biopsy of small pulmonary nodules. Radiology 1997;202:97.
2. Haaga JR. Interventional CT-guided procedures. In: Haaga JR, Lanzieri CF, Santoris DJ, et al., eds . Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging of the whole body, 3rd ed. St.
Louis: Mosby, 1994.
3. Gazelle GS, Haaga JR, Rowland DY. Effect of needle gauge, level of anticoagulation, and target organ on bleeding associated with aspiration biopsy. Work in progress. Radiology
1992;183:509.
4. Andriole JG, Haaga JR, Adams RB, et al. Biopsy needle characteristics assessed in the laboratory. Radiology 1983;148(3):659.
5. Conces DJ, Schwenk GR, Doering PR, et al. Thoracic needle biopsy: improved results utilizing a team approach. Chest 1987;91:813.
6. Khouri NF, Stitik FP, Erozan YS, et al. Transthoracic needle aspiration biopsy of benign and malignant lung lesions. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1985;144:281.
7. Odell MJ, Reid KR. Does percutaneous fine-needle aspiration biopsy aid in the diagnosis and surgical management of lung masses? Can J Surg 1999;42(4):297.
8. Staroselsky AN, Schwarz Y, Man A, et al. Additional information from percutaneous cutting needle biopsy following fine-needle aspiration in the diagnosis of chest lesions. Chest
1998;113(6):1522.
9. Larscheid RC, Thorpe PE, Scott WJ. Percutaneous transthoracic needle aspiration biopsy: a comprehensive review of its current role in the diagnosis and treatment of lung tumors. Chest
1998;114(3):704.
10. Greif J, Marmur S, Schwarz Y, et al. Percutaneous core cutting needle biopsy compared with fine-needle aspiration in the diagnosis of peripheral lung malignant lesions: results in 156 patients.
Cancer 1998;84(3):144.
11. Swischuk JL, Castaneda F, Patel JC, et al. Percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy of the lung: review of 612 lesions. J Vas Interv Radiol 1998;9(2):347.
12. Austin JH, Cohen MB. Value of having a cytopathologist present during percutaneous fine-needle aspiration biopsy of lung: report of 55 cancer patients and meta-analysis of the literature. AJR
Am J Roentgenol 1993;160:175.
13. Zinzani PL, Corneli G, Cancellieri A, et al. Core needle biopsy is effective in the initial diagnosis of mediastinal lymphoma. Haematologica 1999;84(7):600.
14. Grant TH, Stull MA, Kandallu K, et al. Percutaneous needle biopsy of mediastinal masses using a computed tomography-guided extrapleural approach. J Thorac Imaging 1998;13(1):14.
15. Lenglinger FX, Zisch RJ. Technique to avoid iatrogenic pneumothorax during biopsy of mediastinal lesions. Radiology 1994;193:878.
16. Bressler EL, Kirkham JA. Mediastinal masses: alternative approaches to CT-guided needle biopsy. Radiology 1994;191:391.
17. Weisbrod GL. Transthoracic needle biopsy. World J Surg 1993;17:705.
18. Klein JS, Schultz S, Heffner JE. Interventional radiologyof the chest: image-guided percutaneous drainage of pleural effusion, lung abscess, and pneumothorax. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1995;164:581.
19. Casola G, van Sonnenberg E, Keightley A, et al. Pneumothorax: radiologic treatment with small catheters. Radiology 1988;166:89-91.
20. Conces DJ, Tarver RD, Gray WC, et al. Treatment of pneumothoraces utilizing small caliber chesttubes. Chest 1988;94:55.
21. Perlmutt LM, Braun SD, Newman GE, et al. Transthoracic needle aspiration: use of a small chesttube to treat pneumothorax. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1987;148:849.
22. Welch TJ, Sheedy PF, Johnson CD, et al. CT-guided biopsy: prospective analysis of 1,000 procedures. Radiology 1989;171:493.
23. Reading CC, Charboneau JW, James EM, et al. Sonographically guided percutaneous biopsy of small (3 cm or less) masses. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1988;151:189.
24. Dodd GD III, Esola CC, Memel DS, et al. Sonography: the undiscovered jewel of interventional radiology. Radiographics 1996;16:1271.
25. Burbank F, Kaye K, Belville J, Ekuan J, Blumenfeld M. Image-guided automated core biopsies of the breast, chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Radiology 1994;191:165.
26. Martino CR, Haaga JR. Percutaneous biopsy of the liver. Semin Interv Radiol 1985;2:245.
27. Pagani JJ. Biopsy of focal hepatic lesions. Radiology 1983;147:673.
28. Mueller P, van Sonnenberg E. Interventional radiology in the chestand abdomen. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1364.
29. Brandt KR, Charboneau JW, Stephens DH, et al. CT- and US-guided biopsy of the pancreas. Radiology 1993;187:99.
30. Ihse I, Axelson J, Dawiskiba S, et al. Pancreatic biopsy: why? When? How? World J Surg 1999;23(9):896.
31. Wood BJ, Khan MA, McGovern F, et al. Imaging guided biopsy of renal masses: indications, accuracy and impact on clinical management. J Urol 1999;161(5):1470.
32. Welch TJ, Sheedy PF, Stephens DH, et al. Percutaneous adrenal biopsy: review of a 10-year experience. Radiology 1994;193:341.
33. Silverman SG, Mueller PR, Pinkney LP. Predictive value of image-guided adrenal biopsy; analysis of results of 101 biopsies. Radiology 1993;187:715.
34. Saboorian MH, Katz RL, Charnsangavej C. Fine needle aspiration cytology of primary and metastatic lesions of the adrenal gland. Acta Cytol 1995;39:843.
35. Charboneau JW, Reading CC, Welch TJ. CT and sonographically guided needle biopsy; current techniques and new innovations. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1990;154:1.
36. Moulton JS, Moore PT. Coaxial percutaneous biopsy technique with automated biopsy device: value in improving accuracy and negative predictive value. Radiology 1993;186:515.
37. Smith EH. Complications of percutaneous abdominal fine-needle biopsy. Radiology 1991;178:253.
38. Smith TP, McDermott VG, Ayoub DM, et al. Percutaneous transhepatic liver biopsy with tract embolization. Radiology 1996;198:769.
39. Corr P, Beningfield SJ, Davey N. Transjugular liver biopsy: a review of 200 biopsies. Clin Radiol 1992;45:238.

40. Cope C, Marinelli DL, Weinstein JK. Transcatheter biopsy of lesions obstructing the bile ducts. Radiology 1988;169:555.
41. Hall-Craggs MA, Lees WR. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy: pancreatic and biliary tumors. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1986;147:399.
42. Savader SJ, Prescott CA, Lund GB, Osterman FA. Intraductal biliary biopsy: comparison of three techniques. J Vasc Intervent Radiol 1996;7:743.
43. Daly JM, Kemeny N, Botet JF. Long-term hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy. Arch Surg 1984;152:936.
44. Ring EJ. Vascular disease of the liver. In: Herlinger H, Lunderquist A, Wallace S, eds. Clinical radiology of the liver. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1993:953.
45. Okuda K, Obata H, Jinnovichi S, et al. Angiographic assessment of gross anatomy of HCC: comparison of celiac angiograms and liver pathology in 100 cases. Radiology 1977;123:21.
46. Cho KJ, Andrews JC, Williams DM, et al. Hepatic arterial chemotherapy: role of angiography. Radiology 1989;173:783.
47. Dooley WC, Cameron JL, Lillemoe KD, Venbrux AC, et al. Is preoperative angiography useful in patients with periampullary tumors? Ann Surg 1990;211(6):649.
48. Freeny PC. Radiologic diagnosis and staging of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Radiol Clin North Am 1989;27(1):121.
49. Miller DL. Endocrine angiography and venous sampling. Radiol Clin North Am 1993;31(5):1051.
50. Rossi P, Allison DJ, Bezzi M, et al. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas. Radiol Clin North Am 1989;27(1):129.
51. Cho KJ, Venik AI, Thompson NW, et al. Localization of the source of hyperinsulinism: percutaneous transhepatic portal and pancreatic vein catheterization with hormone assay. AJR Am J
Roentgenol 1982;139:237.
52. Krudy AG, Doppman JL, Jensen RT, et al. Localization of islet cell tumors by dynamic CT: comparison with plain CT, arteriography, sonography, and venous sampling. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1984;143:585.
53. Norton AJ, Doppman JL, Collen MJ, et al. Prospective study of gastrinoma localization and resection in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Ann Surg 1986;204:468.
54. Roche A, Raisonnier A, Gillon-Savouret MC. Pancreatic venous sampling and arteriography in localizing insulinomas and gastrinomas: procedure and results in 55 cases. Radiology
1982;145:621.
55. Soulen MC. Chemoembolization of hepatic malignancies. Oncology 1994;8:77.
56. Di Bisceglie AM, Rustgi VK, Koffnagle JH, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:390.
57. Kassianides C, Kew MC. The clinical manifestations and natural history of hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1987;16:553.
58. Solomon B, Soulen M, Baum R, et al. Chemoembolization of hepatocellular carcinoma with cisplatin, doxorubicin, mitomycin-C, Ethiodol, and polyvinyl alcohol: prospective evaluation of
response and survival in a US population. J Vasc Intervent Radiol 1999;10:793.
59. Okuda K, Obata H, Nakajima Y, et al. Prognosis of primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 1984;4:S3.
60. Ngan H, Lai C, Fan S, et al. Transcatheter arterial chemoembolization in inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma: four-year follow-up. J Vasc Intervent Radiol 1996;7:419.
61. Choti MA, Bulkley GB. Management of hepatic metastases. Liver Transpl Surg 1999;5(1):65.
62. Therasse E, Breittmayer F, Roche A, et al. Transcatheter chemoembolization of progressive carcinoid liver metastasis. Radiology 1993;189:541.
63. Kvols LK, Buck M. Chemotherapy of metastatic carcinoid and islet cell tumors. Am J Med 1987;82:77.
64. Mavligit GM, Charnsangavej C, Carrasco CH, et al. Regression of ocular melanoma metastatic to the liver after hepatic arterial chemoembolization with cisplatin and polyvinyl sponge. JAMA
1988;260:974.
65. Vogelzang RL, Nemek AA Jr, Lyster M, et al. Hepatic artery chemoembolization for treatment of hepatic malignancy: results with microfibrillar collagen and triple drug therapy. J Vasc Intervent
Radiol 1993;4:61.
66. Carr BI, Flickinger JC, Lotze MT. Hepatobiliary cancers. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers,
1997.
67. Bruix J. Treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 1997;25:259.
68. Allgaier HP, Diebert P, Olschewski M, et al. Survival benefits of patients with inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma treated by a combination of transarterial chemoembolization and
percutaneous ethanol injectiona single-center analysis including 132 patients. Int J Cancer (Pred Oncol) 1998;79:601.
69. Breedis C, Young G. The blood supply of neoplasms in the liver. Am J Pathol 1954;969.
70. Schenk WG, et al. Direct measurement of hepatic blood flow in surgical patients. Ann Surg 1962;156:463.
71. Pentecost MJ. Transcatheter treatment of hepatic metastases. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1993;160:1171.
72. Soulen MC. Principles of regional cancer therapy. Semin Interv Radiol 1998;15(4):361.
73. Konno T. Targeting cancer chemotherapeutic agents by use of Lipiodol contrast medium. Cancer 1990;66:1897.
74. Egawa H, Maki A, Mori K. Effects of intraarterial chemotherapy with a new lipophilic anticancer agent, estradiol-chlorambucil (KM2210), dissolved in Lipiodol on experimental liver tumor in rats.
J Surg Oncol 1990;44:109.
75. Kanematsu T, Furuta T, Takenaka K, et al. A 5-year experience of lipiodolization: selective regional chemotherapy for 200 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 1989;10:98.
76. Sasaki Y, Imaoka S, Kasugai H, et al. A new approach to chemoembolization therapy for hepatoma using ethiodized oil, cisplatin, and gelatin sponge. Cancer 1987;609:1194.
77. Shibata J, Fujiyama S, Sato T, et al. Hepatic arterial injection chemotherapy with cisplatin suspended in an oily lymphographic agent for hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 1989;64:1586.
78. Kanematsu T, Inokuchi K, Sugimachi K, et al. Selective effects of lipiodolized antitumor agents. J Surg Oncol 1984;25:218.
79. Okamura J, Korikawa S, Fujiyama T, et al. An appraisal of transcatheter arterial embolization combined with transcatheter arterial infusion of chemotherapeutic agent for hepatic malignancies.
World J Surg 1982;6:352.
80. Patt YZ, Chuang VP, Wallace S, et al. Hepatic arterial chemotherapy and occlusion for palliation of primary hepatocellular and unknown primary neoplasms in the liver. Cancer 1983;51:1359.
81. Takayasu K, Shima Y, Muramatsu Y, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma: treatment with intraarterial iodized oil with and without chemotherapeutic agents. Radiology 1987;162:345.
82. Onishi K, Tsuchiya S, Nakayama T, et al. Arterial chemoembolization of hepatocellular carcinoma with mitomycin C microcapsules. Radiology 1984;152:51.
83. Nakamura H, Hashimoto T, Oi H, et al. Transcatheter oily chemoembolization of hepatocellular carcinoma. Radiology 1989;170:783.
84. Shimamura Y, Gunven P, Takenaka Y, et al. Combined peripheral and central chemoembolization of liver tumors. Cancer 1988;61:238.
85. Nakao N, Kamino K, Miura K, et al. Recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma after partial hepatectomy: value of treatment with transcatheter arterial chemoembolization. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1991;156:1177.
86. Van Beers B, Roche A, Cauqil P, et al. Transcatheter arterial chemotherapy using doxorubicin, iodized oil and Gelfoam embolization in hepatocellular carcinoma. Acta Radiol 1989;30:415.
87. Venook AP, Stagg RJ, Lewis BJ, et al. Chemoembolization for hepatocellular carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1108.
88. Pelletier G, Roche A, Ink O, et al. A randomized trial of hepatic arterial chemoembolization in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. JHepatol 1990;11:181.
89. Madden MV, Krige JEJ, Bailey S, et al. Randomized trial of targeted chemotherapy with lipiodol and 5-epiodoxorubicin compared with symptomatic treatment for hepatoma. Gut 1993;34:1598.
90. Groupe d'Etude et de Traitement Du Carcinome Hepatocellulaire. A comparison of Lipiodol chemoembolization and conservative treatment for unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J
Med 1995;1256.
91. Bruix J, Llovet JM, Castells A, et al. Transarterial embolization versus symptomatic treatment in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: results of a randomized, controlled trial in a
single institution. Hepatology 1998;27(6):1578.
92. Vetter D, Wenger J-J, Doffoel M, et al. Transcatheter oily chemoembolization in the management of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 1991;13:427.
93. Bartolozzi C, Lencioni R, Caramella D, et al. Treatment of large HCC: transcatheter arterial chemoembolization combined with percutaneous Ethanol injection versus repeated transcatheter
arterial chemoembolization. Radiology 1995;197:812.
94. Lu D, Peng Y, Jiang C, et al. Preoperative transcatheter arterial chemoembolization and prognosis of patients with hepatocellular carcinomas: retrospective analysis of 120 cases. World J Surg
1999;23:293.
95. DiCarlo V, Ferrari G, Castoldi R, et al. Pre-operative chemoembolization of hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhotic patients. Hepatogastroenterology 1998;45(24):1950.
96. Paye F, Jago P, Vilgrain V, et al. Preoperative chemoembolization of hepatocellular carcinoma. Arch Surg 1998;133;767.
97. Oldhafer K, Chavan A, Fruhauf N, et al. Arterial chemoembolization before liver transplantation in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma: marked tumor necrosis, but no survival benefit? J
Hepatol 1998:953.
98. Harnois DM, Steers J, Andrews JC, et al. Preoperative hepatic artery chemoembolization followed by orthotopic liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma. Liver Transpl Surg
1999;5(3):192.
99. Farges O, Regimbeau J, Belghiti J. Aggressive management of recurrence following surgical resection of hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatogastroenterology 1998;45;1275.
100. Okuda K, Ohtsuki T, Obata H, et al. Natural history of hepatocellular carcinoma and prognosis in relation to treatment. Cancer 1985;56:918.
101. Winkelbauer FW, Niederle B, Pietschmann F, et al. Hepatic artery embolotherapy of hepatic metastases from carcinoid tumors: value of using a mixture of cyanoacrylate and ethiodized oil.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 1995;165:323.
102. Mavligit GM, Pollock RE, Evans HL, et al. Durable hepatic tumor regression after arterial chemoembolization-infusion inpatients with islet cell carcinoma of the pancreas metastatic to the liver.
Cancer 1993;72:375.
103. Stokes KR, Stuart K, Clouse ME. Hepatic arterial chemoembolization for metastatic endocrine tumors. J Vasc Intervent Radiol 1993;4:341
104. Perry LJ, Stuart K, Stokes KR, et al. Hepatic arterial chemoembolization for metastatic neuroendocrine tumors. Surgery 1994;116:1111.
105. Drougas JG, Anthony LB, Blair TK, et al. Hepatic artery chemoembolization for management of patients with advanced metastatic carcinoid tumors. Am J Surg 1998;175(5):408.
106. Tellez C, Benson A, Lyster M, et al. Phase II trial of chemoembolization for the treatment of metastatic colorectal carcinoma to the liver and review of the literature. Cancer 1998;82:1250.
107. Daniels S, Pentecost M, Teitelbaum G, et al. Hepatic artery chemoembolization for carcinoma of colon using angiostat collagen and cisplatin, mitomycin and doxorubicin: response, survival
and serum drug levels. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11;171.
108. Sugiura N, Takara K, Olito M, et al. Percutaneous intratumoral injection of ethanol under ultrasound imaging for treatment of small HCC. Acta Hepatol Jpn 1983;24:920.
109. Livraghi T, Giorgio A, Marin G, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma and cirrhosis in 746 patients: long-term results of percutaneous ethanol injection. Radiology 1995;197:101.
110. Livraghi T, Solbiati L. Percutaneous ethanol injection in liver cancer: method and results. Semin Interv Radiol 1993;10:69.
111. Redvanly RD, Chezmar JL, Strauss RM, et al. Malignant hepatic tumors: safety of high-dose percutaneous ethanol ablation therapy. Radiology 1993;188:283.
112. Lencioni R, Bartolozzi C, Caramella D, et al. Treatment of small hepatocellular carcinoma with percutaneous ethanol injection: analysis of prognostic factors in 105 Western patients. Cancer
1995;76:1737.
113. Kotoh K, Sakai H, Morotomi I, et al. The use of percutaneous ethanol injection therapy for recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatogastroenterology 1995;42:197.
114. Solmi L, Muratori R, Bertoni F, et al. Echo-guided percutaneous ethanol injection in small hepatocellular carcinoma: personal experience. Hepatogastroenterology 1993;40:505.
115. Giorgio A, Tarantino L, Francica G, et al. One-shot percutaneous ethanol injection of liver tumors under general anesthesia: preliminary data on efficacy and complications. Cardiovasc Intervent
Radiol 1996;19:27.
116. Isobe H, Sakai H, Imari Y, et al. Intratumor ethanol injection therapy for solitary minute hepatocellular carcinoma: a study of 37 patients. J Clin Gastroenterol 1994;18:122.
117. Matsuoka Y, Morikawa M, Amamoto Y, et al. Therapeutic ethanol injection of hepatocellular carcinomas undetectable by angiography and Lipiodol computed tomography. Cardiovasc Intervent
Radiol 1992;15:221.
118. Shiina S, Tagawa K, Unuma T, et al. Percutaneous ethanol injection therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma: a histopathologic study. Cancer 1991;68:1524.
119. Vilana R, Bruix J, Bru C, et al. Tumor size determines the efficacy of percutaneous ethanol injection for the treatment of small hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 1992;16:353.
120. Castells A, Bruix J, Bru C, et al. Treatment of small hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhotic patients: a cohort study comparing surgical resection and percutaneous ethanol injection. Hepatology
1993;18:1121.
121. Shiina S, Tagawa K, Niwa Y, et al. Percutaneous ethanol injection therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma: results in 146 patients. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1993;160:1023.
122. Livraghi T, Vettori C, Lazzaroni S. Liver metastases: results of percutaneous ethanol injection in 14 patients. Radiology 1991;179:709.
123. Giovannini M, Seitz JF. Ultrasound-guided percutaneous alcohol injection of small liver metastases: results in 40 patients. Cancer 1994;73:294.
124. Livraghi T. Percutaneous ethanol injection in the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis. Hepatogastroenterology 1998;45:1248.
125. Livraghi T, Benedini V, Lazzaroni S, et al. Long-term results of single session percutaneous ethanol injection in patients with large hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 1997;83:48.

126. Lee MJ, Mueller PR, Dawson SL, et al. Percutaneous ethanol injection for the treatment of hepatic tumors: indications, mechanism of action, technique, and efficacy. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1995;164:215.
127. Ishii H, Okada S, Nose H, et al. Local recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma after percutaneous ethanol injection. Cancer 1996;77:1792.
128. Lencioni R, Caramella D, Bartolozzi C. Hepatocellular carcinoma: use of color Doppler US to evaluate response to treatment with percutaneous ethanol injection. Radiology 1995;194:113.
129. Livraghi T, Bolondi, L, Buscarini L, et al. No treatment, resection and ethanol injection in hepatocellular carcinoma: a retrospective analysis of survival in 391 patients with cirrhosis. Italian
Cooperative HCC Study Group. J Hepatol 1995;22:522.
130. Kotoh K, Sakai H, Sakamoto S, et al. The effect of percutaneous ethanol injection therapy on small solitary hepatocellular carcinoma is comparable to that of hepatectomy. Am J Gastroenterol
1994;89:194.
131. Shiina S, Niwa Y, Omata M. Percutaneous ethanol injection therapy for liver neoplasms. Semin Interv Radiol 1993;10:57.
132. Tanikawa K, Majima Y. Percutaneous ethanol injection therapy for recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatogastroenterology 1993:40:324.
133. Lencioni R, Paolicchi A, Moretti M, et al. Combined transcatheter arterial chemoembolization and percutaneous ethanol injection for the treatment of large hepatocellular carcinoma: local
therapeutic effect and long-term survival rate. EurRadiol 1998;8(3):439.
134. Tanaka K, Nakamura S, Numata K, et al. The long-term efficacy of combined transcatheter arterial embolization and percutaneous ethanol injection in the treatment of patients with large
hepatocellular carcinoma and cirrhosis. Cancer 1998;82(1):78.
135. Dickson A, Calderwood S. Thermosensitivity of neoplastic tissues in vivo. In: Storm K, ed. Hyperthermia in cancer therapy. Boston: GK Hall, 1983;63.
136. Rossi S, Fornari F, Buscarini L. Percutaneous US-guided radiofrequency electrocautery for the treatment of small hepatocellular carcinoma. J Intervent Radiol 1993;8:97.
137. Rossi S, Buscarini E, Garbagnati F, et al. Percutaneous treatment of small hepatic tumors by an expandable RF needle electrode. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1998;170:1015.
138. Livraghi T, Goldberg S, Monti F, et al. Saline-enhanced radiofrequency tissue ablation in the treatment of liver metastases. Radiology 1997;202:205.
139. Solbiati L, Ierace T, Goldberg S, et al. Percutaneous US-guided radiofrequency tissue ablation of liver metastases: long-term follow-up. Radiology 1997;292:195.
140. McGahan J, Schneider P, Brock J, et al. Treatment of liver tumors by percutaneous radiofrequency electrocautery. Semin Interv Radiol 1993;10:143.
141. Curley SA, Izzo F, Delrio P, et al. Radiofrequency ablation of unresectable primary and metastatic hepatic malignancies: results in 123 patients. Ann Surg 1999;230(1):1.
142. Gores G, Thuluvath P, Geschwind JF, et al. Intradose injectable Gel in treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma. Oral communication: Chemotherapy Foundation Symposium, New York City,
November 3, 1999.
143. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, et al. Cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin 1998;48:192.
144. Henson DE, Albores-Saavedra J, Corle D. Carcinoma of the gallbladder: histologic types, stage of disease, grade, and survival rates. Cancer 1992;70:1493.
145. Nunnerley HB, Karani JB. Intraductal radiation in interventional radiologyof the biliary tract. Radiol Clin North Am 1990;28:1237.
146. Dachman AH. Primary biliary neoplasia In: Friedman AC, Dachman AH, eds. Radiologyof the liver, biliary tract and pancreas. St. Louis: MosbyYear Book, 1994:611.
147. Meyer DG, Weinstein BJ. Klatskin tumors of the bile ducts: sonographic appearance. Radiology 1983;148:803.
148. Subramanyam BR, Raghavendra BN, Balthazar EJ, et al. Ultrasonic features of cholangiocarcinoma. J Ultrasound Med 1984;3:405.
149. Pitt HA, Dooley WC, Yeo CJ, et al. Malignancies of the biliary tree. Curr Probl Surg 1995;32:1.
150. Farley DR, Weaver AL, Nagorney DM. “Natural history” of unresected cholangiocarcinoma: patient outcome after noncurative intervention. Mayo Clin Proc 1995;70:425.
151. De Groen PC, Gores GJ, LaRusso NF, et al. Biliary tract cancers. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1368.
152. Bell R. Neoplasms of the exocrine pancreas. In: Greenfield LJ, Mulholland M, Oldham KT, et al., eds. Surgery: scientific principles and practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers,
1997:901
153. Schnur MJ, Hoffman JC, Koenigsberg M. Ultrasonic demonstration of intraductal biliary neoplasms. J Clin Ultrasound 1982;10:246.
154. Gudjonnson B. Cancer of the pancreas: 50 years of surgery. Cancer 1987;60:2284.
155. Desa LA, Akosa AB, Lazzara S, et al. Cytodiagnosis in the management of extrahepatic biliary stricture. Gut 1991;32:1188.
156. Mansfield JC, Griffin SM, Wadehra V, et al. A prospective evaluation of cytology from biliary strictures. Gut 1997;40:671.
157. Thuluvath PJ, Rai R, Venbrux AC, et al. Cholangiocarcinoma: a review. Gastroenterologist 1997;5(4):306.
158. Stanley J, Gobien RP, Cunnigham J, et al. Biliary decompression: an institutional comparison of percutaneous and endoscopic methods. Radiology 1986;158:195.
159. Cameron JL. Proximal cholangiocarcinoma: palliation by transhepatic stenting and hepaticojejunostomy. In: Cameron JL, ed. Atlas of surgery, Vol. 1. Philadelphia: BC Decker, Inc, 1990:84.
160. Cameron JL. Resection of a proximal cholangiocarcinoma with hepatic lobectomy and reconstruction utilizing a silastic transhepatic biliary stent and hepaticojejunostomy. In: Cameron JL, ed.
Atlas of surgery, Vol. 1. Philadelphia: BC Decker, Inc, 1990:72.
161. Nordback IH, Pitt HA, Coleman J, et al. Unresectable hilar cholangiocarcinoma: percutaneous versus operative palliation. Surgery 1994;115:597.
162. Grundy SJR, Strodel WE, Knol JA, et al. Efficacy of preoperative biliary tract decompression in patients with obstructive jaundice. Arch Surg 1984;119:703.
163. Hatfield ARW, Tobias R, Terblanche J, et al. Pre-operative external biliary drainage in obstructive jaundice. Lancet 1982;2:896.
164. Prat F, Chapat O, Ducot B, et al. Predictive factors for survival of patients with inoperable malignant distal biliary strictures: a practical management guideline. Gut 1998;42:76.
165. Schima W, Prokesch R, Osterreicher C, et al. Biliary Wallstent endoprosthesis in malignant hilar obstruction: long-term results with regard to the type of obstruction. Clin Radiol 1997;52:213.
166. Boguth L, Tatalovic S, Antonucci F, et al. Malignant biliary obstruction: clinical and histopathologic correlation after treatment with self-expanding metal prostheses. Radiology 1994;192:669.
167. Rossi P, Bezzi M, Rossi M, et al. Metallic stents in malignant biliary obstruction: results of a multicenter European study of 240 patients. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1994;5:279.
168. Lammer J, Klein GE, Kleinert R, et al. Obstructive jaundice: use of expandable metal stents endoprostheses for biliary drainage. Radiology 1990;177:789.
169. Kaskarelis IS, Papadaki MG, Papageorgiou GN, et al. Long term followup in patients with malignant biliary obstruction after percutaneous placement of uncovered Wallstent endoprostheses.
Acta Radiol 1999;40(5):528.
170. Mueller PR, van Sonnenberg E, Gerruci JT Jr. Percutaneous biliary drainage: technical and catheter related problems in 200 procedures. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1982;138:17.
171. Ishikawa Y, Oishi I, Miyai M, et al. Experience in 100 cases. J Clin Gastroenterol 1980;2:305.
172. Hamlin JA, Friedman M, Stein MG, et al. Percutaneous biliary drainage only: complications of 118 consecutive catherizations. Radiology 1986;158:199.
173. Gunther RW, Schild H, Thelen M. Percutaenous transhepatic biliary drainage experience with 311 procedures. Cardiovasc Interv Radiol 1988;11:65.
174. Hussain S, Ahmed I. Nephrostomy revisited: cost effective approach. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1994;5:394.
175. Reznek RH, Talner LB. Percutaneous nephrostomy. Radiol Clin North Am 1984;22:393.
176. Lee WJ, Patel U, Patel S, et al. Emergency percutaneous nephrostomy: results and complications. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1994;5:135.
177. Castaneda-Zuniga WR, Brady TM, Thomas R, et al. Percutaneous uroradiologic techniques. Interventional radiology, 3rd ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1997.
178. Banner MP, Ramchandani P, Pollack HM. Interventional procedures in the upper urinary tract. Cardiovasc Interv Radiol 1991;14(5):267.
179. Kenny B, Lynch N, Hurley GD. Antegrade stenting of malignant ureteral strictures. Eur Radiol 1995;5:623.
180. Chang R, Marshall FF, Mitchell SE. Percutaneous management of benign ureteral strictures and fistulas. J Urol 1987;137:1126.
181. Lokich JJ, Goodman R. Superior vena cava syndrome: clinical management. JAMA 1975;231:58.
182. Davenport D, Ferree C, Blake D, et al. Radiation therapy in the treatment of superior vena caval obstruction. Cancer 1978;42:2600.
183. Perez CA, Presant CA, van Amburg AL III. Management of superior vena syndrome. Semin Oncol 1978;5:123.
184. Elson JD, Becker GJ, Wholey MH, et al. Vena caval and central venous stenoses: management with palmaz balloons expandable intraluminal stents. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1991;2:215.
185. Schraufnagel DE, Hill R, Leech JA, et al. Superior vena caval obstruction: is it a medical emergency? Am J Med 1981;70:1169.
186. Irving JD, Dondelinger RF, Reidy JF, et al. Gianturco self-expanding stents: clinical experience in the vena cava and large veins. Cardiovasc Interv Radiol 1992;15:328.
187. Rosch J, Bedell JE, Putnam J, et al. Gianturco expandable wire stents in the treatment of superior vena cava syndrome recurring after maximum tolerance radiation. Cancer 1987;60:1243.
188. Sherry CS, Diamond NG, Meyers TB, et al. Successful treatment of superior vena cava syndrome by venous angioplasty. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1986;147:834.
189. Capek P, Cope C. Percutaneous treatment of superior vena cava syndrome. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1989;152:183.
190. Dake MD, Semba CP, Enstrom RJ, et al. Percutaneous treatment of venous occlusive disease with stents. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1993;4:42.
191. Trerotola SO, Lund GB, Samphilipo MA, et al. Palmaz stents in the treatment of central venous stenosis; safety and efficacy of redilation. Radiology 1994;190:379.
192. Kishi K, Sonomura T, Mitsuzane K, et al. Self-expandable metallic stent therapy for superior vena cava syndrome: clinical observations. Radiology 1993;189:531.
193. Moore FD Jr, Osteen RT, Karp DD, et al. Anticoagulants, venous thromboembolism and the cancer patient. Arch Surg 1981;116:405.
194. Sack GH, Levin J, Bell WR. Trousseau's syndrome and other manifestation of chronic disseminated coagulopathy in patients with neoplasms: clinical pathophysiologic and therapeutic features.
Medicine 1977;56:1.
195. Strandness DE, Langlois Y, Cramer M, et al. Long term sequealae of acute deep venous thromboses. JAMA 1983:250:1289.
196. Hirsch J, Genton E, Hull R. Venous thromboembolism. New York: Grune & Stratton, 1981:63.
197. Savader SJ. Inferior vena cava filters. In: Savader SJ and Trerotola SO, eds. Venous interventional radiology with clinical perspectives. New York: Thieme Publishers, 1996; 367.
198. Alpert JS, Smith R, Carlson J, et al. Mortality in patients treated for pulmonary embolism. JAMA 1976;236:1477.
199. Dorfman GS, Cronan JJ, Denny DF, et al. Occult pulmonary embolism: a common occurrence in deep venous thrombosis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1987;148:263.
200. Greenfield L. Current indications for and results of Greenfield filter placement. J Vasc Surg 1984;1:502.
201. Jones T, Barnes R, Greenfield L. Greenfield vena cava filter: rationale and current indications. Ann Thorac Surg 1986;42:S48.
202. Alexander J, Gewerk L, Lu C, et al. New criteria for placement of a prophylactic vena cava filter. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1986;163:405.
203. Becker DM, Philbrick JT, Selby JB. Inferior vena cava filters: indications, safety, effectiveness. Arch Intern Med 1992;152:1985.
204. Grassi CJ. Inferior vena caval filters: analysis of five currently available devices. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1991;156:813.
205. Ferris EJ, McGowan TC, Carver DR, et al. Percutaneous inferior vena cava filters: follow-up of seven designs in 320 patients. Radiology 1993;188:851.

SECTION 27.5 Ultrasound
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 27.5
Ultrasound
ULRIKE M. HAMPER
Introduction
Ultrasonography Applications
Urologic Oncology
Kidney
Bladder
Prostate and Seminal Vesicles
Testes
Gynecologic Oncology
Ovary
Endometrium
Cervix
Gestational Trophoblastic Disease
Breast
Medical Oncology
Liver
Gallbladder Biliary Tree
Pancreas
Endocrine
Bone Marrow Transplant
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome Malignancies
Venous Complications
Ultrasonographically Guided Interventional Procedures
Summary
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Advances in radiologic techniques have allowed the radiologist to make significant contributions in the diagnosis and management of cancer patients. The
applications of ultrasonography (US) in oncology have rapidly increased in recent years, due to development of new technologies and therapeutic regimens as well as
easy availability and noninvasiveness of US. 1,2 This chapter gives an overview of the current role of US in the evaluation of the oncologic patient, with particular
emphasis on the sonographic diagnosis, staging, and follow-up of superficial or deep masses and discusses US guidance and techniques for abdominal, thoracic, and
superficial interventional procedures.

ULTRASONOGRAPHY APPLICATIONS
An evaluation of the diagnostic role of US includes three particular aspects: (1) detection of a mass or lesion, (2) definition of the nature of the lesion, and (3)
estimation of the extent of the lesion. Although a large number of organs can be studied by US with good sensitivities, the staging accuracies of US are limited and
depend on the site of the organ. Superficial organs (thyroid, parathyroid, breast, testicles) are better evaluated than deep-seated organs. Nevertheless, tumors in the
liver, biliary, tree, gallbladder, pancreas and kidney, prostate, and bladder can be detected by US with quite good sensitivities. The results are less favorable in the
retroperitoneum and adrenal glands. In deep-seated tumors, US does not provide detailed evaluation of tumor spread, with exception of hepatic hilar node
involvement or vascular invasion of the hepatic veins in hepatocellular carcinoma and the renal veins in renal cell carcinoma. 1 US may also play an important role in
the follow-up of the oncologic patient in a search for or monitoring of liver metastases as well as for the assessment of response in patients with primary or secondary
malignancies treated by intraarterial infusion of cytotoxic drugs. The areas wherein US plays an important role include urologic oncology, gynecologic oncology,
medical oncology, and as a guidance modality for interventional diagnostic or therapeutic procedures.

UROLOGIC ONCOLOGY
Ultrasound plays a major role in the oncologic workup of tumors of the kidney, bladder, prostate, and seminal vesicles as well as testes. 3,4
KIDNEY
When a renal mass is discovered on an intravenous urogram, further evaluation with US is usually performed. A benign renal cyst has a characteristic US
appearance, defined as an echo-free fluid-filled lesion with a thin wall and posterior acoustic enhancement ( Fig. 27.5-1A). Any doubt about the benign nature of a
renal mass or the presence of a complex lesion demands further evaluation with computed tomography (CT) to exclude a renal cell carcinoma (see Fig. 27.5-1B).
Renal lymphoma is usually metastatic or from direct extension from lymphoma in adjacent retroperitoneal lymph nodes. Transitional cell carcinoma arises in the renal
pelvis or ureter and presents sonographically as a filling defect in the renal collecting system ( Fig. 27.5-2). Doppler and color Doppler US (CDUS) are useful to assess
renal vein or inferior vena cava invasion (or both) by tumor ( Fig. 27.5-3).5

FIGURE 27.5-1. A: Sagittal sonogram of a right renal cyst ( arrow). Note the echo-free appearance and smooth wall. B: Solid mass arising from the lower pole of the
left kidney (arrows), compatible with renal cell carcinoma.

FIGURE 27.5-2. Echogenic mass (arrows) filling the left renal collecting system, compatible with transitional cell carcinoma.

FIGURE 27.5-3. Tumor thrombus (arrow) extending into the inferior vena cava in a patient with metastatic leiomyosarcoma to the kidney.

BLADDER
Transabdominal US permits gross evaluation of the bladder to assess for focal masses. US may have difficulty differentiating a hypertrophied median lobe of the
prostate from a bladder mass. Cytoscopy is usually performed in cases of hematuria. Transurethral US may be used for staging of bladder cancers. 5
PROSTATE AND SEMINAL VESICLES
Analysis of transrectal ultrasonography as a screening tool for prostate cancer has been disappointing, due to the low specificity of a hypoechoic lesion for cancer.
Likewise, sonographic criteria to predict extracapsular extension of disease or spread into the seminal vesicles have not been reliable, with sensitivities of 65% and
33%, respectively, in some series. Transrectal ultrasonography, however, is an excellent tool to detect mimics of cancer on digital rectal examination, such as cysts,
calcification, or abscess, as well as a guidance modality for prostate biopsies and staging biopsies into the seminal vesicles. 6,7
TESTES
US can detect scrotal masses with an accuracy approaching 100%. The majority of intratesticular masses are malignant, whereas the majority of extratesticular
lesions are benign or inflammatory in nature. Testicular tumors account for 1% to 2% of all malignant neoplasms in men and are the most common cancer in 25- to
35-year-olds. The majority of patients present with painless or mildly painful testicular enlargement. Between 90% and 95% of testicular neoplasms are of germ cell
origin and include seminomas, embryonal cell cancer, teratomas, choriocarcinomas, or mixed germ cell tumors ( Fig. 27.5-4). Leukemia and lymphoma are the most
common metastatic tumors to the testis. Malignant lymphoma is the most common secondary neoplasm and most common testicular tumor in men older than 60 years
(Fig. 27.5-5). Most are non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, and 50% of patients have extension into the spermatic cord. Leukemia is the most common metastatic testicular
neoplasm. Leukemic infiltrates are common in children during bone marrow remission. The testis acts as a sanctuary during chemotherapy because of a blood–gonad
barrier inhibiting concentration of chemotherapeutic agents. Other metastases to the testicle are prostate, melanoma, lung, kidney, colon, and pancreas. US is also
used for the surveillance of contralateral testicles in patients with testicular tumors and to detect masses in patients with retroperitoneal masses of unknown origin. 8,9

FIGURE 27.5-4. Well-defined hypoechoic mass in the left testicle ( arrows), compatible with seminoma. Note small, bright, echogenic foci of microlithiasis in the
remainder of the testicle.

FIGURE 27.5-5. Transverse sonogram of both testicles demonstrating heterogeneous enlargement of the left testicle due to infiltration by B-cell lymphoma.

GYNECOLOGIC ONCOLOGY
OVARY
Ovarian cancer is the least frequent but the most lethal of the three common gynecologic malignancies. US has played an increasingly important role in the evaluation
of the oncologic patient with an ovarian mass. Scoring systems to differentiate between benign and malignant masses have been reported to provide encouraging
results in terms of sensitivity and negative predictive values (95% to 100%); however, significant limitations exist in terms of specificity (73% to 83%) and positive
predictive values (32% to 46%). 10 The likelihood of malignancy in an ovarian mass increases with size and complexity of the lesion. Simple cysts are almost always
benign. The role of US for screening of early ovarian carcinoma needs yet to be defined. Doppler and CDUS endovaginal techniques to assess blood flow parameters
are encouraging; however, the role of endovaginal CDUS for the evaluation of ovarian cancer is controversial, with limited sensitivity and specificity of this technique
due to overlaps of flow velocity indices in benign and malignant ovarian masses. 10,11 US is useful to assess local or distant spread and detect ascites. In clinical
practice, US is most often used to confirm the presence of an adnexal mass, often with characteristics of malignancy.
ENDOMETRIUM
Endometrial cancer is the most common gynecologic malignancy in the United States. Most patients present with postmenopausal bleeding. On endovaginal US, the
endometrium is thickened, inhomogeneous in echotexture, and with irregular hypoechoic areas throughout. Endovaginal US is helpful in staging the degree of
myometrial invasion: The presence of an intact subendometrial halo suggests superficial carcinoma without myometrial penetration ( Fig. 27.5-6). With advanced
invasive cancers, the myometrium becomes heterogeneous, with echogenic areas, and the uterus may have a lobulated appearance. 12 Hysterosonography
(instillation of sterile saline into the uterine cavity) allows better detection and characterization of underlying pathology in a patient with a thickened endometrium.

FIGURE 27.5-6. Endovaginal sonogram demonstrating enlarged endometrial echocomplex (between calipers) with posterior irregularity in a patient with endometrial
carcinoma with posterior myometrial invasion.

CERVIX
Cervical cancer is the least frequent of the three common gynecologic malignancies, and most cases can be detected by clinical screening in early stages. US has
been shown to be no better than the physical examination to assess the primary tumor, and it has a limited role for staging. Transrectal US has been utilized to
identify irregular thickening of the parametria. Endovaginal US may demonstrate secondary signs of a cervical obstructing mass, such as hydro- or hematometra.
GESTATIONAL TROPHOBLASTIC DISEASE
US has long been the first imaging study to diagnose molar pregnancy, demonstrating hypoechoic grape-like intrauterine structures during the first or second
trimester. Recent studies have also demonstrated the use of endovaginal Doppler and color Doppler flow studies in assessing myometrial invasion in patients with
persistent human chorionic gonadotropin elevation after dilatation and curettage.
BREAST
Breast US with high-frequency probes (7 to 13 mHz) is most often used to differentiate a cystic from a solid mass detected on palpation or mammography. Recent
reports have demonstrated the utility of US to differentiate benign from malignant masses, therefore limiting the need to perform a biopsy on lesions with benign
features, such as sharp margins, circumscribed borders, homogeneous internal echotexture and a horizontal orientation of the lesion. Doppler and CDUS studies to
differentiate benign from malignant masses are under way. 13 US is an exquisite guidance modality for preoperative needle localization or core biopsy of
sonographically visualized and nonpalpable breast masses.

MEDICAL ONCOLOGY
LIVER
Liver and biliary cancers account for only 1.5% of all gastrointestinal malignancies in the United States. Liver cancers are more common in China and Africa, because
of higher endemic hepatitis B carrier rates. In the United States, 60% of hepatocellular carcinoma are associated with underlying liver cirrhosis. Hepatic US in
conjunction with serum a-fetoprotein has been used to screen patients in Asia and Europe. Sonography in high-risk patients can detect lesions as small as 1 cm in
diameter. The sonographic appearance varies with the histologic composition and size. Tumor invasion of the hepatic and portal veins may be demonstrated by
CDUS. Most often, biopsy is necessary to make the definitive diagnosis and differentiate these from other benign and malignant liver masses. Hepatic lymphoma is an
infiltrative neoplasm, sonographically presenting as focal, multifocal, or diffuse infiltration, often as hypoechoic masses or ill-defined areas of mixed echogenicity ( Fig.
27.5-7). Metastases to the liver may be hypoechoic, hyperechoic, or show a diffuse infiltrative pattern. Most common primary tumors are gastrointestinal, renal,
pancreas, breast, lung, and thyroid cancer. 14

FIGURE 27.5-7. Sagittal sonogram of the right hepatic lobe containing a heterogeneous mass ( arrows) in this patient 9 years after heart transplantation. Biopsy
demonstrated hepatic lymphoma.

GALLBLADDER–BILIARY TREE
Gallbladder carcinoma usually presents with advanced disease. Sonographically, a focal wall mass protruding into the lumen or a diffuse infiltrative mass in the bed
may be seen (Fig. 27.5-8). Cholangiocarcinoma may be intrahepatic, nodular, and mass-forming, or it may be infiltrative along the intra- and extrahepatic bile ducts.
On US, it is seen as a heterogeneous hypoechoic mass, with or without ductal dilatation. 15

FIGURE 27.5-8. Sagittal sonogram of the gallbladder in patient with gallbladder carcinoma demonstrating thickening of the fundal wall, with mass protruding into the
lumen (arrows).

PANCREAS
Pancreatic cancers include exocrine, endocrine, and cystic neoplasms and most commonly an adenocarcinoma of the exocrine duct. The tumor invades adjacent
structures and vessels and commonly metastasizes to the liver. Patients most frequently present with obstructive jaundice. On US, a pancreatic mass, frequently
hypoechoic, and a dilated common bile duct and pancreatic duct are identified. Sonography is less sensitive in imaging carcinoma of the body and tail of the pancreas
because of overlying bowel gas. Pancreatic endocrine tumors, usually islet cell tumors, may present as small, hypoechoic masses in the gland. Mucinous cystic
neoplasms may contain central calcifications. 16 Pancreatic cancers are usually best imaged with CT and biopsies preferably by US, sometimes, however, with CT
guidance (Fig. 27.5-9).

FIGURE 27.5-9. Focal mass in the pancreatic head (cross-hair) proven to be metastatic rhabdomyosarcoma. Linear echogenic lines represent indwelling biliary stent.

ENDOCRINE
Thyroid nodules are not infrequently detected during US performed to evaluate the carotid arteries or in patients with abnormal thyroid function tests or palpable
abnormalities. Solitary or suspicious, complex masses are usually biopsied under US guidance. Local lymph node involvement in thyroid malignancies can be
exquisitely demonstrated with high-resolution US. Postthyroidectomy local recurrence or lymph node spread can be imaged and proven by US guided biopsy. 17
Adrenal malignancies are most commonly adrenocortical carcinoma and pheochromocytoma. CT is usually the mainstay for the evaluation of adrenal masses
because of its high sensitivity and simultaneous ability to accurately stage extension into adjacent structures. US may be the study on which an adrenal mass is
detected incidentally. Small masses are homogeneous, and tumors become progressively heterogeneous with enlargement, due to necrosis and hemorrhage. Right
adrenal masses can cause anterior displacement of the inferior vena cava. Metastases from lung primaries are common to the adrenal gland. However, in larger
series, one-third to two-thirds of patients with adrenal masses and lung cancer had incidental nonfunctioning adenomas. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy is normally
performed in these patients to establish the diagnosis of metastases. 18
BONE MARROW TRANSPLANT
Sonography is frequently used to evaluate complications of high-dose therapy in bone marrow transplant patients, such as hepatic venoocclusive disease or
hemorrhagic cystitis.
Hepatic Venoocclusive Disease
Hepatic venoocclusive disease is caused by high-dose chemotherapy prior to bone marrow transplant salvage. Toxicity to the liver results in hepatic edema, venous
compression, and stagnation, with ultimately occlusion of the small hepatic veins. Imaging with CDUS may demonstrate a heterogeneous and enlarged liver, ascites,
a thick-walled gallbladder, elevated hepatic artery resistive index (>0.8), decreased hepatic vein flow, and pulsatile or reversal of portal vein flow. 19
Hemorrhagic Cystitis
Hemorrhagic cystitis is caused by the toxic effect of high-dose steroids to the urothelium, resulting in severe cystitis, hemorrhage, and bladder necrosis. On US, the
bladder wall is thickened, and blood clots can be seen as intravesical masses ( Fig. 27.5-10). US is also useful to assess the effectiveness of therapy. 20

FIGURE 27.5-10. Vesical ultrasonography in a patient with hemorrhagic cystitis. Note bladder wall thickening and heterogeneous mass in the bladder compatible with
a large blood clot.

ACQUIRED IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROME MALIGNANCIES
The most common neoplasms related to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) are Kaposi's sarcoma and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Other malignancies
include cervical carcinoma, bronchogenic carcinoma, and Hodgkin's lymphoma with an unusual or aggressive presentation. AIDS patients are also at higher risk to
develop testicular neoplasms, such as germ cell tumors or AIDS-related lymphoma (ARL). 21
Kaposi's Sarcoma
In AIDS, Kaposi's sarcoma is an aggressive multifocal neoplasm arising from lymphatic endothelial cells. It can involve skin, lymph nodes, gastrointestinal tract, liver,
spleen, lung, and pleura. On US, focal liver or splenic masses or infiltrative lesions can be seen. Infiltrative lesions may also be present in the kidney, adrenal,
bladder, or prostate. 21
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome–Related Lymphoma
Isolated or bulky adenopathy is rare and favors chronic infections, such as Mycobacterium avium–intracellulare and tuberculosis. Extranodal disease usually involves
the gastrointestinal tract, liver, spleen, kidney, and adrenal gland. Chest wall disease involving the spine and sternum as well as pleural effusions are common. On
US, hepatic and splenic involvement present as solitary or multiple hypoechoic nodules, which may appear cystic. Renal involvement may demonstrate bilateral
parenchymal or perirenal masses. The differential diagnosis for such lesions includes renal cell carcinoma, tuberculosis, candidiasis, aspergillosis, or pyogenic
abscesses.21
VENOUS COMPLICATIONS
US has become the standard primary imaging technique for the initial evaluation of patients with the clinical suspicion of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) of the
extremity veins. Predisposing factors for DVT in the oncologic patient include paraneoplastic syndrome; immobilization; compression or direct invasion by the primary
tumor or metastatic masses (pelvis, chest, Pancoast tumor); radiotherapy; and indwelling catheters or stents. The hallmark finding of acute DVT on gray scale,
Doppler, and CDUS include distention and noncompressibility of vessels and direct visualization of tumor thrombus. In long-standing venous occlusion, abundant
collateral vessels may be seen on US. 22

ULTRASONOGRAPHICALLY GUIDED INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
Accurate characterization and staging of malignancies has become increasingly important for cancer patients to avail themselves of the increasing advances in
treatment options. Precise localization of disease process by fluoroscopy US, CT, and magnetic resonance imaging have made possible percutaneous biopsies,
aspirations of fluid collections, abscess drainages, nephrostomy, and stent placement as well as vascular access in many organ systems of the oncology patient.
Advances in cytopathology diagnostic techniques and the development of smaller and safer needles coupled with cross-sectional image guidance, particularly US,
facilitate accurate and safe needle placement in formerly inaccessible sites. Most biopsies in the oncology patient are performed to confirm malignancy in a
radiographically suspicious lesion or to obtain a tissue diagnosis in an indeterminate lesion. Growing experience with US as a guidance modality has greatly
expanded the role and scope of US-guided interventional masses in deep abdominal and superficial masses, thoracic and mediastinal applications. 23,24,25,26 and 27
Specific biopsy applications include liver ( Fig. 27.5-11) and pancreas; renal, adrenal, retroperitoneal, splenic, neck, and musculoskeletal masses; as well as selected
thoracic lesions when pleura-based or mediastinal ( Fig. 27.5-12); breast lesions; endocavitary biopsy (endorectal, endovaginal); and recently intraoperative or
percutaneous ablations (ethanol, cryosurgery, radiofrequency, laser, and microwave) for hepatic, renal, and prostate lesions. 23,24,25,26,27,28,29 and 30

FIGURE 27.5-11. Ultrasonographically guided percutaneous biopsy of a small mass in the liver proved to be metastatic pancreatic carcinoma. Note biopsy trajectory
(dottedlines).

FIGURE 27.5-12. A: Computed tomography scan of the chest demonstrating small, left-sided posterior pleural-based lung nodule. B: Same nodule imaged by
ultrasonography as a hypoechoic mass (between dotted lines). Ultrasonographically guided biopsy revealed metastatic squamous cell carcinoma to the lung.

US is an ideal guidance modality for interventional procedures for various reasons. It allows real-time display throughout the procedure with unlimited scan plans, thus
allowing creative patient positioning. Speed of the procedure; CDUS for vessel visualization; direct pressure over the lesion with the transducer in case of bleed;
portability; lower cost; and nonionizing irradiation are other advantages of US. Future applications include percutaneous US-guided delivery of chemotherapy agents,
drug delivery, and gene therapy as well as organ-specific delivery of substances in conjunction with contrast agents and directed local bubble destruction.

SUMMARY
US plays an important role in the diagnostic evaluation and management of cancer patients. With further advances in US technology and an ever-increasing variety of
therapeutic options, its use in the oncology patient will expand in the future.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Dalla Palma L, Pozzi Mucelli RS, Ricci C, Zuiani C. Ultrasonography in oncology. Acta Oncol 1989;28:157.
2. Berman CG, Brodsky NJ, Clarke RA, eds. Oncologic imaging. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998:349.
3. Braeckman J, Keuppens F, Chaban M, Denis L. Ultrasound in urological oncology. Eur J Surg Oncol 1987;13:475.
4. Abulafia O, Sherer DM, Lee PS. Postoperative color Doppler flow ultrasonographic assessment of ureteral patency in gynecologic oncology patients. J Ultrasound Med 1997;16:125.
5. Thurston W, Wilson SR. The urinary tract. In: Rumack CM, ed. Diagnostic ultrasound, vol 1. St Louis: Mosby–Year Book, 1998:379.
6. Hamper UM, Sheth S, Walsh PC. Carcinoma of the prostate: value of transrectal sonography to detect extension into the neurovascular bundle. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1990;155:1015.
7. Hamper UM. Elevated prostate specific antigen and/or abnormal prostate physical exam. In: Bluth EI, Benson C, Arger P, Siegel M, Ralls P, eds. The practice of ultrasonography. New York:
Thieme Verlag, 1999:153.
8. Bloom C. Scrotal ultrasonography: a pictorial essay. CanAssoc Radiol J 1998;49:12.
9. Hostman WG. Scrotal imaging. Urol Clin North Am 1997;24(3):653.
10. Fleischer AC, Rodgers WH, Kepple DM. Color doppler sonography of ovarian masses. A multiparameter analysis. J Ultrasound Med 1993;12:41.
11. Hamper UM, Sheth S, Abbas FM, et al. Transvaginal color Doppler sonography of ovarian masses: differences in blood flow impedance in benign and malignant lesions. AJR AM J Roentgenol
1993:160:1225.
12. Sheth S, Hamper UM, Kurman RJ. Thickened endometrium in the postmenopausal woman: sonographic-pathologic correlation. Radiology 1993;187:135.
13. Mendelson EB. The breast. In: Rumack CM, ed. Diagnostic ultrasound, vol 1. St. Louis: Mosby–Year Book, 1998:751.
14. Withers CE, Wilson SR. The liver. In: Rumack CM, ed. Diagnostic ultrasound, vol 1. St. Louis: Mosby–Year Book, 1998:87.
15. Laing C. The gallbladder and biliary tree. In: Rumack CM, ed. Diagnostic ultrasound, vol 1. St. Louis: Mosby–Year Book, 1998:175.
16. Atri M, Finnegan PW. The pancreas. In: Rumack CM, ed. Diagnostic ultrasound, vol 1. St. Louis: Mosby–Year Book, 1998:225.
17. Solbiati L, Charboneau JW, James EM, Hay ID. The thyroid gland. In: Rumack CM, ed. Diagnostic ultrasound, vol 1. St. Louis: Mosby–Year Book, 1998:703.
18. Thurston W, Wilson SR. The adrenal glands. In: Rumack CM, ed. Diagnostic ultrasound, vol 1. St. Louis: Mosby–Year Book, 1998:431.
19. Deeg KH, Clockel U, Richter R, Bede J. Diagnosis of veno-occlusive disease of the liver by color-coded Doppler sonography. Pediatr Radiol 1993;23:134.
20. Cartoni C, Arcese W, Arisati G. Role of ultrasonography in the diagnosis and follow-up of hemorrhagic cystitis after bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:463.
21. Federle MP, Megibow AJ, Naidich DP, eds. Radiology of AIDS. New York: Raven Press, 1988.
22. Bradley OL. The peripheral veins. In: Rumack CM, ed. Diagnostic ultrasound, vol 1. St. Louis: Mosby–Year Book, 1998:943.
23. Christallini EG, Ascani S, Farabi R, et al. Fine needle aspiration biopsy in the diagnosis of intrathoracic masses. Acta Cytol 1992;36:416.
24. Athlin L, Blin PJ, Angstrom T. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of pancreatic masses. Acta Chir Scand 1990;156:91.
25. Bognel C, Rougier P, Ledere J. Fine needle aspiration of the liver and pancreas with ultrasound guidance. Acta Cytol 1988;32:22.
26. Jaeger HJ, MacFie J, Mitchell CJ, et al. Diagnosis of abdominal masses with percutaneous biopsy guided by ultrasound. Br Med J 1990;301:1188.
27. Sheth S, Hamper UM, Stanley DB, Wheeler JH, Smith PA. Sonographic guidance for thoracic biopsies: a valuable alternative to CT. Radiology 1999;210:721.
28. Hopper KD. Percutaneous radiographically guided biopsy: a history. Radiology 1995;195(3):918.
29. Memel DS, Dodd FD III, Escala CC. Efficacy of sonography as a guidance technique for biopsy of abdominal, pelvic and retroperitoneal lymph nodes. AJR AM J Roentgenol 1996;167:957.
30. Lee MJ, Mueller PR, Dawson SK. Percutaneous ethanol injection for the treatment of hepatic tumors: indications, mechanism of action, technique and efficacy. AJR AM J Roentgenol
1995;164(1):215.

SECTION 27.6 Radionuclide Imaging
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 27.6
Radionuclide Imaging
E. EDMUND KIM
Introduction
Indirect Radionuclide Tumor Imaging
Nuclear Bone Scans
Nuclear Liver Scans
Hepatic Perfusion Scans
Nuclear Cardiovascular Imaging
Lymphoscintigraphy
Direct Radionuclide Tumor Imaging
Gallium 67 Citrate Scans
Thallium 201 and Technetium 99m Sestamibi Scans
Nuclear Thyroid and Adrenal Imaging
Antibody and Peptide Imaging
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The development of molecular biology and genetics since the late 1970s has provided medical science with an unprecedented chance to understand the molecular
basis of disease. Although disease is usually defined as gross structural or histopathologic abnormality, it can now be defined on the basis of abnormal deviation from
normal regional biochemistry. Molecular derangements occur at the very beginning of disease processes, and anatomically detectable abnormalities occur much later.
Cancer is viewed as a failure of multiple chemical processes or genetic disease. The care of cancer patients has become a cooperative multidisciplinary endeavor. A
multidisciplinary approach to the diagnosis, staging, treatment, and follow-up of cancer takes a great deal of effort, but the rewards to patients and oncologists are
tremendous. It is critical for imaging specialists to embrace and participate in the multidisciplinary environment so that they are considered valued and equal partners.
Advanced imaging techniques have made it possible to diagnose localized abnormalities, often before they have produced irreversible damage. Cancers too small to
be detected by physical examination can be pinpointed by imaging and treated before metastasis has occurred. Most imaging methods reveal the anatomic extent of
an organ or of an abnormality within an organ. Many masses cannot be characterized clearly with imaging studies. This may be a problem when attempting to
distinguish residual viable tumor from fibrosis.
Many radionuclide studies have been performed for the detection of primary and metastatic tumors. Most are organ- or receptor-specific but not tumor-specific. A few
studies are highly tissue-specific, such as thyroid scans using iodine 131 sodium iodide and adrenal scans using 131I metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) or
6-b-iodomethyl-19-norcholesterol. Radiolabeled antibodies and peptides are potentially tumor-specific. With nonspecific limited agents, abnormalities on scans
represent alteration or displacement of normal tissue, and additional scans with other agents are often necessary to evaluate potential involvement of other organs.
Extensive effort has been directed toward the development of specific general agents that ideally would be taken up specifically by tumor and that could be used for a
broad spectrum of tumor types.

INDIRECT RADIONUCLIDE TUMOR IMAGING
NUCLEAR BONE SCANS
The bisphosphonate bone scan is the most frequently performed radionuclide study, and it is used for the early detection of metastatic bone disease. The positive
bone scan (Fig. 27.6-1) reflects levels of blood flow and osteoblastic formation. 1 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has a greater sensitivity and specificity than bone
scans in detecting metastatic foci, 2 but bone scans remain the choice for initial screening of bony metastasis because of its ability to easily assess the whole body and
because of its availability. In the follow-up of bony metastases, the flare phenomenon, in which the patient's clinical condition is improving but the bone scan is
worsening, has been described in up to 20% of patients after a therapeutic intervention. 3 Bone single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) has been
helpful and complementary in differentiating degenerative joint disease or facet syndrome from metastasis. Extraskeletal uptake of technetium 99m methylene
diphosphonate (MDP) has been reported in many malignant tumors with calcification or increased vascularity. Severe bone pain can be a particularly debilitating
effect of metastatic disease. Strontium 89 chloride, samarium 153 ethylene diamine tetramethane phosphoric acid (EDTMP), and rhenium 186 hydroxy ethylene
diphosphoric acid (HEDP) and Sn-117m DTPA (diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid) have been effective in reducing pain in breast and prostate cancer patients. 4

FIGURE 27.6-1. Whole body anterior (A) and posterior (P) images of follow-up bone scans using technetium 99m methylene diphosphonate show focal areas of
abnormally increased activities in the left humeral head, T7, T8, T12, left sacrum, and left anterior second rib end, indicating active metastatic lesions. Note also the
diffusely increased renal activities suggesting nephrotoxicity in a patient with breast cancer.

NUCLEAR LIVER SCANS
Cavernous hemangioma is the most common benign tumor of the liver and consists of dilated endothelium-lined blood-filled spaces. Increasing focal activity over 1 to
2 hours after injection of 99mTc red blood cells is a typical diagnostic finding. SPECT is cost effective in demonstrating hemangiomas greater than 1 cm when CT or
MRI findings are questionable. 5
Hepatic adenoma and focal nodular hyperplasia show a contrast enhancement on CT or MRI. The adenoma presents as a cold defect on 99mTc sulfur colloid
liver-spleen scans but shows an uptake of 99mTc iminodiacetic acid hepatobiliary agent because no Kupffer cell is present. On the other hand, focal nodular
hyperplasia demonstrates uptake of 99mTc sulfur colloid because of the presence of Kupffer cells. 6
HEPATIC PERFUSION SCANS

Intraarterial chemotherapy has been used to treat many tumors in an effort to obtain better results than with systemic chemotherapy. Hepatic tumors derive 99% of
their blood supply from the hepatic artery. 99mTc macroaggregated albumin, usually 10 to 90 mm, is trapped in the first capillary bed and has been useful to detect
misplaced or displaced hepatic arterial catheters that require repositioning. 7
NUCLEAR CARDIOVASCULAR IMAGING
In patients undergoing chemotherapy with doxorubicin (Adriamycin), one risk is developing cardiotoxicity. Radionuclide ventriculography using 99mTc red blood cells
provides the left ventricular ejection fraction, and a 10% to 15% decrease of left ventricular ejection fraction or a decrease to less than 45% is considered significant. 8
Chemotherapy or catheterization increases the risk for thrombus formation in cancer patients. Radionuclide venograms using 99mTc macroaggregated albumin for
lower extremities and 99mTc sulfur colloid or DTPA for upper extremities have been useful in screening hemodynamically significant venous obstruction. 999mTc P-829
peptide accumulated in the platelet receptor is now being used to detect acute venous thrombosis.
LYMPHOSCINTIGRAPHY
Approximately 20% of melanoma patients do have clinically undetectable micrometastases in the lymph nodes, and the presence of metastases in the sentinel (first
draining) node indicates the need for a regional lymph node dissection. A dose of 0.5 mCi 99mTc sulfur colloid in 0.25 mL is injected intradermally around the
melanoma site, and the lymphatic flow is imaged dynamically for 30 minutes. Subsequent static images demonstrate the draining regional node basin and the location
of the sentinel node. 10 The status of regional lymph node remains the most powerful predictor of survival in women with invasive breast cancer. Approximately 14% to
37% of small (less than 1 cm) invasive cancers may have axillary nodal metastases. Lymphatic drainage from breast cancer can be mapped to regional lymph nodes
pre- or intraoperatively. The technique involves peritumoral injection of 0.5 mCi 99mTc sulfur colloid and gamma camera imaging or gamma detection probe. In one
study,11 the sentinel lymph node was identified in 92% of patients, and 32% of them were found to have metastatic diseases.

DIRECT RADIONUCLIDE TUMOR IMAGING
GALLIUM 67 CITRATE SCANS
Gallium 67 citrate has been known to be taken up in varying degrees by many other tumors, and 67Ga scans have been useful as a marker of tumor viability and for
evaluating the effectiveness of radiotherapy or chemotherapy. 67Ga citrate binds to serum transferrin, ferritin, and lactoferrin. Approximately 15% to 25% is excreted
by kidneys within 24 to 48 hours, and 30% to 40% is cleared slowly through the intestinal tract. 67Ga citrate localizes normally within the reticuloendothelial system
and lacrimal and salivary glands. A dose of 5 to 10 mCi is usually recommended for tumor imaging. High-resolution whole body images ( Fig. 27.6-2) and SPECT of
chest or abdomen are obtained at 48 to 72 hours.

FIGURE 27.6-2. Whole body anterior (A) and posterior (P) images of follow-up gallium scans show focal areas of abnormally increased uptake of gallium 67 citrate
(arrows) in the right upper and lower lungs, indicating active lymphomatous lesions confirmed by biopsy.

67

Ga citrate probably enters the tumor extracellular space through the capillary endothelium and is bound to the tumor cell surface by transferrin receptors. It localizes
in the lysosomes of tumor cells and is taken up by viable and growing tumors. 67Ga scans detect nodal and visceral involvement of Hodgkin's disease, and high- and
intermediate-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, with approximately 90% sensitivity (see Fig. 27.6-2).12 The sensitivities for histocytic Burkitt's lymphoma, and poorly
and well-differentiated lymphocytic lymphomas, have been reported as 89%, 85%, 70%, and 59%, respectively. 13 SPECT greatly improves contrast resolution,
resulting in a 10% to 15% increase of diagnostic accuracy over planar imaging. Persistent 67Ga uptake halfway through the course of chemotherapy in patients with
diffuse large cell lymphoma predicts a poor outcome, either by failure to achieve remission or by subsequent relapse. 13 The diagnostic sensitivity of 67Ga scans for
lung cancer is 85% to 90%, but 67Ga scans are suboptimal for preoperative staging. However, enlarged nodes are not specific for tumors, and normal-size nodes can
carry tumor cells. Most hepatomas and melanomas are Ga-avid, and 67Ga scans can be useful for differentiating hepatomas from regenerative pseudotumor nodules
seen on CT in cirrhotic patients.
THALLIUM 201 AND TECHNETIUM 99M SESTAMIBI SCANS
Thallium 201 chloride behaves in a manner that is biologically similar to potassium. Tumor blood flow influences the uptake of 201Tl by tumors, probably related to the
action of the adenosine triphosphatase system in the cell membrane. 201Tl is accumulated by viable tumor tissue, and its uptake correlates with the grade of
histopathologic differentiation. Planar and SPECT imaging of the lesion is usually obtained at 10 to 30 minutes after the injection of 3 mCi 201Tl chloride. 201Tl scans
have been used to determine viability when CT or MRI cannot differentiate residual or recurrent brain or lung tumors from posttreatment changes or infectious lesions
(Fig. 27.6-3). 201Tl indices, count-density ratios of tumor to nontumor area, were significantly higher in high-grade tumors than in those patients with low-grade
tumors.14201Tl is usually taken up only by tumors, whereas 67GA is taken up in both tumor and inflammatory lesions. 201Tl appears valuable in detecting low-grade
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and also Kaposi's sarcoma. Some studies have found the 201Tl scan to be more sensitive than the 131I scan in the detection of thyroid
cancer, although 201Tl is not specific for thyroid cancer and does not give predictive information on the therapeutic potential of I sodium iodide. 15

FIGURE 27.6-3. A: Axial T1-weighted magnetic resonance images of the head show a contrast-enhanced lesion ( arrow) in the right frontal lobe in a patient who had a
treatment for anaplastic astrocytoma. B: Selected coronal (upper left), sagittal (upper right), and axial (lower left) single photon emission computed tomography
images using thallium 201 chloride show a focal area of markedly increased activity ( arrow) in the right frontal lobe, indicating active malignant tumor. Biopsy
confirmed a recurrent anaplastic astrocytoma.

99m

Tc sestamibi uptake is not tumor-specific, but it has been used to detect benign as well as malignant tumors, including parathyroid adenoma and breast cancer.
Tc sestamibi is bound by the mitochondrial proteins but is passively transferred across the cell membrane. The sestamibi scan is usually performed at 15 to 30
minutes and 2 to 3 hours after injection of 20 to 29 mCi. 99mTc sestamibi uptake is inversely proportional to the level of P glycoprotein, which is a product of the
multidrug resistance gene. Some studies have shown the potential of functional imaging using 99mTc sestamibi to monitor cancer therapy with the multidrug resistance
modulator. 16
99m

NUCLEAR THYROID AND ADRENAL IMAGING
During the 1990s, it has become apparent that the most cost-effective diagnostic workup of a thyroid nodule is fine-needle aspiration. However, histologic and cellular
details of endocrine tumors do not always establish the diagnosis of carcinoma. Both papillary and follicular cancers retain, to varying degrees, the ability to
concentrate radioiodine. Medullary and anaplastic carcinomas do not concentrate radioiodine. All types of thyroid cancer do not concentrate radioiodine as avidly as
normal thyroid tissue. To enhance radioiodine uptake by thyroid cancer, high levels of circulating thyroid-stimulating hormone are desired (more than 30 µIU/mL).
123

I is ideal for imaging because of short physical half-life (13 hours) and optimal photon energy (159 keV). However, it is relatively expensive, and the thyroid imaging
is usually performed at 4 to 6 hours after the oral administration of 0.2 mCi 123I sodium iodide. 99mTc sodium pertechnetate is cheap and ideal for early (30 minutes)
imaging with good physical properties (6-hour half-life; 140 keV optimal photon energy), although it is only trapped and not organified. Indications of radionuclide
thyroid imaging are functional evaluation of palpable nodules, detection of the primary tumor in patients with known regional or distant thyroidal metastases, detection
of thyroid cancer metastases, and assessment of thyroid treatments. Nonfunctioning cold nodules are common, and 6% to 20% of them are usually malignant. 17
Pheochromocytoma is a tumor of adrenal medulla or sympathetic nervous tissues. Approximately 10% occur in children, 10% are familial, 10% are malignant, 10% are
multifocal, and 10% are extraadrenal. CT or MRI is useful in detecting intraadrenal or other abdominal masses. MIBG is an analogue of guanethidine and localizes in
cytoplasmic storage vesicles in presynaptic adrenergic nerves through the active amine transport mechanism. 123I- or 131I-labeled MIBG has been useful in surveying
the entire body for the localization of pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma. 18
ANTIBODY AND PEPTIDE IMAGING
Antibodies are glycoproteins produced by plasma cells after exposure to a foreign antigen. Many tumors have antigens expressed on their cell surfaces, thus allowing
antibody targeting. Major roles of immunoscintigraphy using indium 111 anti-TAG-12 (OncoScint, Cytogen Co., Princeton, NJ) or 99mTc anti–carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA) (CEA-scan, Immunomedics Co., Morris Plains, NJ) (Fig. 27.6-4) in colon cancer are: (1) detection of recurrent disease in patients with elevated serum CEA
level, and either negative workup or equivocal findings on CT or MRI; (2) differential diagnosis of residual or recurrent disease from posttreatment changes; and (3)
exclusion of extraabdominal disease before planned resection of a presumably isolated recurrence. 111In antiprostate membrane antigen (ProstaScint, Cytogen Co.)
scans are indicated for patients with proven prostate cancer thought to be localized clinically after standard diagnostic evaluation who are at risk for pelvic node
metastasis. It is also indicated in prostate cancer patients with a rising prostate-specific antigen level and negative or equivocal standard metastatic evaluation.
Antibody scans generally revealed 70 to 80 T diagnostic sensitivities and should be interpreted in conjunction with CT or MRI studies. 19 Natural somatostatin is a
tetradecapeptide produced by hypothalamus and pancreas. Five subtypes of human somatotropin-release inhibiting factor receptors, termed somatostatin type
receptors (SSTRs), are expressed on many tumors, and SSTR2 is the predominant subtype. Tumors that have been found to express SSTRs include small cell lung
cancer, endocrine pancreatic tumor, carcinoid, pituitary adenoma, paraganglioma, lymphoma, and meningioma. Octreotide is a synthetic somatotropin-release
inhibiting factor analogue that has been used for treating gastroenteropancreatic tumors. 111In pentetreotide (Octreoscan, Mallinckrodt Co., Hazelwood, MO) has been
helpful for detecting neuroendocrine tumors and evaluating their therapeutic response. 2099mTc P-829 peptide has been approved to image somatostatin receptors in
lung cancers. 21

FIGURE 27.6-4. Anterior whole body images at 2 (left) and 20 (right) hours after the injection of technetium 99m anti–carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) show focal
areas of abnormally increased activity in the left inguinal ( closed arrow) and iliac ( open arrow) lymphatic chains in a patient with colon carcinoma and rising serum
CEA levels. Note the cystic lesions in the left kidney.

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Garrett IR. Bone destruction in cancer. Semin Oncol 1993;20:4.
2. Kosuda S, Kaji T, Yokoyama H, et al. Does bone SPECT actually have lower sensitivity for detecting vertebral metastasis than MRI? J Nucl Med 1996;37:975.
3. Coleman RE, Mashiter G, Whitaker KB. Bone scan flare predicts successful systemic therapy for bone metastases. J Nucl Med 1988;29:1354.
4. Holmes RA. Radiopharmaceuticals in clinical trials. Semin Oncol 1993;20:22.
5. Ferrucci JT. Liver tumor imaging: current concepts. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1990;160:473.
6. Welch TJ, Sheedy PF, Johnson CM, et al. Focal nodular hyperplasia and hepatic adenoma: comparison of angiography, CT, ultrasound, and scintigraphy. Radiology 1985;156:593.
7. Bledin AG, Kim EE, Chuang VP, Wallace S, Haynie TP. Changes of arterial blood flow patterns during infusion chemotherapy, as monitored by intra-arterially injected technetium 99m
macroaggregated albumin. Br J Radiol 1984;57:197.
8. Schwartz RG, McKenzie B, Alexander J, et al. Congestive heart failure and left ventricular dysfunction complicating doxorubicin therapy. Am J Med 1987;82:1109.
9. Knight LC. Scintigraphic methods for detecting vascular thrombus. J Nucl Med 1993;34:554.
10. Kapteijin BAE, Nieweg OE, Valdes Olms RA, et al. Reproducibility of lymphoscintigraphy for lymphatic mapping in cutaneous melanoma. J Nucl Med 1996;37: 972.
11. Albertini JJ, Lyman GH, Cox C, et al. Lymphatic mapping and sentinel node biopsy in the patients with breast cancer. JAMA 1996;276:1818.
12. Front D, Israel O. The role of Ga-67 scintigraphy in evaluating the results of therapy of lymphoma patients. Semin Nucl Med 1995;25:60.
13. King SC, Reiman RJ, Prosnitz LR. Prognostic importance of restaging gallium scans following induction chemotherapy for advanced Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:306.
14. Takekawa H, Itoh K, Abe S, et al. Tl-201 uptake, histologic differentiation and Na-K ATPase in lung adenocarcinoma. J Nucl Med 1996;37:955.
15. Lorberboym M, Murthy S, Cechanick JI, et al. Thallium-201 and iodine-131 scintigraphy in differentiated thyroid carcinoma. J Nucl Med 1996;37:1487.
16. Rao VV, Chiu ML, Kronauge JF, Pwinica-Worms D. Expression of recombinant human multidrug resistance P-glycoprotein in insect cells confers decreased accumulation of Tc-99m sestamibi.
J Nucl Med 1994;35:510.
17. Dworkin HJ, Meier DA, Kaplan M. Advances in the management of patients with thyroid disease. Semin Nucl Med 1995;25:205.
18. Freitas JE. Adrenal cortical and medullary imaging. Semin Nucl Med 1995;25:235.
19. Zucker LS, DeNardo GL. Trials and tribulations: oncologic antibody imaging comes to the fore. Semin Nucl Med 1997;27:10.
20. Olsen JO, Pozderac RV, Inkle G, et al. Somatostatin receptor imaging of neuroendocrine tumors with In-111 pentetreotide. Semin Nucl Med 1995;25:251.
21. Vallabhajosula S, Moyer BR, Lister-James J, et al. Preclinical evaluation of Tc-99m labeled somatostatin receptor-binding peptides. J Nucl Med 1996;37:1016.

CHAPTER 28 Cancer Diagnosis: Endoscopy
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 28
Cancer Diagnosis: Endoscopy
ROBERT C. KURTZ
ROBERT J. GINSBERG
Upper Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
Diagnostic Upper Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
Therapeutic Upper Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
Complications
Endoscopic Ultrasonography
Principles
Indications and Results
Sigmoidoscopy
Principles
Indications and Results
Colonoscopy
Diagnostic Colonoscopy
Therapeutic Colonoscopy: Polypectomy
Complications
Laparoscopy
Principles
Indications and Results
Complications
Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography
Diagnostic Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography
Therapeutic Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography
Complications
Small Intestinal Endoscopy: Enteroscopy
Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy
Bronchoscopy
Indications
Technique
Diagnostic Bronchoscopy
Therapeutic Bronchoscopy
Complications
Mediastinoscopy
Indications
Technique
Results
Anterior Mediastinotomy (Chamberlain Procedure)
Thoracoscopy
Technique
Results
Complications
Chapter References

UPPER GASTROINTESTINAL ENDOSCOPY
Endoscopy is a rapidly advancing field. Video-recording or electronic instruments use microchip technology to capture high-resolution digitized endoscopic images,
leading to more accurate diagnoses and greater ease in documentation and analysis. Many internal organs can be examined by endoscopy with video documentation,
endoscopic biopsy, cytology, and endoscopic sonography to determine diagnosis, operability, and staging.
Although diagnostic endoscopy remains the major component of any endoscopy program, therapeutic endoscopy is rapidly catching up. Endoscopic removal of
polyps, tumor ablation with laser therapy, luminal stents, control of hemorrhage, relief of biliary obstruction, and enteral nutritional support through endoscopically
placed tubes are but some of the therapeutic uses of endoscopy available at large medical centers.
Upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy is the procedure of choice for the diagnosis of symptomatic esophagogastric neoplasia. Benign upper GI conditions that can
mimic or complicate cancer are accurately diagnosed. Endoscopy is often the initial diagnostic procedure rather than a follow-up to radiologic examination. 1 Upper GI
endoscopes are thin and highly maneuverable, making upper endoscopy comfortable and rapid. 2 Upper GI endoscopy requires only mild sedation and is safe for the
patient. Although upper GI endoscopy is more invasive and more expensive than barium upper GI radiography, it is also more accurate and may avoid multiple
procedures, with their associated added costs. There is no exposure to radiation, and complications are rare. 3 The ability to perform guided mucosal biopsy and
cytology provides tissue diagnosis to complement high-resolution observation and photography.
DIAGNOSTIC UPPER GASTROINTESTINAL ENDOSCOPY
The diagnostic accuracy of endoscopy and biopsy for primary and metastatic upper GI cancer is in the range of 95%. 1 Infiltrating cancers may be less successfully
subjected to biopsy, although a tissue diagnosis is still achieved in most cases with large biopsy forceps and needle aspiration cytology. 4 Endoscopy is recommended
in all patients with gastric ulcers found on upper GI series, because some benign-appearing gastric ulcers are malignant. 1 If suspicion remains, repeat endoscopy is
indicated in 6 to 8 weeks. This is not the case in duodenal ulcer disease, which is only rarely due to cancer, and endoscopy solely to diagnose Helicobacterpylori
infection is not recommended.
Patients with an identifiable high risk for upper GI cancer, such as those with Barrett's esophagus, prior gastric adenomas, or previous partial gastrectomy, may be
considered for periodic screening endoscopy, although the benefits of such screening remain controversial. 5 When high-grade dysplasia is identified on endoscopic
biopsy of either the stomach or Barrett's esophagus, surgical management should be considered because there is a high likelihood of developing invasive cancer. 6
In northern China, where chronic esophagitis and epidermoid carcinoma of the esophagus are endemic, 7 population screening programs for esophageal cancer have
been carried out on a large scale with promising results. Screening has been based on esophageal cytology and confirmation with endoscopy. 8 Using these methods,
early-stage esophageal cancers with good probability for surgical cure have been detected in asymptomatic persons. Similar screening programs, carried out in heavy
smokers and drinkers in the United States, have not proven effective. 9 Endoscopy has identified early asymptomatic esophageal cancer in up to 5% of patients with
cancers of the head and neck who are also at risk for esophageal cancer. Endoscopic staining of the esophagus with Lugol's iodine solution before endoscopy may
help in detecting small areas of squamous cell malignancy. 10
In Japan, where gastric cancer is a leading cause of death, mass population screening with radiography and endoscopy has led to a major improvement in the
detection of early disease and subsequent survival. 11 Distal gastric cancer in America and Europe has been decreasing in incidence, but there is an increase in
cancers affecting the proximal stomach and an increasing incidence of early gastric cancer detection. 12,13 Mass screening is not practical or economically feasible in
low-incidence Western countries; the increased detection of early gastric cancer has been attributed to greater physician sensitivity to suggestive symptoms and more
aggressive application of radiologic and endoscopic methods. 14

Whether patients with partial gastrectomy for benign disease are at long-term risk for gastric cancer and merit endoscopic screening is also an open question but, in
patients who have dysplasia on endoscopic biopsy, endoscopic surveillance is indicated. 15
Periodic endoscopic surveillance of the stomach and duodenum in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and Gardner's syndrome is recommended,
including the use of a side-viewing duodenoscope for better visualization of the periampullary area. Adenomas of the duodenum are common in patients with FAP. In
such cases, the adenomas tend to be very flat and may be numerous. 16 Carcinoma in the duodenum, most often periampullary, has become a major cause of death in
patients with FAP who have had a colectomy.
New endoscopic technology is continually being developed. Fluorescence spectroscopy is one such advance currently in clinical trials. Laser-generated light of a
specific wavelength is used to stimulate tissue during endoscopy. Differential fluorescence can be detected from benign, dysplastic, and malignant GI tissues. This
technology may become a complement to histopathology, especially in sampling large areas of the GI tract before endoscopic biopsy. 17
As a rule, endoscopy is most effective in evaluating intraluminal GI disease, focal and diffuse, benign and malignant. The procedure can be informative but is less
effective in assessing abnormal motility, extrinsic compression by contiguous structures, and degree of luminal obstruction. Barium radiologic and computed
tomography (CT) scans provide not only better evaluation of extrinsic lesions that are causing compression and contour defects in the GI tract but better assessment
of the degree of obstruction.
THERAPEUTIC UPPER GASTROINTESTINAL ENDOSCOPY
Therapeutic applications of endoscopy include the placement of guidewires, stents, and balloons for the following purposes 18,19 and 20:
1. Dilation of benign and malignant strictures
2. Removal of foreign bodies
3. Removal of polyps by electrocautery
4. Endoscopic strip biopsy of small cancers
5. Vaporization and coagulation of cancerous tissues with neodymium:yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser or with photodynamic therapy
6. Control of bleeding with electrocautery, heat, or laser probes
7. Injection of epinephrine and sclerosant solutions via needle-tipped catheters for tumor necrosis or treatment of bleeding
In patients with advanced, unresectable cancer of the esophagus or gastric cardia that is unresponsive to primary treatment, endoscopic therapy has assumed a
major role in the palliation of concomitant dysphagia. The mainstays of endoscopic palliation have been the placement of endoprostheses, using either plastic stents
or self-expanding metallic stents, and laser ablation with Nd:YAG laser energy. There are advantages and disadvantages to both methods. In approximately 70% of
patients, laser therapy is more likely to allow a normal diet, but it must be repeated at frequent intervals. Although outpatient treatment is possible, laser sessions
become increasingly time-consuming and uncomfortable for the patient as the cancer progresses. Esophageal stents ideally provide a longer-lasting palliation, and
they are the treatment of choice for tumors that are primarily infiltrating, submucosal, or extrinsic. They can be used anywhere in the esophagus except near the
proximal sphincter. Endoluminal stents are also useful for sealing fistulas into the tracheobronchial tree. In most centers where an Nd:YAG laser is available, laser
therapy is performed first, particularly if there is bulky intraluminal tumor. However, some groups preferentially palliate esophageal and esophagogastric malignant
stenoses with stents. This is especially true with the advent of self-expanding metal stents, which are easier to insert, cause less trauma, carry a lower perforation
rate, but are more expensive initially than polyvinyl stents. Complications, mostly perforations, occur in approximately 5% of those treated with laser and 5% to 18% of
those treated with stents. 18,19
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) uses both photochemical sensitizers that preferentially concentrate in neoplastic tissue and low-powered laser light activation. This
technique is, in theory, more selective and safer than the Nd:YAG laser treatment. However, one multicenter study 21 of advanced esophageal cancer showed no
difference when the cancers were treated with either PDT or Nd:YAG laser. Perhaps the most effective use of PDT will be in the management of early cancers or
premalignant conditions such as Barrett's esophagus. 21,22
COMPLICATIONS
Upper GI endoscopy is a very safe procedure with few contraindications and only rare complications. The probability of GI perforation is less than 0.1%. 3 This
procedure can be performed safely even in patients on anticoagulants or with nadir blood counts, although therapeutic options in these patients may be limited. In
weakened or comatose patients, there is an increased risk of aspiration pneumonia.

ENDOSCOPIC ULTRASONOGRAPHY
PRINCIPLES
Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) is an important new extension of diagnostic GI endoscopy. Using this modality, it is possible for the endoscopist to assess not only
mucosal lesions but intramural disease processes deep to the mucosa and extrinsic abnormalities in proximity to the wall of the GI tract. 23,24 and 25
EUS uses high-frequency ultrasound (more than 7 MHz) for high resolution, producing detailed views of the GI wall and surrounding structures that are unmatched by
other imaging methods. The higher the ultrasound frequency, the shorter the penetration depth of ultrasound and the more limited the field of view. However, with
EUS a limited field is acceptable, because the transducer can be placed immediately adjacent to the area of interest.
Using EUS, the wall of the GI tract can be imaged as a five-layer structure of alternating bright (hyperechoic) and dark (hypoechoic) bands ( Fig. 28-1). The echogenic
layers consist in part of interface echoes produced as the sound waves travel between tissues of differing densities. 26 For clinical purposes, the first two layers
correspond to the superficial and deep mucosa, the third layer to the submucosa, the fourth to the muscularis propria, and the fifth to the serosa or adventitia.

FIGURE 28-1. Endosonographic image of the normal gastric wall. The concentric circles in the center represent the transducer and water-filled balloon in the lumen of
the stomach. From the lumen, the first two wall layers correlate with the superficial and deep mucosa (m), the third wall layer represents the submucosa (sm), the
fourth layer is the muscularis propria (mp), and the fifth layer is the serosa (s).

Most clinical studies have been carried out using mechanical sector scan instruments manufactured by the Olympus Corporation, Melville, NY, principally the GF-UM3
instrument. These instruments are combination endoscopes and ultrasound probes that use an acoustic mirror rotating around a transducer with switchable 7.5- and

12-MHz frequencies and produce a 360-degree image. 23,24 and 25 In the tubular GI tract, this greatly facilitates orientation of the image. Optics are forward oblique, but
the 4-cm rigid tip and the 13-mm diameter make the instrument somewhat difficult to use and limit passage through tightly stenotic areas.
Instruments using linear- or phased-array technology have the advantages of forward-viewing optics and an absence of moving parts but provide a slice-like image,
which can make orientation more difficult. Pentax Precision Instruments, Orangeberg, NY, manufactures a linear-array 5- and 7.5-MHz ultrasound endoscope
(FG-32UA). Doppler ultrasound technology, to aid in evaluation of vascularity and blood flow, is easily obtained on ultrasound instruments. Blind endosonography
probes, rigid and flexible, mechanical and electronic, have been used in the rectum and in the esophagus. Ultrathin miniprobes that can be passed through an
endoscope biopsy channel have also been developed. They have a restricted field of view and often produce less-than-satisfactory images.
INDICATIONS AND RESULTS
EUS has been applied most extensively to the staging of esophageal, gastric, and rectal cancer. Data show that EUS is the most accurate imaging modality for
staging depth of tumor invasion (T), with preoperative accuracy in the 80% to 90% range when compared with surgical pathology. 27,28,29,20 and 31 For staging
esophageal and gastric cancer, T1 cancers invade the mucosa to submucosa and are imaged as a disruption of the first three endosonographic wall layers ( Fig.
28-2). T2 cancers invade the muscularis propria to the subserosa and show a hypoechoic invasion of the fourth layer. T3 cancers invade through the serosa and can
be seen to penetrate the fifth layer. T4 cancers directly invade adjacent organs or structures.

FIGURE 28-2. Endosonographic image shows a polypoid hypoechoic disruption involving only the first three wall layers of the stomach at the angularis. A T1 cancer
invading to the submucosa, but not involving the muscularis propria, was confirmed by surgical pathologic examination.

At the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC), a prospective study used EUS in 50 patients for preoperative staging of esophageal cancer ( Fig. 28-3) and
in 50 patients for preoperative staging of gastric cancer ( Fig. 28-4).28,29 Results were compared for accuracy with surgical pathology and with CT using rapid
scanners, oral contrast, and dynamic technique. EUS was significantly more accurate than dynamic CT in staging tumor extent in esophageal and gastric cancer.
Most studies comparing EUS with CT for staging esophageal, gastric, and rectal cancer have found EUS superior for evaluation of tumor extent. 27,28,29,30 and 31

FIGURE 28-3. Esophageal cancer staging concordance with surgical pathology. Results of preoperative staging in 50 consecutive patients who had surgery for
esophageal cancer at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. CT, computed tomography; EUS, endoscopic ultrasonography; N, node; T, tumor.

FIGURE 28-4. Gastric cancer staging concordance with surgical pathology. Results of preoperative staging in 50 consecutive patients who had surgery for gastric
cancer at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. CT, computed tomography; EUS, endoscopic ultrasonography; N, node; T, tumor.

The greatest strength of EUS is in identifying the location of tissues and not the specific histology. Biopsy and histopathologic evaluation are still required to identify
the nature of any abnormality. EUS cannot reliably distinguish an inflammatory from a neoplastic process (e.g., determining whether a gastric ulcer is benign or
malignant). EUS has proved less accurate in staging lymph nodes than in staging depth of tumor invasion because the node must not only be located but be
characterized as benign or malignant. Lymph nodes in the 2- to 3-mm range can be detected with EUS. Some investigators use the echo character of nodes for
staging.27,28 and 29 Nodes that are rounded, sharply defined, and hypoechoic are more likely to be malignant ( Fig. 28-5). Using such criteria, staging regional lymph
node metastases has been more accurate than other imaging modalities, such as CT scan, and is accurate in the range of 70% to 80%. 27,28,29,30 and 31 EUS is a
sensitive method of detecting recurrent upper GI cancer in the area of the surgical anastomosis. 32 There have been false-positive results due to inflammation, and
specificity should be improved.

FIGURE 28-5. A round, hypoechoic, sharply defined lymph node measuring 1.4 cm is imaged through the distal esophagus. The posterior node lies between the aorta
and azygos vein. The relation of the esophagus to the left atrium is evident posteriorly. The node in a patient with cancer of the esophagogastric junction was
malignant at the time of surgical resection.

Characteristic images are recognized for cysts, leiomyomas, and lipomas, but again, it is not always possible to distinguish benign from malignant lesions. 33 On the
other hand, large gastric folds due to benign gastropathy can usually be distinguished from malignant infiltration by carcinoma or lymphoma, which tend to destroy the
normal tissue architecture. 34 Gastric varices may be readily identified.
Imaging the pancreas through the wall of the stomach and duodenum provides a highly detailed image, allowing the detection of small tumors measuring even less
than 1 cm.35 Although changes due to pancreatitis can be evaluated, once again, it has not been possible reliably to distinguish neoplastic from inflammatory
pancreatic masses. 36,37 EUS may play a role in the screening of family members of pancreatic cancer kindreds. 38 Staging of pancreatic, biliary, and ampullary cancer
preoperatively 37,39 and the localization of neuroendocrine tumors have been carried out successfully with EUS. 40
Linear-array endosonographic instruments facilitate the ability to perform fine-needle aspiration of small submucosal lesions or lesions outside of but adjacent to the
GI tract. In 50 consecutive patients in whom the combination of EUS and fine-needle aspiration was performed, the highest yield was 93% (14 of 15) in malignant
lesions extrinsic to the GI tract. 41 Endosonography is often challenging to perform, and image interpretation can be difficult. However, EUS has become progressively
easier and more available as more experience has accumulated and instruments have improved.

SIGMOIDOSCOPY
PRINCIPLES
Rigid and flexible sigmoidoscopies are important for evaluating the distal colon and rectum. Rigid sigmoidoscopes are usually 25 cm long, and flexible instruments are
either 35 cm or 60 cm long. Although rigid sigmoidoscopes are less expensive to purchase and maintain and are somewhat easier to use than their flexible
counterparts, the flexible instruments offer greater depth of insertion, patient comfort, and acceptance.
INDICATIONS AND RESULTS
Colorectal cancer screening represents one of the most important indications for sigmoidoscopy, because the procedure is highly sensitive and specific. 42 Because of
its length, sigmoidoscopy misses proximal colon cancers and polyps. Sigmoidoscopic screening of large population groups remains controversial because most
clinical trials have been uncontrolled and because the proposed goal of mortality reduction has not been met. In a case-control trial of rigid sigmoidoscopy, the
investigators used data from 261 patients who died of distal colon and rectal cancer. Only 8.8% of these patients underwent sigmoidoscopy, as compared with 24.2%
in a control population without cancer. The control patients who had undergone sigmoidoscopy within the preceding 10 years had a 60% to 70% reduction in
colorectal cancer mortality. 43 The use of sigmoidoscopy as part of a periodic comprehensive health evaluation to prevent the lethal complications of advanced cancer
is case finding and should not be confused with population screening. 44 The American Cancer Society recommends the use of sigmoidoscopic evaluation coupled
with annual fecal occult blood testing for average-risk, asymptomatic patients every 3 to 5 years, beginning at 50 years of age. 45
Sigmoidoscopy is a complement to air-contrast barium enema studies performed to evaluate colonic symptoms, such as rectal bleeding. In a comparative study, the
combination of sigmoidoscopy and barium enema was almost as effective in identifying colon cancer as was colonoscopy. The identification of small and medium
polyps was better with colonoscopy. 46 Sigmoidoscopy is also useful to assess therapy in inflammatory bowel disease patients. It may be therapeutic for sigmoid
volvulus, and it is used to follow up patients with FAP after colectomy and ileorectal reconstruction or to evaluate young family members for phenotypic expression.
Sigmoidoscopy is a safe procedure. Flexible sigmoidoscopy can be easily taught to primary care physicians and nurse practitioners. 47 Perforation of the colon during
rigid or flexible sigmoidoscopy is possible but extremely unusual. In a series of 5000 flexible sigmoidoscopies, no perforations occurred. 48

COLONOSCOPY
DIAGNOSTIC COLONOSCOPY
Colonoscopy has become the established method of evaluating and treating diseases of the large intestine. Modern colonoscopes are easier and safer to use, and
complete evaluation by direct observation of the rectum and colon to the cecum is the rule. Abnormalities seen may be photographed, subjected to biopsy and, in the
case of most polypoid lesions, entirely removed. 49 With aggressive bowel preparation, the patients can often be ready for colonoscopy within 24 hours.
An important indication for colonoscopy is evaluation of abnormal findings on barium enema. When a potential neoplastic lesion is identified on barium enema
examination, colonoscopy then is needed to determine the precise nature of the lesion, either by removing it or by biopsy. Colonoscopy also confirms that there are
no synchronous lesions elsewhere in the colon. Synchronous adenomas occur in approximately 50% of patients with colon cancer, and separate synchronous colon
cancers occur in from 1.5% to 5.0% of patients. 49
One of the most difficult areas of barium enema interpretation is the differentiation of strictures due to diverticular disease from colon cancer. Barium enema may
underestimate the degree and intensity of diverticular inflammation. Colonoscopy, with associated biopsy and cytology, is the most important tool to use in making this
distinction. In 44 patients with diverticular disease, Hunt 50 found six (13.6%) with unexpected cancer; he was unable adequately to examine the colon in a similar
number of patients.
Hematochezia and melena thought not to be from an upper GI source should be evaluated by colonoscopy. Cancer of the large bowel, particularly in the rectum and
left colon, often cause rectal bleeding, whereas cancers involving the right colon are more likely to produce melanotic stools or occult bleeding, with the gradual onset
of iron-deficiency anemia. Brand et al. 51 studied by colonoscopy more than 300 patients with recent rectal bleeding and found that the bleeding was due to cancer in
approximately 8% of their patients, though in more than 20% it was due to benign colon polyps. Angiodysplasia was also an important cause of large-bowel
hemorrhage in their patient population. Tedesco et al. 52 performed colonoscopy in 258 patients with rectal bleeding, negative proctosigmoidoscopy, and barium
enemas that were either negative or showed only diverticula. In 29 patients (11.2%), cancer was found during colonoscopy.
Asymptomatic patients with a positive fecal occult blood test should also undergo colonoscopy. Data from the New York occult blood screening trial 53 show that, of
patients initially tested for occult blood, approximately 50% have a colonic neoplastic lesion. Approximately 12% of these lesions are cancers, and the rest are
adenomatous polyps. These rates increase as the age of the study population increases.
Patients who have had a colon cancer or adenomatous polyp resected are at risk for metachronous lesions. Various estimates have placed the risk for metachronous

cancer between 5% and 10%, whereas the risk of developing a metachronous adenoma can be as high as 60%, as defined in a study of 383 patients by Fowler and
Hedberg. 54 The National Polyp Study (NPS), a multicenter randomized trial, demonstrated a polyp recurrence rate of 29% to 35%, depending on the number of
colonoscopies performed and the interval between them. It is clear that these patients should be kept under surveillance by follow-up colonoscopy. 55 Published NPS
data have demonstrated that at a follow-up interval of 3 years, as many important colonic lesions were detected as were found at a 1-year interval. Therefore, it is
recommended that postpolypectomy surveillance colonoscopy be performed once every 3 years. 56
Colonoscopic polypectomy, although long thought to help prevent colon cancer, now has been proven to do so. Winawer et al. 57 analyzed the NPS cohort of 1418
patients who had a complete colonoscopy during which at least one polyp was removed. The colon cancer incidence in the study population was compared with the
incidence in three reference groups, and reductions in cancer incidence of 76%, 88%, and 90%, respectively, were observed ( P <.001).
Surveillance for colon cancer in patients with long-standing chronic ulcerative colitis represents a special problem. Although there is disagreement as to the
magnitude of the cancer risk in ulcerative colitis, most investigators agree that cancer is unusual during the first 8 to 10 years of the disease and that thereafter the
estimated cumulative incidence is approximately 5% at 20 years and 12% at 25 years. 58 Annual surveillance colonoscopy should begin after 10 years. The aim of
colonoscopy is to identify those patients who are especially likely to develop colon cancer by finding high-grade dysplastic changes in the colonic mucosa on
endoscopic biopsy. Dysplasia is clear-cut neoplastic change in the colonic mucosa, and high-grade dysplasia is generally what triggers intervention. Several studies
of colonoscopic surveillance were summarized by Waye. 59 Fifteen percent of patients studied were found to have dysplasia, and 20% of these were found to have
colon cancer. However, 10% of colitis patients with cancer had no evidence of dysplasia.
Studies have confirmed that colorectal cancer occurs in first-degree relatives (i.e., parents, children, siblings) of patients with colorectal cancer, with three to four
times the frequency expected by chance. There is also an increased risk for adenomatous polyps in first-degree relatives of patients with bowel cancer and an
increased risk for colorectal cancer in first-degree relatives with adenomatous polyps. 60,61 Many physicians now recommend colonoscopy, in conjunction with annual
fecal occult blood testing, as the primary diagnostic tool for first-degree relatives in colon cancer families.
Screening colonoscopy has been studied in average-risk, asymptomatic patients with negative fecal occult blood studies. In one such study, adenomatous polyps
were detected at a rate that was twice that expected from flexible sigmoidoscopy alone. 62 Of 210 patients, 53 (25%) had adenomas, and two had cancers. The larger
adenomas and both cancers were found in patients older than 60 years. A follow-up report by the same investigators confirmed the substantial prevalence of colonic
neoplasia in asymptomatic people, particularly elderly men, with negative fecal occult blood tests. 63
THERAPEUTIC COLONOSCOPY: POLYPECTOMY
After a polyp is identified, colonoscopic polypectomy should be performed. If possible, the polyp is totally removed and submitted for histologic assessment. Complete
colonoscopy should be performed at polypectomy to identify and remove any synchronous polyps. Biopsy of polyps is not recommended, because the results may be
misleading. Small polyps (£7 mm in diameter) are often removed by “hot biopsy” technique: Electric current is passed through a special biopsy forceps to cauterize
the base of the polyp; then the tissue in the forceps is sent to pathology. Larger polyps are removed by snare-cautery technique. A wire loop is passed around the
polyp base, and an electric current transects and cauterizes the polyp base. The entire polyp is then retrieved and submitted to pathology for analysis. Most colonic
polyps can be managed in this fashion. Large sessile polyps (>2 cm in diameter) may need to be removed with a piecemeal approach. Submucosal saline injection
has made this process safer. Occasionally, a large sessile polyp may not be removed safely during colonoscopy, and surgical resection is necessary. Marking the
polypectomy site with an injection of sterile india ink has been recommended as an accurate and permanent method for future endoscopic or surgical identification. 64
COMPLICATIONS
The major complications of colonoscopy are bowel perforation and hemorrhage. In 4713 diagnostic colonoscopies reported by the American Society for
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, perforation occurred in 0.17%. 65 These perforations are usually the result of the mechanical force of the colonoscope shaft on the
sigmoid colon, especially a sigmoid colon affected by diverticular disease or adhesions. In 1901 polypectomy patients reported by the American Society for
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, the perforation rate was 0.11%. Perforation almost always occurred at the polypectomy site and was usually related to the removal of a
sessile polyp. Hemorrhage occurred more commonly after polypectomy than after diagnostic colonoscopy (2.16% vs. 0.01%). Patients should avoid aspirin for up to 2
weeks after polypectomy. Postpolypectomy abdominal pain, leukocytosis, and fever do not always represent bowel perforation and may be due to a transmural
electrocautery burn. Conservative management in this setting is appropriate. 66

LAPAROSCOPY
PRINCIPLES
Laparoscopy or peritoneoscopy involves the creation of a pneumoperitoneum and the insertion of a thin telescope through a puncture in the anterior abdominal wall.
Additional punctures are commonly used for insertion of probes, biopsy needles, and other instruments. For diagnosis and for guided biopsy, laparoscopy can be
performed using local anesthesia and mild sedation, similar to that used for other GI endoscopic procedures. This type of laparoscopy should be differentiated from
the therapeutic procedure involved in laparoscopic cholecystectomy and other laparoscopic abdominal surgery, which requires general anesthesia. 67 During
laparoscopy, the anterior peritoneal space is visualized, with a view of the parietal peritoneum on the anterior abdominal wall and the diaphragm. 68 Most of the liver
surface and gallbladder can be examined, along with much of the greater omentum and serosal surfaces of the stomach, small bowel, and colon. The pelvic organs
can be visualized. Less completely seen are posterior structures, such as the porta hepatis, pancreas, and spleen. The retroperitoneal lymph nodes and renal system
are usually not evaluable.
INDICATIONS AND RESULTS
The ability to see large areas of parietal and visceral peritoneum and to evaluate the cause of ascites have been major indications for laparoscopy. CT scans have a
low yield in imaging small peritoneal metastases. Paracentesis and blind peritoneal biopsy are frequently nondiagnostic. Deposits of even a few millimeters in size on
the peritoneum are readily identified and undergo biopsy at laparoscopy to distinguish among metastatic cancer, mesothelioma, or infections (such as tuberculosis). 69
Because so much of the liver surface can be examined in fine detail, primary and metastatic liver cancers are diagnosed with an accuracy in the range of 90%. 4,5 The
ability to see and submit for biopsy small lesions on the liver and peritoneum makes laparoscopy particularly useful in staging the extent of malignant disease. Benign
focal conditions, such as fibrosis, cirrhosis, and hemangiomas, may be distinguished from malignant disease with high accuracy. Larger biopsy specimens are usually
taken at laparoscopy rather than by scan-guided aspiration biopsy. Enough material can be obtained to permit special histopathologic studies. Direct-vision biopsy
allows avoidance of vascular areas, and bleeding after biopsy can usually be controlled. 70
Laparoscopy has been used for preoperative cancer staging, even if CT scans are normal. Experience with laparoscopic staging has been reported in patients with
cancer of the pancreas, esophagus, stomach, gallbladder, and rectum. 71,72,73 and 74 Laparoscopy can increase the diagnostic yield of liver biopsy in Hodgkin's disease
and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. 75,76,77 and 78 Normal CT scans, ultrasound scans, or magnetic resonance images do not exclude the possibility that laparoscopic
examination may detect liver or peritoneal malignancy. 79
COMPLICATIONS
Laparoscopy is contraindicated in acute or unstable cardiopulmonary states, although there is a continuum of relative risk in more chronic situations. An
uncooperative patient should not have laparoscopy under local anesthesia, nor should patients for whom skin infections interfere with sterile insertion of the
laparoscope. The procedure is contraindicated in patients with intestinal obstruction and dilated bowel loops. A small amount of ascites does not present a problem,
but tense ascites must first be decreased by diuresis or paracentesis. Coagulation disorders that cannot be corrected are contraindications, but mild abnormalities
may be acceptable. A history of generalized peritonitis is an absolute contraindication because of the likelihood of multiple dense adhesions, increasing the risk and
decreasing the effectiveness of the procedure. Prior abdominal surgery associated with adhesions represents a relative contraindication. 3
The overall complication rate from laparoscopy is in the range of 1%, with serious complications that delay discharge or necessitate surgery occurring in

approximately 0.2% and with mortality of 0.05%. Subcutaneous emphysema and pneumoomentum are not serious and require no treatment. Mediastinal emphysema,
pneumothorax, and air embolism are rare. Abdominal wall bleeding and laceration of blood vessels, organs, or bowel occurs uncommonly but may require surgical
management. Biopsy, especially of the liver, accounts for most complications. Tumor implantation at the laparoscopy or biopsy needle insertion site is well
described. 67

ENDOSCOPIC RETROGRADE CHOLANGIOPANCREATOGRAPHY
DIAGNOSTIC ENDOSCOPIC RETROGRADE CHOLANGIOPANCREATOGRAPHY
The technique of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was first reported in 1968 and has been an important diagnostic tool for more than 25
years. 80 The skilled endoscopist working with a cooperative patient can often perform a diagnostic ERCP in less than 20 minutes. Success rates for cannulating the
common bile duct and pancreatic duct are well in excess of 90%.
A side-viewing electronic duodenoscope is used to afford excellent visualization of the ampulla of Vater. Cannulization of the biliary and pancreatic ducts is then
accomplished, and a contrast agent, such as diatrizoate (Renograffin-60), is injected into the desired duct under fluoroscopic control, and radiologic films of the duct
anatomy are subsequently obtained. Duct cytology can be obtained, and biopsy of the ampulla, duodenum, and stomach may also be performed.
Evaluation of the jaundiced patient was one of the more important indications for ERCP. Imaging procedures, such as transabdominal sonography, high-quality CT
scans, and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography, are replacing diagnostic ERCP ( Fig. 28-6).81 Today, therapeutic ERCP is most commonly performed for
endoscopic sphincterotomy, removing bile duct gallstones, or placement of an endobiliary stent across the obstructed bile duct segment.

FIGURE 28-6. An endoscopic, retrograde cholangiogram demonstrating a short distal common bile duct stricture caused by a primary bile duct cancer.

ERCP may be useful when the patient's symptoms suggest pancreatic cancer and the sonogram or CT scan is not diagnostic. ERCP may be difficult to interpret in the
setting of chronic pancreatitis, and cancers can be missed. ERCP is a sensitive and specific diagnostic test for pancreatic cancer. At MSKCC, ERCP had a sensitivity
of 92% and a specificity of 97% in the evaluation of 116 patients. In a report by Freeney 82 of 530 patients with pancreatic cancer, normal pancreatograms were seen
in only 15 (2.8%). Typical findings include complete occlusion or stenosis of the main pancreatic duct, narrowing or cutoff of the intrapancreatic portion of the common
bile duct, and the double-duct sign of stenosis or obstruction of both the main pancreatic duct and the common bile duct. There may also be endoscopic
abnormalities, such as a duodenal mass or ulcer that, when subjected to biopsy, document pancreatic cancer.
ERCP is not necessary when the diagnosis appears clear-cut. Frick et al. 83 reported on ERCP used to evaluate 26 patients with indeterminate CT scans and found
that ERCP aided the preoperative diagnosis in 25. One pancreatic cancer was missed by ERCP. In an English study 84 of 140 patients with undiagnosed severe
chronic abdominal pain, the ERCP was abnormal in 25 (18%). In approximately one-fourth of the patients, diagnoses were made. These diagnoses included
gallstones, peptic ulcer disease, pancreatic cancer, and chronic pancreatitis.
THERAPEUTIC ENDOSCOPIC RETROGRADE CHOLANGIOPANCREATOGRAPHY
The therapeutic use of ERCP is growing rapidly. The major therapeutic procedures performed are endoscopic sphincterotomy, stone extraction, and placement of
endobiliary stents for the palliative nonsurgical treatment of biliary obstruction. Approximately 75% of ERCPs done in our endoscopy unit at MSKCC are therapeutic.
Endoscopic sphincterotomy is performed by inserting into the distal common bile duct through the ampulla a specialized cannula containing an electrosurgical cutting
wire. When the electrical current is passed through the exposed wire, a controlled incision is made in the sphincter, opening the distal bile duct to allow the
endoscopic removal of bile duct stones or the placement of endobiliary stents. Biopsy of ampullary tumors is facilitated by endoscopic sphincterotomy, and the
associated obstructive jaundice may be temporarily relieved by this procedure. Bourgeois et al. 85 obtained the correct histologic diagnosis in all 55 patients with
periampullary cancer after endoscopic sphincterotomy but in only one-half before sphincterotomy.
Nonsurgical biliary drainage has become an important tool in the palliative management of patients with malignant biliary obstruction. Endoscopic biliary drainage
(EBD) (Fig. 28-7) and percutaneous transhepatic drainage (PTD) complement each other and are selected on the basis of the level of the biliary obstruction. 86 In a
prospective randomized study comparing EBD with PTD in 75 high-risk patients with malignant biliary obstruction, EBD was significantly more successful in relieving
jaundice (81% vs. 61%) and had a significantly lower 30-day mortality rate (15% vs. 33%). The complication rate of EBD was 19%, whereas the morbidity of PTD was
67%.87

FIGURE 28-7. An endoscopically placed biliary stent is seen in the common bile duct across the malignant stricture shown in Figure 28-6.

The location or level of the malignant biliary stricture is very important in determining success and complication rates with nonsurgical biliary drainage. Seventy
patients with malignant hilar strictures were stratified by Deviere et al. 88 into three groups. Twenty patients had common hepatic duct lesions (type I), and 50 patients
had bifurcation or intrahepatic strictures (types II and III). The type I patients were likely to experience complete drainage, whereas in only approximately 50% of the
type II and III patients was drainage adequate. These patients had a higher 30-day mortality, a higher rate of early cholangitis, a higher death rate from sepsis, and a
shorter postprocedure survival. Success in adequately draining common bile duct and common hepatic duct strictures should be approximately 90% with large-bore
endoprostheses placed during ERCP. The success rate for establishing drainage by ERCP in bifurcation or intrahepatic strictures is much lower. Using an aggressive

approach with multiple attempts and combining EBD with PTD increased the success rate of insertion of two or more stents to only approximately 50% of patients with
hilar strictures. 88
EBD has been prospectively compared to surgical biliary bypass. Fifty-two patients with distal common bile duct obstruction were randomly assigned to either EBD or
surgical biliary bypass. 89 Survival data for both groups were similar, as was the 90% success rate in relieving jaundice. Patients treated with EBD had a significantly
shorter initial hospital stay (5 vs. 13 days; P <.002). Readmissions to the hospital were more frequent in the EBD group, but the total hospital stay in days per patient
until death was shorter in the EBD group (8 vs. 13 days; P <.01). In patients with pancreatic cancer and jaundice who are not candidates for surgical resection,
because of either advanced disease or other medical problems, EBD should be the biliary drainage procedure of choice. Metal endoscopic stents are replacing
polyethylene stents, especially in those patients who can reasonably be expected to live more than 6 months. The use of metal endobiliary stents should reduce the
number of stent replacements. Although EBD affords good palliation for advanced cancer cholestasis, studies have shown that there is no role for preoperative biliary
drainage. 90
COMPLICATIONS
The most common complications of ERCP are cholangitis and sepsis. The rate of cholangitis and sepsis varies, depending on the reason for the ERCP and the
underlying pathology. For example, therapeutic ERCP done for biliary obstruction may have a sepsis rate as high as 14%.
The level of the biliary obstruction affects the rate of sepsis. In an MSKCC series 91 looking at PTD after failed EBD, the rate of sepsis for patients with intrahepatic and
bifurcation strictures was significantly greater than for those with common hepatic or common bile duct lesions (75% vs. 17%; P = .04). Another MSKCC study92
compared the microbiologic data for septic episodes after EBD with septic episodes after PTD. Although enteric gram-negative organisms predominated in both
groups, there were significantly more gram-positive organisms noted in the PTD group ( P <.0005).
Acute pancreatitis is another common complication of ERCP, and it is related to the injection of contrast material into the pancreatic duct. Its frequency varies but
generally occurs in fewer than 7% of patients. It is usually self-limited and rarely presents as a serious clinical problem. Clinical trials with such agents as octreotide
have not shown a reduction in ERCP-associated pancreatitis. 93

SMALL INTESTINAL ENDOSCOPY: ENTEROSCOPY
Evaluation of the small intestine beyond the fourth portion of the duodenum is commonly accomplished by barium studies or angiography. Two endoscopic techniques
for studying the small bowel have been developed. Dedicated push enteroscopes (Olympus Corp., SIF-10) often can be passed rapidly to approximately 100 cm distal
to the ligament of Treitz. Biopsy, polypectomy, diathermy, and Nd:YAG laser treatment can be performed through this instrument. In a study of 56 patients, the median
depth of insertion into the small intestine was 45 cm (range, 15 to 90 cm), and procedure times varied from 10 to 45 minutes. 94 Push enteroscopy has been very
useful in the evaluation and treatment of GI bleeding due to occult proximal small intestinal sources and in the evaluation of abnormalities seen on barium small
intestinal radiographs.
The sonde-type enteroscope is slender and approximately 2.7 m long. It has an inflatable balloon at its tip that helps in passage through the small intestine. Among
the several disadvantages of this instrument are its lack of a biopsy channel, the absence of tip deflection, a limited field of view, the need for fluoroscopy, and the 8
hours required for its use.
In using enteroscopy in the evaluation of obscure GI bleeding, one study of push enteroscopy identified the source of bleeding in 15 of 39 patients (38%). 95 The most
common cause found was an arteriovenous malformation. The diagnostic yield in a study of 35 patients with obscure GI bleeding using a sonde-type enteroscope was
26%.96 A study of 258 patients identified nine malignant and four benign tumors to be the cause of the obscure bleeding (5%). 97

PERCUTANEOUS ENDOSCOPIC GASTROSTOMY
Since its original description by Ponsky and Gauderer 98 in 1981, percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) has become a routine procedure, done in an outpatient
setting without general anesthesia, in patients either unable to take oral feedings or in whom parenteral nutritional support is not feasible. PEG and percutaneous
endoscopic jejunostomy (PEJ) are rapid and safe endoscopic methods for establishing enteral feeding routes and can eliminate the need for long-term nasal feeding
tubes. In a study of 42 patients with dysphagia and cancers of the head and neck, successful use of PEG and PEJ was accomplished in 39. 99 No immediate
complications occurred. After a mean follow-up of 4.5 months, only one patient developed pneumonia presumed to be due to aspiration. Complication rates for
surgical gastrostomies have been reported to be as high as 75%. 100
When patients have had previous gastric resections, PEJ may be used. In 115 patients, Shike et al. 101,102 had a success rate with PEJ of more than 90%. PEJ was
used in gastric outlet and small bowel obstruction, gastroparesis, and anorexia. Only two patients experienced severe complications of bleeding and abscess
formation. Significant caloric intake ranging between 900 and 2400 calories per day could be administered.

BRONCHOSCOPY
Bronchoscopy (Table 28-1) is the single most useful modality for accurately diagnosing lung cancer. With the advent of fiber-optic equipment introduced more than 25
years ago,103,104 this procedure has been used for diagnosis with increasing frequency

TABLE 28-1. Comparison of Rigid and Flexible Fiber-Optic Bronchoscopy Technique

INDICATIONS
The most common oncologic indication for bronchoscopy is to diagnose and assist in staging lung cancer by direct observation and by obtaining material for cytologic
and histologic evaluation. 105 In investigating other upper aerodigestive tumors, bronchoscopy rules out extension of laryngeal and esophageal carcinomas to the
upper airway. Flexible bronchoscopy has been especially important in localizing occult sites of malignancy when sputum cytology results are positive.
Therapeutically, bronchoscopy has been extensively used to remove retained secretions in the postoperative period, to relieve obstructed airways due to malignancy
(in conjunction with laser destruction), and to arrest bleeding. This technique is used to deliver anticancer therapy (cauterization, cryotherapy, photocoagulation, and
brachytherapy) in the definitive or palliative treatment of endobronchial malignancies. 106,107 Bronchoscopy is also used to insert intraluminal stents when required to
maintain airway patency.

TECHNIQUE
Rigid Bronchoscopy
The open-tube rigid bronchoscope, although used less frequently for diagnosis, remains a valuable therapeutic tool. It is especially important in controlling airway
hemorrhage and is favored by most endoscopists for mechanical removal and laser coagulation of tumors ( Fig. 28-8). It also has the advantages of a large lumen,
allowing suctioning of blood or fumes developing during laser coagulation and obtaining larger biopsies. Although the rigid bronchoscope can be introduced under
local anesthesia, the preferred approach is general anesthesia.

FIGURE 28-8. Comparison of flexible and rigid equipment and of biopsy potential. This photograph illustrates a flexible esophagoscope, flexible bronchoscope, rigid
esophagoscope, rigid bronchoscope, and the biopsy forceps that can be used with each endoscope.

Flexible Bronchoscopy
Flexible bronchoscopy has become the mainstay of endoscopic airway examination. The flexible equipment is small enough to be introduced transnasally or
transorally under local anesthesia with or without sedation. Because of its small diameter (6 mm or smaller), the average flexible bronchoscope can enter all
segmental orifices of the tracheobronchial tree. Newer instruments (with an external diameter as small as 2.0 mm) can now extend the visible range to the periphery of
the lung and have been used for biopsy of peripheral nodules or infiltrates ( Fig. 28-9).108 These newer instruments no longer use fiber-optics for visualization:
Electronic signals are now transmitted from the tip of the bronchoscope to a television monitor.

FIGURE 28-9. The range of the flexible bronchoscope within the tracheobronchial tree. The second order of branchings of the tracheobronchial tree can be inspected
and subjected to biopsy.

Most instruments have a 2-mm operating channel for suctioning and to pass brushes and biopsy forceps to obtain pathologic material for examination. Flexible fibers
can be passed through the operating channel for Nd:YAG laser treatment and argon beam excitation of hematoporphyrins (PDT) to induce photocoagulation of
malignant tissue. The versatility and ease of use of the flexible bronchoscope has allowed this procedure to be performed in an outpatient setting with minimal
inconvenience to the patient.
DIAGNOSTIC BRONCHOSCOPY
Malignant lesions of the tracheobronchial tree and pulmonary parenchyma are most often diagnosed using flexible bronchoscopy. Tumors that involve the proximal
airways as distal as subsegmental bronchi can usually be seen at the time of flexible bronchoscopy, and specimens can be obtained for histopathology or exfoliative
cytology. Those lesions beyond the range of the flexible equipment can be subjected to biopsy under fluoroscopic control, passing biopsy forceps or brushes into the
lesion that has been localized using an image intensifier. Diffuse pulmonary infiltrates requiring diagnosis can be easily sampled using similar radiologic techniques,
passing biopsy forceps into the pulmonary parenchyma to obtain representative samples (transbronchial biopsy). Wang et al. 109 have popularized the technique of
transbronchial needle aspiration for diagnosing malignancy in mediastinal lymph nodes as well as in submucosal lesions inaccessible to direct biopsy or brushing.
More recently, localization of mediastinal lymph nodes has been attempted using bronchoscopic ultrasonography. This has proven to be somewhat difficult because
the air-containing airway cannot transmit the ultrasound waves, and obstruction of the airway is required to fill the lumen with a fluid-filled balloon to perform the
examination. However, subcarinal lymph nodes can be easily accessed by performing endoesophageal ultrasonography with guided endobiopsy. 110
The success of these techniques is operator-dependent. It is rare for lesions that can be visualized not to yield a diagnosis. Intrapulmonary lesions located more
peripherally may be more difficult to diagnose, especially if they are small (<3 cm in diameter) and are probably best diagnosed by percutaneous transthoracic needle
aspiration biopsy using radiologic techniques. However, bronchoalveolar lavage with saline and postbronchoscopy sputum samples can provide cytology for
examination.
Identification of occult in situ malignancies can be enhanced with the use of tumor fluorescence aided by laser light excitation. Injected hematoporphyrin derivatives
fluoresce at a specific wavelength (640 nm) emitted by the argon laser beam and, most recently, autofluorescence of tumors using specific wavelengths can identify
areas of dysplasia and frank neoplasia (lung imaging fluorescent endoscopy bronchoscopy). 111 This technique is extremely important in identifying occult cancers
detected by sputum cytology. This autofluorescence technique is being investigated also as a method of early diagnosis of lung cancer in high-risk individuals
(especially patients with previous aerodigestive tumors; Fig. 28-10).112

FIGURE 28-10. A lung imaging fluorescent endoscopy bronchoscopic image demonstrating a darkened area of the carina between the anterior and apical segments
of the upper right lobe (arrow). This proved to be in situ carcinoma on biopsy.

THERAPEUTIC BRONCHOSCOPY
The most common oncologic indication for therapeutic bronchoscopy is bronchopulmonary toilet after major pulmonary resections for malignancy. This has become an
invaluable bedside tool in the postoperative management of thoracic surgical patients since the introduction of flexible instruments. Bronchoscopy has also been used
with success in relieving endobronchial obstruction and in dealing with significant airway hemorrhage.
Endobronchial tumors can be mechanically débrided using the tip of the rigid bronchoscope or a large biopsy forceps. 113 Techniques of tumor coagulation and
destruction have been introduced that avoid unnecessary or excessive bleeding. These techniques include cryosurgery, electrocautery and, most recently, carbon
dioxide, Nd:YAG, or argon laser destruction. 114 These modalities require significant training in the use of lasers and are best applied when visible endobronchial
tumors are present. Extrinsic compression by enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes does not respond to this type of treatment. When extrinsic compression is a major
problem, endobronchial stents similar to those used for obstructing esophageal lesions can be inserted. A variety of Silastic and self-expanding metallic stents have
been devised. The Silastic stents have the disadvantage of frequent migration. Self-expanding metallic stents, once inserted, cannot be removed but rarely migrate.
These stents can be coated with Silastic to avoid growth of tumor through the interstices of the stent ( Fig. 28-11 and Fig. 28-12). With the expandable metallic stents,
instances of tracheoesophageal fistulization have occurred. In properly selected patients, however, these expandable stents are replacing the plastic stents in the
management of malignant disease. When either external-beam radiation or internal brachytherapy is added to endobronchial tumor destruction or in conjunction with
stents, longer periods of palliation can be achieved, avoiding tumor regrowth and overgrowth. 115 With these techniques, approximately 80% of patients can be
relieved of their obstructing symptoms for a median of 3 months.

FIGURE 28-11. A: An endobronchial stent loaded on the end of a rigid bronchoscope uses a chest tube as an inserter. B: Use of an endobronchial stent in extrinsic
compression.

FIGURE 28-12. A carcinoma in situ just at the orifice of the right upper lobe. A standard bronchoscopy (B) demonstrates minimal elevation of mucosa. A marked
change is apparent in the lung imaging fluorescent endoscopy (LIFE) image (A). Note: Black and white production does not reproduce the image that is so well seen
at the LIFE bronchoscopy.

PDT has also been used to destroy endobronchial tumors. This technique is used as definitive therapy for in situ carcinoma and is effective in totally destroying such
tumors in approximately 50% of cases.4 It is now being used with increasing frequency to destroy inoperable tumors obstructing the airway . 116 Most tumors respond to
this therapy, and up to 90% of patients obtain some palliation. With the U.S. Food and Drug Administration release of hematoporphyrins for therapy in North America,
significant activity has occurred in investigating this approach for palliation of obstructing tumors and treatment of in situ and inoperable stage I proximal tumors. A
newer hematoporphyrin, porfimer (Photofrin II), is currently the drug of choice. It is administered 24 to 48 hours before laser illumination of the tumor. This causes an
intense and immediate destruction of the tumor, which requires mechanical débridement. In most instances, a second bronchoscopy 24 or 48 hours later completes
the débridement. When compared to Nd:YAG laser destruction, it fares very well. Currently, all of these endobronchial-relieving methods are effective, and a
combination of two of these (e.g., PDT plus radiotherapy, mechanical or Nd:YAG destruction plus radiotherapy) seems to produce the longest periods of palliation.
Metastatic endobronchial tumors are also amenable to these therapies. 117
COMPLICATIONS
The complications of diagnostic rigid and flexible bronchoscopy are minimal, with fewer than 1.0% of patients experiencing any significant postprocedure problems.
Rigid bronchoscopy has the disadvantage of trauma to the teeth, lips, and mouth as well as the larynx. This is completely avoided by using flexible bronchoscopy.
Biopsy of lesions can lead to hemorrhage, although bleeding rarely is excessive. 118 As with any other surgical procedure, care must be taken, before bronchoscopy is
performed, to evaluate and correct any coagulation abnormalities. Transbronchial biopsy of lung parenchyma can lead to bleeding and pneumothorax; the latter
complication occurs rarely if routine precautions are taken to avoid biopsy at the extreme periphery of the lung. In a series from the Cleveland Clinic, 118 only 58
episodes of bleeding occurred in almost 7000 flexible bronchoscopies. Transbronchial biopsy showed a higher incidence of bleeding, though no deaths ensued. In
two other large bronchoscopy series, the death rates were 0.1% and 0.3%, respectively. 119,120 In a series of 4000 patients, major complications (pneumothorax,
pulmonary hemorrhage, or respiratory failure) occurred in 0.53% of flexible bronchoscopies. After transbronchial biopsy, however, 6.8% of patients experienced either

hemorrhage (2.8%) or pneumothorax (4%), and there were no deaths. 121

MEDIASTINOSCOPY
INDICATIONS
Mediastinoscopy is used most frequently to obtain lymph node samples from the superior mediastinum to assist in the clinical staging of lung cancer. It can be
extremely valuable in identifying metastatic malignancy in these lymph nodes, thereby providing histologic evidence of N2 and N3 (stage IIIa and IIIb) disease in
patients with lung cancer. 122 Less frequently, this technique is used to diagnose other lesions presenting with mediastinal adenopathy. Lymphomas, primary lung
cancers with mediastinal involvement, and a host of benign lesions can be diagnosed using this approach. The procedure can also identify direct mediastinal invasion
by a lung tumor and, by extending the mediastinal dissection, can be used for biopsy of lesions in the anterior mediastinum. Either pleural space can be entered
through the mediastinum to detect abnormalities, especially in the paramediastinal regions. 123
TECHNIQUE
The mediastinoscopy technique (Fig. 28-13) is simple and safe in the hands of well-trained thoracic surgeons. A short suprasternal transverse incision is made,
dissecting down to the pretracheal fascia, which is opened. Finger dissection in the pretracheal plane precedes the insertion of the mediastinoscope. Direct
visualization of all areas of the superior mediastinum then allows appropriate biopsies of tissue in the various mediastinal nodal stations.

FIGURE 28-13. Technique of mediastinoscopy. A: Make a 3- to 4-cm incision just above the manubrium. B: Use the finger to dissect bluntly the loose fibrofatty tissue
in front of the trachea down to the level of the pulmonary artery. C: Introduce the endoscope and take biopsies of suspicious tissues. Needle aspiration of structures
before biopsy helps to reduce hemorrhagic complications. (Modified from PA Kerschner. Transcervical approach to the superior mediastinum. Hosp Pract 1970;5:61.)

Mediastinoscopy is performed under general anesthesia but is usually performed on an outpatient basis. It can also be used just before thoracotomy for final clinical
staging in patients suspected of possibly harboring inoperable disease by virtue of mediastinal spread.
RESULTS
With the ability to biopsy mediastinal lymph nodes directly, the accuracy of mediastinoscopy approaches 90% when assessing the mediastinal involvement of lymph
nodes in lung cancer. 124 Virtually no false-positive examination results should occur. Because of the inaccessibility of certain areas of the mediastinum, a 10%
false-negative rate can be expected. However, those inaccessible mediastinal lymph nodes are usually resectable at the time of surgery. When mediastinoscopy fails
to reveal metastatic disease in patients with otherwise operable lung cancer, the resectability rate of such patients approaches 95%. Mediastinoscopy remains the
most accurate method of assessing mediastinal involvement by lung cancer and is usually used when CT scanning suggests enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes (>1
cm) to confirm the presence of metastatic disease to the mediastinum.
Since the introduction of positron emission tomography (PET) scanning, many centers have used this technique of staging the superior mediastinum instead of the
invasive technique of mediastinoscopy. There are differences of opinion as to whether PET scanning can be depended on to be accurate. Certainly, “positive” PET
scans denoting mediastinal spread of tumor should be confirmed by histologic proof. “Negative” PET scans do not rule out microscopic metastatic disease to the
superior mediastinum.125,126
In expert hands, mediastinoscopy is safe. One retrospective review from Washington University demonstrates the safety of the technique. In more than 2000
mediastinoscopies, there was one treatment-related death in a patient with very extensive mediastinal disease and very few significant complications: Only three
patients required a thoracotomy for bleeding and, in all of those patients, the primary tumor was surgically treated at the time of thoracotomy. 127
ANTERIOR MEDIASTINOTOMY (CHAMBERLAIN PROCEDURE)
Tumors situated in the anterior mediastinum (e.g., lymphomas, germ cell tumors, thymomas) are often diagnosed by percutaneous transthoracic needle aspiration
biopsy. The most direct approach to the anterior mediastinum, when incisional biopsies are required, is a modification of the technique of anterior mediastinotomy
described by MacNeill and Chamberlain. 128 A small transverse incision is made in the second intercostal space or over the second or third costal cartilage. The
anterior mediastinum is entered, usually without transgressing the pleura, and a biopsy can be obtained. Frequently, left upper lobe tumors do not metastasize to
superior mediastinal lymph nodes but to the lymph nodes in the paraaortic area, most accessible by anterior mediastinotomy.

THORACOSCOPY
Thoracoscopy (pleuroscopy) is used most frequently to investigate and treat pleural effusions when simple thoracentesis fails. Until recently, open-tube instruments
(e.g., mediastinoscopes) were used for inspection and biopsy. However, the use of thoracoscopy has been extended significantly with the introduction of miniaturized
video-recording equipment and improved instrument technology ( Fig. 28-14). Learning from the experience developed with laparoscopic surgery, video-assisted
thoracoscopic surgery has become a burgeoning enterprise. 115,129 Thoracoscopy has now been used not only for diagnosing pleural disease but for assessing
mediastinal spread of lung and esophageal cancer and diagnosing lung disease. 130 The diagnosis of indeterminate pulmonary nodules, previously requiring a
thoracotomy, can now be accomplished with relatively minimal invasion using video-assisted techniques. This has become especially important in identifying those
nodules so frequently seen on CT scan, only a few millimeters in diameter, inaccessible by any other technique short of thoracotomy. Advanced thoracoscopic
techniques can allow partial and total lung resection as well as dissection and removal of mediastinal structures (esophagus, thymus gland, mediastinal lymph nodes,
etc.). The ultimate indications for video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery in the treatment of oncologic disease await further investigation and long-term follow-up of
efficacy.131

FIGURE 28-14. The video-assisted technique for removing a solitary pulmonary nodule.

TECHNIQUE
Simple thoracoscopy (pleuroscopy) can be performed using a small incision and inserting an open-tube scope (e.g., mediastinoscope) for removal of fluid and simple
biopsy of abnormal lesions on the pleural surface. Video-assisted thoracoscopy usually requires the development of a pneumothorax using one-lung anesthesia, three
to four small intercostal incisions, and the insertion of multiple trocars to allow the introduction of a videoscope plus a variety of instruments for surgical dissection.
With this technique, the total visceral and parietal pleural surfaces can be examined and subjected to biopsy, the mediastinum can be entered and dissected as well
as subjected to biopsy, and portions of the lung can be removed, taking advantage of mechanical stapling and cutting devices designed for the purpose.
With very small lesions, difficult to identify at the time of thoracoscopy, transthoracic needles placed radiologically before thoracoscopy can localize the area for
resection, similar to the localization techniques used in performing breast biopsies.
RESULTS
Thoracoscopy is an excellent tool to diagnose pleural disease definitively and yields almost a 100% success rate. Peripherally placed lesions of the lung can usually
be localized and can be resected for diagnosis, avoiding a major thoracotomy and its attendant morbidity. For this reason, hospital stays are shortened, and the use of
expensive medical resources is diminished. The long-term results of thoracoscopic resectional surgery for oncologic disease have yet to be determined. When using
this technique for cancer treatment, surgeons must be wary of inadequate resections that may result. In reported series, most surgeons limit video-assisted
thoracoscopic resections to early-stage (T1 to T2, N0) tumors. In experienced hands, this approach is safe, and adequate oncologic resections can occur. However,
as yet, there is no evidence that this approach provides any benefit to the patient with regard to pain, length of stay, or efficacy. Despite its introduction almost 10
years ago, video-assisted thoracoscopic resections for malignancy are practiced by a very small proportion of thoracic surgeons. 132,133 and 134
COMPLICATIONS
Video-assisted thoracoscopy usually requires general anesthesia, although in diagnosing pleural disease, local anesthetic techniques can be used. The risks of
general anesthesia and one-lung ventilation yield some minor morbidity but rarely, if ever, any mortality. Used judiciously, video-assisted thoracoscopy for diagnosis
and staging is an extremely safe technique and may be performed on an outpatient basis. Of great concern is its oncologic application. There have been reports of
inadequate resections with high local recurrence rates and tumor implantation in thoracoscopic port sites. However, with appropriate techniques, these problems are
avoidable. As yet, there is no real evidence of major cost savings or significant long-term benefit using this approach in treating thoracic malignancies. However, the
diagnostic abilities of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery have allowed firm diagnosis to be established with minimal morbidity.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Oguro Y, Takagi K. Recent advances in endoscopic diagnosis of esophagogastric cancer. In: Endoscopic approaches to cancer diagnosis and treatment. London: Taylor & Francis, 1990:19.
2. Winawer SJ, Posner G, Lightdale CJ, et al. Endoscopic diagnosis of advanced gastric cancer: factors influencing yield. Gastroenterology 1975;69:1183.
3. Silvis SE, Nebel O, Rogers G, Sugawa C, Mandelstam P. Endoscopic complications: results of the 1974 ASGE survey. JAMA 1976;235:928.
4. Iishi H, Yamamoto R, Tatsuta M, Okuda S. Evaluation of fine needle aspiration biopsy under direct vision gastrofiberoscopy in diagnosis of diffusely infiltrative carcinoma of the stomach.
Cancer 1986;57:1365.
5. Lightdale CJ, Winawer SJ. Screening diagnosis and staging of esophageal cancer. Semin Oncol 1984;11:101.
6. Kruse P, Boesby S, Bernstein IT, Anderson IB. Barrett's esophagus and esophageal carcinoma: endoscopic and histologic surveillance. Scand J Gastroenterol 1993;28:193.
7. Li FP, Shiang EL. Screening for esophageal cancer in 62,000 Chinese. Lancet 1979;2:804.
8. Yang CS. Research on esophageal cancer in China: a review. Cancer Res 1980;40:2633.
9. Jacob P, Kahrilas PJ, Desai T, et al. Natural history and significance of esophageal squamous cell dysplasia. Cancer 1990;65:2731.
10. Shiozaki H, Tahara H, Kobayashi K, et al. Endoscopic screening of early esophageal cancer with the Lugol dye method in patients with head and neck cancers. Cancer 1990;66:2068.
11. Kaibara N, Kawaguchi H, Nishidoi H, et al. Significance of mass survey for gastric cancer from the standpoint of surgery. Am J Surg 1981;142:543.
12. Blot WJ, Devesa SS, Kneller RW, Fraumeni JF Jr. Rising incidence of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and gastric cardia. JAMA 1991;265:1287.
13. Green PHR, O'Toole KM, Slonim D, Wang T. Increasing incidence and excellent survival of patients with early gastric cancer: experience in a United States medical center. Am J Med
1988;85:658.
14. Hallissey MT, Allum WH, Jewkes AJ, Ellis DJ, Fielding JW. Early detection of gastric cancer. BMJ 1990;301:513.
15. Craanen ME, Dekker W, Ferwerda J, Blok P, Tytgat GNJ. Early gastric cancer: a clinicopathologic study. J Clin Gastroenterol 1991;13:274.
16. Kurtz RC, Sternberg SS, Miller H, DeCosse JJ. Upper gastrointestinal neoplasia in familial polyposis. Dig Dis Sci 1987;32:459.
17. Cothren RM, Richard-Kotrum R, Sival M, et al. Gastrointestinal tissue diagnosis by laser-induced fluorescence spectroscopy at endoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc 1990;36:105.
18. Bown SG. Palliation malignant dysphagia: surgery, radiotherapy, laser, intubation alone or in combination. Gut 1991;32:841.
19. Lightdale CJ, Zimbalist E, Winawer SJ. Outpatient management of esophageal cancer with endoscopic Nd:YAG laser. Am J Gastroenterol 1987;82:46.
20. Hamilton FA, Benjamin SB, Castell DO. Proceedings of the consensus conference in therapeutic endoscopy in bleeding ulcers. Gastrointest Endosc 1990;36:S1.
21. Lightdale CJ, Meier S, Marcon N, et al. A multicenter phase II trial of PDT versus Nd:YAG laser in the treatment of malignant dysphagia. Gastrointest Endosc 1993;39:283.
22. Lightdale CJ. Ablation therapy for Barrett's esophagus: is it time to choose our weapons? Gastrointest Endosc 1999:49(1):122.
23. Tio TL, Tytgat GNJ. Atlas of transintestinal ultrasonography. Aalsmeer, Netherlands: Drukkenj Mur Kostverloren BV, 1986.
24. Kawai K, ed. Endoscopic ultrasonography in gastroenterology. Tokyo: Igaku-Shoin, 1988.
25. Sivak MV Jr, Boyce GA, eds. Endoscopic ultrasonography. Gastrointest Endosc 1990; 36[Suppl]:S1.
26. Kimmey MB, Martin RW, Haggitt RC, et al. Histologic correlates of gastrointestinal ultrasound images. Gastroenterology 1989;96:433.
27. Tio TL, Coene PPLO, Schouwink MH, Tytgat GNJ. Esophagogastric carcinoma: preoperative TNM classification with endosonography. Radiology 1989;173:411.
28. Botet JF, Lightdale CJ, Zauber AG, et al. Preoperative staging of esophageal cancer: comparison of endoscopic US and dynamic CT. Radiology 1991;181:419.
29. Botet JF, Lightdale CJ, Zauber AG, et al. Preoperative staging of gastric cancer: comparison of endoscopic US and dynamic CT. Radiology 1991;181:426.
30. Rosch T, Lorenz R, Suchy R, Dancygier H, Classen M. Colonic endoscopic ultrasonography: first results of a new technique Gastrointest Endosc 1990;36:382.
31. Tio TL, Tytgat GNJ. Comparison of blind transrectal ultrasonography with endoscopic transrectal ultrasonography in assessing rectal and perirectal disease. Scand J Gastroenterol
1986;21[Suppl 123]:104.
32. Lightdale CJ, Botet JF, Kelsen DP, Turnbull AD, Brennan MF. Diagnosis of recurrent upper gastrointestinal cancer at the surgical anastomosis by endoscopic ultrasound. Gastrointest Endosc
1989;35:407.
33. Yasuda K, Nakajima M, Yoshida S, Kiyota K, Kawai K. The diagnosis of submucosal tumors of the stomach by endoscopic ultrasonography. Gastrointest Endosc 1989;35:10.
34. Tio TL, den Hartog Jager FCA, Tytgat GNJ. Endoscopic ultrasonography of non-Hodgkin lymphoma of the stomach. Gastroenterology 1986;91:401.
35. Yasuda K, Mukai H, Fujimoto S, Nakajima M, Kawai K. The diagnosis of pancreatic cancer by endoscopic ultrasonography. Gastrointest Endosc 1988;34:1.
36. Lees WR. Endoscopic ultrasonography of chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic pseudocysts. Scand J Gastroenterol 1986;21[Suppl 123]:123.
37. Rosch T, Lorenz R, Braig C, et al. Endoscopic ultrasound in pancreatic tumor diagnosis. Gastrointest Endosc 1991;37:347.
38. Morales TG, Sampliner RE. Barrett's esophagus: update on screening, surveillance and treatment. Arch Intern Med 1999;159(13):141.
39. Tio TL, Cheng J, Wijers OB, Sars PRA, Tytgat GNJ. Endosonographic TNM staging of extrahepatic bile duct cancer: comparison with pathological staging. Gastroenterology 1991;100:1351.
40. Lightdale CJ, Botet JF, Woodruff JM, Brennan MF. Localization of endocrine tumors of the pancreas with endoscopic ultrasonography. Cancer 1991;68:1815.
41. Wiersema MJ, Wiersema LM, Khurso Q, Cramer HM, Tao L-C. Combined endosonography and fine-needle aspiration cytology in evaluation of gastrointestinal lesions. Gastrointest Endosc
1994;40:199.
42. Schottenfeld D, Winawer SJ. Large intestine. In: Schottenfeld D, Fraumeni JF, eds. Cancer epidemiology and prevention. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1982:703.
43. Selby JV, Friedman GD, Quesenberry CP, Weiss NS. A case control study of screening sigmoidoscopy and mortality from colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1992;326:653.
44. Winawer SJ, Kern JF. Sigmoidoscopy: case finding versus screening. Gastroenterology 1988;95:527.
45. American Cancer Society. Guidelines for the cancer-related checkup: recommendations and rationale. CA Cancer J Clin 1980;34:130.
46. Winawer SJ, Lediner SD, Kurtz RC. Comparison of flexible sigmoidoscopy with other diagnostic techniques in the diagnosis of colorectal neoplasia. Dig Dis Sci 1979;24:277.

47. Baskin WN, Greenlaw RL, Fraker JT, et al. Flexible sigmoidoscopy training for primary care physicians. Gastrointest Endosc 1984;30:141.
48. Traul DG, Davis CB, Pollock JC, et al. Flexible fiberoptic sigmoidoscopy. The Monroe Clinic experience: a prospective study of 5,000 examinations. Dis Colon Rectum 1983;26:161.
49. Marks G, Moses ML. The clinical application of flexible fiberoptic colonoscopy. Surg Clin North Am 1973;53:735.
50. Hunt RH. The role of colonoscopy in complicated diverticular disease. Acta Chir Belg 1979;78:349.
51. Brand EJ, Sullivan BH Jr, Sivak MV Jr, et al. Colonoscopy in the diagnosis of unexplained rectal bleeding. Ann Surg 1980;192:111.
52. Tedesco FJ, Waye JD, Raskin JB, et al. Colonoscopic evaluation of rectal bleeding. Ann Intern Med 1978;89:907.
53. Winawer SJ, Schottenfeld D, Flehinger BJ. Colorectal cancer screening. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:243.
54. Fowler DL, Hedberg SE. Follow-up colonoscopy after polypectomy. Gastrointest Endosc 1980;26:67(abst).
55. Winawer SJ, Zauber A, Diaz B, et al. The national polyp study: overview of program and preliminary report of patient and polyp characteristics. In: Steele G, Burt R, Winawer SJ, Karr J, eds .
Basic and clinical perspectives of colorectal polyps and cancer. New York: Alan R Liss, 1988.
56. Winawer SJ, Zauber AG, O'Brien MJ, et al. Randomized comparison of surveillance intervals after colonoscopic removal of newly diagnosed adenomatous polyps. N Engl J Med 1993;328:901.
57. Winawer SJ, Zauber AG, Nah Ho M, et al. Prevention of colorectal cancer by colonoscopic polypectomy. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1977.
58. Butt J, Lennard-Jones JE, Ritchie J. A practical approach to the cancer risk in inflammatory bowel disease. Med Clin North Am 1980;64:1203.
59. Waye JD. Screening for cancer in ulcerative colitis. Front Gastrointest Res 1986;10:243.
60. Burt RW, Bishop DT, Cannon LA, et al. Dominant inheritance of adenomatous colonic polyps and colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1985;312:1540.
61. Cannon-Albright LA, Skolnick MH, Bishop T, et al. Common inheritance of susceptibility to colonic adenomatous polyps and associated colorectal cancers. N Engl J Med 1988;319:533.
62. Rex DK, Lehman GA, Hawes RH, et al. Screening colonoscopy in asymptomatic average-risk persons with negative fecal occult blood test. Gastroenterology 1991;100:64.
63. Rex DK, Lehman GA, Ulbright TM, et al. Colonic neoplasia in asymptomatic persons with negative fecal occult blood tests: influence of age, gender and family history. Am J Gastroenterol
1993;88:825.
64. Lightdale CJ. India ink colonic tattoo: blots on the record. Gastrointest Endosc 1991;37:99.
65. Gilbert GA, Hallsrom AP, Shaneyfelt SL, et al. The national ASGE colonoscopy survey: complications of colonoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc 1984;30:156(abst).
66. Waye JD. The post-polypectomy coagulation syndrome. Gastrointest Endosc 1981;27:184.
67. Lightdale CJ. Laparoscopy in gastroenterologic practice. In: Sherlock P, Jerzy-Glass G, eds. Progress in gastroenterology. New York: Grune & Stratton, 1983:461.
68. Beck K. Color atlas of laparoscopy. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1984.
69. Lightdale CJ. Indications, contraindications and complications of laparoscopy. In: Sivak M, ed. Gastroenterological endoscopy. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1987:1030.
70. Lightdale CJ, Winawer SJ, Kurtz RC, Knapper WH. Laparoscopic diagnosis of suspected liver neoplasms: value of prior liver scans. Dig Dis Sci 1979;24:588.
71. Riemann JF. Peritoneoscopy in the diagnosis of liver metastases. In: Weiss L, Gilbert H, eds. Liver metastasis. Boston: GK Hall, 1982:244.
72. Boyce HW Jr. Laparoscopy. In: Schiff L, Schiff ER, eds. Diseases of the liver, 6th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1987:443.
73. Warshaw AL, Tepper JE, et al. Laparoscopy in staging and planning of therapy for pancreatic cancer. Am J Surg 1986;151:76.
74. Dagnini G, Martin G, et al. Laparoscopy in the diagnosis of primary carcinoma of the gallbladder. Gastrointest Endosc 1984;30:289.
75. DeVita VT, Bagley CM, Goodell B, et al. Peritoneoscopy in the staging of Hodgkin's disease. Cancer Res 1971;31:1746.
76. Coleman M, Lightdale CJ, Vinciguerra VP, et al. Peritoneoscopy in Hodgkin's disease. Confirmation of results by laparotomy. JAMA 1976;236:2634.
77. Chabner BA, Johnson RE, Young RC, et al. Sequential nonsurgical and surgical staging of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Ann Intern Med 1976;85:149.
78. Brady PG, Pebbles M, Goldschmid S. Role of laparoscopy in the evaluation of patients with suspected hepatic or peritoneal malignancy. Gastrointest Endosc 1991;37:27.
79. Vilardell F, Seres I, Marti-Vicente A. Complications of peritoneoscopy: a survey of 1,455 examinations. Gastrointest Endosc 1968;14:178.
80. McCune WS, Short PE, Moscovitz H. Endoscopic cannulation of the ampulla of Vater. Ann Surg 1968;167:752.
81. Georgopoulos SK, Schwartz LH, Jarnagin WR, et al. A comparison of magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) in
malignant pancreaticobiliary obstruction. Arch Surg 1999; 134:1002.
82. Freeney PC. Radiology of the pancreas: two decades of progress in imaging and intervention. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1988;150:975.
83. Frick MP, Feinberg SB, Goodale RL. The value of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography in patients with suspected carcinoma of the pancreas and indeterminate computed
tomographic results. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1982;155:177.
84. Ruddell WSJ, Linott DJ, Axon, ATR. The diagnostic yield of ERCP in the investigation of unexplained abdominal pain. Br J Surg 1983;70:74.
85. Bourgeois N, Dunham F, Verhest A, et al. Endoscopic biopsies of the ampulla of Vater at the time of endoscopic sphincterotomy: difficulties in interpretation. Gastrointest Endosc 1984;30:163.
86. Dowsett JF, Vaira D, Hatfield ARW, et al. Endoscopic biliary therapy using the combined percutaneous and endoscopic technique. Gastroenterology 1989;96:1180.
87. Speer A, Russell RCG, Hatfield A, et al. Randomized trial of endoscopic versus percutaneous stent insertion for malignant obstructive jaundice. Lancet 1987;2:57.
88. Deviere J, Baize M, de Toeuf J, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients with hilar malignant strictures treated by endoscopic biliary drainage. Gastrointest Endosc 1988;34:95.
89. Sheperd HA, Royle G, Ross APR, et al. Endoscopic biliary endoprosthesis in the palliation of malignant obstruction of the distal common bile duct: a randomized trial. Br J Surg 1988;75:1166.
90. Kurtz RC. Preoperative biliary decompression. In: Jacobson IM, ed. ERCP: diagnostic and therapeutic applications. New York: Elsevier Science, 1989.
91. Kurtz RC, Botet JB, Gerdes H, et al. Percutaneous biliary drainage following failed endoscopic drainage in malignant biliary obstruction. Gastroenterology 1988;34:A189(abst).
92. Levine JG, Kurtz RC, Botet J. Microbiological analysis of sepsis complicating nonsurgical biliary drainage in malignant obstruction. Gastrointest Endosc 1990;36:364.
93. Sternlieb JM, Aronchich CA, Retig JN, et al. A multicenter, randomized, controlled trial to evaluate the effect of prophylactic octreotide on ERCP-induced pancreatitis. Am J Gastroenterol
1992;87:1561.
94. Davis FR, Benson MJ, Gertner DE, et al. Diagnostic and therapeutic push type enteroscopy in clinical use. Gut 1995;37:346.
95. Foutch PG, Sawyer R, Sanowski RA. Push-enteroscopy for diagnosis of patients with gastrointestinal bleeding of obscure origin. Gastrointest Endosc 1990;36:337.
96. Gostout CJ, Schroeder KW, Burton DD. Small bowel enteroscopy: an early experience in gastrointestinal bleeding of unknown origin. Gastrointest Endosc 1991;37:5.
97. Lewis BS, Kornbluth A, Waye JD. Small bowel tumors: yield of enteroscopy. Gut 1991;32:763.
98. Ponsky JL, Gauderer MWL. Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy: a non-operative technique for feeding gastrostomy. Gastrointest Endosc 1981;27:9.
99. Shike M, Berner YN, Gerdes H, et al. Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy and jejunostomy for long-term feeding in patients with cancer of the head and neck. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
1989;101:549.
100. Wasiljew BK, Ujiki GT, Beal JM. Feeding gastrostomy: complications and mortality. Am J Surg 1982;143:194.
101. Shike M, Schroy P, Ritchie MA, et al. Percutaneous endoscopic jejunostomy in cancer patients with previous gastric resection. Gastrointest Endosc 1987;33:372.
102. Shike M, Latkany L, Gerdes H. Direct percutaneous endoscopic jejunostomies (DPEJ): a technique for placement of percutaneous endoscopic tubes directly into the jejunum. Gastrointest
Endosc 1995;41:312.
103. Ikeda S, Eni Yanai T, Ishikawa S. Flexible bronchofiberscope. Keio J Med 1968;17:1.
104. Zavala DC, Richardson RH, Mukerjee PK, et al. Use of the bronchofiberscope for bronchial brush biopsy: diagnostic results and comparisons with other brushing techniques. Chest 1973;63:889.
105. Shure D. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy: diagnostic application. Clin Chest Med 1987;8:1.
106. Cortese DA. Bronchoscopic photodynamic therapy of early lung cancer. Chest 1986;90:629.
107. Seagren SL, Harrell JH, Horn RA. High-dose rate intraluminal irradiation in recurrent endobronchial carcinoma. Chest 1985;88:810.
108. Tanaka M, Kawanami O, Satoh M. Endoscopic observation of peripheral airway lesions. Chest 1988;93:228.
109. Wong KP, Marsh BR, Summer WR, et al. Transbronchial needle aspiration for diagnosis of lung cancer. Chest 1980;80:48.
110. Silvestri GA, Hoffman BJ, Bhutani MS, et al. Endoscopic ultrasound with fine-needle aspiration in the diagnosis and staging of lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1996;61:1441.
111. Ginsberg RJ. Evaluation of the mediastinum by invasive techniques. Surg Clin North Am 1987;67:1025.
112. Lam S, Kennedy T, Unger M. et al. Localization of bronchial intraepithelial neoplastic lesions by fluorescence bronchoscopy. Chest 1998;113:696.
113. Luke WP, Pearson FG, Todd TRJ, et al. Prospective evaluation of mediastinoscopy for assessment of carcinoma of the lung. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1986;91:553.
114. Nathanson LK. Basic instrumentation and operative technique for laparoscopic surgery. In: Cuschieri A, ed. Laparoscopic biliary surgery. London: Blackwell Science, 1990:33.
115. Nathanson LK, Shimi SM, Wood RAB, Cuschieri A. Video thoracoscopic ligation of bulla and pleurectomy for spontaneous pneumothorax. Ann Thorac Surg 1991;52:316.
116. McCaughan JS, Williams TE Jr, Bethel BH. Photodynamic therapy of endobronchial tumors. Lasers Surg Med 1986;6:336.
117. McCaughan JS Jr. Survival after photodynamic therapy to non-pulmonary metastatic endobronchial tumors. Lasers Surg Med 1999;24(3):194.
118. Cordasco EM, Mehta AC, Ahmad M. Bronchoscopically induced bleeding: a summary of 9 years Cleveland clinical experience and review of a literature. Chest 1991;100:1141.
119. Credle WF, Smiddy JF, Elliott RC. Complications of fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Am Rev Respir Dis 1974;109:67.
120. Surratt DM, Smiddy JF, Bruber B. Deaths and complications associated with fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Chest 1976;69:747.
121. Pue CA, Pacht ER. Complications of fiber-optic bronchoscopy at a university hospital. Chest 1995;107:430.
122. Ginsberg RJ. Evaluation of the mediastinum by invasive techniques. Surg Clin North Am 1987;67:1025.
123. Ginsberg RJ, Rice TW, Goldberg M, et al. Extended cervical mediastinoscopy: a single staging procedure for bronchial carcinoma of the left upper lobe. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1987;94:673.
124. Luke WP, Pearson FG, Todd TRJ, et al. Prospective evaluation of mediastinoscopy for assessment of carcinoma of the lung. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1986;91:553.
125. Vansteenkiste JF, Stroobants SG, Dupont PJ, et al. Prognostic importance of the standardized uptake value on 18-F fluoro-2-deoxy-glucose-positron emission tomography scan in NSCLC: an
analysis of 125 cases. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3201.
126. Weigel TL, Meltzer CC, Friedman DM, et al. The role of positron emission tomography in evaluating the mediastinum. American Association of Thoracic Surgery. New Orleans, April 1821,
1999.
127. Hammoud ZT, Anderson RC, Meyers DF, et al. The current role of mediastinoscopy in the evaluation of thoracic disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1999;118:894.
128. McNeill TM, Chamberlain JM. Diagnostic anterior mediastinotomy. Ann Thorac Surg 1966;2:532.
129. Nathanson LK. Basic instrumentation and operative technique for laparoscopic surgery. In: Cuschieri A, ed. Laparoscopic biliary surgery. London: Blackwell Science, 1990:33.
130. Hazelrigg SR, Nunchuck SK, LoCicero J, the Video-Assisted Thoracic Surgery Study Group. Video-assisted thoracic surgery study group data. Ann Thorac Surg 1993;56:1039.
131. Kirby TJ, Mack MJ, Landreneau RJ, Rice TW. Initial experience with video-assisted thoracoscopic lobectomy. Ann Thorac Surg 1993;56:1248.
132. Landreneau RJ, Mack MJ, Dowling RD, et al. The role of thoracoscopy in lung cancer management. Chest 1998;113[Suppl 1]:6S.
133. McKenna RJ Jr, Wolf RK, Brenner M, et al. Is lobectomy by video-assisted thoracic surgery an adequate cancer operation? Ann Thorac Surg 1998;66:1903.
134. Kaseda S, Aoki T, Hangai N. Video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) lobectomy: the Japanese experience. Semin Thorac Cadiovasc Surg l998;10:300.

SECTION 29.1 Laparoscopy
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 29.1
Laparoscopy
ALAN T. LEFOR
Introduction
Laparoscopic Physiology
Cellular Effects
Effects on Hepatic Blood Flow
Cardiopulmonary Effects
Laparoscopy and the Systemic Immune Response
Port-Site Metastases
Laparoscopy in the Diagnosis of Malignancy
General Considerations
Biopsy of Masses
Laparoscopic Intracorporeal Ultrasound
Laparoscopy in the Staging of Malignancy
General Considerations
Pancreatic Cancer
Esophageal and Gastric Tumors
Hepatic Tumors
Prostate Cancer
Testicular Tumors
Lymphoma
Gynecologic Malignancies
Laparoscopy in the Treatment of Malignancy
General Considerations
Gastric Cancer
Colon Cancer
Gallbladder Cancer
Hepatic Tumors
Pancreatic Cancer
Renal Cell Carcinoma
Spleen
Adrenal Tumors
Gynecologic Malignancies
Laparoscopy in the Palliation of Malignancy
Pancreatic Cancer
Feeding Tube Placement
Laparoscopic Stoma Creation
The Future of Laparoscopy in the Care of the Patient with Cancer
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Laparoscopy has become an important tool in the diagnosis and treatment of many diseases worldwide since the late 1980s. However, the procedure has been
available for nearly 100 years, used mostly by gynecologists, hepatologists, and a few pioneer general surgeons. The first report is from a gynecologic procedure
performed by Ott in Russia in 1901. 1 Insufflation was introduced in 1901 by Kelling, in a dog model. The Veress needle was developed in 1938. Older instruments
consisted of a metal tube fitted with lenses, which allowed one person at a time to see the hazy images provided. One of the major reasons for the new popularity of
laparoscopy is the availability of high-quality images on video monitors, making it easy for a team of surgeons to work together, each with the same view. In addition,
the development of long-handled tools that function through ports has rapidly and widely expanded the scope of laparoscopic surgery. 2
One of the earliest applications of laparoscopy to patients with cancer was by Bagley and coworkers 3 in 1973 who reported 96 cases of peritoneoscopy in the
evaluation of lymphoma. Also in 1973, Casirola and colleagues 4 published a series of 38 patients with lymphoma who were evaluated laparoscopically at the
University of Pavia. They concluded that laparoscopy should be used routinely in the evaluation of patients with Hodgkin's lymphoma to accurately assess stage.
Because of limitations imposed by the available equipment, they were limited to observational staging of the liver surface. Laparoscopy and bone marrow biopsy were
advocated as necessary before laparotomy in patients with Hodgkin's disease by several studies as early as 1975. 5,6 The value of laparoscopy in the evaluation of
patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) was further described by Chabner and colleagues 7 from the National Institutes of Health, when they advocated
peritoneoscopy as a routine component of a staging procedure. These investigators advocated multiple liver biopsies through the peritoneoscope for patients with
negative evaluations for widespread disease, including a history, physical examination, imaging studies, bone marrow biopsies, and a percutaneous liver biopsy.
Laparotomy with splenectomy and multiple lymph node biopsies was then recommended for patients with negative peritoneoscopy and liver biopsies. 8
In 1978, Cuschieri and colleagues 9 reported on the laparoscopic evaluation of 23 patients with pancreatic carcinoma. These pioneers were able to investigate the
lesser sac with their primitive instruments and thought that laparoscopy might be used to obviate the need for laparotomy in patients with advanced disease.
Although laparoscopy is applied widely to a large number of surgical conditions and has become the standard surgical approach for cholecystectomy since its
introduction to the United States in 1988, its application to patients with cancer remains less well defined. In fact, there are no specific indications for the use of
laparoscopy in patients with malignancies. Two principles guide the use of laparoscopy in the care of the cancer patient. First, as with any procedure, laparoscopy
should not be performed simply because it can be done. Second, when laparoscopy is used in the care of the cancer patient for diagnosis, staging, treatment, or
palliation, the laparoscopic conduct of the operation should compromise neither the nature of the procedure nor the amount or source of the tissue obtained.
Surgeons have been involved in the diagnosis, staging, treatment, and palliation of malignancies for centuries. Laparoscopy is assuming a role in each of these
areas. Laparoscopy has a role in establishing the diagnosis of cancer in some situations, allowing biopsy of intraperitoneal and retroperitoneal masses and lymph
nodes, biopsy of visceral lesions, and the examination of abdominal contents with ultrasound probes. Laparoscopy is useful in the staging of established
malignancies, such as pancreatic cancer, Hodgkin's lymphoma, and esophageal cancer. Laparoscopy also has a role in the surgical treatment of a variety of
malignancies, including gastric carcinoma, pancreatic cancer, renal tumors, adrenal tumors, colon cancer, and gynecologic tumors. Laparoscopy may be the
appropriate approach for the definitive therapy of these lesions or may be a way to provide a palliative procedure, such as a cholecystojejunostomy, in a patient with
unresectable carcinoma of the pancreas. Lastly, laparoscopy can play an important role in the palliative care of the cancer patient as a way of performing procedures
such as feeding tube placement or intestinal stoma creation with decreased hospitalization and recovery time.
Although many procedures have been performed successfully using laparoscopic technology, the results obtained should be analyzed objectively and critically. There
are advantages and disadvantages to both the open and laparoscopic conduct of many procedures. Most important, the technique selected should benefit the patient
maximally. This must be viewed from many angles, including patient comfort, tissue obtained, cost-effectiveness, surgical morbidity, and surgical mortality. At the
present time, for most laparoscopic procedures applied to the care of the patient with cancer, insufficient data are available to make quantitative judgments about
most of these issues. Therefore, only by critically analyzing the existing data can a practitioner begin to make decisions about what techniques to use for a specific
patient.

LAPAROSCOPIC PHYSIOLOGY
CELLULAR EFFECTS
One of the most notable sequelae of laparoscopic surgery is the generally significant decrease in the amount of pain when compared with open procedures. This may
easily be attributed to the use of smaller incisions and the lack of retractors holding these incisions open for hours. However, patients who undergo laparoscopic
splenectomy and then require an incision for removal of the intact specimen (see later, Lymphoma) also note decreased pain in their incisions. West and colleagues 11
investigated the effect of different insufflation gases on murine peritoneal macrophage intracellular pH and correlated these alterations with alterations in
lipopolysaccharide stimulated inflammatory cytokine release. Peritoneal macrophages were incubated for 2 hours in air, helium, or carbon dioxide (CO 2), and the
effect on tumor necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin (IL)-1, and cytosolic pH were determined. Macrophages incubated in CO 2 produced significantly less TNF and IL-1
compared with incubation in air or helium. In addition, exposure to CO 2, but not air or helium, produced a marked cytosolic acidification. These authors conclude that
cellular acidification induced by peritoneal CO 2 insufflation contributes to the diminished local inflammatory response seen in laparoscopic surgery.
EFFECTS ON HEPATIC BLOOD FLOW
Changes in hepatic blood flow can be significant because the liver plays a central role in the removal of a wide variety of substances from the circulation. Changes in
hepatic blood flow could significantly alter the biokinetics of anesthetic and other agents. In an effort to investigate the effect of CO 2 pneumoperitoneum, Tuñón and
colleagues 10 evaluated the pharmacokinetics of indocyanine green, an anionic dye frequently used to estimate hepatic blood flow in experimental systems. They
found a significantly decreased clearance of indocyanine green in the insufflation and laparoscopic surgery groups compared with the open surgery group,
corresponding to a significantly decreased hepatic blood flow in these two groups. They concluded that dose adjustments of many agents may be necessary for
patients undergoing laparoscopic procedures, especially those with limited hepatic reserve.
CARDIOPULMONARY EFFECTS
The use of laparoscopy in patients with sepsis may be a significant physiologic challenge. In an effort to assess this experimentally, Greif and Forse 12 studied
cardiopulmonary physiologic parameters in a pig model of adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). After inducing ARDS, animals were divided into two groups:
One underwent laparoscopy and the other conventional laparotomy. The laparoscopic group demonstrated a significantly decreased pulmonary compliance compared
with the laparotomy group, had a higher pCO 2, and was more acidotic. Animals with ARDS demonstrate further compromise in pulmonary physiologic parameters
when undergoing laparoscopy, but overall, cardiorespiratory function was preserved.
In a subsequent study, Greif and Forse 13 used a porcine sepsis model to evaluate interventions to ameliorate the effect of laparoscopy on cardiovascular
hemodynamics. Specifically, they found that the adverse effects may be mediated by increased pulmonary vascular resistance, diminished venous return, or both.
They found that insufflation with air instead of CO 2 to manipulate arterial pH did not improve cardiovascular hemodynamics. Aggressive fluid administration, and
administration of prostacyclin or indomethacin, had positive effects on the hemodynamic effects of pneumoperitoneum.
LAPAROSCOPY AND THE SYSTEMIC IMMUNE RESPONSE
The effect of laparoscopy on the activation of the systemic immune response has been studied by a number of investigators. Cytokine levels provide us with one
method of evaluating the systemic immune response. The cytokines IL-1, IL-6, C-reactive protein, and TNF are known mediators of the acute-phase response. 14 Peak
C-reactive protein levels have been shown to be significantly higher after open cholecystectomy compared with laparoscopic cholecystectomy. 14 Furthermore, these
investigators found a significantly prolonged elevation in C-reactive protein levels in patients undergoing open cholecystectomy compared with those undergoing
laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Serum IL-6 levels are early and sensitive markers of tissue damage because they increase proportionally to degree of injury. IL-6 levels also have been shown to
correlate with the development of significant complications and mortality. Serum IL-6 levels have been shown to be reduced in patients undergoing laparoscopic
cholecystectomy compared with those undergoing open cholecystectomy. 15 There remains a distinct lack of consensus about the meaning of the decreased IL-6
response, and further study is indicated.
The immunosuppression induced by open surgery has been studied in the past and has been well described. 16,17 More recent studies have looked at the effect of
laparoscopic surgery on the cellular components of the immune system. Previous studies have shown significant decreases in the CD4 and CD8 cell counts in
patients undergoing open cholecystectomy. 17 Vallina and Velasco 16 studied peripheral lymphocyte populations in 11 patients undergoing laparoscopic
cholecystectomy and found a transient decrease in the CD4 to CD8 ratio, with no difference in absolute CD4 and CD8 cell counts and a return to preoperative ratio
within 1 week of surgery. These studies suggest that laparoscopic surgery may impact less on the cellular components of the immune system than open surgery, but
further study is necessary to determine the significance of this information.
PORT-SITE METASTASES
Soon after the laparoscopic treatment of malignancies began throughout the world, a number of reports appeared describing “port-site metastases”—that is, tumor
recurrence at the sites of trocar placement 18,19,20,21,22,23,24 and 25 in the postoperative period. A large number of such anecdotal reports were published, which
subjectively seemed far more common than wound recurrences after open colon resection. The true extent of the problem was difficult to determine. In a large series
of open colon resections, Hughes et al. 26 reported 11 (0.7%) wound recurrences of tumor in 1603 patients. Several investigators began to look for port-site
recurrences in a prospective manner. Ramos et al. 27 reported 3 recurrences in a series of 208 laparoscopic colon cancer resections. Of these three patients, two had
widespread disease. Between 1993 and 1996, 35 cases of port-site recurrence after laparoscopic colectomy for colorectal carcinoma were reported. 28 These
observations led to a number of consequences. First, these reports prompted careful scientific evaluation of the procedure and its application to malignancies.
Registries were developed to monitor the occurrence of port-site recurrences. Second, a number of investigators began to examine possible mechanisms for this
phenomenon in the laboratory.
A retrospective study of 372 patients who underwent laparoscopic colon resection for malignancy was conducted by Nelson and colleagues. 29 This study had
relatively short follow-up, with a mean follow-up of just 23 months. The incidence of port-site metastases was 1.1%, which is similar to published data for open surgical
resection of colon cancer. This study also demonstrated a 3-year survival rate that was similar, stage for stage, with open colon resection data. In a large prospective
study of 533 patients with a variety of intraabdominal malignancies who underwent laparoscopic investigation, port-site recurrences were identified in just four patients
(0.8%). 30 The investigators in this study looked at the extent of disease as well, identifying port-site recurrences in 3 of 71 patients with advanced disease compared
with just 1 of 462 without advanced disease ( P <.003), further supporting the concept that this phenomenon may be an indicator of advanced disease.
A number of investigators have attempted to explain this phenomenon using clinical studies and laboratory models of port-site recurrences, specifically looking at the
effects of the insufflation gases. In a clinical study of 15 patients with malignancies by Ikramuddin et al., 31 the insufflation gas effluent was directed through saline.
Malignant cells were found in specimens from only two patients, both of whom had carcinomatosis. These authors concluded that tumor cell aerosolization is unlikely
to contribute to port-site metastases. In a study of effluent CO 2, another group reported very low levels of tumor cells in the gas, but they did find large numbers of
tumor cells on trocars and instruments that were used. 32 They suggest that port-site metastases might be reduced with avoidance of mechanical contamination. In
another clinical study, labeled red blood cells were injected in the gallbladder bed in two groups of patients, one with standard CO 2 pneumoperitoneum and one with
gasless laparoscopy. 33 Radioactivity was observed in the area of trocar insertion in all patients who underwent standard laparoscopy but was rare in patients who
underwent gasless laparoscopy. In a rat model of laparoscopy, peritoneal tumor growth was greater after laparotomy than after CO 2 laparoscopy. 34 The investigators
in this study also found that insufflation of CO 2 promotes tumor growth at the peritoneal surface and is associated with more abdominal wall metastases than gasless
laparoscopy. Others also have shown that CO 2 pneumoperitoneum significantly increases tumor implantation at trocar sites in a hamster model. 35 In a rat study, the
influence of the trocar itself was studied, and investigators found an increase in port-site metastases from the act of withdrawing the port and seeding the wound
site.36 Several studies have looked at the role of the gas used for insufflation with contradictory results. In one study, the gas used was not a contributing factor,
comparing CO2, helium, and air.37 In another study, helium was associated with reduced tumor growth. 38 Both of these studies suggest the use of gasless laparoscopy

for patients with malignancies.
Other investigators have looked at the influence of tissue trauma on the formation of port-site metastases. In a rat experiment, tissue trauma was induced at the port
sites, and a significantly greater amount of tumor grew there after insufflation than at port sites without induced trauma. 39 These authors also identified leakage of
insufflating gas as a contributing factor. Other investigators also have looked at the influence of tissue injury and found that peritoneal injury enhances peritoneal
implantation of tumor cells. 40 A number of investigators have used laboratory models to compare laparotomy and laparoscopy. In the absence of tumor manipulation,
no difference was seen in intraperitoneal tumor growth and spread between laparotomy and laparoscopy in a rat model. 41 The possibility of immune mediation has
been investigated by one group. 42,43 and 44 These authors found that tumors were established and grew more readily and larger after laparotomy than after insufflation.
In one of their studies, altered levels of TNF were found, suggesting an association. 45 The relative immunosuppression of laparotomy may play a role.
A number of explanations have been put forth to explain the phenomenon of port-site metastases. These are outlined briefly in Table 29.1-1. The potential causes of
this problem suggest that technical modifications of the procedure may minimize the likelihood of this problem occurring. Early data clearly suggest that the incidence
of port-site recurrences after laparoscopic tumor resection is similar to the wound recurrence rate after open resections for colon cancer. Further clinical and
experimental studies are in progress to determine the true extent of this problem. Laparoscopic resection of malignancies performed outside of clinical trials should be
undertaken “with circumspection” until the true incidence of this problem is known as a result of prospective randomized trials. 28

TABLE 29.1-1. Possible Causes of Tumor Cell Dissemination in Laparoscopic Surgery for Cancer

LAPAROSCOPY IN THE DIAGNOSIS OF MALIGNANCY
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Patients often present with constitutional symptoms and undergo evaluation by imaging studies in the hopes of identifying an underlying cause. Figure 29.1-1 shows a
computed tomography (CT) scan image from a 70-year-old woman who presented with fever and malaise and no evidence of peripheral adenopathy on physical
examination. Celiac lymph nodes were sampled laparoscopically ( Fig. 29.1-2), establishing the diagnosis of NHL. In this case, the patient underwent a diagnostic
procedure and was discharged home the same day with minimal postoperative pain. The use of diagnostic laparoscopy in the evaluation of abdominal malignancies
has been reported. In a series by Easter et al., 46 of 25 patients with suspected malignancies, 17 (68%) had a positive study for cancer; these investigators concluded
that patient management had been altered by the laparoscopic finding in 25 patients (100%).

FIGURE 29.1-1. A 70-year-old woman presented with fevers and nonspecific abdominal pain. Workup revealed a negative physical examination, with an enlarged
celiac lymph node seen on computed tomography scan. (From ref. 2, with permission.)

FIGURE 29.1-2. The celiac node was identified laparoscopically and excised. Histopathologic evaluation revealed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. (From ref. 109, with
permission.)

BIOPSY OF MASSES
Masses identified on preoperative imaging studies are often amenable to laparoscopic biopsy. Some studies have evaluated the tactile sensation afforded by
laparoscopic instruments and have found it to be almost comparable with open palpation. 47 Techniques available for the biopsy of masses under laparoscopic control
include 48
Percutaneous insertion of a core biopsy needle with direct puncture of the mass; this is easily performed under the direct vision afforded by the laparoscope.
Wedge biopsy using the electrocautery; this method should be used cautiously to avoid thermal destruction of the specimen.
Cup forceps biopsy; careful use of these forceps allows removal of adequate tissue for histopathologic examination while avoiding destruction of the specimen.
This technique is extremely useful for the biopsy of small lesions such as those present on peritoneal surfaces ( Fig. 29.1-3).

FIGURE 29.1-3. Laparoscopic evaluation of the abdomen can sometimes reveal unexpected widespread metastatic disease, as shown here.

Liver Biopsy and Evaluation of Liver Tumors
Laparoscopic investigation of hepatic lesions can include inspection, palpation (with a probe), intraoperative ultrasound (discussed later in Laparoscopic
Intracorporeal Ultrasound ), and directed biopsy. 49 Lesions that are located on the thin edge of the liver may be easily biopsied using two applications of the linear
stapler to avoid destruction of the tissue as shown in Figure 29.1-4.50 This method is also useful in obtaining blind liver biopsies requiring larger specimens than those
available with a core biopsy needle.

FIGURE 29.1-4. The linear stapler can be used to obtain a wedge biopsy of the liver by firing twice at approximately 90-degree angles. The resulting specimen is of
adequate size and lacks burn artifact caused by the use of electrocautery to obtain the specimen. (From ref. 50, with permission.)

Lymph Node Biopsy
With careful dissection, laparoscopic access to most lymph node areas can be obtained. Specifically, mesenteric, portal, iliac, pelvic, peri-aortic, and celiac lymph
nodes can be biopsied. 51 In cases in which specific lymph nodes are identified preoperatively with imaging studies, it may be helpful to mark the area of dissection
with clips and use intraoperative radiographs as a guide as well as to assure that the desired area has been evaluated.
LAPAROSCOPIC INTRACORPOREAL ULTRASOUND
One of the most important developments in the laparoscopic evaluation of malignancies is the laparoscopic intracorporeal ultrasound (LICU) probe. 52 Intraoperative
ultrasound was first described in 1958 and, with advancements in the technology, has had significant impact on the intraoperative management of a number of
complex problems.53 The laparoscopic application of these devices is limited by the size and location of the access ports used. The direct contact of the probe to the
liver affords superior resolution compared with that obtained with transabdominal ultrasound imaging. When searching for lymphadenopathy, it is critical to adapt the
technique to the specific area being studied, assuring good acoustic contact between the probe and the tissue. Saline solution may be instilled to aid in this process. 52
Doppler techniques are useful to identify blood vessels that will aid the identification of lymph nodes.
The ability to examine the biliary tree with LICU has been described. 54 This report establishes the accuracy of this technique compared with cholangiography in
determining common duct size and presence of choledocholithiasis. The use of LICU in 176 patients was reported. 55 In this series, 145 patients underwent
laparoscopic cholecystectomy, and 31 patients underwent staging laparoscopy with examination of the liver. From these preliminary studies, it appears that LICU has
potential in the intraoperative evaluation of patients with malignancies. It is also clear that the value of this procedure is limited by operator skill.
The use of LICU is clearly complementary to laparoscopy alone, particularly in the evaluation of hepatic lesions. In a study of 50 patients with potentially resectable
liver tumors, laparoscopy alone demonstrated factors that rendered the patient unresectable in 23 patients (46%). 56 Of the remaining patients, LICU identified nine
patients as unresectable. Patients in this study who underwent combined laparoscopic/LICU staging ultimately had a 93% resectability rate, compared with a 58%
resectability rate among a historical group who did not have laparoscopic staging. In another study of 420 patients with a wide range of upper gastrointestinal
malignancies, laparoscopy/LICU staging precluded laparotomy in 20% of patients deemed resectable by preoperative imaging studies, with an overall sensitivity of
70%.57 The results of these studies and others demonstrate that effective use of laparoscopy for tumor diagnosis requires the use of LICU as a complementary
technique to evaluate the true extent of disease.

LAPAROSCOPY IN THE STAGING OF MALIGNANCY
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Perhaps the most important benefit of laparoscopic staging is the exclusion of patients with disease that is not resectable for cure from further invasive procedures. It
is, however, difficult to assess the utility of this approach. Table 29.1-1 lists the indications for laparoscopic diagnosis and staging at the University of Dundee. This
approach was analyzed by a 2-year prospective evaluation, and the parameters assessed were diagnostic yield, management benefit, and management
disadvantage. 49 The results of this trial showed a 90% diagnostic yield. The authors concluded that 30% of patients had their management affected by the
performance of a laparoscopic staging procedure. Only two cases (4%) in which laparoscopy failed to identify disease that signaled unresectability were reported—a
missed hepatic lesion in segment eight, and portal vein involvement by a tumor of the head of the pancreas.
Laparoscopy is extremely accurate for the identification of peritoneal disease, which is often missed by standard noninvasive imaging studies such as CT scanning,
ultrasonography, and magnetic resonance imaging. 58 Lesions that are only a few millimeters in size can be biopsied with extreme accuracy. Liver and peritoneal
disease are often found in patients with negative CT scans, supporting the use of laparoscopy to identify these lesions. 58 A representative laparoscopic view of such
lesions is shown in Figure 29.1-3.
A series of 162 patients with a variety of malignancies, including 98 patients with hepatic lesions and 64 patients with nonhepatic intraabdominal malignancy,
underwent laparoscopic staging. 59 All of these patients were believed to be resectable for cure based on a number of preoperative imaging studies. Biopsies were
performed in 37% of cases. In 36% of cases, laparoscopy yielded information that prevented unnecessary laparotomy because of the identification of lesions that
were unresectable. Conversely, 12% of patients who had laparoscopic findings suggesting resectability were found at laparotomy to be unresectable. Sites missed

included positive lymph nodes, hepatic vein involvement, and missed peritoneal metastases. This study supports the use of laparoscopy to prevent unnecessary
laparotomy in those patients who will not benefit from resection.
Laparoscopy is facilitated in patients with tense ascites by repeated paracentesis begun 24 hours before surgery. 60 In a series of 47 patients with ascites, laparoscopy
revealed carcinomatosis in 22; ovarian cancer in 11; three patients each with mesothelioma, hepatoma, and hepatic myelofibrosis; two patients with pancreatic
cancer; and one patient each with squamous cancer, chronic lymphatic leukemia, breast cancer, and lymphoma. 60 The accuracy of laparoscopy in the evaluation of
malignant disease presenting as ascites has been reported in one series as 100%. 60
PANCREATIC CANCER
Laparoscopy has been used in the staging of patients with carcinoma of the pancreas for some time. In fact, the first report of laparoscopy in the United States was
the evaluation of a patient with carcinoma of the pancreas. 61 The goal of laparoscopy in the staging of patients with carcinoma of the pancreas is to avoid laparotomy
in those patients deemed resectable by preoperative imaging studies. An early report describes the experience of 23 patients with pancreatic cancer. 9 This study was
carried out before the widespread use of abdominal CT scan and the advent of quality optics for laparoscopy. This report emphasized the utility of biopsy under direct
vision.
In a report of 40 patients with carcinoma of the pancreas, Warshaw and coworkers 62 found 26 patients without evidence of metastatic disease and 14 patients with
metastatic disease that precluded a curative resection. Laparoscopy was performed as the final study before laparotomy, but only if the imaging studies were negative
for metastatic disease. The negative findings at laparoscopy were confirmed in 23 of 26 patients at laparotomy. The positive laparoscopic findings in 14 of 40 patients
altered the therapeutic course of all 14 patients. Findings in these patients were single, small (1 to 2 mm) nodules in the liver (n = 6), peritoneal surfaces (n = 7), and
omentum (n = 1), all of which were verified histologically. The three instances of false-negative findings were due to incomplete examination of the liver (n = 2) and a
central liver lesion (n = 1). The overall accuracy was 93% and, with negative findings, 88%.
Another application of laparoscopy in the staging of patients with carcinoma of the pancreas is the ability to obtain specimens for cytologic examination. In 40 patients
with lesions that were resectable according to the results of preoperative imaging studies, peritoneal washings were obtained (27 at laparoscopy and 13 at
laparotomy).63 Malignant cells were found in 12 (30%) of the specimens. Liver metastases were seen in six patients, all of whom had negative cytology. Interestingly,
positive cytology was found in six of eight patients who had previously undergone needle biopsy and in 6 of 32 patients who had not, suggesting that intraperitoneal
spread may be enhanced by needle biopsy. Laparoscopy is described as an excellent method to obtain cytologic washings, which may be of importance in the
evaluation of patients with carcinoma of the pancreas.
The ability of laparoscopy to detect metastatic disease not otherwise identified has been reported by others. 64 The use of laparoscopy and laparoscopic
ultrasonography has been described in the evaluation of 40 consecutive patients felt to have a resectable pancreatic lesion. 65 Resectability was confirmed in 12
patients with negative laparoscopic examinations, for a sensitivity of 100%. Occult metastatic disease was identified in 14 patients, including liver lesions (n = 10),
disease on peritoneal surfaces (n = 8), and hilar lymphadenopathy (n = 2). Laparoscopy failed to demonstrate metastatic disease in three patients. As for predicting
resectability, laparoscopy alone did not identify the 12 patients with locoregional tumor unresectability, with an overall specificity of only 50%. However, the combined
use of laparoscopy and laparoscopic ultrasonography resulted in a sensitivity of 92%, a specificity of 88%, and an accuracy of 89%.
The careful exploration of the abdominal cavity was emphasized in a study by Conlon and coworkers. 61 These investigators performed laparoscopy on 115 patients
with radiologically resectable lesions. Unresectability was determined by the presence of any of the following: metastatic lesions, extrapancreatic tumor extension,
celiac and portal node involvement, and vascular encasement of the celiac or superior mesenteric vessels. Resection was performed in 76% of patients with a
negative laparoscopic evaluation, compared with a historical series of radiologic evaluation only with a resectability rate of 35%.
The importance of laparoscopy combined with LICU was emphasized in a report by John et al. 66 that demonstrated that this combined approach was significantly
better than CT in predicting resectability (97% vs. 79%, P <.005). LICU was considered indispensable for the detection of occult metastases. Furthermore, these
investigators found that LICU is a reliable predictor of tumor unresectability. Others also have affirmed the importance of combined laparoscopy and LICU to evaluate
extent of disease.67
More recently, several investigators have suggested that laparoscopy be used in a highly selective manner in patients with carcinoma of the pancreas rather than as a
standard staging modality. 68,69 Of 398 patients who underwent laparotomy for pancreatic or periampullary carcinoma at one center, 172 patients underwent resection,
150 had a palliative bypass, and 76 underwent exploratory laparotomy only. 69 Local signs of unresectability, identifiable only at laparotomy, were found in 47, leaving
29 patients (7%) who did not require palliation and whose signs of unresectability could have been determined by laparoscopy. The authors of this study concluded
that laparoscopy (with or without LICU) should be used selectively in patients considered probably unresectable who do not require a palliative surgical procedure.
The laparoscopic conduct of palliative bypass procedures may make laparoscopy somewhat more applicable than these data imply, however. In a retrospective study
of 148 patients with pancreatic cancer, survival of patients with clinically resectable pancreatic cancer that was deemed unresectable at laparotomy was evaluated to
determine the utility of staging laparotomy. 68 The importance of staging laparoscopy is enhanced if one believes that endoscopic stenting is the best palliation. The
authors of this study concluded that extensive laparoscopic evaluation is not necessary, because they contend that operative palliation is superior to endoscopic
palliation. Staging laparoscopy is useful only to identify those patients with liver or peritoneal metastases who have an expected survival of approximately 6 months
and for whom endoscopic palliation is sufficient.
The use of laparoscopy or combined laparoscopy and laparoscopic ultrasonography appears to be helpful in the identification of lesions that suggest unresectability in
patients with negative imaging studies. 70 Although some suggest that laparoscopy be used in a fairly routine manner, data suggest that laparoscopy be used more
selectively.
ESOPHAGEAL AND GASTRIC TUMORS
Early laparoscopic studies of the staging of esophageal cancer were usually characterized by little manipulation of the abdominal contents to identify disease and
were commonly limited to observation of the parietal peritoneal surfaces. A prospective trial was undertaken to compare the accuracy in diagnosing intraabdominal
metastatic disease by scintigraphy, ultrasound scanning, and laparoscopy. 71 Of the 50 patients studied, 23 had esophageal carcinoma, 14 had gastric carcinoma, and
13 had suspected intraabdominal metastatic spread from other lesions. The accuracy of identification of metastatic disease was determined by laparoscopic biopsy,
laparotomy, and autopsy. The overall accuracy was 72% for scintigraphy, 75% for ultrasound, and 96% for laparoscopy. Thirteen patients without hepatic metastatic
disease had nodal or peritoneal disease diagnosed only by laparoscopy. This study demonstrates the value of laparoscopy and its ability to obviate the need for
laparotomy in patients with lesions not resectable for cure.
In another study, 369 patients with carcinoma of the esophagus and cardia of the stomach underwent laparoscopy, revealing single or multiple intraabdominal
metastases in 52 patients (14%).72 This study suggested that intraabdominal metastases become more common as the location of the primary tumor becomes more
distal, being greatest in lesions of the cardia. More recent data suggest that abdominal lymph node metastases may be present despite the location of the primary
tumor.73
The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of laparoscopy, ultrasound, and abdominal CT scan were compared in 90 patients with biopsy-proven carcinoma of the
esophagus or gastric cardia. 74 Laparoscopy was found to be significantly more sensitive and more accurate ( P <.05) than either ultrasound or abdominal CT scanning
in diagnosing hepatic disease. Peritoneal disease was not identified by ultrasound or CT scan, but laparoscopy identified it in eight (89%) of nine cases. Lymph node
metastases were identified most accurately by laparoscopy, although the difference between laparoscopy and CT scanning did not achieve statistical significance.
The authors of this study concluded that laparoscopy offers an accurate, reliable, and safe method of preoperative assessment in patients with carcinoma of the
esophagus.
Thoracoscopic lymph node staging has been shown to provide accurate pre-resection staging of thoracic node status. 75,76 More recently, laparoscopic lymph node
assessment in patients with carcinoma of the esophagus has been combined with thoracoscopic lymph node staging. The use of thoracoscopy in staging accuracy
has been validated in a trial comparing thoracoscopy to noninvasive staging techniques that found greater accuracy with thoracoscopic staging. 77 Laparoscopic
evaluation of intraabdominal disease was correct in 17 of 18 patients (94%) in a prospective trial. 73 A positive lymph node was not identified in a single patient. Three
patients were downstaged as a result of laparoscopic evaluation of intraabdominal lymph nodes. Six of 18 patients (33%) had unsuspected celiac lymph node

involvement. Lymph nodes near the diaphragm may be difficult to evaluate without extensive dissection. Furthermore, the laparoscopic staging procedure can be
combined with placement of an enteral feeding tube at the same time.
The value of combined laparoscopy and laparoscopic ultrasound has been demonstrated in a number of other studies. In 56 patients with carcinoma of the esophagus
(n = 38) and cardia (n = 18), the preoperative stage of disease was altered by laparoscopy in nine (17%) of the overall group of patients. 78 Of the patients with tumors
of the gastric cardia (n = 18), laparoscopy altered the stage in seven (41%), but of patients with esophageal tumors (n = 38), stage was altered in just two (6%). The
authors of this study concluded that the approach was better suited to tumors of the gastric cardia than of the esophagus. In this study, no attempt was made to
perform thoracoscopic staging for lesions of the esophagus, however, and lymphatic drainage patterns may have precluded their ability to identify intraabdominal
metastatic disease in patients with more proximal lesions of the esophagus.
In a study of 71 patients with potentially resectable gastric cancer, laparoscopy identified distant disease in 16 patients (23%). 79 The combination of preoperative CT
and laparoscopic evaluation resulted in a 93% resectability rate. These authors advocate staging laparoscopy for all patients with potentially resectable gastric
cancer. Future studies may use the combination of laparoscopy and laparoscopic ultrasound to improve the results further.
HEPATIC TUMORS
The accurate evaluation of the liver is a critical component of tumor staging for many malignancies of interest to the surgeon, because the presence of metastatic
disease in the liver often obviates the need for major resections. Radiologic imaging alone is imperfect, and several studies have demonstrated the scope of the
problem. In one series, 63 of 150 of patients (42%) with colorectal carcinoma were found to have unresectable hepatic disease at laparotomy after an imaging
evaluation demonstrated resectable lesions. 80 In another series, of 132 patients referred to the National Cancer Institute for liver tumor resection, 107 had negative
staging evaluations and were brought to laparotomy. Extrahepatic disease was identified in 28 of these 107 patients (26%). 81 These studies demonstrate one of the
major potential benefits of laparoscopic staging—the ability to exclude from laparotomy those patients with unresectable lesions in a way that minimizes postoperative
pain and hospitalization.
Of interest, one of the early applications of laparoscopy was for the staging of hepatic lesions, which had been reported as early as 1966 and in 1973 was reported in
the evaluation of patients with Hodgkin's lymphoma. 3 Before the advent of modern video systems and laparoscopic instrumentation, it was estimated that 80% of the
liver surface could be visualized laparoscopically and, of note, performed in the endoscopy clinic. 58 The sensitivity of laparoscopy in the detection of hepatic
metastatic disease was estimated at 70% to 90%.
In a study of 29 patients with hepatic malignancies (12 with hepatoma and 17 with metastatic disease), laparoscopy was undertaken before laparotomy to evaluate the
resectability of the lesions. 82 Laparoscopy alone demonstrated unresectability in 14 (48%) of 29 patients evaluated. Unsuspected cirrhosis was identified in four, and
unresectable or extrahepatic lesions were found in ten. Not surprisingly, these investigators found that patients who underwent laparoscopy had shorter hospital stays
than historical controls who underwent laparotomy that identified unresectable disease, and they concluded that laparoscopy should precede laparotomy for planned
resection of hepatic malignancies.
The gold standard for evaluation of the liver is intraoperative palpation combined with intraoperative ultrasonography (LICU). In an experimental study to evaluate the
effectiveness of laparoscopy and laparoscopic ultrasonography, liver lesions were induced in 18 pigs. 47 Laparoscopic ultrasound identified the lesions in 17 of 18
animals, for a 94% sensitivity. Two false-negatives were obtained, for a specificity of 78%. In a study of 30 patients undergoing planned hepatic resection and 32
patients undergoing resection of a gastrointestinal primary malignancy, intraoperative ultrasonography was compared with CT angioportography. 83 Of the 30 patients
planned to undergo hepatic resection, the procedure was changed or guided by the ultrasonographic result in 20 cases (67%). Of the 32 patients undergoing
resection of their primary tumor, five patients (16%) had the stage of their disease altered by the results of intraoperative ultrasonography.
Having demonstrated the value of laparoscopy and intraoperative ultrasonography, combining the two procedures is a natural extension of the technology. In a study
of 50 patients undergoing laparoscopic evaluation of hepatic tumors, laparoscopic ultrasonography was performed in 43 patients. 56 Laparoscopy alone demonstrated
that lesions shown resectable by preoperative imaging studies were unresectable in 23 patients (46%). Hepatic lesions not visible by laparoscopic examination alone
were identified by laparoscopic ultrasonography in 14 patients. Furthermore, the use of laparoscopic ultrasonography provided staging information in addition to that
gained by laparoscopy in 18 patients (42%).
In a study combining laparoscopy with laparoscopic ultrasound, 50 patients were evaluated. 84 Of these, 28 patients were deemed resectable on the basis of the
laparoscopic studies. At laparotomy, 26 were ultimately resectable, for a false-negative rate of 4%. Of the 22 patients deemed unresectable after laparoscopy, 11
were identified by laparoscopy alone, but 11 more were deemed unresectable after laparoscopic ultrasound. Nodal involvement and vascular invasion were identified
by ultrasound, emphasizing the importance of the combined approach for accurate staging.
A study of 420 patients with upper gastrointestinal malignancies evaluated the utility of combined laparoscopy and laparoscopic ultrasound in staging of these
tumors.57 Patients underwent routine imaging studies and were thought to have resectable disease, then underwent laparoscopy and laparoscopic ultrasound. The
use of combined laparoscopic staging avoided laparotomy in 20% of patients, with a sensitivity of 70%. Although it was of little use in esophageal tumors—avoiding
laparotomy in just 5% of patients and a 42% sensitivity—it appeared beneficial in patients with proximal bile duct tumors, liver tumors, and pancreatic tumors. This
study supports the use of combined laparoscopy and laparoscopic ultrasound in the staging of patients with a variety of upper gastrointestinal malignancies.
Up to 90% of metastatic lesions can be seen on the liver surface using laparoscopy. 85 Furthermore, although CT can reliably detect lesions that are at least 10 mm in
size, laparoscopy can detect lesions as small as 1 mm. Laparoscopy also facilitates the identification of lesions in areas often missed by CT scan, such as peritoneal,
omental, and mesenteric surfaces. Accurate sampling of hepatic lesions with biopsy instruments is greatly facilitated by the direct vision afforded by laparoscopy, and
hemostasis can be assured. Finally, the technical problems caused by loops of bowel are avoided when laparoscopy is used compared with external ultrasonography
or CT scanning. 85 Thus, laparoscopy is extremely important in the staging of hepatic malignancies of all types.
PROSTATE CANCER
The definitive final staging procedure in the evaluation of prostate cancer is now considered to be pelvic lymphadenectomy. In the past, open bilateral pelvic
lymphadenectomy was routinely performed, even with its associated significant morbidity, which included a lengthy recovery time. More recently, laparoscopic pelvic
lymph node dissection (LPLND) has become standard practice for many urologists, affording their patients the benefits of decreased hospitalization and recovery
times. The technique for this procedure has been described, including the extraperitoneal laparoscopic approach. 86,87 and 88
Laparoscopic detection of positive pelvic lymph nodes may alter the management of patients with prostate cancer. Patients with positive pelvic lymph nodes have
been advised to undergo a wide range of therapies, ranging from endocrine treatment to a combination of radical prostatectomy and radiation therapy. 89 An early
series of 11 patients found metastatic disease in five, with a resultant change of therapy. 86 This series included one complication, a bladder laceration that was
repaired laparoscopically.
The effect of laparoscopic conduct of this procedure on operative morbidity and convalescence has been reported. 90 In a study by Kerbl et al., 90 the initial 30 patients
undergoing LPLND were compared with 16 patients undergoing open node dissections. These authors found that the laparoscopic procedure took longer (mean, 199
minutes) than the open procedure (mean, 102 minutes), but that the blood loss was lower in the laparoscopic group. Furthermore, the laparoscopic group had
significantly less postoperative analgesic use, shorter hospital stay, faster return to normal activities, and shorter interval to full recovery compared with the open
surgical group. The incidence of complications was higher in the laparoscopic group, but all of these occurred in the first 12 patients of the series. In another series,
54 patients underwent staging laparoscopic pelvic lymphadenectomy for a variety of genitourinary malignancies, with a major complication rate of 17% and a minor
complication rate of 18%.91 Major complications included bleeding requiring transfusion, respiratory failure necessitating intubation, ureteral injury, and small bowel
obstruction due to herniation at a trocar site. The ability of CT scan to identify these postoperative complications also has been investigated. 92 Complications were
identified in 12 of 85 patients undergoing laparoscopic lymph node dissection, of which eight patients were studied with abdominopelvic CT scans. The CT scan
appearance of small bowel herniation, extensive hematomas, urinary ascites, and lymphocele compressing the bladder is described in this review. The CT scan
identified the complication in seven of eight patients and is thus an important tool in evaluating the complications of this procedure.
The indications for LPLND have evolved over time, particularly with the advent of widespread prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing. Before PSA testing, lymph node

dissection was indicated in all prostate cancer patients considered candidates for curative therapy. 87 Many urologists limit the conduct of LPLND to patients at high
risk for metastatic disease based on clinical stage, a PSA level of greater than 10 mg/dL, and tumor grade (Gleason score ³7).
TESTICULAR TUMORS
Patients with early-stage nonseminomatous testicular cancer have a 20% to 30% incidence of retroperitoneal spread of disease to paraaortic nodes at the time of
diagnosis. 87 Laparoscopic retroperitoneal lymph node dissection has been described to evaluate these patients. 87 At this time, few cases of this procedure have been
reported in the literature. No studies to date have carefully compared this technique with its open counterpart. Therefore, this procedure is appropriate only in patients
who have a low likelihood of nodal disease based on clinical risk factors. 87
LYMPHOMA
Lymphomas are a diverse group of malignant disorders of the lymphatic system that arise in nodal tissues. Typically, they are categorized by histology into Hodgkin's
lymphoma and NHL. The present role of surgery in the management of lymphoma is to establish a tissue diagnosis or to serve as a diagnostic adjunct when
noninvasive diagnostic studies do not accurately define the extent of disease. Definitive treatment based on staged disease then follows.
The histologic type and regional extent of the disease are the primary factors used to determine the prognosis and the treatment selection. Histologic type is usually
determined by a regional lymph node biopsy. Evaluating or staging the true extent of the disease has proven more elusive by noninvasive modalities. This is
especially true in the determination of an intraabdominal component to the spread of lymphoma. The spleen, for example, is involved in approximately one-third of all
cases of Hodgkin's lymphoma. 93 Most involved spleens, however, are of normal size or contain malignant foci whose size is beyond the resolution of present imaging
technology. 93 Likewise, lymph node size is a poor determinant of involvement by lymphoma. Many involved lymph nodes are of normal size, whereas normal lymph
nodes may be enlarged secondary to a reactive response. Because of this lack of sensitivity and specificity of noninvasive modalities, surgical staging still has a key
role in the staging of selected patients with lymphoma. This places the lymphoma staging procedure in the unique position of being one of the few major abdominal
surgical procedures that is undertaken strictly for diagnostic purposes.
Indications and techniques for the performance of the staging laparotomy, in attempts to influence the associated morbidity and mortality, have undergone
considerable evolution. Although previously performed on 85% of all patients with Hodgkin's disease, 94 staging laparotomy is performed in, at most, only 30% of
patients. 95 With refinement of noninvasive imaging techniques, and changes in the medical management of the disease, the value of surgical staging of lymphoma
has been reevaluated. Consequently, the subset of patients for whom surgical staging appears to be of value has become much smaller. This reduction has resulted
in significant decreases in the proportion of splenectomies performed for staging lymphoma. In a study of the frequency of splenectomy for Hodgkin's lymphoma,
Marble et al. 96 reported a rate of 44% during the period from 1979 to 1985, compared with only 26% during the period from 1986 to 1991. The role of splenectomy,
however, is still in evolution. Some evidence suggests that combined chemoradiation therapy for Hodgkin's lymphoma may be associated with a significantly
increased risk of developing a second malignant disease. 93 If this risk proves to hold true, it follows that surgical staging may again provide significant benefits for
patients with Hodgkin's lymphoma by reducing their need for combination therapy. Conversely, some centers are treating every patient with Hodgkin's disease using
chemotherapy as a first-line modality, obviating the need for surgical staging.
The role of the surgeon in patients with Hodgkin's lymphoma includes lymph node biopsy to establish a diagnosis and staging laparotomy in a very select group of
patients, usually limited to those patients with stage IIB disease after imaging evaluation. Patients with obvious stage III or IV disease should rarely be subjected to
staging laparotomy because they will be treated with chemotherapy, and patients with stage I disease are usually treated with radiation alone, obviating the need for
staging laparotomy. In some centers, chemotherapy is used to treat all patients with Hodgkin's lymphoma, almost entirely eliminating the need for any surgical staging
procedure.
Surgical staging of Hodgkin's lymphoma has been reported to change the pathologic stage of the disease in 30% to 40% of patients, resulting in significant alterations
in both prognosis and treatment selection. 97,98 Staging laparotomy is associated with 18% morbidity and up to 0.7% mortality. 93,99 Late complications occur in 5% to
15% of patients. 99,100 These include partial small bowel obstruction in 9.8% of patients, requiring lysis of adhesions in 6.8% of these, and overwhelming
post-splenectomy sepsis (OPSS) in 6.8% of patients. 100 Horowitz et al. 101 reported a 52% overall morbidity and a 9% mortality rate after splenectomy for hematologic
diseases. Splenic size was the only preoperative factor found to be predictive of postoperative complications.
The conventional technique for the surgical staging for lymphoma has been well described. 102,103 With the smaller incisions used in minimal-access surgery, several
potential advantages can be offered to patients undergoing laparoscopic staging of abdominal lymphoma. These include less postoperative pain, earlier ambulation,
better breathing, and shorter recovery time. These can be translated into fewer postoperative complications and possibly earlier administration of definitive therapy.
However, the procedure remains a technically demanding operation with which no single surgeon will probably gain vast experience. With further advances in
laparoscopic technology and refinements in techniques, laparoscopic staging of abdominal lymphoma will become an important tool in the surgical armamentarium.
The laparoscopic approach to this procedure follows the same principles as those delineated for the open procedure. 104 There are no true contraindications to
laparoscopic staging. Relative contraindications to laparoscopic staging include abdominal wall sepsis, gastrointestinal distention, intraabdominal sepsis, and
extensive adhesions. 105 Laparoscopic staging of abdominal lymphoma has been successfully performed by several groups. 104,106,107,108 and 109 A comparison of
laparoscopic and open staging of Hodgkin's disease has demonstrated equivalent oncologic results, and functionally superior results with laparoscopic staging. 104
These investigators found a slightly longer operative time (202 vs. 144 minutes), but significantly shortened postoperative ileus and postoperative hospitalization
times. These data strongly support the use of laparoscopy for accurate staging of Hodgkin's disease when indicated.
Techniques for the laparoscopic exploration of other abdominal malignancies, with lymph node retrieval, laparoscopic splenectomy, 110 and laparoscopic wedge biopsy
of the liver,50 were developed. When combined, these procedures complete a laparoscopic staging procedure. The ports, or trocars, are positioned as in Figure
29.1-5. All five ports are 12 mm in diameter. Using identical large ports enables the surgeon the versatility to switch instruments between the different anatomic sites
required in this procedure. A sixth port may be, but is not always, necessary for access to the iliac nodes.

FIGURE 29.1-5. Port placement for laparoscopic splenectomy. The operating ports are on the left side, whereas the two upper midline ports are used for retraction.
(From ref. 108, with permission.)

Although several groups have advocated preoperative splenic artery embolization, especially for larger spleens, 111,112 and 113 most patients with Hodgkin's lymphoma
have normal-size spleens, and embolization is usually not indicated. The excised but intact spleen is placed into a stout plastic bag and left in the left upper quadrant
for the remainder of the procedure, as shown in Figure 29.1-6. Laparoscopic splenectomy has been widely described and is considered to be the gold standard for
splenectomy at this time.114,115,116,117 and 118 The identification and removal of accessory spleens has been shown to be effectively carried out using laparoscopic
approaches.119,120 Not only has it been shown that hospital charges for laparoscopic splenectomy are less than charges for open splenectomy, it also has been shown

that, over time, charges for laparoscopic splenectomy can be decreased by shorter operating times and judicious use of disposable instruments. 121

FIGURE 29.1-6. The spleen is placed in a stout plastic bag after being completely devascularized and the ligaments divided. (From ref. 109, with permission.)

The laparoscopic dissection of lymph nodes can be very challenging because nonpathologic nodes are small and difficult to identify. LPLND is widely used in
genitourinary surgery for the staging of prostate cancer and has become well accepted. 87 The magnification afforded by the use of laparoscopic instrumentation has
proven to be very helpful. All abnormal nodes on preoperative lymphangiogram should be removed and clips applied as markers. Oophoropexy is then performed in
young females by suturing the ovaries to the back of the uterus. The spleen is then removed intact, within the plastic bag, through a small midline incision
incorporating the umbilical port site.
The accurate histologic diagnosis of lymphoma requires assessment of the nodal architecture, which requires an intact node capsule. Therefore, whenever possible,
one should excise an entire intact lymph node. The use of formalin precludes the assessment by flow cytometry, which has become crucial for complete and accurate
classification of lymphoma and on which therapeutic decisions may ultimately be based. Therefore, each lymph node should be sent for examination in saline in a
fresh state. As mentioned above, the spleen should be sent to the pathologists intact and, usually, in a fresh state. The liver tissue may be placed in formalin for
transport to the pathology department. The planning and conduct of the staging procedure involves close cooperation between surgeon, radiologist, medical
oncologist, and pathologist.
The morbidity and mortality associated with staging laparotomy is well established. 93,99,100,101,122 A review of staging laparotomy by Multani and Grossbard 123
demonstrated a mortality of 0.3% to 1.0%, major morbidity of 3% to 18%, and minor morbidity of 6% to 19%. Delays to definitive treatment occurred in 5% to 10% of
patients. 123 Jockovitch et al.100 reported surgical complications in 26% of 133 consecutive patients. Complications included atelectasis in 13%, small bowel obstruction
in 10% (requiring reoperation in 7%), subphrenic abscesses in 2%, and wound dehiscence in 1%. 100
OPSS, which can follow any procedure that removes the spleen, remains a serious potential complication. The incidence of OPSS can be decreased by the
preoperative administration of the polyvalent pneumococcal vaccine. 100 In addition, vaccinations for Haemophilus influenzae and Neisseria meningitidis are often
administered.124 These precautions should provide some protection against the three organisms most commonly responsible for OPSS. The optimal timing of such
vaccinations remains difficult to define but should probably be administered as long as possible before operation. 124 Patient education is also vitally important. They
should be alerted that a low-grade fever might be a harbinger of a serious infection. Although some recommend prophylactic oral penicillin in children, this practice is
somewhat controversial. In general, although some question the value of splenectomy because of the risk of OPSS, patients whose therapy depends on accurate
staging should undergo splenectomy. 125
Causes for conversion to an open procedure during splenectomy include densely adherent adjacent structures, technical errors, and cardiopulmonary instability. 126
The most troubling technical errors are those associated with excessive bleeding that makes delineating anatomic structures very difficult. Conversion rates from 0%
to 19% have been reported in series of laparoscopic splenectomy alone. 126 Patients about to undergo laparoscopic staging must be apprised of these data as part of
the process of informed consent.
Whereas the use of laparoscopic splenectomy in the treatment of idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura (ITP) has become the standard, some still question the use of
laparoscopic approaches in the staging of Hodgkin's disease. 127 More recent data, such as that reported by Baccarini and coworkers, 104 suggest that the laparoscopic
operation is equivalent to the open procedure. They demonstrated equivalent lymph node harvest, and on reasonable postoperative follow-up, they found fewer
subdiaphragmatic relapses in the laparoscopy group. Although these data are not prospectively randomized, the results are very compelling in support of
laparoscopic staging.
The use of laparoscopy in the management of a variety of abdominal lymphoproliferative diseases has been reported by Silecchia et al. 128 These investigators
performed laparoscopic investigation on 64 patients with a number of diseases, including retroperitoneal adenopathy, Hodgkin's disease, and non-Hodgkin's disease.
Laparoscopic ultrasound was used extensively. They concluded that the interval between diagnosis and treatment was significantly shortened by using a laparoscopic
approach. Although this series does not necessarily provide the final word, it again demonstrates the utility of laparoscopy in the evaluation of these patients and
suggests the need for further study.
NHL is a diverse group of diseases with a wide range of biologic behaviors. They may be very aggressive and rapidly fatal or behave as one of the most indolent and
well-tolerated malignancies afflicting humans. 129 Because the clinical course is variable, the pattern of spread is also unpredictable. NHL is classified into low,
intermediate, and high-grade pathologic groups according to the National Cancer Institute's working formulation. Each of these groups is further subdivided based on
cell type (e.g., small cell, large cell). The therapy for these patients is still evolving, and surgical staging is generally reserved for the very small minority of patients
with localized disease who receive radiation therapy alone. The role of the surgeon in the care of patients with NHL is usually limited to the biopsy of a single
peripheral lymph node to establish a tissue diagnosis. In patients with NHL, the precise definition of disease location, unlike Hodgkin's lymphoma, has less impact on
therapeutic decision making. 130 In general, NHLs are systemic diseases at the time of diagnosis and require the use of systemic therapy (e.g., chemotherapy) rather
than regional therapy (e.g., radiation) for treatment.
Laparoscopy may play a beneficial role in the diagnosis of NHL in a select subgroup of patients. For example, a 70-year-old woman presented to her primary care
physician with general malaise, weight loss, and occasional fevers. In the absence of positive findings on physical examination, she was evaluated with an abdominal
CT scan (see Fig. 29.1-1), which demonstrated peri-aortic lymphadenopathy. 131 The diagnosis of NHL was made in this patient by laparoscopic lymph node excision
as shown in Figure 29.1-2, performed on an outpatient basis, and systemic chemotherapy was begun.
Staging laparoscopy in patients with NHL is restricted to those few patients with clinically limited disease (stage I and II) who are to be treated with radiation therapy
alone with curative intent. 93 In these very unusual cases, a staging procedure similar to that performed for patients with Hodgkin's lymphoma may be undertaken
laparoscopically. Splenectomy may be omitted from the surgical staging of abdominal NHL because splenic involvement usually does not affect the therapy used, 130
and its removal increases toxicity to patients given combination chemotherapy. 96,132 Laparoscopy may have a role in the evaluation of treatment efficacy because
persistent disease is often overdiagnosed by routine imaging studies. 130
The gastrointestinal tract is involved in 20% of advanced NHL and represents 1% to 4% of all alimentary tract malignancies. 133 When large or small bowel is involved,
the typical presenting signs and symptoms are consistent with a bowel obstruction secondary to external compression or intussusception. The most frequent site of
involvement is at the ileocecal valve. Complete, curative resection is generally indicated for localized lesions. If the lymphoma is of a diffuse submucosal pattern
where systemic therapy is required, resection should be limited to the correction of the mechanical obstruction. Should the lesion be discovered during a laparoscopic
exploration or a laparoscopic staging procedure, laparoscopic resection of the lesion may be feasible if the surgeon has the technical ability and experience.
Laparoscopic localization and laparoscopic-assisted resection of the tumor is another alternative. The entire bowel, however, should be evaluated because skip

lesions may exist.93,94 Gastric lymphoma, on the other hand, may be diagnosed after esophagogastroduodenoscopy, which is usually performed for upper
gastrointestinal bleeding or anemia. If the lesion is localized, then laparoscopic resection may be technically feasible. Most patients with NHL are upstaged by staging
laparotomy. This upstaging, however, results in no significant impact on the modality of treatment. 130 Therefore, staging laparotomy for NHL has fallen out of favor
except for the small, select group of patients whose treatment would be intensified should the liver be involved. The liver can be involved in 20% of patients with
NHL.105 The role of the surgeon for patients with NHL is generally limited to the minimum procedure needed to establish the diagnosis.
GYNECOLOGIC MALIGNANCIES
Although gynecologists have used laparoscopic instrumentation for many years, the use of laparoscopy for the management of gynecologic malignancies is more
recent. Several reports of laparoscopic staging for apparent early-stage ovarian cancer have been published. 134 However, the follow-up remains short at this time, and
the utility of this technique in ovarian cancer remains unproven. A prospective trial sponsored by the Gynecologic Oncology Group is under way to evaluate the utility
of laparoscopy in these patients. The utility of the second-look laparotomy in the assessment of patients who have been treated for ovarian cancer is well established.
Several reports of second-look laparoscopy with apparently good results have been published. 134 Further evaluation of this application is currently in progress.
Laparoscopy also has been used in the staging of advanced ovarian disease. Patients with cervical cancer have undergone laparoscopic-assisted radical vaginal
hysterectomy with LPLND. The utility of this procedure remains to be proven with prospective trials. Patients with early endometrial cancer have been staged by
combining laparoscopy with vaginal hysterectomy in a procedure that has been named laparoscopic-assisted surgical staging. 134 Laparoscopy provides the ability to
assess the peritoneal cavity, obtain peritoneal washings, and guarantee the removal of the adnexae. Lymph node sampling can also be performed laparoscopically
when necessary in these patients. Although laparoscopy has been used in the management of ovarian, cervical, and endometrial malignancies, its potential is
unconfirmed at this time. Reports of complications and long-term results are not yet available. 134 The results of ongoing clinical trials must be evaluated before this
technique is widely applied in the management of gynecologic malignancies.

LAPAROSCOPY IN THE TREATMENT OF MALIGNANCY
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Laparoscopic approaches have been used to treat a wide variety of malignancies. Many of these techniques were applied with a curative intent, whereas some were
conducted as palliative procedures. At the time of this writing, the use of laparoscopic techniques to treat patients with malignancy remains controversial. In an
attempt to afford patients with cancer the same benefits afforded patients with cholelithiasis, many investigators have conducted laparoscopic surgery for cancer with
curative intent, particularly for carcinoma of the colon. However, this development may have been somewhat premature. The two major concerns about an operation
performed laparoscopically for the treatment of cancer are (1) to be sure that the laparoscopic operation meets the same “oncologic” goals of the open procedure
(e.g., margins of resection, lymph node harvest, recurrence rate, evaluation of other intraabdominal organs) and (2) to demonstrate an advantage to the patient for
having undergone the procedure laparoscopically (e.g., decreased hospital stay, decreased cost, more rapid return to work). To date, few data convincingly
demonstrate the validity of these two principles in the laparoscopic treatment of cancer.
GASTRIC CANCER
The application of laparoscopic techniques to gastric resection has been made possible by the rapid advances in stapling technology. The first laparoscopic gastric
resection using a Billroth II reconstruction performed intraabdominally was reported in 1992. 135 Since that time, the same group has continued to apply laparoscopic
surgical techniques to gastric surgery. 136 In a series of 16 patients, all were operated on for benign disease, although two patients had foci of cancer found at the time
of histologic examination. These two patients later underwent open lymphadenectomy. Laparoscopic gastric resection remains a technically demanding procedure,
with precise identification of anatomic structures essential to its successful completion.
The use of laparoscopic techniques in the treatment of gastric cancer requires careful selection of patients. Early gastric cancer involving the submucosa requires
gastrectomy with removal of the greater omentum and level 1 lymph nodes. Techniques for this procedure have been fully described. 137 More advanced tumors, which
require further node dissections, are not amenable to laparoscopic resection. Patients with stage IV disease who require palliative gastric resections are good
candidates for laparoscopic resection. Gastric lymphoma and gastric polyps requiring resection are also suitable for laparoscopic resection. 137 The inability to perform
extensive lymphadenectomy may limit the applicability of laparoscopic gastric resection to malignancies, but it is clear that advances in technology may make this
more feasible.
COLON CANCER
Carcinoma of the colon is a very common disease in the United States, making it an attractive candidate for laparoscopic treatment. Surgical resection of carcinoma of
the colon is a well-established procedure. Thus, any surgical approach that can potentially treat this disease with decreased postoperative pain and hospitalization
may result in considerable advantages, generating great interest in the laparoscopic resection of colon cancer. It is clear that laparoscopic colon resection is an
“advanced” procedure requiring more training, experience, and time than that for procedures such as appendectomy or cholecystectomy. 138 The use of animal models
has facilitated the testing of some of these techniques and may be an important educational tool. 139 Intracorporeal anastomotic techniques may be used but remain a
greater technical challenge than extracorporeal anastomoses.
Indications for laparoscopic colon resection at this time include segmental resections for diverticular disease, polyps, rectal prolapse, and intestinal volvulus. 140 The
role of laparoscopic resections in the management of colonic malignancies remain undefined at this time and should be carried out only in the setting of a prospective
trial.28,140,141,142 and 143 It is reasonable to laparoscopically resect colonic malignancies with synchronous hepatic or pulmonary metastases as a palliative procedure.
When performed appropriately, laparoscopic colon resection for cancer should include the following components, just as in open surgical resections: (1) resection of
tumor in the bowel wall and adjacent soft tissues, (2) resection of an adequate margin of normal bowel, and (3) an adequate lymph node resection with associated
vascular pedicle. 144
The preoperative factors affecting suitability for laparoscopic colonic surgery are similar to those important in other laparoscopic procedures. The lack of ability to use
palpation in the abdominal cavity prompts some to perform a more thorough preoperative evaluation with colonoscopy and CT scan. 144 In general, the surgeon and
assistant stand on the side opposite the bowel to be resected. Some prefer the dorsolithotomy position, 144 and others prefer the patient in the supine position. 138 The
use of the dorsolithotomy position has two potential advantages. First, intraoperative colonoscopy, facilitated by the use of low stirrups, may be necessary for
localizing the lesion in the operating room. Second, one technique demonstrates the utility of the colonoscope in dissecting the hepatic and splenic flexures. 145 The
zero-degree laparoscope is used for these procedures.
In general, for a right hemicolectomy, two left-sided and one right-sided port are used in addition to the umbilical camera port ( Fig. 29.1-7). The abdomen is explored
thoroughly, with special attention paid to the liver, just as is performed with open surgical approaches. Ports are best placed as they are needed, which allows for
flexibility, rather than using a static pattern placing all ports synchronously. 139,141 The bowel is then mobilized and the vascular pedicle to the sigmoid colon divided
using a stapler. The bowel is then exteriorized and an extracorporeal anastomosis fashioned. 146

FIGURE 29.1-7. Port placement for laparoscopic colon resection is different for right (A) and left (B) colon procedures as shown here. (From ref. 148, with
permission.)

Technical limitations can hinder the performance of laparoscopic colon resections. In an attempt to define them, Pandya and colleagues 147 examined indications for
intraoperative conversion of a laparoscopic colon resection to an open procedure. Two hundred patients who underwent laparoscopic colon resection were reviewed,
with 47 (23.5%) converted to an open operation. Indications for conversion included technical problems in 15 patients (hypercarbia, unclear anatomy, and stapler
misfire), laparoscopic complications in nine patients (bleeding, cystotomy, and enterotomy), and problems that “exceeded the limits of laparoscopic dissection” in 23
patients (phlegmon, adhesions, obesity, and tumor invasion of adjacent organs). The investigators noted a decreasing conversion rate with experience. After the
“learning curve,” indications for conversion have included excessive tumor bulk, adhesions, and a massive diverticular phlegmon.
The safety and efficacy of laparoscopic colectomy has been studied retrospectively. A summary of a large number of studies is shown in Table 29.1-2. In a series of
51 laparoscopic colon resections, 24 patients underwent operation for cancer. 148 A majority of these procedures were performed using intracorporeal anastomoses,
but 14% were converted to laparoscopic-assisted cases, and 8% were converted to open procedures. This series included right, transverse, left, low, anterior, and
abdominoperineal colon resections. Operative time averaged 2.6 hours and hospitalization averaged 4.6 days. Complications were reported in 8% of patients.

TABLE 29.1-2. Clinical Trials of Laparoscopic Colon Resection

In another series, 66 patients underwent attempted laparoscopic colon resections, with a conversion rate to open colectomy in 41%. 149 Major morbidity was reported in
24% of patients, with no mortality. Length of hospitalization, hospital cost, and lymph node harvest was compared with patients who underwent open colon resection.
Mean postoperative hospital stay was significantly less in patients with laparoscopic sigmoid and right colectomies than for those patients converted to open operation
or for those procedures performed using conventional open techniques. Total hospital cost for patients undergoing conventional open right hemicolectomy was less
than that for the converted group but not for those having a laparoscopic resection. Lymph node harvest was comparable in all three groups. The authors of this study
concluded that these data demonstrate that laparoscopic colectomy can be performed with acceptable morbidity and mortality, but that there is no definite cost
savings.
Laparoscopic colon resection was performed in 80 patients and compared with a control group of 53 patients undergoing conventional open colectomy by the same
group of surgeons. 150 Analysis included complications, rate of conversion, length of procedure, duration of postoperative ileus, hospital stay, hospital cost, and
adequacy of the specimen obtained. Operations were converted to open procedures in 23% of patients, which decreased to 15% in the second half of the series. The
length of procedure was greater in those undergoing laparoscopic resection (mean, 221 minutes) than in those undergoing open colectomy (mean, 183 minutes).
Operating room and total hospital charges were also greater in those patients undergoing laparoscopic resection compared with those having open colectomy.
Patients having a laparoscopic colectomy had an average postoperative stay of 5.2 days, compared with 7.8 days for those having open colectomies. The pathology
specimens were similar in all groups. This study further validates that laparoscopic colectomy can be performed safely with shorter hospitalization, but at higher
overall cost. Perhaps with greater experience, operating times will decrease, as was suggested by this study.
A number of trials have compared laparoscopic colon resection to traditional open resection. Thirty-eight laparoscopic colon resections were compared with 39 open
resections.151 The authors of this study found slightly longer operative time (161 minutes vs. 131 minutes) in the laparoscopic group, with lower estimated blood loss
(122 mL vs. 192 mL) and significantly shorter length of stay (3.3 days vs. 7.4 days), with similar complication rates. They concluded that laparoscopic colon resection
for benign disease affords the patient the advantages of laparoscopic surgery and gives surgeons the opportunity to develop requisite skills while results of trials of
laparoscopic surgery for malignancy are awaited. In a prospective trial of 194 patients in San Antonio, Texas, patients selected their own method of resection. Open
colon resection was selected by 110 patients and laparoscopy by 84 patients. 152 The authors of this study looked at a number of outcome variables and observed that
laparoscopic resection allows adequate margins and lymph node harvests no different from open resection. In brief follow-up, survival in the two groups was similar. In
a study of 14 patients undergoing laparoscopic colon resection for diverticular disease, patients were compared with a similar group who had undergone open
resection.153 Estimated blood loss, days to oral liquids, and length of stay were significantly less in the laparoscopic group. Mean total hospital charges and costs
were also less, suggesting the benefits of laparoscopic colon resection. In a randomized prospective trial, 51 patients underwent colon resection by laparoscopic
means or by traditional open techniques. 154 Similar lymph node harvests were reported in the two groups, as were resection margins and adequacy of specimens.
Patients were discharged earlier from the hospital in the laparoscopic group as well. Although follow-up was not long, this study suggests that the laparoscopic
approach is preferable for patients requiring colon resection. Similar results have been observed by a number of authors. 155,156 and 157
Some of the trials reported to date demonstrate excellent results but lack lengthy follow-up. Hoffman et al. 158 reported 238 patients who underwent laparoscopic colon
resections, with 39 patients who underwent resection available for just 24 months of follow-up. They concluded that survival rates were similar to those observed for
patients who underwent open colon resection. A single-arm, retrospective multicenter study reported a 10.5% conversion rate, an average of 12.1 lymph nodes
resected, and a mean follow-up of 16 months. 159 The authors of this study admitted the need for longer follow-up. In a study of 100 patients, median operative time for
laparoscopic resection was 180 minutes, and the conversion rate was 31%, 163 although the conversion rate decreased relatively along the learning curve. Median
follow-up was just 15 months in this study, which demonstrated four distant recurrences and one pelvic recurrence. These authors asserted the importance of longer
follow-up and a randomized trial to truly establish the benefit of this procedure. In an excellent study of 172 patients who underwent laparoscopic resection for
adenocarcinoma of the colon, 25 patients underwent conversion to open resection and 12 patients were lost to follow-up, leaving 135 patients in the study. 160 Median
follow-up was 24 months, with observed 2-year survival rates of 100% for stage I, 88% for stage II, 81% for stage III, and 29% for stage IV. Survival rates at 4 years
were 100% for stage I, 80% for stage II, 54% for stage III, and 0% for stage IV. No port-site recurrences were observed. Although the authors of this study correctly
concluded that early survival curves for patients undergoing laparoscopic resection do not differ from historical controls, they also assert that “further validation is
needed.”
That laparoscopic colon resection is feasible goes unquestioned. Some studies have pointed out that it remains a technically demanding procedure, considerably
more difficult than laparoscopic cholecystectomy, and has a lengthy learning curve. However, the use of laparoscopic resection of the colon for the treatment of
malignancies is currently under study. The American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons does not endorse the application of laparoscopic technology to cure
carcinoma at this time.140 The studies just described have shown that laparoscopic colon resection is safe, feasible, and obtains pathologic specimens similar to those
obtained from open surgery. Although it is tempting to obtain the same benefits of decreased hospitalization and recovery for patients undergoing colon resection as
has been shown in patients undergoing cholecystectomy through the use of laparoscopy, there is no evidence at this time to definitively conclude that this is the case.
We must also consider the issue of the possibility of compromised cancer control and complications in this discussion. 142 Cancer control issues include extent of
lymph node resection, port-site recurrences, and adequacy of intraperitoneal staging in the absence of tactile sensation. The series reviewed above suggest that a
lymph node resection similar to that in open surgery is possible. Others have made similar observations regarding lymph node harvests. 158,160,161,162 and 163 The issue of
port-site metastases is discussed above in the section Port-Site Metastases, but rates from 0% to 3.2% have been reported, compared with fewer than 1% in open

colon resection. 164 The problem with many of the anecdotal reports in the literature is that the overall denominator is not known, and only through a prospective trial
can these issues be adequately studied. The 1-year port-site recurrence rate has been reported at less than 1% in the first 252 patients in the registry of the American
Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons. 27 In this series, all of the recurrences were in patients with node-positive disease. Sugarbaker 165 has advocated the use of
intraperitoneal chemotherapy based on his work with disseminated gastrointestinal malignancies.
Although laparoscopic surgery has the potential to save hospitalization time and recovery time, such savings must not be made at the expense of overall survival. The
prospective trial currently under way at many centers throughout the United States and funded by the National Institutes of Health should address the issues of cancer
control, costs, and quality of life. 142 The surgical community is awaiting the results of this trial. This carefully designed prospective trial will answer the significant
questions regarding laparoscopic resection of colon cancer. The approach of waiting for the results of this study has been endorsed by a number of
authors. 141,142,166,167
GALLBLADDER CANCER
Although it is rare, the presence of a gallbladder malignancy is a possibility that must always be in the mind of the laparoscopic surgeon while performing a routine
laparoscopic cholecystectomy. This disease, most common in older women, is the fifth most common malignancy of the gastrointestinal tract and is associated with a
dismal prognosis. 168 It is estimated that carcinoma is present in 1% of all cholecystectomy specimens. 168 Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the procedure of choice for
patients with symptomatic cholelithiasis, but the presence of gallbladder carcinoma remains a contraindication to the laparoscopic conduct of this procedure. 169,170
Preoperative diagnosis of this disease is difficult, because the sensitivity for ultrasonography in early cases is only approximately 20%. In view of the difficulty with
which preoperative diagnosis can be made, it is not surprising that the diagnosis is often made only after histologic examination of the surgical specimen.
The optimal treatment for this rare disease remains elusive. In a large retrospective study of 724 patients from a number of European centers, only 4% of patients
presented with Tis lesions, but these were the only patients with any hope of long-term survival. 171 Prognosis in stage T1 and T2 was markedly worse, although no
data support the use of extended surgical resections in these patients. Furthermore, others have shown that, at the present time, the use of adjuvant chemotherapy or
radiation therapy does not significantly affect survival. 172
The treatment of patients suspected of having carcinoma of the gallbladder preoperatively should include a definitive procedure performed through conventional open
surgical techniques as the initial procedure. Clinical data from ten patients with laparoscopically discovered gallbladder carcinoma have been reported. 173 All ten
patients were believed to have resectable disease based on preoperative studies and intraoperative findings. The interval to exploration at the referral center was 14
to 74 days, with a median of 30 days. Gross intraperitoneal dissemination was found in four patients. The investigators concluded that patients in whom gallbladder
carcinoma is suspected on visual examination of the gallbladder during attempted laparoscopic cholecystectomy should be converted immediately to an open
procedure or the procedure terminated and the patient referred for definitive therapy. During the conduct of a laparoscopic cholecystectomy, any evidence for the
presence of a carcinoma is cause for conversion to an open procedure. 174 Routine examination of the specimen with frozen section if suspicious areas are present
should also be carried out, with conversion to an open procedure if positive for malignancy. 170
In summary, any patient with a lesion that is preoperatively suspect for malignancy should undergo cholecystectomy by conventional open cholecystectomy. 175 If the
diagnosis is suspected during a laparoscopic cholecystectomy based on the appearance of the gallbladder, frozen section should be obtained and the procedure
converted to an open cholecystectomy if the histology demonstrates malignancy. If the diagnosis is made only after laparoscopic cholecystectomy is completed, then
port sites should be excised at a second procedure. 176 Further surgical or adjuvant therapy may also be indicated.
HEPATIC TUMORS
Whereas the use of laparoscopy in the staging of hepatic lesions, either primary or metastatic, has become fairly widespread, laparoscopic treatment of hepatic
malignancies is rarely performed. This is because of the technical difficulty of this procedure as well as the scarcity of patients with lesions amenable to laparoscopic
resection. The laparoscopic treatment of hepatic lesions has been reported. A benign liver cyst was fenestrated under laparoscopic guidance and provided effective
therapy for a benign condition while avoiding the potential morbidity of a laparotomy. 177 A large series of 43 patients with benign solid and cystic lesions treated
laparoscopically has been reported by Katkhouda et al. 178 These authors concluded that laparoscopic surgery is indicated for patients with giant solitary hepatic cysts
and select patients with small, benign solid tumors located in anterior liver segments.
A number of techniques can be performed laparoscopically, including wedge excisions using a stapling device 50 or even laparoscopic hepatic segmentectomy. The
anterolateral areas of the segments in the Couinaud classification are amenable to laparoscopic resection because of their accessibility. 178
Although a number of techniques are available for liver resection, the ultrasonic dissector is preferred by some. A randomized prospective trial has shown that a
laparoscopic version of this device is effective in laparoscopic cholecystectomy. 179 It is natural that this device may be used for hepatic resection. An animal trial has
been reported, demonstrating hepatic resection on pigs using the ultrasonic dissector. 180 The ultrasonic dissector was effective in dissecting the intraparenchymal
structures, including vascular structures. A single case of a left lateral segmentectomy in a human performed laparoscopically has been reported. 181 With improved
instrumentation becoming available, perhaps more hepatic resections will be performed laparoscopically.
Another application of laparoscopic technology to the treatment of liver lesions is cryotherapy. Cryosurgery has been shown to be effective in the treatment of some
hepatic malignancies. 182 Ultrasound monitoring of this procedure is essential. With the advent of laparoscopic ultrasound probes and cryotherapy probes, it is possible
to perform cryotherapy of hepatic lesions. However, anatomic limitations may prevent the use of this technology because of limited exposure of certain lesions.
More recently, radio frequency ablation of tumors has been performed for metastatic and primary lesions of the liver. 183,184 This technique is often performed
percutaneously, but situations exist in which a lesion is accessible only by using laparoscopic techniques to position the treatment probe accurately. Of 30 patients
who underwent radio frequency ablation for primary and metastatic lesions of the liver in one series, 12 were treated laparoscopically, 12 at laparotomy, and six
percutaneously. 184
As laparoscopic technology improves and new modalities are applied to the treatment of hepatic lesions, more applications of minimally invasive surgery may be
found for these patients. The role of laparoscopy in the management of malignant lesions of the liver remains undefined.
PANCREATIC CANCER
Resection with the intent for cure is possible in only approximately 10% to 20% of patients who present with carcinoma of the pancreas, and 5-year survival rates of
all patients presenting with the disease are only approximately 3%. 185 However, several more recent series have reported 5-year survival rates as high as 20% to 25%
for patients who undergo resection for cure. Patients with pathologically negative lymph nodes have an even higher survival rate. 186 Many of the patients who are not
resectable for cure often require surgical palliation. Laparoscopic surgery has the potential to provide this palliation while minimizing postoperative pain and length of
hospital stay, both especially important considerations in patients with limited life expectancy.
The laparoscopic resection of pancreatic tumors is technically feasible but unlikely to become widely practiced. Gagner and Pomp 187 reported having performed a
pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy in a patient with chronic pancreatitis and pancreas divisum. Reconstruction was performed with a gastrojejunostomy,
hepaticojejunostomy, and pancreaticojejunostomy. The patient's postoperative course was complicated by delayed gastric emptying, and he was discharged on the
30th postoperative day.
Laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy, with or without splenic salvage, has been well described. 188 It is often combined with splenectomy, as described by Cuschieri and
colleagues,189 who reported a series of five patients who underwent laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy using a five-port technique. This procedure
is indicated for benign tumors in which the splenic vein cannot be separated from the pancreatic lesion, or in palliative resections of the distal pancreas for lesions
such as cystadenoma, neuroendocrine tumors, cysts, and adenocarcinoma of the tail of the pancreas. It is unlikely that minimally invasive surgery will play a large role
in the curative resection of malignancies of the head of the pancreas in the near future.

RENAL CELL CARCINOMA
The use of laparoscopic surgical approaches for patients with renal cell carcinoma has been described, 190,191 and 192 with investigators demonstrating that nephrectomy
can be safely performed using existing laparoscopic instrumentation. In this early series, the procedure took a mean of 5.6 hours to complete, and patients had an
average hospital stay of 4.6 days. 190 The kidney is morcellated with an electric morcellator placed through a 10-mm port and extracted using a sturdy bag.
In some cases, preservation of renal parenchyma may be indicated. The laparoscopic enucleation of a renal cell carcinoma also has been described. 193 These
investigators concluded that this procedure is relatively easy to perform compared with nephrectomy and, when indicated, may be preferable to perform by a
laparoscopic approach.
SPLEEN
Although the spleen rarely harbors primary or secondary tumors in humans, the surgical oncologist is often called on to perform a splenectomy for hematologic
diseases. The spleen is well within the reach of the laparoscopic surgeon, and by applying laparoscopic techniques, the patient is afforded the benefits of
laparoscopic surgery, including shortened hospitalization and decreased postoperative pain. A number of series in the literature report laparoscopic removal of the
spleen .106,107,110,111 and 112,114,121,194,195 and 196 These procedures have been performed for a number of indications including staging of Hodgkin's lymphoma, ITP,
thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome–related thrombocytopenia, hereditary spherocytosis, autoimmune hemolytic anemia,
leukemia, and splenic abscess. There may be particular subsets of patients for whom laparoscopic splenectomy is particularly beneficial. A case report of successful
laparoscopic splenectomy on a patient who is human immunodeficiency virus–positive, a devout Jehovah's witness refusing transfusion, and with a preoperative
hematocrit of 8.8% highlights the attractiveness of this technique. 197 In general, laparoscopic splenectomy represents the gold standard for removal of the spleen. 115
Splenectomy was commonly performed for the staging of lymphomas in the past, and in one series demonstrated a significant increase in the period 1963–1982
compared with 1946–1962. 96 However, more recent trends show that splenectomies are now being performed more often for cytopenic and anemic diseases and less
often for Hodgkin's disease. 198 The consequences of splenectomy are poorly understood at an immunologic level, but it is clear that the spleen plays a major role in a
wide range of immune responses.199 Patients should receive a pneumococcal vaccine preoperatively to help avoid the infectious complications of the asplenic
state.125,199 The patient can be positioned in several ways for this procedure, with some groups preferring a right decubitus position. 200
In one large series, 43 patients were brought to the operating room for laparoscopic splenectomy, and 35 (81%) were successfully completed. 114 The remaining 19%
underwent conversion to open splenectomy, usually for bleeding. Laparoscopic splenectomy has become the standard method for splenectomy in some centers.
Conversion rates in other series have been reported as 2 (9%) of 22 cases, 195 2 (12%) of 17,111 and 3 (19%) of 13.194 The details of the technique have been
adequately described by Flowers et al. 114
It is important to make a thorough search for accessory splenic tissue, identified in 10% of the patients in one series. 114 Accessory spleens are identified in up to 18%
of patients undergoing splenectomy. 201 The magnification afforded by the laparoscope may aid in this task. In a series of 100 patients undergoing open splenectomy
for ITP, 13 patients had a poor response to splenectomy, five of which required accessory splenectomy. 202 In one large series of laparoscopic splenectomies for ITP, a
positive response was observed in 18 (82%) of 22 patients with ITP. 114 It is difficult to predict who will respond to splenectomy, with no predictive factors being
identified, even in large series of patients with ITP. 202
In a prospective study of operative outcomes, laparoscopic splenectomy using the lateral approach was performed on 147 patients and open splenectomy performed
on 63 matched patients at three teaching centers. 194 Laparoscopic splenectomy resulted in longer operative times (145 minutes vs. 77 minutes), reduced blood loss
(162 mL vs. 380 mL), shorter postoperative stay (2.4 days vs. 9.2 days), and fewer complications compared with the open procedure. The authors of this study also
reported that the mean weighted cost of laparoscopic splenectomy was lower than the open procedure ($3311 vs. $3861). The conversion rate in this series was
2.7%.
Although laparoscopic splenectomy is a technically demanding procedure, it offers the patient the potential for decreased postoperative pain and hospitalization with
more rapid return to normal activities of living. Further prospective data are needed to confirm these observations. Surgical alternatives to splenectomy, such as
partial splenectomy, have been offered as a way to reduce the incidence of postoperative infections. 203 These techniques may also be approachable with
laparoscopic techniques in the future.
ADRENAL TUMORS
Laparoscopic techniques have been used for the resection of adrenal lesions. 204,205,206,207,208 and 209 Although the anterior transabdominal approach is considered by
some to be a source of postoperative morbidity, the laparoscopic approach may offer some advantages. Adrenal tumors are fairly common, having been found in 2%
of patients in autopsy series. 210 Small, asymptomatic tumors are reported in as many as 0.6% of abdominal ultrasound and CT examinations. Those discovered that
are less than 4 cm in diameter and in the absence of endocrine syndromes can be observed after a careful evaluation. 210 However, a fair proportion of these lesions
may require extirpation, a procedure that has been performed laparoscopically with the apparent advantages of decreased pain and more rapid return to full activity.
Furthermore, a number of laparoscopic approaches have been described. The anterior laparoscopic approach requires mobilization of the colon and, occasionally,
other intraabdominal organs. A retroperitoneal laparoscopic approach also has been described, which may be more attractive. One study has compared the two
approaches and found no difference in operative time, analgesia requirements, hospital time, recovery time, or complication rate. 205 The retroperitoneal laparoscopic
approach may ameliorate some of the negative effects of pneumoperitoneum on the cardiovascular hemodynamics of the patient. However, most surgeons prefer the
anterior approach at this time.
In one series of four patients, three patients had unilateral tumors and one had a bilateral pheochromocytoma. 205 Single right adrenalectomy was performed in 2.0 to
2.5 hours, whereas bilateral adrenalectomy lasted 5.5 hours. The hospital stay was 3 to 4 days postoperatively.
Over a 14-month period, Takeda and coworkers 204 removed seven left adrenal glands and three right adrenal glands from ten patients in operations ranging from 165
to 572 minutes (mean, 295 minutes). Conversion to open adrenalectomy was reported in one case (10%). They concluded that laparoscopic adrenalectomy is
applicable to cases of primary hyperaldosteronism, but application to other lesions requires further study.
Twenty-five consecutive laparoscopic adrenalectomies performed on 22 patients in a 1-year period were reported by Gagner et al. 206 These surgeries were performed
through a lateral decubitus flank approach and four 11-mm trocars and included 12 right and 13 left adrenal glands. The mean operative time for single adrenalectomy
was 2.3 hours and for bilateral adrenalectomy was 5.3 hours. Diseases in this series included nonfunctional adenoma, pheochromocytoma, Cushing's disease,
Cushing's adenoma, primary aldosteronism, angiomyolipoma, and medullary cyst. Lesions ranged in size from 1 to 15 cm, with a mean of 4.1 cm. Conversion to open
laparotomy was required in one patient for lack of exposure, resulting in completion of the procedure in 96% of patients. The median postoperative stay was 4 days.
Gagner et al. 206 concluded that laparoscopic adrenalectomy results in less postoperative pain and more rapid return to normal activity compared with open
adrenalectomy.
A study compared laparoscopic adrenalectomy with a historical group of posterior adrenalectomies. 207 The two groups were comparable for patient demographics.
The median time for posterior adrenalectomy was 120 minutes versus a median of 160 minutes for laparoscopic adrenalectomy. Patients who underwent laparoscopic
adrenalectomy had a mean hospital stay of 3 days, a shorter time to return to work, and a lower blood loss than those patients who underwent posterior
adrenalectomy with a mean hospital stay of 5 days. The authors of this study concluded that laparoscopic adrenalectomy is the procedure of choice.
One study reported the results of a case-controlled study of 40 laparoscopic and 40 open adrenalectomies. 208 Statistically significant differences were found
(laparoscopic vs. open) in operative blood loss (40 mL vs. 172 mL), operating time (147 minutes vs. 79 minutes), hospital stay (12 days vs. 18 days), and late
morbidity (0% vs. 48%). The authors of this study found no statistically significant differences in time to oral intake, total cost, and early morbidity. The late morbidity in
the open group consisted of wound complications that were absent in the laparoscopic group. The authors concluded that the laparoscopic approach is the method of

choice for adrenal masses less than 6 cm in diameter.
A series from the National Cancer Institute reported the learning curve for laparoscopic adrenalectomy. In the first five patients, median operating time was 255
minutes, which dropped to 207 minutes in the second group of five patients and to 143 minutes in the third group of five patients. 209
The use of minimally invasive surgery for adrenal malignancies remains controversial. The SAGES Manual states that laparoscopy is not to be used in the treatment
of patients with malignant lesions. Other contraindications to laparoscopic adrenalectomy include masses larger than 10 cm, untreated coagulopathies, and surgeon
inexperience. 211 Further study of this technique is clearly needed.
GYNECOLOGIC MALIGNANCIES
The use of laparoscopy in the treatment of gynecologic malignancies has begun relatively recently, particularly in the treatment of endometrial and cervical cancer
with the laparoscopic-assisted surgical staging and laparoscopic-assisted radical vaginal hysterectomy trials (described earlier in Gynecologic Malignancies under
Laparoscopy in the Staging of Malignancy ). At this time, the utility of laparoscopy in the treatment of gynecologic malignancies is unclear, and the results of ongoing
prospective trials are awaited. 134

LAPAROSCOPY IN THE PALLIATION OF MALIGNANCY
PANCREATIC CANCER
The use of laparoscopy in the staging of patients with carcinoma of the pancreas is discussed earlier in Pancreatic Cancer under Laparoscopy in the Staging of
Malignancy. In addition, laparoscopic techniques may be useful for palliative surgical procedures. Unfortunately, palliative therapy is all that is indicated for many
patients with this disease. It is possible to palliate the three symptoms of this disease—biliary obstruction, gastrointestinal obstruction, and pain—using laparoscopic
techniques. As many as 57% of patients who present with this disease undergo palliative surgery. 212 A particularly attractive concept is to stage patients using
laparoscopic techniques, and then perform palliative bypass surgery at the same time using a laparoscopic approach in patients found to have unresectable
disease. 213,214 Nonoperative palliation of obstructive jaundice using an endoscopically placed stent has been shown effective when compared with surgical palliation,
and it also is associated with lower complication rates than surgical palliation. 186
Palliation for obstructive jaundice may be performed nonoperatively using an endoprosthesis, or it may be carried out using a number of bypass procedures that can
be performed laparoscopically. The simplest technique is cholecystojejunostomy, which has been described using both sutured and stapled techniques. 215
Choledochoduodenal or choledochojejunal anastomoses may also be fashioned laparoscopically. 215 The biliary bypass is then combined with a gastroenterostomy,
which is performed at the surgeon's discretion. Similarly, the celiac plexus may be injected under laparoscopic guidance to provide pain relief. 216 Such a combined
approach was used by Mouiel215 in 12 patients with excellent results.
FEEDING TUBE PLACEMENT
Enteral feedings are preferable to parenteral feedings in patients who can tolerate them, yet not all patients with cancer are able to take in enough calories by mouth,
thereby necessitating placement of a feeding tube. Open surgical gastrostomy is most often performed in the United States by the method of Stamm. 217 This was the
only method available until 1980, with the development of the percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG). 218 However, placement of a PEG requires upper
endoscopy, which is not possible in all patients. Furthermore, the use of a PEG tube, necessitating pulling the tube through the tumor-bearing area, has been reported
to result in implantation of the tumor at the PEG site in three cases. 219 In select patients, including patients with head and neck tumors, Zenker's diverticula, and large
hiatal hernias, open surgical gastrostomy remains the preferred method of enteral access.
The technique for laparoscopic gastrostomy has been described. 220 Importantly, although formal laparotomy is not needed, the stomach is directly visualized using
this technique. A retrospective review established the usefulness of this technique. 218 In this study, 32 patients who underwent laparoscopic gastrostomy and 37
patients who underwent open gastrostomy were reviewed. The underlying illnesses and contraindications to PEG placement were similar in both groups. Operative
time was significantly greater in the open gastrostomy group (62 ± 19 minutes) compared with the laparoscopic gastrostomy group (38 ± 7 minutes). Complication
rates were 11% in the open group and 6% in the laparoscopic group. The investigators concluded that laparoscopic gastrostomy is a safe and effective alternative
procedure in patients unable to undergo placement of a PEG. Laparoscopic placement of jejunostomy tubes also has been described. 221
LAPAROSCOPIC STOMA CREATION
Decompression of the intestinal tract may be an important procedure in the cancer patient, especially in those with carcinomatosis and resulting intestinal obstruction.
The importance of colonic decompression in patients with obstructing carcinomas of the colon has been described. 222 The initial presentation of carcinoma of the
colon is obstruction in 15% to 21% of patients, most commonly in the left colon. The 5-year survival rate in these patients is significantly less than that in patients
without obstruction. This common situation underscores the importance of palliative procedures that may decrease postoperative pain, incidence of ileus, and
recovery time.
Laparoscopic creation of a loop colostomy has been described. 223 In this technique, after the sigmoid colon is mobilized, a drain is passed through its mesentery and
is then used to extract the colon through a special 3.5-cm trocar placed in the left lower quadrant. This procedure was modified and described with an associated
decrease in postoperative pain and ileus with a rapid recovery. 224
The use of small laparotomy incisions may be used for the creation of intestinal stomas; however, the presence of metastatic disease or peritoneal implants may make
such procedures difficult to perform. The use of a laparoscopic approach makes possible the inspection of the abdominal cavity for other lesions and results in
discharge from the hospital within 24 to 48 hours of surgery. In one study, 17 (89%) of 19 patients were successfully diverted using laparoscopic techniques. 225 The
remaining two patients had extensive adhesive disease that could not be managed laparoscopically and required conversion to open laparotomy. Other procedures,
such as laparoscopic gastrostomy, may also be carried out as needed.

THE FUTURE OF LAPAROSCOPY IN THE CARE OF THE PATIENT WITH CANCER
Exciting technology for laparoscopic surgery now under development will soon be in operating rooms. Cuschieri 226 has pointed out that we need to “see better, feel
better, increase the precision of maneuverability and handling, reduce contamination, facilitate specimen extraction and bring order to the present ergonomic chaos in
our operating rooms.” New developments in the technology of imaging are being applied to laparoscopic surgery. Although head-mounted displays have been tested,
they are probably less than optimal for the laparoscopic surgeon because of the isolation created by these devices. Current three-dimensional imaging systems are
not without their limitations, but new systems may provide a true improvement in tissue visualization. Continued improvements in instrumentation will certainly be an
important part of the evolution of laparoscopic surgery. New methods of tissue extraction include a sleeve system and an extracorporeal pneumoperitoneal access
bubble. 226 Both of these systems have potential advantages, especially for the removal of large tumor specimens.
Training of surgeons in these newly emerging techniques remains a complicated problem. Because hospitals decide what procedures may be performed by surgeons,
criteria for training and furnishing credentials must be developed. 227 The Society of American Gastrointestinal Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) has suggested criteria
for training and awarding credentials. It remains to be shown whether some advanced laparoscopic procedures result in a true cost savings when the increased cost
of instrumentation and operating room time are factored into the total expenses incurred.
The surgeon has traditionally been involved in the diagnosis, staging, treatment, and palliation of patients with malignancies. Laparoscopy is rapidly becoming an
important tool in each of these areas of cancer patient care. The ultimate application of laparoscopic techniques depends on the imagination of surgical investigators
and on careful analyses of risks and benefits. Over time, it may be discovered that certain uses for this technology are not ultimately advantageous to the patient
compared with traditional open surgical techniques. Only by the conduct of carefully controlled studies, however, will the facts be elucidated, allowing this
methodology to be used when it will benefit the patient and avoided when it will not.

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Gunning JE. The history of laparoscopy. J Reprod Med 1974;12:223.
2. Lefor AT. Laparoscopic surgery for cancer. PPO Updates 1995;9:1.
3. Bagley CM, Thomas LB, Johnson RE, Chretien PB, DeVita VT. Diagnosis of liver involvement by lymphoma: results in 96 consecutive peritoneoscopies. Cancer 1973;31:840.
4. Casirola G, Ippoliti G, Marini G. Laparoscopy in Hodgkin's disease. Acta Haematol 1973;49:1.
5. Spinelli P, Beretta G, Bajetta E, et al. Laparoscopy and laparotomy combined with bone marrow biopsy in staging Hodgkin's disease. BMJ 1975;4:554.
6. Castellani R, Bonadonna G, Spinelli P, et al. Sequential pathologic staging of untreated non-Hodgkin's lymphomas by laparoscopy and laparotomy combined with marrow biopsy. Cancer
1977;40:2322.
7. Chabner BA, Johnson RE, Young RC, et al. Sequential non-surgical and surgical staging of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer 1978;42:922.
8. Anderson T, Bender RA, Rosenoff SH, et al. Peritoneoscopy: a technique to evaluate therapeutic efficacy in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma patients. Cancer Treat Rep 1977:61:1017.
9. Cuschieri A, Hall AW, Clark J. Value of laparoscopy in the diagnosis and management of pancreatic carcinoma. Gut 1978;19:672.
10. Tuñón MJ, Gonzalez P, Jorquera F, et al. Liver blood flow during laparoscopic surgery in pigs. Surg Endosc 1999;13:668.
11. West MA, Hackam DJ, Baker J, et al. Mechanism of decreased in vitro murine macrophage cytokine release after exposure to carbon dioxide. Ann Surg 1997;226:179.
12. Greif WM, Forse A. Cardiopulmonary effects of the laparoscopic pneumoperitoneum in a porcine model of ARDS. Am J Surg 1999;177:216.
13. Greif WM, Forse RA. Interventions to improve cardiopulmonary hemodynamics during laparoscopy in a porcine sepsis model. J Am Coll Surg 1999;189:450.
14. Cho JM, LaPorta AJ, Clark JR, et al. Response of serum cytokines in patients undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Surg Endosc 1994;8:1380.
15. Vittimberga FJ, Foley DP, Meyers WC, Callery MP. Laparoscopic surgery and the systemic immune response. Ann Surg 1998;227:326.
16. Vallina VL, Velasco JM. The influence of laparoscopy on lymphocyte subpopulations in the surgical patient. Surg Endosc 1996;10:481.
17. Hansborough JF, Bender EM, Zapata-Sirvent R, Anderson J. Altered helper and suppressor lymphocyte populations in surgical patients: a measure of postoperative immunosuppression. Am J
Surg 1984;148:303.
18. Fusco MA, Paluzzi MW. Abdominal wall recurrence after laparoscopic-assisted colectomy for adenocarcinoma of the colon. Dis Colon Rectum 1993;36:858.
19. Cava A, Roman J, Quintela AG, Martin F, Aramburo P. Subcutaneous metastasis following laparoscopy in gastric adenocarcinoma. Eur J Surg Oncol 1990;16:63.
20. Weiss SM, Wengert PA, Harkavy SE. Incisional recurrence of gallbladder cancer after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Gastrointest Endosc 1994;40:244.
21. Nduka CC, Monson JRT, Menzies-Gow N, Darz A. Abdominal wall metastases following laparoscopy. Br J Surg 1994;81:648.
22. Stockdale AD, Pocock TJ. Abdominal wall metastasis following laparoscopy. Eur J Surg Oncol 1985;11:373.
23. Clair DG, Lautz DB, Brooks DC. Rapid development of umbilical metastases after laparoscopic cholecystectomy for unsuspected gallbladder carcinoma. Surgery 1993;113:355.
24. O'Rourke N, Price PM, Kelly S, Sikora K. Tumor inoculation during laparoscopy. Lancet 1993;342:368.
25. Pezet D, Fondrinier E, Rotman N, et al. Parietal seeding of carcinoma of the gallbladder after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Br J Surg 1992;79:230.
26. Hughes ESR, McDermott FT, Polglase AL, Johnson WR. Tumor recurrence in the abdominal wall scar tissue after large-bowel cancer surgery. Dis Colon Rectum 1983;26:571.
27. Ramos JM, Gupta S, Anthone GJ, et al. Laparoscopy and colon cancer: is the port site at risk? Arch Surg 1994;129:897.
28. Johnstone PAS, Rohde DC, Swartz SE, et al. Port site recurrences after laparoscopic and thoracoscopic procedures in malignancy. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1950.
29. Fleshman JW, Nelson H, Peters WR, et al. Early results of laparoscopic surgery for colorectal cancer. Retrospective study of 372 patients after laparoscopic colectomy. Dis Colon Rectum
1996;39:S53.
30. Pearlstone DB, Mansfield PE, Curley SA, et al. Laparoscopy in 533 patients with abdominal malignancy. Surgery 1999;125:67.
31. Ikramuddin S, Lucas J, Ellison EC, et al. Detection of aerosolized cells during carbon dioxide laparoscopy. J Gastrointest Surg 1998;2:580.
32. Reymond MA, Wittekind C, Jung A, et al. The incidence of port site metastases might be reduced. Surg Endosc 1997;11:902.
33. Cavina E, Goletti O, Molea N, et al. Trocar site tumor recurrences: may pneumoperitoneum be responsible? Surg Endosc 1998;12:1294.
34. Bouvy ND, Marquet RL, Jeekel H, Bonjer HJ. Impact of gasless laparoscopy and laparotomy on peritoneal tumor growth and abdominal wall metastases. Ann Surg 1996;224:694.
35. Wu JS, Brasfield EB, Guo LW, et al. Implantation of colon cancer at trocar sites is increased by low pressure pneumoperitoneum. Surgery 1997;122:1.
36. Hubens G, Pauwels M, Hubens A, et al. The influence of pneumoperitoneum on the peritoneal implantation of free intraperitoneal colon cancer cells. Surg Endosc 1996;10:809.
37. Dorrance HR, Oien K, O'Dwyer PJ. Effects of laparoscopy on intraperitoneal tumor growth and distant metastases in an animal model. Surgery 1999;126:35.
38. Neuhaus SJ, Ellis T, Roge AM, et al. Tumor implantation following laparoscopy using different insufflation gases. Surg Endosc 1998;12:1300.
39. Tseng LN, Berends FJ, Wittich P, et al. Port site metastases: impact of local tissue trauma and gas leakage. Surg Endosc 1998;12:1377.
40. Aoki Y, Shimura H, Li H, et al. A model of port site metastases of gallbladder cancer: the influence of peritoneal injury and its repair on abdominal wall metastases. Surgery 1999;125:553.
41. Mutter D, Hajri A, Tassetti V, et al. Increased tumor growth and spread after laparoscopy vs laparotomy. Surg Endosc 1999;13:365.
42. Bessler M, Whelan RL, Halverson A, Treat MR, Nowygrod R. Is immune function better preserved after laparoscopic versus open colon resection? Surg Endosc 1994;8:881.
43. Allendorf JDF, Bessler M, Kayton ML, et al. Tumor growth after laparotomy or laparoscopy. Surg Endosc 1995;9:49.
44. Allendorf JDF, Bessler M, Kayton ML, et al. Increased tumor establishment and growth after laparotomy vs laparoscopy in a murine model. Arch Surg 1995;130:649.
45. Bessler M, Allendorf JDF, Chao JD, et al. Permissive tumor growth after laparotomy versus laparoscopy is associated with altered TNF levels. Surg Forum 1994;45:486.
46. Easter DW, Cuschieri A, Nathanson LK, Lavalle-Jones M. The utility of diagnostic laparoscopy for abdominal disorders. Arch Surg 1992;127:379.
47. Foley EF, Kolecki RV, Schirmer BD. The accuracy of laparoscopic ultrasound in the detection of colorectal cancer liver metastases. Am J Surg 1998;176:262.
48. Greene FL, Bianco JE. Laparoscopy's growing role in abdominal tumor diagnosis. Contemp Oncol 1994;(Jan):14.
49. Cuschieri A. Diagnosis and staging of tumors by laparoscopy. Semin Laparosc Surg 1994;1:3.
50. Lefor AT, Flowers JL. Laparoscopic wedge biopsy of the liver. J Am Coll Surg 1994;178:307.
51. Greene FL. Laparoscopy in malignant disease. Surg Clin North Am 1992;72:1125.
52. Jakimowicz J. Laparoscopic intraoperative ultrasonography, equipment, and technique. Semin Laparosc Surg 1994;1:52.
53. Machi J, Sigel B. Intraoperative ultrasonography. Radiol Clin North Am 1992;30:1085.
54. Stiegmann GV, McIntyre RC, Pearlman NW. Laparoscopic intracorporeal ultrasound. Surg Endosc 1994;8:167.
55. Jakimowicz JJ. Review: intraoperative ultrasonography during minimal access surgery. J R Coll Surg Edinb 1993;38:231.
56. John TG, Greig JD, Crosbie JL, Miles WF, Garden OJ. Superior staging of liver tumors with laparoscopy and laparoscopic ultrasound. Ann Surg 1994;220:711.
57. van Dijkum EJ, de Wit LT, van Delden OM, et al. Staging laparoscopy and laparoscopic ultrasonography in more than 400 patients with upper gastrointestinal carcinoma. J Am Coll Surg
1999;189:459.
58. Lightdale CJ. Laparoscopy for cancer staging. Endoscopy 1992;24:682.
59. Hemming AW, Nagy AG, Scudamore CH, Edelman K. Laparoscopic staging of intraabdominal malignancy. Surg Endosc 1995;9:325.
60. Salky BA. Laparoscopic staging of intra-abdominal malignancy. In: Paterson-Brown S, Garden J, eds. Principles and practice of surgical laparoscopy. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1994.
61. Conlon KC, Dougherty E, Klimstra DG, et al. The value of minimal access surgery in the staging of patients with potentially resectable peripancreatic malignancy. Ann Surg 1996;223:134.
62. Warshaw AL, Tepper JE, Shipley WU. Laparoscopy in the staging and planning of therapy for pancreatic cancer. Am J Surg 1986;151:76.
63. Warshaw AL. Implications of peritoneal cytology for staging of early pancreatic cancer. Am J Surg 1991;161:26.
64. Nishizaki T, Matsumata T, Adachi E, Sugimachi K. Laparoscopy preferable to imaging procedures in detecting metastases of a pancreas carcinoma to the liver. Surg Endosc 1994;8:1340.
65. John TG, Greig JD, Carter DC, Garden OJ. Carcinoma of the pancreatic head and periampullary region: tumor staging with laparoscopy and laparoscopic ultrasound. Ann Surg 1995;221:156.
66. John TG, Wright A, Allan PL, et al. Laparoscopy with laparoscopic ultrasound in the TNM staging of pancreatic carcinoma. World J Surg 1999;23:870.
67. Durup Scheel-Hincke J, Mortensen MB, Qvist N, Hovendal CP. TNM staging and assessment of resectability of pancreatic cancer by laparoscopic ultrasonography. Surg Endosc 1999;13:967.
68. Luque de Leon E, Tsiotos GG, Balsiger B, et al. Staging laparoscopy for pancreatic cancer should be used to select the best means of palliation and not only to maximize the resectability rate. J
Gastrointest Surg 1999;3:111.
69. Rumstadt B, Schwab M, Schuster K, Hagmuller E, Trede M. The role of laparoscopy in the preoperative staging of pancreatic carcinoma. J Gastrointest Surg 1997;1:245.
70. Greene FL. Laparoscopic resection. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1995.
71. Shandall A, Johnson C. Laparoscopy or scanning in oesophageal and gastric carcinoma. Br J Surg 1986;72:449.
72. Dagnini G, Caldironi MW, Marin G, et al. Laparoscopy in abdominal staging of esophageal carcinoma. Gastrointest Endosc 1986;32:400.
73. Krasna MJ, Flowers JL, Attar S, McLaughlin JL. Combined thoracoscopic/laparoscopic staging of esophageal cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1996;111:800.
74. Watt I, Stewart I, Anderson D, Bell G, Anderson JR. Laparoscopy, ultrasound and computed tomography in cancer of the oesophagus and gastric cardia: a prospective comparison for detecting
intra-abdominal metastases. Br J Surg 1989;76:1036.
75. Fiocco M, Krasna MJ. Thoracoscopic lymph node dissection in the staging of esophageal carcinoma. J Laparoendosc Surg 1992;2:111.
76. Krasna MJ, McLaughlin JS. Thoracoscopic lymph node staging for esophageal cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1993;56:671.
77. Belani CP, White CS, Slawson R, et al. Value of minimally invasive thoracoscopy versus non-invasive staging techniques in esophageal cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1994;13:195.
78. Bemelman WA, van Delden OM, van Lanschot JJB, et al. Laparoscopy and laparoscopic ultrasonography in staging of carcinoma of the esophagus and gastric cardia. J Am Coll Surg
1995;181:421.
79. Lowy AM, Mansfield PF, Leach SD, Ajani J. Laparoscopic staging for gastric cancer. Surgery 1996;119:611.
80. Steele GD, Bleday R, Mayer RJ, et al. A prospective evaluation of hepatic resection for colorectal carcinoma metastases to the liver: gastrointestinal tumor study group protocol 6584. J Clin
Oncol 1991;9:1105.
81. Lefor AT, Hughes K, Shiloni E, et al. Intra-abdominal extrahepatic disease in patients with colorectal hepatic metastases. Dis Colon Rectum 1988;31:100.
82. Babineau TJ, Lewis WD, Jenkins RL, Bleday R, Steele GD. Role of staging laparoscopy in the treatment of hepatic malignancy. Am J Surg 1994;167:151.
83. Solomon MJ, Stephen MS, Gallinger S, White GH. Does intraoperative hepatic ultrasonography change surgical decision making during liver resection? Am J Surg 1994;168:307.
84. Callery MP, Starsberg SM, Doherty GM, et al. Staging laparoscopy with laparoscopic ultrasonography: optimizing respectability in hepatobiliary and pancreatic malignancy. J Am Coll Surg
1997;185:33.
85. Azurin DJ, Go LS, Kirkland ML. Laparoscopic evaluation of the liver. Surg Rounds 1995;(Oct):406.
86. Flowers JL, Feldman J, Jacobs SC. Laparoscopic pelvic lymphadenectomy. Surg Laparosc Endosc 1991;1:62.
87. Haas CA, Resnick MI. Laparoscopic pelvic and retroperitoneal lymph node dissection. Semin Laparosc Surg 1996;3:61.
88. Albala D, Galal HA, Gomella L. Laparoscopic pelvic lymph node dissection for prostate cancer. Atlas Urol Clin 1995;3:51.
89. Montie J. Counseling the patient with regional metastasis of prostate cancer. Cancer 1993;71[Suppl]:1019.
90. Kerbl K, Clayman RV, Petros JA, Chandhoke PS, Gill IS. Staging pelvic lymphadenectomy for prostate cancer: a comparison of laparoscopic and open techniques. J Urol 1993;150:396.
91. Burney TL, Campbell EC, Naslund MJ, Jacobs SC. Complications of staging laparoscopic pelvic lymphadenectomy. Surg Laparosc Endosc 1993;3:184.
92. Chow CC, Daly BD, Burney TL, et al. Complications after laparoscopic pelvic lymphadenectomy: CT diagnosis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1994;163:353.
93. Williams SF, Golomb HM. Perspective on staging approaches in the malignant lymphomas. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1986;163:193.
94. Bloomfield CD, DeCosse JJ. Staging laparotomy. Arch Surg 1978;113:1135.
95. Urba WJ, Longo DL. Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1992;326:678.
96. Marble KR, Deckers PJ, Kern KA. Changing role of splenectomy for hematologic disease. J Surg Oncol 1993;52:169.
97. Martin JK, Clark SC, Beart RW, et al. Staging laparotomy in Hodgkin's disease: Mayo Clinic experience. Arch Surg 1982;117:586.

98. Schneeberger AL, Girvan DP. Staging laparotomy for Hodgkin's disease in children. J Pediatr Surg 1988;23:714.
99. Muskat PC, Johnson RA, Bowers GJ. Staging laparotomy in Hodgkin's lymphoma: 19791988. Am J Surg 1991;162:603.
100. Jockovich M, Mendenhall NP, Sombeck MD, et al. Long term complications of laparotomy in Hodgkin's disease. Ann Surg 1994;219:615.
101. Horowitz J, Smith JL, Weber TK, et al. Postoperative complications after splenectomy for hematologic malignancies. Ann Surg 1996;223:290.
102. Huang PP, Urist MM. Evaluation of abdominal Hodgkin's disease. Surg Oncol Clin North Am 1993;2:207.
103. Grieco MB, Cady B. Staging laparotomy in Hodgkin's disease. Surg Clin North Am 1980;60:369.
104. Baccarini U, Carroll BJ, Hiatt JR, et al. Comparison of laparoscopic and open staging in Hodgkin disease. Arch Surg 1998;133:517.
105. Greene FL, Cooler AW. Laparoscopic evaluation of lymphomas. Semin Laparosc Surg 1994;1:13.
106. Carroll BJ, Phillips EH, Semer CJ, et al. Laparoscopic splenectomy. Surg Endosc 1992:6:183.
107. Tulman S, Holcomb GW, Karamanoukian HL, Reynhout J. Pediatric laparoscopic splenectomy. J Pediatr Surg 1993;28:689.
108. Lefor AT, Flowers JL, Heyman M. Laparoscopic staging of Hodgkin's disease. Surg Oncol 1993;2:217.
109. Lefor AT. Laparoscopic staging of abdominal lymphomas. In: Greene F, ed. Minimal access surgical oncology. Oxford: Radcliffe, 1995.
110. Lefor AT, Flowers JL, Bailey RW, Melvin WS. Laparoscopic splenectomy in the management of immune thrombocytopenia purpura. Surgery 1993;114:613.
111. Poulin E, Thibault G, Mamazza J, et al. Laparoscopic splenectomy: clinical experience and the role of preoperative splenic artery embolization. Surg Laparosc Endosc 1993;3:445.
112. Poulin EC, Thibault C, Mamazza J. Laparoscopic splenectomy. Surg Endosc 1995;9:172.
113. Fujitani RM, Johs SM, Cobb SR, et al. Preoperative splenic artery occlusion as an adjunct for high risk splenectomy. Am Surg 1988;54:602.
114. Flowers JL, Lefor AT, Steers JA, et al. Laparoscopic splenectomy in patients with hematologic diseases. Ann Surg 1996;224:19.
115. Friedman RL, Fallas MJ, Carrol BJ, Phillips EH. Laparoscopic splenectomy for ITP: the gold standard. Surg Endosc 1996;10:991.
116. Diaz J, Eisenstat M, Chung R. A case controlled study of laparoscopic splenectomy. Am J Surg 1997;173:348.
117. Saldinger PF, Matthews JB, Mowchenson PM, et al. Stapled laparoscopic splenectomy. J Am Coll Surg 1996;182:459.
118. Brunt LM, Langer JC, Quasebarth MA, Whitman ED. Comparative analysis of laparoscopic versus open splenectomy. Am J Surg 1996;172:596.
119. Steers JA, Lefor AT, Flowers JL. Laparoscopic accessory splenectomy for recurrent thrombocytopenia. Surg Rounds 1994;17:477.
120. Katkhouda N, Hurwitz MB, Rivera RT, et al. Laparoscopic splenectomy: outcome and efficacy in 103 consecutive patients. Ann Surg 1998;228:568.
121. Schlinkert RT, Mann D, Weaver A. Laparoscopic splenectomy: reduction of hospital charges. J Gastrointest Surg 1998;2:278.
122. Rosenberg SA. Annotation: splenectomy in the management of Hodgkin's disease. Br J Haematol 1971;23:271.
123. Multani PS, Grossbard M. Staging laparotomy in the management of Hodgkin's disease: is it still necessary? Oncologist 1996;1:41.
124. Shaw JHF, Print CG. Postsplenectomy sepsis. Br J Surg 1989;76:1074.
125. Dawson AA, Jones PF, King DJ. Splenectomy in the management of haematologic disease. Br J Surg 1987;74:353.
126. Brody FJ, Chekan EG, Pappas TN, Eubanks WS. Conversion factors for laparoscopic splenectomy for immune thrombocytopenic purpura. Surg Endosc 1999;13:789.
127. Grossbard ML. Is laparoscopic splenectomy appropriate for the management of hematologic and oncologic disorders? Surg Endosc 1996;10:387.
128. Silecchia G, Fantini A, Raparelli L, et al. Management of abdominal lymphoproliferative diseases in the era of laparoscopy. Am J Surg 1999;177:325.
129. Rosenberg SA. Non-Hodgkin's lymphomaselection of treatment on the basis of histologic type. N Engl J Med 1979;301:924.
130. Longo DL, DeVita VT, Jaffe ES, et al. Lymphocytic lymphomas. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott,
1993:1859.
131. Johna S, Lefor AT. Laparoscopic evaluation of lymphoma. Semin Surg Oncol 1998:15:176.
132. Moormeier JA, Williams SF, Golomb HM. The staging of Hodgkin's disease. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1989;3:237.
133. Palmer ML. Surgical considerations in lymphoma. Contemp Surg 1992;41:13.
134. Chi DS. Laparoscopy in gynecologic malignancies. Oncology 1999:13:773.
135. Goh PMY, Tekant Y, Kum CK. Totally intraabdominal laparoscopic Billroth II gastrectomy. Surg Endosc 1992;6:160.
136. Goh P. Laparoscopic Billroth II gastrectomy. Semin Laparosc Surg 1994;1:171.
137. Cuschieri A. Gastric resections. In: Scott-Conner C, ed. The SAGES manual. New York: Springer-Verlag New York, 1999:353.
138. Dean PA, Beart RW, Nelson H, Elftmann TD, Schlinkert RT. Laparoscopic assisted segmental colectomy: early Mayo Clinic experience. Mayo Clin Proc 1994;69:834.
139. Böhm B, Milsom JW, Kitago K, et al. Use of laparoscopic techniques in oncologic right colectomy in a canine model. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:6.
140. Elftmann TD, Nelson H, Ota DM, Pemberton JH, Beart RW. Laparoscopic assisted segmental colectomy: surgical techniques. Mayo Clin Proc 1994;69:825.
141. Cohen SM, Wexner SD. Laparoscopic right hemicolectomy. Surg Rounds 1994;(Nov):627.
142. Fielding GA, Lumley J, Nathanson L, et al. Laparoscopic colectomy. Surg Endosc 1997;11:745.
143. Ota DM. Laparoscopic colectomy for cancer: a favorable opinion. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:3.
144. Jager RM, Ballantyne GH, Fleshman JW, Franklin ME. The technical nuances in laparoscopic colorectal surgery. Contemp Surg 1994;45:355.
145. Reissman P, Teoh TA, Piccirillo M, Nogueras JJ, Wexner SD. Colonoscopic assisted laparoscopic colectomy. Surg Endosc 1994;8:1352.
146. Weiss EG, Wexner SD. Laparoscopic segmental colectomies, anterior resection and abdominoperineal resection. In: Scott-Conner C, ed. The SAGES manual. New York: Springer-Verlag New
York, 1999.
147. Pandya S, Murray JJ, Coller JA, Rusin LC. Laparoscopic colectomy: indications for conversion to laparotomy. Arch Surg 1999;134:471.
148. Phillips EH, Franklin M, Carroll BJ, et al. Laparoscopic colectomy. Ann Surg 1992;216:703.
149. Falk PM, Beart RW, Wexner SD, et al. Laparoscopic colectomy: a critical appraisal. Dis Colon Rectum 1993;36:28.
150. Hoffman GC, Baker JW, Fitchett CW, Vansant JH. Laparoscopic assisted colectomy: initial experience. Ann Surg 1994;219:732.
151. Muckleroy SK, Ratzer ER, Fenoglio ME. Laparoscopic colon surgery for benign disease: a comparison to open surgery. JSLS 1999;3:33.
152. Franklin ME, Rosenthal D, Norem RF. Prospective evaluation of laparoscopic colon resection versus open colon resection for adenocarcinoma. Surg Endosc 1995;9:811.
153. Liberman MA, Phillips EH, Carroll BJ, et al. Laparoscopic colectomy vs traditional colectomy for diverticulitis. Surg Endosc 1996;10:15.
154. Lacy AM, Garcia-Valdecasas JC, Pique JM, et al. Short-term analysis of a randomized study comparing laparoscopic vs open colectomy for colon cancer. Surg Endosc 1995;9:1101.
155. Begos DG, Arsenault J, Ballantyne GH. Laparoscopic colon and rectal surgery at a VA hospital. Surg Endosc 1996;10:1050.
156. Wexner SD, Reissman P, Pfeiffer J, Bernstein M, Geron N. Laparoscopic colorectal surgery. Surg Endosc 1996;10:133.
157. Pfeifer J, Wexner SD, Reissman P, et al. Laparoscopic vs open colon surgery: costs and outcome. Surg Endosc 1996;10:1322.
158. Hoffman GC, Baker JW, Doxey JB, et al. Minimally invasive surgery for colorectal cancer: initial follow-up. Ann Surg 1996;223:790.
159. Huscher C, Silecchia G, Croce E, et al. Laparoscopic colorectal resection: a multicenter Italian study. Surg Endosc 1996;10:875.
160. Poulin EC, Mamazza J, Schlachta CM, et al. Laparoscopic resection does not adversely affect early survival curves in patients undergoing surgery for colorectal adenocarcinoma. Ann Surg
1999;229:487.
161. Greene FL. Laparoscopic management of colorectal cancer. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:221.
162. Gellman L, Salky B, Edye M. Laparoscopic assisted colectomy. Surg Endosc 1996;10:1041.
163. Kwok SP, Carey PD, Li AKC. Prospective evaluation of laparoscopic assisted large bowel excision for cancer. Ann Surg 1996;223:170.
164. Berman IR. Laparoscopic colectomy for cancer: some cause for pause. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:1.
165. Sugarbaker PH. Wound recurrence after laparoscopic colectomy for cancer: new rationale for intraoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy. Surg Endosc 1996;10:295.
166. Milsom JW, Bohm B, Hammerhofer KA, et al. A prospective randomized trial comparing laparoscopic versus conventional techniques in colorectal cancer surgery: a preliminary report. J Am
Coll Surg 1998;187:46.
167. Ota DM. Laparoscopic colon resection for cancer. Surg Endosc 1996;10:1318.
168. Abi-Rached B, Neugut AJ. Diagnostic and management issues in gallbladder carcinoma. Oncology 1995;9:19.
169. Targarona EM, Pons MJ, Viella P, Trias M. Unsuspected carcinoma of the gallbladder: a laparoscopic dilemma. Surg Endosc 1994;8:211.
170. Copher JC, Rogers JJ, Dalton ML. Trocar site metastasis following laparoscopic cholecystectomy for unsuspected carcinoma of the gallbladder. Surg Endosc 1995;9:348.
171. Cubertafond P, Gainant A, Cucchiaro G. Surgical treatment of 724 carcinomas of the gallbladder. Ann Surg 1994;219:275.
172. Sariego J, Aharonian A, Byrd M, Matsumoto T, Kerstein M. Adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder. Contemp Surg 1994;44:91.
173. Fong Y, Brennan MF, Turnbull A, Coit DG, Blumgart LH. Gallbladder cancer discovered during laparoscopic surgery. Arch Surg 1993;128:1054.
174. Yamaguchi K, Chijiiwa K, Ichimiya H, et al. Gallbladder carcinoma in the era of laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Arch Surg 1996;131:981.
175. Lomis KD, Vitola JV, Delbeke D, et al. Recurrent gallbladder carcinoma at laparoscopy port sites diagnosed by positron emission tomography. Am Surg 1997;63:341.
176. Ferzli GS, Daou R. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy and gallbladder cancer. Surg Endosc 1994;8:1357.
177. Tate JJ, Lau WY, Li AK. Transhepatic fenestration of liver cyst: a further application of laparoscopic surgery. Aust N Z J Surg 1994;64:264.
178. Katkhouda N, Hurwitz M, Gugenheim J, et al. Laparoscopic management of benign solid and cystic lesions of the liver. Ann Surg 1999;229:460.
179. Payne HH. Ultrasonic dissector. Surg Endosc 1994;8:416.
180. Baer HU, Metzger A, Barras JP, et al. Laparoscopic liver resection in the large white pig: a comparison between waterjet dissector and ultrasound dissector. Endosc Surg Allied Technol
1994;2:189.
181. Azagra JS. Laparoscopic left lateral segmentectomy. Proceedings of the 1st International Congress, European Association of Surgical Sciences, Ischia, Italy, 1994.
182. Ravikumar TS, Kane R, Cady B, et al. A 5-year study of cryosurgery in the treatment of liver tumors. Arch Surg 1991;126:1520.
183. Curley SA, Izzo F, Delrio P, et al. Radiofrequency ablation of unresectable primary and metastatic hepatic malignancies: results in 123 patients. Ann Surg 1999;230:1.
184. Rose DM, Allegra DP, Bostick PJ, et al. Radiofrequency ablation: a novel primary and adjunctive ablative technique for hepatic malignancies. Am Surg 1999;65:1009.
185. Neuberger TJ, Wade TP, Swope TJ, Virgo KS, Johnson FE. Palliative operations for pancreatic cancer in the hospitals of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs from 1987 to 1991. Am J Surg
1993;166:632.
186. Lillemoe KD. Current management of pancreatic carcinoma. Ann Surg 1995;221:133.
187. Gagner M, Pomp A. Laparoscopic pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy. Surg Endosc 1994;8:408.
188. Salky BA. Distal pancreatectomy In: Scott-Conner C, ed. The SAGES manual. New York: Springer-Verlag New York, 1999:307.
189. Cuschieri A, Jakimowicz JJ, van Spreeuwel J. Laparoscopic distal 70% pancreatectomy and splenectomy for chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg 1996;3:280.
190. Clayman RV, Kavoussi LR, McDougall EM. Laparoscopic nephrectomy: a review of 16 cases. Surg Laparosc Endosc 1992;2:29.
191. Clayman RV, Kavoussi LR, Soper NJ, et al. Laparoscopic nephrectomy: initial case report. J Urol 1991;146:278.
192. Clayman RV, Long SL, Kavoussi LR, et al. Laparoscopic nephrectomy. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1370.
193. Luciani RC, Greiner M, Clement JC, Houot A, Didierlaurent JF. Laparoscopic enucleation of a renal cell carcinoma. Surg Endosc 1994;8:1329.
194. Phillips EH, Carroll BJ, Fallas MJ. Laparoscopic splenectomy. Surg Endosc 1994;8:931.
195. Cadiere GB, Verroken R, Himpens J, et al. Operative strategy in laparoscopic splenectomy. J Am Coll Surg 1994;179:668.
196. Park A, Marcaccio M, Sternbach M, Witzke D, Fitzgerald P. Laparoscopic vs open splenectomy. Arch Surg 1999;134:1263.
197. Ferzli GS, Hurwitz JB, Fiorillo MA, et al. Laparoscopic splenectomy in a Jehovah's witness with profound anemia. Surg Endosc 1997;11:850.
198. Llende M, Santiago-Delpin EA, Lavergne J. Immunobiological consequences of splenectomy. J Surg Res 1986;40:85.
199. Weintraub LR. Splenectomy: who, when and why? Hosp Pract (Off Ed) 1994;29:27.
200. Hashizume M, Sugimachi K, Kitano S, et al. Laparoscopic splenectomy. Am J Surg 1994;167:611.
201. Akwari OE, Itani KMF, Coleman RE, Rosse WF. Splenectomy for primary and recurrent immune thrombocytopenia purpura. Ann Surg 1987;206:529.

202. Coon WW. Splenectomy for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1987;164:225.
203. Hoekstra HJ, Tamminga RYJ, Timens W. Partial splenectomy in children: an alternative for splenectomy in the pathologic staging of Hodgkin's disease. Ann Surg Oncol 1994;1:480.
204. Takeda M, Go H, Imai T, Nishiyama T, Morishita H. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy for primary aldosteronism: report of initial ten cases. Surgery 1994;115:621.
205. Fernandez-Cruz L, Benarroch G, Torres E, et al. Laparoscopic approach to adrenal tumors. J Laparoendosc Surg 1993;3:541.
206. Gagner M, Lacroix A, Prinz RA, et al. Early experience with laparoscopic approach for adrenalectomy. Surgery 1993;114:1120.
207. Ting ACW, Lo CY, Lo CM. Posterior or laparoscopic approach for adrenalectomy. Am J Surg 1998;175:488.
208. Imai T, Kikumori T, Ohiwa M, et al. A case-controlled study of laparoscopic compared with open lateral adrenalectomy. Am J Surg 1999;178:50.
209. Walther MM. Laparoscopic surgery for adrenal disease. PPO Updates 1997;11:1.
210. Schmidt N. Strategic management of adrenal tumors. Oncology 1994;8:73.
211. Arca MJ, Gagner M. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy. In: Scott-Connor C, ed. The SAGES manual. New York: Springer-Verlag New York, 1999:353.
212. Milsom JW, Hammerhofer KA. Role of laparoscopic techniques in colorectal cancer surgery. Oncology 1995;9:393.
213. Shima SM, Banting SB, Cuschieri A. Laparoscopy in the management of pancreatic cancer. Br J Surg 1992;79:317.
214. Hawasli A. Laparoscopic cholecysto-jejunostomy for obstructing pancreatic cancer. J Laparoendosc Surg 1992;1:351.
215. Mouiel J. Palliative laparoscopic surgery for abdominal malignancies. Semin Laparosc Surg 1994;1:26.
216. Lillemoe KD, Cameron JL, Kaufman HS, et al. Chemical splanchnicectomy in patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer. Ann Surg 1993;217:447.
217. Grant JP. Comparison of percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy with Stamm gastrostomy. Ann Surg 1988;207:598.
218. Murayama K, Schneider PD, Thompson JS. Laparoscopic gastrostomy: a safe method for obtaining enteral access. J Surg Res 1995;58:1.
219. Lee DS, Mohit-Tabatabai MA, Rush BF, Levine C. Stomal seeding of head and neck cancer by percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube placement. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:170.
220. Edelman DS, Unger SW. Laparoscopic gastrostomy. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1992;174:401.
221. Ota DM, Evans DB, Mansfield PF. Placement of a feeding jejunostomy. In: Ballantyne GH, Leahy PF, Modlin IM, eds. Laparoscopic surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1993:467.
222. Leitman IM, Sullivan JD, Brams D, DeCosse JJ. Multivariate analysis of morbidity and mortality from the initial surgical management of obstructing carcinoma of the colon. Surg Gynecol Obstet
1992;174:513.
223. Lange V, Meyer G, Shardey HM, Schildberg MD. Laparoscopic creation of a loop colostomy. J Laparoendosc Surg 1991;1:307.
224. Lyerly HK, Mault JR. Laparoscopic ileostomy and colostomy. Ann Surg 1994;219:317.
225. Ota DM. Laparoscopic management of colon cancer. Semin Laparosc Surg 1994;1:18.
226. Cuschieri A. Whither minimal access surgery: tribulations and expectations. Am J Surg 1995;169:9.
227. Soper NJ, Brunt LM, Kerbl K. Laparoscopic general surgery. N Engl J Med 1994;330:409.
228. Lacy AM, Delgado S, Garcia-Valdecasas JC, et al. Port site metastases and recurrence after laparoscopic colectomy: a randomized trial. Surg Endosc 1998;12:1039.

SECTION 29.2 Vascular Access and Specialized Techniques of Drug Delivery
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 29.2
Vascular Access and Specialized Techniques of Drug Delivery
STEVEN K. LIBUTTI
MCDONALD K. HORNE III
Introduction
Catheter Types
External Devices
Implanted Devices
Insertion Technique
Selecting the Appropriate Catheter
Catheter-Related Complications
Catheter Malfunction
Venous Thrombosis
Infections
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The complex management of the cancer patient frequently relies on the ability to deliver a variety of intravenous or intraarterial agents over a prolonged period.
Chemotherapy, anesthesia, analgesics, and total parenteral nutrition may be required alone or in combination. Certain drug delivery systems may be more
appropriate than others, depending on the particular situation. Since their introduction in the early 1970s, significant changes and improvements have been made in
indwelling catheters and infusion devices. 1,2 All physicians who are involved in caring for cancer patients should have a basic understanding of the uses and
limitations of these devices. An understanding of the issues involved in catheter selection, techniques of insertion, routine maintenance, and treatment for
catheter-related complications, allows the physician and the patient to optimize the use of these devices.

CATHETER TYPES
A variety of catheter types are available, each with its own intrinsic advantages and disadvantages. The choice of which one to use is based on a variety of factors,
including type of agent to be infused, length of time the catheter is to be used, number of concurrent therapies requiring intravascular routes, need for blood draws,
desirability of continuous infusion, and patient (or physician) preference. Given the number of available systems, it is convenient to divide catheters into two broad
categories. The first group are those catheters having an external component, represented by devices such as the Hickman, Groshong, or Broviac (Bard Access
Systems, Salt Lake City, UT). The second group are devices that can be completely internalized or implanted, such as Portacaths and infusion pumps. (Sims Deltec,
Inc., St. Paul, MN).
EXTERNAL DEVICES
The simplest and most straightforward central venous access catheter is a single-lumen 16-gauge catheter positioned in either the subclavian, internal jugular, or
femoral vein. When inserted using sterile technique, these catheters can generally remain in place for 7 to 10 days, and they allow for the acute infusion of a variety
of agents. The catheter is not tunneled, and therefore it is at risk for both infection and migration. Although a simple central line can be very useful, these catheters
are not appropriate for long-term or outpatient intravenous therapy.
The Hickman- or Broviac-type catheters are made of barium impregnated silicone rubber (Silastic, Dow Corning Corporation, Midland, MI) and are available as singleor double-lumen devices in both pediatric and adult sizes. These catheters can be tunneled under the skin and have a Dacron cuff, which is implanted in the
subcutaneous tissue just above the exit site. This cuff is intended to promote fibrous ingrowth and scarring, which serves to lessen the likelihood of catheter migration
and infection. Although some early suggestion was made that silver ion impregnation of the cuff might further reduce the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia, 3,4
prospective randomized studies have not supported any benefit of silver ion impregnation. 5,6 It appears that the mechanical barrier provided by the fibrous reaction to
the cuff is sufficient. The Groshong-type catheter is similar to the Hickman and Broviac designs in all respects except for the tip. The Groshong tip is modified with a
slit valve to prevent the passive reflux of blood into the lumen ( Fig. 29.2-1). The valve only opens when positive or negative pressure is applied to it, such as during
infusion or withdrawal of fluid, thereby reducing the frequency with which the catheter must be flushed. These catheters can normally be flushed with saline alone.
However, Mayo et al. have shown that the addition of a weekly heparinized saline flush decreased the presence of intraluminal adherent clots and improved the
catheter function. 7 This study also demonstrated that the slit valve is frequently incompetent.

FIGURE 29.2-1. The slit valve along the side of the Groshong catheter tip is designed to prevent passive reflux of blood into the lumen.

Considerable interest has been focused on peripherally inserted central catheters (PICC lines). 8,9,10,11 and 12 These lines can be inserted in a peripheral vein in the arm
using a Seldinger technique or a “through the needle” technique and threaded into the subclavian vein. Advantages include ease of insertion and the low risk of
serious complication. Skilled nurses trained in the insertion technique can perform the procedure at the bedside with results similar to those obtained by interventional
radiologists. 11 For initial insertions, this approach has proven very cost-effective. If maintained properly, these lines can last for as long as 1 year and can be used for
chemotherapy12 or total parenteral nutrition. 13
IMPLANTED DEVICES
Since their introduction, implantable ports have become popular with patients and clinicians alike. 14 These devices are constructed from a variety of materials,
including titanium and plastic, and can be made compatible with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT). The general design includes a
compressed silicone diaphragm, which can withstand repeated punctures with a Huber needle. A comparison of a typical external catheter device with an implantable
port is shown in Figure 29.2-2. The device shown is a single-lumen port; however, dual-lumen models are also available. These ports are typically inserted in the
operating room. The technique used for the insertion of the catheter itself is identical to that used for external catheters and is described in detail in the section
Insertion Technique. The port housing is placed in a subcutaneous pocket on the chest wall. Care needs to be taken to make sure that the diaphragm of the port can
be palpated through the overlying tissue to allow for access to the device. The port housing is anchored to the underlying fascia by several interrupted sutures. Unlike
external catheters, removal of a port generally requires a repeat trip to the operating room to perform a cutdown over the port and a removal of the device from the

subcutaneous pocket. If the device is removed because of infection, the pocket should be left open to close by secondary intention to prevent the formation of an
abscess.

FIGURE 29.2-2. A: Dual-lumen 10 Fr. Hickman catheter showing the Dacron cuff. B: Implantable venous access device. A noncoring Huber needle is also shown.
The housing of the port can be made of titanium (pictured) or plastic.

Comparisons have been made between external catheters and implanted ports with respect to infection rates, patency, and long-term complications such as vessel
thrombosis.15,16,17,18,19,20 and 21 Most studies have demonstrated comparable rates of infection between external and implanted devices, with the implanted devices
having a longer durability of usage. 19 Overall, the majority of studies have not demonstrated one system to be overwhelmingly superior to the other. The main
determinants of catheter survival, regardless of whether the device is external or implanted, are still careful placement and careful maintenance.
Improvements in port design have allowed for the construction of very low profile, small devices that can be implanted in the subcutaneous tissue of the arm with the
catheter threaded in a similar fashion as a PICC line. These devices, referred to by their trade name as Pasports (Sims Deltec, Inc., St. Paul, MN), can be inserted in
the operating room or imaging suite using local anesthesia. Comparisons between these devices, standard Portacaths, and external catheters have shown that both
the Portacath and Pasport have a reduced incidence of infectious complications when compared to external catheters. 22
Implantable Infusion Pumps
Although the implantable ports have been an advance in convenience and comfort for patients, they still must be connected to an external infusion system. This is true
whether the port is placed for intravenous or intraarterial access. The reliance on the external pump has been partially supplanted by completely implanted
subcutaneous infusion pumps.
The implantable devices are larger, but they resemble infusion ports in many respects ( Fig. 29.2-3). The earliest devices were used to deliver long-term heparin
therapy for patients with thrombotic complications. 23 Using such a system, patients were able to receive long-term continuous intravenous therapy for periods of up to
1 year.24

FIGURE 29.2-3. A: The implantable infusion pump (Arrow International, Reading, PA), which comes in various sizes. The smaller pump is used for the infusion of
narcotic analgesics either intravenously or via an intraspinal route. B: A schematic representation of how the pump system works. Body heat causes the propellant to
shift from a liquid to a gaseous phase, which compresses the bellows and allows for the drug to be dispensed. When the drug reservoir is refilled, the propellant is
compressed and shifts back into a liquid phase.

The first implantable pump to be introduced was manufactured by Infusaid and was known by the same name (it is now produced by Arrow International (Reading,
PA)).14 This system weighed slightly less than 200 g when it was empty and was positioned in the subcutaneous tissues of the abdominal wall. The pump delivers a
constant rate, determined by internal flow resistors, and is powered by the pressure generated from the expansion of a liquid fluorocarbon to the gaseous phase at
body temperature. As the drug reservoir is filled percutaneously through a septum, the surrounding fluorocarbon chamber is recharged as gas is compressed and
condensed into the liquid phase. The newest models have a side-access septum that bypasses the infusion system and allows for direct delivery of a flush or bolus of
medication.
Although its main use has been in the delivery of intraarterial chemotherapy via the gastroduodenal artery for the regional treatment of liver metastases, 25,26,27 and 28 the
Infusaid pump has been used to deliver insulin intravenously, 29 as well as morphine for intractable pain. 30 The current models are smaller than their predecessors,
resulting in improved patient comfort (see Fig. 29.2-3). Other implantable systems using battery-powered peristaltic or solenoid pump mechanisms are also available.
A telemetry system transmits or receives signals from the totally implanted device, which can turn the pump on or off, adjust the delivery rate, and determine battery
voltage.31 Although these implantable pumps can save patients the inconvenience of carrying an external device and free them from the need to be attached to an
intravenous line, they can be expensive. As the number of uses for these devices increases, however, the costs will undoubtedly decline.

INSERTION TECHNIQUE
The single most important aspect of catheter insertion is to strictly adhere to sterile technique. To do this, it is important to have adequate light and space to perform
the procedure. Therefore, the preferred setting for the insertion of long-term indwelling catheters is the operating room or interventional radiology suite. The
availability of real-time fluoroscopy is also extremely helpful for confirming catheter position. In a patient who is not cognitively impaired and who is able to follow
direction, local anesthesia is all that is required. Monitored sedation can be used in certain cases and with pediatric patients.
The most common insertion technique used today is the one described by Seldinger, using a percutaneous approach over a guidewire. This technique has been
shown to be superior to open cutdown approaches. 20,32 This technique can be used to insert a catheter into any vein; however, the preferred locations are the
subclavian or internal jugular veins. The approach to the subclavian vein is described in greater detail.
The precordium is prepared sterilely, and a local anesthetic is infiltrated infraclavicularly. The patient is placed in Trendelenburg's position, and a shoulder roll
positioned longitudinally between the shoulder blades will sometimes facilitate insertion. A finder needle attached to a 5-cc syringe is advanced into the vein under the
clavicle with the bevel of the needle facing up. Gentle aspiration is applied until blood freely flows into the syringe. If there is any question as to whether the needle is

in an artery or a vein, a central venous pressure line can be connected to confirm a venous insertion.
Once the needle is in the vein, it is rotated 90 degrees and the syringe is disconnected, taking care not to allow air into the vein through the needle. A flexible
guidewire is then advanced into the needle. If advancement of the guidewire meets with any resistance, it is not intraluminal and the wire should be removed. The
needle should then be repositioned and aspiration of venous blood reconfirmed.
Once the wire has been successfully inserted, its position can be confirmed with fluoroscopy. At this point, a site on the precordium is selected for the catheter exit
site (Fig. 29.2-4). After infiltrating the tissues with local anesthetic, a small incision is made at the exit site as well as adjacent to where the wire enters the skin. The
catheter is then tunneled under the skin subcutaneously until the Dacron cuff is situated approximately 1 cm from the exit site. A peel-away sheath dilator is then
advanced over the wire into the vessel by intermittently advancing the sheath and withdrawing the wire to check for resistance (see Fig. 29.2-4 inset). It is possible for
the sheath dilator to bend the wire and result in the dilator penetrating the wall of the vessel. This can result in fatal hemorrhage.

FIGURE 29.2-4. Insertion of a long-term indwelling central venous catheter via a subclavian approach using a percutaneous technique. A: After insertion of the
guidewire, the catheter is tunneled from the chosen exit site to the venous cannulation site. B: The Dacron cuff is placed subcutaneously 1 cm above the exit site.
Inset: As the sheath/dilator is advanced over the guidewire, care is taken to ensure that the dilator is advancing along the course of the wire by intermittently moving
the wire back and advancing the dilator. After trimming the catheter to the proper length, it is advanced through the peel-away sheath.

Once the dilator is in place, the catheter is inserted into the lumen of the dilator and the catheter is advanced as the dilator is peeled apart (see Fig. 29.2-4 inset). The
ideal catheter tip position is just inside the right atrium. The surgeon must keep in mind that, when the patient is upright, the catheter tip migrates back from 1 to 3 cm.
A high rate of catheter failure can occur from thrombotic complications if the tip is in the subclavian vein rather than in the right atrium. 33 To avoid this, the catheter is
cut to its estimated desired length, which is determined from external bony landmarks. Typically, the right superior vena cava/right atrial junction lies approximately 4
to 6 cm inferior to the angle of Louis ( Fig. 29.2-5). The final position of the catheter tip can be confirmed with fluoroscopy. After the procedure is completed, the
patient should have an upright chest x-ray to confirm position and to rule out a pneumothorax. The incidence of pneumothorax after percutaneous placement of a
central venous catheter by either a subclavian or jugular approach has been shown to be less than 1%. 34

FIGURE 29.2-5. The length of the catheter can be estimated by simulating its course through the subclavian vein and superior vena cava along the clavicle and right
border of the sternum. If the catheter is cut 6 cm inferior to the angle of Louis, it approximates a final position at the superior vena caval and atrial junction. Tip
position should be confirmed using fluoroscopy.

In certain situations the subclavian vein may not be suitable for catheter insertion. In such an instance, the internal jugular vein is the preferred location. This vein can
be accessed percutaneously in a similar fashion by using the bellies of the sternocleidomastoid muscle as landmarks. The vessel can also be isolated through a
cutdown procedure. In some patients with occlusions of the subclavian and jugular veins, other sites must be used. The femoral vein may be used with a relatively low
complication rate. 35 This site, however, is less desirable given its anatomic position and difficulty in keeping the area aseptic. Other insertion sites have included the
saphenous vein, gonadal vein, intercostal vein, or azygous vein, or direct placement into the inferior vena cava. 35,36,37,38 and 39
After the successful placement of a long-term indwelling central venous catheter, certain routine postoperative maintenance procedures should be performed to
increase the durability of the catheter. Careful attention should be paid to the maintenance of catheter patency and to the catheter exit site to ensure it is kept clean.
Although there is some discrepancy among catheter manufacturers, external catheters are typically flushed daily or every other day with a heparin solution or saline
when they are not in use.

SELECTING THE APPROPRIATE CATHETER
The selection of the right catheter for a particular patient must be based on an assessment of a number of factors. Consideration must be given to the intended use of
the catheter and how long the catheter will be needed. For example, a patient who needs 2 weeks of intravenous antibiotics as an outpatient will probably be best
served by having a single-lumen external catheter placed, which can be more easily removed when the course of therapy is completed. Some evidence suggests that
single-lumen catheters pose less of an infection risk than dual-lumen devices. 40 In contrast, a patient expected to receive several courses of chemotherapy over the
next 3 months, who will also require frequent blood draws, may be best served by the placement of a double-lumen implantable Portacath.
At the National Institutes of Health, a team approach is used in the selection, insertion, and maintenance of intravenous access devices. The team is made up of
surgeons, interventional radiologists, intensivists, and specially trained access nurses. When a physician requests a consult for a line placement, information about
the patient and planned uses is obtained. The most important issues, in addition to type of agent to be infused and duration of planned use, are history of previous
indwelling catheters, patency of central veins (duplex Doppler examinations are obtained if necessary), the patient's ability to maintain the catheter, age of the patient,
size of the patient, and need for blood draws. All of these issues are factored into the selection of the appropriate device. The Vascular Access Device (VAD) Service
then assists in patient teaching both before and after the device is inserted. Once the device is in place, the VAD Service then tracks information regarding outcome.
Programs such as this have been shown to enable the patient and the physician to derive the longest possible benefit from the vascular access device and to
minimize complications. 41

CATHETER-RELATED COMPLICATIONS

CATHETER MALFUNCTION
Catheters leak or break because of defective construction or because they are pinched between the clavicle and first rib when the patient is upright. 42,43 More
commonly, infusion through a VAD may be difficult because of a kink in the catheter, a forgotten suture holding it in place, or precipitates of salts or medications
obstructing the lumen. The latter can sometimes be removed with instillation of 0.1 N HCl or 70% ethanol. 44,45
The most common type of VAD malfunction, however, is the inability to withdraw blood from the catheter without difficulty infusing through it. Withdrawal occlusion not
only prevents use of the VAD for blood sampling, but also is a sign that fluid injected through the catheter may not be entering freely flowing blood in the superior
vena cava. Continuously bathing a small vein with a nonphysiologic solution may lead to chemical phlebitis. 46,47 Withdrawal occlusion is caused by an obstruction at
the catheter tip that acts as a one-way valve. It occurs when aspiration pulls the wall of a vein against the catheter orifice. This is especially likely if the catheter tip is
in a vein smaller than the superior vena cava. Even if the VAD has been properly placed initially, the catheter tip can migrate into the contralateral innominate or a
jugular vein as a result of postural changes. 46,47 More commonly, it can be pulled back into the ipsilateral innominate vein by traction applied by the chest wall, or
partially retracted so that the tip is held perpendicular to the superior vena cava wall. 48
Malpositioning of a catheter can often be identified by a chest x-ray. The problem can be relieved, at least temporarily, by having the patient stand, raise his or her
arms, or use Valsalva's maneuver to move the catheter tip. Interventional radiologists can sometimes return a migrant catheter to the superior vena cava with a
snare. 42 In the long run, however, poor catheter position is typically associated with recurrent malfunction and ultimately requires replacement of the VAD.
Catheter tips that rub against the vein may stimulate local thrombosis, which can also cause withdrawal occlusion and sometimes anchor the tip to the venous wall.
Even in good position, however, catheters virtually always accumulate a coat of fibrin. 49,50 If this “sheath” extends to the catheter orifice, it can act as a one-way valve
to obstruct withdrawal. 50 In extreme cases, these fibrin sheaths can extend from the tip of the catheter to the point where it enters the vein. This not only creates
withdrawal occlusion but provides a channel for infusates to backtrack and possibly extravasate. 51 Withdrawal occlusion that is not relieved by changing the patient's
position, therefore, suggests the possibility that the obstruction is actually due to a fibrin sheath.
An effort can be made to dissolve the obstructing fibrin by instilling a thrombolytic agent through the obstructed catheter into the suspected sheath, where it is left to
dwell for 1 to 2 hours before re-attempting withdrawal. Although the traditional thrombolytic agent for this indication has been urokinase, this drug is now unavailable
and has been replaced by instillations of recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA) in a concentration of 1 mg/mL. 52,53 Usually 2 to 3 mL are infused and left for
2 hours before withdrawal is attempted.
If this treatment is not successful, the cause of the withdrawal occlusion should be investigated further. If a chest x-ray has not already been taken, one should be
performed to confirm that the catheter tip is properly positioned in the superior vena cava. Then x-ray contrast material should be injected through the obstructed
lumen to look for a fibrin sheath, which is detected as a tubular structure filled with contrast encasing the catheter. 51,54 If the presence of a fibrin sheath is confirmed,
repeat instillations of rtPA can be tried. In the past, regimens of continuously infused urokinase were often successful in relieving obstructions refractory to routine
instillations of the drug. 54 Experience using rtPA in a similar manner, however, is quite limited.
Open-ended catheters have traditionally been flushed with low-dose heparin on a regular schedule to reduce the risk of thrombotic obstruction of the catheter.
However, the value of this technique has not been proven, except perhaps with dosing schedules that are not practical on a long-term outpatient basis. 55,56 A reason
not to use heparin flushes is the risk, albeit a low one, of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and thrombosis. 57,58 and 59 In addition, coagulation tests cannot be reliably
performed with blood drawn through heparinized VADs, even with a large discard volume. 60
VENOUS THROMBOSIS
Thrombi usually originate at the point where a catheter enters the vein or at any point where it chronically rubs against the venous wall. Symptomatic thrombosis of
the catheterized vein develops in 5% to 10% of patients with VADs. 61,62 Most VAD-related venous thrombosis, however, is asymptomatic, occurring in approximately
30% to 70% of patients. 61,62 Thrombi develop soon after the catheter is placed and usually remain clinically silent because abundant collateral veins relieve the
pressure as the primary vein becomes obstructed. 62 It is important to be aware of asymptomatic thrombosis as a potential nidus of infection as well as a source of
pulmonary emboli.50,63 Furthermore, because thrombosis may leave the vein permanently obstructed, it may create a problem for an unsuspecting surgeon who
attempts to re-catheterize the vein at a later time. 61
The management of symptomatic VAD-related thrombosis must be individualized. The catheter rarely must be removed immediately and does not necessarily have to
be removed until the need for it has passed. 64 Prompt relief of symptoms is often achieved by simply elevating the affected arm overnight. Most patients also receive
systemic anticoagulation in the form of heparin, followed by warfarin for several months, with the rationale that this prevents the thrombus from extending. 64,65 and 66
However, the risk of extension is unknown. Anticoagulation also is recommended to prevent pulmonary emboli, which are reported to occur in 10% to 15% of patients
with upper extremity deep venous thrombosis and can be fatal. 63,67,68 Small emboli, however, frequently occur when the catheters are removed, but the minimal
morbidity from these does not justify routine evaluation or therapeutic intervention before explantation. 69 The more threatening emboli appear to be much less
commonly associated with the modern silicone and polyurethane catheters. 67 The risk of chronic venous insufficiency due to thrombosis in the axillary-subclavian vein
may also be a consideration. On the other hand, the most important issues are often the need for long-term venous access and the risks of antithrombotic treatment.
With the introduction of low-molecular-weight heparin, hospitalization is no longer necessary for initial anticoagulation. 70 Subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin
and oral warfarin can be started together and the heparin continued for at least 5 days and until the patient's international normalized ratio has been between 2 and 3
for 2 days. The necessary duration of warfarin therapy is unknown. It can be argued that warfarin should be continued as long as the VAD is in place but that 4 to 6
weeks of warfarin is sufficient if the VAD is removed after the thrombus is discovered. 64,65 However, no clinical trials have tested this recommendation, and
extenuating circumstances often dictate the anticoagulant regime for an individual patient.
Thrombolytic therapy of VAD-related thrombosis may be reasonable when salvaging the vein is a high priority because anticoagulation alone will probably not leave
the vein patent enough to be used for subsequent VADs ( Fig. 29.2-6). A regimen using relatively low doses of rtPA has been published. 71,72 Long-term patency,
however, generally requires that the catheter be removed while anticoagulation is continued for several weeks or months. 71

FIGURE 29.2-6. A: Catheter-related subclavian vein thrombosis documented by venogram, which shows complete obstruction and collateral venous flow. The patient
was treated with urokinase infusion through an ipsilateral forearm vein and, after 16 hours (B) and 39 hours (C) of urokinase infusion, showed progressive resolution
of the thrombosis.

Of course, effective prophylaxis would eliminate the problem of VAD-related thrombosis. This reportedly can be achieved with very low-dose warfarin (1 mg/day) or
with low-molecular-weight heparin. 73,74 and 75 However, the benefit of these regimens was demonstrated in patients with an unusually high incidence of symptomatic
thrombosis, and therefore it is not clear how easily these results can be generalized. The value of prophylactic warfarin was not apparent in a population of less
hypercoagulable patients. 76
INFECTIONS
Infection is the most common complication of VADs and the most common reason that they are removed prematurely. 77,78 and 79 Short-term (i.e., less than 1 month),
nontunneled central venous catheters carry the greatest risk of infection, although bonding the catheter material with antimicrobial agents reduces this risk
significantly. 80 Among long-term, tunneled VADs the infection rate varies considerably, and in some series, infections are much more common (e.g., approximately
40%) with externalized catheters than for subcutaneous ports (approximately 5% to 10%), with the risk of infection decreasing over time from catheterization. 20,79
The organisms infecting VADs are most commonly derived from the patient's skin flora or from the hands of health care workers. 81 They migrate along the internal
(introduced by accessing the hub) and external (from the skin wound) surfaces of the catheter, secreting a biofilm that protects them from the host's immune system
as well as from antibiotics. 82,83 and 84 Before the skin is well healed, percutaneous infections are most common, in the form of cellulitis at the insertion site (“exit-site”
infections) or deeper in the subcutaneous track of the catheter (“tunnel” infections). 81,85
Exit-site infections occur at the skin wound, which is the catheter insertion site, or in the case of subcutaneous ports, the needle access site. They present with
tenderness and erythema and purulent discharge and are most commonly caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis. The site should be cultured and treated with topical
antibiotic ointment. The VAD can usually be left in place unless the infection is due to Pseudomonas species or atypical mycobacteria. 86,87 If fever or other systemic
signs develop, however, blood cultures should be obtained and antibiotics started. If the cultures are negative, an oral cephalosporin may be adequate. 85
Very serious infections can also develop in the subcutaneous tunnel of the catheter or in the pouch where a port resides. These are usually quite tender and swollen
and may be fluctuant. Bacteremia associated with a deep-seated infection requires at least 4 weeks of antibiotics. If fever or bacteremia persists after 3 days of
antibiotics, however, catheter removal is usually necessary, particularly when the organism is Staphylococcus aureus.81,88
Diagnosing catheter-related bacteremia requires obtaining quantitative blood cultures both through the catheter itself and from a peripheral vein. If the number of
colonies growing in the catheter-derived culture is more than tenfold greater than the number in the peripheral blood culture, the VAD is implicated as the source of
the bacteremia.81,85 If the catheter is no longer necessary for the patient's care, it should be immediately removed and antibiotics given for 72 hours. However, if
retaining the VAD is a priority, it may be left in place and the antibiotics administered through it. If the catheter has several lumens, the antibiotics should be rotated
among them. Blood cultures from the catheter should be repeated after 2 to 3 days. If they are sterile, antibiotics should be continued for an additional 7 to 14 days,
and the cultures should be repeated 24 to 48 hours after the antibiotics have been discontinued. 85 The most common organism, coagulase-negative staphylococci,
can usually be eradicated with vancomycin.
If, however, the patient continues to have positive cultures or does not show prompt symptomatic improvement after antibiotics are started, serious consideration must
be given to removing the VAD. An alternative is a trial of local thrombolytic therapy. Skin flora migrating through the catheter to the blood stream tend to adhere to the
fibrin sleeve that inevitably coats the catheter surface. 50 Some species add their own secreted proteins to this sleeve. 84 In this matrix, the organisms are relatively
protected from phagocytes and antibodies, as well as from antibiotics. Instillations of rtPA into the catheter have been shown to improve the outcome in cases
refractory to antibiotics alone. 89,90 rtPA would be expected to provide the same benefit and should be given in the same manner as for treating withdrawal occlusion
associated with a fibrin sheath. 53 Another consideration in assessing antibiotic-resistant bacteremia is whether the patient has an infected venous thrombus. A
venogram is necessary to evaluate this possibility. If thrombosis is found, the catheter must be removed and antibiotics continued for 4 to 6 weeks. In some cases, the
infected clot may require surgical resection. 91
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Broviac JW, Cole JJ, Scribner BH. A silicone rubber atrial catheter for prolonged parenteral alimentation. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1973;136:602.
2. Hickman RO, Buckner CD, Clift RA, et al. A modified right atrial catheter for access to the venous system in marrow transplant recipients. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1979;148:871.
3. Maki DG, Cobb L, Garman JK, et al. An attachable silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with central venous catheters: a prospective randomized multicenter trial. Am J Med
1988;85:307.
4. Flowers RH, Schwenzer KJ, Kopel RF, et al. Efficacy of an attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of intravascular catheter-related infection. A randomized, controlled trial [see
comments]. JAMA 1989;261:878.
5. Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618.
6. Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter
infections in cancer patients [see comments]. Ann Surg 1993;218:206.
7. Mayo DJ, Horne MK, Summers BL, Pearson DC, Helsabeck CB. The effects of heparin flush on patency of the Groshong catheter: a pilot study. Oncol Nurs Forum 1996;23:1401.
8. Masoorli S, Angeles T. PICC lines: the latest home care challenge. RN 1990;53:44.
9. Andersen KM, Holland JS. Maintaining the patency of peripherally inserted central catheters with 10 units/cc heparin. J Intraven Nurs 1992;15:84.
10. James L, Bledsoe L, Hadaway LC. A retrospective look at tip location and complications of peripherally inserted central catheter lines. J Intraven Nurs 1993;16:104.
11. Cardella JF, Cardella K, Bacci N, Fox PS, Post JH. Cumulative experience with 1,273 peripherally inserted central catheters at a single institution. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1996;7:5.
12. Banton J. Using midlines and PICC lines for chemotherapy regimens. Oncol Nurs Forum 1999;26:514.
13. Alhimyary A, Fernandez C, Picard M, et al. Safety and efficacy of total parenteral nutrition delivered via a peripherally inserted central venous catheter. Nutr Clin Pract 1996;11:199.
14. Niederhuber JE, Ensminger W, Gyves JW, et al. Totally implanted venous and arterial access system to replace external catheters in cancer treatment. Surgery 1982;92:706.
15. May GS, Davis C. Percutaneous catheters and totally implantable access systems: a review of reported infection rates. J Intraven Nurs 1988;11:97.
16. Wurzel CL, Halom K, Feldman JG, Rubin LG. Infection rates of Broviac-Hickman catheters and implantable venous devices. Am J Dis Child 1988;142:536.
17. Ross MN, Haase GM, Poole MA, Burrington JD, Odom LF. Comparison of totally implanted reservoirs with external catheters as venous access devices in pediatric oncologic patients. Surg
Gynecol Obstet 1988;167:141.
18. Shaw JH, Douglas R, Wilson T. Clinical performance of Hickman and Portacath atrial catheters. Aust N Z J Surg 1988;58:657.
19. Mirro J Jr, Rao BN, Stokes DC, et al. A prospective study of Hickman/Broviac catheters and implantable ports in pediatric oncology patients. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:214.
20. Mirro J Jr, Rao BN, Kumar M, et al. A comparison of placement techniques and complications of externalized catheters and implantable port use in children with cancer. J Pediatr Surg
1990;25:120.
21. Alexander HR. Clinical performance of long-term venous access devices. In: Vascular access in the cancer patient, vol. 1. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1994:18.
22. Sharpe PC, Morris TC. Complications associated with central venous catheters in a haematology unit. Ulster Med J 1994;63:144.
23. Rohde TD, Blackshear PJ, Varco RL, Buchwald H. Protracted parenteral drug infusion in ambulatory subjects using an implantable infusion pump. Trans Am Soc Artif Intern Organs 1977;23:13.
24. Rohde TD, Blackshear PJ, Varco RL, Buchwald H. One year of heparin anticoagulation. An ambulatory subject using a totally implantable infusion pump. Minn Med 1977;60:719.
25. Boyle FM, Smith RC, Levi JA. Continuous hepatic artery infusion of 5-fluorouracil for metastatic colorectal cancer localised to the liver. Aust N Z J Med 1993;23:32.
26. Hohn DC, Rayner AA, Economou JS, et al. Toxicities and complications of implanted pump hepatic arterial and intravenous floxuridine infusion. Cancer 1986;57:465.
27. Patt YZ, Hoque A, Lozano R, et al. Phase II trial of hepatic arterial infusion of fluorouracil and recombinant human interferon alfa-2b for liver metastases of colorectal cancer refractory to
systemic fluorouracil and leucovorin. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1432.
28. Berlin J, Merrick HW, Smith TJ, Lerner H. Phase II evaluation of treatment of complete resection of hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer and adjuvant hepatic arterial infusion of
floxuridine: an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group study (PB083). Am J Clin Oncol 1999;22:291.
29. Buchwald H, Rohde TD, Dorman FD, et al. A totally implantable drug infusion device: laboratory and clinical experience using a model with single flow rate and new design for modulated insulin
infusion. Diabetes Care 1980;3:351.
30. Hassenbusch SJ, Pillay PK, Magdinec M, et al. Constant infusion of morphine for intractable cancer pain using an implanted pump [see comments]. J Neurosurg 1990;73:405.
31. Fischell RE. A programmable implantable medication system (PIMS) as a means for intracorporeal drug delivery. In: Tyle P, ed. Drug delivery devices. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1988:261.
32. Jansen RF, Wiggers T, van Geel BN, van Putten WL. Assessment of insertion techniques and complication rates of dual lumen central venous catheters in patients with hematological
malignancies. World J Surg 1990;14:100; discussion 105.
33. Petersen J, Delaney JH, Brakstad MT, Rowbotham RK, Bagley CM Jr. Silicone venous access devices positioned with their tips high in the superior vena cava are more likely to malfunction.
Am J Surg 1999;178:38.
34. Miller JA, Singireddy S, Maldjian P, Baker SR. A reevaluation of the radiographically detectable complications of percutaneous venous access lines inserted by four subcutaneous approaches.
Am Surg 1999;65:125.
35. Williard W, Coit D, Lucas A, Groeger JS. Long-term vascular access via the inferior vena cava. J Surg Oncol 1991;46:162.
36. Torosian MH, Meranze S, McLean G, Mullen JL. Central venous access with occlusive superior central venous thrombosis. Ann Surg 1986;203:30.
37. Lammermeier D, Steiger E, Cosgrove D, Zelch M. Use of an intercostal vein for central venous access in home parenteral nutrition: a case report. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:659.
38. Pokorny WJ, McGill CW, Harberg FJ. Use of azygous vein for central catheter insertion. Surgery 1985;97:362.
39. Knox MF, Holton JC, Morris WD, Flippin TA. Translumbar inferior vena cava Groshong catheter placement in a patient with superior vena cava occlusion. J Ark Med Soc 1989;85:325.
40. Hayward SR, Ledgerwood AM, Lucas CE. The fate of 100 prolonged venous access devices. Am Surg 1990;56:515.
41. Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D. Venous access in the cancer patient. In: Principles and practice of oncology updates. Philadelphia: Lippincott,1991;5:1.

42. Boardman P, Hughes J. Pictorial review: radiological evaluation and management of malfunctioning central venous catheters. Clin Radiol 1998;53:10.
43. Aitken D, Minton J. The “pinch-off” sign: a warning of impending problems with permanent subclavian catheters. Am J Surg 1984;148:633.
44. Duffy L, Kerzner B, Gebus V, Dice J. Treatment of central venous catheter occlusions with hydrochloric acid. J Pediatr 1989;114:1002.
45. Pennington CR, Pithie AD. Ethanol lock in the management of catheter occlusion. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:507.
46. Currarino G. Migration of jugular or subclavian venous catheters into inferior tributaries of the brachiocephalic veins or into the azygos vein, with possible complications. Pediatr Radiol
1996;26:439.
47. Kowalski CM, Kaufman JA, Rivitz SM, Geller SC, Waltman AC. Migration of central venous catheters: implications for initial catheter tip positioning. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1997;8:443.
48. Nazarian GK, Bjarnason H, Dietz CA Jr, Bernadas CA, Hunter DW. Changes in tunneled catheter tip position when a patient is upright. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1997;8:437.
49. Peters WR, Bush WH Jr, McIntyre RD, Hill LD. The development of fibrin sheath on indwelling venous catheters. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1973;137:43.
50. Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, et al. The relationship between the thrombotic and infectious complications of central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014.
51. Mayo DJ, Pearson DC. Chemotherapy extravasation: a consequence of fibrin sheath formation around venous access devices. Oncol Nurs Forum 1995;22:675.
52. Lawson M, Bottino JC, Hurtubise MR, McCredie KB. The use of urokinase to restore the patency of occluded central venous catheters. Am J Intraven Ther Clin Nutr 1982;9:29.
53. Haire WD, Atkinson JB, Stephens LC, Kotulak GD. Urokinase versus recombinant tissue plasminogen activator in thrombosed central venous catheters: a double-blinded, randomized trial.
Thromb Haemost 1994;72:543.
54. Horne MK III, Mayo DJ. Low-dose urokinase infusions to treat fibrinous obstruction of venous access devices in cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2709.
55. Smith S, Dawson S, Hennessey R, Andrew M. Maintenance of the patency of indwelling central venous catheters: is heparin necessary? Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1991;13:141.
56. Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165.
57. Garrelts JC. White clot syndrome and thrombocytopenia: reasons to abandon heparin i.v. lock flush solution. Clin Pharm 1992;11:797.
58. Kadidal VV, Mayo DJ, Horne MK. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) due to heparin flushes: a report of three cases. J Intern Med 1999;246:325.
59. Mayo DJ, Cullinane AM, Merryman PK, Horne MK. Serologic evidence of heparin sensitization in cancer patients receiving heparin flushes of venous access devices. Support Care Cancer
1999;7:425.
60. Mayo DJ, Dimond EP, Kramer W, Horne MK III. Discard volumes necessary for clinically useful coagulation studies from heparinized Hickman catheters. Oncol Nurs Forum 1996;23:671.
61. Horne MK, May DJ, Alexander HR, et al. Venographic surveillance of tunneled venous access devices in adult oncology patients. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:174.
62. De Cicco M, Matovic M, Balestreri L, et al. Central venous thrombosis: an early and frequent complication in cancer patients bearing long-term silastic catheter. A prospective study. Thromb
Res 1997;86:101.
63. Horattas MC, Wright DJ, Fenton AH, et al. Changing concepts of deep venous thrombosis of the upper extremityreport of a series and review of the literature. Surgery 1988;104:561.
64. Gould JR, Carloss HW, Skinner WL. Groshong catheterassociated subclavian venous thrombosis [see comments]. Am J Med 1993;95:419.
65. Becker DM, Philbrick JT, Walker FB. Axillary and subclavian venous thrombosis. Prognosis and treatment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:1934.
66. Hicken GJ, Ameli FM. Management of subclavian-axillary vein thrombosis: a review. Can J Surg 1998;41:13.
67. Monreal M, Raventos A, Lerma R, et al. Pulmonary embolism in patients with upper extremity DVT associated to venous central linesa prospective study. Thromb Haemost 1994;72:548.
68. Derish MT, Smith DW, Frankel LR. Venous catheter thrombus formation and pulmonary embolism in children [see comments]. Pediatr Pulmonol 1995;20:349.
69. Brismar B, Hardstedt C, Jacobson S. Diagnosis of thrombosis by catheter phlebography after prolonged central venous catheterization. Ann Surg 1981;194:779.
70. Savage KJ, Wells PS, Schulz V, et al. Outpatient use of low molecular weight heparin (Dalteparin) for the treatment of deep vein thrombosis of the upper extremity. Thromb Haemost
1999;82:1008.
71. Chang R, Horne MK III, Mayo DJ, Doppman JL. Pulse-spray treatment of subclavian and jugular venous thrombi with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator. J Vasc Interv Radiol
1996;7:845.
72. Horne MK, Mayo DJ, Cannon RO, et al. Intra-clot recombinant tissue plasminogen activator in the treatment of deep venous thrombosis of the lower and upper extremities. Am J Med
2000;108:251.
73. Bern MM, Lokich JJ, Wallach SR, et al. Very low doses of warfarin can prevent thrombosis in central venous catheters. A randomized prospective trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423.
74. Monreal M, Alastrue A, Rull M, et al. Upper extremity deep venous thrombosis in cancer patients with venous access devicesprophylaxis with a low molecular weight heparin (Fragmin). Thromb
Haemost 1996;75:251.
75. Boraks P, Seale J, Price J, et al. Prevention of central venous catheter associated thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol
1998;101:483.
76. Ratcliffe M, Broadfoot C, Davidson M, Kelly KF, Greaves M. Thrombosis, markers of thrombotic risk, indwelling central venous catheters and efficiency of antithrombotic prophylaxis using
low-dose warfarin. Br J Haematol 1998;101:79.
77. Wiener ES, McGuire P, Stolar CJ, et al. The CCSG prospective study of venous access devices: an analysis of insertions and causes for removal. J Pediatr Surg 1992;27:155; discussion 163.
78. Mueller BU, Skelton J, Callender DP, et al. A prospective randomized trial comparing the infectious and noninfectious complications of an externalized catheter versus a subcutaneously
implanted device in cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1943.
79. Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term use of venous access devices in patients with cancer [see comments]. Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168.
80. Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1.
81. Raad II, Bodey GP. Infectious complications of indwelling vascular catheters. Clin Infect Dis 1992;15:197.
82. Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, et al. Ultrastructural analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a quantitative relationship between luminal colonization and duration of placement. J Infect
Dis 1993;168:400.
83. Vaudaux P, Pittet D, Haeberli A, et al. Host factors selectively increase staphylococcal adherence on inserted catheters: a role for fibronectin and fibrinogen or fibrin. J Infect Dis 1989;160:865.
84. Costerton JW, Stewart PS, Greenberg EP. Bacterial biofilms: a common cause of persistent infections. Science 1999;284:1318.
85. Jones GR. A practical guide to evaluation and treatment of infections in patients with central venous catheters. J Intraven Nurs 1998;21:S134.
86. Benezra D, Kiehn TE, Gold JW, et al. Prospective study of infections in indwelling central venous catheters using quantitative blood cultures. Am J Med 1988;85:495.
87. Raad II, Vartivarian S, Khan A, Bodey GP. Catheter-related infections caused by the Mycobacterium fortuitum complex: 15 cases and review. Rev Infect Dis 1991;13:1120.
88. Jones GR, Konsler GK, Dunaway RP, Lacey SR, Azizkhan RG. Prospective analysis of urokinase in the treatment of catheter sepsis in pediatric hematology-oncology patients. J Pediatr Surg
1993;28:350; discussion 355.
89. Jones GR, Konsler GK, Dunaway RP. Urokinase in the treatment of bacteremia and candidemia in patients with right atrial catheters. Am J Infect Control 1996;24:160.
90. Verghese A, Widrich WC, Arbeit RD. Central venous septic thrombophlebitisthe role of medical therapy. Medicine (Baltimore) 1985;64:394.
91. Dugdale DC, Ramsey PG. Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia in patients with Hickman catheters [see comments]. Am J Med 1990;89:137.

SECTION 29.3 Isolation Perfusion
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 29.3
Isolation Perfusion
H. RICHARD ALEXANDER
Introduction
Principles of Isolation Perfusion
Isolated Limb Perfusion
Isolated Hepatic Perfusion
Perfusion Parameters
Results of Isolation Perfusion
Hyperthermia
Tumor Necrosis Factor
Current Status of Isolated Limb Perfusion
Current Status of Isolated Hepatic Perfusion
Status of Isolation Perfusion of Other Sites
Conclusions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Vascular isolation and perfusion of a cancer-bearing organ or region (i.e., extremity) using a recirculating extracorporeal perfusion circuit has been in clinical use for
almost 50 years. It was originally applied to the limb by Creech et al. in the 1950s for patients with high-grade unresectable extremity sarcoma or in-transit melanoma. 1
In the early 1960s additional experience with isolated perfusion of the limb or liver was reported by a small number of centers. 2,3 and 4 More recently, the technique has
been actively under clinical evaluation for patients with these conditions and has also been used in isolation perfusion of the lung and kidney. 5,6
Isolation perfusion was initially applied under normothermic conditions using chemotherapeutics alone and subsequently mild to moderate hyperthermia (38.5°C to
42°C) became a routine component of treatment. 7 Over the past 6 years there has been considerable interest in the use of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) used in
combination with melphalan and hyperthermia in isolation perfusion. 8,9,10 and 11 This chapter reviews the principles and technique of isolation perfusion and the current
status of this treatment modality in clinical practice. The role of the various components of therapy that are routinely used on efficacy and toxicity are reviewed.

PRINCIPLES OF ISOLATION PERFUSION
Isolation perfusion is a specialized surgical technique administered under a general anesthetic and usually for an interval of 60 to 90 minutes. Initially, the vascular
supply of a cancer-bearing organ or region such as liver or extremity is identified and isolated and all collateral blood flow to the area is controlled to avoid any leak of
perfusate into the systemic circulation or leak of systemic blood into the perfusion circuit. Once the vessels are cannulated they are connected to inflow and outflow
lines of an extracorporeal bypass circuit, which consists of an oxygenator, reservoir, heat exchanger, and roller pump. The heat exchanger, which warms the
perfusate, is connected to a closed water-recirculating circuit ( Fig. 29.3-1). It has become routine practice during isolation perfusion to confirm that complete vascular
isolation has been achieved using a continuous intraoperative leak monitoring technique with either radiolabeled 131I human serum albumin or technetium 99–labeled
red blood cells. 12,13,14 and 15 Once the perfusion is complete, the vascular bed of the treated region is flushed with several liters of saline and colloid solution to remove
any residual intravascular therapeutic agents. Finally, the native vascular blood flow is reestablished to the site and therapy is completed. Because of the need to
place indwelling vascular catheters during treatment, the patient must be systemically anticoagulated usually using heparin during perfusion. However, the
anticoagulation effects can be effectively reversed with protamine sulfate and thawed fresh frozen plasma.

FIGURE 29.3-1. General components of isolated organ perfusion circuit showing the venous reservoir, oxygenator heat exchanger, and roller pump. Blood flow from
the perfused site is collected in a venous reservoir by passage drainage. The roller pump on the arterial side of the circuit can be adjusted to increase or decrease
flow rates as appropriate. The oxygenator and heat exchanger are in-line components of this circuit, and the latter can effectively heat the perfusate so that tissue
hyperthermia can be routinely achieved.

There are several advantages of isolation perfusion as a treatment technique. In practice, complete separation of the regional and systemic circulation can be
achieved in most circumstances. This is particularly true for isolation perfusion of the liver 16 and in patients undergoing isolated limb perfusion (ILP) for in-transit
melanoma for high-grade unresectable sarcoma of the extremity. 12 Small, less than 1%, leaks of perfusate into the systemic circulation can be detected using a
leak-monitoring system. Klaase and coworkers 12 reported the frequency of perfusate leak in 383 patients who underwent 438 ILPs using a standardized technique.
The cumulative overall leak rate was 0.9%. A leak rate of greater than 5% was encountered in 6.2% of ILPs and a leak rate of greater than 10% was observed in only
1.4%. During ILP, leak of perfusate can usually be controlled with various maneuvers such as adjustments in flow rate or tightening of the extremity tourniquet. 17
Because treatment is confined to an organ or region of the body, systemic exposure and toxicity secondary to the therapeutic agents can be eliminated or significantly
limited.18 In addition, dose escalation of the therapeutic agents is limited largely by the tissue tolerance of the perfused organ or the extremity. 19 Finally, isolation
perfusion allows one to deliver clinically significant levels of hyperthermia, which has direct cytotoxic 3,20 and synergistic antitumor effects with various
chemotherapeutic and biologic agents. 21,23 and 24
ISOLATED LIMB PERFUSION
ILP of the lower extremity is most commonly performed via cannulation of the external iliac vessels and in the arm via the axillary vessels. However, in the lower
extremity ILP can be performed via the femoral or popliteal vessels and in the arm via the brachial vessels under certain clinical situations. For the approach to the
iliac vessels, a lower abdominal transplant incision and a retroperitoneal approach is made. The external iliac artery and vein are carefully dissected from their origin
down to the inguinal ligament and small arterial branches and venous tributaries and ligated and divided. This is particularly important in the region of the inguinal
ligament to prevent leak of perfusate into the systemic circulation. The hypogastric vein is ligated in situ and the hypogastric artery is temporarily occluded with a
vascular occluding clamp. If possible, some of the branches of the hypogastric artery in the pelvis should be identified and ligated to prevent collateral flow across the
pelvis. These vessels include the vesicular, pudendal, and obturator arteries. A Steinmann pin is anchored into the anterior superior iliac spine and the external iliac
vessels are cannulated with the catheter tips positioned just below the inguinal ligament. An Esmarch tourniquet is snugly wrapped at the root of the extremity and the

cannulae are connected to the extracorporeal bypass circuit ( Fig. 29.3-2).

FIGURE 29.3-2. Intraoperative photograph showing an isolated limb perfusion circuit in a patient with in-transit extremity melanoma. Note the leg is wrapped in
warming blankets to facilitate tissue warming, and the leak-monitoring gamma detection camera is positioned over the patient's precordium and connected to a strip
chart recorder. The extracorporeal bypass circuit (not shown) is positioned by the patient's side during therapy.

ISOLATED HEPATIC PERFUSION
Isolated hepatic perfusion (IHP) is a more complex treatment to administer and has not gained as widespread or consistent a clinical evaluation because of the major
nature of the operative procedure, the associated morbidity associated with the treatment, and the fact that initial clinical studies did not clearly document efficacy of
the therapy. The unique vascular anatomy of the liver, however, does make it an ideally suitable organ for isolated perfusion. The procedure starts with a right
subcostal incision and once it has been determined that there are no contraindications to proceeding with IHP, the incision is extended and the liver is extensively
mobilized. This includes division of the diaphragmatic attachments of the left and right hepatic lobes and complete dissection of the retrohepatic vena cava from the
level of the renal veins to the diaphragm to prevent any leak of perfusate from the retrohepatic inferior vena cava ( Fig. 29.3-3). A cholecystectomy is performed and
the portahepatis structures are completely dissected and isolated. This includes complete dissection and division of the surrounding connective tissue and lymphatics,
which can serve as a leak of perfusate into the systemic circulation during therapy. Cannulation for inflow to the liver is typically via the gastroduodenal artery alone or
the gastroduodenal artery and portal vein. 8 Splanchnic venous flow is shunted to the right atrium using a second veno-veno bypass circuit similar to that used in
hepatic transplantation procedures with an inflow cannula positioned in the axillary vein. The venous effluent of the liver is collected from a cannula positioned in an
isolated segment of retrohepatic inferior vena cava and, therefore, during treatment the inferior vena cava flow must also be shunted (see Fig. 29.3-3). Originally
reports of IHP described the use of a passive double-lumen internal shunt system that may not have provided adequate venous return from the inferior vena cava and
the portal vein to the heart. 25 The external veno-veno bypass circuit results in flow rates of approximately 2 L/min and stable cardiac parameters during treatment. 16

FIGURE 29.3-3. Schematic illustration of the isolated limb perfusion circuit. The arterial inflow is via the gastroduodenal artery, and venous outflow is collected from a
cannula positioned in an isolated segment of retrohepatic vena cava. The inflow and outflow cannulae are connected to a perfusion circuit as shown in Figure 29.3-1.
On the patient's left is the veno-veno bypass circuit that shunts portal splanchnic and inferior venal caval blood flow back to the systemic circulation during therapy.
IVC, inferior vena cava.

PERFUSION PARAMETERS
The extracorporeal perfusion circuit typically contains 1 L of perfusate, which consists of 700 mL of a balanced salt solution, 1 U of type-matched packed red blood
cells, and 1500 U of heparin. The resultant hematocrit of approximately 25% provides adequate tissue oxygen retention and perfusates containing higher hematocrits
and provide no additional benefit in preventing regional toxicity. 26 Generally, flow rates in the range of 400 to 800 mL/min are achievable and adjusted depending on
line pressure, changes in reservoir volume, or the presence of a systemic perfusate leak based on intraoperative monitoring.
Continuous intraoperative leak monitoring to assess for the presence of leak of the perfusate into the systemic circulation is being used more routinely and is an
important component of isolation perfusion therapy when one considers that the perfusate often contains doses of therapeutic agents that are at least tenfold greater
than maximally tolerated systemic doses. Careful monitoring of leak can reduce the severity of systemic complications and may improve response rates. 15,18 Standard
leak-monitoring techniques using 131I radiolabeled albumin or technetium 99–labeled red blood cells have been described for continuous intraoperative
monitoring. 12,13 and 14 A gamma detection camera is positioned either over the precordium of the heart for patients undergoing ILP or over the pump housing of the
veno-venous bypass circuit for patients undergoing IHP, both of which serve as a stable reservoir of blood to measure radioactivity (see Fig. 29.3-2). The detection
system provides continuous assessment of leak rates and can discriminate leaks less than 1%. 12 Once the gamma detection camera has been positioned, a small
dose of radionuclide is given systemically and a baseline level of radioactive counts is measured on a strip chart recorder. Then a tenfold higher dose is administered
into the perfusion circuit. Therefore, if a 10% leak of perfusate into the systemic circulation occurs, there will be a doubling of the amount of radioactivity compared
with baseline. Leak rates using this system have been shown to correlate with measured leak rates with TNF or melphalan from the perfusate into the systemic
circulation. 12,18
Despite careful preoperative preparation, during ILP the surgeon may encounter several situations that require adjustment in perfusion parameters to minimize a leak
of perfusate out of or blood into the perfusion circuit. Flow rates that indirectly affect arterial line pressure, reservoir volume, and leak of perfusate are continuously
monitored. If there is leak of systemic blood into the perfusion circuit this is reflected by an increase in the reservoir volume in the circuit and can be remedied by
increasing flow rates to increase line pressure, tightening the extremity tourniquet, or increasing venous pressure in the circuit by placing a partial occluding clamp on
the venous outflow line. If there is a perfusate leak into the systemic circulation this is manifested by an increase in radioactive counts detected by the gamma camera
and the strip chart recorder. In addition, one may see a decrease in reservoir volume in the perfusion circuit, although this is a relatively late manifestation of a
perfusate leak. Under these circumstances, one may decrease flow rates to lower the line pressure or tighten the tourniquet to stop systemic leak. Rarely, a two-way
leak occurs that is evidenced by changes in reservoir volume (generally a gain) as well as an increase in radioactivity on the strip chart recorder. This can be a
particularly difficult and tricky condition to adequately control, and typical steps would include decreasing flow rates to stop any systemic leak of perfusate, tightening
the tourniquet, and then placing the partial occluding clamp on the venous outflow line of the perfusion circuit.

RESULTS OF ISOLATION PERFUSION
There are many perfusion and treatment-related factors that may affect efficacy and toxicity of isolation perfusion. The majority of clinical experience with isolation

perfusion has been with ILP using chemotherapeutics for in-transit melanoma or sarcoma of the extremity ( Table 29.3-1). The early clinical trials of ILP using
hyperthermia or chemotherapy for sarcoma were difficult to interpret because of the variability in treatment conditions and patient selection. 27,28 and 29 Two early studies
of adjuvant ILP using melphalan for patients with melanoma undergoing initial excision of all disease did show a significant reduction in local recurrences with ILP
compared with excision alone but suffered from including high- and low-risk patients. 30,31 and 32 A large multicenter trial of prophylactic ILP following excision of primary
melanoma greater than 1.5 mm in depth showed a decrease in local recurrence with ILP from 6.6% to 3.3% compared with excision alone with no benefit for
survival. 33 Based on these results prophylactic ILP has been largely abandoned. There are other components of isolation perfusion that may have substantial effects
on outcome including hyperthermia and biologic agents, most notably TNF.

TABLE 29.3-1. Results of Selected Trials of Isolated Limb Perfusion for Melanoma or Sarcoma

HYPERTHERMIA
Hyperthermia has been used in isolation perfusion alone or in combination with chemotherapeutics and TNF. In experimental models it has direct cytotoxicity against
tumor lines3,20 and has established synergy with various chemotherapeutics and TNF. 21,22 and 23,34,35,36 and 37 This later feature is presumed to be the main contribution of
hyperthermia in isolation perfusion. Under hyperthermic conditions tumor neovasculature responds differently than native blood vessels. At temperatures up to 46°C
normal microvessels dilate and blood flow increases up to sixfold as a compensatory mechanism to diffuse local heat accumulation. 38 In contrast, tumor-associated
microvessels have a diminished capacity to vasodilate and at comparable temperatures there is stasis and diminution of blood flow, 38 indicating a differential
sensitivity between tumor-associated and normal microvasculature.
Following the original report of normothermic ILP using chemotherapeutics in 1957 by Creech et al., 1 most investigators subsequently incorporated some degree of
hyperthermia as closed circuit water-recirculating heat exchangers became available to replace the use of inefficient warm moist towels and infrared lamps to warm
perfusate fluid. 2 Stehlin et al. reported results of ILP in 50 patients in 1969 2 and a follow-up report in 1975 of 165 patients 39 with extremity sarcoma or melanoma in
whom significant hyperthermia was delivered to the perfused limb. In the initial series the perfusate was warmed to 46°C and average tissue temperatures of 42°C
resulted in severe regional toxicity including pain, edema, blistering, and weakness observed in 70% of patients. When tissue temperatures were reduced to 40°C or
less, regional complications were minimal. 39 In 1967 Cavaliere and coworkers 3 reported results of hyperthermia alone ILP with tissue temperatures ranging from 42°C
to 44°C. The combination of this degree of hyperthermia, perfusion lasting more than 8 hours, and the lack of a proximal tourniquet resulted in severe regional toxicity
and an unacceptable 28% mortality. Stehlin reported that compared with historic controls treated identically at one institution, the addition of hyperthermia during ILP
with melphalan in patients with extremity melanoma resulted in an increase in response rates from 35% to 80%. 39 Klaase and coworkers 40 reported an analysis of
factors associated with toxicity following ILP for melanoma in 425 patients. Tissue temperature greater than 40°C was the most significant factor associated with
increased regional toxicity. In addition, female gender and a decrease in perfusate pH were also associated with worse regional toxicity.
Skibba et al. have reported data on eight patients with unresectable cancer confined to liver and treated with a 4-hour IHP using hyperthermia alone to 42.5°C. 41,42
Toxicity associated with this therapy was substantial; all patients had marked elevation in post-IHP hepatic transaminases and bilirubin and two of eight died in the
early postoperative period. There was evidence of some transient antitumor activity by central tumor necrosis on computed tomography scans obtained, in what
appears to be, to improve the efficacy chemotherapeutics given via isolation perfusion of the limb or liver. It has marginal, if any, independent antitumor effects, and
temperatures higher than 40°C to 41°C are associated with unacceptable toxicity.
TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR
In 1975 Carswell et al. demonstrated that a circulating factor present in the sera of endotoxin-treated mice caused dramatic hemorrhagic necrosis of tumors when
administered to tumor-bearing mice. 43 This factor was termed TNF, and after it became available in recombinant form in the mid-1980s it was evaluated in multiple
clinical trials via various methods of administration. 44 However, it was found that humans are very sensitive to the toxic effects of TNF, and, at the maximum tolerated
doses administered, it had little antitumor activity. Although interest in TNF as a systemically administered antitumor agent waned, enthusiasm for its administration
via isolation perfusion grew remarkably in the early 1990s when Liénard et al. reported initial results in 29 patients treated with a combination of TNF, melphalan, and
hyperthermia for in-transit melanoma or high-grade sarcoma of the extremity. 45 The overall response rate in that initial trial was 100%, with 89% of patients having a
complete response to treatment.
TNF is ideally suited for administration via isolation perfusion and is thought to exert its antitumor activity via effects on the tumor-associated neovasculature. TNF has
significant known procoagulant activity 46,47 and increases vascular permeability. 48 In addition, several authors have published data showing selective obliteration of
tumor neovasculature following ILP with TNF hyperthermia and melphalan for patients with high-grade unresectable extremity sarcoma ( Fig. 29.3-4).49,50 However,
there are few clinical data available using TNF alone via isolation perfusion. Three patients with high-grade extremity sarcoma were treated at our institution with
hyperthermic ILP and TNF. 51 One patient had angiographically documented obliteration of tumor-associated neovasculature following ILP; however, he experienced
clinical and radiographic tumor progression within 6 weeks, suggesting that the vascular obliteration observed after TNF may not be sufficient for subsequent tumor
regression. Posner et al. reported results of ILP with TNF alone in six patients with in-transit melanoma. 52 One had a complete response of 7 months' durations and
two others had brief, less than 1 month, partial responses. TNF administered alone via IHP has little antitumor activity. Fraker reported a 20% transient response rate
following IHP with escalating doses of TNF. 53 Interestingly, the responses were seen only at the lowest doses of TNF and once perfusate pH was corrected with
sodium bicarbonate during treatment, no further responses were seen despite dose escalation of TNF to 2 mg.

FIGURE 29.3-4. Preperfusion and postperfusion magnetic resonance angiograms showing neovascularity in a large multiply recurrent Ewing's sarcoma arising on the
dorsum of a forearm. The patient had small volume pulmonary metastases and was treated with palliative 90-minute hyperthermic isolated limb perfusion using tumor
necrosis factor and melphalan. He had a significant regression ( top panel) that lasted for 2 years until death from systemic disease progression. Three days
posttherapy complete obliteration of the tumor neovasculature was observed with no effect of perfusion on the native blood vessels in the extremity ( bottom panel).

ILP, isolated limb perfusion; MRA, magnetic resonance angiography.

When TNF is used in ILP with melphalan it is associated with a rapid time course of response in tumors compared with ILP with melphalan alone, and large tumors
form eschar reminiscent of the findings in murine models ( Fig. 29.3-5). Because TNF causes increased endothelial permeability 48 and has selective procoagulant
effects on tumor-associated vasculature, it has been postulated that during ILP TNF may augment delivery of chemotherapeutics to the tumor by increasing vascular
permeability. However, a study reported by Alexander and coworkers 54 evaluated vascular permeability in tumor and unaffected liver tissue obtained from patients
undergoing IHP with melphalan alone or TNF and melphalan. After IHP there was a significant increase in permeability in tumor vasculature compared with liver.
However, the increase in permeability was similar in those treated with or without TNF, suggesting that the augmentation in permeability occurred via
TNF-independent mechanisms.

FIGURE 29.3-5. Photographs of a patient treated with isolated limb perfusion using tumor necrosis factor and melphalan for in-transit extremity melanoma. A:
In-transit site of disease before and (B) 5 days after isolated limb perfusion. Note the rapid eschar formation over tumor with sparing of overlying and adjacent normal
skin, which is characteristic of the effect of tumor necrosis factor.

CURRENT STATUS OF ISOLATED LIMB PERFUSION
The role of TNF in isolation perfusion is still under clinical evaluation and has no conclusively demonstrated benefit in properly designed and conducted prospective
random assignment trials. In the initial report from Liénard and Lejeune, results from 29 patients treated with ILP using a combination of TNF, melphalan, and
hyperthermia for in-transit melanoma or high-grade sarcoma of the extremity were presented. 45 The overall response rate in that initial trial was 100%, with 89% of
patients having a complete response to treatment. In subsequent reports from various institutions, including a follow-up report from Liénard and Lejeune of a larger
series of patients, the complete response rates were lower and ranged between 70% and 79% ( Table 29.3-2).18,55,56 A prospective random assignment trial was
initiated at the National Cancer Institute and subsequently expanded to a multiinstitutional study but was closed prematurely in 1997 due to the lack of available
clinical-grade TNF in the United States. The results of that trial showed no difference in overall or complete response rates between the groups. 57 It is also noteworthy
that in several trials of ILP using melphalan alone, complete response rates between 56% and 82% have been reported. 58,59,60 and 61 A prospective random assignment
trial comparing melphalan and TNF with melphalan alone administered via ILP for in-transit melanoma of the extremity was closed in Europe because of low accrual,
suggesting a bias that TNF for most patients with this histology does not substantially contribute to efficacy compared with melphalan alone.
ILP has been used for patients with unresectable high-grade extremity sarcoma for palliation, for potential cure in cases of multifocal disease, and as a neoadjuvant
therapy to convert an unresectable lesion to a resectable one. Most data reported on ILP using chemotherapeutics alone indicate limited antitumor activity against this
histology. 28,62 After the initial reports by Liénard and Lejeune using the combination of TNF, melphalan, and hyperthermia as a neoadjuvant treatment for high-grade
unresectable sarcoma, a multiinstitutional trial using this regimen for patients with condition was conducted in Europe and the results reported in two papers by
Eggermont and coworkers.50,63 In more than 219 patients, the overall clinical and pathologic response rate was more than 80% and the limb salvage rate was 84%.
Based on these results TNF is now licensed for administration via ILP for high-grade sarcoma in Europe, but no trials are currently being conducted in the United
States.
CURRENT STATUS OF ISOLATED HEPATIC PERFUSION
Following the initial experience with TNF and melphalan in ILP several centers have reported results with this regimen used in IHP for patients with unresectable
primary or metastatic cancers confined to liver (see Table 29.3-2).16,64,65 and 66 De Vries and coworkers reported results in eight patients treated with melphalan and
TNF and one patient treated with TNF alone for 1 hour at 41°C. 66 IHP was associated with a 33% mortality in the series but five of six evaluable patients treated with
melphalan and TNF had radiographic evidence of antitumor efficacy. Hafström and coworkers reported results in 11 patients using melphalan and TNF and also
reported a high morbidity and mortality of 45% and 18%, respectively. 64 Three patients experienced a radiographic partial response to therapy. A German group
reported results in six patients treated with a 60-minute IHP using melphalan and TNF at 40°C to 41°C and had no mortality in this series. 65 Three of six patients had
radiographic evidence of significant tumor regression. The largest series reported using TNF and melphalan via IHP comes from the National Cancer Institute; 34
patients underwent IHP with doses of melphalan and TNF that were derived from previously conducted phase I studies and were higher than those used at higher
institutions. 16 The treatment lasted for 1 hour and hyperthermia between 39.5°C and 40°C was used in all circumstances. The treatment-related mortality was 4% and
the investigators observed an overall radiographic response rate of 75%. The group has presented follow-up data on 44 patients with metastatic unresectable
colorectal cancer to the liver. 67 The cohort of patients who had advanced and largely refractory disease had a median number of hepatic lesions of eight, the median
diameter of the greatest lesion was 8.5 cm, and one-fourth of patients had more than 50% hepatic replacement by tumor. Furthermore, approximately 45% of patients
had failed prior systemic 5-fluorouracil–based chemotherapy. In the 32 patients treated with IHP using TNF and melphalan there was a 74% radiographic partial
response rate. The time to liver progression was 8.5 months, and median survival was 16.5 months. In a second cohort of patients, IHP with melphalan alone was
administered followed by hepatic artery infusional therapy using floxuridine and leucovorin. The radiographic partial response rate was 90%, with 9 of 11 responses
ongoing in the liver at a median follow-up of 11 months.

TABLE 29.3-2. Selected Series of Isolation Perfusion Using Tumor Necrosis Factor and Melphalan

Although the morbidity and treatment mortality in some of these series are high, the data, for the most part, represent initial institutional experience with a highly

technical procedure using agents that have known regional and systemic toxicity. With continued refinement and experience the morbidity and mortality associated
with the therapy should decrease. Additional refinements in the technique of IHP, and when combined with potentially effective therapies tailored for specific
histologies, the treatment may become a more widely used option for patients with unresectable hepatic malignancies from a variety of histologies (see Chapter 52.3).
STATUS OF ISOLATION PERFUSION OF OTHER SITES
There are few data regarding the application of isolation perfusion to other organs. Pass and coworkers from the National Cancer Institute reported results of a phase
I isolation lung perfusion with escalating dose TNF for patients with unresectable pulmonary metastases. 6 Twenty patients were treated with unilateral isolated lung
perfusion, with TNF doses ranging from 0.3 to 6.0 mg. An oxygenated circuit was used analogous to that in other isolation perfusion settings, and tissue hyperthermia
between 38°C and 39.5°C was used. There were no deaths on study, and short-term regression of metastatic nodules was noted in three patients. Walther and
coworkers, also from the National Cancer Institute, published a case report of an isolated kidney perfusion with TNF in an individual with localized multifocal renal cell
carcinoma for whom renal parenchymal-sparing surgery would normally have been advocated. 5 The patient tolerated the procedure well, but there were no data
presented with respect to any antitumor efficacy.

CONCLUSIONS
Isolated perfusion of various organs or the extremity using chemotherapeutics with or without TNF has been shown to have substantial antitumor activity against a
variety of histologies. Following the initial studies using TNF there was considerable enthusiasm for its routine use in organ perfusion for the treatment of in-transit
melanoma and high-grade extremity sarcoma. Although the data support its importance in treatment of high-grade extremity sarcoma, the benefit of TNF in
combination with melphalan against in-transit melanoma has not been conclusively demonstrated. Because of the potential associated toxicity with TNF, its routine
use outside of a clinical research trial cannot be advocated. IHP is a promising regional modality for unresectable malignancies confined to the liver, but continued
investigation in a clinical research setting is clearly necessary to determine the optimal clinical setting in which to offer this form of therapy. Hyperthermia appears to
be an important component of treatment and appears to act primarily by enhancing the tumoricidal effects of melphalan. TNF has no substantial antitumor activity
when administered via isolated organ perfusion alone but may enhance the antitumor effects of melphalan against the extremity tumors such as sarcoma.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Creech O, Krementz ET, Ryan RF, Winblad JN. Chemotherapy of cancer: regional perfusion utilizing an extracorporeal circuit. Ann Surg 1958;148:616.
2. Stehlin JS. Hyperthermic perfusion with chemotherapy for cancers of the extremities. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1969;129:305.
3. Cavaliere R, Ciogatto EC, Giovanelli BC, et al. Selective heat sensitivity of cancer cells. Cancer 1967;20:1351.
4. Ausman RK. Development of a technic for isolated perfusion of the liver. NY State J Med 1961;61:3393.
5. Walther MM, Jennings SB, Choyke PL, et al. Isolated perfusion of the kidney with tumor necrosis factor for localized renal-cell carcinoma. World J Urol 1996;14:S2.
6. Pass HI, Mew DJY, Kranda KC, et al. Isolated lung perfusion with tumor necrosis factor for pulmonary metastases. Ann Thorac Surg 1996;61:1609.
7. Alexander HR, Fraker DL, Bartlett DL. Isolated limb perfusion for malignant melanoma. Semin Surg Oncol 1996;12:416.
8. Alexander HR, Bartlett DL, Libutti SK. Isolated hepatic perfusion: a potentially effective treatment for patients with metastatic or primary cancers confined to the liver. Cancer J Sci Am 1998;4:2.
9. Fraker DL, Alexander HR, Thom AK. Use of tumor necrosis factor in isolated hepatic perfusion. Circ Shock 1994;44:45.
10. Liénard D, Eggermont AM, Kroon BBR, Koops HW, Lejeune FJ. Isolated limb perfusion in primary and recurrent melanoma: indications and results. Semin Surg Oncol 1998;14:202.
11. Eggermont AM, Schraffordt KH, Klausner JM, et al. Isolation limb perfusion with tumor necrosis factor alpha and chemotherapy for advanced extremity soft tissue sarcomas. Semin Oncol
1997;24:547.
12. Klaase JM, Kroon BBR, van Geel AN, Eggermont AMM, Franklin HR. Systemic leakage during isolated limb perfusion for melanoma. Br J Surg 1993;80:1124.
13. Alexander C, Omlor G, Berberich R, Gross G, Feifel G. Rapid measurement of blood leakage during regional chemotherapy. Eur J Nucl Med 1993;4:606.
14. Hoekstra HJ, Naujocks T, Schraffordt-Koops H, et al. Continuous leaking monitoring during hyperthermic isolated regional perfusion of the lower limb: techniques and results. Reg Cancer Treat
1992;4:301.
15. Barker WC, Andrich MP, Alexander HR, Fraker DL. Continuous intraoperative external monitoring of perfusate leak using I-131 human serum albumin during isolated perfusion of the liver and
limbs. Eur J Nucl Med 1995;22:1242.
16. Alexander HR Jr, Bartlett DL, Libutti SK, et al. Isolated hepatic perfusion with tumor necrosis factor and melphalan for unresectable cancers confined to the liver. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1479.
17. Sorkin P, Abu-Abid S, Lev D, et al. Systemic leakage and side effects of tumor necrosis factor alpha administered via isolated limb perfusion can be manipulated by flow rate adjustment. Arch
Surg 1995;130:1079.
18. Thom AK, Alexander HR, Andrich MP, et al. Cytokine levels and systemic toxicity in patients undergoing isolated limb perfusion (ILP) with high-dose TNF, interferon-gamma and melphalan. J
Clin Oncol 1995;13:264.
19. Wieberdink J, Benckhuysen C, Braat RP, van Slooten EA, Olthuis GAA. Dosimetry in isolation perfusion of the limbs by assessment of perfused tissue volume and grading of toxic tissue
reactions. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1982;18:905.
20. Hahn GM. Metabolic aspects of the role of hyperthermia in mammalian cell inactivation and their possible relevance to cancer treatment. Cancer Res 1974;34:3117.
21. Barlogie B, Corry PM, Drewinko B. In vitro thermochemotherapy of human colon cancer cells with cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum(II) and mitomycin C. Cancer Res 1980;40:1165.
22. Hahn GM, Strande DP. Cytotoxic effects of hyperthermia and adriamycin on Chinese hamster cells. J Natl Cancer Inst 1976;57:1063.
23. Ohno S, Strebetl FR, Stephens C, et al. Increased therapeutic efficacy induced by tumor necrosis factor a combined with platinum complexes and whole-body hyperthermia in rats. Cancer Res
1992;52:4096.
24. Sakaguchi Y, Makino M, Kaneko T, et al. Therapeutic efficacy of long duration-low temperature whole body hyperthermia when combined with tumor necrosis factor and carboplatin in rats.
Cancer Res 1994;54:2223.
25. Aigner K, Walther H, Tonn J, et al. First experimental and clinical results of isolated liver perfusion with cytotoxics in metastases from colorectal primary. Rec Res Cancer Res 1983;86:99.
26. Klaase JM, Kroon BBR, van Slooten GW, van Dongen JA. Comparison between the use of whole blood versus a diluted perfusate in regional isolated perfusion by continuous monitoring of
transcutaneous oxygen tension: a pilot study. J Invest Surg 1994;7:249.
27. Budd GT, Schreiber MJ, Steiger E, Bukowski RM, Weick JK. Phase I trial of intraperitoneal chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil and citrovorum factor. Invest New Drugs 1986;4:155.
28. Klaase JM, Kroon BBR, Benckhuijsen C, et al. Results of regional isolation perfusion with cytostatics in patients with soft tissue tumors of the extremities. Cancer 1989;64:616.
29. Rossi CR, Vecchiato A, Foletto M, et al. Phase II study on neoadjuvant hyperthermic-antiblastic perfusion with doxorubicin in patients with intermediate or high grade limb sarcomas. Cancer
1994;73:2140.
30. Ghussen F, Nagel K, Groth W, et al. A prospective randomized study of regional extremity perfusion in patients with malignant melanoma. Ann Surg 1984;200:764.
31. Ghussen F, Kruger I, Groth W, Stutzer H. The role of regional hyperthermic cytostatic perfusion in the treatment of extremity melanoma. Cancer 1988;61:654.
32. Hafström L, Rudenstam C-M, Blomquist E, et al. Regional hyperthermic perfusion with melphalan after surgery for recurrent malignant melanoma of the extremities. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:2091.
33. Koops HS, Vaglini M, Suciu S, et al. Prophylactic isolated limb perfusion for localized, high-risk limb melanoma: results of a multicenter randomized phase III trial. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2906.
34. Miller RC, Richards M, Baird C, Martin S, Hall EJ. Interaction of hyperthermia and chemotherapy agents; cell lethality and oncogenic potential. Int J Hyperthermia 1994;10:89.
35. Hachiya T, Okada K, Sakurai A, Satomi N, Haranaka K. Antitumor activity of recombinant human tumor necrosis factor in combination with hyperthermia against heterotransplanted human
prostatic carcinoma and its lymph node metastasis in nude mice. Mol Biother 1992;4:34.
36. Joiner MC, Steel GG, Stephens TC. Response of two mouse tumours to hyperthermia with CCNU or melphalan. Br J Cancer 1982;45:17.
37. Klostergaard J, Leroux E, Siddik ZH, Khodadadian M, Tomasovic SP. Enhanced sensitivity of human colon tumor cell lines in vitro in response to thermochemoimmunotherapy. Cancer Res
1992;52:5271.
38. Dudar TE, Jain RK. Differential response of normal and tumor microcirculation to hyperthermia. Cancer Res 1984;44:605.
39. Stehlin JS, Giovanella BC, de Ipolyi PD, Muenz LR, Anderson RF. Results of hyperthermic perfusion for melanoma of the extremities. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1975;140:339.
40. Klaase JM, Kroon BBR, van Geel BN, et al. Patient- and treatment-related factors associated with acute regional toxicity after isolated perfusion for melanoma of the extremities. Am J Surg
1994;167:618.
41. Skibba JL, Quebbeman EJ. Tumoricidal effects and patient survival after hyperthermic liver perfusion. Arch Surg 1986;121:1266.
42. Skibba JL, Quebbeman EJ, Komorowski RA, Thorsen KM. Clinical results of hyperthermic liver perfusion for cancer in the liver. Contr Oncol 1988;29:222.
43. Carswell EA, Old LJ, Kassel RL, et al. An endotoxin-induced serum factor that causes necrosis of tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1975;72:3666.
44. Alexander HR, Feldman AL. Tumor necrosis factor: basic principles and clinical application in systemic and regional cancer treatment. In: Biologic therapy of cancer. Philadelphia: Lippincott,
2000.
45. Liénard D, Ewalenko P, Delmotti JJ, Renard N, Lejeune FJ. High-dose recombinant tumor necrosis factor alpha in combination with interferon gamma and melphalan in isolation perfusion of
the limbs for melanoma and sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:52.
46. Nawroth PP, Stern DM. Modulation of endothelial cell hemostatis properties by tumor necrosis factor. J Exp Med 1986;163:740.
47. Nawroth P, Handley D, Matsueda G, et al. Tumor necrosis factor/cachectin-induced intravascular fibrin formation in meth A fibrosarcomas. J Exp Med 1988;168:637.
48. Brett J, Gerlach H, Nawroth P, et al. Tumor necrosis factor/cachectin increases permeability of endothelial cell monolayers by a mechanism involving regulatory G proteins. J Exp Med
1989;169:1977.
49. Olieman AFT, van Ginkel RJ, Hoekstra HJ, et al. Angiographic response of locally advanced soft-tissue sarcoma following hyperthermic isolated limb perfusion with tumor necrosis factor. Ann
Surg Oncol 1997;4:64.
50. Eggermont AMM, Koops HS, Liénard D, et al. Isolated limb perfusion with high dose tumor necrosis factor-a in combination with interferon-gamma and melphalan for irresectable extremity soft
tissue sarcomas: a multicenter trial. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2653.
51. Fraker D, Alexander HR, Ross M, et al. A phase II trial of isolated limb perfusion with high dose tumor necrosis factor and melphalan for unresectable extremity sarcomas. Soc Surg Oncol
1999;53:22(abst).
52. Posner MC, Liénard D, Lejeune FJ, Rosenfelder D, Kirkwood J. Hyperthermic isolated limb perfusion with tumor necrosis factor alone for melanoma. Cancer J Sci Am 1995;1:274.
53. Fraker DL. Isolated hepatic infusion perfusion (IHP) with TNF. Cambridge Symposia 1996;1:1(abst).
54. Alexander HR, Brown CK, Bartlett DL, et al. Augmented capillary leak during isolated hepatic perfusion (IHP) occurs via tumor necrosis factor independent mechanisms. Clin Cancer Res
1998;4:2362.
55. Liénard D, Lejeune F, Ewalenko I. In transit metastases of malignant melanoma treated by high dose rTNFa in combination with interferon-gamma and melphalan in isolation perfusion. World J
Surg 1992;16:234.
56. Vaglini M, Santinami M, Manzi R, et al. Treatment of in-transit metastases from cutaneous melanoma by isolation perfusion with tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a), melphalan and
interferon-gamma (IFN-g). Dose-finding experience at the National Cancer Institute of Milan. Melanoma Res 1994;4:35.

57. Fraker DL. Limb perfusion with TNF: current status of United States trials. Cambridge Symposia 1996;1:13(abst).
58. Minor DR, Allen RE, Alberts D, et al. A clinical and pharmacokinetic study of isolated limb perfusion with heat and melphalan for melanoma. Cancer 1985;55:2638.
59. Lejeune FJ, Deloof T, Ewalenko P, et al. Objective regression of unexcised melanoma in-transit metastases after hyperthermic isolation perfusion of the limbs with melphalan. Rec Res Cancer
Res 1983;86:268.
60. Skene AI, Bulman AS, Williams TR, et al. Hyperthermic isolated perfusion with melphalan in the treatment of advanced malignant melanoma of the lower limb. Br J Surg 1990;77:765.
61. Klaase JM, Kroon BBR, van Geel AN, et al. Prognostic factors for tumor response and limb recurrence-free interval in patients with advanced melanoma of the limbs treated with regional
isolated perfusion using melphalan. Surgery 1994;115:39.
62. di Filippo F, Calabro AM, Cavallari A, et al. The role of hyperthermic perfusion as a first step in the treatment of soft tissue sarcoma of the extremities. World J Surg 1988;12:332.
63. Eggermont AMM, Koops HS, Klausner JM, et al. Isolated limb perfusion with tumor necrosis factor and melphalan for limb salvage in 186 patients with locally advanced soft tissue extremity
sarcomas. Ann Surg 1996;224:756.
64. Hafström L, Naredi P. Isolated hepatic perfusion with extracorporeal oxygenation using hyperthermia TNFa and melphalan: Swedish experience. Rec Res Cancer Res 1998;147:120.
65. Oldhafer KJ, Lang H, Frerker M, et al. First experience and technical aspects of isolated liver perfusion for extensive liver metastasis. Surgery 1998;123:622.
66. de Vries MR, Borel Rinkes IH, van de Velder CJH, et al. Isolated hepatic perfusion with tumor necrosis factor a and melphalan: experimental studies in pigs and phase I data from humans. Rec
Res Cancer Res 1998;147:107.
67. Bartlett DL, Libutti SK, Alexander HR. Results of isolated hepatic perfusion (IHP) in patients with regionally advanced unresectable colorectal cancer. Soc Surg Oncol 1999:14(abst).
68. Liénard D, Aggermont A, Koops HS, Kroon B, Lejeune FJ. The use of TNF in isolated limb perfusion for treatment of locally advanced melanoma: an update. Cambridge Symposium
1996;1:12(abst).
69. Fraker DL, Alexander HR, Bartlett DL, Rosenberg SA. A prospective randomized trial of therapeutic isolated limb perfusion (ILP) comparing melphalan (M) versus melphalan, tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) and interferon-gamma (IFN): an initial report. Soc Surg Oncol 1996;49:6(abst).
70. Hill S, Thomas JM. Low-dose tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) and melphalan in hyperthermic isolated limb perfusion. Results from a pilot study performed in the United Kingdom. Mel Res
1994;4:31.

SECTION 29.4 Intensity-Modulated Radiation Therapy
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 29.4
Intensity-Modulated Radiation Therapy
C. CLIFTON LING
CHEN CHUI
THOMAS LOSASSO
CHANDRA BURMAN
MARGIE HUNT
GIGAS MAGERAS
HOWARD IRA AMOLS
MICHAEL J. ZELEFSKY
ZVI Y. FUKS
STEVEN A. LEIBEL
Introduction
Process of Intensity-Modulated Radiotherapy
Patient Setup, Immobilization, and Image Acquisition
Delineation of Treatment Volume and Selection of Treatment Beams
Computer-Aided Plan Optimization in Intensity-Modulated Radiotherapy
Clinical Experience with the Use of Optimization Criteria
Treatment Plan Evaluation
Delivery of Intensity-Modulated Field with Dynamic Multileaf Collimator
Other Methods of Delivery of Intensity-Modulated Field
Dose Distribution Calculation
Commissioning and Quality Assurance Program
Treatment Delivery with Dynamic Multileaf Collimator
Clinical Experience
Cancer of the Prostate
Head and Neck Cancer
Breast Cancer
Consideration of Treatment Uncertainties
Development and Research Issues
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
In radiotherapy, the sum of experimental and clinical data indicates that the probabilities of local tumor control and normal tissue complications are dose dependent,
and that the corresponding dose-response curves are sigmoidal in shape. For some disease sites the curves for local control are at lower dose levels relative to those
for associated normal tissue toxicity, underpinning the success of radiotherapy in those cancers. For other sites, where these curves are closer to each other, or when
the tumor control curve is less steep (the effect of population averaging due to heterogeneous radiosensitivity among individual tumors), the high doses required for
tumor cure may cause unacceptable complications. In the last two decades, the development of three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy (3D-CRT), which
substantially reduces the volume of critical organs irradiated to high doses, has partly addressed this issue. 1 In 3D-CRT, patient immobilization, image-guided
treatment planning, and computer-controlled treatment delivery have combined to conform the radiation dose to the tumor, while maximally excluding the adjacent
normal organs. This approach has permitted the increase of tumor dose without concomitant increase in normal tissue complications. At Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center (MSKCC), a clinical trial in cancer of the prostate has accrued more than 1100 patients, and the prescription dose has been escalated to 81 Gy with
3D-CRT, and to 86.4 Gy using intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT), with promising results. 2,3
3D-CRT involves the delineation of target and nontarget structures from patient-specific 3D image data sets [primarily computed tomography (CT), sometimes
supplemented with magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography, and so forth], the design of treatment portals using beam's eye view (BEV), the
calculation and display of dose distributions, the analysis and evaluation of structure-specific dose-volume data [dose-volume histogram (DVH)], radiation delivery
with computer-controlled multileaf collimators (MLC), and treatment verification with electronic portal images. However, the dose-distribution conformality achieved
with 3D-CRT can be further improved by the use of computer-optimized intensity modulation. In addition, the treatment design phase of 3D-CRT involves several
iterative steps and can be time-consuming, particularly when the anatomic geometry is complex. Thus, with the advance in computer technology, there has been much
investigation on computer-aided treatment plan optimization.
IMRT is an advanced form of 3D-CRT with two key enhancements: (1) computerized iterative treatment plan optimization, and (2) the use of intensity-modulated
radiation beams.4 Although the overall process of IMRT and 3D-CRT is quite similar, these two ingredients have implications in some aspects of treatment planning
and implementation. In this chapter, we describe the process of IMRT as compared with 3D-CRT, identify how they differ, emphasize those features and benefits
unique to IMRT, and point to current and future development. At present, there are two primary methods of IMRT delivery: (1) intensity-modulated radiation fields at
fixed gantry angles delivered with MLCs, 5 and (2) tomotherapy using beams from 360 degrees and modulated by a slit MLC. 6 Most of our discussion focuses on the
former approach.

PROCESS OF INTENSITY-MODULATED RADIOTHERAPY
The process of IMRT, as implemented at MSKCC, is schematically illustrated in Figure 29.4-1. The following is a discussion on each of the steps in the process, and
in addition, other information that is pertinent to the development and application of IMRT.

FIGURE 29.4-1. A schematic illustrating step by step the intensity-modulated radiation therapy process. CT, computed tomography; EPID, electronic portal imaging
device; MLC, multileaf collimators.

PATIENT SETUP, IMMOBILIZATION, AND IMAGE ACQUISITION
The minimization of patient setup uncertainty is more important in 3D-CRT relative to conventional radiotherapy due to the improved conformality of the dose
distribution, and this is even more critical in IMRT, as discussed here. Thus, immobilization devices and precise positioning procedures should be used throughout the

process of image acquisition, simulation, and treatment.
The use of simulators may be decreasing in 3D-CRT and IMRT, relative to its use in conventional radiotherapy. If a simulator is used, an initial (pre-CT) simulation
may be carried out in conjunction with patient immobilization to establish fiduciary skin marks, define the tentative treatment isocenter, and obtain anteroposterior and
lateral radiographic films. A second simulation may be performed, after the treatment plan has been accepted, to position the patient at the established isocenter and
acquire reference radiographs of each field for comparison with the corresponding BEV digitally reconstructed radiographs and subsequently, the verification portal
films.
A complete 3D CT image set is usually obtained with the patient in the treatment position on a flat couch. The number of CT slices and the interslice spacing are
according to protocols, depending on the size, shape, and location of the target and the treatment technique. However, to produce high-resolution digitally
reconstructed radiographs, the slices are contiguous with interslice spacing of 3 to 5 mm. For certain sites, magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission
tomography are complementary to CT and helpful in defining the extent of disease, especially when used with image-correlation software.
The advent of CT simulation may make the process more efficient, by combining the simulation and CT imaging sessions into one. The CT simulator combines the
capabilities of spiral (or helical) scanners for volumetric data acquisition and high-speed workstations for rapid image reconstruction and display. This permits the
so-called virtual simulation, carried out on a computer workstation using the 3D CT data set (the virtual patient). 7 In this process, a complete 3D CT data set is first
obtained with the patient in the treatment position using 3- to 5-mm slice thickness. Then, corresponding to the specific treatment set-up parameters, patient anatomy
is reconstructed from the CT data and displayed in BEV, and simulation fluoroscopic and radiographic images are digitally generated for viewing, decision-making,
and documentation.
Aside from the improved efficiency, CT simulation eliminates or minimizes systematic uncertainties in the registration of simulation films to CT data sets, and in set-up
errors when transferring the patient from one mechanical coordinate system to another. The disadvantage is the degraded image quality of reconstructed radiographs
as compared with a conventional simulation film.
DELINEATION OF TREATMENT VOLUME AND SELECTION OF TREATMENT BEAMS
Treatment volumes are derived from the CT images according to the ICRU Report 50 nomenclature, 8 with clinical target volume (CTV) being the visualized tumor plus
the regions at risk, and planning target volume (PTV) to include setup and other uncertainties. The manual delineation of these and their adjacent critical organs are
time consuming and would benefit from new and improved tools. However, human intervention will likely remain a necessary and important component for defining the
CTV and PTV. Other contours needed for treatment planning and dose-distribution calculation such as the outer skin, bone, lungs, and air cavities can be outlined
automatically with existing edge detection algorithms.
In 3D-CRT, to facilitate the selection of beam angles and field shapes, various display methods have been developed to represent the PTV and the adjacent critical
organs in 3D perspectives. These objects are often displayed as wireframes or solid structures, using colors to differentiate between them and intensity to indicate
depth. The treatment geometry is best visualized in the BEV, in which the anatomy is viewed from the perspective of the radiation source. 9,10 Once the beam
orientations are chosen, their shapes (apertures) can be determined, again facilitated by the BEV display.
3D image display is probably less critical in IMRT than in 3D-CRT. We believe that as long as there are a sufficient number of radiation fields (five to seven or more),
the number of beams and their orientations are less important. This is because the many degrees of freedom in intensity modulation can effectively compensate the
less optimal beam direction. Also, field size and shape can be completely defined by the assignment of intensity pattern in the optimization process (see
Computer-Aided Plan Optimization in Intensity-Modulated Radiotherapy , later in this chapter). This is true at least for the treatment of cancers of the prostate and of
head and neck at MSKCC and likely applies to other disease sites as well. Whether significant improvements in IMRT can be achieved via the use of noncoplanar
beams is yet to be demonstrated, although this may likely prove advantageous for brain tumors and possibly other sites.
COMPUTER-AIDED PLAN OPTIMIZATION IN INTENSITY-MODULATED RADIOTHERAPY
The most distinguishing feature in IMRT planning is the use of intensity modulation to improve the dose distribution. An iterative process is invariably used, alternately
adjusting the intensity pattern of the beams and assessing the resulting dose distribution until an acceptable plan is devised. The iterative process could be computer
automated or could involve significant manual intervention. In general, computer automation is needed in the so-called inverse planning, while user experience and
involvement are more important in the forward planning of IMRT. As widespread enthusiasm is primarily for the inverse method, we shall only briefly describe the
forward process.
In forward planning, the starting point is a number of open beams and their field shapes. Based on the resultant dose distribution, the user adjusts the intensities in
parts of some of the beams and recalculates the dose distribution. This is repeated until an optimal dose distribution is obtained. This approach is sensitive to the
experience of the planner and may be restrictive in terms of the number of intensity levels and the complexity of the intensity-modulation pattern. 11
The inverse method of treatment planning was first proposed by Brahme in 1988. 4 In this approach, the user specifies the number and orientations of the beams, and
the desired objectives for the PTV and the critical organs. The computer algorithm divides each beam into individual rays and iteratively alters the ray weights until the
composite 3D dose distribution conforms to the specified objectives. The beams derived by this method are intensity modulated (i.e., the pattern of radiation varies
within each beam). It is easy to see why the field shapes need not be prespecified; the optimization process determines the edges as well as the intensity patterns
within.
Central to the success of computer optimization is the specification of some quantitative measure of the goodness of a treatment plan. In inverse planning, the criteria
are stated mathematically as objective functions that the optimization algorithm attempts to minimize. At present, most algorithms (including ours) are dose or
dose-volume based (i.e., constraints are defined as doses to the target and normal tissues, or to volumes of interest). 12,13 The use of biologically weighted objective
functions is in principle more relevant, but is currently limited by the lack of validated biophysical models on tumor control and organ toxicity. The inverse planning
method developed by Spirou and Chui at MSKCC is briefly summarized in the section Clinical Experience with the Use of Optimization Criteria , later in this chapter. 13
The starting point is the specification of the number of beams and their directions, and then the algorithm optimizes the intensities in the different parts of each of the
beams. Suppose a patient is treated with three beams as shown in Figure 29.4-2, the computer program first calculates the doses to a matrix of points within the
target and the normal organs from each individual rays of the three beams. If the point in question is in the target with a prescribed dose p i, the goodness of the
current set of ray weights is given by the square of the difference between p i and the current dose. This square of the difference is then summed over all the target
points to determine the objective function that describes the goodness of the present set of beam weights. The weights of the individual rays and of each beam are
then changed one at the time, with the change accepted if the objective function is reduced. The iterative process continues until the optimal plan is obtained, that is
when the objective function is at its minimum.

FIGURE 29.4-2. In this illustration of the inverse planning method, the user begins by specifying three beams and their directions. The planning algorithm optimizes
the intensities of the different rays (x j) of each of the beams so that the dose to each point i within the target and the critical organ conform to the user's criteria. The

resulting beams are intensity modulated (as shown by the profile of the vertical beam).

Constraints for critical organs can be incorporated as added term in the objective function. Dose-volume considerations are typically stated as “no more than q% of
the particular organ may receive a dose greater than d dv.” To impose such a constraint, at each iteration, the cumulative volume of the organ receiving doses greater
than d dv is compared with q. If it exceeds q, a penalty in the form of constraint is added to the objective function, but only for those points that cause the constraint to
be violated (i.e., the points beyond the volume q).
Several objective functions are illustrated graphically in Figure 29.4-3. For the treatment target, the graph illustrates the concept of the allowable inhomogeneity (i.e., if
the dose is between a lower limit P l and an upper limit P u, penalty is not assessed). Also, a larger weight can be assigned to penalize underdose as opposed to
overdose. For the normal organ, penalty can be applied if dose exceeds a certain critical value (D c) or based on dose-volume considerations, as discussed
previously.

FIGURE 29.4-3. Examples of possible objective functions, illustrated graphically. For the treatment target, doses within the allowable inhomogeneity are permitted,
with different penalties (w) assessed for underdose as opposed to overdose. For the normal organ, penalty can be applied if dose exceeds a certain critical value (D c)
or based on dose-volume considerations. D, dose; V, volume.

CLINICAL EXPERIENCE WITH THE USE OF OPTIMIZATION CRITERIA
The iterative adjustment of beam modulation by the optimization algorithm is supposed to minimize the user-specified objective function so that the resultant plan
would satisfy the specified criteria. However, in our initial experience the resultant plan was often unsatisfactory. There are several reasons for this. First, the initial
sets of optimization criteria may not have been realistic. Second, the relationship between the objective function parameters and the resulting dose distribution is
complex. Thus, through a trial-and-error process we have developed preliminary criteria templates that are disease-site specific. We have also learned that the
optimization criteria must be more stringent than the desired clinical result because no penalty is applied unless the constraint is violated.
The relationship between optimization criteria and desired clinical result is further confounded by patient-to-patient variability in the geometric relationship between
the target and normal structures. Although site-specific constraint templates can serve as starting points for inverse planning, the constraints must often be refined for
individual patients in order to achieve uniform clinical results. In general, sites with a high degree of variability in the position, size, or shape of the target require more
individualized modification of constraints. Another trick in inverse planning is to control the spatial distribution of dose by structure definition. By defining subsections
within a target, normal tissues, or both, and constraining them separately for optimization, one can alter the doses in various regions (e.g., to move a high-dose region
away from a nearby critical structure). At the present stage of IMRT development, the specification of structures and criteria for optimization are still being studied for
the different disease sites, and exactly how patient specificity of such criteria will affect the optimization process needs to be better understood.
TREATMENT PLAN EVALUATION
The process of treatment plan evaluation is continuing to evolve, particularly for IMRT with inverse planning. The tools by which plans are evaluated are largely the
same for 3D-CRT and IMRT: two-dimensional (2D) dose distributions superimposed on CT images, 3D volumetric rendering of dose distribution and the PTV (and
critical organs), structure-specific DVH, and biologic indices as a rough guide. Additionally, for IMRT plans, inspection of the intensity profiles either from an observer
view (like a relief map) or by the projection of isointensity lines on a BEV is often useful in evaluating an individual beam's contribution to the dose distribution. Even
though the evaluation tools for 3D and IMRT plans are quite similar, the approach and action are quite different.
In the forward process of 3D-CRT or IMRT, the planner and the physician evaluate the initial treatment design(s) with a view to improve on it by altering some of the
beam parameters (e.g., directions, weights, shapes, wedges, and so forth). The identification of deficiencies and the devising of remedies rely on the experience and
intuition of the planner. The effort-intensive nature of this approach limits the practical number of iterations of evaluation and alteration. On the other hand, the
application of class solutions to some disease sites minimizes the alterations needed and facilitates convergence to an acceptable solution within a few cycles.
In the inverse process of IMRT, to exploit the benefits of the increased degrees of freedom with modulated individual ray weights, a significant number of iterations
(typically five to ten) are both needed and carried out. As the goal of the iterative adjustment of beam modulation by the optimization algorithm is to minimize the
user-specified objective function, the resultant plan should satisfy the clinical criteria of acceptance. Thus, ideally the evaluation process should be primarily checking
and approval. However, as discussed previously, this is usually not the case, at least in the developmental phase of IMRT.
Corrective action for an unacceptable IMRT plan would involve alteration of the parameters of the objective functions (instead of the beam parameters in a 3D-CRT
plan). As alluded to previously, our observation is that such adjustments are not always consistent with our intuition or past experience in conventional or 3D-CRT
treatment planning. One major difference is the lack of control in making coordinate-specific adjustment (i.e., it is difficult to alter the dose level to specific regions in
the 3D space by changing the objective function parameters). At present, a trial and error (and time-consuming) approach is used to alter the input parameters and
improve the IMRT. However, with improvement in software features and with experience in IMRT planning, we believe that this situation will improve.
DELIVERY OF INTENSITY-MODULATED FIELD WITH DYNAMIC MULTILEAF COLLIMATOR
The intensity-modulated field can be delivered with an MLC. 14,15 and 16 The 2D intensity distribution is divided into one-dimensional intensity profiles, with each profile
delivered by one pair of leaves. In the dynamic MLC (DMLC or sliding-window) method, the leaves are in continuous motion during radiation delivery. In Figure 29.4-4,
the trajectory (the dotted lines) of the left and right leaves of one leaf pair is plotted as a function of beam-on time during radiation delivery, from their initial (instance
a) to their final positions (instance d). As the beam is turned on (instance a), both leaves move, with different speeds, from left to right. The point P begins to receive
radiation at instance b when the right leaf edge moves past it. It continues to receive radiation until instance c, when the left leaf begins to block the beam from P. By
controlling the movement of the leaves and therefore the exposure duration (in this case, between b and c), one can deliver any desired intensity to point P, or any
other point under this leaf pair. Extending this concept to multiple pairs of leaves, any desired intensity modulation can be produced with designed sequences of
leaves positions.

FIGURE 29.4-4. This graph depicts radiation delivery by the dynamic multileaf collimation (sliding window) method. The dotted lines are the positions of a leaf pair
(x-axis) as a function of beam-on time (y-axis). As the beam is turned on (point a), both leaves move, with different speeds, from left to right. The point P begins to
receive radiation when the right leaf edge moves pass over it (point b). It receives radiation until the left leaf blocks the beam (point c). By controlling the movement of
the leaves and therefore the beam-on-time duration between b and c, one can deliver any desired intensity to point P, or any other point under this leaf pair.

The leaves' paths illustrated in Figure 29.4-4 (replotted in Figure 29.4-5A as dotted lines) are planned to produce the intensity profile indicated by the solid line in
Figure 29.4-5A. In practice, a separate computer program (different from the inverse planning algorithm), sometimes called the leaf sequencer, is used to translate the
intensity profiles of the intensity-modulated beam into the so-called DMLC file, that contains the data of the leaf position sequence as a function of monitor units
(MU).16 In practice, not all desired intensity profiles are (exactly) achievable because of the constraints on leaf motion imposed by the design of the MLC and the
clinical dose rate of the machine. The MLC manufactured by Varian Medical Systems, for example, is constrained by the maximum leaf speed (v max of 2.5 cm/s) and a
maximum DMLC field of 14.5 cm (unless movement of the carriage is allowed). Beam delivery systems from other manufacturers may have similar or different
limitations and constraints. Some leaf motion patterns may require a large number of MUs to deliver the desired dose (typically two to three times that for static beam
conformal therapy), which increases the importance of scatter and leakage dose. Transmissions through the leaves and the rounded leaf ends (see Dose Distribution
Calculation, later in this chapter) typically contribute 10% to 15% of the total dose and are compensated for in the leaf sequence translation.

FIGURE 29.4-5. A: Illustrating the intensity profile delivered by the leaves' paths shown in Figure 29.4-4 (replotted here as dotted lines). In practice, a leaf-sequencing
algorithm is used to translate the desired intensity profiles into computer data file of the leaf positions as a function of monitor units. B: Another method using the
multileaf collimators to deliver intensity-modulated beams is by multiple static segment (the so-called step-and-shoot method). In the step phase, multileaf collimator
travels to discrete positions, then beam-on in the shoot phase (i.e., alternate multileaf collimator movement and radiation delivery). The result is discrete intensity
levels, the number of which depends on the step number.

The MLC can also be used to deliver intensity-modulated beams in the multiple static segment (MSS, or the so-called step-and-shoot) mode. In this mode, the MLC
travels in a stepwise manner to discrete positions, with the beam turned off during the stepwise movement. As illustrated in Figure 29.4-5B, the leaf paths can be
approximated by alternate horizontal step and vertical shoot segments, representing stepwise and alternate MLC movement and radiation delivery. As a result, the
delivered intensity profile comprises discrete levels, with its number depending on the number of steps. In either mode, the total beam-on time for this leaf pair is T,
and the MU needed for an intensity-modulated field is the largest T among all leaf pairs. It should be noted that there are other methods of MSS leaf sequencing to
produce intensity-modulated beams. 17,18
OTHER METHODS OF DELIVERY OF INTENSITY-MODULATED FIELD
A large number of IMRT treatments have been delivered using the MIMiC collimator from NOMOS. 6 In this schema, a slit beam is used, typically 2-by-20 cm, and
intensity modulation is achieved via 20 pairs of leaves. Each of the 40 leaves defines a pencil beam of 1 by 1 cm 2 that is either on or off at any given gantry position.
As the gantry rotates through its 360-degree arc, all 40 leaves open and close (in a binary manner, either fully open or fully closed) according to the leaf motion
pattern determined during treatment planning. Thus, each gantry arc treats a 2-cm long longitudinal strip of tissue. Treatment fields longer than 2 cm can be delivered
by longitudinally translating the patient (with the treatment couch) between multiple arcs. Of extreme importance is the accuracy and stability of patient positioning as
the treatment progresses from one axial slice to the next.
Yu proposed the intensity-modulated arc therapy method of IMRT delivery. 19 In this method, the 2D intensity-modulated beams at many equally spaced gantry angles
are approximated by a superposition of multiple-shaped radiation fields with uniform intensity. The increments of intensity level are delivered by individual arcs, with
the leaf positions changing with gantry angle to produce the shaped fields. As has been pointed out, there are a large number of possible permutations of
decomposition patterns for the 2D beams, and therefore the design of the most efficient MLC position sequence in the arc therapy is a challenging problem.
DOSE DISTRIBUTION CALCULATION
To fully account for the intricacies of IMRT dose delivery, the calculation model must accurately predict the incident energy fluence and use a dose kernel that
describes the transport of photons and electrons and energy spread in an inhomogeneous medium. One accurate method of dose calculation involves the convolution
of pencil beams. In our current dose model, inhomogeneity is accounted for by the traditional equivalent path length method, and pencil beam convolution is used only
as a correction factor to account for the variation of intensity as opposed to a flat, uniform field. 20 However, in a highly heterogeneous media such as the lung, the
accuracy of this calculation method needs improvement, for which development is in progress. The Monte Carlo method can provide the most accurate dose
calculation, but because of the lengthy computation time, its routine use awaits faster computer speed. Nevertheless, the Monte Carlo method is relied on to derive
accurate pencil beam kernel and the source function (which predicts the incident intensity pattern), with detailed accounting of the finite source size, extrafocal
radiation (from the flattening filters, primary and secondary collimators), beam spectrum, and so forth. For both the DMLC and the MSS methods of IMRT treatment
delivery, because small aperture sizes are frequently used, accurate prediction of output factor is important. 21
Beam-on time calculation for IMRT treatment at MSKCC is an adaptation from our empirical-based method in which the dose D at a point (x,y,z) is given as D(x,y,z) =
MU × F, where MU is the monitor unit of radiation beam, and F is a product of several factors, including the field size or output factor, the tissue maximum ratio, the
off-center ratio, the inverse-square factor, and so forth. For IMRT, we modify the equation using a factor that accounts for the intensity modulation.
In delivering the intensity-modulated field with an MLC, only a portion of the entire field is exposed at a given time. As a result, the total MU required is usually longer
than that normally required. There is no simple relationship between the maximum beam intensity and MU. In practice, the total beam-on time MU is calculated by a
computer program, taking into account effects such as leaf transmission, rounded leaf ends, tongue and groove, distributed source, maximum leaf speed, and dose

rate. In general, the more complex the intensity modulation, the larger the MU.
For conventional treatment, the independent MU check is typically calculated by hand. For IMRT, however, the intensity distribution is sufficiently complex that hand
calculation is not feasible. At MSKCC, the independent check was initially provided by ionization chamber measurement, and subsequently by another computer
program. Measurement is a direct assessment of the delivered dose, particularly valuable for new treatment techniques, but extremely time consuming as a routine
check. Our computer MU check software was programmed by an independent team. The program first constructs the delivered intensity distribution from the
leaf-sequencing files and the beam-on time. Doses to points or to planes at depth in a phantom are then calculated and compared with those of the original plan.
COMMISSIONING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE PROGRAM
Both mechanical and dosimetric measurements are required in the commissioning of IMRT delivery using DMLC. 22,23 and 24 Because the dose delivered using DMLC is
directly related to the gap widths between pairs of opposing leaves, precise leaf position is much more important in this approach than in treatments using static MLC.
Mechanical calibration of the leaf positions can be accomplished using the recommended procedure and software supplied by the manufacturer. We have determined
that a precision of 0.2 mm in leaf position is necessary, and that the Varian Mark II MLC satisfies this requirement. Dosimetric characterization of the MLC, using film,
ion chambers, or both, includes measurements of radiation transmission through the leaves and their rounded ends, and the determination of head scatter. The
dosimetric contribution of these factors, which can amount to as much as 15% of the dose, are accounted for in the leaf sequencer algorithm of the treatment planning
system.
Another important consideration of DMLC is the monitoring of the performance of the MLC during treatment. While the beam is on, the Varian MLC control computer
checks all leaf positions every 55 msec, compares them to the planned leaf positions in the DMLC file, and records them in a DMLC log file. If any leaf deviates from
its planned position beyond a preset tolerance, the control computer invokes a beam holdoff, and radiation delivery is withheld until all the leaves are within tolerance
again. Deviations that invoke beam holdoff should occur infrequently as the leaf sequencer algorithm, in generating the DMLC file, has duly considered the maximum
MLC leaf speed and the nominal dose rate. Tests using clinical fields indicate that deviations of greater than 1 mm occur less than 1% of the time. For the initial group
of patients, we tested the delivery of each field before treatment and examined the log files to ensure that there was no deviation that would significantly affect the
dose. Based on those studies, a preset tolerance level of 2 mm was selected that mainly serves to insure against a potential hardware failure (e.g., a stuck leaf).
In addition, a comprehensive program to evaluate the routine performance of DMLC needs to be in place. This includes a quality assurance procedure and periodic
dosimetric verification of intensity-modulated fields. Image patterns of predesigned fields are produced on radiographic films twice a week by radiotherapists to
provide a quick visual assessment that the DMLC is functioning properly. 9 Ion chamber and diode array measurements at different gantry and collimator angles are
performed monthly by a physicist to ensure constancy of the DMLC output and to track long-term stability. Ion chamber measurements in solid phantom for patient
fields provide a straightforward check on the MU calculations. Film dosimetry, with sufficient spatial resolution for the intensity-modulated patterns, efficiently
compares the delivered and the planned dose distributions. It is also used intensively during the testing of new software and new treatment sites for IMRT, as well as
for periodic spot checks. The general procedure is to irradiate the film in a homogeneous plastic phantom and to digitize the exposed film with a laser scanner.
TREATMENT DELIVERY WITH DYNAMIC MULTILEAF COLLIMATOR
For treatment implementation, the DMLC files of the intensity-modulated fields are transferred either via a floppy disk or electronically to the MLC control computer of
the treatment machine. Also transmitted for each intensity-modulated beam is its fluence aperture, defined as the area with greater than 1% of the maximum intensity,
or approximately the MLC aperture with the leading leaves and the trailing leaves at their respective final and initial positions. This fluence aperture is used for
acquiring portal image (see Consideration of Treatment Uncertainties , later in this chapter) and for recording and verification purposes by that system.
Before the first treatment, portal localization electronic portal imaging device (EPID) images are taken of each intensity-modulated field with its fluence aperture. The
portal localization films are then compared with the corresponding digitally reconstructed radiographs overlaid with the maximal DMLC apertures. This verifies that the
radiation is directed properly, relative to the bony anatomy of the patient. During the treatment course, weekly portals are obtained for each field using the EPID.
Using the EPID in combination with the MLC allows machine setup and image acquisition to occur without the therapist reentering the room between fields, thereby
improving efficiency.
Before the dose delivery in patient treatment, the record and verify computer checks the initial leaf settings and the other machine parameters: the gantry angle,
collimator angle, jaw positions, and MU setting. During radiation delivery, the MLC control computer monitors the leaf positions every 55 msec, compares them with
the planned positions, and records the result in a DMLC log-file. On completion of the first DMLC field, the record and verify system records the MU delivered and the
final positions of the MLC. Without reentering the room, the radiotherapists rotate the gantry to the next orientation, program the accelerator and the MLC for the next
intensity-modulated field, and then deliver the radiation. The process is repeated for each of the fields.

CLINICAL EXPERIENCE
CANCER OF THE PROSTATE
Since 1986 we have treated more than 1000 patients with cancers of the prostate using 3D-CRT. An analysis of 743 of these patients showed a significant effect of
increased dose (from 64.8 Gy to 81.0 Gy) on response. 3 With the capability of IMRT, we have further escalated the dose and have treated approximately 40 patients
to 86.4 Gy. At the same time, a five-field IMRT treatment with a prescription dose of 81.0 Gy has become the standard of care for prostate of the cancer at MSKCC.
This summary describes this experience and our preliminary clinical results.
Patients are immobilized in the prone position, simulated, and imaged on a CT simulator. With the CT data transferred electronically to the MSKCC planning system, 30
the PTV, bladder, rectum, bowel, femors, and pelvis are contoured. IMRT planning is performed with the inverse method using a five-field technique (0, 75, 135, 225,
and 285 degrees) as detailed previously. 23 The present criteria for optimization are dose uniformity (within 12%) to the PTV, less than 34% of the rectal wall at 75 Gy,
and less than 58% of the bladder wall at 81 Gy. The overlap region between the PTV and the rectal wall is separately constrained during optimization to exert greater
control over the spatial dose distribution in that region. On approval of the optimized plan, BEV digitally reconstructed radiographs and the fluence apertures are
generated, and the DMLC files transmitted to the MLC controller for treatment delivery using DMLC. 16
We reported the preliminary results of 171 IMRT patients, in comparison with those of 61 3D-CRT patients treated to the same 81 Gy. 25 Comparison of the dose
distributions of the five-field IMRT plan and the 3D-CRT plan (six-field primary to 72.0 Gy, plus a 9-Gy boost with the rectum blocked) indicated that IMRT improved
the conformality of the 81-Gy isodose line relative to the PTV and decreased the dose to the surrounding normal tissues. A systematic analysis (using the Wilcoxon
assigned rank test) of the two types of plans on 20 randomly selected patients demonstrated that significantly higher percentage of the CTV received 81 Gy with IMRT
relative to 3D-CRT (98 ± 2% vs. 95 ± 2%, P <.01).25 Concomitantly, the percentages of the rectal wall and bladder wall volumes carried to 75 Gy were significantly
decreased with IMRT (P <.01). These data support the notion that IMRT significantly improves the conformality of the radiation treatment in prostate cancer.
Figure 29.4-6 is an example of the dose distribution, in a color wash representation, achieved for an IMRT prostate treatment to 81 Gy with five intensity-modulated
beams. The dose distributions in the transverse and midsagittal planes are shown, with the PTV (green) and rectum (yellow) outlined. The dose distribution conforms
to the PTV and restricts the rectum volume irradiated to high doses. The cumulative DVHs for this plan ( Fig. 29.4-7) reinforce this point. Approximately 95% of the
PTV receives the prescription dose and the level of dose inhomogeneity is reasonable. DVHs for the rectal and bladder walls are also compliant to acceptable criteria
derived from previous 3D-CRT clinical experience. Figure 29.4-8 illustrates the intensity profile of the posterior beam, in the isocentric plane, from the 81-Gy IMRT
plan illustrated in Figure 29.4-6.

FIGURE 29.4-6. An example of the dose distribution, in a color wash representation, for intensity-modulated radiation therapy prostate treatment to 81 Gy with 5
intensity-modulated beams. The dose distributions in the (A) transverse and (B) midsagittal planes are shown, with the planning target volume (PTV) (green) and
rectum (yellow) outlined.

FIGURE 29.4-7. The cumulative dose volume histograms for the 81-Gy intensity-modulated radiation therapy plan illustrated in Figure 29.4-6. The dose-volume
histograms for the planning target volume, rectal wall, and bladder wall are shown.

FIGURE 29.4-8. The intensity profile of the posterior beam, in the isocentric plane, from the 81-Gy intensity-modulated radiation therapy plan illustrated in Figure
29.4-6.

In terms of clinical outcome, the combined rates of acute grade 1 and 2 rectal toxicity for IMRT were significantly less (45%) than that of 3D-CRT (61%) using the
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group morbidity grading scale ( P = .05).28 Similarly, there was a highly significant decrease in late grade 2 rectal bleeding to 0.5% with
IMRT as compared with 13% for conventional 3D-CRT ( P <.001). There was one grade 3 rectal toxicity (bleeding requiring laser cauterization) in each treatment
group. Based on this experience, we have escalated the dose to 86.4 Gy and have successfully treated 40 patients using IMRT. We now await follow-up data on late
reactions before additional patient accrual at this dose level.
Compared with our previous method of 3D-CRT planning for the 81-Gy treatment, IMRT planning is less labor intensive. The 81-Gy 3D-CRT plan was performed in
two phases, a standard six-field plan to 72 Gy and a second one for the 9-Gy boost. In contrast, a single IMRT plan for both the 81-Gy or 86.4-Gy treatment course
was judged acceptable for both tumor coverage and normal tissue sparing. Thus, the treatment planning effort has been reduced by a factor of two.
In terms of implementation, on average the length of treatment sessions was comparable for the five-field IMRT and the six-field 3D-CRT plans, even though the MUs
of IMRT were approximately 2.5-fold higher. The average session for 138 patients treated (April 1995 to March 1996) with 3D-CRT to 75.6 Gy was 17.7 ± 0.1 minutes,
compared with 16.5 ± 0.1 minutes for 140 IMRT patients treated (April 1997 to March 1998) to 81 Gy on the same machine, inclusive of the time for setup and weekly
portal imaging.
HEAD AND NECK CANCER
Radiotherapy of head and neck cancers is often complex due to target doses of 70 Gy or higher and the close proximity of the spinal cord, brain stem, parotid glands,
and optic pathway structures with tolerance doses of 45 to 55 Gy or less. Traditional treatments, consisting of parallel opposed photon fields (with blocks added to
shield the spinal cord at 45 Gy) and electron fields to augment the dose to the cervical lymph nodes, are often inadequate in target coverage and in normal tissue
sparing. We have previously used a multifield 3D-CRT approach, but since May 1998 have adopted IMRT and DMLC to deliver a uniform target dose with steep dose
gradients at target-normal structure interfaces and reduced doses over normal tissues. Approximately one-half of 20 patients have received treatment for primary
nasopharynx cancer, with 70 Gy to the gross disease and 54 Gy to the presumed microscopic disease.
Subsequent to CT simulation and image (3-mm increments) acquisition of the immobilized patient, the PTV (the gross disease and adjacent lymph nodes) and the
normal structures (spinal cord, brain stem, optic nerves, chiasm, mandible, larynx, and parotid glands) are delineated. The beam arrangement, consisting of seven
equally spaced beams directed from the posterior and lateral directions, attempts to create a concave dose distribution that encompasses the nasopharynx, skull
base, and regional lymph nodes but encircles and spares the spinal cord and brain stem. When implemented with 3D-CRT, the technique is limited by excessive dose
nonuniformity within the PTV (up to 140%) and by both planning and treatment complexities. These limitations are easily overcome with IMRT.
The dose-based criteria for optimization are for the nasopharynx and nodal target volumes to receive the prescription dose with a maximum of 120%, and dose
constraints on the normal structures as follows: spinal cord, 40 Gy; brain stem, 50 Gy; optic structures, 50 Gy; and larynx, 45 Gy. The penalties for the spinal cord and
brain stem are generally four to five times greater than the penalties for the PTV and other normal tissues. The derived IMRT plan, as assessed by dose distribution
and DVH for the PTV and normal structures, demonstrates significant improvements over the traditional approach of parallel opposed primary plus 3D-CRT boost.
The dose distributions are highly conformal and constrain the maximum spinal cord and brain stem doses to less than 40 and 50 Gy, respectively, well below
maximum acceptable doses. Although there is no specific attempt to decrease the dose to the parotid glands for fear of underdosing nearby lymph nodes, the
distribution of dose within the parotid gland is substantially different from that obtained with traditional opposed fields. With traditional parallel opposed beams, nearly
the entire parotid gland volume would receive a dose of 70 Gy or more. With IMRT, approximately one-half the gland receives less than 50 Gy. Dose to the mandible
is also substantially improved. Although the maximum mandible dose is still approximately 75 Gy, only 10% of the mandible receives more than 60 Gy. Figure 29.4-9

is a 3D display of the 95% isodose surface (blue) for a typical IMRT treatment of nasopharynx. Superimposed are the outer skin surface (purple) and wireframe
representation of the PTV (yellow), parotids (green), and the spinal cord (red). The left lateral and cranial views are presented.

FIGURE 29.4-9. Three-dimensional display of the 95% isodose surface (blue) for an intensity-modulated radiation therapy treatment of nasopharynx. Superimposed
are the outer skin surface (purple) and wireframe representation of the planning target volume (yellow), parotids (green), and spinal cord (red). The left lateral (A) and
cranial (B) views are presented.

BREAST CANCER
Radiation therapy after lumpectomy remains a primary method of treatment for primary breast cancer. Excellent local control is achieved in early-stage disease along
with generally good cosmetic results and low toxicity. Nonetheless, improvements are needed, particularly for large-breasted patients with left-sided disease for whom
cosmesis and potential cardiac toxicity remain significant issues. Since April 1999, we have treated selected patients with disease in the left breast and with large
chest wall diameters with intensity modulation using a standard tangential beam arrangement. All patients undergo CT simulation during which the direction and size
of the tangential beams are determined. The PTV is defined to be all tissue encompassed within 0.5 cm of the tangent field borders. The ipsilateral lung and coronary
artery regions are defined by the physician using the CT.
The IMRT plan must deliver a uniform dose distribution in the PTV to within 10% of the prescription. Typically, this is achieved by setting an even tighter dose
uniformity constraint for the target (of 5%) during optimization. The dose to the coronary artery region is minimized to the extent possible without sacrificing target
coverage. Generally, a maximum dose constraint of 95% is used for this structure during optimization. Dose to the apex of the breast is controlled by separately
contouring and constraining this region.
The advantages of tangential fields include treatment and setup simplicity and the ability to totally exclude critical structures such as the opposite breast from the
treatment fields. Despite the limits imposed by this simple beam geometry, target dose uniformity and normal tissue doses have improved with IMRT. In a study
comparing intensity modulation with conventional wedged tangents, an average improvement in target dose homogeneity of 5% was observed with IMRT. The mean
dose to the coronary artery region and opposite breast decreased by more than 30% and 35%, respectively. The average volume of ipsilateral lung receiving doses in
excess of the prescription decreased by 35%.
CONSIDERATION OF TREATMENT UNCERTAINTIES
To account for treatment uncertainties, arising from patient set-up variation and organ motion, a margin is added to the target in radiotherapy planning. 26 As the dose
distributions become more conformal in 3D-CRT and even more so in IMRT, the outcome of the treatment may become more sensitive to these uncertainties. Thus, it
is important to quantify them, develop corrective methods to minimize them, and account for the residual component in treatment planning.
Ideally, patient-specific treatment uncertainty data should be used, but practically it would be difficult. Thus, approaches have been developed to quantify treatment
uncertainties of a patient population. Set-up errors have been measured for several disease sites using serial portal images and interfraction organ motion by
repeated CT scans.27,28 and 29 Based on such data, analysis can be performed to assess the potential effect of treatment uncertainties on treatment outcome using
statistical sampling technique.
The previously mentioned population average uncertainty data can also be useful for the calculation of the dose distribution in treatment planning. Specifically, the
frequency distribution of treatment uncertainties can be incorporated into the pencil beam kernel, which is equivalent to a convolution of the idealized dose distribution
with the frequency distribution of treatment uncertainties. This yields an average dose distribution representing the effects of random, or daily, errors occurring over a
treatment course.

DEVELOPMENT AND RESEARCH ISSUES
IMRT is in a developmental phase and there has been limited experience in the use of inverse planning in the radiotherapy community. Although we have had some
experience of its use in the treatment of the prostate, each application to a new disease site (head and neck and breast) represented a new challenge, requiring
adaptation or new custom features. For example, in the treatment of the breast, an extension of each intensity-modulated field to include a skin flash is needed. Given
that our optimization algorithm is developed at MSKCC, we are able to modify the software to meet the unanticipated clinical requirement. We surmise that users of
the emerging inverse planning systems may encounter similar experiences and will seek incremental improvement of their algorithms. The situation will likely be
system specific and may vary widely among them due to the large number of variables in such systems and in the inverse process. In addition, better understanding in
the use of optimization criteria is needed for the efficacious use of the inverse planning technique, and we have approached this by trial and error. Such criteria are
certainly disease site specific and probably algorithm specific as well.
There are investigations on the use of biologic models of tumor tissue response as criteria for plan optimization. 30,31 In general, biology-based score functions typically
consist of some weighted combination of biologic indices. Two under current study are the normal tissue complication probabilities 32 and tumor control probabilities. 33
These indices condense structure-specific dose-distribution data to yield relative figures of merit for the respective objects of interest. However, both of these indices
are at present based on rather rudimentary models with simplistic assumptions. Importantly, clinical data for validating the models and deriving the model parameters
are lacking. Nevertheless, the advent of 3D treatment planning and the accrual of patients treated with this modality are beginning to provide clinical outcome data for
which dose volume information are available. For example, analysis has been performed on clinical complication data of the lung, liver, and optic pathways. 34,35 and 36
Such studies promise to improve the present biologic models, provide better estimates for the model parameters, or both. It is hoped that the iterative process of
generating clinical data and refinement and validation of the models will incrementally improve the predictive power of the biologic indices and facilitate the
quantitative evaluation of 3D treatment plans.
Certain technical aspects of inverse planning will continue to be investigated. For example, the advantages and disadvantages of gradient-based optimization as
compared with simulated annealing. 37,38 and 39 The latter method, though much slower computationally, is more likely to yield the global minimum (or the most optimal
solution), but this theoretical advantage has not been demonstrated to be clinically important. Another often discussed issue pertains to the optimal number of
intensity-modulated beams and their orientations. Again, our view is that given a sufficient number of equally spaced beams (five to seven or more) and the
intensity-modulation capability, near optimal plans can be generated. 40
There is significant interest in developing methods to verify the delivery of intensity-modulated beams. These efforts are benefiting from the gradual maturation of the
EPID technology, particularly using amorphous silicon detectors. The ability to verify directly the intensity pattern of the delivered intensity-modulated beams will
greatly enhance the confidence in the use of IMRT and lead to wider acceptance of this modality. At present, the electromechanical monitoring of leaf positions during
radiation delivery provides similar assurance, albeit indirectly and without providing measured data.

The ability of IMRT to deliver nonuniform dose patterns by design brings to fore the question of how to dose paint and dose sculpt, leading to the suggestion that
biologic images may be of assistance.41 In contrast to the conventional radiologic images that primarily provide anatomic information, biologic images reveal
metabolic, functional, physiologic, genotypic, and phenotypic data. Important for radiotherapy, the new and noninvasive imaging methods may yield 3D radiobiologic
information. Studies are urgently needed to identify genotypes and phenotypes that affect radiosensitivity and to devise methods to image them noninvasively.
Incremental to the concept of gross target volume, CTV, and PTV, we suggest the concept of biologic target volume and hypothesize that biologic target volume can
be derived from biologic images and that their use may incrementally improve target delineation and dose delivery. 41 We emphasize, however, that much basic
research and clinical studies are needed before this potential can be realized.
In conclusion, IMRT is a powerful technique that provides extra degrees of freedom in customizing the dose distribution for photon radiotherapy. With the
development of the computer-controlled treatment machines equipped with DMLC, it is now possible to deliver these treatments reliably. The clinical implementation
of inverse planning and treatment delivery with DMLC is extremely complex and involves a substantial developmental effort. However, once accomplished, the
process is efficient and capable of providing the dual benefits of improved dose distribution and cost savings. It is likely that this new modality will become widely
accepted and applied in the future.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Leibel SA, Zelefsky MJ, Kutcher GJ, et al. The biological basis and clinical application of three-dimensional conformal external beam radiation therapy in carcinoma of the prostate. Semin
Oncol 1994;21:580.
2. Zelefsky MJ, Leibel SA, Kutcher GJ, Fuks Z. Three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy and dose escalation: where do we stand? Semin Radiat Oncol 1998;8:107.
3. Zelefsky MJ, Leibel SA, Gaudin PB, et al. Dose escalation with three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy affects the outcome in prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:491.
4. Brahme A. Optimization of stationary and moving beam radiation therapy techniques. Radiother Oncol 1988;12:129.
5. Ling CC, Burman CM, Chui CS, et al. Conformal radiation treatment of prostate cancer using inversely-planned intensity-modulated photon beams produced with dynamic multileaf collimation.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;35:721
6. Carol M, Grant WH, Pavord D, et al. Initial clinical experience with the Peacock intensity modulation of a 3-D conformal radiation therapy system. Stereotactic & Functional Neurosurgery
1996;6:30.
7. Sherouse GW, Bourland JD, Reynolds K, et al. Virtual simulation in the clinical setting: some practical considerations. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:1059.
8. ICRU Report 50. Prescribing, recording, and reporting photon beam therapy. Bethesda, MD: International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements, 1993:3.
9. Goitein M, Abrams M, Rowell D, et al. Multidimensional treatment planning. II: beam's eye view, back projection and projection through CT sections. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:789.
10. McShan DL, Fraass BA, Lichter AS. Full integration of the beam's eye view concept into computerized treatment planning. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;18:1485.
11. Fraass BA, Kessler ML, McShan DL, et al. Optimization and clinical use of multisegment IMRT for high dose conformal therapy. Semin Radiat Oncol 1999;9:60.
12. Bortfeld T, Burkelbach J, Boesecke R, Schlegel W. Methods of image reconstruction from projections applied to conformation radiotherapy. Phys Med Biol 1990;35:423.
13. Spirou SV, Chui CS. A gradient inverse planning algorithm with dose-volume constraints. Med Phys 1998;25:321.
14. LoSasso T, Chui CS, Kutcher GJ, et al. The use of a multileaf collimator for conformal radiotherapy of carcinoma of the prostate and nasopharynx. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:161.
15. Convery D, Rosenbloom M. The generation of intensity modulated fields for conformal radiotherapy by dynamic multileaf collimation. Phys Med Biol 1992;37:1359.
16. Spirou S, Chui CS. Generation of arbitrary intensity profiles by dynamic jaws or multileaf collimators. Med Phys 1994;21:1031.
17. Galvin JM, Chen XG, Smith RM. Combining multileaf fields to modulated fluence distributions. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:697.
18. Bortfeld T, Kahler DL, Waldron TJ, Boyer AL. X-ray field compensation with multileaf collimators. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;28:723.
19. Yu CX. Intensity-modulated arc therapy with dynamic multileaf collimation: an alternative to tomotherapy. Phys Med Biol 1995;40:1435.
20. Chui CS, LoSasso T, Spirou S. Dose calculations for photon beams with intensity modulation generated by dynamic jaw or multi-leaf collimations. Med Phys 1994;21:1237.
21. Wang X, Spirou S, LoSasso T, Chui CS, Mohan R. Dosimetric verification of an intensity modulated treatment. Med Phys 1996;23:317.
22. LoSasso T, Chui CS, Ling CC. Physical and dosimetric aspects of a multileaf collimation system used in the dynamic mode for implementing intensity modulated radiotherapy. Med Phys
1998;25:1919.
23. Burman C, Chui CS, Kutcher G, et al. Planning, delivery, and quality assurance of intensity-modulated radiotherapy using dynamic multileaf collimator: a strategy for large scale implementation
for the treatment of carcinoma of the prostate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:863.
24. Chui CS, Spirou S, LoSasso T. Testing of dynamic multifleaf collimation. Med Phys 1996;23:635.
25. Zelefsky MJ, Fuks Z, Happersett L, et al. Clinical experience with intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) in prostate cancer. Radiother Oncol 2000;55:241.
26. Kutcher GJ, Mageras GS, Leibel SA. Control, correction, and modeling of setup errors and organ motion. Semin Radiat Oncol 1995;5:134.
27. Zelefsky MJ, Crean D, Mageras GS, et al. Quantification and predictors of prostate position variability in fifty patients evaluated with multiple CT scans during conformal radiotherapy. Radiother
Oncol 1999;50:225.
28. Hanley J, Lumley MA, Mageras GS, et al. Measurement of patient positioning errors in three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy of the prostate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:435.
29. van Herk M, Bruce A, Kroes APG, et al. Quantification of organ motion during conformal radiotherapy of the prostate by three dimensional (3D) image registration. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1995;33:1311.
30. Wang X, Mohan R, Jackson A, et al. Optimization of intensity-modulated 3D conformal treatment plans based on biological indices. Radiother Oncol 1995;37:140.
31. Niemierko A, Urie M, Goitein M. Optimization of 3D radiation therapy with both physical and biological end points and constraints. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;23:99.
32. Lyman JT. Complication probability as assessed from dose volume histograms. Radiat Res 1985;8:104.
33. Niemierko A, Goitein M. Implementation of a model for estimating tumor controlprobability for an inhomogeneously irradiated tumor. Radiother Oncol 1993;29:140.
34. Jackson A, Ten Haken RK, Robertson JM, et al. Analysis of clinical complication data for radiation hepatitis using a parallel architecture model. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:883.
35. Jackson A, Zelefsky M, Cowan D, et al. Rectal bleeding after conformal radiotherapy of prostate cancer and dose volume histograms. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:217.
36. Martel MK, Sandler HM, et al. Dose-volume complication analysis for visual pathway structures on patients with advanced paranasal sinus tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:273.
37. Mageras GS, Mohan R. Application of fast simulated annealing to optimization of conformal radiation treatments. Med Phys 1993;20:639.
38. Webb S. Optimization of conformal radiotherapy dose distributions by simulated annealing. Phys Med Biol 1989;34:1349.
39. Webb S. Optimization of simulated annealing of three-dimensional conformal treatment planning for radiation fields defined by multileaf collimator. Phys Med Biol 1991;36:1201.
40. Stein J, Mohan R, Wang X-H, et al. Number and orientations of beams in intensity-modulated radiation treatments. Med Phys 1997;24:149.
41. Ling CC, Humm J, Larson S, et al. Towards multidimensional radiotherapy (MD-CRT): biological imaging and biological conformality. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2000;47:551.

SECTION 30.1 Molecular Biology of Head and Neck Tumors
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 30.1
Molecular Biology of Head and Neck Tumors
DAVID SIDRANSKY
Introduction
Genetic Susceptibility
Cytogenetic Alterations
Protooncogenes
Suppressive Growth Regulation
Tumor Suppressor Genes
Field Cancerization
Molecular Epidemiology
Human Papillomavirus
Diagnostics
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Cancer is a complex genetic disease derived from the accumulation of various genetic changes. These genetic alterations include activation of protooncogenes and
inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. Moreover, inactivation of tumor suppressor gene function requires inactivation of both parental alleles, usually by point
mutation and a chromosomal deletion. The correlation of these specific genetic changes with the various lesions depicted in the histopathologic progression of
colorectal cancer has led to the development of a molecular progression model for this disease. 1 This molecular model now serves as a paradigm for the molecular
progression of many other solid neoplasms.
A number of specific genetic events have been identified in the progression of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Primary tumor DNA can now be
isolated and assessed directly for the presence of chromosomal deletions and amplification, as well as direct characterization of candidate oncogenes. Identification
of the critical genetic changes that drive the neoplastic process has provided a preliminary progression model for head and neck cancer. This model now delineates
appropriate genetic targets for novel diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic strategies.

GENETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY
It has been estimated that up to 10% of all cancers have a strong hereditary component. Generally, familiar clustering of cancer has suggested the possibility of
genetic predisposing factors. A clustering of oral cancer has been seen in certain ethnic groups, and an increased risk of cancer has been noted among relatives of
patients with one head and neck cancer. 2,3 Several studies have suggested a threefold higher risk of developing an oropharyngeal cancer in populations that have a
first-degree relative with HNSCC. 4 There also has been some suggestion of a remarkable increase in the relative risk of cancer in relatives of individuals with multiple
primary tumors. Except for the finding of head and neck cancer in some rare cancer syndromes, the basis of this genetic susceptibility has yet to be determined. 5
An emerging area of study centers on the prevalence of specific polymorphisms in enzymes that are involved in the detoxification of several tobacco smoke–derived
carcinogens. One larger study of 162 patients with head and neck cancer and 315 healthy controls suggested that certain glutathione S-transferase (GST) genotypes
represented independent risk factors for head and neck cancer. 6 Some studies also have shown a two- to threefold risk for the GST M1 and GST T1 null genotypes,
whereas others have shown no increase in HNSCC risk. 7,8,9,10,11 and 12 In all these studies, it is difficult to exclude other important risk factors, such as smoking, yet
there appears to be a consistent susceptibility based on certain metabolic genotypes. Others also have found that the repair capacity of peripheral lymphocytes or
their ability to repair carcinogen-induced chromatical breaks may also define a certain risk for head and neck cancer. 13,14 and 15 A more precise contribution of these
polymorphisms and other risk factors to the development of head and neck cancer will need to be elucidated in larger studies.

CYTOGENETIC ALTERATIONS
Statistical analysis based on the age-specific incidence of head and neck cancer suggests that HNSCC tumors arise after the accumulation of six to ten independent
genetic events.16 Cytogenetic approaches have given us some insights into potential areas of deletion and amplification involved in the progression of head and neck
cancer. Previously, karyotypic studies concentrated on established cell lines with complex chromosomal abnormalities. Unfortunately, different cell culture conditions
added substantial variation to these observed chromosomal alterations. 17 Moreover, cultured cells from the primary tumor may represent only a small clone derived
from in vitro selection pressure that is not representative of the entire cell population. Short-term cultures of primary tumors have proven more reliable for the
assessment of complex chromosome abnormalities and rearrangements. These studies have already demonstrated consistent chromosomal abnormalities and the
presence of important alterations. 18 Loss of chromosomes 3p, 5q, 8p, 9p, 18q, and 21q has been commonly identified. Preliminary data also suggest that loss of 18q
may indicate the presence of a tumor with a poor prognosis. 18 Additionally, multiple chromosomal breakpoints including those on 1p22, 3p21, 8p11, and distal 14q
have correlated with decreased radiosensitivity. 19 Fluorescence in situ hybridization potentially represents a more sensitive approach for recognizing both
chromosomal deletions and amplifications. 20 For example, genomic amplification at the 11q13 region can be detected in preneoplastic lesions and should allow its
placement directly into a molecular progression model.
More recently, comparative genomic hybridization has emerged as a comprehensive method for genome-wide evaluation to detect deletions or amplification. In this
approach, tumor-normal DNA is mixed and hybridized to metaphase spreads from normal cells. Labeling of tumor-normal DNA by different fluorescent colors allows
direct visualization of increased or decreased chromosomal material in neoplastic tissue by fluorescence detection. This approach is complementary to other methods
for assessment of both tissue culture and primary tumor material. In addition to the chromosomal areas previously noted, comparative genomic hybridization has
demonstrated amplification of 3q, 5p, 11q13, and 19q. 21

PROTOONCOGENES
Protooncogenes were initially identified as activated cellular genes specifically altered in some human neoplasms. 22 Despite the cloning of dozens of putative
protooncogenes involved in the development of human neoplasms, few were found to be altered directly in the progression of primary tumors and cell lines. In
addition to activation of oncogenes such as ras by point mutation, amplification is also a mechanism for activation of a protooncogene locus. Definitive studies
suggested that the 11q13 amplification was associated with amplification of a critical protooncogene termed cyclin D1 (PRAD1; CCND1). Although other genes were
also coamplified in the same region, only cyclin D1 was consistently amplified in approximately 30% of HNSCC and most other neoplasms. 23,24 Moreover,
amplification of this region correlated with increased expression of the cyclin D1 gene and may indicate a likelihood of progression in primary HNSCC. 25
As previously noted, amplification of 3q has been noted in many squamous cell carcinomas, including head and neck cancer. A p53 homologue (p40/p51/p63) has
been cloned and localized to the distal arm of 3q. 26 Although homologous to p53, this genetic locus was found to be amplified in a high frequency of squamous cell
cancers (ais), and this amplification correlated with increased expression at the RNA and protein level. 27 Although there has been no evidence of activating point
mutations in squamous cell cancers, functional evidence suggests that AIS may in fact be a true oncogene in squamous cell cancers. 27 Interestingly, dominant
negative mutations are responsible for a specific hereditary syndrome called ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia–clefting syndrome.28 Knockout mice display a lack of
epithelial development consistent with the role of this gene in epithelial renewal. 29 Further studies should establish the role of ais in the genetic progression of head
and neck cancers.
The role of cyclin D1 in the progression of human cancer is now well established. 30 Other tumor suppressor genes, including Rb and p16, are negative regulators of
the cyclin D1 pathway and often are inactivated in human neoplasms. In head and neck cancer, p16 appears to be a major target of inactivation. Thus, abnormal
cycling through this critical G 1/S checkpoint may be a consistent genetic alteration in a majority of primary HNSCC. Although p16 and Rb inactivation are almost

always exclusive, cyclin D1 amplification is independent of p16 inactivation in head and neck cancers. 31
Like other epithelial neoplasms, the role of other protooncogenes has been much less definitive. Few mutations in ras have been identified in primary head and neck
tumors. Although epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has been an interesting candidate, increased levels of the receptor at the RNA or protein level rarely
correlate with primary DNA amplification. 32 New evidence suggests that activation of signaling through Stat-3 leads to EGFR-mediated cell growth and that antisense
suppression of EGFR protein leads to apoptosis (programmed cell death). 33,34 The protein eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF4E) binds to messenger RNA during initial
protein synthesis, and its overexpression can result in the up-regulation of proteins essential for cell growth and division. Overexpression of eIF4E has been found in
HNSCC, and there has been some evidence of gene amplification and protein overexpression in these tumors. 35,36 Overexpression of the protein in cells can lead to
oncogenic transformation and may facilitate the synthesis of angiogenic factors such as vascular epidermal growth factor by enhancing their translation. In at least
one study, there was a correlation between increasing eIF4E and vascular epidermal growth factor levels, suggesting its possible role in angiogenesis. 37
Additionally, several other genes or gene products have been found to be overexpressed in head and neck tumors. High levels of cyclooxygenase (COX)-2, have
been seen in squamous cell carcinomas by a competitive reverse transcription assay. 38 GST P1 messenger RNA levels are found to be high in most moderately and
poorly differentiated tumors, 39 but only a fraction of these had specific gene amplification. Newer cytogenetic techniques may lead to the identification of important
protooncogenes more commonly involved in the progression of HNSCC.

SUPPRESSIVE GROWTH REGULATION
In addition to growth factors with “positive” regulation and augmentation of tumor growth, other growth factor pathways may suppress cell growth. Transforming growth
factor-b (TGF-b) is among these growth factors that have been implicated almost universally with suppression of tumor growth. Alterations of the type II TGF-b
receptor, one target of TGF-b, were noted in primary colorectal cancers potentially involved in abrogation of this negative regulatory pathway. 40 Initially, some head
and neck cancer cell lines were also found to harbor TGF-b receptor mutations, and mutations in the conserved serine/threonine kinase domain were found in 6 of 28
primary tumors.41,42 The interaction of TGF-b with this critical receptor normally leads to an increase of negative regulators of the cell cycle (e.g., p15, INK4B) and
G1/S arrest; thus, normal negative regulation may be abrogated by mutations in the type II TGF-b receptor.
Through a different mechanism, retinoic acid receptors (RARs) have been implicated in the negative growth regulation of HNSCC. This negative regulation has been
the cornerstone of successful chemopreventive approaches to diminish the incidence of second primary tumors by administration of cis-retinoic acid to patients with a
primary HNSCC tumor.43 Well-designed studies have demonstrated a significant reduction in the occurrence of second primary tumors in patients who receive retinoic
acid. Although the regulation of retinoids is complex, one critical end point may be down-regulation of RAR-b. Studies in patients with premalignant disease
(leukoplakia) have suggested that RAR-b levels are closely associated with response to retinoic acid. 44 In particular, those patients with tumors demonstrating low
RAR-b levels did not respond to retinoic acid. Further functional studies into the role of retinoic acid and RAR-b may yield important information regarding the role of
this pathway in the progression of HNSCC and successful treatment of premalignant lesions.

TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENES
Molecular analysis has now revolutionized the ability to look at primary neoplasms. Methods that required large amounts of DNA (e.g., Southern blot analysis) have
now been supplemented by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)–based approaches that allow access to limited DNA samples. Minute primary specimens from paraffin
can be evaluated by rapid and accurate techniques. DNA extracted from these samples can be amplified by PCR to reveal the presence of allelic losses. In practice,
maternal and paternal alleles can be distinguished by testing highly polymorphic markers that occur naturally among DNA sequences. 45
It is now generally believed that these allelic losses (or chromosomal deletions) are markers for inactivation of critical tumor suppressor genes contained within the
regions of loss. 46 Testing of highly polymorphic microsatellite markers (small 2– to 4–base pair repeats) from a specific chromosomal region allows rapid assessment
of allelic loss by comparing the alleles in tumor DNA to normal DNA. Perhaps the best example of this association is derived from loss of chromosome 17p. These
losses led to characterization of p53 as a candidate gene within the deleted area and subsequent identification of point mutations within the remaining allele.
Inactivation of p53 now represents the best described and most common genetic change in all of human cancer. 47 Approximately 50% of all primary HNSCCs harbor
p53 mutations in the conserved regions (exons 5 to 9). 48,49
A comprehensive allotype of head and neck cancer has now been completed and refined. 50,51 The most commonly deleted region in head and neck cancer is located
at chromosome 9p21-22.5050 Loss of chromosome 9p21 occurs in the majority of invasive tumors and is also present at a high frequency in the earliest definable
lesions, including dysplasia and carcinoma in situ.52 Furthermore, homozygous deletions in this region are frequent in HNSCC and represent one of the most common
genetic changes identified in all human neoplasms. p16 ( CDKN2) is contained within this critically deleted region and is a potent inhibitor of cyclin D1/ CDK4
complexes. Thus, p16 has emerged as an excellent candidate tumor suppressor gene within the deleted area. 53 Indeed, germline point mutations of p16 predispose to
familial melanoma,54 and loss of p16 may be necessary for immortalization of keratinocytes. 55
Although initial enthusiasm for p16 as a target gene in head and neck cancer was diminished when sequence analysis revealed rare point mutation (approximately
10% to 15% of HNSCC tumors),56,57 alternative mechanisms of inactivation were identified suggesting that abrogation of p16 function may be a common occurrence in
head and neck cancer. Homozygous deletion (deletion of both gene copies) and methylation of the 5' CpG region of p16 have been identified, each detected in
approximately one-fourth of primary head and neck cancers. 58,59 This methylation is associated with complete block of p16 transcription and appears to be a common
mechanism for p16 inactivation. The notion that p16 inactivation is directly involved in the progression of primary tumors has been strengthened. Lack of p16 protein
was detected by immunostaining in most primary invasive lesions, and tumors with absent p16 protein contained a homozygous deletion, methylation, or point
mutation of p16.60 Loss of p16 protein has been observed in most advanced premalignant lesions. 61
It is also possible that a second critical tumor suppressor gene resides at 9p21. We and others have identified an alternative RNA transcript for p16 termed p16
beta. 62 This unique transcript originates from an upstream initiating site in a novel exon 1 and codes for a protein through an alternative rating frame (ARF).
Interestingly, introduction of p16 or p16 beta into head and neck cancer cell lines results in potent growth suppression. 63 Although the human transcript is somewhat
shorter than the murine protein, functional studies have suggested that ARF binds to MDM2, leading to a decrease in p53 degradation and a subsequent increase in
p53 levels. 64,65 Moreover, a knockout ARF mouse develops certain tumors at an increased frequency. 66 In human tumors, homozygous deletion of the p16 locus
concomitantly leads to knockout of p16 beta, and thus approximately 30% of HNSCCs have no ARF protein. Evidence in squamous cell carcinoma of the lung
suggests that p53 mutations and p16 inactivation are not exclusive, suggesting that, at least at the genetic level, they do not function in the same pathway. 67
Ultimately, further studies will have to be done in primary tumors and human models to establish the precise role of p16 beta inactivation in squamous cell carcinoma.
A second commonly deleted locus occurs on chromosome 3p. Several studies have suggested that this region of loss is complex in head and neck cancer and may in
fact be composed of three distinct suppressor regions juxtaposed to one another. 68,69 As for 9p21, analysis of 3p21 losses in HNSCC has revealed frequent loss in
early lesions. The 3p21 region is also frequently lost in lung cancer and has been the target of an intensive search for the critical tumor suppressor gene. The FHIT
gene was found in a critical area of homozygous deletion and was evaluated as possible tumor suppressor gene in many cancers. Although altered transcripts have
been detected in primary tumors and cell lines, specific inactivating mutations of the second allele have not been forthcoming. 70,71 Thus, although many candidate
genes have been isolated, none has been demonstrated to be the critical inactivated tumor suppressor gene at 3p involved in the progression of these cancers.
Loss of chromosome 17p is a frequent occurrence in most human cancers, and head and neck cancer is no exception (occurring in 60% of invasive lesions). 48
Although p53 inactivation correlates closely with loss of 17p in invasive lesions, p53 mutations are quite rare in early lesions that contain 17p loss. Some evidence
from cell lines also suggests that a distal breakpoint to p53 occurs in head and neck cancer. Together, these data suggest that a second tumor suppressor gene on
17p may be involved early in the progression of this neoplasm. p53 mutations, as in most tumors, generally rise in frequency between the preinvasive to the invasive
state. This is consistent with a critical function for p53 in response to DNA damage. 72 p53 mutant tumors are also less likely to respond to local radiation therapy. 73
This model is certain to become more complex, but offers an important insight into the role of p53 in the progression of head and neck cancer and many other tumors.
Loss of chromosomal arm 10q is not uncommon in HNSCC and lung cancer. The PTEN gene was cloned and found to be homozygously deleted and inactivated in a
variety of different cancers. Homozygous deletion and rare point mutation inactivation have been seen in HNSCC. 74,75 Although only 10% of these cancers have

inactivated gene, it seems to be more common in advanced tumors and may harbor a poor prognosis. 74,76
Loss of 13q also occurs in approximately 60% of primary tumors and the minimal area of loss includes the tumor suppressor gene Rb. However, immunohistochemical
analysis of Rb (which detects most Rb alterations) revealed inactivation of Rb in only small percentages of tumors with loss of 13q. 77 Again, as in many other
chromosomal regions, there appears to be another tumor suppressor gene near Rb, putatively inactivated in the progression of head and neck cancer.
More recent work has suggested that there may be one or more regions of specific loss on the short arm of chromosome 8 and on 7q31. 78,79,80 and 81 Loss of 18q has
been seen, and one of these minimally deleted regions harbors two tumor suppressor genes. 82,83 Homozygous deletions of both DCC and DPC4 have been noted in
cell lines but have been rarely seen in primary tumors. 84 Many other areas of chromosomal loss have been seen in head and neck cancer consistent with the
occurrence of multiple genetic events in the progression of these neoplasms. Except for those previously noted, critical tumor suppressor genes have not been
identified from these loci and remain to be isolated and characterized. Further fine mapping of these deletions, amplifications, and translocations with characterization
of critical genes within these areas may provide important information about the biology and clinical behavior of these neoplasms.
We have tested the ten most common allelic loss events in a large number of primary preinvasive lesions and invasive HNSCC to develop a molecular progression
model.85 As seen in Figure 30.1-1, the progression of head and neck cancer involves inactivation of many putative suppressor gene loci. Chromosomes 9p and 3p
appear to be lost early, closely followed by loss of 17p. p53 mutations are seen in the progression of the preinvasive to invasive lesions, and many other genetic
events occur later in progression. Other specific genetic events, such as amplification of cyclin D1 and inactivation of p16, have been tested predominantly in invasive
lesions, and their precise order in the model cannot yet be determined. As noted in the molecular model for colorectal cancer, it is the accumulation and not
necessarily the precise order of these genetic events that determine histopathologic progression. This is best exemplified by some early lesions that demonstrated a
“late” event as the sole genetic alteration.

FIGURE 30.1-1. Preliminary progression model for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Genetic alterations have been ordered by testing a variety of preinvasive
and invasive lesions and determining the frequency of these events at each stage in progression. Inactivation of p16 (chromosome 9p21) and amplification of cyclin
D1 (chromosome 11q13q) have not been directly tested in preinvasive lesions. It is the accumulation and not necessarily the order of these genetic changes that
determines progression.

To test this model directly, we were able to analyze lesions that demonstrated histologic progression from one area to another. In each of the cases, we confirmed that
9p and 3p loss were early events, with other genetic changes occurring in the more advanced histopathologic lesion. Moreover, lesions biopsied in the same area
over time in a few critical patients also demonstrated the same general order of these events. Molecular progression models such as this one allow direct
characterization of early genetic events that might be important in diagnostic strategies. Critical events that occur in the progression from the preinvasive state to the
invasive state (e.g., p53 mutations) may be useful as prognostic indicators in primary lesions. Losses occurring later in progression, such as 11q, 13q, 14q, and 18q,
and loss of p27 protein (another cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor) have been found to correlate with a decrease in survival. 83,84,85,86,87,88,89 and 90 Early losses at 3p14
and 9p21 may persist in premalignant lesions exposed to chemoprevention agents and may predict those likely to relapse despite apparent histologic remissions. 91,92
All of these genetic events may one day serve as appropriate targets for novel therapeutic approaches. This model also has given some interesting insights into the
well-known phenomenon of field cancerization.

FIELD CANCERIZATION
Patients with head and neck cancer often present with second metachronous and synchronous tumors of the aerodigestive tract. Moreover, patients with primary
lesions often have skip areas that are characterized by preinvasive lesions throughout the field. Slaughter 93 originally coined the term field cancerization and attributed
this to a field defect that allowed independent transformation of epithelial cells at a number of sites. Previous studies in bladder cancer demonstrated that multiple
tumors arising in a single patient were derived from the uncontrolled spread of a single transformed cell. 94 These tumors then grew independently with variable
subsequent genetic alterations. For head and neck cancer, our working progression model allowed direct assessment of the genetic changes in surrounding areas of
histopathologic abnormality. In every case, surrounding lesions appeared to share the same genetic events (e.g., critical breakpoints at chromosomes 9p21 and 3p21)
present in the primary tumor, suggesting that a single transformed cell gave rise to the independent and apparently geographically distinct skip areas seen in these
patients. Thus, Slaughter's original observations can be explained as follows: A cell is transformed by a critical genetic event and begins to migrate through the
mucosa. Additional genetic events in one critical lesion eventually give rise to the clinical tumor that is seen on presentation. However, direct molecular assessment of
surrounding regions confirms the presence of clonal cell populations that are not yet fully transformed. Given time, these lesions then arise as other preinvasive or
invasive lesions in the same patient.
Although investigators have reported a conformation of this field cancerization effect in head and neck cancer by detection of discordant p53 mutations in multiple
tumors,95 our working model suggests that this conclusion may be premature. Other genetic events, including loss of 9p and 3p, precede inactivation of p53. Thus,
one of these early events probably leads to initial cell transformation and replacement of surrounding mucosa, whereas subsequent genetic events including p53
appear to arise independently. Thus, these investigators identified the diversity of subsequent genetic events rather than established the distinct clonal origin of these
clinically independent lesions. By examining the pattern of X chromosome inactivation and loss of chromosome 9p21 in multiple tumors from female patients, we
demonstrated a common clonal origin in most of these cases. 96 In support of this result, cytogenetic evidence in at least one patient identified the presence of a
specific chromosomal marker in both primary neoplasms. 97 More recently, apparent second primary tumors of the lung and even rare esophageal tumors were found
to be clonally related to the initial primary HNSCC. 98,99
If minimally abnormal or benign-appearing premalignant lesions show clonal genetic changes adjacent to a primary HNSCC, it is conceivable that normal-appearing
mucosal areas could harbor an occult neoplasm. Clinically detectable cervical lymph node metastases without identification of the primary tumor were assessed by
molecular analysis of multiple surveillance biopsies. We investigated whether the site of origin of the primary tumor could be localized by detection of specific losses
on some of the key chromosomes described in the molecular progression model. 100 In 10 of 18 patients, at least one pathologically benign biopsy demonstrated a
pattern of genetic alterations identical to that present in cervical lymph node metastases. Three of these patients went on to develop primary tumors in the identical or
adjacent mucosal region between 1 to 13 years later. 100 These data further support the notion that histopathologically benign mucosa may harbor patches of clonal
preneoplastic cells that are genetically related to the metastatic HNSCC and that such mucosal sites are the sites of origin of unknown primary HNSCC.

MOLECULAR EPIDEMIOLOGY
The pattern of specific mutations within a given gene sequence may provide important information concerning the etiology (e.g., effect of a carcinogen) of that
particular cancer. 101 The p53 gene can be inactivated by a large variety of distinct mutations and is frequently inactivated in many human cancers, providing an
excellent candidate for this type of survey. Analysis of the pattern of the p53 gene mutation in 129 HNSCC patients has demonstrated that the incidence of p53
mutations is much higher among patients exposed to tobacco and alcohol than among those patients who abstained from both. 49 Moreover, we found that the alcohol
appeared to augment the effect of smoking, consistent with models in which alcohol is not a carcinogen per se, but might lead to an increase in the absorbance of
carcinogens contained within cigarette smoke. Furthermore, we found that CpG mutations are rare among mutations patients who smoke cigarettes, whereas they

constituted most of the mutations found in nonsmokers and nondrinkers. C to T mutations at these CpG sites are important because, through methylation and
deamination, they are thought to represent potential sites of “endogenous” mutations. These data thus support a growing body of epidemiologic evidence that
abstinence from cigarette smoke may help decrease the overall incidence of head and neck cancer.

HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS
Human papillomavirus (HPV) has long been thought to play a role in some head and neck cancers. One study of more than 250 patients used PCR followed by
definitive techniques such as sequencing and in situ hybridization to search for the presence of HPV in head and neck tumors. 102 HPV was detected in approximately
25% of the lesions and virtually all were “high-risk” oncogenic types (HPV 16). Remarkably, most HPV-positive tumors were in the oropharynx. For these HPV-positive
oropharyngeal cancers, they were less likely to occur among heavy smokers and drinkers, less likely to harbor a p53 mutation, and had an improved disease-specific
survival. Another group suggested that HPV-positive tumors may also inactivate Rb and harbor a better prognosis. 103 These new data are consistent with previous
studies with a smaller number of patients 104 or those that used less definitive determine techniques. It appears that HPV-positive oropharyngeal tumors compose a
distinct clinical and pathologic disease entity causally associated with HPV.

DIAGNOSTICS
Clonal genetic alterations can be identified in clinical samples including bodily fluids. These clonal genetic alterations are generally considered to represent specific
markers for the presence of neoplastic cells. In many clinical samples, however, the number of neoplastic cells are greatly outnumbered by normal cells within the
same specimen. Therefore, we and others have developed very sensitive and specific techniques to detect these rare clonal genetic alterations among many “normal”
or wild-type DNA molecules. Clonal ras gene mutations have been detected in the stool of patients with colorectal cancer and p53 mutations in the urine of patients
with bladder cancer. 105,106 Moreover, both ras and p53 oncogene mutations were used as targets to detect neoplastic cells in the sputum of patients with lung cancer.
In one case, the same clonal cell population containing the identical mutation eventually identified in the primary tumor was detected 1 year before clinical diagnosis
in a patient with lung cancer. 107 Analysis of p53 mutations also has confirmed the ability to detect neoplastic clones in the saliva of patients with head and neck
cancer. 108
Telomerase is a ribonuclear protein that maintains telomere length, and reactivation of its activity is associated with escape from cellular senescence. Using a
modified PCR-based assay for telomerase activity, 80% to 100% of primary head and neck cancers were found to display telomerase activity. 109,110 Some authors
have suggested that most dysplastic lesions and preneoplastic lesions also display telomerase activation. 110 Interestingly, 14 out of 44 (32%) of oral rinses from
HNSCC patients were found to harbor telomerase activity, but a small percentage of normal controls also exhibited this telomerase activity. 109 Using a panel of 21
microsatellite markers, clonal genetic changes (loss of heterozygosity or microsatellite instability) were detected in 80% of the saliva samples from the patients with
head and neck cancer. 111 Moreover, exfoliative cell samples were subjected to microsatellite analysis and found to contain the identical changes observed in the
primary tumors.112 It is still unknown if these changes can be identified in early lesions or if they can detect recurrence, as has been seen in bladder cancer through
urinalysis. Clearly, the continued identification of molecular markers will lead to improved diagnostic techniques for squamous cell carcinoma.
A more pressing problem in HNSCC is the high incidence of local-regional recurrence despite aggressive surgical therapy. We used a similar molecular approach as
previously described to probe surgical margins and lymph nodes from patients with primary head and neck cancer after surgical resection. 113 A segment of the p53
gene is amplified by PCR from DNA extracted from the clinical sample. The PCR products are then cloned into phage, transferred to nylon membranes, and probed
with a specific oligomer (small DNA strand) able to recognize the same mutation initially identified in the primary tumor. Thus, a unique DNA probe was synthesized
and used to test the resected surgical margins and lymph nodes from affected patients. Perhaps not surprisingly, many of the apparently normal margins and lymph
nodes by light microscopy were found to contain infiltrating tumor cells by this sensitive molecular analysis ( Fig. 30.1-2).

FIGURE 30.1-2. Schematic representation of molecular staging. DNA is extracted from primary clinical (e.g., margin) material and then tested for the presence of
infiltrating tumor cells that harbor the identical p53 mutations detected in the primary tumor. This polymerase chain reaction–based approach is much more sensitive
than morphologic analysis by standard light microscopy. Patients positive by molecular analysis are at high risk for local regional recurrence.

In an initial pilot trial that contained 30 patients, the results were quite interesting. Although all patients were thought to be completely negative by light microscopy,
final pathology revealed at least one positive margin in five patients. 113 These five patients had markedly positive margins by molecular analysis and were further
excluded from this study. There were 25 remaining patients who were still completely negative by light microscopy. Of these, 13 were positive by molecular analysis
and five have recurred within 2 years (average, 9 to 12 months). Of the 12 patients who were completely negative by molecular assessment, none has recurred at
2-year follow-up. As expected, there is a significant improvement in survival for those patients initially negative by molecular analysis ( Fig. 30.1-3). Other markers
have been used to assess possible recurrence in tumor-free margins. eI4FE (previously described) is associated with increasing overexpression in the progression of
head and neck cancer and also has been detected in apparently tumor-free margins.

FIGURE 30.1-3. Probability of having no local recurrence, according to the results of the molecular assay. Kaplan-Meier curves are shown for the probability of having
no local recurrence in the 25 study patients with surgical margins that were negative by light microscopy but were reevaluated with molecular probes. The probability
of having no local recurrence in patients with positive margins by the molecular assessment was significantly lower than that in patients with negative margins ( P = .02
by the log-rank test).

Although the previous results must be confirmed by a larger prospective trial, the results are already intriguing. Perhaps patients with negative molecular assessment
may be spared adjuvant radiation therapy. Moreover, patients with positive margins will benefit from more aggressive chemotherapeutic approaches and perhaps

novel approaches, including gene therapy. Because staging is so critical for many types of cancer, this approach may be important for other tumors in addition to
head and neck cancer.
The identification of new genes and other molecular markers will help in the early detection of head and neck cancer and may already provide useful prognostic
information regarding clinical tumor behavior. As we further understand critical pathways in the genesis of these tumors, chemotherapeutic, pharmacologic, and
genetic approaches may all be useful in either reestablishing or abrogating newly established pathways that lead to tumor growth. These discoveries will eventually
lead to improved surgical techniques, chemoprevention strategies, and novel therapeutic approaches.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model of colorectal tumorigenesis. Cell 1990;61:759.
2. Ankathil R, Mathew A, Joseph F. Is oral cancer susceptibility inherited? Eur J Oral Oncol 1996;32B:63.
3. Gorsky M, Littner M, Sukman Y. The prevalence of oral cancer in relation to the ethnic origin of the Jewish population. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1994;78(3):408.
4. Foulkes WD, Brunet JS, Kowalski LP. Family history is a risk factor for squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck in Brazil: a case control study. Int J Cancer 1995;63:769.
5. Jeffries S, Eeles R, Goldgar D, et al. The role of genetic factors in predisposition to squamous cell cancer of the head and neck. Br J Cancer 1999;79(5/6):865.
6. Cheng L, Sturgis EM, Eicher SA, et al. Glutathione S-transferase polymorphisms and risk of squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Int J Cancer 1999;84:220.
7. Morita S, Yano M, Tsujinaka T, et al. Genetic polymorphisms of drug-metabolizing enzymes and susceptibility to head-and-neck squamous-cell carcinoma. Int J Cancer 1999;80:685.
8. Jourenkova-Mironova N, Voho A, Bouchardy C, et al. Glutathione S-transferase GSTM3 and GSTP1 genotypes and larynx cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1999;8:185.
9. Nazar-Stewart V, Vaughan TL, Burt RD, et al. Glutathione S-transferase M1 and susceptibility to nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1999;8:547.
10. Lazarus P, Sheikh SN, Ren Q, et al. p53, but not p16 mutations in oral squamous cell carcinomas are associated with specific CYP1A1 and GSTM1 polymorphic genotypes and patient use.
Carcinogenesis 1998;19:509.
11. Jourenkova N, Reinikainen M, Bouchardy C, et al. Larynx cancer risk in relation to glutathione S-transferase M1 and T1 genotypes and tobacco smoking. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1998;7:19.
12. Park JY, Muscat JE, Ren Q, et al. CYP1A1 and GSTM1 polymorphisms and oral cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1997;6:791.
13. Cloos J, Nieuwenhuis EJ, Boomsma DI, et al. Inherited susceptibility to bleomycin-induced chromatid breaks in cultured peripheral blood lymphocytes. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1125.
14. Cheng L, Eicher SA, Guo Z, et al. Reduced DNA repair capacity in head and neck cancer patients. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1998;7:465.
15. Wang LE, Sturgis EM, Eicher SA, et al. Mutagen sensitivity to benzo(a)pyrene diol epoxide and the risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:1773.
16. Renan MJ. How many mutations are required for tumorigenesis? Implications from human cancer data. Mol Carcinog 1993;7:139.
17. Jin Y, Mertens F, Mandahl N, et al. Chromosome abnormalities in eight-three head and neck squamous cell carcinomas: influence of culture conditions on karyotypic pattern. Cancer Res
1993;53:2140.
18. Van Dyke DL, Worsham MJ, Benninger MS, et al. Recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities in squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck region. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1994;9:192.
19. Cowan JM, Beckett MA, Weichselbaum RR. Chromosome changes characterizing in vitro response to radiation in human squamous cell carcinoma lines. Cancer Res 1993;53:5542.
20. Visakorpi T, Hyytinen E, Koivisto P, et al. In vivo amplification of the androgen receptor gene and progression of human prostate cancer. Nat Genet 1995;9:401.
21. Brzoska PM, Levin NA, Fu KK, et al. Frequent novel DNA copy number increase in squamous cell head and neck tumors. Cancer Res 1995;55:3055.
22. Bishop JM. Molecular themes in oncogenes. Cell 1991;64:235.
23. Berenson JR, Yan J, Micke RA. Frequent amplification of the bcl-1 locus in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. Oncogene 1989;4:1111.
24. Callender T, El-Nagger AK, Lee MS, et al. PRAD-1 (CCND1)/cyclin D1 oncogene amplification in primary head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer (Phila) 1994;74:152.
25. Jares P, Fernández PL, Campo E, et al. PRAD-1/cyclin D1 gene amplification correlates with messenger RNA overexpression and tumor progression in human laryngeal carcinomas. Cancer
Res 1994;54:4813.
26. Trink B, Okami K, Wu L, et al. A new p53 homologue. Nat Med 1998;4:747.
27. Hibi K, Trink B, Patturajan M, et al. AIS is an oncogene amplified in squamous cell carcinoma. PNAS (in press).
28. Celli J, Dujif P, Hamel B, et al. Heterozygous germline mutations in the p53 homologue p63 are the cause of EEC syndrome. Cell 1999;99:143.
29. Yang A, Schweitzer R, Sun D, et al. p63 is essential for regenerative proliferation in limb, craniofacial and epithelial development. Nature 1999;398:714.
30. Hunter T, Pines J. Cyclins and cancer. II. Cyclin D and CDK inhibitors come of age. Cell 1994;79:573.
31. Okami K, Reed AL, Cairns P, et al. Cyclin D1 amplification is independent of p16 inactivation in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Oncogene 1999;18:3541.
32. Grandis JR, Tweardy DJ. Elevated levels of transforming growth factor alpha and epidermal growth factor receptor messenger RNA are early markers of carcinogenesis in head and neck
cancer. Cancer Res 1993;53:3579.
33. He Y, Zeng Q, Drenning SD, et al. Inhibition of human squamous cell carcinoma growth in vivo by epidermal growth factor receptor antisense RNA transcribed from the U6 promoter. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1998;90:1080.
34. Grandis JR, Drenning SD, Chakraborty A, et al. Requirement of Stat3 but not Stat1 activation for epidermal growth factor receptor-mediated cell growth in vitro. J Clin Invest 1998;102:1385.
35. Sorrells DL, Ghali GE, Meschonat C, et al. Competitive PCR to detect eIF4E gene amplification in head and neck cancer. Head Neck 1999;21:60.
36. Sorrells DL, Meschonat C, Black D, Li BD. Pattern of amplification and overexpression of the eukaryotic initiation factor 4E gene in solid tumor. J Surg Res 1999;85:37.
37. Nathan CA, Franklin S, Abreo FW, et al. Expression of eIF4E during head and neck tumorigenesis: possible role in angiogenesis. Laryngoscope 1999;109:1253.
38. Chan G, Boyle JO, Yang EK, et al. Cyclooxygenase-2 expression is up-regulated in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Cancer Res 1999;59:991.
39. Wang X, Pavelic ZP, Li Y, et al. Overexpression and amplification of glutathione S-transferase pi gene in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3;111.
40. Markowitz S, Wang J, Myeroff L, et al. Inactivation of the type II TGF-beta receptor in colon cancer cells with microsatellite instability. Science 1995;268:1336.
41. Garrigueantar L, Munozantonia T, Antonia SJ, et al. Missense mutations of the transforming growth factor beta type II receptor in human head and neck squamous carcinoma cells. Cancer Res
1995;55:3982.
42. Wang D, Song H, Evans JA, et al. Mutation and downregulation of the transforming growth factor beta type II receptor gene in primary squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck.
Carcinogenesis 1997;18:2285.
43. Lippman SM, Spitz MR, Huber MH, Hong WK. Strategies for chemoprevention study of premalignancy and second primary tumors in the head and neck. Curr Opin Oncol 1995;7:234.
44. Lotan R, Xu XC, Lippman SM, et al. Suppression of retinoic acid receptor-beta in premalignant oral lesions and its up-regulation by isotretinoin. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1405.
45. Weber JL, May PE. Abundant class of human DNA polymorphisms which can be typed using the polymerase chain reaction. Am J Hum Genet 1989;44:388.
46. Knudson AG Jr. Mutation and cancer: statistical study of retinoblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1971;68:820.
47. Hollstein M, Sidransky D, Vogelstein B, Harris C. p53 mutations in human cancer. Science 1991;253:49.
48. Boyle JO, Koch W, Hruban RH, et al. The incidence of p53 mutations increases with progression of head and neck cancer. Cancer Res 1993;53:4477.
49. Brennan JA, Boyle JO, Koch WM, et al. Association between cigarette smoking and mutation of the p53 gene in head and neck squamous carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1995;332:712.
50. Nawroz H, van der Riet P, Hruban RH, et al. Allelotype of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Res 1994;54:1152.
51. Ahsee KW, Cooke TG, Pickford IR, et al. An allelotype of squamous carcinoma of the head and neck using microsatellite markers. Cancer Res 1994;54:1617.
52. van der Riet P, Nawroz H, Hruban RH, et al. Frequent loss of chromosome 9p21-22 early in head and neck cancer progression. Cancer Res 1994;54:1156.
53. Kamb A, Gruis NA, Weaver-Feldhaus J, et al. A cell cycle regulator potentially involved in genesis of many tumor types. Science 1994;264:436.
54. Hussussian CJ, Struewing JP, Goldstein AM, et al. Germline p16 mutations in familial melanoma. Nat Genet 1994;8:15.
55. Munro J, Stott FJ, Vousden KH, et al. Role of the alternative INK4A proteins in human keratinocyte senescence: evidence for the specific inactivation of p16INK4A upon immortalization.
Cancer Res 1999;59:2516.
56. Zhang SY, Kleinszanto AJP, Sauter ER, et al. Higher frequency of alterations in the p16/CDKN2 gene in squamous cell carcinoma cell lines than in primary tumors of the head and neck.
Cancer Res 1994;54:5050.
57. Cairns P, Mao L, Merlo A, et al. Low rate of p16 (MTS1) mutations in primary tumors with 9p loss. Science 1994;265:415.
58. Merlo A, Herman JG, Mao L, et al. 5' CpG island methylation is associated with transcriptional silencing of the tumour suppressor p16/CDKN2/MTS1 in human cancers. Nat Med 1995;7:686.
59. Cairns P, Polascik TJ, Eby Y, et al. Frequency of homozygous deletion at p16/CDKN2 in primary human tumors. Nat Genet 1995;11:210.
60. Reed A, Califano J, Cairns P, et al. High frequency of p16CDKN2/MTS-1/INK4A inactivation in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Res 1996;56:3630.
61. Papadimitrakopoulou V, Izzo J, Lippman SM, et al. Frequent inactivation of p16INK4a in oral premalignant lesions. Oncogene 1997;14:1799.
62. Mao L, Merlo A, Bedi G, et al. A novel p16 INK4A transcript. Cancer Res 1995;55:2995.
63. Liggett WH Jr, Sewell DA, Rocco J, et al. p16 and p16b are potent growth suppressors of head and neck squamous carcinoma cells in vitro. Cancer Res 1996;56:4119.
64. Zhang Y, Xiong Y, Yarbrough WG. ARF promotes MDM2 degradation and stabilizes p53: ARF-INK4a locus deletion impairs both the Rb and p53 tumor suppression pathways. Cell 1998;92:725.
65. Pomerantz J, Schreiber-Agus N, Liegeois NJ, et al. The INK4a tumor suppressor gene product, p19 ARF, interacts with MDM2 and neutralizes MDM2's inhibition of p53. Cell 1998;92:713.
66. Kamijo T, Zindy F, Roussel MF, et al. Tumor suppression at the mouse INK4a locus mediated by the alternative reading frame product p19 ARF. Cell 1997;91:649.
67. Sanchez-Cespedes M, Reed AL, Buta M, et al. Inactivation of the INK4A/ARF locus frequently coexists with TP53 mutations in nonsmall cell lung cancer. Oncogene 1999;18:5843.
68. Maestro R, Gasparotto D, Vuksavljevic T, et al. Three discrete regions of deletion in head and neck cancers. Cancer Res 1993;53:5775.
69. Wu CL, Sloan P, Read AP, et al. Deletion mapping on the short arm of chromosome 3 in squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity. Cancer Res 1994;54:6484.
70. Chen YJ, Chen PH, Lee MD, Chang JG. Aberrant FHIT transcripts in cancerous and corresponding non-cancerous lesions of the digestive tract. Int J Cancer 1997;72:955-.
71. Mao L, Fan YH, Lotan R, Hong WK. Frequent abnormalities of FHIT, a candidate tumor suppressor gene, in head and neck cancer cell lines. Cancer Res 1996;56:5128.
72. Hartwell LH, Kastan MB. Cell cycle control and cancer. Science 1994;266:1821.
73. Koch WM, Brennan JA, Zahurak M, et al. p53 mutation and locoregional treatment failure in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1580.
74. Okami K, Wu L, Riggins G, et al. Analysis of PTEN/MMAC1 alterations in aerodigestive tract tumors. Cancer Res 1998;58:509.
75. Shao X, Tandon R, Samara G, et al. Mutational analysis of the PTEN gene in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Int J Cancer 1998;77:684.
76. Gasparotto D, Vukosavljevic T, Piccinin S, et al. Loss of heterozygosity at 10q in tumors of the upper respiratory tract is associated with poor prognosis. Int J Cancer 1999;84:432.
77. Yoo GH, Xu HJ, Brennan JA, et al. Infrequent inactivation of the retinoblastoma gene despite frequent loss of chromosome 13q in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Res
1994;54:4603.
78. Wu CL, Roz L, Sloan P, et al. Deletion mapping defines three discrete areas of allelic imbalance on chromosome arm 8p in oral and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 1997;20:347.
79. Sunwoo JB, Sun PC, Gupta VK, et al. Localization of a putative tumor suppressor gene in the sub-telomeric region of chromosome 8p. Oncogene 1999;18:2651.
80. Ishwad CS, Shuster M, Bockmuhl U, et al. Frequent allelic loss and homozygous deletion in chromosome band 8p23 in oral cancer. Int J Cancer 1999;80:25.
81. Wang XL, Uzawa K, Miyakawa A, et al. Localization of a tumour-suppressor gene associated with human oral cancer on 7q31.1. Int J Cancer 1998;75:671.
82. Papadimitrakopoulou VA, Oh Y, El-Naggar A, et al. Presence of multiple incontiguous deleted regions at the long arm of chromosome 18 in head and neck cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:539.
83. Pearlstein RP, Benninger MS, Carey TE, et al. Loss of 18q predicts poor survival of patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1998;21:333.
84. Kim SK, Fan Y, Papadimitrakopoulou V, et al. DPC4, a candidate tumor suppressor gene, is altered infrequently in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Res 1996;56:2519.
85. Califano J, van der Riet P, Westra W, et al. A genetic progression model for head and neck cancer: implications for field cancerization. Cancer Res 1996;56:2488.

86. Ogawara K, Miyakawa A, Shiba M, et al. Allelic loss of chromosome 13q14.3 in human oral cancer: correlation with lymph node metastasis. Int J Cancer 1998;79:312.
87. Lee DJ, Koch WM, Yoo G, et al. Impact of chromosome 14q loss on survival in primary head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:501.
88. Lazar AD, Winter MR, Nogueira CP, et al. Loss of heterozygosity at 11q23 in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck is associated with recurrent disease. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:2787.
89. Mineta H, Miura K, Suzuki I, et al. Low p27 expression correlates with poor prognosis for patients with oral tongue squamous cell carcioma. Cancer 1999;85:1011.
90. Venkatesan TK, Kuropkat C, Caldarelli DD, et al. Prognostic significance of p27 expression in carcinoma of the oral cavity and oropharynx. Laryngoscope 1999;109:1329.
91. Mao L, Lee JS, Fan YH, et al. Frequent microsatellite alterations at chromosomes 9p21 and 3p14 in oral premalignant lesions and their value in cancer risk assessment. Nat Med 1996;2:682.
92. Mao L, El-Naggar AK, Papadimitrakopoulou V, et al. Phenotype and genotype of advanced premalignant head and neck lesions after chemopreventive therapy. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90:1545.
93. Slaughter DL, Southwick HW, Smejkal W. “Field cancerization” in oral stratified squamous epithelium: clinical implications of multicentric origin. Cancer (Phila) 1953;6: 963.
94. Sidransky D, Preisinger AC, Frost P, et al. Clonal origin of metachronous tumors of the bladder. N Engl J Med 1992;326:737.
95. Chung KY, Mukhopadhyay T, Kim J, et al. Discordant p53 gene mutations in primary head and neck cancers and corresponding second primary cancers of the upper aerodigestive tract. Cancer
Res 1993;53:1676.
96. Bedi GC, Westra WH, Gabrielson E, et al. Multiple head and neck tumors: evidence for a common clonal origin. Cancer Res 1996;56:2484.
97. Worsham MJ, Wolman SR, Carey TE, et al. Common clonal origin of synchronous primary head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. Hum Pathol 1995;26:251.
98. Leong PP, Rezai B, Koch WM, et al. Distinguishing second primary tumors from lung metastases in patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:972.
99. Califano J, Leong PL, Koch WM, et al. Second esophageal tumors in patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma: an assessment of clonal relationships. Clin Cancer Res
1999;5:1862.
100. Califano J, Westra WH, Meininger G, et al. Unknown primary head and neck squamous cell carcinoma: molecular identification of the site of origin. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999; 91:599.
101. Harris CC, Hollstein M. Clinical implication of the p53 tumor-suppressor gene. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1318.
102. Gillison ML, Koch WM, Spafford M, et al. Causal association between human papillomavirus and a subset of head and neck cancers. JNCI (in press).
103. Andl T, Kahn T, Pfuhl A, et al. Etiological involvement of oncogenic human papillomavirus in tonsillar squamous cell carcinomas lacking retinoblastoma cell cycle control. Cancer Res
1998;58:5.
104. Haraf DJ, Nodzenski E, Brachman D, et al. Human papilloma virus and p53 in head and neck cancer: clinical correlates and survival. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:755.
105. Sidransky D, Tokino T, Frost P, et al. Identification of ras oncogene mutations in the stool of patients with curable colorectal tumors. Science 1992;256:102.
106. Sidransky D, Von Eschenbach A, Tsai YC, et al. Identification of p53 gene mutations in bladder cancers and urine samples. Science 1991;252:706.
107. Mao L, Hruban RH, Boyle JO, et al. Detection of oncogene mutations in sputum precedes diagnosis of lung cancer. Cancer Res 1994;54:1634.
108. Boyle JB, Mao L, Brennan JA, et al. Gene mutations in saliva as molecular markers for head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. Am J Surg 1994;168:429.
109. Califano JA, Ahrendt S, Meininger G, et al. Detection of telomerase activity in oral rinses from head and neck squamous cell cancer patients. Cancer Res 1996;56:5720.
110. Mao L, El-Naggar AK, Fan YH, et al. Telomerase activity in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and adjacent tissues. Cancer Res 1996;56:5600.
111. Spafford MF, Koch WM, Reed AL, et al. Detection of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma in saliva by microsatellite analysis. 2000 ( submitted).
112. Rosin MP, Epstein JB, Berean K, et al. The use of exfoliative cell samples to map clonal genetic alterations in the oral epithelium of high-risk patients. Cancer Res 1997;57:5258.
113. Brennan JA, Mao L, Hruban RH, et al. Molecular assessment of histopathologic staging. N Engl J Med 1995;332:429.

SECTION 30.2 Tumors of the Nasal Cavity and Paranasal Sinuses, Nasopharynx, Oral Cavity, and Oropharynx
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 30.2
Tumors of the Nasal Cavity and Paranasal Sinuses, Nasopharynx, Oral Cavity, and Oropharynx
STIMSON P. SCHANTZ
LOUIS B. HARRISON
ARLENE A. FORASTIERE
Introduction
Anatomy
Pathology
Premalignancy
Staging and Screening
Staging
Screening for Primary Cancers
Screening for Second Primary Cancers
Treatment
Pretreatment Considerations
General Principles of Surgery
General Principles of Radiation Therapy
Principles of Chemotherapy: Recurrent and Metastatic Disease
Single Agent Chemotherapy
Combination Chemotherapy
Randomized Trials of Single and Combination Chemotherapy Regimens
Biologic Targeted Therapies
Principles of Chemotherapy: Previously Untreated Disease
Induction Chemotherapy
Nonrandomized Trials of Induction Chemotherapy
Randomized Trials of Induction Chemotherapy
Postoperative Adjuvant Treatment
Adjuvant Chemotherapy
Adjuvant Chemoradiotherapy
Concurrent Chemoradiotherapy
Results from Metaanalyses
Single-Agent Chemotherapy and Radiotherapy
Combination Chemotherapy and Radiotherapy
Principles of Chemoprevention
Chemoprevention of Oral Premalignancy
Posttreatment Rehabilitation
Nasal Cavity and Paranasal Sinuses
Epidemiology
Anatomy
Pathology
Natural History
Staging and Screening
Treatment
Nasopharynx
Epidemiology
Anatomy
Pathology
Natural History
Staging and Screening
Treatment
Oral Cavity
Epidemiology
Anatomy
Staging
Pathology
Natural History
Lip
Epidemiology
Anatomy
Pathology
Natural History
Treatment
Alveolar Ridge and Retromolar Trigone
Epidemiology
Anatomy
Pathology
Natural History
Treatment
Floor of Mouth
Epidemiology
Anatomy
Pathology
Natural History
Treatment
Tongue
Epidemiology
Anatomy
Pathology
Natural History
Treatment
Hard Palate
Epidemiology
Pathology
Natural History
Treatment
Buccal Mucosa
Epidemiology
Anatomy
Pathology
Natural History
Treatment
Rehabilitation of the Oral Cancer Patient
Oropharynx
Epidemiology
Staging

Base of Tongue
Anatomy
Pathology
Natural History
Treatment
Tonsil, Tonsillar Pillar, and Soft Palate
Anatomy
Pathology
Natural History
Treatment
Pharyngeal Wall
Epidemiology
Anatomy
Pathology
Natural History
Treatment
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The analysis of cancers within the upper aerodigestive tract reveals a heterogeneity of neoplastic processes. Each bears its own unique set of epidemiologic,
anatomic, pathologic, and treatment considerations. This chapter reviews such considerations based on four anatomically defined regions: the nasal cavity and
paranasal sinuses; nasopharynx; oral cavity; and oropharynx.
However, there exist general principles regarding these cancers that may be considered here. Such principles involve anatomy (i.e., primarily the anatomy of regional
lymph nodes within the head and neck), pathology, staging, and screening, as well as general principles of treatment involving either single modality or multimodality
therapy, which are relevant to all sites.

ANATOMY
An understanding of the regional lymph node anatomy is critical to the care of head and neck cancer patients. There are several major lymphatic chains in the neck
containing nearly 200 lymph nodes that run parallel to the jugular veins, spinal accessory nerve, and facial artery and into the submandibular triangle ( Fig. 30.2-1). To
facilitate communication regarding cervical lymph node anatomy, the regions of the neck have been characterized by levels ( Fig. 30.2-2).1,2 and 3

FIGURE 30.2-1. Superficial and deep cervical lymph nodes of the head and neck. (From Shah JP. A color atlas of head and neck surgery . Orlando: Grune & Stratton,
1987, with permission.)

FIGURE 30.2-2. Level classification of regional cervical lymph nodes (see text for description). (From Shah JP. A color atlas of head and neck surgery . Orlando:
Grune & Stratton, 1987, with permission.)

Level I includes nodes within the submental triangle and the submandibular triangle. The submental triangle extends from the midline anteriorly to the anterior belly of
the digastric muscle posteriorly. Its third border is formed by the hyoid bone inferiorly. The submandibular triangle is bounded by the mandible superiorly. The anterior
and the posterior belly of the digastric muscle complete the triangle.
Level II includes the jugular nodes extending from the subdigastric area down to the carotid bifurcation and the nodes surrounding the spinal accessory nerve from the
jugular foramen to the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. It includes the lymph nodes in the upper posterior cervical triangle above the entrance of
the spinal accessory nerve into this triangle.
Level III represents the nodal area principally along the jugular vein between the carotid and its bifurcation, the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle,
and the omohyoid muscle.
Level IV constitutes nodal areas below the omohyoid muscle above the level of the clavicle and between the carotid vessels anteriorly and the omohyoid muscle
posteriorly.
Level V represents nodes in the posterior cervical triangle. Its borders are formed by the posterior edge of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, the level of the entrance of
the spinal accessory nerve, the trapezius muscle, and the posterior belly of the omohyoid muscle.
Specific sites within the aerodigestive tract have a predetermined drainage pattern. A knowledge of this pattern aids in diagnosis. It also affects therapy. Drainage
patterns are addressed in each of the anatomic subsites detailed in this chapter.

PATHOLOGY

The predominant lesion within these anatomically defined regions is squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cell carcinoma can be categorized into three classic
differentiations. Well-differentiated disease shows greater than 75% keratinization; moderately differentiated disease contributes to the bulk of squamous cell
carcinoma and is characterized by 25% to 75% keratinization; and poorly differentiated disease demonstrates less than 25% keratinization. Other variants of
squamous cell carcinoma include verrucous carcinoma, sarcomatoid squamous cell carcinoma, and lymphoepithelioma. Additional pathologic criteria of squamous cell
carcinoma that is believed to be clinically relevant were developed by Jacobsson and others. 4,5,6 and 7 This includes the number of mitoses, presence of vascular
invasion, size of nuclei, degree of inflammatory infiltrate, and pushing or infiltrating borders ( Table 30.2-1).

TABLE 30.2-1. Jacobsson Classification System a

PREMALIGNANCY
A series of pathologic changes from premalignant disease to frank malignancy can occur in the oral cavity. Among the premalignant diseases are leukoplakia,
erythroplakia, hyperplasia, and dysplasia. Each of these types has a propensity for malignant transformation. 8 Histopathologic assessment of leukoplakia reveals
hyperparakeratosis, which is variably associated with an underlying epithelial hyperplasia. Leukoplakia without underlying dysplastic changes is rarely associated with
progression to malignancy (i.e., less than 5% probability of malignant changes). 9,10 Erythroplakia is a condition within the oral cavity and pharynx characterized by red
superficial patches adjacent to normal mucosa. Distinct from leukoplakic lesions as identified previously, erythroplakia is commonly associated with underlying
epithelial dysplasia. Likewise, it can be associated with carcinoma in situ to frank malignancy in nearly 40% of lesions. 9,11
Dysplasia as compared with the previously mentioned two clinical descriptives is a true histopathologic term that is characterized by several morphologic changes,
including the presence of mitoses, pleomorphism, and prominent nucleoli. When dysplasia involves the entire thickness of the mucosa, it is commonly referred to as
carcinomain situ. Dysplasia has been associated with a subsequent risk of progression to frank malignancy ranging from 15% to 30% of cases. 12,13

STAGING AND SCREENING
STAGING
The role and current status of staging for head and neck cancer is undergoing continuous analysis. 14,15,16,17 and 18 Although standard staging has been defined, there is
a growing debate as to what the primary function of staging should be. The American Joint Committee on Cancer Staging (AJCC), however, has described the
principal goal of staging as a means of defining the natural history of disease. Additional goals include the ability to judge therapeutic results between various centers
as well as a means of defining patient prognosis. Revisions to standard staging have continually been offered, 15,16 but today it is based on the TNM classification. T
stage represents extent of primary disease. N represents the extent of regional lymph node metastasis and M is a measure of distant metastasis. The AJCC staging
system, used for classifying TNM status, is periodically revised. 14
The current clinical staging system, although based principally on physical examination, has also incorporated specific radiographic observations of disease status.
Thus, invasion through cortical bone by an oral cavity tumor up-stages a T2 or T3 lesion to T4 (i.e., from stage II or III to stage IV).
Radiographic assessment of cervical lymph node metastases has not been integrated into clinical staging. The benefits of these diagnostic techniques beyond that
provided by standard physical examination are under investigation. 17,18,19,20,21 and 22 Most would consider the combination of radiographic and clinical assessment to be
more accurate than either one alone. Furthermore, growing emphasis is being placed on the advantages of one imaging technique versus another [i.e., the relative
merit of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) vs. computed tomography (CT)]. 17Table 30.2-2 summarizes the relative value of these two techniques in head and neck
imaging.

TABLE 30.2-2. Advantages of Computed Tomographic Scanning and Magnetic Resonance Imaging in the Evaluation of Head and Neck Cancers

The criteria for T staging within the upper aerodigestive tract differs depending on the primary site. N staging and M staging, however, are uniform and therefore are
considered in Table 30.2-3. Table 30.2-4 represents the most current stage classification as defined by the AJCC. 14

TABLE 30.2-3. Staging within the Upper Aerodigestive Tract

TABLE 30.2-4. Stage Grouping Based on American Joint Committee on Cancer Staging Criteria

Additional data continue to accrue regarding the effect of comorbidities in prognostication. Data suggest that these host-related factors provide information beyond
standard AJCC criteria alone. Host factors include the presence of significant heart disease, liver disease, and severe cerebrovascular disease. Survival rates are
significantly reduced if comorbidities exist and are improved with their absence. 23,24 and 25 In a study by Singh et al., for instance, involving 70 patients with squamous
cell carcinoma of the upper aerodigestive tract, patients with Kaplan-Feinstein comorbidity index grades 2 and 3 had a significantly decreased disease-free survival as
compared with those with comorbidity index of grade of 0 to 1. 23 Stage distribution between the two groups was similar.
SCREENING FOR PRIMARY CANCERS
It is intuitive that detection of disease at its earliest stages would improve cancer mortality. Given the degree to which the oral cavity and upper aerodigestive tract can
be easily examined, it would also seem that screening for head and neck cancers would be a readily accomplishable goal. Diminished mortality would be readily
achievable. The significance of screening as a potentially significant modality is emphasized by a review by Smart, who reported that 94% of head and neck cancer
patients had seen a physician at least 1 year before diagnosis. 24 Each patient reported an average of 11 physician visits within a 3-year period before diagnosis.
Smart's review emphasizes that with appropriate training and practice of systematic screening habits by examining physicians, head and neck cancer may be
diagnosed considerably earlier. In that regard, a study by Prout et al. assessed the value of educational programs for health care providers in the Boston area and
provided information that would reinforce that notion. 25 These latter authors noted that health care providers schooled in the oral cancer educational program were
significantly more likely to perform systematic oral screening in subsequent years. These studies emphasize the important role of the physician in the early detection
of head and neck cancer and that such individuals, if properly motivated, are more likely to perform such screening than those less aware of the significance of oral
cancer.
Despite the intuitive benefit that would come with more effective screening, confounding factors may limit success. First, head and neck cancer is a relatively sporadic
disease. Mass screening procedures would detect cancer in only limited instances. Second, individuals at risk tend to be less health conscious. Compliance with
health care advice such as avoidance of substance abuse, good nutritional habits, and regular physical evaluation is not readily achieved in this population. Third,
head and neck cancer patients can often be characterized by diminished social support systems. Access to medical care is hindered, making routine follow-up by a
health care provider difficult. Finally, although it is often stated that a readily identifiable premalignant condition exists (i.e., leukoplakia or erythroplakia), few head
and neck cancer cases can be shown to progress through this premalignant clinical stage. Although head and neck cancers tend to occur late in life, these same
cancers can occur at any time within a 20-year interval. Knowing which patient and when that patient will develop disease remains a conundrum. Furthermore,
whether or not the identification of disease changes its natural history is not clear. We cannot state with certainty the interval required for a tumor to achieve its
initially diagnosed stage. We do not know whether the biologic potential of a head and neck cancer follows the same time course within every individual. Ultimate
tumor aggressiveness may be determined early in its natural history. The window of opportunity to detect the most lethal cancers may be small. No studies have yet
demonstrated that systematic screening diminishes head and neck cancer mortality. Indeed, the Task Force for the Guide to Preventive Services has concluded that
routine screening for oral cancer cannot be recommended. 26
It is not surprising, therefore, that various mass screening programs for head and neck cancer have demonstrated mostly negative results. Jullien et al. and others
have made it apparent that the identification of head and neck cancer is only one part of the process. 27,28,29 and 30 In the assessment of nearly 1000 patients as reported
by Jullien et al., only 67% of the 12 patients noted to have potentially malignant disease were compliant with follow-up recommendations. 27 The experience in Cuba,
likewise, showed similar discouraging results. 28 Annual oral examination had been considered mandatory for all individuals over 15 years of age in Cuba since 1984.
The proportion of early-stage disease was noted to increase during this period of more intensive screening. However, overall oral cancer mortality was not altered. As
in the study by Jullien et al., a major problem was patient compliance in follow-up examinations once the disease has been diagnosed. The investigators of these
large population-based studies conclude that systematic mass screening for head and neck cancer is not a cost-effective process and has little effect on overall
cancer mortality.
Perhaps more significant than the screening process itself and in light of the development of more effective behavioral modification approaches, Cowan et al. have
demonstrated that screening strategies are valuable in identifying the health care beliefs of the provider. 30 Primary care dentists participating in this study were noted
to routinely assess the oral cavity for evidence of disease. 30 However, a minority of dentists routinely recorded information about tobacco and alcohol abuse. The
implication of Cowan's study was that screening was already adopted. What should be developed in the primary care setting is a clearer understanding of the benefits
of health promotion involving substance abuse modification.
There are, however, novel strategies under development that may enhance screening effectiveness. 31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38 and 39 We have previously noted in this brief
review that epidemiologic investigations continue to refine risk estimates. Current computer technology may allow for translating previous risk factor assessments into
clinical strategies that enhance screening efforts. An example involves the use of neural networks. The Oral Cancer Screening Group in England has demonstrated its
potential utility. 31 The performance of the network to identify individuals at increased risk was compared with the results of oral screening by health care specialists.
Over 2000 adults were entered into the study and were asked to fill out a questionnaire that identified ten input variables. The overall sensitivity and specificity of the
screeners as compared with the neural network were comparable. The use of neural networks could be performed, however, at a fraction of the cost.
Other screening techniques under investigation include the use of genetic markers of increased risk, molecular cytology, serum tumor markers, as well as newer
technologies involving optical engineering and the computer sciences. 31,32,33,34,35,36,37 and 38
SCREENING FOR SECOND PRIMARY CANCERS
Head and neck cancer patients are characterized by their high risk of developing second primary malignancies. The majority of these cancers occur within
tobacco-exposed tissue, including the esophagus, lung, and remaining upper aerodigestive tract. This risk has been well characterized and is known to occur at a rate
of 4% per year. 39 Given the high rate of second malignancies within these individuals, numerous screening strategies have been described. Available screening
modalities include laryngoscopy, esophagoscopy, contrast studies of the esophagus, chest radiography, sputum cytology, and bronchoscopy. Newer modalities are
under investigation including the use of molecular assessments of cells within saliva and sputum. 40 Despite this effort, no agreement exists as to the optimal screening
means, including the timing and duration of follow-up. Perhaps the greatest controversy revolves around the role of panendoscopy at the time the patient presents for
treatment of the index cancer. Proponents of this procedure, which includes laryngoscopy, esophagoscopy, and bronchoscopy, cite the high rate of identified second
cancers, reported in one prospective study to occur in 10% of patients. 41 Disease found in this setting is presumed to be of an earlier stage and more responsive to
treatment. Opponents of routine panendoscopy cite the relatively low yield and questionable value in actually altering disease course and survival. 42,43 and 44 A

prospective study by Benninger et al. provided compelling evidence to support the use of screening procedures based principally on symptomatology (i.e., so-called
symptom-directed selective endoscopy). 43 A careful history and physical examination of all newly diagnosed head and neck cancer patients represents the most
effective screening method. Although routine panendoscopy cannot be advocated, in certain individuals its use may be more beneficial. This, in our experience,
includes patients whose index cancer resides within the pharynx and who admit to a long history of tobacco and alcohol abuse. Special attention should be given to
the assessment of the esophagus in these individuals as well as the remaining upper aerodigestive tract.

TREATMENT
PRETREATMENT CONSIDERATIONS
The comprehensive care of the head and neck cancer patient begins with pretreatment considerations including the assessment of general medical conditions,
nutritional status, dental health, and the appropriate choice of medical therapies designed to minimize treatment-related complications. It is beyond the scope of this
chapter to detail the numerous associated medical illnesses that are typically identified in the head and neck cancer patient. Given the prolonged history of tobacco
and alcohol abuse that can be typically identified, diseases involving the pulmonary, cardiovascular, and digestive systems are common. There remain, however,
important considerations that should be stressed. This includes the significance of pretreatment dental care, nutritional support, the effect of therapy on the elderly
patient, and the choice of preoperative medications (i.e., antibiotics for the patient about to undergo major surgical procedures).
The standard of care today for the head and neck cancer patient is the reduction of oral diseases before initiation of treatment. 45,46 and 47 Periodontal diseases,
infections, and caries are common in this patient population. This can lead to loss of integrity of the gingival-crevicular tissues. Left unchecked, significant morbidity
can result to structural elements of the oral cavity in the face of aggressive therapy. Following initial evaluation by the oncologic team, dentulous patients should be
referred to dental colleagues for appropriate oral hygiene. Pretreatment radiographic dental surveys should identify caries and periapical lesions. Other factors that
should be considered include defective restorations, ill-fitting prostheses, and impacted molars. It is generally considered prudent to perform necessary dental
rehabilitation, including extractions, approximately 2 weeks before the initiation of any radiotherapy. This allows for the appropriate healing of extraction sites and
mucosal coverage of exposed bone. In order to minimize delays in the initiation of radiation, dental care can be performed at the time of surgical resection in a patient
who is to undergo multimodality therapy.
The assessment of nutritional status and the choice of pretreatment nutritional regimens is more controversial. Several authors report the common finding of
malnutrition in the head and neck cancer patient. 48,49 and 50 Severe malnutrition has been identified in over 25% of the patients. 48 Furthermore, the presence of severe
malnutrition was associated with increased operative morbidity. 50 This has led to efforts to appropriately quantitate nutritional status through the use of documentation
of pretreatment weight loss, the measurement of triceps skin fold thickness, and the inclusion of various laboratory measures such as plasma protein levels and the
creatinine and height index. To date there has been no conclusive randomized trial of pretherapy nutritional restoration in order to minimize treatment morbidity.
However, Goodwin and Byers have stressed that in the severely malnourished patient, attention should be given to a 2-week pretreatment course of nutritional
support. 48 Such attempts can most often be achieved through enteral means with the placement of either a nasogastric tube or a percutaneously placed gastrostomy
tube.
The care of the elderly patient represents a commonly occurring dilemma. 51,52,53 and 54 The tendency to deny a patient optimal treatment because of the patient's
advanced years should be avoided. In a study by McGuirt and Davis, operative mortality was 4% in 217 patients greater than 65 years of age and not significantly
different than those less than 65 years. 52 In a subset of patients over the age of 75 and with stage III or IV disease, however, the mortality increased to 6%. A
prospective case-control study by Kowalski et al. on elderly patients undergoing head and neck surgery failed to identify any increased frequency of postoperative
complications or mortality as compared with younger patients. 51 The choice of treatment should not be predicated on the age of the patient. Rather, it is the patient's
general medical condition that remains the most critical consideration, regardless of age. In a more recent article by Clayman, 43 patients who were 80 years of age
or older were noted to have no increased postoperative complications than a stage- and site-matched population aged 65 years or less. 54 Of note, the older
population was more likely to have a lesser surgical procedure, more likely to have positive pathologic margins, and less likely to receive postoperative radiation
therapy (RT). Disease-free survival was also decreased in the older population. The perception of an increased risk of treatment-induced complications may
compromise appropriate therapy.
Increasing attention recently has been given to the significance of continued tobacco use in the head and neck cancer population. The data would support the notion
that continued tobacco use following diagnosis of the index cancer leads to an adverse patient outcome. This relates to not only the more obvious problem of
progressive cardiopulmonary disease, but considerations related to head and neck cancer progression as well. Day et al. and others have provided more information
regarding the risk of second primary malignancies in patients who continue to smoke following treatment of their index cancer. 55,56 The risk of second primary
malignancies was significantly higher in the smoking population as compared with those who achieved smoking cessation. This difference was apparent only after 5
years following initial treatment. 55 In another study by Browman et al., continued tobacco use was associated with a decreased likelihood to respond to primary
therapy. 57 This latter study represents an initial report and is limited by its small population size. It does, however, raise an important consideration in the overall care
of these patients, namely, the systematic approach toward achieving smoking cessation. In that regard, several studies have identified characteristics of patients who
are likely to continue smoking habits. 59,61,62 and 63 Interestingly, Ostroff et al. have reported that it is the patients with the best outlook who seem to be the most
recalcitrant. 60 Patients with early-stage disease continued to use tobacco at higher rates than patients with higher stage disease. Strategies are being explored in
order to effectively support the patient through this critical period. 58 The hallmark of any approach should include surgeon-delivered advice as well as the judicious
use of nicotine replacement.
Finally, head and neck surgical oncologists should critically assess the need for supportive therapies in the patient who is to undergo operative procedures. This has
principally related to the choice of perioperative antibiotics. The use of prophylactic antibiotics can only be supported for those individuals undergoing
clean-contaminated surgery (i.e., when it is anticipated that the aerodigestive tract is to be entered) or in those circumstances in which there is frank contamination.
Postoperative infectious complications may occur in up to 30% of the patients. Several studies have addressed risk factors for infectious complications and found
duration of the operative procedure, blood loss, and complexity of the reconstructive procedure to be high-risk variables. 61,62 and 63 Common microbials isolated from
infected wounds include both aerobes and anaerobes with Bacteroides fragilis, Escherichia coli, b-hemolytic streptococcus, Staphylococcus, and Pseudomonas being
frequently identified. Perioperative antibiotics should be started before the operative procedure and should continued for 72 hours postoperatively depending on the
likelihood of infection. Antibiotic regimens should allow for broad coverage. Regimens include combination sulbactam and ampicillin, metronidazole combined with a
cephalosporin, or clindamycin alone. Comparative studies regarding the appropriate antibiotic regimen may be confounded by the definition of infection and rigor in
wound assessment. Regardless of the antibiotic regimen one may choose, however, postoperative infection rates should average less than 15%. 64
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF SURGERY
In the execution of effective surgical management, the single most significant principle is the adequate preoperative assessment of disease extent. Precise and
methodic physical examination of the patient is paramount. Such examination allows for the assessment of adequate extent of surgical excision, which remains for
most cancers the fundamental tenet for achieving cure.
An extension of adequate preoperative assessment is optimal intraoperative exposure of disease. The surgeon should consider appropriate means to achieve
operative exposure. The choice of incision and the ability to mobilize surrounding anatomic structures to achieve exposure is considered later in the text for each
anatomic subsite. Additionally, exposure is facilitated by careful hemostasis. Besides allowing for better operative exposure, minimizing blood loss prevents potential
sequelae associated with blood transfusion. Weber et al. reported expected blood loss for various surgical procedures involving cancers of the upper aerodigestive
tract. 65 Electrocautery dissection had been used by Weber and colleagues, which may explain the relatively infrequent need for blood transfusion. Electrocautery
dissection has been adopted by many experienced surgeons as the preferred extirpative technique.
Additional methods of surgical excision have included the use of the Moh's technique and laser ablation. 66,67 and 68 These techniques, however, cannot be considered
standard surgical procedure at this time.
Surgical Management of the Cervical Lymph Nodes
General principles of surgery exist involving regional lymph nodes as well. The standard in the surgical control of cervical metastases by which various procedures

are judged is the radical neck dissection. The radical neck dissection involves complete removal of the lymphatic pathways within the neck. To ensure complete
extirpation, anatomic structures including the sternocleidomastoid muscle, spinal accessory nerve, and jugular vein are routinely sacrificed.
Developments in the management of cervical lymph node disease involve more conservative surgical procedures. 3,69,70 and 71 These procedures differ from the classic
radical neck dissection principally in the sparing of specific anatomic structures (i.e., principally the spinal accessory nerve and the sternocleidomastoid muscle).
Table 30.2-5 provides a classification of currently used selective neck dissection and details removed lymph node regions.

TABLE 30.2-5. Classification of Neck Dissections

Surgical Management of Disease in the Neck: N0 Neck
Multiple studies have determined that cancers of the upper aerodigestive tract are associated with an approximately 20% to 30% incidence of occult cervical lymph
node metastases, despite clinically negative examination. 72,73 and 74 The overall incidence of occult primary disease is influenced by multiple factors including size and
location of the primary cancer within the upper aerodigestive tract, depth of invasion, and tumor differentiation. 75 These observations have led to the generally
accepted need for elective lymph node neck dissection as part of standard surgical management. Support for this approach has been provided by Spiro et al. 76 Those
patients who did not undergo elective dissection were more likely to present with more advanced neck disease when disease recurred as compared with those
individuals who underwent prophylactic dissection. 76 It should be emphasized, however, that randomized clinical trials that conclusively support the role of elective
cervical lymph node dissection have been limited. Indeed, a study by Vandenbrouck and colleagues failed to find a survival benefit in oral cavity cancer patients
randomized to receive elective dissection. 77 This study was limited by the small number of patients entered.
A debate exists as to the type of elective neck dissection that should be performed. The standard radical neck dissection that encompasses lymph node basins I
through V as well as the spinal accessory nerve, internal jugular vein, and sternocleidomastoid muscle is not indicated in the treatment of occult disease, principally
because of its associated shoulder dysfunction. The debate still exists as to whether to perform modified radical neck dissection versus a more limited selective
procedure. Leemans et al., citing a metaanalysis, report a lower incidence of neck recurrence in those patients treated by a modified neck dissection. 78 Others argue
that a supraomohyoid neck dissection for cancers of the oral cavity is adequate given the limited likelihood of level V metastases and the limited likelihood of disease
recurrence in level V region. In a randomized study conducted by the Brazilian Head and Neck Cancer Study Group, overall survival was the same in patients who
underwent a supraomohyoid neck dissection as compared with patients who underwent a standard modified radical neck dissection. 79 This is despite the observation
that 50% more lymph nodes were identified in the surgical specimen from the population undergoing modified radical neck dissection. The standard supraomohyoid
neck dissection does not, however, encompass level IV nodes. Skip metastases may occur in level IV nodes and disease recurrence in this level has been identified.
These latter two observations suggest that a selective lymph node dissection in oral cancer patients who are clinically N0 should include levels I to IV.
The value of elective neck dissection is further justified by its low risk ratio. When performed by an experienced head and neck surgeon, the procedure does not
require excessively prolonged operative time and can be performed with minimal morbidity. The caveat should be the performance of careful dissection along the
spinal accessory nerve. Indeed, advances in the performance of elective neck dissection have been reported by Kraus et al. 80 The authors investigated the probability
of metastases in the lymph nodes superior to the spinal accessory nerve in patients who were clinically N0. In 44 patients analyzed, only one individual had disease in
this region.
Surgical Management of Disease in the Neck: N+ Neck
The presence of cervical metastases dictates in most instances the use of combination surgery and RT. Surgery alone has been reserved for those situations in which
only a single lymph node is involved with disease and in which there is no extension of disease beyond the lymph node capsule. For patients with evidence of disease
within cervical lymph nodes the most commonly accepted surgical management involves radical neck dissection. A trend, however, is evolving toward a more
oncologically conservative approach designed to preserve shoulder function. Traynor et al. reported on the use of selective neck dissection in the management of the
node-positive neck. 81 Twenty-nine patients were retrospectively reviewed in whom 16 had N2 disease or higher. Only one patient developed recurrence. Again,
however, experience has been limited by the lack of controlled clinical trials designed to answer the question as to the optimal surgical procedure. Pellitari et al.
reviewed their experience with selective neck dissection in 34 patients with multiple pathologically positive lymph nodes who underwent a selective neck dissection. 82
Regional recurrence rates approximated 12%, indicating the adequacy of the surgical resection when used judiciously with postoperative radiation. 83
A major debate in the management of disease in the neck revolves around the handling of the carotid artery. This includes (1) indications for removal of the carotid as
a part of an oncologic procedure and (2) indications and means of carotid artery reconstruction including preoperative assessment determination of cerebral blood
flow reserve. There are those who advocate a less aggressive approach to the carotid, indicating that in the majority of circumstances, actual invasion of the carotid
wall is rare and with careful dissection disease can be dissected away from the vessel without compromising cancer control. Furthermore, in those situations in which
cancer invasion of the carotid artery actually exists, long-term disease control is limited, patients typically die from regional, distant, or both regional and distant
metastatic disease. Finally, and most significantly, a conservative approach to the carotid artery minimizes significant incidence of cerebral vascular morbidity. Carew
and Spiro reported experience with carotid artery resection at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. 84 In their review of extended neck dissections, the authors
noted that in only 3 instances in over 2500 cervical lymph node dissections performed in a 10-year period was carotid artery resection required. Regional disease
control in this population of individuals with predominantly N3 cervical lymph node disease was 71% and comparable with those reports in which carotid artery
resection is more liberally used. None of the three patients who underwent carotid resection was alive at 2 years. The approach at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center also includes the use of brachytherapy implants on the carotid artery in those circumstances in which the surgical peel potentially left macroscopic or
microscopic disease. Others use an intermediate approach for disease encasing the carotid. Adams et al., for instance, reserve resection for instances in which there
is 70% encasement of the vessel. 85 In those situations in which the patient was noted to tolerate preoperative balloon occlusion, survival was 30% at 2 years.
Snyderman et al. have performed a metaanalysis of the reported experience with carotid artery resection in patients with metastatic head and neck cancer. 86 The
overall (disease-free) survival for the group of patients reported was 22% and was similar between those who underwent carotid resection versus those who did not.
Interestingly, survival has not changed in this group of patients over the last 20 years. The authors emphasize the high complication rate, with major cerebral vascular
accidents occurring in 26% of the patients undergoing carotid artery resection. The rate of cerebrovascular accidents was 17% and no difference was seen between
the two groups.
There are an increasing number of reports, however, that demonstrate that carotid artery resection in selected circumstances can be performed safely when preceded
by appropriate presurgical assessment of collateral blood flow from the opposite cerebral hemisphere through the circle of Willis. This approach is justified by a
classic pathologic report by Huvos et al., who showed that metastatic squamous cell carcinoma can be microscopically identified invading the carotid adventitia in up
to 30% of cases in which disease is adjacent to the vessel. 87 Vascular surgeons have used pressure flow studies that assess the patency of collateral blood flow,
mostly contributed through the circle of Willis, to determine the safety of carotid occlusion. Hays et al. reported that back flow pressure of 50 mm Hg was safe for
temporary occlusion and/or ligation. 88 The current protocol of Adams et al. is to perform angiography to demonstrate nonstenotic patent carotid arteries, spontaneous
crossover, and an intact circle of Willis. Patients also undergo an angiogram with controlled balloon inflation for 30 minutes. If tolerated, a xenon CT scan to assess

the likelihood of successful outcome follows. 85
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF RADIATION THERAPY
For early-stage disease, both radiation and surgery are frequently curative and can produce similar rates of cure. Selection of treatment must be individualized to
each patient and must consider issues such as cosmetic and functional outcome, quality of life, speed with which treatment can be completed, sequelae of each
modality, patient reliability, risk of subsequent cancers, and capacity of salvage therapy should there be a recurrence.
For advanced-stage disease, surgery and radiotherapy are often combined (for resectable cases). When this is done, radiation is usually delivered postoperatively.
Peters et al. reported a prospective randomized trial evaluating various dose levels for postoperative radiation in locoregionally advanced head and neck cancer. 89
They found that a dose of 57.6 Gy in daily fractions of 1.8 Gy were superior to doses of 54 Gy. For patients with extracapsular spread in the lymph nodes in the neck,
doses of 63 Gy were superior to 57.6 Gy. Doses above 63 Gy did not appear warranted. Typical indications for postoperative radiation include T3 to T4 primary, close
or involved margins for any primary, the presence of nodal metastases, especially extracapsular extension, and factors such as perineural invasion, soft tissue
extension, and so forth. Ang updated this experience, assessing the effect of a variety of risk factors and total treatment time (surgery plus radiation) on outcome. 90
High-risk features included extracapsular extension, oral cavity primary, positive mucosal margins, nerve invasion, more than one node involved, more than one nodal
station involved, node size greater than 3 cm, and greater than a 6-week interval between surgery and radiation. Patients with none of these features did not receive
RT. Those with one adverse feature in addition to extracapsular extension were considered intermediate risk, and those with more than one feature plus extracapsular
extension were considered high risk. Locoregional control for low-risk patients (no RT) and intermediate-risk patients (57.6 Gy) was greater than 90%, compared with
68% for high-risk (63 Gy) patients ( P = .004). Actuarial 4-year survival by risk was 83%, 66%, and 43%, respectively. Those who began radiation more than 6 weeks
after surgery and whose total therapy time extended beyond 12 to 13 weeks also had worse outcomes.
There are other groups of patients with advanced disease that are treated differently, and these subjects are covered in this chapter. Those with small primary lesions
and neck metastases can be treated with definitive RT to the primary and neck, plus a neck dissection. This is especially true for pharyngeal wall, oropharynx, and
larynx cancers. Patients who have resectable larynx cancer but who would require total laryngectomy are often treated with organ-preserving therapy combining
chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Either that approach or radiation alone (neck dissection) is often used for base of tongue and tonsil lesions, for the purpose of
preserving organ function.
A variety of fractionation programs have been used by different groups. 91 The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) reported a prospective trial looking at four
different schedules: conventional fractionation (70 Gy/35 fractions/7 weeks) versus hyperfractionation (81.6 Gy/68 fractions/7 weeks) versus accelerated fractionation
with split (67.2 Gy/42 fractions/6 weeks including 2 weeks rest after 38.4 Gy) versus accelerated fractionation with concomitant boost (72 Gy/42 fractions/6 weeks),
which used a twice a day concomitant boost during the last 12 treatment days. 92 The latter schedule provided better 2-year locoregional control than standard
fractionation, and will be the standard treatment in future RTOG trials for locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.
For unresectable disease, combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy has become the standard of care. Many of these trials are reviewed in this chapter. Interestingly,
a combined modality experience using cisplatin and RT has been reported, using a concomitant boost schedule not dissimilar to the RTOG experience. Harrison et al.
have reported long-term results of a program using 70 Gy/6 weeks using a concomitant boost during weeks 5 and 6, as well as cisplatin, 100 mg/m 2 on days 1 and
22.93,94 and 95 Three-year local control for unresectable paranormal sinus cancers, T4 nasopharynx cancers, unresectable oropharynx cancers, and unresectable larynx
and hypopharynx cancers were 78%, 78%, 64%, and 100%, although there were only six patients in the latter category. Unresectable oral cavity cancers fared poorly.
Merlano et al. reported a prospective, randomized trial comparing radiation alone with an alternating chemotherapy and radiation approach. This trial is reviewed later
in this chapter, in Combination Chemotherapy and Radiotherapy, but revealed an improved outcome in the chemotherapy and radiation group. 96
Side effects of RT are usually separated into acute and late effects. Acute effects generally are related to inflammatory reactions in the tissues within the radiation
field (i.e., epidermitis and mucositis). Irradiation of the taste buds can cause loss or diminution of taste, irradiation of the salivary glands causes xerostomia, irradiation
of the lacrimal glands can cause dryness in the eye, and epilation can result from irradiating hair-bearing skin. Whether these effects are temporary or permanent are
usually dose related and site related. Because RT to the salivary glands and oral cavity can have a significant effect on dentition, all patients receiving this treatment
should be seen by a dentist before RT. Any required dental work should be done before the initiation of radiation, and patients should be placed on dental prophylaxis
with fluoride applications. It has been clearly shown that fluoride application significantly reduces dental sequela after RT. 97 It has also been clearly shown that dental
extractions in an irradiated mandible can lead to osteonecrosis. 98
Advances in radiotherapy techniques have had a significant effect on head and neck patients. For external-beam treatments, three-dimensional conformal radiation
and stereotactic radiotherapy are particularly exciting new areas ( Fig. 30.2-3). This allows the physician to plan RT based on three-dimensional reconstruction of the
target area, and three-dimensional planning of the radiation beams. As a result, it is frequently possible to lower the dose to surrounding normal tissue while
potentially escalating the dose to the tumor. 99 Efforts to use this technique in nasopharyngeal cancer have been particularly interesting and are discussed in that
section (see Nasopharynx, later in this chapter). The development of multileaf collimators and on-line portal imaging techniques should make the delivery of
three-dimensional RT more efficient. Intensity-modulated radiation is also being developed.

FIGURE 30.2-3. Dose distribution for a stereotactic radiotherapy plan for a boost for a patient with an unresectable squamous cell carcinoma of the frontal sinus. The
microleaf collimator conforms nicely to the target. The optic chiasm is well protected, as is the contralateral orbit.

Finally, there are biologic and treatment-related factors that have been emerging as clinically relevant. Anemia has been shown to have a significantly adverse effect
on local control 100 and is discussed in greater detail throughout Chapters 30.1, 30.3, 30.4, and 30.5. Attempts to overcome tumor hypoxia with hypoxic cell sensitizers
concomitant with RT (mitomycin C) have also shown success, all suggestions that tumor oxygenation has significant importance in the success of radiotherapy. 101,102
Also, with respect to reducing the side effects of radiotherapy, Brizel et al. have reported a clinical trial that shows that the daily administration of amifostine with
radiotherapy reduced the incidence of acute and chronic xerostomia. This is an area under active investigation. 103

PRINCIPLES OF CHEMOTHERAPY: RECURRENT AND METASTATIC DISEASE
The median survival for patients with recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck is 6 months and the 1-year survival rate is 20%. These statistics have
not been affected by the use of chemotherapy. Consequently, patients with recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck are candidates for phase I and II
trials of experimental therapeutics.
SINGLE-AGENT CHEMOTHERAPY
The activity of older single agents commonly incorporated into combination regimens and newer drugs are listed in Table

30.2-6.104,105,106,107,108,109,110,111,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,120,121,122,123,124,125,126,127,128,129,130,131,132,133,134,135,136,137,138 and 139 The older drugs include methotrexate, bleomycin,
cisplatin, carboplatin, ifosfamide, and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). The details of these phase II studies may be found in older reviews, 111,112 and 113 whereas the activity of
newer agents such as the taxanes, vinorelbine, gemcitabine, and topotecan are covered in more recent reviews. 140,141

TABLE 30.2-6. Activity of Single Agents in Recurrent and Metastatic Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma

Methotrexate is the standard palliative therapy for recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. The standard dose for initiation is 40 mg/m 2/week to be
escalated weekly by 10 mg/m2 increments to 60 mg/m2/week or until dose-limiting toxicity or an objective response is reached. Therapy with this drug is relatively
nontoxic, inexpensive, and convenient. Higher doses of methotrexate in single-arm studies were shown to produce higher response rates. 104,105,106 and 107 Five
randomized trials have shown no significant difference in survival rates between higher doses of methotrexate with leucovorin (as much as 5000 mg) and
standard-dose methotrexate. 108,109 and 110
The methotrexate analogues trimetrexate,142 edatrexate,143 and piritrexim 144,145 and 146 have all been tested in small numbers of patients and seem to be active, but have
no particular advantage over methotrexate. In a randomized comparison of methotrexate and edatrexate, activity was similar but edatrexate was more toxic. 143
Bleomycin has been studied extensively as a single agent and in combination in recurrent and metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Response
rates as a single agent vary from 6% to 45%, with a pooled average of 21%. 111,112 It has largely been replaced by continuous infusion 5-FU, which is synergistic and
more active in combination with cisplatin.
Cisplatin is perhaps the most important chemotherapeutic agent for treating squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Most of the studies have used a dose of
80 to 100 mg/m2 every 3 to 4 weeks. Response rates have ranged from 14% to 41%, with a pooled average of 28%. 111,112 and 113 Whether there is a dose-response
relationship is not yet proven. Single-agent cisplatin in doses of up to 200 mg/m 2 produced higher response rates in pilot trials, 114,115 but a randomized trial comparing
60 mg/m2 doses with 120 mg/m2 doses found no difference in response or survival. 116
Carboplatin has significantly less renal, otologic, neurologic, and gastrointestinal toxicity than does cisplatin, but response rates are lower, in the range of 14% to
30%, with an average of 22%. 111,112,117 Carboplatin should be reserved for treatment of patients with peripheral neuropathy or renal dysfunction that prohibits use of
cisplatin. Of the other platinum analogues, iproplatin trials have yielded much lower response rates and major toxicity in phase II trials. 147,148 Oxaliplatin is under
investigation in gastrointestinal and ovarian malignancies and nedaplatin is in early investigations in Japan. 149 Each drug has its own toxicity profile; the relative
advantage over cisplatin and carboplatin will need to be determined in appropriately designed trials in head and neck cancer patients. 5-FU was studied initially using
intravenous daily bolus dosing for 5 days or weekly in recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck as second- or third-line chemotherapy. Response
rates ranged from 0% to 33%, with an average of only 15%. 111,112 The dose-limiting toxicity of this method of administration was myelosuppression. Subsequent
studies of 5-FU as a prolonged infusion for 96 to 120 hours at a dose of 1000 mg/m 2/d showed mucositis to be dose-limiting, and antitumor activity was increased.
5-FU was synergistic with cisplatin, leading to the establishment of the now standard combination regimen of cisplatin plus infusional 5-FU. 113
Ifosfamide, a synthetic analogue of cyclophosphamide, was limited in early clinical trials by the occurrence of hemorrhagic cystitis. With the use of MESNA, a thiol
compound that inactivates the urotoxic metabolites, standard doses (less than 10 g) and high doses (17.5 g) have been tested in patients with head and neck cancer.
Response rates reported from phase II trials vary widely but average 23%. 118,119,120,121,122,123 and 124 An example are the two most recent reports of single-agent phase II
trials conducted in chemotherapy-naive patients. Huber and associates from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center reported a 26% response rate in 31 patients, 121
whereas the Hoosier Oncology Group reported only a 10% response rate in 21 patients 124 using similar regimens. As with most chemotherapy trials for head and neck
cancer, response rates appear to correlate with extent of prior treatment, the antitumor activity is modest, and an advantage for very high doses has not been
demonstrated.
The taxanes, paclitaxel and docetaxel, bind to the P subunit of tubulin, induce the formation of stable microtubule bundles, and inhibit microtubule depolymerization.
In vitro, docetaxel is the more potent analogue. Docetaxel appears to be schedule independent, whereas paclitaxel appears to be more effective with prolonged
exposure.150,151
Initial paclitaxel trials tested 24-hour infusion paclitaxel repeated every 3 weeks. Three phase II trials evaluating 250 mg/m 2 dose with granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor (G-CSF) support in chemotherapy-naive patients with recurrent or metastatic disease and excellent performance status [Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
(ECOG) 0 to 1] reported complete and partial response in 36% to 43% of patients. 125,126 and 127 The trial conducted by the ECOG observed a 9-month median survival
time and 33% survival rate at 1 year, suggesting a highly active new agent. 125 The European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) Head and
Neck Cancer Cooperative Group conducted a three-arm randomized phase II trial of single-agent methotrexate, 40 mg/m 2/week with dose escalation up to 60 mg/m2;
paclitaxel, 175 mg/m2 by 3-hour infusion; and paclitaxel, 175 mg/m 2 by 24-hour infusion. 128 Dose escalation to 200 and 225 mg/m 2 was allowed for the two paclitaxel
arms. Eligibility differed from other paclitaxel trials by the inclusion of patients with performance status 2. In contrast to the promising results reported by others, of the
123 evaluable randomized patients, complete and partial response rates were 9.5% for methotrexate, 12.5% for 3-hour infusion paclitaxel, and 19.5% for 24-hour
infusion paclitaxel. Median progression-free survival was 2.0, 2.0, and 2.7 months, respectively, and the median survival ranged from 5.4 to 6.3 months. Serious toxic
events such as febrile neutropenia, hypersensitivity reaction, or treatment-related death were observed in 34% of 24-hour infusion paclitaxel compared with less than
10% of patients in the other two treatment groups. The authors concluded that the 24-hour infusion schedule was too toxic for further study, and the antitumor activity
of 3-hour infusion paclitaxel was no better than standard weekly methotrexate. One other trial tested paclitaxel, 175 mg/m 2 by 3-hour infusion, in 20 patients and
reported a 20% response rate. 129
The optimal infusion schedule for paclitaxel has not been established. It is known that at doses of 135 mg/m 2, adequate plasma concentrations of paclitaxel can be
achieved to induce polymerization of microtubules. Studies are in progress evaluating other infusion schedules: 1-hour weekly infusions in doses of 60 to 100 mg/m 2,
3-hour infusions of doses ranging from 175 to 225 mg/m 2 every 3 weeks, and 96-hour infusions of 110 to 150 mg/m 2 every 3 weeks. Toxicities associated with
paclitaxel that vary with the infusion schedule include myelosuppression (primarily leukopenia), sensory neuropathy, cardiac conduction disturbances causing
bradycardia or arrhythmias, and anaphylaxis that requires premedication with corticosteroids. At present, only the 3-hour infusion schedule every 3 weeks can be
recommended.
Phase II trials of docetaxel have been conducted in the United States and Europe. Response rates of 21%, 130 31%, 131 and 42%132 were reported in three small trials
evaluating 100 mg/m2 every 3 weeks. A 30% response rate was reported from a fourth study of 60 mg/m2 every 3 weeks.133 In addition to myelosuppression, the
toxicity profile for docetaxel includes peripheral neuropathy, fluid retention, asthenia, and skin toxicity. Trials using 100 mg/m 2 have been limited to patients with
excellent performance status. Lower doses (60 to 75 mg/m2) are better tolerated and recommended. As with paclitaxel, a weekly dosing schedule of 30 to 40 mg/m 2 is
under investigation.

Three other relatively recent drugs with activity in lung cancer and other solid tumors are the semisynthetic vinca alkaloid vinorelbine, 134,135 and 136 the pyrimidine
antimetabolite gemcitabine, 137 and the topoisomerase I inhibitor topotecan. 138,139 These drugs appear to have only marginal activity in head and neck cancer with
response rates under 20%.
Drugs with an uncertain level of activity because they were studied in broad phase I and II trials before uniform response criteria were established include
doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and hydroxyurea. Response rates of less than 10% have been reported from phase II trials of the plant alkaloids vinblastine and
etoposide. 152,153
COMBINATION CHEMOTHERAPY
Over the last two decades numerous phase II trials of cisplatin-based regimens have been published and detailed in reviews. 111,112 and 113,140,141 Most contain small
numbers of patients and often the results suggest greater efficacy than would be expected with single-agent cisplatin or methotrexate. In the early 1980s, researchers
at Wayne State reported a response rate of 70% and a complete response rate of 27% using cisplatin, 100 mg/m 2 day 1, and 5-FU, 1000 mg/m2/d for 96 hours
repeated every 3 weeks.154 The compiled results of 12 trials including 365 patients with recurrent or metastatic squamous cell carcinoma show an average response
rate of 50% and complete response rate of 16%. 155
Three large multicenter trials reported by Jacobs et al., 156 Forastiere et al., 157 and Clavel et al. 158 compared cisplatin and infusional 5-FU to the single agents cisplatin,
5-FU, or methotrexate. The results of the three trials were remarkably similar. The response rate to cisplatin plus 5-FU was 32% in two of the trials and 31% in the
third; all studies demonstrated a significantly higher response rate for cisplatin plus 5-FU compared with the single agents. However, there were no differences in
median survival rates (5 to 6 months) or 1-year survival (20%) for any of the treatment arms. These response and survival results serve as the benchmark for
comparison of regimens incorporating new agents.
Attempts to improve on the cisplatin plus 5-FU regimen include the addition of leucovorin, continuous infusion bleomycin, 159,160 and 161 bleomycin and methotrexate,162
interleukin-2, 163 and interferon.164 These three- and four-drug combinations result in enhanced toxicity without indications of survival benefit. More recently, two- and
three-drug combinations incorporating paclitaxel or docetaxel have been reported in phase II trials.
Table 30.2-7 and Table 30.2-8 list the results of uncontrolled trials of combination chemotherapy regimens that include paclitaxel or docetaxel. Many consist of
preliminary findings presented in abstract form at oncology meetings. Some studies include only patients with recurrent or metastatic disease undergoing palliative
treatment, whereas others include varying proportions of patients with locally advanced, untreated disease who received two to four cycles before proceeding to
radiotherapy, surgery, or both. Nearly all studies were limited to patients with good performance status who had not received prior chemotherapy for treatment of
recurrent disease. All paclitaxel studies used the 3-hour infusion schedule and docetaxel was infused over 1 hour.

TABLE 30.2-7. Phase I and II Trials of Paclitaxel Combination Regimens

TABLE 30.2-8. Phase II Trials of Docetaxel Combination Regimens

Trials testing paclitaxel in combination with either cisplatin or carboplatin in recurrent and metastatic disease patients (see Table 30.2-7) demonstrate response in
32% to 39% of patients and complete response rates of less than 10%. 165,166,167 and 168 In contrast, a phase I and II trial of escalating doses of paclitaxel and cisplatin,
75 mg/m2, reported by Hitt and associates in locally advanced, untreated patients resulted in a 78% overall response rate and 46% clinical complete response rate. 169
Similarly, Dunphy and associates evaluated paclitaxel in doses of 150 to 265 mg/m 2 combined with carboplatin at area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) 7.5
in 33 locally advanced, untreated patients and observed a 54% overall response and 27% complete response rate. 170 The results were quite similar, adding paclitaxel
to cisplatin and 5-FU: 38% in recurrent disease patients 171 and 81% in locally advanced, untreated patients evaluated for primary site response before definitive local
therapy. 172
Two successive trials adding ifosfamide to paclitaxel and either cisplatin or carboplatin (TIP or TIC regimens) have been reported by Shin and associates from the M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center for the treatment of recurrent disease. 173,174 Both studies combined 175 mg/m2 of paclitaxel and 1000 mg/m 2 of ifosfamide daily for 3 days
with cisplatin, 60 mg/m 2, or carboplatin, AUC 6, repeated at 3- to 4-week intervals. The overall response rate of 55% to 58% and complete response rates of 17% to
18% were encouraging.
Despite the low single-agent activity observed for gemcitabine in head and neck cancer, a 41% response rate was reported by Fountzilas et al. when it was combined
with paclitaxel using a day 1 and 8 schedule every 3 weeks. 175
While the amount of life-threatening toxicity varies with each particular regimen, the data do not suggest that taxane-based regimens are less toxic than older
regimens. Myelosuppression and neuropathy are common, particularly with 3-hour infusion paclitaxel combined with cisplatin while the substitution of carboplatin has
the potential to augment myelotoxicity. All of the combination regimens should be reserved for patients with good performance status, while patients with poor
performance status should be considered for either single-agent chemotherapy or supportive care. The results of these phase I and II series suggest response rates
that are similar to what is reported for cisplatin plus 5-FU and certainly no better, for either untreated patients or for patients with recurrent disease. The only
exception is the response data from the TIP and TIC regimens 173,174 for patients with recurrent disease that needs to be evaluated further in a larger multiinstitutional
trial setting. A randomized trial directly comparing cisplatin plus 5-FU as the standard regimen to paclitaxel plus cisplatin completed accrual in January 2000 in the

ECOG. This trial will provide important comparative data on response, duration of response, survival, toxicity, and cost.
Phase II trials of docetaxel in combination with other cytotoxic drugs are shown in Table 30.2-8. Similar to the studies in Table 30.2-7 for paclitaxel, many include
patients with locally advanced untreated disease for which the overall response rates and complete response are proportionately higher. Only one trial was designed
to test docetaxel and cisplatin specifically in patients with recurrent and metastatic disease. 176 A total of 33 patients were enrolled from Johns Hopkins, Vanderbilt, and
M. D. Anderson, of whom 5 were previously untreated, presenting with far advanced locoregional disease or metastatic disease. The overall response rate was 52%
including a 9% complete response. Toxicity was typical of docetaxel and cisplatin combination regimens with grade 3 to 4 neutropenia observed in 79% of patients,
asthenia in 21%, and grade 3 peripheral neuropathy in 9%. Four other small phase II trials with previously untreated patients constituting one-half to all patients
enrolled reported overall response in 46% to 73% of patients and complete response in 15% to 30%. 177,178,179 and 180
In separate trials, docetaxel has been combined with 5-day infusional 5-FU 181 and with vinorelbine 182 with response outcomes similar to that achievable with cisplatin
plus 5-FU.
Two studies have evaluated the three-drug combination of docetaxel, cisplatin, and 5-FU with or without G-CSF support primarily in patients with locally advanced
inoperable disease before treatment with radiotherapy. 183,184 Each study enrolled under 30 patients and reported overall response of 75% and 80% after several
cycles of chemotherapy. Whether or not this level of response is superior to cisplatin plus 5-FU in a comparable population of advanced head and neck cancer
patients is unknown. The addition of docetaxel clearly leads to a substantial increase in life-threatening toxicities of neutropenia and infection. A large multicenter
randomized trial is under way to address this question.
RANDOMIZED TRIALS OF SINGLE AND COMBINATION CHEMOTHERAPY REGIMENS
Randomized trials comparing combination regimens with either single-agent methotrexate or cisplatin are shown in Table 30.2-9.156,157 and 158,185,186,187,188,189,190,191 and 192
Survival benefit was reported in three trials. 188,191,193 Morton et al. reported median survivals of 4.2 and 4.0 months for patients treated with cisplatin or cisplatin plus
bleomycin, respectively, compared with a 2-month median survival for a no-treatment control group. 188 Campbell et al. reported a significant improvement in survival of
patients treated with cisplatin (8.7 months) compared with those treated with methotrexate (2.7 months). 191 The Liverpool Head and Neck Oncology Group randomized
200 patients to receive cisplatin alone, methotrexate alone, cisplatin and infusional 5-FU, or cisplatin and methotrexate. 193 Although there were no differences in
response rate, survival was significantly better in the three cisplatin-containing arms. In contrast, the three large multicenter trials reported by Jacobs et al., 156
Forastiere et al., 157 and Clavel et al. 158 comparing cisplatin plus 5-FU with single agents all showed a significantly increased response rate for combination
chemotherapy but no benefit in median or 1-year survival rate. No other trials comparing combination regimens with single agents have been reported since 1994.

TABLE 30.2-9. Phase III Trials of Combination Regimens versus Single-Agent Cisplatin or Methotrexate in Recurrent and Metastatic Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the
Head and Neck

Randomized trials comparing combination regimens are shown in Table 30.2-10.161,194,195,196,197,198 and 199 Kish et al. compared cisplatin plus infusional 5-FU versus
cisplatin plus bolus 5-FU. 194 The response rate was significantly higher for infusional 5-FU, but median survivals were 6.7 and 5.0 months, respectively. Response
rates were also significantly higher for the methotrexate plus bleomycin plus vincristine plus cisplatin regimen compared with methotrexate, bleomycin, and vincristine
reported by Clavel et al., 195 but survival was similar.

TABLE 30.2-10. Phase III Trials Comparing Combination Regimens in Recurrent and Metastatic Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Head and Neck

To gain perspective on the many trials that have been reported for palliation of patients with recurrent and metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck,
Browman and Cronin113 performed a metaanalysis of randomized trials published between 1980 and 1992. Based on this pooled analysis of response and survival
data, they concluded that single-agent cisplatin was more efficacious than single-agent methotrexate; the combination of cisplatin and 5-FU was more efficacious than
treatment with single agents; and cisplatin and 5-FU was more efficacious than other combinations.
Since then, two additional randomized trials have been reported. The ECOG addressed the questions of dose response and antitumor activity of the combination of
paclitaxel and cisplatin in patients with recurrent and metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. 198 A total of 210 patients were randomized to receive either high-dose
paclitaxel (200 mg/m2 over 24 hours) plus cisplatin, 75 mg/m 2, plus G-CSF or low-dose paclitaxel (135 mg/m2 over 24 hours) plus cisplatin, 75 mg/m 2. No differences
were observed in overall response rate, event-free survival, and median and 1-year survival rates. The response rate was 35% for patients in the high-dose paclitaxel
arm and 36% for the low-dose paclitaxel group. The median survival of all patients was 7.3 months and 29% of patients were alive at 1 year, suggesting a possible
small advantage over the cisplatin plus 5-FU regimen. Myelosuppression was the most frequently encountered toxicity, grade 3 to 4 neutropenia occurring in 70% of
patients on the high-dose arm receiving G-CSF support and in 78% of patients on the low-dose arm. These results showed no advantage for the high-dose paclitaxel
plus cisplatin regimen, and the toxicities associated with the 24-hour infusion schedule proved excessive for this patient population because of the prevalence of
comorbid disease.
The other randomized trial was conducted by Head and Neck Interferon Cooperative Study Group and addressed the question of whether or not the activity of
cisplatin and 5-FU could be modulated by interferon-a 2b as shown in preclinical experiments. 199 A total of 244 patients with recurrent or metastatic disease were
randomized to receive the standard cisplatin (100 mg/m 2) and 5-FU (1000 mg/m 2/d × 4) regimen with or without interferon, 3 million U subcutaneously, days 1 to 5 of

each chemotherapy cycle, repeated every 3 weeks. There was no significant difference in response or survival rates between treatment groups.
In summary, cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy is more effective than single agents. Response to cisplatin plus infusional 5-FU occurs in approximately
one-third of patients, with complete response in 5% to 15%. An advantage for choosing combination chemotherapy seems to be limited to patients with excellent
performance status, no prior chemotherapy for treatment of recurrent disease, and minimal tumor burden. Durable complete responses and prolonged survival are
possible in this small subset of patients. Randomized trials directly comparing docetaxel and paclitaxel combination regimens with cisplatin plus 5-FU are in progress.
However, it is unlikely that the addition of the taxanes to other conventional cytotoxics will produce substantial gains in survival, reduce toxicity, or otherwise improve
patient quality of life. This underscores the need for new therapies to treat this population.

BIOLOGIC TARGETED THERAPIES
An understanding of the molecular and cellular pathways involved in normal and unregulated cell growth is leading to the development of biologically targeted
therapies. These novel agents in early clinical trials affect signal transduction, cell-cycle traversal, programmed cell death, transcription regulation, matrix invasion,
and angiogenesis. Three targeted therapies in head and neck cancer clinical trials with promising preliminary results are the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFr)
antagonists, cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) inhibitors, and replication competent adenoviruses.
The EGFr is a transmembrane glycoprotein that is a member of the tyrosine kinase growth factor receptor family encoded by c-erb-B. Activation of the protooncogene
results in overexpression of the receptor, which has been demonstrated to occur in over 90% of squamous cell head and neck cancers. Transforming growth factor-a,
EGF, and other growth factors bind to the extracellular domain of the EGFr-stimulating tumor growth through autocrine and paracrine pathways. 200,201 Agents that
block ligand binding could inhibit cell proliferation. Several monoclonal antibodies against the EGFr are in clinical development. 202,203 and 204 The chimeric IgG antibody
C225 developed by Mendelsohn has binding affinity that is equal to the natural ligand effectively blocking EGF/transforming growth factor-a binding when
administered using a weekly intravenous dosing schedule. Enhanced cytotoxicity is observed in combination with a number of chemotherapeutic agents including
cisplatin and paclitaxel, and in combination with radiotherapy. 205 The major toxicity is a follicular rash. Phase I and II trials of C225 with cisplatin are in progress in
patients with recurrent disease and in combination with radiotherapy for patients with locally advanced disease. 204,206 The preliminary response rates suggest
enhanced antitumor activity, which has prompted the initiation of multicenter double-blind placebo-controlled trials in patients with advanced disease.
Another novel compound in clinical trials that affects signal transduction is the cdk inhibitor flavopiridol. 207,208 Cdks phosphorylate key substances that regulate
transition from one cell-cycle phase to the next. In vitro, inhibitors of cdks 1, 2, and 4 block cell-cycle progression at G 1/S and G2/M boundaries. In preclinical testing,
flavopiridol induces cell-cycle arrest and p53-independent apoptosis. Flavopiridol is a particularly suitable candidate drug for study in tumors in which cyclin D is
overexpressed or in which p16, the endogenous inhibitor of cdk4, is deleted. 209 The most commonly deleted chromosomal region in head and neck cancer is 9p21-22,
the locus of p16, and p16 is commonly absent. A phase I trial has been completed by investigators at the National Cancer Institutes, and a phase II trial in head and
neck cancer is under way. 210
A third area of promising clinical research for head and neck cancers involves replication competent viruses. Mutant adenoviruses have been developed that
selectively replicate in and cause lysis of cells deficient in p53-suppressor activity. 211 This takes advantage of the high rate (approximately 45%) of p53 mutations in
squamous head and neck cancers. Phase I and II clinical studies of intralesional injection of the E1B-deleted adenovirus ONYX-015 have shown tumor cell necrosis
and improvement in tumor-related symptoms.212 There appears to be enhanced antitumor efficacy in studies of systemic chemotherapy combined with ONYX-015 and
perhaps more durable responses at the injected tumor sites. 213,214 The status of other novel investigational bioresponse modifiers and gene therapies directly
administered to local or regional tumor is discussed in reviews. 215

PRINCIPLES OF CHEMOTHERAPY: PREVIOUSLY UNTREATED DISEASE
INDUCTION CHEMOTHERAPY
Initial trials of cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy given to newly diagnosed patients before receiving local therapies showed dramatic tumor reduction in 70%
to 80% of patients. This observation suggested that sequencing therapies so that chemotherapy was administered before the tumor vasculature was disrupted might
improve locoregional control and affect survival. Now, more that two decades since the first randomized trial evaluated induction cisplatin and bleomycin before
surgery, 216 we can conclude from many such trials that the induction strategy confers no survival advantage. A role in preservation of the larynx for patients with
locally advanced cancers of the larynx or hypopharynx who would otherwise undergo total laryngectomy has emerged and is discussed in Chapter 30.3. Down-staging
of the primary and regional node disease with three cycles of cisplatin plus 5-FU chemotherapy has successfully allowed for larynx preservation and a reduction in the
rate of development of distant metastases. 217,218
NONRANDOMIZED TRIALS OF INDUCTION CHEMOTHERAPY
In the early 1980s, Wayne State University investigators reported high response rates with the regimen cisplatin and infusional 5-FU 219,220 administered before local
treatment. They achieved a response rate of 88% (complete response 19%) 219 with two courses and 93% (complete response 54%) with three courses of the same
regimen.220 Over the past two decades, thousands of patients have received this regimen (cisplatin, 100 to 120 mg/m 2 day 1, and 5-FU, 1000 mg/m2/d infused over 96
to 120 hours) in clinical research trials and in community practice. Response occurs in 85% of patients, on average, with complete response in approximately 40%.
Two-thirds of clinical complete responses are pathologically confirmed in biopsy or resection specimens. Response varies by site, with the larynx and nasopharynx
being most responsive and the oral cavity less responsive. Cisplatin and infusional 5-FU remains the most active regimen in previously untreated patients. 221,222
Modifications of this regimen to increase the complete response rate have been tested. 223,224,225,226,227,228,229 and 230 This includes trials of cisplatin, 5-FU, and
leucovorin, 223,224 and 225 demonstrating overall and compete response rates ranging from 59% to 95% and 24% to 65%, respectively. The initial reports by Vokes et
al.,223 using oral leucovorin, and Dreyfuss et al., 224 using continuous infusion leucovorin appeared promising; however, long-term follow-up did not demonstrate any
striking improvement in survival over cisplatin plus 5-FU. Severe myelosuppression, diarrhea, and mucositis occurred frequently, necessitating dose reductions in
most patients.
Cisplatin-based combination regimens that include paclitaxel or docetaxel are being tested in patients with locally advanced, unresectable disease before receiving
radiotherapy. The preliminary results of those small phase II studies are listed in Table 30.2-7 and Table 30.2-8.169,170,172,177,178 and 179,184 Colevas and associates from
the Dana Farber Cancer Institute have published the results of an intensive induction regimen containing docetaxel for patients with stage III or IV squamous cell
carcinoma receiving nonsurgical management. 226,227 In a phase I and II trial, the maximum tolerated dose of docetaxel in combination with cisplatin (25 mg/m 2 days 1
to 5), 5-FU (700 mg/m2 days 2 to 5) and leucovorin was 60 mg/m2.226 This regimen required postchemotherapy home infusion of fluids, antibiotics, and G-CSF. In 23
patients, a response rate of 100%, including 61% complete response, was documented after three cycles of chemotherapy. Frequently occurring severe toxicities in
addition to myelosuppression included nausea, mucositis, diarrhea, peripheral neuropathy, and sodium-wasting nephropathy. This regimen is of interest because of
the remarkably high response rate, but the toxicity is prohibitive for general use. A regimen with more manageable toxicity is being evaluated in a multicenter trial. 228
The preliminary results of docetaxel, 75 mg/m 2, plus cisplatin, 75 mg/m2 (group A) or cisplatin, 100 mg/m 2 (group B) on day 1, plus 5-FU, 1000 mg/m 2/d, days 1 to 4,
were reported by Posner. The response rate for 13 patients in group A was 84%, 23% complete and 61% partial; while all 17 patients in group B responded (47%
complete and 53% partial responses). Based on this experience, a phase III trial of taxotere, cisplatinum, and 5-FU versus cisplatin plus 5-FU is being initiated.
RANDOMIZED TRIALS OF INDUCTION CHEMOTHERAPY
Many randomized trials have been conducted to determine if the addition of chemotherapy improves survival, and these are detailed in several reviews. 221,231,232 and 233
A listing of 14 randomized trials published since 1990 are shown in Table 30.2-11.234,235,236,237,238,239,240,241,242,243,244,245 and 246 These trials compared induction
chemotherapy followed by definitive local therapy, as dictated by initial resectability status, versus immediate surgery, radiotherapy, or both. Improved survival
through a decrease in local and regional failure and distant metastatic rates was the primary goal. Studies designed in the latter half of the 1980s up to 2000 (not
included in Table 30.2-7) have focused on organ preservation specifically for primaries in the larynx and hypopharynx. 217,218 The results of these randomized trials are
consistent and fail to demonstrate a survival advantage with the addition of induction chemotherapy.

TABLE 30.2-11. Recent Randomized Trials of Induction Chemotherapy followed by Locoregional Treatment versus Locoregional Treatment Alone

Although many trials have been criticized for methodologic flaws, five used full doses of cisplatin and 5-FU for three to five courses and had adequate power to reach
statistical conclusions. 234,241,243,244 and 245 Only one of these trials found a significant improvement in survival for chemotherapy-treated patients and that was limited to a
subset with unresectable disease. 245 Several studies, however, have found a significant reduction in distant metastases, 216,242,243 but in the absence of improvement in
locoregional control this has failed to affect survival. It is noteworthy that both distant metastases and locoregional failure were reduced in the inoperable subset of
patients achieving a survival advantage reported by Paccagnella et al. 243
The following conclusions can be drawn from two decades of experience with induction chemotherapy:
Induction chemotherapy results in major response rates in 60% to 90% and complete response in 20% to 50% of patients with locally advanced squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck.
Pathologic complete response is documented in approximately two-thirds of complete responders determined by clinical assessment, and these patients appear
to have a survival advantage.
Response to induction chemotherapy is predictive of response to subsequent radiotherapy.
There is no increase in morbidity from surgery or radiotherapy in patients who have received induction chemotherapy.
Although cancers from all head and neck sites are lumped together in almost all the studies, there is evidence that biologic behavior differs with primary site.
No significant difference in overall survival has been demonstrated with the use of induction chemotherapy compared with surgery or radiation alone.
Organ preservation and improved quality of life can result from induction chemotherapy (see Chapter 30.3).

POSTOPERATIVE ADJUVANT TREATMENT
ADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY
Chemotherapy administered after a patient has been rendered disease free with surgery, radiation, or both has been evaluated in three large multicenter randomized
trials.247,248 and 249 The rationale for this approach was threefold. First, definitive surgery is not delayed. Second, tumor margins may become blurred after response to
induction chemotherapy, leaving the extent of required surgery uncertain. Third, up to 20% of patients receiving induction chemotherapy refused surgery once
response was achieved and their symptoms abated.
The sequence of surgery followed by adjuvant chemotherapy and then radiation was a strategy developed to avoid these potential disadvantages of induction
chemotherapy. The Head and Neck Intergroup tested this strategy using three cycles of cisplatin and infusional 5-FU as adjuvant chemotherapy. 247 From 1985 to
1990, 499 patients with stage III and IV resected squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity, oropharynx, hypopharynx, and larynx were stratified into high- and
low-risk groups; high-risk was defined as close surgical margins less than 5 mm, cancer in situ at margins, or extracapsular nodal extension. Randomization was to
immediate radiation or adjuvant chemotherapy followed by radiation. Although the overall comparison of the two treatments showed no significant differences in
survival, disease-free survival, or time to locoregional failure, an analysis of treatment effect on high-risk patients suggested benefit. Improved survival and decreased
locoregional failure that approached statistical significance was observed for the high-risk subset of patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy compared with
those receiving radiation alone. No benefit for adjuvant chemotherapy could be detected for the low-risk patients. Had this trial been limited to high-risk patients, a
significant positive outcome may have resulted.
The RTOG250 retrospectively analyzed survival and locoregional failure rates in three patient cohorts enrolled in RTOG clinical trials: those considered low risk, those
at intermediate risk because of two or more involved regional lymph nodes or extracapsular extension of tumor, and those at highest risk because of a positive
surgical margin with or without other risk factors. At 3 years, the locoregional recurrence rate was 14% for the low-risk group, 27% for those at intermediate risk, and
49% for the highest risk group. Median survival rates were 5.6 years, 2.6 years, and 1.5 years, respectively, for the three groups.
Two other large randomized trials have been performed by head and neck cancer study groups in Japan and France. 248,249 Japanese investigators evaluated a
combination of tegafur and uracil known as UFT, 300 mg/d, for 1 year. 248 Three groups of patients were randomized to observation or adjuvant UFT: 424 patients with
stage II to IV cancers treated surgically, 111 patients with stage II disease treated with definitive radiotherapy, and 25 patients with nasopharyngeal cancer treated
with radiotherapy. Three-year survival results of surgically treated patients showed no significant difference in survival or relapse-free survival, but adjuvant UFT
patients had a significantly lower rate of distant metastases (7.9% vs. 14.6%, P = .034). No benefit could be shown in the patients treated with primary radiotherapy.
Reported only in preliminary abstract form, French investigators randomized 287 patients with extracapsular nodal extension to receive postoperative radiation alone
or adjuvant cisplatin, bleomycin, and methotrexate after completion of RT. 249 Chemotherapy-treated patients had significantly worse overall survival and an increased
rate of distant metastases, but better local regional control.
Several randomized trials that use both induction and adjuvant chemotherapy have been conducted in an attempt to further intensify therapy. 216,251,252 The Head and
Neck Contracts Program, a three-arm trial, compared surgery and postoperative radiation to neoadjuvant cisplatin and bleomycin and to treatment with induction
chemotherapy plus adjuvant cisplatin for 6 months after surgery and radiation. 216 No differences in overall survival were observed, but a significant decrease in distant
metastases was reported for the adjuvant group.
Ervin et al. treated 114 patients with neoadjuvant cisplatin, bleomycin, methotrexate, and leucovorin. 251 After definitive local treatment, patients were randomized to
observation or three cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy. The 3-year disease-free survival rates were 55% and 88%, respectively; partial responders to induction
chemotherapy showed the greatest benefit. The Southwest Oncology Group conducted a feasibility trial of postoperative radiotherapy and three cycles of concurrent
cisplatin followed by three cycles of adjuvant cisplatin plus 5-FU. Compliance was poor, with only 37% of 72 patients completing all six chemotherapy cycles. 252
In summary, there is no role for adjuvant chemotherapy in low-risk patients (negative margins of resection, neck disease staged N0 or N1 without extracapsular
extension). Patients with positive or close margins of resection, two or more involved regional nodes, or extracapsular extension of disease are at increased risk for
both locoregional recurrence and distant metastases. It now seems clear from several studies that at least the rate of development of distant metastases can be
reduced with systemic chemotherapy, but an effect on overall survival has not been shown perhaps because of the lack of large enough randomized trials enrolling
only high-risk patients.
ADJUVANT CHEMORADIOTHERAPY
Improvement in locoregional control through the use of concomitant chemotherapy and radiotherapy may be most feasible in the patient with locally advanced but
resectable disease. Locoregional recurrence is the most frequent site of failure after surgery and postoperative radiation. Extracapsular extension of tumor in cervical

node metastases is well established as an adverse prognostic factor for recurrence. 253,254 and 255
The rationale and potential role of chemotherapy to enhance radiation effects is well known and the clinical experience in head and neck cancer is extensive. 256,257,258
and 259 Before 1999, this experience was almost exclusively limited to patients with bulky unresectable disease. The RTOG conducted a small feasibility study treating
51 patients with resected stage IV disease, positive margins, or both, with postoperative RT and concurrent cisplatin, 100 mg/m 2 every 3 weeks for three cycles. 260
Locoregional control was significantly better compared with matched historic controls. This pilot trial and the positive results of a randomized trial by Bachaud et al. 261
led to a Head and Neck Intergroup Phase III trial now in progress. Resected patients with positive margins, metastases to multiple regional nodes, and the presence
of extracapsular spread of disease are randomized to receive postoperative RT with or without concurrent cisplatin (100 mg/m 2 days 1, 22, and 43).
Four randomized trials of postoperative chemoradiation have been published. 261,262,263 and 264 Bachaud et al. randomized 88 patients with extracapsular spread of
disease in regional neck node metastases to receive postoperative RT alone or postoperative RT plus cisplatin, 50 mg intravenously weekly. 261 After a minimum
follow-up of 5 years, the median survival (22 months vs. 40 months) and 5-year survival (13% vs. 36%) were significantly better for the chemoradiotherapy group.
Radiation-treated patients had a higher locoregional failure rate compared with the chemoradiotherapy group, while no differences were observed in the incidence of
distant metastases. Randomized trials reported by Weissberg et al. 262 and Haffty et al. 263 evaluated mitomycin C and postoperative RT versus RT alone. Both
investigators reported improvement in locoregional control but not survival. A third small trial conducted by Weissler et al. found no benefit for cisplatin and 5-FU plus
RT compared with RT alone.264 These last three trials were not targeted to high-risk patients but included all resected patients with stage III and IV disease.
All postoperative chemoradiotherapy studies reported increased acute toxicity, primarily mucositis, and weight loss with combined therapy. Careful monitoring of
patients receiving combined chemoradiotherapy along with psychosocial and nutritional support is essential for these therapies to be successful and to have a high
level of patient compliance. Completion of the current Head and Neck Intergroup Trial is crucial to confirm the improved survival reported by Bachaud and to change
standard of care.
CONCURRENT CHEMORADIOTHERAPY
The purpose of administering chemotherapy and radiotherapy together is to take advantage of the radiosensitizing capability of many of the active drugs for this
disease and effect a substantial enough increase in locoregional control to significantly improve survival. The postulated mechanisms for enhanced cell kill with
concurrent chemoradiation strategies have been described for decades and include interference with repair processes after sublethal or potentially lethal damage or
with tumor cell synchronization. 257,258 In addition, administering both modalities together may prevent or decrease the emergence of radioresistant or drug-resistant
clonagens.
RESULTS FROM METAANALYSES
Since 1992, four metaanalyses evaluating the effect of chemotherapy on survival from randomized trials of induction, adjuvant, and concurrent chemotherapy
compared with definitive local therapy alone have been published. 265,266,267 and 268 These analyses covered the period of publication up to 1993; three were literature
based,265,266 and 267 while the largest and most comprehensive used updated individual patient data from 63 trials including 10,741 patients. 268 The results of all four
analyses were consistent in finding a small survival benefit favoring chemotherapy: 2.8%, 265 4.0%,267 4.0%,268 and 6.5%.266 The reduction in risk of death was
statistically significant in three of the metaanalyses. 266,267 and 268 The survival benefit observed in all of the studies was associated primarily with the patient group
receiving concurrent chemoradiation. In the Meta-Analysis of Chemotherapy in Head and Neck Cancer (MACH-NC) analysis based on individual patient data, the
absolute survival benefit at 5 years from chemoradiation was 8%. 268 It should be emphasized that the most impressive gains in locoregional control, disease-free
survival, and overall survival have been reported since 1995 in large, multicenter randomized trials employing cisplatin-based chemotherapy and concurrent
radiotherapy, either standard or altered fractionation.
SINGLE-AGENT CHEMOTHERAPY AND RADIOTHERAPY
Many randomized trials have been published combining the single agents hydroxyurea, methotrexate, bleomycin, 5-FU, mitomycin-C, and cisplatin with radiotherapy
compared with radiotherapy alone. These older trials were limited to patients with extensive, locally advanced disease not considered resectable. The results of
selected trials with adequate power to demonstrate outcome differences are shown in Table 30.2-12.269,270,271,272,273,274,275,276,277,278,279 and 280 Gupta and associates at the
Christie Hospital and Holt Radium Institute in Manchester randomized over 300 patients to concurrent methotrexate or radiotherapy alone. 270 There was a highly
significant improvement in local control ( P = .0019) and survival (P = .0089) for patients with oropharyngeal cancers in the methotrexate arm, while survival benefit did
not reach statistical significance ( P = .075) in the overall analysis.

TABLE 30.2-12. Selected Randomized Trials of Concurrent Single-Agent Chemotherapy and Radiotherapy versusRadiotherapy Alone

The results of four trials with bleomycin and radiotherapy are conflicting. 271,272,273 and 274 Only the trial reported by Shanta and Krishnamurthi in patients with T3 to T4,
N0 to N2 squamous cell carcinoma of the buccal mucosa showed a significant beneficial effect of bleomycin on local control, disease-free survival, and overall
survival. 271 Local control and progression-free survival were improved in the Northern California Oncology Group trial reported by Fu et al., 273 while large trials from
the EORTC274 and the Norwegian Radium Hospital 272 did not observe benefit for any outcome parameter.
Many studies have used 5-FU with concurrent RT. In the study by Lo and associates, local control and 5-year survival were superior in the combined treatment group,
but only in patients with oral cavity cancers was the difference significant. 275 Browman and associates of the National Cancer Institute Canada evaluated infusional
5-FU and radiotherapy. 276 The complete response rate was significantly better with combined treatment, but only a trend for improved progression-free and overall
survival was observed. Investigators in Barcelona randomized 859 patients with T3 to T4, N0 to N3 cancers to three treatment groups: radiotherapy, 60 Gy in 30
fractions; radiotherapy, 70.4 Gy in 64 fractions; or radiotherapy, 60 Gy in 30 fractions, plus concurrent 5-FU, 250 mg/m 2 every 2 days. 277 The complete response rate
and survival were significantly better for the 5-FU–treated group compared with the control group receiving 60-Gy radiotherapy alone, but there was no difference
when compared with patients receiving 70.4-Gy radiotherapy. Mitomycin C has been shown in trials conducted at Yale to improve progression-free survival but not
overall survival. 278
Cisplatin has been combined with RT because mucositis is not a primary toxicity and experimental data support its effectiveness as a radiosensitizer. 259 As a single
agent, cisplatin has been administered using two schedules in head and neck cancer: weekly low doses (20 mg/m 2) or intermittent high doses (100 mg/m 2 every 3
weeks) concomitant with RT. The results of an intergroup randomized trial comparing low-dose weekly cisplatin (20 mg/m 2) during radiation with conventional
radiation were reported by Haselow et al. 279 The overall response rate was significantly higher for the cisplatin-treated patients (73% vs. 59%, P= .007), but there was
no difference in complete response rate (34% vs. 30%) or survival. The lack of benefit may be attributable to the low total dose of cisplatin received (120 to 140
mg/m2) over the 6 to 8 weeks of radiotherapy. The higher dose of cisplatin (100 mg/m 2 every 3 weeks) during radiotherapy resulted in significant survival benefit for

patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma. 280
Al-Sarraf et al. reported the findings of an intergroup trial for patients with stage III and IV cancer of the nasopharynx. 280 Patients were randomized to receive standard
radiotherapy or cisplatin (100 mg/m 2 days 1, 22, and 43) during radiation followed by three cycles of adjuvant cisplatin and 5-FU. The trial was terminated early after
an interim analysis showed a significant improvement in 2-year survival (80% vs. 55%) with combined treatment. Local and distant failure rates were also significantly
reduced with combined treatment. These results cannot be generalized to other sites in the head and neck and the contribution of each component (concurrent
chemoradiotherapy and adjuvant chemotherapy) to the improvement in survival cannot be determined.
The newer agents paclitaxel, docetaxel, and gemcitabine have radiation-enhancing properties. 281,282 and 283 Phase I and II trials are in progress to assess dose-limiting
toxicities using various schedules of these drugs as single agents or combined with cisplatin or other drugs concurrent with radiation. The safe dose of gemcitabine
for head and neck irradiation has not been determined. Initial dosing in a study at the University of Michigan of 150 to 300 mg/m 2/week was associated with severe
late toxicity. 284 Paclitaxel has been studied in low dose as a prolonged infusion, 285 as a weekly low dose by 3-hour infusion, and in combination with cisplatin 286 or
carboplatin. 287,288 The optimal schedule for radiosensitization has not been determined.
COMBINATION CHEMOTHERAPY AND RADIOTHERAPY
Administering multiple cytotoxic drugs during radiation substantially increases toxicity and often necessitates frequent interruptions in radiotherapy. Thus,
investigators have developed regimens that use split-course RT providing planned breaks in therapy, or regimens that alternate chemotherapy and radiation in order
to minimize normal tissue toxicity. The mode of combining the two therapies is an important issue. For head and neck cancer, it has been demonstrated that
protracted RT as single modality treatment results in decreased local control rates. 289,290 This is thought to be due to accelerated repopulation of tumor cells surviving
the initial treatment. The failure of induction chemotherapy to show any survival benefit in randomized trials may have a similar cause. If RT is considered a
non–cross-resistant tumor-killing agent, then alternating it with chemotherapy or simultaneous administration without breaks might circumvent the problem of
heterogeneous tumor cell repopulation and primary drug resistance.
Many concomitant chemotherapy and radiation pilot trials have been reported. Some with the longest follow-up that use cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy
report promising survival and response data but also severe mucosal toxicity. 291,292 and 293 The advantage of multiagent chemotherapy is that in addition to improved
local regional control, distant metastases may also be decreased. Taylor and associates used a regimen of concurrent radiation and cisplatin and 5-FU chemotherapy
administered every other week.291 After a median follow-up of 8 years, 31% of 68 patients had recurrences or progressed. The 5-year progression-free survival was
60% and overall survival 43%. Lavertu and associates reported their 8-year experience from the University Hospitals of Cleveland, Case Western Reserve University,
using two courses of cisplatin and 5-FU concurrent with 66- to 72-Gy radiotherapy in 105 patients with stage II, III, and IV cancer. 292 At a median follow-up of 39
months, 66 patients (63%) were disease free. The 4-year disease-specific survival was estimated to be 74% and overall survival 60%. The overall survival with the
primary site preserved was 54%. Investigators from the University of Chicago have reported their long-term results with concomitant hydroxyurea and fluorouracil for
stage II and III head and neck cancer. 293 At a median follow-up of 52 months, 5-year survival, progression-free survival, and local regional control were 65%, 82%,
and 86%, respectively. Only eight patients developed local or regional failure, and three were successfully salvaged with surgery. These results suggest a possible
survival advantage over surgery or radiotherapy and the potential for preservation of organ function.
Randomized trials of concurrent or alternating chemotherapy and radiotherapy compared with the induction approach of sequential chemotherapy and radiotherapy
are shown in Table 30.2-13.294,295,296,297 and 298 Only one of the four trials reported a significant improvement in overall survival for the regimen of vinblastine, bleomycin,
and methotrexate alternating with radiotherapy compared with sequential treatment. 297 However, the other three trials showed benefit in complete response rate,
locoregional control, or progression-free survival with the concurrent strategy. 294,295 and 296,298

TABLE 30.2-13. Randomized Trials of Concurrent versus Sequential Chemotherapy and Radiation

More significant are the results of the randomized trials of concurrent platinum-based chemotherapy and radiotherapy compared with radiotherapy alone in patients
with locally advanced disease shown in Table 30.2-14.299,300,301,302,303,304,305,306 and 307 A significant improvement in overall survival has now been reported for three
studies in patients with unresectable disease 304,305 and 306 and for one trial limited to patients with stage III and IV cancers of the oropharynx. 303 These positive results
are reported for standard fractionation radiotherapy as well as altered fractionation radiotherapy. In all studies, toxicity was increased in patients receiving combined
treatment, emphasizing the need for aggressive supportive care, ideally at a treatment center familiar with the expected severity of toxicity and potential complications.

TABLE 30.2-14. Randomized Trials of Concurrent Multiagent Chemotherapy and Radiotherapy versus Radiotherapy in Stage III and IV Disease

Only one study showed no benefit for any outcome parameter. 299 Investigators from the Princess Margaret Hospital compared continuous course radiotherapy with
split-course radiotherapy, 50 Gy, and mitomycin and 5-FU in patients with advanced cancers of the larynx and hypopharynx. The lack of a difference may have been
due to the 4-week planned break after 25 Gy in the chemotherapy arm, allowing tumor repopulation to occur. 299
The data from more recently matured trials shown in Table 30.2-14 support the use of concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy as the standard of care for the
treatment of resectable cancers of the oropharynx when nonsurgical treatment is planned. It must be noted that no randomized trials have been performed or are
planned comparing chemoradiotherapy to surgery with reconstruction. The large French cooperative group trial reported by Calais et al. 303 using three courses of
carboplatin (70 mg/m2 days 1 to 4) and 5-FU (600 mg/m2/d continuous infusion for 4 days) during 70 Gy showed significant survival benefit of 51% versus 31% ( P =

.02) at 3 years for patients with stage III and IV oropharyngeal cancer. In addition, it is noteworthy that most of patients included in the other positive trials had
oropharyngeal primaries. Adelstein et al. using cisplatin and 5-FU on days 1 and 22 of radiotherapy, 66 to 72 Gy, in patients with resectable cancers reported a
complete response rate at the primary site in 90% with chemoradiotherapy compared with 66% ( P = .03) after radiotherapy alone. 301,302 Recurrence-free interval, local
control, and survival with primary site preservation were all significantly better with chemoradiotherapy although overall survival, including salvage surgery for primary
site failure, was equivalent in the two treatment groups. What has not been adequately addressed in any trials in patients with resectable disease is speech and
swallowing function. Preservation of the organ does not equate with preservation of function. Intensive chemoradiotherapy regimens may result in late toxic effects of
soft tissue fibrosis that leave patients unable to swallow and thus dependent on gastrostomy tubes. The outcomes of function and quality of life need to be addressed
in future trials in addition to survival and local control. 308
In contrast to the favorable results of chemoradiotherapy achieved with oropharyngeal cancers, oral cavity primaries continue to be managed by a surgical approach.
Resection produces less relative organ dysfunction, and these cancers appear somewhat less responsive to cytotoxic therapy. Site-specific trials have not been
performed.
The positive results in unresectable patients in five trials 300,304,305,306 and 307 support the use of chemoradiotherapy as the standard of care provided that patients have
adequate performance status and psychosocial supports to undergo this more toxic and complex treatment. 308 The large German trial reported by Wendt and
associates 306 combining cisplatin, 5-FU, leucovorin, and twice a day radiotherapy compared with the same radiotherapy alone showed significant improvements in
locoregional control (36% vs. 17%, P <.004) and survival at 3 years (48% vs. 24%, P <.0003).
The preliminary results of a three-arm intergroup trial, E1392, show significant survival benefit for cisplatin, 100 mg/m 2 on days 1, 22, and 34, during radiotherapy
compared with radiotherapy alone in patients with advanced unresectable disease. 305 This trial compared the cisplatin and radiotherapy regimen previously tested in
the RTOG309 and the regimen of cisplatin and 5-FU and split-course radiotherapy tested by Adelstein in the ECOG 310 with standard radiotherapy alone. A total of 295
patients were randomized, and the two investigational therapies were separately compared with the control arm. At a median follow-up of 25 months, there is a
significant difference in 2- and 3-year projected survivals for patients in the cisplatin and radiotherapy arm compared with radiotherapy alone, but not for the cisplatin
and 5-FU split-course radiotherapy arm. Median survivals were 12.6 months, 19.1 months, and 14 months, respectively, for RT, RT plus cisplatin, and RT plus
cisplatin and 5-FU. 304
In a smaller trial of mitomycin C combined with bleomycin and 66- to 70-Gy radiotherapy compared with the same radiotherapy was reported by Zakotnik and
associates.300 A total of 64 patients with inoperable carcinoma, the majority from oropharyngeal sites, were randomized. The study was closed early because of a
significant benefit in complete response (75% vs. 29%, P = .007), disease-free survival at median follow-up of 42 months (48% vs. 10%, P = .001), and overall
survival (38% vs. 10%, P = .019) observed for patients with unresectable oropharyngeal cancer in the combined treatment group.
What is apparent in all of these trials is the substantial and significant improvement in local regional control that is of a magnitude (20 to 30 percentage points on
average) sufficiently large to affect survival. 308 This is in contrast to the modest increase in local regional control observed in the RTOG radiotherapy trial comparing
altered fractionation with concomitant boost or hyperfractionation with standard radiotherapy in over 1200 patients. 311 Local regional control increased from 45% with
standard fractionation to 54% with altered fractionation and concomitant boost, but survival was not affected.
Of the various regimens tested in these positive trials, cisplatin, 100 mg/m 2, administered with vigorous hydration and diuretics on days 1, 22, and 43 of standard
fractionation radiotherapy (70 Gy) would be a reasonable recommendation for treating unresectable patients. Grade 3 or worse toxicities, particularly mucocutaneous
toxicity, can be expected in approximately 75% of patients and thus aggressive support is required with analgesics, oral care, and gastrostomy tube for nutritional
support. Patients with poor performance status, complicating comorbid disease, or who lack the psychosocial resources to undergo these complex therapies should
be managed with radiotherapy alone.

PRINCIPLES OF CHEMOPREVENTION
Patients at increased risk for developing upper aerodigestive tract cancer may be identified by a history of previous head and neck cancer or exposure to risk factors
such as alcohol and tobacco. Because alcohol and tobacco are avoidable risks, there has been considerable interest in developing effective prevention strategies for
these patients. One approach currently being tested is chemoprevention, which is the administration of natural or synthetic agents to reverse or suppress
carcinogenesis before the development of an invasive cancer. Chemoprevention trials in the upper aerodigestive tract, guided by epidemiologic studies, have often
evaluated dietary constituents, such as b-carotene and retinol. The retinoids, natural and synthetic analogues of vitamin A, have been studied extensively as
chemopreventive agents. Retinoids can modulate the growth and differentiation of normal, premalignant, and malignant epithelial cells in culture and can suppress
carcinogenesis in vivo in various human epithelial tissues. 312,313 and 314
Aerodigestive tract epithelial carcinogenesis is an extremely complex, multistep process. The process begins with genetic alterations and proceeds to altered
expression of regulatory gene products and dysregulated tissue growth or proliferation and dysregulated differentiation. Gross histologic and clinical markers of this
process are observable but not until late in the process. Molecular techniques have revealed specific genetic alterations in the process of epithelial carcinogenesis in
which losses of genes on chromosomes 3p, 9p, 11q, 13q, and 17p are common. 315,316 This step-wise process is an accumulation of genetic events that may be
reversed or suppressed at any of various points. Advances in the biology of carcinogenesis are leading to the development of reliable intermediate biomarkers that
can be quantitatively measured to assess modulation by chemopreventive agents. 317
CHEMOPREVENTION OF ORAL PREMALIGNANCY
The first chemointervention studies in oral premalignancy began in the mid-1950s and used high doses of topical and systemic natural vitamin A derivatives. 318,319 and
320
These early studies reported clinical and histologic activity and response, relapse, and toxicity patterns that are still relevant currently for the reversal of oral
leukoplakia. Agents that have been studied in oral premalignancy chemoprevention trials include selenium, a-tocopherol, b-carotene, and six
retinoids.317,321,322,323,324,325,326,327 and 328) To date, five randomized trials in oral leukoplakia have been reported. 322,323,324,325 and 326
Hong et al. reported the first randomized study in 1986 in which 44 patients were entered into a 3-month placebo-controlled trial of 13- cis retinoic acid (isotretinoin), 2
mg/m2/d.322 Differences observed in clinical response rate (67% vs. 10%, P = .0002) and histopathologic reversal of dysplasia (54% vs. 10%, P = .01) were highly
significant between treated and placebo patients, respectively. Toxicity, however, was unacceptable in those patients receiving 2 mg/kg. Cheilitis, facial erythema, and
skin dryness and peeling occurred in 88% and conjunctivitis in 76% of patients. Although reversal of the leukoplakic lesions was demonstrated, a relapse rate of
higher than 50% occurred within 3 months of stopping the drug.
Hong and coworkers designed a second study to prolong remission with less toxic maintenance therapy. After a 3-month induction phase with high-dose 13- cis
retinoic acid (1.5 mg/kg/d), responding or stable patients were randomized to a 9-month maintenance program with low-dose 13- cis retinoic acid (0.5 mg/kg/d) or
b-carotene (30 mg/d). 323 Low-dose 13-cis retinoic acid was significantly more effective than b-carotene in maintaining clinicopathologic remission. Only 8% of patients
in the 13-cis retinoic acid group had progression of their leukoplakia during maintenance, compared with 55% in the b-carotene group ( P <.001). In addition, the
low-dose 13-cis retinoic acid regimen was well tolerated, causing only mild and reversible toxicities. The long-term results of this study at a median follow-up of 66
months showed that 17 of 70 patients (24%) developed cancer with an annual rate of 5.8%. 329 The rate of development of cancer in the two treatment groups was not
different, 23% for 13-cis retinoic acid and 27% for b-carotene.
Four other randomized trials also demonstrated positive results. Stich et al. observed significant activity with natural vitamin A in Asian patients with leukoplakia
chewing betel nuts and enrolled in a 6-month placebo-controlled trial: 57.1% complete remission with vitamin A versus 30% for controls ( P <.01).324 Benefit was also
seen in a second trial from this group comparing b-carotene plus retinol with placebo. 330 Han et al. also noted positive results with a synthetic Retinamide taken for 4
months in a placebo-controlled trial for oral leukoplakia. 325 The most recently completed trial is a randomized maintenance study of the retinoid fenretinide after laser
resection of oral premalignant lesions. 326 After 12 months of fenretinide, the relapse rate in 39 treated patients was 8% compared with 29% in 41 control patients.
These results are similar to that observed with low-dose 13- cis retinoic acid maintenance therapy.
Current research efforts are focusing on the biochemoprevention therapies such as the combination of high-dose 13- cis retinoic acid, a-tocopherol, and interferon-a
for the treatment of patients with advanced premalignant lesions defined as moderate to severe dysplasia. 331,332 and 333 A striking difference in response was noted in

favor of laryngeal lesions as compared with oral lesions, suggesting that this may be a promising approach for laryngeal dysplasia.
Chemoprevention of Second Primary Tumors
Regardless of their initial treatment, head and neck cancer patients remain at significantly increased risk for second primary tumor (SPT) development. SPTs occur
after treatment for all stages of head and neck cancer, but their effect is most striking in patients treated for early disease. 317,334 SPTs, either synchronous or
metachronous, develop conservatively at a constant yearly rate of 2% to 5% in previously treated patients. The long-term risk of developing additional aerodigestive
tract malignancies is 10% to 40%.
Investigators at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center evaluated the role of cis-retinoic acid in preventing SPTs. 335,336 Following surgery, radiotherapy, or both, 103
patients with stage I through IV (M0) squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck were randomized in a double-blind fashion to receive 13- cis retinoic acid (100
mg/m2/d) or placebo for 12 months. After a median follow-up of 32 months, there was a significant difference in the development of SPTs (24% vs. 4%, P = .005),
respectively, for placebo and treated patients. 335 At a median follow-up of 55 months, the retinoid-treated patients continued to have fewer SPTs, within the upper
aerodigestive tract (7% vs. 33%, P = .008), although the difference in incidence for all SPTs had diminished (14% vs. 31%, P = .004).336 Although these results are
impressive, no survival advantage was seen. This may be due to the small sample size and the nature of the study population: One-half of patients had advanced
disease.
Bolla and colleagues evaluated etretinate in a placebo-controlled trial to prevent SPTs in patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity or oropharynx
following local therapy. 337 After a median follow-up of 41 months, the rates of primary disease recurrence and SPTs were the same for both treatment groups.
Two National Cancer Institute–sponsored multicenter placebo-controlled randomized trials evaluating 13- cis retinoic acid for the prevention of SPTs were initiated in
the early 1990s. Both trials are for patients with stage I or stage II squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity, pharynx, or larynx who have been rendered disease
free with surgery or radiation. The trial, conducted jointly by M. D. Anderson Cancer Center and the RTOG, randomizes patients between placebo and low-dose 13- cis
retinoic acid, 30 mg/d (approximately 0.5 mg/kg/d) for 3 years. The trial has completed accrual and is under analysis. The second intergroup trial (ECOG, NCCTG)
evaluates very low-dose 13-cis retinoic acid, 0.15 mg/kg/d, versus placebo for 2 years. Until these trials are analyzed, there is no role for retinoids in daily practice.

POSTTREATMENT REHABILITATION
Increasing emphasis on the posttreatment rehabilitation of the head and neck cancer patient has taken place over the last decade. No doubt as we see the limitations
of current therapeutic strategies to improve on mortality for advanced disease, quality-of-life issues will become increasingly important. Specific approaches to the
rehabilitation of the head and neck cancer patient have now been defined. 338,339,340,341,342,343,344,345 and 346 The majority of these approaches are based on quantitative
assessment of various speech and swallowing parameters (Table 30.2-15).

TABLE 30.2-15. Assessment of Swallowing Capacity after Oral Cavity and Oropharyngeal Surgery

Optimal rehabilitation approaches for the head and neck patient begin before the initiation of treatment. We have discussed the role of dental examination and
hygiene. Another pretreatment assessment should be performed by a speech and swallowing therapist, especially in those circumstances in which resection of critical
organs is anticipated, such as the tongue, palate, and pharyngeal wall. Posttreatment rehabilitation should generally be considered within 3 days after treatment
depending on the healing and integrity of surgical wounds. Each site within the upper aerodigestive tract must be considered separately.
Appropriate rehabilitation of the oral cavity begins with choice of reconstruction. Resections contribute to intraoral sensory loss, which impairs the initial phases of
deglutition. The optimal reconstruction in most circumstances involves primary closure, thereby minimizing large insensate contact surfaces. Teichgraeber et al.,
however, raised the important consideration of tongue mobility. 343 The degree of swallowing dysfunction correlates with the extent of tongue resection. In certain
circumstances, approximation of the residual tongue to lateral soft tissue may serve to further restrict tongue movement. In this setting the use of a split-thickness skin
graft to cover the surgical defect may prevent this restricted function. Teichgraeber et al. noted that patients reconstructed with a split-thickness graft had improved
articulation and improved swallowing. 343 Resections involving the base of tongue and pharyngeal wall may contribute to velopharyngeal dysfunction (i.e., the inability
to build adequate intraoral pressure), which contributes to dysfunction of the pharyngeal phase of swallowing. Reduced capacity for generating normal food bolus
propulsion results. Rehabilitation in such circumstances may require several means. The placement of an intraoral prosthesis obturates the defect. The obturator also
serves to lower the palate to allow for appropriate contact with the remaining tongue base. Logemann notes that patients with 50% or more of the tongue base
resected are likely to benefit from prosthetic rehabilitation. 338 Other rehabilitation approaches to be initiated by the speech and swallowing therapist include the use of
exercise programs to improve tongue-base motion. Barium swallow studies should be performed before and following rehabilitation efforts to document both the
degree of dysfunction and the extent of improvement.

NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Cancers of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses are relatively infrequent cancers with an incidence of 0.75 per 100,000 individuals in the United States. 347 Lesions
of the maxillary antrum are twice as frequent as those of the nasal cavity. Cancers of the ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses are the least frequently observed. Disease
occurs more frequently in male than in female subjects (2:1 ratio) and primarily involves individuals in the sixth decade of life. It is noted that cancer of the paranasal
sinuses is more frequently observed in other regions of the world including Japan and South Africa. 348
Etiologic factors involved in disease development are multifold. Exposure to nickel has been attributed to cancer development in the nasal cavity. 348,349 Occupations
associated with a high incidence of nasal cavity cancers also include those within the furniture, textile, as well as boot and shoe industries. 350,351 and 352 Other workers
considered at risk include those involved with production of chromium, mustard gas, isopropyl alcohol, and radium. 347 When considering cancers of the paranasal
sinuses, the most frequently cited agent has been Thorotrast. 353 Some have attributed maxillary sinus carcinoma to chronic sinusitis.
ANATOMY
The nasal cavity comprises the nasal vestibule, nasal antrum, and turbinates. The paired nasal cavities are separated by septal cartilage. The nasal vestibule is the
triangular region of the nasal cavity bounded by the palatine processes of the maxilla inferiorly, the nasal septum medially, and laterally by the fibrofatty tissue called
the nasal ala. The nasal vestibule represents that portion of the nasal cavity composed of skin (i.e., bearing hair follicles and sweat glands). Its posterior border is
demarcated by transition from skin to mucosa.

The nasal antrum represents the remaining portion of the nasal cavity and contains the inferior, middle, and superior turbinates. The superior and middle turbinates
are composed of highly vascular tissue overlying fragile bony projections that inset onto the ethmoid air cell bony framework. The inferior turbinate is composed of a
separate bone.
The paranasal sinuses include the maxillary, ethmoid, sphenoid, and frontal sinus. More detailed anatomy of this region is provided. 354
Primary lymphatic drainage of the maxillary sinuses is into the submandibular nodal basin. The ethmoid sinuses drain into the submandibular as well as
retropharyngeal nodes. The nasal cavity drains into these regions as well as along the course of the facial blood vessels into the submandibular triangle and to
periparotid nodes.
PATHOLOGY
The majority of tumors of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinus are squamous cell carcinomas. Distinct from other sites within the upper aerodigestive tract, however,
squamous cell carcinoma is less predominant. A vast variety of histopathologically distinct cancers occur in this region. Tumors found in the superior portion of the
nasal cavity include adenocarcinoma and esthesioneuroblastoma. In the paranasal sinuses, additional neoplasms include tumors of minor salivary gland origin
including adenocarcinoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma, and mucoepidermoid carcinoma. Rare tumors of this region are lymphoma, mucosal melanoma,
teratocarcinomas, angiosarcomas, and various odontogenic and bone tumors.
NATURAL HISTORY
The most common cancers (i.e., squamous cell carcinomas) are usually well differentiated and slow-growing, and the tendency to metastasize is infrequent. Common
presenting symptoms include a nonhealing ulcer, occasional bleeding, and unilateral nasal obstruction.
Given the anatomic limitations in making early diagnosis, disease is usually far advanced at time of initial presentation. Other symptoms may reflect growth into the
oral cavity causing dental pain, loose teeth, or ill-fitting dentures, or into the orbit leading to ocular symptoms such as diplopia, proptosis, and epiphora. Severe pain
and trismus may occur with extension into the pterygoid fossa. Tumors in the superior nasal antrum and paranasal sinuses may invade the cribriform plate and extend
into the anterior cranial fossa, causing anosmia or headache.
The regional lymph nodes most frequently involved with metastatic disease are nodes within the periparotid region or within the submandibular triangle. The
propensity for spread to regional lymph nodes is dependent on the subsite in which primary disease may occur. 355,356 and 357 Approximately 20% of patients with
cancers of the nasal vestibule develop clinically evident lymph node disease. Nearly 15% of these patients have bilateral disease. Regional lymph node spread is less
frequently seen from tumors of the ethmoid and maxillary sinus, approaching 10% to 15% of patients. The probability of lymph node spread increases with extension
of tumors outside the normal confines of the nasal and paranasal cavities, especially with extension into the oral cavity.
Prognoses from nasal cavity lesions are directly proportional to size of the lesion and overall approximate 60% at 5 years. 357,358 The principal determinant of survival is
the presence of local recurrence, which is the most frequent site of disease failure. Prognosis for paranasal sinus cancers likewise depends on extent of primary
disease at presentation and approximates 30% for advanced T4 lesions. 355,359,360
STAGING AND SCREENING
Given the infrequency in which primary cancers occur in this region, AJCC classification has been adopted only within the maxillary sinus. For the maxillary sinus, the
definition of the TNM system is presented in Table 30.2-16. The regional lymph node (N) and distant metastases (M) staging are identical to other sites within the
upper aerodigestive tract and are as stated previously (see Staging, earlier in this chapter).

TABLE 30.2-16. Staging for Cancer of the Maxillary Sinus

Careful examination of patients presenting with symptoms referable to the midface may minimize delay in diagnosis of these cancers. Likewise, considerable progress
has occurred in the use of diagnostic radiology in the preoperative assessment of tumors of this region. Kraus et al. described how the judicious use of CT, MRI, or
both may help to delineate the extent of disease. 361 These authors and others show that CT scan may be optimal for the definition of tumor infiltration of bony
architecture (Fig. 30.2-4). MRI, on the other hand, aids in the assessment of tumor invasion of soft tissue structures including orbit, dura brain, and cavernous sinus
(Fig. 30.2-5).361,362 Gadolinium-enhanced MRI is an additional tool to aid the therapist in the pretreatment of patients with paranasal sinus cancers by helping to
distinguish inflammatory disease from neoplastic extension.

FIGURE 30.2-4. Coronal computed tomographic scan demonstrating bony involvement of the lamina papyracea ( curved arrow) and intracranial extension ( double
arrow). (From ref. 361, with permission.)

FIGURE 30.2-5. T1-weighted sagittal magnetic resonance image showing dural invasion ( arrows) within the same patient as in Figure 30.2-4. (From ref. 361, with
permission.)

TREATMENT
Treatment of Tumors of the Nasal Cavity
For tumors of the nasal cavity, the appropriate surgical procedure depends on location of the primary disease. Tumors of the nasal septum can be approached
through a lateral rhinotomy or by a midface degloving technique. 363 Cancers of the superior or lateral nasal cavity can be resected by a medial maxillectomy and an en
bloc ethmoidectomy.364
Early tumors of the nasal cavity do not require elective treatment of regional lymph nodes as regional spread of disease is relatively infrequent.
RT and surgical resection yield roughly equivalent results for early lesions. Wong and Cummings have pointed out that most patients presented with lesions that are
less than or equal to 5 cm, and less than 10% present with lymph node metastases. 365 When RT is used, treatment can be given by either external-beam techniques,
interstitial implants, or a combination of both.
The difficulty with advanced tumors is in obtaining adequate surgical margins. Given the high propensity for local recurrence, combined modality therapy consisting of
surgery and radiation should be used in most circumstances.
Treatment of Paranasal Sinus Cancers
For cancers of the maxillary sinus, maxillectomy is the procedure of choice and generally is combined with postoperative radiation. For most lesions, maxillectomy
entails a standard Weber-Fergusson incision through skin of the anterior face. The bone cuts used depend on the decision to preserve or resect the orbital floor and
orbital contents. It should be recognized that multiple procedures are encompassed by the term maxillectomy dependent on the extent or resection of the bony
framework (i.e., inferior, medial, anterior, and lateral walls). Spiro et al. have suggested classification schemes indicating limited, subtotal, and total maxillectomy. 366
Debate in the management of paranasal sinus cancers centers on extent of surgical resection as well as what constitutes resectability. Furthermore, the management
of the eye in patients with paranasal sinus cancer remains controversial. For T1 or T2 lesions of the maxilla, the eye can be preserved. Surgeons would advocate
resection of orbital contents in patients whose tumors transgress the orbital floor and infiltrate orbital contents. In certain circumstances, however, invasion of orbital
floor by maxillary sinus cancers cannot be determined preoperatively. 367
Should disease involve orbital floor and yet not extend into the orbit, resection of the bony floor may be entertained with preservation of globe. However, ocular motion
may be impaired and diplopia can result from such a procedure secondary to loss of structural support of orbital contents. This complication has led to numerous
procedures for reconstructing the resected orbital floor including median galeal pericranial flaps. 368 The value of one surgical approach versus another is limited by
the relative infrequency of these tumors. Tiwari et al. have provided additional insight as to the management of orbital contents in patients whose tumors involves
periorbita. 367 The authors, in a careful analysis of anatomic contents of the orbit, note that the periorbita is not the final barrier to tumor invasion, rather, a thin fascia
around the periocular fat. This fascial plane is rarely involved in their series, even in the presence of periorbital involvement. The authors note radiographic
assessment cannot discriminate involvement of this fascial plane. The authors go on to note that ocular function with preservation of this fascial plane, even when
combined with postoperative radiation, is good. Diplopia is not a complicating factor.
With advances in surgical technique and cumulative experience, factors that classically are considered to preclude surgical excision are continually evolving. 369,370 and
371
Lund et al., for instance, presented results of craniofacial resection in over 200 patients with a wide variety of tumors of the paranasal sinuses. 371 Actuarial survival
in this population was 44%. Lund et al. describe acceptable survival results with acceptable morbidity in patients who underwent skull base resection. Disease
involving dura, although associated with an adverse outcome, in selected instances can be controlled surgically. Similar results were noted by McCaffrey et al. 370
Results, however, are significantly influenced by histology. Survival of patients with olfactory neuroblastoma is far superior to those with adenocarcinoma. Involvement
of brain parenchyma and extensive involvement of the infratemporal fossa from tumors of the maxillary sinus has not been considered amenable to surgical resection
for cure. Each of the decisions regarding resectability should be tempered by the skill of the primary surgeon and availability of neurosurgical and reconstructive
expertise.
A major decision in the treatment of paranasal sinus involves reconstruction of the surgical defects. Multiple methods of reconstruction have been advocated including
temporal muscle slings, skin grafts, and even composite flaps containing bone.
In general, elective treatment of regional lymph nodes in patients without clinical evidence of lymph node metastases is not indicated.
RT alone is not commonly used for these lesions although it can be used when surgery is not feasible. Roa et al. have reported results of three-dimensional conformal
RT for advanced paranasal sinus cancer. 372 For unresectable lesions treated by radiation alone, local control was 32% at 3 years. For patients who had a grossly
incomplete resection, local control was only 20%. The group of patients who had a grossly complete operation, leaving only microscopic residual, enjoyed 79% local
control. These data suggest that there is considerable room for improvement. In fact, newer programs that combine this type of sophisticated RT with chemotherapy,
either sequential or concomitant, have been promising.
Results of Treatment
NASAL CAVITY. Spiro et al. have reviewed the results of therapy for 27 patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal cavity.

373

Surgery alone was the treatment in
21 instances. Five-year determinate cure for nasal cavity lesions were 43%. Local failure remains the most frequent site of failure in the treated surgery, occurring at
rates ranging from 10% to more than 40%, emphasizing the need for effective multimodality therapy. 357,358,373,374
Levendag and Pomp have reported a series of 63 consecutive patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal vestibule who were managed with RT, principally
with interstitial implantation. 375 A mean dose of 62 Gy for T1 and 64 Gy for T2 lesions was used. Patients were grouped according to the classification system
proposed by Wang. 376,377 Local control was obtained in 97% of T1N0 patients, and 79% of T2N0 patients. Similar results have been observed by others. 365,374 Factors
associated with an adverse outcome to primary RT include the presence of nodal metastases and local tumor extension into surrounding anatomic structures such as
skin, lip, cartilage, or bone.
PARANASAL SINUS. Results of surgical resection of paranasal sinus cancer have demonstrated local control rates ranging from 10% to 90%, depending on disease

stage. 372,373 Surgical series likewise demonstrated that limits of surgical resection could be extended into the anterior as well as the middle cranial fossa with 5-year

survival rates approaching 50%. 370,371,378,379,380 and 381)
Parsons et al. have reported on the success of radiation therapy against malignant tumors of the nasal cavity, ethmoid sinus, or sphenoid sinus. 382 The 10- and
15-year actuarial local control for all patients except the adenoid cystic histologies was 52% and 42%, respectively. A 10-year actuarial local control rate for stage I
(seven patients) was 100%. The 10-year actuarial local control rate for stage II was 53%, and for stage III it was 30%. Results were dependent on histology, with only
a 17% local control in patients with adenoid cystic carcinoma. Although these data support using radiation alone for the occasional stage I patient, the results with
more advanced stages are clearly suboptimal. Treatment with surgery and postoperative radiation would be preferred. 382,383,384,385 and 386
Other adverse prognostic factors may relate to site of disease within the paranasal sinuses. Suprastructure lesions in the maxillary antrum, for instance, appear more
readily controlled with RT than infrastructure lesions. 384
Yu-Hua et al. compared preoperative and postoperative RT in a cohort of patients with maxillary sinus carcinoma. 385 They reported 64% 5-year survival in the
preoperative group, as opposed to 26% in the postoperative group. The surgical complication rate was higher (29% vs. 14%) in the preoperative versus the
postoperative groups, but the authors concluded that preoperative radiation was better. Nowadays, however, preoperative RT is seldom used in resectable lesions.
Zaharia et al. reported 149 patients treated with surgery and postoperative radiotherapy for cancer of the maxillary sinus. 386 Patients were treated at 180 to 200 cGy/d,
5 days per week, to a total dose in the 5500 to 6000 cGy range. Megavoltage equipment was used. Only two patients had T1 lesions, 12 patients had T2 lesions, 117
had T3 lesions, and 198 had T4 lesions. The 5-year actuarial survival, corrected for death not due to cancer, was 42%. Clinical stage was an important prognostic
feature, with survival being 75%, 36%, and 11% for stage II, III, and IV, respectively.
It is clear that the reported local control rates for paranasal sinus tumors are suboptimal. Future results may be improved through the use of CT-based treatment
planning. Figure 30.2-6 demonstrates a typical radiation technique for paranasal sinus tumors. A more detailed discussion of treatment planning is available
elsewhere.387

FIGURE 30.2-6. A patient with squamous cell carcinoma of the right maxillary antrum, with disease extension toward the medial portion of the right eye. He underwent
a complete resection with close margin near the globe. He was treated with postoperative radiation therapy. The plan is shown here. A: A representative cut through
the level of the orbit. The plan calls for an anteroposterior field and a left lateral field. The anterior field is weighted over the lateral field 1.6 to 1. The target volume is
seen, and the isodose curve shows that the isodose line covers the target volume well. The anterior field has a block for the lateral aspect of the orbit, thereby
protecting the lacrimal gland. The medial aspect of the eye is in the target volume well. The left lateral field has blocking for the spinal cord, optic chiasm, and left eye.
The dose to the left orbit is less than 10%. A total of 6300 cGy was given, prescribed to the 90% line. This keeps the dose to the optic chiasm well within tolerance. B:
The same patient, with a cut through a level below the orbits but through the maxillary antrum. The target volume and isodose curves are seen.

Chemotherapy for Cancer of the Paranasal Sinuses
Information on the role of chemotherapy in treating paranasal sinus cancer is limited because these patients are usually reported as a subset of a larger series of
head and neck cancer patients. For carcinomas of squamous cell histology, there are no data to suggest that the response rate to standard intravenous chemotherapy
such as cisplatin and 5-FU is any different from that achievable at other primary sites.
One form of chemotherapy that is specific to paranasal sinus cancer is intraarterial drug delivery. Intraarterial chemotherapy has been studied for almost three
decades. The rationale is based on the steep dose-response curve exhibited by most cytotoxic drugs. 388 Regional or intraarterial drug delivery has the potential to
increase tumor drug exposure while reducing systemic toxicity. The rationale for using this method of drug delivery for maxillary sinus cancers in particular is to
increase local control and to preserve the orbit.
Most of the literature is from trials performed in the 1970s and 1980s using intraarterial bleomycin or 5-FU. 389,390,391,392,393,394 and 395 As an example, Japanese
investigators reported cannulating the superficial temporal artery in 68 patients with paranasal sinus cancer and treating with intraarterial 5-FU and RT. 389 In 57
patients, 38 showed disappearance of tumor, and among these, 22 required no further treatment. In 19 cases of residual tumor after therapy, partial resection of the
maxilla and intracavitary irradiation were effective in eradicating the tumor. The 2-year survival was 57% compared with 41% in the historic controls treated with
surgery and postoperative RT. Similar results were reported by others with intraarterial 5-FU, bleomycin, or methotrexate and RT. 390,391,392 and 393 Many patients avoided
radical surgery, which resulted in better cosmesis. In question, however, as cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy regimens evolved, was whether the
intraarterial route afforded any advantage over intravenous administration.
More recent trials used intraarterial cisplatin alone or combined with other agents in sequence or simultaneously with radiotherapy. In one trial, intraarterial cisplatin,
bleomycin, and intravenous 5-FU infusion were used as an induction regimen. 394 Of a total of 28 evaluable patients, 6 complete and 13 partial responses were
observed. After chemotherapy, 13 patients had RT alone and 11 had surgery followed by RT. Overall, 21 patients were rendered free of disease. Of 18 patients who
were initially judged to need orbital exenteration, only 7 required it. The median disease-free survival was 42 months. Mortimer et al. employed external carotid artery
catheterization to treat 25 patients with intraarterial cisplatin, 100 mg/m 2 every 7 to 14 days for three cycles. The complete response rate was 32% and partial
response rate was 50%, which is comparable with that reported for combination chemotherapy administered intravenously. 395
Wayne State reported its 10-year experience with intravenous cisplatin-based chemotherapy in 24 patients. 396 The response rate was 82% (complete response, 44%;
partial response, 38%) for previously untreated patients and 88% (complete response, 38%; partial response, 50%) for patients with recurrent disease. The median
survival of untreated patients who achieved complete response was 21 months; for those achieving partial response it was 13 months, and for those achieving no
response it was 3 months. For patients treated for recurrent disease who achieved a complete response, the median survival was 16 months; for those who achieved
a partial response it was 13.5 months; and for those who achieved no response it was 5 months.
Lee and colleagues from the University of Chicago Hospitals published the results of treatment of 19 consecutive patients with stage III and IV paranasal sinus cancer
with multimodality protocols over a 12-year period. 397 Patients received cisplatin-based induction chemotherapy, followed by resection and then concomitant
radiotherapy and hydroxyurea and 5-FU. The disease-free survival rate at 5 and 10 years was 66.6% and local control was 76%. Regional and distant control rates
were 93% and 95.5%, respectively. These results compared favorably with a 40% survival rate for historic controls treated with surgery and radiotherapy.
Harrison and associates reported the results of a prospective study evaluating concomitant chemotherapy with RT for advanced unresectable head and neck
cancer. 398 Eight of the ten patients with unresectable paranasal sinus tumors had a complete response to the combined chemotherapy with RT treatment program.
None of the complete responders have had a local recurrence, although median follow-up is only 1 year. These encouraging results for unresectable paranasal sinus
cancer raise the issue as to whether this combined modality approach could be successful in earlier stage disease. Larger numbers of patients and longer follow-up
are needed before this could be considered an alternative to standard treatment with surgery and RT.

Interesting results have come from Robbins and colleagues using their Rad-Plat protocol of 150 to 200 mg/m2 of cisplatin weekly for up to four doses through a
microcatheter placed angiographically to selectively encompass the dominant tumor supply. 399 Concurrent with the intraarterial cisplatin, intravenous bolus sodium
thiosulfate was administered to neutralize the systemic effects of cisplatin. The response rate in 22 patients in a phase I trial was 62%. This intraarterial regimen is
continuing to be studied by this group in patients with locally advanced head and neck cancer, and high complete response rates have been achieved. 399,400 and 401
Based on the information published to date, it seems that intraarterial chemotherapy with radiation in locally advanced maxillary sinus tumors may achieve results
similar to surgery and RT without the effects of major surgery. For patients with paranasal sinus cancer who need orbital exenteration or major craniofacial resection,
the option of intraarterial chemotherapy as induction therapy to preserve the eye should be considered as an alternative treatment.

NASOPHARYNX
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The epidemiology of nasopharyngeal carcinoma suggests multiple determinants including diet, viral agents, and genetic susceptibility. 402,403 Endemic areas include
Southern China, North Africa, and regions within the far northern hemisphere. The population diets of these regions are what contributes a link to disease
development.404 Populations in endemic areas are characterized by intake of salt-cured fish and meat. The cooking of such food releases volatile nitrosamines that
are distributed over nasopharyngeal mucosa when carried by steam.
In addition to diet, considerable epidemiologic evidence incriminates Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in nasopharyngeal carcinoma development. Old and colleagues first
demonstrated the presence of anti-EBV antibodies within the sera of nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients. 405 Knowledge about EBV serology has rapidly progressed,
reinforcing the potential causal relationship. More recent advances in molecular biology have provided more direct evidence of the carcinogenic properties of this
herpesvirus, including the identification of EBV-related peptides capable of inducing malignant transformation of lymphoblastoid cell lines in vitro.406,407
Potential genetic determinants of nasopharyngeal carcinoma have been suggested by the increased incidence of disease in individuals with specific major
histocompatibility complex profiles. 408 Loci associated with increased relative risk include the H2 locus antigen. Likewise, Simons et al. noted the so-called Singapore
antigen, BW46, was associated with a high risk of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. 409 The risk of disease increases significantly in individuals with both the H2 and BW46
antigen. An increased odds ratio of disease was also demonstrated in individuals who carry the B17 antigen. 408 In the latter instance, the disease is associated with
an earlier age of onset. The peak incidence of disease occurs in the fourth and fifth decades. The male to female ratio is 2.2:1.
ANATOMY
The nasopharynx is a cuboidal structure covered by stratified mucociliary columnar epithelium. Anteriorly it is in continuity to the nasal cavity by way of the posterior
choanae. The roof is formed by the basisphenoid, the basiocciput, and the anterior arch of the atlas. The roof gradually slopes inferiorly to become the posterior wall.
The latter is formed by the first two cervical vertebrae. The lateral walls of the nasopharynx contain the eustachian tube openings, which lie within the elevations of the
torus tubarii (i.e., the cartilaginous portions of the internal auditory canal). Behind the torus is the lateral pharyngeal recess or fossa of Rosenmüller, which is the most
common site of nasopharyngeal carcinoma development. The floor of the nasopharynx is the upper surface of the soft palate.
Lymphatic drainage from the nasopharynx encompasses all levels within the neck as it proceeds along the jugular vein and spinal accessory nerve. Extensive
lymphatics within the nasopharynx also drain into the retropharyngeal nodes medial to the carotid artery. It is of note that involvement of these nodes rarely can be
detected clinically. Radiologic assessment, either CT or MRI, is the most sensitive diagnostic technique for detecting retropharyngeal node enlargement.
PATHOLOGY
The World Health Organization (WHO) has divided nasopharyngeal carcinoma into three types: type 1, keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma; type 2, nonkeratinizing
carcinoma; and type 3, the undifferentiated carcinoma. 410 The latter is the most frequently identified neoplasm. It characteristically is associated with a lymphoid
infiltrate that accounts for its more familiar description, lymphoepithelioma. The proportion of type 1 nasopharyngeal carcinoma among the North American population
is higher than found in other localities.
Additional cancer types noted include lymphoma, juvenile angiofibroma, plasmacytoma, and adenocarcinomas. The latter is of minor salivary gland origin.
NATURAL HISTORY
Nasopharyngeal cancer grows either by infiltration or by expansion with the former growth pattern predominating. Frequently, mucosal abnormalities may reflect only
a small portion of tumor extent. On occasion, no abnormalities of the mucosa are identifiable. In such instances, tumors may exist submucosally and extend into sites
outside the confines of the nasopharynx proper.
The most common presenting complaint of nasopharyngeal carcinoma is a mass in the neck occurring in nearly 90% of patients. Additional frequently encountered
symptoms include alterations in hearing associated with serous otitis media, tinnitus, nasal obstruction, and pain. Patients may present with symptoms that reflect
growth of the disease into the many significant surrounding anatomic structures. Tumors can access the parapharyngeal space through the sinus of Morgagni, an
opening in the lateral nasopharyngeal wall through which the eustachian tube courses. Infiltration laterally into paranasopharyngeal space may lead to pterygoid
muscle involvement and trismus. Frequently, cranial nerve involvement is manifested with more extensive growth into the skull base. Growth into the cavernous sinus
under such circumstances can lead to impairment of cranial nerves II to VI. Additionally, cancer may break through the pharyngobasilar fascia and spread along
vascular sheaths (i.e., fascial planes surrounding the jugular vein and carotid artery). Disease extending along these planes may also extend within skull base and
lead to cranial nerve involvement.
Any description of the natural history of nasopharyngeal carcinoma must take into account its metastatic potential. Furthermore, the metastatic potential of these
tumors is governed by the WHO histopathologic classification. WHO type 1 has a greater propensity for uncontrolled local tumor growth and a lower potential for
metastatic spread than the WHO type 2 or 3 cancers. Clinically advanced nodal metastases from WHO type 1 approximates 60%. 411,412 For WHO type 2 and 3
disease, clinical evidence of metastatic disease ranges from 80% to 90%. Distinct from cancers of the oral cavity and oropharynx, metastatic disease frequently
presents itself in the posterior triangle. Bilateral neck nodes are present in 53% of patients. 413 Another common location for metastatic disease is in the lymph nodes
in the retropharyngeal space, the so-called nodes of Rouviere. Thus, multiple nodal chains can be involved with disease including chains along the special accessory
nerve, jugular vein, and the retropharyngeal pathway.
Prognosis for the various WHO classifications of nasopharyngeal carcinoma vary from approximately 15% 5-year survival for type 1 lesions to 60% for type 3 lesions
dependent on disease stage. 414,415 The 5-year survival for stage I approximates 67% and decreases to 15% for stage IV.
STAGING AND SCREENING
The regional lymph node (N) and distant metastases (M) staging are identical to other sites within the upper aerodigestive tract (see Staging and Screening, earlier in
this chapter; Table 30.2-17).

TABLE 30.2-17. Staging for Nasopharyngeal Cancer

TREATMENT
RT is the standard treatment of almost all nasopharyngeal carcinomas. Surgery is usually not feasible and cannot provide adequate margins of resection. There is
also considerable morbidity to nasopharyngeal surgery, even in the most selected patients.
Modern imaging techniques, including CT and MRI, have dramatically changed RT for this disease. Yu et al. and others have shown that CT scans up-stage more
than 50% of T2 and T3 patients. 416,417 In addition, these investigators found that CT identified parapharyngeal extension in more than 60% to 80% of cases. Cellai et
al. attempted to study the effect that CT staging and treatment planning had on therapeutic results. 420 They found that patients who were treated with CT treatment
plans had improved local control and 5-year survival. This result will not come as a surprise to most radiation oncologists. Because CT and MRI scanning have
identified disease extensions that were not previously known, the RT plans can now be modified accordingly. An example is shown in Figure 30.2-7. The patient in the
figure has parapharyngeal extension. A standard, bilateral opposed field arrangement for the nasopharynx and upper neck would significantly compromise the
treatment to the parapharyngeal space. In particular, when the spinal cord block was added, the parapharyngeal extension would be under the block and thereby
underdosed. It is not surprising that this would lead to treatment failure. Indeed, Sham and Choy have studied the importance of parapharyngeal extension in the
management of nasopharyngeal cancer. 417 This group demonstrated that the degree of parapharyngeal space extension was an important prognostic factor that
influenced local tumor control. Using CT scans, they identified four categories of parapharyngeal extension. Type 1 extension involves disease extending up to a line
that extends from the medial pterygoid plate to the lateral carotid artery. Type 2 extension goes beyond type 1, up to a line from the medial pterygoid to the styloid
process. Type 3 extension goes beyond type 2, up to a line from the lateral pterygoid to the posterior aspect of the ascending ramus of the mandible. Sham and Choy
reported that the degree of extension was important, but also that the degree of extension within the T4 group was statistically significant (type 0 and 1 vs. 2 and 3)
and approached statistical significance for the T3 group. 417

FIGURE 30.2-7. A patient with squamous cell carcinoma of the nasopharynx that was staged as T2N0. A: A computed tomographic (CT) scan shows disease
extension posteriorly in the parapharyngeal space. If bilateral opposed portals were used for the nasopharynx, the posterior extent of the disease would be
undertreated when the spinal cord block is placed. This demonstrates the need for CT scan in all nasopharynx patients. B: Another CT scan shows retropharyngeal
adenopathy (arrow). Again, this disease would be undertreated significantly by conventional, opposed lateral portals with a spinal cord block. C: This patient was
treated before there was three-dimensional treatment planning. A three-field arrangement was used, which included two posterior oblique portals that protected the
spinal cord but treated the posterior extent of disease. A small portion of the posterior aspect of the disease is underdosed by 20%, even with this plan. This area was
boosted with an 125I implant. The patient had no evidence of disease at 5 years.

In addition to the benefits of target-volume delineation that these new imaging techniques have provided, the advent of three-dimensional RT treatment planning has
been vital. Kutcher et al., as well as the experience at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, revealed that multifield conformal plans were able to achieve
excellent coverage of tumor, while reducing the normal tissue doses compared with standard treatment techniques. 421 An example of a treatment plan is shown in
Figure 30.2-8. It should be pointed out that this is complicated RT. Anywhere from seven to ten fields might be necessary to provide the best dose distribution to the
primary site. This needs to be matched to upper neck fields, which then needs to be matched to lower neck fields. The spinal cord must be protected at each junction.
Electron beams are required for the posterior neck and these are matched to the photon fields. The result is that up to 15 fields might be required in a single patient.
There is some suggestion that RT in a concomitant boost during the last 2 to 2.5 weeks of radiation may provide better local control. 422,430 This allows for the total
dose to be increased with a shortened overall treatment time, yielding an enhanced biologic effect. Total doses in the 70-Gy range are usually given to the primary
site. The addition of chemotherapy for selected patients with advanced primary and neck disease is discussed later in this section.

FIGURE 30.2-8. A patient with a T4N0 squamous cell carcinoma of the nasopharynx. The patient has a bulky disease, extending into both retropharyngeal areas. A:
Computed tomographic scan shows target volume outlines. If bilateral opposed lateral portals were used to treat the nasopharynx, and a spinal cord block was placed
at 4500 cGy, the posterior aspect of the target volume is underdosed. The retropharyngeal disease cannot be treated with this technique. B: Using a
three-dimensional treatment plan, it is possible to encompass the entire retropharyngeal area adequately and still protect the brainstem and the spinal cord. This
patient has a complete response to radiation therapy and is doing well 10 months after completion of treatment.

All patients with cancer of the nasopharynx require treatment to both sides of the neck. The overwhelming majority present with either unilateral or bilateral

metastases. Those with clinically negative necks still require elective neck irradiation. 418 The pattern of nodal spread is quite orderly with the upper jugulodigastric
nodes being involved in the great majority, and the low neck involved far less frequently. 419 It is interesting to note the ability of RT to control neck disease without the
need for neck dissection. Neck control is high, even in patients with bulky cervical lymphadenopathy. All patients with nasopharyngeal disease require radiation
treatment to regional cervical lymph nodes. Patients with N0 necks are usually treated to 5000 cGy to the entire neck in 180- to 200-cGy daily fractions. Patients with
involved necks receive at least 6000 cGy to the region of the involved neck, with boost to higher doses to the gross disease itself. For N1 disease, an additional 500
to 1000 cGy is given. For bulkier necks, doses in the 1000 to 1500 cGy range are added. These additional boost dosages are usually done with electron beams.
There has been increasing interest and development of more sophisticated treatment techniques. The role of multileaf and micromultileaf collimators in conformal
therapy has allowed for increasing customization and automation of treatment. In particular, micromultileaf systems (leafs less than 5 mm) may be particularly
valuable. 423 Three-dimensional intensity-modulated radiotherapy may also be helpful in attempts to maximize tumor dose while decreasing normal tissue dose. 424
Treatment of Recurrent Disease
For patients with local recurrence, a second course of RT can usually be delivered to the nasopharynx. This can be quite rewarding in selected patients. Wang has
shown the importance of high-dose reirradiation in obtaining good results. 425 Five-year survival was 45% in patients who received greater than or equal to 6000 cGy,
as compared with zero 5-year survivors in those who receive less than 5000 cGy. Also, the interval of time between the original treatment and the recurrence was of
prognostic significance. For patients who had recurrences more than 2 years after their original treatment, 5-year survival could be obtained in 66%. However, only
13% of patients who failed within 2 years of the original treatment were 5-year survivors. Wang emphasizes the importance of combining external beam and
brachytherapy in the management of recurrent disease. 425
Brachytherapy alone has been used for selected patients with local recurrence. Harrison et al. have reported the use of permanent 125I implants for discreet local
recurrences in the nasopharynx. 426,427 Either the transoral or the transpalatal approaches can be used. Figure 30.2-9 shows a transpalatal approach. The transnasal
approach can also be used. 428 If patients are selected with localized, discreet lesions that are limited to the mucosa, permanent implants can be quite successful. It
also has the advantage of limiting the normal tissue that is reirradiated.

FIGURE 30.2-9. A patient with a discrete mucosal recurrence of a nasopharyngeal cancer. The recurrence was superficial and at the roof of the nasopharynx. It was
not accessible through the opened mouth or through the nose. He was treated with an 125I implant via the transplalatal approach. A: This view looks into the mouth
from above the patient's head, under general endotracheal anesthesia. A mouth retractor holds the mouth open. The tongue is at the top of the figure retracted by the
tongue blade. The soft palate is exposed for the incision. B: The soft palate has been incised and reflected to expose the interior of the nasopharynx. The torus
tubarius is seen, and the glistening mucosa of the nasopharynx is directly visualized. Using this access, 125I seeds are directly implanted into the roof of the
nasopharynx. C: Localization films of the implant show the position of the seeds in the roof of the nasopharynx.

In most situations, because the recurrent lesion is not discreet and localized, a combination of external-beam and intracavitary irradiation is important. The field size
should be kept as small as possible, preferably smaller than 8 cm in maximum diameter. 429 It would be typical to deliver 4500 to 5000 cGy with external-beam RT, and
then boost the nasopharynx with an intracavitary implant with an additional 1000 to 1500 cGy. The techniques for these different brachytherapy approaches have
been reviewed by Harrison et al. 430 and Erickson and Wilson. 431 It is important to tailor the implant to the specific location within the nasopharynx that one wants to
irradiate. This can help maximize the dose to the target area and minimize the dose to the surrounding normal tissue. The use of charged particle irradiation as well
as stereotactic radiosurgery 432 and combining chemotherapy with radiotherapy has been reported. The relative roles of these techniques for patients with recurrent
nasopharyngeal carcinoma remain to be determined. The chemotherapy approaches are discussed later in this section.
The role for surgery in nasopharyngeal carcinoma is limited principally to treatment of residual or recurrent disease. Small locally recurrent disease within the
nasopharynx has been shown to be amenable to surgical resection with 5-year survival rates of 50% in small patient series. 433,434,435 and 436 Morton et al. have reviewed
the various techniques involved in the surgical management of recurrent disease. Various approaches include transpalatal, palatectomy, maxillary swing,
infratemporal, and the transcervicomandibulopalatal approach. 435 Complications of such surgery include injury to cranial nerves, cerebral spinal fluid leaks, and
hemorrhage secondary to vessel injury.
Management of regional recurrence entails the same considerations as regional recurrence from squamous cell carcinomas elsewhere within the upper aerodigestive
tract. If the disease is resectable, an attempt at surgical ablation is indicated. In most instances this requires a radical neck dissection. Brachytherapy can supplement
the neck surgery if there is concern about residual disease.
Chemotherapy for Nasopharyngeal Cancer: Metastatic or Recurrent Disease
The natural history of nasopharyngeal carcinoma, WHO types 2 and 3, differs from that of other sites in the head and neck. Local control rates are high, while distant
failure is more common and is often the cause of death. The distant metastatic rate at presentation is reported to be 5% to 11%. However, a thorough extent of
disease evaluation that includes CT scans of chest and abdomen, a bone scan and bone marrow aspiration, and biopsy reveal distant metastases in up to 40% of
patients. 437 Those presenting with bulky or fixed nodes, disease low in the neck, or bilateral involvement are at the greatest risk. 438,439,440 and 441 Bone is the most
common site of metastases followed by lung, liver, and extraregional nodes. Autopsy series report distant metastases in up to 87% of patients with nasopharyngeal
carcinoma, which is substantially more than found for any other primary site in the head and neck. 442
Reports of chemotherapy for treating recurrent and metastatic disease have usually been included with outcome data for other sites. The single agents, cisplatin,
doxorubicin, epirubicin, bleomycin, and methotrexate have been shown to be active for this disease, whereas the evidence for the activity of 5-FU, cyclophosphamide,
and the vinca alkaloids is less certain. 443
The most effective combinations are cisplatin based. Using these regimens to treat patients with metastatic disease consistently results in a small proportion of
long-term disease-free survivors. 444,445,446 and 447 The results of phase II trials generally show higher complete and partial response rates than are attainable for
squamous cell carcinoma from other sites. Selected trials are shown in Table 30.2-18.444,445,446,447,448,449,450,451,452 and 453

TABLE 30.2-18. Combination Chemotherapy in Recurrent and Metastatic Nasopharyngeal Cancer Patients

Choo and Tannock treated 40 patients with single agents or non–cisplatin-containing combinations and reported response in 25%, three complete and seven partial
responses.448 In contrast, the response to cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy in 30 patients was 70%, 7 complete and 14 partial responses.
A multicenter collaborative group led by investigators from the Institut Gustave Roussy-La Grange, France, has performed a sequence of studies evaluating
cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy. 444,445,446 and 447 The best results were achieved with a regimen of cisplatin, bleomycin, and 5-FU that resulted in a 20%
complete response rate and 79% overall response rate in 49 patients with metastatic or recurrent undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma. 444 A total of 165
patients with metastatic undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma were treated on four consecutive protocols between 1985 and 1996. Twenty patients (12%) were
long-term disease-free survivors (42+ to 208+ months), demonstrating the chemosensitivity of this disease in patients with visceral or bone metastases. 445
Investigators from the Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong, evaluated carboplatin, 300 mg/m 2 day 1, and 5-FU, 1000 mg/m2/d, days 1 to 3 every 3 weeks, in 42
patients with metastatic disease. 453 Complete responses were observed in lung, liver, and distant nodal sites of metastases. The overall response rate of 38% was
lower than reported for cisplatin-based combinations; however, both agents were administered in lower total doses than customarily used in the United States. This
same group subsequently evaluated paclitaxel, 135 mg/m 2 (3-hour infusion), and carboplatin, AUC 6 dosing every 3 weeks. 451 One-third of the 27 patients enrolled
had received prior chemotherapy and yet a 59% response rate was observed with acceptable toxicity. Similar results were reported by Fountzilas and associates
using a more intensive regimen of paclitaxel, 200 mg/m 2 (3-hour infusion), carboplatin, AUC 7 dosing, and G-CSF support repeated every 4 weeks. 452
Combined Modality Therapy for Locally Advanced Disease
Although local control and survival rates are excellent for T1 to T2, N0 to N1 undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma treated with RT alone, the 5-year survival
rate of patients with more advanced disease is unsatisfactory, ranging from 10% to 40%. Because of the high rate of distant metastases, integrating chemotherapy
into the primary management is logical. A number of nonrandomized trials evaluating induction, adjuvant, or concomitant chemotherapy and radiotherapy have been
performed. Selected trials are shown in Table 30.2-19. These studies and others from older literature may be found in several excellent reviews. 465,466

TABLE 30.2-19. Selected Nonrandomized Trials of Combined Modality Approaches for Advanced Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma

Induction Chemotherapy
Reports of two to three cycles of cisplatin-based induction chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy in patients with locally advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma
suggested survival improvement compared with historic controls. 454,455,456,457,458 and 459 Overall response rates of 82% to 98% and complete responses in up to 66% of
patients were observed. Geara et al. reported the results of a single institution study of 61 patients treated with the standard cisplatin and 120-hour infusion of 5-FU
for three courses followed by definitive radiotherapy. 459 The 5-year cumulative incidence of distant metastases was 19% for the chemotherapy patients compared with
34% for the matched historic controls receiving radiotherapy alone. This effect on distant metastases was most notable for patients with N2 to N3 disease. Five-year
disease-free and overall survival were also improved (64% vs. 42% and 69% vs. 48%, respectively). However, locoregional control rates were not different.
A retrospective comparison was reported by Teo and associates from Hong Kong that also suggested that benefit from chemotherapy was limited to those with
advanced disease. 458 Between 1984 and 1989, 209 patients with bulky or low cervical or supraclavicular nodes (less than or equal to 4 cm) were treated with two
courses of cisplatin, 100 mg/m 2, and 3 days of infusional 5-FU followed by radiotherapy. In contrast to the findings of Geara et al., a multivariate analysis, after 5.5
years of follow-up, showed significantly fewer local failures in the chemotherapy group for node-positive T3 and stage IV patients when compared with historic
controls, but no difference in survival, relapse-free survival, or distant metastases. There was no apparent benefit for stage II or T1 and T2 disease. These divergent
results with induction cisplatin and 5-FU may be due to the difference in the number of treatment courses and intensity of the regimens or simply the nature of
retrospective comparisons. These findings emphasized the need for randomized trials.
Three prospective randomized trials of induction chemotherapy have been reported and the results are shown in Table 30.2-20.467,468,469 and 470 The International
Nasopharyngeal Cancer Study Group compared three cycles of bleomycin, epirubicin, and cisplatin (BEC) chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy with radiotherapy
alone in 339 patients with N2 and N3 staged nasopharyngeal carcinoma (WHO types 2 and 3). This BEC regimen consisted of bleomycin, 15 mg/m 2 intravenous bolus
day 1 followed by a 4-day continuous infusion of 12 mg/m 2/d; epirubicin, 70 mg/m 2 day 1; and cisplatin, 100 mg/m 2 day 1 repeated every 3 weeks for three courses.
Conventional fractionation radiotherapy was used to a total dose of 65 to 70 Gy to the primary. The overall response rate to chemotherapy was 91%, with 47%
complete response. The updated 6-year results showed significant improvement in disease-free survival for chemotherapy patients (41% vs. 30%, P <.02) for the
control group. 468 BEC induction chemotherapy was associated with substantial toxicity including 8% treatment-related deaths. Fewer distant and local recurrences
occurred in the chemotherapy arm, but the magnitude of the effect coupled with severe toxicity was insufficient to produce a statistically significant improvement in
overall survival.

TABLE 30.2-20. Randomized Trials of Chemotherapy and Radiotherapy forLocally Advanced Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma

The second completed trial was reported by Chan and associates from the Prince of Wales Hospital. From 1988 to 1991, 82 patients with WHO type 3 carcinoma,
Ho's N3, or any nodal disease greater than or equal to 4 cm were randomized to receive RT alone or two cycles of cisplatin, 100 mg/m 2 day 1, and 3 days of infusional
5-FU, 1000 mg/m2/d, followed by RT. 469 Conventional fractionation radiotherapy was given, 66 Gy to the primary with or without brachytherapy. The response rate to
chemotherapy was 81% (19% complete response) and 100% after radiation compared with 95% after radiotherapy alone. An updated analysis after a median
follow-up of 60 months showed no difference in survival, disease-free survival, or pattern of failure. 466 Only 55% of patients completed the adjuvant chemotherapy
phase of treatment. The less intensive nature of this regimen may account for the lower complete response rate and the absence of any difference in survival
outcomes.
The third randomized comparison of induction chemotherapy was reported by the Asia-Oceanian Clinical Oncology Association, which included centers from Hong
Kong, Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia. 470 This study enrolled 334 patients (286 evaluable) with stage III and IV disease or any nodal involvement greater than or
equal to 3 cm. All patients had WHO types 2 or 3 histology. The investigational treatment consisted of cisplatin, 60 mg/m 2, and epirubicin, 110 mg/m 2 day 1, repeated
every 3 weeks. Response was assessed after two courses with patients demonstrating at least a partial response proceeding to a third cycle before radiotherapy. The
total dose of radiotherapy was 70 Gy to the primary tumor; however, the treatment technique was not standardized but left to each participating center. The response
rate to chemotherapy was 84%, with 18% complete. There was a trend for improved relapse-free survival for the chemotherapy-treated patients (59% vs. 47%, P =
.06) at 3 years, but no difference in overall survival, and local or distant failure rates. In a subset analysis of patients with nodal disease greater than or equal to 6 cm,
significantly improved survival and relapse-free survival was apparent for the chemotherapy group. This trial has been criticized for the lack of standardized
radiotherapy technique, nonuniform use of CT for staging and response assessment, and the high number of inevaluable patients.
In summary, the only induction chemotherapy trial with a positive result was the International Nasopharyngeal Cancer Study Group (INSCG) trial of three cycles of
BEC followed by radiotherapy in which disease-free survival but not overall survival was improved. Although a high response rate was achieved with BEC, it cannot
be recommended because of the associated toxicity and failure to sufficiently improve overall survival. Induction chemotherapy, therefore, remains investigational.
Concurrent Chemotherapy and Radiotherapy
The RTOG conducted a phase II trial of concurrent radiotherapy and cisplatin, 100 mg/m 2 days 1, 22, and 43, in patients with unresectable squamous cell carcinoma
from multiple sites. A subset of 27 patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma had an 89% complete response rate after completing concurrent treatment and a 5-year
survival rate of 55%, which was superior to historic controls. 460
This concept was then tested by the Head and Neck Intergroup. Concomitant chemoradiotherapy and adjuvant chemotherapy (cisplatin, 100 mg/m 2 every 3 weeks for
three doses during radiotherapy followed by three cycles of adjuvant cisplatin, 80 mg/m 2, and 5-FU, 1000 mg/m2/d × 4) were compared with radiotherapy alone. 280
Conventional radiotherapy, total dose 70 Gy, was administered in both arms. This trial was closed in November 1995 when an interim analysis of 138 randomized
patients showed a highly significant difference in progression-free survival (52 vs. 13 months) and 2-year survival (80% vs. 55%) favoring the chemotherapy-treated
patients. Sixty-three percent of patients received all three doses of cisplatin during radiotherapy and 55% completed adjuvant chemotherapy. When all 185 patients
enrolled were included in the analysis, the survival results remained significant: 3-year overall survival was 76% versus 46% ( P <.001), and progression-free survival
was 66% versus 26% (P <.001). The population of patients in this study differed from other trials in that approximately one-half had WHO type 1 squamous cell
carcinoma, a reflection of the U.S. population. WHO type 1 nasopharyngeal carcinoma is associated with lower sensitivity to chemotherapy and radiotherapy as
compared with types 2 and 3 found in endemic areas. Because of the small sample size, a subgroup analysis of these two populations was not feasible. For similar
reasons, it is impossible to dissect the contribution of adjuvant chemotherapy to these positive results.
A second randomized trial of concurrent cisplatin and radiotherapy was completed by Chan and colleagues at the Prince of Wales Hospital in Hong Kong. 471 A total of
321 patients with advanced nodal disease were enrolled between 1994 and 1999 and randomized to receive conventional fractionation radiotherapy, 62.5 Gy, plus
parapharyngeal boost when indicated, or the same radiotherapy plus concurrent cisplatin, 40 mg/m 2/week for up to eight doses. The preliminary results indicate a
significant difference in 2-year disease-free survival (62% vs. 78%, P = .01). Further follow-up will be needed to ascertain the effect on overall survival.
Adjuvant Chemotherapy
Adjuvant chemotherapy after radiotherapy is another strategy that is logical to pursue to improve survival given the propensity of this disease for distant spread.
Several small institutional phase II adjuvant chemotherapy trials from the 1980s are listed in Table 30.2-19.462,463 and 464 Survival comparisons with historic controls
indicated significant improvement in disease-free survival, supporting the need for a prospective randomized trial.
One multicenter randomized trial was reported by Rossi et al. for the Italian National Research Council. 472 A total of 229 patients were treated with radiotherapy or
radiotherapy and six cycles of adjuvant vincristine, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and cyclophosphamide. Seventy-four percent completed the adjuvant chemotherapy. No
differences in relapse-free survival, overall survival, or pattern of failure were observed. The results of this single trial of adjuvant chemotherapy are inconclusive
regarding the potential benefit of this strategy to reduce the incidence of distant metastases. The vincristine, Adriamycin, and cyclophosphamide regimen would be
considered ineffective for this disease. Adjuvant chemotherapy for nasopharyngeal carcinoma requires further formal study using more efficacious regimens.
In summary, three randomized trials evaluating cisplatin-based induction chemotherapy have been performed. Only the INSCG trial used an active regimen optimally
(three cycles of BEC) 467,468 and observed significant improvement in disease-free survival. None of the induction trials, however, could demonstrate a survival
advantage. The role of adjuvant chemotherapy is unclear as only one randomized trial was designed to specifically address this question, but an ineffective
chemotherapy regimen was tested.472 In contrast, the U.S. Head and Neck Intergroup trial of concurrent cisplatin and radiotherapy was highly positive, 280 and the
early, preliminary results of the Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong, trial using concurrent cisplatin on a weekly schedule are supportive. These results now suggest
that radiotherapy alone is insufficient treatment for patients with T3 to T4 or node-positive nasopharyngeal cancer. Chemoradiotherapy followed by adjuvant
chemotherapy as used in this intergroup trial should be considered the standard of care for this disease.
Results of Treatment
External-beam RT alone has shown to provide excellent local control for T1 and T2 lesions of the nasopharynx. 473,474,475,476 and 477 Wang reported better results when
intracavitary RT is added to external-beam treatment alone. 473 However, results with external-beam plus intracavitary RT are equivalent to the results of
external-beam RT alone in other large centers. Well-delivered external-beam RT should provide local control in at least 90% of patients with T1 lesions, and between
85% and 90% of patients with T2 lesions. Doses in the 6500 and 7000 cGy range are used.
For T3 and T4 disease, local control rates have been significantly lower than the earlier stages, ranging from 62% to 73% for T3 lesions and 44% to 71% for T4
lesions.474,475 and 476 There is a suggestion of a dose response curve for RT. Vikram et al. 478 reported a 90% local control rate for T4 patients receiving more than 6700
cGy, although few patients have been followed beyond 4 years. With the use of three-dimensional treatment planning and delivery, dose escalation to 7500 cGy and

beyond may be feasible. Investigators at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center have had ongoing experience with both three-dimensional conformal radiation
alone and in conjunction with concomitant chemotherapy and concomitant boost radiotherapy. 479 Comparison of the outcomes for patients treated with once-daily RT
versus concomitant boost RT, both with concurrent chemotherapy, showed a significant advantage to the concomitant boost technique. The implication of these data
is that dose escalation alone is not adequate. However, the combination of three-dimensional treatment planning, concomitant boost fractionation, and concurrent
chemotherapy are important in improving the outcome.
Results from M. D. Anderson Cancer Center show control of neck disease in all 35 N0 patients, 27 of 30 (90%) for N1, 24 of 26 (92%) for N2a, and 28 of 33 (85%) for
N2b. However, patients with N3a metastases in the neck did worse, with only 10 of 16 (63%) being controlled. Today, most patients with N3 neck disease receive
chemotherapy along with irradiation. Neck dissection is reserved for salvage for residual disease that persists after radiation or chemoradiation.

ORAL CAVITY
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Oral cavity cancer represents a multiplicity of diseases. Epidemiology as it relates to each of these disease processes likewise differs. However, given that squamous
cell carcinoma represents the preponderance of cancers that occur in this region, greater attention is focused on its etiologic determinants.
It is estimated that 30,000 new cases of oral cavity cancer occur annually. 480,481 The relationship between tobacco exposure and disease development has been
clearly demonstrated. 482,483 A clear dose-response relationship has been identified with a greater risk being directly proportional to intensity and duration of exposure.
Alcohol has been identified as a coagent, most probably through a topical effect. 484 The mucosal areas that are exposed to prolonged contact with alcohol are at
greatest risk of cancer development. Readers are referred to reviews on mechanisms of tobacco-induced carcinogenesis for in-depth understanding. 485 Likewise,
reviews regarding the role of alcohol in cancer development are available. 482,486
Cigarette smoking cannot be considered the sole etiologic agent for oral cavity cancer. This fact is made evident by the observation that over 50 million individuals in
the United States consume cigarettes. The percentage of the total population that uses tobacco in its various forms is even greater. As mentioned, however, only
30,000 individuals develop oral cavity cancer annually. Other factors must therefore be considered. Arguably it is genetic susceptibility that may be the most
significant. Genetic factors associated with increased risk include mutagen sensitivity, which is potentially reflective of an underlying DNA repair deficiency. 487
Syndromes that are characterized by mutagen sensitivity including xeroderma pigmentosum, Fanconi's anemia, and ataxia-telangiectasia have all been associated
with oral cavity cancers. 488 Other relevant genetic markers may include inducibility of the cytochrome P-450 enzyme system. 489
Additional risk factors for oral cavity cancer include diet. 490,491 Patients with vitamin A deficiency have been considered at high risk of malignant transformation of oral
mucosa. High dietary consumption of fruits and vegetables have been found to provide a protective effect. Chronic irritants have been considered an etiologic factor,
including mouthwash, poor dental hygiene, and syphilis. 492,493 Reports have incriminated marijuana smoking as a contributing factor to oral cavity cancer. 494
Studies have focused on the viral etiology of cancers within the upper aerodigestive tract. Herpes simplex virus type 1 has long been considered an etiologic agent.
The inability to identify herpes simplex virus type 1–related proteins within oral cavity cancers has, however, raised questions as to the significance of this virus. 495
Investigations have identified human papilloma virus within head and neck cancers, specifically types 2, 11, and 16. 496,497,498 and 499 Papilloma transcriptional factors,
when inserted within human DNA, can alter normal gene replicative control mechanisms.
ANATOMY
The anatomy of the oral cavity is covered for each specific site.
STAGING
T staging for oral cavity cancer applies to all subsites within the oral cavity unless otherwise stated. For the oral cavity the definition of T staging is presented in Table
30.2-21. The regional lymph node (N) and distant metastases (M) staging are identical to other sites within the upper aerodigestive tract (see Staging and Screening,
earlier in this chapter).

TABLE 30.2-21. Staging for Oral Cavity Cancer

PATHOLOGY
The most common cancer within the oral cavity is squamous cell carcinoma. Additionally, cancers can arise from minor salivary glands; these latter cancers include
adenoid cystic carcinoma, mucoepidermoid carcinoma, and adenocarcinoma. Rare soft tissue neoplasms include mucosal melanoma, plasmacytoma, and soft tissue
sarcomas. Also found within the oral cavity are cancers arising from bone including osteosarcomas.
There also exist neoplastic lesions that are not truly malignant disorders of bone growth such as ameloblastoma. These lesions, however, have a propensity for local
expansion and destruction. The principles of sound oncologic surgery and radiation thus apply to these processes.
NATURAL HISTORY
Earliest changes associated with squamous cell carcinoma are associated with erythema and slight mucosal surface irregularities. Many times a punctate lesion also
is identified. As disease progresses, several growth patterns emerge that can be typically characterized as exophytic or infiltrative. The latter is more characteristically
associated with destruction of surrounding anatomic structures. The exophytic lesions have a less aggressive growth pattern. It should be realized that both patterns
are capable of producing metastasis and disease progression. Therapy should be planned accordingly.
Characteristics of the disease are reflected in certain histopathologic criteria. When considering tumor differentiation it has been reported that poorly differentiated
disease has a greater propensity for metastasis than well-differentiated disease. This has, however, not been universally accepted. Jacobsson's criteria, as outlined in
Table 30.2-1, likewise reflects the natural history of the disease. More specific information regarding natural history is covered in each anatomic subsite.

LIP

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Carcinoma of the lip is second only to skin cancer as a site of neoplasia within the head and neck region. It is noted to occur in approximately 3600 cases per year
(i.e., 1.8 persons per 100,000 population annually). 480 The majority of these lesions occur on the lower lip and 95% occur in male subjects. A principal etiologic factor,
similar to other upper aerodigestive cancer, has been the use of tobacco, including both pipes and cigars. 500 Sun exposure has also been incriminated and may
represent the most significant factor. The latter fact is of potential relevance given the increased incidence of other skin cancers as well as lip cancer. Patients
genetically susceptible to skin cancers following sun exposure (i.e., patients with xeroderma pigmentosum) are likewise susceptible to lip cancer. 488 Such an
observation emphasizes ultraviolet radiation as an etiologic agent. Disease has likewise been noted in renal and homograft recipients, implicating immune
suppression as a determinant. 501
ANATOMY
The lip is composed of the orbicularis oris muscle and is delineated by the junction of the vermilion border with the skin. Blood supply and sensory nerve supply are
by means of the labial artery (a branch of the facial artery) and by cranial nerve V, respectively. The primary lymph node drainage is to levels I and II.
PATHOLOGY
The principal cancer involving the lip is squamous cell carcinoma. Another common lesion is basal cell carcinoma. Rarely, minor salivary gland cancers can occur.
NATURAL HISTORY
Patients most frequently present with either an exophytic or ulcerative lesion of the lower lip. Occasionally, these lesions are associated with bleeding and pain. The
latter symptom, however, is a late feature of the disease. These lesions are typically slow-growing lesions. With progression there may be associated numbness of
the skin of the chin secondary to involvement of the mental nerve, a branch of the third division of cranial nerve V. Furthermore, progression of disease along the
mental nerve may extend into the mental foramen of the mandible. Such involvement leads to enlargement of the foramen with bone destruction and widening of the
inferior alveolar canal. A Panorex examination of the mandible is recommended as part of each diagnostic evaluation.
Lymphatic spread occurs relatively infrequently in lip cancer; approximately 5% to 10% of patients develop evidence of nodal involvement. 502,503 and 504 Lymph node
spread is typically to submandibular nodes or submental nodes. Lesions in the midline may spread bilaterally. The incidence of metastases has been related to
histologic grading, with high-grade lesions being at greatest risk. The upper lip tends to metastasize earlier than the lower lip. Upper lesions metastasize to periparotid
nodes (i.e., preauricular nodes, in addition to submandibular nodes).
The prognosis from lip cancer is principally dependent on the size of the primary tumor. 505,506 and 507 T1 lip cancers have a 5-year survival of 90%. T2 survival is 84%.
With evidence of lymph node metastases, survival decreases to 50%. Perineural invasion represents a bad prognostic sign. 508 Likewise, prognosis appears worse in
younger adults. 509 Tumors have a greater tendency to metastatic spread in these latter patients.
TREATMENT
Early Disease
Surgery or radiotherapy are the mainstays of therapy. Dysplasias and carcinoma in situ can be handled by lip shave (i.e., vermilionectomy with advancement of a
mucosal flap). Those lesions that involve less than 30% of the lip can be resected with a V excision and primary closure of resulting defects. For larger lesions
transposition flaps are required for reconstruction.
Undoubtedly the challenge in the surgical management of lip cancer resides in the best means of reconstruction. Oral competence remains the primary goal. Those
lesions that require resection of 30% to 50% of the lip, can be best handled with a transposition flap drawn from the uninvolved opposing lip. This reconstruction
technique is termed Abbe-Estlander. 510,511 and 512 When the near total lip is involved (i.e., 50% to 75%), the Karapandzic advancement flap can be used. 513 This has the
benefit of providing a competent oral sphincter with an associated neurovascular integrity.
The problem with the Karapandzic reconstruction is the reconstructed lip is tight and significantly foreshortened. Other methods have been devised. 514,515 and 516 These
vary from simple nasolabial flaps based inferiorly or superiorly to more formal fan-type flaps such as the Gillies flap and Webster cheek advancement flap. 516
Most T1 to T3 squamous cell carcinomas of the lip can be managed by either RT or surgery. The choice of radiation or surgery may depend on the size and location
of disease. If the lesion is quite small and can be easily excised without functional sequelae, surgery would be the chosen treatment. Lesions involving commissures
can be irradiated, without the functional sequelae of surgery. However, involvement of the commissure under such circumstances is rare. Brachytherapy alone can be
used for early T1 and small T2 lesions. Temporary implantation with 192Ir or localized electron-beam irradiation can be used. Implant doses of 60 Gy over 6 days, or
external-beam doses of 50 Gy in seven fractions to 60 Gy can be used. Figure 30.2-10 shows a clinical example of the brachytherapy procedure.

FIGURE 30.2-10. A: A patient with a T1N0 squamous cancer of the lower lip. The lesion measured 2 cm in greatest diameter and involved the commissure. B: An
implant was used as treatment. Under local anesthesia with 2% lidocaine, 14-gauge angiocatheters were placed through the lesion. After localization and planning
films were done, 192Ir was loaded into these catheters. A total of 6000 cGy in 67 days was delivered. C: The patient had no evidence of disease at 3 years. (From ref.
517, with permission.)

Given the infrequency in which early cancers spread to regional lymph nodes, elective treatment of the neck is not necessarily required.
Advanced Disease
Stage III and IV lip disease are optimally managed with combined surgery and postoperative RT. Selected T3 lesions can be managed with either radiotherapy alone
or surgery alone. Reconstructive options are as described in the previous section. Doses in the 6000- to 6300-cGy range, delivered at 180 to 200 cGy per fraction
over 6 to 7 weeks, is preferred. If the patient has lymph node metastases in the neck, a neck dissection would be done along with the resection of the primary site.
The postoperative RT would then be delivered to both the neck and the primary site. Even if the patient were N0, one should still use elective RT or elective node
dissection as part of the management, given the increased risk of microscopic lymph node metastases in these patients.

For patients with T1 to T3 disease who have had an operation, sometimes the radiation oncologist is faced with a positive margin of resection. This can either be
managed with brachytherapy alone, or localized superficial external-beam irradiation, with similar doses and techniques as when RT alone is used.
Results of Treatment
The RT results are similar to the reported results of surgical management. 517 Heller and Shah reported approximately 90% local control for T1, T2, and T3 lesions
treated with surgery alone. 505 A significant problem in surgical management is local recurrence, which may approach 40% for T3 and T4 lesions. 503 Fitzpatrick has
reported the Princess Margaret Hospital experience, which also documents that the results of RT and surgery are basically equivalent. 518
Jorgensen et al. have reported a series of 869 lip cancers. 519 In 766 patients, treatment was performed entirely with brachytherapy. The remaining cases had
external-beam radiation, mainly with orthovoltage beams. The majority of patients had either T1 or T2 lesions, with only 75 having T3 lesions. Local control was in the
90% range. External-beam radiation can also be used. Petrovich et al. reported on 250 patients, most receiving 5100 cGy in 3 weeks with daily fractions of 300
cGy.520 There were a total of 896 patients in the study, most of whom were treated with orthovoltage beams. Local control was obtained in 94% of T1 and T2 lesions
and in 90% of T3 lesions. For T4 disease, 47% of the patients obtained local control with radiation alone, pointing to the need for combined modality treatment for this
subset. Sykes et al. reported 26 patients with T1 to T2 squamous cell cancers of the lip treated with electron-beam radiation. 521 With median follow-up of 31 months
(range, 1.5 to 60.0 months), there was 100% local control.

ALVEOLAR RIDGE AND RETROMOLAR TRIGONE
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Cancers of the alveolar ridge and retromolar trigone account for approximately 10% of all oral cancers. 522 Male subjects are more frequently affected at a ratio of 4:1.
An increased frequency in rural women in the southeastern United States has been stated to occur.
ANATOMY
The alveolar ridge consists of an upper and lower portion. The lower alveolar ridge has as its structural basis the alveolar process of the mandible, extending from the
ascending ramus to ascending ramus not inclusive of the retromolar trigone. Its borders extend from the gingival-labial sulcus to the free mucosa of the floor of the
mouth. The alveolar process of the maxillary bone constitutes the upper alveolar ridge. The retromolar trigone is a triangular area that is composed principally of
mucosa overlying the ascending ramus of the mandible. It is bounded superiorly by the hard palate, inferiorly by the alveolar ridge, medially by the anterior tonsillar
pillar, and laterally by the gingival buccal sulcus.
Lymphatic drainage of the alveolar ridge and retromolar trigone is principally to levels I and II.
PATHOLOGY
Squamous cell carcinoma represents the near total majority of lesions in this area. Minor salivary gland lesions (i.e., mucoepidermoid carcinomas and adenoid cystic
carcinomas) can occur.
NATURAL HISTORY
Squamous cell carcinoma of the alveolar ridge grows in patterns similar to other squamous cell carcinomas of the oral cavity (i.e., either as exophytic lesions or as
infiltrative disease). The latter is commonly associated with bony destruction, which occurs in up to 58% of cases. The presenting symptom is primarily pain, which is
exacerbated by chewing. Other symptoms include intermittent bleeding as well as loose teeth. In those patients who are edentulous, the principal complaint relates to
ill-fitting dentures. The lower alveolus is affected most often in the molar and premolar region. Delay in diagnosis is characteristic because of confusion with
inflammatory conditions such as gingivitis or periodontitis.
These lesions have a higher probability of regional lymph node metastases than other cancers within the oral cavity, with the exception of tongue cancer. Overall, the
probability of lymph node metastases increases directly with the size of the primary and averages 30%. 523,524,525,526 and 527 It may increase up to 70% for T4 cancers. It is
of note, however, that lymph node metastases tend to occur more frequently from mandibular alveolar ridge cancers than maxillary alveolar ridge disease. Metastatic
disease is primarily to lymph nodes in levels I and II. Byers et al. noted that less than 5% of patients develop disease in the posterior cervical triangle. 527
The prognosis from alveolar ridge carcinoma is reflected by the extent of primary and regional lymph node metastatic disease. 524,525,526 and 527 T1 cancer of the alveolar
ridge can be expected to have an 85% survival. T2 lesions and T3 lesions are associated with 80% and 60% survival, respectively. Prognosis with T4 lesions is poor,
approximating 20%.
TREATMENT
Early Disease
Surgical management of carcinomas of the alveolar ridge reflects the management principles of cancers of other sites within the oral cavity. The fundamental feature
remains the achievement of tumor-free surgical margins with the preservation of critical anatomic structures.
Early T1 or T2 lesions of the alveolar ridge can be managed successfully by surgery alone. With minimal cortical involvement or with involvement by cancer confined
to the mucoperiosteum, resection may include a marginal (coronal) mandibulectomy that preserves structural integrity of the mandible. The ability to preserve
segments of the mandible is in part dependent on dental status. Not infrequently, edentulous patients present with thin pipestem mandibles that preclude all but a
segmental resection.
The tendency for bone invasion by alveolar ridge carcinomas through thin mucoperiosteum or through tooth sockets makes primary radiation less feasible. In general,
lesions of the gingiva are best managed by surgery. Studies by McGregor and MacDonald have reinforced the notion that a conservative approach to the
management of the mandible can only be justified by a thorough understanding of patterns of spread of squamous cell carcinoma into bone. 528
The need for neck dissection for alveolar ridge carcinomas is enhanced secondary to its tendency to regional nodal spread. The considerations for elective neck
dissection as well as the type of neck dissection have been discussed previously in this chapter (see Surgical Management of the Cervical Lymph Nodes, earlier in
this chapter). The infrequency of tumor spread to levels IV and V has led to acceptance of selective neck dissection of levels I through III in instances of a clinically N0
neck.
Advanced Disease
Advanced staged tumors generally require multimodality therapy including surgery and radiation. Segmental mandibulectomy is required. Advances in the
management of such disease has related to improved reconstructive techniques, principally the use of osteomyocutaneous free-tissue transfer. 529
Treatment Results
In those studies that report primary surgery results, the actuarial survival for stage I and II was 77% at 5 years, compared with approximately 60% for stage III, and
24% for stage IV.527,530

There are relatively few patients reported in the literature with gingival carcinoma who have been managed with primary RT. 530,531 Fuchihata et al. reported a group of
patients treated with external-beam irradiation and chemotherapy (bleomycin or peplomycin). 532 Major responders were treated definitively using this approach,
whereas others underwent surgery. Responders with T1 and T2 lesions who were not operated on had local control at 3 years of 95%, while those who had surgery
had local control of 86%. For T3 and T4 lesions, the nonsurgical group had local control of 45%, while the surgery group had local control of 75%. Thus, there may be
a role for nonsurgical management in selected early lesions, but more advanced lesions definitely benefit from surgery followed by postoperative radiation. Early
retromolar trigone tumors can be treated successfully by primary radiation, especially when they are superficial. Figure 30.2-11 shows a clinical example.

FIGURE 30.2-11. A: A patient with a T2N0 squamous cancer of the right retromolar trigone. The patient was treated with definitive external-beam radiation therapy to
the primary and ipsilateral neck. B: The treatment plan involved a wedged photon pair. The boost field is shown. The contralateral parotid area received less than
10% of the dose, thereby avoiding xerostomia. The primary site received 7020 cGy, at 180 cGy per fraction. The right low neck received 5000 cGy over 5 weeks with
an ipsilateral low neck field (not shown). C: The patient had no evidence of disease at 6.5 years.

FLOOR OF MOUTH
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The annual incidence of cancers of the floor of mouth is 0.6 cases per 100,000 in the United States. 480 It occurs in male subjects approximately three times as
frequently as female subjects. Reports, however, have demonstrated an increasing incidence of the disease among women. 533 The median age of individuals
developing squamous cell carcinoma is approximately 60 years.
ANATOMY
The floor of mouth is delineated by the free margin of the mucosa as it extends from the junction of the mobile tongue to the alveolar process. This margin extends
from one anterior tonsillar pillar to the other. Within the floor of mouth anteriorly are the openings of bilaterally located submandibular salivary glands, Wharton's
ducts. These ductal openings are significant because anterior lesions of the floor of mouth can frequently obstruct associated salivary flow, leading to tenderness and
enlargement of the respective submandibular gland. Also within the floor of mouth are minor salivary glands and the sublingual glands. Distinct from mucosa of the
tongue, mucosa of the floor of the mouth is nonkeratinizing stratified squamous epithelium under nonpathologic situations. Musculature making up the floor of mouth
include the genioglossus, geniohyoid, and mylohyoid muscles. Blood supply and nerve supply are principally from the paired lingual arteries and lingual nerves,
respectively.
PATHOLOGY
Cancers of the floor of mouth account for approximately 10% to 15% of all oral cavity cancers. Squamous cell carcinoma constitutes the majority of lesions within the
floor of mouth, with the majority of these lesions being moderate to well differentiated. There are several variants of squamous cell carcinoma of the floor of mouth.
This includes verrucous and sarcomatoid squamous cell carcinoma. Cancers derived from salivary gland tissue also are encountered including mucoepidermoid
carcinomas, adenocarcinomas, and adenoid cystic carcinomas.
NATURAL HISTORY
Squamous cell carcinomas of the floor of mouth typically present as infiltrative lesions that are characteristically painful. These lesions may extend anteriorly to invade
bone, deeply to infiltrate muscles of the floor of mouth, or posteriorly to invade tongue. On occasion, an enlarged lymph node in the neck is the presenting symptom.
Floor of the mouth cancers can grow to massive size without metastasizing to cervical lymph nodes. However, approximately 12% of T1 lesions are associated with
occult metastatic disease, depending on the thickness of lesion. 74 Metastatic rates to cervical lymph nodes occur in 30%, 47%, and 53% of T2, T3, and T4 cancer,
respectively.74 Lymph nodes in the submandibular and submental triangles represent the first echelon of metastatic sites. Distant metastases is infrequently observed
in patients who present with previously untreated disease.
Prognosis is influenced principally by disease stage and presence or absence of histopathologically confirmed regional lymph node metastases. The overall 5-year
survival for stage I disease approximates 85% to 90%. 534,535 For stage II, III, and IV disease, 80%, 66%, and 32% of patients are alive at 5 years, respectively. Other
factors considered to reflect a worse prognosis include evidence of perineural invasion, depth of primary tumor invasion, and poor tumor differentiation. 536,537,538 and 539
Poor tumor differentiation, however, has not been universally accepted as having prognostic significance.
TREATMENT
Early Disease
Treatment of floor of the mouth cancers has been principally surgical resection, but may either be surgery or radiation alone. As is true for cancers of the alveolar
ridge, superficial involvement of the mandible can be handled by marginal mandibulectomy ( Fig. 30.2-12).

FIGURE 30.2-12. Types of mandibular resection for squamous cell carcinomas of the floor of mouth. A: Marginal resection that preserves mandibular continuity. B:
Segmental mandibulectomy in which the entire segment of mandible is removed and mandibular continuity is lost. (From Shah JP, Shemen LJ, Strong EW. Surgical
therapy of oral cavity tumors. In: Thawley SE, Panje WR, eds. Comprehensive management of head and neck tumors . Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1987:558, with

permission.)

When radiation is used for early disease, it has been shown that results are improved when at least a portion of the treatment is delivered by an interstitial
implant.539,540 Interstitial implant alone can also be used. 541 Prostheses can be designed to protect the mandible for brachytherapy ( Fig. 30.2-13). Lesions that abut or
are tethered to the periosteum of the mandible or lesions that extend onto the gingiva are not good candidates for primary radiotherapy. Implants against the mandible
can lead to osteonecrosis.

FIGURE 30.2-13. Prosthesis with lead lining that fits onto the lower teeth and serves as mandibular protection for brachytherapy. (Compliments of Dr. Joshua Verona,
Dental Service, Beth Israel Medical Center.)

The treatment of the neck for early cancer of the floor of mouth is controversial. Most advocate elective neck treatment for clinically N0 disease. The value of this
approach as compared with observation with neck dissection and RT being performed for clinically developing disease remains unproven. Some have advocated
performing neck dissection depending on the thickness of the primary lesion (i.e., greater than 4-mm thickness).
Advanced Disease
For advanced lesions, combined therapy of surgery and radiation is the treatment of choice. Surgical resection generally entails partial glossectomy and segmental
mandibulectomy. Identification of the inferior alveolar nerve and frozen section histopathologic assessment should be performed during the operation. This is to
ensure that disease has not extended beyond surgical margins by perineural spread. Resection for most advanced lesions requires removal of the entire thickness of
the floor of mouth.
New reconstructive techniques have greatly facilitated rehabilitation following surgical excision of advanced tumors. Techniques include myocutaneous flaps as well
as osteomyocutaneous free flaps with microvessel anastomoses. 542
Elective, therapeutic, or both kinds of neck dissections are considered necessary in each case. Bilateral neck dissections are indicated for those lesions that
approach or cross the midline.
Postoperative radiation entails doses in the range of 6000 to 6300 cGy at the primary site. In instances of positive surgical margins, our policy is to treat the area of
positive margins to 6300 cGy. Certain patients with positive margins may be treated with adjuvant brachytherapy instead of external-beam RT. 543
Results of Treatment
Local recurrences after surgical resection of T1 and T2 floor of the mouth cancers are noted in no less than 10% of the patient population. 534,535 As tumors increase in
size, the pattern for failure becomes predominately a regional problem. Nearly 40% of failures are solely within regional cervical lymph nodes. 535
Mazeron et al. have reported a large radiotherapy series. 541 The majority of patients were treated to 65 Gy with 192Ir brachytherapy alone. Local control was 94% for
T1 N0, and 74% for T2 N0 lesions and was dependent on size of the lesion as well as the presence or absence of gingival extension. For T2 lesions between 2 and 3
cm, local control was 58%. For lesions with gingival extension, local control was 50%. There is an interest in using high dose-rate brachytherapy for floor of the mouth
lesions.544,545 Inoue et al. reported 2- and 5-year local control of 94% and 94% for a cohort of mainly T1 to T2 lesions treated with high dose-rate brachytherapy alone
or combined with 30- to 40-Gy external-beam RT. 545
Wang et al. have reported excellent results with the use of intraoral cone electron boost and no brachytherapy. 547 The daily dose of radiation via the cone is frequently
greater than the conventional 180- to 200-cGy range. Local control was obtained in all 13 patients with T1 lesions, and in 19 of 20 (95%) with T2 lesions.
Fu et al. have published an extensive RT experience with floor of the mouth cancer. 548 When implant was either the only treatment or a part of the treatment, local
failure occurred in only 2% (1 of 39 patients) with T1 lesions, 7% (4 of 54 patients) with T2 lesions, and 14% (5 of 35 patients) with T3 lesions. The use of primary
radiation may be associated with improved functional outcome as compared with surgery, but this requires more investigation. 546,549,550
There is a cohort of patients who undergo surgery and are referred for postoperative radiotherapy because the pathology reveals positive or close margins. In this
setting, certain patients may be treated with brachytherapy alone, thereby limiting the high-dose region to the area at risk. This is not always technically or
oncologically feasible. When it is, it can provide the patient with local control in excess of 80% 543 and can avoid the sequelae of wide-field external-beam irradiation to
the oral cavity.

TONGUE
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Tongue cancer is estimated to occur in 6200 individuals per year in the United States. 480 Excluding lip, it exceeds all other sites in the oral cavity. The median age for
individuals with tongue cancer is approximately 60 years. The male to female ratio is similar to other disease sites, approximately 3:1. It is of interest that an increase
in tongue cancer has been reported among young adult men. 551,552 Some have suggested marijuana use as a contributing factor in this latter population. 494
ANATOMY
The oral tongue represents the mobile portion of the tongue musculature that extends from the line demarcated by the circumvallate papilla posteriorly to the junction
of the floor of mouth anteriorly. It is made up of the genioglossus, hyoglossus, styloglossus, and palatoglossus muscles. All of these muscles are innervated by the
hypoglossal nerves. Taste and sensation within the tongue are provided by the lingual nerve, a branch of the third division of the cranial nerve V. Blood is supplied
principally from the external carotid artery through the paired lingual arteries. Lymphatic drainage is principally to level II, III, and I in decreasing order.
PATHOLOGY

The primary cancer of the tongue is squamous cell carcinoma. Other cancers are frequent and include minor salivary gland cancers such as adenoid cystic carcinoma
and adenocarcinoma. Myeloblastoma represents a rare tumor of the tongue.
NATURAL HISTORY
These cancers can grow in both an exophytic and an infiltrative fashion. The primary presenting symptom is pain, although many of these lesions can be painless.
Difficulty in speech and deglutition is occasionally elicited. It tends to be more rapid in its onset than other cancers within the oral cavity. There may be a history of
long-standing leukoplakia before the development of symptoms, especially in younger female subjects.
As compared with other cancers within the oral cavity, tongue cancers have a greater propensity for lymph node metastases. This occurs in ranges from 15% to 75%
depending on the extent of primary disease. 553,554 Lymph nodes most frequently involved lie within level II (i.e., jugulodigastric nodes). Nodes within level I, III, and IV
are involved in decreasing order. It is of note, however, that all nodes can be involved. The incidence of bilateral nodal metastases occurs in up to 25% of cases.
Contralateral nodal metastases are present in 3% of cancers.
Prognosis is principally reflected in extent of nodal metastases, ranging from 75% in early-stage node-negative disease to 30% in those with advanced lesions. Other
factors portending more aggressive disease include perineural and vascular invasion and infiltrative versus pushing borders. 555,556 Depth of invasion has likewise
been considered significant. Whether or not tongue cancer in young adults represents a worse disease has not been demonstrated. 557
TREATMENT
Early Disease
It is generally considered that disease-control rates for early disease when using either surgery or RT are equivalent depending on treatment bias. Early stage I and II
lesions can usually be removed intraorally. Excision usually entails an hemiglossectomy. Special attention to surgical margins should be exercised as disease may
spread along muscle bundles beyond that expected by clinical assessment.
Most T1 lesions can be managed with brachytherapy alone. This generally consists of an 192Ir implant, although high dose-rate implants are also being used. 558,559 and
560

Whether low dose-rate or high dose-rate is used, the catheters themselves are placed in the operating room under general anesthesia. The 192Ir is loaded 1 to 2 days
postoperatively. Localization films are taken, and computerized dosimetry is performed. The usual dose rate is in the 40 to 60 cGy/h range, and the usual total dose is
6000 to 7000 cGy. The patient wears a tongue prosthesis during the dwell time of the implant to protect the hard and soft palate as much as possible. For high dose
rate, 60 Gy fractions given twice a day over 6 days has yielded good results. 558,559
As the lesion increases in size when using radiation as primary therapy, it is preferred to combine external-beam irradiation with implant. First, the external beam can
be used as elective neck irradiation simultaneous with irradiation to the tongue. The implant then serves as the boost to the tongue. Second, the external beam allows
a wider margin of tongue to be treated than does the implant. In these situations, it is typical to treat the primary site and the neck to doses in the 5000-cGy range,
followed by a 2000- to 3000-cGy implant boost to the tongue.
For N0 patient, this treatment program manages both the primary site and the neck. For those patients with palpable neck nodes, a neck dissection can be performed
at the same as anesthesia for the implant, thereby completing the treatment to the primary site and the neck. This can usually be done approximately 3 weeks after
the completion of the external-beam irradiation.
RT is certainly suitable for most T1 lesions. For T2 and T3 lesions, it is most suitable for those tumors that are exophytic or have minimal infiltration. Tumors that are
deeply infiltrative are preferably managed with a primary surgical approach, usually with postoperative RT.
Advanced Disease
The surgical management of more extensive lesions requires either a mandibulotomy or a lingual-releasing procedure to gain access to disease. The latter procedure
entails removal of neck contents before primary cancer resection. The tongue is delivered into the neck by releasing musculature attachments posteriorly and mucosal
attachments within the oral cavity. Large lesions with mandibular involvement require composite resection. The term composite resection refers to the removal of
tissue involving multiple anatomically defined structures, one of which includes the mandible ( Fig. 30.2-14). Typically, it refers to resection of a portion of tongue, floor
of the mouth, and segment of mandible.

FIGURE 30.2-14. Composite resection of tongue, floor of mouth, and margin of mandible. (From Shah JP, Shemen LJ, Strong EW. Surgical therapy of oral cavity
tumors. In: Thawley SE, Panje WR, eds. Comprehensive management of head and neck tumors . Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1987:558, with permission.)

For patients who require postoperative RT to the primary site alone, this can frequently be done with brachytherapy. This is especially true for the smaller lesions. The
decision of how to deliver this irradiation is integrated with the management of the neck. We prefer to use neck dissection as part of the management of all deeply
infiltrative or advanced tongue lesions. For the N0 patients, this generally means a staging procedure or a functional neck dissection. For patients who have involved
lymph nodes, this means either a radical neck dissection or one of its modifications. Yamazaki et al. have shown a clear relationship between tumor thickness and
neck failure in a cohort of patients treated with brachytherapy alone: The incidence of neck metastases was 50%, 40%, and 30% for tumors greater than 11 mm, 6 to
10 mm, and less than or equal to 5 mm, respectively. T stage also correlated with tumor thickness. 560
Results of Therapy
Decroix and Ghossein from the Curie Institute in Paris have reported on over 600 patients treated with primary RT for T1, T2, or T3 squamous cell carcinoma of the
oral tongue. 562 Although the majority of patients had implants alone, a large cohort had combined external-beam irradiation plus implant. Almost all patients at this
center received RT as their primary treatment. Primary control was obtained at 86% for T1, 80% for T2, and 68% for T3. These data compare quite favorably with the
results obtained with partial glossectomy.
Pernot et al. have reported a series of 448 patients with brachytherapy alone with or without neck dissection (181 patients) or combined external beam plus
brachytherapy (267 patients) for oral tongue cancer. 563 The 5-year local control was 93% for T1, 65% for T2, and 49% for T3 lesions. For T2 lesions managed by

brachytherapy alone, local control was 90% versus 50% for those managed by external beam plus implant. These data emphasize the importance of using
brachytherapy as a major part of the radiation program, but patient selection factors clearly play a role as well. The 5-year overall survival for T1, T2, and T3 lesions
(all N stages) was 69%, 41%, and 25%, respectively. Severe complications were uncommon. While 15% experienced grade 1 soft tissue injury, and 3% had grade 1
bone necrosis, only 1% and 2% had grade 3 soft tissue and bone complications, respectively. Spiro et al. have reviewed the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center
experience using partial glossectomy as primary management. 564,565 and 566 As was true for the Curie Institute series, the Memorial Hospital series is also relatively
unselected, with primary surgery being offered to the great majority of patients at that institution. Local control was obtained in 85% for T1, 77% for T2, and 50% for
T3. These data serve to highlight the similarity in local control rates for surgery or irradiation for most early tongue lesions.
Although the traditional brachytherapy approach has involved low dose-rate implants, 562 there has been an emergence of interest in high dose-rate brachytherapy for
oral tongue. 558,559 Either high dose-rate alone or in combination with moderate doses of external-beam irradiation have been used. Inoue et al. compared low
dose-rate versus high dose-rate implants in a small randomized trial of T1 to T2 oral tongue lesions, finding no major differences. 558 A program of 60 Gy in 10
fractions given twice a day over 6 days with high dose-rate yielded 100% local control at 2 years. All tumors had a thickness of 1 mm or less. Leung et al. reported
similar local control using the same fractionation program. 559 Mucositis related to these implants can last up to 20 weeks.
There are relatively few recent studies that report the results of therapy for surgery alone for advanced disease. 564,566,567 RT is generally used in the postoperative
setting. 570,571 Failure is most often within regional lymph nodes and leads to a 5-year determinate survival of 35% for stage III and IV disease. 565,568
Ange et al. have reviewed their experience using implants after excisional biopsy for patients with positive or close margins. 569 Local control was obtained in nearly
100% of the cases. When the primary site and the neck require postoperative RT, external-beam techniques must be used. Doses in the 60- to 63-Gy range over 6 to
7 weeks are typically used.
Surgical salvage of radiation failures in the oral tongue can be difficult. Yuen et al. reported 47 patients who underwent attempted salvage for either local recurrence,
locoregional recurrence, or regional recurrence. 561 Overall, 62% failed their salvage procedure. The 5-year actuarial survival was 39% for local recurrence alone, 27%
for locoregional recurrence, and 68% for regional recurrence alone.

HARD PALATE
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Hard palate cancers account for approximately 5% of all oral cavity cancers. 572 The incidence of the disease in the United States approximates 0.4 per 100,000
population. The male to female ratio is 8:1.
PATHOLOGY
Squamous cell carcinoma accounts for approximately 50% of hard palate tumors. The majority of these lesions are well differentiated. Other cancers occurring in this
area include the minor salivary gland lesions such as adenoid cystic and adenocarcinomas, which may be as frequent as squamous cell carcinoma.
NATURAL HISTORY
Cancers of the hard palate grow in a multiplicity of patterns including deeply infiltrating, destructive lesions versus diffuse superficial lesions associated with
microscopic invasion.
When considering metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the hard palate, lymph node metastases is less frequently encountered than cancers of other sites within
the oral cavity, ranging clinically from 6% to 29%. 553 Likewise, distant metastasis is infrequent. Prognosis in patients with squamous cell carcinoma is 75%, 46%, 36%,
and 11% for stage I through stage IV disease, respectively. 573
TREATMENT
Early Disease
Surgical management of early disease involves infrastructure maxillectomy (i.e., resection of the palatine process of the maxillary bone). Exposure for such resections
is generally obtained through a Weber-Fergusson–type incision.
As stated earlier, carcinoma in situ and microinvasive disease can involve a significant portion of the hard palate with extension of disease onto the soft palate and
retromolar trigone. Under such circumstances, primary radiation may be used.
Elective treatment of the neck is not generally required unless disease extends beyond the anatomic confines of the hard palate. Selective neck dissection under such
circumstances is adequate. Such dissection includes removal of lymph nodes in levels I, II, and III.
Advanced Disease
Surgical resection of advanced disease may involve a near total palatectomy. Generally, however, lesser operations are required. Advances in the surgical therapy of
hard palate cancers involve the immediate use of prosthetic obturators that allow for early restoration of adequate speech and swallowing. The need for postoperative
radiation is based on the closeness or involvement of tumor margins by tumor, perineural involvement, the presence of regional lymph node metastases, or all three
conditions.
Results of Treatment
Generally, incorporating the treatment philosophy described previously, Evans and Shah report an overall survival of 75% for stage I, 46% for stage II, and 36% and
11% for stage III and IV, respectively. The majority of patients who die of disease do so in the face of advanced local recurrence. 573,574 and 575

BUCCAL MUCOSA
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Cancer of the buccal mucosa accounts for approximately 8% of oral cavity cancers in the United States. 572 The disease may be seen much more frequently in other
parts of the world such as India depending on tobacco consumption patterns. Indeed, in the southeastern United States, the incidence of buccal mucosal cancer is
much higher in women; an observation attributed to the common use of snuff. The median age of individuals with buccal mucosal cancer may be slightly higher than
noted in patients with cancers of other sites within the oral cavity.
ANATOMY
The buccal mucosa is composed of a mucous membrane that extends from the lips anteriorly to the retromolar trigone posteriorly. Inferiorly it extends from the lateral
alveolar sulcus of the mandible to the lateral sulcus of the maxillary alveolar ridge. Its blood supply and nerve supply are from the facial artery and the third division of
cranial nerve V. Lymphatics from the buccal mucosa drain primarily into level II and level I in decreasing order.
PATHOLOGY

As in other sites within the oral cavity, squamous cell carcinoma is the predominant neoplasm. The verrucous variant of squamous cell carcinoma is frequently
observed. Only rarely are other cancers, such as minor salivary gland tumors, observed.
NATURAL HISTORY
Cancers of the buccal mucosa are more frequently exophytic than other cancers within the oral cavity. They are also relatively silent in their presentation and thus
present rarely as T1 lesions. Pain is the initial presenting complaint and is subsequently followed by bleeding and difficulty chewing. With extension of the disease
outside the confines of the buccal mucosa into the pterygoid musculature, patients may present with trismus. Disease not infrequently invades the mandible, maxillary
alveolar ridge, or both.
Lymph node metastases are most frequently observed within levels I and II and are observed clinically in 10% of presenting patients. 575
Five-year survival ranges from 77% to 18% depending on the stage of disease. 577 Urist et al. have shown that tumor thickness is a significant prognostic factor. 576
Patients with tumors less than 6 mm in thickness have significantly better survival rates than those with tumors greater than 6 mm in thickness, regardless of tumor
stage.
TREATMENT
Early Disease
Small lesions (T1 and early T2) can be managed with equal effectiveness by either surgery or RT. If the tumor can be excised easily through the open mouth, with
minimal functional sequelae, then small lesions are probably best managed in that fashion. Larger T1 lesions and lesions that approach the commissure are best
managed with RT. T2 lesions can be managed with RT if they are exophytic or relatively superficial. Deeper lesions are probably best managed by surgery.
In patients with small lesions and a clinically negative neck, the neck can be observed. Neck failure occurs in less than 10% of patients. However, for more advanced
lesions, the neck is treated electively with the same therapeutic modality that is used for the primary lesion.
RT can be used with a variety of different techniques. Interstitial brachytherapy, ipsilateral electrons, intraoral cone, or external-beam photon irradiation can all be
employed. The exact technique depends on the clinical situation and the expertise of the radiation oncologist.
Advanced Disease
More advanced disease requires surgery as the principal therapeutic modality, usually with postoperative radiation. The initial factor in such treatment relates to
adequate operative exposure. This is generally facilitated by dividing the lip in the midline and resecting the cheek posterolaterally in order to gain optimal exposure.
Postoperative radiotherapy is used for patients with close or positive margins, high-grade lesions, positive nodes, bone invasion, and thick (greater than 10 mm)
lesions.577 Adequate locoregional treatment at initial diagnosis is essential, as locoregional failure is a major cause of death for patients with buccal mucosa cancer
and few patients can be salvaged.
Care must be taken in assessing the need for resection of surrounding anatomic structures such as skin of face, upper alveolar ridge, and mandible. Invasion of tumor
into buccal fat pad and into dermis of cheek skin occurs not infrequently. Such invasion generally requires full-thickness resections including oral mucosa and cheek
skin. Such defects can be repaired with myocutaneous flaps. Free-tissue transfer is a relatively recent option for reconstruction.
Ipsilateral neck dissection is advocated in all instances of T3 or T4 primary disease, regardless of the nodal status.
Results of Treatment
Nair et al. have reported on 234 patients with buccal mucosa cancer treated with RT. 578 Disease-free survival at 3 years was 85% for stage I, 63% for stage II, 41% for
stage III, and 15% for stage IV disease. All 13 patients with T1 N0 disease were controlled with radiotherapy. Fifty percent of patients with T4 disease failed locally.
The presence of nodal metastases clearly affected the local regional failure rate.
Lapeyre et al. reported an experience using definitive brachytherapy for epidermoid cancer of the buccal mucosa. 579 A variety of techniques were employed from 1973
to 1991. The loop technique provided the best results, with only 1 of 22 patients with T1 to T3 lesions having local recurrence. Bloom and Spiro reported the results
for 90 patients with buccal mucosa cancer treated by surgery. 580 The 5-year survival rate by stage was 77%, 65%, 27%, and 18% for stages I, II, III, and IV,
respectively. Local failure was noted in 47% of patients. Regional failure was observed in 37%.
Dixit et al. performed a comparative study on 176 patients with buccal mucosa cancer, comparing surgery alone with surgery plus postoperative radiation. 577
Postoperative radiation was found to improve local control for patients with positive nodes, close or positive margins, high-grade lesions, bone invasion, and thick
tumors greater than 10 mm. Mishra et al. reported a randomized trial comparing surgery alone versus surgery plus postoperative radiotherapy. 581 There was improved
disease-free survival (68% vs. 38%, P <.005) in those who received radiation. This trial only included patients with stage III and IV disease.

REHABILITATION OF THE ORAL CANCER PATIENT
Over the last decade there has developed an increased effort to address the rehabilitation of the oral cancer patient, the major considerations reflected in speech and
swallowing disorders. 582,583,584,585 and 586 There is no question as to the effect of surgical resection of anatomic components of the oral cavity including the mandible,
tongue, and other soft tissue components. The need to preserve function through appropriate reconstructive measures is becoming increasingly apparent. Likewise,
rehabilitation efforts have been enhanced by improved quantitative assessments of functional outcomes, as well as through improving rehabilitation techniques. No
medical center or treating physicians can truly be considered as providing state-of-the-art therapy unless they are prepared to systematically address these issues.

OROPHARYNX
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The pharynx is divided into three regions: the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and hypopharynx. Our discussion is limited to the oropharynx and its encompassing sites
(i.e., the base of tongue, tonsil and tonsillar fossa, soft palate, and posterior pharyngeal wall). Cancer of the oropharynx is expected to occur in approximately 4000
patients annually in the United States. 481 Most commonly, the disease involves patients in the fifth through seventh decades of life. Men are afflicted three to five times
as frequently as women. The etiology of the disease, to the greatest extent, cannot be distinguished from cancers of the oral cavity. Tobacco and alcohol abuse
constitute the most significant risk factors.
STAGING
As was true for staging of oral cavity cancers, staging of tumors of the oropharynx relies on both physical examination as well as a variety of imaging procedures,
including CT scan. Staging of the primary tumor is presented in Table 30.2-22. The regional lymph nodes (N) and distant metastases (M) staging are identical to other
sites within the upper aerodigestive tract and are as stated in the beginning of this chapter (see Staging and Screening, earlier in this chapter).

TABLE 30.2-22. Staging of Tumors of the Oropharynx

BASE OF TONGUE
ANATOMY
The base of tongue is bounded anteriorly by a line demarcated by the circumvallate papillae. Posteriorly, it ends with the epiglottis. Laterally, it extends to the
glossopalatini sulcus and includes the pharyngoepiglottic and glossoepiglottic folds. Tongue musculature is composed of the genioglossus, styloglossus,
palatoglossus, and hyoglossus muscles. The blood supply and nerve supply are identical to that of the oral tongue and consist of the lingual artery and the
hypoglossal nerve, respectively.
Lymphatics are extensive within the base of tongue. Drainage is into numerous node levels including levels II, III, IV, and V in decreasing order. Indeed, disease may
involve retropharyngeal lymph nodes in certain instances such as with progression to lateral pharyngeal wall.
PATHOLOGY
Base of tongue cancers are less frequent than cancers of other anatomically defined areas of the tongue. Squamous cell carcinoma represents nearly 95% of those
cancers that occur in this subsite. Other cancers in this area include those of minor salivary glands origin (i.e., adenoid cystic and mucoepidermoid carcinoma) and
lymphomas.
NATURAL HISTORY
Cancers of the base of tongue are frequently advanced at the time of presentation. This is partly a reflection of the relatively silent location of such disease as well as
its aggressive tendencies. Patients usually present with symptoms of pain and dysphagia. Not infrequently, as is true for nasopharyngeal carcinomas, individuals
present with a mass in the neck. A history of weight loss is common. Likewise, referred otalgia secondary to cranial nerve involvement is common. With progressive
laryngeal involvement, a muffled quality of the voice may become apparent.
As is true for other squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck, cancers of the base of tongue can grow either in an infiltrative or exophytic pattern. Careful
physical examination delineates such growth. An important component of that evaluation should include digital and bimanual palpation. This delineates the extent of
base of tongue involvement as well as determines whether or not disease has infiltrated into the preepiglottic space. Figure 30.2-15 shows routes of spread for
squamous cell cancers for the base of tongue.

FIGURE 30.2-15. Routes of spread of squamous cell carcinoma of the base of tongue. A: Coronal view. B: Lateral view. (From Shah JP, Shemen LJ, Strong EW.
Surgical therapy of oral cavity tumors. In: Thawley SE, Panje WR, eds. Comprehensive management of head and neck tumors . Philadelphia: WB Saunders,
1987:553, with permission.)

Base of tongue tumors have a high propensity for metastatic spread to lymph nodes. Nearly 70% of patients with T1 lesions have clinically palpable disease in the
neck. The risk of nodal metastases increases with T stage, approaching 85% for T4 cancers. 553 Likewise, tumors of the base of tongue have a high propensity for
bilateral cervical lymph node spread, occurring in approximately 30% of patients. 553 Therapy should account for this propensity even in circumstances of early primary
disease. Lymph nodes commonly involved include levels II and III. Levels IV, V, and VI, however, are more frequently involved than many other cancers of the head
and neck such as oral cavity lesions.
Prognosis for tongue base tumors is generally poor secondary to their advanced stage at presentation. 587,588 and 589 Stage I and II 5-year survival approximates 60%
and 40%, respectively. Five-year survival for patients with stage III disease approximates 30%. For stage IV disease, survival diminished to 15% at 5 years.
TREATMENT
Early Disease
Early-stage cancer of the base of the tongue is readily treated by surgery or RT. Results are equivalent. Surgery for early unilateral lesions entails a
hemiglossectomy. Surgical approaches can be transoral or by lateral pharyngotomy. The former approach entails a midline labiolingual split.
RT has a high prospect of cure without the functional deficit that occurs with operation. In general, treatment consists of 5000 to 5400 cGy with external-beam
radiation and 2000 to 3000 cGy boost to the base of the tongue via an 192Ir implant. There is debate in the radiation oncology literature as to whether or not to use an
interstitial implant as the boost treatment. Altered fractionation programs can also be used, with either twice a day treatment or concomitant boost having its
advocates.
Regional lymphadenectomy is recommended regardless of the primary size because of the high propensity for metastatic spread. Bilateral neck dissection is
recommended for those lesions approaching midline structures.

Advanced Disease
For larger lesions involving the tongue base, primarily T4 lesions, total resection of tongue base, and total laryngectomy may be required. The addition of total
laryngectomy may be dictated for several reasons. Tumor may infiltrate through the relatively thin hyoepiglottic ligament and extend well into the preepiglottic space.
Laryngectomy is required as part of an en bloc procedure necessary to ensure complete extirpation of disease. Additionally, the removal of tongue and soft tissues of
the neck (i.e., the preepiglottic space) impairs normal deglutition. With such surgery, chronic aspiration represents a major long-term complication. Total laryngectomy
may represent the only means to isolate critical air exchange passages from oral secretions. The need for laryngectomy is increased in patients with diminished
cardiopulmonary reserve. Restoring bulk of the base of tongue with myocutaneous flaps or free tissue transfer may minimize aspiration problems. 590 Nowadays,
patients who would require a total laryngectomy can be managed with an organ-sparing program of chemotherapy and RT, reserving surgery for salvage. 591
Extended supraglottic laryngectomy may be performed for smaller lesions involving the vallecula. Disease in such circumstances should not extend along the
pharyngoepiglottic fold to involve lateral pharyngeal wall. In the circumstances in which such a procedure is performed, pretreatment assessment must in all
circumstances confirm adequate cardiopulmonary reserve.
The need for mandibulectomy as part of the surgical procedure for tongue base tumors is controversial. The traditional surgical management involves the composite
(jaw, tongue, neck) resection. Such an en bloc procedure ensues more adequate tumor removal, including tumor within surrounding lymphatics. Furthermore, closure
of surgical defect is facilitated by such resection (i.e., soft tissues are able to collapse with removal of mandible).
Advances, both surgical and in our understanding of patterns of tumor spread, militate against the need for mandibulectomy. Soft tissue defects can be repaired with
free-tissue transfer, thus facilitating wound closure. Studies of lymphatic spread of oropharyngeal tumors have shown that cancer not approximating periosteum rarely
infiltrates mandible. 592 Resection of bone is thus not required for oncologic reasons.
Results of Treatment
Surgical results of early base of tongue cancers have been encouraging, with local control rates approximating 85%. 587,592,594 The major determinate of control rate is
reflective in tumor growth patterns. Exophytic tumors are controlled in 84% of instances as opposed to 58% with ulcerative-infiltrative disease. 593 With advanced
disease, initial surgery is associated with a high probability of positive margins (25%), thus emphasizing the need for combined modality therapy. 615
Data from Harrison et al., 595,596,597 and 598 Goffinet et al., 599 and Puthawala et al. 600 show that the local control rate for T1 to T2 base of tongue tumors is in the 90%
range when treated with external-beam RT plus implant. Harrison et al. 595,596 have reported long-term results on 68 patients treated between 1981 and 1995 with
combined external-beam RT (54 Gy) plus 192Ir implant (20 to 30 Gy), combined with neck dissection for patients presenting with positive nodes ( Fig. 30.2-16 shows a
clinical example; Table 30.2-23). Actuarial 5- and 10-year local control is 89% and 89%, distant metastasis-free survival is 91% and 76%, disease-free survival is 80%
and 67%, and overall survival is 86% and 52%. All T stages (T1, 17 patients; T2, 32 patients; T3, 17 patients; T4, 2 patients) were combined together, as there were
no differences when analyzed by T stage. When survival salvage is included, local control rises to 92%. Lee has reported that all 58 patients who underwent
external-beam RT plus neck dissection (all of whom presented with palpable nodes) were regionally controlled at 10 years, and the majority had negative surgical
experiences.610 Harrison et al. reported detailed quality-of-life assessment on these patients, reporting that the majority of patients could maintain their incomes,
employment status, and socioeconomic quality of life despite having advanced tongue cancer. 598 Understandability of speech and eating in public were excellent, but
xerostomia was a major problem. Horowitz et al. also reported excellent performance status scores for eating in public, understandability of speech, and normalcy of
diet for their patients treated with external-beam RT plus brachytherapy. 611 Finally, a comparison of the performance status outcomes of eating in public,
understandability of speech, and normalcy of diet showed significant advantages in each category to primary radiotherapy over primary surgery. 598

FIGURE 30.2-16. A patient with a T2N2 squamous cancer of the left side of the base of the tongue. The treatment plan consisted of initial external-beam radiation
therapy to the primary site and the entire neck bilaterally. This was followed by a left radical neck dissection and an implant, both done with the same anesthesia. A:
The simulation film shows the primary site outlined and the neck node with wire around it. A bite block is in place. A total of 4500 cGy was given to the primary site
and both upper necks, after which a spinal cord block was placed. The primary and upper neck were then treated with 5400 cGy. Fraction size was 180 cGy/d. After
that, the bed of the lymph node in the left neck was boosted on the right and to 5940 on the left. B: The low neck was treated with a single anterior field to 5000 cGy/5
weeks. A midline block protects the spinal cord at the field junction. C: Approximately 3 weeks after the external radiation was completed, the patient was taken to the
operating room and a left radical neck dissection and an 192Ir implant were done. The figure shows the catheters looped through the base of tongue by the submental
approach. Also visible are the skin staples from the neck surgery. The implant delivered an additional 2800 cGy. The neck specimen was histologically negative. The
patient had no evidence of disease at 6 years. He had a soft tissue ulcer in the tongue that healed with conservative management.

TABLE 30.2-23. Treatment of Carcinoma of the Base of Tongue with External-Beam Irradiation Plus Brachytherapy a

External-beam RT alone has its advocates. 607,608 However, the only study that sought to compare external-beam RT alone, external-beam RT plus implant, versus
surgery plus postoperative radiation was done by Housset et al. 602 They found that the local control rate for both external-beam RT plus implant or surgery plus
postoperative radiation was in the 80% range for T1 and T2 lesions, as opposed to 50% for external-beam RT alone. Survival for external-beam RT alone was 17%,
as opposed to more than 50% for the other two approaches.
Various hyperfractionated and accelerated fractionated regimens have been updated. 607 and 608 Mendenhall reported 5-year local control of 98% for T1, 91% for T2,

81% for T3, and 38% for T4, and advocated that radiotherapy was a better alternative than primary surgery. 607 Moore et al. reported quality-of-life data on the same
group of patients, suggesting excellent outcomes with respect to eating in public, understandability of speech, and good outcomes for normalcy of diet. 609 Neck
dissection did not have a major effect on the performance status measurements. Morrison has also reported good outcomes using an accelerated fractionation,
concomitant boost technique for oropharynx carcinomas of all subsites. 608 However, all patients developed severe mucositis, and there was a growing risk of bone
complications and swallowing problems and gastrostomy tube dependence with longer follow-up. Mak et al. reported that this concomitant boost program of 72 Gy in 6
weeks produced local control at 5 years of 76% (T1 = 100%, T2 = 96%, T3 = 67%), with disease-specific survival of 65% and overall survival of 59%. 605
Implants have also been used for patients who have received prior RT to the oropharynx, who developed either recurrent base of tongue cancers or a second primary
cancer in the base of tongue. 601 Housset et al. reported on 55 patients who had received prior irradiation and in whom they performed 192Ir implants.606 The local
control rate was in the 50% to 60% range. Vikram et al. reported on ten patients who had previously treated base of tongue lesions. 603 All ten received implants in an
attempted salvage maneuver. Local control was obtained in 60% of the patients, with size being the most important prognostic feature. No local failures occurred in
patients who had lesions less than or equal to 4 cm, whereas most of the patients with lesions larger than 4 cm were not salvaged. Overall survival in the entire group
was poor, mainly due to uncontrolled recurrent neck disease.

TONSIL, TONSILLAR PILLAR, AND SOFT PALATE
ANATOMY
The tonsillar pillars anteriorly (the palatoglossal muscle) and posteriorly (the palatopharyngeal muscle) and the glossopalatini sulcus inferiorly constitute a triangular
region that houses the lymphoid tonsillar tissue. Extending from the tonsillar pillars is the soft palate. The latter demarcates the oral cavity from the oropharynx as well
as the oropharynx from the nasopharynx. It is composed of the following muscles: palatoglossus, palatopharyngeus, levator veli palatine, tensor veli palatine, and the
musculus uvulae.
Nerve supply to this region is via the trigeminal nerve. Lymphatics from the tonsillar region drain into the jugulodigastric basin as well as the submandibular triangle.
Lymphatics from the soft palate drain into the upper jugulodigastric lymph nodes as well as the retropharyngeal lymph nodes.
PATHOLOGY
As in other sites within the upper aerodigestive tract, the near total lesions involving this region are squamous cell carcinoma. Occasionally, lymphoepitheliomas have
been identified within the tonsillar fossa. Other cancers include lymphomas and those derived from minor salivary glands.
NATURAL HISTORY
Cancers of these three sites may present and spread in a variety of means. Cancers of the tonsillar pillar tend to be more superficial than those of the tonsillar fossa.
Tonsillar pillar cancers progress over a broad region including lateral soft palate, retromolar trigone and buccal mucosa, tonsillar fossa, as well as the glossopalatini
sulcus.
Tonsillar fossa cancers more often present in advanced-stage disease than either cancers of the tonsillar pillar or soft palate. Approximately 75% of patients present
as stage III or stage IV disease. Disease in this area tends to be bulky and can progress to involve the base of tongue as well as lateral pharyngeal wall. Symptoms
include pain, dysphagia, weight loss, and a mass in the neck. Should disease extend posteriorly and involve pterygoid muscles, trismus may be a presenting sign.
Primary disease of the soft palate, however, may behave in a more indolent manner. Tumors in this region may remain in the early stages. Likewise, disease in this
area may remain superficial, presenting as diffuse erythroplakia extending into the hard palate or inferiorly along the tonsillar pillar.
Tonsillar pillar cancers metastasize less frequently to regional lymph nodes than cancers of the tonsillar fossa. Patients present with clinical evidence of nodal
metastases in 38% of T2 tonsillar pillar cancers, while 68% of T2 tonsillar fossa lesions are associated with clinically evident lymph node disease at presentation.
Contralateral metastases are common for tonsillar fossa cancers. Nodal disease in tonsillar fossa cancer, likewise, most often presents in an advanced stage with
nearly 55% of patients presenting with N2 or N3 disease. 553 Soft palate tumors are more commonly associated with bilateral lymph node metastases. Approximately
20% of patients present with bilateral disease. 553
Prognosis for tonsillar fossa cancers ranges from 93% for stage I disease to 17% for stage IV disease. 612,613,614 and 615 For soft palate lesions, 5-year survival ranges
from 21% to 85% depending on disease stage. 616,617 and 618
TREATMENT
Early Disease
Except in circumstances of early disease, the distinction between cancers arising in the tonsillar fossa versus tonsillar pillar cannot be made. Early cancers of this
region can be treated by single modality therapy, either surgery or RT.
Surgical resection of early disease can occasionally be done transorally. Such an approach, however, should be performed only in circumstances in which free
surgical margins can be ensured. Better exposure to early cancers of this region may also be obtained through a combined lip-splitting incision coupled with an
anterior midline or lateral mandibulotomy. Careful dissection thus proceeds by first identifying anterior lateral margins. If tumors extend to the periosteum of the
mandible but remain superficial, partial mandibulectomy may be performed. Partial mandibulectomy includes a coronal resection, which leaves the body and the
ascending ramus of the mandible in continuity.
Early squamous cell carcinomas of the tonsillar region can, likewise, be treated with RT. Radiation can be delivered with either external beam, interstitial implant, or a
combination of both. In general, radiation is preferred because it offers excellent cure rates and more comprehensive treatment of primary site, retropharyngeal nodes,
and neck, all with a potentially better functional outcome.
Given the high propensity for even early cancers of this region to metastasize to cervical lymph nodes, cervical lymphadenectomy should be included as part of the
surgical resection. The various types of neck dissections that could be used have been discussed (see Surgical Management of the Cervical Lymph Nodes, earlier in
this chapter). Our choice for early lesions in which cervical lymph nodes are not clinically involved with disease would include a modified supraomohyoid neck
dissection. Debate exists as to whether or not such dissection should be performed in continuity with extirpation of the primary disease. Where possible, in continuity
dissection should be advocated.
When applying RT as the primary treatment modality, it is usually possible to treat the ipsilateral neck alone and avoid contralateral neck irradiation. With such
treatment, radiation dosage to the contralateral salivary gland is minimized, thereby reducing the incidence of xerostomia. Due to the rich lymphatic network in the
oropharyngeal region, it is standard practice to radiate the neck in all patients. This includes the retropharyngeal nodes. In fact, one advantage of using radiation is
the inclusion of these nodes in the treatment, which is not included in primary surgical management.
Early-stage soft palate tumors are readily treated with RT. Treatment can be delivered with external beam, brachytherapy, or a combination of both. Figure 30.2-17
shows the external-beam technique in a typical patient. Most patients do not have palpable cervical lymph node metastases on presentation. It is unclear whether or
not all patients require prophylactic neck treatment. Both prophylactic neck irradiation and observation alone have been used by various authors 619,620 with a
successful outcome. Of course, this is retrospective and subject to the selection factors inherent in retrospective reviews. Small superficial lesions can probably be
treated locally, with observation of the neck. Larger T1 and all T2 lesions should receive elective neck treatment.

FIGURE 30.2-17. A: A patient with a T2N0 squamous cancer of the soft palate. He was treated with external-beam radiation therapy to the primary site and to both
necks. Opposed lateral portals were used with a low anterior neck field. B and C: The simulated fields are shown. The primary site and both upper necks were then
treated with 5400 cGy, including the retropharyngeal nodes. The primary site was treated to a total of 6840 cGy. The patient is asked not to swallow during treatment,
so the palate remains in position. Adequate margin is placed around the palate in its plane of motion to avoid geographic miss. Fraction size is 180 cG/d. The lower
neck is treated with an anterior portal to 5000 cGy/5 weeks, thereby delivering elective nodal irradiation to that site. The posterior necks are boosted with electrons to
5400 cGy to protect the spinal cord. The spinal cord is protected at the junction of the lateral fields with the low anterior neck field by a midline block in the low neck
field. This block also protects the larynx. For this purpose, the field is purposely junctioned above the thyroid notch but below the hyoid bone. D: The patient had no
evidence of disease at 2.5 years.

Advanced Disease
Advanced cancers (i.e., stage III and stage IV disease) generally require combined modality therapy (i.e., surgery and postoperative RT). However, there has been
increasing interest in radiation alone for the primary site, combined with neck dissection. 621,622 and 623 Clearly, the choice of treatment relates to the exact T and N stage.
For early (T1 to T2) primary lesions with neck metastases, definitive radiation to the primary neck, followed by a neck dissection, is commonly used. For T3 lesions,
external-beam radiation alone or combined with an implant can be used for the primary site, with a neck dissection added for those with involved nodes. This
approach for T3 lesions is reserved for the exophytic lesions, or those that do not demonstrate highly infiltrative characteristics. The endophytic T3 and T4 lesions are
best managed by surgery followed by postoperative RT. Clearly, optimal management requires individual assessment of each patient and close collaboration between
the surgeon, radiation oncologist, and patient. If the primary lesion can be managed by radiation, however, the functional outcome with regard to speech and
swallowing is usually better than surgically managed patients. The extent of surgical resection should be governed by the size of the primary disease and its pattern of
spread. Tumor-free surgical margins generally entail a segmental mandibulectomy in most circumstances of advanced disease in the tonsillar region.
Results of Treatment
TONSILLAR PILLARS AND FOSSA. Surgical resection as the sole modality of therapy for early disease is not frequently used in most series. However, studies have

demonstrated that when used, local control rates are excellent. 624 Indeed, even for advanced tumors in highly selected instances, effective local control can approach
80%.624 The degree to which local control can be obtained depends on disease extension outside the tonsillar fossa. When disease extends to lateral pharyngeal wall
or base of tongue, local recurrence approaches 33% and 47%, respectively. 624,625 and 626
Wong et al. have reported the results of definitive external-beam irradiation for 150 patients with previously untreated squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsillar
fossa.627 Most patients were treated with conventional fractionation with total doses in the 6400 to 7200 cGy range. Local control was obtained in 15 of 16 (94%)
patients with T1 lesions, and 51 of 52 (79%) patients with T2 lesions. Other series have reported local control rates for T2 lesions approximating 60%. 625,628,629,630,631 and
632
When surgical salvage is added, local control was 100% for T1 and 85% for T2. Wang has used an accelerated hyperfractionation program for oropharyngeal
tumors.628 During an earlier time period, patients received 1.6 cGy per fraction, two fractions per day, to a total of 38.4 cGy. Due to acute toxicity, a 2-week break was
then given. Treatment was then resumed at 1.8 cGy per fraction, one fraction per day, to a total of 65 cGy. This was called the BID-QD program. More recently, the
treatment regimen was changed. The initial treatment remained the same, as did the 2-week break. However, when the patient returned for the second part of the
treatment, they were resumed at 1.6 cGy per fraction, two fractions per day, to a total of 64 cGy. This was called the BID-BID program. For tonsil lesions (T1 to T4),
the 36-month actuarial local control after irradiation therapy was 93% versus 64% for the BID-QD program.
There has been increasing interest in brachytherapy for selected tonsillar lesions. 632,633 and 634 Levendag et al. used fractionated high dose-rate or pulsed dose-rate
brachytherapy as a boost, combined with external-beam irradiation for a cohort of tonsillar and soft palate lesions. 634 There were 5 T1, 22 T2, 10 T3, and 1 T4 lesions.
Local failure occurred in 13% of cases. These authors believed that this approach was superior to external-beam alone when compared with their data for external
beam RT alone. Puthawala et al. reported the results of 80 patients with previously untreated squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsillar region who received 4500 to
5000 cGy with external-beam irradiation, followed by an interstitial 192Ir implant.632 Patients with T1 or T2 disease received an implant boost to 2000 to 2500 cGy, and
those with T3 to T4 lesions received a boost of 3000 to 4000 cGy. Overall local control was 84%, and absolute 3-year disease-free survival was 72%. When looked at
by stage, all three T1 patients obtained local control. For T2, T3, and T4 patients, local control was obtained in 14 of 15 (93%), 32 of 43 (74%), and 11 of 19 (58%),
respectively.
Mazeron et al. reported the results of external beam, implant, or a combination of the two, for lesions of the tonsil and soft palate. 623 For tonsil lesions, most patients
were treated with 45-Gy external beam plus 31-Gy interstitial brachytherapy. A comparison was made for each of the radiotherapeutic techniques for T1 and T2
lesions. Almost all T1 lesions were controlled regardless of technique. However, for T2 disease, 7 of 26 patients failed locally after external-beam RT alone, compared
with only 1 of 43 patients managed by external-beam RT plus implant. Behar et al. evaluated combined external-beam RT, brachytherapy, and adjuvant neck
dissection (neck surgery mainly for N2 and N3 disease) for a group of 37 patients with cancers of the tonsil and palate. 622 Thirty-two percent had T3 or T4 disease,
and 49% had N2 or N3 neck metastases. Local control was obtained in 95% of cases, and neck control was achieved in 87%. Actuarial 5-year survival was 64%, and
approximately 25% of the patients developed a second primary cancer.
Pernot et al. accumulated a large series of 361 patients with cancers of the tonsil and soft palate who were managed either by brachytherapy alone or a combination
of external-beam irradiation (50 Gy) plus a brachytherapy boost (20 to 30 Gy). 621 In total, 64% of patients had T1 to T2 lesions, and 64% were N0. Only two patients
had T4 disease. A select group of 18 patients with small T1 lesions were managed by brachytherapy alone, and all were locally controlled. All others received
combined external-beam RT plus implant. Local control was 89% for T1, 85% for T2, and 67% for T3 lesions. The group with lesions on the soft palate, tonsillar fossa,
and posterior pillar had a better outcome than those with lesions on the anterior pillar and glossotonsillar sulcus. For T3 lesions, the local control with external-beam
irradiation falls considerably. However, it would appear that the subset of T3 tumors with tongue involvement have the highest local failure rate. Tong et al. reported
that 18 of 39 (46%) T3 patients ultimately had failures in the primary site after external-beam irradiation. 625 Interestingly, all 18 patients who failed had lesions that
extended into the base of tongue. Mendenhall has reported that the addition of interstitial implant to the base of tongue, after external-beam irradiation, can improve
the local control. 635 In their T3 patients with base of tongue extension, only five of nine patients were controlled with external-beam RT alone, as compared with 13 of
17 who had full-dose external-beam RT plus a localized base of tongue implant. Puthawala et al. reported local control in 16 of 19 patients with T3 N0 lesions, and 5
of 6 patients with T3 N1 lesions, all treated with external-beam RT and implant. 632 Wong et al. reported local control in only 58% of patients with T3 treated with
external-beam RT alone. 627 Leborgne analyzed 140 patients with tonsil cancer who received definitive radiation. 654 The subgroup of patients with lingual extension
who had an implant as part of their treatment had better local control than those who received external-beam RT alone. Thus, it appears that many T3 lesions and
those with lingual extension may be best served with the addition of an implant, if radiation is used as the primary modality. It would therefore appear that the results
of external-beam radiation alone for T3 tonsillar cancer are suboptimal. The addition of an interstitial implant may improve the results in selected patients. There may
also be a role for a combination of surgery and radiation.
For T1 to T2, N0 to N1 patients, it is usually possible to treat the ipsilateral neck alone and avoid contralateral neck irradiation. By doing this, the radiation dosage to
the contralateral salivary gland tissue is minimized, and the incidence of xerostomia is significantly reduced. Murthy and Hendrickson reported that none of their 20
patients with N0 or N1 disease failed in the untreated contralateral neck when the primary and ipsilateral neck were controlled. 636 Tong et al. reported that none of
their patients with either T1 N0 or T2 N0 lesions failed in either neck despite the fact that approximately 40% of the cases had ipsilateral treatment only. 625 It is

considered safe to omit contralateral neck treatment in most of these early lesions, as long as there is no extension into the base of tongue or significant extension
onto the soft palate.
The management of patients with more advanced lesions is somewhat controversial. 635,636,637,638,639 and 640 There are advocates of RT alone, 635 reserving surgery for
salvage only. Others advocate a approach involving surgery and postoperative radiation. 637,638 Perez et al. analyzed 296 patients with epidermoid carcinoma of the
tonsillar fossa. 629 In this group, 127 received radiation alone, 133 were planned to have preoperative RT, and 36 received surgery plus postoperative radiation. There
was no statistically significant difference in 3-year disease-free survival for T1 to T2, N0 to N2 patients with radiation alone versus radiation combined with surgery. In
patients with T4 or N3 disease, there was an advantage to combined treatment over radiation alone, suggesting a benefit for those who had surgery. The authors
concluded that radiation alone was the treatment of choice for early-stage lesions, but there might be an advantage in selected advanced stage patients for a
combination of surgery and postoperative irradiation. Dasmahapatra et al., likewise, report that the 5-year survival for patients who had combined radiation and
surgery was better than those who had radiation alone in the stage III and IV categories. 637 Spiro and Spiro could not demonstrate a benefit in survival when patients
with stage III and IV disease were treated with either radiotherapy alone, surgery alone, or combined surgery and irradiation. 639 This may be a reflection of selection
bias, with more advanced and less favorable patients being treated with surgery and radiation combined. The RTOG 574 has performed a prospective randomized trial
and analyzed various combinations of radiation and surgery for patients with advanced squamous cell cancer of the oropharynx. Patients with oropharynx tumors
were randomized to receive preoperative RT (5000 cGy) plus surgery, surgery plus postoperative RT (6000 cGy), or RT alone (6500 to 7000 cGy) with surgery
reserved for salvage. This study revealed that the overall survival, as well as the estimated 4-year local regional control rate, was not statistically different in any of
the arms. One of the weaknesses of this study is that it did not stratify the results by subsite within the oropharynx. It is therefore impossible to determine what the
specific results would be for tonsil patients. Clearly, treatment must be individualized from patient to patient and should attempt to provide the highest rate of cure as
well as the best functional and quality-of-life outcome.
SOFT PALATE. There have been emerging data over the past few years advocating the use of brachytherapy for small soft palate lesions.

619,634,641,642
Mazeron et al.

633

reported on 59 T1 and T2 squamous cancer of the soft palate and uvula treated with definitive irradiation.
Sixteen patients had external-beam RT alone, 14 had 192Ir
implantation alone, and 29 had a combination of external-beam RT plus brachytherapy. Local failure occurred in 25% (4 of 16) after external irradiation alone, 18% (5
of 19) after combined external-beam RT and implant, but in 0% (0 of 14) in the group selected for 192Ir implant alone. This group preferred the plastic tube technique
over the guide gutter technique for implantation. It is unclear exactly how the patients were selected for each of the treatment strategies. The authors believed that
severe dry mouth was less frequent in those patients who received all or part of the treatment by implantation compared with those who had external-beam irradiation
alone. Similarly, Sealy et al. reported excellent control rates in patients with early squamous cell cancer of the soft palate and uvula treated with 192Ir implants.641
Pernot et al. have reported on 277 patients treated for carcinoma of the oropharynx by exclusive RT. 620 The group (212 patients) lumped soft palate and tonsil and
posterior pillar lesions together in the reporting of results. Nine percent of these patients had soft palate lesions. In this group, 7% (8 of 121) of the T1 and T2 lesions
exhibited recurrence; 27% (23 of 85) recurred in the T3 category. The overall local control at 5 years was 83%. This series has been updated (361 patients) and
already quoted in the section on tonsil cancer. Local control was 89% for T1, 85% for T2, and 67% for T3 lesions. All 18 patients managed by brachytherapy alone for
small T1 lesions had local control.
The results of the study by Levendag et al. 634 have already been described in the Tonsillar Pillars and Fossa section, but included patients with lesions of either the
tonsil or the soft palate. Amdur et al. reported an analysis of 75 patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the soft palate, uvula, or both treated with RT alone or in
combination with neck dissection. 643 Most patients received 6000 to 7500 cGy. Local control was obtained in all 8 patients with T1 disease, and 14 of 19 patients with
T2 disease. Including surgical salvage, 16 of 19 T2 patients obtained ultimate local control (84%). The results were far worse for T3 and T4 disease, with local control
being 45% and 25%, respectively, for continuous course external-beam irradiation. This series highlights the poor results achieved with RT for advanced disease, with
quite good results for early-stage disease with external-beam RT alone. Clearly, from an oncologic point of view, there is no definitive proof that brachytherapy is
required for early-stage soft palate tumors. However, there may be a rationale for using implant as all or part of the treatment in an effort to improve the functional
outcome with regard to salivary gland function. Obviously, brachytherapy spares the major salivary glands from receiving significant doses of radiation and decreases
the risk of xerostomia. Proper patient selection is required, and the radiation oncologist must have expertise in performing a palatal implant.
Although the local control is excellent for early-stage disease, the overall survival may not necessarily reflect the high local control rate. Intercurrent illness as well as
the problem of second primary malignancies represent a significant cause of mortality in this population. 619,643
Complications from RT are in the 10% range, with severe complications, principally osteonecrosis of the mandible requiring surgical resection, occurring in 5% or
less.619,641,642
Whether elective neck treatment is required remains an open question. The probability of neck recurrence in patients with early disease is low, regardless of whether
or not the neck is treated prophylactically. 619
Most advanced soft palate tumors should be treated with combined surgery and postoperative radiation. Amdur et al. reported that the results of external-beam RT
alone for T3 and T4 disease were suboptimal. 643

PHARYNGEAL WALL
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Epidemiologic considerations are as discussed for oropharyngeal cancers.
ANATOMY
The pharyngeal wall within the oropharynx extends from the nasopharynx at a line demarcated by the soft palate to the level of the vallecular. It comprises the
posterolateral surfaces of the oropharynx. The pharyngeal constrictor muscles constitute the structural framework of the pharyngeal wall. Nerve supply is from the
pharyngeal branches of the ninth and tenth cranial nerves. Blood supply is largely from the ascending pharyngeal and superior thyroid arteries, both emanating from
the external carotid artery.
The pharyngeal wall is rich in lymphatics. Primary drainage is to retropharyngeal lymph nodes as well as nodes in levels II and III.
PATHOLOGY
The near total majority of lesions on the pharyngeal wall are squamous cell carcinomas. Occasional minor salivary gland lesions have been identified.
NATURAL HISTORY
Tumors of the posterior pharyngeal wall are generally identified in the late stages. This is due to the silent location in which they develop. Symptoms at presentation
include pain and bleeding. Weight loss is common. Likewise, patients may present with a mass in the neck as their initial symptom. Disease spread can be superiorly
to involve the nasopharynx. Posteriorly, disease may infiltrate the prevertebral fascia. Inferiorly, disease spreads to involve the pyriform sinuses and hypopharyngeal
walls.
Pharyngeal wall tumors have a propensity for cervical lymph node metastases. Clinically palpable disease is identified in 25% of patients with T1 lesions, 30% of T2
lesions, 66% of T3 lesions, and over 75% of patients with T4 disease. Given that most pharyngeal wall tumors extend past the midline, bilateral cervical metastases
are common.
Prognosis for pharyngeal wall cancers ranges from 75% for stage I disease, 70% for stage II, 42% for stage III, to 27% for stage IV disease. 644,645,646,647,648,649,650,651,652
and 653

TREATMENT
Early Disease
Early-stage disease of the pharyngeal wall can be treated by either surgery or radiation. Given the functional impairment that may result from surgical reaction, RT is
generally preferred. Surgical resection generally entails a (transhyoid) approach to gain access to the lesion. 645 Wide excision of such lesions includes underlying
prevertebral fascia. Split-thickness skin graft coverage is required. A significant morbidity following surgical resection is impaired swallowing secondary to resection of
pharyngeal wall musculature.
Bilateral modified neck dissections are indicated in patients with early pharyngeal wall cancers.
An important issue in planning the RT for posterior pharyngeal wall tumors is the proximity of the spinal cord to the primary tumor volume. When opposed lateral fields
are used, and the spinal cord block is placed, the posterior edge of the field is dangerously close to the posterior aspect of the tumor. It is important to use a sharp
beam edge, so as to avoid underdosing the posterior aspect of the tumor, which can fall in the penumbra of the beam. This is best accomplished by avoiding cobalt 60
and using a 4- or 6-MeV photon beam. Cerrobend blocks are used to define the posterior border. It is also important to make this border as posterior as possible. It
has been our practice to place this border at the anterior-most aspect of the spinal cord. This is much closer to the spinal cord than in most other head and neck
situations. Frequent portal films must be taken to ensure the accuracy of this field, and for maximal spinal cord protection. This situation represents a difficult
challenge to the radiation oncologist. One of the potential advantages to brachytherapy is the delivery of high doses to the tumor with relative sparing of the spinal
cord. However, in order for this technique to be useful, tumors have to be relatively small and discrete. Often, this is not the situation.
Advanced Disease
Advanced disease of the posterior pharyngeal wall is best handled by multimodality therapy. Surgery generally involves a total laryngopharyngectomy. Reconstruction
under such circumstances includes either a pectoralis major myocutaneous flap, gastric pull-up, or free-flap transposition with microvascular anastomoses. Free-flap
transposition entails a jejunal interposition and is becoming the procedure of choice. Rehabilitation and swallowing with the latter procedure is hastened. This allows
for more expeditious use of postoperative radiotherapy.
The use of radiotherapy postoperatively is generally recommended. The high incidence of retropharyngeal lymph node metastases and the associated increased local
regional failure rate mandates aggressive multimodality treatment. 647
Results of Treatment
Guillamondegui et al. have reported on the surgical management of pharyngeal wall carcinomas. 644 Twenty-eight percent of the entire patient population developed
local regional recurrence. Local recurrence predominated. It was of note in that series that salvage therapy consisting of either surgery or radiation was successful in
9 of 22 patients. The success of therapy was governed by the presence of retropharyngeal nodes, with only 25% of such patients disease free at 2 years.
Meoz-Mendes et al. have reported on 164 patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the pharyngeal walls who were treated with definitive RT at the M. D. Anderson
Hospital.648 Their report included patients with both oropharynx and hypopharynx lesions. The primary sites were generally irradiated to a dose of 7000 to 7500 cGy in
7 to 7.5 weeks. Local control was 71% for T1, 73% for T2, 61% for T3, and 37% for T4. The authors recommended RT alone for T1 and T2 lesions. They concluded
that resectable T3 and T4 lesions should be treated with combined surgery and radiation.
Marks et al. reported the experience from Washington University on 51 patients with pharyngeal wall cancer treated between 1964 and 1974. 649 Survival was no
different for patients treated with low-dose preoperative radiation plus surgery versus those treated with high-dose radiation alone. However, this was not randomized,
and the surgical techniques were not standardized. Survival was also poor, with actuarial 3-year survival of 17%. There was a greater complication rate in the patients
receiving surgery, with 31% having pharyngocutaneous fistula, 14% having carotid rupture, and an operative mortality of 14%. Marks et al. updated this series with a
total of 89 patients treated between 1964 and 1981. 650 Their update led to the suggestion that combined surgery and radiation might yield better results than
high-dose radiation alone. Again, definitive conclusions are difficult to make.
Fein et al. analyzed the treatment factors for 99 patients with pharyngeal wall cancer treated with definitive external-beam irradiation at the University of Florida
between 1964 and 1990. 651 The main issues relate to the fractionation schedule (once daily vs. twice daily) and the location of the posterior border of the irradiation
field (midvertebral body vs. posterior edge of the vertebral body). Local control is clearly improved when the posterior body of the field is maximally posterior, thus
allowing better coverage of the posterior wall. This places significant technical demands on the radiation oncologist, who must verify the safety of this border with
respect to the spinal cord on the daily treatment setup. Local control with the border at midvertebral body versus posterior was T1, 100% for both; T2, 57% versus
100%; T3, 46% versus 73%; and T4, 29% versus 75%. Local control for continuous course once daily versus twice daily fractionation was T1, 100% for both; T2, 67%
versus 92%; T3, 43% versus 80%; and T4, 17% versus 50%. Clearly, the technical and fractionation parameters were less significant for early lesions, but
increasingly important for more advanced lesions.
Spiro et al. reported a 12-year experience from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. 652 A variety of operations were used over this time. There was no
standardized treatment, and at least eight different treatment approaches were used during this time period, representing various combinations of surgery,
radiotherapy, and chemotherapy. This heterogeneity of treatment approaches highlights the uncertainty as to the optimal management of this disease and the variety
of disease presentations. Five-year survival was 32%, and the overall complication rate was 50%. A small group of patients were treated with 125I implant to the
primary site, followed by external-beam RT. The implants were done using surgery for access. Local control in this small group of patients was excellent. Son and
Kacinski reported 14 patients treated with a combination of implant and external-beam radiation. 653 Twelve patients had locoregional control, and 18% developed
reversible soft tissue and mucosal injury as a result of the RT. It would appear that this technique deserves further investigation. It represents a mechanism for
delivering definitive RT with high doses to the tumor. However, it is certainly clear that optimal therapy for tumors in this site has yet to be defined.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Schantz SP, Harrison LH, Forastiere A. Tumors of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses, nasopharynx, oral cavity, and oropharynx. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer:
principles and practices of oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott,1997:742.
2. Shah JP, Strong E, Spiro RH, Vikram B. Neck dissections current status and future possibilities. Clin Bull 1981;11:25.
3. Suen JY, Goepfert H. Editorial standardization of neck dissection nomenclature. Head Neck Surg 1987;10:75.
4. Jacobsson P, Killander D, Moberger G, et al. Histologisk Klassifikation och malignitets gradering vid larynx cancer. Proc Swedish Soc Med Radiol March 11, 1972.
5. Eneroth CM, Moberger G. Histological malignancy grading of squamous cell carcinoma of the palate. Acta Otolaryngol 1973;75:293.
6. Anneroth G, Batsakis J, Kyba N. Review of the literature and recommended system of malignancy grading in oral squamous cell carcinoms. Scand J Dent Res 1987;95:229.
7. Byrne M, Koppang HS, Lilling R, et al. New malignancy grading is a better prognostic indicator than Broder's grading in oral squamous cell carcinomas. J Oral Path Oral Med 1989;18:432.
8. Pindborg JJ. Oral precancer. In: Barnes L, ed. Surgical pathology of the head and neck. Vol. 1. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1985:279.
9. Pindborg JJ. Oral cancer and precancer. Bristol, John Wright and Sons, 1980.
10. Cawson RA. Premalignant lesions in the mouth. Br Med Bull 1975;31:164.
11. Shafer WG, Waldron CA. Erythroplakia of the oral cavity. Cancer 1975;36:1021.
12. Mincer HH, Coleman SA, Hopkins KP. Observations on the clinical characteristics of oral lesions showing histologic epithelial dysplasia. Oral Surg 1972;33:389.
13. Silverman S, Gorsky M, Lozada F. Oral leukoplakia and malignant transformation: a follow-up study of 257 patients. Cancer 1984;53:563.
14. American Joint Committee on Cancer. Cancer staging manual, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott, 1997:21.
15. Piccirillo JF. Purposes, problems, and proposals for purposes in cancer staging. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995;121:145.
16. Bailey BJ. Beyond the TNM classification. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1991;117:369.
17. Madison MT, Remley KB, Latchaw RE, Mitchell SL. Radiologic diagnosis and staging of squamous cell carcinoma. Radiol Clin North Am 1994;32:163.
18. Som PM. Detection of metastasis in cervical lymph nodes: CT and MR criteria and differential diagnosis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1992;158:961.
19. Close LG, Merkel M, Vuittch MF, Reisch J, Schaefer SD. Computed tomographic evaluation of regional lymph node involvement in cancer of the oral cavity and oropharynx. Head Neck
1989;11:309.
20. Brekel van den MWM, Castelijns JA, Croll GA, et al. Magnetic resonance versus palpation of cervical lymph node metastasis. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1991;117:666.
21. Brekel van den MWM, Stel HV, Castelijns JA, Croll GJ, Snow GB. Lymph node staging in patients with clinically negative neck examinations by ultrasound and ultrasound-guided aspiration
cytology. Am J Surg 1991;162:362.
22. Madison MT, Remley KB, Latchaw RE, Mitchell SL. Radiologic diagnosis and staging of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1998;31:727.

23. Sing B, Baya M, Zimbler M, et al. Impact of morbidity on outcome of young patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Head Neck 1998;40:1.
24. Smart CR. Screening for cancer of the aerodigestive tract. Cancer 1993;72(Suppl):1061.
25. Prout MN, Morris SJ, Witzburg RA, Hurley C, Chatterjee S. A multidisciplinary educational program to promote head and neck cancer screening. J Cancer Ed 1992;7:139.
26. Screening for oral cancer. Report of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1989:91.
27. Jullien JA, Zakrsewska JM, Downer MC, Speight PM. Attendance and compliance at an oral cancer screening programme in general medical practice. Eur J Cancer Oral Oncol 1995;31B:202.
28. Frenandez GL, Sankaranarayanan R, Lence Anta JJ, Rodriguez Salva A, Maxwell Parkin D. An evaluation of the oral cancer control program in Cuba. Epidemiology 1995;6:428.
29. Ikeda N, Downer MC, Ishii T, et al. Annual screening for oral cancer and precancer by invitation to 60-year-old residents of a city in Japan. Comm Dental Health 1995;12:133.
30. Cowan CG, Gregg TA, Kee F. Prevention and detection of oral cancer: the views of primary care dentists in Northern Ireland. Br Dental J 1995;179:338.
31. Speight PM, Elliott AE, Jullien JA, Downer MC, Zakzrewska JM. The use of artificial intelligence to identify people at risk of oral cancer and precancer. Br Dental J 1995;179:382.
32. McGuire M, Lydiatt W, Trambert R, Shaha A, Schantz S. Head and neck screening day for the community. Ann NY Acad Sci 1995;768:286.
33. Sugarman PB, Savage NW. Exfoliative cytology in clinical oral pathology. Aust Dental J 1996;41:71.
34. Bongers V, Snow GB, deVries N, et al. Second primary head and neck squamous cell carcinoma predicted by the glutathione S-transferase expression in health tissue in the direct vicinity of
the first tumor. Lab Invest 1995;73:503.
35. Sugarman PB, Savage NW. Exfoliative cytology in clinical oral pathology. Aust Dental J 1996;41:71.
36. Kurokawa H, Tsuru S, Okada M, Nakamura T, Kajiyama M. Evaluation of tumor markers in patients with squamous cell carcinoma in the oral cavity. Int J Oral Maxillofasc Surg 1993;22:35.
37. Schantz SP, Alfano RR. Tissue autofluorescence as an intermediate endpoint in cancer chemoprevention trials. J Cell Biochem 1993;(Suppl 17F):199.
38. Kolli V, Savage HE, Yao TJ, Schantz SP. Native cellular fluorescence of neoplastic upper aerodigestive mucosa. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995;121:1287.
39. Tepperman BS, Fitzpatrick PJ. Second respiratory and upper digestive tract cancer after oral cancer. Lancet 1981;2:547.
40. Mao L, Hruban RH, Boyle JO, Tochman M, Sidransky D. Detection of oncogene mutations in sputum precedes diagnosis of lung cancer. Cancer Res 1994;54:1634.
41. Leipzig B, Zellmer JE, Klug D. The role of endoscopy in evaluating patients with head and neck cancera multi-institutional prospective study. Arch Otolaryngol 1985;111:589.
42. Shaha AR, Hoover EL, Mitrani M, Marti JR, Krespi YP. Synchronicity, multicentricity, and metachronicity of head and neck cancer. Head Neck Surg 1988;10:225.
43. Benninger MS, Enrique RR, Nichols RD. Symptom-directed selective endoscopy of head and neck cancer. Head Neck 1993;15:532.
44. deVries N, Gluckman JL, eds. Multiple primary tumors in the head and neck. Thieme, Stuttgart, 1990.
45. Lockhart PB, Clark J. Pretherapy dental status of patients with malignant conditions of the head and neck. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1994;77:236.
46. Keys HM, McCarland JP. Techniques and results of a comprehensive dental care program in head and neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1976;1:859.
47. Peterson DE. Non-surgical management of head and neck cancer patients. Dental Clin North Am 1994;38:435.
48. Goodwin WJ, Byers PM. Nutritional management of the head and neck cancer patient. Med Clin North Am 1993;77:597.
49. Goodwin WJ, Torres J. The value of the prognostic nutritional index in the management of patients with advanced carcinoma of the head and neck. Head Neck Surg 1984;6:932.
50. Hooley R, Levine H, Flores TC, et al. Predicting postoperative head and neck complications using nutritional assessment. Arch Otolaryngol 1983;109:83.
51. Kowalski LP, Alcantara PSM, Magrin J, Parise O. A case-control study on complications and survival in elderly patients undergoing head and neck surgery. Am J Surg 1984;168:485.
52. McGuirt WF, Davis SP. Demographic portrayal and outcome analysis of head and neck cancer surgery in the elderly. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995;121:150.
53. Robinson DS. Head and neck considerations in the elderly patient. Surg Clin North Am 1994;431.
54. Clayman GL. Surgical outcomes in head and neck cancer patients 80 years of age and older. Head Neck 1998;20:216.
55. Day GL, Blot WJ, Shore RE, et al. Second primary cancer following oral and pharyngeal cancers: role of tobacco and alcohol. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:131.
56. Cloos J, Leemans CR, van der Sterre MLT, et al. Mutagen sensitivity as a biomarker for second primary tumors after head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers
Prev (in press).
57. Browman GP, Wong G, Hodson I, et al. Influence of cigarette smoking on the efficiency of radiation therapy in head and neck cancer. N Engl J Med 1993;328:159.
58. Gritz ER, Carr CR, Rapkin DA, et al. A smoking cessation intervention for head and neck cancer patients: trial design, patient accrual, and characteristics. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1991;1:67.
59. Gritz ER, Carr CR, Rapkin D, et al. Predictors of long-term smoking cessation in head and neck cancer patients. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1993;2:261.
60. Ostroff JS, Jacobsen PB, Moadel AB, et al. Prevalence and predictors of continued tobacco use following diagnosis of head and neck cancer. Cancer 1995;75:569.
61. Clayman GL, Raad II, Hankins PD, Weber RS. Bacteriologic profile of surgical infections after antibiotic prophylaxis. Head Neck 1993;15:526.
62. Robbins KT, Byers RM, Cole R, et al. Wound prophylaxis with metronidazole in head and neck surgical oncology. Laryngoscope 1988;98:803.
63. Becker GD, Welch WD. Quantitative bacteriology of intraoperative wound tissue in contaminated surgery. Head Neck 1990;12:293.
64. Johnson JT, Kachman K, Wagner RL, Myers EN. Comparison of ampicillin/sulbactam versus clindamycin. Head Neck 1997;19:367.
65. Weber RS, Lichtiger B, Byers RM, et al. Electro-surgical dissection for reducing blood loss in head and neck surgery. Head Neck Surg 1989;11:318.
66. Panje WR, Sher N, Karnell M. Transoral carbon dioxide laser ablation of cancers, tumors and other disease. Arch OtolaryngolHead Neck Cancer Surg 1981;115:681.
67. Gluckman JL, Waners M, Shumrick K, et al. Photodynamic therapy: a viable alternative to conventional therapy for early lesions of the upper aerodigestive tract. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg 1986;112:949.
68. Mohs FE, Snow SN. Microscopically controlled surgical treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the lower lip. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1985;160:37.
69. Bocca E, Pignataro O. A conservation technique in radical neck dissection. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1967;76:975.
70. Medina JE. A rational classification of neck dissections. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1989;100:169.
71. Robbins KT, Medina JE, Wolfe GT, et al. Standardizing neck dissection terminology. Official report of the Academy's Committee for Head and Neck Surgery and Oncology. Arch Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg 1991;117:601.
72. Byers RM, Wolf PF, Ballantyne AJ. Rationale for elective modified neck dissection. Head Neck Surg 1988;10:160.
73. Giacomarra V, Tirelli G, Papanikolla L, Bussani R. Predictive factors of nodal metastases in oral cavity and oropharynx carcinomas. Laryngoscope 1999;109:795.
74. Suen JY. Management of the N0 neck. Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Head and Neck Cancer. The Society of Head and Neck Surgeons and American Society of Head
and Neck Surgery. Toronto. Madison, WI: Omnipres, 1996:557.
75. Byers RM, El-Naggar A, Lee YY, et al. Can we detect or predict the presence of occult nodal metastases in patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the oral tongue? Head Neck 1998;70:138.
76. Lydiatt WJ, Spiro RH, Strong EW, et al. Treatment of Stage I and II oral tongue cancer. Head Neck 1993;15:308.
77. Vandenbrouck C, Sancho-Garnier H, Chassange D, et al. Elective versus therapeutic radical neck dissection in epidermoid carcinoma of the oral cavity. Results of a randomized clinical trial.
Cancer 1980;46:386.
78. Leemans CR, Snow GB. Is selective neck dissection really as efficacious as modified radical neck dissection for elective treatment of clinically negative neck in patients with squamous cell
carcinoma of the upper extremity and digestive tracts? Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998;124:1042.
79. Brazilian Head and Neck Cancer Study Group. Results of a prospective trial on elective modified radical neck dissection versus supraomohyoid neck dissection in the management of oral
squamous carcinoma. Am J Surg 1998;176:422.
80. Kraus DH, Rosenberg DB, Davidson BJ, et al. Supraspinal accessory lymph node metastases in supraomohyoid neck. Am J Surg 1996;172:646.
81. Traynor SJ, Cohen JI, Gray J, et al. Selective management of the node-positive neck. Am J Surg 1996;172:654.
82. Pellitari PK, Robbins KT, Neuman T. Expanded application of selective neck dissection with regard to nodal status. Head Neck 1997;19:260.
83. Myers EN, Fagan JJ. Treatment of the N+ neck in squamous cell carcinoma of the upperaerodigestive tract. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1998;31:671.
84. Carew JF, Spiro RH. Extended neck dissection. Am J Surg 1997;174:485.
85. Adams GL, Madison M, Remley K, Gapany M. Preoperative permanent balloon occlusion of internal carotid artery in patients with advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Laryngoscope 1999;109:460.
86. Snyderman CH, et al. Outcome of carotid artery resection for neoplastic disease: a meta-analysis. Am J Otolaryngol 1993;14:373.
87. Huvos AG, Leaming RH, Moore OS. Clinicopathologic study of the resected carotid artery: analysis of sixty-four cases. Am J Surg 1973;126:570.
88. Hays RJ, Levinson SA, Wylie EJ. Intraoperative measurement of carotid back pressure as a guide to operative management for carotid endarterectomy. Surgery 1972;72:953.
89. Peters LJ, Goepfert H, Ang KK, et al. Evaluation of the dose for postoperative radiation therapy of head and neck cancer: first report of a prospective randomized trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1993;26:3.
90. Ang KK, Trotti A, Garden AS, et al. Impact of risk factors and total time for combined surgery and radiotherapy on the outcome of patients with advanced head and neck cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45(Suppl):199.
91. Tupchong L, Scott C, Blitzer P, et al. Randomized study of pre-operative vs post-operative radiation therapy in advanced head and neck carcinoma: long term follow up of RTOG study 73-03.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:21.
92. Fu KK, Pajak TF, Trotti A, et al. A Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) phase II randomized study to compare hyperfractionation and two variants of accelerated fractionation to
standard fractionation radiotherapy for head and neck squamous cell carcinomas: preliminary results of RTOG 90003. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45(Suppl):145.
93. Harrison L, Pfister D, Fass D, et al. Concomitant chemotherapy-radiation therapy followed by hyperfractionated radiation therapy for advanced unresectable head and neck cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:703.
94. Harrison LB, Pfister DG, Kraus D, et al. Management of unresectable malignant tumors at the skull base using concomitant chemotherapy and radiotherapy with accelerated fractionation. Skull
Base Surg 1994;4:127.
95. Harrison LB, Raben A, Pfister DG, et al. A prospective phase II trial of concomitant chemotherapy and radiotherapy with delayed accelerated fractionation in unresectable tumors of the head
and neck. Head Neck 1998;20:497.
96. Merlano M, Benasso M, Corvo R, et al. Alternating radiotherapy and chemotherapy with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil for advanced inoperable head and neck squamous cell carcinoma: the 5-year
update of a randomized trial from the National Institute for Cancer Research of Genoa. J Natl Cancer Institute (in press).
97. Regezi JA, Courtney RM, Kerr DA. Dental management of patients radiated for oral cancer. Cancer 1976;38:994.
98. Moorish RB, Chan E, Silverman S, et al. Osteonecrosis in patients irradiated for head and neck carcinoma. Cancer 1981;47:1980.
99. Leibel SA, Kutcher TJ, Harrison LB, et al. Improved dose distributions for 3-D conformal boost treatment in carcinoma of the nasopharynx. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:823.
100. Lee WR, Berkey B, Marcial V, et al. Anemia is associated with decreased survival and increased locoregional failure in patients with locally advanced head and neck carcinoma: a secondary
analysis of RTOG 85-27. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;24:1069.
101. Haffty BG, Son YH, Sasaki CT, et al. Mitocycin C as an adjunct to postoperative radiation therapy in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: results from two randomized clinical trials.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:241.
102. Weissberg JB, Son YH, Papac RJ, et al. Randomized clinical trial of mitomycin C as an adjunct to radiotherapy in head and neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:3.
103. Brizel DM, Wasserman TH, Strnad V, et al. Final report of a phase III randomized trial of Amifostine as a radioprotectant in head and neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1999;45(Suppl):147.
104. Mitchell MS, Wawro NW, DeConti RC, et al. Effectiveness of high-dose infusion of methotrexate followed by leucovorin in carcinomas of the head and neck. Cancer Res 1968;28:108.
105. Kirkwood JM, Millder D, Pitman S, et al. Initial high dose methotrexate-leucovorin in advanced squamous carcinoma of the head and neck. Proc Am AssocCancer Res 1978;19:398.
106. Levitt M, Mosher MB, DeConti RC, et al. Improved therapeutics index of methotrexate with “leucovorin rescue.” Cancer Res 1973;33:1729.
107. Vogle WR, Jacobs J, Moffitt S, et al. Methotrexate therapy with or without citrovorum factor in carcinoma of the head and neck, breast and colon. Cancer Clin Trials 1979;2:227.
108. Woods RL, Fox RM, Tattersall MHN. Methotrexate treatment of advanced head and neck cancers: a dose-response evaluation. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:155.
109. DeConti RC, Schoenfeld D. A randomized prospective comparison of intermittent methotrexate, methotrexate with leucovorin, and a methotrexate combination in head and neck cancer. Cancer
1981;48:1061.
110. Taylor SG IV, McGuire WP, Hauck WW, et al. A randomized comparison of high-dose infusion methotrexate versus standard-dose weekly therapy in head and neck squamous cancer. J Clin

Oncol 1984;2:1006.
111. Al-Sarraf M. Chemotherapeutic management of head and neck cancer. Cancer Metast Rev 1987;6:191.
112. Pinto HA, Jacobs CJ. Chemotherapy for recurrent and metastatic head and neck cancer. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1991;5:667.
113. Browman GP, Cronin L. Standard chemotherapy in squamous cell head and neck cancer: what we have learned from randomized trials. Semin Oncol 1994;21:311.
114. Havlin KA, Kuhn JG, Myers JW, et al. High-dose cisplatin for locally advanced or metastatic head and neck cancer: a phase II pilot study. Cancer 1989;63:423.
115. Forastiere AA, Takasugi BJ, Baker SR, Wolf GT, Kudla-Hatch V. High dose cisplatin in advanced head and neck cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1987;19:155.
116. Veronesi A, Zagonel V, Rirelli U, et al. High dose versus low dose cisplatin in advanced head and neck squamous carcinoma. A randomized study. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1105.
117. Al-Sarraf M. Management strategies in head and neck cancer: the role of carboplatin. In: Bunns PA Jr, Canetta R, Ozols PF, Rozencweig M, eds. Current perspectives and future directions.
Philadelphia: Saunders, 1990.
118. Kish JA, Tapazoglou E, Ensley J, et al. Activity of ifosfamide (NSC-109724) in recurrent head and neck cancer patients. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1990;31:190.
119. Verweij J, Alexiera-Figresch J, DeBoer MF. Ifosfamide in advanced head and neck cancer. A phase II study of the Rotterdam Cooperative Head and Neck Cancer Study Group. Eur J Cancer
Clin Oncol 1988;24:795.
120. Martin M, Diaz-Rubio E, Gonzales Larriba JL, et al. Ifosfamide in advanced epidermoid head and neck cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1993;31:340.
121. Huber MH, Lippman SM, Benner SE, et al. A phase II study of ifosfamide in recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Am J Clin Oncol 1996;19:379.
122. Buesa JM, Fernandez R, Esteban E, et al. Phase II trial of ifosfamide in recurrent and metastatic head and neck cancer. Ann Oncol 1991;2:151.
123. Cervellino JC, Araujo CE, Pirisi C, et al. Ifosfamide and MESNA for the treatment of advanced squamous cell head and neck cancer. Oncology 1991;48:89.
124. Bandealy M, Hann M, Arquette M, et al. Phase II trial of ifosfamide in the treatment of advanced or recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: a Hoosier Oncology Group trial.
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:396a.
125. Forastiere AA, Shank D, Neuberg D, et al. Final report of a phase II evaluation of paclitaxel in patients with advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Cancer 1998;82:2270.
126. Smith R, Thornton D, Allen J, et al. A phase II trial of paclitaxel in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Semin Oncol 1995;22:41.
127. Eisenhauer EA, Vermorken JB. Review: new cytotoxic drugs. South Am J Cancer 1997;1:17.
128. Vermorken JB, Catimel G, De Mulder P, et al. Randomized phase II trial of weekly methotrexate versus two schedules of triweekly paclitaxel in patients with metastatic or recurrent squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:395a.
129. Gebbia V, Testa A, Cannata G, Gebbia N. Single agent paclitaxel in advanced squamous cell head and neck carcinoma. Eur J Cancer 1996;32:901.
130. Couteau C, Chouaki N, Leyvraz S, et al. A phase II study of docetaxel in patients with metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Br J Cancer 1999;81:457.
131. Catimel G, Verweij J, Mattijssen V, et al. Docetaxel (Taxotere): an active drug for the treatment of patients with advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Ann Oncol
1994;5:533.
132. Dreyfuss A, Clark J, Norris C, et al. Docetaxel: an active drug for squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. J Clin Oncol 1996;4:1672.
133. Ebihara S, Fujii H, Sasaki Y, et al. A late phase II study of docetaxel (Taxotere) in patients with head and neck cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:A1425.
134. Degardin M, Bastit PH, Rolland F, et al. Phase II study of vinorelbine in patients with metastatic and/or recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Eur J Cancer 1997;33(Suppl
8):S187.
135. Canfield VA, Saxman SB, Kolodziej MA, et al. Phase II trial of vinorelbine in advanced or recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:387a.
136. Oliveira J, Geoffrois F, Rolland M, et al. Activity of Navelbine on lesions within previously irradiated fields in patients with metastatic and/or local recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head
and neck: an EORTC-ECSG study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:A1449.
137. Catimel G, Vermorken JB, Clavel M, et al. A phase II study of gemcitabine (LYI 88011) in patients with advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Ann Oncol 1994;5:543.
138. Smith R, Lew D, Rodriguez G, et al. Evaluation of topotecan in patients with recurrent or metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. A phase II Southwest Oncology Group
study. Invest New Drugs 1996;14:403.
139. Robert F, Soong SJ, Wheeler RH. A phase II study of topotecan in patients with recurrent head and neck cancer. Identification of an active new agent. Am J Clin Oncol 1997;20:298.
140. Schrijvers D, Vermorken JB. Update on the taxoids and other new agents in head and neck cancer therapy. Curr Opin Oncol 1998;10:233.
141. Khattab J, Urba SG. Chemotherapy in head and neck cancer: overview of newer agents. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1999;13:753.
142. Robert F. Trimetrexate as a single agent in patients with advanced head and neck cancer. Semin Oncol 1988;15:22.
143. Schomagel JH, Verweij J, Demulder PHM, et al. Randomized phase III trial of edatrexate versus methotrexate in patients with metastatic and/or recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head
and neck: a European organization for research and treatment of cancer head and neck cancer cooperative group study. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1649.
144. Uen WC, Huang AT, Mennel R, et al. A phase II study of piritrexim in patients with advanced squamous head and neck cancer. Cancer 1992;69:1008.
145. Degardin M, Demonge C, Copperlaere P, et al. Phase II piritrexim study in recurrent and/or metastatic head and neck cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11:244.
146. Vokes EE, Dimery IW, Jacobs CD, et al. A phase II study of piritrexim in combination with methotrexate in recurrent and metastatic head and neck cancer. Cancer 1991;67:2253.
147. Abele R, Clavel M, Rossi A, et al. Iproplatin (CHIP, JM-9) in advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: a phase II study of the EORTC early clinical trials group. Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1986;5:147.
148. Al-Sarraf M, Metch B, Kish J, et al. Platinum analogs in recurrent and advanced head and neck cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group and Wayne State University Study. Cancer Treat Rep
1987;71:723.
149. Fujii M, Tokumaru Y, Imanishi Y, et al. Combination chemotherapy with nedaplatin and 5-FU for head and neck cancer. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho 1998;25:53.
150. Verweij J, Clavel M, Chevalier B. Paclitaxel (Taxol) and docetaxel (Taxotere): not simply two of a kind. Ann Oncol 1994;5:495.
151. Gueritte-Voegelein F, Guenard D, Lavelle F, et al. Relationships between the structure of taxol analogues and their antimitotic activity. J Med Chem 1991;4:992.
152. Cobleigh MA, Hill JH, Lad TE, et al. Phase II study of etoposide in previously untreated squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:321.
153. Shiu WC, Tsao SY. Etoposide (VP 16-213) in the treatment of advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1988;24:797.
154. Kish JA, Weaver A, Jacobs J, et al. Cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil infusion in patients with recurrent and disseminated epidermoid cancer of the head and neck. Cancer 1984;53:1819
155. Urba SG, Forastiere AA. Systemic therapy of head and neck cancer: most effective agents, areas of promise. Oncology 1989;3:79.
156. Jacobs C, Lyman G, Velez-Garcia E, et al. A phase III randomized study comparing cisplatin and fluorouracil as single agents and in combination for advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:257.
157. Forastiere A, Metch B, Schuller D, et al. Randomized comparison of cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil versus carboplatin + 5-FU versus methotrexate in advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1245.
158. Clavel M, Vermorken JB, Cognetti F, et al. Randomized comparison of cisplatin, methotrexate, bleomycin and vincristine (CABO) versus cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil (CF) versus cisplatin (C) in
recurrent or metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Ann Oncol 1994;5:521.
159. Vokes EE, Choi KE, Schilsky RL, et al. Cisplatin, fluorouracil, and high-dose leucovorin for recurrent metastatic head and neck cancer. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:618.
160. Guthrie TH, Brubaker LH, Porubsky ES, et al. Circadian cisplatin (C), bleomycin (B) and 5-fluorouracil (F) in advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCH). Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1990;9:178.
161. Amrein PC, Fabian RL. Treatment of recurrent head and neck cancer with cisplatin and 5 fluorouracil vs. the same plus bleomycin and methotrexate. Laryngoscope 1992:102:901.
162. Hamm JT, Joseph G, Blumenreich MS, et al. Phase II trial of high-dose cisplatinum (CDDP), 5-fluorouracil (F-FU), bleomycin, and methotrexate in advanced/recurrent head and neck cancer.
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1990;9:175.
163. Dimery I, Martin T, Bradley E, et al. Phase I trial of interleukin-2 (rlL-2) plus cisplatin (CDDP) and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in recurrent or advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1989;8:170.
164. Shiriniam M, Choksi AJ, Dimery I, et al. Phase I/II study of cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil, and alpha interferon for recurrent carcinoma of the head and neck. Invest New Drugs 1994;12:223.
165. Adamo V, Maisano R, Laudani A, et al. Phase II study paclitaxel (PTX) and cisplatin (Cis) in advanced and recurrent head & neck cancer. Eur J Cancer 1999;35:S178.
166. Licitra L, Capri G, Fulfaro F, et al. Biweekly paclitaxel and cisplatin in patients with advanced head and neck carcinoma: a phase II trial. Ann Oncol 1997;8:1157.
167. Fountzilas G, Skarlos D, Athanassiades A, et al. Paclitaxel by three-hour infusion and carboplatin in advanced carcinoma of nasopharynx and other sites of the head and neck: a phase II study
conducted by the Hellenic Cooperative Oncology Group. Ann Oncol 1997;8:451.
168. Junor EJ, Paul J, Robertson A, et al. Phase I dose finding study of paclitaxel in combination with carboplatin in advanced and recurrent squamous carcinoma of the head and neck. Proc Am
Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:407a.
169. Hitt R, Paz-Ares L, Hidalgo M, et al. Phase I/II study of paclitaxel/cisplatin as first-line therapy for locally advanced head and neck cancer. Semin Oncol 1997;26:S19.
170. Dunphy FR, Boyd JH, Kim HJ, et al. A phase I report of paclitaxel dose escalation combined with a fixed dose of carboplatin in the treatment of head and neck carcinoma. Cancer
1997;79:2016.
171. Benasso M, Numico G, Rosso R, et al. Chemotherapy for relapsed head and neck cancer: paclitaxel, cisplatin, and 5-fluorouracil in chemotherapy-naive patients. A dose-finding study. Semin
Oncol 1997:6:S19.
172. Hitt R, Brandariz A, Paz-Ares L, et al. A phase II study of paclitaxel, cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil in locally advanced head and neck cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Onol 1998;17:382a.
173. Shin DM, Glisson BS, Khuri FR, et al. Phase II trial of paclitaxel, ifosfamide, and cisplatin in patients with recurrent head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1325.
174. Shin DM, Khuri FR, Glisson BS, et al. Phase II study of paclitaxel, ifosfamide, and carboplatin in patients with recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:394a.
175. Fountzilas G, Stathopoulos G, Nicolaides C, et al. Paclitaxel and gemcitabine in advanced non-nasopharyngeal head and neck cancer: a phase II study conducted by the Hellenic Cooperative
Oncology Group. Ann Oncol 1999;10:475.
176. Forastiere AA, Glisson B, Murphy B, Frenette G, O'Connell B. A phase II study of docetaxel and cisplatin in patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Ann Oncol
1998;9(Suppl 4):75.
177. Mel JR, Rodriguez M, Constenia M, et al. Phase II study of docetaxel and cisplatin as induction chemotherapy in locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1999;18:401a.
178. Manzione L, Caponigro F, Massa E, et al. A phase II study of docetaxel + cisplatin in locally advanced and metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:398a.
179. Bauer M, Kienzer HR, Schweiger J, et al. First-line therapy in head and neck cancer with docetaxel/cisplatin. Ann Oncol 1998;9(Suppl 4):75.
180. Schoffski P, Catimel G, Planting AS, et al. Docetaxel and cisplatin: an active regimen in patients with locally advanced, recurrent or metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.
Results of a phase II study of the EORTC Early Clinical Studies Group. Ann Oncol 1999;10:119.
181. Filippi MH, Cupissol D, Calais G, et al. A phase II study of docetaxel and 5-fluorouracil in metastatic or recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:402a.
182. Airoldi M, Marchionatti S, Pedani F, et al. Docetaxel + vinorelbine in recurrent heavily pre-treated head and neck cancer patients. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:402a.
183. Janinis J, Papadakou M, Panagos G, Boukis C, Xidakis E. A phase II study of combined chemotherapy with docetaxel cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil in patients with advanced squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck and nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:402a.
184. Schrijvers D, Van Herpen C, Kerger J, et al. Phase I-II study with docetaxel, cisplatin, and 5-fluorouracil in patients with locally advanced inoperable squamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:394a.
185. Davis S, Kessler W. Randomized comparison of cis-diamminedichloro platinum versus cis-diamminedichloro platinum, methotrexate, and bleomycin in recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of
the head and neck. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1979;3:57.
186. Jacobs C, Meyers F, Hendrickson C, et al. A randomized phase III study of cisplatin without methotrexate for recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Cancer 1983;52:1563.
187. Drelichman A, Cummings G, Al-Sarraf N, et al. A randomized trial of the combination of cisplatinum, oncovin and bleomycin (COB) versus methotrexate in patients with advanced squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Cancer 1983;52:399.
188. Morton RP, Rugman F, Dorman EB, et al. Cisplatinum and bleomycin for advanced or recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: a randomized factorial phase III controlled trial.

Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1985;15:283.
189. Vogl SE, Schoenfeld DA, Kaplan BH, et al. A randomized prospective comparison of methotrexate with a combination of methotrexate, bleomycin, and cisplatin in head and neck cancer.
Cancer 1985;56:432.
190. Williams SD, Velez-Garcia E, Essessee I, et al. Chemotherapy for head and neck cancer: comparison of cisplatin plus vinblastine plus bleomycin versus methotrexate. Cancer 1986;57:18.
191. Campbell JB, Dorman EB, McCormick M, et al. A randomized phase III trial of cisplatinum, methotrexate, cisplatinum + methotrexate, and cisplatinum + 5-fluorouracil in end-stage head and
neck cancer. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1987;103:519.
192. Eisenberger M, Krasnow S, Ellenberg S, et al. A comparison of carboplatin plus methotrexate versus methotrexate alone in patients with recurrent and metastatic head and neck cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1989;7:1341.
193. Liverpool Head and Neck Oncology Group. A phase III randomized trial of cisplatinum, methotrexate, cisplatinum + methotrexate and cisplatinum + 5-FU in end stage squamous carcinoma of
the head and neck. Br J Cancer 1990;61:311.
194. Kish JA, Ensley JF, Jacobs J, et al. A randomized trial of cisplatin (CACP) + 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) infusion and CACP + 5-FU bolus for recurrent and advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck. Cancer 1985;56:2740.
195. Clavel M, Cognetti F, Dodion P, et al. Combination chemotherapy with methotrexate, bleomycin and vincristine with or without cisplatin in advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck. Cancer 1987;60:1173.
196. Browman GP, Levin MN, Goodyear MD, et al. Methotrexate/fluorouracil scheduling influences normal tissue toxicity but not antitumor effects in patients with squamous cell head and neck
cancer: results from a randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:963.
197. Paccagnella A, Segati R, Pappagallo GL, et al. Phase II study of epirubicin, methotrexateand bleomycin (EMB) in recurrent cancer of the head and neck: preliminary results of a randomized
GSTTC study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1989;8:175.
198. Forastiere AA, Leong T, Rowinsky E, et al. A phase III comparison of high dose paclitaxel + cisplatin + G-CSF versus low dose paclitaxel + cisplatin in advanced head and neck cancer: an
ECOG study. J Clin Oncol(in press).
199. Schrijvers D, Johnson J, Jiminez U, et al. Phase III trial of modulation of cisplatin/fluorouracil chemotherapy by interferon alfa-2b in patients with recurrent or metastatic head and neck cancer.
Head and Neck Interferon Cooperative Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1054.
200. Mendelsohn J, Fan Z. Epidermal growth factor receptor family and chemosensitization. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:341.
201. Grandis JR, Melhem MF, Gooding WE, et al. Levels of TGF-alpha and EGFR protein in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and patient survival. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:824.
202. Sui LL, Hidalgo M, Nemunaitis J, et al. Dose and schedule-duration escalation of the epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor CP-358, 774: a phase I and pharmacokinetic
study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:388a.
203. Hammond L, Ranson M, Ferry D, et al. ZD1839, an oral epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor: first phase I, pharmacokinetic results in patients. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:388a.
204. Mendelsohn J, Shin DM, Donato N, et al. A phase I study of chimerized anti-epidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody in combination with cisplatin in patients with recurrent head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:389a.
205. Mendelsohn J. Epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition by a monoclonal antibody as anticancer therapy. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:2703.
206. Ezekiel MP, Bonner JA, Robert F, et al. Phase I trial of chimerized anti-epidermal growth factor receptor antibody in combination with either once-daily or twice-daily irradiation for locally
advanced head and neck malignancies. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:388a.
207. Sausville EA, Zaharevitz D, Gussio R, et al. Cyclin-dependent kinases: initial approaches to exploit a novel therapeutic target. Pharmacol Ther 1999;82:285.
208. Senderowicz AM. Flavopiridol: their first cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor in human clinical trials. Invest New Drugs 1999:17:313.
209. Patel V, Senderowicz AM, Pinto D, et al. Flavopiridol, a novel cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, suppresses the growth of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas by inducing apoptosis. J
Clin Invest 1998;102:1674.
210. Senderowicz AM, Headlee D, Stinson SF, et al. Phase I trial of continuous infusion flavopiridol, a novel cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, in patients with refractory neoplasms. J Clin Oncol
1998;19:2986.
211. Heise CC, Williams AM, Xue S, Propst M, Kirn DH. Intravenous administration of ONYS-015, a selectively replicating adenovirus, induces antitumoral efficacy. Cancer Res 1999;59:2623.
212. Kirn D, Nemunaitis J, Ganly I, et al. A phase II trial of intratumoral injection with an E1B-deleted adenovirus, Onyx-015, in patients with recurrent, refractory head and neck cancer. Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1999;17:391a.
213. Heise C, Sampson-Johannes A, Williams A, et al. ONYX-015, an E1B gene-attenuated adenovirus, causes tumor-specific cytolysis and antitumoral efficacy that can be augmented by standard
chemotherapeutic agents. Nat Med 1997;3:639.
214. Kirn DH, Khuri F, Ganly I, et al. A phase II trial of ONYX-015, a selectively replicating adenovirus to combination with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil in patients with recurrent head and neck cancer.
Proc Am Soc Clin 1999;18:389a.
215. Clayman GL, Dreiling LK. Injectable modalities as local and regional strategies for head and neck cancer. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1999;13:787.
216. Head and Neck Contracts Program. Adjuvant chemotherapy for advanced head and neck squamous carcinoma: final report of the Head and Neck Contracts Program. Cancer 1987;60:301.
217. Department of Veterans Affairs Laryngeal Study Group. Induction chemotherapy plus radiation compared with advanced laryngeal cancer. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1685.
218. Lefebvre JL, Chevalier D, Lubomski B, et al. Larynx preservation in hypopharynx and lateral epilarynx cancer: preliminary results of EORTC randomized phase III trial 24891. J Natl Cancer Inst
1996;88:890.
219. Kish J, Drelichman A, Jacobs J, et al. Clinical trial of cisplatin and 5-FU infusion as initial treatment for advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Cancer Treat Rep
1982;66:471.
220. Kish JA, Ensley JF, Weaver A, et al. Improvement of complete response rate to induction adjuvant chemotherapy for advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Cancer Treat
Rep 1982;66:471.
221. Dimery IW, Hong WK. Overview of combined modality therapies for head and neck cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:95.
222. Tavorath R, Pfister DG. Chemotherapy for recurrent disease and combined modality therapies for head and neck cancer. Curr Opin Oncol 1995;7:242.
223. Vokes EE, Schilsky RL, Weichselbaum RR, et al. Induction chemotherapy with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and high-dose leucovorin for locally advanced head and neck cancer: a clinical and
pharmacologic analysis. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:241.
224. Dreyfuss Al, Clark JR, Wright JE, et al. Continuous-infusion high-dose leucovorin with 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin for untreated stage IV carcinoma of the head and neck. Ann Intern Med
1990;112:167.
225. Pfister DG, Bajorin D, Motzer R, et al. Cisplatin, fluorouracil and leucovorin: increased toxicity without improved response in squamous cell head and neck cancer. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg 1994;120:89.
226. Colevas AD, Busse PM, Norris CM, et al. Induction chemotherapy with docetaxel, cisplatin, fluorouracil, and leucovorin for squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: a phase I/II trial. J
Clin Oncol 1998;16:1331.
227. Colevas AD, Norris CM, Tishler RB, et al. Phase II trial of docetaxel, cisplatin, fluorouracil, and leucovorin as induction for squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:3503.
228. Posner MR, Glisson B, Al-Sarraf M, et al. A multi-center phase II study of induction chemotherapy with taxotere (T), cisplatinum (P), and 5-fluorouracil (F) (TPF) for curative treatment of locally
advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:394a.
229. Urba SG, Forastiere AA, Wolf GT, et al. Intensive induction chemotherapy and radiation for organ preservation in patients with advanced resectable head and neck carcinoma. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:946.
230. Vokes EE, Ratain MJ, Mick R, et al. Cisplatin, fluorouracil, and leucovorin augmented by interferon alfa-2b in head and neck cancer: a clinical and pharmacologic analysis. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:360.
231. Aisner J, Hiponia D, Conley B, et al. Combined modalities in the treatment of head and neck cancers. Semin Oncol 1995;22:28.
232. Forastiere AA. Randomized trials of induction chemotherapy: a critical review. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1991;5:725.
233. Adelstein DJ. Induction chemotherapy in head and neck cancer. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1999;13:689.
234. Martin M, Hazan A, Vergnes L, et al. Randomized study of 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin as neoadjuvant therapy in head and neck cancer: a preliminary report. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1990;19:973.
235. Jortay A Demard F, Dalesio O, et al. A randomized EORTC study on the effect of preoperative polychemotherapy in pyriform sinus carcinoma treated by pharyngolaryngectomy and irradiation.
Results from 5 to 10 years. Acta Chir Belg 1999;90:115.
236. Richard JM, Kramer A, Molinari R, et al. Randomized EORTC Head and Neck Cooperative Group Trial of preoperative intra-arterial chemotherapy in oral cavity and oropharynx carcinoma. Eur
J Cancer 1991;27:821.
237. Mazeron JJ, Martin M, Brun B, et al. Induction chemotherapy in head and neck cancer: result of a phase lll trial. Head Neck 1992;14:85.
238. Jaulerry C, Rodriquez J, Brunin F, et al. Induction chemotherapy in advanced head and neck tumors: results of two randomized trials. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;23:483.
239. Tejedor M, Murias A, Soria P, et al. Induction chemotherapy with carboplatin and Ftorafur in advanced head and neck cancer. Am J Clin Oncol 1992;15:417.
240. Depondt J, Gehanno P, Martin M, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin/5-fluorouracil in head and neck cancer. Oncology 1993;50(Suppl):23.
241. Di Blasio B, Barbieri W, Bozzetti A, et al. A prospective randomized trial in resectable head and neck carcinoma: loco-regional treatment with and without neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Proc Am
Soc Clin Oncol 1994;13:279(abst).
242. Hasegawa Y, Matsuura H, Fukushima M, Kano M, Shimozato K. A randomized trial of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin and 5-FU in advanced head and neck cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1994;13:286(abst).
243. Paccagnella A, Orlando A, Marchlori C, et al. A phase III trial of initial chemotherapy in stage III or IV head and neck cancer. A study by the gruppo di studio sui tumori della testa e del collo. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:265.
244. Dalley D, Beller E, Aroney R, et al. The value of chemotherapy prior to definitive local therapy in patients with locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1995;14:297.
245. Domenge C, Coche-Dequeant B, Wibault P, et al. Randomized trial of neoadjuvant chemotherapy before radiotherapy in oropharyngeal carcinoma. Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Head and Neck Cancer. 1996;99.
246. Volling PM, Schroeder M, Eckel H, et al. Results of a prospective randomized trial with induction chemotherapy in cancer of the oral cavity and the pharynx. Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Head and Neck Cancer. 1996;179.
247. Laramore G, Scott C, Al-Sarraf M, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy for resectable squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck: report on Intergroup study 01034. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1992;23:705.
248. Tsukuda M, Ogasawara H, Kaneko S, et al. A prospective randomized trial of adjuvant chemotherapy with UFT for head and Neck carcinoma. Head and neck UFT study group. Gan To Kagaku
Ryoho 1994;21:1169.
249. Domenge C, Marandas P, Vignoud J, et al. Post-surgical adjuvant chemotherapy in extracapsular spread invaded lymph node. (N+R+) of epidermoid carcinoma of the head and neck. A
randomized multicentric trial. Second International Conference on Head and Neck Cancer Boston, 1988. Am SocHead Neck Surg 1988;74.
250. Cooper JS, Pajak TF, Forastiere A, et al. Precisely defining high-risk operable head and neck tumors based on RTOG #85-03 and #88-24: targets for postoperative radiochemotherapy? Head
Neck 1998;20:588.
251. Ervin TJ, Clark JR, Weichulbaum RR, et al. An analysis of induction and adjuvant chemotherapy in the multidisciplinary treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. J Clin
Oncol 1987;5:10.
252. Kish JA, Benedetti JK, Balcerzak SP, et al. Feasibility trial of postoperative radiotherapy and cisplatin followed by three courses of 5-FU and cisplatin in patients with resected head and neck
cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. Cancer J from Scientific American 1999;307.
253. Johnson JT, Myers EN, Bedetti CD, et al. Cervical lymph node metastases: incidence and implications of extracapsular carcinoma. Arch Otolaryngol 1985;111:534.

254. Snow GB, Annyas AA, Van Slooten EA, et al. Prognostic factors of neck node metastasis. Clin Otolaryngol 1982;7:185.
255. Peters LJ, Goepfert H, Ang KK, et al. Evaluation of the dose for postoperative radiation therapy of head and neck cancer: first report of a prospective randomized trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1993;26:3.
256. Brizel DM. Radiotherapy and concurrent chemotherapy for the treatment of locally advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Semin Radiat Oncol 1998;8:237.
257. Fu KK, Phillips TL. Biologic rationale of combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1991;5:737.
258. Vokes EE, Weichulbaum RR. Concomitant chemoradiotherapy: rationale and clinical experience in patients with solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:911.
259. Forastiere AA. Cisplatin and radiotherapy in the management of locally advanced head and neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:465.
260. Al-Sarraf M, Pajak TF, Byhardt RW, et al. Postoperative radiotherapy with concurrent cisplatin appears to improve locoregional control of advanced, resectable head and neck cancer: RTOG
88-24. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:777.
261. Bachaud JM, Choen-Jonathan E, Alzieu C, et al. Combined postoperative radiotherapy and weekly cisplatin infusion for locally advanced head and neck carcinoma. Final report of a
randomized trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:999.
262. Weissberg J, Son YH, Papac RJ, et al. Randomized clinical trial of mitomycin C as an adjunct to radiotherapy in head and neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:3.
263. Haffty B, Son Y, Sasaki C, et al. Mitomycin C as an adjunct to postoperative radiation therapy in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: results from two randomized clinical trials. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:241.
264. Weissler M, Melin S, Sailer S, et al. Simultaneous chemoradiotherapy in the treatment of advanced head and neck cancer. Arch OtolaryngolHead Neck Surg 1992;118:806.
265. Stell PM. Adjuvant chemotherapy for head and neck cancer. Semin Radiat Oncol 1992;2:195.
266. Munro AJ. An overview of randomised controlled trials of trials of adjuvant chemotherapy in head and neck cancer. Br J Cancer 1995;71:83.
267. El Sayed S, Nelson N. Adjuvant and adjunctive chemotherapy in the management of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck region: a meta-analysis of prospective and randomized
trials. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:838.
268. Pignon JP, Bourhis J, Domenge C, et al. Chemotherapy as an adjunct to definitive locoregional treatment for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma: results of three meta-analysis using
updated individual data. Lancet 2000;355:949.
269. Stefani S, Chung TS. Hydroxyurea and radiotherapy in head and neck cancer: long term results of a double-blind randomized prospective study. J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:1398.
270. Gupta NK, Pointon RCS, Wilkinson PM. A randomized clinical trial to contract radiotherapy with radiotherapy and methotrexate given synchronously in head and neck cancer. Clin Radiol
1987;38:575.
271. Shanta V, Krishnamurthi S. Combined bleomycin and radiotherapy in oral cancer. Clin Radiol 1980;156:228.
272. Vermund H, Kaalhus O, Winther F, et al. Bleomycin and radiation therapy in squamous cell carcinoma of the upper aerodigestive tract: a phase III clinical trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1985;11:1877.
273. Fu KK, Phillips TL, Silverberg IJ. Combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy with bleomycin and methotrexate for advanced inoperable head and neck cancer: update of a Northern California
Oncology Group randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1410.
274. Eschwege F, Sancho-Gamier H, Gerard JP, et al. Ten-year results of randomized trial comparing radiotherapy and concomitant bleomycin to radiotherapy alone in epidermoid carcinomas of
theoropharynx: experience of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer. Natl Cancer Inst Mongr 1988;6:275.
275. Lo TCM, Wiley AL Jr, Ainfield FJ, et al. Combined radiation therapy and 5-fluorouracil for advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity and oropharynx: a randomized study. AJRAm J
Roentgenol 1976;126:229.
276. Browman G, Hodson I, Levine M, et al. Placebo-controlled randomized trial of infusional fluorouracil during standard radiotherapy in locally advanced head and neck cancer. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:2648.
277. Sanchiz F, Milla A, Roner J, et al. Single fraction per day versus two fractions per day versus radiochemotherapy in the treatment of head and neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1990;19:1347.
278. Weissberg JB, Son YH, Papac RJ, et al. Randomized clinical trial of mitomycin C as an adjunct to radiotherapy in head and neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:3.
279. Haselow RE, Warshaw MC, Oken MM, et al. Radiation alone versus radiation with weekly low dose cis-platinum in unresectable cancer of the head and neck. Head Neck Cancer 1990;2:279.
280. Al-Sarraf M, LeBlanc M, Giri PG, et al. Chemoradiotherapy versus radiotherapy in patients with advanced nasopharyngeal cancer: phase III randomized Intergroup study 0099. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:1310.
281. Tishler RB, Geard CR, Hall EJ, Schiff PB. Taxol sensitizes human astrocytoma cells to radiation. Cancer Res 1992;52(Suppl 12):3495.
282. Choy H, Rodriguez FF, Loester S, Hilsenbeck S, Von Hoff DD. Investigation of taxol as a potential radiation sensitizer. Cancer 1993;71(Suppl 11):3774.
283. Liebmann J, Cook JA, Fisher J, Teague D, Mitchell JB. In vitro studies of taxol as a radiation sensitizer in human tumor cells. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:441.
284. Eisbruch A, Shewach DS, Bradford CR, et al. Radiation concurrent with low dose gemcitabine for head and neck cancer: interim results of a phase I study. Proc Am Clin Oncol 1998;17:405a.
285. Rosenthal DI, Sinard R, Kavanaugh DY, et al. Dose escalating 7-week continuous infusion paclitaxel with concurrent once-daily radiation therapy for locally advanced squamous carcinoma of
head and neck: a phase I study. Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:397a.
286. Flood W, Lee DJ, Trotti A, et al. Multimodality therapy of patients with locally advanced squamous cell cancer of the head and neck: preliminary results of two pilot trials using paclitaxel and
cisplatin. Semin Radiat Oncol 1999;2:64.
287. Conley B, Jacobs M, Suntharalingam M, et al. A pilot trial of paclitaxel, carboplatin, and concurrent radiotherapy for unresectable squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Semin Oncol
1997;1:S2-78.
288. Wanebo HJ, Chougule P, Ready N, et al. Preoperative paclitaxel, carboplatin, and radiation therapy in advanced head and neck cancer (stage III and IV). Semin Radiat Oncol 1999;2:77.
289. Amdur RJ, Parsons JT, Mendenhall WM, Million RR, Cassissi NJ. Split-course versus continuous-course irradiation in the postoperative setting for squamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:279.
290. Pajak TF, Laramore GE, Marcial VA, et al. Elapsed treatment daysa critical item for radiotherapy quality control review in head and neck trials: RTOG report. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1991;20:13.
291. Taylor SG, Murthy AK, Griem KL, et al. Concomitant cisplatin/5-FU infusion and radiotherapy in advanced head and neck cancer: 8-year analysis of results. Head Neck 1997;19:684.
292. Lavertu P, Adelstein DJ, Saxton JP, et al. Aggressive concurrent chemoradiotherapy for squamous cell head and neck cancer: an 8-year single-institution experience. Arch Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg 1999;125:142.
293. Haraf DJ, Kies M, Rademaker AW, et al. Radiation therapy with concomitant hydroxyurea and fluorouracil in stage II and III head and neck cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:638.
294. Taylor SG IV, Murthy AK, Vannetzel JM, et al. Randomized comparison of neoadjuvant cisplatin and fluorouracil infusion followed by radiation versus concomitant treatment in advanced head
and neck cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:385.
295. Griem KL, Murthy AK, Varnetzel JM, et al. The five year results of a randomized trial of sequential versus concomitant cisplatin and fluorouracil and radiation in advanced head and neck
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32(Suppl 1):194.
296. Adelstein DJ, Sharan VM, Earle S, et al. Simultaneous versus sequential combined technique therapy for squamous cell head and neck cancer. Cancer 1990;65:1685.
297. Merlano M, Corro R, Bargarino G, et al. Combined chemotherapy and radiation therapy in advanced inoperable squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Cancer 1991;67:915.
298. Interim report from the SECOG participants: a randomized trial of combined multi drug chemotherapy and radiotherapy in advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Eur J Surg
Oncol 1986;12:289.
299. Keane TJ, Cummings BJ, O'Sullivan B, et al. A randomized trial of radiation therapy compared with split course radiation therapy combined with mitomycin and 5-fluorouracil as initial treatment
for advanced laryngeal and hypopharyngeal squamous carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:613.
300. Zakotnik B, Smid L, Budihna M, et al. Concomitant radiotherapy with mitomycin C and bleomycin compared with radiotherapy alone in inoperable head and neck cancer: final report. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:1121.
301. Adelstein DJ, Saxton JP, Lavertu P, et al. A phase II randomized trial comparing concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy with radiotherapy alone in resectable stage II and IV squamous cell
head and neck cancer: preliminary results. Head Neck 1997;19:567.
302. Adelstein DJ, Lavertu P, Saxton JP, et al. Long term results of a phase III randomized trial comparing concurrent chemoradiotherpy with radiation therapy alone in squamous cell head and neck
cancer. Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:394a.
303. Calais G, Alfonsi M, Bardet E, et al. Randomized trial of radiation therapy versus concomitant chemotherapy and radiation therapy for advanced-stage oropharynx carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst
1999;91:2081.
304. Merlano M, Benasso M, Corvo R, et al. Five-year update of a randomized trial of alternating radiotherapy and chemotherapy compared with radiotherapy alone in treatment of unresectable
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88(9):583.
305. Adelstein DJ, Adams GL, Li Y, et al. A phase II comparison of standard radiation therapy versus RT plus concurrent cisplatin versus split-course RT plus concurrent DDP and 5-fluorouracil in
patients with unresectable squamous cell head and neck cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2000;19:411a.
306. Wendt TG, Grabenbauer GG, Rodel CM, et al. Simultaneous radiochemotherapy versus radiotherapy alone in advanced head and neck cancer: a randomized multicenter study. J Clin Oncol
1998:16:1318.
307. Brizel DM, Albers ME, Fisther SR, et al. Hyperfractionated irradiation with or without concurrent chemotherapy for locally advanced head and neck cancer. N Engl J Med 1998;42:145.
308. Forastiere AA, Trotti A. Radiotherapy and concurrent chemotherapy: a strategy that improves locoregional control and survival in oropharyngeal cancer. J Natl Cancer 1999;91:2065.
309. Marcial VA, Pajak TF, Mohiudin M, et al. Concomitant cisplatin chemotherapy and radiotherapy in advanced mucosal squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Long term results of the
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group study 81-17. Cancer 1990;66:1862.
310. Adelstein DJ, Kalish LA, Adams GL, et al. Concurrent radiation therapy and chemotherapy for locally unresectable squamous cell head and neck cancer. An Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group pilot study. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2136.
311. Fu KK, Pajak TF, Trotti A, et al. A Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) phase III randomized study to compare hyperfractionation and two variants of accelerated fractionation to
standard fractionation radiotherapy for head and neck squamous cell carcinomas: preliminary results of RTOG 9003. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45(Suppl):145.
312. Lotan R. Retinoids in cancer chemoprevention. FASEB J 1996;10:1031.
313. Hong WK, Lippman SM, Hittleman W, et al. Retinoid chemoprevention of aerodigestive cancer: from basic research to the clinic. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:677.
314. Papadimitrakopolou V, Hong WK. Retinoids in head and neck chemoprevention. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1997;216:283.
315. Nawroz H, van der Riet P, Hruban RH, Koch W, Sidransky D. Allelotype of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Res 1994;54:1152.
316. Sidransky D. Molecular genetics of head and neck cancer. Curr Opin Oncol 1995;7:299.
317. Khuri FR, Lippman SM, Spitz MR, et al. Molecular epidemiology and retinoid chemoprevention of head and neck cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:199.
318. Wulf K. Zur vitamin A behandlung der leukoplakien. Arch Klin Exp Derm 1957;206:495.
319. Silverman S, Eisenberg E, Renstrup G. A study of the effects of high doses of vitamin A on oral leukoplakia (hyperkeratosis), including toxicity, liver function and skeletal metabolism. J Oral
Ther Pharm 1965;2:9.
320. Hong WK, Lippman SM, Wolf GT. Recent advances in head and neck cancer. Larynx preservation and cancer chemoprevention. Cancer Res 1994;53:5113.
321. Lippman SM, Benner SE, Hong WK. Cancer chemoprevention. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:851.
322. Hong WK, Endicott J, Itri LM, et al. 13-cis-retinoic acid in the treatment of oral leukoplakia. N Engl J Med 1986;315:1501.
323. Lippman SM, Batsakis JG, Toth BB, et al. Comparison of low-dose isotretinoin with beta carotene to prevent oral carcinogenesis. N Engl J Med 1993;328:15.
324. Stich HF, Homby AP, Mathew B, et al. Response of oral leukoplakias to the administration of vitamin A. Cancer Lett 1988;40:93.
325. Han J, Lu Y, Sun Z, et al. In Vivo 1990;4:153.
326. Costa A, Formelli F, Chiesa F, et al. Prospects of chemoprevention of human cancers with the synthetic retinoid fenretinide. Cancer Res 1994;54:2032.
327. Benner SE, Winn RJ, Lippman SM, et al. Regression of oral leukoplakia with alpha-Tocopherol: a community Clinical Oncology Program Chemoprevention Study. J Natl Cancer Inst
1993;85:44.
328. Lippman SM, Spitz MR, Huber MH, et al. Strategies for chemoprevention study of premalignancy and second primary tumors in the head and neck. Curr Opin Oncol 1995;7:234.
329. Papadimitrakopolou V, Hong WK, Lee JS, et al. Low-dose isotretinoin versus beta-carotene to prevent oral carcinogenesis: longterm follow-up. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:257.

330. Stich HF, Rosin MP, Hornby P, et al. Remission of oral leukoplakias and micronuclei in tobacco/betel quid chewers treated with beta-carotene and beta-carotene plus vitamin A. Int J Cancer
1988;42:195.
331. Peck R, Bollag W. Potentiation of retinoid-induced differentiation of HL-60 and U937 cell lines by cytokines. Eur J Cancer 1992;27:53.
332. Kolla V, Lindner DJ, Xiao W, et al. Modulation of interferon (IFN)-inducible gene expression by retinoic acid. Up regulation of STAT1 protein in IFN-unresponsive cells. A phase II trial from the
MD Anderson Cancer Center reported pathologic complete responses in 10 of 30 patients at 6 months and partial responses in 7 patients. J Biol Chem 1996;271:10508.
333. Papadimitrakopoulou VA, Clayman GL, Shin DM, et al. Biochemoprevention for dysplastic lesions of the upper aerodigestive tract. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1999;125:1083.
334. Cooper JS, Pajak TF, Rubin P, et al. Second malignancies in patients who have head and neck cancers: incidence, effect on survival and implications for chemoprevention based on the RTOG
experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:449.
335. Hong WK, Lippman SM, Itri LM, et al. Prevention of second primary tumors with isotretinoin in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med 1990;323:795.
336. Benner SE, Pajak TF, Lippman SM, et al. Prevention of second primary tumors with isotretinoin in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: long term follow-up. J Natl Cancer Inst
1994;86:140.
337. Bolla M, Lefur R, Ton Van J, et al. Prevention of second primary tumours with etretinate in squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity and oropharynx. Results of a multicentric double-blind
randomized study. Eur J Cancer 1994;30A:767.
338. Logemann JA. Rehabilitation of the head and neck cancer patient. Semin Oncol 1994;21:359.
339. Rehabilitation of head and neck cancer patients: consensus on recommendation from the international conference on rehabilitation of the head and neck cancer patient. Head Neck 1991;13:1.
340. Davis JW, Lazarus C, Logemann JA. Effect of a maxillary glossectomy prosthesis on articulation and swallowing. J Prosthet Dent 1987;57:715.
341. Pauloski BR, Logemann JA, Rademaker AW, et al. Speech and swallowing function after oral and oropharyngeal resections: one year follow-up. J Speech Hear Res 1993;36:267.
342. Haribhakti VV, Kavarana NM, Tibrewak AN. Oral cavity reconstruction: an objective assessment of function. Head Neck 1993;15:119.
343. Teichgraeber J, Bowman J, Goepfert H. Functional analysis of treatment of oral cavity cancer. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1986;112:959.
344. Lazarus CL, Logemann JA, Kahrillas PJ, Mittal BB. Swallow recovery in an oral cancer patient following surgery, radiotherapy and hyperthermia. Head Neck 1994;16:259.
345. Dodds WJ, Stewart ET, Logemann JA. Physiology and radiology of the normal oral and pharyngeal phases of swallowing. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1990;154:953.
346. Effects of chin down posture on aspiration in dysphagic patients. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1993;74:736.
347. Rousch GC. Epidemiology of cancer of the nose and paranasal sinuses. Current concepts. Head Neck Surg 1979;2:3.
348. Torjussen W, Haug FMS, Olsen A, Andersen I. Concentration and distribution of heavy metals in nasal mucosa of nickel-exposed workers. Acta Otolaryngol 1977;86:449.
349. Pedersen EA, Hogetveit AC, Andersen A. Cancer of the respiratory organs among workers at a nickel refinery in Norway. Int J Cancer 1973;12:32.
350. Ironside P, Matthews J. Adenocarcinoma of the nose and paranasal sinuses in woodworkers in the state of Victoria, Australia. Cancer 1975;36:1115.
351. Acheson ED, Hadfield EH, Macbeth RG. Carcinoma of the nasal cavity and accessory sinuses in woodworkers. Lancet 1967;1:311.
352. Acheson ED, Cowdell RH, Jolles B. Nasal cancer in the Northamptonshire boot and shoe industry. Br Med J [Clin Res] 1970;1:385.
353. Buda JA, Conley JJ, Rankow R. Carcinoma of the maxillary sinus following thorotrast instillation. Am J Surg 1963;106:868.
354. Moss-Salentijn L. Anatomy and embryology. In: Blitzer A, Lawson W, Friedman WH, eds. Surgery of the paranasal sinuses. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1985:1.
355. Sisson GA, Bytell DE, Becker SP, Ruge D. Carcinoma of the paranasal sinuses and cranial-facial resection. J Laryngol Otol 1976;90:59.
356. Robin PE, Powell DJ. Regional node involvement and distant metastasis in carcinoma of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses. J Laryngol Otol 1980;94:301.
357. Jackson RT, Fitz-Hugh GS, Constable WC. Malignant neoplasms of the nasal cavities and paranasal sinuses: a retrospective study. Laryngoscope 1977;87:726.
358. Bosch A, Vallecillo L, Frias Z. Cancer of the nasal cavity. Cancer 1976;37:1458.
359. Sisson GA, Johnson NE, Amiric S. Cancer of the maxillary sinus: clinical classification and management. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1963;72:1050.
360. Birt BD, Braint TDR. The management of malignant tumors of the maxillary sinus. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1976;9:249.
361. Kraus DH, Lanzieri CF, Wanamaker JR, Little JR, Lavertu P. Complementary use of computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging in assessing skull base lesions. Laryngoscope
1992;102:623.
362. Som PM, Dillon WP, Sze G, et al. Benign and malignant sinonasal lesions with intracranial extension: differentiation with MRI imaging. Radiology 1989;172:763.
363. Price JC, Holliday MJ, Johns ME, et al. The versatile midface degloving approach. Laryngoscope 1988;98:291.
364. Sessions RB, Humphrey DH. Technical modifications of the medial maxillectomy. Arch Otolaryngol 1983;109:575.
365. Wong C, Cummings B. The place of radiation therapy in the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal vestibule. Acta Oncol 1988;27:203.
366. Spiro RH, Strong EW, Shah JP. Maxillectomy and its classifications. Head Neck 1997;19:309.
367. Tiwari R, Van der Waal J, Van der Waal I, Snow G. Studies of the anatomy and pathology of the orbit and carcinoma of the maxillary sinus and their impact on preservation of the eye in
maxillectomy. Head Neck 1998;20:189.
368. Kirchner JC, Sasaki CT. Reconstructive surgery of the sinuses. In Thawley SE, Panje WR, Batsakis JG, Lindberg RD, eds. Comprehensive management of head and neck tumors. Philadelphia:
Saunders, 1987:433.
369. Jesse RH, Butler JJ, Healey JE, et al. Paranasal sinuses and nasal cavity. In: MacComb WS, Fletcher GH, eds. In: Cancer of the head and neck. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1967:329.
370. McCaffrey TV, Olsen KD, Yohanan JM, et al. Factors affecting survival of patients with tumors of the anterior skull base. Laryngoscope 1994;104:940.
371. Lund VJ, Howard DJ, Wei WI, Cheesman AD. Craniofacial resection for tumors of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinusesa 7 year experience. Head Neck 1998;20:97.
372. Roa W, Hazuka M, Sandler H, et al. Results of primary and adjuvant CT-base 3-dimensional radiotherapy for malignant tumors of the paranasal sinuses. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1994;28:857.
373. Spiro JD, Soo KC, Spiro RA. Squamous carcinoma of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses. Am J Surg 1991;158:328.
374. Lewis JS, Castro EB. Cancer of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses. J Laryngol Otol 1972;86:255.
375. Levendag P, Pomp J. Radiation therapy of squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal vestibule. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:1363.
376. Wang CC. Treatment of carcinoma of the nasal vestibule by irradiation. Cancer 1976;38:100.
377. Wang CC, Cummings B, Elhakim T, et al. External irradiation for squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal vestibule. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1943.
378. Ketcham AS, Chretien PB, Van Buren JM, et al. The ethmoid sinuses: a re-evaluation of surgical resection. Am J Surg 1973;126:469.
379. Terz JJ, Young HF, Lawrence W. Combined craniofacial resection for locally advanced carcinoma of the head and neck. Am J Surg 1980;140:618.
380. Clayman GL, et al. Outcome and complications of extended cranial-base resection requiring microvascular free-tissue transfer. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995;121:1253.
381. Kraus DH, Shah JP, Arbit C, Galicich JH, Strong EW. Complications of craniofacial resection for tumor involving the anterior skull base. Head Neck Surg 1994;10:307.
382. Parsons J, Mendenhall W, Mancuso A, et al. Malignant tumors of nasal cavity and ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14:11.
383. Frich J. Treatment of advanced squamous carcinoma of the maxillary sinus by irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8:1453.
384. Amendola B, Eisert D, Hazra T, et al. Carcinoma of the maxillary antrum: surgery or radiation therapy? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:743.
385. Yu-Hua H, Gui-Yi T, Yu-Quin Q, et al. Comparison of pre- and post-operative radiation in the combined treatment of carcinoma of the maxillary sinus. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8:1045.
386. Zaharia M, Salem L, Travezan R, et al. Post-operative radiation therapy in the management of cancer of the maxillary sinus. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:967.
387. Raben A, Pfister D, Omalley B. Non-surgical management of carcinoma of the nasal vestibule, nasal cavity, and paranasal sinuses. In: Harrison LB, Sessions RB, Hong WK, eds. Head
andneck cancera multidisciplinary approach. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven, 1999:595.
388. Collins JM. Pharmacologic rationale for regional drug delivery. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:498.
389. Sato Y, Morita M, Takahashi H, et al. Combined surgery, radiotherapy, and regional chemotherapy in carcinoma of the paranasal sinuses. Cancer 1970;25:571.
390. Goepfert H, Jesse RH, Lindberg RD. Arterial infusion and radiation therapy in the treatment of advanced cancer of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses. Am J Surg 1973;126:464.
391. Moseley HS, Thomas LR, Everts EC, et al. Advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the maxillary sinus: results of combined regional infusion chemotherapy, radiation therapy and surgery. Am J
Surg 1981;141:522.
392. Shibuya H, Suzuki S, Horiuchi JI, et al. Reappraisal of trimodal combination therapy for maxillary sinus carcinoma. Cancer 1982;50:2790.
393. Nervi C, Arcangeli G, Badaracco G, et al. The relevance of tumor size and cell kinetics as predictors of radiation response in head and neck cancer: a randomized study on the effect of
intraarterial chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy. Cancer 1978;41:900.
394. Dimery IW, Lee YY, Van Tassel P, et al. Combined intra-arterial (I.A.) and systemic chemotherapy (CT) for paranasal sinus carcinoma (PNSC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1988;7:150(abst).
395. Mortimer JE, Taylor ME, Schulman S, et al. Feasibility and efficacy of weekly intraarterial cisplatin in locally advanced (stage III and IV) head and neck cancers. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:969.
396. LoRusso P, Tapazoglou E, Kish JA, et al. Chemotherapy for paranasal sinus carcinoma: a 10 year experience at Wayne State University. Cancer 1988;62:1.
397. Lee MM, Vokes EE, Rosen A, et al. Multimodality therapy in advanced paranasal sinus carcinoma: superior long-term results. Cancer J Sci Am 19995:219.
398. Harrison L, Pfister D, Fass D, et al. Concomitant chemotherapy-radiation therapy followed by hyper fractionated radiation therapy for advanced unresectable head and neck cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:703.
399. Robbins KT, Storniolo AM, Kerber C, et al. Phase I study of highly selective supradose cisplatin infusions for advanced head and neck cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2113.
400. Samant S, Kumar P, Wan J, et al. Concomitant radiation therapy and targeted cisplatin chemotherapy for the treatment of advanced pyriform sinus carcinoma: disease control and preservation
of organ function. Head Neck 1999;21:595.
401. Robbins KT, Kumar P, Regine WF, et al. Efficacy of targeted supradose cisplatin and concomitant radiation therapy for advanced head and neck cancer: the Memphis experience. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:263.
402. Miller D. The etiology of nasopharyngeal cancer and its management. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1980;13:167.
403. Henderson BE, Louie E, Jing JSH, Buell P, Gardner M. Risk factors associated with nasopharyngeal carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1976;295:1101.
404. Yu MC, Ho JHC, Lai SH, Henderson BE. Cantonese-style salted fish as a cause of nasopharyngeal carcinoma: report of a case-control study in Hong Kong. Cancer Res 1986;46:956.
405. Old LJ, Boyse EA, Oettgen HF, et al. Precipitating antibody in human serum to an antigen present in cultured Burkitt's lymphoma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1966;56:1699.
406. Zur Hausen H, Schulte-Holthausen H, Klein G, et al. Epstein-Barr virus DNA in biopsies of Burkitt tumors and anaplastic carcinoma of the nasopharynx. Nature 1970;228:1056.
407. Fahraeus R, Fu HL, Ernberg I, et al. Expression of Epstein-Barr virus-encoded proteins in nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Int J Cancer 1988;42:329.
408. Chan SH, Day HE, Kunaratnam N, Chia KB, Simons MJ. HLA and nasopharyngeal carcinoma in Chinesea further study. Int J Cancer 1983;32:171.
409. Simons MJ, Wee GB, Goh EH, et al. Immunogenetic aspects of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. IV. Increased risk in Chinese of nasopharyngeal carcinoma associated with a Chinese related HCA
profile (A2, Singapore 2). J Natl Cancer Inst 1976;57:977.
410. International Histological Classification of Tumors, No. 19: histological typing of upper respiratory tract tumors. World Health Organization, 1978:32.
411. Baker SR. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma: clinical course and results of therapy. Head Neck Surg 1980;3:8.
412. Mesic JB, Fletcher GH, Goepfert H. Megavoltage irradiation of epithelial tumors of the nasopharynx. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:447.
413. Neel HB III. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Clinical presentation, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1985;18:479.
414. Chen KY, Fletcher GH. Malignant tumors of the nasopharynx. Radiology 1971;99:165.
415. Hoppe RT, Williams J, Warnke R, et al. Carcinoma of the nasopharynxsignificance of histology. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;4:199.
416. Yu Z, Xu G, Huang Y, et al. Value of computed tomography in staging the primary lesion (T-staging) of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC): an analysis of 54 patients with special reference to the
parapharyngeal space. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:2143.
417. Sham JST, Choy D. Prognostic value of paranasopharyngeal extension of nasopharyngeal carcinoma on local control and short term survival. Head Neck 1991;13:298.
418. Lee A, Sham J, Poon Y, Ho JHC. Treatment of stage I nasopharyngeal carcinoma: analysis of pattern of relapse and the results of withholding elective neck irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1989;17:1183.
419. Sham J, Choy D, Wei W. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma: orderly neck node spread. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:929.
420. Cellai E, Olmi T, Chiavacci A, et al. Computed tomography in nasopharyngeal carcinoma. II. Impact on survival. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:929.
421. Kutcher GJ, Zuks G, Brenner H, et al. Three dimensional photon treatment planning for carcinoma of the nasopharynx. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:169.

422. Ang KK, Peters LJ, Weber RA, et al. Concomitant boost radiotherapy schedules in the treatment of carcinoma of the oropharynx and nasopharynx. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:1339.
423. Cheung KY, Choi PH, Chau RMC, et al. The roles of multileaf and micro multifleaf collimators in conformal and conventional nasopharyngeal carcinoma radiotherapy treatments. Med Phys
1999;26:2077.
424. Sultanem K, Shu HK, Xia P, et al. 3-D intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) in the treatment of nasopharyngeal carcinoma: the UCSF experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1999;45(Suppl):151.
425. Wang CC. Re-irradiation of recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinomatreatment techniques and results. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:953.
426. Harrison LB, Weissberg JB. A technique for interstitial nasopharyngeal brachytherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:451.
427. Harrison LB, Sessions RB, Fass DE, et al. Nasopharyngeal brachytherapy using access via a transpalatal flap. Am J Surg (in press).
428. Vikram B, Hilaris B. Transnasal permanent interstitial implantation of carcinoma of the nasopharynx. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:153.
429. McNeese MB, Fletcher GH. Re-treatment of recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Radiology 1981;138:191.
430. Harrison LB, Nori B, Hilaris B, et al. Nasopharynx. In: The Interstitial Collaborative Working Group, ed. Interstitial brachytherapy. New York: Raven, 1990:95.
431. Erickson B, Wilson JF. Nasopharyngeal brachytherapy. Am J Clin Oncol 1993;16:424.
432. Castro J, Linstadt D, Bahary J, et al. Experience in charged particle irradiation of tumors of the skull base: 19771992. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:647.
433. Fee WE, Gilmer PA, Goffinet DR. Surgical management of recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma after radiation failure at the primary site. Laryngoscope 1988;98:1220.
434. Fisch U. The infratemporal fossa approach for nasopharyngeal tumors. Laryngoscope 1983;93:36.
435. Morton RP, et al. Transcervico-mandibulo-palatal approach for surgical salvage of recurrent nasopharyngeal cancer. Head Neck 1996;18:352.
436. Wei W. Maxillary swing approach. Head Neck 1991;13:204.
437. Cvitkovic E, Bachouchi M, Boussen H, et al. Leukemoid reaction, bone marrow invasion, fever of unknown origin, and metastatic pattern in the natural history of advanced undifferentiated
carcinoma of nasopharyngeal type: a review of 255 consecutive cases. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2434.
438. Teo P, Yu P, Lee WY, et al. Significant prognosticators after primary radiotherapy in 903 nondisseminated nasopharyngeal carcinomas evaluated by computer tomography. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1996;36:2:291.
439. Sham JUST, Choy D, Choi PAK. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma: the significance of neck node involvement in relation to the pattern of distant failure. Br J Radiol 1990;63:108.
440. Perez CA, Devonian OR, Marcia-Vega V, et al. Carcinoma of the nasopharynx: factors affecting prognosis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;23:271.
441. Gear FB, Sanguinity G, Tucker SL, et al. Carcinoma of the nasopharynx treated by radiotherapy alone: determinants of distant metastasis and survival. Radiat Oncol 1997;43:53.
442. Ahmad A, Stefani S. Distant metastasis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. A study of 256 male patients. J Surg Oncol 1986;33:194.
443. Fandi A, Altun M, Azli N, Armand JP, Cvitkovic E. Nasopharyngeal cancer: epidemiology, staging, and treatment. Semin Oncol 1994;21:382.
444. Boussen H, Cvitkovic E, Wendling JL, et al. Chemotherapy of metastatic and/or recurrent undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma with cisplatin, bleomycin and fluorouracil. J Clin Oncol
1991;9:1675.
445. Fandi A, Bachouchi M, Taamma A, et al. Long term disease-free survivors in metastatic (MTS) undifferentiated carcinoma of nasopharyngeal type (UCNT). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17.
446. Azli N, Fandi A, Bachouchi, et al. Final report of a phase II study of chemotherapy with bleomycin, epirubicin and cisplatin for locally advanced and metastatic recurrent undifferentiated
carcinoma of the nasopharyngeal type. Cancer J Sci Am 1995;1:222.
447. Cvitkovic E, Mahjoubi R, Lianes P, et al. 5-Fluorouracil (FU), mitomycin (M). Epirubicin (E). Cisplatin (P) in recurrent and/or metastatic undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma (UCNT).
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11:240.
448. Choo R, Tannock I. Chemotherapy for recurrent or metastatic carcinoma of the nasopharynx. A review of the Princess Margaret Hospital experience. Cancer 1991;68:2120.
449. Marchini S, Licitra L, Grandi L, et al. Cisplatin and fluorouracil in recurrent and/or disseminated nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1991;10:202(abst 672).
450. Gebbia V, Zerillo G, Restivo G, et al. Chemotherapeutic treatment of recurrent and/or metastatic nasopharyngeal carcinoma: a retrospective analysis of 40 cases. Br J Cancer 1993;68:191.
451. Yeo W, Leung TWT, Chan ATC, et al. Phase II study of combination paclitaxel and carboplatin in advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:2027.
452. Fountzilas G, Skarlos D, Athanassiades A, et al. Docetaxel in combination with fluorouracil for advanced solid tumors. Oncology 1997;11:50.
453. Yeo W, Leung TWT, Chan AT, et al. A phase II study of combination paclitaxel and carboplatin in advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Eur J Cancer 1998;34(13):2027.
454. Bachouchi M, Cvitkovic E, Azli N, et al. High complete response in advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma with bleomycin, epirubicin and cisplatin before radiotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst
1990;82:616.
455. Fountzilas G, Daniilidis J, Kosmidis P, et al. Platinum-based chemotherapy followed by radiation therapy of locally advanced nasopharyngeal cancer. A retrospective analysis of 39 cases. Acta
Oncol 1991;30:831.
456. Azli N, Armand JP, Rahal M, et al. Alternating chemo-radiotherapy with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil plus bleomycin by continuous infusion for locally advanced undifferentiated carcinoma
nasopharyngeal type. Eur J Cancer 1992;28A:1792.
457. Dimery IW, Peters L, Goepfert H, et al. Effectiveness of combined induction chemotherapy and radiotherapy in advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1919.
458. Teo PM, Chan AT, Lee WY, Leung TW, Johnson PJ. Enhancement of local control in locally advanced node-positive nasopharyngeal carcinoma by adjunctive chemotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1999;43:261.
459. Geara FB, Glisson BS, Sanguinity G, et al. Induction chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone in patients with advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma: results of a
matched cohort study. Cancer 1997;79:1279.
460. Al-Sarraf M, Paak TF, Cooper JS, et al. Chemo-radiotherapy in patients with locally advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma: a Radiation Therapy Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol
1990;8:1342.
461. Lin J-C, Chen KY, Jan JS, Hsu CY. Partially hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy and concurrent chemotherapy for advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1996;35:1127.
462. Rahima M, Rakowski E, Barzilay J, Sidi J. Carcinoma of the nasopharynx. An analysis of 91 cases and a comparison of differing treatment approaches. Cancer 1986;58:843.
463. Droz JP, Domenge C, Marin JL, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy of regionally advanced UCNT with monthly vindesine, adriamycin, bleomycin, cyclophosphamide and cisplatinum: increasing
disease-free survival. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1987;139:545.
464. Tsuji H, Kamada T, Tsuji H, et al. Improved results in the treatment of nasopharyngeal carcinoma using combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Cancer 1989;63:1668.
465. Altun M, Fandi A, Dupuis O, et al. Undifferentiated nasopharyngeal cancer (UCNT): current diagnostic and therapeutic aspects. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:859.
466. Chang ATC, Teo PML, Johnson PJ. Controversies in the management of loco-regionally advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Curr Opin Oncol 1998;10:219.
467. International Nasopharyngeal Cancer Study. Preliminary results of a randomized trial comparing neoadjuvant chemotherapy (cisplatin, epirubicin, bleomycin) plus radiotherapy vs radiotherapy
alone in stage IV (> N2, M0) undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma: a positive effect on progression-free survival. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;35:463.
468. El-Guedari B. Final results of the VUMCA 1 randomized trial comparing neoajuvant chemotherapy plus radiotherapy to RT alone in undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1998;17:1482.
469. Chan ATC, Teo PML, Leung TWT, et al. A prospective randomized study of chemotherapy adjunctive to definitive radiotherapy in advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1995;33:569.
470. Chua DTT, Sham JUST, Choy D, et al. Preliminary report of the Asian-Oceanian Clinical Oncology Association randomized trial comparing cisplatin and epirubicin followed by radiotherapy
versus radiotherapy alone in the treatment of patient with locoregionally advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Cancer 1998;83:2270.
471. Chan ATC, Teo PML, Ngan RKC, et al. A phase III randomized trial comparing concurrent chemotherapy-radiotherapy with radiotherapy alone in locoregionally advanced nasopharyngeal
carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2000 (in press).
472. Rossi A, Molinari R, Boracchi P, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy with vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin after radiotherapy in local-regional nasopharyngeal cancer: result of a 4-year
multicenter randomized study. J Clin Oncol 1988;10:1401.
473. Wang CC. Improved local control of nasopharyngeal carcinoma after intracavitary brachytherapy boost. Am J Clin Oncol 1991;14:5.
474. Hoppe R, Goffinet B, Bagshaw M. Carcinoma of the nasopharynxeighteen years experience with megavoltage radiation therapy. Cancer 1976;37:2605.
475. Bedwinek JM, Perez CA, Keys DJ. Analysis of failure after definitive irradiation for epidermoid carcinoma of the nasopharynx. Cancer 1980;45:2725.
476. Mesic JB, Fletcher GH, Goepfert H. Megavoltage irradiation of epithelial tumors of the nasopharynx. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:447.
477. Million RR, Cassisi NJ. Nasopharynx. In: Million RR, Cassisi NJ, eds. Management of head and neck cancera multidisciplinary approach. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1984:445.
478. Vikram B, Strong E, Manolatos S, et al. Improved survival and carcinoma of the nasopharynx. Head Neck Surg 1984;7:123.
479. Wolden SL, Pfister DG, Kraus DH, et al. Improved local control and survival with concomitant boost radiation therapy (CBRT) and chemotherapy (CT) for nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Am
Soc Clin Oncol 2000;19:415a.
480. Menck HR, Garfinkel L, Dodd GD. Preliminary report of the National Cancer Data Base. CA Cancer Clin J 1991;41:7.
481. Cancers of the oral cavity and pharynx: a statistics review monograph 19731987. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
482. Wynder EL, Stellman SD. Impact of long-term filter cigarette usage on lung and larynx cancer risk. A case-control study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1979;62:471.
483. Spitz MR, Fueger JJ, Goepfert H, Hong WK, Newell GR. Squamous cell carcinoma of the upper aerodigestive tract: a case comparison analysis. Cancer 1988;61:203.
484. Mashberg A, Garfinkel L, Harris S. Alcohol as a primary risk factor in oral squamous carcinoma. CA Cancer Clin J 1981;31:146.
485. Hoffmann D, Hecht SS. Nicotine-derived N-nitrosamines and tobacco-related cancercurrent status and future directions. Cancer Res 1985;45:935.
486. Schottenfeld D. Alcohol as a co-factor in the etiology of cancer. Cancer 1979;43:1962.
487. Schantz SP, Hsu TC. Head and neck cancer patients express increased clastogen-induced chromosome fragility. Head Neck 1989;11:337.
488. German J, ed. Chromosome mutation and neoplasia. New York: Alan R. Liss, 1983.
489. Guengerich FP. Roles of cytochrome p-450 enzymes in chemical carcinogenesis and cancer chemotherapy. Cancer Res 1988;48:2946.
490. McLaughlin JK, Gridley G, Block G, et al. Dietary factors in oral and pharyngeal cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:1237.
491. Winn DM, Ziegler RG, Pickle LW, et al. Diet in the etiology of oral and pharyngeal cancer among women from the Southern United States. Cancer Res 1984;44:1216.
492. Wynder EL, Hultberg S, Jacobsson F, et al. Oral cancer and mouthwash. J Natl Cancer Inst 1983;70:255.
493. Spitz MR, Newell GR. Descriptive epidemiology of squamous cell carcinoma of the upper aerodigestive tract. Cancer Bull 1987;39:79.
494. Donald PJ. Marijuana smokingpossible cause of head and neck carcinoma in young patients. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1986;94:517.
495. Shillitoe EJ, Greenspan D, Greenspan JS, et al. Immunoglobulin class of antibody to herpes simplex virus in patients with oral cancer. Cancer 1983;51:65.
496. DeVilliers EM, Weidauer H, Otta H, et al. Papillomavirus DNA in human tongue carcinomas. Int J Cancer 1985;36:575.
497. Dekmezian RH, Batsakis JG, Goepfert H. In situ hybridization of papillomavirus DNA in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1987;113:819.
498. Watts SL, Brewer EE, Fry TL. Human papillomavirus DNA types in squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1991;7:701.
499. Bradford CR, Zacks SE, Androphy, EJ, et al. Human papillomavirus DNA sequences in cell lines derived from head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
1990;104:303.
500. Baker SR. Risk factors in multiple carcinoma of the lip. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1988;88:248.
501. Berger HM, Goldman R, Gonick HC, Waisman J. Epidermoid carcinoma of the lip after renal transplantation: report of two cases. Arch Intern Med 1971;128:609.
502. Sack JG, Ford CN. Metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the lip. Arch Otolaryngol 1978;104:282.
503. Baker SR, Krause CJ. Carcinoma of the lip. Laryngoscope 1980;90:19.
504. Nuutinen J, Karja J. Local and distant metastases in patients with surgically treated squamous cell carcinoma of the lip. Clin Otolaryngol 1980;6:415.
505. Heller KS, Shah JP. Carcinoma of the lip. Am J Surg 1979;138:600.
506. Mendenhall WM, Million RR, Bova EJ. Analysis of time-dose factors in clinically positive neck nodes treated with irradiation alone in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:639.
507. Frierson HF Jr, Cooper PH. Prognostic factors in squamous cell carcinoma of the lower lip. Hum Pathol 1986;17:346.

508. Byers RM, O'Brien J, Waxler J. The therapeutic and prognostic implications of nerve invasion in cancer of the lower lip. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1978;4:215.
509. Boddie HW, Fisher EP, Byers RM. Squamous carcinoma of the lower lip in patients under 40 years of age. South Med J 1977;70:711.
510. Baker SR, Krause CJ. Carcinoma of the lip. Laryngoscope 1980;90:19.
511. Abbé R. A new plastic operation for the relief of deformity due to double hairlip. Med Rec 1898;53:477.
512. Estlander JA. Eine Methods aus der einen Lippe Sulstanzverluste der Anderen zu Ersetzen. Arch Klin Chir 1872;14:622.
513. Karapandzic M. Reconstruction of lip defects by local arterial flaps. Br J Plast Surg 1974;27:93.
514. Baker SR, Krause CJ. Pedicle flaps in reconstruction of the lip. Facial Plast Surg 1983;1:61.
515. Webster J. Crescenteric peri-alar cheek excision for upper flap advancement with a short history of upper lip repair. Plast Reconstr Surg 1935;27:434.
516. Jackson IT, ed. Local flaps in head and neck reconstruction. St. Louis: Mosby, 1985:327.
517. Harrison L, Fass D. Radiation therapy for oral cavity cancer. Dental Clin North Am 1990;34:205.
518. Fitzpatrick P. Cancer of the lip. J Otolaryngol 1984;13:32.
519. Jorgensen K, Elbrond O, Anderson A. Carcinoma of the lipa series of 869 cases. Octaradiol Ther Phys Biol 1973;12:177.
520. Petrovich Z, Parker R, Luxten G, Kuisk H, Jepson J. Carcinoma of the lip in selective sites of head and neck skin: a clinical study of 896 patients. Radiol Ther Oncol 1987;8:11.
521. Sykes AJ, Allan E, Irwin C. Squamous cell carcinoma of the lip: the role of electron treatment. Clin Oncol 1996;8:384.
522. Cady B, Catlin D. Epidermoid carcinoma of the gum. A 20-year survey. Cancer 1969;23:551.
523. Euch JB, Kragh LV. Results of treatment of squamous cell carcinoma arising in mandibular gingiva. Arch Surg 1979;79:100.
524. Willen R, Nathanson A. Squamous cell carcinoma of the gingiva. Acta Otolaryngol 1973;75:299.
525. Torabinejad M, Rick GM. Squamous cell carcinoma of the gingiva. J Am Dent Assoc 1980;100:870.
526. Nathanson A, Jakobson A, Wersall J. Prognosis of squamous cell carcinoma of the gums. Acta Otolaryngol 1973;75:301.
527. Byers RM, Newman R, Russell N, et al. Results of treatment for squamous carcinoma of the lower gum. Cancer 1981;47:2236.
528. McGregor AD, MacDonald DG. Patterns of spread of squamous cell carcinoma to the ramus of the mandible. Head Neck 1993;15:440.
529. Hidalgo DA. Aesthetic improvements in free-flap mandible reconstruction. Am Soc Plastic Reconst Surg 1991;88:574.
530. Soo KC, Spiro RH, King W, et al. Squamous carcinoma of the gingiva: an update. Am J Surg 1988;156:281.
531. Million R, Cassisi N. Oral cavity. In: Million RR, Cassissi NJ, eds. Management of head and neck cancer: a multi-disciplinary approach. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1984:295.
532. Fuchihata H, Furukawa S, Murakami S, et al. Results of combined external irradiation and chemotherapy of bleomycin or peplomycin for squamous cell carcinomas of the lower gingiva. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:705.
533. Chen J, Katz RV, Krutchkoff DJ. Intraoral squamous cell carcinoma: epidemiologic patterns in Connecticut from 1935 to 1985. Cancer 1990;66:1288.
534. Shaha JP, Spiro RH, Shah JP, Strong EW. Squamous carcinoma of the floor of the mouth. Am J Surg 1984;148:455.
535. Guillamondegui OM, Oliver B, Hayden R. Cancer of the anterior floor of mouth: selective choice of treatment and analysis of failures. Am J Surg 1980;140:56.
536. Soo K, Carter RC, O'Brien CJ, et al. Prognostic implications of perineural spread in squamous carcinoma of the head and neck. Laryngoscope 1986;96:1145.
537. Spiro RH, Huvos AG, Wong GY, et al. Predictive value of tumor thickness of squamous carcinoma confined to the tongue and floor of the mouth. Am J Surg 1986;152:351.
538. Arthur K, Farr HW. Prognostic significance of histologic grade in epidermoid carcinoma of the mouth and pharynx. Am J Surg 1972;124:489.
539. Gilbert E, Goffinet D, Bradshaw M. Carcinoma of the oral tongue and floor of mouth: fifteen years experience with linear excellarator therapy. Cancer 1975;35:1517.
540. Mendenhall W, Van Ase W, Bover F, Million R. Analysis of time-dose factors in squamous cell carcinoma of the oral tongue and floor of mouth treated with radiation therapy alone. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:1005.
541. Mazeron J, Grimard L, Raynal M, et al. Iridium 192 curietherapy for T1 and T2 epidermoid carcinomas of the floor of mouth. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;18:1299.
542. Salibian AH, Rappaport I, Furnas DW, Auchauer BM. Microvascular reconstruction of the mandible. Am J Surg 1980;140:499.
543. Lapeyre M, Peiffert D, Hoffstetter S, et al. Postoperative brachytherapy: a prognostic factor for local control in epidermoid carcinomas of the mouth floor. Eur J Surg Oncol 1997;23:243.
544. Klein M, Manneking H, Langford A, Koch K, Stahl H. Treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the floor of the mouth and tongue by interstitial high-dose-rate irradiation using iridium-192. Int J
Oral Maxillofac Surg 1998;27:45.
545. Inoue T, Inoue T, Yamazaki H, et al. High dose rate versus low dose rate interstitial radiotherapy for carcinoma of the floor of mouth. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;44:53.
546. Guillamondegui OM, Jesse RH. Surgical treatment of advanced carcinoma of the floor of the mouth. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1976;126:1256.
547. Wang CC, Doppke K, Biggs P. Intra-oral cone radiation therapy for selected carcinomas of the oral cavity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:1185.
548. Fu K, Lichter A, Galante M. Carcinoma of the floor of mouth: an analysis of treatment results and the sites and causes of failure. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1976;1:829.
549. Teichgraber J, Bowman J, Goepfert H. New test series for the functional evaluation of oral cavity cancer. Head Neck Surg 1985;8:9.
550. Kramer S, Gelber R, Snow J, et al. Combined radiation therapy and surgery in the management of advanced head and neck cancer: the final report of study 73-03 of the radiation therapy
oncology group. Head Neck Surg 1987;10:19.
551. Shemen LJ, Klotz J, Shottenfeld D, Strong EW. Increase of tongue cancer in young men. JAMA 1984;252:1857.
552. Schantz SP, Byers RM, Goepfert H. Tobacco and cancer of the tongue in young adults. JAMA 1988;259:1943.
553. Lindberg R. Distribution of cervical lymph node metastases from squamous cell carcinoma of the upper respiratory and digestive tracts. Cancer 1972;29:1446.
554. Strong EW. Carcinoma of the tongue. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1979;12:107.
555. Yamamoto E, Mijakawa, Kohama G. Mode of invasion and lymph node metastasis in squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity. Head Neck Surg 1984;6:938.
556. Poleksic S, Kalwaic HJ. Prognostic value of vascular invasion in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Plast Reconstr Surg 1978;61:234.
557. Schantz SP, Byers RM, Goepfert H, Shallenberger RS, Beddingfield N. The implication of tobacco use in the young adult with head and neck cancer. Cancer 1988;62:1374.
558. Inoue T, Inoue T, Teshima T, et al. Phase III trial of high and low dose rate interstitial radiotherapy for early oral tongue cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:1201.
559. Leung TW, Wong VY, Wong CM, et al. High dose rate brachytherapy for carcinoma of the oral tongue. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:1113.
560. Yamazaki H, Inoue T, Teshima T, et al. Tongue cancer treated with brachytherapy: is thickness of tongue cancer a prognostic factor for regional control? Anticancer Res 1998;18:1261.
561. Yuen AP, Wei WI, Lam LK, Ho WK, Kwong D. Results of surgical salvage of locoregional recurrence of carcinoma of the tongue after radiotherapy failure. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol
1997;106:779.
562. Decroix Y, Ghossein N. Experience of the Curie Institute in treatment of cancer of the mobile tongue-I. Treatment policy and results. Cancer 1981;47:496.
563. Pernot M, Malissard L, Hoffstetter S, et al. The study of tumoral, radiobiological, and general health factors that influence results and complications in a series of 448 oral tongue carcinomas
treated exclusively by irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:673.
564. Spiro RH, Strong EW. Surgical treatment of carcinoma of the tongue. Surg Clin North Am 1974;54:233.
565. Callery CD, Spiro RH, Strong EW. Changing trends in the management of squamous carcinoma of the tongue. Am J Surg 1984;148:449.
566. Spiro R, Strong E. Epidermoid carcinoma of the mobile tonguetreatment by partial glossectomy alone. Am J Surg 1971;122:707.
567. Frazell EL, Lucas JC. Cancer of the tongue. Report of the management of 1554 patients. Cancer 1962;15:218.
568. Vikram B, Strong EW, Shah JP, Spiro R. Failure at the primary site following multi-modality treatment in advanced head and neck cancer. Head Neck Surg 1984;1:720.
569. Ange D, Lindberg R, Guillamondegui O. Management of squamous cell carcinoma of the oral tongue and floor of mouth after excisional biopsy. Radiology 1975;116:143.
570. Bamberg M, Schulz U, Scherer E. Post-operative split course radiotherapy of squamous cell carcinoma of the oral tongue. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1979;5:515.
571. Million R. Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: combined therapy: surgery and post-operative radiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1979;5:2161.
572. Kroll SO, Hoffman S. Squamous cell carcinoma of the oral soft tissuesa statistical analysis of 14,253 cases by age, sex, and race of patients. J Am Dent Assoc 1976;92:571.
573. Evans JF, Shah JP. Epidermoid carcinoma of the palate. Am J Surg 1981;142:451.
574. Eneroth CM, Hjertman L, Moberger G. Squamous cell carcinoma of the palate. Acta Otolaryngol 1972;7:418.
575. Chung CK, Rahman SM, Lim ML, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the hard palate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1979;5:191.
576. Urist MM, O'Brien CJ, Soong SJ, et al. Squamous carcinoma of the buccal mucosa: analysis of prognostic factors. Am J Surg 1987;154:411.
577. Dixit S, Vyas RK, Toparani RB, et al. Surgery versus surgery and postoperative radiotherapy in squamous cell carcinoma of the buccal mucosa: a comparative study. Ann Surg Oncol
1998;5:502.
578. Nair M, Sankaranarayanan R, Padmanavhan T. Evaluation of the role of radiation therapy in the management of carcinoma of the buccal mucosa. Cancer 1988;61:1326.
579. Lapeyre M, Peiffert D, Malissard L, Hoffstetter S, Pernot M. An original technique of brachytherapy in the treatment of epidermoid carcinoma of the buccal mucosa. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1995;33:447.
580. Bloom NO, Spiro RH. Carcinoma of the cheek mucosa: a retrospective analysis. Am J Surg 1980;140:556.
581. Mishra RC, Singh DN, Mishra TK. Postoperative radiotherapy in carcinoma of the buccal mucosa; a prospective randomized trial. Eur J Surg Oncol 1996;22:502.
582. Rehabilitation of head and neck cancer patients: concensus from the International Conference on Rehabilitation of the Head and Neck Cancer Patient. Head Neck 1991;13:1.
583. Lazarus CL, Logemann JA, Kahrillas PJ, Mittal BB. Swallow recovery in an oral cancer patient following surgery, radiotherapy, and hyperthermia. Head Neck 1994;16:259.
584. Pauloski BR, Logemann JA, Rademaker AW, et al. Speech and swallowing function after oral and oropharyngeal resections: one year follow up. Head Neck 1994;16:323.
585. Langius A, Bjorvell H, Lind MG. Functional status and coping in patients with oral and pharyngeal cancer before and after surgery. Head Neck 1994;16:559.
586. Lazarus C, Logemann JA, Gibbons P. Effects of maneuvers on swallowing function in a dysphagic oral cancer patient. Head Neck 1993;15:419.
587. Whicker JH, DeSanto LW, Devine UD. Surgical treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the base of the tongue. Laryngoscope 1972;82:1853.
588. Harrold CC. Surgical treatment of cancer of the base of tongue. Am J Surg 1971;122:487.
589. Riley RW, Fee WE, Goffinet D, Cox R, Goode RI. Squamous cell carcinoma of the base of the tongue. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1983;91:143.
590. Sessions DG. Surgical resection and reconstruction for cancer of the base of tongue. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1983;16:309.
591. Pfister DG, Harrison LB, Strong EW, et al. Organ-function preservation in advanced oropharynx cancer: results with induction chemotherapy and radiation. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:671.
592. Dupont J, Guillamondegui O, Jesse R. Surgical treatment of advanced carcinoma of the base of tongue. Am J Surg 1978;136:501.
593. Weber R, Gidley P, Morrison W, et al. Treatment selection for carcinoma of the base of tongue. Am J Surg 1990;160:415.
594. Foote RL, Olson KD, Davis DL, et al. Base of tongue carcinoma: patterns of failure and predictors of recurrence after surgery alone. Head Neck 1993;15:300.
595. Harrison L, Sessions R, Strong E, et al. Brachytherapy as part of the definitive management of squamous cancer of the base of tongue. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:1309.
596. Harrison L, Zelefsky M, Sessions R, et al. The oncologic and functional outcome of base of tongue cancer treated with external beam radiation plus iridium-192 implant. Radiology
1992;184:267.
597. Harrison L, Zelefsky M, Pfister D, et al. Detailed quality of life assessment on long term survivors of primary radiation therapy for cancer of the base of tongue. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1995;32:78.
598. Harrison L, Zelefsky M, Armstrong J, et al. Performance status after treatment for squamous cell cancer of the base of tongue. A comparison of primary radiation therapy versus primary
surgery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:953.
599. Goffinet D, Fee W, Wells J, et al. Iridium 192 pharyngoepiglottic fold implantthe key to successful treatment of base of tongue carcinoma by radiation therapy. Cancer 1985; 55:941.
600. Puthawala A, Syed A, Eads D, et al. Limited external beam and interstitial iridium-192 irradiation in the treatment of carcinoma of the base of tongue: a ten year experience. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1988;14:839.
601. Foote R, Parsons J, Mendenhall W, et al. Interstitial implantation essential for successful radiotherapeutic treatment of base of tongue carcinoma? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;18:1293.
602. Housset M, Baillet F, Dessard-Diana B, et al. A retrospective study of three treatment techniques for T1/T2 base of tongue lesions: surgery plus post-operative radiation, external radiation plus
interstitial implantation and external radiation alone. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:511.
603. Vikram B, Strong E, Shah J, et al. A non-looping afterloading technique for base of tongue implant: results of the first 20 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:1853.
604. List M, Ritter-Sterr C, Lansky S. A performance status scale for head and neck cancer patients. Cancer 1990;66:564.

605. Mak A, Morrison W, Garden A, et al. Base of tongue carcinoma: treatment results using concomitant boost radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;33:289.
606. Housset M, Baillet F, Delanian S, et al. Split course interstitial brachytherapy with a source shift: the results of a new iridium implant technique vs single course implant for salvage irradiation of
base of tongue cancers in 55 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:965-971.
607. Mendenhall WM, Stringer SP, Moore GJ, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the base of tongue treated with external-beam radiation therapy: a preferred alternative to surgery. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45(Suppl):197.
608. Morrison WH, Garden AS, Ang KK, et al. Long-term results of the concomitant boost fractionation schedule for treatment of oropharyngeal carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1999;45(Suppl):197.
609. Moore GJ, Parsons J, Mendenhall WM. Quality of life outcomes after primary radiotherapy for squamous cell carcinoma of the base of tongue. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:351.
610. Lee WR, Berkey B, Marcial V, et al. Anemia is associated with decreased survival and increased locoregional failure in patients with locally advanced head and neck carcinoma: a secondary
analysis of RTOG 8527. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:1069.
611. Horowitz E, Frazier A, Martinez A, et al. Excellent functional outcome in patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the base of tongue treated with external irradiation and interstitial iodine 125
boost. Cancer 1996;78:948.
612. Givens CD, Johns ME, Cantrell RW. Carcinoma of the tonsil. Arch Otol 1981;107:730.
613. Whicker JH, DeSanto LW, Devine UD. Surgical treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsil. Laryngoscope 1974;84:90.
614. Healy GB, Strong MS, Uchmakli A, et al. Carcinoma of the palatine arch: the rationale of treatment selection. Am J Surg 1976;132:498.
615. Barrs DM, DeSanto LW, O'Fallon WM. Squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsil and tongue-base region. Arch Otolaryngol 1979;105:479.
616. Eneroth CM, Hjertman L, Moberger G. Squamous cell carcinoma of the palate. Acta Otolaryngol 1972;73:418.
617. Fee WE, Schoeppel SL, Rubenstein R, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the soft palate. Arch Otolaryngol 1979;105:710.
618. Russ JE, Applebaum EL, Sisson GA. Squamous cell carcinoma of the soft palate. Laryngoscope 1977;87:1151.
619. Mazeron J, Marinello G, Crook J, et al. Definitive radiation treatment for early stage carcinomas of the soft palate and uvula: the indications for iridium-192 implantation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1987;13:1829.
620. Pernot M, Malissard L, Hoffstetter S, et al. Velotonsillar squamous cell carcinoma: 277 cases treated by combined external irradiation and brachytherapy. Results according to localization,
extension and dose rate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;1:142.
621. Pernot M, Malissard L, Hoffstetter S, et al. Influence of tumoral, radiobiological, and general factors on local control and survival of a series of 361 tumors of the velotonsillar area treated by
exclusive irradiation (external beam irradiation and brachytherapy or brachytherapy alone). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:1051.
622. Behar R, Martin P, Fee W, Goffinet DR. Iridium-192 interstitial implant and external beam radiation therapy in the management of squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsil and soft palate. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;28:221.
623. Mazeron JJ, Belkacemi Y, Simon J, et al. Place of iridium-192 implantation in definitive irradiation of faucial arch squamous cell carcinomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:251.
624. Remmler D, Medina JE, Byers RM, Meoz R, Pfalzgraf K. Treatment of choice for squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsillar fossa. Head Neck Surg 1985;7:206.
625. Tong D, Laramore G, Griffen T, et al. Carcinoma of the tonsil region. Cancer 1982;49:2007.
626. Maltz R, Shumrick D, et al. Carcinoma of the tonsil: results of combined therapy. Laryngoscope 1974;84:2172.
627. Wong C, Ang K, Fletcher G, et al. Definitive radiotherapy for squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsillar fossa. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;16:657.
628. Wang CC. Local control of oropharyngeal carcinoma after two accelerated hyperfractionation radiation therapy schemes. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14:1143.
629. Perez C, Carmichael T, Devinenni V, et al. Carcinoma of the tonsilla fossa: a non-randomized comparison of irradiation alone or combined with surgery: long term results. Head Neck
1991;13:282.
630. Perez C, Purdy J, Breaux S, et al. Carcinoma of the tonsillar fossaa non-randomized comparison of pre-operative radiation and surgery or irradiation alone: long term results. Cancer
1982;50:2314.
631. Perez C, Lee F, Ackerman L, et al. Carcinoma of the tonsillar fossa: significance of dose irradiation and volume treated in the control of the primary tumor and metastatic nodes. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1976;1:817.
632. Puthawala A, Syed A, Eads D, et al. Limited external irradiation and interstitial iridium-192 implant in the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsillar fossa. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1985;11:1595.
633. Mazeron J, Lusinchi A, Marinello G, et al. Interstitial radiation therapy for squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsillar region: The Creteil experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:895.
634. Levendag PG, Schmitz PI, Jansen PP, et al. Fractionated high-dose rate and pulseddose-rate brachytherapy: first clinical experience in squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsillar fossa and soft
palate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:497.
635. Mendenhall W, Parsons J, Cassisi N, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsillar area treated with radical irradiation. Radiother Oncol 1987;10:23.
636. Murthy A, Hendrickson F. Contralateral neck treated necessary in early carcinoma of the tonsil? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:91.
637. Dasmahapatra K, Mohit-Tabatabai M, Rush B, et al. Cancer of the tonsilimproved survival with combination therapy. Cancer 1986;57:451.
638. Zelefsky M, Harrison L, Armstrong J, Fass D. Post-operative radiation therapy for advanced oropharyngeal carcinoma: long term results. Cancer 1992;70:2388.
639. Spiro J, Spiro R. Carcinoma of the tonsillar fossaan update. Arch Otol Head Neck Surg 1989;115:1186.
640. Gluckman J, Zitsch R. Current management of carcinoma of the oropharynx. Oncology 1990;4:23.
641. Sealy R, LeRoux T, Hering E, et al. The treatment of cancer of the uvula and soft palate and interstitial radioactive wire implants. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:1951.
642. Esche B, Haie C, Gerbaulet A, et al. Interstitial and external radiotherapy in carcinoma of the soft palate and uvula. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:619.
643. Amdur R, Mendenhall W, Parsons J, et al. Carcinoma of the soft palate treated with irradiation: analysis of results and complications. Radiother Oncol 1987;9:185.
644. Guillamondegui OM, Meoz R, Jesse RH. Surgical treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the pharyngeal walls. Am J Surg 1978;136:474.
645. Ballantyne AJ. Principles of surgical management of cancer of the pharyngeal walls. Cancer 1967;20:663.
646. Cunningham MP, Catlin D. Cancer of the pharyngeal wall. Cancer 1967;20:1859.
647. Hasegawa Y, Matsuura H. Retropharyngeal node dissection in cancer of the oropharynx and hypharynx. Head Neck 1994;16:173.
648. Meoz-Mendez R, Fletcher G, Guillamondegui O, et al. Analysis of the results of irradiation in the treatment of squamous cell carcinomas of the pharyngeal walls. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1978;4:579.
649. Marks J, Freeman R, Lee F, et al. Pharyngeal wall cancer: an analysis of treatment results complications and patterns of failure. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1978;4:587.
650. Marks J, Smith P, Sessions D. Pharyngeal wall cancerreappraisal after comparison of treatment methods. Arch Otol 1985;111:79.
651. Fein D, Mendenhall W, Parsons J, et al. Pharyngeal wall carcinoma treated with radiotherapy: impact of treatment technique and fractionation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;26:751.
652. Spiro R, Kelly J, Vega A, et al. Squamous carcinoma of the posterior pharyngeal wall. Am J Surg 1990;160:420.
653. Son Y, Kacinski B. Therapeutic concepts of brachytherapy/megavoltage in sequence for pharyngeal, results of integrated dose therapy. Cancer 1987;59:1268.
654. Laborgne JH, Leborgne P, Barlocci L, et al. The place of brachytherapy in the treatment of carcinoma of the tonsil with lingual extension. Int J Radiat Oncol 1986;12:1787.

SECTION 30.3 Tumors of the Larynx and Hypopharynx
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 30.3
Tumors of the Larynx and Hypopharynx
ROY B. SESSIONS
LOUIS B. HARRISON
ARLENE A. FORASTIERE
Larynx
Epidemiology and Etiology
Relevant Anatomy
Pathology, Pathogenesis, and Natural History
Specific Sites
Unusual and Rare Neoplasms
Diagnosis and Evaluation
Staging
Treatment and Survival
Hypopharynx
General
Pathology, Pathogenesis, and Natural History
Diagnosis, Evaluation, and Staging
Staging System
Treatment and Survival
Specific Treatment Methods
Chapter References

LARYNX
Cancers of the larynx are considerably less frequent than malignancies of other sites, such as lung, breast, prostate, and colon; despite this fact, however, a
substantial amount continues to be written on the subject. This seemingly disproportionate body of writing probably reflects the perceived importance of these
neoplasms relative to their potential impact on people's communicative skills. It would seem that the mere threat to a person's vocal organ is associated with profound
psychological and socioeconomic overtones, and curing the cancer at any cost no longer is accepted casually. More than ever before, a premium is placed on
returning the patient to a productive and useful lifestyle (i.e., quality of life after cancer treatment). This attitude is demonstrated more keenly in the treatment of larynx
cancer than with almost any other malignancy. In the past, treatment of laryngeal cancer focused predominantly on cure by relentless surgical aggressiveness. That
era was followed by the emergence of conservation through larynx-sparing operations, the development of sophisticated radiation methods, and most recently,
organ-sparing strategies in which chemotherapeutic, radiotherapeutic, and surgical methods are used in a variety of combinations and sequences. 1,2 and 3 The overall
5-year cure rate for patients with laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is almost 70%, and although those data have not changed dramatically during the last
decade,4,5 and 6 the treatment options and their sequencing have. As a result, a higher percentage of contemporary patients are retaining their larynx.
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY
Although considerable geographic differences exist in the incidence of larynx cancer, the distribution of the disease is consistent within each country. For example,
regardless of the culture, this disease most commonly affects middle-aged or older men who have smoked tobacco 7,8 and have consumed excessive alcohol. 9
Laryngeal cancer rarely occurs in people who have done neither. In the United States during the year 2000, more than 12,000 new larynx cancers will be diagnosed,
and approximately 10,000 of those cases will be in men. Although this disease has always been more common in men, the gender ratio is changing; in 1956, the ratio
was 15:1, whereas current studies show an approximately 5:1 ratio of men to women. This trend is probably due to the predictable effects of the changing smoking
patterns of the sexes. 9 Racial differences also exist. Compared with whites, African Americans in the United States have a significantly higher incidence of larynx
cancer. 10 Overall, the peak incidence of larynx cancer is in the sixth decade. The disease occurs in young people only rarely. 11.
The etiologic factors that have been implicated in laryngeal cancer are voice abuse and chronic laryngitis 7,12; dietary factors13,14 and 15; chronic gastric reflux 16; and
exposure to wood dust, nitrogen mustard, asbestos, and ionizing radiation. 17,18,19 and 20 The carcinogenic effect on the larynx that results from smoking
tobacco—whether by pipe, cigarette, or cigar—is, however, the factor most widely held responsible for this malignancy. 17 Larynx cancer only occasionally occurs in
patients who have never smoked. 20 Possibly, human papillomavirus is an important cofactor in aerodigestive carcinogenesis in general, and it may be especially
significant in the larynx. 21,22,23,24,25,26,27 and 28
Heavy alcohol intake appears to be associated with larynx cancer, and it appears to enhance the already present risk factors associated with smoking. 9 On the other
hand, some studies have failed to demonstrate an interdependent causal effect for alcohol intake and larynx cancer. 28 The issue of alcohol, smoke, and
carcinogenesis is complicated by the nutritional deficiencies that usually occur in alcoholics. 15 In the larynx, this complex issue is more specifically defined by the fact
that whatever the role of alcohol, it is apparently more significant in supraglottic than in glottic cancers. 29,30,31 and 32 With the maturation of the current generation of
those youngsters using smokeless tobacco, some alteration of the relative incidence in the United States of supraglottic and glottic cancers may be noted. Those
worldwide data that show large variations of laryngeal cancer statistics consistently reflect the smoking and drinking habits of the individual country. 33 Also, the sites
within the larynx affected by cancers vary considerably between countries. This distribution is shown in Table 30.3-1,12,24,26,34 which represents a compendium of
worldwide data that addresses the relative distributions of cancer within the larynx.

TABLE 30.3-1. Geographic Variations in Larynx Cancer Sites a

Koufman and Burke35 make a strong case for a multifactorial etiology, and they have proposed a model that involves tobacco, environmental factors, alcohol, reflux,
viral activation, dietary deficiency, and altered host immunity.
RELEVANT ANATOMY

The larynx is a uniquely complicated organ that is strategically located so that significant alteration of its anatomy by either surgery or cancer can have a noticeable
impact on vocal, respiratory, and swallowing physiology. The organ consists of three subsites: glottis (paired true vocal cords), supraglottis, and subglottis. Thus,
clarification of the subsites within the larynx is essential. Because of different embryologic development and different lymphatic patterns that are subsite-specific, to
discuss larynx cancers without specific reference to the exact location(s) within that structure invites inaccuracies in staging and miscalculations in treatment planning.
Additionally, certain embryologic and anatomic facts are relevant to understanding the natural history of cancers that occur in the larynx. For example, the adjacency
of the paraglottic space to the thyroid and cricoid cartilages and to the hypopharynx is critical to the subtle differences between the increasing stages of glottic lesions.
The larynx consists of a complex variety of muscles, an overlying mucous membrane, and a skeletal structure of four cartilages—the cricoid, the epiglottis, the paired
arytenoids, and the shield-like thyroid cartilage. Suspended within the endolarynx are the mobile true vocal cords, which are collectively known as the glottis. That
portion above the glottis, the supraglottis, consists of the false vocal cords, the epiglottis, and the aryepiglottic folds. These folds form the junction (i.e., common
partition) between the endolarynx and the hypopharynx. The medial wall of these folds is within the endolarynx, and the lateral wall is actually the medial wall of the
adjacent pyriform sinus (Fig. 30.3-1). Those lesions that arise on the rim of the aryepiglottic folds, therefore, have been appropriately referred to as marginal cancers,
because they bridge the junction between the larynx and the hypopharynx. Those marginal lesions that extend predominantly into the endolarynx behave more like
supraglottic cancers, whereas those lesions that spill into the pyriform sinus tend to follow the natural history of the hypopharyngeal malignancies. The subglottis is
that portion of the larynx between the underedge of the true vocal cords and the cephalic border of the cricoid cartilage. 36 Although the subglottis is the laryngeal site
least likely to harbor a primary cancer, it is critical to the pathogenesis and natural history of glottic (i.e., vocal cord) cancer because it provides an important route of
inferior tumor extension.

FIGURE 30.3-1. Diagram of internal laryngeal anatomy as viewed posteriorly. Note the endolarynx (el).

The true vocal cords are remarkably engineered, although they are somewhat misnamed; rather than cord-like structures, they really are folds of mucosa that cover
vocal muscles. These vocal cords (folds) are attached anteriorly to the inner surface of the thyroid cartilage and posteriorly to the arytenoid cartilages. The vocal
muscles are complex in their activity, and their dynamic relationship with overlying mucosa is critical to voice production. Any loss of mucosal mobility relative to the
underlying muscle, such as that produced by cancer, surgery or, even to a lesser extent, by radiation therapy, alters the voice. An appreciation of this fundamental
fact is an important component in the selection of treatment of vocal cord cancer.
The lining of the endolarynx consists of respiratory epithelium except on the vibratory edges of the true vocal cords, which typically are lined with pseudostratified
squamous epithelium.
The paired arytenoid cartilages each sit on the cephalic rim of the cricoid cartilage and rotate in a relatively horizontal axis around a pivot point. Each arytenoid is
attached anteriorly to a true vocal cord, and the clockwise and counterclockwise rotation of these cartilages pulls the respective vocal cord attachment with it, causing
abduction and adduction of those structures. Invading cancer can damage any or all of the muscles that are responsible for arytenoid rotation and also the recurrent
laryngeal nerve fibers that innervate them. The posterolateral aspect of the larynx is particularly vulnerable to the invasion of cancer because of the adjacency of the
medial wall of the pyriform sinus. When cancers of this part of the pyriform sinus extend through the mucosa, they gain direct access to the important laryngeal
compartment known as the paraglottic space, which leads to all parts of the endolarynx, including the vocal muscles and the preepiglottic space ( Fig. 30.3-2).
Treatment options for such a tumor are altered significantly because of paraglottic space involvement. Tumors that invade the endolaryngeal muscles or the nerve
fibers that innervate them usually create a noticeable effect on vocal cord motion. Of all the findings on laryngeal examination during cancer evaluation, the state of
endolaryngeal mobility is one of the most important. This fact has been substantiated by the separate designation that the American Joint Committee on Cancer
(AJCC) has assigned to the immobile vocal cord in the staging categorization of this disease. 37

FIGURE 30.3-2. Axial sections of the human laryngopharynx at the level of the glottis. A: Notice the relation of the pyriform sinus (PS) to the paraglottic space (PGS)
of the endolarynx; the proximity of the lateral wall of the pyriform sinus to the thyroid cartilage (TC); and the relation of the pyriform sinus to the arytenoid (A).
Ossification of the area of the thyroid cartilage shown in the axial section renders it vulnerable to skeletal invasion of cancer in this area. The posterior pharyngeal
wall (PPW) acts as an extension of the lateral pharyngeal wall and the pyriform sinuses. B: Cancer (C) of the pyriform sinus invades the endolarynx (PGS). (Courtesy
of Dr. John Kirchner.)

Another more subtle type of motion alteration pertains to the anatomic relation between the vocal cord musculature and the overlying mucosa. An awareness of this
relatively recent knowledge has enhanced the understanding of the pathogenesis and treatment of early glottic cancer. 38 The vibratory mechanism that produces the
voice is due to the mobility of the mucous membrane overlying the musculature of the vocal cords. The free edge of the true vocal cord consists of a pseudostratified
squamous epithelium, under which is a lamina propria of fibroelastic and gelatinous consistency. This arrangement allows a sliding motion of the mucous membrane,
which creates a mucosal wave, the fluidity of which is a direct reflection of the freedom of that layer from the underlying muscle. Any surface cancer that invades
through the basement membrane, such as any cancer deeper than carcinoma in situ (CIS), affects the mucosal wave by creating a tethering effect. These subtle
differences are usually not appreciated by routine laryngeal examination but are obvious with stroboscopic evaluation. 39 An appreciation of these subtleties can
translate into the practical matter of determining whether to radiate or microscopically excise certain minimal vocal cord cancers.
Because of the different embryologic origins of the supraglottic from the glottic and subglottic larynx, and also because of the independent lymphatic drainage patterns
from each of these subsites, the larynx can be thought of as a compartmentalized structure. These features are important influences in determining the spread of
various cancers within that organ. 40
The lymphatics of the supraglottic larynx are profuse, and the frequency of metastasis associated with cancers of this subsite reflects that fact. 41 Lymphatic spread

from the epiglottis is to the false cords, and these channels are directed bilaterally. The drainage from the false cords and the remainder of the supraglottic larynx is
lateral and superior, and these channels exit the larynx bilaterally through the thyrohyoid membrane. They then proceed to the adjacent deep cervical nodes. The
lymphatics of the infraglottic larynx drain laterally and inferiorly, out of the cricothyroid membrane into the lower deep cervical lymph nodes. The true vocal cords, on
the other hand, are unique because they possess little or no lymphatic drainage. 40 From a lymphatic drainage standpoint, the left half of the larynx is essentially
independent from the right half, and the supraglottic larynx is independent from the structures below it. These facts are clinically demonstrated: Early-stage
supraglottic cancers have little affinity for extension into the lower structures, and those beginning on the true vocal cord do not tend to extend cephalad into the
supraglottis.40,42 Knowledge of this unique pathogenesis has substantial impact on the ability to predict metastasis into various parts of the neck as well as on the
planning of the various partial laryngectomies known as conservation operations. These techniques combine the removal of laryngeal parts with the preservation of
vocal and swallowing functions. Additionally, radiation therapy planning, especially for occult cervical metastasis, is predicated on a thorough knowledge of these and
other drainage tendencies of laryngeal cancers.
PATHOLOGY, PATHOGENESIS, AND NATURAL HISTORY
A variety of laryngeal malignancies, most of which are primary to the larynx and others that are metastatic from other sites, have been reported. A comprehensive
classification is shown in Table 30.3-2.

TABLE 30.3-2. Classification of Laryngeal Malignancies by Histologic Type

More than 95% of all primary laryngeal malignancies are SCCs, with the remainder being sarcomas, adenocarcinomas, neuroendocrine tumors, and other types. 43
Both spindle cell and verrucous carcinomas probably are variants of SCC.
It should be noted that knowledge and recognition of the neuroendocrine family of malignancies has changed considerably over time, and the exact percentage of
these within the overall population of larynx cancers is unknown. In the past, certain tumors were vaguely classified as poorly differentiated malignancies when, in
fact, they were neuroendocrine in origin. Modern techniques of immunohistochemical and morphologic analysis will almost certainly lead to the recognition and
accrual of more of these tumors in the future, and as a result, they will make up a higher relative percentage of laryngeal malignancies. 44,45
Laryngeal SCC accounts for approximately one-fourth of all head and neck SCCs. 46 Some variability is seen between series from different institutions and different
patient populations; however, more than one-half of laryngeal SCCs present as localized disease without metastasis, one-fourth present as local disease with regional
metastasis, and approximately 15% are first seen at an advanced stage with or without distant metastasis. As with other aerodigestive carcinomas, metachronous and
synchronous cancers are ongoing considerations in developing appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic strategies. The incidence of metachronous (i.e., second
primary aerodigestive SCC) is reported to be between 5% and 35% of all aerodigestive cases, 47,48,49 and 50 with the esophagus being the most common second site
overall. 49,50 The larynx, however, seems to demonstrate a more frequent association with lung rather than esophagus carcinoma. This is a logical sequel to the
carcinogenic impact of inhaling rather than ingesting offensive chemicals.
Separate consideration must be given to the spectrum of cellular disarray that includes premalignant squamous lesions, CIS, and superficially invasive carcinomas.
To discuss the epithelial changes that precede and probably lead to carcinoma of the larynx is of considerable importance because it is with this group of lesions that
cancer prevention and conservative management methods are most effective. As our knowledge of this subject has increased, so too has our sophistication in
applying the minimal techniques necessary to achieve excellent cure rates in these disorders. The obvious value of a philosophy of preemptive strategies and
treatment minimalism is the achievement of an outcome with the least physiologic change. Important also is that, by applying the appropriate minimal treatment, one is
able to save radiation in reserve for potential future cancers of the adjacent aerodigestive tissues. 51
Because the appropriate management strategy for early laryngeal neoplasia depends greatly on a dialogue that is understood by both oncologist and pathologist, the
description of the various alterations of the surface epithelium, although not exclusively applicable to the larynx, is important to this discussion. The term leukoplakia
describes any white lesion on a mucous membrane and does not automatically refer to an associated or underlying malignancy. Erythroplakia, on the other hand, is a
clinical term that describes any red lesion on a mucous membrane and, in contrast to the white lesions, is often indicative of an underlying malignant tumor. The term
hyperkeratosis represents an increase in the amount of surface keratin. In the case of the larynx, which normally is lined with a nonkeratinizing epithelium, the use of
the term hyperkeratosis is redundant; instead, the preferable term is keratosis.
Investigators have studied the occurrence of aberrant squamous epithelium in various areas of the larynx, and a predilection seems to exist for carcinogenesis in
those respective sites. 52 However, because only those lesions that begin on the true vocal cords are likely to produce early symptoms and signs, the opportunity to
treat small cancers on other aerodigestive sites is infrequent. With true vocal cord lesions, however, the early warning symptoms frequently lead to early diagnosis
and extraordinary cure rates for glottic malignancies.
The mucosal changes that lead to cancer take years to develop, and that evolution probably follows a consistent pattern. Most laryngeal SCCs result from prolonged
exposure to recognized carcinogens that stimulate mucosal hyperplasia and metaplasia. Some of these changes are associated with keratosis, and others are not. In
some situations, epithelial atypia or dysplasia may exist, the degree of which probably determines whether a lesion is destined to become malignant. 53,54 and 55 In one
large study by Sllamniku and colleagues, 56 3% of patients with vocal cord keratosis unassociated with atypia and 7% with mild atypia developed invasive carcinoma.
In those patients with moderate and severe atypia, however, 18% and 24%, respectively, developed carcinoma. Another study by Hjslet and colleagues 57 showed a
similar probability of cancer evolution in the group with less atypia and a strikingly higher probability in those patients with severe atypia.
In addition to the morphologic appearance of mucosal alteration, DNA changes seem to show a correlation between cancer potential and cellular aneuploidy. In a
study by Munck-Wirland and coworkers, 58 for instance, all of those patients with dysplastic laryngeal lesions that later went on to become carcinoma demonstrated an
aneuploid DNA pattern.
Mucosal lesions, whether premalignant or not, have an inconsistent gross appearance; some are white and others are hyperemic. Many investigators believe the risk
for cancer development is substantially higher in lesions that are soft and red in appearance. 55 Without histologic study, however, even the most experienced
diagnostician cannot consistently predict the presence of cancer or the likelihood of its evolution in any of these lesions. Furthermore, any given point within a lesion
does not necessarily represent the balance of that lesion. The facts that CIS is often surrounded by dysplastic epithelium and that many areas of invasive carcinoma
are surrounded by zones of both CIS and dysplastic epithelium 59 lend credence to the concept that these morphologic categories of epithelial disturbance are each
part of a dynamic spectrum of disorders, each probably related to and possibly representing different stages of the same process. This rationale suggests that
dysplasia leads to CIS, which in turn leads to invasive carcinoma.
On the other hand, this concept is challenged vigorously, and contrary thought suggests that the spectrum of abnormal epithelial maturation and individual cellular
aberrations can occur in circumstances that may or may not precede invasive carcinoma. Dysplasia is a term that is synonymous with atypia, and the degree of
dysplasia is graded as mild, moderate, or severe, depending on the extent of involvement of the surface epithelium. In general, the less the degree of dysplasia, the

less likely is the transformation to invasive carcinoma. Conversely, the higher the degree of dysplasia, the more likely is such a progression. In the opinion of some
investigators, however, severe dysplasia, especially in the larynx, is not a prerequisite for the development of an invasive SCC. In fact, invasive carcinoma can
develop in an epithelium with only mild dysplastic changes.
As classically defined, CIS represents full-thickness, mucosal, epithelial, dysplastic change without violation of the basement membrane. For all intents and purposes,
severe dysplasia can be synonymous with CIS. Also, CIS is known to arise from the basal epithelial layer in the absence of overlying dysplastic changes. In this
setting, therefore, the definition of CIS can be expanded to include those lesions in which the mucosal alterations are so severe as to signal a high probability for the
progression to an invasive carcinoma if left untreated. Extension of the dysplastic process to involve the mucoserous glands should still be considered CIS and not
invasive carcinoma. Such is not the case with transgression across the basement membrane, which is the point at which CIS becomes invasive carcinoma.
It is unknown whether those lesions that have achieved the status of carcinoma continue to grow at the same rate as they did during their premalignant state or
whether their growth is accelerated. The growth of a cancer through the basement membrane into the lamina propria constitutes the transition from CIS to
microinvasive carcinoma, and accompanying this development is a tethering of vocal cord mucosal motion. The degree of this membrane motion restriction is in direct
proportion to the extent of invasion into the underlying lamina propria of the vocal cord. 9 Failure to appreciate these subtle changes can result in the administration of
suboptimal treatment. For example, high failure rates that have been reported with mucosal stripping in CIS patients almost certainly represent underestimation of
these lesions. 60 Some of those lesions that had been classified in the prestroboscopic era as CIS probably contained areas of invasive carcinoma, and the stripping
left behind foci of cancer that resulted in recurrence.
The gross appearance of a given laryngeal lesion is suggestive of its general type. SCCs originate within the mucous membrane and are exophytic or ulcerative, are
of surface origin ( Fig. 30.3-3), and are frequently adjacent to or surrounded by keratoses. Neuroendocrine cancers and tumors metastatic to the larynx are usually
submucosal and, as such, do not resemble lesions of surface origin. Metastatic lesions of various types and neuroendocrine tumors are seen throughout the various
subsites within the larynx, although the latter group shows a predilection for the supraglottic area. The distribution of SCC within the various laryngeal subsites varies
between different countries, a fact that reflects the different social habits within those cultures. In the United States, for example, the ratio of supraglottic to glottic
SCCs is 1:2, whereas the reverse is true in certain European countries (see Table 30.3-1).

FIGURE 30.3-3. Squamous cell carcinoma (C) of the true vocal cord (TVC). Notice the “surface” appearance of the lesion.

The major differences in the natural histories of the various SCCs of the larynx are related largely to the area anatomy and to the lymphatic drainage patterns of the
respective subsite(s).
Cellular characteristics vary by site. In the supraglottis, lesions are more likely to be nonkeratinizing and poorly differentiated, and they have more aggressive local
behavior in general. 61 Those lesions of the true vocal cords, on the other hand, are more often well differentiated and tend to be less aggressive locally. Although the
degree of cellular differentiation is not thought to be the most significant fact in tumor grading, it does seem to correlate with the probability of cervical
metastasis,32,42,62,63 which in turn strongly impacts on survival. 64 Other local characteristics, such as tumor-host interface, 42,61 peritumor inflammatory response,65 and
vascular and perineural invasion, 66 also seem important in determining performance. Finally, the actual tumor thickness and depth of invasion almost certainly have
an influence on metastasis and, ultimately, on survival.
A variety of studies have attempted to standardize the predictive value of thickness in SCCs of the upper aerodigestive tract with the probability of cervical metastasis
and, therefore, the prognosis. 65,67, 68, 69 and 70 Although head and neck oncologists have for some time intuitively favored a direct correlation between the two, a number
of studies have failed to demonstrate a statistically significant association between tumor thickness and nodal metastasis. 66,71,72 Also, it should be noted that those
studies demonstrating a correlation between thickness and metastasis generally focused on sites other than the larynx, and because of the anatomic complexity and
embryologic uniqueness of the larynx, one cannot necessarily transpose such data from other head and neck organs.
SPECIFIC SITES
Supraglottis
Lesions of the supraglottic larynx tend to spread locally. If they begin on the epiglottis, they can extend onto the false vocal cords and into the ventricles. Inferior
extension beyond the ventricle is initially thwarted, but as growth continues, these cancers can penetrate into the paraglottic space. From there they gain full access
to the length of the endolarynx. These cancers often exit the paraglottic space at the top and bottom of the larynx to enter directly into the neck.
Most supraglottic lesions arise on the epiglottis, with fewer being seen on the false vocal cords and aryepiglottic folds. Those lesions that occur on the suprahyoid or
upper part of the epiglottis are more often exophytic, whereas those that occur on the lower portion of that structure are likely to be endophytic or ulcerative. 61,73 An
endophytic growth pattern is especially significant in this particular area of the epiglottis because of the presence of foramina that lead directly through the cartilage
into the preepiglottic space. This space is a compartment continuous with the tongue base. What would appear to be a localized tumor in the endolarynx, therefore,
can actually involve considerable unrecognized extralaryngeal extension. Tumors are confined initially to the preepiglottic space by the ligamentous boundaries of
that compartment, but once those barriers are overcome, the loosely arranged skeletal muscle fibers of the tongue provide no restriction to further tumor extension. 74
Modern imaging, especially magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), has greatly improved the ability to recognize tumor extension into the preepiglottic space and base of
the tongue.
Those lesions that occur on the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis are capable of invading and destroying the cartilage of that structure. Supraglottic cancers, on the
other hand, almost never destroy the thyroid cartilage. 75 This feature has an influence on the design of treatment plans. For example, an ossified and invaded thyroid
cartilage poses a substantial problem for surgeons attempting to perform partial laryngectomy and also for radiation oncologists attempting to deliver curative therapy.
Aryepiglottic fold cancers are somewhat different in their behavior, more commonly following the tendencies of pyriform sinus lesions by spreading in a more diffuse
fashion and metastasizing more frequently than their endolaryngeal counterparts. The particularly ominous natural history of these lesions probably relates as much
to the abundant and multidirectional lymphatic drainage of the area as it does to individual cellular peculiarities. 76
Because of the profuse lymphatic network of the supraglottic larynx, carcinomas of this area metastasize frequently to the cervical lymph nodes, and failure of
treatment is usually a result of metastasis rather than local disease. 41,54,77 The incidence of patients with clinically positive lymph nodes at the time of diagnosis is 23%
to 50% for all supraglottic sites and stages combined. 76,78, 79 and 80 A substantial number of those patients with clinically negative necks turn out to have histologic
disease as demonstrated when a neck dissection is done, or, if left untreated, they convert to clinically positive necks. 81,82 In supraglottic cancers, the probability of
cervical metastasis and the probability of delayed contralateral metastasis increase in direct proportion to the size of the primary (i.e., the T stage). 61,83,84 Lindberg41
reported impressive overall metastatic rates with various supraglottic carcinomas: Sixty-three percent of T1, 70% of T2, 79% of T3, and 73% of T4 cases

metastasized.
In that group of patients with supraglottic lesions that present with a clinically positive cervical node 2 cm in diameter or more, the possibility for contralateral neck
metastasis is 40% or higher. 85 The epiglottis is particularly prone to bilateral metastasis, and even in smaller lesions of that site, the incidence of contralateral
metastasis is more than 20%.72 Much of the data on clinically positive necks and on occult metastasis were compiled before the routine use of computed tomography
(CT) and MRI of the neck. With the use of these more sophisticated staging methods added to the already 75% to 85% accuracy of physical examination, 86 the overall
incidence of metastasis noted at the time of diagnosis will probably become higher than that reported previously.
Glottis
Glottic, or true vocal cord (fold), carcinoma is the most common of all laryngeal cancers encountered in the United States. Although these lesions are usually well
differentiated, they can demonstrate an infiltrative growth pattern, even when they appear exophytic and well organized. Most true vocal cord cancers occur on the
anterior two-thirds of that structure; a small percentage of them develop on the anterior commissure; and they rarely occur on the posterior commissure. 87
To a large extent, growth characteristics and the natural history of glottic carcinomas are determined by the unique anatomy of the true vocal cords. First, the sparsity
of the lymphatic drainage of the true vocal cords in all areas other than the posterior commissure makes metastasis of early lesions extremely unlikely. Second, the
elastic layers (conus elasticus) within the larynx often divert cancers that begin on the free edge of the vocal cord and continue into the underlying vocalis muscle and
paraglottic space, which is an inferolateral pathway that leads out of the larynx through the cricothyroid space. With penetration into the underlying tissues, all
degrees of motion impairment, from subtle mucous membrane stiffness to frank fixation of the vocal cord, can follow. That increasing impairment of motion has a
telling effect on local control and survival data, a fact that is reflected in AJCC staging designations. Much discussion continues about mobility change and its
therapeutic implications, and it is in the group of glottic cancers that demonstrate this change that the clinical judgment of the physician is most tested. The final
anatomic factor unique to the glottis that influences the growth pattern of certain cancers is the anterior commissure ligament, which forms the bridge between the
anterior ends of the true vocal cords. This structure lies immediately against the inner lamina of the thyroid cartilage, and its presence initially retards penetration of
cancers into that area, often causing their diversion upward onto the epiglottis or downward onto the cricothyroid membrane. From there, these lesions can escape
the larynx into the anterior neck. If the cancer overcomes the ligamentous barrier at the anterior commissure, the cartilage is penetrated. 88 This event is particularly
likely in thyroid cartilages that are ossified, and when this does occur, substantial therapeutic implications compromise the effectiveness of radiation therapy and
dictate specific surgical approaches. 89,90
Subglottis
Carcinomas of the subglottic larynx are unusual, making up only approximately 1% to 8% of all laryngeal cancers. 91 These lesions tend to be poorly differentiated and
often demonstrate an infiltrative growth pattern unrestricted by tissue barriers. These tumors are, therefore, frequently circumferential and can extend down the
trachea. The incidence of cervical metastasis in this group of cancers is reported to be 20% to 30%, but that figure is somewhat obscured by the fact that the primary
drainage pattern of these lesions is to the less detectable pretracheal and paratracheal nodes. The actual incidence of metastasis may, therefore, be significantly
higher.85,92,93
UNUSUAL AND RARE NEOPLASMS
The pathology and pathogenesis of verrucous carcinoma are unique and deserve special consideration. This unusual tumor is poorly understood, and its origin,
classification, and response to treatment are controversial. 94,95 Verrucous carcinoma is described as a distinct neoplastic entity of squamous origin that occurs in the
oral cavity, larynx, esophagus, and nose and on the genitalia. 47,96, 97, 98 and 99 Some authorities have suggested the human papillomavirus as its cause. 100 Although
there are views to the contrary, most investigators consider verrucous carcinoma to be an entity unto itself. 101 Just because some tumors originally thought to be
verrucous carcinoma are discovered to have features of SCC and can metastasize does not, in their opinion, justify combining the two diagnoses (actually, they think
that such tumors were always low-grade SCCs rather than verrucous carcinoma). 98 Other investigators, although conceding verrucous carcinoma to be unique,
believe it to be only a variant of well-differentiated SCC. Different authors believe that because verrucous carcinomas neither fulfill the histologic and cytologic criteria
of malignancy nor possess the capability to metastasize, they should be renamed verrucous acanthoma.102 When this lesion does occur in the larynx, it usually is on
the true vocal cord, where it grows slowly and can cause significant local destruction by expanding gradually. Although these lesions often destroy cartilage, they do
not tend to metastasize; instead, aggressiveness is directed locally.
Verrucous carcinoma is consistently difficult to diagnose, even when the clinical index of suspicion is high. This observation relates to the fact that these tumors
microscopically demonstrate an exuberant and keratinizing hyperplasia that is benign by pure histologic and cytologic criteria. 103 The diagnosis is largely a clinical one
and is most effectively achieved by concert between pathologist and surgeon, but usually only after multiple biopsies have been taken.
Verrucous carcinoma is typically a slow-growing but relentless mass, exophytic and warty in appearance, and broad based at its interface with the mucosa ( Fig.
30.3-4). Its surface is often necrotic and infected, and the associated inflammation of adjacent tissues can be remarkable. This tendency to cause inflammation can
erroneously influence treatment planning. For example, the patient with verrucous carcinoma can demonstrate enlarged adjacent cervical lymph nodes that are
worrisome when in fact the adenopathy is only secondary to the inflammatory process. Although this finding has been described in other aerodigestive tumors, 104 the
mere presence of lymphadenopathy in the primary drainage area of an impressive primary tumor is worrisome, no matter how benign its histology looks. In such a
circumstance, clinical judgment is enhanced greatly by modern imaging and cytopathologic techniques.

FIGURE 30.3-4. Verrucous carcinoma of the true vocal cord.

This discussion of the nature of verrucous carcinoma has substantial therapeutic implications, especially when the lesion occurs in the larynx. Essentially, SCC is a
radiosensitive cancer, a fact that provides treatment options to the oncologist. On the other hand, verrucous carcinoma seems to be somewhat radioresistant, whether
found in the mouth or the larynx. 94 Additionally, anecdotal information suggests radiation-induced dedifferentiation into anaplastic cancer in these lesions. This
transformation seems to occur in fewer than 10% of verrucous carcinomas 78,96,105, 106 and 107 and may involve alteration of the DNA that facilitates the integration of the
human papillomavirus into host cells. 100 Both the concept of radiation resistance and the transformation into anaplastic cancers are vigorously disputed. 98,108, 109 and 110
The neuroendocrine family of tumors represents an evolving database. This is true largely because newer diagnostic techniques have allowed pathologists
specifically to label as neuroendocrine a variety of previously undefined cancers. Almost certainly, an immunohistochemical reexamination of laryngeal cancers
previously diagnosed as atypical or undifferentiated malignancies would result in the reclassification of many of them as neuroendocrine tumors. The small cell tumors
look and act much like their counterpart oat cell lung lesions and, as such, generally are managed by chemotherapy and radiation therapy. 44,111 Surgical procedures
do not seem to enhance the likelihood of survival in patients with these tumors. 112,113,114,115 and 116 The other neuroendocrine tumors that occur in the larynx—carcinoids

and paragangliomas—are rare and are best managed surgically. 116,117 and 118
Cartilaginous malignancies, 119 adenocarcinomas, 120 sarcomas,121 malignant fibrous histiocytomas, 122 plasmacytomas,123 granular cell tumors, 124 and primary
lymphomas126 have all been reported but are rare. Primary melanomas of the larynx are equally rare. Of all of the laryngeal cancers reported from Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center between 1949 and 1983, only three were melanomas. 126
DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION
Cancers of the supraglottic larynx usually do not produce early symptoms or signs, and it is common for the first hint of such a cancer to be cervical adenopathy.
When symptoms do occur, they are often subtle; pain perceived in the primary site or in the ear (otalgia), a scratchy sensation when swallowing, or merely an
alteration of one's tolerance for hot or cold foods may be all that is noticeable. Airway alteration, hoarseness, or a tendency to aspirate liquids are all produced by
more advanced lesions.
Cancers of the glottis, on the other hand, are often detected early in the course of the disease because even a slight alteration of the vibratory surface of the true
vocal cords produces voice change. Smokers are often hoarse, however, and such alteration of the voice may not alarm them. Anyone with a voice change that
persists longer than 2 weeks should have a laryngeal examination. Different than in supraglottic lesions, it is unusual for glottic cancer patients to seek medical
attention because of cervical adenopathy. In the latter group, metastasis generally occurs late in the course of the disease, long after the early warning signals.
Subglottic cancers are uncommon, but when they do occur, they do not produce early symptoms; therefore, the disease is often advanced by the time of diagnosis.
Almost all laryngeal cancers are squamous carcinomas and, as such, are surface lesions. Most are obvious with routine laryngeal inspection, but a small percentage
are located in obscure areas and, therefore, not readily visible. The modern generation of flexible endoscopes ( Fig. 30.3-5) has provided the capability of examining
the larynx to a broad range of physicians; thus, the overall process of screening and follow-up after treatment has been enhanced. Importantly, these methods allow
the occasional laryngeal examiner to see areas that previously have been visually inaccessible.

FIGURE 30.3-5. Flexible laryngeal endoscope in use.

It is essential that the larynx be examined in the awake patient who is sitting upright. Direct laryngoscopy under anesthesia should be reserved for biopsy and a more
detailed tumor mapping (Fig. 30.3-6). Even when done under local anesthesia, the introduction of a direct laryngoscope distorts the natural position and the relaxed
motion of the larynx and, by doing so, tends to disguise subtle motion changes that are important in staging of these tumors. Certain subtleties of contour, such as
bulging and tethering, are visually not appreciable during direct laryngoscopy.

FIGURE 30.3-6. Diagrams of laryngopharynx used for mapping and recording tumors.

The earliest stage of invasive glottic carcinoma through mucosa into the underlying lamina propria is visible as a tethering of the mucous membrane that normally
slides over the underlying structures, and the mucosal wave 38 is lost. Although the gross abductive capabilities of the vocal cord may be intact, the early invasive
character of a lesion can be appreciated when a stroboscopic examination is used to demonstrate this restrictive feature. As the process of invasion continues into the
underlying vocalis muscle, the actual lateral excursion of the vocal cord is limited and eventually lost. The ability of the clinician to view and interpret this scenario is
critical to the sophisticated management of vocal cord cancer. Essentially, lesions of the true vocal cord that do not transgress the basement membrane do not cause
tethering of the mucosa, and those that enter the underlying lamina propria do cause tethering. 39 Benign lesions and even CIS, therefore, may look extensive
topographically, but their lack of depth is revealed by appropriate diagnostic technology. Although contemporary methods of staging tend to emphasize the bulk and
topographic size of tumors rather than depth, investigators have begun to focus more on this third dimension. As data are accumulated, more emphasis will be placed
on this important matter.
Imaging should not be relied on to detect early larynx cancer, because the routine methods of physical examination are far more suitable. The primary care physician
should not, therefore, initially resort to CT or MRI when a laryngeal cancer symptom persists. Instead, someone skilled in the appropriate techniques should examine
that patient. Once a lesion is discovered, however, the evaluation of its depth, bulk, and possible cartilage invasion and the status of the regional lymph nodes are
often enhanced by CT or MRI. It is not clear which of the two imaging methods is better for larynx cancer evaluation. Both have certain advantages over the other, and
both are of limited usefulness in evaluating the radiated larynx. CT of the larynx is most effectively achieved in the axial plane, and because of this, the images are
especially efficient in showing lateral tumor extension and the relation of that extension to cervical nodal disease. The axial projection is, therefore, effective in
demonstrating the important paraglottic space. CT also effectively demonstrates the vertical extension of tumor, especially in the subglottic and anterior commissure
areas. MRI offers the advantages of multiplanal visualization of the larynx and, therefore, is especially valuable in evaluating the preepiglottic space and the adjacent
base of the tongue.
Invasion of laryngeal cartilage is important in treatment planning. Determining whether this feature exists has always been difficult because of the inconsistency of the
ossification that occurs in the laryngeal framework. Generally, cartilage is vulnerable to tumor invasion in those areas where it is ossified, and it is somewhat resistant
where it is not ossified. In fact, healthy, nonossified cartilage provides a considerable natural barrier to cancer invasion. Writings by Castelijns et al. 127 and Towler and
Young125 have suggested that MRI is the method of choice for delineating the important finding of cartilage invasion. Other investigators would dispute this claim. One
study correlated MRI findings of cartilage invasion with the effectiveness of radiation treatment, and in so doing, the authors found a surprising number of small glottic

lesions with foci of cartilage invasion. 126 Significantly, it was from this group that most of the radiation failures of the series occurred.
Other imaging methods, such as tomography and laryngography, have been surpassed by more elaborate technology and are only of historic interest.
STAGING
The AJCC last updated larynx staging in 1997, and that version is presented in Table 30.3-3. Staging provides a commonality of language that is essential for
effective outcomes analysis. The larynx is a complex structure because it involves many anatomic and physiologic factors that impact on performance and, therefore,
on staging. Although it is essential that pathologic findings always be compared with preoperative analysis, it should be remembered that the staging referred to and
that reported by the AJCC is a clinical one, which is based on performance. The accuracy of clinical staging is periodically updated on the basis of better recognition
of performance. For example, Pillsbury and Kirchner 130 studied this question by comparing whole-organ sections of nonradiated larynges and compared the actual
pathologic findings with the preoperative staging. They found that 40% of cases had been categorized incorrectly, and most of these inaccuracies reflected
understaging. Most commonly, the depth of invasion had been underestimated, and the frequency of cartilage invasion was much higher than previously had been
realized. Certainly, as imaging technology improves, so will the ability to stage more accurately. 128,129 As clinicians make use of adjuvant chemotherapy treatment
protocols for which the assessment of complete versus partial response is required, modern imaging hopefully will enhance the accuracy of that assessment.

TABLE 30.3-3. Tumor (T), Node (N), Metastasis (M) Staging System for Larynx

Survival in larynx cancer decreases in a linear fashion with increasing stage. The most remarkable change is between stages II and III, the zone that generally
represents the occurrence of cervical metastasis.
TREATMENT AND SURVIVAL
Supraglottis
Because the supraglottic larynx is composed of multiple sites, referring to it as one unit is not always accurate when discussing treatment results. Because all of the
subsites are intimately related and because the supraglottis is continuous with its neighboring glottic larynx, the hypopharynx, and the oropharynx, it can be difficult to
determine the exact site of origin for many larger cancers. For example, when one encounters a lesion that involves the pharyngoepiglottic fold, the aryepiglottic
fold(s), and the pyriform sinus(es), it can be difficult to know whether this is a primary hypopharynx cancer extending superiorly or a supraglottic cancer extending
inferiorly.
Unlike glottic cancer, in which cervical metastasis is relatively uncommon in early-stage disease, the probability of nodal spread in all supraglottic lesions is
substantial.41,61 A contralateral metastasis is significantly probable in these lesions, and this probability increases in direct proportion to primary tumor size. 83 This
finding is especially true for epiglottic lesions, which make up most of the supraglottic carcinomas. It is essential to recognize that the site of treatment failure in
supraglottic cancer is usually the neck; therefore, treatment strategies require neck management for virtually all lesions. For the N0 neck, this implies selective neck
dissection and/or postoperative radiation, or elective radiation only. For patients with a clinically positive neck(s), this implies neck dissection, therapeutic radiation, or
both.
Early-stage supraglottic cancers have equivalent cure rates with either conservative (partial laryngectomy) surgery or primary radiation therapy. 131 This is especially
true for those lesions on the most cephalic part of the epiglottis (i.e., the suprahyoid epiglottis), but not for those lesions on the lower part of that structure where there
are foramina that lead through the cartilage into the preepiglottis space and, ultimately, into the tongue base. For more advanced lesions, a variety of treatment
options are available, including radiation therapy alone, 132,133 and 134 supraglottic laryngectomy with or without postoperative radiation therapy, 135,136 and chemoradiation
therapy programs for patients who would otherwise require a total laryngectomy. 137,138,139 and 140
The results of primary radiation for supraglottic cancer are well established. Mendenhall and colleagues 133,134 Mendenhall and colleagues 134 reported 5-year local
control of 100% for T1, 83% for T2, 68% for T3, and 56% for T4 lesions. Wang and associates 133 reported 5-year local control of 96% for T1, 86% for T2, 76% for T3,
and 43% for T4 lesions. In this particular study, when laryngectomy was added for salvage, local control was 96% for T1, 93% for T2, 88% for T3, and 51% for T4
lesions.
Different criteria create T3 designation of supraglottic laryngeal cancer, and in selected circumstances of this stage in which there is no vocal cord fixation,
supraglottic laryngectomy can be applied efficiently; thus, voice sparing is achieved. Three different studies have applied strict standards to the patient selection for
supraglottic laryngectomy in T3 lesions, and disease-free survival of approximately 75% at 3 years can be expected. 141,142 and 143
Parsons and coworkers 144 reported on 26 T4 invasive SCCs of the larynx treated with radiation therapy. Only 38% achieved local control at 5 years in this report.
Other series also demonstrate the similarity of outcomes of primary radiation therapy and surgery, even for moderately advanced disease. 145,146 Supraglottic lesions
that cause vocal cord fixation (T3), those that involve the postcricoid region (T3), those that invade the laryngeal cartilage (T4), or those that extend into
extralaryngeal sites (T4) can often be effectively managed with total laryngectomy and postoperative radiation therapy. Today, however, it is the exception rather than
the norm to offer a patient a total laryngectomy as an initial treatment option in these advanced-stage cancers. Instead, the organ-sparing strategy of chemoradiation,
with laryngectomy reserved for unsuccessful cases, is generally the standard of care. It should be emphasized, however, that each case must be individualized, and
certain lesions in certain patients warrant the traditional approach whereby laryngectomy is performed first.
For patients who undergo supraglottic laryngectomy, postoperative radiation therapy is occasionally considered. Excellent local control has been reported with this
sequencing in selected T3/T4 lesions 136; however, the combination of these two treatments is morbid, with increased gastrostomy or tracheostomy dependence,
airway problems, and delayed independent swallowing. 135 In general, it is best to choose one or the other (i.e., radiation or surgery) as the definitive local therapy.
However, because of the extremely low rate of local recurrence after supraglottic laryngectomy, postoperative radiation to the laryngeal segment is not often used
after this operation.
An advantage to radiation as the initial treatment of early-stage supraglottic disease is that bilateral elective neck treatment can be included in the plan with minimal
morbidity. If an adequate dose of elective neck radiation is given, neck relapse should be less than 5% in the absence of clinically obvious disease. If surgery is
chosen as the treatment for a T1 or T2 supraglottic lesion, the supraglottic laryngectomy should be combined with bilateral selective neck dissections, even when the
neck is N0. Postoperative radiation therapy is added to the necks of those patients in whom these staging procedures show metastatic disease. The obvious
disadvantage to this approach is that it becomes necessary to use two different treatment modalities compared with the strategy in which radiation therapy is used
initially to the primary tumor and necks. The disadvantage to the plan that uses radiation therapy initially is that, when it is unsuccessful, total laryngectomy is needed.
Such is the case because supraglottic laryngectomy is contraindicated after full-course radiation therapy to the larynx (complications such as persistent swelling,

failure of wound healing, radiation chondritis, and swallowing difficulties are strikingly frequent in this setting).
Pretreatment CT scans can be helpful in predicting outcomes for supraglottic lesions treated with primary radiation therapy. Hermans and colleagues 147 reported that
tumor volume derived from CT analysis was the strongest predictor of locoregional failure and that the degree of paraglottic space involvement, subglottic extension,
and preepiglottic space involvement all were important prognostic factors demonstrated by this imaging method. Mancuso et al. 148 was able to quantify the correlation
between CT findings and local control. For patients with a tumor volume of less than 6 cm 3 who were treated by radiation therapy alone, local control was achieved in
89%. When the tumor volume was 6 cm3 or greater, the local control was only 52%. A decreased rate of local control and voice preservation was also noted if 25% or
more of the preepiglottic space was involved with tumor. A study conducted by Lo and associates 149 also correlated CT tumor volume with radiation failure, but this
analysis was unable to demonstrate such a correlation with surgery.
When comparing one type of operation (supraglottic laryngectomy) to the other (total laryngectomy), it is important to note that the former of the two is physiologic and
allows retention of vocal and swallowing functions. Furthermore, because of the unique lymphatic drainage patterns of the organ and the presence of certain natural
anatomic barriers to tumor spread, this operation is oncologically sound, yielding the same local control rates as achieved by total laryngectomy in comparable
lesions.150,151 Ogura and Biller 151 reported an 85% 3-year control for epiglottis cancers treated with supraglottic laryngectomy, but this result decreased to 71% with
extension onto the false cord(s). These figures are comparable to those produced by total laryngectomy for similar lesions.
It is not the mission of this text to provide an elaborate description of the various partial laryngeal surgical techniques used to manage supraglottic cancer; however,
the student of this disease should have at least a summary knowledge of the methods known collectively as conservation laryngeal surgery. The compartmentalization
of the larynx and the directional drainage patterns of the lymph channels within it provide surgeons with the unique opportunity for removing that portion of the larynx
above the true vocal cords, and with proper reconstruction, swallowing and vocal functions are retained in the process. Essentially, this procedure is a horizontally
directed hemilaryngectomy in which the surgeon removes the upper half of the thyroid cartilage and the contents within it (the false vocal cords, the epiglottis, and the
aryepiglottic folds). The edge of the thyroid cartilage is brought up to and attached to the transected base of the tongue. Because the motor nerve supply of the vocal
cords comes from below (recurrent laryngeal nerves) and is not in the surgical field, the important vocal cord functions of abduction and adduction are retained, and
because of this, voice and the important airway protective functions of glottic closure are preserved.
The supraglottic laryngectomy is, however, physiologically challenging, and patients with chronic pulmonary disease often have difficulty tolerating the aspiration that
can follow. Essentially, this elegant technique is oncologically sound in appropriate tumors, but certain patients are not good candidates for its implementation. The
correct use of the supraglottic laryngectomy is accomplished only by surgeons properly trained in this methodology and who have the experience to apply the right
methods in the right situations. A succinct discussion of the method of selection for all conservation procedures and which patients are suitable for them was
developed by Sessions and Parish. 152 Although certain chemoradiotherapy options have been popularized since that discussion was published, the fundamental
principles are the same and can be applied to the current philosophy. As those alternative chemoradiation schema are used more frequently, the number of surgeons
accomplished in the techniques of conservation laryngeal surgery will diminish. Although the idea of saving more larynges without compromising cure is meritorious, it
is worrisome that those subtle skills necessary for achieving excellent functional results with the partial laryngectomies is to some extent being lost by the current
generation of head and neck surgeons. A variety of conservation surgery procedures are applied to variations of laryngeal cancer, and although a description of each
is beyond the scope of this text, the following classification of these operations should be helpful in placing this important surgical methodology into the proper
perspective:
1. Hemilaryngectomy
a. Horizontal hemilaryngectomy (supraglottic)
b. Vertical hemilaryngectomy
i. Lateral hemilaryngectomy
ii. Frontal hemilaryngectomy
2. Cordectomy
3. Supracricoid laryngectomy 153
4. Partial laryngopharyngectomy
Just as with the description of specific surgical methods, elaborate details of radiation therapy technique are not appropriate here. In general, patients with early-stage
laryngeal disease are treated with once daily continuous course radiation therapy. Opposed lateral fields are used for the primary site and upper neck(s), and a
separate anterior field is used for the lower neck(s). In selected total laryngectomies, the stoma is included in this neck treatment plan. The total dose to the primary
site is in the 65 to 70 Gy range. 133,134 For more advanced disease, a variety of fractionation schemes have been used, including once daily, twice daily, and
concomitant boost techniques. 133,134,154 A Radiation Therapy Oncology Group randomized trial compared four different fractionation schedules for advanced head and
neck cancers treated with primary radiotherapy: once daily radiation to a total of 70 Gy in 7 weeks; twice daily radiation using 1.2 Gy per fraction to a total dose of
81.6 Gy; accelerated hyperfractionation technique with a planned break using 1.6 Gy per fraction twice daily up to approximately 38.4 Gy, followed by a 2-week break,
and continuing with 1.6 Gy twice daily to 67.2 Gy; and a concomitant boost technique using once daily fractionation in the beginning of the program, followed by twice
daily fractionation for the concomitant boost during the final 12 treatment days, up to a total of 72 Gy. The results show better 2-year locoregional control and
disease-free survival using the concomitant boost approach. Acute and late toxicity was acceptable, although increased, over standard fractionation.
Glottis
CIS of the true vocal cord is highly curable with equal efficiency by microexcision, laser vaporization, 155 or radiation therapy. 156,157 and 158 Pure CIS lesions are unusual,
and a frequent association exists, more often than not, between such lesions and invasive carcinoma. Those series that have been reported in which numerous
recurrences developed after stripping of vocal cord CIS almost certainly consisted of a heterogeneous group that included lesions containing areas of unrecognized
invasive cancer. For this reason, we favor microexcision of the involved membrane over laser vaporization, which destroys the specimen and does not allow for the
pathologic analysis needed to identify areas of microinvasion.
True CIS, by definition, remains superficial to the basement membrane, and if mucosal excision techniques are confined to that group of patients, the cure rate should
be the same as the best that can be achieved by radiation therapy. The advantages of microexcision over radiation is that it is simpler and that radiation therapy is
held in reserve for future use. Considering the incidence of metachronous and synchronous second primary, cancers that occur in the aerodigestive tract, the policy of
holding radiation in reserve whenever possible is prudent. The advantages of radiation therapy are that the voice is at least as good and often better than with
surgery, and it is a more definitive treatment for invasive cancer that may exist within the lesion. In both microexcision and radiation, when treatment fails, a surgical
procedure can still salvage most patients and, in the majority of cases, with a voice-sparing operation.
All things considered, if the diagnosis of pure CIS of the vocal cord(s) is fairly certain, microexcision is probably the treatment of choice. So-called vocal cord stripping
often has a crippling effect on the voice and is in violation of the contemporary standard of care. Such is not the case with microexcision, which has minimal impact on
vocal quality.
The value of a properly excised piece of tissue to a complete histopathologic analysis cannot be overrated. Importantly, microexcision should include a wide zone
around the obvious trouble, followed by a thorough pathologic evaluation of the specimen to look for microinvasive areas. Procedures that excise the underlying vocal
cord muscle (i.e., cordectomy) produce a crippling vocal effect and do not offer any oncologic improvement over microexcision or radiation; thus, such a procedure
should not be considered as one of the treatment options for vocal cord CIS.
Radiation therapy is used either as the definitive treatment of CIS when microexcision is not possible or is refused, or as a salvage treatment for patients with
recurrent CIS following prior surgical procedures. 159,160 Series of CIS patients show that, when radiation therapy is used, it is very effective. Medini and coworkers 158
reported 20 patients with CIS treated with radiotherapy, using a dose of 1.75 Gy per fraction to a median total dose of 68.4 Gy. The 4-year disease-free survival rate
was 95%. Improved voice was reported in 16 of 20 patients, with no change noted in the other four. In summary, the standard of care for CIS of the vocal cord
consists of a strategy that uses primary surgery for most patients and selective radiation therapy in others.
These authors rely heavily on the preoperative evaluation by videostroboscopy 39 to estimate the depth of the surface cancer. Normal membrane motion (i.e., a normal
mucosal wave)38 suggests confinement of the lesion to that area superficial to the basement membrane (i.e., CIS). On the other hand, if stroboscopy demonstrates
tethering of the membrane to the underlying tissue, we consider that a sign of microinvasion (more advanced than CIS). Such a patient receives radiation therapy. If

we believe the lesion is entirely superficial to the basement membrane, we do microexcision and examine the specimen carefully for microinvasion. The understaging
of CIS in past studies could probably have been avoided by the appropriate use of stroboscopic analysis.
Finally, certain CIS lesions, such as those on the anterior commissure, in the subglottis, or some that extend into the laryngeal ventricle, do not lend themselves to
these surgical methods; in these cases, radiation is a better means of initial treatment.
For T1 or T2 invasive glottic cancer, excellent local control is achieved by either radiation therapy or conservation surgery procedures. 156,161, 162 and 163 It is generally
agreed, however, that vocal quality is better after radiation therapy. 164,165 and 166 Harrison and colleagues 167 reported an ultimate return to normal voice in nearly all
radiated T1 and T2 glottic cancer patients. Even though several patterns of vocal dysfunction existed before, during, and immediately after radiation therapy,
normalization of these alterations occurred within 3 months after completion of radiotherapy. Dagli, 164 however, showed that the postradiation voice, although better
than the surgically treated counterpart, remains abnormal with respect to various subtle parameters, such as maximum vocal intensity, dynamic vocal intensity range,
jitter, and mean fundamental frequency. De Graeff and associates 168 also reported objective improvement of speech after radiotherapy but pointed out that there was
short-term, temporary deterioration of physical functioning and fatigue. Tsunoda and coworkers 169 stroboscopically studied the changes of the mucous membrane
motion after radiation of early glottic cancers. They demonstrated ultimate return to normal motion in all patients studied. Furthermore, these authors suggested the
potential value of stroboscopy for detecting early cancer recurrence, thus corroborating the findings of Sessions et al. 39 in a previously reported study.
Finally, there seem to be predictors of poor vocal quality: Vocal cord stripping (instead of biopsy only) before radiotherapy and continued smoking after radiation
therapy predicted worse voice quality as well as substandard stroboscopic performance. 170
It is important to note that, in those lower-staged (i.e., T1 and T2) glottic lesions that are unsuccessfully treated with radiation, salvage partial laryngectomy
(hemilaryngectomy) can be performed successfully in a significant number of patients, thus achieving excellent overall cure rates while retaining voice. 171,172
Whether achieved by radiation therapy or by surgery, local control rate decreases with increasing tumor bulk. Dickens and coworkers 173 reported the results for early
glottic tumors of various sizes and extent. The lesions were categorized by the type of surgical procedure that would have been necessary had surgery been used.
This type of analysis provides an excellent basis for comparing the results of surgery and radiation. In patients suitable for hemilaryngectomy, the local control with
radiation alone was 94%. This figure increased to 100% when surgical salvage was added. On the contrary, for patients managed by radiation therapy who would
have required total laryngectomy, local control rate was only 65%, but it increased to 91% when surgical salvage was added. Extension of these glottic carcinomas
onto the anterior and posterior aspects of the larynx lessens the local control rates achieved with radiation therapy. 174 In this study, the surgical procedure required for
salvage usually was a total laryngectomy rather than a hemilaryngectomy.
Essentially, the 5-year survival rates for primary surgery (cordectomy or hemilaryngectomy) and primary radiation for T1 lesions are comparable. 161,162 and 163,175,176,177
and 178 Local control obtained in this same-stage glottic group using conservation surgical procedures is reported to be 78% by Kirchner and Owen 78 and 87% by
Ogura et al. 179 Results obtained for comparable T1 lesions treated by radiation therapy show local control of 91% by Harwood 156 and 93% by Pellitteri. 163
Sessions and colleagues 180 reported a 5-year survival rate of 74% for T1 and T2 lesions that originated in the anterior commissure of the glottic larynx. This study
demonstrated that survival and recurrence rates of anterior commissure lesions correlated with the size and stage of the tumor. 181 Olofsson and associates 182 reported
an 80% survival rate at 5 years for early-stage anterior commissure lesions, but this study included those recurrences that had been salvaged by surgery. Those
anterior commissure lesions that are thin and of low volume and that do not have substantial subglottic extension probably are treated with equal efficiency by partial
laryngectomy or radiation therapy. As lesions become more advanced, the natural barrier of the anterior commissure ligament is overcome and the thyroid cartilage is
frequently invaded 183; therefore, radiation therapy becomes less appealing than surgery as the front-line treatment. Most tumors involving the anterior commissure
occur as a result of spread from the true vocal cord. Lesions actually arising in the anterior commissure are unusual, making up 1% to 2% of glottic cancers. 181,183 In
summary, the standard for treating T1 glottic cancers is radiation therapy, and partial or total laryngectomy is used as a salvage operation in those patients for whom
this first line of treatment is unsuccessful.
The management of T2 lesions, on the other hand, is somewhat more complicated because this group is more heterogeneous. Surgical management usually consists
of vertical hemilaryngectomy and is associated with 3-year survival rates of 83% 180 and 82% 179 in two major series. Primary radiation therapy with surgical salvage
yields a net 5-year survival rate of 92% in Pellitteri et al.'s series, 163 72% in Wang's series, 161 and 90% in Fletcher et al.'s series. 162 Because of the heterogeneity of
the T2 group, Wang 161 has suggested subdividing these lesions into those with normal mobility (T2A) and those with impaired mobility (T2B). He showed that local
control was obtained in 86% of the former and 63% of the latter when primary radiation was used. Similar observations were made by Harwood, 156 whose series
yielded 77% and 51% local control rates for T2A and T2B lesions, respectively. Medini and colleagues 158 reported a 5-year disease-free survival rate of 80% for T2A
and 64% for T2B lesions. Klintenberg and associates 184 reported local control of 73% for T2 lesions, with subglottic extension being the most important factor. In
summary, radiation therapy is usually recommended as the primary treatment modality for T2 lesions with no vocal cord mobility impairment (T2A); however, in those
lesions that demonstrate impairment of motion (T2B), hemilaryngectomy is preferred. These criteria are variable, however, depending on tumor bulk, and in those less
bulky T2B lesions, radiation can be used. It should be noted also that, when vocal cord motion is restricted by actual surface tumor bulk rather than by invasion of the
underlying muscle, radiation is often effective.
Those conservation surgical procedures that can be applied to the management of glottic cancer are time honored and tested, and when used in the properly selected
case of laryngeal cancer, they consistently yield excellent results functionally and oncologically. The most commonly used of these procedures is the vertical
hemilaryngectomy, in which the surgeon bisects the larynx and, to a varying degree, removes a portion or all of the true and false vocal cord along with the respective
half of the thyroid cartilage. Because most of the lesions for which this operation is performed are located on the anterior two-thirds of the vocal cord, the most
posterior resection line usually is in front of the arytenoid cartilage. In those circumstances in which the cancer extends onto the posterior larynx, this cartilage can be
resected (Fig. 30.3-7). By using the perichondrium from the external surface of the half of the thyroid cartilage that has been removed, the operated side of the larynx
heals in the midline, forming a firm buttress (pseudocord) against which the opposite and normal true vocal cord vibrates.

FIGURE 30.3-7. Axial and frontal views of larynx show that portion of the organ removed by a horizontal hemilaryngectomy ( shaded).

Just as with surgery, radiation therapy of T2 glottic cancer need not include elective neck treatment. Fein and coworkers 185 reported that, in this group, the incidence
of neck failure was 3.7% with elective neck radiation, and 2.6% when no elective treatment was given. The radiation field arrangement is similar to the technique used
for T1 disease. The field size must be large enough to encompass the entire extent of disease, and the total dose is usually approximately 70 Gy range.
Various factors seem to be important prognostically for all glottic cancer treated with radiation. Several series 186,187 and 188 strongly correlate anemia with poorer
outcomes for T1 and T2 glottic cancer treated with radiation, with one series 186 revealing a 6% drop in local control for every 1 g drop in hemoglobin. Similar studies
have not been accomplished with surgically treated patients.

Data on other potential prognostic markers include contradictions on whether p53 correlates with radiation failure; some suggest such an ability, 189 whereas others fail
to demonstrate a significant relationship. 190,191 Growth factor markers such as Ki-67, an indicator of the proliferation index, may be important and may also be
prognostic for surgically treated cases. 192,193
Radiologic imaging is playing an increasingly important role. CT derived tumor volume correlates with outcome for radiation patients 149,194 and may become
increasingly important. Emerging data also suggest that positron emission tomographic scanning may be very useful in assessing patients after radiation therapy and
in differentiating radiation-related changes from recurrent tumor. 195,196 and 197
A continued evolution of radiation techniques is largely responsible for the excellent control of early glottic disease in many reported series. 161,163,184,198, 199, 200 and 201
Individualized treatment planning, isodose contours, and beam compensation are mandatory to optimize local control. 201 Lower-energy photon beams (cobalt 60,
£4-MV linear accelerators) may have an advantage over higher-energy beams, 202 although proper treatment planning may make 6-MV beams acceptable. 185
Much has been written about the time-dose relationships and the variety of fractionation schemes used. 186,199, 200 and 201,203, 204, 205 and 206 The optimal fractionation
schedule is not known, although many different programs have been successfully conducted. Most authors agree that dose per fraction of 2 Gy or more is preferable
to lower dose per fraction. 201,202 and 203 Most institutions use a dose per fraction of 2 Gy or more and a total dose in the 60 to 66 Gy range, with lower total doses in
those with higher doses per fraction. 201,202 and 203 It seems clear that longer overall treatment times are associated with worse outcomes. 186,200,204, 205 and 206 Skladowski
and colleagues186 reported that a prolongation of the treatment time from 45 days to 55 days decreased the tumor control probability by 13%. Hayakawa and
colleagues 200 reported 5-year local control rates of 95% for those completing treatment in 45 days or less, 81% in 46 to 49 days, and 73% in more than 50 days.
The most commonly used field arrangement is opposed lateral portals measuring between 5.5 × 5.5 cm and 6.0 × 6.0 cm that cover the larynx alone. Patients must be
properly immobilized. A larynx contour is taken during simulation, and an appropriate larynx wedge is usually added to keep the dose inhomogeneity to within 5% to
10%.
Involvement of the anterior commissure continues to be a perplexing issue. Certain authors report poorer outcomes, 207,208 whereas others 209 report that proper
technique yields satisfactory outcomes not dissimilar to other T1 lesions.
Glottic cancers that cause vocal cord or hemilaryngeal immobilization or fixation (i.e., T3) are substantially more ominous than lesions that do not. At a minimum, such
motion impairment reflects vocalis muscle invasion. However, further tumor extension into the paraglottic space is often present, opening the entire larynx and
adjacent exit areas to cancer spread. Many of these lesions are associated with thyroid or cricoid cartilage destruction, and the tendency is to underestimate glottic
lesions with vocal cord fixation. In Olofsson et al.'s 210 study, a significant number of tumors originally had been understaged as T3 cancers but were actually T4
lesions with extralaryngeal extension. With the unpredictable extent of the disease and the overall high probability of cartilage destruction in mind, surgery, which
usually consists of a total laryngectomy, traditionally has been favored over radiation therapy for the primary management of T3 lesions. The overall 5-year survival
rate for T3 glottic cancers treated with total laryngectomy is reported to be 55% to 72% in four major series. 78,211 However, it has been shown by Kirchner and Owen 78
that, in carefully selected T3 vocal cord lesions clearly limited to the vocalis muscle and in which no associated cartilage destruction is found, hemilaryngectomy can
be performed with oncologic safety. In this series of 22 patients, a 60% cure rate was reported. In another similar study, Som 212 reported a 58% cure rate in 26
patients with selected T3 glottic tumors treated by partial laryngectomy. It should be noted that both of these significant studies were done before the use of CT or
MRI. Such technology would almost certainly have made the evaluation of these lesions and the delineation of their dimensions easier and more accurate. Even with
this limitation lessened by contemporary technology, the reader should not be led to underestimate the difficulty of correctly selecting the small subset of T3 lesions
suitable for hemilaryngectomy. This judgment is appropriately left only to those surgeons with considerable experience in partial laryngeal surgery.
Overall, managing T3 glottic cancer can be challenging. A small number of these lesions can be effectively removed by partial laryngectomy, but because this
selection is fraught with hazards, past surgical literature has been slanted toward recommending total laryngectomy. Such is not the case today, however, and those
patients with T3 glottic cancer who would require a total laryngectomy are almost always treated with an organ-preservation chemoradiation approach, with
laryngectomy being used only for those who are unsuccessful with the former. The survival rate is the same between those that require the three modalities
(chemotherapy, radiotherapy, laryngectomy) and those to whom only chemotherapy and radiation are given; however, a substantial percentage of patients retain their
larynges in the process. 139,140,213
A subset of T3 glottic patients can be cured without operation. Van den Bogert et al. 213 reported a local control rate of 53% in a group of patients with operable T3
lesions who had refused surgery. Harwood and colleagues 214 reported a 45% 5-year local control rate for T3 glottic patients, and Wang 215 reported a 36% 5-year
actuarial local control rate, which increased to 57% when surgical salvage was added. Mendenhall and associates 216 have reported that T3 glottic cancer treated with
radiotherapy alone has a 5-year local control rate of 63%, increasing to 86% with surgical salvage. Pretreatment CT scans helped predict outcome. For tumors whose
volume was 3.5 cm3 or less, local control was 87% compared with 29% for larger-volume lesions. A trend has been noted toward better outcomes with twice daily
treatment versus once daily fractionation. 217,218 Finally, no correlation seems to exist between the return of vocal cord mobility and outcome, 217 and it is not uncommon
for the vocal cord to remain fixed, even after successful radiation.
T4 tumor designation denotes cartilage destruction or extension of the tumor outside of the confines of the larynx. Grouping together all T4 lesions is misleading,
however, because it fails to account for the more favorable tumor of lesser thickness and volume that may have achieved a T4 status only because it originated in a
marginal zone and extended to an adjacent area, such as the pyriform sinus or base of the tongue. Just as with T3 supraglottic lesions, there are favorable and
unfavorable T4 lesions, and that determination is made appropriately on the basis of tumor volume, depth, and thickness. With this exception in mind, the
performance of the group of T4 glottic lesions is expectedly poorer than that of lesser stages. Traditionally, most of the unfavorable lesions are treated with total
laryngectomy and some sort of a neck dissection; generally, these patients receive postoperative radiation. This unfavorable subgroup, which has destroyed cartilage,
has been analyzed by Jesse, 219 who demonstrated an ominous pattern: Of the 48 patients, 6% had distant metastasis at presentation, 39% had cervical metastasis,
and 30% required an urgent tracheostomy at the time of diagnosis. In this series of patients, the 4-year cure rate using laryngectomy and radiation was 54%. In the
subset of patients in this study who required tracheostomy, the survival rate decreased to 38%. Other studies have demonstrated 5-year survival rates of 25% to 30%
in this subset of larynx cancer patients. 220,221
It is unusual for the more favorable lesions to be treated with a laryngectomy initially, because we now recognize the effectiveness of the organ-preservation (i.e.,
chemoradiation) strategies. The concept of organ preservation by using induction chemotherapy to help identify those lesions likely to respond to radiation therapy is
a new addition to the treatment armamentarium. Those favorable results of nonrandomized trials 1,2 and 3 and the results of the Veterans Administration Cooperative
Study Group 222,223 include a number of patients with T4 lesions. Although we must exercise caution in replacing standard and time-honored therapy with new
strategies, the concept of organ preservation is today widely accepted as standard therapy in selected advanced larynx and hypopharynx cancers.
Harwood and associates 214 reported local control in 56% of T4, N0 glottic lesions treated with radical radiation therapy. The 5-year survival rate for radiation with
surgical salvage was 49%. Within this group, the local control rate for patients classified as T4 from cartilage invasion was 67% at 5 years. This result was
significantly better than for those T4 patients who had pyriform sinus involvement. In this latter group, the actuarial local control rate was only 19%. The T4 patients
with hypopharyngeal involvement do not seem to be good candidates for radical radiation therapy. This circumstance parallels the dismal performance of the similar
group treated surgically and reported by Jesse. 219 It also is similar to a comparably poor performance for those larynx cancer patients with hypopharyngeal extension
noted by Pfister et al. 1 in their larynx-preservation study with induction chemotherapy. The same trend of poor chemoradiation performance for those larynx cancer
patients with hypopharyngeal extension was noted by Karp and coworkers. 2 Whatever the treatment variation, these patients consistently seem to do poorly.
Subglottis
Although the preponderance of subglottic tumors are SCCs, adenocarcinomas and adenoid cystic carcinomas are seen occasionally. 92 The cure rate for these tumors
is poor, despite combination therapy. Total laryngectomy and appropriate neck surgery, including thyroidectomy, are probably the surgical treatment most
recommended, and postoperative radiation therapy should probably be administered. 79,93 Mediastinal dissection of the paratracheal nodal groups does not seem to
add substantially to survival rates. 92

Chemotherapy for Preservation of Laryngeal Function—Organ Preservation
Surgical management of locally advanced SCCs of the larynx and hypopharynx has often required total laryngectomy. Organ-preservation trials in the form of
uncontrolled feasibility series and prospective randomized controlled trials are now available to guide appropriate use of chemotherapy. In general, two nonsurgical
strategies—induction chemotherapy followed by definitive radiation therapy in responding patients, and concurrent radiation therapy and chemotherapy—are the
alternatives to laryngectomy.
Concurrent chemoradiation has been used for the treatment of unresectable head and neck cancer for decades. Trials of multiagent cisplatin-based chemoradiation
strategies have demonstrated improved locoregional control and survival compared with radiation therapy alone in cancers of the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and in
unresectable cancers of all aerodigestive sites. 224,225,226 and 227 For resectable stage III and IV cancers of the larynx and stage II, III, and IV cancers of the hypopharynx,
mature data is available on the induction chemotherapy strategies as a means of preserving the larynx. Randomized trials evaluating concurrent chemoradiation are
nearing completion in the United States and are in progress in Europe. 228
The concept of induction chemotherapy as a primary strategy evolved for two main reasons. First, high response rates could be achieved with the standard cisplatin
(100 mg/m2 day 1) and infusional 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) (1000 mg/m 2/d, days 1 to 5) regimen: an 85% overall response rate (complete and partial) and a clinical
complete response rate ranging from 30% to 50%. 229,230 and 231 A pathologic complete response was confirmed by biopsy or by resection in two-thirds of clinical
complete responders. Second, the response to chemotherapy was generally predictive of radiosensitivity. 3,232 These observations led to a number of uncontrolled
trials, mostly in patients with advanced laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers that were destined for total laryngectomy. 1,2,233,234,235 and 236 These small published series
confirmed the feasibility of the concept of induction chemotherapy followed by definitive radiotherapy to preserve speech and swallowing function, and importantly,
they suggested that survival was not compromised in the process. Three randomized controlled trials and a metaanalysis provide data from which to draw conclusions
and recommend guidelines for patient management. 138,237,238 The general scheme for organ preservation protocols that was conceptualized by Hong and colleagues 3
is outlined in Figure 30.3-8.

FIGURE 30.3-8. Posterior view of pharynx and great vessels shows retropharyngeal lymph nodes commonly involved in hypopharyngeal cancer. a, artery; Int.,
internal; n, nerve; v, vein.

Randomized Trials
The first randomized trial 237 using induction chemotherapy for organ preservation was started in 1985 by the Department of Veterans Affairs Laryngeal Study Group in
which 332 patients with stage III or IV (M0) cancer of the glottis or supraglottis were analyzed ( Table 30.3-4). These were randomly assigned treatments with either
surgery (total laryngectomy) and radiation therapy, or induction chemotherapy and radiation therapy. In the experimental arm, partial or complete responders after two
cycles of cisplatin and 5-FU received a third cycle of chemotherapy followed by definitive radiation therapy. Laryngectomy was reserved for salvage of persistent or
recurrent disease. Patients demonstrating less than a partial response at the primary site after two cycles of chemotherapy underwent immediate laryngectomy.

TABLE 30.3-4. Randomized Trials of Laryngeal Preservation

Various prognostic factors were analyzed for response to chemotherapy, organ preservation, and survival. 239 For surgically treated patients, the one factor in
multivariate analysis that was significant for decreased survival was extracapsular extension of nodal disease, whereas no independent predictive factor of survival
emerged for chemotherapy-treated patients. Low T class (T1–T3 vs. T4) was the best predictor of response to chemotherapy (relative risk ratio, 5.6; P = .01). T class,
p53 overexpression, and elevated proliferating cell nuclear antigen index were independent predictors of successful organ preservation with induction chemotherapy
and radiotherapy.
The second randomized induction chemotherapy trial of larynx preservation was conducted by the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
(EORTC) in patients with resectable cancers of the pyriform sinus or the aryepiglottic fold (lateral epilarynx) 238 (see Table 30.3-4). A total of 194 patients with stage
T2–T4, N0–N2b were randomized to surgery (total laryngectomy plus partial pharyngectomy) and radiation therapy in one study arm or induction chemotherapy
(cisplatin + 5-FU) and radiation therapy in responders. A clinical complete response at the primary site after two or three cycles of chemotherapy was required to
proceed to radiation, and this was achieved in 54% of patients. Survival equivalence was demonstrated at 3 and 5 years, and a functioning larynx was preserved in
48% at 3 years. A delay in development of distant metastases was noted for the chemotherapy-treated patients, whereas no differences were observed in the rates of
local or regional failure between treatment groups.
A third randomized trial of patients with locally advanced larynx cancer was conducted by the Groupe d'Etude des Tumeurs de la Tete et du Cou in France 240 (see
Table 30.3-4). This study was limited to patients with T3 tumors and consisted predominately of patients with glottic primaries. This was in contrast to the Veterans
Affairs trial in which a majority of the lesions were supraglottic lesions. Laryngectomy was avoided in 41% (15 of 36 patients); however, the trial has been criticized for
the small number of patients enrolled, the lack of imaging studies to assess tumor extent before treatment, and the lack of proper response evaluation after
chemotherapy and after radiotherapy.
A metaanalysis by Lefebvre of chemotherapy in head and neck cancer limited to the 602 patients enrolled in these three trials shows a statistically nonsignificant
difference in survival after a median follow-up of 5.8 years (45% for surgery patients vs. 39% for the induction chemotherapy group). 241 The larynx was preserved in

58% of surviving patients at 5 years.
From these three randomized studies, one can conclude the following for induction chemotherapy as a strategy to preserve the larynx: Survival is not jeopardized;
laryngeal function can be preserved in approximately one-half of surviving patients; and the risk of requiring salvage surgery increases with bulky primary and nodal
disease. In effect, these trial results confirm a role for induction chemotherapy using the cisplatin plus 5-FU regimen followed by radiation therapy as an alternative
nonsurgical treatment for patients with locally advanced cancers of the larynx (stage III and IV) and hypopharynx (stage II, III, and IV) who would otherwise undergo
total laryngectomy. A team approach that includes the surgical, radiation, and medical oncologists; nutritionist; and experts in lifestyle behavior modification is critical
to the success of combined modality treatment. So that surgery can be performed promptly in nonresponders and for salvage of recurrent disease, it is essential that
the surgeon be involved throughout and after the induction chemotherapy and radiation phases of treatment.
Left unanswered by these trials are the following important questions: (1) What is the precise role of induction chemotherapy?, (2) What is the comparative efficacy of
radiation therapy as a single modality for preservation of the larynx?, and (3) What is the potential of concurrent chemotherapy and radiation therapy to improve
locoregional control and survival? These questions are being addressed for cancers of the larynx and hypopharynx in randomized trials in the United States and
Europe in which cisplatin plus 5-FU induction chemotherapy followed by radiation therapy in responding patients (partial response of the primary tumor) serves as the
control arm.228 The U.S. intergroup trial (R91-11) will complete accrual of 546 patients in the year 2000. This trial will provide data on two treatment alternatives:
concurrent radiation therapy plus cisplatin compared to the control group, and radiation therapy alone compared to the control group. Until those trial results mature
for larynx cancer specifically, induction chemotherapy sequenced with radiation therapy remains the standard of care. The consistent survival benefit observed in
recent multisite and oropharynx randomized trials comparing concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy to radiotherapy alone is impressive. This suggests that the
concurrent rather than the sequential strategy may emerge as the preferred treatment strategy for larynx and hypopharynx primaries as well.
Chemotherapy in the Treatment of Far Advanced (Unresectable) Locoregional Disease
There is no role for induction chemotherapy in the management of patients with advanced locoregional disease in which clear margins cannot be achieved by
resection. Many randomized trials of patients with unresectable disease were carried out in the 1980s, which directly compared induction chemotherapy followed by
radiation to radiation therapy alone. 242 Survival benefit was reported in a subset analysis of patients with unresectable disease in only a single randomized trial. 243 In
contrast, prospective randomized trials of patients with unresectable disease clearly demonstrate a substantial increase in locoregional control and significantly
improved survival with the use of concurrent chemotherapy and radiation therapy regimens when compared to either standard or altered fractionation schedules of
radiation therapy alone. 224,225,226 and 227 Thus, concurrent chemotherapy and radiation therapy can be recommended as the standard of care in this disease setting,
provided the patient has sufficient performance status and psychosocial resources to undergo the generally more toxic treatment. At present, the most widely used
regimen with proven survival benefit in a multicenter comparative trial is cisplatin 100 mg/m 2 on days 1, 22, and 43, during which radiation is taken to 70 Gy at a rate
of 2 Gy/d.3 Taxane-based regimens are under investigation in phase I and II trials evaluating a variety of doses and infusion schedules combined with varying
radiation therapy fractionation schedules. 244,245,246 and 247 However, insufficient data is available on efficacy and toxicity at this time to recommend any taxane-based
chemoradiation regimen as a standard of care. For patients with poor performance status, radiation therapy alone or, in some situations, supportive care alone may
constitute appropriate management.
In summary, the selection of a treatment strategy for T4 supraglottic and glottic larynx cancers is dependent on a variety of factors, including the following:
1. If there is bulky neck disease and if the primary tumor does not have extensive hypopharyngeal extension, induction chemotherapy followed by radiation therapy
to the primary tumor and neck can be used in chemosensitive tumors. This should be followed by a neck dissection(s). In such lesions that are not
chemoresponsive, laryngectomy and neck dissection(s) plus postoperative radiation therapy should be used.
2. If substantial hypopharyngeal extension is present, laryngectomy or laryngopharyngectomy plus neck dissection and postoperative radiation therapy is
recommended.
3. If no clinical neck disease is present (i.e., T4, N0), induction chemotherapy followed by radiation therapy to the primary tumor and necks in chemoresponsive
tumors should be considered. If such a lesion does not respond adequately to induction chemotherapy, then the logical course should be a laryngectomy. The
laryngectomy should probably be accompanied by appropriate selective neck dissection for staging 248 and, depending on the result of the histologic analysis of
the neck nodes harvested, postoperative radiation therapy.
4. In these large lesions, especially lesions that demonstrate subglottic extension, radiation must be directed to the tracheal stoma, because recurrence here can
be seen in a substantial percentage of these patients. Other indications for postoperative radiation are cartilage and extensive soft tissue invasion.
Most of these strategies for treating patients with advanced larynx or hypopharynx cancer and clinically positive necks must be analyzed in light of the dynamic state
of the knowledge and experience with the organ-preservation concepts. Hitherto, we have been comfortable with the notion that substantial neck disease usually
required surgery of some sort at some stage in the treatment plan. Armstrong and colleagues, 249 however, have published data that parallel the concept of larynx
preservation and that suggest that patients with clinically palpable cervical nodal metastases who have a complete response to chemotherapy and who receive
high-dose radiation therapy have excellent neck control and may not need neck dissection. To address this issue, they reviewed the neck management of the first 80
patients treated in the larynx preservation trials at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. Of these, 54 patients presented with clinically positive nodes. Of these,
44% had a complete response and 20% had a partial response in the neck to induction chemotherapy. In 63% of the major responders, surgery to the neck was
omitted, and radiation alone was used. Neck control was obtained in 91%, with only 1 in 17 complete responders and 1 of 5 partial responders exhibiting neck failure.
These data suggest that major responders to induction chemotherapy may possibly avoid neck dissection. These data require supplementation, and data for
concomitant chemotherapy and radiotherapy must also be generated before it can be decided if this observation is sustained. Even if these preliminary suggestions
are substantiated, however, the definitive question to be asked is whether the morbidity endured with high-dose radiation is justified when moderate-dose neck
radiation plus a tailored neck operation is so well tolerated.
Considerations for Neck Surgery
Management of the neck is critical to successful therapy of supraglottic cancer. Levendag and associates 77 studied elective surgical management of the neck in a
group of patients with stage I and II supraglottic carcinoma treated with surgery alone at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. In those patients who
underwent elective neck dissection (i.e., the group with clinically negative necks), 32% were found to have histologically positive cervical lymph nodes. One-half of the
patients with involved nodes eventually had cancer recurrence in the dissected neck. Additionally, 19% of patients with negative elective neck dissections had cancer
recurrence in the contralateral neck. Finally, in a group of 48 patients who did not have elective neck dissection, 29% had cancer recurrence in the neck. Therefore, a
total of 35% of the T1, N0 and T2, N0 patients ultimately developed cervical lymph node metastases. Importantly, nearly two-thirds of those who relapsed in the neck
eventually died from their cancer. On the other hand, none of the patients without neck relapse died from supraglottic cancer. These investigators compared their
experience with a similar patient group from the other studies that showed similar neck failure rates with surgery alone and when radiation therapy was administered
to the necks. Less than 5% failure follows electively radiated necks. These reports indicate that even the smallest supraglottic tumors require elective neck
management.
A variety of neck operations are currently used in the various treatment plans for laryngeal cancer: the classic radical neck dissection, the modified radical neck
dissection, and a group of regional dissections collectively known as selective neck dissections. This group of operations has been standardized and endorsed by the
American Academy of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery and the American Head and Neck Society. The monograph outlining the recommended terminology
should be studied, and oncologists are strongly urged to incorporate this classification into their lexicon to facilitate interinstitutional data recording and appropriate
comparisons.248
Considerable diversity of opinion exists in the surgical community as to which of these operations should be applied to which situation. Exact guidelines are not
consistently substantiated by the data available. Generalizations are possible, however. The radical neck dissection is almost never used in the clinically negative
neck, even in those lesions in which the probability for metastasis is extraordinary. This procedure is usually reserved for necks in which there is gross metastasis,
and even then the selective procedures are often used. Most of the time, however, these selective neck dissections are used as staging procedures in which the goal
is to harvest and sample the nodal groups at highest risk for metastasis. This philosophy has evolved as a result of our increasing reliance on radiation therapy as the
second half of neck treatment whenever disease is discovered in the neck. Only in very limited circumstances is the selective neck dissection thought to be
therapeutic; that is to say, in most necks in which any neck disease is present, postoperative radiation is recommended.
The choice of the appropriate selective neck dissection in larynx cancer is based on a knowledge of the consistent patterns of metastasis that are exhibited by the
various subsites within the larynx; for example, lesions of the supraglottis are prone to metastasis bilaterally and to levels II and III. Rarely, however, do they spread to

level I.41 Based on this knowledge, the logical staging operation for a supraglottic laryngeal cancer with a clinically negative neck would be designed specifically to
clean out those various compartments at highest risk. This is but one example of a tailored approach, and the reader is referred to the classic work by Lindberg, 41 in
which he mapped the patterns of metastases of the various aerodigestive SCCs. More recently, Shah and Andersen 250 applied the modern classification to this
process of selectivity and have established recommendations for the use of these neck operations.

HYPOPHARYNX
GENERAL
The hypopharynx is the area of the pharynx that lies behind and below the oropharynx, just outside the view provided by tongue blade and flashlight; as such, it is
visually inaccessible by routine office examination. Hypopharyngeal cancers are usually aggressive in their behavior, grow in an area of abundant lymphatic drainage,
do not produce early symptoms or signs, and usually occur in people who are nutritionally depleted and immunologically compromised. It is not surprising, then, that
the survival rates for these cancers are poor and that their treatment is difficult at best.
The hypopharynx is the area of the pharynx that lies behind and below the oropharynx, just outside the view provided by tongue blade and flashlight; as such, it is
visually inaccessible by routine office examination. Hypopharyngeal cancers are usually aggressive in their behavior, grow in an area of abundant lymphatic drainage,
do not produce early symptoms or signs, and usually occur in people who are nutritionally depleted and immunologically compromised. It is not surprising, then, that
the survival rates for these cancers are poor and that their treatment is difficult at best.
The hypopharynx extends from the oropharynx above to the esophageal inlet below, is cone shaped, and consists of three regions or subsites: the paired pyriform
sinuses, the posterior pharyngeal wall, and the postcricoid area. The larynx is located at the anterior aspect of the hypopharynx, indenting it to create the two lateral
sulci that are the pyriform sinuses. Although these sulci lie partially within the framework of the thyroid cartilage, they are actually part of the hypopharynx, and
cancers that develop within them behave differently than do those of the larynx. The lateral wall of each pyriform sinus continues around to blend with and become the
posterior pharyngeal wall. The apex of the pyriform sinuses extends down to a level just inferior to those endolaryngeal muscles of the adjacent true vocal cord.
Above, the medial walls of the pyriform sinuses each form the pharyngeal side of the corresponding aryepiglottic fold, which is the partition between the hypopharynx
and endolarynx. Laterally, the pyriform sinuses extend superiorly to the glossoepiglottic fold. The posterior aspect of each pyriform sinus is open and connects with
the hypopharyngeal cavity. In effect, each pyriform sinus is a three-walled space that opens into the general hypopharyngeal cavity (see Figs. 30.3-1 and 30.3-2).
The funnel-shaped postcricoid area begins just below the arytenoids and extends to the level of the cricopharyngeus muscle below. It is lined with the mucosa that
overlies the posterior lamina of the cricoid cartilage and that continues into the cervical esophagus. Laterally, the postcricoid mucosa blends with that of the pyriform
sinuses, and because of this, the same cancer often affects these two areas.
Approximately 70% of hypopharyngeal lesions occur in the pyriform sinuses, and the remaining 20% to 30% occur on the posterior pharyngeal wall and in the
postcricoid area. 251 Postcricoid cancers make up a small percentage of the latter group. Cancer of the hypopharynx is uncommon; approximately 2500 new cases are
diagnosed in the United States each year. Overall, these lesions occur more often in men by a significant ratio, but there does seem to be a higher incidence of lower
hypopharyngeal, or postcricoid, cancers in women. The upper hypopharyngeal lesions are more common in men. Those lower lesions are more often associated with
nutritional abnormalities, whereas the lesions in the remainder of the hypopharynx seem to be associated more with heavy smoking and drinking. 252 Those ratios vary
somewhat in different countries and change in accordance with the incidence of vitamin deficiencies. 253 For example, a higher incidence of carcinoma of the
postcricoid area is seen in patients with Plummer-Vinson syndrome, a condition that includes an iron deficiency anemia. This condition is especially prevalent in
northern Europe and is seen in nonsmoking women. Also, other metabolic deficiencies, such as vitamin B 12 malabsorption, may play a role in the development of
these lesions. 254
PATHOLOGY, PATHOGENESIS, AND NATURAL HISTORY
Almost all hypopharynx malignancies are SCCs that have developed in an environment of deranged mucosa. The generalized effects of the carcinogens encountered
over a lifetime can lead to the occurrence of multiple mucosal sites of epithelial disturbances that range from dyskeratosis to frank cancer. The concept of field
cancerization is in part responsible for the multiple, synchronous primary malignant lesions that occur in approximately 12% to 20% of hypopharyngeal cancers. 255,256
Cancers of the hypopharynx are generally aggressive in their behavior and demonstrate a natural history that is characterized by diffuse local spread, early
metastasis, and a relatively high rate of distant spread. The anatomy of the area is such that, once a cancer has penetrated the mucosa, little restriction is placed on
diffuse tumor extension in the submucosal plane. Because of this fact and also because of the abundant lymphatic network of the region, a localized hypopharyngeal
tumor is exceptional rather than expected. An important study by Harrison 256 demonstrated pathologically that, in 40% of hypopharynx lesions, the true extent of the
cancer had been underestimated initially. Tumors of the pharyngeal walls are more often ulcerative than exophytic and are particularly prone to an insidious and
deceptive growth pattern characterized by skip metastasis and ill-defined margins; once submucosal, these lesions can resurface at various locations remote from the
primary site. They can extend upward in this fashion and can travel all the way to the base of the skull. Cancers of the postcricoid area also tend to spread laterally
and can cause vocal cord paralysis by invading the recurrent laryngeal nerve just as it enters the larynx. Postcricoid lesions can extend inferiorly and can develop skip
metastases in the cervical esophagus. Gross involvement of the esophagus with postcricoid cancer is uncommon. These lesions usually do not produce early
symptoms, and when discovered, they often have caused cricoid cartilage destruction.
It is significant that the lateral walls of the pyriform sinuses lie against that area of the thyroid cartilage that is often ossified, a state that renders the cartilage
vulnerable to tumor invasion 257 (see Fig. 30.3-2). In Kirchner and Owen's series 78 of 500 whole-organ larynx sections, more than 50% of the pyriform sinus cancers
demonstrated cartilage invasion. This fact is relevant to the strategies of radiation oncologists and surgeons, because cancer involvement in the cartilage probably
lessens radiocurability and substantially compromises the potential for conservation laryngeal surgery. Depending on the degree of ossification present, tumor that
has invaded the thyroid or cricoid cartilage in one area can permeate the entire framework by extending within the cartilage and can even travel all the way to the
opposite lamina of the structure.
Overall, the distribution of metastatic hypopharynx cancer is to all levels of the neck, with the level II (jugulodigastric) nodes being most common; level III the next
most common site; and level I, IV, and V the least likely sites of metastasis. 41 Overall, the risk for cervical metastasis from pyriform sinus cancer is 75%; from posterior
pharyngeal wall, 60%; and from the postcricoid area, 40%. Because the pyriform sinuses are located laterally, only 10% of these lesions present with bilateral
metastasis. Such a pattern of spread occurs more commonly in postcricoid cancers, and it is the norm in posterior pharyngeal lesions. 258 Approximately 60% of
posterior pharyngeal wall lesions demonstrate bilateral cervical nodes at the initial examination. 259 Metastasis occurs early in the course of hypopharynx cancers.
Approximately 60% of pyriform sinus lesions are associated with clinically positive necks at the time of diagnosis, and many of those that have clinically negative
necks turn out to have occult metastasis in the thyroid gland or in the paratracheal node chain. 81,83
Because a significant number of postcricoid and pyriform sinus apex lesions metastasize to the less obvious paratracheal and thyroid gland lymphatics, the incidence
of occult metastasis from those sites is somewhat greater than in the higher pyriform sinus and posterior pharyngeal wall lesions that typically metastasize to the deep
jugular nodes. 260,261 Because of this fact, calculating occult metastatic rate is a problem in hypopharyngeal cancers.
The retropharyngeal lymph nodes that are located high in the neck are primary drainage sites for hypopharyngeal cancers and are involved in more than 40% of
patients with posterior pharyngeal wall and pyriform sinus lesions. 262 It is, therefore, especially important in the staging and treatment of this particular group of tumors
to include these nodes in the field of dissection, radiation, or both. These lymphatics are part of the deep jugular chain, are outside of the constrictor muscles, and are
readily visible by imaging (see Fig. 30.3-8). Involvement of the retropharyngeal nodes may produce a symptom complex characterized by pain and stiffness in the
neck, with pain radiating to the ipsilateral eye and forehead.
The incidence of distant metastasis from hypopharyngeal cancer is substantial, occurring in 24% of all sites and in all stages. This incidence is initially lower, rising in
those subpopulations that live longest. 263,264
DIAGNOSIS, EVALUATION, AND STAGING

Hypopharyngeal cancer is usually not diagnosed in its early stages. In fact, most series reported include few T1 lesions. This finding is due, in part, to the fact that
many patients with these cancers have abused their health by smoking and drinking heavily and therefore they have a high tolerance for throat symptoms; however, it
is also true that these lesions are often indolent and produce few symptoms until they are substantial in size. This is especially so for posterior pharyngeal wall
cancers. More than 50% of patients with hypopharyngeal cancer have clinically obvious cervical metastasis at the time they are first encountered, and in one-half of
these individuals, the neck mass is actually the presenting symptom. 265,266 Pyriform sinus and posterior pharyngeal wall lesions can cause a sensation of irritation and
mucus retention that is felt only with swallowing. Otalgia is characteristic of pyriform sinus lesions and is a manifestation of cancer compromising the sensory fibers of
the superior laryngeal nerve, the axons of which synapse with sensory nerves of the external auditory canal. The pain generated is typically dull and is perceived by
the patient in the posterior and inferior aspects of the canal and on the posterior aspect of the auricle. In the absence of ear findings, persistent pain in these areas
must be viewed with suspicion, and a careful examination of the upper aerodigestive tract must be done by someone skilled in the appropriate methods. Voice change
associated with pyriform sinus or postcricoid lesions is a late symptom and usually represents impairment of vocal cord function by invasion into the endolarynx or of a
recurrent laryngeal nerve. Patients often have lost their ability to swallow comfortably or have a lack of willingness to swallow because of fear of aspiration. Therefore,
they often become debilitated during the course of this disease.
Many patients with hypopharyngeal cancer are chronically ill before the development of their lesion, having the pulmonary and hepatic diseases that accompany a
lifetime of tobacco and alcohol excesses. Recognition of the compounding nature of these associations with hypopharyngeal cancer is essential in the formulation of
an appropriate treatment plan.
Physical examination of the hypopharynx has become much less problematic since the development of the flexible, fiberoptically lighted endoscopes that are easily
included in basic outpatient facilities (see Fig. 30.3-5). The crevices and partially hidden areas of the laryngopharynx are effectively visualized using these
instruments; however, the conventional hand-held mirror examination is still the state of the art when used by the experienced head and neck diagnostician. For the
occasional examiner, however, the benefits of the flexible endoscopes are significant. What is most essential is that the primary care physician not be reassured
falsely by a normal tongue blade and light examination. In those patients with persistent symptoms of swallowing alteration or discomfort, otalgia, or voice change,
such an examination is inadequate, because only a small part of the hypopharynx and none of the larynx is visualized in such an examination.
Examination of the hypopharynx can reveal pooling of secretions in all lesions of the area, but this finding is especially impressive in postcricoid and pyriform sinus
cancers because of impairment of the passage of food and secretions into the esophagus. Often, such pooling is the only sign of a small lesion. In larger tumors, the
abundance of secretions sometimes obscures the actual lesion. Occasionally, small and less obvious lesions of the medial wall and apex of the pyriform sinuses
cause subglottic edema in the adjacent larynx. Postcricoid carcinomas generally produce esophageal obstructive symptoms sooner than tumors in other areas of the
hypopharynx.
In deeply invasive postcricoid or posterior pharyngeal wall cancers, fixation of the larynx and the pharyngeal wall to the prevertebral fascia often is associated with a
loss of normal laryngeal crepitation when the examining physician attempts to move the thyroid cartilage from side to side. As with other sites in the head and neck,
the importance of lesion thickness and depth is becoming more obvious, especially as the search continues for nonsurgical means of treating these cancers. The
thickness, or third dimension, of hypopharyngeal tumors; their lateral extension into the neck; and finally, the status of the adjacent lateral cervical and
retropharyngeal nodes are visualized well by CT or MRI. 267
Barium esophagogram is a relatively effective tool for detecting second primary cancers in the esophagus and also for evaluating postcricoid lesions 268; however, this
study is of limited value because it visualizes only the surface of the area and does not accurately demonstrate the total tumor volume. Because of tissue edema and
the resulting image distortion that can be caused by instrumentation, these studies should be obtained before endoscopy and biopsy whenever possible.
Each hypopharyngeal cancer should be examined, staged, and carefully mapped on a permanent record (see Fig. 30.3-6); importantly, this should be accomplished
on the awake and upright patient. Direct endoscopy and biopsy should then be done on all patients under general anesthesia, so that adequate tissue can be
sampled and the third-dimensional appreciation for the tumor better achieved. Finally, considering the significant incidence of multiple synchronous primary tumors
that occur with hypopharyngeal cancer, esophagoscopy and bronchoscope should be done at this time.
STAGING SYSTEM
As with most cancers, a workable staging system is critical to the evaluation of treatment methods and for the comparison of data between institutions ( Table 30.3-5).
This is especially true now that the use of sophisticated imaging allows for a relative quantification of tumor volume and extension. Although staging based on
physical examination alone is fairly accurate, imaging is especially important in those lesions treated by nonsurgical means, because pathologic positivity or negativity
of the neck is never proved unless a recurrence develops. Although considerable effort has been expended to develop workable and descriptive terminology, there
continue to be limitations to current staging for hypopharyngeal cancers. For example, the system is satisfactory for disease of the pyriform sinuses, but it cannot be
applied completely to lesions of the posterior pharyngeal wall, because they usually do not invade the larynx, and fixation is not part of the natural history. Rather,
posterior pharyngeal wall tumors would be more appropriately staged by tumor diameter, as is the case with oropharyngeal lesions. According to the current system, a
5 × 4–cm posterior pharyngeal lesion without laryngeal fixation would still be classified as a T1 lesion, but in fact, it would have a prognosis similar to that for a T3
lesion.37,269 The nodal staging and the stage grouping for the hypopharynx are the same as with other head and neck sites.

TABLE 30.3-5. Hypopharynx Staging

TREATMENT AND SURVIVAL
A variety of prognostic factors have been identified for squamous carcinomas of the hypopharynx. Women and patients younger than 50 years of age seem to have a
more favorable outcome. Because these tumors can affect swallowing, significant weight loss can occur, and extreme nutritional deficiency and debilitation may even
prevent the delivery of curative therapy. Because many of the symptoms of this disease result from an advanced state, most patients are stage III or IV when
diagnosed, and therefore, most are candidates for combined-modality treatment. This treatment involves surgery, radiation therapy and, more recently, chemotherapy
programs. Surgeon, radiation oncologist, and medical oncologist must collaborate closely in the multidisciplinary evaluation and treatment of patients with
hypopharyngeal cancer.
The fact that most patients with hypopharyngeal cancers currently are managed with combined-treatment modalities probably is not entirely explained by an inherent
biologic difference between these tumors and other SCCs in the upper aerodigestive tract; rather, it may also reflect the fact that only a small number of these patients
present with T1 or T2 disease. Higher percentages of poorly differentiated carcinomas are seen in the hypopharynx, but cell for cell, it is not entirely clear that these
cancers are different from other poorly differentiated SCCs found in other sites. What makes hypopharyngeal cancers particularly ominous is probably related in large
part to the anatomy of the area that allows extensive spreading of these tumors. On the other hand, even early-stage lesions do not do as well as other aerodigestive
SCCs, and furthermore, in all larynx preservation protocols, the hypopharyngeal lesions fare worse than the larynx lesions. Finally, poor performance relates to
debilitation, chronic anemia, to the extensive lymphatic drainage of the area, and to the fact that the diffuse carcinogenic effects that led to the initial problem also

create an environment of condemned mucosal multifocality and de novo carcinoma formation.
The appropriate therapy for tumors of the hypopharynx is predicated on several factors, such as the patient's performance status, extent of disease, laryngeal
involvement, and the presence and extent of metastasis. If, for example, the only surgical option available for removal of a given lesion of the hypopharynx involves a
total laryngectomy, then organ preservation strategies using chemotherapy and radiation therapy become more appealing. However, total laryngectomy is not always
necessary with resection of hypopharyngeal cancers, and a few selected patients who have tumors of the pharyngeal wall and pyriform sinuses are candidates for
partial laryngopharyngectomies. The physiologic stress imposed on older and debilitated patients by these partial operations, however, can be unacceptable. Thin,
early-stage cancers of the hypopharynx are probably as curable with radiation therapy as with surgery.
Excision of postcricoid cancers always involves a total laryngectomy. In a select subset of patients, lesions of the posterior pharyngeal wall can be resected even
while retaining laryngeal integrity. Even in the smaller of these lesions, however, the larynx can be preserved in only a few cases. 258 Because of the tendency of
pharyngeal wall lesions to have ill-defined margins, generous resections are necessary; with such liberal tissue removal, much of the sensory innervation normally
used in the act of swallowing is violated. With large T3 and T4 tumors, laryngectomy is mandatory to achieve adequate surgical margins and to avoid the significant
chronic aspiration that usually follows pharyngectomy in these cases. With the contemporary techniques of reconstruction in head and neck surgery being as
sophisticated as they are, the limitations to this form of surgery do not relate to anatomic realignment; rather, they are physiologic, and an ill-conceived larynx
preservation procedure may cure the cancer but condemn the patient to an unacceptable lifestyle. Newer techniques of hypopharyngeal reconstruction are being
developed that use reinnervated free flaps. This reconstitution of the sensory apparatus so important to deglutition may to some extent solve the problems currently
limiting the ability to resect this area radically. 270
Limited T1 and T2 lesions on the medial wall of the pyriform sinus may be removed by partial laryngectomy, but either extension to the apex of the sinus or
involvement of the adjacent postcricoid area mandates total laryngectomy. These medial wall lesions are particularly prone to penetrate the paraglottic space of the
larynx (see Fig. 30.3-2), and when this does occur, partial laryngectomy becomes oncologically unsafe. In a pyriform sinus lesion, any motion change noticed in the
vocal cord suggests invasion into the larynx. Some notable surgeons are skeptical of any indication for the use of partial laryngectomy for cancers of the pyriform
sinuses. However, whatever the indications, it is fundamental that any attempt to remove a pyriform sinus cancer with less than a total laryngectomy should be done
only by those surgeons with considerable experience in making the subtle judgments so often involved in this type of surgery. With the alternatives to surgery that are
now available to treat these tumors, and considering our consistent ability to restore voice function after laryngectomy, any oncologic gamble associated with
inadvisably trying to save the larynx is unacceptable. Overall, partial laryngopharyngectomy with preservation of voice and swallowing can be justifiably performed in
fewer than 5% of all hypopharyngeal cancers. 271
Radiation therapy is effective for early lesions of the hypopharynx, especially when they are exophytic. Mendenhall and associates 272 report local control in 79% of T1
and 71% of T2 lesions treated with radiation; however, the 5-year survival rate in this group was only 60%. Vandenbrouck and coworkers 273 reported a 5-year survival
rate of only 40% in an extensive series of smaller lesions treated with radiation therapy. Itami et al. 274 reported local control of 49% for T1/T2 lesions of the pyriform
sinus, which fell to 25% for T3/T4 disease. Doses of 70 Gy or higher are generally used, depending on the fractionation program. Pameijer and colleagues 275
evaluated the role of CT scans in predicting the outcome for patients treated with definitive radiation for T1/T2 disease. Tumor volume was found to be prognostic. For
tumors larger than 6.5 mL, local control was 25% compared with 89% for tumors of less than 6.5 mL. These data are similar to those achieved surgically for early
disease. For instance, Shah et al. 276 reported 5-year survival rates of 43% and 38%, respectively, for surgically managed TI and T2/T3 (N0) hypopharyngeal disease.
Disease control drops significantly for more advanced lesions. In the series by Mendenhall et al. 272 and Bataini and colleagues, 277 T3 lesions treated with primary
radiation therapy had approximately a 40% local control rate but a dismal 5-year survival rate of less than 20%. Results of surgery for advanced disease are not any
better. Shah and coworkers276 reported a 16% 5-year survival rate for patients with T3 disease. When comparing single-modality therapy of hypopharyngeal cancers,
results of surgery and radiation therapy are roughly equivalent, with both yielding suboptimal outcomes.
Because of the consistently poor survival data associated with the single-modality methods of treating more advanced hypopharyngeal cancer, combined therapy
consisting of radiation administered after pharyngectomy or laryngopharyngectomy is the method currently being practiced in most centers. 272,278,279 The sequencing of
the modalities is fairly standard, with the radiation generally administered postoperatively in all but selected circumstances. Essentially, this sequence allows the safe
delivery of radiation doses in the 6000- to 7000-cGy range. Various trials from the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group and others have compared preoperative with
postoperative therapy, and those data suggest better locoregional control and a trend toward better survival in the group treated with postoperative therapy. 280,281
Select circumstances exist, however, in which radiation therapy is recommended before surgery. For example, in those circumstances in which the primary tumor is
small and exophytic and is therefore suitable for definitive radiation therapy, but in which the degree of neck disease precludes management with radiation alone,
curative therapy to both the primary tumor and neck followed by neck dissection is an acceptable treatment plan. Mendenhall and associates 272 have reported an 80%
2-year control rate for disease above the clavicle in patients with advanced neck disease and early primary tumors that have been treated in this fashion. Just as with
other head and neck sites, the clonal progeny in cervical metastasis is often more prominent than in the primary tumor.
Several groups have reported results of a treatment strategy that consists of primary radiation with surgery being used only for salvage. Keane and colleagues 282
reported 41% disease control using this approach. Most patients (75%) in this series had been staged as T3 or T4. Approximately two-thirds had palpable nodal
metastases, and the 5-year survival rate was only 15%.
Traditional treatment programs of surgery and radiation therapy for hypopharyngeal carcinomas have been augmented by organ-preservation induction-chemotherapy
strategies. Organ preservation for hypopharyngeal cancer may be feasible, but the percentage of patients who preserve their larynx long term is unsatisfactory. Future
trials exploring concomitant chemotherapy and radiotherapy are more likely to yield better locoregional control and to affect survival.
Two randomized trials of organ preservation for patients with cancer of the hypopharynx have been published. The EORTC randomized 202 patients with operable
squamous cancers of the pyriform sinus or the aryepiglottic fold (stage T2, T3, or T4 and N0, N1, N2a, or N2b) to receive either induction chemotherapy and radiation
or standard treatment with total laryngectomy, partial pharyngectomy, and radiation. 238 In the experimental treatment group, only patients achieving a clinical complete
response of the primary tumor proceeded to radiotherapy; all others underwent resection. The preliminary results after a median follow-up of 51 months show no
difference in survival for the two treatment groups; 3- and 5-year survival estimates are 57% and 30% for patients randomized to chemotherapy and 43% and 35% for
those randomized to surgery. Fifty-four percent of patients had a clinical complete response at the primary site and 52% in the neck after chemotherapy. Three- and
5-year estimates of survival with a functional larynx were 28% and 17%, respectively. If only the deaths from local progression are considered, to account for patients
who died with a functional larynx, then these survival estimates with a preserved larynx are 42% and 35%, respectively. The EORTC is now embarking on a trial that
will compare sequential to simultaneous chemotherapy and radiotherapy for organ preservation of patients with cancer of the hypopharynx.
Mahe and colleagues 283 evaluated the role of surgery for patients with T3/T4 or N2/N3 cancer of the hypopharynx. Ninety-one patients were randomly assigned
treatment with induction chemotherapy followed by surgery and radiation or induction chemotherapy followed by radiation. Median and 5-year survival rates were
significantly better with resection: 40 versus 20 months, and 37% versus 19%, respectively. This difference was explained by a significantly higher local failure rate in
the nonsurgical group of 61%, compared with 37% in the surgical group. Because of the nature of the study design, no conclusions regarding the impact of induction
chemotherapy can be made.
Survival data vary considerably between sites within the hypopharynx. Few postcricoid cancers are treated by radiation, but anecdotal experience suggests that a
small subset of patients with smaller thin lesions are treatable with curative therapy. In almost all postcricoid lesions, extensive surgery consisting of
laryngopharyngectomy or laryngopharyngoesophagectomy with reconstruction is followed by postoperative radiation and yields a 20% to 25% 5-year survival rate. 284
Posterior pharyngeal wall lesions of earlier stages can be treated with equal effectiveness by radiation or surgery. More advanced lesions are best treated by
combined surgery followed by postoperative radiation. Meoz-Mendez and colleagues 285 reported that 91% of T1 and 73% of T2 lesions of the pharyngeal wall can be
controlled with primary radiation, requiring a dosage greater than 6500 cGy. For T3 and T4 disease, similar doses controlled 61% and 37%, respectively. Pyriform
sinus lesions of early stage are curable by radiation, whereas the much more common advanced lesions are best treated by combined therapy. Data accumulated by
Vandenbrouck and coworkers280 showed a 3-year survival rate of 48%, which dropped to 33% at 5 years for lesions treated with total and partial laryngectomy plus
postoperative radiation therapy. In that same series, the 3-year survival rate was 67% in the group treated by partial laryngectomy plus postoperative radiation
therapy. This latter statistic probably reflects the increased survival expected in lesser-stage disease.
All treatment plans for hypopharyngeal cancer must consider certain facts: The overwhelming majority of these lesions metastasize to cervical lymph nodes, and in
the case of the posterior pharyngeal wall, bilateral metastasis is the rule rather than the exception; 40% of posterior pharyngeal wall lesions and probably an equal

number of upper pyriform sinus lesions metastasize to the retropharyngeal nodes; in those patients with clinically negative necks, the incidence of occult metastasis is
substantial; and between 20% and 30% of pyriform sinus lesions, and probably an equal number of posterior pharyngeal wall lesions, are associated with distant
metastasis. Even in the lesser-stage hypopharyngeal lesions, the high rate of regional metastases requires inclusion of the neck(s) in all management plans.
SPECIFIC TREATMENT METHODS
Patients treated with primary radiation therapy require treatment to the primary site and both necks. The primary site and upper neck fields are treated with bilateral
opposed portals, and the low-neck fields are treated with anterior portals. If lymph nodes are involved, a neck dissection usually is added. If no neck dissection is
planned, the node-bearing regions must be treated with higher doses.
When patients who have had a total laryngectomy are receiving postoperative radiation, it is important to radiate the tracheal stoma. For postoperative radiation, the
total doses recommended to the primary site and involved areas of the neck are between 6000 and 6500 cGy in 6.5 to 7.5 weeks. The tracheal stoma is treated with a
total dose of 5000 to 5500 cGy.
Lesions of the hypopharynx often require laryngopharyngectomy or laryngopharyngoesophagectomy, after which the means of reconstruction consist of free jejunal
graft with microvascular anastomosis, 286 various myocutaneous flaps or, in the cases that include esophagectomy, gastric transposition. 287 Reconstruction of the
hypopharynx has been enhanced greatly by the interposition free jejunal graft, which is less morbid than gastric transposition and is associated with a high rate of
success.
Surgical management of the neck is similar to that of other sites in the upper aerodigestive tract. In those patients with substantial and multilevel disease, at least a
modified radical neck dissection usually is performed in continuity with the primary resection, unless the primary tumor has been treated with curative radiation. In
those patients with minimal neck disease or with clinically negative necks, radiation alone can suffice, or any of a variety of selected neck dissections can be used as
a means of removing gross disease from the neck in preparation for radiation. 248
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Pfister D, Strong E, Harrison L. Larynx preservation with combined chemo- and radiotherapy in advanced head and neck cancer. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:830.
2. Karp D, Vaughan C, Carter R, et al. Larynx preservation with induction chemotherapy plus radiation as alternative to laryngectomy. Am J Clin Oncol 1991;14:273.
3. Hong W, O'Donoghue G, Sheetz S. Sequential response patterns to chemotherapy and radiotherapy in head and neck cancer: potential impact of treatment in advanced laryngeal cancer. Prog
Clin Biol Res 1985;201:191.
4. Cann C, Fried M, Rothman K. Epidemiology of squamous cell cancer of the head and neck. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1985;18;367.
5. Gloecker Ries L, Miller B, Hankey B. SEER cancer statistics review, 19731991. Washington, DC: Surveillance Program, Division of Cancer Prevention and Control, National Cancer Institute,
1992.
6. Barclay T, Rao N. The incidence and mortality rates for laryngeal cancer from total cancer registries. Laryngoscope 1975;83:254.
7. Krajina Z, Kucar Z, Zonic-Carnelutti V. Epidemiology of laryngeal cancer. Laryngoscope 1975;85:11.
8. Iwai H, Koike Y. Primary laryngoplasty. Laryngoscope 1975;85:929.
9. Lowry W. Alcoholism in cancer of the head and neck. Laryngoscope 1975;85:1275.
10. Clayton L, Byrd W. The African-American cancer crisis. J Health Care Poor Underserved 1993;4:830.
11. Austen D. Larynx. In: Schottenfeld P, Aumeni J, eds. Cancer epidemiology and prevention. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1982:554.
12. Iwamoto H. An epidemiological study of laryngeal cancer in Japan (19601969). Laryngoscope 1975;85:1162.
13. Hiranandani L. Panel on epidemiology and etiology of laryngeal carcinoma. Laryngoscope 1975;85:1197.
14. DeStefani E, Correa P, Oreggia F. Risk factors for laryngeal cancer. Cancer 1987;60:3087.
15. Graham S, Mettlin C, Marshall J. Dietary factors in the epidemiology of cancer of the larynx. Am J Epidemiol 1981;113:675.
16. Morrison M. Is chronic gastroesophageal reflux a causative factor in glottic carcinoma? Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1988;99:370.
17. Wynder E, Bross I, Day E. Epidemiological approach to the etiology of cancer of the larynx. JAMA 1956;160:1384.
18. Kurozumi S, Harada Y, Sugimoto Y, Saaski H. Airway malignancy in poisonous gas workers. Laryngol Otol 1977;91:217.
19. Morgan R, Shettigara P. Occupational asbestos exposure, smoking, and laryngeal carcinoma. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1976;271:308.
20. Goolden A. Radiation cancer of the pharynx. BMJ 1951;2:1110.
21. Doyle D, Henderson L, LeJeune F. Changes in human papillomavirus typing of recurrent respiratory papillomatosis progressing to malignant neoplasm. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
1994;120:1273.
22. Fouret P, Dabit D, Sibony M. Expression of p53 protein related to the presence of human papillomavirus infection in precancerous lesions of the larynx. Am J Pathol 1995;146:599.
23. Gissman L, Wolnik W, Ikenberg H. Human papilloma virus types 6 and 11 DNA sequences in genital laryngeal papillomas and in some cervical cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1983;80:560.
24. Howley P. The human papillomaviruses. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1982;106:429.
25. Kashima HD, Tzyy-Choou W, Mounts P. Carcinoma ex-papilloma: histologic and virologic studies in whole-organ sections of the larynx. Laryngoscope 1988;98:619.
26. Kashima H, Kutcher M, Keswsis T. Human papillomavirus in squamous cell carcinoma, leukoplakia, lichen planus and clinically normal epithelium of the oral cavity. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol
1990;99:55.
27. Lynch P. Warts and cancer. Am J Dermatopathol 1982;4:55.
28. Spitz M, Fvegers J, Goepfert H, Hong W, Newell G. Squamous cell carcinoma of the upper aerodigestive tract. Cancer 1988;61:203.
29. Segi M. Age-adjusted death rates for cancer for selected sites in 46 countries in 1977. Tokyo: Segi Institute for Cancer Epidemiology, 1982:13.
30. Ramadan M, Morton R, Stell P, Phawah P. Epidemiology of laryngeal cancer. Clin Otolaryngol 1982;7:417.
31. Pietramtoni L, Fior R. Clinical and surgical problems of cancer of the larynx and hypopharynx. Acta Otolaryngol 1958;142:1.
32. Lauerma S. Treatment of laryngeal cancer: a study of 638 cases. Acta Otolaryngol 1967;225:140.
33. Wynder E. Toward the prevention of laryngeal cancer. Laryngoscope 1975;85:1190.
34. Martensson B. Indications for transconiscopy. In: Alberti P, Bryce D, eds. Workshops from the Centennial Conference on Laryngeal Cancer. East Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts,
1976:668.
35. Koufman J, Burke A. Etiology of laryngeal carcinoma. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1997;30:14.
36. Kirchner J. Growth and spread of laryngeal cancer: as related to partial laryngectomy. In: Alberti P, Bryce D, eds. Workshops from the Centennial Conference on Laryngeal Cancer. East
Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1976:54.
37. American Joint Committee on Cancer. Manual for staging of cancer, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1988.
38. Hirano M. Structure of the vocal fold in normal and disease states. In: Ludlow C, O'Connell H, eds. Proceedings of the Conference on the Assessment of Vocal Pathology. Report no. 11.
Rockville, MD: American Speech and Hearing Association, 1981:11.
39. Sessions R, Miller S, Martin G, et al. Videostroboscopy in assessment of early glottic carcinomas. Trans Am Laryngol Assoc 1989;100:56.
40. Pressman J, Simon M, Moncel C. Anatomical studies related to the dissemination of cancer of the larynx. Trans Am Acad Ophthalmol Otolaryngol 1970;64:628.
41. Lindberg R. Distribution of cervical lymph nodes from squamous cell carcinoma of upper respiratory and digestive tracts. Cancer 1972;29:1446.
42. Kashima H. The characteristics of laryngeal cancer correlating with cervical lymph node metastasis. In: Alberti P, Bryce D, eds. Workshops from the Centennial Conference on Laryngeal
Cancer. East Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1976:855.
43. Clinical evaluation of the larynx. In: Thawley S, Panje W, Batsakis J, Lindberg R, eds. Comprehensive management of head and neck tumors, vol 1. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1987:874.
44. Milroy C, Rode J, Moss E. Laryngeal paragangliomas and neuroendocrine carcinomas. Histopathology 1991;18:201.
45. Laccourreye O, Chabardes E, Weinstein G, et al. Synchronous arytenoid and pancreative neuroendocrine carcinomas. Laryngol Otol 1991;105:573.
46. Batsakis J. Tumors of the head and neck: clinical and pathological considerations, 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1979:200.
47. Luna M, Tortoledo M. Verrucous carcinoma. In: Gnepp DR, ed. Pathology of the head and neck. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1988:497.
48. Mansel R, Vermeersch H. Panendoscopies for second primaries in head and neck cancer. American Laryngology Society Meeting, Vancouver, British Columbia, May 1981.
49. McGuirt W, Matthews B, Koufman J. Multiple simultaneous tumors in patients with head and neck cancer. Cancer 1982;50:1195.
50. Shapsay S, Hong W, Fried M. Simultaneous carcinomas of the esophagus and upper aerodigestive tract. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1980;88:373.
51. Healey G, Strong M, Uchmakli A. Carcinoma of the palatine arch: the rationale of therapeutic selection. Am J Surg 1978;132:498.
52. Arold-Schneider M, Schall H. Occurrence of non-metaplastic squamous epithelium within the larynx and its relation to the development of cancer. Laryngol Rhinol Otol 1990;69:91.
53. Crissman J. Laryngeal keratosis preceding laryngeal carcinoma. Arch Otolaryngol 1982;108:445.
54. Crissman J. Laryngeal keratosis and subsequent carcinoma. Head Neck Surg 1979;1:386.
55. Hellquist H, Lundgren J, Olofsson J. Hyperplasia, keratosis, dysplasia and carcinoma- in-situ of the vocal cords. Clin Otolaryngol 1982;7:11.
56. Sllamniku B, Bauer W, Painter C, Sessions D. The transformation of laryngeal keratosis into invasive carcinoma. Am J Otolaryngol 1989;10:42.
57. Hjslet P, Nielsen P, Palvio P. Premalignant lesions of the larynx. Acta Otolaryngol 1989;107:130.
58. Munck-Wirland E, Krylenstierna R, Lindholm J, Amer G. Image cytometry DNA analysis of dysplastic squamous epithelial lesions of the larynx. Anticancer Res 1991;11:597.
59. Bauer W. Concomitant carcinoma in situ and invasive carcinoma of the larynx. In: Alberti P, Bryce D, eds. Workshops from the Centennial Conference on Laryngeal Cancer. East Norwalk, CT:
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1976:127.
60. Miller A, Fisher H. Clues to the life history of carcinoma in situ of the larynx. Laryngoscope 1971;81:1475.
61. McGavran M, Bauer W, Ogura J. The incidence of cervical lymph node metastases from epidermoid carcinoma of the larynx and their relationship to certain characteristics of the primary
tumor. Cancer 1961;14:55.
62. Reid A, Robin P, Powell J, McConkey C, Rockley J. Staging carcinoma: its value. J Laryngol Otol 1991;105:456.
63. Hirabayshi H, Koshi K, Uno K. Extracapsular spread of squamous carcinoma in neck nodes: prognostic factors in laryngeal cancer. Laryngoscope 1991;101:502.
64. Spiro R, Alfonso A, Farr H, Strong E. Cervical node metastases for epidermoid carcinoma: a critical assessment of current staging. Am J Surg 1974;128:566.
65. Mohit-Tabatabai M, Sobel H, Rush B, Mashberg R. Relationship of thickness of floor of mouth stage I and II cancers to regional metastasis. Am J Surg 1986;152:351.
66. Close L, Brown P, Vuitch M, Reisch J, Schaefer S. Microscopic invasion and survival in cancer of the oral cavity and oropharynx. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1989;115:1304.
67. Spiro R, Huvos A, Wong G, et al. Predictive value of tumor thickness in squamous carcinoma confined to the tongue and floor of the mouth. Am J Surg 1986;152:345.
68. Rasgon B, Cruz R, Hilsinger R, Sawicki J. Relation of lymph node metastasis to histopathologic appearance in oral cavity and oropharyngeal carcinoma. Laryngoscope 1989;99:1103.

69. Platz H, Fries R, Hudec M, Min Tjoa A, Wagner R. The prognostic relevance of various factors at the time of first admission of the patient. J Maxillofac Surg 1983;11:3.
70. Barades S, Leeman D, Chen T, Mohit-Tabatabai M. Significance of tumor thickness in soft palate carcinoma. Laryngoscope 1992;103:389.
71. Ravasz L, Hordijk G, Slootweg P, Smit F, Tweel I. Uni- and multivariant analysis of eight indications for post-operative radiotherapy and their significance for local-regional cure in advanced
head and neck cancer. J Laryngol Otol 1993;107:437.
72. Morton R, Ferguson C, Lambie N, Whitlock R. Rumor thickness in early tongue cancer. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1994;120:717.
73. Kirchner J, Cornog J, Holmes R. Transglottic cancer: its growth and spread within the larynx. Arch Otolaryngol 1974;99:247.
74. Micheau C, Luboinski B, Sancho H, Cachin Y. Modes of invasion of cancer of the larynx: a statistical, histological, and radioclinical analysis of 120 cases. Cancer 1976;38:346.
75. Kirchner J. One hundred laryngeal cancer studies by serial section. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1969;78:689.
76. Ogura J, Sessions D, Spector G. Conservation surgery for epidermoid carcinoma of the supraglottic larynx. Laryngoscope 1975;85:1808.
77. Levendag P, Vikram B, Sessions R. The problem of neck relapse in early stage supraglottic cancerresults of different treatment modalities for the clinically negative neck. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1987;13:1621.
78. Kirchner J, Owen J. Five hundred cancers of the larynx and pyriform sinus. Laryngoscope 1977;87:1288.
79. Hansen H. Supraglottic carcinoma of the aryepiglottis fold. Laryngoscope 1975;85:1667.
80. Shah J, Tollefsen H. Epidermoid carcinoma of the supraglottic larynx. Am J Surg 1974;128:494.
81. Ogura J, Biller H, Wette R. Elective neck dissection for pharyngeal and laryngeal cancers. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1971;80:646.
82. Putney F. Elective versus delayed neck dissection in cancer of the larynx. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1961;112:736.
83. Biller H, Davis W, Ogura J. Delayed contralateral cervical metastasis with laryngeal and laryngopharyngeal cancers. Laryngoscope 1971;81:1499.
84. Ogura J, Spector G, Sessions D. Conservation surgery for carcinoma of the marginal area. Laryngoscope 1975;85:1801.
85. Som M. Conservation surgery for carcinoma of the supraglottis. J Laryngol Otol 1970;84:655.
86. Spiro R. Cervical node metastasis from epidermoid carcinoma of the oral cavity and oropharynx. Am J Surg 1974;128:562.
87. Lawson W, Biller H, Suen J. Cancer of the larynx. In: Myers G, Suen J, eds. Cancer of the head and neck, 2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1989:533.
88. Kirchner J, Fischer J. Anterior commissure cancer. In: Alberti P, Bryce D, eds. Workshops from the Centennial Conference on Laryngeal Cancer. East Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts,
1976:679.
89. Jesse R, Lindberg R, Horiot J. V ocal cord cancer with anterior commissure extension: choice of treatment. Am J Surg 1971;122:437.
90. Sessions D, Ogura J, Fried M. Laryngeal carcinoma involving anterior commissure and subglottis. In: Alberti P, Bryce D, eds. Workshops from the Centennial Conference on Laryngeal Cancer.
East Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1976:674.
91. Lawson W, Biller H, Suen J. Cancer of the larynx. In: Myers G, Suen J, eds. Cancer of the head and neck, 2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1989:558.
92. Stell P. The subglottic space. In: Alberti P, Bryce D, eds. Workshops from the Centennial Conference on Laryngeal Cancer. East Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1976:682.
93. Harrison D. The pathology and management of subglottic cancer. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1971;80:6.
94. Kraus F, Perez-Mesa C. Verrucous carcinoma: clinical and pathological study of 105 cases involving oral cavity, larynx, and genitalia. Cancer 1966;19:26.
95. Van Nostrand A, Olofsson J. Verrucous carcinoma of the larynx. Cancer 1972;30:691.
96. Biller H, Ogura J, Bauer W. Verrucous cancer of the larynx. Laryngoscope 1971;81:1323.
97. Ackerman L. Verrucous carcinoma of the oral cavity. Surgery 1948;23:670.
98. Batsakis J, Hybels R, Crissman J, Rice D. The pathology of head and neck tumors: verrucous carcinoma, Part XV. Head Neck Surg 1982;5:29.
99. Ferlito, A, Recher G. Ackerman's tumor of the larynx. Cancer 1980:46:1517.
100. Vesely J, Sibl O, Kudrmann J, Kremar M. Verrucous carcinoma of the larynx. Otolaryngology 1989;38:284.
101. Abramson A, Brandsma J, Steinberg B, Winkler B. Verrucous carcinoma of the larynx. Arch Otolaryngol 1985;111:709.
102. Glanz H, Kleinasser O. Verrucous carcinoma of the larynx: a misnomer. Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1987;244:108.
103. Myers E, Sobol S, Ogura H. Hemilaryngectomy for verrucous carcinoma of the glottis. Laryngoscope 1980;90:693.
104. Sessions R, Hudkins C. Malignant cervical adenopathy. In: Cummings C, ed. Otolaryngology: head and neck surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby, 1992:1605.
105. Fonts E, Greenlaw R, Rush B, Rovin S. Verrucous squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity. Cancer 1969;23:152.
106. Perez C, Kraus F, Evans J. Anaplastic transformation in verrucous carcinoma of the oral cavity after radiation therapy. Radiology 1966;86:108.
107. Elliott G, MacDougall J, Elliott J. Problems of verrucous squamous carcinoma. Ann Surg 1973;177:21.
108. Rider W. Toronto experience of verrucous carcinoma of the larynx. In: Alberti P, Bryce D, eds. Workshops from the Centennial Conference on Laryngeal Cancer. East Norwalk, CT:
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1976:460.
109. Medina J, Dichtel W, Luna M. Verrucous-squamous carcinomas of the oral cavity. Arch Otolaryngol 1984;110:437.
110. Burns H, Van Nostrand A, Bryce D. Verrucous carcinoma of the larynx: management by radiotherapy and surgery. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1976;85:538.
111. Myerowitz R, Barnes E, Myers E. Small cell anaplastic (oat cell) carcinoma of the larynx. Laryngoscope 1978;88:1697.
112. Gould V, Linnoila R, Memoli V, Warren W. Neuroendocrine components of the bronchopulmonary tract. Lab Invest 1983;49:519.
113. Strahlenther O. Primary small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the larynx. 1994;170:365.
114. Sole J, Jurgens A, Musulen E, et al. Small cell carcinoma of the larynx. Bull Cancer Radiother 1994;81:45.
115. Mullins J, Newman R, Coltman C. Primary oat cell carcinoma of the larynx. Cancer 1979;43:711.
116. Goldman N, Hood C, Singleton G. Carcinoid of the larynx. Arch Otolaryngol 1969;90:90.
117. Ferlito A, Milroy C, Wenig B, Barnes L, Silver C. Laryngeal paraganglioma versus atypical carcinoid tumor. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1995;104:78.
118. Ferlito A, Barnes L, Wenig B. Identification classification, treatment of laryngeal paraganglioma. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1994;103:525.
119. Devaney K, Ferlito A, Silver C. Cartilaginous tumors of the larynx. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1995;104:251.
120. Obermyer N, Ramadan H. Adenocarcinoma of the larynx. Head Neck 1994;16:453.
121. Morland B, Cox G, Randall C, Ramsay A, Radford M. Synovial sarcoma of the larynx. Med Pediatr Oncol 1994;23:64.
122. Scott K, Carter C. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma of the larynx. J Otolaryngol 1995;2:198.
123. Maniglia A, Xue J. Plasmacytoma of the larynx. Laryngoscope 1983;93:741.
124. Booth J, Osborn D. Granular cell myoblastoma of the larynx. Acta Otolaryngol 1970;70:279.
125. Anderson H, Maisel R, Cantrell R. Isolated laryngeal lymphoma. Laryngoscope 1976;86:1251.
126. Reuter V, Woodruff J. Melanoma of larynx. Laryngoscope 1986;96:389.
127. Castelijns J, Gerristen G, Kaiser M, et al. Invasion of laryngeal cartilage by cancer: comparison of CT to MR. Radiology 1989;167:199.
128. Towler C, Young S. MRI of the larynx. Magn Reson 1989;5:228.
129. Castelijns J, Golding R, Van-Schaik C, Valk J, Snow G. MR findings of cartilage invasion by laryngeal cancer: value of predicting outcome of radiation therapy. Radiology 1990;174:669.
130. Pillsbury H, Kirchner J. Clinical versus histologic staging in laryngeal cancer. Arch Otolaryngol 1979;105:157.
131. Spriano G, Antognoni P, Piantanida R, et al. Conservative management of T1-T2N0 supraglottic cancer. Am J Otolaryngol 1997;18:299.
132. Lera J, Lara P, Perez S, Cabrera J, Santana C. Tumor proliferation, p53 expression, and apoptosis in laryngeal carcinoma: relation to the results of radiotherapy. Cancer 1998;83:2493.
133. Wang C, Nakfoor B, Spiro I, Martins P. Role of accelerated fractionated irradiation for supraglottic carcinoma. Cancer J Sci Am 1997;3:88.
134. Mendenhall W, Parsons J, Mancuso A, Stringer S, Cassisi N. Radiotherapy for squamous cell carcinoma of the supraglottic larynx: an alternative to surgery. Head Neck 1996;18:24.
135. Steinger J, Parnes S, Gardner G. Morbidity of combined therapy for the treatment of supraglottic carcinoma: supraglottic laryngectomy and radiotherapy. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol
1997;106:151.
136. Adamopoulos G, Yotakis I, Apostolopoulos K, et al. Supraglottic laryngectomy. J Laryngol Otol 1997;111:730.
137. Bradford CR, Wolf GT, Fisher SG, McClatchey KD. Prognostic importance of surgical margins in advanced laryngeal squamous carcinoma. Head Neck 1996;18:11.
138. Lefebvre J, Wolf G, Luboninski B. Meta-analysis of chemotherapy in head and neck cancer (MACHNC)(2) Larynx preservation using neoadjuvant chemotherapy in laryngeal and
hypopharyngeal carcinoma. Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;34:224.
139. Wolf G, Hong W, Fisher S. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for organ preservation: current status. Fourth International Conference on Head and Neck Cancer. 1996:89.
140. Wolf GT, Forastiere A, Ang K, et al. Workshop report: organ preservation strategies in advanced head and neck cancercurrent status and future directions. Head Neck 1999;21:689.
141. Lee N, Goepfert H, Awendt C. Supraglottic laryngectomy for intermediate stage cancer: UT M. D. Anderson Cancer Center experience with combined therapy. Laryngoscope 1990;100:831.
142. Soo K, Shah J, Gopinath K, et al. Analysis of prognostic variables and results after supraglottic partial laryngectomy. Am J Surg 1988;156:301.
143. Bocca E, Pignataro O, Oldini C. Supraglottic laryngectomy: 30 years of experience. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1983;92:14.
144. Parsons J, Mendenhall W, Stringer S, Cassisi N. T4 laryngeal carcinoma: radiotherapy alone with surgery reserved for salvage. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:549.
145. Vermund H, Boysen M, Evensen J, et al. Recurrence after different primary treatment for cancer of the supraglottic larynx. Acta Oncologica 1998;37:167.
146. Finizia C, Geterud A, Holmberg E, et al. Advanced laryngeal cancer T3-T4 in Sweden: a retrospective study 19861990. Survival and locoregional control related to treatment. Acta Otolaryngol
1996;116:906.
147. Hermans R, Van den Bogaert W, Rijnders A, Baert A. Value of CT as outcome predictor of supraglottic squamous cell carcinoma treated by definitive radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1999;44:755.
148. Mancuso A, Mukherji S, Schmalfuss I, et al. Preradiotherapy computed tomography as a predictor of local control in supraglottic carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:631.
149. Lo S, Venkatesan V, Matthews T, Rogers J. Tumour volume: implications in T2/T3 glottic/supraglottic squamous cell carcinoma. J Otolaryngol 1998;27:247.
150. Jankovic I, Merkas Z. Radiotherapy as the primary approach in the treatment of laryngeal cancer. In: Alberti P, Bryce D, eds. Workshops from the Centennial Conference on Laryngeal Cancer.
East Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1976:881.
151. Ogura J, Biller H. Conservative surgery in cancer of the head and neck. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1969;2:641.
152. Sessions R, Parish R. How are patients chosen for conservation surgery of the larynx? In: Harrison DFN, ed. Dilemmas in otorhinolaryngology. London: Churchill Livingstone, 1988:283.
153. Laccourreye H, Laccourreye O, Menard M, et al. Supracricoid laryngectomy with cricohyoidoepiglottopexy: a partial laryngeal procedure for glottic carcinoma. Ann Otol Rhino Laryngol
1990;99:421.
154. Fu K, Pajak T, Trotti A, et al. A Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) phase III randomized study to compare hyperfractionation and two variants of accelerated fractionation to standard
fractionation radiotherapy for head and neck squamous cell carcinomas: preliminary results of RTOG 9003. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45[Suppl]:145.
155. McGuirt WF, Kaufman JA. Endoscopic laser surgery: an alternative in laryngeal cancer treatment. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1987;113:501.
156. Harwood A. Cancer of the larynx: the Toronto experience. J Otolaryngol 1982;11:1.
157. Njuyen C, Naghibzadeh B, Black M, Rochon L, Shenouda G. Carcinoma in situ of the glottic larynx: excision or irradiation? Head Neck 1996;18:225.
158. Medini E, Medini I, Lee CK, Gapany M, Levitt SH. The role of radiotherapy in the management of carcinoma in situ of the glottic larynx [Review]. Am J Clin Oncol 1998;21:298.
159. Smitt M, Goffinet D. Radiotherapy for cis of glottic larynx. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;28:251.
160. Fein D, Mendenhall W, Parsons J, et al. Carcinoma in situ of the glottic larynx: the role of radiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:370.
161. Wang CC. Treatment of glottic carcinoma by megavoltage radiation therapy and results. Am J Roentgenol Radium Ther Nucl Med 1974;120:157.
162. Fletcher G, Lindbert R, Hamberger A, Horiot J. Reasons for irradiation failure in squamous cell carcinoma of the larynx. Laryngoscope 1975;85:987.
163. Pellitteri P, Kennedy T, Vrabec D, Beiler D, Hellstrom M. Radiotherapy, the mainstay in the treatment of early glottic carcinoma. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1991;117:297.
164. Dagli A, Mahieu H, Festen J. Quantitative analysis of voice quality in early glottic laryngeal carcinomas treated with radiotherapy. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1997;254:78.
165. Morton R. Laryngeal cancer: quality of life and cost effectiveness. Head Neck 1997;19:243.
166. Rosier J, Gregoire V, Counoy H, et al. Comparison of external radiotherapy, laser microsurgery and partial laryngectomy for the treatment of T1N0M0 glottic carcinomas: a retrospective

evaluation. Radiother Oncol 1998;48:175.
167. Harrison L, Solomon B, Miller S, et al. Prospective computer assisted voice analysis for patients with early stage glottic cancer: a preliminary report of the functional result of laryngeal
irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:123.
168. de Graeff A, de Leeuw R, Ros W, et al. A prospective study on quality of life of laryngeal cancer patients treated with radiotherapy. Head Neck 1997;19:243.
169. Tsunoda K, Soda Y, Tojima H, et al. Stroboscopic observation of the larynx after radiation in patients with T1 glottic carcinoma. Acta Otolaryngologica 1997;527[Suppl]:1656.
170. Verdonck-de Leeuw J, Vreeburg G, Bartelink H. Consequences of voice impairment in daily life for patients following radiotherapy for early glottic cancer: voice quality, vocal function, and
vocal performance. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:1071.
171. Biller H, Barnhill F, Ogura J, Perez C. Hemilaryngectomy following radiation failure for carcinoma of the vocal cords. Laryngoscope 1970;80:249.
172. Sorenson H, Hansen H, Thomsen K. Partial laryngectomy following irradiation. Laryngoscope 1980;90:1344.
173. Dickens W, Cassisi N, Million R, Bova F. Treatment of early vocal cord carcinoma: a comparison of apples and apples. Laryngoscope 1983;93:216.
174. Wang CC. Treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the larynx by radiation. Radiol Clin North Am 1978;16:209.
175. Daly C, Strong E. Carcinoma of the glottic larynx. Am J Surg 1975;130:489.
176. Leroux-Robert J. A statistical study of 620 laryngeal carcinomas of the glottic region personally operated upon more than five years ago. Laryngoscope 1975;85:1440.
177. Sessions D, Maness G, McSwain B. Laryngofissure in the treatment of carcinoma of the vocal cord. Laryngoscope 1964;75:490.
178. Southwick H. Cancer of the larynx: surgical management. In: Seventh National Cancer Conference proceedings. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1973:54.
179. Ogura J, Sessions D, Spector G. Analysis of surgical therapy for epidermoid carcinoma of the laryngeal glottis. Laryngoscope 1975;85:1522.
180. Sessions D, Ogura J, Fried M. The anterior commissure in glottic carcinoma. Laryngoscope 1974;85:1624.
181. Sessions D, Ogura J, Fried M. Laryngeal carcinoma involving the anterior commissure and subglottis. In: Alberti P, Bryce D, eds. Workshops from the Centennial Conference on Laryngeal
Cancer. East Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1976:674.
182. Olofsson J, Williams G, Rider W, Bryce D. Anterior commissure carcinoma: primary treatment with radiotherapy in 57 patients. Arch Otolaryngol 1972;95:230.
183. Olofsson J. Specific features of laryngeal carcinoma involving the anterior commissure and subglottic region. In: Alberti P, Bryce D, eds. Workshops from the Centennial Conference on
Laryngeal Cancer. East Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1976:626.
184. Klintenberg C, Lundgren J, Adell G, et al. Primary radiotherapy of T1 and T2 glottic carcinomaanalysis of treatment results and prognostic factors in 223 patients. Acta Oncologica
1996;35[Suppl]:81.
185. Fein DA, Hanlon AL, Lee WR, Ridge JA, Coia LR. Neck failure in T2N0 squamous cell carcinoma of the true vocal cords: the Fox Chase experience and review of the literature [Review]. Am J
Clin Oncol 1997;20:1547.
186. Skladowski K, Tarnawski R, Maciejewski B, Wygoda A, Slosarek K. Clinical radiobiology of glottic T1 squamous cell carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:101.
187. Warde P, O'Sullivan B, Bristow RG, et al. T1/T2 glottic cancer managed by external beam radiotherapy: the influence of pretreatment hemoglobin on local control. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;41:347.
188. Tamawski R, Skladowski K, Maciejewski B. Prognostic value of hemoglobin concentration in radiotherapy for cancer of supraglottic larynx. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:1007.
189. Narayana A, Vaughan A, Gunaratne S, et al. Is p53 an independent prognostic factor in patients with laryngeal carcinoma? Cancer 1998;82:286.
190. Lera J, Lara P, Perez S, Cabrera J, Santana C. Tumor proliferation, p53 expression, and apoptosis in laryngeal carcinoma: relation to the result of radiotherapy. Cancer 1998;83:2493.
191. Pai H, Rochon L, Clark B, Black M, Shenouda G. Overexpression of p53 protein does not predict local regional control or survival in patients with early stage squamous cell carcinoma of the
glottic larynx treated with radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:37.
192. Kropveld A, Slootweg P, Blankenstein M, Terhaard C, Hordijk G. Ki-67 and p53 in T2 laryngeal cancer. Laryngoscope 1998;108:1548.
193. Valente G, Giusti U, Kerim S, et al. High prognostic impact of growth fraction parameters in advanced stage laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma. Oncol Rep 1999;6:298.
194. Pameijer FA, Mancuso AA, Mendenhall WK, Parsons JT, Kubilis PS. Can pretreatment computed tomography predict local control in T3 squamous cell carcinoma of the glottic larynx treated
with definitive radiotherapy? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:1011.
195. Stokkel MP, Terhaard CH, Mertens IJ, Hordijk GJ, van Rijk PP. Fluorine-18-FDG detection of laryngeal cancer postradiotherapy using dual-head coincidence imaging. J Nucl Med
1998;39:1385.
196. Kim HJ, Boyd J, Dunphy F, Lowe V. F-18 FDG PET scan after radiotherapy for early-stage larynx cancer. Clin Nucl Med 1998;23:750.
197. McGuirt WF, Greven KM, Keyes JW Jr, Williams DW III, Watson N. Laryngeal radionecrosis versus recurrent cancer: a clinical approach. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1998;107:293.
198. Dickens W, Cassisi N, Million R, Bova F. Treatment of early vocal cord carcinoma. Laryngoscope 1983;93:216.
199. Medini E, Medini A, Gapany M, Levitt SH. Radiation therapy in early carcinoma of the glottic-larynx T1N0M0. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:1211.
200. Hayakawa K, Mitsuhashi N, Akimoto T, et al. The effect of overall treatment time of radiation therapy on local control of T1-stage squamous cell carcinoma of the glottis. Laryngoscope
1996;106:1545.
201. Yu E, Shenouda G, Beaudet MP, Black MJ. Impact of radiation therapy fraction size on local control of early glottic carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:587.
202. Yamamoto M, Joja I, Takemoto M, Kuroda M, Hiraki Y. The results of radiotherapy for T1 glottic cancers: influence of radiation beam energy. Acta Medica Okayama 1999;53:91.
203. van der Voet JC, Keus RB, Hart AA, Hilgers FJ, Bartelink H. The impact of treatment time and smoking on local control and complications in T1 glottic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;42:247.
204. Robertson AG, Robertson C, Perone C, et al. Effect of gap length and position on results of treatment of cancer of the larynx in Scotland by radiotherapy: a linear quadratic analysis. Radiother
Oncol 1998;48:165.
205. Robertson C, Robertson AG, Hendry JH, et al. Similar decreases in local tumor control are calculated for treatment protraction and for interruptions in the radiotherapy of carcinoma of the
larynx in four centers. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:319.
206. Saarilahti K, Kajanti M, Lehtonen H, Hamalainen T, Joensuu H. Repopulation during radical radiotherapy for T1 glottic cancer. Radiother Oncol 1998;47:155.
207. Marshak G, Brenner B, Shvero J, et al. Prognostic factors for local control of early glottic cancer: the Rabin Medical Center retrospective study on 207 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1999;43:1009.
208. Le QT, Fu KK, Kroll S, et al. Influence of fraction size, total dose, and overall time on local control of T1-T2 glottic carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:11526.
209. Jakobsson P, Rneroth G, Kollander D, Moeberger G, Martensson B. A histological classification and grading of malignancy in carcinoma of the larynx. Acta Radiologica 1973;12:1.
210. Olofsson J, Lord I, VanNostrand A. Vocal cord fixation in laryngeal carcinoma. Acta Otolaryngol 1973;75:486.
211. Mullins J, Newman R, Coltman C. Primary oat cell carcinoma of the larynx. Cancer 1979;43:7.
212. Som M. Cordal cancer with extension to vocal process. Laryngoscope 1975;85:1298.
213. Van den Bogert W, Ostyn F, Vancer Schuerren E. The primary treatment of advanced vocal cord cancer: laryngectomy or radiotherapy? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:329.
214. Harwood A, Hawkins V, Beale F. Management of advanced glottic cancer: a 10-year review of the Toronto experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1979;5:899.
215. Wang C. Radiation therapy of laryngeal tumors. In: Thawley S, Panje W, Batsakis J, Lindberg R, eds. Comprehensive management of head and neck tumors. Philadelphia: WB Saunders,
1987:906.
216. Mendenhall W, Parsons J, Mancuso A, et al. Definitive radiotherapy for T3 squamous cell carcinoma of the glottic larynx. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2394.
217. Mendenhall W, Parsons J, Stringer S. Stage T3 squamous cell carcinoma of the glottic larynx: irradiation compared to laryngectomy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21[Suppl 1]:142.
218. Terhaard C, Karim A, Hoogenraad S. Local control in T3 laryngeal cancer treated with radical radiotherapy: time-dose relationshipthe concept of nominal standard dose and linear quadratic
model. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:1207.
219. Jesse R. The evaluation of treatment of patients with extensive squamous cancer of the vocal cords. Laryngoscope 1975;85:1424.
220. Hawkins N. The treatment of glottic carcinoma: an analysis of 800 cases. Laryngoscope 1975;85:1485.
221. Stewart J, Brown J, Palmer M, Cooper A. The management of glottic carcinoma by primary irradiation with surgery in reserve. Laryngoscope 1975;85:1477.
222. Jacobs C, Goffinet D, Goffinet L. Chemotherapy as a substitute for surgery in the treatment of advanced resectable head/neck cancer. Cancer 1987;60:1178.
223. Wolf G, Hong W, Fisher S, et al. Larynx preservation with induction chemotherapy and radiation in advanced laryngeal cancer: final result of the VA Laryngeal Cancer Study Group cooperative
trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1993;12:277.
224. Adelstein DJ, Adams GL, Li Y, et al. A phase II comparison of standard radiation therapy (RT) versus RT plus concurrent DDP and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in patients with unresectable squamous
cell head and neck cancer: an intergroup study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2000 (in press).
225. Brizel DM, Albers ME, Fisher SR, et al. Hyperfractionated irradiation with or without concurrent chemotherapy for locally advanced head and neck cancer. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1798.
226. Merlano M, Vitale V, Rosso R, et al. Treatment of advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck with alternating chemotherapy and radiotherapy. N Engl J Med 1992;327:1115.
227. Wendt TG, Grabenbauer GG, Rodel CM, et al. Simultaneous radiochemotherapy versus radiotherapy alone in advanced head and neck cancer: a randomized multicenter study. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:1318.
228. Forastiere AA. Larynx preservation trials: a critical appraisal. Semin Radiat Oncol 1998:8:254.
229. Al-Kourainy K, Kish J, Ensley J, et al. Achievement of superior survival for histologically negative versus histologically positive clinically complete responders to cisplatin combination in patients
with locally advanced head and neck cancer. Cancer 1987;59:233.
230. Kish J, Weaver A, Jacobs J, et al. Cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil infusion in patients with recurrent and disseminated epidermoid cancer of the head and neck. Cancer 1984;53:1819.
231. Weaver A, Fleming S, Ensley J, et al. Superior clinical response and survival rates with initial bolus of cisplatin and 120 hour infusion of 5 fluorouracil before definitive therapy for locally
advanced head and neck cancer. Am J Surg 1984;148:525.
232. Ensley J, Jacobs J, Weaver A, et al. Correlation between response to cisplatinum combination chemotherapy and subsequent radiotherapy in previously untreated patients with advanced
squamous cell cancers of the head and neck. Cancer 1984;54:811.
233. Demard F, Chauvel P, Santini J, et al. Response to chemotherapy as justification for modification of the therapeutic strategy for pharyngolaryngeal carcinomas. Head Neck 1990;12:225.
234. Clayman GL, Weber RS, Guillamondegui O, et al. Laryngeal preservation for advanced laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995;121:219.
235. Shirinian MH, Weber RS, Lippman SM, et al. Laryngeal preservation by induction chemotherapy plus radiotherapy in locally advanced head and neck cancer: the MD Anderson Cancer Center
experience. Head Neck 1994;16:39.
236. De Andres L, Brunet J, Lopez-Pousa A, et al. Function preservation in stage III squamous laryngeal carcinoma: results with an induction chemotherapy protocol. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1493.
237. Wolf GT, Hong WK, Fisher S, et al. Induction chemotherapy plus radiation compared with surgery plus radiation in patients with advanced laryngeal cancer. The Departments of Veterans
Affairs Laryngeal Cancer Study Group. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1685.
238. Lefebvre JL, Chevalier D, Luboniski B, et al. Larynx preservation in pyriform sinus cancer. Preliminary results of a European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer phase III trial.
EORTC Head and Neck Cancer Cooperative Group. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:890.
239. Bradford CF, Wolf GT, Carey TE, et al. Predictive markers for response to chemotherapy, organ preservation, and survival in patients with advanced laryngeal carcinoma. Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg 1999;121:534.
240. Richard J, Sancho-Garnier H, Pessey J, et al. Randomized trial of induction chemotherapy in larynx carcinoma. Oral Oncol 1998;34:224.
241. Lefebvre J, Wolf G, Luboninski B. Meta-analysis of chemotherapy in head and neck cancer (MACH-NC): (2) larynx preservation using neoadjuvant chemotherapy in laryngeal and
hypopharyngeal carcinoma. Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:382a.
242. Adelstein DJ. Induction chemotherapy in head and neck cancer. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1999;13:689.
243. Paccagnella A, Orlando A, Marchiori C, et al. Phase III trial of initial chemotherapy in stage III or IV head and neck cancers: a study by the Gruppo di Studio sui Tumori della Testa a del Collo. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:265.
244. Brockstein B, Haraf D, Stenson K, et al. Phase I study of concomitant chemoradiotherapy with paclitaxel, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor support for
patients with poor-prognosis cancer of the head and neck. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:735.
245. Conley B, Jacobs M, Suntharalingam M, et al. A pilot trial of paclitaxel, carboplatin and concurrent radiotherapy for unresectable squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Semin Oncol
1997;24:78.

246. Fountzilas G, Athanassiadis A, Samathas E, et al. Paclitaxel and carboplatin in recurrent or metastatic head and neck cancer: a phase II study. Semin Oncol 1997;19:28.
247. Hoffman W, Belka C, Schmidberger H, et al. Radiotherapy and concomitant weekly 1-hour infusion of paclitaxel in the treatment of head and neck cancer: result from a phase I trial. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:691.
248. Robbins KT, Medina J, Wolfe G. Standardizing neck dissection terminology. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1991;117:604.
249. Armstrong J, Pfister D, Strong E, et al. The management of the clinically positive neck as part of a larynx preservation approach. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;26:759.
250. Shah J, Andersen P. The impact of patterns of nodal metastasis on modifications of neck dissection. Ann Surg Oncol 1994;1:521.
251. Carpenter R III, DeSanto L. Cancer of the hypopharynx. Surg Clin North Am 1977;57:7.
252. Wynder E, Hultberg S, Jacobsson F, Bross I. Environmental factors in cancer of the upper alimentary tract. Cancer 1957;10:470.
253. Higginson J, Terracini B, Agthe C. Nutrition and cancer: ingestion of foodborne carcinogens. In: Schottenfeld D, ed. Cancer epidemiology and prevention. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas
Publisher, 1975:177.
254. Larsson L, Sandstrom A, Westling P. Relationship of phenomenon: Vinson disease to cancer of the upper alimentary tract in Sweden. Cancer Res 1975;3:3308.
255. Cunningham M, Catlin D. Cancer of the pharyngeal wall. Cancer 1967;20:1859.
256. Harrison D. Pathology of hypopharyngeal cancer in relation to surgical management. J Laryngol Otol 1970;84:349.
257. Harrison D. Significance and means by which laryngeal cancer invades thyroid cartilage. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1981;93:392.
258. Guillamondegui O, Meoz-Mendez R, Jesse R. Surgical treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the pharyngeal walls. Am J Surg 1978;136:474.
259. McGavarvan M, Bauer W, Spjut H. Carcinoma of the pyriform sinus. Arch Otolaryngol 1963;78:826.
260. Ogura J, Jurema H, Watson R. Partial laryngopharyngectomy and neck dissection for pyriform sinus cancer. Laryngoscope 1960;70:1399.
261. Byers R, Wolf P, Ballantyne A. Rationale for elective modified neck dissection. Head Neck Surg 1988;10:160.
262. Ballantyne A. Methods of repair after surgery for cancer of the pharyngeal wall, post cricoid area, and cervical esophagus. Am J Surg 1971;122:482.
263. Marks J, Freeman R, Lee F, Ogura J. Pharyngeal wall cancer: an analysis of treatment results, complications, and patterns of failure. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1978;4:587.
264. Merino O, Landberg R, Fletcher C. An analysis of distant metastases from squamous cell carcinoma of the upper respiratory and digestive tracts. Cancer 1977;40:1415.
265. Keane T. Carcinoma of the hypopharynx. J Otolaryngol 1982;11:227.
266. Honvitz S, Caldarelli D, Hendrickson F. Treatment of carcinoma of the hypopharynx. Head Neck Surg 1979;2:107.
267. Mancuso A, Harnsberger H, Muraki A, Stevens M. Computed tomography of cervical and retropharyngeal lymph nodes. II. Pathology. Radiology 1983;148:709.
268. Grossman T, Kita M, Toohill R. The diagnostic accuracy of pharyngoesophagogram compared to esophagoscopy of patients with head and neck cancer. Laryngoscope 1987;97:103
269. Million R, Cassissi N. Management of head and neck cancer: a multidisciplinary approach. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1984:85.
270. Urken ML, Weinberg H, Vickery C, et al. The combined sensate radical forearm and iliac crest free flaps for reconstruction of significant glossectomy-mandibulectomy defects. Laryngoscope
1992;102:543.
271. Million R, Cassissi N. Radical irradiation for carcinoma of the pyriform sinus. Laryngoscope 1981;91:439.
272. Mendenhall W, Parsons J, Devine J. Squamous cell carcinoma of the pyriform sinus treated with surgery and/or radiotherapy. Head Neck Surg 1987;10:88.
273. Vandenbrouck C, Eschwege F, DeLaRochfordiere A. Squamous cell carcinoma of the pyriform sinus: retrospective study of 351 cases treated at the Institute Roussy. Head Neck Surg
1987;10:4.
274. Itami J, Uno T, Aruga M, Ode S. Local control of piriform sinus cancer treated by radiation therapy alone. Acta Oncologica 1997;36:389.
275. Pameijer F, Mancuso A, Mendenhall W, et al. Evaluation of pretreatment computed tomography as a predictor of local control in T1/T2 pyriform sinus carcinoma treated with definitive
radiotherapy. Head Neck 1998;20:159.
276. Shah J, Shaha A, Spiro R, Strong E. Carcinoma of the hypopharynx. Am J Surg 1976; 132:439.
277. Bataini P, Brugere J, Vernier J. Results of radical radiotherapy treatment of carcinoma of the pyriform sinus: experience of the Institute Curie. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8:1276.
278. Donald P, Haves H, Dhalival R. Combined treatment for pyriform sinus cancer using postoperative irradiation. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1980;88:738.
279. Hong W, Dimery I, Kramer A. The role of induction chemotherapy in the treatment of advanced head and neck cancer. In: Salmon S, ed. Adjuvant therapy of cancer, 5th ed. Orlando, FL: Grune
& Stratton, 1987:79.
280. Vandenbrouck C, Sancho A, LeFur R. Results of a randomized clinical trial of preoperative irradiation versus postoperative in treatment of tumors of the hypopharynx. Cancer 1977;39:145.
281. Kramer S, Gelber R, Snow J. Combined radiation therapy in the management of advanced head and neck cancer: final report of study 73-03 of the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group. Head
Neck Surg 1987;10:19.
282. Keane T, Hawkins N, Beal F. Carcinoma of the hypopharynx: results of primary radical radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:659.
283. Mahe M, Peuvrel P, Bergerot P, et al. Final results of a randomized trial comparing chemotherapy plus radiotherapy (ct + rt) versus chemotherapy plus surgery plus radiotherapy (ct + s + re) in
locally advanced resectable hypopharyngeal carcinomas. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:295.
284. Harrison D, Thompson A. Pharyngolaryngoesophagectomy with pharyngogastric anastomosis for cancer of the hypopharynx. Head Neck Surg 1986;8:418.
285. Meoz-Mendez R, Fletcher G, Guillamondegui O, Peters L. Analysis of the results of irradiation in the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the pharyngeal walls. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1978;4:579.
286. Kato H, Iizuka T, Watanabe H. Reconstruction of the esophagus by microvascular surgery. Jpn J Clin Oncol 1984;14:379.
287. Theile D, Robinson D, McCafferty G. Pharyngolaryngectomy reconstruction by revascularized free jejunal graft. Aust N Z J Surg 1986;56:849.

SECTION 30.4 Tumors of the Salivary Glands and Paragangliomas
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 30.4
Tumors of the Salivary Glands and Paragangliomas
ROY B. SESSIONS
LOUIS B. HARRISON
ARLENE A. FORASTIERE
Major Salivary Gland Tumors
Anatomy
Etiology, Pathology, and Classification
Natural History, Behavior Staging, and Treatment Principles
Clinical Evaluation and Workup
Treatment
Minor Salivary Gland Tumors
Treatment
Specific Strategies for Special Situations
Paragangliomas
Pathogenesis
Clinical Behavior and Natural History
Evaluation
Treatment and Results
Chapter References

MAJOR SALIVARY GLAND TUMORS
The same neoplasms affect all salivary gland tissue, but with predictable variations for the different anatomic sites. The major salivary glands consist of paired
parotids in the preauricular area, paired submandibulars deep and inferior to the mandible, and paired sublinguals in the floor of the mouth. The minor salivary glands,
on the other hand, are ubiquitous in the upper aerodigestive tract, occurring throughout the oral and nasal cavities and the paranasal sinuses. The probability of any
given salivary neoplasm being malignant is highest in the sublingual glands, next highest in the minor salivary glands, third highest in the submandibular glands, and
least in the parotid glands. Overall, salivary cancers make up approximately 3% of all head and neck malignancies that are diagnosed in North America each year;
most of these are in the parotid glands. Sublingual and minor salivary gland cancers are unusual. 1
ANATOMY
The parotid gland is tightly compacted in the area immediately anterior and inferior to the external ear. It is best thought of in three dimensions, with the deep portion
extending medially behind the posterior rim of the ascending ramus of the mandible into the parapharyngeal space. The superficial part of the gland lies on the
masseter muscle and extends inferiorly to overlie the sternocleidomastoid and digastric muscles ( Fig. 30.4-1). The same fascia that engulfs both of these muscles
also forms a substantial capsule around both the parotid and submandibular glands, thus forming a barrier that confines tumors to their site of origin. The most inferior
extent of the parotid gland extends a variable distance, and in those necks in which this extension is exaggerated, the glandular tail overlies the transverse process of
the second cervical vertebrae as well as the deep jugular lymph nodes adjacent to this level. Not infrequently, a prominent transverse process or an enlarged lymph
node in this area is misinterpreted as a parotid tail mass. This circumstance is encountered less frequently today, however, because contemporary imaging has
helped to define that which is abnormal.

FIGURE 30.4-1. Representation of parotid gland and facial nerve anatomy. Lower part of diagram shows details of the relation of the nerve to the surrounding gland.
Various branches of the nerve are directed to various parts of the facial musculature. (CIBA Collection, Frank Netter.)

The facial nerve leaves the stylomastoid foramen at the base of the skull and almost immediately penetrates the posterior capsule of the parotid gland. Once within
that structure, the nerve divides into five main branches—temporal, zygomatic, buccal, mandibular, and cervical—all of which extend in a consistent direction and
depth, and all of which gradually become more superficial as they extend anteriorly. In addition to being more superficial, the more anterior branches of the nerve are
more delicate; thus, increased risks are associated with dissection of tumors located more anterior in the gland.
Although no actual lobes are defined by fascial planes, that part of the parotid gland superficial to the facial nerve is arbitrarily referred to as the superficial lobe. That
portion deep to the nerve is called the deep lobe. These facts have considerable bearing on dissections done within the parotid gland (see Fig. 30.4-1). The deep
lobe of the parotid gland extends into the parapharyngeal space; thus, tumors of that portion of the gland can come into contact with the carotid sheath and its
contents, which form the posterior boundary of that space. These deep lobe tumors can press against the constrictor muscles of the pharynx that normally form the
medial wall of the parapharyngeal space ( Fig. 30.4-2). A large deep lobe parotid tumor can, therefore, present as a submucosal bulge of the tonsil pillar, a finding that
is easily misinterpreted by the inexperienced diagnostician as an oropharyngeal neoplasm ( Fig. 30.4-3). The distinction between a deep lobe parotid tumor and an
oral lesion becomes clear on either magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT). There is some difficulty, however, in distinguishing these deep
lobe neoplasms from tumors that have their origin in the parapharyngeal space. Correct diagnosis depends on the presence or absence of a fat plane between the
deep lobe and the tumor. The distinction between the two is important, because the differential diagnosis of tumors that originate in the parapharyngeal space must
include lymphomas, neurogenic tumors, and paragangliomas, 2,3 none of which is likely to occur primarily in the parotid gland. Most parotid tumors originate in the
superficial lobe, probably because that portion of the gland is considerably larger than the deep lobe. Because no identifiable histologic differences exist between
deep and superficial lobes, no reasonable explanation can be provided for this distribution of tumors other than the amount of salivary gland tissue available for tumor
development. The distribution of different types of tumors is probably the same in the various parts of the gland.

FIGURE 30.4-2. Presentation of deep lobe parotid gland tumors. A: Schematic diagram shows frontal view just posterior to mandible where the deep lobe (DL) enters
parapharyngeal space. Notice the proximity of the deep lobe to the pharyngeal muscles and the palate. B: An axial computed tomographic scan of the skull shows the
deep lobe tumor (DLT) occupying parapharyngeal space and pressing against the pharyngeal constrictor muscles (pm). The retromandibular tunnel extends the deep
lobe behind the mandible (M).

FIGURE 30.4-3. Intraoral photograph of soft palate mucosal bulge caused by parotid gland deep lobe tumor (DLT). (Courtesy of Dr. Ronald Spiro.)

The lymphatics in and around the parotid gland consist of two groups, and a knowledge of that distribution is essential to the understanding of the natural history of
these tumors. The preauricular (periparotid) nodes lie superficially to the gland capsule and drain the external auditory canal, the facial and auricular skin, and the
temple scalp. They are especially important drainage sites for squamous carcinomas and melanomas of adjacent skin. Parotid gland cancers usually do not drain into
these nodes. The second nodal group consists of five to seven intraparotid lymph nodes that do play a role in the pathogenesis of parotid cancer. The efferent
channels of the superficial nodes drain into the superficial jugular chain, whereas the intraglandular nodes drain into the upper and middle deep jugular lymph
nodes.1,4 The extraparotid (periparotid) nodes are readily palpable and are distinguished easily from primary parotid tumors; however, nodes within the substance of
the gland are not easily palpated and become noticeable only when they are enlarged. Distinguishing them from primary parotid gland tumors by palpation or by
imaging can be difficult.
The submandibular gland lies in the submandibular triangle of the neck with its posterior extent adjacent to, but not contiguous with, the tail of the parotid gland. The
deep surface of the submandibular gland lies against the muscular diaphragm of the floor of the mouth and is best examined bimanually, with one finger in the mouth
and the external hand on the surface of the gland. Lymph nodes do not exist within the submandibular gland, but instead they lie around its surface. A mass outside
the submandibular gland may represent a metastatic node from some other site, such as the lateral tongue or the floor of the mouth. Drainage from the submandibular
gland goes into the adjacent nodes and upper deep jugular chain. Three important nerves, the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve (motor) and the lingual
(sensory) and hypoglossal (motor) nerves to the tongue all lie in close proximity to the submandibular gland.
The sublingual glands are located submucosally in the floor of the mouth, just superficially to the muscular diaphragm. They are oval and lie along the inner table of
the mandible. The sublingual glands drain into submandibular lymphatics and then into the deep jugular nodes.
ETIOLOGY, PATHOLOGY, AND CLASSIFICATION
The causes of salivary gland cancer have not been determined. Certain factors have been etiologically suggested, including ionizing radiation with all salivary
cancers,5 a familial predisposition in parotid cancer, 6 and chronic wood dust inhalation in certain individuals who develop minor salivary gland adenocarcinomas of the
nasal and paranasal sinuses. 7 Proof of cause and effect does not exist, however, in any of these postulated associations, and the etiology of most salivary gland
cancers cannot be determined.
Overall, the majority of salivary gland neoplasms are benign, a fact that reflects an overwhelming predominance of parotid tumors, three-fourths of which are
nonmalignant. Different classifications of salivary gland neoplasms have been established, but the one that seems to be the most consistently workable is shown in
Table 30.4-1.

TABLE 30.4-1. Classification of Salivary Gland Neoplasms

Benign Tumors
PLEOMORPHIC ADENOMA. Also known as the benign mixed tumor, the pleomorphic adenoma is the most common of the neoplasms that originate in the major salivary

glands. 8 This tumor is more correctly referred to by its formal name, which describes its multiple histologic components, including myxoid, mucoid, chondroid, and
other elements. Although these lesions can occur in all salivary gland tissues, most often they are seen in the parotid gland.
The distinction between this tumor and its malignant counterpart, malignant mixed tumor, is often difficult, but the histologic features that most reliably separate the
two include a tendency in the malignant version for perivascular and perineural invasion and significant cellular atypia and mitosis. Malignant lesions can be

underinterpreted and their true nature not appreciated until metastasis occurs; even then, the metastases can appear histologically benign. 9,10 and 11 At the opposite
extreme, a benign but extremely cellular pleomorphic adenoma can be overinterpreted as a malignant mixed tumor. These factors must be critically considered when
doing retrospective interinstitutional outcomes research.
The natural history of these tumors is characterized by slow growth and few symptoms. Even when growing to large size, those lesions that remain benign rarely
affect clinical facial nerve function. In such tumors, however, the nerve is often stretched around the mass and seems to become more fragile with increasing tumor
size. In that circumstance, tumor removal may more likely be associated with postoperative nerve weakness.
There is controversy over the evolution of pleomorphic adenomas into their malignant counterparts. Many authors believe that the latter originates in a preexisting
benign setting; hence, the term carcinoma expleomorphic adenoma. Other researchers, however, believe that malignant mixed tumor arises de novo.9,10,11 and 12
PAPILLARY CYSTADENOMA LYMPHOMATOSUM (WARTHIN'S TUMOR). Papillary cystadenoma lymphomatosum (Warthin's tumor) is a slow-growing, often cystic, and

usually innocuous tumor that almost always occurs in older men, seems to favor the tail of the parotid gland, and occurs bilaterally in 10% of cases. Because of its
benign nature and because it can be easily diagnosed cytologically, surgical removal is not always necessary, especially in older or unhealthy patients.
MONOMORPHIC ADENOMA. The monomorphic adenomas are a group of benign lesions that can have a variety of growth patterns. The most common monomorphic

patterns are the basal cell and the oxyphilic adenomas (oncocytomas). Other monomorphic adenomas are the sebaceous lymphadenomas and sebaceous adenomas.
The parotid gland is the most common site of these lesions.
BENIGN LYMPHOEPITHELIAL LESION. Benign lymphoepithelial lesion (BLL) was first described in association with systemic conditions such as Sjögren's and Mikulicz's

syndromes.13 An apparent increase in its incidence has been seen in patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). BLL now encompasses a spectrum of cystic
changes seen in the parotid glands of HIV-infected persons, the common denominator of which is atypical lymphoid hyperplasia. It is thought that these changes are
the direct result of HIV infection of intraparotid lymph nodes. 14
Several reports of HIV-associated malignancies of the parotid have been published, including non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, 15 Kaposi's sarcoma,16 and adenoid cystic
carcinoma.17 Some of these have arisen on a background of BLL. Malignancy in association with prior BLL, however, was described before the acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) epidemic,18 and it remains unclear whether HIV infection predisposes this lesion to malignancy.
Treatment of BLL in HIV-infected patients is controversial. Some clinicians cite the association of malignancy as justification for parotidectomy. 19 Others have
proposed observation of the lesion with intermittent fine-needle aspirations (FNAs) for decompression of cyst. 20 Still others have recommended low-dose radiation
therapy. 21 Optimally, therapy should be individualized, depending on the clinical and diagnostic suspicion of malignancy, the status of the patient's HIV infection
(asymptomatic, AIDS-related complex, or AIDS), and risk-benefit analysis for patient and surgeon.
Malignant Tumors
Spiro and Spiro1 have developed a compendium of the various series of salivary gland cancers reported and, in their survey, have outlined the relative occurrence
rates of the various cancers in both the parotid and submandibular glands. The various reports from nine studies total 1778 parotid gland cancers, the distribution of
which is abbreviated and summarized in Table 30.4-2. Summarized in Table 30.4-3 are comparable data for the submandibular gland that are taken from eight studies
and that, when combined, reflect the relative distribution by type of 383 submandibular gland cancers.

TABLE 30.4-2. Relative Prevalence of Histologic Types of Parotid Gland Cancer a

TABLE 30.4-3. Relative Prevalence of Histologic Types of Submandibular Gland Cancer a

ACINIC CELL CARCINOMA. Acinic cell carcinoma is an uncommon malignancy that probably accounts for fewer than 10% of all salivary gland cancers. 22 Although acinic

cell lesions usually are seen in the parotid gland, they occasionally occur in the submandibular gland. 23 They are low grade, only infrequently invade the facial nerve,
and are late to metastasize. When they do metastasize, however, it is usually to the lungs, and under these circumstances, death usually follows. Because of their
slow growth, survival data are good when generous surgical excision is performed. 24,25
MUCOEPIDERMOID CARCINOMA. In major salivary glands, mucoepidermoid carcinoma occurs more frequently than any other malignancy. It is relatively more common in

the parotid than in the submandibular gland, where it is third in prevalence after adenoid cystic carcinoma and adenocarcinoma (see Table 30.4-2 and Table 30.4-3).
Mucoepidermoid carcinoma is unique in that it demonstrates a broad spectrum of aggressiveness, from the low grade that rarely kills to its high-grade counterpart that
frequently does. Low-grade mucoepidermoid carcinomas tend to create mostly local problems and can have a long natural history. A locally aggressive surgical
approach is usually associated with cure. Although metastasis can occur from these lesions, it is the exception rather than the rule. In fact, such a striking
performance gradient is apparent between low- and high-grade mucoepidermoid carcinomas that some investigators believe that the former should be referred to as
mucoepidermoid tumor rather than carcinoma. When low-grade mucoepidermoid cancer metastasizes, however, it can be lethal, 26,27 and 28 and to diminish the
appreciation of its potential seriousness by this name change seems ill advised. The high-grade and, to a great extent, the intermediate-grade mucoepidermoids are
often troublesome because they are locally aggressive and are prone to invasion of nerves and vessels as well as to early metastasis. Spiro 26 have reported that 44%
of the previously untreated patients with intermediate- or high-grade mucoepidermoid parotid tumors develop nodal involvement at some stage. Analysis of only the
high-grade lesions reveals an incidence of nodal metastasis from all salivary gland sites that is probably even higher. 26,29,30 Because of the propensity for regional

nodal metastasis in high-grade mucoepidermoid carcinomas, regional nodal dissection combined with generous local or primary resection plus postoperative radiation
therapy is important in the treatment of these lesions.
Grading of mucoepidermoid lesions relates in part to the ratio between epidermoid and glandular elements, the high-grade tumors having a larger proportion of the
former.30 It is common for those higher-grade tumors that demonstrate little glandular component on routine hematoxylin and eosin stains to be misinterpreted as
epidermoid or squamous cell carcinomas.
ADENOCARCINOMA. Adenocarcinomas make up approximately 16% of parotid gland and 9% of submandibular gland cancers (see Table 30.4-2 and Table 30.4-3).

These lesions are encountered more frequently in the minor salivary glands of the nose and paranasal sinuses. A difference in survival seems to correlate with grade,
with the high grade having a poorer prognosis and the low grade a much more favorable one. 9,22,31 In the higher-grade tumors, treatment failures result predominantly
from distant metastasis. Along with the overall poor performance, this fact is important in helping to judge the degree of aggressiveness with which locoregional
disease should be treated.
SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA. Squamous cell carcinomas are uncommon in salivary tissue, making up approximately 7% of parotid gland and 10% of submandibular

gland cancers. 22 Individuals with high-grade tumors do poorly and usually present with an advanced stage of cancer. 32,33 Squamous cell carcinomas of the parotid
gland frequently are not primary to that gland but instead represent metastasis into parotid nodes from adjacent sites, such as temple, auricular, and facial skin. Skin
lesions that come from virtually any site on the face tend to metastasize to the superficial lymph nodes that lie external to the parotid capsule. 34,35
MALIGNANT MIXED TUMOR. Malignant mixed tumors make up approximately 14% of parotid gland and 12% of submandibular gland cancers (see Table 30.4-2 and

Table 30.4-3). The diagnosis is often difficult because of the similarities with the tumor's benign counterpart, the pleomorphic adenoma. Many of the malignant mixed
tumors seem to originate in previous pleomorphic adenomas (carcinoma ex-pleomorphic adenoma), but just how often they occur de novo is not known. Thus,
controversy has continued for some time. Those proponents of the malignant transformation theory believe that the evolution of malignancy within a pleomorphic
adenoma is the explanation for the circumstance encountered periodically in which a longstanding and stable tumor begins to grow significantly. When this does
occur, they believe the assumption of malignant development should be made and management tailored accordingly. Although growth acceleration of a previously
dormant salivary mass is not pathognomonic of malignancy, we agree that this behavior pattern dictates such a treatment strategy. The exact probability of any given
benign mixed tumor becoming malignant is unknown but probably occurs in approximately 5% of pleomorphic adenoma cases. 36 Survival from malignant mixed tumor
must be measured over a lengthy period, because the natural history of this lesion can be characterized by protracted but inexorable growth. Metastasis to regional
lymph nodes occurs in more than one-fourth of cases. 22,31,37
ADENOID CYSTIC CARCINOMA. In most series, adenoid cystic carcinoma accounts for almost one-fourth of the malignant salivary gland tumors treated and constitutes

approximately 10% to 15% of all parotid gland malignancies (see Table 30.4-2). This cancer is relatively more common in minor than in major salivary glands. It is
unique because of its protracted natural history, even when local recurrence or distant metastasis has developed. For instance, patients are known to live 10 to 20
years despite pulmonary metastasis, the most frequent manifestation of distant spread. When visceral or bone metastasis occurs, however, death usually follows
within a relatively short time. 1 The actual cure rate of adenoid cystic carcinoma is poorly defined, because long-term follow-up often is not included in data analyses.
Also clouding the issue of cure is the fact that some 10- to 20-year studies have shown disease-related deaths that continue to occur throughout the follow-up
period.30,38 Some investigators believe that most adenoid cystic carcinomas recur if followed long enough. Overall, the rate of pulmonary metastasis from these
cancers is approximately 40%.
Adenoid cystic carcinoma has an exceptional capability to invade nerve tissue, and when this occurs, local control and survival are compromised. Such a morphologic
finding is the rule rather than the exception in this cancer, and recognition of the tendency is essential in planning treatment, which usually consists of wide surgical
excision and radiation therapy. Treatment failure most often occurs in the primary tumor site. Some authors have drawn a correlation between histologic patterns of
adenoid cystic carcinoma and clinical behavior. 39 Others, although conceding certain behavior pattern differences in the different histologic variants of adenoid cystic
carcinoma, do not believe a correlation exists between these features and long-term outcome. 38
NATURAL HISTORY, BEHAVIOR STAGING, AND TREATMENT PRINCIPLES
Malignant tumors of major salivary gland origin are a heterogeneous group of diseases; three primary sites and at least eight different histologic patterns have been
identified for this relatively uncommon group of cancers. Studies reporting treatment results have, therefore, often grouped primary sites and histologic types. This
method is flawed, however, and because the problem often has been compounded by analyzing short-term results in diseases that often have a long natural history,
many questions remain unanswered.
Most patients with benign tumors, whether in minor or major salivary glands, present with asymptomatic swelling of the lip or the parotid, submandibular, or sublingual
glands (floor of the mouth). Neurologic signs, such as mucosal or tongue numbness, associated with a floor of mouth mass usually indicate a malignancy. In the
presence of a lip mass, a numb lower lip can result from tumor involvement of the submental nerve. Facial nerve weakness that is associated with a parotid or
submandibular tumor is an ominous finding. Even in huge tumors of the parotid gland that are benign, the facial nerve usually is not affected. Essentially, any
compromise in nerve function greatly heightens concern for malignancy. Overall, malignant parotid gland tumors are associated with facial nerve paralysis in 10% to
20% of patients. 40 Although benign tumors occasionally cause facial discomfort, persistent facial pain is strongly suggestive of malignancy in a salivary gland tumor;
in fact, approximately 10% to 15% of patients with malignant parotid neoplasms present with pain. 29 Furthermore, those malignancies that are characterized by pain
seem to have a worse prognosis.
The majority of parotid tumors, whether benign or malignant, present with an asymptomatic mass in the gland; in fact, this is the case even in the majority of malignant
tumors.
The most common benign tumor, the pleomorphic adenoma, can be problematic. Usually a pseudocapsule is found around this lesion, and, importantly, finger-like
projections of tumor penetrate into the surrounding glandular parenchyma, whether it is parotid or submandibular. Enucleation of these lesions tends to leave behind
foci of tumor that result in frequent local recurrence. It should be remembered that benign mixed tumor, although not classified as malignant, can ultimately cause
great hardship for a patient. Multiple recurrences, skull base involvement, facial nerve paralysis, malignant transformation and, ultimately, incurable disease can all
result from a casual initial approach to this neoplasm. This tumor should be regarded as locally dangerous, and any operation should provide a wide margin of normal
tissue.
Special problems exist with tumors of the parotid deep lobe, because they are frequently surrounded by little or no glandular parenchyma; thus, even the best of
operations consists largely of tumor enucleation. In this circumstance, the probability is high for leaving behind histologic disease, and postoperative radiation therapy
must be considered.
Malignant tumors of the parotid can be locally aggressive, demonstrating invasiveness that leads to involvement of the facial nerve, skin, bone, and surrounding soft
tissue. Prognosis is related to tumor size and stage and is affected by histologic grade. Decreasing survival occurs for many years, especially in patients with adenoid
cystic carcinoma and malignant mixed tumor, and in those lesions, distant metastasis may not always represent a terminal event. The treatment of primary disease,
therefore, is not necessarily precluded by lung metastasis, especially in adenoid cystic carcinoma.
Overall, the prognosis for parotid gland cancer is better than it is for the submandibular gland lesions: 50% to 81% 5-year survival is reported for the former and 30%
to 50% for the latter29,41; the 10-year survival rate declines in both sites. The lower survival rate for the submandibular gland group probably relates to the larger
proportion of adenoid cystic carcinomas in that group. Spiro and colleagues 42 reported survival results in 474 patients with major salivary gland tumors treated at the
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center from 1944 to 1986. The 5-, 10-, and 15-year survival rates were 54%, 43%, and 34%, respectively, with determinate
survivals of 63%, 47%, and 42%, respectively. Multivariate analysis showed that advanced stage, higher histologic grade, and submandibular location were
prognostic for a poorer outcome. In addition, treatment after 1966 was found to be an important prognostic factor and was thought to relate to an increased use of
postoperative radiation therapy beginning during this latter period.
Differences in histologic features affect natural history. The prognosis for acinic cell carcinoma is the most favorable for the major salivary cancers; more than 75%
5-year and more than 65% 10-year survivals are reported in various series. 26,37 Low-grade mucoepidermoid carcinomas show 76% to 95% 5-year survival rates,
whereas only 30% to 50% of those with high-grade tumors are alive at 5 years. 26,32 The survival rates for intermediate-grade mucoepidermoids are between those of

the low and high grades. Adenoid cystic carcinoma, on the other hand, must be analyzed with the realization that 5-year survival rates are always better than 10-year
figures, which in turn are better than those at 15 years, and so on. Most series show 50% to 90% 5-year survival rates, 30% to 67% 10-year survival rates, and 25%
15-year survival rates for treated adenoid cystic carcinoma. 38,39,41,43 Patients with adenocarcinomas of major salivary glands show gradual deterioration of survival
statistics with the passage of time; 76% to 85% survival at 5 years and 34% to 71% at 10 years. 31 Patients with malignant mixed tumors do not do well; only 31% to
65% survive 5 years and 23% to 30% survive 10 years. 6,41
Distant metastasis is predictive of a poor prognosis, and it occurs in approximately 20% of parotid malignancies. 44 Distant metastasis is a significant concern in most
higher-grade salivary gland malignancies. At least 40% of patients with adenoid cystic carcinoma and 26% to 32% with malignant mixed tumors demonstrate this
feature.38 Even with lower-grade tumors, such as acinic cell carcinoma, a measurable incidence of distant metastasis is found. 9,26 In all of these lesions, the site of
distant metastasis is most often the lung(s). Overall, the likelihood of metastasis from the submandibular gland is almost twice that from the parotid gland. 22
Regional lymphatic metastasis is a subject of considerable importance in relation to malignant salivary gland tumors. In the extensive series reported from Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 14% of patients presented with palpable nodal metastases. Thirty-four percent of the patients with high-grade tumors demonstrated
this finding, compared to only 2% of patients with low-grade lesions. Additionally, in the group of patients who had clinically negative necks but underwent elective
neck dissections, 49% of the high-grade and 7% of the low-grade tumors turned out to have histologically positive necks. 45,46 These statistically significant figures
suggest that the rates of occult and clinically positive node disease are increased with high-grade malignant salivary gland tumors.
With submandibular gland malignancies, as with parotid tumors, prognosis is dependent on a number of factors, the most significant of which seem to be clinical
stage and perineural invasion. 47,48
Spiro and associates believed that the most important prognosticator for survival is tumor stage. Accordingly, in 1975, they proposed a staging system that was later
incorporated into the current American Joint Committee on Cancer staging system. 29,49 This system addresses the size of the primary lesion and the presence or
absence of fixation or facial nerve dysfunction. It was first applied only to parotid sites but seems to serve all salivary sites. Table 30.4-4 describes the American Joint
Committee on Cancer staging system. According to Spiro, 22 cumulative survival exceeds 90% at 10 years for patients with stage I or II disease, whereas only 22% of
stage III or IV patients are alive after 10 years.

TABLE 30.4-4. Staging System for Major Salivary Gland Malignancies

CLINICAL EVALUATION AND WORKUP
Short of surgical exploration, the physical examination remains the most important tool of the experienced diagnostician. A hard mass with fixation or nerve palsy is
likely to be malignant; however, any malignancy can masquerade with a more benign appearance and presentation. Cytologic analysis achieved through FNA is
helpful in selected circumstances, especially when the index of suspicion for malignancy is high or when the patient is not a good candidate for surgery. In the latter
circumstance, the patient is somewhat reassured by benign cytologic findings and is more secure in choosing a nonsurgical approach. In a patient with disseminated
metastatic disease in whom a salivary gland mass also is found, making a diagnosis easily with FNA of the parotid lesion can be of considerable value to the patient.
For example, if the FNA reveals lymphoma, the appropriate diagnostic cascade is different than in the nonlymphomatous mass. Finally, if an older patient has FNA
findings suggestive of Warthin's tumor, surgery can be avoided. Some concern has been expressed that the false-negative rate with cytologic evaluation of salivary
gland cancers is somewhat higher than in other tumor families, and because of the heterogeneity of salivary gland tumors, a negative FNA does not substantially alter
the treatment plan in most circumstances. False-positive rates for malignancy, on the other hand, are very low. To know in advance of a malignancy is helpful in both
treatment strategizing and in patient education. Malata and colleagues 50 reported 88% sensitivity for FNA-cytologic evaluation for the parotid gland. Overall, the
accuracy rate of FNA is extraordinary, and we use it in the vast majority of parotid and submandibular masses.
CT and MRI are helpful in analyzing the important third dimension of larger tumors, especially those that involve the deep lobe of the parotid gland. Imaging
technologies are especially important in studying malignant tumors; however, these expensive methods are not necessary for the evaluation of all parotid or
submandibular gland tumors. As it pertains to tumors, sialography is of historic interest only and is superfluous.
TREATMENT
The initial treatment for salivary gland neoplasia, whether benign or malignant, whether of minor or major gland origin, is almost always surgical, and whenever
possible, removal of parotid, submandibular, and sublingual gland tumors should be excisional rather than incisional. The diagnosis of parotid tumors usually is
established by removal of the involved part of the gland, thus avoiding lumpectomy whenever possible. In the case of a lesion of the parotid superficial lobe, for
instance, the least extensive or most conservative operation should be superficial parotidectomy. With benign tumors, the diagnostic operation and the definitive
operation are, therefore, usually the same. Before surgery, it is helpful for the surgeon to have a sense of whether the tumor is benign or malignant, and this is
achieved by physical examination, history, and technological aids such as FNA and imaging.
An important general principle of management that applies particularly to higher-grade adenocarcinomas, malignant mixed tumor, and adenoid cystic carcinoma is
that, by combining postoperative radiation therapy with moderate locoregional surgery, mutilation and physiologic compromise are often avoided. The preoccupation
with liberal resection of facial nerve, mandible, and other important structures solely because they are in the field no longer dominates surgical philosophy. Instead,
the realization that “more” does not necessarily improve survival has spawned a form of surgical minimalism. When failure does occur, it is frequently at a distant site
and is probably not influenced by the degree of the local treatment. Important anatomic structures are rarely sacrificed unless obviously invaded by tumor. The
surgeon's reliance on postoperative radiation therapy to manage histologic disease has dramatically altered the surgical feats required to deal with many malignant
salivary gland tumors. It should be pointed out, however, that although local and regional control of these tumors is enhanced by this combined therapy, its impact on
the development of distant metastasis and, therefore, on survival is less clear.
Some investigators have proposed the routine use of postoperative radiation therapy for almost all malignant tumors of the parotid, 51 but the absence of randomized
data complicates the issue. Armstrong and associates 52 performed a matched-pair analysis comparing surgery alone versus surgery plus postoperative radiotherapy.
Patients with stage III/IV disease and those with positive nodes experienced improved locoregional control and survival with postoperative radiation. A trend also was
seen toward improved local control for high-grade lesions treated with postoperative radiation (63% vs. 44%). The 5-year determinant survival rate tended to be better
for high-grade lesions treated with adjuvant radiotherapy than with surgery alone (57% vs. 28%). No benefits were achieved for lower-grade or lower-stage tumors.
Malata and coworkers 50 reported 51 patients with malignant parotid tumors, most of whom (73%) received postoperative radiation. The crude 5- and 10-year survival
rates were 68% and 49%, respectively, and 10-year actuarial local control was 79%.
Surgical resection is the mainstay of the management of benign pleomorphic adenoma. Renehan et al. 53 reported the cumulative experience of more than 1400
salivary gland tumors treated at Christie Hospital between 1947 and 1992. For 551 patients with previously untreated parotid pleomorphic adenoma treated by
surgery, the recurrence rate (median follow-up of 12.5 years) was 1.6%. The recurrence rate rises to 15% in patients undergoing surgery for recurrence. Dawson and

Orr54 reported long-term outcomes for pleomorphic adenomas treated by “lumpectomy” plus radiotherapy. The 10-year local recurrence rate was 1.5%, with
cumulative risk rising to 8% at 20 years. Most late recurrences were malignant, with one of four developing malignant recurrence at 15 years, and three at 18 years.
The possibility of radiation-induced malignancy, therefore, must be added to the known possibility of malignant transformation when considering treatment options.
Given these considerations, surgery alone seems to be the obvious initial treatment of choice.
Management of parotid pleomorphic adenomas that recur despite surgical removal can be particularly challenging. Generally, recurrences develop slowly, and
frequently their appearance is not noted for years after surgery. Furthermore, recurrences often present in the form of multifocal nodules, all of which are inevitably
engulfed in scar tissue from the previous surgery, and in this setting, the identification and protection of the facial nerve is substantially more difficult than in the
nonoperated circumstance. Leverstein and colleagues 55 reported on 40 patients with recurrent pleomorphic adenoma of the parotid. In three patients, no tumor
resection was performed. Two received radiotherapy, and both were controlled. In the remaining 37 cases, en bloc resection was done. Pathology remained benign in
36 cases, and 16 received postoperative radiotherapy. None of the patients developed local failure with a median follow-up of 106 months. One patient experienced
facial nerve paralysis and two developed malignant transformation. It would seem, therefore, that in high-risk circumstances, such as multifocality, positive surgical
margins, and certain deep lobe tumors, selective use of radiation therapy after appropriate surgical excision should be the treatment of choice.
Cervical metastasis is an ominous event in salivary gland malignancy, and the standard management approach is to do a modified radical neck dissection followed by
postoperative radiation. In malignant parotid and submandibular tumors in which no clinical adenopathy is present, the first echelon lymph nodes should be sampled
because of a surprisingly high rate of occult metastasis. In a multivariate analysis, Armstrong et al. 52 reported that the risk of occult metastasis is 20% in primary
malignancies larger than 4 cm, with a 49% risk for high-grade tumors. Frankenthaler and colleagues 56 found a 33% risk of occult metastases for parotid malignancies
associated with facial nerve paralysis and 18% risk for high-grade tumors in general. At the present time, however, no compelling data support the benefit of elective
neck dissection for the clinically negative neck in malignant high-grade tumors. 57
Other series consistently have shown improvement in locoregional control when patients with major salivary gland cancers received postoperative radiation
therapy. 37,43,58,59,60,61 and 62 These consistent data are a marked improvement over the substantial local failure rates (39% for parotid gland and 60% for submandibular
gland) reported for patients treated by surgery alone. 22
Specifically, the indications for adding radiation to surgery for management of malignant tumors are positive surgical margins, advanced primary tumor stage
(including facial nerve involvement, positive neck nodes, high-grade histology, and deep lobe involvement), and tumor spillage during the operation.
Other data suggest that, for lesions that are locally advanced at the time of initial treatment and for patients with involved margins, intraoperative brachytherapy plus
postoperative external-beam radiation therapy might be useful in improving local control. 59 Fu and associates63 showed that, with positive resection margins, local
control improved with the addition of radiation. Overall, only 14% of those with microscopic disease at or close to the surgical margin experienced local recurrence
when postoperative radiation therapy was given, as compared with 54% who recurred locally in the surgery-only group. Most patients in this series received total
doses between 5000 and 7500 cGy.
Although a detailed technical description of parotidectomy is inappropriate here, several points should be made about this meticulous but safe surgical technique.
Were it not for the presence of the facial nerve within the substance of the parotid gland, the procedure would be far less challenging; however, this important motor
nerve, along with all of its branches, weave through the parotid parenchyma in such a way that almost all tumor operations involve nerve identification, isolation, and
dissection. The approaches vary somewhat, but consistent with all parotid operations is the fundamental surgical tenet of generous and well-planned incision, skin
flap elevation, and wide exposure. When well designed, the parotidectomy incision, even though long, leaves little obvious scarring. The incision usually is begun
anterior to the auricle, extends behind the edge of the external ear canal to minimize its exposure, then swings along the lower edge of the ear lobe down to the first
horizontal crease of the cervical skin and then anteriorly for some distance ( Fig. 30.4-4). A skin flap is then lifted anteriorly to an extent that exposes the entire
external surface of the parotid gland. The gland is separated from the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, and the posterior belly of the diagastric
muscle is identified lying deep to the sternocleidomastoid. The diagastric muscle and the cartilaginous ear canal serve as landmarks for identification of the main
trunk of the facial nerve as it exits the stylomastoid foramen and extends anteriorly. The various branches of the nerve are dissected and, in the case of the tumors
within the superficial lobe of the parotid gland, that lobe and the tumor within it are removed without violating the capsule of the neoplasm. To remove tumors that lie
within the deep lobe (i.e., under the nerve), the superficial lobe of the gland is often removed, and various manipulations of the nerve are necessary to remove the
tumor under it. For a large, deep lobe neoplasm, other techniques of deep lobe exposure, such as submandibular gland excision, with or without mandibulotomy, may
be necessary to accomplish safely and effectively the important goal of en bloc tumor removal.

FIGURE 30.4-4. Typical parotidectomy incision. A: The drawing of the incision is designed to blend into natural skin folds and minimize visibility. B: One-year
postoperative result of an actual parotidectomy incision like the one depicted in A.

Often, the oncologic principles of wide excision with ample surrounding normal parenchyma are not attainable in deep lobe tumors, and the adequacy of the surgery
must be sternly questioned. Generally speaking, one should apply liberal criteria in this circumstance for the use of postoperative radiation therapy. Modern imaging
provides the means by which the surgeon can be forewarned about deep lobe involvement, its size, and the probability of needing extended methods, such as
mandibulotomy, to extricate the tumor from the parapharyngeal space. Whether partial or total parotidectomy is done, the defect incurred is usually reasonable. With
proper attention to detail, dissection of the facial nerve and removal of most tumors can be accomplished with minimal risk of postoperative facial weakness. Closure
of the skin incision usually is followed by a pleasing esthetic result.
Radiation therapy techniques vary, depending on the anatomic and pathologic situation. Submandibular lesions are usually treated with parallel opposed portals to
cover the entire tumor bed and submandibular/submental area. The cervical lymph nodes are included for node-positive patients, and the occasional, high-risk,
node-negative patient. For parotid, treatment-planning CT scans should routinely be done. A variety of techniques have been reported. 59,64 Yaparpalvi and
coworkers65 reported a comparison of nine different techniques using dose-volume histogram analysis of exit dose to contralateral parotid, hot spots in mandible and
temporal lobe, and other key parameters. They concluded that an ipsilateral wedged pair; a three-field anteroposterior (wedged), posteroanterior (wedged), and
lateral portal using 6-MV photons; and a mixed 6-MV photon beam with a 16-MeV electron beam (1:4 weighting) provided the best target coverage with minimal
normal tissue dose. Garden et al. 64 reported a preference for ipsilateral mixed beam over the wedged pair technique with respect to complications. Modern conformal
techniques should provide excellent coverage of the target area and minimum dose to surrounding normal tissue using either approach.
The exact dose required for postoperative radiation therapy has not been determined. In a study in which patients who received doses of at least 5750 cGy were
compared with patients who received smaller doses, Harrison and colleagues 59 compared dose with outcome. The 10-year local control rate for the higher-dose group
was 72%, compared with 53% for those in the lower-dose group. However, despite the suggestion of a trend in favor of high doses, the difference was not statistically
significant. In another important study, Garden and associates 64 reported no clear dose-response relationship, except in patients with positive margins or tumor
involvement of major named nerves, and in those, he noted better local control with doses of more than 60 Gy. Hosokawa and coworkers 66 reported that patients with
mucoepidermoid cancer of salivary gland origin experienced no local recurrences with postoperative doses of more than 55 Gy, whereas 3 of 17 patients recurred
locally with doses of less than 55 Gy. The difference was statistically significant. McNaney and coworkers 61 reviewed treatment failure and the total dose for patients

who received at least 6000 cGy or more. The doses that were associated with treatment failure did not lend themselves to a specific dose-response relation. In
general, doses in the 6000 to 6500 cGy range given over 6 to 7 weeks are used for postoperative radiation therapy, except in patients with involved margins or T4
disease, who may require even higher doses. In this subset of patients, the expected high local failure rate that has been reported supports the need for dose
intensification with either conformed external-beam techniques or intraoperative brachytherapy/radiotherapy approaches.
Because of the unique natural history of adenoid cystic carcinoma and because of its affinity for neural involvement, this tumor deserves special and separate
consideration. Data from three different studies consistently show that postoperative radiation therapy should be added for almost all adenoid cystic carcinomas.
When regional nodes are involved, the neck should be included in the treatment planning. 59,67,68 When these nodes are uninvolved, elective neck radiation generally
is not recommended.
Management of the neck in general includes the consideration of important variables such as T stage and grade. In a study by Armstrong and associates, 52 474
patients with major salivary gland cancers were reviewed. High-grade tumors had a 49% risk for occult metastases, as compared with only 7% for intermediate- or
low-grade tumors. The risk for epidermoid cancers was 41%, but only 10% for all other histologies combined. Submandibular tumors had a higher risk for occult
metastases, occurring in 21% as compared with 9% for parotid tumors. Occult disease was found in 7% of T1 and T2 tumors, 16% of T3 tumors, and 24% of T4
tumors. Most agree that, in patients with clinically positive regional nodes, postoperative radiation therapy should be administered. The question of how to manage the
clinically negative neck is less clear, but the thinking is aided by Armstrong's data. In patients who would otherwise need postoperative radiation therapy because of
concerns about the primary site, elective neck treatment with radiation can be used. It is appropriate to electively harvest the first echelon nodes in high-risk patients
as a means of staging the neck. If histologic nodal examination reveals disease, postoperative radiation therapy to the neck should be added. In Armstrong's study,
the periparotid nodes were the ones most commonly involved, and in those that were positive, 25% had positive nodes at levels III and IV. This was because of skip
metastases to level III and IV without level II metastases. This point emphasizes the need for treatment of the entire neck when involved nodes are found.
For patients with a clinically positive neck, surgery and postoperative radiation therapy are indicated. Although with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck,
nodal disease in one side of the neck frequently places the contralateral neck at risk, this does not appear to be the case with major salivary gland cancers. King and
Fletcher 69 and Harrison et al. 59 showed that elective contralateral neck radiation is not necessary in this circumstance.
The role of chemotherapy in the management of both the major and minor salivary gland malignancies is limited to treating distant metastasis that is progressing and
to circumstances of palliation of local/regional disease not amenable to either salvage surgery or radiation therapy. Although a few patients have been reported who
have been given combination chemotherapy in the neoadjuvant setting or as adjuvant therapy after surgery, too few patients are available for study. 70,71 Similarly, no
data has been published evaluating concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy administered in an attempt to improve outcome by increasing radiation cell kill.
The interpretation of response data from phase II trials of single agents and combination chemotherapy regimens is limited by the heterogeneity of histologic types of
salivary gland cancer, by the fact that response probably differs by histologic type, and by the small numbers of patients enrolled in any one study. Mucoepidermoid,
adenoid cystic, and adenocarcinoma histologies constitute the bulk of patients referred to medical oncologists and therefore those that are included in clinical trials.
Patients with other salivary gland malignancies, such as malignant mixed tumors, epithelial-myoepithelial carcinomas, salivary duct carcinomas, acinic cell
carcinomas, and squamous cell carcinomas, are rare and therefore not separated out in the chemotherapy literature.
Mucoepidermoid and squamous cell carcinomas are thought to arise from the salivary excretory duct and generally respond to cisplatin-based chemotherapy
regimens used for other sites in the head and neck. Adenoid cystic carcinomas and adenocarcinomas arise from the intercalated ducts of the salivary glands and tend
to be lumped together in study reports but often have a different clinical course; adenoid cystic carcinoma may be surprisingly indolent and only manifested by the
chronic pain of perineural tumor infiltration. Metastatic adenocarcinoma, on the other hand, generally has a more aggressive course that is reflected in proportionately
more obvious responses to chemotherapy.
Table 30.4-5 lists single-agent and combination regimens reported to have activity in salivary gland cancers. Cumulative response rates to single agents range from
10% to 40%, with the higher rates reported from older literature. 72,73,74,75,76,77,78 and 79 Retrospective reviews of patients treated for adenoid cystic carcinoma before
1980 at both the M. D. Anderson and Princess Margaret hospitals indicated that Adriamycin and 5-fluorouracil were the most effective single agents, 80,81 whereas
methotrexate, vincristine, and cyclophosphamide showed little activity. A review published by Suen and Johns 82 in 1982 noted clinical efficacy for cisplatin as well.

TABLE 30.4-5. Single Agents and Combination Regimens with Activity in Salivary Gland Malignancies

In the 1990s, three new agents were tested in multicenter trials with adequate numbers of patients with adenoid cystic carcinoma. The European Organization for
Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) conducted a phase II evaluation of epirubicin in 20 patients and reported two responses that lasted 7.5 and 20 months,
respectively, and ten patients with disease stabilization. 76 Symptomatic improvement was documented in 29% in this particular study. Phase II trials of mitoxantrone in
adenoid cystic carcinoma patients were carried out by the EORTC 77 and the Southwest Oncology Group.78 EORTC investigators observed four partial responses and
22 with stable disease in a total of 32 patients; the Southwest Oncology Group investigators reported one complete response and 12 patients with stable disease out
of the 18 treated.
Paclitaxel at a dose of 200 mg/m2 over 3 hours every 3 weeks was tested in the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, using a standard two-stage statistical design,
in three patient cohorts: individuals with adenoid cystic carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, or mucoepidermoid carcinoma. The trial was closed for the adenoid cystic
carcinoma cohort after no responses were observed in 15 patients, but patients with adenocarcinoma and mucoepidermoid carcinoma continue to be enrolled, with
both arms demonstrating responses.83
A fourth new drug studied is vinorelbine. Airoldi et al. 79 conducted a phase II trial in 20 patients with salivary gland malignancies (13 adenoid cystic carcinomas, five
adenocarcinomas, one malignant mixed tumor, and one undifferentiated carcinoma). Four patients achieved a partial response and nine demonstrate stable disease.
In summary, modest activity has been shown for epirubicin, mitoxantrone, and vinorelbine in patients with adenoid cystic carcinoma. Paclitaxel does not appear to be
active for adenoid cystic carcinoma, but preliminary findings from the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group suggest activity for adenocarcinoma and mucoepidermoid
carcinoma.
Combinations that include cisplatin, Adriamycin, or 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) have been the cornerstone of palliative treatment for salivary gland malignancies, a fact
particularly true in adenoid cystic and adenocarcinomas. Complete and partial response rates in the 30% to 60% range have been reported. In addition, some trials
note prolonged disease stabilization and relief of pain among patients with adenoid cystic carcinoma. 76,84,85 Median response duration is in the range of 6 to 9 months,
with some responses lasting more than 1 year. It is unknown whether survival is improved with chemotherapy. 86 Two- and three-drug regimens combining
cyclophosphamide with Adriamycin and cisplatin (CAP) 17,18,19,20 and 21; cisplatin with Adriamycin or epirubicin plus 5-FU (OAF or OEF) 70,87,89,91; cisplatin plus 5-FU
(PF)3,16,19,21; or cisplatin, Adriamycin, and bleomycin (PAB) 84 all appear equally effective. Combinations that incorporate mitomycin C or vincristine 71,88,90 or use more
than three drugs 92 do not seem to offer any advantage.

In summary, no standard drug therapy has been established for treatment of salivary gland cancer because of the lack of formal trials with adequate numbers of
patients. For the treatment of adenoid cystic carcinoma, the information at hand would suggest that combination chemotherapy is superior to single-agent strategies
and that two- or three-drug combinations of cisplatin, doxorubicin, and 5-FU would be reasonable initial treatment. The slow growth rate of adenoid cystic carcinoma
may be one of the factors that account for the lack of response observed in some studies. Relief of symptoms and stabilization of disease may be more achievable
palliative end points for evaluating drug efficacy. Adenocarcinomas of salivary gland origin may be treated with the same regimens. High-grade mucoepidermoid
carcinoma appears to be sensitive to the same spectrum of drugs that are commonly used to treat squamous malignancies (cisplatin, bleomycin, methotrexate, and
5-FU).72,93 Thus, the combination of cisplatin and 5-FU or taxane-based combinations are reasonable regimens to use. No data are available about treatment of the
less common malignancies, such as acinic cell carcinoma and malignant mixed tumors. All patients should be considered candidates for trials of investigational new
drugs. Studies of adjuvant chemotherapy, particularly for high-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma, have not been undertaken because of the small number of patients
available for study. The optimal way to assess new therapies for salivary gland carcinoma is in a multiinstitutional setting in which patient resources can be pooled
and treatments made uniform.

MINOR SALIVARY GLAND TUMORS
Minor salivary gland tumors can occur in any age group, and they have no particular gender predilection. The glands are ubiquitous in the upper aerodigestive tract,
so tumors originating in minor glands can occur anywhere in the head and neck; however, the palate is the most common site for both benign and malignant lesions.
Rarely, ectopic salivary gland tissue can lead to tumors in such diverse locations as the middle ear or the thyroid area. Table 30.4-6 shows the distribution by site of
origin in the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center's experience with these tumors. Minor salivary gland lesions occur in the nasal cavities and paranasal sinuses,
nasopharynx, larynx, lip, floor of the mouth, trachea, and other sites in the head and neck, but overall, they are most frequently seen in the oral cavity. It is often
impossible to differentiate between a primary sublingual tumor and a minor salivary gland tumor in the anterior floor of the mouth.

TABLE 30.4-6. Incidence by Site of Origin of Minor Salivary Gland Tumors a

Between 65% and 88% of all of minor salivary gland tumors are malignant. 94 Adenoid cystic carcinoma is the most common histologic type, occurring in as many as
55% of patients with minor salivary gland tumors. 95 Otherwise, the presenting types are the same as for major salivary gland tumors, including mucoepidermoid
carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, malignant mixed tumor, and anaplastic carcinoma. Small cell (oat cell) carcinoma of minor salivary gland origin also has been reported. 96
Minor salivary gland tumors tend to present as painless submucosal masses and can be present for many years without change. Malignant tumors can persist without
change, but more often they increase in size.
Any submucosal mass in the head or neck should be considered a minor salivary gland tumor until proved otherwise. Malignancies can spread to invade local tissue,
including bone and nerve. Tumors of the floor of the mouth or the tongue can extend into the neck and into the mandible. Adenoid cystic carcinoma has a particular
tendency to grow along the perineural spaces and to extend great distances from the primary tumor along nerve pathways, and it is important for the surgeon to
realize that skip areas of tumor involvement can occur along the nerve. For instance, when this lesion occurs in the lateral aspect of the palate, it can infiltrate the
branches of the greater palatine nerve, extend centrally, and can ultimately occupy the gasserian ganglion in the middle cranial fossa. This fact should be taken into
account, and treatment planning should include the ganglion. The presence of a negative frozen section taken from the nerve trunk proximal to the originally
discovered peripheral nerve lesion does not rule out the possibility that the nerve is involved with tumor more centrally. Adenoid cystic carcinomas can also spread
along the haversian canals of bone. Therefore, when involvement of the mandible is questionable in floor of mouth lesions, the surgeon must be prepared to deal with
further extension than what is obvious.
Fewer than 20% of patients with minor salivary gland malignancies present with lymph node metastases, and approximately 10% who demonstrate a clinically
negative neck subsequently develop nodal metastases. As with major salivary gland tumors, the incidence of nodal metastases is related to grade and tumor size (i.e.,
stage).
No uniform staging system has been developed for minor salivary gland tumors. Survival seems to correlate with clinical stage. Olsen and coworkers 97 showed that
tumor size was significant for mucoepidermoid carcinoma of the oral cavity. In their study, patients with lesions larger than 2 cm did much worse than those with
lesions smaller than 2 cm. None in the latter group died from mucoepidermoid carcinoma.
TREATMENT
Surgery is usually the treatment of choice for minor salivary gland tumors, whether benign or malignant. Enucleation is considered inadequate and is associated with
a recurrence rate in excess of 93% 106; therefore, wide excision or regional excision must be performed whenever possible. The surgeon should not hesitate to remove
underlying bone, such as palate or sinus wall(s), to achieve such excision. Paranasal sinus malignancies often require partial maxillectomy for complete removal.
Speech and swallowing rehabilitation for hard palate defects that have been created by tumor resection is easily accomplished by prosthetic devices. Defects of the
soft palate, however, are more problematic.
Limited information exists on the effectiveness of primary radiation treatment. Ellis and colleagues 98 reported their results, in which a total of 20 patients with minor
salivary gland malignancies received only radiation therapy for their disease. Seven had early-stage tumors and 13 had advanced tumors. Local control was obtained
in six of the seven early-stage lesions (86%), a result that is comparable with those for surgical management. For more advanced lesions, however, radiation alone
controlled only 2 of 13 (15%), a result considerably inferior to that following combined therapy. Parsons and associates 99 reported local control in 13 patients treated
with radiotherapy alone for adenoid cystic cancer, and five of these patients have follow-up longer than 10 years. A total of 20 of 51 cases treated with radiotherapy
alone are locally controlled with follow-up ranging from 2.5 to 21.0 years. Several surgical failures were salvaged with radiotherapy as well. Although this and other
limited studies suggest that radiation can be effective for small lesions, surgery usually is considered the treatment of choice whenever possible. Advanced lesions
should always be treated initially with surgery, and usually that procedure is followed by postoperative radiation therapy. Exactly which patients should receive
postoperative radiation therapy remains unclear. We tend to recommend the guidelines that have been established for major salivary gland tumors: Patients with
advanced-stage disease, lymph node metastases, high-grade tumors, or inadequate surgical margins are treated with postoperative radiation. Many patients have a
combination of these factors.
Long-term follow-up is now available for patients with minor salivary gland tumors. Parsons and associates 99 reported 20-year local control of 57%. The most
important factors affecting local control were tumor stage and combined modality therapy (surgery plus radiotherapy). It is significant that, with longer follow-up, the
distant metastasis rate at 12 years was 40%.
Eapen and colleagues 100 reported 70 patients with salivary gland carcinomas. Approximately one-third had minor salivary gland tumors, and the indications cited for
postoperative radiation therapy were inconsistent. However, a significant decrease in locoregional recurrence was noted among patients who were given
postoperative radiation therapy. The actuarial risk of locoregional recurrence in the nonradiated patients was 62%, as compared with 20% for the radiated group.

Ninety percent of the patients received between 5500 and 6590 cGy over 5.0 to 6.5 weeks. In 95% of radiated patients, the regional lymph nodes were treated along
with the primary site.
Tran and coworkers95 reviewed the University of California, Los Angeles, experience with salivary gland tumors of the oral cavity. A total of 62 patients with previously
untreated lesions were analyzed, all of whom were treated with primary surgical resection. Twenty-four patients received postoperative radiation therapy owing to
advanced local disease, involved margins of resection, or both. Most of the lesions in this series were adenoid cystic carcinomas, and the palate was the most
common primary site. Local tumor control in patients with positive margins was 50% for surgery alone, as compared with 71% with combined surgery and
postoperative radiation therapy. A trend toward less successful disease control and poorer survival for patients with adenoid cystic carcinoma was noted as compared
with the other malignant tumors.
The experience with minor salivary gland tumors of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses was also reported by Tran and coworkers. 95 Thirty-five patients seen and
treated between 1962 and 1985 were included, most of whom (68%) had adenoid cystic carcinoma. Adenocarcinoma was seen in approximately one-half the ethmoid
and nasal cavity lesions. Local control for the combined surgery and radiation group was 62%; for surgery alone, it was 18%, and for radiation alone, it was 9%. This
benefit of radiation was present despite the fact that the radiated group had higher-stage disease and fewer patients had adequate surgical margins. Among those
with positive margins, local recurrence was seen in 67% with surgery alone and 30% with postoperative radiation therapy.
Just as with the major salivary glands, data on the treatment of adenoid cystic cancer of minor salivary gland origin clearly demonstrate a local control advantage from
combined surgery and postoperative radiation therapy over surgery alone. The authors recommend this combined strategy for almost all adenoid cystic carcinomas of
minor salivary gland origin. A young patient with a small lesion that is resected completely may be an exception to this rule. Essentially, all treatment decisions must
be individualized.
Koss and associates96 reported 14 patients with small cell carcinoma of minor salivary gland origin. Although no conclusive data were obtained from this or other
series, these lesions may be managed optimally with resection, chemotherapy, and local radiation therapy.
The technique of radiation therapy for minor salivary gland tumors is similar to that for squamous cancer at the corresponding primary site. For postoperative
radiation, doses in the 6000- to 6500-cGy range are used over 6 to 7 weeks. Wide portals are required, especially for adenoid cystic cancer. The nerve pathways up
to and including the base of the skull should be included in the treated portals. When radiation therapy alone is used for early-stage disease, doses of at least 7000
cGy in 7.0 to 7.5 weeks should be used. Brachytherapy can be used for a portion of the treatment, especially for oral cavity lesions. Elective nodal radiation usually is
indicated only in selected circumstances, such as the occasional patient with minor salivary gland tumors of the nasopharynx. Whether elective nodal radiation is
required here is unclear, but it can certainly be justified on the basis of the rich lymphatic drainage of the nasopharynx.
SPECIFIC STRATEGIES FOR SPECIAL SITUATIONS
Deep lobe parotid tumors, whether benign or malignant, are often inaccessible in standard parotidectomy. In such a circumstance, a variety of mandibulotomy
techniques are available to surgeons that provide excellent exposure to the area into which these tumors expand (i.e., the parapharyngeal space). Because deep lobe
tumors often are not surrounded by parotid gland parenchyma, removing the lesion without fragmentation can be difficult. Additionally, this potential space is at the
skull base, and the carotid sheath forms part of its perimeter. 101 Although these mandibulotomy techniques are seldom required, in selected circumstances the
efficient and safe removal of deep lobe tumors is greatly enhanced by their use.
Occasionally, the facial nerve or one of its branches is encased within (but not invaded by) a benign tumor; thus, sparing the nerve requires meticulous and
painstaking removal of the neoplasm. Radiation therapy is not usually part of the primary management of benign lesions; however, for a lesion that encases the nerve,
for recurrent benign lesions, and when complete gross tumor removal is not possible, radiation therapy is often recommended. 54 Postoperative radiation therapy is
probably important for recurrent deep lobe parotid tumors, whether benign or malignant, even though all gross tumor has been removed. Even with gross tumor
removal, large pleomorphic adenomas of the deep lobe are associated with a high local recurrence rate. To add radiation after routine and uncomplicated removal of
a benign tumor of the superficial lobe of the parotid or from the submandibular gland seems unwarranted.
In cancers that involve the facial nerve or its branches, the involved segment is best resected and grafted with an interposition of nerve harvested from another site. In
most cases, however, nerve can be dissected off a tumor surface and, with the use of postoperative radiation therapy, control results are achievable that are similar to
those from a more radical approach. However, sacrifice of the facial nerve is rarely required; when it is necessary, the consequence of the surgery and the gravity of
the prognosis take on added dimensions. The functional and esthetic results of correctly done nerve grafting, although not perfect, are good in a substantial
percentage of cases. Essentially, oncologists are working in an era of surgical minimalism when the tendency is to sacrifice the facial nerve only in extraordinary
circumstances. The substantial body of knowledge showing the effectiveness of postoperative radiation therapy has in large part been responsible for this more
conservative approach to dealing with the facial nerve in parotid gland surgery. No prospective studies have been done that document the effectiveness of this
approach, which has evolved from considerable anecdotal information. It is axiomatic that those patients who require nerve resection and grafting have
advanced-staged disease and, therefore, require postoperative radiation therapy. Even though no definitive studies have been done to analyze the impact of
external-beam radiation on nerve regeneration, it is generally felt that nerve grafts do equally well despite radiation. The important addition of postoperative radiation
therapy for these advanced malignancies should not, therefore, be avoided or even delayed because of concern for neural regeneration.
Although most data for major salivary gland cancers involve the parotid gland, selected reports have focused on submandibular tumors. Sykes and colleagues 51
reported 30 cases of carcinoma of the submandibular gland treated with radiation therapy. Most were treated postoperatively, but 12 patients were radiated after
grossly incomplete surgery or after biopsy alone. The 5- and 10-year local control rates were 85% and 73%, respectively. Cancer-specific survival was 79% and 57%,
respectively. Late recurrences were seen, especially for those with adenoid cystic histology. Interestingly, 9 of 12 patients radiated for gross disease had local control.
Not infrequently, a particular situation arises in which a patient with a submandibular mass is explored, and for various reasons, only gland resection is done at the
initial operation (i.e., none of the adjacent tissue is removed), and pathologic examination later reveals the existence of a malignancy. The literature is not clear in its
recommendations, but the value of reoperation usually lies in the removal of gross disease such as that left behind at the primary site or metastatic nodes. To
reoperate and radically remove regional nerves such as cranial nerve XII or to remove mandible in the absence of such gross disease does not seem warranted. Neck
dissection of some sort is often recommended, and postoperative radiation to the primary bed and neck should be conducted. Considering the potential for
locoregional control with this plan, and considering that more radical measures at the locoregional site do nothing to prevent distant metastasis, this moderate
approach seems appropriate. 102
A unique accumulation of data has assessed the value of fast-neutron radiotherapy for malignant salivary gland tumors. 103,104,105,106 and 107 Douglas et al.'s report 103 of
the results of neutron radiotherapy in 148 patients with major salivary gland malignancies is particularly noteworthy. The 5-year actuarial locoregional control rate for
patients treated with curative intent for gross tumor was 59%. Tumor size was an important determinant of outcome. Tumors smaller than 4 cm were controlled in
80%, whereas larger tumors were only controlled in 35%. All patients who had complete resection followed by postoperative neutron therapy had local control. In yet
another report,104 Douglas and colleagues assessed fast-neutron radiotherapy for minor salivary tumors. They reported on 84 patients with adenoid cystic cancers
treated between 1985 and 1994. Overall 5-year actuarial locoregional control was 59%. For advanced lesions that involved the skull base, cavernous sinus, or
nasopharynx, locoregional control was only 15%, whereas it was 63% when these sites were uninvolved. Recurrence-free survival of 53% at 5 years also has been
reported for adenoid cystic carcinoma in a European series. 106
Buchholz and coworkers108 also reviewed a limited experience of six patients with large, advanced, or recurrent pleomorphic adenoma who, because surgery was
deemed excessively morbid, were treated with neutron beam therapy. With median follow-up of 52 months, all tumors are locally controlled. Although the method is
alluring, the unavailability of neutrons precludes most patients from receiving this therapy.

PARAGANGLIOMAS
Throughout modern medical literature, the paragangliomas have been known by a variety of names, including glomus tumors, chemodectomas, nonchromaffin
paragangliomas, glomerocytomas, carotid body and tympanic body tumors, and receptomas. These names and others make up a heterogeneous and confusing list
that addresses certain individual characteristics of various tumors but does not achieve the necessary consistency of classification. 109,110,111,112,113,114,115,116,117,118 and 119

Essentially, these tumors make up a family of neoplasms that develop from the paraganglia tissues, which are themselves chemoreceptor organs that are distributed
throughout the body. These organs are of neural crest origin and have similar functions and histologic appearances. 112 Their cells of origin are part of the diffuse
neuroendocrine system (DNES), a name that has replaced the previous designation of amine precursor uptake and decarboxylase system. The newer terminology
acknowledges that the primary products of the paraganglia, neuropeptides, and catecholamines may serve as neurotransmitters, neurohormones, hormones, and
parahormones. 113
Paragangliomas can be broadly categorized as either sympathetic or parasympathetic. The former arise from the adrenal medulla (pheochromocytomas), certain
extraadrenal sympathetic paraganglia, and visceral autonomic paraganglia. 120 Parasympathetic paraganglia are found throughout the body, and it is this group that
gives rise to almost all the paragangliomas of the head and neck.
The chief cell is probably the principal component of the paraganglia, serving as its chemoreceptor. These cells contain acetylcholine, catecholamines, and serotonin.
They are of neural crest origin and, hence, are neuroendocrine in nature. The chief cells render the paraganglia receptive to hypoxia and pH changes, and to
fluctuations in the blood carbon dioxide concentration. 114
As members of the DNES, the chief cells of the paraganglia are functionally and ultrastructurally linked with thyroid C cells, ultimobranchial cells, and
adrenaline/noradrenaline-producing cells of the adrenal medulla. 121 These chief cells migrate with autonomic ganglion cells and are, therefore, in close association
with sympathetic ganglia around the aorta and its main branches. 115 Many head and neck paraganglia, and their respective neoplasms, are distributed in relation to
the vessels and cranial nerves of the primitive branchial arches and are therefore referred to as branchiomeric paraganglia.109,116,117 For example, the jugulotympanic
paragangliomas are branchiomeric by virtue of their relation to the third gill arch. The intravagal paragangliomas, on the other hand, are not associated with either the
gill arches or their arterial derivatives. 109
Although paragangliomas can be seen in a variety of head and neck locations—orbit, maxilla, larynx, trachea—most are found on the carotid body, the vagus nerve,
or in the jugulotympanic area. This follows the consistent sites occupied throughout the body by the paraganglia. They can be classified as follows:
I. Branchiomeric paraganglia
a. Temporal bone (tympanicum, jugulare)
b. Carotid body
c. Other head and neck (orbit, laryngeal, nasal)
d. Subclavian, aortic, pulmonary
II. Intravagal (upper mediastinal) paraganglia
III. Aorticosympathetic (retroperitoneal) paraganglia
IV. Visceral (pelvic, vagal, mesenteric) paraganglia
The term glomus was applied to paragangliomas because it was believed that the chief cells within the paraganglia were derived from specialized pericytes or from
blood vessel walls, as is seen in true arteriovenous glomus complexes. 109 Depending on whether they began in the ear or on the jugular bulb, those tumors that
develop in the jugulotympanic paraganglia usually are referred to as glomus tympanicum or glomus jugulare tumors, respectively. The paraganglia from which these
neoplasms arise are associated with the tympanic branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve and the auricular branch of the vagus nerve, respectively. 119 The
paragangliomas of the intravagal area are often referred to as glomus intravagal122 or vagal body tumors.123 Although the term glomus enjoys considerable name
recognition, it is deceiving because of the suggestion of pathologic uniqueness. Such is not the case, however, because all the head and neck paragangliomas have
similar histologic, ultrastructural, and cytochemical features, irrespective of the site of origin. 109,112,117 In point of fact, location and functional capabilities, rather than
appearance, separate them from one another. It is noteworthy that the first description of a temporal bone glomus tumor by Lubbers 124 referred to a carotid body-like
tumor that was thought to be metastatic from a contralateral carotid body tumor.
PATHOGENESIS
The word functional is used to describe paragangliomas that secrete catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine) and serotonin. Even though the capacity for
catecholamine synthesis and secretion has been documented for both jugulotympanic and intravagal paragangliomas, these two tumors actually have the lowest
catecholamine content of all paragangliomas. 109,122,123,125,126 Other functional capabilities have been documented in paragangliomas, but the significance of any
secretory activity should be evaluated by its clinical impact. The incidence of clinically functional paragangliomas is only 1% to 3% 127; however, because of the
potentially serious consequences of a catecholamine crisis during manipulations of a functional tumor, evaluation of patients with paragangliomas should include
screening for symptoms and signs of catecholamine secretion and in selected circumstances, even the measurement of the appropriate blood and urine products. 128
Although all paraganglia are chemically capable of secreting these products, no physiologic function of the jugulotympanic or the intravagal paraganglia has been
established. For the carotid body paraganglia, however, a physiologic role is clearly defined. The carotid body and carotid sinus function as complementary
chemoreceptor and baroreceptor, respectively, to effect homeostatic regulation of both ventilation and perfusion.
Overall, paragangliomas are uncommon neoplasms that occur as nonfamilial and familial tumors; the former develop more frequently in women and the latter in men.
The mode of inheritance is thought to be autosomal dominant with incomplete penetration. The affected gene is probably located in the long arm of chromosome 11,
but there have also been abnormalities found in chromosomes 5 and 7. 117,129,130,131,132,133, and 134
Multiple paragangliomas occur synchronously or metachronously, unilaterally or bilaterally, in 25% to 50% of the familial and in approximately 10% of the nonfamilial
tumors.130,132,135,136, and 137 Any combination of two, three, or more sites of origin of synchronous tumors can occur, but the most frequent combination involves
concurrent carotid body and jugulotympanic tumors. 131 Synchronous occurrence is seen between paragangliomas and other DNES lesions, such as
pheochromocytomas.130,136 Although this occurrence is unusual, the serious consequences of not being forewarned before surgery mandates screening for this tumor
in all paragangliomas. Specifically, in patients with certain catecholamine profiles, the existence of a pheochromocytoma must be ruled out before any surgery is
undertaken. Parathyroid adenomas, thyroid carcinomas, and certain other neural crest tumors also can be concurrent with jugulotympanic, intravagal, and carotid
body paragangliomas. 117,138,139 Essentially, this group of neoplasms must always be thought of as potentially systemic afflictions, especially in patients with a family
history of similar tumors. Carotid body tumors are much more common in people living at high altitudes than in those living at sea level. 140
CLINICAL BEHAVIOR AND NATURAL HISTORY
Although the clinical behavior of paragangliomas is determined somewhat by cellular characteristics, tumor location is the more influential factor. Malignancy is rare
and typically is defined by the existence of metastasis rather than by cellular characteristics. Metastasis is usually to lungs, lymph nodes, liver, bone, or
spleen. 139,141,142 Because paraganglia tissue is not usually found in these structures, its presence in them constitutes metastasis. Metastasis apparently is more
frequent in intravagal and jugulotympanic paragangliomas than in carotid body tumors, 143 a fact that is probably related to tumor proximity to the jugular vein. 144,145
DNA ploidy studies do not seem to be predictive of behavior. 146 In the final analysis, no criteria other than metastasis can consistently be used to gauge
aggressiveness of a primary paraganglioma. 147 Malignancy also varies by site of origin: Up to 13% of carotid body, 7% to 15% of vagal, and a substantially smaller
percentage of jugulotympanic paragangliomas are malignant. 148,149,150,151 and 152 Malignant lesions metastasize to either the regional lymph nodes or to distant sites, the
more common of which are lung and bone. Much like the primary paragangliomas, which are late to metastasize, metastatic sites are characterized by a quiescent
natural history; some patients with known lung and bone metastases can live as long as 25 years after the lesions are discovered. Spontaneous remission of
metastatic paraganglioma has been reported. 153
The natural history of primary benign paragangliomas usually is characterized by slow and inexorable growth, and the alterations of the structures into or around
which they grow determines the clinical symptoms and signs that occur. Furthermore, different lesions have different structure, and this fact probably impacts on the
type of expansion that ultimately occurs. For example, carotid body paragangliomas are encapsulated and rubbery, whereas their jugulotympanic counterparts are
friable. Regardless of their site of origin, most paragangliomas are extremely vascular and tend to bleed profusely when manipulated. The jugulotympanic tumors
extend into the skull, the eustachian tubes, and the normal cracks and furrows of the ear space. If the tumor originates in the hypotympanicum or on the jugular bulb, it
often can be seen through the tympanic membrane. A bluish red mass behind the membrane or a polyp in the external ear canal can be but the surface of an
extensive paraganglioma, and a casual biopsy or myringotomy can lead to troublesome bleeding. Only by appropriate imaging can the true extent of the tumor be

determined.
The jugulotympanic paragangliomas often initially create a sense of fullness in the ear, followed by a conductive hearing loss and pulsatile tinnitus. Destruction of the
temporal bone can lead to facial nerve weakness, vertigo, deafness, and intracranial complications such as cerebrospinal fluid leak and meningitis. When a tumor
occurs in the jugular bulb area, its otologic manifestations often precede vagal nerve signs.
Paragangliomas of the vagus nerve, on the other hand, almost always create vocal cord paralysis before otologic symptoms and signs occur. 154 That is not to say,
however, that vagal nerve paragangliomas always produce vocal cord paralysis; such is not the case. Overall, only approximately 3% of paragangliomas are vagal in
origin. 155 These slow-growing tumors occur most often at the base of the skull and in the parapharyngeal space but may arise anywhere along the course of the nerve
or its branches. When the tumors are located high on the nerve, they tend to displace the internal carotid artery anteriorly. Such a vagal paraganglioma is
demonstrated by the arteriogram shown in Figure 30.4-5A. The arteriographic appearance is, therefore, different from that of carotid body paragangliomas, which
generally cause splaying of the external and internal carotid arteries ( Fig. 30.4-5B). Vagal paragangliomas often present as asymptomatic cervical masses, 156 and in
the absence of unusually aggressive local behavior, neurogenic signs such as those caused by involvement of the sympathetic trunk and cranial nerves X, XI, and XII
usually occur only after extensive growth.

FIGURE 30.4-5. Arteriogram shows vagal paraganglioma and anterior displacement of internal carotid artery (ICA) (A) and carotid body paraganglioma (B). Notice the
splaying of the ICA and external carotid arteries.

Laryngeal paragangliomas are extremely uncommon. 157 Most originate in the supraglottic portion of that organ and, as such, do not present with early symptoms, such
as hoarseness, or with airway compromise. When discovered, they present as a discolored, submucosal mass that is atypical in appearance and is often confused
with other tumors, especially neuroendocrine carcinoma. These malignancies have a distinctly different behavioral pattern. Studies have concluded that laryngeal
paragangliomas are benign neoplasms. 157 Malignant behavior of these lesions is so unusual as to suggest misdiagnosis. These lesions are effectively managed by
surgical excision.
Most commonly, carotid body paragangliomas present as painless masses located deep to the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle in the upper or
midneck. These are generally slow growing and often have been obvious for years before diagnosis. They are usually nonfunctional, but they do have the capability of
function. 148 Carotid body paragangliomas actually can grow to impressive dimensions without creating neurologic or vascular findings. Large tumors occasionally
produce compressive carotid artery symptoms. These facts are important in determining treatment philosophy, especially in older, asymptomatic patients. They begin
in the arterial adventitia, usually at or around the bifurcation of the internal and external carotid arteries. Because these tumors generally develop from the medial
aspect of the great vessels, the arteries generally are displaced laterally. This typical appearance of splayed and lateralized vessels distinguishes the carotid body
tumors radiographically from vagal nerve paragangliomas (see Fig. 30.4-5). The radiography is important in diagnosis, because it is unique. As these neoplasms
become larger, they can occupy the parapharyngeal space, actually presenting as a bulge in the tonsil area, and encroachment into this area can produce dysphagia.
EVALUATION
The diagnostic workup of paragangliomas should consist of CT or MRI and, in selected situations, angiography. Imaging should delineate bone destruction and
complete tumor, intracranial and extracranial. CT scanning is more effective for imaging bone, but MRI offers a superior capability in accessing intracranial extension,
as well as the relation of tumor to bone. With proper enhancement techniques, one or both of these images plus clinical evaluation can provide sufficient information
to plan treatment of most paragangliomas. This point is relevant to overall management strategy; if radiation therapy is the planned treatment, the radiation oncologist
must be comfortable enough with the diagnosis to proceed without a biopsy. FNA and cytologic analysis can be helpful, but because of the location medial to the
carotid artery and because of the dense vascularity of most of these lesions, this study may not always be practical. Open biopsy becomes necessary when the
diagnosis is not achieved by these other means.
Invasive arteriography is valuable in preoperative preparation because it provides a picture of contralateral vascular crossover and because it allows tumor
embolization to be done before contemplated surgery. Paragangliomas are usually very vascular, and when surgery is planned, intraluminal embolization of the main
arterial supply and the tumor bed is helpful for safe and less morbid removal of large tumors. The continued concern for the purity of the commercial blood supply is
such that surgeons should avoid transfusion whenever possible, and preoperative embolization can be extremely helpful in pursuing this goal. This technique has its
most impressive impact in the removal of larger carotid body and jugular bulb tumors and is probably unnecessary for most small tumors. The techniques of
embolization are beyond the scope of this chapter, and the reader is referred to the literature on the subject; it must be emphasized, however, that use of this
technology carries significant risks and should be undertaken only by an experienced interventional radiology team. Finally, embolization of paragangliomas is only an
adjunct to surgery and should not be considered primary treatment for these highly vascular tumors, no matter how successful the devascularization. If embolization is
not followed promptly by tumor removal, undesirable collateral circulation and vascular shunting can develop, ultimately complicating an already challenging surgical
process. In fact, the sooner the surgery follows the embolization, the more effective the hemostasis will be during surgery. If surgery is not to be the treatment of
choice, then embolization should probably not be done.
TREATMENT AND RESULTS
Paragangliomas usually are considered benign, and although they can metastasize or be locally aggressive, such is the exception rather than the rule. Traditionally,
the mainstay of treatment has been surgical removal, 158,159 but repeated series of cases treated by radiation therapy have demonstrated its effectiveness in achieving
local control of these tumors. 160,161,162,163,164 and 165 Investigators have reviewed the literature and have compared surgical with radiation therapy results, which show no
difference in local control achieved by either modality. Accordingly, treatment decisions should be based on a formula that considers tumor size, patient age and
general health, symptoms and signs present before treatment, treatment-related morbidity, and the expertise of those involved in the planned treatment.
Reluctance to use radiation therapy in paragangliomas probably stems from a historic bias against radiating benign tumors. Furthermore, series that have compared
the two treatment methods have been somewhat biased because many tumors radiated in various series were not favorable lesions by virtue of their size and
recurrent state. As in any study that compares treatment results, an accurate comparison of radiation and surgery should analyze comparable tumors. An important
aspect of radiation therapy of paragangliomas relates to the definition of local control. In traditional cancer thinking, sustained complete response after radiation is the
criterion by which local control is usually judged. Such cannot be the case, however, with paragangliomas. Instead, these tumors typically partially regress or remain
stable after therapy. Because the tumors are composed predominantly of vascular tissue, the proliferative (i.e., neoplastic) elements make up but a minor portion of
the overall tumor volume, and although successful radiotherapy kills the proliferative cellular component, the remaining vascular tissue typically does not change
significantly. For purposes of assessing local control, therefore, the absence of disease progression with the resolution or even halting of symptoms after radiation is
the ultimate goal. In fact, there may even be some short-term postradiation edema or swelling of the involved area, but this generally resolves within several months.
When radiation is used as the treatment modality, therefore, it is important that both the treatment team and the patient understand this important aspect of local
control, and all concerned should exercise patience in judging the outcome. Some investigators have been skeptical of the persistence palpable tissue after radiation,
expressing concern for its capacity to proliferate after 20 to 30 years' dormancy. 166 However, it has never been demonstrated that this has occurred. In the future,

genetic mutations of p53, p161NK4A, and others may provide markers for local tumor progression and regression. 167
Cummings and coworkers160 have reported 45 patients radiated for glomus tumors. Only three patients (6.6%) have had symptomatic recurrences, two of which were
believed to be due to a “geographic miss.” The radiation therapy was effective in relieving the presenting symptoms of most patients. For example, 27 of 35 patients
(77%) who received 3500 cGy in 3 weeks had complete relief of their tinnitus. The remaining 23% had partial relief or stabilization of symptoms. All patients with pain,
vertigo, discharge, bleeding, and abnormalities of the fifth cranial nerve had complete relief of their symptoms with radiation therapy. All patients with abnormalities of
cranial nerve IX through XII had partial relief or stabilization of their cranial nerve abnormalities. The authors of this study noted that symptomatic improvement often
did not occur until many months after radiation therapy, highlighting the need to follow these patients for a lengthy period. As long as no clinical progression was
noted, the authors believed there would be no need to intervene in the postradiation setting.
Kim and associates161 have analyzed the dose-response relation for radiation of paragangliomas. The literature was reviewed, and the rate of failure was correlated
with dose. Overall, the recurrence rate was 25% when the radiation dose was less than 4000 cGy. With doses greater than 4000 cGy, local recurrence was rare.
Overall, only 2 of 142 patients (1.4%) who received more than 4000 cGy had local recurrence. The authors recommended doses in the 4000- to 4500-cGy range
delivered over 4.0 to 4.5 weeks. Cole and Beiler 163 treated 39 glomus jugulare or vagal tumors with radiotherapy. The last 32 of those patients were treated with
megavoltage radiotherapy (cobalt 60) or linear accelerator; the first seven patients had been treated with orthovoltage therapy. In the first seven patients, the results
were unpredictable; however, 30 of the 32 later patients show no evidence of recurrence.
Evenson et al.168 have reported the results of 15 patients with 23 paragangliomas treated with radiotherapy. Eighteen of these tumors were previously untreated,
whereas five had been unsuccessfully treated with prior therapy (one with radiation therapy, four with surgery). Most patients received doses in the 15-Gy range over
5 weeks. The local control for previously untreated patients was 100% at 10 years. The cause-specific survival rate was 100% for the 14 patients that were previously
untreated. No cranial nerve injuries were seen. The patient who was re-radiated developed a transient lethargy syndrome. Mumber and Greven 169 also reported that
all 15 patients treated in their series with definitive radiotherapy had long-term local control. Doses of more than 4500 cGy did not improve the outcome.
Complications are associated with both methods of treatment; most series show the rate to be higher in patients managed by surgery. 170 It should be pointed out,
however, that most series have studied cases accumulated over many years, and when many of the earlier surgical cases were done, modern temporal bone and
carotid artery bypass techniques had not yet been developed. The contemporary methods of reducing intraoperative bleeding by preoperative embolization usually
are not included in these series. The intraoperative precision achieved by using contemporary methods surely render previous complication data invalid. The
complications associated with radiation therapy are dose related. Bone and brain necrosis and abscess are the most serious of those reported. Each of these has
occurred in approximately 1% of treated patients. These complications should not occur as long as doses in the 4000- to 4500-cGy range are used. Fuller and
colleagues 171 reported one fibrosarcoma in their series that was considered a radiation-induced malignancy. Malignant transformation of tissue secondary to radiation
has been reported in these tumors, and although unusual, this occurrence is a concern.
The decision to operate or radiate should be based on a formula that considers tumor size and location, patient age and health, symptoms or signs present before
treatment, potential morbidity, and the expertise and availability of those involved in treatment. The decision should be made in consultation between the head and
neck surgeon and the radiation oncologist and with an appreciation for the fact that this group of tumors is one of the most complex and dangerous head and neck
tumors to be treated. To do nothing is an acceptable option in some patients, because these lesions are often tolerated well and for a prolonged period. In general, a
reasonable plan in patients with head and neck paragangliomas is to operate and remove those lesions (whether jugulotympanic, intravagal, laryngeal, or carotid
body in origin) that are smaller and less likely to be associated with significant operative morbidity. For large tumors that demonstrate extensive bone destruction,
intracranial involvement, or both, or in which considerable operative morbidity is expected, radiation therapy is probably the method of choice for achieving local
control. In young patients, radiation therapy should be avoided if a reasonable surgical option is available. On the other hand, the risk for radiation-induced cancer is
small, and these authors do not hesitate to recommend it to young patients if the surgical procedure required is likely to be associated with unreasonable morbidity.
Older patients are especially suited for radiation therapy, because local control usually is sustained throughout the balance of their lifetime.
Removal of jugulotympanic lesions should only be attempted by surgeons trained in otologic and skull base techniques. Those intravagal paragangliomas that are
located high in the neck are often very challenging surgical endeavors, being too high to approach by conventional cervical exposure and too low to be handled from
an intracranial approach. These are true skull base lesions, often having an epicenter within the jugular foramen. This mostly inaccessible location is best approached
by complex but precise and well-described skull base techniques. 159,172 Paragangliomas of the temporal bone can be a challenging group of patients. 173 De Jong and
colleagues 174 reported on 38 patients radiated for temporal bone paragangliomas between 1956 and 1991. Fourteen patients were treated primarily, 13 in
combination with surgery, and 11 as salvage. Local control was achieved in 79% of the primary radiation group, 100% of the combined therapy group, and 91% in the
salvage group. Complications were few and minor.
Because resection of vagal paragangliomas is almost always followed by complete vagal paralysis, the choice of a radiation versus a surgical strategy in these
lesions should be based on a particularly flexible paradigm. Rehabilitation after resection of midcervical vagal lesions is more easily accomplished than those at the
base of the skull. This is partly because of the fact that, in the latter group, multiple cranial nerve injuries are more common. Older individuals have much more
physiologic difficulty after vagal nerve resection than do younger patients, regardless of the part of the nerve involved. One must factor into the decision process the
fact that a significant percentage of patients with vagal paragangliomas demonstrate a vagal nerve paralysis at the time of diagnosis, and that fact certainly alters the
decision process somewhat.
Surgery of carotid body paragangliomas, although safe overall, is fraught with hazards, and only head and neck surgeons competent in vascular techniques should
attempt to remove these lesions, especially in recurrent lesions. Carotid artery bypass or shunt, or even artery resection and reconstruction, are sometimes necessary
to achieve complete tumor removal. Additionally, and with regard to the surgical removal of carotid body paragangliomas, the input from both chemoreceptor and
baroreceptor mechanisms is mediated via a common neural pathway; therefore, function of the entire system is affected by the resection of tumors involving the
intercarotid paraganglia. Whereas the resection of unilateral carotid body lesions is generally well accepted, excision of bilateral tumors or of a unilateral carotid
tumor with a contralateral vagal paraganglioma is often problematic from two standpoints: the potential of sustaining bilateral vagal nerve injury and the baroreceptor
dysfunction that potentially can result from the bilateral denervation of the carotid sinuses. Labile hypertension and hypotension, headaches, diaphoresis, and
emotional anxiety occur in a substantial percentage of patients who undergo bilateral excision. 175 Apparently, the loss of the parasympathetic regulatory system and
the subsequent unopposed sympathetic system leads to this cardiovascular syndrome. Surprisingly little emphasis has been placed on this finding in the literature.
Considering the gravity of the potential morbidity, we do not recommend bilateral carotid body paraganglioma removal, especially simultaneously. If bilateral surgery
is contemplated, the procedures should be staged, both to ensure the functionality of the vagus nerve on the first side, and to minimize the risk of baroreceptor
dysfunction. Surgery on one side and radiation therapy to the contralateral lesion is an accepted alternative to bilateral surgery. Finally, one can also consider
radiation to both lesions.
Overall, the most accepted treatment for paragangliomas is surgical extirpation; however, radiation therapy is an effective alternative to surgery for achieving local
control in certain patients. An asymptomatic paraganglioma in an elderly patient or one in ill health is of questionable concern, and therefore, consideration should be
given to observation only.
Malignant paragangliomas are managed most effectively with surgery, radiation therapy, or both. Essentially, chemotherapy has no defined role for treatment at any
stage. Patients with disease that cannot be approached with surgery or radiation should be treated when symptoms require palliation, but because these are rarely
encountered, only a few anecdotal reports of experience with chemotherapy have been published. These patients should be considered for investigational therapies.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Spiro R, Spiro J. Cancer of the salivary glands. In: Meyers E, Suen J, eds. Cancer of the head and neck, 2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1984:645.
2. Som P, Braun I, Shapiro M. Tumors of the parapharyngeal space: MR imaging. Radiology 1987;164:823.
3. Work W, Gates G. Tumors of the parotid gland and parapharyngeal space. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1969;2:497.
4. Cassissi N, Dickerson D, Million R. Squamous cell cancer of the skin metastatic to parotid nodes. Arch Otol 1978;104:336.
5. Katz A, Preston-Martin S. Salivary gland tumors and previous radiation therapy to the head and neck. Am J Surg 1984;147:345.
6. Hollander L, Cunningham M. Management of cancer of the parotid gland. Surg Clin North Am 1973;53:113.
7. Klintenber C, Olofsson J, Hellquist H, Sokjer H. Adenocarcinoma of the ethmoid sinuses: a review of 28 cases with special reference to dust exposure. Cancer 1984;54:482.
8. Evans R, Cruckshank A. Epithelial tumors of the salivary glands. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1970.
9. Batsakis J, Regezi T, Bloch D. The pathology of head and neck tumors, vol 3. Head Neck Surg 1979;1:260.
10. Livolsi V, Perzin K. Malignant mixed tumors arising in salivary glands: carcinomas arising in benign mixed tumors. Cancer 1971;39:2209.
11. Geraghty R, Scofield H, Brown F, Hennigar C. Malignant mixed tumors of salivary origin. Cancer 1969;24:471.

12. Spiro R, Huvos A, Strong E. Malignant mixed tumor of salivary gland origin. Cancer 1978;41:924.
13. Godwin J. Benign lymphoepithelial lesion of the parotid gland. Cancer 1952;5:1089.
14. Bruner J, Cleary K, Smith F, Batsakis J. Immunocytochemical identification of HIV antigen in parotid lymphoid lesions. J Laryngol Otol 1989;103:1063.
15. Finn D. Lymphoma of the head and neck and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: clinical investigation and immunohistological study. Laryngoscope 1995;105:1.
16. Yeh C, Fox P, Fox C, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma of the parotid gland in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1989;67:308.
17. McShane D, Vellend H, Dayal V. AIDS, otolaryngology and a case of adenoid cystic carcinoma of the parotid arising in a patient with AIDS-related complex. J Otolaryngol 1987;16:10.
18. Gravanis M, Giansanti J. Malignant histopathologic counterpart of the benign lymphoepithelial lesion. Cancer 1970;26:1332.
19. Finfer M, Schinella R, Rothstein S, Persky M. Cystic parotid lesions in patients at risk for the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1988; 114:1290.
20. Sperling N, Lin P. Parotid disease associated with HIV infection. Ear Nose Throat J 1990;69:475.
21. Terry J, Lorec T, Thomas M, Marti J. Major salivary gland lymphoepithelial lesions and the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Am J Surg 1991;162:324.
22. Spiro R. Salivary neoplasms: overview of 25 years' experience with 2,807 patients. Head Neck Surg 1986;8:177.
23. Perzin K, Livoisi V. Acinic cell carcinoma arising in ectopic salivary gland tissue. Cancer 1980;45:967.
24. Spiro R, Huvos A, Strong E. Acinic cell carcinoma of salivary origin. Cancer 1978;41:924.
25. Chong GC, Beahrs O, Woolner L. Surgical management of acinic cell carcinoma of the parotid gland. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1974;136:65.
26. Spiro R, Huvos A, Berk R, Strong E. Mucoepidermoid carcinoma of salivary gland origin. Am J Surg 1978;136:461.
27. Eneroth C, Hertman L, Moberger G, Soderberg G. Mucoepidermoid carcinoma of the salivary glands with special reference to the possible existence of a benign variety. Acta Otolaryngol
1972;73:68.
28. Thoryaldsson S, Beahrs O, Woolner L, Simons J. Mucoepidermoid tumors of major salivary glands. Am J Surg 1970;120:432.
29. Spiro R, Huvos A, Strong E. Cancer of the parotid gland. Am J Surg 1975;130:452.
30. Nasomento A, Amarol A, Prado L. Mucoepidermoid carcinoma of salivary glands. Head Neck Surg 1986;8:409.
31. Spiro R, Huvos A, Strong E. Adenocarcinoma of salivary gland origin. Am J Surg 1982;144:423.
32. Eneroth C. Facial nerve paralysis: a sign of malignancy in parotid tumors. Arch Otolaryngol 1972;95:300.
33. Conley T, Hamaker R. Prognosis of malignant tumors of the parotid gland with facial paralysis. Arch Otolaryngol 1975;101:39.
34. Conley J, Arena S. Parotid gland as a focus of metastasis. Arch Surg 1963;87:757.
35. Nicholas R, Pinnock L, Szymanowski R Metastases to parotid nodes. Laryngoscope 1980;90:1324.
36. Duck S, McConnel F. Malignant degeneration of pleomorphic adenoma. Am J Otolaryngol 1993;14:175.
37. Borthune A, Kjellevold K, Kaalhus O, Vermurad H. Salivary gland malignant neoplasms: treatment and prognosis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:747.
38. Spiro R, Huvos H, Strong E. Adenoid cystic carcinoma of salivary gland origin. Am J Surg 1974;128:512.
39. Matsuba H, Simpson J, Mauney M, Thawley S. Adenoid cystic salivary gland carcinoma: a clinicopathologic correlation. Head Neck Surg 1986;8:200.
40. Frankenthaler R, Luna M, Lee S, et al. Prognostic variables in parotid gland cancer. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1991;117:1251.
41. Cohen J, Guillamondegui O, Batsakis J, Medina J. Cancer of the minor salivary glands of the larynx. Am J Surg 1985;150:513.
42. Spiro R, Armstrong J, Harrison L. Carcinoma of major salivary glands. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1989;115:316.
43. Johns M, Coulthard S. Survival and follow-up in malignant tumors of the salivary glands. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1977;10:455.
44. Eisele D, Kleinberg L, O'Malley. Management of malignant salivary gland tumors. In: Harrison L, Sessions R, Hong K, eds. Head and neck cancer. Philadelphia: Lippincott Raven Publishers,
Chapter 30.
45. Spiro R, Huvos A, Strong E. Malignant mixed tumor of salivary origin. Cancer 1977;39:388.
46. Armstrong J, Harrison L, Thaler H, et al. The indications for elective treatment of the neck in cancer of the major salivary glands. Cancer 1992;69:615.
47. Van Poorten V, Balm A, Hilgers F, et al. Prognostic factors for long term results of the treatment of patients with malignant submandibular tumors. Cancer 1999;85:2255.
48. Camilleri I, Malata C, McLean N, Kelly C. Malignant tumours of the submandibular salivary gland: a 15 year review. Br J Plastic Surg 1998;51:181.
49. American Joint Committee for Cancer Staging and End Results. Manual for staging of cancer. Chicago: American Joint Committee for Cancer, 1978.
50. Malata C, Camilleri I, McLean N, et al. Malignant tumors of the parotid gland: a 12 year review. Br J Plastic Surg 1997;50:600.
51. Sykes A, Slevin N, Birzgalis A, Gupta N. Submandibular gland carcinoma: local control and survival following adjuvant radiotherapy. Oral Oncol 1999;35:L187.
52. Armstrong J, Harrison L, Spiro R, et al. The role of postoperative radiation therapy in malignant salivary gland tumors: a matched pain analysis using historic controls. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1988;15:176.
53. Renehan A, Gleave E, Hancock B, Smith P, McGach M. Long term follow up of over 1000 patients with salivary gland tumors treated in a single center. Br J Surg 1996;83:1750.
54. Dawson A, Orr J. Long-term results of local excision and radiotherapy in pleomorphic adenoma of the parotid. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:451.
55. Leverstein H, Tiwari R, Snow G, van der Waal J, van der Waal I. The surgical management of recurrent or residual pleomorphic adenomas of the parotid gland. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
1997;254:313.
56. Frankenthaler R, Byers R, Luna M, et al. Predicting occult lymph node metastasis in parotid cancer. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1993;119:517.
57. Armstrong J, Harrison L, Thaler H, et al. The indications for elective treatment of the neck in cancer of the major salivary glands. Cancer 1992;69:615.
58. Fitzpatrick P, Theriault C. Malignant salivary gland tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1743.
59. Harrison L, Armstrong J, Spiro R, Fass D, Strong E. Post-operative radiation therapy for major salivary gland malignancies. J Surg Oncol 1990;45:52.
60. North C, Lee D, Piantadosi S, Zahurak M, Johns M. Carcinoma of the major salivary glands treated by surgery or surgery plus post-operative radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1990;18:1319.
61. McNaney D, McNeese M, Guillamondegui O. Postoperative irradiation in malignant epithelial tumors of the parotid. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:1289.
62. Elkon D, Coleman M, Hendrickson F. Radiation therapy in the treatment of malignant salivary gland tumors. Cancer 1978;41:502.
63. Fu K, Leibel S, Levine M. Cancer of the major and minor salivary glands. Cancer 1977; 40:2882.
64. Garden A, el-Naggar A, Morrison W, et al. Post-operative radiotherapy for malignant tumors of the parotid gland. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:79.
65. Yaparpalvi R, Fontanla D, Tyerech S, Boselli L, Beitler J. Parotid gland tumors: a comparison of postoperative radiotherapy techniques using 3 dimensional dose distributions and dose volume
histograms. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:43.
66. Hosokawa Y, Shirato H, Kagei K, et al. Role of radiotherapy for mucoepidermoid carcinoma of salivary gland. Oral Oncol 1999;35:105.
67. Simpson J, Matsuba H, Thawley S. Improved treatment of salivary gland adenocarcinoma: planned confirmation surgery and irradiation. Laryngoscope 1986;96:904.
68. Vikram B, Strong E, Shah J, Spiro R. Radiation therapy in adenoid cystic carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:221.
69. King J, Fletcher G. Malignant tumors of the major salivary glands. Radiology 1971;100:381.
70. Venook A, Tseng A, Meyers F. Cisplatin, doxorubicin, and 5-fluorouracil chemotherapy for salivary gland malignancies: a pilot study of the Northern California Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol
1987;5:951.
71. Triozzi P, Brantley A, Fisher S. 5-Fluorouracil, cyclophosphamide, and vincristine for adenoid cystic carcinoma of the head and neck. Cancer 1987;59:887.
72. Airoldi M, Brando V, Giordano C, et al. Chemotherapy for recurrent salivary gland malignancies: experience of the ENT department of Turin University. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec
1994;56:105.
73. Licitra L, Marchini R, Spinazze R, et al. Cisplatin in advanced salivary gland carcinoma. A phase II study of 25 patients. Cancer 1991;68:1874.
74. Schramm V, Srodes C, Myers E. Cisplatin therapy for adenoid cystic carcinoma. Arch Otolaryngol 1981;107;739.
75. Jones A, Phillips D, Cook J, Helliwell T. A randomized phase II trial of epirubicin and 5 fluorouracil versus cisplatinum in the palliation of advanced and recurrent malignant tumour of the
salivary glands. Br J Cancer 1993;37:1127.
76. Vermorken J, Verweij J, de Mulder P, et al. Epirubicin in patients with advanced or recurrent adenoid cystic carcinoma of the head and neck: a phase II study of the EORTC Head and Neck
Cancer Cooperative Group. Ann Oncol 1993;4:785.
77. Venveij J, de Mulder P, de Graeff A, et al. Phase II study on mitoxantrone in adenoid cystic carcinomas of the head and neck. EORTC Head and Neck Cancer Cooperative Group. Ann Oncol
1996;7:876.
78. Mattox F, VonHoff D, Balcerzak S. Southwest Oncology Group study of mitoxantrone for treatment of patients with advanced adenoid cystic carcinoma of the head and neck. Invest New Drugs
1990;8:105.
79. Airoldi M, Bumma C, Bertetto O, et al. Vinorelbine treatment of recurrent salivary gland carcinomas. Bull Cancer 1998;85:892.
80. Tannock I, Sutherland D. Chemotherapy for adenoid cystic carcinoma. Cancer 1980;46:452.
81. Rentschler R, Burgess M, Byers R. Chemotherapy of malignant salivary gland neoplasms: a 25 year review of M. D. Anderson Hospital experience. Cancer 1977;40:619.
82. Suen J, Johns M. Chemotherapy for salivary gland cancer. Laryngoscope 1982;92:235.
83. H Pinto, personal communication.
84. de Haan L, De Mulder P, Vermorken J, et al. Cisplatin-based chemotherapy in advanced adenoid cystic carcinoma of the head and neck. Head Neck 1992;14:273.
85. Hill M, Constenla D, A'Hern R, et al. Cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil for symptom control in advanced salivary adenoid cystic carcinoma. Oral Oncol 1997;33:275.
86. Belani C, Eisenberger M, Gray W. Preliminary experience with chemotherapy in advanced salivary gland neoplasms. Med Pediatr Oncol 1988;16:197.
87. Alberts D, Manning M, Coulthard S. Adriamycin/cisplatinum/cyclophosphamide combination chemotherapy for advanced carcinoma of the parotid gland. Cancer 1981;47:645.
88. Creagan E, Woods J, Rubin J. Cisplatin-based chemotherapy for neoplasms arising from salivary glands and contiguous structures in the head and neck. Cancer 1988;62:2313.
89. Dreyfuss A, Clark J, Fallon B. Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin combination chemotherapy for advanced carcinomas of salivary gland origin. Cancer 1987;60:2869.
90. Kaplan M, Johns M, Cantrell R. Chemotherapy for salivary gland cancer. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1986;95:165.
91. Airoldi M, Pedani F, Brando V, Gabriele P, Giordano C. Cisplatin, epirubicin and 5-fluorouracil combination chemotherapy for recurrent carcinoma of the salivary gland. Tumori 1989;75:252.
92. Dimery I, Legha T, Shirinian M. Fluorouracil, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and cisplatin combination chemotherapy in advanced or recurrent salivary gland carcinoma. J Clin Oncol
1990;8:1056.
93. Posner M, Ervin T, Weichselbaum R. Chemotherapy of advanced salivary gland neoplasms. Cancer 1982;50:2261.
94. McKenna R. Tumors of the major and minor salivary glands. CA Cancer J Clin 1984;34:24.
95. Tran L, Sidrys J, Sadeghi A, et al. Salivary gland tumors of the oral cavity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;18:413.
96. Koss L, Spiro R, Hajdu S. Small cell (oat cell) carcinoma of minor salivary gland origin. Cancer 1972;30:737.
97. Olsen K, Devine D, Weiland L. Mucoepidermoid carcinoma of the oral cavity. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1981;89:783.
98. Ellis E, Million R, Mendenhall W, Parsons J, Cassisi N. The use of radiation therapy in the management of minor salivary gland tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:613.
99. Parsons J, Mendenhall W, Stringer S, Cassisi N, Million R. Management of minor salivary gland carcinomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;35:443.
100. Eapen L, Gerig L, Catton G, Danjoux C, Girard A. Impact of local radiation in the management of salivary gland carcinomas. Head Neck Surg 1988;10:239.
101. Biller H, Shugar J, Krespi Y. A new technique for wide-field exposure of the base of the skull. Arch Otolaryngol 1981;107:698.
102. Sessions R, Ward P, Johns M, Goeffinet D. Carcinoma of the submaxillary gland, radiation and or surgery? Head Neck Surg 1987;10:129.
103. Douglas J, Lee S, Laramore G, et al. Neutron radiotherapy for the treatment of locally advanced major salivary gland tumors. Head Neck 1999;21:255.
104. Douglas J, Laramore G, Austin-Seymour M, et al. Neutron radiotherapy for adenoid cystic carcinoma of minor salivary glands. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:87.
105. Prott F, Haverkamp U, Willich N, et al. Ten years of fast neutron therapy in Munster. Bull Cancer Radiother 1996;835[Suppl]:115s.
106. Krull S, Schwarz R, Engenhart R, et al. European results in neutron therapy of malignant salivary gland tumors. Bull Cancer Radiother 1996;835[Suppl]:125.
107. Potter R, Prott F, Micke O, et al. Results of fast neutron therapy of adenoid cystic carcinoma of salivary glands. Strahlentiver Onkologie 1999;175[Suppl 2]:65.
108. Buchholz TA, Laramore GE, Griffin TW. Fast neutron radiation for recurrent pleomorphic adenomas of the parotid gland. Am J Clin Oncol 1992;15:441.

109. Glenner G, Grimley P. Tumors of the extra-adrenal paraganglion system (including chemoreceptors). In: Hymes V, ed. Atlas of tumor pathology, 2nd ser, pt 9. Washington, DC: Armed Forces
Institute of Pathology, 1974:1.
110. Mulligan R. Chemodectoma in the dog. Am J Pathol 1950;28:680(abst).
111. Rosenwasser H. Glomus jugulare tumors. Arch Otolaryngol 1968;88:29.
112. Zak F. An expanded concept of glomus tissue. N Y State J Med 1954;54:1153.
113. Pearse A. The diffuse neuroendocrine system: historical review. Front Horm Res 1984;12:1.
114. Bleau H, Rougues L, Gerard P. L'angiome du rocher et son aspect radiographique. Presse Med 1950;58:1141.
115. Case 14-1975. Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. N Engl J Med 1975;292:741.
116. Kohn A. Uber den Bau and die Entwicklung der sogenannten Caotisdruse. Arch Mikr Anat Mika Anat 1903;62:263.
117. Batsakis J. Paragangliomas of the head and neck. In: Batsakis J, ed. Tumors of the head and neck: clinical and pathological considerations, 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1979:369.
118. Smith P, Schwaber M, Goebel J. Clinical evaluation of glomus tumors of the ear and the base of the skull. In: Thawley S, Panje W, Batsakis J, Lindberg R, eds. Comprehensive management of
head and neck tumors. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1987:207.
119. Guild S. The glomus jugulare, a nonchromaffin paraganglion, in man. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1953;62:1045.
120. Hodge K, Byers R, Peters L. Paragangliomas of the head and neck. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1988;114:872.
121. Pearse A. The cytochemistry and ultrastructure of polypeptide hormone-producing cells of the APUD series and the embryologic, physiologic and pathologic implications of the concept. J
Histochem Cytochem 1969;17:303.
122. Conley J, Clairmont A. Glomus intravagale. Laryngoscope 1977;87:2096.
123. Kahn L. Vagal body tumor (nonchromaffin paraganglioma, chemodectoma, and carotid body-like tumor) with cervical node metastases and familial association. Cancer 1976;38:2367.
124. Lubbers J. Fezwel van het os petrum met gecombineerede hersenzenuw verlanning. Ned Tijdschr Gencesk 1937;81:2566.
125. Cantrell R, Kaplan M, Winn H, Atuk N, Jahrsdoerfer R. Catecholamine-secreting infratemporal fossa paraganglioma. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1984;93:583.
126. Brown J. Glomus jugulare tumors revisited: a ten-year statistical follow-up of 231 cases. Laryngoscope 1985;95:284.
127. Schwaber M, Glasscock M, Jackson C, Nissen A, Smith P. Diagnosis and management of catecholamine secreting glomus tumors. Laryngoscope 1984;94:1008.
128. Million R, Cassisi N, Wittes R. Cancer of the head and neck. In: DeVita V, Hellman S, Rosenberg S, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott,
1985:407.
129. Brown J. Glomus jugulare tumors: methods and difficulties of diagnosis and surgical treatment. Laryngoscope 1967;77:26.
130. Parkin J. Familial multiple glomus tumors and pheochromocytomas. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1981;90:60.
131. Van Baars F, Van den Brock P, Cremers C, Veldman J. Familial non-chromaffinic paragangliomas (glomus tumors): clinical aspects. Laryngoscope 1981;91:988.
132. Van Baars F, Cremers C, Van den Brock P, Veldman J. Familiar non-chromaffinic paragangliomas (glomus tumors): clinical and genetic aspects [Abridged]. Acta Otolaryngol 1981;91:589.
133. McCaffrey T, Meyer F, Michels V, Piepgras D, Marion M. Familial paragangliomas of the head and neck. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1994;120:1211.
134. Zaslav A, Mvssiorek D, Mucia C, Fox J. Cytogenetic analysis of tissues from patients with familial paragangliomas of the head and neck. Head Neck 1995;17:102.
135. Spector G, Ciralski R, Maisel R, Ogura J IV. Multiple glomus tumors in the head and neck. Laryngoscope 1975;85:1066.
136. Irons G, Weiland L, Brown W. Paragangliomas of the neck. Clinical and pathologic analysis of 116 cases. Surg Clin North Am 1977;57:575.
137. Bickerstaff E, Howell J. The neurological importance of tumors of the glomus jugulare. Brain 1953;76:576.
138. Revak C, Morris S, Alexander G. Pheochromocytoma and recurrent chemodectomas over a 25-year period. Radiology 1971;100:53.
139. El Fiky F, Paparella M. A metastatic glomus jugulare tumor. A temporal bone report. Am J Otol 1984;5:197.
140. Arias-Stella J, Valcarel J. Chief cell hyperplasias in human carotid body at high altitudes. Physiologic and pathologic significance. Hum Pathol 1976;7:361.
141. Borsanyi S. Glomus jugulare tumors. Laryngoscope 1962;72:1336.
142. Taylor M, Alford B, Greenberg S. Metastasis of glomus jugulare tumors. Arch Otolaryngol 1965;82:5.
143. Crouzet G, Vasdev A, Lambrinidis M, et al. Spinal metastasis of carotid paragangliomas. J Neuroradiol 1989;16:172.
144. Spector G, Sobol S, Thawley S, Maisel R, Ogura J. Panel discussion: glomus jugulare tumors of the temporal bone. Laryngoscope 1979;89:1628.
145. Druck N, Spector G, Ciralsky R, Ogura J. Malignant glomus vagale. Arch Otolaryngol 1976;102:634.
146. Barnes L, Taylor S. Carotid body paragangliomas: a clinicopathologic and DNA analysis of 13 cases. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1990;116:447.
147. Granger J, Houn H. Head and neck paragangliomas: a clinicopathologic study with DNA flow cytometry. South Med J 1990;83:1407.
148. Lack E, Cubilla A, Woodruff J. Paragangliomas of the head and neck region. A pathologic study of tumors from 71 patients. Hum Pathol 1979;10:191.
149. Kliewer K, Wen D, Cancilla P, Cochran A. Paragangliomas: assessment of prognosis by histologic, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural techniques. Hum Pathol 1989; 20:29.
150. Barnes L. Paraganglioma of the larynx. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec 1991;53:220.
151. Someren A, Karcioglu Z. Malignant vagal paraganglioma. Am J Clin Pathol 1977;68:400.
152. Heinrich M, Harris A, Bell W. Metastatic intravagal paraganglioma. Am J Med 1985;78:1017.
153. Nixon D, York R, McConnel F. Spontaneous remission of metastatic paraganglioma. Am J Med 1987;83:805.
154. Leonetti N, Brackman D. Glomus vagale tumor: the significance of early vocal cord paralysis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1989;100:533.
155. Hirsch B, Johnson J, Black F, Meyers E. Paraganglioma of vagal origin. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1982;90:708.
156. Nunez D, Lang N, Pollack J. Associated carotid body tumor and pharyngeal pouch. J Laryngol Otol 1989;103:531.
157. Ferlito A, Barnes L, Wenig BM. Identification, classification, treatment, and prognosis of laryngeal paraganglioma. Review of the literature and eight new cases. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol
1994;103:525.
158. Mischkle R, Balkany T. Skull base approach to glomus jugulare tumors. Laryngoscope 1987;90:89.
159. Glasscock M, Harris P, Newsome G. Glomus tumors: diagnosis and treatment. Laryngoscope 1974;84:2006.
160. Cummings B, Beale F, Garrell P. The treatment of glomus tumors in the temporal bone by megavoltage radiation. Cancer 1984;53:2635.
161. Kim J, Elkon D, Lim M. Optimum dose of radiotherapy for chemodectomas of the middle ear. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:815.
162. Boyle J, Shimm D, Coulthard S. Radiation therapy for paragangliomas of the temporal bone. Laryngoscope 1900;8:896.
163. Cole JM, Beiler D. Long-term results of treatment for glomus jugulare and glomus vagale tumors with radiotherapy. Laryngoscope 1994;104:1461.
164. Valdagni P, Amichett M. Radiation therapy of carotid body tumors. Am J Clin Oncol 1990;13:45.
165. Peyzant P, Chow J, Easley J. Twenty-five years experience with radiation therapy for temporal bone chemodectomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:1303.
166. Schwaber M, Gussack G, Kirkpatrick W. The role of radiation therapy in the management of catecholamine secreting glomus tumors. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1988;98:150.
167. Guran S, Tali E. p53 and p161NK4A mutations during the progression of glomus tumor. Pathol Oncol Res 1999;5:41.
168. Evenson L, Mendenhall W, Parsons J, Cassisi N. Radiotherapy in the management of chemodectomas of the carotid body and glomus vagale. Head Neck 1998;20:609.
169. Mumber M, Greven K. Control of advanced chemodectomas of the head and neck with irradiation. Am J Clin Oncol 1995;18:389.
170. Wang M, Hussey D, Doornbos J, Vigliotti A, Wen B. Chemodectoma of the temporal bone: a comparison of surgical and radiotherapeutic results. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14:643.
171. Fuller A, Brown H, Harrison E. Chemodectomas of the glomus jugulare tumors. Laryngoscope 1967;77:218.
172. Biller H, Lawson W, Som P, Rosenfeld R. Glomus vagale tumors. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1989;98:21.
173. Jackson C. Basic surgical principles of neurotologic skull base surgery. Laryngoscope 1993;103[Suppl 60]:29.
174. de Jong A, Coker N, Jenkins H, Goepfert H, Alford B. Radiation therapy in the management of paragangliomas of the temporal bone. Am J Otol 1995;16:283.
175. Netterville J, Reilly M, Reiber M, Armstrong W. Carotid body tumors: a review of 30 patients with 46 tumors. Laryngoscope 1995;105:115.

SECTION 30.5 Rehabilitation after Treatment for Head and Neck Cancer
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 30.5
Rehabilitation after Treatment for Head and Neck Cancer
SUSAN D. MILLER
ROY B. SESSIONS
Introduction
Pretreatment Assessment
Diagnostic Evaluation
Posttreatment Intervention
Speech and Swallowing After Oral Cavity Surgery
Voice and Swallowing Changes After Treatment of Laryngeal Cancer
Tracheoesophageal Puncture
Swallowing and Speech After Extensive Reconstruction of the Pharynx or Cervical Esophagus
Comparison of Esophageal, Tracheoesophageal Puncture, and Normal Speech
Volunteer and Support Organizations
Written Materials
Volunteers
Support Groups
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
In the 1980s and 1990s, concern for posttreatment function restoration became a primary part of management of head and neck cancer. Conservation surgery,
radiation strategies, reinnervation of free flaps, and larynx-sparing protocols continue to be used under various circumstances in an attempt to maintain or reestablish
functional speech, voice, and swallowing in head and neck cancer patients. The ideal multidisciplinary concept requires interactions, therefore, among the surgical,
radiation, and medical oncologists, reconstructive surgeons, speech pathologists, maxillofacial prosthodontists, dental oncologists, nutritionists, nurse oncologists,
psychologists, audiologists, and social workers during pretreatment assessment and posttreatment intervention. To say the least, the standard for the complete head
and neck team is complex.
Pretreatment counseling for persons with oral cavity and pharyngeal cancer is well established; the same should apply to organ preservation patients with laryngeal
and hypopharyngeal cancers. Patients benefit from discussions with the speech pathologist regarding swallowing and voice and speech difficulties that can result
from radiation therapy and chemotherapy regimens. Regrettably, however, patients entering organ preservation protocols often are inadequately counseled, if at all.
Should failure of the treatment protocol occur, surgery is performed immediately, and the patient and family are forced to enter a frightening and stressful period
unprepared for either the surgical experience or the rehabilitation that lies ahead. Optimal rehabilitation for all patients requires consideration of future strategies
should one particular treatment plan fail.

PRETREATMENT ASSESSMENT
Preoperative consultation with the speech pathologist should be scheduled soon after the physician has made the final diagnosis and a treatment plan is formulated.
During this consultation, the speech pathologist reviews what the patient already knows and further explains normal anatomy and physiology as well as the
anticipated changes resulting from treatment. Patients with glottic carcinoma who are scheduled to be treated with radiation are counseled regarding vocal changes
and swallowing difficulties that might occur during or after the treatment. Patients scheduled to undergo oral, pharyngeal cavity, or conservation laryngeal surgical
procedures should be counseled in a special way, with an emphasis on their immediate postsurgical needs that relate to nasogastric, gastrostomy, and tracheostomy
tubes. Additionally, short- and long-term rehabilitation strategies for speech, voice, and swallowing are summarily discussed in this initial consultation. The speech
pathologist must be sensitive to the fine line between appropriate coverage and information overload; patients labor under a heavy emotional burden at this stage of
their treatment and can easily be overwhelmed by someone insensitive to this potential. It is important, however, to accomplish as much of this as possible before the
treatment. Depending on the specific treatment used, the patient's ability to communicate may be largely or completely impaired afterward. Even though there are
substitute means of communicating during this period, none are as effective as an interactive dialogue between patient and speech pathologist. If loss of oral
communication is expected after treatment, patients will need information regarding augmentative or alternative communication methods or devices. Patients
scheduled for total laryngectomy learn about alternatives to natural voice: the availability of the electrolarynx and the mastery of esophageal or tracheoesophageal
puncture speech (or both). Frequently, patients will consent to trial use of an electrolarynx and will order the recommended device before surgery. We have found that
patients who are willing preoperatively to experiment with speech replacement devices feel more empowered and are relieved that they will be able to express their
needs immediately after surgery. We frequently incorporate patient volunteers to meet patients and their families, thus allowing them to relate to and question a
person who has had a similar treatment experience. Even candidates not scheduled for laryngectomy (i.e., laryngeal preservation protocol patients) should meet with
the speech pathologist to discuss potential problems with voice and swallowing during or after the treatment.

DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
The correct rehabilitative effort after treatment is enhanced greatly by the initial evaluation of speech and swallowing. In matters pertaining to potential speech
rehabilitation, baseline reading samples of standardized articulation sentences, nonnasal and nasal paragraphs, and conversational speech samples are
audio-recorded from patients whose tongue, velum, or jaw will be affected by surgery. These recordings serve to establish baseline speech patterns of articulation,
fluency, rate, dialect, intonation, and nasality. A spectrogram that portrays frequency, intensity, and format information descriptive of resonant frequencies of the vocal
tract provides additional baseline data regarding tongue placement and resonance. Standardized articulation testing typically is not performed for patients undergoing
treatment for early- or later-stage laryngeal carcinoma unless modification of the articulators (lips, tongue, cheek, etc.) is planned. The speech pathologist, however,
should document any articulation, fluency, rate, or dialectal patterns observed during this conversation with the patient. Additionally, orofacial structures, sensation,
and function should be carefully examined. Plans for pretreatment dental care or postoperative radiation are discussed at this time because they also can have an
impact on articulation, voice, and deglutition. Finally, because of the fact that patients with hearing deficiencies often have difficulty in monitoring the intelligibility and
precision of their articulation, it is important to evaluate hearing before treatment.
If preexisting swallowing problems are present, a modified barium swallow (MBS), 1 fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES), 2 or FEES with sensory
testing (FEESST) 3 should be performed. If dysphagia does exist postoperatively, it is important that these studies be performed at the time to aid in the development
of a management strategy. The MBS is a videofluoroscopic study of the motor aspects of the oral, pharyngeal, and esophageal stages of the swallow with varying
food consistencies. This procedure permits measured amounts of barium bolus to be followed from the lips to the stomach and incorporates the effects of
compensatory strategies, such as head position, chin tuck, and the like. 4 Because of its clear documentation of the oral preparatory and oral stages of the swallow,
the MBS is ideal for patients with oral-stage dysphagia; in fact, it is the diagnostic test of choice. If pharyngeal or laryngeal swallowing problems exist, however, the
FEES or FEESST should be performed. The FEES uses a fiber-optic nasoendoscope to observe the pharyngeal and laryngeal structures directly during the
pharyngeal phase of the swallow. A bolus of contrasting color is used to note premature spillage into the hypopharynx or laryngeal vestibule before swallowing and
vocal fold closure and the presence of residuum in the hypopharynx and laryngopharynx after a swallow. Although penetration (i.e., aspiration) may be identified
during a FEES or MBS examination,5 the primary purpose of these procedures is to analyze the motor components of swallowing. The FEESST combines the FEES
with a technique that determines laryngopharyngeal sensory discrimination thresholds by endoscopically delivering air pulse stimuli to the mucosa that is innervated
by the superior laryngeal nerve. 3
Because vocal and aerodynamic parameters may be affected by the presence of a lesion or a biopsy (or both), baseline acoustic and aerodynamic analysis should be
performed on all early glottic cancer patients, regardless of whether destined for radiation, microsurgery, or laser excision. Vocal measures of fundamental frequency,
amplitude, frequency perturbation (jitter), amplitude perturbation (shimmer), and noise-to-harmonic ratio are obtained from a sustained vowel a. Sophisticated
instruments, such as the Computerized Speech Laboratory (Kay Elemetrics Corp., Lincoln Park, NJ), Speech Viewer III (IBM, Austin, TX), Dr. Speech (Tiger
Electronics, Seattle, WA), and Speech Master III (Speech-Master, Vero Beach, FL), all obtain and record these measures quickly. Baseline airflow rates, subglottal

pressure, and laryngeal resistance are calculated using the Aerophone II (Kay Elemetrics), Glottal Enterprise MS-100 (Syracuse, NY), or Nagashima Phonatory
Function Analyzer. Documentation of these measures prior to treatment and at specific intervals during and after treatment is important for objective comparison of
vocal changes after surgery or radiation therapy (or both) for glottic carcinoma.

POSTTREATMENT INTERVENTION
SPEECH AND SWALLOWING AFTER ORAL CAVITY SURGERY
Restoration of speech and swallow function after glossectomy appears to be highly dependent on a number of factors: the quantity and mobility of residual tongue
after surgery, the particuar reconstructive technique used, the integrity of motor and sensory nerve supply to the tissue, the functional recovery after reconstruction,
the degree of scarring and fibrosis to the residual tongue musculature after surgery and radiation, the early intervention of speech therapy, and patient psychosocial
factors, such as age, medical condition, motivation, and family support. 6,7 and 8 Even patients undergoing resection of the anterior portion or less than 50% of the mobile
tongue can develop a delayed swallowing reflex and reduced ability to manipulate the bolus in the oral cavity. 5 The return of normal speech intelligibility and
deglutition for small, anterior tongue lesions of up to 3 cm has been reported. 9,10 Articulation deficits are mild and often characterized by only a lisp. Speech therapy
should focus on oral motor exercises to achieve adequate linguoalveolar and linguopalatal contact for accurate phoneme productions.
Owing to decreased tongue bulk and mobility, patients who have been treated for larger tongue lesions present with poor bolus formation, poor bolus manipulation,
delayed elicitation of the swallow reflex, and increased oral transit time. 1 Finally, because of the loss of tongue volume, glossopalatal contact and closure are often
severely compromised: Vertical capabilities of the tongue are diminished. Compensatory speech patterns, such as contacting the tongue behind the lower teeth, are
used to obtain intelligible linguoalveolar ( t, d, n, l, s, z) and linguopalatal ( sh, ch) sound production if the tongue cannot contact the alveolar ridge or palate. If contact
remains difficult, a palatal drop prosthesis is often helpful in lowering the contact point of the palate; thus, the vertical deficiency of the tongue is diminished, and
linguopalatal contact is achieved. 5,12
Speech and swallowing difficulties can be profound when more than 50% of the tongue is sacrificed; when the base of tongue, floor of mouth, or lateral pharyngeal
walls are altered 13; or when an extensive oral lesion requires a composite resection that might include total glossectomy, floor-of-mouth resection, radical neck
dissection, and mandibulectomy. 14,15 Reconstructive methods for large tongue or floor-of-mouth tumors (or both) in which split-thickness skin grafts, reinnervated free
flaps,10,16 and pectoralis major 17 myocutaneous flaps are used generally provide a speech and swallowing outcome that is superior to those techniques in which the
defect is closed primarily. 18,19 In particular, the bilobed, sensate radial forearm flap allows maximum functional speech and swallowing return after extensive oral
cavity surgery. 20,21 and 22 The design allows for one part of the flap to provide bulk for restoring the floor of the mouth, whereas the other lobe provides volume to the
mobile tongue.23 Excellent speech and swallowing have been reported using the infrahyoid muscle flap for medium-sized defects in the floor of the mouth, tongue,
buccal mucosa, and lateral pharyngeal wall. 24 Salibian et al. 25 found that the successful outcome of swallowing and speech correlated with the shape and position of
the tongue root and the surface area of the floor of the mouth.
In the realm of nonsurgical treatment of tongue cancer, excellent to good functional speech and swallowing outcomes were reported in 18 of 20 patients with tongue
base lesions (11 of 12 patients with stage T1 or T2 cancer; 8 of 9 patients with stage T3 or T4 cancer) treated with external-beam radiation followed by an interstitial
implant boost with iodine 125 several weeks later. 26
As reconstructive techniques and organ preservation protocols proliferate, additional diagnostic studies, such as videosonography, 27 high-speed cineradiography, 28
and perfusion manometry29 may be needed to measure and compare functional aspects of swallowing recovery accurately after different radiologic and rehabilitative
treatments. The short- and long-term effects of radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or surgery on the sensory aspects of swallowing also will become more apparent as
FEESST becomes an integral part of cancer management.
VOICE AND SWALLOWING CHANGES AFTER TREATMENT OF LARYNGEAL CANCER
There is general agreement that voice quality in early glottic cancers (T1a and T2b) is better after radiation than before radiation 30,31 and 32 and better after radiation
than after surgery. 30,31 Studies vary, however, regarding whether the postradiation voice ever becomes normal. Harrison 33 reported an ultimate return to normal voice
within 3 months after completion of radiation therapy in nearly all irradiated T1 and T2 glottic cancer patients. Tsunoda 34 found ultimate return of normal mucosal
wave motion stroboscopically in his patients with early glottic cancer that had been treated with radiation. Other studies report that voice after radiation therapy cannot
be considered normal. Dagli et al. 30 investigated vocal parameters in patients successfully treated with radiation therapy for T1a and T1b glottic carcinoma. They
found less than normal values for maximum vocal intensity, dynamic vocal intensity, range, jitter, and mean fundamental frequency. Aref et al. 32 reported abnormal
acoustic and aerodynamic measures on T1 glottic cancer patients 3 months to 7 years after completion of radiation therapy. Increased laryngeal resistance that
affected communication function was reported in laryngeal cancer patients treated with chemotherapy and radiation. 35 Longitudinal multiinstitutional standardized
stroboscopic, acoustic, and aerodynamic investigations of early-stage glottic carcinoma patients are needed to allow more systematic predictions of vocal quality after
radiation and surgical treatment. At present, there seem to be several predictors of poor vocal quality: Vocal fold stripping before radiation and continued smoking
during and after radiation therapy predicted worse voice quality. 36 Nevertheless, as changes in vocal quality are common among patients after either radiation therapy
or laser excision, patients should be seen by the speech pathologist for at least one posttreatment therapy session. Adherence to a vocal hygiene program with
certain daily exercises results in a more efficient, resonant voice.
Patients in whom radiation therapy for early glottic carcinoma has failed or selected glottic lesions that are not suitable for radiation are frequently treated with
conservation surgery (i.e., hemilaryngectomy). Voice and swallowing problems after hemilaryngectomy vary according to the extent of surgery. For example, if the
arytenoid has been resected, the risk for aspiration is greater. If the hemilaryngectomy is isolated to one true vocal fold, one false vocal fold and the ventricle, with
preservation of the epiglottis, swallowing may be improved with a chin tuck to assist in airway protection and head turning toward the operated side to direct food from
the compromised area.5 Vocal characteristics of the hemilaryngectomee have been described as rough, low-pitched, and breathy, all of which are probably due to
compensatory efforts to achieve adequate glottal adduction. 37 Therapy techniques, such as forced adduction exercises, digital pressure to the side of the thyroid
cartilage, decreased speaking rate, and increased phrasing, may decrease vocal strain, improve voice quality, and increase vocal intensity by reducing glottal
opening.5 Surgical augmentation techniques deserve consideration to improve glottal closure.
Those supraglottic cancers that fail radiation are not candidates for supraglottic laryngectomy; however, those nonradiated patients with supraglottic lesions who are
able to undergo supraglottic laryngectomy not infrequently experience dysphagia due to the combined effects of supraglottic sensory denervation, incomplete
posterior motion of the partially resected tongue base, restricted arytenoid motion, partial closure of the airway, and delays in bolus propulsion from narrowing at the
laryngeal entrance. 38 These patients must avoid thin liquids and learn the special techniques and maneuvers of supraglottic 5,39 and supersupraglottic 40,41 swallow to
ensure feeding safety. Commercially available thickening agents may be used to thicken the consistency of thin liquids for safer swallowing. Supraglottic laryngectomy
patients frequently experience breathiness or hoarseness (or both), which may respond to short-term voice therapy. They may also demonstrate an increase in
fundamental frequency, which may result from added tension to the vocal cords, thought to be the result of forced adduction exercises. 5
It is not widely appreciated that a significant percentage of total laryngectomy patients experience dysphagia. Although they often do not complain of this, various
studies have reported that 10% to 58% of laryngectomees have the problem, 42,43 and 44 which appears to center around the pharyngoesophageal (PE) segment. 43 Total
laryngectomy may produce increased resistance to bolus transfer from stenosis and decrease of negative pressure in the upper esophageal segment. Resections of
the hyoid bone and thyroid cartilage further aggravate this problem by allowing the pharyngeal lumen to collapse. 45
Dysphagia that is secondary to surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and concomitant chemoradiation can cause swallowing dysfunction by compromising
salivary flow; by causing edema, myositis, and fibrosis; by causing a delayed pharyngeal motor response stimulus; by decreasing laryngopharyngeal sensation; by
causing pharyngeal incoordination; and by decreasing laryngeal elevation as a result of scaring and fibrosis. 45,49 Patients in whom dysphagia is suspected should
undergo objective assessment with MBS, FEES, or FEESST. The MBS and FEES primarily analyze the motor components of swallowing, whereas the FEESST
analyzes the sensory component that is frequently present in patients who have undergone conservation laryngeal operations and also in patients treated on
preservation protocols. The short- and long-term effects of radiation therapy, chemotherapy or surgery on the sensory aspects of swallowing will almost certainly
become more apparent as we learn and extend the range of FEESST-type testing as a routine part of cancer management.

For some laryngectomy patients, concerns regarding loss of speech are more important than survival itself. 47 Alternative voice sources for the laryngectomee include
the use of a pneumatic or an electronic speech aid, esophageal speech, or the gold-standard tracheoesophageal puncture (TEP) speech. Patients who have
undergone a partial or total glossectomy are unable to use these alternative voice sources, and they should be introduced to computerized speaking systems or
talking keyboards.
Artificial Larynges
A 1987 study of voice rehabilitation practices revealed that the use of an artificial speaking device was widely recommended by 90% of 400 head and neck surgeons
surveyed, in many cases as a temporary means of communication after total laryngectomy. 48 These battery-operated or pneumatic devices simulate vocal sound, are
relatively inexpensive, are easy to operate, and can be used by a patient 1 to 2 days after surgery. These devices continue to serve a useful purpose, and surgeons
and speech pathologists should encourage all patients to own an artificial device as a primary or auxiliary speech system. Pneumatic devices consist of a piece that
fits over the tracheal stoma, a unit containing a reed that produces sound, and a tube that directs sound into the mouth to be articulated. These particular devices are
less popular in the United States than they are in Europe.
On the other hand, a variety of battery-operated, hand-held artificial larynges (electrolarynges) are currently available. Examples are illustrated in Figure 30.5-1. The
Cooper-Rand Electronic Speech Aid (Luminaud Inc., Mentor, OH) is an electrolarynx that is used exclusively with an intraoral adapter. This adapter directs sound into
the oral cavity through a tube placed in the mouth. The NuVois 1 and NuVois 2 (Mountain Precision Manufacturing, Boise, ID), Servox Inton (Siemens Hearing
Instruments, Inc., Prospect Heights, IL), Romet (Romet, Inc., Las Vegas, NV), OptiVox (Bivona Medical Technologies, Gary, IN), TruTone and SolaTone (Griffin
Laboratories, Temecula, CA), Denrick (Denrick, Inc., Honolulu, HI), SPKR (UNI Mfg. Co., Ontario, OR; not pictured), and Amplicord model 55 (Amplicord, Inc., Rome,
Italy) are neck-type devices that transmit sound through the tissues of the neck into the oral cavity for speech production. These devices are activated with an on-off
switch and are equipped with an adapter so that they can be used either as intraoral or when pressed against the neck. The availability of both options is important
because patients can use the intraoral adapter immediately after surgery when the neck is edematous. The Amplicord model 95 is pressure-activated as it contacts
the neck rather than being activated by a switch. The UltraVoice (UltraVoice, Ltd., Berwyn, PA; Fig. 30.5-2) is an intraoral electrolarynx custom-built into a denture or
retainer and activated by a remote control switch.

FIGURE 30.5-1. Various speech aids. Top, left to right, the Cooper-Rand Electronic Speech Aid (Luminaud Inc., Mentor, OH); the NuVois 2 (Mountain Precision
Manufacturing, Boise, ID); the Servox Inton (Siemens Hearing Instruments, Inc., Prospect Heights, IL); the Romet (Romet, Inc., Las Vegas, NV); bottom, left to right,
the OptiVox (Bivona Medical Technologies, Gary, IN); the TruTone and SolaTone (Griffin Laboratories, Temecula, CA); the Denrick (Denrick, Inc., Honolulu, HI); and
the Amplicord model 55 (Amplicord, Inc., Rome, Italy).

FIGURE 30.5-2. UltraVoice (courtesy of UltraVoice, Ltd., Mavern, PA). (From Miller SD, Levine DK. Rehabilitation of speech, voice and swallowing functions after
treatment of head and neck cancer. In: Harrison LB, Sessions RB, Hong WK, eds. Head and neck cancer. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1999, with
permission.)

Esophageal Speech
Esophageal speech involves learning to inject or inhale air into the esophagus through the reservoir created by surgical closure of the PE segment or gullet after
laryngectomy. The trapped air is then released through the upper esophageal segment, which is the vibratory source for sound in the laryngectomee. 49,50,51,52 and 53
Typically, the speech pathologist encourages the laryngectomee to attempt esophageal sound soon after the patient is able to swallow food comfortably. The details
of the techniques taught by speech pathologists are beyond the scope of this text, but certain basic principles should be pointed out. The patient traps air in the mouth
and forces it into the esophagus. Some patients learn the inhalation method, in which a lowered pressure in the esophageal segment relative to atmospheric pressure
allows air to enter the gullet; thus, the source and the location of vibratory sound are fulfilled.
Even though esophageal speech can be introduced to the patient 1 or 2 weeks after the total laryngectomy, the development of functional capabilities with this method
may take from 6 months to 1 year to learn; in fact, some patients never master it. Previous reports regarding the success rate in learning esophageal speech have
varied from 26% to 55%54,55,56 and 57; however, Fujii 58 found that 74% (51 of 69) of their patients successfully used esophageal speech in daily communication. Age was
the most important factor in success and failure. Ninety percent of the patients in this study who were younger than 60 were successful in learning esophageal speech
as compared to 10% of those older than 75. 58 Although motivation and age appear to be important to the achievement of esophageal speech, 56,59 abnormalities of the
vibrating esophageal segment—tonic and hypertonic spasms—are the most common reasons cited for esophageal speech failure. 60,61 Botulinum toxin type A
injections have been used to combat other muscular spasmodic conditions, including the cricopharyngeus muscle spasm sometimes responsible for failure of TEP
patients to achieve satisfactory speech. 62,63 Perhaps some of the speakers who cannot master esophageal speech would benefit from this same treatment.
In patients in whom esophageal speaking has failed, the tonicity or relaxation of that esophageal segment that vibrates (the PE segment) can be accurately evaluated
by simultaneous use of videofluoroscopy and esophageal insufflation. 64 This is not routinely performed in the postoperative laryngectomee. An easier and reliable way
to assess initial opening pressures of the PE segment is a portable manometry system that can be used 4 weeks after laryngectomy. 65 An initial opening pressure of
between 15 and 20 mm Hg has been found to correlate with the production of a good esophageal voice. 65,66
TRACHEOESOPHAGEAL PUNCTURE

Most head and neck surgeons and most professionals who rehabilitate laryngectomy patients think that in properly selected patients, TEP, introduced by Singer and
Blom in 1980, 67 is the standard of care for reconstitution of voice after laryngectomy. Rather than relying on the trapping of air in the esophagus, the creation of a
permanent puncture through the tracheoesophageal wall permits the shunting of pulmonary air into and up the esophagus; thus, the basis for noise—vibration of the
PE segment walls—is generated. Importantly, unlike esophageal speech, the reservoir of air does not depend on the gulping or trapping of air; instead it is limited
only by expiratory capacity and, as such, more closely resembles normal voice. A valved prosthesis is placed into the puncture and, when the tracheal stoma is
occluded, directs pulmonary air into the esophagus for speech. The one-way valve design of the prosthesis prevents aspiration from the esophagus into the trachea.
An outer housing that contains a soft diaphragm allows normal respiration during silent periods; however, when speech is used, an alteration of the patient's
expiratory effort shuts off the diaphragm, thus diverting the air through the tracheoesophageal conduit into the esophagus. This external housing, called a
tracheostoma breathing valve, was developed in 1982, and is of immeasurable value in rehabilitation of these patients because it eliminates the need for manual
occlusion of the stoma during speech. 68 A patient can, therefore, wear normal clothing over the lower neck to cover the apparatus, as there is no need for involvement
of the hands. For a historical review of the evolution of voice restoration procedures and prostheses, the reader is referred to Singer 69 and Singer and Blom.70
Although TEP is the method of choice for voice and speech rehabilitation in the United States, some patients and some cultures are not so enthusiastic about its
implementation.
Initially, TEP was performed as a second surgery in patients who had been laryngectomized; however, many surgeons and speech pathologists now prefer that TEP
be done at the time of the laryngectomy. The controversy as to the value of the secondary versus primary TEP is ongoing and is unlikely to end. Recently, Chan 71
performed a TEP as an outpatient office procedure using a flexible endoscope with local anesthesia and intravenous sedation. Those surgeons and speech
pathologists who advocate secondary or delayed TEP think that waiting for 1 to 3 months after laryngectomy allows better control of factors, such as stoma size,
vibration of the PE segment, and migration of the puncture site after radiation. Proponents of the primary puncture argue that patients are psychologically uplifted 72 by
the fact that they can speak 3 weeks after surgery. Furthermore, primary TEP proponents cite the value of technical simplicity, effectiveness, low morbidity, and
cost-effectiveness of the one-stage procedure. Success rates for both primary and secondary procedures are reported to be between 73% and 95%, respectively. 73,74
and 75
Regardless of time of puncture, an average of 7 hours of speech therapy is needed to learn to manage the prosthesis and to obtain optimal communication using
the TEP.73 Researchers have reported a decrease in TEP speech success rates from an initial 84% to 67% at 9 months 74 and 65% at 10 years 75 due to such “patient
factors” as delays in seeking medical attention when the valve becomes dislodged and failure to care for the equipment properly. Although the Blom-Singer technique
is popular in the United States, specialists in other parts of the world favor different methods to restore phonation. 76 Most interesting was a study by Quer, 77 who
performed TEP at the time of the laryngectomy and also provided intensive esophageal speech instruction to 24 patients. Seventy percent of the patients (16 of 23)
later chose to use esophageal speech rather than TEP speech even though they agreed that TEP speech was superior to esophageal speech.
Candidacy for Tracheoesophageal Puncture
The success of voice restoration depends on a multidisciplinary team committed to thorough patient assessment, consistent management, and flexibility in problem
solving. Success with TEP depends on good stoma construction, adequate stomal size, and accurate placement and angle of the TEP. 78 The tracheal stoma should
be at least 1.5 cm and not retracted behind the manubrium. If stomal stenosis is a problem, a Bivona-Colorado stent can be used by the surgeon to create the
puncture. A Bivona-Colorado prosthesis ( Fig. 30.5-3), which is built into the tracheostoma vent, is inserted into the puncture.

FIGURE 30.5-3. Bivona and Atos voice restoration products. A: Bivona ultra-low-resistance prostheses and inserter. B: Bivona-Colorado button, template and sizing
devices. Bivona-Colorado products are designed in cooperation with Bruce Jafek, M.D. and Bryan Spofford, M.D. C: Atos Medical Provox 2 prostheses. D: Bivona
Tracheostoma Valve II and housing assembly. (Courtesy of Bivona Medical Technologies, Gary, IN.) (From Miller SD, Levine DK. Rehabilitation of speech, voice and
swallowing functions after treatment of head and neck cancer. In: Harrison LB, Sessions RB, Hong WK, eds. Head and neck cancer. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven
Publishers, 1999, with permission.)

Patients with emphysema, severe allergies, or pulmonary complications are generally not good TEP candidates, owing to copious amounts of secretions and reduced
air volume associated with these conditions. The patient's cognitive status, physical health, and desire for communication should be considered before TEP. The
presence or absence of radiation therapy does not seem to have a significant relationship to the success or failure of TEP. 79
Because of the development of low-resistance, self-retaining prostheses inserted by the speech pathologist or surgeon (or both) and composed of materials designed
to last approximately 3 to 6 months, manual dexterity and visual acuity are no longer essential for the use of this technology. These prostheses include Inhealth
Indwelling (Inhealth Technologies, Santa Barbara, CA; Fig. 30.5-4); Provox-280 (Atos Medical, Sweden, Milwaukee, WI; see Fig. 30.5-4); Voicemaster81 (Amsterdam,
Netherlands), and Nijdam82 (Sweden; not pictured). The Provox (Atos Medical), and Groningen prostheses (Groningen, Holland; not pictured) are popular indwelling
prostheses in Europe.

FIGURE 30.5-4. Inhealth voice restoration products. A: Fistula measurement probe, duckbill prostheses, and inserters. B: No. 16 and No. 18 Fr. low-pressure
prostheses, gel cap, and inserters. C: Indwelling voice prosthesis and gel cap. D: Tracheostoma breathing valve (without humidifier). (Courtesy of Inhealth
Technologies, Santa Barbara, CA.) (From Miller SD, Levine DK. Rehabilitation of speech, voice and swallowing functions after treatment of head and neck cancer. In:
Harrison LB, Sessions RB, Hong WK, eds. Head and neck cancer. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1999, with permission.)

In following up TEP patients over 13 years, Lavertu 83 found that the absence of PE stricture was the only significant predictor of good to excellent speech. Because
the tonicity of the PE segment in a primary puncture patient before the laryngectomy cannot be assessed, surgeons often perform a pharyngeal constrictor myotomy,
a unilateral pharyngeal plexus neurectomy, or a unilateral pharyngeal plexus neurectomy with a cricopharyngeal myotomy at the time of surgery. Although all three

methods are equally effective in preventing pharyngospasms, Singer et al. 84 advocate use of the pharyngeal plexus neurectomy, as it preserves the vascular supply to
the pharyngeal wall and preserves any residual resting tone in the PE segment, resulting in a higher speaking fundamental frequency compared to the other methods.
Many speech pathologists perform air insufflation testing before a secondary puncture, although the value of this has been challenged. 85 Lewin86 reported greater
than 90% success in predicting TEP failures when intraesophageal peak pressure levels are obtained in conjunction with the air insufflation test. The air insufflation
test is performed by insertion of a transnasal catheter approximately 25 cm into the upper thoracic esophagus. The catheter is attached to a circular tracheostoma
housing, which is secured to the patient's skin by an adhesive. As air is insufflated into the catheter, patients are instructed to inhale, occlude the stomal assembly,
and sustain a vowel sound for as long as they can. Success is determined by patients' ability to sustain a vowel for 15 to 20 seconds and count from 1 to 15. 67 To
ensure optimal results, it is important for the patient to feel relaxed and comfortable with the examiner. Multiple trials and a repeat visit are often necessary to confirm
test results.
If insufflation testing fails but speech is achieved in a patient after a pharyngeal plexus nerve block with lidocaine, PE spasm is suspected. This should be confirmed
via a videofluoroscopic MBS performed during rest and swallow and during speech with air insufflation. If the PE segment is confirmed to be highly resistant to airflow,
botulinum toxin type A injection should be considered as a first-line treatment 87 before consideration of surgical procedures, such as a pharyngeal constrictor
myotomy, a unilateral pharyngeal plexus neurectomy, or a unilateral pharyngeal plexus neurectomy with cricopharyngeal myotomy. If speech during the air insufflation
test is faint or whispery, the PE segment may be hypotonic. Digital pressure on the outside of the neck may help to produce a stronger sound. The existence of
hypotonicity is not a contraindication for TEP, although it may indicate the need for a neck band or digital pressure postoperatively to enhance contact of intraluminal
vibratory surfaces.
Post–Tracheoesophageal Puncture Intervention
With primary TEP, a catheter is placed in the newly created fistula that penetrates the posterior wall of the trachea and enters the esophageal lumen. The catheter
provides a stent that keeps the fistula open during the weeks in which the tract is regenerating mucosae. Removal of the catheter and fitting of the voice prosthesis in
a primary TEP patient generally takes place from 10 to 21 days after surgery. 88 If radiation therapy is planned, the patient should be advised that speech may diminish
during the third to fourth week of radiation, owing to mucositis and radiation-induced edema. In the secondary, or delayed, TEP patient, the device is measured and
inserted approximately 1 week. The 14-Fr. catheter placed during surgery is removed, and the patency of the tract is assessed by asking the patient to take a breath
and say “Ah” on exhalation while the speech pathologist or patient occludes the stoma. If the tract is patent but sound cannot be attained, the patient can be fitted with
a prosthesis but should be counseled that speech may not occur until there is further healing of the tissue tract. To determine the proper prosthesis size, the Inhealth
fistula measurement probe (see Fig. 30.5-4) or the Bivona fitting kit (see Fig. 30.5-3) are used to measure the length of the fistula tract. Once appropriate length has
been determined, the patient is fitted with a 16-Fr. duckbill or lower-resistance prosthesis (see Figs. 30.5-3 and 30.5-4).
During this initial session, patients are taught to occlude their stoma digitally. They are taught how to phrase their speech and how to apply appropriate abdominal
support to initiate sound. Patients are also instructed regarding the possibility of fistula closure and how to manage the problem if the prosthesis becomes dislodged.
It is essential that the speech pathologist be available for the first few days after fitting of a patient's prosthesis should problems arise.
SWALLOWING AND SPEECH AFTER EXTENSIVE RECONSTRUCTION OF THE PHARYNX OR CERVICAL ESOPHAGUS
Several researchers think that after extensive pharyngeal resection or cervical esophageal resection (or both), the tubed radial forearm free flap maximizes functional
rehabilitation of the patient by providing the best swallowing and speech results. 89,90 and 91 Free jejunal transfer also has gained wide acceptance in PE reconstruction
because the jejunum is well vascularized and is associated with a low incidence of fistula formation and stricture. Voice restoration has been successfully achieved in
these jejunal interpositions with the creation of either a primary tracheojejunal shunt at the time of the surgery 92,93 or a secondary procedure. 94 Reconstruction with
jejunal interposition and gastric pull-up have demonstrated better swallowing results than those with myocutaneous (pectoralis and latissimus dorsi) flaps, and colon
interposition. 29,95 Performance of a TEP in gastric pull-up patients has been successful in certain small heterogeneous patient groups, 96,97 but this is unpredictable,
and the overall experience is limited.
Dysphasia in jejunal interposition patients may occur from discoordination of jejunal peristalsis with occasional oral and nasal regurgitation. Regurgitation of food is
frequently noted in the gastric pull-up patient, owing to an absent esophagogastric sphincter. These patients are encouraged to eat small meals throughout the day.
From a functional and from a morbidity standpoint, the jejunal interposition is generally considered to be a superior method of reconstruction compared to the gastric
pull-up.
Patients undergoing total laryngopharyngectomy or laryngopharyngoesophagectomy with jejunal graft reconstruction experience a lack of innervation and muscle in
the wall of the jejunum that causes hypotonicity. Therefore, sound may be easier to attain than esophageal speech; however, it is often softer in intensity and limited
to fewer syllables per air charge. 108 Voice quality is often described as wet, owing to mucus in the jejunum; however, the success rates of primary or secondary
tracheojejunal puncture are reported to be 72% to 93%. 99,100 and 101
COMPARISON OF ESOPHAGEAL, TRACHEOESOPHAGEAL PUNCTURE, AND NORMAL SPEECH
Acoustic and temporal studies indicate that TEP speech more closely approximates laryngeal speech in fundamental frequency, intensity, reading rate, percent silent
time, and maximum phonation time.102,103 Significantly higher fundamental frequencies were found during reading in neurectomized primary TEP patients as compared
to primary TEP patients receiving myotomy or a neurectomy with myotomy. In addition, TEP speakers using the tracheostoma-breathing valve demonstrated faster
speaking rates and fewer pauses. The valve prevents the escape of air sometimes observed with digital occlusion of the tracheostoma. 88 Although TEP speech in
general is more intelligible and preferred over esophageal speech, the monotonous tone, voicing errors, and fricative errors are similar in TEP and esophageal
speakers.88 When TEP speech after a total laryngectomy is compared to TEP speech after a laryngopharyngectomy with pectoralis major flap reconstruction, no
significant differences were noted for soft and loud intensity levels, fundamental frequency for soft voice, and jitter, although perceptual analysis revealed significant
differences. 104 Speech in the tracheojejunal-esophageal puncture patients has even less pitch variation, more noise in the signal, shorter mean phonation time, a wet
quality, and a softer intensity voice than TEP speech. 105

VOLUNTEER AND SUPPORT ORGANIZATIONS
The diagnosis and treatment of head and neck cancer may proceed quickly; however, a patient's adjustment to the diagnosis of a malignancy, its management, and
the subsequent disability is not a short-term process. 106,107 and 108 Patients and their families will require different information and support throughout various times of
the treatment process. A variety of resources are available to laryngectomees and their families.
WRITTEN MATERIALS
Several good books are available for the laryngectomee that may be provided to the patient preoperatively or postoperatively. These guides provide useful
information regarding anatomic changes, stoma care, first aid, alternative communication options, practice exercises, and support groups. They include the following
titles:
Self-Help for the Laryngectomee , by Edmund Lauder
Lauder Enterprises, Inc., 11115 Whisper Hollow, San Antonio, TX 78230-3609
800-388-8642
E-mail: lauder@voicestore.com
http://www.voicestore.com
A Handbook for the Laryngectomee, by Robert L. Keith
PRO-ED, 8700 Shoal Creek Boulevard, Austin, TX 76001
512-451-8542
Looking Forward by R. Keith, H. Shane, H. Coates, K. Devine.
Thieme Medical Publishers, Suite 1501,

381 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10157-0208
Rescue Breathing for Laryngectomees and Check the Neck (videotape)
IAL, 7822 Ivymount Terrace, Potomac, MD 20854
301-983-9323
The Clinician's Guide of Alaryngeal Speech Therapy, by Minnie S. Graham
(available from Lauder Enterprises, Inc.; see first item in this list)
Butterworth–Heinemann, 225 Wildwood Avenue,
Woburn, MA 01801-2041
1-800-388-8642
Booklets about cancer treatment and living with cancer can be obtained free of charge by writing the Office of Cancer Communications, National Cancer Institute,
Building 31, Room 1024, Bethesda, MD 20892, or calling 1-800-4-CANCER.
VOLUNTEERS
Patients are encouraged to meet before or after surgery with individuals who have undergone similar procedures. Some otolaryngology or speech pathology
departments require that patient volunteers participate in formal volunteer training; other departments choose well-adjusted individuals and attend the patient visit with
the volunteer. Many laryngectomee clubs maintain a laryngectomee volunteer-patient visitation program coordinated with medical professionals in local hospitals and
clinics.
SUPPORT GROUPS
Patients and their spouses should be encouraged to join the International Association of Laryngectomies (IAL) and the American Cancer Society (ACS). The IAL is a
voluntary, nonprofit, organization dedicated to total rehabilitation of laryngectomees. The purpose of the IAL is to facilitate the formation of new laryngectomee clubs,
foster improvement of hospital laryngectomee visitor programs, and upgrade standards for teachers of alaryngeal speech. The IAL provides educational support to
more than 200 member clubs located throughout the United States, Canada, Europe, South America, Asia, and Australia. The IAL publishes IAL News, conducts an
annual meeting, and sponsors an annual Voice Rehabilitation Institute. The Voice Rehabilitation Institute is attended by laryngectomees and speech pathologists for
alaryngeal speech instructor training. The IAL publishes a directory of certified alaryngeal speech instructors. It can be contacted at International Association of
Laryngectomies, 7822 Ivymount Terrace, Potomac, MD 20854; 301-983-9323; http://www.larynxlink.com.
The various geographic, state divisions, and local units of the ACS assist IAL member clubs and sponsor field work of benefit to laryngectomees. Some ACS offices
are able to lend equipment and other types of support. The ACS can be contacted at 1599 Clifton Road NE, Atlanta, GA 30329; 404-320-3333.
The American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) is a professional organization that oversees certification of speech pathologists and audiologists.
ASHA defines position statements and guidelines for practice standards within the profession. Several policy statements are related to the management of head and
neck cancer patients and to instrumental diagnostic procedures for swallowing and evaluation and treatment of tracheoesophageal fistulization and puncture. ASHA
can provide patients and their families with speech pathology resources in their area. ASHA can be contacted at 10801 Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD 20852;
1-800-638-6868; or http://www.asha.org.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Logemann JA. Manual for the videofluorographic study of swallowing, 2nd ed. Austin, TX: PRO-ED, 1993.
2. Langmore S, Schatz K, Olson N. Fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing safety: a new procedure . Dysphagia 1988;2:216.
3. Aviv J, Kim T, Goodhart M, et al. FEESST: a new bedside endoscopic test of the motor and sensory components of swallowing. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1998;107(5):378.
4. Lazarus C, Logemann J, Gibon P. Effects of maneuvers on swallowing function in a dysphagic oral cancer patient . Head Neck 1993;15:419.
5. Logemann JA. Speech and swallowing rehabilitation for head and neck tumor patients. In: Myers EN, Suen JY, eds. Cancer of the head and neck, 2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone,
1989:1021.
6. Dios PD, Feijoo JF, Ferreiro MC, Alvarez JA. Functional consequences of partial glossectomy. Am Assoc Oral Maxillofac Surg 1994;52:12.
7. Urken ML, Biller HF. A new bilobed design for the sensate radial forearm flap to preserve tongue mobility following significant glossectomy. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1994;120:26.
8. Urken ML, Moscoso JF, Lawson W, Biller H. A systematic approach to functional reconstruction of the oral cavity following partial and total glossectomy. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
1994;120:589.
9. Logemann J. Speech and swallowing rehabilitation for head and neck, 2nd ed. 1989:1021.
10. Heller SH, Levy J, Sciubba JJ. Speech patterns following partial glossectomy for small tumors of the tongue. Head Neck 1991;13(4):340.
11. Dios PD, Conley JJ. The crippled oral cavity. Plast Reconstr Surg 1962:469.
12. Yamamoto Y, Sugihara T, Furuta Y, Fukuda S. Functional reconstruction of the tongue and deglutition muscles following extensive resection of tongue cancer. Plast Reconstr Surg
1998;102(4):99.
13. Wheeler R, Logemann JA, Rosen M. Maxillary reshaping prosthesis: effectiveness in improving speech and swallowing of post-surgical oral cancer patients. J Prosthet Dent 1980;43:314.
14. Hirano M, Matsuoka H, Kuroiwa Y, et al. Dysphagia following various degrees of surgical resection for oral cancer. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1992;101:138.
15. Teichgraeber J, Bowman J, Geopfert H. Functional analysis of treatment of oral cavity cancer. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1986;112:959.
16. Rentschler GJ, Mann MB. The effects of glossectomy on intelligibility of speech and oral perception discrimination. J Oral Surg 1980;38:348.
17. Lyos AT, Evans GR, Perez D, Schusterman MA. T ongue reconstruction: outcomes with the rectus abdominis flap. Plast Reconstr Surg 1999;103(2):442.
18. Pompei S, Caravelli G, Vigili MG, Ducci M, Marzetti F. Free radial forearm flap and myocutaneous flaps in oncological reconstructive surgery of the oral cavity, comparison of functional results.
Minerva Chir 1998;53(3):183.
19. Tiwari RM, Greven AJ, Karim ABMF, Snow GB. Total glossectomy: reconstruction and rehabilitation. J Laryngol Otol 1989;103:917.
20. Tiwari RM, Karim ABMF, Greven AJ, Snow GB. Total glossectomy with laryngeal preservation. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1993;119:945.
21. Urken ML, Vickery C, Weinberg H, Biller HF. The neurofascicutaneous radial forearm free flap for functional reconstruction of near-total glossectomy defects. Laryngocope 1990;100:161.
22. Urken ML, Biller HF. A new bilobed design for the sensate radial forearm flap to preserve tongue mobility following significant glossectomy. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1994;120:589.
23. Aviv JE, Keen MS, Rodriquez HP, et al. Bilobed radial forearm free flap for functional reconstruction of near-total glossectomy defects. Laryngoscope 1994;104:893.
24. Hell B, Heissler E, Gath H, Menneking H, Langford. The infrahyoid flap. A technique for defect closure in the floor of the mouth, the tongue, the buccal mucosa, and the lateral pharyngeal wall.
Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1997;26(1):35.
25. Salibian AH, Allison GR, Armstrong WB, et al. Functional hemitongue reconstruction with the microvascular ulnar forearm flap. Plast Reconstr Surg 1999;104(3):654.
26. Horwitz EM, Frazier AJ, Martinez AA, et al. Excellent functional outcome in patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the base of the tongue treated with external irradiation and interstitial
iodine 125 boost. Cancer 1996;78(5):948.
27. Neuschaefer-Rube C, Wein BB, Angerstein W, Klajman S, Fischer-Wein G. Sector-related grey scale analysis of video ultrasound recorded tongue movements in swallowing. HNO
1997;45(7):556.
28. Krappen S, Remmert S, Gehrking E, Zwaan M. Cinematographic functional diagnosis of swallowing after plastic reconstruction of large tumor defects of the mouth cavity and pharynx.
Laryngorhinootologie 1997;76(4):229.
29. Sommer K, Burk C, Sommer T, Remmert S. Perfusion manometry in the evaluation of postoperative swallowing function following various reconstructive procedures of the upper aero-digestive
tract. Laryngorhinootologie 1997;76(3):178.
30. Dagli A, Mahieu H, Festen J. Quantitative analysis of voice quality in early glottic laryngeal carcinomas treated with radiotherapy. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1997:254(2):78.
31. Rydell R, Schalen L, Fex S, Elner A. Voice evaluation before and after laser excision vs. radiotherapy of TIA glottic carcinoma. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1995;115(4):560.
32. Aref A, Dworkin J, Devi S, Denton L, Fontanesi J. Objective evaluation of the quality of voice following radiation therapy for T1 glottic cancer. Radiother Oncol 1997; 45(2):149.
33. Harrison L, Sololmon B, Miller S, et al. Prospective computer assisted voice analysis for patients with early stage glottic cancer: a preliminary report of the functional result of laryngeal
irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:123.
34. Tsunoda K, Soda Y, Tojima H, et al. Stroboscopic observation of the larynx after radiation in patients with T1 glottic carcinoma. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl 1997;527:165.
35. Woodson G, Rosen C, Murry T, et al. Assessing vocal function after chemoradiation for advanced laryngeal carcinoma. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1996;122(8):858.
36. Wang M, Hussey D, Doornbos J, et al. Chemodectoma of the temporal bone: a comparison of surgical and radiotherapeutic results. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14:643.
37. Leeper H, Heeneman H, Reynolds C. Vocal function following vertical hemilaryngectomy: a preliminary investigation. J Otolaryngol 1990;19:62.
38. Logemann J, Gibbons P, Rademaker A, et al. Mechanisms of recovery of swallow after supraglottic laryngectomy . J Speech Hear Res 1993;37:965.
39. Martin B, Logemann J, Shaker R, et al. Normal laryngeal valving patterns during three breath hold maneuvers: a pilot investigation. Dysphagia 1993;8:11.
40. Omae Y, Logemann J, Haqnson D, et al. Effects of two breath-holding maneuvers on oropharyngeal swallow. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 19996;105:123.
41. Kahrilas P, Logemann J, Gibbons P. Food intake by maneuver: an extreme compensation for impaired swallowing. Dysphagia 1992;7:155.
42. Balfe DM, Koehler RE, Setzen M, Weyman PJ, Raaron RL. Barium examination of the esophagus after total laryngectomy. Radiology 1982;143:501.
43. McConnell FM, Mendelsohn MS, Logemann JA. Examination of swallowing after total laryngectomy using manofluorography. Head Neck Surg 1986;9:3.
44. Kirchner JA, Scatliff JH, Dey FL, Shedd DP. The pharynx after laryngectomy: changes in its structure and function. Laryngoscope 1963;73:18.
45. Broniatowski M, Sonies B, Rubin J, et al. Current evaluation and treatment of patients with swallowing disorders. Otol Head Neck Surg 1999;120:464.
46. Lazarus CL, Logemann JA, Kahrilas PJ, Mittal BB. Swallow recovery in an oral cancer patient following surgery, radiotherapy, and hyperthermia. Head Neck 1994;16:259.
47. McNeil BJ, Weichselbaum R, Pauker, SG. Speech and survival: tradeoffs between quality and quantity of life in laryngeal cancer. N Engl J Med 1981;305:982.
48. Davis R, Vincent M, Shapshay S, Strong M. The anatomy and complication of “T” versus vertical closure of the hypopharynx after laryngectomy. Laryngoscope 1982;92:16.
49. Damste PH. Some obstacles to learning esophageal speech. In: Keith RL, Darley FH, eds. Laryngectomee rehabilitation, 2nd ed. San Diego: College-Hill Press, 1986:85.
50. Diedrich WM, Youngstrom KA. Alaryngeal speech. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas Publisher, 1966.
51. Gardner WH. Laryngectomee speech and rehabilitation. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas Publisher, 1971.

52. Singer MT. The upper esophageal sphincter: role in alaryngeal speech acquisition. Head Neck Surg 1988;[Suppl 2]:S118.
53. Gates GA, Ryan W, Cooper JC Jr, et al. Current status of laryngectomee rehabilitation: I. Results of therapy. Am J Otol 1982;3:1.
54. Van Weissenbruch R, Albers FW. Vocal rehabilitation after total laryngectomy using Provox voice prosthesis. Clin Otolaryngol 1993;18(5):359.
55. Gates GA, Ryan W, Cooper JC Jr, et al. Current status of laryngectomee rehabilitation: I. Results of therapy. Am J Otol 1982;3:1.
56. Mjones AB, Olofsson J, Danbolt C, Tibbling L. Oesophageal speech after laryngectomy: a study of possible influencing factors. Clin Otolaryngol 1991;16:442.
57. Salmon SJ. Adjusting to laryngectomy. In: Perkins WH, Northern JL, eds. Current strategies of rehabilitation of the laryngectomized patient: seminars in speech and language. New York:
Thieme Medical Publishers, 1986.
58. Fujii T, Sato T, Yoshino K, et al. Voice rehabilitation with esophageal speech in the laryngectomized. Nippon Jibiinkoka Gakkai Kaiho 1993;96(7):1086.
59. Shanks JC. Evoking esophageal voice. Semin Speech Lang 1986;7:1.
60. Cheesman AD, Knight J, McIvor J, Perry A. Tracheo-oesophageal “puncture speech”: an assessment technique for failed oesophageal speakers. J Laryngol Otol 1986;100:191.
61. Perry A, Cheesman AD, McIvor JL, Charlton R. British experience of surgical voice restoration techniques as a secondary procedure following total laryngectomy. J Laryngol Otol 1987;101:155.
62. Blitzer A, Komisar A, Baredes S, Brin MF, Stewart C. Voice failure after tracheoesophageal puncture: management with botulinum toxin. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995;113(6):668.
63. Hoffman HT, Fischer H, VanDenmark D, et al. Botulinum neurotoxin injection after total laryngectomy. Head Neck 1997;19(2):92.
64. Sloane PM, Griffin JM, O'Dwyer TP. Esophageal insufflation and videofluoroscopy for evaluation of esophageal speech in laryngectomy patients: clinical implications . Radiology 1991;181:433.
65. Morgan DW, Hadley J, Willis G, Cheesman AD. Use of a portable manometer as a screening procedure in voice rehabilitation. J Laryngol Otol 1992;106:353.
66. Baugh RF, Lewin JS, Baker SR. Preoperative assessment of tracheo-oesophageal speech . Laryngoscope 1987;97:461.
67. Singer MI, Blom ED. An endoscopic technique for restoration of voice after laryngectomy. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1980;89:529.
68. Blom ED, Singer MI, Hamaker R. Tracheostoma valve for postlaryngectomy voice rehabilitation. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1082;91:576.
69. Singer MI. Voice rehabilitation. In: Cummings CW, ed. Otolaryngologyhead and neck surgery, 2nd ed. St Louis: Mosby, 1993:2190.
70. Singer MI, Blom ED. Medical techniques for voice restoration after total laryngectomy. CA Cancer J Clin 1990;40:166.
71. Chan H, Mesko T, Fields K, Barkin J. An improved method of flexible endoscopic creation of tracheoesophageal fistula for voice restoration. Surg Endosc 1997;11(10):1034.
72. Yoshida GY, Hamaker RC, Singer MI, Blom ED, Glenwood AC. Primary voice restoration at laryngectomy. Laryngoscope 1989;99:1093.
73. Izdebski K, Reed C, Ross J, Hilsinger R. Problems with tracheoesophageal fistula voice restoration in totally laryngectomized patients. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1994;120:840.
74. Van Weissenbruch R, Albers FWJ. Vocal rehabilitation after total laryngectomy using the Provox voice prosthesis. Clin Otolaryngol 1993;18:359.
75. Lacau St Guily J, Angelard B, El-Bez M, et al. Postlaryngectomy voice restoration. ArchOtolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1992;118:252.
76. Mehta AR, Sarkar S, Mehta SA, Bachher GK. The Indian experience with immediate tracheoesophageal puncture for voice restoration. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1995;252(4):209.
77. Quer M, Burgues-Vila J, Garcia-Crespillo P. Primary tracheoesophageal puncture vs esophageal speech. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1992;118(3):252.
78. Schultz JR, Harrison J. Defining and predicting tracheoesophageal puncture success. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1992;102:704.
79. Artazkoz del Toro JJ, Lopez MR. Surgical voice rehabilitation: influence of postoperative radiotherapy on tracheoesophageal fistulas. Long-term follow-up study. Acta Otorrhinolaringol Esp
1997;48(4):299.
80. Hilgers FJ, Ackerstaff AH, Balm AJ, et al. Development and clinical evaluation of a second-generation voice prosthesis (Provox 2), designed for anterograde and retrograde insertion. Acta
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1997;117(6):889.
81. Schouwenburg PF, Eelenstein SE, Grolman W. The Voicemaster voice prosthesis for the laryngectomized patient. Clin Otolaryngol 1998;23(6):555.
82. Van den Hoogen FJA, Nijdam HF, Veenstr A, Manni JJ. The Nijdam voice prosthesis. A self-retaining valveless voice prosthesis for vocal rehabilitation after total laryngectomy. Acta
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1996;116:913.
83. Lavertu P, Guay ME, Meeker SS, et al. Secondary tracheoesophageal puncture: factors predictive of voice quality and prosthesis use. Head Neck 1996;18(5):393.
84. Singer MI, Blom ED, Hamaker RC. Pharyngeal plexus neurectomy for alaryngeal speech rehabilitation. Laryngoscope 1986;96:50.
85. Callaway E, Truelson JM, Wolf GT, Thomas-Kincaid L, Cannon S. Predictive value of objective esophageal insufflation testing for acquisition of tracheoesophageal speech. Laryngoscope
1992;102:704.
86. Lewin JS, Baugh RF, Baker SR. An objective method for prediction of tracheoesophageal speech production . J Speech Hear Disord 1990;52:212.
87. Zormeier NM, Melecca RJ, Simpson ML, et al. Botulinum toxin injection to improve tracheoesophageal speech after total laryngectomy. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1999;120(3):314.
88. Paulowski BR, Blom ED, Logemann JA, Hamaker RC. Functional outcome after surgery for prevention of pharyngospasms in tracheoesophageal speakers: Part II. Swallow characteristics.
Laryngoscope 1995;105:1104,
89. Anthony JP, Singer MI, Mathes SJ. Pharyngoesophageal reconstruction using the tubed free radial forearm flap. Clin Plast Surg 1994;21(1):137.
90. Kelly KE, Anthony JP, Singer M. Pharyngoesophageal reconstruction using the radial forearm fasciocutaneous free flap: preliminary results. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1994;111(1):16.
91. Hussain A, Dolph JL, Padilla JF, Silver S. Tubed, folded radial forearm free flap for pharyngeal reconstruction and voice rehabilitation. Ann Plast Surg 1993;30(6):541.
92. Kinishi M, Amatsu M, Tahara S, Makino K. Primary tracheojejunal shunt operation for voice restoration following pharyngolaryngoesophagectomy. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1991;100(6):435.
93. Matsuura K, Yamada A, Hashimoto S, et al. Simultaneous reconstruction of pharyngoesophagus and phonation following laryngopharyngoesophagectomy. Nippon Jibiinkoka Gakkai Kaiho
1999;102(2):208.
94. Bleach N, Perry A, Cheesman A. Surgical voice restoration with the Blom-Singer prosthesis following laryngopharyngoesophagectomy and pharyngogastric anastomosis. Ann Otol Rhinol
Laryngol 1991;100(2):142.
95. Carlson GW, Schusterman MA, Guillamondegui OM. Total reconstruction of the pharynx and cervical esophagus: a 20 year experience. Ann Plast Surg 1992;29:408.
96. Medina JE, Nance A, Burns L, Overton R. Voice restoration after total laryngopharyngectomy and cervical esophagectomy using the duckbill prosthesis . Am J Surg 1987;154:407.
97. Juarbe C, Sheman L, Wang R, et al. Tracheoesophageal puncture for voice restoration extended laryngopharyngectomy. Arch Otolaryngol 1989;115:356.
98. Wilson PS, Bruce-Lockhart FJ, Johnson AP, Physevans PH. Speech reconstruction following total laryngo-pharyngectomy with free jejunal repair. Clin Otolaryngol 1994;19:145.
99. Garth RJN, McRae A, Rhysevans PH. Tracheo-esophageal puncture: a review of problems and complications. J Laryngol Otol 1991;105:750.
100. Mendolsohn M, Morris M, Gallagher R. A comparative study of speech after total laryngectomy and total laryngopharyngectomy. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1981;305:982.
101. Wenig BR, Mullooly V, Levy J, Abramson AL. Voice restoration following laryngectomy: the role of primary versus secondary tracheoesophageal puncture. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1989;98:70.
102. Robbins J, Fisher HB, Blom ED, Singer MI. A comparative acoustic study of normal, esophageal, and tracheoesophageal speech production. J Speech Hear Disord 1984; 49:202.
103. Casper J, Colton R. Understanding voice problems: physiological perspective for diagnosis and treatment. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1966.
104. Deschler DB, Doherty ET, Reed CG, Singer MI. Quantitative and qualitative analysis of tracheoesophageal voice following pectoralis major flap reconstruction of the neopharynx. Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg 1998;118(6):771.
105. Haughey BH, Fredrickson JM, Sessions DG, et al. A comparative study of speech after total laryngectomy and total laryngopharyngectomy. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1993;119:487.
106. Blood GW, Luther AR, Stemple JC. Coping and adjustment in alaryngeal speakers. Am J Speech Lang Pathol 1992;1:63.
107. Doyle PC. Foundations of voice and speech rehabilitation following laryngeal cancer. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, 1994.
108. Gunn AE. Cancer rehabilitation: an overview. In: Gunn AE, ed. Cancer rehabilitation. New York: Raven Press, 1984:1.

SECTION 31.1 Molecular Biology of Lung Cancer
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 31.1
Molecular Biology of Lung Cancer
YOSHITAKA SEKIDO
KWUN M. FONG
JOHN D. MINNA
Introduction
Genetic and Epigenetic Alterations in Lung Cancers
Chromosomal Abnormalities
Microsatellite Instability
Aberrant DNA Methylation
Protooncogenes and Growth Stimulation
Tumor Suppressor Genes and Growth Suppression
p53 Pathway
The p16INK4A–Cyclin D1–Cyclin-Dependent Kinase-4–Retinoblastoma Protein Pathway
Pten, Fhit, Rar-b, Putative 3P Tumor Suppressor Genes, and Other Tumor and Growth-Suppressive Gene Sites in Lung Cancer Pathogenesis
Other Biologic Abnormalities for Lung Cancer Development
Telomerase Activity
Apoptosis
Metastasis and Angiogenesis
Carcinogens in Tobacco Smoke and Genetic Susceptibility to Lung Cancer (Genetic Epidemiology)
Molecular Changes in Preneoplasia
Molecular Tools in the Lung Cancer Clinic
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Lung cancer cells have accumulated a number of molecular genetic and epigenetic lesions, which appear necessary to transform normal bronchial epithelium to an
overt lung cancer. There is complex interaction between the various molecular changes that ultimately result in the abrogation of key cellular regulatory and growth
control pathways. Of the three major classes of human “cancer” genes, the protooncogenes and tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) are involved in lung carcinogenesis,
whereas evidence implicating DNA repair genes is not yet conclusive. Many of the protooncogene and TSG changes are present in both major lung cancer subtypes:
small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), although certain mutations have subtype specificity ( Table 31.1-1). Protooncogenes generally
encode proteins that are positive effectors of the transformed phenotype and can simplistically be considered positive growth regulators. Their “activation” results in
their functional deregulation, leading to a gain in function or “dominant” effect. Conversely, TSG products are negative growth regulators and their “inactivation”
results in a loss of function that contributes to malignancy. Interacting with yet other biologic changes, these fundamental molecular events appear to underlie the
characteristics of dysregulated growth, clonal expansion, and immortality, which are typical of overt lung cancers. In addition, these, and yet other to be discovered
molecular changes, may affect the processes of invasion, metastasis, and resistance against cancer therapy. In translating these laboratory discoveries into the clinic,
it is important to identify these various changes, determine the frequency of occurrence, and test whether they have clinically important associations (e.g., with
histologic type, stage, survival, response to therapy), as well as to determine if they could be used for early diagnosis, to monitor prevention and treatment efforts, and
as targets for the development of new treatments. In addition, these abnormalities will probably also give us important understanding about lung development and
differentiation.

TABLE 31.1-1. The Most Frequent Acquired Molecular Abnormalities in Lung Cancer

GENETIC AND EPIGENETIC ALTERATIONS IN LUNG CANCERS
CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES
Lung cancer cells display numerical abnormalities (aneuploidy) of chromosomes, which are suggestive of allele loss or gain, as well as structural cytogenetic
abnormalities. The latter include nonreciprocal translocations and deletions, whereas the presence of double minutes and homogeneously staining regions indicate
gene amplification, such as for the MYC gene family.1 In SCLCs, losses from chromosomes 3p, 5q, 13q, and 17p predominate, but double minutes may be common
late in disease. In NSCLCs, deletions of 3p, 9p, and 17p, together with +7, i(5)(p10), and i(8)(q10) are often seen. Molecular cytogenetic analysis with comparative
genomic hybridization has identified hitherto unrecognized abnormalities, including deletions at 10q26, 16p11.2, and 22q12.1-13.1 and amplification at 1q24, 3q, 5p,
17q, and Xq26.
It has been proposed that human tumors may be genetically unstable at two levels: at the chromosomal level, including losses and gains (amplification), and at the
DNA nucleotide level, including single or several base changes. 2 It will thus be important to determine if aneuploidy and structural cytogenetic abnormalities, apart
from targeting key genes, actually represent the phenomenon of chromosomal instability in lung cancers.
MICROSATELLITE INSTABILITY
A genetic change that manifests itself as a mutator phenotype (often called the replication error repairphenotype) in human cancers results in widespread
microsatellite instability. The result of microsatellite instability is a “laddering” of short-tandem DNA repeat sequences at multiple loci seen on high-resolution
polyacrylamide electrophoretic gels. This phenotype is usually due to mutational inactivation of DNA mismatch repair enzymes, resulting in marked instability of these
polymorphic DNA repeat sequences. This phenotype was initially reported in hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancers. Lung cancer frequently exhibits microsatellite
instability; however, this occurs at only a few loci and results only in “shifts” of individual allelic bands (“microsatellite alterations”) compared to normal DNA in the
same patient. The abnormal mechanism underlying this phenotype is currently unknown, and apparently mutations in DNA mismatch repair enzymes are very
uncommon in lung cancer. The human 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (hOGG1) gene, involved in the repair of oxidative DNA damage, is another candidate for
involvement in generating multiple lung cancer mutations. However, abnormalities in this gene only rarely occur in lung cancer, and mutations in other DNA repair
genes have not yet been reported in lung cancer. Overall, approximately 35% (37 of 106) of SCLCs and 22% (160 of 727) of NSCLCs showed some examples of
microsatellite alterations at individual loci. 3 Microsatellite alterations in lung cancer have been reported to be associated with younger age, reduced survival, and
advanced tumor stage. Regardless of the underlying mechanism, many groups are testing the possibility of using this microsatellite alteration phenotype for the early

diagnosis of lung cancer by detecting these shifted DNA bands in sputum, bronchial washings, or blood.
ABERRANT DNA METHYLATION
DNA methylation involves covalent modification at the fifth carbon position of cytosine residues within CpG nucleotides of DNA, which tend to be clustered around the
5' ends of many housekeeping genes (CpG islands). Hypermethylation in the 5' promoter region of genes is associated with transcriptional silencing and is an
alternative mechanism for down-regulating TSG expression rather than gene deletion or mutation.
Hypermethylation of the promoter region of the p16INK4A gene in a subset of NSCLCs results in its down-regulation and may be an early event in lung cancer
pathogenesis. 4 Other genes also have been found to undergo aberrant promoter methylation in lung cancer but are not found in the normal lung associated with these
tumors, including DAP (death associated protein) kinase, GSTP1 (glutathione S-transferase), and MGMT (O 6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase). 5 In addition,
DNA containing these methylated sequences could be detected in the corresponding blood samples from the same patients, indicating that the tumor cells had shed
DNA into the peripheral blood. Thus, aberrantly methylated DNA sequences, which can be sensitively detected among a background of normal DNA, represent an
attractive strategy for early molecular detection. Other sites of hypermethylation, including 3p, 4q34, 10q26, and 17p13, have been implicated in lung cancer
pathogenesis, although the precise gene targets are uncertain. In addition to use as an early detection target, it may be possible to reverse methylation
pharmacologically. In tissue culture systems, this is routinely done with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. Clinical trials with such agents have been
attempted in other diseases, and agents with less toxicity need to be developed and tested in lung cancer.
Another acquired tumor abnormality is loss of imprinting (loss of methylation) to allow the expression of genes in lung cancer. Methylation plays a role in mediating
genomic imprinting, which is a gamete-specific modification causing differential expression of the two alleles of a gene in somatic cells. Loss of genomic imprinting of
the insulin-like growth factor-2 ( IGF-2) gene and the H19 gene (associated with hypomethylation of its promoter region) also occurs in lung cancer.

PROTOONCOGENES AND GROWTH STIMULATION
The activation of protooncogenes requires mechanisms such as gene amplification or point mutation of a single allele leading to constitutive overexpression. In some
cases, however, the mechanisms causing overexpression are still unclear. Protooncogene products include several growth factor receptors, such as epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), ERBB2, KIT, and MET. Indeed, many growth factor/receptor systems are expressed by either the lung tumor or adjacent normal cells, thus
providing autocrine or paracrine growth stimulatory loops ( Fig. 31.1-1). For example, overexpression of the EGFR encoded by the ERBB1 gene is more common in
NSCLC than SCLC and may be related to tumor stage and differentiation. Coexpression of EGFR and their ligands, especially transforming growth factor-a (TGF-a),
by lung cancer cells indicates the presence of an autocrine (self-stimulatory) growth factor loop. Overexpression of EGFR occurred in 70% of NSCLCs, and
overexpression of both EGFR and TGF-a occurred in 38%. 6 Clinically, the presence of this loop had no significant impact on overall survival in early-stage NSCLCs
and thus seems to play a role in lung tumor formation rather than tumor progression. 6 ERBB2 (HER2/neu) is highly expressed in more than one-third of NSCLCs,
especially adenocarcinomas. Its expression correlates with a shorter survival in lung adenocarcinomas and may also be a marker for intrinsic multidrug resistance in
NSCLC cell lines. 7 KIT and its ligand, stem cell factor (SCF), are both preferentially expressed in many SCLCs. Activation of this putative autocrine loop may provide a
growth advantage, or it may mediate chemoattraction. The SCF/KIT signal transduction pathway has been shown to be associated with Lck, a src-related tyrosine
kinase.8 MET and its ligand, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), are involved in fetal lung development. Coexpression of this putative loop is observed in most NSCLCs,
and high HGF levels were associated with a poor outcome in resectable NSCLC patients. 9 There are several clinical applications of these growth factor receptor
abnormalities that have occurred in other cancers, which also need to be explored as new treatments for lung cancer. These include treatment with humanized
monoclonal anti-HER-2/neu receptor antibody Herceptin alone or in combination with chemotherapy, treatment with monoclonal anti-EGF receptor antibody combined
with radiotherapy, and new drugs that would inhibit the tyrosine kinase activity of these receptors.

FIGURE 31.1-1. The common growth stimulatory and inhibitory cascades involved in lung cancer cells. A single circle denotes growth stimulatory molecules, and
multiple circles denote activation caused by some tumor-acquired abnormality. A box denotes growth inhibitory molecules, whereas their inactivation is indicated by a
cross within the box, again acquired (for example) by mutation in the tumor. Double arrows indicate transcriptional activation of target genes that regulate cell growth.
cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CDK4, cyclin-dependent kinase-4; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; ERK, extracellular regulated kinase; GRP,
gastrin-releasing peptide; HGF, hepatocyte growth factor; NSCLC, non–small cell lung carcinoma; RB, retinoblastoma protein; SCF, stem cell factor; SCLC, small cell
lung carcinoma; TGF-a, transforming growth factor-a.

Apart from protooncogene products, other growth stimulatory loops are found in lung cancer. The best known is that governed by gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) and
other bombesin-like peptides, together with their receptors, which participates in lung development and repair as well as promoting SCLC growth via an autocrine
loop. This loop represents a future therapeutic target because a clinical trial of an anti-GRP monoclonal antibody showed some antitumor activity in patients with
previously treated SCLC. 10
Because downstream effectors are needed to transduce incoming growth factor/receptor signals to the nucleus, it is not surprising that cytoplasmic signal transduction
cascades are also implicated in carcinogenesis. For instance, the receptor tyrosine kinases initially signal the guanosine triphosphate–binding RAS protein. The RAS
gene family (KRAS, HRAS, and NRAS) can be activated by point mutations at codons 12, 13, or 61, and one member of this family is mutated in approximately 20% to
30% of NSCLC (particularly adenocarcinomas) but probably never in SCLC. 11KRAS accounts for 90% of the RAS mutations in lung adenocarcinomas, with
approximately 85% of the KRAS mutations affecting codon 12. Characteristically, approximately 70% of KRAS mutation are G to T transversions, with the substitution
of the normal glycine (GGT) with either cysteine (TGT) or valine (GTT). Similar G to T transversions also affect the P53 gene in lung cancer and represent the type of
DNA damage expected from bulky DNA adducts caused by the polycyclic hydrocarbons and nitrosamines in tobacco smoke. Further evidence for a causative role for
tobacco smoke is the correlation of KRAS mutations with cigarette consumption. The presence of KRAS mutations portends a poor prognosis in both early- and
late-stage NSCLCs,12 although the data conflict. 13 Nonetheless, a metaanalysis of eight studies of 217 (of 881) NSCLC patients positive for KRAS mutations
suggested a negative prognostic role. 14 A prospective study has shown that neither chemosensitivity or survival correlated with KRAS mutation in advanced lung
adenocarcinomas.15 New drugs, farnesyltransferase inhibitors, were developed to specifically kill or inhibit the growth of tumor cells with RAS mutations. However,
these drugs appear to be active against tumors with and without RAS mutations and are coming into clinical trials against lung cancer.
A direct downstream effector of RAS is the RAF1 protooncogene product. Unexpectedly, the experimental growth arrest of SCLC by activated RAF1 suggests that it
has more of a TSG function. 16 Although one copy of RAF1 is frequently lost; however, mutations in the RAF1 gene have not been detected in human lung cancers.
Molecules downstream of RAF1 in the signal transduction pathway, such as MEKK, MEK, and mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular-regulated kinase
(MAPK/ERK), may also be involved occasionally in lung carcinogenesis. 3 The PPP2R1B gene, encoding the beta isoform of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), which
regulates the RAS/MAPK cascade, is also infrequently mutated in lung cancers. 17
Ultimately, signal transduction cascades result in the activation of nuclear protooncogene products such as those encoded by the myc family genes (MYC, MYCN,
MYCL). MYC, when heterodimerized with a protein called MAX, functions as a transcription factor, necessary for normal cell-cycle progression, differentiation, and
programmed cell death. MYC is most frequently activated via gene amplification or transcriptional dysregulation in both SCLC and NSCLC, whereas abnormalities of

MYCN and MYCL generally occur in SCLC. Indeed, MYCL was originally isolated from a SCLC cell line. The myc family gene amplification has been differentially
observed in the major lung cancer subtypes. In SCLC, one member of the MYC family was amplified in 18% of tumors and 31% of cell lines, compared to 8% of
NSCLC tumors and 20% of cell lines, respectively. 11 Amplification appears more frequent in patients previously treated with chemotherapy, the “variant” subtype of
SCLC, and its presence correlates with adverse survival. In terms of therapy, all- trans-retinoic acid (RA) treatment inhibited the in vitro growth of a SCLC cell line
overexpressing MYC, a process associated with increased neuroendocrine differentiation and increased MYCL and decreased MYC expression.18 Lastly, there also
have been reports of MYCL amplification with rearrangement in which MYCL fuses to the RLF gene causing a chimeric protein. 19
Occasional reports have implicated other oncogenes, such as ERBA, MYB, JUN, and FOS in lung cancer, but data are relatively few.

TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENES AND GROWTH SUPPRESSION
p53 PATHWAY
p53 (or TP53) maintains genomic integrity in the face of cellular stress from DNA damage (for example caused by g- and UV irradiation, carcinogens, or
chemotherapy). It functions as a transcription factor to activate the expression of genes that control cell-cycle checkpoints (e.g., p21WAF1/CIP1), apoptosis (BAX), DNA
repair (GADD45), and angiogenesis (thrombospondin). The p53 gene is the most frequently mutated TSG in human malignancies, and mutations affect approximately
90% of SCLCs and 50% of NSCLCs.20,21 Most mutations occur in the evolutionarily conserved p53 exons 5 to 8. In NSCLCs, p53 alterations occurred more frequently
in squamous cell (51.2%) and large cell (53.7%) carcinomas than adenocarcinomas (38.8%). 21p53 mutations correlate with cigarette smoking and most are of the type
of G to T transversions expected from tobacco smoke carcinogens. More evidence linking smoking damage with p53 mutations is the finding that a major cigarette
smoke carcinogen, benzo(a)pyrene, selectively forms adducts at the p53 mutational hot spots.22 The types of p53 mutations are varied and include missense,
nonsense, and splicing abnormalities as well as larger deletions. Missense mutations (the most common type of mutation) often prolong the half-life of the p53 protein
to several hours, leading to increased levels detectable by immunohistochemistry and thus the use of immunohistochemistry as a surrogate assay for p53 mutation.23
Whether the occurrence of p53 mutations (detected by either immunohistochemistry or molecular analysis) in a patient's tumor affect survival is controversial. 24
Approximately 15% of lung cancer patients develop antibodies to the p53 protein, raising the possibility that mutant p53 protein overexpression can lead to a humoral
immune response. Although p53 antibodies have been proposed as a marker for early diagnosis 25 and chemoresponsiveness, 26 the development of these antibodies
does not appear to improve prognosis in lung cancer. 27 There have been several promising gene therapy clinical trials with objective response rates of approximately
10% to 15% in which lung cancers are treated by intratumoral injection [endobronchially, or by computed tomography (CT)–guided needle injection] with a normal
(wild-type) p53 gene using retroviral 28 or adenoviral vectors. 29 These local injections are now being combined with chemo- and radiotherapy to test if gene therapy
increases sensitivity to conventional treatments. Also, systemic methods (such as with lipid vesicles) of delivering p53 gene therapy to disseminated tumors are being
developed. In another approach, clinical trials are being conducted to immunize patients against either mutant p53 or RAS proteins occurring in patients' tumors in
attempts to generate a tumor-specific cytotoxic T-cell response.
p53 functions in a biochemical pathway; thus it is reasonable to consider that other components of this pathway may be mutated in lung tumors that are wild-type for
p53. One of the upstream components is the kinase that phosphorylates p53 encoded by the ataxia telangiectasia ( ATM) gene. However, this gene has not yet been
found to be mutated in lung cancer. Other components are the MDM2 and p14ARF genes (see p16INK4A, later in this chapter), which regulate the levels of p53 protein,
but so far they have not been implicated in lung cancer. Two proteins homologous to p53—p51 and p73—have been discovered, leading to the hypothesis that they
may be mutated in p53 wild-type tumors. However, they are only infrequently, if ever, mutated in lung cancers. Finally, the Li-Fraumeni syndrome of inherited
susceptibility to cancer determined by an inherited germline mutation of p53 may also lead to increased susceptibility to lung cancer in adults in these pedigrees.
THE p16INK4A–CYCLIN D1–CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE-4–RETINOBLASTOMA PROTEIN PATHWAY
p16 INK4A
The p16INK4A–cyclin D1–cyclin-dependent kinase-4 (CDK4)–retinoblastoma (RB) protein pathway is a key cell-cycle regulator at the G 1/S phase transition, and one of
the components of this pathway is abnormal in the majority of lung cancers. The activation of CDKs by cyclins eventually leads to the phosphorylation (inactivation) of
the growth-suppressive RB protein (see Fig. 31.1-1). As p16INK4A is an inhibitor of CDKs, especially CDK4 or CDK6 (which phosphorylate and keep RB in an “inactive”
state), its normal role is to positively regulate RB's growth-controlling function by keeping RB unphosphorylated. However, if p16 INK4A is inactivated by mutation, RB
remains chronically phosphorylated and thus cannot function to regulate growth (see Fig. 31.1-1).
The p16INK4A (also called CDKN2) gene locus on chromosome 9p21 is frequently abnormal in human malignancies. In lung cancer, p16INK4A abnormalities are frequent
in NSCLC but rare in SCLC (in which, by contrast, RB is mutated in 90% of cases). Thus, these two major histologic lung cancer types have this pathway inactivated
by mutation of one or the other gene, and double mutants in the same tumor are very rare. A summary of 20 studies showed that p16INK4A point mutations in NSCLCs
were observed in only 14% of primary tumors. 3 However, homozygous deletions or aberrant promoter methylation can also down-regulate p16INK4A. Indeed, aberrant
methylation of p16INK4A may be the most frequent as well as an early preneoplastic event in the pathogenesis of squamous cell carcinomas. 4 Taken together, these
mechanisms ultimately result in absent p16 INK4A expression in approximately 40% of primary NSCLCs, 3 indicating that this may be the most common way to inactivate
the p16INK4A-cyclin D1-CDK4-RB pathway in NSCLC. Because of the frequency of the abnormalities, p16 INK4A is an attractive clinical trials candidate for replacement
gene therapy or induction of re-expression with antimethylation drug therapy.
Complicating matters is the discovery of an alternative reading frame at the p16INK4A locus, p14ARF, which encodes a protein that binds p53/MDM2 complex, leading to
p53 protein stabilization. If p14ARF is missing because of mutations in the p16 locus, p53 is less stable and its function diminished. It thus emerges that inactivation of
the p53 pathway may also be triggered by abnormalities of the p16INK4A gene locus. Another CDK inhibitor gene, p15INK4B is situated close to p16INK4A and can be
co-deleted with p16INK4A in NSCLC. However, it appears that the majority of lung cancer abnormalities focus on p16INK4A and not on p15INK4B.
Cyclin D1 and Cyclin-Dependent Kinase-4
Because cyclin D1/CDK4 complex inhibits RB activity by stimulating its phosphorylation, cyclin D1 or CDK4 overexpression is an alternative way to disrupt this
pathway. Immunohistochemically, cyclin D1 is overexpressed in 12% to 47% of primary NSCLCs and, in some cases, cyclin D1 overexpression is associated with a
poor prognosis.30 How this overexpression occurs in lung cancer is unknown.
Retinoblastoma Protein
The RB gene (RB), located at chromosomal region 13q14, encodes a growth-suppressive nuclear phosphoprotein. When active (i.e., hypophosphorylated), RB binds
and inactivates proteins such as transcription factor E2F-1, which is essential for G 1/S transition of the cell cycle (see Fig. 31.1-1). RB mutations (truncation by
deletion, nonsense mutation, or splicing abnormalities), together with loss of the wild-type RB allele, have been demonstrated in lung cancers, particularly SCLC. The
RB protein is absent or structurally abnormal in more than 90% of SCLCs and 15% to 30% of NSCLCs. 31 Absent RB expression may be associated with poor
prognosis in NSCLCs, although this is not a consistent finding. The relatively low frequency of RB abnormalities in NSCLC is consistent with the frequent disruption of
the p16INK4A-cyclin D1-CDK4-RB pathway in these histologic types. Essentially, lung cancers can be characterized as having either RB mutation (mostly SCLC) or
p16INK4A inactivation (mostly NSCLC). Gene therapy with replacement of RB function has been considered, but because of the large size of the RB coding region and
the necessity for systemic delivery in, for example, typical widely metastatic SCLCs, such therapy has not been actively pursued. Mutations of two other RB related
genes, p107 and RB2/p130, also have been implicated in lung cancer. In the case of RB2, loss of protein expression and restoration of growth control by genetically
re-introducing a normal copy of RB2 have been demonstrated. 32 Finally, retinoblastoma patients or their relatives who carry a mutant RB in the germline have an
excess risk of developing small cell lung cancer if they survive into adult life. 33
PTEN, FHIT, RAR-b, PUTATIVE 3P TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENES, AND OTHER TUMOR AND GROWTH-SUPPRESSIVE GENE SITES IN LUNG CANCER
PATHOGENESIS
Besides the p53, p16INK4A, RB, and loci, cytogenetic and allelotyping studies show nonrandom, hemiallelic loss at many other chromosome regions in lung cancer.
Such tumor-specific somatically acquired loss of heterozygosity is a hallmark feature of traditional TSG inactivation. In other words, the consistent identification of

multiple sites of loss of heterozygosity at various chromosomal regions suggests the existence of underlying TSGs in these regions. Usually the remaining allele is
silenced by point or small mutations, epigenetic hypermethylation of the promoter region or, less frequently, by a larger deletion. These sites of allele loss have been
defined at more than 30 regions dispersed on 21 different chromosomal arms, although the molecular targets of most of these sites is not known. 34 Although several
of these chromosomal arms contain known TSGs, including VHL (3p25), APC (5q21), WT1 (11p13), DCC (18q21), and NF2 (22q12), these genes are not known to be
mutated in lung cancer. The TSG PTEN, which encodes a phosphatase, is located at chromosome region 10q23, another common area of allele loss in lung cancer.
However, PTEN is mutated in only a subset of lung cancers. 35 Frequent loss (60% to 80%) of several 4p and 4q regions were found in thoracic malignancies
(particularly SCLC and mesotheliomas); however, the genes involved are not yet known. 36
Among these chromosomal locations, chromosome 3p allele loss (occurring at more than four different 3p regions) stands out as a very frequent and early event in
lung cancer pathogenesis. 3p loss occurs in more than 90% of SCLCs and more than 80% of NSCLCs. In addition, it appears to be the earliest genetic change found
in lung cancer development, occurring at great frequency in patches of normal epithelium accompanying lung cancer or in smokers, as well as in sites of hyperplasia,
dysplasia, and carcinoma in situ of respiratory epithelium (see Molecular Changes in Preneoplasia , later in this chapter). Multiple distinct 3p regions have been
identified by allelotyping, including 3p25-26, 3p21.3-22, 3p14, and 3p12. Furthermore, homozygous deletions are found in several lung cancer cell lines (at several
3p21.3 sites, as well as at 3p12 and 3p14.2). Several candidate TSGs have been identified in an approximately 600-kilobase 3p21.3 region homozygously deleted in
three SCLCs, and another 800-kilobase deletion region at 3p21 also has been described. 37,38 The FHIT (fragile histidine triad) gene is found in the 3p14.2
homozygous deletion region. Forty percent to 80% of lung cancer cells express abnormal FHIT messenger RNA transcripts but paradoxically almost always also
express wild-type FHIT transcripts.39 Regardless of these molecular complexities, the FHIT protein is absent in many lung cancers, particularly in the squamous cell
type (87%) compared to adenocarcinoma (57%) and may also be lost in some preneoplastic lesions. The loss of FHIT protein expression is also strongly associated
with smoking.40,41 Functionally, FHIT may be involved in the regulation of apoptosis and in cell-cycle control. 42 Transfection of wild-type FHIT into lung cancers
induces apoptosis and blocks tumor formation in vivo in mouse models.43,44 Because of the occurrence of FHIT abnormalities early in lung cancer pathogenesis (e.g.,
in preneoplastic stages), it is possible to consider delivering FHIT gene therapy to airways containing multiple preneoplastic lesions by using aerosols.
TGF-b1 is a potent inhibitor of proliferation of most epithelial and hematopoietic cells, and its signal is mediated through TGF-b receptors and subsequently SMAD
proteins. In SCLC cells, down-regulation of the type II receptor (TGFb-RII) located in chromosome region 3p, has been shown to correlate with the resistance to
growth inhibition by TGF-b1. 45 However, the TGFb-RII or SMAD family genes are rarely mutated in lung cancer.
There is considerable evidence of dysfunction of retinoic acid receptor beta (RAR-b), located in chromosome region 3p24, in lung cancers, leading to resistance of
lung cancer cells to retinoids and making it an excellent candidate 3p TSG. 46 Although initial studies did not find RAR-b mutations, more recent studies have shown
loss of expression of RAR-b protein in approximately 50% of clinically overt lung cancers. 47 It is quite likely that this loss of expression without genomic changes
occurs because of methylation of the promoter region. Because of the widespread testing of retinoids as chemoprevention agents, it will be important to characterize
the timing of loss of RAR-b function in lung cancer preneoplasia. It is possible that loss of expression of RAR-b may occur at such an early stage that
chemoprevention with retinoids cannot succeed.

OTHER BIOLOGIC ABNORMALITIES FOR LUNG CANCER DEVELOPMENT
TELOMERASE ACTIVITY
During normal cell division, telomere shortening leads to cell senescence and thus governs normal cell “mortality.” Telomeres are maintained in normal stem cells by
the enzyme telomerase. However, with abnormal expression of the enzyme in, for example, tumors, telomerase has been implicated in contributing to human cell
immortalization and cancer cell pathogenesis. Telomerase is a ribonucleocomplex, and ectopic expression in tumors of its catalytic subunit, human telomerase
reverse transcriptase, appears critical for the cellular immortalization typical of cancer cells. Using the highly sensitive telomere replication amplification protocol
assay, approximately 100% of SCLCs and 80% to 85% of NSCLCs were demonstrated to express high levels of telomerase activity. High telomerase activity was
associated with increased cell proliferation rates and advanced stage in NSCLCs. 48 Further tests must be performed to conclusively demonstrate that true
telomerase-negative NSCLCs exist. If these telomerase-negative tumors truly exist, debulking therapy with surgery and radiotherapy should be considered, even for
metastatic disease. It would be predicted that eventually such tumors would “senesce” and stop growing when their telomeres got too short. Telomerase activity and
expression of its RNA component are also dysregulated in carcinoma in situ lesions associated with lung cancer, indicating that the timing of telomerase activation for
lung cancer development can occur in preneoplasia. 49 Because of the nearly ubiquitous expression of telomerase in human tumors, including lung cancer, there is
much interest in developing anti-telomerase drugs as new therapeutics.
APOPTOSIS
Unlike normal cells, tumors have acquired the ability to escape from programmed cell death (apoptosis), which usually occurs under adverse conditions such as DNA
damage. In addition to p53, other molecules of the complex apoptotic signaling pathways are abnormal in lung cancer cells. For example, the anti-apoptotic gene,
BCL2, can be abnormally overexpressed in SCLCs (75% to 95%) and some NSCLCs (25% to 35% of squamous cell carcinoma and an approximately 10% of
adenocarcinoma). Because of the potent role BCL2 plays in suppressing apoptosis and thus also in inhibiting responses to chemotherapy and radiotherapy, there is
considerable ongoing effort to develop antisense BCL2 therapeutics, which are entering clinical trials. Also, extracellular matrix proteins may protect SCLC against
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis via b 1 integrin–stimulated tyrosine kinase activation. 50 In addition, Fas (CD95) and its ligand (FasL), which play key roles in the
initiation of one apoptotic pathway, also have been implicated in lung cancer. 51 In this case, lung cancers express Fas ligand but not the receptor, whereas T cells
express the receptor. In this way, lung cancers could cause the clonal deletion of immune T cells that were directed against lung cancer antigens and thus provide a
mechanism for escape from immune surveillance.
METASTASIS AND ANGIOGENESIS
Many potential factors influencing metastasis from primary lung cancers have been studied, including cell adhesion molecules. For instance, reduced E-cadherin
expression, which can occur by promoter hypermethylation, was associated with tumor dedifferentiation, increased lymph node metastasis, and poor survival in
NSCLC patients. 52 Reduced a3 integrin expression correlated with a poor prognosis of patients with lung adenocarcinoma. 53 Specific CD44 isoforms may be
associated with lung cancer metastasis. Meanwhile, matrix metalloproteinases inducing stromal degradation may also be involved in lung cancer invasion: Gelatinase
A expression was observed in approximately 50% of SCLCs and 65% of NSCLCs, and stromelysin-3 overexpression was detected in stromal elements of primary
NSCLCs. Because of this expression, several ongoing clinical trials of matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors in the treatment of lung cancer are ongoing. Finally, multiple
other as yet unidentified genes may also be involved in lung tumor progression and metastases, as evidenced by the development of additional allelic losses (at 2q,
9p, 18q, and 22q) in brain metastases compared to the primary NSCLCs in the same patients. 54
Tumor angiogenesis is necessary for a tumor mass to grow beyond a few millimeters in size. Currently, angiogenesis is thought to be regulated by the balance of
inducers and inhibitors that are released by both tumor cells and host cells. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and basic fibroblast growth factor are two major
angiogenesis inducers produced by human lung cancers. 55 Angiogenic CXC chemokines, such as interleukin-8, also have been implicated in lung cancer. Mutations
in p53 lead to decreased expression of thrombospondin, a negative regulator of angiogenesis. Overall it is thought that lung cancers produce factors that stimulate
angiogenesis and stop producing others that would inhibit this process. Thus, tumor angiogenesis has become a major new therapeutic target for lung cancer. Clinical
trials with humanized recombinant anti-VEGF monoclonal antibody combined with chemotherapy in NSCLC are already ongoing. In addition, several new small
molecules that inhibit the tyrosine kinase activity of the VEGF receptor(s) are entering clinical trials as new drugs.
CARCINOGENS IN TOBACCO SMOKE AND GENETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY TO LUNG CANCER (GENETIC EPIDEMIOLOGY)
The major cause of lung cancer, of course, comes from smoking, and tobacco smoke contains many substances, including carcinogens, co-carcinogens, and tumor
promoters. Among them, 20 carcinogens convincingly cause lung tumors in laboratory animals or humans and are likely to be involved in lung cancer induction. 56 The
carcinogenic effects of tobacco smoke in the lung involve the induction of carcinogen-activating and inactivating enzymes, as well as covalent DNA adduct formation,
which may cause DNA misreplication and mutation. DNA adducts have been identified in the bronchial tissue of lung cancer patients, and adduct levels correlate with
the amount of tobacco smoke exposure. Of great importance is preventing children from starting to smoke. In this regard, it was found that, in former smokers, age at
smoking initiation was inversely associated with DNA adduct levels. 57 Thus, after controlling for the amount of smoking, the earlier one started smoking, the worse the
long-term damage. In addition, for reasons that are not yet clear, it appears that women are more susceptible to developing lung cancer from cigarette smoking than
men.58 Of the three major classes of carcinogens in tobacco smoke (polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, such as benzo[a]pyrene; nitrosamines; and aromatic amines),

much interest focuses on the nitrosamines, especially 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK), partly because it induces tumors of the lung—primarily
adenomas and adenocarcinomas—independent of the route of administration in mice. 56
The finding that not every heavy smoker develops lung cancer has led to the concept of interindividual variation and the hypothesis that individuals may exhibit
genetic polymorphisms in carcinogen-metabolizing pathways that determine individual lung cancer risk. Clearly, such genetic susceptibility operates in close
interaction with smoking and other external carcinogenic factors (“gene-environment” interaction, with smoking being the primary environment factor). Among genes
for carcinogen-metabolizing enzymes, polymorphisms in the cytochrome P-450 genes CYP1A1, CYP2D6, CYP2E1 and in mu-class glutathione S-transferase
(GSTM1) have received the most attention. Although studies have suggested that there may be a modest association of GSTM1 null polymorphism with lung cancer, 59
studying single candidate genes may not be adequate to predict lung cancer risk due to complexity of carcinogen metabolism and gene-gene and gene-environment
interactions.56 In addition to carcinogens, it also appears that persons may inherit different susceptibility to become addicted to nicotine, for example, through
polymorphisms in one of the dopamine receptors. Overall, molecular epidemiology, aided by DNA microarray technology together with the Human Genome Project,
should in the near future help to identify individuals at highest risk of developing lung cancer. Such information will be of great value in new lung cancer screening
trials (for example with spiral CT scans) and in chemoprevention trials.
MOLECULAR CHANGES IN PRENEOPLASIA
Before clinically recognizable lung cancer develops, a series of morphologically distinct changes (hyperplasia, metaplasia, dysplasia, and carcinoma in situ) can be
observed in the bronchial epithelium of smokers. It is felt that dysplasia and carcinoma in situ represent true preneoplastic (precancerous) changes. These sequential
changes found with squamous cell cancers arising from central bronchi have long been recognized, whereas other changes in peripheral bronchioles and alveoli
(adeno- and large cell cancers), such as adenomatous and alveolar hyperplasia, are more recently described.
It is now clear that preneoplastic cells contain several genetic abnormalities identical to some of the abnormalities found in overt lung cancer cells.
Immunohistochemical analysis has confirmed abnormal expression of protooncogenes (cyclin D1) and TSGs (p53) in these lesions. 60 Allelotyping of precisely
microdissected, preneoplastic foci of cells shows that 3p allele loss is currently the earliest known change, suggesting that one or more 3p TSGs may act as
“gatekeepers” for lung cancer pathogenesis. This loss is followed by 9p allele loss, 8p allele loss, and 17p allele loss (and p53 mutation) (Fig. 31.1-2).61 Even the
histologically normal bronchial epithelium adjacent to cancers has been shown to have genetic losses. Similarly, atypical alveolar hyperplasia, the potential precursor
lesion of adenocarcinomas, also harbors KRAS mutations.62 These observations are also consistent with the multistep model of carcinogenesis and a “field
cancerization” process, whereby the whole tissue region is repeatedly exposed to carcinogenic damage (tobacco smoke) and is at risk for developing multiple
separate foci of neoplasia. Although all types of lung cancers have associated molecular abnormalities in their normal and preneoplastic lung epithelium, small cell
lung cancer patients in particular appear to have multiple genetic alterations occurring in their histologically normal-appearing respiratory epithelium. Molecular
changes have been found not only in the lungs of patients with lung cancer but also in the lungs of current and former smokers without lung cancer. 63,64 These
molecular alterations are thus important targets for use in the early detection of lung cancer and for use as surrogate biomarkers in following the efficacy of lung
cancer chemoprevention. In this regard, it appears that the smoke-damaged lung has thousands of multiple clonal or subclonal patches of approximately 90,000 cells
each in the respiratory epithelium containing clones of cells with 3p and other allele loss abnormalities. 65

FIGURE 31.1-2. Timing of genetic changes found in preneoplastic lesions in respiratory epithelium, best studied to date in squamous cell lung carcinoma. Note that
not every change is necessary, and the sequence may not always be the same. EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; RAR-b, retinoic acid receptor beta.

MOLECULAR TOOLS IN THE LUNG CANCER CLINIC
Our understanding of the molecular genetic changes in lung cancer pathogenesis is advancing rapidly. Some abnormalities also occur in other human cancers,
whereas others appear more specific for lung cancer. Where their biochemical function is known, the proteins rendered abnormal appear to fall into several growth
regulatory pathways. Thus, the “wiring” diagram of the lung cancer cell is becoming clear. There is a substantial effort to translate this current scientific knowledge of
these abnormalities from the bench to the bedside. These approaches fall into four general categories:
1. Identification of persons at highest risk of developing lung cancer to enable chemoprevention and intensified smoking cessation efforts. In this regards, with
improved methods of molecular identification of true precancerous lesions, our paradigm will become “treatment” of precancerous lesions rather than
“chemoprevention.” Obviously, because this treatment would occur in individuals without clinically evident cancer, the treatments must have low toxicity and high
risk-benefit ratios.
2. Early detection tools to identify primary and recurrent disease (e.g., polymerase chain reaction–based molecular methods for testing body fluids). 5,66 Again, such
“early detection” of invasive but clinically occult disease would require careful analysis of risk-benefit ratios. Because only one out of ten cigarette smokers
eventually develops lung cancer, the identification of persons with a genetic susceptibility to lung cancer should allow targeting and intensification of smoking
cessation, early detection, and chemoprevention efforts. In this regard, the encouraging new information on spiral CT scanning for the early detection of lung
cancer67 should be greatly targeted and enhanced by combining radiologic screening with identification of genetic epidemiology markers and acquired
respiratory genetic alterations to identify the individuals at highest risk.
3. Identification of prognostic biomarkers 68 that would also include markers that would predict the response to various therapies such as chemo- and radiotherapy.
4. The designing of new cancer-specific therapies based on knowledge of genetic abnormalities. This includes replacing mutant TSGs; developing drugs targeted
against activated protooncogenes; interfering with autocrine or paracrine loops; and inhibiting angiogenesis, metastasis, and apoptotic pathways in cancer cells.
Although new therapies may be dramatically effective, it is probably more reasonable to assume that they would complement rather than replace existing
therapies.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Testa JR, Liu Z, Feder M, et al. Advances in the analysis of chromosome alterations in human lung carcinomas. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1997;95:20.
2. Lengauer C, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Genetic instabilities in human cancers. Nature 1998;396:643.
3. Sekido Y, Fong KM, Minna JD. Progress in understanding the molecular pathogenesis of human lung cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta 1998;1378:F21.
4. Belinsky SA, Nikula KJ, Palmisano WA, et al. Aberrant methylation of p16(INK4a) is an early event in lung cancer and a potential biomarker for early diagnosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1998;95:11891.
5. Esteller M, Sanchez-Cespedes M, Rosell R, et al. Detection of aberrant promoter hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes in serum DNA from nonsmall cell lung cancer patients. Cancer
Res 1999;59:67.
6. Rusch V, Klimstra D, Venkatraman E, et al. Overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor and its ligand transforming growth factor alpha is frequent in resectable nonsmall cell lung
cancer but does not predict tumor progression. Clin Cancer Res 1997; 3:515.
7. Tsai CM, Chang KT, Wu LH, et al. Correlations between intrinsic chemoresistance and HER-2/neu gene expression, p53 gene mutations, and cell proliferation characteristics in nonsmall cell
lung cancer cell lines. Cancer Res 1996;56:206.
8. Krystal GW, DeBerry CS, Linnekin D, Litz J. Lck associates with and is activated by Kit in a small cell lung cancer cell line: inhibition of SCF-mediated growth by the Src family kinase inhibitor
PP1. Cancer Res 1998;58:4660.
9. Siegfried JM, Weissfeld LA, Singh-Kaw P, et al. Association of immunoreactive hepatocyte growth factor with poor survival in resectable nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer Res 1997;57:433.
10. Kelley MJ, Linnoila RI, Avis IL, et al. Antitumor activity of a monoclonal antibody directed against gastrin-releasing peptide in patients with small cell lung cancer. Chest 1997;112:256.

11. Richardson GE, Johnson BE. The biology of lung cancer. Semin Oncol 1993;20:105.
12. Rosell R, Li S, Skacel Z, et al. Prognostic impact of mutated K- ras gene in surgically resected nonsmall cell lung cancer patients. Oncogene 1993;8:2407.
13. Graziano SL, Gamble GP, Newman NB, et al. Prognostic significance of K- ras codon 12 mutations in patients with resected stage I and II non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:668.
14. Huncharek M, Muscat J, Geschwind JF. K-ras oncogene mutation as a prognostic marker in nonsmall cell lung cancer: a combined analysis of 881 cases. Carcinogenesis 1999; 20:1507.
15. Rodenhuis S, Boerrigter L, Top B, et al. Mutational activation of the K- ras oncogene and the effect of chemotherapy in advanced adenocarcinoma of the lung: a prospective study. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:285.
16. Ravi RK, Weber E, McMahon M, et al. Activated Raf-1 causes growth arrest in human small cell lung cancer cells. J Clin Invest 1998;101:153.
17. Wang SS, Esplin ED, Li JL, et al. Alterations of the PPP2R1B gene in human lung and colon cancer. Science 1998;282:284.
18. Ou X, Campau S, Slusher R, et al. Mechanism of all- trans-retinoic acidmediated L-myc gene regulation in small cell lung cancer. Oncogene 1996;13:1893.
19. Makela TP, Hellsten E, Vesa J, et al. The rearranged L- myc fusion gene (RLF) encodes a Zn-15 related zinc finger protein. Oncogene 1995;11:2699.
20. Bennett WP, Hussain SP, Vahakangas KH, et al. Molecular epidemiology of human cancer risk: gene-environment interactions and p53 mutation spectrum in human lung cancer. J Pathol
1999;187:8.
21. Tammemagi MC, McLaughlin JR, Bull SB. Meta-analyses of p53 tumor suppressor gene alterations and clinicopathological features in resected lung cancers. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers
Prev 1999;8:625.
22. Denissenko MF, Pao A, Tang M, Pfeifer GP. Preferential formation of benzo[ a]pyrene adducts at lung cancer mutational hotspots in P53. Science 1996;274:430.
23. Casey G, Lopez ME, Ramos JC, et al. DNA sequence analysis of exons 2 through 11 and immunohistochemical staining are required to detect all known p53 alterations in human malignancies.
Oncogene 1996;13:1971.
24. Graziano SL. Nonsmall cell lung cancer: clinical value of new biological predictors. Lung Cancer 1997;17:S37.
25. Lubin R, Zalcman G, Bouchet L, et al. Serum p53 antibodies as early markers of lung cancer. Nature Med 1995;1:701.
26. Zalcman G, Schlichtholz B, Tredaniel J, et al. Monitoring of p53 autoantibodies in lung cancer during therapy: relationship to response to treatment. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:1359.
27. Mitsudomi T, Suzuki S, Yatabe Y, et al. Clinical implications of p53 autoantibodies in the sera of patients with non-small-cell lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1563.
28. Roth JA, Nguyen D, Lawrence DD, et al. Retrovirus-mediated wild-type p53 gene transfer to tumors of patients with lung cancer. Nature Med 1996;2:985.
29. Swisher SG, Roth JA, Nemunaitis J, et al. Adenovirus-mediated p53 gene transfer in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:763.
30. Mishina T, Dosaka-Akita H, Kinoshita I, et al. Cyclin D1 expression in non-small-cell lung cancers: its association with altered p53 expression, cell proliferation and clinical outcome. Brit J
Cancer 1999;80:1289.
31. Reissmann PT, Koga H, Takahashi R, et al. Inactivation of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene in non-small-cell lung cancer. Oncogene 1993;8:1913.
32. Claudio P, Howard C, Pacilio C, et al. Mutations in the retinoblastoma-related gene RB2/p130 in lung tumors and suppression of tumor growth in vivo by retroviral-mediate gene transfer.
2000;60:372.
33. Sanders BM, Jay M, Draper GJ, Roberts EM. Non-ocular cancer in relatives of retinoblastoma patients. Br J Cancer 1989;60:358.
34. Kohno T, Yokota J. How many tumor suppressor genes are involved in human lung carcinogenesis? Carcinogenesis 1999;20:1403.
35. Forgacs E, Biesterveld EJ, Sekido Y, et al. Mutation analysis of the PTEN/MMAC1 gene in lung cancer. Oncogene 1998;17:1557.
36. Shivapurkar N, Virmani AK, Wistuba II, et al. Deletions of chromosome 4 at multiple sites are frequent in malignant mesothelioma and small cell lung carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:17.
37. Sekido Y, Bader S, Latif F, et al. Human semaphorins A(V) and IV reside in the 3p21.3 small cell lung cancer deletion region and demonstrate distinct expression patterns. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 1996;93:4120.
38. Wei MH, Latif F, Bader S, et al. Construction of a 600-kilobase cosmid clone contig and generation of a transcriptional map surrounding the lung cancer tumor suppressor gene ( TSG) locus on
human chromosome 3p21.3: progress toward the isolation of a lung cancer TSG. Cancer Res 1996;56:1487.
39. Fong KM, Biesterveld EJ, Virmani A, et al. FHIT and FRA3B 3p14.2 allele loss are common in lung cancer and preneoplastic bronchial lesions and are associated with cancer-related FHIT
cDNA splicing aberrations. Cancer Res 1997;57:2256.
40. Sozzi G, Pastorino U, Moiraghi L, et al. Loss of FHIT function in lung cancer and preinvasive bronchial lesions. Cancer Res 1998;58:5032.
41. Geradts J, Fong K, Zimmerman P, Minna J. Loss of Fhit expression in nonsmall cell lung cancer: correlation with other molecular genetic abnormalities and clinico-pathologic features. Br J
Cancer 2000;82:1191.
42. Sard L, Accornero P, Tornielli S, et al. The tumor-suppressor gene FHIT is involved in the regulation of apoptosis and in cell cycle control. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:8489.
43. Ji L, Fang B, Yen N, et al. Induction of apoptosis and inhibition of tumorigenicity and tumor growth by adenovirus vector-mediated fragile histidine triad ( FHIT) gene overexpression. Cancer Res
1999;59:3333.
44. Siprashvili Z, Sozzi G, Barnes LD, et al. Replacement of Fhit in cancer cells suppresses tumorigenicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:13771.
45. Norgaard P, Spang-Thomsen M, Poulsen HS. Expression and autoregulation of transforming growth factor b receptor mRNA in small-cell lung cancer cell lines. Br J Cancer 1996;73:1037.
46. Geradts J, Chen JY, Russell EK, et al. Human lung cancer cell lines exhibit resistance to retinoic acid treatment. Cell Growth Differ 1993;4:799.
47. Picard E, Seguin C, Monhoven N, et al. Expression of retinoid receptor genes and proteins in non-small-cell lung cancer [see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1059.
48. Albanell J, Lonardo F, Rusch V, et al. High telomerase activity in primary lung cancers: association with increased cell proliferation rates and advanced pathologic stage. J Natl Cancer Inst
1997;89:1609.
49. Yashima K, Litzky LA, Kaiser L, et al. Telomerase expression in respiratory epithelium during the multistage pathogenesis of lung carcinomas. Cancer Res 1997;57:2373.
50. Sethi T, Rintoul RC, Moore SM, et al. Extracellular matrix proteins protect small cell lung cancer cells against apoptosis: a mechanism for small cell lung cancer growth and drug resistance in
vivo. Nature Med 1999;5:662.
51. Niehans GA, Brunner T, Frizelle SP, et al. Human lung carcinomas express Fas ligand. Cancer Res 1997;57:1007.
52. Sulzer MA, Leers MP, van Noord JA, Bollen EC, Theunissen PH. Reduced E-cadherin expression is associated with increased lymph node metastasis and unfavorable prognosis in nonsmall
cell lung cancer. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:1319.
53. Adachi M, Taki T, Huang C, et al. Reduced integrin alpha3 expression as a factor of poor prognosis of patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1060.
54. Shiseki M, Kohno T, Adachi J, et al. Comparative allotype of early and advanced stage nonsmall cell lung carcinomas. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1996;17:71.
55. Mattern J, Koomagi R, Volm M. Association of vascular endothelial growth factor expression with intratumoral microvessel density and tumour cell proliferation in human epidermoid lung
carcinoma. Br J Cancer 1996;73:931.
56. Hecht SS. Tobacco smoke carcinogens and lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1194.
57. Wiencke JK, Thurston SW, Kelsey KT, et al. Early age at smoking initiation and tobacco carcinogen DNA damage in the lung. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:614.
58. Zang EA, Wynder EL. Differences in lung cancer risk between men and women: examination of the evidence. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:183.
59. Spivack SD, Fasco MJ, Walker VE, Kaminsky LS. The molecular epidemiology of lung cancer. Crit Rev Toxicol 1997;27:319.
60. Lonardo F, Rusch V, Langenfeld J, Dmitrovsky E, Klimstra DS. Overexpression of cyclins D1 and E is frequent in bronchial preneoplasia and precedes squamous cell carcinoma development.
Cancer Res 1999;59:2470.
61. Wistuba II, Behrens C, Virmani AK, et al. Allelic losses at chromosome 8p21-23 are early and frequent events in the pathogenesis of lung cancer. Cancer Res 1999;59:1973.
62. Westra WH, Baas IO, Hruban RH, et al. K- ras oncogene activation in atypical alveolar hyperplasias of the human lung. Cancer Res 1996;56:2224.
63. Wistuba II, Lam S, Behrens C, et al. Molecular damage in the bronchial epithelium of current and former smokers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1366.
64. Wistuba II, Behrens C, Milchgrub S, et al. Sequential molecular abnormalities are involved in the multistage development of squamous cell lung carcinoma. Oncogene 1999; 18:643.
65. Park IW, Wistuba II, Maitra A, et al. Multiple clonal abnormalities in the bronchial epithelium of patients with lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1863.
66. Ahrendt SA, Chow JT, Xu LH, et al. Molecular detection of tumor cells in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from patients with early stage lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:332.
67. Henschke CI, McCauley DI, Yankelevitz DF, et al. Early Lung Cancer Action Project: overall design and findings from baseline screening [see comments]. Lancet 1999;354:99.
68. D'Amico TA, Massey M, Herndon JE II, Moore MB, Harpole DH Jr. A biologic risk model for stage I lung cancer: immunohistochemical analysis of 408 patients with the use of ten molecular
markers. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1999;117:736.

SECTION 31.2 Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 31.2
Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer
ROBERT J. GINSBERG
EVERETT E. VOKES
KENNETH ROSENZWEIG
Epidemiology
Incidence
Mortality
Lung Cancer Control
Smoking
Occupation
Diet
Evidence for a Genetic Predisposition
Applications of Advances in Lung Cancer Biology to Clinical Practice
Pathology
Histogenesis
Methods of Spread
Clinical Features
Diagnosis and Staging
History and Physical Examination
Sputum Cytology
Imaging Studies
Percutaneous Fine-Needle Aspiration
Bronchoscopy
Mediastinoscopy and Mediastinotomy
Thoracentesis
Thoracoscopy
Thoracotomy
Evaluation of Extent of Disease
Pretreatment Prognostic Factors
Early-stage (I, II, and Resectable Stage III) Disease
Advanced-Stage (Unresectable Stage III and IV) Disease
New Potential Prognostic Markers
Occult Disease
Lung Cancer Screening
Management
Chemoprevention
Overview of Invasive Lung Cancer Management: Treatment Modalities
Surgery
Radiotherapy
Chemotherapy
Biologic Therapy
Specifics of Lung Cancer Management
Localized “Resectable” (Stages I, II, and IIIA) Disease
“Unresectable” Stage IIIA and IIIB Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer
Stage IV Disease
Chapter References

EPIDEMIOLOGY
INCIDENCE
Lung cancer is among the most commonly occurring malignancies in the world and is one of the few that continues to show an increasing incidence. In the United
States, lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in men, and it surpassed breast cancer as the leading cause of cancer death in women in the latter part of
the 1980s.1 In the year 2000, there will be approximately 164,100 new cases and approximately 156,900 deaths from this disease ( Fig. 31.2-1).

FIGURE 31.2-1. The age-adjusted cancer death rates for selected sites in males (A) and females (B) in the United States from 1930 to 1996. It appears that lung
cancer deaths from smoking are leveling off in males but are continuing to rise in females. Data adjusted to the age distribution of the 1970 U.S. Census Population
(U.S. National Center for Health Statistics and U.S. Bureau of the Census).

Excluding this malignancy, most developed countries have shown declines in death rates from cancer in the last 20 years. During the same period in countries such
as the United States and Canada, the death rate from lung cancer increased more than threefold but, in the last 5 years, it has finally begun to decline. In developing
countries, the death rate from lung cancer continues to accelerate. These changes appear to be affected significantly by the observed difference in smoking habits
and cigarette tar levels in developed and developing countries. 2
The incidence of lung cancer now exceeds 70 per 100,000 men in the United States. As we enter the twenty-first century, it is expected that the altered smoking
habits of the nation's population during the last two decades and the decreased tar content of cigarettes consumed in the United States will lead to a further decline in
lung cancer incidence.
MORTALITY
In the United States, only 14% of patients who develop lung cancer survive 5 years. These mortality rates (>150,000/year) far exceed those of the acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome epidemic. However, this survival rate has only slightly increased in the last two decades, and it appears unlikely that marked

improvements will occur in the near future. With the anticipated decreased incidence, however, it is hoped that the lung cancer epidemic, at least in developed
countries, will abate and that the total number of deaths per year attributed to this cancer will decline even further.
LUNG CANCER CONTROL
With the solid base of scientific information linking cigarette smoking habits to the development of lung cancer, many countries have launched programs to decrease
tobacco use and educate the population. Included in these programs are legislative activity (e.g., increased taxes, smoke-free areas, banning tobacco
advertisements), educational activities through mass media and schools, and interventional approaches (e.g., smoking-cessation clinics) targeted to groups at the
highest risk for developing tobacco-related cancer. The greatest impact on decreased smoking habits appears to be the societal stigma directed at smokers. These
activities have reduced the percentage of the U.S. population who smoke from a high of approximately 40% to approximately 30%. However, this decline has now
leveled off. The only cohort that has demonstrated an increasing smoking habit in the United States is younger women. It is hoped, however, that with the societal
pressures and the educational programs in developed countries, the incidence of smoking will continue to decrease. It is also hoped that a similar trend will occur in
developing countries, where smoking activity continues to increase at present. 3
SMOKING
The epidemiologic data on smoking and lung cancer fulfill the following criteria for causal association: the consistency of results across studies, the strength of the
relation and its specificity, the correct temporal sequence between exposure and disease, and the coherence of the association as evidenced by a dose-response
relation.4
It has been estimated that 80% of lung cancer deaths among men (approximately 65,000 deaths per year) and 75% of lung cancer deaths among women
(approximately 27,000 deaths per year) are attributable to smoking. 5 Mattson et al.6 calculated that a 35-year-old man who smokes 25 or more cigarettes per day has
a 13% risk of dying of lung cancer before the age of 75 years, a 10% chance of dying of coronary heart disease, and a 28% chance of dying of smoking-related
disease.
There is clear evidence for a dose-response relation between smoking and lung cancer. The risk of lung cancer increases with the number of cigarettes smoked,
years of smoking duration, earlier age at onset of smoking, degree of inhalation, tar and nicotine content, the use of unfiltered cigarettes, and passive smoking, 4 and it
decreases in proportion to the number of years after smoking cessation. 7 These relationships to lung carcinogenesis are discussed in more detail in Chapter 11 and
are incontrovertible. 8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22 and 23,24,27
OCCUPATION
Increases in lung cancer risk accompany exposure to carcinogens, such as asbestos, 28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38 and 39 radon,40,41,42,43 and 44 bis(chloromethyl)ether,
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, chromium, nickel, and inorganic arsenic compounds. 25,26 The association with occupational exposure to these agents appears to be
independent of cigarette smoking.
DIET
The role of dietary antioxidant micronutrients in the prevention of lung cancer is reviewed in Chapter 23.3. The presumed mechanism leading to prevention of
carcinogenesis by these nutrients is that antioxidant micronutrients, including carotenoids, vitamins C and E, and selenium, have an important role in scavenging free
radicals produced endogenously and exogenously by tobacco smoke, solvents, and pollutants. Carotenoids and vitamins C and E trap free radicals and reactive
oxygen molecules, whereas selenium is a component of antioxidant enzymes. 45 Analysis of the role of nutrients in the cause of lung cancer is confounded by
methodologic problems and by the conflicting results of studies. 45,46,47,48 and 49 However, to date, chemoprevention studies have failed to have an impact on lung cancer
incidence. 50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59 and 60
EVIDENCE FOR A GENETIC PREDISPOSITION
There is limited evidence that genetic factors may contribute to lung cancer risk. Variations in the metabolism of carcinogens have been implicated. 61 The pathways to
create these toxic metabolites are genetically determined. The metabolism of the antihypertensive drug debrisoquin is genetically determined by a single gene. The
metabolisms of many drugs and chemicals correlate with that of debrisoquin, 61 and this may also apply to carcinogenic components of cigarette smoke ( Table 31.2-1),
although this has not been proven for any one substance with respect to lung carcinogenesis. 61,62,63,64 and 65 Several approaches have been adopted to detect a genetic
association: studies of familial clustering, studies of naturally occurring antigens, and studies of the metabolism of drugs. Studies of familial clustering have been
interpreted as showing no substantial genetic predisposition. 66,67 and 68 Braun et al.66 conducted a twin cohort study and found no genetic factors to be predictive of
lung cancer. Highway et al. 69 observed that the allele K-ras occurred in 29% of non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cases, compared with 15% of controls ( P = .03).
Numerous other chromosomal abnormalities (rearrangements and deletions) are present in lung cancer. These abnormalities are thought to result from the effects of
carcinogens or the genetic instability observed in malignant transformation.

TABLE 31.2-1. Major Mutagens, Carcinogens, and Related Substances in Tobacco Smoke

Although the molecular and genetic events underlying the pathogenesis of lung cancer are an area of active investigation, no genetic abnormality has conclusively
defined the risk of lung cancer. In NSCLC, the most frequently identified abnormalities are deregulation of tumor suppressor gene p53, aberrant expression of the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and one of its ligands, and the presence of K-ras abnormalities in adenocarcinoma (discussed in New Potential Prognostic
Markers).70,71,72,73 and 74
APPLICATIONS OF ADVANCES IN LUNG CANCER BIOLOGY TO CLINICAL PRACTICE
Advances in our understanding of the biology of lung cancer have the potential to affect all areas of lung cancer management. The identification of specific mutations
related to tobacco exposure has elucidated the possible molecular foundation for the association of cigarette smoking and lung cancer and may allow us better to
identify at-risk people for chemoprevention programs. The presence of autocrine growth factor receptors, specific mutations, or chromosomal deletions may provide
additional or more accurate means for diagnosing, staging, choosing therapies, and establishing prognosis for patients with lung cancer. The presence of K-ras point
mutations has been shown to be associated with a shortened survival in patients with completely resected NSCLC. 72 Clinical trials targeting adjuvant therapies for
patients with resected NSCLC with K-ras point mutations are in progress. Monoclonal antibodies or other drugs blocking the action of epidermal growth factor are in
clinical trials. 75,76 The activation of cellular receptors for virtually all autocrine growth factors involves the activation of a protein kinase. 77 This observation has given
us a new therapeutic target, and the search for agents specifically inhibiting this enzyme is under way. The mutated sequences of p53 provide a unique,

tumor-specific antigen at which to direct therapeutic strategies. 78 New treatment approaches using viral vectors to reverse discordant p53 mutations are in progress.

PATHOLOGY
The World Health Organization (WHO) classification of lung cancer is accepted worldwide ( Table 31.2-2). NSCLC includes carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and large
cell (undifferentiated) carcinoma.

TABLE 31.2-2. World Health Organization Histologic Classification of Epithelial Tumors of the Lung

HISTOGENESIS
Evidence is increasing that lung cancer is derived from a pluripotent stem cell that is capable of expressing a variety of phenotypes. This epithelial stem cell, in normal
histogenesis, differentiates to those cells found in the tracheobronchial tree, including pseudostratified reserved cells, ciliated goblet columnar cells, neuroendocrine
cells, and type I and II pneumocytes seen lining the alveoli. Cells that are capable of division can express hyperplastic, metaplastic, or neoplastic change. 79
Frequently, a lung cancer exhibits two or more histologic patterns. The frequency of this occurrence depends on the assiduity of the pathologist and the number of
sections examined. In one study, when at least 10 blocks from each tumor were examined, 45 of the 100 cases demonstrated heterogeneity, and 10% of cases
showed elements of both squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma. 80
It appears that squamous cell carcinoma and small cell carcinoma have a distinct dose-response relation, with increasing tobacco exposure producing increasing
numbers of these histologic subtypes. Worldwide, however, adenocarcinoma appears to be increasing, especially in women, despite the fact that it does not have this
significant dose-response relation with smoking. This increasing incidence of adenocarcinoma is especially seen in the United States and is less apparent in Europe
and Japan. 81
quamous Cell Carcinoma
Although at one time the most frequent of all lung cancers, squamous cell carcinoma in North America has not seen the marked increase observed with
adenocarcinoma, the latter tumor accounting for most of the recent increased incidence of lung cancer. Some of these differences may be related to the change from
nonfiltered to filtered cigarettes and their relation to site of deposition of the carcinogens. Squamous cell carcinoma arises most frequently in proximal segmental
bronchi and is associated with squamous metaplasia. In its earliest form, carcinoma in situ, stratified squamous epithelium is replaced by malignant squamous cells
without invasion through the basement membrane. Because of the ability of these cells to exfoliate, this tumor can be detected by cytologic examination at its earliest
stage. With further growth, the tumor invades the basement membrane and extends into the bronchial lumen, producing obstruction with resultant atelectasis or
pneumonia.
Histologically, the squamous cell tumor is composed of sheets of epithelial cells, which may be well or poorly differentiated. Most well-differentiated tumors
demonstrate keratin pearls. The more poorly differentiated tumors, if determined to be squamous cell carcinoma, have positive keratin staining ( Fig. 31.2-2).

FIGURE 31.2-2. Moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Sheets of tumor cells with variable amounts of cytoplasm and moderate nuclear atypia are
present. Focal keratinization is evident ( arrow). A: Low-power magnification. B: High-power magnification.

These tumors tend to be slow-growing, and it is estimated that up to 3 or 4 years are required from the development of in situ carcinoma to a clinically apparent tumor.
Adenocarcinoma
In North America, adenocarcinoma is the most frequent tumor, accounting for 40% of all cases of lung cancer. Some of this increase is due to the better identification
of adenocarcinoma using immunohistochemical staining, with fewer tumors classified as undifferentiated large cell tumors. Most of these tumors are peripheral in
origin, arising from alveolar surface epithelium or bronchial mucosal glands; they also can present as peripheral tumors arising in areas of previous infections,
so-called scar tumors (Fig. 31.2-3).

FIGURE 31.2-3. Well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. Well-formed glands with a focal cribriform arrangement ( arrows) are surrounded by a cellular stroma. A:
Low-power magnification. B: High-power magnification.

Histologically, these tumors form glands and produce mucin. Although they can be subdivided by light microscopy into the classic four types defined by the WHO
classification, this has little clinical relevance except for bronchoalveolar carcinoma, which appears to be a distinct clinicopathologic entity ( Fig. 31.2-4).82 This latter
tumor appears to arise from type II pneumocytes, grows along alveolar septa by lepidic growth, and shows little, if any, desmoplastic or glandular change. These
tumors are interesting in that they present in three different fashions: a solitary peripheral nodule, multifocal disease, or a rapidly progressive pneumonic form, which
appears to spread from lobe to lobe, ultimately encompassing both lungs.

FIGURE 31.2-4. Bronchoalveolar carcinoma. Columnar cells with minimal nuclear atypia are arranged along intact alveolar septa. The lepidic growth pattern is
associated with no stromal reaction. Mucin vacuoles are present in the apical cytoplasm ( arrows). A: Low-power magnification. B: High-power magnification.

Other than T1N0 tumors, it appears that adenocarcinoma has a somewhat worse prognosis, stage for stage, than does squamous cell carcinoma.
Immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy have been used by pathologists with increasing frequency to identify adenocarcinoma. 83 Using these techniques,
adenocarcinoma cells stain positive for carcinoembryonic antigen and mucin. Specific monoclonal antibodies recognizing adenocarcinoma have been identified. 84
Large Cell Carcinoma
Large cell carcinoma is the least common of all NSCLC tumors, accounting for approximately 15% of all lung cancers. With immunohistochemical staining, electron
microscopy, and monoclonal antibodies, many tumors previously diagnosed as undifferentiated large cell carcinoma can now be classified more appropriately as
poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma. For this reason, the incidence of this type of tumor continues to decrease ( Fig. 31.2-5).

FIGURE 31.2-5. Large cell undifferentiated carcinoma. Sheets of highly atypical cells with focal necrosis ( arrows) are present. There is no evidence of keratinization
of gland formation. A: Low-power magnification. B: High-power magnification.

Although the WHO classification subdivides this group into giant cell and clear cell varieties, these subclassifications have little clinical relevance. Few true giant cell
tumors have been identified, although they do represent a poorly differentiated subtype with what appears to be a poorer prognosis. The prognosis of large cell
undifferentiated carcinoma appears to be similar to that of adenocarcinoma and, in most clinical trials, these two histologic types are grouped together using
immunohistochemical staining. Pathologists are increasingly identifying neuroendocrine features in large cell tumors. These tumors appear to have a worse
prognosis, and their relation to small cell lung cancer remains to be defined.
METHODS OF SPREAD
After a variable period as a primary tumor growing within lung parenchyma or within the bronchial wall, the tumor ultimately invades the vascular and lymphatic
channels, resulting in spread by these channels to regional draining lymph nodes and distant metastatic sites. Occasionally, airborne or lymphatic metastases
(so-called satellite nodules) can be seen in the lung parenchyma near the primary tumor or in ispilateral lobes other than that containing the primary tumor. These
satellite nodules auger a worse prognosis and alter the stage of the disease.
In most instances, it appears that lymphatic spread occurs earlier than spread to metastatic sites elsewhere. The regional lymphatic drainage of the lung is outlined in
Figure 31.2-6. In the lung tissue, lymphatic drainage follows the bronchoarterial branching pattern, with lymph nodes situated at the origin of these branchings. These
lymphatic channels coalesce, draining into lymph nodes situated around segmental and lobar bronchi. Lower lobe lymphatics then drain to the posterior mediastinum
and, ultimately, to the subcarinal lymph nodes. In the right upper lobe, lymphatics drain toward the superior mediastinum; in the left upper lobe, lymphatic channels
run anterolateral to the great vessels (aorta and subclavian artery) in the anterior mediastinum as well as along the main bronchus into the superior mediastinum in
one-third of cases.

FIGURE 31.2-6. The regional lymphatic drainage of the lung as described by Noel. Most of the lymphatic drainage ultimately reaches the right superior mediastinum
and right supraclavicular regions. (From ref. 416, with permission.)

Ultimately, all these lymphatic channels drain to the right lymphatic or left thoracic ducts. Metastatic lymphatic spread of lung cancer follows these lymphatic channels
with tumor involving bronchopulmonary (N1), mediastinal (N2-3) and, ultimately, supraclavicular (N3) lymph nodes. Retrograde lymphatic spread to the pleural surface
can occur, especially in peripheral tumors.
The primary tumor can also spread locally, ultimately invading contiguous structures, including mediastinal pleura or organs and the chest wall or diaphragm. Once
vascular or lymphatic invasion occurs, metastatic spread to distant sites is common. The most frequent sites involved include bone, liver, adrenals, and brain. As
demonstrated in autopsy studies, however, lung cancer metastases can be found in every organ system. 85 Metastases within the lung are thought to result from a
variety of mechanisms, including airborne spread by bronchi, retrograde lymphatic spread, and blood-borne spread.
CLINICAL FEATURES
The signs and symptoms manifested by patients suffering from lung cancer depend on the location of the tumor, its locoregional spread, or the effects of metastatic
spread (Table 31.2-3). Lung cancer is associated with paraneoplastic syndromes more frequently than any other tumor. Many patients present with an asymptomatic
lesion discovered incidentally on chest radiography.

TABLE 31.2-3. Common Signs and Symptoms of Lung Cancer

Locoregional Manifestations
Tumors arising in the larger airways produce symptoms related to the growth of the tumor. Frequently, patients present with a persistent cough. In larger airways, with
encroachment of the lumen, a wheeze or stridor may develop. As the tumor grows, areas of necrosis may develop, resulting in bleeding. Massive hemoptysis is a rare
event, with most patients experiencing blood-streaked sputum.
With continued tumor growth, airways may become obstructed, resulting in atelectasis, pneumonia and, occasionally, abscess formation. These obstructive
complications often result in fevers and the signs and symptoms of pulmonary infection. If pleural surfaces are involved in the infection, pleuritic pain may develop
with or without a detectable pleural effusion. With endobronchial obstruction and the failure of ventilation of segments or lobes or even an entire lung, increasing
shortness of breath can ensue.
Depending on the location of the primary tumor, adjacent structures, such as the chest wall or mediastinum, may ultimately become involved by direct spread.
Radicular chest wall pain then develops. With apical tumors, the classic Pancoast's syndrome (lower brachial plexopathy, Horner's syndrome, and shoulder pain) may
become manifest, owing to local invasion of the lower brachial plexus (T1 and C8 nerve roots), chest wall, and stellate ganglion.
Similarly, tumors invading or involving lymph nodes in the mediastinum may encase the phrenic nerve, vagus nerve, or recurrent nerve, resulting in malfunction of the
specific end organs (e.g., diaphragm, vocal cord). It is not uncommon for patients to present initially with symptoms of a recurrent nerve palsy, including hoarseness
and cricopharyngeal dysphagia, especially with left upper lobe tumors.
Superior vena cava syndrome usually results from mediastinal lymphadenopathy encroaching on this structure rather than primary tumor invasion. Direct invasion of
the pericardium or metastases to this structure can occur and lead to a malignant pericardial effusion, with signs and symptoms of pericardial tamponade.
Visceral pleural invasion or retrograde lymphatic spread can ultimately result in visceral and parietal pleural seeding. Pleuritic pain or increasing shortness of breath
due to a massive pleural effusion can ensue.
Nodal involvement or tumor invasion of the posterior mediastinum, usually from lower lobe tumors, can produce partial or complete obstruction of the esophagus,
resulting in dysphagia and, with further invasion, symptoms of a tracheoesophageal fistula. Nodal involvement of the superior mediastinum can cause a nonproductive
cough or, when extensive, superior vena cava obstruction.
In addition to these specific symptoms related to the presence of tumor or lymphadenopathy in a locoregional area, nonspecific and vague chest pains, generally
referred to the ipsilateral hemithorax, are frequent occurrences in patients suffering from lung cancer. These pains are of visceral origin and are unrelated to invasion
of local structures. Other nonspecific symptoms, including weight loss and a general unwell feeling, are common and usually indicate advanced disease.
Metastatic Manifestations
Nearly all patients with advanced inoperable NSCLC demonstrate symptoms referable to their disease at the time of initial presentation. 86,87 Most patients, in fact,
have more than one symptom at the onset of their illness. 87 Fatigue and decreased activity were reported by more than 80%, and most patients also experienced
cough, dyspnea, decreased appetite, and weight loss. The high incidence of lung cancer symptoms, the occurrence of multiple symptoms in most patients, and the
severity of these complaints demand both prompt treatment of the lung cancer and careful attention to the management of each symptom while definitive therapy is in
progress.
Although lung cancer can metastasize to virtually any organ, the most common sites of spread that are clinically apparent are the pleura, lung, bone, brain,
pericardium, and liver. 85 The presenting complaints of a patient with metastatic spread are largely determined by the specific metastatic organ site involved. For
example, bone metastases present with pain and limitation of function in the affected area.
We cannot explain the high incidence of adrenal metastases in NSCLC, detected in 41% of patients at autopsy. 85 Most adrenal metastases are asymptomatic and are
discovered incidentally during a staging evaluation or at autopsy. The computed tomographic (CT) scan is the most frequent method of diagnosis. Fine-needle
aspiration provides a safe method to confirm the presence of metastatic disease in the adrenal gland if pathologic documentation is necessary, although other
imaging studies, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission tomography (PET) can be confirmatory. Adrenal hormone insufficiency due to
bilateral adrenal metastases from lung cancer is rare but can occur. 88

Pericardial complications are due to direct invasion, metastatic spread, or a cancer-associated but nonmalignant pericardial effusion. 89 The presenting complaints of
dyspnea, cough, and chest discomfort are identical to those of pulmonary tumors or pleural metastases. Because of its slow evolution, signs of pericardial tamponade
are often absent. Electrocardiograms are usually not diagnostic. Enlargement of the cardiac silhouette on chest radiograph is often subtle and apparent only on
review of multiple prior studies. The frequent association of a pleural effusion in patients with pericardial involvement further impedes the prompt diagnosis of this
condition. 90 The echocardiogram provides a safe and rapid diagnostic test for this condition as well as information on the presence and severity of associated cardiac
compromise. Pericardial involvement should be considered in any lung cancer patient with dyspnea, cough, or chest discomfort and should be ruled out if a large
pleural effusion is present.
Nonmetastatic Features
The anorexia-cachexia syndrome and generalized weakness and fatigue are the most common and least understood nonmetastatic complications of lung cancer. In
addition, a variety of paraneoplastic syndromes associated with epithelial lung cancer have been identified. Many of these conditions are not specific to lung cancer
but have been documented to occur frequently in lung cancer patients owing to the large number of patients with this disease ( Table 31.2-4).

TABLE 31.2-4. Paraneoplastic Syndromes in Patients with Lung Cancer

Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy (HPO) occurs frequently in NSCLC patients. Symptoms of bone and joint pain herald the onset of this condition and can be
the presenting signs of lung cancer. Clubbing of the digits is observed. The alkaline phosphatase level is commonly elevated, while serum hepatic enzyme levels are
normal. Plain radiographs of affected bones demonstrate periosteal inflammation and elevation, and radionuclide bone scans reveal an intense and symmetric
generalized increased uptake of the radiolabel, particularly in the distal end of long bones. Symptoms usually respond dramatically to aspirin and other nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory agents and disappear after effective definitive treatment of the primary lesion. The digital clubbing is frequently present without other signs of HPO
and resolve, as does HPO, with curative therapy.

DIAGNOSIS AND STAGING
In 1985, the American Joint Committee on Cancer, the Union Internationale Contre le Cancer, and the Japanese Cancer Committee agreed to a worldwide tumor,
node, metastasis (TNM) staging system. 91 This has been rapidly accepted and is used extensively in the management of lung cancer. A revision of the l985 version
was accepted by the American Joint Committee on Cancer and Union Internationale Contre le Cancer in 1997.
The primary tumor is subdivided into four categories (T1–4), depending on size, site, and local involvement. Lymph node spread has been subdivided into
bronchopulmonary (N1), ipsilateral mediastinal (N2), and contralateral or supraclavicular disease (N3), and metastatic spread is absent (M0) or present (M1; Table
31.2-5; Fig. 31.2-7). Four stages of lung cancer have been identified, with significant differences found in 5-year survival, depending on the stage of disease at
diagnosis. The accuracy of these stages in predicting survival has been confirmed by many authors ( Fig. 31.2-8). Although the 1979 staging system still lacks
uniformity in definition and prognosis in certain subsets of locally advanced disease (T3 vs. T4 and N2 vs. N3), 92 on the whole, it is a functional system that should be
used for all patients.

TABLE 31.2-5. Tumor, Node, Metastasis (TNM) Staging System for Lung Cancer; Including Proposed Changes

FIGURE 31.2-7. New International Staging System (ISS). Categories of stage IA, IB, IIA, IIB, IIIA, and IIIB disease. (From ref. 91, with permission.)

FIGURE 31.2-8. Actuarial survival curves according to different stages (1986 staging). A: Survival after clinical staging. B: Survival after final pathologic staging. Note
that early stages are understaged by clinical staging resulting in a poorer survival than after pathologic staging. However, the higher the stage, the less likely that
clinical staging understages the disease. (From ref. 91, with permission.)

The TNM staging includes clinical, surgical, and pathologic collection. Even with the use of pretreatment minimally invasive techniques only, a significant percentage
of patients are clinically understaged as compared with the ultimate stage identified by surgical and pathologic staging. Despite these inadequacies, it is clinically
relevant to stage all lung cancer patients before treatment (clinical) and after therapy (surgical and pathologic). 93,94
In patients suspected of harboring lung cancer, accurate diagnosis with confirmatory cytology or histology is of supreme importance, as is an estimation of the clinical
stage of the disease, since clinical staging will determine treatment. Since many of the modalities used for diagnosis are also important in clinical staging, these are
discussed simultaneously (Fig. 31.2-9).

FIGURE 31.2-9. Schema to indicate the diagnostic procedures depending on the presenting lesion. CT, computed tomography. PET, positron emission tomography.

HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A detailed history and accurate physical examination remain the most important steps in assessing a patient with lung cancer. Smoking history, past exposure to
environmental carcinogens, and family history may suggest a higher probability of lung cancer. New symptoms, including a change in cough, hemoptysis, or history of
recurrent respiratory infection, are of concern. Symptoms suggesting locoregional spread include chest pain, symptoms of recurrent nerve palsy, or superior vena
cava obstruction. Symptoms suggestive of metastatic disease frequently include focal neurologic symptoms, bone pain, or weight loss. Occasionally, patients
suffering from NSCLC present with symptoms and signs of a paraneoplastic syndrome but not as frequently as with small cell tumors.
Physical examination should look for signs of partial or complete obstruction of airways, atelectasis or pneumonia, and pleural effusions. Examination of the head and
neck, including the draining regional lymph node areas in the supraclavicular area, may demonstrate lymphadenopathy, indicating regional lymphatic (N3) spread.
SPUTUM CYTOLOGY
Once the disease is suspected, a simple and effective method of obtaining a positive diagnosis of lung cancer is sputum cytology. The yield from sputum cytology
depends on many factors, including the ability of the patient to produce sufficient sputum, the size of the tumor, the proximity of the tumor to major airways and, to a
lesser extent, the histologic type of the tumor.
With sputum samples, up to 80% of central tumors can be diagnosed. The yield is much smaller for peripheral tumors, dropping to less than 20% for peripheral tumors
smaller than 3.0 cm in diameter. A 3-day collection of early morning sputa, preserved in Saccamano's solution, appears to be the optimal method of assessment.
Squamous cell tumors, being more proximal, are more frequently diagnosed by cytology than adenocarcinoma or large cell tumors. Another factor affecting the ability
of sputum cytology to diagnose malignancy is the experience and training of the cytopathologist. Viral infections and other acute inflammations can produce cellular
changes that are difficult to distinguish from malignancy, especially adenocarcinoma. Frequently, severe dysplasia is misinterpreted as a malignancy, and vice versa.
Tockman et al.95,96 and 97 have described a monoclonal antibody–staining technique that may more accurately diagnose the presence or absence of malignancy in
severely dysplastic cells. This is being tested prospectively in a large North American effort.
IMAGING STUDIES
Chest Radiography
Chest radiography is probably the most valuable tool in the diagnosis of lung cancer. A perfectly normal chest radiograph rules out this diagnosis in most instances,
except for the rare occult tumor. 98 Plain chest radiography can reveal peripheral nodules and hilar and mediastinal changes suggestive of lymphadenopathy or pleural
effusions, all suggestive of possible malignancy. Areas of subsegmental, segmental, lobar, or lung collapse suggest an endobronchial obstruction. Improvements in
plain radiography (e.g., digital radiography) may improve the diagnostic yield of this modality. 99,100
Computed Tomography
With the introduction of CT scanning in the late 1970s, a giant step was taken in the ability to diagnose and stage lung cancer employing noninvasive imaging
techniques. CT imaging can confirm abnormalities seen on plain chest radiographs, can often detect early (<1 cm) lesions that cannot be seen on chest radiographs,
and has played an important role in staging of lung cancer, especially spread to areas of the mediastinum undetected on plain films. There is general agreement that
to be considered “normal,” mediastinal lymph nodes must be smaller than 1 cm in transverse diameter. Any lymph node larger than this suggests lymphadenopathy
and should be investigated further by more invasive techniques. 101,102
CT scans may also suggest possible areas of local invasion of the primary tumor to chest wall, vertebrae, or mediastinal structures. Small pleural effusions or pleural
nodules, often undetected on plain films, may be evident on CT scans.
An added advantage of CT scanning is the ability to detect abnormalities below the diaphragm, especially metastases to liver and adrenal glands. For the

investigation of lung cancer, CT scanning should include upper abdominal scanning to the level of the kidneys to include imaging of the liver and adrenal gland.
Abnormalities seen on CT scan, unless associated with unequivocal signs of malignancy, should be confirmed by more invasive cytologic or histologic
investigation. 103
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI investigation of pulmonary lesions has been disappointing and has offered no improvement over CT scanning. Exceptions to this rule include investigation of
paravertebral tumors, because imaging of the spinal canal without contrast media is possible. Changes in bone marrow of the vertebrae suggestive of carcinoma can
be detected with greater accuracy with MRI. Also, invasion of tissue planes and vascular structures within the mediastinum and at the thoracic inlet can be assessed
with greater accuracy using MRI. Routine MRI of all lung cancer is unnecessary and should be reserved for situations in which local tumor invasion of the
mediastinum, thoracic inlet, or paravertebral region is questioned on CT scanning. 104,105 and 106
Radionuclide Scanning
Until the advent of PET scanning, the ability of radionuclide scanning to diagnose and stage lung cancer was limited by its lack of specificity. Nuclide scanning with
gallium citrate or cobalt-bleomycin previously was used mainly for detecting unsuspected mediastinal spread once the diagnosis had been made. The rate of
incorporation of the radioisotope by the primary tumor and its metastatic foci was variable, however, and thus has limited its clinical use in both diagnosis and
staging.107,108 Isotope-labeled monoclonal antibodies have also been investigated as a technique for staging and diagnosing lung cancer. Specific monoclonal
antibodies directed to lung cancer cells may prove valuable as diagnostic and staging modalities in the future. Routine radionuclide bone scanning to rule out
asymptomatic, unsuspected bone metastases in early-stage disease has never been shown to be cost-effective but is still advocated by many practitioners. In clinical
stage III disease, before curative therapy is considered, bone scans may be more cost-effective and certainly are of value when bony syndromes are present. 109
Positron Emission Tomography
During the last decade, an exciting new modality, whole-body PET scanning, came into use. This scanning technique, which has yet to be completely investigated, is
based on the uptake of a radioactive glucose, fluorodeoxyglucose, in metabolically active cells. In North America and Europe, PET centers are opening almost on a
daily basis. It appears to be exceptionally valuable in diagnosing and staging lung cancer and, in the United States, has now been accepted for reimbursement in
investigating this disease. Virtually all reports demonstrate higher accuracies than CT imaging and bone scanning in identifying occult metastatic disease in the
mediastinum and distant sites. 110,111 and 112 In addition, it appears useful in differentiating benign from malignant lesions when investigating a solitary pulmonary nodule.
However, granulomatous inflammation can be metabolically active, whereas bronchoalveolar carcinomas may be metabolically inactive. This limits PET's usefulness
in diagnosing with absolute certainty the etiology of a solitary pulmonary nodule.
The amount of activity seen in the tumor—the standard uptake value (SUV)—has been analyzed with regard to ultimate outcome. It does appear that tumors with high
SUV numbers have a poor prognosis, which is independent of other prognostic indices, such as stage of disease. The exact level of SUV activity that is independently
prognostic has yet to be defined but appears to be somewhere in excess of 7. In addition, the response to therapy (e.g., induction chemotherapy or radiotherapy) as
measured by a declining SUV is being investigated with the use of PET. In the future, chemotherapy response rates may be able to be assessed with repeated PET
scans; this is being actively investigated. The response to primary chemoradiotherapy may also be assessed using this technique. The exact place of PET scanning
in assessing response to therapy, however, has yet to be defined. 112
PERCUTANEOUS FINE-NEEDLE ASPIRATION
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of pulmonary nodules is an excellent method of obtaining cytologic and histologic material for positive identification of malignancy. This
is performed using fluoroscopic or CT-guided techniques. The positive yield in experienced hands can be as high as 95%. An indeterminate biopsy, however, cannot
be accepted as negative. False-negative examination results are frequent and must be considered indeterminate unless a positive benign diagnosis (e.g., hamartoma,
tuberculosis) can be made. 113
Abnormalities identified by imaging scans in bone, liver, or adrenal gland and suggestive of metastatic disease can be confirmed by fine-needle aspiration biopsy
using ultrasonographic or CT-guided techniques, and abnormalities identified on physical examination (e.g., large supraclavicular nodes) are very accessible to
fine-needle aspiration. In some centers, confirmation by PET scanning or MRI has been considered accurate enough and has replaced the necessity of biopsy
confirmation (e.g., of adrenal tumor).
BRONCHOSCOPY
Although rigid bronchoscopy was used for many years to confirm the diagnosis of lung cancer, the introduction of flexible fiber-optic bronchoscopy more than 20 years
ago has revolutionized this approach. The procedure, although invasive, can be performed under local anesthesia with or without sedation and with minimal morbidity
and exceptional safety. Using flexible instruments, the proximal tracheobronchial tree can be examined up to the second or third subsegmental division, and cytologic
or histologic specimens can be obtained from identified abnormal lesions. The diagnostic yield of fiber-optic bronchoscopy with cytology brushing and biopsy for
histology when a visible lesion is identified is higher than 90%. Even with no visible lesion seen, the bronchus draining the area of suspicion can be irrigated and
lavaged, yielding cytologic material. With fiber-optic bronchoscopy and image intensification, peripheral lesions can be reached by cytology brushes, needles, or
biopsy forceps, and specimens can thus be obtained. This is most effective in lesions larger than 2 cm in diameter.
The increased yield of postbronchoscopy sputum cytology (as compared with routine induction sputum cytology) renders this maneuver valuable as an added
diagnostic tool. The bronchoscope is also valuable for staging. The site of the primary tumor in a major airway may affect its stage (T3 vs. T2 vs. T1), and
transbronchoscopic needle aspiration through the airway wall, as popularized by Wang, can confirm the presence of malignancy in enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes
(N3 vs. N2 vs. N1). 113a,113b Care must be taken, however, with this latter technique, because false-positive examination results have been reported, and differentiation
between resectable N2 and unresectable N2 or N3 disease cannot always be determined by needle aspiration alone; a more invasive approach (e.g.,
mediastinoscopy, thoracoscopy) may be required. 114
MEDIASTINOSCOPY AND MEDIASTINOTOMY
Mediastinoscopy was developed by Carlens approximately 45 years ago to facilitate staging of superior mediastinal lymph nodes (N2 or N3) before consideration of
therapy in patients with lung cancer. It remains the most accurate lymph node staging technique to assess superior mediastinal lymph nodes, which are frequently
involved in this disease. The procedure is simple, safe, and effective in experienced hands. In two large series, 115,116 the mortality rate was 0%, and the major
morbidity rate was less than 1%. In patients suspected of having inoperable disease by virtue of mediastinal involvement as detected by CT or PET scanning,
confirmation by mediastinoscopy is indicated. Depending on the philosophy of management of patients with minimal mediastinal involvement, mediastinoscopy is
used to a greater or lesser extent by individual practitioners. Mediastinoscopy is extremely valuable for accurate staging of the disease before neoadjuvant (induction)
chemotherapy.
In the future, PET scanning may replace this invasive procedure as a method of accurately identifying superior mediastinal involvement. However, prospective studies
have suggested that in “negative” PET scans related to the superior mediastinum, approximately 10% of individuals will be found to have microscopic mediastinal
nodal involvement. 23,117 Whether a negative PET scan result is sufficient to allow primary surgery in patients without the addition of mediastinoscopy is yet to be
determined. Granulomatous inflammation within the mediastinal lymph nodes will be identified as increased activity on a PET scan. For this reason, “positive” PET
imaging in the superior mediastinum must be confirmed histologically as representing metastatic cancer.
Involvement of anterior mediastinal lymph nodes, which occurs frequently in left upper lobe tumors, can be assessed by the extended mediastinoscopy technique, 118
by an anterior mediastinotomy (as advocated by McNiel and Chamberlain 119), or by video-assisted thoracoscopy. Because this is the first level of mediastinal lymph
nodes involved in disease, many practitioners defer this examination when cervical mediastinoscopy fails to reveal metastatic disease in the superior mediastinum
unless these lymph nodes appear involved on imaging studies. Patients without superior mediastinal involvement have a good prognosis after resection, even when

anterior mediastinal (first-level) nodes are microscopically involved. 120
THORACENTESIS
Thoracentesis of a pleural effusion associated with a presumed lung cancer can identify pleural disease (T4). Classically, a bloody pleural effusion is considered
malignant; however, unless malignant cells are identified in the cytologic assessment of these pleural effusions, for the sake of the patient, a bloody pleural effusion
should be considered traumatic. In these instances, thoracoscopy may be required to prove, without a doubt, the existence of pleural metastases.
THORACOSCOPY
Video-assisted thoracoscopy has been used in the diagnosis and staging of lung cancer. Peripheral nodules can be identified and excised using video-assisted
minimally invasive techniques, and mediastinal lymph nodes can be sampled for histologic examination. This technique also can identify suspected pleural disease
and has the ability to assess accurately the status of pleural effusions when thoracentesis does not. The exact indications and use of this minimally invasive technique
await further prospective studies, 121,122 and 123 but it has been used for assessment of mediastinal nodes and T4 status, especially when pleural effusions with
nonmalignant cytology are present.
THORACOTOMY
Thoracotomy continues to be used in the diagnosis and staging of lung cancer. With less invasive procedures, however, more than 95% of tumors can be accurately
diagnosed and staged prior to thoracotomy. Despite this, there remains a small minority of patients in whom the diagnosis of lung cancer is made only at thoracotomy.
At the time of thoracotomy, the diagnosis can be confirmed by fine-needle aspiration, incisional or (preferably) excisional biopsy, and frozen-section analysis. All
these techniques can provide tissue that can be rapidly assessed by pathologists.
At the time of thoracotomy, further staging is mandatory by the surgeon by sampling hilar and mediastinal lymph node or performing a complete ipsilateral lymph node
dissection. Not infrequently, unsuspected involvement of adjacent structures is recognized only at the time of surgery, identifying a T3 or T4 tumor invading adjacent
structures.
EVALUATION OF EXTENT OF DISEASE
Once the diagnosis of lung cancer has been made and before consideration of definitive therapy, a clinical evaluation of extent of disease is required ( Fig. 31.2-10).
Frequently, the history and physical examination suggest evidence of lymphatic or distant metastatic spread. These symptoms or signs should be confirmed by
appropriate radiologic studies directed at the organs suspected to be involved ( Fig. 31.2-11).

FIGURE 31.2-10. Clinical staging of lung cancer: a schema to indicate extent of disease evaluation. AST, aspartate aminotransferase; CA, serum calcium; CT,
computed tomography; PET, positron emission tomography; SGOT, serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase.

FIGURE 31.2-11. Chest radiographs of patients with different presentations of lung cancer. A: A centrally located tumor on cavitation, suggestive of squamous cell
carcinoma. B: A peripherally located nodule with possible pleural involvement. C: A large hilar mass in mediastinal adenopathy, suggesting stage IIIB disease. D:
Multiple bilateral pulmonary nodules of bronchoalveolar carcinoma. E: Small cell lung cancer involving a large, bulky central mass with hilar and mediastinal
adenopathy and obstruction of the right upper lobe.

Regarding patients suspected of having disease localized to the hemithorax, there has been significant debate about the minimum required investigations to prove or
disprove metastatic spread. After an accurate medical history and physical examination, routine studies should include chest radiographs, hematologic survey, and
specific biochemical markers, including serum calcium, alkaline phosphatase, and aspartate aminotransferase. Elevation of these biochemical markers indicates the
need for investigation for bony or liver metastases.
In the United States, virtually all patients considered for curative treatment of lung cancer undergo routine CT scanning of the chest and upper abdomen to detect
mediastinal lymph node enlargement, unsuspected pulmonary metastases, and unsuspected liver and adrenal metastases. Whether the use of CT scanning is
cost-effective in detecting these unsuspected metastases is a moot point. Frequently, abnormalities found with this examination lead to further invasive testing,
ultimately revealing a false-positive investigation result. Similarly, the routine use of bone scans despite the absence of clinical or biochemical abnormalities is
probably not cost-effective.
PET scanning is being used with increased frequency to assess both regional and metastatic spread of tumor. Because of the inherent high metabolic activity within
the brain, this area cannot be accurately assessed by this new imaging technique.
The routine use of mediastinoscopy before surgical intervention for the treatment of lung cancer is also debated. With mediastinoscopy, inoperable superior
mediastinal disease can be identified, thereby avoiding some unnecessary thoracotomies. Approximately 10% of patients harbor inoperable unsuspected mediastinal
disease if mediastinoscopy is not used as a routine staging operation, despite the use of CT and PET scanning.
In clinical practice, for peripheral nodules smaller than 3 cm in diameter with no other abnormalities detected on chest radiograph, physical examination, or
biochemical screening, it is probably not cost-effective to pursue all these investigations. The role of routine PET scanning in this early stage of disease has yet to be

defined.
In patients with more locally advanced disease (clinical stage II or III) and in patients with suggestive adverse prognostic signs (e.g., weight loss), a more complete
metastatic survey might be advantageous, although as yet there is no evidence of cost-effectiveness. 124 The routine use of CT scanning or MRI of the brain to detect
asymptomatic cerebral metastasis has not been settled but is probably not cost-effective, especially in early-stage (I and II) disease.

RETREATMENT PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
After establishing the diagnosis and clinical stage of NSCLC, it is desirable to determine the likely clinical course and survival outcome. This is important for both the
patient and the treating physician, because this estimate is essential to guide the choice of therapy. Such information is also vital for the design and interpretation of
clinical trials when it is necessary to discriminate between the effectiveness of a new therapy and the natural history of disease for a particular group of patients.
Several retrospective analyses have evaluated traditional and newer prognostic factors for patients with operable and patients with inoperable NSCLC ( Table
31.2-6).125,126,127,128,129 and 130

TABLE 31.2-6. Univariable Survival Comparison of Three Large Retrospective Datasets

EARLY-STAGE (I, II, AND RESECTABLE STAGE III) DISEASE
The major clinical prognostic determinants for patients with early-stage disease are the size of the tumor and the presence or absence of lymph node spread. These
features are well captured in the TNM staging classifications. 131 Additional clinical adverse prognostic factors are age older than 60 years and male gender and
performance of a wedge resection instead of lobectomy or pneumonectomy. 132 Histologic subtype does not provide consistent additional prognostic information. 133
Expression of mucin has been shown to be a poor prognostic factor. 126,129,134,135 Mucin decreases tumor cell aggregation and may facilitate formation of metastases.
Overall, clinical stage remains the most important prognostic tool. 136 However, newer diagnostic techniques are likely to continue to refine our precision in staging
patients. For example, the detection of disseminated tumor cells in lymph nodes or the bone marrow using immunohistochemical analysis has been shown to correlate
with a poor prognosis, 137,138 as do high SUV numbers in the primary tumors on PET scan.
ADVANCED-STAGE (UNRESECTABLE STAGE III AND IV) DISEASE
Because advanced-stage lung cancer has few 5-year survivors, TNM staging is not as valuable in assessing prognosis within these groups. Several comprehensive
evaluations have searched for pretreatment prognostic factors in patients with advanced-stage NSCLC. 139,140,141,142,143,144 and 145 Pretreatment stage, performance
status, and weight loss are the most important factors. The definitions of weight loss have varied among the reviews. Many trials evaluated small numbers of women.
Those that included larger numbers of women generally found them to survive longer than men. 141,142,144 Serum lactate dehydrogenase, a predictor of survival in small
cell lung cancer and many other malignancies, also appears to be an independent survival variable. The use of chemotherapy has also been shown to be of
prognostic importance. 144 Histologic subtype is of no prognostic importance.
Whether any specific metastatic disease site confers a survival advantage or disadvantage remains controversial. Bone and liver metastases have been cited most
often as predicting shorter survival. The total number of metastatic sites or total tumor burden has been shown to influence prognosis. In particular, patients with a
solitary metastasis have a better prognosis, and an aggressive surgical approach should be considered. As yet, there is no clinically meaningful model combining the
various independent factors that can be recommended either to select appropriate therapy or predict outcome for individual patients.
NEW POTENTIAL PROGNOSTIC MARKERS
With the increasing availability of sophisticated molecular testing, a variety of novel potential prognostic factors has emerged. These factors have largely been studied
in earlier-stage disease, owing to the ready availability of surgical specimens. Activation of oncogenes (RAS, MYC C-ERB B-2, and BCL-2) or loss of the tumor
suppressor genes (RB, p53, and p16) have frequently been described. 125,126,127,128,129 and 130 Several trials have shown that patients with diploid tumors survive longer
than those with aneuploid tumors. 130,146,147 Further study is necessary to define the significance of ploidy and that of specific chromosomal alterations within the lung
cancer field.148,149
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptors
After the identification of the presence and often increased numbers of EGFRs on lung cancer cells, trials have assessed the impact of EGFR expression on survival.
In one trial, patients with operable EGFR-positive tumors survived significantly longer than those with EGFR-negative tumors (median survival, 71 and 28 months,
respectively). In a second trial, overexpression of EGFR in primary lung tumors was associated with poor survival. 150,151 The presence of EGFR on lung cancer cells is
a common finding and may be an important therapeutic target in the future.
Blood Group Antigen
Investigators have reported that the expression of blood group antigen A in tumors of patients with blood group types A and AB was associated with longer survival
after surgical therapy than was seen in patients with blood types A and AB who had no blood group antigen A expressed on their tumor cells. 152 This finding has been
confirmed in some studies, while others have not been able to show this. 128,129,153,154 This is also true for expression of Lewis y antigen.129,155
Neuroendocrine Markers
After the observation that tumors with neuroendocrine differentiation, such as small cell lung cancer, are responsive to chemotherapy and the fact that many types of
NSCLC contain small cell lung cancer elements, several investigators have looked for evidence of neuroendocrine differentiation in NSCLC. They have done this in
the hope of identifying a population of NSCLC patients with enhanced responsiveness to chemotherapy and improved survival. Markers of neuroendocrine
differentiation include chromogranin, L-dopa decarboxylase, dense core granules, neuron-specific enolase, and Leu-7. 156 In a group of NSCLC patients treated with a
variety of chemotherapeutic agents, neuron-specific enolase, Leu-7, and chromogranin were more commonly expressed in responding patients. 157 In the same study,
responding patients with two or more positive markers survived longer. In another study using a monoclonal antibody to define neuroendocrine differentiation,
approximately 30% of tumors were positive, and the presence of biopsy specimens containing more than 50% positively staining cells was associated with shortened
survival in a multivariable analysis. 158 Although they remain an intriguing and potentially useful area of investigation, neuroendocrine markers cannot be used to select
a specific therapy or to determine response or survival in patients with NSCLC.

Genetic Markers
The intensive study of the role of oncogenes in the pathogenesis of human malignancy has led to an investigation of oncogene activation in lung cancer. In one study,
K-ras point mutations occurred in almost one-third of human lung adenocarcinomas, while it is less common in squamous cell cancers. 159 In a follow-up study, the
same authors found that the presence of K-ras point mutations can define a subgroup of operable NSCLC patients at high risk for relapse and overall shortened
survival. 72 This has largely been confirmed by other studies. 73,160,161,162,163,164,165 and 166
Mutation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene has been frequently investigated. To date, it has no consistent correlation with prognosis. 126,129,132,167,168 Reduced
E-cadherin expression has been associated with unfavorable prognosis in one trial. 163 Plakoglobin expression is also thought to play a role in cell adhesion. Its
reduced expression has been shown to be associated with a poor prognosis. 169 Expression of BCL-2 leads to inhibition of apoptosis. It has been described in
approximately 20% of patients and is a favorable prognostic factor. 126,129,170,171Fas expression has been suggested to be associated with a good prognosis in resected
stage III disease. 172 Angiogenesis is increasingly recognized as an important factor of tumorigenesis. A variety of end points have been evaluated as angiogenic
indicators, including microvessel density or immune staining with anti–factor VIII antibodies. Current evidence supports an adverse prognosis correlating with
angiogenesis. 173,174,175,176,177 and 178

OCCULT DISEASE
An occult lung cancer is defined as a tumor in a symptom-free patient without radiographic findings. In most instances, this is detected by finding abnormal cells on
screening sputum cytologic examination. On occasion, an occult lung cancer may be identified at bronchoscopy that has been performed for other reasons (e.g.,
screening patients with other aerodigestive tract abnormalities). These occult tumors are usually found at an early stage either as in situ disease (Tis) or early T1N0
tumors. A truly occult lung cancer, undetected by radiography and asymptomatic, is almost always found at this early stage of disease. An extremely high proportion
(>90%) of such tumors are squamous cell and can be totally cured by surgical removal. In many instances, nonsurgical approaches [e.g., laser ablation,
hematoporphyrin ablation, or endobronchial brachytherapy (EBB)] may be employed as curative treatment, especially in noninvasive mucosal tumors.
LUNG CANCER SCREENING
In the hope that the screening of high-risk population groups by sputum cytology and chest radiograph would improve the identification of early-stage lung cancer, the
National Cancer Institute Cooperative Early Lung Cancer Group was formed more than 20 years ago and developed protocols for screening high-risk people (e.g.,
male cigarette smokers older than 45 years). More than 30,000 male volunteers at three centers were recruited and followed up. One-half underwent intensive
screening with four monthly sputum examinations and an annual chest radiograph, and the other one-half composed a control group. Each center had different
methods of following up the control group, but initial chest radiographs were performed by all study groups.
The results of this trial demonstrated that lung cancers identified by screening methods were more frequently early-stage tumors (40% vs. 15%). Patients who
developed lung cancer during the screening period had an overall 5-year survival of 35%, as compared with 13% in the general population. Despite this, there was no
impact on overall survival of the two groups when all deaths were considered. 179,180 It was also found that sputum cytology can identify squamous cell carcinomas and
that yearly chest radiographs identify with modest accuracy squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinomas. Small cell carcinoma is rarely detected at an early stage
no matter what the screening technique.
Other mass screening trials using plain chest radiography performed in Europe have also failed to alter the total death rate in screened versus control groups. All
trials demonstrated an improved ability to diagnose lung cancer early. Because these screening interventions fail to alter mortality rates, however, mass screening for
lung cancer by chest radiography or sputum cytology (or both) cannot be recommended.
Despite the failure of mass chest x-ray screening, most investigators involved in these studies continue to believe that a person at high risk for developing lung cancer
would be prudent to undergo annual chest radiography. Sputum cytology may be worthwhile as an initial screen, limiting further sputum cytology follow-up to those
patients demonstrating dysplasia.
Chest Radiography
Although there are no specific recommendations from cancer agencies, plain posteroanterior and lateral chest radiographs have been used on a yearly basis in
high-risk people in an attempt to provide an earlier diagnosis of lung cancer. 181 Important in this approach is the ability to compare previous radiographs with recent
films to detect subtle changes. As yet, routine CT scans of high-risk people have not been performed as a mass screening technique, and the impact of digitized chest
radiography has not been assessed.
Computed Tomography Scans
Most recently, two reports of screening using low-dose spiral CT scans have been reported. In a long-term Japanese study, a significant number of very early primary
tumors have been identified using this technique, with significantly improved 5-year survival outcome in treated patients. In a more recent U.S. study, the use of
low-dose spiral CT scans has confirmed the ability to discover extremely early lung cancers, with a prevalence rate of 30 per 1000 (vs. 3000 to 4000 with plain chest
radiographs). These provocative studies have suggested that screening for lung cancer using low-dose, low-cost spiral CT scans is worthwhile in identifying early
tumors and, it is hoped, in improving the outcome of patients with lung cancer by virtue of earlier detection. Although the exact cost of this type of mass screening
program cannot be estimated in relation to finances or the investigation of other abnormalities identified at the time of CT scan (23% of individuals in the American
study had other noncalcified benign nodules requiring investigation), this approach is worthy of further study. Whether the discovery of early treatable cancers
ultimately affects the overall long-term mortality in a mass screening population will have to be determined prospectively. However, the 5-year survival of
screen-detected stage I lung cancer falls from near 70% to less than 20% if left untreated, suggesting a significant benefit for earlier treatment. 182,183,184 and 185
Sputum Cytology
The routine use of annual sputum examination for cytologic assessment is not cost-effective in the detection of early lung cancer. Dysplastic changes identified at
sputum cytology, however, should be followed up. Severe dysplasia indicates a significant chance of ultimately developing lung cancer. 186 These patients should be
followed up extremely closely. 187 As noted, Tockman et al.95,96 and 97 have developed a monoclonal antibody that may improve the yearly detection rate of lung cancer
using specific monoclonal antibodies.
Bronchoscopy
Bronchoscopy certainly can identify early mucosal changes suggestive of lung cancer. Tis and T1N0 proximal tumors (usually squamous cell) can be identified with
relative ease using flexible bronchoscopy. The improved acuity of video equipment will probably further increase this yield. 188 However, many early lesions can be
missed. Hematoporphyrins are preferentially taken up by rapidly dividing cells and, by using hematoporphyrin excitation by specific wavelengths (630 or 410 nm) of
light, a characteristic fluorescence occurs in tissue containing the hematoporphyrin sensitizer. This technique can be used to detect these occult neoplasms but has
the disadvantages of false-positive results (due to fluorescence of cellular atypia or metaplasia), hematoporphyrin light sensitivity, and limited availability. Only two or
three centers have pursued this diagnostic approach. 189,190
A new approach exploits spectral differences of autofluorescence in dysplastic and malignant cells without using drugs. This technique, called lung imaging
fluorescent endoscopy, has been shown to identify early cellular changes and is being investigated for the detection and localization of early lung cancer, 191,192
especially proximal squamous cell tumors.
MANAGEMENT
The management of occult lung cancer depends on the stage of disease at diagnosis. Because most of these tumors are early but invasive T1N0 carcinomas, many

are treated by surgical excision. Whenever surgery is contraindicated, curative radiotherapy is indicated. With proximal early-stage tumors, the role of brachytherapy
alone or to augment the total dose is unknown, but curative treatment can be applied in this fashion.
In patients who have carcinoma in situ, hematoporphyrin or neodymium–yttrium aluminum garnet laser destruction of lesions can been used. Hayata et al. 194 found
that early lesions should be less than 1 cm 2 in total surface area. Only a complete endobronchial response to such therapy is acceptable. After such a response, local
recurrences are rare. Cortese et al. 193 recently reported using photodynamic therapy (PDT) in 21 carefully selected patients with superficial T1N0 lesions, all of which
were squamous cell lung cancers. Using PDT, a complete response was identified in 15 of 21 patients at the Mayo Clinic; ultimately, 9 patients were spared an
operation, 12 had recurrent disease after treatment, and 6 had complete responses. Recommendations for primary treatment with PDT in minimal occult tumors await
further definition. 194,195 Only those patients who have had complete responses should be maintained on this type of treatment protocol, and they should be closely
monitored with follow-up bronchoscopies. Whenever possible, surgical treatment is indicated for invasive T1N0 tumors and for all lesions persisting after nonsurgical
(e.g., phototherapy, laser destruction, radiotherapy) treatment.

CHEMOPREVENTION
No chemopreventive strategy has been proven effective for NSCLC, either for at-risk people (i.e., smokers or individuals with occupational exposures) or for patients
with treated lung cancer who have an increased risk of second primary tumors. No definite link between the dietary intake of carotenoids, vitamins C and E, or
selenium and the pathogenesis of lung cancer has yet been established. Chemoprevention trials of carotene, retinol, and the combinations of folic acid plus vitamin
B12 and carotene plus retinol in lung cancer have failed to demonstrate a chemopreventive effect. In two studies, an adverse risk was associated with carotene
use.47,53
Recent insights into the biology of lung cancer and cellular differentiation suggest several new lines of research in this area. The most relevant to the
chemoprevention of lung cancer appears to be the use of derivatives of retinoic acid, particularly 13- cis retinoic acid. This agent has been demonstrated to control
leukoplakia (a premalignant epithelial lesion) 196 and to prevent second primary cancers in head and neck cancer patients after treatment of their primary tumors. 197
The association of specific chromosomal deletions, inactivation or loss of tumor suppressor genes, and mutation of specific protooncogenes may allow better
definition of people at risk for second lung cancers and development of specific interventions for each genetic event. A nationwide trial in the United States is
assessing the value of this association. Early unpublished results appear to be negative.

OVERVIEW OF INVASIVE LUNG CANCER MANAGEMENT: TREATMENT MODALITIES
Surgery and radiotherapy have been used independently to obtain local control of the primary tumor and regional lymphatic drainage. Until recently, chemotherapy
had been used in an attempt to prolong symptom-free life in patients with metastatic disease. In the last 20 years, however, combined-modality therapies have
become much more prevalent and have spurred intensive investigation. All three modalities are now used as primary therapy and, in combination, have been
employed to improve disease-free intervals and ultimate survival.
Historically, surgery has provided the best chance of cure in the management of NSCLC when the tumor can be completely resected. Whenever surgery is not an
option because of the inability of the patient to tolerate this approach, primary radiotherapy has been offered for patients with limited locoregional disease. Effective
chemotherapy in the management of NSCLC is the last modality to be introduced. Although as a single modality chemotherapy rarely provides a total cure in the
management of lung cancer, complete responses do occur with locoregional disease and in patients with metastatic disease. Long-term survival occasionally is
possible. This section describes these three treatment modalities and, in general terms, their application. The newer forms of systemic therapy (e.g., biologic therapy)
also are discussed.
SURGERY
In NSCLC, when the tumor is limited to the hemithorax and can be totally encompassed by excision, surgery provides the best chance for cure ( Fig. 31.2-12). In stage
I and stage II disease, when the tumor has not extended beyond the bronchopulmonary lymph nodes, a complete excision is almost always possible. Controversy
arises in the management of N2 disease. Ipsilateral (N2) mediastinal lymph node involvement, despite being potentially resectable, remains a contentious issue when
indications for surgery are discussed. Whenever a complete excision occurs, the patient is afforded a chance of cure. In clinical staging, it is imperative that the
surgeon assess whether the tumor and its involved nodes can be completely removed at operation. N2 disease identified preoperatively (clinical staging), either by
imaging studies or mediastinoscopy, affords a much poorer prognosis (<10% 5-year survival rate) than occult N2 disease (30% 5-year survival rate) discovered only
at the time of surgery.

FIGURE 31.2-12. Schema for operability at the various stages of non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). See text for details. Chemo, chemotherapy; Prox. Bronch,
proximal bronchus; Pulm. Art., pulmonary artery; Rx, therapy; Sup., superior.

Except for a few special circumstances, stage IIIB disease, by virtue of incontrovertible evidence of contralateral lymph node spread (N3) or primary tumor invasion of
vital structures (T4), denotes inoperability, with a small likelihood of success after surgical excision. Similarly, lung cancer that has metastasized to distant organs is
usually beyond the realm of surgical excision. There has been success, however, in removing the primary tumor as well as a solitary metastatic focus. In selected
patients, this affords long-term disease-free control. Surgical approaches are frequently used to palliate symptoms.
Patient Selection
The preoperative assessment of patients considered for surgical treatment of lung cancer includes clinical staging of the disease to assess its resectability,
assessment of the cardiopulmonary reserve of the patient to determine whether the intended pulmonary resection is possible, and assessment of the patient with
regard to the perioperative risk of the procedure. Traditionally, patients are suitable candidates for pneumonectomy if the predicted forced expiratory volume in 1
second (FEV1) after pneumonectomy is greater than 1.2 L, the patient does not suffer from hypercapnia, and cor pulmonale is not present. 198,199 and 200 Pulmonary
function studies best suited to assess these parameters include spirometry, arterial blood gases, diffusion capacity measurements of oxygen uptake with exercise
(mVO2) and, when indicated, ventilation-perfusion scans to estimate the proportions of functioning pulmonary tissue required to be excised. 201 Patients undergoing
lobectomy or smaller resection require similar postoperative pulmonary function parameters. 202,203 Prospective analyses, however, have failed to show differences in
pulmonary function studies, including FEV 1, after lobectomy or smaller resection. 204,205 The amount of functioning pulmonary tissue removed by lobectomy or smaller
resection rarely interferes with ultimate recovery and function and may actually improve pulmonary function, 206 as it does with volume-reduction operations for
emphysema.
A more important factor in preoperative assessment is the ability of the patient to tolerate a general anesthetic and the rigors of the early postoperative period. To
prevent postoperative cardiopulmonary complications and decrease the chance of other major postoperative problems, care must be taken to determine accurately

the patient's cardiopulmonary status before operation. In the hope of ultimately improving the estimate of these risks, mVO 2, cardiac radionuclide studies, and
echocardiography have been introduced. The ability of patients to perform the necessary pulmonary toilet (e.g., coughing, deep breathing) after such procedures
requires intensive preoperative instruction and a period of rehabilitation when necessary. Pulmonary complications increase remarkably when the FEV 1–forced vital
capacity (FEV 1/FVC) ratio is below 75% of predicted, indicating significant airway obstruction. FEV 1/FVC ratios of less than 50% of predicted lead to significant
postoperative morbidity and mortality. Similarly, it appears that an mVO 2 of less than 15 increases morbidity and an mVO 2 of less than 10 leads to significant morbidity
and mortality. However, the exact risk for any single patient cannot be estimated. No single test is absolutely predictive. Clinical judgment is extremely important.
Postoperative Care
A major insult to cardiopulmonary reserve reflected by thoracotomy and pulmonary resection demands that patients undergoing such procedures receive assiduous
care and monitoring in the postoperative period. This is best served by a 24- to 48-hour period in a monitored setting. With newer forms of pain control (epidural
narcotic analgesia, patient-controlled analgesia, intrathoracic analgesia), the potential for less morbidity after pulmonary resection may be realized.
Surgical Procedures
Until 50 years ago, pneumonectomy was considered the surgical excision of choice in managing all lung cancers. 207 Presently, when complete excision can be
obtained by lobectomy, thus sparing functioning lung, this is the preferred resection method, with what appears to be an equal opportunity for long-term success. 208 In
the last 20 years, there has been a resurgence of interest in smaller resections and lung-conserving operations. Jensik 209 has been the major proponent of
segmentectomy for T1–2N0 peripheral tumors. Survival after such a limited resection and the morbidity and mortality of the operation appeared at least equivalent to
lobectomy in retrospective analyses. 210 Newer information, however, suggests that locoregional recurrence is increased and survival is decreased when less than a
lobectomy is performed.
In proximally situated tumors (T3) for which a pneumonectomy may be required for total excision, lung-conserving operations using bronchoplastic procedures to
preserve uninvolved lobes (e.g., sleeve lobectomy) have results equivalent to the more extensive pneumonectomy and should be employed when possible. Even
when the proximal pulmonary artery is involved, vascular sleeve resections can be used to preserve pulmonary function ( Fig. 31.2-13).

FIGURE 31.2-13. Bronchoplastic and bronchovascular sleeve resections to preserve pulmonary function. A: Right upper lobe sleeve resection. B: Left upper lobe
sleeve resection. C: Left upper lobe bronchovascular sleeve resection.

With improved surgical and anesthetic technique and perioperative care, the postoperative mortality rate for surgical resections has decreased remarkably during the
last 50 years. Today, pneumonectomy can be performed with a mortality rate of less than 6%, lobectomy with less than 3%, and smaller resections with 1% mortality
or less. These mortality figures are significantly affected by the age of the patient, stage of the disease, and extent of resection. 211
The most common complications after resectional surgery are not technical failures of the operation but cardiopulmonary problems, especially supraventricular
arrhythmias and respiratory failure. Improved preoperative assessment and postoperative care to identify high-risk patients and to decrease these complications will
ultimately lead to lessened operative risks for the patient ( Table 31.2-7).212

TABLE 31.2-7. Postoperative Mortality for Surgical Resections

RADIOTHERAPY
Radiotherapy is used for the treatment of NSCLC in various ways. In unresectable disease, it is the primary modality for the cure of tumor. In the postoperative setting,
it used as an adjuvant treatment to improve local control. Radiotherapy is also frequently used for the palliation of advanced and metastatic lung cancer.
The vast bulk of radiotherapy for NSCLC is delivered via external-beam radiotherapy, either through a radioactive source, such as cobalt 60, or more commonly via a
linear accelerator. Newer techniques, such as three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy (3D-CRT) and intensity-modulated radiotherapy, are essentially improved
techniques to deliver external-beam radiotherapy more accurately and with fewer side effects. This allows for a higher dose of radiation to be delivered safely.
Brachytherapy is another treatment modality that is used for both curative and palliative intent. Alterations in dose fractionation, such as hyperfractionation, are
attempts to take advantage of the biologic behavior of tumors and normal tissue to optimize repair of radiation damage and limit tumor repopulation.
The maximum tolerated dose of radiotherapy to the thorax has yet to be established. Standard therapy for unresected disease in this country and Europe has
consisted of 60 to 65 Gy over approximately 6 weeks. When patients receiving 65 Gy without chemotherapy were carefully evaluated for local tumor control, only 15%
were free of disease after treatment.213 Radiation resistance to the dose levels typically used represents a major factor contributing to the high incidence of local
failure. Higher doses appear to be required for improved local control. 214 A phase I–II dose escalation protocol 215 of hyperfractionated radiotherapy established that a
dose of 79.2 Gy can be safely delivered. Currently, dose escalation protocols are under way at many institutions to investigate the upper limits of dose that can be
tolerated. Doses as high as 102.9 Gy for small tumors and 81 Gy for large tumors have been delivered safely. 216,217 and 218
External-Beam Radiotherapy

External-beam radiotherapy is generally delivered via high-energy photon beams generated by a linear accelerator. The challenge in delivering radiotherapy is the
balancing of toxicity to the lung, spinal cord, esophagus, and other thoracic structures. To avoid an excessive dose of radiation to the lung, treatment is given from
opposed anterior and posterior beams. These beams typically include the spinal cord, and the dose that can be delivered this way is limited. Therefore, oblique
treatment fields are used to avoid the spinal cord. However, these fields treat more lung and expose the patient to an increased risk of radiation pneumonitis.
When a patient is simulated for radiotherapy, the treatment field encompasses the tumor with enough margin to account for tumor motion, patient movement, and
set-up error. The tumor can be demarcated by many methods. The most straightforward is observing the tumor under fluoroscopy and on plain films during simulation.
This has the advantage of helping to determine tumor motion. However, this method might lead to underestimation of tumor dimensions because of inadequate
imaging technique and disease not discernible on plain films. Therefore, CT images should be used to help to localize tumor. With the advent of CT-based simulation,
tumors can be outlined in the axial plane of consecutive images. A representation of the tumor in three dimensions can then be placed on a digitally reconstructed
radiograph. Recently, new imaging modalities, such as [ 18F]fluorodeoxyglucose-PET scanning, have been used to help to define tumor volumes. 219 The treatment field
should be verified on the treatment machine prior to the initiation of radiotherapy. Treatment fields should also be checked weekly so that adjustments can be made.
Acute side effects occurring during the course of radiotherapy are organ-specific and related to the fractionation scheme, total dose, and use of sequential or
concomitant chemotherapy or radiosensitizers. They typically manifest in the second to third week of treatment. A significant concern of combined therapy is the
increased toxicity, which may outweigh the benefit from both modalities.
Delayed acute radiation toxicity can occur 1 to 3 months after completing treatment but has been known to occur as late as 6 months after completion of treatment.
Organs at risk include normal lung, esophagus, spinal cord, and heart. Radiation factors, including fraction size, overall treatment time, radiation dose, and volume of
normal organ treated, contribute to acute delayed toxicity for conventional fractionation with radiotherapy. Similarly, the use of concurrent chemotherapy, as well as
novel fractionation regimens, can lower the threshold for delayed tissue reactions. 220
PULMONARY TOXICITY. Animal models have demonstrated increased vascular permeability after thoracic irradiation.

221

Alveolar surfactant levels also increase after
thoracic irradiation and, owing to increased vascular permeability, are detectable in the serum.
This endothelial injury may lead to an inflammatory response,
causing the clinical syndrome of radiation pneumonitis. Elevated serum levels of transforming growth factor-b, a growth factor known to stimulate connective tissue
formation, has been demonstrated in patients developing lung toxicity. 223 Radiation-induced clinical pneumonitis represents the most commonly observed delayed
acute reaction, usually occurring between 1 and 3 months after completion. Patients with pneumonitis typically present with shortness of breath on exertion,
tachypnea, tachycardia, fever, and nonproductive cough. Chest radiography often reveals an infiltrate within the irradiated volume. 224 These symptoms can mimic an
upper respiratory infection, which must be ruled out before embarking on specific treatment related to alleviating pneumonitis. Recurrence or spread of tumor must be
considered in the differential diagnosis. Although the effects of radiation pneumonitis are usually self-limiting, it is a potentially life-threatening process. The use of
corticosteroids (prednisone) in a starting dose of 1 mg/kg/d, followed by a carefully controlled slow taper, usually resolves most clinical symptoms of pneumonitis.
Corticosteroids, however, appear to reduce the ability of alveolar macrophages to release tumor necrosis factor in response to infectious agents, which can lead to
recurrent respiratory tract infections in patients treated chronically with these drugs. 225
222

Enhancement of radiation damage by chemotherapy in terms of acute and late effects appears to be maximum with concurrent treatment, with a tendency for damage
to decline as the interval between drug and radiation is increased. 226,227 Roach et al. 228 analyzed radiotherapy parameters in 24 combined-modality trials completed
before 1994, involving more than 1911 patients with both small cell lung cancer and NSCLC, to determine potential risk factors for radiation pneumonitis when
radiation is combined with chemotherapy. Multiple fractionation schemes, total doses, and fraction sizes, along with several chemotherapeutic regimens, were used.
The overall incidence of pneumonitis was 7.8%. Factors associated with a higher risk included fraction size higher than 2.67 Gy and total dose. Twice-daily radiation,
however, appeared to reduce the risk expected if the same total daily dose were given as a single fraction. Based on this analysis, high dose per fraction when
combined with chemotherapy should be avoided.
Late radiation injury is related primarily to the dose per fraction and total dose. Most patients who develop clinical pneumonitis eventually become asymptomatic,
although nearly all ultimately develop the radiologic evidence of pulmonary fibrosis in the region of the previous pneumonitis. The degree of late pulmonary toxicity
and fibrosis is directly proportional to the volume of normal lung irradiated and the total dose delivered, as well as the fraction size. It is not clear whether
chemotherapy actually modifies the latency period for the development of late pulmonary reactions or increases the actual incidence. For most patients, pulmonary
fibrosis is an expected and unavoidable consequence of high-dose irradiation. For patients presenting with preexisting compromised pulmonary function, however,
and for patients who develop severe clinical pneumonitis, a distortion of the pulmonary architecture by fibrosis can have a major impact on the quality of life and
functional status.
ESOPHAGEAL TOXICITY. Since the esophagus has a central location, it is exposed to high-dose radiation during the treatment of most NSCLCs and can be a major

dose-limiting factor. Radiation may induce acute esophagitis during the course of therapy. Histologic changes occur during the first week of treatment, 229 although
clinical symptoms typically begin during the second through fourth weeks of treatment. Esophagitis presents with mild to severe swallowing difficulty requiring diet
modification and nonnarcotic or narcotic analgesics, depending on severity. It is caused by an inflammatory response of the esophageal mucosa. 229
Chemotherapy and radiosensitizers appear to accelerate the onset and severity of symptoms. In a randomized prospective intergroup trial, the rate of grade 3 or
worse esophagitis increased from 1.3% to 65% with the addition of concurrent cisplatin and etoposide to 50.4 Gy thoracic radiation. 230 When used concurrently with
carboplatin and paclitaxel, the grade 3 or 4 esophageal toxicity has been reported to be approximately 25%. 229 Agents such as 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, cisplatin,
and mitomycin also enhance radiation-induced esophageal toxicity. 168,169 and 170,231,232 and 233 Acute esophagitis generally resolves shortly after the completion of
radiotherapy, with few patients progressing to chronic esophagitis. The rare patient with chronic esophagitis may require dilatation to relieve stricture formation.
Hyperfractionated treatment has also been shown to increase toxicity. When 60 Gy given via accelerated hyperfractionation was compared to standard fractionation,
the grade 3 or worse acute esophageal toxicity increased from 9% to 35% ( P = .0017).234
CUTANEOUS TOXICITY. With the use of megavoltage equipment, treatment rarely causes an acute reaction to the skin, such as erythema or moist desquamation. Moist

desquamation can occur in the supraclavicular region after a course of high-dose radiotherapy, owing to the sloping surface of the chest at the level of the thoracic
inlet. The addition of chemotherapy or sensitizers may also enhance the effects of radiotherapy on the skin.
NEUROTOXICITY. A transient myelopathic syndrome (Lhermitte's syndrome) can occur during the first 6 months after therapy and is manifested by dysesthesias and

paresthesias affecting the upper extremities and shoulder girdles on flexion of the neck. 235 It is related to the total radiation dose, dose per fraction, and length of
spinal cord irradiated. Lhermitte's syndrome is self-limiting and does not appear to be related to the development of late radiation myelitis. 236
The spinal cord can tolerate conventionally fractionated radiotherapy doses in the range of 45 to 50 Gy, and the radiation oncologist should strive to maintain the
maximal spinal cord dose at or below this level. In some cases, depending on the volume of spinal cord treated and the dose per fraction, the tolerance has been
reported to be as high as 60 Gy; in selected cases in which the tumor is paraspinal, it may be appropriate to treat a small portion of the cord to this dose with the
patient's understanding of potential toxicity. 237 Chemotherapy can reduce the tolerance threshold of this organ. There has been a concern that altered fractionation
might lead to increased myelitis. Jeremic et al. 238 have reported no cases of radiation myelitis in 158 patients who lived at least 1 year after receiving
hyperfractionated radiotherapy in fraction sizes of 1.2 Gy per day to a total dose of 50.4 Gy. Once it develops, radiation-induced transverse myelitis is irreversible.
CARDIAC TOXICITY. Radiation injury to the heart is usually manifested as pericarditis, although other complications, such as myocardial ischemia and chronic

pericardial effusions, can occur. The tolerance for the entire heart is approximately 40 Gy; up to one-third of the heart can tolerate approximately 60 Gy. 239
Three-Dimensional Conformal Radiotherapy
3D-CRT represents an approach to improve the local outcome of radiotherapy in NSCLC. 239a,239b The major aim of this method is to decrease the risk of underdosing
or missing portions of the tumor. In addition, owing to the improved ability to conform the high radiation dose to the target, considerable amounts of normal lung,
esophagus, and heart can be effectively excluded from the high-radiation-dose regions. This provides a potential for increasing the tumor dose to levels beyond those
feasible with conventional radiotherapy, with a concomitant decrease in the normal tissue complication probability. Single-institution and cooperative group studies of

dose escalation are under way 216,217 and 218 to evaluate the efficacy of this strategy.
3D-CRT is accomplished using CT to aid in treatment planning. A clinical tumor volume (CTV) is defined in the axial plane of the CT images. A margin is subsequently
added to the CTV to generate the planning target volume. This margin compensates for tumor motion during treatment caused by breathing, patient movement, and
set-up error. The treatment beams are subsequently constructed using the beam's-eye-view technique.
The use of 3D-CRT also allows investigators to predict more accurately the toxicity of a given course of radiotherapy. The normal tissue complication probability is an
estimate of clinical toxicity based on the dose delivered to the volume of normal lung. It has been shown to correlate with incidence of radiation pneumonitis. Other
institutions use either the mean lung dose 240 or the dose that a given volume of lung receives as a determinant of lung toxicity. For example, in the Radiation Therapy
Oncology Group (RTOG) dose escalation protocol, the volume of lung receiving 20 Gy is used as a guide as to what dose to deliver. 216
Intensity-Modulated Radiotherapy
Intensity-modulated radiotherapy represents a new approach to radiotherapy wherein the beam within the treatment field is dynamically changed during treatment to
give more radiotherapy to areas with tumor and less to areas with normal tissue. 241 Its use is being investigated.
Gated Radiotherapy
Motion of the tumor and of the lung itself during the delivery of each treatment appears to affect the outcome of radiotherapy in inoperable NSCLC. Lung tumors have
been shown to move substantially during quiet breathing, causing inaccuracies in treatment delivery. 242,243 Underdosage of the CTV may result if the tumor target
moves outside the treatment volume during the administration of radiotherapy. To compensate for this motion, a large margin is usually used, consequently increasing
the amount of normal lung tissue in the high-dose volume and limiting the amount of radiation that can be delivered.
To overcome this, techniques have been developed to keep the tumor still during radiotherapy. Two distinct techniques have been used to reduce the effect of
respiratory motion. The first involves confining the radiation delivery to a specified phase in the breathing cycle by gating the linear accelerator while the patient
breathes freely. Breathing is monitored with devices that trigger radiation delivery during specific phases of the patient's respiratory cycle. 244 The use of gated
treatments has been evaluated244,245,246 and 247 and offers the advantage of allowing patients to breathe freely while the radiation beam is turned on and off. In the
second approach, breathing is controlled either voluntarily by the patient 248 or by using an occlusion valve. 249 This technique is less challenging to perform, since it
involves no modification to the treatment machine, but it is not suitable for all patients.
Stereotactic Radiotherapy
Stereotactic radiotherapy and stereotactic radiosurgery have been shown to be effective in treating brain metastases. Stereotactic radiotherapy is a technique by
which a high dose of radiation is delivered to a small, well-circumscribed lesion with minimal dose to surrounding structures. This technique has been applied to lung
tumors with good local control. 250 It will be applicable only in a small subset of patients with very early, small tumors and must be considered investigational at this
time.
Neutron Therapy
Fast neutrons have been examined as a potential modality to improve the results of therapy for NSCLC. The biologic properties of neutrons differ from conventional
photon energies, possessing advantages of high-linear-energy transfer. This high-linear-energy transfer can lead to a number of biologic effects, including greater
relative biologic effectiveness, reduced oxygen enhancement ratio, less sublethal and potentially lethal damage repair, and less cell cycle specificity than photons. 251
A randomized trial of 200 patients was performed using modern neutrons to a dose of 20.4 neutron Gy as compared to 66 Gy of standard photons. 252 It showed no
difference in overall survival between the two groups. Grade 3 or worse radiation pneumonitis occurred in 11% and 24% of the patients in the photon and neutron
groups, respectively. Therefore, unless a specific group of patients who might benefit from neutron therapy can be identified, it is unclear whether this modality is
useful for patients with NSCLC.
Brachytherapy
INTRAOPERATIVE INTERSTITIAL BRACHYTHERAPY AND RADIOTHERAPY. Intraoperative interstitial brachytherapy has been applied in the curative and palliative treatment

of NSCLC. Implantation of radioactive sources offers an advantage over external irradiation because of the limited penetrability from source to prescription point,
resulting in rapid dose fall-off and sparing of surrounding normal tissues.
Indications for implantation include unresectable or incompletely resected tumors found at thoracotomy: hilar tumors adherent to major vasculature with no clearance
for safe dissection; attachment of tumors to mediastinal structures, such as the trachea, pericardium, or esophagus; extensive tumor involvement of the chest wall,
spine, or paravertebral tissue when a complete resection is not possible; and recurrent or metastatic endobronchial lesions. 253
For curative techniques, the selection of radioactive sources depends on the tumor location and the amount of gross disease left after surgery. In circumstances in
which more than 1 cm of tumor is left behind, a permanent volume implant is usually required. The area to be implanted is determined, and its dimensions are
measured. A nomogram is applied to determine the number of radioactive sources ( 125I or 103Pd) needed and the proper spacing of the needles, which in turn are
based on the strength of the sources and the average dimension of the tumor volume. Hollow needles are inserted into the tumor, and radioactive sources are
permanently implanted. For close and positive margins or in the presence of a minimal plaque of residual gross disease, either a permanent planar or temporary
interstitial implant may be used. For situations requiring permanent placement of radioactive sources, 125I seeds encapsulated in Vicryl or 103Pd seeds can either be
directly sutured onto the area at risk or sewn into a premeasured Dexon or Vicryl mesh, which in turn is sutured onto the target area. A similar technique employing
125
I embedded in a Gelfoam plaque has been described. 254 Both techniques allow implantation of radioactive seeds in areas that are near vital structures that cannot
be directly sutured. 255
Temporary implants use 192Ir or 125I at either a low- or a high-dose-rate method of delivering radiation using afterloading catheters. Temporary implants have been
advocated for tumors invading the chest wall, superior sulcus, mediastinum, and paravertebral regions when a complete resection is not certain. In general, the
catheters are spaced 1 cm apart, with a 1-cm margin around the defined target, and exit out the chest wall. The patient is then loaded with radioactive sources ( 125I or
192
Ir) approximately 4 or 5 days after surgery to allow for proper wound healing.
INTRALUMINAL BRACHYTHERAPY. Intraluminal brachytherapy or EBB is generally used as a palliative treatment for obstructive recurrent tumors causing such symptoms

as dyspnea and hemoptysis. This treatment directly introduces a high-activity 192Ir source directly into the lumen of the tracheal or bronchial airway. Flexible
bronchoscopic guidance is used to localize the tumor and to position a catheter beyond the site of disease. Patients are generally treated under a combination of
monitored intravenous sedation and the application of local anesthesia to the larynx and trachea. The radioactive 192Ir source is then introduced into the catheter and
positioned. Treatment lasts only a couple of minutes, owing to the high activity of the source. High-dose-rate intraluminal brachytherapy has largely replaced both
direct interstitial implantation of 125I seeds into endobronchial tumors and low-dose-rate endobronchial irradiation. 256
Side effects after intraluminal brachytherapy include massive hemoptysis, fistula formation, chronic mucosal sloughing, and airway edema. 257 Langendijk et al. 258
examined risk factors for massive hemoptysis. The highest complication rate occurred in patients receiving EBB for recurrent tumor (43%) or combination
external-beam therapy and EBB (25%). They also found that patients receiving a single fraction of 15 Gy prescribed to 1 cm had a 50% rate of massive hemoptysis,
whereas patients receiving 7.5 Gy × 2 or 10 Gy in a single fraction had an 11% rate. Hennequin et al. 259 theorized that most massive hemoptysis is from disease
progression and not treatment toxicity. They reported a 7% risk of massive hemoptysis and concluded that all but one case had evidence of tumor progression. They
also reported an 8.7% rate of radiation bronchitis. The risk factors for toxicity in their series included palliative intent of treatment and the length of bronchus treated.
Intraoperative Radiotherapy

Experience with the use of intraoperative radiotherapy for NSCLC is limited. This modality does not appear to show a significant benefit over external-beam irradiation
alone or in combination with chemotherapy. The technique involves the modification of a linear accelerator through the attachment of an intraoperative cone for
electron-beam treatment.260 Both the optimal dose and threshold tolerance of mediastinal structures are unknown; however, one fraction is generally delivered
intraoperatively at a dose of 10 to 20 Gy. The published results are conflicting. With no reported phase III trials, this modality must be considered experimental.
CHEMOTHERAPY
General Principles
Chemotherapy for patients with NSCLC has been under investigation for several decades. Conceptually, it has evolved from the administration in the palliative care
setting to its integration into combined-modality curative therapy settings in patients with locoregionally advanced disease.
Currently, chemotherapy as a single-treatment modality can be considered standard therapy for most patients with stage IV disease or stage IIIB disease due to
pleural effusion or positive scalene lymph nodes. 261,262,263,264 and 265 In these settings, prolongation of survival time and amelioration of clinical symptoms are the goals
of therapy. It has been conclusively demonstrated in randomized clinical trials that chemotherapy prolongs median survival times as compared with “best supportive
care” and also increases quality of life (discussed later in Stage IV Disease).
In patients with locoregionally advanced disease (stage IIIA or IIIB), traditional therapy has consisted of surgery and postoperative radiotherapy (PORT) or
radiotherapy alone for patients with unresectable disease. In these patients, chemotherapy is now used as a component of multimodality therapy. 266,267 and 268 Therapy
is given with curative intent, and it is hoped that the integration of chemotherapy will lead not only to an increased overall median survival time but to an increase in
the percentage of (cured) patients surviving for long periods (discussed later in “Unresectable” Stage IIIA and IIIB Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer ).
Strategies in this setting have included classic adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with fully resected disease and induction (or “neoadjuvant”) chemotherapy whereby
a specified number of chemotherapy cycles are administered prior to definitive local therapy with surgery, radiotherapy, or both. The simultaneous use of
chemotherapy and radiotherapy (concomitant chemoradiotherapy) has also been intensively investigated. In theory, adjuvant and induction chemotherapy are aimed
at improving systemic control of occult microscopic metastatic disease. Decreasing the size (downstaging) of the locoregional tumor burden may also be observed
with induction chemotherapy. The delay of radiotherapy to allow for administration of induction chemotherapy has been of theoretic concern, since this could lead to
the proliferation of clonogenic tumor cells in an unresponsive tumor. 269 Concomitant chemoradiotherapy may also result in systemic antitumor activity. 270 However, this
will be realized only if systemically active doses and schedules of the drugs are administered. In clinical practice, the latter has been challenging, since
radiation-related toxicities are usually increased in the presence of chemotherapy (i.e., esophagitis and radiation pneumonitis). Therefore, the primary goal of
concomitant chemoradiotherapy may be to enhance the antitumor activity of radiation and increase locoregional control (radiation sensitization or enhancement). 270
It has been conclusively demonstrated that induction chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy prolongs the median survival time in patients with unresectable stage III
disease when compared with radiotherapy alone. 213,271,272 and 273 Encouraging data also exist to support the administration of combination chemotherapy with
concomitant radiotherapy. 274,275 The use of induction chemotherapy in the surgical setting (stage IIIA) 276,277 or with simultaneous radiotherapy 274 remains
investigational. Also, the use of adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with resected stage I, stage II, or stage IIIA disease is considered experimental.
Selection of Specific Drugs
Most patients with NSCLC present with metastatic (stage IV) disease at initial diagnosis. There is no known curative therapy for these patients. The treatment goals
are, therefore, broadly defined to maximize survival time and maintain acceptable quality of life. Because metastatic NSCLC is a systemic disease, its therapy is
logically based on the use of systemic therapy. Additional local therapy is used to palliate specific sites of disease.
Most traditional drugs have at best moderate single-agent activity in NSCLC. 261,263,264 and 265,270,278,279,280 and 281 It has been generally accepted that a single agent should
have a response rate of approximately 15% for the drug to be considered active. 261,262,263,264 and 265 This guideline is compromised by the fact that, historically, not all
drugs have been studied in rigorously designed and conducted phase II or phase III trials. For example, rigorous testing during the 1990s suggested response rates
for cisplatin or carboplatin of only approximately 10%.
Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, only six drugs were thought to have sufficient single-agent activity in NSCLC. Complete responses to single-agent therapy were
exceedingly rare. Furthermore, the response duration was short, on average 2 to 3 months. Median survival trials were 6 to 8 months, with no long-term survivors.
Combination chemotherapy was investigated in an attempt to increase response rates. 261,262,263,264 and 265,270,282 Generally, higher responses were reported, but it
remained unclear whether a more pronounced impact on survival was also achieved. One of the earliest combination chemotherapy regimens was the regimen
consisting of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), methotrexate, and procarbazine (CAMP). In a single-institution study, a response rate of 26% was
noted. 283
Subsequent clinical trials incorporated cisplatin, which was thought by many investigators to be the most active single agent in NSCLC in the 1980s. 144,282,284 Among
the most frequently used combinations were the regimens of cisplatin and etoposide, cisplatin and vinblastine, or (in Europe) cisplatin and vindesine or
teniposide. 282,285,286 and 287 Three-drug combinations incorporating ifosfamide, 288,289 mitomycin C,286,290 or leucovorin 291,292 were also investigated (Table 31.2-8).

TABLE 31.2-8. Combination Chemotherapy Regimens for Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer

Most of these regimens have in common the combination of cisplatin with a vinca alkaloid or etoposide. They were based on the incorporation of drugs with known
single-agent activity, unlike earlier combinations, such as CAMP. Phase II studies of these regimens frequently resulted in response rates of 30% to 50%, suggesting
higher activity than the first-generation combination regimens. 265 Because cisplatin is logistically difficult to administer and can result in severe toxicity, direct
comparisons of cisplatin-based regimens with non–cisplatin-containing combinations were performed. Although some studies reported increased response rates with
a cisplatin-containing regimen, there was no consistent increase in survival. Only three studies reported superior survival with cisplatin. 293
Another question of interest was whether there exists a dose-response curve for cisplatin's activity in NSCLC. One early study suggested an increase in response rate
when increasing the cisplatin dose from 60 to 120 mg/m 2.294 A second study, however, did not support this observation. 282 The Southwestern Oncology Group
(SWOG) initiated a three-arm comparison of cisplatin administered at 100 mg/m 2 versus 200 mg/m2 per cycle versus a third arm of high-dose cisplatin and mitomycin
based on promising phase II data for high-dose cisplatin. 284 The response rates for the three arms were 12%, 14%, and 27%, respectively, and median survival times

were not statistically different at 5 to 7 months. 295 This study discounted the possibility that increasing the cisplatin dose beyond 100 mg/m 2 results in significantly
higher activity. Currently, most clinical trials use doses of 75 or 80 mg/m 2 every 3 weeks.
The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) conducted several comparative studies attempting to identify the most active combination in treating NSCLC. In
one such study, a first-generation regimen (CAMP) was compared with three cisplatin-containing regimens, including the combination of mitomycin C, vinblastine, and
cisplatin (platinum), or MVP. 296 Although the MVP regimen produced the highest numeric response rate at 31%, the median survival time ranged from 4.5 months (for
MVP) to 6.5 months and was not significantly different among the four regimens. In another five-arm study, single-agent carboplatin or iproplatin followed by MVP
chemotherapy at the time of first progression was compared with first-line MVP and two other cisplatin-based regimens. 297 Patients treated with initial carboplatin had
the longest median survival time; first-line MVP again resulted in the highest response rate but in a lower median survival time (23 weeks, versus 32 weeks for initial
carboplatin). Carboplatin and cisplatin are now considered to be of equal activity in NSCLC, with single-agent response rates of approximately 10% and a different
spectrum of clinical toxicities.
New Drugs
During the decade of the 1990s, several new drugs with single activity in NSCLC were identified. These include the taxanes, paclitaxel, and docetaxel; the
antimetabolite gemcitabine; the topoisomerase I inhibitor irinotecan; and the vinca alkaloid vinorelbine. 261,262,263,264 and 265 The introduction of these agents into clinical
practice generated much enthusiasm, since they are usually tolerated better than cisplatin, have reproducible single-agent activity of 15% to 25% and, in some cases,
have novel intracellular targets. Current standard regimens for stage IV disease and most clinical trials in earlier-stage disease involving chemotherapy are focused
on combinations including these drugs and are discussed further in the stage-specific segments.
BIOLOGIC THERAPY
Investigators have evaluated both nonspecific and specific means to stimulate the immune system of patients with NSCLC. 298 Despite this effort and the proven ability
to modulate immunologic end points, no immunologic agent or approach has been shown to induce regressions or improve survival in epithelial lung cancer patients.
As with all other forms of systemic therapy for this illness, immunotherapy remains an investigational approach. Patients should be treated only as part of formal
protocols. In addition, because cytotoxic chemotherapy given as initial treatment for metastatic NSCLC can reliably induce regressions and prolong survival, inclusion
of chemotherapeutic drugs in the overall treatment plan should be discussed.
Several trials have tested nonspecific agents to enhance immune response. After observations that patients who survive an empyema after lung cancer surgery
appear to have prolonged survival, 299 McKneally et al.300 tested the usefulness of intrapleural bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) in stage I NSCLC and found fewer
recurrences and deaths in treated patients than in comparable controls. Confirmatory prospective randomized trials have failed to confirm this result and, in fact,
demonstrated a decrease in disease-free interval for patients given BCG. 301 Levamisole has also been tested as a nonspecific immunopotentiator in epithelial lung
cancer patients, with no evidence of benefit. 302,303
The combination of BCG and levamisole as adjuvant therapy has been compared to cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (CAP) chemotherapy in patients
with completely resected stage II and III adenocarcinoma and large cell carcinoma. 304 This trial showed an improvement in both disease-free survival and overall
survival among patients randomly assigned to receive CAP chemotherapy. The accumulated data demonstrate that no nonspecific immunostimulating agent tested
has been shown to improve symptoms, response, or survival in NSCLC.
Interferons have been tested alone and in combination in patients with epithelial lung cancer. Trials of human leukocyte interferon 305 and recombinant interferon-a 306
or interferon-b 307 have not shown sufficient activity to warrant either use or further study for this indication. The combination of interferon-a and -b given with cisplatin
plus etoposide has been compared with the same chemotherapy given alone. 308 No improvement in response or survival and enhanced hematologic toxicity were
observed in the combination chemotherapy plus interferon arm of this study. Preclinical data, however, demonstrated additive effects or synergy when interferon was
combined with cytotoxic agents, such as fluorouracil or cisplatin, in several tumor types. 309 A therapeutic clinical benefit has not been established. 310,311 and 312 At
present, there is no evidence that interferon-a, -b, or -g, given alone or in combination with chemotherapy, can influence the natural history of NSCLC. The use of
interferon for this indication remains investigational.
Phase I and phase II trials of interleukins have failed to reveal any significant effect. 313 Current investigations are focused on a possible role for monoclonal antibodies
to the EGFR (e.g., IMclone C225) or the Her2/neu antibody herceptin.

SPECIFICS OF LUNG CANCER MANAGEMENT
LOCALIZED “RESECTABLE” (STAGES I, II, AND IIIA) DISEASE
When disease is localized to the lung or includes only regional draining lymphatic channels, treatment of the primary disease and these regional lymphatics employs
a surgical or radiotherapeutic approach. However, despite lack of evidence of distant metastatic disease at initial staging, patients fail most frequently after treatment
because of distant recurrences that indicate that despite primary control, micrometastatic disease was probably present at the time of initial treatment. For this reason,
even with disease that can be completely resected, combined-modality treatments are being investigated with fervor to eliminate these presumed micrometastatic foci
at the time of initial therapy.
Primary Surgery
Stage I and II lung cancer denotes disease limited to the hemithorax, with tumor extension no farther than the adjacent resectable structures peripherally (T3) or hilar
nodes proximally (N1). In these cases, whenever possible, surgical excision is the treatment of choice.
In most instances, lobectomy is the resection procedure required. When the primary tumor or lymph node involvement extends to the proximal bronchus or proximal
pulmonary artery (T3) or cross the major fissure such that a complete resection is only possible by pneumonectomy, this more extensive procedure should be
performed. When resectable adjacent structures are involved, an en bloc resection of the involved area together with the pulmonary resection is necessary.
The role of mediastinal lymphadenectomy as part of the surgical procedure when hilar or mediastinal nodes are uninvolved is debated. The proponents of complete
ipsilateral or bilateral mediastinal lymphadenectomy argue that complete removal of mediastinal lymph nodes improves survival. Certainly, this dissection provides the
best possible surgical staging by removing all draining lymph nodes, which can then be analyzed pathologically for metastatic involvement. At minimum, for accurate
final surgical and pathologic staging, lymph node sampling of all draining areas should be performed at the time of surgical resection, 314,315 and all lymph nodes
involved or suspected to be involved with tumor should be removed. A small randomized trial comparing mediastinal lymphadenectomy to mediastinoscopy plus
intraoperative lymph node sampling showed no difference in survival, locoregional recurrence, or accuracy of the two staging procedures as applied to stage I or II
lung cancer. 316 A larger phase III trial is under way in North America to address this issue.
In peripheral T1N0 tumors, the role of lesser resection (segmentectomy, wedge excision, or precision cautery dissection) has yet to be fully defined. A randomized
trial conducted by the Lung Cancer Study Group (LCSG) 205 showed that after long-term follow-up, the locoregional recurrence rate with limited resection was threefold
greater than with lobectomy (15% vs. 5%), and mortality, morbidity, and pulmonary function were equal in both arms. There was a marginally significant long-term
survival benefit for lobectomy. For this reason, it is recommended that limited resection be reserved for compromise situations in which the surgeon feels that
lobectomy is contraindicated and a complete excision can be performed by a smaller resection ( Table 31.2-9). As well, an analysis by the Rush-Presbyterian group
also suggests that locoregional recurrence rate after segmentectomy is much higher than that after lobectomy. The value of segmentectomy in preserving lung
function in otherwise normal individuals has been questioned. A recent analysis suggests that lobectomy and segmentectomy result in identical pulmonary function 1
year after the surgery. 205,317,318 Except in a few centers, lesser resections (e.g., segmentectomy, wedge excision, precision cautery dissection) have been reserved for
situations in which, because of poor cardiopulmonary reserve, it is thought that the patient cannot tolerate a lobectomy. In these situations, this “compromised
resection” is certainly indicated, although the risks of locoregional recurrence are higher.

TABLE 31.2-9. Results of Limited Pulmonary Resection Performed as an Intentional Procedure, Mainly for T1N0 Tumors

In the LCSG trial, there appeared to be no difference in locoregional recurrence rates whether the tumor measured 1, 2, or 3 cm. However, some surgeons do
advocate that for very early tumors (1 cm or less) a lesser resection is justified without the need to perform a lobectomy. However, studies have demonstrated that
even in these very early tumors, lymphatic permeation may have occurred within that lobe, 205,317,318 and the patient would have been better served by a formal
lobectomy. The exact role of lesser resections in these very small (often CT-detected) tumors (0.5 to 1 cm) has yet to be defined. This will be important in managing
CT-screening-identified subcentimeter nodules.
After surgical resection for stage I and II lung cancer, the 5-year survival rate without recurrence exceeds 50% in stage I and 35% in stage II disease. In completely
resected T1N0 tumors, 5-year survival rates exceed 70%. Approximately 25% of patients are tumor-free at death, suggesting that surgical resection in T1N0 lung
cancer renders 80% of patients tumor-free.
T3N0 Tumors
Tumors that invade the chest wall, the diaphragm, the mediastinal pleura, or the pericardium or are situated within 2 cm of the carina constitute the designation of T3.
At the Japan National Cancer Center, Naruke et al. 315 reported an overall 5-year survival rate of 26% in 327 patients with this stage of disease. At Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC), 77 patients with completely resected tumor had a 42% 5-year survival rate, but 48 patients with incomplete resections did
not survive beyond 2.5 years. From the literature, it appears that approximately 40% of patients with completely resected T3N0 lesions survive at least 5 years.
CHEST WALL INVASION. Involvement of parietal pleura or chest wall muscle or rib constitutes T3 tumors ( Table 31.2-10). The deeper the invasion, the worse is the

prognosis. In all instances, it is recommended that the tumor be resected en bloc with the involved chest wall, with a minimum of 2 cm of normal chest wall removed in
all directions beyond the tumor. When necessary, plastic reconstruction can be used to reconstitute the chest wall. Prognosis is related to the completeness of
resection and depth of chest wall invasion, with no patients surviving 5 years after incomplete resection. Whether simple removal of the parietal pleura in tumors only
invading this structure is adequate remains a contentious issue. A recent report suggested that with sufficient care and experience, pleurectomy is adequate in
selected T3 tumors. 319

TABLE 31.2-10. Results after Surgical Treatment for Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer with Chest Wall Invasion (T3)

SUPERIOR SULCUS TUMORS. Pancoast described a tumor in the apex of the lung invading the first rib, with associated involvement of the brachial plexus and stellate

ganglion, creating Pancoast's syndrome (rib erosion, shoulder pain radiating down the arm, Horner's syndrome). Shaw and Paulson were the first to describe a
curative resection in this disease. Since that initial report, most surgeons continue to treat a documented superior sulcus tumor with preoperative radiotherapy of 3000
to 4500 cGy, followed by en bloc resection of the involved lung, chest wall and, frequently, the T1 nerve root. Residual disease at the time of resection is treated with
PORT or intraoperative brachytherapy, 320 but the results of these R1 or R2 resections are disappointing despite the adjuvant therapy.
The overall survival rate for patients with completely resected tumors is approximately 40% ( Table 31.2-11). Adverse prognostic factors include involved mediastinal
lymph nodes (stage IIIA) and bony erosion. In a report from MSKCC, lobectomy with en bloc chest wall resection proved far superior to smaller resections in treating
this disease, and N2 disease severely affected prognosis. 321

TABLE 31.2-11. Reported Results after Surgical Treatment for Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer with a Superior Sulcus Lesion (T3)

Usual contraindications to surgery for superior sulcus tumors include a T4 tumor (vertebral body invasion, subclavian artery, or vein invasion) or clinically evident N2
disease. On occasion, palliative resection of such lesions may be required for pain relief. More recently, aggressive curative approaches to remove and replace these
adjacent structures have been reported, with some long-term survivors. 322
MEDIASTINAL INVASION. Invasion of the mediastinal pleura, pericardium, or mediastinal fat also constitutes T3 disease. In many instances, en bloc resection of the

involved mediastinal tissue can accomplish a complete resection. The results of such surgery for this type of invasion are not well-known. At MSKCC, a review

suggested that only approximately 10% of such patients with completely resected disease survive 5 years. 323 From this review of 225 patients with mediastinal
invasion, it was apparent that once mediastinal invasion occurs, frequently major structures are involved (T4), or concomitant mediastinal lymph node disease is
present (N2 or N3). In such patients, whenever possible, technical resectability should be determined preoperatively. MRI to detect mediastinal invasion value, then
CT scanning to detect mediastinal invasion and mediastinoscopy, are indicated before resection of any of these tumors. Of 225 patients analyzed in this series, only
22% had tumors that could be completely resected, 44% had totally unresectable disease and, in 34%, tumors were incompletely resected. In this sole report of the
results of mediastinal invasion, brachytherapy was used in incomplete resections, with a surprising 22% survival rate in this small subset of patients. A more recent
reanalysis of this group of patients confirmed a 30% to 40% 5-year survival rate in patients with completely resected T3N0 disease. 324
DIAPHRAGMATIC INVASION. Tumors invading the diaphragm frequently spread along the diaphragmatic pleura, and most patients present with a malignant pleural

effusion (T4) that usually is unresectable. In the occasional patient, focal diaphragmatic invasion can be completely resected by lobectomy and en bloc resection of
the diaphragm, replacing this structure with a synthetic mesh or fabric. In a recent analysis of our material at MSKCC, only seven patients were found with
diaphragmatic invasion, and in only two was disease localized enough to be resected. 326 There are no reports of results of such surgery in a series large enough to
analyze results, but one would anticipate a result similar to that for T3 tumors elsewhere.
Stage IIIA Disease
t3n1 disease
Stage IIIA disease includes T3N1 tumors. As with any other T status, once lymph nodes are involved, the prognosis is much worse, thus categorizing these patients
as IIIA rather than IIB. Even with completely resected tumors, of 32 patients with lymphatic metastases in T3 lesions, only 20% survived 5 years, and few if any
survive 5 years when mediastinal nodes are involved. 319
T1–3N2 DISEASE. The existence of N2 disease remains the most controversial area for primary surgical management of lung cancer. Although potentially resectable,

once ipsilateral mediastinal or subcarinal lymph nodes (or both) are involved by tumor, the ultimate prognosis is much worse. When disease is diagnosed
preoperatively either by noninvasive or invasive staging techniques, fewer than 10% of all patients treated with primary surgery survive 5 years, no matter the
adjuvant therapy.
Selectivity is important before considering surgery for patients with preoperatively identified N2 disease. Adverse prognostic factors include multiple levels of N2
disease, multiple lymph nodes at one level involved with tumor, adenocarcinoma, and extranodal spread of disease. More than 75% of patients with N2 disease
present with disease extending beyond one lymph node station.
“Minimal” N2 Disease. Single-station lymph node involvement with microscopic foci of disease not clinically apparent on clinical staging constitutes most of the subset
of patients with minimal N2 disease. This early-stage disease is usually discovered at the time of thoracotomy or at pretreatment mediastinoscopy. Five-year survival
rates after surgical resection are 10% to 20% and are higher when a complete resection is performed ( Table 31.2-12). Incomplete (R1, R2) resection results in a
noncurative treatment, with few if any patients surviving beyond 3 years. Patients found to have multiple lymph node stations involved at final pathologic staging also
fare poorly.

TABLE 31.2-12. Results after Surgical Treatment for Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer with N2 Disease

The criteria for resection of minimal N2 disease include no mediastinal involvement seen on CT or PET scan but found to be present at surgery or mediastinoscopy,
identifying a single station of lymph nodes involved with only microscopic disease. At the time of surgery, a complete mediastinal lymph node dissection is warranted
whenever N2 disease is suspected or known. Proponents of mediastinal lymph node dissection (vs. lymph node sampling) in all patients treated by surgical resection
for lung cancer believe that this extended dissection can identify patients with occult N2 disease who might have benefited by complete nodal dissection. One
retrospective study327 suggested a doubling of 5-year survival rates (15.9% vs. 6.7%) when lymph node dissection is carried out in patients with this stage of disease,
although this has not been confirmed by other studies.
“Bulky” N2 Disease. Tumors with mediastinal involvement beyond that described as minimal N2 disease constitute the large segment of patients presenting with stage
IIIA disease. This more advanced, bulky, or multistation N2 disease usually can be identified preoperatively and is termed clinical N2 disease. It is considered by most
surgeons to be inoperable by primary surgery, with few 5-year survivors identified after surgical resection. 328,329 and 330 Induction therapies before surgery using
chemotherapy or chemoradiotherapy have been tested in this group. For most of these patients, primary radiotherapy is still considered the standard treatment for
local control.
Combined-Modality Approaches (Including Surgery)
SITES OF FAILURE. Recognition of prognostic and surgical factors that predict for specific anatomic failure patterns can allow selection of patients for local, systemic, or

combined therapy. After surgical resection, patients with pathologic stage T1–2N0 tumors who have negative resection margins have survival rates in excess of 50%.
For these patients, isolated mediastinal or primary site recurrences are unusual, and there is no rationale for the routine use of PORT. Patients with T1N1 tumors
have an isolated local failure rate of 12%. The rate of isolated distant failure for T1N1 patients is 33% and provides a clear need for developing effective prophylactic
therapy for systemic and central nervous system spread. For T2N1 disease, the isolated local failure rate is 14%, and the distant failure rate is 36%, again
demonstrating the need for effective adjuvant systemic therapy. 331 In view of the fact that isolated N1 metastases are rare in these large surgical series, it is
reasonable to consider adjuvant local therapy in patients with documented N1 disease when the mediastinal nodes were neither sampled nor dissected because
occult N2 disease may be present.
Survival decreases for patients with N2 disease discovered intraoperatively. When no adjuvant therapy is used for these more advanced patients, thoracic recurrence
occurs in approximately 20% of patients even if the resection margins are negative, and distant metastases become even more common, suggesting that both failure
patterns need to be addressed if survival is to be improved. 332 Although not proven equally effective, increasingly more conservative resections are being performed
for early-stage lung cancers. For sleeve lobectomies, isolated local failure rates are more common than distant failures, ranging from 30% to 52%. Isolated local
failure rates are particularly high if the procedure is performed to conserve parenchyma in patients with compromised pulmonary function. This high incidence of
isolated local failure provides a basis for the selective use of PORT after sleeve lobectomy. Second primary lung cancers occur frequently in all surviving patients at a
rate of approximately 1% each year. 333,334
ADJUVANT RADIOTHERAPY. Stage I Disease The results for selected patients managed with surgery alone (T1–2N0) are reasonably good, and in general these

patients require no further treatment. Randomized trials of PORT including N0 patients have found no benefit with the addition of adjuvant treatment, 335,336,337 and 338
and it is not recommended. In fact, some trials have shown a survival disadvantage in patients receiving PORT, presumably from the toxicity of the radiation. The
Medical Research Council recently performed a metaanalysis of nine trials of 2128 patients who underwent complete resection and were randomly assigned to either

no treatment or PORT. 339 Doses of PORT varied from 30 to 60 Gy, and most of the trials used cobalt 60. Patients with stage I disease were included in many of the
trials. A significantly increased hazard ratio of mortality in stage I patients receiving PORT was reported.
Stage II and Stage III Disease The role of adjuvant radiotherapy for stage II (N1) NSCLC is controversial but has been recommended in the past because the
incidence of local failure with surgery alone is high. A locoregional intrathoracic failure rate of 31% was observed by the Ludwig Lung Cancer Group for patients with
completely resected stage II disease. 340 The Medical Research Council metaanalysis reported a trend toward decreased survival in patients receiving PORT with
stage II disease.
The LCSG investigated the efficacy of postoperative mediastinal irradiation in completely resected stage II and III squamous cell carcinoma of the lung. This trial
randomly assigned 210 patients to receive 50 Gy in 25 fractions after surgery versus observation alone. The locoregional failure rate (as first site of failure) was
reduced from 41% to 3% with radiotherapy for all node-positive patients. Despite this improvement, the increase in locoregional control with radiotherapy did not
translate into a survival benefit for stage II patients because more than two-thirds of first failures were distant. 332 The LCSG failed to separate patients with N1 and N2
disease but rather combined and analyzed them as a single group. 332 A trend toward improved survival was observed in N2 patients receiving radiotherapy.
The Medical Research Council of the United Kingdom also completed a randomized adjuvant trial in which 308 patients with stage II and III disease were treated with
either 40 Gy or no further therapy, although a trend toward improved survival was seen in the T2N2 subgroup. Again, no overall survival benefit was observed. 341 The
metaanalysis performed by the Medical Research Council confirmed these results. The Council reported higher local recurrences in 276 patients in the surgery-only
arms of the trials. There were fewer local recurrences in patients receiving PORT. In addition, there was a trend toward improved survival in stage III and N2 patients
in this arm, although it did not reach significance. 339 PORT has also been advocated for resected NSCLC invading pleura or chest wall without nodal metastases
(T3N0). This issue has never been properly examined in prospective fashion, although the LCSG attempted to address this question in a study that was closed owing
to poor patient accrual. 323,342 The survival rate approaches 50% for patients with chest wall tumors undergoing en bloc complete resection (R0), and there would
appear to be little gained with additional local treatment. 343 Therefore, the role of PORT remains controversial. It has not been shown to produce a benefit in
early-stage disease. It has been shown to improve local control in patients with mediastinal nodal disease but has no proven survival benefit. There is likely a
subgroup of patients, such as those with micrometastatic disease, who will have an improved survival from PORT; however, this patient population has yet to be
identified.
Positive Margins (R1, R2 Resections) The presence of microscopic disease after curative surgery for early-stage disease at the bronchial resection margin, chest wall,
or vascular margin may adversely affect the prognosis of patients. Yet, despite data that suggest that adjuvant radiotherapy reduces local recurrence, the
retrospective literature regarding the efficacy of radiotherapy to improve local control is conflicting. 344,345 and 346
BRACHYTHERAPY. Intraoperative brachytherapy was used as an adjuvant treatment in 23 patients undergoing video-assisted thoracoscopic limited resections (wedge

resections) who were unable to tolerate conventional resections. 125I seeds implanted into a Vicryl mesh were placed thoracoscopically over the tumor bed and
resection staple line. A dose of 100 to 120 Gy was delivered. As yet, there have been no local failures in this treatment group. 347
ADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY WITH OR WITHOUT RADIOTHERAPY. Given the large number of patients with resectable disease, few randomized studies of adjuvant

chemotherapy in NSCLC have been published. Most of these studies used chemotherapy regimens with limited activity. 348,349
The LCSG published two large randomized trials using the CAP regimen. The first trial included patients with completely resected stage II or III adenocarcinoma or
large cell carcinoma. 304 Patients were randomly assigned to receive either CAP chemotherapy or immunotherapy with intrapleural BCG and levamisole administered
for 18 months. In 141 randomly assigned patients, there was a trend for increased time to recurrence and for prolonged overall survival favoring chemotherapy. The
survival of the control immunotherapy group was similar to that of earlier patients treated with surgery alone, and the authors attributed the improved survival in the
chemotherapy arm to the effects of chemotherapy.
Another study involved patients with incompletely resected disease who were randomly assigned to PORT alone or radiotherapy and six cycles of CAP. 350 Incomplete
resection was defined as postoperative residual microscopic or macroscopic disease or disease in the highest resected paratracheal lymph node. One hundred
sixty-four patients were analyzed. The chemotherapy group had a significantly longer time to progression ( P = .066); median survival was only marginally improved
with chemotherapy, and there was no 5-year survival benefit.
Studies in patients with less advanced disease have also been published. The LCSG compared four cycles of CAP to no further therapy in 269 patients with stage I
disease. No benefit was identified for chemotherapy, but only 53% of assigned patients completed chemotherapy. A study testing a lower-dose, six-cycle CAP
regimen in T1–3N0 disease showed a benefit in time to recurrence and survival; however, an imbalance in the randomization process resulted in the assignment of
more patients with advanced disease to the observation arm. 351 A metaanalysis of all trials of adjuvant chemotherapy failed to demonstrate a decided advantage
(<5%) to this approach. 352
Since the CAP regimens are no longer considered the most active available regimens in NSCLC, the question of adjuvant chemotherapy in NSCLC remains open. A
large intergroup study in the United States is testing the value of four cycles of cisplatin plus etoposide (the first two cycles given with concomitant radiotherapy)
versus radiotherapy alone in patients with completely resected N1 or N2 disease. Additional international studies are in progress.
It is possible that recurrence rates in early-stage disease are too low to be effectively influenced by adjuvant chemotherapy. An alternative concept of influencing
survival rates in these patients is focused on a reduction in the incidence of second primary malignancies. A large North American intergroup study randomly
assigning patients with stage I disease to postoperative placebo versus cis-retinoic acid chemopreventive therapy has been completed, but the results have yet to be
reported. An interesting Japanese study using 1 to 2 years of oral Tegafur in early-stage lung cancer has demonstrated a survival benefit and reduction of second
primary tumors in the treated group. 353
After complete resection of stage I or II lung cancer or microscopic N2 disease, the current standard must be considered surgery alone without adjuvant treatments.
Because of the minimal effect of chemotherapy as assessed in the foregoing recent metaanalysis, larger trials of adjuvant chemotherapy are being carried out in North
America and Europe. Patients with completely resected disease should be offered inclusion in these randomized trials whenever possible.
INDUCTION RADIOTHERAPY. After the initial studies were published on the use of preoperative irradiation as a component of treatment of NSCLC, many attempts with

this induction approach were initiated in the hope of improving both local control and survival of patients with marginally resectable disease. 354,355 and 356 Preliminary
acceptance of preoperative irradiation was based on observations of improved resectability as well as on a significant number of complete responses in a surgical
specimen after the use of preoperative irradiation. Reports of survival in patients with tumors arising in the superior sulcus after combined preoperative radiotherapy
(where no previous survivals occurred) also contributed to the initial enthusiasm of a preoperative radiotherapy-alone approach. Subsequently, a few randomized
trials were initiated to answer this question with larger cohorts of patients. The first such major randomized trial was performed by the U.S. Veterans Administration.
With a minimum follow-up of 4 years in surviving patients, no increase in survival was noted in the pretreatment group. The overall survival rate was 12.5% in the
pretreatment arm, as compared with 21% in the surgery-alone arm, although this was not statistically significant. 356 In 1975, the National Cancer Institute published
two separate but integrated multiinstitutional randomized trials addressing the use of preoperative radiotherapy followed by surgery in both operable and inoperable
NSCLC without evidence of preoperative radiotherapy advantage. 357
It is clear from both the nonrandomized and randomized data that preoperative irradiation alone does not improve long-term survival and has no role as a
single-induction modality in the management of marginally resectable or unresectable stage IIIA or IIIB disease. The use of radiotherapy as a single preoperative
modality is no longer studied consistently, owing to the advent of effective chemotherapeutic agents. Most current trials investigate the use of preoperative
concomitant chemoradiotherapy.
Induction Chemotherapy Phase II studies using a variety of chemotherapeutic regimens have suggested that preoperative chemotherapy could be administered and
may be beneficial in locally advanced (N2) disease. 358,359 Martini et al.360,361 had demonstrated that otherwise resectable patients with ipsilateral mediastinal
lymphadenopathy as their sole site of distant spread can have 3-year survival rates of 43% and 5-year survival rates of 24% if both the primary tumor and ipsilateral
mediastinal nodes are completely resected and followed by mediastinal irradiation. However, the same studies revealed that patients with ipsilateral mediastinal
lymphadenopathy large enough to be clinically apparent on a plain chest radiograph had only an 18% resectability rate and only an 8% 3-year survival rate. A

program was developed that used preoperative combination chemotherapy with high-dose cisplatin (120 mg/m 2), vinca alkaloids, and mitomycin (i.e., MVP) in stage
IIIA patients with clinically apparent ipsilateral mediastinal spread. 362 In a group of 73 patients, the objective major response rate to MVP chemotherapy was 77%, with
a 10% complete response rate. Overall, 60% of patients underwent complete resections, and 12% had pathologic complete responses at surgery. The median
survival was 19 months for all patients and 27 months for those with complete resections. The 3-year survival rate for the completely resected patients was 44%, a
significant improvement over the prior surgery-only experience, in which the 3-year survival rate for clinically evident N2 disease was only 8% ( P = .001). 361 Two
treatment-related deaths occurred. Using the same MVP chemotherapy program before surgery, Burkes et al. 363 reported a 69% chemotherapy response rate, a 49%
complete resection rate, and a median survival of 19 months for all 35 patients studied. Three randomized trials have compared surgery alone to the
combined-modality program of induction chemotherapy before surgery. Despite small numbers of patients in each arm, all reported significant differences in both
2-year survival and distant recurrence rates, favoring the induction chemotherapy arm. These survival advantages have been confirmed in 5-year survival update
reports.276,277,364 Larger trials have yet be reported, but a recent abstract of a very large phase III clinical trial of all resectable stages except T1N0 has failed to confirm
this survival advantage in the N2 disease subset. 365 More recent phase II trials of chemotherapy have been reported in T4 disease and earlier stage tumors. 366
Because of these successful outcomes in most phase III trials of induction chemotherapy in stage III disease, this approach is now being investigated in earlier-stage
disease. At least three phase III trials in North America and Europe have been instituted, involving patients with clinically evident stage I and II disease, excluding
T1N0 tumors.
INDUCTION CHEMOTHERAPY WITH CONCOMITANT RADIOTHERAPY. Cisplatin - based combination chemotherapy has been combined with concomitant radiotherapy in an

effort to improve results. In the 1950s, Faber et al. 367 conducted two consecutive trials in clinical N2 NSCLC patients. The first combined 5-fluorouracil, cisplatin, and
40 Gy of chest radiotherapy; the second added etoposide to the regimen. The complete resection rate was 68% in the first trial and 76% in the second program.
Median survivals were 21 months and 34 months, respectively. The difference in survival was not significant. Four treatment-related deaths occurred in the two trials.
The LCSG combined 5-fluorouracil, cisplatin, and 30 Gy of chest radiotherapy. 368 Overall, 42% of patients underwent a complete surgical resection, and a median
survival of 11 months was observed. These results were similar to an earlier trial by the LCSG employing the CAP regimen with 30 Gy of chest irradiation; a 33%
resection rate and 11-month median survival were seen in stage III patients. 369 The Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) tested the combination of 5-fluorouracil,
vinblastine, and cisplatin plus 30 Gy of irradiation in 32 stage IIIA patients. 370 The complete resection rate was 62%, and three treatment-related deaths occurred. The
SWOG employed 45 Gy with etoposide and cisplatin and documented a 65% complete resection rate. 371
More recently, a significant effort has been put forth in phase I and II trials to optimize the locoregional therapy in a select group of patients with marginally resectable
stage IIIA and IIIB disease. The goals of induction therapy are to convert marginally or unresectable disease, improve locoregional control, and eliminate distant
micrometastases.
Sequential Chemotherapy and Radiotherapy
Two phase II trials reported results with induction chemotherapy followed by preoperative radiotherapy and surgery for stage III NSCLC. Skarin et al. 372 treated 41
patients with pathologically determined marginally resectable stage IIIA NSCLC. Included within this group were patients with T3N0 disease and patients with N2
mediastinal metastases. Forty-one patients received two cycles of CAP chemotherapy followed by 30 Gy of irradiation. A complete resection was accomplished in 36
of 41 patients (88%). The median survival was 32 months, and the 3-year survival rate was 30%. Systemic treatment failed in 18 of 36 patients (50%), and local
treatment failed in 4 patients. Using a sequential chemotherapy regimen of vinblastine and cisplatin, Sherman et al. 373 treated 21 patients with this neoadjuvant
regimen followed by 30 Gy of irradiation to the mediastinum. The observed radiographic response rate, resection rate, and median survival were similar to those
reported by Skarin et al. 372
Concurrent Chemotherapy and Radiotherapy
Several phase II trials have tested the feasibility of combining a variety of induction chemotherapy regimens concurrently with radiotherapy before surgery to maximize
induction results through a trimodal strategy. To determine whether surgical resection is a necessary component of a combined-modality approach in the treatment of
stage IIIA and select stage IIIB NSCLC, using the SWOG VP-16-platinum regimen, a North American intergroup effort is completing a phase III trial
(chemoradiotherapy vs. chemoradiotherapy plus surgery).
It is a challenge to define an optimal regimen from this large group of phase II trials because of the heterogeneity of both the patients entered and the treatments
delivered. 374 Different chemotherapeutic regimens were used, with either low-dose cisplatin alone or other agents in a multidrug regimen. Significant variability among
the different trials can be seen in the sequencing of the chemotherapy in relation to the radiation, radiation dose, dose per fraction, continuous-course versus
split-course strategy, timing of surgery, inclusion by some studies of T3N0 versus clinical N2 disease, inclusion of stage IIIB disease, staging methods, performance
criteria, and the toxicity of individual regimens. Although a number of phase II trials report promising results, wide variation also exists in terms of initial response rates
(range, 50% to 90%); complete resection rates (range, 28% to 88%); pathologic complete response rates (range, 9% to 21%); median survival rates (range, 13 to 32
months); and 2-year survival rates (range, 20% to 40%).
Recent trials have attempted novel fractionation schemes (especially hyperfractionation) combined with concurrent chemotherapy using a variety of drugs and dosage
schemes further to enhance the response rates and optimize resection rates and local control. 375,376 and 377 Overall, these trials appear to suggest that a bimodality or
trimodality approach combining neoadjuvant chemotherapy with or without radiation and followed by surgery provides a potentially superior method of enhancing
resectability and improving locoregional control and survival over radiotherapy alone followed by surgery. Some series also demonstrated a doubling of both local
control and survival rates over those reported with primary radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy. The use of altered fractionation also appears to provide greater
response rates and local control rates than standard fraction irradiation combined with chemotherapy with acceptable toxicity.
The role of induction therapies followed by surgery in resectable lung cancer remains to be defined. In N2 disease, it does appear to improve long-term survival,
although the role of surgery vis-à-vis radiotherapy as the primary control mechanism will be defined only as a result of the aforementioned current phase III trial in
North America. Whether induction therapies will have an impact on earlier-stage (non-T1N0) disease has yet to be defined but, once again, it is hoped that current
phase III trials will resolve this question.
Primary Radiotherapy
EXTERNAL-BEAM RADIOTHERAPY. Selection Criteria The selection of patients for definitive management with radiotherapy depends on several factors, the most

important of which are extent of disease, performance status, and pulmonary function. Accurate staging is required to establish and exclude patients with distant
metastasis from undergoing radical treatment. In addition to distant metastases, malignant pleural and pericardial effusions are an absolute contraindication for
definitive radiotherapy. In some circumstances, however, a small pleural effusion not seen on chest radiography is discovered on staging CT scanning, rendering the
decision to proceed with definitive management less clear. Patients with this finding, in the setting of no other significant clinical, laboratory, or radiographic findings
that suggest distant spread, should be considered for curative treatment. 378
No specific criteria exist to define the extent of tumor bulk as unsuitable for treatment with curative intent using conventional treatment planning. In general, however,
intrathoracic tumors 8 cm or larger are considered relatively prohibitive for high-dose treatment (55 to 70 Gy) due to excessive pulmonary toxicity. Patients with such
large tumors without evidence of extrathoracic spread should be considered for induction chemotherapy to attempt tumor shrinkage and reduction in the volume of
lung that would otherwise be targeted. Large tumors or bulky nodal disease may potentially receive high-dose radiotherapy with 3D-CRT. This approach has the
potential to maximize delivery of the prescribed high dose to the target volume and minimize the dose to surrounding normal tissues. Clinical research is addressing
this issue in ongoing phase I dose escalation trials. 216,217 and 218
Most patients considered for primary radiotherapy have preexisting compromised lung function from underlying emphysema or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
secondary to a long history of smoking. It remains a difficult challenge for the radiation oncologist to predict accurately which patients will retain the minimum
adequate posttreatment functional lung volume to provide basic pulmonary function for normal activity. 379 Physiologic changes in pulmonary function after
radiotherapy depend on several factors, including preexisting pulmonary function reserve before radiotherapy, the anatomic region of lung treated, total dose, dose
per fraction, prior chemotherapy or the desire to incorporate chemotherapy concurrent with radiotherapy, and the presence of more than a 10% shift of the ventilation
or perfusion to the contralateral lung from tumor or nodal disease causing central bronchial or major pulmonary vessel obstruction. 380 Some investigators have found
that the decrease in pulmonary function as determined by pulmonary function tests and single-photon emission CT imaging studies correlates with the amount of lung

receiving 30 Gy. 381
For patients with clinical stage I and II NSCLC that otherwise is technically resectable but in whom surgery is prohibitive secondary to severe medical
contraindications, as well as for patients who refuse surgery or have clinical but minimal N2 disease, primary radiotherapy alone offers a reasonable alternative
approach and potential for locoregional control and cure. 382,383,384,385,386,387,388,389,390,391,392,393,394,395,396,397 and 398 Although surgery has resulted in the highest reported
survival rates in stage I and II disease, no modern randomized studies have compared surgery to radiation in a comparable group of patients. The observed
differences in results between surgery and radiation are due in part to selection bias because, in many instances, patients referred for radiation have worse
performance status, are less rigorously staged, and have poor pulmonary function combined with comorbid illnesses. 393 In addition, most surgical series report results
after pathologic staging. Surgical series reveal that approximately 25% to 50% of clinical stage I patients are up-staged (see Fig. 31.2-8). The rate of occult N1 or N2
disease is as high as 56% if the patient has a positive preoperative bronchoscopy. 399 Therefore, it is important to evaluate cause-specific survival as an end point in
these studies, since many patients die of intercurrent disease. In addition, many historical series reporting results with radiation alone used inferior equipment and
treatment planning by today's standards and delivered inadequate doses.
More modern series have examined the issues of dose and dose escalation in relation to tumor size, local control, and survival for stage I and II disease. The
evidence suggests that radical radiotherapy is an effective treatment primarily for tumors smaller than 3 cm (T1) when treated to doses of 65 Gy or higher. This
treatment has a greater probability of complete response rates, local control, and disease-free survival almost comparable to some surgical series. 383 Complete
response and local control of larger tumors, however, appear less likely with standard radiation fraction schedules and doses, despite availability of modern
equipment and CT-based planning.
The need electively to treat the mediastinum in patients with no evidence of nodal spread has been challenged. The inclusion of large volumes of lung within a
radiation port, especially for peripheral T1 and T2 tumors, to prevent regional failure must be balanced against the potential for increased toxicity. The rationale for
treating the local tumor volume alone appears justified when the patient's outcome is not subjected to negative impact if the regional lymph nodes are not included.
The evidence appears to support the use of smaller target volumes to deliver higher doses without compromise of the regional outcome. 388 The regional failure rate is
typically less than 10% in reported series where elective nodal areas were not treated. 388,394,400 In one series, 396 most patients did receive elective nodal irradiation but
still had a failure rate approaching 10%, which suggests that a typical elective dose of 40 Gy is not enough to control occult disease. Selection for this approach would
be improved by pretreatment invasive mediastinal staging.
The issue of split-course versus continuous-course radiation has also been examined for stage I and II NSCLC with mixed results and has generally been
discouraged when treating with curative intent. 385,388 Split-course radiotherapy is a reasonable alternative for elderly patients or patients living at great distances in
whom a protracted course of treatment is impractical. It is also potentially more cost-effective.
Results
One of the earliest studies demonstrating the curability of medically inoperable lung cancer with radiation alone was reported by Hilton and Smart in the early 1940s
and 1950s. Thirty-eight patients with stage I or II NSCLC were treated with curative intent. Doses of 50 to 55 Gy were prescribed for squamous cell histology,
delivered to the primary site only, and doses of 40 to 45 Gy were prescribed for undifferentiated cancers, delivered to the primary site and mediastinum. Despite
inadequate doses, frequent treatment breaks to allow recovery for acute reactions, orthovoltage equipment, unsatisfactory staging, and a mix of histologies, the 2-year
and 5-year survival rates were 47% and 17%, respectively. 386,390
In 1963, Morrison et al. 401 reported the results of the only randomized trial comparing surgery with radiation for stage I and II NSCLC. Although the outcome for
surgery was superior to that for radiotherapy alone, the trial was severely flawed. This study of patients randomly assigned to radiation alone suffered from small
patient numbers, the patients received low radiation doses in the range of 45 Gy, and the study included small cell histology (approximately 30%). Additionally, almost
30% of patients undergoing surgery received adjuvant PORT. 401
Historical series reporting results with primary radiotherapy alone are often the victims of selection bias. Many of the same medical contraindications that prohibit
surgery, such as age, performance status, severe intercurrent medical illness, and poor pulmonary function, are known to be significant prognostic factors for
survival. 402,403 Patients referred for radiotherapy are more likely be elderly and to be at greater risk for death from intercurrent diseases. Patients receiving
radiotherapy alone generally have also undergone less extensive staging (clinical versus pathologic) than those in surgical series reporting pathologic versus clinical
outcome. Some patients discovered on mediastinoscopy to harbor N2 disease may be excluded or separated from outcome analyses in surgical series. 402 Sandler et
al.393 demonstrated the importance of rigorous clinical staging in selecting true stage I NSCLC for primary radiotherapy. In their series of 77 patients with clinical stage
I NSCLC treated with primary radiotherapy, treatment in only 2 of 12 patients who underwent “excellent'' staging evaluation failed locoregionally at 3 years, in contrast
to that in 22 of 24 (87%) and in 30 of 41 (79%) with locoregional failure for “good'' or “other'' staging, respectively. With the advent of noninvasive assessment of
nodal regions through CT and PET, some of this discrepancy might diminish. 402,403
Tumor size is a prognostic factor in almost every retrospective series reported. For example, Krol et al. 388 found that tumors smaller than 4 cm had a 35% overall
survival at 3 years and tumors larger than 4 cm had a 13% 3-year survival. There has also been some evidence that higher doses (>65 Gy) lead to improved
survival. 383,394 Jeremic et al. 400 and Morita et al. 397 have reported treating patients with some of the highest doses seen in the literature, 69.6 Gy and 65 Gy,
respectively, and report favorable overall survival. These two factors, tumor size and dose, are interrelated, since a very large tumor, technically T2, is often difficult to
treat to high doses secondary to pulmonary toxicity. Squamous cell histology has been shown to be a positive prognostic factor, as has younger age. 393,396 The results
from many modern series appear in Table 31.2-13. Therefore, patients with smaller tumors treated to higher doses appear to be the best candidates for primary
radiotherapy. Treatment of elective nodal regions prophylactically is probably not needed. The best radiotherapy results are still inferior to most surgical series,
although there are many confounding factors to account for a portion of this difference. It is hoped that with improved staging and dose delivery, the results with
primary radiotherapy will improve.

TABLE 31.2-13. Results for Patients Treated with Radiation Therapy Alone for Early-Stage Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer

PRIMARY BRACHYTHERAPY. Hilaris and Martini

404,405
described the use of brachytherapy at MSKCC for medically inoperable NSCLC in the setting of a tumor that was

determined to be unresectable intraoperatively. Permanent or temporary implantation was used as a local conformal boost or as primary treatment alone. These
authors reported the results of 55 patients with medically unresectable stage I and II NSCLC. Most (44 of 55) patients underwent biopsy only. The remainder
underwent subtotal resection. After surgery, 24 patients received additional external-beam irradiation (median dose, 40 Gy). An actuarial 5-year overall survival of
32% was observed, with a local control at 5 years of 65%. Broken down into stages, the local control rates for T1N0, T2N0, and T1–2N0–1 disease were 100%, 70%,
and 70%, respectively. The addition of external-beam irradiation for patients with N1 involvement improved the local control (86%), as compared with the local control
rate in patients with N1 disease who received no further therapy (57%). These intraoperative situations are less frequent with the advent of better preoperative

imaging.
Perol et al. 406 examined the use of high-dose-rate EBB for early-stage NSCLC limited to the endobronchus that was smaller than 1 cm and not visible on CT scan.
Nineteen patients were treated with 7 Gy per fraction every week for 3 to 5 weeks. The 2-year overall survival and local control rates were 58% and 75%, respectively.
Tredaniel et al. 407 reported the results of 29 patients with endoluminal localized tumor treated definitively with 192Ir after loading sources prescribed to a depth of 1 cm
from the source center. Complete macroscopic regression was seen in 21 of 25 evaluable patients, with histologically complete responses in 18 of 25. At 23-month
follow-up, the median survival had not been reached.
“UNRESECTABLE” STAGE IIIA AND IIIB NON–SMALL CELL LUNG CANCER
Whether stage IIIA or IIIB disease is considered unresectable depends, to a large degree, on the experience and attitudes of physicians treating the patient. What
one surgeon considers unresectable, another with an aggressive surgical attitude may deem completely resectable. Despite this, when stage IIIA disease is extremely
bulky and enlarged lymph nodes surround vital structures in the mediastinum, it is unlikely that any primary surgical approach will allow a complete resection or
significant cure. In centers with more aggressive attitudes, these “unresectable” tumors have become eligible for combined-modality programs that include surgery.
Despite this, the standard treatment for locoregional unresectable disease does not include surgery.
Patients with unresectable stage IIIA or IIIB NSCLC have traditionally been treated with radiotherapy alone. Since all known macroscopic disease is confined to the
chest, therapy is in theory given with curative intent. However, only 5% to 10% of patients survived beyond 5 years. This was frequently owing to distant disease
progression (outside the radiation field), which occurs in up to 70% of patients and reflects the presence of systemic micrometastases at the time of initial therapy. 408
Disease in a large proportion of patients also progresses within the irradiated volume, reflecting the inability of radiotherapy to eliminate all macroscopic disease.
Efforts to increase cure rates have, therefore, attempted to increase both locoregional and systemic control. In practice, induction chemotherapy or concomitant
chemoradiotherapy (or both) has been most frequently studied to achieve these goals.
Aggressive Surgery
When stage IIIA (N2) disease is bulky, involving mediastinal lymph node stations or extracapsular disease, and is proven by an invasive staging technique, such as
mediastinoscopy, the role of the primary surgery has been proven to be of little value with regard to an intent to cure. It is these patients in whom the role of induction
therapies combined with surgery or radiotherapy has been intensively investigated. In all these patients, imaging studies must be correlated with invasive staging.
Whether PET scanning can replace mediastinoscopy as positive proof of involvement of mediastinal lymph nodes has yet to be defined. At present, even with a
positive PET scan, invasive staging is mandatory: Too many inflammatory processes (e.g., sarcoid reactions with concurrent tumors) can produce “positive” PET scan
results. All too frequently, disease in some patients is deemed unresectable by imaging studies alone and not considered for a surgical approach because of this. It
has been well recognized that imaging studies are in error at least 30% of the time and that confirmation of N2, N3, or T4 disease by invasive staging is mandatory
unless there is incontrovertible evidence present.
Stage IIIB disease encompasses patients with a T4 or an N3 lesion, both of which are usually considered unresectable disease. Radiotherapy, chemotherapy, or a
combination of both remains the standard treatment for these patients. In general, they are not referred for surgical treatment. Nevertheless, in a large retrospective
study, patients with surgically resected stage IIIB disease had an overall 5-year survival rate of 6%. 409 There is a danger of clinically overstaging a tumor as T4 and
denying a patient with completely resectable T1–3 disease the opportunity of a curative resection. T4 disease in highly selected patients can be completely resected,
and long-term survival can be achieved in some of these patients. In this group of patients as well, combined-modality therapy (including surgery) is being
investigated 410,411 (discussed in Induction Chemoradiotherapy).
T4 TUMORS. T4 tumors include those invading mediastinal structures (the carina and trachea, the heart and great vessels, the esophagus or vertebral body) as well as

the presence of a malignant pleural effusion. Naruke et al. 409 reported a 5-year survival of 8% in 104 selected patients after resection of such a T4 lesion.
Carinal Invasion Although primary lung cancer invading the carina is generally considered unresectable, pneumonectomy with tracheal sleeve resection and direct
reanastomosis of the trachea to the contralateral main stem bronchus can be accomplished, with reported 5-year survival rates approaching 20%. In most series
reported, patients were highly selected, with most long-term survivors having T4N0 tumors.
Anastomotic dehiscence with bronchial fistula formation and postoperative pulmonary insufficiency are major postoperative problems and are the main cause of the
high operative mortality rate, which ranges from 11% to 27%. Only highly selected patients without N2 disease should be offered such a resection. For this reason,
prior to resection of such a tumor, mediastinoscopy should be considered mandatory. In some patients, “extended” sleeve lobectomies (resecting the carina) can be
used to preserve pulmonary function.
Invasion of Superior Vena Cava Involvement of the superior vena cava has been treated occasionally by en bloc resection and graft replacement. Long-term survivors
reported in the literature are limited to case reports. 412,413 In a retrospective analysis of 18 patients with superior vena cava invasion at MSKCC, there were no 5-year
survivors after resection. 323 Preoperative distinction of superior vena cava invasion by the tumor (T4) or by its involved mediastinal lymph nodes (N2) can be difficult.
Reported series include only few cases, and the significance of this finding cannot be assessed. It appears likely, however, that only T4 and not N2 lesions can
occasionally be cured with such a radical resection.
Invasion of Myocardium, Aorta, Esophagus, and Vertebral Body Surgical resection resulting in complete excision of a primary tumor with other mediastinal organ
invasion is usually not possible. Palliative incomplete resections have not demonstrated survival or palliation benefit. In the series from MSKCC, although not all
patients underwent resection of the primary tumor or part of the invaded organ, there were no 5-year survivors among 19 patients with aorta involvement and 3
patients with atrial invasion, but 1 patient of 7 (14%) with esophageal invasion lived beyond 5 years. 323 Despite these results, a tumor with limited invasion of the atrial
wall can occasionally be completely resected with the hope of an occasional cure.
En bloc resection of the lung with part of the involved aorta, esophagus, or vertebral body, not uncommon in the treatment of superior sulcus tumors, may result in
long-term survival for selected patients. PORT may be of benefit in these situations to augment local control. An analysis from Japanese investigators suggested that
long-term survival is limited to patients with minimal atrial or aortic adventitial involvement in tumors invading great vessels. 414
Pleural Effusion Approximately 5% to 10% of patients with lung cancer present with a nonmalignant pleural effusion, a result of atelectasis, obstructive pneumonitis,
lymphatic or venous obstruction, or pulmonary embolus. Despite being nonmalignant, an effusion evident on prior chest radiography has a poor prognosis, with a
5-year survival. Investigators at the Mayo Clinic demonstrated that even cytologically negative pleural effusions evident on chest radiographs were predictive of
surgical unresectability in 95% of these patients. However, they concluded that in patients with cytologically negative pleural effusions, unresectability must be
documented surgically. On the other hand, Naruke et al. 409 reported a 40% 5-year survival rate in 112 patients with nonmalignant effusion, identical to the 5-year
survival rate in 1298 patients without effusion.
Even with malignant pleural effusions, occasional 5-year survivals have been documented when all disease has been eradicated. 409,415 In general, however, malignant
pleural effusions, cytologically proven, indicate incurable disease by a surgical approach and are usually treated initially with primary chemotherapy. However, one
should never consider a pleural effusion malignant without cytologic or histologic proof. A “bloody” pleural effusion may be due to a traumatic thoracentesis or
concomitant pulmonary infarction and not indicate T4 disease.
N3 DISEASE. The role of surgery in preoperatively identified N3 disease previously considered totally inoperable has now been reexamined in phase II trials. Hata et

al.416 have investigated the use of two-field lymphadenectomy, including total mediastinal exenteration and supraclavicular node dissection for this group of patients.
The exact role of postoperative therapies combined with this has not been discussed. The results of such treatment still await long-term reporting. Also, the induction
therapies, especially chemoradiation, have been investigated by the SWOG group and others. 417,418 It does appear that with very intensive induction therapies, some
patients survive long term. It does not appear, however, that these survivals are improved by the addition of surgery. In fact, in many phase II trials, no attempt was
made to remove the involved N3 lymph nodes. Surgery was directed toward removal of the primary tumor and N2 nodes.

Adjuvant and Neoadjuvant Therapies
After complete resection in patients proven to have T4 or N3 disease, radiotherapy has been usually recommended as adjuvant treatment because of the high
incidence of locoregional failure after aggressive surgery for this advanced tumor. Because of the paucity of patients reported to have undergone this treatment, the
exact role of adjuvant radiotherapy cannot be assessed. It is in this subset of tumors that neoadjuvant therapies have been investigated in many phase II trials. It does
appear that clinically staged T4 tumors (especially T4N0 disease) do reasonably well after this combined-modality approach. 419,420 and 421 In one such study,420 patients
with clinically evident T4 tumors, including superior vena caval syndrome, tracheal involvement, and posterior mediastinal invasion, were treated with MVP
chemotherapy followed by surgery. Sixty-three percent of patients underwent a complete resection, and overall survival at 4 years was 19.5%. Despite these
encouraging results, in most instances T4 and N3 tumors cannot be resected completely and are usually considered for combined-modality therapy, using
radiotherapy as the primary control mechanism.
RADIOTHERAPY. The 2-year survival rate for patients with unresectable locally advanced NSCLC receiving supportive care alone is approximately 4%.

422

Historical
series examining the ability of thoracic radiotherapy to have an impact on the natural history of locally advanced NSCLC demonstrated mixed results. Higgins and
Shields 423 reported the results of a randomized trial by the Veterans Administration in which male patients with a variety of histologic subtypes of lung cancer,
including small cell lung cancer, were prospectively randomly assigned to receive supportive care only or external-beam radiotherapy. Two hundred forty-six patients
were treated with placebo, and 308 male patients were treated to doses of 40 to 50 Gy. The results of the trial were reported with 1-year minimum follow-up. Most
patients had performance status of less than 70. In addition, the radiotherapy was inadequate by modern standards, both in terms of the dose delivered (40 to 50 Gy)
and the equipment used (orthovoltage). Radiotherapy alone provided a modest but significant improvement in survival at 1 year, as compared with that in patients
who received supportive care only (22% vs. 16%, respectively). 423 Other earlier trials of thoracic radiotherapy for unresectable NSCLC despite inadequate doses also
showed a modest but significant improvement in 2-year survival rates in the range of 9% to 18%. 424,425
Cox et al. 426 analyzed the patterns of failure in locally advanced unresectable NSCLC treated with radiotherapy alone and found that the median survival was
increased from 6 to 12 months when the primary tumor was controlled. However, they found that 75% of patients with squamous cell cancer died of complications
secondary to intrathoracic tumor progression, as compared with approximately 40% of patients with either large cell cancer or adenocarcinoma. In contrast, Berry et
al.,427 using similar doses of radiotherapy, could find no improvement in survival with the use of thoracic irradiation as compared with chemotherapy alone. A
retrospective study from British Columbia that controlled for tumor stage and other prognostic factors reported improved survival of 79 days in patients receiving
high-dose palliative radiotherapy and survival of more than a year in patients receiving radical radiotherapy. 428
In a multiinstitutional cooperative trial, Johnson et al. 429 reported the results of 319 patients with locally advanced unresectable NSCLC without evidence of distant
metastases who were randomly assigned prospectively to one of three arms: chemotherapy alone with vindesine, 3 mg/m 2/week; standard thoracic irradiation to a
dose of 60 Gy in 6 weeks; or combined vindesine and thoracic radiotherapy. Although the overall response rate was superior in the radiotherapy arms (radiotherapy
alone, 30%; radiotherapy plus vindesine, 34%; vindesine alone, 10%; P = .001), the intrathoracic progression rates were similar in the vindesine arm (60%) and in the
radiotherapy arm (65%); both median survival and overall survival were also comparable in all three arms. This study has been criticized, however, for the large
number of patients in the vindesine-alone arm who received radiotherapy and for the number of patients involved, which was inadequate to detect a difference in
survival. 430,431 A randomized trial of low-dose thoracic radiotherapy compared to cisplatin and etoposide alone reported a higher response in the radiotherapy arm but
similar overall survival. 432
Although it seems clear that thoracic radiotherapy does offer a survival advantage to patients with disease limited to the thorax, the poor results of these earlier
studies led the RTOG to investigate methods of improving outcome with radiation alone by initially concentrating on dose intensification with conventional
fractionation and, more recently, using altered fractionation. In addition, they have attempted to identify appropriate selection criteria and prognostic factors for the
various approaches and apply the use of innovative treatment planning and technology.
Standard External-Beam Radiotherapy The earliest trial by the RTOG for unresectable NSCLC focused on dose intensification by attempting to establish the optimal
schedule of standard fractionated radiation alone. Protocol 73-01 was limited to 379 patients with either medically inoperable stage I or II or unresectable stage III
NSCLC of various histologies. Patients in this trial were randomly selected for one of four dose-escalating arms, including 40-Gy split-course, or 40-Gy, 50-Gy, or
60-Gy continuous-course thoracic radiation delivered in 4, 5, or 6 weeks with a daily fraction size of 2 Gy. Analysis of patterns of failure and survival showed a higher
complete response rate (24%) and 3-year survival rate (15%) with 60-Gy continuous-course radiotherapy, in comparison with lower doses of continuous- and
split-course irradiation (40 to 50 Gy). The failure rate within the irradiated volume was 53% to 58% for 40 Gy, 49% for 50 Gy, and 35% for 60 Gy. This improvement in
local control was still appreciated nearly 5 years later. The median time to any failure increased from 8 to 19 months as dose was increased from 40 to 60 Gy. Overall,
patients who achieved a complete tumor response also experienced increased survival, as compared with partial responders or patients with stable disease. The
3-year survival rate in complete responders was 23%, as compared with 10% in partial responders and 15% in patients with stable disease. 424
By escalating the total dose from 40 to 60 Gy, this trial established a significant dose-response relation between local control and short-term survival. Despite the
preliminary local control and survival advantages in patients experiencing a complete response and in patients receiving a dose of 60 Gy, the overall median survival
for patients receiving 40 Gy was 9.6 months, as compared with 10.1 months for patients receiving 50 to 60 Gy. In addition, the 5-year survival rate for all patients in
this trial was approximately 6%, with no significant differences among the four arms.
Brachytherapy and External-Beam Radiotherapy Huber et al. 433 randomly assigned 108 patients to either conventional radiotherapy (60 Gy) alone or an EBB boost of
4.8 Gy before and after conventional radiotherapy. There was a trend toward improved local control in patients receiving brachytherapy, although it failed to reach
significance. There was no difference in overall survival. Criticisms of the trial include that the majority of patient treatment significantly deviated from the protocol.
However, it does suggest that EBB might play a role in the treatment of primary disease.
A pilot study examined the use of Gelfoam radioactive plaques in addition to postoperative external-beam radiation in patients who have had an R1 or R2 resection of
stage III NSCLC. In 12 patients, there was a local control rate of 82% and overall survival of 45%. Whether this is an improvement from standard PORT for these
patients remains to be examined in further studies. 434
Three-Dimensional Conformal Radiotherapy In a dose-escalation protocol using 3D-CRT at the University of Michigan, patients were treated with dose ranges from
69.3 to 102.9 Gy. The researchers have reported a single case of acute grade 3 pneumonitis and five cases of acute grade 2 pneumonitis. 217 Recently, patients with
advanced disease have been receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy in addition to radiotherapy. The median survival in patients with stage III or recurrent disease was
16 months, and 2-year overall survival was 36%.
Graham et al.216,435 reported the results of 3D-CRT from Washington University. They have treated tumors to a dose of 60 to 74 Gy. Elective nodal irradiation was
given to all except those patients with poor pulmonary function. These investigators report a 2-year survival rate of 53% with this technique. The University of Chicago
reported a 2-year local control and a survival rate of 23% and 37%, respectively, in patients treated with doses ranging from 60 to 70 Gy. 436 The MSKCC reported a
2-year local control, disease-free survival, and overall survival rates of 36%, 11%, and 22%, respectively, in a group of patients with advanced-stage disease. 218
Elective Nodal Irradiation Standard radiotherapy typically involves a dose of 40 Gy to the entire mediastinum, supraclavicular fossa, and ipsilateral hilum, even if there
is no evidence of disease in these areas (e.g., T4N0 tumors). It has been shown that this elective treatment can significantly add to the morbidity of radiation. 437,438
Many centers have made the decision to eliminate elective nodal irradiation in an effort to increase the dose to the tumor. When RTOG trials were reviewed to
estimate the clinical impact of omitting nodal irradiation, it was found that when the ipsilateral hilum and mediastinum were incorrectly treated, there was an increased
risk of progression. 439 The MSKCC reported an elective nodal failure rate of 8% and a local failure rate of 65%, 440 which suggests that until regions of known disease
can be better controlled, there is probably no need to treat the entire mediastinum and supraclavicular region electively when T4N0 tumors are being treated. Invasive
staging or PET scanning may improve decision making.
ALTERED FRACTIONATION RADIOTHERAPY. Altered fractionation implies any deviation from standard fractionation of 1.8 to 2 Gy delivered once daily, 5 days weekly for

6 to 7 weeks. Several forms of altered fractionation, such as continuous hyperfractionation accelerated radiotherapy (CHART), or variations of these have been
investigated. 441 The basic goal of altered fractionation strategies is to deliver higher total doses of radiation to improve the local outcome without increasing late
normal tissue toxicity. Altered fractionation schemes exploit the significant differences in the capacity of late-responding and early-responding tissues to repair

radiation cellular damage.
Hyperfractionation Hyperfractionated radiotherapy employs more than 1 fraction per day, using fraction sizes that are smaller than those used with standard
fractionation (1.1 to 1.5 Gy per fraction versus 1.8 to 2 Gy per fraction). Thus, hyperfractionation uses multiple small fractions per day to deliver a higher total daily
dose and final total dose to improve tumor cell kill without increasing late toxicity and accepting increased but recoverable acute toxicity. 441
The RTOG initiated a phase I and II trial to evaluate 1.2-Gy twice-daily fractionation for locally advanced unresectable disease. Eight hundred eighty-four patients
were randomly picked to receive doses of 60.0, 64.8, and 69.6 Gy, using 1.2 Gy twice daily with a minimum of a 4-hour interfraction interval. After reasonable time had
elapsed to evaluate both acute and late effects, which were considered tolerable, patients were further assigned to either 74.4 Gy or 79.2 Gy, with closure of the two
lowest dose arms. In a favorable subgroup of patients, the 69.6-Gy dose results appeared significantly better ( P = .002) than results with standard fractionation in
comparable patients from an earlier RTOG study and the other arms of the trial. 382 No increased toxicity was seen in the higher-dose arms to account for the
decreased survival as compared to the 69.6-Gy arm.
Based on these results, the RTOG began a phase III trial comparing 69.6 Gy given via hyperfractionation and 60 Gy given via standard fractionation of thirty 2-Gy
fractions. The third arm of the trial replicated the study arm of CALGB protocol 8433: induction chemotherapy with cisplatin and vinblastine followed by 60 Gy of
irradiation. The 5-year survivals for standard radiotherapy, hyperfractionated radiotherapy, and induction chemotherapy plus radiation were 4%, 5%, and 8%,
respectively. The survival in the chemotherapy-plus-radiotherapy arm was significantly higher. 442 As yet, there is no clear survival advantage that can be
demonstrated for hyperfractionation as compared to standard radiotherapy. However, many trials continue to use this hyperfractionation regimen of 69.6 Gy. Further
studies are needed to find the maximum tolerable dose of radiation with either hyperfractionation or standard fractionation and compare it to 60 Gy.
Accelerated Radiotherapy RTOG trial 84-07 examined the role of an accelerated concomitant boost of radiotherapy. Patients received 45 Gy over 5 weeks to the
primary tumor and mediastinal lymph nodes. Two to three times a week, a concomitant boost of 1.8 Gy would be delivered only to the primary tumor and involved
lymph nodes. A dose of 25.2 cGy via concomitant boost (70.2 Gy) was found to be tolerable. 443 Two-year survival was 21% for the higher-dose patients. Another
RTOG phase II trial (83-12) demonstrated a 2-year survival rate of 25% and a 3-year survival rate of 18%. 435
Continuous Radiotherapy CHART employs many radiobiologic principles in an effort to improve the therapeutic ratio. CHART delivers 54 Gy in three daily doses of
1.5 Gy over 12 continuous days, including weekends. With CHART, treatment is given every day to counteract rapidly proliferating cells. Hyperfractionation with many
smaller doses of radiation may reduce long-term toxicity. Accelerating the treatment time from 6 weeks to 2 weeks also may counteract tumor repopulation.
CHART was first examined in a small prospective phase II trial. 444 Some degree of esophageal toxicity was present in all patients. Ten percent of patients developed
acute radiation pneumonitis. Two-year survival was 34%.
A phase III randomized study was performed in 13 centers in the United Kingdom. Patients were assigned to either standard radiation of 60 Gy in 30 daily doses of 2
Gy over 6 weeks or CHART. Approximately one-half the patients had stage III disease; the remainder had early-stage disease or unknown staging. No other
therapeutic modality was used. Two-year survival significantly increased from 20% to 29% in the CHART arm. In addition, local control significantly improved from
15% to 23%.445 Severe esophageal toxicity also increased from 3% to 19%, and acute radiation pneumonitis was 19% in the conventional group and 10% in the
CHART arm. However, late pulmonary toxicity and fibrosis requiring treatment at 2 years was present in 16% of living patients who received CHART as compared to
4% receiving conventional radiotherapy. The physical and psychological symptoms caused by this aggressive regimen have been shown to be tolerable as well. 446
The use of CHART has been limited by the need to reorganize radiation departments to accommodate the demanding radiation treatment schedule. In addition,
patients are hospitalized during their entire course of radiation, which may significantly increase the cost of treatment. Therefore, trials have been conducted using
CHART without treatment on weekends.447
An ECOG trial examined the feasibility of hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy. 448 Twenty-eight patients received 57.6 Gy over 15 days (12 treatment days) in
1.6-Gy fractions three times daily, 4 hours apart. The need to wait 6 hours was avoided by not treating consecutively those fields containing spinal cord. The
investigators found that this regimen was tolerable, with the main toxicity being esophagitis and moist desquamation of the skin. Median survival of 13 months was
similar to combined-modality approaches.
A North Central Cancer Treatment Group Trial evaluated standard radiotherapy (60 Gy in 30 daily fractions of 2 Gy over 6 weeks) to an accelerated hyperfractionated
approach (60 Gy in 40 fractions of 1.5 Gy twice daily over 4 weeks). A third arm included the accelerated hyperfractionated approach with concomitant cisplatin and
etoposide. The two radiation-alone arms were not significantly different, although there was a trend toward improved local control and overall survival when the two
hyperfractionated arms were combined.449
Hypofractionated Radiotherapy The reality for most physicians treating unresectable NSCLC is that in many patients, favorable patient parameters are not present. In
these patients with unresectable stage III tumors, the results with either radiotherapy alone or combined-modality treatment are poor, and the chance for cure is rare.
Studies have examined the use of hypofractionated radiotherapy for unresectable stage III disease and compared the results to those for standard fractionation to 60
Gy in RTOG trials. Depending on one's philosophy, the use of hypofractionated radiotherapy may simply be a palliative approach, or it may be a curative approach
with low expectation, based on known results with radiotherapy alone. A study revealed that patients with stage III disease treated with 40-Gy split-course irradiation
had longer survival times and lower local relapse rates but higher distant failure rates than those receiving 24 to 32 Gy. Survival rates for patients with stage IIIA
disease treated with 40 Gy at 1, 2, and 5 years were 47%, 22%, and 7%, respectively. For stage IIIB disease, the radiation scheme did not correlate with survival and
relapse rates. Survival rates at 1, 2, and 5 years were 30%, 9%, and 2%, respectively. The hypofractionated regimen schemes were extremely well tolerated, and no
severe complications were observed. 450 Although the data for both schedules of treatment appear comparable, split-course irradiation cannot be routinely
recommended based on the available literature for locally advanced NSCLC.
Radiosensitizers Schaake-Koning et al.451 demonstrated a survival advantage when weekly or daily cisplatin was added to thoracic radiotherapy. Three-year overall
survival improved from 2% to 16% with the addition of daily cisplatin. The benefit was due to increased local control with cisplatin. It is not clear whether cisplatin
actually enhances the effect of radiation or whether it is independently cytotoxic, with its effectiveness more dependent on dosing and dose level. Other studies have
shown no benefit from the addition of concomitant chemotherapy with thoracic radiation. 452,453 and 454
A CALGB-ECOG study examined induction chemotherapy with cisplatin and vinblastine followed by 60 Gy radiotherapy with or without radiosensitization with
carboplatin, 100 mg/m2.455 This study differs from those referenced heretofore because it used cytotoxic chemotherapy for induction in both arms and, therefore, was
solely testing the value of radiosensitization. There was no difference in overall survival, failure-free survival, or response between the two arms. There was a higher
local control in the carboplatin arms, but this did not have an impact on survival.
Radiation Protectors The radioprotectant amifostine is a sulfhydryl compound the metabolites of which scavenge free radicals that are generated in tissues exposed to
radiation. 456 A phase II clinical trial using amifostine with sequential chemotherapy and standard radiation (60 Gy) demonstrated no episodes of grade 3 or worse
esophagitis or pneumonitis. 457 There was no evidence of tumor protection, either. Amifostine might allow for the use of higher doses of chemotherapy and radiation
with acceptable toxicity. RTOG protocol 98-01 is addressing this issue.
Prophylactic Cranial Irradiation for Locally Advanced Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer
The hypothesis that prophylactic cranial irradiation (PCI) can improve survival is based on the assumption that isolated brain failures occur commonly and lead to
death and that these can be effectively prevented by tolerable doses of radiation. PCI has recently been shown on metaanalysis to improve survival in patients with
small cell lung cancer. 458 However, isolated brain failures in NSCLC are not common, and it is not possible to predict the patients at risk. Consequently, it is unlikely
that survival would be improved to a detectable degree if effective prophylaxis were delivered to the entire population of patients with resected disease. Of 1532
patients treated surgically in prospective trials of the LCSG, only 6.8% (104 of 1532) had first recurrences in the brain. However, 71% of the patients in this series had
T1–2N0 tumors. Patients with locally advanced disease treated with thoracic irradiation on the RTOG protocols had an initial brain failure rate of 7% for squamous
histology, 19% for adenocarcinoma, and 13% for large cell carcinoma. Even for adenocarcinoma, brain is a less common site of initial failure than are bone (24%) and
opposite lung (21%). 286,389

Four randomized trials of PCI added to chest irradiation (with or without chemotherapy) have been reported for patients with locally advanced NSCLC and have not
demonstrated improved survival, although treatment did reduce the rate of development of brain metastasis. 459,460,461 and 462 Thus, until systemic treatment and local
therapy are sufficient to render the brain as the main site of clinical failure, PCI cannot be recommended for any stage of NSCLC, and its use remains investigational.
The use of PCI after combined-modality therapy that includes surgery has not been sufficiently investigated. However, a recent report involved 75 patients who had
stage IIIA or IIIB NSCLC treated by induction therapy and who were treated with PCI (30 Gy over 3 weeks). In this phase II trial, PCI was started after the end of the
final chemotherapy cycle and prior to surgery. In those patients who had partial or complete responses to the induction chemotherapy, there were no relapses in the
brain as the first site. Further study is warranted, since brain is the most common site of first relapse in most induction therapy reports. 462
Combined-Modality Treatments, Including Radiotherapy
SEQUENTIAL CHEMOTHERAPY AND RADIOTHERAPY (INDUCTION OR NEOADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY). The use of induction chemotherapy is based on several theoretic

considerations. 266,463,464 and 465 It has been suggested that the early use of chemotherapy lowers the systemic tumor burden and prevents the growth of microscopic
systemic disease, while bulky locoregional macroscopic disease is decreased and addressed more easily by subsequent surgery, radiotherapy, or both.
Several large randomized studies of induction chemotherapy in unresectable NSCLC have been published ( Table 31.2-14).213,266,272,273,463,464,465,466,467,468,469,470,471,472,473
and 474 Generally, studies using more intensive chemotherapeutic regimens and entering larger study cohorts have favored the use of chemotherapy. Metaanalyses of
chemotherapy in this setting also suggest a significant therapeutic benefit but are compromised by the limitations of this technique, reflecting the poor design or
execution of many of the randomized trials. 473,474

TABLE 31.2-14. Selected Randomized Trials Testing Induction Chemotherapy in Locally Advanced Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer Treated by Radiotherapy

In assessing the role of chemotherapy for unresectable stage III disease, it appears beneficial to concentrate on specific well-designed and -conducted trials. In 1984,
the CALGB initiated a randomized study comparing standard radiotherapy to two cycles of induction chemotherapy with cisplatin plus vinblastine followed by
radiotherapy. 271,469 Eligible patients had stage III unresectable NSCLC; eligibility was restricted to allow for only 5% weight loss before study entry and a performance
status of 0 or 1. Patients with supraclavicular lymph node involvement or cytologically positive pleural effusion were also excluded. Thus, eligible patients were
selected to be in a generally favorable state of health and to be treated with curative intent. This study was closed after an interim analysis, with only 155 eligible
patients entered, when a survival difference became apparent. The median survival favored chemotherapy (14 vs. 10 months; P = .0066). Thus, the addition of 1
month of chemotherapy to radiation resulted in a 4-month prolongation of life. More interestingly, the chemotherapy also resulted in a doubling of long-term survivors.
On both study arms, few patients were noted to have recurrences after 2 years of follow-up. Seventeen percent of patients were alive at 5 years' follow-up on the
chemotherapy arm, as compared with 7% of patients receiving standard radiotherapy alone.
A confirmatory three-arm intergroup study was subsequently organized. 273,470 In this study, the two study arms of the CALGB trial were repeated; a third arm was
added to test the hypothesis that intensified radiotherapy as a single modality might also result in increased survival rates. Eligibility criteria were identical to those
spelled out in the CALGB study. This study largely confirms the results of the CALGB study; median survival times for radiotherapy alone, hyperfractionated
radiotherapy, and induction chemotherapy were 11, 12, and 14 months, respectively. This difference again favored the addition of chemotherapy to radiotherapy. The
use of hyperfractionated radiotherapy alone resulted in no significant benefit. Long-term survival data from this study suggest that 3-year survival rates are similar for
induction chemotherapy and hyperfractionated radiotherapy (and superior to standard fractionation radiotherapy).
Given the systemic activity of chemotherapy, it might be expected that the increased survival rate observed with induction chemotherapy would be due to increased
systemic control. However, not all studies have included an analysis of the pattern of failure. A European study tested three cycles of induction chemotherapy with
vindesine, lomustine, cisplatin, and cyclophosphamide in patients with squamous cell and large cell lung carcinoma and showed a small survival benefit favoring
chemotherapy. Increased systemic control due to chemotherapy was also shown in the intergroup trial, while there was no effect on intrathoracic control. 213,272,407
In summary, induction chemotherapy has been shown in large randomized studies to increase survival rates of patients with unresectable stage III NSCLC. This
appears to be due to increased systemic disease control and is, therefore, compatible with the observations of activity for chemotherapy in patients with stage IV
disease and the theoretic models supporting induction chemotherapy. Induction chemotherapy is a current standard therapy for these patients.
CONCOMITANT CHEMORADIOTHERAPY. The simultaneous use of chemotherapy and radiotherapy has also been widely investigated ( Table 31.2-15). This approach is

based on considerations similar to those for sequential chemoradiotherapy in that chemotherapy may cover systemic disease, while radiotherapy can treat
locoregional disease. The concomitant approach provides the additional theoretic benefit of increasing locoregional control through a direct interaction of the two
modalities, which is not the case when the two modalities are administered in sequence. 266,270 Clinically, the administration of intensive concomitant
chemoradiotherapy is complicated by increased toxicities. This includes esophagitis, a risk of radiation pneumonitis, and increased myelosuppression because the
thoracic bone marrow is exposed to the radiation.

TABLE 31.2-15. Randomized Trials of Concomitant Chemoradiotherapy with Single-Agent Cisplatin or Carboplatin in Locally Advanced Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer

As a result, the chemotherapy frequently has been given at suboptimal doses as single-agent chemotherapy instead of combination chemotherapy, or the
radiotherapy schedule has been interrupted to allow for recovery of normal tissues. It is known that prolongation of a course of radiotherapy decreases its

single-modality efficacy.
Several single-drug chemoradiotherapeutic trials have been published (see Table 31.2-15).451,452,453,454 and 455,475 In particular, cisplatin as a single agent has been
tested in several randomized clinical trials. A study of weekly cisplatin (15 mg/m 2/week) plus radiotherapy to 50.4 Gy found no survival benefit. 452 Similarly, studies of
radiotherapy with low daily doses of cisplatin 453 or cisplatin given every 3 weeks 454 showed no survival benefit. Only one study showed improved local control and
survival for daily cisplatin added to radiotherapy; however, the patients on the control arm received protracted radiotherapy. 451 Thus, concomitant chemoradiotherapy
using single-agent cisplatin or other drugs has largely failed to improve the survival rates of patients with locoregionally advanced NSCLC, although it may provide a
locoregional sensitization effect. This appears to be due to the lack of systemic activity of low-dose single-agent therapy; thus, the predominant site of failure in these
patients (distant disease) is inadequately addressed.
Several studies testing combination chemotherapy with concomitant radiotherapy or using hyperfractionated radiotherapy have also been
published.266,475,476,477,478,479,480 and 481 These studies largely have been performed in the phase I and II settings. Results uniformly indicate increased toxicity. Some
studies, however, have also suggested therapeutic benefit and encouraging survival data.
The SWOG has published two phase II trials using cisplatin and etoposide with concurrent radiotherapy. 274,482 In the first such trial, concomitant chemoradiotherapy to
45 Gy was administered in the preoperative setting. The response rate to this regimen prior to surgery was 59%, and 71% of patients were able to undergo surgical
resection. This study forms the basis for the large current intergroup trial evaluating concomitant chemoradiotherapy plus chemoradiotherapy boost versus surgical
resection in patients with marginally resectable stage IIIA NSCLC. The 3-year survival rate was 26%. In a second study, the SWOG evaluated this chemoradiotherapy
regimen in patients with unresectable disease. Here patients received two cycles of cisplatin-etoposide with concurrent radiotherapy to 61 Gy followed by an
additional two cycles of chemotherapy in the “adjuvant” setting. For 50 patients, the median survival time was 13 months, and 2- and 3-year survival rates were 33%
and 26%, respectively. The SWOG has evaluated a similar regimen of carboplatin, etoposide, and concurrent radiotherapy in patients with poor prognostic
features.483 Pilot data in this group of patients indicated similar median and 2-year survival times, indicating the feasibility of chemoradiotherapy for a suboptimal
patient population.
Definitive testing of combination chemotherapy with concurrent radiotherapy in the phase III setting has been limited. A three-arm study investigated the combination
of carboplatin and etoposide at two dose levels added to hyperfractionated radiotherapy (1.2 Gy twice daily; total dose, 64.8 Gy). 478 Carboplatin, 100 mg/m2 on days 1
and 2, and etoposide, 100 mg/m2 on days 1 to 3, of each week of radiotherapy resulted in a significant increase in median survival as compared with hyperfractionated
radiotherapy alone (median survival, 8 vs. 18 months). A similar comparison of twice-daily radiotherapy to 69.6 Gy with or without daily intravenous carboplatin (50
mg) and etoposide (50 mg) showed a significant increase in median survival time (22 vs. 14 months) and 4-year survival rates (23% vs. 9%). 479 These studies support
the addition of chemotherapy to radiotherapy but do not clarify whether twice-daily radiotherapy is superior to single daily fractions. Intensified radiotherapy schedules
are mainly supported by the British CHART study. 445
Since both induction chemotherapy and concomitant chemoradiotherapy prolong survival, it can be asked which of the two approaches is superior. Induction
chemotherapy has, indeed, been directly compared with concomitant chemoradiotherapy using the cisplatin-plus-vinblastine regimen in a randomized study by the
RTOG. Based on previous pilot studies, patients with stage III NSCLC were randomly chosen to receive induction chemotherapy with cisplatin plus vinblastine
(standard), or the same drugs given concomitantly during radiotherapy, or cisplatin with orally administered etoposide and concomitant hyperfractionated
radiotherapy. 484,485 Results from this trial are expected in the near future.
A similar study has been reported by Japanese investigators. Furuse et al. 275,486 compared the administration of the MVP regimen as induction chemotherapy to its
administration with concurrent radiotherapy. Median survival times were 16 versus 13 months, favoring the concurrent administration of chemoradiotherapy. A
pattern-of-failure analysis indicated a higher relapse in the brain for patients treated with concurrent chemoradiotherapy, with the possibility of higher intrathoracic
control (Table 31.2-16).

TABLE 31.2-16. A Randomized Phase III Study of Concurrent versus Sequential Radiotherapy with MVP in Stage III Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer

INDUCTION AND CONCOMITANT CHEMORADIATION. An alternative strategy to a direct comparison of induction versus concomitant combined-modality therapy is the

administration of both. This strategy is supported by the suggestion that induction chemotherapy and concomitant chemoradiotherapy may exert their favorable
influence on survival by different mechanisms. In particular, induction chemotherapy appears to improve systemic disease control, while concomitant
chemoradiotherapy leads to higher locoregional control. This hypothesis has been evaluated in several studies. The CALGB compared administration of cisplatin and
vinblastine followed by radiotherapy with administration of the same induction chemotherapeutic regimen followed by radiotherapy with weekly doses of concomitant
carboplatin. 455 This study showed a median survival time of 13 months on both arms but suggested increased locoregional control for patients receiving carboplatin.
This study adds to the evidence that single-agent radiation sensitization with a platinating agent is of clinical benefit.
More recently, similar investigations have focused on the integration of novel chemotherapeutic single agents into the setting. Preclinical and early clinical data
support a role as radiation enhancers for the taxanes, gemcitabine, vinorelbine, and topoisomerase I inhibitors. 487,488,489,490,491,492,493,494,495,496,497,498,499,500 and 501 Additional
trials have evaluated the administration of paclitaxel with or without carboplatin on a weekly schedule with concurrent chest radiotherapy. Phase II trials indicate high
response and promising 1- and 2-year survival rates with this approach. Pilot studies using paclitaxel are summarized in Table 31.2-17. A three-arm study by the
CALGB evaluating three novel agents (gemcitabine, paclitaxel, or vinorelbine in combination with cisplatin) in the induction and concomitant setting is under way. The
radiation dose in this trial is 66 Gy. 499

TABLE 31.2-17. Selected Phase II Trials of Weekly Paclitaxel-Based Chemotherapy with Concurrent Radiotherapy in Patients with Stage III Unresectable Non–Small
Cell Lung Cancer

To evaluate further the role of induction chemotherapy within the context of concomitant chemoradiotherapy, the CALGB is conducting a randomized trial comparing
concomitant chemoradiotherapy with carboplatin, paclitaxel, and concurrent radiotherapy versus two cycles of induction chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel
followed by the same concomitant chemoradiotherapeutic regimen. This trial will evaluate whether induction chemotherapy is of benefit in patients receiving
concomitant chemoradiotherapy.
Additional trials are expanding on observations with accelerated radiotherapy. The aforementioned British trial has indicated that administration of accelerated
radiotherapy is superior to standard radiotherapy as a single-treatment modality. 445,481 Because accelerated radiotherapy will have an impact on locoregional control
only, its administration after induction chemotherapy is being evaluated in a randomized Eastern Oncology Cooperative Group Trial. 502
In reviewing these studies of combined-modality therapy for unresectable NSCLC, it is clear that induction chemotherapy has led to a significant increase in survival
rates; concomitant chemoradiotherapy can also achieve this. The existing data support that patients can be treated with induction chemotherapy or concomitant
therapy outside of a clinical trial (as a standard therapy); however, the impact of these strategies in survival is small, and participation in clinical trials is strongly
encouraged.
STAGE IV DISEASE
In most instances, stage IV (M1) disease is treated with primary chemotherapy. The goals of therapy are the palliation of symptoms and prolongation of survival time.
On occasion, however, when a solitary site of metastasis occurs (e.g., brain), both the primary tumor and the solitary metastatic site can be treated with curative intent
either by a surgical or radiotherapeutic approach.
Prolongation of Survival by Chemotherapy
In the 1970s and 1980s, combination chemotherapy, usually cisplatin-based, was demonstrated to result in reproducible response rates of approximately 20% to
30%.262,265 Although these studies suggested activity of chemotherapy in stage IV NSCLC, they left unanswered what constituted the optimal chemotherapeutic
regimen for NSCLC. Furthermore, because overall median survival times were short at 6 to 8 months and few patients survived beyond 1 year, the general value of
chemotherapy in the routine management of patients with stage IV NSCLC was questioned. 261,297,503,504,505 and 506
Some investigators hypothesized that the survival benefits that patients derived from chemotherapy were not sufficient to offset the toxicities and economic costs. A
number of randomized studies were initiated to compare directly best supportive care versus chemotherapy plus best supportive care ( Table
31.2-18).408,507,509,510,511,512,513,514,515 and 516 The first such study was reported by Cormier et al. 507 and supported the use of chemotherapy. However, like most subsequent
studies listed in Table 31.2-18, it included insufficient patient numbers to allow for definitive conclusions. The subsequent Canadian study remains the most frequently
cited study in this category. 508 Of interest, it demonstrated not only increased survival time with chemotherapy but acceptable treatment costs. 517 Additional studies
confirmed the finding of a statistically significant increase in median survival for chemotherapy-treated patients compared with those receiving best supportive care
only, and all studies suggested at least a statistical trend for improved outcome favoring chemotherapy.

TABLE 31.2-18. Randomized Trials

Since each of these trials comparing the use of chemotherapy with best supportive care can be criticized for methodologic reasons, such as including too few patients
or using insufficiently active chemotherapy, metaanalyses of these studies were suggested. Four such metaanalyses have been published and are summarized in
Table 31.2-19.474,518,519 and 520 All four metaanalyses support the same conclusion: Chemotherapy prolongs survival time by a modest but statistically significant amount
of time and, generally, should be offered to patients. As mentioned, economic analyses support similar conclusions. As a result, many physicians consider the use of
chemotherapy a standard therapy approach for most patients with NSCLC. 261,262,263 and 264

TABLE 31.2-19. Metaanalysis of Best Supportive Care versus Chemotherapy

Quality of Life
With the limited survival benefit for patients, quality of life (QOL) has been considered as another relevant end point of chemotherapeutic trials in stage IV NSCLC.
Validated questionnaires have been developed to assess QOL accurately. The earlier randomized trials comparing chemotherapy gave indirect evidence that
chemotherapy can improve QOL: The reason that chemotherapy reduced health care costs in the Canadian study was that patients receiving chemotherapy had a
lower incidence of disease-related complications, leading to fewer hospital admissions. 517 Economic analyses support the use of combined-modality and palliative
combination-chemotherapy approaches. 517,521,522
More recently, improved QOL has been prospectively evaluated as an independent variable. 516,523 Disease-related symptoms will improve after chemotherapy,
sometimes even in the absence of a measurable tumor response. 516,524,525 QOL scores improved with chemotherapy, whereas they declined over the first 6 weeks with
best supportive care. In one study, symptomatic improvement was 70%, whereas the objective response rate was only 35%. 524 Improved survival and QOL were also

demonstrated with single-agent chemotherapy in a population of patients exceeding the age of 70 years. 515
Given the substantial experience with chemotherapy-based clinical trials in stage IV disease, large analyses for prognostic factors have been performed. The SWOG
analyzed their database of 2531 patients with advanced NSCLC using Cox modeling, recursive partitioning, and amalgamation to identify prognostic factors in these
patients. 144 Good performance status, female gender, age of 70 years or older, low tumor burden, normal lactate dehydrogenase and serum calcium levels, and a
hemoglobin level of more than 11 g/dL were favorable factors. The use of cisplatin was an additional significant favorable predictor of survival. A European group
conducted a similar analysis in 1052 patients and identified similar favorable prognostic factors of lower tumor burden, good performance status, higher age, and
female gender.526
Newer Chemotherapeutic Drugs
Randomized phase III trials investigating a new drug in stage IV NSCLC are aimed at demonstrating improved survival when compared with previous standard
therapy. The randomized studies of the 1980s established the value of chemotherapy as compared with best supportive care. The combination of cisplatin with
etoposide or vinblastine emerged as a standard in the United States, while in Europe, the combination of cisplatin and vindesine was frequently administered.
Randomized studies testing a new agent or combination in the 1990s could, therefore, be designed with several possible control arms, including the two combinations
noted previously or cisplatin as a single agent.
In the 1990s, reproducible single-agent activity was demonstrated for several new agents. Paclitaxel, docetaxel, vinorelbine, gemcitabine, and irinotecan have been
extensively investigated (Table 31.2-20). Their definitive evaluation has frequently included a comparison of the new drug with cisplatin versus cisplatin alone ( Table
31.2-21).

TABLE 31.2-20. Single-Agent Activity of New Chemotherapeutic Agents for Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer

TABLE 31.2-21. Cisplatin Alone versus Cisplatin and New Drug Combination

Vinorelbine has undergone thorough testing in NSCLC and was the first of the recent drugs to receive approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for use in
NSCLC (see Tables 31.2-20 and 31.2-21).515,527,528,529,530 and 531 A randomized study conducted in Europe compared a standard of cisplatin and vindesine with cisplatin
and vinorelbine and with single-agent vinorelbine. 530 The median survival time was 30 weeks for patients treated with cisplatin and vindesine and for those treated
with vinorelbine alone. Patients treated with cisplatin and vinorelbine had a significantly longer median survival time of 40 weeks. An economic evaluation of this study
concluded that this chemotherapy had acceptable efficacy and cost-effectiveness as compared with other common medical interventions. 521
A second study in the United States compared the combination of cisplatin and vinorelbine with single-agent cisplatin. Again, the combination of cisplatin and
vinorelbine proved superior to the single agent. 531 Finally, single-agent vinorelbine resulted in superior survival times as compared with 5-fluorouracil plus leucovorin
(30 vs. 22 weeks). 532 This study has been criticized for its use of 5-fluorouracil plus leucovorin in the control arm, which is not a commonly used regimen in NSCLC
and resulted in a low 6% response rate. An intriguing European study compared vinorelbine with best supportive care in the elderly (70 years). Increased median
survival times (6.5 vs./ 4.9 months) and QOL were demonstrated. 515 This study not only supported previous conclusions regarding prolongation of life but specifically
indicated that patient age, as an isolated factor, should not be a primary determinant of whether the use of chemotherapy is indicated.
Paclitaxel also showed encouraging single-agent activity (see Table 31.2-20).533,534 and 535 The ECOG performed a three-arm randomized study comparing a regimen of
cisplatin plus etoposide with cisplatin plus paclitaxel with a regimen of paclitaxel given either at a low or high dose with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor support.
The paclitaxel-plus-cisplatin arms were superior to the etoposide-plus-cisplatin regimen, with no evidence of an increased response rate with a higher paclitaxel
dose.536 This study evaluated paclitaxel as a 24-hour infusion. Shorter infusion duration (3 hours) has been used in most other studies. A European trial showed
cisplatin and paclitaxel to result in median survival (10 months) similar to that of cisplatin and teniposide while being better tolerated. 537 Of note, median survival times
in both of these studies were better in both arms than historic controls. Other randomized trials confirm the activity of cisplatin or carboplatin-paclitaxel regimens and
the favorable toxicity profile of the latter combination ( Table 31.2-22).537,538,539,540 and 541

TABLE 31.2-22. Comparison of Various Combination Chemotherapy Regimens

Encouraging data also exist for docetaxel, 542,543,544 and 545 gemcitabine, 546,547,548,549,550 and 551 and irinotecan. 552,553,554 and 555 All three have reproducible single-agent activity
and have been investigated in combination with a platinating agent. Gemcitabine has been evaluated in randomized phase II and III trials. 556,557,558 and 559 Equivalence
of single-agent gemcitabine with the (more toxic) combination of cisplatin and etoposide was suggested in two small studies. The combination of gemcitabine and
cisplatin showed a significant improvement in median survival (7.6 vs. 9.1 months) versus single-agent cisplatin. 556 A smaller European trial compared cisplatin and
gemcitabine with cisplatin and etoposide and suggested a favorable impact on median survival. 557 Tirapazamine, a bioreductive alkylating agent, has been shown to
increase the cytotoxicity of cisplatin and prolong survival after therapy with that combination. 560
Docetaxel has been shown to have activity as second-line therapy in patients with cisplatin-refractory disease. 544,545 This is encouraging because second-line activity
has rarely been observed with other drugs. Second-line activity has also been described for gemcitabine. 561
Currently, investigators are focused on comparing some of the recent regimens with one another. 539 A comparison of cisplatin and vinorelbine with carboplatin and
paclitaxel has been presented. Identical median survival times of 8 months suggested equivalence of antitumor activity, while the toxicity spectrum of the regimens
predictably differed (more nausea and vomiting and myelosuppression with cisplatin, more neurotoxicity with carboplatin). The ECOG is comparing
carboplatin-paclitaxel with gemcitabine-cisplatin, docetaxel-cisplatin, and cisplatin-paclitaxel. This is an important study, since it will establish the relative activity and
toxicity of several novel cisplatin-based regimens versus the combination of paclitaxel and carboplatin. The CALGB is comparing single-agent paclitaxel therapy with
the combination of paclitaxel-carboplatin. 463 Evaluating response, survival, economic, and QOL end points, this study will establish whether a benefit exists for this
“doublet” over single-agent paclitaxel. Similarly, three drug regimens using novel drugs are being evaluated. Additional trials are evaluating the weekly administration
of paclitaxel,562 “non-platinum”–containing two-drug regimens, 563,564 three-drug regimens,275,565 and other new cytoxic agents.566,567 Of current interest in particular are
“cytostatic” molecules inhibiting specific cellular or extracellular targets, including inhibitors of farnesyl transferase, matrix metalloproteinase, or antiangiogenic
agents. 568,569,570,571 and 572
In summary, chemotherapy for stage IV NSCLC has been shown to prolong survival as compared with best supportive care. The use of chemotherapy can be
supported by cost and QOL analyses. Its administration to the elderly has been shown to be of benefit. Based on recent evidence, current standard regimens are the
doublets of cisplatin in combination with either vinorelbine, paclitaxel, or gemcitabine or the combination of paclitaxel and carboplatin. In selected cases,
administration of second-line chemotherapy should be considered.
Current Clinical Approaches to Stage IV Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer
In the 1990s, most patients with newly diagnosed stage IV NSCLC should undergo treatment with at least one chemotherapeutic regimen. Based on available data
from randomized trials, treatment should consist of the combination of cisplatin and vinorelbine, cisplatin and gemcitabine or, alternatively, cisplatin or carboplatin and
paclitaxel. Generally, chemotherapy should be restricted to patients with a performance status of 0 to 2, because it is that group of patients in which most phase II and
positive phase III studies have been conducted. Available evidence suggests that patients with a performance status of 2 will have, at best, a minor prolongation of
survival time by chemotherapy but may experience significant relief of disease-related symptoms. Single-agent therapy in elderly patients should be considered.
Patients should understand that the treatment goals are not cure but prolongation of life and palliation of symptoms; additional palliative measures, such as pain relief,
radiotherapy, and surgery, should be applied as most beneficial for symptom relief.
In patients with stable or responding disease, the treatment duration has traditionally been six cycles of chemotherapy. Historically, this is largely based on the
cumulative toxicity observed with cisplatin, which frequently limits to six or less the total number of cycles. The optimal duration of chemotherapy is undergoing
evaluation in randomized trials. It is possible that newer regimens, particularly those not containing cisplatin, might be tolerated (and active) for more than six cycles.
In patients with stable or responding disease, it might, therefore, make sense to continue therapy beyond six cycles. The optimal duration of chemotherapy is
undergoing evaluation in randomized trials.
Patients who progress on or after first-line chemotherapy but continue to have a good performance status may be offered second-line chemotherapy. Few drugs have
undergone formal testing in this setting. Docetaxel has been most extensively evaluated. In phase II studies, the use of docetaxel in patients not previously exposed to
another taxane resulted in a response rate of approximately 10%. 542 Two randomized trials have been presented. 544,545 A Canadian trial compared second-line best
supportive care with docetaxel (at 75 or 100 mg/m 2).545 Improvement in survival (7 vs. 5 months) and improved QOL supported the use of docetaxel at the lower dose.
In a second study, docetaxel (at two dose levels of 75 or 100 mg/m 2) was compared with vinorelbine or ifosfamide. 544 Median survival times were similar, while 1-year
survival was highest at the lower-dose docetaxel arm. QOL analysis also favored docetaxel therapy. Gemcitabine has also had second-line antitumor activity in phase
II trials. 561 There is little published information to support the use of other drugs as second-line therapy.
Because novel and more effective or less toxic therapies are still much needed in treating NSCLC, it should be recommended to offer investigational therapies of new
drugs or novel combinations of drugs to such patients in prospective phase I and II studies whenever possible. Such an approach holds promise for the intermediate
and long-term identification of more active therapies. The empiric use of sequential chemotherapy regimens as second-, third-, or fourth-line therapy cannot be
supported using current data. Given the lack of drugs with established activity as second-line therapy, using investigational drugs will not compromise a patient's
chance of obtaining benefit from therapy.
Solitary Metastases
METASTASIS (M1) TO LUNG. To differentiate between a second primary lung cancer and a metastasis in synchronous lung lesions or among local recurrence, a new

primary lung cancer, and a pulmonary metastasis from a previous resected lung cancer in metachronous lung lesions can be difficult. A second or recurrent lung
lesion is considered a metastasis if the histology is identified to the primary tumor and occurs in the opposite lung or a noncontiguous area of the ipsilateral lung.
Deslauriers et al. 572a found that the presence of satellite nodules discovered at surgery, clearly separated from the primary tumor but with identical histologic
characteristics, is a poor prognostic factor. In patients with satellite nodules from all stages of lung cancer, 5-year survival was 21.6%, as compared with 44% if no
nodules were present. The mechanism of tumor spread in the lung is not well known, but metastases may develop as a result of a blood-borne or airborne spread
from a primary bronchogenic carcinoma. The new TNM staging system fails to classify these synchronous lung lesions specifically.
The same criteria used in selecting patients for surgical resection of a pulmonary metastasis from a primary lung cancer should be used in patients with metastatic
carcinoma to the lung from other primary tumors. 572b If a solitary synchronous lesion is discovered in a different lobe from the primary tumor, both lesions should be
resected whenever possible.
METASTASIS (M1) TO BRAIN. Brain metastases constitute more than 25% of all observed recurrences in patients with resected NSCLC and are seen with greater

frequency at autopsy. 573 In a review by the LCSG, the brain was the sole site of first recurrence in only 6.4% of patients with completely resected NSCLC but
accounted for approximately 20% of all recurrences. 574 Nearly one-half of the patients seen with brain metastases have solitary lesions on CT scan. When these
lesions are symptomatic, the median survival without therapy is limited to 1 month. Corticosteroids and whole brain irradiation can offer effective palliation of
symptoms but only modestly increase survival up to 6 months. 575
A synchronous or metachronous solitary brain metastasis can be treated, whenever possible, by surgical resection, with 5-year survival rates of 10% to 20% ( Table
31.2-23). Surgical excision of a brain metastasis, no matter the primary site (approximately 75% from NSCLC), followed by radiation has been shown to be superior to
whole brain radiotherapy alone in prolonging median survival (9.2 vs. 3.4 months), in preventing local recurrence, and in providing a better QOL. 576

TABLE 31.2-23. Reported Results after Combined Resection for Primary Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer with a Single Brain Metastasis (M1)

A resurgence of interest in the use of high-dose 3D-CRT or sterotactic radiosurgery in managing solitary brain metastases has followed early results suggesting
equivalence to a surgical approach. 577
METASTASIS (M1) TO THE ADRENAL GLAND. Adrenal metastases from bronchogenic carcinoma are found in approximately one-third of patients at autopsy. Routine

preoperative upper abdominal CT scanning may reveal an adrenal mass in approximately 10% of patients. 578
A few case reports of adrenalectomy for solitary adrenal metastasis are available, and long-term survival after combined excision of the primary lung tumor and its
metastatic lesion has been reported. 579,580 and 581 The ultimate role of such an approach has yet to be defined.
METASTASIS (M1) TO LIVER, BONE, OR SKIN. No reports of long-term survival have been made after combined surgical excision of a primary lung cancer with a

synchronous solitary liver, bone, or skin metastasis. It is rare that these lesions are truly solitary metastatic foci. However, patients with solitary metachronous sites
fare reasonably well after complete surgical excision.
Palliation
In view of the poor survival rate of patients with locally advanced NSCLC and patients with metastatic disease, effective palliation is an important objective. Carroll et
al.582 followed up 134 inoperable patients and reported that 64% needed immediate local palliation and that, of those with no thoracic symptoms at presentation,
one-half required subsequent local treatment. Thus, a watch-and-wait policy is appropriate for only a minority of patients, and it is critical that they be followed up
carefully to prevent the development of serious local complications of the disease that may be less easily palliated. It is important to intervene before superior vena
cava obstruction, obstructive pneumonia, or lobar collapse develops. The latter two conditions produce a radiographic picture in which tumor and other processes are
not easily distinguishable, and large radiation fields may be necessary for effective control.
Radiotherapy
LOCAL DISEASE. External-Beam Irradiation Numerous trials have been conducted in which the palliative benefit of radiotherapy has been documented.

582,583,584 and 585

Various regimens produce a high rate of palliation that often is sustained for a significant proportion of a patient's survival. The randomized trials suggest that certain
symptoms, such as hemoptysis and pain, are more effectively palliated, while dyspnea and poor performance status appear to be more refractory. Investigators in Italy
used either 5.5 Gy or 8.8 Gy once a week for a total dose of 44 Gy and reported that 80% of 45 patients experienced an average improvement of 20 points on the
Karnofsky performance score.421,586
The RTOG trial showed that even regimens with larger fraction sizes had a low (8%) incidence of severe complications. An early Medical Research Council trial
showed no difference in survival or toxicity between 17 Gy given in two fractions 1 week apart and more conventional palliative fractionation (30 Gy in ten fractions or
27 Gy in six fractions). 583 A follow-up study, however, demonstrated an increase in median survival from 7 months to 9 months when 17 Gy in 2 fractions was
compared to 36 to 39 Gy in 12 to 13 fractions. 587 Palliation was quicker and more durable in the hypofractionated arm, however.
A significant number of patients, however, suffer recurrence of symptoms. Few data report on the result of re-treatment with radiation. Jackson and Ball 588 re-treated
22 patients whose disease recurred after radical irradiation and delivered between 20 and 30 Gy in 2-Gy fractions. Symptomatic improvement occurred in 52%, and
median survival was 5.4 months.
Superior vena cava syndrome is characterized by venous distention, facial edema, headache, tachypnea, cyanosis, and plethora 589 It is caused by the obstruction of
the superior vena cava by compression, invasion, or thrombosis. Approximately 80% of cases are caused by bronchiogenic cancer, most frequently small cell lung
cancer, but non–small cell histologies are also very common. Although some have questioned whether emergent radiation treatment is necessary, 589 others report
symptomatic relief with palliative radiotherapy in 80% of patients. 590 High dose per fraction (300 cGy or greater) appears to incite faster relief. 590
Intraluminal Brachytherapy Intraluminal brachytherapy or EBB is an excellent palliative treatment for symptoms of hemoptysis, obstruction, and dyspnea. It has been
shown to work best in tumors that are endoluminal or submucosal. 591 Direct permanent implantation of 125I seeds into endobronchial tumors was developed at MSKCC
in the 1960s. Relief of symptoms was achieved in approximately 60% of cases, but there was significant morbidity due to perforation of the airway, hemorrhage, and
ventilatory arrest. 592 Subsequent workers avoided direct implantation into tissues and used temporary intraluminal placement of cobalt 60 or 192Ir to deliver one or
more large fractions over a few days. 593,594 High-dose-rate fractionated intraluminal therapy was developed to avoid such prolonged treatment times, which were
uncomfortable for the patient and required hospitalization with attendant expense and radiation risk to personnel. In a sequential comparison of low- and high-dose
rate endobronchial radiation, there was no difference in palliative effect or toxicity. 595 In a population of patients receiving prior radiation, this approach yielded
symptomatic improvement in 75% of patients, and there were a few long-term survivors. 425 Similar data were reported by Macha et al., 596 who obtained a response in
79% (44 of 56) of patients receiving 7.5 Gy 1 cm from the source in four treatments. Radiologic improvement occurred in 88% (22 of 25) of patients with collapse or
atelectasis, and improvements in FEV 1 and vital capacity were well documented. Delclos et al. 597 reported an 84% response rate in 81 previously treated patients. The
median response duration was 4.5 months. Burt et al. 598 gave 15 to 20 Gy at 1 cm in one fraction of high-dose-rate endoluminal brachytherapy and reported relief of
hemoptysis in 86% (24 of 28), dyspnea in 64% (21 of 33), and cough in 50% (9 of 18). Unlike in other series, these authors did not use laser therapy before radiation.
Laser treatment provides immediate relief of symptoms, facilitates catheter placement beyond the obstruction, and may increase response rates and duration.
Seagren and Harrell 599 reported significantly improved response rates among a population of 36 patients who received laser treatment versus 14 who did not.
The optimum brachytherapy fractionation schedule has yet to be determined. Single large fractions have been associated with a large risk of massive hemoptysis. 258
Huber et al. 600 compared two fractionation schedules of high-dose-rate EBB: 3.8 Gy in four fractions and 7.2 Gy in two fractions. There was no difference in overall
survival or complications between the two groups, although there was a trend toward improved survival with the large fraction size. Therefore, doses in the range of 5
to 7.5 Gy prescribed to 1 cm should be considered safe for high-dose-rate endobronchial radiation. EBB has also been given concurrently with chemotherapy
safely.601
Distant Metastases
NSCLC metastasizes to a variety of organs. For asymptomatic metastatic disease remote from critical locations, the usual approach is expectant management or
chemotherapy. Isolated symptomatic lesions, such as bone metastases and spinal cord compression (even if asymptomatic), are managed with palliative courses of
radiation (e.g., 30 Gy in ten fractions).
Brain metastases are particularly common in NSCLC and can be debilitating. The standard therapy for multiple brain metastases in NSCLC is whole brain irradiation.

This is accompanied by dexamethasone, 4 mg four times daily before and during radiation, and anticonvulsants only if seizures occur.
The RTOG studied a variety of dose and fractionation schemes for 1994 patients with brain metastases arising from several primary sites, including lung
(approximately one-half of patients). The schedules used were 20 Gy in 1 week, 30 Gy in 2 weeks, 30 Gy in 3 weeks, 40 Gy in 3 weeks, and 40 Gy in 4 weeks. The
shorter schedules tended to give more rapid relief of neurologic symptoms, but otherwise the schedules had comparable palliative effects (50% overall), duration of
improvement (9 to 13 weeks), and median survival (15 to 18 weeks). 601,602
Surgical resection combined with postoperative resection has been advocated for single metastases. At MSKCC, 104 patients with NSCLC were treated with surgery
and radiation (n = 35) or radiation alone (n = 69). Median survival was 18 months for the combined-therapy arm versus 4 months for the radiation-alone arm. The
patients on the combined-arm had fewer metastases to other organs and tended to have controlled or more aggressively managed primary tumors. 603 Mandell et al. 603
and Patchell et al. 604 randomly assigned 45 patients with resectable single brain metastases (82% NSCLC primary tumors) to receive radiation alone or combined
resection and radiation to the entire brain. Median survival (40 weeks vs. 15 weeks) and duration of functional independence (38 weeks vs. 8 weeks) were
significantly higher in the combined surgery-plus-radiation arm. The magnitude of the difference in survival documented in the trial has prompted an increasing
acceptance of resection and postoperative irradiation for solitary brain metastases arising from NSCLC. A subsequent study from Patchell et al. 605 examined the role
of whole brain radiotherapy in patients who underwent surgical resection. They found that whole brain radiotherapy decreased the rate of neurologic death but did not
have an effect on overall survival. Stereotactic radiosurgery for solitary brain metastases appears promising as a substitute for surgery.
SURGERY. Even when surgery cannot lead to cure, this approach may be used to afford best palliation of symptoms. Such surgical intervention may include

bronchoscopic removal or ablation of tumor to relieve endobronchial obstruction or hemoptysis, pleurodesis to relieve symptomatic malignant pleural effusions,
pericardial fenestration for malignant pericardial effusions, endobronchial or endoesophageal stents for relief of obstruction, and (occasionally) surgical resection of
primary tumors and lung parenchyma for relief of septic complications or massive hemoptysis. On very rare occasions, en bloc resection, albeit incomplete, may be
excellent palliation for painful invasion of bony structures, such as vertebrae or ribs.
Relief of Endobronchial Obstruction Bronchoscopic removal of endobronchial tumor is an efficient way of relieving endobronchial obstruction. Simple mechanical
débridement with the use of the bronchoscope is often sufficient. Coagulative techniques, such as CO 2, argon or neodymium–yttrium aluminum garnet laser,
electrocautery, and cryotherapy have been used in conjunction with mechanical débridement. There has been an increase in interest in the use of photocoagulation
employing hematoporphyrins and argon beam excitation as a method of relieving endobronchial obstructions. 606 All the techniques can be effective. Massive
hemorrhage from the lesion is rare but can be avoided by the judicious use of coagulative techniques. In most instances, endobronchial débridement and coagulation
are best carried out by rigid bronchoscopy. Frequently, endobronchial stents are employed for long-term palliation.
Hemoptysis Frequently, hemoptysis can plague the patient with stage IV lung cancer. As with bronchial obstruction, bronchoscopy is often the treatment of choice to
control this annoying and sometimes devastating complication. All the coagulative methods discussed for bronchial obstruction can apply. In some patients, the
bleeding can be controlled by the use of bronchial artery embolization to obstruct the hypertrophy in the bronchial arteries that have been eroded in the area of the
tumor. On rare occasions, massive hemoptysis can be dealt with by a palliative resection.
Pleurodesis of Malignant Pleural Effusions Malignant pleural effusions associated with lung cancer can be difficult to treat. In most instances, a portion of the
ipsilateral lung is atelectatic, making pleurodesis more refractory. Before pleurodesis, a chest tube should be inserted to drain the pleural effusion completely to
ensure that the lung is expandable. Occasionally, endobronchial removal of tumor may allow such expansion. After confirmation that the visceral and parietal pleura
can be opposed, pleurodesis can be effected using intrapleural tetracycline, bleomycin, or talc. The latter chemical appears to be most effective, especially since
tetracycline has become unavailable in the United States.
Pericardial Effusions Symptomatic pericardial effusion secondary to metastatic disease from lung cancer can be treated by simple pericardial drainage, drainage
followed by sclerosis of the pericardium, or the surgical creation of a pericardial window either by the subxiphoid laparotomy approach or anterior thoracotomy
approach or using video-assisted thoracoscopic techniques. In all surgical approaches, a pericardial window is created, and a chest tube is inserted to complete the
drainage of the pericardium.
Bronchial and Esophageal Obstruction Extrinsic compression of a major airway or the esophagus sometimes complicates lung cancer that involves mediastinal lymph
nodes. When minimal endobronchial disease is present, bronchoscopy or esophagoscopy to relieve such obstruction yields temporary relief. In such instances,
insertion of endobronchial or endoesophageal stents may relieve the problem. Because of the proximity of the major airways to the esophagus, these stents may
cause compression of the other organ. This is especially true when endoesophageal stenting is used, with resultant major airway compression. Such treatment,
however, frequently yields excellent palliation of symptoms.
Palliative Resection Palliative resection for uncontrolled symptoms rarely is indicated. Endobronchial obstruction with distal uncontrolled pneumonia or lung abscess
can be treated by endoscopic removal of tumor or, in the case of lung abscess, percutaneous or transbronchoscopic drainage of the abscess. Massive hemoptysis
may not respond to other therapeutic measures. It is rare that a palliative, incomplete surgical resection is required for patients presenting with these complications. In
most instances, lesser procedures afford excellent palliation.
Invasion of tumors into vertebral bodies or the spinal canal may, on rare occasions, require surgical resection of all or part of the primary tumor plus the involved
vertebral body to relieve uncontrollable pain or impending spinal cord damage. In most instances, such surgery provides palliation for only a short time.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Cancer facts and figures, 2000. Atlanta: American Cancer Society, 2000.
2. Parkin DM. Trends in lung cancer worldwide. Chest 1989;96:5S.
3. Cullen JW. The National Cancer Institute's smoking, tobacco and cancer program. Chest 1989;96:9S.
4. Loeb LA, Ernster VL, Warner KE, et al. Smoking and lung cancer: an overview. Cancer Res 1984;44:5940.
5. Minna JD, Higgins GA, Glatstein EJ. Cancer of the lung. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott,
1989:597.
6. Mattson ME, Pollack ES, Cullen JW. What are the odds that smoking will kill you? Am J Public Health 1987;77:425.
7. Garfinkel L, Stellman SD. Smoking and lung cancer in women: findings in a prospective study. Cancer Res 1988;48:6951.
8. Cullen JW, McKenna JW, Massey MM. International control of smoking and the US experience. Chest 1986;89[Suppl 4]:2206.
9. Garfinkel L, Silverberg E. Lung cancer and smoking trends in the United States over the past 25 years. CACancer J Clin 1991;41:137.
10. Stellman SD, Garfinkel L. Smoking habits and tar levels in a new American Cancer Society prospective study of 1.2 million men and women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1986;76:1057.
11. Pierce JP, Fiore MC, Novotny TE. Trends in cigarette smoking in the United States: projections to the year 2000. JAMA 1989;261:61.
12. Masironi R, Rothwell K. Trends in and effects of smoking in the world. World Health Stat Q 1988;41:228.
13. Liu BQ, Petro R, Chen ZM, et al. Emerging tobacco hazards in China: 1. Retrospective proportional mortality study of one million deaths. Br Med J 1998;317:1399.
14. Hoffman D, Haley NJ, Brunnemann KD, et al. Cigarette sidestream smoke: formation, analysis and model studies on the uptake by non-smokers. Presented at the JS-Japan meeting on new
etiology of lung cancer, Honolulu, HI, March 1983.
15. Wald NJ, Nanchahal K, Thompson SG, et al. Does breathing other people's smoke cause lung cancer? Br Med J 1986;293:1217.
16. Greenberg RA, Haley NJ, Etzel RA, et al. Measuring the exposure of infants to tobacco smoke: nicotine and cotinine in urine and saliva. N Engl J Med 1984;310:1075.
17. Janerich DT, Thompson WD, Varela LR, et al. Lung cancer and exposure to tobacco smoke in the household. N Engl J Med 1990;323:632.
18. Florin I, Rutberg L, Curvall M, et al. Screening of tobacco smoke constituents for mutagenicity using the Ames' test. Toxicology 1980;18:219.
19. Phillips DH, Hewer A, Martin CN, et al. Correlation of DNA adduct levels in human lung with cigarette smoking. Nature 1988;336:790.
20. Slebos RJC, Dalesio O, Mooi WJ, et al. Mutational activation of the K-ras oncogene is associated with smoking in adenocarcinoma of the lung. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1991;10:244.
21. Slebos RJC, Ruban RH, Dalesio O, et al. Relationship between K-ras oncogene activity and smoking in adenocarcinoma of the human lung. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:1024.
22. Westra WH, Slebos RJC, Offerhausg JA, et al. K-ras oncogenic activation in lung adenocarcinomas from former smokers: evidence that K-ras mutations are an early and irreversible event in
the development of adenocarcinoma of lung. Cancer 1993;72:432.
23. Hecht SS, Hoffman D. Tobacco-specific nitrosamines: an important group of carcinogens in tobacco and tobacco smoke. Carcinogenesis 1988;9:875.
24. Castonguay A, Stoner GD, Schut HAJ, et al. Metabolism of tobacco-specific nitrosamines by cultured human tissues. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1983;80:6694.
25. Fraumeni JF Jr. Carcinogenesis: an epidemiological appraisal. J Natl Cancer Inst 1975;55:1039.
26. Fraumeni JF Jr, Blott WJ. Lung and pleura. In: Schottenfeld D, Fraumeni JF Jr, eds. Cancer epidemiology and prevention. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1982:564.
27. National Academy of Sciences.Environmental tobacco smoke: measuring exposures and assessing health effects, appendix D. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1986.
28. Seidman H, Selikoff I, Gelb S. Mortality experience of amosite asbestos factory workers: dose-response relationships 540 years after onset of short-term work exposure. Am J Ind Med
1986;10:479.
29. Kjuus H, Langard S, Skjaerven R. A case-referent study of lung cancer, occupational exposure and smoking: II. Role of asbestos exposure. Scand J Work Environ Health 1986;12:203.
30. Kjuus H, Langard S, Skjaerven R. A case-referent study of lung cancer, occupational exposure and smoking: I. Comparison of title-based and exposure-based occupational information. Scand J
Work Environ Health 1986;12:193.

31. Selikoff IJ, Hammond EC, Seidman H. Mortality experience of insulation workers in the United States and Canada, 194376. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1979;330:91.
32. Robinson C, Lemen R, Wagoner JK. Mortality patterns, 19401975, among workers employed in an asbestos textile friction and packing products manufacturing facility. In: Lemen R, Dement
JM, eds. Dusts and disease. Park Forest South, IL: Pathatox Publishers, 1979:131.
33. Armstrong BK, de Klerk NH, Musk AW, et al. Mortality in miners and millers of crocidolite in Western Australia. Br J Ind Med 1988;45:5.
34. McDonald AD, Fry JS, Woolley AJ, et al. Dust exposure and mortality in American chrysotile absestos friction products plant. Br J Ind Med 1984;41:151.
35. Finkelstein MM. Mortality among employees of an Ontario asbestos-cement factory. Am Rev Respir Dis 1984;129:754.
36. Talcott JA, Thruber WA, Kantor AF, et al. Asbestos-associated diseases in a cohort of cigarette-filter workers. N Engl J Med 1989;321:1220.
37. Omenn G, Merchant J, Boatmann E, et al. Contribution of environmental fibres to respiratory cancer. Environ Health Perspect 1986;70:51.
38. Kjuus H, Langard S, Skjaerven R. A case-referent study of lung cancer, occupational exposure and smoking: III. Etiologic fraction of occupational exposures. Scand J Work Environ Health
1986;12:210.
39. Weiss W. Asbestosis: a marker for the increased risk of lung cancer among workers exposed to asbestos. Chest 1999;115:320.
40. Fabrikant J. Radon and lung cancer: the BEIR IV report. Health Physics 1990;59:89.
41. Roscoe R, Steenland K, Halperin W, et al. Lung cancer mortality among nonsmoking uranium miners exposed to radon daughters. JAMA 1989;262:629.
42. Schoenberg J, Klotz J, Wilcox H, et al. Case-control study of residential radon and lung cancer among New Jersey women. Cancer Res 1990;50:6520.
43. Blot W, Zhao-Yi X, Boice J, et al. Indoor radon and lung cancer in China. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:1025.
44. Letourneau EG, Krewski D, Choi MW, et al. Case-control study of residential radon and lung cancer in Winnipeg Manitoba Canada. Ann J Epidemiol 1994;140:310.
45. Lippman SM, Benner SE, Hong WK. Cancer chemoprevention. J Clin Oncol 1994;12(4):851.
46. Menkes MS, Cornstock GW, Vuilleumier JP, et al. Serum beta-carotene, vitamins A and E, selenium, and the risk of lung cancer. N Engl J Med 1986;315:1250.
47. Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group. The effect of vitamin E and beta carotene on the incidence of lung cancer and other cancers in male smokers. N Engl J Med
1994;330(15):1029.
48. Kvale G, Bjelke E, Gart JJ. Dietary habits and lung cancer risks. Int J Cancer 1983;31:397.
49. Knekt P, Aromaa A, Maatela J, et al. Serum selenium and subsequent risk of cancer among Finnish men and women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:864.
50. Shekelle R, Lepper M, Liu S. Dietary vitamin A and risk of cancer in the Western Electric Study. Lancet 1981;2:1185.
51. Lee JS, Lippman SM, Benner SE, et al. Randomized placebo-controlled trial of isotretinoin in chemoprevention of bronchial squamous metaplasia. J Clin Oncol 1994;12(5):937.
52. Hennekens CH, Buring JE, Manson JE, et al. Lack of effect of long-term supplementation with beta carotene on the incidence of malignant neoplasms and cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med
1996;334(18):1145.
53. Omenn GS, Goodman GE, Thornquist MD, et al. Effects of a combination of beta carotene and vitamin A on lung cancer and cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med 1996;334(18):1150.
54. Greenberg ER, Sporn MB. Antioxidant vitamins, cancer, and cardiovascular disease [Editorial]. N Engl J Med 1996;334(18):1189.
55. Bolla M, Lefur R, Ton Van J, et al. Prevention of second primary tumours with etretinate in squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity and oropharynx. Results of a multicentric double-blind
randomised study. Eur J Cancer 1994;30A(6):767.
56. Stahelin HB, Gey KF, Eichholzer M, et al. Beta-carotene and cancer prevention: the Basel study. Am J Clin Nutr 1991;53[Suppl]:265S.
57. Virtamo J. Vitamins and lung cancer. Proc Nutr Soc 1999;58(2):329.
58. Willet WC, Polk BF, Underwood BA. Relation of serum vitamins A and E and carotenoids to the risk of cancer. N Engl J Med 1984;310:430.
59. Salonen JT, Alfthan G, Huttenen JK. Association between serum selenium and the risk of cancer. Am J Epidemiol 1984;120:342.
60. Clark LC, Combs GF, Turnbull BW, et al. Effects of selenium supplementation for cancer prevention in patients with carcinoma of the skin. JAMA 1996;272(24):1957.
61. Law MR, Hetzel Mr, Idel JR. Debrisoquine metabolism and genetic predisposition to lung cancer. Br J Cancer 1987;59:686.
62. Caporaso N, Hayes RB, Dosemeci M, et al. Lung cancer risk, occupational exposure, and the debrisoquine metabolic phenotype. Cancer Res 1989;49:3675.
63. Spelrs CJ, Murray S, Davies DS, et al. Debrisoquine oxidation phenotype and susceptibility to lung cancer. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1990;29:101.
64. Benltez J, Ladero JM, Jara C, et al. Polymorphic oxidation of debrisoquine in lung cancer patients. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:158.
65. Nakachi K, Imai K, Hayashi S, et al. Polymorphisms of the CYP1A1 and glutathione S-transferase genes associated with susceptibility to lung cancer in relation to cigarette dose in a Japanese
population. Can Res 1993;53:2994.
66. Braun MM, Caporaso NE, Page WF, Hoover RN. Genetic component of lung cancer: cohort study of twins. Lancet 1994;344:440.
67. Ramalingam S, Pawlish K, Gadgeel S, et al. Lung cancer in young patients: analysis of a surveillance, epidemiology, and end results database. J Clin Oncol 1998;16(2):651.
68. Shaw GL, Falk RT, Pickle LW, et al. Lung cancer risk associated with cancer in relatives. J Clin Epidemiol 1991;44:429.
69. Heighway J, Thatcher N, Cerny T, et al. Genetic predisposition to human lung cancer. Br J Cancer 1986;53:453.
70. Chiba M, Takahashi T, Nau MM, et al. The patients in the p53 gene are frequent in primary resected nonsmall cell lung cancer. Oncogene 1990;5:1603.
71. Rusch V, Baselga J, Cordon-Cardo C, et al. Differential expression of the epidermal growth factor receptor and its ligands in primary nonsmall cell lung cancers and adjacent benign lung.
Cancer Res 1993;53:2379.
72. Slebos R, Kibbelaar R, Dalesio O. K-RAS oncogene activation as a prognostic marker in adenocarcinoma of the lung. N Engl J Med 1990;323:561.
73. Mills NE, Fishman CL, Rom WN, et al. Increased prevalence of K-ras oncogene mutations in lung adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res 1995;55:1444.
74. Ebina M, Steinberg SM, Mulshine JL, et al. Relationship of p53 overexpression and up-regulation of proliferating cell nuclear antigen with the clinical course of nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer
Res 1994;54:2496.
75. Siu LL, Hidalgo M, Nemunaitis J, et al. Dose and schedule-duration escalation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase (TK) inhibitor CP-358, 774: a phase I and
pharmacokinetic (PK) study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:388a(abst 1498).
76. Hammond L, Ranson M, Ferry D, et al. ZD 1839, an oral epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor: first phase I, pharmacokinetic (PK) results in patients. Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1999;18:388a(abst 1500).
77. Roth JA. Molecular events in lung cancer. Lung Cancer 1995;12[Suppl 2]:S3.
78. Roth JA, Nguyen D, Lawrence DD, et al. Retrovirus-mediated wild-type p53 gene transfer to tumors of patients with lung cancer. Nature Med 1996;2(9):985.
79. Linnoila I. Pathology of nonsmall cell lung cancer: new diagnostic approaches. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1990;4(6):1027.
80. Roggli VI, Volmer RB, Greenberg, ST, et al. Lung cancer heterogeneity: a blinded and randomized study of 100 consecutive cases. Hum Pathol 1985;16:569.
81. Percy C, Horm JW, Goffman TE. Trends in histologic type of lung cancer, SEER, 19731981. In: Mizell M, Korrea P, eds. Lung causes and prevention. Deerfield Beach, FL: Verlag, Chemie
International, 1984:153.
82. Clayton F. The spectrum and significance of bronchoalveolar carcinomas. Pathol Annu 1988;23:361.
83. Hammer SP, Bolan JW, Bockus D, et al. Ultrastructural and immunohistochemical features of common lung tumors: an overview. Ultrastruct Pathol 1985;9:283.
84. Souhami RL, Beverly PC, Bobrow LG. Antigens of small cell lung cancer: first international workshop. Lancet 1987;2:325.
85. Matthews MJ. Problems in morphology and behavior of bronchopulmonary malignant disease. In: Israel I, Chahanian P, eds. Lung cancer: natural history, prognosis and therapy. New York:
Academic Press, 1976:23.
86. Sorenson J, Badsberg J, Olsen J. Prognostic factors in inoperable adenocarcinoma of the lung: a multivariate regression analysis of 259 patients. CancerRes 1989;49:5748.
87. Kris M, Gralla R, Potanovich L, et al. Assessment of pretreatment symptoms and improvement after edam + mitomycin + vinblastine (EMV) in patients (PTS) with inoperable nonsmall cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1990;9:229.
88. Redman BG, Pazdur R, Zingas AP, et al. Prospective evaluation of adrenal insufficiency in patients with adrenal metastasis. Cancer 1987;60:103.
89. Wade JL, Little AG, Vogelzang NJ, et al. Idiopathic pericardial effusions in patients with malignancy. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1984;3:15.
90. Posner MR, Cohen AT, Skarin AT. Pericardial disease in patients with cancer. Am J Med 1981;71:407.
91. Mountain CF. A new international staging system for lung cancer. Chest 1986;89[Suppl]:225.
92. Watanabe Y, Shimizu J, Oda M, et al. Proposals regarding some deficiencies in the new international staging system for nonsmall cell lung cancer. Jpn J Clin Oncol 1991;21:160.
93. Naruke T, Goya T, Tsuchiya R, et al. Prognosis and survival in resected lung carcinoma based on the new international staging system. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1988;96:440.
94. Mountain CF. Value of the new TNM staging system for lung cancer. Chest 1989;97:935.
95. Tockman MS, Gupa PK, Myers JD, et al. Sensitive and specific monoclonal antibody recognition of human lung cancer antigen on preserved sputum cells. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1685.
96. Tockman MS, Erozan YS, Gupta P, et al. The early detection of second primary lung cancers by sputum immunostaining. Chest 1994;106[Suppl]:385S.
97. Tockman MS, Mulshine JL, Piantadosi S, et al. Prospective detection of preclinical lung cancer: results from two studies of heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2/B1 overexpression. Clin
Cancer Res 1997;3:2237.
98. Melamed MR, Flehinger B, Zaman MB, et al. Detection of true pathologic stage I lung cancer in a screening program and the effect on survival cancer. Cancer 1981;47:1182.
99. Vlasbloem H, Schultz Kool LJ. AMBER: a scanning multiple-beam equalization system for chest radiography. Radiology 1988;169:29.
100. Wandtke JC, Plewes DB, McFaul JA. Improved pulmonary nodule detection with scanning equalization radiography. Radiology 1988;169:23.
101. Jolly PC, Hutchinson CH, Detterbeck F, et al. Routine computed tomographic scans, selective mediastinoscopy and other factors in evaluation of lung cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
1991;102:226.
102. Dales RE, Stark RM Sankaranarayan AN. Computed tomography to stage lung cancer. Am Rev Respir Dis 1990;141:1096.
103. Fontana RS. Metaanalysis of computed tomography for staging non-small cell lung cancer [Editorial]. Am Rev Respir Dis 1990;141:1093.
104. Heelan R, Martini N, Westcot JW, et al. Carcinomas involving the hilum and mediastinum: computed tomographic and magnetic resonance evaluation. Radiology 1985;156:111.
105. Payne PY, Bronskill MJ, Henkelman RM, et al. Mediastinal lymph node metastases from bronchogenic carcinoma: detection with MR imaging and CT. Radiology 1987;162:651.
106. Batra P, Brown K, Collins JD, et al. Evaluation of intrathoracic extent of lung cancer by plain chest radiography, computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging. Am Rev Respir Dis
1988;137:1456.
107. Kies MS, Baker AW, Kennedy PS. Radionuclide scans in staging of carcinoma of lung. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1978;147:175.
108. Little AG, DeMeester TR, Ryan JW. The use of radionuclide scans in lung cancer: gallium-67 scanning for preoperative staging. In: Kittle CF, ed. Current controversies in thoracic surgery.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1986:122.
109. Michel F, Soler M, Imhof E, et al. Initial staging of nonsmall cell lung cancer: value of routine radioisotope bone scanning. Thorax 1991;46:469.
110. Saunders CA, Dussek JE, O'Doherty MJ, et al. Evaluation of fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose whole body positron emission tomography imaging in the staging of lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg
1999;67:790.
111. Gambhir SS, Hoh CK, Phelps ME, et al. Decision tree sensitivity analysis for cost-effectiveness of FDG-PET in the staging and management of nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Nucl Med
1997;38:1173.
112. Rivera-Garcia R, White CS, Templeton PA. Lung cancer: value of various imaging modalities. Clin Lung Cancer 1999;1:130.
113. Wescott JL. Direct percutaneous needle aspiration of localized pulmonary lesions: results in 422 patients. Radiology 1980;137:31.
113a. Wang JP, Terry PB. Transbronchial needle apiration in the diagnosis of staging of bronchogenic carcinoma. AM Rev Resp Dis 1983;127:344.
113b. Harrow EM, Oldenburg FA, Lindenfelter MS, Smith AM. Transbronchial needle aspiration in clinical practice: a five year experience. Chest 1989;96:1268
114. Cripp AJ, DiMarco AF, Lankerani M. False-positive transbronchial needle aspiration in bronchogenic carcinoma. Chest 1984;85:696.
115. Luke WP, Pearson FG, Todd TRJ, et al. Prospective evaluation of mediastinoscopy for assessment of carcinoma of the lung. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1986;91:53.
116. McCaughan JS, William TE Jr, Bethel BH. Photodynamic therapy of endobronchial tumors. Lasers Surg Med 1986;6:336.

117. Weigel TL, Meltzer CC, Friedman D, et al. The role of positron emission tomography in evaluating the mediastinum in patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer. Presented at the seventy-ninth
annual meeting of the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, New Orleans, LA, April 1821, 1999 (abst 23).
118. Ginsberg RJ, Rice TW, Goldberg M, et al. Extended cervical mediastinoscopy: a single staging procedure for bronchial carcinoma of the left upper lobe. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1987;94:673.
119. McNiel TM, Chamberlain JM. Diagnostic anterior mediastinotomy. Ann Thorac Surg 1966;2:523.
120. Patterson GA, Piazza D, Pearson FG, et al. Significance of metastatic disease in subaortic lymph node. Ann Thorac Surg 1987;43:155.
121. Landreneau RJ, Mack MJ, Hazelrigg SR, et al. Video-assisted thoracic surgery: a minimally invasive approach to thoracic oncology. PPO Update 1994;8:1.
122. Ginsberg RJ. Thoracoscopy: a cautionary note. Ann Thorac Surg 1993;56:801.
123. Kirby TJ, Mack MJ, Landreneau RJ, et al. Lobectomy video-assisted thoracic surgery versus muscle-sparing thoracotomy: a randomized trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1995;109:997.
124. Silvestri GA, Lippenberg B, Collice GL. The clinical evaluation for detecting metastatic lung cancer: a meta analysis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;152:225.
125. Strauss GM, Kwiatkowski DJ, Harpole DH, et al. Molecular and pathologic markers in stage 1 non-small-cell carcinoma of the lung. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1265.
126. Kwiatkowski DJ, Harpole DH Jr, Godleski J, et al. Molecular pathologic substaging in 244 stage I nonsmall cell lung cancer patients: clinical implications. J Clin Oncol 1998;16: 2468.
127. Harpole DH, Herndon JE, Wolfe WG, et al. Prognostic model of recurrence and death in stage I nonsmall cell lung cancer utilizing presentation, histopathology, and oncoprotein expression.
Cancer Res 1995;55:51.
128. Harpole DH. Commentary on “Prognostic markers in resected stage I and II non-small-cell lung cancer patients.” Clin Lung Cancer 1999;1(1):68.
129. Mehdi SA, Tatum AH, Newman NB, et al. Prognostic markers in resected stage I and II non-small-cell lung cancer: an analysis of 260 patients with 5 year follow-up. Clin Lung Cancer
1999;1(1):59.
130. Salgia R, Skarin AT. Molecular abnormalities in lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16(3):1207.
131. Mountain CF. Revision in the international system for staging lung cancer. Chest 1997;111:1710.
132. Graziano SL. Nonsmall cell lung cancer: clinical value of new biological predictors. Lung Cancer 1997;17:S37.
133. Gall MH, Eagan RT, Feld R, et al. Prognostic factors in patients with resected stage I nonsmall cell lung cancer. A report from the Lung Cancer Study Group. Cancer 1984;54:1802.
134. Yu C, Shun C, Yang P, et al. Sialomucin expression is associated with erbB-2 oncoprotein overexpression, early recurrence, and cancer death in nonsmall cell lung cancer. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 1997;155:1419.
135. Linnoila RI, Piantadosi S, Ruckdeschel JC. Impact of neuroendocrine differentiation in nonsmall cell lung cancer. The LCSG experience. Chest 1994;106:367S.
136. Pastorino U, Andreola S, Tagliabue E, et al. Immunocytochemical markers in stage I lung cancer: relevance to prognosis. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2858.
137. Kubuschok B, Passlick B, Izbicki JR, et al. Disseminated tumor cells in lymph nodes as a determinant for survival in surgically resected non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17(1):19.
138. Pantel K, Izbicki J, Passlick B, et al. Frequency and prognostic significance of isolated tumour cells in bone marrow of patients with non-small-cell lung cancer without overt metastases. Lancet
1996;347:649.
139. Green N, Kurohara SS, George FW. Cancer of the lung: an in-depth analysis of prognostic factors. Cancer 1971;28:1229.
140. Lanzotti VJ, Thomas DR, Boyle LE, et al. Survival with inoperable lung cancer: an integration of prognostic variables based on simple clinical criteria. Cancer 1977;39:303.
141. Stanley KE. Prognostic factors for survival in patients with inoperable lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1980;65:25.
142. Finkelstein DM, Ettinger DS, Ruckdeschel JC. Long-term survivors in metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer: an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:702.
143. O'Connell JP, Kris MG, Gralla RJ, et al. Frequency and prognostic importance of pretreatment clinical characteristics in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer treated with
combination chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1604.
144. Albain KS, Crowley JJ, LeBlanc M, Livingston RB. Survival determinants in extensive-stage non-small-cell lung cancer. The Southwest Oncology Group experience. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1618.
145. Paesmans M, Sculier JP, Libert P, et al. Prognostic factors for survival in advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer: univariate and multivariate analyses including recursive partitioning and
amalgamation algorithms in 1052 patients. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1221.
146. Zimmerman PV, Bint MH, Hawson GAT, et al. Ploidy as a prognostic determinant in surgically treated lung cancer. Lancet 1987;2:530.
147. Volm M, Hahn EW, Mattern J, et al. Five-year follow-up study of independent clinical and flow cytometric prognostic factors for the survival of patients with nonsmall cell lung carcinoma.
Cancer Res 1988;48:2923.
148. Hittelman WN. Clones and subclones in the lung cancer field. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91(21):1796.
149. Park I-W, Wistuba II, Maitra A, et al. Multiple clonal abnormalities in the bronchial epithelium of patients with lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91(21):1863.
150. Kern J, Schwartz D, Nordberg J, et al. p185 ncu expression in human lung adenocarcinomas predicts shortened survival. Cancer Res 1990;50:5184.
151. Kern J, Filderman A. Oncogenes and growth factors in human lung cancer. Clin Chest Med 1993;14:31.
152. Lee JS, Ro JY, Sahin AA, et al. Expression of blood-group antigen A: a favorable prognostic factor in non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1084.
153. Rice TW, Tubbs RR, Hoeltge GA, et al. Expression of blood-group antigen A by stage I nonsmall cell lung carcinomas. Ann Thorac Surg 1995;59:568.
154. Dresler CN, Ritter JH, Wick MR, et al. Immunostains for blood-group antigens lack prognostic significance in T1 lung carcinomas. Ann Thorac Surg 1995;59:1069.
155. Miyake M, Taki T, Hitomi S, et al. Correlation of expression of H/Ley/Leb antigens with survival in patients with carcinoma of the lung. N Engl J Med 1992;327:14.
156. Graziano SL, Tatum AH, Newman NB, et al. The prognostic significance of neuroendocrine markers and carcinoembryonic antigen in patients with resected stage I and II nonsmall cell lung
cancer. Cancer Res 1994;54:2908.
157. Graziano SL, Mazid R, Newman N, et al. The use of neuroendocrine immunoperoxidase markers to predict chemotherapy response in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol
1989;7:1398.
158. Berendsen HH, de Leij L, Poppema S, et al. Clinical characterization of non-small-cell lung cancer tumors showing neuroendocrine differentiation features. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1614.
159. Rodenhuis S, van de Wetering ML, Mooi WJ, et al. Mutational activation of the K-RAS oncogene: a possible pathogenetic factor in adenocarcinoma of the lung. N Engl J Med 1987;317:929.
160. Rosell R, Li S, Mate JL, et al. A prognostic impact of mutated k-ras gene in surgically resected nonsmall cell lung cancer patients. Oncogene 1993;8:2407.
161. Sugio K, Ishida T, Yokoyama H, et al. Ras gene mutations as a prognostic marker in adenocarcinoma of the lung without lymph node metastasis. Cancer Res 1992;52:2903.
162. Graziano SL, Gamble GP, Newman NB, et al. The prognostic significance of K-ras-codon 12 mutations in patients with resected stage I and II nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:668.
163. Sulzer MA, Leers MPG, Noord JAV, et al. Reduced E-cadherin expression is associated with increased lymph node metastasis and unfavourable prognosis in nonsmall cell lung cancer. Am J
Crit Care Med 1998;157:1319.
164. Schiller JH, Adak S, Feins R, et al. Prognostic significance of p53 and K-RAS mutations in primary resected nonsmall cell lung cancer: preliminary results from a prospective randomized trial of
postoperative adjuvant therapy (Intergroup Trial 0115). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:464a(abst 1789).
165. Rodenhuis S, Boerrigter L, Top B, et al. Mutational activation of the K-ras oncogene and the effect of chemotherapy in advanced adenocarcinoma of the lung: a prospective study. J Clin Oncol
1997;15(1):285.
166. Cho JY, Kim JH, Lee YH, et al. Correlation between K-ras gene mutation and prognosis of patients with nonsmall cell lung carcinoma. Cancer 1997;79(3):462.
167. Apolinario RM, van der Valk P, de Jong JS, et al. Prognostic value of the expression of p53, bcl-2, and bax oncoproteins, and neovascularization in patients with radically resected
non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15(6):2456.
168. Ohsaki Y, Toyoshima E, Fujiuchi S, et al. P53 protein expression in nonsmall cell lung cancers: correlation with survival time. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:915.
169. Pantel K, Passlick B, Vogt J, et al. Reduced expression of plakoglobin indicates an unfavorable prognosis in subsets of patients with non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16(4):1407.
170. Pezzella F, Turley H, Kuzu I, et al. Bcl-2 protein in nonsmall cell lung carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1993;329:690.
171. Fontanini G, Vignati S, Bigini JD, et al. BCL-2 protein: a prognostic factor inversely correlated to p53 in nonsmall cell lung cancer. Br J Cancer 1995;71:1003.
172. Uramoto H, Osaki T, Inoue M, et al. Fas expression in nonsmall cell lung cancer: its prognostic effect in completely resected stage III patients. Eur J Cancer 1999;35(10):1462.
173. Weidner N, Semple JP, Welch WR, et al. Tumor angiogenesis and metastatic correlation in invasive breast carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1.
174. Macchiarini P, Fontanini GM, Hardin MJ, et al. Relation of neovascularization to metastasis of nonsmall cell lung cancer. Lancet 1992;340:145.
175. Harpole DH, Richards WG, Herndon JE, et al. Angiogenesis and molecular biologic substaging in patients with stage I non-small cell lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1996;61:1470.
176. Fontanini G, Lucchi M, Vignati S, et al. Angiogenesis as a prognostic indicator of survival in nonsmall cell lung cancer: a prospective study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:881.
177. Giatromanolaki A, Koukourakis MI, Theodossiou D, et al. Comparative evaluation of angiogenesis assessment with anti-factor-VIII and anti-CD31 immunostaining in nonsmall cell lung cancer.
Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:2485.
178. Shibusa T, Shijubo N, Abe S. Tumor angiogenesis and vascular endothelial growth factor expression in stage I lung adenocarcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:1483.
179. Berlin NI, Buncher CR, Fontana RS, et al. Early lung cancer detection: summary and conclusions. Am Rev Respir Dis 1984;30:565.
180. Berlin NI, Buncher CR, Fontana RS, et al. National Cancer Institute Cooperative Lung Cancer Detection Program: results of initial screen (prevalence)Early Lung Cancer Detection. Am Rev
Respir Dis 1984;130:545.
181. Strauss GM, Gleason RE, Sugarbaker DJ, et al. Chest x-ray screening improves outcome in lung cancer. A reappraisal of randomized trials on lung cancer screening. Chest 1995;107[Suppl
6]:270S.
182. Ohmatsu H, Kakinuma R, Nishiwaki Y, et al. Lung cancer screening with low-dose spiral CT. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:1787(abst).
183. Henschke CI, McCauley DI, Yankelevitz DF, et al. Early lung cancer action project: overall design and findings from baseline screening. Lancet 1999;354:99.
184. Smith IE. Screening for lung cancer: time to think positivea commentary. Lancet 1999;354:86.
185. Flehinger BJ. Kimmel M, Melamed MR. The effect of surgical treatment on survival from early lung cancer. Implications for screening. Chest 1992;101:1013.
186. Pilotti S, Ralk EF, Gribaudi D, et al. Sputum cytology for the diagnosis of carcinoma of the lung. Acta Cytol 1982;26:649.
187. Risse EKJ, Vooigis GP, Van't Hof MA. Diagnostic significance of “severe dysphagia” since sputum cytology. Acta Cytol 1988;32:629.
188. Shure D. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy: diagnostic application. Clin Chest Med 1987;8:1.
189. Lam S, Palcic D, McLean D, et al. Detection of early lung cancer using low dose Photofrin II. Chest 1990;97:333.
190. Kinse JH, Cortese DA. Endoscopic system for simultaneous visual examination and electronic detection of fluorescence. Rev Sel Instrum 1987;51:1403.
191. Lam S, Kennedy T, Unger M, et al. Localization of bronchial intraepithelial neoplastic lesions by fluorescence bronchoscopy. Chest 1998;113:696.
192. Weigel TL, Kosco PJ, Dacic S, et al. Fluorescence bronchoscopic surveillance in patients with a history of nonsmall cell lung cancer. Diag Therap Endosc 1999;6:1.
193. Cortese DA, Edell ES, Kinsey JH. Photodynamic therapy for early stage squamous cell carcinoma of the lung. Mayo Clin Proc 1997;72:595.
194. Hayata Y, Kato H, Komaka C, et al. Photoradiation therapy with hematoporphyrin derivative in early and stage I lung cancer. Chest 1984;86:169.
195. Edell ES, Cortese DA. Bronchoscopic localization and treatment of occult lung cancer. Chest 1989;96:919.
196. Hong WK, Endicott J, Itri LM. 13-Cis-retinoic acid in the treatment of oral leukoplakia. N Engl J Med 1986;315:1501.
197. Hong WK, Lippman SM, Itri LM, et al. Prevention of second primary tumors with isotretinoin in squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med 1990;323:795.
198. Reichl J. Assessment of operative risk of pneumonectomy. Chest 1972;62:570.
199. Taube K, Koniezko N. Prediction of postoperative cardiopulmonary function of patients undergoing pneumonectomy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1980;28:348.
200. Putman JB, Lammermeier DE, Colon R, et al. Predicted pulmonary function in survival after pneumonectomy for primary lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1990;49:909.
201. Ginsberg RJ. Pre-operative assessment of the thoracic surgical patient: a surgeon's viewpoint. In: Pearson FG, Deslauriers J, Ginsberg RJ, et al., eds. Thoracic surgery, vol 1. New York:
Churchill Livingstone, 1995:29.
202. Gass GD, Olsen GN. Preoperative pulmonary function testing to predict postoperative morbidity and mortality. Chest 1986;89:127.
203. Olsen GN, Block AJ, Swanson EW, et al. Pulmonary function evaluation of a lung resection candidate: a prospective study. Am Rev Respir Dis 1975;111:379.
204. Murphy TP, Casey MT. Determination of operability in candidates who undergo lung resection for bronchogenic carcinoma. Can J Surg 1990;33:470.
205. Ginsberg RJ, Rubinstein LV, Lung Cancer Study Group. Randomized trial of lobectomy versus limited resection for T1 N0 nonsmall cell lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1995;60:615.
206. Korst RJ, Ginsberg RJ, Ailawadi M, et al. Lobectomy improves ventilatory function in selected patients with severe COPD. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;66:898.
207. Graham EA, Sedal JJ. Successful removal of the entire lung for carcinoma of the bronchus. JAMA 1933;101:1371.

208. Churchill ED, Sweet RH, Sutter L, et al. The surgical management of carcinoma of the lung: the study of cases treated at the Massachusetts General Hospital from 193050. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 1950;20:349.
209. Jensik RJ, Faber LD, Milloy FJ, et al. Segmental resection for lung cancer: a 15 year experience. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1973;66:563.
210. Jensik RJ. The extent of resection for localized lung cancer: segmental resection. In: Kittle CF, ed. Current controversies in thoracic surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1986:175.
210a. Read RC, Boop WC, Schaeffer RC. Survival after conservative resection for T1 N0 M0 non-small cell lung cancer. Ann Thoracic Surg 1990;49:391.
210b. Wain JC, Mathisen DJ, Hilgenberg AD, et al. Wedge and segmental resection for primary lung carcinomas. Proc Am Assoc ThoracicSurg 1991;May(abst).
211. Ginsberg RJ, Hill LD, Eagan RT, et al. Modern day operative mortality for surgical resection in lung cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1983;86:654.
212. Delauriers J, Ginsberg RJ, Dubois P, et al. Modern operative morbidity for elective surgical resection in lung carcinoma. Can J Surg 1989;32:335.
213. Le Chevalier T, Arriagada R, Quoix E, et al. Radiotherapy alone versus combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy in nonresectable non-small-cell lung cancer. First analysis of a randomized
trial in 353 patients. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:417.
214. Emami B. Three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy in bronchogenic carcinoma. Semin Radiat Oncol 1996;6:92.
215. Cox JD, Azarnia N, Byhardt RW, et al. A randomized phase I/II trial of hyperfractionated radiation therapy with total doses of 60.0 Gy to 79.2 Gy: possible survival benefit with greater than or
equal to 69.6 Gy in favorable patients with Radiation Therapy Oncology Group stage III non-small-cell lung carcinoma: report of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 8311. J Clin Oncol
1990;8:1543.
216. Graham MV. Predicting radiation response. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:561.
217. Hayman JA, Martel MK, Ten Haken RK, et al. Dose escalation in nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) using conformal 3-dimensional radiation therapy (C3DRT): update of a phase I trial. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:459a(abst).
218. Rosenzweig KE, Hanley J, Mychalczak B, et al. Final report of the 70.2 Gy and 75.6 Gy dose levels of a phase I dose escalation study using three dimensional conformal radiotherapy in the
treatment of inoperable lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:165(abst).
219. Munley MT, Marks LB, Scarfone C, et al. Multimodality nuclear medicine imaging in three-dimensional radiation treatment planning for lung cancer: challenges and prospects. Lung Cancer
1999;23:105.
220. Dische S, Saunders MI. Continuous, hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy (CHART): an interim report upon late morbidity. Radiother Oncol 1989;16:65.
221. Evans ML, Graham MM, Mahler PA, et al. Changes in vascular permeability following thoracic irradiation. Radiat Res 1986;107:262.
222. Rubin P, McDonald S, Maasilta P, et al. Serum markers for prediction of pulmonary radiation syndromes: I. Surfactant apoprotein. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:553.
223. Anscher MS, Murase T, Prescott DM, et al. Changes in plasma TGF- b levels during pulmonary radiotherapy as a predictor of the risk of developing radiation pneumonitis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1994;30:671.
224. Marks LB. The pulmonary effects of thoracic radiation. Oncology 1994;8:89.
225. Martinet N, Vaillent P, Charles TH, et al. Dexamethasone modulation of tumor necrosis factor-alpha release by activated normal human alveolar macrophages. Eur Respir J 1992;5:67.
226. Steel GG. The search for therapeutic gain in the combination of radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Radiother Oncol 1988;11:31.
227. Von der Masse H, Overgaard JJ, Vaeth M. Effect of cancer chemotherapeutic drugs on radiation-induced lung damage in mice. Radiother Oncol 1986;5:245.
228. Roach M, 3rd, Gandara DR, Yuo HS, et al. Radiation pneumonitis following combined modality therapy for lung cancer: analysis of prognostic factors. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2606.
229. Choy H. Esophagitis in combined modality therapy for locally advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. Semin Radiat Oncol 1999;9:90.
230. Keller SM, Adak S, Wagner H, et al. Prospective randomized trial of postoperative adjuvant therapy in patients with completely resected stages II and IIIa nonsmall cell lung cancer: an
intergroup trial (E3590). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:465a(abst 1793).
231. Sadeghi A, Payne D, Rubestein L, et al. Combined modality treatment for resected nonsmall cell lung cancer: local control and recurrence. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:89.
232. Eagan RT, Lee RR, Frytak S, et al. Thoracic radiation therapy and adriamycin/cisplatin-containing chemotherapy for locally advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer Clin Trials 1981;2:381.
233. Umsawadi T, Valdivieso M, Barkley HT, et al. Esophageal complications from combined chemoradiotherapy (cyclophosphamide + Adriamycin + cisplatin + XRT) in the treatment of nonsmall
cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:511.
234. Ball D, Bishop J, Smith J, et al. A phase III study of accelerated radiotherapy with and without carboplatin in nonsmall cell lung cancer: an interim toxicity analysis of the first 100 patients. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:267.
235. Van Houtte P, Danheir S, Mornex F. Toxicity of combined radiation and chemotherapy in nonsmall cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer 1994;10[Suppl 1]:S271.
236. Sheline GE, William WW, Smith V. Therapeutic irradiation and brain injury. Oncol Intell 1980;6:1215.
237. McCunniff AJ, Liang MJ. Radiation tolerance of the cervical spinal cord. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;16:675.
238. Jeremic B, Shibarnoto Y, Milicic B, et al. Absence of thoracic radiation myelitis after hyperfractionated radiation therapy with and without concurrent chemotherapy for stage III non small-cell
lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:343.
239. Emami B, Lyman J, Brown A, et al. Tolerance of normal tissue to therapeutic irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:109.
239a. Armstrong J, Raben A, Zelefsky M, et al. Promising survival with three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy for nonsmall cell lung cancer. Radiother Oncol 1997;44:17.
239b. Robertson JM, Ten Haken RK, Hazuka MB. Dose escalation for nonsmall cell lung cancer using conformal radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:1079.
240. Kwa SL, Lebesque JV, Theuws JC, et al. Radiation pneumonitis as a function of mean lung dose: an analysis of pooled data of 540 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:1.
241. Derycke S, De Gersem WR, Van Duyse BB, De Neve WC. Conformal radiotherapy of stage III nonsmall cell lung cancer: a class solution involving non-coplanar intensity-modulated beams. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:771.
242. Ekberg L, Holmberg O, Wiltgren L, Bjelkengren G, Landberg T. What margins should be added to the clinical target volume in radiotherapy treatment planning for lung cancer? Radiother Oncol
1998;48:71.
243. Ross CS, Hussey DH, Pennington EC, Stanford W, Doombos JF. Analysis of movement of intrathoracic neoplasms using ultrafast computerized tomography. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1990;18:671.
244. Kubo HD, Hill BC. Respiration gated radiotherapy treatment: a technical study. Phys Med Biol 1996;41:83.
245. Ohara K, Okumura T, Akisada M, et al. Irradiation synchronized with respiration gate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:853.
246. Sontag MR, Merchant TE, Burnham B, Shah AB, Kun LE. Clinical experience with a system for pediatric respiratory gated radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:140(abst).
247. Johnson LS, Hadley SW, Pelizzari CA. A video-based technique to gate radiotherapy treatments for respiration. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:139(abst).
248. Hanley J, Debois MM, Mah D, et al. Deep inspiration breath-hold technique for lung tumors: the potential value of target immobilization and reduced lung density in dose escalation. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:603.
249. Wong JW, Sharpe MB, Jaffray DA, et al. The use of active breathing control (ABC) to reduce margin for breathing motion. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:911.
250. Uematsu M, Shioda A, Tahara, K. Focal, high dose, and fractionated modified stereotactic radiation therapy for lung carcinoma patients. Cancer 1998;82:1062.
251. Budach V. The role of fast neutrons in radiooncology: a critical reappraisal. Strahlenther Onkol 1991;176:677.
252. Koh WJ, Krall JM, Peters LJ, et al. Neutron vs. photon radiation therapy for inoperable regional nonsmall cell lung cancer: results of a multicenter randomized trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1993;27:499
253. Nori D. Intraoperative brachytherapy in nonsmall cell lung cancer. Semin Surg Oncol 1993;9:99
254. Marchese M, Nori D, Anderson LL, et al. A versatile permanent planar implant technique utilizing I-125 seed embedded in Gelfoam. Int J Radiat Oncol BiolPhys 1981;194:747.
255. Nori D. Role of intraoperative brachytherapy in nonsmall cell lung cancer. In: Nori D, ed. Proceedings of the International Conference on Thoracic Oncology. New York: Booth Memorial Medical
Center, 1991:43.
256. Raben A, Mychalczak B. Brachytherapy for nonsmall cell lung cancer and selected neoplasms of the chest. Chest 1997;112:276S.
257. Mehta, M, Shahabi S, Jarjour N, et al. Effect of endobronchial radiation therapy on malignant bronchial obstruction. Chest 1990;97:662.
258. Langendijk J, Tjwa M, de Jong J, et al. Massive haemoptysis after radiotherapy in inoperable nonsmall cell lung carcinoma: Is endobronchial brachytherapy really a risk factor? Radiother Oncol
1998;49:175.
259. Hennequin C, Tredaniel J, Chevert S, et al. Predictive factors for late toxicity after endobronchial brachytherapy: a multivariate analysis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:21.
260. Abe M, Takahishi M, Yabumoto E, et al. Clinical experiences with intraoperative radiotherapy of locally advanced cancers. Cancer 1980;45:40.
261. American Society of Clinical Oncology. Clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of unresectable non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2996.
262. Bunn PA, Kelly K. New chemotherapeutic agents prolong survival and improve quality of life in nonsmall cell lung cancer: a review of the literature and future directions. Clin Cancer Res
1998;5:1087.
263. Johnson DH. Treatment strategies for metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer. Clin Lung Cancer 1999;1:34.
264. Vokes EE, Bitran JD. Non-small cell lung cancer: towards the next plateau [Editorial]. Chest 1994;106:659.
265. Shepherd FA. Treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Semin Oncol 1994;21[Suppl 7]:7.
266. Gordon GS, Vokes EE. Chemoradiation for locally advanced, unresectable NSCLC. New standard of care, emerging strategies. Oncology 1999;13(8):1075.
267. Vokes EE. Interactions of chemotherapy and radiation. Semin Oncol 1993;20:70.
268. Lilenbaum RC, Green MR. Multimodality therapy for non-small-cell lung cancer. Oncology 1994;8:25.
269. Rossenthal DI, Pistenmaa DA, Glatstein E. A review of neoadjuvant chemotherapy for head and neck cancer: partially shrunken tumors may be both leaner and meaner. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1993;28:315.
270. Vokes EE, Vijayakumar S, Bitran JD, et al. The role of systemic therapy in advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer: a review. Am J Med 1990;89:777.
271. Dillman R, Seagren S, Proprert K, et al. A randomized trial of induction chemotherapy plus high-dose radiation versus radiation alone in stage III nonsmall cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med
1990;323:940.
272. Le Chevalier T, Arriagada R, Lacombe-Terrier M-J, et al. Significant effect of adjuvant chemotherapy on survival in locally advanced non-small-cell lung carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst
1992;84:58.
273. Sause WT, Scott C, Taylor S, et al. Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 8808 and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) 4588: preliminary results of a phase III trial in
regionally advanced, unresectable non-small-cell lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:198.
274. Albain KS, Rusch VW, Crowley JJ, et al. Concurrent cisplatin/etoposide plus chest radiotherapy followed by surgery for stages IIIA (N2) and IIIB non-small-cell lung cancer: mature results of
Southwest Oncology Group phase II study 8805. J Clin Oncol 1995;13(8):1880.
275. Furuse K, Fukuoka M, Kawahara M, et al. Phase III study of concurrent versus sequential thoracic radiotherapy in combination with mitomycin, vindesine, and cisplatin in unresectable stage III
non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17(9):2692.
276. Roth JA, Fosella F, Komaki R, et al. A randomized trial comparing perioperative chemotherapy and surgery with surgery alone in resectable stage IIIa nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1994;86:673.
277. Rosell R, Gomez-Codina J, Camps C, et al. A randomized trial comparing preoperative chemotherapy plus surgery with surgery alone in patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med
1994;330:153.
278. Joss RA, Cavalli F, Goldhirsch A, et al. New agents in nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer Treat Rev 1984;11:205.
279. Robert F, Omura GA, Birch R, et al. Randomized phase III comparison of three doxorubicin-based chemotherapy regimens in advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer: a Southeastern Cancer

Study Group trial. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:391.
280. Rosso R, Salvati F, Ardizzoni A, et al. Etoposide versus etoposide plus high-dose cisplatin in the management of advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer 1990;66:130.
281. Sorensen JB, Clerici M, Hansen HH. Review: single-agent chemotherapy for advanced adenocarcinoma of the lung. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1988;21:89.
282. Klastersky J, Sculier J, Ravez P, et al. A randomized study comparing a high and a standard dose of cisplatin in combination with etoposide in the treatment of advanced nonsmall cell lung
carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1780.
283. Shepard KV, Golomb HM, Bitran JD, et al. CAMP chemotherapy for metastatic non-oat cell bronchogenic carcinoma. Cancer 1985;56:2385.
284. Gandara D, Wold H, Perez E, et al. Cisplatin dose intensity in nonsmall cell lung cancer: phase II results of a day 1 and day 8 high-dose regimen. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:790.
285. Longeval E, Klastersky J. Combination chemotherapy with cisplatin and etoposide in bronchogenic squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma. Cancer 1982;50:2751.
286. Kris M, Gralla R, Wertheim M, et al. Trial of the combination of mitomycin, vindesine, and cisplatin in patients with advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:1091.
287. Eguchl K, Etou H, Miyachi S, et al. A study of dose escalation of teniposide (VM-26) plus cisplatin (CDD) with recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (rhG-CSF) in patients
with advanced small cell lung cancer. Eur J Cancer 1994;30A:188.
288. Graziano SL, Herndon JE, Richards F, et al. A phase I trial of ifosfamide, mesna, and cisplatin in advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer: a Cancer and Acute Leukemia Group B study. Cancer
1993;72:62.
289. Krigel RL, Palackdharry CS, Padavic K, et al. Ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide plus granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor: a phase I study with apparent activity in
non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1251.
290. Schulman P, Budman DR, Weiselberg L, et al. Phase II trial of mitomycin, vinblastine, and cisplatin (MVP) in nonsmall cell bronchogenic carcinoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:943.
291. Lynch TJ Jr, Kalish LA, Kass F, et al. Continuous-infusion cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil, and leucovorin for advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer 1994;73:1171.
292. Vokes EE, Lyss AP, Herndon JE II, et al. Intravenous 6-thioguanine or cisplatin, fluorouracil and leucovorin for advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer: a randomized phase II study of the cancer
and leukemia group B. Ann Oncol 1992;3:727.
293. Jett JR. Current treatment of unresectable lung cancer. Mayo Clin Proc 1993;68:603.
294. Gralla R, Casper E, Kelsen D. Cisplatin plus vindesine combination chemotherapy for advanced carcinoma of the lung: a randomized trial investigating two dosage schedules. Ann Intern Med
1981;95:414.
295. Gandara DR, Crowley J, Livingston RB, et al. Evaluation of cisplatin intensity in metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer: a phase III study of the Southwest Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:873.
296. Ruckdeschel J, Findelstein D, Ettinger D, et al. A randomized trial of the four most active regimens for metastatic nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:14.
297. Bonomi P, Finkelstein D, Ruckdeschel J, et al. Combination chemotherapy versus single agents followed by combination chemotherapy in stage IV nonsmall cell lung cancer: a study of the
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1602.
298. Fishbein GE. Immunotherapy of lung cancer. Semin Oncol 1993;20:351.
299. Ruckdeschel J, Codish S, Stranahan A, et al. Postoperative empyema improves survival in lung cancer: documentation and analysis of a natural experiment. N Engl J Med 1972;287:1013.
300. McKneally M, Maver C, Kausel H. Regional immunotherapy of lung cancer with intrapleural B.C.G. Lancet 1976;1:377.
301. Ludwig Lung Cancer Study Group. Immunostimulation with intrapleural BCG as adjuvant therapy in resected non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer 1986;58:2411.
302. Anthony H. Yorkshire trial of adjuvant therapy with levamisole in surgically treated lung cancer. In: Terry W, Rosenberg S, eds. Immunotherapy of human cancer. New York: Elsevier North
Holland, 1982:135.
303. Amery W, Cosemans J, Gooszen H, et al. Four year results from double-blind study of adjuvant levamisole treatment in resectable lung cancer. In: Terry W, Rosenberg S, eds. Immunotherapy
of human cancer. New York: Elsevier North Holland, 1982:123.
304. Holmes E, Gail M. Surgical adjuvant therapy for stage II and stage III adenocarcinoma and large-cell undifferentiated carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:710.
305. Krown S, Stoopler M, Gralla R, et al. Phase II trial of human leukocyte interferon in nonsmall cell lung cancer: preliminary results. In: Terry W, Rosenberg S, eds. Immunotherapy of human
cancer. New York: Elsevier North Holland, 1982:397.
306. Grunberg S, Kempf R, Itri L. Phase II study of recombinant alpha interferon in the treatment of advanced nonsmall cell lung carcinoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:1031.
307. McDonald S, Chang AY, Rugin P, et al. Combined betaseron R (recombinant human interferon beta) and radiation for inoperable nonsmall cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1993;27:613.
308. Schiller J, Storer B, Dreicer R, et al. Randomized phase IIIII trial of combination beta and gamma interferons and etoposide and cisplatin in inoperable nonsmall cell cancer of the lung. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1989;81:1739.
309. Wadler S, Schwartz E. Antineoplastic activity of the combination of interferon and cytotoxic agents against experimental and human malignancies: a review. Cancer Res 1990;50:3473.
310. Bowman A, Ferguson RJ, Allan SG, et al. Potentiation cis-platinum by alpha-interferon in advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer: a phase II study. Ann Oncol 1990;1:351.
311. Kataja V, Yap A, for the NSCLC Collaborative Study Group. Combination of cisplatin and interferon alpha IIa in patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer: an open phase II multicentre trial. Eur J
Cancer 1995;31A:35.
312. Athanasladis I, Kies MS, Miller M, et al. Phase II study of all- trans-retinoic acid and a-interferon in patients with advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:973.
313. Vokes EE, Figlin R, Hochester H, et al. A phase II study of recombinant human interleukin-4 for advanced or recurrent nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer J Sci Am 1998;4:46.
314. Martini N, Flehinger BJ. The role of surgery in N2 lung cancer. Surg Clin North Am 1987;67:1037.
315. Naruke T, Goya T, Tsuchiya R, et al. The importance of surgery to nonsmall cell carcinoma of the lung with mediastinal lymph node metastases. Ann Thorac Surg 1988;46:603.
316. Izbicki JR, Thetter O, Habekost M, et al. Radical systematic mediastinal lymphadenectomy in nonsmall cell lung cancer: a randomized controlled trial. Br J Surg 1994;81:229.
317. Warren WH, Faber LP. Segmentectomy vs lobectomy in patients with stage I pulmonary carcinoma: five-year survival and patterns of intrathoracic recurrence. J Cardiovasc Surg
1994;107:1087.
318. Takizawa T, Haga M, Yagi N, et al. Pulmonary function after segmentectomy for small peripheral carcinoma of the lung. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1999;118:536.
319. Downey RJ, Martini N, Rusch VW, et al. Extent of chest wall invasion and survival in patients with lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;68:188.
320. Hilaris BS, Martini N, Wong GY, et al. Treatment of superior sulcus tumor (Pancoast tumor). Surg Clin North Am 1987;67:965.
321. Ginsberg RJ, Martini N, Zaman M, et al. The influence of surgical resection and intraoperative brachytherapy in the management of superior sulcus tumor. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;57:1440.
322. Dartevelle P, Macchiarini P. Surgical management of superior sulcus tumors. Oncologist 1999;4:398.
323. Burt ME, Pomerantz AH, Bains MS. Results of surgical treatment of stage III lung cancer invading the mediastinum. Surg Clin North Am 1987;67:987.
324. Martini N, Yellin A, Ginsberg RJ, et al. Management of nonsmall cell lung cancer with direct mediastinal involvement. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;58:1447.
325. Deslauriers J, Gaulin P, Beaulieu M, et al. Long term clinical and functional results of sleeve lobectomy for primary lung cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1986;92:871.
326. Weksler B, Bains MS, Burt ME, et al. Brief communicationresection of lung cancer invading the diaphragm. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1997;114:500.
327. Naruke T, Goya T, Tsuchiya R, Suemasu K. The importance of surgery to nonsmall cell carcinoma of the lung with mediastinal lymph node metastasis. Ann Thorac Surg 1988;46:603.
328. Martini N, Flehinger BJ, Zaman MB, Beattie JB. Results of resection in nonoat cell carcinoma of the lung with mediastinal lymph node metastasis. Ann Surg 1983;198:386.
329. Martini N, Flehinger BJ. The role of surgery in N2 lung cancer. Surg Clin North Am 1987;67:1037.
330. Shields TW. The significance of ipsilateral mediastinal lymph node metastasis (N2 disease) in nonsmall cell carcinoma of the lung. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1990;99:48.
331. Martini N, Flehinger BJ, Nagasaki F, Hart B. Prognostic significance of NI disease in carcinoma of the lung. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1983;86:646.
332. Lung Cancer Study Group. Effects of postoperative mediastinal radiation on completely resected stage II and stage III epidermoid carcinoma of the lung. N Engl J Med 1986;315:1377.
333. Feld R, Rubinstein L, Weisenberger TH, Lung Cancer Study Group. Sites of recurrence in resected stage I nonsmall cell lung cancer: a guide for future studies. J Clin Oncol 1985;2:1352.
334. Pairolero PC, Williams DE, Bergstralh MS, et al. Post-surgical stage I bronchogenic carcinoma: morbid implications of recurrent disease. Ann Thorac Surg 1984;38:331.
335. Bangma P. Post-operative radiotherapy. In: Deeley T, ed. Carcinoma of the bronchus: modern radiotherapy. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1972:163.
336. Paterson R, Russell M. Clinical trials in malignant disease: IV. Lung cancer: value of post-operative radiotherapy. Clin Radiol 1962;13:141.
337. Van Houtte P, Rocmans P, Smets P, et al. Postoperative radiation therapy in lung cancer: a controlled trial after resection of curative design. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:983.
338. Dautzenberg B, Arriagad R, Chammard A, et al. A controlled study of postoperative radiotherapy for patients with completely resected nonsmall cell lung carcinoma. Cancer 1999;86:265.
339. Stewart L. Postoperative radiotherapy in nonsmall cell lung cancer: systematic review and meta-analysis of individual patient data from nine randomized controlled trials. Lancet 1998;352:257.
340. The Ludwig Cancer Study Group. Patterns of failure in patients with resected stage I and II non-small-cell carcinoma of the lung. Ann Surg 1987;205:67.
341. Stephens R, Girling D, Bleehen N, et al. The role of post-operative radiotherapy in nonsmall cell lung cancer: a multicenter randomized trial in patients with pathologically staged T12 N12, M0
disease. Br J Cancer 1996;74:632.
342. Piehler JM, Pairolero PC, Weiland LH, et al. Bronchogenic carcinoma with chest wall invasion: factors affecting survival following en bloc resection. Ann Thorac Surg 1982;34:684.
342a. Paone JF, Spees EK, Newton CG, et al. An appraisal of en bloc resection of peripheral bronchogenic carcinoma involving the Thoracacic wall. Chest 1982;81:203.
342b. Patterson GA, Ilves R, Ginsberg RJ, et al. The value of adjuvant radiotherapy in pulmonary and chest wall resection for bronchogenic carcinoma. Ann Thorac Surg 1982;34:692.
342c. Van de Wal HJ, Lacquet LK, Jongerius CM. Chirurgische behandeling van longtumoren met doorgroei in de Thoracaxwand. (Belg) Tijdschr voor Geneeskunde 1987;43:91.
342d. Allen MS, Mathisen DJ, Grillo HC, et al. Bronchogenic carcinoma with chest wall invasion. Ann Thorac Surg 1991;51:948.
343. McCaughan BC. Primary lung cancer invading the chest wall. Chest Surg Am 1994;4:17.
344. Gebitekin C, Guipta NK, Satur CM, et al. Fate of patients with residual tumor at the bronchial resection margin. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1994;8:339.
345. Law MR, Henk JM, Lennox SC, et al. Value of radiotherapy for tumour on the bronchial stump after resection for bronchial carcinoma. Thorax 1982;37:496.
346. Kaiser LR, Fleshner P, Keller S, et al. Significance of extramucosal residual tumor at the bronchial resection margin. Ann Thorac Surg 1989;47:265.
347. Chen A, Galloway M, Landreneau R, et al. Intraoperative 1251 brachytherapy for high-risk stage I nonsmall cell lung carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44(5):1057.
348. Vokes EE, Vijayakumar S, Bitran JD, et al. The role of systemic therapy in advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer: a review. Am J Med 1990;89:777.
349. Ihde DC. Is there a place for classical adjuvant treatment? Lung Cancer 1994;11[Suppl 3]:S111.
350. Lad T, Rubinstein L, Sadeghi A, et al. The benefit of adjuvant treatment of resected locally advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:9.
351. Niiranen A, Niitamo-Korhonen S, Kouri M, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy after radical surgery for nonsmall cell lung cancer: a randomized study. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1927.
352. NonSmall Cell Collaborative Group. Chemotherapy in nonsmall cell lung cancer: a meta analysis using updated data on individual patients from 52 randomized clinical trials. Br Med J
1995;311:899.
353. Wada H, Hitomi S, Teramatsu T, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy after complete resection in nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1048.
354. Bromley LL, Szur L. Combined radiotherapy and resection for carcinoma of the bronchus. Lancet 1955;5:937.
355. Bloedorn FG, Cowley RA, Cuccia CA, et al. Preoperative irradiation in bronchogenic carcinoma. Am J Roentgenol Radiat Ther Nucl Med 1964;92:77.
356. Shields TW, Higgins GA, Lawton R, et al. Preoperative x-ray therapy as an adjuvant in the treatment of bronchogenic carcinoma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1970;59:49.
357. Warram J. Preoperative irradiation of cancer of the lung: final report of the therapeutic trial. Cancer 1975;36:914.
358. Takita H, Regal A, Antkowiak J, et al. Chemotherapy followed by lung resection in inoperable nonsmall cell lung carcinomas due to locally far-advanced disease. Cancer 1986;57:630.
359. Raut Y, Huu N, Clavier J, et al. Surgery and chemotherapy: a new method of treatment for squamous cell bronchial carcinoma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1984;88:754.
360. Martini N, Flehinger B, Zaman M, et al. Prospective study of 445 lung carcinomas with mediastinal lymph node metastases. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1980;80:390.
361. Martini N, Flehinger B, Zaman M, et al. Results of resection in nonoat cell carcinoma of the lung with mediastinal lymph node metastases. Ann Surg 1983;198:386.
362. Pisters K, Kris M, Gralla R, et al. Preoperative chemotherapy in stage IIIA nonsmall cell lung cancer: an analysis of a trial in patients with clinically apparent mediastinal node involvement. In:
Salmin S, ed. Adjuvant therapy of cancer VI. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1990:133.

363. Burkes R, Ginsberg R, Shepherd F, et al. Neo-adjuvant trial with MVP (mitomycin-C + vindesine + cisplatin) chemotherapy for stage III (T13, N2 M0) unresectable nonsmall cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1989;8:221.
364. Pass HI, Pogrebniak HW, Steinberg SM, et al. Randomized trial of neoadjuvant therapy for lung cancer: interim analysis. Ann Thorac Surg 1992;53:992.
365. Depierre A, Milleron B, Moro D, et al. Phase III trial of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NCT) in resectable stage I (except T1N0), II, IIIa nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC): the French experience.
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:465a(abst 1792).
366. Pisters KMW, Ginsberg RJ, Bunn PA, et al. (for the Bimodality Lung Oncology Team BLOT). Induction chemotherapy prior to surgery for early stage lung cancer-a novel approach. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 2000;119:429..
367. Faber L, Kittle C, Warren W, et al. Preoperative chemotherapy and irradiation for stage III nonsmall cell lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1989;47:669.
368. Weiden P, Piantadosi S. Preoperative chemoradiotherapy in stage III nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC): a phase II study of the Lung Cancer Study Group (LCSG). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1988;7:197.
369. Eagan R, Ruud C, Lee R, et al. Pilot study of induction therapy with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (CAP) and chest irradiation prior to thoracotomy in initially inoperable stage III
M0 nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:895.
370. Strauss G, Sherman L, Mathisen D, et al. Concurrent chemotherapy (CT) and radiotherapy (RT) followed by surgery (S) in marginally resectable stage IIIA nonsmall cell carcinoma of the lung
(NSCLC): a cancer and leukemia group B study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1988;7:203.
371. Albain K, Rusch V, Crowley J, et al. Concurrent cisplatin (DDP) VP-16 and chest, irradiation (RT) followed by surgery for stages IIIa and IIIb nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC): a Southwest
Oncology Group (SWOG) study 8805. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1991;10:244.
372. Skarin A, Jochelson M, Sheldon T, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy in marginally resectable stage III M0 nonsmall cell lung cancer: long-term follow-up in 41 patients. J Surg Oncol
1989;40:266.
373. Sherman D, Strauss G, Schwartz J, et al. Combined modality therapy for regionally advanced stage III nonsmall cell carcinoma of the lung (NSCLC) employing neo-adjuvant chemotherapy
(CT), radiotherapy (RT), and surgery (S). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1978;6:167.
374. Albain KS. Induction therapy followed by definitive local control for stage III nonsmall cell lung cancer: a review, with focus on recent trimodality trials. Chest 1993;103[Suppl]:43S.
375. Choi NC, Carey RW, Daly W, et al. Potential impact on survival of improved tumor downstaging and resection rate by preoperative twice-daily radiation and concurrent chemotherapy in stage
IIIa nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:712.
376. Grunenwald D, Le Chavalier T, Arriagada R, et al. Surgical resection of stage IIIb nonsmall cell lung cancer after concomitant induction chemotherapy: preliminary results of a pilot study. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:349(abst).
377. Eberhardt W, Wilke H, Stamatis G. Preoperative chemotherapy followed by concurrent chemoradiation therapy based on hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy and definitive surgery in
locally advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer: mature results of a phase II trial. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:622.
378. Bleehen N, Ball D, Belani C, et al. Combined radiation and chemotherapy for unresectable nonsmall cell lung carcinoma. Lung Cancer 1994;10[Suppl 1]:S19.
379. Choi N, Kanarek D. Toxicity of thoracic radiotherapy on pulmonary function in lung cancer. Lung Cancer 1994;10[Suppl 1]:S219.
380. Choi N, Kanarek D, Grillo H. Effect of postoperative radiotherapy on changes in pulmonary function in patients with stage II and IIIA lung carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;18:95.
381. Marks LB, Munley MT, Bentel GC, et al. Physical and biological predictors of changes in whole-lung function following thoracic irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:563.
382. Cox JD, Azarnia N, Byhardt RW, et al. A randomized phase I/II trial of hyperfractionated radiation therapy with total doses of 60.0 Gy to 79.2 Gy: possible survival benefit with greater than or
equal to 69.6 Gy in favorable patients with Radiation Therapy Oncology Group stage III non-small-cell lung carcinoma: report of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 8311. J Clin Oncol
1990;8:1543.
383. Dosoretz E, Galmanari D, Rubenstein JH, et al. Local control in medically inoperable lung cancer: an analysis of its importance in outcome and factors determining the probability of tumor
eradication. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:507.
384. Haffty BG. Is radiation therapy a viable alternative to surgery in early stage lung cancer [Editorial]? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:223.
385. Haffty BG, Goldberg NB, Gerstley J, et al. Results of radical radiation therapy in clinical stage I, technically operable nonsmall cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:69.
386. Hilton G. Present position relating to cancer of the lung: results with radiotherapy alone. Thorax 1960;15:17.
387. Holsti L, Mattson K. A randomized study of split-course radiotherapy of lung cancer: long-term results. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:977.
388. Krol AD, Aussems P, Noordijk EM, et al. Local irradiation alone for peripheral Stage I lung cancer: Could we omit the elective regional nodal irradiation? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1996;34:297.
389. Perez CA, Pajak TF, Rubin P, et al. Long-term observations of the pattern of failure in patients with unresectable nonoat cell carcinoma of the lung treated with definitive radiotherapy. Cancer
1987;59:1874.
390. Smart J. Can lung cancer be cured by irradiation alone? JAMA 1965;195:1034.
391. Talton BM, Constable WC, Kersch CR. Curative radiotherapy in nonsmall cell carcinoma of the lung. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:15.
392. Zhang KX, Yin WB, Zhang LJ, et al. Curative radiotherapy of early operable nonsmall cell lung cancer. Radiother Oncol 1989;14:89.
393. Sandler HM, Curran WJ, Turrisi AT. The influence of tumor size and pretreatment staging in outcome following radiation therapy alone for stage I nonsmall cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1990;19:9.
394. Sibley GS, Jamieson TA, Marks LB, Anscher MS, Prosnitz LR. Radiotherapy alone for medically inoperable stage I non-small-cell lung cancer: the Duke experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1998;40:149.
395. Graham PH, Glebski VJ, Stat M. Radical radiotherapy for early nonsmall cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:261.
396. Kaskowitz L, Graham MV, Emami B, Halverson KJ, Rush C. Radiation therapy alone for stage I nonsmall cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:517.
397. Morita K, Fuwa N, Suzuki Y, et al. Radical radiotherapy for medically inoperable nonsmall cell lung cancer in clinical stage I: a retrospective analysis of 149 patients. Radiother Oncol
1997;42:31.
398. Gauden S, Ramsey J, Tripcony L. The curative treatment by radiotherapy alone of stage I nonsmall cell lung carcinoma of the lung. Chest 1995;108:1278.
399. Sawyer TE, Bonner JA, Gould PM, et al. Predictors of subclinical nodal involvement in clinical stages I and II nonsmall cell lung cancer: implications in the inoperable and three-dimensional
dose-escalation settings. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:965.
400. Jeremic B, Shibamoto Y, Acimovic L, et al. Hyperfractionated radiotherapy alone for clinical stage I nonsmall cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:521.
401. Morrison R, Deeley TJ, Cleland WP. The treatment of carcinoma of the bronchus: a clinical trial to compare surgery and supervoltage radiotherapy. Lancet 1963;30:683.
402. Armstrong JG, Minsky BD. Primary radiation therapy for stage I and II medically inoperable nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer Treat Rev 1989;16:247.
403. Vansteenkiste JF, Stroobants SG, De Leyn PR. Lymph node staging in nonsmall cell lung cancer with FDG-PET scan: a prospective study on 690 lymph node stations from 68 patients. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:2142.
404. Hilaris BS. Lung brachytherapy. Chest Surg Clin North Am 1994;4:45.
405. Hilaris BS, Martini N. The current state of intraoperative interstitial brachytherapy in lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:1347.
406. Perol M, Caliandro R, Pommier P, et al. Curative irradiation of limited endobronchial carcinoma with high-dose rate brachytherapy. Chest 1997;111:1417.
407. Tredaniel J, Henneuin C, Zalcman G, et al. Prolonged survival after high-dose rate endobronchial radiation for malignant airway obstruction. Chest 1994;105:767.
408. Arriagada R, LeChevalier T, Rekacewicz E, et al. Cisplatin-based chemoradiotherapy (CT) in patients with locally advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC): late analysis of a French
randomized trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:446a(abstr 1601).
409. Naruke T, Goya T, Tsuchiya R, et al. Prognosis and survival in resected lung carcinoma based on the new international staging system. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1988;96:440.
410. Rusch VW, Albain KS, Crowley JJ. Neoadjuvant therapy: a novel and effective treatment for stage IIIb nonsmall cell lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;58:290.
411. Macchiarini P, Chapelier AR, Monnet I, et al. Extended operations after induction therapy for stage IIIb (T4) nonsmall cell lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;57:966.
412. Darteville P, Chapelier A, Navajas M, et al. Replacement of superior vena cava with polytetrafluorethylene grafts combined with resection of mediastinal-pulmonary malignant tumors. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 1987;94:361.
413. Nakahara K, Ohno K, Mastumura A, et al. Extended operation for lung cancer invading the aortic arch and superior vena cava. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1989;97:428.
414. Tsuchiya R, Asamura H, Kondo H, et al. Extended resection of left atrium, great vessels or both for lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;57:960.
415. Reyes L, Parvez Z, Regal AM, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and operations in the treatment of lung cancer with pleural effusion [Letter]. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1991;101:946.
416. Hata E, Miyamoto H, Kohiyama R, et al. Resection of N2/N3 mediastinal disease. In: Motta G, ed. Lung cancer frontiers in science and treatment. Genoa, Italy: Grafica L.P. Publishers,
1994:431.
417. Stamatis G, Eberhardt W, Stubent G, et al. Preoperative chemoradiotherapy and surgery for selected non-small cell lung cancer IIIB subgroups: long-term results. Ann Thorac Surg
1999;68:1144.
418. Albain KS. Induction chemotherapy with/without radiation followed by surgery in stage III non-small cell lung cancer. Oncology 1997;11:(Suppl 9):51.
419. Choi NC, Carey RW, Myojin JC, et al. Preoperative chemo-radiotherapy (CT-RT) using concurrent boost radiation (RT) and resection for good responders in stage IIIb (T4 or N3) nonsmall cell
lung cancer (NSCLC): a feasibility study. Lung Cancer 1997;18[Suppl 1]:76(abst 291).
420. Rendina EA, Venuta F, DiGiacomo T, et al. Induction chemotherapy for T4 centrally located nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1999;117:225.
421. Rusch VW, Albain KS, Crowley JJ. Neoadjuvant therapy: a novel and effective treatment for stage IIIb nonsmall cell lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;58:290.
422. Cox JD, Komaki R, Byhardt RW. Is immediate radiation therapy indicated for patients with unresectable nonsmall cell lung cancer? Yes. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:327.
423. Higgins GA, Shields TW. Experience of the Veterans Administration surgical adjuvant group. In: Muggia F, Rozencweig M, eds. Lung cancer: progress in therapeutic research. New York:
Raven Press, 1979.
424. Perez CA, Bauer M, Edelstein S, et al. Impact of tumor control on survival in carcinoma of the lung treated with irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:539.
425. Kubota K, Furuse K, Kawahara M, et al. Role of radiotherapy in combined modality treatment of locally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1547.
426. Cox JD, Yesner R, Mietlowski W, et al. Influence of cell type on local failure pattern after irradiation for locally advanced carcinoma of the lung. Cancer 1979;44:94.
427. Berry RJ, Liang Ah, Newman CR, Peto J. The role of radiotherapy in the treatment of inoperable lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1977;2:433.
428. Schaafsma J, Coy P. The effect of radiotherapy on the survival of nonsmall cell lung cancer patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;41:291.
429. Johnson DH, Einhorn LH, Bartolucci A, et al. Thoracic radiotherapy does not prolong survival in patients with locally advanced, unresectable, non-small cell lung cancer. Ann Intern Med
1990;113:33.
430. Curran W. Effectiveness of treatment for nonsmall cell lung cancer [Letter]. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:637.
431. Prosnitz L. Radiotherapy for lung cancer [Letter]. Ann Intern Med 1991;114:95.
432. Kaasa S, Thorud E, Host H. A randomized study evaluating radiotherapy versus chemotherapy in patients with inoperable nonsmall cell lung cancer. Radiother Oncol 1988;11:7.
433. Huber R, Fischer R, Hautmann H, et al. Does additional brachytherapy improve the effect of external irradiation? A prospective randomized study in central lung tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1997;38:533.
434. Nori D, Li X, Pugkhem T. Intraoperative brachytherapy using Gelfoam radioactive plaque implants for resected stage III nonsmall cell lung cancer with positive margin: a pilot study. J Surg
Oncol 1995;60:257.
435. Graham PH, Glebski VJ, Stat M. Radical radiotherapy for early nonsmall cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:261.
436. Sibley GS, Mundt AJ, Shapiro C, et al. The treatment of stage III nonsmall cell lung cancer using high dose conformal radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;33:1001.
437. Armstrong J, McGibney C. The impact of 3-dimensional radiation on the treatment of nonsmall cell lung cancer. Radiother Oncol 2000 (in press).
438. Pu AT, Harrison AS, Robertson JM. The toxicity of elective nodal irradiation in the definitive treatment of nonsmall cell carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39(2S):196(abst).
439. Emami B. Three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy in bronchogenic carcinoma. Semin Radiat Oncol 1996;6:92.
440. Rosenzweig KE, Sim SE, Mychalczak B. Elective nodal irradiation in the treatment of nonsmall cell lung cancer with three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1999;45:23.
441. Byhardt R. The evolution of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) protocols for nonsmall cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:1513.

442. Sause W, Kolesar P, Taylor S, et al. Five-year results: phase III trial of regionally advanced unresectable nonsmall cell lung cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:453a(abst).
443. Byhardt RW, Pajak TF, Emami B, et al. A phase I/II study to evaluate accelerated fractionation via concomitant boost for squamous, adeno, and large cell carcinoma of the lung: report of
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 8407. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;26:459.
444. Saunders M, Dische S. Continuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy (CHART) in nonsmall cell lung carcinoma of the bronchus. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:1211.
445. Saunders M, Dische S, Barrett A, et al. Continuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy (CHART) versus conventional radiotherapy in nonsmall cell lung cancer: a randomized
multicenter trial. Lancet 1997;350:161.
446. Balley AJ, Parmar MKB, Stephens RJ, et al. Patient-reported short-term and long-term physical and psychological symptoms: results of the continuous hyperfractionated accelerated
radiotherapy (CHART) randomized trial in nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3082.
447. Saunders MI, Rojas A, Lyn BE, et al. Experience with dose escalation using CHARTWELL (continuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy weekend less) in non-small-cell lung cancer.
Br J Cancer 1998;78:1323.
448. Mehta MP, Tannehill SP, Adak S, et al. Phase II trial of hyperfractionated accelerated radiation therapy for nonresectable nonsmall cell lung cancer: results of Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group 4593. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3518.
449. Bonner JA, McGinnis WL, Stella PJ. The possible advantage of hyperfractionated thoracic radiotherapy in the treatment of locally advanced nonsmall cell lung carcinoma. Cancer
1998;82:1037.
450. Slotman BJ, Njo KH, DeJonge A, et al. Hypofractionated radiation therapy in stage III nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer 1993;72:1885.
451. Schaake-Koning C, van den Bogaert W, Dalesio O, et al. Effects of concomitant cisplatin and radiotherapy on inoperable nonsmall cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med 1992;326:524.
452. Soresi E, Clerici M, Grilli R, et al. A randomized clinical trial comparing radiation therapy versus radiation therapy plus cis-dichlorodiammine platinum (II) in the treatment of locally advanced
nonsmall cell lung cancer. Semin Oncol 1988;15:20.
453. Trovó MG, Minatel E, Franchin G, et al. Radiotherapy versus radiotherapy enhanced by cisplatin in stage III nonsmall cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:11.
454. Blanke C, Ansari R, Montravadi R, et al. Phase III trial of thoracic irradiation with or without cisplatin for locally advanced unresectable non-small-cell lung cancer: a Hoosier Oncology Group
protocol. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1425.
455. Clamon G, Herndon J, Cooper R, et al. Radiosensitization with carboplatin for patients with unresectable stage III non-small-cell lung cancer: a phase III trial of the Cancer and Leukemia Group
B and the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:4.
456. Smoluk GD, Fahey RC, Calabro-Jones PM, Aguilera JA, Ward JF. Radioprotection of cells in culture by WR-2721 and derivatives: form of the drug responsible for protection. Cancer Res
1988;48:3641.
457. Tannehill SP, Mehta MP, Larson M, et al. Effect of amifostine on toxicities associated with sequential chemotherapy and radiation therapy for unresectable non-small-cell lung cancer: results of
a phase II trial. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2850.
458. Auperin A, Arriagada R, Pignon JP, et al. Prophylactic cranial irradiation for patients with small-cell lung cancer in complete remission. Prophylactic Cranial Irradiation Overview Collaborative
Group. N Engl J Med 1999;341:476.
459. Cox J, Stanley K, Petrovich Z, et al. Cranial irradiation in cancer of the lung of all cell types. JAMA 1981;245:469.
460. Umsawadi T, Valdivieso M, Chen T, et al. Role of elective brain irradiation during combined chemoradiotherapy for limited disease nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Neurooncol 1984;2:253.
461. Mira J, Miller T, Crowley J. Chest irradiation (RT) versus chest RT + chemotherapy +/ prophylactic brain RT in localized non small cell lung cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group randomized
study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19[Suppl 1]:145.
462. Stuschke M, Eberhardt W, Pottgen C, et al. Prophylactic cranial irradiation in locally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer after multimodality treatment. J Clin Oncol 1997;17:2700.
463. Lilenbaum RC, Langenerg P, Dickersin K. Single agent versus combination chemotherapy in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung carcinoma: a meta-analysis of response, toxicity, and
survival. Cancer 1998;82:116.
464. Vokes EE, Weichselbaum RR. Concomitant chemoradiotherapy: rationale and clinical experience in patients with solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:911.
465. Vokes EE, Green MR. Clinical studies in nonsmall cell lung cancer: the CALGB experience. Cancer Invest 1998;16(2):72.
466. Mattson K, Holsti LR, Holsti P, et al. Inoperable non-small-cell lung cancer: radiation with or without chemotherapy. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1988;24:477.
467. Morton RF, Jett JR, McGinnis WL, et al. Thoracic radiation therapy alone compared with combined chemoradiotherapy for locally advanced unresectable non-small-cell lung cancer: a
randomized phase III trial. Ann Intern Med 1991;115:681.
468. Marino P, Preatoni A, Cantoni A. Randomized trials of radiotherapy alone versus combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy in stages IIIa and IIIb non-small-cell lung cancer. Cancer
1995;76:593.
469. Dillman RO, Seagren SL, Propert KJ, et al. Improved survival of stage III non-small-cell lung cancer: seven-year follow-up of Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) 8433 trial. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1996;88:1210.
470. Komaki R, Scott CB, Sause WT, et al. Induction cisplatin/vinblastine and irradiation vs. irradiation in unresectable squamous cell lung cancer: failure patterns by cell type in RTOG 8808/ECOG
4588. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:537.
471. Crino L, Latini P, Meacci M, et al. Induction chemotherapy plus high-dose radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone in locally advanced unresectable nonsmall cell lung cancer. Ann Oncol
1993;4:847.
472. Planting A, Helle P, Drings P, et al. A randomized study of high-dose split course radiotherapy preceded by high dose chemotherapy versus high-dose radiotherapy only in locally advanced
nonsmall cell lung cancer: the EORTC Lung Cancer Cooperative Group trial. Ann Oncol 1996;7:139.
473. Pritchard RS, Anthony SP. Chemotherapy plus radiotherapy compared with radiotherapy alone in the treatment of locally advanced, unresectable, nonsmall cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis.
Ann Intern Med 1996;125:723.
474. Non-Small Cell Collaborative Group. Chemotherapy in nonsmall cell lung cancer: a meta analysis using updated data on individual patients from 52 randomized clinical trials. Br Med J
1995;311:899.
475. Mirimanoff RO. Concurrent chemotherapy (CT) and radiotherapy (RT) in locally advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC): a review. Lung Cancer 1994;11[Suppl 3]:S79.
476. Shaw EG, McGinnis WL, Jett JR, et al. Pilot study of accelerated hyperfractionated thoracic radiation therapy plus concomitant etoposide and cisplatin chemotherapy in patients with
unresectable stage III nonsmall cell carcinoma of the lung. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:321.
477. Langer CJ, Curran WJ Jr, Keller SM, et al. Report of phase II trial of concurrent chemoradiotherapy with radical thoracic irradiation (60 Gy), infusional fluorouracil, bolus cisplatin and etoposide
for clinical stage IIIB and bulky IIIA nonsmall cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;26:469.
478. Jeremic B, Shibamoto Y, Acimovic L, et al. Randomized trial of hyperfractionated radiation therapy with or without concurrent chemotherapy for stage III non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:452.
479. Jeremic B, Shibamoto Y, Acimovic L, et al. Hyperfractionated radiation therapy with or without concurrent low-dose daily carboplatin/etoposide for stage III nonsmall cell lung cancer: a
randomized study. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1065.
480. Jeremic B, Shibamoto Y, Milicic B, et al. A phase II study of concurrent accelerated hyperfractionated radiotherapy and carboplatin/oral etoposide for elderly patients with stage III non-small-cell
lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44(2):343.
481. Bailey AJ, Parmar MKB, Stephens RJ, et al. Patient-reported short-term and long-term physical and psychologic symptoms: results of the continuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy
(CHART) randomized trial in nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3082.
482. Albain KS, Crowley JJ, Turrisi AT, et al. Concurrent cisplatin/etoposide plus radiotherapy for pathologic stage IIIB nonsmall cell lung cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group phase II study
(S9019). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:446a(abstr 1600).
483. Lau DH, Crowley JJ, Gandara DR, et al. Southwest Oncology Group phase II trial of concurrent carboplatin, etoposide, and radiation for poor-risk stage III nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:3078.
484. Lee JS, Scott C, Komaki R, et al. Concurrent chemoradiation therapy with oral etoposide and cisplatin for locally advanced inoperable nonsmall cell lung cancer: Radiation Therapy Oncology
Group protocol 9106. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1055.
485. Komaki R, Scott C, Ettinger D, et al. Randomized study of chemotherapy/radiation therapy combinations for favorable patients with locally advanced inoperable nonsmall cell lung cancer:
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 9204. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:149.
486. Furuse K, Kubota K, Kawahara M, et al. Phase II study of concurrent radiotherapy and chemotherapy for unresectable stage III non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:869.
487. Vokes EE, Gregor A, Turrisi AT. Gemcitabine and radiation therapy for nonsmall cell lung cancer. Semin Oncol 1998;25[Suppl 9]:66.
488. Masters GA, Haraf DJ, Hoffman PC, et al. Phase I study of vinorelbine, cisplatin, and concomitant thoracic radiation in the treatment of advanced chest malignancies. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:2157.
489. Mauer AM, Masters GA, Haraf DJ, et al. Phase I study of docetaxel with concomitant thoracic radiation therapy. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:159.
490. Choy H, Akerley W, Devore R. Paclitaxel, carboplatin and radiation therapy for nonsmall cell lung cancer. Oncology 1998;12[Suppl 2]:80.
491. Choy H, Akerley W, Safran H, et al. Phase II trial of weekly paclitaxel and concurrent radiation therapy for locally advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1996;15:371(abst 1098).
492. Choy H, Akerley W, Safran S, et al. Multi-institutional phase II trial of paclitaxel, carboplatin, and concurrent radiation therapy for locally advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:3316.
493. Choy H, DeVore RD, Hande KR, et al. Phase II study of paclitaxel, carboplatin, and hyperfractionated radiation therapy for locally advanced inoperable nonsmall cell lung cancer: A Vanderbilt
Cancer Center Affiliate Network (VCCAN) trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:467a(abstr 1794).
494. Belani CP, Aisner J, Day R, et al. Weekly paclitaxel and carboplatin with simultaneous thoracic radiotherapy for locally advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer: three year follow-up. Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1997;16:448a(abst 1608).
495. Greco FA, Stroup SL, Gray JR, et al. Paclitaxel in combination chemotherapy with radiotherapy in patients with unresectable stage III nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1642.
496. Wagner H, Antonia S, Shaw G, et al. Induction chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel followed by hyperfractionated accelerated radiation for patients with unresectable stage IIIA and
IIIB nonsmall cell lung cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:469a(abst 1804).
497. Lau DH, Ryu JK, Gandara DR, et al. Twice-weekly paclitaxel and radiation for stage III nonsmall cell lung cancer. Semin Oncol 1997;24[Suppl 12]:S12-106.
498. Hudes R, Langer C, Movsas B, et al. Induction paclitaxel and carboplatin followed by concurrent chemoradiotherapy in unresectable, locally advanced nonsmall cell lung carcinoma: report of
FCCC 94001. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:448a(abst 1609).
499. Vokes EE, Leopold KA, Hemdon II JE, et al. A randomized phase II study of gemcitabine or paclitaxel or vinorelbine with cisplatin as induction chemotherapy (Ind CT) and concomitant
chemoradiotherapy (XRT) for unresectable stage II nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) (CALGB Study 9431). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:459a(abst 1771).
500. Saka H, Shimokata K, Yoshida S, et al. Irinotecan (CPT-11) and concurrent radiotherapy in locally advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer (NCSLC): a phase II study of the Japan Clinical
Oncology Group (JCOG9504). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:447a(abst 1607).
501. Niell HB, Kumar P, Miller AA, Griffin JP. Induction paclitaxel and cisplatin followed by concomitant chemoradiation therapy in stage III non-small-cell lung cancer. Cancer Ther 1999;2:67.
502. Mehta MP, Tannehill SP, Adak S, et al. Phase II trial of hyperfractionated accelerated radiation therapy for nonresectable non-small-cell lung cancer: results of Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group 4593. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3518.
503. Masters GA, Vokes EE. Should nonsmall cell carcinoma of the lung be treated with chemotherapy? Pro: chemotherapy is for nonsmall cell lung cancer [Editorial]. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1995;151:1285.
504. Johnson DH. Chemotherapy for metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer: Can that dog hunt? J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:766.
505. Slevin ML, Stubbs L, Plant HJ, et al. Attitudes to chemotherapy: comparing views of patients with cancer with those of doctors, nurses, and general public. Br Med J 1990;300:1458.
506. Douglas IS, White SR. Therapeutic empiricism: the case against chemotherapy in nonsmall cell lung cancer. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;151:1288.
507. Cormier Y, Bergeron D, LaForge J, et al. Benefits of polychemotherapy in advanced nonsmall cell bronchogenic carcinoma. Cancer 1982;50:845.
508. Rapp E, Pater J, Willan A, et al. Chemotherapy can prolong survival in patients with advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer: report of a Canadian multicenter randomized trial. J Clin Oncol
1988;6:633.
509. Cartei G, Cartei F, Cantone A, et al. Cisplatin-cyclophosphamide-mitomycin combination chemotherapy with supportive care versus supportive care alone for treatment of metastatic

non-small-cell lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:794.
510. Quoix E, Dietemann A, Charbonneau J, et al. La chimiotherapie comportant du cisplatine est-elle utile dans le cancer bronchique non microcellulaire au stade IV? Resultants d'une etude
randomise. Bull Cancer 1991;78:341.
511. Ganz P, Figlin R, Haskell C, et al. Supportive care versus supportive care and combination chemotherapy in metastatic nonsmall cell lung cancer: Does chemotherapy make a difference?
Cancer 1989;63:1271.
512. Woods R, Williams C, Levi J, et al. A randomized trial of cisplatin and vindesine versus supportive care only in advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. Br JCancer 1990;61:608.
513. Cellerino R, Tummarello D, Guidi F, et al. A randomized trial of alternating chemotherapy versus best supportive care in advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1453.
514. Kaasa S, Lund E, Thorud E, et al. Symptomatic treatment versus combination chemotherapy for patients with extensive nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer 1991;67:2443.
515. Elderly Lung Cancer Vinorelbine Italian Study Group. Effects of vinorelbine on quality of life and survival of elderly patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst
1999;91:66.
516. Cullen MH, Billingham KJ, Woodroffe CM, et al. Mitomycin, ifosfamide, and cisplatin in unresectable non-small-cell lung cancer: effects on survival and quality of life. J Clin Oncol
1999;17(10):3188.
517. Jaakkimainen L, Goodwin J, Pater J, et al. Counting the costs of chemotherapy in a National Cancer Institute of Canada randomized trial in nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1301.
518. Souquet PJ, Chauvin F, Boissel JP, et al. Polychemotherapy in advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis. Lancet 1993;342:19.
519. Grilli R, Oxman AD, Julian JM. Chemotherapy for advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer: How much benefit is enough? J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1866.
519a. Marino P, Pampallona S, Prestoni A, et al. Chemotherapy versus supportive care in advanced non-small cell lung cancer: results of a meta-analysis of the literature. Chest 1994;106:861.
520. Marino P, Preatoni A, Cantoni A. Randomized trials of radiotherapy alone versus combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy in stages IIIa and IIIb non-small-cell lung cancer. Cancer
1995;76:593.
521. Smith TJ, Hillner BE, Neighbors DM, et al. Economic evaluation of a randomized clinical trial comparing vinorelbine, vinorelbine plus cisplatin, and vindesine plus cisplatin for non-small-cell
lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2166.
522. Goodwin PJ, Shepherd FA. Economic issues in lung cancer: a review. J Clin Oncol 1998;16(12):3900.
523. Brundage MD, Davidson JR, Mackillop WJ. Trading treatment toxicity for survival in locally advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:330.
524. Ellis PA, Smith IE, Hardy JR, et al. Symptom relief with MVP (mitomycin C, vinblastine and cisplatin) chemotherapy in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Br J Cancer 1995;71:366.
525. Tummarello D, Graziano F, Isidori P, et al. Symptomatic, stage IV, non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC): response, toxicity, performance status change and symptom relief in patients treated
with cisplatin, vinblastine and mitomycin-C. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1995;35:249.
526. Paesmans M, et al. Response to chemotherapy has predictive value for further survival of patients with advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer: 10 years experience of the European Lung Cancer
Working Party. Eur J Cancer 1997;33(14):2326.
527. Vokes EE. Integration of vinorelbine into current chemotherapy strategies for advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. Oncology 1995;9:565.
528. Vokes EE, Rosenberg RK, Jahanzeb M, et al. Multicenter phase II study of weekly oral vinorelbine for stage IV non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13(3):637.
529. Depierre A, Chastang C, Quoix E, et al. Vinorelbine versus vinorelbine plus cisplatin in advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer: a randomized trial. Ann Oncol 1994;5:37.
530. Le Chevalier T, Brisgand D, Douillard J-Y, et al. Randomized study of vinorelbine and cisplatin versus vindesine and cisplatin versus vinorelbine alone in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer:
results of a European multicenter trial including 612 patients. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:360.
531. Wozniak AJ, Crowley JJ, Balcerzak SP, et al. Randomized trial comparing cisplatin with cisplatin plus vinorelbine in the treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a Southwest
Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2459.
532. Crawford J, O'Rourke M, Schiller JH, et al. Randomized trial of vinorelbine compared with fluorouracil plus leucovorin in patients with stage IV non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol
1996;14(10):2774.
533. Murphy WK, Fossella FV, Winn RJ, et al. Phase II study of Taxol in patients with untreated advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:384.
534. Chang AY, Kim K, Glick J, et al. Phase II study of Taxol, merbarone, and piroxantrone in stage IV non-small-cell lung cancer: the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group results. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1993;85:388.
535. Hainsworth JD, Thompson DS, Greco FA. Paclitaxel by 1 hour infusion: an active drug in metastatic nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1609.
536. Bonoml P, Kim K, Chang A, et al. Phase III trial comparing etoposide (E) cisplatin (C) versus Taxol (T) with cisplatin-G-CSF (G) versus Taxol-cisplatin in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.
An Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1996;15:382(abst 1145).
537. Giaccone G, Splinter TAW, Debruyne C, et al. Randomized study of paclitaxel-cisplatin versus cisplatin-teniposide in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol
1998;16(6):2133.
537a. Crino L, Mosconi AM, Scagliotti GV, et al. Gemcitabine as second-line treatment for relapsing or refractory advanced non-small cell lung cancer: a phase II trial. Semin Oncol 1998;25:23.
538. Gatzemeier U, von Pawel J, Gottfried M, et al. Phase III comparative study of high-dose cisplatin (HD-CIS) versus a combination of paclitaxel (TAX) and cisplatin (CIS) in patients with
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:454a(abst 1748).
539. Belani C, Natale R, Lee J, et al. Randomized phase III trial comparing cisplatin/etoposide versus carboplatin/paclitaxel in advanced and metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;455a(abst 1751).
540. Kelly K, Crowley J, Bunn P, et al. A randomized phase III trial of paclitaxel plus carboplatin (PC) versus vinorelbine plus cisplatin (VC) in untreated advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC): a Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG) trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18a(abst 1777).
541. Kosmidis P, Mylonakis N, Skarlos D, et al. A multicenter randomized trial of paclitaxel (175 mg/m 2) plus carboplatin (6 AUC) versus paclitaxel (225 mg/m 2) plus carboplatin (6 AUC) in
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18a(abst 1785).
542. Fossella FV, Lee J-S, Berille J, et al. Summary of phase II data of docetaxel (Taxotere), an active agent in the first- and second-line treatment of advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. Semin
Oncol 1995;22:22.
543. Francis PA, Rigas JR, Kris MG, et al. Phase II trial of docetaxel in patients with stage III and IV non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1232.
544. Fossella FV, DeVore R, Kerr R, et al. Phase II trial of docetaxel 100 mg/m 2 or 75 mg/m2 vs vinorelbine/ifosfamide for nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) previously treated with
platinum-based chemotherapy (PBC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18(abst 1776).
545. Shepherd F, Ramlau R, Mattson K, et al. Randomized study of Taxotere (TAX) versus best supportive care (BSC) in nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients previously treated with
platinum-based chemotherapy. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:463a(abst 1784).
546. Abratt RP, Bezwoda WR, Falkson G, et al. Efficacy and safety profile of gemcitabine in non-small-cell lung cancer: a phase II study. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1535.
547. Anderson H, Lund B, Bach F, et al. Single-agent activity of weekly gemcitabine in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a phase II study. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1821.
548. Fossella FV, Lippman SM, Shin DM, et al. Maximum tolerated dose defined for single-agent gemcitabine: a phase I dose escalation study in advanced chemotherapy naïve patients with
nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:310.
549. Gatzemeler U, Shepherd FA, Le Chevalier T, et al. Activity of gemcitabine in patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer: a multicenter, extended phase II study. Eur J Cancer 1996;32:243.
550. Iaffaioli RV, Tortoriello A, Facchini G, et al. Phase III study of gemcitabine and carboplatin in stage IIIBIV non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17(3):921.
551. Thatcher N, Jayson G, Bradley B, et al. Gemcitabine: symptomatic benefit in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Semin Oncol 1997;24[Suppl 8]:S8-6.
552. DeVore RF, Johnson DH, Crawford J, et al. Phase II study of irinotecan plus cisplatin in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17(9):2710.
553. Fukuoka M, Niitani H, Suzuki A, et al. A phase II study of CPT-11, a new derivative of camptothecin, for previously untreated nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:16.
554. Oshita F, Noda K, Nishiwaki Y, et al. Phase II study of irinotecan and etoposide in patients with metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15(1):304.
555. Masuda N, Fukuoka M, Kudoh S, et al. Phase I study of irinotecan and cisplatin with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor support for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol
1994;12(1):90.
556. Sandler A, Nemunaitis J, Deehnam C, et al. Phase III study of cisplatin (C) with or without gemcitabine (G) in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1998;17:454a(abst 1747).
557. Cardenal F, Lopez-Cabreizo M, Anton A, et al. Randomized phase III study of gemcitabine-cisplatin versus etoposide-cisplatin in the treatment of locally advanced or metastatic non-small-cell
lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:12.
558. Perng RP, Chen YM, Ming-Liu J, et al. Gemcitabine versus the combination of cisplatin and etoposide in patients with inoperable nonsmall cell lung cancer in a phase II randomized study. J
Clin Oncol 1997;15:2097.
559. Manegold CH, Stahel R, Mattson K, et al. Randomized phase II study of gemcitabine (GEM) monotherapy versus cisplatin plus etoposide (C/E) in patients (pts) with locally advanced or
metastatic nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:1651.
560. Von Pawel J, von Roemeling R. Survival benefit from Triazone (tirapazamine) and cisplatin in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients: final results from the international phase
III CATAPULT trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:454a(abst 1749).
561. Crino L, Mosconi AM, Scagliotti G, et al. Gemcitabine as second-line treatment for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a phase II trial. J Clin Oncol 1999;17(7):2081.
562. Akerley W, Hernson J, Egorin MJ, et al. CALGB 9731: phase II trial of weekly paclitaxel for advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18: 463a(abst 1783).
563. Kroep JR, Giaccone G, Voorn DA, et al. Gemcitabine and paclitaxel: pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol
1999;17(7):2190.
564. Georgoulias V, Kouroussis C, Androulakis N, et al. Front-line treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer with docetaxel and gemcitabine: a multicenter phase II trial. J Clin Oncol
1999;17(3):914.
565. Recchia F, De Filippis S, Rosselli M, et al. Ifosfamide, vinorelbine and gemcitabine in advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. A phase I study. Eur J Cancer 1999;35(10):1457.
566. Thodtmann R, Depenbrock H, Dumez H, et al. Clinical and pharmacokinetic phase I study of multi-targeted antifolate (LY231514) in combination with cisplatin. J Clin Oncol 1999;17(10):3009.
567. Rusthoven JJ, Eisenhauer E, Butts C, et al. Multitargeted antifolate LY231514 as first-line chemotherapy for patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a phase II study. J Clin Oncol
1999;17(4):1194.
568. Stetler-Stevenson WG. Matrix metalloproteinase in angiogenesis: a moving target for therapeutic intervention. J Clin Invest 1999;103(9):1237.
569. Furuse K, Fukuoka M, Kato H, et al. A prospective phase II study on photodynamic therapy with photofrin II for centrally located early-stage lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1993;11(10):1852.
570. Fujiwara T, Grimm EA, Mukhopadhyay T, et al. Induction of chemosensitivity in human lung cancer cells in vivo by adenovirus-mediated transfer of the wild-type p53 gene. Cancer Res
1994;54:2287.
571. Wojtowicz-Praga S, Torri J, Johnson M, et al. Phase I trial of marimastat, a novel matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor, administered orally to patients with advanced lung cancer. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:2150.
572. Karp DD, Atkins MB. Adoptive immunotherapy for nonsmall cell lung carcinoma. Cancer 1996;78(2):195.
572a. Deslauriers J, Brisson J, Cartier R, et al. Carcinoma of the lung: Evaluation of satellite nodules as a factor influencing prognosis after resection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1989;97:504.
572b. McCormack P. Surgical resection of pulmonary metastasis. Semin Surg Oncol 1990;6:297.
573. Magilligan DJ, Duvernoy C, Malik G, et al. Surgical approach to lung cancer with solitary cerebral metastasis: twenty-five years' experience. Ann Thorac Surg 1986;42:360.

574. Figlin RA, Piantadosi S, Feld R, et al. Intracranial recurrence of carcinoma after complete surgical resection of stage I, II and III nonsmall cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med 1988;318:1300.
575. Martini N. Rationale for surgical treatment of brain metastasis in nonsmall cell lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1986;42:357.
576. Patchell RA, Tibbs PA, Walsh JW, et al. A randomized trial of surgery in the treatment of single metastases to the brain. N Engl J Med 1990;322:494.
577. Harpole D, Arnos A, Alexander E, et al. Stage of the primary is important when treating isolated brain metastases from lung cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1996;15:382.
578. Allard P, Yankaskas BC, Fletcher RH, et al. Sensitivity and specificity of computed tomography for the detection of adrenal metastatic lesions among 91 autopsied lung cancer patients. Cancer
1990;66:457.
579. Twomey P, Montgomery C, Clark O. Successful treatment of adrenal metastasis from large-cell carcinoma of the lung. JAMA 1982;248:581.
580. Raviv G, Klein E, Yellin A, et al. Surgical treatment of solitary adrenal metastases from lung carcinoma. J Surg Oncol 1990;43:123.
581. Reyes L, Parvez Z, Nemoto T, et al. Adrenalectomy for adrenal metastasis from lung carcinoma. J Surg Oncol 1990;44:32.
582. Carroll M, Morgan SA, Yarnold JR, et al. Prospective evaluation of a watch policy in patients with inoperable nonsmall cell lung cancer. Eur J CancerClin Oncol 1986;22:1353.
583. Bleehan N. Inoperable nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC): a Medical Research Council randomized trial of palliative radiotherapy with two fractions or ten fractions. Br J Cancer 1991;63:265.
584. Teo P, Tal T, Choy D, Tsui K. A randomized study on palliative radiation therapy for inoperable nonsmall cell carcinoma of the lung. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14:867.
585. Simpson J, Francis M, Perez-Tamayo R, et al. Palliative radiotherapy for inoperable carcinoma of the lung: final report of the RTOG multi-institutional trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1988;11:751.
586. Bindi M, Tucci E, Pepi F, et al. Changes in performance status in patients with pulmonary carcinoma treated with mono-fractionation radiotherapy once a week. Giornale Ital Oncol 1990;10:89.
587. Macbeth FR, Bolger JJ, Hopwood P. Randomized trial of palliative two-fraction versus more intensive 13-fraction radiotherapy for patients with inoperable nonsmall cell lung cancer and good
performance status. Clin Oncol 1996;8:167.
588. Jackson M, Ball D. Palliative retreatment of locally recurrent lung cancer after radical radiotherapy. Med J Aust 1987;147:391.
589. Ahmann F. A reassessment of the clinical implications of the superior vena caval syndrome. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:961.
590. Armstrong B, Perez C, Simpson J, et al. Role of irradiation in the management of superior vena cava syndrome. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:531.
591. Ofiara L, Roman T, Schwartzman K, et al. Local determinants of response to endobronchial high-dose rate brachytherapy in bronchogenic carcinoma. Chest 1997;112:946.
592. Nori D, Hilaris B, Martini N. Intraluminal irradiation in bronchogenic carcinoma. Surg Clin North Am 1987;67:1093.
593. Schray M, McDougall J, Martinez A, et al. Management of malignant airway obstruction: clinical and dosimetric considerations using an iridium-192 afterloading technique in conjunction with
the neodymium-YAG laser. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:403.
594. Mehta M, Shahabi S, Jarjour N, et al. Endobronchial irradiation for malignant airway obstruction. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:847.
595. Mehta M, Petereit D, Chosy L, et al. Sequential comparison of low dose rate and hyperfractionated high dose rate endobronchial radiation for malignant airway occlusion. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1992;23:133.
596. Macha H, Coch K, Stadler M, et al. New technique for testing occlusive and stenosing tumors of the trachea and main bronchi: endobronchial irradiation by high dose iridium-192 combined with
laser utilization. Thorax 1987;42:511.
597. Delclos M, Komaki R, Morice R, et al. Endobronchial brachytherapy with high-dose-rate remote afterloading for recurrent endobronchial lesions. Radiology 1996;201:279.
598. Burt P, O'Driscoll R, Notley M, et al. Intraluminal irradiation for the palliation of lung cancer with the high dose rate micro-Selectron. Thorax 1990;45:765.
599. Seagren S, Harrell J. Prospective trial of palliative high dose rate endobronchial irradiation with or without laser for recurrent nonsmall cell lung cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1990;9:224.
600. Huber R, Fischer R, Hautmann, et al. Palliative endobronchial brachytherapy for central lung tumors. Chest 1995;107:463.
601. Lee JS, Komaki R, Morice R, et al. A pilot clinical laboratory trial of paclitaxel and endobronchial brachytherapy in patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer. Semin Radiat Oncol 1999;9:121
602. Borgelt B, Gelber R, Larson M, et al. Ultra-rapid high-dose irradiation schedules for the palliation of brain metastases: final results of the first two studies by the Radiation Therapy Oncology
Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:1633.
603. Mandell L, Hilaris B, Sullivan M, et al. The treatment of single brain metastasis from nonoat cell lung carcinoma: surgery and radiation versus radiation therapy alone. Cancer 1986;58:641.
604. Patchell R, Tibbs P, Walsh J, et al. A randomized trial of surgery in the treatment of single metastases to the brain. N Engl J Med 1990;322:494.
605. Patchell RA, Tibbs PA, Regine WF, et al. Postoperative radiotherapy in the treatment of single metastases to the brain: a randomized trial. JAMA 1998;280:1485.
606. Moghissi K, Dixon K, Stringer M, et al. The place of bronchoscopic photodynamic therapy in advanced unresectable lung cancer: experience of 100 cases. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1999;15:1.
607. Paulson DL. The "superior sulcus" lesion. In: Delarue NC, Eschapasse H. International trends in general Thoracacic surgery, Vol.1: lung cancer. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders, 185:121.
608. Anderson TM, Moy PM, Homes EC. Factors affecting survival in superior sulcus tumors. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1598.
609. Devine JW, Mendenhall WM, Million RR, Carmichael MJ. Carcinoma of the superior sulcus treated with surgery and/or radiation therapy. Cancer 1986;57:941.
610. Rice TW, Pringle JF, Sinclair JE, et al. Superior sulcus tumors; results of treatment. Lung Cancer (abst) 1986;2:156.
611. Miller JI. Discussion of: Shahian DM, Neptune WB, Ellis FH. Pancoast tumors: improved survival with preoperative and postoperative radiotherapy. Ann Thorac Surg 1987;43:32.
612. McKneally M. Discussion of: Shahian DM, Neptune WB, Ellis FH. Pancoast tumors: improved survival with preoperative and postoperative radiotherapy. Ann Thorac Surg 1987;43:32.
613. Ricci C, Rendina EA, Venuta F. Surgical treatment of superior sulcus tumors (abst). Lung Cancer 1988;4:A80.
614. Carrel T, Nachbur B, Bleher A. Is radiotherapy prior to surgical resection indicated for bronchogenic carcinoma with chest wal infiltration and for pancoast tumors? (abst) Lung Cancer
1988;4:A80.
615. Komaki R, Mountain CF, Holbert JM, et al. Superior sulcus tumors: treatment selection and results for 85 patients without metastasis (M0) at presentation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1990;19:31.
616. Hagan MP, Choi NC, Mathisen DJ, et al. Superior sulcus tumors: impact of local control on survival. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1999;117:1086.
617. Attar S, Krasna MJ, Sonett JR, et al. Superior sulcus (Pancoast) tumor: experience with 105 patients. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;66:193.
618. Kirschner PA. Lung cancer: preoperative radiation therapy and surgery. N Y State J Med 1981;81:339.
619. Sawamura K, Mori T, Hashimoto S, et al. Results of surgical treatment for N2 disease (abst). Lung Cancer 1986;2:96.
620. Mastrorilli M, Bragaglia RB, Cipolla G, et al. Surgical management of N2 lung cancer (abst). Lung Cancer 1988;4(suppl):A97.
621. Deneffe G, Stalpaert G. Five year survival in resected T3/N2 lung cancer. Acta Chir Belg 1989;89:159.
622. Levasseur PH, Regnard JF. Long term results after surgery for N2 non small cell lung cancer. Presented at the IASLC workshop, 1721 June 1990, Bruges, Belgium.
623. Watanabe Y, Shimizu J, Oda M, et al. Aggressive surgical intervention in N2 non-small cell cancer of the lung. Ann Thorac Surg 1991;51:253.
624. Walker WS, Carey F, Cameron EWJ, Lamb D. Results of surgery for N2 status bronchial carcinoma. Presented at the IASLC workshop, 1721 June 1990, Bruges, Belgium.
625. Mountain CF. The biological operability of stage III non-small cell lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1985;40:60.
626. Miller LD, McManus KG, Allen MS, et al. Results of surgical resection in patients with N2 non-small cell lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;57:1095.
627. Goldstraw P, Mannam GC, Kaplan DK, Michail P. Surgical management of non-small cell lung cancer with ipsilateral mediastinal node metastasis (N2 disease). J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1994;
107:19.
628. Pearson FG, Delarue NC, Ilves R, et al. Significance of positive superior mediastinal nodes identified at mediastinoscopy in patients with resectable cancer of the lung. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg 1982;83:1.
629. Coughlin M, Deslauriers J, Beaulieu M, et al. Role of mediastinoscopy in pretreatment staging of patients with primary lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1985;40:556.
630. Riquet M, Manac'h D, Saab M, LePimpec-Barthes F, et al. Factors determining survival in resected N2 lung cancer. Eur J CardioThorac Surg 1995;9:300.
631. Salerno TA, Little JR, Munro DD. Bronchogenic carcinoma with a brain metastasis: a continuing challenge. Ann Thorac Surg 1979;27:235237.
632. Winston KR, Walsh JW, Fischer EG. Results of operative treatment of intracranial metastatic tumors. Cancer 1980;45:26392645.
633. White KT, Fleming TR, Laws ER. Single metastasis to the brain; surgical treatment in 122 consecutive patients. Mayo Clin Proc 1981;56:424428.
634. Mussi A, Janni A, Pistolesi M, et al. Surgical treatment of primary lung cancer and solitary brain metastasis. Thoracax 1985;40:191193.
635. Ehrenhaft JL. Discussion of: Magilligan DJ, Duvernoy C, Malik G, et al. Surgical approach to lung cancer with solitary cerebral metastasis: twenty-five years' experience. Ann Thorac Surg
1986;42:360364.
636. Magilligan DJ, Duvernoy C, Malik G, et al. Surgical approach to lung cancer with solitary cerebral metastasis: twenty-five years' experience. Ann Thorac Surg 1986;42:360364.
637. Read RC, Boop WC, Yoder G, Schaefer R. Management of nonsmall cell lung carcinoma with solitary brain metastasis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1989;98:884891.
638. Macchiarini P, Bonaguidi R, Hardin M, Angeletti CA. Results and prognostic factors of surgery in the management of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with solitary brain metastasis. (SBM) .
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1991;10:253.
639. Wronski N, Arbit E, Burt M, Galicich JH. Survival after surgical treatment of metastases from lung cancer: a follow-up study of 231 patients treated between 19761991. J Neurosurg
1995;83:605616.

SECTION 31.3 Small Cell Lung Cancer
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 31.3
Small Cell Lung Cancer
JOHN R. MURREN
ELI GLATSTEIN
HARVEY I. PASS
Epidemiology and Etiology
Pathology
Clinical Presentation
Staging Evaluation and Prognostic Factors
Other Prognostic Factors
Assessment of Risk
Staging Procedures
Treatment
Definitions of Active Chemotherapy and Strategies for Evaluating New Agents
Standard Chemotherapy Agents and Analogues of Standard Agents
Newer Chemotherapy Agents
Combination Chemotherapy
Duration of Chemotherapy
General Approach to Patients with Limited Disease
Role of Radiotherapy in Limited Disease
Role of Surgery in Limited Disease
General Approach to Patients with Extensive Disease
Role of Chest Irradiation in Extensive Disease
Role of Chemotherapy and Radiation Therapy to the Neuraxis
Strategies to Optimize Chemotherapy Response
Alternating Cyclic Combination Chemotherapy
Dose Intensification
Weekly Dose-Intensive Chemotherapy Regimens
Management of Small Cell Lung Cancer in the Elderly and Infirm
Biologic Response Modifiers and Other Treatments
Treatment at Relapse
Surgical Management of Persistent or Recurrent Local Disease
Treatment Outcome and Long-Term Survival
Extrapulmonary Small Cell Carcinoma
Chapter References

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is the histologic diagnosis in approximately 18% of the more than 171,000 patients diagnosed with lung cancer annually in the United
States.1,2 Across the world, the proportion of lung cancers that are of the small cell histology tends to be between 10% and 20% in male subjects and 10% and 30% in
women.3 The predominant risk factor for lung cancer is tobacco exposure, which is the cause for up to 90% of cases diagnosed. 4 Among the major histologic subtypes
of lung cancer, the association between the extent of tobacco exposure and risk is particularly strong for squamous cell and SCLC. 5,6 Thus, the incidence of SCLC has
paralleled trends in cigarette smoking after a 20- to 50-year lag period. In the twentieth century, manufactured cigarettes first became popular among men, then
among women, and successive generations began smoking at progressively earlier ages. Per capita consumption in the United States increased from approximately
54 cigarettes per adult in 1900, to a peak of 4345 cigarettes per adult in 1963. 7 Between 1965 and 1995, the number of adult men who were active smokers declined
from 52% to 27%. For women, smoking prevalence declined from 28% to 23% in this time period. However, smoking prevalence for the adult population has changed
little from 1993 to 1997, and during the 1990s there have been increasing trends in tobacco smoking among adolescents, particularly girls. 7,8 and 9 In 1997, the
prevalence of current cigarette smoking was 36.4% among U.S. secondary school students. 10
Exposure to other environmental respiratory carcinogens, such as asbestos, benzene, coal tar, and other industrial chemicals may interact with tobacco smoke to
increase risk.11,12,13 and 14 The presence of underlying lung disease and diet have also been implicated. 12,15,16 The risk associated with household exposure to radon
gas remains controversial. 12 Pedigree studies and specific metabolic phenotypes have identified familial clusters and populations at increased risk for lung cancer,
which is not surprising because several nonrandom genetic defects are associated with this disease. 17,18,19 and 20 Germline mutations of genes such as p53 are not
likely to contribute to susceptibility to lung cancer. Rather, genetic polymorphisms in genes involved in the activation and metabolism of the procarcinogens in tobacco
smoke probably contribute to risk. 21,22
These trends in smoking prevalence have important implications for the current and future population demographics of SCLC. Over the next few decades, the
incidence of lung cancer should continue to decline in the United States, and as the birth cohorts most heavily exposed to tobacco age, the median age at diagnosis
for SCLC will also grow older. Among men, the incidence rates for lung cancer peaked in 1984 and have been declining at a rate of approximately 1.4% per year, with
the largest declines noted in the incidence of small cell and squamous cell cancers. 7 Among women, the peak incidence appeared to be in 1994. However, if the
increase in popularity of cigarette smoking among adolescents does not change, the declining incidence of lung cancer can be predicted to reverse. Furthermore,
female subjects appear to be more susceptible to tobacco smoke carcinogens than male subjects, and racial differences in susceptibility may also exist. 23,24 and 25
These factors, along with the changing demographics of the smoking population, will define the patient population who develops SCLC in future generations.

PATHOLOGY
A diagnosis of SCLC is based primarily on light microscopy. In 1981, the World Health Organization proposed a histologic classification that gained wide
acceptance.26 In this classification, SCLC was divided into three subtypes that consist of oat cell, intermediate cell type, and combined oat cell (SCLC combined with
squamous or adenocarcinoma). It soon became clear that the morphologic features used to distinguish oat cell from the intermediate cell histology were imprecise,
and that even when strict criteria were used, pure SCLC, whether it was classified as oat cell or intermediate cell, behaved identically. Consequently, the International
Association for the Study of Lung Cancer proposed a revised classification in 1988 that recognized pure small cell cancer and two less common variants: mixed small
cell and large cell carcinoma and combined small cell carcinoma. 27 This classification schema is what is typically used today.
SCLC is composed of neoplastic cells that are typically arranged in clusters, sheets, or trabeculae separated by a delicate fibrovascular stroma. The tumor typically
arises in the central airways and initially infiltrates the submucosa, gradually obstructing the lumen by extrinsic or endobronchial spread. The cells are generally 1.5 to
2.5 times the diameter of a small resting lymphocyte. 28 They have scant cytoplasm and a finely granular nuclear chromatin. Nucleoli are absent or inconspicuous.
Mitotic rates are high, and necrosis of individual tumor cells within cell clusters is common. Crush artifact, resulting in smearing of nuclear chromatin and
hematoxyophilic encrustation of vessel walls is common. 27,29 More than 90% of untreated SCLC falls into this category.
In the mixed small cell and large cell variant, there is a subset of cells that resembles large cell carcinoma. These cells may be larger than, or equivalent in size to, the
small cell component. These cells are distinguished by the presence of prominent, frequent nucleoli and a nuclear chromatin pattern that is more coarsely granular or
open. There are variable amounts of cytoplasm present. The other subtype recognized in the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer classification is
combined SCLC. In this tumor, small cell carcinoma typically coexists with squamous carcinoma, although adenocarcinoma or one of the less common non–small cell
histologies may be present. 27
In most series, the frequency of the small cell and large cell variant is between 3% and 6%, and for combined SCLC it is 1% to 3%. 27,30,31 and 32 There is less
concordance among pathologists on the diagnosis of the mixed cell variant than there is for pure SCLC. 30,31 Furthermore, the ability to identify a mixed population is
influenced by the size of the biopsied material, with examination of a lymph node more likely to result in identification of a mixed cellular population than a typical

bronchial biopsy. It remains unclear whether the presence of a mixed cell or a combined histology confers a different prognosis or response to treatment than pure
small cell carcinoma. For the mixed small cell subtype, there are series that have identified survival that is inferior to, 33,34 superior to, 31 or comparable with30,35 pure
SCLC. There is little information regarding the outcome of patients with combined SCLC. A review of 429 patients treated at Vanderbilt University for SCLC identified
nine (2%) with combined small cell and non–small cell histologies. 32 Two of these patients were long-term survivors, and both underwent surgical resection in addition
to chemotherapy. Thus, surgery may play a role in the management of combined SCLC, and the presence of non–small cell elements, although uncommon, must be
considered in patients who might potentially benefit from resection of residual non-SCLC when the initial diagnosis is based on the limited material available by
needle or bronchoscopic sampling.
Although the diagnosis of small cell carcinoma rests primarily on morphologic assessment, immunocytochemistry plays a role, and electron microscopy is of
occasional value in difficult cases. Virtually all SCLCs are immunoreactive for keratin and epithelial membrane antigen, so that if a tumor does not stain for these
markers, other diagnoses should be considered. 36 One or more markers of neuroendocrine differentiation, such as chromogranin, neuron-specific enolase, Leu-7, and
synaptophysin, can be detected in approximately 75% of SCLC. 29,36 The presence of these markers, however, is not mandatory for the diagnosis and does not
distinguish small cell from non-SCLC, as 10% to 20% of non-SCLC exhibit neuroendocrine differentiation. By electron microscopy, the cells are closely apposed, with
a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio. Chromatin is finely clumped but uniformly dispersed within the nucleus. Few organelles and only occasional uniformly small dense
core granules are located in the cytoplasm. The presence of large granules should raise the diagnosis of a carcinoid tumor. 29
The major differential diagnostic considerations for a small cell carcinoma are non-SCLC, other small round cell tumors, reserve cell hyperplasia, and a lymphocytic
proliferation. Small cell carcinoma composed of larger tumor cells may be difficult to differentiate from a poorly differentiated non-SCLC, particularly if neuroendocrine
features are present. Reserve cells are progenitors for bronchial epithelial cells and proliferate in response to chronic irritation of the airways. Features that
distinguish reserve cells from small cell carcinoma include retention of cell boundaries within a cell cluster, a lack of the extreme nuclear molding found in small cell
carcinoma, and an absence of granularity of the chromatin. 29

CLINICAL PRESENTATION
In general, the clinical presentation of SCLC is similar to the other histologies of bronchogenic carcinoma. Few patients are asymptomatic at diagnosis. In screening
studies, only 4% to 12% of the lung cancers detected as a solitary pulmonary nodule are small cell carcinoma. 37,38 The initial complaints usually reflect the local
presence of a tumor. Cough is the most common symptom. Recent acceleration of cough or accompanying hemoptysis increases the likelihood that an underlying
cancer is present. Dyspnea and chest pain are reported in 30% to 40% of patients at diagnosis. 1 Because SCLC typically develops in the central airways, hemoptysis,
postobstructive pneumonitis, wheezing, or hoarseness due to vocal chord paralysis may be present. Superior vena caval obstruction is present at diagnosis in 10% of
patients with SCLC. 39 Chest imaging typically shows hilar and mediastinal invasion and regional adenopathy. One-third of patients have some degree of atelectasis
present. 1 A peripheral location or chest wall involvement by the tumor is uncommon. For example, no more than 2% of SCLC present as a superior sulcus tumor. 40,41
Most patients with SCLC have clinically detectable metastases at diagnosis ( Table 31.3-1). Bone involvement is usually characterized by osteolytic lesions, often in
the absence of bone pain, or elevations in the serum calcium or alkaline phosphatase. 42,43 and 44 However, marked osteoblastic activity is present in a minority of
patients. Hepatic and adrenal lesions are typically asymptomatic. Elevations of the serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), alkaline phosphatase, or hepatic
transaminases are present in the majority of patients in whom liver metastases are identified. 45 In contrast, radiographically confirmed brain metastases are
symptomatic in more than 90% of cases. Endovascular metastases (tumor emboli) or lymphangitic spread can be among the underlying causes of dyspnea.
Constitutional symptoms, including weight loss, anorexia, and fatigue, are common and correlate with the presence of extensive-stage disease.

TABLE 31.3-1. Sites of Involvement of Small Cell Lung Cancer at Diagnosis and Autopsy

The spectrum of paraneoplasia associated with SCLC differs to some degree from the syndromes observed with non-SCLC. Small cell carcinoma is the histology in
only 5% of patients with lung cancer diagnosed with hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy. Humorally mediated hypercalcemia is rare. 46 On the other hand, the
vast majority of lung cancer patients who develop the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone, Cushing's syndrome, or neurologic paraneoplasia have SCLC.
SCLC accounts for approximately 75% of the tumors associated with the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone. Although serum concentrations of
antidiuretic hormone are elevated in the majority of patients with SCLC, only approximately 10% of patients fulfill the criteria for syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic
hormone, and symptoms are present in no more than 5%. In some cases, ectopic production of atrial natriuretic factor contributes to the disorder in sodium
homeostasis. Similarly, increased serum levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone can be detected in up to 50% of patients with lung cancer, but only 5% of patients with
SCLC develop Cushing's syndrome. In approximately one-half of these cases, it is present at diagnosis. Some of the cutaneous manifestations of Cushing's syndrome
may not be prominent, perhaps because of the rapid growth and clinical course of SCLC. A few studies have demonstrated that a low serum sodium level is an
adverse prognostic factor, 47,48 and patients with Cushing's syndrome have a limited survival. 49,50
Neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes include sensory, sensorimotor, and autoimmune neuropathies and encephalomyelitis. These syndromes are thought to occur
through autoimmune mechanisms, and antinuclear antibodies that bind both to SCLC and neuronal tissues have been identified. 51 Symptoms may precede the
diagnosis by many months and are often the presenting complaint. 46 They may also be the initial sign of relapse from remission. In contrast to the endocrine
syndromes, for which successful treatment of the tumor effectively controls the symptoms, the severity of the neurologic symptoms is unrelated to tumor bulk and often
does not improve despite successful antineoplastic therapy. Subacute peripheral neuropathy may be the most frequent neurologic syndrome. The Lambert-Eaton
syndrome is characterized by proximal muscle weakness that improves with continued use and hyporeflexia and dysautonomia. Characteristic electromyographic
findings confirm the diagnosis. The cause is related to autoantibody impairment of acetylcholine release from the cholinergic nerve terminals. 52 Rare neurologic
entities include cerebellar ataxia, 53 retinal degeneration, 51 intestinal dysmotility, 54 limbic encephalomyelitis, 55 and necrotizing myelopathy.56

STAGING EVALUATION AND PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
The goal of staging is to establish the prognosis, identify patients with disease confined to the chest who are appropriate for combined modality therapy, and assess
whether an individual patient will be at increased risk of mortality if treated with an aggressive chemotherapy program. Surgery plays a minor role in the management
of this disease, and less than 10% of patients might be considered candidates for thoracotomy. As a result, the revised TNM system for staging lung cancer is not
widely employed.57 Rather, a simpler system, introduced by the Veterans' Administration Lung Study Group (VALSG) is generally used. 58 In the VALSG system,
limited stage is defined as disease confined to one hemithorax that can be encompassed in a tolerable radiation field. These patients are currently treated with a
combined modality approach. In all other settings, patients are considered to have extensive-stage disease. At presentation, after appropriate staging procedures are
performed, 60% to 70% of patients with SCLC have extensive disease and 30% to 40% have limited-stage disease. 1
In the VALSG staging system, the appropriate classification of selected sites remains controversial. These sites include an ipsilateral pleural effusion, supraclavicular
lymphadenopathy (ipsilateral or contralateral), or contralateral mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Several large series have failed to identify a difference in survival
between patients with an isolated ipsilateral pleural effusion compared with other patients with limited SCLC, 59,60,61 and 62 and many groups have included patients with

ipsilateral pleural effusions within their definition of limited-stage disease. 63,64,65 and 66 However, only 2% to 7% of all patients with otherwise limited SCLC have an
isolated pleural effusion, 61,67 so that small differences in outcome associated with this clinical factor might be missed. In an analysis of two large cooperative group
databases, which included in toto more than 4000 patients, the survival of patients with an isolated effusion was similar to patients with one site of extensive
disease. 64,67 In one of these analyses, an isolated effusion conferred a poorer survival compared with other patients classified as having limited disease, which was of
borderline significance ( P = .051). 64 In clinical practice, small effusions, usually detected by computed tomography (CT) scan, are sometimes difficult to evaluate. It is
assumed that these effusions are malignant, unless the fluid is a transudate, nonhemorrhagic, and cytologically negative on repeated examination results. Clinical
judgment in individual cases should be applied for selection of these patients for combined modality therapy until this issue is addressed in a prospective trial.
Although most randomized trials evaluating the role of combined modality therapy in limited-stage SCLC have excluded patients with an ipsilateral pleural effusion,
they have usually included patients with ipsilateral, and sometimes contralateral, supraclavicular lymph node metastases. The presence of supraclavicular
lymphadenopathy is commonly associated with extensive disease, but when encountered in patients with otherwise limited disease (5% of cases), carries a trend
toward poorer survival. 67,68 Contralateral mediastinal involvement is also usually classified as limited-stage disease. However, two randomized studies that evaluated
the use of a more aggressive, twice daily, radiation regimen, excluded patients with contralateral hilar disease, 69,70 presumably to reduce the volume of irradiated field
and the risk for toxicity. If this form of more intensive radiotherapy becomes a standard of care, the potential prognostic significance of the extent of mediastinal nodal
involvement will need to be reexamined. Patients with limited-stage disease who present with superior vena cava syndrome have a similar prognosis to other patients
with limited-stage disease 62,71 and have been included in randomized studies investigating the role of combined modality therapy. 72,73
Several series have identified a more favorable outcome for patients with “very” limited disease, that is a tumor confined to the lung without evidence of spread to the
mediastinum.66,74,75 Retrospective analysis of the University of Toronto database demonstrated that patients without evidence of mediastinal metastases by CT scan
or mediastinoscopy who were treated with chemotherapy and radiation had a median survival of almost 16 months and a projected survival at 5 years of 18%. 66 This
was significantly better than other patients with limited disease who had more extensive tumor burden. Patients who undergo surgical resection and have an absence
of mediastinal metastases have an especially favorable outcome. Survival in this select group is between 50% and 60%. Among the patients with extensive disease, a
number of studies have shown that the number of metastatic sites is an important parameter. 59,62,64,67
OTHER PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
In addition to disease extent based on VALSG stage, multivariate analyses suggest that performance status and the serum LDH are the most reproducible prognostic
factors. Performance status reflects both the underlying extent of the disease and partially dictates tolerance for the intensity of treatment. Although patients with a
lower performance status are at a higher risk for treatment-related complications, they may still benefit from a combined modality approach. 76
An elevated LDH is seen in 33% to 57% of all patients with SCLC, 48,64,77 and up to 85% of patients with extensive-stage disease. 64 Biochemical parameters, such as
an elevation of the LDH and neuron-specific enolase, are strong predictors of poor outcome in SCLC. 48,61,64,78,79 Male gender is an adverse prognostic factor in
some,80,81 but not all series. 67 Older age has been an independent adverse prognostic factor in limited disease in some series, 67,82,83 but not in others.48,84 Older age
often results in a compromised dose intensity, usually due to treatment delays. 84
Molecular studies have identified several specific lesions involved in the pathogenesis of SCLC, and the prognostic import of the gain or loss of function of these
critical genes and gene products is now being evaluated clinically. 22,85,86 Drug sensitivity testing in vitro may be useful to guide selection of a chemotherapy regimen,
but with current methodologies it is feasible in only a minority of patients and is labor intensive. 87
ASSESSMENT OF RISK
In many respects, treatment for SCLC is as demanding as a thoracotomy and pulmonary resection. In some large cooperative group trials, treatment-related mortality
has exceeded 10%. Accordingly, a careful assessment of a patient's ability to undergo aggressive therapy, particularly if concurrent chemotherapy and radiation are
planned, is warranted. Several retrospective analyses have attempted to identify patients at increased risk for a treatment-related mortality. An analysis of 382
patients treated in a single institution identified age older than 50 years, Karnofsky performance status less than or equal to 50, treatment with a regimen containing
three drugs or more, and a prior septic episode during chemotherapy as risk factors for septic complications. 88 In this study, older patients with a poor performance
status had a 22-fold greater risk of septic death than patients without those risk factors. In another study involving 610 patients, each one of the 71 fatalities that
occurred during the first cycle of VP-16–based chemotherapy was matched to the next patient enrolled on the trial. 89 Patients dying early were more likely to have a
poor performance status, clinical hepatomegaly, a low serum albumin, and elevations of the blood urea nitrogen and serum alkaline phosphatase. The Copenhagen
Lung Cancer Group compared 937 patients treated in its two most recent studies with 819 patients treated in early clinical studies. 90 The mortality during the first cycle
of chemotherapy in the recent studies was threefold higher (12.6% vs. 4.2%) compared with the earlier trials. An algorithm was developed to identify high-risk patients
that included age, performance status, and serum LDH. Patients were defined as high risk if they had a poor performance status [Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group (ECOG) 3 or 4], or if they were 65 years old or older and had a serum LDH that was more than twice the upper normal level. Based on this algorithm, 21% of
the 937 patients would be considered at high risk. In this high-risk group, the median survival time was 133 days, and the 2-year survival was 4.5%. Mortality during
the first chemotherapy cycle was 33%, and among patients treated with etoposide and platinum the frequency was 41%. Of note, more than one-half of these early
deaths occurred in older patients with an elevated LDH who had a preserved performance status. For these high-risk patients, therefore, less intensive chemotherapy
would be appropriate, and careful monitoring and support during treatment is mandatory.
STAGING PROCEDURES
Autopsy and clinical studies have shown that SCLC commonly disseminates to soft tissue and multiple viscera (see Table 31.3-1). Autopsy studies in patients with
lung cancer who were staged without modern imaging methods and died within 1 month of a potentially curative surgical resection but of causes unrelated to the
cancer, showed that 12 of 19 patients (63%) with SCLC had distant metastases, in comparison with 14% to 40% for the non-SCLC histologies. 91 Outside of the
context of a clinical trial, it is reasonable to discontinue the staging survey once disease outside the chest has been identified. Exceptions would include the presence
of additional symptomatic areas that may require prompt therapy, such as symptoms and signs suggestive of metastases to a weight-bearing bone or the neuraxis. In
an era of cost containment, algorithms have been proposed that use each diagnostic modality in a stepwise fashion to reduce the costs of the staging workup. 65,92
History, clinical examination, including neurologic examination, a complete blood cell count, and a biochemical panel, including electrolytes, liver function tests, and
LDH determination, and a chest radiographic film make up the first line of pretreatment evaluation in SCLC. Selected biochemical parameters, in particular the serum
LDH, have been shown to be predictive of the extent of disease. 48,61,64,77,93,94 Symptoms and abnormalities detected in these tests often direct subsequent testing. CT
scanning of the chest is superior to chest radiography in delineating the extension of the primary tumor and detecting mediastinal lymphadenopathy and may up-stage
T or N designations in up to 82% of cases. 95 A pericardial effusion is infrequently seen at presentation, but thickening of the pericardium detected on CT scan of the
chest is a common finding of unknown significance. 96 A CT is necessary for purposes of planning the radiation portal field and for evaluation of the minority of patients
who are candidates for surgical resection. In the pre-CT era, bronchoscopy was found to be helpful as an adjunct to chest radiography findings in assessing a
complete response.97 CT scan is now widely available and is commonly used for pretreatment evaluation and response assessment. However, its capability to assess
tumor response is limited in areas of atelectasis and radiation-induced fibrosis where the presence of active tumor cannot be ascertained. The role of positron
emission tomography (PET) scanning or somatostatin receptor imaging in distinguishing residual tumor versus benign radiographic abnormalities should be further
investigated.
CT scanning detects intraabdominal lesions in approximately 35% of patients with SCLC at presentation. 98,99 By the use of chest and abdominal CT, locally advanced
or distant disease is diagnosed in 94% to 96% of patients. 95,98 CT has an accuracy of 85% in detecting liver metastases in SCLC overall, 99,100 and that increases in
patients with abnormalities in liver function test results. 100 Involvement of the adrenal glands by metastatic tumor is almost always clinically silent. Clinical studies have
implicated the adrenals as the only metastatic site in SCLC in 8% to 11% of patients at presentation; however, the majority of these cases were not biopsy proven. In
autopsy series, adrenal metastases are seen in 35% to 65% of patients with SCLC. The accuracy of noninvasive imaging in differentiating between adenomas and
adrenal metastases in patients with lung cancer has been suboptimal, 101 although newer magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques, such as chemical shift
imaging, may improve the accuracy of MRI in differentiating adenomas from metastatic deposits. 102
Brain metastases are found in 10% of SCLC patients at the time of diagnosis. 103,104 The cumulative risk for brain metastases increases with survival. Multiple lesions

are usually found in autopsy in patients with CNS involvement. 103,105 Leptomeningeal involvement is extremely rare at presentation, but may develop antemortem in
2% to 13% of patients. 103,105,106 The majority of these patients have simultaneous brain metastases. 103,106 The usefulness of a pretreatment brain scan in asymptomatic
patients is controversial. Although the yield of brain CT in patients with neurologic abnormalities is high (42% to 88%), 107,108 it is only 3% to 8% in asymptomatic
patients with SCLC. 107,108 and 109 In a patient in whom metastatic disease has been demonstrated by another test or who is not a potential candidate for thoracic
irradiation for other reasons, imaging the brain is probably not a mandatory component of the initial staging evaluation. If asymptomatic brain metastases are present,
chemotherapy may be adequate treatment,110 and the early detection and treatment of asymptomatic brain metastases with radiation therapy has not been shown to
significantly improve patient outcome, 107,109 partly due to the effect of systemic failure on survival. If brain metastases are the single site of distant disease, the
prognosis may not be significantly altered because the median survival compared with patients with limited disease has been comparable in some series, 111,112
although not in others. 106,107 A CT of the brain is needed in patients considered for prophylactic cranial irradiation, as the presence of clinically occult metastases
would affect treatment planning.
Up to 40% of patients with SCLC have a positive radionuclide bone scan at diagnosis; in fewer than 10% of cases this is the only site of metastatic disease. 42,113 Bone
involvement shown by bone scan is frequently detected in asymptomatic patients with SCLC and correlates with an elevated alkaline phosphatase level and bone
marrow positivity. Further diagnostic evaluation with a plain radiograph and in some cases with a bone CT scan or MRI may be required to investigate areas of
equivocal findings that could be due to osteoarthritis or trauma. In assessing response, repeat bone scanning is helpful but not sufficiently reliable. 113 In some cases,
patients demonstrate a more intense uptake of metastatic lesions on bone scan, which reflects bone regeneration and is a sign of response to therapy.
The bone marrow is involved in 15% to 30% of patients with SCLC at presentation, but is uncommonly the only site of metastatic disease. 42,61,114,115 and 116 As a result,
routine bone marrow examinations rarely modify staging. The yield of bone marrow biopsy can be increased by in vitro semisolid cultures of bone marrow aspirates or
immunostaining with anti-SCLC monoclonal antibodies, which are positive in 10% and 15% to 66% of histologically negative bone marrow, respectively. 117,118,119,120 and
121
However, the clinical significance of bone marrow involvement demonstrated by these methods has not yet been determined. A leukoerythroblastic picture on the
peripheral blood, which is present in 8% to 19% of all cases at presentation, is highly specific for extensive bone marrow infiltration by SCLC. 44,115,116 Severe
thrombocytopenia, with a platelet count of less than 50 × 10 9/L, and an elevated LDH are also suggestive of bone marrow metastases. 44,94,115 Bone marrow
involvement usually coincides with bone and liver metastases, but not with CNS involvement. 115 At least one-half of the patients with a positive bone marrow result
have bone metastases detected by bone scan. 42,122,123 In patients with a normal bone scan, normal LDH, and no evidence of thrombocytopenia or peripheral blood
leukoerythroblastosis, the yield of bone marrow biopsy is extremely low, 123 and it can be omitted.
MRI allows for the noninvasive evaluation of large volumes of bone marrow and is a sensitive method for detecting bone marrow involvement by SCLC. Bone marrow
positivity by MRI has been reported in 30% to 60% of patients with SCLC and identifies marrow involvement missed in the initial biopsy in 3% to 19% of
patients. 117,124,125,126 and 127 Circulating malignant cells detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction for cytokeratin can be found in the peripheral blood
of 27% of SCLC patients.128 The significance of this finding should be investigated.
PET scan has emerged as a promising imaging modality in lung cancer. Most commonly, a radiolabeled glucose analogue, [ 18F]fluoro-2-deoxy- d-glucose, has been
used to demonstrate differences in the metabolism of normal and neoplastic cells. The potential role of PET scan in assessing a solitary lung nodule and mediastinal
involvement by tumor has been demonstrated in multiple studies 129,130 and 131 and has also proven valuable in the detection of unexpected extrathoracic disease. 132
Thus, as PET continues to technically improve and become more widely available, it may assume an important role in the staging of SCLC.
Technetium-labeled monoclonal antibody imaging has been evaluated as a staging method in SCLC. 133 The accuracy of this imaging modality in staging patients with
SCLC is approximately 90%. However, it has limited value in detecting liver metastases or lesions smaller than 2 cm. 133 The presence of somatostatin receptors in
SCLC, a neuroendocrine neoplasm, has made possible the use of radiolabeled somatostatin analogues for the imaging of patients with SCLC. Somatostatin receptor
imaging is accurate in detecting the primary lesion and mediastinal lymphadenopathy in SCLC, but has not shown sufficient sensitivity (50% or less) in detecting sites
of metastatic disease.134,135 and 136

TREATMENT
Early efforts at the management of SCLC with surgery were characterized by incomplete staging both before and during thoracotomy. Nevertheless, in the 1960s
some studies reported 5-year or longer survival in more than 10% of the patients. 137,138 These results, however, were overshadowed by two studies in the 1970s that
provided philosophical justification for not using a surgical approach in this disease. The British Medical Research Council published a 144-patient trial ( Table 31.3-2)
that demonstrated the modest superiority of radiotherapy as primary treatment for “operable” SCLC. 139 Shortly thereafter, an American study 140 compared the survival
of 146 operable but nonresected patients with 41 resected patients and found no differences.

TABLE 31.3-2. Survival in Patients with Operable Small Cell Lung Cancer Randomized to Surgery or Radiotherapy

The inadequate results with surgery or radiation alone, even in carefully selected patients, highlighted the need for systemic treatment in SCLC, and the primary role
of chemotherapy in the management of this disease is now well established. In a study conducted in the late 1960s testing various alkylating agents,
cyclophosphamide was shown to double survival compared with supportive care in patients with extensive disease, and shortly thereafter a combination of
cyclophosphamide with radiation was shown to improve survival compared with radiation alone in patients with limited disease. 141,142 An extensive evaluation of the
drugs then available demonstrated that anthracyclines and vinca alkaloids, along with certain alkylating drugs, produced single-agent response rates of up to 50%.
The antimetabolites appeared to be less active, with response rates reported of 20% to 30%. In the 1980s the epipodophyllotoxins (VP-16 and VM-26) and the
platinum analogues were introduced, and their activity ranged from 40% to 60% in previously untreated patients. 143 During the 1990s, two new classes of
chemotherapeutic agents, the taxanes and the camptothecins, entered clinical practice and are establishing a role in the management of this disease.
DEFINITIONS OF ACTIVE CHEMOTHERAPY AND STRATEGIES FOR EVALUATING NEW AGENTS
As agents such as cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin became established in the management of this disease, it became clear in the evaluation of new drugs that
exposure to prior chemotherapy and response to this therapy were at least as important as other known prognostic factors in predicting response to the new agent.
For example, the epipodophyllotoxins produce response rates of 40% to 90% in untreated patients, 144,145 and 146 but in relapsed patients the response rate to VP-16 and
VM-26 were 5% to 12% and 20%, respectively. 147,148 and 149 Based on retrospective analysis of the activity of effective chemotherapy drugs in different populations,
response rates greater than or equal to 10% in patients with refractory disease, greater than or equal to 20% in patients in sensitive relapse (typically defined as
response to initial therapy and a treatment-free interval of longer than 3 months before disease progression), and greater than or equal to 30% in patients with
previously untreated extensive disease have been proposed as the appropriate targets to declare a new chemotherapy drug active. 143,150,151 Because of the biologic
aggressiveness of SCLC, the patient population that should be selected to test new drugs remains controversial. Clinical trials that enroll patients with refractory
disease, for example, pose the least risk that outcome might be compromised if the new agent turns out to be inactive. However, substantially more patients would

need to be evaluated to establish a response rate of greater than or equal to 10% than would be necessary to establish a response rate of greater than or equal to
30% in previously untreated patients. This means that a much larger number of patients would be exposed to the toxicity of a new drug beforeit was rejected. Thus,
the initial testing of new drugs in patients with sensitive relapse has been proposed as a reasonable compromise, 152 although evaluation in previously untreated
patients may be reasonable for new drugs of particular promise. 151
STANDARD CHEMOTHERAPY AGENTS AND ANALOGUES OF STANDARD AGENTS
A number of chemotherapy drugs fulfill the criteria for activity outlined in the previous section. Several of these drugs, such as nitrogen mustard, methotrexate,
altretamine, and carmustine, are seldom used today. In the 1990s, five drugs, or analogues of these five drugs, have been used in the management of SCLC ( Table
31.3-3). Current treatment recommendations are based on the experience with these agents.

TABLE 31.3-3. Active Agents in Small Cell Lung Cancer

The activity of VP-16 is dependent on the schedule of administration. In randomized trials, bolus administration for 3 or 5 consecutive days repeated every 3 to 4
weeks is superior to one dose by bolus or 24-hour infusion every 3 weeks. 145,153,154 The 5-day bolus schedule is as effective as an 8-day bolus schedule. 146 Two
studies that included a pharmacokinetic analysis suggested that the duration of exposure to a threshold concentration of VP-16 was an important determinant of
efficacy and toxicity. 145,146 The availability of an oral formulation has led to the development of more prolonged schedules. As a single agent, prolonged oral regimens
of VP-16 were tested in previously treated patients and appeared to have activity comparable with the standard 3- to 5-day bolus schedules. 155,156 When included in
multidrug regimens, the schedule dependence of activity has not been demonstrated. In a randomized trial comparing cisplatin plus VP-16 given as an intravenous
bolus for 3 consecutive days to cisplatin plus VP-16 given as a 21-day oral regimen, there was greater hematologic toxicity with no improvement in response or
survival in patients receiving the prolonged oral regimen. 157 Continuous infusion of VP-16 for 72 hours was not superior to a 3-day bolus in combination with
cisplatin.158
Cisplatin has been evaluated as a single agent, particularly in patients who have had previous treatment, and response rates from these studies approximate 15%.
Carboplatin produces a comparable response rate in previously treated patients, and in newly diagnosed patients a 60% response rate has been observed. 159
Ifosfamide is an analogue of cyclophosphamide that appears to be at least as active as cyclophosphamide in the treatment of SCLC. In newly diagnosed patients,
response rates of 50% to 65% have been reported. Teniposide is an analogue of VP-16 and, in a randomized trial in newly diagnosed patients with extensive disease,
produced a response rate of 43%, compared with a response rate of 49% for ifosfamide and 56% for the standard cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine
(CAV) regimen.160 At the dose tested, hematologic toxicity and life-threatening complications were much more common in the patients treated with CAV. In other
phase II studies, the response rate of teniposide has ranged from 38% to 90%, and in one, 5 of 30 patients experienced a toxic death, underlying the importance of
patient selection in determining response and toxicity. 161,162 Epirubicin is an anthracycline that in preclinical models was as active as doxorubicin and less cardiotoxic.
As a single agent, epirubicin has been shown to produce a response rate of approximately 50% in previously untreated patients with extensive disease. 163
NEWER CHEMOTHERAPY AGENTS
The taxanes bind microtubules and promote microtubular assembly. This interferes with tubulin depolymerization, resulting in a disruption of cell division. In an ECOG
study, paclitaxel at a dose of 250 mg/m 2 infused over 24 hours produced a response rate of 34%. 164 The North Central Cancer Treatment Group used a similar
schedule with the addition of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) support and reported a response rate of 53% with a reduction in the grade IV leukopenia
to 14%. Docetaxel at a dose of 100 mg/m2 has been reported to produce a response rate of 25% in untreated patients and at a dose of 60 mg/m 2 a response rate of
13.5% in previously treated patients. 165,166
Camptothecin is a plant alkaloid that has the unique mechanism of action of interacting with topoisomerase I, a nuclear enzyme that plays a key role in DNA
metabolism. Schiller et al. treated 48 chemotherapy-naive patients with extensive-stage SCLC with intravenous topotecan at 2 mg/m 2/d for 5 days, repeated every 3
weeks. Most patients received G-CSF support. The regimen was active, with a response rate of 40%, 1-year survival of 39%, and median survival of 10 months. 167 In
patients progressing or relapsing shortly after completing chemotherapy, the response rate was 6% to 11%. 168,169 Pooled data from three multicenter studies showed a
response rate of 18% in 168 patients in sensitive relapse (>3-month interval from previous chemotherapy treatment); the median survival was 30 weeks, and the
1-year survival was 21%. 170 A randomized trial comparing topotecan with CAV in patients in sensitive relapse demonstrated comparable response rates and survival
for the two regimens.171 Topotecan is also available in an oral formulation, and this preparation appears to be at least as active as the intravenous drug. 172 Irinotecan
also has activity in SCLC, but has not been as extensively evaluated. In patients previously treated with chemotherapy, response rates of 16% to 47% have been
reported.173,174 and 175
Gemcitabine, a pyrimidine antimetabolite, produced responses in 7 of 26 (27%) previously untreated patients with extensive disease and 12 of 19 (63%) patients
resistant to cisplatin and VP-16. 176 Preliminary results in another study enrolling patients with resistant disease identified three brief remissions in 12 evaluable
patients, which together with the demonstrated activity of gemcitabine in previously treated non-SCLC suggests that the mechanism of drug resistance may differ
between gemcitabine and other agents used to treat lung cancer. 177
Vinorelbine (Navelbine) is a new vinca alkaloid that in previously treated patients has produced a response rate of 12% to 16%. 178,179 The activity in newly diagnosed
patients with extensive disease was 26%. 180 Because vinorelbine is well tolerated in an elderly population, it may be a useful component of palliative combination
regimens. In combination with carboplatin, for example, it produced a response rate of 74% (32 of 43 patients) and a median survival of 37 weeks in patients with
extensive disease.180

COMBINATION CHEMOTHERAPY
After the activity of cyclophosphamide was established in SCLC, multidrug combinations were developed and tested ( Table 31.3-4). Randomized trials of these early
combinations demonstrated superior activity to single-agent cyclophosphamide. The combination of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and dacarbazine produced a
higher response rate and survival when compared with an equally toxic dose of single-agent cyclophosphamide. 181 Hansen et al. demonstrated that the addition of
vincristine to the combination of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and CCNU improved survival compared with the three-drug combination, highlighting the
usefulness of this relatively nonmyelotoxic agent in combination therapy. 182 Livingston et al. developed the CAV combination, and this became a standard. 183

TABLE 31.3-4. Commonly Used Chemotherapy Regimens

With the identification of VP-16 as an important new agent, several modifications of the CAV regimen that included VP-16 were tested. In extensive disease, a slight
improvement in survival was noted when VP-16 replaced either doxorubicin or vincristine, although greater myelosuppression was evident in the cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, VP-16 (CDE) arm in the latter trial. 184,185 Hong et al. compared intensive CV (with the dose of cyclophosphamide increased from 1000 to 2000 mg/m 2)
with CAV and cyclophosphamide, VP-16, and vincristine (CEV) and reported that patients treated with CV had a shorter survival and experienced more
myelosuppression than patients treated on the other two arms. 184 Substitution of VP-16 for methotrexate in the lomustine, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and
methotrexate regimen also improved survival. 186 Administration of the VP-16 beginning on day 3 produced better survival but more myelosuppression than beginning
the VP-16 on day 14 of the cycle, perhaps because this schedule provided greater dose density, or perhaps because it delivered the VP-16 at a point at which more
tumor cells were in cell cycle and therefore more susceptible to the drug. 187
Five randomized trials have evaluated the addition of VP-16 (CAVE) to the CAV regimen. 188,189,190,191 and 192 In three studies, the doses of CAV were equivalent in each
arm.188,189 and 190 Not surprisingly, in these studies the addition of VP-16 resulted in increased hematologic toxicity. Although a better response rate was evident in the
arm containing VP-16 in at least some patient subsets in each of these studies, there was an improvement in response duration (of 3 months) and survival (of 6
weeks, P = .08) in only one study. 189 Jett et al. compared CAVE with CAV in 231 patients with limited disease. 190 Despite a reduction of the dose of cyclophosphamide
by 33%, there was still greater myelosuppression in the CAVE arm. There was a small improvement in median and 2-year survival with CAVE, which was not
statistically significant. Two randomized studies intensified components of this regimen: In one the cyclophosphamide was increased from 1000 to 1200 mg/m 2 and
the dose of doxorubicin increased from 40 to 75 mg/m2 in the CAV arm compared with the CAVE arm.192 The regimens produced equivalent myelotoxicity, response
rates, and survival. These results were comparable with the outcomes with less intensive CAV regimens in extensive disease.
The VP-16 and cisplatin (EP) regimen was tested in SCLC because this combination produced synergistic activity in preclinical systems and was established as an
active regimen in other diseases. Evans et al. reported response rates of 55% in patients previously treated with CAV and 86% in newly diagnosed patients. 193,194 and
195
Einhorn et al. reported that two cycles of consolidation with EP added to the treatment of patients with limited disease who were responding to six cycles of CAV
had a longer survival than patients randomized to CAV only. 196 Prospective studies comparing these two regimens showed comparable response and survival, with a
significant reduction in toxicity with EP. 197,198 There was less myelosuppression with EP, and if given with radiation, patients experienced less esophagitis and
interstitial pneumonitis. Consequently, EP became an alternative to CAV as the frontline regimen for SCLC.
Carboplatin can be substituted for cisplatin with no loss of activity and improved tolerance. 199,200 In combination with VP-16, Bishop et al. reported a response rate of
77% and 58% for limited and extensive disease, respectively. 201 Moreover, randomized trials of multiagent regimens in which the two platinum analogues were
compared suggested that they were at least equivalent. The Hellenic Cooperative Oncology Group randomized 147 patients to receive VP-16, 100 mg/m 2, days 1 to 3,
and cisplatin, 100 mg/m 2, or carboplatin, 300 mg/m 2, along with concurrent radiation. 199 Response and survival were similar in the two arms, although the toxicity,
particularly nausea, vomiting, nephrotoxicity, and neurotoxicity, were significantly lower in the patients who received carboplatin. Myelosuppression was also less in
the carboplatin arm, but this was not statistically significant. In another large randomized trial, induction with teniposide, vincristine, and either carboplatin or cisplatin
produced equivalent activity and toxicity. 200
Ifosfamide produces less myelosuppression than cyclophosphamide and has significant single-agent activity. Ifosfamide has been substituted for cyclophosphamide
in the CAV regimen. 202 Combinations of ifosfamide with cisplatin and with etoposide have also been tested. The three-drug regimen VP-16, ifosfamide, and cisplatin,
initially tested in refractory germ cell tumors, has also been evaluated. In patients with SCLC, a population that is older and has more comorbid illness than patients
with germ cell tumors, a 20% reduction in dose intensity was necessary to avoid excessive myelosuppression. 203 In a randomized trial comparing VP-16, ifosfamide,
and cisplatin with EP, one study, which enrolled only patients with extensive disease, identified a significant, although small, difference in both median survival (9.0
vs. 7.3 months) and 2-year survival rates (13% vs. 5%). 204 Myelosuppression was more severe in the arm treated with ifosfamide. Carboplatin has been substituted for
cisplatin in regimens that also include ifosfamide, carboplatin, and VP-16 (ICE), and in single-arm studies impressive response rates and cumulative
myelosuppression have been reported. 205,206 Other three-drug regimens that incorporate these agents, such as ifosfamide, doxorubicin, and VP-16 202; ifosfamide,
carboplatin, and oral VP-16 206; and paclitaxel, cisplatin, and VP-16, 207 have been tested but have not been demonstrated to be superior to either EP or CAV.
Several studies are in progress evaluating camptothecin (topotecan or irinotecan)-based regimens in SCLC. In combination with platinum agents, response rates are
between 17% and 29% in previously treated patients and 75% and 84% in newly diagnosed patients. 208,209 and 210 Preliminary results of a multicenter randomized trial in
Japan found that the combination of irinotecan and cisplatin produced superior survival than the standard VP-16 and cisplatin regimen in patients with extensive stage
disease. 211 Combinations of camptothecins with other agents active in SCLC are also being evaluated, and many have shown significant activity, albeit with
substantial associated myelosuppression. 212,213 and 214 Three-drug regimens, such as paclitaxel, cisplatin, and topotecan, 215 are also being developed.

DURATION OF CHEMOTHERAPY
Through the 1970s, sensitive tumors were often treated with chemotherapy for periods that might extend up to 2 years. This meant that most patients with SCLC
received uninterrupted chemotherapy until disease progression or death. In 1984, Feld et al. reported that six cycles of CAV and thoracic irradiation produced survival
comparable with the results of a previous treatment program that included 12 months of maintenance therapy. 216 Subsequently, a large number of randomized trials
examined whether maintenance chemotherapy prolonged survival. 217,218,219,220,221,222,223,224,225 and 226
A few studies have suggested that prolonged treatment programs improve survival, at least in certain patient subsets. The CALGB randomized 258 patients to one of
four chemotherapy regimens, and 57 patients in complete remission underwent a second randomization to maintenance therapy or observation. Among the 46
patients with limited disease who proceeded to the second randomization, the median survival was improved with maintenance chemotherapy (16.8 vs. 6.8
months).217 However, the induction regimens utilized in this study might be considered inferior to currently used treatments. The Medical Research Council
randomized 265 patients who had responded to six cycles of induction chemotherapy to an additional six cycles of maintenance or observation. 220 Overall, there was
no difference in survival between patients treated with six or 12 cycles of chemotherapy, though for patients in complete remission at the time of randomization a
subset analysis suggested that maintenance may provide a survival benefit. In a second British study, patients treated with six cycles of CAV were randomized to six
additional cycles of the same chemotherapy or observation. 218 Most of the patients treated in this study were in complete or near complete remission. For the patients
with extensive disease, the median survival was improved by approximately 4 months with maintenance treatment. An additional trial, organized by the Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG), randomized patients to CAV alternating with another three drug combination or CAV alone. 221 After six to eight cycles of
induction, patients in complete remission underwent a second randomization to maintenance treatment or observation. Patients assigned to CAV and maintenance
therapy had both a longer progression-free survival and overall survival ( P = .0 9) than patients who received only CAV with no maintenance. For the patients who
received the six-drug regimen, those who were given no maintenance survived longer than the patients who received maintenance treatment.
In contrast, four other studies that randomized patients to five or six cycles of chemotherapy or a total of 12 cycles of chemotherapy found no difference in
outcome.219,222,223,225 Among these studies, only one trial evaluated maintenance therapy in complete responders, 222 one study included both complete and partial

responders, 225 and two studies randomized all patients without evidence of disease progression following completion of induction chemotherapy. 219,223 In summary,
these studies do not exclude the possibility that there is a subset of patients, perhaps those with particularly chemotherapy-sensitive disease treated with moderately
intensive chemotherapy, who may derive a benefit from a maintenance program beyond five to eight cycles of standard chemotherapy. In unselected patients,
however, treatment programs that extend beyond six cycles of chemotherapy have not demonstrated an advantage in survival and may be associated with inferior
quality of life.
A number of additional studies have evaluated whether four cycles of chemotherapy are adequate. 224,227,228 Spiro et al. designed a study that included a double
randomization at diagnosis. 227 Patients received four or eight cycles of CEV and on relapse received additional chemotherapy or supportive care. Of the four
treatment arms, patients who received four cycles of chemotherapy and only supportive care at relapse had a significantly inferior median survival of 30 weeks. Thus,
in this study four cycles of treatment were adequate if chemotherapy was offered to patients appropriate for additional therapy at relapse. Two additional studies also
evaluated four cycles of induction with longer treatment programs. 224,228 Both studies found survival with the longer treatment program to be similar to the shorter
program. The Medical Research Council randomized a total of 458 patients to treatment with VP-16, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and vincristine (ECMV) for
three cycles, ECMV for six cycles, or VP-16 and ifosfamide for six cycles. 229,230 The median survival for patients treated for only three cycles was approximately 1
month shorter than for patients who received one of the regimens given for six cycles. Although this difference was not statistically significant, the study was not
sufficiently powered to exclude a small advantage with longer treatment programs. 230 Among the more symptomatic patients, palliation of symptoms was slightly better
for those treated with the ifosfamide and VP-16 combination, but the differences between the three arms were small. 229
In summary, four to six cycles of induction chemotherapy appear to be optimal in the management of both limited and extensive SCLC. Maintenance chemotherapy
beyond induction is of unproven value but may play a role in selected patients, depending on the sensitivity of their disease to chemotherapy and the induction
regimen they received. Treatment at relapse should be considered if clinically appropriate.

GENERAL APPROACH TO PATIENTS WITH LIMITED DISEASE
An overview of the management of patients with limited disease is shown in Figure 31.3-1. An occasional patient has stage I disease by noninvasive staging; if this
patient is a candidate for thoracotomy, a mediastinoscopy should be considered to ensure that mediastinal nodal metastases are not present before thoracotomy is
attempted. Adjuvant chemotherapy is indicated in patients whose disease is resected. Other patients with limited disease should be carefully evaluated to determine
their capacity to undergo combined modality therapy. Most patients who are not candidates for a clinical protocol should receive four to six cycles of chemotherapy
and radiation to the chest. In limited disease, the CAV regimen produces an overall response rate of 80% to 90%, a complete remission rate of 50% to 60%, a median
survival time of 12 to 16 months, and a 3-year disease-free survival of 10% to 15%. The VP-16 and cisplatin regimen appears to be at least as active as CAV and is
associated with less toxicity if given with concurrent radiation.

FIGURE 31.3-1. Algorithm outlining management of patients with limited disease. CR, complete response; CSI, clinical stage I; CT, computed tomography; PCI,
prophylactic cranial irradiation; PD, progressive disease; PR, partial response.

Intrathoracic SCLC appears optimally treated with 150 cGy twice a day to a total dose of 4500 cGy in 3 weeks. 69 At least 4 (and preferably 6) hours between
treatments are allowed. Customized blocks are used to limit exposure to normal tissues throughout the entire 3-week period. Initial portals are delivered anteriorly and
posteriorly each day, switching to a posterior obliqued field to limit direct spinal cord dose to approximately 3600 Gy. Occasionally, a patient's pulmonary function is
so marginal that a conscious decision is made not to shift to oblique fields because of fear of expanding total treatment volume and thereby increasing the risk of
radiation pneumonitis in high-risk patients. In this setting, it becomes imperative to use a spinal cord block that is suboptimal from the standpoint of tumor control but
essential from the standpoint of minimizing the risk of myelopathy. Conformal planning may help in this dilemma, but one must acknowledge that our quantitative
knowledge of partial organ tolerance is presently negligible.
Some authors have advocated radiation doses up to 6000 cGy for SCLC. 231 In conjunction with multiagent chemotherapy, the routine need for such doses appears
doubtful because of the impressive responsiveness of this neoplasm to both chemotherapy and radiation.
The sequencing of radiation and chemotherapy remains controversial and is more fully discussed later in this chapter (see Sequencing of Radiation with
Chemotherapy). Concurrent rather than sequential administration of chemotherapy and radiation has produced superior survival in some but not all studies.
Concurrent therapy can produce more toxicity than sequential chemotherapy and radiation, and because there is a broad range among individual patients in their
capacity to tolerate aggressive therapy, a challenge in designing a treatment program is to satisfy the need to deliver optimal treatment without exposing patients to
unacceptable toxicity. After induction therapy, most centers recommend prophylactic cranial irradiation to patients if they have achieved a complete or near complete
remission. Some patients with significant adverse prognostic factors may be best served with treatment programs that attenuate the dose and duration of the standard
regimens. At the time of disease progression, treatment with an alternative chemotherapy regimen (or even the initial induction regimen if there was an especially long
initial remission) should be considered.
ROLE OF RADIOTHERAPY IN LIMITED DISEASE
The systemic nature of SCLC, even when it appears to be localized after careful staging procedures, precludes complete reliance on any local form of treatment. Most
patients with limited-stage disease who were treated with chest irradiation alone rapidly developed distant metastases, emphasizing the need for primary systemic
treatment. After combination chemotherapy began to be used in the management of SCLC in the 1970s, the response rates and improved survival that resulted led to
speculation that chest irradiation added toxicities while contributing little or no therapeutic advantage in patients treated with chemotherapy. However, this neoplasm
is also the most responsive of all cell types of lung cancer to thoracic radiotherapy, with objective tumor regression occurring in more than 90% of patients, 232 and the
primary tumor is the site of progression in up to 80% of relapsing limited-stage patients treated with chemotherapy alone. 233,234 Thus, it would seem to be logical to
combine chemotherapy and chest irradiation in these patients.
Retrospective reviews of numerous nonrandomized studies using chemotherapy with or without chest irradiation for limited-stage disease revealed the following
facts235,236: (1) A lower rate of chest relapse was seen with combined modality therapy, although the frequency of local recurrence still approached 33%; (2)
hematologic, pulmonary, and esophageal complications were increased with combined modality treatment; and (3) although median survivals were similar, the 2-year
disease-free survival appeared superior for combined modality therapy compared with that achieved with chemotherapy alone.
Retrospective data, however, suffer from many deficiencies. Because chemotherapy alone is less toxic than combined modality therapy, there may have been a
consistent bias against giving combined modality therapy to poor-risk patients. If the administration of radiotherapy is delayed for several chemotherapy cycles,
patients who develop early progression are generally excluded from receiving radiation. An analysis of local relapse may sometimes be misleading because the
definition of what constitutes a relapse may be heterogeneous. Variations in dose and schedule of the radiation and specific chemotherapy programs used further
complicate comparison of relapse rates from different series. Less effective chemotherapy combined with effective radiation reduces the site of first failure in the chest
because distant metastases are more prone to develop, whereas more effective chemotherapy combined with less effective radiation yields the opposite result. All

these factors make it difficult to assess the value of adding chest irradiation to combination chemotherapy when reviewing uncontrolled data.
Sequencing of Radiation with Chemotherapy
The problem of how to integrate chemotherapy and radiation therapy remains far from standardized. Concurrent therapy is defined as combined modality treatment in
which chemotherapy and radiation therapy are administered throughout the same time period. In alternating therapy, radiation therapy is administered on days during
which no chemotherapy is given, followed by a chemotherapy cycle, and the process is repeated for several iterations of interdigitation. Sequential therapy is defined
as the administration of chemotherapy and radiotherapy separately in time, with one modality begun only after completion of the other, often associated with a delay
for the second modality to allow the patient an adequate recovery from the initial treatment modality. Several randomized studies reported borderline or significantly
improved survival using combined modality treatment. Two of these used concurrent radiotherapy 72,237; one, alternating radiotherapy 238; and two, sequential
radiation. 239,240 The magnitude of survival benefit was modest, ranging from 1 to 4 months in improvement in median survival and increases in the 2-year survival from
7% to 17%. The two studies with the longest follow-up 237,240 demonstrated less advantage beyond 5 years for patients given radiotherapy, partially because of second
primary lung cancers. Of the studies not demonstrating improved survival without chest irradiation, two used sequential radiation therapy and one a concurrent
regimen in that only a single drug was given simultaneously with irradiation. The negative trial conducted exclusively in patients in complete remission from
chemotherapy was initiated because of earlier uncontrolled data suggesting marked improvement in disease-free survival when radiation was given tocomplete
responders at the completion of drug administration. The randomized trial showed a lack of survival benefit from consolidation treatment when irradiation was given
after chemotherapy was completed. Combined modality therapy also increased the complete response rate in most of trials and also significantly reduced chest
recurrence rates.
A 1992 metaanalysis evaluated randomized trials in which more than 2100 limited-stage small cell lung cancer patients were randomized to receive either
chemotherapy alone or in combination with chest irradiation. 76 Patients given combined modality therapy had a 14% reduction in death rate, and an absolute 5.4%
improvement in 3-year survival compared with those receiving chemotherapy alone. Both differences were highly significant in this metaanalysis. This study reinforces
the results of individual studies that demonstrated modest but statistically significant improvement in survival after combined modality treatment. A second and
independent metaanalysis reached similar conclusions. 241
Whether the variations in the temporal relationships of the radiation therapy and chemotherapy components of combined modality treatment influence the antitumor
effects is by no means resolved. Concurrent and alternating combined modality programs that do not incorporate planned delays in chemotherapy for radiotherapy
administration may possess superior efficacy. Among the randomized trials, three of four concurrent or alternating programs yielded improved survival, whereas one
of three sequential programs produced only marginally significant improvement favoring radiation. However, indirect comparisons from the metaanalysis do not
document significant survival advantages for any of the three methods of combining chemotherapy with irradiation. 76
The dose of thoracic irradiation needed to control local regional SCLC was initially thought to be reduced when chemotherapy was given with irradiation. 242 Because
improved drug treatment yielded better control of distant metastases, however, a high frequency of local failures with lower dose schedules such as 3000 cGy in 2
weeks became apparent.243 Retrospective data in patients given combined modality therapy suggested that doses higher than 5000 cGy were needed for optimal
prevention of local regional failure, 244 and one randomized trial demonstrated superior local tumor control with 3750 cGy compared with 2500 cGy. 245 Many authorities
recommend higher doses in the range of 4500 to 5000 cGy or more 236,246,247 for optimal local control. Furthermore, simply because a radiotherapy program reduces
local recurrences does not mean that it is optimal.
Randomized trials have yielded conflicting results on whether concurrent irradiation is best given early or late in the chemotherapy program. One study by the Cancer
and Acute Leukemia Group B found better results with delayed irradiation perhaps because a greater percentage of projected chemotherapy doses were actually
administered.72 The National Cancer Institute of Canada trial came to the opposite conclusion. 73 Indirect comparisons from the metaanalysis could not resolve this
issue. 76
Minimizing the toxicities of combined modality approach without compromising therapeutic efficacy is worthy of further research. The addition of chest irradiation has
increased myelosuppressive, pulmonary, and esophageal complications of treatment, particularly with concurrent regimens. In the National Cancer Institute (U.S.)
trial 237,248 26% of combined modality patients developed severe pulmonary toxicity requiring hospitalization within a median of 2 months from the beginning of
treatment compared with only 4% of patients given chemotherapy alone; moreover, five combined modality patients in complete remission died of this complication. In
patients who responded completely, pulmonary function test results improved in patients given chemotherapy alone, but did not do so in patients receiving combined
modality therapy. 237 The Finsen Institute from Denmark, which also used concurrent chemotherapy and irradiation, reported 7% death from pulmonary and pericardial
complications in complete responders. 249 This frequency of cardiopulmonary complications among patients given combined modality treatment is clearly higher than
what is seen in patients who are given chemotherapy alone.
One study analyzed the frequency of radiation pneumonitis in lung cancer patients treated with chemotherapy and chest irradiation. 250 Almost 80% of the patients in
this series had SCLC. In a multivariate analysis, the only factors that significantly correlated with the increased frequency of radiation-related pulmonary injury were
individual fraction sizes of more than 2.50 Gy/d, twice daily fractionation as opposed to once-a-day fractions, and the total cumulative dose. Somewhat surprisingly,
there were no significant differences among concurrent, alternating, and sequential combined modality treatments. Several trials reported high rates of esophagitis
(with occasional strictures) and weight loss in patients given combined modality therapy. 237,249
Not all concurrent combined modality programs report excessive pulmonary toxicity, 72 suggesting that the selection of drugs combined with irradiation is influential in
inducing some of these complications. Platinum and etoposide may be an especially suitable regimen for concurrent treatment in small cell carcinoma of the lung. Two
successive trials of sequential combined modality treatment in limited-stage patients produced 4-year survival figures of approximately 10% in the Southwest
Oncology Group; a subsequent trial in which a platinum-etoposide combination was given concurrently with chest irradiation beginning on the first day of therapy
resulted in 30% 4-year survival, and severe pulmonary toxicity was seen only in one patient. 251
Although used less often, alternating regimens interdigitating chemotherapy and irradiation appear to have reduced pulmonary toxicity while maintaining the
therapeutic advantage of adding radiation therapy. 238,252 In one retrospective study, 253 irradiating only the postchemotherapy tumor volume after several chemotherapy
cycles did not appear to increase marginal recurrences and was also associated with a low frequency of radiation injury.
Hyperfractionated Radiation
Delivering chest irradiation in multiple daily fractions was theorized on experimental grounds to reduce long-term pulmonary toxicity while still maintaining antitumor
efficacy. SCLC would appear to be an ideal neoplasm for twice-a-day treatment in that it has a high growth fraction, short cell-cycle time, and small to absent shoulder
on the in vitro cell survival curve. Pilot studies in the late 1980s combining etoposide and platinum plus twice-a-day chest irradiation were promising, with median
survivals greater than 2 years and in most series low rates of associated pneumonitis. 254,255 and 256 An intergroup study randomized 417 patients with limited-stage
SCLC to a program that included cisplatin and etoposide for four cycles and radiation therapy beginning on day 1 of the first cycle. 69 The cumulative dose was 4500
rad in both arms, with one arm receiving the radiation in 180-cGy fractions daily and the other arm receiving 150-cGy fractions on a twice-a-day basis. The daily
fractionation scheme required 5 weeks to reach the cumulative dose, whereas the twice-a-day schedule required only 3 weeks. The target volume included the
primary tumor plus bilateral mediastinal nodes and the ipsilateral hilum and the supraclavicular nodes when involved. Margins of 1.0 to 1.5 cm were included and
cone-downs were prohibited. Local failure was reduced from 52% with the daily schedule to 36% with the twice-a-day schedule ( P = .06). Patients who failed in both
local and distant sites had a frequency of 23% with daily treatment, versus only 6% with the twice-a-day approach ( P = .01). More important, although statistically
significant differences in survival were not seen at 24 months, 255 the curves deviated so that at 5 years the survival was only 16% with once-a-day treatment, as
opposed to 26% with the twice- a-day schedule (P = .04). 69 Overall morbidities were not significantly different between the two arms, although there was a higher
frequency of grade III esophagitis with twice-a-day treatment.
It should be reemphasized that selecting patients for combined modality treatment requires an excellent performance status. Combined modality therapy is a complex
undertaking requiring close coordination between both medical and radiation oncologists. Because not all combined modality programs have been shown to increase
survival but usually do increase toxicities, chest irradiation need not be considered for all patients, especially those who have impaired pulmonary function or poor
performance status. Investigational programs that do not include chest irradiation remain entirely appropriate for many patients because the greater antitumor efficacy
of combined modality treatment appears to be at least partially offset by enhanced toxicity. If the results of chemotherapy improve so that most patients have

eradication of systemic but not of local disease, then chest radiation therapy could have a survival effect of even greater significance. At present, however, distant
metastases remain the predominant cause of failure, and most patients with limited disease who are irradiated still die of their SCLC. Thus, improving systemic
treatment currently has a much greater potential for achieving survival gains than does increasing the efficiency of local regional therapy.
Prophylactic Cranial Irradiation
Brain metastases are detected in approximately 10% of SCLC patients at the time of presentation and are subsequently diagnosed during life in another 20% to 25%,
with an increasing likelihood of development seen with lengthening survival. 103,104 In the absence of radiation therapy to the CNS, actuarial analysis reveals a
probability of brain metastases ranging from 50% to 80% in terms of those patients who survive 2 years. 104,257 At postmortem examination, they are found in up to 65%
of patients.105 Because these metastases are sometimes the sole site of clinical relapse from complete remission and are frequently clinically disabling, prophylactic
cranial irradiation has been recommended by many 258 but not all 259 since the mid-1980s to curtail their development. The rationale is essentially an extrapolation from
original strategies used in acute lymphocytic leukemia of childhood.
A review of 667 patients entered on several prospective randomized trials assessed the benefit of prophylactic cranial irradiation given at or within a few months of
diagnosis in patients who were initially free of CNS involvement. 217,260,261,262,263,264,265,266,267,268 and 269 When these trials were considered together, doses of prophylactic
cranial irradiation ranging from 2000 to 4000 cGy reduced the frequency of clinically detectable brain metastases from 24% to 6%. 270 In most of these trials, a
significant reduction of intracranial tumor spread was observed. However, no significant effect of prophylactic cranial irradiation on survival was observed in any of
those studies. Retrospective analyses suggested that virtually all benefit in preventing intracranial metastases with prophylactic cranial irradiation was confined to
patients who achieved a complete remission to their initial treatment. 257,261 In actuarial analysis, partial responders or nonresponders have similar risks of recurrence
in the brain regardless of whether prophylactic cranial irradiation was administered. 257 This is not surprising because persisting systemic cancer could readily
metastasize to the CNS after completion of prophylactic cranial irradiation.
More recently in a metaanalysis of almost 1000 patients in seven trials between 1977 and 1995, patients were evaluated with and without prophylactic cranial
irradiation 271 after initially obtaining a complete response. The primary end point was overall survival, and the analysis was based on intent to treat. Prophylactic
cranial irradiation doses ranged from 24 to 40 Gy in most patients, although the metaanalysis did include one series of 25 patients who received only 8 Gy in one
fraction. The metaanalysis suggested that there was a significant gain in survival seen with prophylactic cranial irradiation in patients who achieved complete
remission, with 3-year survival figures increasing from 15% to almost 21%. Prophylactic cranial irradiation did significantly decrease the probability of brain
metastases and increased the likelihood of disease-free survival. Going to higher doses appeared to have no obvious effect on survival, although it did appear to
have an increasing effect of eliminating brain metastases. There was also a trend toward a decreased risk of brain metastases when prophylactic cranial irradiation
was administered earlier in time. The metaanalysis was not able to assess the effect of prophylactic cranial irradiation on cognitive function, because most of the
studies included did not include a baseline assessment. Two studies 272,273 assessed baseline neuropsychological function before treatment and demonstrated that
many patients appear to have abnormalities of cognitive function as initial manifestations of their cancer, even when brain metastases were not detected and before
any treatment.
Some investigators have proposed forgoing the prophylactic cranial irradiation in favor of therapeutic brain irradiation when metastases are detected. 274 This policy
assumes that cranial irradiation can effectively control symptoms from overt brain metastases for a substantial fraction of the patient's remaining life. Because the
duration of survival is short in most patients who develop brain metastases during the course of therapy, this assumption is not unreasonable. However, other
physicians have questioned the durability of palliation after radiotherapy for overt metastases as well as the difficulty of achieving long-term control in the unusual
patient who does survive for a long time. 275,276 and 277
Another factor that produces considerable controversy in recommending prophylactic cranial irradiation to patients who achieve a complete response is the significant
risk of toxicity associated with it. Because the 5-year survival appears to have improved, it is evident that some patients have neurologic and intellectual impairment
as well as abnormalities on CT scan that may be related to prophylactic cranial irradiation. 277,278,279 and 280 In one study, both CT scan and CNS abnormalities were
significantly more frequent in patients who had received prophylactic cranial irradiation or therapeutic brain irradiation than in those who had not. 280 These findings
were especially disturbing because complete responders are at greater risk for possible complications. Many deficits on neuropsychological testing have been
unsuspected on casual examination, but a few patients have obvious major impairments. CT scan abnormalities continue to worsen for several years after treatment
has ended, although the abnormalities may eventually stabilize. 281 Neurologic abnormalities were most prominent in one series of patients who were given
prophylactic cranial irradiation concurrently with high-dose chemotherapy or individual radiation fractions of 400 cGy. 278 Some authorities suggest that prophylactic
cranial irradiation should be administered only in standard fractions of 200 cGy after completion of chemotherapy. 282
The neuropsychological and imaging abnormalities may or may not be due to prophylactic cranial irradiation. Chemotherapy, possible paraneoplastic syndromes, and
the effects of chronic cigarette and alcohol abuse are some of the factors that may be important contributors. In one study that evaluated cognitive function in patients
before and after chemoradiation but before any prophylactic cranial irradiation, deficits were discovered in verbal memory, frontal lobe function, and motor
coordination within both groups of patients. 273 Administration of methotrexate, procarbazine, and lomustine has decreased since the 1980s; these particular agents
have been incriminated in neuropsychological dysfunction. 280,283
One of the studies in the metaanalysis included almost 300 patients who were randomized to receive prophylactic cranial irradiation after having achieved a complete
remission to initial treatment. 271 Twenty percent of these patients had extensive-stage disease, virtually all of whom are ultimately expected to relapse and die. The
mean time between the initiation of treatment and the randomization was 5 months. The actuarial likelihood of isolated brain metastasis as the first site of treatment
failure was 19% in patients given prophylactic cranial irradiation and 45% in those who did not receive prophylactic cranial irradiation. Corresponding figures for total
brain metastases were 40% and 67%, respectively; both differences were highly significant. However, in this one study, overall survival was not significantly improved.
The important observation was that there were no obvious differences in the neuropsychological function between the two groups, but only 33 patients underwent a
complete reassessment at 18 months. Inasmuch as neuropsychological abnormalities possibly due to prophylactic cranial irradiation progress over time, these data
are insufficient to exclude radiation-associated cognitive damage, but they are nonetheless relevant.
It is important to understand that prophylactic cranial irradiation as opposed to therapeutic irradiation should not require a dose that approaches tissue tolerance.
Higher doses may be more successful at eliminating brain metastases but there appears to be prophylactic benefit with relatively modest doses of 24 to 25 Gy. If
prophylactic cranial irradiation is administered at a time when no chemotherapeutic agents are being administered, radiation-induced permeability alterations that
allow more chemotherapeutic agent into brain parenchyma should be obviated. Our guidelines for prophylactic cranial irradiation, after thorough discussion with the
patient of the potential risks and benefits, are (1) prophylactic cranial irradiation is typically not recommended until at least 2 weeks after completion of all
chemotherapy and only to complete responders after induction therapy; and (2) radiotherapy fractions of 200 to 300 cGy are given over 2 to 3 weeks to a total dose of
2400 to 3000 cGy.
Large-Field Radiation Therapy
Pilot studies have examined the role of hemibody and total body radiation in radioresponsive tumor. Hemibody irradiation is an active agent in SCLC and can induce
some complete clinical responses in patients who achieved only partial response after combination chemotherapy. 284 The initial treatment is usually given to the upper
hemibody where the bulk of tumor is located; in some studies treatment of the lower hemibody was administered after hematologic recovery occurred after the upper
hemibody dose. A controlled German trial confirmed that chemotherapy produced markedly better survival than hemibody radiation in patients with extensive
disease. 285 As an adjunct to combination chemotherapy in both limited and extensive disease, hemibody irradiation yielded substantial toxicity in several pilot studies
without any obvious benefit in tumor response or survival. 286,287 There is also no evidence that low doses of total body irradiation are of benefit as an adjuvant to chest
irradiation in limited-stage or chemotherapy in extensive-stage disease. 288 In a large randomized trial in patients with limited disease given chemotherapy and chest
irradiation, additional hemibody radiation therapy to the upper abdominal sites of potential relapse produced no improvement in response duration or survival. 260
Currently, wide-field irradiation has no proven role in the management of this disease.
ROLE OF SURGERY IN LIMITED DISEASE
Surgery is reserved for selected patients. In contrast to the majority of patients with limited disease, careful TNM staging is important in those patients being
considered for surgical resection. The first hint that proper staging would lead to less bias in the interpretation of surgical results came from the subset of SCLC

patients described by Higgins et al. 37 in their report of the management of the solitary pulmonary nodule. In a 10-year follow-up of 15 small cell patients with solitary
nodules (1% of total cases), 11 who would be presently classified as having stage I tumors 289 had a 5-year survival of 36%. Rejuvenation of interest in surgical
resection for this cancer, however, received its greatest support from the recognition that newly available chemotherapeutic agents could possibly provide effective
adjunctive therapy. Meyer 290 reported that of ten pathologically staged stage I and II patients resected and given chemotherapy for at least a year, 80% remained well
at 30 months. Of greater significance, however, were the carefully designed trials conducted by the Veterans Administration Surgical Oncology Group. 291 Of 148 small
cell carcinoma patients entered on four trials, 132 who survived a potentially curative resection were randomized to receive either preoperative adjuvant
chemotherapy or surgery alone. A 23% overall 5-year survival was recorded, with survival patterns that were more favorable in less advanced stages: T1 to T2N0,
28% to 60%; T1 to T2N1, 9% to 31%; and T3 or N2, 3.6%. Although survival was marginally better with the addition of postoperative chemotherapy, it was clear that
the small group of patients with localized disease after sophisticated surgical staging techniques could enjoy much better survival with surgical resection alone than
was previously appreciated.
Several factors have strengthened the rationale for incorporating surgical therapy into the total package of treatment for selected SCLC patients. Despite the high
response rate to present chemotherapy regimens, the rate of relapse in the thorax can approach 75% in the absence of properly administered radiotherapy. A gradual
shift toward identification of more localized potentially resectable subgroups of limited disease patients with clinical staging occurred, encouraged both by the use of
invasive procedures, including Wang needle biopsy, mediastinotomy, and mediastinoscopy, and the recognition that the new international staging system for lung
cancer57 can provide a common language for discussing these issues.
Theoretical justifications for combining surgery with other therapies for SCLC have been enumerated by Meyer. 292
1. Since local relapse is a problem, could surgical removal offer a better chance for disease control?
2. Surgery used for local control, unlike radiotherapy, would not limit the intensity of chemotherapy that could be delivered.
3. By rendering the patient free of disease in the chest without affecting bone marrow reserves, surgery could possibly make the chemotherapy more effective.
4. Complete surgical staging could identify patients at higher risk of recurrence. Numerous uncontrolled reports, although not definitive, have provided
considerable insight into whether these theoretical considerations are valid.
One of the chief theoretical justifications for adding surgery to the treatment regimen for SCLC is the possibility of influencing relapse in the tumor bed or
mediastinum. In patients who have had surgery at diagnosis, local recurrences are infrequent, 293,294 possibly because patients with stage I or II disease are
overrepresented in this group. Patients who have been pretreated with chemotherapy more often had clinical stage IIIA disease, and their local relapse rate is higher,
in the range of 18% to 28%. 295,296 These local relapse rates still appear considerably less than in patients given chemotherapy with or without radiation therapy with
no surgical intervention. Patients given initial chemotherapy who have a negative biopsy of the primary tumor site at the time of surgery and therefore do not have
resection performed have a high frequency of local recurrence. 297 No cancer is present in the resected specimen in 10% to 20% of cases resected for CT, 30,298,299 and
300
and this particular patient subset enjoys a better prognosis.
Only a modest quantity of data exists on how often surgical resection at the diagnosis of SCLC is possible. Prospective studies of the feasibility of initial thoracotomy
by their nature cannot include cases discovered only at thoracotomy to have small cell carcinoma. A review of the literature 301 suggests that as many as 16% of
patients with SCLC are operative candidates, but this is likely to be an unrealistically high estimate because those patients who are evaluated by a thoracic surgeon
constitute a highly selected group.
There does not seem to be a marked increase in mortality in patients who have operative removal of small cell carcinoma. In the few studies that describe operative
risks after chemotherapy and radiotherapy, the mortality varies between 0% and 10%, 295,296 and 297,302,303 and 304 with many studies reporting no operative mortality or
increased morbidity compared with expected outcomes in patients undergoing pulmonary resection for other indications. The extent of resection, pneumonectomy or
lobectomy, has generally been dictated by the intraoperative findings rather than the original extent of the tumor in patients given preoperative chemotherapy.
Surgery Followed by Chemotherapy
The initial exceedingly poor long-term survival rates with surgery of SCLC were obtained in patients with clinical stages I through III, who for the most part underwent
only minimal staging procedures by current standards. Only when results are categorized by tumor stages can the potential curative effects of surgery alone be
demonstrated. One report, for example, documents 5-year survival of 35% in stage I and 23% in stage II patients. 304 The only randomized trials of surgery compared
with surgery with postoperative chemotherapy were begun approximately 20 years ago and used inferior drug regimens by today's standards. 305,306,307 and 308
Nonetheless, they did in the aggregate reveal a survival advantage from chemotherapy ( Table 31.3-5). Suffice it to say that in the 1990s thoracic oncologists never
recommend surgery as sole treatment for SCLC.309

TABLE 31.3-5. Pooled Results from Randomized Surgical Adjuvant Studies in Samll Cell Lung Cancer

Statements regarding the efficacy of combined modality approaches for SCLC that include surgical resection can be evaluated only when stratified by the temporal
relationships among the different modalities. There have been a number of programs of initial surgery followed by adjunctive chemotherapy after surgery; patients with
multiple stages of tumor are included. 75,292,293,303,310,311,312,313,314 and 315 In general, modern combination chemotherapy programs, usually including cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine, or etoposide, have been used. Survival experience is quite heterogeneous, ranging from 5-year survival of 9% in earlier studies to as high as
83% in more recent studies.
Both nodal status and primary tumor or T status have significant effects on the survival of patients whose SCLC is resected. These prognostic factors were addressed
directly in a few studies. Angeletti et al. 294 and Shepherd et al. 293 reported increased survival of node-negative compared with N1 and N2 patients after surgical
resection and postoperative chemotherapy, while Macchiarini et al. 311 found a decrease in 5-year survival with increasing T category in surgically resected patients
without nodal metastases. Retrospective reviews published by Rea et al. 314 and Lucchi et al. 315 have reinforced the importance of surgical staging in evaluating the
outcomes for surgery and SCLC. Rea et al. reported that of 51 stage I and II SCLC patients resected and given chemotherapy after resection had 5-year survival rates
of 52.2% (stage I) and 30% (stage II). In the review by Lucchi et al., 315 stage I or II resected SCLC patients having postoperative chemotherapy had 5-year survival
rates of 47% and 14.8%, respectively. Stage III patients from this series having surgery followed by adjuvant therapy had a 5-year survival of 14.4%. In general,
5-year survival is rare in patients given postoperative chemotherapy after mediastinal node disease has been documented at initial surgical resection, 303,304 although
this observation is not universal. 293
The largest experience as a cooperative group trial examining the role of surgery followed by adjuvant therapy in SCLC was conducted by the International Society of
Chemotherapy Lung Cancer Study Group.75 Four-year survival rates for completely resected, pathologically staged SCLC patients with N0 (n = 69), N1 (n = 58), and
N2 (n = 36) who received postoperative therapy were 60%, 36%, and 33%, respectively. Based on these studies, most authorities believe that any survival benefits of
initial surgical resection will likely be confined to patients with pathologic stage I and II disease, and conventional wisdom currently holds that surgical resection at

diagnosis in patients with N2 disease is considered experimental.
Because most available data on outcome of patients who receive surgery and postoperative chemotherapy are uncontrolled, one can only observe that the survival of
such patients is clearly better than the survival of patients with limited disease who receive chemotherapy alone and better than the reported outcome of all but a few
series of patients, most of them more recent, given chemotherapy and chest irradiation. An extremely important point concerning initial surgical resection that remains
unresolved is whether the superior outcome of more localized (i.e., stages I and II) disease in patients who undergo complete resection before initiation of
chemotherapy is attributable to the resection itself or to an inherently better prognosis in patients with a tumor burden small enough to permit resection.
Because a controlled trial to address this question cannot be done because of the impossibility of randomizing patients whose small cell carcinoma is diagnosed only
at the time of thoracotomy to undergo or not undergo surgical extirpation of their cancers, institutional data on patients with similar tumor burden after clinical staging
who do and do not proceed to thoracotomy may be relevant. In Denmark, survival of clinically operable patients is similar whether an operation with the intent of
completing resecting the tumor is performed, 316 although both these groups live much longer than other limited-stage patients. At the University of Toronto, a similar
analysis, evaluating only patients without evidence of mediastinal metastases on chest radiography or mediastinoscopy, produced similar conclusions. 66 At present,
one can only conclude that early-stage patients may benefit from surgical resection. Certainly, if a resectable SCLC is documented for the first time at thoracotomy,
we recommend the surgeon proceed with the operation if mediastinal node metastases are absent. In patients with a proven pathologic diagnosis, thoracotomy for
tumor resection in clinical stage I disease should be considered only after complete staging procedures, including mediastinoscopy or mediastinotomy, reveal no
evidence of tumor spread.
The whole question of the SCLC presenting as a solitary pulmonary nodule is somewhat controversial at this time. In a retrospective review of 408 small cell
carcinoma patients, Quoix et al. 317 found that solitary pulmonary nodule cases have a median survival of 24 months. The improved prognosis could be explained by a
number of factors, not the least of which is simply early diagnosis (lead time bias). Another possibility is that the solitary nodule may represent a fundamentally
different category of SCLC or not be small lung cancer at all. Warren et al. 318 reevaluated 50 cases of surgically resected SCLC. Thirty-four were pathologically
confirmed to be SCLC, and stage I cases had a surprisingly low 9% 2-year survival. Twelve cases, however, were reclassified as well-differentiated neuroendocrine
carcinoma, and 2-year survival of these stage I patients was 75%. The significance of these findings is presently unclear.
Chemotherapy Followed by Surgery
Surgical resection in SCLC might theoretically be more effective if performed after initial chemotherapy rather than at the time of diagnosis. Chemotherapy could be
given in an immediate attempt to eradicate occult distant metastatic disease, the major cause of treatment failure. Only patients who respond to the chemotherapy
(i.e., those most likely to benefit) would undergo thoracotomy. Comprehensive initial preoperative staging procedures could be avoided, or at least be less rigorous,
because chemotherapy would be the first treatment. Finally, after response to chemotherapy, a larger fraction of patients might be surgical candidates.
There has been a steady increase since 1984 in the fraction of cases reported to be resectable after chemotherapy response. Moreover, there is more uniformity in
presurgical staging procedures, including mediastinoscopy, used to identify patients who might benefit from postchemotherapy surgery. As shown in Table
31.3-6,295,296 and 297,302,319,320 resection rates in some series can exceed 50%, with estimated 5-year survivals in resected patients of 35% to 65%. Factors that prevent
thoracotomy include poor response to chemotherapy, poor pulmonary function or other medical problems, and patient refusal. 296 The selection criteria for potential
surgical candidates often exclude those with such adverse prognostic factors as supraclavicular adenopathy, superior vena cava syndrome, bulky mediastinal
involvement, and pleural effusions.

TABLE 31.3-6. Survival Data with Chemotherapy Followed by Surgical Resection

The approach of chemotherapy followed by surgery has led to higher survival rates compared with chemotherapy (often with chest irradiation) in patients with stage I
disease, with median survival not yet reached in patients from the Toronto study. 293 Stage II and III patients had median survivals of 69 and 52 weeks, respectively,
and significant differences in survival were noted in all resected patients compared with 19 eligible patients who did not receive surgery after the chemotherapy. The
median survival of stage II and III patients was no different, however, than in otherwise eligible patients not receiving thoracotomy (51 weeks). The best results, not
surprisingly, are found in patients with no malignant cells in the surgical specimen. 296 Some321 but not all 293 authors report absence of long-term survival in patients
with initial mediastinal node involvement who undergo postchemotherapy resection.
Whether surgery is best performed before or after chemotherapy in patients with known SCLC who are considered operable at diagnosis is not known. Survival of
patients with surgery followed by chemotherapy and with chemotherapy followed by surgery was quite similar in the Toronto study. 322 The more fundamental question,
whether postchemotherapy surgery improves survival, also cannot be regarded as settled, although in one institution survival of limited-stage patients who were
considered eligible or ineligible for eventual surgical resection should they respond to chemotherapy was similar. 296 A Lung Cancer Study Group trial in which 217
patients who responded to chemotherapy (66% of those beginning chemotherapy) were randomized to undergo or not undergo thoracotomy for attempted surgical
resection has matured. This study did not reveal survival differences, and the median survival and 2-year survival were 12 months and 20%, respectively, for both
arms.323 The results of this study, however, are difficult to interpret because only 42% of the registered patients were randomized, 10% did not receive
protocol-specified therapy, and the response rate of 65% was low compared with modern response rates with SCLC regimens. This point is emphasized when one
considers a more recent pilot study from Japan. Treatment in this pilot study consisted of induction chemotherapy with cisplatin, doxorubicin, vincristine, and
etoposide followed by surgical resection. In the 28 patients reported, the response rate was 96% and the resection rate was 95%. The 3-year survival rates were 73%
for stage I and II disease and 43% for stage IIIA disease. 324 The majority of patients in the Lung Cancer Study Group (LCSG) study were stage III (N2, T3, or both)
tumors, and, not withstanding the previously mentioned data from Japan, the role of surgery in N2 disease is of debate not only in SCLC but in non-SCLC. A trial of
similar design that concentrates on patients with early-stage SCLC disease could potentially sort out the role of surgery after induction therapy for SCLC, but as so
few patients (less than 10%) fall into this category, it is unlikely that this trial can ever be performed.

GENERAL APPROACH TO PATIENTS WITH EXTENSIVE DISEASE
For more than 90% of patients, extensive SCLC is a fatal disease within 2 years of diagnosis. Nevertheless, compared with supportive care, chemotherapy offers
substantial benefit by improving both the quality and quantity of survival within this limited window. Treatment with current chemotherapy produces an overall
response rate of 60% to 80%, and the median survival time is 7 to 12 months. Once distant metastases have been identified during staging, further radiographic
staging studies are necessary only if dictated by a clinical protocol or as necessary to evaluate a symptomatic complaint ( Fig. 31.3-2). Combination chemotherapy is
superior to any single agent tested thus far, including oral VP-16. 325,326 Treatment should be administered for a total of four to six cycles. Because many of these
patients have poor functional status and other adverse prognostic factors, less aggressive chemotherapy programs are acceptable and may provide comparable
palliation with less toxicity. Because relapse invariably occurs, enrollment on an investigational study evaluating new targets designed to impair tumor growth is
warranted if available. When disease progression does occur, additional chemotherapy should be offered to most patients with a good functional status.

FIGURE 31.3-2. Algorithm outlining management of patients with extensive disease. CR, complete response; PD, progressive disease; PR, partial response.

ROLE OF CHEST IRRADIATION IN EXTENSIVE DISEASE
Retrospective reviews of the literature demonstrate that the addition of chest irradiation plus chemotherapy for patients who have extensive-stage SCLC may reduce
the frequency of progressive disease in the thorax, but the overall response rates, median survival, and 2-year disease-free survival figures remain unchanged. 236,327
Because extensive disease patients generally achieve complete response rates of only 20% to 25% with current chemotherapy regimens and frequently relapse in
distant metastatic sites, it is logical that an additional localized form of treatment would have minimal effect on survival. Successive large studies by the Southwest
Oncology Group also confirm that although thoracic radiotherapy can substantially reduce the frequency of initial relapse at the primary tumor site, there is no
apparent effect on survival. 328,329
There have been several clinical trials that randomize patients with extensive disease to chemotherapy alone or in combination with irradiation to the chest disease as
well as to some or all sites of overt distant metastases. 243,329,330 and 331 With one more recent exception, 330 no worthwhile advantages in survival have been seen with
the addition of radiotherapy for patients with extensive disease. At present, except as part of a clinical trial, there is no indication for chest irradiation in extensive
SCLC other than symptomatic palliation.
ROLE OF CHEMOTHERAPY AND RADIATION THERAPY TO THE NEURAXIS
The therapeutic management of overt disease in the CNS with radiation therapy is discussed in detail in Chapter 43.2. For overt metastatic lesions within the CNS,
doses of 300 rad daily to doses of 3000 to 3600 Gy typically are used. Overt intracranial metastases appear to be more difficult to sterilize than intrathoracic
disease. 332 If there are one or two clinically documented intracranial lesions only, a boost to 5000 cGy may be considered if the patient has an excellent performance
status. Stereotactic treatment can also be used.
Chemotherapy is also a therapeutic option for brain metastases, perhaps because the blood–brain barrier is disrupted in the setting of macroscopic metastatic
disease. Small series of patients in whom brain metastases were present at diagnosis have been treated with standard chemotherapy regimens without radiation, and
the majority have demonstrated both clinical and radiographic improvement. 110 Chemotherapy has also been used at the time of relapse, and response rates of 33%
to 43% have been reported. 110,333,334 In previously treated patients, the response to chemotherapy in the brain appears to be comparable with the response rates in
other organs, and it is not dissimilar from the activity of irradiation, which in one series produced a partial response rate of 50%, and the median survival was 4.7
months in a series of 22 patients. 335 Thus, while brain irradiation remains the standard for patients who have not been previously irradiated, chemotherapy is a
reasonable option for patients who develop recurrent disease after prior brain radiation, particularly if active systemic disease is also present.

STRATEGIES TO OPTIMIZE CHEMOTHERAPY RESPONSE
A number of strategies have been investigated in an attempt to improve treatment outcome using the currently available drugs. These approaches include increasing
the number of active agents used in the treatment program, often by the use of cyclic alternation between two combination regimens, increasing the dose intensity,
often with the support of hematopoietic growth factors or blood progenitor cells, and weekly chemotherapy regimens, which increase the dose intensity by shortening
the interval between treatment rather than increasing the dose.
ALTERNATING CYCLIC COMBINATION CHEMOTHERAPY
The recognition of clonal heterogeneity within a tumor and the inability to develop treatment regimens that included more than four drugs due to overlapping toxicity
led to an interest in alternating chemotherapy combinations. The somatic mutation model developed by Goldie and Coldman provided a theoretical underpinning to
this approach, as this model predicted that the best probability of cure was achieved by the earliest possible introduction and most rapid alternation of all active
agents. 336,337 If two equally effective non–cross-resistant regimens were available, the model predicted that alternating between regimens every other cycle would be
more effective than alternating after every three cycles or giving one regimen continuously for five cycles before switching to the second regimen. 337
A large number of clinical trials have been conducted attempting to evaluate alternating multidrug combinations, particularly in extensive disease. 197,221,328,338,339 and 340
The EP regimen was initially tested in patients who had progressed after cyclophosphamide-based chemotherapy, suggesting that these drug combinations were
non–cross-resistant. 341 The National Cancer Institute of Canada conducted a study in which 289 patients were randomized to CAV or CAV alternating with EP. 338
Chemotherapy was given for a total of six cycles. Both the response rate (65% vs. 47%), progression-free survival, and median survival time (9.6 vs. 8.0 months)
favored the patients who had received alternating therapy. The results could be explained by the inclusion of a more active regimen (EP) within the alternating arm, an
advantage due to greater drug diversity with five effective drugs rather than three, or as support of the Goldie and Coldman concept. Roth et al. subsequently
evaluated 437 patients with extensive disease in a randomized trial comparing EP for four cycles, CAV for six cycles, or CAV alternating with EP for a total of six
cycles.197 Although there was a slight improvement in progression-free survival ( P = .052) there was no significant difference in response rate or overall survival
between the treatment arms. Nonresponders to CAV crossed over to EP were twice as likely to respond to second-line therapy than nonresponders to EP who
crossed over to CAV, although these differences were not statistically significant (28% vs. 14% for induction responders who relapsed, and 15% vs. 8% for patients
with primary resistance, respectively). An assumption of the Goldie and Coldman hypothesis is that the alternating regimens are non–cross-resistant, which is not the
case with the CAV and EP combinations as demonstrated by the modest activity when nonresponding patients are crossed over from one of these regimens to the
other. The European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer developed a regimen consisting of vincristine, ifosfamide, mesna, and carboplatin (VIMP)
that, in a randomized phase II study, appeared to be as active as CDE. 342 As important, patients who were progressing on, or were within 3 months of stopping either
CDE or VIMP, had a greater than 50% likelihood of responding to the alternate combination, indicating that a significant degree of non–cross-resistance existed
between these combinations. In a randomized trial, patients with extensive disease were treated with CDE or CDE alternating with VIMP. 339 The study was closed
after 143 patients had been registered and demonstrated no significant differences in survival. Although it did not reach its planned accrual, it still had sufficient power
to have detected a 2-month increase in median survival time with alternating therapy, had it existed. These studies, therefore, do not support the superiority of an
alternating chemotherapy combination in patients with extensive disease.
Alternating non–cross-resistant chemotherapy has also been investigated in patients with limited disease. 198,343,344,345 and 346 The National Cancer Institute of Canada
randomized 300 patients with limited disease to either CAV for three cycles followed by EP for three cycles, or CAV alternating with EP for a total of six cycles. 344 No
differences were noted in response rates, time to treatment failure, or survival. A Japanese study compared CAV to EP with alternating CAV and EP. 198 Patients with
limited disease received four cycles of chemotherapy followed by thoracic irradiation. Patients with extensive disease who responded to chemotherapy continued
treatment for 1 year. A total of 288 patients were enrolled. No differences in survival based on treatment were noted in the patients with extensive disease. In patients
with limited disease, there was improved survival, even after adjusting for other prognostic factors with the alternating regimen compared with CAV ( P = .058) or EP (P
= .032). In contrast, Urban et al. reported inferior survival with an alternating seven-drug regimen compared with a four-drug regimen, although the seven-drug
combination was less intensive based on the magnitude of myelosuppression. 346 These results suggest that an equally intensive alternating regimen is a reasonable

alternative for patients with limited disease, although the survival advantage noted in the Japanese trial has not been confirmed by another study.
Additional studies have evaluated alternating chemotherapy introduced after achieving a response to an induction regimen. 343,347,348 For example, Wolf et al.
randomized 321 patients, 135 of whom had limited disease, to treatment with ifosfamide and VP-16, to response plateau followed by CAV, or ifosfamide and VP-16
alternating with CAV. 343 A total of six cycles of chemotherapy were delivered in each arm. No difference in outcome was noted based on treatment arm in either
limited or extensive disease. Other studies have compared alternating regimens that were designed based on the suggestion of in vitro synergy349 or have compared
an alternating multidrug combination with a different standard regimen. 350 For example, a German multicenter trial demonstrated that an alternating eight-drug
regimen was slightly superior to CAV. 350 In sum, these studies may be viewed as suggesting a modest advantage for regimens that introduce a greater diversity of
active drugs into treatment rather than a test of the Goldie-Coldman hypothesis.
DOSE INTENSIFICATION
In experimental models, numerous chemotherapy drugs display log-linear or near linear dose-response curves. 351,352 Increasing the dose of chemotherapy delivered
has been demonstrated to improve survival in a number of clinical settings. 353,354 and 355 In SCLC, several approaches to increase dose intensity have been evaluated.
These include dose intensification without or with hematopoietic growth factor support, dose intensification with marrow or peripheral blood stem cell support, and
compression of the time in which chemotherapy is delivered using a weekly schedule.
Hryniuk and Bush developed a methodology that expresses dose intensity as the drug dose administered per meter squared per week. 356 Limitations of this method
include the assumption that all drugs and schedules of administration are therapeutically equivalent. Nevertheless, this method has been used to demonstrate a
positive correlation between dose intensity and treatment outcome in advanced breast cancer and ovarian cancer. 356,357 In SCLC, a retrospective multivariate analysis
of 131 patients suggested that modest increases in the dose intensity of cisplatin and cyclophosphamide in a four-drug regimen produced better survival. 358 In
contrast, analysis of 60 clinical trials using this methodology found limited and conflicting correlations between dose intensity, response rates, and median survival. 359
Several randomized trials have attempted to determine whether a modest increase in dose intensity improves survival in this disease. 360,361,362,363,364 and 365 In a small
trial comparing different doses of a regimen consisting of cyclophosphamide (500 vs. 1000 mg/m 2), lomustine (50 vs. 100 mg/m2), and methotrexate (50 vs. 100
mg/m2), survival was inferior in the lower dose arm. 360 Preliminary findings of a cooperative group study in which the dose of cyclophosphamide was increased from
700 to 1500 mg/m2 in a regimen that also included lomustine and methotrexate also demonstrated improved survival in the patients treated with the more intensive
regimen.361 These early studies confirm that the use of lower than standard doses of drugs can compromise survival in chemotherapy-sensitive disease.
More recently, several investigators evaluated whether increasing the dose of drugs beyond the dose used in current regimens improves survival. Most of these
studies were conducted in patients with extensive disease 364,365,366,367 and 368 (Table 31.3-7). A trial comparing dose-intensified with standard dose CAV 364 and a study
comparing high-dose with standard-dose EP 365 identified increased toxicity without improvement in survival. Neither of these studies used a hematopoietic growth
factor in the intensified arm. Standard doses of cyclophosphamide, 4'-epidoxorubicin, etoposide, and cisplatin given for six cycles have been compared with an
intensified schedule in which three of the four drugs were given at a 50% higher dose for four cycles. 368 This study demonstrated a shorter response duration and
survival in the dose-intensified arm. Although the planned cumulative doses of chemotherapy were equivalent for three of the drugs, the intensified arm actually
received a lower total dose because of toxicity. The only study that has suggested that the administration of higher drug doses within a standard regimen was
beneficial was conducted in patients with limited disease. This French study randomized 105 patients with limited disease to a higher dose of cisplatin (100 vs. 80
mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide (1200 vs. 1000 mg/m2) in a regimen that also included doxorubicin and VP-16. 363 The increased doses of chemotherapy were only
given on the first cycle. At 2 years, both the progression-free (28% vs. 8%) and the overall survival (43% vs. 26%) were improved in the higher dose arm. These
studies indicate that a modest intensification of the dose of the commonly used agents does not improve outcome for patients with extensive disease and may even
compromise survival by producing excessive toxicity. Whether a modest increase in the dose of drugs improves the outcome of patients with limited disease should be
confirmed, and this question should probably be addressed in randomized trials that include either growth factor or stem cell support to maximize the delivered dose.

TABLE 31.3-7. Randomized Trials Evaluating Dose Intensity in Small Cell Lung Cancer

A number of other studies have evaluated whether shortening the interval between chemotherapy cycles improves survival. In patients with extensive disease,
delivering CAVE on days 1 and 8 of the first few courses of chemotherapy did not appear promising. 366 A multicenter study randomized 300 patients to six cycles of
vincristine, ifosfamide, carboplatin, and VP-16 delivered every 4 weeks or every 3 weeks. 369 Most of the patients included in the study had limited disease. In the
group receiving chemotherapy every 3 weeks, the delivered dose intensity was increased by 26% over the entire treatment program compared with the group treated
every 4 weeks. Both the median survival (443 vs. 351 days) and the 2-year survival rate (33% vs. 18%) were better in the intensified arm ( P = .0014), even after
adjustment in a multivariate analysis. Another multicenter study also explored the importance of the interval between treatment cycles by randomizing 403 patients,
77% of whom had limited disease, to cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and VP-16 delivered on an every-3-week schedule or on an every-2-week schedule. Patients
treated every 2 weeks received G-CSF support. 370 The delivered dose intensity was 34% greater on the every-2-week schedule, and both the complete remission rate
and the overall survival were better in this group. Improved survival was observed in both patients with limited and extensive-stage disease treated every 2 weeks.
These studies suggest that for some standard regimens, compression of the treatment cycle, if this can be accomplished without a significant increase in toxicity, may
be an effective means to improve survival.
Hematopoietic Growth Factors
G-CSF and granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) are members of a group of glycoproteins that stimulate the production and maturation of
hematopoietic progenitor cells and regulate the function of mature blood cells. 371 Two randomized, placebo-controlled trials demonstrated that the use of G-CSF as an
adjuvant to CAE chemotherapy significantly reduced the duration of neutropenia, incidence of febrile neutropenia, and the use of hospital resources. 372,373 A decision
analysis based on the results of one of these trials concluded that the routine use of G-CSF led to a net decrease in the total cost per treatment cycle based on billed
charges, but was associated with an increased cost based on actual provider costs or payments by the U.S. Medicare system. 374 Moreover, this analysis was
extrapolated from the rate of hospitalization due to febrile neutropenia during the first cycle of chemotherapy, which in this study was 55% in the placebo arm and 26%
in the group treated with G-CSF. Another decision analysis suggested that from an economic perspective a rate of hospitalization greater than or equal to 40% was
necessary to justify the routine inclusion of G-CSF into a chemotherapy regimen. 375 These conclusions are consistent with the 1996 guidelines of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology, which recommended primary prophylaxis (G-CSF administration concomitant with the first chemotherapy cycle) only when the expected
incidence of febrile neutropenia exceeded 40%. 376 A review by Nichols et al., however, concluded that the incidence of febrile neutropenia after conventional
chemotherapy for SCLC was approximately 18%.377 The differences in the reported rates of febrile neutropenia between studies was related both to the chemotherapy
regimen used and also to the diligence with which fever was sought and with how febrile neutropenia was defined. Two analyses that compared the use of G-CSF as
secondary prophylaxis (G-CSF administered with all subsequent courses of chemotherapy if febrile neutropenia occurred on the previous cycle) suggested that this
approach was more costly than a strategy of reducing the dose of the chemotherapy by 25%. 377,378

Maintaining the dose of chemotherapy with growth factor support, rather than reducing or delaying the dose because of hematologic toxicity, would be appropriate if
this translated into improved treatment efficacy. The results of studies designed to determine whether hematopoietic growth factors can increase the delivered dose
intensity have been mixed. 368,369 and 370,379,380 and 381 A study that randomized a total of 65 patients to vincristine, ifosfamide, carboplatin, and VP-16 demonstrated that
the use of G-CSF as an adjunct significantly improved the delivered dose intensity, although there was no difference in the incidence of febrile neutropenia or the
days of hospitalization. 380 In this study, there was no difference in median survival between the arms, although there was a suggestion that long-term survival may be
improved with the intensified dose delivery. A subsequent larger trial randomized patients to treatment with this regimen at fixed treatment intervals of every 3 or 4
weeks.369 In a second randomization, patients were given GM-CSF or placebo following each chemotherapy cycle. Survival was improved for patients treated every 3
weeks, but the addition of GM-CSF did not reduce the incidence or the duration of febrile neutropenia, nor was there any difference in survival between the patients
who received GM-CSF or placebo. With the use of G-CSF, treatment with standard doses of doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and VP-16 are feasible every 2 weeks.
A randomized trial comparing doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and VP-16 given every 2 weeks with G-CSF or every 3 weeks without the growth factor identified
improved survival with the every-2-week schedule. 370 Treatment with intravenous antibiotics was similar in the two arms. Although the intensified group did require
more transfusions of red cells and platelets, overall quality of life measured by a symptom scale was comparable between the groups.
Two studies evaluated G-CSF as an adjunct to weekly chemotherapy programs. 379,381 In one trial, G-CSF did not increase the delivered dose intensity, 379 whereas in
the other study both dose intensity and survival were improved in the arm that included G-CSF support. 381 A subsequent trial, however, compared this latter regimen
with G-CSF support to a standard chemotherapy regimen that was given every 3 weeks and found no survival advantage with the intensified program. 382 An attempt to
use G-CSF to increase the dose of three myelotoxic drugs in a four-drug regimen by 50% was not feasible and resulted in increased marrow toxicity, a reduction in
cumulative drug dose received, and inferior survival. 368 Inclusion of GM-CSF in a combined modality program that consisted of EP plus concurrent radiation in patients
with limited disease demonstrated that although the neutrophil nadirs were increased in the arm receiving GM-CSF, these patients developed more episodes of febrile
neutropenia requiring intravenous antibiotics and hospitalization. 383 Serious thrombocytopenia and blood transfusions were also increased in the group receiving
GM-CSF.
These data suggest that the inclusion of a hematopoietic growth factor within a chemotherapy regimen may permit a modest escalation in the dose intensity of some
regimens, but not others. Whether this dose intensification is clinically meaningful is a separate issue, and broad generalizations are difficult. For example, although it
appears that administration of doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and VP-16 every 2 weeks rather than every 3 weeks improves survival for patients with favorable
prognostic features, 370 a program delivering chemotherapy every week was not better than EP alternating with CAV every 3 weeks in patients with extensive
disease. 381 In this latter example, multiple variables (drug doses, drug diversity, patient tolerance) differed between the treatment arms and may have contributed to
the observed lack of benefit with the weekly dose-intensive treatment regimen. Another issue that has not been resolved is whether patients who are at higher risk of
toxicity due to age or other adverse prognostic factors, and patients who have developed febrile neutropenia on a previous treatment cycle, are better managed by
reducing the dose of standard chemotherapy regimens or by adding a myeloid growth factor so that standard regimens can be given at full dose. Thus, dose,
treatment interval, drug diversity, and patient selection are all parameters that define clinical outcome. Meaningful improvements in disease control beyond that
produced by the programs outlined in Table 31.3-4 using the currently available cytotoxic chemotherapy drugs may still be possible, and this remains an appropriate
area of study.
Marrow and Peripheral Blood Stem Cell Transplantation
Dose intensification with high-dose chemotherapy, supported by stem cells collected from the peripheral blood or bone marrow, has provided a survival advantage to
select groups of patients with hematologic malignancies. 353,354 and 355 In contrast, reviews of the efficacy of high-dose therapy in adult solid tumors have concluded that
no role for this approach has been established, even in the diseases most sensitive to chemotherapy and radiation. 384,385 and 386 However, the efficacy of high-dose
therapy in SCLC has been evaluated in a relatively limited number of patients when compared with other diseases, such as breast cancer. Many of the earliest studies
in SCLC enrolled patients with relapsed or chemotherapy-resistant disease. Although response rates were higher than would be anticipated with additional standard
doses of chemotherapy, response durations were brief (ranging from 2 to 8 months) and the median survival was often less than 4 months. 387,388 and 389
Some subsequent studies evaluated high-dose therapy as an early component of treatment in newly diagnosed patients. 390,391,392 and 393 With this strategy, patients
received little or no induction chemotherapy before the high-dose regimen. It was hoped that by avoiding exposure to multiple cycles of conventional chemotherapy
the risk of developing drug resistance in the tumor could be reduced. Response durations and survival, however, were comparable with that achieved with standard
chemotherapy.394
A more commonly applied approach has been to use high-dose therapy as late intensification after standard treatment. 387,395,396,397,398,399,400 and 401 Theoretic support for
this strategy is provided by the mathematical model proposed by Norton and Simon, which predicts that as the tumor volume is reduced relative resistance to
chemotherapy develops.402 These studies differ in the number of cycles and type of regimen used for induction, the extent of tumor response required before
high-dose consolidation, the composition of the high-dose regimen, and whether radiation, surgery, or both were included as part of the treatment program.
The only reported phase III trial administered five cycles of induction therapy and then randomized patients who achieved a good response to consolidation with
cyclophosphamide, carmustine, and etoposide with bone marrow support, or one additional cycle of conventional doses of these same drugs. 398 A total of 101 patients
were registered, and 45 patients were randomized, which included 13 patients who initially had extensive disease. Both the complete remission rate and the median
relapse-free survival ( P = .002) were superior in the high-dose arm. Although the median survival time was improved (68 vs. 55 weeks), this was not statistically
significant ( P = .13), and long-term survival was achieved in only 2 of the 23 patients treated with the high-dose regimen. A criticism of this study has been that
thoracic irradiation was not included as part of the treatment plan, and in most patients the site of initial relapse was confined to the chest. Accordingly, many groups
that have continued to investigate consolidative high-dose therapy have used a multimodality program. For example, the Southwest Oncology Group treated 58
patients with limited disease with induction chemotherapy and radiation followed by consolidation with high-dose cyclophosphamide and autologous marrow
support. 403 Only 21 patients received the consolidation but nine achieved long-term disease-free remissions, and the median survival of the patients receiving
consolidation was 27 months.
At the Dana Farber Cancer Institute, patients responding to conventional chemotherapy have been treated with high doses of carmustine, cyclophosphamide, and
cisplatin along with stem cell or marrow support followed by thoracic and prophylactic cranial irradiation. The initial report described 19 patients, and this has been
updated to include 36 patients. 394,399 With the period of observation after completion of the high-dose therapy ranging from 21 months to 9 years, 52% of these
patients with limited disease have remained in remission. The majority of patients (81%) were in complete remission or near complete remission at the time they
received high-dose consolidation, and, compared with patients transplanted in a partial remission, maximal cytoreduction with induction therapy appears to have been
an important prognostic factor for long-term survival. Despite treatment with 50- to 60-Gy radiation to the chest, approximately one-half of the relapses occurred at the
primary site.
Fetscher et al. have described a program whereby patients received two to four cycles of induction chemotherapy followed by dose-intensive VP-16, ifosfamide,
carboplatin, and epirubicin along with peripheral blood stem cell support. 401 Additional locoregional therapy consisted of surgical resection or thoracic irradiation.
Complete responders received prophylactic cranial irradiation. Over a 6-year period, 100 patients (67 with extensive disease and 32 with limited disease) were treated
with this approach. Only 19 of the 33 patients with limited disease proceeded to high-dose therapy. Excluding the favorable subset of patients with early-stage
disease in which complete surgical resection was performed, 5-year survival was 33%. 401 Leyvraz et al. have shown that multiple cycles of high-dose therapy can be
given within a cooperative group. 404 In this study, treatment consisted of mobilization with epirubicin, collection of stem cells, and then three cycles of dose-intensified
ICE given at 4-week intervals. Compared with standard doses of ICE, a two- to threefold escalation of each chemotherapy drug was feasible. The median duration of
severe leukopenia was 4 days, and there was no evidence of cumulative toxicity with the multiple cycles of high-dose treatment. This program is now being compared
with standard therapy in patients with a favorable prognosis in a randomized trial.
In sum, high-dose consolidative therapy has been evaluated in a selected population that is younger and healthier than the general population of patients with SCLC.
Even in this more favorable subset, it is not clear whether survival is better than would have been expected with conventional treatment. Treatment-related
complications have been reduced with the substitution of peripheral blood stems cells for bone marrow and with improvements in supportive care, but even the most
recent series report treatment-related mortality that exceeds the 2% to 5% mortality currently expected with high-dose therapy. This may be the result of more
comorbid illness, even in the best subset of patients with SCLC, or it may simply be due to the small numbers of patients included in the reported series. In addition,
among the technical issues that need to be clarified is whether tumor cell contamination of the harvested stem cell product is a significant cause of treatment failure,
as marrow involvement can be documented by immunocytochemistry in a substantial minority of patients with limited disease considered to be in a

chemotherapy-induced remission by routine histologic examination. 405 Several randomized studies are evaluating the role of high-dose consolidation in SCLC and
should help define whether this approach, as currently practiced, is of value in this disease.
WEEKLY DOSE-INTENSIVE CHEMOTHERAPY REGIMENS
Dose intensity is defined both by the dose and the time interval required to deliver the dose. 356 Therefore, shortening the time interval between chemotherapy cycles
is an alternative to increasing the dose as a means of achieving greater dose intensity. Some groups have developed weekly regimens that use six or seven
drugs. 406,407 and 408 For example, the Southwestern Oncology Group developed a six-drug program that included doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and
leucovorin, vincristine, VP-16, and cisplatin. 406 Among the 48 patients with extensive disease, the complete response rate was 38% and the median survival time was
11.4 months. A European group used a fairly comparable six-drug regimen in which the most significant differences were the inclusion of teniposide, a lower dose of
methotrexate (30 mg/m2 instead of 200 mg/m2), and a shorter treatment interval (12 weeks instead of 16 weeks). 407 In this study, the complete response rate for
patients with extensive disease was 9.7%, and the median survival for this group was 7 months. These differences highlighted the importance of patient selection in
the resultant outcome and the necessity for randomized trials to evaluate new treatment approaches in SCLC.
Three weekly programs have been tested in randomized multiinstitutional settings. 382,408,409 A multidrug combination developed by Sculier et al., which included seven
drugs, was compared with standard treatment of CAV.408 The planned duration of treatment was 18 weeks in both arms. A total of 215 patients were enrolled that
included 120 patients with extensive disease and 95 patients with limited disease. Overall, there was no difference in median survival (49 vs. 43 weeks) or in 2-year
survival rates (8.5% vs. 7.9%) between the treatment arms, and analysis by stage of disease failed to identify any difference in outcome based on treatment. A second
randomized trial evaluated a regimen consisting of EP alternating on a weekly basis with ifosfamide plus doxorubicin. This was compared with a standard
chemotherapy regimen consisting of alternating 3-week cycles of CAV and EP. 409 Patients who achieved at least a partial response to chemotherapy received thoracic
irradiation, and some patients also received prophylactic cranial irradiation. Included in this study were 438 patients, the majority of whom had limited disease. No
differences in either median or 2-year survival rates were evident. In both of these randomized studies, myelosuppression was a dominant side effect, and the actual
dose intensity delivered was a lower percentage of the planned dose in the weekly treatment arms. However, treatment-related mortality was low, and no worse, with
weekly treatment than with standard therapy.
A more intensive weekly program that included cisplatin, vincristine, doxorubicin, and VP-16 (CODE) delivered higher doses of chemotherapy by infusing
myelosuppressive and relatively nonmyelosuppressive drugs on alternate weeks and by using an aggressive supportive regimen consisting of corticosteroids,
gastroprotective agents, and prophylactic antibiotics. In the initial report, 19 of 48 (40%) patients with extensive disease attained a complete remission, and the 2-year
survival rate was 30%. 410 In a small randomized trial, a Japanese group reported that G-CSF support improved both the delivered dose intensity and the median
survival when CODE was used to treat patients with extensive disease. 381 They subsequently compared CODE plus G-CSF with a standard regimen consisting of
alternate 3-week cycles of CAV and EP.382 There were 220 patients with extensive disease enrolled in this study. Both the overall response rate and the complete
remission rate (15%) were similar in the two treatment arms. The median survival time (11.6 vs. 10.9 months) and 2-year survival rates (11.7% vs. 8.5%) were also
comparable. The incidence of neutropenic fever was significantly higher, and there were four toxic deaths in the weekly treatment arm. In North America, a
randomized intergroup study compared CODE with alternating CAV and EP over 18 weeks. 411 A total of 219 patients with extensive disease with a good performance
status were enrolled. Although the response rate was improved (87% vs. 70%) with the weekly program, the response duration and median survival were equivalent
between the two treatment arms. Moreover, febrile neutropenia was more common in the patients treated with CODE, and there were more toxic deaths (8.2% vs.
1.0%) compared with the standard treatment arm. In aggregate, these studies demonstrate that weekly chemotherapy programs offer no advantage to standard
treatment given every 3 weeks, and if given at the maximum tolerated dose, weekly chemotherapy is significantly more toxic than standard therapy.

MANAGEMENT OF SMALL CELL LUNG CANCER IN THE ELDERLY AND INFIRM
At diagnosis, 25% to 40% of patients with SCLC are 70 years old or older. 412,413,414 and 415 Compared with younger patients, the elderly have a poorer performance
status and more comorbidity.412,413 They are at higher risk for complications from intensive treatment. 88,90,416 As a result, many physicians treat elderly patients less
aggressively. For example, one retrospective review management for 20 of 123 (16%) elderly patients consisted only of radiation therapy, and another 23 patients
(19%) received only supportive care. 412 Another review of the management of 312 patients diagnosed between 1985 and 1991 showed that in the management of the
elderly population, 23% of the patients received only supportive care, and in the subset of patients with limited disease only 43% received both chemotherapy and
radiation. 413 In contrast, in patients between the ages of 60 and 69 less than 10% of the patients received supportive care and 65% of the patients with limited disease
received combined modality therapy.
When chemotherapy is given to elderly patients, it is usually given at attenuated doses and often for fewer cycles. 84,412,413,415 In one study, the median nadir white
blood cell count was 2800/µL and the nadir platelet count was 198,000/µL. 412 Patients who are treated with chemotherapy derive a survival benefit despite attenuation
of both the dose and duration of treatment, and in some series the response and survival for the elderly have been comparable with younger patients. 84,412,413
Few elderly patients have been included in clinical trials, and those who have been enrolled are among a minority with less comorbidity and better functional
status.413,415 As a result, extrapolation of the published data for standard therapies to the general population of elderly patients may be inaccurate. Consequently,
several chemotherapy programs have been developed for the elderly and for patients unfit for participation in standard therapy protocols that aim to optimize palliation
with acceptable risks. One approach has been to use monotherapy with the epipodophyllotoxins. 144,417,418 VP-16 can be given orally, making it particularly attractive in
the palliative setting. 155 In a study of 35 elderly patients, one-third of whom had poor performance status, a 5-day course of oral VP-16 every 4 weeks produced a
response rate of 71% and survival comparable with the results with combination treatment in a younger population. 417 The Medical Research Council designed a trial
comparing oral VP-16, 50 mg twice daily for 10 days, with standard combination chemotherapy consisting of either VP-16 and vincristine or CAV. 325 In each arm,
chemotherapy was repeated every 3 weeks for a total of four cycles. The median age enrolled in this study was 67 years, and 38% of the patients had a performance
status equal to 3 to 4. The study was prematurely stopped after an interim analysis that showed inferior survival in the patients treated with VP-16 monotherapy.
Hematologic toxicity was also worse with oral VP-16, and there were 17 deaths during the first month of treatment in this arm compared with ten deaths on the control
group. A second British trial comparing oral VP-16 given at 100 mg twice daily for 5 days with VP-16 and cisplatin alternating with CAV in poor-prognosis patients was
also stopped early because of inferior progression-free and overall survival in the VP-16 monotherapy arm. 326 Moreover, palliation of symptoms and quality of life
were better with combination chemotherapy. Based on the results of these two trials, monotherapy with oral VP-16 cannot be recommended as adequate treatment for
patients with SCLC.
An alternative approach for providing palliative chemotherapy in Britain was the delivery of chemotherapy as needed to palliate symptoms, rather than at fixed 3- or
4-week treatment intervals. A total of 300 patients were randomized to receive CEV every 3 weeks for a total of eight cycles or to an as-needed treatment program. 419
In this arm, patients were evaluated at 3-week intervals after the first treatment cycle and were retreated only if they were symptomatic or had evidence of tumor
growth while not receiving treatment. Patients randomized to receive chemotherapy as needed had a median interval between cycles of 42 days and received only
50% as much total chemotherapy as the patients treated on the fixed schedule. Although the median survival times were equivalent, better symptomatic control was
achieved with the fixed interval treatment.
Another investigation of less intensive therapy compared the ECMV regimen with EV. 420 Three cycles were planned for each arm because a prior study comparing
three and six cycles of ECMV showed equivalent survival. 230 A total of 310 patients with extensive disease or limited disease and poor performance status were
registered. The response rates and survival were comparable between the two arms. 420 There were twice as many early fatalities (death during the first treatment
cycle) in patients receiving the four-drug ECMV regimen (37 vs. 18). Nevertheless, ECMV produced better palliation of symptoms than did EV. Another study
compared a regimen of EP alternating with CAV every 3 weeks at standard doses with EP alternating with CAV every 10 to 11 days at 50% of the standard dose. 421
Response and survival were comparable with both schedules, and toxicity was not reduced with the more frequent administration of lower doses.
Several other less intensive regimens have been designed for high-risk and elderly patients that use lower doses of chemotherapy than are used in standard
regimens and report reasonable response rates and survival with less toxicity. 414,418,422,423,424,425,426 and 427 In a study of 75 elderly patients with reasonably good
performance status and limited disease, two cycles of carboplatin and prolonged oral VP-16 were given with concurrent hyperfractionated radiation, and a median
survival of 15 months and a 5-year survival of 13% were observed. 428 In 55 patients with limited disease unfit for standard treatment, Murray et al. administered one
cycle of CAV followed by one cycle of VP-16 and cisplatin along with 20 to 30 Gy of concurrent thoracic irradiation. 414 The complete remission rate was 51%, and 28%
of the patients were alive and disease-free at 2 years. This same group of investigators have also reported a series of 66 patients older than 65 years and with a

performance status of 3 who were treated with a four-drug regimen consisting of attenuated doses of cisplatin, doxorubicin, vincristine, and VP-16 for a total of four
cycles.427 Concurrent thoracic irradiation was given to patients with limited disease and selected patients with extensive disease. The delivered total dose was 80% of
the intended dose. Survival at 2 years was 38% and 18% for patients with limited and extensive disease, respectively. Hospitalization was necessary for 42% of
patients receiving combined modality treatment and for 15% of the patients treated with chemotherapy alone. There was just one septic death. Comparison of these
single-institution phase II trials with the outcomes observed in controlled cooperative group studies is difficult. Nevertheless, it highlights the importance of developing
chemotherapy programs of sufficient intensity to achieve optimal palliation, with manageable toxicity, in elderly and high-risk patients.

BIOLOGIC RESPONSE MODIFIERS AND OTHER TREATMENTS
Although cytotoxic therapy is effective in reducing the disease burden in SCLC, it is rarely curative. The immune response to SCLC appears to be modest, as
evidenced by a lack of association with tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in tumor biopsies. Efforts to augment the immune response have included treatment with
nonspecific immunomodulators, therapy with interferons and interleukin-2, and active immunization with antiidiotypic antibodies. Studies that have evaluated bacille
Calmette-Guérin, the methanol-extracted residue of bacille Calmette-Guérin, or thymosin fraction V, a soluble product of calf thymus thought to reconstitute immune
function, have failed to demonstrate a beneficial effect on response rate, response duration, or survival. 429,430,431,432 and 433
The expression of major histocompatability complex antigens is reduced in SCLC, which may play a role in this tumor's ability to escape immune surveillance. 434,435 and
436 Interferon has been shown to increase the expression of major histocompatability complex antigens on SCLC cells both in vitro and in vivo.437,438 Small studies in
newly diagnosed patients, however, treated with either interferon-a or interferon-g showed a total absence of activity. 439,440 and 441 Because immune augmentation may
be most effective in patients with low-disease burden, larger studies have evaluated interferons as maintenance treatment in patients responding to chemotherapy.
Mattson et al. conducted a study in which patients responding to induction chemotherapy were randomized to a maintenance chemotherapy, natural interferon-a, or
observation. 442 Although there were no differences overall, a subset analysis showed improved survival for patients with limited disease who received interferon.
Another study that administered interferon-a both along with the induction chemotherapy and as a maintenance reported a higher complete response rate and
improved median survival. 443 Due to poor accrual, however, the study was stopped prematurely and only 77 patients were evaluable. Two other randomized trials, one
in which interferon-a was included both as part of the induction and maintenance regimen, and a second, cooperative group trial in which interferon-a maintenance
was evaluated in patients with limiteddisease who had responded to induction chemotherapy, 444,445 showed no survival advantage. Interferon-g maintenance therapy
in patients with complete or near complete remissions has also been evaluated in two randomized trials. 446,447 Although the dose and schedule selected from one trial
was confirmed to be biologically active as demonstrated by a significant increase in the expression of HLA-DR and Fc receptors on monocytes, 448 neither study
produced an effect on survival. In addition to the typical influenza-like side effects and myelosuppression, a few of the studies in lung cancer have suggested that the
interferons may enhance radiation-induced lung injury, and there was at least one case of fatal pneumonitis. 447
High-dose interleukin-2 has also been evaluated in a group of patients with extensive disease who experienced less than a complete remission to induction
chemotherapy.449 The overall response rate was 21%, but the toxicity was severe, and treatment was discontinued in 11 of 24 patients because of life-threatening side
effects. These studies indicate that at the present time treatment with cytokine therapy has not established a role in the management of this disease.
SCLC displays a variety of markers of neuroendocrine differentiation that could serve as targets for biologic agents. Neural cell adhesion molecule is one such target
to which an immunotoxin, consisting of a murine monoclonal antibody linked to a modified ricin molecule, has been developed. In a dose-escalation trial, 1 of 21
patients had a partial response that lasted 3 months. 450 In an alternate strategy, a monoclonal antibody directed against gastrin-releasing peptide was developed with
the intent of interrupting this autocrine growth loop. One of 12 evaluable patients had a complete remission that lasted 6 months. 451 The patients treated with these
two biologic agents all had disease resistant to chemotherapy. The activity noted is encouraging for further clinical development.
The variable region of an antibody mirrors its antigen. Therefore, a second antibody raised against this variable region structurally mimics the original antigen.
Infusion of this second antiidiotypic antibody often induces a more effective immune response than does infusion of the antigen of interest. Thus, a limitation of
monoclonal antibody therapy, the development of a host immune response to the infused mouse protein [human antimouse antibody (HAMA) reaction] can be
exploited by infusing a mouse antiidiotypic antibody to augment immunity to antigens preferentially expressed on tumor cells. An antiidiotypic antibody, BEC2, which
resembles a ganglioside expressed on SCLC cells, has been tested in 15 patients who had responded to conventional chemotherapy. 452 Side effects of the
vaccination were modest and consisted primarily of skin reactions to the bacille Calmette-Guérin adjuvant. The median progression-free survival was 11 months and
longer than 47 months for patients with extensive and limited disease, respectively. Comparison with an historic matched control group suggested that both
progression-free and overall survival were substantially improved. Antiidiotypic antibodies are being developed that resemble other poorly immunogenetic antigens
expressed by SCLC cells. Because the expression of any one of these antigens is variable, a polypeptide vaccine containing multiple immunogenetic antigens will
probably be needed to effectively target every SCLC cell.
A potential role of the coagulation system in the propagation of cancer has been recognized for many years. Thrombin is generated in situ and may function as a
growth factor for the tumor.453 Tumors produce urokinase-like enzymes that may participate in the degradation of the extracellular matrix. 454 Initial studies evaluating
whether the addition of warfarin to the chemotherapy regimen improved survival yielded mixed results. 455,456 In a randomized trial involving a total of 50 patients, the
addition of warfarin significantly improved both progression-free and overall survival. 456 In a larger cooperative group study, patients receiving coumadin with
chemotherapy had a higher response rate (P = .012) and a 6-week improvement in median progression-free and overall survival, although the difference for the latter
two end points was not statistically significant. 457 The addition of 1 g/d of aspirin, a dose sufficient to inhibit platelet aggregation, failed to demonstrate a benefit. 458 A
subsequent trial by the same group of investigators demonstrated that the subcutaneous administration of unfractionated heparin at therapeutic doses given during
the first 5 weeks of chemotherapy resulted in a higher complete remission rate and improved survival. 453

TREATMENT AT RELAPSE
The majority of patients with SCLC relapse within a year of initial therapy, and many are candidates for second-line treatment 193,197,198,342,459,460 and 461,467,468 (Table
31.3-8). Factors that predict the likelihood of response to subsequent chemotherapy include the interval between completion of induction and relapse, the extent of
tumor regression achieved with the induction regimen, and the composition of the induction program. 462 For example, the activity of teniposide in previously treated
patients was 53% if the chemotherapy-free interval was greater than 2.6 months, compared with 12% if the treatment-free interval was shorter. 463 As a consequence,
sensitive relapse is often, and somewhat arbitrarily, defined as a chemotherapy-free interval of greater than or equal to 3 months. In patients in sensitive relapse,
response rates to second-line therapy often exceed 50%, and any chemotherapy regimen active in SCLC appears to be effective, including the drug regimen that was
initially used for induction. 152,464,465 and 466

TABLE 31.3-8. Activity of Combination Chemotherapy Regimens at Relapse

For patients who relapse early, both the regimen used for second-line and the induction regimen may be important in determining the likelihood of a secondary
response.341 For example, in patients treated with CAV as the induction regimen, second-line treatment EP produces a response rate of approximately 35%. 193,459 Only

approximately one-half as many patients (15%) who experience early relapse after EP induction respond to CAV as a second-line therapy. 460 In some of the
randomized trials that have compared CAV with EP, patients not responding to initial therapy (primarily refractory) and crossed over to the alternative regimen were
more likely to respond to EP than to CAV, although in this more resistant group of patients the response rates to second-line treatment overall were lower and were
15% to 23% for EP and approximately 8% for CAV.197,198
Drugs that have been reported to be active as second-line agents include carboplatin, ifosfamide, and paclitaxel (Taxol), although the reported response rates have
been variable, reflecting the small, heterogeneous populations tested. For example, carboplatin in combination with ifosfamide or paclitaxel has been reported to be
active in more than 50% of the patients relapsing early after induction with CDE. 342,467 In contrast, in another study zero of ten patients resistant to cisplatin,
doxorubicin, and VP-16 responded to carboplatin, ifosfamide, and vincristine. 461 Furthermore, the survival from the start of second-line therapy is rarely more than 4 to
6 months. More dose-intensive therapy with a weekly regimen has been reported to produce a 30% 1-year survival rate in patients with good performance status in
sensitive relapse. 469 These studies indicate that for patients with a reasonable performance status second-line therapy with a moderately intensive drug regimen is
appropriate. The likelihood of a secondary response may be better in patients who have not previously been treated with a platinum agent. 470 Symptomatic sites of
disease can frequently be managed with radiation.
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF PERSISTENT OR RECURRENT LOCAL DISEASE
Histologically mixed disease is a not an uncommon occurrence when SCLC is resected after chemotherapy. Non–small cell lung and mixed small and non–small cell
elements occur in 5% to 35% of specimens. 296,302,319,471 Whether these pathologic findings may be attributable to selection by chemotherapy of non–small cell
elements present in the original tumor, histologic changes induced by chemotherapy, the presence of a second lung cancer, or incorrect initial diagnosis is not
resolved. Nevertheless, surgery may prove therapeutically efficacious if the only residual cancer is non–small cell in type. Because of the frequency of mixed
histologies at the time of resection after chemotherapy, the Toronto group reported a retrospective analysis of salvage surgery in limited SCLC. 322 Twenty-eight
patients underwent thoracotomy after lack of response to induction chemotherapy or relapse after initial response. A resection rate of 82% was possible in this
selected group, and ten patients (36%) had mixed elements histologically. Projected 5-year survival is 23%. We believe it is important to verify these findings in other
patients who are prospectively identified by specific selection criteria before recommending such an approach.

TREATMENT OUTCOME AND LONG-TERM SURVIVAL
Although current therapy has a significant effect on the natural history of this disease, the number of patients cured remains frustratingly small ( Table 31.3-9). Patients
are at greatest risk of dying during the first 24 months after diagnosis; this risk declines between years 2 and 3 and is further reduced beyond the third year. In the
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results database, overall survival at 2, 3, and 5 years was 11.6%, 7.1%, and 4.6%, respectively. 472 In an analysis of 2196
patients treated on clinical trials in Britain, the hazard fell by a factor of 10 after 3 years but was still approximately seven times that of the general population. 473
Excessive mortality in long-term survivors is due both to late relapse with SCLC and to the development of second primary tumors. Late relapse occurs in
approximately 10% of patients who are free of disease at 5 years. 474 Second primary tumors pose an even greater risk than relapse in long-term survivors. Overall,
the relative risk of a second primary tumor in survivors beyond 2 years is increased by 3.5-fold. 475 Most of these second primary tumors are non-SCLC or other
malignancies of the upper aerodigestive tract, indicating that field cancerization due to tobacco exposure has occurred. 475,476 The risk of a second primary tumor
increases significantly over time, and continued smoking after the initial diagnosis of SCLC, radiation to the chest, and treatment with alkylating agents magnifies this
risk.475 For example, the risk of a second lung cancer in patients who continue to smoke was approximately fourfold more than those who stopped before the
diagnosis of SCLC and twofold greater in patients who received chest irradiation compared with nonirradiated patients. The cumulative risk of a second lung cancer
was 32% at 12 years and continued to increase beyond that time point. Consequently, patients successfully treated for SCLC constitute an extraordinarily high-risk
group and deserve close medical follow-up. This population would be appropriate for studies evaluating new screening technologies, such as spiral CT scanning, and
are candidates for chemoprevention trials.

TABLE 31.3-9. Effect of Treatment on Survival in Small Cell Lung Cancer According to Extent of Disease

Long-term survivors are also at increased risk for noncancer-related morbidity. In a French study of patients surviving beyond 30 months, treatment-related sequelae
included neurologic impairment in 13% of the patients, pulmonary fibrosis in 18%, and cardiac disorders in 10%. 477 Return to work was possible in 40% of these
patients and was not influenced by the presence of late treatment-related complications. In a Danish analysis of patients surviving 5 years or longer, there was a
sixfold increase risk of death from nonneoplastic causes, particularly cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases. 478
Few patients with extensive disease attain long-term survival. At 2 years after diagnosis no more than 5% of these patients remain alive, and the survival rate at 5
years is only 1%. 472,479 Although the effect of combination chemotherapy on survival is unambiguous, it is not clear whether any of the agents, treatment schedules, or
supportive measures introduced since 1980 have improved survival compared with the therapies available in the 1970s. Analysis of 21 phase III trials conducted in
North America between 1972 and 1990 showed an improvement in median survival time from 7 months to 8.9 months when studies initiated in the first decade were
compared with studies initiated in the second. 480 In contrast, an analysis of 1111 consecutive patients treated in clinical trials in Scandinavia between 1973 and 1992
demonstrated no improvement in survival over those two decades. 481 In this series, severe myelosuppression and febrile neutropenia was significantly more common
in patients treated between 1981 and 1992, suggesting that more intensive therapies in a relatively unselective population increase toxicity without improving survival.
This study highlights one of the great challenges in the management of SCLC. There is significant heterogeneity among patients in their capacity to tolerate
aggressive therapy, and optimal management requires therapy that is tailored to the tolerance of the individual patient.

EXTRAPULMONARY SMALL CELL CARCINOMA
Extrapulmonary small cell anaplastic carcinoma is a clinicopathologic entity distinct from SCLC. It is estimated that approximately 1000 cases are diagnosed in the
United States annually. 482 On routine histopathologic examination, pulmonary and extrapulmonary small cell carcinomas are indistinguishable. Mixed tumors, which
include a variety of cell types, may occur more frequently, and deletions of chromosome 3p may be less common with extrapulmonary tumors. 483 Primary small cell
carcinomas have been identified in virtually every organ site. 484 The most common sites include the esophagus and other gastrointestinal organs, the head and neck
region, cervix, and bladder. There appears to be a sex predilection based on the primary site: Most of the small cell carcinomas of the head and neck region,
esophagus, and bladder are found in male subjects. With the exception of primary tumors arising in the cervix in which a younger age group is affected, the majority of
patients are middle-aged or older.
A history of tobacco use is common, particularly in tumors that occur in the head and neck region and the esophagus, but there is not as strong an association with
smoking as there is with pulmonary small cell carcinoma. Paraneoplastic syndromes due to the ectopic production of adrenocorticotropic and antidiuretic hormones
also occur with extrapulmonary small cell cancer, and there is at least one case report in which humorally mediated hypercalcemia was identified. 485
By definition, patients with extrapulmonary small cell cancers must have a normal CT scan of the chest and preferably a normal bronchoscopic examination.

Merkel-cell carcinoma is a distinct entity that is primarily found in the skin and can be distinguished by certain immunocytochemical characteristics. Extrapulmonary
small cell carcinomas can disseminate widely, and the recommended staging studies are similar for pulmonary small cell carcinoma. 484 A two-stage system is
generally used. Limited disease is defined as tumor confined to the organ of origin and the local regional nodes that are encompassable within a radiation protal.
Tumors that have spread beyond one radiation portal are defined as extensive. In contrast to SCLC, most patients in whom a primary site is identified have limited
disease at the time of diagnosis. In a series of 71 patients from the Mayo Clinic, 76% of the tumors were localized at diagnosis. 486 In this series, the only sites that
presented greater than or equal to 50% of the time with extensive disease were primary tumors of the gastrointestinal tract and tumors of unknown primary site.
In many respects, natural history and response to treatment for small cell carcinoma are similar for both pulmonary and extrapulmonary sites. Patients with extensive
disease are candidates for treatment with combination chemotherapy. There are several reports in the literature in which a proportion of patients with limited disease
managed, with local therapies alone, particularly surgical resection, to achieve a long-term progression-free survival. 482,484,486 Success of local therapy appears to vary
depending on the primary site of the small cell carcinoma. For example, Koss et al. reported an approximate 30% 5-year survival in patients with small cell carcinoma
of the minor salivary glands managed only with local therapy. 487 Surprisingly, small cell cancers of unknown primary site have been successfully managed by local
therapy. 486,488 In contrast, small cell cancer rising in other head and neck sites, such as the larynx and hypopharynx, and primaries of the esophagus, prostate, and
bladder recur rapidly despite complete surgical resection. 482,489 Patients with stage I small cell carcinoma of the cervix have been managed successfully by radical
hysterectomy, but if the regional lymph nodes are involved local therapy alone is almost never curative. 486,490,491 Although some patients with small-volume disease
confined to the organ of origin can be cured with surgery alone, the risk of relapse remains high even in this most favorable subset, and in most patients adjuvant
chemotherapy should be strongly considered. For patients with locoregional disease, the combination of chemotherapy and radiation is a reasonable alternative to
surgery. Overall, the prognosis for extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma is poor. In the Mayo Clinic series, 3- and 5-year survivals were 38% and 13%, respectively. 486
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Chute CG, Greenberg ER, Baron J, et al. Presenting conditions of 1539 population-based lung cancer patients by cell type and stage in New Hampshire and Vermont. Cancer 1985;56:2107.
2. Landes SH, Murray T, Bodden S, et al. Cancer statistics, 1999. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:8.
3. Parkin DM, Sankaranarayanan R. Overview on small cell lung cancer in the world: industrialized countries, Third World, eastern Europe. Anticancer Res 1994;14:277.
4. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Reducing the health consequences of smoking: 25 years of progress. A report of the Surgeon General. Rockville, MD: Center for Chronic
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, 1989.
5. Lubin JH, Blot WJ. Assessment of lung cancer risk factors by histologic category. J Natl Cancer Inst 1984;73:383.
6. Morabia A, Wynder EL. Cigarette smoking and lung cancer cell types. Cancer 1991;68:2074.
7. Wingo PA, Ries LA, Giovino GA, et al. Annual report to the nation on the status of cancer, 19731996, with a special section on lung cancer and tobacco smoking. 1999;91:675.
8. J Natl Cancer Inst 8.Cigarette smoking among adults . MMWRMorb Mortality Wkly Rep 1997;46:1217.
9. Barrueco M, Cordovilla R, Hernandez Mezquita MA, et al. Sex differences in experimentation and tobacco consumption by children, adolescents and young adults. Arch Bronconeumol
1998;34:199.
10. Tobacco use among high school studentsUnited States, 1997. MMWR Morb Mortality Wkly Rep 1998;47:229.
11. Saracci R. The interactions of tobacco smoking and other agents in cancer etiology. Epidemiol Rev 1987;9:175.
12. Ernster VL. Female lung cancer. Annu Rev Public Health 1996;17:97.
13. Hayes RB, Yin SN, Dosemeci M, et al. Mortality among benzene-exposed workers in China. Environ Health Perspect 1996;104(Suppl 6):1349.
14. Steenland K, Loomis D, Shy C, et al. Review of occupational lung carcinogens. Am J Ind Med 1996;29:474.
15. Alavanja MC, Brownson RC, Boice JD Jr, et al. Preexisting lung disease and lung cancer among nonsmoking women. Am J Epidemiol 1992;136:623.
16. Mayne ST, Buenconsejo J, Janerich DT. Previous lung disease and risk of lung cancer among men and women nonsmokers. Am J Epidemiol 1999;149:13.
17. Bartsch H, Petruzzelli S, De Flora S, et al. Carcinogen metabolism in human lung tissues and the effect of tobacco smoking: results from a case-control multicenter study on lung cancer
patients. Environ Health Perspect 1992;98:119.
18. Brownson RC, Alavanja MC, Caporaso N, et al. Family history of cancer and risk of lung cancer in lifetime non-smokers and long-term ex-smokers. Int J Epidemiol 1997;26:256.
19. Sellers TA, Bailey-Wilson JE, Elston RC, et al. Evidence for mendelian inheritance in the pathogenesis of lung cancer [see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:1272.
20. Mayne ST, Buenconsejo J, Janerich DT. Familial cancer history and lung cancer risk in United States nonsmoking men and women. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarker Prev 1999;8:1065.
21. Bennett WP, Hussain SP, Vahakangas KH, et al. Molecular epidemiology of human cancer risk: gene-environment interactions and p53 mutation spectrum in human lung cancer. J Pathol
1999;187:8.
22. Kohno T, Yokota J. How many tumor suppressor genes are involved in human lung carcinogenesis? Carcinogenesis 1999;20:1403.
23. Harris RE, Zang EA, Anderson JI, et al. Race and sex differences in lung cancer risk associated with cigarette smoking. Int J Epidemiol 1993;22:592.
24. Zang EA, Wynder EL. Differences in lung cancer risk between men and women: examination of the evidence [see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:183.
25. Ramalingam S, Pawlish K, Gadgeel S, et al. Lung cancer in young patients: analysis of a Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results database. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:651.
26. World Health Organization. Histologic typing of lung tumors, 2nd ed. Geneva: World Heath Organization, 1981.
27. Hirsch FR, Matthews MJ, Aisner S, et al. Histopathologic classification of small cell lung cancer. Changing concepts and terminology. Cancer 1988;62:973.
28. Carter D, Eggleston JC. Tumors of the lower respiratory tract. In: Atlas of tumor pathology, second series, fascicle 17. Washington, DC: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 1980.
29. Travis WD, Linder J, Mackay B. Classification, histology, cytology, and electron microscopy. In: Pass HI, Mitchell JB, Johnson DH, et al., eds. Lung cancer: principles and practice. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven, 1996.
30. Aisner SC, Finkelstein DM, Ettinger DS, et al. The clinical significance of variant-morphology small-cell carcinoma of the lung. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:402.
31. Fraire AE, Johnson EH, Yesner R, et al. Prognostic significance of histopathologic subtype and stage in small cell lung cancer. Hum Pathol 1992;23:520.
32. Mangum MD, Greco FA, Hainsworth JD, et al. Combined small-cell and non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:607.
33. Radice PA, Matthews MJ, Ihde DC, et al. The clinical behavior of “mixed” small cell/large cell bronchogenic carcinoma compared with “pure” small cell subtypes. Cancer 1982;50:2894.
34. Fushimi H, Kukui M, Morino H, et al. Detection of large cell component in small cell lung carcinoma by combined cytologic and histologic examinations and its clinical implication. Cancer
1992;70:599.
35. Bepler G, Neumann K, Holle R, et al. Clinical relevance of histologic subtyping in small cell lung cancer. Cancer 1989;64:74.
36. Guinee DG Jr, Fishback NF, Koss MN, et al. The spectrum of immunohistochemical staining of small-cell lung carcinoma in specimens from transbronchial and open-lung biopsies. Am J Clin
Pathol 1994;102:406.
37. Higgins GA, Shields TW, Keehn RJ. The solitary pulmonary nodule. Ten-year follow-up of Veterans Administration-armed forces cooperative study. Arch Surg 1975;110:570.
38. Muhm JR, Miller WE, Fontana RS, et al. Lung cancer detected during a screening program using four-month chest radiographs. Radiology 1983;148:609.
39. Sculier JP, Evans WK, Feld R, et al. Superior vena caval obstruction syndrome in small cell lung cancer. Cancer 1986;57:847.
40. Paulson DL. Carcinomas in the superior pulmonary sulcus. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1975;70:1095.
41. Johnson DH, Hainsworth JD, Greco FA. Pancoast's syndrome and small cell lung cancer. Chest 1982;82:602.
42. Levitan N, Byrne RE, Bromer RH, et al. The value of the bone scan and bone marrow biopsy staging small cell lung cancer. Cancer 1985;56:652.
43. Michel F, Soler M, Imhof E, et al. Initial staging of non-small cell lung cancer: value of routine radioisotope bone scanning. Thorax 1991;46:469.
44. Tritz DB, Doll DC, Ringenberg QS, et al. Bone marrow involvement in small cell lung cancer. Clinical significance and correlation with routine laboratory variables. Cancer 1989;63:763.
45. Dombernowsky P, Hirsch F, Hansen HH, et al. Peritoneoscopy in the staging of 190 patients with small-cell anaplastic carcinoma of the lung with special reference to subtyping. Cancer
1978;41:2008.
46. Patel AM, Jett JR. Clinical presentation and staging of lung cancer. In: Aisner J, Arriagada R, Green MR, et al., eds. Comprehensive textbook of thoracic oncology. Baltimore: Williams &
Wilkins, 1996:293.
47. Souhami RL, Bradbury I, Geddes DM, et al. Prognostic significance of laboratory parameters measured at diagnosis in small cell carcinoma of the lung. Cancer Res 1985;45:2878.
48. Osterlind K, Andersen PK. Prognostic factors in small cell lung cancer: multivariate model based on 778 patients treated with chemotherapy with or without irradiation. Cancer Res
1986;46:4189.
49. Shepherd FA, Laskey J, Evans WK, et al. Cushing's syndrome associated with ectopic corticotropin production and small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:21.
50. Dimopoulos MA, Fernandez JF, Samaan NA, et al. Paraneoplastic Cushing's syndrome as an adverse prognostic factor in patients who die early with small cell lung cancer. Cancer 1992;69:66.
51. Dalmau J, Furneaux HM, Gralla RJ, et al. Detection of the anti-Hu antibody in the serum of patients with small cell lung cancera quantitative western blot analysis. Ann Neurol 1990;27:544.
52. O'Neill JH, Murray NM, Newsom-Davis J. The Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. A review of 50 cases. Brain 1988;111:577.
53. Anderson NE, Rosenblum MK, Graus F, et al. Autoantibodies in paraneoplastic syndromes associated with small-cell lung cancer. Neurology 1988;38:1391.
54. Lennon VA, Sas DF, Busk MF, et al. Enteric neuronal autoantibodies in pseudoobstruction with small-cell lung carcinoma [see comments]. Gastroenterology 1991;100:137.
55. Newman NJ, Bell IR, McKee AC. Paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis: neuropsychiatric presentation. Biol Psychiatry 1990;27:529.
56. Ojeda VJ. Necrotizing myelopathy associated with malignancy. A clinicopathologic study of two cases and literature review. Cancer 1984;53:1115.
57. Mountain CF. Revisions in the International System for Staging Lung Cancer. Chest 1997;111:1710.
58. Zelen M. Keynote address on biostatistics and data retrieval, part 3. Cancer Chemother Rep 1973;4:31.
59. Sagman U, Maki E, Evans WK, et al. Small-cell carcinoma of the lung: derivation of a prognostic staging system. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1639.
60. Livingston RB, McCracken JD, Trauth CJ, et al. Isolated pleural effusion in small cell lung carcinoma: favorable prognosis. A review of the Southwest Oncology Group experience. Chest
1982;81:208.
61. Dearing MP, Steinberg SM, Phelps R, et al. Outcome of patients with small-cell lung cancer: effect of changes in staging procedures and imaging technology on prognostic factors over 14
years. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1042.
62. Maestu I, Pastor M, Gomez-Codina J, et al. Pretreatment prognostic factors for survival in small-cell lung cancer: a new prognostic index and validation of three known prognostic indices on
341 patients. Ann Oncol 1997;8:547.
63. Stahel RA, Ginsberg RJ, Haddad K, et al. Staging and prognostic factors in small cell lung cancer: a consensus report. Lung Cancer 1989;5:119.
64. Albain KS, Crowley JJ, LeBlanc M, et al. Determinants of improved outcome in small-cell lung cancer: an analysis of the 2,580-patient Southwest Oncology Group data base. J Clin Oncol
1990;8:1563.
65. Chauvin F, Trillet V, Court-Fortune I, et al. Pretreatment staging evaluation in small cell lung carcinoma. A new approach to medical decision making. Chest 1992;102:497.
66. Shepherd FA, Ginsberg RJ, Haddad R, et al. Importance of clinical staging in limited small-cell lung cancer: a valuable system to separate prognostic subgroups. The University of Toronto Lung
Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1592.
67. Spiegelman D, Maurer LH, Ware JH, et al. Prognostic factors in small-cell carcinoma of the lung: an analysis of 1,521 patients. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:344.
68. Urban T, Chastang C, Vaylet F, et al. Prognostic significance of supraclavicular lymph nodes in small cell lung cancer: a study from four consecutive clinical trials, including 1,370 patients.
“Petites Cellules” Group. Chest 1998;114:1538.

69. Turrisi AT 3rd, Kim K, Blum R, et al. Twice-daily compared with once-daily thoracic radiotherapy in limited small-cell lung cancer treated concurrently with cisplatin and etoposide. N Engl J Med
1999;340:265.
70. Bonner JA, Sloan JA, Shanahan TG, et al. Phase III comparison of twice-daily split-course irradiation versus once-daily irradiation for patients with limited stage small-cell lung carcinoma. J Clin
Oncol 1999;17:2681.
71. Vincent MD, Ashley SE, Smith IE. Prognostic factors in small cell lung cancer: a simple prognostic index is better than conventional staging. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1987;23:1589.
72. Perry MC, Eaton WL, Propert KJ, et al. Chemotherapy with or without radiation therapy in limited small-cell carcinoma of the lung. N Engl J Med 1987;316:912.
73. Murray N, Coy P, Pater JL, et al. Importance of timing for thoracic irradiation in the combined modality treatment of limited-stage small-cell lung cancer. The National Cancer Institute of
Canada Clinical Trials Group. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:336.
74. Kreisman H, Wolkove N, Quoix E. Small cell lung cancer presenting as a solitary pulmonary nodule. Chest 1992;101:225.
75. Karrer K, Ulsperger E. Surgery for cure followed by chemotherapy in small cell carcinoma of the lung. For the ISC-Lung CancerStudy Group. Acta Oncol 1995;34:899.
76. Pignon JP, Arriagada R, Ihde DC, et al. A meta-analysis of thoracic radiotherapy for small-cell lung cancer [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1992;327:1618.
77. Byhardt RW, Hartz A, Libnoch JA, et al. Prognostic influence of TNM staging and LDH levels in small cell carcinoma of the lung (SCCL). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:771.
78. Fizazi K, Cojean I, Pignon JP, et al. Normal serum neuron specific enolase (NSE) value after the first cycle of chemotherapy: an early predictor of complete response and survival in patients
with small cell lung carcinoma. Cancer 1998;82:1049.
79. Jorgensen LG, Osterlind K, Genolla J, et al. Serum neuron-specific enolase (S-NSE) and the prognosis in small-cell lung cancer (SCLC): a combined multivariable analysis on data from nine
centres [published erratum appears in Br JCancer 1996;74:2043]. Br J Cancer 1996;74:463.
80. Wolf M, Holle R, Hans K, et al. Analysis of prognostic factors in 766 patients with small cell lung cancer (SCLC): the role of sex as a predictor for survival. Br JCancer 1991;63:986.
81. Albain KS, Crowley JJ, Livingston RB. Long-term survival and toxicity in small cell lung cancer. Expanded Southwest Oncology Group experience. Chest 1991;99:1425.
82. Gronowitz JS, Bergstrom R, Nou E, et al. Clinical and serologic markers of stage and prognosis in small cell lung cancer. A multivariate analysis. Cancer 1990;66:722.
83. Rawson NS, Peto J. An overview of prognostic factors in small cell lung cancer. A report from the Subcommittee for the Management of Lung Cancer of the United Kingdom Coordinating
Committee on Cancer Research [published erratum appears in Br JCancer 1990;62:550]. Br JCancer 1990;61:597.
84. Siu LL, Shepherd FA, Murray N, et al. Influence of age on the treatment of limited-stage small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:821.
85. Young LC, Campling BG, Voskoglou-Nomikos T, et al. Expression of multidrug resistance protein-related genes in lung cancer: correlation with drug response. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:673.
86. Onuki N, Wistuba II, Travis WD, et al. Genetic changes in the spectrum of neuroendocrine lung tumors. Cancer 1999;85:600.
87. Gazdar AF, Steinberg SM, Russell EK, et al. Correlation of in vitro drug-sensitivity testing results with response to chemotherapy and survival in extensive-stage small cell lung cancer: a
prospective clinical trial [see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:117.
88. Radford JA, Ryder WDJ, Dodwell D, et al. Predicting septic complications from chemotherapy: an analysis of 382 patients treated for small cell lung cancer without dose reduction after major
sepsis. Eur J Cancer 1993;29A:81.
89. Morittu L, Earl HM, Souhami RL, et al. Patients at risk of chemotherapy-associated toxicity in small cell lung cancer. Br J Cancer 1989;59:801.
90. Lassen UN, Osterlind K, Hirsch FR, et al. Early death during chemotherapy in patients with small-cell lung cancer: derivation of a prognostic index for toxic death and progression. Br J Cancer
1999;79:515.
91. Matthews MJ, Kanhouwa S, Pickren J, et al. Frequency of residual and metastatic tumor in patients undergoing curative surgical resection for lung cancer. Cancer Chemother Rep 1973;4:63.
92. Richardson GE, Venzon DJ, Edison M, et al. Application of an algorithm for staging small-cell lung cancer can save one third of the initial evaluation costs. Arch Intern Med 1993;153:329.
93. Sagman U, Feld R, Evans WK, et al. The prognostic significance of pretreatment serum lactate dehydrogenase in patients with small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:954.
94. Stokkel MP, van Eck-Smit BL, Zwinderman AH, et al. Pretreatment serum lactate dehydrogenase as additional staging parameter in patients with small-cell lung carcinoma. J Cancer Res Clin
Oncol 1998;124:215.
95. Norlund JD, Byhardt RW, Foley WD, et al. Computed tomography in the staging of small cell lung cancer: implications for combined modality therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1985;11:1081.
96. Whitley NO, Fuks JZ, McCrea ES, et al. Computed tomography of the chest in small cell lung cancer: potential new prognostic signs. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1984;142:885.
97. Ihde DC, Cohen MH, Bernath AM, et al. Serial fiberoptic bronchoscopy during chemotherapy for small cell carcinoma of the lung: early detection of patients at high risk of relapse. Chest
1978;74:531.
98. Harper PG, Houang M, Spiro SG, et al. Computerized axial tomography in the pretreatment assessment of small-cell carcinoma of the bronchus. Cancer 1981;47:1775.
99. Ihde DC, Dunnick NR, Johnston-Early A, et al. Abdominal computed tomography in small cell lung cancer: assessment of extent of disease and response to therapy. Cancer 1982;49:1485.
100. Mulshine JL, Makuch RW, Johnston-Early A, et al. Diagnosis and significance of liver metastases in small cell carcinoma of the lung. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:733.
101. Boland GW, Lee MJ, Gazelle GS, et al. Characterization of adrenal masses using unenhanced CT: an analysis of the CT literature. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1998;171:201.
102. Schwartz LH, Ginsberg MS, Burt ME, et al. MRI as an alternative to CT-guided biopsy of adrenal masses in patients with lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;65:193.
103. Nugent JL, Bunn PA Jr, Matthews MJ, et al. CNS metastases in small cell bronchogenic carcinoma: increasing frequency and changing pattern with lengthening survival. Cancer 1979;44:1885.
104. Komaki R, Cox JD, Whitson W. Risk of brain metastasis from small cell carcinoma of the lung related to length of survival and prophylactic irradiation. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:811.
105. Hirsch FR, Paulson OB, Hansen HH, et al. Intracranial metastases in small cell carcinoma of the lung: correlation of clinical and autopsy findings. Cancer 1982;50:2433.
106. van Oosterhout AG, van de Pol M, ten Velde GP, et al. Neurologic disorders in 203 consecutive patients with small cell lung cancer. Results of a longitudinal study. Cancer 1996;77:1434.
107. Crane JM, Nelson MJ, Ihde DC, et al. A comparison of computed tomography and radionuclide scanning for detection of brain metastases in small cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:1017.
108. Johnson DH, Windham WW, Allen JH, et al. Limited value of CT brain scans in the staging of small cell lung cancer. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1983;140:37.
109. Hardy J, Smith I, Cherryman G, et al. The value of computed tomographic (CT) scan surveillance in the detection and management of brain metastases in patients with small cell lung cancer.
Br J Cancer 1990;62:684.
110. Kristensen CA, Kristjansen PE, Hansen HH. Systemic chemotherapy of brain metastases from small-cell lung cancer: a review. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1498.
111. van Hazel GA, Scott M, Eagan RT. The effect of CNS metastases on the survival of patients with small cell cancer of the lung. Cancer 1983;51:933.
112. Kochhar R, Frytak S, Shaw EG. Survival of patients with extensive small-cell lung cancer who have only brain metastases at initial diagnosis. AmJ Clin Oncol 1997;20:125.
113. Levenson RM Jr, Sauerbrunn BJ, Ihde DC, et al. Small cell lung cancer: radionuclide bone scans for assessment of tumor extent and response. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1981;137:31.
114. Ihde DC, Makuch RW, Carney DN, et al. Prognostic implications of stage of disease and sites of metastases in patients with small cell carcinoma of the lung treated with intensive combination
chemotherapy. Am Rev Respir Dis 1981;123:500.
115. Campling B, Quirt I, DeBoer G, et al. Is bone marrow examination in small-cell lung cancer really necessary? Ann Intern Med 1986;105:508.
116. Bezwoda WR, Lewis D, Livini N. Bone marrow involvement in anaplastic small cell lung cancer. Diagnosis, hematologic features, and prognostic implications. Cancer 1986;58:1762.
117. Trillet V, Revel D, Combaret V, et al. Bone marrow metastases in small cell lung cancer: detection with magnetic resonance imaging and monoclonal antibodies. Br J Cancer 1989;60:83.
118. Hunter RF, Broadway P, Sun SL, et al. Detection of small cell lung cancer bone marrow involvement by discontinuous gradient sedimentation. Cancer Res 1987;47:2737.
119. Pollard EB, Tio F, Myers JW, et al. Utilization of a human tumor cloning system to monitor for marrow involvement with small cell carcinoma of the lung. Cancer Res 1981;41:1015.
120. Trillet-Lenoir VN, Arpin D, Brune J. Bone marrow metastases detection in small cell lung cancer. A review. Anticancer Res 1994;14:2795.
121. Canon JL, Humblet Y, Lebacq-Verheyden AM, et al. Immunodetection of small cell lung cancer metastases in bone marrow using three monoclonal antibodies. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol
1988;24:147.
122. Muss HB, Jackson DV Jr, Richards FD, et al. Bone marrow evaluation in small cell lung cancer. Am J Clin Oncol 1984;7:59.
123. Hamrick RMD, Murgo AJ. Lactate dehydrogenase values and bone scans as predictors of bone marrow involvement in small-cell lung cancer. Arch Intern Med 1987;147:1070.
124. Milleron BJ, Le Breton C, Carette MF, et al. Assessment of bone marrow involvement by magnetic resonance imaging in small cell lung cancer. No significant change of staging. Chest
1994;106:1030.
125. Hochstenbag MM, Snoep G, Cobben NA, et al. Detection of bone marrow metastases in small cell lung cancer. Comparison of magnetic resonance imaging with standard methods. Eur J
Cancer 1996;32A:779.
126. Seto T, Imamura F, Kuriyama K, et al. Effect on prognosis of bone marrow infiltration detected by magnetic resonance imaging in small cell lung cancer. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:2333.
127. Layer G, Steudel A, Schuller H, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging to detect bone marrow metastases in the initial staging of small cell lung carcinoma and breast carcinoma. Cancer
1999;85:1004.
128. Peck K, Sher YP, Shih JY, et al. Detection and quantitation of circulating cancer cells in the peripheral blood of lung cancer patients. Cancer Res 1998;58:2761.
129. Wahl RL, Quint LE, Greenough RL, et al. Staging of mediastinal non-small cell lung cancer with FDG PET, CT, and fusion images: preliminary prospective evaluation. Radiology 1994;191:371.
130. Kubota K, Matsuzawa T, Fujiwara T, et al. Differential diagnosis of lung tumor with positron emission tomography: a prospective study. J Nucl Med 1990;31:1927.
131. Weber W, Young C, Abdel-Dayem HM, et al. Assessment of pulmonary lesions with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron imaging using coincidence mode gamma cameras. J Nucl Med
1999;40:574.
132. Weder W, Schmid RA, Bruchhaus H, et al. Detection of extrathoracic metastases by positron emission tomography in lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;66:886.
133. Balaban EP, Walker BS, Cox JV, et al. Detection and staging of small cell lung carcinoma with a technetium-labeled monoclonal antibody. A comparison with standard staging methods. Clin
Nucl Med 1992;17:439.
134. Hochstenbag MM, Heidendal GA, Wouters EF, et al. In-111 octreotide imaging in staging of small cell lung cancer. Clin Nucl Med 1997;22:811.
135. Berenger N, Moretti JL, Boaziz C, et al. Somatostatin receptor imaging in small cell lung cancer. Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:1429.
136. Reisinger I, Bohuslavitzki KH, Brenner W, et al. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy in small-cell lung cancer: results of a multicenter study [see comments]. J Nucl Med 1998;39:224.
137. Taylor AB, Shinton NK, Waterhouse JAH. Histology of bronchial carcinoma in relation to prognosis. Thorax 1963;18:178.
138. Lennox SC, Flavell G, Pollock DJ, et al. Results of resection for oat-cell carcinoma of the lung. Lancet 1968;2:925.
139. Fox W, Scadding JG. Medical Research Council comparative trial of surgery and radiotherapy for primary treatment of small-celled or oat-celled carcinoma of bronchus. Ten-year follow-up.
Lancet 1973;2:63.
140. Mountain CF. Clinical biology of small cell lung carcinoma: relationship to surgical therapy. Semin Oncol 1978;5:272.
141. Green RA, Humphrey E, Close H. Alkylating agents in bronchogenic carcinoma. Am J Med 1969;46:516.
142. Medical Research Council. Radiotherapy alone or with chemotherapy in the treatment of small-cell carcinoma of the lung. Br J Cancer 1979;40:1.
143. Grant SC, Gralla RJ, Kris MG, et al. Single-agent chemotherapy trials in small-cell lung cancer, 1970 to 1990: the case for studies in previously treated patients. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:484.
144. Bork E, Ersboll J, Dombernowsky P, et al. Teniposide and etoposide in previously untreated small cell lung cancer: a randomized study. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1627.
145. Slevin ML, Clark PI, Joel SP, et al. A randomized trial to evaluate the effect of schedule on the activity of etoposide in small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1333.
146. Clark PI, Slevin ML, Joel SP, et al. A randomized trial of two etoposide schedules in small-cell lung cancer: the influence of pharmacokinetics on efficacy and toxicity. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:1427.
147. Wolff SN, Birch R, Sarma P, et al. Randomized dose-response evaluation of etoposide in small cell carcinoma of the lung: a Southeastern Cancer Study Group Trial. Cancer Treat Rep
1986;70:583.
148. Issell BF, Einhorn LH, Comis RL, et al. Multicenter phase II trial of etoposide in refractory small cell lung cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:127.
149. Hansen HH, Dombernowsky P, Hansen M, et al. Teniposide in the treatment of small cell lung cancer: a review. Semin Oncol 1992;19:65.
150. Ettinger DS, Finkelstein DM, Abeloff MD, et al. Justification for evaluating new anticancer drugs in selected untreated patients with extensive-stage small-cell lung cancer: an Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group randomized study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1077.
151. Moore TD, Korn EL. Phase II trial design considerations for small-cell lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:150.
152. Giaccone G, Ferrati P, Donadio M, et al. Reinduction chemotherapy in small cell lung cancer. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1987;23:1697.
153. Cavalli F, Sonntag RW, Jungi F, et al. VP-16-213 monotherapy for remission induction of small cell lung cancer: a randomized trial using three dosage schedules. Cancer Treat Rep
1978;62:473.
154. Abratt RP, Willcox PA, de Groot M, et al. Prospective study of etoposide scheduling in combination chemotherapy for limited disease small cell lung carcinoma. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:28.

155. Johnson DH, Greco FA, Strupp J, et al. Prolonged administration of oral etoposide in patients with relapsed or refractory small-cell lung cancer: a phase II trial. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1613.
156. Einhorn LH, Pennington K, McClean J. Phase II trial of daily oral VP-16 in refractory small cell lung cancer: a Hoosier Oncology Group study. Semin Oncol 1990;17:32.
157. Miller AA, Herndon JE 2nd, Hollis DR, et al. Schedule dependency of 21-day oral versus 3-day intravenous etoposide in combination with intravenous cisplatin in extensive-stage small-cell lung
cancer: a randomized phase III study of the Cancer and Leukemia Group B. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1871.
158. Maksymiuk AW, Jett JR, Earle JD, et al. Sequencing and schedule effects of cisplatin plus etoposide in small-cell lung cancer: results of a North Central Cancer Treatment Group randomized
clinical trial. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:70.
159. Smith IE, Harland SJ, Robinson BA, et al. Carboplatin: a very active new cisplatin analog in the treatment of small cell lung cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:43.
160. Ettinger DS. The place of ifosfamide in chemotherapy of small cell lung cancer: the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group experience and a selected literature update. Semin Oncol
1995;22(Suppl 2):23.
161. Bork E, Hansen M, Dombernowsky P, et al. Teniposide (VM-26), an overlooked highly active agent in small-cell lung cancer. Results of a phase II trial in untreated patients. J Clin Oncol
1986;4:524.
162. Cerny T, Pedrazzini A, Joss RA, et al. Unexpected high toxicity in a phase II study of teniposide (VM-26) in elderly patients with untreated small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Eur J Cancer Clin
Oncol 1988;24:1791.
163. Blackstein M, Eisenhauer EA, Wierzbicki R, et al. Epirubicin in extensive small-cell lung cancer: a phase II study in previously untreated patients: a National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical
Trials Group Study. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:385.
164. Ettinger DS, Finkelstein DM, Sarma RP, et al. Phase II study of paclitaxel in patients with extensive-disease small-cell lung cancer: an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:1430.
165. Smyth JF, Smith IE, Sessa C, et al. Activity of docetaxel (Taxotere) in small cell lung cancer. The Early Clinical Trials Group of the EORTC. Eur J Cancer 1994;8:1058.
166. Hesketh PJ, Crowley JJ, Burris HA 3rd, et al. Evaluation of docetaxel in previously untreated extensive-stage small cell lung cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group phase II trial. Cancer J Sci
Am 1999;5:237.
167. Schiller JH, Kim K, Johnson D, et al. Phase II study of topotecan in extensive stage small cell lung cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1994;13:330(abst 1093).
168. Ardizzoni A, Hansen H, Dombernowsky P, et al. Topotecan, a new active drug in the second-line treatment of small-cell lung cancer: a phase II study in patients with refractory and sensitive
disease. The European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Early Clinical Studies Group and New Drug Development Office, and the Lung Cancer Cooperative Group. J Clin
Oncol 1997;15:2090.
169. Eckardt J, Gralla R, Palmer MC, et al. Topotecan as second-line therapy in patients with small cell lung cancer: a phase II study. Ann Oncol 1996;7(Suppl 5; abst 513P).
170. Eckardt J, Depierre A, Ardizzoni A, et al. Pooled analysis of topotecan in the second-line treatment of patients with sensitive small cell lung cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:A1624.
171. von Pawel J, Schiller JH, Shepherd FA, et al. Topotecan versus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine for the treatment of recurrent small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:658.
172. von Pawel J, Gatzemeier U, Harstrick A, et al. A multicentre randomized phase II study of oral topotecan versus IV topotecan for second line therapy in sensitive patients with small cell lung
cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:471(abst 1816).
173. Masuda N, Fukuoka M, Kusunoki Y, et al. CPT-11: a new derivative of camptothecin for the treatment of refractory or relapsed small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1225.
174. DeVore RF, Blanke CD, Denham CA, et al. Phase II study of irinotecan (CPT-11) in patients with previously treated small-cell lung cancer (SCLC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:451(abst
1736).
175. Le Chevalier T, Ibrahim N, Chomy P, et al. A phase II study of irinotecan (CPT-11) in patients (pts) with small cell lung cancer (SCLC) progressing after initial response to first-line treatment.
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:450(abst 1617).
176. Cormier Y, Eisenhauer E, Muldal A, et al. Gemcitabine is an active new agent in previously untreated extensive small cell lung cancer (SCLC). A study of the National Cancer Institute of
Canada Clinical Trials Group. Ann Oncol 1994;5:283.
177. Postmus PE, Schramel FM, Smit EF. Evaluation of new drugs in small cell lung cancer: the activity of gemcitabine. Semin Oncol 1998;25:79.
178. Furuse K, Kubota K, Kawahara M, et al. Phase II study of vinorelbine in heavily previously treated small cell lung cancer. Japan Lung Cancer Vinorelbine Study Group. Oncology 1996;53:169.
179. Jassem J, Karnicka-Mlodkowska H, van Pottelsberghe C, et al. Phase II study of vinorelbine (Navelbine) in previously treated small cell lung cancer patients. EORTC Lung Cancer Cooperative
Group. Eur J Cancer 1993;12:1720.
180. Gridelli C, Perrone F, Ianniello GP, et al. Carboplatin plus vinorelbine, a new well-tolerated and active regimen for the treatment of extensive-stage small-cell lung cancer: a phase II study.
Gruppo Oncologico Centro-Sud-Isole. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1414.
181. Lowenbraun S, Bartolucci A, Smalley RV, et al. The superiority of combination chemotherapy over single agent chemotherapy in small cell lung carcinoma. Cancer 1979;44:406.
182. Hansen HH, Dombernowsky P, Hansen M, et al. Chemotherapy of advanced small-cell anaplastic carcinoma. Superiority of a four-drug combination to a three-drug combination. Ann Intern
Med 1978;89:177.
183. Livingston RB, Moore TN, Heilbrun L, et al. Small-cell carcinoma of the lung: combined chemotherapy and radiation: a Southwest Oncology Group study. Ann Intern Med 1978;88:194.
184. Hong WK, Nicaise C, Lawson R, et al. Etoposide combined with cyclophosphamide plus vincristine compared with doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide plus vincristine and with high-dose
cyclophosphamide plus vincristine in the treatment of small-cell carcinoma of the lung: a randomized trial of the Bristol Lung Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:450.
185. Bunn PA Jr, Greco FA, Einhorn L. Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and etoposide as first-line therapy in the treatment of small-cell lung cancer. Semin Oncol 1986;13:45.
186. Hirsch FR, Hansen HH, Hansen M, et al. The superiority of combination chemotherapy including etoposide based on in vivo cell cycle analysis in the treatment of extensive small-cell lung
cancer: a randomized trial of 288 consecutive patients. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:585.
187. Vindelov LL, Hansen HH, Gersel A, et al. Treatment of small-cell carcinoma of the lung monitored by sequential flow cytometric DNA analysis. Cancer Res 1982;42:2499.
188. Jackson DV Jr, Zekan PJ, Caldwell RD, et al. VP-16-213 in combination chemotherapy with chest irradiation for small-cell lung cancer: a randomized trial of the Piedmont Oncology
Association. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:1343.
189. Jackson DV Jr, Case LD, Zekan PJ, et al. Improvement of long-term survival in extensive small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1161.
190. Jett JR, Everson L, Therneau TM, et al. Treatment of limited-stage small-cell lung cancer with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine with or without etoposide: a randomized trial of
the North Central Cancer Treatment Group. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:33.
191. Messeih AA, Schweitzer JM, Lipton A, et al. Addition of etoposide to cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine for remission induction and survival in patients with small cell lung cancer.
Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:61.
192. Lowenbraun S, Birch R, Buchanan R, et al. Combination chemotherapy in small cell lung carcinoma. A randomized study of two intensive regimens. Cancer 1984;54:2344.
193. Evans WK, Feld R, Osoba D, et al. VP-16 alone and in combination with cisplatin in previously treated patients with small cell lung cancer. Cancer 1984;53:1461.
194. Evans WK, Osoba D, Feld R, et al. Etoposide (VP-16) and cisplatin: an effective treatment for relapse in small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:65.
195. Evans WK, Shepherd FA, Feld R, et al. VP-16 and cisplatin as first-line therapy for small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1471.
196. Einhorn LH, Crawford J, Birch R, et al. Cisplatin plus etoposide consolidation following cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine in limited small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:451.
197. Roth BJ, Johnson DH, Einhorn LH, et al. Randomized study of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine versus etoposide and cisplatin versus alternation of these two regimens in
extensive small-cell lung cancer: a phase III trial of the Southeastern Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:282.
198. Fukuoka M, Furuse K, Saijo N, et al. Randomized trial of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine versus cisplatin and etoposide versus alternation of these regimens in small-cell lung
cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:855.
199. Skarlos DV, Samantas E, Kosmidis P, et al. Randomized comparison of etoposide-cisplatin vs. etoposide-carboplatin and irradiation in small-cell lung cancer. A Hellenic Co-operative Oncology
Group study. Ann Oncol 1994;5:601.
200. Lassen U, Kristjansen PE, Osterlind K, et al. Superiority of cisplatin or carboplatin in combination with teniposide and vincristine in the induction chemotherapy of small-cell lung cancer. A
randomized trial with 5 years follow up. Ann Oncol 1996;7:365.
201. Bishop JF, Raghavan D, Stuart-Harris R, et al. Carboplatin (CBDCA, JM-8) and VP-16-213 in previously untreated patients with small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1574.
202. Kamthan AG, Lind MJ, Thatcher N, et al. Ifosfamide, doxorubicin and etoposide in small cell lung cancer patients with poor prognosis. Eur J Cancer 1990;26:691.
203. Loehrer PJ Sr, Rynard S, Ansari R, et al. Etoposide, ifosfamide, and cisplatin in extensive small cell lung cancer. Cancer 1992;69:669.
204. Loehrer PJ Sr, Ansari R, Gonin R, et al. Cisplatin plus etoposide with and without ifosfamide in extensive small-cell lung cancer: a Hoosier Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2594.
205. Thatcher N, Lind M, Stout R, et al. Carboplatin, ifosfamide and etoposide with mid-course vincristine and thoracic radiotherapy for ‘limited' stage small cell carcinoma of the bronchus. Br J
Cancer 1989;60:98.
206. Wolff AC, Ettinger DS, Neuberg D, et al. Phase II study of ifosfamide, carboplatin, and oral etoposide chemotherapy for extensive-disease small-cell lung cancer: an Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group pilot study. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1615.
207. Kelly K, Pan Z, Wood ME, et al. A phase I study of paclitaxel, etoposide, and cisplatin in extensive stage small cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:3419.
208. Ardizzoni A, Manegold C, Gaafar R, et al. Combination chemotherapy with cisplatin and topotecan as second-line treatment of sensitive (S) and resistant (R) small cell lung cancer (SCLC).
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:471(abst 1817).
209. Kudoh S, Fujiwara Y, Takada Y, et al. Phase II study of irinotecan combined with cisplatin in patients with previously untreated small-cell lung cancer. West Japan Lung Cancer Group. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:1068.
210. Suigiura S, Saka H, Ando M, et al. Phase II and pharmacokinetic (PK)/pharmacodynamic (PD) study of carboplatin (CBDA) and inrinotecan (CPT-11) in patients with small cell lung cancer
(SCLC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:502(abst 1934).
211. Noda K, Nishiwaki Y, Kawahara M, et al. Randomized phase III study of irinotecan (CPT-11) and cisplatin versus etoposide and cisplatin in extensive-disease small-cell lung cancer. Japan
Clinical Oncology Group Study (JCOG9511). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2000;19483a(abstr 1887).
212. Murren J, Kraut E, Gams R, et al. Phase II trial of topotecan and cyclophosphamide (Cy) with GCSF in high risk small cell lung cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:495(abst 1907).
213. Nakamura S, Kudoh S, Komuta K, et al. Phase II study of irinotecan (CPT-11) combined with etoposide (VP-16) for previously untreated extensive-disease small-cell lung cancer (ED-SCLC): a
study of the West Japan Lung Cancer Group. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;18:470(abst 1815).
214. Jacobs SA, Jett JR, Belani CP, et al. Topotecan and paclitaxel, and active couplet, in untreated extensive disease small cell lung cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:470(abst 1814).
215. Frasci G, Panza N, Comella P, et al. Cisplatin-topotecan-paclitaxel weekly administration with G-CSF support for ovarian and small-cell lung cancer patients: a dose-finding study. Ann Oncol
1999;10:355.
216. Feld R, Evans WK, DeBoer G, et al. Combined modality induction therapy without maintenance chemotherapy for small cell carcinoma of the lung. J Clin Oncol 1984; 2:294.
217. Maurer LH, Tulloh M, Weiss RB, et al. A randomized combined modality trial in small cell carcinoma of the lung: comparison of combination chemotherapy-radiation therapy versus
cyclophosphamide-radiation therapy effects of maintenance chemotherapy and prophylactive whole brain irradiation. Cancer 1980;45:30.
218. Cullen M, Morgan D, Gregory W, et al. Maintenance chemotherapy for anaplastic small cell carcinoma of the bronchus: a randomised, controlled trial. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1986;17:157.
219. Byrne MJ, van Hazel G, Trotter J, et al. Maintenance chemotherapy in limited small cell lung cancer: a randomised controlled clinical trial. Br J Cancer 1989;60:413.
220. Controlled trial of twelve versus six courses of chemotherapy in the treatment of small-cell lung cancer. Report to the Medical Research Council by its Lung Cancer Working Party. Br J Cancer
1989;59:584.
221. Ettinger DS, Finkelstein DM, Abeloff MD, et al. A randomized comparison of standard chemotherapy versus alternating chemotherapy and maintenance versus no maintenance therapy for
extensive-stage small-cell lung cancer: a phase III study of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:230.
222. Lebeau B, Chastang C, Allard P, et al. Six vs twelve cycles for complete responders to chemotherapy in small cell lung cancer: definitive results of a randomized clinical trial. The “Petites
Cellules” Group. Eur Respir J 1992;5:286.
223. Giaccone G, Dalesio O, McVie GJ, et al. Maintenance chemotherapy in small-cell lung cancer: long-term results of a randomized trial. European Organization for Research and Treatment of
Cancer Lung Cancer Cooperative Group. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1230.
224. Beith JM, Clarke SJ, Woods RL, et al. Long-term follow-up of a randomised trial of combined chemoradiotherapy induction treatment, with and without maintenance chemotherapy in patients
with small cell carcinoma of the lung. Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:438.
225. Sculier JP, Paesmans M, Bureau G, et al. Randomized trial comparing induction chemotherapy versus induction chemotherapy followed by maintenance chemotherapy in small-cell lung

cancer. European Lung Cancer Working Party. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2337.
226. Sandler AB, Ansari R, Saxman S, et al. Phase III trial of maintainence daily oral VP-16 versus no further therapy following induction chemotherapy with VP-16 (V) plus ifosfamide (I) plus
cisplatin (P) (VIP) in extensive small cell lung cancer (SCLC): a Hoosier Oncology Group (HOG) trial (LUN93-2). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:470(abst 1813).
227. Spiro SG, Souhami RL, Geddes DM, et al. Duration of chemotherapy in small cell lung cancer: a Cancer Research Campaign trial. Br J Cancer 1989;59:578.
228. Jarry O, Fournel P. A randomized trial of 4 versus 8 courses of chemotherapy with ifosfamide, epirubicin, and etoposide (EVI) in extensive small cell lung cancer. IASLC-SCLC, Denver, CO,
1994 (abst).
229. Bleehen NM, Girling DJ, Machin D, et al. A randomised trial of three or six courses of etoposide cyclophosphamide methotrexate and vincristine or six courses of etoposide and ifosfamide in
small cell lung cancer (SCLC). II: Quality of life. Medical Research Council Lung Cancer Working Party. Br J Cancer 1993;68:1157.
230. Bleehen NM, Girling DJ, Machin D, et al. A randomised trial of three or six courses of etoposide cyclophosphamide methotrexate and vincristine or six courses of etoposide and ifosfamide in
small cell lung cancer (SCLC). I: survival and prognostic factors. Medical Research Council Lung Cancer Working Party. Br J Cancer 1993;68:1150.
231. Ajaikumar BS, Barkley HT Jr. The role of radiation therapy in the treatment of small cell undifferentiated bronchogenic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1979;5:977.
232. Salazar OM, Rubin P, Brown JC, et al. Predictors of radiation response in lung cancer. A clinico-pathobiological analysis. Cancer 1976;37:2636.
233. Cohen MH, Ihde DC, Bunn PA Jr, et al. Cyclic alternating combination chemotherapy for small cell bronchogenic carcinoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:163.
234. Johnson DH, Greco FA. Small cell carcinoma of the lung. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 1986;4:303.
235. Bunn PA, Ihde DC. Small cell bronchogenic carcinoma: a review of therapeutic results. In: Livingston RB, ed. Lung cancer I. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1981.
236. Lichter AS, Bunn PA Jr, Ihde DC, et al. The role of radiation therapy in the treatment of small cell lung cancer. Cancer 1985;55:2163.
237. Bunn PA Jr, Lichter AS, Makuch RW, et al. Chemotherapy alone or chemotherapy with chest radiation therapy in limited stage small cell lung cancer. A prospective, randomized trial. Ann Intern
Med 1987;106:655.
238. Perez CA, Einhorn L, Oldham RK, et al. Randomized trial of radiotherapy to the thorax in limited small-cell carcinoma of the lung treated with multiagent chemotherapy and elective brain
irradiation: a preliminary report. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:1200.
239. Fox RM, Woods RL, Tattersall MH, et al. A randomized study of adjuvant immunotherapy with levamisole and Corynebacterium parvum in operable non-small cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:1043.
240. Rosenthal S, Tattersa MHN, Fox RM, et al. Adjuvant thoracic radiotherapy in small cell lung cancer: ten-year follow-up of a randomized study. Lung Cancer 1991;7:235.
241. Warde P, Payne D. Does thoracic irradiation improve survival and local control in limited-stage small-cell carcinoma of the lung? A meta-analysis [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:890.
242. Cox JD, Byhardt R, Komaki R, et al. Interaction of thoracic irradiation and chemotherapy on local control and survival in small cell carcinoma of the lung. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:1251.
243. Williams C, Alexander M, Glatstein EJ, et al. Role of radiation therapy in combination with chemotherapy in extensive oat cell cancer of the lung: a randomized study. Cancer Treat Rep
1977;61:1427.
244. Choi NC, Carey RW. Importance of radiation dose in achieving improved loco-regional tumor control in limited stage small-cell lung carcinoma: an update. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1989;17:307.
245. Coy P, Hodson I, Payne DG, et al. The effect of dose of thoracic irradiation on recurrence in patients with limited stage small cell lung cancer. Initial results of a Canadian Multicenter
Randomized Trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14:219.
246. Arriagada R, Kramar A, Le Chevalier T, et al. Competing events determining relapse-free survival in limited small-cell lung carcinoma. The French Cancer Centers' Lung Group. J Clin Oncol
1992;10:447.
247. Papac RJ, Son Y, Bien R, et al. Improved local control of thoracic disease in small cell lung cancer with higher dose thoracic irradiation and cyclic chemotherapy [published erratum appears in
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14:213]. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:993.
248. Brooks BJ Jr, Seifter EJ, Walsh TE, et al. Pulmonary toxicity with combined modality therapy for limited stage small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:200.
249. Osterlind K, Hansen HH, Hansen HS, et al. Chemotherapy versus chemotherapy plus irradiation in limited small cell lung cancer. Results of a controlled trial with 5 years follow-up. Br J Cancer
1986;54:7.
250. Roach M 3rd, Gandara DR, Yuo HS, et al. Radiation pneumonitis following combined modality therapy for lung cancer: analysis of prognostic factors [see comments]. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:2606.
251. McCracken JD, Janaki LM, Crowley JJ, et al. Concurrent chemotherapy/radiotherapy for limited small-cell lung carcinoma: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:892.
252. Arriagada R, Mouriesse H, Spielmann M, et al. Alternating radiotherapy and chemotherapy in non-metastatic inflammatory breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:1207.
253. Liengswangwong V, Bonner JA, Shaw EG, et al. Limited-stage small-cell lung cancer: patterns of intrathoracic recurrence and the implications for thoracic radiotherapy. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:496.
254. Turrisi ATD, Glover DJ. Thoracic radiotherapy variables: influence on local control in small cell lung cancer limited disease. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:1473.
255. Turrisi ATD, Glover DJ, Mason BA. A preliminary report: concurrent twice-daily radiotherapy plus platinum-etoposide chemotherapy for limited small cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1988;15:183.
256. Ihde DC, Grayson J, Woods E, et al. Twice daily chest irradiation an adjuvant to etoposide/cisplatin therapy of limited stage small cell lung cancer. In: Salmon S, ed. Adjuvant therapy of cancer,
6th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1990.
257. Rosen ST, Makuch RW, Lichter AS, et al. Role of prophylactic cranial irradiation in prevention of central nervous system metastases in small cell lung cancer. Potential benefit restricted to
patients with complete response. Am J Med 1983;74:615.
258. Glantz MJ, Choy H, Yee L. Prophylactic cranial irradiation in small cell lung cancer: rationale, results, and recommendations. Semin Oncol 1997;24:477.
259. Einhorn L. The case against prophylactic cranial irradiation in limited small cell lung cancer. Semin Radiat Oncol 1995;5:57.
260. Hansen HH, Dombernowsky P, Hirsch FR, et al. Prophylactic irradiation in bronchogenic small cell anaplastic carcinoma. A comparative trial of localized versus extensive radiotherapy
including prophylactic brain irradiation in patients receiving combination chemotherapy. Cancer 1980;46:279.
261. Aroney RS, Aisner J, Wesley MN, et al. Value of prophylactic cranial irradiation given at complete remission in small cell lung carcinoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:675.
262. Beiler DD, Kane RC, Bernath AM, et al. Low dose elective brain irradiation in small cell carcinoma of the lung. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1979;5:941.
263. Cox JD, Petrovich Z, Paig C, et al. Prophylactic cranial irradiation in patients with inoperable carcinoma of the lung: preliminary report of a cooperative trial. Cancer 1978;42:1135.
264. Eagan RT, Frytak S, Lee RE, et al. A case for preplanned thoracic and prophylactic whole brain radiation therapy in limited small-cell lung cancer. Cancer Clin Trials 1981;4:261.
265. Jackson DV Jr, Richards FD, Cooper MR, et al. Prophylactic cranial irradiation in small cell carcinoma of the lung. A randomized study. JAMA 1977;237:2730.
266. Katsenis AT, Karpasitis N, Grannakakis D, et al. Elective brain irradiation in patients with small cell carcinoma of the lung. In: Lung cancer. Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica, 1982: 558.
267. Seydel HG, Creech R, Pagano M, et al. Prophylactic versus no brain irradiation in regional small cell lung carcinoma. Am J Clin Oncol 1985;8:218.
268. Niiranen A, Holsti P, Salmo M. Treatment of small cell lung cancer. Two-drug versus four-drug chemotherapy and loco-regional irradiation with or without prophylactic cranial irradiation. Acta
Oncol 1989;28:501.
269. Kristjansen PE, Hansen HH. Prophylactic cranial irradiation in small cell lung canceran update. Lung Cancer 1995;12(Suppl 3):S23.
270. Auperin A, Arriagada R, Pignon JP, et al. Prophylactic cranial irradiation for patients with small-cell lung cancer in complete remission. Prophylactic Cranial Irradiation Overview Collaborative
Group [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1999;341:476.
271. Arriagada R. Re: Prophylactic cranial irradiation for patients with small-cell lung cancer [letter; comment]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:766; discussion 767.
272. Gregor A, Cull A, Stephens RJ, et al. Prophylactic cranial irradiation is indicated following complete response to induction therapy in small cell lung cancer: results of a multicentre randomised
trial. United Kingdom Coordinating Committee for Cancer Research (UKCCCR) and the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) [see comments]. Eur J Cancer
1997;33:1752.
273. Meyers CA, Byrne KS, Komaki R. Cognitive deficits in patients with small cell lung cancer before and after chemotherapy. Lung Cancer 1995;12:231.
274. Baglan RJ, Marks JE. Comparison of symptomatic and prophylactic irradiation of brain metastases from oat cell carcinoma of the lung. Cancer 1981;47:41.
275. Cox JD, Komaki R, Byhardt RW, et al. Results of whole brain irradiation for metastases from small cell carcinoma of the lung. Cancer Treat Rep 1980;64:957.
276. Lucas CF, Robinson B, Hoskin PJ, et al. Morbidity of cranial relapse in small cell lung cancer and the impact of radiation therapy. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:565.
277. Fleck JF, Einhorn LH, Lauer RC, et al. Is prophylactic cranial irradiation indicated in small-cell lung cancer? J Clin Oncol 1990;8:209.
278. Johnson BE, Becker B, Goff WB, et al. Neurologic, neuropsychologic, and computed cranial tomography scan abnormalities in 2- to 10-year survivors of small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol
1985;3:1659.
279. Laukkanen E, Klonoff H, Allan B, et al. The role of prophylactic brain irradiation in limited stage small cell lung cancer: clinical, neuropsychologic, and CT sequelae. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1988;14:1109.
280. Lee JS, Umsawasdi T, Lee YY, et al. Neurotoxicity in long-term survivors of small cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:313.
281. Johnson BE, Patronas N, Hayes W, et al. Neurologic, computed cranial tomographic, and magnetic resonance imaging abnormalities in patients with small-cell lung cancer: further follow-up of
6- to 13-year survivors. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:48.
282. Turrisi AT. Brain irradiation and systemic chemotherapy for small-cell lung cancer: dangerous liaisons? [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:196.
283. Frytak S, Shaw JN, O'Neill BP, et al. Leukoencephalopathy in small cell lung cancer patients receiving prophylactic cranial irradiation. Am J Clin Oncol 1989;12:27.
284. Urtasun RC, Belch A, Bodnar D, et al. Radiation as a non-cross resistant systemic agent: experience with hemibody and total body irradiation in patients with small cell lung cancer. Cancer
Treat Symp 1985;2:41.
285. Huttner J, Wiener N, Quadt C, et al. A randomized clinical trial comparing systemic radiotherapy versus chemotherapy versus local radiotherapy in small cell lung cancer. Eur J Cancer Clin
Oncol 1989;25:933.
286. Byhardt RW, Cox JD, Wilson JF, et al. Total body irradiation vs. chemotherapy as a systemic adjuvant for small cell carcinoma of the lung. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1979; 5:2043.
287. Powell BL, Jackson DV Jr, Scarantino CW, et al. Sequential hemibody irradiation integrated into a chemotherapy-local radiotherapy program for limited disease small cell lung cancer. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1951.
288. Dillman RO, Seagren SL, Taetle R. Failure of low-dose, total-body irradiation to augment combination chemotherapy in extensive-stage small cell carcinoma of the lung. J Clin Oncol
1983;1:242.
289. CancerAJCO. Lung cancer. In: Beahrs O, Henson D, Hutter R, et al., eds. Manual for staging cancer. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1988:115.
290. Meyer JA. Effect of histologically verified TNM stage on disease control in treated small cell carcinoma . Cancer 1985;55:1747.
291. Shields TW, Higgins GA Jr, Matthews MJ, et al. Surgical resection in the management of small cell carcinoma of the lung. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1982;84:481.
292. Meyer JA. Indications for surgical treatment in small cell carcinoma of the lung. Surg Clin North Am 1987;67:1103.
293. Shepherd FA, Evans WK, Feld R, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy followed by surgical resection for small cell carcinoma of the lung. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:832.
294. Angeletti CA, Macchiarini P, Mussi A, et al. Influence of T and N stages on long-term survival in resectable small cell lung cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol 1989;15:337.
295. Shepherd FA, Ginsberg RJ, Patterson GA, et al. A prospective study of adjuvant surgical resection after chemotherapy for limited small cell lung cancer. A University of Toronto Lung Oncology
Group study. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1989;97:177.
296. Williams CJ, McMillan I, Lea R, et al. Surgery after initial chemotherapy for localized small-cell carcinoma of the lung. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1579.
297. Johnson DH, Einhorn LH, Mandelbaum I, et al. Postchemotherapy resection of residual tumor in limited stage small cell lung cancer. Chest 1987;92:241.
298. Gazdar AF, Linnoila RI. The pathology of lung cancerchanging concepts and newer diagnostic techniques. Semin Oncol 1988;15:215.
299. Abeloff MD, Eggleston JC, Mendelsohn G, et al. Changes in morphologic and biochemical characteristics of small cell carcinoma of the lung. A clinicopathologic study. Am J Med 1979;66:757.
300. Carney DN, Gazdar AF, Bepler G, et al. Establishment and identification of small cell lung cancer cell lines having classic and variant features. Cancer Res 1985;45:2913.
301. Sridhar KS, Hussein AM, Thurer RJ. Evolving role of surgical treatment in limited-disease small cell lung carcinoma. J Surg Oncol 1989;40:155.
302. Baker RR, Ettinger DS, Ruckdeschel JD, et al. The role of surgery in the management of selected patients with small-cell carcinoma of the lung. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:697.
303. Hara N, Ohta M, Ichinose Y, et al. Influence of surgical resection before and after chemotherapy on survival in small cell lung cancer. J Surg Oncol 1991;47:53.
304. Prasad US, Naylor AR, Walker WS, et al. Long term survival after pulmonary resection for small cell carcinoma of the lung [see comments]. Thorax 1989;44:784.

305. Higgins GA, Shields TW. Experience of the Veterans Administration Surgical Adjuvant Group. In: Muggia FM, Rozencweig M, eds. Lung cancer: progress in therapeutic research. New York:
Raven, 1979:433.
306. Karrer K, Pridun N, Denck H. Chemotherapy as an adjuvant to surgery in lung cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1978;1:145.
307. Shields TW, Humphrey EW, Eastridge CE, et al. Adjuvant cancer chemotherapy after resection of carcinoma of the lung. Cancer 1977;40:2057.
308. Wingfield HV. Combined surgery and chemotherapy for carcinoma of the bronchus. Lancet 1970;1:470.
309. Karrer K, Shields TW, Denck H, et al. The importance of surgical and multimodality treatment for small cell bronchial carcinoma [see comments]. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1989;97:168.
310. Friess GG, McCracken JD, Troxell ML, et al. Effect of initial resection of small-cell carcinoma of the lung: a review of Southwest Oncology Group Study 7628. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:964.
311. Macchiarini P, Hardin M, Basolo F, et al. Surgery plus adjuvant chemotherapy for T1-3N0M0 small-cell lung cancer. Rationale for current approach [see comments]. Am J Clin Oncol
1991;14:218.
312. Hayata Y, Funatsu H, Suemasu K, et al. Surgical indications in small cell carcinoma of the lung. Jpn J Clin Oncol 1978;8:93.
313. Osterlind K, Hansen M, Hansen HH, et al. Influence of surgical resection before chemotherapy on the long-term results in small cell lung cancer. A study of 150 operable patients. Eur J Cancer
Clin Oncol 1986;22:589.
314. Rea F, Callegaro D, Favaretto A, et al. Long term results of surgery and chemotherapy in small cell lung cancer. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1998;14:398.
315. Lucchi M, Mussi A, Chella A, et al. Surgery in the management of small cell lung cancer. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1997;12:689.
316. Osterlind K, Hansen M, Hansen HH, et al. Treatment policy of surgery in small cell carcinoma of the lung: retrospective analysis of a series of 874 consecutive patients. Thorax 1985;40:272.
317. Quoix E, Fraser R, Wolkove N, et al. Small cell lung cancer presenting as a solitary pulmonary nodule. Cancer 1990;66:577.
318. Warren WH, Memoli VA, Jordan AG, et al. Reevaluation of pulmonary neoplasms resected as small cell carcinomas. Significance of distinguishing between well-differentiated and small cell
neuroendocrine carcinomas. Cancer 1990;65:1003.
319. Holoye PY, Shirinian M. Adjuvant surgery in the multimodality treatment of small-cell lung cancer. Am J Clin Oncol 1991;14:251.
320. Prager RL, Foster JM, Hainsworth JD, et al. The feasibility of adjuvant surgery in limited-stage small cell carcinoma: a prospective evaluation. Ann Thorac Surg 1984;38:622.
321. Meyer JA, Gullo JJ, Ikins PM, et al. Adverse prognostic effect of N2 disease in treated small cell carcinoma of the lung. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1984;88:495.
322. Shepherd FA, Ginsberg R, Patterson GA, et al. Is there ever a role for salvage operations in limited small-cell lung cancer? [see comments]. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1991; 101:196.
323. Lad T, Piantadosi S, Thomas P, et al. A prospective randomized trial to determine the benefit of surgical resection of residual disease following response of small cell lung cancer to
combination chemotherapy. Chest 1994;106(Suppl 6):320S.
324. Fujimori K, Yokoyama A, Kurita Y, et al. A pilot phase 2 study of surgical treatment after induction chemotherapy for resectable stage I to IIIA small cell lung cancer. Chest 1997;111:1089.
325. Girling DJ. Comparison of oral etoposide and standard intravenous multidrug chemotherapy for small-cell lung cancer: a stopped multicentre randomised trial. Medical Research Council Lung
Cancer Working Party. Lancet 1996;348:563.
326. Souhami RL, Spiro SG, Rudd RM, et al. Five-day oral etoposide treatment for advanced small-cell lung cancer: randomized comparison with intravenous chemotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst
1997;89:577.
327. Seifter EJ, Ihde DC. Therapy of small cell lung cancer: a perspective on two decades of clinical research. Semin Oncol 1988;15:278.
328. Livingston RB, Mira JG, Chen TT, et al. Combined modality treatment of extensive small cell lung cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:585.
329. Livingston RB, Schulman S, Mira JG, et al. Combined alkylators and multiple-site irradiation for extensive small cell lung cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. Cancer Treat Rep
1986;70:1395.
330. Jeremic B, Shibamoto Y, Nikolic N, et al. Role of radiation therapy in the combined-modality treatment of patients with extensive disease small-cell lung cancer: a randomized study. J Clin
Oncol 1999;17:2092.
331. Wilson HE, Stanley K, Vincent RG, et al. Comparison of chemotherapy alone versus chemotherapy and radiotherapy for extensive small cell carcinoma of the lung. J Surg Oncol 1983;23:181.
332. Carmichael J, Crane JM, Bunn PA, et al. Results of therapeutic cranial irradiation in small cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14:455.
333. Groen HJ, Smit EF, Haaxma-Reiche H, et al. Carboplatin as second line treatment for recurrent or progressive brain metastases from small cell lung cancer. Eur J Cancer 1993;12:1696.
334. Postmus PE, Smit EF, Haaxma-Reiche H, et al. Teniposide for brain metastases of small-cell lung cancer: a phase II study. European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Lung
CancerCooperative Group. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:660.
335. Postmus PE, Haaxma-Reiche H, Gregor A, et al. Brain-only metastases of small cell lung cancer; efficacy of whole brain radiotherapy. An EORTC phase II study. Radiother Oncol 1998;46:29.
336. Goldie JH, Coldman AJ. A mathematical model for relating the drug sensitivity of tumors to their spontaneous mutation rate. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:1727.
337. Goldie JH, Coldman AJ, Gudauskas GA. Rationale for the use of alternating non-cross-resistant chemotherapy. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:439.
338. Evans WK, Feld R, Murray N, et al. Superiority of alternating non-cross-resistant chemotherapy in extensive small cell lung cancer. A multicenter, randomized clinical trial by the National
Cancer Institute of Canada [published erratum appears in Ann Intern Med 1988;108:496]. Ann Intern Med 1987;107:451.
339. Postmus PE, Scagliotti G, Groen HJ, et al. Standard versus alternating non-cross-resistant chemotherapy in extensive small cell lung cancer: an EORTC Phase III trial. Eur J Cancer
1996;32A:1498.
340. Osterlind K, Sorenson S, Hansen HH, et al. Continuous versus alternating combination chemotherapy for advanced small cell carcinoma of the lung. Cancer Res 1983;43:6085.
341. Andersen M, Kristjansen PE, Hansen HH. Second-line chemotherapy in small cell lung cancer. Cancer Treat Rev 1990;17:427.
342. Postmus PE, Smit EF, Kirkpatrick A, et al. Testing the possible non-cross resistance of two equipotent combination chemotherapy regimens against small-cell lung cancer: a phase II study of
the EORTC Lung Cancer Cooperative Group. Eur J Cancer 1993;2:204.
343. Wolf M, Pritsch M, Drings P, et al. Cyclic-alternating versus response-oriented chemotherapy in small-cell lung cancer: a German multicenter randomized trial of 321 patients. J Clin Oncol
1991;9:614.
344. Feld R, Evans WK, Coy P, et al. Canadian multicenter randomized trial comparing sequential and alternating administration of two non-cross-resistant chemotherapy combinations in patients
with limited small-cell carcinoma of the lung. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1401.
345. Goodman GE, Crowley JJ, Blasko JC, et al. Treatment of limited small-cell lung cancer with etoposide and cisplatin alternating with vincristine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide versus
concurrent etoposide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide and chest radiotherapy: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:39.
346. Urban T, Baleyte T, Chastang CL, et al. Standard combination versus alternating chemotherapy in small cell lung cancer: a randomised clinical trial including 394 patients. ‘Petites Cellules'
Group. Lung Cancer 1999;25:105.
347. Aisner J, Whitacre M, Van Echo DA, et al. Combination chemotherapy for small cell carcinoma of the lung: continuous versus alternating non-cross-resistant combinations. Cancer Treat Rep
1982;66:221.
348. Ettinger DS, Lagakos S. Phase III study of CCNU, cyclophosphamide, adriamycin, vincristine, and VP-16 in small-cell carcinoma of the lung. Cancer 1982;49:1544.
349. Osterlind K, Hansen M, Hirsch FR, et al. Combination chemotherapy of limited-stage small-cell lung cancer. A controlled trial on 221 patients comparing two alternating regimens. Ann Oncol
1991;2:41.
350. Havemann K, Wolf M, Holle R, et al. Alternating versus sequential chemotherapy in small cell lung cancer. A randomized German multicenter trial. Cancer 1987;59:1072.
351. Teicher BA. Preclinical models for high-dose therapy. In: Armitage JO, Antman KH, eds. High-dose chemotherapy: pharmacology, hematopoietins, stem cells. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins,
1992:14.
352. Schabel FM Jr, Griswold DP Jr, Corbett TH, et al. Increasing the therapeutic response rates to anticancer drugs by applying the basic principles of pharmacology. Cancer 1984;54:1160.
353. Linch DC, Winfield D, Goldstone AH, et al. Dose intensification with autologous bone-marrow transplantation in relapsed and resistant Hodgkin's disease: results of a BNLI randomised trial.
Lancet 1993;341:1051.
354. Attal M, Harousseau JL, Stoppa AM, et al. A prospective, randomized trial of autologous bone marrow transplantation and chemotherapy in multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med 1996;335:91.
355. Shipp MA, Abeloff MD, Antman KH, et al. International consensus conference on high-dose therapy with hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: report
of the jury. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:423.
356. Hryniuk W, Bush H. The importance of dose intensity in chemotherapy of metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:1281.
357. Levin L, Hryniuk W. The application of dose intensity to problems in chemotherapy of ovarian and endometrial cancer. Semin Oncol 1987;14:12.
358. De Vathaire F, Arriagada R, de The' H, et al. Dose intensity of initial chemotherapy may have an impact on survival in limited small cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer 1993;8:301.
359. Klasa RJ, Murray N, Coldman AJ. Dose-intensity meta-analysis of chemotherapy regimens in small-cell carcinoma of the lung. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:499.
360. Cohen MH, Creaven PJ, Fossieck BE Jr, et al. Intensive chemotherapy of small cell bronchogenic carcinoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1977;61:349.
361. Mehta C, Vogl SE, Farber S, et al. High-dose cyclophosphamide (C) in the induction (IND) chemotherapy (CT) of small cell lung cancer (SCLC)-minor improvements in the rate of remission
and survival. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1982;23:165(abst).
362. Figueredo AT, Hryniuk WM, Strautmanis I, et al. Co-trimoxazole prophylaxis during high-dose chemotherapy of small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:54.
363. Arriagada R, Le Chevalier T, Pignon JP, et al. Initial chemotherapeutic doses and survival in patients with limited small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1848.
364. Johnson DH, Einhorn LH, Birch R, et al. A randomized comparison of high-dose versus conventional-dose cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine for extensive-stage small-cell lung
cancer: a phase III trial of the Southeastern Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1731.
365. Ihde DC, Mulshine JL, Kramer BS, et al. Prospective randomized comparison of high-dose and standard-dose etoposide and cisplatin chemotherapy in patients with extensive-stage small-cell
lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2022.
366. Brower M, Ihde DC, Johnston-Early A, et al. Treatment of extensive stage small cell bronchogenic carcinoma. Effects of variation in intensity of induction chemotherapy. Am J Med
1983;75:993.
367. Gridelli C, Perrone F, D'Aprile M, et al. Phase II study of intensive CEV (carboplatin, epirubicin and VP-16) plus G-CSF (granulocyte-colony stimulating factor) in extensive small cell lung
cancer [letter]. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:2424.
368. Pujol JL, Douillard JY, Riviere A, et al. Dose-intensity of a four-drug chemotherapy regimen with or without recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in
extensive-stage small-cell lung cancer: a multicenter randomized phase III study. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2082.
369. Steward WP, von Pawel J, Gatzemeier U, et al. Effects of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and dose intensification of V-ICE chemotherapy in small-cell lung cancer: a
prospective randomized study of 300 patients. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:642.
370. Thatcher N, Girling DJ, Hopwood P, et al. Improving survival without reducing quality of life in small-cell lung cancer patients by increasing the dose-intensity of chemotherapy with granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor support: results of a British Medical Research Council Multicenter Randomized Trial. Medical Research Council Lung Cancer Working Party. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:395.
371. Clark SC, Kamen R. The hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors. Science 1987;236:1229.
372. Crawford J, Ozer H, Stoller R, et al. Reduction by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor of fever and neutropenia induced by chemotherapy in patients with small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med
1991;325:164.
373. Trillet-Lenoir V, Green J, Manegold C, et al. Recombinant granulocyte colony stimulating factor reduces the infectious complications of cytotoxic chemotherapy. Eur J Cancer 1993;29A:319.
374. Glaspy JA, Bleecker G, Crawford J, et al. The impact of therapy with filgrastim (recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor) on the health care costs associated with cancer
chemotherapy. Eur J Cancer 1993;29A:S23.
375. Lyman GH, Lyman CG, Sanderson RA, et al. Decision analysis of hematopoietic growth factor use in patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:488.
376. Update of recommendations for the use of hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors: evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1957.
377. Nichols CR, Fox EP, Roth BJ, et al. Incidence of neutropenic fever in patients treated with standard-dose combination chemotherapy for small-cell lung cancer and the cost impact of treatment
with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1245.
378. Chouaid C, Bassinet L, Fuhrman C, et al. Routine use of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor is not cost-effective and does not increase patient comfort in the treatment of small-cell lung
cancer: an analysis using a Markov model. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2700.
379. Miles DW, Fogarty O, Ash CM, et al. Received dose-intensity: a randomized trial of weekly chemotherapy with and without granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in small-cell lung cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1994;12:77.
380. Woll PJ, Hodgetts J, Lomax L, et al. Can cytotoxic dose-intensity be increased by using granulocyte colony-stimulating factor? A randomized controlled trial of lenograstim in small-cell lung
cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:652.

381. Fukuoka M, Masuda N, Negoro S, et al. CODE chemotherapy with and without granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in small-cell lung cancer. Br J Cancer 1997;75:306.
382. Furuse K, Fukuoka M, Nishiwaki Y, et al. Phase III study of intensive weekly chemotherapy with recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor versus standard chemotherapy in
extensive-disease small-cell lung cancer. The Japan Clinical Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2126.
383. Bunn PA Jr, Crowley J, Kelly K, et al. Chemoradiotherapy with or without granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in the treatment of limited-stage small-cell lung cancer: a
prospective phase III randomized study of the Southwest Oncology Group [published erratum appears in J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2860]. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1632.
384. Savarese DM, Hsieh C, Stewart FM. Clinical impact of chemotherapy dose escalation in patients with hematologic malignancies and solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2981.
385. Antman K, Tiersten A. High-dose chemotherapy for breast cancer: evolving data. Oncology 1999;13:1215.
386. McGuire WP. High-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow or stem cell reconstitution for solid tumors. Curr Probl Cancer 1998;22:135.
387. Stahel RA, Takvorian RW, Skarin AT, et al. Autologous bone marrow transplantation following high-dose chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, BCNU and VP-16 in small cell carcinoma of the
lung and a review of current literature. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1984;20:1233.
388. Eder JP, Antman K, Elias A, et al. Cyclophosphamide and thiotepa with autologous bone marrow transplantation in patients with solid tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:1221.
389. Lazarus HM, Spitzer TR, Creger RJ. Phase I trial of high-dose etoposide, high-dose cisplatin, and reinfusion of autologous bone marrow for lung cancer. Am J Clin Oncol 1990;13:107.
390. Farha P, Spitzer G, Valdivieso M, et al. High-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation for the treatment of small cell lung carcinoma. Cancer 1983;52:1351.
391. Littlewood TJ, Bentley DP, Smith AP. High-dose etoposide with autologous bone marrow transplantation as initial treatment of small cell lung cancera negative report. Eur J Respir Dis
1986;68:370.
392. Souhami RL, Hajichristou HT, Miles DW, et al. Intensive chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow transplantation for small-cell lung cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1989;24:321.
393. Nomura F, Shimokata K, Saito H, et al. High dose chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow transplantation for limited small cell lung cancer. Jpn J Clin Oncol 1990;20:94.
394. Elias A. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for small cell lung cancer. Chest 1999;116(suppl 3):531S.
395. Sculier JP, Klastersky J, Stryckmans P. Late intensification in small-cell lung cancer: a phase I study of high doses of cyclophosphamide and etoposide with autologous bone marrow
transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:184.
396. Spitzer G, Farha P, Valdivieso M, et al. High-dose intensification therapy with autologous bone marrow support for limited small-cell bronchogenic carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:4.
397. Cunningham D, Banham SW, Hutcheon AH, et al. High-dose cyclophosphamide and VP 16 as late dosage intensification therapy for small cell carcinoma of lung. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol 1985;15:303.
398. Humblet Y, Symann M, Bosly A, et al. Late intensification chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow transplantation in selected small-cell carcinoma of the lung: a randomized study. J Clin
Oncol 1987;5:1864.
399. Elias AD, Ayash L, Frei ED, et al. Intensive combined modality therapy for limited-stage small-cell lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:559.
400. Perey L, Rosti G, Lange A, et al. Sequential high-dose ICE chemotherapy with circulating progenitor cells (CPC) in small cell lung cancer: an EBMT study. Bone Marrow Transplant
1996;18(Suppl 1):S40.
401. Fetscher S, Brugger W, Engelhardt R, et al. Standard- and high-dose etoposide, ifosfamide, carboplatin, and epirubicin in 100 patients with small-cell lung cancer: a mature follow-up report.
Ann Oncol 1999;10:561.
402. Norton L, Simon R. The Norton-Simon hypothesis revisited. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:163.
403. Goodman GE, Crowley J, Livingston RB, et al. Treatment of limited small-cell lung cancer with concurrent etoposide/cisplatin and radiotherapy followed by intensification with high-dose
cyclophosphamide: a Southwest Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:453.
404. Leyvraz S, Perey L, Rosti G, et al. Multiple courses of high-dose ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide with peripheral-blood progenitor cells and filgrastim for small-cell lung cancer: a
feasibility study by the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3531.
405. Leonard RC, Duncan LW, Hay FG. Immunocytological detection of residual marrow disease at clinical remission predicts metastatic relapse in small cell lung cancer. Cancer Res
1990;50:6545.
406. Taylor CW, Crowley J, Williamson SK, et al. Treatment of small-cell lung cancer with an alternating chemotherapy regimen given at weekly intervals: a Southwest Oncology Group pilot study. J
Clin Oncol 1990;8:1811.
407. Alba E, Breton JJ, Alonso L, et al. Alternating chemotherapy for small-cell lung cancer. A twelve-week schedule of six drugs. Ann Oncol 1992;3:31.
408. Sculier JP, Paesmans M, Bureau G, et al. Multiple-drug weekly chemotherapy versus standard combination regimen in small-cell lung cancer: a phase III randomized study conducted by the
European Lung Cancer Working Party. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1858.
409. Souhami RL, Rudd R, Ruiz de Elvira MC, et al. Randomized trial comparing weekly versus 3-week chemotherapy in small-cell lung cancer: a Cancer Research Campaign trial. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:1806.
410. Murray N, Shah A, Osoba D, et al. Intensive weekly chemotherapy for the treatment of extensive-stage small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1632.
411. Murray N, Livingston R, Shepherd F, et al. Randomized study of CODE versus alternating CAV/EP for extensive-stage small-cell lung cancer: an intergroup study of the National Cancer
Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group and the Southwest Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 1997;17:2300.
412. Shepherd FA, Amdemichael E, Evans WK, et al. Treatment of small cell lung cancer in the elderly. J Am Geriatr Soc 1994;42:64.
413. Dajczman E, Fu LY, Small D, et al. Treatment of small cell lung carcinoma in the elderly. Cancer 1996;77:2032.
414. Murray N, Grafton C, Shah A, et al. Abbreviated treatment for elderly, infirm, or noncompliant patients with limited-stage small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3323.
415. Jara C, Gomez-Aldaravi JL, Tirado R, et al. Small-cell lung cancer in the elderlyis age of patient a relevant factor? Acta Oncol 1999;38:781.
416. Findlay MP, Griffin AM, Raghavan D, et al. Retrospective review of chemotherapy for small cell lung cancer in the elderly: does the end justify the means? Eur J Cancer 1991;27:1597.
417. Smit EF, Carney DN, Harford P, et al. A phase II study of oral etoposide in elderly patients with small cell lung cancer. Thorax 1989;44:631.
418. Byrne A, Carney DN. Small cell lung cancer in the elderly. Semin Oncol 1994;21:43.
419. Earl HM, Rudd RM, Spiro SG, et al. A randomised trial of planned versus as required chemotherapy in small cell lung cancer: a Cancer Research Campaign trial. Br J Cancer 1991;64:566.
420. Randomised trial of four-drug vs less intensive two-drug chemotherapy in the palliative treatment of patients with small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) and poor prognosis. Medical Research Council
Lung Cancer Working Party [published erratum appears in Br J Cancer 1996;74:997]. Br J Cancer 1996;73:406.
421. James LE, Gower NH, Rudd RM, et al. A randomised trial of low-dose/high-frequency chemotherapy as palliative treatment of poor-prognosis small-cell lung cancer: a Cancer Research
Campaign trial. Br J Cancer 1996;73:1563.
422. Allan SG, Gregor A, Cornbleet MA, et al. Phase II trial of vindesine and VP16-213 in the palliation of poor-prognosis patients and elderly patients with small cell lung cancer. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol 1984;13:106.
423. Cerny T, Lind M, Thatcher N, et al. A simple outpatient treatment with oral ifosfamide and oral etoposide for patients with small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Br J Cancer 1989;60:258.
424. Michel G, Leyvraz S, Bauer J, et al. Weekly carboplatin and VM-26 for elderly patients with small-cell lung cancer. Ann Oncol 1994;5:369.
425. Evans WK, Radwi A, Tomiak E, et al. Oral etoposide and carboplatin. Effective therapy for elderly patients with small cell lung cancer. Am J Clin Oncol 1995;18:149.
426. Matsui K, Masuda N, Fukuoka M, et al. Phase II trial of carboplatin plus oral etoposide for elderly patients with small-cell lung cancer. Br J Cancer 1998;77:1961.
427. Westeel V, Murray N, Gelmon K, et al. New combination of the old drugs for elderly patients with small-cell lung cancer: a phase II study of the PAVE regimen. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1940.
428. Jeremic B, Shibamoto Y, Acimovic L, et al. Carboplatin, etoposide, and accelerated hyperfractionated radiotherapy for elderly patients with limited small cell lung carcinoma: a phase II study.
Cancer 1998;82:836.
429. McCracken JD, Heilbrun L, White J, et al. Combination chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and BCG immunotherapy in extensive (metastatic) small cell carcinoma of the lung. A Southwest Oncology
Group study. Cancer 1980;46:2335.
430. McCracken JD, Chen T, White J, et al. Combination chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and BCG immunotherapy in limited small-cell carcinoma of the lung: a Southwest Oncology Group Study.
Cancer 1982;49:2252.
431. Jackson DVJ, Paschal BR, Ferree C, et al. Combination chemotherapy-radiotherapy with and without the methanol-extraction residue of Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (MER) in small cell carcinoma
of the lung: a prospective randomized trial of the Piedmont Oncology Association. Cancer 1982;50:48.
432. Cohen MH, Chretien PB, Ihde DC, et al. Thymosin fraction V and intensive combination chemotherapy. Prolonging the survival of patients with small-cell lung cancer. JAMA 1979;241:1813.
433. Scher HI, Shank B, Chapman R, et al. Randomized trial of combined modality therapy with and without thymosin fraction V in the treatment of small cell lung cancer. Cancer Res 1988;48:1663.
434. Doyle A, Martin WJ, Funa K, et al. Markedly decreased expression of class I histocompatibility antigens, protein, and mRNA in human small-cell lung cancer. J Exp Med 1985;161:1135.
435. Tanio Y, Watanabe M, Osaki T, et al. High sensitivity to peripheral blood lymphocytes and low HLA-class I antigen expression of small cell lung cancer cell lines with diverse
chemo-radiosensitivity. Jpn JCancer Res 1992;83:736.
436. Yazawa T, Kamma H, Fujiwara M, et al. Lack of class II transactivator causes severe deficiency of HLA-DR expression in small cell lung cancer. J Pathol 1999;187:191.
437. Ball ED, Sorenson GD, Pettengill OS. Expression of myeloid and major histocompatibility antigens in small cell carcinoma of the lung cell lines by cytofluorography: modulation by gamma
interferon. Cancer Res 1986;46:2335.
438. Funa K, Gazdar AF, Mattson K, et al. Interferon-mediated in vivo induction of beta 2-microglobulin on small-cell lung cancers and mid-gut carcinoids. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 1986;41:159.
439. Jones DH, Bleehen NM, Slater AJ, et al. Human lymphoblastoid interferon in the treatment of small cell lung cancer. Br J Cancer 1983;47:361.
440. Newman HF, Bleehen NM, Galazka A, et al. Small cell lung carcinoma. A phase II evaluation of r-interferon-gamma. Cancer 1987;60:2938.
441. Olesen BK, Ernst P, Nissen MH, et al. Recombinant interferon A (IFL-rA) therapy of small cell and squamous cell carcinoma of the lung. A phase II study. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1987;23:987.
442. Mattson K, Niiranen A, Pyrhonen S, et al. Natural interferon alfa as maintenance therapy for small cell lung cancer. Eur J Cancer 1992;28A:1387.
443. Prior C, Oroszy S, Oberaigner W, et al. Adjunctive interferon-alpha-2c in stage IIIB/IV small-cell lung cancer: a phase III trial [published erratum appears in Eur Respir J 1997;10:963]. Eur
Respir J 1997;10:392.
444. Ruotsalainen TM, Halme M, Tamminen K, et al. Concomitant chemotherapy and IFN-alpha for small cell lung cancer: a randomized multicenter phase III study. J Interferon Cytokine Res
1999;19:253.
445. Kelly K, Crowley JJ, Bunn PA Jr, et al. Role of recombinant interferon alfa-2a maintenance in patients with limited-stage small-cell lung cancer responding to concurrent chemoradiation: a
Southwest Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2924.
446. Jett JR, Maksymiuk AW, Su JQ, et al. Phase III trial of recombinant interferon gamma in complete responders with small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2321.
447. van Zandwijk N, Groen HJ, Postmus PE, et al. Role of recombinant interferon-gamma maintenance in responding patients with small cell lung cancer. A randomised phase III study of the
EORTC Lung Cancer Cooperative Group. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:1759.
448. Pujol JL, Gibney DJ, Su JQ, et al. Immune response induced in small-cell lung cancer by maintenance therapy with interferon gamma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1844.
449. Clamon G, Herndon J, Perry MC, et al. Interleukin-2 activity in patients with extensive small-cell lung cancer: a phase II trial of Cancer and Leukemia Group B. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:316.
450. Lynch TJ Jr, Lambert JM, Coral F, et al. Immunotoxin therapy of small-cell lung cancer: a phase I study of N901-blocked ricin. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:723.
451. Kelley MJ, Linnoila RI, Avis IL, et al. Antitumor activity of a monoclonal antibody directed against gastrin-releasing peptide in patients with small cell lung cancer. Chest 1997;112:256.
452. Grant SC, Kris MG, Houghton AN, et al. Long survival of patients with small cell lung cancer after adjuvant treatment with the anti-idiotypic antibody BEC2 plus bacillus Calmette-Guerin. Clin
Cancer Res 1999;5:1319.
453. Lebeau B, Chastang C, Brechot JM, et al. Subcutaneous heparin treatment increases survival in small cell lung cancer. “Petites Cellules” group. Cancer 1994;74:38.
454. Calvo FA, Hidalgo OF, Gonzalez F, et al. Urokinase combination chemotherapy in small cell lung cancer. A phase II study. Cancer 1992;70:2624.
455. Stanford CF. Anticoagulants in the treatment of small cell carcinoma of the bronchus. Thorax 1979;34:113.
456. Zacharski LR, Henderson WG, Rickles FR, et al. Effect of warfarin on survival in small cell carcinoma of the lung. Veterans Administration study no. 75. JAMA 1981;245:831.
457. Chahinian AP, Propert KJ, Ware JH, et al. A randomized trial of anticoagulation with warfarin and of alternating chemotherapy in extensive small-cell lung cancer by the Cancer and Leukemia
Group B. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:993.
458. Lebeau B, Chastang C, Muir JF, et al. No effect of an antiaggregant treatment with aspirin in small cell lung cancer treated with CCAVP16 chemotherapy. Results from a randomized clinical
trial of 303 patients. The “Petites Cellules” group. Cancer 1993;71:1741.
459. Lopez JA, Mann J, Grapski RT, et al. Etoposide and cisplatin salvage chemotherapy for small cell lung cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:369.

460. Shepherd FA, Evans WK, MacCormick R, et al. Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine in etoposide- and cisplatin-resistant small cell lung cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:941.
461. Monnet I, Chariot P, Quoix E, et al. Extensive small-cell lung cancer. A randomized comparison of two chemotherapy programs with early crossover in instances of failure. Association pour le
Traitement des Tumeurs Intra-Thoraciques (ATTIT). Ann Oncol 1992;3:813.
462. Ebi N, Kubota K, Nishiwaki Y, et al. Second-line chemotherapy for relapsed small cell lung cancer. Jpn J Clin Oncol 1997;27:166.
463. Giaccone G, Donadio M, Bonardi G, et al. Teniposide in the treatment of small-cell lung cancer: the influence of prior chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1264.
464. Batist G, Ihde DC, Zabell A, et al. Small-cell carcinoma of lung: reinduction therapy after late relapse. Ann Intern Med 1983;98:472.
465. Postmus PE, Berendsen HH, van Zandwijk N, et al. Retreatment with the induction regimen in small cell lung cancer relapsing after an initial response to short term chemotherapy. Eur J
Cancer Clin Oncol 1987;23:1409.
466. Vincent M, Evans B, Smith I. First-line chemotherapy rechallenge after relapse in small cell lung cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1988;21:45.
467. Groen HJ, Fokkema E, Biesma B, et al. Paclitaxel and carboplatin in the treatment of small-cell lung cancer patients resistant to cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and etoposide: a
non-cross-resistant schedule. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:927.
468. Smit EF, Berendsen HH, de Vries EG, et al. A phase II study of carboplatin and vincristine in previously treated patients with small-cell lung cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1989;25:202.
469. Kubota K, Nishiwaki Y, Kakinuma R, et al. Dose-intensive weekly chemotherapy for treatment of relapsed small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:292.
470. Albain KS, Crowley JJ, Hutchins L, et al. Predictors of survival following relapse or progression of small cell lung cancer. Southwest Oncology Group Study 8605 report and analysis of recurrent
disease data base. Cancer 1993;72:1184.
471. Shepherd FA, Ginsberg RJ, Feld R, et al. Surgical treatment for limited small-cell lung cancer. The University of Toronto Lung Oncology Group experience. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
1991;101:385.
472. Merrill RM, Henson DE, Barnes M. Conditional survival among patients with carcinoma of the lung [see comments]. Chest 1999;116:697.
473. Stephens RJ, Bailey AJ, Machin D. Long-term survival in small cell lung cancer: the case for a standard definition. Medical Research Council Lung Cancer Working Party. Lung Cancer
1996;15:297.
474. Sekine I, Nishiwaki Y, Kakinuma R, et al. Late recurrence of small-cell lung cancer: treatment and outcome. Oncology 1996;53:318.
475. Tucker MA, Murray N, Shaw EG, et al. Second primary cancers related to smoking and treatment of small-cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer Working Cadre [see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst
1997;89:1782.
476. Kawahara M, Ushijima S, Kamimori T, et al. Second primary tumours in more than 2-year disease-free survivors of small-cell lung cancer in Japan: the role of smoking cessation. Br J Cancer
1998;78:409.
477. Jacoulet P, Depierre A, Moro D, et al. Long-term survivors of small-cell lung cancer (SCLC): a French multicenter study. Groupe d'Oncologie de Langue Francaise. Ann Oncol 1997;8:1009.
478. Osterlind K, Hansen HH, Hansen M, et al. Long-term disease-free survival in small-cell carcinoma of the lung: a study of clinical determinants. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1307.
479. Lassen U, Osterlind K, Hansen M, et al. Long-term survival in small-cell lung cancer: posttreatment characteristics in patients surviving 5 to 18+ yearsan analysis of 1,714 consecutive patients.
J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1215.
480. Chute JP, Chen T, Feigal E, et al. Twenty years of phase III trials for patients with extensive-stage small-cell lung cancer: perceptible progress. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1794.
481. Lassen UN, Hirsch FR, Osterlind K, et al. Outcome of combination chemotherapy in extensive stage small-cell lung cancer: any treatment related progress? Lung Cancer 1998;20:151.
482. Remick SC, Hafez GR, Carbone PP. Extrapulmonary small-cell carcinoma. A review of the literature with emphasis on therapy and outcome. Medicine (Baltimore) 1987;66:457.
483. Johnson BE, Whang-Peng J, Naylor SL, et al. Retention of chromosome 3 in extrapulmonary small cell cancer shown by molecular and cytogenetic studies. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:1223.
484. Remick SC, Ruckdeschel JC. Extrapulmonary and pulmonary small-cell carcinoma: tumor biology, therapy, and outcome. Med Pediatr Oncol 1992;20:89.
485. Hobbs RD, Stewart AF, Ravin ND, et al. Hypercalcemia in small cell carcinoma of the pancreas. Cancer 1984;53:1552.
486. Galanis E, Frytak S, Lloyd RV. Extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma. Cancer 1997;79: 1729.
487. Koss LG, Spiro RH, Hajdu S. Small cell (oat cell) carcinoma of minor salivary gland origin. Cancer 1972;30:737.
488. Kasimis BS, Wuerker RB, Malefatto JP, et al. Prolonged survival of patients with extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma arising in the neck. Med Pediatr Oncol 1983;11:27.
489. Casas F, Ferrer F, Farrus B, et al. Primary small cell carcinoma of the esophagus: a review of the literature with emphasis on therapy and prognosis. Cancer 1997;80:1366.
490. Yamasaki M, Tateishi R, Hongo J, et al. Argyrophil small cell carcinomas of the uterine cervix. Int J Gynecol Pathol 1984;3:146.
491. Randall ME, Kim JA, Mills SE, et al. Uncommon variants of cervical carcinoma treated with radical irradiation. A clinicopathological study of 66 cases. Cancer 1986;57:816.

CHAPTER 32 Neoplasms of the Mediastinum
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 32
Neoplasms of the Mediastinum
ROBERT B. CAMERON
PATRICK J. LOEHRER
CHARLES R. THOMAS, JR.
Introduction
Anatomy
Incidence and Pathology
Diagnostic Considerations
Symptoms and Signs
Radiographic Imaging Studies
Serology and Chemistry
Invasive Diagnostic Tests
Thymic Neoplasms
Thymic Anatomy and Physiology
Thymoma
Thymic Carcinoma
Thymic Carcinoid
Thymolipoma
Germ Cell Tumors
Etiology
Classification
Incidence and Clinical Presentation
Diagnosis
Teratomas
Seminoma
Nonseminomatous Germ Cell Tumors
Mesenchymal Tumors
Neurogenic Tumors
Neurilemoma (Schwannoma)
Neurofibroma
Malignant Schwannoma
Tumors of Sympathetic Ganglia
Neuroblastomas
Granular Cell Tumor
Diagnosis
Management
Primary Cardiac Malignancies
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Tumors involving the mediastinum may be primary or secondary in nature. Primary neoplasms can originate from any mediastinal organ or tissue but most commonly
arise from thymic, neurogenic, lymphatic, germinal, and mesenchymal tissues. All primary mediastinal neoplasms, except those of thymic origin, also occur elsewhere
in the body and are discussed in other chapters. Secondary (metastatic) mediastinal tumors are more common than primary neoplasms and most frequently represent
lymphatic involvement from primary tumors of the lung or infradiaphragmatic organs, such as pancreatic, gastroesophageal, and testicular cancer. This chapter
provides an overview of primary mediastinal neoplasms. Specific tumors are covered in detail, including thymic, primary mediastinal germ cell, mesenchymal, cardiac,
and neurogenic tumors. Esophageal cancer and lymphomas are covered elsewhere, in Chapter 33.2 (Cancer of the Esophagus) and Chapter 45.1, Chapter 45.2,
Chapter 45.3, Chapter 45.4, Chapter 45.5 and Chapter 45.6 (Lymphomas).

ANATOMY
The mediastinum occupies the central portion of the thoracic cavity. It is bounded by the pleural cavities laterally, by the thoracic inlet superiorly, by the diaphragm
inferiorly, by the sternum anteriorly, and by the chest wall posteriorly. The mediastinum can be divided into three clinically relevant compartments: anterior, middle,
and posterior (Fig. 32-1A).1 The anterior mediastinum lies posterior to the sternum and anterior to the pericardium and great vessels, extending from the thoracic inlet
to the diaphragm. The middle mediastinum is defined as the space occupied by the heart, pericardium, proximal great vessels, and central airways. The posterior
mediastinum is bounded by the heart and great vessels anteriorly, the thoracic inlet superiorly, the diaphragm inferiorly, and the chest wall of the back posteriorly, and
it includes the paravertebral gutters. Table 32-1 lists the major anatomic structures within each of the compartments. A thorough understanding of each area's
contents helps define the diagnostic possibilities. Other divisions have been proposed, dividing the mediastinum into three or four compartments ( Fig. 32-1B,C).
Heitzman even proposed seven anatomic regions. 1 Although the exact scheme that should be used is still debated, these other schemes have limited clinical utility.

FIGURE 32-1. Mediastinal compartments.

TABLE 32-1. Anatomic Structures within the Mediastinum

INCIDENCE AND PATHOLOGY
Mediastinal neoplasms are uncommon tumors that can occur at any age but are most common in the third through the fifth decades of life. 2,3 and 4 Table 32-2 reviews
the classification of mediastinal neoplasms. The incidence of primary mediastinal tumors was documented in a review of 1900 patients ( Table 32-3).2 Additionally, 439
patients (18% of all mediastinal masses) were found to have cystic lesions. The distribution of primary mediastinal neoplasms is shown in Table 32-4. Thymic
neoplasms predominate in the anterior mediastinum, followed in frequency by lymphomas, germ cell tumors, and carcinoma. Bronchial, enteric, and pericardial cysts
are the most common masses in the middle mediastinum, followed by lymphomas, mesenchymal tumors, and carcinoma.5 In the posterior mediastinum, neurogenic
tumors and esophageal cancers are most common, followed by enteric cysts, mesenchymal tumors, and endocrine neoplasms. 2,3 and 4

TABLE 32-2. Classification of Mediastinal Tumors

TABLE 32-3. Relative Frequency of Primary Mediastinal Tumors

TABLE 32-4. Distribution of Primary Mediastinal Masses by Anatomic Location

The incidence of mediastinal tumors in each anatomic compartment also varies with age. In adults, 54% of mediastinal neoplasms occur in the anterior, 20% in the
middle, and 26% in the posterior mediastinum. 2 In pediatric populations, 43%, 18%, and 40% of neoplasms occur in the anterior, middle, and posterior mediastinum,
respectively.4,6 A higher incidence of thymic tumors and lymphomas in adults and neurogenic tumors in children account for these differences. Azarow 4 compared
mediastinal masses in 195 adult and 62 pediatric patients ( Table 32-5). Cysts were not included but accounted for 16% to 18% of adult and 24% of pediatric
mediastinal masses. 4 Therefore, age as well as location establishes the probable diagnosis. 2,3 and 4,6,7,8 and 9

TABLE 32-5. Relative Frequency of Primary Mediastinal Tumors in Adults and Children

DIAGNOSTIC CONSIDERATIONS
A meticulous history and physical examination, along with a variety of imaging, serologic, and invasive tests ( Table 32-6), often can confirm the suspected diagnosis.

With improved imaging, biopsy, and pathologic techniques, the majority of patients no longer require open surgical biopsy before planning definitive therapy.

TABLE 32-6. Diagnostic Evaluation of Mediastinal Masses

SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
Approximately 40% of mediastinal masses are asymptomatic and discovered incidentally on a routine chest radiograph. 2,3 The remaining 60% of cases have
symptoms related to compression or direct invasion of surrounding mediastinal structures or to paraneoplastic syndromes. Asymptomatic patients are more likely to
have benign lesions, whereas symptomatic patients more often harbor malignancies. 2,3 and 4,7,8 Davis found that 85% of patients with a malignancy were symptomatic,
but only 46% of patients with benign neoplasms had identifiable complaints. Symptoms and signs of mediastinal neoplasms are shown in Table 32-7. The most
commonly described symptoms are chest pain, cough, and dyspnea.2,3,8 Superior vena cava syndrome, Horner's syndrome, hoarseness, and neurologic deficits more
commonly occur with malignancies.10 Systemic syndromes associated with mediastinal neoplasms are shown in Table 32-8 and Table 32-9.

TABLE 32-7. Symptoms and Signs of Mediastinal Masses

TABLE 32-8. Systemic Syndromes Associated with Mediastinal Neoplasms

RADIOGRAPHIC IMAGING STUDIES
Radiographic imaging studies initially localize mediastinal neoplasms. The posteroanterior and lateral chest radiographs define the location, size, density, and
calcification of a mass, limiting the diagnostic possibilities. 11 After these results, an intravenous contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan can further
assess the nature (cystic vs. solid) of the lesion and detect fat and calcium. 12,13,14,15,16 and 17 The relationship to surrounding structures and blood vessels also can be
determined.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is used less frequently than CT. 18,19 and 20 Its advantages include multiplanar imaging and absence of ionizing radiation. 12 MRI
scans are superior to CT in defining vascular involvement and in distinguishing recurrent tumor from radiation fibrosis. 20 However, patient claustrophobia, time, and
expense limit the use of MRI scanning. Other imaging modalities that may be useful include transthoracic sonography and transesophageal echocardiography. 21,22
The utility of positron emission tomography in the evaluation of mediastinal masses is yet to be determined, but it may help clarify the nature of such masses and the
presence of neoplasm in residual mediastinal tissue after therapy. 23
SEROLOGY AND CHEMISTRY
Some mediastinal neoplasms release substances into the serum that can be measured by specific radioimmunoassays. These substances may be used to confirm a
diagnosis, evaluate response to therapy, and monitor for tumor recurrence. a-Fetoprotein (AFP), human chorionic gonadotropin-b (b-HCG), and lactate
dehydrogenase are elaborated by some germ cell tumors and should be obtained in male patients with anterior mediastinal masses. 1 Also, adrenocorticotropic
hormone, thyroid hormone, and parathormone may help differentiate certain mediastinal tumors (see Table 32-9).

TABLE 32-9. Systemic Manifestations of Hormone Production by Mediastinal Neoplasms

INVASIVE DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
The determination of the histologic diagnosis of mediastinal masses often is essential for implementation of appropriate treatment. Previously, most patients
underwent surgical procedures to establish the diagnosis of mediastinal neoplasms; however, improvements in less invasive diagnostic and immunohistochemical
techniques and in electron microscopy have greatly improved the ability to differentiate the cell types in mediastinal neoplasms. 24,25,26,27,28,29,30 and 31 CT-guided
percutaneous needle biopsy, using either fine-needle aspiration techniques and cytologic assessment or larger-core needle biopsy and histologic evaluation, now are
standard in the initial evaluation of most mediastinal masses. 32 Although fine-needle specimens are usually adequate to distinguish carcinomatous lesions, core
biopsies are recommended to distinguish most other mediastinal neoplasms, especially lymphoma and thymoma. 26,27 and 28 Most series report diagnostic yields for
percutaneous needle biopsy of 72% to 100%, and, most recently, that figure is in excess of 90%. 25,26 and 27,29 Complications include simple pneumothorax (25%),
pneumothorax requiring chest tube placement (5%), and hemoptysis (7% to 15%). 29
Surgical procedures are still occasionally required in the diagnosis of mediastinal tumors. 24,30 Mediastinoscopy is a relatively simple procedure, accomplished under
general anesthesia. It provides access to the middle and a limited portion of the upper posterior mediastinum and has a diagnostic accuracy of more than 90%. 33,34
Anterior parasternal mediastinotomy (Chamberlain procedure) yields a diagnosis in 95% of anterior mediastinal masses. 33,34 Thoracoscopy requires general
anesthesia but is minimally invasive and provides a diagnostic accuracy of nearly 100% in most areas of the mediastinum. 34 Thoracoscopy should be reserved,
however, for biopsies that cannot be obtained with mediastinoscopy or parasternal mediastinotomy. Thoracotomy is almost never necessary for diagnosis and should
be reserved for rare circumstances.

THYMIC NEOPLASMS
The thymus is an incompletely understood lymphatic organ functioning in T-lymphocyte maturation. It is composed of an epithelial stroma and lymphocytes. Although
lymphomas, carcinoid tumors, and germ cell tumors all may arise within the thymus, only thymomas, thymic carcinomas, and thymolipomas arise from true thymic
elements. Epithelial thymic neoplasms have been classified into three proposed categories: (1) thymomas, well-differentiated neoplasms; (2) atypical thymomas,
moderately differentiated neoplasms; and (3) thymic carcinomas, poorly differentiated neoplasms. This classification is based on features of glandular differentiation;
however, further validation of this system is needed. 35,36 and 37
THYMIC ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The thymus develops from a paired epithelial anlage in the ventral portion of the third pharyngeal pouch. It is closely associated with the developing parathyroid
glands. 38 The stroma of the thymus consists of epithelial cells, which are likely derived from both ectodermal and endodermal components. 39 During weeks 7 and 8 of
development, the thymus elongates and descends caudally and ventromedially into the anterior mediastinum. By week 12, a separate cortex and medulla become
evident, and mesenchymal septae develop perivascular spaces that contain blood vessels. Lymphoid cells arrive from the liver and bone marrow during week 9 and
are separated from the perivascular space by a flat layer of epithelial cells that create the blood–thymus barrier. Maturation and differentiation occurs in this
antigen-free environment. By the fourth fetal month, lymphocytes circulate to peripheral lymphoid tissue. 39
Six subtypes of epithelial cells have been identified in mature thymus. 39 Four exist primarily in the cortical region and two in the medullary region. Type 6 cells form
Hassall's corpuscles that are characteristic of thymus. These cells have an ectodermal origin and are displaced into the thymic medulla, where they hypertrophy and
form tonofilaments, finally appearing as concentric cells without nuclei. 38,39
At maturity, the thymus gland is an irregular, lobulated organ. It attains its greatest relative weight at birth, but its absolute weight increases to 30 to 40 g by puberty.
During adulthood, it slowly involutes and is replaced by adipose tissue. 39 Ectopic thymic tissue has been found to be widely distributed throughout the mediastinum
and neck, particularly the aortopulmonary window and retrocarinal area, and often is indistinguishable from mediastinal fat. 40,41 This ectopic tissue is the likely
explanation for thymomas outside the anterior mediastinum and possibly for failure of thymectomy in some cases to improve myasthenia gravis. 40,41 and 42
THYMOMA
Thymic neoplasms, mostly thymomas, constitute 30% of anterior mediastinal masses in adults. 2,3 and 4,8,43,44 Thymomas are less common in children, accounting for only
15% of anterior mediastinal masses. 8 Thymomas exhibit no gender predilection and occur most often in the fifth and sixth decades of life. 45 Nearly one-half of these
tumors are asymptomatic and are discovered only on routine radiographs. In symptomatic patients, 40% have myasthenia gravis 35 (diplopia, ptosis, dysphagia,
fatigue, etc.), whereas others complain of chest pain and symptoms of hemorrhage or compression of mediastinal structures. 45
Pathology and Classification
Ninety percent of thymomas occur in the anterior mediastinum, and the remainder are located in the neck or other areas of the mediastinum. Grossly, they are
lobulated, firm, tan-pink to gray tumors that may contain cystic spaces, calcification, or hemorrhage. They may be encapsulated, adherent to surrounding structures,
or frankly invasive. 46 Microscopically, thymomas arise from thymic epithelial cells, although lymphocytes may predominate histologically. 47 True thymomas contain
cytologically bland cells and should be distinguished from thymic carcinomas, which have malignant cytologic characteristics. Confusion exists because of previous
“benign” or “malignant” designations. Currently, the terms noninvasive and invasive are used. Noninvasive thymomas have an intact capsule, are movable, and are
easily resected, although they can be adherent to adjacent organs. In contrast, invasive thymomas involve surrounding structures and can be difficult to remove
without en bloc resection of adjacent structures. Despite this difficulty, their cytologic appearance remains benign. 46 Metastatic disease does occur and is most
commonly seen as pleural implants and pulmonary nodules. Metastases to extrathoracic sites are rare. 46
In 1985, Marino and Muller-Hermelink 48 proposed a histologic classification system determined by the thymic site of origin—that is, tumors arising from epithelial cells
of the cortex are termed cortical thymomas, those arising from the medullary areas are called medullary thymomas, and those with features of both are termed mixed
thymomas. Spindle-shaped cells predominate in the medullary area and likely correspond to spindle cell thymomas of the traditional classification system. Likewise,
the cortex contains predominantly round to oval epithelial cells; thus, cortical thymomas probably correspond to the traditional epithelial thymoma. 49 The
Muller-Hermelink classification was later revised and further divided into medullary, mixed, predominantly cortical, and cortical thymomas. Well-differentiated and
high-grade thymic carcinoma were also described. 50 Medullary and mixed thymomas were considered benign with no risk of recurrence, even with capsular invasion.
Predominantly cortical and cortical thymomas exhibited intermediate invasiveness and a low but definite risk of late relapse, regardless of their invasiveness.
Well-differentiated thymic carcinomas were always invasive, with a high risk of relapse and death. 51 Some support this revision, claiming that it better correlates
pathology with prognosis. 51,52 and 53 Others believe that it has no distinct clinicopathologic advantage over the traditional system. 49,50,54,55 and 56 This issue has been
re-examined,57,58 and the World Health Organization Committee on the Classification of Thymic Tumors adopted a new classification system for thymic neoplasms

based on cytologic similarities between certain normal thymic epithelial cells and neoplastic cells, which is of prognostic significance ( Table 32-10).59

TABLE 32-10. World Health Organization Staging System for Thymic Epithelial Tumors

In 1981, Masaoka et al.60 developed a staging system based on the previous work of Bergh et al. 61 The four stages are shown in Table 32-11. The Masaoka stage II
classification assesses both microscopic invasion (occult in 28%) and gross tumor adherence as determined by surgical findings. 49,54,62 Staging was found to correlate
with prognosis, with 5-year survival rates 96% for stage I, 86% for stage II, 69% for stage III, and 50% for stage IV. 60 The Groupe d'Etudes des Tumeurs Thymiques
(GETT) staging system is surgery-based and demonstrates 90% concordance with the Masaoka system ( Table 32-12).63,64

TABLE 32-11. Thymoma Staging System of Masaoka

TABLE 32-12. Thymoma Staging System of Groupe d'Etudes des Tumeurs Thymiques

Associated Systemic Syndromes
A wide variety of systemic disorders are associated with 71% of thymomas. 65 The symptoms of these associated disorders often lead to the original discovery of the
mediastinal tumor. Autoimmune diseases (systemic lupus erythematosus, polymyositis, myocarditis, Sjögren's syndrome, ulcerative colitis, Hashimoto's thyroiditis,
rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, and scleroderma) and endocrine disorders (hyperthyroidism, hyperparathyroidism, Addison's disease, and panhypopituitarism) are
most common.66
Blood disorders, such as red cell aplasia, hypogammaglobulinemia, T-cell deficiency syndrome, erythrocytosis, pancytopenia, megakaryocytopenia, T-cell
lymphocytosis, and pernicious anemia, also have been noted. 66 Other than myasthenia, neuromuscular syndromes include myotonic dystrophy, myositis, and
Eaton-Lambert syndrome. 66 Miscellaneous diseases include hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, nephrotic syndrome, minimal change nephropathy, pemphigus, and
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. 66 Nearly 15% of patients with thymoma develop a second malignancy, such as Kaposi's sarcoma, chemodectoma, multiple
myeloma, acute leukemia, and various carcinomas (e.g., lung, colon). 66
MYASTHENIA GRAVIS. Myasthenia gravis is the most common autoimmune disorder, occurring in 30% to 50% of patients with thymomas. Younger women and older
men usually are affected, with a female to male ratio of 2:1. Myasthenia is a disorder of neuromuscular transmission. Symptoms begin insidiously and result from the
production of antibodies to the postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptor at the myoneural junction. Ocular symptoms are the most frequent initial complaint,
eventually progressing to generalized weakness in 80%. The role of the thymus in myasthenia remains unclear, but autosensitization of T lymphocytes to
acetylcholine receptor proteins or an unknown action of thymic hormones remain possibilities. 52,67
Pathologic changes in the thymus are noted in approximately 70% of patients with myasthenia gravis. Lymphoid hyperplasia, characterized by the proliferation of
germinal centers in the medullary and cortical areas, is most commonly seen. Thymomas are identified in only about 15% of patients with myasthenia.
The treatment of myasthenia gravis involves the use of anticholinesterase-mimetic agents [i.e., pyridostigmine bromide (Mestinon)]. In severe cases, plasmapheresis
may be required to remove high antibody titers. Thymectomy has become an increasingly accepted procedure in the treatment of myasthenia, although the
indications, timing, and surgical approach remain controversial. 42 Some improvement in myasthenic symptoms almost always occurs after thymectomy, but complete
remission rates vary from 7% to 63%. 42 Patients with myasthenia gravis and thymomas do not respond as well to thymectomy as those without thymomas. Overall
survival for myasthenia patients also is lower for patients with thymomas, but no differences were noted based on the extent of invasion present. 68
RED CELL APLASIA. Pure red cell aplasia is considered an autoimmune disorder and is found in approximately 5% of patients with thymomas. Of patients with red
cell aplasia, 30% to 50% have associated thymomas. 69 Ninety-six percent of the patients affected are older than 40 years of age. Examination of the bone marrow
reveals an absence of erythroid precursors and, in 30%, an associated decrease in platelet and leukocyte numbers. Thymectomy has produced remission in 38% of

patients. Octreotide and prednisone were effective in one patient with recurrent disease. 70 The pathologic basis of these responses is poorly understood. 69
HYPOGAMMAGLOBULINEMIA. Hypogammaglobulinemia is seen in 5% to 10% of patients with thymoma, and 10% of patients with hypogammaglobulinemia have
been shown to have thymoma. Defects in both cellular and humoral immunity have been described, and many patients also have red cell hypoplasia. Thymectomy
has not proven beneficial in this disorder.
Treatment
Thymomas are slow-growing neoplasms that should be considered potentially malignant. Surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy all may play a role in their
management.
SURGERY. Complete surgical resection is the mainstay of therapy for thymomas and is the most important predictor of long-term survival. 71,72,73,74,75,76,77 Although
median sternotomy with a vertical or submammary incision is most commonly used, bilateral anterolateral thoracotomies with transverse sternotomy, or “clam-shell
procedure,” is preferred with advanced or laterally displaced tumors. 45,71,72,76 Video-assisted thoracoscopy also has been reported, but long-term results remain
unproven. 78 Because of concern about tumor seeding, biopsy procedures are not routinely performed. 72 During surgery, a careful assessment of areas of possible
invasion and adherence should be made by the surgeon, who is the best judge of tumor invasiveness. 62 Extended total thymectomy, including all tissue anterior to the
pericardium from the diaphragm to the neck and laterally from phrenic nerve to phrenic nerve, is recommended in all cases. Complete surgical resection is associated
with an 82% overall 7-year survival rate, whereas survival with incomplete resection is 71% and with biopsy is only 26%. 71 Survival after complete tumor resection has
been similar in patients with noninvasive and invasive thymomas in several studies. 60,72,74,75,79 Patients with myasthenia gravis and thymoma were studied by Crucitti
et al., 84 who reported a 78% 10-year survival rate and a 3% recurrence rate with 4.8% (1.7% since 1980) operative mortality after extended thymectomy. Aggressive
resection, including lung, phrenic nerve, pericardium, pleural implants, and pulmonary metastases, is occasionally helpful. 60,71,79
The role of debulking or subtotal resection in stage III and IV disease remains controversial. Several studies have documented 5-year survival rates from 60% to 75%
after subtotal resection and 24% to 40% after biopsy alone. 60,71,76,77,79 More recent studies, however, suggest no survival advantage to debulking followed by radiation
when compared to radiation alone. 80,81 The use of surgery in recurrent disease remains to be defined. Maggi et al. 71 reported a 71% 5-year survival rate in 12 surgery
patients and a 41% survival rate in 11 patients treated with radiation and chemotherapy alone. Prolonged tumor-free survival also was reported by Kirschner 82 in 23
patients. Urgesi et al., 83 however, noted a 74% 5-year survival rate in 11 patients undergoing surgery and radiation, compared with 65% in ten patients treated with
radiation alone (not statistically different). 83
RADIATION THERAPY. Thymomas are radiosensitive tumors and, consequently, radiation has been used to treat all tumor stages as well as recurrent
disease. 43,45,71,72,74,76,77,79,81,85 In stage I thymomas, adjuvant radiotherapy has been administered but has not improved on the excellent results with surgery alone
(more than 80% 10-year survival rate). 71,72,74,77,79 In stage II and III invasive disease, adjuvant radiation can decrease recurrence rates after complete surgical
resection from 28% to 5%.43,76,86,87 In addition, Pollack et al. 76 reported an increase in 5-year disease-free survival for stage II to IVa from 18% to 62% with the
addition of adjuvant radiation. Others have documented similar results. 72,79 Stage II patients with cortical tumors 88,89 and 90 and microscopic invasion of pleura or
pericardium are most likely to benefit from postoperative radiation. 91,92 Preoperative radiotherapy for extensive tumors has been reported in limited studies that
suggest a decreased tumor burden and potential for tumor seeding at the time of surgery. 71,77,86
Radiation therapy has proven beneficial in the treatment of extensive disease. 76,77,80,81,85,86,93 Radiotherapy after incomplete surgical resection produces local control
rates of 35% to 74% and 5-year survival rates ranging from 50% to 70% for stage III and 20% to 50% for stage IVa tumors. 72,77,80,83,85,86 In addition, Ciernik et al. 80 and
others 81,83 have reported similar survival rates (87% 5-year and 70% 7-year) in patients treated with radiation alone compared with partial surgical resection and
adjuvant radiation in small numbers of stage III and IV patients and patients with intrathoracic recurrences. Large variations in the amount of tumor treated and
radiation delivered, however, make interpretation of these results difficult. 64,76,77,80,85,94
Radiation therapy is delivered in doses ranging from 30 to 60 Gy in 1.8 or 2.0 cGy fractions over 3 to 6 weeks. 43,71,73,76,77,79,85,86,94 and 96 No improvement in local control
has been shown with doses exceeding 60 Gy80; however, completely resected and microscopic residual disease can be well controlled with only 40 to 45 Gy. 77,80,85
Treatment portals have included single anterior field, unequally weighted (2:1 or 3:2) opposed anterior-posterior fields, wedge-pair, and multifield arrangements. 43,97
The gross tumor volume is defined by visible tumor or surgical clips seen on a treatment-planning CT scan. Areas of possible microscopic disease and a small border
to account for daily variability and respiratory motion are added to define the clinical and planning target volumes. Gating techniques to minimize respiratory variation
and intensity-modulated radiation therapy are new techniques that can minimize the dose heterogeneity, increase total dose and fraction size, and minimize
toxicity.98,99 and 100 Prophylactic supraclavicular and hemithorax fields have been used but are not warranted because of increased risks of pulmonary fibrosis,
pericarditis, and myelitis. 43,77,80,81,101,102
CHEMOTHERAPY. Chemotherapy has been used with increasing frequency in the treatment of invasive thymomas. Both single-agent and combination therapy have
demonstrated activity in the adjuvant and neoadjuvant settings. Doxorubicin, cisplatin, ifosfamide, corticosteroids, and cyclophosphamide all have been used as
single-agent therapy. 103,104 The most active agents are cisplatin, ifosfamide, and corticosteroids; however, only cisplatin and ifosfamide have undergone phase II
testing. 43,104,105 Cisplatin, at doses of 100 mg/m 2, has produced complete responses lasting up to 30 months, but lower doses (50 mg/m 2) have associated response
rates of only 11%. 103,104 Ifosfamide (with mesna) at a single dose of 7.5 g/mn or as a continuous infusion of 1.5 g/m 2/d for 5 days every 3 weeks has resulted in 50%
complete and 57% overall response rates. Duration of complete remission ranged from 6 to 66 months. 105 Varying regimens of corticosteroids have shown
effectiveness in the treatment of all histologic subtypes of thymoma (with and without myasthenia), with a 77% overall response rate in limited numbers of
patients. 103,106 Corticosteroids also have been effective for patients unsuccessful with chemotherapy 103; however, the actual impact may only be on the lymphocytic
and not the malignant epithelial component of the tumor.
Combination chemotherapy regimens have shown higher response rates and have been used in both adjuvant and neoadjuvant settings in the treatment of advanced
invasive, metastatic, and recurrent thymoma. Cisplatin-containing regimens appear to be the most active. Fornasiero et al. 107 reported a 43% complete and 91.8%
overall response rate with a median survival of 15 months in 37 previously untreated patients with stage III or IV invasive thymoma treated with monthly (median, 5
months) cisplatin, 50 mg/m2 on day 1; doxorubicin, 40 mg/m2 on day 1; vincristine, 0.6 mg/m2 on day 3; and cyclophosphamide, 700 mg/m2 on day 4. Loehrer et al. 108
documented 10% complete and 50% overall response rates with a median survival of 37.7 months in 29 patients with metastatic or locally progressive recurrent
thymoma treated with cisplatin, 50 mg/m 2; doxorubicin, 50 mg/m2; and cyclophosphamide, 500 mg/mn, given every 3 weeks for a maximum of 8 cycles after
radiotherapy. Park et al. 109 retrospectively described 35% complete and 64% overall response rates with a median survival of 67 months in responding and 17 months
in nonresponding patients in 17 patients with invasive stage II and IV thymoma initially treated after relapse with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin, with or
without prednisone. The European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer noted 31% complete and 56% overall response rates with a median survival
of 4.3 years in a small study of 16 patients with advanced thymoma treated with cisplatin and etoposide. 110 The addition of ifosfamide to cisplatin and etoposide had a
lower than anticipated response rate (approximately 32%) in patients with thymoma and thymic carcinoma. 111
COMBINED NODALITY APPROACHES. The use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy as part of a multimodality approach to stage III and IV thymoma was reviewed by
Tomiak and Evans. 103 Six combined reports document 31% complete and 89% overall response rates in 61 total patients treated with a variety of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy regimens (80% cisplatin-based). Twenty-two patients (36%) underwent surgery, with 11 (18%) achieving a complete resection (all treated with
cisplatin). Nineteen patients were treated with radiotherapy, but only five patients had disease-free survivals exceeding 5 years. 103 Rea et al. 112 reported 43%
complete and 100% overall response rates with median and 3-year survival rates of 66 months and 70%, respectively, in 16 stage III and IVa patients treated initially
with cisplatin, doxorubicin, vincristine, and cyclophosphamide, followed by surgery. At surgery, 69% were completely resected and the other 31% received
postoperative radiation. Macchiarini et al. 113 reported similar findings. Twenty-five percent complete and 92% overall response rates with a remarkable 83% 7-year
disease-free survival rate were reported in 12 patients at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center who received cisplatin, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and prednisone
induction chemotherapy followed by surgical resection (80% complete) and adjuvant radiotherapy for locally advanced (unresectable) thymoma. 114 The degree of
chemotherapy-induced tumor necrosis correlated with Ki-67 expression.
A multiinstitutional prospective trial demonstrated a 22% complete and 70% overall response rate with a median survival of 93 months and a Kaplan-Meier 5-year
failure-free survival rate of 54.3% in 23 patients with stage III (22/23) unresectable thymoma (GETT stage IIIA/IIIB) stage IV (1/23) thymoma, and thymic carcinoma

(2/23) treated with 2 to 4 cycles of cisplatin, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide chemotherapy and sequential radiation therapy (54 Gy). 115,116 Just more than 25%
had myasthenia gravis. Although these results compare favorably to those obtained with neoadjuvant therapy followed by surgical resection and radiation, further
confirmation is needed.
Results of Treatment
Five- and 10-year survival rates for stage I, III, and IV tumors are reported to be 89% to 95% and 78% to 90%, 65,74,117 70% to 80% and 21% to 80%,65,74,117 and 50% to
60% and 30% to 40%,60,65,74,117 respectively. Disease-free survival rates of 74%, 71%, 50%, and 29% also have been reported for stage I, II, III, and IV disease,
respectively.71 Although Maggi et al. 71 reported a 10% overall recurrence rate in 241 patients, less than 5% of noninvasive thymomas and 20% of invasive thymomas
were noted to recur.65 Although myasthenia gravis was once considered an adverse prognostic factor, this is no longer the case because of improvements in
perioperative care. Currently, myasthenia actually may lead to improved survival owing to earlier detection of thymomas. 65,84,118,119
THYMIC CARCINOMA
Thymic carcinoma is a rare aggressive thymic neoplasm that has a poor prognosis. Like thymoma, it is an epithelial tumor, but cytologically it exhibits malignant
features. Extensive local invasion and distant metastases are common. Approximately 150 cases have been reported. 120,121,122,123,124 and 125 Suster and Rosai 120
reported the largest single series, which included 60 patients ranging in age from 10 to 76 years and with a slight male predominance. Nearly 70% of patients had
symptoms of cough, chest pain, or superior vena cava syndrome. Myasthenia and other thymoma-associated syndromes are rare. 120
The histologic classification of thymic carcinoma was proposed by Levine and Rosai 126 and revised by Suster and Rosai. 120 The tumors are classified broadly as low
or high grade. Low-grade tumors include squamous cell carcinoma, mucoepidermoid carcinoma, and basaloid carcinoma. High-grade neoplasms include
lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma and small cell, undifferentiated, sarcomatoid, and clear cell carcinomas. 120,122,123,127 The classification of thymic carcinoma has
prognostic significance, with low-grade tumors following a favorable clinical course (median survival rates of 25.4 months to more than 6.6 years) because of a low
incidence of local recurrence and metastasis, and high-grade malignancies exhibiting an aggressive clinical course (median survival of only 11.3 to 15.0
months).120,121 and 122 Although the Masaoka thymoma staging system120,122,124 and a proposed tumor-node-metastasis classification system 125 have been used in
staging thymic carcinoma, their utility is unproven. The histologic grade remains the best prognostic indicator.
The optimal treatment of thymic carcinoma remains undefined, but currently a multimodality approach, including surgical resection, postoperative radiation, and
chemotherapy, is recommended. Initial surgical resection followed by radiation has been used in most studies. 47,111,120,122 and 125 Complete resection should be
attempted, but usually is not possible. 122 One analysis noted a 9.5-month median survival after resection and postoperative electron beam radiation therapy, 111 with a
trend toward improved survival in other studies. 122,123 Chemotherapy with cisplatin-based regimens similar to those used with thymomas have produced variable
responses in small numbers of patients. 120,122 and 124 Combinations of doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and vincristine also have generated partial responses, as has the
combination of 5-fluorouracil and leukovorin. 124 Use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy has been reported in a small number of patients. 124
The prognosis of thymic carcinoma is poor because of early metastatic involvement of pleura; lung; mediastinal, cervical, and axillary lymph nodes; bone; and liver. 120
The overall survival rate at 5 years is approximately 35%. 120,122 Improved survival has been correlated with encapsulated tumors, lobular growth pattern, low mitotic
activity, and low histologic grade. 120
THYMIC CARCINOID
Thymic carcinoid tumors are rare, with fewer than 125 reported cases. 128,1,129,130 and 131 They occur predominantly in males 129 and originate from normal thymic
Kulchitsky's cells, which are part of the amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation (APUD) group. Most have the ability to manufacture peptides, amines, kinins, and
prostaglandins. They are aggressive tumors that invade locally and commonly metastasize to regional lymph nodes. Metastases occur in 70% of patients within 8
years of initial diagnosis. 131
The gross appearance of thymic carcinoids is similar to that of thymomas, but they are rarely encapsulated. Microscopically, the tumors exhibit a ribbon-like growth
pattern with rosette formation in a fibrovascular stroma. The cells are small, round, or oval with eosinophilic cytoplasm and uniformly round nuclei. 129
Immunohistochemical studies reveal argyrophilic cells that stain with cytokeratin and neuronal-specific enolase. Electron microscopy reveals the presence of
secretory granules. 130 Thymic carcinoids, like other foregut carcinoids, are associated with Cushing's syndrome, multiple endocrine neoplasia and, rarely, the
carcinoid syndrome. 129,130,131 and 132
The diagnosis of thymic carcinoid often requires open surgical biopsy. Complete surgical resection is recommended, although recurrence is common. 129,130 and 131 The
effectiveness of adjuvant therapy is unproven, but most reports advocate adjuvant radiotherapy for incompletely resected tumors. 129,130 and 131 Chemotherapy rarely has
been used in cases of metastatic or recurrent disease. 129,130 and 131
Although a 5-year survival rate of 60% has been reported with complete surgical resection, 130 local recurrences are common and distant metastases occur in
approximately 30% of patients. 129 The long-term prognosis is generally poor.
THYMOLIPOMA
Thymolipomas are rare benign neoplasms composed of mature adipose and thymic tissue, and they account for 1% to 5% of thymic neoplasms. 133 These tumors are
also known as lipothymomas, mediastinal lipomas with thymic remnants, and thymolipomatous hamartomas.133,134 In a review of 27 patients, Rosado-de-Christenson
et al.134 noted an equal gender distribution and a mean age of 27 years. Approximately 50% of patients presented with symptoms of vague chest pain, dyspnea, and
tachypnea. Others have reported, in adults only, an association with myasthenia gravis, red cell aplasia, hypogammaglobulinemia, lichen planus, and Graves'
disease. 133,135
Thymolipomas are soft, lobulated, encapsulated tumors that originate in the anterior mediastinum. They often attain a large size before becoming symptomatic. They
frequently conform to the shape of the cardiac and mediastinal structures and are found in the anterior inferior mediastinum “draped along the diaphragm” and
connected to the thymus by a small pedicle. 134 Microscopically, the tumors are composed of thymic tissue, often with calcified Hassall's corpuscles, and more than
50% adipose tissue. 134 Histologically, thymolipomas do not appear malignant, and malignant transformation does not occur. 134 Treatment involves complete resection.
Long-term follow-up is not available, but recurrences have not been reported.

GERM CELL TUMORS
The vast majority of germ cell tumors arise within gonadal tissue, but the mediastinum is the most common site for the development of extragonadal germ cell tumors.
They are most commonly seen in the anterior mediastinum and account for 10% to 15% of all primary mediastinal tumors. 2 These tumors have generated
considerable interest because of their uncertain histogenesis.
ETIOLOGY
Extragonadal germ cell tumors are found along the body's midline from the cranium (pineal gland) to the presacral area. This line corresponds to the embryologic
urogenital ridge. It is presumed that these tumors arise from malignant transformation of germ cells that have abnormally migrated during embryonic
development.136,137 Mediastinal germ cell neoplasms account for only 2% to 5% of all germinal tumors, but they constitute 50% to 70% of all extragonadal tumors. 137,138
CLASSIFICATION

Mediastinal germ cell tumors are broadly classified as benign or malignant. Benign tumors include mature teratomas and mature teratomas with an immature
component of less than 50%. Malignant germ cell tumors are divided into seminomas (dysgerminomas) and nonseminomatous tumors. Nonseminomatous tumors
include embryonal carcinomas, choriocarcinomas, yolk sac tumors, and immature teratomas. 139 Seminomas may exist in a pure form, but any elevation of AFP
indicates the presence of an element of a nonseminomatous tumor. In addition, mediastinal germ cell tumors have a propensity to develop a component of non–germ
cell malignancy (e.g., rhabdomyosarcoma, adenocarcinoma, permeative neuroectodermal tumor), which can become the predominant histology.
INCIDENCE AND CLINICAL PRESENTATION
In adults, benign germ cell tumors have no gender predilection, but 90% of malignant germ cell tumors occur in men. 136 In the pediatric population, both benign and
malignant extragonadal germ cell tumors occur with equal gender distribution. Mediastinal germ cell tumors are most commonly diagnosed in the third decade of life,
but patients as old as 60 years of age have been reported. The incidence of these neoplasms is equal in all races. Many patients with benign tumors, including 50%
of teratomas, are asymptomatic; however, 90% to 100% of patients with malignant tumors have symptoms of chest pain, dyspnea, cough, fever, or other findings
related to compression or invasion of surrounding mediastinal structures. 140,141
DIAGNOSIS
Mediastinal germ cell tumors are most often detected on the basis of standard chest radiographs. More than 95% of the chest films are abnormal, with almost all
masses noted in the anterior mediastinum. Three percent to 8% of tumors arise within the posterior mediastinum. 136 Chest CT scans demonstrate the extent of
disease, relationship to surrounding structures, and presence of cystic areas and calcification within the tumor. Abdominal imaging should be performed to assess for
possible liver metastases. Although careful examination of the testes, including a testicular ultrasound, should always be performed, an isolated tumor mass in the
anterior mediastinum without retroperitoneal involvement is not consistent with a testicular primary tumor. It is not necessary to perform blind orchiectomy or testicular
biopsy in patients with normal physical examinations and unremarkable ultrasound findings. 137
Determination of serum tumor markers is important in the diagnosis and follow-up of mediastinal germ cell tumors. Immunoassays for b-HCG and AFP should be
obtained in all patients possessing mediastinal masses suspicious for germ cell tumors. Elevations of b-HCG and AFP confirm a malignant component to the tumor.
AFP or b-HCG, or both, are elevated in 80% to 85% of nonseminomatous germ cell tumors, with AFP being detected in 60% to 80% of these tumors and b-HCG in
30% to 50%.140 Patients with benign teratomas have normal markers, and patients with pure seminoma may have low levels of b-HCG, but AFP is not detected.
TERATOMAS
Benign teratomas are the most common mediastinal germ cell tumor, accounting for 70% of the mediastinal germ cell tumors in children and 60% of those in adults. 136
They can be seen in any age group but most commonly occur in adults from 20 to 40 years of age. There is no gender predilection.
Teratomas may be solid or cystic in appearance and are often referred to as dermoid cysts if unilocular. Teratomas contain elements from all three germ cell layers,
with a predominance of the ectodermal component in most tumors, including skin, hair, sweat glands, sebaceous glands, and teeth. Mesoderm is represented by fat,
smooth muscle, bone, and cartilage. Respiratory and intestinal epithelium are often seen as the endodermal component. The majority of mediastinal teratomas are
composed of mature ectodermal, mesodermal, and endodermal elements and exhibit a benign course. Immature teratomas phenotypically may appear as a
malignancy derived from these ectodermal, mesodermal, and endodermal elements. These latter tumors behave aggressively and generally are not responsive to
systemic therapy.
Treatment of “benign” mediastinal teratoma includes complete surgical resection, which results in excellent long-term cure rates. Radiotherapy and chemotherapy
play no role in the management of this tumor. The tumor may be adherent to surrounding structures, necessitating resection of pericardium, pleura, or lung. Complete
resection of teratomas should be the goal of treatment. Resection of mature teratomas has been shown to result in prolonged survival with little chance of
recurrence.139,142 Immature teratomas are potentially malignant tumors; their prognosis is influenced by the anatomic site of the tumor, patient age, and the fraction of
the tumor that is immature.139 In patients younger than 15 years, immature teratomas behave similarly to their mature counterparts. In older patients, they may behave
as highly malignant tumors. Currently, a trial of cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy (up to 4 cycles of cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin or vinblastine,
ifosfamide, and cisplatin, if responding) is frequently administered before attempted surgical resection. 139
SEMINOMA
Primary pure mediastinal seminoma accounts for approximately 35% of malignant mediastinal germ cell tumors; it is principally seen in men aged 20 to 40 years. 143
Seminomas grow slowly and metastasize later than their nonseminomatous counterparts, and they may have reached a large size by the time of diagnosis. Symptoms
are usually related to compression or even invasion of surrounding mediastinal structures. Twenty percent to 30% of mediastinal seminomas are asymptomatic when
discovered, 143 but metastases are present in 60% to 70% of patients. Pulmonary and other intrathoracic metastases are most commonly seen. Extrathoracic
metastases usually involve bone. 143
The treatment of mediastinal seminoma has evolved since the early 1970s. Definitive conclusions regarding treatment are difficult, because several potentially
curative treatment modalities exist. Seminomas are extremely radiosensitive tumors, and for many years, high-dose mediastinal radiation has been used as initial
therapy, resulting in long-term survival rates of 60% to 80%. 144 A review of recommendations for radiation therapy treatment in extragonadal seminoma was reported
by Hainsworth and Greco. 143 Thirty-five to 40 Gy are the most commonly used radiation doses. Doses as low as 20 Gy have been reported to be curative, but most
reports note a significant local recurrence rate with doses of less than 45 Gy. 143 Radiation portals should include a shaped mediastinal field and both supraclavicular
areas. 143
Mediastinal seminoma often presents as bulky, extensive, and locally invasive disease, requiring large radiotherapy portals. These portals result in excessive
irradiation of surrounding normal lung, heart, and other mediastinal structures. Additionally, for 20% to 40% of patients in whom local control is achieved, treatment
can be expected to fail at distant sites. 136,143
Chemotherapy was previously used only in advanced gonadal seminoma, but encouraging results and the above-mentioned problems with radiotherapy have led to
broadened indications; chemotherapy is now being used as initial therapy in many patients with bulky tumors. Pure mediastinal seminoma falls into the
intermediate-risk category of the new International Staging System for Germ Cell Tumors. Even patients with visceral metastases fall into this intermediate category
and, as such, have a prognosis with cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy exceeding 75% for 5-year survival. Standard systemic therapy consists of
cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy. Lemarie and coworkers 140 reported that 12 of 13 patients treated experienced complete remission, with two recurrences
after treatment. Cisplatin-based combination therapy achieved a complete response in three of five patients treated by Giaccione. 145 A collective review of 52 patients
was undertaken by Hainsworth and Greco. 143 Fourteen patients had received prior radiation therapy, but all underwent chemotherapy with cisplatin and various
combinations of cyclophosphamide, vinblastine, bleomycin, or etoposide. Complete responses to treatment were noted in 85% of patients, and 83% were long-term
disease-free survivors. 143 Although chemotherapy appears to be a superior modality in these small series, radiotherapy is less toxic, and the high salvage rate with
chemotherapy after radiotherapy failure makes selection difficult. Therefore, the recommended treatment is either supradiaphragmatic radiation or 4 cycles of
cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy.
The management of patients with residual radiographic abnormalities after chemotherapy is controversial. Studies have shown that the residual mass is a dense
scirrhous reaction in 85% to 90% of patients, and the presence of viable seminoma is rare. Others have shown a 25% incidence of residual viable seminoma in these
patients treated with chemotherapy followed by resection of residual masses larger than 3 cm. 146 Close observation without surgery is recommended for residual
masses after chemotherapy unless the mass enlarges. 147,148 Empiric radiation therapy is not recommended. 143
Most authors believe that surgery does not play a role in the definitive treatment of seminoma. 144 In addition, surgical debulking of large tumors has not been shown to
be of benefit in improving local control or survival. 143
All patients with mediastinal seminoma should be treated with curative intent. Isolated mediastinal seminoma without evidence of metastatic disease is most often

managed with radiotherapy alone, with an excellent prognosis and long-term survival. Locally advanced and bulky disease may be treated initially with cisplatin-based
combination chemotherapy, usually 4 cycles of cisplatin and etoposide, with radiotherapy, and followed by salvage chemotherapy (vinblastine, ifosfamide, and
cisplatin) in the event of recurrence. 149 Patients with distant metastases should undergo cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy as initial treatment.
NONSEMINOMATOUS GERM CELL TUMORS
Nonseminomatous germ cell tumors include choriocarcinoma, embryonal carcinoma, teratoma, and endodermal sinus (yolk sac) tumors. They may occur in pure form,
but in approximately one-third of cases, multiple cell types are present. Other malignant components, including adenocarcinomas, squamous cell carcinomas, and
sarcomas, may be present or even represent the predominant tissue type, as usually occurs in immature teratomas.
Nearly 85% of nonseminomatous germ cell tumors occur in men, with a mean age of 29 years. 136 Karyotypic analyses have been performed on a number of these
patients, and the 47,XXY pattern of Klinefelter's syndrome has been found in up to 20% of patients. 136 Mediastinal nonseminomatous germ cell tumors are most
commonly found in the anterior mediastinum and appear grossly as lobulated masses with a thin capsule. They are frequently invasive at the time of diagnosis, with
almost 90% of patients exhibiting symptoms. They appear on CT scans as large inhomogeneous masses containing areas of hemorrhage and necrosis. Elevated
levels of b-HCG are seen in 30% to 50% of patients, and AFP is detected in 60% to 80%.
These tumors carry a poorer prognosis than either pure extragonadal seminoma or their gonadal nonseminomatous counterparts, and all patients with primary
mediastinal nonseminomatous germ cell tumors fall into the poor risk category of the new International Germ Cell Consensus Classification. 150 Eighty-five percent to
95% of patients have obvious distant metastases at the time of diagnosis. Common metastatic sites include lung, pleura, lymph nodes, liver, and, less commonly,
bone.143
A number of non–germ cell malignant processes have been found in association with nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. One of the most interesting is that found in
association with acute megakaryocytic leukemia. Other hematologic malignancies, such as acute myeloid leukemia, acute nonlymphocytic leukemia, erythroleukemia,
myelodysplastic syndrome, malignant histiocytosis, and thrombocytosis, have all been reported. These malignancies may antedate the discovery of the germ cell
tumor or occur synchronously. Solid tumors, such as embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, small cell undifferentiated carcinoma, neuroblastoma, and adenocarcinoma have
been described and occur more frequently in primary mediastinal tumors compared to gonadal germ cell neoplasms. 137
The diagnosis of nonseminomatous germ cell tumors can often be made without tissue biopsy. 144 In many centers, the presence of an anterior mediastinal mass in a
young male with elevated serum tumor markers (AFP and b-HCG) is adequate to initiate treatment. If a tissue diagnosis is deemed necessary, fine-needle guided
aspiration with cytologic staining for tumor markers may be used for confirmation. An anterior mediastinotomy provides the best exposure for open biopsy if
necessary.144
Treatment of nonseminomatous germ cell tumors incorporates cisplatin-based chemotherapy, which has markedly improved the prognosis in these patients. In the
past, long-term survival after treatment of nonseminomatous germ cell tumors was very rare; today, however, overall complete remission rates of 40% to 50% are
obtained in most series. 139,140,143,145 Treatment is initiated with cisplatin-containing combination chemotherapy, which often includes etoposide and bleomycin.
Treatment should be administered every 3 weeks for 4 courses; patients should then be restaged with serum tumor markers and CT scans of the chest and
abdomen.143 In a collective review of 158 patients undergoing a variety of combination chemotherapeutic regimens for the initial treatment of nonseminomatous germ
cell tumors, complete responses were noted in 54% of patients, and 42% were long-term disease-free survivors. 143
Patients with negative tumor markers and no radiographic evidence of residual disease after initial chemotherapy require no further treatment. Persistent elevation of
serum tumor markers, particularly if they begin to rise again, usually requires salvage chemotherapy. 143 Patients with normal serum tumor markers but radiographic
evidence of residual masses after induction chemotherapy should undergo surgical resection 4 to 6 weeks after completion of chemotherapy. 143,144 Complete resection
should be attempted, because debulking procedures provide no benefit. Patients found to have residual viable germ cell tumor undergo 2 additional cycles of
chemotherapy. Patients with immature teratoma or non–germ cell malignancies can simply be observed after complete resection. Nichols 136 reports complete
remissions in 18 of 31 patients using this regimen, and other series report complete remission rates of 50% to 70%, with long-term survival rates approximating
50%.136 Equivalent results are obtained in all histologic subtypes.
The treatment of recurrent disease is difficult, because patients with relapsing mediastinal nonseminomatous germ cell tumors do extraordinarily poorly with salvage
therapy, such as vinblastine, ifosfamide, and cisplatin 151; optimal therapy has not been determined. Standard salvage chemotherapy has not proven beneficial, and
few patients achieve durable remissions. High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell rescue is effective in only a few selected patients. 152,153 Most patients are candidates
for experimental phase I trials.

MESENCHYMAL TUMORS
Mediastinal mesenchymal tumors, or soft tissue tumors, originate from the connective tissue elements of the mediastinum. Smooth and striated muscle, lymphatic
tissue, fat, and vascular tissue all give rise to a variety of neoplasms, which may be benign or malignant. Most of these tumors also occur in other parts of the body
and are discussed in detail elsewhere in the chapter on soft tissue sarcomas.
Mesenchymal tumors account for approximately 6% of primary mediastinal neoplasms. 2 They are less common in the mediastinum than in other locations.
Approximately 55% are malignant, and there is no gender predilection. 10,154 In general, treatment of malignant mesenchymal tumors involves combination therapy,
including surgical resection, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. Benign tumors should be completely excised, after which little chance of recurrence remains.
Lipomas are the most common mesenchymal tumor of the mediastinum, representing 2% of all mediastinal neoplasms. 8 Benign lipomas are most often located in the
anterior mediastinum. They may grow to large size without symptoms. Treatment is complete resection, and although local recurrence is possible, it is unusual.
Malignant liposarcoma is more commonly found in the posterior mediastinum.
Fibromas are encapsulated asymptomatic tumors that may grow to a very large size. Fibrosarcomas often are symptomatic malignancies associated with
hypoglycemia. Fibromas are cured with complete surgical excision, but fibrosarcomas are usually unresectable and respond poorly to radiation and chemotherapy. 10
Leiomyomas, leiomyosarcomas, rhabdomyomas, rhabdomyosarcomas, synovial cell sarcomas, mesotheliomas, and xanthogranulomas also occasionally occur in the
mediastinum.8,154
Vascular tumors of the mediastinum include hemangiomas, hemangioendotheliomas, and benign and malignant hemangiopericytomas. 8,154 Ten percent to 30% of all
vascular tumors are malignant. 10 Mediastinal hemangiomas represent 0.5% of all mediastinal neoplasms but are the most common vascular tumor. 155 They may be
cavernous or capillary and are often associated with hemangiomas in other areas of the body. 155,156 Sixty percent occur in the anterior mediastinum, and 25% occur
posteriorly.10 Diagnosis is best accomplished by CT scan or MRI, in which phleboliths may be seen in 30% of these tumors. Angiography is important in identifying
and embolizing major feeding vessels before surgery. 156 Total excision is considered the treatment of choice; however, large, incompletely resected hemangiomas
usually do not recur. 155
Lymphangiomas, also known as cystic hygromas, often extend into the anterior mediastinum from the cervical area. Seventeen percent are located exclusively in the
mediastinum. They tend to enlarge as patients grow, particularly during puberty. Treatment involves surgical resection, but this is often difficult because of adherence
to surrounding structures. Response to radiation is variable. 10 Other lymphatic soft tissue tumors include lymphangiosarcoma and lymphangiopericytoma.

NEUROGENIC TUMORS
Thoracic neurogenic tumors occur most commonly in the posterior mediastinum but occasionally are found in the anterior mediastinum and elsewhere. They compose
between 19% and 39% of all mediastinal tumors 157,158 and 75% of posterior mediastinal tumors. 159 They originate from peripheral nerves (nerves of the brachial plexus
and intercostal nerves), autonomic sympathetic ganglia and, rarely, from the vagus nerve. 160 Neurogenic tumors in the anterior mediastinum originate in

chemoreceptor paragangliomas.
Whereas neurogenic tumors in infants and children are frequently malignant and often present with metastatic disease, 161 in adults the majority of these tumors are
benign. They occur without gender predilection at any age but are more likely in young adults. Often asymptomatic, they are solitary (except in neurofibromatosis) and
found on a routine chest x-ray. Benign tumors can attain a considerable size. They frequently arise in the paravertebral sulcus from the posterior roots of the spinal
nerves at the zone of transition between the central and peripheral myelin. 162 They also may arise on the posterior portion of the spinal nerve root in the spinal canal
and grow through the intervertebral foramen into the paravertebral area, giving rise to the appearance of a dumbbell- or hourglass-shaped tumor. These tumors must
be recognized to plan an appropriate operation in conjunction with a neurosurgeon. Depending on their size and location, lesions may cause spinal cord compression,
pain, paresthesias, Horner's syndrome, and muscle atrophy. Superior vena cava syndrome, dyspnea, cough, and bony erosions, which wrongly suggest a malignant
process, also have been described.
NEURILEMOMA (SCHWANNOMA)
Neurilemoma (schwannoma) is the most common tumor in the paravertebral sulcus. Arising from the intercostal nerve sheath, the tumor is encapsulated, white or
yellowish pink in color, with calcifications and cystic degeneration. Histologically, it is composed of uniform slender biphasic fusiform cells with elongated, twisted
nuclei that have a tendency to align in a regimented or palisaded appearance. 163 The tumor may contain large blood vessels and may be a source of considerable
blood loss during surgical removal. Schwannoma may be further differentiated into melanotic, adenomatous, or psammomatous tumors ( Fig. 32-2).163

FIGURE 32-2. Schwannoma in the paravertebral area in the apex of the left chest.

NEUROFIBROMA
Neurofibromas are most often benign and asymptomatic. However, they can have an intradural as well as an extradural component and may cause symptoms of cord
compression. They are not encapsulated and may have a plexiform appearance. 164 Microscopically, neurofibromas have a heterogeneous cell population, but
Schwann cell differentiation is not always present. 157 Neurogenic tumors can be differentiated from leiomyomas, meningiomas, and fibrous histiocytomas by the
immunohistochemical identification of S-100 protein. Solitary neurofibromas are cured by surgical excision.
Neurofibromas can occur as multiple lesions in von Recklinghausen's disease. 165 Neurofibromatosis is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait affecting both genders
equally; however, approximately one-half of the cases are sporadic. 166,167 The clinical features vary and include hyperpigmented café au lait skin spots, skin and
subcutaneous multiple neurofibromas (hamartomas), scoliosis, bowing of long bones, disorders of sexual development, and multiple neurogenic tumors and
malignancies, such as malignant schwannomas.168,169 Mediastinal neurofibromas may be multiple and appear as long plexiform masses. Histologically, they consist of
large nerve fibers mixed with connective tissue stroma containing Schwann cells and fibroblasts. Surgical intervention is justified for lesions located in the spinal canal
that cause spinal cord or nerve root compression. The prognosis generally is poor. 170
MALIGNANT SCHWANNOMA
Malignant schwannomas are the malignant counterparts of neurilemmomas and neurofibromas. Ultrastructural studies, however, cannot always document Schwann
cells in these tumors derived from nerve sheaths, and therefore the terms malignant nerve sheath tumor, neurogenic sarcoma, and neurofibrosarcoma are sometimes
used.170 Malignant nerve sheath tumors commonly are large. They are painful and may cause superior vena cava obstruction; Horner's syndrome; dyspnea;
dysphagia; hoarseness; and invasion of the lung, bones, and aorta, depending on their location and size.
The diagnostic criteria for malignant nerve sheath tumors are controversial. 166 Origin from a major nerve, presence of Schwann cells and S-100 protein, the diagnosis
of neurofibromatosis, and nuclear palisading are important features. Histologic findings include hypercellularity, pleomorphic dense nuclei, multiple and abnormal
mitoses, and invasion of the surrounding structures. 160 The malignant nerve sheath tumors are usually large (often larger than 5 cm in diameter), partially
encapsulated, soft, and gray, with hemorrhage and necrosis. Histologically, they are composed of spindle cells with comma-shaped, irregular nuclei. Neural and
perineural invasion, mature cartilage, bone, striated muscle, squamous differentiation, and mucin-secreting glands also may be seen. 171,172
Clinically, these tumors are aggressive, locally invasive, and highly metastatic. They often recur after resection, leading to a 75% 5-year survival rate. Patients with
neurofibromatosis and a malignant nerve sheath tumor have a 15% to 30% 5-year survival rate. Combination chemotherapy is recommended in stage III and IV
disease (Fig. 32-3).

FIGURE 32-3. A: Malignant neurofibroma, initially considered to be nonresectable, in a 34-year-old man. B: The tumor was resected after a combination of
chemotherapy and radiation therapy.

TUMORS OF SYMPATHETIC GANGLIA
Mediastinal ganglioneuromas are found in the posterior mediastinum along the sympathetic chain in children older than 4 years and in adults in the third and fourth
decades of life. Occasionally, a neuroblastoma may mature into a benign ganglioneuroma. 173,174 and 175 The tumor usually is asymptomatic, but sometimes presents with
Horner's syndrome and, rarely, with diarrhea caused by production of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide. Ganglioneuromas have a smooth contour and contain areas of

stippled calcification. They may resemble other benign neurogenic tumors, causing rib erosions. 176 Microscopically, spindle cell proliferation is seen that appears
identical to that in a neurofibroma, except that ganglioneuromas exhibit the presence of large ganglion cells. 160 Ganglioneuromas are benign tumors, although
regional lymph nodes may contain islands of tumor cells attributed to matured neuroblasts. 166 They require complete excision.
NEUROBLASTOMAS
Although neuroblastomas can be found in any location in which embryonic neuroblasts migrated from the neural crest, they usually originate in the adrenal glands and
along nerve plexuses. In the chest, they occur along the sympathetic trunk in the paravertebral sulcus. This tumor is the most common malignancy of early childhood,
occurring most commonly in the first 2 years of life. Patients with mediastinal neuroblastomas usually are symptomatic and frequently have metastatic disease. 177,178
Symptoms are related to local compression (Horner's syndrome and heterochromia of the iris) or to systemic release of vasoactive peptides, such as catecholamines,
vanillylmandelic acid, homovanillic acid, and 3-methoxy-4-hydroxy phenylglycol. Encephalopathy, myasthenia, and Cushing's syndrome may be present. 179
Radiographically, a mass is seen in the posterior mediastinum with stippled calcifications, skeletal erosion, and occasional extension into the spinal canal.
Pathology reveals lobulated gray or red tumors with hemorrhagic areas. Microscopically, small cells with scant cytoplasm and polygonal nuclei exhibit various degrees
of differentiation. Intracytoplasmic neurofilaments and neurosecretory granules and extracellular material seen on electron microscopy distinguish neuroblastoma from
other childhood tumors, such as lymphoma, Ewing's sarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma.160
Neuroblastomas are highly aggressive tumors. Survival depends on the age of the patient, the stage of disease, the location of the tumor, and histologic
differentiation. The prognosis is better in patients younger than 1 year of age and in patients with limited, well-differentiated tumors. Neuroblastomas may regress
spontaneously or undergo maturation into ganglioneuromas. Ganglioneuroblastomas have a better prognosis than neuroblastomas. 180 The staging system for
neuroblastoma shown in Table 32-13 was developed to help guide therapy. Treatment for stage I and II disease is simple surgical resection, although adjuvant
postoperative radiotherapy is recommended for stage II tumors. For stage III and IV, a combination of chemotherapy and radiation is advised.

TABLE 32-13. Staging System for Neuroblastoma

GRANULAR CELL TUMOR
Granular cell tumors (granular cell myoblastomas) are considered benign. They are found in the posterior mediastinum and are derived from Schwann cells. They are
soft, gray, and poorly circumscribed tumors consisting of uniform polygonal cells either in nests or strands with eosinophilic granular cytoplasm and a stroma of fibrous
connective tissue. 181 Resection is always curative.
DIAGNOSIS
Although posterior mediastinal neoplasms are predominately neurogenic, other tumors also must be considered in the differential diagnosis. Goiters, esophageal
leiomyomas, solitary fibrous tumors, and bronchial/esophageal duplication cysts all have been reported. Once identified, the nature of these lesions, their relationship
to other structures, and the presence of distant metastases can be determined by CT scans. MRI scans can define vascular involvement and provide multiplanar
views that are valuable in assessing tumor extension into paravertebral foramina. An iodine 131 nuclear scan may be helpful if a goiter is suspected.
Histologic diagnosis is not necessary before surgery. However, if surgical resection is not contemplated, a definitive diagnosis is required for further treatment
planning. This diagnosis generally requires a generous biopsy obtained by an open surgical procedure or a CT-guided core-needle biopsy.
MANAGEMENT
If no contraindication is present, resection of all neurogenic tumors is advised. Neurogenic tumors grow and can cause life-threatening symptoms, depending on their
size and location. Therefore, observation of neurogenic tumors may be justified only with a stable, asymptomatic, benign tumor in an otherwise poor surgical
candidate. The standard approach uses a posterolateral thoracotomy incision, removing the tumor with normal tissue margins. More recently, thorascopic resection of
small- to moderate-size tumors has been reported. In dumbbell tumors, the intraspinal component should be removed first. The mortality rate for surgical resection is
less than 1%. Complications include Horner's syndrome and chylothorax. Surgery on tumors with spinal canal involvement may be complicated by direct spinal cord
trauma, ischemia from spinal artery injury and, rarely, an epidural hematoma with spinal cord compression.

PRIMARY CARDIAC MALIGNANCIES
The vast majority of tumors involving the heart and pericardium are metastatic. 182,183 In addition, most primary cardiac tumors are benign myxomas, 75% to 80% of
which arise from the left atrium. Other benign primary cardiac neoplasms include rhabdomyoma, fibroma, lipoma, hemangioma, teratoma, and fibroelastoma. Primary
malignant cardiac tumors make up one-fourth of all primary cardiac neoplasms and most commonly originate from the atria. 184,185 Most are some variant of
sarcomas,186 including angiosarcoma, 187 rhabdomyosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma,188 fibrosarcoma,189 lymphoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma, 190 and mesothelioma of
the pericardium. 191 Pheochromocytomas also occur as primary cardiac neoplasms.
A high index of suspicion is imperative in establishing a diagnosis, because the presenting symptoms often mimic other nonneoplastic cardiac pathology. Whole body
gallium scans,192 echocardiography, CT, and MRI all may serve to localize a primary cardiac neoplasm. Up to 80% of primary cardiac malignancies present with
systemic metastases193 and have clinical evidence of right heart failure, and many develop tamponade. Surgical resection is required for cure; however, negative
margins usually are not possible. 194
Chemotherapy and external-beam radiation can be administered after surgery, although a report of 15 cases treated at the Institut Gustave-Roussy does not support
the routine use of adjuvant chemotherapy for primary cardiac sarcomas. 190 There has been a report of a patient receiving neoadjuvant (induction) chemotherapy,
which resulted in a response and subsequent surgical resection. 195
New surgical techniques, including orthotopic and autotransplantation, may be beneficial in carefully selected patients. 196,197 With the advent of “gating” technology
and sophisticated treatment planning, more accurate targeting with electron beam radiation therapy may be possible, similar to stereotactic radiosurgery of the brain.
At times, a pericardial window may be required to palliate symptoms of pericardial tamponade. Currently, long-term survival is rare. 198,199
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Fraser RS, Pare JAP, Fraser RG, et al. The normal chest. In: Synopsis of diseases of the chest, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1994:73.

2. Davis RD, Oldham HN, Sabiston DC. Primary cysts and neoplasms of the mediastinum: recent changes in clinical presentation, methods of diagnosis, management, and results. Ann Thorac
Surg 1987;44:229.
3. Cohen AJ, Thompson L, Edwards FH, Bellamy RF. Primary cysts and tumors of the mediastinum. Ann Thorac Surg 1991;51:378.
4. Azarow KS, Pearl RH, Zurcher R, Edwards FH, Cohen AJ. Primary mediastinal masses: a comparison of adult and pediatric populations. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1993;106:67.
5. Strollo DC, Rosado-de-Christenson ML, Jett JR. Primary mediastinal tumors. Part II. Tumors of the middle and posterior mediastinum. Chest 1997;112:1344.
6. Grosfeld JL. Primary tumors of the chest wall and mediastinum in children. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1994;6:235.
7. Adkins RB, Maples MD, Hainsworth JD. Primary malignant mediastinal tumors. Ann Thorac Surg 1984;38:648.
8. Mullen B, Richardson JD. Primary anterior mediastinal tumors in children and adults. Ann Thorac Surg 1986;42:338.
9. Simpson I, Campbell PE. Mediastinal masses in childhood: a review from a pediatric pathologist's point of view. Prog Pediatr Surg 1991;27:93.
10. Davis RD, Oldham HN, Sabiston DC. The mediastinum. In: Sabiston DC, Spencer FC, eds. Surgery of the chest, 5th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1989.
11. Harris GJ, Harmon PK, Trinkle JK, Grover FL. Standard biplane roentgenography is highly sensitive in documenting mediastinal masses. Ann Thorac Surg 1987;44:238.
12. Weisbrod GL, Herman SJ. Mediastinal masses: diagnosis with non-invasive techniques. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1992;4:3.
13. Tecce PM, Fishman EK, Kuhlman JE. CT evaluation of the anterior mediastinum: spectrum of disease. Radiography 1994;14:973.
14. Woodring JH, Johnson PJ. Computed tomography distinction of central thoracic masses. J Thorac Imaging 1991;6:32.
15. Waller DA, Rees MR. Computed tomography in the preoperative assessment of mediastinal tumors: does it improve surgical management? Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1991;39:158.
16. Graeber GM, Shriver CD, Albus RA, et al. The use of computed tomography in the evaluation of mediastinal masses. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1986;91:662.
17. Naidich DP. Helical computed tomography of the thorax: clinical applications. Radiol Clin North Am 1994;32:759.
18. Ikezoe J, Takeuchi N, Johkoh T, et al. MRI of anterior mediastinal tumors. Radiat Med 1992;10:176.
19. Batra P, Brown K, Collins JD, et al. Mediastinal masses: magnetic resonance imaging in comparison with computed tomography. J Natl Med Assoc 1991;83:969.
20. Mayo JR. Magnetic resonance imaging of the chest: where we stand. Radiol Clin North Am 1994;32:795.
21. Wernecke K, Vassallo P, Potter R, Lukener HG, Peters PE. Mediastinal tumors: sensitivity of detection with sonography compared with CT and radiography. Radiology 1990;175:137.
22. Faletra F, Ravini M, Moreo A, et al. Transesophageal echocardiography in the evaluation of mediastinal masses. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 1992;5:178.
23. Kubota K, Yamada S, Kondo T, et al. PET imaging of primary mediastinal tumours. Br J Cancer 1996;73:882.
24. Ferguson MK, Lee E, Skinner DB, Little AG. Selective operative approach for diagnosis and treatment of anterior mediastinal masses. Ann Thorac Surg 1987;44:583.
25. Tarver RD, Cances DJ. Interventional chest radiology. Radiol Clin North Am 1994;32:689.
26. Morrissey B, Adams H, Gibbs AR, Crane MD. Percutaneous needle biopsy of the mediastinum: review of 94 procedures. Thorax 1993;48:632.
27. Herman SJ, Holub RV, Weisbrod GL, Chamberlain DW. Anterior mediastinal masses: utility of transthoracic needle biopsy. Radiology 1991;180:167.
28. Heilo A. Tumors in the mediastinum: US-guided histologic core needle biopsy. Radiology 1993;189:143.
29. Bressler EL, Kirkham JA. Mediastinal masses: alternative approaches to CT-guided needle biopsy. Radiology 1994;191:391.
30. Pearson FG. Mediastinal masses diagnosis: invasive techniques. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1992;4:23.
31. Yang PC, Cheng DB, Lee YC, et al. Mediastinal malignancy: ultrasound guided biopsy through the supraclavicular approach. Thorax 1992;47:377.
32. Kohman LJ. Approach to the diagnosis and staging of mediastinal masses. Chest 1993;103:328S.
33. Elia S, Cecera C, Giampaglia F, Ferrante G. Mediastinoscopy vs anterior mediastinotomy in the diagnosis of mediastinal lymphoma. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1992;6:361.
34. Rendina EA, Venuta F, DeGiacomo T, et al. Comparative merits of thoracoscopy, mediastinoscopy, and mediastinotomy for mediastinal biopsy. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;57:992.
35. Kornstein MJ. Thymoma classification: my opinion. Am J Clin Pathol 1999;112:304.
36. Harris NL, Muller-Hermelink H-K. Thymoma classification: a siren's song of simplicity. Am J Clin Pathol 1999;12:299.
37. Suster S, Moran CA. Thymoma, atypical thymoma, and thymic carcinoma. Anat Pathol 1999;111:826.
38. Skandalakis JE, Gray SW, Todd NW. Pharynx and its derivatives. In: Skandalakis JE, Gray SW, eds. Embryology for surgeons, 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1994.
39. VonGaudecker B. Functional histology of the human thymus. Anat Embryol 1991;183:1.
40. Jaretski A, Wolff M. “Maximal” thymectomy for myasthenia gravis: surgical anatomy and operative technique. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1988;96:711.
41. Fukai I, Funato Y, Mizuno T, Hasimoto T, Masaoka A. Distribution of thymic tissue in the mediastinal adipose tissue. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1991;101:1099.
42. Blossom GB, Ernstoff RM, Howells GA, Bendick PJ, Glover JL. Thymectomy for myasthenia gravis. Arch Surg 1993;128:855.
43. Thomas CR Jr, Wright CD, Loehrer PJ Sr. Thymoma: state of the art. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2280.
44. Cowen D, Hannoun-Levi JM, Resbeut M, et al. Natural history and treatment of malignant thymoma. Oncology 1998;12:1001.
45. Patterson GA. Thymomas. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1992;4:39.
46. Lewis JE, Wick MR, Scheithauer BW, Bernatz PE, Taylor WF. Thymoma: a clinicopathologic review. Cancer 1987;60:2727.
47. Sweeney CJ, Wick MR, Loehrer PJ. Thymoma and thymic carcinoma. In: Raghavan D, Brecher ML, Johnson DH, et al., eds. Textbook of uncommon cancer, 2nd ed. New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1999:485.
48. Marino M, Muller-Hermelink HK. Thymoma and thymic carcinoma: relation of thymoma epithelial cells to the cortical and medullary differentiation of thymus. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat
Histopathol 1985;407:119.
49. Kornstein MJ. Controversies regarding the pathology of thymomas. Pathol Ann 1992;27:1.
50. Kirchner T, Muller-Hermelink H. New approaches to the diagnosis of thymic epithelial tumors. Prog Surg Pathol 1989;10:167.
51. Quintanilla-Martinez L, Wilkins EW, Choi N, et al. Thymoma: histologic subclassification is an important prognostic factor. Cancer 1994;74:606.
52. Kuo TT, Lo SK. Thymoma: a study of the pathologic classification of 71 cases with evaluation of the Muller-Hermelink system. Hum Pathol 1993;24:766.
53. Shimosato Y. Controversies surrounding the subclassification of thymoma. Cancer 1994;74:542.
54. Quintanilla-Martinez L, Wilkins EW, Ferry JA, Harris NL. Thymoma-morphologic subclassification correlates with invasiveness and immunohistologic features: a study of 122 cases. Hum Pathol
1993;24:958.
55. Pan CC, Wu HP, Yang CF, Chen WYK, Chiang H. The clinicopathological correlation of epithelial subtyping in thymoma: a study of 112 consecutive cases. Hum Pathol 1994;25:893.
56. Dawson A, Ibrahim NBN, Gibbs AR. Observer variation in the histopathological classification of thymoma: correlation with prognosis. J Clin Pathol 1994;47:519.
57. Suster S, Moran CA. Primary thymic epithelial neoplasms: current concepts and controversies. In: Fechner RE, Rosen PP, eds. Anatomic pathology 1997, vol 2. Chicago: ASCP Press, 1997:1.
58. Suster S, Moran CA. Thymoma classification: the ride of the Valkyries? Am J Clin Pathol 1999;112:308.
59. Marx A, Muller-Hermelink HK. From basic immunobiology to the upcoming WHO-classification of tumors of the thymus. Pathol Res Pract 1999;195:515.
60. Masaoka A, Monden Y, Nakahara K, Tanioka T. Follow-up study of thymomas with special reference to their clinical stages. Cancer 1981;48:2485.
61. Bergh NP, Gatzinsky P, Larsson S, Lundin P, Ridell B. Tumors of the thymus and thymic region. I. Clinicopathological studies on thymomas. Ann Thorac Surg 1978;25:91.
62. Kornstein MJ, Curran WJ, Turrisi AT, Brooks JJ. Cortical versus medullary thymomas: a useful morphologic distinction? Hum Pathol 1988;19:1335.
63. Gamondes JP, Balawi A, Greenland T, et al. Seventeen years of surgical treatment of thymoma: factors influencing survival. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1991;5:124.
64. Cowen D, Richaud P, Mornex F, et al. Thymoma: results of a multicentric retrospective series of 149 non-metastatic irradiated patients and review of the literature. Radiother Oncol 1995;34:9.
65. Souadjian JV, Enriquez P, Silverstein MN, et al. The spectrum of diseases associated with thymoma. Arch Intern Med 1974;134:374.
66. Marchevsky AM, Kaneko M. Surgical pathology of the mediastinum.New York: Raven Press, 1984:58.
67. Berrih-Akin S, Morel E, Raimond F, et al. The role of the thymus in myasthenia gravis: immunohistological and immunological studies in 115 cases. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1987;505:51.
68. Palmisani MT, Evoli A, Batocchi AP, Provenzano C, Torali P. Myasthenia gravis associated with thymoma: clinical characteristics and long term outcome. Eur Neurol 1993;34:78.
69. Masaoka A, Hashimoto T, Shibata K, Yamakowa Y, Nakamae K. Thymomas associated with pure red cell aplasia: histology and follow up studies. Cancer 1989;64:1872.
70. Palmieri G, Lastoria S, Cala O, et al. Successful treatment of a patient with a thymoma and pure red cell aplasia with octreotide and prednisone. N Engl J Med 1997;336:263.
71. Maggi G, Casadio C, Cavallo A, et al. Thymoma: results of 241 operated cases. Ann Thorac Surg 1991;51:152.
72. Wilkins EW, Grillo HC, Scannell G, Moncure AC, Mathisen DJ. Role of staging in prognosis and management of thymoma. Ann Thorac Surg 1991;51:888.
73. McCart JA, Gaspar L, Inculet R, Casson AG. Predictors of survival following surgical resection of thymoma. J Surg Oncol 1993;54:233.
74. Haniuda M, Marimoto M, Nishimura H, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy after complete resection of thymoma. Ann Thorac Surg 1992;54:311.
75. Shimizu N, Moriyama S, Aoe M, et al. The surgical treatment of invasive thymoma: resection with vascular reconstruction. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1992;103:414.
76. Pollack A, Komaki R, Cox JD, et al. Thymoma: treatment and prognosis. Int J Radiol Oncol Biol Phys 1992;23:1037.
77. Cowen D, Mornex RF, Bachelot T, et al. Thymoma: results of a multicentric retrospective series of 149 non-metastatic irradiated patients and review of the literature. Radiother Oncol
1995;34:9.
78. Kaiser LR. Thymoma: the use of minimally invasive resection techniques. Chest Surg Clin North Am 1994;4:185.
79. Nakahara K, Ohno K, Hashimoto J, et al. Thymoma: results of complete resection and adjuvant postoperative irradiation in 141 consecutive patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1988;95:1041.
80. Ciernik IF, Meier U, Lutolf UM. Prognostic factors and outcome of incompletely resected invasive thymoma following radiation therapy. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1484.
81. Ichinose Y, Ohta M, Yano T, et al. Treatment of invasive thymoma with pleural dissemination. J Surg Oncol 1993;54:180.
82. Kirschner PA. Reoperation for thymoma: report of 23 cases. Ann Thorac Surg 1990;49:550.
83. Urgesi A, Monetti U, Rossi G, et al. Aggressive treatment of intrathoracic recurrences of thymoma. Radiother Oncol 1992;24:221.
84. Crucitti F, Daghetto GB, Bellantone R, et al. Effects of surgical treatment in thymoma with myasthenia gravis: our experience in 103 patients. J Surg Oncol 1992;50:43.
85. Jackson MA, Ball DL. Postoperative radiotherapy in invasive thymoma. Radiother Oncol 1991;21:77.
86. Curran WJ, Kornstein MJ, Brooks JJ, Turrisi AT. Invasive thymoma: the role of mediastinal irradiation following complete or incomplete surgical resection. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1722.
87. Koh WJ, Loehrer PJ Sr, Thomas CR Jr. Thymoma: the role of radiation and chemotherapy. In: Wood DE, Thomas CR Jr, eds. Mediastinal tumors: update 1995. Medical radiology-diagnostic
imaging and radiation oncology volume. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1995:19.
88. Wilkins EW Jr. Thymoma: surgical management. In: Wood DE, Thomas CR Jr, eds. Mediastinal tumors: update 1995. Medical radiology-diagnostic imaging and radiation oncology volume.
Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1995:11.
89. Quintanilla-Martinez L, Wilkins EW Jr, Ferry JA, et al. Thymoma: morphologic subclassification correlates with invasiveness and immunohistologic features. A study of 122 cases. Hum Pathol
1993;24:958.
90. Harris N. Classification of thymic epithelial neoplasms. In: Marx A, Muller-Hermelink HK, eds. Epithelial tumors of the thymus. Pathology, biology, treatment. New York: Plenum Publishing,
1997:1.
91. Haniuda M, Morimoto M, Nishimura H, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy after complete resection of thymoma. Ann Thorac Surg 1992;54:311.
92. Haniuda M, Miyazawa M, Yoshida K, et al. Is postoperative radiotherapy for thymoma effective? Ann Surg 1996;224:219.
93. Maggi G, Giaccone G, Donadio M, et al. Thymomas: a review of 169 cases, with particular reference to results of surgical treatment. Cancer 1986;58:765.
94. Mornex F, Resbeut M, Richard P, et al. Radiotherapy and chemotherapy for invasive thymomas: a multicentric retrospective review of 90 cases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:651.
95. Latz D, Schraube P, Oppitz U, et al. Invasive thymoma: treatment with postoperative radiation therapy. Radiology 1997;204:859.
96. Leung JT. The role of radiotherapy in thymomas. Aust Radiol 1996;40:430.
97. Graham MV, Emami B. Mediastinum and trachea. In: Perez CA, Brady LW, eds. Principles and practice of radiation oncology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven Publishers, 1997:1221.
98. Roach M III, Vijayakumar S. The role of three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy in the treatment of mediastinal tumors. In: Wood DE, Thomas CR Jr, eds. Mediastinal tumors: update 1995.
Medical radiology-diagnostic imaging and radiation oncology volume. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1995:117.
99. Marks LB. The impact of organ structure on radiation response. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;34:1165.
100. Thomas CR Jr, Williams TE, Turrisi AT III. Lung toxicity in the treatment of lung cancer: thoughts at the end of the millennium. In: Meyer J, Karger T, eds. Radiation injury: prevention and
treatment. Frontiers of radiation therapy and oncology. Basel, Switzerland: Karger Medical and Scientific Publishers, 1999.

101. Yoshida H, Yasuda S, Aruga T, et al. [Whole mediastinal irradiation with or without entire hemithoracic irradiation for invasive thymoma]. Nippon Igaku Hoshasen Gakkai Zasshi 1995;55:968.
102. Bogart J, Sagerman RH. High-dose hemithorax irradiation in a patient with recurrent thymoma: a study of pulmonary and cardiac radiation tolerance. Am J Clin Oncol 1999;22:441.
103. Tomiak EM, Evans WK. The role of chemotherapy in invasive thymoma: a review of the literature and considerations for future clinical trials. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 1993;15:113.
104. Bonami PD, Finkelstein D, Aisner S, Ettinger D. EST 2582 phase II trial of cisplatin in metastatic or recurrent thymoma. Am J Clin Oncol 1993;16:342.
105. Harper P, Highly M, Rankin E, et al. The treatment of malignant thymoma with single agent ifosfamide. Br J Cancer 1991;63[Suppl 13]:7.
106. Kirkove C, Berghmans J, Noel H, Van de Merckt J. Dramatic response of recurrent invasive thymoma to high dose corticosteroids. Clin Oncol 1992;4:64.
107. Fornasiero A, Danilele O, Ghiotto C, et al. Chemotherapy for invasive thymoma: a 13 year experience. Cancer 1991;68:30.
108. Loehrer PJ, Kim KM, Aisner SC, et al. Cisplatin plus doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide in metastatic or recurrent thymoma: final results of an intergroup trial. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1164.
109. Park HS, Shin DM, Lee JS, et al. Thymoma: a retrospective study of 87 cases. Cancer 1994;73:2491.
110. Giaccone G, Ardizzoni A, Kirkpatrick A, et al. Cisplatin and etoposide combination chemotherapy for locally advanced or metastatic thymoma: a phase II study of the European Organization for
Research and Treatment of Lung Cancer Cooperative Group. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:814.
111. Loehrer PJ, Jiroutek M, Aisner S, et al. Phase II trial of etoposide (V), ifosfamide (I), plus cisplatin (P) in patients with advanced thymoma (T) or thymic carcinoma (TC): preliminary results from
a ECOG coordinated intergroup trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:30(abst 118).
112. Rea F, Sartori F, Lay M, et al. Chemotherapy and operation for invasive thymoma. J Cardiovasc Surg 1993;106:543.
113. Macchiarini P, Chella A, Ducci F, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy, surgery and postoperative radiation therapy for invasive thymoma. Cancer 1991;68:706.
114. Shin DM, Walsh GL, Komaki R, et al. A multidisciplinary approach to therapy for unresectable malignant thymoma. Ann Intern Med 1998;129:100.
115. Loehrer PJ Sr, Chen M, Kim KM, et al. Cisplatin, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide plus thoracic radiation therapy for limited-stage unresectable thymoma: an intergroup trial. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:3093.
116. Bernatz PE, Harrison EG, Clagget OT. Thymomas: a clinicopathologic study. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1961;42:424.
117. Muller-Hermelink HK, Marx A, Gender K, Kirchner T. The pathological basis of thymoma-associated myasthenia gravis. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1993;681:56.
118. Tsuchida M, Yamato Y, Souma T, et al. Efficacy and safety of extended thymectomy for elderly patients with myasthenia gravis. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;67:1563.
119. Nieto IP, Robledo JP, Pajuelo MC, et al. Prognostic factors for myasthenia gravis treated by thymectomy: review of 61 cases. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;67:1568.
120. Suster S, Rosai J. Thymic carcinoma: a clinicopathologic study of 60 cases. Cancer 1991;67:1025.
121. Wick MR, Scheithauer BW, Weiland LH, Barnatz PE. Primary thymic carcinomas. Am J Surg Pathol 1982;6:613.
122. Hsu CP, Chan CY, Chen CL, et al. Thymic carcinoma: ten years' experience in twenty patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1994;107:615.
123. Weide LG, Ulbright TM, Loehrer PJ, Williams SD. Thymic carcinoma: a distinct clinical entity responsive to chemotherapy. Cancer 1993;71:1219.
124. Yano T, Hara N, Ichinose Y, et al. Treatment and prognosis of primary thymic carcinoma. J Surg Oncol 1993;52:255.
125. Shimizu J, Hayashi Y, Monita K, et al. Primary thymic carcinoma: a clinicopathological and immunohistochemical study. J Surg Oncol 1994;56:159.
126. Levine GD, Rosai J. Thymic hyperplasia and neoplasia: a review of current concepts. Hum Pathol 1978;9:495.
127. Suster S, Moran CA. Spindle cell thymic carcinoma: clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical study of a distinctive variant of primary thymic epithelial neoplasm. Am J Surg Pathol
1999;23:681.
128. Rosai J, Higa E. Mediastinal endocrine neoplasm of probable thymic origin related to carcinoid tumors. Cancer 1972;29:1061.
129. Wang DY, Chang DB, Kuo SH, et al. Carcinoid tumors of the thymus. Thorax 1994;49:33.
130. Vietri F, Illuminati R, Guglielmi R, et al. Carcinoid tumor of the thymus gland. Eur J Surg 1994;160:645.
131. Asbun HJ, Calabria RP, Calmes S, Lang AG, Bloch JH. Thymic carcinoid. Am Surg 1991;57:442.
132. Zeiger MA, Swartz SE, Macgillivary DC, Linnoila I, Shakir M. Thymic carcinoid in association with MEN syndromes. Am Surg 1992;58:430.
133. McManus KG, Allen MS, Trastek VF, et al. Lipothymoma with red cell aplasia, hypogammaglobulinemia and lichen planus. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;58:1534.
134. Rosado-de-Christenson ML, Pugatch RD, Moran CA, Galobardes J. Thymolipoma: analysis of 27 cases. Radiology 1994;193:121.
135. Litano Y, Yokomari K, Ohkura M, et al. Giant thymolipoma in a child. J Pediatr Surg 1993;28:1622.
136. Luna M, Valenzuela-Tamaritz J. Germ cell tumors of the mediastinum: postmortem findings. Am J Clin Pathol 1976;65:450.
137. Nichols CR, Fox EP. Extra-gonadal and pediatric germ cell tumors. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1991;5:1189.
138. Kuhn M, Weissbach L. Localization, incidence, diagnosis and treatment of extratesticular germ cell tumors. Urol Int 1985;40:166.
139. Dulmet EM, Macchiarini P, Suc B, Verley J. Germ cell tumors of the mediastinum: a 30 year experience. Cancer 1993;72:1994.
140. Lemarie E, Assouline PS, Diot P, et al. Primary mediastinal germ cell tumors: results of a French retrospective study. Chest 1992;102:1477.
141. Knapp R, Hurt R, Payne W, et al. Malignant germ cell tumors of the mediastinum. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1985;89:82.
142. Lewis BD, Hurt RD, Payne WS, et al. Benign teratomas of the mediastinum. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1983;86:727.
143. Hainsworth JD, Greco FA. Extragonadal germ cell tumors and unrecognized germ cell tumors. Semin Oncol 1992;19:119.
144. Ginsberg RJ. Mediastinal germ cell tumors: the role of surgery. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1992;4:51.
145. Giaccione G. Multimodality treatment of malignant germ cell tumors of the mediastinum. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:273.
146. Schultz S, Einhorn L, Conces D, et al. Management of residual mass in patients with advanced seminoma: Indiana University experience. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1497.
147. Schultz SM, Einhorn LH, Conces D, et al. Management of postchemotherapy residual mass in patients with advanced seminoma: Indiana University experience. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1497.
148. Horwich A, Paluchowska B, Norman A, et al. Residual mass following chemotherapy of seminoma. Ann Oncol 1997;8:37.
149. Miller KD, Loehrer PJ, Gonin R, et al. Salvage chemotherapy with vinblastine, ifosfamide, and cisplatin in recurrent seminoma. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1427.
150. International Germ Cell Collaborative Group. International germ cell consensus classification: a prognostic factorbased staging system for metastatic germ cell cancers. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:594.
151. Loehrer PJ, Gonin R, Nichols CR, et al. Vinblastine plus ifosfamide plus cisplatin as initial salvage therapy in recurrent germ cell tumor. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2500.
152. Motzer RJ, Gulati SC, Tang WP, et al. Phase I trial with pharmacokinetic analyses of high dose carboplatin, etoposide and cyclophosphamide with autologous bone marrow transplantation in
patients with refractory germ cell tumors. Cancer Res 1993;53:3730.
153. Broun ER, Nichols CR, Einhorn LH, Tricot GJK. Salvage therapy with high dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow support in the treatment of primary non-seminomatous mediastinal
germ cell tumors. Cancer 1991;68:1513.
154. Mack TM. Sarcomas and other malignancies of soft tissue, retroperitoneum, peritoneum, pleura, heart, mediastinum, and spleen. Cancer 1995;75:211.
155. Cohen AJ, Sbaschnig RJ, Hochholzer L, Cough FC, Albus RA. Mediastinal hemangiomas. Ann Thorac Surg 1987;43:656.
156. Worthy SA, Gholkar A, Walls TJ, Todd NV. Case report: multiple thoracic hemangiomas: a rare cause of spinal cord compression. Br J Radiol 1995;68:770.
157. Chavez-Espinosa UI, Chavez-Fernandez JA, Hoyer OH, et al. Endothoracic neurogenic neoplasms (analysis of 30 cases). Rev Int Radiol 1980;5:49.
158. Davidson KG, Walbaum PR, McCormack RJM. Intrathoracic neural tumors. Thorax 1978;33:359.
159. Gale AW, Jelihovsky T, Grant AF, et al. Neurogenic tumors of the mediastinum. Ann Thorac Surg 1974;17:434.
160. Marchevsky AM, Kaneko M. Surgical pathology of the mediastinum. New York: Raven Press, 1984:256.
161. Adams GA, Shochat SJ, Smith EL, et al. Thoracic neuroblastoma: a pediatric oncology group study. J Pediatr Surg 1993;28:372.
162. Boyd W. Pathology for the surgeon, 7th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1955:487.
163. Wick MR, Sterenberg SS. Diagnostic surgical pathology. New York: Raven Press, 1994:1141.
164. Chalmers AH, Armstrong P. Plexiform mediastinal neurofibromas: a report of two cases. Br J Radiol 1977;50:215.
165. Von Recklinghausen FD. Ueber die multiplen fibrome der haut und ihre beziehung zu den multiplen neuromen. Festschrift zur Fierdes Fünfundzwaazigjährigen Bestehens des Pathologischen
Instituts za Berlin Herrn Rud. IF Virchow Berlin: A. Hirschwald, 1882 (est. 1982).
166. Enzinger FM, Weiss SW. Soft tissue tumors. St. Louis: Mosby, 1983.
167. Crose FW, Schull WJ, Neel JV. A clinical, pathological, and genetic study of multiple neurofibromatosis. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas Publisher, 1956.
168. Brasfield RD, Das Gupta TK. Von Recklinghausen's disease: a clinical pathologic study. Ann Surg 1972;175:1986.
169. Guccion JG, Enzinger FM. Malignant Schwannoma associated with von Recklinghausen's neurofibromatosis. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histol 1979;383:43.
170. Akwari OE, Payne WS, Onforio BM, et al. Dumbbell neurogenic tumors of the mediastinum. Mayo Clin Proc 1978;53:353.
171. Woodruff JM. Peripheral nerve tumors showing glandular differentiation. Cancer 1976;37:2399.
172. MacKay B, Osborne BM. The contribution of electron microscopy to the diagnoses of tumors. Pathobiology annual, vol 8. New York: Raven Press, 1978:359.
173. Adam A, Hochholzer L. Ganglioneuroblastoma of the posterior mediastinum: a clinicopathologic review of 80 cases. Cancer 1981;47:373.
174. Hamilton JP, Koop CE. Ganglioneuromas in children. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1965;121:803.
175. McRae D Jr, Shaw A. Ganglioneuroma, heterochromia iridis, and Horner's syndrome. J Pediatr Surg 1979;14:612.
176. Bar-Ziv J, Nogrady MB. Mediastinal neuroblastoma and ganglioneuroma: the differentiation between primary and secondary involvement on the chest roentgenogram. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1975;125:380.
177. DeLorimier AA, Bragg KU, Linden G. Neuroblastoma in childhood. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:441.
178. Robinson MG, McCorquodale MM. Trisomy 18 and neurogenic neoplasia. J Pediatr 1981;99:428.
179. Evans AE, D'Angio GJ, Koop CE. Diagnosis and treatment of neuroblastoma. Pediatr Clin North Am 1976;23:161.
180. Fortner J, Nicastri A, Murphy ML. Neuroblastoma: natural history and results of treating 133 cases. Ann Surg 1968;167:132.
181. Rosenbloom PM, Barrows GH, Kmetz DR, et al. Granular cell myoblastoma arising from the thoracic sympathetic nerve chain. J Pediatr Surg 1975;10:819.
182. Hall RJ, McAllister HA Jr, Cooley DA, et al. Tumors of the heart. In: Cohn J, Willerson JT, eds. Cardiovascular medicine. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1995:1525.
183. Thomas CR Jr, DeVries B, Bitran JD, et al. Cardiac neoplasms. In: Wood DE, Thomas CR Jr, eds. Mediastinal tumors: update 1995. Medical radiology-diagnostic imaging and radiation oncology
volume. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1995:79.
184. Chen HZ, Jiang L, Rong WH, et al. Tumours of the heart. An analysis of 79 cases. Chin Med J 1992;105:153.
185. McAllister HA. Primary tumors and cysts of the heart and pericardium. Curr Probl Cardiol 1979;4:8.
186. Raaf HN, Raaf JH. Sarcomas related to the heart and vasculature. Semin Surg Oncol 1994;10:374.
187. Stein M, Deitling F, Cantor A, et al. Primary cardiac angiosarcoma: a case report and review of therapeutic options. Med Pediatr Oncol 1994;23:149.
188. Han P, Drachtman RA, Amenta P, Ettinger LJ. Successful treatment of a primary cardiac leiomyosarcoma with ifosfamide and etoposide. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1996;18:314.
189. Jyothirmayi R, Jacob R, Nair K, Rajan B. Primary fibrosarcoma of the right ventriclea case report. Acta Oncol 1995;34:972.
190. Llombart-Cussac A, Pivot X, Contesso G, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy for primary cardiac sarcomas: the IGR experience. Br J Cancer 1998;78:1624.
191. Thomason R, Schlegel W, Lucca M, et al. Primary malignant mesothelioma of the pericardium: case report and literature review. Texas Heart Inst 1994;21:170.
192. Teramoto N, Hayashi K, Miyatani K, et al. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma of the right ventricle of the heart. Pathol Int 1995;45:315.
193. Hermann MA, Shankerman RA, Edwards WD, et al. Primary cardiac angiosarcoma: a clinicopathologic study of six cases. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1992;103:655.
194. Thomas CR Jr, Johnson GW Jr, Stoddard MF, et al. Primary malignant cardiac tumors: update 1992. Med Pediatr Oncol 1992;20:519.
195. Baat P, Karwande SV, Kushner JP, et al. Successful treatment of a cardiac angiosarcoma with combined modality therapy. J Heart Lung Transplant 1994;13:923.
196. Michler RE, Goldstein DJ. Treatment of cardiac tumors by orthotopic cardiac transplantation. Semin Oncol 1997; 24:534.
197. Goldstein DJ, Oz MC, Rose EA, et al. Experience with heart transplantation for cardiac tumors. J Heart Lung Transplant 1995;14:382.
198. Nakamichi T, Fukuda T, Suzuki T, et al. Primary cardiac angiosarcoma: 53 months' survival after multidisciplinary therapy. Ann Thorac Surg 1997;63:1160.
199. Percy RF, Perryman RA, Amornmarn R, et al. Prolonged survival in a patient with primary angiosarcoma of the heart. Am Heart J 1987;113:1228.

SECTION 33.1 Molecular Biology of Gastrointestinal Cancers
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 33.1
Molecular Biology of Gastrointestinal Cancers
ERIC R. FEARON
Introduction
Colorectal Cancer as a Model System
The Adenoma-Carcinoma Sequence in the Colon
Inherited Colorectal Cancer Syndromes
Familial Adenomatous Polyposis and the Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Gene
Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer
Oncogene and Tumor Suppressor Gene Mutations in Colorectal Tumor Progression
K-RAS and Other Oncogene Defects
The p53 Gene
Chromosome 18q Loss of Heterozygosity
Gene Defects in Pancreatic Carcinoma
Gene Defects in Esophageal Adenocarcinoma
Potential Clinical Applications of Molecular Advances
Risk Assessment
Early Detection
Prognostic Markers and Patient Stratification for Therapy
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The specific etiologic factors and pathogenetic mechanisms underlying the development of cancers of the gastrointestinal tract appear to be complex and
heterogeneous. Although likely etiologic factors include environmental and dietary exposures, defining specific agents that influence cancer risk remains a major
challenge. Only limited progress has been made in treatment of patients with advanced gastrointestinal cancer. In light of the obstacles that hinder our ability to more
effectively prevent and treat gastrointestinal cancers, it is important to recognize that increasingly significant advances have been made in the gastrointestinal cancer
field. Arguably, some of the most encouraging advances have been successes in defining the specific genetic defects that underlie inherited forms of gastrointestinal
cancer and in gaining new insights into the constellation of molecular alterations present in sporadic tumors. For most gastrointestinal tumor types, the prevalence
and nature of mutations in several distinct oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes have been defined. The conversion of cellular protooncogenes into oncogenic
variant alleles (gene copies) can result from specific point mutations or rearrangements that alter gene structure and function or from chromosomal rearrangements or
gene amplifications that disrupt regulated expression of the protooncogene. Tumor suppressor gene inactivation can result from localized mutations, complete loss of
the gene, or via epigenetic alterations that interfere with gene expression. At present, only somatic (arising in nongerm cells during the patient's lifetime) mutations in
protooncogenes have been detected in gastrointestinal cancers. Similarly, the vast majority of tumor suppressor gene mutations are also somatic. Nevertheless,
germline (constitutional) mutations in tumor suppressor genes do underlie cancer predisposition in several hereditary gastrointestinal cancer syndromes.
It is not possible to present in this chapter an exhaustive summary detailing the molecular alterations present in each gastrointestinal cancer type. Rather, the focus is
on molecular defects in colorectal carcinoma. The basis for this focus is several-fold. Colorectal cancer is the most common gastrointestinal cancer type in the United
States and several other regions of the world. Understanding of colorectal cancer molecular biology is generally more advanced than that of other gastrointestinal
cancer types, although significant progress has been made on the molecular front in esophageal, gastric, pancreatic, and hepatocellular cancer. Some of the frequent
genetic alterations in colorectal carcinomas are also common in other gastrointestinal cancers. Furthermore, study of the multiple genetic alterations that accumulate
during the adenoma-carcinoma sequence in the colon has nicely illustrated the means by which multiple genetic alterations underlie tumor initiation and progression
in other organ sites. Although the focus of this chapter is on colorectal cancer, selected advances in the molecular biology of pancreatic and esophageal cancer also
are highlighted. The main objectives of this chapter are to review the following: (1) the genetic basis of two inherited forms of colorectal cancer; (2) some of the
frequent molecular abnormalities in colorectal tumors; (3) common molecular abnormalities in pancreatic and esophageal cancer; and (4) the potential clinical utility of
genetic alterations in early detection and clinical management of gastrointestinal cancer.

COLORECTAL CANCER AS A MODEL SYSTEM
In 2000, approximately 140,000 U.S. residents will be diagnosed with colorectal cancer, and roughly 55,000 will die from the disease. 1 Males and females have a
nearly equal likelihood of being diagnosed, and the cumulative lifetime risk of colorectal cancer in the United States is 6%, with an average age of 66 years at
diagnosis. Individuals with a family history of colorectal cancer in a first-degree relative, but who otherwise lack clinical features or a family history consistent with a
highly penetrant colorectal cancer syndrome [e.g., familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) or hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC)], are approximately
twice as likely to develop colorectal cancer as those without a family history. 2,3,4 and 5 Other risk factors for colorectal cancer include older age, inflammatory bowel
disease, a diet high in fat and animal proteins, and a sedentary lifestyle. 2 Many other exposures, including excess alcohol consumption, smoking, aspirin and
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agent use, and specific dietary components (e.g., micronutrients such as calcium and selenium), have been extensively studied for their
effects on colorectal cancer risk. 6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20 and 21 However, these exposures remain uncertain risk factors. The reality is that the main dietary and
environmental factors that contribute to most colorectal cancers are poorly defined, and perhaps 75% of all incident colorectal cancers arise in people with no
well-defined risk factor. On the other hand, many colorectal cancers may be preventable, and improved adoption and implementation of current screening
recommendations might save up to 30,000 lives per year. 22

THE ADENOMA-CARCINOMA SEQUENCE IN THE COLON
A variety of benign gastrointestinal tumors have been identified, but a generic term for a localized lesion projecting above the surrounding mucosa is polyp. Most
colorectal polyps, particularly small polyps, are of hyperplastic type, and most data indicate hyperplastic polyps are not a precursor to cancer. The adenomatous
polyp, or adenoma, is generally thought to be the important precursor lesion to cancer. Adenomas arise from glandular epithelium, and their common features are the
dysplastic morphology and abnormal differentiation of the epithelial cells in the lesion. The prevalence of adenomas in the United States is approximately 25% by age
50 years and perhaps 50% by age 70. 22 The notion that most colorectal carcinomas arise from an adenomatous precursor is well supported. First, longitudinal studies
have shown a high risk of colorectal cancer development in individuals whose adenomas are not removed, 23,24 and polypectomy decreases colorectal cancer risk. 25
Second, foci of carcinoma can often be detected in adenomatous polyps, and residual regions of adenomatous glands are often noted in carcinoma specimens. 26,27 and
28 Third, individuals affected by syndromes that strongly predispose to the development of adenomas, such as FAP (discussed later in Familial Adenomatous
Polyposis and the APC Gene), invariably develop colorectal carcinomas by the third to fifth decades of life if their colons are not removed. 29,30 Nevertheless, only a
fraction of adenomas progress to cancer, and progression probably occurs over a period measured in years to decades. Adenomas larger than 1 cm in size are
estimated to have a 15% chance of progressing to carcinoma over a 10-year period. 31
Besides adenomatous polyp development, another clinical situation associated with markedly increased colorectal carcinoma risk is ulcerative colitis (UC). Patients
with longstanding and severe UC have a 20-fold or greater increase in colorectal cancer risk compared to the general population. 32,33 It is generally thought that
carcinomas arise in UC patients as a result of chronic cycles of mucosal injury and subsequent regrowth, a situation that may bear some similarity to processes
underlying the development of some esophageal, gastric, and pancreatic cancers. Possible cancer precursors in patients with UC include dysplasia and flat
adenomatous plaques. 28 The relationship of these presumptive precursors to one another and to the villous regeneration seen in UC patients as well as the relative
risks of progression of the lesion types are less well defined than the adenoma-carcinoma sequence.

INHERITED COLORECTAL CANCER SYNDROMES
Highly penetrant, inherited predisposition syndromes are estimated to account for only approximately 5% of colorectal cancers. 30 Hereditary syndromes predisposing
to colorectal cancer include FAP and HNPCC. Other rare syndromes also associated with an increased, but less clearly defined, risk of colorectal or other

gastrointestinal cancers include Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Cowden disease, and juvenile polyposis syndrome. The genes responsible for these inherited syndromes
have been identified ( Table 33.1-1). Consistent with the Knudson two-hit model for tumor suppressor genes, in all cases, inactivating mutations in both alleles are
present in the cancers that arise in affected individuals. However, these other cancer predisposition syndromes are rarer than FAP and HNPCC, and with the
exception of the DPC4 (deleted in pancreatic cancer locus 4) gene, defects in the other familial gastrointestinal cancer genes do not appear to contribute to sporadic
cases of colorectal cancer. For these reasons, the discussion here focuses on FAP and HNPCC.

TABLE 33.1-1. Genetics of Inherited Colorectal Tumor Syndromes

FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS AND THE ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS COLI GENE
FAP is an autosomal dominant syndrome affecting approximately 1 in 8000 individuals and accounting for approximately 0.5% of all colorectal cancers. 29,30 Hundreds
to thousands of adenomas arise in the colon and rectum of affected individuals by the third to fourth decades of life, and the lifetime incidence of colorectal cancer in
untreated FAP patients approaches 100%. Several variants of FAP have been described, including Gardner's syndrome, in which affected individuals may manifest
extensive polyposis, epidermoid cysts, desmoid tumors, and osteomas; and Turcot's syndrome, in which polyposis and brain tumors can be seen. Families with
attenuated forms of FAP (termed attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli) also have been described in which some affected individuals have only 10 to 20 adenomas
by 50 years of age. The gene that, when mutant, underlies FAP, Gardner's syndrome, and other variants is the adenomatous polyposis coli ( APC) tumor suppressor
gene on chromosome 5q.34
APC is a large gene encoding a protein of 2843 amino acids, and its last exon is remarkable because it contains a 6579-base-pair open reading frame. 34,35 Although a
fraction of germline mutations in FAP patients extinguish APC gene expression, more than 95% of the known mutations lead to premature truncation of APC protein
synthesis. The mutations are located predominantly in the 5' half of the gene, and two “hot spots” at codons 1061 and 1309 account for approximately 35% of the
germline mutations identified (Fig. 33.1-1).35 Some phenotypic variation among those with FAP appears to be because of the specific mutant APC allele present. 34 In
spite of the genotype-phenotype associations noted, however, patients with identical APC mutations can display distinct clinical features. For instance, some patients
with germline mutations between APC codons 1403 and 1578 manifest Gardner's syndrome features, whereas others with the identical mutation do not. Similarly,
despite the fact FAP patients have a greatly increased risk of medulloblastoma and an elevated risk of hepatoblastoma and thyroid cancers, only a subset of
individuals within any one kindred manifests these tumors.

FIGURE 33.1-1. Schematic representation of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein functional domains with respect to germline and somatic mutations. A putative
domain involved in homo-oligomerization (?dimerization) of APC is located at the amino-terminus. Also noted are a series of repeats of unknown function with
similarity to the Drosophila armadillo protein; sequences known to mediate binding to b-catenin and axin and regulate b-catenin's abundance and localization; a basic
domain in the carboxy terminal third of the protein that appears to facilitate complexing with microtubules (MT), and sequences near the carboxy terminus of APC that
interact with the EB1 protein and the human homologue of the Drosophila disc large (hDlg) protein. Germline mutations in the APC gene (predominantly
chain-terminating) are dispersed throughout the 5' half of the sequence, with two apparent “hot spots” at codons 1061 and 1309. Somatic mutations in the APC gene
in colorectal cancer appear to cluster in a region termed the mutation cluster region, and mutations at codons 1309 and 1450 are most common. (Modified from
Fearon ER. Oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. In: Abeloff MD, Armitage JO, Lichter AS, Niederhuber JE, eds. Clinical oncology, 2nd ed. New York: Churchill
Livingstone, 2000:77, with permission.)

Somatic Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Mutations in Sporadic Tumors
Notwithstanding the APC gene's critical role in FAP, the gene has an even more prominent role in sporadic colorectal tumors. Roughly 80% of sporadic colorectal
adenomas and carcinomas have somatic mutations inactivating APC.34,35 The nature and distribution of APC somatic mutations are similar to the germline mutations in
FAP patients (see Fig. 33.1-1), with nearly all somatic mutations leading to premature truncation of the APC protein. 35 The data suggest somatic APC mutations are
an early and likely rate-limiting event in adenoma development. First, APC mutations have essentially the same frequency in small adenomas as advanced adenomas
and carcinomas,34,35 in contrast to other somatically mutated genes in colorectal tumors, such as K- ras and p53. Second, somatic APC mutations are found in the
earliest lesions analyzed, including microscopic adenomas composed of only a few dysplastic glands. As predicted by the Knudson model, both APC alleles appear to
be inactivated in most colorectal adenomas and all colorectal carcinomas. APC somatic mutations are infrequent in tumor types other than colorectal carcinomas, 34,35
with the possible exception of ampullary carcinomas and desmoid tumors. 36,37 and 38
Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Protein Function
The APC protein has been suggested to regulate cell-cell adhesion, cell migration, or possibly apoptosis. 34,35,39 Presently, perhaps the best-characterized function of
the APC protein is regulation of b-catenin. b-Catenin, an abundant cellular protein, was first identified because of its role in linking the cytoplasmic domain of the
E-cadherin cell-cell adhesion molecule to the cortical actin cytoskeleton, via b-catenin's binding to a-catenin. The truncated (mutant) forms of the APC protein present
in most colorectal carcinomas lack sequences crucial for binding b-catenin and other cellular proteins (see Fig. 33.1-1). A model has been developed to explain the
significance of APC's interaction with b-catenin and these other proteins ( Fig. 33.1-2). The model indicates that, in collaboration with the glycogen synthase kinase-3
(GSK3) and axin proteins, APC regulates b-catenin's abundance in the cytoplasm and nucleus. In 75% to 80% of colorectal cancers, APC is mutated and unable to
regulate b-catenin (see Fig. 33.1-2B). As a result, b-catenin accumulates in the cytoplasm and nucleus, and complexes with transcription factors of the Tcf (T-cell
factor family), such as Tcf-4. On binding to Tcf proteins, b-catenin functions as a transcription co-activator, activating expression of Tcf-regulated genes. The identities
and functions of Tcf-regulated target genes are not yet well understood, although they may include powerful stimulators of cell growth and proliferation (e.g., the
c-MYC and cyclin D1 genes) and extracellular proteases [e.g., matrix metalloprotease 7 (MMP-7)] that might facilitate invasion and metastasis. 40,41,42 and 43 Further

compelling support for the notion that gene activation by the Tcf/b-catenin complex is critical in colorectal tumorigenesis includes the fact that, in a subset of the 20%
of colorectal cancers lacking APC mutations, somatic mutations in b-catenin have been found. 44,45 and 46 These mutations are present in the phosphorylation
consensus sequences near b-catenin's amino-terminus, and they appear to render mutant b-catenin proteins resistant to regulation by the APC/GSK3/axin complex.
Consequently, b-catenin accumulates and activates Tcf-regulated genes (see Fig. 33.1-2C).

FIGURE 33.1-2. A model indicating the function of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), axin, and glycogen synthase kinase 3b (GSK3b) proteins in the regulation
of b-catenin (b-cat) in normal cells, and the consequence of APC or b-cat defects in cancer cells. b-cat is an abundant cellular protein, and much of it is often bound to
the cytoplasmic domain of the E-cadherin (E-cad) cell-cell adhesion protein. A: In normal cells, the proteins GSK3b, APC, and axin function to promote degradation of
free cytosolic b-cat, probably as a result of phosphorylation of the N-terminal sequences of b-cat by GSK3b. GSK3b activity and b-cat degradation are inhibited by
activation of the wingless (WNT) pathway, as a result of the action of the Frizzled receptor and disheveled (DSH) signaling protein. B: Mutation of APC in colorectal
and other cancer cells results in accumulation of b-cat, binding to Tcf-4, and transcriptional activation of Tcf-4 target genes, such as c-MYC, cyclin D1, MMP-7, and
PPARd (see text). C: Point mutations and small deletions in b-cat in cancer cells inhibit phosphorylation and degradation of b-cat by GSK3b and APC, with resultant
activation of c-MYC and other Tcf-4 target genes. (Modified from Fearon ER. Human cancer syndromes: clues to the origin and nature of cancer. Science
1997;278:1043, with permission.)

Variant Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Alleles and Familial Aggregations of Colorectal Cancer
In the majority of colorectal cancer patients, no definitive hereditary component can be identified. These cases are, therefore, labeled “sporadic.” Nonetheless, some
of these apparently sporadic cases may well have some hereditary component. The identification of genes that confer weak predisposition to colorectal cancer has
been and will continue to be a difficult issue for the colorectal cancer field. One study has, however, provided fascinating insights into familial forms of colorectal
cancer that do not manifest as highly penetrant cancer syndromes. 47 The study was initiated because of the identification of eight colorectal adenomas in a
39-year-old patient with a family history of colorectal cancer. The diagnosis of HNPCC was excluded by molecular analyses (the genetics of HNPCC is discussed in
the section Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer ). Diagnosis of FAP was unlikely based on clinical findings. Nonetheless, detailed studies of the patient's APC
alleles were carried out. No germline APC mutation of the type predicted to truncate the APC protein was identified. However, a sequence change at codon 1307 was
found, resulting in a substitution of lysine (K) for isoleucine (I). Thus, the allele was referred to as the APC I1307K allele. The resultant amino acid change was not
predicted to alter APC protein function. However, at the DNA sequence level, the variant allele had an extended mononucleotide tract in the coding region of (A) 8
instead of (AAATAAAA).
Further studies revealed that the I1307K allele was present only in individuals of Ashkenazi Jewish origin and that those who carried the I1307K allele had a twofold
increase in their lifetime risk of colorectal cancer. 47 Moreover, the localized somatic APC mutations in colorectal cancers arising in individuals carrying the I1307K
allele were nearly always small insertions or deletions in or adjacent to the (A) 8 mononucleotide repeat tract. The somatic mutations created frameshifts that lead to
truncated APC proteins. Therefore, the I1307K allele appears to be a novel cancer predisposition allele that does not exert its effects by directly altering APC function.
Rather, the I1307K allele contains a DNA sequence tract that is a more frequent target for somatic mutation in colonic epithelial cells than the normal APC sequence.
Future studies may establish that subtle or unconventional mutations in APC or other genes also contribute to gastrointestinal cancer predisposition by similar
mechanisms.
HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS COLORECTAL CANCER
HNPCC was first described by Warthin in 1913. 48 Roughly half a century later, Lynch and others described kindreds with autosomal dominant patterns of colorectal
and other cancers that were not associated with extensive intestinal polyposis. 49,50 Before identification of the specific inherited mutations that underlie HNPCC,
clinical criteria useful for ascertaining families most likely to be affected by HNPCC were outlined. 51 These criteria, termed the Amsterdam [or International
Collaborative Group (ICG)] criteria, are as follows: (1) FAP must be excluded; (2) at least three affected relatives must have histologically verified colorectal cancer,
and at least two of the affected must be first-degree relatives; (3) the affected individuals must be from at least two successive generations; and (4) at least one of the
affected individuals must have developed colorectal cancer before age 50 years. Although the ICG criteria do not identify all individuals who are ultimately found to
carry HNPCC gene defects, the criteria have proven useful for focusing attention on families most likely to have HNPCC. Based on the criteria, HNPCC cases are
estimated to account for 2% to 4% of all colorectal cancer cases. Of note, other cancers often seen in families with HNPCC, including endometrial, ovarian, gastric,
and hepatobiliary and urinary tract cancers, are not included in the ICG criteria.
Mutations in DNA Mismatch Repair Genes in Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer
Unlike FAP, in which the intestinal polyposis phenotype usually permits diagnosis of patients by their late teenage years or early 20s, no distinct clinical features are
seen in asymptomatic carriers of HNPCC defects. 30,52 As such, definitively ascertaining the phenotypic status of an individual in an HNPCC kindred who has not yet
developed cancer is nearly impossible, thus rendering genetic linkage analyses for mapping predisposition genes very challenging. The initial genetic studies of
HNPCC were successful in excluding a role for variant APC alleles in cancer predisposition in HNPCC, as well as in excluding a role for several of the genes known to
be somatically mutated in sporadic colorectal cancers. 53,54 A subsequent search of the entire genome for linkage to HNPCC was undertaken using microsatellite
sequence markers. Microsatellites are short, repetitive DNA sequence tracts, scattered throughout the genome, and many microsatellite tracts show polymorphic
length variation among normal individuals. One such search for linkage in several HNPCC kindreds was successful in mapping a cancer predisposition gene to
chromosome 2p.55 In other HNPCC families, a predisposition gene was localized to chromosome 3p. 56 In yet other families with HNPCC, no evidence for linkage to
either chromosome 2p or 3p was found. These findings clearly established that HNPCC was a genetically heterogeneous disease. 55,56
In an attempt to establish the potential relevance of the Knudson two-hit model for HNPCC genes, investigators sought to demonstrate that loss of the wild-type
HNPCC allele on chromosome 2p was present in cancers from individuals carrying a defect in that particular predisposition gene. However, not only was there no loss
of heterozygosity (LOH) of chromosome 2p sequences in the cancers, but the microsatellite DNA sequences demonstrated marked variation in length in tumor tissue
compared to the patient's normal tissue. 57 In fact, in any given cancer from an HNPCC patient, microsatellite sequence alterations were present at many loci scattered
throughout the genome. This curious phenotype was termed the microsatellite instability (MI) or replication error–positive (RER+) phenotype. Independent studies
revealed that the MI/RER+ phenotype was present in approximately 15% of apparently sporadic colorectal cancers. 58,59
The demonstration that the MI/RER+ phenotype was present in all cancers from HNPCC patients and some sporadic cancers piqued the interest of researchers in the
DNA mismatch repair field because similar instability phenotypes had previously been seen in yeast strains with defective DNA mismatch repair genes. The prediction
that germline mutations in one allele of a DNA mismatch repair gene might underlie HNPCC was quickly borne out. A functional link between MI/RER+ and mutated
mismatch repair genes was first provided by the demonstration that cancer cell lines derived from patients with HNPCC have at least a 100-fold increased rate of
mutation in repetitive DNA sequence tracts (e.g., microsatellites). 60 Subsequently, a human homologue of the bacterial mutS mismatch repair gene, designated MSH2,
was mapped to chromosome 2p,61 and one allele was found to be mutated in the germline of some HNPCC patients. 62 As might have been predicted, based on the
fact that mismatch repair is dependent on the function of a number of distinct proteins ( Fig. 33.1-3), other DNA mismatch repair genes were found to be mutated in
subsets of HNPCC patients, including the MLH1 gene on chromosome 3p, the PMS1 gene on 2q, the PMS2 gene on 7q, and the GTBP/MSH6 gene on chromosome

2p.63,64,65,66,67 and 68 Together, germline mutations in the MSH2 and MLH1 genes account for more than 60% of the known mutations present in HNPCC patients (Table
33.1-2).

FIGURE 33.1-3. Mismatch repair pathway in human cells. A,B: During DNA replication, DNA mismatches may arise, such as from strand slippage (shown) or
misincorporation of bases (not shown). C: The mismatch is recognized by MutS homologues, perhaps most often MSH2 and GTBP/MSH6, although another MutS
homologue, MSH3, may substitute for GTBP/MSH6 in some cases. D,E: MutL homologues, such as MLH1 and PMS2, are recruited to the complex, and the mismatch
is repaired through the action of a number of proteins, including an exonuclease, helicase, DNA polymerase, and ligase. (Modified from ref. 34, with permission.)

TABLE 33.1-2. Germline Mismatch Repair Gene Mutations in Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC)

The prevalence of germline mutations in the DNA mismatch repair genes in colorectal cancer patients not meeting the ICG criteria for HNPCC remains uncertain,
although some preliminary findings have emerged. A study of 509 consecutive patients in a Finnish tumor registry found that the MI/RER+ phenotype was present in
cancers from 12% of patients.69 Ten of the 63 patients with MI/RER+ cancers (16%, or roughly 2% of total patients) had a detectable germline mutation in MLH1 or
MSH2. Patients with an identifiable germline mutation had either a first-degree relative with endometrial or colorectal cancer, were younger than 50 years, or had a
previous colorectal or endometrial cancer. Another study of patients from the Netherlands and Norway found that 26% of the 184 families with clustering of colorectal
cancer studied had germline mutations in the MSH2 or MLH1 genes.70 Similar to the Finnish study, germline MSH2 or MLH1 mutations were more likely to be found in
individuals from families meeting the ICG criteria, individuals whose cancers arose at a particularly young age, or individuals whose families manifested both
colorectal and endometrial cancer.
Mechanisms and Mutation Targets in Cancers with Defective Mismatch Repair
In normal cells of a patient with HNPCC, DNA repair is not usually impaired, because the cells have a wild-type copy of the gene. During tumorigenesis, however, and
perhaps even at an early stage in that process, the wild-type allele of the gene that is mutant in all of the patient's constitutional cells is inactivated by a somatic
mutation. Then, affected cells manifest a mutator phenotype and accumulate mutations in a much more rapid fashion. HNPCC appears, therefore, to be a disease with
more rapid tumor progression from a benign, initiated clone to frank malignancy. In HNPCC patients, the transition from a small adenoma to carcinoma has been
estimated to take only 3 to 5 years, instead of the 20 to 40 years believed required for development of most sporadic carcinomas. 28,52
Germline mutations in the known mismatch repair genes have only been detected in 2% to 4% of colorectal cancer patients. However, approximately 15% of all
colorectal cancers manifest the MI/RER+ phenotype, implying that germline or somatic mutations in mismatch repair pathway genes may be present in a substantial
fraction of colorectal cancers, regardless of the patient's family history. Only a fraction of the 15% of apparently sporadic colorectal cancers with the MI/RER
phenotype develop as the result of a germline mutation in a known mismatch repair gene, such as MSH2 or MLH1. Similarly, somatic mutations in MSH2, MLH1, or
other mismatch repair genes are present in only a small fraction of the apparently sporadic cancers with the MI/RER+ phenotype. 52,71 Although germline or somatic
mutation of known mismatch repair genes are infrequent, inactivation of the MLH1 gene via epigenetic changes, such as DNA hypermethylation of the MLH1
promoter, appears to be a causal factor in the majority of “sporadic” colorectal cancer cases with the MI/RER+ phenotype. 72,73
The vast majority of the mutations arising in cells with the MI/RER+ phenotype are likely to have either no effect on cell growth or detrimental effects. Such mutations
do not promote the clonal outgrowth and evolution characteristic of colorectal tumor progression. A subset of mutations do, however, activate oncogenes, such as
K-ras, or inactivate tumor suppressor genes, such as APC and p53.57,74,75 Some genes may be more frequent targets for somatic mutations in cancers with MI/RER+.
For instance, genes that contain repetitive DNA sequence tracts, such as microsatellites, would appear to be likely targets for mutation in MI/RER+ tumors. A gene
containing a mononucleotide repeat tract in its coding sequence and that is frequently inactivated in colorectal cancers with the MI/RER+ phenotype is the
transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b) type II receptor (RII). 76,77 The RII gene is a likely tumor suppressor gene, because both copies of the gene are inactivated by
mutations in more than 90% of MI/RER+ colorectal cancers, and TGF-b is known to be a strong inhibitor of cell proliferation in many normal epithelial tissues,
including colonic epithelial cells. Approximately 15% of microsatellite stable colorectal carcinomas also show biallelic inactivation of RII, although the mutations are
located in regions other than the gene's mononucleotide tract. 78 Other suggested candidates for somatic inactivation in MI/RER colorectal cancers include bax, a
p53-regulated gene in some cell types and whose protein product functions in promoting apoptosis, 79 and E2F-4, a gene encoding a transcription factor that may
regulate cell-cycle progression. 80 Moreover, not all genes that appear to be more frequently mutated in MI/RER+ cancers than in microsatellite-stable cancers need
themselves be mutated in microsatellite sequence tracts. The b-catenin gene appears to be more frequently activated by mutations in MI/RER+ colon cancers than in
microsatellite-stable cancers, and the missense mutations seen are not associated with a microsatellite sequence tract. 81,82

ONCOGENE AND TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENE MUTATIONS IN COLORECTAL TUMOR PROGRESSION
Somatic mutations in the APC gene appear to be an early and, perhaps, rate-limiting event in the development of upwards of 75% to 80% of colorectal adenomas and
carcinomas. Presumably, mutations in other tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes play an important role in tumor progression. Some of the genes believed critical
in colorectal tumor progression are discussed in this chapter and summarized in Table 33.1-3. Another important point already noted is that roughly 15% of colorectal
carcinomas display the MI/RER+ phenotype. Although the MI/RER+ cancers have a very elevated rate of localized mutations (e.g., point mutations and small
deletions and insertions), they are generally near diploid, with few chromosome losses or gains. In contrast to MI/RER+ cancers, upwards of 85% of colorectal
carcinomas display frequent chromosome losses and gains. 83 Defects in genes that regulate formation of the mitotic spindle and proper alignment and segregation of
chromosomes at mitosis may underlie the chromosome instability phenotype, although few of the specific defects likely to underlie the chromosome instability
phenotype in cancer have been defined.

TABLE 33.1-3. Summary of Selected Somatic Mutations in Colorectal Carcinomas

K-RAS AND OTHER ONCOGENE DEFECTS
The RAS genes encode small guanosine triphosphatases with critical roles in signal transduction downstream of growth factor receptors, such as that for epidermal
growth factor. K-RAS is the most frequently mutated of the three RAS genes, with K-RAS mutations found in approximately 50% of colorectal adenomas larger than 1
cm in size and a similar fraction of carcinomas. 84,85 and 86 The majority of K-RAS mutations are at codon 12, but codon 13 is mutated in 15% to 20% of cases, and
codon 61 is infrequently affected. N-RAS mutations are infrequent, and no H-RAS mutations have been reported in colorectal tumors. In adenomatous polyps, K-RAS
mutations have been associated with features predictive of subsequent progression to cancer—increased size and more severe dysplasia 85,87,88—although K-RAS
mutations also have been seen in some colonic lesions with very reduced or no malignant potential (e.g., hyperplastic polyps and aberrant crypt foci lacking
dysplasia). 89,90,91 and 92 Notwithstanding these latter observations, inactivation of mutant K-RAS activity in advanced colorectal cancer cells abrogates the tumorigenic
growth properties of colorectal carcinoma cells. 93 Hence, RAS gene mutations in colorectal tumors have a role not only in promoting growth of small adenomas to
larger and more clinically significant lesions, but also in maintenance of the fully neoplastic phenotype in advanced carcinomas.
Somatic mutations in other protooncogenes, including amplifications of the MYC, MYB, cyclin D1, and HER-2/NEU genes, have been found in only a small percentage
of colorectal cancers (see Table 33.1-3).94,95 Gain of function mutations in the b-catenin gene are present in 2% to 8% of colorectal cancers and appear to render the
mutant b-catenin protein resistant to regulation by the APC protein. 45,81,82,96,97 Like APC mutations, b-catenin mutations appear to be an early event in adenoma
formation. Finally, some oncogene mutations may vary in their frequency in colorectal carcinomas, depending on whether the tumor has the MI/RER+ phenotype. For
example, although K-RAS mutations have a roughly similar prevalence in MI/RER+ carcinomas compared with cases with chromosome instability, b-catenin mutations
appear to be more common in MI/RER+ cases.82
THE P53 GENE
Allelic loss or LOH is believed to be a common mechanism for tumor suppressor gene inactivation in the roughly 85% of colorectal carcinomas that manifest the
chromosome instability phenotype. Although allelic loss of chromosome 17p is an infrequent event in adenomas, 17p allelic losses can be detected in nearly 70% to
75% of colorectal carcinomas. 85,98 Wild-type p53 alleles are presumed to be targeted for inactivation by 17p LOH, because the remaining p53 allele is mutated in the
majority of colorectal tumors with 17p LOH, most often at codons 175, 245, 248, 273, or 282. 99,100 and 101 Only a small subset of carcinomas lacking 17p LOH have p53
mutations, and most adenomas lack 17p LOH and p53 mutation. Hence, mutation and LOH of p53 appear to arise most frequently during the transition from adenoma
to carcinoma. The biologic selection for p53 inactivation at this point in tumor development is not well understood. However, based on our understanding of the
functions of p53 in cell-cycle checkpoints at the G 1/S and G2/M boundaries and in apoptosis, 102,103,104 and 105 the selection for p53 inactivation may reflect the fact that
several distinct stresses on tumor cells activate apoptotic pathways in cells with wild-type p53 function. Such stresses may include DNA strand breakage, hypoxia,
and reduced access to glucose or other nutrients. Loss of p53 function at the critical juncture between adenoma and carcinoma may facilitate continued growth and
the acquisition of invasive properties in the face of stresses that might otherwise severely limit tumor cell growth in the colon and rectum.
CHROMOSOME 18Q LOSS OF HETEROZYGOSITY
Chromosome 18q LOH is seen in approximately 60% to 70% of primary colorectal cancers and, rarely, in adenomas, with the exception of large villous adenomas that
contain a focus of carcinoma. 85,86 The prevalence of 18q LOH rises to nearly 90% to 100% in liver metastases from colorectal primary tumors. 106 The findings suggest
a role for inactivation of a chromosome 18q tumor suppressor gene(s) in the later stages of tumor progression and metastasis. Several studies have reported that
patients whose primary colorectal cancers have 18q LOH have an increased likelihood of distant metastasis and death from their disease, independent of stage and
perhaps other clinical and histopathologic features. 107,108,109,110 and 111 In colorectal carcinomas, a common region of LOH includes bands 18q12.3 to 18q21.3, and the
DCC (deleted in colorectal cancer) gene at 18q21.2 has been suggested to be a candidate tumor suppressor gene. 112,113 In some studies, loss of DCC transcripts and
protein has been noted in more than 50% of colorectal cancers, although the specific mechanisms accounting for DCC inactivation are not well understood. 114 Few
specific mutations in the DCC gene have been identified, perhaps in part because the DCC gene spans more than 1.35 million base pairs. 115DCC encodes a
transmembrane protein that functions in transducing signals from netrin chemoattractant and cell guidance factors. 114 Some findings indicate that, in the absence of
netrin, the DCC protein may induce apoptosis in epithelial cells, 116 perhaps reconciling why there might be selection for genetic or epigenetic inactivation of DCC in
colorectal carcinomas.
Although DCC remains a candidate tumor suppressor gene in colorectal and other tumors, a well-established tumor suppressor gene, termed DPC4SMAD4 (also
known as), is also present in the 18q21 region. 117,118 As is discussed later (see the section Gene Defects in Pancreatic Carcinoma), DPC4 is mutated in 50% to 55%
of pancreatic carcinomas. Furthermore, germline DPC4 mutations have been seen in a subset of patients affected by juvenile polyposis syndrome. 119 Those with
juvenile polyposis syndrome develop benign hamartomatous polyps in the intestinal tract, and they also have an increased risk of colorectal and gastric cancer.
Nevertheless, DPC4 is mutated in only approximately 10% to 15% of colorectal carcinomas and much less frequently in other gastrointestinal tumors, such as gastric
and esophageal carcinomas. 120,121,122,123,124,125,126 and 127 The DPC4-related SMAD2 gene is also located in the region of 18q commonly affected by LOH in colorectal
carcinomas. A major role for SMAD2 in colorectal cancer has been excluded, because SMAD2 is inactivated in less than 5% of colon carcinomas and SMAD2
alterations are rare or absent in other gastrointestinal carcinomas. 127,128,129,130,131 and 132 Based on the frequencies of mutations in DPC4 and MADR2, neither gene
appears to be the primary tumor suppressor gene targeted for inactivation by 18q LOH in colorectal cancer. Nonetheless, inactivation of either of the two genesis
likely to have an important role in the tumor process, because each gene encodes a protein that functions to transduce TGF-b growth regulatory signals, and TGF-b
has significant growth inhibitory effects on colonic epithelial cells. Whether DCC inactivation is associated with 18q LOH in the majority of colorectal carcinomas or
whether additional novel tumor suppressor genes are present in the 18q12.3-q21.3 region remains to be determined.

GENE DEFECTS IN PANCREATIC CARCINOMA
Ductal epithelial cells in the pancreas comprise less than 5% of the total cell mass in the organ, yet they are the origin of the most common form of pancreatic
carcinoma. The natural history of the progression from normal epithelium to carcinoma in the pancreas is less well understood than in the colon. However, it appears
that a flat hyperplastic lesion in which the epithelium changes from its normal cuboidal pattern to columnar may be an early precursor. 118,133 Papillary hyperplasia, in
which the mucosa becomes more crowded and folded, arguably represents the next recognizable stage. Papillary hyperplasia can be associated with varying degrees
of cellular and nuclear atypia (i.e., dysplasia), and the most advanced premalignant stage is sometimes referred to as carcinoma in situ. Bona fide carcinoma is
marked by invasion through the duct wall. A major difficulty hindering early molecular analyses of pancreatic carcinoma was the fact that pancreatic carcinoma cells
engender a strong host desmoplastic and inflammatory response, and the neoplastic cells only constitute a fraction of the total cells in the cancer specimen.
Generation and study of pancreatic carcinoma specimens explanted into the flank of immunocompromised mice (i.e., xenografts) have proven crucial in defining
specific genetic alterations in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in pancreatic carcinoma, because all human DNA isolated from the xenografts is derived from
neoplastic cells. 118,134,135

As is the case for colorectal carcinomas, accumulation of multiple mutations in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes is critical in tumor progression ( Table 33.1-4).
Mutations in K-RAS have been found in more than 90% of pancreatic carcinomas, and the mutations appear to arise early in the natural history of the disease, with
more than 50% of flat hyperplasias and the vast majority of papillary hyperplasias exhibiting K-RAS mutations.118 Like colorectal carcinoma, other oncogene defects
appear to be much less frequent, with the next most common oncogene changes—amplifications of the AKT2 and MYB genes—present in only 10% to 20% and 10%
of carcinomas, respectively. 118

TABLE 33.1-4. Summary of Selected Mutations in Pancreatic Carcinoma

A number of distinct tumor suppressor gene defects are seen in pancreatic carcinomas, although three tumor suppressor genes stand out because of their frequent
inactivation—namely, the p16INK4a, p53, and DPC4 genes (see Table 33.1-4). Whereas mutations in the pRb/cyclin D1-cdk4/p16 INK4a pathway are uncommon in
colorectal carcinoma, mutations inactivating the p16INK4a gene are found in roughly 85% of pancreatic carcinomas. 118 A subset of pancreatic carcinomas may
epigenetically inactivate p16INK4a, perhaps as a result of hypermethylation of p16INK4 promoter sequences.136 In another small fraction of cases, rather than p16INK4a
inactivation, the RB1 tumor suppressor gene is inactivated, 118 presumably with similar net consequences to p16INK4a inactivation, because the pRb protein is
functionally inactive when the p16 INK4a protein is lacking in a cell (i.e., the cyclin D and cdk4 proteins constitutively phosphorylate pRb in this setting). Mutations in the
p53 gene are found in 50% to 75% of pancreatic carcinomas. 118 Similar to the situation in colorectal carcinomas, the vast majority of the p53 mutations are missense
mutations accompanied by loss of the wild-type p53 allele. Some alterations inactivating the p16INK4a gene, particularly homozygous deletions, also lead to loss of the
p14ARF protein, an alternative protein product synthesized in part from sequences shared with those encoding the p16 INK4a protein. Because p14ARF inactivation
appears to lead to functional inactivation of the p53 protein, the actual frequency of pancreatic carcinomas with p53 inactivation may be higher than the percentage of
cases with demonstrable p53 sequence alterations. As noted earlier in the section Chromosome 18q Loss of Heterozygosity, DPC4 mutations are found in
approximately 50% to 55% of pancreatic carcinomas. 117,118,137 Among other potential effects, the mutations presumably render the cells resistant to the negative
growth regulatory effects of TGF-b. Finally, in addition to the frequent alterations of p16INK4a, p53, and DPC4, several other tumor suppressor gene defects are found
in a fraction of pancreatic carcinomas, such as BRCA2 inactivation 118 (see Table 33.1-4). Consistent with the view that BRCA2 defects have an important role in a
subset of pancreatic cancers, in addition to the very elevated risk of breast cancer in those carrying a germline BRCA2 mutation, the lifetime risk of pancreatic
carcinoma for BRCA2 mutation carriers appears to be increased by three- to fivefold relative to the general population. 138,139

GENE DEFECTS IN ESOPHAGEAL ADENOCARCINOMA
Esophageal cancers are readily distinguished into squamous and adenocarcinoma types on the basis of their histopathologic appearance. Clear differences exist in
the pathogenesis of the two types, as well as differences in their epidemiology and associated risk factors. Not unexpectedly, the genetic alterations detected in the
two types appear to be largely distinct. The brief discussion here focuses on esophageal adenocarcinoma because its natural history and genetic alterations are
better defined than squamous carcinoma. Moreover, the genetics of esophageal adenocarcinoma has interesting parallels with the genetics of colorectal and
pancreatic carcinoma, as well as some interesting differences.
Efforts to define the natural history and likely precursor lesions for esophageal adenocarcinoma have focused on Barrett's esophagus (BE). 140,141 BE is a condition in
which the normal squamous epithelium of the esophagus is replaced by a metaplastic columnar epithelium. BE is generally restricted to the lower esophagus, and it is
thought to develop in response to the mucosal injury that arises in the setting of chronic gastroesophageal reflux, although only approximately 10% to 12% of patients
with reflux develop BE. The important histologic feature that predicts increased adenocarcinoma risk in patients with BE is the development of dysplasia, and
increasing grades of dysplasia are associated with increased aneuploidy. 141 Flow cytometry analyses indicate aneuploid cell populations are absent in normal
esophageal mucosa from patients with gastroesophageal reflux and no BE. Aneuploidy is rare in metaplasia and low-grade dysplasia. However, aneuploidy is present
in biopsy specimens from approximately two-thirds of patients with high-grade dysplasia and nearly 100% of cancers. The flow cytometry studies also have
demonstrated clonal heterogeneity in DNA content among the neoplastic cell populations present in distinct dysplastic areas of a single patient with BE, 141 suggesting
that a large area of BE is neoplastically transformed and multifocal progression ensues.
Various oncogene defects have been found in esophageal adenocarcinomas, most notably the amplification of several distinct protooncogenes, including the
HER-2/NEU/ErbB2 gene in 22% of cases, the cathepsin B and GATA-4 genes in 14%, the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR) gene in 13%, and the K-RAS gene
in 10%.142, 143 and 144 Among the tumor suppressor genes frequently inactivated by genetic and epigenetic alterations in esophageal carcinomas are the p53 and
p16INK4a genes. 141,145,146,147,148 and 149 Missense mutations in one p53 allele coupled with LOH of chromosome 17p and the remaining p53 allele are found in nearly
100% of esophageal adenocarcinomas. In contrast to the situation in the colon in which p53 mutation and 17p LOH are infrequent in premalignant lesions (i.e.,
adenomas) but frequent in carcinomas, p53 mutations and 17p LOH are frequently found in high-grade dysplastic regions of premalignant BE. Inactivation of p16INK4a
by mutational and epigenetic (e.g., promoter hypermethylation) mechanisms is frequent not only in high-grade dysplasias, but also in low-grade and nondysplastic BE
specimens. Hence, p16INK4a inactivation frequently precedes p53 inactivation in esophageal tumor progression. Nevertheless, as indicated in Figure 33.1-4, there
appear to be multiple genetic routes to cancer in BE. 148 Of some note, although several of the chromosome regions frequently affected by LOH in colorectal and
pancreatic carcinomas are also frequently affected by LOH in esophageal adenocarcinoma, including chromosomes 5q and 18q, 148,150 the APC and DPC4 tumor
suppressor genes appear to be infrequently, if ever, mutated in esophageal adenocarcinoma. 125,126 and 127,151 Further work will be needed to define the tumor
suppressor genes on chromosomes 5q and 18q that are inactivated in esophageal adenocarcinoma.

FIGURE 33.1-4. Multiple genetic routes to esophageal adenocarcinoma in the setting of Barrett's esophagus (BE). The clonal progression of cell populations as they
progress from the metaplasia (M) seen in BE is illustrated schematically. The figure is not intended to be comprehensive, as there are multiple pathways to cancer.
Nevertheless, some general patterns appear to be consistent in studies of progression in many patients. Chromosome losses (i.e., loss of heterozygosity), such as
those involving chromosomes 5q, 9p, 13q, 17p, and 18q appear to arise in a diploid, proliferating cell population (2N). Chromosome 17p and 9p losses are both early
events and can precede detectable inactivation of the p53 (TP53) or p16INK4a (CDKN2A) genes. In some cases, tetraploidy (4N) may precede aneuploidy (An).

Progression to cancer (Ca) is shown as an end point, although additional chromosome changes and mutations may contribute to further progression of the cancer.
(Modified from ref. 148, with permission.)

POTENTIAL CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF MOLECULAR ADVANCES
Advances in the understanding of the inherited and somatic genetic alterations in gastrointestinal cancers have made possible several clinical applications that should
improve the diagnosis and care of patients and families affected by these cancers. Although many future clinical applications can be envisioned, only a few potential
applications in the colorectal cancer area are described here.
RISK ASSESSMENT
Presymptomatic diagnosis of FAP or HNPCC may be of significant value to members of families with these syndromes. The ability to identify germline mutations in the
APC gene in more than 80% of families with FAP and Gardner's syndrome provides the basis for genetic counseling of at-risk families. Individuals from polyposis
kindreds who are not found to have inherited a disease-causing APC mutation would be spared frequent colonoscopic examinations in their adolescent and early
adult years. In turn, individuals who have inherited a mutant allele can be closely monitored via colonoscopy and offered surgical intervention at an appropriate time.
Perhaps in the not too distant future, effective chemopreventive regimens may delay the onset or perhaps even prevent entirely the development of adenomas and
carcinomas. The nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agent sulindac can cause regression of polyps in FAP patients, 152,153 and 154 although sulindac's efficacy is limited in part
by its side effects. Encouraging results with selective inhibitors of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in a mouse polyposis model imply that COX-2 inhibitors may be more
useful in prevention than sulindac. 155 Furthermore, because sulindac inhibits colorectal tumor growth via both COX-2–dependent and COX-2–independent
mechanisms and the COX-2–independent pathway involves the APC-regulated transcription factor PPARd, 156 a strategy of using both COX-2–selective inhibitors and
novel PPARd antagonists may be most efficacious in preventing adenoma formation or progression.
Novel mutation detection strategies, such as “chip-based” approaches, will hopefully supersede present laborious methods for detecting mutations in patients with
FAP and HNPCC. Nevertheless, although rapid and robust mutation detection strategies will be a significant advance, other problems must be conquered. For
instance, although the vast majority of germline APC mutations in FAP patients and many of the germline MSH2, MLH1, PMS1, and PMS2 mutations in HNPCC
patients are clearly inactivating (e.g., nonsense, frameshift), a subset of the mutations are missense substitutions. Distinguishing cancer-predisposing missense
mutations from benign polymorphic variants is a troublesome issue at present. The development of in vitro assays that accurately predict the functional activity of wild
type and mutant alleles in vivo is critical, particularly if large-scale screening for HNPCC mutations in asymptomatic patients is envisioned. Some progress toward this
important goal has been achieved. 157 After identification of novel variant alleles that contribute to modestly increased risk of colorectal cancer, akin to the effects of
the I1307K APC allele in Ashkenazi Jews, 47 recombinant DNA-based approaches may be used in a more general fashion in the future to estimate an individual's risk
of colorectal cancer. The technical and theoretical difficulties of identifying variant alleles that have only subtle effects on colorectal cancer risk are substantial.
Moreover, because many uncertainties exist regarding the optimal clinical management of such lower risk patients, as well as legal and ethical issues surrounding
presymptomatic genetic testing even in high-risk patients, 158 many challenges lie ahead.
EARLY DETECTION
The results of clinical trials indicate that colonoscopic removal of larger adenomas and early colorectal carcinomas reduces colorectal cancer incidence and most
likely decreases mortality. 25,159 Because of the reduced specificity and sensitivity of current noninvasive tests, such as fecal occult blood testing, the development of
highly specific and sensitive tests for early detection of colorectal cancer is an important goal. If inexpensive and reliable molecular diagnostic tests of stool
specimens could be developed, such tests might serve an adjunctive role along with more invasive and expensive methods for detection, such as colonoscopy.
Perhaps someday the molecular tests might even supplant colonoscopy as a definitive screening methodology. The intent of the molecular stool tests would be to
identify mutated oncogene or tumor suppressor gene DNA sequences, with such mutant DNA sequences presumably derived from adenoma or carcinoma cells shed
into the stool. Preliminary findings from studies of DNA isolated from stool samples of patients known to have carcinomas or advanced adenomas indicate stool-based
tests for mutant oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes may have utility. The early findings indicate that if a K-RAS gene mutation is present in the primary tumor
and the tumor is of sufficient size, mutant K-RAS gene sequences can usually be detected in the DNA of cells shed into the stool. 160,161,162 and 163 The sensitivity and
specificity of present methods for identifying RAS gene mutations in the stool of normal individuals and patients with various types of colorectal tumors have not been
fully determined, nor have the preliminary results been confirmed in much larger cohorts. Nonetheless, the early results are encouraging, because approximately 50%
of colorectal cancers and adenomas larger than 1 cm in size contain a mutant K-RAS allele.85
A possible concern with using K-RAS mutations for early detection of colorectal adenomas and carcinomas is that RAS mutations are not entirely specific to
premalignant and malignant lesions of the colon and rectum. K-RAS mutations are frequent in nondysplastic aberrant crypt foci and hyperplastic polyps, 89,90,91 and 92
and neither lesion has a clear relationship to adenoma or carcinoma development. K-RAS mutations may also be found in stool samples from some patients with
pancreatic cancer and pancreatic ductal hyperplasia, 164,165 presumably because the pancreatic duct drains cells from these lesions into the gastrointestinal tract and
both lesions have frequent K-RAS mutations. Nonetheless, a K-RAS mutation test for early detection of colorectal tumors may prove useful because aberrant crypt
foci, hyperplastic polyps, and nonneoplastic pancreatic lesions are small lesions that may often shed too few mutant K-RAS alleles into the stool to permit their
efficient detection. Even if K-RAS mutations do not offer a robust stool-based test for colorectal adenomas and carcinomas, similar molecular approaches may be
used to detect localized mutations in other oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, particularly those mutations that are intimately linked to malignant potential in
colonic epithelium (e.g., APC and p53 mutations).
PROGNOSTIC MARKERS AND PATIENT STRATIFICATION FOR THERAPY
In addition to presymptomatic diagnosis (risk assessment) and early detection of tumors, several studies indicate characterization of the specific genetic alterations
present in a cancer may provide improved or increased prognostic information about the likelihood of local and distant tumor recurrence. Several studies have
suggested that chromosome 18q LOH and loss of DCC expression in primary colorectal cancer specimens may predict poor outcome in both stage II (lymph node
metastases absent) and stage III (lymph node metastases present) patients. 107,108,109,110 and 111 Molecular analyses of lymph node from patients who do not appear to
have metastatic disease on the basis of histologic examination may also be very useful for detecting micrometastases and refining the staging of patients. For
instance, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is often highly expressed by colorectal carcinoma cells. Research has shown that CEA gene expression may be found in
lymph nodes of roughly one-half of stage II patients and that the presence of CEA expression in the lymph node predicts poor survival, 166 presumably because CEA
expression results from occult micrometastases. Molecular studies of lymph nodes for mutant oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes may also prove helpful in refining
staging and prognosis. 167,168
In the future, if differences are noted in the response rates between patients whose tumors have differing constellations of genetic alterations, it may be particularly
useful to define the specific mutations in a patient's tumor, so that a patient might receive the particular chemotherapeutic regimen with greatest efficacy on tumors of
that genotype. Similarly, analysis of gene expression patterns may also be of clear benefit in predicting response. Finally, some of the oncogene and tumor
suppressor gene alterations in colorectal tumors may provide specific targets for novel chemotherapeutic agents. Some of these agents might antagonize or act
selectively on the mutated oncogene products or the growth pathways in which they function. Other agents might act to counter loss of tumor suppressor function in
affected cells.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, et al. Cancer statistics, 1999. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:8.
2. Slattery ML, Kerber RA. Family history of cancer and colon cancer risk: the Utah Population Database [published erratum appears in J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1802]. J Natl Cancer Inst
1994;86:1618.
3. Potter JD, Slattery ML, Bostick RM, et al. Colon cancer: a review of the epidemiology. Epidemiol Rev 1993;15:499.
4. Lovett E. Family studies in cancer of the colon and rectum. Br J Surg 1976;63:13.
5. Kerber RA, Slattery ML. Comparison of self-reported and database-linked family history of cancer data in a case-control study. Am J Epidemiol 1997;146:244.
6. Longnecker MP, Chen MJ, Probst-Hensch NMH, et al. Alcohol and smoking in relation to the prevalence of adenomatous colorectal polyps detected at sigmoidoscopy. Epidemiology
1996;7:275.

7. Baron JA, Sandler RS, Haile RW, et al. Folate intake, alcohol consumption, cigarette smoking, and risk of colorectal adenomas. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:57.
8. Thun MJ, Namboodiri MM, Heath CW Jr. Aspirin use and reduced risk of fatal colon cancer. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1593.
9. Greenberg ER, Baron JA, Freeman DH Jr, et al. Reduced risk of large-bowel adenomas among aspirin users. The Polyp Prevention Study Group. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:912.
10. Giovannucci E, Egan KM, Hunter DJ, et al. Aspirin and the risk of colorectal cancer in women. N Engl J Med 1995;333:609.
11. Sturmer T, Glynn RJ, Lee IM, et al. Aspirin use and colorectal cancer: post-trial follow-up data from the Physicians' Health Study. Ann Intern Med 1998;128:713.
12. Paganini-Hill A, Chao A, Ross RK, et al. Aspirin use and chronic diseases: a cohort study of the elderly. BMJ 1989;299:1247.
13. Gann PH, Manson JE, Glynn RJ, et al. Low-dose aspirin and incidence of colorectal tumors in a randomized trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1220.
14. Marincola FM, White DE, Wise AP, et al. Combination therapy with interferon alfa-2a and interleukin-2 for the treatment of metastatic cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1110.
15. Bird CL, Frankl HD, Lee ER, et al. Obesity, weight gain, large weight changes, and adenomatous polyps of the left colon and rectum. Am J Epidemiol 1998;147:670.
16. Weiss NS, Daling JR, Chow WH. Incidence of cancer of the large bowel in women in relation to reproductive and hormonal factors. J Natl Cancer Inst 1981;67:57.
17. Potter JD, McMichael AJ. Large bowel cancer in women in relation to reproductive and hormonal factors: a case-control study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1983;71:703.
18. Grodstein F, Martinez ME, Platz EA, et al. Postmenopausal hormone use and risk for colorectal cancer and adenoma. Ann Intern Med 1998;128:705.
19. Chen MJ, Longnecker MP, Morgenstern H, et al. Recent use of hormone replacement therapy and the prevalence of colorectal adenomas. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1998;7:227.
20. Witte JS, Longnecker MP, Lee ER, et al. Relation of vegetable, fruit, and grain consumption to colorectal adenomatous polyps. Am J Epidemiol 1996;144:1015.
21. Bird CL, Witte JS, Swendseid ME, et al. Plasma ferritin, iron intake, and the risk of colorectal polyps. Am J Epidemiol 1996;144:34.
22. Winawer SJ, Fletcher RH, Miller L, et al. Colorectal cancer screening: clinical guidelines and rationale [published erratum appears in Gastroenterology 1997;112:1060]. Gastroenterology
1997;112:594.
23. Gilbertson VA. Proctosigmoidoscopy and polypectomy in reducing the incidence of rectal cancer. Cancer 1974;34:936.
24. Murakanni R, Tsukuma H, Kanamori S, et al. Natural history of colorectal polyps and the effect of polypectomy on occurrence of subsequent cancer. Int J Cancer 1990;46:159.
25. Winawer SJ, Zauber AG, Ho MN, et al. Prevention of colorectal cancer by colonoscopic polypectomy. The National Polyp Study Workgroup. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1977.
26. Muto T, Bussey HJ, Morson BC. The evolution of cancer of the colon and rectum. Cancer 1975;36:2251.
27. Fenoglio CM, Lane N. The anatomical precursor of colorectal carcinoma. Cancer 1974;34[Suppl]:819.
28. Hamilton SR. Pathology and biology of colorectal neoplasia. In: Young GP, Rozen P, Levin B, eds. Prevention and early detection of colorectal cancer. London: WB Saunders, 1996:3.
29. Burt RW, Samowitz WS. The adenomatous polyp and the hereditary polyposis syndromes. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1988;17:657.
30. Rustgi AK. Hereditary gastrointestinal polyposis and nonpolyposis syndromes. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1694.
31. Stryker SJ, Wolff BG, Culp CE, et al. Natural history of untreated colonic polyps. Gastroenterology 1987;93:1009.
32. Ekbom A, Helmick C, Zack M, et al. Ulcerative colitis and colorectal cancer. A population-based study. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1228.
33. Lewis JD, Deren JJ, Lichtenstein GR. Cancer risk in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1999;28:459.
34. Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Lessons from hereditary colorectal cancer. Cell 1996;87:159.
35. Polakis P. The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor. Biochim Biophys Acta 1997;1332:F127.
36. Alman BA, Li C, Pajerski ME, et al. Increased beta-catenin protein and somatic APC mutations in sporadic aggressive fibromatoses (desmoid tumors). Am J Pathol 1997;151:329.
37. Achille A, Scupoli MT, Magalini AR, et al. APC gene mutations and allelic losses in sporadic ampullary tumours: evidence of genetic difference from tumours associated with familial
adenomatous polyposis. Int J Cancer 1996;68:305.
38. Imai Y, Oda H, Tsurutani N, et al. Frequent somatic mutations of the APC and p53 genes in sporadic ampullary carcinomas. Jpn J Cancer Res 1997;88:846.
39. Bienz M. APC: the plot thickens. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1999;9:595.
40. He TC, Sparks AB, Rago C, et al. Identification of c-MYC as a target of the APC pathway. Science 1998;281:1509.
41. Tetsu O, McCormick F. b-catenin regulates expression of cyclin D1 in colon carcinoma cells. Nature 1999;398:422.
42. Shtutman M, Zhurinsky J, Simcha I, et al. The cyclin D1 gene is a target of the b-catenin/LEF-1 pathway. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:5522.
43. Crawford HC, Fingleton BM, Rudolph-Owen LA, et al. The metalloproteinase matrilysin is a target of beta-catenin transactivation in intestinal tumors. Oncogene 1999;18:2883.
44. Morin PJ, Sparks AB, Korinek V, et al. Activation of b-catenin-Tcf signaling in colon cancer by mutations in b-catenin or APC. Science 1997;275:1787.
45. Sparks AB, Morin PJ, Vogelstein B, et al. Mutational analysis of the APC/b-catenin/Tcf pathway in colorectal cancer. Cancer Res 1998;58:1130.
46. Polakis P. The oncogenic activation of b-catenin. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1999;9:15.
47. Laken SJ, Petersen GM, Gruber SB, et al. Familial colorectal cancer in Ashkenazim due to a hypermutable tract in APC. Nat Genet 1997;17:79.
48. Warthin AS. Hereditary with reference to carcinoma. Arch Intern Med 1913;12:546.
49. Lynch HT, Shaw MW, Magnuson CW, et al. Hereditary factors in cancer. Study of two large midwestern kindreds. Arch Intern Med 1966;117:206.
50. Lynch HT, Krush AJ. Cancer family “G” revisited: 18951970. Cancer 1971;27:1505.
51. Vasen HF, Mecklin JP, Khan PM. The International Collaborative Group on Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer (ICG-HNPCC). Dis Colon Rectum 1991;34:424.
52. Boland CR. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. In: Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW, eds. The genetic basis of human cancer. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998:333.
53. Peltomaki P, Sistonen P, Mecklin JP, et al. Evidence supporting exclusion of the DCC gene and a portion of chromosome 18q as the locus for susceptibility to hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
carcinoma in five kindreds. Cancer Res 1991;51:4135.
54. Peltomaki P, Sistonen P, Mecklin JP, et al. Evidence that the MCC-APC gene region in 5q21 is not the site for susceptibility to hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinoma. Cancer Res
1992;52:4530.
55. Peltomaki P, Aaltonen LA, Sistonen P, et al. Genetic mapping of a locus predisposing to human colorectal cancer. Science 1993;260:810.
56. Lindblom A, Tannergard P, Werelius B, et al. Genetic mapping of a second locus predisposing to hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer. Nat Genet 1993;5:279.
57. Aaltonen LA, Peltomaki P, Sistonen P, et al. Clues to the pathogenesis of familial colorectal cancer. Science 1993;260:812.
58. Thibodeau SN, Bren G, Schaid D. Microsatellite instability in cancer of the proximal colon. Science 1993;260:816.
59. Ionov Y, Peinado MA, Malkhosyan S, et al. Ubiquitous somatic mutations in simple repeated sequences reveal a new mechanism for colonic carcinogenesis. Nature 1993; 363:558.
60. Parsons R, Li GM, Longley MJ, et al. Hypermutability and mismatch repair deficiency in RER+ tumor cells. Cell 1993;75:1227.
61. Fishel R, Lescoe MK, Rao MR, et al. The human mutator gene homolog MSH2 and its association with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer [published erratum appears in Cell 1994;77:167].
Cell 1993;75:1027.
62. Leach FS, Nicolaides NC, Papadopoulos N, et al. Mutations of a mutS homolog in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Cell 1993;75:1215.
63. Bronner CE, Baker SM, Morrison PT, et al. Mutation in the DNA mismatch repair gene homologue hMLH1 is associated with hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer. Nature 1994;368:258.
64. Papadopoulos N, Nicolaides NC, Wei YF, et al. Mutation of a mutL homolog in hereditary colon cancer. Science 1994;263:1625.
65. Nicolaides NC, Papadopoulos N, Liu B, et al. Mutations of two PMS homologues in hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. Nature 1994;371:75.
66. Akiyama Y, Sato H, Yamada T, et al. Germ-line mutation of the hMSH6/GTBP gene in an atypical hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer kindred. Cancer Res 1997;57:3920.
67. Miyaki M, Konishi M, Tanaka K, et al. Germline mutation of MSH6 as the cause of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Nat Genet 1997;17:271.
68. Liu B, Farrington SM, Petersen GM, et al. Genetic instability occurs in the majority of young patients with colorectal cancer. Nat Med 1995;1:348.
69. Aaltonen LA, Salovaara R, Kristo P, et al. Incidence of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer and the feasibility of molecular screening for the disease. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1481.
70. Wijnen JT, Vasen HF, Khan PM, et al. Clinical findings with implications for genetic testing in families with clustering of colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1998;339:511.
71. Liu B, Nicolaides NC, Willson JK, et al. Mismatch repair gene defects in sporadic colorectal cancers with microsatellite instability. Nat Genet 1995;9:48.
72. Kane MF, Loda M, Gaida GM, et al. Methylation of the hMLH1 promoter correlates with lack of expression of hMLH1 in sporadic colon tumors and mismatch repair-defective human tumor cell
lines. Cancer Res 1997;57:808.
73. Herman JG, Umar A, Polyak K, et al. Incidence and functional consequences of hMLH1 promoter hypermethylation in colorectal carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:6870.
74. Losi L, Ponz de Leon M, Jiricny J, et al. K-ras and p53 mutations in hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancers. Int J Cancer 1997;74:94.
75. Fujiwara T, Stolker JM, Watanabe T, et al. Accumulated clonal genetic alterations in familial and sporadic colorectal carcinomas with widespread instability in microsatellite sequences. Am J
Pathol 1998;153:1063.
76. Markowitz S, Wang J, Myeroff L, et al. Inactivation of the type II TGF-b receptor in colon cancer cells with microsatellite instability. Science 1995;268:1336.
77. Myeroff LL, Parsons R, Kim SJ, et al. A transforming growth factor beta receptor type II gene mutation common in colon and gastric but rare in endometrial cancers with microsatellite instability.
Cancer Res 1995;55:5545.
78. Grady WM, Myeroff LL, Swinler SE, et al. Mutational inactivation of transforming growth factor beta receptor type II in microsatellite stable colon cancers. Cancer Res 1999;59:320.
79. Rampino N, Yamamoto H, Ionov Y, et al. Somatic frameshift mutations in the BAX gene in colon cancers of the microsatellite mutator phenotype. Science 1997;275:967.
80. Souza RF, Yin J, Smolinski KN, et al. Frequent mutation of the E2F-4 cell cycle gene in primary human gastrointestinal tumors. Cancer Res 1997;57:2350.
81. Kitaeva MN, Grogan L, Williams JP, et al. Mutations in beta-catenin are uncommon in colorectal cancer occurring in occasional replication errorpositive tumors. Cancer Res 1997;57:4478.
82. Mirabelli-Primdahl L, Gryfe R, Kim H, et al. b-catenin mutations are specific for colorectal carcinomas with microsatellite instability but occur in endometrial carcinomas irrespective of mutator
pathway. Cancer Res 1999;59:3346.
83. Lengauer C, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Genetic instabilities in human cancers. Nature 1998;396:643.
84. Bos JL. ras oncogenes in human cancer: a review [published erratum appears in Cancer Res 1990;50:1352]. Cancer Res 1989;49:4682.
85. Vogelstein B, Fearon ER, Hamilton S, et al. Genetic alterations during colorectal-tumor development. N Engl J Med 1988;319:525.
86. Rashid A, Zahurak M, Goodman SN, et al. Genetic epidemiology of mutated K-ras proto-oncogene, altered suppressor genes, and microsatellite instability in colorectal adenomas. Gut
1999;44:826.
87. Miyaki M, Seki M, Okamoto M, et al. Genetic changes and histopathological types in colorectal tumors from patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. Cancer Res 1990;50:7166.
88. Ohnishi T, Tomita N, Monden T, et al. A detailed analysis of the role of K-ras gene mutation in the progression of colorectal adenoma. Br J Cancer 1997;75:341.
89. Pretlow TP, Brasitus TA, Fulton NC, et al. K-ras mutations in putative preneoplastic lesions in human colon. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:2004.
90. Jen J, Powell SM, Papadopoulos N, et al. Molecular determinants of dysplasia in colorectal lesions. Cancer Res 1994;54:5523.
91. Smith AJ, Stern HS, Penner M, et al. Somatic APC and K-ras codon 12 mutations in aberrant crypt foci from human colons. Cancer Res 1994;54:5527.
92. Otori K, Oda Y, Sugiyama K, et al. High frequency of K-ras mutations in human colorectal hyperplastic polyps. Gut 1997;40:660.
93. Shirasawa S, Furuse M, Yokoyama N, et al. Altered growth of human colon cancer cell lines disrupted at activated Ki-ras. Science 1993;260:85.
94. Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. Cell 1990;61:759.
95. Leach FS, Elledge SJ, Sherr CJ, et al. Amplification of cyclin genes in colorectal carcinomas. Cancer Res 1993;53:1986.
96. Iwao K, Nakamori S, Kameyama M, et al. Activation of the b-catenin gene by interstitial deletions involving exon 3 in primary colorectal carcinomas without adenomatous polyposis coli
mutations. Cancer Res 1998;58:1021.
97. Samowitz WS, Powers MD, Spirio LN, et al. Beta-catenin mutations are more frequent in small colorectal adenomas than in larger adenomas and invasive carcinomas. Cancer Res
1999;59:1442.
98. Boland CR, Sato J, Appelman HD, et al. Microallelotyping defines the sequence and tempo of allelic losses at tumour suppressor gene loci during colorectal cancer progression. Nat Med
1995;1:902.
99. Baker S, Fearon ER, Nigro J, et al. Chromosome 17 deletions and p53 gene mutations in colorectal carcinomas. Science 1989;244:217.
100. Baker SJ, Preisinger AC, Jessup JM, et al. p53 gene mutations occur in combination with 17p allelic deletions as late events in colorectal tumorigenesis. Cancer Res 1990;50:7717.
101. Greenblatt MS, Bennett WP, Hollstein M, et al. Mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene: clues to cancer etiology and molecular pathogenesis. Cancer Res 1994;54:4855.
102. Levine AJ. p53, the cellular gatekeeper for growth and division. Cell 1997;88:323.
103. Burns TF, El-Deiry WS. The p53 pathway and apoptosis. J Cell Physiol 1999;181:231.

104. Prives C, Hall PA. The p53 pathway. J Pathol 1999;187:112.
105. Brown JM, Wouters BG. Apoptosis, p53, and tumor cell sensitivity to anticancer agents. Cancer Res 1999;59:1391.
106. Ookawa K, Sakamoto M, Hirohashi S, et al. Concordant p53 and DCC alterations and allelic losses on chromosomes 13q and 14q associated with liver metastases of colorectal carcinoma. Int J
Cancer 1993;53:382.
107. Jen J, Kim H, Piantadosi S, et al. Allelic loss of chromosome 18q and prognosis in colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1994;331:213.
108. Ogunbiyi OA, Goodfellow PJ, Herfarth K, et al. Confirmation that chromosome 18q allelic loss in colon cancer is a prognostic indicator. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:427.
109. Lanza G, Matteuzzi M, Gafa R, et al. Chromosome 18q allelic loss and prognosis in stage II and III colon cancer. Int J Cancer 1998;79:390.
110. Martinez-Lopez E, Abad A, Font A, et al. Allelic loss on chromosome 18q as a prognostic marker in stage II colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 1998;114:1180.
111. Jernvall P, Makinen MJ, Karttunen TJ, et al. Loss of heterozygosity at 18q21 is indicative of recurrence and therefore poor prognosis in a subset of colorectal cancers. Br J Cancer 1999;79:903.
112. Fearon ER, Cho KR, Nigro JM, et al. Identification of a chromosome 18q gene that is altered in colorectal cancers. Science 1990;247:49.
113. Cho K, Fearon ER. DCClinking tumour suppressor genes and altered cell surface interactions in cancer. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1995;5:72.
114. Fearon ER. DCC: is there a connection between tumorigenesis and cell guidance molecules? Biochim Biophys Acta 1996;1288:M17.
115. Cho KR, Oliner JD, Simons JW, et al. The DCC genestructural analysis and mutations in colorectal carcinomas. Genomics 1994;19:525.
116. Mehlen P, Rabizadeh S, Snipas SJ, et al. The DCC gene product induces apoptosis by a mechanism requiring receptor proteolysis. Nature 1998;395:801.
117. Hahn SA, Schutte M, Hoque AT, et al. DPC4, a candidate tumor suppressor gene at human chromosome 18q21.1. Science 1996;271:350.
118. Hilgers W, Kern SE. Molecular genetic basis of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1999;26:1.
119. Howe JR, Roth S, Ringold JC, et al. Mutations in the SMAD4/DPC4 gene in juvenile polyposis. Science 1998;280:1086.
120. Thiagalingam S, Lengauer C, Leach FS, et al. Evaluation of candidate tumour suppressor genes on chromosome 18 in colorectal cancers. Nat Genet 1996;13:343.
121. Takagi Y, Kohmura H, Futamura M, et al. Somatic alterations of the DPC4 gene in human colorectal cancers in vivo. Gastroenterology 1996;111:1369.
122. Koyama M, Ito M, Nagai H, et al. Inactivation of both alleles of the DPC4/SMAD4 gene in advanced colorectal cancers: identification of seven novel somatic mutations in tumors from Japanese
patients. Mutat Res 1999;406:71.
123. Miyaki M, Iijima T, Konishi M, et al. Higher frequency of Smad4 gene mutation in human colorectal cancer with distant metastasis. Oncogene 1999;18:3098.
124. Powell SM, Harper JC, Hamilton SR, et al. Inactivation of Smad4 in gastric carcinomas. Cancer Res 1997;57:4221.
125. Barrett MT, Schutte M, Kern SE, et al. Allelic loss and mutational analysis of the DPC4 gene in esophageal adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res 1996;56:4351.
126. Lei J, Zou TT, Shi YQ, et al. Infrequent DPC4 gene mutation in esophageal cancer, gastric cancer and ulcerative colitisassociated neoplasms. Oncogene 1996;13:2459.
127. Maesawa C, Tamura G, Nishizuka S, et al. MAD-related genes on 18q21.1, Smad2 and Smad4, are altered infrequently in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Jpn J Cancer Res
1997;88:340.
128. Riggins GJ, Thiagalingam S, Rozenblum E, et al. Mad-related genes in the human. Nat Genet 1996;13:347.
129. Eppert K, Scherer SW, Ozcelik H, et al. MADR2 maps to 18q21 and encodes a TGFb-regulated MAD-related protein that is functionally mutated in colorectal carcinoma. Cell 1996;86:543.
130. Takenoshita S, Tani M, Mogi A, et al. Mutation analysis of the Smad2 gene in human colon cancers using genomic DNA and intron primers. Carcinogenesis 1998;19:803.
131. Takagi Y, Koumura H, Futamura M, et al. Somatic alterations of the SMAD-2 gene in human colorectal cancers. Br J Cancer 1998;78:1152.
132. Shitara Y, Yokozaki H, Yasui W, et al. No mutations of the Smad2 gene in human sporadic gastric carcinomas. Jpn J Clin Oncol 1999;29:3.
133. Hruban RH, Yeo CJ, Kern SE. Pancreatic cancer. In: Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW, eds. The genetic basis of human cancer. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998:603.
134. Seymour AB, Hruban RH, Redston M, et al. Allelotype of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res 1994;54:2761.
135. Hahn SA, Seymour AB, Hoque AT, et al. Allelotype of pancreatic adenocarcinoma using xenograft enrichment. Cancer Res 1995;55:4670.
136. Schutte M, Hruban RH, Geradts J, et al. Abrogation of the Rb/p16 tumor-suppressive pathway in virtually all pancreatic carcinomas. Cancer Res 1997;57:3126.
137. Wilentz RE, Su GH, Dai JL, et al. Immunohistochemical labeling for dpc4 mirrors genetic status in pancreatic adenocarcinomas: a new marker of DPC4 inactivation. Am J Pathol 2000;156:37.
138. Ozcelik H, Schmocker B, Di Nicola N, et al. Germline BRCA2 6174delT mutations in Ashkenazi Jewish pancreatic cancer patients. Nat Genet 1997;16:17.
139. Lal G, Liu G, Schmocker B, et al. Inherited predisposition to pancreatic adenocarcinoma: role of family history and germ-line p16, BRCA1, and BRCA2 mutations. Cancer Res 2000;60:409.
140. Phillips RW, Wong RK. Barrett's esophagus. Natural history, incidence, etiology, and complications. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1991;20:791.
141. Neshat K, Sanchez CA, Galipeau PC, et al. Barrett's esophagus: a model of human neoplastic progression. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1994;59:577.
142. Houldsworth J, Cordon-Cardo C, Ladanyi M, et al. Gene amplification in gastric and esophageal adenocarcinomas. Cancer Res 1990;50:6417.
143. Hughes SJ, Glover TW, Zhu XX, et al. A novel amplicon at 8p22-23 results in overexpression of cathepsin B in esophageal adenocarcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:12410.
144. Lin L, Aggarwal S, Glover TW, et al. A minimal critical region of the 8p22-23 amplicon in esophageal adenocarcinomas defined using sequence tagged site-amplification mapping and
quantitative polymerase chain reaction includes the GATA-4 gene. Cancer Res 2000;60:1341.
145. Wong DJ, Barrett MT, Stoger R, et al. p16INK4a promoter is hypermethylated at a high frequency in esophageal adenocarcinomas. Cancer Res 1997;57:2619.
146. Galipeau PC, Cowan DS, Sanchez CA, et al. 17p (p53) allelic losses, 4N (G2/tetraploid) populations, and progression to aneuploidy in Barrett's esophagus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1996;93:7081.
147. Barrett MT, Sanchez CA, Galipeau PC, et al. Allelic loss of 9p21 and mutation of the CDKN2/p16 gene develop as early lesions during neoplastic progression in Barrett's esophagus. Oncogene
1996;13:1867.
148. Barrett MT, Sanchez CA, Prevo LJ, et al. Evolution of neoplastic cell lineages in Barrett oesophagus. Nat Genet 1999;22:106.
149. Galipeau PC, Prevo LJ, Sanchez CA, et al. Clonal expansion and loss of heterozygosity at chromosomes 9p and 17p in premalignant esophageal (Barrett's) tissue. J Natl Cancer Inst
1999;91:2087.
150. Wu TT, Watanabe T, Heitmiller R, et al. Genetic alterations in Barrett esophagus and adenocarcinomas of the esophagus and esophagogastric junction region. Am J Pathol 1998;153:287.
151. Powell SM, Papadopoulos N, Kinzler KW, et al. APC gene mutations in the mutation cluster region are rare in esophageal cancers. Gastroenterology 1994;107:1759.
152. Waddell WR, Ganser GF, Cerise EJ, et al. Sulindac for polyposis of the colon. Am J Surg 1989;157:175.
153. Giardiello FM, Hamilton SR, Krush AJ, et al. Treatment of colonic and rectal adenomas with sulindac in familial adenomatous polyposis. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1313.
154. Giardiello FM. NSAID-induced polyp regression in familial adenomatous polyposis patients. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1996;25:349.
155. Oshima M, Dinchuk JE, Kargman SL, et al. Suppression of intestinal polyposis in Apc delta716 knockout mice by inhibition of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2). Cell 1996;87:803.
156. He TC, Chan TA, Vogelstein B, et al. PPARd is an APC-regulated target of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Cell 1999;99:335.
157. Shimodaira H, Filosi N, Shibata H, et al. Functional analysis of human MLH1 mutations in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nat Genet 1998;19:384.
158. Petersen GM, Brensinger JD, Johnson KA, et al. Genetic testing and counseling for hereditary forms of colorectal cancer. Cancer 1999;86:2540.
159. Markowitz AJ, Winawer SJ. Screening and surveillance for colorectal cancer. Semin Oncol 1999;26:485.
160. Sidransky D, Tokino T, Hamilton SR, et al. Identification of RAS oncogene mutations in the stool of patients with curable colorectal tumors. Science 1992;256:102.
161. Smith-Ravin J, England J, Talbot IC, et al. Detection of c-Ki-ras mutations in faecal samples from sporadic colorectal cancer patients. Gut 1995;36:81.
162. Villa E, Dugani A, Rebecchi AM, et al. Identification of subjects at risk for colorectal carcinoma through a test based on K-ras determination in the stool. Gastroenterology 1996;110:1346.
163. Puig P, Urgell E, Capella G, et al. A highly sensitive method for K-ras mutation detection is useful in diagnosis of gastrointestinal cancer. Int J Cancer 2000;85:73.
164. Caldas C, Hahn SA, Hruban RH, et al. Detection of K-ras mutations in the stool of patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma and pancreatic ductal hyperplasia. Cancer Res 1994;54:3568.
165. Caldas C. Biliopancreatic malignancy: screening the at risk patient with molecular markers. Ann Oncol 1999;10[Suppl 4]:153.
166. Liefers GJ, Cleton-Jansen AM, van de Velde CJ, et al. Micrometastases and survival in stage II colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1998;339:223.
167. Hayashi N, Ito I, Yanagisawa A, et al. Genetic diagnosis of lymph-node metastasis in colorectal cancer. Lancet 1995;345:1257.
168. Sanchez-Cespedes M, Esteller M, Hibi K, et al. Molecular detection of neoplastic cells in lymph nodes of metastatic colorectal cancer patients predicts recurrence. Clin Cancer Res
1999;5:2450.

SECTION 33.2 Cancer of the Esophagus
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 33.2
Cancer of the Esophagus
DAVID S. SCHRUMP
NASSER K. ALTORKI
ARLENE A. FORASTIERE
BRUCE D. MINSKY
Epidemiology
Anatomy
Histology
Predisposing Conditions
Tylosis
Plummer-Vinson/Paterson-Kelly Syndrome
Caustic Injury
Achalasia
Helicobacter Pylori Infection
Human Papillomavirus Infection
Prior Aerodigestive Tract Malignancy
Barrett's Esophagus
Molecular Biology
Clinical Presentation
Diagnosis
Treatment
Surgical Resection
Chemotherapy
Radiation Therapy
Treatment-Related Deaths
Comparison of Definitive Chemoradiation and Surgery
Treatment in the Setting of a Tracheoesophageal Fistula
Adjuvant Therapy
Endoluminal Palliation Techniques
Treatment Recommendations and Future Directions
Chapter References

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Esophageal cancer represents the third most common gastrointestinal malignancy and ranks among the ten most common cancers worldwide. The incidence of
esophageal cancer varies considerably relative to geographic location; high incidence areas have been identified within the Caspian littoral region of northern Iran,
Southern republics of the former Soviet Union, and northern China where the incidence exceeds 100 in 100,000 individuals. The incidence of esophageal cancer
ranges from 10 to 50 in 100,000 in Sri Lanka, India, South Africa, France, and Switzerland. This disease is less common (average incidence less than 10 in 100,000)
in most areas within Japan, Great Britain, Europe, and Canada. 1,2 Squamous cell carcinomas account for the vast majority of neoplasms observed in these regions.
In the United States, esophageal cancers are relatively uncommon (average incidence less than 5 in 100,000); however, U.S. mortality data from 1990 to 1994 have
revealed a steady increase in age-adjusted mortality in male as well as female subjects due to this malignancy. 2 Within the United States, the incidence of esophageal
cancer varies with location, with a high frequency of esophageal squamous cell carcinomas being noted in coastal regions in South Carolina and metropolitan areas
including New York City, Detroit, Washington, DC, and Los Angeles, where the incidence approximates 30 in 100,000 individuals. 1,3 Squamous cell carcinomas
predominate in these high incidence areas within the United States.
In the recent past, the incidence of esophageal adenocarcinomas has risen dramatically, whereas the incidence of squamous cell carcinomas has remained relatively
steady in the United States. 2 Before 1980, adenocarcinomas constituted approximately 15% of esophageal malignancies; however, by 1994, nearly 60% of all
esophageal malignancies were adenocarcinomas. 2 Rates of adenocarcinoma are highest in white men. The incidence of esophageal carcinoma in women is much
lower, although the incidence of adenocarcinomas is also increasing in women. Similar trends have been noted in western European countries. 4,5 and 6 The rising
incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma cannot be attributed solely to the increased incidence of carcinomas of the cardia, which now account for approximately
one-half of gastric cancers in American men. 4,7 Although the precise etiology of these neoplasms has not been elucidated, considerable data indicate that esophageal
adenocarcinomas result from chronic gastroesophageal reflux often in the context of hiatal hernia. 8,9,10 and 11
Although cultural as well as dietary practices contribute to esophageal cancers in high incidence areas in Asia, South Africa, South America, and the Middle East,
tobacco and ethanol exposure are believed to be the primary risk factors associated with esophageal squamous cell carcinomas in the United States and western
Europe.1,2,12,13 Tobacco and ethanol consumption have been identified as individual risk factors for this malignancy, and their effects are multiplicative. 1,14 A five- to
tenfold increase in esophageal squamous cell cancers has been noted in smokers relative to nonsmokers, and the risk of esophageal carcinoma correlates with
extent of tobacco exposure. 1,15,16 and 17 Tobacco abuse may also contribute to the pathogenesis of esophageal adenocarcinomas, although to a much lesser extent; a
multicenter study by Gammon et al.18 as well as additional clinical studies have indicated that the risk of esophageal adenocarcinoma is approximately twofold higher
in smokers compared with nonsmokers.2,14 Interestingly, whereas the risk of esophageal squamous cell cancer decreases significantly following cessation of tobacco
abuse, little change is noted in esophageal adenocarcinoma risk following smoking cessation. 18 These data suggest that tobacco-related carcinogens may be
influencing different stages of malignant transformation associated with squamous cell cancers relative to adenocarcinomas. Chemicals in tobacco are known to
induce p53 mutations, 19 and these mutations appear to be extremely early events during multistep esophageal adenocarcinogenesis. 20,21 The timing of p53 mutations
during squamous cell carcinogenesis has not been defined; however, these mutations appear to be relatively late events during pulmonary carcinogenesis. 22,23
Alcohol abuse has been associated with increased risk of esophageal squamous cell cancers, and risk increases with amount of alcohol consumed. 24,25 Alcohol
interacts in a multiplicative manner with tobacco, with nearly a 100-fold increase in the risk of esophageal malignancy observed in individuals with heavy tobacco and
ethanol exposure. 1,2 Specific beverages have been implicated in the pathogenesis of squamous cell cancers in Europe, South Africa, South America, and the United
States; however, in all likelihood, ethanol is the major component related to the pathogenesis of these cancers. 14 Ethanol consumption appears to have a less
significant role in the pathogenesis of esophageal adenocarcinomas. 18,26,27
Data indicate that obesity may be related to risk of esophageal cancer, particularly adenocarcinomas. 28,29 In general, the risk of esophageal squamous cell cancers
decreases, whereas risk of adenocarcinoma increases with enlarging body mass. Esophageal squamous cell cancers have been associated with nutritional
deficiencies; a low intake of fruits and vegetables may increase the esophageal cancer risk twofold. 1,30,31 Deficiencies in b-carotene, vitamin E, and selenium may also
increase the risk of squamous cell cancer in underdeveloped areas. Dietary practices including drinking of extremely hot beverages or ingestion of fermented
vegetables may contribute to increased cancer risk in Asia and South America 32,33; however, the role of dietary practices in the pathogenesis of esophageal cancers
in the United States is unclear. Although several environmental carcinogens, including asbestos, perchlorethylene, and combustion products, may contribute to the
pathogenesis of esophageal squamous cell cancers, 34,35 and 36 no occupational risk factors have been associated with esophageal adenocarcinomas.

ANATOMY
The esophagus commences at the cricopharyngeus muscle at the level of the cricoid cartilage and extends 5 to 6 cm in the cervical region to enter the thoracic inlet
(Fig. 33.2-1). The intrathoracic esophagus extends an additional 20 to 25 cm to the gastroesophageal junction. Typically, many radiologists and surgeons divide the

esophagus into thirds whereby the upper third extends from the cricopharyngeus to the superior portion of the aortic arch, the middle third extends from the aortic arch
to the inferior pulmonary veins, and the distal third extends from the level of the inferior pulmonary veins to the gastroesophageal junction.

FIGURE 33.2-1. General anatomy of the esophagus with major landmarks identified. GE, gastroesophageal.

The blood supply to the esophagus is segmental, with vessels extending into the esophagus to form a submucosal vascular plexus ( Fig. 33.2-2). The cervical
esophagus is supplied primarily by the superior and inferior thyroid arteries, whereas the thoracic esophagus is supplied by esophageal arteries arising directly from
the aorta near the level of the carina; the distal esophagus and gastric cardia are supplied primarily by the left gastric artery. Venous drainage from the esophagus is
into the azygous and hemiazygous veins as well as intercostal veins that ultimately drain into the azygous system ( Fig. 33.2-3).

FIGURE 33.2-2. Blood supply of the esophagus.

FIGURE 33.2-3. Venous drainage of the esophagus.

The esophagus contains abundant mucosal and submucosal lymphatics that communicate with lymphatic channels in the muscular layers to drain either directly
through the esophageal wall to adjacent lymph nodes or to the thoracic duct ( Fig. 33.2-4).37 Lesions in the upper third of the esophagus tend to drain initially to
internal jugular, cervical, and supraclavicular nodes; in contrast, middle third lesions drain initially to paratracheal, hilar, subcarinal, paraesophageal, and pericardial
nodal regions. Distal third tumors tend to drain to nodes along the lesser curvature, left gastric artery, and celiac axis. However, because the pattern of lymphatic
drainage is primarily longitudinal rather than segmental, extensive regional dissemination of cancer cells may occur irrespective of the location of the primary tumor.
Celiac nodal metastases have been observed in 10% of patients with upper third carcinomas, and nearly 45% of individuals with middle third lesions; approximately
30% patients with middle or lower third carcinomas have metastatic disease in deep cervical lymph nodes at presentation. 38,39

FIGURE 33.2-4. Major lymphatic drainage areas of the esophagus.

HISTOLOGY
The overwhelming majority of esophageal malignancies may be classified as either squamous cell carcinomas or adenocarcinomas. Squamous cell carcinomas
account for approximately 40% of esophageal malignancies diagnosed in the United States and the vast majority of cancers arising in high-incidence areas
throughout the world.1,2 Approximately 60% of these neoplasms are located in the middle third of the esophagus, whereas 30% and 10% arise in the distal third or
proximal third of the intrathoracic esophagus, respectively. 40,41 Typically, these tumors are moderately well differentiated and often are associated with contiguous or

noncontiguous carcinoma in situ, as well as widespread submucosal lymphatic dissemination. 42,43
Adenocarcinomas frequently arise in the context of Barrett's esophagus; as such, these tumors tend to be localized in the distal third of the esophagus and may be
fungating or stenotic in appearance. 44,45 Many of these tumors are well-differentiated adenocarcinomas, and the vast majority are associated with intraepithelial
neoplasia.46,47 No significant survival differences have been noted in adenocarcinoma patients compared with similarly staged individuals with squamous cell
cancers.39,48
Several rare cancers of the esophagus have been described, including squamous cell carcinoma with sarcomatous features, as well as adenoid cystic, and
mucoepidermoid carcinomas. 49,50,51,52 and 53 These neoplasms are indistinguishable clinically and prognostically from the more common types of esophageal
carcinomas.
Small cell carcinomas account for approximately 1% of esophageal malignancies and arise from argyrophilic cells in the basal layer of the squamous epithelium. 54,55
These neoplasms are usually located in the middle or lower third of the esophagus and may be associated with ectopic production of a variety of hormones including
parathormone, secretin, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, and gastrin-releasing peptide; individuals with these cancers often present with systemic disease. 56,57
Although small cell carcinomas frequently respond to radiation and chemotherapy, patients with these neoplasms typically succumb to widespread distant
metastases.58,59 and 60
Leiomyosarcoma is the most common mesenchymal tumor affecting the esophagus, accounting for less than 1% of all esophageal malignancies. 49,61 These
neoplasms usually arise as lower third tumors and typically present as bulky masses with significant hemorrhage and necrosis. 62,63 Malignant lymphoma and
Hodgkin's disease rarely involve the esophagus; esophageal involvement typically is secondary to extension from other sites, although primary malignant lymphoma
of the esophagus has occasionally been observed. 64,65 Patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome may exhibit Kaposi's sarcoma involving the esophagus. 66,67
Malignant melanoma involving the esophagus is exceedingly rare and presents as a bulky polypoid intraesophageal tumor of varying color depending on melanin
production. 49,68 The prognosis is extremely poor for these patients despite aggressive therapy.

PREDISPOSING CONDITIONS
TYLOSIS
Tylosis (focal nonepidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma) is a rare disease inherited in an autosomal dominant manner that is characterized by hyperkeratosis of the
palms and soles and esophageal papillomas. Patients with this condition exhibit abnormal maturation of squamous cells and inflammation within the esophagus and
have extremely high risk of developing esophageal cancer. 69,70 The tylosis esophageal cancer (TOC) gene has been mapped to 17q25 by linkage analysis of
pedigrees associated with high risk of esophageal cancer development. 71 In addition to being mutated in tylosis, the TOC gene is frequently deleted in sporadic
human esophageal cancers. 72,73 Iwaya et al.73 used 20 microsatellite markers focusing on the TOC locus to investigate loss of heterozygosity in 58 sporadic
esophageal squamous cell carcinomas. Loss of heterozygosity was observed in 37 of 52 (71%) informative cases, 80% (33 of 37) of which involved the TOC locus.
Envoplakin, encoding a protein component of desmosomes that is expressed in esophageal keratinocytes, has been mapped to the TOC region 74; however, no
tylosis-specific mutations involving this gene have been observed. 75 Further studies are required to define the tumor suppressor gene(s) mapping to 17q25 that are
inactivated in tylosis-associated as well as sporadic esophageal carcinomas.
PLUMMER-VINSON/PATERSON-KELLY SYNDROME
Plummer-Vinson/Paterson-Kelly syndrome is characterized by iron-deficiency anemia, glossitis, kelosis, brittle fingernails, splenomegaly, and esophageal webs.
Approximately 10% of individuals with Plummer-Vinson/Paterson-Kelly syndrome develop hypopharyngeal or esophageal epidermoid carcinomas. 76 The mechanisms
by which these tumors arise have not been fully defined, although nutritional deficiencies as well as chronic mucosal irritation from retained food particles at the level
of the webs may contribute to the pathogenesis of these neoplasms. 77
CAUSTIC INJURY
Squamous cell carcinomas may arise in lye strictures, often developing 40 to 50 years following caustic injury. 78 The majority of these cancers are located in the
middle third of the esophagus. The pathogenesis of these neoplasms may be similar to that implicated in esophageal cancers arising in patients with Plummer-Vinson
syndrome. These cancers are often diagnosed late due to the fact that chronic dysphagia and pain due to the lye strictures obscure symptoms of esophageal cancer.
ACHALASIA
Achalasia is an idiopathic esophageal motility disorder characterized by increased basal pressure in the lower esophageal sphincter, incomplete relaxation of this
sphincter following deglutition, and aperistalsis of the body of the esophagus. A 16- to 30-fold increase in esophageal cancer risk has been noted in achalasia
patients. 79,80 In a retrospective analysis, Aggestrup et al. 81 observed the development of esophageal carcinomas in 10 of 147 patients undergoing esophagomyotomy
for achalasia. These neoplasms typically are squamous cell carcinomas, believed to result from prolonged irritation from retained foods at the air–fluid interface in the
midesophagus, and arise an average of 17 years following onset of achalasia symptoms. The insidious nature of carcinomas arising in the context of chronic
dysphagia and pain attributable to megaesophagus contributes to their late diagnosis in achalasia patients. 82
HELICOBACTER PYLORI INFECTION
Helicobacter infection has been associated with gastritis and peptic ulcer disease. Several studies suggest that the extent of Helicobacter gastritis may correlate
inversely with diminished gastroesophageal reflux and esophageal cancer. 83,84 Sharma et al. 85 observed no evidence of Helicobacter pylori in specialized intestinal
metaplasia in 209 esophageal biopsies from 58 patients with columnar-lined epithelium. In another study, El-Serag et al. 86 evaluated the database of the Department
of Veterans Affairs and noted that Helicobacter pylori infection and atrophic gastritis were associated with diminished acid output and increased risk of gastric
carcinoma, but diminished risk of esophageal cancer. These data have been confirmed by Chow et al., 83 who also noted an inverse relationship between Helicobacter
infection and risk of gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma. Thus, available data indicate that Helicobacter has little, if any, role in the pathogenesis of esophageal
cancer.
HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS INFECTION
Several studies suggest that human papillomavirus (HPV) may contribute to the pathogenesis of esophageal squamous cell cancers in high-incidence areas in Asia
and South Africa.87 This oncogenic virus, which has been associated with cervical and oropharyngeal cancers, 88,89 encodes two proteins (E6 and E7) that sequester
the Rb and p53 tumor suppressor gene products. Using polymerase chain reaction techniques, de Villiers et al. 90 detected HPV DNA sequences in 17% of
esophageal squamous cell cancers from China. In an additional study using similar techniques, Lavergne and de Villiers et al. 91 identified a broad spectrum of HPV in
approximately one-third of esophageal cancer specimens obtained from patients living in high-incidence areas in China and South Africa. Shibagaki et al. 92 detected
HPV sequences in 15 of 72 (21%) esophageal cancer specimens obtained from Japanese patients. In contrast, HPV sequences have not been observed in cancers
arising in low-incidence areas. Poljack et al. 93 observed no evidence of HPV in 121 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded esophageal cancer specimens obtained from
patients in Slovenia. Similarly, Rugge et al. 94 detected no HPV in 18 carcinomas arising in Italian patients. Turner et al. 95 observed no evidence of HPV in 51
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded esophageal cancer specimens obtained from patients in North America. In a large population-based control study, Lagergren et
al.96 compared 121 esophageal squamous cell cancers and 173 adenocarcinoma patients with 302 population-based controls in Sweden. These authors observed no
association between HPV infection and risk of esophageal cancer in this low-incidence area. Collectively, these data suggest that HPV may contribute to the
pathogenesis of esophageal squamous cancers in high-incidence regions; however, this oncogenic virus appears to have little, if any, role in the pathogenesis of
esophageal malignancies arising in low-incidence areas.

PRIOR AERODIGESTIVE TRACT MALIGNANCY
Carcinomas of the aerodigestive tract arise as the consequence of multistep processes in cancerization fields. Patients with upper aerodigestive tract cancers develop
second primary cancers at a rate of approximately 4% per year. 97 Nearly 10% of secondary neoplasms arising in patients with prior histories of oropharyngeal
carcinoma arise in the esophagus. 97 Levi et al.98 observed that approximately 10% of second primary cancers in patients with prior histories of lung carcinoma arose
in the esophagus. The increased risk of second primary tobacco-related carcinomas 99 warrants close surveillance of patients with histories of aerodigestive tract
malignancy.
BARRETT'S ESOPHAGUS
Barrett's esophagus is characterized by the presence of columnar epithelium lining 3 or more cm of the distal tubular esophagus in the presence or absence of hiatal
hernia. Short segment Barrett's esophagus is defined as intestinal metaplasia involving less than 3 cm of the distal esophagus at the region of the lower esophageal
sphincter.100,101,102 and 103 The prevalence of Barrett's esophagus ranges between 0.45% and 2.2% among all patients undergoing upper gastrointestinal endoscopy,
increasing to 10% to 20% in patients undergoing endoscopy for symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux disease, and 30% to 50% in patients with peptic
strictures.104,105,106,107 and 108 Barrett's esophagus is twice as prevalent in men compared with women, and increases with age, reaching a plateau in the seventh to ninth
decade of life; this disease is infrequently observed in nonwhites. 100,105,109 In all likelihood, the prevalence of Barrett's esophagus exceeds that which has been
previously reported given the fact that most individuals with this disease are asymptomatic. 100,110
Although a congenital etiology has been proposed, considerable data indicate that Barrett's esophagus is primarily an acquired condition resulting from
gastroesophageal reflux. 11,100,103 The vast majority of patients diagnosed with Barrett's esophagus have significant gastroesophageal reflux, and Barrett's metaplasia
has been observed following esophagogastrectomy or Heller's myotomy presumably as the result of gastroesophageal reflux in the absence of a competent lower
esophageal sphincter. 111,112 Three types of columnar metaplasia have been identified in Barrett's esophagus. The fundic type mucosa is characterized by the
presence of chief and parietal cells in addition to surface mucus-secreting cells containing neutral sialomucins; junctional type epithelium resembling that of gastric
cardia is composed primarily of mucus-secreting cells. Specialized or intestinal type epithelia resemble that of the small bowel, appearing as a villiform surface
comprised of mucus-secreting cells as well as goblet cells staining positively for acid nonsulfated mucins. Specialized epithelium is distinctive for Barrett's esophagus,
being present in virtually all cases, and is the type most commonly associated with malignant degeneration. 113
Barrett's esophagus has been associated with a 30- to 40-fold increase in the risk of adenocarcinoma, the incidence of which increased at a rate of 10% per year
during the 1980s.1,7,100 Currently, esophageal adenocarcinomas account for as much as 60% of all esophageal cancers diagnosed in the United States, and nearly
65% of esophageal adenocarcinomas had evidence of metaplastic columnar epithelia adjacent to them. 4,47 Presumably, many other esophageal adenocarcinomas
have arisen in and replaced short segment Barrett's esophagus before clinical presentation. 47,114
Although presumed to arise as the result of malignant transformation in specialized epithelia, the prevalence of adenocarcinoma in Barrett's esophagus has not been
conclusively defined; however, estimates range between 0% and 64%. 105 Sharma et al. 115 identified 20 individuals with high-grade dysplasias (nearly one-half of
whom would be expected to have invasive carcinomas 10,116) out of 177 patients with short segment Barrett's esophagus. Hirota et al. 109 prospectively examined the
prevalence of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and gastroesophageal junction in patients with specialized intestinal metaplasia involving long segment Barrett's
esophagus, short segment Barrett's esophagus, or esophagogastric junction. Of 833 patients studied by esophagogastroduodenoscopy, the overall prevalence of
specialized intestinal metaplasia was 13.2% (1.6% long segment Barrett's esophagus, 6.0% short segment Barrett's esophagus, and 5.6% esophagogastric junction).
Dysplasia or cancer was noted in 31% of long segment Barrett's esophagus, 10% of short segment Barrett's esophagus, and 6.4% of esophagogastric
junction–specialized intestinal metaplasia patients. Although the prevalence of short segment Barrett's esophagus or esophagogastric junction–specialized intestinal
metaplasia was approximately 3.5-fold higher than that of long segment Barrett's esophagus, the prevalence of dysplasia in long segment Barrett's esophagus was
two to four times higher than that observed in the two other conditions.
Additional studies have been performed to ascertain the incidence of adenocarcinoma in Barrett's esophagus. Cameron et al. 117 followed 104 patients with Barrett's
esophagus for an average of 8.5 years, only two of whom developed carcinoma, for an incidence of 1 in 141 patient-years. In an additional study, Spechler et al. 118
observed the development in carcinoma in 2 of 105 patients followed for an average of 3.3 years. In a prospective study, Robertson et al. 119 observed one case of
cancer in Barrett's esophagus in 56 patient-years. In a retrospective study, Katz et al. 120 reported on 102 patients with Barrett's esophagus undergoing surveillance
over a 24-year period; during 563 patient-years, three patients developed adenocarcinoma a minimum of 4 years after diagnosis; 23 additional patients progressed to
low-grade dysplasia (19) or high-grade dysplasia (4) during the study period. In a large prospective analysis, O'Connor et al. 121 evaluated 136 patients enrolled in an
endoscopic surveillance program at the Cleveland Clinic. The average duration of follow-up was 4.2 years, with a total of 570 patient-years. Thirty patients (22%) had
short segment Barrett's esophagus. Two patients developed adenocarcinoma (incidence, 1 in 285 patient-years), and four patients progressed to high-grade
dysplasia. Low-grade dysplasias developed in an additional 24 patients. In another prospective study, Weston et al. 8 reported that the incidence of high-grade
dysplasia or adenocarcinoma in Barrett's esophagus was 1 per 72 patient-years.
Although esophageal adenocarcinomas are frequently preceded by histologically defined stages of metaplasia and progressively severe dysplasia in Barrett's
esophagus,122 the risk of progression to malignancy cannot be predicted by histologic parameters due to significant discordance between histologic, cytogenetic, and
flow cytometric abnormalities in this condition. Fennerty et al. 123 analyzed 86 patients with Barrett's esophagus and noted that 23 of 73 patients without dysplasia, and
4 of 13 patients with dysplasia had aneuploidy or increased G 2/tetrapoid fractions evaluated by flow cytometry. Widespread cellular proliferation and aneuploidy occur
relatively early in Barrett's esophagus, and progression to malignancy is associated with three well-defined cell-cycle events: (1) mobilization of G 0 cells into G 1; (2)
loss of G 1/S regulation and increased S-phase fraction; and (3) accumulation of cells in G 2/M, frequently with significant aneuploidy. 20,124 Evidence of genomic
instability has been observed in metaplastic epithelia as well as histologically normal tissues adjacent to Barrett's esophagus, indicating that the histologic alterations
underestimate the severity of genetic events during progression to malignancy in Barrett's epithelia. 125,126 and 127 Reid et al. 128 prospectively evaluated 62 patients with
Barrett's esophagus and observed that 9 of 13 patients with abnormal flow cytometry, including two with Barrett's metaplasia, five with low-grade dysplasias, and two
with high-grade dysplasias, progressed to either high-grade dysplasia or invasive carcinoma; none of 49 patients with normal flow cytometry progressed to
malignancy during the 34-month study. Interestingly, five patients with low-grade dysplasia who had normal flow cytometry parameters reverted to Barrett's metaplasia
during the study. Collectively, these data indicate that histologic changes do not accurately reflect the severity of genomic instability in Barrett's esophagus.
Furthermore, 15% to 20% of patients with Barrett's esophagus have columnar-lined epithelia exhibiting aberrant cell-cycle regulation; 70% of these individuals
progress to malignancy within a 3-year period. Although the incidence of adenocarcinoma in patients with Barrett's esophagus may be relatively low, use of flow
cytometry techniques may help to identify those patients who are at high risk for the development of esophageal cancer. 126,128
Flow cytometry techniques may enhance the efficiency and optimize expense of screening surveillance programs in patients with Barrett's esophagus, which already
appear to identify cancers at earlier stages compared with those detected outside the context of screening programs. 129,130,131,132,133 and 134 However, surveillance
protocols may have limited effect overall on the incidence of advanced esophageal carcinomas. Bytzer et al. 6 evaluated the incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma
in Denmark over a 20-year period and ascertained the proportion of patients with a prior diagnosis of Barrett's esophagus. A history or diagnosis of reflux was present
in 21% of patients, and 23% of individuals had undergone previous endoscopy for reflux or dyspepsia. Interestingly, only 1.3% of 524 esophageal adenocarcinoma
patients had a prior diagnosis of Barrett's esophagus. In essence, greater than 98% of patients would not have entered endoscopic surveillance programs.
Collectively, those data indicate that endoscopic surveillance may be beneficial in patients with Barrett's esophagus, but the vast majority of esophageal cancer
patients have no antecedent symptoms that might enable early detection. Clearly, additional factors other than gastroesophageal reflux contribute to malignant
transformation in Barrett's esophagus.

MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
Flow cytometric and molecular analyses of dysplastic squamous and Barrett's epithelia have revealed that esophageal cancers arise via widespread clonal outgrowth
of cells exhibiting aberrant cell-cycle regulation. 20,124,135,136 In general, genomic instability precedes the appearance of histologic abnormalities in esophageal
mucosa,125,135 and the extent of cell-cycle derangements influences progression to malignancy in this setting. 128,137,138 Many of the oncogene and tumor suppressor
gene mutations frequently observed in esophageal cancers and their precursor lesions perturb cell-cycle regulation by disrupting the G 1 restriction point (Table

33.2-1).

TABLE 33.2-1. Oncogene and Tumor Suppressor Gene Mutations in Esophageal Cancers and Their Precursor Lesions that Disrupt the G 1 Restriction Point

A reciprocal relationship between retinoblastoma (Rb), cyclin D, and p16 expression has been observed in esophageal cancers similar to what has been reported for
other solid tumors.139,140 In general, esophageal cancers that lack Rb expression tend to have normal cyclin D1 and p16 expression, whereas cancers that retain Rb
expression typically exhibit overexpression of cyclin D1, p16 inactivation, or both. In the majority of esophageal cancers, restriction point control is circumvented via
overexpression of cyclin D1, and inactivation of p16, often in the context of p53 mutations.
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFr) is a 170-kD tyrosine kinase receptor that is overexpressed in approximately 30% and 70% of esophageal
adenocarcinomas and squamous cell cancers, respectively. 141,142 Approximately 40% of these tumors also express transforming growth factor-a, which binds to EGFr
and stimulates proliferation via autocrine mechanisms. Several studies suggest that overexpression of EGFr may have prognostic significance in esophageal cancer
patients. Itakura et al. 142 reported that EGFr immunoreactivity correlated significantly with diminished survival of patients undergoing esophagectomy for squamous
cell cancer. Iihara et al. 143 noted that expression of transforming growth factor-a, EGFr, or both correlated with reduced survival in patients with node-positive
esophageal squamous cell carcinomas. More recently in studies involving a total of 223 patients, Kitagawa et al. 144 and Shimada and coworkers 145 observed that
EGFr overexpression significantly enhanced predilection for lymph node metastases, hematogenous recurrence, and diminished survival in patients undergoing
potentially curative esophagectomies.
The erbB2 gene product is a 185-kD receptor molecule with intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity, which also regulates expression and function of a variety of other
receptors including EGFr; in addition, p185 modulates expression of matrix metalloproteases and vascular endothelial growth factor by cancer cells. 146,147,148 and 149
Overexpression of erbB2 correlates with in vitro drug resistance, and abrogation of p185 expression enhances chemosensitivity in cancer cells. 150,151 The prognostic
significance of erbB2 overexpression in esophageal cancers is unclear. Polkowski et al. 129 observed overexpression of erbB2 in approximately 25% of
adenocarcinomas of the distal esophagus and gastroesophageal junction. Interestingly, 10 of 30 stage III to IV tumors overexpressed erbB2 in contrast to 0 of 11
stage I to II cancers; however, subsequent regression analysis revealed that erbB2 expression was not independent of clinical stage in determining patient survival.
Furthermore, Wang and colleagues 152 observed no significant correlation between erbB2 expression and long-term survival in 117 patients undergoing potentially
curative resections for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. In contrast, Brien et al. 153 observed that erbB2 amplification independently correlated with diminished
survival in patients with Barrett's adenocarcinomas.
Together with its kinase partners, cdk4 and cdk6, cyclin D1 directly regulates phosphorylation of the Rb protein at the restriction point, thereby facilitating G 1/S transit;
abrogation of cyclin D1 expression inhibits the proliferation and tumorigenicity of cancer cells. 154,155 Approximately 40% to 60% of esophageal carcinomas and 30% of
premalignant esophageal lesions 156,157,158 and 159 exhibit overexpression of cyclin D1 resulting directly from amplification of the cyclin D1 protooncogene, or indirectly
from mutations involving upstream growth factor receptors such as EGFr and p185. Several studies suggest that cyclin D1 overexpression may be prognostically
relevant in esophageal cancers. Shimada et al. 145 observed that cyclin D1 overexpression correlated with hematogenous recurrence and diminished survival in
esophagectomy patients. In an additional study, Roncalli et al. 160 detected amplification of cyclin D1 in 17 of 55 of esophageal carcinomas, noting that overexpression
of cyclin D1 correlated significantly with lymph node metastases, advanced tumor stage, and reduced overall survival in esophageal cancer patients. Takeuchi and
colleagues 161 have also observed a significant correlation between cyclin D1 overexpression, and distant metastases as well as diminished survival in esophagectomy
patients.
Cytogenetic and molecular analyses have revealed nonrandom patterns of allelic loss in esophageal cancers and their precursor lesions indicative of selective
pressure to specifically inactivate tumor suppressor genes in these regions during multistep esophageal carcinogenesis. 136,137,162,163 and 164 Deletions involving 3p have
been detected in 60% to 100% of esophageal cancers as well as a significant percentage of specimens derived from Barrett's esophagus. Although the tumor
suppressor genes that are silenced by 3p mutations have not been identified conclusively, one major target appears to be the fragile histidine triad (FHIT) gene, which
modulates cell-cycle progression and apoptosis. 165,166 Point mutations as well as promoter hypermethylation contribute to aberrant expression of FHIT in 50% to 90%
of esophageal cancers, and the majority of Barrett's metaplasia specimens examined to date. 167,168,169 and 170 Although FHIT mutations correlate with increased tobacco
exposure and diminished survival in lung cancer patients, 171,172 the prognostic significance of these mutations in esophageal cancers has not been defined as yet.
The retinoblastoma (Rb) gene, located on 13q14, encodes a 105-kD nuclear phosphoprotein that governs the G 1 restriction point via complex interactions with a
variety of cyclin-dependent kinases, transcription factors, and viral oncoproteins 173,174; Rb is a critical mediator of cell-cycle arrest after DNA damage. 175 Mutations
resulting in the loss of Rb protein expression have been observed in 20% to 60% of esophageal cancers and their precursor lesions 136,139,176; Rb mutations tend to
occur more frequently in tumors that also exhibit mutations involving p53 176 and appear to correlate with advanced disease, nodal metastases, and diminished
survival in esophageal cancer patients. 160,176,177
The p16 tumor suppressor gene product encoded on 9p21 inhibits the activity of cdk4 and cdk6, thereby preventing cyclin D–dependent phosphorylation of the Rb
protein at the restriction point. 178 Restoration of p16 expression by gene therapy techniques results in profound cell-cycle arrest in esophageal cancer cells. 140 Allelic
deletions or point mutations inactivate p16 in approximately 20% of esophageal cancers, and allelic loss involving 9p21 precedes the onset of aneuploidy in Barrett's
esophagus.179,180 Promoter hypermethylation silences p16 in an additional 30% to 50% of esophageal cancers and adenocarinomas. 179,181 Although not extensively
studied, loss of p16 expression appears to correlate with overexpression of cyclin D1 and diminished survival in esophageal cancer patients. 161
The p14/ARF gene product is encoded by an alternate reading frame in the p16 locus and functions to stabilize p53 by preventing its interaction with MDM2. 182 ARF is
critical for initiating p53-mediated apoptosis in response to activated protooncogenes, but appears dispensable for p53-mediated response to genotoxic stress. 183
Inactivation of ARF occurs by allelic deletion as well as methylation mechanisms that may simultaneously inactivate p16. 184 Xing et al.185 performed a comprehensive
analysis of the mechanisms responsible for silencing of p16 and p14/ARF in 40 esophageal cancers. Promoter hypermethylation involving ARF and p16 was
observed in 15% and 40% of specimens, respectively. Nearly all of the methylations involving ARF also silenced p16; in contrast, most of the p16 methylations were
exclusive. Homozygous deletions involving ARF or p16 were seen in 33% and 18% of specimens, respectively. These data suggest that p14/ARF is a primary target
for homozygous deletion, whereas p16 appears to be silenced by hypermethylation in esophageal cancers. The prognostic significance of p14/ARF mutations in
established esophageal cancers has not been defined.
The p53 gene product regulates cell-cycle progression, DNA repair, apoptosis, and neovascularization in normal and malignant tissues via highly complex DNA and
protein interactions. 186 As previously mentioned, oncogene activation is mediated to p53 via p14/ARF; however, genotoxic stress resulting from DNA damage as well
as telomeric shortening directly induces p53 expression. 183,187 In response to aberrant growth signals, p53 mediates either cell-cycle arrest in part via induction of p21
or apoptosis by a variety of transcription-dependent, as well as transcription-independent, mechanisms. 186,188,189 p53 may influence the metastatic potential of tumor
cells by inhibiting expression of vascular endothelial growth factor. 190 Additional studies have shown that restoration of p53 expression by gene therapy techniques

results in cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis as well as enhanced sensitivity to chemotherapy and ionizing radiation in esophageal cancer cells. 191,192
Fifty percent to 80% of esophageal cancers exhibit p53 mutations, most of which occur in evolutionarily conserved residues within the sequence-specific DNA binding
domain.164,193,194 p53 mutations precede the development of aneuploidy in Barrett's esophagus, 125 and the frequency of these mutations increases dramatically during
histologic progression to malignancy in this condition. 20,195,196 Several studies suggest that p53 mutations correlate with Rb mutations in esophageal cancers, as well
as disease-free and overall survival in patients with these neoplasms. 176,177,197
Malignant transformation not only depends on the inactivation of growth constraints mediated by the Rb and p53 tumor suppressor pathways, but equally important
requires activation of telomerase, a ribonucleoprotein that adds hexameric DNA repeats to chromosomal ends to prevent loss of telomere length during DNA
replication. 187,198,199 Aberrant expression of telomerase has been observed in the vast majority of esophageal cancers examined to date 200; Koyanagi et al. 201 detected
telomerase expression in 100% of 57 esophageal squamous cell cancers compared with less than 10% of normal tissue samples. In addition, Morales et al. 202
observed high-level telomerase expression in 100% of adenocarcinomas and high-grade Barrett's dysplasias; in contrast, only weak or moderate expression was
seen in metaplasia or low-grade dysplasia samples. Similar findings have been noted by Lord et al., 203 who observed high-level telomerase expression in all stages of
Barrett's esophagus, the level of which appeared to increase during histologic progression to cancer. Interestingly, telomerase reverse transcriptase expression in
histologically normal esophageal squamous epithelia in cancer patients was significantly higher than that observed in esophageal biopsies obtained from noncancer
patients. Although the clinical relevance of telomerase activity in esophageal cancers has not been defined, the fact that telomere length may correlate with
chemosensitivity in esophageal cancer cells and that inhibition of telomerase activity induces death in cultured cancer cells 204 strongly suggest that telomerase
expression may significantly influence the clinical course of esophageal carcinomas.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Because it lacks a serosal coat, the esophagus is able to distend and accommodate considerable intraluminal tumor growth before deglutition is affected; as such,
50% of esophageal cancer patients have locally advanced unresectable disease or distant metastases at presentation. Dysphagia and weight loss are the initial
symptoms in approximately 90% of patients presenting with esophageal cancer. Approximately 75% of the esophageal circumference must be involved with tumor
before dysphagia is experienced; hence, although many patients relate a vague discomfort with swallowing for several months, dysphagia to solid foods may progress
rapidly to total obstruction from circumferential tumor growth. Approximately 20% of patients experience odynophagia (painful swallowing). Although the vast majority
of esophageal cancer patients present with weight loss, cachexia is seen in less than 10% of these individuals. Additional presenting symptoms may include dull
retrosternal pain resulting from invasion of mediastinal structures, cough, or hoarseness due to paratracheal nodal or recurrent laryngeal nerve involvement.
Infrequently, patients may present with pneumonia secondary to tracheoesophageal fistula or exsanguinating hemorrhage due to erosion of the esophageal neoplasm
into the aorta.
DIAGNOSIS
Esophageal cancer should be suspected in any patient complaining of dysphagia and weight loss. A thorough history should be ascertained, focusing on preexisting
conditions, as well as tobacco and ethanol abuse, which are known to be associated with increased esophageal cancer risk. Aspiration cytology should be performed
on palpable cervical lymph nodes to rule out extrathoracic metastases. Chest radiography and barium swallow should be performed; the barium swallow provides an
inexpensive and important initial assessment of the extent of the disease within the esophagus and should include the entire esophagus as well as stomach and
duodenum; double-contrast studies are preferable because they provide more precise evaluation of mucosal patterns and allow detection of small lesions that may be
missed on single-contrast examination. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest and upper abdomen should be obtained to evaluate the extent of disease within the
chest and rule out visceral metastases in the abdomen.
Patients who are suspected to have a primary esophageal carcinoma on the basis of history, physical examination, or radiographic studies should undergo
esophagoscopy to establish tissue diagnosis and define the extent of the esophageal lesion. At the time of endoscopy, attention should focus on the identification of
the neoplasm in relation to cricopharyngeus, the squamocolumnar junction, and the diaphragmatic hiatus; in addition the presence or absence of satellite lesions,
Barrett's esophagus, and esophagitis should be noted. Biopsies and brushings should be obtained from suspicious lesions; the combined diagnostic accuracy of
these two procedures exceeds 90%. 205 Vital stains including toluidine blue or Lugol's iodine may be useful to guide endoscopic biopsies in situations in which lesions
are equivocal. Frequently, strictures are encountered that require dilation to allow passage of the endoscope and provide temporary relief of dysphagia. Occasionally,
the esophagus is so strictured it cannot be safely dilated; in these situations, multiple biopsies in four quadrants should be obtained, and the patients treated as if they
have esophageal carcinoma irrespective of biopsy results. Bronchoscopy should always be performed in patients with potentially resectable upper and middle third
esophageal carcinomas to rule out recurrent laryngeal nerve involvement and to identify and biopsy suspicious areas within the membranous trachea to rule out
impending esophagorespiratory fistula.
Once a tissue diagnosis of esophageal cancer has been established, additional studies should be obtained to accurately stage the disease according to American
Joint Committee on Cancer criteria (outlined in Table 33.2-2 and Tables 33.2-3) in order to ascertain prognosis and optimize treatment. Tumor length and the degree
of obstruction appear to have less effect than the extent of wall penetration and lymph node metastases in determining survival of esophageal cancer patients.
Current noninvasive imaging modalities are imperfect regarding evaluation of local regional disease and detection of distant metastases in these individuals. 206
Conventional CT scans detect the primary tumor in 75% to 80% of cases; however, sensitivity for local regional nodal disease is only 50% to 70%. 207,208 and 209
Furthermore, although CT scans may accurately predict resectability in as many as 75% of cases, they have not proven useful for assessing response to induction
therapy in esophageal cancer patients. 207,209,210

TABLE 33.2-2. Tumor, Node, Metastasis (TNM) System for Esophageal Cancer

TABLE 33.2-3. Tumor Stages for Esophageal Cancer

Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) has been advocated as a means to enhance the accuracy of staging of esophageal cancers. 211 Several studies indicate that in
experienced hands, EUS accurately assesses wall involvement in 50% to 90% of tumors and mediastinal lymph node status in 67% to 100% of patients with localized
esophageal cancers.212,213 Reid et al.,214 as well as Catalano and colleagues, 215 reported that EUS may be a valuable noninvasive means to detect celiac nodal
metastases in esophageal cancer patients (sensitivity, 70% to 80%, and specificity, 88% to 98%). However, the accuracy of EUS is highly dependent on the expertise
of the ultrasonographer 216; an incomplete or erroneous assessment of lymph node metastases, invasion of adjacent organs, and poor staging of early carcinomas
have been reported. 217 Furthermore, EUS has limited value in staging patients with high-grade obstruction or assessing response to induction therapy in esophageal
cancer patients. 218,219
[18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) scans have been used for staging patients with locally advanced esophageal cancers. Kole et
al.209 prospectively compared FDG PET and CT scans in 26 esophageal cancer patients. The primary tumor was visualized in 80% of patients by CT scan and 96%
by FDG PET; neither modality accurately assessed the extent of wall involvement. Nodal disease was imaged in 62% of patients by CT scan and 90% by PET scan.
PET scans detected distant metastases not seen by CT scans in three patients. Although these data suggest that PET scans may improve the staging of esophageal
cancer patients, McAteer et al. 220 reported that PET scans do not accurately assess regional lymph node involvement in these individuals. Luketich et al. 208 reported
their experience with FDG PET scans in 91 consecutive esophageal cancer patients. Minimally invasive procedures were used to confirm or refute imaging results.
FDG PET scans detected metastases in only 27 of 39 cases documented by minimally invasive techniques (sensitivity, 69%; specificity, 97%; accuracy, 84%); CT
scans revealed metastases in only 18 of these cases (sensitivity, 46%; specificity, 74%; accuracy, 63%). Although FDG PET scans were more accurate than CT
scans in detecting distant metastases, they were only 69% sensitive relative to minimally invasive surgery techniques. Krasna 221 observed greater than 93%
diagnostic accuracy using thoracoscopy and laparoscopic techniques to stage esophageal cancers. Collectively, these data indicate that minimally invasive surgery
techniques presently represent the most accurate means to stage locally advanced esophageal carcinomas; in addition to enabling pathologic assessment of lymph
nodes, thoracoscopy can confirm the presence of unresectable (T4) lesions, which are not accurately assessed by current noninvasive techniques.
Kobori et al. 222 compared 11C-methylcholine PET and 18F-FDG PET in 50 patients with locally advanced esophageal cancer. Methylcholine PET scans were more
effective than FDG PET or CT scans in detecting small metastases in the mediastinum, but could not detect metastases in the upper abdomen due to uptake of
11
C-choline in the liver. FDG PET scans were superior to CT scans for detection of metastases in the chest and abdomen. When combined, 11C-choline and 18F-FDG
PET were 85% sensitive for detecting metastatic nodes in the mediastinum and abdomen. Thus, combination PET scans may enhance the sensitivity for imaging
small metastatic deposits in the mediastinum and abdomen. Further refinement may enable the diagnostic accuracy of PET scans to equal that achieved by minimally
invasive staging techniques. Furthermore, preliminary data suggest that PET scans may prove to be valuable for assessing response to induction therapy in
esophageal cancer patients 223 in contrast to CT scans or EUS, which appear to be unreliable for evaluation of treatment response in these individuals. 207,218,219 Use of
these imaging modalities may enhance the accuracy of staging in esophageal cancer patients, thereby improving stratification of individuals for multimodality
treatment protocols.

TREATMENT
The treatment of choice for patients with esophageal cancer is controversial. Esophagectomy remains the standard of care; however, its role has been challenged due
to the generally poor outcomes following surgical resection alone in patients who typically have locally advanced disease. 224,225 A survey of community care practice
patterns between 1988 and 1993 revealed an increase in the use of chemoradiotherapy relative to surgery as primary management of esophageal cancer. 226
Currently, in many institutions, primary resection is deferred in favor of combined modality therapy with or without adjuvant esophagectomy. The routine use of
combined modality treatment outside the realms of controlled clinical trials is troublesome since most randomized trials have not shown a survival advantage of
various induction regimens compared with esophagectomy alone. Furthermore, there is considerable controversy within the surgical literature as to what represents
the appropriate operation for patients with esophageal cancer ( Table 33.2-4); the debate focuses primarily on the need for and the extent of lymph node dissection
during esophagectomy for cancer. The following discussion summarizes the current status of surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and combined modality
regimens in the treatment of esophageal cancer.

TABLE 33.2-4. Types of Esophageal Resection

SURGICAL RESECTION
Transhiatal Esophagectomy
Transhiatal esophagectomy entails extirpation of the intrathoracic esophagus through the esophageal hiatus of the diaphragm without the need for a thoracotomy
incision. An upper abdominal incision and a low-neck incision are required to isolate the esophagus at either end. The organ is next carefully stripped from its
mediastinal attachments and removed. The prepared esophageal substitute, usually a greater curvature gastric tube, is advanced across the esophageal bed in the
posterior mediastinum, and gastrointestinal continuity is restored by an end-to-side esophagogastrostomy in the neck. No attempt is made to perform a systematic
lymph node dissection apart from the few parahiatal nodes removed with the specimen. Occasionally, sampling of readily accessible celiac and periesophageal nodes
is performed.227
Transhiatal esophagectomy is one of the more commonly used techniques for esophagectomy in North America and Europe. Orringer et al. 227 reported on 800
patients with cancer of the intrathoracic esophagus and cardia treated with transhiatal esophagectomy; adenocarcinoma was present in 69% of these individuals,
whereas 28% had epidermoid cancer. Hospital mortality was 4.5% and morbidity was 27%. Major complications included anastomotic leaks (13%), recurrent laryngeal
nerve injury (7%), wound infection (3%), pulmonary complications (2%), bleeding (1%), and chylothorax (1%). More than 90% of patients were discharged within 21
days of hospitalization. Overall survivals at 2, 3, and 5 years were 47%, 34%, and 23%, respectively. Five-year survival was 59% for stage I patients and 22% for
patients with stage IIA. Patients with stage III disease had 2- and 5-year survival rates of 32% and 10%, respectively. There was an overall statistically significant
survival advantage for patients with adenocarcinoma (24% vs. 17%). This study by the University of Michigan group represents the largest experience with transhiatal
resections for carcinoma, and the survival rates are quite consistent with those reported by other surgeons who practice a similar approach ( Table
33.2-5).227,228,229,230,231,232,233 and 234 Gelfand et al.228 reported on 160 patients who underwent transhiatal esophagectomy for carcinoma of the lower esophagus and
cardia. The majority of the tumors were adenocarcinomas, and most were in early stages; survival rates at 2 and 5 years were 40% and 21%, respectively. Gertsch
and colleagues229 described their experience with 100 esophageal cancer patients who were uniformly treated with transhiatal esophagectomy without adjuvant
therapy over a 10-year period. Hospital mortality was 3% and morbidity was 68%. The median survival was 18 months and the overall 5-year survival was 23%.
Survival was better for T1 and T2 tumors (63% 5-year survival). Vigneswaran et al. 230 reported on 131 patients who underwent transhiatal resection with a 2%
operative mortality. Overall 5-year survival was 21%. Patients with stage I disease had a 47.5% 5-year survival compared with patients with stage III disease whose

5-year survival was 5.8%. Patients with adenocarcinoma had a 5-year survival of 27%, whereas none of those with squamous cell cancer were alive at 5 years.

TABLE 33.2-5. Transhiatal Esophagectomy for Esophageal Cancer

Only two studies have reported local recurrence rates following transhiatal esophagectomy. One of these studies 235 was published in abstract form only as an update
of the results of a randomized trial comparing transhiatal esophagectomy alone with transhiatal esophagectomy following induction chemoradiotherapy. A significant
reduction in the local recurrence rate without improvement in overall survival was noted in the combined modality arm. Local recurrence as a component of treatment
failure was observed in 39% of patients in the surgery alone arm versus 19% of those receiving combined modality treatment. In a prospective study using serial CT
scans, Barbier et al. 236 also detected local recurrence in 39% of 50 esophageal cancer patients following transhiatal resection.
In summary, transhiatal esophagectomy can usually be performed with an operative mortality of 5% or less in the hands of experienced esophageal surgeons.
Five-year survival rates are generally in the 20% to 25% range. Survival for patients with stage I tumors is in the 60% to 70% range, whereas patients with stage III
disease have a 5% to 10% 5-year survival. Finally, the procedure is associated with failure to control or eradicate local disease in nearly 40% of patients.
Standard Transthoracic Esophagectomy
Transthoracic esophagectomy is probably the most widely performed operation for cancer of the esophagus worldwide. The procedure can be carried out through a
right or left thoracotomy incision depending on the preference of the surgeon and the location of the tumor within the esophagus. Generally, a right thoracotomy is
required for adequate exposure of tumors in the middle or upper third that are anatomically intimately related to the membranous trachea or the arch of the aorta.
Tumors located at the gastroesophageal junction or in the lower third of the esophagus can be usually approached through a left thoracotomy incision. A left sixth
interspace incision provides excellent exposure of the lower mediastinum, and a semicircular diaphragmatic incision performed 1 inch from the costal arch allows
access to the upper abdomen. The esophagus is mobilized from its mediastinal bed along with adjoining periesophageal as well as lesser curvature lymph nodes; no
radical mediastinal or upper abdominal lymphadenectomy is performed. Gastrointestinal reconstruction is subsequently achieved by preparation of the esophageal
substitute (usually stomach) and advancing it to the neck for a cervical anastomosis. Patients operated on through a right thoracotomy require a laparotomy to
prepare the gastric tube and pass it across the posterior mediastinum or retrosternal space for a cervical anastomosis. In patients operated on through a left
thoracotomy, the esophagus is mobilized along its course in the supra aortic posterior mediastinum well into the neck. The prepared gastric tube is then passed
underneath the aortic arch and attached to the esophageal stump. Following reattachment of the diaphragm and closure of the thoracotomy, a small left cervical
incision is performed to retrieve the esophagus and the gastric tube. A cervical incision is then performed and the previously mobilized esophagus and gastric tube
are easily delivered to the neck for a cervical anastomosis.
Ellis237 reported his experience with more than 500 esophageal cancer patients who underwent standard transthoracic esophagectomy. One-third of the patients had
squamous cell cancers, whereas the remaining two-thirds had adenocarcinomas of the esophagus or gastroesophageal junction. Hospital mortality was 3.3%.
Complications occurred in 34% of patients and resulted in a prolonged hospital stay in 21% of individuals. Overall 5-year survival including operative mortality and
noncancer-related deaths was 24.7%. Patients who had a complete (R0) resection had a 5-year survival of 29%, whereas no patients with either residual microscopic
(R1) or macroscopic disease (R2) survived 5 years. There was no significant effect of cell type on survival. Five-year survival was 79% for patients with stage I
disease, 38% for those with stage IIA, and 27% for those with stage IIB. Patients with stage III disease had 3- and 5-year survival rates of 20% and 13.7%,
respectively.
Some of the more pertinent surgical series pertaining to standard transthoracic esophagectomy that have been reported within the last decade from North America
and Europe are listed in Table 33.2-6.231,232,238,239,240,241,242 and 243 Resectability rates have ranged from 60% to 90%, and hospital mortality has ranged from 3.2% to
23%. Five-year survival rates have varied between 9% and 24%. The variability in rates of resectability, hospital mortality, and 5-year survival may have been related
to differences in patient selection, surgical expertise, and the retrospective nature of most of these studies. More instructive to review are the survival results achieved
by the surgical arms of randomized trials comparing various preoperative regimens to surgical resection alone. The most recent of these trials was the North American
Intergroup trial that compared chemotherapy followed by surgery with surgery alone. 244 There were 467 eligible patients of whom 227 underwent primary surgical
resection, the majority through a transthoracic approach. One hundred six patients had squamous cell cancer (47%) and 121 had adenocarcinoma (53%). Hospital
mortality was 6%. Major complications occurred in 26% of patients. Overall survivals at 1, 2, and 3 years were 60%, 37%, and 26%, respectively. Actuarial 5-year
survival was 20%. There was no difference in outcome between patients with adenocarcinoma and those with epidermoid cancer. In a separate trial performed by
Walsh et al., 245 113 patients were randomized to receive either surgery alone or chemoradiation followed by transthoracic esophagectomy. Hospital mortality in the
control arm was 2%, and the 3-year survival was 6%. Bossett et al. 246 performed a randomized trial comparing transthoracic esophagectomy alone with radiotherapy
followed by esophagectomy. Three- and 5-year survival rates in the surgery alone arm were 38% and 22%, respectively. Finally, Law et al. 247 reported on 147 patients
with squamous cell carcinoma randomized to either chemotherapy followed by esophagectomy or esophagectomy alone. There were 73 patients in the control arm,
and nearly all underwent resection by a transthoracic approach. Hospital mortality was 8.7%. Survival rates at 2 and 5 years were 31% and 10%, respectively.

TABLE 33.2-6. Transthoracic Esophagectomy for Esophageal Cancer

Local recurrences following standard transthoracic resections have been reported in 30% to 60% of patients. Most of the data regarding local recurrences have been
obtained from surgical control arms of various randomized trials. Gijnoux et al. 248 reported the incidence of local recurrence in a study comparing surgical resection
alone with preoperative radiotherapy. Local recurrences were observed in 67% of patients in the surgery alone arm compared with 47% of individuals in the
experimental arm. Similarly Nygaard et al. 249 reported a 35% local recurrence rate following resection alone in a four-arm randomized trial comparing resection with
preoperative chemotherapy, preoperative radiotherapy, and preoperative chemoradiation. In the Intergroup trial comparing esophagectomy alone with chemotherapy
followed by esophagectomy, 244 the local recurrence rate in the control arm was 31% among 135 patients who received a complete (R0) resection. An additional 68

patients had R1 or R2 resections. The overall local failure rate (persistent or recurrent disease) in all 227 patients in the control arm was 61%. In the previously
mentioned randomized trial reported by Law et al., 247 21% of patients developed local recurrence, while an additional 10% had both local and distant recurrences;
thus local recurrence was a component of treatment failure in 31% of patients in this study.
Comparison of Transhiatal and Transthoracic Esophagectomy
Several retrospective studies have shown little difference in the operative mortality and morbidity between transhiatal and transthoracic esophagectomy with limited
lymph node dissection. Rindani et al. 250 reviewed the results from 44 series published between 1986 and 1996. Thirty-three articles described results of 2675 patients
who underwent transhiatal resection, whereas 29 articles reported results of transthoracic resections performed in 2808 patients. Thirty-day mortality was 6.3% after
transhiatal and 9.5% after transthoracic esophagectomy. Major pulmonary and cardiovascular morbidity was similar in both groups. Transhiatal esophagectomy was
associated with a higher incidence of anastomotic leaks (16% vs. 10%), anastomotic strictures (28% vs. 16%), and recurrent laryngeal nerve injury (11% vs. 5%).
Overall 5-year survival was 24% after transhiatal esophagectomy and 26% following transthoracic resection.
Two randomized trials have compared transthoracic with transhiatal resections. Chu et al. 231 reported on 39 patients with carcinoma of the lower third of the
esophagus who were prospectively randomized to receive either a transhiatal (n = 25) or a transthoracic resection (n = 19). There were no significant differences
between the groups in terms of blood loss, postoperative ventilatory requirements, cardiopulmonary complication rates, and mean hospital stay. Median survival was
16.0 months after transhiatal esophagectomy and 13.5 months after transthoracic resection. Goldminc et al. 233 prospectively randomized 67 patients to receive either
a transhiatal (n = 32) or transthoracic esophagectomy. There were no differences between the two groups with respect to hospital mortality, morbidity, incidence of
pulmonary complications, or long-term survival.
In summary, survival rates achieved with the surgical transhiatal esophagectomy are comparable with those reported for standard transthoracic resection. However,
radical lymph node dissections have not been performed in any of the aforementioned series; hence the survival results reflect the effect of the surgical incision rather
than the extent of lymphadenectomy.
En Bloc Esophagectomy
The deep location of the esophagus within the narrow confines of the mediastinum and the lack of a well-defined mesentery have generally precluded the application
of en bloc resection to patients with esophageal carcinoma. In 1963, Logan described results pertaining to 250 patients who underwent en bloc resection for cancer of
the cardia, noting a 16% 5-year survival. 251 Although that survival rate was remarkable at the time, the 21% operative mortality limited a wider adoption of the
procedure. Skinner reintroduced the technique in 1969, which was later modified and applied to cancer of the thoracic esophagus. 252 The basic principle of the
operation is extirpation of the tumor-bearing esophagus within a wide envelope of adjoining tissues that include both pleural surfaces laterally and the pericardium
anteriorly where these structures are intimately related to the esophagus. The lymphatics wedged dorsally between the esophagus and the aorta, and the thoracic
duct throughout its mediastinal course, are resected en bloc with the specimen. This posterior mediastinectomy necessarily results in a complete mediastinal node
dissection from the tracheal bifurcation to the esophageal hiatus. Additionally, an upper abdominal lymphadenectomy is performed including the common hepatic,
celiac, left gastric, lesser curvature, parahiatal, and retroperitoneal nodes. The purpose of this extended resection is to maximize locoregional control of the primary
tumor; local recurrence rates following en bloc esophagectomy are reported to be less than 10%. 253,254 This is a strikingly low local failure rate compared with those
observed following transhiatal or standard transthoracic resections, or chemoradiation delivered with curative intent. 255
Critics have argued that the en bloc procedure is associated with a high operative mortality and morbidity without an apparent survival advantage. In fact, in the
earliest report by Skinner, 252 the operative mortality for 80 patients with cancer of the cardia treated by en bloc resection was 11%, and the 5-year survival was only
18%. However, in more recent series, hospital mortality has ranged between 2% and 7%, 48,256,257 and several investigators have reported survival rates exceeding
those achievable by standard resection. Lerut et al. 48 reported their experience with 129 patients who had an R0 resection for cancer of the thoracic esophagus.
Approximately two-thirds of patients had squamous cell cancer, and one-third had adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. Resection was accomplished by the en bloc
technique in 54 patients, with a hospital mortality of 7.5%. Survival was significantly better following en bloc resection compared with standard resection (48% vs.
41%; P = .002). Interestingly, multivariate analysis showed that the survival advantage after en bloc resection was apparent only in patients with nodal metastasis ( P =
.005). Furthermore, patients with stage III tumors had a 5-year survival of 22% after en bloc resection, compared with 13% after standard resection (P = .05). Hagen et
al.256 reported similar results in a smaller group of patients with adenocarcinoma of the distal esophagus and gastroesophageal junction. En bloc resection was
performed in 30 patients, and transhiatal resection was done in 16 patients. Overall survival was significantly better after en bloc resection (41% vs. 14%; P = .001). A
survival advantage was observed in patients with early lesions (T1 and T2) in whom the 5-year survival was 75% versus 21% in favor of en bloc resection. Similarly,
patients with transmural (T3) tumors and five or fewer positive nodes had a significantly better survival after en bloc resection (27% vs. 9%).
An important criticism of most of these studies is the failure to clearly define the criteria used to stratify patients to receive one procedure versus another. For
example, in the study by Hagen et al., 256 patients receiving transhiatal esophagectomies were significantly older or more debilitated than those undergoing en bloc
resections. Preferential inclusion of early-stage patients into the en bloc groups may have biased survival outcomes. Arguably some early-stage patients undergoing
en bloc resections might have had similarly favorable outcomes following a more limited procedure.
Altorki et al. 257 reported on 155 patients who underwent resection for carcinoma of the esophagus between 1988 and 1998. During the first 4 years of the study,
standard transthoracic resections were performed in nearly all patients; thereafter en bloc resections were carried out preferentially in nearly all patients. The overall
hospital mortality was 5.1% and did not vary significantly by procedure ( en bloc, 4.8%; standard transthoracic, 5.7%). Overall 5-year survival was 40% in the en bloc
group. Node-negative patients had 5-year survival rates of 67% following en bloc resection and 27% after standard esophagectomy. Interestingly, the mean number of
resected nodes per patient in node-negative patients was significantly higher after en bloc resection (36 vs. 20 per patient; P = .03) suggesting that the extended
procedure may improve the accuracy of staging in esophageal cancer patients. Conceivably, some node-negative patients were understaged during standard
resections, resulting in apparently worse survival relative to similarly staged patients who had undergone en bloc resections. Survival was also significantly better
after en bloc resection in patients with nodal metastases (33% vs. 13%; P = .002). Five-year survival was significantly higher in patients with stage III disease treated
by en bloc resection (34% vs. 11%; P = .007). This survival advantage was noted despite an analysis of variance showing no difference between the groups in terms
of age, gender, performance status, tumor size, cell type, or number of positive nodes per patient. The 5-year survival rate (11%) in stage III patients undergoing
standard resection in this series is similar to those reported in other series following similarly limited resections, suggesting no obvious selection bias in favor of en
bloc resection. The survival advantage conferred by en bloc esophagectomy in patients with stage III disease confirms previous observations by Lerut et al. 48
Furthermore, the 7.8% (8 of 109) local recurrence rate observed following en bloc esophagectomy in Altorki's trial is dramatically less than those observed following
transhiatal or standard transthoracic resections.
Three-Field Lymphadenectomy
Three-field lymph node dissection for carcinoma of the esophagus has been practiced by Japanese surgeons since the early 1980s. This effort was initially prompted
by studies showing that the cervical lymph nodes were the site of tumor recurrence in 30% to 40% of patients in whom a curative resection had been performed. 258
The extended procedure included dissection of the cervical, mediastinal, and upper abdominal nodes in patients with carcinoma of the thoracic and abdominal
esophagus. In 1991, Isono et al. 259 reported the results of a nationwide study on three-field dissections performed at 35 institutions throughout Japan. Nearly 1800
patients underwent esophagectomy with three-field lymph node dissection, whereas 2800 underwent two-field dissection. The following observations were made:
Approximately one-third of patients had previously unsuspected metastases in cervical lymph nodes. The prevalence of cervical nodal metastases was highest
for upper third tumors (40%), but even patients with lower third cancers had a 20% probability of metastatic carcinoma involving the cervical lymph nodes.
The frequency of nodal metastases increased with depth of tumor penetration through the esophageal wall. Patients with intramucosal carcinoma had a 30%
probability of nodal metastases, while invasion into the submucosa, muscularis propria, or adventitia signaled a 50%, 60%, and 80% probability of nodal
disease, respectively. Interestingly, a statistically higher prevalence of nodal metastases was observed after three-field lymph node dissection in patients with
T1 and T2 tumors, but not in those with more advanced disease.
The cervical lymph nodes most frequently involved with metastatic carcinoma were the nodal chains along the recurrent nerves, as well as the deep cervical
nodes along the posterior aspect of the internal jugular vein. Supraclavicular nodal disease was infrequent and was associated with a distinctly poor outcome.
Collectively, these observations indicate that a large number of patients will be inaccurately staged after en bloc resection with isolated mediastinal and abdominal
lymphadenectomy. Approximately one-third of patients will have their tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) stage upstaged as a result of the extended procedure. Although

most surgeons readily concede that extended lymphadenectomy improves tumor staging, many question its effect on the survival of patients with locally advanced
esophageal cancer.260 However, Japanese surgeons have provided a compelling argument for a positive effect of three-field lymph node dissection on survival in
these individuals. Akiyama et al. 261 reported their experience with 717 patients in whom an R0 resection was performed using either a two-field (n = 393) or three-field
technique (n = 324). 261 Five-year survival in node-negative patients was 84% after the three-field procedure compared with 55% after two-field lymphadenectomy ( P =
.004). Furthermore, in patients with node-positive disease, the 5-year survival rate was 43% in patients receiving three-field dissections, compared with 28% for
patients undergoing two-field dissections ( P = .008), indicating that the improved survival rates observed in patients receiving extended lymphadenectomies were not
simply due to stage migration. Similar results have been reported by a number of Japanese surgeons. 262,263 and 264 Significantly, most studies have reported 5-year
survivals of 25% to 30% in patients with positive cervical lymph nodes. These impressive data suggest that the recurrent laryngeal nodes should be considered a
regional (N1) rather than a distant (M1) site of disease for tumors of the intrathoracic and abdominal esophagus. Indeed, lymphoscintigraphy studies using
radiolabeled colloid injected into the midthoracic esophagus have routinely demonstrated tracer uptake within the upper mediastinal and cervical nodes as well as the
left gastric lymph nodes. 265,266
In spite of the intriguing results reported by Japanese surgeons, most European and North American oncologists have viewed three-field dissection with skepticism.
There are several reasons that might explain the lack of enthusiasm for the procedure:
There is a prevailing concept among western surgeons that patients with carcinoma of the esophagus have systemic disease at the time of presentation. Cure
following resection has often been considered a chance phenomenon dependent more on the biologic behavior of the tumor than on the surgical strategy
pursued.
Three-field lymph node dissection has been associated with a definite, albeit a statistically insignificant, increase in hospital morbidity. Foremost among the
potential complications is injury to one or both recurrent nerves, reported in up to 70% of patients, some of whom have required tracheostomy and prolonged
mechanical ventilation. 263 Furthermore, at least one study examined the quality of life following esophagectomy with three-field lymph node dissection with
particular emphasis on the effect of vocal cord paralysis. 264 Twenty percent of patients reported severe hoarseness, restricted food intake, and reduced exercise
tolerance up to 60 months postoperatively.
Nearly all of the Japanese data are from retrospective studies comparing surgical therapies delivered over two decades. Two randomized studies have been
reported.267,268 Nishihira et al. 267 randomized 62 patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus to receive a two-field or three-field lymph node
dissection. Hospital deaths occurred in 3% after two-field dissection and in 7% after three-field lymphadenectomy. There were no differences between the two
groups in 5-year survival or recurrence rates. In another trial, Kato et al. 268 randomized 150 patients to receive transthoracic esophagectomy with either two-field
or three-field lymph node dissection. Hospital mortality and morbidity were comparable in both groups; a significantly higher 5-year survival was observed in
patients who underwent a three-field dissection (48% vs. 33%).
Altorki et al. 39 reported the only experience with this procedure in North America. Esophagectomy with a three-field node dissection was performed in 34 patients, 10
of whom had adenocarcinomas. Hospital mortality and morbidity were 2.3% and 35%, respectively. Recurrent nerve injury occurred in 6% of patients. An average of
60 nodes were resected per patient; 70% of these individuals had nodal metastases, most of which were within the lesser gastric curve, parahiatal, and recurrent
laryngeal nodes. Cervical nodal metastases were present in 30% of patients regardless of cell type or location of the primary tumor within the esophagus. With a
median follow-up of 42 months, 3-year and 5-year survival was 46%. Node-negative patients had a 77% 5-year survival, whereas those with nodal metastases had a
5-year survival of 33%. Three of the ten patients with metastases involving cervical or recurrent laryngeal nodes were disease free a minimum of 3 years after
operation. Local recurrence was observed in two patients.
Lerut et al. 269 reported the only European experience with esophagectomy and three-field lymph node dissection. Thirty-eight patients underwent the procedure with
no hospital mortality. Overall survival rates at 3 and 5 years were 45% and 37%, respectively. Patients with nodal metastases had a 27% 5-year survival; individuals
with cervical node disease had a 20% 5-year survival. The patterns of nodal metastases observed by Altorki and Lerut are similar to those reported by Japanese
investigators and appear independent of tumor histology. The potential survival advantage offered by three-field dissection in esophageal cancer patients (particularly
those with adenocarcinoma) is encouraging given the limited efficacy of chemotherapy and radiation in these individuals.
CHEMOTHERAPY
Five-year survival rates for esophageal cancer patients resected at most major centers in the United States range from 15% to 20%. 270,271 Although radical
esophagectomy may salvage some patients with locally advanced carcinomas, the vast majority of individuals succumb to their disease, suggesting that most patients
have occult metastases at presentation. Studies of patterns of recurrence, and data from autopsy series confirm the potential for tumor spread to all organs. 41,272,273,274
and 275 These data have provided the rationale for using systemic therapy in conjunction with surgery, radiation, or both in patients with apparently localized disease or
as the primary treatment for patients with clinically evident disseminated disease.
Until fairly recently, standard criteria of treatment response required a bidimensional lesion that could be serially measured. For the esophageal cancer patient with
metastatic disease, treatment response can be reliably assessed using pulmonary, soft tissue, and liver nodules as indicators. CT, magnetic resonance imaging, and
double-contrast barium esophagography, which are typically used to assess response in patients with disease limited to the esophagus, only provide unidimensional
measurements of the primary.276,277 Endoscopy with brushings and biopsy may be performed to confirm a clinical complete response; however, biopsy is subject to
sampling error and is not a reliable indicator of complete histologic resolution of disease.
A variety of single agents and combination regimens have been evaluated in patients with recurrent or metastatic carcinoma of the esophagus. These patients often
have a high tumor burden and poor performance status with little prospect for prolongation of survival. Phase II clinical trials in this population have identified drugs
with activity,278 and they have been integrated into combined modality regimens for the treatment of earlier stage disease.
The accumulated experience with chemotherapy to date is almost entirely in patients with squamous cell histology. Due to the rising incidence of adenocarcinoma of
the esophagus, gastroesophageal junction, and cardia in the United States, 3 patients with this histology now make up two-thirds of referrals for chemotherapy. Only
recently have trials with new agents and combined modality regimens included both histologies.
Chemotherapy for Palliation of Recurrent and Metastatic Disease
279,280,281,282,283,284,285,286,287,288,289,290,291,292,293,294,295,296,297,298,299,300,301 and 302
The cumulative

SINGLE AGENTS. Studies of single agents are summarized in Table 33.2-7.

response rate for any one drug is low (on the order of 15% to 30%), and there is no indication of survival benefit. Symptomatic improvement, if reported, is brief.
Response data for many of the older drugs have come from broad phase I and II trials conducted in the early 1970s, which included small numbers of esophageal
cancer patients. Bleomycin, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), mitomycin, and cisplatin (CDDP) have been used most often because of their single-agent activities and their
additive or synergistic effects with radiation. Because of the potential for pulmonary toxicity, bleomycin is no longer included in combination regimens, having been
replaced by 5-FU. Similarly, mitomycin is less often used because of its toxicity profile, which includes hemolytic-uremic syndrome and cumulative myelosuppression.

TABLE 33.2-7. Trials of Single Agents with Activity in Carcinoma of the Esophagus

5-FU has remained an important drug for the treatment of gastrointestinal malignancies. One study 284 using a protracted infusion schedule for 6 weeks in patients with
newly diagnosed esophageal cancer reported an 85% response rate that contrasts with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group trial 285 in which a 15% response rate
was observed in previously treated patients given intermittent bolus 5-FU.
There are seven trials pertaining to cisplatin as a single agent in esophageal cancer patients, 286,289,290,291,292,293 and 294 six of which used doses ranging from 50 to 120
mg/m2 every 3 to 4 weeks. The cumulative response rate in patients with metastatic or recurrent disease was 21%. 286,289,290,291,292 and 293 Administration of the drug as a
single bolus dose once every 3 weeks or in a divided dose over 5 days every 3 weeks appeared to be equally efficacious. Employing a more dose-intense schedule of
cisplatin (120 mg/m2 on day 1 and 15), Miller et al. 294 observed a 73% response rate in 15 patients before surgery. Although no complete responses were observed,
these data suggest that sensitivity to chemotherapy is greater in the newly diagnosed patient.
A randomized phase II trial of cisplatin alone and cisplatin in combination with 5-FU in 92 patients with metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus was
reported by the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC). 293 An 18% response rate was observed in 45 patients receiving single-agent
cisplatin at a dose of 100 mg/m 2 every 3 weeks. Although the response rate in the combination therapy arm was 36%, survival was similar for both groups. No studies
of single-agent cisplatin have been performed in patients with adenocarcinoma of the esophagus.
Two investigational agents have demonstrated moderate activity in squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. These are the vinca alkaloid vindesine 295,296 and 297 and
the polyamine synthesis inhibitor mitoguazone (methyl-GAG). 298,299 and 300 Responders included patients previously treated with cisplatin-based combination
chemotherapy.
Vinorelbine, a semisynthetic vinca alkaloid that inhibits microtubule assembly, has been approved for use in lung cancer. It has less neurotoxicity compared with
vincristine and vinblastine; neutropenia is dose limiting. The EORTC reported a 20% response rate in chemotherapy-naive patients with metastatic squamous cell
cancer of the esophagus.301 In a subsequent trial, 303 vinorelbine was combined with cisplatin in 57 patients with metastatic squamous cell cancer resulting in a 32%
response rate and 6-month median duration of response. Vinorelbine has not been evaluated in patients with adenocarcinoma of the esophagus.
The taxane paclitaxel is the first entirely new compound to be tested in both adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Paclitaxel promotes the
stabilization of microtubules and is a cycle-specific agent affecting cells in the G 2/M phase. Paclitaxel also enhances radiation effects that may be both concentration
and schedule dependent. 304 The only trial of single-agent paclitaxel in esophageal cancer used the maximum tolerable dose of 250 mg/m 2, derived from initial phase I
trials using a 24-hour infusion schedule. 302 A 34% response rate was observed in 33 patients with adenocarcinoma, and a 28% response rate was noted in 18
patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. The overall response rate was 32%. All patients had good performance status, were chemotherapy-naive,
and had distant metastases. The dose-limiting toxicity of paclitaxel is myelosuppression, primarily neutropenia. There are no completed studies using either shorter or
longer infusion schedules such as 1, 3, and 96 hours.
Drugs that have been adequately tested in squamous cell cancer of the esophagus and have response rates of less than 5% are the methotrexate analogues,
dichloromethotrexate305 and trimetrexate,306,307 and etoposide,308,309 ifosamide,310,311 and carboplatin. 312,313,314 and 315 Carboplatin has been studied in both
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma patients using a fixed dose schedule of 300 to 400 mg/m 2 in individuals with normal renal function. In contrast to the
activity observed in phase II evaluations of cisplatin, responses were observed in only 3 of 59 chemotherapy-naive patients who received carboplatin. Therefore,
substitution of carboplatin for cisplatin is not recommended when treating patients with either adenocarcinomas or squamous cell carcinomas of the esophagus.
Combination Chemotherapy
Only in more recent years have combination regimens been evaluated in patients with adenocarcinoma. Older trials (before the mid-1990s) and those from Europe
have almost exclusively been limited to patients with squamous cell carcinomas. Because esophageal cancer is a relatively uncommon malignancy, many studies
have included patients treated preoperatively as well as those with recurrent or metastatic disease, and some have also included patients with locally advanced,
unresectable neoplasms. In addition to the variation in patient populations, more recent trials have often limited eligibility to patients with no prior chemotherapy and
performance status of 0 or 1. Thus, it is difficult to compare treatment efficacies reported from these phase II trials.
The results of platinum-based combination chemotherapy regimens are detailed in Table 33.2-8.293,303,316,317,318,319,320,321,322,323,324,325,326,327 and 328 Most series have had
small numbers of patients and therefore 95% confidence intervals have been large. Nearly all responses have been partial, with only an occasional clinical complete
response. Duration of response has been variable but on average has ranged from 3 to 6 months.

TABLE 33.2-8. Selected Combination Chemotherapy for Recurrent and Metastatic Carcinoma of the Esophagus

Trials in the 1980s testing three-drug regimens such as cisplatin, bleomycin, and vindesine 317,318 and cisplatin, mitoguazone, and vindesine 321 or vinblastine 322 yielded
response rates of 30% to 40% in epidermoid cancer patients. Toxicity was primarily moderate myelosuppression. Bleomycin and mitoguazone were replaced by 5-FU,
which has synergistic activity with cisplatin.
The two-drug combination of cisplatin (100 mg/m 2 day 1) and 5-FU (1000 mg/m2/d continuous infusion for 96 to 120 hours) is the regimen most commonly used to
treat patients with either squamous or adenocarcinoma histology. A 35% response rate has been observed in patients with metastatic, recurrent, or locally advanced,
incurable squamous cell cancer of the esophagus. 293,323 Higher response rates (in the 40% to 60% range) have been reported from trials administering two to three
cycles of cisplatin and 5-FU as neoadjuvant therapy before surgery. The difference in response rates may be related to better performance status, nutrition, and
smaller volume disease in the surgical candidates. Attempts to substitute carboplatin for cisplatin have been unsuccessful; in a phase II trial of carboplatin and
vinblastine, 324 investigators from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center observed no responses in 16 patients even though 11 with advanced, inoperable cancers
were previously untreated, and 15 had Karnofsky performance scores of 70% or better.
Three trials using interferon-a 2a as a biomodulator of 5-FU suggested possible benefit. 325,326 and 327 Preclinical data had indicated synergistic cytolytic activity when
interferon was combined with 5-FU, possibly due to interferon-mediated stimulation of thymidine phosphorylase, which increases the conversion of 5-FU to its active
metabolite, fluorodeoxyuridylate. Ilson and associates 327 treated 26 incurable esophageal cancer patients with interferon-a 2a (3 million U subcutaneously daily),
cisplatin (100 mg/m2 day 1), and continuous infusion 5-FU (750 mg/m 2/d for 5 days) recycled every 28 days; the complete and partial response rates were 50%, and
the duration of response ranged from 11 to 74 weeks. Treatment responses were observed in 8 of 11 with squamous cell carcinoma (73%; 95% confidence interval,
47% to 99%) and 5 of 15 adenocarcinoma patients (33%; 95% confidence interval, 9% to 57%). The combination of 13- cis retinoic acid and interferon-a 2a, however,

had no activity. 328
Despite the lack of single-agent activity for etoposide, the Rotterdam Esophageal Cancer Study Group 329 reported a 48% response rate in patients with unresectable
or metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. This experience using cisplatin (80 mg/m 2 day 1) and etoposide (100 mg/m2 intravenously on days 1 to 2 and 200 mg/m2
orally on days 3 to 5 every 4 weeks) served as the basis for a phase III evaluation of this regimen in the preoperative setting. 330
Combination regimens including paclitaxel have been evaluated in esophageal cancer patients. In three phase II trials of paclitaxel and cisplatin, response rates
ranged from 44% to 52%; activity was comparable in both histologic types. 331,332 and 333 Ilson and associates 331 evaluated paclitaxel administered by 24-hour infusion in
doses of 200 to 250 mg/m 2 with growth factor support combined with cisplatin (75 mg/m 2). Toxicity (primarily myelosuppression) was severe, leading to one or more
hospitalizations in 50% of patients and five treatment-related deaths; as such, this particular regimen cannot be recommended. Van der Gaast and associates from
Rotterdam reported two separate trials. 332,333 The first evaluated escalating doses of 3-hour infusion paclitaxel (100 to 200 mg/m 2) combined with a fixed dose of
cisplatin (60 mg/m 2) administered every 2 weeks. 332 A 52% response rate was observed in 59 patients. Doses of paclitaxel above 180 mg/m 2 caused dose-limiting
neurotoxicity. The second trial evaluated a weekly regimen of cisplatin (70 mg/m 2) and 3-hour paclitaxel infusion. 333 A preliminary report indicated that the maximum
tolerable dose of paclitaxel was 100 mg/m 2/week, and that the response rate in 22 adenocarcinoma patients was 50%. The antitumor activity reported for these three
regimens was comparable, but toxicities varied considerably.
The three-drug combination of paclitaxel, 175 mg/m 2 (3-hour infusion), combined with cisplatin (20 mg/m 2/d × 5) and 5-FU (1000 mg/m2/d continuous infusion × 120
hours) was evaluated in 60 patients at four centers. 331 A 48% response rate was reported (56% in patients with squamous cell cancers and 46% in adenocarcinoma
patients); significantly more complete responses were observed in patients with squamous cell carcinomas. Toxicity was severe, resulting in hospitalizations for 48%
of patients, primarily for severe stomatitis, fever, and neutropenia. The addition of paclitaxel to the established cisplatin and 5-FU regimen did not raise the response
rate sufficiently to warrant further evaluation in a larger comparative trial.
It is clear that the optimal dose and scheduling of paclitaxel in combination with other active drugs remains to be determined. In general, shorter infusion schedules of
paclitaxel result in less myelotoxicity, but more neurotoxicity when this taxane is combined with cisplatin. The regimen of paclitaxel and carboplatin has not been
tested in esophageal cancer. However, because of the lack of activity of carboplatin as a single agent or in combination with other agents used to treat esophageal
cancer, it should not be substituted for cisplatin until appropriate clinical trials have been performed.
A new regimen under evaluation in esophageal cancer patients is the combination of irinotecan and cisplatin administered in low dose on a weekly schedule. 334In vitro
studies have demonstrated sequence-dependent synergy for cisplatin followed by irinotecan, which prevents removal of cisplatin-induced DNA-interstrand
cross-links. Two trials have yielded encouraging results with a regimen of cisplatin (30 mg/m 2) followed by irinotecan (65 mg/m 2) administered weekly for 4 weeks,
repeated every 6 weeks.335,336 Ilson and associates 335 observed a 57% response rate in 35 patients [12 of 23 (52% response) in adenocarcinoma patients and 8 of 12
(66% response) in patients with squamous cell cancers]; median duration of response was 4.2 months. 335 Dysphagia and global quality of life were improved in the
majority of patients. Ajani and associates 336 observed a 51% response rate using the same regimen in 25 adenocarcinoma patients, but recommended reduction of
the irinotecan dose to 50 mg/m2 in previously treated patients. Toxicity in both studies consisted of myelosuppression and diarrhea in a minority of patients. Diarrhea
was ameliorated with prophylactic use of antidiarrheal agents, dose reduction, or both.
In summary, more recent trials of combination regimens that have included paclitaxel or irinotecan appear to have higher response rates than previous regimens;
however, duration of response remains brief for esophageal cancer patients, and some trials have been reported only in preliminary abstract form and consist of small
numbers of evaluable patients. In addition, the toxicities associated with many of these phase II single-institution experiences have been excessive.
Further follow-up of early reports and additional patient trials using the most promising regimens are needed. Based on the available data, the standard regimen of
cisplatin and infusional 5-FU remains the recommended first-line treatment for patients with recurrent or metastatic disease of either histology. No specific
paclitaxel-based regimen has yet emerged as more efficacious and less toxic than cisplatin/5-FU; however, alternative dosing schedules are currently under
investigation.
Preoperative Chemotherapy
Nearly three-fourths of patients in the West present with locally advanced (stages IIB and III) disease, and the poor survival rates achieved with surgery alone have
provided the impetus for the evaluation of preoperative chemotherapy in resectable esophageal cancer patients.
The potential benefits of induction chemotherapy include downstaging the disease to facilitate surgical resection, improvement in local control, and eradication of
micrometastatic disease. Esophagectomy following induction therapy enables comprehensive pathologic assessment of treatment response, which may be important
in selecting patients for postoperative adjuvant therapy. The disadvantages of preoperative chemotherapy include the potential selection of drug-resistant clones and
the delay in definitive treatment with the risk of further spread of disease. These are important concerns because approximately 50% of patients do not respond to
current chemotherapeutic regimens.
Trials evaluating chemotherapy followed by surgery in esophageal cancer patients have been underway since the late 1970s. Stimulated by the promising results of
cisplatin-based induction chemotherapy trials in patients with locally advanced oropharyngeal cancers, phase II trials using similar regimens were conducted in
esophageal cancer patients in parallel with studies evaluating concurrent chemoradiation followed by surgery or chemoradiation as definitive therapy. Encouraging
results with cisplatin and bleomycin, 316 with or without the addition of a vinca alkaloid 317,337 or mitoguazone,338 and later with cisplatin and 5-FU, 339,340,341,342 and 343 led to
randomized trials initiated in the 1980s. For squamous histology, the response rate to cisplatin (100 mg/m 2 day 1) and 5-FU (1000 mg/m2/d for 96 or 120 hours) every
3 weeks ranged between 42% and 66%, with 0% to 10% pathologic complete response rates; curative resection rates ranged from 40% to 80%, and median survival
rates ranged from 18 to 28 months. 339,340,341,342 and 343 In these trials, two or three cycles of chemotherapy were administered before resection. A barium esophagogram
and CT scans were used to initially stage patients and to assess response to induction therapy.
Five randomized trials evaluating preoperative chemotherapy in esophageal cancer patients are summarized in Table 33.2-9.244,249,330,344,345 Four of the trials enrolled
only patients with squamous cell carcinoma. 249,330,344,345 The Scandinavian trial reported by Nygaard et al. 249 involved randomization to one of four treatment arms:
surgery alone, radiotherapy followed by surgery, two courses of induction cisplatin and bleomycin followed by surgery, and all three modalities in sequence. No
improvement in survival was noted in patients in the two treatment arms that included chemotherapy in this study.

TABLE 33.2-9. Randomized Trials of Preoperative Chemotherapy

In a study performed at the National Cancer Institute, Roth et al. 344 compared the combination of cisplatin, bleomycin, and vindesine for three courses followed by
surgery, with surgery alone in 39 esophageal cancer patients. Six months of postoperative adjuvant cisplatin and vindesine were planned for patients in the

preoperative chemotherapy arm. A 47% major response rate including one pathologic complete response was documented using barium esophagogram and CT
scans. Resectability rates were similar in the two groups, but a higher percentage of patients in the preoperative chemotherapy group had negative surgical margins.
Responders to chemotherapy had significantly longer survival than nonresponders (median, 20 vs. 6.2 months; P = .008). However, 3-year survival rates in the two
treatment groups were not significantly different. All recurrences included distant metastases; the local recurrence rate was low (6.9%). Weight loss of greater than
10% was associated with poor survival in a multivariate analysis of potential prognostic variables.
A multicenter trial from Germany reported by Schlag et al. 345 compared preoperative cisplatin and 5-FU (three cycles) and surgery with surgery alone. The trial was
stopped early after only 46 patients were enrolled because of a substantial increase in operative morbidity and mortality in the chemotherapy group. Response to
chemotherapy was documented with serial CT scans, barium esophagogram, and endoscopy before treatment and before surgery. A 41% major response rate was
observed, including pathologic complete response in two patients. There was no difference in median survival in the overall comparison; however, responders to
preoperative chemotherapy survived longer than nonresponders (13 vs. 5 months).
The small numbers of patients enrolled in these three trials and the lack of prospective randomized controlled data in patients with adenocarcinoma of the esophagus
led the U.S. Gastrointestinal Intergroup to mount a multicenter trial. Trial 0113 registered 467 patients with resectable disease to receive either three cycles of
cisplatin and 5-FU followed by surgery and then two cycles of the same chemotherapy as adjuvant treatment for those who had a curative resection, or immediate
surgery. 244 In contrast to other trials, barium esophagogram was the only test required to assess clinical response to preoperative chemotherapy. Thus, it is not
surprising that only a 19% response rate was reported. Survival and patterns of failure were the major study end points. No differences were observed between the
surgery control arm and the preoperative cisplatin and 5-FU arm in terms of curative resection rate (59% vs. 62%), treatment mortality (6% vs. 7%), overall median
survival (16.1 vs. 14.9 months), or 3-year survival (26% vs. 23%). Furthermore, the median survival of patients who had a curative resection was the same in both
treatment groups (27.4 vs. 25.0 months). The patterns of failure were also similar between groups (local recurrence 31% vs. 32%, and distant recurrence 50% vs.
41% in the surgery alone versus chemosurgery arms, respectively). Tumor histology did not influence response to treatment. As reported in the Roth trial, 344
pretreatment weight loss was a significant predictor of poor outcome in this study.
The failure of the large, well-controlled Intergroup 0113 trial to show benefit from the addition of cisplatin and 5-FU to surgery suggests either that this strategy does
not work as had been theorized or that the induction chemotherapy agents and surgical techniques have not been optimized. Hence, the efficacy of any preoperative
chemotherapy regimen in the treatment of resectable esophageal cancer patients remains unproven; as such, induction chemotherapy should not be routinely
considered for these individuals unless administered in the context of well-designed, prospective, randomized clinical trials.
Kok and associates330 reported preliminary results of a trial involving patients with squamous cell cancers. This study, which represents the only positive randomized
trial in the literature, differed from the other trials reviewed previously in that patients in the preoperative chemotherapy arm were evaluated for response after two
courses; nonresponders went on to surgery, whereas responding patients received two more courses of chemotherapy before surgery. The regimen consisted of
cisplatin (80 mg/m 2 day 1) and etoposide (100 mg/m2 intravenously on days 1 to 2 and 200 mg/m2 orally on days 3 to 5). At a median follow-up for surviving patients of
15 months, the median survival of preoperative chemotherapy patients was significantly longer than those randomized to immediate surgery (18.5 vs. 11.0 months; P
= .002). These data raise the question of possible benefit from more intensive therapy than delivered in other trials and also demonstrate the potential relevance of
identifying patients with chemosensitive tumors. A final report with further follow-up is awaited.
In conclusion, although a survival advantage has been demonstrated for definitive chemoradiation compared with radiotherapy alone, 346 four of five randomized trials
of chemotherapy followed by surgery versus surgery alone have shown no benefit from this sequence of treatments. As such, more recent trials have focused on the
evaluation of preoperative concurrent chemoradiation strategies that may have a greater likelihood of achieving histologic complete response and improving long-term
survival in esophageal cancer patients.
Postoperative Adjuvant Chemotherapy
Widespread dissemination of disease is the primary cause of death in esophageal cancer patients. As such, considerable efforts are underway to identify novel
chemotherapeutic agents and to intensify exposure to agents with documented activity in this disease. Administering chemotherapy after surgery to patients who have
already received chemotherapy or chemoradiation preoperatively has not been easily achieved in phase II 338,339 and phase III trials 244,344; only 38% of patients who
were candidates for adjuvant cisplatin and 5-FU in Intergroup trial 0113 received the two planned courses. 244
Adjuvant chemotherapy in patients who have had surgery alone as their primary curative treatment is more feasible from the standpoint of patient tolerance, but it
remains unclear whether current agents confer a survival advantage. The Japanese Oncology Group has studied this question in three separate randomized
trials.347,348 and 349 One study compared postoperative radiotherapy (50 Gy) to postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy (two courses of cisplatin and vindesine) in 258
patients following curative resection. 347 No differences were observed in survival (44% vs. 42% at 5 years), time to recurrence, or site of recurrence. Because these
results could be interpreted as showing an equivalent beneficial effect from adjuvant chemotherapy and adjuvant radiotherapy, a second trial of surgery alone
compared with surgery followed by two courses of adjuvant cisplatin and vindesine was conducted. 323 A total of 205 resected patients were randomized after
stratification for regional node involvement. At a median follow-up of 59.2 months, the 5-year survival rate was 45% in the control arm, and 48% in the adjuvant
treatment arm, indicating no survival benefit from this adjuvant chemotherapy regimen.
More recently, these investigators have reported preliminary results of a third trial. 349 The study design was the same as that previously described, except that the
chemotherapy was changed to cisplatin and 5-FU for two courses after curative resection. A total of 242 patients were randomized with stratification for N0/1 status. At
a median follow-up of 40.4 months, the estimated 5-year disease-free survival rate was 46% for the control group and 58% for chemotherapy patients ( P = .05);
survival rates were 77% versus 82% in node-negative patients ( P = .3), and 35% versus 53% in node-positive patients ( P = .06) in the control and adjuvant arms,
respectively. Overall survival rates were 51% for controls and 61% for chemotherapy patients ( P = .3). These data suggest that adjuvant chemotherapy may decrease
the rate of development of distant metastases in patients with positive regional nodes. It is unlikely that two courses of chemotherapy would be sufficient to have a
major effect on micrometastatic disease; thus, it is not surprising that more significant differences in survival did not emerge from this trial. However, the improvement
in disease-free survival that approached statistical significance is intriguing, and further evaluation of adjuvant chemotherapy in both histologic types of esophageal
cancer should be performed.
The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group is currently conducting a phase II trial (E8296) evaluating adjuvant cisplatin and paclitaxel for four courses in patients with
resected, node-positive adenocarcinomas of the esophagus, gastroesophageal junction, and cardia. A comparison with matched controls from a contemporary
surgical series is planned.
The role of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy or chemoradiation is currently undefined. There are no clear data indicating that administration of postoperative
adjuvant chemotherapy will prolong survival, particularly for patients who have undergone a curative resection and have negative nodes. However, patients who have
positive margins of resection should be considered for postoperative radiation. Those who have had R0 resections but have regional nodal metastases (stages IIB
and III) should be enrolled in clinical trials evaluating adjuvant treatments.
RADIATION THERAPY
Considerable controversy exists as to the ideal therapeutic approach for esophageal cancer. The Patterns of Care study examined 400 patients treated at 61
academic and nonacademic radiation oncology practices to determine practice patterns in the United States from 1992 to 1994. 350 During that time period, treatment
approaches included primary combined modality therapy in 54%, radiation alone in 20%, preoperative combined modality therapy in 13%, postoperative combined
modality therapy in 8%, postoperative radiation in 4%, and preoperative radiation in 1%. Various oncology groups have published treatment guidelines; however,
there is still no consensus at present. 351 Because the effect of histology has not been adequately assessed, it is reasonable to treat both squamous cell cancers and
adenocarcinomas in a similar manner.
Primary Therapy
Primary therapy of esophageal cancer is either surgical or nonsurgical. Although the overall results of these approaches are similar, the patient populations selected
for treatment with each modality are usually different, resulting in a potential selection bias against nonsurgical therapy. Patients with poor prognostic features,
including those with comorbid conditions, or unresectable or metastatic disease, are more commonly selected for treatment with nonsurgical therapy. Furthermore,

surgical series report results based on pathologically staged patients, whereas nonsurgical series express results pertaining to clinically staged individuals.
Pathologic staging has the advantage of excluding some patients with metastatic disease. In addition, because some nonsurgical patients are treated with palliative
rather than curative intent, the intensity of chemotherapy and the doses and techniques of radiation therapy may be suboptimal.
Nonsurgical Therapy
RADIATION THERAPY ALONE. Many series have reported results of external-beam radiation therapy alone; most include patients with unfavorable features such as

clinical T4 disease and positive lymph nodes ( Table 33.2-10). For example, in the series by De-Ren, 352 184 of the 678 patients had stage IV disease. Overall, the
5-year survival rate for patients treated with conventional doses of radiation therapy alone is 0% to 10%. 352,353 and 354 The use of radiation therapy as a potentially
curative modality requires doses of at least 50 Gy at 1.8 to 2.0 Gy per fraction. Furthermore, given the large size of many unresectable esophageal cancers, doses of
60 Gy or greater are probably required. Shi and colleagues 355 reported a 33% 5-year survival rate with the use of late-course accelerated fractionation to a total dose
of 68.4 Gy. However, in the radiation therapy alone arm of the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 85-01 trial in which patients received 64 Gy at 2 Gy/d with
modern techniques, all patients were dead of disease within 3 years. 255,356

TABLE 33.2-10. Selected Series of Radiation Therapy Alone for Esophageal Cancer

There is one report of radiation therapy alone for patients with clinically early-stage disease. Sykes et al. 357 evaluated 101 patients (90% with squamous cell
carcinoma) with tumors less than 5 cm who received 45.0 to 52.5 Gy in 15 to 16 fractions, noting a 5-year survival of 20%.
Collectively, these data indicate that radiation therapy alone should be reserved for palliation or for patients who are medically unfit to receive chemotherapy. As
discussed in the following section, combined modality therapy should be the standard of care.
Combined Modality Therapy
CONVENTIONAL APPROACHES. A number of single-arm, nonrandomized trials have been conducted to evaluate the efficacy of combined modality therapy alone in

esophageal cancer patients. 358,359,360,361 and 362 The series reported by Coia and associates 359 is the only one in which patients with early-stage malignancies (clinical
stages I and II) were analyzed separately from those with more advanced disease. Patients received 5-FU and mitomycin C concurrently with 60 Gy. The local failure
rate was 25%, the 5-year actuarial local relapse-free survival was 70%, and the 5-year actuarial survival was 30% in early-stage patients.
The Southwest Oncology Group 9060 trial reported by Poplin et al. 363 included 32 patients who received 5-FU and cisplatin concurrently with 50 Gy, followed by two
cycles of 5-FU and cisplatin. Since the choice of further management (observation, radiation, chemotherapy, and surgery) was based on the tumor response, this
study cannot be considered a pure combined modality therapy trial. Although the median survival was 20 months, the authors concluded that the complexity and
toxicity of this treatment regimen precluded its further use.
Six randomized trials have been performed comparing radiation therapy alone with combined modality therapy ( Table 33.2-11).249,255,346,364,365,366,367 and 368 Five of the
six trials used suboptimal doses of radiation, and three used inadequate doses of systemic chemotherapy. For example, in the series from Araujo and colleagues, 364
patients received only one cycle of 5-FU, mitomycin C, and bleomycin. The EORTC trial used subcutaneous methotrexate. 365 In the Scandinavian trial reported by
Nygaard and associates, 249 patients received low doses of chemotherapy (cisplatin, 20 mg/m 2, and bleomycin, 10 mg/m2, for a maximum of two cycles).

TABLE 33.2-11. Randomized Trials of Radiation Therapy versus Combined Modality Therapy for Esophageal Cancer

In the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Esophagal Cancer Trial-1282 trial, patients who received combined modality treatment had a significantly increased
median survival compared with those receiving radiation alone (15 vs. 9 months; P = .04), but had no improvement in 5-year survival (9% vs. 7%). However, this was
not a pure nonsurgical trial since approximately 50% of patients in each arm underwent resection after 40 Gy. Furthermore, the decision to proceed with surgery was
left to the discretion of the individual investigator. 368 The operative mortality was 17%. Lastly, the Pretoria trial reported by Slabber et al. 367 was limited to a total of 70
patients with T3 squamous cell cancers and used a low-dose (40 Gy) split-course radiation schedule.
The only trial that was designed to deliver adequate doses of systemic chemotherapy with concurrent radiation therapy was the RTOG 85-01 trial reported by
Herskovic et al. (Fig. 33.2-5).255,346,366 This Intergroup trial primarily included patients with squamous cell carcinoma. Patients received four cycles of 5-FU (1000
mg/m2/24 hours × 4 days) and cisplatin (75 mg/m 2 on day 1). Radiation therapy (50 Gy at 2 Gy/d) was given concurrently with day 1 of chemotherapy. Curiously,
cycles 3 and 4 of chemotherapy were delivered every 3 weeks (weeks 8 and 11) rather than every 4 weeks (weeks 9 and 13). This intensification may explain, in part,
why only 50% of the patients finished all four cycles of the chemotherapy. The control arm was radiation therapy alone, at a higher dose (64 Gy) than that delivered in
the combined modality treatment arm.

FIGURE 33.2-5. Phase III Intergroup trial Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 85-01 for patients with squamous cell and adenocarcinoma of the esophagus selected
for a nonoperative approach. 5-FU, 5-fluorouracil; CDDP, cisplatin; RT, radiation therapy.

Patients who were randomized to receive combined modality therapy had a significant improvement in median survival (14 vs. 9 months) and 5-year survival (27% vs.
0%; P <.0001). 366 There was a clear plateau in the survival curve such that with a minimum follow-up of 5years, the 8-year survival was 22%. 346 Histology did not
significantly influence the results with 21% of patients with squamous cell carcinomas (n = 107) alive at 5 years compared with 13% of patients with adenocarcinoma
(n = 23; P = NS). Although African Americans had larger primary tumors (all of which were squamous cell cancers), there was no difference in their survival compared
with whites.369 The incidence of local failure as the first site of failure (defined as local persistence plus recurrence) was also decreased in the combined modality arm
(47% vs. 65%). The protocol was closed early due to the positive results; however, following this early closure, an additional 69 patients were treated with the same
combined modality therapy regimen. In this nonrandomized combined modality group, the 5-year survival was 14% and local failure rate was 52%.
Combined modality therapy not only improves the results compared with radiation alone, but is also associated with a higher incidence of toxicity. In the 1997 report of
the RTOG 85-01 trial, patients who received combined modality therapy had a higher incidence of acute grade III toxicity (44% vs. 25%) and acute grade IV toxicity
(20% vs. 3%) compared with radiation therapy alone. Including the one treatment-related death (2%), the incidence of total acute grade III+ toxicity was 66%. 366 The
1999 report examined late toxicity; the incidence of late grade III+ toxicity was similar in the combined modality arm compared with the radiation alone arm (29% vs.
23%).346 However, grade IV+ toxicity remained higher (10% vs. 2%, respectively). Interestingly, the nonrandomized combined modality therapy group experienced a
similar incidence of late grade III+ toxicity (28%), but a lower incidence of grade IV toxicity (4%), and there were no treatment-related deaths.
Based on the positive results from the RTOG 85-01 trial, the conventional nonsurgical treatment for esophageal carcinoma is combined modality therapy.
Notwithstanding, the local failure rate in RTOG 85-01 combined modality therapy arm was 45%; therefore, new approaches such as intensification of combined
modality therapy, including escalation of the radiation dose, have been pursued in an attempt to help improve these results.
INTENSIFICATION OF COMBINED MODALITY THERAPY. The phase II Intergroup trial 0122 (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group PE289/RTOG 90-12) was designed to

intensify the RTOG 85-01 combined modality arm. 370 The development of the neoadjuvant chemotherapy approach used in Intergroup 0122 was based, in part, on the
results of a randomized trial of preoperative radiation therapy (55 Gy) versus preoperative chemotherapy (5-FU, cisplatin, vindesine) from Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center. This trial revealed that the resectability (65% vs. 58%), objective response (64% vs. 55%), and local failure (15% vs. 6%) rates with either
preoperative radiation therapy or preoperative chemotherapy were similar. 371 Both the chemotherapy and radiation therapy in Intergroup 0122 were intensified as
follows: (1) the 5-FU continuous infusion (1000 mg/m 2/24 hours) was increased from 4 days to 5 days; (2) the total number of cycles of chemotherapy was increased
from four to five cycles; (3) three cycles of full-dose neoadjuvant 5-FU and cisplatin were delivered before the start of combined modality therapy; and (4) the radiation
dose was increased from 50.0 to 64.8 Gy.
The final results of the Intergroup trial 0122 have been reported. 370 For the 38 eligible patients, the primary tumor response rates were 47% complete and 8% partial;
3% had stable disease. The first site of clinical failure was local in 39% of patients and distant in 24% of individuals. For the total patient group, there were six deaths
during treatment of which 9% (4 of 45) were treatment related. The median survival was 20 months and the 5-year actuarial survival was 20%. Therefore, this
intensive neoadjuvant approach did not appear to offer a benefit compared with conventional doses and techniques of combined modality therapy. However, the
higher radiation dose (64.8 Gy) was tolerable and is being further tested in Intergroup trial 0123, which is the replacement trial for RTOG 85-01 ( Fig. 33.2-6).

FIGURE 33.2-6. Phase III Intergroup trial 0123 (Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 94-05) for patients with squamous cell or adenocarcinoma of the esophagus.
5-FU, 5-fluorouracil; CDDP, cisplatin; RT, radiation therapy.

A limited number of phase II trials have tested the use of induction chemotherapy before radiation therapy or combined modality therapy. Valerdi et al. 362 reported the
results of 40 patients with clinical stage II and III squamous cell cancers who received two cycles of neoadjuvant cisplatin, vindesine, and bleomycin (days 1 and 29)
followed by 60 Gy. In contrast with Intergroup 0122, no chemotherapy was delivered with the radiation therapy. The pathologic complete response rate was 53%. With
a median follow-up of 78 months, the local failure rate was 62%, median survival was 11 months, and the 5-year actuarial survival was 15%. These results are similar
to those obtained with the RTOG 85-01 combined modality arm, with the exception of the higher treatment-related death rate of 5%.
Using a five-drug neoadjuvant regimen, Roca and colleagues 372 treated 55 patients (54 with squamous cell) with bolus cisplatin, 5-FU, leucovorin, bleomycin, and
mitomycin C for 15 days followed by 60 Gy plus concurrent 5-FU, leucovorin, and cisplatin. No maintenance chemotherapy was delivered. All anatomic sites within the
esophagus were acceptable, and 53% of patients had clinical stage III disease. Although the treatment-related mortality was only 4% and the 3-year survival was
35%, the local failure rate was 42%, which was similar to the 45% reported in the RTOG 85-01 combined modality therapy arm.
In summary, neoadjuvant chemotherapy, as delivered in the previously mentioned trials, does not appear to improve the results of combined modality therapy. New
trials using paclitaxel (Taxol)-based induction chemotherapy are in progress. 373
INTENSIFICATION OF THE RADIATION DOSE. Another approach to dose intensification of combined modality therapy involves increasing the radiation dose above 60 Gy.

There are two methods by which to increase the radiation dose to the esophagus: brachytherapy and external-beam radiation.
Brachytherapy
Intraluminal brachytherapy allows the escalation of the dose to the primary tumor while protecting the surrounding dose-limiting structures such as the lung, heart, and
spinal cord. 374 A radioactive source is placed intraluminally via endoscope or a nasogastric tube. Brachytherapy has been used both as primary therapy (usually as a

palliative modality), 375,376,377 and 378 as well as boost following external-beam radiation therapy or combined modality therapy. 375,379,380 and 381 It can be delivered by high
dose-rate or low dose-rate. 382 Although there are technical and radiobiologic differences between the two dose rates, there are no clear therapeutic advantages.
As a single therapy, brachytherapy is used as a palliative modality and results in a local control rate of 25% to 35% and a median survival of approximately 5
months.375,376,377 and 378 In the randomized trial from Sur et al. 376 there were no significant differences in local control or survival with high dose-rate brachytherapy
compared with external-beam radiation. Jager et al. 377 treated 88 patients with 15 Gy, and 67% had improvement of dysphagia at 4 to 6 weeks and 47% had complete
restoration of swallowing.
A major limitation of brachytherapy is the effective treatment distance. The primary isotope is 192Ir, which is usually prescribed to treat to a distance of 1 cm from the
source. Therefore, any portion of the tumor that is greater than 1 cm from the source receives a suboptimal radiation dose. This limitation has been confirmed by
pathologic analysis of treated specimens. 383
More encouraging results have been reported from series combining brachytherapy with external-beam or combined modality therapy; however, it is not clear if this
advantage is due to the therapy or a selection bias in favor of patients treated in the curative setting as opposed to those treated for palliation only. In a phase II trial
reported by Calais et al., 379 a total of 53 patients with clinically unresectable adenocarcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus received 60 Gy plus three
cycles of concurrent 5-FU, cisplatin, and mitomycin C followed by high dose-rate intraluminal brachytherapy (5 Gy/week × 2). With a median follow-up of 39 months,
the 3-year and 5-year actuarial survivals were 27% and 18%, respectively. Severe late toxicity occurred in 11%. One patient died of treatment-related toxicity. Two
patients (4%) developed a fistula; however, both were due to tumor progression. Swallowing function was reported as good in 75%. The local failure rate was 43% (23
of 53).
Other trials of brachytherapy following external-beam radiation or combined modality therapy have reported less favorable results. Schraube and associates 381 treated
54 patients with 60-Gy external-beam radiation followed by a 14-Gy brachytherapy boost, observing a median survival of 8 months and a 2-year overall survival of
10%. Major toxicity was seen in 15%. Using a similar treatment regimen in 35 patients with squamous cell carcinomas, Akagi et al. 380 reported a 26% local failure rate,
a 5-year survival of 35%, and a 26% incidence of late complications. Moni et al. 375 reported a 62% local failure rate and 2-year survival of 27% in 21 patients with
primary, nonmetastatic disease. However, for the total group of 47 patients there was a 36% grade III+ complication rate including a 17% incidence of fistula.
The trial by Yorozu et al. 384 was limited to a more favorable subset of patients with clinical T1 to T2 disease. A total of 125 patients received 40- to 60-Gy
external-beam radiation followed by a 8- to 24-Gy high dose-rate brachytherapy boost. With a median follow-up of 3.1 years, the 5-year survival was 26% and local
failure was 44%. Esophageal ulcers occurred in 41% and were fatal in 6% of patients.
In the RTOG 92-07 trial, 75 patients with squamous cell cancers (92%) or adenocarcinomas (8%) of the thoracic esophagus received the RTOG 85-01 combined
modality regimen (5-FU, cisplatin × 4 with concurrent 50 Gy) followed by a boost during cycle 3 of chemotherapy with either low dose-rate (19 patients) or high
dose-rate (56 patients) intraluminal brachytherapy. 385 The choice of the dose rate was at the discretion of the investigator. Due to low accrual, the low dose-rate option
was discontinued and the analysis was limited to patients who received the high dose-rate treatment. High dose-rate brachytherapy was delivered in weekly fractions
of 5 Gy during weeks 8, 9, and 10. Following the development of several fistulas, the fraction delivered at week 10 was discontinued. Although the complete response
rate was 73%, with a median follow-up of only 11 months, local failure as the first site of failure occurred in 27% of patients. Acute toxicity included 58% grade III, 26%
grade IV, and 8% grade V (treatment-related death). The cumulative incidence of fistula was 18% per year and the crude incidence was 14%. Three of the six
treatment-related fistulas were fatal. Given the significant toxicity, this treatment approach should be used with caution.
The American Brachytherapy Society has developed guidelines for esophageal brachytherapy. 386 For patients treated in the curative setting, brachytherapy should be
limited to tumors less than or equal to 10 cm with no evidence of distant metastasis. Contraindications include tracheal or bronchial involvement, cervical esophagus
location, or stenosis that cannot be bypassed. The applicator should have an external diameter of 6 to 10 cm. If combined modality therapy is used (defined as
5-FU–based chemotherapy plus 45 to 50 Gy), the recommended doses of brachytherapy are 10 Gy in 2 weekly fractions of 5 Gy each for high dose-rate, and 20 Gy in
a single fraction at 4 to 10 Gy/h for low dose-rate. The doses should be prescribed to 1 cm from the midsource. Lastly, brachytherapy should be delivered after the
completion of external-beam radiation, and not concurrently with chemotherapy.
In summary, in the palliative setting, intraluminal brachytherapy is an effective modality for decreasing symptoms such as dysphagia and bleeding. In patients treated
in the curative setting, the addition of brachytherapy does not appear to improve results compared with radiation therapy or combined modality therapy alone.
Therefore, the benefit of adding intraluminal brachytherapy to radiation or combined modality therapy remains unclear.
External-Beam Therapy
There are limited data examining the tolerance of external-beam doses of greater than or equal to 60 Gy when delivered concurrently with chemotherapy. In a
separate toxicity analysis from Coia and associates, 359 the results of 90 patients with clinical stages I to IV squamous and adenocarcinomas of the esophagus were
reported; the incidence of grade III toxicity was 22%, and grade IV toxicity was 6%. There were no treatment-related deaths.
Calais et al. 387 reported the results of 53 patients with clinically unresectable disease who received 5-FU, cisplatin, and mitomycin C plus 65 Gy. The full dose of
radiation could be delivered in 96% of patients. The incidence of World Health Organization grade III+ toxicity was 30%, and the overall 2-year survival was 42%. It
should be noted that the chemotherapy in this trial was not delivered at doses adequate to treat systemic disease.
On the encouraging side, almost all patients in both the Intergroup 0122 and the Calais trials (96% and 94%, respectively) who started radiation therapy were able to
complete the full dose (64.8 to 65.0 Gy). Therefore, this higher dose of radiation was considered tolerable and was used in the experimental arm of the Intergroup
esophageal trial 0123 (RTOG 94-05). Intergroup 0123 is the follow-up trial to RTOG 85-01. In this trial, patients with either squamous cell or adenocarcinomas who
are selected for a nonsurgical approach are randomized to a slightly modified RTOG 85-01 combined modality regimen with 50.4 Gy versus the same chemotherapy
with 64.8 Gy (see Fig. 33.2-6).
The modifications to the original RTOG 85-01 combined modality therapy arm include (1) using 1.8 Gy fractions to 50.4 Gy rather than 2 Gy fractions to 50 Gy; (2)
treating with 5-cm proximal and distal margins for 50.4 Gy rather than treating the whole esophagus for the first 30 Gy followed by a cone-down with 5-cm margins to
50 Gy; (3) not beginning cycle 3 of 5-FU and cisplatin until 4 weeks following the completion of radiation therapy rather than 3 weeks; and (4) delivering cycles 3 and
4 of chemotherapy every 4 weeks rather than every 3 weeks. The Intergroup 0123 opened in late 1994 and was closed to accrual in 1999 when an interim analysis
revealed that it was unlikely that the high-dose arm would achieve a superior survival compared with the standard-dose arm.
In addition to increasing the total dose, radiation can be intensified by accelerated fractionation or hyperfractionation. Selected series using these approaches are
summarized in Table 33.2-12.355,388,389 and 390 Although these approaches are reasonable, most series report an increase in acute toxicity without any clear therapeutic
benefit. These regimens remain investigational.

TABLE 33.2-12. Selected Series of High-Dose Accelerated Fractionation/Hyperfractionated Combined Modality Therapy

Palliation of Dysphagia with Radiation Therapy
Dysphagia is a common problem in patients with esophageal cancer. Not only is it the most frequently presenting symptom, but it can remain a problem up to the time
of the patient's death. Many of the series that have examined palliation are retrospective, and most do not use objective criteria to define and assess this symptom.
Some have not reported the number of patients presenting with dysphagia or the percentage who were palliated until the time of death. Furthermore, few series have
carefully examined other variables that may have influenced results such as histology, stage, and location of the primary tumor.
As seen in Table 33.2-13, a limited number of series have examined the palliative effects of radiation alone 365,391,392,393 and 394 or combined modality
therapy. 360,361,,393,395,396 and 397 Overall, external-beam radiation therapy alone palliates dysphagia in approximately 70% to 80% of patients.

TABLE 33.2-13. Palliation of Dysphagia with External-Beam Radiation Therapy with or without Chemotherapy

The most comprehensive and carefully performed analysis of swallowing function in patients receiving combined modality therapy is from Coia et al. 398 Using a
swallowing score modified from O'Rourke et al., 399 Coia et al. analyzed 102 patients treated with three 5-FU–based combined modality regimens. Before the start of
therapy, 95% of patients had some degree of dysphagia. Within 2 weeks following the start of treatment, 45% had improvement in dysphagia and by the completion of
the 6-week therapy, 83% had improvement. Overall, 88% had an improvement in dysphagia. The median time to maximum improvement was 4 weeks (range, 1 to 21
weeks), and all but two patients were able to swallow at least soft or solid foods at the time of maximum symptomatic improvement.
Variables such as treatment intent, histology, and tumor location were examined. All of the 25 patients treated with curative intent who survived more than 1 year were
able to eat soft or solid foods following treatment. The benign stricture rate (defined as a stricture in the absence of recurrent disease) was 12%. Ninety-one percent
of patients treated in the noncurative setting had an initial improvement in swallowing, and 67% were palliated until death. Histology and stage had no effect on the
rate of palliation; however, patients with distal third lesions had significant improvement in dysphagia compared with individuals with upper or middle third tumors
(95% vs. 79%; P <.05).
Intraluminal brachytherapy achieves palliation of dysphagia in 40% to 90% of patients. 375,376,377 and 378 Because it is usually prescribed to 1 cm from the source, it may
not sufficiently treat gross disease. There is a selection bias against brachytherapy since it is commonly used for patients who have either failed to respond to
external-beam radiation or who are medically unfit to travel for daily outpatient treatment. Even accounting for these selection biases, given its limited effective range,
brachytherapy has not proven to be as successful as external-beam radiation in treating the entire tumor volume.
In summary, external-beam radiation therapy, either alone or in combination with chemotherapy, palliates dysphagia in approximately 80% of patients, one-half of
whom are palliated until death. If a patient requires rapid palliation (within a few days), alternative approaches such as laser or stent are recommended, since
external-beam radiation with or without chemotherapy requires at least 2 weeks to obtain palliation. However, palliation achieved by external-beam therapy is more
durable than that obtained by other palliative modalities since it treats the problem (the gross tumor mass), not just the symptom. If external-beam radiation is not
possible, then brachytherapy should be considered.
Acute and Long-Term Toxicity of Radiation Therapy
The toxicity of radiation therapy is a function of total dose and technique of administration, as well as chemotherapy exposure. There are limited toxicity data in
patients who received conventional doses of radiation therapy. Essentially all patients experience lethargy and esophagitis commencing 2 to 3 weeks after the start of
radiation; these symptoms begin to resolve 1 week after the completion of therapy.
The most carefully documented acute radiation-related toxicity data are from the control arm of RTOG 85-01 in which patients received radiation therapy alone to a
dose of 64 Gy.255,366 The incidence of acute grade III toxicity was 25%, and grade IV toxicity was 3%; the incidence of long-term grade III+ toxicity was 23% and grade
IV+ was 2%.346 There were no treatment-related deaths.
As with surgery, radiation therapy can produce esophageal strictures. The total incidence of stricture (benign plus malignant) in patients receiving radiation therapy
alone or radiation combined with chemotherapy is 20% to 40% in modern studies, and up to 60% in historical series 400; nearly one-half of these strictures are
malignant since they are associated with local recurrence. The incidence of stricture is lower in series in which careful radiation techniques were used. For example,
Coia et al. 398 noted that the incidence of benign stricture was 12% in a subset of 25 patients who were locally controlled and survived at least 1 year.
One series examined the functional results in patients who developed benign or malignant strictures. 399 Eighty patients received 45 to 56 Gy and 53% received some
form of chemotherapy. Of the 24 patients (30%) who developed a benign stricture, 71% were able to tolerate a full or soft diet and required dilation with a median
interval between dilations of 5 months. Therefore, even in the subset of patients who develop a benign stricture, dilation is effective in the majority of patients. In
contrast, in the 28% of patients who developed a malignant stricture, dilation was unsuccessful and esophageal intubation was required.
The high incidence of fistulae reported in the RTOG 92-07 trial of combined modality therapy plus intraluminal brachytherapy (18% actuarial, 14% crude) has not
been seen in series using radiation therapy or combined modality therapy without intraluminal brachytherapy. The incidence of other long-term grade III+ toxicities
such as pneumonitis or pericarditis is 5%. If appropriate radiation doses and techniques are used, spinal cord myelitis should not occur.
TREATMENT-RELATED DEATHS
The issue of treatment-related deaths in patients receiving combined modality therapy is complex. Although the incidence was only 2% in RTOG 85-01, subsequent
trials have reported a higher treatment-related mortality (i.e., 9% in Intergroup 0122 and 8% in RTOG 92-07). This mortality is lower than the 10% to 15% incidence
reported in the historical surgical series, although only slightly higher than the 6% reported in the surgical control arm of Intergroup 0113. 244 It is interesting to note
that as the mortality with surgery has decreased, there has been a corresponding increase in the treatment-related mortality reported in the nonoperative trials. As
previously discussed, this may be related, in part, to selection bias against patients treated with the nonoperative approach. Only a randomized trial of surgical versus
nonsurgical therapy can address this issue.
COMPARISON OF DEFINITIVE CHEMORADIATION AND SURGERY
Appropriate randomized trials comparing chemoradiation and surgery have not been performed. However, it is an important issue for the practicing oncologist and for

the establishment of standards of care. The positive results of RTOG 85-01, demonstrating a 27% 5-year survival rate for patients treated with definitive
chemoradiation compared with no survivors after treatment with radiotherapy alone, are a major advance. Without a doubt, this treatment option has influenced the
selection of patients for surgical management because it provides an alternative for restoring swallowing function in patients with locally advanced disease for whom
resection would likely be palliative.
For patients with earlier stage disease that appears resectable, definitive chemoradiotherapy may also be appropriate treatment; however, prospective trials
comparing this approach with surgery, stratified for histology and stage have yet to be performed. Nonetheless, contemporary series suggest that the nonsurgical
approach offers a survival rate that is the same or better than that achievable with surgery alone in most medical centers. For example, the median and 5-year
survival rates in the surgical control arm of Intergroup 0113 trial were 16 months and 20%, respectively, 244 and in the surgical control arm of the Dutch trial by Kok et
al.330 the median survival rate was 11 months. The incidence of local recurrence (local failure plus local persistence of disease) as the first site of failure was 45% in
RTOG 85-01 and 39% in Intergroup 0122. Although local recurrence as the first site of failure in Intergroup 0113 was 31%, this analysis was limited to patients who
underwent a complete resection with negative margins (R0 resection). Since an additional 30% of patients had residual local disease, if one was to score these
patients as having local persistent disease (as was done in the RTOG 85-01 analysis), the comparable local failure rate with surgery alone was 30% + 31% = 61%.
The treatment-related mortality was also similar (2% in RTOG 85-01 and 6% in Intergroup 0113).
In summary, the local failure, survival, and treatment-related mortality of definitive chemoradiation as administered in RTOG 85-01 and those observed following
surgery alone appear comparable. Despite these observations, it is clear that both approaches have limited success; as such trials combining all three modalities
(surgery plus preoperative chemotherapy and radiotherapy) have been initiated.
TREATMENT IN THE SETTING OF A TRACHEOESOPHAGEAL FISTULA
The presence of a malignant tracheoesophageal fistula is an unfavorable prognostic feature; however, occasionally patients may survive for a prolonged period of
time. Historically, radiation therapy was believed to be contraindicated due to concerns of exacerbating the fistula as the tumor responded. There have been several
reports that challenge these views. In a Mayo Clinic series, 401 ten patients with malignant tracheoesophageal fistula received 30 to 66 Gy external-beam radiation,
with a median survival of 5 months. None of these patients experienced an enlarged or more debilitating fistula following radiation. Arlington and Bohorquez 402
described a patient who developed a fistula while receiving external-beam radiation to a total dose of 56.5 Gy, which healed 2 months following the completion of
radiation.
Although the experience is limited, data suggest that radiation may not necessarily increase the severity of a malignant tracheoesophageal fistula, and it can be
administered safely. Due to the poor prognosis of this group of patients, it is unclear if it improves outcome particularly in individuals who may also be palliated by
stents.403,404 and 405
ADJUVANT THERAPY
Adjuvant Radiation Therapy without Chemotherapy
The rationale of adjuvant radiation therapy is based on the patterns of failure following potentially curative surgery in patients with clinically resectable disease.
Unfortunately, few surgical series report these data. The incidence of local failure in the surgical control arms from the preoperative radiation therapy randomized
trials from Mei et al. 406 and Gignoux and coworkers248 was 12% and 67%, respectively. The local failure rate in the surgical control arm from the postoperative
radiation therapy randomized trial from Teniere et al. 407 was 35% for patients with negative local regional lymph nodes and 38% for patients with positive local
regional lymph nodes. The surgical control arm of Intergroup 0113 244 provides a modern, more relevant baseline for the results of surgery alone. As previously
discussed there was a 31% local failure in patients with a R0 resection and a total local failure rate (including the additional 30% of patients with persistent disease) of
61%. Although the majority of patients with esophageal cancer succumb to distant metastases, the incidence of local failure following transhiatal or standard
transthoracic resection is high enough to warrant the evaluation of adjuvant radiation therapy.
Preoperative Radiation Therapy
Six randomized trials of preoperative radiation therapy for patients with clinically resectable disease are summarized in Table 33.2-14.248,249,406,408,409 and 410 The series
performed by Launois et al., 408 Gignoux et al.,248 and Nygaard et al. 249 were limited to patients with squamous cell carcinoma. Patients with both squamous cell
carcinoma and adenocarcinoma were included in the series by Arnott et al. 409; the histologies of the esophageal cancers treated in the series by Huang et al. 410 and
Mei et al.406 were not indicated.

TABLE 33.2-14. Randomized Trials of Preoperative Radiation Therapy for Esophageal Cancer

Overall, preoperative radiation therapy did not increase resectability, and only two series reported local failure rates. Although Mei and colleagues 406 reported no
difference in local failure, Gignoux et al. 248 observed a significant decrease in local failure in patients who received preoperative radiation therapy compared with
those treated by surgery alone (46% vs. 67%, respectively).
Two trials have reported an improvement in survival in patients receiving preoperative radiation therapy, although the significance of these observations is debatable.
In a previously described four-arm randomized trial, Nygaard et al. 249 observed that the 48 patients who received preoperative radiation therapy without chemotherapy
had a 20% 3-year survival compared with 5% survival in control patients; however, this did not reach statistical significance. Huang et al. 410 also reported improved
survival in surgical patients treated with preoperative radiation therapy relative to surgical controls (46% vs. 25%, respectively); however, formal statistical analysis
was not performed. Furthermore, metaanalysis from the Oesphageal Cancer Collaborative Group showed no clear evidence of a survival advantage for preoperative
radiation therapy. 411
The aforementioned randomized preoperative radiation therapy trials used suboptimal designs. Conventional radiation therapy doses were not delivered, and some
trials used split-course radiation. Furthermore, none of the trials allowed an adequate interval between completion of radiation therapy and surgery (in general, a 4- to
6-week interval is recommended). Consequently, radiation-related morbidity cannot be appropriately assessed in these trials.
The only study that allows analysis of the effect of radiation techniques is a randomized trial from France involving patients with squamous cell carcinomas who
received combined modality therapy using continuous or split-course radiation. 412 The 95 patients who received continuous-course therapy had a significantly higher
local control rate (57% vs. 29%), 2-year event-free survival rate (33% vs. 23%), and a borderline significant 2-year survival rate (37% vs. 23%) relative to patients
treated with split-course radiation. Because it is less effective than continuous-course, split-course radiation is not recommended.

In summary, since only two of the six series have reported local failure rates, it is difficult to draw firm conclusions regarding the influence of preoperative radiation
therapy on local control. Two series have reported an improvement in survival; one in which half of the patients also received chemotherapy, and in the other a
statistical analysis was not performed. Four of the six series have reported no advantage in overall survival. Nonrandomized trials performed by Yadava et al. 413 and
Sugimachi and associates 414 have also shown no survival benefit. Based on the available, albeit limited, randomized trials, preoperative radiation therapy does not
appear to significantly enhance local control or improve survival in esophageal cancer patients.
Postoperative Radiation Therapy
Several nonrandomized reports of postoperative radiation therapy have suggested that postoperative radiation therapy may be beneficial in esophagectomy patients.
Yamamoto and associates415 reported a 94% 2-year local control rate in node–positive patients. In patients who underwent a three-field dissection, Hosokawa and
associates added intraoperative radiation followed by 45 Gy postoperatively; the 5-year survival was 34%. 416 In patients who received the highest dose of
intraoperative radiation (25 Gy), 22% developed fatal tracheal ulceration. No treatment-related deaths were seen with doses less than 20 Gy.
There have been only two randomized trials limited to patients treated in the adjuvant setting ( Table 33.2-15). Teniere and colleagues 407 reported the results of 221
patients with squamous cell carcinoma randomized to surgery alone versus surgery plus postoperative radiation therapy (45 to 55 Gy at 1.8 Gy per fraction). With a
minimum follow-up of 3 years, postoperative radiation therapy had no significant effect on survival. In the series by Fok et al., 417 patients with squamous cell or
adenocarcinomas receiving either curative or palliative resections were evaluated; although the total dose of radiation therapy was conventional, the dose per fraction
(3.5 Gy per fraction) was unconventional. No significant decrease in local failure, distant failure, or improvement in median survival was achieved by use of
postoperative radiation therapy.

TABLE 33.2-15. Randomized Trials of Postoperative Radiation Therapy for Esophageal Cancer

For reasons that are unclear, postoperative radiation therapy has been recommended for patients with positive local regional lymph nodes. Although the data from
Teniere et al. 407 support the use of postoperative radiation therapy for decreasing local failure, the benefit was limited to patients with negative lymph nodes in whom
postoperative radiation therapy decreased local failure from 35% to 10%. Postoperative radiation therapy had no significant effect in patients with positive nodes.
In summary, although limited data suggest that adjuvant postoperative radiation therapy may decrease local failure in node-negative patients, it appears to have no
effect on overall survival. The only role for postoperative radiation therapy is for patients with positive margins. Based on the positive survival results from combined
modality therapy trials such as RTOG 85-01, patients selected to receive postoperative radiation therapy should also be considered for systemic chemotherapy. 255,356
Preoperative Combined Modality Therapy
Given the limited success of single-modality treatment using radiation therapy or surgery for the primary management of esophageal cancer and the absence of
survival improvement when radiotherapy is used in the adjuvant setting (preoperatively or postoperatively), efforts have focused on the use of systemic chemotherapy
before surgery or in conjunction with preoperative radiation therapy. As previously discussed, the rationale to use chemotherapy before surgery includes the reduction
of local and micrometastatic tumor deposits and downstaging the primary tumor by enhanced delivery of cytotoxic agents via intact microvasculature. Furthermore,
many of the active agents in esophageal cancer (i.e., 5-FU, cisplatin, mitomycin C, paclitaxel) are known to enhance radiosensitivity in cancer cells. Conceivably,
chemotherapy in conjunction with radiotherapy may prevent dissemination of tumor cells during surgery, thus decreasing the rate of distant metastases in patients
receiving potentially curative resections.
Combined modality therapy has been used both in the preoperative setting as well as in primary, nonsurgical management of unresectable lesions. In the
preoperative trials, patients have had clinically resectable disease, whereas in the nonsurgical trials patients typically have had unresectable neoplasms or have been
deemed inoperable on the basis of additional comorbid conditions. Some of the preoperative combined modality regimens have employed accelerated courses of
radiation [either twice a day or large fraction sizes (greater than 2 Gy)] plus a short, but intensive course of systemic chemotherapy. Others have used more
conventional fractionation (1.8 to 2.0 Gy/d) and moderate total doses of radiation (40 to 50 Gy). In contrast, the nonsurgical combined modality regimens have
commonly used conventional fractionation and moderate to high doses of radiation (50.0 to 64.8 Gy) plus longer, but less intensive chemotherapy regimens. Some of
these regimens have included neoadjuvant chemotherapy before starting the combined modality therapy. 362,372,418 The differences in patient populations and study
designs preclude meaningful comparisons of these trials.
Nonrandomized Trials
In general, the nonrandomized series of preoperative combined modality therapy have used two treatment strategies. Patients have either undergone a planned
operation (Table 33.2-16), or for a variety of reasons, were selected for an operation ( Table 33.2-17). The results of these two approaches must be analyzed
separately since selection factors for surgery may have influenced outcomes. This discussion focuses on series that have been limited to patients with clinically
resectable neoplasms, thus excluding those with metastatic disease. 419 Most of the trials have used 5-FU and cisplatin–based chemotherapy, although several more
recent trials have used Taxol- or docetaxel (Taxotere)-based regimens. 373,420,421 and 422 Posner and colleagues 423 added interferon to the regimen, and Nesbitt et al. 421
administered neoadjuvant Taxol before the start of preoperative combined modality therapy.

TABLE 33.2-16. Selected Nonrandomized Trials of Planned Preoperative Combined Modality Therapy for Esophageal Cancer

TABLE 33.2-17. Selected Nonrandomized Series of Preoperative Combined Modality Therapy Plus Surgery for Esophageal Cancer

The results of selected phase II series in which patients have undergone preoperative combined modality therapy followed by a planned operation are summarized in
Table 33.2-16. Leichman and colleagues from Wayne State University 424 reported the results of 21 patients with squamous cell carcinomas. Patients received 30 Gy
at 2 Gy/d, plus two cycles of concurrent 5-FU and cisplatin. Individuals with residual tumor at surgery received an additional 20 Gy postoperatively. Pathologic
complete response rate was 37%, and the median survival was 18 months in the 19 patients who underwent an operation; a 27% operative mortality was observed.
Forty-eight percent of patients required hyperalimentation during preoperative therapy. This pilot trial was expanded to a Southwest Oncology Group trial (8037) for
patients with squamous cell carcinoma. Of 113 patients evaluated in this trial, only 71 underwent an operation. The pathologic complete response rate was 16%, and
the operative mortality was 11%. Despite a 3-year actuarial survival rate of 16%, all patients were dead of disease within 4 years. 425
Since these initial reports, a variety of treatment approaches have been examined. In most studies, pathologic complete response rates were approximately 25%.
Intensive combined modality regimens using hyperfractionated radiation have been evaluated by Urba et al. and Forastiere and associates 426,427 and 428 from the
University of Michigan, as well as Shahab and colleagues 429 from Ellis Fischel Cancer Center, and Adelstein et al. 430 Some of these regimens achieved higher
pathologic complete response and survival rates, usually with corresponding increases in acute toxicity. For example, Raoul et al. 431 reported a 56% complete
pathologic response rate and a 52% 3-year survival rate, but a 63% incidence of grade III+ acute toxicity. In the series by Adelestein et al., 432 patients received
preoperative accelerated fractionation (1.5 Gy twice a day to 45 Gy) plus 5-FU and cisplatin. The 27% complete response and 44% 3-year survival rates observed in
this trial were comparable with those reported in other series using conventional fractionation; however, the 18% surgical mortality was higher.
In addition to the different treatment schedules, variable surgical techniques have been used in these trials. For instance, investigators from the University of Michigan
performed transhiatal resections exclusively, whereas others preferentially did Ivor-Lewis procedures. Transhiatal esophagectomy is thought to be a more
conservative operation relative to the Ivor-Lewis procedure, although as previously discussed, both operations appear to be inferior to en bloc esophagectomy in
terms of achieving local control and improving survival in esophageal cancer patients.
More conventional doses of chemotherapy and radiation therapy techniques have been advocated by Stahl et al., 433 Jones and colleagues, 434 Forastiere et al., 435 and
Bates and associates. 436 In addition, these investigators have sought to determine if preoperative endoscopy with biopsy can accurately assess response to
treatment, and whether achievement of pathologic complete response following chemoradiation improves overall survival. Bates et al. 436 reported a 65% 3-year
survival rate in patients who achieved a pathologic complete response, compared with a 25% survival rate in those who did not. Forastiere and associates 435 reported
2-year survival rates of 78% for pathologic complete responders compared with 46% for those having residual tumor in the resected esophagus ( P = .006); in a
previous trial with long-term follow-up, 427 these investigators observed 5-year survival rates of 60% and 32% for pathologic complete responders and those with
residual disease following induction therapy, respectively. These nonrandomized data suggest that with aggressive induction chemoradiation therapy, patients who
are downstaged to pathology-negative status may have a survival advantage. In addition, the fact that long-term survival was observed in 25% to 30% of patients with
residual tumor in the resected specimen suggests that surgery was an important component of the multimodality regimens. Bates et al. 436 noted a 41% false-negative
rate with preoperative endoscopy and biopsy, indicating that this technique cannot reliably determine the need for further therapy. Furthermore, Jones and colleagues
437 reported that CT scan had a sensitivity of 65%, specificity of 33%, a positive predictive value of 58%, and a negative predictive value of 41% in evaluating
pathologic response following preoperative combined modality therapy in esophageal cancer patients. EUS may have similar limitations, 218,219 although FDG PET may
prove to be a useful noninvasive means to assess response to induction therapy. 223 Thus, at present, no methods short of surgical resection accurately determine
which patients have achieved pathologic complete response following induction chemoradiation therapy.
In some trials, patients have been selected for surgery based on their overall medical status and response to preoperative therapy (see Table 33.2-17). Gill and
colleagues 396 evaluated the role of surgery following combined modality therapy consisting of two cycles of 5-FU and cisplatin and radiation therapy. The study was
biased in that only those patients with more favorable prognoses were selected for surgery. Although the differences were not statistically significant, the local failure
and distant failure rates were higher in the patients who underwent surgery compared with those who did not. Using a similar approach of limiting surgery to those
patients who responded to preoperative therapy and delivering higher radiation doses to nonresponders, Kavanagh and associates 438 reported that patients who
underwent surgery had a lower local failure rate (24% vs. 44%); however, there were no differences in distant failure or median survival. The 1992 to 1994 Patterns of
Care439 survey study reported a significant improvement in survival of patients selected to received preoperative combined modality therapy compared with combined
modality therapy alone.
Randomized Trials
There have been three randomized trials comparing preoperative combined modality therapy with surgery alone in patients with clinically resectable disease ( Table
33.2-18).245,440,441 The series from Le Prise et al. 442 is not included since patients received sequential rather than concurrent chemotherapy plus radiation.

TABLE 33.2-18. Randomized Trials of Preoperative Combined Modality Therapy for Esophageal Cancer

Urba and associates from the University of Michigan 440 randomized 100 patients (75% with adenocarcinoma) to preoperative cisplatin (20 mg/m 2 days 1 to 5 and 17 to
21), vinblastine (1 mg/m2 days 1 to 4 and 17 to 20), 5-FU (300 mg/m 2/24 hours days 1 to 21), and concurrent radiation therapy (1.5 Gy twice a day to 45 Gy), followed
on day 42 by a transhiatal esophagectomy versus surgery alone. Preliminary analysis with a median follow-up of 1.82 years in surviving patients revealed no benefit
in median survival (1.46 vs. 1.48 years) or estimated 2-year survival (41% vs. 36%) of preoperative combined modality therapy. Subsequent analysis with a median
follow-up of 5.2 years in the 19 living patients revealed that preoperative combined modality therapy did not improve median survival (1.41 vs. 1.46 years); however,
univariate analysis demonstrated a borderline significant improvement in 3-year survival (32% vs. 15%; P = .07). This survival benefit reached statistical significance

(P = .04) with multivariate analysis. Furthermore, a significant decrease in local recurrence (19% vs. 39%; P = .04) was observed in patients receiving combined
modality therapy. 441
In a series from Dublin, Walsh et al. 245 reported a significant survival benefit with preoperative combined modality therapy. In this trial, 113 patients with
adenocarcinoma of the midesophagus or distal esophagus (including the cardia) were randomized to two cycles (weeks 1 and 6) of 5-FU (15 mg/kg/24 hours days 1
to 5), cisplatin (75 mg/m2 day 7), plus concurrent preoperative radiation therapy (2.67 cGy/d to 40 Gy) versus surgery alone. Resection was performed 8 weeks
following the start of chemotherapy, and a variety of operations were allowed. Combined modality therapy was well tolerated. The incidence of acute grade III+ toxicity
was 15%. The operative mortality was 9% in the multimodality treatment arm compared with 4% in surgery control arm. With a median follow-up in surviving patients
of 18 months, a significant improvement in both median survival (16 vs. 11 months; P = .01) and 3-year survival (32% vs. 6%; P = .01) was observed in patients
receiving preoperative therapy compared with those treated with surgery alone. A major criticism of this trial is the high operative mortality (9%) and the low 3-year
survival rate (6%) in the surgical control arm. In the Intergroup 0113 (RTOG 89-11) trial the operative mortality and 3-year survival rates were 6% and 25%,
respectively, in the surgical control arm.
The third randomized trial of preoperative combined modality therapy was reported by Bosset et al. 246 from the EORTC. A total of 282 patients with clinically
resectable (stages I and II) squamous cell carcinomas were randomized to preoperative combined modality therapy versus surgery alone. The preoperative regimen
included 3.7 Gy × 5 followed by a 2-week rest and another 3.7 Gy × 5. Chemotherapy was limited to cisplatin, 80 mg/m 2, 0 to 2 days before starting radiation therapy.
With a median follow-up of 55 months, patients who received preoperative combined modality therapy had a significantly greater 3-year disease-free survival (40%
vs. 28%) and local disease-free survival (relative risk, 0.6), yet had no improvement in median survival (19 months) or overall 3-year survival (36%) compared with
patients treated with surgery alone. However, this combined modality therapy regimen was unconventional in design; not only was the radiation split course and
delivered with unusually high doses per fraction, but the doses of chemotherapy were not adequate for systemic therapy.
Although two of the three randomized trials demonstrated a survival advantage, they are limited by small numbers of patients and short follow-up, hence their results
should be interpreted with caution. To help clarify this controversy, the Intergroup has developed a randomized trial of preoperative combined modality therapy
(Cancer and Leukemia Group B C9781), which is the follow-up trial to Intergroup 0113. The preoperative regimen is based on the combined modality arm from RTOG
85-01 and uses conventional 5-FU, cisplatin, and 50.4 Gy; the control arm is surgery alone since preoperative chemotherapy was not beneficial in Intergroup 0113.
Paclitaxel-based regimens have activity in patients with advanced esophageal cancer, and preoperative combined modality regimens using paclitaxel have achieved
encouraging results 420,421 and 422,443; however, an increase in acute radiation esophagitis has been seen in initial reports. Safran et al. 422 reported a 9% incidence of
radiation esophagitis in patients receiving 3-hour paclitaxel infusion. More protracted infusions appear to be better tolerated; in an ongoing phase I dose escalation
trial using 96-hour paclitaxel infusion plus cisplatin and 5040 cGy (reported in abstract form by Kelsen and associates 373), no patients experienced grade III+
esophagitis at the 80 mg/m2 dose level of paclitaxel. As with combined modality regimens in other gastrointestinal cancers, development of ideal regimens and
schedules remains an active area of clinical investigation.
In summary, the efficacy of preoperative combined modality treatment for resectable esophageal cancer patients remains unclear. Although an apparent benefit has
been seen in phase II trials that have used intensive regimens, significant toxicities have been observed. Whereas two of the three randomized trials revealed a
survival advantage for combined modality treatment, in the study by Urba et al. 440,441 this advantage reached significance only by multivariate analysis, and the trial by
Walsh et al. 245 had an unusually low survival rate in the surgical control arm. Both trials had relatively small numbers of patients and limited follow-up. Further
maturation of these randomized trials, together with results of the Intergroup trial Cancer and Leukemia Group B C9781, may allow more definitive conclusions
regarding the role of preoperative combined modality therapy. In the interim, preoperative combined modality therapy remains an investigational approach, results of
which should be compared with the best results achievable by surgery alone in patients who have been optimally staged.
Due to selection bias, it is difficult to determine what is the best treatment for esophageal cancer. The standard of care is either surgery alone or primary combined
modality therapy. The results of these two approaches appear similar, although no direct comparative trials have been performed.
Radiation Field Design and Treatment Techniques
Similar to the expert surgical skills required for a successful esophagectomy, radiation field design for esophageal cancer requires careful techniques. 444 There are a
number of sensitive organs that, depending on the location of the primary tumor, will be in the radiation field. These include but are not limited to skin, spinal cord,
lung, heart, intestine, stomach, kidney, and liver. Minimizing radiation to these structures while delivering an adequate dose to the primary tumor and local regional
lymph nodes requires patient immobilization and CT-based treatment planning for organ identification, lung correction, and development of dose-volume histograms.
Although CT can identify adjacent organs and structures, it may be limited in defining the extent of the primary tumor. To assess the consistency of target-volume
delineation, Tai and colleagues sent sample cases with CT scans to 48 radiation oncologists throughout Canada and asked them to fill out questionnaires regarding
treatment techniques as well as outline the boost target volumes. 445 There was substantial inconsistency in defining the planning target volume, both in the transverse
and longitudinal dimensions. Therefore, in addition to a CT scan, barium swallow should be obtained at the time of radiation therapy simulation. The integration of
other imaging modalities in radiation treatment planning such as esophageal ultrasound, PET scan, and magnetic resonance imaging are under active investigation.
At present, the standard radiation dose for patients selected for curative nonoperative combined modality therapy approach is 50.4 Gy at 1.8 Gy per fraction. The
radiation field should include the primary tumor with 5-cm superior and inferior margins and 2-cm lateral margins. The primary local regional lymph nodes should
receive the same dose. For cervical (proximal) primary tumors (defined as at or proximal to the carina), the treatment volume includes the bilateral supraclavicular
nodes, and for distal gastroesophageal primaries the celiac axis nodes should be included. An example of a four-field technique for a distal esophageal cancer is
seen in Figure 33.2-7.

FIGURE 33.2-7. An example of a four-field technique for the treatment of a distal esophophageal cancer.

For cervical primaries, patients are placed supine. Various field designs are possible and their choice depends on the geometry of the primary tumor in relation to the
spinal cord. The spinal cord dose should be limited to 45 Gy. Field designs include a three-field technique (two anterior obliques and a posterior) or more commonly
anteroposterior and posteroanterior to 39.6 to 41.4 cGy, followed by a left or right opposed oblique pair with photons plus an electron boost to the contralateral
supraclavicular area, both to a total dose of 50.4 Gy. For midesophageal primary tumors patients are placed prone to help exclude the spinal cord from the radiation
field and receive four fields (anteroposterior and posteroanterior and opposed laterals). For distal primaries patients are treated supine using the same four-field
technique. Care should be taken to exclude as much of the normal stomach as possible, especially if the patient is receiving radiation therapy preoperatively.
CT-based three-dimensional treatment planning should be performed and all fields treated each day. Dose-volume histograms help guide the radiation oncologist in
choosing the radiation plan that minimizes the loss of normal organ function.
A variety of radiation treatment regimens may be used in the palliative setting. Since the goal is rapid amelioration of symptoms, the most common approach is to treat

anteroposterior and posteroanterior, including the primary tumor with 2-cm margins with ten 3-Gy fractions to a total dose of 30 Gy.
Tumor Markers and Predictors of Response to Combined Modality Therapy
It would be helpful to predict tumors that have a higher likelihood of responding to radiation or combined modality therapy. In 38 patients with squamous cell
carcinoma who received combined modality therapy with or without surgery, Sarbia et al. 446 observed that tumors without p53 expression and those with weak Bcl-XL
expression had a higher response to chemotherapy (56% and 53%, respectively) than tumors positive for p53 or those having high-level Bcl-XL expression (30% and
32%, respectively; P = NS). Following preoperative combined modality therapy, patients with p53-negative tumors had significantly better mean survivals compared
with those whose tumors expressed p53 (31 vs. 11 months; P = .0378). There was no prognostic effect of the expression of apoptosis-regulating genes. Using
multivariate analysis, Pomp et al. 447 found that overexpression of p53 correlated with diminished survival in 69 patients with squamous or adenocarcinomas treated
with radiation alone. In another study, Merchant et al. 448 found a correlation between decreasing phospholipid expression and increasing T stage and grade.
ENDOLUMINAL PALLIATION TECHNIQUES
As previously discussed, surgery remains the standard of care for patients with resectable neoplasms; however, many esophageal cancer patients are inoperable due
to locally advanced or distant metastatic disease. Although chemotherapy and radiation therapy are typically used to palliate unresectable disease, many individuals
require additional measures to relieve dysphagia and pain. Esophageal dilation frequently can alleviate esophageal obstruction secondary to malignancy; however,
results usually are temporary, and patients require repeated treatments. Lundell et al. 449 reported their experience with esophageal dilation in 41 esophageal cancer
patients. Although complications were observed in less than 5% of these individuals, dysphagia recurred in all patients, and most dilations had to be repeated every 4
weeks.
Whereas in a strict sense surgery for locally advanced esophageal cancer can be considered palliative in nature, resection of esophageal carcinomas in the context
of known distant metastases or the treatment of unresectable obstructing neoplasms using surgical bypass procedures presently cannot be advocated in light of data
demonstrating safe and effective palliation by endoluminal stents, laser, or photodynamic therapy (PDT) techniques. 450 Orringer 451 reported results of bypass
procedures in 37 patients with unresectable esophageal carcinomas, noting an operative mortality of 24%, an anastomotic leak rate of 19%, and effective palliation in
only 25% of individuals. The average survival of patients leaving the hospital following esophageal bypass procedure was less than 6 months. In additional studies,
Mannell et al. 452 evaluated 124 patients undergoing esophageal bypass for unresectable disease. Although 82% of patients experienced complete and durable
palliation, hospital mortality was approximately 11%, and survival in these individuals was only 5 months. Holting et al. 453 compared results of 26 patients undergoing
surgical bypass, with 45 patients undergoing endoscopic laser palliation. Although surgical patients tended to experience more sustained palliation, survival rates
were comparable in both patient groups. In a more recent study, Segalin et al. 454 reported an operative mortality of 20% and median survival of 6 months for 49
patients undergoing esophageal resection for advanced metastatic disease. In contrast, 30-day mortality was 10%, and median survival was 4 months for 254 patients
treated with intubation procedures. Laser therapy was performed in 50 patients with no operative mortality and a median survival of 4 months.
Although previous studies employing intubation techniques have reported high morbidity and mortality, current data indicate that expandable stents placed by
endoscopic methods afford cost-effective and durable palliation in esophageal cancer patients. Raijman et al. 455 evaluated 101 patients with malignant dysphagia, 83
of whom experienced dysphagia secondary to esophageal cancer, and 13 of whom had digestive respiratory tract fistulas. The majority of strictures were in the distal
third of the esophagus and most were secondary to exophytic tumors. The mean stricture length was approximately 7 cm. Initial stent placement was successful in 100
patients, and the vast majority experienced significant improvement in their dysphagia. Life-threatening complications were noted in approximately 8%; there were no
procedure-related deaths. All digestive respiratory tract fistulas were successfully controlled by endoscopic stents. Ninety-nine patients died of their disease within a
mean follow-up of 201 days. In an additional series, Cwikiel et al. 456 reported long-term results of 100 patients with malignant dysphagia treated with self-expanding
Nitinol stents. Esophageal strictures were due to squamous cell carcinoma in 43 patients, adenocarcinoma in 18, anastomotic recurrence in 14, or extrinsic
compression from mediastinal tumor in 14 individuals. One hundred six stents were placed in 100 patients. Complications included incomplete expansion due to stent
twisting (four patients), stent migration (four patients), tumor ingrowth (17 patients), food impaction (five patients), fracture of stent wires (two patients), benign
stricture (two patients), and tumor bleeding (four patients). Forty-seven patients experienced transient chest pain following deployment of the stent. Esophageal
respiratory fistulas were observed in five patients, three of whom were successfully treated with additional stent placement. Ninety-seven patients experienced
significant reduction in dysphagia; at the time of their deaths, 42 patients had no dysphagia, 39 had grade 1 dysphagia, 16 had grade 2 dysphagia, and 3 experienced
grade 3 dysphagia.
Cantero et al. 457 compared results of 25 patients undergoing esophageal bypass with 30 patients treated with autoexpandable esophageal stents. Dysphagia was not
relieved in 24% of surgical patients, and hospitalization for these patients ranged from 18 to 50 days; the hospital mortality was 24%. Survival in these patients was
only 5.4 months. Twenty-eight of 30 individuals treated with esophageal stents experienced significant relief of dysphagia; hospitalization ranged from 5 to 12 days. A
6.6% mortality was observed for these individuals, and no deaths were related to technical difficulties. Mean survival for these patients was 6 months.
Although less commonly used, PDT has been advocated as an additional means to palliate obstructing esophageal carcinomas. 458 Lightdale et al. 459 reported results
of a randomized multicenter trial evaluating PDT versus neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser treatment for palliation of dysphagia secondary to
esophageal carcinomas. Two hundred thirty-six patients were evaluated, of whom 218 patients underwent treatment; 110 individuals received PDT, and 108 patients
were treated with YAG laser. Significant improvement in dysphagia was noted in all patients without obvious differences between groups. Objective tumor responses
were comparable but slightly improved with PDT. Esophageal perforations occurred in 1% of individuals following PDT treatment versus 7% of individuals treated with
laser techniques. These results suggest that PDT and Nd:YAG laser are equally efficacious with regard to palliation of dysphagia, and that PDT may be associated
with a relatively lower risk of acute perforations.
Maier et al. 460 reviewed their experience with 119 cases of unresectable esophageal cancers treated with endoluminal palliation techniques. Twenty-one patients
required dilation and Nd:YAG laser obliteration before therapy; 44 patients received PDT followed by brachytherapy; 25 of these individuals also received
external-beam radiation therapy. Seventy-five patients refused PDT and were treated with high-dose brachytherapy, 17 of whom also received external-beam
radiation therapy. PDT was more successful than brachytherapy in relieving stenosis; significant relief of dysphagia was observed. The mean number of PDT
treatments was four (range, one to seven); because of concerns regarding stricture formation and perforations, PDT was not repeated within 3 months. Major
complications were noted in 9.2% of patients. Four esophageal perforations occurred that were treated by esophageal exclusion and mediastinal drainage techniques.
Four esophageal respiratory fistulas were observed, all of which were treated with endoluminal stents. Mean overall survival was 7.7 months; a statistically significant
difference in survival was observed for patients receiving PDT and external-beam therapy compared with those receiving brachytherapy alone.
Thus, current data indicate that esophageal stents, laser, or PDT can efficiently palliate obstructing esophageal cancers with far less morbidity and mortality than
surgical bypass techniques. Relative contraindications to esophageal stenting include complete obstruction not allowing guidewire placement, noncircumferential
tumor not enabling stabilization of the stent, esophageal dilation above the stenosis, or high cervical esophageal lesions. Although laser and PDT require more
expertise, these modalities may either be used initially to palliate obstructing esophageal lesions or as an adjunct to treat tumor ingrowth, which occurs in 20% to 30%
of stent patients. Endoluminal stenting, YAG laser, and PDT should be viewed as complementary modalities for palliation of unresectable, obstructing esophageal
carcinomas.
TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Although individuals occasionally are diagnosed early due to participation in screening protocols, the vast majority of patients with esophageal cancer present with
either locally advanced (stages IIB or III) or inoperable metastatic disease. Esophagectomy remains the standard of care for patients who can tolerate resection.
Available data from well-designed prospective randomized trials do not support the routine use of induction chemotherapy in resectable patients. Furthermore, there
are no convincing data that justify the routine use of chemotherapy following esophagectomy. Radiation therapy has no proven benefit as the sole modality in the
induction setting, and current data indicate a potential benefit of this treatment modality in patients with positive resection margins, but not in completely resected
individuals irrespective of nodal status. Limited data suggest that combined chemoradiation therapy may be beneficial in the induction setting in resectable patients,
particularly in individuals achieving pathologic complete responses; surgery remains an important component of these aggressive protocols since no other modality
enables accurate assessment of response to induction therapy, and no other intervention can enhance local control in this setting. However, further analysis of
well-designed, prospective randomized trials is required before multimodality treatment can be considered the standard of care for individuals with resectable cancers.
Data from Altorki et al., 39 Lerut and colleagues, 269 and Akiyama and coworkers261 indicate that en bloc esophagectomy, particularly with three-field lymphadenectomy,
enhances the accuracy of staging and appears to improve local control and overall survival in esophageal cancer patients. If confirmed by other expert esophageal
cancer surgeons, these results should be considered the standard against which all other treatments are compared. Patients with unresectable cancers should be

palliated with chemoradiation therapy in cooperative trials, such that toxicity and survival data can be evaluated in a rigorous manner. Considerable progress must be
made in terms of enhancing the accuracy of staging to improve stratification of patients to appropriate prospective trials and minimize stage migration, which may
obscure potential benefits of therapeutic interventions.
Although their prognostic significance remains unclear, mutations involving growth factor receptors, cyclin D1, Rb, p16, p53, and telomerase appear to be appropriate
targets for intervention in esophageal cancers and their precursor lesions. Several novel compounds have been identified that specifically inhibit the tyrosine kinase
activity of EGFr, or erbB2, and enhance the efficacy of conventional cytotoxic agents. Nguyen et al. (manuscript in preparation) observed that 17-allylamino
geldanamycin mediated dose-dependent depletion of p185 protein expression and inhibited proliferation of cultured esophageal carcinoma cells overexpressing
erbB-2. Interestingly, reduced doses of 17-allylamino geldanamycin that exhibited minimal inhibitory activity synergistically potentiated the effects of paclitaxel in
esophageal cancer cells; enhanced paclitaxel sensitivity following 17-allylamino geldanamycin treatment coincided with cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in these cells.
Chemotherapeutic regimens that exploit these observations are currently under evaluation at the National Cancer Institute.
The Rb tumor suppressor pathway is disrupted by a variety of mechanisms in virtually all esophageal cancers, and gene transfer experiments have confirmed that
restoration of this pathway significantly inhibits the malignant phenotype of esophageal cancer cells. 140,155 Flavopiridol is a synthetic flavone that inhibits several
cyclin-dependent kinases (including cdk4 and cdk6), diminishes cyclin D1 and Bcl-2 expression, and induces cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in a variety of cancer
cells. 461,462 Data indicate that flavopiridol mediates profound cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in esophageal cancer cells irrespective of histology or genotype; inhibition
of cyclin D1, Rb, and p107 expression precedes the onset of apoptosis in these cells. 463 Additional studies have demonstrated that pretreatment of esophageal cancer
cells with flavopiridol markedly enhances their sensitivity to paclitaxel, in part, by synchronizing them in G 2/M.464 In addition to being a novel agent for the treatment of
esophageal cancers, flavopiridol may be a potential chemoprevention agent since it effectively targets three mutational events (i.e., cyclin D1 overexpression, as well
as Rb and p16 inactivation) that are known to occur early during multistep esophageal carcinogenesis.
Approximately 50% of esophageal cancers exhibit loss of p16 expression due to promoter hypermethylation. 179,181 Studies by Weiser et al. 465 have shown that the
demethylating agent, 5 aza-2' deoxycytidine (DAC) at low doses induces p16 expression in cancer cells. Furthermore, these investigators have observed that the
novel histone deacetylase inhibitor, depsipeptide FR901228, enhances DAC-mediated growth arrest and apoptosis in esophageal cancer cells irrespective of
histology or tumor suppressor gene status. Additional studies have demonstrated that sequential DAC and depsipeptide treatment enhances NY-ESO-1 expression in
esophageal cancer cells and enables their recognition by HLA-restricted cytolytic T cells specific for this cancer testis antigen. 466 Clinical trials designed to evaluate
the ability of DAC and depsipeptide to mediate target gene induction and apoptosis in esophageal carcinomas and augment antitumor immunity in patients with these
malignancies are underway in the Surgery Branch, National Cancer Institute. Evaluation of these agents, as well as other novel compounds targeting p53 mutations
and telomerase expression in cancer cells, 246,467 may ultimately enable evolution of more precise and efficacious treatment regimens for highly lethal esophageal
neoplasms.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Blot WJ. Epidemiology and genesis of esophageal cancer. In: Roth JA, Ruckdeschel JC, Weisenburger TH, eds. Thoracic oncology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1995:278.
2. Blot WJ, McLaughlin JK. The changing epidemiology of esophageal cancer. Semin Oncol 1999;26:2.
3. Blot WJ. Esophageal cancer trends and risk factors. Semin Oncol 1994;21:403.
4. Devesa SS, Blot WJ, Fraumeni JFJ. Changing patterns in the incidence of esophageal and gastric carcinoma in the United States. Cancer 1998;83:2049.
5. Navaratnam RM, Winslet MC. Barrett's oesophagus. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:653.
6. Bytzer P, Christensen PB, Damkier P, Vinding K, Seersholm N. Adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and Barrett's esophagus: a population- based study. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:86.
7. Blot WJ, Devesa SS, Kneller RW, Fraumeni JF Jr. Rising incidence of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and gastric cardia. JAMA 1991;265:1287.
8. Weston AP, Badr AS, Hassanein RS. Prospective multivariate analysis of clinical, endoscopic, and histological factors predictive of the development of Barrett's multifocal high-grade dysplasia
or adenocarcinoma [see comments]. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:3413.
9. Lagergren J, Bergstrom R, Lindgren A, Nyren O. Symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux as a risk factor for esophageal adenocarcinoma [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1999;340:825.
10. DeMeester SR, DeMeester TR. The diagnosis and management of Barrett's esophagus. Adv Surg 1999;33:29.
11. Cameron AJ. Barrett's esophagus: prevalence and size of hiatal hernia. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:2054.
12. Kelsen D, Laufer I, Leichman L, et al. Alarming trends in esophageal cancer. Patient Care 1992;15:72.
13. Castellsague X, Munoz N, De Stefani E, et al. Independent and joint effects of tobacco smoking and alcohol drinking on the risk of esophageal cancer in men and women. Int J Cancer
1999;82:657.
14. Blot WJ. Alcohol and cancer. Cancer Res 1992;52:2119s.
15. Hammond EC. Smoking in relation to the death rates of one million men and women. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1966;19:127.
16. Doll R, Peto R. Mortality in relation to smoking: 20 years' observations on male British doctors. BMJ 1976;2:1525.
17. Rogot E, Murray JL. Smoking and causes of death among US veterans: 16 years of observation. Public Health Rep 1980;15:213.
18. Gammon MD, Schoenberg JB, Ahsan H, et al. Tobacco, alcohol, and socioeconomic status and adenocarcinomas for the esophagus and gastric cardia. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1277.
19. Denissenko MF, Pao A, Tang M, Pfeifer GP. Preferential formation of benzo[a]pyrene adducts at lung cancer mutational hotspots in p53. Science 1996;274:430.
20. Reid BJ, Barrett MT, Galipeau PC, et al. B arrett's esophagus: ordering the events that lead to cancer. Eur J Cancer Prev 1996;5(Suppl 2):57.
21. Galipeau PC, Cowan DS, Sanchez CA, et al. 17 p (p53 allelic losses, 4N (G2/tetraploid) populations, and progression to aneuploidy in Barrett's esophagus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1996;93:7081.
22. Horio Y, Chen A, Rice P, et al. Ki-ras and p53 mutations are early and late events, respectively, in urethane-induced pulmonary carcinogenesis in A/J mice. Mol Carcinogen 1996;17:217.
23. Rusch V, Klimstra D, Linkov I, Dmitrovsky E. Aberrant expression of p53 or the epidermal growth factor receptor is frequent in early bronchial neoplasia, and coexpression precedes squamous
cell carcinoma development. Cancer Res 1995;55:1365.
24. Anonymous International Agency for Research on Cancer. Tobacco smoking, in evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans. International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1986:38.
25. Anonymous International Agency for Research on Cancer. Alcohol drinking, in evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans. International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1988:44.
26. Zhang ZF, Kurtz RC, Sun M, et al. Adenocarcinomas of the esophagus and gastric cardia: medical conditions, tobacco, alcohol, and socioeconomic factors. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1996;5:761.
27. Kabat GC, Ng SK, Wynder EL. Tobacco, alcohol intake, and diet in relation to adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and gastric cardia. Cancer Causes Control 1993;4:123.
28. Vaughan TL, Davis S, Kristal A, Thomas DB. Obesity, alcohol, and tobacco as risk factors for cancers of the esophagus and gastric cardia: adenocarcinoma versus squamous cell carcinoma.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1995;4:85.
29. Brown LM, Swanson CA, Gridley G, et al. Adenocarcinoma of the esophagus: role of obesity and diet [see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:104.
30. Mettlin C, Graham S, Priore S. Diet and cancer of the esophagus. Nutr Cancer 1981;2:143.
31. VanRensburg SJ. Epidemiologic and dietary evidence for a specific nutritional predisposition to esophageal cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1981;67:243.
32. DeJong UW, Breslow N, Hong JG. Etiological factors in esophageal cancer in Singapore Chinese. Int J Cancer 1974;13:291.
33. Victora C, Munoz N, Day NE. Hot beverages and oesophageal cancer in southern Brazil: a case-control study. Int J Cancer 1987;39:710.
34. Selikoff IJ, Hammond EC, Seidman H. Mortality experience of insulation workers in the United States and Canada, 19431976. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1979;330:91.
35. Weiss NS. Cancer in relation to occupational exposure to perchloroethylene. Cancer Causes Control 1995;6:257.
36. Gustavisson P, Hogstedt C, Evanoff B. Increased risk of esophageal cancer among workers exposed to combustion products. Arch Environ Health 1993;48:243.
37. DeNardi FG, Riddel RH. Esophagus. In: Sternberg SS, ed. Histology for pathologists. New York: Raven Press, 1992:515.
38. Guernsey JM, Knudsen DF. Abdominal exploration in the evaluation of patients with carcinoma of the thoracic esophagus. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1970;59:62.
39. Altorki NK, Skinner DB. Occult cervical nodal metastasis in esophageal cancer: preliminary results of three-field lymphadenectomy [see comments]. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1997;113:540.
40. Sons H, Borchard F. Esophageal cancer: autopsy findings in 171 cases. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1984;108:983.
41. Anderson LL, Lad TE. Autopsy findings in squamous-cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Cancer 1982;50:1587.
42. Mandard AM, Tourneux J, Gignoux M, et al. In situ carcinoma of the esophagus. Macroscopic study with particular reference to the Lugol test. Endoscopy 1980;12:51.
43. Mandard AM, Marnay J, Gignoux M, et al. Cancer of the esophagus and associated lesions: detailed pathologic study of 100 esophagectomy specimens. Hum Pathol 1984;15:660.
44. Begin LR. The pathobiology of esophageal cancer. In: Roth JA, Ruckdeschel JC, Weisenburger TH, eds. Thoracic oncology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1995:288.
45. Steiger Z, Wilson RF, Leichman L, Busuito MJ, Rosenberg JC. Primary adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. J Surg Oncol 1987;36:68.
46. Haggitt RC, Tryzelaar J, Ellis FH, Colcher H. A denocarcinoma complicating columnar epithelium-lined (Barrett's) esophagus. Am J Clin Pathol 1978;70:1.
47. Hamilton SR, Smith RR, Cameron JL. Prevalence and characteristics of Barrett esophagus in patients with adenocarcinoma of the esophagus or esophagogastric junction. Hum Pathol
1988;19:942.
48. Lerut T, Devlyn P, Coosemans W. Surgical strategies in esophageal carcinoma with emphasis on radical lymphadenectomy. Ann Surg 1992;216:583.
49. Caldwell CB, Bains MS, Burt M. Unusual malignant neoplasms of the esophagus. Oat cell carcinoma, melanoma, and sarcoma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1991;101:100.
50. Osamura RY, Shimamura K, Hata J, et al. Polypoid carcinoma of the esophagus. A unifying term for “carcinosarcoma” and “pseudosarcoma.” Am J Surg Pathol 1978;2:201.
51. Matsusaka T, Watanabe H, Enjoji M. Pseudosarcoma and carcinosarcoma of the esophagus. Cancer 1976;37:1546.
52. Sweeney EC, Cooney T. Adenoid cystic carcinoma of the esophagus: a light and electron microscopic study. Cancer 1980;45:1516.
53. Burt M. Unusual malignancies. In: Pearson FG, Deslauriers J, Ginsberg RJ, et al., eds. Esophageal surgery. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1995:629.
54. Reyes CV, Chejfec G, Jao W. Neuroendocrine carcinomas of the esophagus. Ultrastruct Pathol 1980;1:367.
55. Tateishi R, Taniguchi H, Wada A. Argyrophil cells and melanocytes in esophageal mucosa. Arch Pathol 1974;98:87.
56. Nagashima R, Mabe K, Takahashi T. Esophageal small cell carcinoma with ectopic production of parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrp), secretin, and granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor (G-CSF). Dig Dis Sci 1999;44:1312.
57. Suzuki H, Takayanagi S, Otake T, et al. Primary small cell carcinoma of the esophagus with achalasia in a patient in whom pro-gastrin-releasing peptide and neuron-specific enolase levels
reflected the clinical course during chemotherapy. J Gastroenterol 1999;34:378.
58. Medgyesy CD, Wolff RA, Putnam JBJ, Ajani JA. Small cell carcinoma of the esophagus: the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center experience and literature review. Cancer
2000;88:262.
59. Maier A, Woltsche M, Fell B, et al. Local and systemic treatment in small cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Oncol Rep 2000;7:187.
60. Kimura H, Konishi K, Maeda K, et al. Highly aggressive behavior and poor prognosis of small-cell carcinoma in the alimentary tract: flow-cytometric analysis and immunohistochemical staining

for the p53 protein and proliferating cell nuclear antigen. Dig Surg 1999;16:152.
61. Adad SJ, Etchebehere RM, Hayashi EM, et al. Leiomyosarcoma of the esophagus in a patient with chagasic megaesophagus: case report and literature review. Am J Trop Med Hyg
1999;60:879.
62. Levine MS, Buck JL, Pantongrag-Brown L, et al. Leiomyosarcoma of the esophagus: radiographic findings in 10 patients. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1996;167:27.
63. Rocco G, Trastek VF, Deschamps C, et al. Leiomyosarcoma of the esophagus: results of surgical treatment. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;66:894.
64. Herrmann R, Panahon AM, Barcos MP, Walsh D, Stutzman L. Gastrointestinal involvement in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer 1980;46:215.
65. Agha FP, Schnitzer B. Esophageal involvement in lymphoma. Am J Gastroenterol 1985;80:412.
66. Haller JO, Cohen HL. Gastrointestinal manifestations of AIDS in children. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1994;162:387.
67. Lim SG, Lipman MC, Squire S, et al. Audit of endoscopic surveillance biopsy specimens in HIV positive patients with gastrointestinal symptoms. Gut 1993;34:1429.
68. Chalkiadakis G, Wihlm JM, Morand G, Weill-Bousson M, Witz JP. Primary malignant melanoma of the esophagus. Ann Thorac Surg 1985;39:472.
69. Ashworth MT, Nash JR, Ellis A, Day DW. Abnormalities of differentiation and maturation in the oesophageal squamous epithelium of patients with tylosis: morphological features.
Histopathology 1991;19:303.
70. Risk JM, Mills HS, Garde J, et al. The tylosis esophageal cancer (TOC) locus: more than just a familial cancer gene. Dis Esophagus 1999;12:173.
71. Risk JM, Field EA, Field JK, et al. Tylosis oesophageal cancer mapped [letter]. Nat Genet 1994;8:319.
72. von Brevern M, Hollstein MC, Risk JM, et al. Loss of heterozygosity in sporadic oesophageal tumors in the tylosis oesophageal cancer (TOC) gene region of chromosome 17q. Oncogene
1998;17:2101.
73. Iwaya T, Maesawa C, Ogasawara S, Tamura G. Tylosis esophageal cancer locus on chromosome 17q25.1 is commonly deleted in sporadic human esophageal cancer. Gastroenterology
1998;114:1206.
74. Ruhrberg C, Williamson JA, Sheer D, Watt FM. Chromosomal localisation of the human envoplakin gene (EVPL) to the region of the tylosis oesophageal cancer gene (TOCG) on 17q25.
Genomics 1996;37:381.
75. Risk JM, Ruhrberg C, Hennies H, et al. Envoplakin, a possible candidate gene for focal NEPPK/esophageal cancer (TOC): the integration of genetic and physical maps of the TOC region on
17q25. Genomics 1999;59:234.
76. Shamma MH, Benedict EB. Esophageal webs. N Engl J Med 1958;259:378.
77. Ribeiro UJ, Posner MC, Safatle-Ribeiro AV, Reynolds JC. Risk factors for squamous cell carcinoma of the oesophagus [see comments]. Br J Surg 1996;83:1174.
78. Csikos M, Horvath O, Petri A. Late malignant transformation of chronic corrosive oesophageal strictures. Langenbecks Arch Chir 1985;365:231.
79. Sandler RS, Nyren O, Ekbom A, et al. The risk of esophageal cancer in patients with achalasia. A population- based study. JAMA 1995;274:1359.
80. Meijssen MA, Tilanus HW, van Blankenstein M, Hop WC, Ong GL. Achalasia complicated by oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma: a prospective study in 195 patients. Gut 1992;33:155.
81. Aggestrup S, Holm JC, Sorensen HR. Does achalasia predispose to cancer of the esophagus? Chest 1992;102:1013.
82. Loviscek LF, Cenoz MC, Badaloni AE, Agarinakazato O. Early cancer in achalasia. Dis Esophagus 1998;11:239.
83. Chow WH, Blaser MJ, Blot WJ, et al. An inverse relation between cagA+ strains of Helicobacter pylori infection and risk of esophageal and gastric cardia adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res
1998;58:588.
84. Vieth M, Stolte M. Re: Richter, et al. Possibly protective properties of Helicobacter pylori in connection with GERD [letter; comment]. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:3068.
85. Sharma VK, Demian SE, Taillon D, Vasudeva R, Howden CW. Examination of tissue distribution of Helicobacter pylori within columnar-lined esophagus. Dig Dis Sci 1999;44:1165.
86. El-Serag HB, Sonnenberg A. Ethnic variations in the occurrence of gastroesophageal cancers [see comments]. J Clin Gastroenterol 1999;28:135.
87. Sur M, Cooper K. The role of the human papilloma virus in esophageal cancer. Pathology 1998;30:348.
88. Stoler MH. Human papillomaviruses and cervical neoplasia: a model for carcinogenesis. Int J Gynecol Pathol 2000;19:16.
89. Mineta H, Ogino T, Amano HM, et al. Human papilloma virus (HPV) type 16 and 18 detected in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Anticancer Res 1998;18:4765.
90. de Villiers EM, Lavergne D, Chang F, et al. An interlaboratory study to determine the presence of human papillomavirus DNA in esophageal carcinoma from China. Int J Cancer 1999;81:225.
91. Lavergne D, de Villiers EM. Papillomavirus in esophageal papillomas and carcinomas. Int J Cancer 1999;80:681.
92. Shibagaki I, Tanaka H, Shimada Y, et al. p53 mutation, murine double minute 2 amplification, and human papillomavirus infection are frequently involved but not associated with each other in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:769.
93. Poljak M, Cerar A, Seme K. Human papillomavirus infection in esophageal carcinomas: a study of 121 lesions using multiple broad-spectrum polymerase chain reactions and literature review
[see comments]. Hum Pathol 1998;29:266.
94. Rugge M, Bovo D, Busatto G, et al. p53 alterations but no human papillomavirus infection in preinvasive and advanced squamous esophageal cancer in Italy. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers
Prev 1997;6:171.
95. Turner JR, Shen LH, Crum CP, Dean PJ, Odze RD. Low prevalence of human papillomavirus infection in esophageal squamous cell carcinomas from North America: analysis by a highly
sensitive and specific polymerase chain reaction-based approach. Hum Pathol 1997;28:174.
96. Lagergren J, Wang Z, Bergstrom R, Dillner J, Nyren O. Human papillomavirus infection and esophageal cancer: a nationwide seroepidemiologic case-control study in Sweden. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1999;91:156.
97. Leon X, Quer M, Diez S, et al. Second neoplasm in patients with head and neck cancer. Head Neck 1999;21:204.
98. Levi F, Randimbison L, Te VC, La Vecchia C. Second primary cancers in patients with lung carcinoma. Cancer 1999;86:186.
99. Narayana A, Vaughan AT, Fisher SG, Reddy SP. Second primary tumors in laryngeal cancer: results of long-term follow-up. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:557.
100. Spechler SJ. Barrett's esophagus. Semin Gastrointest Dis 1996;7:51.
101. Goldblum JR, Rice TW. The columnar-lined esophagus. In: Pearson FG, Deslauriers J, Ginsberg RJ, et al., eds. Esophageal surgery. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1995:273.
102. Wolf C, Timmer R, Breumelhof R, Seldenrijk CA, Smout AJ. Columnar lined oesophagus and intestinal metaplasia: current concepts. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1999;11:793.
103. Nandurkar S, Talley NJ. Barrett's esophagus: the long and the short of it [published erratum appears in Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:1719]. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:30.
104. Van Asche C, Rahm AEJ, Goldner F, Crumbaker D. Columnar mucosa in the proximal esophagus. Gastrointest Endosc 1988;34:324.
105. Altorki NK, Oliveria S, Schrump DS. Epidemiology and molecular biology of Barrett's adenocarcinoma. Semin Oncol 1997;13:270.
106. Voutilainen M, Sipponen P, Mecklin J, Juhola M, Farkkila M. Gastroesophageal reflux disease: prevalence, clinical, endoscopic and histopathological findings in 1,128 consecutive patients
referred for endoscopy due to dyspeptic and reflux symptoms. Digestion 2000;61:6.
107. Spechler SJ, Sperber H, Doos WG, Schimmel EM. The prevalence of Barrett's esophagus in patients with chronic peptic esophageal strictures. Dig Dis Sci 1983;28:769.
108. Lundell L. Acid suppression in the long-term treatment of peptic stricture and Barrett's oesophagus. Digestion 1992;51(Suppl 1):49.
109. Hirota WK, Loughney TM, Lazas DJ, et al. Specialized intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia, and cancer of the esophagus and esophagogastric junction: prevalence and clinical data.
Gastroenterology 1999;116:277.
110. Cameron AJ, Zinsmeister AR, Ballard DJ, Carney JA. Prevalence of columnar-lined (Barrett's) esophagus. Comparison of population-based clinical and autopsy findings. Gastroenterology
1990;99:918.
111. Meyer WH, Vollmar F, Bar W. Barrett's esophagus following total gastrectomy. Endoscopy 1979;202:121.
112. Gallez JF, Berger F, Moulinier B, Partensky C. Esophageal adenocarcinoma following Heller myotomy for achalasia. Endoscopy 1987;19:76.
113. Paull A, Trier JS, Dalton MD, et al. The histologic spectrum of Barrett's esophagus. N Engl J Med 1976;295:476.
114. de Mas CR, Kramer M, Seifert E, et al. Short Barrett: prevalence and risk factors. Scand J Gastroenterol 1999;34:1065.
115. Sharma P, Weston AP, Morales T, et al. Relative risk of dysplasia for patients with intestinal metaplasia in the distal oesophagus and in the gastric cardia. Gut 2000;46:9.
116. Falk GW, Rice TW, Goldblum JR, Richter JE. Jumbo biopsy forceps protocol still misses unsuspected cancer in Barrett's esophagus with high-grade dysplasia. Gastrointest Endosc
1999;49:170.
117. Cameron AJ, Ott BJ, Payne WS. The incidence of adenocarcinoma in columnar-lined (Barrett's) esophagus. N Engl J Med 1985;313:857.
118. Spechler SJ, Robbins AH, Rubins HB, et al. Adenocarcinoma and Barrett's esophagus. An overrated risk? Gastroenterology 1984;87:927.
119. Robertson CS, Mayberry JF, Nicholson DA, James PD, Atkinson M. Value of endoscopic surveillance in the detection of neoplastic change in Barrett's oesophagus. Br J Surg 1988;75:760.
120. Katz D, Rothstein R, Schned A, et al. The development of dysplasia and adenocarcinoma during endoscopic surveillance of Barrett's esophagus. Am J Gastroenterol 1998;93:536.
121. O'Connor JB, Falk GW, Richter JE. The incidence of adenocarcinoma and dysplasia in Barrett's esophagus: report on the Cleveland Clinic Barrett's Esophagus Registry. Am J Gastroenterol
1999;94:2037.
122. Reid BJ. Barrett's esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1991;20:817.
123. Fennerty MB, Sampliner RE, Way D, et al. Discordance between flow cytometric abnormalities and dysplasia in Barrett's esophagus. Gastroenterology 1989;97:815.
124. Reid BJ, Sanchez CA, Blount PL, Levine DS. Barrett's esophagus: cell cycle abnormalities in advancing stages of neoplastic progression. Gastroenterology 1993;105:119.
125. Blount PL, Galipeau PC, Sanchez CA, et al. 17p allelic losses in diploid cells of patients with Barretts esophagus who develop aneuploidy. Cancer Res 1994;54:2292.
126. Reid BJ, Haggitt RC, Rubin CE, Rabinovitch PS. Barrett's esophagus. Correlation between flow cytometry and histology in detection of patients at risk for adenocarcinoma. Gastroenterology
1987;93:1.
127. Prevo LJ, Sanchez CA, Galipeau PC, Reid BJ. p53-mutant clones and field effects in Barrett's esophagus. Cancer Res 1999;59:4784.
128. Reid BJ, Blount PL, Rubin CE, et al. Flow-cytometric and histological progression to malignancy in Barrett's esophagus: prospective endoscopic surveillance of a cohort. Gastroenterology
1992;102:1212.
129. Polkowski W, van Sandick JW, Offerhaus GJ, et al. Prognostic value of Lauren classification and c-erbB-2 oncogene overexpression in adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and
gastroesophageal junction. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:290.
130. Provenzale D, Schmitt C, Wong JB. Barrett's esophagus: a new look at surveillance based on emerging estimates of cancer risk. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:2043.
131. Nandurkar S, Talley NJ. Surveillance in Barrett's oesophagus: a need for reassessment? J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1998;13:990.
132. Gross CP, Canto MI, Hixson J, Powe NR. Management of Barrett's esophagus: a national study of practice patterns and their cost implications. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:3440.
133. Atkinson M, Iftikhar SY, James PD, Robertson CS, Steele RJ. The early diagnosis of oesophageal adenocarcinoma by endoscopic screening. Eur J Cancer Prev 1992;1:327.
134. Streitz JMJ, Ellis FHJ, Tilden RL, Erickson RV. Endoscopic surveillance of Barrett's esophagus: a cost-effectiveness comparison with mammographic surveillance for breast cancer. Am J
Gastroenterol 1998;93:911.
135. Barrett MT, Sanchez CA, Galipeau PC, et al. Allelic loss of 9p21 and mutation of the CDKN2/p16 gene develop as early lesions during neoplastic progression in Barrrett's esophagus. Oncogene
1996;13:1867.
136. Barrett MT, Galipeau PC, Sanchez CA, Edmond MJ, Reid BJ. Determination of the frequency of loss of heterozygosity in esophageal adenocarcinoma by cell sorting, whole genome
amplification and microsatellite polymorphisms. Oncogene 1996;12:1873.
137. Barrett MT, Sanchez CA, Prevo LJ, et al. Evolution of neoplastic cell lineages in Barrett oesophagus. Nat Genet 1999;22:106.
138. Blount PL, Rabinvitch PS, Haggitt RC, Reid BJ. Early Barrett's adenocarcinoma arises within a single aneuploid population. Gastrointestinal Oncol 1990;A273(abst).
139. Jiang W, Zhang Y-J, Kahn SM, et al. Altered expression of the cyclin D1 and retinoblastoma genes in human esophageal cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:9026.
140. Schrump DS, Chen A, Consuli U, Jin X, Roth JA. Inhibition of esophageal cancer proliferation by adenoviral- mediated delivery of p16 INK4. Cancer Gene Ther 1996;3:357.
141. Al-Kasspooles M, Moore JH, Orringer MB, Beer DG. Amplification and over-expression of the EGFR and erbB-2 genes in human esophageal adenocarcinomas. Int J Cancer 1993;54:213.
142. Itakura Y, Sasano H, Shiga C, et al. Epidermal growth factor receptor overexpression in esophageal carcinoma. An immunohistochemical study correlated with clinicopathologic findings and
DNA amplification. Cancer 1994;74:795.
143. Iihara K, Shiozaki H, Tahara H, et al. Prognostic significance of transforming growth factor-alpha in human esophageal carcinoma. Implication for the autocrine proliferation. Cancer
1993;71:2902.
144. Kitagawa Y, Ueda M, Ando N, et al. Further evidence for prognostic significance of epidermal growth factor receptor gene amplification in patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.
Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:909.

145. Shimada Y, Imamura M, Watanabe G, et al. Prognostic factors of oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma from the perspective of molecular biology. Br J Cancer 1999;80:1281.
146. Hung MC, Lau YK. Basic science of HER-2/neu: a review. Semin Oncol 1999;26:51.
147. Wiechen K, Karaaslan S, Dietel M. Involvement of the c-erbB-2 oncogene product in the EGF-induced cell motility of SK-OV-3 ovarian cancer cells. Int J Cancer 1999;83:409.
148. Roetger A, Merschjann A, Dittmar T, et al. Selection of potentially metastatic subpopulations expressing c-erbB-2 from breast cancer tissue by use of an extravasation model. Am J Pathol
1998;153:1797.
149. Petit AM, Rak J, Hung MC, et al. Neutralizing antibodies against epidermal growth factor and ErbB-2/neu receptor tyrosine kinases down-regulate vascular endothelial growth factor production
by tumor cells in vitro and in vivo: angiogenic implications for signal transduction therapy of solid tumors. Am J Pathol 1997;151:1523.
150. Shi D, He G, Cao S, et al. Overexpression of the c-erbB-2/neu-encoded p185 protein in primary lung cancer. Carcinogenesis 1992;5:213.
151. Tsai CM, Levitzki A, Wu LH, et al. Enhancement of chemosensitivity by tyrphostin AG825 in high-p185(neu) expressing non-small cell lung cancer cells. Cancer Res 1996;56:1068.
152. Wang LS, Chow KC, Chi KH, et al. Prognosis of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma: analysis of clinicopathological and biological factors. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:1933.
153. Brien TP, Odze RD, Sheehan CE, McKenna BJ, Ross JS. HER-2/neu gene amplification by FISH predicts poor survival in Barrett's esophagus-associated adenocarcinoma. Hum Pathol
2000;31:35.
154. Schrump DS, Chen A, Consoli U. Inhibition of lung cancer proliferation by antisense cyclin D. Cancer Gene Ther 1996;3:131.
155. Zhou P, Jiang W, Zhang YJ, et al. Antisense to cyclin D1 inhibits growth and reverses the transformed phenotype of human esophageal cancer cells. Oncogene 1995;11:571.
156. Adelaide J, Monges G, Derderian C, Seitz JF, Birnbaum D. Oesophageal cancer and amplification of the human cyclin D gene CCND1/PRAD1. Br J Cancer 1995;71:64.
157. Jiang W, Kahn SM, Tomita N, et al. Amplification and expression of the human cyclin D gene in esophageal cancer. Cancer Res 1992;52:2980.
158. Yoshida T, Sakamoto H, Terada M. Amplified genes in cancer in upper digestive tract. Semin Cancer Biol 1993;4:33.
159. Arber N, Lightdale C, Rotterdam H, et al. Increased expression of the cyclin D1 gene in Barrett's esophagus. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1996;5:457.
160. Roncalli M, Bosari S, Marchetti A, et al. Cell cycle-related gene abnormalities and product expression in esophageal carcinoma. Lab Invest 1998;78:1049.
161. Takeuchi H, Ozawa S, Ando N, et al. Altered p16/MTS1/CDKN2 and cyclin D1/PRAD-1 gene expression is associated with the prognosis of squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Clin
Cancer Res 1997;3:2229.
162. van Dekken H, Geelen E, Dinjens WN, et al. Comparative genomic hybridization of cancer of the gastroesophageal junction: deletion of 14Q31-32.1 discriminates between esophageal
(Barrett's) and gastric cardia adenocarcinomas. Cancer Res 1999;59:748.
163. Pack SD, Karkera JD, Zhuang Z, et al. Molecular cytogenetic fingerprinting of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma by comparative genomic hybridization reveals a consistent pattern of
chromosomal alterations. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1999;25:160.
164. Dolan K, Garde J, Gosney J, et al. Allelotype analysis of oesophageal adenocarcinoma: loss of heterozygosity occurs at multiple sites. Br J Cancer 1998;78:950.
165. Brenner C, Bieganowski P, Pace HC, Huebner K. The histidine triad superfamily of nucleotide-binding proteins. J Cell Physiol 1999;181:179.
166. Sard L, Accornero P, Tornielli S, et al. The tumor-suppressor gene FHIT is involved in the regulation of apoptosis and in cell cycle control. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999; 96:8489.
167. Ohta M, Inoue H, Cotticelli MG, et al. The FHIT gene, spanning the chromosome 3p14.2 fragile site and renal carcinoma-associated t(3;8) breakpoint, is abnormal in digestive tract cancers. Cell
1996;84:587.
168. Tanaka H, Shimada Y, Harada H, et al. Methylation of the 5' CpG island of the FHIT gene is closely associated with transcriptional inactivation in esophageal squamous cell carcinomas. Cancer
Res 1998;58:3429.
169. Chen YJ, Chen PH, Lee MD, Chang JG. Aberrant FHIT transcripts in cancerous and corresponding non-cancerous lesions of the digestive tract. Int J Cancer 1997;72:955.
170. Michael D, Beer DG, Wilke CW, Miller DE, Glover TW. Frequent deletions of FHIT and FRA3B in Barrett's metaplasia and esophageal adenocarcinomas. Oncogene 1997;15:1653.
171. Nelson HH, Wiencke JK, Gunn L, et al. Chromosome 3p14 alterations in lung cancer: evidence that FHIT exon deletion is a target of tobacco carcinogens and asbestos. Cancer Res
1998;58:1804.
172. Tomizawa Y, Nakajima T, Kohno T, et al. Clinicopathological significance of Fhit protein expression in stage I non-small cell lung carcinoma. Cancer Res 1998;58:5478.
173. Ewen ME. The cell cycle and the retinoblastoma protein family. Cancer MetastasisRev 1994;13:45.
174. Chen PL, Riley DJ, Lee WH. The retinoblastoma protein as a fundamental mediator of growth and differentiation signals. Crit Rev Eukary Gene Exp 1995;1:79.
175. Harrington EA, Bruce JL, Harlow E, Dyson N. pRB plays an essential role in cell cycle arrest induced by DNA damage. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:11945.
176. Xing EP, Yang GY, Wang LD, Shi ST, Yang CS. Loss of heterozygosity of the Rb gene correlates with pRb protein expression and associates with p53 alteration in human esophageal cancer.
Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:1231.
177. Hashimoto N, Tachibana M, Dhar DK, Yoshimura H, Nagasue N. Expression of p53 and RB proteins in squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus: their relationship with clinicopathologic
characteristics. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:489.
178. Grana X, Reddy EP. Cell cycle control in mammalian cells: role of cyclins, cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs), growth suppressor genes and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CKIs). Oncogene
1995;11:211.
179. Xing EP, Nie Y, Wang LD, Yang GY, Yang CS. Aberrant methylation of p16INK4a and deletion of p15INK4b are frequent events in human esophageal cancer in Linxian, China. Carcinogenesis
1999;20:77.
180. Esteve A, Martel-Planche G, Sylla BS, et al. Low frequency of p16/CDKN2 gene mutations in esophageal carcinomas. Int J Cancer 1996;66:301.
181. Wong DJ, Barrett MT, Stoger R, Emond MJ, Reid BJ. p16INK4a promoter is hypermethylated at a high frequency in esophageal adenocarcinomas. Cancer Res 1997;57:2619.
182. Zhang Y, Xiong Y, Yarbrough WG. ARF promotes MDM2 degradation and stabilizes p53: ARF-INK4a locus deletion impairs both the Rb and p53 tumor suppression pathways. Cell 1998;92:725.
183. Sherr CJ. Tumor surveillance via the ARF-p53 pathway. Genes Dev 1998;12:2984.
184. Robertson KD, Jones PA. The human ARF cell cycle regulatory gene promoter is a CpG island which can be silenced by DNA methylation and down-regulated by wild-type p53. Mol Cell Biol
1998;18:6457.
185. Xing EP, Nie Y, Song Y, et al. Mechanisms of inactivation of p14ARF, p15INK4b, and p16INK4a genes in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:2704.
186. Kastan MB, Canman CE, Leonard CJ. p53, cell cycle control and apoptosis: implications for cancer. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1995;14:3.
187. Vaziri H, Benchimol S. Alternative pathways for the extension of cellular life span: inactivation of p53/pRb and expression of telomerase. Oncogene 1999;18:7676.
188. El-Deiry WS, Harper JW, O'Connor PM, et al. WAF1/CIP1 is induced in p53-mediated G1 arrest and apoptosis. Cancer Res 1994;54:1169.
189. Kastan MB, Onyekwere O, Sidransky D, Vogelstein B, Craig R. Participation of p53 protein in the cellular response to DNA damage. Cancer Res 1991;51:6304.
190. Fontanini G, Boldrini L, Vignati S, et al. Bc12 and p53 regulate vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)mediated angiogenesis in non-small cell lung carcinoma. Int J Cancer 1998;34:718.
191. Schrump DS, Nguyen DM. Strategies for molecular intervention in esophageal cancers and their precursor lesions. Dis Esophagus 1999;12:181.
192. Matsubara H, Kimura M, Sugaya M, et al. Expression of wild-type p53 gene confers increased sensitivity to radiation and chemotherapeutic agents in human esophageal carcinoma cells. Int J
Oncol 1999;14:1081.
193. Gonzalez MV, Artimez ML, Rodrigo L, et al. Mutation analysis of the p53, APC, and p16 genes in the Barrett's oesophagus, dysplasia, and adenocarcinoma. J Clin Pathol 1997;50:212.
194. Hollstein M, Sidransky D, Vogelstein B, Harris CC. p53 mutations in human cancers. Science 1991;253:49.
195. Blount PL, Meltzer SJ, Yin J, et al. Clonal ordering of 17p and 5q allelic losses in Barrett dysplasia and adenocarcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:3221.
196. Wu TT, Watanabe T, Heitmiller R, et al. Genetic alterations in Barrett esophagus and adenocarcinomas of the esophagus and esophagogastric junction region. Am J Pathol 1998;153:287.
197. Kobayashi S, Koide Y, Endo M, Isono K, Ochiai T. The p53 gene mutation is of prognostic value in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma patients in unified stages of curability. Am J Surg
1999;177:497.
198. Cerni C. Telomeres, telomerase, and myc. An update. Mutat Res 2000;462:31.
199. Oulton R, Harrington L. Telomeres, telomerase, and cancer: life on the edge of genomic stability. Curr Opin Oncol 2000;12:74.
200. Hiyama T, Yokozaki H, Kitadai Y, et al. Overexpression of human telomerase RNA is an early event in oesophageal carcinogenesis. Virchows Arch 1999;434:483.
201. Koyanagi K, Ozawa S, Ando N, et al. Clinical significance of telomerase activity in the non-cancerous epithelial region of oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma [see comments]. Br J Surg
1999;86:674.
202. Morales CP, Lee EL, Shay JW. In situ hybridization for the detection of telomerase RNA in the progression from Barrett's esophagus to esophageal adenocarcinoma. Cancer 1998;83:652.
203. Lord RV, Salonga D, Danenberg KD, et al. Telomerase reverse transcriptase expression is increased early in the Barrett's metaplasia, dysplasia, adenocarcinoma sequence. J Gastrointest Surg
2000;4:135.
204. Hahn WC, Stewart SA, Brooks MW, et al. Inhibition of telomerase limits the growth of human cancer cells [see comments]. Nat Med 1999;5:1164.
205. Zargar SA, Khuroo MS, Jan GM, Mahajan R, Shah P. Prospective comparison of the value of brushings before and after biopsy in the endoscopic diagnosis of gastroesophageal malignancy.
Acta Cytol 1991;35:549.
206. Nishimaki T, Tanaka O, Ando N, et al. Evaluation of the accuracy of preoperative staging in thoracic esophageal cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;68:2059.
207. Rankin SC, Taylor H, Cook GJ, Mason R. Computed tomography and positron emission tomography in the pre-operative staging of oesophageal carcinoma. Clin Radiol 1998;53:659.
208. Luketich JD, Friedman DM, Weigel TL, et al. Evaluation of distant metastases in esophageal cancer: 100 consecutive positron emission tomography scans. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;68:1133.
209. Kole AC, Plukker JT, Nieweg OE, Vaalburg W. Positron emission tomography for staging of oesophageal and gastroesophageal malignancy. Br J Cancer 1998;78:521.
210. Griffith JF, Chan AC, Chow LT, et al. Assessing chemotherapy response of squamous cell oesophageal carcinoma with spiral CT. Br J Radiol 1999;72:678.
211. Bergman JJ, Fockens P. Endoscopic ultrasonography in patients with gastro-esophageal cancer. Eur J Ultrasound 1999;10:127.
212. de Manzoni G, Pedrazzani C, Di Leo A, et al. Experience of endoscopic ultrasound in staging adenocarcinoma of the cardia. Eur J Surg Oncol 1999;25:595.
213. Vickers J. Role of endoscopic ultrasound in the preoperative assessment of patients with oesophageal cancer. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 1998;80:233.
214. Reed CE, Mishra G, Sahai AV, Hoffman BJ, Hawes RH. Esophageal cancer staging: improved accuracy by endoscopic ultrasound of celiac lymph nodes. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;67:319.
215. Catalano MF, Alcocer E, Chak A, et al. Evaluation of metastatic celiac axis lymph nodes in patients with esophageal carcinoma: accuracy of EUS. Gastrointest Endosc 1999;50:352.
216. Schlick T, Heintz A, Junginger T. The examiner's learning effect and its influence on the quality of endoscopic ultrasonography in carcinoma of the esophagus and gastric cardia. Surg Endosc
1999;13:894.
217. Sozzi M, Nguyen CC, Valentini M. What is the current role of endoscopic ultrasonography in oesophageal cancer? Ital J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1999;31:154.
218. Laterza E, de Manzoni G, Guglielmi A, et al. Endoscopic ultrasonography in the staging of esophageal carcinoma after preoperative radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Ann Thorac Surg
1999;67:1466.
219. Zuccaro GJ, Rice TW, Goldblum J, et al. Endoscopic ultrasound cannot determine suitability for esophagectomy after aggressive chemoradiotherapy for esophageal cancer. Am J Gastroenterol
1999;94:906.
220. McAteer D, Wallis F, Couper G, et al. Evaluation of 18F-FDG positron emission tomography in gastric and oesophageal carcinoma. Br J Radiol 1999;72:529.
221. Krasna MJ. Surgical staging and surgical treatment in esophageal cancer. Semin Oncol 1999;26:9.
222. Kobori O, Kirihara Y, Kosaka N, Hara T. Positron emission tomography of esophageal carcinoma using (11)C-choline and (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose: a novel method of preoperative lymph
node staging. Cancer 1999;86:1638.
223. Couper GW, McAteer D, Wallis F, et al. Detection of response to chemotherapy using positron emission tomography in patients with oesophageal and gastric cancer. Br J Surg 1998;85:1403.
224. O'Reilly S, Forastierre AA. Is surgery necessary with multimodality treatment of esophageal cancer. Ann Oncol 1995;6:551.
225. Coia LR. Esophageal cancer: is esophagectomy necessary? Oncology 1989;3:101.
226. Daly JM, Karnell LH, Menck HR. National Cancer Data Base report on esophageal carcinoma. Cancer 1996;78:1820.
227. Orringer MB, Marshall B, Iannettoni MD. Transhiatal esophagectomy: clinical experience and refinements. Ann Surg 1999;230:392.
228. Gelfand GA, Finley RJ, Nelems B, et al. Transhiatal esophagectomy for carcinoma of the esophagus and cardia. Arch Surg 1992;127:164.
229. Gertsch P, Vauthey JN, Lustenberger AA, Friedlander-Klar H. Long-term results of transhiatal esophagectomy for esophageal carcinoma. A multivariate analysis of prognostic factors. Cancer
1993;72:2312.
230. Vigneswaran WT, Trastek VF, Pairolero PC, et al. Transhiatal esophagectomy for carcinoma of the esophagus. Ann Thorac Surg 1993;56:838.
231. Chu KM, Law SY, Fok M, Wong J. A prospective randomized comparison of transhiatal and transthoracic resection for lower-third esophageal carcinoma. Am J Surg 1997;174:320.

232. Horstmann O, Verreet PR, Becker H, Ohmann C, Roher HD. Transhiatal esophagectomy compared with transthoracic resection and systematic lymphadenectomy for the treatment of
esophageal cancer. Eur J Surg 1995;161:557.
233. Goldminc M, Maddem G, Le Prise E, et al. Esophagectomy by a transhiatal approach for thoracotomy: a prospective randomized trial. Br J Surg 1993;80:367.
234. Putnam JB, Suell DM, McMurtrey MJ, et al. Comparison of three techniques of esophagectomy within a residency training program. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;57:319.
235. Urba S, Orringer M, Turrisi A, et al. A randomized trial comparing surgery to preoperative concomittant chemoradiation plus surgery in patients with resectable esophageal cancer. Update
analysis. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;6:227.
236. Barbier PA, Luder PJ, Schupfer G, Becker CD, Wagner HE. Quality of life and patterns of recurrence following transhiatal esophagectomy for cancer: results of a prospective follow-up in 50
patients. World J Surg 1988;12:270.
237. Ellis FH Jr. Standard resection for cancer of the esophagus and cardia. Surg Oncol Clin North Am 1999;8:279.
238. Lieberman MD, Shriver CD, Bleckner S, Burt M. Carcinoma of the esophagus. Prognostic significance of histologic type. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1995;109:130.
239. Wright CD, Mathisen DJ, Wain JC, et al. Evolution of treatment strategies for adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and gastroesophageal junction. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;58:1574.
240. Sharpe DA, Moghissi K. Resectional surgery in carcinoma of the esophagus and cardia: what influences long-term survival? Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1996;10:359.
241. Swisher SG, Hunt KK, Holmes EC, Zinner MJ, McFadden DW. Changes in the surgical management of esophageal cancer from 1970 to 1993. Am J Surg 1995;169:609.
242. Adam DJ, Craig SR, Sang CT, Walker WS, Cameron EW. Esophagogastrectomy for carcinoma in patients under 50 years of age. J R Coll Surg Obstet 1996;41:371.
243. Law SY, Fok M, Cheng SW, Wong J. A comparison of outcome after resection for squamous cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas of the esophagus and cardia. Surg Gynecol Obstet
1992;175:107.
244. Kelsen DP, Ginsberg R, Pajak TF, et al. Chemotherapy followed by surgery compared with surgery alone for localized esophageal cancer [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1998;339:1979.
245. Walsh TN, Noonan N, Hollywood D, et al. A comparison of multimodal therapy and surgery for esophageal adenocarcinoma. N Engl J Med 1996;335:462.
246. Bosset JF, Gignoux M, Triboulet JP, et al. Chemoradiotherapy followed by surgery compared with surgery alone in squamous cell cancer of the esophagus. N Engl J Med 1997;337:161.
247. Law S, Fok M, Chow S, Chu KM, Wong J. Preoperative chemotherapy versus surgical therapy alone for squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. A prospective randomized trial. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 1997;114:203.
248. Gignoux M, Roussel A, Paillot B. The value of preoperative radiotherapy in esophageal cancer: results of a study of the E.O.R.T.C. World J Surg 1987;11:426.
249. Nygaard K, Hagen S, Hansen HS, et al. Pre-operative radiotherapy prolongs survival in operable esophageal carcinoma: a randomized, multicenter study of pre- operative radiotherapy and
chemotherapy. The second Scandinavian trial in esophageal cancer. World J Surg 1992;16:1104.
250. Rindani R, Martin CJ, Cox MR. Transhiatal versus Ivor-Lewis esophagectomy: is there a difference? Aust N Z J Surg 1999;69:187.
251. Logan A. The surgical treatment of carcinoma of the esophagus and cardia. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1963;46:150.
252. Skinner DB. En-bloc resection for neoplasms of the esophagus and cardia. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1983;85:59.
253. Nigro JJ, De Meester SR, Hagen JA, et al. Node status in transmural esophageal adenocarcinoma and outcome after en-bloc esophagectomy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1999;117:960.
254. Altorki NK, Girardi L, Skinner DB. En-bloc esophagectomy improves survival for stage III esophageal cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1997;114:948.
255. Herskovic A, Martz K, Al-Sarraf M. Combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy compared with radiotherapy alone in patients with cancer of the esophagus. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1593.
256. Hagen JA, Peters JH, De Meester TR. Superiority of extended en bloc esophagogastrectomy for carcinoma of the lower esophagus and cardia. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1993;106:850.
257. Altorki NK. The rationale for radical resection. Surg Oncol Clin North Am 1999;8:295.
258. Isono K, Onada S, Okuyama K. Recurrence of intrathoracic esophageal cancer. Jpn J Clin Oncol 1985;15:49.
259. Isono K, Sato H, Nakayama K. Results of nationwide study of the three-field lymph node dissection of esophageal cancer. Oncology 1991;48:411.
260. Orringer MB. Editorial: occult cervical nodal metastases in esophageal cancer: preliminary results of three-field lymphadenectomy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1997;113:538.
261. Akiyama H, Tsurumaru M, Udagawa H. Radical lymph node dissection for cancer of the thoracic esophagus. Ann Surg 1994;220:364.
262. Kato H, Tachimore Y, Watanabe H, et al. Recurrent esophageal carcinoma after esophagectomy with three-field lymph node dissection. J Surg Oncol 1996;61:267.
263. Fujita H, Kakegawa T, Yamana H, et al. Mortality and morbidity rates, postoperative course, quality of life and prognosis after extended radical lymphadenectomy for esophageal cancer.
Comparison of three-field lymphadenectomy with two-field lymphadenectomy. Ann Surg 1995;222:654.
264. Baba M, Aikou T, Yoshinaka H, et al. Long-term results of subtotal esophagectomy with three-field lymphadenectomy for carcinoma of the thoracic esophagus. Ann Surg 1995;221:432.
265. Tanabe G, Baba M, Kuroshima K. Clinical evaluation of esophageal lymph flow system based on the RI uptake of removed regional lymph nodes following lymphoscintigraphy. J Jpn Surg Soc
1986;87:315.
266. Aikou T, Natugoe S, Tenabe G, Baba M, Shimazu H. Lymph drainage originating from the lower esophagus and gastric cardia as measured by radioisotope uptake in the regional lymph nodes
following lymphoscintigraphy. Lymphology 1987;20:145.
267. Nishihira T, Hirayama K, Mori S. A prospective randomized trial of extended cervical and superior mediastinal lymphadenectomy for carcinoma of the thoracic esophagus. Am J Surg
1998;175:47.
268. Kato H, Watanabe H, Tachimori Y, Iizuka T. Evaluation of neck lymph node dissection for thoracic esophageal carcinoma. Ann Thorac Surg 1991;51:931.
269. Lerut T, Coosemans W, De Leyn P, et al. Reflections on three field lymphadenectomy in carcinoma of the esophagus and gastroesophageal junction. Hepto-Gastroenterology 1999;46:717.
270. Roth JA, Putnam JB. Surgery for cancer of the esophagus. Semin Oncol 1994;21:453.
271. Salazar JD, Doty JR, Lin JW, et al. Does cell type influence post-esophagectomy survival in patients with esophageal cancer? Dis Esophagus 1998;11:168.
272. Mantravadi R, Ladd T, Briele H, Liebner EJ. Carcinoma of the esophagus: sites of failure. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8:1897.
273. Mandard AM, Chasle J, Marnay J, et al. Autopsy findings in 111 cases of esophageal cancer. Cancer 1981;48:329.
274. Attah E, Hadju S. Benign and malignant tumors of the esophagus at autopsy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1980;55:396.
275. Aisner JA, Forastiere AA, Aaroney R. Patterns of recurrence for cancer of the lung and esophagus. Cancer Treat Symp 1983;2:87(abst).
276. Noh HM, Fishman EK, Forastiere AA, et al. CT of the esophagus: spectrum of disease with emphasis on esophageal carcinoma. RadioGraphics 1995;15:1113.
277. Ng CS, Husband JE, MacVicar AD, Cunningham DC. Correlation of CT with histopathological finding in patients with gastric and gastro-oesophageal carcinomas following neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. Clin Radiol 1998;53:422.
278. Flood WA, Forastiere AA. Esophageal cancer. Curr Opin Oncol 1995;7:381.
279. Yagoda A, Mukherji B, Young C, et al. Bleomycin, an antitumor antibiotic: clinical experience in 274 patients. Ann Intern Med 1972;77:861.
280. Stephens F. Bleomycin: a new approach in cancer chemotherapy. Med J Aust 1973;1:1277.
281. Ravry M, Moertel CG, Schutt AJ, et al. Treatment of advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the gastrointestinal tract with bleomycin (NSC 125066). Cancer Chemother Rep 1973;57:493.
282. Tancini G, Bejetta E, Bonnadonna G. Therapy with bleomycin alone or in combination with methotrexate in epidermoid carcinoma of the esophagus. Tumori 1973;60:65.
283. Kolaric K, Moricic Z, Dujomovic I, Roth A. Therapy of advanced esophageal cancer with bleomycin, irradiation and combination bleomycin and irradiation. Tumori 1976;62:255.
284. Lokich J, Shea M, Chaffey J. Sequential infusional 5-fluorouracil followed by concomitant radiation for tumors of the esophagus and the gastroesophageal junction. Cancer 1987;60:275.
285. Ezdinli EZ, Gelber R, Desai DV, et al. Chemotherapy of advanced esophageal carcinoma: Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group experience. Cancer 1980;46:2149.
286. Engstrom P, Lavin P, Lassen D. Phase II evaluation of mitomycin and cisplatin in advanced esophageal carcinoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:713.
287. Whitington R, Clos H. Clinical experience with mitomycin C. Cancer Chemother Rep 1970;54:195.
288. Kolaric K, Maricic Z, Roth A, Qujmovic I. Combination of bleomycin and adriamycin with and without radiation in the treatment of inoperable esophageal cancer. A randomized study. Cancer
1980;45:2265.
289. Advani SH, Saikia TK, Swaroop S, et al. Anterior chemotherapy in esophageal cancer. Cancer 1985;56:1502.
290. Davis S, Shanmugathasa M, Kessler W. Cis-dichlorodiamminc platinum (11) in the treatment of esophageal carcinoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1980;64:709.
291. Ravry M, Moore M. Phase II pilot study of cisplatinum (II) in advanced squamous cell esophageal cancer. Proc Soc Surg Oncol 1980;21:353(abst).
292. Panettiere F, Leichman L, Tilchen E, et al. Chemotherapy for advanced epidermoid carcinoma of the esophagus with single agent cisplatin: final report on Southwest Oncology Group study.
Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:1023.
293. Bleiberg H, Jacob JH, Bedenne L, et al. Randomized phase II trial of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and cisplatin (DDP) versus DDP alone in advanced esophageal cancer. Proc Soc Clin Oncol
1991;10:A447(abst).
294. Miller JI, McIntyre B, Hatcher CR. Combined treatment approach in surgical management of carcinoma of the esophagus: a preliminary report. Ann Thorac Surg 1985;40:289.
295. Kelsen DP, Bains MS, Cvitkovic E, Golbey R. Vindesine in the treatment of esophageal carcinoma: a phase II study. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:2019.
296. Bedikian AY, Valdivieso M, Bodey GP, Freireich EJ. Phase II evaluation of vindesine in the treatment of colorectal and esophagela tumors. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1979;2:263.
297. Bezwoda WR, Derman DP, Weaving A, Nissenbaum M. Treatment of esophageal cancer with vindesine: an open trial. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:783.
298. Kelsen D, Chapman R, Baines M, et al. Phase II study of methyl-GAG in the present treatment of esophageal carcinoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:1427.
299. Ravry MJ, Omura GA, Hill GJ. Phase II evaluation of mitoguazone in cancer of the esophagus, stomach, and pancreas: a Southwestern Cancer Study Group Trial. Cancer Treat Rep
1986;70:533.
300. Falkson G. Methyl-GAG (NSC 32946) in the treatment of esophagus cancer. CancerChemother Rep 1971;55:209.
301. Conroy TC, Etienne PL, Adenis A, et al. Phase II trial of vinorelbine in metastatic squamous cell esophageal carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:164.
302. Ajani JA, Ilson DH, Daugherty K, et al. Activity of taxol in patients with squamous cell carcinoma and adenocardinoma of the esophagus. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1086.
303. Etienne PL, Conroy T, Adenis A, et al. Vinorelbine and cisplatin in metastatic epidermoid carcinoma of the esophagus (MECE). An EORTC phase II study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:270a.
304. Milas L, Hunter NR, Mason KA, Kurdoglu B, Peters LJ. Enhancement of tumor radio-response of a murine mammary carcinoma by paclitaxel. Cancer Res 1994;54:3506.
305. Bajorin D, Kelsen D, Heelan R. Phase II trials of dischloromethotrexate in epidermoid carcinoma of the esophagus. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:1245.
306. Alberts AS, Falkson G, Badata M, Terblanche AP, Schmid EU. Trimetrexate in advanced carcinoma of the esophagus. Invest New Drugs 1988;6:319.
307. Brown T, Fleming T, Tangen C, Macdonald J. A phase II trial of trimetrexate in the treatment of esophageal cancer. A Southwest Oncology Group Trial. Proc Clin Oncol 1992;11:A479(abst).
308. Coonley C, Bains M, Kelsen DP. VP-16-213 in the treatment of esophageal cancer: a phase II trial. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:397.
309. Radice P, Bunn P, Ihde D. Therapeutic trials with VP-16 and VM-26. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;62:1231.
310. Nanus DM, Kelson DP, Lipperman R, Eisenberger M. Phase II trial of ifosfamide in epidermoid carcinoma of the esophagus: unexpectant severe toxicity. Invest New Drugs 1988;6:239.
311. Kok TC, VanDer Gaast A, Splinter TA, Tilanus HW. Ifosfamide in advanced adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus or oesophageal-gastric junction area. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:1112.
312. Mannell A, Winters Z. Carboplatin in the treatment of esophageal cancer. South Afr Med J 1989;76:213.
313. Queisser W, Preusser P, Mross KB, et al. Phase II evaluation of carboplatin in advanced esophageal carcinoma. A trial of the phase I/II study group of the Association for Medical Oncology of
the German Cancer Society. Onkologie 1990;13:190.
314. Sternberg C, Kelsen D, Dukeman M, Leichman L, Heelan R. Carboplatin: a new platinum analog in the treatment of epidermoid carcinoma of the esophagus. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:1305.
315. Steel A, Cullen MH, Robertson PW, Matthews HR. A phase II study of carboplatin in adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. Br J Cancer 1988;58:500.
316. Coonley CJ, Bains M, Hilaris B, Chapman R, Kelsen DP. Cisplatin and bleomycin in the treatment of esophageal carcinoma. A final report. Cancer 1984;54:2351.
317. Kelsen D, Hilaris B, Coonley C, et al. Cisplatin, vindesine and bleomycin chemotherapy of local regional and advanced esophageal carcinoma. Am J Med 1983;75:645.
318. Dinwoodie WR, Bartolucci AA, Lyman GH, et al. Phase II evaluation of cisplatin, bleomycin, and vindesine in advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus: a south eastern cancer
study trail. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:267.
319. DeBasi P, Salvagno L, Endrizi L, et al. Cisplatin, blcomycin and methotrexate in the treatment of advanced oesophageal cancer. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1984;20:743.
320. Vogl SE, Greenwald E, Kaplan BH. Effective chemotherapy for esophageal cancer with methotrexate, bleomycin, and cis-diamminedichloroplatinum II. Cancer 1981;48:2555.
321. Kelsen DP, Fein R, Coonley C, Heelan R, Bains M. Cisplatin, vindesine, and mitoguazone in the treatment of esophageal cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:255.
322. Chapman R, Fleming TR, Van Damme J, Macdonald J. Cisplatin, vinblastine, and mitoguazone in squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. Cancer
Treat Rep 1987;71:1185.

323. Lizuka T, Kakegawa T, Ide H, et al. Phase II study of CDDP + 5-FU for squamous esophageal carcinoma: JEOG Co-operative Study results. Proc Clin Oncol 1991;10:157(abst).
324. Lovett D, Kelsen D, Eisenberger M, Houston C. A phase II trial of carboplatin and vinblastine in the treatment of advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Cancer 1991;67:354.
325. Kelsen D, Lovett D, Wong J, et al. Interferon alfa-2a and fluorouracil in the treatment of patients with advanced esophageal cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:269.
326. Wadler S, Fell S, Haynes H, et al. Treatment of carcinoma of the esophagus with 5-fluorouracil and recombinant alfa-2a-interferon. Cancer 1993;71:1726.
327. Ilson DH, Sirott M, Saltz L, et al. A phase II trial of interferon alfa-2a, 5-fluorouracil, and cisplatin in patients with advanced esophageal carcinoma. Cancer 1995;74:2197.
328. Enzinger PC, Ilson DH, Saltz LB, Martin LK, Kelsen DP. Phase II clinical trial of 13-cisretinoic acid and interferon-alpha-2a in patients with advanced esophageal carcinoma. Cancer
1999;85:1213.
329. Kok TC, Van der Gaast A, Dees J, et al. Cisplatin and etoposide in oesophageal cancer: a phase II study. Rotterdam Oesophageal Tumour Study Group. Br J Cancer 1996;74:980.
330. Kok TC, Lanschot JV, Siersema PD, Overhagen HV, Tilanus HW. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy in operable esophageal squamous cell cancer: final report of a phase III multicenter randomized
trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:277.
331. Ilson DH, Ajani J, Bhalla K, et al. Phase II trial of paclitaxel, fluorouracil, and cisplatin in patients with advanced carcinoma of the esophagus. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1826.
332. Van der Gaast A, Kok TC, Kerkhofs L, et al. Phase I study of a biweekly schedule of a fixed dose of cisplatin with increasing doses of paclitaxel in patients with advanced oesophageal cancer.
Br J Cancer 1999;80:1052.
333. Van der Gaast A, Polee M, Kok TC, Splinter TA. Phase I study with weekly cisplatin and increasing doses of paclitaxel in patients with esophageal cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:303a.
334. Enzinger PC, Ilson DH, Saltz LB, O'Reilly EM, Kelsen DP. Irinotecan and cisplatin in upper gastrointestinal malignancies. Oncology 1998;12:110.
335. Ilson DH, Saltz L, Enzinger P, et al. Phase II trial of weekly irinotecan plus cisplatin in advanced esophageal cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3270.
336. Ajani J, Fairweather J, Pisters P, et al. U.T.M.D. Anderson Center: phase II study of CPT-11 plus cisplatin in patients with advanced gastric and GE junction carcinomas. Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1999;18:241a.
337. Schlag P, Herrmann R, Raeth V, et al. Preoperative chemotherapy in esophageal cancer. A phase II study. Acta Oncol 1988;27:811.
338. Forastiere A, Gennis MK, Orringer M, et al. Cisplatin, vinblastine and mitoguazone chemotherapy for epidermoid and adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. J Clin Oncol 1987;15:1143.
339. Carey RW, Hilgenberg AD, Wilkins EW. Long-term follow-up of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin with surgical resection and possible postoperative radiotherapy and
or chemotherapy in squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Cancer Invest 1993;11:99.
340. Kies M, Rosen S, Tsang T, et al. Cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil in primary management of squamous esophageal cancer. Cancer 1987;60:2156.
341. Ajani JA, Ryan B, Rich TA, et al. Prolonged chemotherapy for localized squamous carcinoma of the oesophagus. Eur J Cancer 1992;28A:880.
342. Vignoud J, Visset J, Paineau J, et al. Preoperative chemotherapy in squamous cell carcinoma of the esopahgus: clincal and pathological analysis, 48 cases. Ann Oncol 1990;1:45.
343. Wright CD, Mathisen DJ, Wain JC, et al. Evolution of treatment strategies for adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and gastroesophageal junction. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;58:1574.
344. Roth JA, Pass HI, Flanagan MM, et al. Randomized clinical trial of preoperative and postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin, vindesine, and bleomycin for carcinoma of the
esophagus. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1988;96:242.
345. Schlag PM. Randomized trial of preoperative chemotherapy for squamous cell cancer of the esophagus. The Chirurgische Arbeitsgemeinschaft Fuer Onkologie der Deutschen Gesellschaft
Fuer Chirurgie Study Group. Arch Surg 1992;127:1446.
346. Cooper JS, Guo MD, Herskovic A, et al. Chemoradiotherapy of locally advanced esophageal cancer: long-term follow-up of a prospective randomized trial (RTOG 85-01). Radiation Therapy
Oncology Group. JAMA 1999;281:1623.
347. Japanese Esophageal Oncology Group. A comparison of chemotherapy and radiotherapy as adjuvant treatment to surgery for esophageal carcinoma. Chest 1993;104:203.
348. Iizuka AT, Isono KK, Watanabe H, et al. A randomized trial comparing surgery to surgery plus postoperative chemotherapy for localized squamous carcinoma of the thoracic esophagus: the
Japan clinical oncology study group (JCOG) study. Proc Am Soc Oncol 1998;17:282a.
349. Ando N, Iizuka T, Kakegawa T, et al. A randomized trial of surgery with and without chemotherapy for localized squamous carcinoma of the thoracic esophagus: the Japan Clinical Oncology
Group Study [see comments]. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1997;114:205.
350. Coia LR, Minsky BD, John MJ, et al. The evaluation and treatment of patients receiving radiation therapy for carcinoma of the esophagus. Results of the 19921994 Patterns of Care Study.
Cancer 1999;85:2499.
351. Coia LR, Minsky BD, John MJ, et al. Patterns of care study decision tree and management guidelines for esophageal cancer. Radiat Med 1998;16:321.
352. De-Ren S. Ten-year follow-up of esophageal cancer treated by radical radiation therapy: analysis of 869 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;16:334.
353. Newaishy GA, Read GA, Duncan W, Kerr GR. Results of radical radiotherapy of squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Clin Radiol 1982;33:347.
354. Okawa T, Kita M, Tanaka M, Ikeda M. Results of radiotherapy for inoperable locally advanced esophageal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:49.
355. Shi X, Yao W, Liu T. Late course accelerated fractionation in radiotherapy of esophageal carcinoma. Radiother Oncol 1999;51:21.
356. Al-Sarraf M, Martz K, Herskovic A, et al. Superiority of chemo-radiotherapy (CT-RT) vs radiotherapy (RT) in patients with esophageal cancer. Final report of an Intergroup randomized and
confirmed study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1996;15:206(abst).
357. Sykes AJ, Burt PA, Slevin NJ, Stout R, Marrs JE. Radical radiotherapy for carcinoma of the oesophagus: an effective alternative to surgery. Radiother Oncol 1998;48:15.
358. John MJ, Flam M, Ager Mowry PA, et al. Radiotherapy alone and chemoradiation for nonmetastatic esophageal carcinoma. Cancer 1989;63:2397.
359. Coia LR, Engstrom PF, Paul AR, Stafford PM, Hanks GE. Long-term results of infusional 5-FU, mitomycin-C, and radiation as primary management of esophageal carcinoma. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:29.
360. Izquierdo MA, Marcuello E, Gomez de Segura G, et al. Unresectable nonmetastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus managed by sequential chemotherapy (cisplatin and bleomycin)
and radiation therapy. Cancer 1993;71:287.
361. Seitz JF, Giovannini M, Padaut-Cesana J, et al. Inoperable nonmetastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus managed by concomitant chemotherapy (5-flurouracil and cisplatin) and
radiation therapy. Cancer 1990;66:214.
362. Valerdi JJ, Tejedor M, Illarramendi JJ, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy in locally advanced esophagus carcinoma: long term results. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1994;27:843.
363. Poplin EA, Jacobson J, Herskovic A, et al. Evaluation of multimodality treatment of locoregional esophageal carcinoma by Southwest Oncology Group 9060. Cancer 1996;78:1851.
364. Araujo CM, Souhami L, Gil RA, et al. A randomized trial comparing radiation therapy versus concomitant radiation therapy and chemotherapy in carcinoma of the thoracic esophagus. Cancer
1991;67:2258.
365. Roussel A, Jacob JH, Jung GM. Controlled clinical trial for the treatment of patients with inoperable esophageal carcinoma: a study of the EORTC Gastrointestinal Tract Cancer Cooperative
Group. In: Schlag P, Hohenberger P, Metzger U, eds. Recent Results in Cancer Research. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1988:21.
366. Al-Sarraf M, Martz K, Herskovic A, et al. Progress report of combined chemoradiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone in patients with esophageal cancer: an intergroup study. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:277.
367. Slabber CF, Nel JS, Schoeman L, et al. A randomized study of radiotherapy alone versus radiotherapy plus 5 fluorouracil and platinum in patients with inoperable, locally advanced squamous
cell cancer of the esophagus. Am J Clin Oncol 1998;21:465.
368. Smith TJ, Ryan LM, Douglass HO, et al. Combined chemoradiotherapy vs. radiotherapy alone for early stage squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus: a study of the Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group. Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:269.
369. Streeter OE, Martz KL, Gaspar LE, et al. Does race influence survival for esophageal cancer patients treated on the radiation and chemotherapy arm of RTOG # 85-01? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1999;44:1047.
370. Minsky BD, Neuberg D, Kelsen DP. Final report of intergroup trial 0122 (ECOG PE-289, RTOG 90-12): phase II trial of neoadjuvant chemotherapy plus concurrent chemotherapy and high-dose
radiation for squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:517.
371. Kelsen DP, Minsky BD, Smith M, et al. Preoperative therapy for esophageal cancer: a randomized comparison of chemotherapy vs. radiation therapy. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1352.
372. Roca E, Pennella E, Sardi M, et al. Combined intensive chemoradiotherapy for organ preservation in patients with resectable and non-resectable oesophageal cancer. Eur J Cancer
1996;32A:429.
373. Kelsen D, Ilson D, Lipton R, Baylor L, Minsky B. A phase I trial of radiation therapy (RT) plus concurrent fixed dose cisplatin (C) with escalating doses of paclitaxel (P) as a 96 hour continuous
infusion in patients (PTS) with localized esophageal cancer (EC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:271(abst).
374. Armstrong JG. High dose rate remote afterloading brachytherapy for lung and esophageal cancer. Semin Radiat Oncol 1993;4:270.
375. Moni J, Armstrong JG, Minsky BD, Bains MS, Harrison LB. High dose rate intraluminal brachytherapy for carcinoma of the esophagus. Dis Esophagus 1996;9:123.
376. Sur RK, Singh DP, Sharma SC. Radiation therapy of esophageal cancer: role of high dose rate brachytherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;22:1043.
377. Jager J, Langendijk H, Pannebakker M, Rijken J, Jong J. A single session of intraluminal brachytherapy in palliation of esophageal cancer. Radiother Oncol 1995;37:237.
378. Sur RK, Donde B, Levin VC, Rad FF, Mannell A. Fractionated high dose rate intraluminal brachytherapy in palliation of advanced esophageal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:447.
379. Calais G, Dorval E, Louisot P, et al. Radiotherapy with high dose rate brachytherapy boost and concomitant chemotherapy for stages IIB and III esophageal carcinoma: results of a pilot study.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:769.
380. Akagi Y, Hirokawa Y, Kagemoto M, et al. Optimum fractionation for high-dose-rate endoesophageal brachytherapy following external irradiation of early stage esophageal cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:525.
381. Schraube P, Fritz P, Wannenmacher MF. Combined endoluminal and external irradiation of inoperable oesophageal carcinoma. Radiother Oncol 1997;44:45.
382. Caspers RJL, Zwinderman AH, Griffioen G, et al. Combined external beam and low dose rate intraluminal radiotherapy in oesophageal cancer. Radiother Oncol 1993;27:7.
383. Sur M, Sur R, Cooper K, et al. Morphologic alterations in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma after preoperative high dose rate intraluminal brachytherapy. Cancer 1996;77:2200.
384. Yorozu A, Dokiya T, Oki Y, Suzuki T. Curative radiotherapy with high-dose-rate brachytherapy boost for localized esophageal carcinoma: dose-effect relationship of brachytherapy with the
balloon type applicator system. Radiother Oncol 1999;51:133.
385. Gaspar LE, Qian C, Kocha WI, et al. A phase I/II study of external beam radiation, brachytherapy and concurrent chemotherapy in localized cancer of the esophagus (RTOG 92-07): preliminary
toxicity report. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:593.
386. Gaspar LE, Nag S, Herskovic A, Mantravadi R, Speiser B. American Brachytherapy Society (ABS) consensus guidelines for brachytherapy of esophageal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1997;38:127.
387. Calais G, Jadaud E, Chapet S, et al. High dose radiotherapy (RT) and concomitant chemotherapy for nonresectable esophageal cancer. Results of a phase II study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1994;13:197(abst).
388. Girinsky T, Auperin A, Marsiglia H, et al. Accelerated fractionation in esophageal cancers: a multivariate analysis on 88 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:1013.
389. Powell MEB, Hoskin PJ, Saunders MT, et al. Continuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy (CHART) in localized cancer of the esophagus. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;40:1061.
390. Jeremic B, Shibamoto Y, Acimovic L, et al. Accelerated hyperfractionated radiation therapy and concurrent 5-fluorouracil/cisplatin chemotherapy for locoregional squamous cell carcinoma of
the thoracic esophagus: a phase II study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;121:717.
391. Wara WM, Mauch PM, Thomas AN, Phillips TL. Palliation for carcinoma of the esophagus. Radiology 1976;121:717.
392. Petrovich Z, Langholz B, Formenti S, Luxton G, Astrahan M. Management of carcinoma of the esophagus: the role of radiotherapy. Am J Clin Oncol 1991;14:80.
393. Whittington R, Coia LR, Haller DG, Rubenstein JH, Rosato EF. Adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and esophago-gastric junction: the effects of single and combined modalities on the survival
and patterns of failure following treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:593.
394. Caspers RJL, Welvaart K, Verkes RJ, Hermans J, Leer JWH. The effect of radiotherapy on dysphagia and survival in patients with esophageal cancer. Radiother Oncol 1988;12:15.
395. Algan O, Coia LR, Keller SM, et al. Management of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus with chemoradiation alone or chemoradiation followed by esophagectomy: results of sequential
nonrandomized phase II studies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:753.
396. Gill PG, Denham JW, Jamieson GG, et al. Patterns of treatment failure and prognostic factors associated with the treatment of esophageal carcinoma with chemotherapy and radiotherapy
either as sole treatment or followed by surgery. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1037.
397. Urba SG, Turrisi AT. Split-course accelerated radiation therapy combined with carboplatin and 5-fluorouracil for palliation of metastatic or unresectable carcinoma of the esophagus. Cancer
1995;75:435.

398. Coia LR, Soffen EM, Schultheiss TE, Martin EE, Hanks GE. Swallowing function in patients with esophageal cancer treated with concurrent radiation and chemotherapy. Cancer 1993;71:281.
399. O'Rourke IC, Tiver K, Bull C, Gebski V, Langlands AO. Swallowing performance after radiation therapy for carcinoma of the esophagus. Cancer 1988;61:2022.
400. Minsky BD. Radiation therapy in the treatment of esophagus cancer. Chest Surg Clin North Am 1994;4:285.
401. Gschossmann JM, Bonner JA, Foote RL, et al. Malignant tracheoesophageal fistula in patients with esophageal cancer. Cancer 1993;72:1513.
402. Arlington A, Bohorquez J. Irradiation of carcinoma of the esophagus containing a tracheoesophageal fistula. Cancer 1993;71:3808.
403. Belleguic C, Lena H, Briens E, et al. Tracheobronchial stenting in patients with esophageal cancer involving the central airways. Endoscopy 1999;31:232.
404. Raijman I, Siddique I, Ajani J, Lynch P. Palliation of malignant dysphagia and fistulae with coated expandable metal stents: experience with 101 patients. Gastrointest Endosc 1998;48:172.
405. May A, Ell C. Palliative treatment of malignant esophagorespiratory fistulas with Gianturco-Z stents. A prospective clinical trial and review of the literature on covered metal stents [see
comments]. Am J Gastroenterol 1998;93:532.
406. Mei W, Xian-Zhi G, Weibo Y, et al. Randomized clinical trial on the combination of preoperative irradiation and surgery in the treatment of esophageal carcinoma: report on 206 patients. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;16:325.
407. Teniere P, Hay JM, Fingerhut A, Fagniez P-L. Postoperative radiation therapy does not increase survival after curative resection for squamous cell carcinoma of the middle and lower
esophagus as shown by a multicenter controlled trial. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1991;173:123.
408. Launois B, Delarue D, Campion JP, Kerbaol M. Preoperative radiotherapy for carcinoma of the esophagus. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1981;153:690.
409. Arnott SJ, Duncan W, Kerr GR, et al. Low dose preoperative radiotherapy for carcinoma of the oesophagus: results of a randomized clinical trial. Radiother Oncol 1993;24:108.
410. Huang GJ, Gu XZ, Wang LJ. Combined preoperative irradiation and surgery for esophageal carcinoma. In: Delarue NC, ed. International trends in general thoracic surgery. St. Louis: C.V.
Mosby, 1988:315.
411. Arnott SJ, Duncan W, Gignoux M, et al. Preoperative radiotherapy in esophageal carcinoma: a meta-analysis using individual patient data (oesophageal cancer collaboratorive group). Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:579.
412. Jacob JH, Seitz JF, Langlois C, et al. Definitive concurrent chemo-radiation therapy (CRT) in squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus (SCCE): preliminary results of a French randomized
trial comparing standard vs. split course irradiation (FNCLCC-FFCD 9305). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:270a(abst).
413. Yadava OP, Hodge AJ, Matz LR, Donlon JB. Esophageal malignancies: is preoperative radiotherapy the way to go? Ann Thorac Surg 1991;51:189.
414. Sugimachi K, Matsufuji H, Kai H, et al. Preoperative irradiation for carcinoma of the esophagus. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1986;162:174.
415. Yamamoto M, Yamashita T, Matsubara T, et al. Reevaluation of postoperative radiotherapy for thoracic esophageal carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:75.
416. Hosokawa M, Shirato H, Ohara K, et al. Intraoperative radiation therapy to the upper mediastinum and nerve-sparing three-field lymphadenectomy followed by external beam radiotherapy for
patients with thoracic esophageal carcinoma. Cancer 1999;86:13.
417. Fok M, Sham JST, Choy D, Cheng SWK, Wong JW. Postoperative radiotherapy for carcinoma of the esophagus: a prospective, randomized controlled trial. Surgery 1993;113:138.
418. Minsky BD, Neuberg D, Kelsen D, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy plus concurrent chemotherapy and high dose radiation for squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagusa preliminary analysis
of the phase II intergroup trial 0122. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:149.
419. Becker M, Adelstein DJ, Rice TW, et al. Concurrent chemotherapy, accelerated hyperfractionated split course radiation therapy and surgery for esophageal cancer. 1996;36(abst).
420. Kelsen D, Ilson D, Minsky B, Lipton R. Phase I trial of combined modality therapy for localized esophageal cancer: radiation therapy + concurrent cisplatin and escalating doses of 96 hour
infusional paclitaxel. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:260a(abst).
421. Nesbitt J, Ajani JA, Komaki R, et al. Preoperative taxol-based chemotherapy (CT) followed by chemoradiation therapy (CTRT) in patients (PTS) with potentially resectable esophageal
carcinoma (EC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:282a(abst).
422. Safran H, Gaissert H, Akerman P, et al. Neoadjuvant paclitaxes, cisplatin and radiation for esophageal cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:259a(abst).
423. Posner MC, Gooding WE, Landreneau RJ, et al. Preoperative chemoradiotherapy for carcinoma of the esophagus and gastroesophageal junction. Cancer J Sci Am 1998;4:237.
424. Leichman L, Steiger Z, Seydel HG, et al. Preoperative chemotherapy and radiation therapy for patients with cancer of the esophagus: a potentially curative approach. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:75.
425. Poplin E, Fleming T, Leichman L, et al. Combined therapies for squamous-cell carcinoma of the esophagus, a Southwest Oncology Group Study (SWOG-8037). J Clin Oncol 1987;5:622.
426. Urba SG, Orringer MB, Perez-Tamayo C, Bromberg J, Forastiere A. Concurrent preoperative chemotherapy and radiation therapy in localized esophageal adenocarcinoma. Cancer
1992;69:285.
427. Forastiere A. Treatment of locoregional esophageal cancer. Semin Oncol 1992;19:57.
428. Forastiere A, Orringer MB, Perez-Tamayo C, et al. Concurrent chemotherapy and radiation therapy followed by transhiatal esophagectomy for local-regional cancer of the esophagus. J Clin
Oncol 1990;8:119.
429. Shahab N, Wilkes J, Beyer S, et al. Neoadjuvant chemoradiation followed by transhiatal esophagectomy for regional/locally advanced esophageal carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1996;17:259a(abst).
430. Adelstein DJ, Rice TW, Becker M, et al. Concurrent chemotherapy (CCT), accelerated fractionated radiation (AFR) and surgery for esophageal cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1996;15:203(abst).
431. Raoul JL, Le Prise E, Meunier B, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and hyperfractionated radiotherapy with concurrent low-dose chemotherapy for squamous cell esophageal cardinoma. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:29.
432. Adelstein DJ, Rice TW, Becker M, et al. Use of concurrent chemotherapy, accelerated fractionation radiation, and surgery for patients with esophageal cancer. Cancer 1997;80:1011.
433. Stahl M, Wilke H, Fink U, et al. Combined preoperative chemotherapy and radiotherapy in patients with locally advanced esophageal cancer: interim analysis of a phase II trial. J Clin Oncol
1996;14:829.
434. Jones DR, Detterbeck FC, Egan TM, et al. Induction chemoradiotherapy followed by esophagectomy in patients with carcinoma of the esophagus. Ann Thorac Surg 1997; 64:185.
435. Forastierre AA, Heitmiller RF, Lee DJ, et al. Intensive chemoradiation followed by esophagectomy for squamous cell and adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. Cancer J SciAm 1997;3:144.
436. Bates BA, Detterbeck FC, Bernard SA, Qaqish BF, Tepper JE. Concurrent radiation therapy and chemotherapy followed by esophagectomy for localized esophageal carcinoma. J Clin Oncol
1996;14:156.
437. Jones DR, Parker LA, Detterbeck FC, Egan TM. Inadequacy of computed tomography in assessing patients with esophageal carcinoma after induction chemoradiotherapy. 1999;85:1032.
438. Kavanagh B, Anscher M, Leopold K, et al. Patterns of failure following combined modality therapy for esophageal cancer, 19841990. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:633.
439. Coia L, Minsky B, John M, et al. Outcome of patients receiving radiation for cancer of the esophagus: results of the 19921994 Patterns of Care study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1998;17:258a(abst).
440. Urba S, Orringer M, Turrisi A, et al. A randomized trial comparing transhiatal esophagectomy (THE) to preoperative concurrent chemoradiation (CT/XRT) followed by esophagectomy in
localregional esophageal carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:199(abst).
441. Urba S, Orringer M, Turrisi A, et al. A randomized trial comparing surgery (S) to preoperative concomitant chemoradiation plus surgery in patients (pts) with resectable esophageal cancer. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:277(abst).
442. Le Prise E, Etienne PL, Meunier B, et al. A randomized study of chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and surgery versus surgery for localized squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Cancer
1994;73:1779.
443. Safran HS, Akerman P, Cioffi W, et al. Paclitaxel and concurrent radiation therapy for locally advanced adenocarcinomas of the pancreas, stomach, and gastroesophageal junction. Semin
Radiat Oncol 1999;53:57.
444. Phillips TL, Minsky BD, Dicker A. Cancer of the esophagus. In: Leibel S, Phillips TL, eds. Textbook of radiation oncology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1998:601.
445. Tai P, van Dyk J, Yu E, et al. Variability of target volume delineation in cervical esophageal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:277.
446. Sarbia M, Stahl M, Fink U, et al. Expression of apoptosis-regulating proteins and outcome of esophageal cancer patients treated by combined therapy modalities. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:2991.
447. Pomp J, Davelaar J, Blom J, et al. Radiotherapy for oesophagus carcinoma: the impact of p53 on treatment outcome. Radiother Oncol 1998;46:184.
448. Merchant TE, Minsky BD, Lauwers GY, et al. Esophageal cancer phospholipids correlated with histopathologic findings: a 31P NMR study. NMR Biomed 1999;12:184.
449. Lundell L, Leth R, Lind T, et al. Palliative endoscopic dilatation in carcinoma of the esophagus and esophagogastric junction. Acta Chir Scand 1989;155:179.
450. Boyce HWJ. Palliation of dysphagia of esophageal cancer by endoscopic lumen restoration techniques. Cancer Control 1999;6:73.
451. Orringer MB. Substernal gastric bypass of the excluded esophagus: results of an ill-advised operation. Surgery 1984;96:467.
452. Mannell A, Becker PJ, Nissenbaum M. Bypass surgery for unresectable oesophageal cancer: early and late results in 124 cases. Br J Surg 1988;75:283.
453. Holting T, Friedl P, Schraube N, et al. Palliation of esophageal canceroperative resection versus laser and afterloading therapy. Surg Endosc 1991;5:4.
454. Segalin A, Little AG, Ruol A, et al. Surgical and endoscopic palliation of esophageal carcinoma. Ann Thorac Surg 1989;48:267.
455. Raijman I, Siddique I, Ajani J, Lynch P. Palliation of malignant dysphagia and fistulae with coated expandable metal stents: experience with 101 patients. Gastrointest Endosc 1998;48:172.
456. Cwikiel W, Tranberg KG, Cwikiel M, Lillo-Gil R. Malignant dysphagia: palliation with esophageal stentslong-term results with 100 patients. Gastrointest Endosc 1998;50:134(abst).
457. Cantero R, Torres AJ, Hernando F, et al. Palliative treatment of esophageal cancer: self-expanding metal stents versus Postlethwait technique. Hepatogastroenterology 1999;46:971.
458. Ell C, Gossner L. Photodynamic therapy. Rec Res Cancer Res 2000;155:175.
459. Lightdale CJ, Heier SK, Marcon NE, et al. Photodynamic therapy with porfimer sodium versus thermal ablation therapy with Nd:YAG laser for palliation of esophageal cancer: a multicenter
randomized trial. Gastrointest Endosc 1995;42:507.
460. Maier A, Tomaselli F, Gebhard F, et al. Palliation of advanced esophageal carcinoma by photodynamic therapy and irradiation. Ann Thorac Surg 2000;69:1006.
461. Carlson BA, Dubay MM, Sausville EA, Brizuela L, Worland PJ. Flavopiridol induces G 1 arrest with inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 2 and CDK4 in human breast carcinoma cells.
Cancer Res 1996;56:2973.
462. Konig A, Schwartz GK, Mohammad RM, Al-Katib A, Gabrilove JL. The novel cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor flavopiridol downregulates Bcl-2 and induces growth arrest and apoptosis in
chronic B-cell leukemia lines. Blood 1997;90:4307.
463. Schrump DS, Matthews W, Chen GA, Mixon A, Altorki NK. Flavopiridol mediates cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in esophageal cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:2885.
464. Schrump D, Nguyen DM. Strategies for molecular intervention in esophageal cancers and their precursor lesions. Dis Esophagus 1999;3:181.
465. Weiser TS, Ohnmacht GA, Guo S, et al. Sequential 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (DAC)/depsipeptide (DP) treatment synergistically enhances MAGE-3 expression and apoptosis in lung and
esophageal cancer cells. Ann Thorac Surg 2000(in press).
466. Weiser TS, Guo ZS, Ohnmacht GA, et al. Sequential 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (DAC)/depsipeptide FR901228 (DP) treatment induces apoptosis in cancer cells and facilitates their recognition by
cytolytic T lymphocytes specific for NY-ESO-1. 2000 (submitted for publication).
467. Foster BA, Coffey HA, Morin MJ, Rastinejad F. Pharmacological rescue of mutant p53 conformation and function. Science 1999;286:2507.
468. Naunheim KS, Petruska PJ, Roy TS, et al. Preoperative chemotherapy and radiotherapy for esophageal carcinoma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1992;5:887.
469. Stewart JR, Hoff SJ, Johnson DH, et al. Improved survival with neoadjuvant therapy and resection for adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. Ann Surg 1993;218:571.
470. Malhaire JP, Labat JP, Lozach P, et al. Preoperative concomitant radiochemotherapy in squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus: results of a study of 56 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1996;34:429.
471. Chiappori A, DeVore R, Stewart J, et al. Phase II study of neoadjuvant cisplatin (P), 5-FU, leucovorin (LV), + etoposide (E) & concurrent radiotherapy (RT) in patients with esophageal cancer.
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1996;15:214(abst).
472. Keller SM, Ryan L, Coia LR, et al. High dose chemoradiotherapy followed by esophagectomy for adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and gastroesophageal junction. Results of a phase II study
of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Cancer 1998;83:1908.

SECTION 33.3 Cancer of the Stomach
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 33.3
Cancer of the Stomach
MARTIN S. KARPEH
DAVID P. KELSEN
JOEL E. TEPPER
Introduction
Epidemiology
Etiology and Pathogenesis
Prior Gastric Surgery and Gastric Cancer
Anatomic Considerations
Pathology and Tumor Biology
Histopathology
Patterns of Spread
Clinical Presentation
Signs and Symptoms
Screening
Pretreatment Staging
Tumor Markers
Endoscopy
Computed Tomography
Positron Emission Tomography
Laparoscopy
Pathologic Staging and Prognosis
Treatment of Localized Disease
Endoscopic Mucosal Resection
Surgery
Technique of Operation
Adjuvant Therapy
Rationale for Adjuvant Therapy
Postoperative Treatment
Metaanalysis of Adjuvant Chemotherapy Trials
Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy
Continuous Hyperthermic Peritoneal Perfusion
Immunochemotherapy
Ranitidine
Tamoxifen
Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy
Adjuvant Radiation and Chemoradiation Therapy
Technique of Radiation Therapy
Palliative Treatment of Gastric Cancer
Single-Agent Chemotherapy
Combination Chemotherapy
FAM and FAM Variants
Predicting Response
Chemotherapy Versus Best Supportive Care
Surgery for Palliation
Radiation for Palliation
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Adenocarcinoma of the stomach has been the leading cause of cancer death worldwide through most of the twentieth century. It now ranks second only to lung cancer
with an estimated 755,500 new cases diagnosed annually around the world. The incidence of this disease has gradually decreased in many parts of the world,
principally because of changes in diet, food preparation, and other environmental factors. The declining incidence has been dramatic in the United States, where this
disease ranks fourteenth as a cause of cancer deaths. It is estimated that 21,900 new cases are diagnosed annually, with approximately 13,500 deaths per year. 1,2
With the exception of just a few countries in the world, the prognosis for this disease remains poor. The overall 5-year survival rate in the United States and most of
the Western world ranges from 5% to 15%. The explanations for these poor results are multifactorial. The lack of defined risk factors and specific symptomatology,
and the relatively low incidence, have contributed to the late stage of onset seen in most Western countries. In Japan, where gastric cancer is endemic, patients are
diagnosed at an early stage, which is reflected in the excellent 50% 5-year survival rate.
Although the incidence of gastric cancer has decreased dramatically over the last century, the decline has been limited to cancers below the gastric cardia. The
number of newly diagnosed patients with proximal gastric and gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinomas has increased markedly since the mid-1980s. 3,4 and 5 The
disturbing fact is that these are thought to be biologically more aggressive than distal tumors and more complex to treat. The only proven, potentially curative
treatment is surgical resection of all gross and microscopic disease. Even after a “curative'' gastrectomy, disease recurs in both regional and distant sites in at least
80% of patients. Efforts to improve these poor results have focused on developing effective pre- and postoperative systemic and regional adjuvant therapies. It is
generally accepted that patients with chemoresponsive tumors are more likely to have a survival advantage. Consequently, a greater emphasis is being placed on
predicting chemoresponsiveness in gastric cancer. This chapter details the current thinking regarding the origins, treatment, and prevention of this universal health
problem.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
In 1965, Laurén 6 described two distinct histologic types of stomach adenocarcinoma: intestinal and diffuse, which provided a model to better understand the etiology
and epidemiology of the disease. 7 The intestinal variant arises from precancerous areas, such as gastric atrophy or intestinal metaplasia within the stomach; occurs
more commonly in men than in women; is more frequent in an older population; and represents the dominant histologic type in areas where stomach cancer is
epidemic, suggesting a predominantly environmental etiology. The diffuse form does not typically arise from recognizable precancerous lesions. It represents the
major histologic type in endemic areas; occurs slightly more frequently in women and in younger patients; and has a higher association with familial occurrence (blood
type A), suggesting a genetic etiology. 8 Changes in the incidence of gastric cancer within populations over time or between geographically distinct populations appear
to reflect a difference or change in the incidence of the intestinal form. 9,10 and 11
The highest incidences of stomach cancer can be found in Japan, South America, Eastern Europe, and portions of the Middle East. In most countries, the mortality
rate approximates the incidence; in Chile and Costa Rica, the mortality rates for gastric cancer exceed 40 per 100,000 population. In contrast, low-incidence areas,
such as New Zealand and Australia, have mortality rates of less than 10 per 100,000. 12 In Japan, despite the epidemic incidence of gastric cancer, a decline has been
seen in mortality rates since the 1970s as a result of mass screening. 13
The studies of migrant populations from areas of high to low risk have produced evidence of environmental influences on the development of gastric cancer. 9,14,15,16,17
and 18 Among Japanese migrating from the highest risk prefectures in Japan to Hawaii, the risk of stomach cancer persisted even when a Western-style diet was
adopted. The high risk of stomach cancer also was observed in second-generation offspring who continued to consume a Japanese-style diet but was low in those
adopting a Western-style diet. 16 In the population of Polish migrants living in the United States for 10 years or more, the incidence of gastric cancer decreased and

became intermediate between the countries of origin and adoption. 15 These studies suggest that environmental exposure in early life is essential in determining risk
but that other environmental or cultural factors may be continually influencing the predisposition to cancer.
In the United States, stomach cancer occurs at a higher incidence in men than in women (ratio of approximately 2:1). It is more frequent in black men than in white
men (1.5:1). Starting at the fourth decade, the incidence of stomach cancer increases with advancing age and has a peak incidence in the seventh decade in men and
a slightly later peak incidence in women. 12,19 The mortality rate for stomach cancer has decreased from 31.5 per 100,000 for white men in 1935 to 7.8 per 100,000 for
all U.S. men in 1983. However, this decline in mortality simply reflects the decrease in the incidence of the disease, and relative 5-year survival rates have not
changed considerably.
One of the most striking epidemiologic observations has been the increasing incidence of adenocarcinomas involving the proximal stomach and distal
esophagus.3,4,20,21 In 1991, Blot and colleagues, 3 reviewing the National Cancer Institute's Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results database, reported that,
during the period 1976 to 1987, a shift to proximal gastric lesions was noted. The annual increase in proximal gastric lesions was 4.3% for white men, 4.1% for white
women, 3.6% for black men, and 5.6% for black women. This annual rate of increase on a percentage basis is greater than that of lung cancer or melanoma. The
incidence of adenocarcinoma elsewhere in the stomach was approximately the same or slightly lower. By 1984 to 1987, cancers of the cardia made up 47% of all
gastric cancers in white men. European investigators have reported similar data. 22 This trend is worrisome, because proximal gastric cancers are thought to have a
poorer prognosis, stage for stage, compared with distal cancers. 23,24,25 and 26 The etiologic basis for this rising trend is being aggressively pursued. Increasing
prevalence of obesity in the United States may be one factor contributing to this trend. Elevated body mass index 27,28 and caloric consumption29 have been associated
with adenocarcinoma of the distal esophagus and gastric cardia. Gastroesophageal reflux disease may be another risk factor. A population-based, case-control study
performed in Sweden found that, for persons with recurrent symptoms of reflux, as compared to those without such symptoms, the odds ratio was 7.7 [95% confidence
interval (CI), 5.3 to 11.4] for esophageal adenocarcinoma and 2.0 (95% CI, 1.4 to 2.9) for adenocarcinoma of the gastric cardia. 30 Others have found tobacco use to
be associated with these tumors at these sites. 31 Gammon et al.32 observed an increased odds ratio of 2.4 (95% CI, 1.7 to 3.4) for cigarette smokers. Conversely,
aspirin and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug use has been associated with a lower risk of esophageal and cardia cancers, 33 implicating inflammation in the etiology
of this disease.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS
It is generally accepted that the carcinogenic process leading to the intestinal-type cancers takes many years to develop into invasive adenocarcinoma. Many studies
have investigated the role of diet in association with the development of stomach cancer, concluding that the consumption of raw (uncooked) vegetables, fruit, citrus
fruit, and high fiber are inversely related to stomach cancer risk. 14,18,34,35 Dietary factors that may be associated with an increased risk of stomach cancer are listed in
Table 33.3-1. Antioxidants, which can prevent the conversion of nitrates to nitrosamine, appear to be protective. Diets rich in vitamins A and C 14,36 and micronutrients
such as selenium, zinc, cooper, iron, and manganese may lower the risk of gastric carcinoma. 37

TABLE 33.3-1. Factors Associated with Increased Risk of Developing Stomach Cancer

The incidence of cancers affecting the gastric body and antrum is inversely related to socioeconomic status, which probably reflects a number of social, occupational,
or cultural factors. 18 A higher incidence has been associated with the practice of smoking or salting meat and fish and a low incidence with the use of refrigeration and
better food preparation. The use of well water, which may contain high concentrations of nitrates or Helicobacter pylori, has been shown to be a risk factor for gastric
cancer. 38,39 Smoking has been reported to increase the relative risk, whereas no consistent data have supported that alcohol consumption affects the incidence of
stomach cancer.35
Correa and colleagues 9 have proposed a model for the pathogenesis of intestinal-type gastric cancer. Normal mucosa, either through environmental or other factors,
becomes atrophied in association with impaired gastric acid secretion and an increased gastric pH. Subsequent bacterial overgrowth results in further mucosal injury
directly or via the bacterial production of nitrites or N-nitroso compounds from dietary nitrates. 38 In laboratory animals, the ability of chronically administered oral
N-nitroso compounds to produce intestinal metaplasia and subsequent carcinoma has been well described. 40,41 In humans, this mechanism is supported by the
observation of a high prevalence of chronic atrophic gastritis and intestinal metaplasia in populations with a high incidence of gastric cancer and the association of
gastric cancer with pernicious anemia. 10,42,43 and 44
The Epstein-Barr virus genome has been identified in human gastric cancers with lymphoepithelioid features. 45,46 This is an uncommon finding that has been
associated with tumors of younger patients (younger than 35 years), tumors located in the cardia, or in stump carcinomas. 47,48 The frequency in Japan is estimated to
be approximately three times that of North America. 49
The data in support of radiation exposure increasing the risk of gastric cancer come from the Japanese atomic bomb reports. 50 An initial analysis of patients irradiated
for peptic ulcer disease followed through 1962 showed no significant tumor increase. A subsequent study of 2049 irradiated patients and 763 medically managed
patients was undertaken in 1984 to estimate the risk of cancer due to gastric irradiation. A relative risk of 3.7 was found for stomach cancer. 51
The occurrence of gastric carcinoma clustered in families suggests the existence of a genetic susceptibility to cancer of the stomach. Estimates of familial clustering of
gastric cancer range from 1% 52 to 15% of all gastric cancers. 52,53 The most celebrated example of the genetic predisposition toward stomach cancer is illustrated in
the Bonaparte family: Napoleon, his father, and his grandfather all died of gastric carcinoma. 54 Gastric cancer occurs with increased frequency in family members
diagnosed with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer and Li-Fraumeni syndrome. In 1998, Guilford et al. 55 identified an E-cadherin germline mutation present in
three Maori kindreds with familial gastric cancers in New Zealand. The potential role for this mutated intracellular adhesion protein in the susceptibility of diffuse-type
cancers also was documented in non-Maori families of European and Korean dissent. 56 Shinmura et al.52 studied DNA from 13 proband cases of familial gastric
cancer and concluded that DNA mismatch repair, mutated p53, and E-cadherin genes did not contribute to the observed familial clustering.
PRIOR GASTRIC SURGERY AND GASTRIC CANCER
In 1922, Balfour 57 made the original observation that an association existed between the development of gastric cancer and previous partial gastrectomy for benign
disease. A gastric stump cancer arises in the gastric remnant no less than 5 years after partial gastrectomy to distinguish a de novo gastric stump cancer from a
locally recurrent tumor that was not recognized at the original operation. 58 Two metaanalyses have been published that indicate an increased risk of gastric stump
cancer in patients with partial gastrectomy. 59,60 The increased risk is observed only after a latency period of at least 15 years, is increased in patients operated on for
gastric but not for duodenal ulcer, and is slightly higher in women than in men. The type of reconstruction does not appear to influence the relative risk of developing
gastric stump cancer. Baas et al. 48 compared 26 stump carcinomas with 24 conventional stomach cancers and found that RNA in situ hybridization for Epstein-Barr
virus was positive in nine stump carcinomas versus two carcinomas in the nonoperated stomach, suggesting etiologic differences between stump carcinoma and

cancers arising in the intact stomach.
Because histamine-2 receptor antagonists suppress gastric acid secretion, it has been suggested that chronic use of these agents may predispose the gastric
epithelium toward malignant degeneration. However, the only increased risk of stomach cancer in histamine-2 receptor antagonist users has been restricted to
patients who had started treatment within 5 years before the diagnosis of stomach cancer. 61,62 This suggests that there may have been a misdiagnosis in some
patients rather than a causal role for the drug.
Helicobacter pylori and Gastric Cancer
In 1982, Marshall and Warren first isolated H pylori from biopsies of gastric epithelium. The role for H pylori in initiating mucosal injury and the subsequent
development of chronic atrophic gastritis is well known. 40,63 In patients who had undergone resection for intestinal-type gastric cancer, the presence of H pylori has
been identified in noncancerous tissue in almost 90% of patients, compared with 32% with the diffuse form of gastric cancer. 64 Several studies have reported a
significant association between H pylori infection and gastric cancer, 65,66 and 67 particularly for tumors in the distal stomach. 68 The risk of developing gastric cancer
correlated with increasing H pylori immunoglobulin G antibody levels and was higher when the time interval between the diagnosis of H pylori infection and gastric
cancer was more than 10 years. Parsonnet and colleagues 65 found a particularly strong association between H pylori infection and stomach cancer in women and
blacks. The intestinal and diffuse types of stomach adenocarcinoma, as well as gastric lymphoma, were associated with H pylori infection. However, others have
found a significantly higher incidence of H pylori infection in patients with intestinal but not diffuse-type gastric cancer. 69 Although H pylori has been classified as a
class I carcinogen, the incidence of H pylori infection in matched controls in these studies was between 61% and 76%, indicating that most people with H pylori
infection do not develop stomach cancer and that other contributing factors are important in its pathogenesis. It has been shownthat H pylori isolates that process the
cagA gene are more virulent in nature and produce significant amounts of gastritis and epithelial injury. Patients with cagA H pylori infection have a slightly higher risk
of developing stomach cancer than those with cagA-negative strains. 70 Further research may define whether characteristics of certain subtypes of H pylori or unique
characteristics of its host promote malignant transformation. At the present time, antibiotic therapy in H pylori–positive patients should be reserved for those with
proven ulcer disease or nonulcer dyspepsia in whom other measures have been unsuccessful.
ANATOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
The stomach begins at the gastroesophageal junction and ends at the pylorus ( Fig. 33.3-1). Above it lie the diaphragm and left lobe of the liver; before it is the
abdominal wall; and below it are the transverse colon, mesocolon, and greater omentum. Behind and to the sides are the spleen, pancreas, left adrenal gland, left
kidney, and splenic flexure of the colon. Cancers arising from the proximal greater curvature may directly involve the splenic hilum and tail of pancreas, whereas more
distal tumors may invade the transverse colon. Proximal cancers may extend into the diaphragm, spleen, or the left lateral segment of the liver.

FIGURE 33.3-1. Blood supply to the stomach and anatomic relationships of the stomach with other adjacent organs likely to be involved by direct extension of a large
gastric malignancy.

The blood supply to the stomach is extensive and is based on vessels arising from the celiac axis (see Fig. 33.3-1). The right gastric artery, arising from the hepatic
artery, and the left gastric artery, arising from the celiac axis directly, course along the lesser curvature. Along the greater curvature are the right gastroepiploic artery,
which originates from the gastroduodenal artery at the inferior border of the proximal duodenum, and the left gastroepiploic artery, branching from the splenic artery
laterally. The short gastric arteries (vasa brevia) arise directly from the splenic artery and make a relatively small contribution to the blood supply to the proximal
portion of the stomach. The preservation of any of these vessels in the course of a subtotal gastrectomy for carcinoma is not necessary (nor possible if the operation
is performed correctly), and the most proximal few centimeters of remaining stomach are well supplied by collateral flow from the lower segmental esophageal arcade.
The rich submucosal blood supply of the stomach is an important factor in its ability to heal rapidly and produce a low incidence of anastomotic disruption.
The venous supply of the stomach tends to parallel the arterial supply. The venous efflux ultimately passes the portal venous system and is reflected in the fact that
the liver is a primary site for distant metastatic spread.
The lymphatic drainage of the stomach is extensive, and distinct anatomic groups of perigastric lymph nodes have been defined according to their relationship to the
stomach and its blood supply. There are six perigastric lymph node groups: along the greater curvature are the subpyloric and gastroepiploic nodes, and along the
lesser curvature are the suprapyloric and the lesser curvature lymph nodes. Proximally are found the right and left pericardial nodes. The second echelon
(extraperigastric) nodes include the common hepatic, left gastric, splenic hilum, and splenic artery lymphatics, which drain into the celiac and periaortic lymphatics.
Proximally are the lower esophageal lymph nodes; extensive spread of gastric cancer along the intrathoracic lymph channels may be manifested clinically by a
metastatic lymph node in the left supraclavicular fossa (Virchow's node) or left axilla (Irish's node). As the submucosal lymphatic supply of the stomach becomes
extensively involved with tumor, other routes of lymphatic drainage may be recruited. Tumor spread to the lymphatics in the hepatoduodenal ligament can extend
along the falciform ligament and result in subcutaneous periumbilical tumor deposits known as Sister Mary Joseph's nodes.

PATHOLOGY AND TUMOR BIOLOGY
Approximately 95% of all malignant gastric neoplasms are adenocarcinomas, and in general, the term gastric cancer refers to adenocarcinoma of the stomach. Other
malignant tumors are very rare and include squamous cell carcinoma, adenoacanthoma, carcinoid tumors, and leiomyosarcoma. 71 Although no normal lymphoid tissue
is found in the gastric mucosa, the stomach is the most common site for lymphomas of the gastrointestinal tract. The increased awareness of association between
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas and H pylori may explain, in part, the rise in incidence. 72 The differentiation between adenocarcinoma and lymphoma
can sometimes be difficult but is essential because staging, treatment, and prognosis are different for each disease. 73
HISTOPATHOLOGY
Several staging schemas have been proposed based on the morphologic features of gastric tumors. The Borrmann classification divides gastric cancer into five types
depending on macroscopic appearance. Type I represents polypoid or fungating cancers, type II encompasses ulcerating lesions surrounded by elevated borders,
type III represents ulcerated lesions infiltrating the gastric wall, type IV are diffusely infiltrating tumors, and type V are unclassifiable cancers. 74 The gross morphologic
appearance of gastric cancer and the degree of histologic differentiation are not independent prognostic variables. 75,76 Ming76 has proposed a histomorphologic
staging system that divides gastric cancer into either a prognostically favorable expansive type or a poor prognosis infiltrating type. Based on an analysis of 171
gastric cancers, the expansive-type tumors were uniformly polypoid or superficial on gross appearance, whereas the infiltrative tumors were almost always diffuse.
Grossly ulcerated lesions were equally divided between the expanding or infiltrative forms. Broder's classification of gastric cancer grades tumors histologically from 1
(well differentiated) to 4 (anaplastic). Bearzi and Ranaldi 77 have correlated the degree of histologic differentiation with the gross appearance of 41 primary gastric
cancers seen on endoscopy. Ninety percent of protruding or superficial cancers were well differentiated (Broder's grade 1), whereas almost one-half of all ulcerated
tumors were poorly differentiated or diffusely infiltrating (Broder's grades 3 and 4).

The most widely used classification of gastric cancer is by Laurén. 6 It divides gastric cancers into either intestinal or diffuse forms. This classification scheme, based
on tumor histology, effectively characterizes two varieties of gastric adenocarcinomas that manifest distinctively different pathology, epidemiology, and etiologies. The
intestinal variety represents a differentiated cancer with a tendency to form glands. In contrast, the diffuse form exhibits very little cell cohesion and has a predilection
for extensive submucosal spread and early metastases. Although the diffuse-type cancers are generally associated with a worse outcome than the intestinal type, this
finding is not independent of tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) stage.
PATTERNS OF SPREAD
Carcinomas of the stomach can spread by local extension to involve adjacent structures and can develop lymphatic metastases, peritoneal metastases, and distant
metastases. These extensions can occur by the local invasive properties of the tumor, lymphatic spread, or hematogenous dissemination. The initial growth of the
tumor occurs by penetration into the gastric wall, extension through the wall, and involvement of an increasing percentage of the stomach. The two modes of local
extension that can have a major therapeutic impact are tumor penetration through the gastric serosa, where the risk of tumor invasion of adjacent structures or
peritoneal spread is increased, and involvement of lymphatics. Zinninger 78 has evaluated the spread in the gastric wall and has found a wide variation in its extent.
Tumor spread is often through the intramural lymphatics or in the subserosal layers. Local extension can also occur into the esophagus or the duodenum. Duodenal
extension is principally through the muscular layer by direct infiltration and through the subserosal lymphatics, but is not generally of great extent. Extension into the
esophagus occurs primarily through the submucosal lymphatics.
Local extension does not occur solely by radial intramural spread but also by deep invasion through the wall to involve adjacent structures. Extension can occur
through the gastric serosa to involve omentum, spleen, adrenal gland, diaphragm, liver, pancreas, or colon. Data from several large older series indicated that 60% to
90% of patients had primary tumors penetrating the serosa or invading adjacent organs and that at least 50% had lymphatic metastases. 79,80 Of the 1577 primary
gastric cancer cases admitted to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center between July 1, 1985, and June 30, 1998, 60% of the 1221 resected cases had evidence of
serosal penetration, and 68% had positive nodes. Lymph node metastases were found in 18% of pT1 lesions after R0 resection in 941 patients. This rate increased
significantly to 60% in pT2 lesions. The highest incidence of lymphatic metastasis was seen in tumors diffusely involving the entire stomach. Tumors located at the
gastroesophageal junction also had a high incidence relative to other sites. The pattern of nodal metastases also varies depending on the location of the primary site
(Table 33.3-2), with the left gastric artery nodes being consistently at increased risk for nodal metastases regardless of tumor location.

TABLE 33.3-2. Pattern of Nodal Metastases from Gastric Cancer

Gastric cancer recurs in multiple sites, both locoregionally and systemically ( Table 33.3-3). The literature reveals disagreements over failure patterns ( Table 33.3-4);
these disagreements are likely related to the patient cohorts accepted for evaluation, the time at which failure was determined, and the method of determination of
failure patterns. In two older autopsy series, the rate of locoregional failure [defined as tumor in perigastric tissues (e.g., in the retroperitoneal “gastric bed,” perigastric
lymph nodes, gastric remnant)] after potentially curative resection was 40% to 80%. 81,82 Many patients had multiple sites of local failure. Shiu and coworkers 79 found a
23% local recurrence rate in 169 patients treated for carcinoma of the body of the stomach.

TABLE 33.3-3. Site of Metastases at Autopsy or Operation

TABLE 33.3-4. Failure Patterns in Gastric Cancer Patients

Gunderson and Sosin 83 reanalyzed the reoperation series performed by Wangensteen at the University of Minnesota, where patients had a second-look laparotomy
after resection of the primary tumor. This type of analysis is valuable because it can demonstrate the early (and perhaps most treatable) modes of failure rather than
simply showing diffuse metastatic disease at autopsy. Sixty-nine percent of patients had evidence of a locoregional recurrence, and 42% of patients had peritoneal
seeding. Most of the local failures were located in the gastric bed (81%), although recurrences also occurred in the anastomosis or stump (39%) or in the regional
lymph nodes (63%). A trial from the British Stomach Cancer Group found an incidence of local failure in patients treated with surgery alone to be 37 of 69 (54%). 84 A
series evaluating local failure patterns reported by Landry and coworkers 85 showed a total locoregional failure rate of 38%, with most of the local recurrences in the
gastric bed, the anastomosis, or the gastric stump. The incidence of local failure increased when the primary disease extended through the gastric wall or when lymph
nodes were involved at the initial surgery. Liver metastases occurred in 30% of patients and peritoneal seeding in 23%. Extraabdominal failure was relatively rare and

occurred in 13% of patients.
Some newer series suggest a higher incidence of peritoneal seeding as a failure pattern. Wisbeck et al. 82 evaluated autopsy and clinical records of 85 patients who
died of gastric cancer. Sixteen patients had a resection with curative intent; 15 of these developed a locoregional recurrence, eight developed peritoneal seeding, and
seven developed lung metastases. Of the entire cohort, 40 of 85 (47%) developed peritoneal seeding. Ajani and colleagues 86 treated 25 patients with preoperative
chemotherapy. At the time of surgery, eight had peritoneal carcinomatosis, and it developed subsequently in an additional five patients. Because imaging studies
were not done routinely postoperatively, they could not accurately determine the risk of locoregional failure. These data suggest that increased attention to methods of
controlling local and regional disease as well as systemic disease is needed to improve long-term results.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS
Most patients with gastric cancer are diagnosed with advanced-stage disease, and this is reflected in the vague, nonspecific symptoms that characterize the disease.
Patients may have a combination of signs and symptoms, such as weight loss, anorexia, fatigue, or epigastric discomfort, none of which unequivocally indicates
gastric cancer. The clinical significance of weight loss in gastric cancer should not be underestimated. Dewys and colleagues 87 has shown that, in 179 patients with
advanced, nonmeasurable gastric cancer, more than 80% of patients had a greater than 10% decrease in body weight. Patients with weight loss had a significantly
shorter survival than those without weight loss.
In some patients, symptoms may suggest the presence of a lesion in specific locations. A history of dysphagia may indicate the presence of a tumor in the cardia with
extension through the gastroesophageal junction. A complaint of early satiety is actually a very infrequent symptom of gastric cancer, but is indicative of a diffusely
infiltrative tumor that has resulted in loss of distensibility of the gastric wall. Persistent vomiting is consistent with an antral carcinoma obstructing the pylorus.
Significant gastrointestinal bleeding is uncommon with gastric cancer; however, hematemesis does occur in approximately 10% to 15% of patients. However, many
patients are diagnosed after the development of ascites, jaundice, or a palpable mass, indicating extensive and incurable disease.
Because the transverse colon is held in close proximity to the stomach by the gastrocolic ligament, it is a potential site of malignant fistula and large bowel obstruction
from a gastric primary. Diffuse peritoneal spread of disease frequently produces other sites of intestinal obstruction. A large ovarian mass (Krukenberg's tumor) or a
large peritoneal implant in the pelvis (Blumer's shelf), which can produce symptoms of rectal obstruction, may be felt on pelvic or rectal examination. Nodular
metastases in the subcutaneous tissue around the umbilicus or in peripheral lymph nodes represent areas in which tissue diagnosis can be established with minimal
morbidity.
SCREENING
Mass screening programs for gastric cancer have been most successful in high-risk areas, especially in Japan. 88 A variety of screening tests have been studied in
Japanese patients, with a sensitivity and specificity of approximately 90%. 89 They frequently include the use of double-contrast barium radiographs or upper
endoscopy. 89 The yield in screened populations has been substantial; in some Japanese studies, up to 40% of newly diagnosed patients have early gastric cancer,
and up to 60% of patients actively participating in routine mass screening programs have the disease. 88 This is clinically important because, as discussed below in
Pathologic Staging and Prognosis, early gastric cancer has a very high cure rate when treated surgically. However, the fact that gastric cancer remains the number
one cause of death in Japan may reflect the limitations of a mass screening program when the entire population at risk is not effectively screened. Newer studies have
verified that a low serum pepsinogen I/II ratio can be used to better select patients at increased risk for atrophic gastritis and gastric cancer. 90

PRETREATMENT STAGING
TUMOR MARKERS
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is elevated in approximately one-third of primary gastric cancer patients. 91 The sensitivity of CEA is low, but when elevated, the level
does generally correlate with stage. Combining CEA with other markers, such as the sialylated Lewis antigens CA19-9 or CA50, can increase the sensitivity over CEA
alone. 92,93 and 94 A large study evaluated the prognostic significance of serum levels of CEA (n = 237), a-fetoprotein (n = 164), human chorionic gonadotropin-b
(b-HCG) (n = 165), CA19-9 (n = 64), and CA125 (n = 104), as well as tissue staining for C-erb B-2 (n = 160) and b-HCG (n = 160). In a multivariate analysis, only
serum b-HCG ³4 IU/L (hazard ratio, 1.7; 95% CI, 2.8 to 1.1) and CA125 ³350 U/mL (hazard ratio, 2.2; 95% CI, 4.2 to 1.2) had prognostic significance. Elevated serum
b-HCG and CA125 in gastric cancer before chemotherapy may reflect not just tumor burden but aggressive biology, however, these findings must be compared to
other known preoperative markers of stage, such as endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) T and N stage. 95
ENDOSCOPY
Upper endoscopy is used routinely for the initial diagnosis and staging of gastric adenocarcinoma and should be performed in any patient with localized disease for
which surgical treatment is anticipated. Numerous reports have demonstrated diagnostic accuracy of more than 95% for advanced disease. 96,97 The size, location,
and morphology of the tumor, including the proximal and distal extent of spread, as well as other mucosal abnormalities, should be carefully evaluated. Decreased
distensibility of the stomach, abnormal peristaltic activity, or abnormal pyloric function may indicate extensive submucosal infiltration or extramural extension of tumor
into the vagi. The likelihood of a positive yield on biopsy is greater than 95% when six to ten tissue samples are obtained. 96 Detecting the faint mucosal irregularities
usually associated with early gastritis-like carcinomas can be enhanced by endoscopic dye spraying with vital dyes, such as 0.1% indigocalmin. This technique has
been used extensively in Japan with good success.
EUS has been used extensively to stage the depth of invasion and regional lymph node extent in potentially operable gastric cancer. EUS uses a high-frequency (7.5
or 12 MHz) transducer at the end of an endoscope and allows highly accurate staging of the depth of invasion of the primary tumor (T stage) and is more accurate
than a computed tomographic (CT) scan for staging T and N status. 95,98 Although it appears more useful than a CT scan for detecting perigastric lymph node
metastases, the overall accuracy of EUS for assessing all regional nodes is less satisfactory. Because CT may identify metastases to distant nodes and sites, such as
the liver, ovaries, and peritoneum, CT and EUS are best used as complementary tests. EUS has become an invaluable tool to assess which early gastric cancers are
candidates for endomucosal resection, a curative treatment in properly selected patients 99,100 (see Treatment of Local Disease, below).
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Once gastric cancer is suspected, a barium study or flexible upper endoscopy with biopsy is performed. After the diagnosis is established, staging procedures involve
careful physical examination, routine blood screening tests, and abdominal and chest CT scanning. 101 Barium contrast studies have limited accuracy for determining
resectability, but by using double-contrast techniques, a positive diagnosis of lesions between 5 and 10 mm can be made in 75% of patients. 102 CT of the chest,
abdomen, and pelvis is useful for assessing the lateral extension of the tumor and presence of systemic metastases. 103 However, up to 50% of patients have more
extensive disease at laparotomy than was predicted by preoperative CT. 104 With newer triphasic spiral CT scanning methods, greater emphasis has been placed on
identifying low-volume disease and predicting the T stage. Takao et al. 105 reported an accuracy for spiral CT of 82% for staging T status in advanced gastric cancer
and 15% in early gastric cancer by obtaining images with the stomach filled with water. Few Western centers routinely apply these techniques, and without them the
accuracy of T staging is generally poor.
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY
Whole body [ 18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) is being applied increasingly in the evaluation of gastrointestinal malignancies. The
positron-emitting 18F-labeled analogue of 2-deoxyglucose, 2-[ 18F]-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose is readily transported into cells by either type I or II hexose transporters.
Once in the cell, the analogue is phosphorylated into FDG-6-phosphate, which in most tumor tissues is not metabolized further. The preferential accumulation of
positron-emitting FDG by tumor cells has been used successfully to image human tumors. Several studies have documented improved efficacy of detecting recurrent
colorectal and hepatic (primary and metastatic) tumor sites, with a sensitivity ranging from 92% to 100% and an accuracy of 90% to 96%. 106 Results from a study in
esophageal cancer demonstrated that PET could detect 20% of metastases missed by CT. 107 Little information regarding the use of FDG-PET in the management of

gastric cancer is available. In a pilot study begun here at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, we set out to assess the feasibility of FDG-PET imaging in gastric
cancer patients. Fifteen studies were performed on 14 gastric cancer patients with various stages of disease. One hundred forty-five lesions were imaged with
concurrent histologic confirmation. The preliminary results show FDG-PET to have a sensitivity of 60%, specificity of 100%, and an overall accuracy of 94% in
identifying gastric cancer. The most consistent finding has been uptake in the primary tumor, indicating a possible role in treatment response assessment as well as
for staging.
LAPAROSCOPY
The introduction of fiberoptic, video-assisted laparoscopy in the early 1980s added a means of direct and immediate assessment of the abdominal cavity without the
morbidity of a laparotomy. Comparative studies of CT and laparoscopy have consistently shown laparoscopy to provide additional information that was not seen by
preoperative CT imaging. In a study of 103 consecutively staged gastric cancer patients, laparoscopy had an accuracy of 94% when compared to what was found at
laparotomy. Disease missed by CT was mostly peritoneal metastases. The rate of detecting occult M1 disease by this method ranges from 13% to 37%. 108,109,110,111,112
and 113
Patients without clinically significant bleeding or obstruction that are found to have occult metastatic disease are incurable and may benefit from participation in
new treatment protocols. Use of induction chemotherapy and selective resection of responding patients is an attractive alternative to immediate resection. Contrary to
previously held dogma, most stage IV patients rarely develop significant symptoms from the primary tumor before death. None of the 24 patients with metastatic
disease discovered at laparoscopy who were followed until death required subsequent laparotomy for complications of the primary tumor. 109 Because CT may identify
metastases to distant sites (liver, adrenal glands, and ovaries), thus avoiding an operation, CT, EUS, and laparoscopy are all considered complementary tests.
The development of laparoscopic ultrasonographic probes has added a third dimension to the laparoscopic examination. 114 Laparoscopy with laparoscopic
ultrasonography, although more invasive than EUS, is superior in identifying unsuspected metastases to liver and lymph nodes. Considering the low morbidity and
significantly shorter hospital stay, 109,112 laparoscopy, whenever feasible, should eliminate the need for patients undergoing laparotomy without resection.
PATHOLOGIC STAGING AND PROGNOSIS
As with other neoplasms, the uniform and accurate staging of gastric cancer is essential to meaningfully predict prognosis and assess response to treatment. The R
classification indicates the amount of residual disease left after tumor resection. 115R0 indicates no gross or microscopic residual disease; R1 indicates microscopic
residual disease, and R2 signifies gross residual disease. This is an obvious but most important prognostic factor, but it was not always indicated in the past, making
interpretation of survival results difficult.
The International Union Against Cancer (UICC) and American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) TNM classification for stomach cancer is shown in Table 33.3-5.
The depth of tumor invasion (Fig. 33.3-2) determines T stage. The relationship between T stage and survival is well defined ( Fig. 33.3-3). The General Rules for
Gastric Cancer Study in Surgery and Pathology was published in English in 1995 by the Japanese Research Society for Gastric Cancer. 74 The definition of the
primary tumor stage based on the depth of invasion and the presence and extent of serosal invasion is shown in Table 33.3-6. T stage is further divided into mucosa
(m), submucosa (sm), and muscularis propria (pm). The subserosa (ss) and S1 tumors have been reclassified to further stratify the degree and type of serosal
invasion. INFa is a subserosal tumor with expansive growth, INFb is a subserosal tumor with intermediate-type growth, and INFg is a subserosal tumor with infiltrating
growth. S2 and S3 are now defined as either se (cancer cells exposed to the peritoneal cavity), si (cancer cells infiltrating neighboring tissue), or sei (the coexistence
of se and si). 74 Survival results based on T stage are fairly consistent among Japan, Europe, and the United States 116,117,118,119,120 and 121 (see Table 33.3-6).

TABLE 33.3-5. American Joint Committee on Cancer Staging of Gastric Cancer, 1997

FIGURE 33.3-2. Definition of American Joint Committee on Cancer/International Union Against Cancer T stage based on depth of penetration of the gastric wall.

FIGURE 33.3-3. Kaplan-Meier curves of disease-specific survival according to American Joint Committee on Cancer T stage. Tis (tumor in situ; n = 16) A; T1 (n =
168) B; T2 (n = 265) C; T3 (n = 464) D; T4 (not shown), n = 28. (From the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center Department of Surgery Prospective Gastric
Cancer Database.)

TABLE 33.3-6. Survival after Curative Resection for Gastric Cancer with Respect to Depth of Invasion

The AJCC/UICC N stage was changed in 1997 to reflect the number of involved lymph nodes. Tumors with one to six involved nodes are classified as pN1; 7 to 15
involved nodes are pN2, and more than 15 involved nodes is N3. Survival decreases dramatically as the number of metastatic lymph nodes increase. The N stage
survival rate based on the number of nodes involved is shown in Figure 33.3-4 for 941 R0 gastric cancer patients treated at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
The previous classification was based on the localization of lymph node metastases. An analysis of 477 R0 resected node-positive cases from the German Gastric
Cancer Study compared survival using both staging systems. This new 1997 AJCC further separated the survival of patients categorized by the old N definition ( Fig.
33.3-5). Survival was significantly changed in the old N2 group by applying the new N stage classification. 122 Differences between the two staging systems were not
as great for N1 patients. Within the groups with one to six, 7 to 15, and more than 15 involved nodes, the location of metastatic lymph nodes did not significantly alter
the prognosis. The new classification can now be applied in surgical trials with fewer methodologic problems, and it seems more reproducible provided that a
minimum of at least 15 lymph nodes are examined. Several studies have assessed quantitative involvement of lymph nodes and survival after resection for gastric
cancer and found that survival with up to three to four metastatic lymph nodes is better than with more extensive lymph node involvement. 121,123 Once nodal
metastases are found, Japanese survival statistics are better than those seen in Western patients 123 (Table 33.3-7). Possible explanations for this observation include
a potential difference in the biology of the tumor between the two patient populations or that the Japanese are removing and analyzing more lymph nodes, resulting in
stage migration. The new AJCC/UICC requirement that a minimum of 15 nodes be removed and analyzed may minimize these differences.

FIGURE 33.3-4. Kaplan-Meier curves of disease-specific survival according to the 1997 American Joint Committee on Cancer N stage. N0 (no positive nodes; n =
355) A; N1 (one to six positive nodes; n = 354) B; N2 (7 to 15 positive nodes; n = 164) C; N3 (>15 positive nodes; n = 60) D. (From the Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center Department of Surgery Prospective Gastric Cancer Database.)

FIGURE 33.3-5. This graph demonstrates the range in 5-year survival rates according to the 1997 American Joint Committee on Cancer/International Union Against
Cancer N stage within two groups of patients classified by the 1992 N1 and N2 staging. lnm, lymph node metastases. (Data modified from ref. 122.)

TABLE 33.3-7. Survival after Resection for Gastric Cancer with Respect to Lymph Node Status

Under the current staging system, the presence of more than 15 perigastric lymph node metastases is classified as N3 disease, which is staged as M1. The Japanese
staging system extensively classifies 18 lymph node regions into four N categories depending on their relationship to the primary tumor as well as anatomic location.
The careful and complete prosection of the operative specimen may often be performed by the attending surgeon or designated surgical resident. Involvement with N1
and N2 lymph node groups represent regional disease, which is encompassed by the D2 lymphadenectomy, whereas N3 and N4 lymph nodes are considered distant
metastases. In addition, the presence and extent of intraabdominal metastases to the peritoneum and liver are categorized ( Table 33.3-8).

TABLE 33.3-8. Japanese Surgical Staging System for Gastric Cancer

Stage for stage, considerable disparity exists between the survival of patients with stomach cancer in Japanese and Western series. Wanebo and coworkers 124 have
reported on the results of a tumor registry survey in 1982 and 1987 of 18,365 U.S. patients. In the entire cohort, 18% of patients were stage I, 16% stage II, 36% stage
III, and 30% stage IV. Although early diagnosis, a higher incidence of intestinal-type tumors, and the use of radical surgery in Japan may explain these differences, in
part, a major contributing factor may be the extensive and meticulous surgical and pathologic staging of gastric cancer in Japan. Several reports from the United
States, Japan, and Europe have demonstrated similar survival results by applying more similar surgical and pathologic staging techniques. 125,126 and 127 The 1997 AJCC
TNM survival curves are shown in Figure 33.3-6 for R0-resected patients.

FIGURE 33.3-6. Kaplan-Meier curves of disease-specific survival according to the 1997 American Joint Committee on Cancer system. Stage 0 (n = 16) A; IA (n = 139)
B; IB (n = 133) C; II (n = 206) D; IIIA (n = 239) E; IIIB (n = 130) F; IV (n = 81) G. (From the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center Department of Surgery
Prospective Gastric Cancer Database.)

Although not a formal component of stage grouping, the histopathologic grade and type and, when available, the peritoneal lavage cytology status should be
recorded. The presence of free peritoneal cancer cells has been shown by a number of investigators to be an M1 equivalent. 128,129,130 and 131 Burke et al.132 found no
survivors beyond 18 months among stage III patients with positive peritoneal lavage.
TREATMENT OF LOCALIZED DISEASE
ENDOSCOPIC MUCOSAL RESECTION
It has been shown that a subset of early gastric cancers can undergo an R0 resection without lymphadenectomy or gastrectomy. The Japanese have popularized
endoscopic mucosal resection of early gastric cancers that meet specific criteria. This approach involves the submucosal injection of fluid to elevate the lesion to
facilitate complete mucosal resection. The technique is suitable for lesions that have a low metastatic potential. 133 These include well-differentiated, superficial type IIa
or IIc lesions that are generally smaller than 3 cm in diameter and located in an easily manipulated area. Tumors invading the submucosa are at increased risk for
metastasizing to lymph nodes and are not appropriate for endoscopic resection. Takekoshi et al. 134 reported a series of 308 endoscopic resections for early cancer.
Forty-four patients had residual or recurrent lesions after endoscopic mucosal resection. All recurrences were resected, and no patients died of gastric cancer. In
experienced hands, endoscopic mucosal resection is a suitable alternative to gastrectomy for favorable early gastric cancer.
SURGERY
The only potentially curative treatment for localized gastric cancer is complete surgical resection. The principles that guide operative management are based on the
Halstedian belief that gastric cancer progresses from mucosa to submucosa where it then invades into lymphatics. From there, lymph node involvement occurs but
before the disease reaches the systemic circulation. Clearly this is an oversimplified view of tumor progression; however, support for this theory comes from the strong
correlation between depth of invasion and the extent and number of lymph node metastases. Others have argued that epithelial cancers can metastasize directly into
the systemic circulation, thus bypassing lymph nodes. 20 Molecular factors, which govern invasion and metastases, differ from one tumor to the next, such that even
some early gastric cancers do recur and are fatal after curative surgery. 135 In general, the success of an R0 resection is directly dependent on stage as determined by
the TNM system. It is well accepted that surgery carries a high cure rate for stage IA and IB cancers and much poorer results for stages IIIA and IIIB. Disagreement
exists among surgeons with respect to the appropriate extent of resection, because improved outcome has not been conclusively linked with more radical surgery.
Current areas of discussion include the potential therapeutic benefit from extended lymphadenectomy, the routine use of total versus subtotal gastrectomy for tumors
of the body or antrum, and prophylactic splenectomy.
Extended Lymphadenectomy
The Japanese Research Society for Gastric Cancer proposed a standardized D2 resection for patients undergoing curative gastrectomy. As radical surgery for gastric
cancer has become uniformly accepted in Japan, the operative mortality rate for D2 resection has declined and 5-year survival after curative resection has improved.
Many large retrospective reports from Japan, other Asian countries, and specialty centers in the West advocate a D2 lymphadenectomy for patients with resectable
gastric cancer. 136 Maruyama and colleagues117 have reported results from more than 20,000 cases from a nationwide registry in Japan for three periods: 1963 to
1966, 1969 to 1973, and 1971 to 1985. The 30-day operative mortality rate declined from 3.8% in the first period to 1.0% in the latest. When patients were compared
with respect to stage, depth of tumor invasion, presence of serosal invasion, and N1 or N2 nodal metastases, improved survival was noted in the most recent period
compared to the first. However, radical (D2) resection did not improve survival for patients with extranodal disease, such as peritoneal metastases, distant lymph node
metastases (N3–4), or diffusely infiltrating carcinomas (linitis plastica). Takeda and coworkers 137 also have reported that 5-year survival improved from 21% to 46% in
166 patients undergoing total gastrectomy with curative intent for tumors with positive serosal invasion when a D2 lymphadenectomy was performed compared with 62
patients in whom no systematic lymphadenectomy was performed. Kodama and colleagues 138 have compared survival in 254 patients undergoing simple resection
with 454 patients undergoing extensive regional lymph node dissection (ELD) for gastric carcinoma. The therapeutic effect of ELD was greatest in patients with
serosal invasion (T3) or with positive lymph node metastases; patients with T1, T2, T4, or N0 disease did not show a benefit from ELD. In all of these studies,
outcomes of patients operated on in different periods were compared, and it is possible that other factors could have influenced survival. In a series of 486 patients
who underwent curative (D2) resection for gastric cancer, Sowa and coworkers 139 demonstrated that tumor size and depth of penetration were directly related to the
incidence of lymph node metastases in gastric cancer and that the rate of skip metastases was less than 1%. In this study, as well as in others, 140 T1–2 lesions had
metastases limited to perigastric lymph nodes in 15% to 40% of patients, suggesting that, in cases of less-advanced cancers, a systematic lymphadenectomy may be

needed to clear all nodal disease.
Reports have also come from the United States and Europe that are mostly retrospective series advocating D2 lymphadenectomy for gastric cancer. 141 Keller and
colleagues,142 reporting for the German Stomach Cancer TNM Study Group, recommended systematic lymphadenectomy for resectable gastric cancer because occult
lymph node metastases were pathologically identified two to three times more frequently than when no systematic lymphadenectomy was performed. Roder et al. 143
reported the results of the German Gastric Carcinoma Study, in which the treatment of 1999 patients was prospectively recorded and assessed in a systematic,
uniform manner. They demonstrated a survival advantage after D2 lymphadenectomy for stage II and IIIA tumors. The issue of stage migration was dismissed on the
basis that both the standard and extended lymph node dissection groups had far more than the recommended 15 lymph nodes examined. In a retrospective analysis
of 210 patients, Shiu et al. 121 found that, if their lymphadenectomy encompassed one echelon of pathologically uninvolved nodes beyond the level of nodal
metastases, survival was significantly improved over those with a less extensive lymphadenectomy (60% vs. 25%, respectively). Irvin and Bridger 144 have reported a
similar 60% 5-year survival rate in 22 patients undergoing curative D1 resection, but all 22 had pathologically negative nodes (T1–3,N0).
Because of the technical difficulty of an extended lymphadenectomy, some authors have addressed the possibility of using selective lymph node dissection in gastric
cancer with macroscopically suspicious nodes. In one series, however, the mean size of metastatic lymph nodes in 370 patients undergoing D2 gastrectomy was 7
mm,145 and others have reported that surgeons could correctly diagnose metastatic involvement by intraoperative macroscopic examination in only 20% of
patients. 142,145 Noguchi and colleagues 146 have reported that, although a direct correlation exists between lymph node size and the frequency of metastases, 30% of
all metastases to lymph nodes occur in nodes smaller than 3 mm in size. Therefore, it is unlikely that selective lymphadenectomy based on gross appearance of
lymph nodes is feasible or appropriate.
The need for and extent of lymphadenectomy necessary for patients with early gastric cancer, defined as primary tumors limited to the mucosa or submucosa, is
controversial. 147,148,149,150 and 151 Risk factors for lymph node metastases have been identified for intramucosal tumors 133,152 in early gastric cancer. Some have
advocated selective lymphadenectomy, particularly when other favorable factors exist, such as a primary tumor of small size (less than 1.5 cm), protruded-type tumor
(Borrmann type I), and tumors confined to the mucosa. 145 Hochwald et al. 152 analyzed 165 early gastric cancers for clinical and pathologic factors associated with a
low incidence of lymph node metastases. Tumor size [relative risk (RR), 4.8; 95% CI, 4.0 to 5.5], depth of invasion (RR, 3.4; 95% CI, 2.9 to 4.0), and the presence of
venous invasion (RR, 3.3; 95% CI, 2.8 to 3.8) were all independently associated with having positive nodes. However, of the 47 tumors smaller than 4.5 cm in size
and limited to the mucosa only, 4% had lymph node metastases. Kurihara et al. 153 found that when submucosal carcinomas were classified into three categories
according to depth of invasion by dividing the submucosal (sm) layer into three equal parts—sm1, sm2, and sm3—the incidence of lymph node metastasis increased
from 2% to 12% and 20%, respectively. With the availability of EUS and mucosal strip biopsy techniques such as endoscopic mucosal resection, informed decisions
can be made regarding the risk of lymph node metastases and need for lymphadenectomy. The approach to early gastric cancer is evolving into one of selective
management. The favorable long -term results of endoscopic mucosal resection suggest that lymphadenectomy is not needed in properly selected cases. 134
For advanced cancers, considerable debate continues as to whether the routine use of an extensive en bloc resection of second-echelon lymph nodes (D2 resection)
is superior to a more limited lymphadenectomy of the perigastric lymph nodes (D1 resection). Four prospective randomized trials have now been completed on this
subject. Dent et al. 154 reported the first prospective randomized trial of D1 versus D2 gastrectomy from Cape Town, South Africa ( Table 33.3-9). At surgery, only 43
patients of 403 explored were randomized to receive either D2 or D1 gastrectomy. They found no difference in 5-year survival rates. 155 Patients undergoing D2
resection had a significantly longer operating time, greater transfusion requirement, and longer hospital stay. A second single-institution, prospective, randomized trial
comparing D1 subtotal gastrectomy to D3 total gastrectomy (omentectomy, splenectomy, distal pancreatectomy, lymphadenectomy of celiac axis, and porta hepatis) in
55 patients with antral cancer was reported from Hong Kong. 156 The length of hospitalization and morbidity was significantly increased in the D3 group. Median
survival was significantly shorter than for D1 resection patients. In Japan and in specialty centers in the West, however, where extended D2 resection is performed
routinely, operative mortality is minimal and does not appear to be related to the extent of lymphadenectomy. 117,157,158 Given the small sample sizes, these trials lacked
the statistical power needed for meaningful interpretation of survival results.

TABLE 33.3-9. Prospective Randomized Trial Comparing D1 versus D2–3 Resection for Potentially Curable Gastric Carcinoma

In 1989, two major randomized trials were conducted to further address the D2 controversy. In the United Kingdom, the Medical Research Council (MRC) conducted a
trial that accrued 737 patients, with 400 patients randomized into two equal arms at the time of laparotomy. Postoperative morbidity was significantly greater in the D2
group (46% vs. 28%; P <.001). Hospital mortality was an alarming 13% for the D2 group and 6% for D1 ( P <.04; 95% CI for D2, 4% to 11%).159 The excess morbidity
and mortality seen in the D2 group was associated with the routine use of distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy, which proponents of the D2 lymphadenectomy
would point out is not required for adequate lymph node clearance. In a follow-up publication, Cuschieri et al. 160 reported that the 5-year survival rates were 35% for
D1 resection and 33% for D2 resection (difference, –2%; 95% CI, –12% to 8%). Both overall and recurrence-free survival were the same. The authors concluded that
their findings indicated that the classic Japanese D2 lymphadenectomy offered no survival advantage over the D1. The question of whether D2 resection without
pancreaticosplenectomy is better than standard D1 resection could not be dismissed by the results of this trial.
The Dutch Gastric Cancer Group conducted a subsequent larger and rigorously monitored trial. In this study, 996 patients were entered and 711 were randomized
(380 in the D1 group and 331 in the D2 group). In an effort to assure quality control, all operations were monitored. Initially, this oversight was done by a Japanese
surgeon who trained a group of Dutch surgeons who, in turn, acted as supervisors during surgery at any one of the 80 participating centers. A number of observations
were made from this trial. Despite the extraordinary efforts made to ensure quality control of the two types of lymph node dissection, both noncompliance (not
removing all lymph node stations) and contamination (removing more than was indicated) occurred, thus blurring the distinction between the two operations. 161 The
postoperative morbidity was again higher in the D2 group (43% vs. 25%, P <.001). The mortality rate also was significantly higher in the D2 group (10% vs. 4%, P =
.004), and these patients required a longer hospitalization. 162 Pancreaticosplenectomy also was performed en passant in the D2 group as part of the classic operation.
In summary, the D2 operation is a systematic approach toward the removal of high-risk perigastric lymph nodes. Most retrospective single-center reports indicate that
the routine use of extended lymphadenectomy for potentially curable gastric cancer can be performed safely. Four published prospective randomized trials have not
shown a survival advantage for the D2 lymph node dissection and do not support the routine use of extended D2 gastrectomy. A modified D2 operation avoiding
pancreaticosplenectomy will provide superior staging information and may avoid the added morbidity and mortality associated with the additional organ resection. The
advanced stage of disease at surgery in most patients remains the key determinant of survival. If there is a survival benefit from the D2 lymphadenectomy, it is limited
to those with few lymph node metastases.
Total versus Subtotal Gastrectomy
Ideally, the extent of gastric resection should provide the optimal cancer procedure with the minimal attendant morbidity. The rationale for the routine use of total
gastrectomy is presumably based on the appreciation that extensive intramural extension of tumor may be present and that simultaneous multiple gastric cancers
have been reported. 163 Although older retrospective data do suggest that survival is improved with total gastrectomy compared with subtotal gastrectomy, 81 current
evidence does not support this finding. 164 Three prospective randomized trials have addressed this question for the treatment of distal gastric cancers. 156,164,165 A
French cooperative prospectively randomized trial of total gastrectomy versus subtotal gastrectomy has reported data on postoperative morbidity, mortality, and

5-year survival. One hundred sixty-nine patients with adenocarcinoma of the antrum who were operated on with curative intent were included for analysis. 164 The
groups were well matched for the usual prognostic variables. The overall complication rate and postoperative mortality rate was 32% and 1.3% for total gastrectomy
and 34% and 3.2% for subtotal gastrectomy, respectively. No difference was found in cumulative 5-year survival between groups. The second single institution
prospective randomized trial, as reported above in the Extended Lymphadenectomy section, compared subtotal gastrectomy and D1 lymphadenectomy with total
gastrectomy and D3 lymphadenectomy in 55 patients with antral cancers from Hong Kong. 156 No survival advantage was found after the more extensive resection.
Bozzetti et al. 166 reported the 5-year survival rates from a multicenter randomized Italian trial conducted by the Italian Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. The
median follow-up was 72 months after subtotal gastrectomy (range, 2 to 125 months) and 75 months after total gastrectomy (range, 7 to 113 months). The 5-year
survival rate was 65.3% after subtotal gastrectomy and 62.4% after total gastrectomy for gastric cancer. The data support the use of subtotal gastrectomy for the
treatment of advanced distal tumors, provided a 5-cm gross negative margin can be achieved.
Other series have reported an operative mortality after total gastrectomy, ranging from 4% to 18%, and that anastomotic leak is responsible for up to 50% of these
operative deaths. 167,168 and 169 Others have argued that the functional results after total gastrectomy may be slightly worse than with distal subtotal gastrectomy. 170,171 and
172
Moreover, the ability to completely dissect paracardial lymph nodes is not related to the extent of gastric resection. 173 Therefore, although routinely used by many,
total gastrectomy should not be considered the initial option in patients in whom a 5-cm gross proximal margin can be obtained with a subtotal resection.
Carcinomas arising in the proximal one-third of the stomach have a worse prognosis than distal gastric lesions. 24,25,121 Total gastrectomy has traditionally been the
procedure of choice for proximal tumors. Review of the prospective gastric database at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center from July 1985 to August 1995
identified 391 patients with proximal gastric cancers. Ninety-eight of these patients underwent either a total or proximal gastrectomy exclusively through an abdominal
approach. Patients undergoing esophagogastrectomy were excluded. Patients were matched for clinical and pathologic factors. The length of hospital stay was the
same for patients undergoing resection for proximal gastrectomy (16.5 days; range, 8 to 55 days) and for total gastrectomy (18 days; range, 8 to 48). Postoperative
mortality for proximal gastrectomy (6.0%) and total gastrectomy (3.0%) were not significantly different. The overall 5-year survival rate for proximal gastric cancer was
43% and was 41% for total gastrectomy. Total and proximal gastrectomy have similar time to first recurrence, and the pattern of recurrence was the same. As was
found for distal tumors, the extent of resection for proximal gastric cancer does not affect long-term outcome.
The functional sequelae and postoperative mortality of proximal gastric resection are considered to be worse than for total gastrectomy. In a series of 89 patients
reported by Buhl and associates 174 who were treated with total gastrectomy, distal gastric resection, or proximal gastric resection, the latter group had a higher
incidence of dumping, heartburn, and reduced appetite. In addition, quality of life and capacity to work were reduced in patients with proximal gastric resection. The
Norwegian Stomach Cancer Trial has prospectively studied the incidence of postoperative complications and mortality in more than 1000 consecutive patients
undergoing surgery for gastric cancer. 175 The postoperative mortality rate in more than 760 patients undergoing resection was 8.3% and was highest in patients
undergoing proximal resection (16%) compared with total gastrectomy (8%), subtotal gastrectomy (10%), or distal resection (7%). Factors significantly related to the
incidence of postoperative complications included advancing age, male gender, no antibiotic prophylaxis, and splenectomy. Similar to the postoperative mortality, the
complication rate was highest for proximal resections (52%), followed by total gastrectomy (38%), subtotal resection (28%), and distal resection (19%). Therefore, for
proximal lesions, it appears that total gastrectomy using a variety of reconstructive options may provide better functional results, but this observation has not been
tested in a prospective randomized fashion. 175a There appear to be fewer complications and a lower operative mortality after total gastrectomy for the treatment of
proximal gastric cancers.
Prophylactic Splenectomy
Several authors have critically evaluated the value of routine splenectomy during gastric resection for tumors not adjacent to or invading the spleen. 175,176,177,178,179 and
180 In a multivariate analysis of more than 250 patients who underwent total gastrectomy with curative intent, no correlation was found between splenectomy and
survival. 177 The Norwegian Stomach Cancer Trial has demonstrated a higher complication rate with the use of splenectomy in their prospective trial (42% vs. 27%). 175
In Sasako's analysis of potential risk factors in patients from the Dutch multicenter randomized study of D1 versus D2 lymphadenectomy, splenectomy was the most
important risk factor for developing a complication (RR, 2.13; 95% CI, 1.44 to 3.16). 175b The consensus from the literature is that prophylactic splenectomy increases
morbidity and mortality without an apparent survival benefit. 177,179,180,181 and 182
TECHNIQUE OF OPERATION
Beginning with laparoscopy allows for careful intraoperative staging of disease. Inspection for the presence of ascites; hepatic metastases; peritoneal seeding;
disease in the pelvis, such as a “drop” metastasis; or ovarian involvement should be performed. Once distant metastases have been ruled out depending on the
location of the lesion, a bilateral subcostal incision or a midline abdominal incision can be used to gain adequate exposure to the upper abdomen. The stomach
should be inspected to assess the location and extent of tumor. The size and location of the primary tumor dictates the extent of gastric resection. A D2
lymphadenectomy sparing the spleen and pancreas can be done safely and provides an excellent specimen for surgical and pathologic staging, but this procedure
should only be performed by or with an experienced surgeon.
The D2 subtotal gastrectomy commences with mobilization of the greater omentum from the transverse colon. After the omentum is mobilized, the anterior peritoneal
leaf of the transverse mesocolon is incised along the lower border of the colon, and a plane is developed down to the head of the pancreas. The infrapyloric lymph
nodes are dissected, and the origin of the right gastroepiploic artery and vein are ligated. With a combination of blunt and sharp dissection, the plane of dissection
continues on to the anterior surface of the pancreas, extending to the level of the common hepatic and splenic arteries. This maneuver can be tedious, but
theoretically it provides additional protection against serosal spread of tumor to the local peritoneal surface.
The right gastric artery is ligated. At this point, the duodenum is divided distal to the pylorus. The stomach and omentum are then reflected cephalad. The
gastrohepatic ligament is divided close to the liver up to the gastroesophageal junction. Dissection is then continued on the hepatic artery toward the celiac axis. Once
near the celiac axis, the lymph node–bearing tissue is dissected until the left gastric artery is visualized and can be divided at its origin. The proximal peritoneal
attachments of the stomach and distal esophagus can then be incised, and the proximal extent of resection is chosen.
For tumors of the mid- and proximal stomach, dissection of the lymph nodes along the splenic artery and splenic hilum is important. This technique is not indicated for
antral tumors, given the low rate of splenic hilar nodal metastases seen with these tumors. The stomach is then divided 5 cm proximal to the tumor, which dictates the
extent of gastric resection. Despite the fact that the entire blood supply of the stomach has been interrupted, a cuff of proximal stomach invariably shows good
vascularization from the feeding distal esophageal arcade. When feasible, most surgeons prefer to anastomose jejunum to stomach versus esophagus because of the
technical ease and excellent healing. Reconstruction using a variety of techniques has been described and is a matter of personal choice ( Fig. 33.3-7).

FIGURE 33.3-7. Variations in types of reconstruction after total or subtotal gastrectomy include ( left to right) the Roux-en-Y, Braun, and Lawrence techniques.

ADJUVANT THERAPY

RATIONALE FOR ADJUVANT THERAPY
As already mentioned, the prognosis for patients with gastric cancer is, to a large extent, dependent on the stage of the disease at the time of diagnosis. Patients with
early-stage gastric cancer (Tis; T1N0M0; or shallow penetrating T2N0M0) have a good to excellent prognosis, with cure rates exceeding 70% to 80% after operation
alone. After curative surgery, however, patients with locally advanced cancers without nodal metastases (T3N0 gastric cancers) have an at least 50% chance of dying
within 5 years; lymph node metastases have an even more ominous prognosis. Although 80% to 90% of American patients fall in the high-risk group, preoperative
identification of patients at low risk for recurrence is difficult. Newer preoperative staging techniques, such as laparoscopy, have been demonstrated to be highly
sensitive and specific in identifying patients with intraabdominal metastatic tumor, particularly in the peritoneal cavity. However, these techniques still have a relatively
low sensitivity for separating deeply penetrating T2 from T3 tumors, as well as a low sensitivity for identifying metastatic lymphadenopathy. Therefore, for patients who
have more than early-stage gastric cancer (deeply penetrating T2 or T3 tumors and patients with lymph node metastasis), the use of systemic therapy early in the
treatment plan is rational in a disease in which a high propensity is seen for systemic failure with or without local recurrence. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (also known
as preoperative or primary chemotherapy) is an attractive concept in diseases such as gastric cancer for which complete resection of the primary tumor is often
difficult or impossible, and because systemic dissemination at the time of diagnosis is common. A more traditional approach to adjuvant therapy is the use of
postoperative treatment.
POSTOPERATIVE TREATMENT
Table 33.3-10 summarizes the results of a number of prospective randomized trials of postoperative chemotherapy in gastric cancer. These studies date back to the
1960s. Two early trials from the Veterans Administration Surgical Oncology Group investigated the use of thiotepa or 5-fluorodeoxyuridine (FUDR) after surgical
resection.183,184 Both were negative.

TABLE 33.3-10. Intravenous Adjuvant Therapy for Gastric Cancer: Selected Phase III Trials

Nitrosourea-Containing Regimens
Four studies have used a combination of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and the nitrosourea methyl chloroethylcyclohexylnitrosourea (CCNU) as adjuvant therapy after gastric
resection. It should be noted that, in advanced disease, 5-FU and methyl CCNU had only modest effectiveness, and this combination was an inferior arm in a
randomized trial in patients with advanced disease (see Table 33.3-10). The Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group randomly assigned patients to either no additional
treatment or to 18 months (originally 2 years) of methyl CCNU and 5-FU. 185 At a final analysis, the survival curves reached statistical significance in favor of the
chemotherapy arm. However, an identical study using 5-FU and methyl CCNU performed during the same period by the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group using
the same dose and schedule and including a group of 180 patients (89 controls, 91 treated) demonstrated no difference in disease-free or overall survival rate
(median survival, 32.7 and 36.6 months; 2-year survival rate, 57% for both groups) 186 (see Table 33.3-10). A third study by the Veterans Administration Surgical
Oncology Group using the same agents on a different schedule was also negative. 187
Estrada and colleagues 188 studied the use of 12 to 18 months of methyl CCNU, 5-FU, and doxorubicin or observation in a small group of 66 evaluable patients after
resection. At 5 years, no difference was noted in disease-free survival (29% treated vs. 34% observed) or overall survival (29% vs. 37%). Two treatment-related
deaths were reported. Most current adjuvant or neoadjuvant studies do not include a nitrosourea.
Mitomycin -Containing Regimens
A series of trials have involved the use of mitomycin (see Table 33.3-10). One Spanish trial investigated the use of high-dose mitomycin C alone after surgical
resection. In this study, only 33 patients received chemotherapy; 37 patients were in a control group. A striking difference in survival was noted (seven relapses in the
treatment arm, 23 in the control arm; P <.001). The chemotherapy dose schedule was mitomycin C, 20 mg/m2 once every 6 weeks for four doses. An update continues
to show a significant survival advantage for the mitomycin-treated group. 189 However, this study has not been confirmed by other mitomycin-containing trials.
In a larger study, 190 evaluable patients were randomized after gastrectomy to receive (within 7 days of surgery) mitomycin C, 10 mg/m 2 monthly for six doses, plus oral
uracil and ftorafur (UFT) or to expectant observation. With a median follow-up of 3.1 years, no difference was noted in disease-free or overall survival between
treatment and control groups (median survival for patients receiving chemotherapy, 2.3 years; for observation, 2.6 years). This study does not confirm the role of
mitomycin C in the adjuvant setting. However, although the total dose was similar (80 mg/m 2 vs. 60 mg/m2), the dose intensity was different. 191 Allum and coworkers192
reported the results of a three-arm randomized trial comparing postoperative 5-FU and mitomycin C with or without cyclophosphamide, 5-FU, vincristine, and
methotrexate induction compared with surgery only. The study allowed entrance up to 12 weeks after surgery. The surgery-only group received saline every 3 weeks;
140 patients received 5-FU and mitomycin C plus a 5-day induction course of cyclophosphamide, 5-FU, vincristine, and methotrexate; 141 patients received 5-FU and
mitomycin C alone. Therapy was continued for 2 years. With a median follow-up of 100 months, the median survival was 15.5 months; no significant difference was
noted between the treated or control groups.
Japanese studies involving mitomycin also have been reported. Nakajima et al. 193 treated a group of 243 patients who received either mitomycin C, 5-FU, plus
cytosine arabinoside or a similar regimen in which 5-FU was replaced by ftorafur, with the control patients having surgery only. No statistical differences in survival
were seen at 5 years, although 5-year survival for the chemotherapy patients was somewhat better than for the control group ( P = .09). Subgroup analyses indicated
significant differences in survival for those with earlier stage disease (stages I and II), but these were retrospective and unplanned. More recently, Nakajima and
colleagues 194 have reported the results of another, larger trial performed in Japan. Five hundred seventy-nine patients with early-stage gastric cancer (T1 or T2
lesions) were stratified and randomized to receive postoperative chemotherapy or observation. The treatment plan involved mitomycin C, 1.4 mg/m 2, twice weekly for
3 weeks after surgery in conjunction with FU, 167.7 mg/m 2, also given twice weekly for 3 weeks. This was followed by 18 months of oral UFT given 300 mg daily. The
primary end point was survival. Two hundred eighty-eight patients received treatment and 285 were followed expectantly. Slightly more than one-half of the patients
had lymph node–negative tumors. With a median follow-up of 72 months, the overall 5-year survival rate was 82.9% for those in the control group and 85.8% for those
in the treatment group (P = .17; hazard ratio, 0.738). The authors of this study concluded that this regimen has no survival benefit in patients with serosa-negative,
surgically resected gastric cancer.
A preliminary report in patients with advanced gastric cancer has compared a cisplatin, epirubicin, and FU combination to a combination of mitomycin, epirubicin, and
FU. Although the initial report indicated an advantage to the mitomycin-containing arm, at the presentation itself no advantage was reported. 195 Most current adjuvant
or neoadjuvant studies do not include mitomycin.
Anthracycline-Containing Regimens
The uses of several doxorubicin-containing combination chemotherapy adjuvant regimens have been reported (see Table 33.3-10). Coombes and colleagues 196

studied 315 patients with curatively resected gastric cancer who were randomized to receive FU, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and mitomycin (FAM) or no postoperative
therapy. Two hundred eighty-one patients were evaluable for analysis. Chemotherapy could be started as late as 6 weeks from surgery. Twenty-six percent of patients
in the control arm had N2 disease versus 18% in the treated group, but this difference was not statistically significant. With a median follow-up of 68 months, 56% of
patients in the treated arm and 61% of those in the control arm had a recurrence in disease. No significant difference was reported in disease-free survival or overall
survival (FAM, 45.7%; control, 35.4%). A number of subgroup analyses were performed, the most positive of which was an effect for patients with T3 or T4 tumors who
had positive lymph nodes ( P =.07 in favor of the FAM group). This, however, was an unplanned subgroup analysis. Three FAM patients died from suspected
treatment-related complications. In a second FAM study, the Southwest Oncology Group also failed to note an improvement in survival for the treated group. 197 Both
groups of investigators concluded that chemotherapy, including FAM, when given in the adjuvant setting, should be used only in an investigational setting.
Krook and colleagues 198 used a different doxorubicin-containing combination in the adjuvant setting. After curative resection, 125 evaluable patients were randomized
to either observation alone or to three cycles of 5-FU, 250 mg/m 2/d, for 5 days plus doxorubicin, 40 mg/m2, on day 1. Treatment began between 4 and 6 weeks after
resection. No differences were noted in overall survival between the two groups (median survival of observation group, 31 months; treatment group, 36 months). The
5-year survival rate was almost identical (33% vs. 32%). Two treatment-related deaths, both related to sepsis during leukopenia, were reported.
The FU, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and methotrexate (FAMTX) regimen has been extensively studied in patients with advanced metastatic disease, and in randomized
trials it was superior to regimens such as FAM. 198 There is one random assignment trial from the Netherlands comparing neoadjuvant FAMTX to surgery alone.
Fifty-six eligible and evaluable patients were entered: 27 were randomized to receive FAMTX before surgery and 29 to undergo surgery only. In the FAMTX plus
surgery treatment group, 15 of 27 (56%) had curative resections versus 18 of 29 (62%) in the surgery-only arm. Forty-four percent of treated patients could not
complete the planned four courses of FAMTX due to disease progression or toxicity. Response evaluation after chemotherapy was possible in 25 patients: two
complete responses, six partial responses. The difference in curative resectability rate was 6.5% (95% confidence interval –32% to +19%) in favor of surgery only.
The authors concluded that more active regimens than FAMTX will be required for future randomized trials.
Neri et al. 199 used a regimen containing epirubicin, FU, and leucovorin for patients with stage III disease. Chemotherapy was given for 7 months. Fifty-five patients
were followed expectantly, and 48 received chemotherapy. The median survival rate for patients receiving therapy (20.4 months) was superior to those undergoing
observation (13.6 months; P = .01). At an average of 36 months of follow-up, 25% of patients receiving adjuvant therapy were alive compared to 13% of those being
followed expectantly. Although these results are encouraging, they are at odds with the study by Krook et al. 198 in a similar number of patients. Use of this regimen
should still be considered experimental, and it requires a larger confirmatory trial.
Tsavaris et al. 200 performed a small randomized trial in which epirubicin was substituted for doxorubicin to create the FU, epirubicin, and mitomycin (FEM) regimen.
Eighty-four patients were randomized to receive three cycles of FEM or no treatment. Recurrence or death occurred in 64% of patients receiving FEM versus 81% of
the control group; however, this difference was not statistically significant.
Cisplatin -Containing Regimens
Although cisplatin-containing combinations have undergone extensive studies in patients with advanced metastatic disease, as discussed below (see Palliative
Treatment of Gastric Cancer), currently no randomized trials are available in which patients with curative resections of gastric cancer were postoperatively and
randomly assigned to receive or not receive a cisplatin-based regimen.
METAANALYSIS OF ADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY TRIALS
Earle and Maroun 201 presented the preliminary results of a metaanalysis involving 12 trials performed in Western countries. It was not clear that individual patient data
was obtained. In this analysis, the crude odds ratio for death for patients receiving adjuvant therapy was 0.81 (0.67 to 0.98) with a relative risk of 0.94 (0.88 to 1.01).
These authors concluded that the survival benefit from these trials in patients undergoing curative resections was small. In an earlier analysis, Hermans et al. 202
reviewed 11 trials reported since 1980. In these studies, surgery was followed by postoperative chemotherapy or by observation alone. A total of 2096 patients were
studied. The odds ratio was 0.88 (0.78 to 1.08), which was not statistically significantly superior to observation alone. In a later brief report by the same authors, two
additional trials were added to this database that indicated a slight benefit to postoperative adjuvant therapy.
In both cases, the metaanalysis performed involved a variety of chemotherapy regimens, most of which had FU in common. They were a review of the literature,
rather than a pooled analysis of individual patient data. Furthermore, the number of patients involved is relatively small in comparison to the metaanalysis in breast
cancer, for example. Gastric cancer overviews to date suggest a modest benefit for older chemotherapeutic regimens. Almost all of these trials are seriously
handicapped by their statistical design: With a small number of patients accrued, only very large differences could be expected to show a statistical benefit.
Particularly as newer, potentially more effective chemotherapy regimens are developed, a high priority should be placed on designing trials that have adequate
numbers of patients who are carefully staged so that the trials have appropriate power to allow an assessment of benefit.
INTRAPERITONEAL CHEMOTHERAPY
The rationale for the use of intraperitoneal therapy after resection of primary gastric cancer is based on the high risk of peritoneal metastasis as a component of first
failure. Autopsy series and second-look laparotomy series have reported that up to 50% of patients have clinically evident peritoneal carcinomatosis as a site
(sometimes the only site) of failure. The pharmacokinetic rationale for intraperitoneal therapy has been well described. Drug concentrations within the peritoneal
cavity are severalfold to one to two logs higher than concentrations that can be achieved after oral or intravenous treatment. Clinical support for the use of
intraperitoneal chemotherapy also comes from other tumors. For example, a decrease of all sites of failure in patients receiving adjuvant colon cancer treatment using
intravenous FU plus oral levamisole was reported; the only exception was peritoneal recurrence. In ovarian cancer, a large randomized trial demonstrated a small but
statistical and clinically significant survival advantage for women receiving a portion of their therapy intraperitoneally. Thus, as is the case for many abdominal
malignancies, a strong rationale exists for maximizing the effectiveness of currently available antineoplastic agents by using intraperitoneal treatment as a portion of
the adjuvant therapy.
During the 1990s, an increasing number of reports have summarized data on the use of immediate postoperative intraperitoneal therapy for patients with gastric
cancer. Interpretation of this data is hampered, however, by the retrospective nature of some of these trials. In addition, most prospective studies are pilot or phase II,
involving small numbers of patients and testing feasibility. Last, even the small number of phase III trials reported to date are severely underpowered, making
definitive conclusions regarding the use of intraperitoneal therapy, at this point, impossible. Table 33.3-11 lists selected reports involving intraperitoneal
chemotherapy given as adjuvant treatment in the postoperative setting. Although the database is limited, several themes are clear. The technique most commonly
used is to administer intraperitoneal treatment (with or without hyperthermia) at the end of resection of all gross disease. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy is delivered in
the operating room or recovery room or, at the latest, within several days of resection. In the latter case, this involves placement of an intraperitoneal catheter with
therapy started soon after operation and given for repeated courses. No randomized comparative studies of the two techniques are available. The theoretical
advantage of immediate intraoperative treatment is better distribution, whereas the theoretical advantage of intraperitoneal therapy via an implanted catheter is the
ability to give repeated courses. Both techniques also have been used with established peritoneal carcinomatosis, but it is even harder to draw conclusions regarding
this patient population. A fluorinated pyrimidine (FU or FUDR) or mitomycin C is usually part of the treatment plan.

TABLE 33.3-11. Intraperitoneal Therapy for Gastric Cancer: Phase III Trials

In preclinical studies, Archer and Grey 203 used a rat model to demonstrate that intraperitoneal chemotherapy is capable of treating both peritoneal and liver
micrometastasis. In a second study, Murthy and coworkers 204 demonstrated in a mouse model that the frequency of tumor formation at sites of surgical trauma in the
peritoneum ranged from 28% to 82%, depending on the type of incisions made in the peritoneal cavity, as opposed to a 33% rate of peritoneal tumors in nonoperated
mice. Data from several animal models indicate that the risks of peritoneal implantation and intraabdominal tumor spread immediately after laparotomy are high. 205,206
Clinically, a randomized trial in colon cancer by Sugarbaker and colleagues 207 demonstrated a marked decrease in peritoneal metastasis with intraperitoneal
chemotherapy when compared with intravenous treatment, but showed no change in survival.
During the late 1980s and early 1990s, one of the most extensively used intraperitoneal agents in gastric cancer was mitomycin C. As is the case for all intraperitoneal
therapy in gastric cancer, however, the small number patients involved hamper interpretation of this data. The initial promising study of Hajiwara and colleagues 308
indicated a marked improvement in survival for patients randomized to intraperitoneal therapy compared to those receiving no postoperative treatment. Mitomycin was
adsorbed to a carbon-containing solution and infused immediately after the end of the operative procedure. In this study, 24 patients received treatment with
mitomycin and 25 were observed after operation. A highly significant difference in favor of the intraperitoneally treated group was found (2-year survival, 68.6% vs.
26.9%; the difference was maintained at 3 years). This study sparked a number of reports, some of which are included in Table 33.3-11. Retrospective reviews using
higher-dose mitomycin with or without activated charcoal raised concerns regarding toxicity, with some studies indicating a high risk of intraabdominal toxicity leading
to an increase in perioperative mortality. To more definitively test the hypothesis that intraperitoneal mitomycin offered benefit, Rosen and colleagues 208 reported their
results using a similar technique. Ninety-one patients were randomly assigned to resection followed by observation or resection followed by carbon-adsorbed
mitomycin C, 50 mg, given intraperitoneally. The study was stopped prematurely when an interim analysis revealed a marked increase in postoperative complications
(25% vs. 16%) and an increased perioperative mortality (11% for patients receiving intraperitoneal therapy vs. 2% for the control arm). No survival advantage was
noted at the time of the interim analysis, and the trial was closed. This randomized trial, plus the phase II andretrospective data, indicate that intraperitoneal mitomycin
C, particularly in higher dosages of 25 to 50 mg, given with or without activated charcoal and with or without hyperthermia may be associated with a marked increase
in toxicity with only questionable improvement in survival.
Regimens that do not contain mitomycin C also have been studied. These primarily involve the use of fluorinated pyrimidines (either FU or floxuridine), usually given
with leucovorin or other agents (e.g., cisplatin) or both. Mitomycin in lower doses also has been used with FU. Phase II studies performed in the United States at
single institutions by Crookes et al. 209 and Atiq et al.210 indicated that postoperative intraperitoneal therapy using fluorinated pyrimidines could be given with safety.
However, unusual toxicity has occasionally been noted. Atiq and colleagues 210 from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center reported the results of a phase II study
involving intraperitoneal cisplatin and FU plus systemic FU in high-risk patients having undergone potentially curative resections with gastric cancer. Thirty-five
patients (most with stage IIIA or IIIB tumors) received intraperitoneal cisplatin, 25 mg/m 2, on days 1 to 4 and FU, 750 mg/m2, as a single dose. Each drug was given
daily for 4 days in a row for up to five cycles on a once a month basis. FU systemically as a continuous 24-hour infusion was given simultaneously. With a median
follow-up of 24 months, 51% of patients remained alive and free of disease. Toxicity was acceptable. An unusual side effect of sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis
was noted in 15% of patients. Further investigation revealed that solutions containing FU had a pH of greater than 8.5. The authors speculated that this resulted in
hydrolysis of cisplatin to a reactive alkylating species. To avoid further sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis, the authors subsequently avoided mixing cisplatin and FU
together before administration. No further episodes of sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis were seen. In a further update of this trial with a minimum follow-up of 42
months, 40% of patients remain alive and free of disease.
Yu et al.211 reported the results of a randomized trial in which 248 patients were randomly assigned to receive intraperitoneal therapy or to observation. Patients
receiving intraperitoneal chemotherapy were given mitomycin C on postoperative day 1 and FU on postoperative days 2 to 5. The study included patients with all
stages of disease (I to IV). As is the case in other mitomycin-containing trials, morbidity and mortality were higher in the experimental arm (postoperative mortality,
5.6% vs. 0.8%). No statistical difference was noted in overall survival for the investigation arm (38.7% vs. 29.3%; P = .219), although an unplanned subset analysis
showed a benefit for patients with stage II or III disease.
Similarly, Sautner and colleagues 185 performed a small, randomized phase III trial using intraperitoneal cisplatin as a single agent. Cisplatin, 90 mg/m 2, was given
intraperitoneally once a month. Therapy began 2 to 4 weeks after surgery. This study also allowed entrance of patients with documented peritoneal metastasis so that
not all those treated were in the adjuvant setting. No difference was reported in survival for patients receiving or not receiving additional treatment. The authors
concluded that intraperitoneal cisplatin as a single agent had no significant impact on recurrence.
CONTINUOUS HYPERTHERMIC PERITONEAL PERFUSION
Continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion (CHPP) for the treatment or prophylaxis of peritoneal carcinomatosis usually is administered during exploratory
laparotomy after a primary tumor resection in patients who have established carcinomatosis or who are considered at high risk for developing peritoneal disease.
CHPP takes advantage of the favorable pharmacokinetics that can be achieved with intraperitoneal chemotherapy 212 and the established synergistic cytotoxicity of
hyperthermia and chemotherapy.213,214
Most of the initial clinical experiences came from Japanese investigators who administered CHPP to patients in whom peritoneal seeding was identified at the time of
gastric resection for cancer. 215,216,217 and 218 The therapeutic agent administered into the perfusate was usually mitomycin C (10 mg/mL). Steady-state concentrations of
mitomycin C were approximately tenfold higher in the perfusate compared with serum. With the significant hyperthermia, a mild increase in hepatic transaminases was
noted after treatment. However, the studies did confirm that CHPP could be safely administered after a major extirpative procedure.
Fujimoto and coworkers219 and Gilly and colleagues 220 reported that malignant ascites could be palliated effectively with CHPP. Fujimoto's group reported that five of
six patients with malignant ascites secondary to recurrent gastrointestinal cancer had resolution of the ascites after undergoing tumor resection and CHPP; all five
patients were without evidence of recurrent disease at a mean follow-up of 12.8 ± 5 months. Gilly's group reported that nine of ten patients had no evidence of
recurrent ascites on ultrasound obtained 2 months after CHPP. Fujimura and colleagues 218 treated 31 patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis secondary to recurrent
gastric cancer with cisplatin and mitomycin C administered via CHPP. In 12 of 31 patients who underwent a second-look operation, four had a complete response and
one had a partial response to treatment. However, it is important to appreciate that CHPP is only effective in treating small-volume peritoneal disease. Yonemura and
coworkers216 introduced CHPP with 30 mg mitomycin C and 300 mg cisplatin as prophylactic treatment for peritoneal recurrence after curative resection of 79
advanced gastric cancers. Survival was compared to that of 81 patients treated during the same period. Prolonged survival was reported in the subgroup of patients
with tumors that penetrated the serosa. No increase in morbidity or mortality was reported between the two groups. 216
Several multiarm studies have evaluated the efficacy of prophylactic or therapeutic CHPP administered immediately after resection for gastric cancer reported
primarily from centers in Japan 218,221 (Table 33.3-12). In a report by Koga and coworkers 221 of a subset of 47 patients who had histopathologic evidence of serosal
invasion, the 3-year survival rate in the CHPP-treated group was better than in the control group, but not significantly. In the same study, a larger CHPP-treated cohort
did have a significantly better 5-year survival rate compared with historically matched controls. In patients who underwent major gastric resection, the incidence of an
anastomotic leak or the length of postoperative ileus was affected by CHPP treatment. Fujimoto and colleagues 222 reported that overall survival was significantly
longer in patients treated with CHPP; in the subgroup analysis, the beneficial effect was observed in patients with and without documented peritoneal seeding.
Peritoneal disease was the major contributing cause of death in patients who did not receive CHPP. In a three-arm randomized trial reported by Fujimura and
colleagues,218 the efficacy of CHPP was compared with continuous normothermic peritoneal perfusion and surgery alone in patients with gastric cancer and serosal
invasion undergoing resection with curative intent. In the two perfusion groups, survival was significantly better compared with the group receiving surgery alone.
Hamazoe and colleagues 223 reported that survival was slightly better in 42 patients treated prophylactically with CHPP compared with 40 untreated control patients.
Several centers in the United States and Europe are currently evaluating the feasibility of CHPP for patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis. 224,225,226,227 and 228

TABLE 33.3-12. Clinical Results of Multiarm Studies Evaluating the Efficiency of Prophylactic or Therapeutic Continuous Hyperthermic Peritoneal Perfusion (CHPP)
after Resection for Gastric Cancer

In summary, intraperitoneal chemotherapy given with curative intent is a rational strategy to pursue until such time as more highly effective systemic agents can be
developed. Future studies will probably require intergroup or international trials to accrue adequate numbers of patients in a timely fashion.
IMMUNOCHEMOTHERAPY
Japanese and Korean investigators have performed a number of trials investigating the use of immunochemotherapy as adjuvant treatment after curative resection of
gastric cancer. Many of these trials involve using a protein-bound polysaccharide (PSK) alone or combined with chemotherapy after gastrectomy. PSK is a
polysaccharide extracted from Coriolis versicolor, whose mechanism of action is not fully understood. The control arm in most of these studies, however, also received
chemotherapy. Nakazato and coworkers 229 reported the results of a study involving 230 patients who were randomly assigned to receive mitomycin plus FU (given by
mouth) or the same chemotherapy plus PSK. The experimental arm received treatment with PSK for 36 months after surgery. As part of the eligibility process, patients
had to have a positive purified protein derivative of tuberculin (PPD) test. Both groups received ten cycles of chemotherapy. With a minimum follow-up of 5 years, a
significant survival advantage was seen for the PSK group; 70.7% of the PSK group versus 59.4% of the standard treatment group were alive and disease-free at 5
years. Ochiai and colleagues 231 compared chemotherapy versus chemoimmunotherapy after resection. The immunotherapy used was a Nocardia rubra cell wall
skeleton extract. No surgery-only control group was established; both groups received mitomycin, FU, and cytosine arabinoside chemotherapy. In this study, therapy
was started perioperatively: Patients received mitomycin during surgery and on day 1, and then began weekly mitomycin, FU, and cytosine arabinoside. The
chemotherapy group had 90 patients, and the chemotherapy immunotherapy group had 97 patients. No difference in survival for patients having curative resections
was seen. A subgroup of 71 patients did not undergo a curative resection and were analyzed separately. A survival advantage for those receiving
immunochemotherapy was seen.
In other trials, Korean investigators have studied the use of chemotherapy plus immunostimulants after potentially curative resection. In one trial, chemotherapy with
mitomycin, FU, and cytosine arabinoside plus OK432 (a Streptococcus pyrogenes preparation) was given to 74 patients, whereas a control group of 64 patients
underwent surgery alone. 232 Of the group receiving postoperative treatment, 44.6% were alive at 5 years compared to 23.4% of those randomized to surgery only. In a
follow-up three-arm trial, patients were randomized to receive immunotherapy with OK432 plus chemotherapy with mitomycin and FU. A second group received
chemotherapy alone, whereas the third arm was a control arm of observation after surgery. At 5 years, 45.3% of the immunochemotherapy group were alive compared
to 29.8% of the chemotherapy group and 24.4% of the surgery group. Kim and colleagues 233 performed a similar trial using FAM chemotherapy with or without
OK-432. Fifty patients received chemotherapy alone, and 49 patients received chemotherapy plus OK-432. These authors reported a significant improvement in
survival for chemotherapy plus immunotherapy versus chemotherapy alone (62% vs. 52%, P = .04).
In summary, data from Japanese and Korean investigators suggest that immunotherapy may improve outcome for patients undergoing potentially curative resection.
The number of patients in any given trial is small, however, and the power of the observation therefore relatively weak. Large-scale confirmatory trials are necessary
before accepting immunochemotherapy as a standard of care.
RANITIDINE
Preliminary data had suggested that ranitidine or cimetidine might be useful in preventing recurrence of resected gastric cancer. Primrose et al. 234 performed a
double-blind placebo-controlled trial of ranitidine, 150 mg twice daily, versus placebo taken for up to 5 years. No other adjuvant therapy was allowed. Patients with
resectable gross disease, including those with stage IV tumors, were allowed entrance into this trial. The study, as is the case with other adjuvant trials, has only a
small number of patients (41 in one arm and 46 in the other). No difference was seen in overall outcome, although a trend to benefit in stage IV patients was noted. In
a second trial with a similar design using cimetidine, a similar lack of benefit was noted. Thus, to date, therapy using histamine-2 blockers has not shown benefit in
preventing recurrence in patients with resected gastric tumors.
TAMOXIFEN
Using a hormonal approach, Harrison and colleagues 235 treated 100 patients in a randomized trial with tamoxifen as a single agent. This study allowed entrance of
patients who had residual gross disease, and thus the study was not evaluating truly adjuvant chemotherapy. Slightly more than one-half (55.8%) of tumors were
estrogen receptor–positive. Tamoxifen had no effect on survival outcome; in fact, the control group did slightly better than the treated group.
NEOADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY
A strong rationale exists for the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy before attempted resection in high-risk gastric cancer patients. For patients with locally advanced
gastric cancers, performing a potentially curative resection (R0) frequently is difficult; the risk of distant failure, even with resection, is high. Locally advanced localized
gastric cancers usually are defined as those with potentially resectable T3 or T4 tumors without distant metastases. Because assessment of lymph node involvement
is difficult with the preoperative staging techniques currently available, T2 lesions, particularly those with suspicious lymph nodes, also are frequently included in
these studies. Many pilot and formal phase II trials have been reported, either in complete or abstract form during the last 3 to 5 years. Results from selected trials are
shown in Table 33.3-13. Almost all of these trials have involved the use of systemic chemotherapeutic regimens, which have demonstrated moderate response rates
in patients with metastatic measurable gastric cancer. However, assessing response in patients with localized tumors is difficult. The overall accuracy of repeat
endoscopy after induction chemotherapy has been poor. 236 Reports indicate that even CT scans performed carefully after induction chemotherapy have a low overall
sensitivity and accuracy, primarily because their negative predictive value is so limited. 237 Kelsen et al. 236 and others have investigated the use of EUS and CT scans
in predicting pathologic stage in patients undergoing induction chemotherapy. In these trials, preoperative EUS stage before and after neoadjuvant chemotherapy was
compared to pathologic T, N, and M stage. Postchemotherapy EUS was inaccurate in separating T2 from T3 tumors and in assessing lymph node status. 236 Therefore,
data from phase II trials indicating down-staging should be interpreted with caution.

TABLE 33.3-13. Neoadjuvant Therapy for Locally Advanced Gastric Cancer: Selected Phase II and Phase III Trials

Another technique for predicting outcome early in the treatment course involves the use of PET scanning. A decrease in F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose uptake has been
proposed as an early marker for objective regression in patients receiving systemic chemotherapy for locally advanced or metastatic disease. 238 Although preliminary
studies with PET in gastric cancer have now been reported, definitive, large-scale trials correlating survival outcome with change in PET scan are still awaited.
Although assessing the degree of tumor regression is difficult, phase II studies of neoadjuvant chemotherapy have demonstrated that such treatment can be given
with acceptable toxicity and with no apparent increase in operative morbidity or mortality. Several phase II pilot studies have been reported using this approach (see
Table 33.3-13). Ajani and colleagues 239 at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center performed a single-arm phase II trial involving 48 patients who had gastric cancers that
were potentially operable. Etoposide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin chemotherapy was given for three courses before operation followed by two planned postoperative
courses. Eighty-five percent of patients underwent operation, and 77% had potentially curative resections. Toxicity, primarily due to neutropenia, was substantial but
generally manageable. One chemotherapy-related death was reported. In a second study, Ajani and colleagues 86 used a similar regimen of cisplatin, FU, and
etoposide for two preoperative and three postoperative courses. One postoperative death was reported. All patients underwent operation, and 72% had potentially
curative resections. The most common site for recurrent disease was peritoneal carcinomatosis either found at surgery or developing subsequently. Lowy et al. 240
summarized the long-term results of these and a third sequential phase II trial. A total of 83 patients were treated. All the studies involved the use of cisplatin-based
therapy. Seventy-three percent of patients underwent R0 resections. Although response to therapy can be difficult to interpret, 4% of patients had pathologic complete
remissions. Response to chemotherapy as assessed clinically was thought to be an independent predictor of survival.
Leichman and colleagues 241 reported the initial results of a trial in which 38 patients with resectable gastric tumors received two cycles of a preoperative
chemotherapy regimen involving 5-FU, 200 mg/m 2/d, given over 3 weeks with weekly intravenous leucovorin, 20 mg/m 2, and monthly cisplatin, 100 mg/m2.
Postoperative intraperitoneal therapy involved FUDR, 3000 mg total dose, daily for 3 days plus cisplatin, 200 mg/m 2, with intravenous sodium thiosulfate. Ninety-two
percent of patients underwent laparotomy; 87% of patients had resection. Postoperative intraperitoneal therapy was possible in 68% of study patients. One
treatment-related death was reported. Prestudy clinical tumor staging (by CT and endoscopy) was not provided. Postoperative staging showed 14 patients with either
stage 0 (one patient) or stage I disease. An additional seven patients had stage II tumors. Crookes et al. 209 reported the long-term results of this phase II study. In the
final report, a total of 59 patients were included. A 71% R0 resection rate was noted. The operative mortality was 5%. Median survival of this group of patients was
estimated to exceed 4 years. Because these patients did not undergo preoperative laparoscopy or EUS, however, they may have included patients with both locally
advanced and earlier-stage tumors.
Kelsen and coworkers236 performed two trials involving preoperative chemotherapy followed by postoperative intraperitoneal treatment. The first study used the
FAMTX regimen preoperatively and gave postoperative intraperitoneal FU and cisplatin. 236 Fifty-six evaluable patients were identified by EUS as having advanced
disease; most had stage IIIA or IIIB tumors. Toxicity was tolerable, the major side effect was myelosuppression leading to hospitalization for neutropenic fever on at
least one occasion in 60% of patients. Down-staging occurred in 51% of patients. The operability rate was 89%, and the resectability rate was 74% (61% curative,
20% palliative). With a median follow-up of 28 months, the median duration of survival for all patients was 15.3 months.
In a follow-up study, the same group of investigators treated a group of 35 patients with preoperative cisplatin and FU chemotherapy for two cycles followed by
postoperative intraperitoneal floxuridine plus leucovorin. All patients underwent pretreatment laparoscopy and EUS, and all had T3 or lymph node–positive tumors.
Preoperative toxicity was tolerable, without any increase in operative morbidity or mortality. The R0 resection rate was 82%, and the estimated medial duration of
survival was 22.5 months. Fink and colleagues 242 treated a group of 49 patients with preoperative cisplatin, FU, and leucovorin (PLF). The R0 resection rate was 76%.
Median duration of survival for all patients was 36 months, and at a median follow-up of 28 months, the median survival for the R0-resected patients had not been
reached.242
Alexander and coworkers 243 treated 22 patients with locally advanced gastric cancer with three cycles of 5-FU, leucovorin, and interferon followed by resection and
three cycles of postoperative consolidation therapy. The response rate to neoadjuvant therapy was 38%, and 18 patients (82%) underwent resection with curative
intent. Endoscopic tumor biopsies were obtained in 13 patients before and during cycle two of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, and thymidylate synthase (TS) levels were
quantitated by Western blot. Pretreatment TS levels in tumor were significantly higher in responders versus nonresponders. After exposure to 5-FU, levels of free TS
were significantly lower, and the percentage of TS complexed with 5-FU was significantly higher in responders. These preliminary data indicate that quantification of
TS in tumor may provide a method to select patients most likely to respond to 5-FU–based chemotherapy.
Kang et al. 244 reported the preliminary results of a small randomized trial of neoadjuvant cisplatin, etoposide, and FU therapy versus surgery alone. Fifty-three patients
received preoperative chemotherapy, and 54 underwent immediate operation. No significant difference was noted in operability rate (89% vs. 100%), resection rate
(71% vs. 61%), or in median survival (33 vs. 32 months). All of these trials have demonstrated that preoperative chemotherapy can be given safely without an
increase in operative morbidity or mortality when experienced surgeons perform the operation. Most studies are single-institution trials, and all investigators have
emphasized the need for multiinstitutional prospective studies to test the hypothesis that preoperative treatment will improve outcome as measured by overall survival.
Although it is unclear as to whether one chemotherapy regimen, including cisplatin-based treatment, is markedly superior to another (as discussed in Palliative
Treatment of Gastric Cancer, below), almost all preoperative regimens do involve this agent. The identification of the taxanes docetaxel and paclitaxel and, more
recently, of the camptothecan irinotecan as active agents in the treatment of this disease has led to the introduction of these agents into newer neoadjuvant regimens.
Larger-scale phase III trials with a surgery-only control arm are now under way, and additional studies are in the advanced planning stage. A European group, led by
the United Kingdom MRC, is currently performing a randomized trial with a projected accrual of 500 patients. The investigational arm involves preoperative
chemotherapy with epirubicin, cisplatin, and FU (ECF) followed by operation versus operation alone. Three preoperative courses are delivered, followed by operation
within 6 weeks of completing chemotherapy. An additional three courses of postoperative ECF is planned. This study is still accruing patients. Phase II pilot trials are
nearing completion in the United States preliminary to a large-scale randomized study. These pilot trials include neoadjuvant chemotherapy using cisplatin, taxotere,
and FU followed by surgery followed by intraperitoneal chemotherapy; a second study uses neoadjuvant chemoradiation with cisplatin, FU, and taxotere plus
concurrent radiation followed by resection. Last, the Eastern Gastric Oncology Group is performing a study of cisplatin and taxotere therapy followed by surgery
followed by postoperative chemoradiation therapy. It is anticipated that the control arm in the next intergroup trial will be the best arm of the Intergroup 116 study
(discussed later, in Adjuvant Radiation and Chemoradiation Therapy ), in which patients having undergone curative resection for gastric cancer were randomized to
observation or chemoradiation therapy using FU and leucovorin as the chemotherapeutic agents.
In summary, neoadjuvant approaches involving preoperative chemotherapy with or without postoperative intraperitoneal treatment are now under way in the United
States and in Europe. To date, the data indicate no increase in operative morbidity or mortality. Because evaluating the primary tumor is difficult, down-staging can
only be estimated. The approach, although promising, requires definitive randomized phase III trials before firm conclusions regarding the value of this technique are
established.
ADJUVANT RADIATION AND CHEMORADIATION THERAPY
Few studies have evaluated radiation therapy alone (with no concomitant chemotherapy) as an adjuvant to surgical resection of gastric cancer. Most of the studies
that have evaluated radiation therapy as an adjuvant have used concomitant 5-FU chemotherapy.
Some of the earliest data on radiation therapy of gastric cancer comes from the Mayo Clinic, where studies were performed in the 1960s on the use of radiation
therapy and 5-FU in a variety of gastrointestinal malignancies. Although these reports were based on patients with locally advanced tumors, they laid the groundwork
for the subsequent adjuvant studies. Childs and colleagues 245 reported a study of patients with advanced gastric cancer who were randomized to either radiation
therapy alone to a dose of approximately 4000 cGy or radiation therapy combined with 5-FU as a radiation sensitizer (bolus 5-FU for 3 days, 15 mg/kg/d). This study
showed a significant improvement in survival with the combination of 5-FU and radiation compared with radiation alone. Because the dose of 5-FU was extremely low,
most people have interpreted these data as showing an advantage to 5-FU as a radiation sensitizer. This observation also is consistent with the data that have been
obtained in other gastrointestinal sites, such as rectal and pancreatic cancer, for which 5-FU has improved survival when combined with radiation therapy. The British
Stomach Cancer Group study randomized patients to postoperative radiation therapy; postoperative chemotherapy with FAM; or surgery alone. At 5-year follow-up, no

significant difference was seen among any of the three arms, but the local recurrence rate was decreased by the use of radiation therapy (54% with surgery alone vs.
32% with radiation therapy, P <.01).246
Two studies used chemotherapy plus concurrent radiation. In one study, however, incompletely resected patients were included. Dent and colleagues 247 treated 142
patients who were randomly assigned to no additional therapy or to 2000 cGy given in eight treatments over 10 days plus FU, 12.5 mg/kg, daily for 4 days immediately
before the beginning of radiation. A second cycle was given on day 28. Patients in “division one'' had no residual gross disease but may have had incomplete
resection. The control group had 31 patients, and the chemotherapy/radiation group had 35 patients. No difference in survival between the two groups was reported.
Moertel and coworkers 247a from the Mayo Clinic have reported the results of a randomized trial of radiation therapy (3750 cGy in 24 fractions) plus 5-FU (15 mg/kg ×
3) versus surgery alone for poor prognosis patients, including those with scirrhous carcinomas, metastases to regional lymph nodes, invasion of adjacent structures,
or tumors originating in the cardia. Eighty percent of patients had positive nodal disease, and approximately 25% had invasion of adjacent structures. The treated
patients had a 5-year survival rate of 20% versus a 4% 5-year survival rate in the surgery-only controls. However, the issue is confused by the fact that ten patients
who were randomized to adjuvant treatment refused therapy. In this small cohort of patients, the 5-year survival rate was 30%. Locoregional recurrence was
decreased from 54% in the surgery-alone arm to 39% in the combined modality arm. The survival results in these studies are also similar to those reported in
nonrandomized series, such as that by Slot and colleagues, 248 in which 57 patients with poor prognostic factors received postoperative radiation therapy to a dose of
30 to 50 Gy combined with 5-FU. The 5-year survival rate was 26%, with 16 patients having a locoregional recurrence as their first sign of relapse.
Although others have evaluated other combinations of chemotherapy with radiation therapy, 249,250 no advantage has been shown to date with any drug regimen
besides 5-FU when combined with chemotherapy. The data suggest that, for patients with nodal positivity, serosal involvement, or close or positive surgical resection
margins, postoperative radiation therapy may be of value. This approach has been studied in the United States in a national intergroup trial (INT 116) evaluating two
cycles of chemotherapy with 5-FU and leucovorin followed by radiation therapy to a dose of 4500 cGy with concurrent chemotherapy. Intergroup 116 involved a total
of 556 evaluable patients, 275 of whom were followed expectantly after operation, and 281 who were randomly assigned to receive postoperative chemoradiation
therapy. All patients had undergone an R0 resection. The type of lymphadenectomy was not mandated by the study protocol. Postoperative chemoradiation therapy
involved the use of FU and leucovorin chemotherapy and 45 Gy of external-beam radiation therapy. One cycle using the Mayo Clinic regimen of FU, 425 mg/m 2, and
leucovorin, 20 mg/M2, for 5 consecutive days was followed by concurrent chemoradiation. Doses were decreased during radiation to FU, 400 mg/M 2, and leucovorin,
20 mg/M2, daily for 4 days during week 1 of radiation, and for 3 days at the end of radiation. One month after the completion of radiation, additional chemotherapy
using FU, 425 mg/M2, and leucovorin, 20 mg/M 2, daily for 5 days was given for two additional cycles. This data has been presented in abstract form. The two arms
were well balanced for important prognostic indicators. Eighty-five percent of patients had lymph node metastases. With close attention to detail, especially to
radiation therapy treatment planning, toxicity was tolerable, although three (1%) toxic deaths on the experimental arm were reported. Postoperative adjuvant
chemoradiation therapy resulted in a significant improvement in both disease-free and overall 3-year survival rates. The median survival was improved from 26
months for the surgery-only group to 40 months for those receiving chemoradiation. Three-year survival was 41% for surgery only and 52% for postoperative
chemoradiation (P = .03; hazard ratio, 1.28) (J. McDonald, personal communication). If the final report confirms these initial data, postoperative chemoradiation using
FU and leucovorin will become the standard of care for resected R0 patients able to tolerate such treatment.
To try to increase the total radiation dose that can safely be delivered, newer radiation approaches have been tried. An approach that has been investigated at a few
centers is intraoperative electron-beam radiation therapy. In this technique, pioneered by Abe and Takahashi, 251 patients receive a single dose of high-energy
electrons delivered to the tumor bed at the time of gastrectomy. Because most of the radiosensitive normal structures can be moved from the radiation beam, the risk
of producing significant bowel complications is reduced. In a nonrandomized trial, Abe has demonstrated an improved 5-year survival rate in patients with locally
advanced disease (usually because of posterior infiltration) who were treated with intraoperative radiation therapy (20%). 251a A small randomized trial of a similar
approach at the National Cancer Institute 252 did not demonstrate any significant survival advantage, although it did demonstrate an improvement in local control
compared with surgery alone. A number of phase II trials have been performed that demonstrate the feasibility of this approach in a large number of centers, but these
trials do not allow any conclusions regarding efficacy 251,252,253 and 254 (Table 33.3-14).

TABLE 33.3-14. Gastric Cancer: Surgery Alone versus Surgery and Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT), Japan

TECHNIQUE OF RADIATION THERAPY
In general, the presence of normal tissues close to the tumor mass limits the radiation dose that can be delivered safely. The spinal cord, kidneys, small bowel, and
liver are all in close proximity and cannot be entirely avoided. In addition, the stomach itself is a radiation-sensitive tissue, and high doses (more than 5000 cGy) to a
functional stomach produce a significant incidence of ulceration and bleeding.
When irradiating the upper abdomen, a number of acute side effects from therapy may occur, including nausea, weight loss, and fatigue. With properly planned
radiation fields, the nausea is not generally severe, but given the prolonged course of radiation, if careful attention is not given to the patient's nutritional status, the
therapy can end up producing more harm than good. Usually, a combination of antiemetics, multiple small feedings, and nutritional supplements are sufficient to
control the side effects of treatment, but on occasion, feeding tubes are useful. If patients cannot maintain their weight before the initiation of radiation therapy, they
usually have difficulty with the therapy. The other acute side effects are relatively minor and easily managed. The possible late side effects that must be considered
include damage to spinal cord, liver, kidney, and stomach.
Late liver and renal failure or radiation-induced spinal cord transection are all possible complications from excess irradiation, but if proper attention is paid to these
structures during treatment planning, a clinical problem should rarely develop. The tolerance dose of the stomach itself is on the order of 5000 cGy, so those doses
above this level have a real risk of producing gastric ulceration.
It is common for at least one kidney to be required in the radiation field to a high dose (more than 3000 cGy), which produces a very high chance of significant renal
injury, usually to the left kidney. Studies have demonstrated 255 that, for a patient with baseline renal function that is within normal range, treating one kidney to high
dose has a very low likelihood of producing renal injury that adversely effects the patient's quality of life. The compensatory hypertrophy of the unirradiated kidney
results in adequate renal function, and the risk of renovascular hypertension is very low. If the equivalent of one kidney can be eliminated from the radiation field and
the patient starts with a relatively normal creatinine clearance, then the patient should tolerate the radiation course adequately in regard to the kidneys. Standard
radiation tolerance doses should be observed for the other normal tissues mentioned previously.
If radiation therapy is being used as an adjuvant or with curative intent, the patterns of spread of the tumor must be considered in planning the radiation field. In
contrast to many other tumor sites, a standard radiation field is often inappropriate in treatment of gastric cancer because the spread patterns relate to the site of
origin and the extension that is found on preoperative imaging studies and at surgery. The lymphatic pattern of spread has already been discussed, and this pattern
greatly influences the radiation fields that are appropriate. Although one usually wishes to encompass much of the stomach (or the gastric bed), for tumors that
originated and remained limited to the gastric antrum, it is not necessary to irradiate the entire cardia of the stomach and to extend the radiation field to encompass
the lower esophagus, but it is necessary to treat the periduodenal lymph nodes. Similarly, for tumors originating in the cardia, it is essential that the field extend up
into the esophagus and that there is full coverage of the bed of the gastric cardia and fundus, but one can safely avoid irradiating the periduodenal nodes. Often, a
local failure from gastric cancer occurs from posterior extension of the primary tumor onto the pancreas and into other retroperitoneal tissues. Therefore, full coverage

of these areas of posterior invasion is essential. An example of a typical radiation field is shown in Figure 33.3-8. The radiation fields are primarily anteroposterior
fields, although lateral and oblique fields can be very useful for the final boost. If lateral fields are used for a substantial portion of the large-field treatment, then care
must be taken to avoid treating large segments of the liver to doses higher than 2000 or 2500 cGy.

FIGURE 33.3-8. Typical treatment field for postoperative radiation therapy of a tumor of the body of the pancreas. This field encompasses the entire tumor bed and
virtually all regional lymphatic sites. For tumors that are located more proximally or distally in the stomach, the fields can be shaped to avoid regions at lower risk (see
text).

The total radiation dose to be used is determined primarily by the tolerance of the normal tissues mentioned above. Generally, a dose of 4500 cGy given at 180 cGy/d
has a minimal chance of producing significant late complications. At doses higher than 5000 cGy, the risk of late complications increases, and doses greater than this
should be limited to very small volumes. As mentioned above, the data strongly suggest that the combination of 5-FU and radiation is more effective than radiation
alone. Although the optimal method of drug administration is not known, it is appropriate to use, as a minimum, 3 days of bolus 5-FU during the first and last week of
radiation therapy.
PALLIATIVE TREATMENT OF GASTRIC CANCER
Since the late 1970s, many chemotherapeutic agents have been studied in gastric cancer. Although reports of very high response rates with some of the newer
combination chemotherapy regimens have been published, the median survival of patients with advanced cancer continues to be dismal.
SINGLE-AGENT CHEMOTHERAPY
The objective response rates reported for single agents in patients with gastric cancer are shown in Table 33.3-15. FU is the most extensively studied single agent in
this disease, with an overall objective response rate of 21%. 256,257 The two most commonly used schedules for administering 5-FU as a single agent are daily
intravenous injections for 5 consecutive days, repeated every 4 to 5 weeks, and weekly intravenous injections. Both schedules have similar response rates and
toxicity profiles. The major side effects of 5-FU are mucositis, diarrhea, myelosuppression, and (using a continuous infusion) the hand-foot syndrome. 5-FU has been
a common element in most combination chemotherapy regimens for gastric cancer.

TABLE 33.3-15. Chemotherapeutic Agents

Mitomycin C, an antitumor antibiotic, also has been extensively used in the treatment of gastric cancer, especially in Japan. The overall objective response rate for
mitomycin C has been approximately 30%. 258,259 and 260 Its greatest toxicity is delayed and cumulative myelosuppression, so the drug is usually given on an intermittent
basis every 4 to 8 weeks.
Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), an anthracycline antibiotic, also has been studied. In 141 evaluable patients with advanced disease, it had an overall response rate of
17%.258,259,261 Doxorubicin is a potent agent with significant but manageable early side effects. Its most critical toxicity is irreversible myocardial damage. Several
groups have studied cisplatin. As a single agent, it is reported to produce major responses in 19% of patients, including those previously treated. 262,263 and 264
Several new agents have been identified as having substantial activity in advanced gastric cancer. As shown in Table 33.3-15, the taxanes paclitaxel and docetaxel
have both undergone phase II trials. For paclitaxel, both 3-hour and 24-hour infusions given every 3 weeks have been studied. Overall, approximately 20% of patients
have had major objective regressions, primarily partial remissions. It is unclear as to whether a substantial difference exists between the two schedules. Response
also has been seen in patients who have received prior chemotherapy. Similar data exists for docetaxel. The overall response rate is approximately 20% to 25%, with
most studies having used an every 3-week dosing schedule. The two taxanes have not yet been compared in prospective randomized studies. Irinotecan, a new agent
in the treatment of patients with colorectal cancer, also has single-agent activity in gastric cancer. Responses have been reported in both previously treated and
untreated patients.
Both of these new classes of agents have now been used in multidrug combinations as described in the following sections. In addition to the identification of the
taxanes and irinotecan, interest is increasing in oral fluorinated pyrimidine therapy. In this case, although the agents being studied are not of a new class but rather
are FU prodrugs, ease of administration and the mimicking of chronic infusional therapy is of interest. UFT has been the most well-studied oral fluorinated pyrimidine.
Responses in 20% to 30% of patients have been reported. Fewer data are available for S1, although in one study, an unusually high response rate of 49% was
reported. Also shown in Table 33.3-15 are newer agents studied since 1996 that have not demonstrated antineoplastic activity.
COMBINATION CHEMOTHERAPY
Numerous attempts have been made to develop more effective combination chemotherapy regimens using known active drugs; some trials also have included other
agents that did not have substantiated activity. Both phase II and prospective randomized phase III trials have been reported ( Table 33.3-16 and Table 33.3-17). In
general, results from multicenter phase III trials have had lower response rates than single-institution phase II studies for the same drug
regimens.230,261,265,266,267,268,269,270,271,272 and 272a Several combination chemotherapy regimens have shown response rates in the range of 30% to 50%, usually in phase II
studies.

TABLE 33.3-16. Combination Chemotherapy

TABLE 33.3-17. Prospective Randomized Trials of Combination Chemotherapy in Advanced Gastric Cancer

FAM AND FAM VARIANTS
The FAM combination was widely used in the 1980s (see Table 33.3-16). In the initial report of this regimen, 26 of 62 patients (42%) achieved a partial response; no
complete responses were reported. 273 The median duration of response was 9 months; the median survival for the whole group was 5.5 months, although the median
survival for responding patients was 12.5 months. Results using FAM have since been reported in more than 650 patients in various dose schedules with a cumulative
response rate of 30%; the complete remission rate has been 2%. 260 The median remission duration is 5 to 10 months. Other studies have used variants of the FAM
regimen (e.g., increased doxorubicin dose). The overall response rate of 28% for such modified regimens is similar to the response rate reported in patients treated
with the original FAM combination. The median survival of patients treated on FAM variants was also identical to those treated on the original FAM regimen. 260
In a review of Japanese studies, Ogawa 274 reported a cumulative response rate of 36% in 356 patients with a combination of 5-FU, mitomycin C, and cytarabine. The
mean survival was reported as 16 to 20 months. In a randomized trial of 5-FU alone versus 5-FU, mitomycin, and cytarabine, however, Cocconi and colleagues 257
found no statistical difference among the response rate, duration of response, or median survival in the two arms.
In a phase III trial, the North Central Cancer Treatment Group compared single-agent 5-FU to 5-FU plus doxorubicin and to FAM 275 (see Table 33.3-17). The primary
end point of this study was survival. The median survival of all patients was 29 weeks. The investigators also did not notice any significant differences in the palliative
effect among these three treatment regimens.
Cisplatin -Based Chemotherapy
Although many phase II studies have been performed during the 1990s involving a variety of cisplatin-containing and non–cisplatin-containing combinations, only a
few phase III randomized studies have been reported. Most of these trials involve relatively small numbers of patients, so that the ability to make definitive statements
of superiority of one treatment over the other is limited.
The in vitro synergy between cisplatin and 5-FU, the activity of cisplatin as a single agent in gastric cancer, and the bone marrow toxicity of mitomycin led several
investigators to replace mitomycin in the FAM combination with cisplatin. The cumulative overall response rate for this FAP regimen was 34%, with 5% of the patients
achieving complete remission. 260,268,276 Cisplatin and doxorubicin were given in doses of 60 to 100 and 30 to 60 mg/m 2 per cycle, respectively. 5-FU dose and
schedule also varied in individual trials.
To assess the individual contribution of cisplatin, methyl CCNU, and triazinate in combination with 5-FU and doxorubicin, the Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group
performed a prospective randomized trial comparing FAP, FAMe [FU, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and methyl CCNU], and FAT [5-FU, doxorubicin (Adriamycin),
triazinate]. 276 The primary end point was survival. Of 249 patients studied, 38% had measurable disease and were evaluable for response. The response rates for
FAP, FAMe, and FAT were 19%, 15%, and 20%, respectively. Median survival rates were 31 weeks (FAP), 24 weeks (FAMe), and 30 weeks (FAT). Severe toxicity
was seen in 69% of patients treated with FAP, 62% on FAMe, and 42% on FAT.
Cunningham and coworkers 277 substituted epirubicin, an analogue of doxorubicin that, in preclinical studies, has less cardiac toxicity with equivalent tumor activity to
doxorubicin, for doxorubicin in the ECF regimen in one report. Ten of 14 evaluable patients (71%) achieved an objective response. In a second trial involving 52
evaluable patients, the response rate was 37%, with a 17% complete remission rate. 278 Median durations of survival were not reported. The Italian Oncology Group for
clinical research performed a randomized phase III trial comparing the FAM regimen to a cisplatin, epirubicin, leucovorin, and FU (PELF) regimen. 279 Nonhematologic
toxicity was significantly more frequent with PELF compared with FAM, including two treatment-related deaths. PELF had a significantly higher response rate (43%)
than did FAM (15%). The median duration of survival was not significantly different. Waters et al. 279a reported the long-term results of a randomized trial in which ECF
was compared to the FAMTX combination. This is one of the largest phase III trials in advanced gastric cancer reported.
In phase II studies led by Cunningham and colleagues, 277 ECF had a high response rate with acceptable toxicity. FAMTX had been shown in earlier trials to be
superior to FAM, which was one of the standards of the early 1980s. In the randomized MRC study, 279a 126 patients received ECF and 130 patients received FAMTX.
The overall response rate for ECF was significantly higher than that of FAMTX (46% vs. 21%). Median survival was also longer for ECF (8.7 vs. 6.1 months). In the
update, long-term survival was presented. At 2 years, 14% of patients receiving ECF were alive versus 5% of FAMTX patients. In an earlier trial, Kim and
colleagues 279b compared FU and cisplatin to FU alone and to the FAM regimen. This smaller trial had 54 to 57 patients per arm. The response rate to the
cisplatin-containing combination was 51%, significantly better than the 25% to 26% for the non–cisplatin-containing arms. The median duration of survival of 8.5
months was almost identical to the median duration of survival for ECF.
Barone and colleagues 279c compared a cisplatin, epirubicin, and etoposide combination to FU plus leucovorin. In this small study, 32 patients received
cisplatin-containing therapy and 33 received FU plus leucovorin. Response rates were similar (22% vs. 18%, respectively), as was median survival. The 2-year
survival rate was 14% for patients receiving cisplatin, epirubicin, and etoposide compared to 3% of those receiving 5-FU plus leucovorin. The Turkish Oncology
Group 279d compared two cisplatin-containing combinations: etoposide, epirubicin, cisplatin versus FU, epirubicin, and cisplatin; 20% of patients responded to the
etoposide, epirubicin, and cisplatin regimen versus 15% to FU, epirubicin, and cisplatin. Median survival rates were short (6 vs. 5 months). Thus, to date, epirubicinand cisplatin-containing combinations have been reported to have higher response rates and, in some trials, a survival advantage.

Cisplatin -Etoposide Variants
Because of evidence that etoposide and cisplatin may be synergistic and that the combination of the two may be helpful in overcoming multidrug resistance, 280,281
these drugs have been combined in many tumors. Two phase II trials of etoposide and cisplatin in advanced gastric cancer (including gastroesophageal junction
adenocarcinoma) showed an 18% response rate in 79 evaluable patients. Kelsen and colleagues 282 reported only one major objective regression in 33 evaluable
patients. Cisplatin at a dose of 60 mg/m 2 was given on days 1 and 29 and every 6 weeks thereafter, with etoposide given at a dose of 100 mg/m 2 on days 3, 5, 7, and
31, 33, and 35. Toxicity was generally tolerable. In the second trial, Elliott and coworkers 283 saw 13 responses in 46 evaluable patients. Etoposide was given at a dose
of 130 mg/m2/d × 3 plus cisplatin, 45 mg/m 2/d, on days 2 and 3. Both drugs were given by continuous intravenous infusion, and the cycles were repeated every 4
weeks. Most patients experienced severe toxicity. The median duration of response was 4 months.
Preusser and colleagues 284 used the combination of etoposide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (EAP) and reported a 64% response rate in 67 patients, with a complete
remission rate of 21%. Including patients with locoregional tumor treated in a separate trial, Wilke and colleagues 285 treated 145 patients with EAP, resulting in a
cumulative response rate of 57%. Analyzing response as a function of extent of disease, patients with locoregional tumor had a response rate of 73%, with a 29%
complete remission rate, as opposed to those with metastatic disease who had a response rate of 49% with a complete remission rate of 8%. Similarly, the median
survival time for patients with locally advanced disease was 17 months in comparison with 8.5 months for those with metastatic disease. In four subsequent phase II
trials of EAP involving 173 evaluable patients, a cumulative response rate of 53% and a complete remission rate of 6% has been seen. 286,287 However, in each of the
subsequent trials after the initial study reported by Preusser, a treatment-related death rate of 10% to 14% with EAP was noted.
In part because EAP caused severe toxicity in older patients, Wilke and colleagues, 288 devised a combination chemotherapy regimen of etoposide, leucovorin, and FU
(ELF) for patients older than 65 years with advanced gastric cancer. The rationale for this combination was that 5-FU and etoposide are active agents in gastric
cancer that are well tolerated and have no cumulative organ toxicity, the dose limiting toxicity being overlapping myelosuppression; etoposide and 5-FU are
synergistic and are not cross-resistant; and leucovorin enhances the cytotoxicity of FU in other tumors. Fifty-one patients older than 65 years of age or with cardiac
disease were treated. The overall response rate was 53%, including 12% complete remissions. The response rate in patients with locally advanced disease was 70%
compared with 49% in patients with distant metastases. The median duration of response was 9.5 months. Twenty percent of patients experienced grade 3 or 4
myelosuppression; however, nonhematologic toxicity was generally mild. The authors recommended ELF as a suitable regimen for high-risk patients (advanced age
or cardiac risk factors).
Fluorouracil, Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and Methotrexate
The concept of biochemical modulation of 5-FU involves the use of agents designed to increase the pool of phosphoribosylpyrophosphate in tumor cells, resulting in
increased 5-FU ribonucleotide metabolites, thereby increasing the effectiveness of 5-FU–directed tumor kill. This approach led Klein 289 to study sequential high-dose
methotrexate followed by 5-FU in combination with doxorubicin (Adriamycin) (the FAMTX regimen) in advanced gastric cancer. The interval between methotrexate
and 5-FU is 1 hour in the original FAMTX regimen. Klein reported a response rate of 59% in 100 evaluable patients, with a complete remission rate of 12% and a
treatment-related mortality rate of 3%. In a review of his experience, 289 Klein noted a 6% long-term (more than 5 years) survival rate for patients receiving FAMTX.
Kelsen and colleagues 290 reported the results of a randomized trial comparing EAP to FAMTX in advanced gastric cancer. The response rates were similar. Three
patients (10%) had complete remission rates in the FAMTX arm; no complete remissions were seen with EAP. Although no significant differences were reported in the
response rate, EAP was significantly more toxic than FAMTX for neutropenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. Most important, four treatment-related deaths (13%)
were noted on the EAP arm as opposed to none on the FAMTX arm (P = .04). In view of the significant toxicity difference, the study was closed. The median durations
of survival of all patients was similar (FAMTX, 7 months; EAP, 6 months). The authors concluded that FAMTX was at least as active as EAP but was significantly less
toxic.
The European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer published the results of a multicenter prospective randomized trial comparing FAMTX with FAM 291
(see Table 33.3-17). The response rate of 41% for FAMTX was significantly superior to the 9% response rate for FAM ( P <.0001). Five complete responders were
reported in the FAMTX arm compared with none on the FAM regimen. Survival among FAMTX patients was also superior (42 weeks compared with 29 weeks for
FAM; P = .004). The toxic death rate of the two combinations was similar (FAMTX, 4%; FAM, 3%). At 1 year, 41% of FAMTX versus 22% of FAM patients were alive.
None were surviving at the 2-year mark on FAM, whereas 9% of the patients survived on the FAMTX arm. Severe hematologic toxicity was seen in more patients on
FAM than on the FAMTX regimen. As noted previously, in a randomized trial performed by Cunningham and colleagues, 277 ECF was superior to FAMTX in terms of
response rate, quality of life, and survival.
The European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer has performed a randomized trial of FAMTX versus ELF versus cisplatin and 5-FU. In a
preliminary result of this study, 274 eligible patients were randomized. 291 No significant difference was found in severe toxicity (World Health Organization scale 3 or
4+) between the three arms. The response rates in the subgroups of patients with measurable disease in the preliminary report also showed no significant difference.
Median survival was 7 to 8 months. The analysis was preliminary because not all patients had been fully assessed. 292
In summary, as is the case for adjuvant trials, few adequately powered, large-scale phase III studies have been performed comparing one regimen with another. From
the point of view of median survival, little substantial difference exists between one regimen and another, particularly in those in which both arms include cisplatin.
However, it is of note that 2-year survival rates of 10% to 15% have been reported in several series reporting longer-term data, indicating that at least some patients
have substantial palliative benefit. Although some investigators have proposed that one regimen be considered the standard of care, as yet no convincing data shows
that one cisplatin and FU–containing combination is markedly better than another.
The identification of several new classes of agents with substantial single-agent activity (the taxanes and irinotecan) and new modalities of treatment (including newer
approaches, such as immunotherapy, angiogenesis blockade, monoclonal antibody chemotherapy combinations, and manipulation of molecular biologic targets)
should be vigorously pursued. Their inclusion in multidrug combinations may lead to further improvements in palliation, and eventually to cure, when these agents are
used in the multimodality setting. Several large-scale randomized trials are currently under way comparing, for example, docetaxel and cisplatin–containing treatment
to “standard” cisplatin and FU or, alternatively, irinotecan and cisplatin–containing therapy to cisplatin and FU.

PREDICTING RESPONSE
The development of techniques that will allow physicians to choose those individual chemotherapeutic agents that are most likely to work in the individual patient is a
high priority. It is particularly important because currently available cytotoxic chemotherapy for gastric cancer has only modest to moderate effectiveness, with
objective regressions in 25% to 40% of all patients treated, and toxicities can be substantial. Earlier in vitro assays have not proven to have adequate sensitivity;
however, several studies suggest that molecular analysis of tumor tissue might be a more accurate measure to predict outcome. The hypothesis is that levels of
expression of target molecules, or of molecules associated with the mechanism of action of an individual agent, are associated with response or resistance.
Several new techniques for molecular analysis are being studied to allow individualization of therapy. These include immunohistochemical stains for expression of the
molecular marker of interest (such as TS) or use of reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction technology to measure relative gene expression. In gastric
cancer, a substantial amount of data involves the use of relative gene expression of messenger RNA. For example, in trials from the University of Southern California
and Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, studies have been performed in patients with locally advanced but not metastatic gastric cancer. Although response
has been used in the outcome analysis in several of these trials, it should be recognized that response assessment in locoregional gastric cancer can be difficult;
survival is a firmer end point. Lenz and colleagues 293 and Metzger et al. 294 from the same group reported an analysis of a subgroup of patients receiving neoadjuvant
cisplatin and FU chemotherapy followed by resection and intraperitoneal FUDR chemotherapy. Response and survival were correlated with molecular markers in 38
evaluable patients. Those with low levels of relative TS and ERCC1 (excision repair cross complementing gene; a marker for cisplatin sensitivity) had a significantly
longer median and long-term survival than did patients with high levels of expression. Fata and colleagues 294a evaluated the predictive value of TS, thymidylate
phosphorylase, dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, and ERCC1 in inoperable gastric cancer patients undergoing surgery, without pre- or postoperative chemotherapy.
This study addressed the question as to whether levels of expression of a molecular marker were independent predictors of outcome, or whether levels of gene
expression were only important in the context of chemotherapy. In a preliminary assessment, patients with low relative gene expression of TS, TP, or ERCC1 did not
have an improved outcome (either disease-free or overall survival). They noted that surgery-only patients with high TS gene expression, a marker that would predict
resistance to chemotherapy, had a better survival compared to patients with low TS. This finding was persistent even in a multivariant analysis adjusting for stage.

Conversely, patients receiving cisplatin and FU preoperative chemotherapy with low TS were more likely to have better outcome. Several other groups also have
investigated the use of similar molecular markers. Boku and colleagues 295 used immunohistochemistry to measure TS, p53, vascular endothelial growth factor, and
glutathione S-transferase. Thirty-nine patients in this study had unresectable disease and received cisplatin plus FU. Patients with immunohistochemistry negative for
TS (indicating low expression) had a higher response rate and survived longer than patients with positive stains, as did those negative for p53, BCL2, and glutathione
S-transferase. Conversely, patients with vascular endothelial growth factor–positive tumors had a higher response rate. A multivariant analysis indicated that a
combination of favorable molecular phenotypes had a greater impact on survival than did performance status or other clinical parameters.
Resistance to chemotherapy has been reported by many investigators to be associated with mutations of the p53 oncogene. Several such studies have been
performed in gastric cancer. Cascinu and colleagues 296 performed immunohistochemistry on pretreatment endoscopic biopsies in 30 patients with locally advanced
but not metastatic disease. As is the case in other studies in this group of patients, assessing response can be difficult. With this caveat, 16 of 30 patients had high
levels of p53 expression by immunohistochemistry. Ten of 12 responding patents had p53-negative tumors. These authors concluded that mutation of p53 oncogene
confers resistance to chemotherapy. On the other hand, Ikeguchi et al. 297 found no relationship between p53 status and intraperitoneal chemotherapy, nor did Yeh
and colleagues. 298 A definitive study in which adequate numbers of patients with advanced gastric cancer receive the same chemotherapy irrespective of their
molecular marker profile and are followed prospectively has not yet been performed. Such studies have been proposed for other tumors (such as colorectal cancer).
The identification of molecular markers measured by immunohistochemistry, by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, or by other techniques that could
predict outcome would be a substantial improvement in directing therapy.

CHEMOTHERAPY VERSUS BEST SUPPORTIVE CARE
During the late 1980s and early 1990s, considerable debate occurred over whether chemotherapy for patients with advanced gastric cancer had any advantages over
best supportive care. This issue is of importance, not only in addressing the options for standard care treatment for patients with advanced disease, but in the
implication that effective systemic therapy given in the palliative setting may lead to an increase in cure rate for patients with localized, high-risk, potentially curable
tumors. Four randomized trials have been reported in which patients were assigned to either chemotherapy and best supportive care or best supportive care alone. In
all of these trials, the option for the initiation of chemotherapy at the time of symptomatic or objective progression was at the discretion of the treating physician.
Although these studies have relatively small numbers of patients (recognizing the difficulty of performing such studies and that, in several cases, the study was
stopped when benefit was seen in the chemotherapy-receiving arm), the data are fairly consistent. Patients randomized to receive best supportive care alone, even
when allowed to receive chemotherapy at a later date, have a median survival of 3 to 5 months. Patients randomized to immediate chemotherapy had a median
survival of 9 to 11 months. More impressive is 1- and 2-year survival when reported. As shown in Table 33.3-18, the 1-year survival rate is 35% to 40% for patients
receiving chemotherapy versus approximately 10% for those randomized to best supportive care. The 2-year survival rate is 6% to 10% for patients receiving
chemotherapy versus 0% of patients with initial observation. These data strongly support the conclusion similar to that of other malignancies, such as colorectal and
breast cancer, that systemic chemotherapy has a real although modest affect on survival in patients with advanced disease. Furthermore, the results support the use
of systemic cytotoxic chemotherapy as part of multimodality therapy in patients with less-advanced but high-risk cancers. None of the regimens used in the best
supportive care trials included cisplatin nor, of course, the more recently identified active agents paclitaxel, docetaxel, and irinotecan. As already discussed, however,
reports on longer-term follow-up of randomized chemotherapy trials also show 5% to 15% of patients living for longer than 2 years.

TABLE 33.3-18. Chemotherapy for Advanced Gastric Cancer: Treatment versus Best Supportive Care

SURGERY FOR PALLIATION
Because the survival for patients with advanced gastric cancer is so poor, any proposed operation should have a good chance of providing sustained symptomatic
relief while minimizing the attendant morbidity and need for prolonged hospitalization. Ekbom and Gleysteen 299 have reviewed the results of palliative resection versus
intestinal bypass (gastrojejunostomy) in 75 patients with advanced gastric cancer. The most frequent symptoms for which patients underwent operation included pain,
hemorrhage, nausea, dysphagia, or obstruction. Operative mortality was 25% for gastrojejunostomy, 20% for palliative partial or subtotal gastrectomy, and 27% for
total or proximal palliative gastrectomy. The most common and often fatal complication was anastomotic leak. After gastrojejunostomy, 80% of patients had relief of
symptoms for a mean of 5.9 months compared with palliative resection, which provided relief of symptoms in 88% of patients for a mean of 14.6 months. Although the
duration of palliation was significantly longer after resection ( P <.01), the selection criteria for resection versus bypass were not controlled, and some bias against
performing a palliative resection in high-risk patients with more advanced disease may have occurred. Meijer and colleagues 300 also have reported a retrospective
analysis of 51 patients undergoing either palliative intestinal bypass or resection. In 20 of 26 patients (77%) undergoing resection, palliation was considered moderate
to good with a mean survival of 9.5 months. After gastroenterostomy, some palliation was noted in 8 of 25 patients (30%), and survival was 4.2 months. Butler and
colleagues 167 have presented the results of total gastrectomy for palliation in 27 patients with advanced gastric cancer. Operative mortality was only 4%, whereas
morbidity occurred in 48% of patients. Median survival was 15 months, with a survival rate of 38% at 2 years. This substantial survival rate at 2 years reflects the fact
that, although all patients were symptomatic before surgery, only one-half had stage IV disease. Patients with linitis plastica present a very difficult therapeutic
challenge. Resection may provide palliation of symptoms; however, survival after total gastrectomy is exceedingly poor, ranging from 3 months to 1 year. 301
Bozzetti and colleagues 302 have reviewed the outcomes of 246 patients with advanced gastric cancer who underwent simple exploratory laparotomy alone,
gastrointestinal bypass, or palliative resection at the National Cancer Institute of Milan. When survival was compared in patients with similar type and extent of
disease, a consistent trend was seen for improved median survival with palliative resection in patients with local spread (4.4 vs. 8 months) and distant spread of
disease (3 vs. 8 months). Boddie et al. 303 has reported similar results in 45 patients undergoing palliative resection at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center for advanced
gastric cancer. Operative mortality for resection was 22%. In 21 patients who had undergone a palliative bypass procedure, survival was significantly shorter than for
those undergoing resection (P <.01).
In select patients with symptomatic advanced gastric cancer, resection of the primary disease appears to provide symptomatic relief with acceptable morbidity and
mortality, even in the presence of macroscopic residual disease. The criteria for deciding which patients may benefit from palliative operation have not been
established, and the data available represent retrospective analyses of patients selected for operation. The choice of procedure in these studies may have been
influenced by differences in opinion regarding the value of palliative surgery in patients with such a grave prognosis.
RADIATION FOR PALLIATION
To date, no studies have evaluated the use of radiation therapy in patients with locally recurrent or metastatic carcinoma of the stomach. Its use is likely to be limited
to palliation of symptoms, such as bleeding or controlling pain secondary to local tumor infiltration. Although minimal data are available, radiation therapy seems to be
fairly effective (from anecdotal experience) in controlling bleeding, as is true in other sites. This can often be accomplished at relatively low radiation doses. Pain from
local tumor invasion can also be palliated, although the doses required are higher (4000 cGy). On rare occasions, a case may arise of a patient with a focal local
recurrence without metastases who would be amenable to relatively high-dose radiation therapy to try to prolong survival or in whom radiation therapy would be given
as an adjuvant to surgical resection. At present, however, no data support such an approach.

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics, 1999. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:8.
2. Boring C, Squires T, Tong J. Cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin 1991;41:28.
3. Blot WJ, Devesa SS, Kneller RW, Fraumeni JF Jr. Rising incidence of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and gastric cardia. JAMA 1991;265:1287.
4. Meyers WC, Damiano RJ Jr, Rotolo FS, Postlethwait RW. Adenocarcinoma of the stomach. Changing patterns over the last 4 decades. Ann Surg 1987;205:1.
5. Salvon-Harman JC, Cady B, Nikulasson S, et al. Shifting proportions of gastric adenocarcinomas. Arch Surg 1994;129:381, discussion 388.
6. Laurén P. The two histological main types of gastric carcinoma: diffuse and so-called intestinal-type carcinoma. Acta Pathol 1965;64:31.
7. Holtz J, Goebell H. Epidemiology and pathogenesis of gastric carcinoma. In: Meyer HJ, Schmoll HJ, Holtz J, eds. Gastric carcinoma. New York: Springer-Verlag New York, 1989:3.
8. Aird I, Bentall H. A relationship between cancer of the stomach and the ABO blood group. BMJ 1953:799.
9. Correa P, Cuello C, Duque E. Carcinoma and intestinal metaplasia in the stomach in Colombian migrants. J Natl Cancer Inst 1970;44:297.
10. Imai T, Kubo T, Watanabe H. Chronic gastritis in Japanese with reference to high incidence of gastric carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1971;47:179.
11. Fortner JG, Lauwers GY, Thaler HT, et al. Nativity, complications, and pathology are determinants of surgical results for gastric cancer. Cancer 1994;73:8.
12. Mettlin C. Epidemiologic studies in gastric adenocarcinoma. In: Douglass HJ, ed. Gastric cancer. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1988:1.
13. Murakami R, Tsukuma H, Ubukata T, et al. Estimation of validity of mass screening program for gastric cancer in Osaka, Japan. Cancer 1990;65:1255.
14. Hotz J, Goebell H. Epidemiology and pathogenesis of gastric carcinoma. In: Meyer H, Schmoll HJ, Hotz J, eds. Gastric carcinoma. New York: Springer-Verlag New York, 1989:3.
15. Staszewski J. Migrant studies in alimentary tract cancer. Recent Results Cancer Res 1972;39:85.
16. Haenszel W, Kurihara M, Segi M, Lee RK. Stomach cancer among Japanese in Hawaii. J Natl Cancer Inst 1972;49:969.
17. Correa P. Clinical implications of recent developments in gastric cancer pathology and epidemiology. Semin Oncol 1985;12:2.
18. Boeing H. Epidemiological research in stomach cancer: progress over the last ten years [Editorial] [published erratum appears in J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1991;117:273]. J Cancer Res Clin
Oncol 1991;117:133.
19. Nagayo T. Background data to study of advanced gastric cancer. In: Histogenesis and precursors of human gastric cancer. New York: Springer-Verlag New York, 1986:17.
20. Cady B, Rossi RL, Silverman ML, et al. Gastric adenocarcinoma. A disease in transition. Arch Surg 1989;124:303.
21. Powell J, McConkey CC. The rising trend in oesophageal adenocarcinoma and gastric cardia. Eur J Cancer Prev 1992;1:265.
22. Powell J, McConkey CC. Increasing incidence of adenocarcinoma of the gastric cardia and adjacent sites. Br J Cancer 1990;62:440.
23. Rohde H, Bauer P, Stutzer H, et al. Proximal compared with distal adenocarcinoma of the stomach: differences and consequences. German Gastric Cancer TNM Study Group. Br J Surgery
1991;78:1242.
24. Harrison LE, Karpeh MS, Brennan MF. Proximal gastric cancers resected via a transabdominal-only approach. Results and comparisons to distal adenocarcinoma of the stomach. Ann Surg
1997;225:678, discussion 683.
25. Maehara Y, Moriguchi S, Kakeji Y, et al. Prognostic factors in adenocarcinoma in the upper one-third of the stomach. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1991;173:223.
26. Ohno S, Tomisaki S, Oiwa H, et al. Clinicopathologic characteristics and outcome of adenocarcinoma of the human gastric cardia in comparison with carcinoma of other regions of the stomach.
J Am Coll Surg 1995;180:577.
27. Chow WH, Blot WJ, Vaughan TL, et al. Body mass index and risk of adenocarcinomas of the esophagus and gastric cardia. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:150.
28. Lagergren J, Bergstrom R, Nyren O. Association between body mass and adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and gastric cardia. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:883.
29. Zhang ZF, Kurtz RC, Yu GP, et al. Adenocarcinomas of the esophagus and gastric cardia: the role of diet. Nutr Cancer 1997;27:298.
30. Lagergren J, Bergstrom R, Lindgren A, Nyren O. Symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux as a risk factor for esophageal adenocarcinoma. N Engl J Med 1999;340:825.
31. Zhang ZF, Kurtz RC, Sun M, et al. Adenocarcinomas of the esophagus and gastric cardia: medical conditions, tobacco, alcohol, and socioeconomic factors. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1996;5:761.
32. Gammon MD, Schoenberg JB, Ahsan H, et al. Tobacco, alcohol, and socioeconomic status and adenocarcinomas of the esophagus and gastric cardia. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1277.
33. Farrow DC, Vaughan TL, Hansten PD, et al. Use of aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and risk of esophageal and gastric cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1998;7:97.
34. Chyou PH, Nomura AM, Hankin JH, Stemmermann GN. A case-cohort study of diet and stomach cancer. Cancer Res 1990;50:7501.
35. Nomura A, Grove JS, Stemmermann GN, Severson RK. A prospective study of stomach cancer and its relation to diet, cigarettes, and alcohol consumption [See comments]. Cancer Res
1990;50:627.
36. Weisburger JH, Marquardt H, Mower HF, et al. Inhibition of carcinogenesis: vitamin C and the prevention of gastric cancer. Prev Med 1980;9:352.
37. Dorgan JF, Schatzkin A. Antioxidant micronutrients in cancer prevention. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1991;5:43.
38. Forman D. Are nitrates a significant risk factor in human cancer? Cancer Surv 1989;8:443.
39. Burstein M, Monge E, Leon-Barua R, et al. Low peptic ulcer and high gastric cancer prevalence in a developing country with a high prevalence of infection by Helicobacter pylori. J Clin
Gastroenterol 1991;13:154.
40. Matsukura N, Kawachi T, Sasajima K, et al. Induction of intestinal metaplasia in the stomachs of rats by N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. J Natl Cancer Inst 1978;61:141.
41. Sasajima K, Kawachi T, Matsukura N, et al. Intestinal metaplasia and adenocarcinoma induced in the stomach of rats by N-propyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
1979;94:201.
42. Morson B. Carcinoma arising from areas of intestinal metaplasia in the gastric mucosa. Br J Cancer 1955;9:377.
43. Hoffman NR. The relationship between pernicious anemia and cancer of the stomach. Geriatrics 1970;25:90.
44. Correa P, Haenszel W, Cuello C, et al. Gastric precancerous process in a high risk population: cross-sectional studies. Cancer Res 1990;50:4731.
45. Selves J, Bibeau F, Brousset P, et al. Epstein-Barr virus latent and replicative gene expression in gastric carcinoma. Histopathology 1996;28:121.
46. Adachi Y, Yoh R, Konishi J, et al. Epstein-Barr virusassociated gastric carcinoma. J Clin Gastroenterol 1996;23:207.
47. Tokunaga M, Land CE, Uemura Y, et al. Epstein-Barr virus in gastric carcinoma. Am J Pathol 1993;143:1250.
48. Baas IO, van Rees BP, Musler A, et al. Helicobacter pylori and Epstein-Barr virus infection and the p53 tumour suppressor pathway in gastric stump cancer compared with carcinoma in the
non-operated stomach. J Clin Pathol 1998;51:662.
49. Watanabe S, Tsugane S, Ohno Y. Etiology. In: Sugimura T, Sasako M, eds. Gastric cancer. Tokyo: Oxford, 1997:33.
50. Kato H, Schull WJ. Studies of the mortality of A-bomb survivors. 7. Mortality, 19501978: Part I. Cancer mortality. Radiat Res 1982;90:395.
51. Griem ML, Justman J, Weiss L. The neoplastic potential of gastric irradiation. IV. Risk estimates. Am J Clin Oncol 1984;7:675.
52. Shinmura K, Kohno T, Takahashi M, et al. Familial gastric cancer: clinicopathological characteristics, RER phenotype and germline p53 and E-cadherin mutations. Carcinogenesis
1999;20:1127.
53. Zanghieri G, Di Gregorio C, Sacchetti C, et al. Familial occurrence of gastric cancer in the 2-year experience of a population-based registry. Cancer 1990;66:2047.
54. Sokoloff B. Predisposition to cancer in the Bonaparte family. Am J Surg 1938;40:673.
55. Guilford P, Hopkins J, Harraway J, et al. E-cadherin germline mutations in familial gastric cancer. Nature 1998;392:402.
56. Richards FM, McKee SA, Rajpar MH, et al. Germline E-cadherin gene (CDH1) mutations predispose to familial gastric cancer and colorectal cancer. Hum Mol Genet 1999;8:607.
57. Balfour DC. Factors influencing the life expectancy of patients operated on for gastric surgery. Ann Surg 1922;76:405.
58. Lygidakis NJ. Gastric stump carcinoma after surgery for gastroduodenal ulcer. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 1981;63:203.
59. Stalnikowicz R, Benbassat J. Risk of gastric cancer after gastric surgery for benign disorders. Arch Intern Med 1990;150:2022.
60. Tersmette AC, Offerhaus GJ, Tersmette KW, et al. Meta-analysis of the risk of gastric stump cancer: detection of high risk patient subsets for stomach cancer after remote partial gastrectomy
for benign conditions. Cancer Res 1990;50:6486.
61. La Vecchia C, Negri E, Franceschi S, D'Avanzo B. Histamine-2-receptor antagonists and gastric cancer: update and note on latency and covariates. Nutrition 1992;8:177.
62. Schumacher MC, Jick SS, Jick H, Feld AD. Cimetidine use and gastric cancer. Epidemiology 1990;1:251.
63. Dooley CP, Cohen H, Fitzgibbons PL, et al. Prevalence of Helicobacter pylori infection and histologic gastritis in asymptomatic persons. N Engl J Med 1989;321:1562.
64. Parsonnet J, Vandersteen D, Goates J, et al. Helicobacter pylori infection in intestinal- and diffuse-type gastric adenocarcinomas [published erratum appears in J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:881].
J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:640.
65. Parsonnet J, Friedman GD, Vandersteen DP, et al. Helicobacter pylori infection and the risk of gastric carcinoma [See comments]. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1127.
66. Nomura A, Stemmermann GN, Chyou PH, et al. Helicobacter pylori infection and gastric carcinoma among Japanese Americans in Hawaii [See comments]. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1132.
67. Lin JT, Lee WC, Wu MS, et al. Diagnosis of gastric adenocarcinoma using a scoring system: combined assay of serological markers of Helicobacter pylori infection, pepsinogen I and gastrin. J
Gastroenterol 1995;30:156.
68. Hansson LE, Engstrand L, Nyren O, et al. Helicobacter pylori infection: independent risk indicator of gastric adenocarcinoma [See comments]. Gastroenterology 1993;105:1098.
69. Endo S, Ohkusa T, Saito Y, et al. Detection of Helicobacter pylori infection in early stage gastric cancer. A comparison between intestinal- and diffuse-type gastric adenocarcinomas. Cancer
1995;75:2203.
70. Blaser MJ, Perez-Perez GI, Kleanthous H, et al. Infection with Helicobacter pylori strains possessing cagA is associated with an increased risk of developing adenocarcinoma of the stomach.
Cancer Res 1995;55:2111.
71. Lewin JK, Appelman HD. Carcinoma of the stomach. In: Rosai J, Sobin LH, eds. Tumors of the esophagus and stomach, vol 18. Washington, DC: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology,
1995:245.
72. Isaacson PG. Gastric MALT lymphoma: from concept to cure. Ann Oncol 1999;10:637.
73. Haber DA, Mayer RJ. Primary gastrointestinal lymphoma. Semin Oncol 1988;15:154.
74. Japanese Research Society for Gastric Cancer. Japanese classification of gastric cancer. Tokyo: Kanehara & Co, 1995.
75. Kitamura K, Beppu R, Anai H, et al. Clinicopathologic study of patients with Borrmann type IV gastric carcinoma. J Surg Oncol 1995;58:112.
76. Ming SC. Gastric carcinoma. A pathobiological classification. Cancer 1977;39:2475.
77. Bearzi I, Ranaldi R. Early gastric cancer: a morphologic study of 41 cases. Tumori 1982;68:223.
78. Zinninger M. Extension of gastric cancer in the intramural lymphatics and its relation to gastrectomy. Am Surg 1954;20:920.
79. Shiu MH, Papacristou DN, Kosloff C, Eliopoulos G. Selection of operative procedure for adenocarcinoma of the midstomach. Twenty years' experience with implications for future treatment
strategy. Ann Surg 1980;192:730.
80. Papachristou DN, Shiu MH. Management by en bloc multiple organ resection of carcinoma of the stomach invading adjacent organs. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1981;152:483.
81. McNeer G, Bowden L, Booner RJ, McPeak CJ. Elective total gastrectomy for cancer of the stomach: end results. Ann Surg 1974;180:252.
82. Wisbeck W, Becher E, Russel A. Adenocarcinoma of the stomach: autopsy observations with therapeutic implications for the radiation oncologist. Radiother Oncol 1986;7:13.
83. Gunderson L, Sosin H. Adenocarcinoma of the stomach: areas of failure in a reoperative series (second or symptomatic look) clinicopathologic correlation and implications for adjuvant therapy.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8:1.
84. Allum WH, Hallissey MT, Ward LC, Hockey MS. A controlled, prospective, randomised trial of adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy in resectable gastric cancer: interim report. British
Stomach Cancer Group. Br J Cancer 1989;60:739.
85. Landry J, Tepper JE, Wood WC, et al. Patterns of failure following curative resection of gastric carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:1357.
86. Ajani JA, Ota DM, Jessup JM, et al. Resectable gastric carcinoma. An evaluation of preoperative and postoperative chemotherapy. Cancer 1991;68:1501.

87. Dewys WD, Begg C, Lavin PT, et al. Prognostic effect of weight loss prior to chemotherapy in cancer patients. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Am J Med 1980;69:491.
88. Kaneko E, Nakamura T, Umeda N, et al. Outcome of gastric carcinoma detected by gastric mass survey in Japan. Gut 1977;18:626.
89. Murakami R, Tsukuma H, Ubukata T, et al. Estimation of validity of mass screening program for gastric cancer in Osaka, Japan. Cancer 1990;65:1255.
90. Yoshihara M, Sumii K, Haruma K, et al. Correlation of ratio of serum pepsinogen I and II with prevalence of gastric cancer and adenoma in Japanese subjects. Am J Gastroenterol
1998;93:1090.
91. Nakane Y, Okamura S, Akehira K, et al. Correlation of preoperative carcinoembryonic antigen levels and prognosis of gastric cancer patients. Cancer 1994;73:2703.
92. Ikeda Y, Oomori H, Koyanagi N, et al. Prognostic value of combination assays for CEA and CA 19-9 in gastric cancer. Oncology 1995;52:483.
93. Kodera Y, Yamamura Y, Torii A, et al. The prognostic value of preoperative serum levels of CEA and CA19-9 in patients with gastric cancer. Am J Gastroenterol 1996;91:49.
94. Pectasides D, Mylonakis A, Kostopoulou M, et al. CEA, CA 19-9, and CA-50 in monitoring gastric carcinoma. Am J Clin Oncol 1997;20:348.
95. Botet JF, Lightdale CJ, Zauber AG, et al. Preoperative staging of gastric cancer: comparison of endoscopic US and dynamic CT. Radiology 1991;181:426.
96. Graham DY, Schwartz JT, Cain GD, Gyorkey F. Prospective evaluation of biopsy number in the diagnosis of esophageal and gastric carcinoma. Gastroenterology 1982;82:228.
97. Kurtz RC, Sherlock P. The diagnosis of gastric cancer. Semin Oncol 1985;12:11.
98. Grimm H, Binmoeller KF, Hamper K, et al. Endosonography for preoperative locoregional staging of esophageal and gastric cancer. Endoscopy 1993;25:224.
99. Akahoshi K, Chijiiwa Y, Hamada S, et al. Endoscopic ultrasonography: a promising method for assessing the prospects of endoscopic mucosal resection in early gastric cancer. Endoscopy
1997;29:614.
100. Yanai H, Matsumoto Y, Harada T, et al. Endoscopic ultrasonography and endoscopy for staging depth of invasion in early gastric cancer: a pilot study. Gastrointest Endosc 1997;46:212.
101. Karpeh M, Brennan M. Gastric carcinoma: counterpoints. In: Johnson F, Virgo K, eds. Cancer patient follow-up. St. Louis: Mosby, 1997:100.
102. Kurihara M, Shirakabe H, Yarita T, et al. Diagnosis of small early gastric cancer by x-ray, endoscopy, and biopsy. Cancer Detect Prev 1981;4:377.
103. Miller FH, Kochman ML, Talamonti MS, et al. Gastric cancer. Radiologic staging. Radiol Clin North Am 1997;35:331.
104. Cook AO, Levine BA, Sirinek KR, Gaskill HV. Evaluation of gastric adenocarcinoma. Abdominal computed tomography does not replace celiotomy. Arch Surg 1986;121:603.
105. Takao M, Fukuda T, Iwanaga S, et al. Gastric cancer: evaluation of triphasic spiral CT and radiologic-pathologic correlation. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1998;22:288.
106. Gupta N, Bradfield H. Role of positron emission tomography scanning in evaluating gastrointestinal neoplasms. Semin Nucl Med 1996;26:65.
107. Luketich JD, Schauer PR, Meltzer CC, et al. Role of positron emission tomography in staging esophageal cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 1997;64:765.
108. Asencio F, Aguilo J, Salvador JL, et al. Video-laparoscopic staging of gastric cancer. A prospective multicenter comparison with noninvasive techniques. Surg Endosc 1997;11:1153.
109. Burke EC, Karpeh MS, Conlon KC, Brennan MF. Laparoscopy in the management of gastric adenocarcinoma. Ann Surg 1997;225:262.
110. Stell DA, Carter CR, Stewart I, Anderson JR. Prospective comparison of laparoscopy, ultrasonography and computed tomography in the staging of gastric cancer [See comments]. Br J Surg
1996;83:1260.
111. Stell DA, Carter CR, Stewart I, Anderson JR. Prospective comparison of laparoscopy, ultrasonography and computed tomography in the staging of gastric cancer. Br J Surg 1996;83:1260.
112. Lowy AM, Mansfield PF, Leach SD, Ajani J. Laparoscopic staging for gastric cancer. Surgery 1996;119:611.
113. Possik RA, Franco EL, Pires DR, et al. Sensitivity, specificity, and predictive value of laparoscopy for the staging of gastric cancer and for the detection of liver metastases. Cancer 1986;58:1.
114. Bartlett DL, Conlon KC, Gerdes H, Karpeh MS Jr. Laparoscopic ultrasonography: the best pretreatment staging modality in gastric adenocarcinoma? Case report. Surgery 1995;118:562.
115. Hermanek P, Wittekind C. Residual tumor (R) classification and prognosis. Semin Surg Oncol 1994;10:12.
116. Lisborg PH, Jatzko GR, Denk H, et al. Long-term survival analysis of gastric cancer limited to the subserosa. Zeitschrift fur Gastroenterologie 1997;35:663.
117. Maruyama K, Okabayashi K, Kinoshita T. Progress in gastric cancer surgery in Japan and its limits of radicality. World J Surg 1987;11:418.
118. Boku T, Nakane Y, Minoura T, et al. Prognostic significance of serosal invasion and free intraperitoneal cancer cells in gastric cancer. Br J Surg 1990;77:436.
119. Baba H, Korenaga D, Okamura T, et al. Prognostic factors in gastric cancer with serosal invasion. Univariate and multivariate analyses. Arch Surg 1989;124:1061.
120. Hermanek P. Prognostic factors in stomach cancer surgery. Eur J Surg Oncol 1986;12:241.
121. Shiu MH, Perrotti M, Brennan MF. Adenocarcinoma of the stomach: a multivariate analysis of clinical, pathologic and treatment factors. Hepatogastroenterology 1989;36:7.
122. Roder JD, Bottcher K, Busch R, et al. Classification of regional lymph node metastasis from gastric carcinoma. German Gastric Cancer Study Group. Cancer 1998;82:621.
123. Adachi Y, Kamakura T, Mori M, et al. Prognostic significance of the number of positive lymph nodes in gastric carcinoma. Br J Surg 1994;81:414.
124. Wanebo HJ, Kennedy BJ, Winchester DP, et al. Gastric carcinoma: does lymph node dissection alter survival? J Am Coll Surg 1996;183:616.
125. Siewert JR, Bottcher K, Roder JD, et al. Prognostic relevance of systematic lymph node dissection in gastric carcinoma. German Gastric Carcinoma Study Group [See comments]. Br J Surg
1993;80:1015.
126. Brennan MF, Karpeh MS Jr. Surgery for gastric cancer: the American view. Semin Oncol 1996;23:352.
127. Sue-Ling HM, Johnston D, Martin IG, et al. Gastric cancer: a curable disease in Britain. BMJ 1993;307:591.
128. Murphy PD, Wadhera V, Griffin SM, et al. Free peritoneal tumour cell identification in patients with gastric and colorectal cancer. J R Coll Surg Edinb 1993;38:28.
129. Nekarda H, Gess C, Stark M, et al. Immunocytochemically detected free peritoneal tumour cells (FPTC) are a strong prognostic factor in gastric carcinoma. Br J Cancer 1999;79(34):611.
130. Ribeiro U Jr, Gama-Rodrigues JJ, Safatle-Ribeiro AV, et al. Prognostic significance of intraperitoneal free cancer cells obtained by laparoscopic peritoneal lavage in patients with gastric cancer.
J Gastrointest Surg 1998;2:244.
131. Ikeguchi M, Oka A, Tsujitani S, et al. Relationship between area of serosal invasion and intraperitoneal free cancer cells in patients with gastric cancer. Anticancer Res 1994;14(5B):2131.
132. Burke EC, Karpeh MS Jr, Conlon KC, Brennan MF. Peritoneal lavage cytology in gastric cancer: an independent predictor of outcome. Ann Surg Oncol 1998;5:411.
133. Yamao T, Shirao K, Ono H, et al. Risk factors for lymph node metastasis from intramucosal gastric carcinoma. Cancer 1996;77:602.
134. Takekoshi T, Baba Y, Ota H, et al. Endoscopic resection of early gastric carcinoma: results of a retrospective analysis of 308 cases. Endoscopy 1994;26:352.
135. Ishigami S, Hokita S, Natsugoe S, et al. Carcinomatous infiltration into the submucosa as a predictor of lymph node involvement in early gastric cancer. World J Surg 1998;22:1056, discussion
1059.
136. Maruyama K, Gunven P, Okabayashi K, et al. Lymph node metastases of gastric cancer. General pattern in 1931 patients. Ann Surg 1989;210:596.
137. Takeda J, Koufuji K, Kodama I, et al. Total gastrectomy for gastric cancer: 12-year data and review of the effect of performing lymphadenectomy. Kurume Med J 1994;41:15.
138. Kodama Y, Sugimachi K, Soejima K, et al. Evaluation of extensive lymph node dissection for carcinoma of the stomach. World J Surg 1981;5:241.
139. Sowa M, Kato Y, Nishimura M, et al. Surgical approach to early gastric cancer with lymph node metastasis. World J Surg 1989;13:630.
140. Boku T, Nakane Y, Okusa T, et al. Strategy for lymphadenectomy of gastric cancer. Surgery 1989;105:585.
141. Jatzko G, Lisborg PH, Klimpfinger M, Denk H. Extended radical surgery against gastric cancer: low complication and high survival rates. Jpn J Clin Oncol 1992;22:102.
142. Keller E, Stutzer H, Heitmann K, et al. Lymph node staging in 872 patients with carcinoma of the stomach and the presumed benefit of lymphadenectomy. German Stomach Cancer TNM Study
Group. J Am Coll Surg 1994;178:38.
143. Roder JD, Bottcher K, Siewert JR, et al. Prognostic factors in gastric carcinoma. Results of the German Gastric Carcinoma Study 1992. Cancer 1993;72:2089.
144. Irvin TT, Bridger JE. Gastric cancer: an audit of 122 consecutive cases and the results of R1 gastrectomy. Br J Surg 1988;75:106.
145. Okamura T, Tsujitani S, Korenaga D, et al. Lymphadenectomy for cure in patients with early gastric cancer and lymph node metastasis. Am J Surg 1988;155:476.
146. Noguchi Y, Imada T, Matsumoto A, et al. Radical surgery for gastric cancer. A review of the Japanese experience. Cancer 1989;64:2053.
147. Sue-Ling HM, Martin I, Griffith J, et al. Early gastric cancer: 46 cases treated in one surgical department. Gut 1992;33:1318.
148. Iriyama K, Asakawa T, Koike H, et al. Is extensive lymphadenectomy necessary for surgical treatment of intramucosal carcinoma of the stomach? Arch Surg 1989;124:309.
149. Farley DR, Donohue JH, Nagorney DM, et al. Early gastric cancer. Br J Surg 1992;79:539.
150. Maehara Y, Orita H, Moriguchi S, et al. Lower survival rate for patients under 30 years of age and surgically treated for gastric carcinoma. Br J Cancer 1991;63:1015.
151. Lawrence M, Shiu MH. Early gastric cancer. Twenty-eight-year experience. Ann Surg 1991;213:327.
152. Hochwald S, Brennan M, Klimstra D, et al. Is lymphadenectomy necessary for early gastric cancer? Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:664.
153. Kurihara N, Kubota T, Otani Y, et al. Lymph node metastasis of early gastric cancer with submucosal invasion. Br J Surg 1998;85:835.
154. Dent DM, Madden MV, Price SK. Randomized comparison of R1 and R2 gastrectomy for gastric carcinoma. Br J Surg 1988;75:110.
155. Dent DM, Madden MV, Price SK. Controlled trials and the R1/R2 controversy in the management of gastric carcinoma. Surg Oncol Clin North Am 1993;2:433.
156. Robertson CS, Chung SC, Woods SD, et al. A prospective randomized trial comparing R1 subtotal gastrectomy with R3 total gastrectomy for antral cancer [See comments]. Ann Surg
1994;220:176.
157. Smith JW, Shiu MH, Kelsey L, Brennan MF. Morbidity of radical lymphadenectomy in the curative resection of gastric carcinoma. Arch Surg 1991;126:1469.
158. Roder JD, Bonenkamp JJ, Craven J, et al. Lymphadenectomy for gastric cancer in clinical trials: update. World J Surg 1995;19:546.
159. Cuschieri A, Fayers P, Fielding J, et al. Postoperative morbidity and mortality after D1 and D2 resections for gastric cancer: preliminary results of the MRC randomised controlled surgical trial.
The Surgical Cooperative Group. Lancet 1996;347:995.
160. Cuschieri A, Weeden S, Fielding J, et al. Patient survival after D1 and D2 resections for gastric cancer: long-term results of the MRC randomized surgical trial. Surgical Co-operative Group. Br
J Cancer 1999;79(910):1522.
161. Bunt TM, Bonenkamp HJ, Hermans J, et al. Factors influencing noncompliance and contamination in a randomized trial of “Western” (r1) versus “Japanese” (r2) type surgery in gastric cancer.
Cancer 1994;73:1544.
162. Bonenkamp JJ, Songun I, Hermans J, et al. Randomised comparison of morbidity after D1 and D2 dissection for gastric cancer in 996 Dutch patients. Lancet 1995;345:745.
163. Isozaki H, Okajima K, Hu X, et al. Multiple early gastric carcinomas. Clinicopathologic features and histogenesis. Cancer 1996;78:2078.
164. Gouzi JL, Huguier M, Fagniez PL, et al. Total versus subtotal gastrectomy for adenocarcinoma of the gastric antrum. A French prospective controlled study. Ann Surg 1989;209:162.
165. Bozzetti F, Marubini E, Bonfanti G, et al. Subtotal versus total gastrectomy for gastric cancer: five-year survival rates in a multicenter randomized Italian trial. Italian Gastrointestinal Tumor
Study Group. Ann Surg 1999;230:170.
166. Bozzetti F, Marubini E, Bonfanti G, et al. Total versus subtotal gastrectomy: surgical morbidity and mortality rates in a multicenter Italian randomized trial. The Italian Gastrointestinal Tumor
Study Group. Ann Surg 1997;226:613.
167. Butler JA, Dubrow TJ, Trezona T, et al. Total gastrectomy in the treatment of advanced gastric cancer. Am J Surg 1989;158:602, discussion 604.
168. Kawaura Y, Mori Y, Nakajima H, Iwa T. Total gastrectomy with left oblique abdominothoracic approach for gastric cancer involving the esophagus. Arch Surg 1988;123:514.
169. Paolini A, Tosato F, Cassese M, et al. Total gastrectomy in the treatment of adenocarcinoma of the cardia. Review of the results in 73 resected patients. Am J Surg 1986;151:238.
170. Anderson ID, MacIntyre IM. Symptomatic outcome following resection of gastric cancer. Surg Oncol 1995;4:35.
171. Santoro E, Garofalo A, Carlini M, et al. Early and late results of 100 consecutive total gastrectomies for cancer. Hepatogastroenterology 1994;41:489.
172. Bozzetti F. Total versus subtotal gastrectomy in cancer of the distal stomach: facts and fantasy. Eur J Surg Oncol 1992;18:572.
173. Huscher C, Chiodini S, Freni V, et al. Adequacy of paracardial dissection in subtotal versus total gastrectomy. Br J Surg 1992;79:942.
174. Buhl K, Schlag P, Herfarth C. Quality of life and functional results following different types of resection for gastric carcinoma. Eur J Surg Oncol 1990;16:404.
175. Viste A, Haugstvedt T, Eide GE, Soreide O. Postoperative complications and mortality after surgery for gastric cancer. Ann Surg 1988;207:7.
175a. Harrison LE, Karpeh MS, Brennan MF. Total gastrectomy is not necessary for proximal gastric cancer. Surgery 1998;123(2):127.
175b. Sasako M. Risk factors for surgical treatment in the Dutch Gastric Cancer Trial. Br J Surg 1997;84(11):1567.
176. Sugimachi K, Kodama Y, Kumashiro R, et al. Critical evaluation of prophylactic splenectomy in total gastrectomy for the stomach cancer. Gann 1980;71:704.
177. Brady MS, Rogatko A, Dent LL, Shiu MH. Effect of splenectomy on morbidity and survival following curative gastrectomy for carcinoma. Arch Surg 1991;126:359.
178. Maehara Y, Moriguchi S, Yoshida M, et al. Splenectomy does not correlate with length of survival in patients undergoing curative total gastrectomy for gastric carcinoma. Univariate and

multivariate analyses. Cancer 1991;67:3006.
179. Adachi Y, Kamakura T, Mori M, et al. Role of lymph node dissection and splenectomy in node-positive gastric carcinoma. Surgery 1994;116:837.
180. Griffith JP, Sue-Ling HM, Martin I, et al. Preservation of the spleen improves survival after radical surgery for gastric cancer. Gut 1995;36:684.
181. Otsuji E, Yamaguchi T, Sawai K, et al. End results of simultaneous splenectomy in patients undergoing total gastrectomy for gastric carcinoma. Surgery 1996;120:40.
182. Wanebo HJ, Kennedy BJ, Winchester DP, et al. Role of splenectomy in gastric cancer surgery: adverse effect of elective splenectomy on long-term survival. J Am Coll Surg 1997;185:177.
183. Group VCSAS. Use of thiotepa as an adjuvant to the surgical management of carcinoma of the stomach. Cancer 1965;18:291.
184. Serlin O, Wolkoff JS, Amadeo JM, Keehn RJ. Use of 5-fluorodeoxyuridine (FUDR) as an adjuvant to the surgical management of carcinoma of the stomach. Cancer 1969;24:223.
185. Sautner T, Hofbauer F, Depisch D, et al. Adjuvant intraperitoneal cisplatin chemotherapy does not improve long-term survival after surgery for advanced gastric cancer. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:970.
186. Engstrom P, Labin P, Douglas H. Postoperative adjuvant 5 fluorouracil plus methyl CCNU therapy for gastric cancer. Cancer 1985;55:1868.
187. Higgins GA, Amadeo JH, Smith DE, et al. Efficacy of prolonged intermittent therapy with combined 5-FU and methyl-CCNU following resection for gastric carcinoma. A Veterans Administration
Surgical Oncology Group report. Cancer 1983;52:1105.
188. Estrada E, Lacave L, Valle M, et al. Methyl CCNU 5 fluorouracil, and Adriamycin (MeFA) as adjuvant chemotherapy in gastric cancer. Proc ASCO 1988;7:94.
189. Estape J, Grau JJ, Alcobendas F, et al. Mitomycin C as an adjuvant treatment to resected gastric cancer. A 10-year follow-up. Ann Surg 1991;213:219.
190. Endo M, Habu H. Clinical studies of early gastric cancer. Hepatogastroenterology 1990;37:408.
191. Carrato A, Diaz-Rubio E, Medrano J, et al. Phase III trial of surgery versus adjuvant chemotherapy with mitomycin C and tegafur plus uracil, starting within the first week after surgery, for
gastric adenocarcinoma. Proc ASCO 1995;14:198.
192. Allum WH, Hallissey MT, Kelly KA. Adjuvant chemotherapy in operable gastric cancer: 5 year follow-up of first British Stomach Cancer Group trial. Lancet 1989;1:571.
193. Nakajima T, Takahashi T, Takagi K, et al. Comparison of 5-fluorouracil with ftorafur in adjuvant chemotherapies with combined inductive and maintenance therapies for gastric cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1984;2:1366.
194. Nakajima T, Nashimoto A, Kitamura M, et al. Adjuvant mitomycin and fluorouracil followed by oral uracil plus tegafur in serosa-negative gastric cancer: a randomised trial. Gastric Cancer
Surgical Study Group. Lancet 1999;354:273.
195. Ross P, Cunningham D, Scarffe H, et al. Results of a randomised trial comparing ECF with MCF in advanced oesophago-gastric cancer. In: Perry MC, ed. American Society of Clinical
Oncology Thirty-Fifth Annual Meeting, vol 18. Atlanta: American Society of Clinical Oncology, 1999:272a.
196. Coombes RC, Schein PS, Chilvers CE, et al. A randomized trial comparing adjuvant fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and mitomycin with no treatment in operable gastric cancer. International
Collaborative Cancer Group. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1362.
197. Macdonald JS, Fleming TR, Peterson RF, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy with 5-FU, Adriamycin, and mitomycin-C (FAM) versus surgery alone for patients with locally advanced gastric
adenocarcinoma: a Southwest Oncology Group study. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:488.
198. Krook JE, O'Connell MJ, Wieand HS, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of intensive-course 5-fluorouracil plus doxorubicin as surgical adjuvant chemotherapy for resected gastric
cancer. Cancer 1991;67:2454.
198a. Klein HO, Wils J, Bleiberg H, et al. An EORTC gastrointestinal group randomized evaluation of the toxicity of sequential high-dose methotrexate and 5-fluorouracil combined with adriamycin
(FAMTX) vs. 5-fluorouracil, adriamycin, and mitomycin (FAM) in advanced gastric cancer. Med Oncol Tumor Pharmacol 1989;6(2):171.
198b. Songun I, Keizer HJ, Hermans J, et al. Chemotherapy for operable gastric cancer: results of the Dutch randomised FAMTX trial. The Dutch Gastric Cancer Group (DGCG). Eur J Cancer
1999;35(4):558.
199. Neri B, de Leonardis V, Romano S, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy after gastric resection in node-positive cancer patients: a multicentre randomised study. Br J Cancer 1996;73:549.
200. Tsavaris N, Tentas K, Kosmidis P, et al. A randomized trial comparing adjuvant fluorouracil, epirubicin, and mitomycin with no treatment in operable gastric cancer. Chemotherapy 1996;42:220.
201. Earle CC, Maroun JA. Adjuvant chemotherapy after curative resection for gastric cancer in non-Asian patients: revisiting a meta-analysis of randomised trials. Eur J Cancer 1999;35:1059.
202. Hermans J, Bonenkamp JJ, Boon MC, et al. Adjuvant therapy after curative resection for gastric cancer: meta-analysis of randomized trials. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1441.
203. Archer S, Grey B. Intraperitoneal 5-fluorouracil infusion for treatment of both peritoneal and liver micro-metastasis. Surgery 1990;108:502.
204. Murthy SM, Goldschmidt RA, Rao LN, et al. The influence of surgical trauma on experimental metastasis. Cancer 1989;64:2035.
205. Gunduz N, Fisher B, Saffer EA. Effect of surgical removal on the growth and kinetics of residual tumor. Cancer Res 1979;39:3861.
206. Eggermont A, Steller E, Sugarbaker P. Laparotomy enhances intraperitoneal tumor growth and abrogates the antitumor effects of interleukin-2 and lymphokine-activated killer cells. Surgery
1987;102:71.
207. Sugarbaker PH, Cunliffe WJ, Belliveau J, et al. Rationale for integrating early postoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy into the surgical treatment of gastrointestinal cancer. Semin Oncol
1989;16:83.
208. Rosen HR, Jatzko G, Repse S, et al. Adjuvant intraperitoneal chemotherapy with carbon-absorbed mitomycin in patients with gastric cancer: results of a randomized multicenter trial of the
Austrian Working Group for Surgical Oncology. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2733.
209. Crookes P, Leichman CG, Leichman L, et al. Systemic chemotherapy for gastric carcinoma followed by postoperative intraperitoneal therapy: a final report. Cancer 1997;79:1767.
210. Atiq OT, Kelsen DP, Shiu MH, et al. Phase II trial of postoperative adjuvant intraperitoneal cisplatin and fluorouracil and systemic fluorouracil chemotherapy in patients with resected gastric
cancer. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:425.
211. Yu W, Whang I, Suh I, et al. Prospective randomized trial of early postoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy as an adjuvant to resectable gastric cancer. Ann Surg 1998;228:347.
212. Dedrick RL. Theoretical and experimental bases of intraperitoneal chemotherapy. Semin Oncol 1985;XII:1.
213. Kitamura K, Kuwano H, Matsuda H, et al. Synergistic effects of intratumor administration of cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) combined with local hyperthermia in melanoma bearing mice. J
Surg Oncol 1992;51:188.
214. Los G, Smals OA, van Vugt MJ, et al. A rationale for carboplatin treatment and abdominal hyperthermia in cancers restricted to the peritoneal cavity. Cancer Res 1992;52:1252.
215. Fujimoto S, Shrestha RD, Kokubun M, et al. Clinical trial with surgery and intraperitoneal hyperthermic perfusion for peritoneal recurrence of gastrointestinal cancer. Cancer 1989;64:154.
216. Yonemura Y, Ninomiya I, Kaji M, et al. Prophylaxis with intraoperative chemohyperthermia against peritoneal recurrence of serosal invasion-positive gastric cancer. World J Surg 1995;19:450.
217. Yonemura Y, Fujimura T, Fushida S, et al. Hyperthermo-chemotherapy combined with cytoreductive surgery for the treatment of gastric cancer with peritoneal dissemination. World J Surg
1991;15:530.
218. Fujimura T, Yonemura Y, Fushida S, et al. Continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion for the treatment of peritoneal dissemination in gastric cancers and subsequent second-look operation.
Cancer 1990;65:65.
219. Fujimoto S, Shrestha R, Kokubun M, et al. [Pharmacokinetic analysis in intraperitoneal hyperthermic perfusion using mitomycin C in far-advanced gastric cancer]. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho
1989;16:2411.
220. Gilly FN, Sayag AC, Carry PY, et al. Intra-peritoneal chemo-hyperthermia (CHIP): a new therapy in the treatment of the peritoneal seedings. Preliminary report. Int Surg 1991;76:164.
221. Koga S, Hamazoe R, Maeta M, et al. Prophylactic therapy for peritoneal recurrence of gastric cancer by continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion with mitomycin C. Cancer 1988;61:232.
222. Fujimoto S, Shrestha RD, Kokubun M, et al. Positive results of combined therapy of surgery and intraperitoneal hyperthermic perfusion for far-advanced gastric cancer. Ann Surg 1990;212:592.
223. Hamazoe R, Maeta M, Kaibara N. Intraperitoneal thermochemotherapy for prevention of peritoneal recurrence of gastric cancer. Cancer 1994;73:2048.
224. Alexander HR, Buell JF, Fraker DL. Rationale and clinical status of continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion (CHPP) for the treatment of peritoneal carcinomatosis. In: DeVita VT, Hellman
S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Principles and practices of oncology updates. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1995.
225. Alexander HR, Fraker DL. Continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion with cisplatin in the treatment of peritoneal carcinomatosis. 1995;8:2.
226. Gilly GN, Carry PY, Brachet A, et al. Treatment of malignant peritoneal effusion in digestive and ovarian cancer. Med Oncol Tumor Pharmacother 1992;9:177.
227. Gilly FN, Carry PY, Sayag AC, et al. Regional chemotherapy (with mitomycin C) and intra-operative hyperthermia for digestive cancers with peritoneal carcinomatosis. Hepatogastroenterology
1994;41:124.
228. Yamaguchi A, Tsukioka Y, Fushida S, et al. Intraperitoneal hyperthermic treatment for peritoneal dissemination of colorectal cancers. Dis Colon Rectum 1992;35:964.
229. Nakazato H, Koike A, Saji S, Ogawa N, Sakamoto J. Efficacy of immunochemotherapy as adjuvant treatment after curative resection of gastric cancer. Lancet 1994;343:1122.
230. Douglass H Jr, Lavin P, Goudsmit A, et al. An Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group evaluation of combination of methyl-CCNU, mitomycin-C, Adriamycin, and 5-fluorouracil in advanced
measurable gastric cancer. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:1372.
231. Ochiai T, Sato H, Hayashi R, et al. Randomly controlled study of chemotherapy versus chemoimmunotherapy in postoperative gastric cancer patients. Cancer Res 1983;43:3001.
232. Kim JP, Kwon OJ, Oh ST, Yang HK. Results of surgery on 6589 gastric cancer patients and immunochemosurgery as the best treatment of advanced gastric cancer. Ann Surg 1992;216:269,
discussion 278.
233. Kim SY, Park HC, Yoon C, et al. OK-432 and 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and mitomycin C (FAM-P) versus FAM chemotherapy in patients with curatively resected gastric carcinoma: a
randomized phase III trial. Cancer 1998;83:2054.
234. Primrose JN, Miller GV, Preston SR, et al. A prospective randomised controlled study of the use of ranitidine in patients with gastric cancer. Yorkshire GI Tumour Group [See comments]. Gut
1998;42:17.
235. Harrison JD, Morris DL, Ellis IO, et al. The effect of tamoxifen and estrogen receptor status on survival in gastric carcinoma. Cancer 1989;64:1007.
236. Kelsen D, Karpeh M, Schwartz G, et al. Neoadjuvant therapy of high-risk gastric cancer: a phase II trial of preoperative FAMTX and postoperative intraperitoneal fluorouracil-cisplatin plus
intravenous fluorouracil. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1818.
237. Ng CS, Husband JE, MacVicar AD, et al. Correlation of CT with histopathological findings in patients with gastric and gastro-oesophageal carcinomas following neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Clin
Radiol 1998;53:422.
238. Ichiya Y, Kuwabara Y, Sasaki M, et al. A clinical evaluation of FDG-PET to assess the response in radiation therapy for bronchogenic carcinoma. Ann Nucl Med 1996;10:193.
239. Ajani JA, Mayer RJ, Ota DM, et al. Preoperative and postoperative combination chemotherapy for potentially resectable gastric carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1839.
240. Lowy AM, Mansfield PF, Leach SD, et al. Response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy best predicts survival after curative resection of gastric cancer. Ann Surg 1999;229:303.
241. Leichman L, Silberman H, Leichman CG, et al. Preoperative systemic chemotherapy followed by adjuvant postoperative intraperitoneal therapy for gastric cancer: a University of Southern
California pilot program. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1933.
242. Fink U, Ott K, Dittler HJ, et al. Neoadjuvant cisplatin leucovorin and fluorouracil (PLF) in adequately staged patients with locally advancer gastric carcinoma. In: Perry MC, ed. American Society
of Clinical Oncology Thirty-Fifth Annual Meeting, vol 18. Atlanta: American Society of Clinical Oncology, 1999:272a.
243. Alexander HR, Grem JL, Hamilton JM, et al. Thymidylate synthase protein expression association with response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy and resection for locally advanced gastric and
gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma. Cancer J Sci Am 1995;1:49.
244. Kang YK, Choi DW, Im YH, et al. A phase III randomized comparison of neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by surgery versus surgery for locally advanced stomach cancer. Proc ASCO
1996;15:215.
245. Childs D, Moertel C, Holbrook M, et al. Treatment of unresectable adenocarcinomas of the stomach with a combination of 5-fluorouracil and radiation. Am J Roentgenol Radium Ther Nucl Med
1968;102:541.
246. Hallissey MT, Dunn JA, Ward LC, Allum WH. The second British Stomach Cancer Group trial of adjuvant radiotherapy or chemotherapy in resectable gastric cancer: five-year follow-up. Lancet
1994;343:1309.
247. Dent DM, Werner ID, Novis B, et al. Prospective randomized trial of combined oncological therapy for gastric carcinoma. Cancer 1979;44:385.
247a. Moertel CG, Childs DS, O'Fallon JR, et al. Combined 5-fluorouracil and radiation therapy as a surgical adjuvant for poor prognosis gastric carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1984;2(11)1249.

248. Slot A, Meerwaldt J, van Putten W, Treurniet-Donker A. Adjuvant postoperative radiotherapy for gastric carcinoma with poor prognostic signs. Radiother Oncol 1989;16:269.
249. Gunderson LL, Hoskins RB, Cohen AC, et al. Combined modality treatment of gastric cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:965.
250. Caudry M, Escarmant P, Maire J, et al. Radiotherapy of gastric cancer with a three field combination: feasibility, tolerance, and survival. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:1821.
251. Abe M, Takahashi M. Intraoperative radiotherapy: the Japanese experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:863.
251a. Abe M, Nishimura Y, Shibamoto Y. Intraoperative radiation therapy for gastric cancer. World J Surg 1995;19(4):544.
252. Sindelar WF, Kinsella TJ, Tepper JE, et al. Randomized trial of intraoperative radiotherapy in carcinoma of the stomach. Am J Surg 1993;165:178, discussion 186.
253. Ogata T, Araki K, Matsuura K, et al. A 10-year experience of intraoperative radiotherapy for gastric carcinoma and a new surgical method of creating a wider irradiation field for cases of total
gastrectomy patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:341.
254. Calvo FA, Aristu JJ, Azinovic I, et al. Intraoperative and external radiotherapy in resected gastric cancer: updated report of a phase II trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:729.
255. Willett C, Tepper J, Orlow E, Shipley W. Renal complications secondary to radiation treatment of upper abdominal malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1601.
256. Comis S. Integration of chemotherapy into combined modality treatment of solid tumors. Cancer Treat Rep 1974;1:221.
257. Cocconi G, DeLisi V, DiBlasio B. Randomized comparison of 5-FU alone or combined with mitomycin and cytarabine (MFC) in the treatment of advanced gastric cancer. Cancer Treat Rep
1982;66:1263.
258. The Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Phase II/III chemotherapy studies in advanced gastric cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:1871.
259. Moertel CG, Lavin PT. Phase IIIII chemotherapy studies in advanced gastric cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:1863.
260. Preusser P, Achterrath W, Wilke H, et al. Chemotherapy of gastric cancer [Review]. Cancer Treat Rev 1988;15:257.
261. Levi J, Fox R, Tattersall M, et al. Analysis of a prospectively randomized comparison of doxorubicin versus 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and BCNYU in advanced gastric cancer: implications for
future studies. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1348.
262. Lacave AJ, Wils J, Diaz-Rubio E, et al. Cisplatinum as second-line chemotherapy in advanced gastric adenocarcinoma: a phase II study of the EORTC gastrointestinal tract cancer cooperative
group. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1985;21:1321.
263. Aabo K, Pedersen H, Rorth M. Cisplatin in the treatment of advanced gastric carcinoma: a phase II study. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:449.
264. Perry MC, Green MR, Mick R, et al. Cisplatin in patients with gastric cancer: a cancer and leukemia group B phase II study. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:415.
265. The Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. A comparative clinical assessment of combination chemotherapy in the management of advanced gastric carcinoma. Cancer 1982;49:1362.
266. The Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Randomized study of combination chemotherapy in unresectable gastric cancer. Cancer 1984;53:13.
267. Lacave A, Wils J, Bleiberg H, et al. An EORTC Gastrointestinal Group phase III evaluation of combinations of methyl-CCNU, 5-fluorouracil, and Adriamycin in advanced gastric cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1987;5:1387.
268. Epelbaum R, Haim N, Stein M, et al. Treatment of advanced gastric cancer with DDP (cisplatin), Adriamycin, and 5-fluorouracil (DAF). Oncology 1987;44:201.
269. Schnitzler G, Queisser W, Heim ME, et al. Phase III study of 5-FU and carmustine versus 5-FU, carmustine, and doxorubicin in advanced gastric cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:477.
270. Lopez M, Di Lauro L, Papaldo P, Conti EM. Treatment of advanced measurable gastric carcinoma with 5-fluorouracil, Adriamycin, and BCNU. Oncology 1986;43:288.
271. Janieson G, Gill P. A prospective trial of 5-FU and BCNU in the treatment of advanced gastric cancer. Aust N Z J Surg 1985;5:16.
272. Levi J, Dalley D, Aroney R. Improved combination chemotherapy in advanced gastric cancer. BMJ 1979;2:1471.
272a. Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Triazinate and platinum efficacy in combination with 5-fluorouracil and doxorubicin: results of a three-arm randomized trial in metastatic gastric cancer.
Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:1011.

J

273. Macdonald JS, Schein PS, Woolley PV, et al. 5-Fluorouracil, mitomycin-C, and Adriamycin (FAM): a new combination chemotherapy program for advanced gastric carcinoma. Ann Intern Med
1980;93:533.
274. Ogawa M. A recent overview of chemotherapy for advanced stomach cancer in Japan. Appl Cancer Chemother 1978;24:149.
275. Cullinan SA, Moertel CG, Fleming TR, et al. A comparison of three chemotherapeutic regimens in the treatment of advanced pancreatic and gastric carcinoma. JAMA 1985; 253:2061.
276. Group GTS. Triazinate and platinum efficacy in combination with 5-fluorouracil and doxorubicin: results of a three-arm randomized trial in metastatic gastric cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst
1988;80:1011.
277. Cunningham D, Cahn A, Menzies-Gow N. Cisplatin, epirubicin and 5-fluorouracil (CEF) has significant activity in advanced gastric cancer. Proc ASCO 1990;9:123.
278. Caccia G, Alasino C, Fein L. 5-Fluorouracil + epirubicin + cisplatin in patients with advanced gastric cancer. 1990;9:123.
279. Cocconi G, Bella M, Zironi S, et al. Fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and mitomycin combination versus PELF chemotherapy in advanced gastric cancer: a prospective randomized trial of the Italian
oncology group for clinical research. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2687.
279a. Waters JS, Norman A, Cunningham D, et al. Long-term survival after epirubicin, cisplatin and fluorouracil for gastric cancer: results of a randomized trial.

Br J Cancer 1999;80:269.

279b. Kim NK, Park YS, Heo DS, et al. A phase III randomized study of 5-fluorouracil alone in the treatment of advanced gastric cancer. Cancer1993;71(12):3813.
279c. Barone C, Cassano A, Astone A, et al. Association of epirubicin, etoposide and cisplatin in gastric cancer. A phase II study. Oncology1991;48(5):353.
279d. Turkish Oncology Group. A randomized phase III trial of etoposide, epirubicin, and cisplatin versus 5-fluorouracil, epirubicin, and cisplatin in the treatment of patients with advanced gastric
carcinoma. Cancer1998;83:2475.
280. Mabel JA, Little AD. Therapeutic synergism in murine tumors for combinations of cis-dichlorodiammine platinum with VP-16-213 or BCNU. Proc AACR ASCO 1979;20:230.
281. Seeber S, Osieka R, Schmidt CG, et al. In vivo resistance towards anthracyclines, etoposide, and cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II). Cancer Res 1982;67:4719.
282. Kelsen DP, Buckner J, Einzig A, et al. Phase II trial of cisplatin and etoposide in adenocarcinomas of the upper gastrointestinal tract. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:329.
283. Elliott T, Moertel C, Wieand H, et al. A phase II study of the combination of etoposide and cisplatin in the therapy of advanced gastric cancer. Cancer 1990;65:1491.
284. Preusser P, Wilke H, Achterrath W, et al. Phase II study with the combination etoposide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin in advanced measurable gastric cancer. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1310.
285. Wilke H, Preusser P, Fink U, et al. Preoperative chemotherapy in locally advanced and nonresectable gastric cancer: a phase II study with etoposide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin. J Clin Oncol
1989;7:1318.
286. Katz A, Gansl R, Simon S. Phase II trial of VP-16, Adriamycin, and cisplatinum in patients with advanced gastric cancer. Proc ASCO 1989;8:98.
287. Lerner A, Steele GD, Mayer RJ. Etoposide, doxorubicin, cisplatin for advanced gastric adenocarcinoma: results of a phase II trial. Proc ASCO 1990;9:103.
288. Wilke H, Preusser P, Fink U, et al. New developments in the treatment of gastric carcinoma. Semin Oncol 1990;17[Suppl 2]:61.
289. Klein HO. Long-term results with FAMTX (5-fluorouracil, Adriamycin, methotrexate) in advanced gastric cancer. Anticancer Res 1989;9:1025.
290. Kelsen D, Atiq O, Saltz L, et al. FAMTX (fluorouracil, methotrexate, Adriamycin) is as effective and less toxic than EAP (etoposide, Adriamycin, cisplatin): a random assignment trial in gastric
cancer. Proc ASCO 1991;10:137.
291. Wils JA, Klein HO, Wagener DJ, et al. Sequential high-dose methotrexate and fluorouracil combined with doxorubicina step ahead in the treatment of advanced gastric cancer: a trial of the
European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Gastrointestinal Tract Cooperative Group [See comments]. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:827.
292. Wilke H, Wils J, Rougier P, et al. Preliminary analysis of a randomized phase III trial of FAMTX versus ELF versus cisplatin/FU in advanced gastric cancer: a trial of the EORTC
Gastrointestinal Tract Cancer Cooperative Group and the AIO. Proc ASCO 1995;14:206.
293. Lenz HJ, Leichman CG, Danenberg KD, et al. Thymidylate synthase mRNA level in adenocarcinoma of the stomach: a predictor for primary tumor response and overall survival. J Clin Oncol
1996;14:176.
294. Metzger R, Leichman CG, Danenberg KD, et al. ERCC1 mRNA levels complement thymidylate synthase mRNA levels in predicting response and survival for gastric cancer patients receiving
combination cisplatin and fluorouracil chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:309.
294a. Fata F, Baylor L, Karpeh M, et al. Thymidylate symthase (TS) is not an independent predictor of outcome in patients with operable gastric cancer. Proc ASCO 1998;17:280a.
295. Boku N, Chin K, Hosokawa K, et al. Biological markers as a predictor for response and prognosis of unresectable gastric cancer patients treated with 5-fluorouracil and cis-platinum. Clin Cancer
Res 1998;4:1469.
296. Cascinu S, Graziano F, Del Ferro E, et al. Expression of p53 protein and resistance to preoperative chemotherapy in locally advanced gastric carcinoma. Cancer 1998;83:1917.
297. Ikeguchi M, Saito H, Katano K, et al. Relationship between the long-term effects of intraperitoneal chemotherapy and the expression of p53 and p21 in patients with gastric carcinoma at stage
IIIa and stage IIIb. Int Surg 1997;82:170.
298. Yeh KH, Shun CT, Chen CL, et al. High expression of thymidylate synthase is associated with the drug resistance of gastric carcinoma to high dose 5-fluorouracilbased systemic chemotherapy.
Cancer 1998;82:1626.
299. Ekbom GA, Gleysteen JJ. Gastric malignancy: resection for palliation. Surgery 1980;88:476.
300. Meijer S, De Bakker OJ, Hoitsma HF. Palliative resection in gastric cancer. J Surg Oncol 1983;23:77.
301. Aranha GV, Georgen R. Gastric linitis plastica is not a surgical disease. Surgery 1989;106:758, discussion 762.
302. Bozzetti F, Bonfanti G, Audisio RA, et al. Prognosis of patients after palliative surgical procedures for carcinoma of the stomach. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1987;164:151.
303. Boddie A Jr, McMurtrey M, Diacco G, McBride C. Palliative total gastrectomy and esophagogastrectomy. Cancer 1983;51:1195.
304. Warwick M. Analysis of one hundred and seventy-six cases of carcinoma of the stomach submitted to autopsy. Ann Surg 1928;88:216.
305. Dupont JB Jr, Lee JR, Burton GR, Cohn I Jr. Adenocarcinoma of the stomach: review of 1,497 cases. Cancer 1978;41:941.
306. Clarke JS, Cruze K, El Farra S. The natural history and results of surgical therapy for carcinoma of the stomach: an analysis of 250 cases. Am J Surg 1961;102:143.
307. Bozzetti F, Bonfanti G, Morabito A, et al. A multifactorial approach for the prognosis of patients with carcinoma of the stomach after curative resection. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1986;162:229.
308. Hajiwara A, Takahashi T, Kojima O, et al. Prophylaxis with carbon-adsorbed mitomycin against peritoneal recurrence of gastric cancer [See comments]. 1992;339:629.
309. Schiessel R, Funovics J, Schick B, et al. Adjuvant intraperitoneal cisplatin therapy in patients with operated gastric carcinoma: results of a randomized trial. Acta Med Aust 1989;16:68.
310. Karpeh MS, Leon L, Klimstra D, and Brennan MF. Lymph node staging in gastric cancer: Is location more important than number? An analysis of 1,038 patients. Ann Surg 2000;232(3):362.
311. Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. The concept of locally advanced gastric cancer. Cancer 1990;66:2324.
312. The Italian Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Adjuvant treatments following curative resection of gastric cancer. Br J Surg 1988;75:1100.
313. Ajani JA, Roth JA, Putnam JB, et al. Feasibility of five courses of pre-operative chemotherapy in patients with resectable adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus or gastrointestinal junction. Eur J
Cancer 1995;31A:665.

SECTION 33.4 Cancer of the Pancreas
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 33.4
Cancer of the Pancreas
DOUGLAS B. EVANS
JAMES L. ABBRUZZESE
CHRISTOPHER G. WILLETT
Introduction
Epidemiology
Etiologic Factors
Pathology and Molecular Pathogenesis
Cellular Pathology
Oncogenes and Tumor Suppressor Genes
Clinical Signs and Symptoms
Natural History and Patterns of Treatment Failure
Clinical and Pathologic (Surgical) Staging
Pretreatment Diagnostic Studies
Tumors of the Pancreatic Head and Periampullary Region
Tumors of the Pancreatic Body and Tail
Treatment of Potentially Resectable Disease
Preoperative and Postoperative Chemoradiation
Pancreaticoduodenectomy
Pylorus Preservation
Adjuvant Intraoperative Electron-Beam Radiation Therapy
Reconstruction
Treatment Decisions: Potentially Resectable Disease
Palliative Methods of Biliary and Gastric Decompression
Treatment of Locally Advanced Disease
External-Beam Irradiation with or without 5-Fluorouracil
Intraoperative Electron-Beam Radiation Therapy
New Agents Combined with Radiation Therapy
Radiation Therapy Techniques
Treatment Decisions: Locally Advanced, Nonmetastatic Disease
Treatment of Metastatic and Recurrent Disease
Single-Agent Chemotherapy
Modulation of 5-Fluorouracil
Hormonal Therapy
Combination Chemotherapy
Regional Chemotherapy
New Approaches to Systemic Disease
Treatment Decisions: Metastatic Disease
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Cancer of the exocrine pancreas continues to be a major unsolved health problem, with approximately 28,200 deaths per year in the United States and 50,000 deaths
per year in Europe (excluding the former USSR). 1,2 In the United States in the year 2000, pancreatic cancer is expected to be the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related death for both men and women and to be responsible for close to 5% of all cancer-related deaths. 1 Because of difficulties in diagnosis, the
aggressiveness of pancreatic cancers, and the lack of effective systemic therapies, generally fewer than 5% of patients with adenocarcinoma of the pancreas survive
5 years after diagnosis. 3,4 Thus, incidence rates and mortality rates are virtually identical.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
In the United States, the incidence of pancreatic cancer steadily increased for several decades but has leveled off since the late 1970s, with 28,300 new cases (2% of
all cancer diagnoses) estimated in the year 2000. 1 Studies evaluating this trend suggest that the decreased incidence is due to a steady decline in the rate for white
men, which peaked during the period of 1970 to 1974. By contrast, rates for white women, African American men, and African American women have not fallen and
may have increased slightly. 4 In Japan, the incidence of pancreatic cancer increased sharply from 1.8 per 100,000 in 1960 to 5.3 per 100,000 in 1985. 5,6
Overall, pancreatic cancer incidence and mortality statistics are similar for the United States and Western Europe. Between 1989 and 1991, mortality rates for
pancreatic cancer in the United States were 10 per 100,000 for men and 7.2 per 100,000 for women. 7 Although the overall mortality rates in industrialized societies
appear similar, geographically and ethnically dissimilar populations show considerable differences in mortality rates from pancreatic cancer. In Europe, for the time
period of 1985 to 1989, mortality rates ranged from 5.3 per 100,000 in Spain to 10.3 per 100,000 in Hungary and Czechoslovakia. 2 Spain, Portugal, and Greece
recorded an extremely low mortality rate of 3 per 100,000 among men. 2 The reasons for these regional differences and the changing incidence of pancreatic cancer
remain obscure, but they might possibly be related to the trend of a declining smoking rate. 8

ETIOLOGIC FACTORS
Investigations have identified a number of factors that may contribute to the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer. Current estimates suggest that approximately 30% of
pancreatic cancer cases are due to cigarette smoking. 9,10 Studies that have explored the dose-response relationship have shown that the risk of pancreatic cancer
increases as the amount and duration of smoking increase and that long-term smoking cessation (more than 10 years) reduces risk by approximately 30% relative to
the risk of current smokers. 9,11 Application of molecular epidemiologic techniques that are being developed for lung cancer may provide greater specificity in linking
tobacco exposure with the development of pancreatic cancer 12,13 and may facilitate the study of chemopreventive strategies. 14
Data regarding the effect of coffee consumption and excessive alcohol consumption appear to be conflicting. For each of these factors, a few studies have suggested
an increased risk of pancreatic cancer, 11,15,16,17 and 18 but the majority of studies conducted during the 1990s have failed to consistently demonstrate such a
risk.11,17,19,20,21,22 and 23 In some cases, significant methodologic problems may have confounded interpretation of the data, leading to erroneous conclusions. 20
Diabetes mellitus has been long associated with pancreatic cancer; however, not all studies have supported such a relationship, 24 and the precise mechanism has yet
to be defined. Diabetes mellitus has been implicated as both an early manifestation of pancreatic carcinoma 25,26,27 and 28 and a predisposing factor. 2229,30,31 and 32 It is
known that pancreatic cancer can induce peripheral insulin resistance, 33,34 and 35 and the argument that long-standing diabetes mellitus is also a risk factor for
pancreatic cancer is supported by a cohort study showing that, after an initial hospitalization for diabetes, patients had an increased risk of developing pancreatic
cancer and that this risk persisted for more than a decade. 30 However, the increased risk was limited to patients with non–insulin-dependent diabetes or patients
whose diabetes was diagnosed after 40 years of age. 30 Metaanalysis of studies published between 1975 and 1994 showed that pancreatic cancer occurred with
increased frequency in patients with long-standing diabetes. 36 The mechanisms underlying the association between pancreatic cancer and diabetes are obscure;
however, the diabetic state seems to enhance the growth of pancreatic cancer in animal models. 37
A series of reports have validated the epidemiologic association between chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer, 38,39,40,41 and 42 but the magnitude of the risk of
pancreatic cancer attributable to pancreatitis remains controversial. 43 Pathologic and molecular biologic studies have begun to explore the relationship between both

hereditary and nonhereditary chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer. 44 Pathologic examination of lesions along the pancreatic duct has revealed a spectrum of
mucous cell hyperplasias (papillary and nonpapillary hyperplastic lesions and atypical hyperplastic lesions currently termed pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia) in
patients with chronic pancreatitis and patients with pancreatic cancer. 45 The identification of mutations in the K- ras oncogene, a mutation found almost universally in
established pancreatic cancers, in regions of mucous cell hyperplasia in patients with chronic pancreatitis provided the first molecular link between chronic
inflammation and the initiation of multistep pancreatic carcinogenesis. 46 Calculation of a general estimate of population-attributable risk has suggested that chronic
pancreatitis may explain as many as 5% of pancreatic cancer cases. 47
The emergence of the importance of inherited genetic syndromes in gastrointestinal tract neoplasia has led to closer investigation of the potential role for heritable
factors in pancreatic cancer. Considerable progress in our understanding of familial pancreatic cancer has been made since the late 1990s. 48,49 Currently, it is
estimated that possibly as many as 5% to 8% of pancreatic cancer cases are associated with a familial predisposition. 32,50 Several hereditary disorders predispose
persons to both endocrine and exocrine pancreatic cancer. These include the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 syndrome, 51,52 hereditary pancreatitis, 44,53
hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer/Lynch syndrome II, 54 von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, 55 ataxia-telangiectasia, 56 and the familial atypical multiple mole melanoma
syndrome.57,58 and 59 In addition, case reports and formal epidemiologic studies have suggested the possibility of familial aggregations of pancreatic cancer outside the
context of these rare familial syndromes. 60,61 and 62
Through the establishment of large familial pancreatic cancer registries, 48,53 progress has been made in understanding the specific genetic alterations responsible for
the familial aggregation of pancreatic cancer in some families. Genetic testing of kindreds with increased rates of pancreatic cancer has revealed germline mutations
in genes known to be important in pancreatic carcinogenesis: p16 (CDKN2),58,59BRCA2,63 and STK11/LKB1,64 but not Smad4.65 Evaluation of approximately 30
extended families with presumed familial pancreatic cancer has suggested that transmission is consistent with an autosomal dominant pattern 66 and that even
second-degree relatives of patients from these families are at increased risk. 48 Interestingly, unlike for other familial gastrointestinal cancers (e.g., colon cancer in
familial polyposis coli), the age at onset, tumor histopathology, and overall survival for patients with familial pancreatic cancer are often the same as those for patients
with sporadic cancers.49,54,63
Presently, the management of individuals documented to be at increased risk of pancreatic cancer is extremely controversial. 67 Options range from close observation
to aggressive surgical intervention 68; the optimal surveillance and surgical strategies have yet to be defined. However, continued study of patients with familial
pancreatic cancer and their families is expected to provide insight into the critical molecular genetic abnormalities leading to familial pancreatic cancer. These genetic
abnormalities may then provide new perspectives on the process of pancreatic carcinogenesis for patients with sporadic pancreatic cancer and provide opportunities
for early detection and chemoprevention. 69,70

PATHOLOGY AND MOLECULAR PATHOGENESIS
CELLULAR PATHOLOGY
The normal pancreatic architecture is characteristic of a secretory gland: A background of acinar cells accounts for approximately 80% of the cell number and volume
of the gland; 1% to 2% is clusters of islet cells; 10% to 15% is single-layered, cuboidal ductal cells; and a sparse interlacing network of blood vessels, lymphatics,
nerves, and collagenous stroma is present. This architecture is markedly altered in carcinoma, in which the predominant histologic feature is a dense collagenous
stroma with atrophic acini, remarkably preserved islet cell clusters, and a slight to moderate increase in the number of ducts, both of normal appearance and
cancerous. The diagnosis of ductal adenocarcinoma rests on the identification of mitoses; nuclear and cellular pleomorphism; discontinuity of ductal epithelium; and
evidence of perineural, vascular, or lymphatic invasion. 71
Ninety-five percent of malignant neoplasms of pancreatic origin arise from the exocrine portion of the gland and have light-microscopic features consistent with those
of adenocarcinomas. 71 Much more infrequent are tumors arising from the islets of Langerhans' (endocrine) cells of the pancreas. Primary nonepithelial tumors of the
pancreas (e.g., lymphomas or sarcomas) are extremely rare. A current view of the histologic classification of exocrine pancreatic neoplasms is presented in Table
33.4-1.

TABLE 33.4-1. Histologic Classification of Epithelial Tumors of the Exocrine Pancreas

Extensive “preneoplastic” lesions have been demonstrated in the pancreatic ducts adjacent to frankly invasive cancers with a higher frequency than was seen in a
matched control population without pancreatic cancer. 72 Furthermore, clinical studies have documented progression of lesions from mild dysplasia yo high-grade
dysplasia 73 and from high-grade dysplasia to infiltrating ductal adenocarcinoma. 74 Finally, the identification of mutated K- ras, a genetic change found in the majority of
patients with invasive pancreatic cancer, 75,76 and 77 In papillary and dysplastic papillary ductal lesions has provided further evidence that these hyperproliferative states
are the precursors of infiltrative ductal carcinoma. Current evidence supports the general hypothesis that progression of the ductal lesions is characterized by the
accumulation of additional genetic and biochemical changes. For example, preneoplastic ductal lesions can be shown to harbor mutations in genes that are typically
altered in invasive pancreatic carcinoma, including P16 and P53.78,79 and 80 Activated telomerases can also Bb Ffund. 81,82 Interestingly, other malignancies that can
masquerade as pancreatic cancer, such as carcinoma of the ampulla of vater, only infrequently vontain a mutated K- ras oncogene. 83 At present, however, accurate
identification of high-risk patient subsets who are destined to develop invasive cancer and thus are candidates for intervention is not possible.
ONCOGENES AND TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENES
Studies using archival human pancreatic tumor tissue and human pancreatic cancer cell lines have identified a number of characteristic genetic abnormalities
associated with pancreatic cancer. As described previously, these studies have revealed specific point mutations at codon 12 of the K- ras oncogene in 75% to 90% of
pancreatic adenocarcinoma specimens. 75,76 and 77 The ras protein is an important signal-transduction mediator for receptor protein tyrosine kinases. Signaling is
initiated by the recruitment of guanine nucleotide exchange proteins that promote hydrolysis of guanosine triphosphate (GTP) to guanosine diphosphate (GDP). Ras
bound to GTP is maintained in an active configuration that triggers other enzymatic second messengers, such as the raf, phosphatidylinositol, and protein kinase C
pathways, which leads to nuclear signals resulting in cellular division and proliferation. The mutated ras oncogene is not able to convert GTP to inactive GDP,
resulting in a constitutively active ras protein product, unregulated cellular proliferation signals, and susceptibility to transformation. 84 The K-ras mutation in pancreatic
carcinogenesis is proposed to be an early event in pancreatic tumor progression. 85
Data suggest that up-regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) occurs as a result of the activation of mutations of the ras oncogene. 86 VEGF is an
endothelial cell–specific mitogen that promotes angiogenesis in solid tumors. Angiogenesis is essential for tumors to grow larger than 1 mm 3, and angiogenesis must
occur for metastasis formation and growth. Overexpression of VEGF has been demonstrated in several tumors, and VEGF messenger RNA has been shown to be
overexpressed in a Syrian hamster pancreatic cancer cell line. 87,88 Therefore, ras mutations may contribute to pancreatic carcinogenesis not only by promoting tumor
cell proliferation but also indirectly by stimulating tumor angiogenesis. The available data also suggest that ras and src oncogenes mediate their effects on gene

expression partly by activating the transcription factors AP-1 and Rel/NF-kB. These transcription factors have been shown to up-regulate a number of genes whose
protein products play important roles in tumor invasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis 89,90 and are relevant to pancreatic cancer carcinogenesis. 91,92 Other
proangiogenic factors, such as interleukin-8, are also up-regulated by AP-1 and NF-kB. 93,94 In addition, the tumor suppressor genes p53 and p16 have been shown to
regulate the expression of VEGF. 95,96 Numerous agents that inhibit angiogenesis are currently undergoing testing in phase I and II clinical trials in patients with
various types of cancer in the United States. 97,98
Additional genetic alterations in human pancreatic cancer have been described, many by Kern and colleagues 99,100,101,102 and 103 at Johns Hopkins University. Their
studies have been facilitated by xenograft enrichment of human tumors obtained at the time of surgical resection. 99 Pieces of the fresh human tumors are implanted
subcutaneously in athymic nude mice, and the resulting tumors are harvested when they have grown to 1 cm in diameter. This allows the neoplastic cells to expand
while preventing similar expansion of contaminating stromal cells. Subsequent molecular studies can then be performed on a population of pure tumor cells. Using
this technology, three chromosomal loci with homozygous deletions have been identified in pancreatic ductal carcinomas. They are appropriately termed DPC
(deleted in pancreatic cancer) 1/2, 3, and 4. DPC1/2 is located on chromosome 13q12 (the region of the BRCA2 gene),100DPC3 (p16/MTS-1) on chromosome
9q21,101 and DPC4 on chromosome 18q21.1.102,103DPC4 (Smad4), the most recently discovered tumor suppressor gene, is an important component of the
transforming growth factor-b signaling pathway that normally down-regulates the growth of epithelial cells, stimulates differentiation, and promotes apoptosis. 104,105
Loss of this important growth regulatory pathway contributes to unregulated cell growth. 106,107DPC4 was found to be homozygously deleted in 30% of pancreatic
carcinomas and inactivated through loss of heterozygosity and intragenic mutation in another 20% of the cases studied. 108
The p16 protein belongs to a class of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)–inhibitory proteins (including p21/WAF1/Cip1) and inhibits the cyclin D1/CDK-4 complex that
normally acts to phosphorylate the retinoblastoma (Rb) protein. Inactivation of p16 leads to hyperphosphorylated Rb, loss of cell-cycle control, and unregulated cell
growth. Allelic deletions involving p16 have been found in 85% of human pancreatic tumor xenografts. 101 The second p16 allele is inactivated by three mechanisms:
point mutations in 40% of cases, 101,109 deletion of the second allele in 40%, 110 and promoter silencing through hypermethylation of the p16 promoter in 15%. 111
Interestingly, p16 mutations also have been detected in 30% to 50% of melanoma-prone kindreds. A report of 19 families with a history of melanoma in at least two
first-degree relatives found pancreatic cancer only in families with germline p16 mutations.58 Patients with malignant melanoma in the cancer registries of the
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program were followed to determine the incidence of pancreatic cancer in this cohort. Nearly twice as many pancreatic
cancers as expected were found in patients diagnosed with malignant melanoma before age 50, and the pancreatic cancer incidence was more than twice that
expected in female melanoma patients younger than 50 years. 112
The tumor suppressor gene p53 is critical to normal cellular function, and its amino acid sequence is highly conserved among many species. After DNA damage, p53
protein levels increase because of posttranslational changes in protein stability. The normal p53 response to DNA damage leads to both cell-cycle arrest and
apoptosis. The p53 gene is the most commonly mutated gene in human cancer. Seventy percent of pancreatic adenocarcinomas have loss of p53 function. 56,108
Inactivation of p53 function occurs through loss of one p53 allele and mutational inactivation of the other. Mutations in the p53 sequence are more frequently seen in
poorly differentiated tumors, and patients whose tumors have a p53 intragenic frameshift deletion experience a significantly reduced disease-free survival (compared
to those with other mutations or wild-type p53).113 However, this type of relationship has not been documented in all studies. 114
Based on the frequency with which mutations in K- ras, p53, and p16 are found, a model of pancreatic carcinogenesis has been suggested whereby the malignant
clone evolves from cells driven by a dominant oncogene (K- ras) with subsequent deregulation of cell growth precipitated by abnormal cell-cycle control resulting from
mutations in p53, p16, or both. 115,116
Exactly how the increasingly complex molecular alterations described thus far in human pancreatic cancer interact during pancreatic carcinogenesis is still unclear.
However, in vitro studies designed to correct these alterations may lead to novel treatment strategies and improve our understanding of the relative roles of these
changes in pancreatic cancer biology.

CLINICAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS
The lack of obvious clinical signs and symptoms delays diagnosis in most patients with pancreatic cancer. Jaundice, due to extrahepatic biliary obstruction, is present
in approximately 50% of patients at diagnosis and is associated with a less advanced stage of disease than are other signs or symptoms. 117 Small tumors of the
pancreatic head may obstruct the intrapancreatic portion of the bile duct and cause the patient to seek medical attention when the tumor is still localized and
potentially resectable. In the absence of extrahepatic biliary obstruction, few patients present with potentially resectable disease.
The pain typical of locally advanced pancreatic cancer is a dull, fairly constant pain of visceral origin localized to the region of the middle and upper back. The pain is
due to tumor invasion of the celiac and mesenteric plexus. Vague, intermittent epigastric pain occurs in some patients; its etiology is less clear. Fatigue, weight loss,
and anorexia are common, even in the absence of mechanical gastric outlet obstruction. Pancreatic exocrine insufficiency due to obstruction of the pancreatic duct
may result in malabsorption and steatorrhea. Although malabsorption and mild changes in stool frequency are common, diarrhea occurs infrequently.
Glucose intolerance is present in the majority of patients with pancreatic cancer. 118,119 and 120 Although the exact mechanism of hyperglycemia remains unclear, both
altered b-cell function and impaired tissue insulin sensitivity are present. 118,121 The importance of islet cell function to the development of exocrine cancer is suggested
by the work of Bell and Stayer,122 who demonstrated that pretreatment of hamsters with streptozocin and the resulting destruction of islet cells prevented the induction
of pancreatic cancer in these animals by the carcinogen N-nitrosobis-(2-oxopropyl) amine. This work was substantiated by studies in Chinese hamsters, which
demonstrated that only genetically diabetic animals did not develop cancers in response to this carcinogen. 123
In the absence of jaundice, patient complaints are nonspecific, as are clinical signs on physical examination. However, important staging information with direct
implications for therapy can be obtained from the physical examination. This information includes performance status, cardiopulmonary function, and the presence or
absence of left supraclavicular adenopathy and ascites.

NATURAL HISTORY AND PATTERNS OF TREATMENT FAILURE
Rational anticancer therapy for solid malignancies is based on accurate knowledge of the natural history and patterns of treatment failure for each tumor type.
Pancreatic cancer spreads early to regional lymph nodes, and subclinical liver metastases are present in the majority of patients at the time of diagnosis, even when
findings from imaging studies are normal. Patient survival depends on the extent of disease and performance status at diagnosis. 124 The extent of disease is best
categorized as resectable, locally advanced, or metastatic. Patients who undergo surgical resection for localized nonmetastatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic
head have a long-term survival rate of approximately 20% and a median survival of 13 to 20 months ( Table 33.4-2).125,126,127,128,129,130,131,132,133,134,135,136,137,138 and 139 As is
discussed later (see Treatment of Potentially Resectable Disease), survival is clearly maximized by combining surgery with either preoperative or postoperative
5-fluorouracil (5-FU)-based chemotherapy and radiation therapy (chemoradiation). However, disease recurrence after a potentially curative pancreaticoduodenectomy
remains common, as illustrated in Table 33.4-3.133,134 and 135,137,140,141,142,143,144,145,146,147,148 and 149 Local recurrence occurs in up to 86% of patients who undergo surgery
alone; local-regional tumor control is maximized with combined-modality therapy in the form of chemoradiation and surgery. 124 With improved local-regional disease
control, liver metastases become the dominant form of tumor recurrence and occur in 25% to 53% of patients after potentially curative combined-modality treatment. 124

TABLE 33.4-2. Survival in Patients with Localized Adenocarcinoma of the Pancreas Who Underwent Surgical Resection of the Primary Tumor (with or without
Adjuvant Therapy)

TABLE 33.4-3. Incidence of Subsequent Local Recurrence and Peritoneal and Liver Metastases in Patients with Adenocarcinoma of the Pancreas Who Underwent a
Potentially Curative Resection of the Primary Tumor

Patients with locally advanced, nonmetastatic disease have a median survival of 6 to 10 months. A survival advantage has been demonstrated for patients with locally
advanced disease treated with 5-FU–based chemoradiation compared to no treatment or radiation therapy alone. 150,151,152,153 and 154 Patients with metastatic disease
have a short survival (3 to 6 months), the length of which depends on the extent of disease and performance status.
Knowledge of the prognosis and patterns of treatment failure associated with adenocarcinoma of the pancreas leads to the following basic treatment principles: (1)
The treatment must not be worse than the disease. The low cure rate and modest median survival after pancreatectomy mandate that treatment-related morbidity be
low and treatment-related death be rare. (2) Improvements in patient survival and quality of life will result from the development of innovative treatment strategies
directed at the known sites of tumor recurrence. To date, the data have clearly demonstrated that, as local-regional treatment has become more effective, the
dominant site of failure has shifted to hepatic metastases. 124 Therefore, future improvements in survival duration will result either from effective systemic or regional
therapy directed at subclinical liver metastases or from strategies for screening and early diagnosis directed at increasing the number of patients eligible for
potentially curative surgery. Future improvements in the quality of patient survival will result from the application of innovative multimodality therapy to carefully
selected (staged) patients and the avoidance of unnecessary patient morbidity due to the inappropriate use of surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy in poorly selected
(advanced disease) patients.

CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC (SURGICAL) STAGING
A standardized system for the clinical and pathologic staging of pancreatic cancer does not currently exist in the United States. The system of the American Joint
Committee on Cancer in cooperation with the TNM Committee of the International Union Against Cancer appears in Table 33.4-4.155 However, this TNM (tumor, node,
metastasis) staging system provides only one system for both clinical (radiographic) and pathologic staging. Pathologic staging can be applied only to patients who
undergo pancreatectomy; in all other patients, only clinical staging, based on radiographic examinations, can be done. Without surgery, the histologic status of
regional lymph nodes cannot be determined. In addition, treatment and prognosis are based on whether the tumor is potentially resectable, locally advanced, or
metastatic, definitions that may not directly correlate with TNM status. 156 For example, both potentially resectable and locally advanced tumors may be categorized as
T4; isolated involvement of the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) would be considered T4 disease but does not preclude resection in the absence of arterial
encasement.

TABLE 33.4-4. TNM Staging System for Pancreatic Cancer

Tumors of the pancreas are unlike other solid tumors of the gastrointestinal tract in that accurate diagnosis, clinical staging, and pathologic evaluation of resected
specimens require extensive interaction and cooperation among physicians of different specialties. Accurate clinical staging requires high-quality computed
tomography (CT) to accurately define the relationship of the tumor to the celiac axis and superior mesenteric vessels. The use of standardized, objective radiologic
criteria for preoperative tumor staging allows physicians to develop detailed treatment plans for their patients, avoid unnecessary laparotomy in patients with locally
advanced or metastatic disease, and improve rates of resectability at laparotomy. 157 Therefore, a system for clinical staging like the one illustrated in Table 33.4-5 is
useful to practicing medical oncologists, surgeons, and radiation oncologists.

TABLE 33.4-5. Clinical (Radiologic) Staging of Pancreatic Cancer

Standardized criteria also are needed for the pathologic analysis of pancreaticoduodenectomy specimens to allow accurate interpretation of reported survival
statistics. Retrospective pathologic analysis of archival material does not allow accurate assessment of margins of resection or number of lymph nodes retrieved.
However, these are the most accurate predictors of outcome. In studies by Yeo et al., 135,138 positive resection margin status, lymph node metastases, poorly
differentiated tumor histology, and tumor size of 3 cm or greater were the tumor characteristics that most strongly predicted disease recurrence and short survival
duration. To determine which patient subsets may benefit from the most aggressive treatment strategies, accurate pathologic staging and histologic assessment of
response are mandatory.
At the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, the surgeon and pathologist evaluate each specimen first by frozen-section examination of the common bile
duct transection margin and the pancreatic transection margin. 156 The retroperitoneal margin, defined as the soft tissue margin directly adjacent to the proximal 3 to 4
cm of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA), 157 is evaluated by permanent-section examination. This can be done either by taking a 2- to 3-mm full-face ( en face)
section of the margin or by inking the margin and sectioning the tumor perpendicular to the margin. The retroperitoneal margin must be evaluated or accurately inked
at the time of tumor resection by the pathologist and surgeon; identification of the retroperitoneal margin is not possible later. A positive bile duct or pancreatic
transection margin is treated with re-resection; however, this is not possible in the retroperitoneum, where the aorta and SMA origin limit the extent of surgical
resection.
Samples of multiple areas of each tumor, including the interface between the tumor and adjacent uninvolved tissue, are submitted for paraffin-embedded histologic
examination (five to ten blocks). Sections 4-µm thick are cut and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Final pathologic evaluation of permanent sections includes a
description of tumor histology and differentiation; gross and microscopic evaluation of the tissue of origin (pancreas, bile duct, ampulla of Vater, or duodenum); and
assessments of maximum transverse tumor diameter, lymph node status, and the presence or absence of perineural, lymphatic, and vascular invasion. When
segmental resection of the SMV is required, the area of presumed tumor invasion of the vein wall is serially sectioned and examined in an attempt to discriminate
benign fibrous attachment from direct tumor invasion. In patients who received preoperative chemoradiation, the grade of treatment effect is assessed on permanent
sections using the grading schema developed by Cleary and reported by Evans et al. 158
The method for classifying subsets of regional lymph nodes in pancreaticoduodenectomy specimens 156 is based on the work of Cubilla et al. 159 The soft fibrofatty
tissue containing regional lymph nodes is divided into six regions as outlined on an anatomic pathology dissection board. 156 If lymph nodes are not identified, fat or
other potentially neoplastic tissue is submitted for microscopic examination. Staley and colleagues 156 have demonstrated that the number of lymph nodes identified in
the surgical specimen is increased by the use of a standardized system of specimen analysis. The dissection board used at our institution provides a simple means of
improving lymph node identification and documenting the location of histologically confirmed lymph node metastases. 156 The Japanese staging system involves
extremely detailed analysis of margins and lymph node groups but is not a practical system for widespread application. 160 As the use of multimodality treatment
strategies for pancreatic cancer becomes more common, it will be even more important to standardize pathologic assessment of tumor specimens.
Maintaining an active pancreatic tumor banking program is critical to the ongoing success of translational research programs. Only through the coordinated efforts of
such interdisciplinary programs will new treatments advance from the laboratory to clinical practice. Pathologists should routinely bank tumors for collaborative
research efforts. At the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, small sections of normal pancreas (when possible) and tumor are collected immediately for RNA extraction,
and additional samples are snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at –80°C. A representative section of tumor and normal tissue is routinely fixed in 70% ethyl
alcohol for paraffin block processing, and a hematoxylin and eosin–stained slide is made.

PRETREATMENT DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
TUMORS OF THE PANCREATIC HEAD AND PERIAMPULLARY REGION
Few anatomic regions in the human body cause greater confusion and controversy regarding appropriate diagnostic evaluation and treatment than does the
periampullary region. The reasons for this are unclear because the differential diagnosis of extrahepatic biliary obstruction is limited to a malignant neoplasm (of the
pancreas, bile duct, ampulla of Vater, or duodenum), a benign stricture (usually due to pancreatitis), and choledocholithiasis. Benign tumors of the periampullary
region are exceedingly rare and therefore need not be considered in this differential diagnosis. Unlike for tumors in other parts of the gastrointestinal tract, the
diagnostic algorithm cannot be separated from the treatment plan—diagnosis and treatment represent a continuum. Patients often receive diagnostic studies and
treatment based more on established lines of physician referral than on sound knowledge of the natural history and current therapies for periampullary cancer. This
fact is largely responsible for the variability in diagnostic and treatment recommendations: Typically, surgeons favor surgery, gastroenterologists favor endoscopically
placed stents, and radiologists favor transhepatic stents.
General Principles
The recommended diagnostic evaluation for a patient with extrahepatic biliary obstruction and presumed cancer of the head of the pancreas is based on the following
three principles.
LAPAROTOMY SHOULD BE THERAPEUTIC, NOT DIAGNOSTIC. If the primary tumor cannot be resected completely, surgery (pancreaticoduodenectomy) for pancreatic

cancer offers no survival advantage. However, only 30% to 50% of patients who undergo operation with curative intent have their tumors successfully removed; the
remaining patients are found to have unsuspected liver or peritoneal metastases or local tumor extension to the mesenteric vessels. 128,161,162 Therefore, the majority of
patients who undergo surgical exploration for presumed cancer of the pancreatic head receive no survival benefit; however, the laparotomy results in a perioperative
morbidity rate of 20% to 30%, a mean hospital stay of 1 to 2 weeks, and a median survival after surgery of only 6 months. 161,163,164 Furthermore, in patients whose
tumors are resected with positive margins ( Table 33.4-6),129,131,133,134 and 135,146,165,166,167 and 168 the survival duration is less than 1 year and is no different from the
survival duration achieved with palliative chemotherapy and irradiation in patients who have locally advanced, unresectable disease. 150,153 Therefore, in contrast to the
case for selected patients with colorectal or gastric cancer, no data support palliative (positive-margin) resection for adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.

TABLE 33.4-6. Median Survival for Patients Who Underwent Surgical Resection for Adenocarcinoma of the Pancreas and Were Found to Have a Positive Margin of
Resection

RESECTABILITY SHOULD BE DETERMINED PREOPERATIVELY. Accurate preoperative assessment of resectability increases resectability rates and minimizes

positive-margin resections. A common misconception in pancreatic tumor surgery is that resectability is determined best at laparotomy. In fact, however, resectability
is most accurately determined preoperatively by imaging studies, not at the time of “exploratory” laparotomy. 124,139,157,169 Surgeons declare a tumor to be unresectable
at the time of laparotomy when unsuspected liver metastases, peritoneal implants or, most commonly, locally advanced disease is found. The term locally advanced is
often poorly defined, leaving the patient, the medical oncologist, and the radiation oncologist without a clear understanding of why the primary tumor was not
resected. 170 At the time of surgical exploration for pancreatic head cancer, a Kocher maneuver (mobilization of the pancreatic head and duodenum from their
retroperitoneal attachments) is the first procedure performed to assess the relationship of the tumor to the SMA by palpation. However, the presumed accuracy of this

maneuver to assess SMA involvement evolved before the development of contrast-enhanced CT, and no anatomic basis exists for the maneuver's use as a
determinant of resectability. Direct intraoperative assessment of the extent of retroperitoneal tumor growth in relation to the SMA origin is not completed until the final
step in tumor resection, after gastric and pancreatic transection, when the surgeon is committed to resection even if all of the tumor cannot be safely removed.
Data from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center have demonstrated improved rates of resectability and low rates of margin positivity when high-quality CT is combined
with the use of objective preoperative criteria for resectability. 139,149,157 The CT criteria for resectability are (1) the absence of extrapancreatic disease, (2) a patent
superior mesenteric–portal vein (SMPV) confluence (assuming the technical ability to resect isolated involvement of the SMV or SMPV confluence), and (3) no direct
tumor extension to the celiac axis or SMA. Patients whose tumors are deemed unresectable by these radiologic criteria are not considered candidates for a potentially
curative resection.
Fuhrman and colleagues 157 studied 145 consecutive patients referred for pancreaticoduodenectomy because of a presumed or biopsy-proven periampullary cancer.
Thin-section, contrast-enhanced CT was performed on all patients, and only 42 patients fulfilled the criteria for resectability. Thirty-seven of the 42 patients were able
to undergo pancreaticoduodenectomy, for a resectability rate of 88%. Final pathologic evaluation of the retroperitoneal margin was used to confirm the accuracy of the
CT criteria in predicting resectability. No patient had a grossly positive margin of resection, and only 5 of 25 patients with adenocarcinoma of pancreatic head origin
were found to have a microscopic focus of adenocarcinoma at the retroperitoneal margin. This was despite the fact that many patients had undergone a previous
nontherapeutic laparotomy before referral and that nine patients required resection of the SMV or SMPV confluence. In contrast, the intraoperative use of the Kocher
maneuver is much less effective in determining resectability. Robinson and colleagues 170 studied 29 patients who underwent a successful pancreaticoduodenectomy
after a previous unsuccessful laparotomy during which the pancreatic tumor was judged to be unresectable. Incorrect assessment of resectability (at the time of the
Kocher maneuver) was the reason why 17 of the 29 patients did not undergo resection at their first laparotomy. The data thus demonstrate that, unlike intraoperative
palpation, contrast-enhanced CT can accurately assess the relationship of the tumor to the SMA and celiac axis; this tumor-vessel relationship should be the main
focus of the staging (preoperative) radiologic evaluation.
PALLIATIVE LAPAROTOMY SHOULD BE AVOIDED WHEN POSSIBLE. In patients with locally advanced or metastatic pancreatic cancer, operation for palliation is rarely

needed. Multiple studies have compared operative biliary decompression and endoscopic stent placement in patients with jaundice due to malignant obstruction of the
intrapancreatic portion of the common bile duct. 171,172 and 173 The higher initial morbidity and mortality rates and longer hospital stay associated with operative biliary
bypass are countered by the higher frequency of hospital readmission for stent occlusion and cholangitis with endoscopic stent placement. Physicians typically
advocate either surgery or endoscopic stenting; however, a selective approach based on the patient's extent of disease and performance status is more appropriate.
Patients with liver metastases or ascites have a median survival of less than 6 months, making endoscopic stent placement an obvious choice. Patients with locally
advanced disease treated with chemoradiation have a median survival of 10 to 12 months, with 20% surviving 2 years. 152,153 Patients with a superior performance
status at diagnosis often survive longer, yet it is difficult in most patients to predict, at diagnosis, the tempo of disease progression. Clearly, one would like to avoid
operation (with its morbidity and often lengthy recovery period) in patients with rapidly progressive disease. Similarly, one would like to have a durable means of
biliary decompression in patients who are expected to survive longer than 6 to 9 months. Therefore, in patients with locally advanced nonmetastatic disease, it is
reasonable to proceed with endoscopic stent placement and reserve operative biliary bypass for patients who survive long enough to experience stent occlusion. As is
discussed later (see the section Palliative Methods of Biliary and Gastric Decompression ), innovations in stent construction and the development of the expandable
10-mm metal stent have improved patency rates and resulted in more widespread application of stenting. Data from Raikar and colleagues 174 at the Mayo Clinic have
demonstrated that endoscopic stenting for unresectable pancreatic cancer provides an equivalent duration of survival with a reduced cost and shorter hospital stay
than operative biliary decompression, despite the need for subsequent stent exchanges.
Computed Tomography and Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography
Improved CT technology has resulted in CT being the study of choice to determine the extent of disease and resectability status in patients with pancreatic cancer.
Image resolution has improved considerably with the use of dynamic scanning, whereby intravenous contrast material is delivered by an automatic injector. The
development of helical or spiral scanning has improved scan speed through continuous rotation of the x-ray tube around the gantry. This allows the entire pancreas to
be imaged during the bolus phase of contrast enhancement. In addition, scan data can be processed to display images in three-dimensional and multiplanar formats.
Helical CT performed with contrast enhancement and a thin-section technique can accurately assess the relationship of the low-density tumor to the celiac axis, SMA,
and SMPV confluence. However, design of the scanning protocol and interpretation of scans must be done by experienced radiologists who understand the clinical
importance of accurate staging and assessment of resectability in patients with pancreatic cancer. A completed CT scan report should contain the following
information necessary to determine resectability: (1) the presence or absence of extrapancreatic metastatic disease, (2) the patency of the SMV and SMPV
confluence and their relationship to the tumor, and (3) the relationship of the tumor to the celiac axis and SMA. If such information is not apparent from review of the
scans or the report, the study should be repeated.
Our diagnostic schema, based on high-quality CT, appears in Figure 33.4-1. A patient is deemed to have locally advanced, unresectable disease when clear evidence
on the CT scans shows encasement of the SMA or celiac axis or occlusion of the SMPV confluence. The accuracy of CT in predicting unresectability is well
established; current technology has eliminated the use of laparotomy to assess local tumor resectability. 175,176 and 177 If a low-density mass is not seen on CT scans,
patients with extrahepatic biliary obstruction undergo diagnostic and therapeutic endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). A malignant obstruction of
the intrapancreatic portion of the common bile duct is characterized by the double-duct sign (proximal obstruction of the common bile and pancreatic ducts), which can
often be accurately differentiated from choledocholithiasis and the long, smooth tapering bile duct stricture seen with chronic pancreatitis. To prevent cholangitis in
patients who undergo diagnostic ERCP in the setting of extrahepatic biliary obstruction, endoscopic stents are routinely placed. Endoscopic stent placement also is
done in patients with elevated bilirubin levels who are enrolled in preoperative chemoradiation protocols.

FIGURE 33.4-1. Management algorithm used at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center for patients with suspected or biopsy-proven (from previous laparotomy before
referral) adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head. Accurate radiographic imaging allows patients to be staged as having resectable, locally advanced, or metastatic
disease (see text). In patients with locally advanced or metastatic disease, biopsy confirmation of malignancy is mandatory before the initiation of specific anticancer
therapy. Similarly, before initiation of neoadjuvant chemoradiation, cytologic confirmation of malignancy is required. The development of endoscopic ultrasonography
(EUS)–guided fine-needle aspiration (FNA) has greatly simplified tissue acquisition in patients with localized, nonmetastatic pancreatic cancer. Angiography is
performed selectively and is largely limited to patients who have undergone a previous biliary bypass involving the common bile duct to define hepatic arterial
anatomy before reoperative pancreaticoduodenectomy. Laparoscopy should be considered before opening the abdomen in patients with potentially resectable
disease. CT, computed tomography; ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography.

Endoscopic Ultrasonography and the Role for Pancreatic Biopsy
Accurate staging and biliary decompression are achieved with CT and ERCP in the majority of patients. Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS)–guided fine-needle
aspiration (FNA) is currently the procedure of choice for obtaining a cytologic diagnosis of malignancy. Pretreatment confirmation of malignancy is mandatory in all
patients with locally advanced or metastatic disease before treatment with systemic therapy or external-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) and is being considered more
commonly in patients with localized, potentially resectable disease because of the growing popularity of neoadjuvant therapy. Reports of EUS-guided FNA of the
pancreas have demonstrated its accuracy and safety. 178,179 and 180 When biopsy material is interpreted by an experienced cytopathologist, false-positive results should

not occur. However, false-negative results may be common, resulting in negative predictive values as low as 40%. 178 In a patient who presents with extrahepatic
biliary obstruction, has a malignant-appearing stricture of the intrapancreatic portion of the common bile duct, and has no history of recurrent pancreatitis or alcohol
abuse, the absence of a mass on CT or EUS should not exclude the possibility of a carcinoma of the pancreas or bile duct. Similarly, negative results of EUS-guided
FNA should not be interpreted as definitive proof that a malignancy does not exist. The results of EUS, with or without FNA, should be considered in the context of the
clinical situation and as a complement to CT and ERCP findings.
Although pretreatment pancreatic biopsy is frequently used, physicians should be cautioned about the use of intraoperative pancreatic biopsy. In patients with
resectable disease, there is no indication for routine intraoperative pancreatic biopsy, and as stated, the use of preoperative EUS-guided FNA should be limited to
those patients receiving preoperative chemoradiation in whom cytologic confirmation of malignancy is needed. In contrast to the minimal risk of FNA, a risk of
peritoneal dissemination of tumor cells resulting from surgical manipulation and intraoperative large-needle biopsy is supported by data from Staley et al. 148 Having
undergone a previous laparotomy with tumor biopsy before definitive pancreaticoduodenectomy was the only factor associated with an increased risk of local-regional
tumor recurrence in their study. Furthermore, intraoperative pancreatic biopsy has been associated with significant complications, such as pancreatitis, pancreatic
fistula, and hemorrhage. 170 Nevertheless, because of the perceived risk of tumor dissemination due to preoperative FNA (a common concern when CT-guided FNA
was popular), patients with presumed periampullary or pancreatic neoplasms are often brought to the operating room for planned intraoperative diagnostic biopsy
before extirpative surgery. If the frozen-section findings are negative, many surgeons do not proceed with tumor resection because of concerns about performing such
an extensive operation for benign disease. 170,181 In contrast, most experienced pancreatic surgeons believe that preoperative or intraoperative pancreatic biopsy is
unnecessary, because a negative biopsy in the appropriate clinical setting is likely due to sampling error and therefore should not influence the decision to proceed
with pancreaticoduodenectomy.182,183,184 and 185 In the absence of choledocholithiasis found at ERCP or a history of pancreatitis, obstruction of the intrapancreatic
portion of the common bile duct is almost always secondary to malignancy. If the decision to perform pancreaticoduodenectomy is based on high-quality images
obtained by CT and ERCP and on an accurate clinical history, it is extremely unlikely that pancreaticoduodenectomy will be performed for benign disease.
Furthermore, if the preoperative FNA result is benign or nondiagnostic, it is a mistake to assume that the patient does not have cancer or that a tissue diagnosis can
be obtained at surgery before complete tumor resection. The diagnosis of a malignant obstruction of the intrapancreatic portion of the common bile duct should be
accurately established by high-quality images obtained by CT, ERCP, and EUS; unnecessary and preventable patient morbidity occurs when laparotomy, pancreatic
biopsy, or both are used as diagnostic studies because of the physician's failure to obtain state-of-the-art pretreatment imaging.
Laparoscopy and Angiography
During the 1990s, laparoscopy has been used in patients with radiologic evidence of localized disease to detect extrapancreatic tumor not seen on CT scans, thereby
allowing laparotomy to be limited to patients with localized disease. Studies by Cusheri 186 and Warshaw et al. 187 have demonstrated the value of laparoscopy in
detecting liver and peritoneal metastases not seen on CT scans. This favorable initial experience with laparoscopy in the identification of subclinical metastatic
disease has led to a policy of routine laparoscopy in the staging of pancreatic adenocarcinoma in many centers. 188,189 and 190 However, it is important to remember that
70% to 80% of patients with pancreatic cancer present with locally advanced or metastatic disease; if laparoscopy is done early in the diagnostic sequence, it will
have a very high yield of positive findings. If laparoscopy is performed after high-quality contrast-enhanced CT, the yield will likely be much lower. For example,
Conlon and colleagues 188 evaluated 115 patients with periampullary tumors thought to be resectable based on CT. All patients underwent careful laparoscopic
examination, including inspection of the lesser sac and biopsy of celiac, portal, or perigastric lymph nodes. Unresectable disease was found at laparoscopy in 41
(38%) of 108 evaluable patients. Sixty-one (91%) of the remaining 67 evaluable patients underwent pancreatic resection. Overall, however, only 53% of the initial 115
patients underwent resection. Although the authors did not describe the specific CT scanning protocol used to evaluate their patients, the low radiologic resectability
rate in comparison to that achievable with high-quality CT suggests that optimal preoperative imaging was not used in all patients before laparoscopy.
Other, more recent investigations suggest that CT-occult extrapancreatic disease is uncommon, being found in only 4% to 15% of patients with tumors considered
resectable after high-quality CT. 139,191,192,193 and 194 In a study by Rumstadt and colleagues 192 from the University of Heidelberg, 398 patients with pancreatic or
periampullary cancer treated between 1990 and 1995 were evaluated preoperatively with high-quality CT, ERCP, and angiography. On the basis of this imaging
evaluation, 194 patients were considered to have a high probability of resectability based on the absence of infiltration into adjacent tissue or distant metastases. Of
these 194 patients, 172 (89%) underwent successful pancreaticoduodenectomy. Only 9 (5%) of the 194 patients thought to have resectable tumors were found to
have occult metastatic disease at laparotomy. The authors concluded that only this small group of patients would have benefited from laparoscopy.
Contrast-enhanced helical CT allows accurate assessment of vital tumor-vessel relationships, remains the study of choice for detecting intraparenchymal liver
metastases, and is less invasive and therefore less costly than laparoscopy (which still requires general anesthesia in most centers). CT remains the initial study of
choice for determining whether a patient has potentially resectable, locally advanced, or metastatic disease; such clinical staging is critical for accurate treatment
planning. Laparoscopy may prevent unnecessary laparotomy in approximately 10% of patients with presumed localized, potentially resectable pancreatic cancer.
Laparoscopy before laparotomy (during a single anesthesia induction) is a reasonable approach in patients with biopsy-proven or suspected potentially resectable
pancreatic cancer in whom a decision has been made to proceed with pancreaticoduodenectomy. However, data are not available to support the cost-effectiveness of
laparoscopy's routine use as a staging procedure under a separate anesthesia induction before treatment planning. Furthermore, laparoscopy should not be used to
compensate for inadequate CT imaging.
Contrast-enhanced helical CT also has reduced the role of preoperative angiography. Angiography does not provide the detail that is needed to determine the
anatomic relationship between the tumor and the SMA that is provided by highquality contrast-enhanced CT. Angiography allows contrast enhancement of only the
vessel lumen; the surrounding tumor and soft tissue cannot be evaluated. We limit the use of angiography to reoperative cases, in which identification of aberrant
hepatic arterial anatomy may prevent iatrogenic injury during portal dissection when there is extensive scarring from a previous biliary procedure. 195 Tyler and
Evans181 reported a replaced or accessory right hepatic artery arising from the SMA in 26% of patients who underwent reoperative pancreaticoduodenectomy.
Preoperative knowledge of this common anatomic variant may help prevent operative misadventure in the reoperative setting.
TUMORS OF THE PANCREATIC BODY AND TAIL
Because adenocarcinomas of the pancreatic body and tail do not cause obstruction of the intrapancreatic portion of the common bile duct, early diagnosis is rare;
virtually all patients have locally advanced or metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis. CT provides an excellent assessment of the relationship of the tumor to the
celiac axis and the SMA origin. Arterial encasement is present in the majority of patients, except for the anecdotal patient who presents with upper gastrointestinal
hemorrhage resulting from sinistral hypertension secondary to splenic vein occlusion by a small tumor. In the rare patient who appears to have resectable disease on
CT (no arterial encasement and no extrapancreatic disease), laparoscopy before laparotomy is a logical approach because peritoneal metastases are frequently
found. 196,197 The scant data available regarding surgical resection confirm the short survival and poor prognosis in this subgroup of patients. 198,199 Furthermore, the
high 30-day hospital mortality rate (43%; 6 of 14 patients with adenocarcinoma) reported in a study from the Department of Veterans Affairs hospitals suggests that
many of the patients taken to surgery have advanced disease and a poor performance status. 200 Accurate preoperative imaging and a selective approach to surgical
therapy minimizes treatment-related morbidity and mortality and maximizes the length and quality of patient survival.

TREATMENT OF POTENTIALLY RESECTABLE DISEASE
PREOPERATIVE AND POSTOPERATIVE CHEMORADIATION
EBRT and concomitant 5-FU chemotherapy (chemoradiation) were shown in several studies to prolong survival in patients with locally advanced adenocarcinoma of
the pancreas.150,151,201 Those data were the foundation for a prospective randomized study of adjuvant chemoradiation (500 mg/m 2/d of 5-FU for 6 days and 40 Gy of
radiation) after pancreaticoduodenectomy conducted by the Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group (GITSG); that trial also demonstrated a survival advantage from
multimodality therapy compared with resection alone (20 months vs. 11 months). 141,202 However, owing to a prolonged recovery, 5 (24%) of the 21 patients in the
adjuvant chemoradiation arm could not begin chemoradiation until more than 10 weeks after pancreaticoduodenectomy, despite the fact that the only patients likely to
be considered for protocol entry were those who recovered rapidly from surgery and had a good performance status. Similar findings have been reported from the
European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC). 203,204 and 205 In 1987, the EORTC initiated trial 40891 comparing adjuvant 5-FU–based
chemoradiation after pancreatectomy with surgery alone. Between 1987 and 1995, 218 patients were randomized to receive either chemoradiation (40 Gy in a split
course and 5-FU given as a continuous infusion at a dose of 25 mg/kg/d during EBRT) or no further treatment after pancreaticoduodenectomy for adenocarcinoma of
the pancreas or periampullary region. Patients were recruited from 29 centers in Europe, one in France, and three in the Netherlands. Analysis was performed on 207
of the patients, 114 (55%) of whom had pancreatic cancer. Eleven patients were deemed ineligible for analysis because of extensive local disease with incomplete
resection. The median survival duration was 24.5 months for those who received adjuvant therapy and 19 months for those who received surgery alone ( P = .2); for

patients with pancreatic cancer, the median survival was 17.1 months for those who received adjuvant therapy compared with 12.6 months for those who received
surgery alone (P = .099). Concerns over trial design, methodology, and data interpretation include the following:
1. The precise anatomic (pathologic) distinction between pancreatic and periampullary adenocarcinoma was not defined, and the high proportion of periampullary
(nonpancreatic) tumors is unexplained.
2. Patients were considered for enrollment in this trial after recovery from pancreaticoduodenectomy; despite this selection bias, 21 (20%) of 104 evaluable
patients randomized to receive chemoradiation did not receive intended therapy owing to patient refusal, medical comorbidities, or rapid tumor progression.
3. No assessment of the retroperitoneal margin of resection was performed, and therefore no mechanism to assess the completeness of surgical resection was
available. Furthermore, although the method of follow-up was not defined (raising the concern that sites of recurrent disease were underestimated), tumor
recurrence in the pancreatic bed was a site of first progression in 20% of patients. This finding, combined with the short survival in the observation arm (12
months for patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma), suggests that many patients underwent incomplete resection.
4. Although the survival differences for the subset of patients with pancreatic cancer were not significant ( P = .099), the wide confidence interval (relative risk, 0.7;
95% confidence interval, 0.5–1.1) does not exclude the possibility of a clinically meaningful improvement in survival in the chemoradiation arm that was not
apparent because of the small sample size.
Despite these concerns, the authors concluded that postoperative adjuvant chemoradiation should not be considered standard therapy after
pancreaticoduodenectomy for cancer. 204
Two additional trials of postoperative adjuvant therapy after pancreaticoduodenectomy are ongoing: the European Study Group of Pancreatic Cancer (ESPAC)-1 trial
and a Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) trial. The ESPAC-1 trial is a four-arm study incorporating a two-by-two factorial design to compare adjuvant
chemoradiation (40 Gy in a split course and 5-FU), adjuvant chemotherapy (5-FU and folinic acid), chemoradiation followed by chemotherapy, and observation alone
after pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic and periampullary carcinomas. 206,207 More than 40 centers in nine countries are participating in this study, which began
accrual in 1994. In July 1998, the RTOG activated the first American phase III cooperative group study of postoperative adjuvant therapy for resected pancreatic
adenocarcinoma since the GITSG trial. 208 Patients are randomized to receive either gemcitabine or 5-FU to be given before and after 5-FU–based chemoradiation.
Despite the selection bias involved in the enrollment of patients into postoperative adjuvant therapy studies, prospective and retrospective data suggest an improved
survival duration with the addition of postoperative adjuvant chemoradiation after pancreaticoduodenectomy ( Table 33.4-7).133,139,140 and 141,149,167,202,209,210211,212 and 213
The most compelling data reported of late come from Yeo and colleagues 167 at Johns Hopkins University, who reviewed all patients who underwent
pancreaticoduodenectomy for adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head during a 4-year period. One hundred twenty patients received adjuvant chemoradiation, and 53
underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy alone. The median survival for those who received adjuvant therapy was 19.5 months, compared with 13.5 months for the group
who received surgery alone.

TABLE 33.4-7. Chemoradiation Studies in Patients with Resectable Pancreatic Cancer

A survival advantage was also demonstrated for patients treated with adjuvant combination chemotherapy (5-FU, doxorubicin, and mitomycin C) after
pancreatectomy.214 The median survival was 23 months in the 30 patients randomized to receive adjuvant therapy, compared to 11 months in the 31 patients treated
with surgery alone. Forty-six additional patients were ineligible after surgery, attesting to the difficulty in performing multiinstitutional protocol-based research involving
as complex a surgical procedure as pancreaticoduodenectomy. The toxicity of the surgery and chemotherapy was significant; only 24 of 30 patients received
chemotherapy, and only 13 of those received all six planned courses of chemotherapy. A previous pilot study of adjuvant 5-FU, doxorubicin, and mitomycin C using a
different schedule of administration found similar toxicity and therefore questioned the use of adjuvant combination chemotherapy, even of moderate toxicity, after
pancreatectomy.145
The risk of delaying or not receiving postoperative adjuvant therapy, 167,203,214,215 combined with small published experiences of successful pancreatic resection after
EBRT,216,217 and 218 prompted many institutions to initiate studies in which chemoradiation was given preoperatively. 158,219 Results of these and other studies have
suggested specific advantages of preoperative versus postoperative chemoradiation, including the following considerations 124: (1) Because chemotherapy and
radiation are given first, delayed postoperative recovery has no effect on the delivery of multimodality therapy 139,149; (2) pancreaticojejunal anastomotic leaks, the most
common major complication after pancreaticoduodenectomy, are decreased in patients who receive preoperative chemoradiation 220; (3) the high frequency of
positive-margin resections that have been reported supports the concern that the retroperitoneal margin of excision, even when negative, may be only a few
millimeters—surgery alone is thus inadequate local therapy for most patients 134,167; and (4) patients with disseminated disease evident on restaging studies after
chemoradiation are not subjected to laparotomy. 149
In patients who receive chemoradiation before planned pancreaticoduodenectomy, repeat staging CT after chemoradiation reveals liver metastases in approximately
25%.139,149 If these patients had undergone pancreaticoduodenectomy at the time of diagnosis, it is probable that the liver metastases would have already been
present subclinically; these patients would therefore have undergone a major surgical procedure only to have liver metastases found soon after surgery. In the M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center trials, patients who were found to have disease progression at the time of restaging had a median survival of only 7 months. 124 The
avoidance of a lengthy recovery period and the potential morbidity of pancreaticoduodenectomy in patients with such a short expected survival duration represents a
distinct advantage of preoperative over postoperative chemoradiation. Furthermore, when delivering multimodality therapy for any disease, it is beneficial, when
possible, to deliver the most toxic therapy last, thereby avoiding morbidity in patients who experience rapid disease progression not amenable to currently available
therapies.
The survival advantage for the combination of chemoradiation and surgery compared with surgery alone (see Table 33.4-7) likely results from improved local-regional
tumor control. Because of the poor rates of response to 5-FU–based systemic therapy in patients with measurable metastatic disease, it is unlikely that 5-FU–based
chemoradiation regimens significantly impact the development of distant metastatic disease. Data from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center support this belief. 148,149
Staley and colleagues 48 reported on 39 consecutive patients who underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy and intraoperative electron-beam radiation therapy (IOERT;
10 Gy) for adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head after preoperative infusional 5-FU (300 mg/m 2/d, 5 days per week) and EBRT (50.4 Gy). Thirty-eight patients were
evaluable for analysis of patterns of treatment failure; one perioperative death occurred. Overall, 38 recurrences were found in 29 patients; eight recurrences (21%)
were local-regional (pancreatic bed, peritoneal cavity, or both), and 30 (79%) were distant (lung, liver, bone). The liver was the most frequent site of tumor recurrence,
and liver metastases were a component of treatment failure in 53% of patients (69% of all patients who had recurrences). Fourteen patients (37% of all patients; 48%
of patients who had recurrences) had liver metastases as their only site of recurrence. Isolated local or peritoneal recurrences were documented in only four patients
(11%). In contrast, previous reports of pancreaticoduodenectomy alone for adenocarcinoma of the pancreas documented local recurrence in 50% to 80% of
patients. 134,142,147 The improvement in local-regional control with preoperative chemoradiation was seen despite the fact that 14 of 38 evaluable patients had
undergone laparotomy with tumor manipulation and biopsy before referral for chemoradiation and reoperation. If these 14 patients are excluded, only two patients
(8%) experienced local or peritoneal recurrence as any component of treatment failure. However, the chemoradiation program was associated with gastrointestinal
toxic effects (nausea, vomiting, and dehydration) that required hospital admission in one-third of patients. 148 In addition, the multicenter Eastern Cooperative Oncology

Group trial documented the need for hospital admission in 51% of patients during or within 4 weeks of completing chemoradiation. 213 These findings led to a change in
the delivery of radiation therapy and 5-FU at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. A rapid-fractionation program of chemoradiation was designed to avoid the
gastrointestinal toxicity seen with standard-fractionation chemoradiation (5.5 weeks) while attempting to maintain the excellent local tumor control achieved with
multimodality therapy.149 In a study of the revised regimen, rapid-fractionation chemoradiation was delivered over 2 weeks with 18-MeV photons using a four-field
technique to a total dose of 30 Gy (3 Gy per fraction for ten fractions, 5 days per week). 5-FU was given concurrently by continuous infusion at a dosage of 300
mg/m2/d, 5 days per week. Restaging with chest radiography and abdominal CT was performed 4 weeks after completion of chemoradiation in preparation for
pancreaticoduodenectomy. Thirty-five patients received this treatment, 27 were taken to surgery, and 20 (74%) underwent successful pancreaticoduodenectomy.
Local tumor control and patient survival were equal to the results reported above with standard-fractionation (5.5 weeks) chemoradiation: Local-regional recurrence
developed in only 2 (10%) of the 20 patients who underwent resection, and the median survival for all 20 patients was 25 months. 149
Because of the large percentage of patients who develop distant metastatic disease, predominantly in the liver, the improved local-regional tumor control achieved
with combined-modality therapy (chemoradiation and surgery) translates into only a small improvement in median survival. Therefore, more effective systemic agents
are needed to both maximize radiation sensitization and treat microscopic extrapancreatic metastatic disease. One such potential agent is gemcitabine
(2'-deoxy-2',2'-difluorocytidine; Gemzar), a deoxycytidine analogue capable of inhibiting DNA replication and repair. After a phase I study, 221 gemcitabine was
evaluated in a multicenter trial of 44 patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. 222 Although only five objective responses were documented, the investigators noted
frequent subjective symptomatic benefits, often in the absence of an objective tumor response. Toxicity appeared to be minor and included myelosuppression,
particularly thrombocytopenia, as well as a flu-like syndrome and mild hemolytic-uremic syndrome. Based on these observations, gemcitabine was compared to 5-FU
in previously untreated patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. 223 Patients treated with gemcitabine had a median survival of 5.65 months, compared to 4.41
months (P = .0025) in those treated with 5-FU. Twenty-four percent of patients treated with gemcitabine were alive at 9 months, compared to 6% of patients treated
with 5-FU. In addition, more clinically meaningful effects on disease-related symptoms (pain control, performance status, and weight gain) were seen with gemcitabine
(24% of patients) than with 5-FU (5% of patients). Similar systemic effects and demonstrable disease responses were documented in patients who were treated with
gemcitabine after experiencing disease progression while receiving 5-FU. 224
Gemcitabine is also a potent radiation sensitizer of human pancreatic cancer cells in vitro, supporting studies examining its use in vivo. Laboratory studies suggest
that the inhibitory effect of gemcitabine on DNA synthesis (when combined with irradiation) is prolonged in tumor compared to normal tissues. 225 This may provide a
window of opportunity for the combination of gemcitabine and EBRT when delivered in a fractionated schedule. Such data provide the basis for the ongoing phase I
studies of this drug-radiation combination in patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer; gemcitabine (combined with EBRT) is being given in escalating doses
weekly as a single agent, 226 in combination with 5-FU, 227 in combination with cisplatin, 228 at a fixed dose with escalating doses of EBRT, 229 and as a twice-weekly
infusion with either standard-fractionation EBRT 230 or split-course EBRT. 231 Wolff and colleagues 226 from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center have reported a phase I
study of rapid-fractionation EBRT (30 Gy over 2 weeks, 3 Gy per fraction) and concomitant weekly gemcitabine in patients with locally advanced adenocarcinoma of
the pancreatic head. Gemcitabine was given during the first 2 weeks of irradiation and continued weekly to complete a 7-week course of systemic therapy. The
maximum tolerated dose of gemcitabine using this treatment schedule was 350 mg/m 2/week. Dose-limiting toxicities included fatigue, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and
dehydration; febrile neutropenia occurred in only one patient. Future studies of gemcitabine-based chemoradiation will likely incorporate a fixed dose-rate schedule of
administration because current data suggest an improved response rate with such a schedule. 232
The results with gemcitabine for locally advanced and metastatic pancreatic cancer suggest that gemcitabine may be useful in patients with potentially resectable
disease. Hoffman and colleagues 233 have reported a phase I study of preoperative standard-fractionation EBRT (50.4 Gy) and escalating weekly doses of gemcitabine
(300 mg/m2, 400 mg/m2, 500 mg/m2) for potentially resectable pancreatic cancer. Eight (53%) of 15 patients required hospitalization after chemoradiation.
Pancreaticoduodenectomy was completed in eight patients; so far, the histologic response to the preoperative therapy appears to be superior to that with prior
chemoradiation combinations. No experience with adjuvant gemcitabine-based chemoradiation after pancreaticoduodenectomy has been published; acute and late
toxic effects of this drug-radiation combination may be more significant than when it is used in the preoperative setting.
The evolution of multimodality therapy for patients with potentially resectable pancreatic cancer appears in Figure 33.4-2. Future regimens will likely emphasize
neoadjuvant therapy and capitalize on our expanding understanding of the molecular basis of metastasis, allowing conventional chemoradiation and surgery to be
combined with systemic or regional delivery of novel agents that inhibit essential steps in tumor cell growth.

FIGURE 33.4-2. The evolution of multimodality neoadjuvant (preoperative) therapy for patients with potentially resectable adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head.
Current treatment schemas combine 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) chemoradiation (ChemoXRT) and pancreaticoduodenectomy. Short-course rapid-fractionation
chemoradiation avoids the gastrointestinal toxicity of standard-fractionation chemoradiation and reduces overall treatment time. Future treatment schemas (currently
being studied in the protocol setting) emphasize the importance of improving local and systemic disease control with more potent radiation-sensitizing agents and
novel systemic therapies. n, restaging evaluation; ChemoXRT #1, 50.4 Gy, 1.8 Gy per fraction: 5-FU 300 mg/m 2d, M–F; ChemoXRT #2, 30 Gy, 3.0 Gy per fraction:
5-FU 300 mg/m2d, M–F; ChemoXRT #3, 30 Gy, 3.0 Gy per fraction: with improved radiation-sensitizing agents (gemcitabine). aSystemic agents: novel systemic
agents, such as inhibitors of angiogenesis, farnesyl-protein transferase, epidermal growth factor, and so forth.

PANCREATICODUODENECTOMY
Background
Current surgical treatment is based on the procedure of pancreaticoduodenectomy as described in 1935 by Whipple et al. 234 Their two-stage
pancreaticoduodenectomy consisted of biliary diversion and gastrojejunostomy during a first operation and, after the patient recovered (approximately 3 weeks later),
resection of the duodenum and pancreatic head. By 1941, the world experience totaled 41 cases, and the perioperative mortality rate was 30%. 235 Before 1940, the
pancreatic remnant was not reanastomosed to the small bowel, and the high mortality rate was largely due to pancreatic fistula from the oversewn pancreatic remnant.
In 1941, Whipple modified his reconstruction to include a pancreaticojejunostomy, with the entire procedure done in one operation. In 1946, Waugh and Clagett 236
from the Mayo Clinic described their modification of the one-stage procedure to its current form. The goals of surgical therapy outlined by Waugh and Clagett have
not changed since that date: (1) there should be reasonable opportunity for cure, (2) the risk of death should not outweigh the prospects for cure, and (3) the patient
should be left in as normal a condition as possible. 236
Surgical Mortality Rates
Advances in operative technique, anesthesia, and critical care have resulted in a 30-day in-hospital mortality rate of less than 2% for pancreaticoduodenectomy when
performed at major referral centers by experienced surgeons. 138,220,237 At such centers, mortality rates remain less than 2% despite the use of multimodality therapy,
the frequent need for complex vascular resection and reconstruction, and the referral of many patients after an initial unsuccessful attempt at tumor resection. 238,239
Mortality rates from other institutions, including university centers and the Department of Veterans Affairs hospitals, have been reported in the range from 7.8% to
more than 10%. 240,241,242 and 243 Data from New York State have demonstrated that hospitals performing fewer than nine pancreatic resections per year have an
unacceptably high perioperative mortality rate of 12%. 244 Data from Maryland and Ontario, Canada, also have demonstrated that increased patient volume is

associated with lower surgery-related mortality. 245,246 and 247 The most compelling data on the relationship of hospital volume to perioperative mortality and long-term
survival after pancreaticoduodenectomy come from the Center for the Evaluative Clinical Sciences at Dartmouth Medical School. 248,249 Birkmeyer et al.248 studied 7229
Medicare patients older than 65 years of age who underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy at 1772 hospitals between 1992 and 1995. The study population was divided
into quartiles according to hospital volume, with high-volume centers defined as those that performed five or more pancreaticoduodenectomies per year. Forty
high-volume hospitals (2%) performed 1541 (21%) of the 7229 pancreaticoduodenectomies. In-hospital mortality was 11% overall, 4% in high-volume hospitals, and
10% to 16% in medium-volume (two to five pancreaticoduodenectomies per year) and very low-volume (fewer than one pancreaticoduodenectomy per year) hospitals.
These data suggest a linear relationship between surgical volume and outcome. Birkmeyer and colleagues suggested that more that 100 deaths per year could
potentially be prevented by the referral of pancreatic cancer patients to high-volume hospitals. Furthermore, in an analysis of survival duration, after exclusion of
perioperative deaths and adjustment for case mix, patients who underwent surgery at high-volume hospitals were less likely to experience late mortality. 249 The
authors concluded that patients considering pancreaticoduodenectomy at low-volume hospitals should be given the option of referral to a high-volume center.
Patient outcome is optimized and costs minimized by the referral of patients requiring major pancreatic resections for malignant disease to centers with active
multidisciplinary treatment programs. 250 However, because surgical resection benefits only patients who undergo a complete resection, it is essential that surgery be
done only on patients with localized, potentially resectable pancreatic cancer. In the absence of significant innovations in systemic therapy, the only potential for major
improvements in the quality of life of patients with pancreatic cancer lies in our ability to limit surgery-related morbidity to those patients most likely to benefit from
surgical intervention (i.e., to avoid laparotomy in patients with unresectable disease). Therein lies the importance of determining resectability using strict CT criteria
(see Pretreatment Diagnostic Studies, earlier in this chapter).
Technique
Pancreaticoduodenectomy as currently performed in the United States incorporates selected aspects of the traditional Whipple procedure and emphasizes the
importance of removing all soft tissue to the right of the SMA. 251 The surgical resection is divided into six clearly defined steps, 181,251 the most important of which is
step 6, during which the pancreas is divided and the specimen is removed from the SMPV confluence and the right lateral border of the SMA. This is performed by
completely mobilizing the SMV and portal vein medially; the uncinate process is then dissected off of the SMV and its posteriorly located first jejunal branch. Only after
full medial mobilization of the SMV can one identify the SMA (lateral to the SMV). The pancreatic head and all soft tissue to the right of the SMA are then removed
with direct ligation of the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery or arteries.
The high incidence of local recurrence after standard pancreaticoduodenectomy (see Table 33.4-3) mandates that close attention be paid to the retroperitoneal
margin. The retroperitoneal margin is the soft tissue margin along the right lateral border of the proximal SMA. This margin contains the lateral portion of the
mesenteric neural plexus that surrounds the artery. Importantly, perineural invasion involving the mesenteric plexus at the SMA origin and tumor cell infiltration of
lymphatic vessels and connective tissue may extend beyond the confines of the palpable tumor in the pancreatic head and result in a microscopically positive
retroperitoneal margin, even when all gross disease is easily resected. 252,253 and 254 A more extensive retroperitoneal dissection to the right of the SMA is not associated
with greater operative morbidity and is necessary to obtain a negative retroperitoneal margin. 124,157,238 This important margin of resection is often confused with the
soft tissue posterior to the pancreatic head and duodenum and anterior to the inferior vena cava (posterior pancreaticoduodenal region). Direct invasion of the inferior
vena cava is uncommon, and removal of all tissue anterior to this vessel is easily accomplished. As is true for other solid tumors, adequate local-regional control of
pancreatic cancer requires negative margins of excision, and the margin of greatest importance at the time of pancreaticoduodenectomy is the soft tissue margin
along the proximal SMA (retroperitoneal margin). In addition, clear identification of the SMA avoids the potential for iatrogenic injury.
Segmental resection of the SMPV confluence is performed when the tumor is inseparable from the lateral wall of the SMV or portal vein. 239 Although an occasional
patient may have such a small area of venous involvement that a saphenous vein patch is an obvious choice, the majority of patients with involvement of the SMPV
confluence require segmental venous resection. The technical feasibility of portal vein resection was first reported by Fortner 255 in his large series of type I regional
pancreatectomies that included routine portal vein resection. More recently, surgeons have reported the safety of pancreatectomy with en bloc resection of the SMPV
confluence. 256,257 Fuhrman and colleagues 238 have demonstrated that invasion of the SMV or portal vein is not associated with histopathologic variables (margin and
lymph node positivity) that suggest a poor prognosis. Their data imply that venous involvement is a function of tumor location rather than an indicator of aggressive
tumor biology. Additional data from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center have confirmed that patient survival is not affected by the need for venous resection at the time
of pancreaticoduodenectomy. 258 In contrast to previous reports on venous resection, the preferred technique for resection of the SMPV confluence at M. D. Anderson
involves preservation of the splenic vein–portal vein junction and use of an internal jugular vein interposition graft placed between the SMV and portal vein. 195,239,257
It is important to emphasize the distinction between regional pancreatectomy and pancreaticoduodenectomy with segmental resection of the SMV or SMPV
confluence. Venous resection is not an attempt to improve en bloc lymphatic and soft tissue clearance, as is performed in regional pancreatectomy. It is unlikely that
larger local-regional resections (to the left of the SMA and celiac axis) in poorly selected patients with advanced disease will impact survival. 195,258 Venous resection
should be performed only in carefully selected patients who have tumor adherence to the SMV or SMPV confluence but no evidence of tumor extension to the SMA or
celiac axis. The rationale for venous resection and the anatomic difference between tumor invasion of venous and arterial structures have been reviewed. 238,239,258
Because the need for venous resection is unexpected in many patients and is discovered only after gastric and pancreatic transection, when nonresectional
procedures are no longer an option, surgeons who perform pancreaticoduodenectomies should be familiar with standard vascular techniques for resection and
reconstruction of the SMPV confluence.
PYLORUS PRESERVATION
Preservation of the antropyloroduodenal segment in combination with pancreaticoduodenectomy ( Fig. 33.4-3) was first described by Traverso and Longmire in
1978.259 Since then, increasing numbers of pancreatic surgeons have used this modification of the procedure, particularly for patients with benign disease or small
periampullary lesions. Proponents of the technique argue that preservation of the antropyloric pump mechanism results in improved long-term upper gastrointestinal
tract function with associated salutary nutritional sequelae. 132,135,260 Physiologic studies suggest that pylorus preservation decreases intestinal transit time, lessens
diarrhea (steatorrhea), normalizes glucose metabolism, and improves postoperative weight gain. 261,262 Detractors of pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy
counter that the reported improvements in gastrointestinal tract function and nutrition are small, if any, and that they come at the expense of an increased incidence of
delayed gastric emptying during the early postoperative period. 263,264 Clinically significant long-term gastrointestinal dysfunction occurs in very few patients after
standard pancreaticoduodenectomy with distal gastric resection. 261 Additionally, leaving the distal stomach and duodenum may compromise margins of excision,
prevent adequate peripyloric lymphadenectomy, and negatively impact patient survival. 130,263,265 Published data to date involve retrospective comparisons that have
yielded mixed results. Most investigators would agree that pylorus preservation should not be performed in patients with bulky tumors of the pancreatic head or with
duodenal tumors involving the first or second portions of the duodenum.

FIGURE 33.4-3. Illustration of the completed reconstruction after pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy.

However, a far greater body of literature exists on the use of pylorus preservation than on innovative, multimodality therapies for patients with localized pancreatic

cancer. The resection or retention of the pylorus is of much less significance than the proper selection of patients for pancreaticoduodenectomy and the status of the
retroperitoneal margin after tumor resection. For example, three reports advocating pylorus preservation for malignant pancreatic and periampullary cancers reported
positive resection margins in 25%, 29%, and 37% of patients. 132,135,266 In the presence of a positive margin of resection, patients do not survive long enough to receive
a potential nutritional benefit (if one exists) from pylorus preservation.
ADJUVANT INTRAOPERATIVE ELECTRON-BEAM RADIATION THERAPY
Despite the use of postoperative adjuvant EBRT and 5-FU, the incidence of disease recurrence in the tumor bed has been reported to be as high as 50%. 267 This rate
of local recurrence is likely due to the high incidence of residual macroscopic or microscopic disease at the resection margins and in the retroperitoneal soft tissues
after pancreaticoduodenectomy and to the inability of 40 to 50 Gy of EBRT to control this level of tumor burden. 134 IOERT, which delivers a single large dose of
radiation to the tumor bed at the time of surgery, has been used alone and in combination with postoperative EBRT to improve local control. With IOERT, the total
radiation dose delivered to a tumor or tumor bed can be increased over the dose that can be given by EBRT because sensitive normal tissues are displaced from the
radiation field during the surgical procedure. Furthermore, this single intraoperative dose is believed to be biologically equivalent to an external-beam radiation dose
at least two to three times greater given by means of conventional fractionation.
The data on the efficacy of pancreatic resection with IOERT alone or in combination with preoperative or postoperative EBRT are limited to retrospective or
prospective single-institution studies and one small randomized trial. 136,268,269,270,271 and 272 The only reported prospective, randomized, controlled clinical trial of IOERT
for resectable pancreatic cancer was performed at the U.S. National Cancer Institute beginning in 1980. 272 Twenty-four patients who underwent resection for
pancreatic adenocarcinoma were randomized to receive IOERT (20 Gy) to the bed of the resected pancreas or observation. Patients in the IOERT group who had
extrapancreatic tumor extension also received postoperative EBRT (45 to 55 Gy). Most patients had locally advanced disease that would be considered unresectable
by conventional criteria. Patients underwent extensive extirpative surgery to remove all gross evidence of the primary tumor; the procedures frequently required
vascular and adjacent organ resections, and this extent of surgical therapy resulted in considerable morbidity. The overall perioperative mortality rate was 27%, and
the morbidity rate was 71%; the mortality and morbidity did not differ significantly between the IOERT and observation groups. The median survival of patients who
received IOERT was 18 months, compared to 12 months for the observation group. Local recurrences occurred in all 12 patients (100%) in the observation group but
in only 4 (33%) of 12 patients who received IOERT. One patient who received IOERT remained disease-free more than 15 years after therapy. Because of the small
patient numbers, statistically significant survival differences were not reached between the IOERT and control groups.
More recently, investigators from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center studied a regimen that included preoperative chemoradiation and IOERT. Patients with
potentially resectable pancreatic cancer received preoperative EBRT (50.4 Gy in 28 fractions or 30 Gy in ten fractions) and concomitant protracted-infusion 5-FU (300
mg/m2/d) followed by pancreaticoduodenectomy and IOERT (10 to 20 Gy) to the resection bed. 139,149 Based on this group's experience, it appears that IOERT can be
delivered with minimal morbidity after preoperative chemoradiation and pancreaticoduodenectomy. The median survival duration in their most recent study was 25
months.149 Disease recurrence occurred in 70% of patients at a median follow-up of 37 months; 86% of recurrences were distant, and only 14% were local-regional.
The results of these studies show that IOERT can be combined safely with pancreaticoduodenectomy and contemporary chemoradiation protocols. Although local
control appears improved by IOERT, marked improvements in survival have not been demonstrated. At present, IOERT should be limited to investigative protocols.
RECONSTRUCTION
After pancreaticoduodenectomy with or without IOERT, gastrointestinal reconstruction is performed in a counterclockwise direction ( Fig. 33.4-4).251,273 The transected
jejunum is brought through a small incision in the transverse mesocolon to the right or left of the middle colic vessels, and a two-layer, end-to-side, duct-to-mucosa
pancreaticojejunostomy is performed over a small Silastic stent (if the pancreatic duct is not dilated). A two-layer anastomosis that invaginates the cut end of the
pancreas into the jejunum can be performed if the pancreatic duct is not suitable for a duct-to-mucosa anastomosis. However, we prefer a duct-to-mucosa
anastomosis. A single-layer biliary anastomosis is then completed, followed by an antecolic, end-to-side gastrojejunostomy constructed in two layers. Gastrostomy
and feeding jejunostomy tubes are placed using the Witzel technique, and two closed-suction drains are placed.

FIGURE 33.4-4. Illustration of pancreatic, biliary, and gastric reconstruction after standard pancreaticoduodenectomy. The remaining pancreas is anastomosed to the
jejunum; we prefer a direct duct-to-mucosa anastomosis of the pancreatic duct.

Gastrointestinal reconstruction after pancreaticoduodenectomy is associated with two recognized complications: leak at the pancreaticojejunostomy and delayed
gastric emptying. Anastomotic leak from the biliary and gastric anastomoses should be very uncommon. Initial techniques for gastrointestinal reconstruction after
pancreaticoduodenectomy involved simple closure of the pancreatic stump. Because of a high rate of pancreatic fistula formation, surgeons quickly switched to
implantation of the pancreatic remnant into the jejunum. 274 A more recent alternative is implantation of the pancreatic remnant into the posterior wall of the
stomach.275,276 and 277 Regardless of the technique used, results appear dependent on the experience of the surgeon. With greater experience, the incidence of
complications decreases.
Delayed gastric emptying is common after standard pancreaticoduodenectomy and may be more frequent with pylorus preservation. 278 The cause is multifactorial but
largely related to denervation of the upper gastrointestinal tract during resection of the pancreatic head and attached soft tissues and nerves to the right of the SMA.
Symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and postprandial fullness resolve in 4 to 12 weeks in virtually all patients. The routine placement of gastrostomy and jejunostomy
tubes at the time of surgery avoids needless patient morbidity due to temporary gastric emptying dysfunction. Patients can be discharged while receiving enteral
feeding (via the jejunostomy tube) and allowed to advance their oral diet as tolerated. In addition, such tube placement prevents the expense and potential
complications associated with intravenous hyperalimentation in patients who require prolonged hospitalization because of perioperative or postoperative
complications. Poor gastric emptying in the absence of other concomitant intraabdominal pathologic conditions should not be the cause of prolonged hospitalization.
TREATMENT DECISIONS: POTENTIALLY RESECTABLE DISEASE
The use of contrast-enhanced helical CT allows accurate assessment of local tumor resectability. High-quality CT with objective CT criteria for resectability has
replaced exploratory laparotomy as a means of assessing resectability. Pancreaticoduodenectomy should be considered only in patients with a good performance
status (Karnofsky scale, 70% or higher) and as part of a multimodality treatment program that includes either preoperative or postoperative chemoradiation. The
modest survival rates seen with current treatments (see Table 33.4-2) argue strongly for enrollment of all patients into clinical trials of new combinations of surgery,
chemoradiation, and newly developed systemic agents. Published perioperative mortality rates support the referral of patients with potentially resectable disease to
centers that are experienced with the operative management of pancreatic cancer and that perform at least nine major pancreatic resections per year. 244,248,249

PALLIATIVE METHODS OF BILIARY AND GASTRIC DECOMPRESSION
Debate over the best method of biliary decompression (surgical bypass or endoscopic stent) in patients with terminal pancreatic cancer stimulated a series of

prospective randomized trials. 171,172 and 173 These studies demonstrated that both methods are effective in relieving jauµndice. Stenting is associated with lower initial
morbidity and mortality rates and shorter hospital stays than operative bypass, but stent occlusion often results in the need for readmission to the hospital. Surgical
biliary bypass provides a durable means of biliary decompression, but with greater initial morbidity. It is reasonable to assume that surgical complications are higher in
patients with advanced disease and a poor performance status. In contrast, stent occlusion is more likely in patients with locally advanced or low-volume metastatic
disease who survive long enough to experience this complication. Logic argues strongly for a selective approach to biliary decompression based on an accurate
assessment of performance status and tumor burden. 279
Patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer due to locally advanced or metastatic disease have a median survival of 6 months 280; this duration of survival can be
quite variable, ranging from 3 to 14 months depending on performance status and extent of disease. Laparotomy in this patient group is associated with a mortality
rate of 2.5% to 5.0%, a morbidity rate of 20% to 30%, and a mean hospital stay of 10 to 14 days. 161,280,281 and 282 If one assumes that satisfactory recovery requires an
additional 2 to 4 weeks, the patient with unresectable disease has invested 10% to 20% of overall survival time in achieving biliary drainage. Therefore, the incentive
for the development of a less invasive method of biliary decompression is obvious. Technological advances in stent construction have now made endoscopic stent
placement the procedure of choice in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. 174,283,284 In patients with metastatic disease, whose survival duration is rarely longer
than 6 to 9 months, biliary obstruction should be managed with outpatient endobiliary stent placement; this avoids the morbidity, hospital stay, and prolonged recovery
period associated with operative biliary bypass. Stent occlusion is minimized with the use of large-caliber polyethylene stents (10.0 or 11.5 Fr.) without side holes;
these stents reduce sludge and improve patency compared with smaller stents. Expandable 10-mm metal stents further decrease bacterial colonization and biofilm
formation, resulting in improved patency compared with polyethylene stents 285,286; however, that improved patency comes at a higher initial cost.
Patients with locally advanced, nonmetastatic pancreatic cancer have a median survival of 10 to 14 months (with current chemotherapy and chemoradiation
regimens); endoscopic biliary decompression (even with an expandable metal stent) is associated with an increased incidence of stent occlusion as survival duration
increases. Currently consensus has not been reached on how to manage an obstructed bile duct in patients with locally advanced, unresectable, nonmetastatic
pancreatic cancer who have a good performance status. The desire to avoid palliative surgery (biliary bypass) that provides no anticancer therapy is balanced by the
need for durable biliary decompression without the risk of recurrent cholangitis secondary to stent occlusion. This controversy is best illustrated by two publications
from the same institution: one supports endobiliary stenting, 174 whereas the other supports operative bypass. 279
We use a selective approach to biliary decompression. Outpatient endoscopic stenting is performed in all patients who are not candidates for
pancreaticoduodenectomy. In patients with a life expectancy of 3 to 5 months (i.e., those with poor performance status or liver or peritoneal metastases), an 11.5-Fr.
polyethylene stent is placed. In patients with a life expectancy of 6 to 12 months (i.e., those with locally advanced, nonmetastatic disease), a self-expanding metal
stent is preferred. However, patients who develop early stent occlusion or migration or who by clinical criteria appear to do poorly with endoscopic biliary
decompression are quickly referred for operative biliary bypass. A multidisciplinary approach to these patients is critical—the medical oncologist, gastroenterologist,
and surgeon must communicate and avoid overly dogmatic approaches to palliative care.
Operative biliary bypass is routinely performed in patients who are brought to the operating room for planned pancreaticoduodenectomy and are found to have locally
advanced or extrapancreatic metastatic disease. In such patients, a biliary-enteric bypass is performed. Previous studies have demonstrated no difference in outcome
between cholecystojejunostomy and choledochojejunostomy.161 However, the gallbladder should not be used for biliary decompression in the setting of acute or
chronic gallbladder disease, cephalad tumor extension, or prolonged stent placement before surgery. In patients with a previous endoscopic stent, hypertrophy and
fibrosis of the wall of the bile duct may make the cystic duct–common bile duct junction unsuitable for biliary decompression. Our choice for biliary bypass at the time
of surgery is a Roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy. The gallbladder is removed and the common bile duct transected. The endoscopic stent (if present) is removed, the
distal bile duct is closed, and an end-to-side choledochojejunostomy is created with a single layer of interrupted monofilament sutures.
In patients with unresectable disease, laparoscopic cholecystojejunostomy represents another alternative for biliary decompression. 287,288,289 and 290 We use this
technique in patients with locally advanced, nonmetastatic disease in whom attempted endoscopic stenting has been unsuccessful. Tumors of the uncinate process or
the inferior aspect of the pancreatic head that extend to the root of the mesentery often deform the ampulla of Vater, making endoscopic cannulation difficult.
Laparoscopic biliary decompression is an attractive option in these patients. Because laparoscopically assisted cholecystojejunostomy depends on a patent cystic
duct–common bile duct junction, it is important not to consider this form of biliary decompression in patients with large tumors that extend cephalad to the porta
hepatis.
Patients with symptomatic jaundice and ascites present a unique technical challenge. A subset of these patients have such advanced disease (and poor performance
status) that pain control and hospice care are all that is indicated. For the occasional patient who presents with jaundice and the rapid onset of ascites and requires
palliative treatment, we prefer endoscopic stent placement followed by early peritoneovenous shunting if an initial attempt at diuretic therapy is unsuccessful. If
endoscopic stenting is not technically possible, laparoscopic cholecystojejunostomy is a reasonable alternative in the absence of high-volume carcinomatosis.
Transhepatic biliary drainage with an internal-external catheter is not advised in patients with ascites because the ascitic fluid leaks around the catheter at the skin
entrance site. In patients with malignant ascites, the surgeon should avoid using transabdominal catheters and making large abdominal incisions because of the risk
of ascitic leak.
The subject of prophylactic gastrojejunostomy is not as relevant to the current surgical management of patients with pancreatic cancer as it was before the 1990s.
Accurate preoperative imaging has increased resectability rates so that fewer patients are found to have unresectable disease at surgery. Advocates of prophylactic
gastrojejunostomy state that the procedure can be performed safely, is not associated with postoperative delayed gastric emptying, and prevents subsequent gastric
outlet obstruction in 10% to 20% of patients. 161,280 Detractors argue that concomitant gastric bypass at the time of therapeutic biliary bypass significantly increases
operative morbidity, that the incidence of subsequent gastric outlet obstruction (in patients who receive only a biliary bypass) is much less than 10%, and that, if
clinically evident gastric outlet obstruction does occur, it is usually a manifestation of end-stage disease. 281,291,292 and 293 Lillemoe et al. 294 from Johns Hopkins University
reported on a prospective randomized trial of prophylactic gastrojejunostomy in patients with adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head and periampullary region.
Patients found to have unresectable disease and not to have intraoperative evidence of impending gastric outlet obstruction (such patients were excluded from
analysis) at the time of laparotomy were randomly assigned to receive either a prophylactic gastrojejunostomy or no further surgery. Subsequent gastric outlet
obstruction developed in 8 (19%) of the 43 patients who did not receive a gastric bypass, compared to 0 of 44 patients who received a gastrojejunostomy.
Postoperative delayed gastric emptying occurred in 2% of patients in both groups, and the mean survival duration (8.3 months) was identical in both groups.
Furthermore, no perioperative deaths occurred, and the mean hospital stay was approximately 8 days; again, no difference was noted between groups. The authors
concluded that a retrocolic gastrojejunostomy should be performed routinely when a patient with pancreatic or periampullary cancer is found at operation to have
unresectable disease. It appears that high-volume referral centers can perform palliative surgical biliary and gastric bypass procedures with low morbidity and
mortality; however, these results may not be easily translated to low-volume centers with less experience. For example, a review of patients at 74 Department of
Veterans Affairs hospitals from 1987 to 1991 concluded that prophylactic gastric bypass should be performed in patients with locally advanced, nonmetastatic
pancreatic cancer, but the 30-day operative mortality rate (15% to 20%) was unacceptably high for palliative surgery in patients with such a short anticipated
survival. 295
In contrast to the data from Johns Hopkins University, Espat et al. 296 from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center reported a low incidence of gastric outlet
obstruction in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. These investigators reported the longitudinal follow-up of 155 patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma who
were found to have locally advanced or metastatic disease at the time of staging laparoscopy (for presumed localized disease by CT). The median survival was 6.2
months for those with metastatic disease and 7.8 months for those with locally advanced disease; these survival durations support the authors' contention that the
patients did not have high-volume metastatic disease at the time of laparoscopy. At a median follow-up of 6 months (81% of patients had died of disease), only 3 (2%)
of 155 patients had undergone a subsequent open surgical procedure. Gastrojejunostomy for symptomatic gastric outlet obstruction was performed in two of these
three patients. Two additional patients underwent elective gastric bypass (one was performed laparoscopically) at the time of biliary bypass. One additional patient
required a percutaneous gastrostomy tube for poor gastric emptying during the terminal phase of his disease. Raikar et al. 174 from the Mayo Clinic also reported a low
incidence of subsequent gastric outlet obstruction in patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer who had endoscopic biliary decompression. In their study, only 1
(3%) of 34 patients treated with endoscopic biliary decompression required surgical bypass for gastric outlet obstruction. These two nonrandomized studies do not
support the practice of routine prophylactic gastric bypass.
The apparent differences in the incidences of gastric outlet obstruction in the above studies are not readily explained. In general, we do not perform prophylactic
surgery in patients with pancreatic cancer. If a patient is found to have unresectable disease during surgery for planned pancreaticoduodenectomy, we consider
gastrojejunostomy when clinical symptoms or anatomic findings suggest impending obstruction. However, in patients with locally advanced or limited metastatic
disease with good performance status, the Johns Hopkins data 294 (based on a prospective randomized trial) would support the creation of a retrocolic

gastrojejunostomy.

TREATMENT OF LOCALLY ADVANCED DISEASE
Approximately 40% of the 28,600 patients diagnosed with ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas in 1999 presented with unresectable but nonmetastatic disease.
Because these patients' tumors are unresectable by a Whipple procedure or total pancreatectomy owing to invasion of the portal or mesenteric vessels and they have
no clinically demonstrable metastases, radiotherapeutic approaches frequently have been used. These approaches have included EBRT, with and without 5-FU
chemotherapy; IOERT; and, more recently, EBRT with new chemotherapeutic (radiosensitizing) agents.
EXTERNAL-BEAM IRRADIATION WITH OR WITHOUT 5-FLUOROURACIL
In all except one study, conventional EBRT combined with 5-FU chemotherapy has been shown to improve survival in patients with locally advanced unresectable
pancreatic cancer compared to irradiation alone or chemotherapy alone ( Table 33.4-8).151,201,297,298 The most favorable median survival duration and 2-year survival
rate for EBRT plus 5-FU were approximately 10 months and 12%, respectively. When interpreting the GITSG trials of this combination, it is important to remember
that all patients were entered in the GITSG studies after laparotomy, at which time the disease was deemed unresectable by the operating surgeon. The significant
morbidity reported with palliative pancreatic surgery 295 suggests that only patients with a high performance status could have recovered rapidly enough to be eligible
for these studies. Thus, although surgical staging provided a more uniform study population, it also introduced significant selection bias: Only rapidly recovering
patients were considered for treatment. Comparison of future findings to these data must take into account this selection bias.

TABLE 33.4-8. Prospective Randomized Studies of Radiation Therapy and Chemotherapy for Locally Advanced Unresectable Pancreatic Cancer

Because of the limited tolerance of normal tissue in the upper abdomen (liver, kidney, spinal cord, and bowel) to EBRT, total doses of only 45 to 54 Gy, in 25 to 30
fractions, have usually been given. For an unresectable lesion, this dose of radiation is inadequate, as demonstrated by the high rates of tumor progression and poor
survival seen in both prospective and retrospective studies. For example, the Mayo Clinic reported a local failure rate of 72% for 122 patients with unresectable
pancreatic cancer treated with an EBRT dose of 40 to 60 Gy. 299
Because surgical resection of the primary tumor remains the only potentially curative treatment for pancreatic cancer, preoperative irradiation has been studied to
assess its ability to convert locally unresectable pancreatic cancer to resectable disease ( Table 33.4-9).230,300,301,302,303,304 and 305 In a study from the New England
Deaconess Hospital, 304 16 patients with locally advanced unresectable pancreatic cancer were treated with 45 Gy of EBRT and infusional 5-FU to enhance
resectability. Of these 16 patients, only two (13%) were able to undergo resection. Similarly, investigators from Duke University reported that only 2 (8%) of 25
patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer treated with 45 Gy of EBRT and 5-FU (with or without cisplatin or mitomycin C) subsequently underwent complete
resection with negative margins. 300 These and other studies (see Table 33.4-9) indicate that it is unlikely that neoadjuvant chemoradiation can convert unresectable
lesions to resectable ones and thereby increase the number of patients potentially cured with combined-modality therapy. It is important to remember that as one
loosens the definition of a locally advanced pancreatic cancer, results appear more optimistic. If, however, one maintains a strict (CT) definition of locally advanced
pancreatic cancer that includes only arterial involvement (low-density tumor inseparable from the SMA or celiac axis on contrast-enhanced CT) or SMV or SMPV
confluence occlusion, successful down-staging to allow complete surgical resection will be rare with currently available chemotherapy or chemoradiation techniques.

TABLE 33.4-9. Surgical Resection after Chemoradiation for Locally Advanced Pancreatic Cancer

INTRAOPERATIVE ELECTRON-BEAM RADIATION THERAPY
To enhance the local-regional tumor control achieved by conventional EBRT and chemotherapy, specialized radiation therapy techniques that increase the dose of
radiation to the desired tumor volume have been used in an attempt to improve local tumor control without increasing normal tissue morbidity. These include iodine
125 implants or intraoperative electrons as a boost dose in combination with EBRT and chemotherapy. A lower incidence of local failure in most series and improved
median survival in some have been reported with these techniques when compared with conventional EBRT ( Table 33.4-10),299,306,307,308 and 309 but it is uncertain
whether the differences are due to superior treatment or to case selection.

TABLE 33.4-10. External-Beam and Intraoperative Radiation Therapy for Locally Advanced Unresectable Pancreatic Cancer

In the Massachusetts General Hospital 308 and Mayo Clinic studies 308 combining EBRT and IOERT for locally advanced pancreatic cancer, local tumor control was
improved; however, the median survival was only approximately 12 months, and the 2-year survival rate remained approximately 20%. Most patients developed liver
metastases, peritoneal seeding, or both. Although slight gains in survival may be achieved by improving local tumor control, the high incidence of distant metastases
precludes significant improvements in long-term survival duration with IOERT.
NEW AGENTS COMBINED WITH RADIATION THERAPY
Because of the high incidence of hepatic and peritoneal metastases and the poor results with standard chemotherapy, current and future research efforts include
evaluation of EBRT with new radiosensitizing agents (paclitaxel and gemcitabine). Interest in these agents is based on both their systemic cytotoxic effects and their
radiosensitizing properties. In radiobiologic models, paclitaxel results in enhanced radiosensitization through tumor reoxygenation after apoptotic clearance of
paclitaxel-damaged cells. In a phase I trial at Brown University 303 evaluating paclitaxel and 50 Gy of EBRT for patients with unresectable pancreatic and gastric
cancers, the maximum tolerated dose of weekly paclitaxel with conventional irradiation was 50 mg/m 2. The response rate was 31% among 13 evaluable pancreatic
cancer patients. In the Brown University phase II study, 310 which administered 50 Gy of EBRT with 50 mg/m2/week of paclitaxel, 6 (33%) of 18 evaluable pancreatic
cancer patients have had a partial response; stable disease has been observed in seven patients (39%); only one patient (6%) has had local tumor progression after
completion of treatment; and four (22%) have developed distant metastases. These data have led to the initiation of an RTOG phase II study evaluating paclitaxel with
EBRT for patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer.
Gemcitabine also has been the focus of an investigation in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. Burris and colleagues 223 randomized 160 previously untreated
patients with advanced and metastatic pancreatic cancer to receive either gemcitabine or 5-FU. Patients who received gemcitabine had a statistically improved
median survival, 1-year survival rate, and clinical benefit compared to patients who received 5-FU. In radiobiologic models, gemcitabine also has been observed to be
a potent radiosensitizer, likely because it depletes intracellular deoxynucleoside triphosphates. At present, numerous investigators are pursuing phase I and II studies
combining EBRT with gemcitabine. Investigators from Wake Forest University and the University of North Carolina have reported the results of a phase I trial 230 of
twice-weekly gemcitabine and 50.4 Gy of concurrent upper abdominal EBRT in 19 patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer. In this study, the maximum tolerated
dose of gemcitabine was 40 mg/m2. At this dose level, gemcitabine was well tolerated. Of eight patients with a minimum follow-up of 12 months, three remain alive,
and one of the three has no evidence of disease progression. On the basis of these data, a phase II Cancer and Leukemia Group B study of EBRT and twice-weekly
gemcitabine is currently accruing patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. At the Massachusetts General Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and
Brigham and Women's Hospital, a phase I/II study (unpublished) is under way examining preoperative EBRT (50.4 Gy) to the pancreas with continuous-infusion 5-FU
and weekly gemcitabine for locally advanced pancreatic cancer. If no evidence of distant metastases is found at the time of restaging after completion of
chemoradiation, patients proceed to laparotomy and IOERT to the primary tumor.
RADIATION THERAPY TECHNIQUES
For patients undergoing surgery, clips should be placed to mark the extent of the lesion for postoperative EBRT. Used sparingly (e.g., a single small vascular clip
placed in each location to mark superior, inferior, lateral, and medial margins), small clips produce only minimal interference on CT scans. Titanium clips produce less
CT interference but sometimes cannot be located on lateral simulation x-ray films because of their lesser density. During simulation and treatment, the patient should
be supine. An initial set of anteroposterior and cross-table lateral x-ray films is obtained after injection of renal contrast medium to identify operative clips and renal
position relative to the field center. Additional films can be obtained with contrast medium in the stomach and duodenal loop.
Radiation therapy for locally advanced pancreatic cancer generally involves multiple-field, fractionated, external-beam techniques with high-energy photons to deliver
45 to 54 Gy in 1.8-Gy fractions to unresected or residual tumor (as defined by CT and clips) and to at-risk nodal areas. For lesions in the head of the pancreas, major
at-risk lymph node groups include the pancreaticoduodenal, porta hepatis, celiac, and suprapancreatic nodes. The suprapancreatic lymph node group is included with
the body of the pancreas in the radiation field to encompass a 3- to 5-cm margin beyond gross disease; however, more than two-thirds of the left kidney is excluded
from the anteroposterior-posteroanterior field because at least 50% of the right kidney needs to be included in this field to treat the entire pancreatic head and
duodenum. The entire duodenal loop with a margin of grossly uninvolved tissue is included because pancreatic head lesions may invade the medial wall of the
duodenum and place the entire circumference at risk.
For pancreatic body or tail lesions, at least 50% of the left kidney may need to be included in the radiation field to achieve adequate margins and to include lymph
node groups at risk (i.e., lateral suprapancreatic and splenic hilum nodes). Because inclusion of the entire duodenal loop is not indicated with body or tail lesions, at
least two-thirds of the right kidney can be preserved; with tailored blocks, it is usually possible to do this and still cover the pancreaticoduodenal and porta hepatis
nodes adequately.
For pancreatic head lesions, the superior field extent is at the middle or upper portion of the T11 vertebral body to achieve adequate margins along the celiac vessels
(T12-L1). The superior field extent is occasionally more superior for pancreatic body lesions to obtain an adequate margin around the primary lesion.
For the lateral fields, the anterior field margin is 1.5 to 2.0 cm beyond gross disease. The posterior margin is at least 1.5 cm behind the anterior portion of the
vertebral body to allow adequate margins around paraaortic nodes, which are at risk for posterior tumor extension of head or body lesions. The dose to the lateral
fields is usually limited to 18 to 20 Gy because a moderate volume of kidney or liver may be in the fields.
After resection, anteroposterior-posteroanterior and lateral fields are designed on the basis of preresection CT tumor volumes, operative clip placement, and
postoperative CT lymph node volumes. The only border that can be reduced is the anterior border of the lateral fields, because the primary tumor has been resected.
This border is determined by vascular or nodal boundaries (porta hepatis, superior mesenteric, and celiac arteries) as demonstrated on CT.
Three-dimensional conformal therapy is currently being investigated in patients with pancreatic cancer. Figure 33.4-5 illustrates a multifield technique and composite
isodose distribution for a patient with an unresectable pancreatic head cancer. Preliminary studies indicate that five or six conformal fields can be designed to improve
dose-volume characteristics over those achieved with conventional four-field treatment designs, but the posterior wall of the stomach and the medial wall of the
duodenum cannot be excluded from the high-dose volume. 311

FIGURE 33.4-5. A multifield radiation technique (A) and composite isodose distributions (B) for a patient with an unresectable adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic
head.

TREATMENT DECISIONS: LOCALLY ADVANCED, NONMETASTATIC DISEASE
Patients with clear evidence of encasement of the celiac axis or SMA or occlusion of the SMPV confluence on contrast-enhanced helical CT do not require laparotomy
to confirm that the tumor is unresectable; cytologic confirmation of malignancy can be achieved with EUS- or CT-guided FNA. This fundamental advance in the
pretreatment diagnosis of pancreatic tumors can improve the quality of patient survival and reduce health care costs by avoiding the morbidity and prolonged recovery
associated with palliative pancreatic cancer surgery. Published data have suggested an increased survival duration for patients treated with chemoradiation, but this
benefit is limited largely to patients with higher performance status. In selected patients, aggressive treatment programs consisting of EBRT and chemotherapy may
result in a median survival of approximately 12 months and a 2-year survival rate of 20%, although long-term survivors are rare. A program of chemoradiation is
justified in fully ambulatory patients with locally advanced disease who have minimal symptoms. Systemic therapy with gemcitabine also represents a reasonable
alternative in these patients. For patients with poor performance status, chemoradiation is probably not indicated. Current pharmacologic and interventional
techniques for pain control, including percutaneous injection of alcohol into the celiac plexus, have proven highly successful in patients with pancreatic cancer. 312
Furthermore, adequate pain control improves performance status and quality of life, which may translate into increased length of life. 313 The limited therapeutic
options available for patients with locally advanced disease and the modest impact of current treatments on survival rates provide the rationale for the entry of these
patients into trials examining novel systemic agents.

TREATMENT OF METASTATIC AND RECURRENT DISEASE
The early emergence of metastatic disease in patients with exocrine pancreatic cancer suggests that systemic therapy (chemotherapy) should play a major role in the
management of this disease. However, only marginal success has been achieved in identifying effective systemic therapies for pancreatic cancer. Most studies of
single-agent or combination chemotherapy in patients with advanced adenocarcinoma of the pancreas have documented low response rates and little reproducible
impact on patient survival or quality of life. Response rates as high as 15% to 30% occasionally seen in pilot studies of novel agents or combinations have generally
been difficult to reproduce in larger trials, suggesting that patient selection often accounts for apparent differences between study results. The inherent difficulty in
accurately applying bidimensional measurements to local pancreatic masses and the problem of interobserver variations in the measurement of metastatic disease
may also contribute to the poor reproducibility of clinical trial findings in patients with locally advanced or metastatic pancreatic cancer. 314,315
Because of the large volume of published material on this disease, we have chosen to present the results of important new studies and approaches to therapy;
comprehensive reviews of the results of chemotherapy for pancreatic cancer are available, 316,317,318,319 and 320 and a previous edition of this text provides a
comprehensive review of past chemotherapy trials. 321
SINGLE-AGENT CHEMOTHERAPY
The thymidylate synthase inhibitor 5-FU remains the most extensively evaluated chemotherapeutic agent for pancreatic cancer. In 212 cases collected from the
literature in the pre-CT era, the response rate to 5-FU was 28%. 322 However, despite numerous trials, the optimal dose and schedule of 5-FU have not been clearly
defined. Two of the most commonly used schedules are continuous infusion of 1000 mg/m 2/d for 5 days or bolus infusion of 400 to 500 mg/m 2/d for 5 days. 318,323,324 A
highly potent and specific thymidylate synthase inhibitor, Tomudex, has been evaluated in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. However, despite its potent
inhibition of thymidylate synthase and other biochemical advantages over 5-FU, clinical trial results have been disappointing, with only 2 of 42 patients achieving an
objective response. 325 Additional regimens based on protracted infusions of 5-FU continue to be explored but have not demonstrated any major effect on the outcome
of the disease. 326,327 The new oral 5-FU prodrugs (capecitabine, uracil-tegafur, and S-1) have not yet been comprehensively tested in pancreatic cancer, but given the
limited impact of intravenous 5-FU on this disease, expectations for these agents are low.
Most of the cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents studied during the 1990s have demonstrated little objective evidence of significant activity against advanced pancreatic
cancer (Table 33.4-11).222,328,329,330,331,332,333,334,335,336,338 and 339 Inactive drugs that have undergone evaluation during this period include iproplatin, 328 trimetrexate,329
edatrexate,330 fazarabine, 331 diaziquone,332 mitoguazone,332 and amonafide.333 Ifosfamide, evaluated in the 1980s, showed initial promise, with six partial responses in
29 patients with advanced disease. 340 A subsequent phase II trial that used ifosfamide as a continuous infusion with mesna yielded three partial responses, one
complete response, and six minor responses in 25 evaluable patients. 341 However, a follow-up study did not confirm these favorable results. 342

TABLE 33.4-11. Single-Agent Chemotherapy Trials in Patients with Advanced Pancreatic Cancer

More recently, the semisynthetic taxanes paclitaxel and docetaxel have been studied in patients with locally advanced and metastatic pancreatic cancer. In vitro,
docetaxel demonstrated significant activity against human pancreatic cancer cell lines. 343 In a subsequent clinical trial, Rougier and coworkers 334 at the Institut
Gustave-Roussy reported five objective responses (29%) in 17 patients with hepatic metastases. However, toxic effects were substantial and included grade 3 or 4
neutropenia in all patients and severe edema in 13%. In three patients, the edema was so severe that therapy had to be discontinued. Three confirmatory phase II
trials failed to confirm the initial response findings. 335,344,345 Similarly, paclitaxel, even when administered using an aggressive schedule with granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor, had only minimal efficacy against advanced pancreatic cancer. 315
Novel analogues of the topoisomerase I inhibitor camptothecin also have undergone evaluation in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. Topotecan, administered
once daily for 5 days or using a 21-day continuous infusion schedule, was ineffective. 337,338,346,347 Irinotecan (CPT-11) was evaluated in 34 patients by the EORTC
Early Clinical Trials group. 339 Irinotecan was administered intravenously over 30 minutes at a dose of 350 mg/m 2 every 3 weeks; objective partial responses were
documented in only three patients, with a median survival for the entire group of 5 months.
Gemcitabine is a deoxycytidine analogue with structural and metabolic similarities to cytarabine. 348 As a prodrug, gemcitabine must be phosphorylated to its active
metabolites gemcitabine diphosphate and gemcitabine triphosphate (dFdCTP). In both preclinical and clinical testing, gemcitabine demonstrated activity in solid
tumors greater than that of cytarabine. 349 These observations can be potentially explained by the following properties of gemcitabine: (1) It is three to four times more
lipophilic than cytarabine, resulting in greater membrane permeability and cellular uptake; (2) it has higher affinity for deoxycytidine kinase; and (3) the intracellular
retention of dFdCTP is long. 350 In the initial multicenter trial, 222 objective responses to gemcitabine were documented in only 5 (11%) of 44 patients with advanced
pancreatic cancer, but the investigators noted frequent subjective symptomatic benefits, often in the absence of an objective tumor response. Based on these
observations, two subsequent trials of gemcitabine in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer have been completed. In one randomized trial, 223 gemcitabine was
compared to 5-FU in previously untreated patients. Patients treated with gemcitabine had a median survival of 5.65 months, compared to 4.41 months ( P = .0025) in
those treated with 5-FU. Twenty-four percent of patients treated with gemcitabine were alive at 9 months, compared to 6% of patients treated with 5-FU. In addition,
more clinically meaningful effects on disease-related symptoms (pain control, performance status, weight gain) were seen with gemcitabine (23.8% of patients) than
with 5-FU (4.8% of patients). Similar systemic effects and demonstrable disease responses were documented in patients who were treated with gemcitabine after
experiencing disease progression while receiving 5-FU. 351 These results have helped gemcitabine to become the accepted first-line therapy for patients with

advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma in the United States, although this approach is not necessarily shared worldwide. 352
During the early phase II trials of weekly gemcitabine in chemotherapy-naive patients, it became clear that much higher doses could be safely administered (using
30-minute bolus infusions) than were tolerated in patients who had received multiple prior chemotherapies. However, previous cellular pharmacologic studies of this
agent suggested that simply increasing the dose administered over 30 minutes may not increase cytotoxicity or improve gemcitabine's therapeutic index. During the
early clinical experience in patients with solid tumors, dFdCTP levels were measured in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and showed that the rate of gemcitabine
phosphorylation, like that of cytarabine, was subject to saturation kinetics. 221,353 The concentration of dFdCTP in the circulating mononuclear cells increased in
proportion to the gemcitabine dose between 35 and 250 mg/m 2, but further increments in cellular dFdCTP were not observed at higher doses (350 to 1000 mg/m 2);
instead, the plasma gemcitabine concentrations rose to more than 20 nmol/L, suggesting saturation of gemcitabine 5'-phosphate accumulation. The rate of dFdCTP
accumulation and the peak cellular concentration were highest at a dose rate of 350 mg/m 2 per 30 minutes (approximately 10 mg/m2/min), during which steady-state
gemcitabine levels of 15 to 20 nmol/L were achieved in plasma. 353 Similar results were found in a pilot trial of gemcitabine in leukemia patients in which dFdCTP
levels were measured in circulating malignant cells. 354 A more comprehensive phase I trial 355 in leukemia patients showed that a gemcitabine dose rate of 10
mg/m2/min achieved a mean steady-state gemcitabine level of 26.5 nmol/L and was sufficient to maximize the rate of dFdCTP accumulation in circulating leukemic
cells.
The most commonly applied approach to dose intensification in phase II studies of gemcitabine was to maintain the weekly schedule and increase the dose
administered over 30 minutes.356 However, because the plasma levels of gemcitabine achieved using this approach are well above 20 nmol/L, this strategy is not
likely to increase intracellular levels of the active metabolite dFdCTP or improve efficacy. The pharmacodynamic relationships documented through the studies just
described suggest that increasing the infusion time while holding the dose rate constant increases intracellular levels of the active metabolites gemcitabine
diphosphate and dFdCTP and thus achieves the goal of dose intensification. To establish the feasibility of this approach, a phase I study 357,358 of gemcitabine was
conducted in patients with advanced solid tumors whereby dose escalation was achieved by increasing the duration of the weekly gemcitabine infusions while
maintaining the dose rate at 10 mg/m2/min. A subsequent randomized phase II trial 232 in patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer suggested that short infusions (10
mg/m2/min) of gemcitabine may be more effective than the standard 30-minute bolus technique.
Given gemcitabine's manageable toxicity profile and favorable intracellular pharmacology, gemcitabine-based combinations are also under active evaluation. 359,360
Early trials have combined gemcitabine with 5-FU, 361,362 cisplatin, 363,364 docetaxel,365,366 and 367 paclitaxel,368 epirubicin, 369 and marimastat370 (Table 33.4-12).

TABLE 33.4-12. Gemcitabine -Based Combination Chemotherapy Trials in Patients with Advanced Pancreatic Cancer

Despite the encouraging results with gemcitabine and gemcitabine-based combinations, the median survival for patients with metastatic disease continues to be less
than 6 months, with very few patients achieving long-term disease stabilization. Although two trials have supported the superiority of chemotherapy over supportive
care, 371,372 some of the effects attributed to chemotherapy may not be substantially different from what can be achieved with aggressive supportive care alone. The
study of novel chemotherapeutic agents based on the evolving understanding of the pathobiology of pancreatic cancer must continue.
MODULATION OF 5-FLUOROURACIL
Interest remains in the possibility of increasing the activity and therapeutic index of 5-FU by the use of biochemical modulators. N-(Phosphonoacetyl)- L-aspartate
disodium (PALA) depletes uridine nucleotide pools by inhibiting aspartate transcarbamoylase, favoring incorporation of 5-FU nucleotide metabolites into RNA and
thereby potentiating the antitumor activity of 5-FU. Administering methotrexate before PALA and 5-FU results in increased formation of fluorouridine monophosphate.
A study by Morrell et al. 373 using a weekly schedule of PALA at a dose of 250 mg/m 2 followed 24 hours later by a 24-hour continuous infusion of 5-FU (2600 mg/m 2) in
patients with advanced pancreatic cancer was associated with severe toxicity, including one death, and only one response. A similar study demonstrated less toxicity
but also no benefit from the use of PALA plus 5-FU compared with 5-FU alone. 374 The addition of methotrexate or 6-methylmercaptopurine riboside also provided no
benefit over 5-FU alone. 375,376
Regimens that rely on the modulation of 5-FU and prolong inhibition of thymidylate synthase have demonstrated efficacy against colon cancer but have shown little
activity against pancreatic cancer. Prospective clinical trials in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer have evaluated high-dose leucovorin (500 mg/m 2),
administered daily or as a continuous infusion for 6 days, in combination with 5-FU. 377,378 The daily dose of 5-FU ranged from 375 mg/m 2 to 600 mg/m2. Objective
response rates averaged less than 10%, and toxicity was often significant. The substitution of 5-methyltetrahydrofolate for leucovorin also failed to demonstrate
clinically meaningful biochemical modulation of 5-FU. 379 Thus, despite some evidence to the contrary, 371,380 the current consensus is that the addition of leucovorin to
5-FU provides no therapeutic advantage over single-agent 5-FU in advanced pancreatic cancer.
Another potential modulator of 5-FU is interferon-a, with or without leucovorin. 381,382,383 and 384 Scheithauer et al. 385 combined 5-FU (20 mg/kg on day 3) with interferon-a
(10 × 10 6 U/d for 3 days) and leucovorin (200 mg on day 3). The observed response rate (4 of 32) and median duration of survival (5.5 months) were no different than
with 5-FU alone. Gattani et al. 386 used three potential biomodulators—cisplatin, leucovorin, and methotrexate—in an effort to enhance the cytotoxicity of 5-FU. Six
responses were seen in 24 patients with advanced pancreatic cancer, but mucositis occurred in more than one-half of the study population. Thus, the results from
clinical trials to date have not demonstrated any reproducible benefit of 5-FU modulation in patients with pancreatic cancer.
HORMONAL THERAPY
Johnson and Corbishley 387 were the first to note that pancreatic tumors contain sex steroid hormone receptors, stimulating interest in a hormonal approach to the
management of pancreatic cancer. This interest continues as investigators refine their understanding of the hormonally controlled signal transduction pathways that
control cellular proliferation. 388,389 and 390 Early research in this area demonstrated that serum testosterone concentrations were lower in both men and women with
pancreatic cancer than in patients with other cancers or healthy controls. 391,392 and 393 Laboratory evidence that exocrine pancreatic cancers are sensitive to
gastrointestinal hormones, sex steroids, and growth factors led to the use of hormonal manipulation in patients with pancreatic cancer. 394,395,396 and 397 Cyproterone
acetate, an antiandrogen, inhibited the growth of human pancreatic xenografts in nude mice, 398 and a luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone (LHRH) analogue,
D-trp-6-LHRH, induced regression of nitrosamine-induced pancreatic cancers in hamsters. 399 When this analogue was combined with RC-160, an experimental
somatostatin analogue, the same growth inhibition was observed. 400 Another somatostatin analogue, SMS-201-995, also demonstrated in vivo inhibition of human
adenocarcinoma cell lines. 401 These laboratory observations stimulated clinical trials evaluating LHRH agonists, growth factor inhibitors (octreotide), 402,403 and 404
tamoxifen, and more recently, flutamide405,406 in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. Consistent with the cytostatic effect of hormonal therapy, objective
responses were not seen; median survival duration ranged from 3 to 8 months. 405,407,408,409,410,411,412,413,414,415,416,417 and 418 The potential cytostatic effects of tamoxifen
continue to be studied in the laboratory. 419
Several uncontrolled clinical studies have suggested improved survival in patients with pancreatic cancer treated with tamoxifen, 407,408,420,421 yet other studies have not

confirm this observation. 414,415 and 416 A case-control study involving 80 patients did suggest a survival advantage for patients treated with tamoxifen. 409 However, in a
prospective, randomized, double-blind trial, pancreatic cancer patients receiving tamoxifen had a median survival of 115 days compared to 122 days for the
placebo-treated patients; 8% of patients were alive at 1 year in both groups. 415 A small trial reported by Crowson et al. 410 using CT to evaluate tumor response also
demonstrated no benefit with tamoxifen. Studies with octreotide, 417 steroids, and LHRH agonists, 411,422 as well as combinations of these agents, 403,412,413 have not
shown an increase in survival for patients with pancreatic cancer. Likewise, a pilot study of MK329, a cholecystokinin antagonist, in 18 patients with pancreatic cancer
demonstrated no antitumor activity.423 Nevertheless, despite the lack of a clear effect of currently available hormonal therapies on exocrine pancreatic carcinoma,
research in this area continues.
COMBINATION CHEMOTHERAPY
In general, combination chemotherapy has not been a successful approach to the management of pancreatic cancer. However, the results of prior studies of
combination chemotherapy are presented here for historical purposes.
5-Fluorouracil , Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and Mitomycin C Regimen
The combination of 5-FU, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and mitomycin C (FAM) for metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma was first described by Smith et al. 424 in 1980,
based on previous work demonstrating a 13% partial response rate with doxorubicin in previously untreated patients. 425 Twenty-seven of 39 patients had measurable
disease; ten (37%) of these achieved a partial response. 424 These ten patients had a median survival of 12 months, compared with 3.5 months in nonresponders.
Bitran et al.426 reported similar results. An earlier report of streptozocin, mitomycin C, and 5-FU (SMF) for advanced pancreatic cancer suggested a response rate of
43%, although many patients experienced severe gastrointestinal and renal toxicity. 427 Therefore, several cooperative groups compared FAM and SMF. The Cancer
and Leukemia Group B studied 184 patients and found response rates of 14% for FAM and 4% for SMF (not significantly different), both of which were much lower
than suggested by previous reports. 428 Comparison of FAM to two schedules of SMF,429 to 5-FU alone, and to 5-FU and doxorubicin 430 confirmed these low response
rates. More recently, FAM was combined with aminoglutethimide without benefit. 431 Despite these negative trials, a randomized study of a modified FAM regimen
compared to no treatment demonstrated an improved median survival for FAM-treated patients. 432 However, this was a small study involving only 44 patients, and the
pancreatic cancer was pathologically confirmed in only 31. Based on the results to date, the use of FAM chemotherapy in the management of advanced pancreatic
cancer cannot be recommended.
Mallinson Regimen
In 1980, Mallinson et al. 433 first reported on a regimen of induction therapy with 5-FU, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and vincristine followed by maintenance
treatment with 5-FU and mitomycin C for advanced pancreatic cancer. A median survival of 44 weeks was reported for patients who received therapy, compared with
9 weeks for patients offered only supportive care. However, a phase III trial comparing the Mallinson regimen to 5-FU alone and to 5-FU, doxorubicin, and cisplatin
was unable to confirm these results; the median survival was only 4.5 months in patients who received the Mallinson regimen. 434
Cisplatin -Containing Regimens
After a trial that showed significant activity of cisplatin administered at a dose of 100 mg/m 2 every 4 weeks,435 cisplatin was combined with continuous-infusion 5-FU.
However, poor results have been seen with low-dose schedules, 436 and toxic effects have been seen in a high percentage of patients. 437 Somewhat better results have
been observed with higher doses of cisplatin (100 mg/m 2) combined with 5-FU (1000 mg/m2/d) administered by continuous infusion. In a study of 40 pancreatic cancer
patients, 438 13 of whom were previously treated and 36 of whom had metastatic disease, one complete and nine partial remissions (response rate, 26.5%) were
documented; the median survival rate was 7 months. This high-dose regimen was associated with one treatment-related death and the occurrence of grade 4
granulocytopenia in 27% of patients. The most recent report of cisplatin and 5-FU comes from Japan. 439 These investigators used a lower dose of both agents (5-FU,
500 mg/m2/d; cisplatin, 80 mg/m2) based on phase I studies in their country. In 37 previously untreated patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma, the response rate
was only 8%.
Other Combinations
A combination regimen of 5-FU, leucovorin, mitomycin C, and dipyridamole produced 12 responses in 16 patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. 440 Five of
these were objective complete responses documented by CT and tumor marker measurements. At the time of this report, median survival had not yet been reached
but was projected to be greater than 1 year. Five patients had received EBRT, but this was not believed to have affected overall survival. In a subsequent report from
the same group, this regimen achieved an overall response rate of 39% in patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer, with six patients achieving sufficient
improvement in their tumor status on CT scans to justify surgical exploration. 301
Based on laboratory data suggesting synergy of this drug combination, Dougherty et al. 441 reported on a phase I/II study of cisplatin, high-dose cytarabine, and
caffeine (CAC) in 28 patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. A partial response was documented in 7 of 18 evaluable patients. This finding prompted a phase III
study by Kelsen et al. 442 comparing CAC to SMF. Eighty-two patients were randomized, and 90% were evaluable; objective responses were seen in two patients who
received CAC and four patients who received SMF.
The question of the benefit gained by multiagent chemotherapy compared with single-agent therapy also has been examined. The Southwest Oncology Group
performed a series of phase II trials comparing single-agent chemotherapy with combination chemotherapy (5-FU, doxorubicin, mitomycin C, and streptozocin). 332 The
single agents studied included mitoguazone, dihydroxyanthracenedione, and diaziquone. Eighty-two patients received single-agent therapy, and 71 received
combination chemotherapy; the median survival durations were 3.4 and 4.8 months, respectively, indicating no significant benefit from combination chemotherapy.
In sum, these results confirm the ineffectiveness of conventional combination chemotherapy and support clinical studies evaluating novel single agents in previously
untreated patients with advanced pancreatic cancer.
REGIONAL CHEMOTHERAPY
The high incidence of liver metastases and local tumor recurrence in the pancreatic bed has prompted investigation of regional chemotherapy. Regional approaches
to chemotherapy for pancreatic cancer have included infusion of the SMA or celiac axis, 443,444 combined intraarterial and SMV infusion, 445,446 and isolated perfusion
with extracorporeal chemofiltration. 447,448 One report includes a phase II study from the Puget Sound Oncology Consortium of combined intraarterial cisplatin,
intravenous infusional 5-FU, and EBRT in 16 patients with locally advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma. 443 No treatment-related deaths occurred, five patients
achieved a minor response, and the median survival was 9 months. The authors thus concluded that this regimen was not superior to more standard chemoradiation
regimens.
Maurer et al. 444 treated 12 patients with locally advanced, recurrent, or metastatic pancreatic cancer with intraarterial chemotherapy (mitoxantrone, folinic acid, 5-FU,
and cisplatin). Only one patient achieved a partial response, and the median survival was 6 months. However, an improvement in tumor-related pain was achieved in
9 of 11 evaluable patients.
Researchers at Tulane University combined intraarterial chemotherapy (mitomycin C, 5-FU, and mitoxantrone) with hemofiltration. 449 They reported two complete
responses and ten partial responses in 32 patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. Although these results demonstrate the feasibility of the regional chemotherapy
approach to pancreatic cancer, future pilot studies aimed at achieving local control of disease in the pancreas or at decreasing the growth or development of liver
metastases will require more sophisticated therapeutic agents to achieve meaningful anticancer effects.
Regional chemotherapy infusion may be more applicable to patients who have undergone pancreaticoduodenectomy and in whom liver metastases are the dominant
site of disease recurrence. Ishikawa and colleagues 445 treated 21 patients with continuous-infusion 5-FU (125 mg/d) delivered through the hepatic artery and portal
vein for the first 4 to 5 weeks after pancreaticoduodenectomy. No chemotherapy-related complications were reported; one patient died of surgery-related
complications. Survival in the 20 evaluable patients was superior to that of historical controls, and liver metastases were the cause of death in only 8% of patients at 3

years of follow-up. Updated results from Ishikawa et al. 446 with 27 patients who received postoperative adjuvant intraarterial and portal venous 5-FU demonstrated a
5-year survival rate of 39%; this high survival rate was thought to be secondary to a marked decrease in hepatic metastases. Reported experiences from both
Lygidakis and Stringaris 450 (intraarterial immunochemotherapy) and Beger et al. 451 (intraarterial chemotherapy) support the potential benefit of adjuvant intraarterial
therapy after pancreaticoduodenectomy. These results come from highly talented and very experienced physicians; similar results will be difficult to produce outside of
specialty centers because of the complexity of treatment delivery. However, the concept of postoperative, adjuvant, liver-directed regional therapy will likely receive
greater attention because of improved local tumor control with contemporary forms of chemoradiation and surgery.
NEW APPROACHES TO SYSTEMIC DISEASE
Despite advances in the understanding of the molecular biology of pancreatic cancer, the systemic treatment of metastatic disease remains unsatisfactory.
Chemotherapy and the administration of biologically active molecules, such as tumor necrosis factor 452,453 or interferons, 381,453 have not resulted in significant
improvements in response rates or patient survival. The study of novel chemotherapeutic agents based on the evolving understanding of the molecular biology of
pancreatic cancer must receive the highest priority.
A number of general areas of clinical investigation may yield favorable results. These include interruption or modulation of known growth factors and signal
transduction pathways involved with cell growth, invasion, and angiogenesis. Some of the systemic agents undergoing clinical investigation are described in this
section, with an emphasis on therapies that are intended to inhibit specific signals required for cell growth and metastasis.
Farnesyl Transferase Inhibition
Because the ras oncogene is mutated and thereby constitutively activated in the majority of pancreatic cancers, inhibition of ras signaling has been postulated as a
possible target for therapy. A particularly attractive approach under active development is the inhibition of ras protein function through interruption of essential
posttranslational processing (farnesylation) necessary to localize ras proteins to the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane. This effort involved the discovery and
synthesis of specific small molecules that inhibit the protein farnesyl transferase. 454,455 and 456 The functional consequence of this inhibitory effect is that the ras
oncoprotein cannot localize to the cell membrane and is rendered inactive. A number of these small molecules are under investigation and include drugs that are
administered orally and intravenously. Phase I and II trials of these agents are under way. 457
Other approaches are also under investigation. The monoterpene limonene and its more potent metabolite perillyl alcohol decrease farnesylated ras levels, probably
through a different mechanism than lovastatin (which acts via hepatic hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibition, thereby lowering plasma levels of
farnesyl pyrophosphate). 458 Orally administered perillyl alcohol demonstrated significant in vivo activity against pancreatic cancer in a Syrian golden hamster model. 459
A phase I clinical trial of orally administered perillyl alcohol has been reported. 460 Perillyl alcohol also holds promise as a potential chemopreventive agent for
pancreatic cancer. 461
Somatostatin Analogues
Overexpression of the somatostatin receptor occurs in both ductal adenocarcinomas and neuroendocrine tumors. Physiologically, somatostatin is an antitrophic
hormone that inhibits the trophic effects of cholecystokinin and other factors. Binding the somatostatin receptor with the octapeptide somatostatin analogue octreotide
has been demonstrated to inhibit cell growth in vitro. Initial animal studies were encouraging, but early clinical trials have proved disappointing. 462,463 and 464 Two large
multicenter phase III clinical trials have been conducted comparing a long-acting octreotide analogue with a placebo in the treatment of advanced pancreatic cancer.
In one trial, 417 patients received either a placebo or a long-acting octreotide analogue (SMS-201-995 pa LAR; octreotide pamoate LAR) alone. No objective responses
were observed, and the median survival times for patients receiving the octreotide analogue or the placebo were equivalent (16 weeks). In the other trial, 418 all
patients received 5-FU infusions with either an octreotide analogue (SMS-201-995 pa LAR) or a placebo. The addition of the octreotide analogue to 5-FU provided no
advantage in terms of objective response or survival.
A novel variation of this approach used an octapeptide analogue of somatostatin containing methotrexate attached to the a-amino group of D-phenylalanine in position
1 of the octapeptide. Subsequent experiments with this agent against the MIA PaCa-2 human pancreatic cancer cell line in nude mice demonstrated significant
inhibition of tumor growth. 465 Further preclinical trials investigating the efficacy of such an approach continue.
Another strategy being explored is binding somatostatin analogues, such as octreotide, with radioisotopes, specifically yttrium 90, to selectively deliver therapeutic
doses of radiation. 466
Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Inhibition
TRASTUZUMAB (HERCEPTIN). Binding the HER2/neu oncoprotein with specific antibodies leads to growth-inhibitory signaling and promotes apoptosis. Trastuzumab

(Herceptin) is a humanized monoclonal antibody developed in mice that specifically binds the HER-2 receptor. Preclinical studies have shown that Herceptin leads to
growth inhibition in cell lines that overexpress HER2/neu. Clinical trials in patients with metastatic breast cancer whose tumors overexpress HER2/neu have
demonstrated that Herceptin has activity as a single agent, with objective response rates of 11% to 26%. 467,468 Preclinical studies also have suggested synergy
between Herceptin and cytotoxic agents. 469 In a clinical trial, 470 response rates and survival were both improved in women receiving Herceptin and chemotherapy
compared to chemotherapy alone for metastatic breast cancer (all patients had tumors that overexpressed HER2/neu.) Side effects were generally mild, but it should
be noted that, when Herceptin was delivered in combination with an anthracycline, class III or IV heart failure (by New York Heart Association criteria) was observed
in 19% of patients, compared to only 3% of patients receiving anthracycline-based chemotherapy without herceptin. 470
In pancreatic cancer, 30% to 40% of human tumors overexpress HER2/neu; however, the role of Herceptin has not yet been defined. A phase II trial is now under way
to assess the combination of Herceptin and gemcitabine in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer.
EPIDERMAL GROWTH FACTOR RECEPTOR MONOCLONAL ANTIBODY (C225). Antibodies to the epidermal growth factor receptor have been shown to compete with the

growth stimulatory ligands for binding to this receptor. Binding with specific antibodies leads to growth inhibition and in some cases to apoptosis. A humanized
monoclonal antibody to epidermal growth factor receptor (C225) has demonstrated potent competitive binding to the receptor, leading to growth inhibition. In vitro
studies suggest an additive effect of C225 with cytotoxic agents. 471 Data from laboratories at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center suggest a synergistic interaction in
animal models of metastasis when gemcitabine and C225 are combined. 472 The exact mechanisms of this synergy are being investigated, including effects on growth
inhibition, apoptotic cell death, and angiogenesis. Clinical trials are under way with C225 in head and neck cancer patients; a clinical trial studying the toxicity and
efficacy of gemcitabine combined with C225 is planned for patients with advanced pancreatic cancer.
Matrix Metalloproteinase Inhibitors
Matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors (MMPIs) occur as both endogenous factors that tightly regulate the activity of proteases in the extracellular milieu and as
exogenous synthetic molecules. The two primary endogenous inhibitors are tissue metalloproteinase inhibitors 1 and 2. Both are fairly large proteins (28 kD and 21
kD, respectively) and unlikely to be clinically relevant because of their poor pharmacologic properties. 473
A number of synthetic MMPIs have been developed, including batimastat, marimastat, and BAY 12-9566. Marimastat is an orally bioavailable agent that has been
studied clinically in patients with advanced prostate cancer, colorectal cancer, ovarian cancer, and pancreatic cancer. Interestingly, the dose-limiting toxicity is often
musculoskeletal pain with arthralgias and myalgias. 474 BAY 12-9566 is another orally bioavailable MMPI. Both marimastat and BAY 12-9566 are under investigation in
multicenter phase III trials. In one randomized trial, marimastat is being compared with gemcitabine as a treatment for advanced pancreatic cancer; the results from
this trial will be available soon. Marimastat is also being investigated in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial designed to evaluate whether this agent
can delay or prevent the onset of metastatic disease after pancreaticoduodenectomy in patients undergoing surgery with curative intent. In yet another clinical trial,
patients with advanced pancreatic cancer are being randomized to receive gemcitabine with marimastat or gemcitabine alone; the primary end point of this trial is
survival (data unpublished).

Antiangiogenic Agents
Tumor vascularity is an important requirement for tumor growth beyond a few millimeters, and it is now accepted that specific endogenous angiogenic factors exist
that allow for endothelial cell growth and migration into tumor nodules. One such factor is VEGF, which is up-regulated in pancreatic cancer. Strategies have been
developed to inhibit the effects of VEGF, including monoclonal antibodies to VEGF. In addition, a specific inhibitor to the receptor tyrosine kinase for VEGF has been
discovered (SU5416). 475 Phase I and early phase II clinical trials of SU5416 are currently under way.
Another antiangiogenic agent being studied is TNP-470, an analogue of fumagillin. Fumagillin is derived from the fungus Aspergillus fumigatus fresenius and was
found to inhibit angiogenesis in an in vitro angiogenesis model. Pharmacokinetic studies of TNP-470 have demonstrated that it has a half-life of only 1 hour,
suggesting that prolonged or frequent infusions of the agent may be required for activity. 476 Nevertheless, as a single agent, TNP-470 produced a complete response
in one patient with metastatic cervical cancer, with other study subjects achieving disease stabilization. 477
Two other antiangiogenic molecules that have been isolated from tumor-bearing animals are angiostatin, which is a peptide fragment of plasminogen, and endostatin,
a fragment from collagenase XVIII. 478 Both angiostatin and endostatin have shown significant antitumor activity in animal models, and angiostatin has induced tumor
dormancy in mice.479,480 Endostatin entered clinical trials in the latter part of 1999.
Gene Therapy
Given the large number of somatic mutations in pancreatic cancer, gene therapy represents a potentially powerful approach to this disease. Generally, gene therapy
for pancreatic cancer includes approaches designed to replace the function of inactivated tumor suppressor genes such as p53, p16, and SMAD4/DPC4. Correcting
loss of functional cellular changes is more challenging than inhibiting overexpressed proteins or a mutated oncogene. However, in vitro reintroduction of genetic
information into cells has been shown to be an effective way to alter cellular growth, induce apoptosis, and sensitize pancreatic cancer cells to chemotherapy and
radiation. 481,482 and 483 Other approaches use genetic strategies to inhibit dominant oncogene function. The high frequency with which K- ras is altered in exocrine
pancreatic cancer and its central function in signal transduction suggest that inhibiting production of the K-ras protein could lead to significant growth-inhibitory
effects. This strategy has been used successfully in lung adenocarcinoma cells using retroviral constructs coding for K-ras antisense RNA. 484 In addition, evolving
ribozyme technologies offer the possibility of improved inhibition compared with traditional antisense approaches. 485 A particularly interesting gene-therapy approach
uses an oncolytic adenovirus that is genetically modified to replicate only in p53-deficient cells. 486 Direct injection of this oncolytic virus has been shown to be
feasible. 487 The challenge in gene therapy for pancreatic cancer will be to develop delivery strategies that are capable of targeting both the local and metastatic
components of this neoplasm.
TREATMENT DECISIONS: METASTATIC DISEASE
The complex pathophysiologic abnormalities accompanying metastatic pancreatic cancer often make specific treatment decisions extremely difficult. Many patients
present to the medical oncologist or surgeon with profound debilitation, severe pain, and extensive metastatic disease. For these patients, chemotherapy is unlikely to
result in significant improvements in quality of life or survival, and the toxic effects of chemotherapy may create additional complications. Management with supportive
care or nontoxic hormonal approaches may be the optimal strategies for these patients.
For patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer who present with a good performance status, systemic chemotherapy is appropriate. In view of the limited impact of the
currently available agents on survival, continued enrollment of patients in phase II trials of new agents or combinations is essential. In the absence of access to a
phase II trial, treatment with gemcitabine appears to be the standard in the United States. However, it must be recognized that the primary impact of gemcitabine is on
quality of life; therefore, continued evaluation of novel agents, especially those targeted against specific molecular events important in the pathogenesis of pancreatic
cancer, is crucial. With the expansion of our understanding of the molecular and biochemical basis of pancreatic cancer, we are entering an era in which treatments
may be tailored to interact with specific molecular and biochemical targets thought to be important in the development or maintenance of neoplasia.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Greenlee RT, Murray T, Bolden S, et al. Cancer statistics, 2000. CA Cancer J Clin 2000;50:12.
2. Fernandez E, La Vecchia C, Porta M, et al. Trends in pancreatic cancer mortality in Europe, 19551989. Int J Cancer 1994;57:786.
3. Williamson RCN. Pancreatic cancer: the greatest oncological challenge. BMJ 1991;296:445.
4. Gold EB, Goldin SB. Epidemiology of and risk factors for pancreatic cancer. Surg Oncol Clin North Am 1998;7:67.
5. Hirayama T. Epidemiology of pancreatic cancer in Japan. Jpn J Clin Oncol 1989;19:208.
6. Oomi K, Amano M. The epidemiology of pancreatic diseases in Japan. Pancreas 1998;16:233.
7. American Cancer Society. Cancer facts and figures1995. Atlanta: American Cancer Society, 1990.
8. Tominaga S, Kuroishi T. Epidemiology of pancreatic cancer. Semin Surg Oncol 1998;15:3.
9. Silverman DT, Dunn JA, Hoover RN, et al. Cigarette smoking and pancreas cancer: a case-control study based on direct interviews. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1510.
10. La Vecchia C, Boyle P, Franceschi S, et al. Smoking and cancer with emphasis on Europe. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:94.
11. Zheng W, McLaughlin JK, Gridley G, et al. A cohort study of smoking, alcohol consumption, and dietary factors for pancreatic cancer (United States). Cancer Causes Control 1993;4:477.
12. Hecht SS. Environmental tobacco smoke and lung cancer: the emerging role of carcinogen biomarkers and molecular epidemiology. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1369.
13. Wang M, Abbruzzese JL, Friess H, et al. DNA adducts in human pancreatic tissues and their potential role in carcinogenesis. Cancer Res 1998;58:38.
14. Perera FP, Tang D, Grinberg-Funes RA, et al. Molecular epidemiology of lung cancer and the modulation of markers of chronic carcinogen exposure by chemopreventive agents. J Cell
Biochem Suppl 1993;17F:119.
15. MacMahon B, Yen S, Trichopoulos D, et al. Coffee and cancer of the pancreas. N Engl J Med 1981;304:630.
16. Lin RS, Kessler IL. A multifactorial model for pancreatic cancer in man. JAMA 1981;245:147.
17. Olsen GW, Mandel JS, Gibson RW, et al. A case-control study of pancreatic cancer and cigarettes, alcohol, coffee, and diet. Am J Public Health 1989;79:1016.
18. Hakulinen T, Lehtimaki L, Lehtonen M, et al. Cancer morbidity among two male cohorts with increased alcohol consumption in Finland. J Natl Cancer Inst 1974;52:1711.
19. Friedman GD, van den Eeden SK. Risk factors for pancreatic cancer: an exploratory study. Int J Epidemiol 1993;22:30.
20. Feinstein AR, Horwitz RI, Stitzer WO, et al. Coffee and pancreatic cancer. The problems of etiologic science and epidemiologic research. JAMA 1981;246:957.
21. Gordis L. Consumption of methylxanthine-containing beverages and risk of pancreatic cancer. Cancer Lett 1990;52:1.
22. Shibata A, Mack TM, Paganini-Hill A, et al. A prospective study of pancreatic cancer in the elderly. Int J Cancer 1994;58:46.
23. Velema JP, Walker AM, Gold EB. Alcohol and pancreatic cancer. Insufficient epidemiologic evidence for a causal relationship. Epidemiol Rev 1986;8:28.
24. Gullo L. Diabetes and the risk of pancreatic cancer. Ann Oncol 1999;10[Suppl 4]:79.
25. Mack TM, Yu MC, Hanisch R, et al. Pancreas cancer and smoking, beverage consumption, and past medical history. J Natl Cancer Inst 1986;76:49.
26. Gullo L, Pezzilli R, Morselli-Labate AM. Diabetes and the risk of pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med 1994;331:81.
27. La Vecchia C, Negri E, Franceschi S, et al. A case-control study of diabetes mellitus and cancer risk. Br J Cancer 1994;70:950.
28. Permert J, Larsson J, Westermark GT, et al. Islet amyloid polypeptide in patients with pancreatic cancer and diabetes. N Engl J Med 1994;330:313.
29. Kalapothaki V, Tzonou A, Hsieh CC, et al. Tobacco, ethanol, coffee, pancreatitis, diabetes mellitus, and cholelithiasis as risk factors for pancreatic carcinoma. Cancer Causes Control
1993;4:375.
30. Chow WH, Gridley G, Nyrén O, et al. Risk of pancreatic cancer following diabetes mellitus: a nationwide cohort study in Sweden. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:930.
31. Wideroff L, Gridley G, Mellemkjaer L, et al. Cancer incidence in a population-based cohort of patients hospitalized with diabetes mellitus in Denmark. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1360.
32. Silverman DT, Schiffman M, Everhart J, et al. Diabetes mellitus, other medical conditions and familial history of cancer as risk factors for pancreatic cancer. Br J Cancer 1999;80:1830.
33. Permert J, Ihse I, Jorfeldt L, et al. Improved glucose metabolism after subtotal pancreatectomy for pancreatic cancer. Br J Surg 1993;80:1047.
34. Fogar P, Basso D, Pasquali C, et al. Portal but not peripheral serum levels of interleukin 6 could interfere with glucose metabolism in patients with pancreatic cancer. Clin Chim Acta
1998;277:181.
35. Valerio A, Basso D, Brigato L, et al. Glucose metabolic alterations in isolated and perfused rat hepatocytes induced by pancreatic cancer conditioned medium: a low molecular weight factor
possibly involved. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999;257:622.
36. Everhart J, Wright D. Diabetes mellitus as a risk factor for pancreatic cancer. A meta-analysis. JAMA 1995;273:1605.
37. Fisher WE, Boros LG, O'Dorisio TM, et al. GI hormonal changes in diabetes influence pancreatic cancer growth. J Surg Res 1995;58:754.
38. Talamini G, Bassi C, Falconi M, et al. Alcohol and smoking as risk factors in chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer. Dig Dis Sci 1999;44:1303.
39. Lowenfels AB, Maisonneuve P, Cavallini G, et al. Pancreatitis and the risk of pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1433.
40. Ekbom A, McLaughlin JK, Karlsson BM, et al. Pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer: a population-based study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:625.
41. Bansal P, Sonnenberg A. Pancreatitis is a risk factor for pancreatic cancer. Gastroenterology 1995;109:247.
42. Lowenfels AB, Maisonneuve P, Lankisch PG. Chronic pancreatitis and other risk factors for pancreatic cancer. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1999;28:673.
43. Gold EB, Cameron JL. Chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer [Editorial]. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1485.
44. Gates LK Jr, Ulrich CD II, Whitcomb DC. Hereditary pancreatitis. Gene defects and their implications. Surg Clin North Am 1999;79:711.
45. Kozuka S, Sassa R, Taki T, et al. Relation of pancreatic duct hyperplasia to carcinoma. Cancer 1979;43:1418.
46. Yanagisawa A, Ohtake K, Ohashi K, et al. Frequent c-Ki-ras oncogene activation in mucous cell hyperplasias of pancreas suffering from chronic inflammation. Cancer Res 1993;53:953.
47. Fernandez E, La Vecchia C, Porta M, et al. Pancreatitis and the risk of pancreatic cancer. Pancreas 1995;11:185.
48. Hruban RH, Petersen GM, Goggins M, et al. Familial pancreatic cancer. Ann Oncol 1999;10[Suppl 4]:69.

49. Kern SE. Advances from genetic clues in pancreatic cancer. Curr Opin Oncol 1998;10:74.
50. Lynch HT, Smyrk T, Kern SE, et al. Familial pancreatic cancer: a review. Semin Oncol 1996;23:251.
51. Marx S, Spiegel A, Allen M, et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1: clinical and genetic topics. Ann Intern Med 1998;129:484.
52. Bordi C, Brandi ML. Ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas in Men-1 patients. Virchows Arch 1998:432;385.
53. Finch MD, Howes N, Ellis I, et al. Hereditary pancreatitis and familial pancreatic cancer. Digestion 1997;58:564.
54. Lynch HT, Voorhees GJ, Lanspa SJ, et al. Pancreatic carcinoma and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer: a family study. Br J Cancer 1985;52:271.
55. Neumann HP, Dinkel E, Brambs H, et al. Pancreatic lesions in the von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. Gastroenterology 1991;101:465.
56. Swift M, Sholman L, Perry M, et al. Malignant neoplasms in the families of patients with ataxia telangiectasia. Cancer Res 1976;36:209.
57. Lynch HT, Fusaro RM. Pancreatic cancer and the familial atypical multiple mole (FAMMM) syndrome. Pancreas 1991;6:127.
58. Goldstein AM, Fraser MC, Struewing JP, et al. Increased risk of pancreatic cancer in melanoma-prone kindreds with p16INK4 mutations. N Engl J Med 1995;333:970.
59. Whelan AJ, Bartsch D, Goodfellow PJ. Brief report: a familial syndrome of pancreatic cancer and melanoma with a mutation in the CDKN2 tumor-suppressor gene. N Engl J Med 1995;333:975.
60. Ghadirian P, Boyle P, Simard A, et al. Reported family aggregation of pancreatic cancer within a population-based case-control study in the Francophone community in Montreal, Canada. Int J
Pancreatol 1991;10:183.
61. Lynch HT, Fitzsimmons ML, Smyrk TC, et al. Familial pancreatic cancer: clinicopathologic study of 18 nuclear families. Am J Gastroenterol 1990;85:54.
62. Friedman JM, Fialkow PJ. Familial carcinoma of the pancreas. Clin Genet 1976;9:463.
63. Goggins M, Schutte M, Lu J, et al. Germline BRCA2 gene mutations in patients with apparently sporadic pancreatic carcinomas. Cancer Res 1996;56:5360.
64. Su GH, Hruban RH, Bansal RK, et al. Germline and somatic mutations of the STK11/LKB1 Peutz-Jeghers gene in pancreatic and biliary cancers. Am J Pathol 1999;154:1835.
65. Moskaluk CA, Hruban RH, Schutte M, et al. Genomic sequencing of DPC4 in the analysis of familial pancreatic carcinoma. Diagn Mol Pathol 1997;6:85.
66. Lynch HT. Genetics and pancreatic cancer. Arch Surg 1994;129:266.
67. Steinberg WM, Barkin J, Bradley EL III, et al. Workup of a patient with familial pancreatic cancer. Pancreas 1999;18:219.
68. Brentnall TA, Bronner MP, Byrd DR, et al. Early diagnosis and treatment of pancreatic dysplasia in patients with a family history of pancreatic cancer. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:247.
69. Ji BT, Chow WH, Hsing AW, et al. Green tea consumption and the risk of pancreatic and colorectal cancers. Int J Cancer 1997;70:255.
70. Levin B. An overview of preventive strategies for pancreatic cancer. Ann Oncol 1999;10[Suppl 4]:193.
71. Cubilla AL, Fitzgerald PJ. Tumors of the exocrine pancreas. Washington, DC: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 1984.
72. Cubilla AL, Fitzgerald PJ. Morphological lesions associated with human primary invasive nonendocrine pancreas cancer. Cancer Res 1976;36:2690.
73. Furukawa T, Chiba R, Kobari M, et al. Varying grades of epithelial atypia in the pancreatic ducts of humans. Classification based on morphometry and multivariate analysis and correlated with
positive reactions of carcinoembryonic antigen. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1994;118:227.
74. Brat DJ, Lillemoe KD, Yeo CJ, et al. Progression of pancreatic intraductal neoplasias to infiltrating adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Am J Surg Pathol 1998;22:163.
75. Almoguera C, Shibata D, Forrester K, et al. Most human carcinomas of the exocrine pancreas contain mutant c-K-ras genes. Cell 1988;53:549.
76. Smit VT, Boot AJ, Smits AM, et al. KRAS codon 12 mutations occur very frequently in pancreatic adenocarcinomas. Nucleic Acids Res 1988;16:7773.
77. Pellegata NS, Losekoot M, Foddie R, et al. Detection of K-ras mutations by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE): a study on pancreatic cancer. Anticancer Res 1992;12:1731.
78. Boschman CR, Stryker S, Reddy JK, et al. Expression of p53 protein in precursor lesions and adenocarcinoma of human pancreas. Am J Pathol 1994;145:1291.
79. DiGuseppe JA, Hruban RH, Goodman SN, et al. Overexpression of p53 protein in adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Am J Clin Pathol 1994;101:684.
80. Moskaluk CA, Hruban RH, Kern SE. p16 and K-ras gene mutations in the intraductal precursors of human pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res 1997;57:2140.
81. Uehara H, Nakaizumi A, Tatsuta M, et al. Diagnosis of pancreatic cancer by detecting telomerase activity in pancreatic juice: comparison with K-ras mutations. Am J Gastroenterol
1999;94:2513.
82. Suehara N, Mizumoto K, Muta T, et al. Telomerase elevation in pancreatic ductal carcinoma compared to nonmalignant pathological states. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:993.
83. Motojima K, Tsunoda T, Kanematsu T, et al. Distinguishing pancreatic carcinoma from other periampullary carcinomas by analysis of mutations in the Kirsten-ras oncogene. Ann Surg
1991;214:657.
84. Bos JL. Ras oncogenes in human cancer: a review. Cancer Res 1989;49:4682.
85. Pellegata NS, Sessa F, Renault B, et al. K-ras and p53 gene mutations in pancreatic cancer: ductal and nonductal tumors progress through different genetic lesions. Cancer Res 1994;54:1556.
86. Rak J, Mitsuhashi Y, Bayko L. Mutant ras oncogenes upregulate VEGF/VPF expression: implications for induction and inhibition of tumor angiogenesis. Cancer Res 1995;55:4575.
87. Brown LF, Berse B, Jackman RW, et al. Expression of vascular permeability factor (vascular endothelial growth factor) and its receptors in adenocarcinomas of the gastrointestinal tract. Cancer
Res 1993;53:4727.
88. Egawa S, Tsutsumi M, Konishi Y, et al. The role of angiogenesis in the tumor growth of Syrian hamster pancreatic cancer cell line HPD-NR. Gastroenterology 1995;108:1526.
89. Bours V, Dejardin E, Goujon-Letawe F, Merville M, Castronovo V. The NF-kB transcription factor and cancer: high expression of NF-kB- and IkB-related proteins in tumor cell lines. Biochem
Pharmacol 1994;47:145.
90. Grilli M, Chiu JJS, Lenardo MJ. NF-kB and Rel: participants in a multiform transcriptional regulatory system. Int Rev Cytol 1993;143:1.
91. Wang W, Abbruzzese JL, Evans DB, et al. The nuclear factor-kB RelA transcription factor is constitutively activated in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:119.
92. Wang W, Abbruzzese JL, Evans DB, Chiao PJ. Overexpression of urokinase-type plasminogen activator in pancreatic adenocarcinoma is regulated by constitutively activated RelA. Oncogene
1999;18:4554.
93. Shi Q, Abbruzzese JL, Huang S, et al. Constitutive and inducible interleukin 8 expression by hypoxia and acidosis renders human pancreatic cancer cells more tumorigenic and metastatic. Clin
Cancer Res 1999;5:3711.
94. Shi Q, Le X, Abbruzzese JL, et al. Cooperation between transcription factor AP-1 and NF-kB in the induction of interleukin-8 in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells by hypoxia. J Interferon
Cytokine Res 1999;19:1363.
95. Bouvet M, Ellis LM, Nishizaki M, et al. Adenovirus-mediated wild-type p53 gene transfer down-regulates vascular endothelial growth factor expression and inhibits angiogenesis in human colon
cancer. Cancer Res 1998;58:2288.
96. Harada H, Nakagawa K, Iwata S, et al. Restoration of wild-type p16 down-regulates vascular endothelial growth factor expression and inhibits angiogenesis in human gliomas. Cancer Res
1999;59:3783.
97. Brower V. Tumor angiogenesisnew drugs on the block. Nat Biotechnol 1999;17:963.
98. Pluda JM. Tumor-associated angiogenesis: mechanisms, clinical implications, and therapeutic strategies. Semin Oncol 1997;24:203.
99. Hahn SA, Seymour AB, Hoque ATM, et al. Allelotype of pancreatic adenocarcinoma using xenograft enrichment. Cancer Res 1995;55:4670.
100. Schutte M, Da Costa LT, Hahn SA, et al. Identification by representational difference analysis of a homozygous deletion in pancreatic carcinoma that lies within the BRCA2 region. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:5950.
101. Caldas C, Hahn SA, da Costa LT, et al. Frequent somatic mutations and homozygous deletions of the p16 (MTS1) gene in pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Nat Genet 1994;8:27.
102. Hahn SA, Hoque ATM, Moskaluk CA, et al. Homozygous deletion map at 18q21.1 in pancreatic cancer. Cancer Res 1996;56:490.
103. Hahn SA, Schutte M, Hoque ATM, et al. DPC4, a candidate tumor suppressor gene at human chromosome 18q21.1. Science 1996;271:350.
104. Lagna G, Hata A, Hemmati-Brivanlou A, et al. Partnership between DPC4 and SMAD proteins in TGF-beta signalling pathways. Nature 1996;383:832.
105. Derynck R, Zhang Y, Feng XH. Smads: transcriptional activators of TGF-beta responses. Cell 1998;95:737.
106. Grau AM, Zhang L, Wang W, et al. Induction of p21 waf1 expression and growth inhibition by transforming growth factor-b is mediated by the tumor suppressor gene DPC-4 in human pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cells. Cancer Res 1997;57:3929.
107. Hunt KK, Fleming JB, Abramian A, et al. Overexpression of the tumor suppressor gene Smad4/DPC4 induces p21waf1 expression and growth inhibition in human carcinoma cells. Cancer Res
1998;58:5656.
108. Hruban RH, Petersen GM, Ha PK, et al. Genetics of pancreatic cancer. Surg Clin North Am 1998;7:1.
109. Bartsch D, Shevlin DW, Tung WS, et al. Frequent mutations of CDKN2 in primary pancreatic adenocarcinomas. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1995;14:189.
110. Naumann M, Savitskaia N, Eilert C, et al. Frequent codeletion of p16/MTS1 and p15/MTS2 and genetic alterations in p16/MTS1 in pancreatic tumors. Gastroenterology 1996;110:1215.
111. Merlo A, Herman JG, Mao L, et al. 5' CpG island methylation is associated with transcriptional silencing of the tumour suppressor p16/CDKN2/MTS1 in human cancers. Nat Med 1995;1:686.
112. Schenk M, Severson RK, Pawlish KS. The risk of subsequent primary carcinoma of the pancreas in patients with cutaneous malignant melanoma. Cancer 1998;82:1672.
113. Redston MS, Caldas C, Seymour AB, et al. p53 mutations in pancreatic carcinoma and evidence of common involvement of homocopolymer tracts in DNA microdeletions. Cancer Res
1994;54:3025.
114. Bold RJ, Hess KR, Pearson AS, et al. Prognostic factors in resectable pancreatic cancer: p53 and Bcl-2. J Gastrointest Surg 1999;3:263.
115. Schutte M, Hruban RH, Geradts J, et al. Abrogation of the Rb/p16 tumor-suppressive pathway in virtually all pancreatic carcinomas. Cancer Res 1997;57:3126.
116. Moskaluk CA, Hruban RH, Kern SE. p16 and K-ras mutations in the intraductal precursors of human pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res 1997;57:2140.
117. Bakkevold KE, Arnesjø B, Kambestad B. Carcinoma of the pancreas and papilla of Vater: presenting symptoms, signs, and diagnosis related to stage and tumour site. Scand J Gastroenterol
1992;27:317.
118. Permert J, Ihse I, Jorfeldt L, et al. Pancreatic cancer is associated with impaired glucose metabolism. Eur J Surg 1993;159:101.
119. Permert J, Larsson J, Fruin AB, et al. Islet hormone secretion in pancreatic cancer patients with diabetes. Pancreas 1997;15:60.
120. Pour PM. The role of Langerhans islets in exocrine pancreatic cancer. Int J Pancreatol 1995;17:217.
121. Basso D, Plebani M, Fogar J, et al. b-Cell function in pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Pancreas 1994;3:332.
122. Bell RH, Stayer DS. Streptozotocin prevents development of nitrosamine-induced pancreatic cancer in the Syrian hamster. J Surg Oncol 1983;24:258.
123. Bell RH, Pour PM. Induction of pancreatic tumors in genetically non-diabetic but not in diabetic Chinese hamsters. Cancer Lett 1987;34:221.
124. Evans DB, Pisters PWT, Lee JE, et al. Preoperative chemoradiation strategies for localized adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg 1998;5:242.
125. Allema JH, Reinders ME, vanGulik TM, et al. Prognostic factors for survival after pancreaticoduodenectomy for patients with carcinoma of the pancreatic head region. Cancer 1995;75:2069.
126. Bakkevold KE, Kambestad B. Long-term survival following radical and palliative treatment of patients with carcinoma of the pancreas and papilla of Vaterthe prognostic factors influencing the
long-term results: a prospective multicentre study. Eur J Surg Oncol 1993;19:147.
127. Cameron JL, Crist DW, Sitzmann JV, et al. Factors influencing survival after pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic cancer. Am J Surg 1991;161:120.
128. Geer RJ, Brennan MF. Prognostic indicators for survival after resection of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Am J Surg 1993;165:68.
129. Nitecki SS, Sarr MG, Colby TV, vanHeerden JA. Long-term survival after resection for ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Is it really improving? Ann Surg 1995;221:59.
130. Roder JD, Stein HJ, Hüttl W, Siewert JR. Pylorus-preserving versus standard pancreaticoduodenectomy: an analysis of 110 pancreatic and periampullary carcinomas. Br J Surg 1992;79:152.
131. Trede M, Chir B, Schwall G, Saeger H. Survival after pancreaticoduodenectomy: 118 consecutive resections without an operative mortality. Ann Surg 1990;211:447.
132. Tsao JI, Rossi RL, Lowell JA. Pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy. Arch Surg 1994;129:405.
133. Whittington R, Bryer MP, Haller DG, Solin LJ, Rosato EF. Adjuvant therapy of resected adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:1137.
134. Willett CG, Lewandrowski K, Warshaw AL, et al. Resection margins in carcinoma of the head of the pancreas: implications for radiation therapy. Ann Surg 1993;217:144.
135. Yeo CJ, Cameron JL, Lillemore KD, et al. Pancreaticoduodenectomy for cancer of the head of the pancreas: 201 patients. Ann Surg 1995;221:721.
136. Zerbi A, Fossati V, Parolini D, et al. Intraoperative radiation therapy adjuvant to resection in the treatment of pancreatic cancer. Cancer 1994;73:2930.
137. Bossett JF, Pavy JJ, Gillet M, et al. Conventional external irradiation alone as adjuvant treatment in resectable pancreatic cancer: results of a prospective study. Radiother Oncol 1992;24:191.
138. Yeo CJ, Cameron JL, Sohn TA, et al. Six hundred fifty consecutive pancreaticoduodenectomies in the 1990s. Ann Surg 1997;226:248.
139. Spitz FR, Abbruzzese JL, Lee JE, et al. Preoperative and postoperative chemoradiation strategies in patients treated with pancreaticoduodenectomy for adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. J Clin
Oncol 1997;15:928.
140. Foo ML, Gunderson LL, Nagorney DM, et al. Patterns of failure in grossly resected pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma treated with adjuvant irradiation 5-fluorouracil. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys

1993;26:483.
141. Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Further evidence of effective adjuvant combined radiation and chemotherapy following curative resection of pancreatic cancer. Cancer 1987;59:2006.
142. Griffin JF, Smalley SR, Jewell W. Patterns of failure after curative resection of pancreatic carcinoma. Cancer 1990;66:56.
143. Johnstone PA, Sindelar WF. Patterns of disease recurrence following definitive therapy of adenocarcinoma of the pancreas using surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy: correlations of a clinical
trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:831.
144. Ozaki H. Improvement of pancreatic cancer treatment from the Japanese experience in the 1980s. Int J Pancreatol 1992;12:5.
145. Splinter TAW, Obertop H, Kok TC, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy after resection of adenocarcinoma of the periampullary region and the head of the pancreas. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
1989;115:200.
146. Tepper J, Nardi G, Suit H. Carcinoma of the pancreas: review of MGH experience from 19631973. Cancer 1976;37:1519.
147. Westerdahl J, Andrén-Sandeberg Å, Ihse I. Recurrence of exocrine pancreatic cancerlocal or hepatic? Hepatogastroenterology 1993;40:384.
148. Staley CA, Lee JE, Cleary KA, et al. Preoperative chemoradiation, pancreaticoduodenectomy, and intraoperative radiation therapy for adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head. Am J Surg
1996;171:118.
149. Pisters PWT, Abbruzzese JL, Janjan NA, et al. Rapid-fractionation preoperative chemoradiation, pancreaticoduodenectomy, and intraoperative radiation therapy for resectable pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3843.
150. Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. A multi-institutional comparative trial of radiation therapy alone and in combination with 5-fluorouracil for locally unresectable pancreatic carcinoma. Ann
Surg 1979;189:205.
151. Moertel CG, Childs DS, Reitemeier RJ, et al. Combined 5-fluorouracil and supervoltage radiation therapy of locally unresectable gastrointestinal cancer. Lancet 1969;2:865.
152. Mohiuddin M, Cantor RJ, Biermann W, et al. Combined modality treatment of localized unresectable adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14:79.
153. Whittington R, Neuberg D, Tester WJ, et al. Protracted intravenous fluorouracil infusion with radiation therapy in the management of localized pancreaticobiliary carcinoma: a phase I Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group trial. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:227.
154. Treurniet-Donker AD, Van Mierlo MJM, Van Putten WLJ. Localized unresectable pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;18:592.
155. Exocrine pancreas. In: Fleming ID, Cooper JS, Henson DE, et al., eds. American Joint Committee on Cancer manual for staging of cancer, 5th ed. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven, 1997:122.
156. Staley CA, Cleary KR, Abbruzzese JL, et al. Need for standardized pathologic staging of pancreaticoduodenectomy specimens. Pancreas 1996;12:373.
157. Fuhrman GM, Charnsangavej C, Abbruzzese JL, et al. Thin-section contrast enhanced computed tomography accurately predicts resectability of malignant pancreatic neoplasms. Am J Surg
1994;167:104.
158. Evans DB, Rich TA, Byrd DR, et al. Preoperative chemoradiation and pancreaticoduodenectomy for adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Arch Surg 1992;127:1335.
159. Cubilla AL, Fortner J, Fitzgerald PJ. Lymph node involvement in carcinoma of the head of the pancreas area. Cancer 1978;41:880.
160. International Pancreatic Cancer Study Group. Staging for carcinoma of the pancreas: Japanese stage classification compared to UICC stage classification. In: Pour PM, Konishi Y, Klöppel G,
Longnecker DS, eds. Atlas of exocrine pancreatic tumors. Hong Kong: Springer-Verlag Tokyo, 1994:247.
161. Lillemoe KD, Sauter PK, Pitt HA, et al. Current status of surgical palliation of periampullary carcinoma. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1993;176:1.
162. Kelsen DP, Portenoy R, Thaler H, Tao Y, Brennan M. Pain as a predictor of outcome in patients with operable pancreatic carcinoma. Surgery 1997;122:53.
163. de Rooij PD, Rogatko A, Brennan MF. Evaluation of palliative surgical procedures in unresectable pancreatic cancer. Br J Surg 1991;78:1053.
164. DiFronzo LA, Egrari S, O'Connell TX. Choledochoduodenostomy for palliation in unresectable pancreatic cancer. Arch Surg 1998;133:820.
165. Millikan KW, Deziel DJ, Silverstein JC, et al. Prognostic factors associated with resectable adenocarcinoma of the head of the pancreas. Am Surg 1999;65:618.
166. Nishimura Y, Hosotani R, Shibamoto Y, et al. External and intraoperative radiotherapy for resectable and unresectable pancreatic cancer: analysis of survival rates and complications. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:39.
167. Yeo CJ, Abrams RA, Grochow LB, et al. Pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic adenocarcinoma: postoperative adjuvant chemoradiation improves survival. Ann Surg 1997;225:621.
168. Sperti C, Pasquali C, Piccoli A, Pedrazzoli S. Survival after resection for ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Br J Surg 1996;83:625.
169. McGrath PC, Sloan DA, Kenady DE. Surgical management of pancreatic carcinoma. Semin Oncol 1996;23:200.
170. Robinson EK, Lee JE, Lowy AM, et al. Reoperative pancreaticoduodenectomy for periampullary carcinoma. Am J Surg 1996;172:432.
171. Andersen JR, Soren SM, Kruse A, et al. Randomized trial of endoscopic endoprosthesis versus operative bypass in malignant obstructive jaundice. Gut 1989;30:1132.
172. Shepherd HA, Royle G, Ross AP, et al. Endoscopic biliary endoprosthesis in the palliation of malignant obstruction of the distal common bile duct: a randomized trial. Br J Surg 1988;75:1166.
173. Smith AC, Dowsett JF, Hatfield ARW, et al. Prospective randomised trial of bypass surgery versus endoscopic stenting in patients with malignant obstructive jaundice. Gut 1989;30:A1513.
174. Raikar GV, Melin MM, Ress A, et al. Cost-effective analysis of surgical palliation versus endoscopic stenting in the management of unresectable pancreatic cancer. Ann Surg Oncol 1996;3:470.
175. Freeny PC, Traverso LW, Ryan JA. Diagnosis and staging of pancreatic adenocarcinoma with dynamic computed tomography. Am J Surg 1993;165:600.
176. Yeung RS, Weese JL, Hoffman JP, et al. Neoadjuvant chemoradiation in pancreatic and duodenal carcinoma. Cancer 1993;72:2124.
177. Warshaw AL, Gu Z, Wittenberg J, et al. Preoperative staging and assessment of resectability of pancreatic cancer. Arch Surg 1990;125:230.
178. Baron PL, Aabakken LE, Cole DJ, et al. Differentiation of benign from malignant pancreatic masses by endoscopic ultrasound. Ann Surg Oncol 1997;4:639.
179. Faigel DO, Ginsberg GG, Bentz JS, et al. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided real-time fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the pancreas in cancer patients with pancreatic lesions. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:1439.
180. Suits J, Frazee R, Erickson RA. Endoscopic ultrasound and fine needle aspiration for the valuation of pancreatic masses. Arch Surg 1999;134:639.
181. Tyler DS, Evans DB. Reoperative pancreaticoduodenectomy. Ann Surg 1994;2:211.
182. Smith CD, Behrns E, vanHeerden JA, Sarr MG. Radical pancreaticoduodenectomy for misdiagnosed pancreatic mass. Br J Surg 1994;81:585.
183. vanHeerden JA. Invited commentary. Arch Surg 1994;129:642.
184. Warshaw AL. Implications of peritoneal cytology for staging of early pancreatic cancer. Am J Surg 1991;161:26.
185. Temudom T, Sarr MG, Douglas MG, Farnell MB. An argument against routine percutaneous biopsy, ERCP, or biliary stent placement in patients with clinically resectable periampullary masses:
a surgical perspective. Pancreas 1995;11:283.
186. Cusheri A. Laparoscopy for pancreatic cancer: does it benefit the patient? Eur J Surg Oncol 1988;14:41.
187. Warshaw AL, Tepper JE, Shipley WU. Laparoscopy in the staging and planning of therapy for pancreatic cancer. Am J Surg 1985;151:76.
188. Conlon KC, Dougherty E, Klimstra DS, et al. The value of minimal access surgery in the staging of patients with potentially resectable peripancreatic malignancy. Ann Surg 1996;223:134.
189. Fernandez-delCastillo C, Rattner DW, Warshaw AL. Further experience with laparoscopy and peritoneal cytology in the staging of pancreatic cancer. Br J Surg 1995;82:1127.
190. Bemelman WA, de Wit LT, van Delden OM, et al. Diagnostic laparoscopy combined with laparoscopic ultrasonography in staging of cancer of the pancreatic head region. Br J Surg
1995;82:820.
191. Gloor B, Todd KE, Reber HA. Diagnostic workup of patients with suspected pancreatic carcinoma: the University of CaliforniaLos Angeles approach. Cancer 1997;79:1780.
192. Rumstadt B, Schwab M, Schuster K, Hagmiller E, Trede M. The role of laparoscopy in the preoperative staging of pancreatic carcinoma. J Gastrointest Surg 1997;1:245.
193. Holzman MD, Reintgen KL, Tyler DS, Pappas TN. The role of laparoscopy in the management of suspected pancreatic and periampullary malignancies. J Gastrointest Surg 1997;1:236.
194. Friess H, Kleeff J, Silva JC, et al. The role of diagnostic laparoscopy in pancreatic and periampullary malignancies. J Am Coll Surg 1998;186:675.
195. Evans DB, Lee JE, Leach SD, et al. Vascular resection and intraoperative radiation therapy during pancreaticoduodenectomy: rationale and technique. Adv Surg 1995;29:235.
196. Fernandez-delCastillo C, Warshaw AL. Laparoscopy for staging in pancreatic carcinoma. Surg Oncol 1993;2:25.
197. Fernandez-delCastillo C, Warshaw A. Peritoneal metastases in pancreatic carcinoma. Hepatogastroenterology 1993;40:430.
198. Dalton RR, Sarr MG, van Heerden JA, et al. Carcinoma of the body and tail of the pancreas: is curative resection justified? Surgery 1992;111:489.
199. Johnson CD, Schwall G, Flechtenmacher J, Trede M. Resection for adenocarcinoma of the body and tail of the pancreas. Br J Surg 1993;80:1177.
200. Wade TP, Virgo KS, Johnson FE. Distal pancreatectomy for cancer: results in US Department of Veterans Affairs Hospitals, 19871991. Pancreas 1995;11:341.
201. Moertel CG, Frytak S, Hahn RG, et al. Therapy of locally unresectable pancreatic carcinoma: a randomized comparison of high dose (6000 rads) radiation alone, moderate dose radiation (4000
rads + 5-fluorouracil), and high dose radiation + 5-fluorouracil. The Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Cancer 1981;48:1705.
202. Kalser MH, Ellenberg SS. Pancreatic cancer: adjuvant combined radiation and chemotherapy following curative resection. Arch Surg 1985;120:899.
203. Jeekel J. Adjuvant or neoadjuvant therapy for pancreatic carcinoma? Digestion 1997;58:533.
204. Klinkenbijl JH, Jeekel J, Sahmoud T, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy and 5-fluorouracil after curative resection for the cancer of the pancreas and peri-ampullary region. Phase III trial of the
EORTC Gastrointestinal Tract Cancer Cooperative Group. Ann Surg 1999;230:776.
205. van Eijck CHJ, Link KH, van Rossen MEE, Jeekel J. (Neo)adjuvant treatment in pancreatic cancerthe need for future trials. Eur J Surg 1999;25:132.
206. Neoptolemos JP, Baker P, Berger H, et al. A randomized multicenter European study vs no-adjuvant treatment in resectable pancreatic cancer (ESPAC-1). Int J Pancreatol 1997;21:97.
207. Neoptolemos JP, Kerr DJ, Beger H, et al. ESPAC-1 trial progress report: the European randomized adjuvant study comparing radiochemotherapy, 6 months chemotherapy and combination
therapy versus observation in pancreatic cancer. Digestion 1997;58:570.
208. Regine WF, John WJ, Mohiuddin M. Evolving trends in combined modality therapy for pancreatic cancer. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg 1998;5:227.
209. Davis BJ, Raben A, Casper E, Minsky BD. Acute toxicity and efficacy of postoperative combined modality therapy for adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Proceedings of the 38th Annual ASTRO
Meeting 1996:2039.
210. Demeure MJ, Doffek KM, Komorowski RA, et al. Molecular metastases in stage I pancreatic cancer: improved survival with adjuvant chemoradiation. Surgery 1998;124:663.
211. Abrams RA, Grochow LB, Chakravarthy A, et al. Intensified adjuvant therapy for pancreatic and periampullary adenocarcinoma: survival results and observations regarding patterns of failure,
radiotherapy dose and CA19-9 levels. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:1039.
212. Hoffman JP, Weese JL, Solin LJ, et al. A pilot study of preoperative chemoradiation for patients with localized adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Am J Surg 1995;169:71.
213. Hoffman JP, Lipsitz S, Pisansky T, et al. Phase II trial of preoperative radiation therapy and chemotherapy for patients with localized, resectable adenocarcinoma of the pancreas: an Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:317.
214. Bakkevold KE, Arnesjo B, Dahl O, Kambestad B. Adjuvant combination chemotherapy (AMF) following radical resection of carcinoma of the pancreas and papilla of Vaterresults of a controlled,
prospective, randomized multicentre study. Eur J Cancer 1995;29A:698.
215. Crucitti F, Doglietto GB, Frontera D, et al. Integrated radiosurgical treatment of resectable pancreatic head carcinoma. Pancreas 1998;16:31.
216. Ishikawa O, Ohhigashi H, Teshima T. Clinical and histopathological appraisal of preoperative irradiation for adenocarcinoma of the pancreaticoduodenal region. J Surg Oncol 1989;40:143.
217. Pilepich MV, Miller HH. Preoperative irradiation in carcinoma of the pancreas. Cancer 1980;46:1945.
218. Kopelson G. Curative surgery for adenocarcinoma of the pancreas/ampulla of Vater: the role of adjuvant pre- or postoperative radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:911.
219. Hoffman JP, Weese JL, Solin LJ. A single institutional experience with preoperative chemoradiation for stage IIII pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Am Surg 1993;59:772.
220. Lowy AM, Lee, JE, Pisters PWT, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of octreotide to prevent pancreatic fistula after pancreaticoduodenectomy for malignant disease. Ann Surg 1997;226:632.
221. Abbruzzese JL, Grunewald R, Weeks EA, et al. A phase I clinical, plasma and cellular pharmacology study of gemcitabine. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:491.
222. Casper ES, Green MR, Kelsen DP, et al. Phase II trial of gemcitabine (2',2'-difluorodeoxycytidine) in patients with adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Invest New Drugs 1994;12:29.
223. Burris HA III, Moore MJ, Andersen J, et al. Improvements in survival and clinical benefit with gemcitabine as first-line therapy for patients with advanced pancreas cancer: a randomized trial. J
Clin Oncol 1997;15:2403.
224. Rothenberg ML, Burris HA III, Andersen JS, et al. Gemcitabine: effective palliative therapy for pancreas cancer patients failing 5-FU. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:198(abst).
225. Lawrence TS, Chang EY, Hahn TM, Hertel LW, Shewach DS. Radiosensitization of pancreatic cancer cells by 2',2'-difluoro-2'-deoxycytidine. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;34:867.
226. Wolff RA, Evans DB, Gravel DM, et al. Phase I trial of gemcitabine (GEM) combined with radiation (XRT) for the treatment of locally advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1998;17:1091(abst).
227. Osteen RT, Zinner MJ, Fuchs CS, et al. Phase I trial of concurrent gemcitabine (GEM), infusional 5-fluorouracil (FU) and radiation therapy (RT) in patients with localized, unresectable
pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:1091(abst).
228. Safar AM, Altamira PS, Recht A, Stevenson M, Stuart K. Phase I trial of gemcitabine, cisplatin (CDDP) and external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) for pancreatic cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin

Oncol 1999;18:873(abst).
229. McGinn CJ, Shureiqi I, Robertson JM, et al. A phase I trial of radiation dose escalation with full dose gemcitabine (GEM) in patients (pts) with pancreatic cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:1051(abst).
230. Blackstock AW, Bernard SA, Richards F, et al. Phase I trial of twice-weekly gemcitabine and concurrent radiation in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2208.
231. Brierley J, Oza A, Patnaik A, et al. A phase I study of radiation therapy and gemcitabine in patients with locally advanced pancreatic carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:713(abst).
232. Tempero M, Plunkett W, van Haperen VR, et al. Randomized phase II trial of dose intense gemcitabine by standard infusion vs. fixed dose rate in metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:1048(abst).
233. Hoffman JP, McGinn CJ, Szarka CE, et al. A phase I study of preoperative gemcitabine with radiation therapy followed by postoperative gemcitabine for patients with localized, resectable
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:1090(abst).
234. Whipple AO, Parson WV, Mullin CR. Treatment of carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater. Ann Surg 1935;102:763.
235. Whipple AO. The rationale of radical surgery for cancer of the pancreas and ampullary region. Ann Surg 1941;114:612.
236. Waugh JM, Clagett OT. Resection of the duodenum and head of the pancreas for carcinoma. Surgery 1946;20:224.
237. Fernandez-delCastillo C, Rattner DW, Warshaw AL. Standards for pancreatic resection in the 1990s. Arch Surg 1995;130:295.
238. Fuhrman G, Leach SD, Staley CA, et al. Rationale for en-bloc vein resection in the treatment of pancreatic adenocarcinoma adherent to the superior mesentericportal venous confluence. Ann
Surg 1996;223:154.
239. Bold RJ, Charnsangavej C, Cleary KR, et al. Major vascular resection as part of pancreaticoduodenectomy for cancer: radiologic, intraoperative, and pathologic analysis. J Gastrointest Surg
1999;3:233.
240. Doerr RJ, Yildiz I, Flint LM. Pancreaticoduodenectomy: university experience and resident education. Arch Surg 1990;125:463.
241. Edge SB, Schmieg RE, Rosenlof LK, et al. Pancreas cancer resection outcome in American university centers. Cancer 1993;71:3502.
242. Wade TP, Kraybill WG, Virgo KS, et al. Pancreatic cancer treatment in the U.S. veteran from 1987 to 1991: effect of tumor stage on survival. J Surg Oncol 1995;58:104.
243. Wade TP, Radford DM, Virgo KS, et al. Complications and outcomes in the treatment of pancreatic adenocarcinoma in the United States veteran. J Am Coll Surg 1994;179:38.
244. Lieberman MD, Kilburn H, Lindsey M, Brennan MF. Relation of perioperative deaths to hospital volume among patients undergoing pancreatic resection for malignancy. Ann Surg
1995;222:638.
245. Sosa JA, Bowman HM, Gordon TA, et al. Importance of hospital volume in the overall management of pancreatic cancer. Ann Surg 1998;228:429.
246. Gordon TA, Bowman HM, Tielsch JM, et al. Statewide regionalization of pancreaticoduodenectomy and its effect on in-hospital mortality. Ann Surg 1998;228:71.
247. Simunovic M, To T, Theriault M, Langer B. Relation between hospital surgical volume and outcome for pancreatic resection for neoplasm in a publicly funded health care system. CMAJ
1999;160:643.
248. Birkmeyer JD, Finlayson SR, Tosteson AN, et al. Effect of hospital volume on in-hospital mortality with pancreaticoduodenectomy. Surgery 1999;125:250.
249. Birkmeyer JD, Warshaw AL, Finlayson SR, Grove MR, Tosteson AN. Relationship between hospital volume and late survival after pancreaticoduodenectomy. Surgery 1999;126:178.
250. Gordon TA, Burleyson GP, Tielsch JM, et al. The effects of regionalization on cost and outcome for one general high-risk surgical procedure. Ann Surg 1995;221:43.
251. Evans DB, Lee JE, Pisters PWT. Pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple operation) and total pancreatectomy for cancer. In: Nyhus LM, Baker RJ, Fishcer JF, eds. Mastery of surgery, 3rd ed.
Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1997:1233.
252. Kayahara M, Nagakawa T, Konishi I, et al. Clinicopathological study of pancreatic carcinoma with particular reference to the invasion of the extrapancreatic neural plexus. Int J Pancreatol
1991;10:105.
253. Nagakawa T, Kayahara M, Ohta T, et al. Patterns of neural and plexus invasion of human pancreatic cancer and experimental cancer. Int J Pancreatol 1991;10:113.
254. Nagakawa T, Mori K, Nakano T, et al. Perineural invasion of carcinoma of the pancreas and biliary tract. Br J Surg 1994;80:619.
255. Fortner J. Technique of regional subtotal and total pancreatectomy. Am J Surg 1985;150:593.
256. Ishikawa O, Ohigashi H, Imaoka S, et al. Preoperative indications for extended pancreatectomy for locally advanced pancreas cancer involving the portal vein. Ann Surg 1992;215:231.
257. Cusack JC, Fuhrman GM, Lee JE, et al. Management of unsuspected tumor invasion of the superior mesentericportal venous confluence at the time of pancreaticoduodenectomy. Am J Surg
1994;168:352.
258. Leach SD, Lee JE, Charnsangavej C, et al. Survival following pancreaticoduodenectomy with resection of the superior mesentericportal vein confluence for adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic
head. Br J Surg 1998;85:611.
259. Traverso LW, Longmire WP. Preservation of the pylorus in pancreaticoduodenectomy. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1978;146:959.
260. Grace PA, Pitt HA, Longmire WP. Pylorus preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy: an overview. Br J Surg 1990;77:968.
261. Crucitti F, Doglietto G, Bellantone R, et al. Digestive and nutritional consequences of pancreatic resections. Int J Pancreatol 1995;17:37.
262. Kozuschek W, Reith HB, Waleczek H, et al. A comparison of long term results of the standard Whipple procedure and the pylorus preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy. J Am Coll Surg
1994;178:443.
263. Patel AG, Toyama MT, Kusske AM, et al. Pylorus-preserving Whipple resection for pancreatic cancer. Is it any better? Arch Surg 1995;130:838.
264. Lin PW, Lin YJ. Prospective randomized comparison between pylorus preserving and standard pancreaticoduodenectomy. Br J Surg 1999;86:603.
265. Sharp KW, Ross CB, Halter SA, et al. Pancreaticoduodenectomy with pyloric preservation for carcinoma of the pancreas: a cautionary note. Surgery 1988;105:645.
266. Zerbi A, Balzano G, Patuzzo R, et al. Comparison between pylorus-preserving and Whipple pancreaticoduodenectomy. Br J Surg 1995;82:975.
267. Gunderson LL, Willett CG. Pancreas and hepatobiliary tract. In: Perez C, Brady L, eds. Principles and practice of radiation oncology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven, 1997:1467.
268. Manabe T, Baba N, Ono K, et al. Radical pancreatectomy with intraoperative radiation therapy for pancreatic head cancer. In: Abe M, Takahashi M, eds. Intraoperative radiation therapy.
Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Intraoperative Radiation Therapy. New York: Pergamon Press, 1991:249.
269. Hiraoka T, Watanabe E, Mochinaga M, et al. Intraoperative irradiation combined with radical resection for cancer of the head of the pancreas. World J Surg 1984;8:766.
270. Hiraoka T. Extended radical resection of cancer of the pancreas with intraoperative radiotherapy. Ballieres Clin Gastroenterol 1990;4:985.
271. Coquard R, Ayzac L, Gilly N, et al. Intraoperative radiotherapy in resected pancreatic cancer: feasibility and results. Radiother Oncol 1997;44:271.
272. Sindelar WF, Kinsella TJ. Studies of intraoperative radiotherapy in carcinoma of the pancreas. Ann Oncol 1999;10[Suppl 4]:S226.
273. Evans DB, Roh M. Pancreaticoduodenectomy. In: Roh M, Ames FC, eds. Atlas of advanced surgical oncology. London: MosbyYear Book, 1994:4.2.
274. Whipple AO. Observations on radical surgery for lesions of the pancreas. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1946;82:623.
275. Mason GR, Freeark RJ. Current experience with pancreatogastrostomy. Am J Surg 1995;169:217.
276. Park CD, Mackie JA, Rhoads J. Pancreaticogastrostomy. Am J Surg 1967;113:85.
277. Yeo CJ, Cameron JL, Maher MM, et al. A prospective randomized trial of pancreaticogastrostomy versus pancreaticojejunostomy after pancreaticoduodenectomy. Ann Surg 1995;222:580.
278. Warshaw AL, Torchiana DL. Delayed gastric emptying after pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1985;160:1.
279. Luque-de Leon E, Tsiotos GG, Balsiger B, et al. Staging laparoscopy for pancreatic cancer should be used to select the best means of palliation and not only to maximize the resectability rate.
J Gastrointest Surg 1999;3:111.
280. Sohn TA, Lillemoe KD, Cameron JL, et al. Surgical palliation of unresectable periampullary adenocarcinoma in the 1990s. J Am Coll Surg 1999;188:658.
281. de Rooij PD, Rogatko A, Brennan MF. Evaluation of palliative surgical procedures in unresectable pancreatic cancer. Br J Surg 1991;78:1053.
282. Glazer G, Coulter C, Crofton ME, et al. Controversial issues in the management of pancreatic cancer. Part One. A debate held at St. Mary's Hospital, London on 18 November 1993. Ann R Coll
Surg Engl 1995;77:111.
283. Sung JJY, Chung S. Endoscopic stenting for palliation of malignant biliary obstruction. A review of progress in the last 15 years. Dig Dis Sci 1995;40:1167.
284. Consensus statement. Management of unresectable pancreatic ductal cancer. J Gastrointest Surg 1999;3:331.
285. Born P, Rosch T, Bruhl K, et al. Long-term results of endoscopic treatment of biliary duct obstruction due to pancreatic disease. Hepatogastroenterology 1998;45:833.
286. Brugge WR, VanDam J. Pancreatic and biliary endoscopy. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1808.
287. Evans DB, Winchester DJ, Lee JE. Laparoscopic cholecystojejunostomy. In: MacFadyen BV, Ponsky JL, eds. Operative laparoscopy and thorascopy. New York: Raven Press, 1996.
288. Fletcher DR, Jones RM. Laparoscopic cholecystojejunostomy as palliation for obstructive jaundice in inoperable carcinoma of pancreas. Surg Endosc 1992;6:147.
289. Nathanson LK. Laparoscopic cholecyst-jejunostomy and gastroenterostomy for malignant disease. Surg Oncol 1993;2:19.
290. Park A, Schwartz R, Tandan V, Anvari M. Laparoscopic pancreatic surgery. Am J Surg 1999;177:158.
291. Egrari S, O'Connell TX. Role of prophylactic gastroenterostomy for unresectable pancreatic carcinoma. Am Surg 1995;61:862.
292. van der Schelling GP, van den Bosch R, Klinkenbij JHG, et al. Is there a place for gastroenterostomy in patients with advanced cancer of the head of the pancreas? World J Surg 1993;17:128.
293. Weaver DW, Wiencek RG, Bouwman DL, Walt AJ. Gastrojejunostomy: is it helpful for patients with pancreatic cancer? Surgery 1987;102:608.
294. Lillemoe KD, Cameron JL, Hardacre JM, et al. Is prophylactic gastrojejunostomy indicated for unresectable periampullary cancer? A prospective randomized trial. Ann Surg 1999;230:322.
295. Wade TP, Neuberger TJ, Swope TJ, et al. Pancreatic cancer palliation: using tumor stage to select appropriate operation. Am J Surg 1994;167:208.
296. Espat NJ, Brennan MF, Conlon KC. Patients with laparoscopically staged unresectable pancreatic carcinoma do not require subsequent surgical biliary or gastric bypass. J Am Coll Surg
1999;188:649.
297. Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Radiation therapy combined with Adriamycin or 5-fluorouracil for the treatment of locally unresectable pancreatic carcinoma. Cancer 1985;56:2563.
298. Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Treatment of locally unresectable carcinoma of the pancreas: comparison of combined-modality therapy (chemotherapy plus radiotherapy) to
chemotherapy alone. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:751.
299. Roldan GE, Gunderson LL, Nagorney DM, et al. External beam versus intraoperative and external beam irradiation for locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Cancer 1988;61:1110.
300. White R, Lee C, Anscher M, et al. Preoperative chemoradiation for patients with locally advanced adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:38.
301. Todd KE, Gloor B, Lane JS, Isacoff WH, Reber HA. Resection of locally advanced pancreatic cancer after downstaging with continuous-infusion 5-fluorouracil, mitomycin-C, leucovorin, and
dipyridamole. J Gastrointest Surg 1998;2:159.
302. Kamthan AG, Morris JC, Dalton J, et al. Combined modality therapy for stage II and stage III pancreatic carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2920.
303. Safran H, King T, Choy H, et al. Paclitaxel and concurrent radiation for locally advanced pancreatic and gastric cancer: a phase I study. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:901.
304. Jessup JM, Steele G, Mayer RJ, et al. Neoadjuvant therapy for unresectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Arch Surg 1993;128:559.
305. Jeekel J, Treurniet-Donker AD. Treatment perspectives in locally advanced unresectable pancreatic cancer. Br J Surg 1991;78:1332.
306. Tepper JE, Moyes D, Krall JM, et al. Intraoperative radiation therapy of pancreatic carcinoma: a report of RTOG-8505. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:1145.
307. Shipley WU, Nardi GL, Cohen AM. Iodine-125 implant and external beam irradiation in patients with localized pancreatic carcinoma: a comparative study to surgical resection. Cancer
1980;45:709.
308. Tepper JE, Shipley WU, Warshaw AL, et al. The role of misonidazole combined with intraoperative radiation therapy in the treatment of pancreatic carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:579.
309. Garton GR, Gunderson LL, Nagorney DM, et al. High-dose preoperative external beam and intraoperative irradiation for locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1993;28:1153.
310. Safran H, Akerman P, Cioffi W, et al. Paclitaxel and concurrent radiation therapy for locally advanced adenocarcinomas of the pancreas, stomach, and gastroesophageal junction. Semin Radiat
Oncol 1999;9:53.
311. Higgins PD, Sohn JW, Fine RM, et al. Three-dimensional conformal pancreas treatment: comparison of four- to six-field techniques. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:605.
312. Lee MJ, Mueller PR, vonSonnenberg E, et al. CT-guided celiac ganglion block with alcohol. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1993;161:633.
313. Lillemoe KD, Cameron JL, Kaufman HS, et al. Chemical splanchnicectomy in patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer. Ann Surg 1993;217:447.
314. Rothenberg ML. New developments in chemotherapy for patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. Oncology 1996;10[Suppl]:18.
315. Rothenberg ML, Abbruzzese JL, Moore M, et al. A rationale for expanding the endpoints for clinical trials in advanced pancreatic carcinoma. Cancer 1996;78[Suppl]:627.
316. Abbruzzese JL. Novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches to pancreatic cancer. Cancer Bull 1994;46:525.

317. Kelsen D. The use of chemotherapy in the treatment of advanced gastric and pancreatic cancer. Semin Oncol 1994;21:58.
318. Bukowski RM. Role of chemotherapy in patients with adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Adv Oncol 1995;11:25.
319. Glimelius BJ. Chemotherapy in the treatment of cancer of the pancreas. J Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surg 1998;5:235.
320. Cascinu S, Graziano F, Catalano G. Chemotherapy for advanced pancreatic cancer: it may no longer be ignored. Ann Oncol 1999;10:105.
321. Brennan MR, Kinsella TJ, Casper ES. Cancer of the pancreas. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott,
1993:849.
322. Carter SK. The integration of chemotherapy into a combined modality approach for cancer treatment. VI. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Cancer Treat Rev 1975;3:193.
323. Hansen R, Quebbeman E, Ritch P, et al. Continuous 5-fluorouracil infusion in carcinoma of the pancreas: a phase II study. Am J Med Sci 1988;295:91.
324. Tajiri H, Yashimori M, Okazaki N, et al. Phase II study of continuous infusion of 5-fluorouracil in advanced pancreatic cancer. Oncology 1991;48:18.
325. Pazdur R, Meropol NJ, Casper E, et al. Phase II trial of ZD1694 (Tomudex) in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. Ann Oncol 1996;13:355.
326. Auerbach M, Wampler GL, Lokich JJ, et al. Treatment of advanced pancreatic carcinoma with a combination of protracted infusional 5-fluorouracil and weekly carboplatin: a Mid-Atlantic
Oncology Program study. Ann Oncol 1997;8:439.
327. John WJ, Flett MQ. Continuous venous infusion 5-fluorouracil and interferon-alpha in pancreatic carcinoma. Am J Clin Oncol 1998;21:147.
328. Hubbard KP, Pazdur R, Ajani JA, et al. Phase II evaluation of iproplatin in patients with advanced gastric and pancreatic cancer. Am J Clin Oncol 1992;15:524.
329. Carlson RW, Doroshow JH, Odujinrin OO, et al. Trimetrexate in locally advanced or metastatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas: a phase II study of the Northern California Oncology Group.
Invest New Drugs 1990;8:387.
330. Casper ES, Schwartz GK, Johnson B, et al. Phase II trial of edatrexate in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. Invest New Drugs 1992;10:313.
331. Casper ES, Schwartz GK, Kelsen DP. Phase II trial of fazarabine (arabinofuranosyl-5-azacytidine) in patients with advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Invest New Drugs 1992;10:205.
332. Bukowski RM, Fleming TR, MacDonald JS, et al. Evaluation of combination chemotherapy and phase II agents in pancreatic adenocarcinoma: a Southwest Oncology Group study. Cancer
1993;71:322.
333. Linke K, Pazdur R, Abbruzzese J, et al. Phase II study of amonafide in advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Invest New Drugs 1991;9:353.
334. Rougier P, De Forni M, Adenis A, et al. Phase II study of Taxotere (RP56976, docetaxel) in pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1994;13:200(abst).
335. Okada S, Sakata Y, Matsuno S, et al. Phase II study of docetaxel in patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer: a Japanese cooperative study. Cooperative Group of Docetaxel for Pancreatic
Cancer in Japan. Br J Cancer 1999;80:438.
336. Whitehead RP, Jacobson J, Brown TD, et al. Phase II trial of paclitaxel and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in patients with pancreatic carcinoma: a Southwest Oncology Group study. J
Clin Oncol 1997;15:2414.
337. O'Reilly S, Donehower RC, Rowinsky EK, et al. A phase II trial of topotecan in patients with previously untreated pancreatic cancer. Anticancer Drugs 1996;7:410.
338. Scher RM, Kosierowski R, Lusch C, et al. Phase II trial of topotecan in advanced or metastatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Invest New Drugs 1996;13:347.
339. Wagener DJT, Verdonk HER, Dirix LY, et al. Phase II trial of CPT-11 in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. An EORTC Early Clinical Trials Group study. Ann Oncol 1995;6:129.
340. Loehrer PJ Sr, Williams SD, Einhorn LH, et al. Ifosfamide: an active drug in treatment of adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:367.
341. Cerny T, Martinelli G, Goldhirsch A, et al. Continuous 5 day infusion of ifosfamide and mesna in inoperable pancreatic cancer patients: a phase II study. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1991;117:135.
342. Ajani JA, Abbruzzese JL, Goudeau P, et al. Ifosfamide and mesna: marginally active in patients with advanced carcinoma of the pancreas. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1703.
343. Bissery MC, Guenard D, Gueritte-Voegelein F, et al. Experimental antitumor activity of Taxotere (RP 56976, NSC 628503), a Taxol analogue. Cancer Res 1991;51:4845.
344. Abbruzzese JL, Evans D, Markowitz A, et al. Docetaxel, a potentially active agent for patients with pancreatic adenocarcinomas . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:221(abst).
345. Androulakis N, Kourousis C, Dimopoulos MA, et al. Treatment of pancreatic cancer with docetaxel and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor: a multicenter phase II study. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:1779.
346. Sugarman SM, Pazdur R, Daugherty K, et al. A phase II trial of topotecan for the treatment of unresectable pancreatic cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1994;13:224(abst).
347. Stevenson JP, Scher RM, Kosierowski R, et al. Phase II trial of topotecan as a 21-day continuous infusion in patients with advanced or metastatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Eur J
Cancer 1998;34:1358.
348. Hertel LW, Kroin JS, Misner JW, Tustin JM. Synthesis of 2-deoxy-2',2'difluoro- D-ribose and 2-deoxy-2',2'difluoro-D-fibofuranosyl nucleosides. J Organic Chem 1988;53:2406.
349. Hertel LW, Boder GB, Kroin JS, et al. Evaluation of the antitumor activity of gemcitabine (2',2'-difluoro-2'-deoxycytidine). Cancer Res 1990;50:4417.
350. Heinemann V, Hertel LW, Grindey GB, Plunkett W. Comparison of the cellular pharmacokinetics and toxicity of 2',2'-difluorodeoxycytidine and 1-b- D-arabinofuranosylcytosine. Cancer Res
1988;48:4024.
351. Rothenberg ML, Moore MJ, Cripps MC, et al. A phase II trial of gemcitabine in patients with 5-FU-refractory pancreas cancer. Ann Oncol 1996;7:347.
352. Ragnarson-Tennvall G, Wilking N. Treatment of locally advanced pancreatic carcinoma in Sweden. A health economic comparison of palliative treatment with best supportive care versus
palliative treatment with gemcitabine in combination with best supportive care. Pharmacoeconomics 1999;15:377.
353. Grunewald R, Abbruzzese JL, Tarassoff P, et al. Saturation of 2',2'-difluorodeoxycytidine 5'-triphosphate accumulation by mononuclear cells during a phase I trial of gemcitabine. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol 1991;27:258.
354. Grunewald R, Kantarjian H, Keating MJ, et al. Pharmacologically directed design of the dose rate and schedule of 2',2'-difluorodeoxycytidine (gemcitabine) administration in leukemia. Cancer
Res 1990;50:6823.
355. Grunewald R, Kantarjian H, Du M, et al. Gemcitabine in leukemia: a phase I clinical, plasma, and cellular pharmacology study. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:406.
356. Fossella FV, Lippman SM, Shin DM, et al. Maximum-tolerated dose defined for single-agent gemcitabine: a phase I dose-escalation study in chemotherapy-naive patients with advanced
nonsmall-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:310.
357. Touroutoglou N, Gravel D, Raber MN, et al. Clinical results of a pharmacodynamically-based strategy for higher dosing of gemcitabine in patients with solid tumors. Ann Oncol 1998;9:1003.
358. Brand R, Capadano M, Tempero M. A phase I trial of weekly gemcitabine administered as a prolonged infusion in patients with pancreatic cancer and other solid tumors. Invest New Drugs
1997;15:331.
359. van Moorsel CJ, Peters GJ, Pinedo HM. Gemcitabine: future prospects of single-agent and combination studies. Oncologist 1997;2:127.
360. van Moorsel CJ, Veerman G, Bergman AM, et al. Combination chemotherapy studies with gemcitabine. Semin Oncol 1997;24[Suppl 7]:S7-17.
361. Cascinu S, Silva RR, Barni S, et al. A combination of gemcitabine and 5-fluorouracil in advanced pancreatic cancer, a report from the Italian Group for the Study of Digestive Tract Cancer
(GISCAD). Br J Cancer 1999;80:1595.
362. Hidalgo M, Castellano D, Paz-Ares L, et al. Phase III study of gemcitabine and fluorouracil as a continuous infusion in patients with pancreatic cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:585.
363. Heinemann V, Wilke H, Possinger K, et al. Gemcitabine and cisplatin in the treatment of advanced and metastatic pancreatic cancer. Final results of a phase II study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:274a(abst).
364. Colucci G, Riccardi F, Giuliani F. et al. Randomized trial of gemcitabine alone or with cisplatin in advanced pancreatic cancer: a phase II multicenter study of the Southern Italy Oncology
Group. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:250a(abst).
365. Spiridonidis CH, Laufman LR, Jones J, et al. Phase I study of docetaxel dose escalation in combination with fixed weekly gemcitabine in patients with advanced malignancies. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:3866.
366. Rizvi NA. Docetaxel (Taxotere) and gemcitabine in combination therapy. Semin Oncol 1999;26[Suppl 11]:19.
367. Lueck A, Ridwelski K, Lippert H. Phase I study of a treatment of gemcitabine and docetaxel weekly in advanced pancreatic cancer. Ann Oncol 1998;9[Suppl 4]:52(abst).
368. Rothenberg ML, Sharma A, Weiss GR, et al. Phase I trial of paclitaxel and gemcitabine administered every two weeks in patients with refractory solid tumors. Ann Oncol 1998;9:733.
369. Scheithauer W, Kornek GV, Raderer M, et al. Phase II trial of gemcitabine, epirubicin and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in patients with advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Br J
Cancer 1999;80:1797.
370. Carmichael J, Lederman JA, Woll PJ, et al. Phase 1B study of concurrent administration of marimastat and gemcitabine in non-resectable pancreatic cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1998;17:232a(abst).
371. Glimelius B, Hoffman K, Sjoden PO, et al. Chemotherapy improves survival and quality of life in advanced pancreatic and biliary cancer. Ann Oncol 1996;7:593.
372. Palmer KR, Kerr M, Knowles G, et al. Chemotherapy prolongs survival in inoperable pancreatic carcinoma. Br J Surg 1994;81:882.
373. Morrell LM, Bach A, Richman SP, et al. A phase II multi-institutional trial of low-dose N-phosphonoacetyl- L-aspartate and high dose 5-fluorouracil as a short-term infusion in the treatment of adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. A
374.
375.
376.
377.
378.
379.
380.
381.
382.
383.
384.
385.
386.
387.
388.
389.
390.
391.
392.
393.
394.
395.
396.
397.
398.
399.
400.
401.
402.
403.
404.
405.
406.
407.
408.
409.
410.
411.
412.
413.
414.
415.
416.
417.
418.
419.
420.
421.
422.

Southwest Oncology Group study. Cancer 1991;67:363.
Rosvold E, Schilder R, Walczak J, et al. Phase II trial of PALA in combination with 5-fluorouracil in advanced pancreatic cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1992;29:305.
Harstrick A, Kohne-Wompner CH, Preusser P, et al. A phase II study of the combination of PALA, methotrexate and 5-FU in advanced pancreatic carcinoma.Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1993;12:219(abst).
Redei I, Green F, Hoffman JP, et al. Phase II trial of PALA and 6-methylmercaptopurine riboside (MMPR) in combination with 5-fluorouracil in advanced pancreatic cancer.Invest New Drugs 1994;12:319.
Crown J, Casper ES, Botet J, et al. Lack of efficacy of high dose leucovorin and fluorouracil in patients with advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma.J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1682.
DeCaprio JA, Mayer RJ, Gonin R, et al. Fluorouracil and high dose leucovorin in previously untreated patients with advanced adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Results of a phase II trial.J Clin Oncol 1991;9:2128.
Bolli E, Saccomanno S, Mondini G, et al. 5-Fluorouracil plus 5-methyltetrahydrofolate in advanced pancreatic cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1995;35:339.
Weinerman BH, MacCormick RE. A phase II survival comparison of patients with adenocarcinoma of the pancreas treated with 5-fluorouracil and calcium leucovorin versus a matched tumor registry control population.Am J Clin Oncol 1994;17:467.
Pazdur R, Ajani JA, Abbruzzese JL, et al. Phase II evaluation of fluorouracil and recombinant a-2a-interferon in previously untreated patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma.Cancer 1992;70:2073.
Moore MJ, Erlichman C, Kaizer L, et al. A phase II study of 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin and interferon-alpha in advanced pancreatic cancer.Anticancer Drugs 1993;4:555.
Knuth A, Bernhard H, Klein O, et al. Combination fluorouracil, folinic acid, and interferon alfa-2a: an active regimen in advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Semin Oncol 1992;19:211.
Bernhard H, Jèger-Arand E, Bernhard G, et al. Treatment of advanced pancreatic cancer with 5-fluorouracil, folinic acid and interferon alpha-2A: results of a phase II trial. Br J Cancer 1995;71:102.
Scheithauer W, Pfeffel F, Komek G, et al. A phase II trial of PALA in combination with 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin and recombinant alpha-2B interferon in advanced adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.Cancer 1992;70:1864.
Gattani A, Mandeli J, Chesser MR, et al. An active biochemical modulation regimen for advanced adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11:193(abst).
Johnson PJ, Corbishley TP. Sex steroid receptors and antisteroid agents in the treatment of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Monograph Series. European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer 1987;18:99.
Fisher WE, Muscarella P, Boros LG, et al. Gastrointestinal hormones as potential adjuvant treatment of exocrine pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Int J Pancreatol 1998;24:169.
Andren-Sandberg A, Hoem D, Backman PL. Other risk factors for pancreatic cancer: hormonal aspects. Ann Oncol 1999;10[Suppl 4]:131.
Yamashita J, Abe M, Ogawa M. Endocrine therapy in pancreatic carcinoma.Oncology 1998;55[Suppl 1]:17.
Greenway B, Iqbal MJ, Johnson PJ, Williams R. Oestrogen receptor proteins in malignant and fetal pancreas. BMJ 1981;283:751.
Iqbal MJ, Greenway BA, Wilkinson ML, et al. Sex steroid enzymes, aromatase and 5-alpha-reductase in the pancreas: a comparison of normal adult, foetal and malignant tissue.Clin Sci 1983;65:71.
Greenway B, Iqbal MJ, Johnson PJ, Williams R. Low serum testosterone concentrations in patients with carcinoma of the pancreas. BMJ 1983;286:93.
Siu TO, Kwan WB. Hormones in chemotherapy for pancreatic cancer, chemoagents or carriers? In Vivo 1989;3:255.
Comaru-Schally AM, Schally AV. LHRH agonists as adjuncts to somatostatin analogs in the treatment of pancreatic cancer. Hum Reprod 1990;3:203.
Klijn JG, Setyono-Han B, Bakker GH, et al. Effects of somatostatin analog (Sandostatin) treatment in experimental and human cancer. Monograph Series, European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer 1987;18:459.
Schally AV, Redding TW, Cal RZ, et al. Somatostatin analogs in the treatment of various experimental tumors. Monograph Series, European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer 1987;18:431.
Greenway B, Duke D, Pym B, et al. The control of human pancreatic adenocarcinoma xenografts in nude mice by hormone therapy.Br J Surg 1982;69:595.
Szende B, Srkalovic G, Schally AV, et al. Inhibitory effects of analogs of luteinising hormonereleasing hormone and somatostatin on pancreatic cancer in hamsters.Cancer 1990;65:2279.
Zalatnai A, Schally AV. Treatment of N-nitrosobis(2-oxopropyl)amineinduced pancreatic cancer in Syrian golden hamsters with D-Trp-6-LH-RH and somatostatin analogue RC-160 microcapsules. Cancer Res 1989;49:1810.
Upp JR Jr, Olson D, Poston DJ, et al. Inhibition of growth of two human pancreatic adenocarcinomas in vivo by somatostatin analog SMS 201-995. Ann Surg 1988;155:29.
Helle SI, Geisler J, Poulsen JP, et al. Microencapsulated octreotide pamoate in advanced gastrointestinal and pancreatic cancer: a phase I study.Br J Cancer 1998;78:14.
Fazeny B, Baur M, Prohaska M, et al. Octreotide combined with goserelin in the therapy of advanced pancreatic cancerresults of a pilot study and review of the literature.J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1997;123:45.
Weckbecker G, Raulf F, Tolcsvai L, et al. Potentiation of the anti-proliferative effects of anti-cancer drugs by octreotide in vitro and in vivo. Digestion 1996;57[Suppl 1]:22.
Greenway BA. Effect of flutamide on survival in patients with pancreatic cancer: results of a prospective, randomised, double blind, placebo controlled trial. BMJ 1998;316:1935.
Sharma JJ, Razvillas B, Stephens CD, et al. Phase II study of flutamide as second line chemotherapy in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer.Invest New Drugs 1997;15:361.
Theve NO, Pousette A, Carlstrom K. Adenocarcinoma of the pancreasa hormone sensitive tumor? A preliminary report on Nolvadex treatment.Clin Oncol 1983;9:193.
Tonnesen K, Kamp-Jensen M. Antiestrogen therapy in pancreatic carcinoma: a preliminary report. Eur J Surg Oncol 1986;12:69.
Wong A, Chan A. Survival benefit of tamoxifen therapy in adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. A case-control study.Cancer 1993;71:2200.
Crowson MC, Dorrell A, Rolfe EB, et al. A phase II study to evaluate tamoxifen in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.Eur J Surg Oncol 1986;12:335.
Allegretti A, Lionetto R, Saccomanno S, et al. LH-RH analogue treatment in adenocarcinoma of the pancreas: a phase II study.Oncology 1993;50:77.
Philip PA, Carmichael J, Tonkin K, et al. Hormonal treatment of pancreatic carcinoma: a phase II study of LHRH agonist goserelin plus hydrocortisone. Br J Cancer 1993;67:379.
Swarovsky B, Wolf M, Havemann K, et al. Tamoxifen or cytoproterone acetate in combination with buserelin is ineffective in patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma.Oncology 1993;50:226.
Taylor OM, Benson IA, McMahon MJ. Clinical trial of tamoxifen in patients with irresectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The Yorkshire Gastrointestinal Tumor Group. Br J Surg 1993;80:384.
Bakkevold KE, Pattersen A, Ames JB, et al. Tamoxifen therapy in unresectable adenocarcinoma of the pancreas and the papilla of Vater.Br J Surg 1990;77:725.
Keating JJ, Johnson PJ, Cochrane AM, et al. A prospective randomized trial of tamoxifen and cytoproterone acetate in pancreatic carcinoma.Br J Cancer 1989;60:789.
Pederzoli P, Maurer U, Vollmer K, et al. Phase 3 trial of SMS 201-995pa LAR vs. placebo in unresectable stage II, III, and IV pancreatic cancer.Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:257a(abst).
Roy A, Jacobs A, Bukowski R, et al. Phase 3 trial of SMS 201-995 pa LAR (SMS PA LAR) and continuous infusion (CI) 5-FU in unresectable stage II, III, and IV pancreatic cancer.
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:257a(abst 987).
Robinson EK, Grau AM, Evans DB, et al. Cell cycle regulation of human pancreatic cancer by tamoxifen.Ann Surg Oncol 1998;5:342.
Wong A, Chan A, Arthur K. Tamoxifen therapy in unresectable adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:7.
Horimi T, Takasaki M, Toki A, et al. The beneficial effect of tamoxifen therapy in patients with resected adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Hepatogastroenterology 1996;43:1225.
Andren-Sandberg A. Treatment with an LH-RH analogue in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. A preliminary report.Acta Chir Scand 1990;156:540.

423.
424.
425.
426.
427.
428.
429.
430.
431.
432.
433.
434.
435.
436.
437.
438.
439.
440.
441.
442.
443.
444.
445.
446.
447.
448.
449.
450.
451.
452.
453.
454.
455.
456.
457.
458.
459.
460.
461.
462.
463.
464.
465.
466.
467.
468.
469.
470.
471.
472.
473.
474.
475.
476.
477.
478.
479.
480.
481.
482.
483.
484.
485.
486.
487.

Abbruzzese JL, Gholson CF, Daugherty K, et al. A pilot clinical trial of the cholecystokinin receptor antagonist MK 329 in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer.Pancreas 1992;7:165.
Smith FP, Hoth DF, Levin B, et al. 5-Fluorouracil, Adriamycin, and mitomycin-C (FAM) chemotherapy for advanced adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.Cancer 1980;46:2014.
Schein PS, Lavin PT, Moetel CG, et al. Randomized phase II trial of Adriamycin, methotrexate, and actinomycin-D in advanced measurable pancreatic carcinoma.Cancer 1978;42:19.
Bitran JD, Desser RR, Kozloff MF, et al. Treatment of metastatic pancreatic and gastric adenocarcinoma with 5-FU, Adriamycin and mitomycin (FAM). Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:2049.
Wiggans RG, Woolley PV, MacDonald JS, et al. Phase II trial of streptozotocin, mitomycin C, and 5-fluorouracil (SMF) in the treatment of advanced pancreatic cancer. Cancer 1978;41:387.
Oster MW, Gray R, Panasci L, et al. Chemotherapy for advanced pancreatic cancer. A comparison of 5-fluorouracil, Adriamycin, and mitomycin (FAM) with 5-fluorouracil, streptozotocin, and mitomycin (FSM).Cancer 1986;57:29.
Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Phase II studies of drug combinations in advanced pancreatic carcinoma: fluorouracil plus doxorubicin plus mitomycin C and two regimens of streptozotocin plus mitomycin C plus fluorouracil. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1794.
Cullinan SA, Moertel CG, Fleming TR, et al. A comparison of three chemotherapeutic regimens in the treatment of advanced pancreatic and gastric carcinoma. JAMA 1985;253:2061.
Lipton A, Harvey HA, Santen RJ, et al. FAM chemotherapy aminoglutethimide in the treatment of pancreatic carcinoma.Eur J Surg Oncol 1990;16:12.
Palmer KR, Kerr M, Knowles G, et al. Chemotherapy prolongs survival in inoperable pancreatic carcinoma. Br J Surg 1994;81:882.
Mallinson CN, Rake MO, Cocking JB. Chemotherapy in pancreas cancer.BMJ 1980;281:1589.
Cullinan S, Moertel CG, Wieand HS, et al. A phase III trial. On the therapy of advanced pancreatic carcinoma. Evaluations of the Mallinson regimen and combined 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin and cisplatin.Cancer 1990;65:2207.
Wils JA, Kok T, Wagener DJ, et al. Activity of cisplatin in adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Eur J Cancer 1993;29:203.
Rothman H, Cantrell JE Jr, Lokich J, et al. Continuous infusion of 5-fluorouracil plus weekly cisplatin for pancreatic carcinoma. A Mid-Atlantic Oncology Program study. Cancer 1991;68:264.
Lokich JJ, Ahlgren JD, Cantrell J, et al. A prospective randomized comparison of protracted infusional 5-fluorouracil with or without weekly bolus cisplatin in metastatic colorectal carcinoma. A Mid-Atlantic Oncology Program study. Cancer 1991;67:14.
Rougier P, Zarba JJ, Ducreux M, et al. Phase II study of cisplatin and 120 hour continuous infusion of 5-fluorouracil in patients with advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma.Ann Oncol 1993;4:333.
Nose H, Shuichi O, Okusaka T, et al. 5-fluorouracil continuous infusion combined with cisplatin for advanced pancreatic cancer: a Japanese cooperative study.Hepatogastroenterology 1999;46:3244.
Isacoff WH, Botnick L, Rose C, et al. Treatment of patients with locally advanced pancreatic carcinoma with continuous infusion 5-fluorouracil, calcium leucovorin, mitomycin-C and dipyridamole. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1993;12;225(abst).
Dougherty JB, Kelsen D, Kemeny N, et al. Advanced pancreatic cancer: a phase III trial of cisplatin, high-dose cytarabine and caffeine.J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:1735.
Kelsen D, Hudis C, Nredwiecki D, et al. A phase III comparison of streptozotocin, mitomycin and 5-fluorouracil with cisplatin, cytosine arabinoside and caffeine in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer.Cancer 1991;68:965.
Thomas CR, Weiden PL, Traverso LW, Thompson T. Concomitant intraarterial cisplatin, intravenous 5-fluorouracil, and split-course radiation therapy for locally advanced unresectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma: a phase II study of the Puget Sound Oncology Consortium
(PSOC-703). Am J Clin Oncol 1997;20:161.
Maurer CA, Borner MM, Lauffer J, et al. Celiac axis infusion chemotherapy in advanced nonresectable pancreatic cancer.Int J Pancreatol 1998;23:181.
Ishikawa O, Ohigashi H, Sasaki Y, et al. Liver perfusion chemotherapy via both the hepatic artery and portal vein to prevent hepatic metastasis after extended pancreatectomy for adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.Am J Surg 1994;168:361.
Ishikawa O, Ohigashi H, Sasaki Y, et al. Adjuvant therapies in extended pancreatectomy for ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.Hepatogastroenterology 1998;45:644.
Crist KA, Arredondo MA, Chaudhuri B, et al. Pharmacokinetics and toxicity of isolated perfusion of human pancreas-duodenum with mitomycin-C.Reg Cancer Treat 1991;3:305.
Lorenz M, Petrowsky H, Heinrich S, et al. Isolated hypoxic perfusion with mitomycin C in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer.Eur J Surg Oncol 1998;24:542.
Muchmore JH, Carter RD, Preslan JE, George WJ. Regional chemotherapy with hemofiltration: a rationale for a different treatment approach to advanced pancreatic cancer. Hepatogastroenterology 1996;43:346.
Lygidakis NJ, Stringaris K. Adjuvant therapy following pancreatic resection for pancreatic duct carcinoma: a prospective randomized study.Hepatogastroenterology 1996;43:671.
Beger HG, Gansauge F, Buchler MW, Link KH. Intraarterial adjuvant chemotherapy after pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic cancer: significant reduction in occurrence of liver metastasis.World J Surg 1999;23:946.
Abbruzzese JL, Levin B, Ajani JA, et al. A phase I trial of recombinant human interferon-gamma and recombinant human tumor necrosis factor in patients with gastrointestinal cancer. Cancer Res 1989;49:4057.
Abbruzzese JL, Levin B, Ajani JA, et al. A phase II trial of recombinant human interferon-gamma and recombinant tumor necrosis factor in patients with advanced gastrointestinal malignancies: Results of a trial terminated by excessive toxicity.J Biol Response Mod 1990;9:522.
Gibbs JB, Oliff A, Kohl NE. Farnesyltransferase inhibitors: ras research yields a potential cancer therapeutic. Cell 1994;77:175.
Gibbs JB, Oliff A. Pharmaceutical research in molecular oncology. Cell 1994;79:193.
Sun J, Qian Y, Hamilton AD, Sebti SM. Ras CAAX peptidomimetic FTI 276 selectively blocks tumor growth in nude mice of a human lung carcinoma with K-Ras mutation and p53 deletion. Cancer Res 1995;55:4243.
Rowinsky EK, Windle JJ, Von Hoff DD. Ras protein farnesyltransferase: a strategic target for anticancer therapeutic development. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3631.
Hohl RJ, Lewis K. Differential effects of monoterpenes and lovastatin on RAS processing. J Biol Chem 1995;270:17508.
Stark MJ, Burke YD, McKinzie JH, Ayoubi AS, Crowell PL. Chemotherapy of pancreatic cancer with the monoterpene perillyl alcohol.Cancer Lett 1995;96:15.
Ripple GH, Gould MN, Stewart JA, et al. Phase I clinical trial of perillyl alcohol administered daily. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:1159.
Montoya RG, Velasco MA, Price RE, Abbruzzese JL, Wargovich MJ. Pilot study on the chemoprevention of N-nitrosobis(2-oxopropyl)amineinduced cancers of the pancreas in Syrian golden hamsters by the monoterpene perillyl alcohol.Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res
1996;37:274(abst 1872).
Klijn JG, Hoff AM, Planting AS, et al. Treatment of patients with metastatic pancreatic and gastrointestinal tumors with the somatostatin analogue Sandostatin: a phase II study including endocrine effects.Br J Cancer 1990;62:627.
Savage AP, Calam J, Wood CB, Bloom SR. SMS 201-995 treatment and advanced intestinal cancer: a pilot study.Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1987;1:133.
Canobbio L, Boccardo F, Cannota D, Gallotti P, Epis R. Treatment of advanced pancreatic carcinoma with the somatostatin analogue BIM 23014. Preliminary results of a pilot study.Cancer 1992;69:648.
Radulovic S, Nagy A, Szoke B, Schally AV. Cytotoxic analog of somatostatin containing methotrexate inhibits growth of MIA PaCa-2 human pancreatic cancer xenografts in nude mice.
Cancer Lett 1992;62:263.
Smith-Jones PM, Stolz B, Albert R, et al. Synthesis and characterisation of [90 Y]-Bz-DTPA-oct: a yttrium-90labelled octreotide analogue for radiotherapy of somatostatin receptorpositive tumours.Nucl Med Biol 1998;25:181.
Cobleigh MA, Vogel CL, Tripathy D. Multinational study of the efficacy and safety of humanized anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody in women who have HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer that has progressed after chemotherapy for metastatic disease.
J Clin Oncol
1999;17:2639.
Baselga J, Tripathy D, Mendelsohn J, et al. Phase II study of weekly intravenous recombinant humanized anti-p185HER2 monoclonal antibody in patients withHER2/neu-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:737.
Baselga J, Norton L, Albanell J, Kim YM, Mendelsohn J. Recombinant humanized anti-HER2 antibody (Herceptin) enhances the antitumor activity of paclitaxel and doxorubicin againstHER2/neu overexpressing human breast cancer xenografts. Cancer Res 1998;58:2825.
Norton L, Slamon D, Leyland-Jones B, et al., for the Multinational Herceptin Investigator Group. Overall survival advantage to simultaneous chemotherapy plus the humanized anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody Herceptin in HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer.Proc Am
Soc Clin Oncol 1998;18:127a(abst).
Mendelsohn J. Epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition by a monoclonal antibody as anticancer therapy. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:2703.
Bruns CJ, Portera CA, Tsan R, Hicklin DJ, Radinsky R. Regression of human pancreatic carcinoma growing orthotopically in athymic nude mide by blockade of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R) signaling in combination with gemcitabine. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res
1999;40:23(abst 154).
Bramhall SR. The matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitors in pancreatic cancer. From molecular science to a clinical application. Int J Pancreatol 1997;21:1.
Rasmussen H, Rugg T, Brown P, Baillet M, Millar A. A 371 patient meta-analysis of studies of marimastat in patients with advanced cancer.Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:429a(abst 1538).
Fong TA, Shawver LK, Sun L, et al. SU5416 is a potent and selective inhibitor of the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (Flk-1/KDR) that inhibits tyrosine kinase catalysis, tumor vascularization, and growth of multiple tumor types.Cancer Res 1999;59:99.
Figg WD, Pluda JM, Lush RM, et al. The pharmacokinetics of TNP-470, a new angiogenesis inhibitor. Pharmacotherapy 1997;17:91.
Kudelka AP, Levy T, Verschraegen CF, et al. A phase I study of TNP-470 administered to patients with advanced squamous cell cancer of the cervix.Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:1501.
O'Reilly MS. The preclinical evaluation of angiogenesis inhibitors. Invest New Drugs 1997;15:5.
O'Reilly MS, Holmgren L, Chen C, et al. Angiostatin induces and sustains dormancy of human primary tumors in mice. Nat Med 1996;2:689.
Cao Y, O'Reilly MS, Marshall B, et al. Expression of angiostatin cDNA in a murine fibrosarcoma suppresses primary tumor growth and produces long-term dormancy of metastases. J Clin Invest 1998;101:1055.
Bouvet M, Bold RJ, Lee J, et al. Adenovirus-mediated wild-typep53 tumor suppressor gene therapy induces apoptosis and suppresses growth of human pancreatic cancer. Ann Surg Oncol 1998;5:681.
Joshi US, Dergham ST, Chen YQ, et al. Inhibition of pancreatic tumor cell growth in culture by p21WAF1 recombinant adenovirus. Pancreas 1998;16:107.
Hwang RF, Gordon EM, Anderson WF, et al. Gene therapy for primary and metastatic pancreatic cancer with intraperitoneal retroviral vector bearing the wild-typep53 gene. Surgery 1998;124:143.
Mukhopadhyay T, Tainsky M, Cavender AC, Roth JA. Specific inhibition of K-ras expression and tumorgenicity of lung cancer cells by anti-sense RNA. Cancer Res 1991;51:1744.
Feng M, Cabrera G, Deshane J, Scanlon KJ, Curiel DT. Neoplastic reversion accomplished by high efficiency adenoviral-mediated delivery of an anti-ras ribozyme. Cancer Res 1995;55:2024.
Mulvihill SJ, Warren RS, Fell S, et al. A phase I trial of intratumoral injection with an E1B-attenuated adenovirus, ONYX-015, into unresectable carcinomas of the exocrine pancreas.Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:211a(abst 815).
Hecht JR, Abbruzzese JL, Lahoti S, et al. Feasibility of multiple direct injections of Onyx-015 adenovirus into pancreatic carcinomas under endoscopic ultrasound guidance.Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:186a(abst 715).

SECTION 33.5 Cancer of the Liver and Biliary Tree
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 33.5
Cancer of the Liver and Biliary Tree
YUMAN FONG
NANCY KEMENY
THEODORE S. LAWRENCE
Introduction
Hepatocellular Carcinoma
Epidemiology and Etiology
Pathologic Features
Clinical Presentation
Diagnostic Investigations
Potentially Curative Treatments
Palliative Treatment Modalities
Screening for Hepatocellular Carcinoma
Other Primary Tumors of the Liver
Hepatoblastoma
Angiosarcoma
Epithelioid Hemangioendothelioma
Cholangiocarcinoma
Epidemiology and Etiology
Pathology and Classification
Distal Bile Duct Cancers
Proximal or Hilar Cholangiocarcinoma
Peripheral Cholangiocarcinoma
Tumors of the Gallbladder
Epidemiology and Etiology
Pathologic Features
Pattern of Spread and Staging
Clinical Presentation
Radiologic Evaluation
Role for Needle Biopsy
Treatment
Gallbladder Polyps
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Primary hepatobiliary malignancies are the most common of solid-organ cancers, and include hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs), cholangiocarcinomas, and
gallbladder cancers. As a group, these tumors represent both major diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. Though surgery can be potentially curative for these
tumors, until recently, most cases of hepatobiliary cancers were discovered at a stage far too advanced for complete excision. These tumors also are highly resistant
to chemotherapy, limiting options for palliative treatment. However, the last two decades have seen great advances in the diagnosis of and therapy for these tumors.
Advances in imaging have allowed for earlier detection and more accurate staging of disease. The safety of surgical therapy has improved and, as a consequence of
increased understanding of the biology of these diseases, favorable short- and long-term results are increasingly achieved by extensive but rational resection.
Palliative measures such as radiotherapy and ablative therapy have extended the limits of tumor eradication and treatment. In this chapter, a discussion of the current
therapy for these hepatobiliary tumors will be presented, emphasizing the recent major advances as well as the most important areas of ongoing and future studies.

HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA
HCC is the most common solid-organ tumor worldwide, being responsible for more than 1 million deaths annually. The difficulties in treating HCC and the high
mortality associated with it are attributable to a number of factors. First, this cancer usually is associated with cirrhosis, which is not only a cause of morbidity but also
limits treatment options for the cancer. Second, HCC is usually asymptomatic at early stages and has a great propensity for intravascular or intrabiliary extension,
even when the primary tumor is small. As a result, the carcinoma is usually at an advanced stage when discovered. This tumor is, therefore, usually beyond curative
therapy at presentation and, indeed, often beyond any useful therapy.
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY
At least 1 million new cases of HCC occur yearly. 1 The incidence of HCC increases with age and is four to eight times more common in men than in women. 2 This
cancer is clearly associated with chronic liver injury and, therefore, geographic distribution of HCC closely mirrors that of viral hepatitis ( Table 33.5-1). Countries with
a high incidence of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection—namely Taiwan, Korea, Thailand, Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, China, and countries of tropical
Africa—have the highest incidence of HCC. 3,4 and 5 Areas in which hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections are endemic, such as Japan and Italy, also experience an
increased rate of HCC. 3,6,7,8,9 and 10 In these areas, incidence varies from a high of 150 per 100,000 in Taiwan 3 to 28 per 100,000 in Singapore. 4 Comparatively, in
low-incidence areas such as Australia, North America, and Europe, HCC occurs in only 1 to 3 per 100,000 population. In high-incidence areas, HCC also occurs in
younger individuals as compared to its occurrence in low incidence areas. In Mozambique, one of the areas of highest incidence of HCC, 50% of patients with the
tumor are younger than 30 years. In fact, the incidence of HCC among men aged 25 to 34 years is more than 500-fold that of the same age group in Western
countries.11

TABLE 33.5-1. Conditions Predisposing to or Associated with Development of Hepatocellular Carcinoma

This etiologic association between HBV infection and HCC is well established. In a landmark study examining HBV infection and HCC, Beasley et al. 12 followed
22,707 male subjects in Taiwan, 15.2% of whom were HBV chronic carriers, as exhibited by detection of hepatitis B surface antigen (HB sAg) in the serum. Of the 116
cases of HCC that occurred during a mean follow-up period of 7 years, 113 occurred in patients positive for HB sAg. This study demonstrated that HCC was related not

simply to a history of HBV infection but to the chronic carrier states and that the relative risk of developing HCC was 200-fold greater in individuals with evidence of
HBV infection than in noninfected individuals. 12
Epidemiologic evidence has also clearly linked HCV infection with HCC. Antibodies to HCV have been found in as many as 76% of patients with HCC in Japan, Italy,
and Spain13 and in 36% in the United States. 14 In contrast to HBV-associated HCC, however, HCC rarely occurs in HCV carriers before the development of cirrhosis.
In addition, the incidence of HCC in cirrhotic carriers of HCV is estimated to be as high as 5% per year, as compared to 0.5% per year for HBV carriers. 15
Chemical carcinogens also have been linked to primary liver cancers. Chemicals such as nitrites, hydrocarbons, solvents, organochlorine pesticides, primary metals,
and polychlorinated biphenyls have been implicated in the development of HCC. 16 Colloidal thorium dioxide (Thorotrast), which emits high level a, b, and g radiation
and was used as an angiographic agent in the 1930s, has been linked to angiosarcoma, cholangiocarcinoma, and HCC. 1
Of all the chemicals linked to development of HCC, the most important is ethanol. Alcohol abuse has been linked to the development of not only HCC but also
carcinomas in the larynx, mouth, and esophagus. Ethanol is thought to produce HCC through development of hepatic cirrhosis or as a cocarcinogen with other agents
such as HBV, HCV, hepatotoxins, and tobacco, 17,18,19,20,21 and 22 rather than through direct effect on the hepatocytes.
Aflatoxins produced by the fungi Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus parasiticus have also been linked to HCC. These are fungi that grow on grains, peanuts, and other
food products and are the most common cause of food spoilage in the tropics. These fungi produce aflatoxins designated as B1, B 2, G1, and G2. Aflatoxin B1 is the
most hepatotoxic, and chronic exposure to these mycotoxins leads to development of HCC. 23
Some congenital conditions also lead to development of HCC. Genetic diseases such as hemochromatosis, Wilson's disease, hereditary tyrosinemia, type 1 glycogen
storage disease, hepatic porphyria of both intermittent and cutanea tarda types, familial polyposis coli, ataxia telangiectasia, familial cholestatic cirrhosis, biliary
atresia, congenital hepatic fibrosis, neurofibromatosis, situs inversus, fetal alcohol syndrome, a-antitrypsin deficiency, and the Budd-Chiari syndrome 11 have all been
linked to a higher incidence of HCC. Ultimately, though, the unifying etiology of HCC may be chronic injury and inflammation.
PATHOLOGIC FEATURES
HCC has been graded as well differentiated, moderately well differentiated, and poorly differentiated. The well-differentiated variety may be difficult to distinguish from
a regenerating nodule on fine-needle biopsy. No firm correlation of grade to prognosis has been established. HCC can be classified generally into three different
growth patterns, and these growth patterns have a much greater influence than does histologic grade on resectability and, therefore, greater influence on long-term
outcome. The hanging type of tumor is attached to the normal liver by a small vascular stalk, even if the tumor is large. This type is easily excised with little loss in
functional parenchyma. The pushing type generally is well demarcated and often encapsulated by a fibrous capsule. This type of tumor displaces normal vasculature
rather than infiltrates and invades the major vessels. It is often resectable, even when tumor bulk is substantial. Finally, the infiltrative variety has a very indistinct
tumor-liver interface and tends to exhibit a much greater degree of vascular infiltration and invasion, even when the tumor is small. Excising the infiltrative variety
often is complicated by positive margins. The practical nature of this gross pathologic classification is reinforced by the distinctive radiologic appearance of these
three different growth patterns on imaging.
The most important pathologic issue is the distinct appearance and clinical behavior of the fibrolamellar variant of HCC. The contrast in clinical behavior is
summarized in Table 33.5-2. On gross and radiologic inspection, fibrolamellar HCC is generally well demarcated and often encapsulated, with a central fibrotic area. It
is a variant that generally occurs in young patients who lack underlying cirrhosis. a-Fetoprotein (AFP), which is commonly elevated in the usual case of HCC, is not
elevated in fibrolamellar HCC. Other serum markers that often are elevated in fibrolamellar HCC include neurotensin 24 and vitamin B12 binding protein. The
fibrolamellar variant of HCC is associated with a prolonged survival as compared with typical HCC, likely owing to the well-demarcated nature of the tumor and the
greater range in treatment options for patients without underlying cirrhosis. 25

TABLE 33.5-2. Comparison of Standard Hepatocellular Carcinoma with the Fibrolamellar Variant

HCC can also appear with mixed or combined features of HCC and cholangiocarcinoma. The two components of this tumor may be separate, adjacent to each other,
or intimately mixed. 1,26 Biliary differentiation in HCC is associated with a poor prognosis, because such tumors are more rapidly growing and less vascular and,
therefore, are more resistant to embolic therapy. 27 In the clear-cell variant of HCC, the cells have an abundant, pale, finely granular or vacuolated cytoplasm as a
result of abundant glycogen, fat, or water. The prognostic importance of finding the clear-cell variant has been debated, but this subtype may be associated with a
better prognosis. 28,29
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Even though it is generally a slow-growing tumor, the majority of HCCs present at an advanced stage, when most are beyond curative treatment. Because the liver is
relatively hidden behind the right costal cartilages, tumors must reach substantial size before they are palpable. Furthermore, the large functional reserve of the liver
masks any small impairment produced by local parenchymal disturbances. Therefore, small tumors are most often asymptomatic and are usually discovered during
screening programs30,31 and 32 or incidentally during imaging performed for other abdominal conditions.
Most cases of HCC are detected only when tumors are large, at a stage when local symptoms are common. Patients usually complain of a dull, right upper quadrant
ache, sometimes referred to the shoulder. Hepatomegaly is a frequent accompanying finding. The liver edge is hard and irregular, due both to tumor and the usual
accompanying cirrhosis. A vascular bruit can be heard in approximately 25% of cases. 33 General symptoms of malignancy, including anorexia, nausea, lethargy, and
weight loss, are common. The most common clinical presentation is the triad of right upper quadrant pain, mass, and weight loss. 34,35 and 36 Central necrosis of large
tumors can also lead to fever, and HCC can present as pyrexia of unknown origin. For most patients, the presentation of HCC will also be the first presentation of the
underlying cirrhosis. In one study, although 90% of patients were eventually found to have cirrhosis, fewer than 10% were thought, at first evaluation for HCC, to have
chronic liver disease on the basis of history and clinical examination. 35
Hepatic decompensation is another common presentation of HCC, with patients seeking medical attention owing to typical symptoms of liver failure such as ascites,
jaundice, or encephalopathy. This decompensation of liver function is most often attributable to bulk replacement of functional parenchyma in a patient with previously
compensated cirrhosis. HCC has a great propensity for vascular invasion and intravascular growth. Therefore, hepatic failure may also be due to portal vein occlusion
secondary to intravascular tumor thrombus. 37,38 and 39 A much rarer cause of liver failure is Budd-Chiari syndrome, resulting from direct invasion and occlusion of the
hepatic vein and inferior vena cava by tumor and tumor thrombus.
Gastrointestinal bleeding often complicates the clinical course of patients with HCC and, in 10% of patients, is the presenting finding. 39 In approximately one-half of
these cases, bleeding is from esophageal varices, 39 which can result from portal hypertension due to cirrhosis alone or with an added contribution of intraportal

thrombus. Patients with gastrointestinal bleeding from esophageal varices have an extraordinarily poor prognosis, with a median survival measurable in weeks. 38 The
particularly poor prognosis of variceal bleeding complicating HCC is due to the common finding of intraportal thrombus, which further increases the portal pressure
and makes control of bleeding varices more difficult. In fact, in one study, nearly one-fourth of patients with HCC died from massive variceal hemorrhage. 37
Gastrointestinal bleeding can occur from other causes as well, such as benign peptic ulcer or direct invasion of the gastrointestinal tract by tumor. 39
The most dramatic presentation of HCC is tumor rupture, which is the initial presentation in 2% to 5% of patients with HCC. 40,41,42,43,44 and 45 Patients present with acute
abdominal pain and swelling and are found to have, in addition to swelling, guarding, rebound tenderness, and ileus. Patients also commonly have signs of
hemodynamic instability or overt hypovolemic shock. Diagnosis is confirmed by findings of either tumor mass or peritoneal blood through imaging, laparotomy, or
paracentesis. 44,46,47
Jaundice as a presenting symptom of HCC occurs in up to one-half of all patients. The most common cause of the jaundice is hepatic parenchymal insufficiency. 34,48,49
and 50
On rare occasions (<10% of jaundiced patients), jaundice associated with HCC results from biliary obstruction. 34,51,52,53,54,55 and 56 The biliary obstruction can occur
from intraluminal tumor, from hemobilia, or from extraluminal bile duct obstruction. In the clinical evaluation of jaundice in a patient with HCC, it is enormously
important to distinguish hepatocellular failure from obstruction. The former usually indicates that the patient is beyond any therapeutic benefit, whereas the latter can
be treated, often with good palliation and even potential cure. 53,54,57,58,59,60 and 61
Rarely (<5% of cases), HCC can present with paraneoplastic syndromes owing to hormonal or immune effects of the tumors. 62 The most important of these
syndromes are hypoglycemia, erythrocytosis, hypercalcemia, and hypercholesterolemia. Porphyria cutanea tarda, virilization and feminization syndromes, carcinoid
syndrome, hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, hyperthyroidism, and osteoporosis can also occur. 63,64 and 65
DIAGNOSTIC INVESTIGATIONS
For patients suspected of suffering from HCC, the aims of diagnostic investigations are (1) verification of diagnosis, (2) determination of extent of disease, (3)
determination of functional liver reserve, and (4) assessment of biologic determinants that affect long-term prognosis.
Verification of Diagnosis
Diagnosis of HCC can usually be positively established noninvasively by a combination of history, physical assessment, imaging, and blood tests. There is little
diagnostic doubt in a patient with a liver mass consistent with an HCC visible on computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and a serum AFP
of more than 500 ng/dL. This combination is diagnostic, and treatment can be instituted without tissue diagnosis. The presence of cirrhosis or hepatitis infection, as
documented by presence of HBsAg or HCV virus in the blood, is further confirmation.
In the patient with a space-occupying lesion on ultrasonography (US) or CT and a nondiagnostic AFP level, the role of a percutaneous needle biopsy often is
debated. There is no doubt that needle biopsy is diagnostic for HCC. However, complications are also not infrequent. Hemorrhage or tumor rupture can occur.
Furthermore, there is also a small but finite risk of tumor spillage and seeding of the needle biopsy tract. 66 In cases of potentially resectable HCC, where the
diagnostic certainty is high, we would proceed to surgical exploration without tumor biopsy. Indeed, in this clinical scenario, the histologic appearance of the
nonneoplastic liver may have a greater impact on surgical planning. If advanced cirrhosis will preclude safe resection, we often perform a biopsy the portion of the
liver that does not contain tumor, for histologic evaluation.
In patients with a nondiagnostic AFP level who are not surgical candidates and, therefore, are not candidates for curative therapy, tumor biopsy is performed if the
patients are candidates for palliative therapy. In that case, fine-needle aspiration for cytologic evaluation is usually performed in preference to core-needle biopsy for
histology, as comparative studies indicate that smear cytology yielded a much higher percentage of correct diagnoses as compared to microhistology (86% vs.
66%).67 Patients who are not candidates for palliative therapy do not need a definitive diagnosis, and biopsy is discouraged.
Determination of Extent of Disease
The two issues to be resolved by the extent-of-disease evaluation are whether the disease is isolated to the liver and whether distribution of tumor in the liver is
amenable to surgical excision. The most common sites of metastases of HCC include lung, peritoneum, adrenal gland, and bone. Hence, chest radiography is
mandatory. Cross-sectional imaging, such as CT or MRI, of the abdomen should be scrutinized for peritoneal and adrenal sites of disease. Many centers consider
bone scans mandatory prior to liver resection. Certainly, in patients with pain attributable to bony metastases, a bone scan should be performed. A finding of
extrahepatic disease changes the prognosis of the patients greatly, as such a finding precludes the possibility of hepatectomy as curative therapy.
The extent of liver involvement usually is determined by CT scanning. This diagnostic imaging modality is widely available and relatively inexpensive. In interpreting
any cross-sectional imaging modality for the patient with HCC, the number and distribution of liver tumors must be determined, as well as the degree of vascular
invasion. In this regard, triple-phase (non–contrast-enhanced, arterial phase, and portal phase) CT images should be obtained. HCCs are generally highly vascular
tumors, and tumors on images with contrast enhancement may become isodense with the surrounding liver. Tumors sometimes are visible only during the
non–contrast-enhanced phase. Because HCC has a great propensity for vascular invasion and extension, tumor thrombus in the portal vein, hepatic vein, or vena
cava is not unusual. Scans should therefore be scrutinized for evidence of such invasion, as therapy and prognosis can be altered significantly by such findings. If
such invasion is suspected but not proven by CT, Doppler US or MRI is indicated.
At some centers, hepatic angiography is standard. 68,69 Some have even advocated routine use of iodized oil (Lipiodol) injected angiographically to delineate hepatic
extent of disease further. 70 This lipid is preferentially retained in HCC because of the particle size. These angiographic methods are highly sensitive for the presence
of tumor. Nonetheless, with current helical CT or MRI, there is only minor incremental yield. We rely on angiography only when we suspect small tumors not visible by
conventional cross-sectional imaging, such as for a patient with small amounts of disease seen on CT who has a very high AFP level.
Assessment of the Patient's General Condition and Hepatic Functional Reserve
In the evaluation of patients for possible hepatectomy, cardiopulmonary assessment should be conducted as for any major procedure. Patients older than 65 years or
patients with a history or symptoms consistent with cardiopulmonary disease should be referred for formal medical preoperative evaluation.
Assessment of baseline liver function and assessment of complications of cirrhosis are paramount in the process of determining the optimal treatment option for each
patient. Recovery from liver resection is reliant on the capacity of the liver to regenerate. The cirrhotic liver often has a reduced capacity for regeneration. In addition,
cirrhosis and portal hypertension often are associated with derangements in hepatic production of coagulation factors and with thrombocytopenia, which explains the
increased risk of liver failure and bleeding after resection for HCC. Indeed, the complication rate after ablative therapies is increased proportionate to the degree of
liver dysfunction. 71,72 Consequently, many clinical and laboratory methods have been devised for determining the level of risk for various therapies.
SERUM LIVER FUNCTION TESTS AND CLINICAL ASSESSMENT. Various liver function tests, alone or in combination, have been touted as useful for predicting risks of liver

resection and other treatments for HCC. Various single serum measures of liver function have been suggested to be useful predictors of perioperative outcome,
including serum bilirubin 73 and serum alanine aminotransferase. 74 A doubling of bilirubin has been suggested as a contraindication for liver resection. 73 Other
investigators have deemed a platelet count of fewer than 50,000 or a prolonged prothrombin time (>4 seconds over control) as a relative contraindication for hepatic
resection.75 Most investigators, however, have not relied on a single parameter but rather have used a combination of clinical and biochemical parameters to gauge
safety of hepatectomy and other treatments. In this regard, the most clinically useful system is the Pugh-Child's classification, which is a point-scoring system for
evaluation of liver function based on the levels of serum bilirubin, coagulation profile, serum albumin, presence or absence of ascites and encephalopathy, and
nutritional status ( Table 33.5-3).76,77 Functionally well-compensated cirrhosis is classified as Pugh-Child's classification grade A; decompensating cirrhosis is grade B;
and decompensated cirrhosis is grade C. Generally, partial hepatectomy is offered only to patients who are Pugh-Child's grade A and to the most favorable grade B
patients. 78 In general, Pugh-Child's grade C patients are offered only supportive care, as even nonsurgical ablative methods, such as embolization, are associated
with procedure-related mortality in one-third of patients. 71

TABLE 33.5-3. Pugh's Modification of Child's Grading of Cirrhosis

DYNAMIC TESTS. Many sophisticated dynamic measures of liver function have also been used in attempts to quantitate hepatic function. Investigators have attempted

to use elimination of certain dyes that are exclusively cleared by the liver, such as bromsulfophthalein or indocyanine green, as measures of hepatic function.
Galactose clearance or [ 14C]aminopyrine clearance has also been used to evaluate the specific metabolic capacity of the liver. Of these, the most commonly used
evaluative modalities in clinical practice are indocyanine green retention at 15 minutes 79 and the [14C]aminopyrine breath test,80 though controversy still exists
concerning their usefulness. 81 We do not use these tests on a routine basis in our care of the patient with HCC but have found the clinical Pugh-Child's classification
sufficiently discriminatory for selecting patients for therapies.
PORTAL PRESSURES AND BLOOD FLOW. Another relatively simple test that may be predictive of perioperative outcome is the hepatic venous wedge pressure. By

passing a venous catheter through the vena cava into the hepatic vein, the hepatic venous pressure can be directly ascertained. By balloon occlusion of the hepatic
vein, the hepatic venous wedge pressure, which is a reflection of the portal pressure, can be determined. These measurements have been touted as useful in
segregating Pugh-Child's grade B patients who may have favorable results from resection from those likely to experience major complications. 82
POTENTIALLY CURATIVE TREATMENTS
Therapies for HCC can be separated into resection, ablation, radiotherapy, systemic chemotherapy or immunotherapy, and supportive care ( Table 33.5-4).
Resectional therapy represents the only potentially curative option.

TABLE 33.5-4. Treatment Options for Hepatocellular Carcinoma

Partial Hepatectomy
Partial hepatectomy represents the most common procedure for treatment of HCC performed with curative intent. The liver is normally a very resilient organ with
remarkable regenerative capacity. In a noncirrhotic liver, routine recovery can be expected even after resection of more than two-thirds of the functional
parenchyma.83 In the United States, nearly one-half the patients with HCC will have no associated cirrhosis. 84 For patients with no cirrhosis, operative mortality at
most major centers is generally less than 5%, and very extensive procedures are justified by the low risk and the potential for long-term survival and cure. Resection is
associated with a 5-year survival in more than 30% of patients. 85,86,87,88 and 89 For a patient without cirrhosis, partial hepatectomy is a relatively safe procedure and is
the treatment of choice for eradication of HCC ( Table 33.5-5).

TABLE 33.5-5. Operative Mortality as Related to Liver Cirrhosis

Worldwide, however, most cases of HCC are associated with cirrhosis, which greatly increases the risk for partial hepatectomy (see Table 33.5-5). This increase in
risk is due in part to intraoperative factors. These patients will usually have rigid and hard parenchyma and established varices that are difficult to manipulate and are
prone to bleeding. In addition, such patients will have thrombocytopenia and coagulation defects that further exacerbate the risk of hemorrhage. Postoperatively, the
liver may not regenerate, resulting in liver failure. Furthermore, postoperative exaggeration of portal hypertension may lead to ascites and variceal bleeds. It is
understandable, therefore, that resection is associated with increased morbidity and mortality in these patients. Even for a cirrhotic patient with well-compensated liver
function, we are reluctant to remove more than 20% to 25% of the functional parenchyma. 81,89,90,91 and 92 Until recently, even at centers with a low mortality for partial
hepatectomy in the noncirrhotic population, partial hepatectomy for patients with cirrhosis was associated with a 10% mortality or higher (see Table 33.5-5).85,86,93,94 and
95
This explains the nihilistic view adopted by some for this disease, as well as the interest in treating this disease by total hepatectomy and liver transplantation.
Nevertheless, even now, cirrhotic patients who survive the operation have a 5-year survival of approximately 30% ( Table 33.5-6).85,86,87,88 and 89,93,94 and 95 Over the last
decade, a number of series have demonstrated increasing safety of partial hepatectomy in cirrhotic patients (see Table 33.5-5). The mortality at most major centers
treating HCC has been reduced to the 5% level, owing to improvements in patient selection, perioperative support, and surgical technique. 84,96,97 and 98

TABLE 33.5-6. Survival Rates after Liver Resection for Hepatocellular Carcinoma

Patient selection for surgery depends first and foremost on hepatic function. As discussed earlier, in Serum Liver Function Tests and Clinical Assessment , the most
commonly used clinical selection criteria for patient's fitness for surgery relies on the Pugh-Child's score. Few surgeons are willing to perform hepatic resection for
patients with a Pugh-Child's grade C liver status. Most surgeons will consider resection only for patients with Pugh-Child's grade A liver functional reserve and the
best Pugh-Child's grade B patients.
The major changes in operative conduct that have improved perioperative outcome include a willingness to use inflow occlusion during resection and a willingness to
accept nonanatomic resection. Temporary occlusion of the hepatic artery and portal vein during liver resection by clamping the gastrohepatic ligament has been a
useful technique for reducing blood loss during hepatectomy for patients with no cirrhosis. 99 In the past, surgeons have been reluctant to use such inflow occlusion,
called the Pringle maneuver, in cirrhotic patients because of fears that cirrhotic parenchyma will not tolerate the transient ischemia. Recent studies have indicated that
the reluctance to use this technique was largely unfounded and that cirrhotic liver can tolerate a Pringle maneuver for more than 30 minutes. 100,101 The most important
change in operative technique, however, is a willingness to use limited, nonanatomic resections. For patients with no cirrhosis, most major centers adhere to the
anatomic boundaries of the various segments during liver resection for cancer. Lobectomies, sectorectomies, and segmentectomies are preferred over wedge and
other nonanatomic resections because limited resections are more likely to result in a positive microscopical margin. 102 In the cirrhotic liver, however, a smaller
resection margin is acceptable if it will reduce the chance of postoperative liver failure. The smallest resection that will remove all gross tumor is generally used at
most centers.
As safety of resections has improved, reports of increasingly large experiences in the treatment of HCC provide long-term results that allow for analysis of prognostic
factors that influence long-term outcome. Many factors that previously were thought to be contraindications to surgical resection have not been substantiated by data.
It is now clear that multiple lesions do not preclude surgical resection 88,89: Five-year survival in patients resected of multiple tumors is expected to be between 24% 89
and 28%. 88 Presentation with intraductal tumor and obstructive jaundice also does not preclude long-term survival after surgical resection. 86 Therefore, distinguishing
biliary obstruction from hepatic insufficiency as the cause for jaundice is very important in a patient who presents with HCC and jaundice. Finally, synchronous direct
invasion of adjacent organs such as the diaphragm by HCC is not an absolute contraindication to resectional surgery. 103,104
One group that has a particularly poor prognosis is patients with major intravascular extension of tumor. Even though tumor thrombus can be treated with liver
resection and thrombus extraction, the risk of disseminated disease is extremely high in these patients. 105 If the tumor thrombus involves the vena cava or main portal
vein, liver resections accompanied by venous tumor thrombectomies are unlikely to result in long-term survival.
Neoadjuvant Treatment of Tumors
Many groups have attempted to treat HCC with local or systemic therapies prior to attempts at surgical resection. The rationale for such neoadjuvant therapies is that
large primary tumors may be sufficiently reduced in bulk to make resection safer and that local and systemic microscopic disease may be reduced or eradicated,
thereby improving long-term outcome. In this regard, methods that have been employed to achieve these goals include transarterial chemoembolization, 106,107
combined chemotherapy [doxorubicin (Adriamycin) and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)] and radiotherapy (2100 cGy), 103 hepatic artery infusion of chemotherapeutic agents,
radioimmunotherapy, fractionated regional radiotherapy, 108 and transarterial 90Y microspheres. 109
Another form of preoperative treatment is immunoembolization. Neoadjuvant transarterial immmunoembolization (TIE) was tested with OK-432, a Streptococcus
preparation. In a comparison of 22 patients who underwent TIE versus transarterial embolization (TAE) alone, the 1- and 2-year disease-free survival rates after
resection were 85% and 85% for TIE and 62% and 56% for TAE, respectively. 110 Lygidakis and Tsiliakos 111 randomized 91 patients with HCC to resection alone or to
resection with neoadjuvant chemoembolization and immunotherapy. Of 20 patients, 2 had preoperative complete necrosis of tumor as a consequence of preoperative
therapy. Overall, survival was 18 months for resection alone and 36 months for the group receiving chemoembolization.
Promising data have recently emerged from studies of neoadjuvant use of systemic chemoimmunotherapy consisting of cisplatin, 5-FU, Adriamycin, and
interferon-a(IFN-a). 112 In a regimen modified from that initially suggested by Patt et al., 113 Leung et al.112 were able to produce objective response in tumors believed
not to be resectable and converted one-fourth of these tumors to resectability. Whether preoperative use of this regimen by Leung et al. 112 would help to select the
patients most favorably treated with resection and whether continuing such chemotherapy as adjuvant therapy after resection will improve long-term outcome await
prospective studies. Overall, though, each of these studies consisted of only a few patients and, though such neoadjuvant therapy seems promising, a definitive role
for any of these treatments in a neoadjuvant setting has not been unequivocally demonstrated.
An alterative neoadjuvant approach that attempts to improve outcome of resections involves embolization of the portal vein nourishing the side of the liver to be
removed. Compensatory preoperative hypertrophy of the side of the liver not involved by the tumor will ensue and potentially allows a safer hepatic resection. 114
Whether such theoretic advantage is sustained by clinical data awaits prospective randomized trials.
Adjuvant Therapy
Though up to one-third of patients can expect to remain disease-free long after hepatectomy for HCC, the majority will experience recurrence, indicating the presence
of microscopic residual disease at the time of liver resection. 115,116 and 117 This explains the keen interest in developing adjuvant therapy directed at microscopic
residual disease.
In a study from China, 61 patients with resected HCC were randomized to no further therapy or postoperative hepatic infusion of Lipiodol and cisplatin with systemic
epirubicin. The treated group seemed to have a higher extrahepatic recurrence and a worse outcome. 118 Another study of 57 patients with resected HCC randomized
to hepatic arterial infusion and systemic epirubicin versus no further treatment again demonstrated no difference in overall and disease-free survival. 119
Though transarterial chemoembolization is used extensively for the treatment of unresectable disease, randomized studies have not supported the use of this
modality in the adjuvant setting. In fact, in three different studies, survival has been worse for those treated with chemoembolization after resection. 120,121 and 122 To
date, no study has demonstrated that any systemic chemotherapy or immunotherapy improves survival after hepatectomy for HCC.
Two positive randomized trials of adjuvant therapy after resection for HCC have been reported. The first involves the use of the retinoid derivative polyprenoic acid,
which had been shown to inhibit hepatocarcinogenesis in rodents. 123 In a study randomizing patients, after curative resection or PEI for HCC, to receiving either
polyprenoic acid or placebo, significantly higher numbers of patients receiving placebo developed additional HCC. Currently, polyprenoic acid is not available in the
United States, but these data encourage further study of this and other retinoid derivatives in adjuvant treatment for HCC and in chemoprevention for patients at high
risk for developing HCC.
The other positive adjuvant study involved the use of radioembolization employing transarterial delivery of

131

I-labeled Lipiodol. This compound has demonstrated

significant activity against small HCCs, but problems with dosimetry have limited its use for patients with bulky unresectable disease. In a prospective, randomized
study, Lau et al. 124 compared 21 patients who received 50 mCi of transarterial 131I-Lipiodol within 6 weeks of liver resection for HCC with 22 patients receiving no
adjuvant therapy. The 3-year survival rates for the treated group and the control group were 85% and 46%, respectively. These results await multicenter studies to
confirm with bigger numbers not only the long-term cancer results but also the feasibility of using such radioembolization methods in diverse centers.
Total Hepatectomy and Liver Transplantation
From a theoretic standpoint, total hepatectomy and liver transplantation is the most attractive treatment for HCC. This treatment allows for removal of the liver cancer
with the widest margin possible. It also allows for removal of diseased parenchyma that may contain microscopic metastatic disease as well as parenchyma that may
be predisposed to formation of second primary tumors. A number of studies have attempted to define the biologic parameters predicting good long-term outcome after
liver transplantation. The best results are seen in patients with fibrolamellar histology and in patients with small incidental tumors found unexpectedly within the
explanted liver. Characteristics associated with poor long-term outcome include advanced stage, the presence of a margin involved by tumor, large tumors, multiple
tumors, microscopic or macroscopic vascular invasion, and bilobar disease. 125,126 Patients with tumors smaller than 5 cm have a mean survival of 55 months, whereas
those with tumors larger than 5 cm have a mean survival of only 24 months. 127,128 Therefore, most transplantation centers will not consider patients with tumors larger
than 5 cm for transplantation. Currently, at most centers, only patients with fewer than three tumors, all smaller than 5 cm, and with no main portal vein or vena caval
involvement are considered for liver transplantation.
In clinical practice, however, biology of the cancer is not the most important determinant of the usefulness of transplantation. Liver transplantation is associated with
substantial morbidity and mortality ( Table 33.5-7). Series from the 1980s and early 1990s often report mortality rates as high as 10% to 20%. 129 Though some recent
series have reported much-improved perioperative mortality (see Table 33.5-7),130,131 and 132 the morbidity is still substantial. In patients with liver dysfunction in either
the Pugh-Child's grade B or C categories, however, total hepatectomy with liver transplantation represents the only potentially curative option.

TABLE 33.5-7. Results of Liver Transplantation for Hepatocellular Carcinoma

The greatest obstacle is the limited availability of livers for transplantation. Even in the United States, where active public campaigns have resulted in comparatively
high rates of organ donations for transplantation, only 3000 to 4000 livers are available each year. This would explain the limited numbers of livers used in
transplantation for treatment of liver cancers. Only approximately 100 transplantations are performed each year for this indication ( Fig. 33.5-1). In countries in the Far
East, where organ donation goes against social and religious beliefs, the shortage of donated organs is even greater. Living-relative liver transplants offer a potential
source of organs for such use. 133,134 However, the morbidity associated with donation of a lobe of liver is substantial, and mortality is not only a theoretic but a
documented actual complication. For patients with cancer, the likelihood of recurrence brings into question the ethics of endangering a donor's life.

FIGURE 33.5-1. Number of liver transplantations performed each year in the United States for cancer. Use of liver transplantation for this indication is greatly limited
by the shortage of organs. (Data from UNOS.)

In addition, the costs of liver transplantation are substantial. Certainly, it is much more cost-effective to use available livers for the treatment of benign diseases. In
many parts of the world, however, the high costs completely rule out transplantation for any indication. Because of these obstacles, liver transplantation is not likely to
make an important impact on the worldwide treatment of cancer in the near future.
Comparing results of partial hepatectomy with results of liver transplantation for HCC has been difficult, primarily because patients with very distinct clinical
characteristics are usually selected for each treatment. Patients selected for partial hepatectomy generally have good liver function and may have enormous tumors.
Patients selected for transplantation almost always have small tumors but may have advanced liver failure. In the past, the reported 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival rates of
liver transplantation for HCC were 40% to 82%, 16% to 71%, and 19.6% to 36%, respectively, rates that were highly comparable to those achieved with partial
hepatectomy (see Table 33.5-7). This indicated not so much that these two techniques were equivalent as that the right patients were being selected for each
treatment.
Recently, two series of studies have encouraged a renewed comparison of these two treatment options. In a series from the transplantation literature, operative
mortality appears to have been dramatically reduced to a current low of less than 5%. 126,130,131 and 132 With such low operative mortality, Mazzaferro et al. 131 are
reporting 3-year survival after transplantation of 85% for small HCC. This has fueled enthusiasm for liver transplantation in this clinical setting. At the same time, a
number of articles examining partial hepatectomy for HCC have been published that include sufficient data in the subset of patients with small tumors to allow
comparison.84,135 It appears that partial hepatectomy for patients with small tumors also results in very favorable outcomes. For a patient with a tumor that is less than
5 cm in diameter, the 5-year survival can be expected to be 45% to 57%. 84,135,136 In fact, disease-free survival can be expected in 44% of patients ( Fig. 33.5-2).84
These results are comparable to the best results for liver transplantation. Therefore, given the organ shortage and costs of liver transplantation, partial hepatectomy
should still be regarded as the curative treatment of choice. For patients without cirrhosis or with Pugh-Child's grade A cirrhosis, partial hepatectomy should be
considered first. Total hepatectomy with transplantation may be necessary in this group if removal of tumor requires extensive resection of nonneoplastic liver. For
patients with severe liver dysfunction, total hepatectomy and transplantation is a better option and may be the only viable option.

FIGURE 33.5-2. Survival (solid line) and disease-free survival (dotted line) after resection of (A) small (<5 cm) or (B) large (>10 cm) hepatocellular carcinoma. Results
of resection for these small tumors are highly favorable and comparable to liver transplantation. (From ref. 84, with permission.)

Because the incidence of recurrence of HCC after liver transplantation is high, many investigators have attempted to improve long-term results by use of adjuvant
therapies. Cherqui et al. 137 used an adjuvant regimen combining neoadjuvant chemoembolization and radiotherapy with posttransplantation chemotherapy. Stone et
al.138 used a regimen of aggressive neoadjuvant, intraoperative, and postoperative chemotherapy. Farmer et al. 139 used an adjuvant chemotherapeutic regimen
combining 5-FU, cisplatin, and doxorubicin. These are all small studies based on a sound understanding of HCC and represent promising approaches. All use
neoadjuvant therapy because patients often spend a considerable amount of time awaiting availability of a liver for transplantation. However, given the small number
of transplantations performed yearly for HCC, the role, timing, and regimens to be used are far from decided.
PALLIATIVE TREATMENT MODALITIES
Most patients presenting with HCC will have disease that is not treatable by partial hepatectomy. Even if the disease is confined to the liver, the likelihood of treatment
with total hepatectomy and transplantation is low for reasons outlined in the preceding section, Total Hepatectomy and Liver Transplantation . Nevertheless, if the
disease is confined completely or largely to the liver, local tumor ablative therapies can be performed and result in good local control of disease. The ablative methods
with the longest track record include ethanol injection, embolization, and cryotherapy. These will be discussed with specific emphasis on technical limitations,
morbidity, and their likely role in patient clinical management. Other more investigative modalities, such as radiotherapy, radiofrequency ablation, and laser heat
ablation, also are discussed.
Systemic Therapies
When a patient has widely disseminated disease, only systemic therapies make sense. However, the results of chemotherapeutic therapy or other systemic therapies
for HCC have been dismal.
SYSTEMIC CHEMOTHERAPY. Numerous chemotherapeutic regimens have been tested for use against HCC (Table 33.5-8). HCC is, however, highly resistant to

chemotherapy, owing to multiple factors: Tissue analysis has revealed that HCC harbors high levels of dehydropyrimidine dehydronase (DPD), and it is known that
cells high in DPD are generally resistant to 5-FU. 140 In addition, HCC exhibits overexpression of the MDR1 (multidrug resistance) gene 141,142 and the gene product P
glycoprotein. 141 This would explain the modest effects of 5-FU on HCC. In an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) study of eniluracil (a DPD inhibitor) and
5-FU, 5 of 35 patients with HCC developed stable disease but no responses.

TABLE 33.5-8. Systemic Chemotherapy for Hepatocellular Carcinoma

Doxorubicin is the most popular drug studied, though published data from 13 studies indicate that administration of this drug either alone or in combinations results in
less than a 20% response and a median survival of less than 4 months. 143,144 Response to either single agent or multiagent systemic chemotherapy occurs in only
10% to 20% of patients (see Table 33.5-8). Furthermore, even the objective responses are short-lasting. In a systemic review 145 and metaanalysis146 of the published
randomized studies on HCC, neither doxorubicin nor any chemotherapeutic agent used singly or in combination has been shown to have any survival benefit for HCC
patients. It is generally acknowledged that systemic chemotherapy has minimal impact on survival of patients with this disease. At our institution, systemic
chemotherapy is offered mostly in the context of clinical trials. Moreover, most patients with unresectable disease are jaundiced or have a poor performance status
because of extensive liver disease, making use of chemotherapeutic drugs virtually impossible.
HEPATIC ARTERIAL INFUSION. Because the results with systemic chemotherapy are far from optimal, regional delivery of chemotherapy has been attempted. Such

regional approaches rely on the dual nutrient blood supply of the liver, portal vein, and hepatic artery. Hepatic tumors, however, derive their blood supply mainly from
the hepatic artery. 147,148 Infusion of chemotherapy directly into the hepatic artery may allow increased effective dose at the tumor with fewer systemic side effects.
Hepatic arterial infusion (HAI) chemotherapy can be accomplished through a percutaneously placed angiographic catheter, through an implantable arterial port
inserted at open operation and connected to an external infusion pump, or using self-contained subcutaneous infusion pumps implanted at surgery. Drugs with high
liver extraction rates and short plasma half-lives are particularly well suited for HAI chemotherapy. 149 The fluoropyrimidines [5-FU and 5-fluorodeoxyuridine (5-FUDR)],
cisplatin, doxorubicin, and 4'-epidoxorubicin are chemotherapeutic agents that have been tested in this mode of delivery.
Most data for treatment of HCC by HAI chemotherapy are gleaned from various phase II clinical trials ( Table 33.5-9). Intraarterial doxorubicin seems to be more active
than intravenous treatment. 150,151 The highest response rates have been obtained with the drug FUDR. This drug has a high hepatic extraction ratio and short serum
half-life, making it ideal for regional therapy. Warren et al. 152 reported a response rate of 60% in 15 patients. Atiq et al. 153 reported a 50% response rate in ten patients
using an HAI regimen of mitomycin C, FUDR, and subcutaneous IFN. Makela and Kairaluoma 154 reported a 48% response rate with HAI mitomycin, with a median
survival of 14 months. HAI of cisplatin has produced responses between 20% and 40%. In a small study comparing HAI of doxorubicin with systemic administration of
doxorubicin, the response rate was greatly increased with HAI. 155

TABLE 33.5-9. Hepatic Arterial Chemotherapy for Hepatocellular Carcinoma and Other Hepatobiliary Tumors

Though these results are encouraging, this route of chemotherapy is unlikely to make a great impact on the treatment of HCC. Significant toxicity, including cholangitis
and bone marrow suppression, can still be encountered. Furthermore, the studies with the most encouraging results used surgically implanted infusion pumps or
ports. Most patients with unresectable disease are not in sufficiently fit condition for surgery and pump implantation, as any operation in patients with underlying
cirrhosis of the liver carries significant morbidity.
SYSTEMIC IMMUNOTHERAPY. Most studies of immunotherapy for HCC have involved the use of IFN-a or IFN-b. In a randomized controlled trial, high-dose IFN-a (18 to

50 mU/m2 three times weekly) was found to be superior to doxorubicin in inducing more tumor regression (10% partial response), less toxicity, and fewer fatalities. 156
The same group also compared high-dose IFN-a (50 mU/m 2 three times weekly) to supportive treatment and found better survival and tumor regression for the
patients treated with IFN. However, the median survival was only 14.5 weeks for patients so treated. 157 In another study comparing IFN-b with the chemotherapeutic
agent menogaril, a slightly longer 1-year but shorter 2-year survival was found for the patients treated with IFN-b. 158 These modest results certainly do not support the
use of IFN as a single agent. Furthermore, all these studies used relatively high doses of IFN, and therefore toxicities requiring dose reduction were not uncommon.
Most current studies of immunotherapies, therefore, involve use of lower doses of IFN in combination with chemotherapeutic agents. The most promising combination
is a regimen of cisplatin, doxorubicin, 5-FU, and IFN-a. Using this combination, Leung and Lau 112 achieved a partial response rate of 26% in 50 patients with
unresectable HCC. Six of these patients experienced sufficient regression of tumor to allow subsequent surgical resection. Two of these six patients had a complete
response as confirmed by pathologic analysis. This regimen incites significant toxicity, as demonstrated by a 4% treatment-related mortality. 112 Future randomized
multicenter trials must be performed to define completely the clinical role for this regimen.
SYSTEMIC HORMONAL THERAPY. HCC has long been observed to be more common in men. Subsequently, it was noted that these tumors also express receptors for

estrogens and androgens. 159 Therefore, hormonal manipulation has been the basis of a number of trials directed at HCC. Of the antiestrogen compounds, tamoxifen
has undergone the most extensive testing. This drug inhibits growth of HCC in vitro. The mechanisms of action against HCC, however, may not be related to its
antiestrogen effects. Hepatocellular tumors express a high level of the MDR gene product P glycoprotein. 160 Tamoxifen is a potential MDR-reversing agent. 161 Overall,
results of clinical trials using tamoxifen have been mixed. Three small, randomized studies comparing tamoxifen to no treatment or placebo showed that tamoxifen
significantly prolonged survival. 162,163 and 164 A large study involving 120 patients showed no benefit of tamoxifen over placebo in terms of tumor progression or
survival. 165,166 Another recent randomized study of 496 patients with HCC showed no difference in survival in patients receiving tamoxifen or no tamoxifen. 167
Tamoxifen is not believed to be clinically useful as a single agent.
A number of trials have also attempted to combine tamoxifen with other therapeutic agents. There were encouraging results in phase II trials. In 33 patients with HCC
who were receiving tamoxifen and etoposide (VP-16), 8 (24%) had a partial response, with a median survival of 8 months in the responders. 168 Combining epirubicin
and VP-16 produced a 36% response rate in 36 patients. 169 However, a randomized study of 59 patients with inoperable HCC showed no difference in response rates
or survival between patients who received doxorubicin and those who received doxorubicin plus tamoxifen. 170 Further larger-scale randomized trials are required to
define tamoxifen's exact role in the management of HCC in combination with chemotherapeutic agents.
Antiandrogenic treatment has also been attempted using agents such as ketoconazole and cyproterone acetate. The experience is, however, still too preliminary to
permit firm conclusions. 171 Overall, hormonal manipulation in the treatment of HCC has a good theoretic basis but has not yet been upheld by clinical data.
Ablative Therapies
PERCUTANEOUS ETHANOL INJECTION. Percutaneous ethanol injection (PEI) was first advocated by Sugiura

171a

in 1983 for ablation of liver tumors. Tumor cells are killed
by a combination of cellular dehydration, coagulative necrosis, and vascular thrombosis. Direct injections can be easily performed during open surgery or laparoscopy
or percutaneously using ultrasound guidance. This ablative procedure is most often performed percutaneously and is very effective and safe for treating small HCCs.
Ethanol injections are usually very well tolerated by patients, side effects being primarily pain, fever, and a transient rise in liver enzymes. Though other side effects,
including bleeding, tumor rupture, needle tract tumor implantation, 172 and death, can occur, these are uncommon complications. HCC is well suited for such injections
also because these tumors are most often soft and lie in a hard, cirrhotic liver. The injected alcohol tends to diffuse well within the soft tumors for good coverage of the
cancerous tissues.
Because of technical limitations, only tumors smaller than 3 cm are generally treatable by PEI. 173 In addition, most clinicians are unwilling to treat more than three
tumors by this method. Tumors at the dome of the liver are difficult to treat because of overlying lung and the risk of pneumothorax. Patients with ascites are poor
candidates for such injections, as the risk of bleeding is higher in these patients because the abdominal wall is not directly against the liver and cannot act to
tamponade the sites of injection.
When tumors are within the limits for injection, results are very good. Nonrandomized studies have demonstrated a 3-year survival rate of 55% to 77% after
PEI.172,174,175 and 176 In one large phase II trial that included 210 patients, the 5-year survival was found to be 33%. 177 These treatments are unlikely to be curative,
however. Patients should be followed up closely by imaging, and repeated treatments should be given when appropriate.
In a nonrandomized case study comparing liver resection (n = 33) with PEI (n = 30) in the treatment of small (<4-cm) HCCs, the recurrence rate was higher with PEI,
but 1- and 4-year survival rates were similar for both treatment modalities. 175 Two randomized, controlled trials have been performed, one comparing PEI to no
treatment 178 and the other comparing PEI plus transarterial chemotherapy to transarterial chemotherapy alone. 179 No definitive differences were found, but this may be
due to small sample size.146
Currently, we use PEI as the ablative method of choice for small (<3 cm) HCCs of limited number (<3) in Pugh-Child's grade A or B cirrhotics in whom resection is not
possible. The procedure is well tolerated and the risks minimal. Patients are followed up closely, and treatments are repeated when viable tumor is again
demonstrated. Larger trials comparing this technique with supportive care and other ablative techniques are sorely needed for patients with unresectable small
tumors. In addition, for patients with resectable small tumors, a comparative study of resection versus PEI is important. The greatest limitation to PEI, however, is that
few patients in the Western world present with tumors of sufficiently small size for such treatments.
Tumor ablation can also be accomplished by injection of other agents. Agents so tested have included acetic acid, hot saline, glass microspheres containing 90Y, and
various chemotherapeutic drugs. 180 Partial and complete destruction of tumors has been documented with each of these. However, an advantage of any of these
agents over ethanol has not been demonstrated to date. Ethanol is so well tolerated and the procedure so simple, particularly as compared to injections of radioactive
isotopes, that until results from future comparative trials demonstrate a better alternative, PEI remains the treatment of choice for small, locally limited HCC.
CRYOSURGERY. Repeated freezing and thawing of tissues also produces tissue destruction. Recent technologic advancements have allowed for design and mass

marketing of vacuum-sealed probes that are cooled by liquid nitrogen or argon. These probes can be introduced into tumors, and freezing can be performed under

ultrasound guidance until the ice ball is more than 2 cm beyond the tumor margin. The tumor then is thawed and frozen again to produce effective cryoablation. The
major advantage of this method over ethanol injection is the relatively larger size of tumor that can be treated effectively by cryoablation. Using probes of a diameter
of 2 to 3 mm, a 5- to 6-cm ice ball can be produced. By placing multiple probes in proximity to one another, ice balls of up to 10 cm can be produced.
The major disadvantage is the need for general anesthesia and laparoscopy or laparotomy. Furthermore, not only is freezing of tumors near major vascular channels
difficult because of the risks of bleeding, but complete freezing is virtually impossible because warm blood circulates in the vessels.
A number of series have been published that clearly demonstrate the safety of such an ablative approach in experienced hands. 181,182 Recently, as smaller and
smaller cryoprobes have become available, some investigators have also attempted to perform the cryoablation percutaneously. Whether this will represent an
advance is not yet known. Certainly, comparative studies of cryoablation to nonsurgical ablative methods such as ethanol injection or embolization are
needed. 174,183,184
In our practice, we are prepared to perform cryoablation whenever an operation is performed to attempt resection. If a tumor is found to be unresectable at the time of
surgery, and the patient has already incurred the risks of anesthesia and laparotomy, we will proceed with cryoablation if it is technically feasible. We will also perform
cryoablation for patients with clearly unresectable cancers in whom nonsurgical forms of ablative therapy fail.
RADIOFREQUENCY ABLATION. An ablation technique that is becoming increasingly popular is radiofrequency ablation (RFA). In this ablative modality, heat as

generated by a radiofrequency electrode is used to kill tumors. The radiofrequency electrode is passed under radiologic guidance into the tumor of interest and tumor
is ablated by thermal energy. The major advantage of RFA results from the small diameter of the electrodes, which allows routine percutaneous and laparoscopic
ablation. 185,186 and 187 RFA equipment is also much less expensive than is cryotherapy equipment and is more portable and easier to maintain. However, RFA is limited
by the small size of tumors that can be completely ablated by current radiofrequency instruments. As heat is generated within the tumor, charring of tissues occurs,
decreasing the conduction of heat. The result is that tumors of only 3-cm diameter or smaller can currently be ablated reliably. In addition, in contrast to cryoablation,
wherein the ice ball appears unequivocally as a homogeneous, hypoechoic lesion on US, the RFA lesion is much more difficult to follow radiographically.
The published experience to date on use of RFA is meager. 186,188 It is already clear, however, that patients tolerate RFA well. The tumors treatable by RFA are
currently being treated by PEI. RFA carries a theoretically lower risk of bleeding, as the needle track can be coagulated during withdrawal of the radiofrequency
electrode. PEI however, is simpler, less expensive, and has a longer track record. A direct trial comparing these two techniques is essential. For now, PEI represents
the standard ablative modality for unresectable, small HCC, though RFA is a promising investigational treatment for this same population.
HEPATIC ARTERIAL EMBOLIZATION. The liver has a dual nutrient blood supply consisting of the hepatic artery and the portal vein. Under normal conditions, the hepatic

parenchyma derives most of its nutrients from the portal vein, and complete occlusion of the hepatic artery does not render the liver ischemic. In contrast, hepatic
tumors derive most of their nutrients from the hepatic artery. To induce ischemia and death of unresectable tumors, surgical hepatic arterial ligation was at one time
the treatment of choice but has largely been abandoned for two main reasons. First, long-term clinical efficacy is poor, probably owing to the rapid development of
collateral vessels after ligation of the main vessels. 189 Second, in patients with cirrhosis and portal hypertension, a high percentage of nutrient blood supplying
functional noncancerous parenchyma is derived from the hepatic artery. Ligation of the main hepatic artery therefore was associated with a high procedure-related
mortality, as high as 13%. Hence, this procedure has largely been abandoned as a treatment mode for HCC in the cirrhotic patient. 118,190
Percutaneous selective TAE is a much safer method for treating liver tumors when vascular interruption is desired and has largely replaced surgical arterial ligation. In
this method, a catheter is introduced through a percutaneous femoral approach and is threaded under fluoroscopic guidance to the hepatic artery. The branch feeding
each tumor can then be cannulated selectively and occluded with degradable or nondegradable particles, coils, or oils. Such selective embolization maintains patency
of the main hepatic arteries, thus sparing normal functional liver parenchyma. In addition, it allows repeated treatments through the same arteries. Possible adverse
effects include pain, fever, nausea, and transient increase in liver enzymes. 191 Hepatic insufficiency and infected necrotic tumor are rare complications but may be a
cause of treatment-related mortality. The risk of complications is clearly related to the degree of hepatic dysfunction. Treatment-related mortality is as high as 30% in
patients with Pugh-Child's grade C hepatic function. 71 Therefore, embolization generally is performed only for patients with Pugh-Child's grade A or B liver function. In
addition, patients with portal vein occlusion tolerate arterial interruption very poorly, and presence of tumor thrombus in the main portal vein is considered a relative
contraindication to embolization.
There is no doubt that such embolization produces objective responses in approximately one-half the patients ( Table 33.5-10).192,193,194,195 and 196 For patients with
painful, unresectable tumors, embolization is effective therapy. It can also be life-saving therapy for patients with ruptured HCC. 197 Documenting the benefits of
embolization in other settings has been more difficult. Randomized studies comparing TAE to chemotherapy 198 or to supportive care 199,200 and 201 have been unable to
document an improvement in survival. However, most studies are plagued by difficulties and flaws, including small sample size. More important, treatment in these
studies has usually involved embolization of the main hepatic arteries rather than the safer and more effective selective embolization performed at major centers.

TABLE 33.5-10. Embolization and Chemoembolization for Hepatocellular Carcinoma

To improve on the efficacy of embolization, investigators have attempted to soak the embolization particles, such as Gelfoam, with chemotherapeutic agents prior to
delivery by chemoembolization. In two randomized studies of chemoembolization versus embolization alone, however, there were no differences in survival. 202,203
In other attempts to improve the results of TAE, investigators have used Lipiodol or ethiodized oil (Ethiodol). Each of these agents is a lymphangiogram dye derived
from poppy seed oil that selectively wedges within HCC when administered via the hepatic artery. 204,205 Embolization of tumors using these oils was originally
developed to enhance visualization of HCC. It then was discovered that these oils can be used to deliver and concentrate chemotherapeutic agents at sites of tumor.
By mixing hydrophilic drugs with Lipiodol, an emulsion is produced that can be administered intraarterially to produce Lipiodol chemoembolization.
Phase I and II studies and small phase III studies have demonstrated a significant tumor response rate after such treatment. Treatment with doxorubicin and Lipiodol
produced responses in 10 of 18 patients with small HCCs (<4 cm) and in 5 of 49 patients with large tumors. 206 Yoshikawa et al. 207 randomized 19 patients to receive
Lipiodol-epirubicin and compared them with 17 patients who received epirubicin alone through the hepatic artery. Lipiodol-epirubicin gave a higher tumor response
rate as compared with epirubicin alone (42% vs. 12%, respectively).
Larger, randomized trials have been unable to substantiate a survival benefit for such Lipiodol chemoembolizations, however. Madden et al. 208 randomized 136 HCC
patients to receive intraarterial Lipiodol-epirubicin versus supportive care and found no survival benefit. Instead, there was an increased morbidity for the treatment
arm. A randomized study comparing treatment using Lipiodol plus Adriamycin to Lipiodol alone showed a trend toward a better response at 1 and 2 years with the
combination of Lipiodol and Adriamycin, but the difference was not statistically significant. 202
A further modification of this same theme involved the intraarterial administration of hydrophilic drugs mixed with Lipiodol in an emulsion, followed by temporary or

permanent occlusion of the hepatic artery by embolization using a Gelfoam pellet, Ivalon particles, or starch particles. Okuda et al. 194 treated 52 patients with HCC
using HAI 5-FU plus cisplatin followed by particle embolization and Lipiodol injections. They reported a response rate of 71% and a 5-year survival of 46%. 194 In
another study comparing particle embolization with epirubicin and Lipiodol versus chemotherapy alone in 38 patients, the 1- and 2-year survivals were 73 and 35
versus 43 and 0 in the two groups, respectively. 207 A randomized study comparing intraarterial Lipiodol-cisplatin and Gelfoam embolization to supportive care showed
no improvement in survival among the treated group, though this is likely attributable to the high incidence of liver failure in the treated patients. 200 Another
randomized study comparing treatment with Lipiodol-cisplatin plus Gelfoam embolization to Lipiodol and Gelfoam in patients with HCC showed a worse outcome in
the group using cisplatin. 203 The case for chemoembolization with or without Lipiodol administration is, therefore, far from proven. Because of the small size of
individual studies, metaanalyses of the published randomized studies have been performed 146 but have failed to show any clear benefit of transarterial
chemoembolization over no treatment.
Particle embolization clearly produces responses in the majority of tumors. At times, the response can be very dramatic, resulting in impressive relief of symptoms.
Hence, these treatments may be useful in a patient with ruptured tumors or tumors that are symptomatic in pain or paraneoplastic syndromes. In addition, it is our bias
(though not yet supported by randomized trials) that, for the subset of patients with good liver function, tumors of less than 10 cm in diameter, less than 50% liver
replacement by tumors, and no portal vein thrombus, selective embolization may be beneficial. It is in this favorable subset of patients that future clinical trials should
be directed, examining the utility of embolization. We believe that current data do not support the use of chemoembolization or Lipiodol mixtures but rather indicate
that these complex mixtures may merely add cost and complications without improving efficacy. At present, we prefer to use simple particle embolization for treatment
of symptomatic or favorable tumors. It is likely that effective palliative therapy will be a combination of local therapy by embolization and an as-yet unidentified
systemic treatment.
Radiotherapy
Initial attempts to use whole liver radiation in the treatment of primary hepatobiliary cancer were unsuccessful. 209,210 For instance, in the series by El-Domeiri et al. 209
and Phillips and Murikami, 210 only 1 of 31 patients with unresectable disease who underwent radiation survived more than 1 year. The most important reason for this
lack of success is the low tolerance of the liver to whole organ radiation. Indeed, the radiation tolerance of the whole liver in patients with primary HCC may tend to be
lower than in those with metastatic cancer to the liver, as many patients with primary disease have some degree of underlying cirrhosis.
Attempts have been made to increase the effectiveness of whole liver irradiation in the treatment of patients with unresectable hepatoma by the addition of
intravenous chemotherapy 211,212 and 131I antiferritin monoclonal antibody therapy. 213,214 Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) trial RTOG 83-19 was a
randomized trial assessing the benefit of adding 131I antiferritin monoclonal antibody therapy to doxorubicin and 5-FU for patients who had received initial treatment
with doxorubicin plus 5-FU and whole liver irradiation (21 Gy in seven fractions). 214 RTOG 88-23 measured the benefit of combining antibody with hepatic artery
cisplatin for patients who had received induction treatment with whole liver irradiation (21 Gy in seven fractions) and intravenous cisplatin. The conclusions from these
and other studies 215 are that 131I antiferritin increased toxicity without benefit and that hepatic arterial cisplatin may be superior to either intravenous 211 or hepatic
arterial212 doxorubicin and 5-FU when combined with irradiation. The finding that hepatic arterial cisplatin and radiation can produce an objective response rate of
43% and a median survival of 7.5 months in a relatively large group of patients 76 suggests that these combinations have some activity. 215
In contrast to the relative ineffectiveness of whole liver irradiation (when used alone), focal liver irradiation can produce regression of primary hepatobiliary cancers
(Fig. 33.5-3). At least four techniques have been assessed: 90Y microspheres, 131I-labeled ethiodized oil, and external-beam radiotherapy with either protons or
photons. In 90Y therapy, 89Y oxide is incorporated into a stable glass matrix. When bombarded with neutrons, 89Y is converted to 90Y, a pure beta emitter with a
half-life of 64.5 hours and average electron energy of 2.23 MeV, which produces an electron range of approximately 2.5 cm. The microspheres have been infused into
the hepatic artery as a form of regional therapy for well-vascularized tumors, producing objective response rates ranging from 0% to 25% 109,216,117 and 218 (for review,
see Ho et al. 219). Note that 90Y doses (50 to 150 Gy) cannot be compared directly to the more familiar external-beam doses, as the former are calculated by assuming
full decay with all radiation homogeneously deposited within the liver. More important, low dose-rate irradiation (<0.2 Gy/h) delivered by 90Y has far less effect than
the same physical dose delivered by standard external-beam treatment (>2 Gy/min). A better understanding of the dosimetry of this technique 220 as well as of the
technical factors (such as pulmonary shunting, which can lead to radiation pneumonitis, 221 or variant arterial supply to the stomach, which can produce gastric ulcers)
is required before the application of microspheres can become routine. 90Y microspheres are not available for clinical use in the United States currently.

FIGURE 33.5-3. Treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by conformal radiation. The large HCC in the right lobe of the liver (A) has had a dramatic response
(B) to such treatment.

Another method of delivering focal liver irradiation involves hepatic arterial administration of 131I ethiodized oil. Ethiodized oil has been used extensively for
chemoembolization for HCC (discussed earlier in the section Hepatic Arterial Embolization); in this approach it is formulated with radioactive iodine in an attempt to
deliver localized irradiation using the beta (electron) component of the 131I emissions.222,223 Randomized trials led by French investigators compared 131I-labeled
ethiodized oil to chemoembolization 224 and 131I-labeled ethiodized oil to supportive care for patients with portal vein thrombosis. 225 In the former study, 129 patients
were randomized to receive either 60 mCi of 131I-labeled ethiodized oil or chemoembolization with cisplatin (70 mg). There was no difference in overall survival
between the two groups (median survival, approximately 40 weeks), but the toxicity of the ethiodized oil arm was significantly less. In the latter study, 27 patients were
randomized to receive either 60 mCi of 131I-labeled ethiodized oil or control treatment (such as tamoxifen). The ethiodized oil group showed a statistically significantly
greater median survival (approximately 6 months as compared to 2 months). Although these findings suggest that 131I-labeled ethiodized oil has activity in HCC, this
small study does not permit a firm conclusion to be drawn. Furthermore, as is the case for 90Y, little is known about the tumor and normal tissue dosimetry. 131I-labeled
ethiodized oil is not available for use in the United States.
Traditional external-beam photon techniques, either alone 226 or in combination with chemoembolization, 227 have produced objective responses in patients with
unresectable HCC. However, standard photon techniques often require the treatment of large volumes of normal liver. In contrast, three-dimensional conformal
radiotherapy (3D-CRT) planning using beams not confined to the axial plane can substantially reduce irradiation of normal liver. 228,229 Phase I and II trials for patients
using 3D conformal external-beam irradiation combined with hepatic arterial FUDR have demonstrated that high-dose focal irradiation can produce a 60% response
rate (see Fig. 33.5-3).230,231 Recent results support the hypothesis that the dose delivered is an important prognostic factor in both local control and survival for
patients with primary hepatobiliary cancers. In this study, dose is prescribed (to a maximum of 90 Gy) according to the fraction of normal liver that is spared, based on
a normal tissue complication probability (NTCP) model. Patients who can receive more than 70 Gy have a median survival in excess of 17 months, which approaches
that achieved by surgical resection. In a multivariate analysis, dose is a prognostic factor independent of tumor size. 232
Although 3D techniques permit parts of the liver to be treated with doses of radiation far higher than the entire liver can tolerate, it is possible that both higher doses
and larger volumes than have been used in the current studies could be used safely. A first step in defining these limits is to develop an NTCP model to describe the
dependence of liver tolerance on the combination of dose and volume. A number of theoretic models (all of which require knowledge of the 3D dose distribution) have
been proposed to estimate the volume dependence of normal tissue tolerance. 233,234 Initial investigations have suggested that it will be possible to derive a
quantitative model to predict radiation-induced liver disease. 235 More recently, an NTCP model with parameters calculated from patient data has been used

prospectively to prescribe a dose that would subject each patient to a predetermined complication risk. Twenty-one patients have completed treatment on such a
protocol. The mean dose delivered was 56.6 ± 2.3 Gy (range: 40.5 to 81 Gy). One of 21 patients developed radiation-induced liver disease. The observed
complication rate of 4.8% (95% confidence interval, 0% to 23.8%) did not differ significantly from the predicted 8.8% NTCP (based on dose delivered). These results
suggest that an NTCP model can be used prospectively to deliver safely far higher doses of radiation to patients with intrahepatic cancer than were possible using
previous approaches. 236 The widespread adoption of 3D conformal planning systems should permit these concepts to be tested in multiinstitutional trials.
Another method of delivering highly conformal radiation is with protons. Investigators at the Proton Medical Research Center in Japan have demonstrated response
rates similar to those just reported using 3D-CRT. 237,238 Interestingly, high-dose focal irradiation using either photons 239 or protons 240 can produce hypertrophy in the
nonirradiated liver, resembling the effect of partial hepatectomy.
In summary, whole liver irradiation alone has little efficacy in the treatment of HCC. The addition of hepatic arterial cisplatin may increase the efficacy somewhat.
High-dose focal irradiation, especially using external-beam photons or protons, can produce objective responses in the majority of patients, although the relative merit
of these techniques as compared to other nonsurgical approaches described in this chapter has not been assessed in randomized trials.
SCREENING FOR HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA
Patients found to have small (<5-cm) HCC have a much better prognosis than do those presenting with larger tumors. The size of a tumor is a significant risk factor for
intrahepatic and extrahepatic spread. 241,242 and 243 The frequency of intrahepatic metastases rose by almost one-third between HCCs smaller and larger than 5 cm (60%
to 90%), and the rate of portal vein tumor thrombosis almost doubled (40% to 75%). 242,243 Many more treatment options are also available for patients with small
tumors. Tumors smaller than 3 cm can be treated by PEI, RFA, resection, or transplantation, whereas tumors smaller than 5 cm can be treated by cryoablation,
resection, or transplantation. Hence, smaller tumors are not only biologically more favorable but are technically more easily treated. Because symptomatic tumors are
usually large, widely disseminated, and beyond therapeutic option, the rationale for screening patients at risk for HCC is clear.
Whole population screening, even in areas where HBV is endemic, is almost certainly not a financially viable option. In epidemiologic studies, it is apparent that the
incidence of HCC in HB sAg-positive patients is approximately 0.5% annually. 244 Therefore, the yield for screening programs is low. Hepatitis occurs mainly in
developing countries, where the cost of any population screening program will also be too prohibitive.
In the presence of HCV, however, the risk of HCC in a patient with established cirrhosis is estimated to be as high as 5% per year. 15 Also, HCV occurs more often in
industrialized nations. Hence, it is much more justifiable and likely that screening programs will be developed for detection of HCC in patients with cirrhosis due to
HCV infection.
As a clinician striving to deliver optimal care for individual patients, screening high-risk patients for HCC is justifiable. Patients with established cirrhosis or chronic
HCV infection are clearly important candidates for screening. Patients with chronic HBV infection should also be considered for screening. Furthermore, only patients
with Pugh-Child's grade A or B liver functional status should be screened, as patients with Pugh-Child's grade C disease will generally be too sick for therapeutic
interventions and early detection of HCC will only cause anxiety and detrimentally affect the patient's likelihood for liver transplantation. Screening protocols are
largely based on the biases of each major center. Some have advocated frequent testing, including ultrasound examination every 3 months 245 and serum AFP testing
once every 2 months. 246 Because HCC is slow-growing, however, with a documented median doubling time of 4 to 5 months for small HCCs, 245 we advocate AFP and
liver function tests every 3 months and liver imaging every 6 months.

OTHER PRIMARY TUMORS OF THE LIVER
HEPATOBLASTOMA
Hepatoblastoma affects approximately 1 in 100,000 children and is the most common primary malignant liver tumor in children. 247,248 It is usually diagnosed before the
age of 3 years, with a 2:1 male predominance. Patients usually present with abdominal swelling 247,248 and elevated serum AFP (>75% of patients). 249 CT scans will
reveal a vascular mass that often (50%) is speckled with calcifications. 249 The Children's Cancer Study Group staging system is shown in Table 33.5-11.250 Overall
long-term survival varies between 15% and 37%. 249,251,252 and 253 Poor prognosis is associated with unresectable tumors and tumors demonstrating aneuploidy and
anaplastic characteristics. 251,254,255

TABLE 33.5-11. Children's Cancer Study Group Staging for Hepatoblastoma

Complete resection is possible in 50% to 65% of children with hepatoblastoma and is associated with cure rates between 30% and 70%. 247,248 Unlike adult primary
liver tumors, chemotherapy may produce response in a significant number of patients with hepatoblastomas. Preoperative chemotherapy has been used with some
success in converting unresectable tumors to resectable lesions. 256,257 Adjuvant chemotherapy has also been used after resection of hepatoblastoma. 250 Evans et
al.250 reported that 20% of 24 patients with hepatoblastoma were relapse-free 8 to 42 months after surgical resection coupled with adjuvant vincristine, doxorubicin,
5-FU, and cyclophosphamide.
Radiotherapy has been used in the treatment of unresectable hepatoblastomas, but its utility is far from proven. 256,258 Orthotopic liver transplantation should be
considered in children with unresectable hepatoblastoma if the tumor does not become resectable after preoperative chemotherapy. Penn 259 reported on 18 patients
undergoing liver transplantation for unresectable hepatoblastoma. Though tumors recurred in six patients, five have survived disease-free for more than 2 years, with
actuarial survival rates of approximately 50%.
ANGIOSARCOMA
Angiosarcomas are malignant mesenchymal tumors of the liver that are also referred to as hemangiosarcomas. Only approximately 25 cases occur in the United
States each year. 260 Peak incidence is in the sixth and seventh decades, with a predominance in men (85%). 261 Abdominal pain, abdominal swelling (usually due to
liver enlargement), liver failure, nausea, anorexia, vomiting, and jaundice are seen. These malignant tumors have been associated with exposure to thorotrast,
arsenic, or vinyl chloride.
Angiosarcomas are aggressive neoplasms. Partial hepatectomy can result in long-term survival, but most patients present with advanced tumors that cannot be
treated by excision. Distant metastases are found at initial presentation in one-half of patients. Most patients die within 6 months of diagnosis. Even with surgical
excision, few patients survive more than 1 to 3 years after complete resection because of metastatic disease. Results of radiotherapy and chemotherapy or both have
been disappointing. 261 The results of orthotopic liver transplantation for treatment of angiosarcoma have also been poor. Penn et al. reported development of tumor

recurrences in 9 of 14 transplant patients with tumors classified as either angiosarcomas or epithelioid tissue sarcomas. The 2-year survival rate was 15%, and no
patient survived more than 28 months postoperatively. 259
The liver can occasionally be the primary site for rhabdomyosarcoma, 262 though this is more common in children than in adults. Hepatic metastases from a
gastrointestinal or uterine primary tumor must be ruled out before the diagnosis of primary leiomyosarcoma of the liver can be made. Surgical resection is the
treatment of choice for these primary hepatic sarcomas. 262 Unresectable disease carries an unfavorable prognosis.
Undifferentiated sarcomas of the liver are very rare and usually occur in children between the ages of 6 and 15 years. 263,264 Most undifferentiated sarcomas of the liver
are found at an advanced stage, when surgical resection is not possible. The patient with such a tumor rapidly succumbs to the sarcoma, as such tumors usually are
not responsive to radiotherapy or chemotherapy. 263
EPITHELIOID HEMANGIOENDOTHELIOMA
Epithelioid hemangioma is another malignant soft tissue tumor of endothelial cell origin. 260,262,265 Factor VII staining differentiates hemangioendothelioma from other
nonvascular tumors. Infantile hemangioendothelioma, which is benign, is unlikely; the adult variety is malignant and highly aggressive. Average age at presentation is
50 years, and the usual presenting signs and symptoms consist generally of nonspecific complaints, including pain, and an abdominal mass. In contrast to
angiosarcoma, there is a female predominance (63% of patients). 262 Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma has also been related to vinyl chloride exposure in some
patients. 265
Weiss and Enzinger 260 recommended radical surgery, if possible. However, these tumors are almost always diffuse and multifocal and, therefore, are unlikely to be
cured by partial hepatectomy. If hemangioendothelioma is suspected, a percutaneous biopsy is performed for diagnosis. Frozen-section analysis is not usually helpful
at open surgery because special stains are required for diagnosis of this tumor. Patients with hemangioendotheliomas should be considered for total hepatectomy and
liver transplantation. Penn 259 reported a series of 21 patients who underwent orthotopic liver transplantation for treatment of epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas; 7 of
21 patients experienced tumor recurrence. The actuarial survival rate was 82% at 2 years and 43% at 5 years.

CHOLANGIOCARCINOMA
Cancers of the bile ducts are rare tumors, with only approximately 4000 cases presenting in the United States annually. Because of the proximity of the bile duct to the
liver, the pancreas, and major vascular structures, surgical excision of these tumors usually requires a major hepatic or pancreatic resection or both. Major vascular
reconstructions may also be necessary. The technical demands of such resections and the lack of effective alternative therapies for cholangiocarcinomas explain the
nihilistic attitude that generally surrounds this disease. Advances in imaging over the last two decades now allow for earlier diagnosis of bile duct cancer and better
surgical planning. Recent improvements in operative technique have substantially improved the outlook of patients presenting with this cancer.
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY
Cholangiocarcinoma is an uncommon cancer, with an incidence of 1 to 2 cases per 100,000 population in the United States 266 and constituting approximately 2% of all
reported cancers. 267 It is a disease of the elderly, with the majority of such lesions occurring in patients older than 65 years and the peak incidence occurring in the
eighth decade of life. 266 Untreated, bile duct cancers are rapidly fatal diseases, and the majority of patients will die within 6 months to a year of diagnosis. Death
usually results from liver failure or biliary sepsis. 267,268,269 and 270 Long-term survival is highly dependent on the effectiveness of surgical therapy. Indeed, it has been
shown that tumor location within the biliary tree has no impact on survival, provided that complete resection is achieved. 271 Nonetheless, it is more likely that distal
bile duct cancer will be resected with curative intent, which explains the relatively more favorable prognosis of distal tumors.
A number of conditions are associated with an increased incidence of cholangiocarcinomas, including PSC, choledochal cysts or Caroli's disease, and pyogenic
cholangiohepatitis and other hepatic infections. In addition, environmental agents may influence the incidence of cholangiocarcinomas.
Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis
In Western nations, the disease most often associated with development of cholangiocarcinoma is primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC). This is an autoimmune
disease characterized by inflammation of the periductal tissues and, at advanced stages, is characterized by multifocal strictures of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic
bile ducts. 272,273 and 274 The majority (70% to 80%) of patients with PSC also have associated inflammatory bowel disease in the form of ulcerative colitis. 272 In a
longitudinal study of patients with PSC, 8% of patients developed clinically apparent cholangiocarcinoma over a 5-year period. 272 This explains the high incidence
(30% to 40%) of occult cholangiocarcinoma found in autopsy or explant specimens from patients with PSC. 272,273 and 274 Cholangiocarcinomas presenting in patients
with PSC are often multifocal and not amenable to treatment by partial hepatectomy. Liver transplantation is often the only treatment possible for these patients, not
only because of multifocal cancer but also because of the baseline hepatic insufficiency from the underlying inflammatory disease.
Choledochal Cysts or Caroli's Disease
The increased risk of cholangiocarcinoma in patients with congenital cystic disease of the biliary tree is well recognized. 275,276 The reason for the malignant
transformation is thought to be related to chronic inflammation and bacterial contamination within the cystic areas. 276,277,278 and 279 Early excision of the choledochal cyst
significantly reduces the risk of cancer. 276,277 Fifteen to twenty percent of adult patients with unexcised choledochal cysts or cysts previously treated with bypass will
be found to have a cholangiocarcinoma. 276,277
Pyogenic Cholangiohepatitis and Other Hepatic Infections
In the Orient, chronic infections of the liver can predispose to development of cholangiocarcinoma. Pyogenic cholangiohepatitis or Oriental cholangiohepatitis results
from chronic portal bacteremia and portal phlebitis, which gives rise to intrahepatic pigment stone formation. This hepatolithiasis leads to recurrent episodes of
cholangitis and stricture formation. 280,281,282 and 283 Those patients who do not succumb to sepsis will have approximately a 10% chance of developing
cholangiocarcinoma. 281,282 and 283 In Southeast Asia, biliary parasites ( Clonorchis sinensis, Opisthorchis viverrini) are also associated with an increased risk of
cholangiocarcinoma. 273 In areas where these parasites are endemic, the incidence of cholangiocarcinoma is as high as 87 per 100,000. 284
Influence of Environmental Agents
Several radionuclides and chemical carcinogens, including thorium, radon, nitrosamines, dioxin, and asbestos, have also been implicated in the development of
cholangiocarcinomas.
PATHOLOGY AND CLASSIFICATION
Cholangiocarcinoma can arise anywhere within the biliary tree. Approximately 10% of cholangiocarcinoma cases arise within the intrahepatic bile ducts. 285,286,287,288 and
289
These usually present as hepatic masses that are thought at first to be HCCs or metastatic tumor of unknown origin. The extrahepatic variety is more common and
can occur along the entire length of the bile duct from the confluence of the hepatic ducts to the ampulla. Some have classified these extrahepatic tumors into
proximal (hilar), middle, and distal bile duct tumors. Nakeeb et al. 290 proposed a more practical division of cholangiocarcinomas into intrahepatic, perihilar, and distal
subgroups, thus eliminating the midduct group. Those lesions that are proximal to the cystic duct–common duct junction usually require a liver resection for
extirpation. These represent approximately 40% to 60% of cases of cholangiocarcinoma and include the hilar cholangiocarcinomas or Klatskin
tumors.270,290,291,292,293,294,295 and 296 Those tumors distal to the cystic duct usually require pancreatectomy for treatment. Fewer than 10% of patients will present with
multifocal or diffuse involvement of the biliary tree. 297
Cholangiocarcinomas are characterized by early invasion of adjacent organs. 298 Nodal metastases are also common and occur in up to one-third of cases. 270,299 In

addition to lymphatic involvement, these tumors are also characterized by neural, perineural, and subepithelial extension. 298
Cholangiocarcinomas can be separated into three distinct macroscopic subtypes: sclerosing, nodular, and papillary. 298 Most are sclerosing tumors, which are very firm
and are seen as annular thickening of the bile duct, often with diffuse infiltration and fibrosis of the periductal tissues. Nodular tumors are firm tumors that project into
the lumen of the duct. Frequently, features of both sclerosing and nodular tumors are found, and the tumor is described as nodular-sclerosing. Papillary tumors are
soft and friable and often demonstrate little transmural invasion. These tumors have a more favorable prognosis than do the others, 273 are more common in the distal
bile duct, and account for approximately 10% of all cholangiocarcinomas. 298
The overwhelming majority (>90%) of cholangiocarcinomas are adenocarcinomas, often well differentiated and mucin-producing. 266,298,300 Rarely, malignant
obstruction of the bile duct may be due to other cell types, such as carcinoid tumors, arising primarily in the biliary tree or to tumors metastatic to the biliary tree. 301,302
and 303

DISTAL BILE DUCT CANCERS
Distal bile duct cancers are rare cancers that usually are reported as part of a series of periampullary tumors or as a series describing all bile duct cancers. Distal bile
duct tumors represent approximately 20% to 30% of all cholangiocarcinomas or 5% to 10% of all periampullary tumors. 290,293,294,304 Approximately 2000 new cases of
distal bile duct cancer are diagnosed in the United States each year. 293 They are almost always adenocarcinomas. The papillary variety is also more common in this
location than in other parts of the bile duct. 292
Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis
On the practical level, patients with distal bile duct cancers usually present with jaundice and a mass at the head of the pancreas. Except in the case of the papillary
variety of this cancer, patients are brought to the operating room with the diagnosis of periampullary cancer, and it is in the final pathologic analysis that the anatomic
site of origin of the tumor becomes clear. The importance of distinguishing distal bile duct cancer from the other periampullary tumors is in the prognostic implications,
as distal bile duct cancer has a much more favorable outcome than does the more common adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.
Jaundice is the presenting symptom in up to 90% of patients with distal bile duct cancer. Abdominal pain, weight loss, fever, or pruritus are also common symptoms,
though these occur in one-third of cases or fewer. 290,293 If the patient reports that the jaundice is intermittent, a papillary bile duct cancer should be suspected. Most
often, however, the symptoms and signs will be indistinguishable from adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head or other periampullary malignancies.
US will demonstrate a dilated extrahepatic and intrahepatic biliary tree. Cross-sectional imaging by CT scanning will usually then demonstrate a mass in the region of
the head of the pancreas. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) may be diagnostic if it demonstrates an obstruction in the bile duct that does not
involve the pancreatic duct. Most often, however, ERCP will demonstrate distal biliary obstruction without diagnostic information on the cell origin of the malignancy.
In fact, we tend not to perform ERCP if the patient is a surgical candidate, preferring to operate on the patient without direct biliary manipulation, as this decreases the
risk of biliary sepsis. 305
If surgical resection is planned, a preoperative tissue diagnosis of cancer is not necessary and often is not possible. Endoscopic brush biopsy has a low sensitivity,
making a negative result virtually useless. 306 Performing a percutaneous needle biopsy is difficult because of the small size of these tumors. Therefore, preoperative
diagnosis is usually based on clinical impression. In patients with a stricture of the distal bile duct and a clinical presentation consistent with cholangiocarcinoma,
cross-sectional imaging studies are scrutinized for signs of unresectable cancer. In this regard, a contrast-enhanced helical CT scan with overlapping 5-mm sections
through the area of the pancreas is the most useful. This test allows for evaluation for vascular involvement or metastatic disease. Magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) may also be used for evaluation of these periampullary tumors. 307
If the tumor is judged unresectable by radiologic criteria, it is usually of sufficient size for diagnosis by percutaneous needle biopsy. Biliary obstruction then can also
be treated by endoscopic stenting or, if necessary, through percutaneous transhepatic stenting to avoid surgery.
Treatment Options
Complete resection is the only effective and potentially curative therapy for cancers of the lower bile duct. 271,290,292,293 and 294,304 Resection usually requires a
pancreaticoduodenectomy. 293,304 In comparison to pancreatic cancer, distal bile duct cancer is more often amenable to resection and patients less often have
microscopic disease at the resection margin and less frequently demonstrate spread of tumor to adjacent lymph nodes. 290,293,294 Completeness of resection, presence
of lymphatic metastases,293,304 and tumor differentiation 290 are the prognostic factors that most strongly influence long-term outcome. Fong et al. 293 found that lymph
node status was the only independent predictor of long-term survival in patients who have undergone resection, with positive nodes conferring a 6.7 times greater
likelihood of recurrence and death.
The results of resection for distal bile duct cancer as compared to the other periampullary tumors are demonstrated in Figure 33.5-4. The results are similar to those
for duodenal cancer, more favorable than those for adenocarcinoma of the pancreas, 293,304 and less favorable than those for neuroendocrine or ampullary tumors.
Five-year survival rates of up to 40% have been reported after complete resection ( Table 33.5-12). It has long been assumed that survival after resection of distal bile
duct tumors is more favorable than after resection of hilar cholangiocarcinomas, 292 but this commonly held belief has been refuted by data. Though it is true that
resectability rates are higher for distal bile duct cancers and the likelihood of achieving a negative margin during resection is greater, the survival rates of the various
bile duct tumors, if adjusted for stage and completeness of resection, appear to be comparable. 271

FIGURE 33.5-4. Survival for patients with various peripancreatic tumors.

TABLE 33.5-12. Survival after Resection of Distal Cholangiocarcinoma

Because of the rarity of distal cholangiocarcinoma, no prospective data are available to guide the use of adjuvant therapy after resection. 290 We tend not to use
adjuvant therapy if resection margins are clear of tumor, though many other practitioners use regimens of chemoradiation originally developed for adenocarcinoma of
the pancreas.
In patients with nonresectable cancers, palliation for biliary obstruction can be achieved with a surgical bypass or biliary endoprostheses. Endoprostheses for distal
biliary obstruction are usually placed endoscopically and provide more durable palliation than does an endoprosthesis placed for hilar obstruction. 277 Surgical
bypasses also provide excellent relief of jaundice and can be achieved with an acceptably low morbidity and mortality. In our practice, patients found to have
unresectable disease at laparotomy are subjected to surgical bypasses, as they will already have incurred the risk of anesthesia and laparotomy. Furthermore,
patients expected to survive longer than 6 months are also considered for surgical bypass. 308 All other patients are treated with biliary endoprostheses.
Chemotherapy or radiotherapy or both have offered generally poor results as palliative treatment for unresectable cases. Survival beyond 1 year is uncommon in
patients subjected to palliative therapies. 290,292,293,304
PROXIMAL OR HILAR CHOLANGIOCARCINOMA
Proximal or hilar cholangiocarcinomas were first described by Altemeier 341 in 1957 and subsequently by Klatskin 309 in 1965. Of the hepatobiliary tumors, these
cholangiocarcinomas represent the greatest diagnostic and therapeutic challenge because of the vast number of vital structures that can be involved by even a small
hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Proximal or hilar cholangiocarcinomas require the most extensive of liver resections and vascular reconstruction for extirpation.
Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis
CLINICAL FINDINGS. Most patients with cholangiocarcinoma come to medical attention because of jaundice or abnormal liver function tests. Other associated symptoms

are nonspecific. Abdominal pain or discomfort, anorexia, weight loss, and pruritus are the most common symptoms but are seen in only approximately one-third of
patients. Fever usually is seen only after biliary manipulation. 273,274,283,290,310,311 In some patients, pruritus precedes jaundice by some weeks, and this symptom should
prompt an evaluation, especially if associated with abnormal liver function tests. Intermittent jaundice may be seen with papillary tumors and is usually due to
intermittent detachment of pieces of friable tumors from the right or left hepatic duct that pass into and occlude the common hepatic duct. The serum bilirubin level is
usually greater than 10 mg/dL and averages 18 mg/dL, whereas bilirubin levels of 2 to 4 mg/dL are the norm in patients with obstruction from choledocholithiasis. 312
Malignancy should be strongly suspected in patients with deep, painless jaundice who present with no fever or other signs of infection.
On physical examination, jaundice is usually obvious. Patients with pruritus may have multiple excoriations of the skin. Proximal biliary obstruction is usually
associated with a decompressed and nonpalpable gallbladder. Thus, a palpable gallbladder would suggest a more distal obstruction or gallbladder cancer. Signs of
portal hypertension are rare but would be an ominous indication of advanced vascular involvement or the alternative diagnosis of cirrhosis and HCC.
Medical history and family history should be scrutinized for conditions such as PSC or Oriental cholangiohepatitis that may predispose to cholangiocarcinoma. Many
tumors express carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and the carbohydrate antigen CA 19-9. The diagnostic value of these serum markers is, however, debated. 273 It has
been suggested that CEA levels in hepatic bile may help to distinguish between benign and malignant strictures in patients with premalignant conditions. 313 Diagnosis
of cholangiocarcinoma is usually made radiologically.
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Radiologic imaging is central to the diagnosis and treatment planning for patients with cholangiocarcinomas. The importance of imaging

studies results from the difficulties in obtaining a positive tissue diagnosis by biopsy, particularly when the tumors are small and in the potentially curable stages.
Relying on the results of percutaneous needle biopsy or biliary brush cytology is dangerous, as the results of these tests are often misleading and one may miss the
opportunity to resect an early cancer. 314,315 Therefore, the preoperative and, often, operative diagnoses are based mainly on the history and radiologic appearance of
the tumors.
The differential diagnosis must include gallbladder carcinoma, Mirizzi syndrome, idiopathic benign focal stenosis (malignant masquerade), or sclerosing cholangitis.
Unless there is a large intraluminal mass in the gallbladder, distinguishing gallbladder carcinoma from hilar cholangiocarcinoma can be difficult. Mirizzi syndrome is
caused by a large gallstone impacted in the neck of the gallbladder, resulting in biliary obstruction from periductal inflammation. 316,317 and 318 Benign focal strictures
(malignant masquerade) can also occur at the hepatic duct confluence but are uncommon. 319,320,321 and 322
Beyond diagnosis, the radiologic evaluation is aimed at determining resectability, as surgical resection is the most effective and only potentially curative therapy.
Imaging may locate occult distant metastases and thereby spare patients from nontherapeutic surgery. In defining the degree of invasion of adjacent organs and
vasculature, imaging is also essential for planning the surgical procedure and directing major vascular reconstructions when necessary.
Most patients will present to the surgeon having already been subjected to a sonogram and CT. US is usually the first investigation performed because it is
noninvasive, readily available, and provides important diagnostic information regarding the jaundiced patient. Generally, intrahepatic biliary dilatation will be seen
without evidence of extrahepatic bile duct abnormality and without evidence of stones. In experienced hands, the tumor will often be clearly defined by US, as will
information important for planning of surgery such as delineation of the biliary extent of disease, vascular involvement, presence of lymph node metastases in the
porta hepatis, and presence of noncontiguous liver metastases. US not only may demonstrate the level of biliary ductal obstruction but can also provide information
regarding tumor extension within the bile duct and in the periductal tissues. 323,324 and 325 In centers specializing in treatment of cholangiocarcinomas, a good Doppler US
may indeed provide diagnostic information equivalent to that provided by a combination of angiography and CT and is highly accurate in predicting resectability. 325,326
However, US is more operator-dependent than is most cross-sectional imaging. Therefore, in most circumstances, other cross-sectional imaging is necessary.
Most patients will present to a tertiary care center having already been imaged by CT. CT remains an important study for evaluating patients and is less dependent
than US on the skills of the operator. Important information regarding level of biliary obstruction, vascular involvement, and presence of nodal or noncontiguous
metastases can be assessed. One of the most important findings to be gleaned from a CT scan, however, is the presence of hepatic lobar atrophy, which is usually
indicative of portal venous occlusion. 327
In years past, most patients also were subjected to direct angiography and cholangiography. Angiography allows for determination of arterial or portal venous vascular
encasement. Cholangiography demonstrates the location of the tumor and the biliary extent of disease. Recently, however, MRCP has emerged as a noninvasive
substitute for direct cholangiography. 328,329,330 and 331 MRCP not only may identify the tumor and the level of biliary obstruction but also may reveal obstructed and
isolated ducts not appreciated at endoscopic or percutaneous study. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) or CT angiography has become a substitute for direct
angiography. Today, the need to perform invasive tests is moot. When direct cholangiography is needed, percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC) is
preferred over ERCP because it is more likely to provide the details of the intrahepatic biliary tree necessary for surgical planning.
For patients presenting with proximal cholangiocarcinomas, a Doppler US, helical CT, and chest radiograph may suffice as preoperative radiologic evaluation. In
patients in whom further delineation of biliary or vascular involvement may be necessary, MRCP and MRA are the next tests of choice. This noninvasive approach
prevents biliary instrumentation and bacterbilia and the associated increased perioperative morbidity. 305,332 When necessary, direct cholangiography or angiography is
used.
Staging
The most commonly used staging systems are the modified Bismuth-Corlette and the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) TNM (tumor, node, metastasis)
staging system. The former classifies patients based on the extent of biliary duct involvement by tumor, 333 whereas the latter is based largely on pathologic criteria

(Table 33.5-13). These staging systems do not distinguish between extensive unilateral disease and bilateral disease because, before surgical resections became
commonplace, such distinctions had little value. Thus, a patient with tumor extension into third-order biliary ducts on one side of the liver accompanied by ipsilateral
portal vein occlusion will be classified as having very advanced disease, though this patient may now be treatable with potentially curative resection as disease is
confined to one side.

TABLE 33.5-13. American Joint Committee on Cancer TNM Staging System for Proximal (Hilar) Cholangiocarcinoma and Cancer of the Extrahepatic Bile Ducts

We recently proposed a staging system, using preoperative imaging and taking into account the extent of biliary ductal involvement, vascular involvement, and lobar
atrophy, that may be more applicable than the other systems, given modern surgical therapies ( Table 33.5-14).270 In the era of effective surgical therapy for
cholangiocarcinomas, this staging system is a better predictor of resectability and outcome than is the AJCC classification.

TABLE 33.5-14. Proposed Staging System for Proximal (Hilar) Cholangiocarcinoma in the Era of Effective Surgical Therapy

Treatment with Curative Intent
The only curative option is complete surgical excision of the cholangiocarcinoma. Until the last decade, such surgical resections were rarely accomplished, because
complete excision usually requires a major liver resection, biliary resection and reconstruction and, often, a major vascular resection and reconstruction. 270,334,335 As
advances in diagnostic imaging have been made, earlier detection of cholangiocarcinoma and improved operative planning are possible. As surgical techniques have
evolved to make major hepatectomies routine, increasing numbers of resections have been accomplished. The results generated over the last decades has firmly
established resection as safe and effective treatment and have helped to define patient selection and operative conduct.
RESECTION. It has become clear over the last three decades that curative treatment of tumors involving the upper third of the bile duct very much depends on

aggressive surgical excision. Until as recently as one decade ago, surgical treatment of hilar cholangiocarcinomas was associated with a mortality as high as
30%.333,336,337,338,339 and 340 Before the 1990s, most surgical series were small, operative mortalities were high, and only a handful of 5-year survivors were
reported.578,579,580,581,582 and 583 That this entire disease was regarded with pessimism was understandable. 309,341,342 It is not surprising, therefore, that until recently, the
surgical therapy for proximal biliary malignancies consisted mainly of biliary-enteric bypass as palliation for jaundice and cholangitis. Results reported over the last
decade, however, have indicated a major improvement in safety of these operations such that resections of hilar tumors can be accomplished (even when liver
resections are required) with a mortality of less than 10% ( Table 33.5-15).271,333,337,343 Increasingly large series have been reported that have firmly documented the
curative potential of such major resections (see Table 33.5-15). Given that unresected disease is uniformly fatal, usually within 6 to 12 months, surgical resection has
become the treatment of choice when possible.

TABLE 33.5-15. Results of Resection for Proximal (Hilar) Cholangiocarcinoma after 1990

The goals of surgical management for cholangiocarcinomas are eradication of tumor and establishment of adequate biliary drainage. For tumors of the hepatic ducts
and the biliary confluence, symptoms often appear late in the course of disease when the lesion has already involved adjacent structures, including the portal vein or
adjacent hepatic parenchyma. Complete resection, therefore, usually requires not only biliary resection but also major liver resection and, often, major vascular and
biliary reconstruction.
Discussion of the fine details of resections for hilar cholangiocarcinomas is beyond the scope of this chapter. The reader is referred to standard texts of surgical
techniques for detailed technical discussions. 126,344,345 Nonetheless, some major points and principles warrant emphasis.
Laparoscopic evaluation should be considered before a formal laparotomy is performed. Metastatic disease is common in patients with hilar cholangiocarcinoma.
One-half or more of the patients will have metastatic disease found at surgery. 270,343,346,347 Recent studies suggest that staging laparoscopy combined with
laparoscopic US may be useful in hepatobiliary malignancies to find such metastatic disease and thereby prevent unnecessary laparotomies. 318 In our recent series,
50% of unresectable cases were identified as such by laparoscopy. 347 Of the causes of unresectability, laparoscopy was best at identifying peritoneal metastases and

noncontiguous liver metastases and was poor at identifying vascular invasion and nodal metastases. 347 Hence, we would recommend a laparoscopic evaluation
immediately before laparotomy. We also recommend that the examination concentrate on peritoneal and liver disease and not perseverate on the biliary or nodal
extent of disease in the porta hepatis because of low yield and risk of violation and spread of tumor.
Laparotomy then commences with a thorough exploration of the abdomen. The lymph nodes in the porta hepatis and celiac and retropancreatic area are carefully
assessed. If there is spread to celiac or retropancreatic nodes, the chance of long-term survival is sufficiently low that resection is ill-advised. Though a segmental bile
duct resection and biliary reconstruction are possible in some patients, most require partial hepatectomy to achieve complete tumor clearance. The extent of liver
resection should be tailored to achieve tumor clearance. Some patients with small tumors and low bifurcation of the hepatic ducts may be treatable with a central liver
resection. Most patients will, however, require either a lobectomy or a trisegmentectomy for resection of tumor. A subset of patients will also require excision of the
caudate lobe (segment 1) to clear tumor completely. 348,349
The factors most influential in predicting recurrence are a margin-positive resection, 350 node-positive tumor, 351 and vascular involvement by tumor. Of these, the only
factor over which the surgeon can routinely have influence is the surgical margin. There is now substantial evidence that partial hepatectomy is usually required to
achieve a surgical margin clear of tumor. Bile duct excision and partial hepatectomy, often with en bloc caudate lobectomy, 352 are frequently necessary to achieve
negative margins. Indeed, several recent studies show a parallel between the number of patients undergoing partial hepatectomy and the number of patients with
negative margins (Fig. 33.5-5A).270,339,353,354 and 355 Furthermore, there is a direct correlation between negative margins and long-term survival (see Fig. 33.5-5B).
Clearance of tumor is essential for potential cure. 270

FIGURE 33.5-5. A: Relationship of percentage of liver resection to percentage of margin-negative cases for proximal (hilar) cholangiocarcinomas. Willingness to
resect liver is essential for complete excision of cholangiocarcinomas and for achieving negative surgical margins. B: Relationship of percentage of margin-negative
cases to percentage of 5-year survivors for proximal (hilar) cholangiocarcinomas. Achieving a negative margin is essential for favorable long-term outcome.

In the era when surgeons were unwilling to perform major liver resections to clear tumor, only the smallest of hilar cholangiocarcinomas could be resected. Given that
extensive liver resections are now routine at many major centers, extensive unilobar disease is commonly resected with curative intent. In a recent study, of the 30
patients subjected to resections of cholangiocarcinoma, including 25 (83%) with negative histologic margins, 15 patients had tumor involvement of secondary biliary
radicals, 11 had unilateral lobar liver atrophy, and 8 had encasement or occlusion of a major portal vein branch. 270 In the past, these findings would have been
considered technically insurmountable.
The entire extrahepatic bile duct should be removed, as this assists in resection of the lymphatic tissues in the porta hepatis. Lymphatic metastases are common, 270
and a complete portal lymphadenectomy is essential. Biliary continuity is then reestablished using a jejunal reconstruction. 356,357 Portal vein invasion by tumor does
not rule out resection, long-term survival, or potential cure, 270 provided that the portal vein involvement is unilobar and on the side of the dominant biliary involvement.
Bilateral portal venous involvement or unilobar invasion contralateral to extensive biliary invasion usually denotes unresectable disease and, consequently, poor
prognosis.
Recent results of resection have shown great improvement over previous results. Median survival is longer than 24 months. 271,333,337 Five-year survival is
accomplished in nearly 30% of patients (see Table 33.5-15). Such long-term survival can be achieved with an acceptable operative
mortality.187,270,271,295,313,316,339,352,353,354 and 355,358,359,360,361 and 362 For those surviving the operative procedure, surgical resection provides not only improved survival but
also improved quality of survival. 363
ADJUVANT THERAPY. To date, no chemotherapeutic regimen has consistently shown activity in cholangiocarcinoma.

364

Although chemotherapy based on 5-FU often is
offered to patients with nonresectable disease, the likelihood of response is less than 10% (see later in Chemotherapy and Immunotherapy). There is certainly no
proven role for adjuvant chemotherapy in the treatment of cholangiocarcinoma.
The role of radiotherapy in the treatment of resected extrahepatic bile duct cancer is controversial. Given the poor prognosis of patients who have undergone a
complete resection (median survival range, 1.5 to 2.0 years) and the fact that many resections leave microscopically positive margins, many practitioners have
advocated postoperative irradiation with or without systemic chemotherapy ( Table 33.5-16). External-beam doses in the range of 45 to 60 Gy (with the latter doses for
positive margins) are usually administered. In addition to external-beam radiation, boost doses can be administered using intraluminal brachytherapy (ILB). In this
approach, a wire or string of radioactive seeds (typically 192Ir) is introduced into the bile duct, which delivers 20 to 30 Gy at a 0.5- to 1.0-cm depth. Traditionally, this
has been performed using low dose-rate radiation (<1 Gy/h); more recently, high dose-rate radiation (approximately 2 Gy/min) has been administered. 365 The
advantage of ILB is the potential to deliver a high dose of radiation to the duct itself with minimal damage to surrounding liver. 366,367 The disadvantage is that disease
more than 1 cm from the duct tends to be underdosed. In addition, ILB may be associated with an increased risk of infection.

TABLE 33.5-16. Results of Adjuvant Radiotherapy in Patients with Resected Cholangiocarcinoma

In two separate reports from Johns Hopkins, no benefit of adjuvant external-beam and intraluminal radiotherapy was demonstrated. 343,368 In contrast, Kamada et al.369
suggested that radiation may improve survival in patients with histologically positive hepatic duct margins. Additionally, in a small series of patients (five with hilar
cholangiocarcinoma) from Louisville, resectability was reportedly greater in patients given neoadjuvant radiotherapy prior to exploration. 370 In a series of 23 patients
with cholangiocarcinoma, Urego et al. 371 used a chemoradiation regimen for adjuvant therapy, consisting of postoperative irradiation, 5-FU, leucovorin, and IFN. The
5-year survival was 53%. 371 These results certainly encourage further study of radiotherapy with or without chemosensitization in the adjuvant treatment of

cholangiocarcinoma. Given the small size of the studies and lack of randomized trials, the utility of radiotherapy, and particularly ILB, is far from proven. In our
practice, adjuvant therapy is generally used only if there is a positive margin or in the setting of metastases to lymph nodes. Other patients are not offered adjuvant
therapy.
LIVER TRANSPLANTATION. Orthotopic liver transplantation has been attempted for unresectable hilar tumors. Klempnauer et al.

372

reported 4 long-term survivors of 32
patients submitted to transplantation for hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Comparable results were reported by Iwatsuki et al.
These results do not justify the use of
precious organs when many patients with benign disease are dying awaiting liver transplantation. Therefore, most centers do not currently perform liver
transplantation for cholangiocarcinoma.
373

Palliative Treatments
Patients with hilar cholangiocarcinoma most often die from liver failure due to tumor progression or from sepsis due to biliary infection. If resection is not feasible, then
palliative treatment must be directed first and foremost at preventing or relieving biliary infection. Secondarily, palliative antitumor treatments such as radiotherapy or
chemotherapy should be considered, though neither of these modalities has been clearly proven to prolong survival significantly.
BILIARY DRAINAGE. The important concept in the prevention of biliary sepsis is the understanding that jaundice alone is not necessarily an indication for biliary

decompression. Unlike biliary obstruction in the lower bile duct, where a single stent usually effectively relieves the biliary obstruction, biliary obstruction near the
hilus is much more difficult to relieve. Even with a small tumor, a single stent likely will drain only one-half of the liver. When the tumors are large and involve secondor third-order bile ducts, many stents may be required to provide effective biliary decompression; it is also possible that effective biliary decompression cannot be
achieved in such cases. Biliary manipulation of any kind may therefore introduce bacteria into the biliary tree and cause sepsis that may not subsequently be fixable.
Good indication for biliary drainage must exist before attempts are made. Our current indications for biliary decompression in inoperable patients are intractable
pruritus, cholangitis, the need for access for intraluminal radiotherapy, or the need for drainage for administration of chemotherapeutic agents. When none of these
indications exists, the patient is probably better served by avoiding biliary manipulation. Supportive care alone is probably the best approach, particularly for elderly
patients with significant comorbid conditions.
Unfortunately, most patients present to a tertiary care center already having undergone manipulation of the biliary tree. Most of these patients, therefore, have
bacterbilia and, possibly, overt sepsis, and drainage of the biliary tree is an essential part of the therapy to prevent immediate life-threatening complications.
Biliary drainage can be accomplished nonsurgically or surgically. Nonsurgical drainage is preferred if the patient has significant comorbid conditions or if the tumor as
evaluated by preoperative imaging is clearly not resectable for cure. Though biliary decompression can theoretically be accomplished either by percutaneous
transhepatic puncture or by endoscopic stent placement, hilar tumors are notoriously difficult to traverse with the endoscopic technique. Moreover, the failure rates
and incidence of subsequent cholangitis are high. 374 Thus, most patients with unresectable hilar tumors are not candidates for endoscopic biliary drainage.
Percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage and subsequent placement of a self-expandable metallic endoprosthesis (Wallstent, Boston Scientific, Boston, MA) is the
palliative procedure of choice for these patients. However, as mentioned, satisfactory results are more difficult to achieve in patients with hilar tumors than in those
with distal biliary obstruction. 277,375,376 Frequently, hilar tumors isolate the liver into multiple obstructed biliary units, and two or more stents must be placed for
adequate drainage. 377 Portal venous involvement and consequent hepatic lobar atrophy may also complicate drainage procedures, as drainage through an atrophic
lobe usually does not relieve jaundice. Furthermore, a stent placed for a hilar obstruction is associated with a substantially higher rate of occlusion than that placed in
the distal duct. 277,378 Therefore, most patients will require multiple manipulations of their stents placed for hilar obstruction. 277,377,378,779,380,381 and 382 These difficulties
also explain the high periprocedural mortality in this patient population: 14% at 30 days. 380
Biliary enteric bypass is a surgical alternative to percutaneous placement of an endobiliary prosthesis. Certainly, patients whose tumors are found to be unresectable
at operation should be considered for such bypasses, 270 because they will have already incurred the morbidity of laparotomy. Patients with small, unresectable, but
well-localized disease are particularly good candidates for biliary enteric bypass, as this allows access to the biliary tree for ILB. 383 Typically, segment III bypass is
used.384 Relief of jaundice will be achieved if at least one-third of the functioning hepatic parenchyma is adequately drained. Additional percutaneous stenting to
reestablish biliary continuity of the two sides of the liver is required if the bypass is to an atrophic or a small lobe or if infection has occurred in the contralateral lobe of
liver. 385 In our recent report of 55 consecutive bypasses in patients with malignant hilar obstruction, segment III bypass yielded a 1-year bypass patency of 80%, and
there were no perioperative deaths. 384
CHEMOTHERAPY AND IMMUNOTHERAPY. Many different chemotherapeutic regimens have been investigated in small uncontrolled studies, with generally poor results

(Table 33.5-17). A study by the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer testing mitomycin C on patients with gallbladder and biliary carcinomas
showed a response rate of 10% (3 of 30). The group also compared oral 5-FU to 5-FU with either streptozotocin or MeCCNU in patients with gallbladder or biliary duct
cancer and demonstrated a similarly low response rate of 9%, with no differences in the types of drugs used. 386 Some of the newer drugs have also not demonstrated
significant efficacy as single-agent therapy. Paclitaxel demonstrated no activity in 15 patients with biliary carcinoma, 387 and a phase II study of docetaxel likewise
demonstrated no activity. 388

TABLE 33.5-17. Results of Chemotherapy for Biliary Tract Tumors (Cholangiocarcinomas or Gallbladder Cancers)

Combinations of various chemotherapeutic agents have been tested, with mixed and conflicting results. Patt et al. 389 used 5-FU and IFN as combined therapy for
patients with cholangiocarcinoma. Of 32 patients, 11 (34%) had a partial response, with a median time to disease progression of 9.5 months and a median survival of
12 months.389 However, another phase II study analyzing the effect of 5-FU combined with IFN-a 2b and paclitaxel failed to show any benefit. 390 In one study combining
5-FU, mitomycin, and doxorubicin, 31% of patients responded, 391 whereas in another trial, there were no responses among 18 patients. 392 The combination of 5-FU,
cisplatin, and epirubicin produced a 33% response rate in 15 patients with biliary tract carcinoma in an Italian study, 393 and 5-FU, leucovorin, and carboplatin
produced a 21% response rate among 14 patients. 394 Rougier et al., 395 using continuous-infusion 5-FU and cisplatin, produced a 33% response rate in 18 patients.
Gemcitabine 396 and 5-FU plus gemcitabine397 have also been tested and, in one study involving 14 patients, 42% responded. 397 At present, either 5-FU and cisplatin
or 5-FU and gemcitabine must be considered the regimens of greatest promise in the palliative treatment of unresectable cholangiocarcinoma. We tend to use the
latter combination because of its lower toxicity as compared to the former.
The blood supply to the biliary tree is derived primarily from the hepatic artery. Therefore, attempts have been directed at delivering chemotherapeutic treatment via
hepatic arterial infusion to patients with cholangiocarcinoma. In one study of 11 patients (4 with cholangiocarcinomas and 7 with gallbladder cancers), hepatic infusion
of 5-FU and mitomycin produced 7 responses but a median duration of response of only 3 months and a median survival of 12.5 months. 398 Reed et al. 399 reported
seven significant regressions in nine patients with biliary carcinoma treated with intraarterial FUDR. This approach is far from proven and, at present, operative
intervention to implant an arterial infusion pump for delivery of regional chemotherapy should be performed only in the investigational setting.

Tamoxifen is a potential MDR-reversing agent 161 and has been shown to inhibit human cholangiocarcinoma cell lines. 400 No clinical data exist, however, to indicate
whether this may be a reasonable therapeutic modality for patients with unresectable cholangiocarcinomas.
PALLIATIVE RADIOTHERAPY. External-beam irradiation with or without ILB has also been used for palliation of patients with unresectable perihilar bile duct cancer.

External-beam irradiation is usually delivered to a dose of 5000 to 6000 cGy. ILB most often uses 192Ir (2000 cGy) delivered percutaneously. Several authors have
demonstrated the feasibility of radiotherapy in small, nonrandomized trials. 343,383,401,402,403 and 404 However, to date, no study has clearly demonstrated efficacy for this
modality. In a group of 12 patients treated with a combination of endoluminal and external-beam radiotherapy, the median survival was 15 months. Though episodes
of cholangitis and intermittent jaundice were relatively common, the incidence of serious complications was low, and there were no treatment-related deaths. 383
Cameron et al.343 reported improved survival in irradiated patients as compared to a group of patients who were not irradiated; however, the median survival in both
groups was less than 1 year. Others have reported no benefit of radiotherapy in this setting and question its routine use, given the increased incidence of
complications and the greater time spent in hospital. 401 Certainly, radiotherapy has not been shown to produce improved survival as compared with biliary
decompression in randomized, controlled trials. Though anecdotal reports of long-term survivors after external-beam radiotherapy show that some individuals may
benefit from such treatment, such potential benefit must be weighed against the possible complications, such as duodenal or bile duct stenosis and duodenitis.
Evidence in the literature supports using fluoropyrimidines as radiosensitizers, and chemoradiotherapy is used as standard therapy for a number of other tumor types.
For bile duct cancers in particular, however, evidence supporting the use of chemoradiotherapy is sparse. In a study conducted by the Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group, 16 patients with pancreatic carcinoma and 9 with bile duct cancers were treated with a combination of 5-FU (200 mg/m 2/d) and concurrent radiotherapy (59.4
Gy). The entire group had a median survival time of 11.9 months. Unfortunately, 15 of the 25 patients had clinical or radiographic evidence of progression of disease
at the site of the primary tumor, which was in the radiotherapy port. 405 Moreover, median survival for the patients with locally advanced, unresectable disease that was
treated with radiotherapy with or without systemic chemotherapy tends to be less than 1 year. 273,370,371,401,406,407 and 408 Our current practice is to use combined interstitial
irradiation and external-beam irradiation in patients with very limited, locally unresectable disease, when there are no indications of distant spread. Multicenter,
randomized trials are in order for this subpopulation. Radiotherapy is clearly inappropriate in patients with widespread disease.
PERIPHERAL CHOLANGIOCARCINOMA
Peripheral or intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma is another rare disease, accounting for 1000 to 2000 cases per year in the United States. 409 Clinical presentation is
similar to that for HCC, with the most common symptoms being right upper quadrant pain, epigastric pain, and weight loss. 287,409 Jaundice occurs in only 24% of
patients with peripheral cholangiocarcinoma as compared with 71% of patients with hilar or Klatskin tumors. 409 Because the tumor is usually asymptomatic in its early
stages, most patients have advanced disease at presentation. On cross-sectional imaging by CT or MRI, the peripheral cholangiocarcinoma usually is confused with
HCC or metastatic tumor from an unknown primary source. Unlike HCC, AFP levels will be normal. A search for alternative primary cancers that may have produced a
liver metastases will not be fruitful. A solitary lesion not associated with the gallbladder in a patient with no cirrhosis and no other primary cancer and with a normal
serum AFP should raise suspicion of a peripheral cholangiocarcinoma. However, intrahepatic metastases and tumor growth along the biliary tract frequently occur.
When multiple tumors are found, it is even more difficult to distinguish these tumors from metastatic disease originating from a distant site.
Lymph node involvement is more common with peripheral cholangiocarcinoma with hilar bile duct tumors. In a series of 65 peripheral and 27 hilar
cholangiocarcinomas, Nakajima et al.410 found lymph node involvement in 86% of peripheral tumors as compared with 33% of hilar tumors. Intrahepatic and systemic
metastases were found in 68% and 71%, respectively. The TNM staging of intrahepatic or peripheral cholangiocarcinoma is the same as that for HCC.
Conventional surgical resection, when possible, is the treatment of choice. In a series of 42 patients with peripheral cholangiocarcinoma, Altaee et al. 336 reported that
survival was indistinguishable from that of 70 patients with hilar cholangiocarcinomas. The median survival was 12 months, and no patient survived more than 42
months. Others have reported more favorable results. Chen et al. 409 reported on 20 patients with peripheral cholangiocarcinoma undergoing surgery over a 10-year
period who had a median survival of 21 months. Four patients lived more than 3 years, and one patient was alive 5 years after resection. In our own report of 32
cases of resected peripheral cholangiocarcinoma, median survival was 59 months, with an actuarial 5-year survival of 42%. Vascular invasion and intrahepatic
satellite lesions were predictors of worse survival ( P<.05).287
The few data available concerning results of liver transplantation for this disease have not been encouraging. Penn 259 reported a 17% actuarial 5-year survival rate for
109 intrahepatic and extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma patients who received liver transplants at various centers throughout the world. In this series also, there was no
significant difference between the recurrence rates of hilar and peripheral tumors.
Data for chemotherapy or radiotherapy in treating this disease is even more sketchy. Stillwagon et al. 411 reported a 5% complete response and 46% partial response
for the treatment of peripheral cholangiocarcinoma with a regimen of initial whole liver irradiation to 2100 cGy in seven fractions and doxorubicin, cisplatin, and 131I
anti-CEA antibody. 411 Although the median survival was 14 months from diagnosis and 10 months from treatment, no patient survived more than 2 years from the start
of therapy.

TUMORS OF THE GALLBLADDER
Alfred Blalock recommended in 1924 that “. . . in malignancy of the gallbladder when a diagnosis can be made without exploration, no operation should be performed,
inasmuch as it only shortens the patient's life.” 412 This nihilistic view of gallbladder cancer is understandable because this rapidly growing tumor has a propensity for
early dissemination by direct invasion of liver, by lymphatic spread, by hematogenous spread, and by production of peritoneal “drop” metastases. In addition, because
of the proximity of the liver and major vasculature, extensive hepatic resections often are required to eradicate local disease. Until recently, therefore, most cases in
which patients were cured of gallbladder cancer occurred “accidentally” when early-stage disease was completely excised by simple cholecystectomy for suspected
stone disease. With improving safety of liver resections and biliary reconstructions, major resections are increasingly performed for gallbladder cancer and have
demonstrated a curative potential even for advanced disease. Given that gallbladder cancer treated by any method other than complete excision is associated with a
median survival of less than 6 months, surgery, when possible, is standard treatment.
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY
Gallbladder cancer is a relatively rare disease in the United States, with an incidence of approximately 1.2 cases per 100,000 population per year. 266 Even though this
would still make gallbladder cancer the most common biliary tract malignancy in this country and the fifth most common gastrointestinal malignancy, only 2000 to 3000
cases occur in the United States annually. Certain geographic regions and racial or ethnic groups demonstrate a much higher incidence, which can be 25 times higher
than the national figure. 413 The highest incidences are reported in Chileans, northeastern Europeans, Israelis, American Indians, and Americans of Mexican origin. In
fact, gallbladder cancer is the main cause of death from cancer among women in Chile. 414 Within the United States and the United Kingdom, urban areas show higher
incidences than rural regions. 413,415 This cancer affects women two to six times more often than it does men. 416,417 The incidence steadily increases with age, reaching
its maximum in the seventh decade of life. 418
The epidemiology of gallbladder cancer is similar to the epidemiology of gallbladder stones, 415 though there is still no general agreement as to whether this represents
cause and effect or common risk factors. Seventy-five to ninety-eight percent of all patients with carcinoma of the gallbladder have cholelithiasis. 419 Gallbladder
cancer is usually associated with cholesterol-type gallstones. Other risk factors include the presence of an anomalous pancreaticobiliary duct junction, 420 chronic
typhoid infection, 421 and inflammatory bowel disease.422 Calcification of the gallbladder (porcelain gallbladder), signifying long-standing inflammation, is associated
with gallbladder cancer in 10% to 25% of cases. 423 These conditions suggest that chronic inflammation may play an important role in the development of gallbladder
cancer. Though reports of family clusters of gallbladder cancer exist in the literature, 424 congenital predisposition is not believed to play a major role in the
development of this cancer.
Exposure to a number of chemicals has been suggested to play a role in carcinogenesis in the gallbladder, including methyldopa, 425 oral contraceptives, 426
isoniazid, 427 and chemicals used in the rubber industry. 428 None of these associations have been definitively proven, however. It may be that chronic inflammation acts
as a promoter for some other carcinogenic exposure. This is suggested by the studies of Kowalewski and Todd, 429 in which carcinoma of the gallbladder was induced
in 68% of hamsters in whom cholesterol pellets were inserted into the gallbladder and the carcinogen dimethylnitrosamine was administered, as compared to only 6%

of control hamsters who received the carcinogen only.
PATHOLOGIC FEATURES
In general, gallbladder cancers can be categorized by growth pattern into infiltrative, nodular, papillary, or combined forms. 430 Most common are the infiltrative and
combined nodular-infiltrative forms. The infiltrative tumors cause thickening and induration of the gallbladder wall, sometimes extending to involve the entire
gallbladder. These infiltrative tumors often are difficult to distinguish from a chronically inflamed but benign gallbladder. Because the spread of tumor is often along
the subserosal plane, which, incidentally, is the plane of dissection during cholecystectomy for gallstone disease, it is not uncommon for tumor to go recognized and
for tumor to be disseminated by cholecystectomy.
Nodular types of gallbladder cancer are more distinctive and can show early invasion through the gallbladder wall into the liver or neighboring structures. Despite this
invasiveness, nodular disease may be easier to control surgically than the infiltrative form, wherein the margins are less defined.
Papillary carcinomas exhibit a polypoid appearance. This variety has a much better prognosis than the other types owing to its relatively low invasiveness. A papillary
tumor may be sufficiently large to fill the entire lumen of the gallbladder and still show minimal invasion of the gallbladder wall.
Most gallbladder cancers (99%) are of epithelial cell origin 431 and can be separated histologically into adenocarcinoma, squamous, adenosquamous, 432 and oat cell433
subtypes. Most are adenocarcinomas. Rarely, tumors can be of mesenchymal cell origin and result in embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, malignant
fibrous histiocytoma, angiosarcoma, and Kaposi's sarcoma. Even more rarely, carcinosarcoma, carcinoid, lymphoma, and melanoma can occur at this site. In addition,
the gallbladder can be involved with metastatic cancers. While classification is academically interesting, the only primary histologic type having clear prognostic
significance is the papillary adenocarcinoma, for which the outlook is comparatively favorable. 266 Grading of tumors is also performed and may have prognostic
significance. 433 However, it is extent of dissemination and resectability that has the greatest influence on outcome.
PATTERN OF SPREAD AND STAGING
Gallbladder cancer generally disseminates by all four routes of tumor spread: direct adjacent organ invasion, lymphatic spread, hematogenous spread, and peritoneal
drop metastases. The gallbladder is attached to the undersurface of the liver along segments IVb and V. The organ has a thin wall, a narrow lamina propria, and only
a single muscle layer. Direct invasion of the liver is therefore common. In addition, the infundibulum and the cystic duct abut the common bile duct and are in proximity
of the major vasculature of the porta hepatis. Tumors of the infundibulum or the cystic duct may occlude the hepatic arteries, portal veins, and bile ducts, making
tumor unresectable at an early stage or dictating an extensive resection and vascular reconstruction. Whereas tumors of the fundus may be resected by a limited liver
resection, tumors of the infundibulum most often will require a major liver resection for extirpation.
Once gallbladder cancer penetrates the thin muscle layer, it has access to major lymphatic and vascular channels. Lymph node metastases and hematogenous
metastases are therefore common. An autopsy study revealed a 94% incidence of lymphatic metastasis and 65% incidence of hematogenous dissemination. 434 In
general, lymphatic spread of tumor descends around the bile duct and involves cystic and pericholedochal nodes first and subsequently descends to portacaval and
celiac nodes. Further spread will lead tumor to nodes in the retropancreatic, interaortocaval, and superior mesenteric artery lymph nodes. Therefore, it is essential
that full mobilization of the duodenum and head of the pancreas be performed for full evaluation of the extent of lymphatic spread of disease. Though autopsy studies
demonstrate as high a rate of distant metastases as 32% in lung and 5% in brain, 435 such spread is clinically apparent only late in the disease. Metastasis to the lung
is rare, however, in the absence of advanced locoregional disease.
Gallbladder cancer has a great propensity for peritoneal spread and for seeding incisions and laparoscopic port sites. 436,437 At postmortem examination, Perpetuo et
al.435 reported that 60% of gallbladder cancer patients had peritoneal spread. This reflects a predilection for transserosal tumor both to shed and to implant and grow.
In addition, a large proportion of patients present after previous cholecystectomy for presumed gallstone disease, when violation of tumor is likely.
Multiple staging systems have been advocated for the classification of gallbladder cancer. The most popular systems are listed in Table 33.5-18. Most useful are the
modified Nevin system 438,439 and the AJCC–Union Internationale Contre le Cancer TNM staging system. 440 The Japanese Biliary Surgical Society system 441 is
included because of the extensive literature on gallbladder cancer originating in Japan. Understanding the Japanese system is essential for interpreting this literature.

TABLE 33.5-18. Summary of Most Commonly Used Staging Systems for Gallbladder Cancer

Nevin et al. 439 originally classified patients into five stages, based primarily on the thickness of invasion, and combined patients with direct liver extension or distant
metastasis into stage V. This staging system was later modified by Donohue et al. 438 such that tumors with contiguous liver invasion were reclassified as stage 3 and
noncontiguous liver involvement as stage 5. Stage 4 continued to include lymph node metastasis. The disadvantage of this system is that it does not differentiate
between tumors that invade through muscle without invading the liver and tumors with minimal (<2 cm) or extensive (>2 cm) invasion of the liver, factors that seem to
have significant prognostic significance.
In the TNM staging system, T1 tumors are those involving only the mucosa or muscle layer. T2 tumors involve perimuscular connective tissue. T3 tumors extend
beyond the serosa but involve less than 2 cm of liver. T4 tumors invade beyond 2 cm of liver. T1 or T2 tumors with no lymph node metastases are stage I and II,
respectively. T3 of N1 (perihilar) nodal involvement is classified as stage III. T4 tumors with no lymph node or distant metastasis constitute stage IVA, while distant
nodal or other metastases are classified as stage IVB. We agree with Donohue et al. 438 that direct liver invasion is less ominous than nodal metastases, which in turn
are less ominous than distant metastases. Included in Table 33.5-18 is a proposed revision of the TNM staging system that we believe more closely segregates
patients according to biologic features of the disease.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Distinguishing the clinical presentation of gallbladder cancer from gallstone disease is usually difficult. Pain is the most common symptom, occurring in 60% to 95% of
cases. Symptoms are often mistaken for biliary colic or chronic cholecystitis. Jaundice occurs in one-fourth to one-half of patients and usually denotes far-advanced
disease 442,443 or an infundibular tumor. Gallbladder cancer can also cause obstructive jaundice by direct invasion of the common hepatic duct or by compression and
involvement of the common hepatic duct by pericholedochal lymph nodes. A high correlation between Mirizzi syndrome and gallbladder cancer exists. 444 Anorexia,
weight loss, and anemia are other nonspecific symptoms that often accompany this cancer. Obstruction of the cystic duct or the neck of the gallbladder may lead to
hydrops of the gallbladder, which manifests as a mass in the right upper quadrant. A firm, fixed mass, however, would be an ominous sign and usually denotes
extensive local invasion. In a review from Thorbjarnarson and Glenn, 443 the presence of a right upper quadrant mass in association with gallbladder cancer reflected
unresectability in 23 of 25 patients.
Laboratory examination usually reveals nonspecific liver function abnormalities. Increased alkaline phosphatase or bilirubin levels are found commonly in cases of

advanced tumors. CEA and CA 19-9 are tumor markers that may be useful in the diagnosis and treatment of this cancer. A CEA level greater than 4 ng/mL is 93%
specific for the diagnosis of gallbladder cancer, as compared to controls undergoing cholecystectomy or upper abdominal surgery for benign conditions, though it is
only 50% sensitive. 445 Serum CA 19-9 levels greater than 20 units/mL have a 79.4% sensitivity and 79.2% specificity. 446 These markers may be useful when radiologic
imaging is ambiguous or indeterminate.
RADIOLOGIC EVALUATION
Before the routine use of CT and US, the preoperative diagnosis rate for gallbladder carcinoma was generally less than 10%, which, in part, explains the dismal
outcomes of surgical therapy in the era prior to sophisticated cross-sectional imaging, as many patients with incurable disease were subjected to exploration. With the
routine use of CT scanning and real-time US in the 1980s, preoperative diagnosis was achieved in 75% to 88% of patients. 447 Beyond diagnosis, the goals of imaging
also include accurate staging. The goal of imaging is to determine extent of liver invasion, invasion of other adjacent organs, vascular involvement, extent of biliary
involvement, presence of nodal metastases, and presence of peritoneal metastases.
Because the majority of patients will present with symptoms suggestive of biliary colic or chronic cholecystitis, the diagnostic workup will usually begin with abdominal
US. Discontinuous gallbladder mucosa, echogenic mucosa, submucosal echolucency, or a mass greater than 1 cm should arouse suspicion of gallbladder cancer. 448
The finding most convincing of a gallbladder malignancy is an inhomogeneous mass replacing all or part of the gallbladder. 449,450 The index of suspicion should be
high for elderly patients, patients with atypical symptoms, and patients with suspicious laboratory findings such as anemia, hypoalbuminemia, and abnormal liver
function tests. US can also delineate the degree of biliary involvement and can define the presence of arterial or portal venous involvement by tumor. In experienced
hands, US will provide diagnostic information equivalent to that provided by much more expensive cross-sectional imaging.
CT scanning is usually the next imaging examination performed because of its wide availability, low cost, low risk, and high yield. On CT, gallbladder cancer can
appear as a mass almost filling the gallbladder lumen in 42% of cases, a polypoid mass in 26%, and diffuse wall thickening in 6% of gallbladder cancer patients. 451 CT
is better than US in demonstrating liver atrophy, which usually is indicative of ipsilateral portal vein involvement by tumor. CT is also better at detecting
lymphadenopathy,452 particularly for retropancreatic nodal disease, which would rule out the potential for cure, though only 38% of pathologically positive nodes were
identified preoperatively by CT scan. 452
In years past, jaundice or radiologic signs of biliary obstruction would lead to direct cholangiography via ERCP or PTC. Indeed, direct cholangiography may provide a
diagnosis. A long stricture at the mid–common bile duct is more likely to be a gallbladder cancer than any other malignancy. Direct cholangiography also allows brush
sampling of the area of tumor invasion for diagnosis by cytology. Such cholangiography, however, carries the risk of introducing bacteria into an obstructed biliary tree
and may cause infection and sepsis. 332 In addition, the presence of a biliary catheter or stent may produce sufficient inflammation to obscure margins between tumor
and normal ductal epithelium. This may, in turn, compromise surgical resection.
Angiography was another common test for assessing vascular invasion when the mass encroached on the porta hepatis, but this invasive method of examination
carries finite risks. Cholangiography and angiography remain important tests in certain settings, but Doppler US, magnetic resonance cholangiography, and MRA
have largely replaced these invasive procedures in the majority of cases. 307,453
Magnetic resonance procedures have long been accepted as invaluable for characterizing hepatic tumors. Such procedures may also identify and characterize lymph
node metastases with greater precision than can other cross-sectional imaging techniques. 454 With recent advances in hardware and software, the extent of biliary
involvement can now be determined through MRCP. 455 MRA allows for assessment of vascular invasion to determine resectability and can demonstrate anomalous
anatomic findings to assist in surgical planning.
If a patient presents with a clinical picture and ultrasound scans suspicious for gallbladder cancer, a CT scan of the abdomen and a chest radiograph usually are
obtained. Findings of pulmonary metastases, peritoneal metastases, vascular or biliary involvement not amenable to reconstruction, discontiguous liver metastases,
or distant nodal disease indicate unresectability. Tissue confirmation of diagnosis can be obtained by needle biopsy, and the patient can be sent for alternative
therapy.
Barring signs of unresectability, medically fit and nonjaundiced patients may proceed directly to surgical exploration. For those with jaundice or equivocal CT findings,
MRCP represents the next least invasive test that may have utility. In patients with medical contraindications to immediate surgery, particularly those with renal
insufficiency or sepsis, a PTC should be performed to delineate extent of biliary involvement and to treat the jaundice. At times, arteriography is still needed to
demonstrate clearly unresectable vascular involvement. On rare occasions, the gallbladder cancer can erode into the transverse colon and produce a colonic fistula
as a source of sepsis. In patients in whom this condition is suspected, a colonoscopy should be performed and full bowel preparation should be undertaken prior to
surgical exploration.
ROLE FOR NEEDLE BIOPSY
Generally, needle biopsy is contraindicated if a patient is thought to have a resectable gallbladder cancer. This cancer has a great propensity to spread in needle
tracts, a laparoscopic port site, surgical wounds, and the peritoneal cavity. 456,457 Therefore, needle biopsy is not indicated if surgical exploration is otherwise
appropriate. However, if radiologic studies demonstrate an unresectable tumor, percutaneous fine-needle aspiration cytology is highly accurate 458 and may avoid an
unnecessary laparotomy in many patients. If the tumor is clearly unresectable and the patient is jaundiced, direct cholangiography allows for placement of stents to
relieve jaundice and allows diagnosis to be established by either bile cytology or brush biopsy. 458,459 and 460 Yield can be expected in 50% to 75% of cases, and the
false-positive rate is less than 1%.
TREATMENT
Surgical Management
Much controversy exists as to the extent of surgery required for treatment of gallbladder cancer. Recommendations have ranged from simple cholecystectomy to
ultraaggressive resections consisting of combined major liver resection and pancreaticoduodenectomy. 461 This controversy exists because, until recently, the
operations required for complete resection of cancer were associated with prohibitive morbidity and mortality. 462,463 The majority of patients undergoing treatment for
gallbladder cancer are in their seventh or eighth decade of life and may be at increased risk for radical surgery as a consequence of concomitant medical problems.
The major morbidity after resection for gallbladder cancer has ranged from 5% to 54% and mortality from 0% to 21% ( Table 33.5-19). In a multiinstitutional review of
1686 gallbladder cancer resections from Japan, a comparison of morbidity by procedure was made. 463 The review reports 12.8% morbidity for cholecystectomy, 21.9%
for extended cholecystectomy, and 48.3% for hepatic lobectomy. The mortality rates were 2.9%, 2.3%, and 17.9%, respectively. 463 The morbidity and mortality rates of
major liver resections have decreased in recent reports, even in the aged population. 464,465 Most recent series report a mortality rate of 5% or less even with extensive
liver resections. With these improvements in perioperative outcome, radical resections are increasingly accepted.

TABLE 33.5-19. Morbidity and Mortality of Resection for Gallbladder Cancer

Controversy concerning the extent of resection is also based on the dismal results of treatment in decades past. Until the last decade, the results of treatment for
gallbladder cancer in general, including surgical treatment, were dismal. Piehler and Crichlow 466 reviewed 5836 cases in the world's literature from 1960 to 1978. The
overall 5-year survival rate was consistently less than 5%, with a median survival of 5 to 8 months. Even for the 25% who were treated by resections with curative
intent, only 16.5% survived 5 years. In fact, the only long-term survivors were among the group in which the tumor was small enough not to be recognized at the time
of cholecystectomy. Perpetuo et al.435 reviewed a 36-year experience with gallbladder cancer from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center and reported a 5-year survival
rate of less than 5% and median survival of 5.2 months. Cubertafond et al. 467 recently reported the results of a French Surgical Association survey of 724 carcinomas
of the gallbladder. These investigators reported a median survival of 3 months, a 5-year survival rate of 5%, and a 1-year survival rate of 14%. They observed no
differences among the various surgical procedures adopted and concluded that no progress had been made in the treatment of gallbladder cancer. A review of
gallbladder cancer from Australia revealed a 12% 5-year survival rate, with all survivors having stage I or II disease. The median survival for patients with stage III or
IV disease was only 46 days.468 These miserable results sowed the seeds of nihilism that surrounded this disease in the past.
Over the last decade, many reports have demonstrated the utility of aggressive therapy. As a result, a more reasoned approach based on the biology of the disease is
now advocated. The following recommendations are based on the goal of complete resection of tumor. To achieve this goal, surgery must remove the cancerous
gallbladder, remove any adjacent organ invaded by tumor, remove involved lymph glands, and provide biliary continuity if resection of the bile duct is necessary.
Surgical strategy is best directed by the suspected T stage of disease.
T1 DISEASE. Patients with T1 stage tumor (tumor confined within the mucosa or muscular layers of the gallbladder) most often present after the gallbladder has already

been removed by simple cholecystectomy for presumed gallstone disease. Ample literature reports that patients with T1 tumors may be cured by simple
cholecystectomy alone. The 5-year survival rate is expected to be 85% to 100% ( Table 33.5-20).469,470,471 and 472 Therefore, when patients present after simple
cholecystectomy, the pathologic findings are reviewed to ensure that margins are negative. Particular attention is paid to the cystic duct margin. If all margins are
negative, no other therapy is undertaken. If the cystic duct margin is positive, patients should be subjected to a common bile duct excision and biliary reconstruction.

TABLE 33.5-20. Survival after Resection of Stage I Gallbladder Cancers

Alternatively, the early-stage tumor may be discovered radiographically by a vigilant radiologist. If a T1 cancerous lesion is suspected, an open simple
cholecystectomy should be performed and the diagnosis and stage confirmed immediately by frozen-section pathology. If a benign lesion or a T1 tumor is confirmed,
simple cholecystectomy is all that is necessary. If deeper invasion is found, further resection according to stage should be performed, as outlined next.
T2 DISEASE. T2 tumors remain subserosal but have invaded through the muscular layer. It would at first seem logical that a simple cholecystectomy may be adequate

for T2 tumors. However, there are two good reasons for performing more extensive resection. First, the plane that is generally taken between the liver and gallbladder
is subserosal and may violate T2 tumors along the liver interphase. In the review by Yamaguchi and Tsuneyoshi, 470 25 patients had tumor extending into the
subserosal layer and 11 of these had positive microscopic margins after simple cholecystectomy. Second, T2 tumors are associated with a high incidence of regional
nodal metastases (Table 33.5-21). Therefore, the most reasonable primary operation for T2 gallbladder cancer is the radical cholecystectomy that was first advocated
by Thorbjarnarson and Glenn. 443 This includes a wedge resection of the gallbladder bed and regional lymphadenectomy of the hepatoduodenal ligament. Except for
the thinnest of patients, total nodal clearance in the porta hepatis is difficult without removal of the common bile duct. In addition, adequate lymph node dissection of
the porta hepatis has a good chance of devascularizing the common bile duct, and subsequent benign structure is a possible late consequence. For both reasons, we
prefer to resect the common bile duct as part of the clearance of lymphatic tissue in this region. A hepaticojejunostomy using a Roux-en-Y loop of jejunum is the
preferred method of reestablishing biliary continuity.

TABLE 33.5-21. Incidence of Nodal and Peritoneal Metastases from Gallbladder Cancer According to T Stage of Disease

A large number of patients will present for definitive therapy after simple cholecystectomy. Good evidence supports a repeat exploration for a more definitive
resection. Data from many series have demonstrated that simple cholecystectomy results in 30% to 40% 5-year survival, while radical cholecystectomy or a more
extensive liver resection results in a 5-year survival of 80% to 90% ( Table 33.5-22). This could be explained by the possibility of residual tumor in the gallbladder bed
or the 30% to 50% chance of regional lymph node involvement in cases of T2 gallbladder cancer. 469,473 In an article by Shirai et al., 471 the 5-year survival rate after
radical re-resection for stage II tumors was 90%, as compared to 40% 5-year survival for simple cholecystectomy alone. In a study comparing 20 patients treated by
radical re-resection for T2 tumors with 18 patients treated by simple cholecystectomy, de Aretxabala 472 demonstrated a 50% improved 5-year survival rate for the
more aggressive approach (70% vs. 20%).

TABLE 33.5-22. Survival after Resection of Stage II (T2) Gallbladder Cancers

T3 AND T4 CANCERS. The greatest controversy in surgical management of gallbladder cancer lies in the treatment of advanced tumors. The debate centers on whether

radical surgery is ever justified for such advanced disease, given the perceived poor long-term prognosis. The literature from the last decade has provided much
support for an aggressive approach by confirming a possibility for long-term survival after resection of locally advanced disease ( Table 33.5-23). Onoyama et al.441
recently reported a 63.6% 5-year survival for patients with Japanese Biliary Surgical Society stage II disease and a 44.4% 5-year survival for stage III disease after
extended cholecystectomy (these stages combined represent AJCC stage III). Similarly, Nakamura et al. 418 reported 13 radical resections for tumors of Nevin's stage
V, with 54% alive at 1 year and 15% (two patients) alive for longer than 7 years. 474 Similar results were recently reported from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, where a 67% 5-year survival was achieved for patients with completely resected stage III disease and a 33% 5-year survival was noted for patients with
completely resected stage IV tumors. 473 It is clear from these results that an aggressive approach to locally advanced disease is justified.

TABLE 33.5-23. Survival after Extended Resection of Stage III and IV Gallbladder Cancers

POSITIVE RETROPERITONEAL NODES. Metastases to cystic, portal, and portacaval lymph nodes may be curable by regional lymphadenectomy. Onoyama et al.

441

reported a 5-year survival rate of 60% for patients having metastatic disease to N1 nodes. Shirai et al. 474 reported a 45% 5-year survival for patients with positive
regional nodes, documenting nine patients surviving for more than 5 years after radical resection. Such findings support radical lymphadenectomy for gallbladder
cancer.
Some researchers have advocated even more radical lymphadenectomies. The next nodal area for extension of tumor includes the retropancreatic and aortocaval
nodes, which explains the recommendation of some investigators to perform a pancreaticoduodenectomy for patients with suspicious retropancreatic nodes. 461,475 It is
assumed that nodal clearance is improved with pancreaticoduodenectomy. One multicenter series of 150 hepatopancreaticoduodenectomies for gallbladder cancer
reported a 54% morbidity and 15.3% mortality rate. 463 Most other series report higher mortality rates. Such high morbidity and mortality of combined hepatectomy and
pancreaticoduodenectomy is not justified by the long-term outcome. Long-term survival is extremely rare, even after such radical resection, when N2 nodes contain
metastatic disease.
RE-RESECTION AFTER LAPAROSCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY. A significant number of gallbladder cancers will present for definitive therapy after prior cholecystectomy.

This is particularly common for early-stage tumors, which account for most cancers diagnosed at pathologic analysis. For patients treated initially with open
cholecystectomy, data clearly indicate that a radical re-resection is justified for tumors with a depth of penetration equal to or greater than T2. 471 As would be
expected, however, prognosis for patients subjected to two operations is less favorable than for patients treated with a single procedure. Gall et al. 476 reported a
median survival of 42 months for patients undergoing a curative resection at the first operation as compared to 13 months for those requiring two operations.
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy has given birth to an entirely new clinical entity since 1989—namely, laparoscopically discovered gallbladder cancer. To date, few data
have addressed the utility of radical re-resection after gallbladder cancer has been discovered laparoscopically. We recently reported a series of 42 gallbladder
cancers discovered at laparoscopy. 436 One patient with T1 gallbladder cancer was advised that his laparoscopic cholecystectomy was a definitive procedure, and no
additional therapy was undertaken. All other patients underwent extent-of-disease evaluation and re-resection as appropriate. Of the 41 patients with T2, T3, or T4
disease, 5 were not offered further surgery because disease was determined on imaging to be unresectable. The remaining 36 patients were subjected to surgical
exploration, which revealed that an additional 17 patients had unresectable disease. The survival of the 19 re-resected patients was significantly different from that of
the patients whose disease was found to be unresectable. Only 3 of these 19 patients subjected to re-resection have died, and the median survival has not been
reached, whereas 14 of the 17 patients whose disease was deemed unresectable have died, with a median survival of 4 months. These data would indicate that such
reexploration and re-resection are justified and useful.
Gallbladder cancer has a great potential for peritoneal dissemination. This propensity for abdominal seeding is further enhanced by laparoscopic exploration. Data
indicate that the incidence of peritoneal metastases is higher now than that reported in the prelaparoscopy age. 475 During reexploration, therefore, care must be taken
to perform a full abdominal inspection to rule out peritoneal disease.
Special consideration should also be extended for the laparoscopic port sites: A number of studies have demonstrated the propensity of tumor to recur in the
laparoscopic port sites. 437,456,477,478,479,480 and 483 It has become our standard practice to excise laparoscopic port sites at reexploration. Whether such excision of port
sites is useful will be proven only by future follow-up, but it is known that the procedure adds little morbidity.
Chemotherapy, Radiotherapy, and Adjuvant Therapy
In general, chemotherapy and radiotherapy have offered poor results in the treatment of gallbladder cancer. A European Organization for Research and Treatment of
Cancer cooperative study examined bolus mitomycin C in advanced gallbladder and biliary tree carcinoma, with no significant activity identified. 484 Other regimens
based on 5-FU, Adriamycin, or nitrosoureas alone and in combination for gallbladder cancer result in only minimal responses. 435 In a study that treated 30 patients
with advanced gallbladder carcinoma with 5-FU, leucovorin, and hydroxyurea, 9 had a partial response. However, the median duration of response was only 6.5
months, and the median survival was only 8 months. 485 Regional therapy has recently been examined using intraarterial mitomycin C for gallbladder cancer. A 48%
overall response rate and a prolongation of median survival from 5 months to 14 months as compared to historic controls was reported. 486 However, a regional
approach is rarely indicated, since the major reasons for unresectability usually are disseminated disease and extensive involvement of the porta hepatis.
The results for radiotherapy have also been poor, because the mode of spread of gallbladder cancer does not lend itself well to radiotherapy. Although Houry et al. 487
suggest that radiotherapy may increase survival after no resection or palliative resection of gallbladder carcinoma, the suggested benefit is small, with a median

survival of only 6 to 8 months. However, because it does appear to be well tolerated, radiotherapy with or without chemosensitization is the most common palliative
modality used.
Because of the rarity of this disease in general and the rarity of completely resected gallbladder cancers, it is not surprising that there are no prospective, randomized
studies examining the utility of adjuvant therapy. Nonetheless, as part of many retrospective studies, the issue of adjuvant therapy has been addressed. Chao and
Greager488 compared 15 patients who received some form of chemotherapy or radiotherapy (or both) after resection for gallbladder cancer to 7 patients who did not
receive any adjuvant therapy and found no significant difference in outcome. Oswalt and Cruz 489 reported a median survival of 20 weeks in 13 patients treated with
adjuvant chemotherapy, as compared to 8 weeks in patients treated with surgery alone. Morrow et al. 490 from the University of Minnesota reported a median survival of
4.5 months for those receiving adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy versus 3 months for those treated with surgery alone. With such small sample sizes and the
generally dismal results in these series, it is difficult to draw firm conclusions from these data.
Definitive data for adjuvant radiotherapy also are lacking, but the existing data are a bit more encouraging than are those for chemotherapy. 491 Todoroki et al. 492
examined intraoperative radiotherapy after complete resection for stage IV gallbladder cancer and reported a 10% 3-year survival for patients receiving intraoperative
radiotherapy versus 0% for surgery alone. Hanna and Rider 493 reviewed results for 51 patients with gallbladder cancer and found survival to be significantly longer in
patients receiving postoperative radiotherapy as compared with those who underwent only surgery. In another retrospective study, the median survival of patients
receiving postoperative irradiation was 63 months, as compared with 29 months for patients undergoing surgery alone. 494 Though the data are encouraging, firm
support for such adjuvant therapy awaits confirmation by prospective trials. Nevertheless, given the high incidence of local recurrence of gallbladder carcinoma and
the low morbidity of radiotherapy, it is not unreasonable to recommend some form of radiotherapy, particularly for patients with advanced-stage disease.
Other Palliative Management
Palliative management for gallbladder cancer usually is directed at relief of jaundice, treatment of sepsis, and palliation for pain and bowel obstruction. Decisions on
palliative treatment should take into account the short survival of patients with nonresectable gallbladder cancer. The median survival for patients presenting with
unresectable disease is generally 2 to 4 months, with a 1-year survival rate of less than 5%. 413,442 All palliative treatments should, therefore, be kept as simple as
possible, given the aggressive nature of this disease. For jaundiced patients, for example, procedures to achieve relief of jaundice should be attempted only if patients
are symptomatic (itching or experiencing biliary sepsis) or require a normal bilirubin level for chemotherapy. This is because any attempt to relieve the jaundice can
result in introduction of bacteria into the biliary tree, which subsequently becomes a source of biliary sepsis. If the patient is experiencing pruritus or biliary sepsis,
percutaneous drainage of the biliary tree is preferred. Surgical bypass often is difficult because of advanced disease in the porta hepatis. Even though a segment III
bypass is possible 495 and can be performed at the time of laparotomy for attempted resection, it is unreasonable to perform exploratory surgery on patients with the
sole goal of achieving biliary bypass. Kapoor et al. 496 report a 12% 30-day mortality rate for segment III bypasses. In addition, subjecting a patient with an anticipated
4-month survival to a palliative procedure that requires a 1- to 2-month recovery period is unwise. In the event of a preoperative diagnosis of advanced, unresectable
gallbladder cancer in the jaundiced patient, a noninvasive radiologic approach to biliary drainage is justified. This disease is rapidly progressive, and so it is
preferable to avoid the morbidity and recovery time of a laparotomy and surgical bypass.
GALLBLADDER POLYPS
A section on gallbladder cancer must include a discussion of gallbladder polyps, as polyps are found in up to 5% of patients in the general population. 497,498 The
majority of polyps are benign and can be classified as epithelial tumors (adenoma), mesenchymal tumors (fibroma, lipoma, hemangioma), or pseudotumors
(cholesterol polyps, inflammatory polyps, and adenomyoma). Most polyps are cholesterol polyps, 499 which histologically are submucosal deposits of lipid-laden
macrophages. Of the various types of polyps, the only type believed to be precancerous is the adenoma. 500
Distinguishing benign from malignant or premalignant lesions is essential in the patient presenting with a polyp. US is the most practical test for evaluating polypoid
lesions of the gallbladder and has a sensitivity of 90.1% and a specificity of 93.9% in making the diagnosis. 501 In general, malignant lesions were significantly more
likely to be found in patients older than 50 years and more likely to be present as a solitary lesion, to be sessile in character, and to measure greater than 1.0 cm in
diameter. Conversely, cholesterol polyps, which account for more than 90% of benign lesions, are more likely to occur as multiple lesions (more than three), to be
small, and to retain an intact mucosa. Because of the poor prognosis of gallbladder cancer and the low morbidity of a cholecystectomy, most investigators recommend
open cholecystectomy for any solitary polyp greater than 1.0 cm. Some investigators have advocated an even more aggressive approach. Shinkai et al. 499 recommend
cholecystectomy for patients with fewer than three polyps, regardless of size.
Figure 33.5-6 is our recommended algorithm for the treatment of gallbladder polyps. It is based on the recommendations of Boulton and Adams 498 and on the findings
in longitudinal follow-up studies in which small (<1-cm) gallbladder polyps were followed by imaging, demonstrating a low rate of subsequent diagnosis of cancer. 502
For symptomatic polyps, cholecystectomy should be performed. For patients with gallbladder polyps and other conditions that warrant cholecystectomy (e.g.,
cholelithiasis), cholecystectomy should be performed. Likewise, for patients with characteristics suspicious for cancer—namely, a lesion larger than 1 cm, fewer than
three lesions, and eroded mucosa—cholecystectomy should be performed. Other patients should be followed by US every 6 months, and any suspicious findings
should prompt cholecystectomy.

FIGURE 33.5-6. Algorithm for treatment of gallbladder polyps. (Modified from ref. 498.)

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Okuda K, Kojiro M. Neoplasms of the liver. In: Schiff L, Schiff ER, eds. Diseases of the liver, 7th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1993:1236.
2. Grasso P. Experimental liver tumors in animals. In: Johnson PJ, ed. Bailliere's Clinical Gastroenterology 1987;183.
3. Rustgi V. Epidemiology of hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1987;16:545.
4. Oon C, Rauff A, Tan LK. Treatment of primary liver cancer in Singapore. A review of 3,200 cases seen between January 1, 1977, and July 31, 1987. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1989;23:S13.
5. Benveniste R, Bixler D, Conneally PM. Periodontal disease in diabetics. J Periodontol 1967;38:271.
6. Munoz N, Linsell A. Epidemiology of primary liver cancer. In: Correa P, Haenzel W, eds. Epidemiology of cancer in the digestive tract. The Hague: Nijoff, 1982:161.
7. Munoz N, Bosch X. Epidemiology of hepatocellular carcinoma. In: Okuda K, Ishak KG, eds. Neoplasms of the liver. Berlin: Springer, 1988:3.
8. Bosch X, Muñoz N. Epidemiology of hepatocellular carcinoma. In: Bannasch P, Keppler D, Weber C, eds. Liver cell carcinoma. Falk Symposium No. 15. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1989:3.
9. Lau JYN, Lai CL. Hepatocarcinogenesis. Trop Gastroenterol 1990;11:9.
10. Simonetti RG, Camma C, Fiorello Fea. Hepatocellular carcinoma: a worldwide problem and the major risk factors. Dig Dis Sci 1991;36:962.
11. Leong ASY, Liew CT. Epidemiology, risk factors, etiology, premalignant lesions and carcinogenesis. In: Leong ASY, Liew CT, Lau JWY, Johnson PJ, eds. Hepatocellular carcinoma, diagnosis,
investigation and management. London: Arnold, 1999:1.
12. Beasley RP, Hwang LY. Epidemiology of hepatocellular carcinoma. In: Vyas GH, Dienstag JL, Hoofnagle JH, eds. Viral hepatitis and liver disease. New York: Grune & Stratton, 1984:209.
13. Simonetti RG. Prevalence of antibodies to hepatitis C virus in hepatocellular carcinoma. Lancet 1989;2:1338.
14. Hasan F, Jeffers ZJ, DeMedina M, et al. Hepatitis Cassociated hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 1990;12:589.
15. Di Bisceglie AM. Hepatitis C and hepatocellular carcinoma. Semin Liver Dis 1995;15:64.

16. Forman D. Ames, the Ames test and the causes of cancer [editorial]. Br Med J 1991;303:428.
17. Saunder J, Latt W. Epidemiology of alcoholic liver disease. Bailleres Clin Gastroenterol 1993;7:555.
18. Nalpas B, Pol S, Theopot V, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma in alcoholics. Alcohol 1995;12:117.
19. Schiff ER. Hepatitis C and alcohol. Hepatology 1997;26[Suppl 1]:S39.
20. Austin H, Delzell E, Grufferman S, et al. A case-control study of hepatocellular carcinoma and the hepatitis B virus, cigarette smoking and alcohol consumption. Cancer Res 1986;46:962.
21. Trichopoulos D, Day NE, Kaklamani E, et al. Hepatitis B virus, tobacco smoking and ethanol consumption in the etiology of hepatocellular carcinoma. Int J Cancer 1987;39:45.
22. Naccarato R, Farinati F. Hepatocellular carcinoma, alcohol and cirrhosis: facts and hypothesis. Dig Dis Sci 1991;36:1137.
23. Yu SZ. Primary prevention of hepatocellular carcinoma. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1995;10:674.
24. Collier NA, Bloom SR, Hodgson HJF, et al. Neurotensin secretion by fibrolamellar carcinoma of the liver. Lancet 1984;1:538.
25. Craig JR. Fibrolamellar carcinoma: clinical and pathological features. In: Okuda K, Tabor E, eds. Liver cancer. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1999:255.
26. Taguchi J, Nakashima O, Tanaka M, et al. A clinicopathological study on combined hepatocellular and cholangiocarcinoma. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1996;11:758.
27. Wu PC, Fang JWS, Lar VKT, et al. Classification of hepatocellular carcinoma according to hepatocellular and biliary differentiation markers. Clinical and biological implications. Am J Pathol
1996;149:1167.
28. Lai CL, Wu PC, Lam KC, Todd D. Histologic prognostic indicators in hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 1979;44:1677
29. Yang SH, Watanabe J, Nakashima O, et al. Clinicopathologic study on clear cell hepatocellular carcinoma. Pathol Int 1996;46:503.
30. Heyward W, Lanier A, McMahon B, et al. Early detection of primary hepatocellular carcinoma. JAMA 1985;254:791.
31. Lok ASF, Lai CL. Alpha-fetaprotein monitoring in Chinese patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection: role in early detection of hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 1989;9:110.
32. Johnson PJ, Leung N, Cheng P, et al. “Hepatoma-specific” alphafetoprotein may permit preclinical diagnosis of malignant change in patients with chronic liver disease. Br J Cancer
1997;75:236.
33. Sherman H, Hardison J. The importance of a coexistent hepatic rub and bruit. JAMA 1979;241:1495.
34. Ihde DC, Sherlock P, Winawer SJ, et al. Clinical manifestations of hepatoma. A review of 6 years experience at a cancer hospital. Am J Med 1974;56:83.
35. Lai CL, Wu PC, Chan GC, et al. Clinical features of hepatocellular carcinoma review of 211 patients in Hong Kong. Cancer 1988;47:2746.
36. Shiu W, Dewar G, Leung N, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma in Hong Kong: clinical study on 340 cases. Oncology 1990;47:241.
37. Ho J, Wu PC, Kung TM. An autopsy study of hepatocellular carcinoma in Hong Kong. Pathology 1981;13:409.
38. Ng WD, Chan YT, Ho KK, et al. Injection sclerotherapy for bleeding esophageal varices in cirrhotic patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastrointest Endosc 1989;35:69.
39. Yeo W, Surg JY, Ward SC, et al. A prospective study of upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Dig Dis Sci 1995;40:2516.
40. Spontaneous rupture of the liver [editorial]. Br Med J 1976;2:1278.
41. Nagasue N, Inokuchi K. Spontaneous and traumatic rupture of hepatoma. Br J Surg 1979;66:248.
42. Chearanai O, Plengvanit UAC, Asavanich C, et al. Spontaneous rupture of primary hepatoma; report of 63 cases with particular reference to the pathogenesis and rationale treatment by hepatic
artery ligation. Cancer 1983;51:1532.
43. Chen MF, Hwang TL, Jeng LB, et al. Surgical treatment for spontaneous rupture of hepatocellular carcinoma. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1988;167:99.
44. Dewar GA, Griffin SM, Ku KW, Lau WY, Li AK. Management of bleeding liver tumours in Hong Kong. Br J Surg 1991;78:463.
45. Kew MC, Dos Santos HA, Sherlock S. Diagnosis of primary liver cancer of the liver. Br Med J 1971;4:408.
46. Ong GB, Taw J. Spontaneous rupture of hepatocellular carcinoma. Br Med J 1972;4:146.
47. Miyamoto M, Sudo T, Kuyama T. Spontaneous rupture of hepatocellular carcinoma: a review of 172 Japanese cases. Am J Gastroenterol 1991;86:68.
48. Edmondson HA, Steiner PE. Primary carcinoma of the liver: a study of 100 cases. Cancer 1954;7(462):503.
49. Kappel DA, Miller DR. Primary hepatic carcinoma. A review of thirty-seven patients. Am J Surg 1972;124:798.
50. Kew MC, Geddes EW. Hepatocellular carcinoma in rural Southern African blacks. Medicine 1982;61:98.
51. Lin TY. Tumors of the liver: I. Primary malignant tumors. In: Bockus HL, ed. Gastroenterology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1976:522.
52. Okuda K. Clinical aspects of hepatocellular carcinomaanalysis of 134 cases. In: Okuda K, Peters F, eds. Hepatocellular carcinoma. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1976:387.
53. Kojiro M, Kawabaata K, Kawano Y, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma presenting as intrabile duct tumor growth. A clinicopathologic study of 24 cases. Cancer 1982;49:2144.
54. Lee NW, Wong KP, Siu KF, et al. Cholangiography in hepatocellular carcinoma with obstructive jaundice. Clin Radiol 1984;35(119):123.
55. Lai ECS, Ng IOL, Ng MMT, et al. Long-term results of resection for large hepatocellular carcinoma: a multivariate analysis of clinicopathological features. Hepatology 1990;11:815.
56. Lau WY, Leung KL, Leung TW, et al. Obstructive jaundice secondary to hepatocellular carcinoma. Surg Oncol 1995;4:303.
57. Afroudakis AP, Bhuta SM, Ranganath KA, et al. Obstructive jaundice caused by hepatocellular carcinoma. Report of three cases. Dig Dis 1978;23:609.
58. Van Sonnenberg E, Ferucci J. Bile duct obstruction in hepatocellular carcinoma (hepatoma)clinical and cholangiographical characteristics. Report of 6 cases and review of the literature.
Radiology 1979;130:7.
59. Roslyn JJ, Kuchenbecker S, Longmire WP, Tompkins RK. Floating tumor debris. A cause of intermittent biliary obstruction. Arch Surg 1984;119:1312.
60. Wu CS, Wu SS, Chen PC, et al. Cholangiography of icteric type hepatoma. Am J Gastroenterol 1994;89:774.
61. Lau WY, Leow CK, Li AKC. A logical approach to hepatocellular carcinoma presenting with jaundice. Ann Surg 1997;225:281.
62. Kew MC, Dusheiko GM. Paraneoplastic manifestations of hepatocellular carcinoma. In: Berk PD, Chalmers TC, eds. Frontiers of liver and disease. New York: Thieme-Stratton, 1981:305.
63. Shapiro E, Bell GI, Polonsky K, et al. Tumor hypoglycemia: relationship to high molecular weight insulin-like growth factor II. J Clin Invest 1990;85:1672.
64. McFrazean AJS, Yeung RRT. Further observations on hypoglycaemia in hepatocellular carcinoma. Am J Med 1969;47:220.
65. Helzberg JH, McPhee MS, Zarling EJ, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma: an unusual course with hyperthyroidism and inappropriate thryoid-stimulating hormone production. Gastroenterology
1985;88:181.
66. Lau JWY, Leow CK. Surgical management (including liver transplantation). In: Leong ASY, Leiw CT, Lau JWY, Johnson PJ, eds. Hepatocellular carcinoma. Diagnosis, investigation and
management. London: Arnold, 1999:147.
67. Caturelli E, Bisceglia M, Fusilli S, et al. Cytology versus microhistological diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma. Comparative accuracies in the same fine-needle biopsy specimen. Dig Dis Sci
1996;41:2326.
68. Williamson BW, Blumgart LH, McKellar NJ. Combined use of arteriography and venography in the assessment of resectability especially in hilar tumours. Am J Surg 1980;139:210.
69. Voyles CR, Bowley NJ, Allison DJ, Benjamin IS, Blumgart LH. Carcinoma of the proximal extrahepatic biliary tree radiologic assessment and therapeutic alternatives. Ann Surg 1983;197:188.
70. Lau WY, Arnold M, Leung NW, et al. Hepatic intraarterial lipiodol ultrasound guided biopsy in the management of hepatocellular carcinoma. Surg Oncol 1993;2:119.
71. Bismuth H, Chiche L, Adam R, et al. Liver resection versus transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhotic patients. Ann Surg 1993;218(2):145.
72. Bismuth H, Morino M, Sherlock D, et al. Primary treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma by arterial chemoembolization. Am J Surg 1992;163:387.
73. Hasegawa H, Yamazaki S, Makuuchi M, et al. Hepatectomies pour hepatocarcinome sur goie cirrhotique: schemes desionnels et principes de reanimation peri-operatoir. Experience de 204
cas. J Chirurg 1987;124:425.
74. Noun R, Jagot P, Farges O, Sauvanet A, Belghiti J. High preoperative serum alanine transferase levels: effect on the risk of liver resection in child grade A cirrhotic patients. World J Surg
1997;21:390.
75. Lau WY, Leow CK, Li AKC. Hepatocellular carcinomacurrent management and treatment. GICancer 1996;2:35.
76. Child CG, Turcotte JG. Surgery and portal hypertension. In: Child CG, ed. The liver and portal hypertension. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1964:50.
77. Pugh R, Murray-Lyon IM, Dawson JL, et al. Transection of the oesophagus for bleeding oesophageal varices. Br J Surg 1973;60:646.
78. Franco D, Borgonovo G. Liver resection in cirrhosis of the liver. In: Blumgart LH, ed. Surgery of the liver and biliary tract. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1994:1539.
79. Hemming AW, Scudamore CH, Shackleton CR, Pudek M, Erb SR. Indocyanine green clearance as a predictor of successful hepatic resection in cirrhotic patients. Am J Surg 1992;163:515.
80. Gill RA, Goodman MW, Golfus GR, et al. Aminopyrine breath test predicts surgical risk for patients with liver disease. Ann Surg 1983;198:701.
81. Takenaka K, Kanematsu T, Fukuzawa K, Sugimachi K. Can hepatic failure after surgery for hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhotic patients be prevented? World J Surg 1990;14:123.
82. Bruix J, Castells A, Bosch J, et al. Surgical resection of hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhotic patients: prognostic value of preoperative portal pressure. Gastroenterology 1996;111(4):1018.
83. Bismuth H, Houssin D, Mazmanian G. Postoperative liver insufficiency: prevention and management. World J Surg 1983;7:505.
84. Fong Y, Sun RL, Jarnagin W, Blumgart LH. An analysis of 412 cases of hepatocellular carcinoma at a Western center. Ann Surg 1999;229(6):790.
85. Mnegchao W, Han C, Xiaohua Z, Xiaoping Y, Jiamei Y. Primary hepatic carcinoma resection over 18 years. Chin Med J 1980;93:723.
86. Tsuzuki T, Sugoika A, Ueda M, et al. Hepatic resection for heaptocellular carcinoma. Surgery 1990;107:511.
87. Chen MF, Hwang TL, Jeng LBB, et al. Hepatic resection in 120 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Arch Surg 1989;124:1025.
88. Bagasue N, Kohno H, Chang YC, et al. Liver resection for hepatocellualr carcinoma. Ann Surg 1993;217:375.
89. Vauthey JN, Klimstra D, Franceschi D, et al. Hepatic resection for hepatocellular carcinoma. Am J Surg 1995;169:28.
90. Nagasue N, Yukaya H, Ogawa Y, Kohno H, Nakamura T. Human liver regeneration after major hepatic resection. A study of normal liver and livers with chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis. Ann Surg
1987;206:30.
91. Nagasue N, Kohno H, Chang YC, et al. Liver resection for hepatocellular carcinoma: results of 229 consecutive patients during 11 years. Ann Surg 1993;217(4):375.
92. Tanabe G, Sakamoto M, Akazawa K. Intraoperative risk factors associated with hepatic resection. Br J Surg 1995;82:1262.
93. Okuda K, Liver Study Group of Japan. Primary liver cancer in Japan. Cancer 1980;71:19.
94. Nagao T, Goto S, Kawano N, et al. Hepatic resection for hepatocellular carcinoma: clinical features and long-term prognosis. Ann Surg 1987;205:33.
95. Kanematsu T, Takenaka K, Matsumata T, et al. Limited hepatic resection effective for selected cirrhotic patients with primary liver cancer. Ann Surg 1984;199:51.
96. Fuster J, Garcia-Valdecasas JC, Grande L, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma and cirrhosisresults of surgical treatment in a European series. Ann Surg 1996;223(3):297.
97. Capussotti L, Borgonovo G, Bouzari H, et al. Results of major hepatectomy for large primary liver cancer in patients with cirrhosis. Br J Surg 1994;81:427.
98. Kawasaki S, Makuuchi M, Miyagawa S, et al. Results of hepatic resection for hepatocellular carcinoma. World J Surg 1995;19:31.
99. Melendez JA, Arslan V, Fischer ME, et al. Perioperative outcomes of major hepatic resections under low central venous pressure anesthesia: blood loss, blood transfusion, and the risk of
postoperative renal dysfunction. J Am Coll Surg 1998;187(6):620.
100. Kim YI, Nakashima K, Tada I, Kawano K, Kobayashi M. Prolonged normothermic ischaemia of human cirrhotic liver during hepatectomy: a preliminary report. Br J Surg 1993;80:1566.
101. Man K, Fan ST, Ng IO, et al. Prospective evaluation of Pringle maneuver in hepatectomy for liver tumors by a randomized study. Ann Surg 1997;226(6):704.
102. DeMatteo RP, Palese C, Jarnagin WR, et al. Anatomic segmental hepatic resection is superior to wedge resection as an oncologic operation for colorectal liver metastases. J Gastrointest Surg
2000;4(2):178.
103. Sitzmann JV, Abrams R. Improved survival for hepatocellular cancer with combination surgery and multimodality treatment. Ann Surg 1993;217:149.
104. Lau WY, Leung KL, Leung TW, et al. Resection of hepatocellular carcinoma with diaphragmatic invasion. Surg Oncol 1995;82:264.
105. Yamanaka N, Okamoto E, Fujihara S, et al. Do the tumor cells of hepatocellular carcinomas dislodge into the portal venous system during hepatic resection? Cancer 1992;70:2263.
106. Harada T, Matsuo K, Inoue T. Is preoperative hepatic arterial chemoembolisation safe and effective for hepatocellular carcinoma? Ann Surg 1996;224:4.
107. Fan J, Tang ZY, Yu YQ, et al. Improved survival with resection after transcatheter arterial chemoembolisation (TACE) for unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. Dig Surg 1998;15:674.
108. Tang ZY, Yu YQ, Zhou XD, et al. Cytoreduction and sequential resection for surgically verified unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma: evaluation with analysis of 72 patients. World J Surg
1995;19:784.
109. Lau WY, Ho S, Leung TW, et al. Selective internal radiation therapy for nonresectable hepatocellular carcinoma with intraarterial infusion of 90 yttrium microspheres. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1998;40:583.
110. Sakon M, Yoshida T, Kanai T, et al. Transcatheter arterial immunoembolization for hepatocellular carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:456a(abst).
111. Lygidakis NJ, Tsiliakos S. Multidisciplinary management of hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatogastroenterology 1996;43(12):1611.

112. Leung TW, Lau WY, Ho SK, et al. Final report on a pahse II study of combination cisplatin, interferon alpha, doxorubicin and 5-fluorouracil for inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology
1998;28:227A.
113. Patt YZ, Hoque A, Lozano R, et al. Systemic therapy with platinol, interferon a 2B, doxorubicin and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) (PIAF) for treatment of non-resectable hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17[Suppl]:301a(abst).
114. Borzutzky CA, Turbiner EH. The predictive value of hepatic artery perfusion scintigraphy. J Nucl Med 1985;26:1153.
115. Friedman M. Primary hepatocellular cancer: present results and future prospects. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:1841.
116. Okuda K, Ohtsuki T, Obata H, et al. Natural history of hepatocellular carcinoma and prognosis in relation to treatment. Cancer 1985;56:918.
117. Dewar GA, Griffin SM, Ku KW, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma. Ann Intern Med 1991;108:390.
118. Lai E, Choi T, Tong S, et al. T reatment of unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma: results of a randomised controlled trial. World J Surg 1986;10:501.
119. Carr BI, Zajko A, Bron K, et al. Phase II study of Spherex (degradable starch microspheres) injected into the hepatic artery in conjunction with doxorubicin and cisplatin in the treatment of
advanced-stage hepatocellular carcinoma: interim analysis. Semin Oncol 1997;24[Suppl 6]:S6.
120. Lai EC, Lo CM, Fan ST, et al. Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy after curative resection of hepatocellular carcinoma: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Surg 1998;133:183.
121. Izumi R, Shimizu K, Iyobe T, et al. Postoperative adjuvant arterial infusion of lipiodol containing anticancer drugs in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 1994;20:295.
122. Wu CC, Ho YZ, Ho WL, et al. Preoperative transcatheter arterial chemoembolisation for resectable large hepatocellular carcinoma. A reappraisal. Br J Surg 1995;82:122.
123. Muto Y, Moriwaki H, Ninomiya M, et al. Prevention of second primary tumors by an acyclic retinoid, polyprenoic acid, in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1996;334:1561.
124. Lau WY, Leung TW, Ho SK, et al. Adjuvant intra-arterial iodine-131-labeled lipiodol for resectable hepatocellular carcinoma: a prospective randomised trial. Lancet 1999; 353(9155):797.
125. Selby R, Kadry Z, Carr B, et al. Liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma. World J Surg 1995;19:53.
126. Blumgart LH. Liver resectionliver and biliary tumours. In: Blumgart LH, ed. Surgery of the liver and biliary tract. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1988:1251.
127. Yokoyama I, Todo S, Iwatsuki S, Starzl TE. Liver transplantation in the treatment of primary liver cancer. Hepatogastroenterology 1990;37:188.
128. Haug CE, Jenkins RL, Rohrer RJ, et al. Liver transplantation for primary hepatic cancer. Transplantation 1992;53:376.
129. O'Grady JG, Polson RJ, Rolles K, Calne RY, Williams R. Liver transplantation for malignant disease. Ann Surg 1988;207:373.
130. Schwartz ME, Sung M, Mor E, et al. A multidisciplinary approach to hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with cirrhosis. J Am Coll Surg 1995;180:596.
131. Mazzaferro V, Regalia E, Doci R, et al. Liver transplantation for the treatment of small hepatocellular carcinomas in patients with cirrhosis. N Engl J Med 1996;334(11):693.
132. Tan K, Rela M, Ryder S. Experience of orthotopic liver transplantation and hepatic resection for hepatocellular carcinoma of less than 8 cm in patients with cirrhosis. Br J Surg 1995;82:253.
133. Emond JC, Leib M. The living-related liver transplant evaluation: linking risk factors and outcome. Liver Transpl Surg 1996;2[Suppl 1]:57.
134. Wadstrom J, Rogiers X, Malago M, et al. Experience from the first 30 living related liver transplants in Hamburg. Transplant Proc 1995;27(1):1173.
135. Livraghi T, Bolondi L, Buscarini L, et al. No treatment, resection and ethanol injection in hepatocellular carcinoma: a retrospective analysis of survival in 391 patients with cirrhosis. Italian
Cooperative HCC Study Group. J Hepatol 1995;22(5):522.
136. Nonami T, Harada A, Kurokawa T, Nakao A, Takagi H. Hepatic resection for hepatocellular carcinoma. Am J Surg 1997;173(4):288.
137. Cherqui D, Piedbois P, Pierga J, et al. Multimodal adjuvant treatment and liver transplantation for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. A pilot study. Cancer 1994;73:2721.
138. Stone M, Goran B, Klintmalm G, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma: a pilot study in 20 patients. Gastroenterology 1993;104:196.
139. Farmer DG, Rosove MH, Shaked A, Busuttil RW. Treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma. Ann Surg 1994;219:236.
140. Jiang W, Lu Z, He Y, Diasio RB. Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase activity in hepatocellular carcinoma: implication in 5-fluorouracil-based chemotherapy. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3(3):395.
141. Soini Y, Virkajarvi N, Raunio H, et al. Expression of P-glycoprotein in hepatocellular carcinoma: a potential marker of prognosis. J Clin Pathol 1996;49:470.
142. Chenivesse X, Franco D, Brechot C. MDRI (multiple resistance) gene expression in human primary liver cancer and cirrhosis. J Hepatol 1993;18:168.
143. Nerenstone SR, Ihde DC, Friedman MA. Clinical trials in primary hepatocellular carcinoma: current status and future directions. Cancer Treat Rev 1988;15:1.
144. Lai CL, Wu PC, Chan GC, et al. Doxorubicin vs. no antitumor therapy in an inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma: a prospective randomized trial. Cancer 1988;62:479.
145. Simonetti RG, Liberati A, Angiolini C, et al. Treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma: a systemic review of randomised controlled trials. Ann Oncol 1997;8:117.
146. Mathurin P, Rixe O, Carbonell N, et al. Review article: overview of medical treatments in unresectable hepatocellular carcinomaan impossible meta-analysis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
1998;12:111.
147. Breedis C, Young C. The blood supply of neoplasms in the liver. Am J Pathol 1954;30:969.
148. Ackerman NB. Experimental studies on the circulatory dynamics of intrahepatics tumor blood flow supply. Cancer 1972;29:435.
149. Civalleri D. Methods to enhance the efficacy of regional chemotherapeutic treatment of liver malignancies. In: Civalleri D, ed. An update on regional treatment of liver cancer. London: Wells
Medical Press, 1992:17.
150. Carr BI, Starlz T, Iwatsuki S, et al. Aggressive treatment for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). High response rate and prolonged survival. Hepatology 1991;14:243.
151. Patt Y, Charnsangavej C, Yoffe B, et al. Hepatic arterial infusion of fluorouridine, leucovorin, doxorubicin and cisplatin for hepatocellular carcinoma: effects of hepatitis B and C viral infection
on drug toxicity and patient survival. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1204.
152. Warren KW, Mountain JC, Lloyd-Jones W. Malignant tumours of the bile-ducts. Br J Surg 1972;59(7):501.
153. Atiq OT, Kemeny N, Niedzwiecki D, Botet J. Treatment of unresectable primary liver cancer with intrahepatic fluorodeoxyuridine and mitomycin C through an implantable pump. Cancer
1992;69(4):920.
154. Makela JT, Kairaluoma MI. Superselective intra-arterial chemotherapy with mitomycin for gallbladder cancer. Br J Surg 1993;80(7):912.
155. Tzoracoleftherakis EE, Spiliotis JD, Kyriakopoulou T, Kakkos SK. Intra-arterial versus systemic chemotherapy for non-operable hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatogastroenterology
1999;46(26):1122.
156. Lehner K, Reiser M, Gebhardt U, Heuck A, Schaff J. DSAcontrol of implanted devices for arterial hepatic perfusion. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 1987;10:71.
157. Krahenbuhl L, Feodorovici M, Renzulli P, et al. Laparoscopic partial hepatectomy in the rat: a new resectional technique. Dig Surg 1998;15(2):140.
158. Falkson G, Lipsitz S, Borden E, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma. An ECOG randomised phase II study of beta-interferon and menagoril. Am J Clin Oncol 1995;18:287.
159. Nagasue N, Yu L, Yukaya H, Kohno H, Nakamura T. Androgen and oestrogen receptors in hepatocellular carcinoma and surrounding liver parenchyma: impact on intrahepatic recurrence after
hepatic resection. Br J Surg 1995;82(4):542.
160. Huang CC, Wu MC, Xu GW, et al. Overexpression of the MDR1 gene and P-glycoprotein in human hepatocellular carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84(4):262.
161. Berman E, Adams M, Duigou-Osterndorf R, et al. Effect of tamoxifen on cell lines displaying the multidrug-resistant phenotype. Blood 1991;77(4):818.
162. Farinati F, De Maria N, Fornasiero A, et al. Prospective controlled trial with anti-estrogen drug tamoxifen in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. Dig Sci 1992;37:659.
163. Martinez-Cerezo FJ, Tomas A, Donoso L, et al. Controlled trial of tamoxifen in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 1994;20:702.
164. Manesis EK, Giannoulis G, Zoumboulis P, et al. Treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma with combined suppression and inhibition of sex hormones: a randomised controlled trial. Hepatology
1995;21:1535.
165. Paliard P, Clement G, Saez S, et al. Traitment du carcinome hepato-cellulaire par le tamoxifene. Gastroenterol Clin Biol 1984;8:680.
166. Castells A, Bruix J, Bru C, et al. Treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma with tamoxifen: a double-blind placebo-controlled trial in 120 patients. Gastroenterology 1995;109:917.
167. Pignata S, Izzo F, Farinati F, et al. Role of tamoxifen (TM) in the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Results from the Clip-01 randomized trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1998;17[Suppl]:257a(abst).
168. Cheng AL, Chen YC, Yeh KH, et al. Chronic oral etoposide and tamoxifen in the treatment of far-advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 1996;77(5):872.
169. Bobbio-Pallavicini E, Porta C, Moroni M, et al. Epirubicin and etoposide combination chemotherapy to treat hepatocellular carcinoma patients: a phase II study. Eur J Cancer 1997;33(11):1784.
170. Melia WM, Johnson PJ, Williams R. Controlled clinical trial of doxorubicin and tamoxifen versus doxorubicin alone in hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:1213.
171. Forbes A, Wilkinson ML, Iqbal MJ, et al. Response to cyproterone acetate treatment in primary hepatocellular carcinoma is related to fall in free 5a-dihydrotestosterone. J Cancer Res Clin
Oncol 1987;23:1659.
171a. Sugiura N, Takara K, Ohto M, et al. Treatment of small hepatocellular carcinoma by percutaneous injection of ethanol into tumor with real-time ultrasound monitoring. Acta Hepatology Japan
1983;24:920.
172. Ebara M, Ohto M, Sugiura N, et al. Percutaneous ethanol injection for the treatment of small hepatocellular carcinoma. Study of 95 patients. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1990;5:616.
173. Vilana R, Bruix N, Bru C, et al. Tumor size determines the efficacy of percutaneous ethanol injection for the treatment of small hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 1992;16:354.
174. Livraghi T, Bolondi L, Lazzaroni S, et al. Percutaneous ethanol injection in the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis. A study on 207 patients. Cancer 1992;69:925.
175. Yu JS, Burwick JA, Dranoff G, Breakefield XO. Gene therapy for metastatic brain tumors by vaccination with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor-transduced tumor cells. Hum
Gene Ther 1997;8(9):1065.
176. Isobe H, Sakai H, Imari Y, et al. Intratumor ethanol injection therapy for solitary minute hepatocellular carcinoma. A study of 37 patients. J Clin Gastroenterol 1994;18:122.
177. Livraghi T, Lazzaroni S, Meloni F, et al. Intralesional ethanol in the treatment of unresectable liver cancer. World J Surg 1995;19:801.
178. Karin SK, Sreenivas DV, Saraya A, et al. Improved survival with percutaneous ethanol injection in patients with large hepatocellular carcinoma. EurJ Gastroenterol Hepatol 1994;6:999.
179. Bartolozzi C, Lencioni R, Caramella D, et al. Treatment of large HCC: transcatheter arterial chemoembolization combined with percutaneous ethanol injection versus repeated transcatheter
arterial chemoembolization. Radiology 1995;197(3):812.
180. Tian J, Xu BX, Zhang J, et al. Ultrasound guided internal radiotherapy using yttrium-90 glass microspheres for liver malignancies. J Nucl Med 1996;37:958.
181. Zhou XD. Improved cryosurgery for primary liver cancer [in Chinese]. Chung Hua Chung Liu Tsa Chih 1992;14:61.
182. Tang ZY, Yu YQ, Zhou XD, et al. Cytoreduction and sequential resection: a hope for unresectable primary liver cancer. J Surg Oncol 1991;47:27.
183. Shiina S, Tagawa K, Unuma T, et al. Percutaneous ethanol injection therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma. A histopathologic study. Cancer 1991;68:1524.
184. Sironi S, Livraghi T, DelMaschio A. Small hepatocellular carcinoma treated with percutaneous ethanol injection: MR imaging findings. Radiology 1991;180:333.
185. Siperstein AE, Rogers SJ, Hansen PD, Gitomirsky A. Laparoscopic thermal ablation of hepatic neuroendocrine tumor metastases. Surgery 1997;122(6):1147.
186. Goldberg SN, Hahn PF, Tanabe KK, et al. Percutaneous radiofrequency tissue ablation: does perfusion-mediated tissue cooling limit coagulation necrosis? J Vasc Interv Radiol 1998;9(1):101.
187. Nagata Y, Hiraoka M, Akuta K, et al. Radiofrequency thermotherapy for malignant liver tumors. Cancer 1990;65:1730.
188. Livraghi T, Goldberg SN, Monti F, et al. Saline-enhanced radio-frequency tissue ablation in the treatment of liver metastases. Radiology 1997;202(1):205.
189. Plengvanit U, Chearanai O, Sindhvananda K, et al. Collateral arterial blood supply of the liver after hepatic artery ligation. Angiographic study of 20 patients. Ann Surg 1972;175:105.
190. Mooka REM, Larmi TKI, Huttunen R, Kairaluoma MI. Evaluation of the ligation of the hepatic artery and regional arterial chemotherapy in the treatment of primary and secondary cancer of the
liver. Ann Chir Gynaecol 1975;64:347.
191. Hickman MA, Bruss ML, Morris JG, Rogers QR. Dietary protein source (soybean vs. casein) and taurine status affect kinetics of the enterohepatic circulation of taurocholic acid in cats. J Nutr
1992;122(4):1019.
192. Brown KT, Nevins AB, Getrajdman GI, et al. Particle embolization for hepatocellular carcinoma. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1998;9(5):822.
193. Kanematsu T, Furuta T, Takenaka K, et al. A 5-year experience of lipiodolisation: selective regional chemotherapy for 200 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 1989;10:98.
194. Okuda K, Tanaka M, Shibata J, et al. Hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy with continuous low dose administration of cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil for multiple recurrence of hepatocellular
carcinoma after surgical treatment. Oncol Rep 1999;6(3):587.
195. Carr B, Orons P, Zajko A, et al. Prolonged survival with chemotherapy alone for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) with intra-arterial chemotherapy. In: Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology, vol 13. 1994:A606(abst).
196. Ngan H, Lai CL, Fan ST. Transcatheter arterial chemoembolisation in inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma: four-year follow-up. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1996;7:419.
197. Corr P, Chan M, Lau WY, et al. The role of hepatic arterial embolisation in the management of ruptured hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Radiol 1993;48:163.

198. Lin DY, Liaw YF, Lee TY, et al. Hepatic arterial embolisation in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. A randomised controlled trial. Gastroenterology 1988;109:917.
199. Pelletier G, Roche A, Ink O, et al. A randomized trial of hepatic arterial chemoembolization in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 1990;11:181.
200. Groupe D'Etude et de Traitement du Carcinome Hepatocellulaire. A comparison of lipiodol chemoembolization and conservative treatment for unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J
Med 1995;332:1256.
201. Bruix J, Llovet J, Castellas A, et al. Transarterial embolisation versus symptomatic treatment in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: results of a randomised controlled trial in a
single institution. Hepatology 1998;27:1578.
202. Kawai S, Okamura J, Ogawa M, et al. Prospective and randomised clinical trial for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinomaa comparison lipiodol transcatheter embolisation with and without
adriamycin (first cooperative study). Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1992;31[Suppl]:S1.
203. Chang JM, Tzeng WS, Pan HB, Yang CF, Lai KH. Transcatheter arterial embolization with or without cisplatin treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 1994;74:2449.
204. Yumoto Y, Jinno K, Tokuyama K, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma detected by iodized oil. Radiology 1985;154:19.
205. Okayasu I, Hatakeyama S, Yoshida T, et al. Selective and persistent deposition and gradual drainage of iodized oil, Lipiodol in the hepatocellular carcinoma after injection into the feeding
hepatic artery. Cancer 1988;90:536.
206. Ryder S, Rissi P, Metivier E, et al. Chemoembolisation with lipiodol and doxorubicin: applicability in British patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Gut 1996;38:125.
207. Yoshikawa M, Saisho H, Ebara M, et al. A randomised trial of intrahepatic aterial infusion of 4'-epidoxorubicin with Lipiodol versus 4'-epidoxorubicin alone in the treatment of hepatocellular
carcinoma. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1994;33[Suppl]:149.
208. Madden MV, Krige JE, Bailey S. Randomised trial of targeted chemotherapy with lipiodol and 5-epidoxorubicin compared with symptomatic treatment of hepatoma. Gut 1993;34:1598.
209. El-Domeiri AA, Huvos AG, Goldsmith HS, Foote FW. Primary malignant tumors of the liver. Cancer 1971;27:7.
210. Phillips R, Murikami K. Primary neoplasms of the liver. Cancer 1960;13:714.
211. Cochrane AMD, Murray-Lyon IM, Brinkley DM, Williams R. Quadruple chemotherapy versus radiotherapy in treatment of primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 1977;40:609.
212. Friedman MA, Volberding PA, Cassidy MJ, et al. Therapy for hepatocellular cancer with intrahepatic arterial Adriamycin and 5-fluorouracil combined with whole-liver irradiation: a Northern
California Oncology Group Study. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63(11):1885.
213. Abrams R, Pajak TF, Haulk TL, Flam M, Asbell SO. Survival results among patients with a-fetoprotein-positive, unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma: analysis of three sequential treatments
of the RTOG and Johns Hopkins Oncology Center. Cancer J 1998;4:178.
214. Order SE, Pajak T, Leibel S, et al. A randomized prospective trial comparing full dose chemotherapy to I131 antiferritin: an RTOG study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;1:953.
215. Abrams RA, Cardinale RM, Enger C, et al. Influence of prognostic groupings and treatment results in the management of unresectable hepatoma: experience with cisplatinum-based
chemoradiotherapy in 76 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:1077.
216. Shepherd FA, Rotstein LE, Houle S, et al. A phase I dose escalation trial of Yttrium-90 microspheres in the treatment of primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 1992;70:2250.
217. Houle S, Yip TK, Shepherd FA, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma: pilot trial of treatment with Y-90 microspheres. Radiology 1989;172:857.
218. Tain JH, Xu BX, Zhang JM, et al. Ultrasound-guided internal radiotherapy using yttrium-90-glass microspheres for liver malignancies. J Nucl Med 1996;37:958.
219. Ho S, Lau WY, Leung TW, Johnson PJ. Internal radiation therapy for patients with primary or metastatic hepatic cancer: a review. Cancer 1998;83(9):1894.
220. Ho S, Lau WY, Leung TW, et al. Clinical evaluation of the partition model for estimating radiation doses from yttrium-90 microspheres in the treatment of hepatic cancer. EurJ Nucl Med
1997;24(3):293.
221. Leung WT, Lau WY, Ho SK, et al. Radiation pneumonitis after selective internal radiation treatment with intra-arterial 90-yttrium-microspheres for inoperable hepatic tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1995;33:919.
222. Leung WT, Lau WY, Ho S, et al. Selective internal radiation therapy with intra-arterial iodine-131-Lipiodol in inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma. J Nucl Med 1994;35(8):1313.
223. Raoul JI, Bretagne JF, Caucanas JP, et al. Internal radiation therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma. Results of a French multicenter phase II trial of transarterial injection of iodine 131-labeled
Lipiodol. Cancer 1992;69(2):346.
224. Raoul JL, Guyader D, Bretagne JF, et al. Randomized controlled trial for hepatocellular carcinoma with portal vein thrombosis: intra-arterial iodine-131-iodized oil versus medical support. J Nucl
Med 1994;35(11):1782.
225. Raoul JL, Guyader D, Bretagne JF, et al. Prospective randomized trial of chemoembolization versus intra-arterial injection of 131 I-labeled-iodized oil in the treatment of hepatocellular
carcinoma. Hepatology 1997;26(5):1156.
226. Matsuura M, Nakajima N, Arai K, Ito K. The usefulness of radiation therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatogastroenterology 1998;45(21):791.
227. Seong J, Keum KC, Han KH, et al. Combined transcatheter arterial chemoembolization and local radiotherapy of unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1999;43(2):393.
228. Ten Haken RK, Lawrence TS, McShan DL, et al. Technical considerations in the use of 3-D beam arrangements in the abdomen. Radiother Oncol 1991;22:19.
229. Lawrence TS, Tesser RJ, Ten Haken RK. An application of dose volume histograms to the treatment of intrahepatic malignancies with radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1990;19(4):1041.
230. Lawrence TS, Dworzanin LM, Walker-Andrews SC, et al. Treatment of cancers involving the liver and porta hepatis with external beam irradiation and intraarterial hepatic fluorodeoxyuridine. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:555.
231. Robertson JM, Lawrence TS, Andrews JC, et al. Long-term results of hepatic artery fluorodeoxyuridine and conformal radiation therapy for primary hepatobiliary cancers. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1997;37(2):325.
232. Dawson LA, McGinn NJ, Ensminger W, et al. Preliminary results of escalated focal liver radiation and hepatic artery floxuridine for unresectable liver malignancies. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18[Suppl]:86a(abst).
233. Lyman JT. Complication probability as assessed from dose-volume histograms. Radiat Res 1985;8:13.
234. Jackson A, Ten Haken RK, Robertson JM, et al. Analysis of clinical complication data for radiation hepatitis using a parallel architecture model. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31(4):883.
235. Lawrence TS, Ten Haken RK, Kessler ML, et al. The use of 3-D dose volume analysis to predict radiation hepatitis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;23:781.
236. McGinn CJ, Ten Haken RK, Ensminger WD, et al. Treatment of intrahepatic cancers with radiation doses based on a normal tissue complication probability model. J Clin Oncol
1998;16(6):2246.
237. Tusjii H, Inada T, Maruhashi A, et al. Clinical results of fractionated proton therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;25:49.
238. Matsuzaki Y, Osuga T, Saito Y, et al. A new, effective, and safe therapeutic option using proton irradiation for hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterology 1994;106(4):1032.
239. Yamasaki SA, Marn CS, Francis IR, Robertson JM, Lawrence TS. High-dose localized radiation therapy for treatment of hepatic malignant tumors: CT findings and their relation to radiation
hepatitis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1995;165(1):79.
240. Ohara K, Okumura T, Tsuji H, et al. Radiation tolerance of cirrhotic livers in relation to the preserved functional capacity: analysis of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma treated by focused
proton beam radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38(2):367.
241. The Liver Cancer Study Group of Japan, et al. The general rules of the clinical and pathological study of primary liver cancer. Jpn J Surg 1989;19:98.
242. Yuki K, Hirohashi S, Sakamoto M, et al. Growth and spread of hepatocellular carcinoma: a review of 240 consecutive autopsy cases. Cancer 1990;66:2174.
243. Adachi E, Maeda T, Kajiyama K, et al. F actors correlated with portal venous invasion by hepatocellular carcinoma: univariate and multivariate analyses of 232 resected cases without
preoperative treatments. Cancer 1996;77(10):2022.
244. Beasley RP. Hepatitis B virus: the major etiology of hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 1988;61:1942.
245. Ebara M, Ohto M, Shinagawa T, et al. Natural history of minute hepatocellular carcinoma smaller than three centimeters complicating cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 1986;90:289.
246. Kaneko S, Unoura M, Kobayashi K. Early detection of hepatocellular carcinoma. In: Okuda K, Tabor E, eds. Liver cancer. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1997:393.
247. Halpern E, Kun LE, Constine LS, et al. Pediatric radiation oncology. New York: Raven Press, 1989:280.
248. Stocker JT, Ishak KG. Hepatoblastoma. In: Okuda K, Ihak KG, eds. Neoplasms of the liver. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1987.
249. Lack EE, Neave C, Vawter GF. Hepatoblastoma. A clinical and pathologic study of 54 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1982;6(8):693.
250. Evans AE, Land VJ, Newton WA, et al. Combination chemotherapy (vincristine, Adriamycin, cyclophosphamide, and 5-fluorouracil) in the treatment of children with malignant hepatoma.
Cancer 1982;50(5):821.
251. Mahour GH, Wogu GU, Siegel SE, Isaacs H. Improved survival in infants and children with primary malignant liver tumors. Am J Surg 1983;146(2):236.
252. Weinberg AG, Finegold MJ. Primary hepatic tumors of childhood. Hum Pathol 1983;14(6):512.
253. Schmidt D, Harms D, Lang W. Primary malignant tumors in childhood. Virchows Arch 1985;407:387.
254. Stevens WR, Johnson CD, Stephens DH, Nagorney DM. Fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma: stage at presentation and results of aggressive surgical management. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1995;164:1153.
255. Hata Y, Ishizu H, Ohmori K, et al. Flow cytometric analysis of the nuclear DNA content of hepatoblastoma. Cancer 1991;68(12):2566.
256. Filler RM, Ehrlich PF, Greenberg ML, Babyn PS. Preoperative chemotherapy in hepatoblastoma. Surgery 1991;110(4):591.
257. Ninane J, Perilongo G, Stalens JP, et al. Effectiveness and toxicity of cisplatin and doxorubicin (PLADO) in childhood hepatoblastoma and hepatocellular carcinoma: a SIOP pilot study. J Med
Pediatr Oncol 1991;19:199.
258. Habrand JL, Pritchard J. Role of radiotherapy in hepatoblastoma and hepatocellular carcinoma in children and adolescents: results of a survey conducted by the SIOP Liver Tumour Study
Group. J Med Pediatr Oncol 1991;19:208.
259. Penn I. Hepatic transplantation for primary and metastatic cancers of the liver. Surgery 1991;110:726.
260. Weiss SW, Enzinger FM. Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma: a vascular tumor often mistaken for a carcinoma. Cancer 1982;50(5):970.
261. Makk L, Delmore F, Creech JL, et al. Clinical and morphological features of hepatic angiosarcoma in vinyl chloride workers. Cancer 1976;37:149.
262. Ishak KG, Sesterhenn IA, Goodman ZD, Rabin L, Stromeyer FW. Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma of the liver: a clinicopathologic and follow-up study of 32 cases. Hum Pathol
1984;15(9):839.
263. Stocker JT, Ishak KG. Undifferentiated (embryonal) sarcoma of the liver. Ann Surg 1955;141:246.
264. Leuschner I, Schmidt D, Harms D. Undifferentiated sarcoma of the liver in childhood: morphology, flow cytometry, and literature review. Hum Pathol 1990;21(1):68.
265. Shin MS, Carpenter JT Jr, Ho KJ. Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma: CT manifestations and possible linkage to vinyl chloride exposure 45. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1991;15(3):505.
266. Carriaga MT, Henson DE. Liver, gallbladder, extrahepatic bile ducts, and pancreas. Cancer 1995;75[Suppl]:171.
267. Kuwayti K, Baggenstoss AH, Stauffer MH, Priestly JI. Carcinoma of the major intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts exclusive of the papilla of Vater. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1957;104:357.
268. Sako S, Seitzinger GL, Garside E. Carcinoma of the extrahepatic ducts. Review of the literature and report of six cases. Surgery 1957;41:416.
269. Okuda K, Kubo Y, Okazaki N, et al. Clinical aspects of intrahepatic bile duct carcinoma including hilar carcinoma. A study of 57 autopsy proven cases. Cancer 1977;39:232.
270. Burke EC, Jarnagin WR, Hochwald SN, et al. Hilar cholangiocarcinoma: patterns of spread, the importance of hepatic resection for curative operation, and a presurgical clinical staging system.
Ann Surg 1998;228(3):385.
271. Nagorney DM, Donohue JH, Farnell MB, Schleck CD, Ilstrup DM. Outcomes after curative resections of cholangiocarcinoma. Arch Surg 1993;128:871.
272. Broome U, Olsson R, Loof L, et al. Natural history and prognostic factors in 305 Swedish patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis. Gut 1996;38:610.
273. Pitt HA, Nakeeb A, Abrams RA, et al. Perihilar cholangiocarcinoma. Postoperative radiotherapy does not improve survival. Ann Surg 1995;221:788.
274. Katoh H, Shinbo T, Otagiri H, et al. C haracter of a human cholangiocarcinoma CHGS, serially transplanted to nude mice. Hum Cell 1988;1:101.
275. Hewitt PM, Krige JE, Bornman PC, Terblanche J. Choledochal cyst in pregnancy: a therapeutic dilemma. J Am Coll Surg 1995;181:237.
276. Vogt DP. Current management of cholangiocarcinoma. Oncology 1988;2:37.
277. Becker CD, Glattli A, Maibach R, Baer HU. Percutaneous palliation of malignant obstructive jaundice with the Wallstent endoprosthesis: follow-up and reintervention in patients with hilar and
non-hilar obstruction. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1993;4:597.
278. Tanaka K, Ikoma A, Hamada N, et al. Biliary tract cancer accompanied by anomalous junction of pancreaticobiliary ductal system in adults. Am J Surg 1998;175:218.
279. Jeng KS, Ohta I, Yang FS, et al. Coexisting sharp ductal angulation with intrahepatic biliary strictures in right hepatolithiasis. Arch Surg 1994;129:1097.

280. Chu KM, Lo CM, Liu CL, Fan ST. Malignancy associated with hepatolithiasis. Hepatogastroenterology 1997;44:352.
281. Kubo S, Kinoshita H, Hirohashi K, Hamba H. Hepatolithiasis associated with cholangiocarcinoma. World J Surg 1995;19:637.
282. Winslet MC, Bramhall S, Neoptolemos JP, Harding LK, Hesslewood RS. Diffuse increase in renal uptake of technetium 99m methylene diphosphonate in association with disseminated
cholangiocarcinoma. Eur J Nucl Med 1990;17:372.
283. Meade CJ, Birke F, Metcalfe S, et al. Serum PAF-acetylhydrolase in severe renal or hepatic disease in man: relationship to circulating levels of PAF and effects of nephrectomy or
transplantation. J Lipid Mediat Cell Signal 1994;9:205.
284. Wantanapa P. Cholangiocarcinoma in patients with opisthorchiasis. Br J Surg 1996;83:1062.
285. Berdah SV, Delpero JR, Garcia S, Hardwigsen J, Le Treut YP. A western surgical experience of peripheral cholangiocarcinoma. Br J Surg 1996;83:1517.
286. Chu KM, Lai EC, al-Hadeedi SY, et al. Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. World J Surg 1997;21:301.
287. Harrison LE, Fong Y, Klimstra DS, Zee SY, Blumgart LH. Surgical treatment of 32 patients with peripheral intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. Br J Surg 1998;85(8):1068.
288. Shimizu Y, Iwatsuki S, Herberman RB, Whiteside TL. Effects of cytokines in in vitro growth of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes obtained from human primary and metastatic liver tumors. Cancer
Immunol Immunother 1991;32:280.
289. Severini A, Belloni M, Cozzi G, Pizzetti P, Spinelli P. Lymphomatous involvement of intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary ducts. PTC and ERCP findings. Acta Radiol Diagn 1981;22:159.
290. Nakeeb A, Pitt HA, Sohn TA, et al. Cholangiocarcinoma: a spectrum of intrahepatic perihilar, and distal tumors. Ann Surg 1996;224:463.
291. Ahmed T, Wuest D, Ciavarella D. Peripheral blood stem cell mobilization by cytokines. J Clin Apheresis 1992;7:129.
292. Tompkins RK, Thomas D, Wile A, Longmire WP. Prognostic factors in bile duct carcinoma. Analysis of 96 cases. Ann Surg 1981;194:447.
293. Fong Y, Blumgart LH, Lin E, Fortner JG, Brennan MF. Outcome of treatment for distal bile duct cancer. Br J Surg 1996;83(12):1712.
294. Yeo CJ, Sohn TA, Lillemoe KD, et al. Six hundred fifty consecutive pancreaticoduodenectomies in the 1990s: pathology, complications and outcomes. Ann Surg 1997;226:248.
295. Haswell-Elkins MR, Sithithaworn P, Mairiang E, et al. Immune responsiveness and parasite-specific antibody levels in human hepatobiliary disease associated with Opisthorchis viverrini
infection. Clin Exp Immunol 1991;84:213.
296. Kuo YC, Wu CS. Spontaneous cutaneous biliary fistula: a rare complication of cholangiocarcinoma. J Clin Gastroenterol 1990;12:451.
297. Saunders K, Longmire WP Jr, Tompkins R, et al. Diffuse bile duct tumors: guidelines for management. Am Surg 1991;57:816.
298. Weinbren K, Mutum SS. Pathological aspects of cholangiocarcinoma. J Pathol 1983;139:217.
299. Tsuzuki T, Ogata Y, Iida S, et al. Carcinoma of the bifurcation of the hepatic ducts. Arch Surg 1983;118:1147.
300. Rodgers CM, Adams JT, Schwartz SI. Carcinoma of the extrahepatic bile ducts. Surgery 1981;90:596.
301. Jutte DL, Bell RHJ, Penn I, Powers J, Kolinjivadi J. Carcinoid tumor of the biliary system. Case report and literature review. Dig Dis Sci 1987;32(7):763.
302. Rugge M, Sonego F, Militello C, Guido M, Ninfo V. Primary carcinoid tumor of the cystic and common bile ducts. Am J Surg Pathol 1992;16(8):802.
303. Sankary HN, Foster P, Frye E, Williams JW. Carcinoid tumors of the extrahepatic bile duct: an unusual cause of bile duct obstruction. Liver Transplant Surg 1995;1:122.
304. Wade TP, Prasad CN, Virgo KS, Johnson FE. Experience with distal bile duct cancers in U.S. Veterans Affairs hospitals. J Surg Oncol 1997;64:242.
305. Heslin MJ, Brooks AD, Hochwald SN, et al. A preoperative biliary stent is associated with increased complications after pancreaticoduodenectomy. Arch Surg 1998;133:149.
306. Ryan ME. Cytologic brushings of ductal lesions during ERCP. Gastrointest Endosc 1991;37:139.
307. Georgopoulso SK, Schwartz LH, Jarnagin WR, et al. A comparison of magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) in
malignant pancreaticobiliary obstruction. Arch Surg 1999.
308. van den Bosch RP, van der Schelling GP, Klinkenbijl JHG, et al. Guidelines for the application of surgery and endoprostheses in the palliation of obstructive jaundice in advanced cancer of the
pancreas. Ann Surg 1994;219:18.
309. Klatskin G. Adenocarcinoma of the hepatic duct at its bifurcation within the porta hepatis. Am J Med 1965;38:241.
310. Farley DR, Weaver AL, Nagorney DM. “Natural history” of unresected cholangiocarcinoma: patient outcome after noncurative intervention. Mayo Clin Proc 1995;70:425.
311. Vatanasapt V, Tangvoraphonkchai V, Titapant V, et al. A high incidence of liver cancer in Khon Kaen Province, Thailand. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health 1990;21:489.
312. Way LW. Current surgical diagnosis and treatment: biliary tract, 10th ed. Norwalk: Appleton & Lange, 1994:537.
313. Nakeeb A, Lipsett PA, Lillemoe KD, et al. Biliary carcinoembryonic antigen levels are a marker for cholangiocarcinoma. J Surg Oncol 1996;171:147.
314. Rabinovitz M, Zajko AB, Hassanein T, et al. Diagnostic value of brush cytology in the diagnosis of bile duct carcinoma: a study in 65 patients with bile duct stricture. Hepatology 1990;12:747.
315. Enjoji M, Sakai H, Nakashima M, Nawata H. Integrins: utility as cell type- and stage-specific markers for hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim
1998;34:25.
316. Baer HU, Matthews JB, Schweizer WP, Gertsch P, Blumgart LH. Management of the Mirizzi syndrome and the surgical implications of cholecystcholedochal fistula. Br J Surg 1990;77:743.
317. Cabooter M, Sas S, Laukens P. Mirrizi syndrome. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd 1990;134:708.
318. Callery MP, Strasberg SM, Doherty GM, Soper NJ, Norton JA. Staging laparoscopy with laparoscopic ultrasonography: optimizing resectability in hepatobiliary and pancreatic malignancy. J Am
Coll Surg 1997;185:33.
319. Wetter LA, Ring EJ, Pellegrini CA, Way LW. Differential diagnosis of sclerosing chlangiocarcinomas of the common hepatic duct (Klatskin tumors). Am J Surg 1991;161:57.
320. Hadjis NS, Collier NA, Blumgart LH. Malignant masquerade at the hilum of the liver. Br J Surg 1985;72:659.
321. Verbeek PC, Van Leeuwen DJ, de Wit LT, et al. Benign fibrosing disease at the hepatic confluence mimicking Klatskin tumors. Surgery 1992;112:866.
322. Saldinger PF, Blumgart LH. Resection of hilar cholangiocarcinomaa European and United States experience. J Hepatobil Pancreat Surg 2000;7:111.
323. Gibson RN, Yeung E, Thompson JN, et al. Bile duct obstruction: radiologic evaluation of level, cause and tumor resectability. Radiology 1986;160:43.
324. Okuda K, Ohto M, Tsuchiya Y. The role of ultrasound, percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography, computed tomographic scanning, and magnetic resonance imaging in the preoperative
assessment of bile duct cancer. World J Surg 1988;12:18.
325. Hann LE, Greatrex KV, Bach AM, Fong Y, Blumgart LH. Cholangiocarcinoma at the hepatic hilus: sonographic findings. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1997;168(4):985.
326. Bach AM, Hann LE, Brown KT, et al. Portal vein evaluation with US: comparison to angiography combined with CT arterial portography. Radiology 1996;201(1):149.
327. Hadjis NS, Blumgart LH. Role of liver atrophy, hepatic resection and hepatocyte hyperplasia in the development of portal hypertension in biliary disease. Gut 1987;28:1022.
328. Itoh K, Fujita N, Kubo K, et al. MR imaging of hilar cholangiocarcinomacomparative study with CT. Nippon Igaku Hoshasen Gakkai Zasshi 1992;52:443.
329. Guthrie JA, Ward J, Robinson PJ. Hilar cholangiocarcinomas: T2-weighted spin-echo and gadolinium-enhanced FLASH MR imaging. Radiology 1996;201:347.
330. Lee MG, Lee HJ, Kim MH, et al. Extrahepatic biliary diseases: 3D MR cholangiopancreatography compared with endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. Radiology 1997;202:663.
331. Wei MX, Tamiya T, Chase M, et al. Experimental tumor therapy in mice using the cyclophosphamide-activating cytochrome P450 2B1 gene. Hum Gene Ther 1994;5(8):969.
332. Hochwald SN, Burke EC, Jarnagin WR, Fong Y, Blumgart LH. Association of preoperative biliary stenting with increased postoperative infectious complications in proximal cholangiocarcinoma.
Arch Surg 1999;134(3):261.
333. Bismuth H, Nakache R, Diamond T. Management strategies in resection for hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Ann Surg 1992;215:31.
334. Blumgart LH, Hadjis NS, Benjamin IS, Beazley R. Surgical approaches to cholangiocarcinoma at confluence of hepatic ducts. Lancet 1984;1:66.
335. Nimura Y, Hayakawa N, Kamiya J, et al. Combined portal vein and liver resection for carcinoma of the biliary tract. Br J Surg 1991;78:727.
336. Altaee MY, Johnson PJ, Farrant JM, Williams R. Etiologic and clinical characteristics of peripheral and hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Cancer 1991;68:2051.
337. Baer HU, Stain SC, Dennison AR, Eggers B, Blumgart LH. Improvements in survival by aggressive resections of hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Ann Surg 1993;217:20.
338. Bengmark S, Ekberg H, Evander A, Klofver Stahl B, Tranberg KG. Major liver resection for hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Ann Surg 1988;207:120.
339. Hadjis NS, Blenkharn JI, Alexander N, Benjamin IS, Blumgart LH. Outcome of radical surgery in hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Surgery 1990;107:597.
340. Launois B, Campion J-P, Brissot P, Gosselin M. Carcinoma of the hepatic hilus: surgical management and the case for resection. Ann Surg 1978;190:151.
341. Altermeier WA, Gall EA, Zinninger MM, Hoxworth PI. Sclerosing carcinoma of the major intrahepatic bile ducts. Arch Surg 1957;75:450.
342. Longmire WP, McArthur MS, Bastounis EA, Hiatt J. Carcinoma of the extrahepatic biliary tract. Ann Surg 1973;178:333.
343. Cameron JL, Pitt HA, Zinner MJ, Kaufman SL, Coleman J. Management of proximal cholangiocarcinomas by surgical resection and radiotherapy. Am J Surg 1990;159:91.
344. Fong Y, Blumgart LH. Resection for bile duct carcinoma: technical considerations. In: Terblanche J, ed. Hepatobiliary malignancyits multidisciplinary management. London: Edward Arnold,
1994:571.
345. Blumgart LH, Benjamin IS. Liver resection for bile duct cancer. Surg Clin North Am 1989;69:323.
346. Lai EC, Tompkins RK, Mann LL, Roslyn JJ. Proximal bile duct cancer. Quality of survival. Ann Surg 1987;205:111.
347. Jarnagin WR, Bodniewicz J, Dougherty E, et al. A prospective analysis of staging laparoscopy in patients with primary and secondary hepatobiliary malignancies. J Gastrointest Surg 1999 (in
press).
348. Mizumoto R, Kawarada Y, Suzuki H. Surgical treatment of hilar carcinoma of the bile duct. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1996;162:153.
349. Mizumoto R, Suzuki H. Surgical anatomy of the hepatic hilum with special reference to the caudate lobe. World J Surg 1988;12:2.
350. Yeo CJ, Pitt HA, Cameron JL. Cholangiocarcinoma. Surg Clin North Am 1990;70:1429.
351. Reding R, Buard JL, Lebeau G, Launois B. Surgical management of 552 carcinomas of the extrahepatic bile ducts (gallbladder and periampullary tumors excluded). Results of the French
Surgical Association Survey. Ann Surg 1991;213:236.
352. Nimura Y, Hayakawa N, Kamiya J, Kondo S, Shionoya S. Hepatic segmentectomy with caudate lobe resection for bile duct carcinoma of the hepatic hilus. World J Surg 1990;14:535.
353. Lupi L, Bighi S, Cervi PM, Marzola A. The CT and US aspects in hepatic cholangiocarcinoma due to thorum dioxide (Thorotrast). A case report and review of the literature. Radiol Med Torino
1990;79:399.
354. Pichlmayr R, Weimann A, Klempnauer J, et al. Surgical treatment in proximal bile duct cancer. A single-center experience. Ann Surg 1996;224:628.
355. Ahrendt SA, Pitt HA, Kalloo AN, et al. Primary sclerosing cholangitis: resect, dilate, or transplant? Ann Surg 1998;227:412.
356. Blumgart LH, Kelley CJ. Hepaticojejunostomy in benign and malignant high bile duct stricture: approaches to the left hepatic ducts. Br J Surg 1984;71:257.
357. Voyles CR, Blumgart LH. A technique for the construction of high biliary-enteric anastomoses. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1982;154:885.
358. Olthoff KM, Millis JM, Rosove MH, et al. Is liver transplantation justified for the treatment of hepatic malignancies? Arch Surg 1990;125:1261.
359. Rosen CB, Nagorney DM. Cholangiocarcinoma complicating primary sclerosing cholangitis. Semin Liver Dis 1991;11:26.
360. Wolber RA, Greene CA, Dupuis BA. Polyclonal carcinoembryonic antigen staining in the cytologic differential diagnosis of primary and metastatic hepatic malignancies. Acta Cytol 1991;35:215.
361. Parc Y, Frileux P, Balladur P, et al. Surgical strategy for the management of hilar bile duct cancer. Br J Surg 1997;84:1675.
362. Klempnauer J, Ridder GJ, von Wasielewski R, et al. Resectional surgery of hilar cholangiocarcinoma: a multivariate analysis of prognostic factors. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:947.
363. Blumgart LH, Hadjis NS, Benjamin IS, Beazley R. Surgical approaches to cholangiocarcinoma at confluence of hepatic ducts. Lancet 1984;1:66.
364. Ottow RT, August DA, Sugarbaker PH. Treatment of proximal biliary tract carcinoma: an overview of techniques and results. Surgery 1985;97:251.
365. Erickson BA, Nag S. Biliary tree malignancies. J Surg Oncol 1998;67(3):203.
366. Picus J, Myerson R, Drebin J, et al. A phase II trial of continuous infusion (CIVI) 5-FU with 3-D conformal radiation in the adjuvant treatment of pancreatic, ampullary and biliary cancers. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:266a(abst).
367. Chakravarthy A, Yeo CJ, Cameron JL, et al. Preliminary results of a phase II study of adjuvant combined modality therapy for resected pancreatic and periampullary adenocarninoma using
local irradiation, R-FU, Leucovorin, Dipyridamole, and Mitomycin-C. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17[Suppl]:266a(abst).
368. Pitt HA, Dooley WC, Yeo CJ, Cameron JL. Malignancies of the biliary tree. Curr Probl Surg 1995;32(1):1.
369. Kamada T, Saitou H, Takamura A, Nojima T, Okushiba SI. The role of radiotherapy in the management of extrahepatic bile duct cancer: an analysis of 145 consecutive patients treated with
intraluminal and/or external beam radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;34:767.
370. McMaster KM, Tuttle TM, Leach SD, et al. Neoadjuvant chemoradiation for extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. Am J Surg 1997;174:605.
371. Urego M, Flickinger JC, Carr BI. Radiotherapy and multimodality management of cholangiocarcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44(1):121.
372. Klempnauer J, Ridder GJ, Werner M, Weimann A, Pichlmayr R. What constitutes long-term survival after surgery for hilar cholangiocarcinoma? Cancer 1997;79:26.

373. Iwatsuki S, Todo S, Marsh JW, et al. Treatment of hilar cholangiocarcinoma (Klatskin tumors) with hepatic resection or transplantation. J Am Coll Surg 1998;187:358.
374. Liu CL, Lo CM, Lai EC, Fan ST. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and endoscopic endoprosthesis insertion in patients with Klatskin tumors. Arch Surg 1998;133:293.
375. Cheung KL, Lai EC. Endoscopic stenting for malignant biliary obstruction. Arch Surg 1995;130:204.
376. Miyazaki M, Ito H, Nakagawa K, et al. Aggressive surgical approaches to hilar cholangiocarcinoma: hepatic or local resection? Surgery 1998;123:131.
377. Schima W, Prokesch R, Osterreicher C, et al. Biliary Wallstent endoprosthesis in malignant hilar obstruction: long-term results with regard to the type of obstruction. Clin Radiol 1997;52:213.
378. Stoker J, Lameris JS. Complications of percutaneously inserted biliary Wallstents. Interv Radiol 1993;4:767.
379. Rossi P, Bezzi M, Adam A, et al. Metallic stents in malignant biliary obstruction: results of multicenter European study of 240 patients. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1994;5:279.
380. Glattli A, Stain SC, Baer HU, et al. Unresectable malignant biliary obstruction: treatment by self-expandable biliary endoprostheses. HPBSurg 1993;6:175.
381. Bergquist A, Glaumann H, Persson B, Broome U. Risk factors and clinical presentation of hepatobiliary carcinoma in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis: a case-control study.
Hepatology 1998;27:311.
382. Hurlimann J, Gardiol D. Immunohistochemistry in the differential diagnosis of liver carcinomas. Am J Surg Pathol 1991;15:280.
383. Kuvshinoff BW, Armstrong JG, Fong Y, et al. Palliation of irresectable hilar cholangiocarcinoma with biliary drainage and radiotherapy. Br J Surg 1995;82(11):1522.
384. Jarnagin WR, Burke E, Powers C, Fong Y, Blumgart LH. Intrahepatic biliary enteric bypass provides effective palliation in selected patients with malignant obstruction at the hepatic duct
confluence. Am J Surg 1998;175(6):453.
385. Baer HU, Rhyner M, Stain SC, et al. The effect of communication between the right and left liver on the outcome of surgical drainage for jaundice due to malignant obstruction at the hilus of the
liver. HPB Surg 1994;8:27.
386. Falkson G, MacIntyre JM, Moertel CG. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group experience with chemotherapy for inoperable gallbladder and bile duct cancer. Cancer 1984;54(6):965.
387. Jones DV, Lozano R, Hoque A, Markowitz A, Patt Y. Phase II study of paclitaxel therapy for unresectable biliary tree carcinomas. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2306.
388. Pazdur R, Royce ME, Rodriguez GI, et al. Phase II trial of docetaxel for cholangiocarcinoma. Am J Clin Oncol 1999;22(1):78.
389. Patt YZ, Jones DVJ, Hoque A, et al. Phase II trial of intravenous fluorouracil and subcutaneous interferon alfa-2b for biliary tract cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14(8):2311.
390. Jones DVJ, Lozano R, Hoque A, Markowitz A, Patt YZ. Phase II study of paclitaxel therapy for unresectable biliary tree carcinomas. J Clin Oncol 1996;14(8):2306.
391. Harvey JH, Smith FP, Schein PS. 5-Fluorouracil, mitomycin, and doxorubicin (FAM) in carcinoma of the biliary tract. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:1245.
392. Takada T, Kato H, Matsushiro T, et al. Comparison of 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and mitomycin C with 5-fluorouracil alone in the treatment of pancreatic-biliary carcinomas. Oncology
1994;51:396.
393. Di Lauro L, Carpano S, Campomolla E, et al. Cisplatin, epirubicin, and fluorouracil (PEF) for advanced biliary tract carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:287a(abst).
394. Sanz-Altamira PM, Ferrante K, Jenkins RL, et al. A phase II trial of 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin and carboplatin in patients with unresectable biliary tree carcinoma. Cancer 1998;82(12):2321.
395. Rougier P, Roche A, Pelletier G, et al. Efficacy of chemoembolisation for hepatocellular carcinomas: experience from the Gustave Roussy Institute and the Bicentre Hospital. J Surg
OncolSuppl 1993;3:94.
396. Mezger J, Sauerbruch T, Ko Y, Wolter H, Funk C. Phase II trial of gemcitabine in biliary tract cancers. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:297a.
397. DeGusmao CBRA, Murad AM. Phase II trial of the use of gemcitabine (G) and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in the treament of advanced pancreatic (APC) and biliary tract (ABTC) adenocarcinoma.
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17[Suppl]:290a(abst).
398. Smith GW, Bukowski RM, Hewlett JS, Groppe CW. Hepatic artery infusion of 5-fluorouracil and mitomycin C in cholangiocarcinoma and gallbladder carcinoma. Cancer 1984;54(8):1513.
399. Reed ML, Vaitkevicius VK, Al-Sarraf M, et al. The practicality of chronic hepatic artery infusion therapy of primary and metastatic hepatic malignancies: ten-year results of 124 patients in a
prospective protocol. Cancer 1981;47:402.
400. Sampson LK, Vickers SM, Ying W, Phillips JO. Tamoxifen-mediated growth inhibition of human cholangiocarcinoma. Cancer Res 1997;57(9):1743.
401. Bowling TE, Galbraith SM, Hatfield AR, Solano J, Spittle MF. A retrospective comparison of endoscopic stenting alone and with stenting and radiotherapy in non-resectable
cholangiocarcinoma. Gut 1996;39:852.
402. Vallis KA, Benjamin IS, Munor AJ, et al. External beam and intraluminal radiotherapy for locally advanced bile duct cancer: role and tolerability. Radiother Oncol 1996;41:61.
403. Vatanasapt V, Uttaravichien T, Mairiang EO, et al. Cholangiocarcinoma in north-east Thailand. Lancet 1990;335:116.
404. Nagano H, Sasaki Y, Imaoka S, et al. Intraarterial and intraportal chemotherapy combined with decollateralization for cholangiocellular carcinoma and metastic liver cancer. Jpn J Cancer
Chemother 1990;17:1758.
405. Whittington R, Neuberg D, Tester WJ, Benson III AB, Haller DG. Protracted intravenous fluorouracil infusion with radiation therapy in the management of localized pancreaticobiliary carcinoma:
a phase I Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group trial. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:227.
406. Ohnishi H, Asada M, Shichijo Y, et al. External radiotherapy for biliary decompression of hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Hepatogastroenterology 1995;42(3):265.
407. Gonzalez DG, Gouma DJ, Rauws EAJ, et al. Role of radiotherapy, in particular intraluminal brachytherapy, in the treament of proximal bile duct carcinoma. Ann Oncol 1997;4:s215.
408. Foo ML, Gunderson LL, Bender CE, Buskirk SJ. External radiation therapy and transcatheter iridium in the treatment of extrahepatic bile duct carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1997;39(4):929.
409. Chen MF, Jan YY, Wang CS, Jeng LB, Hwang TL. Clinical experience in 20 hepatic resections for peripheral cholangiocarcinoma. Cancer 1989;64:2226.
410. Nakajima T, Kondo Y, Miyazaki M, Okui K. A histopathologic study of 102 cases of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma: histologic classification and modes of spreading. Hum Pathol
1988;19(10):1228.
411. Stillwagon GB, Order SE, Haulk T, et al. Variable low dose rate irradiation (131I-anti-CEA) and integrated low dose chemotherapy in the treatment of nonresectable primary intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21(6):1601.
412. Blalock AA. A statistical study of 888 cases of biliary tract disease. Johns Hopkins Hosp Bull 1924;35:391.
413. Wanebo HJ, Castle WN, Fechner RE. Is carcinoma of the gallbladder a curable lesion? Ann Surg 1982;196:624.
414. de Aretxabala X, Roa I, Araya JC, et al. Gallbladder cancer in patients less than 40 years old. Br J Surg 1994;81(1):111
415. Zatonski WA, Lowenfels AB, Boyle P, et al. Epidemiologic aspects of gallbladder cancer: a case-control study of the SEARCH Program of the International Agency for Research on Cancer. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89(15):1132.
416. Ghadirian P, Simard A, Baillargeon J. A population-based case-control study of cancer of the bile ducts and gallbladder in Quebec, Canada. Rev Epidemiol Sante Publ 1993;41(2):107.
417. Kodama M, Kodama T. Epidemiological peculiarities of cancers of the gall-bladder and larynx that distinguish them from other human neoplasias. Anticancer Res 1994;14(5B):2205.
418. Nakamura S, Sakaguchi S, Suzuki S, Muro H. Aggressive surgery for carcinoma of the gallbladder. Surgery 1989;106:467.
419. Wanebo HJ, Vezeridis MP. Treatment of gallbladder cancer. Cancer Treat Res 1994;69:97.
420. Chijiiwa K, Tanaka M, Nakayama F. Adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder associated with anomalous pancreaticobiliary ductal junction. Am Surg 1993;59(7):430.
421. Welton JC, Marr JS, Friedman SM. Association between hepatobiliary cancer and typhoid carrier state. Lancet 1979;1(8120):791.
422. Joffe N, Antonioli DA. Primary carcinoma of the gallbladder associated with chronic inflammatory bowel disease. Clin Radiol 1981;32(3):319.
423. Berk RN, Armbuster TG, Saltzstein SL. Carcinoma in the porcelain gallbladder. Radiology 1973;106(1):29.
424. Trajber HJ, Szego T, de Camargo HS Jr, et al. Adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder in two siblings. Cancer 1982;50(6):1200.
425. Broden G, Bengtsson L. Biliary carcinoma associated with methyldopa therapy. Acta Chir Scand 1980;500:7.
426. Ellis EF, Gordon PR, Gottlieb LS. Oral contraceptives and cholangiocarcinoma. Lancet 1978;1:207.
427. Lowenfels AB, Norman J. Isoniazid and bile duct cancer. JAMA 1999;240:434.
428. Mancuso TF, Brennan MJ. Epidemiological considerations of cancer of the gallbladder, bile ducts and salivary glands in the rubber industry. J Occup Med 1970;12(9):333.
429. Kowalewski K, Todd EF. Carcinoma of the gallbladder induced in hamsters by insertion of cholesterol pellets and feeding dimethylnitrosamine. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1971;136:482.
430. Sumiyoshi K, Nagai E, Chijiiwa K, Nakayama F. Pathology of carcinoma of the gallbladder. World J Surg 1991;15(3):315.
431. Santi L, Civalleri D, Conte PF, Fraschini G, Sertoli MR. Regional intra-arterial chemotherapy of metastatic liver cancer. Chemioterapia 1985;4:359.
432. Yamaguchi K, Enjoji M. Carcinoma of the gallbladdera clinicopathology of 103 patients and a newly proposed staging. Cancer 1988;62:1425.
433. Henson DE, Albores-Saavedra J, Corle D. Carcinoma of the gallbladder. Histologic types, stage of disease, grade, and survival rates. Cancer 1992;70(6):1493.
434. Kimura W, Nagai H, Kuroda A, Morioka Y. Clinicopathologic study of asymptomatic gallbladder carcinoma found at autopsy. Cancer 1989;64:98.
435. Perpetuo MD, Valdivieso M, Heilbrun LK, et al. Natural history study of gallbladder cancer: a review of 36 years experience at M.D. Anderson Hospital and Tumor Institute. Cancer
1978;42(1):330.
436. Fong Y, Heffernan N, Blumgart LH. Gallbladder carcinoma discovered during laparoscopic cholecystectomy: aggressive reresection is beneficial. Cancer 1998;83(3):423.
437. Winston CB, Chen JW, Fong Y, Schwartz LH, Panicek DM. Recurrent gallbladder carcinoma along laparoscopic cholecystectomy port tracks: CT demonstration. Radiology 1999;212(2):439.
438. Donohue JH, Nagorney DM, Grant CS, et al. Carcinoma of the gallbladder. Does radical resection improve outcome? Arch Surg 1990;125:237.
439. Nevin JE, Moran TJ, Kay S, King R. Carcinoma of the gallbladder: staging, treatment, and prognosis. Cancer 1976;37:141.
440. Bears OH, Henderson DE, Hutter RV, et al., eds. AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1988:93.
441. Onoyama H, Yamamoto M, Tseng A, Ajiki T, Saitoh Y. Extended cholecystectomy for carcinoma of the gallbladder. World J Surg 1995;19(5):758.
442. Oertli D, Herzog U, Tondelli P. Primary carcinoma of the gallbladder: operative experience during a 16 year period. Eur J Surg 1993;159(8):415.
443. Thorbjarnarson B, Glenn F. Carcinoma of the gallbladder. Cancer 1959;12:1009.
444. Redaelli CA, Buchler MW, Schilling MK, et al. High coincidence of Mirizzi syndrome and gallbladder carcinoma. Surgery 1997;121:58.
445. Strom BL, Maislin G, West SL, et al. Serum CEA and CA 19-9: potential future diagnostic or screening tests for gallbladder cancer? Int J Cancer 1990;45(5):821.
446. Ritts RE, Nagorney DM, Jacobson DJ, Talbot RW, Zurawski VR Jr. Comparison of preoperative serum CA19-9 levels with results of diagnostic imaging modalities in patients undergoing
laparotomy for suspected pancreatic or gallbladder disease. Pancreas 1999;9:707.
447. Chijiiwa K, Sumiyoshi K, Nakayama F. Impact of recent advances in hepatobiliary imaging techniques on the preoperative diagnosis of carcinoma of the gallbladder. World J Surg
1991;15(3):322.
448. Wibbenmeyer LA, Sharafuddin MJ, Wolverson MK, et al. Sonographic diagnosis of unsuspected gallbladder cancer: imaging findings in comparison with benign gallbladder conditions. AJR Am
J Roentgenol 1995;165(5):1169.
449. Franquet T, Montes M, Ruiz DA, Jimenez FJ, Cozcolluela R. Primary gallbladder carcinoma: imaging findings in 50 patients with pathologic correlation. Gastrointest Radiol 1991;16(2):143.
450. Bach AM, Loring LA, Hann LE, et al. Gallbladder cancer: can ultrasonography evaluate extent of disease? J Ultrasound Med 1998;17(5):303.
451. Kumar A, Aggarwal S. Carcinoma of the gallbladder: CT findings in 50 cases. Abdom Imaging 1994;19(4):304.
452. Ohtani T, Shirai Y, Tsukada K, Hatakeyama K, Muto T. Carcinoma of the gallbladder: CT evaluation of lymphatic spread. Radiology 1993;189(3):875.
453. Soto JA, Yucel EK, Barish MA, Chuttani R, Ferrucci JT. MR cholangiopancreatography after unsuccessful or incomplete ERCP. Radiology 1996;199(1):91.
454. Wilbur AC, Gyi B, Renigers SA. High-field MRI of primary gallbladder carcinoma. Gastrointest Radiol 1988;13(2):142.
455. Schwartz LH, Coakley FV, Sun Y, et al. Neoplastic pancreaticobiliary duct obstruction: evaluation with breath-hold MR cholangiopancreatography. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1998;170(6):1491.
456. Fong Y, Brennan MF, Turnbull A, Coit DG, Blumgart LH. Gallbladder cancers discovered during laparoscopic surgery: potential for iatrogenic tumor dissemination. Arch Surg 1993;128:1054.
457. Merz BJ, Dodge GG, Abellera RM, Kisken WA. Implant metastasis of gallbladder carcinoma in situ in a cholecystectomy scar: a case report. Surgery 1993;114(1):120.
458. Akosa AB, Barker F, Desa L, Benjamin I, Krausz T. Cytologic diagnosis in the management of gallbladder carcinoma. Acta Cytol 1995;39(3):494.
459. Harada H, Sasaki T, Yamamoto N, Tanaka J, Tomiyama Y. Assessment of endoscopic aspiration cytology and endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreatography in patients with cancer of the
hepato-biliary tract: II. Gastroenterol Jpn 1977;12(1):59.
460. Mohiuddin M, Chen E, Ahmad N. Combined liver radiation and chemotherapy for palliation of hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14(3):722.
461. Nimura Y, Hayakawa N, Kamiya J, et al. Hepatopancreatoduodenectomy for advanced carcinoma of the biliary tract. Hepatogastroenterology 1991;38(2):170.
462. Ouchi K, Owada Y, Matsuno S, Sato T. Prognostic factors in the surgical treatment of gallbladder carcinoma. Surgery 1987;101:731.
463. Ogura Y, Mizumoto R, Isaji S, et al. Radical operations for carcinoma of the gallbladder: present status in Japan. World J Surg 1991;15:337.

464. Fong Y, Blumgart LH, Fortner JG, Brennan MF. Pancreatic or liver resection for malignancy is safe and effective in the elderly. Ann Surg 1995;222(4):426.
465. Tsau JJ, Loftus JP, Nagorney DM, Adson MA, Ilstrup DM. Trends in morbidity and mortality of hepatic resection for malignancya matched comparative analysis. Ann Surg 1993;220(2):199.
466. Piehler JM, Crichlow RW. Primary carcinoma of the gallbladder. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1978;147:929.
467. Cubertafond P, Gainant A, Cucchiaro G. Surgical treatment of 724 carcinomas of the gallbladder. Results of the French Surgical Association Survey. Ann Surg 1994;219(3):275.
468. Wilkinson DS. Carcinoma of the gall-bladder: an experience and review of the literature. Aust N Z JSurg 1995;65(10):724.
469. Tsukada K, Kurosaki I, Uchida K, et al. Lymph node spread from carcinoma of the gallbladder. Cancer 1997;80(4):661.
470. Yamaguchi K, Tsuneyoshi M. Subclinical gallbladder carcinoma. Am J Surg 1992;163:382.
471. Shirai Y, Yoshida K, Tsukada K, Muto T. Inapparent carcinoma of the gallbladderan appraisal of a radical second operation after simple cholecystectomy. Cancer 1988;62(Oct):1422.
472. de Aretxabala X, Roa IS, Burgos LA, et al. Curative resection in potentially resectable tumours of the gallbladder. Eur J Surg 1997;163(6):419.
473. Bartlett DL, Fong Y, Fortner JG, Brennan MF, Blumgart LH. L ong-term results after resection for gallbladder cancer. Ann Surg 1996;224(5):639.
474. Shirai Y, Yoshida K, Tsukada K, Muto T, Watanabe H. Radical surgery for gallbladder carcinomalong-term results. Ann Surg 1992;216(5):565.
475. Matsumoto Y, Fujii H, Aoyama H, et al. Surgical treatment of primary carcinoma of the gallbladder based on the histologic analysis of 48 surgical specimens. Am J Surg 1992;163:239.
476. Gall FP, Kockerling F, Scheele J, Schneider C, Hohenberger W. Radical operations for carcinoma of the gallbladder: present status in Germany. World J Surg 1991;15:328.
477. Drouard F, Delamarre J, Capron J. Cutaneous seeding of gallbladder cancer after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1316.
478. Clair DG, Lautz DB, Brooks DC. Rapid development of umbilical metastases after laparoscopic cholecystectomy for unsuspected gallbladder carcinoma. Surgery 1993;113(3):355.
479. Landen SM. Laparoscopic surgery and tumor seeding [letter]. Surgery 1993;114(1):131.
480. Fligelstone L, Rhodes M, Flook D, Puntis M, Crosby D. Tumour inoculation during laparoscopy [letter]. Lancet 1993;342(8867):368.
481. Nduka CC, Monson JRT, Menzies-Gow N, Darzi A. Abdominal wall metastases following laparoscopy. Br J Surg 1994;81:648.
482. Nally C, Preshaw RM. Tumour implantation at umbilicus after laparoscopic cholecystectomy for unsuspected gallbladder carcinoma. Can J Surg 1994;37(3):243.
483. Kim HJ, Roy T. Unexpected gallbladder cancer with cutaneous seeding after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. South Med J 1994;87(8):817.
484. Taal BG, Audisio RA, Bleiberg H, et al. Phase II trial of mitomycin C (MMC) in advanced gallbladder and biliary tree carcinoma. An EORTC gastrointestinal tract cancer cooperative group
study. Ann Oncol 1993;607.
485. Gebbia V, Majello E, Testa A, et al. Treatment of advanced adenocarcinomas of the exocrine pancreas and the gallbladder with 5-fluorouracil, high dose levofolinic acid and oral hydroxyurea
on a weekly schedule. Results of a multicenter study of the Southern Italy Oncology Group (G.O.I.M.). Cancer 1996;78(6):1300.
486. Makela J, Tikkakoski T, Leinonen A, et al. Superselective intra-arterial chemotherapy with mitomycin C in hepatic neoplasms. Eur J Surg Oncol 1993;19(4):348.
487. Houry S, Schlienger M, Huguier M, et al. Gallbladder carcinoma: role of radiation therapy. Br J Surg 1989;76:448.
488. Chao TC, Greager JA. Primary carcinoma of the gallbladder. J Surg Oncol 1995;46:215.
489. Oswalt CE, Cruz AB Jr. Effectiveness of chemotherapy in addition to surgery in treating carcinoma of the gallbladder. Rev Surg 1977;34(6):436.
490. Morrow CE, Sutherland DE, Florack G, Eisenberg MM, Grage TB. Primary gallbladder carcinoma: significance of subserosal lesions and results of aggressive surgical treatment and adjuvant
chemotherapy. Surgery 1983;94(4):709.
491. Todoroki T. Radiation therapy for primary gallbladder cancer. Hepatogastroenterology 1997;44(17):1229.
492. Todoroki T, Iwasaki Y, Orii K, et al. Resection combined with intraoperative radiation therapy (IORT) for stage IV (TNM) gallbladder carcinoma. World J Surg 1991;15:357.
493. Hanna SS, Rider WD. Carcinoma of the gallbladder or extrahepatic bile ducts: the role of radiotherapy. Can Med Assoc J 1978;118(1):59.
494. Vaittinen E. Carcinoma of the gall-bladder. A study of 390 cases diagnosed in Finland 19531967. Ann Chir Gynaecol 1970;168:1.
495. Bismuth H, Corlett MB. Intrahepatic cholangioenteric anastomosis in carcinoma of the hilus of the liver. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1975;140:170.
496. Kapoor VK, Pradeep R, Haribhakti SP, et al. Intrahepatic segment III cholangiojejunostomy in advanced carcinoma of the gallbladder. Br J Surg 1996;83(12):1709.
497. Ozmen MM, Patankar RV, Hengirmen S, Terzi MC. Epidemiology of gallbladder polyps [letter]. Scand J Gastroenterol 1994;29(5):480
498. Boulton RA, Adams DH. Gallbladder polyps: when to wait and when to act. Lancet 1997;349(9055):817.
499. Shinkai H, Kimura W, Muto T. Surgical indications for small polypoid lesions of the gallbladder. Am J Surg 1998;175(2):114.
500. Kozuka S, Tsubone N, Yasui A, Hachisuka K. Relation of adenoma to carcinoma in the gallbladder. Cancer 1982;50(10):2226.
501. Yang HL, Sun YG, Wang Z. Polypoid lesions of the gallbladder: diagnosis and indications for surgery. Br J Surg 1992;79(3):227.
502. Furukawa H, Kosuge T, Shimada K, et al. Small polypoid lesions of the gallbladder: differential diagnosis and surgical indications by helical computed tomography. Arch Surg 1998;133(7):735.
503. Bismuth H, Chiche L, Castaing D. Surgical treatment of hepatocellular carcinomas in noncirrhotic liver: experience with 68 liver resections. World J Surg 1995;19:35.
504. Kishi K, Shikata T, Hirohashi S, et al. Hepatocellur carcinoma. A clinical and pathologic analysis of 57 hepatectomy cases. Cancer 1983;51:542.
505. Lee CS, Sung JL, Hwang LY, et al. Surgical treatment of 109 patients wth symptomatic and asymptomatic hepatocellular carcinoma. Surgery 1986;99:481.
506. Kanematsu T, Matsumata T, Takenaka K, et al. Clinical management of recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma after primary resection. Br J Surg 1988;75:203.
507. Lai ECS, Ng IOL, You KT, et al. Hepatic resection for small hepatocellular carcinoma: the Queen Mary Hospital Experience. World J Surg 1991;15:654.
508. Hemming AW, Scudamore CH, Davidson A, et al. Evaluation of 50 consecutive segmental hepatic resections. Am J Surg 1993;165:621.
509. Fan ST, Lo CM, Lai EC, et al. Perioperative nutritional support in patients undergoing hepatectomy for hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1547.
510. Chen MF, Hwang TL, Jeng LB, et al. Postoperative recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma. Two hundred five consecutive patients who underwent hepatic resection in 15 years. Arch Surg
1994;129:738.
511. Lai EC, Fan ST, Lo CM, et al. Hepatic resection for hepatocellular carcinoma. An audit of 343 patients. Ann Surg 1995;221(3):291.
512. Takenaka K, Kawahara N, Yamamoto K, et al. Results of 280 liver resections for hepatocellular carcinoma. Arch Surg 1996;131(1):71.
513. Nadig DE, Wade JP, Fairchild RB, et al. Major hepatic resection. Indications and results in a national hospital system from 1988 to 1992. Arch Surg 1997;132:115.
514. Franco D, Capussotti L, Smadja C, et al. Resection of hepatocellular carcinomas: results in 72 European patients with cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 1990;98:733.
515. Honjo I, Mizumoto R. Primary carcinoma of the liver. Am J Surg 1974;128:31.
516. Okuda K, Obata H, Nakajima Y, et al. Prognosis of primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 1984;4:S3.
517. Hsu HC, Sheu JC, Lin YH, et al. Prognostic histologic features of resected small hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in Taiwan. A comparison with resected large HCC. Cancer 1985;56:672.
518. Stukart MJ, Rijnsent A. Induction of tumoricidal activity in isolated rat liver macrophages by liposomes containing recombinant rat G-IFN supplemented with lipopolysaccharide or
muramyldipeptide. Cancer Res 1987;47:3880.
519. Yamanaka N, Okamoto E, Toyosaka A, et al. Prognostic factors after hepatectomy for hepatocellular carcinoma. A univariate and multivariate analysis. Cancer 1990;65:1104.
520. Fong Y, Blumgart LS. Liver resection for cancer. In: Zakim D, Boyer T, eds. Hepatology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1996.
521. Ringe B, Pichlmayr R, Wittekind C, Tusch G. S urgical treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma: experience with liver resection and transplantation in 198 patients. World J Surg 1991;15:270.
522. Sasaki Y, Imaoka S, Masutani S, et al. Influence of coexisting cirrhosis on long-term prognosis after surgery in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Surgery 1992;112:515.
523. Ouchi K, Matsubara S, Fukuhara K, et al. Recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma in the liver remnant after hepatic resection. Am J Surg 1993;166:270.
524. Takenaka K, Shimada M, Higahi H, et al. Liver resection for hepatocellular carcinoma in the elderly. Arch Surg 1994;129:846.
525. Suenaga M, Sugiura H, Kokuba Y, Uehara S, Kurumiya T. Repeated hepatic resection for recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma in eighteen cases. Surgery 1994;115:452.
526. Ringe B, Wittekind C, Bechstein WO, et al. The role of liver transplantation in hepatobiliary malignancy: a retrospective analysis of 95 patients with particular regard to tumor stage and
recurrence. Ann Surg 1989;209:88.
527. Iwatsuki S, Starzl TE, Sheahan DG, et al. Hepatic resection versus transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma. Ann Surg 1991;214:221.
528. Pichlmayr R, Weimann A, Steinhoff G, Ringe B. Liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma: clinical results and future aspects. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1992;21[Suppl 1]:S157.
529. Moreno-Gonzalez EM, Comez R, Garcia I, et al. Liver transplantation in malignant hepatic neoplasms. Am J Surg 1992;163:395.
530. Bismuth H, Chiche L, Adam R, et al. Liver resection versus transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhotic patients. Ann Surg 1993;218:145.
531. Romani F, Belli LS, Rondinara GF, et al. The role of transplantation in small hepatocellular carcinoma complicating cirrhosis of the liver. J Am Coll Surg 1994;178:379.
532. Chung SW, Toth JL, Rezieg M, et al. Liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma. Am J Surg 1994;167:317.
533. Dalgic A, Mirza DF, Gunson BK, et al. Role of total hepatectomy and transplantation in hepatocellular carcinoma. Transplant Proc 1994;26:3564.
534. Leung TW, Patt YZ, Lau WY, et al. Complete pathological remission is possible with systemic combination chemotherapy for inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res
1999;5(7):1676.
535. O'Reilly E, Stuart K, Kemeny N, et al. A phase II trial of irinotecan (CPT-11) in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17[Suppl]: 267a(abst).
536. Umsawasdi T, Chainuvati T, Viranuvatti V. Combination chemotherapy of hepatocellular carcinoma with fluorouracil and mytomycin-C. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1978;19:193(abst).
537. Vogel CL, Bayley AC, Brocker RJ, et al. A phase II study of adriamycin in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma from Zambia and the United States. Cancer 1977;39:1936(abst).
538. Baker HL, Kaiki J, Jones S, et al. Adriamycin and 5-fluorouracil in the treatment of advanced hepatoma: a Southwest Oncology Study. Cancer Treat Rep 1977;61:1595.
539. Ravey M, Omura G, Bartolucci A. Phase II evaluation of doxorubicin plus bleomycin in hepatocellular carcinoma: a Southeastern Cancer Study Group trial. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:1517.
540. Okada S, Okusaka T, Ueno H, et al. Phase II trial of cisplatin, mitoxantrone and continuous-infusion 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) (FMP therapy) for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1999;18[Suppl]:248a(abst).
541. Zaniboni A, Biasi L, Graffeo M, et al. Phase II study of high-dose vitamin K 1 in hepatocellular carcinoma: a Giscad study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17[Suppl]:307a(abst).
542. Noy L, Feun L, Marini A, et al. A phase II trial of recombinant leukocyte interferon (IFN), doxorubicin, and 5FUDR in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18[Suppl]:295a(abst).
543. Benson AB, Mitchell E, Abramson N, et al. A multicenter, phase II trial of oral eniluracil plus 5-FU in patients with inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18[Suppl]:256a(abst).
544. Strumberg D, Erhard J, Harstrick A, et al. Phase I study of a weekly 1-h infusion of paclitaxel in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. Eur J Cancer 1998;34(8):1290.
545. Chao Y, Chan WK, Birkhofer MJ, et al. Phase II and pharmacokinetic study of paclitaxel therapy for unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma patients. Br J Cancer 1998;78(1):34.
546. Stuart K, Tessitore J, Huberman M. 5-Fluorouracil and alpha-interferon in hepatocellular carcinoma. AmJ Clin Oncol 1996;19(2):136.
547. Mani S, Schiano T, Garcia JC, et al. Phase II trial of uracil/tegafur (UFT) plus leucovorin in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. Invest New Drugs 1998;16(3):279.
548. Gebbia V, Maiello E, Serravezza G, et al. 5-Fluorouracil plus high dose levofolinic acid and oral hydroxyurea for the treatment of primary hepatocellular carcinomas: results of a phase II
multicenter study of the Southern Italy Oncology Group (G.O.I.M.). Anticancer Res 1999;19(2B):1407.
549. Chlebowski RT, Brzechwa-Adjukiewicz A, Cowden A, et al. Doxorubicin (75 mg/m 2) for hepatocellular carcinoma: clinical and pharmacokinetic results. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68(3):487.
550. Falkson G, MacIntyre J, Schutt A, et al. Neocarzinostatin versus m-AMSA or doxorubicin in hepatocellular carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:581.
551. Melia WM, Johnson P, Williams R. Induction of remission in hepatocellular carcinoma. A comparison of VP16 with adriamycin. Cancer 1983;51:206.
552. Falkson G, Ryan LM, Johnson LA, et al. A random phase II study of mitoxantrone and cisplatin in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. An ECOG study. Cancer 1987;60:2141.
553. Ji SK, Park NH, Choi HM, et al. Combined cis-platinum and alpha interferon therapy of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. Korean J Intern Med 1996;11(1):58.
554. Ansfield FJ, Ramirez G, Davis HL Jr, et al. The treatment of metastatic carcinoma of the liver by percutaneous selective hepatic artery infusion of 5-fluorouracil. Cancer 1975;36:2413.
555. Misra NC, Jaiswal MS, Singh RV, Das B. Intrahepatic arterial infusion of combination of mitomycin-C and 5-fluorouracil in treatment of primary and metastatic liver carcinoma. Cancer
1977;39(4):1425.
556. Kinami Y, Shinmura K, Miyazaki I. The super-selective and the selective one-shot methods for treatment of inoperable cancer of the liver. Cancer 1978;41:1720.
557. Wellwood J, Cady B, Oberfield R. Treatment of primary liver cancer: response to regional chemotherapy. Clin Oncol 1979;5:25.
558. Olweny CLM, Katongole-Mbidde E, Bahendeka S, et al. Further experiences in treating patients with hepatocellular carcinoma in Uganda. Cancer 1980;46:2717.
559. Cheng E, Watson R, Fortner J, et al. Regional intra-arterial infusion of cisplatin in primary liver cancer: a phase II trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1982;2:179(abst).
560. Urist M, Balch C. Intra-arterial chemotherapy for hepatoma using adriamycin administered via an implantable infusion pump. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1984;3:148
561. Shildt R, Baker L, Stuckey W. Hepatic artery infusion (HAI) with 5-FUDR, Adriamycin (A) and streptozotocin (St) in unresectable hepatoma. A Southwest Oncology Group Study. Proc Am Soc

Clin Oncol 1984;3:150(abst).
562. Carr BI, Dvorchik I. Effects of cisplatin (DDP) intensity on hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) responses and survival in 57 patients. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17[Suppl]:288a(abst).
563. Urabe T, Kaneko S, Matsushita E, Unoura M, Kobayashi K. Clinical pilot study of intrahepatic arterial chemotherapy with methotrexate, 5-fluorouracil, cisplatin and subcutaneous
interferon-alpha-2b for patients with locally advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. Oncology 1998;55(1):39.
564. Nakamura H, Hashimoto T, Oi H, et al. Transcatheter oily chemoembolization of hepatocellular carcinoma. Radiology 1989;170:783.
564a. Shibata J, Fujiyama S, Sata T, et al. Hepatic arterial injection chemotherapy with cisplatin suspended in an oily lymphographic agent for hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 1989;64:1586.
565. Pelletier C, Roche A, Ink O. A randomised trial of hepatic aterial chemoembolisation in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 1990;11:181.
566. Venook A, Stagg R, Lewis B, et al. Chemoembolization for hepatocellular carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1108.
567. Yamada R, Kishi K, Sonomura T, et al. Transcatheter arterial embolization in unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. Cardiovasc Interv Radiol 1990;13(3):135.
568. Nakao N, Kamino K, Miura K, et al. Recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma after partial hepatectomy: value of treatment with transcatheter arterial chemoembolization. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1991;156:1177.
569. Stuart K, Stokes K, Jenkins R, et al. Treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma using doxorubicin/ethiodized oil/gelatin powder chemoembolisation. Cancer 1993;72:3202.
570. Uchida H, Matsuo N, Nishimine K, et al. Transcatheter arterial embolization for hepatoma with lipiodol: hepatic arterial and segmental use. Semin Interv Radiol 1993;10:19.
571. Carr B, Orons P, Zajko A, et al. Phase II study of intra-hepatic arterial (I/A) cisplatinum, doxorubicin and Spherex for advanced stage hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In: Proceedings of the
Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 1995:A451(abst).
572. Chung J, Park J, Han J, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma and portal vein invasion: results of treatment with transcatheter oily chemoembolization. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1995;(165):315.
573. Warren KW, Choe DS, Plaza J, Relihan M. Results of radical resection for periampullary cancer. Ann Surg 1975;181:534.
574. Nakase A, Matsumoto Y, Uchida K, Honjo I. Surgical treatment of cancer of the pancreas and the periampullary region. Ann Surg 1977;185:52.
575. Alexander F, Rossi RL, O'Bryan M, et al. Biliary carcinoma. A review of 109 cases. Am J Surg 1984;147:503.
576. Lerut JP, Gianello PR, Otte JB, Kestens PJ. Pancreaticoduodenal resection. Surgical experience and evaluation of risk factors in 103 patients. Ann Surg 1984;199:432.
577. Tarazi RY, Hermann RE, Vogt D, et al. Results of surgical treatment of periampullary tumors: a thirty-five-year experience. Surgery 1986;100:716.
578. Fortner JG, Kallum BO, Kim DK. Surgical management of carcinoma of the junction of the main hepatic ducts. Ann Surg 1976;184:68.
579. Akwari OE, Kelly KA. Surgical treatment of adenocarcinoma. Location: junction of the right, left, and common hepatic ducts. Arch Surg 1979;114:22.
580. Cameron JL, Broe P, Zuidema GD. Proximal bile duct tumors. Surgical management with silastic transhepatic biliary stents. Ann Surg 1982;196:412.
581. Beazley RM, Hadjis N, Benjamin IS, Blumgart LH. Clinicopathological aspects of high bile duct cancer. Experience with resection and bypass surgical treatment. Ann Surg 1984;199:623.
582. Iwasaki Y, Okamura T, Ozaki A, et al. Surgical treatment for carcinoma at the confluence of the major hepatic ducts. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1986;162:457.
583. Iida S, Tsuzuki T, Ogata Y, et al. The long-term survival of patients with carcinoma of the main hepatic duct junction. Cancer 1987;60:1612.
584. Guthrie CM, Haddock G, De Beaux AC, Garden OJ, Carter DC. Changing trends in the management of extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. Br J Surg 1993;80:1434.
585. Washburn WK, Lewis WD, Jenkins RL. Aggressive surgical resection for cholangiocarcinoma. Arch Surg 1995;130(3):270.
586. Su CH, Tsay SH, Wu CC, et al. Factors influencing postoperative morbidity, mortality, and survival after resection for hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Ann Surg 1996;223:384.
587. Kurosaki H, Karasawa K, Kaizu T, et al. Intraoperative radiotherapy for resectable extrahepatic bile duct cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:634.
588. Brayman KL, Dafoe DC, Smythe WR, et al. Prophylaxis of serious cytomegalovirus infection in renal transplant candidates using live human cytomegalovirus vaccine. Interim results of a
randomized controlled trial. Arch Surg 1988;123(12):1502.
589. Davis HLJ, Ramirez G, Ansfield FJ. Adenocarcinomas of stomach, pancreas, liver, and biliary tracts. Survival of 328 patients treated with fluoropyrimidine therapy. Cancer 1974;33(1):193.
590. Haskell CM. Cancer in the liver. In: Haskell CM, ed. Cancer treatment. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1980:319.
591. Sons HU, Borchard F, Joel BS. Carcinoma of the gallbladder: autopsy findings in 287 cases and review of the literature. J Surg Oncol 1985;28(3):199.
592. Crooke ST, Bradner WT. Mitomycin C: a review. Cancer Treat Rev 1976;3:131.
593. Okada S, Ishii H, Nose H, et al. A phase II study of cisplatin in patients with biliary tract carcinoma. Oncology 1994;51:515.
594. Raderer M, Hejna MH, Valencak JB, et al. Two consecutive phase II studies of 5-fluorouracil/leucovorin/mitomycin C and of gemcitabine in patients with advanced biliary cancer. Oncology
1999;56(3):177.
595. Chen JS, Jan YY, Lin YC, et al. Weekly 24 h infusion of high-dose 5-fluorouracil and leucovorin in patients with biliary tract carcinomas. AnticancerDrugs 1998;9(5):393.
596. Rougier P, Fandi A, Ducreux M, et al. Demonstrated efficiency of 5- fluorouracil continuous infusion and cisplatin in patients with advanced biliary tract carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1995;14:205.
597. Hall SW, Benjamin RS, Murphy WK, Valdivieso M, Bodey GP. Adriamycin, BCNU, ftorafur chemotherapy of pancreatic and biliary tract cancer. Cancer 1979;44(6):2008.
598. Isacoff WH, Botnick L, Tompkins R, et al. Treatment of patients with advanced tumors of the bile ducts with continuous infusion 5-fluorouracil in conjuction with calcium, leucovorin, mitomycin
C, and dipyridamole. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1993;12:225(abst).
599. Kajanti M, Pyrhonen S. Epirubicin-sequential methotrexate-5-fluorouracil-leucovorin treatment in advanced cancer of the extrahepatic biliary system: a phase II study. Am J Clin Oncol
1994;17:223.
600. Shirai Y, Yoshida K, Tsukada K, Muto T, Watanabe H. Early carcinoma of the gallbladder. Eur J Surg 1992;158(10):545.
601. de Aretxabala X, Roa I, Burgos L, et al. Gallbladder cancer in Chile. A report on 54 potentially resectable tumors. Cancer 1992;69:60.
602. Paquet KJ. Appraisal of surgical resection of gallbladder carcinoma with special reference to hepatic resection. J Hepatobil Pancreat Surg 1998;5(2):200.
603. Chijiiwa K, Tanaka M. Carcinoma of the gallbladder: an appraisal of surgical resection. Surgery 1994;115:751.

SECTION 33.6 Cancer of the Small Intestine
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 33.6
Cancer of the Small Intestine
DANIEL G. COIT
History
Incidence
Etiology
Characteristics of the Small Bowel
Premalignant Lesions
Anatomy
Pathology
Presentation
Diagnosis
Management
Benign Tumors of the Small Bowel
Malignant Tumors of the Small Bowel
Chapter References

HISTORY
The first small bowel tumor, a perforated duodenal carcinoma, was described by Hamberger in 1746. 1 The first small bowel leiomyoma was described by Foerster in
1858,2 and the first small bowel leiomyosarcoma was described by Wesener in 1883. 3 An early review of malignant small bowel tumors was published by
Leichtenstern in 1876, 4 and Heurtaux published a review of benign small bowel tumors in 1899. 5 Many of the earlier reviews were weighted heavily by the autopsy
incidence of tumors. Most of the current information we have about the presentation, diagnosis, management, and outcome of bowel tumors is derived either from
small single-center series or larger collective reviews.

INCIDENCE
Small bowel tumors, both benign and malignant, are exceedingly unusual. It has been estimated that small bowel tumors constitute fewer than 10% of all
gastrointestinal tumors, 6 although the incidence varies significantly depending on whether autopsy data are included. Approximately 64% of all small bowel tumors are
malignant. These account for 0.1% to 0.3% of all malignancies. 7,8 and 9 Some 2100 to 2400 new cases of small bowel malignancies occur each year in the United
States,10,11 approximately 0.4 to 1 case per 100,000 population, 12,13 and 14 with a slight male predominance. 15,16,17,18,19 and 20 Fewer than 1000 deaths are due to primary
malignant small bowel tumors annually in the United States, which is approximately 0.5 deaths per 100,000 population. 21 By contrast, approximately 36% of small
bowel tumors are benign, with roughly equal gender incidence.
In a review of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program registries from 1973 to 1982, Weiss and Yang 14 showed the incidence of malignant small
bowel tumors to be low in patients younger than 30 years of age, with a steady increase in incidence with age for adenocarcinoma, carcinoid, and lymphoma. The
incidence of sarcoma levels off after the seventh decade. 14

ETIOLOGY
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SMALL BOWEL
The small bowel constitutes approximately 75% of the length of the gastrointestinal tract and provides 90% of the absorptive surface. Despite this predominance in
length and surface area, however, it appears to be resistant to the development of malignancy. Small bowel malignancies account for only 1% to 3% of all
gastrointestinal malignancies, 7,10,11,12 and 13,22,23 and they are estimated at 36 to 60 times less frequent than malignancies of the colon. 9,15,24,25 and 26 A number of
hypotheses have been formulated to explain this finding. Transit through the small bowel is relatively rapid compared with the colon, resulting in less contact of the
mucosa with potential carcinogens. Any potential carcinogens would be diluted by the large volume of secretions, which create liquid small bowel contents. This liquid
in turn may be less mechanically irritating to the small bowel mucosa than solid stool would be to the colonic mucosa. The small bowel contains a small, metabolically
inactive bacterial population, one that may not be capable of transforming potential procarcinogens to their active component. 9 The contribution of the alkaline pH to
the resistance of small bowel neoplasms is unknown. The proximal small bowel contains a number of microsomal enzyme systems known to detoxify carcinogens,
particularly benzopyrene hydroxylase. 27,28 Finally, high numbers of lymphocytes and B cells secrete immunoglobulin A in the distal ileum, which may contribute to a
local immunosurveillance system that prevents the development of malignancies. Evidence in support of this supposition is derived from immunocompromised
patients, either those with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome or those on chronic immunosuppression, who seem more prone to the development of malignancies,
both lymphoma and Kaposi's sarcoma, in the distal small bowel.
The small intestine does appear to be susceptible to carcinogens. It is of interest that, as is shown later, adenocarcinomas in the small intestine occur proximally, in
much the same distribution as azoxymethane-induced adenocarcinoma in rats. 29,30 This distribution of small bowel adenocarcinomas also correlates with the length of
contact of the small bowel mucosa with pancreaticobiliary secretions, implicating bile as a possible carcinogen. 31 Diversion of the bile in animals has been shown to
decrease the incidence of experimentally induced small bowel malignancy. 32
Chow and colleagues 33 looked at risk factors in 430 patients with small bowel cancer, who they compared with 921 case-control patients dying of other causes. They
found that weekly or more frequent consumption of red meat and monthly or more frequent consumption of salt-cured smoked foods was associated with a two- to
threefold increase in risk. Tobacco use and alcohol consumption were not associated with increased risk of small bowel cancer in the study. 33 Lowenfels and Sonni 34
showed an excellent correlation between dietary fat intake and the incidence of small bowel carcinoma in various countries around the world. Pollard 34a showed that
the incidence of methylazoxymethanol acetate–induced intestinal carcinoma in rats could be markedly reduced by dietary restriction, further implicating oral intake as
a possible promoter of intestinal malignancy.
Other factors that predispose patients to development of large bowel adenocarcinoma may also play a role in the development of small bowel adenocarcinoma.
Neugut and Santos 16 looked at the incidence of second cancers among 2581 cases of small bowel malignancy from a Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
program cohort collected from 1973 to 1988. They found an increased probability of subsequent colorectal carcinoma after small bowel carcinoma (relative risk, 3.6 to
5.0) and an increased risk of small bowel carcinoma after colorectal carcinoma (relative risk, 7.1 to 9.0).
PREMALIGNANT LESIONS
A number of small bowel lesions are thought to predispose patients to the development of small bowel malignancy. The adenoma-carcinoma sequence has been well
described. 29,35 Perzin and Bridge36 observed that 25% of primary small bowel carcinomas demonstrated adenomatous epithelium in the same lesion. This finding has
particular significance in patients with familial adenomatous polyps, in whom polyps of the upper gastrointestinal tract are being recognized with increasing
frequency.37,38,39,40,41 and 42
Patients with chronic Crohn's disease are at increased risk for the development of small bowel carcinoma. 43,44,45 and 46 These patients usually exhibit malignancy by the
appearance of dysplasia. 47,48 However, distinguishing clinically between distal small bowel malignancy and Crohn's disease without histologic confirmation can be
exceedingly difficult. 49,50,51,52 and 53
Patients with adult celiac disease (nontropical sprue), particularly those who are unresponsive to dietary gluten withdrawal, are also at significantly increased risk for

development of small bowel malignancy, particularly lymphoma, although adenocarcinomas also have been reported. 54,55,56 and 57
Patients with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome have been reported to develop primary carcinoma of the gastrointestinal tract. 58,59,60 and 61 The primary polyp of Peutz-Jeghers
is a hamartoma, and the in situ transformation of a hamartomatous polyp to adenocarcinoma has not been clearly demonstrated. Because these patients often have
an adenomatous component in their primarily hyperplastic and hamartomatous polyps, the development of malignancy more likely represents malignant evolution of
that adenomatous component rather than transformation of the other hamartomatous elements. 60,61
Patients with von Recklinghausen's neurofibromatosis also have been reported to have gastrointestinal involvement, both benign and malignant. 62,63,64 and 65 Although
most of these small bowel tumors are benign neurofibromas and leiomyomas, malignant tumors of nerve tissue origin have been reported. 66 Case reports of a
proximal small bowel adenocarcinoma and carcinoid tumor occurring in association with neurofibromatosis have also appeared. 67,68

ANATOMY
Grossly, the small bowel extends from the pylorus to the iliosacral valve. It is estimated to measure 625 cm in length but may vary from 300 to 850 cm. 69 The
duodenum, measuring approximately 25 cm, forms a C loop; the first portion extends 5 cm horizontally from the pylorus before turning inferiorly into the second
portion. The second, or descending, portion of the duodenum is approximately 10 cm long, just anterior to the hilus of the right kidney. Typically, the ampulla of Vater,
through which pancreaticobiliary secretions pass into the small bowel, is found midway down the descending second portion of the duodenum medially. The third
portion of the duodenum travels transversely in close relationship to the uncinate process of the pancreas, anterior to the ureter, inferior vena cava, vertebral column,
and aorta. This leads to the fourth portion of the duodenum, which measures approximately 2.5 cm in diameter, ascends to join with the proximal jejunum, and is
suspended on the right cross of the diaphragm by the ligament of Treitz at the level of the second lumbar vertebra.
The jejunum, comprising the proximal 250 cm of the small bowel distal to the duodenum, and the ileum, the remaining 350 cm of small bowel, are supported on a
fan-shaped mesentery that measures approximately 15 cm in length. More distally, this mesentery becomes progressively longer, with arterial blood supply, venous
and lymphatic drainage, and small bowel innervation traversing between its two leaves. Grossly, the duodenum tends to be the largest in diameter and the ileum the
smallest.
The arterial blood supply for the duodenum is derived from the gastroduodenal branch of the hepatic artery as well as the inferior pancreaticoduodenal branch of the
superior mesenteric artery. The blood supply for the remaining small bowel is derived from intestinal branches of this superior mesenteric artery. Venous return from
the entire small intestine is into the portal vein. Lymphatic drainage of the duodenum is to peripancreatic nodes. The remainder of the small bowel drains into the
abundant lymph nodes through channels that parallel the course of the mesenteric blood vessels. Autonomic innervation of the small bowel is by means of the celiac
and superior mesenteric plexus. Sensory fibers are responsive to distention but not to other painful stimuli.
Microscopically, the intestine is a hollow muscular tube composed of four layers: serosa, muscularis, submucosa, and mucosa. The muscular layer consists of an
outer longitudinal layer and an inner circular layer. Immediately beneath the mucosa is the lamina propria. The absorptive surface of the intestine is increased
manifold by the presence of dense glandular villi covered by an epithelium of mucus-secreting goblet cells and absorptive cells, secretory Paneth's cells, and rare
argentaffin cells. Mucus-secreting Brunner's glands are found in the duodenum but not in the distal small bowel. The myenteric plexus of Auerbach is located between
the two muscular layers of the intestine; Meissner's plexus is located in the small bowel submucosa. Lymphatic tissue is found in the lamina propria of the submucosa;
this tissue increases as one progresses distally, becoming quite abundant in the distal ileum, where it is seen as Peyer's patches.

PATHOLOGY
More than 35 histologic variants of small bowel neoplasms have been described. For practical purposes, they can be subdivided as benign and malignant and further
classified according to their cell of origin ( Table 33.6-1). Thirty-six percent of all small bowel tumors are benign.

TABLE 33.6-1. Pathology of Primary Small Bowel Tumors by Cell of Origin

A number of authors have commented on the inordinately high incidence of second primary malignant tumors in patients with primary small bowel malignancy. 16,18 The
reason for this high incidence is not clear, although many have linked it to a defect in the individual patient's immune surveillance system. The clinical implications of
these observations are clear. Any patient who has had a primary small bowel malignancy should be watched closely for the development of a second malignant tumor.

PRESENTATION
Although no specific symptom complex is diagnostic of small bowel tumors, either benign or malignant, a few generalizations can be made. Presentation depends on
the location of the tumor and its growth pattern. Malignant lesions are more often symptomatic than are benign lesions, and for a shorter duration. 15,70,71,72,73,74,75 and 76
Furthermore, in large part because of the nonspecific nature of the symptoms, the delay between the onset of symptoms and the final diagnosis is often significant,
averaging 6 to 8 months. 71,77,78,79 and 80 The average age at presentation of patients with small bowel tumors is the seventh decade and is slightly younger for patients
with malignant tumors than for patients with benign tumors. 15
Although fewer than 50% of patients with benign small bowel tumors develop symptoms, 15 more than 90% of patients with malignant tumors of the small bowel have
symptoms before diagnosis. 11,24,81,82 These symptoms can be subdivided into four general categories: mass, obstruction, bleeding, and perforation.
In patients with benign tumors, pain from obstruction is the most common symptom, occurring in 42% to 70% of cases. Bleeding, usually chronic, is seen in 20% to
53% of patients. 15,79,83 The most common cause of adult intussusception is a benign small bowel tumor. A palpable mass or perforation is rare.
In patients with malignant tumors, the most common symptoms are pain (not always associated with obstruction) in 32% to 86% and weight loss in 32% to 67% of
cases.15,70,79,83 Bleeding occurs somewhat less frequently than in patients with benign small bowel tumors. 25 Perforation, usually localized, is seen in roughly 10% of
patients, usually those with lymphomas or sarcomas. A mass that may represent dilated bowel proximal to an obstructing tumor is palpable in fewer than 25% of
patients with malignant small bowel tumors.

DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of small bowel tumors is rarely made preoperatively. In fact, the diagnosis of small bowel malignancy is frequently delayed, not necessarily because of
delay in presentation to the physician. Maglinte and colleagues, 80 in a review of 77 patients with small bowel malignancy, reported the average delay between onset

of symptoms and presentation to the physician as 1 month, whereas the average interval from seeing the physician to final diagnosis was 7.8 months.
With the exception of an elevated 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid level in the presence of carcinoid syndrome, all the presenting signs and symptoms of small bowel
tumors are nonspecific. Laboratory examination may reveal a mild anemia in the presence of chronic blood loss. Hyperbilirubinemia may be seen in the presence of
periampullary duodenal tumors. Mild to moderate elevations of liver function tests may be seen in the presence of hepatic metastases, occasionally associated with
an elevation in carcinoembryonic antigen.
Radiologic studies may be more suggestive of the diagnosis. Plain abdominal films that reveal signs of partial or complete bowel obstruction in the absence of prior
laparotomy are suggestive of primary small bowel neoplasm, although nonspecific as to the diagnosis. Upper gastrointestinal series with small bowel follow-through is
abnormal in 53% to 83% of patients and delineates small bowel tumor in 30% to 44% of patients. 84,85 A number of investigators have suggested that this diagnostic
accuracy can be improved to in excess of 90% using enteroclysis, with particular attention to the distensibility of the small bowel. 85,86 and 87 Barium enema can be useful
in the diagnosis of small bowel disease, particularly lymphoma, in which thickening of the distal ileum can be seen on refluxing contrast material into the distal small
bowel. This finding, however, is nonspecific and can be identical to the appearance of regional ileitis. Hyams and associates 49 suggested that a rectal biopsy
revealing granulomatous disease can reliably distinguish between inflammatory and neoplastic changes in the terminal ileum.
Computed tomography (CT) is thought to be somewhat more accurate in detecting small bowel tumors. 88,89,90,91,92 and 93 In a review of 35 patients with small bowel
tumors, Laurent and colleagues 89 found the CT scan to be abnormal in 97%, predicting tumor in 80%. CT was predictive of the tumor histology 69% of the time and of
the tumor stage in 61% of patients. Of 18 malignant tumors, the CT predicted extramural invasion and liver metastases correctly 75% of the time; CT was accurate in
predicting regional lymph node status only 25% of the time. Laurent and colleagues described characteristic CT findings for the following 89:
Adenocarcinoma: partially obstructing concentric narrowing in the proximal small bowel, best detected with tumors more than 3 cm in diameter
Lymphoma: thickened distal small bowel, best seen with tumors larger than 2 cm
Leiomyosarcoma: eccentric tumor of the mid- or distal small bowel, with malignancy suggested by the presence of necrosis, ulceration, and size greater than 5 cm
Carcinoid: homogeneous mesenteric mass, often associated with stranding of the mesentery
Lipoma: small homogeneous fat density; small bowel or mesenteric nodule
Dudiak and coworkers,91 in a review of 63 patients with small bowel tumors, found that CT was able to detect a tumor in 73% of patients and to correctly predict the
diagnosis in 43%. Radiologic criteria similar to those of Laurent and associates were described. 91
Other investigators have focused on small bowel thickness as measured by CT scanning to predict enteric disease. 88,93 However, although small bowel wall thickness
is predictive of disease, it is not predictive of malignancy.
Angiography is rarely helpful in the diagnosis of small bowel tumors. Angiograms may be distinctly abnormal in vascular smooth muscle tumors of the small bowel 84
and may help to define the source of occult but active upper gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with a small bowel hemangioma. Alfidi and colleagues 94 reported
angiography as being helpful in patients with small bowel arteriovenous malformations, identifying lesions in nine patients after negative laparotomy. In addition,
angiography may on occasion demonstrate occlusion of the peripheral branches of the mesenteric circulation that is responsible for a syndrome of mesenteric
ischemia seen occasionally in the carcinoid syndrome.
Nuclear medicine scans using technetium-labeled red blood cells may be helpful, again to delineate an occult source of chronic gastrointestinal blood loss in the
presence of a normal colonic and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. It can be difficult to localize the site of bleeding with this test, however, and Oliver and
coworkers95 suggested that if technetium-labeled red blood cell scanning is used, the sensitivity of the examination improves if more frequent images are obtained.
With more sophisticated instrumentation, endoscopy is being more frequently used in the investigation of small bowel disease. Clearly, upper gastrointestinal
endoscopy with total duodenoscopy is the mainstay for detection, diagnosis and, occasionally, treatment of more proximal neoplasms. Interest has been renewed in
perioral enteroscopy. 96 With new instrumentation, and some experience, total small bowel enteroscopy can be achieved. Enteroscopy can be helpful in diagnosing
both focal lesions 97 and more diffuse lesions, such as Mediterranean lymphoma. 98 It may be most useful in localizing the source of occult nongastric, noncolonic
gastrointestinal bleeding. 99 Lida and associates 100 described the use of intraoperative enteroscopy to increase the detection of polyps in familial adenomatous
polyposis syndrome. In addition, intraoperative enteroscopy with trans–illumination of the bowel wall has been useful in patients with identified arteriovenous
malformations that cannot be otherwise localized at the time of operation. 96,101
Colonoscopy with retrograde ileoscopy has been described as useful in the diagnosis of primary lymphoma of the ileum. 102 In experienced hands, the small bowel can
be visualized by retrograde ileoscopy in up to 30% of patients. 83

MANAGEMENT
BENIGN TUMORS OF THE SMALL BOWEL
The distribution of benign small bowel tumors by diagnosis and anatomic location is shown in Table 33.6-2. Most common are leiomyomas, followed by adenomas,
lipomas, vascular lesions, and fibrous lesions.

TABLE 33.6-2. Distribution of Benign Tumors of the Small Bowel by Site in 13 Series

Leiomyomas
Leiomyomas of the small bowel account for 20% to 40% of all benign small bowel tumors and are the most common small bowel tumor according to a review by
Wilson and associates. 103 These tumors may grow within or outside the bowel lumen, and the growth pattern determines the presenting symptoms. Perforation is
unusual. It can be difficult to distinguish benign from malignant smooth muscle tumors of the gastrointestinal tract intraoperatively, even with histologic evaluation by
frozen section. According to the comprehensive review by Skandalakis and Gray, 104 malignancy in lesions less than 4 cm in diameter is distinctly unusual. Histologic
criteria of malignancy include necrosis, nuclear pleomorphism, and frequent mitotic activity. Surgical management of small bowel leiomyomas includes adequate

segmental resection with grossly negative serosal margins. Because lymph node metastases are unusual, even for malignant leiomyosarcomas of the small bowel,
extensive mesenteric lymphadenectomy is not required.
Small bowel polyps can be divided into three broad categories based on principles of management: villous adenomas of the duodenum, adenomas of the distal small
bowel, and Peutz-Jeghers hamartomas.
VILLOUS ADENOMAS OF THE DUODENUM. Although villous adenomas of the duodenum are unusual, the duodenum is the most common small bowel location for these

lesions. Their most common presenting sign is obstructive jaundice, and diagnosis is straightforward with upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. Most lesions are located
in the second portion of the duodenum, usually on the medial wall, surrounding the ampulla of Vater. They are being increasingly recognized as a component of the
familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome. 37,38,39,40,41 and 42 A number of reports of villous tumors of the duodenum have appeared since the late 1980s. These tumors
have a high propensity for malignant degeneration, averaging 45%. Risk factors associated with malignancy include size greater than 5 cm, 105 age over 50 years,106
and more distally situated polyps. 106 This propensity toward malignant degeneration, together with their location around the ampulla of Vater, combine to make
management decisions difficult. Although a number of experts have advocated local excision for benign lesions, 107,108 one cannot always be certain of the benign
nature of a tumor before complete histologic examination. Furthermore, local recurrence rates of 17% to 75% have been reported after local excision of these
tumors,109,110,111,112 and 113 occasionally with malignant degeneration. Certainly, close ongoing endoscopic surveillance is mandatory after local excision of these lesions.
Lesions in the third and fourth portion of the duodenum shouldbe managed with wedge or sleeve resection. Lesions in the first or second portion of the duodenum
should be managed with pancreaticoduodenectomy, particularly if any question remains about the diagnosis.
Survival after complete excision is excellent in patients with both benign villous adenomas and carcinoma in situ. Patients with invasive carcinoma fare comparably to
those with periampullary adenocarcinoma.
SMALL BOWEL ADENOMAS. Adenomas in the remainder of the small intestine are distinctly unusual. These tend to be distributed more proximally, and case reports of

malignant degeneration have appeared. 114 These tumors should be managed with segmental resection.
PEUTZ-JEGHERS HAMARTOMAS. Peutz-Jeghers hamartomas are always multifocal and occur primarily in the small intestine.

115,116
Symptoms of low-grade obstruction

with chronic recurrent intussusception usually become apparent in the second decade of life and frequently warrant repeated surgical intervention.
Appropriate surgical management of these tumors includes enterotomy and polypectomy. If bowel resection is required, an absolute minimum length of bowel should
be sacrificed, because this is a chronic problem, and frequent reoperation can be anticipated. It is important to verify the status of both the stomach and colon before
laparotomy, because intraoperative palpation of these structures can be notoriously unreliable. Furthermore, gastrointestinal malignancy occurs in these patients with
increased frequency, probably because of malignant generation of adenomatous polyps.
Other Benign Lesions
Angiomas of the small bowel are less common and may be multifocal. They are usually discrete and well circumscribed, presenting most often as occult
gastrointestinal bleeding. Management consists of segmental resection of the small bowel. 103,117,118
Lipomas of the small intestine are distinctly unusual. Patients usually present with symptoms of abdominal pain consistent with partial bowel obstruction. 119 The
difficulty in managing these lesions is that they may involve the small bowel diffusely. 120 Surgical management involves resection of the symptomatic segment of
bowel.
Brunner's gland hamartomas are extremely rare, with fewer than 100 reports in the world literature. Symptoms at presentation depend on the size of the tumor and
range from a lack of symptoms to chronic upper gastrointestinal bleeding and duodenal or biliary obstruction. Because these are submucosal tumors, preoperative
diagnosis is rarely possible. Treatment involves either endoscopic removal of pedunculated lesions or surgical resection of larger lesions. 121,122 and 123
Upper digestive tract involvement has been estimated to occur in 2% to 25% of patients with systemic neurofibromatosis (von Recklinghausen's disease). 63 This
range may well represent an underestimate, because much of the involvement is asymptomatic and detected only on postmortem examination. Typically, the
involvement is characterized by submucosal neurofibromas, originating in the submucosal nerve plexus. Duodenal paragangliomas have been reported to occur in
association with von Recklinghausen's disease. 64,65 Although these lesions are generally considered benign, Inai and colleagues 66 reported a case of duodenal
paraganglioma with regional lymph node metastases.
Inflammatory polyps may occur at any point within the small bowel, from the duodenum through the ileum, and occasionally are reported in association with
preexisting Crohn's disease. 124,125,126 and 127 These are uniformly benign lesions arising from the submucosa, are usually solitary, and present with symptoms of
obstruction. Management consists of polypectomy or segmental small bowel resection.
MALIGNANT TUMORS OF THE SMALL BOWEL
The distribution of malignant small bowel tumors by anatomic location and diagnosis is shown in Table 33.6-3.

TABLE 33.6-3. Distribution of Malignant Tumors of the Small Bowel by Site in 27 Series

Adenocarcinoma
Adenocarcinomas constitute 25% of all small bowel tumors and 39% of all malignant small bowel tumors. These tumors are distributed proximally in the small bowel,
with nearly 80% located in the duodenum or jejunum. For purposes of analyzing mode of presentation, diagnosis, management, and outcome, these tumors can be
separated into two categories: those of the duodenum and those of the jejunum and ileum.
DUODENUM. Approximately 45% of all adenocarcinomas of the small bowel arise within the duodenum. In general, approximately 15% of these are in the first portion of

the duodenum, 40% are in the second portion of the duodenum, and 45% are in the distal duodenum, 128,129,130,131,132 and 133 a distribution pattern that parallels the
relative lengths of each portion. The median age of these patients is 60 years. Symptoms relate primarily to the size and site of the tumor. The most common symptom
is upper abdominal pain related to partial duodenal obstruction. 129,132 Series that include periampullary tumors also report an incidence of biliary obstruction. 130
Anemia with Hemoccult-positive stools is frequent, although frank upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage is unusual. 132

Diagnosis is usually suspected from an upper gastrointestinal series. Hypotonic duodenography may improve the accuracy of this test. 134 Histologic confirmation can
be obtained preoperatively in most patients by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with total duodenoscopy.
As can be seen from Table 33.6-4, most patients who present with duodenal carcinoma undergo exploration; in these patients, resectability rates tend to be high. In
general, patients with tumors of the first and second portions of the duodenum require pancreaticoduodenectomy; patients with tumors of the third and fourth portions
of the duodenum often can undergo complete resection with segmental duodenectomy and primary anastomosis. Because 22% to 71% of patients with duodenal
adenocarcinoma have positive nodes at presentation 129,130,131,132 and 133,135 and a finite 5-year survival rate is seen in the presence of regional nodal involvement, 129,135
curative resection of duodenal carcinomas should always include a systemic regional lymphadenectomy regardless of the primary tumor location.

TABLE 33.6-4. Duodenal Adenocarcinoma

A number of authors have commented on the steady decrease in operative mortality after pancreaticoduodenectomy; this procedure can now be performed with an
operative mortality rate of less than 5%. 132,135,136 and 137 Outcome in duodenal carcinoma patients is determined by resectability, lymph node involvement and, in some
series, histologic grade. 129,130,131,132 and 133 No clear-cut evidence has established that pancreaticoduodenectomy results in superior survival to that with segmental
resection when the latter is technically feasible. 136,138
The role of postoperative adjuvant therapy has not been clearly defined in this group of patients. In patients with advanced unresectable disease, it may be that
palliative radiation therapy can be of some benefit in controlling chronic blood loss. Because these tumors clinically appear to behave more like gastric cancer than
pancreatic cancer, 135 participation in an investigational chemotherapy program with a 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)-based regimen may be warranted.
JEJUNUM AND ILEUM. Tumors of the jejunum and ileum account for the remaining 55% of small bowel adenocarcinoma. As can be seen in Table 33.6-5, much of the

information about these tumors is derived from small series collected over a number of years. The report by Adler and associates 53 is a collected series based on
several large tumor registries. In general, most reports are from institutions that see fewer than one patient with small bowel adenocarcinoma per year.

TABLE 33.6-5. Survival of Patients with Adenocarcinoma of the Small Intestine

These patients present with signs or symptoms of obstruction in 50% to 74%, or occult gastrointestinal bleeding in 33% to 64%. 30,53,139 Although adenocarcinoma of
the small bowel may be suspected based on a small bowel follow-through series or CT scan, neither examination is specific, and the diagnosis is frequently not made
until laparotomy. 30
At the time of operation, 77% to 100% of distal small bowel adenocarcinomas are resectable, 30,128,139 although regional lymph node metastases are frequent. 128,140,141
The principles of surgical resection include attainment of negative surgical margins and wide resection of the corresponding mesentery of the involved segment of
small bowel.
Survival in these patients is generally poor, with most series reporting only 20% to 30% of patients alive at 5 years (see Table 33.6-5). Prognostic factors in these
patients include depth of tumor penetration and the presence of nodal or systemic metastases. Histologic grade of the tumor also has been shown to be predictive of
outcome.128 Survival rates of 45% to 70% have been reported in patients with negative nodes after curative resection; these rates fall to 12% to 14% in patients with
positive nodes. 53,128 Radiation therapy is difficult in these patients given the mobile nature of the small bowel mesentery and the inability to localize the target field.
Because these tumors are rare, any meaningful comment on the impact of chemotherapy in their management is difficult. Jigyasu and associates 142 reported one
partial response in 14 patients treated with 5-FU–based combination chemotherapy accrued over 30 years.
Carcinoid Tumors
Carcinoid tumors represent 29% of all small bowel malignancies and 19% of all small bowel tumors; they are second only to adenocarcinoma in frequency. The small
bowel is the second most common site of carcinoid tumors after the appendix. Ninety percent of all small bowel carcinoids arise in the ileum. These tumors are often
silent, with many series including otherwise asymptomatic tumors discovered incidentally, either at laparotomy or autopsy. When present, the most common
presenting symptom is vague, nonspecific abdominal pain. 143,144 and 145 This pain may be due to a number of causes. Frequently, an intense desmoplastic fibrous
reaction occurs around the primary tumor, with shortening of the small bowel mesentery, which is thought to be induced in some way by the biochemical products of
the tumor. This reaction induces foreshortening of the mesentery with kinking of the bowel and either ileus or partial bowel obstruction. Partial bowel obstruction may
also occur from the tumor itself, although this appears less often. In addition, a syndrome of chronic mesenteric ischemia has been described in these patients,
associated with a mesenteric angiopathy described as elastic vascular sclerosis.146 On angiography, this condition is manifest by occlusion of the peripheral small
vessels of the mesenteric arcade.
Although only 10% to 17% of patients with small bowel carcinoid present with carcinoid syndrome, 147,148 up to 67% develop features of the syndrome at some point
during the course of the disease. 149 Symptoms include flushing of the head, neck, and upper chest in 84% to 94% of patients and a watery secretory diarrhea in 70%
to 86% of patients; both symptoms are present in 58% of patients. Right-sided valvular heart disease is present in 37% to 50% of patients, and bronchial asthma is
manifest in 17% to 23% of patients. 147,149,148,149,150 and 151 These symptoms are often prompted by emotion, alcohol intake, or the ingestion of tyramine-containing foods,
such as blue cheese or chocolate. 150 Virtually all patients with evidence of carcinoid syndrome have bulky liver metastases and elevated urinary 5-hydroxyindole

acetic acid levels.
In the absence of the classic carcinoid syndrome, preoperative diagnosis of these tumors is unusual. Radiologic findings, even with small bowel follow-through
studies, are inconclusive, revealing only an ileus-like or partial obstruction picture. CT scanning may reveal a mass infiltrating the mesentery with or without liver
metastases, but this finding is nonspecific. 152 Mesenteric angiography may reveal occlusion of the peripheral mesenteric vessels, but this finding is unusual.
At laparotomy, carcinoid tumors appear as firm, tan, submucosal nodules, usually in the distal small bowel. Invariably, symptomatic tumors are larger than those found
incidentally or at autopsy. 144 The frequency of metastatic disease to regional lymph nodes and liver is directly related to the size of the tumor. Nodal metastases are
unusual with tumors less than 1 cm in diameter but are present in 33% to 67% of tumors 1 to 3 cm in size and in 75% to 90% of tumors larger than 3 cm. 143,147,150,153,154
and 155
The majority of patients presenting with symptomatic carcinoids of the small intestine have metastatic disease at the time of operation.
Approximately 30% of small bowel carcinoids are multiple, 143,144 and 145,148,151,153 mandating a careful search of the remainder of the small bowel for other primary lesions
before definitive surgical management.
Surgical management of the primary tumor includes wide resection of all visible disease, together with complete resection of the supporting mesentery. Although the
likelihood of regional lymph node metastases is known to increase with tumor size, metastases have been reported in carcinoids smaller than 1 cm. 147,156
Management of carcinoid tumors metastatic to liver is aimed primarily at controlling the symptoms of the carcinoid syndrome. Prolonged remission of symptoms has
been observed with resection of bulk liver metastases, even if incomplete. 147,154,157,158 For unresectable disease, short-term remission of symptoms has been observed
with hepatic dearterialization. 147,158 Hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy has been attempted without convincing reports of success. 149,154
Medical management of the symptoms of carcinoid syndrome has included a long list of drugs, all with limited success. The most effective drug in controlling these
symptoms is the long-acting somatostatin analogue SMS-201. Given as a subcutaneous injection, this drug controls symptoms in nearly all patients. 150
Systemic chemotherapy has been disappointing in carcinoid syndrome. Active agents include 5-FU, streptozotocin, mitomycin C, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate,
interferon-a, and doxorubicin (Adriamycin). The most active single agents are 5-FU and doxorubicin, and the most effective combination regimens are methotrexate
with cyclophosphamide, 5-FU with streptozotocin, and streptozotocin with doxorubicin. 147 Although response rates of 30% to 55% are reported, none of these drugs,
either alone or in combination, has clearly demonstrated any impact on the generally indolent natural history of carcinoid tumors.
The prognosis in patients with carcinoid tumors of the small intestine is generally better than that for adenocarcinoma and depends on a number of factors, including
tumor size, depth of invasion, presence of lymph node, and liver metastases. 143,144 and 145,147,159 Other factors identified as prognostically significant by univariate
analysis are lack of symptoms, complete resectability, 143 and histologic growth pattern. 160 In advanced disease, two groups have looked at the association of DNA
ploidy and prognosis, with both finding a trend toward better prognosis in patients with solely diploid tumors. 161,162 In general, however, this tumor can be
characterized as one of indolent growth. In the absence of metastatic disease, complete resection of localized carcinoid tumors results in a 75% to 94% 5-year
survival rate. 150,159 With regional lymph node involvement, 5-year survival rates of 45% to 90% have been reported. 145,147,149,154,159 Five-year survival rates of 19% to
54% have been reported in the presence of liver metastases. 145,147,149,150 and 151,159
Lymphoma
Lymphoma may involve the gastrointestinal tract either primarily or as a manifestation of extensively disseminated systemic disease. Primary small bowel lymphoma
constitutes 1% to 4% of all gastrointestinal malignancies and, in a review of series, 15% of all small bowel malignancies (see Table 33.6-3). The gastrointestinal tract
is the most frequent site of extranodal lymphoma, the stomach being the most frequent site, followed by the small bowel and colon, respectively. 163 Within the small
bowel, the incidence of lymphoma increases as one progresses distally, the most frequent site being the ileum. The incidence parallels the relative amount of
lymphatic tissue in the wall of the small bowel at these locations.
The incidence of primary intestinal lymphoma in the United States nearly doubled in the period from 1985 to 1990. 164 Factors implicated in this increase include the
increasing number of immunocompromised patients (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome patients, transplantation recipients) and the increasing number of
immigrants from Third World countries.
For the diagnosis of primary small bowel lymphoma, one must satisfy the criteria specified by Dawson and coworkers 165: (1) There must be no peripheral or
mediastinal lymphadenopathy, (2) the peripheral blood smear must display a normal white blood cell count and differential, and (3) tumor involvement must be
predominantly in the gastrointestinal tract.
Most authors think that there should be no evidence of liver or spleen involvement. 166,167 Antecedent conditions reported to be associated with the development of
primary small bowel lymphoma include nontropical sprue and Crohn's disease. 56,138,166
Patients with gastrointestinal lymphoma have been traditionally staged using a modification of the Ann Arbor staging system. 168 Because this was not a staging
system originally designed for lymphomas of the gastrointestinal tract, Blackledge and colleagues 169 described a staging system to incorporate the prognostic
significance of perforation ( Table 33.6-6). Another clinically relevant modification of the Ann Arbor staging system, by Mussoff and Schmidt-Vollmer, 164 recognizes the
prognostic significance of regional (stage II 1E), as opposed to extraregional (stage II 2E), lymph node involvement.

TABLE 33.6-6. Staging Systems for Small Bowel Lymphoma

Five clinically distinct subtypes of primary small intestinal lymphoma have been described: the adult Western type; the pediatric type; the immunoproliferative small
intestinal disease, or Mediterranean, type; enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma; and Hodgkin's lymphoma. 164
The most common lymphoma of the small intestine, the Western type, occurs primarily in adults at a median age of 54 to 61 years and has a distinct male
predominance. 170,171 and 172 These lesions are usually focal and are found in the distal small bowel. The most common presenting symptom is abdominal pain related to
partial bowel obstruction. The most common physical finding is a mass. Anemia occurs in approximately 20% of these patients, and approximately 10% of patients
present with perforation. 138,170,172,173 and 174
The diagnosis of Western-type lymphoma is often made only at laparotomy. Radiologic findings suggestive of this diagnosis include a diffuse segment of thickened
distal small bowel on follow-through examination. This finding can often be even better demonstrated by CT scan. However, radiologically, the diagnosis is easily

confused with other segmental disease of the distal small intestine, such as Crohn's disease. 175
Several systems have been described to classify the pathology of small bowel lymphomas. Using the Rappaport system, approximately 60% of non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas are diffuse histiocytic (40% diffuse large cell and 20% immunoblastic), 25% are lymphocytic, and the remainder are of mixed type. The more recently
described Kiel system uses both morphology and cell surface markers to classify lymphomas. Although histologic staging systems remain in evolution, the grade of
the lymphoma remains most predictive of outcome. Most small bowel lymphomas are intermediate or high grade. 166,171,176,177
Management of these patients usually entails surgical exploration with resection of the affected segment of small bowel together with its subjacent mesentery. Fifty
percent to 78% of patients who present with this type of lymphoma undergo complete surgical resection. 30,138,170,171
The role of adjuvant therapy in patients who undergo complete resection is debated. Most authors agree that any patient with evidence of incompletely resected
disease or regional nodal metastases can benefit from systemic chemotherapy. 170 Some believe that adjuvant chemotherapy is warranted after complete resection of
all high-grade lymphomas, even if they are stage IE. 178,179 Auger and Allan171 reported on 16 patients undergoing complete surgical resection of intestinal lymphomas.
The median survival in patients who underwent complete resection with chemotherapy was 34 months, compared with 14 months in patients who underwent complete
surgical resection without adjuvant chemotherapy. 171 These 16 patients were not broken down by the presence or absence of nodal metastases, and as such, the
issue of adjuvant chemotherapy remains unresolved in patients with lymphoma localized to the bowel.
Adjuvant radiation therapy had been advocated by some investigators, 138,170 although the permanent long-term side effects of abdominal radiation therapy, together
with the efficacy of contemporary combination chemotherapy, make this option less attractive. 178
Most of the larger more recent series report 5-year survival rates in excess of 50% with aggressive multimodality therapy. Prognostic factors include tumor grade,
stage at presentation, complete response to therapy, complete resectability, histologic subtype, and the use of multimodality therapy. 163,166,170,171,175,177,178,180 Patients
with B-cell lymphomas tend to have better median survival than those with T-cell lymphomas. 57,181 In contrast to the indolent course of patients with carcinoid tumors,
most deaths in patients with small bowel lymphoma occur within 2 years of diagnosis. 173,182,183
The second major type of lymphoma is childhood lymphoma. This disease typically occurs in patients younger than 15 years of age and presents with symptoms of
pain and physical findings of a mass in the right lower quadrant, often with associated intussusception. Histologically, nearly one-half of these lymphomas resemble a
Burkitt's-type lymphoma.184 These patients often require resection before systemic therapy, because perforation while on treatment is not uncommon. The prognosis
for these children is improving in the era of combined-modality therapy, with a survival rate of 76% reported by Fleming and colleagues 184; all deaths in this series
occurred within 10 months of diagnosis. Outcome depends on stage at presentation and resectability. 166,185,186
A third clinically distinct type of intestinal lymphoma is immunoproliferative small intestinal disease, or Mediterranean lymphoma. This is the most common lymphoma
encountered in Middle Eastern and African populations, occurring with equal gender predilection in young adults, with a median age of 30. 183,185,186 Typically, these
patients present with the triad of pain, malabsorption (manifest by weight loss and diarrhea), and nail clubbing. 185 Approximately 50% of these patients present with a
mass. Mediterranean lymphoma generally involves the entire small bowel and is manifested histologically by villous atrophy and an intense lymphoplasmacytoid
infiltrate in the lamina propria of the small bowel. As such, diagnosis can often be made by peroral jejunal biopsy. Surgery is reserved for cases in which the diagnosis
is unclear or for complications such as obstruction or perforation. Grossly, the bowel appears to be involved by a diffuse thickening with some nodularity. Lymph
nodes are involved in 85% of patients. As a biologic curiosity, approximately 30% of patients with Mediterranean lymphoma have free a heavy-chain protein in their
serum and jejunal fluid. This finding, however, is neither specific nor diagnostic in this disease.
Treatment of patients with Mediterranean lymphoma consists primarily of systemic chemotherapy, although reports of whole abdominal radiation therapy have
appeared.178 The use of tetracycline in the management of this lymphoma supports the role of an infectious etiology. 187,188 Prognosis is variable, with Al-Bahrani and
associates 185 reporting a 23% 5-year survival rate; El Saghir and colleagues 187 reported an overall 5-year survival rate of 58% after aggressive therapy.
Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma is an unusual variant of intestinal lymphoma, most often seen in the Middle East and often associated with an antecedent
history of malabsorption or frank celiac disease. The malignancy is believed to arise from unrestricted proliferation of T-cell clones from the reactive T-cell population
in the enteropathic bowel. 189 It is usually disseminated at presentation and is often associated with significant malnutrition. Prognosis is generally poor despite
multiagent chemotherapy.57
Primary Hodgkin's lymphoma of the small bowel is extremely unusual, accounting for fewer than 3% of all small bowel lymphomas. 166,176 In many cases, this diagnosis
may represent impingement of mesenteric lymphadenopathy on the small bowel rather than primary visceral involvement. 190 Management consists of diagnostic and
palliative surgery followed by definitive systemic chemotherapy.
Sarcoma
Sarcomas of the small intestine are extremely unusual, constituting only approximately 9% of all small bowel tumors and 14% of all small bowel malignancies (see
Table 33.6-2). Most are of smooth muscle origin (leiomyosarcomas and leiomyoblastomas), although case reports of other histologies have appeared. More recent
reports have grouped these tumors under the category of gastrointestinal stromal tumors, from which another variant, gastrointestinal autonomic nerve tumors, can be
distinguished based on immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy. 191,192 From a clinical and prognostic viewpoint, however, these tumors can be discussed
together.
Sarcomas of the small intestine can present with a number of symptoms, depending on their growth pattern. Endoenteric lesions can present as either bleeding or
obstruction. Exoenteric lesions can present as an abdominal mass or perforation before any sense of obstruction is evident. Although the diagnosis may be suggested
by upper gastrointestinal series with small bowel follow-through or enteroclysis, with or without abdominal CT scan, it is rarely made with certainty preoperatively.
These tumors also tend to be highly vascular, with a plethora of tumor vessels seen with arteriography. Intraoperatively, these tumors have a variety of appearances,
but they are usually appreciated as firm, encapsulated masses that arise in relation to the bowel. It is difficult both clinically and by frozen-section examination to
distinguish a small leiomyosarcoma from its benign counterpart, the leiomyoma.
The principles of surgical management include wide resection of the primary tumor, including any adjacent structures that may be invaded. Duodenal tumors often
require pancreaticoduodenectomy if the medial wall of the second portion of the duodenum is involved. Smaller leiomyosarcomas of the duodenum may be treated
with wedge or sleeve resection. For sarcomas of the jejunum and ileum, the involved segment of intestine is resected together with its supporting mesentery.
Deliberate or extended lymphadenectomy is unnecessary, because these tumors involve regional lymph nodes in fewer than 15% of cases. 104
The overall 5-year survival rate for patients with small bowel sarcoma is approximately 20% and depends on tumor size, histologic grade, local invasiveness, and
resectability. 193,194,195,196,197,198,199 and 200 In a review of patients at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, all of nine patients with high-grade sarcomas of the small
bowel had experienced recurrences, whereas none of four patients with low-grade sarcomas had recurrences. 201
Peritoneal and liver metastases are the most common causes of treatment failure. No evidence suggests that adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation therapy after
complete resection diminishes the risk of subsequent recurrence.
Standard treatment of symptomatic metastatic disease usually involves doxorubicin-based combination chemotherapy, with or without high-dose ifosfamide. Although
response rates of up to 40% have been reported with these regimens, no convincing impact on the survival of patients with advanced metastatic gastrointestinal
sarcoma has been demonstrated.
Metastatic Disease
The small bowel is not infrequently involved by metastatic disease. The most common tumor metastasizing to the gastrointestinal tract is melanoma, with 60% of
patients who die of melanoma having autopsy evidence of metastatic disease involving the gastrointestinal tract. 202 Other extraabdominal tumors known to

metastasize to the small intestine include those of the lung, 203,204 breast,205,206 cervix,207,208 and kidney.209,210 Case reports of small bowel metastases from other
tumors, including tumors of the thyroid, 211 Merkel cell carcinoma,212 and hepatoma,213 have appeared. Intraabdominal tumors that may involve the small bowel by
transperitoneal spread include colorectal carcinoma, ovarian carcinoma, gastric carcinoma, pancreatic carcinoma, and transitional cell carcinoma of the genitourinary
system. The small bowel may also be involved by direct extension from any intraabdominal malignancy.
Symptoms of small bowel metastases most commonly include bleeding and obstruction; rarely, perforation is seen. Although surgical treatment of patients with local
small bowel invasion can often be performed with curative intent, it is almost always palliative in patients with hematogenous or peritoneal metastases. Identification of
an obstructing metastatic lesion is usually possible, although these lesions are rarely solitary. Identification of a bleeding metastasis among multiple small bowel
lesions can be difficult.
The outcome in patients undergoing small bowel resection for metastatic melanoma has been summarized by a number of authors. Median survival rates of 4.5 to 8.5
months have been reported, with few, if any, long-term survivors. 202,214,215,216 and 217 Caputy and colleagues 215 were able to identify small bowel involvement as an
independent adverse prognostic indicator in patients with melanoma metastatic to the gastrointestinal tract. Branum and Seigler 216 found a mean survival of 31
months in patients who underwent complete resection, compared with 10 months in patients who underwent noncurative procedures, which is more likely a reflection
of the extent of tumor rather than the impact of therapy. Ricaniadis and colleagues 218 reported a 28% 5-year survival rate in 12 patients with no other site of metastatic
melanoma who underwent complete surgical resection; these patients were selected from a group of 68 patients with involvement of the gastrointestinal tract by
recurrent melanoma.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Hamberger GE. Proempticum auspicale quo dissertantionem solemnen: indicit et de ruptura intestini duodeni disserit. Jena: Litteris Ritterianis, 1746:1.
2. Foerster G. Fibroid der muscularis des ileum. Virchows Arch Pathol Anat 1858;13:270.
3. Wesener F. Geirtrage zur casuistil der geschwulste i uebe Telangiectatisches myom des Duodenum von Ungewohnlichen. Virchows Arch Pathol Anat 1833;93:377.
4. Leichtenstern O. Handbuch des speciellen Pathologie und Therapie. In: Vogel FCW, ed. Handbuch des speciellen Pathologie und Therapie. Leipzig: Vogel FCW, 1876:523.
5. Heurtaux A. Note sur les tumeurs benignes de I'intestin. Arch Prov Chir 1899;8:701.
6. Ellis H. Tumours of the small intestine. Semin Surg Oncol 1987;3:12.
7. Sager GF. Primary malignant tumors of the small intestine. Am J Surg 1978;135:601.
8. Coutsoftides T, Shibata HR. Primary malignant tumors of the small intestine. Dis Colon Rectum 1979;22:24.
9. Lowenfels AB. Why are small-bowel tumours so rare? Lancet 1973;1:24.
10. Ciccarelli O, Welch JP, Kent G. Primary malignant tumors of the small bowel: the Hartford Hospital experience 19691983. Am J Surg 1987;153:350.
11. Collin CF, Amerson JR, Fulenwider JT, et al. Primary malignant small bowel tumors: clinical imitators of benign disease. Surg Gastroenterol 1982;1:203.
12. Johnson AM, Harman PK, Hanks JB. Primary small bowel malignancies. Am Surg 1985;51:31.
13. Barclay THC, Schapira DV. Malignant tumors of the small intestine. Cancer 1983;51:878.
14. Weiss NS, Yang C. Incidence of histologic types of cancer of the small intestine. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;78:653.
15. Herbsman H, Western L, Rosen Y, et al. Tumors of the small intestine. Curr Probl Surg 1980;17:123.
16. Neugut AI, Santos J. The association between cancers of the small and large bowel. Cancer Epidemiol Biol Prev 1993;2:551.
17. DiSario JA, Vargas H, McWhorter WP. Small bowel cancer: epidemiological and clinical characteristics from a population based registry. Am J Gastroenterol 1994;89:699.
18. Frost DB, Mercado PD, Tyrell JS. Small bowel cancer: a 30 year review. Ann Surg Oncol 1994;1:290.
19. Garcia Marcilla JA, Sanchez Bueno F, Aguilar J, et al. Primary small bowel malignant tumors. Eur J Surg Oncol 1994;20:630.
20. Baillie CT, Williams A. Small bowel tumors: a diagnostic challenge. J R Coll Surg Edinb 1994;39:8.
21. Laws H, Han SY, Aldrete J. Malignant tumors of the small bowel. South Med J 1984;77:1087.
22. Goel JP, Didolkar MS, Elias EG. Primary malignant tumors of the small intestine. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1976;143:717.
23. Martin RG. Malignant tumors of the small intestine. Surg Clin North Am 1986;66:779.
24. Wilson JM, Melvin DB, Gray GF, Thorbjarnarson B. Primary malignancies of the small bowel: a report of 96 cases and review of the literature. Ann Surg 1974;180:175.
25. Miles RM, Crawford D, Duras S. The small bowel tumor problem. Ann Surg 1979;189:732.
26. Reyes EL, Talley RW. Primary malignant tumors of the small intestine. Am J Gastroenterol 1970;54:30.
27. Wattenberg LW. Carcinogen-detoxifying mechanisms in the gastrointestinal tract. Gastroenterology 1966;51:932.
28. Wattenberg LW. Studies of polycyclic hydrocarbon hydroxylases of the intestine possibly related to cancer effect of diet on benzpyrene hydroxylase activity. Cancer 1971;28:99.
29. Cooper MJ, Williamson RCN, Chir M. Enteric adenoma and adenocarcinoma. World J Surg 1985;9:914.
30. Williamson RC, Welch CE, Malt RA. Adenocarcinoma and lymphoma of the small intestine. Ann Surg 1983;197:171.
31. Ross RK, Hartnett NM, Bernstein L, Henderson BE. Epidemiology of adenocarcinomas of the small intestine: is bile a small bowel carcinogen? Br J Cancer 1991;63:143.
32. Scudamore CH, Freeman HJ. Effects of small bowel transection, resection, or bypass in 1,2-dimethylhydrazine-induced rat intestinal neoplasia. Gastroenterology 1983;84:725.
33. Chow WH, Linet MS, McLaughlin JK, et al. Risk factors for small intestine cancer. Cancer Cause Control 1993;4:163.
34. Lowenfels AB, Sonni A. Distribution of small bowel tumors. Cancer Lett 1977;3:83.
34a. Pollard M, Luckert PM. Tumorigenic effect of direct and indirect acting chemical carcinogens in rats on a restricted diet. J Natl Cancer Inst 1985;74:1347.
35. Sellner F. Investigations on the significance of the adenoma-carcinoma sequence in the small bowel. Cancer 1990;66:702.
36. Perzin KH, Bridge MF. Adenomas of the small intestine: a clinicopathologic review of 51 cases and a study of their relationship to carcinoma. Cancer 1981;48:799.
37. Gahtan V, Nochomovitz LE, Robinson AM, et al. Gastroduodenal polyps in familial polyposis coli. Am Surg 1989;55:278.
38. Bulow S, Lauritsen KB, Johannsen A, et al. Gastroduodenal polyps in familial polyposis coli. Dis Colon Rectum 1985;28:90.
39. Jarvinen HJ, Sipponen P. Gastroduodenal polyps in familial adenomatosis and juvenile polyposis. Endoscopy 1986;18:230.
40. Iida M, Yao T, Watanabe H, et al. Natural history of duodenal lesions in Japanese patients with familial adenomatosis coli (Gardner's syndrome). Gastroenterology 1989;96:1301.
41. Domizio P, Talbot IC, Spigelman AD, et al. Upper gastrointestinal pathology in familial adenomatous polyposis: results from a prospective trial of 102 patients. J Clin Pathol 1990;43:738.
42. Kurtz RC, Sternberg SS, Miller HH, Decosse JJ. Upper gastrointestinal neoplasia in familial polyposis. Dig Dis Sci 1987;32:459.
43. Hawker PC, Glyde SN, Thompson H, Allan RN. Adenocarcinoma of the small intestine complicating Crohn's disease. Gut 1982;23:188.
44. Frank JD, Shorey BA. Adenocarcinoma of the small bowel as a complication of Crohn's disease. Gut 1973;14:120.
45. Morowitz DA, Block GE, Kirsner JB. Adenocarcinoma of the ileum complicating chronic regional enteritis. Gastroenterology 1968;55:397.
46. Michelassi F, Testa G, Pomidor WJ, et al. Adenocarcinoma complicating Crohn's disease. Dis Colon Rectum 1993;36:654.
47. Petras RE, Mir-Madjlessi SH, Farmer RG. Crohn's disease and intestinal carcinoma: a report of 11 cases with emphasis on associated epithelial dysplasia. Gastroenterology 1987;93:1307.
48. Simpson S, Traube J, Riddell RH. The histologic appearance of dysplasia (precarcinomatous change) in Crohn's disease of the small and large intestine. Gastroenterology 1981;81:492.
49. Hyams JS, Goldman H, Katz AJ. Differentiating small bowel Crohn's disease from lymphoma: role of rectal biopsy. Gastroenterology 1980;79:340.
50. Ribeiro MB, Greenstein AJ, Heiman TM, et al. Adenocarcinoma of the small intestine in Crohn's disease. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1991;173:343.
51. Bonacina E, Barbano PR, Barberis M, Rossi MV. Primary adenocarcinoma of terminal ileum with clinical and gross morphologic features simulating Crohn's disease: a case report. Tumori
1985;71:513.
52. Keller RJ, Hertz I, Zimmerman M, Geller S. Carcinoma of the ileum simulating Crohn disease. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1982;138:151.
53. Adler SN, Lyon DT, Sullivan PD. Adenocarcinoma of the small bowel clinical features, similarity to regional enteritis, and analysis of 338 documented cases. Am J Gastroenterol 1982;77:326.
54. Swinson CM, Coles EC, Slavin G, Booth CC. Coeliac disease and malignancy. Lancet 1983;1:111.
55. Holmes GKT, Dunn GI, Cockel R, Brookes VS. Adenocarcinoma of the upper small bowel complicating coeliac disease. Gut 1980;21:1010.
56. Trier JS. Celiac sprue. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1709.
57. Domizio P, Owen RA, Shepherd NA, et al. Primary lymphoma of the small intestine: a clinicopathological study of 119 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1993;17:429.
58. Giardiello FM, Welsh SB, Hamilton SD, et al. Increased risk of cancer in the Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. N Engl J Med 1987;316:1511.
59. Konishi F, Wyse NE, Muto T, et al. Peutz-Jeghers polyposis associated with carcinoma of the digestive organs. Dis Colon Rectum 1989;30:790.
60. Spigelman AD, Murday V, Phillips RKS. Cancer and the Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Gut 1990;30:1588.
61. Linos DA, Dozois RR, Dahlin DC, Bartholomew LG. Does Peutz-Jeghers syndrome predispose gastrointestinal malignancy? Arch Surg 1981;116:1182.
62. Hochberg FH, Dasilva AB, Galdabini J, Richardson EP. Gastrointestinal involvement in von Recklinghausen's neurofibromatosis. Neurology 1974;24:1144.
63. Rutgeerts P, Hendrick H, Geboes K, et al. Involvement of the upper digestive tract by systemic neurofibromatosis. Gastrointest Endosc 1981;27:22.
64. Williams SJ, Lucas RJ, McCaughey RS. Paraganglioma of the duodenum: a case report. Surgery 1980;87:454.
65. Kheir SM, Halpern NB. Paraganglioma of the duodenum in association with congenital neurofibromatosis. Cancer 1984;53:2491.
66. Inai K, Kobuke T, Yonehara S, Tokuoka S. Duodenal gangliocytic paraganglioma with lymph node metastasis in a 17-year-old boy. Cancer 1989;63:2540.
67. Kingston RD. Neurofibromatosis and small bowel adenocarcinoma: an unrecognized association. Gut 1988;29:134.
68. Wheeler MH, Curley IR, Williams ED. The association of neurofibromatosis pheochromocytoma, and somatostatin-rich duodenal carcinoid tumor. Surgery 1986;100:1163.
69. Adkins RB, Davies J. Gross and microscopic anatomy of the stomach and small intestine. In: Scott HW, Sawyers JL, eds. Surgery of the stomach, duodenum, and small intestine. Oxford:
Blackwell Scientific, 1987:45.
70. Silberman H, Crichlow RW, Caplan HS. Neoplasms of the small bowel. Am Surg 1974;180:157.
71. Treadwell TA, White R. Primary tumors of the small bowel. Am J Surg 1975;130:749.
72. Norberg K, Emas S. Primary tumors of the small intestine. Am J Surg 1981;142:569.
73. Ahlman H, Kjellstrom T. Clinically diagnosed small intestinal tumors in an urban Swedish area. Acta Chir Scand 1981;147:371.
74. Waterhouse G, Skudlarick J, Adkins RB. A clinical review of small bowel neoplasms. South Med J 1981;74:1202.
75. Gupta S. Primary tumors of the small bowel: a clinicopathological study of 58 cases. J Surg Oncol 1982;20:161.
76. Desa L, Bridger F, Grace PA, Krausz T, Spencer J. Primary jejunoileal tumors: a review of 45 cases. World J Surg 1991;15:81.
77. Croom RD, Newsome JF. Tumors of the small intestine. Am Surg 1975;41:160.
78. Freund H, Lavi A, Pfefferman R, Durst AL. Primary neoplasms of the small bowel. Am J Surg 1978;135:757.
79. Zollinger RM, Sternfeld W, Schreiber H. Primary neoplasms of the small intestine. Am J Surg 1986;151:654.

80. Maglinte DDT, O'Connor K, Bessette J, et al. The role of the physician in the late diagnosis of primary malignant tumors of the small intestine. Am J Gastroenterol 1991;86:304.
81. Awrich AE, Irish CE, Vetto RM, Fletcher WS. A twenty-five year experience with primary malignant tumors of the small intestine. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1980;151:9.
82. Brophy C, Cahow CE. Primary small bowel malignant tumors. Unrecognized until emergent laparotomy. Am Surg 1989;55:408.
83. Ashley SW, Wells SA. Tumors of the small intestine. Semin Oncol 1988;15:116.
84. Ekberg O, Ekholm S. Radiography in primary tumors of the small bowel. Acta Radiol Diagn (Stockh) 1980;21:79.
85. Bessette J, Maglinte DDT, Kelvin FM, Chernish SM. Primary malignant tumors in the small bowel: a comparison of the small-bowel enema and conventional follow-through examination. AJR
Am J Roentgenol 1989;153:741.
86. Maglinte DDT, Hall R, Miller RE, et al. Detection of surgical lesions of the small bowel by enteroclysis. Am J Surg 1984;147:225.
87. Cohen ME, Barkin JS. Enteroscopy and enteroclysis: the combined procedure. Am J Gastroenterol 1989;84:1413.
88. Schnyder PA, Candardjis G. CT detection of benign and malignant abnormalities of the small bowel. Eur J Radiol 1983;3:33.
89. Laurent F, Raynaud M, Biset JM, et al. Diagnosis and categorization of small bowel neoplasms: role of computed tomography. Gastrointest Radiol 1991;16:115.
90. James S, Balfe DM, Lee JKT, Picus D. Small bowel disease: categorization by CT examination. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1987;148:863.
91. Dudiak KM, Johnson CD, Stephens DH. Primary tumors of the small intestine: CT evaluation. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1989;152:995.
92. Scatairge JC, Allen HA, Fishman EK. Computed tomography of the small bowel. Semin Ultrasound CT MR 1987;8:403.
93. Siegel MJ, Evans SJ, Balfe DM. Small bowel disease in children: diagnosis with CT. Radiology 1988;169:127.
94. Alfidi RJ, Esselstyn CD, Tarar R, et al. Recognition and angio-surgical detection of arteriovenous malformations of the bowel. Ann Surg 1971;174:573.
95. Oliver GC, Rubin RJ, Park YH, Ashton JK. Preoperative localization of intermittently bleeding small intestinal tumors using Tc-99m labeled red blood cell scanning report of two cases. Dis
Colon Rectum 1987;30:715.
96. Bowden TA. Endoscopy of the small intestine. Surg Clin North Am 1989;69:1237.
97. Foutch PG, Sanowski RA, Kelly S. Endoscopy: a method for detection of small bowel tumors. Am J Gastroenterol 1985;80:887.
98. Halphen M, Najjar T, Jaafoura H, et al. Diagnostic value of upper intestinal fiber endoscopy in primary small intestinal lymphoma. Cancer 1986;58:2140.
99. Gilbert DA, Buelow RG, Chung RSK, et al. Status evaluation: enteroscopy. Gastrointest Endosc 1991;37:673.
100. Iida M, Yao T, Ohsato K, et al. Diagnostic value of intraoperative fiberscopy for small-intestinal polyps in familial adenomatosis coli. Endoscopy 1980;12:161.
101. Frucht J, Norton JA, London JF, et al. Detection of duodenal gastrinomas by operative endoscopic transillumination. Gastroenterology 1990;99:1622.
102. Estrin HM, Farhy DC, Ament AA, Yang P. Ileoscopic diagnosis of malignant lymphoma of the small bowel in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Gastrointest Endosc 1987;33:390.
103. Wilson JM, Melvin DB, Gray G, Thorbjornson B. Benign small bowel tumors. Ann Surg 1975;181:247.
104. Skandalakis JE, Gray SW. Smooth muscle tumors of the small intestine. In: Smooth muscle tumors of the alimentary tract: leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas, a review of 2525 cases .
Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas Publisher, 1962:112.
105. Delpy JC, Bruneton JN, Drouillard J, Leconte P. Non-vaterian duodenal adenomas: report of 24 cases and review of the literature. Gastrointest Radiol 1983;8:135.
106. Kutin ND, Ranson JHC, Gouge TH, Localio SA. Villous tumors of the duodenum. Ann Surg 1975;181:164.
107. Everett GD, Shirazi SS, Mitros FA. Villous tumors of the duodenum. Am J Gastroenterol 1981;75:376.
108. Schulten MF, Oyasu R, Beal JM. Villous adenoma of the duodenum: a case report and review of the literature. Am J Surg 1976;132:90.
109. Reddy RR, Schuman BM, Priest RJ. Duodenal polyps: diagnosis and management. J Clin Gastroenterol 1981;3:139.
110. Haglund U, Fork FT, Genell S, Rehnberg O. Villous adenomas in the duodenum. Br J Surg 1985;72:26.
111. Galandiuk S, Hermann RE, Jagelman DG, et al. Villous tumors of the duodenum. Ann Surg 1988;207:234.
112. Chappuis CW, Divincenti FC, Cohn I Jr. Villous tumors of the duodenum. Ann Surg 1989;209:593.
113. Bjork KJ, Davis CJ, Nagorney DM, Mucha P Jr. Duodenal villous tumors. Arch Surg 1990;125:961.
114. Steinberg LS, Shieber W. Villous adenomas of the small intestine. Surgery 1972;71:423.
115. Dormandy TL. Gastrointestinal polyposis with mucocutaneous pigmentation (Peutz-Jeghers syndrome). N Engl J Med 1957;256:1186.
116. Dormandy TL. Gastrointestinal polyposis with mucocutaneous pigmentation (Peutz-Jeghers syndrome). N Engl J Med 1957;256:1093.
117. Bilton JL, Riahl M. Hemangioma of the small intestine. Am J Gastroenterol 1967;48:120.
118. Sivula A. Intestinal hemangioma. Acta Chir Scand 1966;131:485.
119. Brzezinski W, Bailey RJ, Besney M, Turner G. Small-bowel lipoma: an uncommon cause of obstruction. Can J Surg 1990;33:423.
120. Climie ARW, Wylin RF. Small-intestinal lipomatosis. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1981;105:40.
121. Silverman L, Waugh JM, Huizenga KA, Harrison EG. Large adenomatous polyp of Brunner's glands. Am J Clin Pathol 1961;36:438.
122. DeSilva S, Chandrasoma P. Giant duodenal hematoma consisting mainly of Brunner's glands. Am J Surg 1977;133:240.
123. Maglinte DDT, Mayes SL, Ng AC, Pickett RD. Brunner's gland adenoma: diagnostic considerations. J Clin Gastroenterol 1982;4:127.
124. Shimer GR, Helwig EB. Inflammatory fibroid polyps of the intestine. Am J Clin Pathol 1984;81:708.
125. Manning RJ, Lewis C. Inflammatory ileal polyps in Crohn's disease presenting as refractory iron deficiency anemia. Gastrointest Endosc 1986;32:122.
126. Ott DJ, Wu WC, Shiflett DW, Pennell TC. Inflammatory fibroid polyp of the duodenum. Am J Gastroenterol 1980;73:62.
127. Assarian GS, Sundareson A. Inflammatory fibroid polyp of the ileum. Hum Pathol 1985;16:311.
128. Ouriel K, Adams J. Adenocarcinoma of the small intestine. Am J Surg 1984;147:66.
129. Lai ECS, Doty JE, Irving C, Tompkins RK. Primary adenocarcinoma of the duodenum: analysis survival. World J Surg 1988;12:695.
130. Kerremans RP, Lerut J, Penninck FM. Primary malignant duodenal tumors. Ann Surg 1979;190:179.
131. Spira IA, Ghazi A, Wolff WI. Primary adenocarcinoma of the duodenum. Cancer 1977;39:1721.
132. Joesting DR, Beart RW, VanHeerden JA, Weiland LH. Improving survival in adenocarcinoma of the duodenum. Am J Surg 1981;141:228.
133. Awlmark A, Andersson A, Lasson A. Primary carcinoma of the duodenum. Ann Surg 1980;191:13.
134. Chernish SM, Miller RE, Rosenak B, Scholz NE. Hypotonic duodenography with the use of glucagon. Gastroenterology 1972;62:392.
135. Brennan MF. Duodenal cancer. Asian J Surg 1990;13:204.
136. Grace PA, Pitt HA, Tompkins RK, et al. Decreased morbidity and mortality after pancreatoduodenectomy. Am J Surg 1986;151:141.
137. Crist DW, Sitzmann JV, Cameron JL. Improved hospital morbidity, mortality, and survival after the Whipple procedure. Ann Surg 1987;206:358.
138. O'Rourke MGE, Lancashire RP, Vattoune JR. Lymphoma of the small intestine. Aust N Z J Surg 1986;56:351.
139. Morgan DF, Busuttil RW. Primary adenocarcinoma of the small intestine. Am J Surg 1977;134:331.
140. Lioe TF, Biggart JD. Primary adenocarcinoma of the jejunum and ileum: clinicopathological review of 25 cases. J Clin Pathol 1990;43:533.
141. Koretz MJ, Graham R. Primary adenocarcinoma of the jejunum. Am Surg 1989;55:539.
142. Jigyasu D, Bedikian AY, Stroehlein JR. Chemotherapy for primary adenocarcinoma of the small bowel. Cancer 1984;53:23.
143. Strodel WE, Talpos G, Eckhauser F, Thompson N. Surgical therapy for small-bowel carcinoid tumors. Arch Surg 1983;118:391.
144. Peck JJ, Shields AB, Boyden AM, et al. Carcinoid tumors of the ileum. Am J Surg 1983;146:124.
145. Sjoblom SM. Clinical presentation and prognosis of gastrointestinal carcinoid tumors. Scand J Gastroenterol 1988;23:779.
146. Makridis C, Oberg K, Juhlin C, et al. Surgical treatment of mid-gut carcinoid tumors. World J Surg 1990;14:377.
147. Moertel CG. Treatment of the carcinoid tumor and the malignant carcinoid syndrome. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:727.
148. Olney JR, Urdaneta LF, Al-Jurf AS, et al. Carcinoid tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. Am Surg 1985;51:37.
149. Tilson MD. Carcinoid syndrome. Surg Clin North Am 1974;54:409.
150. Vinich AI, McLeod MK, Fig LM, et al. Clinical features, diagnosis, and localization of carcinoid tumors and their management. Gastrointest Clin North Am 1989;18:865.
151. Thompson GB, VanHeerden JA, Martin JK Jr, et al. Carcinoid tumors of the gastrointestinal tract: presentation, management and prognosis. Surgery 1985;98:1054.
152. Woodard PK, Feldman JM, Paine SS, Baker ME. Midgut carcinoid tumors: CT findings and biochemical profiles. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1995;19:400.
153. Woods HF, Bax NDS, Smith JAR. Small bowel carcinoid tumors. World J Surg 1985;9:921.
154. Dawes L, Schulte WJ, Condon RE. Carcinoid tumors. Arch Surg 1984;119:375.
155. Nwiloh JO, Pillarisetty S, Moscovic EA, Freeman HP. Carcinoid tumors. J Surg Oncol 1990;45:261.
156. O'Rourke MGE, Lancashire RP, Vattoune JR. Carcinoid of the small intestine. Aust N Z J Surg 1986;56:405.
157. Moertel CG, Sauer WG, Dockerty MB, Baggenstoss AH. Life history of the carcinoid tumor of the small intestine. Cancer 1961;14:901.
158. Martin JK Jr, Moertel CG, Adson MA, Schutt AJ. Surgical treatment of functioning metastatic carcinoid tumors. Arch Surg 1983;118:537.
159. Godwin JD. Carcinoid tumors: an analysis of 2837 cases. Cancer 1975;36:560.
160. Johnson LA, Lavin P, Moertel CG, et al. Carcinoids: the association of histologic growth pattern and survival. Cancer 1983;51:882.
161. Nobin AP, Erhardt K, Auer G, et al. Nuclear DNA patterns and survival in metastasizing ileal carcinoids. World J Surg 1987;11:372.
162. Tsushima K, Nagorney DM, Weiland LH, Lieber MM. The relationship of flow cytometric DNA analysis and clinicopathology in small-intestinal carcinoids. Surgery 1989;105:366.
163. Rosenfelt F, Rosenberg SA. Diffuse histiocytic lymphoma presenting with gastrointestinal tract lesions: the Stanford experience. Cancer 1980;45:2188.
164. Turowski GA, Basson MD. Primary malignant lymphoma of the intestine. Am J Surg 1995;169:433.
165. Dawson IM, Cornes JS, Morson BC. Primary malignant lymphoid tumors of the intestinal tract: report of 37 cases with a study of factors influencing prognosis. Br J Surg 1961;40:80.
166. Cooper BT, Read AE. Small intestinal lymphoma. World J Surg 1985;9:930.
167. Sweetenhaus JW, Mead GM, Wright DH, et al. Involvement of the ileocaecal region by non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in adults: clinical features and results of treatment. Br J Cancer 1989;60:366.
168. Carbone PP, Kaplan HS, Mussoff K, et al. Report of the committee on Hodgkin's disease staging classification. Cancer Res 1971;31:1860.
169. Blackledge G, Bush H, Dodge OG, Crowther D. A study of gastrointestinal lymphoma. Clin Oncol 1979;5:209.
170. Contreary K, Nance FC, Becker WF. Primary lymphoma of the gastrointestinal tract. Ann Surg 1980;191:593.
171. Auger MJ, Allan NC. Primary ileocecal lymphoma. Cancer 1990;65:358.
172. Gray GM, Rosenberg SA, Cooper AD, et al. Lymphomas involving the gastrointestinal tract. Gastroenterology 1982;82:143.
173. Rao AR, Kagan AR, Potyk D, et al. Management of gastrointestinal lymphoma. Am J Clin Oncol 1984;7:213.
174. ReMine SG, Braasch JW. Gastric and small bowel lymphoma. Surg Clin North Am 1986;66:713.
175. Sartoris DJ, Harell GS, Anderson MF, Zboralske FF. Small bowel lymphoma and regional enteritis: radiographic similarities. Radiology 1984;152:291.
176. Morgan DR, Holgate CS, Dixon MF, Bird CC. Primary small intestinal lymphoma: a study of 39 cases. J Pathol 1985;147:211.
177. Weingrad DN, Decosse JJ, Sherlock P, et al. Primary gastrointestinal lymphoma: a 30-year review. Cancer 1982;49:1258.
178. Shepherd FA, Evans WK, Kutas G, et al. Chemotherapy following surgery for stages IE and IIE non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the gastrointestinal tract. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:253.
179. Steward WP, Harris M, Wagstaff J, et al. A prospective study of the treatment of high grade histology non-Hodgkin's lymphoma involving the gastrointestinal tract. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol
1985;21:1195.
180. Aozasa K, Ueda T, Kurata A, et al. Prognostic value of histologic and clinical factors in 56 patients with gastrointestinal lymphomas. Cancer 1988;61:309.
181. Li G, Ouyang Q, Liu K, et al. Primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the intestine: a morphological, immunohistochemical and clinical study of 31 Chinese cases. Histopathology 1994;25:113.
182. Skudder PA Jr, Schwartz SI. Primary lymphoma of the gastrointestinal tract. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1985;160:5.
183. Chandran RR, Hemanth E, Chaturvedi HK. Primary gastrointestinal lymphoma: 30-year experience at the Cancer Institute, Madras, India. J Surg Oncol 1995;60:41.
184. Fleming ID, Turk PS, Murphy SB, et al. Surgical implications of primary gastrointestinal lymphoma of childhood. Arch Surg 1990;125:252.

185. Al-Bahrani ZR, Al-Mondhiry H, Bakir F, Al-Saleem T. Clinical and pathologic subtypes of primary intestinal lymphoma. Cancer 1983;52:1666.
186. Haghigi P, Nasr K. Primary upper small intestinal lymphoma (so-called Mediterranean lymphoma). Pathol Annu 1973;8:231.
187. El Saghir NS, Jessen K, Mass RE, et al. Combination chemotherapy for primary small intestinal lymphoma of the Middle East. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1989;5:851.
188. El Saghir NS. Combination chemotherapy with tetracycline and aggressive supportive care for immunoproliferative small intestinal disease lymphoma [Letter]. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:794.
189. Murray A, Cuevas EC, Jones DB, Wright DH. Study of the immunohistochemistry and T cell clonality of enteropathy-associated T cell lymphoma. Am J Pathol 1995;146:509.
190. Monco A, Sartori C. Hodgkin's primary lymphoma of the small intestine. Haematologica 1984;69:568.
191. Antonioli DA. Gastrointestinal autonomic nerve tumors: expanding the spectrum of gastrointestinal stromal tumors. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1989;113:831.
192. Herrera GA, Cerezo L, Jones JE, et al. Gastrointestinal autonomic nerve tumors: plexosarcomas. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1989;113:846.
193. Chiotasso PJP, Fazio VW. Prognostic factors of 28 leiomyosarcomas of the small intestine. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1982;155:197.
194. Shiu MH, Farr GH, Egeli RA, et al. Myosarcomas of the small and large intestine: a clinicopathological study. J Surg Oncol 1983;24:67.
195. McGrath PC, Neifeld JP, Lawrence W, et al. Gastrointestinal sarcomas: analysis of prognostic factors. Ann Surg 1987;206:706.
196. Kimura H, Yonemura Y, Kadoya N, et al. Prognostic factors in primary gastrointestinal leiomyosarcoma: a retrospective study. World J Surg 1991;15:771.
197. Dougherty MJ, Compton C, Talbert M, Wood WJ. Sarcomas of the gastrointestinal tract: separation into favorable and unfavorable prognostic groups by mitotic count. Ann Surg 1991;214:569.
198. Conlon KC, Casper ES, Brennan MF. Primary gastrointestinal sarcomas: analysis of prognostic variables. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:26.
199. Horowitz J, Spellman JE, Driscoll DL, et al. An institutional review of sarcomas of the large and small intestine. J Am Coll Surg 1995;180:465.
200. Chou FF, Eng HL, Sheen-Chen SM. Smooth muscle tumors of the gastrointestinal tract: analysis of prognostic factors. Surgery 1996;119:171.
201. Shiu MH, Brennan MF. Soft tissue sarcoma of the gastrointestinal tract. In: Shiu MH, Brennan MF, eds. Surgical management of soft tissue sarcomas. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1989:170.
202. Ihde JK, Coit DG. Melanoma metastatic to the stomach, small bowel and colon. Am J Surg 1991;162:208.
203. McNeill PM, Wagman LD, Neifeld JP. Small bowel metastases from primary carcinoma of the lung. Cancer 1987;59:1486.
204. Leidich RB, Rudolf LE. Small bowel perforation secondary to metastatic lung carcinoma. Ann Surg 1981;193:67.
205. Koos L, Field RE. Metastatic carcinoma of breast simulating Crohn's disease. Int Surg 1980;65:359.
206. Nyberg B, Sonnenfeld T. Metastatic breast carcinoma causing intestinal obstruction. Acta Chir Scand Suppl 1986;530:95.
207. Farmer RG, Hawk WA. Metastatic tumors of the small bowel. Gastroenterology 1964;47:496.
208. Ngan H. Involvement of the duodenum by metastases from tumours of the genital tract. Br J Radiol 1970;43:701.
209. Haynes IG, Wolverson RL, O'Brien JM. Small bowel intussusception due to metastatic renal carcinoma. Br J Urol 1986;58:460.
210. Lawson LJ, Holt LP, Rooke HWP. Recurrent duodenal haemorrhage from renal carcinoma. Br J Urol 1966;38:133.
211. Phillips DL, Benner KG, Keefe EB, Traweek ST. Isolated metastasis to small bowel from anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. J Clin Gastroenterol 1987;9:563.
212. Naunton Morgan TC, Henderson RG. Small bowel metastases from a Merkel cell tumor. Br J Radiol 1985;58:1212.
213. Yang PM, Sheu JC, Yang TH, et al. Metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma to the jejunum manifested by occult gastrointestinal bleeding. Am J Gastroenterol 1987;82:165.
214. Reintgen DS, Thompson W, Garbutt J, Seigler HF. Radiologic, endoscopic and surgical consideration of malignant melanoma metastatic to the small intestine. Curr Surg 1984;41:87.
215. Caputy G, Donohue JH, Goellner JH, Ilstrup DM. Metastatic melanoma of the gastrointestinal tract: the results of surgical management. Arch Surg 1991;126:1353.
216. Branum GD, Seigler HF. Role of surgical intervention in the management of intestinal metastases from malignant melanoma. Am J Surg 1991;162:428.
217. Wilson BG, Anderson JR. Malignant melanoma involving the small bowel. Postgrad Med J 1986;62:355.
218. Ricaniadis N, Konstadoulakis MM, Walsh D, Karakousis CP. Gastrointestinal metastases from malignant melanoma. Surg Oncol 1995;4:105.
219. Mittal VK, Bodzin JH. Primary malignant tumors of the small bowel. Am J Surg 1980;140:396.
220. Giuliani A, Caporale A, Teneriello F, et al. Primary tumors of the small intestine. Int Surg 1985:331.
221. Matsuo S, Eto T, Tsunoda T, et al. Small bowel tumors: an analysis of tumor-like lesions, benign and malignant neoplasms. Eur J Surg Oncol 1994;20:47.
222. Lillemoe K, Imbembo AL. Malignant neoplasms of the duodenum. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1980;150:822.
223. Cohen JR, Kuchta N, Geller N, et al. Pancreaticoduodenectomy. Ann Surg 1982;195:608.
224. Herter FP, Cooperman AM, Ahinorn TN, Antinori C. Surgical experience with pancreatic and periampullary cancer. Ann Surg 1982;195:274.
225. Kellum JM, Clark J, Miller HH. Pancreatoduodenectomy for resectable malignant periampullary tumors. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1983;157:362.
226. Gaddy M, Max MH. Carcinoma of the duodenum. South Med J 1985;78:150.
227. Jones BA, Langer B, Taylor BR, Girotti M. Periampullary tumors: which ones should be resected? Am J Surg 1985;149:46.
228. Tarazi RY, Hermann RE, Vogt DP, et al. Results of surgical treatment of periampullary tumors: a thirty-five-year experience. Surgery 1986;100:716.
229. Gonzalez CD, Evans EC. Primary adenocarcinoma of the duodenum. Am Surg 1987;53:174.
230. Sarma DP, Weilbaecher TG. Adenocarcinoma of the duodenum. J Surg Oncol 1987;34:262.
231. Michelassi F, Erroi F, Dawson PJ, et al. Experience with 647 consecutive tumors of the duodenum, ampulla, head of the pancreas, and distal common bile duct. Ann Surg 1989;210:544.
232. Lanzafame RJ, Long JE, Hinshaw JR. Primary cancer of the small bowel. N Y State J Med 1982;82:1325.
233. Bauer RL, Palmer ML, Bauer AM, et al. Adenocarcinoma of the small intestine: 21 year review of diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis. Ann Surg Oncol 1994;1:183.
234. Zeitels J, Naunheim K, Kaplan EL, Straus F. Carcinoid tumors: a 37 year experience. Arch Surg 1982;117:732.
235. Dragosics B, Bauer P, Radaszkiewicz T. Primary gastrointestinal non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a retrospective clinicopathologic study of 150 cases. Cancer 1985;55:1060.
236. Conlon KC, Casper ES, Brennan MF. Primary gastrointestinal sarcomas: analysis of prognostic variables. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:26.
237. Horowitz J, Spellman JE, Driscoll DL, et al. An institutional review of sarcomas of the large and small intestine. J Am Coll Surg 1995;180:465.

SECTION 33.7 Cancer of the Colon
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 33.7
Cancer of the Colon
JOHN M. SKIBBER
BRUCE D. MINSKY
PAULO M. HOFF
Introduction
Anatomy
Gross Anatomy
Vascular Supply
Lymphatic Drainage
Epidemiology
Etiology
Predisposition to Mutagen Effects
Fecal Mutagens
Meat Intake
Bile Acids
Vitamin and Mineral Intake
Fecal Ph
Primary Prevention
Dietary Factors
Alcohol and Tobacco Intake
Hormone Replacement In Women
Energy Intake, Physical Activity, and Obesity
Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs
Secondary Prevention
Clinical Risk Factor: Age
Genetic Risk Factors
Familial Polyposis Syndromes
Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colon Cancer
Inherited Colorectal Cancer In Ashkenazi Jews
Attenuated Familial Adenomatous Polyposis Syndrome
Family History of Colon Carcinoma or Polyps
Predisposing Medical Conditions
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Granulomatous Colitis
History of Colorectal Carcinoma or Polyps
Pelvic Irradiation
Noncancer Surgery
Screening
Screening of High-Risk Groups
Screening of Average-Risk Groups: the General Population
Diagnosis
Workup of a Symptomatic Patient
Pathologic Features
Spread of Colorectal Cancer
Local Spread
Lymphatic Extension
Hematogenous Spread
Implantation
Staging and Prognostic Features
Dukes' Classification
The Jass System
Tumor, Node, Metastasis (Tnm) Classification
Additional Prognostic Features
Treatment of Precancerous Conditions
Neoplastic Polyps (Adenomas)
Management of Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
Ulcerative Colitis
Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colon Cancer
Management of Potentially Curable Colon Cancer
Pretreatment Evaluation
Surgical Management of Carcinoma of the Colon
Specific Management Problems
Adjuvant Therapies
Treatment of Initially Advanced Colon Cancer
Synchronous Metastatic Disease
Locally Unresectable Colon Cancer
Follow-Up After Potentially Curative Treatment
Follow-Up Strategies
Extent of Disease Workup After Recurrence
Chemotherapy For Metastatic Colorectal Cancer
5-Fluorouracil
Oral Fluoropyrimidines
Irinotecan
Oxaliplatin
Raltitrexed
Summary
Miscellaneous Colorectal Tumors
Carcinoids
Sarcomas
Lymphoma
Small Cell Carcinoma
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Colorectal cancer represents a major public health problem, especially in developed countries. As such, it has attracted the efforts of researchers from a wide variety
of disciplines, including epidemiologists, molecular biologists, nutritionists, gastroenterologists, prevention experts, surgeons, radiation therapists, nurses, medical
oncologists, and outcomes researchers. This chapter section and Chapter 33.8 present some of the exciting information that has been generated about this common
malignancy.

ANATOMY

GROSS ANATOMY
The large bowel is divided into the colon and the rectum. Segments of both may be intraperitoneal or extraperitoneal. The treatment and pattern of recurrence of colon
and rectal cancer are affected by the location of the tumor in these organs and its relationship to the peritoneal cavity and surrounding structures. Treatment failures
in large bowel tumors involving extraperitoneal segments often occur because of a locoregional recurrence. 1 This is especially true of rectal cancers, which usually
have no serosal covering and are surrounded by fat, bone, nerves, blood vessels, and viscera within the confines of the pelvis. The colon has segments that are
largely intraperitoneal, and the relationship of certain aspects of the colon to the retroperitoneum and its structures are important factors in tumor spread. The cecum,
transverse colon, and sigmoid loop are the intraperitoneal portions of the colon. The ascending colon, descending colon, splenic and hepatic flexures, and beginning
and end of the sigmoid colon have their posterior surface in the retroperitoneum.
The large bowel is immediately recognized by its large diameter, haustra, and presence of appendices epiploicae and tenia coli. The tenia consist of condensations of
longitudinal muscle fibers starting near the base of the appendix and continuing throughout the abdominal colon to form a continuous longitudinal muscle coat in the
upper rectum. Haustra are outpouchings of bowel wall separated by folds that give a classic appearance on radiography or barium enema.
The first part of the colon is the cecum, with the appendix lying at the lower pole. The ascending colon lies on the right aspect of the retroperitoneum and extends up
to the hepatic flexure. The hepatic flexure lies near the gallbladder fossa and porta hepatis and overlies the lower portion of the right kidney and the duodenum. The
transverse colon is variable in its length. The splenic flexure lies just beneath the left diaphragm and abuts the hilum of the spleen and tail of the pancreas. The
descending colon lies along the left retroperitoneum and terminates in the sigmoid colon. The descending colon is of variable length. The sigmoid colon is the
narrowest portion of the large bowel, and it terminates at its junction with the upper rectum just below the sacral promontory.
VASCULAR SUPPLY
In general, the artery and vein supplying and draining each segment of the colon accompany each other in the mesocolon. The mesocolon contains vessels, lymph
nodes, nerves, and lymphatic trunks. The marginal artery and vein form an arcade along the mesocolic side of the colon. The presence of collateral circulation allows
performance of mesenteric resection to the level of the principal nodes found at the origin of the major vessels supplying segments of the colon.
The superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) contribute to the arterial supply of the colon ( Fig. 33.7-1).2 Shortly after its origin, the
SMA divides into the middle colic artery and the trunk of the SMA. The middle colic artery immediately forms two to three large arcades in the transverse mesocolon.
The SMA ileocolic arterial branches then extend from the SMA. The right colic artery arises as a separate branch from the SMA in 10.7% of cases. 3 The ileocolic
artery gives off a right colic artery to the upper ascending colon and forms an anastomosis with branches from the middle colic artery. The ileal branch of the ileocolic
artery gives off branches to the distal small bowel and cecum, whereas the colic branch supplies the ascending colon. An anastomosis occurs between the distal SMA
and the ileal branch of the ileocolic artery at the junction of the terminal ileum and cecum.

FIGURE 33.7-1. Anatomic segments and vascular supply to the colon and rectum. a, artery; Inf, inferior; Int, internal; L, left; mes, mesenteric; R, right; Sup, superior;
v, vein. (From Jones T, Shepard WC, A manual of surgical anatomy. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1945, with permission.)

The arterial supply to the left side of the colon comes from the IMA, which arises from the aorta. The IMA gives off the left colic artery. It also gives off three to four
sigmoidal arteries. The anastomosis between the vessels of the middle colic artery and those of the left colic artery occurs at the splenic flexure. This vessel parallels
the course of the colon between the middle colic artery and the branches of the IMA.This is critical in surgical reconstruction of the left colon and rectum.
The venous drainage of the colon parallels that of the arterial supply. The drainage of the superior and inferior mesenteric veins is to the portal vein. This enhances
the production of liver metastases. The venous drainage of the lower rectum is also into the vena cava and, therefore, rectal cancers are more likely to produce
isolated pulmonary metastases than are cancers at other large bowel sites.
LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
Curative surgical resection and staging of large bowel cancer requires resection of the lymph nodes that drain the primary tumor site. The relationship between the
blood vessels supplying the affected segment of colon and the draining lymphatics determines the extent of bowel resection to be done.
Lymphatic drainage of the large bowel follows its arterial supply in the mesocolon ( Fig. 33.7-2). Invasive carcinoma of the large bowel is identified by spread beyond
the muscularis mucosa into the submucosa, where it gains access to lymphatic channels through open junctionsformed by the destruction of lymphatic endothelial
cells. 4 The efferent lymphatic channels pass from the submucosa to the intramuscular and subserosal plexus of the bowel to the first tier of lymph nodes lying adjacent
to the large intestine and known as epicolic nodes. Paracolic nodes lie on the marginal vessels along the mesenteric side of the colon and are frequently involved in
metastases. Intermediate nodes are found along the major arterial branches of the SMA and IMA in the mesocolon. The principal nodes are found around the origin of
these vessels from the aorta, and they drain into retroperitoneal nodes.

FIGURE 33.7-2. For tumors that lie between two pedicles, lymphatic flow may drain in either or both directions. From a study of cleared specimens, it was possible to
determine the preferential route by the location of lymphatic metastases. The numbers signify the percentage of metastasizing carcinomas in the indicated locations
that have demonstrated positive nodes along a given vascular route. For example, node-positive tumors lying between the ileocolic and right colic arcades
metastasize along the ileocolic pedicle in 100% of cases and along the right colon in 12% of cases. (From Hertzer FP, Slanetz CA, Patterns and significance of
lymphatic spread from cancer of the colon and rectum. In: Weiss L, Gilbert HA, Ballon SC, eds, Lymphatic system metastasis. Boston: GK Hall, 1980:283, with

permission.)

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Colorectal cancers rank third in frequency in men and second in women. Male incidence rates, adjusted for age and race, appear greater than female rates for both
proximal and distal cancers [odds ratio (OR), 1.32 for proximal cancers and 1.68 for distal cancers, respectively]. The mortality rate is similar in men and women, the
ratio being 1.05:1.00. Colorectal cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer mortality because it has a better prognosis than more common cancers. A 5-year
survival rate of 61% is reported by the U.S. Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program, 6,7 as compared with a 5-year survival rate of 41% to 42% in
European and Indian registries. 5 Slightly lower survival rates of 32% and 38% are reported in China and developing countries, respectively. The lowest estimated
survival rate (30%) is in Eastern Europe.
The incidence of colorectal cancer is higher in developed countries than in developing countries. 7 Fewer than one-third of these cancers occur in developing
countries. The incidence rates vary tenfold. The lifetime risk of developing colorectal cancer in developed countries appears to be 4.6% in men and 3.2% in women.
Incidence rates are relatively low in Africa and Asia, except in Japan, which now has an incidence rate similar to that in Europe. Sharp increases in incidence have
been seen in Eastern Europe and Japan. 8 The geographic differences in colorectal cancer incidence appear to be attributable to differences in exposures that are
essentially dietary and environmentally imposed on a background of genetically determined susceptibility. Immigration from a low-incidence to a high-incidence
environment will increase a person's risk. 11 This has been most evident among immigrants to the United States from Japan.
Decreases in the incidence of colon and rectal cancers in the United States began in the mid-1980s and continue today. African American men have the highest
incidence rates of colon and rectal cancer among U.S. racial and ethnic groups. Differences in subsite distribution between African Americans and whites have been
noted. 9 African Americans have the highest mortality rates for colon and rectal cancer among ethnic and racial groups. Studies have postulated that these differences
are not due to biologic aggressiveness of the tumors but rather to access to care. 10 U.S. colorectal cancer mortality and incidence rates continue to decline, with
age-adjusted rates dropping to 16.8 and 42.7 per 100,000 population, respectively, in 1996. 11 An analysis of data from population studies that included the National
Cancer Institute's Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program reports that changes in the use of endoscopic polypectomy, dietary factors, energy intake,
physical activity, serum cholesterol, cigarette smoking, and obesity contributed to this fall in incidence after 1986. 12
Recent epidemiologic studies have suggested that the anatomic distribution of colorectal cancer may have undergone a distal to proximal shift over several decades.
The U.S. National Cancer Database has reported that cecal and ascending colon tumors increased in incidence from 33.9% to 36.1%, tumors of the transverse colon
increased from 15.8% to 17.2%, and tumors of the sigmoid colon decreased from 36.0% to 33.4%. These changes occurred between 1986 and 1992. 13 Reports
suggest that the apparent distal to proximal shift may be a result of preventive measures and improved diagnostic techniques used in developed, high-incidence
countries but that these have not had an impact in less developed nations. 14 In an analysis of improvements in survival over time by anatomic subsites of colon
cancer, it was found that 5-year survival rates improved significantly for patients with left colon and transverse colon cancers, owing to advances in treatment and
diagnostic techniques, whereas survival rates from right colon cancer did not improve. 15

ETIOLOGY
The essential element of the etiology of colorectal cancer is a process of genetic change in the epithelial cells of the colonic mucosa. 16 These changes are discussed
more fully in the Chapter 33.1 that address the molecular biology of this disease.
Epidemiologic factors have provided initial evidence about the specific factors that initiate the process of carcinogenesis in the large bowel mucosa. 17 Chief among
the factors that can initiate colorectal cancer development are a predisposition to mutagen effects, fecal mutagens, meat intake, bile acids, altered vitamin and mineral
intake, and fecal pH.
PREDISPOSITION TO MUTAGEN EFFECTS
There is an interaction between mutagen exposure and genetic constitution. Metabolic pathways may be altered by polymorphisms in genes responsible for
detoxifying mutagens.18 Protection from the effects of mutagen-induced DNA damage is achieved by a range of detoxification enzymes. Examples are reduced
glutathione S-transferase (GSH transferase), DT-diaphorase, and N-acetyltransferase. 19
Differences among individuals can account for susceptibility to mutagens from the diet. An example is a polymorphism in N-acetyltransferase, an enzyme that
catalyzes the formation of mutagenic products from heterocyclic amines, which can play a role in colorectal cancer development. 20 Heterocyclic amines are
substances formed in cooked meats. Differences in N-acetyltransferase activity classify individuals as slow or fast acetylators. Risk for colorectal cancer development
increases with the level of red meat consumption in fast acetylators but not in slow acetylators. 21
Individuals with risk factors for colorectal cancer have significantly lower levels of GSH transferase activity in their blood lymphocytes. 22 Strategies to enhance the
expression of detoxifying enzymes are available. 23
FECAL MUTAGENS
Mutagenic compounds such as fecapentaenes, 3-ketosteroids, and heterocyclic amines in the stool may be produced by the interaction of digestion and food
products. 24 These compounds produce reactive molecules that may form bulky adducts to DNA. One of the chief influences of diet is the production of fecal mutagens
by certain diets. Changes in the fecal microflora indicate that changes in diet may alter mutagenic activity by altering extracellular superoxide formation. 25 For
instance, a change in a lactovegetarian diet to a diet with increased fiber intake caused a dilution of mitogenic activity within the stool. 26 Other factors may moderate
the effects of fecal mutagens. Intake of antioxidants reduces the mutagenicity of compounds in the stool. Changes in intestinal transit time owing to fiber intake affects
the exposure of the mucosa to mutagens.
In addition to mutagenic compounds such as fecapentaenes, the presence of other products of digestion such as 3-ketosteroids, which are products of cholesterol
metabolism, may act as tumor promoters or initiators.
MEAT INTAKE
Armstrong and Doll (1975) described the high correlation of meat intake and mortality from colorectal cancer. Among the risk factors are the intake of red meats and
the compounds that result from cooking meats at high temperatures. 27 In a study of meat preparation, it was observed that the association between red meat and
colorectal cancer could be due to heterocyclic amines present in cooked meat. 28 This mechanism has been implicated in the high incidence of colorectal cancer in
New Zealand.29 The method of red meat preparation and frequency of intake can be correlated with the prevalence of distal colorectal adenomas. Subjects who ate
browned, fried red meat more than once per week had an OR of 2.2 for distal colorectal adenomas, as compared with those who ate lightly browned red meat one
time or less per week.30 In Western countries, fried meat is the main source of exposure to heterocyclic amines. Nurses who consumed the highest ratio of red meat to
white meat had a higher relative risk (RR) of colon cancer (OR 2.49, P<.001).31
BILE ACIDS
Normal bile acids that are related to the digestion of fat can induce intestinal mucosal hyperproliferation, which acts as a marker for neoplasia risk. 32 The presence of
bile acids correlates with fat consumption, which is a known risk factor for colorectal cancer. 33 Bile acids have been shown to activate AP-1, a transcription factor
associated with the promotion of neoplastic transformation in colonic cells. 34 They are also able to induce apoptosis, and variations in the epithelial apoptotic
response to bile acids may correlate with risk. 35 Cholecystectomy can result in high levels of bile acids in the cecum and ascending colon and appears to increase the

frequency of right-sided carcinoma. In a retrospective study of colorectal cancer patients, it was found that levels of the secondary bile acid deoxycholic acid were
higher than normal and that the ratio between deoxycholic acid and cholic acid may be an indicator of risk. 36
VITAMIN AND MINERAL INTAKE
Calcium can alter colonic mucosal proliferation by binding fatty acids and bile acids in the stool, resulting in insoluble complexes that are less likely to affect the
mucosa. It can also decrease proliferation of the mucosa directly. 37 These effects of calcium may be site-specific within the colon. 38 In a large study of U.S. health
professionals, the risk reduction from high calcium intake appeared modest after adjusting for confounding variables. 39 Two case-control studies suggest that any
protective effect of calcium may occur only at low levels of fat intake. 40 The National Polyp Prevention Trial indicated that supplemental calcium intake reduced
adenoma formation by 19%.41 A similar effect has been seen in patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC) syndrome. 38
In case-control studies, the use of multivitamins has been shown to reduce the risk of adenoma formation in high-risk patients. 42 In an update of the Nurses' Health
Study, Giovannucci et al. 43 found a reduced risk of colon cancer [OR, 0.25; confidence interval (CI), 0.13 to 0.51] after 15 years of use of folate-containing
multivitamins. The contribution of dietary folate appeared to be modest.
That folate is a potentially protective agent has been demonstrated also by other studies. Experimental tumor studies have shown that folate depletion increases the
risk of tumor formation and that it also reduces methyl group availability for DNA methylation. Individuals with different forms of the 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase gene may demonstrate different risks for colorectal cancer, which may account for differences in the effectiveness of folate supplementation on colorectal
cancer risk. 48 Administration of a folate agent may interact with alcohol consumption as a risk factor because demands for folate are raised by alcohol consumption. 49
Low folate intake has been implicated in increased colorectal cancer risk, especially when combined with alcohol and a low-protein diet. 50
Populations with increased vitamin D intake have been noted to be at reduced risk for colon carcinoma. 44 The effects of dihydroxyvitamin D3 on differentiation are
mediated through protein kinase C and its activation by dihydroxyvitamin D 3. Total vitamin D intake was inversely related to colorectal cancer incidence in the Nurses'
Health Study (RR, 0.33; CI, 0.16 to 0.70). 45
A reduced risk of colon cancer is associated with the use of vitamin C. 46 Antioxidants such as vitamin E have been given in conjunction with vitamins C and A in
studies indicating some protection against colorectal cancer risks. 47
There is a weak association between high iron exposure and colorectal polyps (OR, 1.5; CI, 1.0 to 2.3). 51 Low levels of selenium correlated with the presence of
adenomas, whereas increased levels were associated with reduced risk of adenomas (OR, 0.58; CI, 0.31 to 1.08). 52 Intervention trials have found a beneficial effect of
selenium supplementation.53
FECAL PH
Another aspect of the interaction between the intestinal milieu and the genome of the intestinal mucosa is the fact that alkaline environments in the stool support
higher concentrations of free bile acids and other potential carcinogens. 54 This pH may affect the solubility of bile acid and carcinogens and make them more
damaging to the DNA of the intestinal mucosal cells. Epidemiologic studies show that higher rates of colon carcinoma are found in subjects with a higher stool pH. 55

PRIMARY PREVENTION
Primary prevention of colorectal carcinoma is defined as the identification and eradication of etiologic factors responsible for this disease. Dietary factors, energy
intake, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) use, and such lifestyle factors as hormone use in women, tobacco and alcohol use, parity, and exercise, will be
discussed. These issues are addressed extensively in Chapter 22, Chapter 23.1, Chapter 23.2, Chapter 23.3, Chapter 23.4, Chapter 23.5, Chapter 23.6, and Chapter
23.7.
DIETARY FACTORS
Fiber
The term fiber refers to a diverse group of complex carbohydrates. Numerous epidemiologic studies suggest that fiber exerts a protective effect, whereas other
epidemiologic studies report no protective activity of fiber in relation to colorectal carcinoma. 56 High fiber intake may be associated with other dietary habits that also
decrease cancer risk. 57
Certain types of fiber appear to be more effective than others in reducing the risk of carcinogenesis. Cellulose and bran are specific examples of fibers that have
demonstrated increased effectiveness. 58 In an epidemiologic study of 16,448 health professionals, a trend toward a reduced risk of distal colorectal adenomas from
fruit fiber ingestion but not from cereals or vegetables was seen. When data from this study were adjusted for incidents of polyp development, the risk reduction
associated with soluble fiber intake was stronger (RR, 0.27; CI, 0.11 to 0.66). 59 Fiber may not reduce rectal cancer risk as much as it reduces colon cancer risk. 59
Intervention trials involving fiber are appealing because of fiber's ready availability and low cost. 60 However, the effect of fiber may not be independent of meat
intake. 31 A recent long-term analysis of this issue failed to demonstrate a significant reduction in risk for colorectal cancer or adenomas (OR, 0.95; CI, 0.73 to 1.25)
attributable to dietary fiber. 56
Dietary Fat
Epidemiologic data suggest a direct relationship between total fat intake and increased cancer risk in the colon and rectum, and migrant studies show that changes
toward a low-fat, low-fiber Western diet result in a rise in colorectal cancer incidence. 61 Type of dietary fat may be important in the risk for colorectal cancer, as
studies appear to link animal fat and red meat to colon cancer risk but do not support an association between colon cancer and vegetable fat. 31 However, fish oils may
have protective effects. 62 Elevated levels of serum triglycerides have been associated with a higher risk of adenomatous polyps (OR, 1.5). 63 Interestingly, lower
cholesterol levels have been demonstrated in patients in whom colorectal cancer is diagnosed. 64
ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO INTAKE
Daily alcohol intake has been associated with a twofold increase in colon carcinoma. 65 A more moderate risk is likely when a number of studies are considered. 66
Genetic polymorphisms in metabolic pathways may modify this risk. In addition, current and past smoking habits are independent factors that increase risk. Among
Japanese men and women, it was found that long-term smoking conveyed a 1.6 to 4.54 RR for adenoma formation. 67
HORMONE REPLACEMENT IN WOMEN
In a review of 59,002 postmenopausal participants in the Nurses' Health Study, self-reported data were used to study the relationship between postmenopausal
hormone therapy and colorectal carcinomas and adenomas. 68 Current use of postmenopausal hormones was associated with decreased risk of colorectal cancer (RR,
0.65; CI, 0.50 to 0.83). The protective effect of hormonal replacement disappeared within 5 years after hormone use was discontinued. Similar protective effects were
noted in a Minnesota study. 69,70 In the Nurses' Health Study, oral contraceptive use has been implicated in reducing the risk of colorectal cancer development by 40%
(OR, 0.60; CI, 0.40 to 0.89). 71 A higher parity was found to increase risk in those women with a family history of colorectal cancer. 72
ENERGY INTAKE, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, AND OBESITY
Multiple studies have correlated factors such as energy intake, physical activity, and other lifestyle factors with colorectal cancer risk. 73 In animal models, restricted
energy intake has reduced the development of colonic tumors. 74 The interaction between obesity and reduced physical activity was demonstrated by an alteration in

intestinal prostaglandin activity, which can correlate with colon cancer risk. 75 The Nurses' Health Study showed an inverse relationship between physical activity and
adenomas. In this same study, obesity was associated with an increased risk. 76 A similar protective effect from physical activity in men was noted in a
population-based cohort study conducted in Norway. 77
Excessive weight and abdominal obesity were found to be risk indicators in men and women. 78 An exploration of the relationship among obesity, energy intake, and
insulin as a growth factor indicated an increased risk of colorectal cancer in the face of a high fasting glucose level, high insulin levels, and obesity. 79,80 Epidemiologic
studies in the United States and Italy have shown a similar association between diabetes mellitus and colorectal cancer risk. 81
NONSTEROIDAL ANTIINFLAMMATORY DRUGS
Experimental, epidemiologic, and intervention trails address the role of aspirin and NSAIDs in colorectal cancer biology. 82 Human and experimental animal colon
tumors contain increased amounts of prostaglandin E 2, and this compound is thought to participate in colon cancer carcinogenesis. 83 Formation of prostaglandins
requires the action of cyclooxygenase (COX), which exists in two isoforms. COX-2 appears to be responsible for increased prostaglandin E 2 in response to growth
factors in human and animal colonic tumors. 84 COX-2 inhibition, therefore, may play a role in colon cancer prevention.
Aspirin, a relatively nonspecific COX-2 inhibitor, has been associated with lower-than-expected rates of colorectal adenomas and carcinomas in epidemiologic
studies. 85,86 and 87 However, in a large aspirin intervention trial involving more than 22,000 U.S. male physicians, a secondary analysis did not confirm a reduced
incidence of colorectal cancer. 88
In a Wisconsin study, regular NSAID use conferred a lower risk of a colorectal cancer diagnosis than did nonuse (OR, 0.65; CI, 0.40 to 1.03). 89 Importantly, the risk
reduction was greater for those using nonaspirin compounds (OR, 0.43; 95% CI, 0.20 to 0.89) as compared with users of aspirin compounds (OR, 0.79; CI, 0.46 to
1.36). The NSAID sulindac has been studied in the setting of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), where it achieved a 56% reduction in polyps. 90 The long-term use
of nonselective COX inhibitors can be associated with increased toxicity. 91 Use of more selective COX-2 inhibitors may be beneficial in preventing toxicity with
long-term use while maintaining the agents' preventive effects. 92

SECONDARY PREVENTION
Secondary prevention focuses on the identification of high-risk populations and interventions that can prevent the development of colorectal carcinoma. It involves
identifying those persons at increased risk of death from colorectal cancer owing to the presence of premalignant lesions or early cancers. Examples of secondary
prevention strategies are screening for adenomas, treatment of adenomatous polyps by endoscopic polypectomy, or excision of the large bowel in FAP. High-risk
states can be identified by an individuals' age, genetic makeup, and predisposing diseases such as previous cancer or inflammatory bowel disease. In addition,
previous medical treatments can have an impact on a patient's risk ( Table 33.7-1). In nearly three-fourths of colorectal cancer cases, no predisposing factors will be
identifiable. 93

TABLE 33.7-1. Risk Factors for Colorectal Cancer

CLINICAL RISK FACTOR: AGE
Age is the most relevant factor affecting colorectal cancer risk in most general populations ( Fig. 33.7-3). The peak onset of colorectal cancer in the United States is at
age 65 years. People older than 40 years are the largest increased-risk group. Fewer than 10% of cancers of the colorectum occur in people younger than 40 years.
The increase in incidence occurs into the eighth decade of life, when a decline begins. The most common risk factor for polyp development is age greater than 50
years. 94

FIGURE 33.7-3. Cumulative incidence of colorectal cancer by age in the general population ( open circle), hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer population ( open
square), and familial adenomatous polyposis population ( closed circle).

GENETIC RISK FACTORS
FAMILIAL POLYPOSIS SYNDROMES
FAP syndromes are a group of syndromes characterized by the early onset of multiple polyps and a virtually 100% risk of colorectal cancer development. 95 FAP
represents but a small percentage of the overall number of colorectal cancer cases. Its importance as a model for sporadic colorectal cancer development far
outweighs its importance as a problem in public health. 96 It affects from 1 in 8000 to 1 in 10,000 persons. These syndromes have autosomal dominant inheritance with
high but variable penetrance. The phenotype may vary by mutation site. 97 Synchronous cancers are common in FAP patients.
There is an association between FAP and periampullary, thyroid, and specific cancers or nonneoplastic growth such as osteomas, sebaceous cysts, and gastric
fundic gland polyps. It is important to realize that 10% to 20% of the cases are de novo mutations with no apparent family history.After the colorectal cancer risk has

been controlled by surgery, other neoplasms such as periampullary tumors are prominent causes of death among people with FAP. 98
A subset of polyposis patients have Gardner's syndrome, which is characterized by colonic adenomatous polyposis associated with the presence of mesenteric or
abdominal wall desmoid tumors, lipomas, and fibromas. 99 The presence of a mesenteric desmoid tumor is a cause of great morbidity in these patients. Other diseases
included under the category of polyposis syndromes are Turcot's syndrome and Oldfield's syndrome. Hamilton 96a has described the presence of two germline defects
in Turcot's syndrome that are seen with both polyposis and HNPCC syndromes. There can often be considerable overlap between these adenomatous polyposis
syndromes, and they are best characterized on the basis of their common genetic abnormality in the adenomatosis polyposis coli ( APC) gene.
The basic genetic defect in FAP is a mutation in the APC gene. The genetic locus for the APC gene has been identified at 5q21. 100 The most common abnormality is
an alteration in the genetic sequence resulting in the generation of a stop codon, which in turn results in the production of a truncated nonfunctional protein. 101 This is
the basis for a commonly used screening procedure in which the truncated protein is synthesized in vitro and is identified. Since the introduction of genetic testing into
the medical armamentarium, it is important that patients have access to appropriate genetic counseling and proper interpretation of test results. 102
HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS COLON CANCER
The HNPCC syndrome is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with high penetrance. Its phenotypic features are early-onset colorectal cancer (mean age, 46
years), multiple (synchronous or metachronous) colorectal cancers (35%), and colorectal cancers usually (but not always) located in the proximal colon. 103 There is an
associated early onset of adenocarcinoma of the colon, ovary, pancreas, breast, bile duct, endometrium, stomach, genitourinary tract, and small bowel. 104 In addition,
sebaceous gland adenomas and carcinomas are seen in the Muir-Torre syndrome, a variant of HNPCC. 105 A high rate of colorectal cancer is seen in first-degree
relatives of patients with HNPCC. 106 Approximately 1% to 6% of colorectal cancers fit the criteria for HNPCC. 107
The phenomenon of microsatellite instability is present in the tumor of patients (90%) with HNPCC and in 12% to 15% of sporadic colorectal cancer cases.The genes
responsible for this are hMSH2, hMLH1, PMS1, PMS2, and hMSH6.108 Germline mutations in these genetic loci produce the DNA mismatch repair phenomenon,
causing the development of colorectal cancer in patients with HNPCC. Though the results of genetic testing depend on criteria used for instituting testing, the overall
mutation detection rate appears to be greater than 50% in suspected cases. 109
HNPCC cancers are more likely to be signet-ring cancers and poorly differentiated, with extensive inflammatory infiltrates. 110,111 There may be a more rapid time
course for the development of cancers in this syndrome. 107 The adenomas tend to have a villous component and to be more dysplastic than in sporadic cases. 112 In
general, on a stage-for-stage basis, survival for colorectal cancer patients with HNPCC is better than for patients with sporadic cases. 104
The Amsterdam criteria, developed in 1991, are helpful in identifying and categorizing patients with a familial history of colorectal cancer. 113 The initial Amsterdam
criteria—Criteria I—require first that at least three relatives have colorectal cancer. In addition, one of the three relatives must be a first-degree relative of the other
two; the colorectal cancer must involve at least two successive generations; at least one family member who developed colorectal cancer must be younger than 50
years; and FAP must by excluded and tumors must be verified by pathologic examination. 113 These criteria may underestimate the true incidence of HNPCC as
pedigree analysis is uninformative for some families. 110 Because the initial Amsterdam criteria were established to be specific and to define criteria for HNPCC
recognition strictly, families with more subtle histories or extracolonic cancers may be missed. Therefore, newer criteria were established to address these
concerns.112

TABLE 33.7-2. Amsterdam II Criteria

Amsterdam Criteria II (Table 33.7-2) include consideration of extracolonic tumors and eliminate the requirement that one of the index cancers be a colorectal cancer.
The HNPCC cancers accepted are colorectal, endometrial, small bowel, ureteral, or renal pelvic. This less exclusionary set of criteria will reduce the number of
families in which colorectal cancer is suspected but that fail to receive genetic counseling and mutation analysis. Counseling is critical for appropriate management. 114
Aaltonen et al.115 examined the feasibility of screening for HNPCC mutations in patients with colorectal carcinoma. They prospectively screened tumor specimens from
patients with colorectal adenocarcinomas for microsatellite instability. DNA from the normal tissues of patients with tumors demonstrating replication errors was
screened for germline mutations in the mismatched repair genes MLH1 and MSH2. Sixteen percent of patients with replication errors had detectable germline
mutations. All the patients in whom germline mutations were detected had a family history of colorectal cancer or were younger than 50 years. In patients with
replication errors, further testing should be carried out for germline mutations in known DNA mismatch repair genes.
Because successful strategies for identifying patients suspected of harboring HNPCC have been terminated, the Bethesda guidelines for testing colorectal tumors for
microsatellite instability have been developed ( Table 33.7-3). These guidelines are expected to apply to 15% to 20% of colorectal cancer patients in the United
States.

TABLE 33.7-3. Bethesda Guidelines for Testing Colorectal Tumors for Microsatellite Instability

INHERITED COLORECTAL CANCER IN ASHKENAZI JEWS
Israeli Jews of European birth have the highest colorectal cancer incidence of any Israeli ethnic group. There are reports of a missense mutation (I 1307 K) in the APC

gene found in 6% of unselected Ashkenazi Jews and 28% of this population who have a family history of colorectal cancer. Colorectal cancer is found in 13% of
those with polyps. 116,117 This condition lacks the florid polyposis seen in FAP. These polymorphisms of the APC gene create a hypermutable region of the APC gene
that causes a predisposition to colorectal cancer. 118 There do not appear to be any differences in clinical presentation or family history between carriers of the
mutation and noncarriers, so genetic testing in this population may be required to identify high-risk individuals for screening. This mutation appears to be unique to
Ashkenazi Jews.116
ATTENUATED FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS SYNDROME
Attenuated FAP syndrome is characterized by the development of flat adenomas that are precursor lesions to carcinoma. 67 Genetic linkage studies identify
abnormalities on chromosome 5Q, and this may be a variant of FAP, with the mutation being more proximal or distal in the gene than common mutations with classic
FAP. In patients with attenuated FAP syndrome, disease onset is later than usual for FAP, neoplasms appear in the proximal colon, and oligopolyposis is present. 97
Because these characteristics commonly are associated with HNPCC, making the clinical diagnosis is difficult.
Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is an autosomal dominant inherited condition in which hamartomatous polyps can occur throughout the gastrointestinal (GI) tract.The polyps
are nonneoplastic and have a characteristic branching muscular framework.Melanin pigmentation surrounding the lips is associated with this syndrome. There is an
estimated frequency of associated GI cancer of 2% to 3%. Although these patients may develop a variety of cancers throughout life, their polyps should be managed
symptomatically. Prophylactic colectomy is not recommended. Germline mutations in a chromosome 19 gene have been found in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome families.
This gene may act as a tumor suppressor gene. 119 Inactivating mutations in the responsible gene act on a protein kinase. 119
Juvenile Polyposis
In juvenile polyposis, multiple hamartomatous polyps occur in the colorectum, although they may also be found in the small bowel and stomach. Jass et al. 120 defined
this syndrome as the presence of more than five juvenile polyps, which differs from the solitary juvenile polyp seen in children. These investigators found colorectal
cancer in 18 of 80 cases. 120 Neoplasia can occur in the index polyps or in a separate adenoma. Colonoscopic control of polyps appears appropriate, whereas
colectomy may be used for large numbers of polyps, symptomatic polyps, or cancers. 121
A subset of patients with juvenile polyposis has been identified to carry germline mutations in the SMAD4 gene,122 which causes a defect in growth factor control. The
risk of colorectal cancer has been estimated at 38%. There is a 21% risk of upper GI cancers. 123
FAMILY HISTORY OF COLON CARCINOMA OR POLYPS
Even among populations that do not exhibit any of the well-characterized familial cancer syndromes, there is an increased risk among those who have first-degree
relatives with colorectal cancer. This group accounts for most of the increased risk population (15% to 20% of patients). 125 An autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance has been suggested. Depending on the age at onset of the cancer and the number of relatives involved, lifetime risk can increase from 1.8-to 8-fold. 125 It
appears that the age-adjusted risk for those with one affected first-degree relative is approximately 1.72 (CI, 1.34 to 2.19). 126 For those with two or more affected
first-degree relatives, the risk is 2.75 (CI, 1.34 to 5.63). The age at onset of the colorectal cancer in the affected relative is an important factor: Risk can be increased
5.37-fold (CI, 1.98 to 14.6) in those who have an affected first-degree relative whose colorectal cancer occurred at less than 45 years of age. 127 When the age at
onset is 60 years or older, there is little increased risk, beyond that of having an affected first-degree relative. 126 People with first-degree relatives having colorectal
cancer have an 8% risk of developing large adenomas, and colonoscopy appears to be the most appropriate screening technique for these lesions. 128
In the review of data from participants in the National Polyp Study who had a newly diagnosed adenomatous polyp, information was gathered on the history of
colorectal cancer in their parents and siblings. 129 The RR of colorectal cancer was 1.78 for parents and siblings of patients with adenomas as compared with controls.
The RR for colorectal cancer in siblings of patients in whom adenomas were diagnosed before 60 years of age was 2.59 (CI, 1.46 to 4.58). When this group was
compared with the siblings of patients 60 years of age or older at the time of diagnosis, a decrease in the risk for colorectal cancer was associated with an increase in
age at the time of diagnosis of the adenoma. First-degree relatives of patients with adenomatous polyps are at increased risk for developing colorectal cancer,
particularly when an adenoma is diagnosed before the age of 60 or, in the case of siblings, when a parent has had colorectal cancer. The subsequent familial risk of
colon cancer is independent of the size and histologic features of the polyp.

PREDISPOSING MEDICAL CONDITIONS
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
There is an increased colorectal cancer risk in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. 131 Specifically, patients with ulcerative colitis demonstrate a high risk of
colorectal cancer that is related to the duration and extent of disease and dysplasia. 132 The risk of colorectal cancer in people with ulcerative colitis is estimated to be
5% or 10% at 20 years after diagnosis of ulcerative colitis and 12% to 20% at 30 years. 133 This justifies the intensive surveillance that is carried out in patients with
long-standing disease, especially those who demonstrate pancolitis. Synchronous cancers are seen in 10% to 20% of cases. 134
Genetic alterations associated with inflammatory bowel disease suggest that there are accumulated genetic defects similar to those of sporadic carcinomas. 135 The
pattern of progressive genetic abnormalities has been confirmed by analysis of p53 abnormalities found in both active colitis and dysplasia. The RR for patients with
proctitis alone is 1.7 (CI, 4.6 to 7.0); patients with left-sided colitis have an RR of 2.8 (CI, 1.6 to 4.4); and a 14.8-fold RR (the highest risk of colorectal cancer) is seen
in those suffering from pancolitis (CI, 11.4 to 18.9). The mean age at onset of cancer has been found to be 48 years. The value of assessment of cancer risk based
totally on the presence of dysplasia has been questioned. 136 Ulcerative colitis patients operated on for colorectal cancer may not have a preoperative diagnosis of
dysplasia. Other researchers have found that screening for high-grade dysplasia is a useful marker of the risk of coexistent cancer mandating colectomy.
GRANULOMATOUS COLITIS
Crohn's disease can affect the ileocolic area or may be limited to portions of the colon. In the absence of colonic involvement, there is no increased risk of colorectal
cancer. The RR for ileocolic involvement was 3.2 and, for colonic involvement, was 5.6. The RR for those with colonic involvement in whom diagnosis was made
before age 30 was 20.9.137 In addition to being at increased risk for large bowel cancer, all patients with Crohn's disease also have an increased risk of small bowel
carcinomas.138 In studies of specimens of intestinal adenocarcinoma complicating Crohn's disease, an early age at onset for adenocarcinomas (49 years) was
noted. 138 The carcinomas are associated with the site of the Crohn's disease. Seventy-three percent of the intestinal cancers in patients with Crohn's disease are
found in the colon or rectum. Most carcinomas were found to be poorly differentiated. Dysplasia was found adjacent to carcinoma in 87% of the cases. Mucinous
adenocarcinomas accounted for one-third of the carcinomas affecting Crohn's disease. 139
HISTORY OF COLORECTAL CARCINOMA OR POLYPS
The incidence of metachronous colorectal cancer often is reported to be between 0.5% and 3%. 140 In an analysis that takes into account the number of patients
remaining at each time point during follow-up, the incidence at 18 years was 6.3%. 141 In this study of 5476 patients, it was also demonstrated that metachronous
colorectal cancers were diagnosed at earlier stages than were index lesions. Metachronous tumors occur four times more often in patients with HNPCC. 142 An Italian
study of patients with multiple tumors of the large bowel demonstrated that the interval between first and second malignancies was 8.7 years. The recommendations
for colonoscopic follow-up and complete colonic evaluation at the time of colorectal cancer diagnosis are based on these risks.
A personal history of colonic polyps is important in the risk assessment of patients for colon carcinoma. The presence of adenomatous polyps within the colon carries
a risk of carcinoma in the index polyp as well as for additional sites within the colon. The risk of carcinoma in the individual polyp is related to the size and the
histology of the polyp. Tubular adenomas are less likely to carry a risk of carcinoma as compared with villous polyps. In general, approximately half of the polyps
larger than 2 cm will harbor a carcinoma. The greater the number of adenomas, the more likely it is that a cancer will develop. If these multiple polyps harbor

advanced characteristics, the incidence of colon cancer development increases six-fold (OR, 6.6; CI, 3.3 to 11.8). 143
In studies of patients with colon polyps identified on flexible sigmoidoscopy, it was found that at complete colonoscopy, 20% had advanced lesions such as adenomas
greater than 1 cm with a villous component, severe dysplasia, or invasive cancer. 144 The risk of proximal colonic neoplasia was increased with sessile lesions in the
distal colorectum. 145 In a multicenter, prospective study of colonoscopic findings in patients with proximal colon cancer, 116 patients were found to have cancer
proximal to the splenic flexure, and 34% had neoplasia distal to the splenic flexure. 145 Most average-risk patients with proximal colon cancer will have normal results
on flexible sigmoidoscopy.
After the removal of rectal or sigmoid polyps with villous or tubulovillous histology or size greater than 1 cm, the rate of colon cancer incidence was increased
threefold over the general population (OR, 3.6; CI, 2.4 to 5.0). 143 The cumulative incidence of colon cancer appears to be approximately 4% at 5 years and 14% at 10
years in patients with an untreated rectosigmoid polyp. Sixty-six percent of these cancers are in the index polyp, and 34% are at other sites. 146 These findings help to
demonstrate the effectiveness of polypectomy in preventing colon cancer. 147
PELVIC IRRADIATION
The data implicating irradiation as a cause of colorectal cancer are controversial. 148 Such reports imply that patients are followed up for extremely long periods,
because the interval between pelvic irradiation and the onset of a radiation therapy–induced GI tract malignancy appears to be 15 to 28 years. 149 The radiation doses
and techniques may have an impact on the overall incidence of GI tract cancers induced by pelvic radiation therapy. Second cancers are increased in patients with
previous malignancies. The risk of colorectal cancer in this population is small and should not alter plans for curative treatment for pelvic malignancies.
NONCANCER SURGERY
Some studies suggest that cholecystectomy increases the incidence of colorectal cancer. The etiology for the relationship between cholecystectomy and colorectal
carcinoma is controversial. 150 In a study conducted in the United Kingdom, a metaanalysis of 35 studies was conducted. 151 The OR for a positive association between
cholecystectomy and colorectal cancer was found to be only 1.11 (95% CI, 1.02 to 1.21). For women, the OR was 1.14 (95% CI, 1.01 to 1.28) and, for right-sided
cancers, the ratio was 1.86 (95% CI, 1.31 to 2.65). It appeared from this that any additional risk was quite small. Data from case-control studies have shown an
increased risk for proximal colon cancers after cholecystectomy. However, there was no indication that there was an increased risk for distal colorectal cancer. 152 The
risk of colorectal cancer after cholecystectomy cannot be separated from the presence of cholelithiasis as a possible marker for dietary changes that affect colorectal
cancer risk. 153 The risks associated with ureterosigmoidostomy may be related to the presence of mutagens within the stool or urine. An additional factor is that
patients subjected to such operations may have confounding factors such as previous pelvic irradiation.

SCREENING
Screening involves testing asymptomatic individuals to assess the likelihood that they may have colorectal cancer or precursors. For a screening technique to be
practical, it must be a risk-based approach to the assessment of asymptomatic patients. Colorectal cancer lends itself to screening because of the long period
between the development of early mucosal abnormalities and the development of invasive carcinoma. 143,144,145 and 146 Adenomatous polyps are the well-described
precursor lesions of invasive colorectal cancer and can be effectively managed by endoscopic intervention. 147 In the general population, the risk of development of a
colorectal adenoma is approximately 19%, and it is estimated that 2% to 5% of these sporadic polyps will develop into an invasive carcinoma. 154
Screening tests are available that detect early curable disease and are well-established aspects of medical practice. 155 The screening techniques do not involve
excessive risk.156 The benefits of early diagnosis are improvements in treatment effectiveness and survival.
SCREENING OF HIGH-RISK GROUPS
Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
Once an average-risk person reaches the fourth decade of life, his or her risk of developing colorectal cancer increases almost 100%. Screening is not an effective
management tool. On establishment of a diagnosis of FAP, patients should be considered for colectomy to reduce the risk of colorectal cancer development. In cases
in which there is a remaining rectal stump that has been cleared of polyps, the patient should undergo annual screening to assess for polyp development and the
need for proctectomy or fulguration of polyps. The usual recommendation is to start annual screening for FAP during early adolescence. If no polyps are found after
age 24, the screening schedule can be modified to every 2 years until age 34, then every 3 years until age 44, when screening reverts to that of an average-risk
individual. Molecular testing for genetic mutations is appropriate in screening at-risk family members when the mutation is known.
Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colon Cancer
Patients affected by HNPCC have cancers that develop from adenomatous polyps that are commonly proximal to the splenic flexure. The risk of colorectal cancer in
HNPCC patients begins to increase by age 20 and is very high by age 45. 157 The risk for colorectal cancer by age 60 is estimated to be 57% to 80%. 158 Colonoscopy
is the preferred method of surveillance because it allows complete examination of the colon. Its yields are high in HNPCC because of the high risk of cancer.
Metachronous cancers are common in people who have an intact colon after an initial cancer; the annual rate of metachronous colorectal cancer appears to be 2.1%
to 1.7%.
There is a concern of rapid de novo development of carcinomas from flat lesions that may be inapparent during endoscopy. Therefore, intervals between screening for
HNPCC patients should probably be shorter than for average-risk persons. Because of a higher 5-year survival of colorectal cancer in many patients with HNPCC as
compared to patients with sporadic colorectal cancer, it may be even more beneficial to screen these patients than average-risk patients. The Cancer Genetic Studies
Consortium reviewed the literature on cancer surveillance and risk reduction for individuals with HNPCC and concluded that the efficacy of cancer surveillance in
reducing risk in these individuals is unknown. However, on the basis of observational studies, the Consortium recommended colonoscopy every 1 to 3 years starting
at age 25 for individuals known to have HNPCC-associated mutations.
Jarvinen et al. 159 described the effects of screening on colorectal cancer rates in families with HNPCC. They evaluated the effectiveness of long-term screening in 22
families with HNPCC. The incidence of colorectal cancer and colorectal cancer mortality between those who were screened at 3-year intervals by colonoscopy or
barium enema sigmoidoscopy and those who did not undergo screening were compared. Colorectal cancer occurred in 4.5% of the screened subjects and 11.9% of
the unscreened group. No deaths due to colorectal cancer occurred in the screened group, as compared with colorectal cancer death in 5 of the 14 cases in the
control group. 159 This provides strong evidence that increased screenings reduce the colorectal cancer death rate in members of families with a history of HNPCC.
Syngal et al. 160 conducted a decision analysis study of the benefits of colonoscopic surveillance and subsequent colectomy on mortality and quality of life for patients
with HNPCC mutations. They assessed risk for colorectal cancer in the study to be 31.5% by 40 years, 54.5% by 50 years, 63% by 60 years, and 87.5% by 75 years
of age. The cumulative lifetime risk for colorectal cancer was 88.2%. The risk of metachronous colorectal cancer was estimated at 45% in those not undergoing a
prophylactic total colectomy. Endoscopic surveillance would reduce lifetime risk by 52%. Mortality from endoscopic surveillance was estimated to be approximately
0.02%. These investigators found a life expectancy benefit of 2.1 years associated with prophylactic colectomy as compared with surveillance. 160 However, when
estimates of health-related quality of life were incorporated into the analysis, surveillance became the preferred cancer prevention mode.
In a study using data from the International Collaborative Group on HNPCC, rectal cancers were found to have developed in 11% of patients at a median of 158
months from the time of their abdominal colectomy.161 Adenomas were found to have developed in the rectal mucosa in five of eight of the patients who developed
rectal carcinoma and hence were deemed a marker of risk. The risk of developing rectal cancer was estimated to be 3% for every 3 years after abdominal colectomy
for the first 12 years of follow-up. The authors recommended endoscopic surveillance of the rectum after abdominal colectomy. Lin et al. (1998) estimated that rectal
cancer was more common in MSH2 kindreds.
Family History of Colorectal Cancer or Adenomatous Polyps

Specialty organizations recommend that people with first-degree relatives who have had colorectal cancer or adenomatous polyps should be screened on a schedule
similar to that for average-risk persons but beginning at age 40 instead of 50. 157 Individuals who have a relative with early-onset disease should begin surveillance 3
to 10 years prior to the age of onset in the index individual. Owing to the overlap between patients who have been affected by an HNPCC mutation and an otherwise
genetically undefined familial colorectal cancer risk, it is prudent to consider complete examination of the colon in these patients as opposed to flexible
sigmoidoscopy.162
Personal History of Colorectal Cancer or Adenomatous Polyps
Patients who have had a previous colorectal cancer are at increased risk for polyp formation and development of second primary cancers. It is recommended that
patients in whom a colorectal cancer has been resected undergo complete examination of the colon within 1 year after resection. This surveillance schedule is similar
to that recommended for patients with a previous polypectomy. If the results of this examination are otherwise normal, then the patient can undergo evaluation in 3
years, with subsequent examinations dependent on the findings at that initial examination. Any subsequent cancers often are preceded by polyps, in the same
adenoma-to-carcinoma sequence seen in sporadic colorectal cancer. Because of the effectiveness of polypectomy, the follow-up procedure should be colonoscopy. 162
Patients who have undergone previous removal of an adenomatous polyp should undergo colonoscopy during follow-up. The rate of metachronous adenoma
formation is 3.3% over 3 years. 147 The Polyp Prevention Study did not demonstrate any increase in risk of developing advanced polyps when subsequent screening
was deferred for 3 years. 163 No direct evidence supports a recommendation for the cessation of screening. 164
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Because the rate of colorectal cancer development in patients with inflammatory bowel disease is related to dysplasia and duration and extent of disease, surveillance
colonoscopy is an important consideration in the management of these patients. 165 Colonoscopic surveillance should begin annually after 8 years of disease in
patients with pancolitis or after 15 years of disease in those with colitis involving the left side of the colon. 166 Random biopsy should be performed to detect dysplasia,
which is a marker for the presence of colorectal cancer. 167 However, there is no direct evidence that this practice is more effective than colectomy performed on the
basis of extent and duration of disease.
SCREENING OF AVERAGE-RISK GROUPS: THE GENERAL POPULATION
Subjects who are healthy and have an average risk of colon cancer represent the largest population appropriate for screening. There is a relatively high risk of
colorectal cancer in the United States, and the screening can be targeted to older individuals in whom colorectal cancer is much more common. For average-risk
groups, the screening techniques consist primarily of digital rectal examination, fecal occult blood testing, and endoscopic examination. It is hoped that less invasive
but sensitive tests such as virtual colonoscopy may be useful in screening in the future. 168
Any discussion of screening techniques must be analyzed in terms of the effectiveness and cost of such programs for asymptomatic individuals. These considerations
and evolving clinical practice have generated recommendations that asymptomatic patients with no family history of colorectal cancer begin screening at 50 years of
age with digital rectal examination and fecal occult blood assessment annually and flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years. 157 Alternative approaches may be total
colonoscopy every 10 years or a double-contrast barium enema every 5 to 10 years. 169
Digital Rectal Examination
The digital rectal examination is part of the routine physical examination. Approximately 5% to 10% of colorectal cancers may be palpable.
Fecal Occult Blood Testing
Fecal occult blood testing relies on the presence of blood in the stool to indicate a neoplastic lesion in the large bowel. Testing for the presence of fecal occult blood
using guaiac-impregnated paper slides is a relatively low-cost examination that is based on the ability of heme to catalyze a reaction involving the oxidation of guaiac
in the presence of hydrogen peroxide, which produces a blue stain. 170 Other techniques rely on the detection of hemoglobin by its conversion to porphyrin or the
detection of human hemoglobin by immunochemical approaches.
The advantages of this test are ease, low cost, and low risk to the patient. The use of this test has been criticized, however, for its relatively low ability to predict the
presence or absence of disease, leading to missed lesions (owing to poor sensitivity) and unnecessary invasive workups in patients without colorectal neoplasia.
Nonetheless, studies have demonstrated a decline in mortality from colorectal cancer in patients screened annually with fecal occult blood testing as compared with
control groups. This improvement is attributable to the fact that cancers detected by fecal occult blood testing were at an earlier stage of disease at diagnosis,
resulting in a decrease in the proportion of patients who had metastatic disease at the time of cancer discovery. These findings support the use of this method of
cancer screening.171
Not all rectal cancers bleed and not all blood in the GI tract is due to cancer. Some cancers may bleed intermittently. False negative fecal occult blood test results
have been reported in 20% to 30% of patients with known colorectal cancers. 172 The ability to detect polyps in the colon and rectum by testing for fecal occult blood is
even less successful. 172 Yearly testing for fecal occult blood has been recommended, because randomized trials show that yearly testing is more effective than testing
every 2 years.
Fecal occult blood testing provides only a suspicion of colorectal cancer or polyps. The consequences of a positive test are that the patient requires a complete colon
examination, usually in the form of a barium enema and sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy. 173 The costs and effectiveness of fecal occult blood testing as a screening
modality must be evaluated in the context of these additional tests resulting from a positive examination. Elements of an ordinary diet, including red meat and certain
vegetables that may have peroxidase activity, can cause false-positive reactions in guaiac-based tests. The use of salicylates and vitamin C can cause either
false-positive or false-negative examinations, respectively. 174 Because of these factors, the best results for fecal occult blood testing in screening for colorectal cancer
are from studies that use rehydrated tests on two samples from each of three consecutive stools in individuals who were adhering to a restricted diet and who were
abstaining from compounds that could alter test results. Fecal occult blood testing is limited by the fact that the testing is aimed mainly at detecting cancer, owing to
the low incidence of bleeding in small adenomatous polyps. An additional drawback of such testing is that the false-positive rate commits large groups of patients to
undergoing the cost and inconvenience of testing with colonoscopy or barium enema when no colorectal pathologic process is present. 175
In a randomized trial of 46,551 asymptomatic people between the ages of 50 and 80 years, fecal occult blood testing was studied. Patients were evaluated with
colonoscopy after fecal occult blood tests proved positive. The 13-year cumulative mortality rate per 1000 from colorectal cancer was 5.88% in the annually screened
group, 8.33% in the biannually screened group, and 8.83% in the control group. 86 A randomized, controlled trial was performed in England with patients aged 45 to 74
years who were offered either fecal occult blood testing every 2 years or routine medical management. Again, colonoscopy was used to evaluate positive tests, which
resulted in a 15% reduction in mortality in the screened group. 172 Some practitioners have expressed concern that the improvement in mortality seen is these studies
could be related to chance selection for colonoscopy and its effects. 176
Flexible Sigmoidoscopy
Flexible sigmoidoscopy can be used to evaluate the region from the anal verge to approximately 60 cm of the distal large intestine. This can allow detection of up to
one-half to two-thirds of colorectal adenomas and cancers. 177 Because distal adenomas and cancers are an indicator of more proximal neoplasia, a patient with
findings of neoplastic polyp on flexible sigmoidoscopy should undergo complete colonic examination.
Flexible sigmoidoscopy screening programs can be expected to detect neoplasms in the distal colon and rectum in up to 8% of asymptomatic persons older than 40
years. Reductions in sigmoid and rectal cancer risk with rigid proctosigmoidoscopy of 70% were seen in a case-control study. 178,179 It has been proposed that
once-only sigmoidoscopy would be a cost-effective method of screening and subsequently assigning patients to low- or high-risk groups. 180 Its use is a recommended

part of screening for low- and average-risk patients older than 50 years in the Untied States. 157

DIAGNOSIS
WORKUP OF A SYMPTOMATIC PATIENT
The diagnosis of colorectal cancer can be made either by the workup of a symptomatic patient or by discovery of cancer by screening in an asymptomatic patient.
Most Americans are not currently screened for colorectal cancer. In a survey of the general population, it was found that only approximately 17.3% of people aged 50
years or older had undergone fecal occult blood testing in the previous year and that only 9.4% had undergone sigmoidoscopy in the previous 3 years. The majority of
patients will be found to have colorectal cancer on investigation of symptoms or signs.
Patients who present with symptoms are not appropriate candidates for a screening examination (i.e., less than a total colonic examination). Those in whom
symptoms are compatible with the diagnosis of colorectal cancer, such as those with rectal bleeding, iron-deficiency anemia, obstruction, or alteration in bowel habits,
should undergo total colonic examination. Colonoscopy will allow biopsy of colonic masses as well as removal of polyps; however, a mass in the colon should not be
managed conservatively, even in the case of an equivocal biopsy. Those individuals with obstructive tumors should undergo examination of the whole colon as soon
as is practical after management of the obstructing tumor.
A wide variety of abdominal symptoms and signs are consistent with colorectal cancer. These include rectal bleeding, discovery of occult blood in the stool, abdominal
pain, change in bowel habits, nausea, vomiting, distention, weight loss, fatigue, and anemia. Rectal bleeding is more commonly associated with rectal cancer than
colon cancer. Because it can be such an obvious symptom, patients who develop rectal bleeding come to medical attention sooner than those who do not have
obvious rectal bleeding. Patients who present with rectal bleeding must not be managed for hemorrhoids without workup, even though many more patients will have
benign causes for rectal bleeding as compared to the number who will have rectal carcinoma.
Abdominal pain in colorectal cancer may be caused by partial obstruction, which is commonly a cramping type of pain. A more diffuse type of abdominal pain may
occur with the development of perforations, leading to signs of generalized peritonitis. Other pain syndromes that may be present in colorectal carcinoma can develop
from involvement of the pelvic floor by rectal cancer–caused tenesmus. Locally advanced rectal cancer may be associated with involvement of the sciatic nerve or
obturator nerve, producing a neuropathic pain syndrome.
Partial or complete obstruction may occur in 2% to 16% of newly diagnosed cases of rectal cancer. The presence of obstruction has been found to reduce the 5-year
survival rate to 31%, as compared with 72% for patients without obstruction. 181
Malignancy of the colon can result in a free perforation with peritonitis or a contained perforation and fistula formation. Approximately half of perforations caused by
colorectal cancer are into the free abdominal cavity. Contained perforation with involvement of adjacent organs is most commonly seen in cecal or sigmoid
carcinomas. Either type of carcinoma may involve loops of small bowel, bladder, abdominal wall, or the retroperitoneum. When there is such involvement in the setting
of a sigmoid colon carcinoma, the condition may mimic diverticulitis. Diagnosis in these circumstances can be difficult. It is justifiable to pursue surgery in such
patients to clarify the diagnosis as well as to treat. Radiologic signs indicating diverticulitis include the presence or absence of intramural fistulas and the degree of
mucosal abnormality. Tumor perforation can occur either at the site of a primary tumor or in the cecum when it is dilated because of obstruction. Perforation is a bad
prognostic factor, not only because it heralds an increased risk of cancer spread but also because of the mortality associated with peritonitis.
In the 10% to 15% of patients who present with metastatic disease, signs and symptoms are usually present. Pain in the right upper quadrant, especially when
accompanied by palpable hepatomegaly or a mass, often will indicate the presence of liver metastases. This finding should prompt investigation with imaging as well
as endoscopy. Fever without an overt cause may also be a manifestation of metastatic disease. Patients with diffuse liver involvement or carcinomatosis may manifest
ascites with signs of abdominal distention or symptoms of early satiety or bowel obstruction. Development of umbilical nodules may occur as a sign of intraperitoneal
disease. In patients with advanced colorectal cancer, supraclavicular adenopathy may be present. Inguinal adenopathy may develop in patients with an advanced low
rectal carcinoma.
PATHOLOGIC FEATURES
Gross Appearance
Size alone is not a reliable predictor of outcome from colorectal cancer because of the predominance of biologic behavior in predicting outcome. A 1-cm, clinically
detectable colorectal neoplasm may contain 30 or more successive generations of malignant cells prior to detection. Colorectal cancers can be exophytic or fungating,
or tumors may be ulcerated. In general, ulcerated tumors predominate. Annular tumors produce obstructive symptoms and have the classic appearance of an
apple-core lesion on barium enema. Tumors of the right colon often are fungating masses that grow into the lumen and for which the symptom is occult bleeding as
opposed to obstruction; they often present with a palpable mass. Left-sided tumors tend to be more annular and cause obstructive symptoms.
Residual adenomas can often be found in addition to invasive cancer. Assessment of the colon specimen for synchronous lesions is important. In 3% to 5% of primary
colorectal cancers, a synchronous carcinoma will be found. The number and type of neoplastic lesions, polyps, or invasive carcinomas in a colorectal specimen are
important in identifying associated inherited colorectal cancer syndromes.
Histologic Types
Adenocarcinoma represents 90% to 95% of all colorectal tumors. Tumors can be further classified by grade and histologic subtypes ( Table 33.7-4).

TABLE 33.7-4. World Health Organization Classification of Malignant Primary Tumors of the Large Intestine: Histopathologic Variants of Colorectal Carcinoma

The vast majority of colorectal cancers are moderately differentiated, gland-forming adenocarcinomas. Less common variants are classified on the basis of the
predominance of an unusual pattern as compared with the usual adenocarcinoma of the colon. Mucinous or colloid carcinomas exhibit the majority of tumor in mucin
pools, which are often of low cellularity. 182 Signet-ring tumors display a large amount of intracellular mucus pushing the nucleus to the side of the cell. These often are
associated with diffuse intramural spread beyond the obvious mucosal lesion. In poorly differentiated cancers, features of neuroendocrine differentiation may appear.
Approximately 4% to 17% of carcinoid tumors appear in the rectum, and 2% to 7% are found in the colon. 183 They often present as submucosal masses with normal
colonic mucosa overlying lesions. Sarcomas may account for 0.1% to 0.3% of all colorectal malignancies. These are chiefly leiomyosarcomas.
DEGREE OF DIFFERENTIATION. Broders (1925) designated four grades of differentiation based on the percentage of differentiated tumor cells found in the overall tumor

specimen. The degree of differentiation for colonic adenocarcinoma commonly refers to the degree to which there are well-formed glands. There is a spectrum of
histopathologic findings used to assess differentiation in typical cancers of the colon and rectum. Glands may range from large and dilated to small and compact.
Gland formation is usually associated with tumors that are well or moderately differentiated. At the other extreme of differentiation, glandular architecture may form
sheets of infiltrating individual cells, which characterize a poorly differentiated tumor.
Dukes' (1932) grading system was based on cytologic characteristics as well as glandular formation and nuclear polymorphism. the system ranges from stage A
through stage D, the latter stage being the most poorly differentiated, with only occasional gland formation and markedly pleomorphic cells marked by a high
incidence of mitoses. Jass et al. (1986) provided a system of classifying differentiation based on histologic type, overall differentiation, nuclear polarity, tubal
configuration, pattern of growth, lymphocytic infiltration, and amount of desmoplastic reaction. Other aspects of the histopathologic evaluation of a colorectal tumor
include assessments for vascular or lymphatic invasion. Extramural venous invasion is considered an indicator of worsening prognosis. Invasion of perineural spaces
can be identified.
The degree of fibrosis present in tumors will vary widely. The pattern of infiltration at the edge of tumors can be pushing, expansile, or infiltrative. The host
inflammatory response at the periphery of tumors can be composed of lymphocytes, neutrophils, mast cells, and macrophages. Angiogenesis may be noted at a
tumor's periphery.
The inclusion of lymphoid nodules and germinal centers at the periphery of infiltrating carcinomas is termed a Crohn's-like lymphoid reaction. This is sometimes
considered to be associated with HNPCC or with a high incidence of microsatellite instability. 184 Many of these adjunctive characteristics of the histopathologic
assessment of a tumor are subject to considerable intraobserver and interobserver variability in reporting.
DEGREE OF LOCAL INVASION. Invasion into the submucosa is the hallmark of the development of the potential for metastatic spread and is the key histopathologic

characteristic of colorectal cancer. It is best assessed by histopathologic assessment. In colon carcinoma, the mesentery and serosal surfaces are at greatest risk for
violation by tumor penetration. In rectal cancer, perirectal fat and adjacent organs are most commonly involved by direct invasion through the bowel wall. Gross
assessment of local extent can be misleading in some cases due to desmoplastic response, the effect of neoadjuvant therapies, or infection surrounding tumor
perforation. Locally recurrent tumors are characterized by the predominance of the tumor mass in or around the bowel wall or an anastomotic site rather than in the
mucosa itself.
Lymph Node Pathology
Gross pathologic evaluation of lymph nodes in colorectal cancer specimens is unreliable. Large nodes may show only lymphoid hyperplasia, whereas smaller nodes
may harbor micrometastases detectable only by histologic examination, immunohistochemistry, or molecular techniques. This factor is important in understanding the
inaccuracy of imaging techniques that typically rely on the size of lymph nodes as criteria for determining nodal involvement with tumor.
The number of lymph nodes found directly influences the accuracy and frequency of findings of Dukes' grade C cases. 185 By using more intensive methods of lymph
node assessment such as fat clearance, fewer false-negative lymph node stagings occur. 186
Goldstein et al. 187 showed an increase in the percentage of patients with at least one lymph node metastasis when 12 to 20 lymph nodes were recovered from each
specimen, as compared with specimens in which fewer lymph nodes were found. Wong et al. 188 found, in a sample of patients statistically similar to a sample in the
National Cancer Database Report, that examination of at least 14 T2 or T3 carcinoma colorectal cancer specimens was required to stage patients accurately.
Molecular Detection of Micrometastases
Owing to the effective use of adjuvant therapies for node-positive colorectal cancer, there is a theoretic advantage to the use of a more intensive method of detecting
cancer cells in the lymph nodes of resected specimens. This improved detection is necessary of the approximately 20% rate of distant metastases in patients with
resected stage II colon carcinoma who could theoretically benefit from systemic adjuvant chemotherapy. An increase in the detection of micrometastases has been
demonstrated with fat-clearing techniques, serial sectioning, and immunohistochemistry, detection of epithelial antigens, and molecular screening with polymerase
chain reaction–based (PCR-based) methods to detect tumor-specific RNA. 189 The detection of micrometastases in regional lymph nodes by PCR technique has been
demonstrated to have prognostic value in stage II colon carcinoma. 189 Though the potential for the use of these techniques is great, currently gross pathology and
histopathology are the mainstays of pathologic staging of colorectal carcinoma.

SPREAD OF COLORECTAL CANCER
The capability of a tumor to invade and metastasize is not only the most visible hallmark of cancer but also the leading cause of death in cancer patients. Colorectal
cancers can spread locally or distantly via the lymphatic and venous systems. In addition to unregulated tumor growth, imbalances in regulation of motility and
proteolysis are required for those events to occur. 190 We owe much of our current knowledge in this area to the pioneering work of Dukes et al. in the early 1930s
involving careful analyses of rectal cancer cases. Although Dukes's work helped to explain the natural history of colorectal cancer and this information remains largely
current, it hypothesized a very rigid pattern of spread. Dukes believed that lymph node invasion and distant metastasis could occur only after the tumor had extended
through the bowel wall. Although years earlier, Miles had described metastasis with earlier-stage primaries, Dukes considered these rare events. Dukes hypothesis
could not explain why a large number of patients with complete surgical resection eventually die of tumor recurrence.
LOCAL SPREAD
Percival Cole, in 1913, was the first to report that colorectal cancers usually grow preferentially in the transverse direction rather than in the horizontal direction. After
reviewing 20 rectal cancer specimens, he made the important observation that the long axis of the ulcerating tumor was always transverse, with the lesion tending to
involve the bowel circularly rather than longitudinally. Therefore, the tumors tended to narrow and constrict the bowel wall. Contrary to the previously held belief, Cole
theorized that recurrences were due to extramural deposits of tumor cells that were not removed by local excision and not to persistence of tumor along the bowel
wall. Several authors corroborated Cole's findings.
One notable exception to this common pattern of circumferential growth is seen in tumors showing perineural invasion. Tumor cells may reach as far as 10 cm from
the primary tumor when spreading through the perineural spaces, and local recurrences are 2.5 times more frequent in patients who present with perineural invasion
than in patients who do not.This preferential mural growth, the importance of which was recognized early, may result in local failure and peritoneal seeding. Staging
systems from the initial work by Dukes to the tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system used today have included degree of mural invasion as one of the most important
prognostic factors.
LYMPHATIC EXTENSION
As early as 1925, Miles described cases of early rectal cancers presenting with lymph node involvement. Although Dukes initially incorrectly considered these events
to be rare, he and Bussey (1958) demonstrated the direct relationship of the extent of local spread to the incidence of lymphatic metastasis. Grinnell (1964) was able
to demonstrate that tumor limited to the submucosa and muscularis propria metastasized to lymph nodes in 13% of patients. More recent studies have corroborated
these findings, with a 10% to 20% incidence of lymph node metastasis for tumors limited to the bowel wall. 191
In 1935, Gabriel et al. analyzed 62 specimens with lymphatic metastasis and described the orderly and predictable course of lymphatic spread in rectal cancer.
One-half of the patients studied had three fewer glands involved, and half had four or more. Dukes hypothesized that if the spread from gland to gland had been
rapid, patients would either have no lymph node involvement or multiple glands at the time of diagnoses. Hence, he concluded that the lymphatic spread was a slow
process. The first glands to be involved were situated in the perirectal tissues at the level of the primary tumor or immediately above it, followed by the chain along the
superior hemorrhoidal vessels. In an advanced case, the involved lymph nodes extended to the ligature of the inferior mesentery vessels. The same orderly
progression was demonstrated by Gilchrist and David. 192
Exceptions to this orderly spread are possible and have been well-documented by Gabriel et al. (1935). Atypical presentations could be due to spread through
aberrant lymphatic routes, which were described as early as 1925. Several authors have documented the existence of these discontinuous or skip metastases. Wood

and Wilkie (1933) found them in 6 of 51 specimens, Gabriel et al. (1935) in 1 of 62, and Grinnell (1939) in 4 of 118 specimens.
A second exception to the usual mode of lymphatic spread is seen when the lymphatics are blocked by tumor. When this occurs, the natural interconnection of
lymphatic channels allows lymph nodes at a great distance from the relevant chain to be affected. Lymphatic obstructions are responsible for the retrograde extension
of tumor below the primary lesion. 193 In a review of 913 specimens from patients with colorectal cancer, Grinnell (1966) found 34 (3.7%) to have this type of spread. In
colon carcinoma, the lymphatic flow follows the major arteries, with three levels of lymph nodes: pericolic, intermediate, and principal. Tumors located between more
than one major vessel may metastasize in any direction.
Dukes divided 985 rectal cancers into four different categories depending on the tumor grade. Stage A tumors were very well differentiated, whereas stage D tumors
were anaplastic. There was a close correlation between the tumor grade and the incidence of local spread, lymph node involvement, and venous spread. The same
correlation between tumor grade and lymphatic involvement has been demonstrated by other researchers.
With the advent of advanced staging techniques such as sentinel node biopsy and molecular analysis of lymph nodes, the existence of discontinuous or skip
metastases needs to be taken into consideration when planning changes in current surgical techniques.
HEMATOGENOUS SPREAD
Despite our continuous efforts toward early detection, approximately 10% to 15% of colorectal cancer patients have evidence of distant metastasis at the time of the
initial diagnosis. The liver is by far the most commonly involved organ. The colon is drained by the portal venous system. The rectum is drained by two different
systems: The superior hemorrhoidal veins enter the portal system to the liver, whereas the middle and inferior hemorrhoidal veins drain to the inferior vena cava and
spread to the lungs via the systemic circulation. This dual venous drainage system has important implications in the pattern of hematogenous spread. Brown and
Warren 194 retrospectively analyzed the results of 70 autopsies in patients with rectal cancer. They identified 23 patients (33%) with metastasis to the liver only and 6
patients (9%) with metastasis to the lung only. Metastasis to other sites without liver or lung involvement were rare, seen in only three patients (4%). The patients with
lung metastasis only were found to have lower primary lesions. In a larger study involving 506 patients, Dionne (1965) described rectal cancer patients with upper
rectal lesions and lung metastasis only. However, because metastasis was determined in routine clinical examinations, liver metastasis may have been missed in
those patients.
Brown and Warren reported that 14% of the patients they analyzed had vertebral involvement. In his larger series, Dionne (1965) described 6% of the patients with
spread to the pelvis and lumbosacral spine. Even though some (or even most) of those lesions were the result of direct extension or were present in patients with
widespread metastases, at least some patients have isolated metastases to the spine. Although the vertebral venous plexus is a high-pressure system, it may open
during special circumstances, such as defecation. This would allow tumor cells to invade vertebral bones and the central nervous system using communications
between the portal system and the paravertebral veins.
IMPLANTATION
Implantation refers to the capability of cancer cells to deposit and grow on another surface after being released from the primary tumor. Most normal human cells,
regardless of their origin, are in constant contact with an extracellular matrix and cannot survive for long when away from it, undergoing apoptosis or cell-cycle
arrest.195 However, cancer cells have been known to be able to survive without interaction with an extracellular matrix. The ability of cancer cells to detach from the
primary tumor and either to penetrate into the circulation or to implant in a different surface away from their original extracellular matrix is most likely related to
changes in the cell adhesion molecules. 195
Implantation may occur when cancer cells are shed intraluminally, from the serosal surface, and by surgical manipulation. 196 Umpleby and Williamson (1987)
determined the viability of tumor cells shed into the intestinal lumen in 49 patients. Viable exfoliated tumor cells were demonstrated in 52 of 74 specimens collected
(70%).197 The number of viable tumor cells recovered from the distal resection margin was inversely related to the distance of the tumor from that margin, confirming
earlier observations made by McGrew et al. (1954). Zeng et al. 196 prospectively scraped the serosa overlying the primary tumor mass in 65 patients who underwent
surgery for colon cancer. Malignant cells were present in the cytologic analysis of 23% of all patients and 26% of those with tumors invading through the muscularis
propria but not through serosa. After reviewing clinical, reoperation, and autopsy series, Brodsky and Cohen 198 determined the incidence of peritoneal seeding
followed by peritoneal failure to be fairly frequent among patients who experience recurrence of colorectal cancer. The risk of colorectal cancer spread caused by
surgical manipulation is well recognized, and the improvement of surgical technique has been considered a way of preventing recurrences since the early decades of
the twentieth century.

STAGING AND PROGNOSTIC FEATURES
The most reliable prognostic factor identified to date in colorectal cancer is the staging of disease at the time that treatment is initiated. 199 The staging of colorectal
cancer has been an evolving field since the beginning of the twentieth century, with multiple authors attempting to develop a reliable and reproducible system. The
first widely used system was introduced by Dukes in the 1930s and, like the majority of staging systems developed to date, relied on information obtained during
surgery. Imaging techniques used preoperatively have not been successful in reliably staging colorectal cancer. 200 Both conventional computed tomography (CT)
scanning and conventional magnetic resonance imaging have an unacceptably low accuracy for identifying the early stages of primary colorectal cancers. 200 The low
staging accuracy of these imaging techniques is related to the fact that neither method can assess the depth of tumor infiltration within the bowel wall, and both have
difficulty in diagnosing lymph node involvement. For colorectal cancer patients evaluated with CT scans or magnetic resonance imaging, the overall accuracy of
primary tumor staging is approximately 70%, with sensitivity for lymph node detection of only approximately 45%. The sensitivity for positive lymph nodes is higher for
rectal tumors.200 The development of new imaging techniques such as positron emission tomography (PET) 201 and endoscopic ultrasonography 202,203 may enhance the
usefulness of imaging studies in the staging of colorectal cancer. These imaging techniques would be especially important in rectal cancer, wherein preoperative
treatment with chemotherapy and radiation therapy is a viable therapeutic option. 204
Besides the pathologic staging determined by depth of penetration through the bowel wall and involvement of lymph nodes, distant organs, or both, several other
potential independent factors for survival have been identified. The number of factors reported to have an impact on the overall survival of patients with colorectal
cancer continues to grow, but the prognostic value of few of these factors has been confirmed in larger trials. The presence of obstruction or perforation, 205 vascular
or lymphatic invasion (or both), perineural invasion, 206 peritumoral lymphocytic invasion, 207 the character of invasive margin and tumor type, 208 presence and number
of mast cells,209 age and gender, tumor grade, 210 DNA content, 211 increased mitosis and low Bcl-2 expression, low apoptosis rate, 212 vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) levels, and allelic loss of chromosome 18q 213,214 are among the growing number of prognostic factors used in the analysis of colorectal cancer. The rapidly
evolving field of molecular biology holds the promise of accurate staging and, it is hoped, individualized prognosis and treatment tailoring in the not-so-distant future.
DUKES' CLASSIFICATION
At the beginning of the twentieth century, surgery became routine for the treatment of colorectal cancers, including those arising in the colon and rectum. Almost
immediately, the need arose for a staging system that allowed for comparisons among different surgical experiences and for determination of prognosis. A number of
authors have tackled this challenge, with varying results. Based partially on earlier experiences, Dukes 315 developed the first practical system in the early 1930s. The
initial Dukes' system was directed to rectal cancers and was remarkable for its simplicity and ability to give adequate prognostic information. The tumors were
classified from A to C, with stage A indicating penetration restricted to the bowel wall, stage B indicating penetration through the bowel wall, and stage C indicating
lymph node involvement. Over the years, several authors have attempted to make improvements on the initial work by Dukes, and the system has been extended to
include both colon and rectal cancers. Dukes himself made a few changes in his system, first dividing stage C into C1 (local lymph nodes involved) and C2 (lymph
nodes at the point of ligature involved) and later adding a fourth stage for distant metastasis, which was denoted as stage D by subsequent authors.
Kirklin et al. (1949) divided Dukes' stage A into a more restricted stage A (mucosa and submucosa involvement only) and a new B1, which involved the muscularis
propria (but not penetration through it). The old stage B became B2. One problem seen with the earlier version of the Dukes' system was its inability to separate the
depth of wall penetration and the involvement of lymph nodes. The revision by Astler and Coller in 1954 changed that feature, introducing the concept of stages C1
and C2, which are used commonly today. Gunderson and Sosin further modified the Astler-Coller system, subdividing the patients based on the presence of
microscopic (B2m or C2m) and gross penetration (B2m + g, and C2m + g) through the bowel wall.

One of the problems not addressed by any of the commonly used variations of the Dukes' system is its inability to classify patients further based on the extent of their
lymph node involvement. After the initial revision by Gabriel and Dukes in 1935 in which the location of the affected lymph nodes was considered, the issue was left
unaddressed. The ideal number of lymph nodes that should be evaluated before the specimen can be considered negative for lymph node involvement remains
controversial. It is well-known that up to 70% of affected lymph nodes in colorectal cancer are less than 5 mm in diameter, making them easy to overlook. 215,216 In
1994, Hernanz et al. 185 analyzed 193 specimens and suggested that at least six nodes had to be identified before the specimen could be called negative. Wong et
al.217 recently readdressed the same question and, after analyzing 196 cases, concluded that at least 14 nodes should be evaluated in each specimen. The advent of
improved pathologic techniques and sensitive methods such as PCR may have an impact on the number of positive lymph nodes detected. 186 However, the prognostic
value of these positive lymph nodes, which otherwise would not be detected, is still undetermined.
The National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Program (NSABP) carried out an analysis of the prognostic variables in 844 patients with Dukes' stage C lesions. 218
The level of positive nodes provided little information over and above that provided by the two most important prognostic factors, depth of tumor penetration and the
number of positive nodes. The subset of patients with one to four positive nodes fared remarkably better than did patients with larger numbers of involved nodes, and
the number of positive nodes appeared to be the single most important prognostic factor. 218 The newer classifications of colorectal cancer have incorporated the
number of involved lymph nodes as an important prognostic factor.
The size of the primary tumor in colorectal cancer, contrary to most solid tumors, does not seem to influence prognosis. A review of 391 patients treated surgically at
the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center from 1955 to 1975 demonstrated that the mean diameter of Dukes' stage B2 tumors was actually greater than
the mean diameter of stage C2 tumors (P<.001) and D tumors (P<.05). The size of the primary tumor showed no relationship to 5-year adjusted survival. These results
were confirmed by the NSABP experience.
Even though the modified Dukes' staging still is commonly used worldwide, the number of applied variations makes correlation of different studies less than ideal.
Therefore, use of the TNM staging has been encouraged. This system is compatible with and is gradually replacing the Dukes' system.
THE JASS SYSTEM
The traditional Dukes system was primarily anatomic; the influence of the tumor grade and other pathologic features remained largely ignored. After analyzing 447
patients treated surgically for rectal cancer, Jass et al. (1986) were able to assess a number of histopathologic factors using the Cox regression model. The important
variables included lymphocytic infiltration, tubule configuration, and pattern of growth. Subsequently, the authors compared the grade-related parameters with the
established stage-related parameters. The best prognostic model included the number of affected lymph nodes, the presence of lymphocytic infiltration, and extent of
spread through the bowel wall. The model was tested on a second data set comprising 331 patients, and similar results were derived. The authors concluded that
their classification was simple to use and was superior to staging by the method of Dukes. The NSABP compared the Jass classification with the traditional Dukes
system and validated its results. 219 However, the criteria used in the Jass prognostic system for colorectal cancer have been found to be less than optimal in routine
practice and are not readily reproducible. 220
Others have also questioned the superiority of the Jass system over the conventional Dukes' system. In a retrospective study of 312 colorectal carcinomas, Deans' et
al.221 found the Dukes classification to be of greater prognostic value and more reproducible than the components of Jass's classification. The simplicity and
reproducibility of the new TNM staging system has discouraged further use of the Jass system by the major clinical groups.
TUMOR, NODE, METASTASIS (TNM) CLASSIFICATION
Despite its initial shortcomings, the TNM classification is the preferred system for colorectal cancer patients ( Table 33.7-5). Starting in the late 1970s, both the
American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) and the Union Internationale Contre le Cancer (UICC) made attempts to unify the staging system for colorectal cancer
with a simple classification similar to the TNM system used for most solid tumors. However, the initial TNM classifications were complicated and failed to provide
adequate prognostic information for the different stages. The survival for patients with stage II disease was the same as or worse than that for patients with stage III
cancer. 222,223 and 224 One of the main problems with those initial classifications was the fact that the number of positive lymph nodes was ignored.

TABLE 33.7-5. Tumor, Node, Metastasis Stage Grouping

Eventually, the AJCC and the UICC unified their TNM systems, creating a simpler system with greater prognostic value. The 1988 and 1994 revised systems included
the number of affected lymph nodes as an important variable, and the newest system was found to have greater prognostic accuracy.
The rules for classification of colorectal cancer are relatively simple. 225 Colorectal cancers are commonly staged after surgical exploration and pathologic evaluation of
the resected specimen. Tumors invading the stalk of polyps are classified according to the same definitions adopted for colorectal cancers. Carcinoma in situ (Tis)
includes cancers confined to the glandular basement membrane or lamina propria. T1 tumors invade the submucosa, T2 tumors invade the muscularis propria, and T3
tumors invade through the muscularis propria into the subserosa or into nonperitonealized pericolic or perirectal tissue. T4 tumors invade other organs or structures or
perforate the visceral peritoneum. Tumors invading other colorectal segments by way of the serosa (i.e., carcinoma of the cecum invading the sigmoid) are classified
as T4. 225 Recurrent tumors at the site of surgery are assigned to the proximal segment of the anastomosis. 225
The new TNM classification calls for at least 12 lymph nodes to be analyzed. N0 denotes that all nodes are negative. N1 includes tumors with metastasis in one to
three regional lymph nodes. N2 indicates metastasis in four or more regional lymph nodes. Metastatic nodules or foci found in the pericolic, perirectal, or adjacent
mesentery without evidence of residual lymph node tissue are equivalent to regional node metastasis. Involvement of the external iliac or common iliac lymph nodes is
classified as metastatic disease (M1). 225 The concept of distant metastasis is virtually self-explanatory.
The TNM system also classifies a tumor based on its histologic grade, including four levels from well-differentiated to undifferentiated, and should not be used for
sarcomas, lymphomas, and carcinoids arising in the colorectum. Additional independent prognostic factors worthy of attention include the histologic type,
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level, and vascular invasion. 225 The authors strongly recommend that the TNM staging system be used routinely ( Table 33.7-6).

TABLE 33.7-6. American Joint Committee on Cancer–Union Internationale Contre le Cancer Tumor, Node, Metastasis Staging of Colon and Rectal Cancer

ADDITIONAL PROGNOSTIC FEATURES
Clinical Features
AGE. Although colorectal cancer is a disease that occurs predominantly in older adults, it also affects a significant number of younger patients. Starting with the 1958

article by Hoerner,several investigators have reported more aggressive tumor behavior and a worse overall survival rate for patients with colorectal cancer whose
disease was diagnosed before the patient had reached the age of 40. Several explanations for this finding have been explored, including the notion that younger
patients are more prone to delayed diagnoses. They seem to have a higher frequency of high-grade tumors, and their disease is more commonly diagnosed at an
advanced stage. Recio and Bussey (1965) noted an increased percentage of mucinous tumors in younger patients. In their study, high-grade tumors accounted for
53% of all tumors in the young group and only 20% in the older group. The most common histologic pattern in young patients is an aggressive, mucin-producing
adenocarcinoma,226 particularly in patients younger than 20 years old. When comparing patients with colorectal cancer who were younger than 40 years with older
patients, Behbehani et al. (1985) found both a higher incidence of poorly differentiated tumors (21% vs. 8%, respectively) and a more advanced stage at presentation
in the young patients. The survival rate for young patients was 23% versus 61%, respectively, for the general population. Stage III patients had a survival rate of 56%
in the general population, as compared with 34% in young adults. Data compiled by the Commission on Cancer Data from the National Cancer Database from hospital
cancer registries across the United States showed that the very elderly tended to present with an earlier stage of disease than younger patients. 227 Others have
supported the notion that young patients tend to present with more advanced disease, 228 reflecting a more aggressive tumor or a delay in diagnosis; however, most
analyses have failed to show a significant difference in prognosis when stage-adjusted survival is analyzed.
The prognosis for elderly patients with colorectal cancer is less well studied. Patients older than 80 years submitted for curative surgery have similar operative
mortality when compared with patients in their fifties to seventies. 229 data supplied by cancer registries in 17 countries in Europe on patients in whom colorectal
cancer was diagnosed between 1978 and 1989 showed a possible decreased survival rate with increasing age. 230 Additional data on the prognosis for very elderly
patients affected by colorectal cancer is greatly needed in view of the expected rapid growth of this segment of society.
GENDER. Several older analyses have shown a survival advantage for women (as compared to men) with colorectal cancer. Among known associations with reduced

colorectal cancer risk, women appear to ingest more dietary fiber, to benefit more from physical activity and body mass, and to consume less alcohol. Hormonal
characteristics may also affect a woman's risk of developing colorectal cancer. 231 However, others have failed to demonstrate a significant difference in prognosis
based on gender alone. 232,233
An inverse association has been detected between the number of pregnancies and the risk of colon cancer. 234 Parity appears to exert its predominant effect on risk of
cancer of the right colon. 235 The use of oral contraceptives has also been linked to lower risk of colon and rectal cancer. 236 However, some investigators have recently
questioned the true effect of reproductive events or oral contraceptives. Interestingly, parity could have no effect on the absolute risk of colorectal cancer but appears
to have led to a decrease in proximal and an increase in distal colon cancer. Increasingly, the use of estrogen replacement therapy in postmenopausal women has
been linked with a decrease in risk of subsequent colorectal cancer. 237 The confirmation of this finding would have far-reaching implications in public health.
Although the risk of colon cancer is similar in men and women, women frequently have the perception that colorectal cancer is a male disease and so they
underestimate their true risk. 238 Partially in consequence, women are less likely than men to undergo screening studies. 239 This represents a true public health
problem.
SYMPTOMS. As the natural history of colorectal cancer becomes better understood,

240

we are compelled to believe that the length of time required for the development
and growth of colorectal cancer allows a window of opportunity for early detection and an increase in cures for colorectal cancer. 241 Indeed, screening efforts have
been proven to reduce mortality from colorectal cancer. 242 Cancers detected by routine screening are less likely to have spread to lymph nodes or adjacent organs
and, consequently, are less likely to be symptomatic. Beahrs and Sanfelippo (1971) reported that the 5-year survival for symptomatic colorectal cancer patients was
49%, as compared with 71% for asymptomatic patients, confirming that patients who present with symptoms from their tumors are more likely to have advanced
disease and less likely to have a favorable outcome.
The duration of symptoms has not been conclusively proven as a prognostic factor. Contrary to what could be expected, several large studies have failed to
demonstrate a direct relation between the duration of symptoms prior to diagnosis and pathologic stage at the time of surgery for colorectal cancer. 243 Patients in
whom disease is diagnosed and treated prior to the development of any symptoms do tend to have early-stage colorectal cancer and improved survival. 243 However,
patients with a short symptomatic history of colon cancer do not have a better prognosis than patients with a long history. 437 Pescatori et al.436 found that, in a
relatively small study, those patients with symptoms lasting more than 6 months actually had a significantly lower postoperative mortality and a higher 5-year survival
rate than patients with symptoms lasting for less than 6 months. Copeland et al., 438 in a much larger trial (1084 patients), reported a slightly worse 5-year survival rate
for patients with symptoms lasting longer than 6 months. The available data support the notion that patients in whom colorectal cancer is diagnosed prior to the
development of any symptoms tend to have a better prognosis than do symptomatic patients. The duration of symptoms does not seem to yield any significant
prognostic value. 372
OBSTRUCTION AND PERFORATION. Carcinoma of the colon that is complicated by obstruction or perforation has been recognized as having a poorer prognosis.

205

Data
obtained from 1021 patients with Dukes stage B and C colorectal cancer who were entered into randomized clinical trials of the NSABP showed that the presence of
bowel obstruction strongly influenced the prognostic outcome. The effect of bowel obstruction was more pronounced when the obstruction was located in the right
colon. The larger-sized tumor needed to block the ascending colon completely might allow a longer time for these tumors to grow and spread when compared with
tumors located in the descending colon.
A review of the Massachusetts General Hospital records compared patients presenting with obstruction or perforation with a control group undergoing curative
resection. The actuarial 5-year survival rate seen in patients presenting with obstruction was 31%, in contrast to 59% in control patients. For patients with localized
perforation, the 5-year actuarial survival rate was 44%.
According to a study involving 709 patients who underwent resection for colorectal carcinoma, stage was the strongest prognostic variable. However, obstruction had
an independent effect in the same multivariate analysis. The Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group (GITSG) multivariate analysis concluded that obstruction was an
important indicator of prognosis, independent of Dukes stage. Bowel perforation was a poor prognostic factor only for disease-free survival.
HEMORRHAGE OR RECTAL BLEEDING. Cancers characterized by erosion are believed to manifest earlier than those characterized by invasion. Therefore, tumors

presenting with bleeding are thought to be found earlier and to be associated with a better prognosis. This belief has not been confirmed in other studies. In the
GITSG multivariate analysis, the presence of melena or rectal bleeding showed a trend as a prognostic factor for prolonged survival but failed to reach statistical
significance (P = .08). Chapuis et al. (1985) demonstrated by univariate analysis in a large study conducted in Australia that the presence of rectal bleeding predicted

longer survival; however, the significance of this symptom disappeared on multivariate analysis.
PRIMARY TUMOR LOCATION. Multiple analyses have shown that cancers arising at or below the peritoneal reflection (rectosigmoid and rectum) have a worse 5-year

survival rate than those arising above the reflection. 232 With regard to colon primary tumors, different authors have reached different conclusions. Some, including
Wolmark et al. (1967, 1983) in a large retrospective review of data from the NSABP, reported that lesions in the right side carry a worse prognosis. Poorer prognosis
for patients with disease in the left colon has been reported. Several investigators report no difference based on the location of the primary tumor. The large GITSG
colon cancer experience showed that tumor location (left, right, and rectosigmoid or sigmoid) was of low prognostic value.
PRIMARY TUMOR SIZE. In contrast to most solid tumors, the size of the primary tumor is not considered in the staging of colorectal cancer, reflecting the unusual nature

of these cancers. Even though some authors have shown improved survival with smaller tumors, most studies have failed to demonstrate a significant prognostic
value for the size of the primary tumor at the time of diagnosis. 191 Data collected by the NSABP also underscore the lack of a relation between tumor size and lymph
node metastasis. Indeed, an M. D. Anderson Cancer Center review demonstrated that patients with Dukes B2 tumors frequently had larger primary lesions than did
patients with Dukes stage C and D tumors.
PRIMARY TUMOR CONFIGURATION. When compared with ulcerating tumors, exophytic tumors tend to penetrate the bowel wall less frequently (24% vs. 39%,

respectively) and have less frequent nodal metastases and fewer hematogenous metastases (23% vs. 31%, respectively). Analysis of a GITSG colon adjuvant study
revealed that the presence of an exophytic lesion had a beneficial effect on survival when compared with ulcerating lesions.
BLOOD TRANSFUSION. Considerable controversy has surrounded the association of perioperative blood transfusions and the recurrence rate of colorectal cancer. 244

Some investigators have reported worse disease-free survival in patients who require transfusions. 245 The reason for this outcome would be a transfusion-related form
of immunosuppression.246 However, when differences in confounding background variables are accounted for, the significance of transfusion seems less evident, 247
and several authors believe it to have no direct relation to prognosis. 248 By multivariate analysis in a prospective study, no negative influence of transfusion on
survival could be detected. 249
A retrospective analysis evaluating 1051 patients treated with curative surgery for stage II or III colorectal adenocarcinoma at the Mayo Clinic demonstrated that the
use of blood components probably had no impact on disease recurrence, and the documented adverse impact of transfusions is more likely due to other variables or
to the underlying illness necessitating the transfusion. 250 This was confirmed in a study in which patients were randomized to receive, when needed, perioperative
transfusions with either allogeneic or autologous blood. 251 There were no differences in disease-free survival between the two groups. Disease-free and
cancer-specific survivals were increased in the group that donated but did not receive any transfusions, as opposed to those who received the transfusions,
suggesting that the conditions that necessitate transfusion may be more important than the transfusion itself. 251
Pathologic Features
VASCULAR ENDOTHELIAL GROWTH FACTOR. VEGF is an important factor in the angiogenic process. Several studies have demonstrated a correlation between the

expression of VEGF and vessel count in the tumor specimen, and a combination of vessel count and expression of VEGF may be useful for predicting distant
recurrence in patients with node-negative colon cancer. 252 VEGF is being evaluated as a possible prognostic marker and also is currently an important new target for
novel therapeutic agents in the treatment of cancer. 253
LYMPH NODE MICROMETASTASIS. Lymph node status has long been recognized as one of the best prognostic markers in patients with colorectal cancer. To minimize

false-negative results, a minimum number of lymph nodes should be evaluated, though there is no clear consensus on the ideal number. The TNM classification calls
for at least 12 nodes to be examined, 225 whereas a recent review suggested that 14 nodes may be a better target. 217 New techniques directed at increasing the
number of lymph nodes available for analysis are being developed, including new staining procedures 254 and sentinel lymph node mapping. 255 Unfortunately, despite
all efforts, a significant number of patients with grossly negative lymph nodes eventually experience disease recurrence, and many of those patients who experience
recurrence are believed to have had microscopic involvement of their lymph nodes.
Determining the actual lymph node status of patients who received potentially curative surgery would be a valuable tool in the treatment of colorectal cancer. This is
especially true for those patients with stage II disease in whom the need for adjuvant therapy remains an intensely debated topic. Several different techniques are
being explored, including immunohistochemistry, 256 radioimmunologically guided surgery, 257 and histochemical detection of micrometastatic deposits in bone marrow
aspirates.258 An area of intensive research is the use of reverse transcriptase–PCR (RT-PCR) targeting different primers in blood, bone marrow, and lymph nodes.
Primers used thus far with varying degrees of success have included matrilysin (matrix metalloproteinase 7), cytokeratin, and guanylyl cyclase C. 259,260 and 261
Perhaps no other primer has been sought and studied as much as CEA. 262 Mori et al.263 performed both histologic and molecular examination of CEA-specific
RT-PCR in 406 lymph nodes obtained from 65 patients with breast or GI carcinomas. Patients were followed prospectively for 2 years, and the positive detection rate
increased from 20% by histologic examination to 60% by RT-PCR. The recurrence rate was 40% in 15 cases showing positive results in the histologic and molecular
examinations, 14% in 29 cases showing histologically negative but RT-PCR-positive results, and 0% in 21 cases showing negative results in both examinations. The
positive detection rate in peripheral blood samples increased with advancing stage of disease. With respect to 62 cases in which curative surgery was performed,
CEA was detected in 12 cases. In 4 of these 12 cases, metastatic disease developed after surgery, whereas, at the time of the study's publication, metastasis had
failed to develop in any of 50 cases that were negative by RT-PCR. 263 Novel potential targets for diagnostic PCR and RT-PCR are constantly being sought.
ADJACENT ORGAN INVOLVEMENT. Involvement of adjacent organs has long been considered an important adverse prognostic factor. Furthermore, the surgical removal

of the affected organ did not seem to alter overall survival for such patients. The prognostic value of adjacent organ invasion seems to be more pronounced in
node-negative patients, and the type and duration of presenting symptoms had no effect on the survival in a series reported by Eldar et al. 264 The presence of
pathologically confirmed organ invasion had a significant impact on overall survival when compared with clinical involvement only in a series of colon cancer patients
reported by Minsky et al. 199 The 5-year survival for stage B3 patients with pathologic involvement was only 27% versus 88% for the others. Interestingly, the same
authors failed to demonstrate this difference in patients with stage B3 tumors of the rectum. 191
RADIAL (LATERAL) MARGINS. Whether the proximal and distal margins are involved in colorectal cancer has traditionally been emphasized in pathologic reports.

However, the fact that penetration of the primary tumor carries significant prognostic value should be carefully considered. Quirke et al. 265 reported an 85% incidence
of local failure in patients with rectal cancer and positive lateral margins, versus only 3% in the patients with completely negative margins. Some reports have found
up to an impressive 33% positive lateral margins in patients with negative proximal and distal margins. 266 A large review of 325 patients who underwent curative
surgery for rectal or rectosigmoid cancer demonstrated 29% local recurrence for patients with positive radial margins versus 8% local recurrence for those with
negative radial margins. 267 Radial margins seem to be particularly important in rectal cancer, and the concept of total mesorectal excision explores the idea that clean
lateral margins improve local control.
DEGREE OF DIFFERENTIATION (GRADE). The degree of tumor differentiation, also known as tumor grading, has long been suspected to be a prognostic factor in

colorectal cancer. Several recent metaanalyses and multivariate analyses confirm the importance of tumor grading as an independent prognostic factor for survival. 205
Grade has been associated with several other prognostic factors, and most patients with poorly differentiated tumors will have multiple poor prognostic factors.
Interestingly, patients with lower-grade tumors at the initial diagnosis may be more likely to undergo a second curative surgery for recurrences than patients whose
original tumors were of a higher grade. 268
COLLOID (MUCINOUS) CANCER. Colonic mucins are high-molecular-weight glycoproteins produced by goblet cells of colonic epithelium. Some studies have indicated

that colon cancers that produce high amounts of mucin have a poorer prognosis and are frequently diagnosed at advanced stages 269 and in younger patients. 270 In
animal models, mucin-producing cancer cells form tumors larger than those of low-mucin variants and seem to have increased metastatic potential. 271 In humans,
mucinous tumors are associated with a clear, gelatinous fluid, present either within or outside the cancer cells. The variant in which the mucin remains inside the cell
is commonly referred to as signet-ring carcinoma. This rare variant of colorectal cancer accounts for only 1% to 2% of all colorectal cancers but is well-known for its
aggressiveness. 271a
Initial reports emphasized the fact that signet-ring carcinoma is capable of growing and spreading intramurally, sparing the mucosa and forming a linitis plastica
appearance. This presentation is uncommon and is seen in fewer than 20% of the signet-ring carcinoma cases but has important implications for diagnosis, as the

cancer may not be easily detected on a routine colonoscopy. Despite a few reports indicating otherwise, most authors report a worse prognosis for signet-ring
carcinomas than for common adenocarcinomas and even the conventional mucinous carcinoma. The 5-year overall survival rate is poor and varies from 0% to 36%,
with most series falling toward the lower value. 271a Signet-ring carcinoma patients tend to have a higher rate of peritoneal seeding, and several series have
demonstrated that peritoneal carcinomatosis is more frequently seen than liver metastasis. 271a
The extracellular variant, commonly termed mucinous carcinoma, is considerably more common. In a series of 352 patients with colorectal cancer, Secco et al. 272
identified 39 cases (11%). The same incidence had been reported previously. 273 Mucinous carcinomas seem to have a predilection for the rectum and the sigmoid
colon.272 Several series have indicated that the prognosis for mucinous carcinoma is intermediate between that for signet-ring carcinoma and the prognosis for regular
adenocarcinoma.272 Some authors have argued that the worse outcome for these patients is due to the more advanced stage at presentation. 269
Recent reports showing a reduced incidence of the K-ras mutation in patients with signet-ring and poorly differentiated carcinomas in relation to ordinary colorectal
carcinoma suggest that these types of carcinomas may have a different genetic background than well- or moderately differentiated colorectal carcinoma. 274 Mucinous
carcinomas seems to exhibit less apoptotic activity than does regular colorectal cancer (19% vs. 51%, respectively; P = .01). 275
CELL-CYCLE PARAMETERS AND PLOIDY. Aneuploidy is an abnormal balance of chromosomes, and recent evidence seems to indicate that it may cause genetic

instability, leading to the karyotypic and phenotypic heterogeneity commonly seen in cancer cells. 276 Even though the results of DNA analysis of colorectal
adenocarcinomas varies greatly depending on study methodology, 277 aneuploidy is commonly observed in colorectal cancer cells, especially in advanced stages. 211 In
a series of 51 cases analyzed by Saccani et al., 211 normal mucosa adjacent to aneuploid tumors showed only a 7% incidence of aneuploidy, whereas the mucosa
adjacent to diploid cancers demonstrated only diploid characteristics.
Despite the controversies, there is enough evidence to suggest that a greater proportion of the higher-stage tumors are aneuploid and that aneuploid tumors tend to
have a higher growth rate and poorer survival than diploid tumors. 278 When various prognostic factors are analyzed, aneuploid tumors are associated with factors that
are indicative of a poor prognosis. 278 The prognostic value of the tumor's ploidy is especially important in stage II patients. In a small study by Nori et al. (1995), the
DNA content of colon cancers in 20 stage II patients with evidence of disease relapse was measured and compared with 20 stage II patients in whom there was no
evidence of relapse. Aneuploidy occurred in 16 patients (80%) with recurrence, as compared to only 8 patients (40%) in the control group. Aneuploidy was associated
with significantly higher tumor recurrence rate ( P = .024) and a shorter overall survival ( P<.002). These results are consistent with an earlier North Central Cancer
Treatment Group (NCCTG) analysis of 694 patients with stage II or III colorectal cancer enrolled in some of their adjuvant trials. Patients with diploid tumors had a
higher survival rate than did those with aneuploid tumors ( P <.001). The proliferation index (the sum of the percentage of cells in S phase plus those in G 2/M phase)
was also a strong prognostic factor ( P<.001). When the ploidy and proliferation data were combined, the patients in the favorable group had a 5-year survival rate of
74%, as compared with 54% for the unfavorable group ( P<.001). 279 Despite some negative reports, 280,281 most series and multivariate analyses have confirmed that
the DNA content is an important independent prognostic factor for survival in colorectal cancer. 279,280,282,283 and 284
BLOOD VESSEL INVASION. Vascular invasion can be divided into blood vessel and lymphatic invasion. Blood vessel invasion generally refers to venous invasion, as

arterial invasion is considered a rare phenomenon. Intramural blood vessel invasion refers to the involvement of vessels located within the bowel wall, whereas
extramural invasion refers to the involvement of vessels located outside the bowel wall. The incidence of blood vessel invasion in colorectal cancer varies from as low
as 17% to as high as 81%, depending on the series reported and on whether special elastic tissue stains were used. 285 The prognostic value of the presence of blood
vessel invasion for overall survival remains controversial. Whereas some researchers have found it to be an independent prognostic factor, 286 others have not been
able to confirm this finding. 285
Minsky et al. (1988) have evaluated the prognostic value of blood vessel invasion independently in colon and in rectal cancers. Analysis of 294 patients who had
curative surgery for colon cancer showed that blood vessel involvement resulted in a significant decrease in the 5-year actuarial survival rate. However, when
examined by proportional hazards analysis, blood vessel invasion was not an independent prognostic variable. The same group retrospectively reviewed 168 patients
who had curative surgery for rectal cancer. A significant decrease in 5-year actuarial survival was seen in patients with extramural blood vessel involvement as
compared with patients who had tumors with intramural or no blood vessel involvement. When the intramural and extramural types of involvement were combined, no
significant impact was noted on the patterns of failure or survival. 287
Krasna et al. 288 and Inoue et al. have used elastic tissue stains and evaluated the prognostic value of blood vessel invasion independently from lymphatic vessel
involvement. In the first series, metastases were seen in 60% of patients with vascular invasion as opposed to 17% of those with no vascular invasion ( P <.0001).
Survival in these patients was 29.7% and 62.2%, respectively ( P <.003). In the second series, a higher incidence of vascular invasion was seen in patients who died
of cancer within 2 years of surgery. These differences were not evident with the use of routine hematoxylin and eosin staining.
LYMPHATIC VESSEL INVASION. In contrast to blood vessel invasion, the presence of lymphatic vessel involvement has been almost uniformly reported as a poor

prognostic factor. Minsky et al. 289 retrospectively reviewed 61 patients with colorectal carcinoma who were found to have lymphatic vessel invasion and compared
them with 401 patients who had tumors without such invasion. In patients with lymphatic vessel invasion, the incidence of positive lymph nodes was 59% as opposed
to 25% for the control group ( P = .0004). The 5-year survival rate also was statistically lower for the patients with lymphatic vessel invasion. Proportional hazards
analysis confirmed that lymphatic vessel invasion is an independent prognostic factor for survival. 289 Other authors have reached a similar conclusion in their own
reviews, suggesting that the presence of lymphatic vessel invasion should be considered a useful prognostic factor for survival in colorectal cancer. 290
PERINEURAL INVASION. The ability of colorectal cancers to invade perineural spaces as far as 10 cm from the primary tumor was first reported in 1943 by Seefeld and

Bargen. This was also the first work in which the presence of perineural invasion was demonstrated to be associated with increased disease recurrences and worse
5-year survival. This conclusion has been confirmed by others. Krasna et al. 288 reported a 73% incidence of metastasis in patients with perineural invasion, as
compared with 27% in those without such invasion ( P<.01) and a 30% survival rate versus 58%, respectively ( P<.003). Several other authors have confirmed that
perineural invasion can be considered an independent prognostic factor for survival, 206 whereas Bouvet et al.291 failed to demonstrate that perineural invasion is a
significant prognostic factor for recurrence in treated rectal cancer. Investigators from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center found by univariate analysis (but not by
multivariate analysis) that the presence of perineural invasion was a significant prognostic factor for time to cancer recurrence. 252
CARCINOEMBRYONIC ANTIGEN. Since it was first described in 1965, CEA has become the most reliable tumor marker for use in the detection of colorectal cancer. It is

recommended as a monitoring tool for patients who have been treated with curative intent. Further, it is a poor prognostic factor for cancer recurrence in patients in
whom the CEA level is elevated preoperatively and who failed to normalize after a potentially curative operation. 54 The prognostic potential of the preoperative CEA
level remains unclear, and even the value above which the CEA is considered significantly elevated has varied from as low as 2.5 ng/dL to as high as 10 ng/mL,
depending on the series reported.
Since the 1970s, several authors have presented evidence indicating that CEA is an independent prognostic factor. 292 In one of the largest reports, Harrison et al. 293
reviewed 572 patients who underwent curative resection for node-negative colon cancer at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. The preoperative CEA level
and the stage of disease predicted survival by both univariate and multivariate analysis.
However, Chapman et al.294 reported that, although the 5-year survival rate for patients with an elevated CEA was 39% as compared with 57% for patients with a
normal CEA level (P = .001), the proportion of patients with an elevated CEA level increased with more advanced tumor stage and a poorly differentiated tumor grade.
Once controls were in place for the variable of stage, CEA was not a predictor of survival. This study confirmed the work by other authors that failed to demonstrate a
significant independent prognostic value for preoperative CEA level. 295 An elevated CEA level may be a reflection of a more advanced colorectal carcinoma.
IMMUNE RESPONSE TO THE PRIMARY TUMOR. Careful pathologic evaluation of the primary tumor site has demonstrated that a significant number of tumors exhibit

evidence of local inflammation and that this reaction is a positive prognostic factor. Jass et al. 207 demonstrated that the presence of lymphocytic infiltration was a very
important independent prognostic factor in colorectal cancer. This finding led to the development of the Jass staging system. 207 By univariate analysis, the presence
of lymphocytic infiltration has been demonstrated to have prognostic importance for survival in colon cancer, 208 and lymphatic stroma reaction has been demonstrated
to be of prognostic value for local failure in rectal cancer. 296 NSABP protocol R-01 showed that survival was significantly decreased with increasing numbers of
eosinophils and mast cells present at the tumor border. 297 Recent work by Diederichsen et al. 298 using flow cytometry to study the phenotype of tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes in 41 cases of colorectal cancer showed that expression of class II human leukocyte antigens (HLA) did not correlate with any lymphocyte surface
markers. Because tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes are “turned off” rather than stimulated when tumor cells express HLA class II but not CD80, the lack of correlations

could be due to anergy.
DELETIONS IN COLORECTAL CANCER. Allelic deletions involving chromosome 18q occur in more than 70% of colorectal cancers. In colorectal cancer, the DCC gene

was cloned from a region of chromosome 18q, and whereas the DCC gene was expressed in most normal tissues, including colonic mucosa, its expression was
greatly reduced or absent in most colorectal carcinomas tested. 299 The mechanism of action of DCC is unknown. It may function as a tumor suppressor gene by
inducing apoptosis. 300 Experimentally, DCC induces apoptosis in the absence of ligand binding and blocks apoptosis when engaged by netrin-1. It is a caspase
substrate, and mutation of the site at which caspase 3 cleaves DCC suppresses the proapoptotic effect of DCC completely.300
In a series of 118 patients who had undergone curative surgery for stage II or III colon cancer, those patients whose tumor exhibited no evidence of chromosome 18q
allelic loss showed a better disease-free and overall survival than did those whose tumor demonstrated 18q allelic loss. When patients were stratified by tumor stage,
a significant survival advantage for patients whose tumor had no allelic loss on chromosome 18q was observed in stage II and in stage III disease. In particular,
patients with stage II disease whose tumor had no chromosome 18q allelic loss demonstrated an excellent clinical outcome, with a 5-year disease-free survival rate of
96%. In contrast, the 5-year disease-free survival rate of patients with stage II disease and chromosome 18q allelic loss was only 54%. In a multivariate analysis, the
status of chromosome 18q was a significant independent prognostic factor for both disease-free and overall survival. 213 Several investigators have shown that not only
deletion of and lowered messenger RNA expression of the DCC gene but also marked reduction of DCC protein occurred in colon cancer tissues. 301 In addition, colon
cancer patients with liver metastases expressed significantly lower levels of DCC as compared to patients without such metastases.
Additional Tumor Biologic Features
ONCOGENES AND MOLECULAR MARKERS. Oncogenes and molecular markers are discussed extensively in Chapter 33.1. However, the study of molecular markers has

enormously advanced our understanding of the development and treatment of colorectal cancer. Molecular markers have the potential to revolutionize the way such
cancers are treated. Some of the areas of intensive research currently are thymidylate synthase, 302 dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD), 303 and the presence of
microsatellite instability. 304
p53 GENE The p53 gene located on chromosome 17p is a well-known tumor suppressor gene. Attallah et al. 305 reported no significant difference in p53
overexpression between patients with stage II and III colorectal cancer; however, flow cytometric analysis revealed a slightly higher incidence of DNA aneuploidy in
75% of p53-positive cases as compared with 64.3% p53 positivity in diploid tumors.
The abnormal p53 appears to be a late phenomenon in colorectal carcinogenesis. This mutation may allow the growing tumor with multiple genetic alterations to
evade cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. 306 In a retrospective review of 141 patients with resected stage II and stage III colon carcinoma, the presence of a p53 mutation
was the single most important risk factor associated with poorer survival in patients with either stage of disease (stage II, P = .02; stage III, P = .006).307 A p53
mutation increased the risk of death by 2.82 times in patients with stage II disease and by 2.39 times in patients with stage III colon carcinoma. 307
The Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG) assessed the prognostic value of p53 in 66 stage II and 163 stage III colon cancer patients in adjuvant intergroup trial
0035.308p53 expression was found in 63% of cancers and was associated with favorable survival in stage III but not stage II disease. Seven-year survival with stage III
disease was 56% with p53 expression versus 43% with no p53 expression (P = .012). 308 The true independent prognostic value of p53 remains to be defined.
IMMUNOLOGY AND MARKERS. The most frequently used tumor marker in colorectal cancer continues to be CEA, though several other markers have been evaluated in

this disease. For example, many investigators have demonstrated that the blood group antigens ABH and Lewis, which are normally expressed only in the proximal
colon, can be reexpressed in distal colon cancers. Also, an antigen that is incompatible with the individual's blood type can be expressed. 309 Similar alterations occur
in adenomatous polyps, but with reduced frequency. ABH antigens are not commonly expressed in hyperplastic polyps but are seen in neoplastic polyps. 309
CA 19-9 is a carbohydrate cell surface antigen, a sialylated lacto-N-fucopentose related to the Lewis blood group substance. CA 19-9 does not appear to be as
sensitive as CEA but does have some value as a prognostic factor, especially if combined with CEA. 310 However, currently available data do not justify the routine use
of CA 19-9 in colorectal cancer outside of an investigational trial. Several other antigens have been defined with the use of monoclonal antibodies, but their use
remains restricted and has not been adopted in clinical practice because these antibodies seem to add little to the currently available markers.
ADDITIONAL FACTORS. A comprehensive review of every prognostic factor studied in colorectal cancer is beyond the scope of this chapter. Extensive review of such

factors as the amount of collagen type IV present in the tumor matrix, 311 the presence of reactive lymph nodes, and the morphometric measurements of the tumor cell
(nuclear morphology) have yielded conflicting results. 181 Such other factors as proliferating cell nuclear antigen expression, 312 sucrase isomaltase, 313 helix pomatia
agglutinin, 314 microacinar growth pattern,210 autocrine motility factor, 315 ornithine decarboxylase, 316 fibronectin, and tumor-associated glycoprotein DF3 317 have shown
some prognostic value, but the true value of many of these factors continues to be explored in colorectal cancer. 318

TREATMENT OF PRECANCEROUS CONDITIONS
NEOPLASTIC POLYPS (ADENOMAS)
Adenomas are the most common neoplasms in the large bowel. They are classified into three types—tubular, tubulovillous, and villous—according to their histologic
appearance. Tubular adenomas account for 75% of polyps found, tubulovillous adenomas account for 15% of all neoplastic polyps, and villous adenomas account for
10%. The malignancy rate of tubular adenomas is 5%, but it rises to 40% in villous adenomas. The malignancy rate for tubulovillous adenomas is 22%, suggesting
that these tumors behave more like villous than like tubular adenomas. The entire colon must be examined if a histologically proven adenoma has been removed from
the colon or is found on endoscopic biopsy. 164 Endoscopic removal of polyps should be performed to confirm the diagnosis of a benign or malignant polyp. Polyps with
a stalk can be removed by endoscopic snare polypectomy. Sessile lesions can be removed in a piecemeal fashion; however, there is an increased risk of
complications, and judgment must be used to assess this risk and the practicality of attempting piecemeal removal of tumors, especially in the relatively thin-walled
abdominal colon.
The National Polyp Study demonstrated a synchronous polyp detection rate of 29% to 35% at colonoscopic follow-up for patients in whom an adenomatous polyp has
been demonstrated.164 This detection rate depends on the number of interventions and the time intervals from the last colonoscopy. Approximately 15% of patients will
have evidence of small adenomas after the colon is considered cleared of polyps at colonoscopy.
Further management and timing of surveillance depends on the characteristics of the adenomas removed initially, as well as on their number and the clinical status of
the patient. Follow-up of adenomas containing in situ carcinoma or severe dysplasia that have been completely removed is the same as that for benign adenomas:
routine follow-up colonoscopy at 3-year intervals once the colon is cleared. 164 Individuals in whom the colon is not cleared of all polyps will require an earlier
examination. In addition, patients having multiple adenomas are at a higher risk for oversight of synchronous adenomas and, therefore, these patients should be
examined at 1 year. A large sessile adenoma that cannot be removed endoscopically will often require surgery.
Large villous adenomas (i.e., >2 cm in diameter) have a malignant potential that is significantly greater than that for other adenomatous polyps. Even small villous
adenomas have a greater malignant potential than do adenomatous polyps of the same size. They are sessile, in most cases, and grossly appear velvety owing to
frond-like glands. Villous adenomas require complete excision for histologic examination. Random biopsies of villous adenomas are unreliable and only contribute to
difficulties in management. If such adenomas can be palpated in the rectum, they are more likely to be benign if they are soft. However, excision is still required.
Surgical resection should be performed. This is due to the high risk of recurrence, complications from endoscopic polypectomy, and presence of invasive cancer.
When located in the rectum, such lesions can often be treated by local excision. Submucosal techniques of transanal excision or the Kraske approach, which are
used for large lesions that otherwise cannot be approached by transanal excision, are appropriate in the complete excision of rectal villous adenomas. 319
Circumferential villous adenomas of the lower rectum can be removed in three to four longitudinal strips and have subsequent mucosal advancement. Alternatively,
low anterior resection or proctectomy with coloanal anastomosis can be used to manage large circumferential villous adenomas of the lower rectum. Laser ablation of
the lesion has the disadvantage of destroying tissue before pathologic examination is carried out. Nonetheless, this may be reasonable when an operative approach
is prohibited.

MANAGEMENT OF FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS
Because the risk of development of colorectal carcinoma in patients with FAP is virtually 100% when the colon and rectum are left intact, resection is the only
therapeutic intervention known to alter the natural history of this disease. 98 Owing to the high rate of development of carcinomas before the age of 40, this surgical
intervention usually is performed relatively early in life (15 to 20 years of age). Surgery should not be delayed once the diagnosis is established. 320 Surgical
procedures in these patients range from total abdominal colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis to total proctocolectomy with ileoanal anastomosis. 321 Total
proctocolectomy and end ileostomy are rarely used for these patients except in the presence of a failed ileoanal reservoir, in patients older than 50 years, in the face
of poor medical condition, or in patients with poor sphincter tone. An alternative to end ileostomy in these patients may be the use of a Kock pouch to act as a
continent ileostomy.
Removal of the entire abdominal colon with a small bowel anastomosis performed to the upper rectum is the procedure selected for many patients with polyposis. It
carries a relatively low mortality rate and low morbidity rate. 322 Advantages to this procedure include the avoidance of a stoma, relatively normal bowel habits, and
avoidance of bladder and sexual dysfunction. 323 Selection of this procedure requires that the surgeon be able to remove or fulgurate any rectal polyps and
necessitates continued endoscopic surveillance of the rectum. Risk of subsequent carcinoma in the rectal stump increases with age, the presence of malignancy in
the original colectomy specimen, the length of the rectal stump, and the number of rectal polyps present preoperatively ( Fig. 33.7-4).324 Patients with a rectal stump
greater than 10–15 cm long appear to be at greater risk of rectal cancer. 325 In a review of 11 member registries from the Leads Castle Polyposis Group, the
cumulative incidence of rectal carcinoma was found to be 13% at 25 years.

FIGURE 33.7-4. Cumulative risk of rectal cancer after ileorectal anastomosis over 25 years of follow-up.

Total proctocolectomy with ileoanal anastomosis is commonly used in patients who are unable to accept the risk of subsequent rectal carcinoma, those with extensive
rectal polyps, or those who develop large numbers of rectal polyps after ileorectal anastomosis. The advantages of this procedure are virtual elimination of rectal
cancer risk and avoidance of a permanent stoma. Total proctocolectomy with ileoanal anastomosis does carry a higher complication rate than does abdominal
colectomy. Morbidity rates vary from 10% to 24. 326 Stool frequency varies from three to six bowel movements per day, with occasional nocturnal stooling; however,
quality of life is similar to that of patients with ileorectal anastomosis. 327 Continence and bowel habits improve with time, and most patients are free of antidiarrheal
agents by 1 year after surgery. Satisfaction for patients undergoing total proctocolectomy and ileoanal anastomosis can be quite high. This operation can be
performed in selected patients with FAP and coexistent cancer without compromising oncologic or functional outcomes. 328 It also can be performed after a previous
ileorectal anastomosis.
Vasen et al.(1996) and Wu et al. 329 have described a correlation between specific sites of mutations within the APC gene and the subsequent development of rectal
carcinoma after ileorectal anastomosis. Vasen's group noted that the risk of secondary surgery for cancer or polyps is higher in patients with a mutation after codon
1250 (RR, 2.7; P <.05). Wu's group 329 reported that APC gene mutations at codons 1309 and 1328 were associated with severe polyposis and should be treated with
total proctocolectomy. The utility of this technique in selecting patients for the appropriate surgical procedure requires further investigation. 330 A thorough discussion
between patient and physician, taking into account the patient's medical characteristics, history, and wishes, will help in the decision making about management
techniques for FAP. 331,332 Referral to an established registry will lower the stage of disease at which cancer is diagnosed in relatives of the proband and thereby will
improve survival.
Colorectal carcinoma is but one component of the overall syndrome of FAP. Additional tumors of the GI tract (e.g., periampullary cancer) as well as thyroid, brain, or
hepatic tumors can complicate this disease. 333 A difficult problem that occurs in approximately 3.5% to 38.0% of patients with FAP is desmoid tumor. Specific
mutations can be associated with severe desmoid disease. 330 These tumors frequently occur in the mesentery of the small bowel and extend into the retroperitoneum.
Mesenteric desmoid tumors often are unresectable because of involvement of the superior mesenteric vessels. Even if resected, there is a very high recurrence rate
and a very high surgical morbidity rate. 334 Because of the poor results of surgical resection of mesenteric desmoid tumors, a variety of medical treatments, as well as
radiation therapy, have been described. In an FAP patient who has been protected from colorectal cancer by surgery, upper GI tract tumors and desmoids become
more frequent causes of mortality. 98
ULCERATIVE COLITIS
The process of screening and selection of patients for surgery based on biopsy-proven, high-grade dysplasia of the colon in patients with ulcerative colitis was
presented earlier, in Screening. As described, patients can be observed, with surgery performed only for those with high cancer risk or invasive carcinoma. This
discussion of the indications for surgery related to the risk of colorectal cancer is not relevant to the indications for surgery related to complications of inflammatory
bowel disease itself.
Commonly, the timing of colectomy is related to findings of dysplasia on random biopsy of the colon. Some studies have emphasized the development of cancer in
patients with ulcerative colitis in whom dysplastic changes were seen in the colon on biopsy. Such findings have generated screening strategies based on the
presence of dysplasia. 335 The disadvantages to this approach are the need for life-long screening even in the presence of quiescent disease and the requirement that
experienced pathologists perform the evaluation for dysplasia. 329 The appeal of this technique is that it can provide indications for resection of the large bowel before
the presence of a colorectal carcinoma becomes obvious by symptoms or gross appearance.
Duration of disease is another factor in timing surgery. Identifying neoplastic lesions at colonoscopy can be difficult because of the marked distortion of the mucosa
and the flat appearance of many cancers associated with ulcerative colitis. The presence of a mass is an indication for surgery even in the absence of a biopsy
specimen that exhibits dysplasia or cancer.
The options for a patient who has indications for surgery due to cancer risk in ulcerative colitis include total proctocolectomy with end ileostomy, total proctocolectomy
with Kock pouch, total abdominal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis, and total proctocolectomy with ileoanal anastomosis. 336 Each of these procedures has
advantages and disadvantages that should be considered in light of each patient's individual circumstances. Total proctocolectomy with end ileostomy is most suitable
for elderly patients, those with impaired sphincter function, and those in whom an ileoanal pouch is technically impossible or has failed. It is a single-stage procedure
with a lower rate of complications than the alternative procedures. Total abdominal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis is a relatively simple procedure that avoids
any of the risks of proctectomy and the need for ileostomy. However, it does appear to carry the risks of recurrence of symptoms in the retained rectum as well as a
small risk of carcinoma in the retained rectal segment. It should not be used in patients with preexisting large bowel cancer or rectal dysplasia, because of an
approximately 70% risk of subsequent development of rectal carcinoma or dysplasia. Close endoscopic follow-up is required for any patient with a retained rectum
who undergoes ileorectal anastomosis for chronic ulcerative colitis. Rectal cancer risk has been estimated to be 0% to 22%. 336
In selected cases, restorative proctocolectomy can be performed for patients with cancer in the setting of ulcerative colitis. 328 Multicentricity is seen in 25% of such

patients. 328 A complication with this procedure can be pouchitis, which occurs in 7% to 42% of patients. Pouch failure occurs in a small number of patients because of
either technical difficulties at the time of surgery or pelvic sepsis. Problems of early age at onset of colorectal cancer, multiple neoplasms, and need for surveillance
are similar to those encountered by patients with Crohn's disease. 337
HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS COLON CANCER
The development of molecular genetic techniques to establish a presymptomatic diagnosis of HNPCC and the increasing clinical recognition of families with this
syndrome have made the consideration of prophylactic colectomy realistic. Total abdominal colectomy appears to be appropriate, even though there is still a small but
cumulative risk of rectal carcinoma development in patients with HNPCC who have undergone abdominal colectomy. 334 Because the majority of such patients will be
adequately treated by an abdominal colectomy, it could be considered as prophylactic management of their colorectal cancer risk. 338 It is appropriate to perform total
abdominal colectomy at the time of operation for colorectal cancer or endoscopically untreatable colorectal polyps in patients with HNPCC, because of the high risk of
synchronous and metachronous colorectal cancer.
Experience with this operation for FAP demonstrates that abdominal colectomy has low complication rates and good functional outcomes that are acceptable for such
a prophylactic procedure. Some have recommended that patients with proven germline mutations be given the option of prophylactic abdominal colectomy. The
Cancer Genetics Consortium, however, has not found adequate evidence to make a recommendation for prophylactic abdominal colectomy in patients with
HNPCC.329

MANAGEMENT OF POTENTIALLY CURABLE COLON CANCER
PRETREATMENT EVALUATION
After colorectal carcinoma has been diagnosed, the pretreatment assessment is conducted to determine the most appropriate form of treatment. Whereas surgical
management is required for most patients with a diagnosis of colon carcinoma, the appropriateness of a surgical resection will be determined by the extent of disease
and comorbidities. Even in cases of metastatic colorectal carcinoma, surgery may be required for palliation. Some authors have recently documented an ability to
manage colon cancer patients nonoperatively in the presence of metastatic disease without significant complications from bleeding, perforation, or obstruction. 339
A well-conducted history and physical examination will provide a great deal of information about the patient's extent of disease and suitability for treatment. Specific
aspects of the history taking should focus on a personal history of cancer or polyps and family history of colorectal cancer or polyps. Physical examination will reveal
the patient's general suitability for anesthesia and extent of disease. Supraclavicular adenopathy can indicate advanced disease. The abdominal examination can
reveal distention due to ascites or obstruction. An abdominal mass may be palpated to reveal the location of the tumor. Extensive hepatomegaly will produce a mass
or tenderness in the right upper quadrant. Rectal examination can reveal presence of a mass outside the rectum, caused by peritoneal metastases, and may detect
synchronous lesions in patients with colon cancer.
Laboratory examinations should evaluate for the presence of anemia or hepatic dysfunction. Both of which can be consequences of the patient's underlying carcinoma
or comorbid conditions. The CEA level will be most useful in terms of subsequent assessment for disease recurrence if the initial CEA is elevated.
Complete colonic examination will not only allow a biopsy of the index lesion but will also provide information about the exact location of the lesion. Additionally, it will
provide information on the presence or absence of synchronous colon cancers, which are present in 1.5% to 7.6% of cases. In addition, significant synchronous
polyps can occur in 25% to 40% of patients. 129 The colon should be endoscopically cleared of these lesions. If polyps cannot be removed endoscopically, they should
be included in the planned resection.
Chest radiography may reveal the presence of metastases or preexisting severe pulmonary disease that might contraindicate laparotomy. CT scanning is used to
reveal clinically inapparent liver metastases or the extent of local spread of a colon carcinoma. Intraoperative ultrasonography is another useful technique that will be
more sensitive in the detection of liver metastases.
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF CARCINOMA OF THE COLON
Radical resection with curative intent is appropriate for 80% to 90% of patients with colon carcinoma. The surgical principles of elective colonic resection include the
appropriate use of outpatient bowel preparation to reduce the fecal and bacterial load of the colon. This, along with the use of parenteral antibiotics and appropriate
anastomotic techniques, will reduce the risk of postoperative sepsis and morbidity. In patients with partially obstructing lesions, modification of the bowel preparation
or the use of hydration along with the bowel preparation may be required preoperatively. It is important to use prophylaxis for deep venous thrombosis to reduce the
subsequent risks of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. Measures such as early ambulation and the use of intermittent compression devices and
consideration of the use of low-dose heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin in the perioperative period reduce the incidence of venous thrombosis.
Surgical management must include the assessment of liver metastases. Although this is commonly accomplished by palpation and inspection, intraoperative
ultrasonography of the liver has increased the rate of detection of small metastases. 340,341 and 342 The Doppler perfusion index has also been found to predict liver
failure, because occult disease alters liver blood flow. 343 However, liver metastases still occur in 13% to 21% of patients who have negative results on intraoperative
ultrasonography. 344
Extent of Resection
The extent of colonic resection is determined by the blood vessels that must be divided to remove the lymphatic drainage of the tumor-bearing portion of the colon
with tumor-free margins (Fig. 33.7-5). This is the primary treatment approach in patients with colon carcinoma. 345 Segmental resections without extensive mesenteric
resection sometimes are performed in palliative situations. Resection of intermediate and principal nodes requires ligation and division of the main vascular trunks to
the affected colon segment. Tumor-free margins usually are accomplished by resection of at least 5 cm of normal bowel proximal and distal to the tumor. However, in
very aggressive tumors with lymphatic submucosal spread, this may be inadequate. In general, spread beyond the gross limits of the tumor of more than 1.2 cm
occurs only in rare cases.

FIGURE 33.7-5. A: Surgical resection for a cecal or ascending colon cancer. B: Surgical resection for a cancer at the hepatic flexure. C: Surgical resection for a
descending colon cancer. D: Preferred surgical procedure for cancer of the middle and proximal sigmoid colon. In poor-risk patients, the inferior mesenteric artery and
the left colic artery may be preserved. E: Surgical resection for cancer of the retrosigmoid. F: A more radical surgical resection for cancer of the retrosigmoid.
(Modified from Enker WE, Surgical treatment of large bowel cancer. In: Enker WE, Cancer of the colon and rectum. Chicago: Year Book, 1978:73)

Tumors of the right colon include those of the cecum, ascending colon, hepatic flexure, and proximal half of the transverse colon. The ileocolic artery, right colic

artery, and right branches of the middle colic artery usually are divided, and resection of the distal 10 cm of ileum is carried out along with resection of the cecum,
ascending colon, and proximal transverse colon. If the main branch of the middle colic artery is taken near the origin from the superior mesenteric vessels, the bowel
resection is extended to the distal third of the transverse colon to ensure that there is viable bowel for anastomosis. Uncontrolled data exist to demonstrate
improvement in outcomes from extending this resection.
For tumors of the left colon, which includes the descending and upper sigmoid colon, the IMA is ligated near its origin at the aorta, and the splenic flexure of the colon
is anastomosed to the upper rectum. In more limited resections for tumors in the left half of the transverse colon and splenic flexure, the resection may be limited to
the ascending and descending left colic arteries and left branch of the middle colic artery. Anastomosis then is constructed between the proximal transverse colon and
proximal sigmoid colon. Tumors of the distal sigmoid colon are usually resected along with the IMA near its origin at the aorta and the vessels that supply the sigmoid
colon. The anastomosis is created between the area of the splenic flexure and the upper rectum. Growths between the hepatic flexure and splenic flexure may require
a transverse colectomy or an extended right colectomy. The aim of transverse colectomy is removal of the transverse colon, the attached greater omentum, and the
lymphatics lying in the drainage of the middle colic artery. For all these procedures, anastomosis may be created by either hand-sewn techniques or the use of
stapling devices, with a low rate of anastomotic leak.
Extent of Lymph Node Resection
Some patients with node-positive colon carcinoma may be cured by surgical resection alone. Therefore, adequate lymphadenectomy is critical. In addition to its
therapeutic benefits of preventing local progression and subsequent development of symptoms due to mesenteric recurrence, lymphadenectomy is critical in the
staging of patients with colon carcinoma. 329 In colon cancer, recovery of lymph nodes is the parameter used for adjuvant therapy recommendations in the United
States.
Controversy exists over the curative efficacy of extensive lymphadenectomy in patients with colon carcinoma. Excellent results have been obtained with wide
mesenteric resection, whereas other studies have found patients with principle node involvement to be incurable. In a recent update regarding this issue, Slanetz and
Grimson346 reviewed 2409 cases of curative resections. They found that specific groups of patients benefited from high ligation of the vascular pedicle. These were
patients with transmural node-negative tumors and those with limited nodal spread. Those in whom the highest nodes were involved did not appear to benefit.
Contiguous Organ Involvement
For tumors that are adherent to adjacent organs, adhesions should not be divided. In one-half of cases, the adherence may be caused by invasion of these adjacent
organs by a transmural bulky colon carcinoma. 347 Separation of sites of adherence can disrupt the tumor, increase recurrence, and reduce survival rates. The organs
commonly involved with transverse colon tumors are the stomach and omentum. Tumors of the splenic flexure may involve the spleen, tail of pancreas, left kidney, or
diaphragm. Tumors of the right colon or cecum may involve the duodenum or right kidney. Tumors anywhere in the colon may involve the abdominal wall or may have
adherent loops of small intestine. Occasionally, tumors of the cecum or sigmoid may involve the bladder at its dome or, in female patients, the uterus. Adjacent organ
involvement should be resected in continuity with the colon and primary tumor. Radical resection may still be curative in 20% to 50% of patients, even if adjacent
tissues are invaded by malignant infiltration. 347
No-Touch Technique
Manipulation of a tumor-bearing colon during mobilization has been shown to release tumor cells into the circulation. This fact provides a theoretic basis for using a
no-touch technique consisting of early vascular ligation prior to mobilization, to prevent subsequent development of distant metastases due to seeding.Molecular
techniques have enhanced the ability to detect cancer cells released into the circulation during operative manipulation. 348 A prospective, randomized trial by Wiggers
et al.349 showed that in patients who underwent preliminary ligation of vessels, liver metastases appeared later than in patients who did not undergo this procedure.
However, no overall survival benefit was demonstrated. The small benefit seen in this study occurred only in the subset of patients with sigmoid colon cancer and
histologic evidence of venous invasion.
Laparoscopic Colectomy
Laparoscopic techniques have become widely used in the management of benign and malignant colorectal conditions. 350 These techniques are able to be carried out
safely and successfully, especially in the hands of an experienced laparoscopic surgeon. Even assessment of the liver is carried out by laparoscopic intraoperative
ultrasonography. 351,352 With laparoscopic colectomies, there is a theoretic advantages of a shortened hospital stay and a more rapid recovery. 353 The shortened stay
associated with laparoscopic colectomy, attributable to early postoperative feeding, has also translated to a change in the management of colon resection patients
who are treated by open techniques. 354
The overall complications of laparoscopic colorectal surgery are comparable to those of open resection in a large randomized trial of laparoscopic and open
colectomy in the United States. 355 However, the intraabdominal complications with laparoscopic surgery may be somewhat different from those seen with open surgery
and include cauterization injury to the bowel, hypercapnia, ureteric injury, and development of hernia at the port site. 356 The risk of an anastomotic leak from a colonic
anastomosis in a laparoscopically assisted procedure is similar to the leak rate seen after open resection and anastomosis. An unusual problem of laparoscopic
resection can be an inability to localize a small lesion due to loss of ability to palpate the bowel. This may be avoided by tattooing small lesions or using
endoscopically placed clips near the lesions.
Data that are available on the extent of lymphadenectomy and resection margins suggest that oncologic laparoscopic resection is comparable to open colectomy for
cancer. 357 Hase358 has demonstrated that among candidates for a curative resection, approximately 10% will have a positive cytologic workup. If positive cytologic
findings persist on postoperative peritoneal lavage, the risk of locoregional failure is high. 358 Though there is experimental evidence of an increase in trocar site
implantation of colorectal cancer cells by pneumoperitoneum, the clinical importance of this is not clear. 359 Studies have documented estimated recurrence rates in
port sites of 1.08% to 3.8% after laparoscopic resection. These recurrence rates are similar to those associated with laparotomy wounds in patients treated by open
resection.355
A prospective, randomized trial is currently under way to compare the efficacy of laparoscopic colectomy with open colectomy for carcinoma. 355 The study involves
patients with right, left, or sigmoid colon adenocarcinoma, and patients are randomly assigned to laparoscopically assisted or open colectomy. The primary end points
of the study are disease-free and overall survival. The secondary end points are examinations of morbidity, cost-effectiveness, and quality of life. This study is
providing important information on the long-term outcomes of laparoscopic colectomy for colon resection.
Prophylactic Oophorectomy
Ovarian metastases and colorectal cancer can occur at the time of presentation in 2% to 8% of patients and as a subsequent site of metastases in 1% to 7% of
curatively resected patients.Survival from ovarian metastases is poor in both settings, being 9% with synchronous metastases and 20% with metachronous
metastases.360 Ovarian metastases are almost always accompanied by additional metastases, most of which are unresectable. Isolated ovarian metastases should be
resected.
Prophylactic removal of the ovaries at the time of colorectal cancer resection has been considered in order to reduce the risks of poor survival from metachronous
metastases. This will be pertinent for only the 1% to 7% of women who develop metachronous metastases, of whom only 6% to 20% will have disease confined to the
ovaries. Ultimately, this applies to approximately 1% to 4% of women undergoing curative resection for colorectal cancer. Disadvantages to prophylactic resection of
the ovaries can be an increase in operative morbidity, infertility, and induced menopause in premenopausal women. The effects of oophorectomy on cardiovascular
risk and bone density are important considerations in the quality of life of long-term survivors. A policy of prophylactic oophorectomy in postmenopausal women has
been proposed owing to the risk of ovarian metastases or subsequent development of an ovarian primary cancer.
In a study of prophylactic oophorectomy in postmenopausal women by Sielezneff et al., 361 the incidence of occult ovarian metastases was 2.4%. The 5-year survival
rates in this study were equal, whether or not a prophylactic oophorectomy was performed. 362 In a preliminary report of a randomized trial of prophylactic
oophorectomy in patients with Dukes stage B and C colorectal cancer treated at the Mayo Clinic, no incidence of gross or microscopic ovarian metastases was found
in 77 patients randomized to oophorectomy. No differences were seen in overall survival, whether or not patients were randomized to oophorectomy. A trend was

noted toward an improved recurrence-free survival with prophylactic oophorectomy. No selection criteria based on tumor size, grade, or other characteristics exist at
this time.363
In clinical practice, isolated synchronous ovarian metastases should be resected by oophorectomy. In premenopausal women, there is no substantial proof of benefit
of this procedure, though the potential for harm by prophylactic oophorectomy does exist. In postmenopausal women, prophylactic oophorectomy can be considered
after careful explanation to the patient of the risks and potential benefits.
Oncologic Results of Surgical Management
For patients undergoing curative resection for colon cancer, overall survival rates vary between 55% and 75%, with most recurrences seen in the first 2 years of
follow-up. Survival after curative resection is markedly affected by the presence of nodal metastases. For node-negative patients, survival with surgery alone varies
between 75% and 90%. 364 Even in these cancers, such factors as depth of penetration, contiguous organ involvement, lymphatic and vascular invasion,
differentiation, and perineural invasion, as well as molecular and cellular characteristics, will affect survival. 365
Important issues in surgically resected apparently node-negative colon cancer are the methods of lymph node evaluation and the detection of occult metastatic
disease. Standardizing node evaluation and using immunohistochemical techniques can identify occult nodal metastases in up to 26% of those whose nodes test
negatively by routine techniques. 366 In addition, radioimmunologically guided surgical evaluation of apparently node-negative patients after resection is highly
predictive of occult metastatic disease causing recurrence. 367 However, convincing data on survival improvement based on these techniques are lacking. Some have
even questioned the relevance of occult micrometastatic disease in patients who have undergone curative resection. 368 In a group of surgically resected patients with
micrometastases in resected nodes and original Dukes' stage A or B colorectal cancer, survival time was 48 months, which mimicked the survival time for patients
without micrometastases.
Among patients with node-positive cancers, survival can be affected by the number of positive nodes. Patients with one positive node may have survival rates in the
69% to 75% range, whereas 5-year survival for those with four or more positive nodes or metastases along a named vascular trunk will be in the 27% to 40% range. 364
Overall, survival rates for patients with node-positive cancers appear to be approximately 40% to 50%. The analysis by Cohen et al. (1991) of node-positive colon
cancer patients treated with resection alone showed a significant difference in survival for patients having one to three positive nodes (66% 5 year survival) and those
with four or more positive nodes (37% 5-year survival).
Patterns of Recurrence
Locoregional failure in colon cancer occurs in adjacent soft tissues, regional and retroperitoneal nodes, and the peritoneum. The major pattern of recurrence in colon
cancer is disseminated disease with liver metastasis in two-thirds of patients in whom treatment fails. Few patients will have isolated recurrence. There is a 6% rate of
anastomosis recurrence. 369 As mentioned, the abdominal colon consists of portions that are intraperitoneal (e.g., the cecum, transverse colon, and sigmoid colon) and
portions that are less mobile and lie against the retroperitoneum (e.g., the ascending and descending colon and hepatic and splenic flexures). The portions lying
against the retroperitoneum are at higher risk for minimal radial margins at the time of surgical resection and therefore are at higher risk for local recurrence.
Gunderson demonstrated that local failure increased in these areas of immobility and with extension of tumor through the bowel. In patients with transmural
node-positive disease, areas of mobile bowel had a 13% local failure rate, whereas areas of immobile bowel had a 29% local failure rate. Local recurrence rates were
even higher when there was gross extension into pericolonic fat. Retroperitoneal nodal failures can be seen in up to two-thirds of patients in whom resection of
transmural tumors fails. Patients with node-positive disease exhibit locoregional failure more commonly than do those with negative nodes.
In lesions that occur in areas of the bowel covered by serosa, extension through the bowel wall will increase the risk for peritoneal spread. In the autopsy series
reported from the University of Washington, treatment failure manifested as peritoneal seeding in 36% of patients who died from colon cancer. This is chiefly a
component of multiple sites of recurrence. In a series of 533 patients studied at the Massachusetts General Hospital, peritoneal failure rates varied from 0% to 4% for
stage A and B lesions, whereas for stage C lesions, rates of peritoneal failure ranged from 14% to 16%.
SPECIFIC MANAGEMENT PROBLEMS
Synchronous Cancer
Synchronous cancers are relatively uncommon, having an incidence of 3.4%, as described by Finan et al. 370 In addition to the presence of another malignancy, there
can be up to a 30% to 40% incidence of synchronous neoplastic polyps in the colon of a patient with a large bowel carcinoma. 371 These facts emphasize the need for
complete colonic examination at the time of diagnosis of a colon carcinoma.
Most synchronous neoplastic polyps can be removed at the time of preoperative colonoscopy. If this cannot be accomplished owing to obstructing lesions or an
emergency operation for perforation, the index lesion should be addressed at the time of surgery and subsequent complete colonoscopic examination should be
carried out in the early postoperative period. 372 If the synchronous lesions are in the same colonic segment, they can be included in the resection, which should
maintain the principles of wide anatomic resection and lymphadenectomy.
When lesions are in widely disparate parts of the colon and cannot otherwise be cleared by endoscopic polypectomy, then consideration should be given to either two
segmental resections or subtotal colectomy. Partial colectomies will require subsequent intensive colonic surveillance. However, they may be the most appropriate
alternative for an elderly patient. Subtotal colectomy may be the treatment of choice for a younger patient with synchronous lesions. 373 Passman et al.373 conducted an
18-year, multiinstitutional database study of 4878 patients with colon cancer. They found a 3.3% incidence of synchronous tumors. They also found that patients with
synchronous colon cancers have the same survival rate as patients with solitary colon tumors when the highest stage of the synchronous tumor is considered. 373
Obstructing Cancers
Intestinal obstruction is the most common emergency presentation of colorectal carcinoma. 374 Poor prognosis is associated with this presentation, even when
analyzed stage for stage, with an overall survival of 31% at 5 years. Patients who present with this problem are frequently elderly or in poor condition because of
dehydration, and operative mortality can approach 28%. 374 Operative approaches in such patients have included a three-stage operation with an initial diverting
colostomy followed by resection and then colostomy closure. An alternative approach is the use of a two-stage Hartmann procedure in which the resection is
performed and an end colostomy is created while the distal colon is closed. The second operation then reestablishes continuity.
Staged resection is most useful in elderly persons with multiple comorbidities. 374 As techniques of preoperative resuscitation and perioperative care have advanced,
further alternatives for obstructing lesions distal to the splenic flexure have been studied. The first is subtotal colectomy, the second is an extended right colectomy to
include the obstructing lesion without colonic decompression, and a third is the use of intraoperative colonic lavage and segmental resection. Nyam et al. 362 reported
on a series of 103 patients with obstructing left-side colon carcinomas undergoing an extended right colectomy without colonic decompression or a segmental left
colectomy with intraoperative lavage. They found that both procedures had an acceptably low anastomotic leak rate and mortality. Poon et al. 375 studied emergency
primary resection and anastomosis with intraoperative colonic lavage for left-sided obstruction. Hospital mortality rate was 5% to 9%. The anastomotic leak rate with
this approach was 4%.
The alternative approach of subtotal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis has been compared with intraoperative lavage in primary colonic anastomosis in a
randomized trial.376 This trial showed no difference in mortality or morbidity rates. However, patients with subtotal colectomy had a higher postoperative frequency of
bowel movements.376
Patients with right-sided obstructing lesions should undergo a radical right hemicolectomy with primary anastomosis.
Perforating Cancers
Perforation of the colon due to carcinoma can occur either at the site of the colon tumor itself (in approximately 65% to 82% of patients with perforation) or in the

bowel proximal to an obstructing tumor (in 18% to 35% of patients). 377 Many of these patients will have local or regionally advanced disease at the time of the
discovery of perforation, and approximately one-third of these patients will have metastatic disease at the time of laparotomy. Overall 5-year survival for patients with
localized perforation is approximately 44%. This complication occurs in 2% to 8% of all patients with colorectal cancer. These patients can present with diffuse
peritonitis and require emergency management. Some contained perforations will extend into adjacent bowel loops or viscera and therefore cause a fistula that should
be resected en bloc with the tumor at the time of resection.
The presence of a perforation or fistula will increase cancer recurrence rates. Local recurrence rates of 23% have been reported by Carraro et al. 377 in a study of 83
patients with large bowel perforation and colorectal cancer. This compares with figures of 28% to 44% reported in the literature. Peritoneal seeding is a particularly
common failure in patients with perforated colorectal cancers, with carcinomatosis rates of 17% to 18%.
Malignant Polyps
The management of neoplastic polyps that are benign has already been addressed. In this section, we will consider the management of a malignant polyp in which the
invasive component has perforated the muscularis mucosae and therefore has the potential for metastatic spread. The rationale for colon resection for a malignant
colorectal polyp after endoscopic removal is minimization of the risk of residual carcinoma at the site of the polypectomy, the risk of metastatic spread to regional
lymph nodes, and the risk of disease dissemination.
The risks and benefits of resection must be weighed against the patient's potential for morbidity and mortality from either the cancer or a surgical resection. 378 The
risks of mortality from elective colorectal surgery are approximately 1% to 2%. However, in a given individual, age and the presence or absence of comorbidity will
dictate surgical mortality.
Malignant colorectal polyps may be pedunculated or sessile. Endoscopic removal will be more successful in managing malignant pedunculated polyps. Critical factors
in determining the need for surgery after colonoscopic removal of a malignant polyp are the differentiation features of the carcinoma (well or moderately
differentiated), the presence of vascular or lymphatic invasion, the presence of a clear polyp resection margin, and assessment that the polyp has been completely
removed.378 Most commonly, the issue dictating surgical resection will be an inadequate or questionable margin. 379
Haggitt et al.(1985) have described various levels of invasion of carcinoma into pedunculated polyps ( Fig. 33.7-6). They noted that, in a pedunculated polyp, an
invasive component in the head of the polyp may be a substantial distance from the submucosa and therefore may be resected endoscopically with a significant
margin. In a sessile polyp, the invasive component has early access to the submucosa and therefore has an earlier opportunity for dissemination. Sessile polyps will
have a higher incidence of lymph node metastases than pedunculated polyps with invasive cancer. 380 When the invasive cancer is limited to the head of a
pedunculated polyp, lymph node metastasis rates appear to be approximately 3%, in contrast to 10% to 25% for sessile polyps ( Table 33.7-7). The incremental
improvement related to extensive surgery in patients with cancers limited to the head of the polyp is low. Patients with favorable risk criteria and a cancer limited to the
head of a pedunculated polyp will be treated best by colonoscopic polypectomy alone. Sessile polyps are best treated by surgical resection, 381 though some
investigators have disputed this. 382

FIGURE 33.7-6. Levels of invasion in a pedunculated adenoma (A) and a sessile adenoma (B). The stippled areas represent zones of carcinoma. Any invasion below
the muscularis mucosae in a sessile lesion represents level 4 invasion (submucosa). In contrast, invasive carcinoma in a pedunculated adenoma must traverse a
considerable distance before it reaches the submucosa of the underlying bowel wall. However, any cancer that penetrates the muscularis mucosae is at risk for
dissemination.

TABLE 33.7-7. Cancer in Polyps: Risk of Lymph Node Metastases

After colonoscopic removal of the malignant polyp, it is important to document carefully the site of polypectomy in the event that surgical resection is warranted. We
commonly perform this procedure using endoscopically placed clips, which are both palpable and evident on abdominal radiographs. Follow-up colonoscopy is
generally performed 3 to 6 months after removal of a malignant polyp, to assess the polypectomy site for any residual mass. Presence of a mass is an indication for
surgical resection. In patients in whom there is no further evidence of residual carcinoma, colonoscopic follow-up can be carried out at 1 year. 154
Whitlow et al. 379 studied a group of 59 patients who underwent treatment for malignant colonic polyps. Sixty-three percent of the patients were managed with
polypectomy and surveillance. The remainder underwent colectomy. The most common indications for colectomy were Haggitt level 3 or 4 invasion, inadequate
margins, patient preference, or poor differentiation, in that order. Residual disease was found in 3 of the 22 patients undergoing colectomy. Importantly, there were no
cancer-related deaths in either treatment group. None of the patients in Whitlow's group had evidence of lymph node involvement at the time of colectomy.
Netzer et al.379 studied the outcomes in 32 patients with endoscopically removed low-risk malignant polyps versus the outcomes of 38 patients with high-risk polyps.
High-risk malignant polyps were defined as having an incomplete polypectomy, a margin that was not clearly cancer-free, lymphatic or vascular invasion, or grade 3
carcinoma. In this series, 73% of the patients had pedunculated malignant polyps and, of these, 8.5% had adverse outcomes. Of the 27% of patients with sessile
malignant polyps, 58% had had adverse outcomes defined as residual disease at colectomy or cancer recurrence during the follow-up period. 380 Large sessile lesions
in the colon often require surgical resection as the safest approach. Biopsy and observation alone is usually not the best approach, unless operative morbidity is
expected to be excessive.
ADJUVANT THERAPIES

Adjuvant Radiation Therapy for Colon Cancer
PATTERNS OF FAILURE OF AND THE RATIONALE FOR RADIATION THERAPY. The role of adjuvant radiation therapy in colon cancer is less well defined than in rectal

cancer. This is due to differences in the natural history of colon cancer as compared with rectal cancer. As seen in Table 33.7-8, the most common failure site after
potentially curative surgery in colon cancer is abdominal rather than local. Furthermore, because most local failures in colon cancer are extrapelvic, local failure
usually does not result in the same degree of debilitating pelvic pain as that seen in rectal cancer.

TABLE 33.7-8. Patterns of Failure after Potentially Curative Surgery for Colon Cancer (All Stages) a

Although the overall incidence of local failure is relatively low in colon cancer, data suggest that, on the basis of anatomic location and selected pathologic features,
certain subsets of patients have a higher incidence of local failure. However, there is not uniform agreement as to how to define these subsets. For example,
Gunderson et al. (1985) divided the colon into two regions. The “anatomically immobile” (or mainly retroperitoneal) region included the ascending colon, hepatic
flexure, splenic flexure, and descending colon. The “anatomically mobile” (or mainly intraperitoneal) region included the cecum and transverse colon. The highest
incidence of local failure occurred in the cecum (30%), whereas the other intraperitoneal site, the transverse colon, had one of the lowest rates of local failure (13%).
In contrast, Minsky et al. (1988) reported a general trend of increased local failure with more distal colon sites. Patients with cecal cancer had a significantly lower
incidence of local failure (3%), as compared to those with cancer of the transverse colon (15%) or descending colon (25%). These data do not support the notion that
bowel mobility is predictive of local failure.
In the series by Willett et al. (1984), the colon was divided into two groups. Group 1 included the cecum and ascending, midsigmoid, transverse, and descending
colon. Group 2 included the high and low sigmoid colon, the splenic flexure, and the hepatic flexure. In stage T1–2N0M0 disease, there was a higher incidence of
local failure in group 1 tumors (16% to 24%) as compared with group 2 tumors (0% to 11%).
Overall, there is no consistency as to which anatomic site or sites have the highest local failure rates. This inconsistency may reflect the differences in methods used
to detect failure (reoperation versus clinical or radiographic methods) and to determine failure (cumulative vs. first failure) rather than the true natural history of the
disease.
LOCOREGIONAL RADIATION THERAPY. Although all the series are retrospective, the most comprehensive series examining the role of locoregional radiation therapy in

colon cancer is the study by Willett et al. 383 at the Massachusetts General Hospital ( Table 33.7-9). After potentially curative surgery for stages T3–4N0–2M0 colon
cancer, 203 patients received postoperative adjuvant radiation therapy. Eligibility included patients with the following stages of disease: T4N0–2M0 tumors regardless
of anatomic site, T3N1–2M0 tumors excluding midsigmoid and transverse colon, and selected high-risk T3N0M0 tumors with close margins. Patients received 45 Gy
to the primary tumor bed with a 5-cm margin and inclusive of the primary draining lymph nodes. This was followed by a shrinking-field technique to 50.4 to 55.0 Gy
depending on the volume of small bowel that could be excluded from the high-dose field. Of the 203 patients, 173 were treated in the adjuvant setting and 30 after a
subtotal resection. Sixty-three received bolus 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) with a variety of doses and schedules.

TABLE 33.7-9. Local Adjuvant Radiation Therapy in Colon Cancer

The results were compared with a historical control group of 395 patients who underwent surgery only. Three patient groups appeared to benefit from postoperative
radiation therapy. There was a significant improvement in local control and disease-free survival for patients with stage T4N0M0 or T4N1–2M0 disease. Also, patients
with stage T4N0 disease with a perforation or fistula had improved local control and disease-free survival. Finally, radiation therapy salvaged some patients with
residual disease after subtotal resection, resulting in a 37% 5-year disease-free survival. There was no benefit in local control or disease-free survival in patients with
stage T3N0M0 or T3N1–2M0disease.
For the total patient group, the incidence of grade 3+ acute bowel toxicity was 8%. The incidence was lower in the patients who received radiation therapy plus
chemotherapy (4% vs. 16%, respectively). Grade 3+ long-term bowel toxicity was 4.5%. Therefore, with careful treatment techniques, the acute and long-term bowel
toxicities of postoperative locoregional radiation therapy (with or without chemotherapy) for colon cancer are comparable with those reported for rectal cancer.
Other reports of adjuvant locoregional radiation therapy are limited by small numbers of patients and short follow-up. 384 Most have been limited to cecal cancers.
Based on the retrospective data from the Massachusetts General Hospital, a randomized phase III intergroup trial coordinated by the Mayo Clinic and NCCTG (INT
0130) was developed. Patients with T4 or selected T3N1–2 colon tumors were randomized to 12 cycles of bolus 5-FU plus levamisole with or without locoregional
radiation therapy (45.0 to 50.4 Gy in 25 to 28 fractions) beginning with cycle two of chemotherapy. The trial was closed early due to poor accrual, with only 222 of the
anticipated 400 patients randomized, leaving 189 eligible patients. 385 Grade 3+ toxicity was modestly higher in the combined-modality therapy arm (43% vs. 35%).
With a median follow-up of 35 months, there was no significant difference in survival between the two arms. The patterns of failure data have not been reported.
In a phase I trial of 21 patients (4 with colon cancers) who received upper abdominal radiation plus continuous-infusion 5-FU at 150 mg/m 2, Martenson et al.386
reported a 40% grade 3+ toxicity rate. In contrast, the recommended dose of continuous-infusion 5-FU plus concurrent radiation for patients with rectal cancer who
receive adjuvant therapy is 225 mg/m 2.387 These data suggest that the dose of continuous-infusion 5-FU needs to be attenuated in patients receiving

combined-modality therapy for upper abdominal malignancies. This is most likely related to the larger radiation field.
In summary, the retrospective data from the Massachusetts General Hospital suggest that there are subsets of colon cancer patients with high local failure rates in
whom the addition of postoperative locoregional radiation therapy may improve local control and disease-free survival. The randomized INT 0130 trial did not show a
survival advantage with combined-modality therapy versus chemotherapy alone. It must be emphasized, however, that the INT 0130 trial was closed prior to meeting
its accrual goals and has not yet reported local control results. Although postoperative locoregional radiation therapy in colon cancer remains investigational, two
clinical situations exist in which its use is reasonable: in a patient with close or positive resection margins and in a patient who has undergone a resection of a T4
colon cancer adherent to pelvic structures. These cancers (most commonly sigmoid or cecal primary lesions) have local failure rates similar to rectal cancers, and it is
reasonable to treat them as such with adjuvant combined-modality therapy, including six cycles of 5-FU–based chemotherapy plus concurrent pelvic radiation. 388
WHOLE ABDOMEN RADIATION THERAPY. The use of whole abdomen radiation therapy is limited by dose considerations. To treat the volume at risk with a potentially

curative dose of radiation required for microscopic disease, the whole abdomen would need to receive 45 Gy. Although limited portions of the abdomen can tolerate
this dose, the tolerance of the whole abdomen with conventional fractionation is 30 Gy. Based on the high incidence of abdominal failure in some colon cancers, a
number of phase II adjuvant trials were designed to examine the efficacy of whole abdomen radiation therapy ( Table 33.7-10).389,390

TABLE 33.7-10. Whole Abdomen Adjuvant Radiation Therapy for Colon Cancer

In general, patients received 20 to 30 Gy to the whole abdomen with or without a boost to the primary tumor bed. In three of the series, 5-FU was delivered with a
variety of doses and schedules. The combined results revealed an in-field (abdominal) failure rate of 12% to 50%. Significant toxicity varied from 5% to 38%. Although
the initial phase II results appeared promising, three of the series have never been updated.
The most encouraging data have been reported by Fabian et al. 389 from the SWOG 8572 study. In this phase II adjuvant pilot trial, 41 patients with T3N1–2M0 disease
received whole abdomen radiation therapy plus continuous-infusion 5-FU (200 mg/m 2/24 h) followed by 9 monthly cycles of maintenance continuous-infusion 5-FU
(1000 mg/m2/24 h × 4 days). Due to unacceptable toxicity in the first six patients, the protocol was modified such that the 5-FU was started on day 1 and radiation
began concurrently on day 8 and a 1-week treatment break from both the 5-FU and radiation was required at day 42. The tumor bed boost (1.6 Gy × 10 days) was
delivered first, followed by whole abdomen radiation therapy (1 Gy/d × 30 days) for a total dose of 30 Gy to the whole abdomen and 46 Gy to the tumor bed.
With a median follow-up of 5 years, the 5-year disease-free and overall survival rates were 58% and 67%, respectively. 389 Limiting the analysis to the 20 patients with
more than four positive nodes, the 5-year disease-free and overall survival rates were 55% and 74%, respectively. For the total patient group, the patterns of failure
included local failure (12%), liver failure (22%), and peritoneal and other abdominal failure (15%). In contrast with other whole abdomen radiation therapy trials,
toxicity during the combined-modality segment was tolerable (17%, grade 3; 7%, grade 4). The toxicity during the maintenance chemotherapy was also acceptable
(25%, grade 3; 3%, grade 4). These results are encouraging, but further follow-up is needed. Currently, whole abdomen radiation therapy remains investigational.
Adjuvant Systemic Therapy for Colon Cancer
SINGLE-AGENT STUDIES. The fact that a substantial number of patients treated surgically with curative intent eventually die of metastatic disease was understood early.

Once the natural history of the disease became better defined, subsets of patients with a higher risk of recurrence could be identified. The next logical step was the
development of adjuvant treatments attempting to improve the long-term disease-free and overall survival rates. The first trials were conducted in the 1950s, 391,392 and
393
and a partial summary of these first-generation studies is provided in Table 33.7-11. The chemotherapeutic agents available were restricted to thiotepa, floxuridine
(FUDR), and 5-FU, and they were commonly used with suboptimal intensity.

TABLE 33.7-11. First-Generation Randomized Trials of Adjuvant Therapy for Large Bowel Cancer

Even though these early trials are generally considered negative because no dramatic benefit could be elicited, some studies with the fluoropyrimidines did
demonstrate a 5% to 10% benefit in 5-year survival. The results were intriguing enough to justify continuous efforts with novel agents and combinations of the
available agents in the same setting.
INITIAL COMBINATION CHEMOTHERAPY STUDIES. The combinations explored in the 1970s included chemotherapy and, occasionally, nonspecific immunotherapy with

bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG), BCG variations, and levamisole. These drugs are well represented in six large studies published in peer-reviewed journals and are
summarized in Table 33.7-12. Methyl-CCNU plus 5-FU (MF) and MF plus vincristine (Oncovin; MOF) were commonly used, because at that time, they were believed
to be more active in advanced disease than 5-FU alone. With more than 3700 patients entered in these six trials, a trend favoring the chemotherapy-treated groups
was noted. However, the only trials to achieve statistical significance were NSABP C-01 and NCCTG 78-48-52.

TABLE 33.7-12. Second-Generation Colon Cancer Adjuvant Trials

The NSABP C-01 study randomly assigned 1166 patients with Dukes stage B and C colon carcinoma to receive chemotherapy or immunotherapy or to be observed
only. When compared with the control group, the patients treated with MOF had statistically superior disease-free survival ( P = .02) and overall survival ( P = .05). At
5-year follow-up, the group treated with MOF had an 8% survival improvement over the control group. There was no significant difference between the BCG and
control groups (P = .40).394 This was the first randomized trial to demonstrate a benefit in disease-free and overall survival for patients treated with chemotherapy. The
toxicity of the MOF regimen is significant, and five patients in the NSABP C-01 trial developed acute leukemia or myelodysplasia. This particular toxicity was
evaluated by Boice et al., who found 19 cases of leukemia or myelodysplasia among 2067 patients treated with regimens containing MF, with an estimated risk of 2.3
cases per 1000 patients per year.
Levamisole. Levamisole is a synthetic, orally active agent with antihelmintic and immunomodulatory properties. The observation that levamisole enhances the immune
response of mice vaccinated against Brucella bacteria led to its investigation in cancer. The drug is well absorbed from the GI tract after oral administration and is
extensively metabolized by the liver. 395
Levamisole was initially evaluated in the treatment of advanced colorectal cancer in combination with 5-FU. More than 400 patients were enrolled in three randomized
trials evaluating the addition of levamisole to 5-FU chemotherapy. The results were disappointing, with no improvement in response rate, time to progression, or
survival in favor of the levamisole-treated groups. 396
Since 1974, levamisole has been investigated as a single agent in the adjuvant treatment of colorectal cancer. 397 Despite the good results seen initially, two large,
prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled trials reported subsequently have failed to demonstrate a significant benefit for levamisole administered as a single
agent. 398 Eventually, levamisole was combined with 5-FU in the adjuvant setting. Small trials comparing 5-FU-based chemotherapy with or without levamisole did not
demonstrate a benefit for the levamisole-treated group. In a larger trial, after curative surgery for colorectal cancer, 141 patients were randomized to receive a
6-month course of 5-FU with or without levamisole or supportive treatment only. 399 After 5 years of follow-up, a significant survival advantage was detected in the
patients receiving levamisole as compared with patients treated with 5-FU alone.
The true turning point in the adjuvant treatment of colorectal cancer came with the results of two well-known randomized trials ( Table 33.7-13). In one, conducted by
the NCCTG and the Mayo Clinic, 401 eligible patients with Dukes stage B and C colorectal cancer after curative surgery were randomized to receive no further
treatment, levamisole alone, or 5-FU plus levamisole. 364 Levamisole plus 5-FU (P = .003) and, to a lesser extent, levamisole alone (P = .05) reduced cancer
recurrence in comparison with no adjuvant therapy. Whereas both treatment regimens were associated with overall improvements in survival, these improvements
reached borderline significance only for patients with stage C disease treated with levamisole plus 5-FU ( P = .03).364 These promising results led to a large national
intergroup confirmatory trial involving the NCCTG, the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, and SWOG, which changed dramatically the way oncologists
approached and treated colon cancer. 400 Twelve hundred and ninety-six patients with Dukes stage B2 or C resected colon cancer were randomly assigned to
observation or to treatment for 1 year with levamisole combined with 5-FU or with levamisole alone. Therapy with levamisole plus 5-FU reduced the risk of cancer
recurrence among patients with stage C disease by 41% ( P <.0001) after a median follow-up of 3 years. The overall death rate was reduced by 33% ( P = .006).
Treatment with levamisole alone had no detectable effect. The results in patients with stage B2 disease were equivocal, and no treatment recommendation could be
made.400 In 1995, Moertel et al. 401 updated the results of this trial. With the 929 patients with stage C disease followed for a median of 6.5 years, 5-FU plus levamisole
reduced the recurrence rate by 40% ( P <.0001) and the death rate by 33% ( P = .0007). Levamisole alone reduced the recurrence rate by only 2% and the death rate
by only 6%.401

TABLE 33.7-13. Adjuvant Studies of Levamisole plus 5-Fluorouracil

Toxic effects of levamisole alone were infrequent, usually consisting of mild nausea with occasional metallic taste, fatigue, dermatitis, or leukopenia, and those of
levamisole plus 5-FU were essentially the same as those of 5-FU alone, including nausea, vomiting, stomatitis, diarrhea, dermatitis, and leukopenia. The
cost-effectiveness of this treatment for a typical patient has been calculated as a very reasonable $2094 per year of life saved. Even after using a variety of less
favorable assumptions, cost-effectiveness remains less than $5000 per year of life saved. 402 The NCCTG and the National Cancer Institute of Canada attempted to
compare 5-FU plus conventional-dose levamisole with a 5-FU plus high-dose levamisole regimen. Accrual was stopped owing to the significant toxicity seen in the
high-dose levamisole group.
Combinations of 5-Fluorouracil and Leucovorin. The relative success of combinations of 5-FU with leucovorin in the treatment of advanced colorectal cancer 403 led
several investigators to explore this combination in the adjuvant setting. Combinations of 5-FU and leucovorin were tested against different control groups ( Table
33.7-14). The NSABP C-03 randomized 1081 patients with Dukes stage B and C colon cancer to receive either MOF or 5-FU plus leucovorin. 404 A comparison of
these two groups indicated a disease-free survival advantage for patients treated with 5-FU plus leucovorin ( P = .0004). The 3-year disease-free survival rate for
patients in this group was 73%, as compared with 64% for patients receiving MOF. The overall survival at 3 years was 84% for those randomized to receive 5-FU plus
leucovorin and 77% for the MOF-treated cohort ( P = .003). Patients treated with postoperative 5-FU plus leucovorin had a 30% reduction in the risk of developing a
treatment failure and a 32% reduction in mortality risk as compared with similar patients treated with MOF. 404

TABLE 33.7-14. Adjuvant Trials with 5-FU plus Leucovorin for Colon Cancer

In the International Multicentre Pooled Analyses of Colon Cancer Trials (IMPACT), three randomized trials conducted to investigate the efficacy of 5-FU and
high-dose leucovorin after surgery for stage II and III colon cancer were pooled for combined analysis. All included trials using the same treatment regimen: 5-FU, 370
to 400 mg/m2/d, plus leucovorin, 200 mg/m 2/d, 5 days every 28 days for six cycles. A pooled analysis of the results was performed, including 1493 eligible patients
with resected stage II and III carcinoma of the colon. 5-FU plus leucovorin significantly reduced mortality by 22% and adverse events by 35%, increasing 3-year
event-free survival from 62% to 71% and overall survival from 78% to 83%. 405
In an Italian study reported by Francini et al., 517 239 patients with surgically resected Dukes stage B2 or C colon cancer were randomly assigned to chemotherapy with
5-FU and leucovorin or to observation alone. In stage B2, no significant difference between the adjuvant arm and the observation arm was noted. In stage C, adjuvant
chemotherapy produced an advantage over observation in terms of a reduction in cancer recurrence rate, with a 3-year disease-free survival of 81% versus 64% and
an improvement in overall survival ( P = .0025).
An intergroup study was planned to compare 5-FU plus leucovorin to control only, but the study was closed prematurely in September 1989 after 309 patients had
been enrolled, when reports of the positive results of 5-FU plus levamisole adjuvant therapy precluded randomization to an untreated control group. Patients were
randomized to observation or 5-FU plus low-dose leucovorin daily for 5 days every 28 days for six cycles. Preliminary results released after a median follow-up of 3.5
years showed a significant advantage in recurrences in favor of the 5-FU plus leucovorin group ( P = .001). 406
5-Fluorouracil plus Levamisole versus 5-Fluorouracil plus Leucovorin. Both 5-FU plus levamisole and 5-FU plus leucovorin regimens have been found to be
successful in prolonging disease-free and overall survival. The similar results obtained with the use of either levamisole or leucovorin as 5-FU modulators made
necessary a direct comparison between the two modalities (Table 33.7-15). When these two regimens were directly compared in randomized clinical trials, it
appeared that a small disease-free survival and overall survival advantage had emerged in favor of 5-FU plus leucovorin. 407

TABLE 33.7-15. Summary of Randomized Trials of 5-FU plus LV as Compared with 5-FU for the Treatment of Advanced Colorectal Cancer

The intergroup study INT 0089 was the largest trial to address this question. Starting in 1989, 3759 patients with stage II (20%) and stage III (80%) colon cancer were
randomly assigned to receive 5-FU plus low-dose leucovorin, 5-FU plus high-dose leucovorin, or 5-FU plus both levamisole and leucovorin for 6 to 7 months, or 5-FU
plus levamisole for 12 months. The results are summarized in Table 33.7-16. The leucovorin-containing arms demonstrated a trend toward better results than the
5-FU plus levamisole only arm. Additionally, the toxicity profile was different among the regimens. Patients in the 5-FU plus low-dose leucovorin or the 5-FU plus
levamisole arms experienced a greater incidence of stomatitis and neutropenia, whereas patients in the 5-FU plus high-dose leucovorin arm had a greater incidence
of diarrhea.408 The addition of levamisole to 5-FU plus leucovorin did increase toxicity, with no significant increase in disease-free or overall survival. 408
The NSABP C-04 study, also summarized in Table 33.7-16, compared 5-FU plus levamisole to 5-FU plus high-dose leucovorin and to a combination of the three
agents. 409 A total of 2152 patients with Dukes B (41%) or Dukes C (59%) colon cancer were randomized into one of the three treatment arms. At 5 years, there was an
advantage for the leucovorin-containing arms, with 69% of the patients treated with 5-FU plus levamisole alive as compared to 74% of the patients receiving 5-FU
plus leucovorin and 72% of those receiving 5-FU, leucovorin, and levamisole. 409

TABLE 33.7-16. Recently Reported Adjuvant Colon Cancer Trials

The NCCTG joined with the National Cancer Institute of Canada to examine the effectiveness of a regimen of 5-FU plus levamisole plus leucovorin as adjuvant
therapy for patients with high-risk colon cancer and evaluated 6 months versus 12 months of chemotherapy in the same setting. 410 A total of 891 eligible patients with
stage II or III colon cancer were randomly assigned to receive adjuvant chemotherapy with 5-FU and leucovorin combined with levamisole or a standard regimen of
5-FU plus levamisole. Patients also were randomly assigned to receive either 12 months or 6 months of chemotherapy. After a median follow-up of 5.1 years, there
was no significant improvement in patient survival when chemotherapy was given for 12 months as compared with 6 months. When chemotherapy was given for 6
months, standard 5-FU plus levamisole was associated with inferior patient survival ( P<.01). These data suggest that a 6-month regimen of 5-FU plus levamisole

should not be used in clinical practice, whereas 6 months of treatment with 5-FU plus leucovorin plus levamisole is effective. 410
An analysis of the available randomized trials indicates that whereas 5-FU with levamisole given for 1 year could still be considered an acceptable regimen, 5-FU plus
leucovorin for 6 months is clearly superior in terms of convenience and, possibly, efficacy. 5-FU plus leucovorin should be considered the new standard against which
new therapies should be tested.
FUTURE ADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY TRIALS. The NSABP C-06 trial compared intravenous 5-FU plus leucovorin to a combination of the oral 5-FU prodrug UFT (uracil,

5-FU, and tegafur) with oral leucovorin. More than 1500 patients with stage II and III colon cancer were eligible to participate in this study. Accrual was completed in
early 1999, and final results are not expected for at least a few years. Preliminary analysis of toxicity findings among 473 evaluated patients indicate that both
regimens are well tolerated and have similar toxicity profiles. 411
The availability of newer regimens with higher response rates than traditional 5-FU-based regimens has led to different strategies that attempt to maximize the benefit
of adjuvant chemotherapy (Table 33.7-17). The NSABP has focused on the impressive response rates reported with the use of oxaliplatin. This diaminocyclohexane
platinum derivative has synergistic activity with 5-FU in advanced colorectal cancer. The NSABP C-07 study is being planned to compare 5-FU plus leucovorin
against a regimen containing 5-FU, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin in patients with stage II and III colon cancer. Similarly, the impressive response rates reported with the
use of 5-FU, leucovorin, and irinotecan in the treatment of advanced colorectal cancer 412 led to an intergroup trial randomizing patients to two arms: intravenous 5-FU
plus leucovorin versus a combination of 5-FU, leucovorin, and irinotecan. The results of those trials are eagerly awaited.

TABLE 33.7-17. Recently Completed or Ongoing Randomized Adjuvant Colon Cancer Trials

LOCOREGIONAL THERAPY. The liver is a major site of recurrence in patients with colorectal cancer and is frequently the only site of metastasis. Even though

established liver metastasis is primarily fed by the hepatic arteries, micrometastasis still is dependent on portal venous blood, and animal models have demonstrated
the potential benefit for intrahepatic delivery of chemotherapy immediately after surgery for the primary tumor. 413 Chemotherapy delivered by means of continuous
portal vein infusion into the liver during the immediate postoperative period may improve therapeutic efficacy.
In 1975, a randomized trial of adjuvant portal vein infusion with 5-FU at 1 g/d and heparin at 5000 U/d for 7 days was initiated in patients undergoing surgery for
Dukes' stage A, B, and C colorectal cancer. A total of 117 patients received the infusion, and 127 were enrolled in the control arm. There were fewer liver metastases
in the perfusion group, and a statistically important overall survival improvement was noted in Dukes' stage B and C patients. 179 Several other trials have followed the
same basic design.
The Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer Research investigated the efficacy of a perioperative intraportal cytotoxic regimen in a randomized trial of 533 patients with
operable colorectal carcinoma. Patients were randomly assigned to either a single course of portal infusion with mitomycin (one dose of 10 mg/m 2) plus 5-FU (500
mg/m2 every 24 hours for 7 days) starting immediately after surgery or to no adjuvant treatment. Five hundred and five patients were evaluated. At a median follow-up
of 8 years, adjuvant therapy reduced the risk of recurrence by 21% and the risk of death by 26%. The benefit obtained with a single course of adjuvant chemotherapy
via the portal vein for patients with operable colorectal carcinoma might be due to the systemic effects of the portal chemotherapy. 414
Between March 1984 and July 1988, in the largest randomized trial to date, the NSABP explored the use of chemotherapy and heparin administered by portal vein
infusion versus no further treatment. A total of 1158 patients with Dukes' stage A, B, and C carcinoma of the colon were entered into the NSABP C-02 protocol.
Therapy began on the day of operation and consisted of 5-FU, 600 mg/m 2/d, with 5000 U/d by constant infusion for 7 successive days. Randomization was assigned
prior to surgery, and 23% of patients were later found to be ineligible, primarily because of metastatic disease. A comparison at 4 years involving 901 eligible patients
distributed between the two groups indicated both an improvement in disease-free survival, from 64% to 74% ( P = .02), and a borderline improvement in overall
survival, from 73% to 81% (P = .07) in favor of the chemotherapy-treated group. When compared with the treated group, patients who received no further treatment
had 1.26 times the risk of developing a treatment failure and 1.25 times the likelihood of dying after 4 years. However, the incidence of hepatic metastasis was not
significantly altered, and the benefits observed could potentially be explained by the systemic effect of the chemotherapy.
A large metaanalysis has been conducted to assess the effects on recurrence and survival of administering 5-FU-based chemotherapy by portal infusion after
colorectal cancer surgery. 415 Data from ten trials involving approximately 4000 patients were available for analysis. The final result showed that portal infusion of 5-FU
for approximately 1 week after surgery in patients with colorectal cancer may produce a small absolute improvement in 5-year survival. 415 This result is somewhat
disappointing, and it is possible that the reason for the survival benefit is the systemic exposure to chemotherapy. The use of portal vein infusion cannot be
considered routine in the adjuvant treatment of colorectal cancer.
The use of hepatic arterial infusion in the adjuvant setting has been controversial. However, recent data published by the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center
group demonstrated that patients who had liver resections did benefit from the addition of hepatic arterial infusion to their adjuvant regimen. 194 Further studies are
necessary to confirm this.
ADJUVANT IMMUNOTHERAPY. The use of immunotherapy in the fight against cancer has been a goal of cancer research for decades. Despite initial encouraging results

with the use of BCG and other agents such as levamisole, nonspecific stimulation of the immune system has not been proven effective in the adjuvant treatment of
colon cancer. 416
The combination of traditional chemotherapy with immunotherapeutic agents is an interesting field of research. At least one combination was proven effective in a
large, randomized trial. In fact, until recently the combination of 5-FU plus levamisole was considered the standard adjuvant treatment for stage III colorectal
cancer. 401 Preclinical 417 and early clinical data 418 have suggested that interferon-a 2a (INF-a2a) enhances the efficacy of 5-FU therapy in colorectal cancer. In an attempt
to improve on the results obtained with the use of 5-FU and leucovorin in the adjuvant setting, the NSABP C-05 protocol evaluated the addition of recombinant IFN to
5-FU plus leucovorin in a randomized trial including 2176 patients with Dukes stage B or C colon cancer. The results showed no statistically significant difference in
either disease-free survival or overall survival at 4 years of follow-up. Toxicity was more pronounced in the 5-FU, leucovorin, and IFN arm as compared with 5-FU plus
leucovorin alone. 419
The use of vaccines has been explored extensively as well. Hoover and Hanna 420 randomized 98 colorectal patients with Dukes stage B2 and C disease into groups
treated by resection alone or resection plus a vaccine made with irradiated autologous tumor cells plus BCG. After 6.5 years, no statistically significant differences
were detected in survival or disease-free survival for the 80 eligible patients. However, there was a significant improvement in survival ( P = .02) and disease-free
survival (P = .039) in the colon cancer group, although no benefits were seen in patients with rectal cancer. The potential negative impact of the radiation therapy in
the immune system of the rectal patients has been postulated as a reason for this difference. 421
The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group conducted a larger trial that enrolled a total of 412 patients with Dukes' stage B2 and C colon cancer and randomized them
to observation or to vaccination with autologous irradiated tumor cells in combination with BCG and with irradiated tumor cells alone. 422 When the results were

analyzed, there were no significant differences in time to relapse or overall survival among the two groups.
A more recent study involving 254 patients presented by a group of Dutch investigators showed that in patients with stage II colon cancer, there was a 32% relative
reduction in mortality when a tumor vaccine was compared with observation only. 423
The use of vaccines for the treatment of colorectal cancer remains an interesting and active field of research. However, no conclusive evidence of benefit has
emerged to this date, and it continues to be an experimental treatment reserved for clinical trials.
The use of passive-specific immunotherapy has met with more success. The monoclonal antibody 17-1A is specific for an antigen expressed on cells of human GI
malignancies. It was originally developed in mice and later produced in a chimeric version. 424 The chimeric version of the monoclonal antibody 17-1A exhibits
molecular characteristics of normal human immunoglobulin G (IgG) but retains the specificity and binding affinity of the native 17-1A murine monoclonal antibody. 424
Reithmuller et al. 425 recently published a 7-year analysis of their randomized trial comparing the use of the monoclonal antibody 17-1A to controls in 189 patients with
resected stage III colorectal cancer. The monoclonal antibody was administered as a 500-mg infusion postoperatively followed by 4 monthly doses of 100 mg each. 386
After 7 years of follow-up, treatment had reduced overall mortality by 32% ( P<.01) and had decreased the recurrence rate by 23% ( P<.04). The reduction in
recurrence and mortality is similar to that seen with the use of 5-FU plus levamisole or leucovorin.
In the United States, two large trials are evaluating the use of the monoclonal antibody 17-1A in the adjuvant setting. The first study randomized patients with stage III
colon cancer to receive either modulated 5-FU or a combination of modulated 5-FU plus the antibody. The second study randomized stage II colon cancer patients to
receive the antibody or no further treatment. In the next few years, the results of these trials will help to determine the role of the monoclonal antibody in the adjuvant
treatment of colorectal cancer.

TREATMENT OF INITIALLY ADVANCED COLON CANCER
SYNCHRONOUS METASTATIC DISEASE
From 10% to 15% of patients with primary colorectal cancer will present with synchronous metastatic cancer disease. Scroggins et al. 339 have presented data on a
series of patients presenting with stage IV disease. They found that only 8.7% of a selected asymptomatic group of patients managed nonoperatively required surgical
intervention. None of the nonoperatively managed group required surgery for hemorrhage or perforation. These data challenge the traditional teaching that in patients
with colon cancer who have metastatic disease at presentation the primary tumor should always be resected. Survivals were on the order of 14 to 16 months in this
group of patients with asymptomatic intact primary tumors.
Patients with symptomatic primary colon tumors should have appropriate resections unless their medical condition does not allow it. Whereas palliative surgery in
colorectal cancer patients with synchronous metastases is a reasonable method to control perforation, obstruction, hemorrhage, and bleeding, it can carry substantial
morbidity and mortality. In a series presented by Liu et al., patients with colon cancer underwent resection as palliation. As compared with standard operative mortality
for elective colon resection, 3% of patients in this group had an operative mortality of 10%, whereas in those in whom more than 50% of the liver was replaced,
mortality was significantly higher.
Patients with synchronous metastases that are potentially resectable should undergo definitive surgical resection of the primary tumor.
LOCALLY UNRESECTABLE COLON CANCER
Unresectable primary tumor in the absence of peritoneal metastases or unresectable visceral metastases is uncommon. The areas commonly involved with advanced
colon tumors are the abdominal wall, retroperitoneum, kidney, duodenum, pancreas, and bladder. Fixation to major nerves or great vessels may confer unresectability
based on local spread. Consideration should be given to preoperative irradiation. In such cases, conversion to resectability has been seen in up to 75% of cases.
Extensive nodal disease is common with locally advanced primary tumors and can extend into the retroperitoneum and along the SMA. Perforated tumors can
produce a profound inflammatory reaction around the site of perforation. After resolution of sepsis, such tumors can be reassessed for resectability, preoperative
therapy, or both. Palliative ostomies and bypass procedures may improve quality of life for some patients.

FOLLOW-UP AFTER POTENTIALLY CURATIVE TREATMENT
Follow-up is carried out to find potentially curable recurrences, to palliate symptomatic recurrences, and to identify and resolve treatment-related problems. The
biology of colorectal cancer works both for and against the effectiveness of follow-up after the curative resection of colorectal cancer. Solitary liver and lung
metastases can be resected and result in long-term survivals in a significant number of patients. Local recurrences of rectal cancer can also be resected with curative
intent. Detection of these recurrences can be worthwhile in terms of survival. However, the reality is that most recurrences will represent the outgrowth of multiple
occult metastatic sites that were unresponsive to initial surgery and adjuvant therapy. These are unlikely to respond to subsequent therapy, and so they prevent any
survival advantage that might have resulted from earlier therapies. Most colorectal cancers that recur or metastasize are biologically determined to be incurable.
FOLLOW-UP STRATEGIES
Critical factors in carrying out and designing follow-up protocols for colorectal cancer patients are the cost-effectiveness of such follow-up and the effects of follow-up
on survival. An important study was carried out by Schoemaker et al. in a university hospital setting in South Australia. These researchers conducted a randomized
controlled trial with 5-year follow-up in patients who had undergone curative resections for colorectal cancer. Patients were followed by either an intensive follow-up
regimen or a standard follow-up regimen. The study group encompassed Dukes stage A, B, and C cancer patients. Standard follow-up consisted of history and
physical examination, blood counts, and liver function tests that were carried out every 3 months for 2 years and every 6 months thereafter. The intensive follow-up
consisted of the standard follow-up plus annual chest radiography, CT of the liver, and colonoscopy. The results of this study demonstrated no difference in the
survival rate at 5 years between patients who received intensive follow-up and those who received standard follow-up.
In a prospective, randomized study of follow-up after radical surgery for colorectal cancer, Kjeldsen et al. 426 made similar findings. The differences between the
randomized groups in this study were based on the frequency of follow-up. The intensively followed group had examinations at 6 and 12 months after treatment,
whereas the other group had examinations at 5 and 10 years. It was found that recurrences were detected with the same frequency in both groups, but the diagnosis
of recurrence was made earlier in the intensively followed group. There was no overall improvement in survival by the intensive follow-up regimen.
The pattern of recurrence of rectal cancer as opposed to colon cancer is an important factor in evaluating the role of follow-up strategies. The role of follow-up in
detection and management of local recurrences of colorectal cancer was studied by Pietra et al. 427 Patients were randomly assigned to either a conventional follow-up
or to intensive follow-up after resection of primary colorectal carcinoma. In the intensively followed group, local recurrence of rectal carcinoma was more frequently
detected. More than 90% of these recurrences in the intensively followed group were detected at scheduled visits. Again, local recurrences were detected earlier in
the intensively followed group, and curative re-resection was more frequently carried out in this group. In this study, patients in the intensive follow-up group had an
improved 5-year survival, mainly due to the re-resection of local recurrences of rectal carcinoma. The usefulness of CEA determination in detecting luminal
recurrences of colorectal cancer was also supported, because it initiated workup for recurrence in asymptomatic patients who were most likely to undergo a curative
reoperation. 428
Other studies have disputed the value of CEA in the follow-up of patients with colorectal carcinoma, on the basis of a lack of detectable increase in survival. In a study
of second-look operations for recurrent colorectal cancer initiated by an elevation of CEA level, it was found that nearly half of the colorectal cancer patients who
developed recurrence underwent second-look operations and that approximately half of these patients underwent resection. 429 As determined by modern imaging
techniques, 1 patient in 72 who underwent exploration for recurrence had no detectable disease at the second-look operation. The group who underwent resection at
a second-look operation had a 5-year survival rate of 41%. It appears that when modern imaging techniques are used to evaluate an elevated CEA level, patients can
be more appropriately selected for surgery.
The issue of cost in the postsurgical surveillance of patients with colon cancer is addressed by Graham et al. 430 In a cooperative group study of 421 patients who
underwent surgical resection for Dukes stage B2 and C colon carcinoma, patients were treated with surgery and adjuvant therapy. Patients underwent physical

examination every 3 months, along with CEA determination, chest radiography, and colonoscopy every 6 months in year 1, physical examination and CEA level
determination every 6 months in years 2 through 5, and colonoscopy every 1 to 2 years during this period. Costs were estimated on the basis of Medicare
reimbursement guidelines. It was found that of the 421 patients in whom recurrent disease was found, 96 underwent surgical resection with curative intent. CEA level
determination was the most cost-effective way to identify patients with recurrence that could be surgically treated. CEA monitoring is controversial but has been
adopted for routine surveillance by national groups in the United States. 431
Rosen432 conducted a metaanalysis evaluating two randomized and three comparative cohort studies examining more than 2000 patients. The analysis looked at the
outcomes of curative resection rates, survival after re-resection, length of survival after recurrence, and cumulative 5-year survival in these patients. Fourteen
single-cohort studies were also included in the analysis, and a study of these additional patients supported the findings of the metaanalysis. The metaanalysis
indicated that the cumulative 5-year survival rate was 1.16 times higher in the intensively followed group ( P = .003). Furthermore, 2.5 times more curative
re-resections were performed for patients undergoing intensive follow-up, and those in the intensive follow-up group had a higher survival rate than did those followed
less intensively.
EXTENT OF DISEASE WORKUP AFTER RECURRENCE
Certain groups of patients with proven or suspected recurrence may benefit from a more extensive workup to identify occult metastatic disease. Examples of this
situation are patients with potentially resectable hepatic metastases or patients with locally recurrent rectal cancer. Another group that may benefit are those patients
with a rising CEA level in whom the source has not been identified on conventional evaluation with physical examination, endoscopy, chest radiography, and CT
scan.433 Two such tests are 18-fluorodeoxyglucose PET and scanning after the injection of radiolabeled antibodies that bind to CEA.
Studies of patients with recurrent or metastatic colorectal cancer have demonstrated high sensitivity (91% to 93%) and specificity (98% to 100%) of these tests in
identifying sites of recurrence. 434 In patients with solitary hepatic metastases on conventional imagery, PET found additional inoperable disease in 11%. PET was able
to identify additional unsuspected sites of tumor in 21% of patients. Overall, approximately 20% to 30% of patients with a potentially resectable recurrence have been
found by PET to have additional disease. 434 The positive predictive value of elevated CEA determinations in patients with an equivocal or negative conventional
workup was 89%.435 This group of patients appeared to benefit most from the additional information provided by PET. 436 It appears, however, that PET will be limited
in detecting certain variances due to small size or the presence of necrotic low metabolically acting tumors.
The use of injectable radiolabeled antibodies demonstrated the presence of occult metastatic sites in many patients believed to have a localized primary lesion or
recurrent disease. 437 This technique appears to be especially adept at identifying microscopic disease in celiac or extraperitoneal nodes that usually are not evaluated
by traditional surgical exploration. 438 When imaging techniques were used to identify antibody uptake, there was a significant increase over the use of CT alone in the
ability to detect unresectability. 439

CHEMOTHERAPY FOR METASTATIC COLORECTAL CANCER
Metastatic colorectal cancer is a resistant disease, and the dismal 5-year survival reflects this difficulty extremely well. Both MDR1 and GSH S-transferase gene
expression are thought to be increased in colon cancer cells. 440 However, this belief has not been confirmed universally. 441 The human mdr1 P glycoprotein is
overexpressed in multidrug resistant tumor cells and is believed to play a role in the elimination of certain cytotoxic drugs used in the chemotherapy of colorectal
cancer. 442 GSH S-transferases are thought to impart resistance to different chemotherapeutic agents, especially alkylating agents. 443 The mean GSH S-transferase
level is significantly increased in colon cancer as compared with the level in adjacent normal tissue. 444 The paucity of chemotherapeutic agents with activity in
colorectal cancer reflects the intrinsic resistance demonstrated in those cells.
5-FLUOROURACIL
Since its introduction by Heidelberger et al. (1957) in 1957, 5-FU has become firmly established as the most important antineoplastic drug in the treatment of
colorectal cancer. Early trials demonstrated that 5-FU's bioavailability when administered orally is erratic, with less than 75% of a dose reaching the systemic
circulation and marked variability in plasma levels observed among patients. This pharmacologic observation led to the development of 5-FU as an intravenous agent.
The variability in oral absorption might be associated with varying levels of DPD, the first catabolic enzyme in 5-FU metabolism in the GI tract. 5-FU has been used in
a variety of schedules, and determining the best dose, method, and duration of its administration has been the object of intense investigation. 403,445
The overall response rate for single-agent 5-FU has been reported to be as high as 30% but, realistically, it is closer to 20%. Median survival for patients responding
to 5-FU treatment is believed to be in the 12- to 18-month range. Accumulated clinical evidence suggests that the use of protracted intravenous infusion of 5-FU may
be superior and better tolerated than intravenous bolus dosing 446 and that modulation of 5-FU may yield higher response rates. 403,447
Continuous Infusion
Lokich et al. 448 demonstrated clearly the feasibility of a continuous infusion of 5-FU as a treatment for colorectal cancer. When administered for protracted periods, the
major toxicity of 5-FU is mucositis. Additionally, hand-foot syndrome is seen in approximately 5% to 25% of patients. 446 The lack of significant hematologic toxicity
makes continuous-infusion regimens very attractive. The results from larger randomized trials are encouraging. Despite a response rate and overall survival that are
statistically equivalent to those of bolus regimens, as shown in the SWOG experience, the single-agent infusion regimens demonstrated a favorable toxicity profile
and a trend toward longer survival. 449 A metaanalysis involving 1219 patients treated in six randomized trials confirmed the superiority of continuous infusion 5-FU
over bolus regimens regarding response rates and toxicity. Even though the overall survival was superior for the continuous-infusion group, the medians were very
similar.450 The need for a central venous catheter, with its inherent problems (e.g., infection, thrombus, and slippage) and for a portable pump and the cost and
inconvenience for the patients are the major problems associated with continuous-infusion regimens. However, they are acceptable alternatives in the treatment of
colorectal cancer patients.
Biochemical Modulation of 5-Fluorouracil
The relatively disappointing results of single-agent 5-FU led many investigators to explore the use of agents that could modulate its activity. One approach to improve
the activity of 5-FU has been the addition of biochemical modulators to 5-FU regimens. Several modulators have been studied, among them leucovorin, methotrexate,
trimetrexate, and IFN-a. 451 Of these biochemical modulators, leucovorin is without doubt the most successful. 452 This agent, also known as folinic acid, is a
tetrahydrofolic acid derivative that can enhance the therapeutic and toxic effects of fluoropyrimidines such as 5-FU. 403 The reduction in DNA synthesis by 5-FU
involves the formation of a complex of FdUMP, thymidylate synthetase (TS), and a cofactor designated 5'10 methylene tetrahydrofolate (Me-THP). The enzyme TS is
essential to DNA synthesis because it is the only source of thymidylate in the cell, converting dUMP to dTMP. If the enzyme becomes trapped in a complex with
FdUMP and Me-THP, it is no longer available to convert dUMP to dTMP, and DNA synthesis is reduced. DNA synthesis is not completely inhibited because there is
turnover of the FdUMP/TS/Me-THP complex, freeing up the TS to convert dUMP to dTMP, although in reduced quantities. Leucovorin enhances the inhibition of DNA
synthesis by stabilizing the FdUMP/TS/Me-THP complex. 453
In a metaanalysis of nine randomized clinical trials of advanced colorectal cancer comparing 5-FU alone with 5-FU plus leucovorin,significant improvement in
response rate was seen in patients receiving 5-FU and leucovorin as compared with those receiving 5-FU alone. 454 This improvement in response did not result in a
significant survival advantage in most studies. 454,455 However, Poon et al.403,447 were able to demonstrate a statistically significant survival advantage for the
combination of 5-FU with leucovorin over 5-FU alone or in combination with methotrexate. The leucovorin dose and schedule required for optimal modulation of 5-FU
has not been clearly defined. Doses ranging from 20 to 500 mg/m 2/d of leucovorin have been administered on daily or weekly schedules.
In an attempt to determine the best regimen of 5-FU, the SWOG randomly allocated 626 patients to receive one of seven regimens: (1) 5-FU alone, (2) 5-FU with
low-dose leucovorin, (3) 5-FU with high-dose leucovorin, (4) 5-FU by continuous infusion, (5) 5-FU by continuous infusion plus weekly leucovorin, (6) 5-FU by 24-hour
infusion, and (7) 5-FU by 24-hour infusion plus PALA. 449 There was no statistical difference in the response rates, which ranged between 15% and 29%, with a
median survival for the entire group of 14 months. Despite the statistically equivalent efficacy, the single-agent infusion regimens demonstrated encouraging results,
with a favorable toxicity profile trend toward longer survival. 449

A metaanalysis involving 1219 patients treated in six randomized trials confirmed the superiority of continuous-infusion 5-FU over bolus regimens in terms of response
rates and toxicity. Even though the overall survival was superior for the continuous-infusion group, the medians were very similar. 450
A bimonthly regimen combining bolus with 24-hour infusion of 5-FU plus high-dose leucovorin has been extensively examined in France. A study comparing bimonthly
with monthly 5-FU plus leucovorin noted a higher response and more favorable toxicity profile for the bimonthly schedule but no statistically significant improvement in
overall survival. 456
INTERFERON. The combination of IFN-a and 5-FU has demonstrated synergistic cytotoxicity against human colon cancer cell lines in preclinical studies.

457,458
The

459

exact mechanism of action of IFN when combined with 5-FU is unknown. IFN has been shown to enhance conversion of 5-FU to FdUMP,
to reduce TS, 460 to inhibit
thymidine salvage pathways, 459 and to potentiate 5-FU-induced DNA strand breaks. The addition of IFN also seemed to increase the 5-FU exposure by decreasing its
clearance. 461
Wadler et al. 457 initially reported a response rate of 63% for the combination of 5-FU and IFN. Based on this promising result, multiple trials were conducted using IFN
as a 5-FU modulator, showing response rates in the range of 25% to 40%. 418 The toxic effects were significant and included leukopenia, mucositis, diarrhea, fever,
chills, myalgia, and neurotoxicity. A group of researchers at the Royal Marsden Hospital randomized patients to receive 5-FU, 750 mg/m 2/d by continuous infusion for
5 consecutive days, followed by weekly bolus 5-FU, 750 mg/m 2 either with or without IFN (10 MU subcutaneously three times weekly). Objective response was
observed in 19% of the patients who received 5-FU plus IFN and in 30% of those who received 5-FU only. Patients who received IFN did experience significantly
more toxicity.462 The NSABP C-05 protocol compared 5-FU plus leucovorin with the same combination plus IFN. With 2176 patients evaluated, there was no
statistically significant difference in either disease-free survival or overall survival. Toxic effects were observed in 61.8% of patients in the 5-FU plus leucovorin group
and in 72.1% of patients in the IFN group. 419 These results indicate that the use of IFN as a 5-FU modulator added to the toxicity of the regimen without affecting
efficacy. This regimen has been largely abandoned and should not be used outside an investigational trial.
TRIMETREXATE. Trimetrexate, a dihydrofolate reductase inhibitor, potentiates the cytotoxicity of 5-FU.

463

Phase II studies demonstrated objective responses with
trimetrexate plus 5-FU and leucovorin in patients previously treated with and without 5-FU.
However, severe diarrhea and hypersensitivity were observed with this
combination regimen. Blanke et al. 464 reported the results of a phase II study combining trimetrexate, 5-FU, and leucovorin in patients with advanced colorectal
cancer. Thirty-six patients received trimetrexate, 110 mg/m 2 on day 1, leucovorin, 200 mg/m2 on day 2, and 5-FU, 500 mg/m2 on day 2 immediately after leucovorin.
Oral leucovorin, 15 mg, was given every 6 hours for seven doses. This regimen was repeated weekly for six courses every 8 weeks. Two patients achieved a
complete response, and the overall response rate was 50%. Diarrhea was the most common toxicity. A phase II trial involving patients with previously treated
colorectal cancer disclosed a disappointing 4% overall response rate. 465 A randomized phase III trial comparing 5-FU plus leucovorin against a combination of 5-FU,
leucovorin, and trimetrexate has completed accrual. Final results have not been reported.
402

ORAL FLUOROPYRIMIDINES
Oral fluoropyrimidines are thought to provide prolonged exposure to 5-FU with lower peak concentrations than those observed with bolus schedules of intravenous
5-FU. This may reduce the occurrence of toxic effects associated with a high plasma concentration of 5-FU, such as neutropenia and stomatitis. 5-FU has been
studied in several different dosing schedules, and clinical trials suggest the importance of constant exposure to 5-FU. 450 The toxicity profile of 5-FU is
schedule-dependent and, whereas bolus schedules produce mainly neutropenia, protracted infusions produce mainly stomatitis and hand-foot syndrome. 446
Additionally, cancer patients seem to prefer the convenience of oral instead of intravenous medications, as long as the efficacy remains at least equal for both
modalities. 466
In the last decade, several oral agents have been introduced for the treatment of colorectal cancer in the Western world ( Table 33.7-18). The erratic bioavailability of
oral 5-FU caused by the varying GI levels of DPD, the primary catabolic enzyme of 5-FU, 467,468 was overcome by the development of 5-FU prodrugs that are well
absorbed enterally and then are enzymatically converted to 5-FU or by the coadministration of DPD inactivators. 303

TABLE 33.7-18. Summary of Recent Randomized Trials Comparing Intravenous 5-FU/LV versus Oral Fluorinated Pyrimidines for the Treatment of Advanced
Colorectal Cancer

Uracil, 5-Fluorouracil, and Tegafur
Tegafur is a prodrug of 5-FU originally studied in the United States as an intravenous medication. The agent was believed to be too toxic, and so its development as
an intravenous medication was discontinued. In the early 1980s, tegafur was tested as an oral medication at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, and it was shown to
have antitumor activity when administered this way. At the same time, Japanese investigators began to study and use tegafur as an oral medication. 469 Uracil, a
competitive inhibitor of DPD, was later combined with tegafur to provide sustained levels of 5-FU. 470 The combination of uracil, 5-FU, and tegafur is known as UFT.
The previously demonstrated activity and favorable toxicity profile of UFT led to its development as an oral alternative to intravenous 5-FU for the treatment of solid
tumors, especially colorectal cancer. 471
Two large, multinational phase III trials comparing the oral regimen of UFT plus leucovorin to intravenous 5-FU and leucovorin as the initial treatment for patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer have been reported. 472,473 In the first trial, 816 patients were randomly allocated to intravenous 5-FU plus leucovorin or to oral UFT and
leucovorin. 472 UFT was taken at a dose of 300 mg/m 2/d in three divided doses for 28 days followed by 1 week of rest. Oral leucovorin was administered at 90 mg/d,
with the UFT administered at the same frequency daily. The intravenous 5-FU and leucovorin were administered for 5 consecutive days, with cycles repeated every
28 days. The study demonstrated statistical equivalence between the treatment arms, with a median survival of 12.4 months for the UFT plus leucovorin arm and 13.4
months for the intravenous arm. No statistical difference was seen for the two treatment arms regarding response (12% for UFT plus leucovorin and 15% for
intravenous 5-FU plus leucovorin). Severe neutropenia and stomatitis were less common in the oral regimen. 472
The second trial compared time to progression between patients receiving an intravenous 5-FU plus leucovorin regimen or UFT plus leucovorin. 473 Three hundred and
eighty patients were randomized to two treatment groups that were identical to those described in the first study except that the intravenous 5-FU plus leucovorin was
repeated every 35 days. The treatment arms were equivalent in terms of time to progression, with a median of 3.4 months in the UFT plus leucovorin group and 3.3
months in the intravenous 5-FU plus leucovorin group. The median survival times were 12.2 and 11.9 months, respectively. 473
Capecitabine
Capecitabine , a fluoropyrimidine carbamate, was developed as an oral alternative to intravenous 5-FU. 474 Capecitabine is absorbed through the intestinal mucosa as
an intact molecule, not being affected by the thymidine phosphorylase present in the intestines. It then is metabolized in the liver by carboxylesterase to

5'-deoxy-5-fluorocytidine (5'DFCR), which is converted by cytidine deaminase to 5'DFUR mainly in the liver and tumor tissues. Finally, 5'DFUR is metabolized by
thymidine phosphorylase to 5-FU at the tumor site. 475 Preclinical studies demonstrated capecitabine's activity in 5-FU-sensitive and -resistant cell lines. 476 Colorectal
cancers, like many other solid tumors, tend to have high levels of thymidine phosphorylase, which is known for its angiogenic properties. 477
In phase I trials, diarrhea, vomiting, and hand-foot syndrome (palmar-plantar erythrodysesthesia) were dose-limiting toxic effects. 478 A large multinational, randomized,
open-label phase II trial evaluated three schedules of capecitabine (i.e., continuous, intermittent, and intermittent with leucovorin) in metastatic colorectal cancer. The
response rates for the three groups ranged from 21% to 24%. The median time to disease progression ranged from 127 to 230 days, with the best time to disease
progression seen in patients treated in the intermittent capecitabine arm, without leucovorin. 479 The addition of leucovorin seemed to increase the incidence of toxic
effects, without improving therapeutic activity.
Results of two phase III trials comparing capecitabine, 2500 mg/m 2/d for 2 weeks every 3 weeks, to bolus 5-FU, 425 mg/m 2/d, plus leucovorin, 20 mg/m2/d, daily for 5
days every 4 weeks, as first-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer, were recently reported at the 1999 American Society of Clinical Oncologists' meeting. The
first trial enrolled 602 patients, and the second trial enrolled 605 patients. Both trials demonstrated a higher response rate with capecitabine as compared with bolus
5-FU plus leucovorin. Taking into account all randomized patients using intention-to-treat analysis, investigator response rates were 26.6% versus 17.9% (95% CI ,
1.9% to 15.1%) in the first trial and 24.8% versus 15.5% (95% CI, 2.8% to 15.5%) in the second trial. The median survival duration was 54 versus 57.1 weeks ( P =
.2363), respectively. The toxicity profile of capecitabine was favorable, with fewer treatment-related serious adverse events and hospitalizations in the capecitabine
arm as compared with the 5-FU plus leucovorin arm. The most common adverse events with capecitabine were palmar-plantar erythrodysesthesia (hand-foot
syndrome) and diarrhea.
Eniluracil
Eniluracil, also known as 776C85 and ethynyluracil, is a potent irreversible inactivator of DPD, the first enzyme in the degradative pathway of 5-FU. 480 When it is used
in combination with an oral formulation of 5-FU, eniluracil makes the absorption and bioavailability of 5-FU more reliable, 481 and the 5-FU bioavailability and half-life
are increased.
Phase I trials have demonstrated that a dose ranging from 10 to 40 mg/d of eniluracil inactivates DPD maximally. The concentration of 5-FU obtained with a 28-day
oral dosing regimen of this agent plus eniluracil is similar to steady-state concentrations from protracted intravenous infusions of 5-FU. 481 Main toxic effects included
fatigue and diarrhea. Nausea, vomiting, mucositis, pain, dehydration, and constipation were relatively uncommon.
Based on these results, a phase II trial of 5-FU, 1.0 mg/m 2, plus eniluracil, 10 mg/m2, orally twice daily for 28 days followed by a 7-day rest period was conducted in
patients with previously untreated colorectal cancer. 482 However, after approximately one-third of the patients had been treated, the doses of both agents were
increased because of the unexpectedly low toxicity observed. The doses were increased to 5-FU, 1.15 mg/m 2, and eniluracil, 11.5 mg/m2, twice daily for 28 days. The
objective response rate was 29%. 482 This dose and schedule is currently being used in two pivotal trials comparing this oral combination with intravenous 5-FU plus
leucovorin and with a protracted intravenous schedule of 5-FU in metastatic colorectal cancer patients.
IRINOTECAN
Camptothecin is an agent derived from the Chinese ornamental tree Camptotheca acuminata. Its clinical development began in the United States in the late 1960s but
was eventually halted due to excessive toxicity. In the late 1980s, irinotecan, also known as CPT-11 , an analogue of camptothecin, was developed in Japan. 483
Pivotal phase II studies of irinotecan in advanced colorectal carcinoma were conducted in the United States, including patients who had received prior chemotherapy
with 5-FU and had progressed while on treatment within the last 6 months. The dose of irinotecan ranged from 100 to 150 mg/m 2 given weekly for 4 weeks, followed
by 2 weeks of rest. The overall response rate ranged from 12.5% to 23%. Grade 3 and 4 toxicities were noted in 30% of patients, with a 20% hospitalization rate for
management of toxicity-related events. The principle toxicities included diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and neutropenia. Severe diarrhea was seen in up to 23% of
patients and was not well controlled by standard therapy but was limited by use of an intensive loperamide regimen and appropriate dose modification. 484
The real value of irinotecan in the treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer refractory to 5-FU was determined by two randomized clinical trials conducted in Europe.
In the first one, Cunningham et al. 479 randomly assigned patients in whom 5-FU therapy had failed to receive either 300 to 350 mg/m 2 of irinotecan every 3 weeks or
supportive care alone (Fig. 33.7-7). A total of 189 patients were randomized to the irinotecan arm and 90 to the supportive-care alone arm. The mean age of the
participants was 58.8 years; performance status was 0 in 79 patients (42%), 1 in 77 patients (41%), and 2 in 32 patients (17%). After a median follow-up of 13 months,
the overall survival was significantly better in the irinotecan group ( P = .0001), with a 36.2% 1-year survival rate in the irinotecan group versus 13.8% in the
supportive-care group. In a quality-of-life analysis, all significant differences except diarrhea favored the irinotecan group. 479

FIGURE 33.7-7. Probability of survival of the 279 patients enrolled in a trial of irinotecan versus supportive care for metastatic colorectal cancer refractory to
5-fluorouracil. (From ref. 479, with permission.)

Rougier et al. 485 reported the results of the second trial, in which 267 patients with advanced colorectal cancer in whom 5-FU therapy had failed received either
second-line fluorouracil by continuous infusion or irinotecan, 300 to 350 mg/m 2 infused once every 3 weeks. Patients treated with irinotecan lived longer than patients
receiving second-line infusional 5-FU ( P = .035). Median survival duration was 10.8 months in the irinotecan group and 8.5 months in the 5-FU group ( Fig. 33.7-8).485

FIGURE 33.7-8. Survival curve in patients on irinotecan or infused 5-fluorouracil for advanced colorectal cancer refractory to first-line 5-fluorouracil. (From ref. 485,
with permission.)

A randomized phase III trial compared the combinations of irinotecan plus 5-FU and leucovorin with 5-FU plus leucovorin and single-agent irinotecan as first-line
treatment of patients with advanced colorectal cancer ( Table 33.7-19).412 Approximately 220 patients were enrolled in each of the three treatment groups. Objective
responses were noted in 51% of patients receiving the three-drug combination, 29% of patients receiving 5-FU with leucovorin, and 30% of patients receiving
single-agent irinotecan ( P<.001). The median time to treatment failure for each of the three treatment groups was 5.4, 3.9, and 3.2 months, respectively. The median
survival duration, however, did not achieve a statistical difference, with a median survival of 14.4 months for the triple combination, 12.6 months for 5-FU plus
leucovorin, and 12.0 months for the group receiving irinotecan ( P = .173). A new analysis is planned when the data mature further.

TABLE 33.7-19. Summary of Recent Randomized Trials Comparing 5-FU/LV versus Irinotecan or Oxaliplatin for the Treatment of Advanced Colorectal Cancer

A second phase III trial, conducted primarily in Europe, examined the role of irinotecan plus 5-FU and leucovorin in the first-line setting. This trial randomized 387
patients to receive either of two commonly used 5-FU plus leucovorin regimens with or without irinotecan. Response rates were significantly improved with the use of
irinotecan (49% vs. 23%). Additionally, the median survival was statistically superior for the group receiving irinotecan with the 5-FU plus leucovorin (16.8 vs. 14
months). The combination of irinotecan with 5-FU and leucovorin is being investigated against other promising combinations and against standard 5-FU plus
leucovorin in a large intergroup trial in the United States.
OXALIPLATIN
Oxaliplatin is a novel diaminocyclohexane platinum agent that acts mainly by causing interstrand and intrastrand cross-links in DNA. 481 It has been investigated as a
single agent in colorectal cancer both in previously treated and untreated patients. In chemotherapy-naive patients with advanced colorectal cancer, two phase II trials
assessed the activity of oxaliplatin, 130 mg/m 2 given over 2 hours every 3 weeks. 486 Response rates ranged from 20% to 24%, with a median response duration of 6 to
7 months and a median progression-free survival of approximately 4 months. Peripheral neuropathy and laryngopharyngeal dysesthesia were the main toxicities
reported. In previously treated patients, the overall response rate was considerably lower (»10%), and the median survival duration was 8.5 months. 481
Preclinical models demonstrated synergy between oxaliplatin and 5-FU, and this was subsequently confirmed in clinical trials. 487 A phase II trial involving 90 patients
with advanced colorectal cancer evaluated the combination of chronomodulated 5-FU, 700 mg/m 2/d, leucovorin, 300 mg/m2/d, and oxaliplatin, 25 mg/m2/d, given for 4
days every 2 weeks. The response rate was 58%, and the median survival duration was 15 months. 488
The potential benefits of oxaliplatin when added to 5-FU and leucovorin as first-line therapy for patients with advanced colorectal cancer were subsequently evaluated
in phase III randomized trials (see Table 33.7-19). A study with 200 patients compared chronomodulated 5-FU plus leucovorin administered every 3 weeks with or
without oxaliplatin at 125 mg/m2 given over 6 hours on day 1. The overall response rates were 53% versus 16% ( P<.001) for the combinations with and without
oxaliplatin, respectively. However, the overall survival duration was equivalent in both arms (19.4 vs. 17.6 months, respectively). This survival equivalence was
attributed to crossover and surgery after chemotherapy.
A second study reported by De Gramont et al. randomized 420 patients to receive 5-FU plus leucovorin on days 1 and 14 of a 28-day schedule with or without
oxaliplatin, 85 mg/m2. The response rates in the first 200 patients were 57% versus 26% in patients treated with and without oxaliplatin, respectively. The
corresponding median progression-free survival duration for the treatment groups were 39.6 versus 27.8 weeks. Once more, however, no significant impact on overall
survival has been demonstrated (P = .12).
As second-line therapy, oxaliplatin in combination with 5-FU and leucovorin has also shown promising results. In one trial, 46 patients with 5-FU-refractory colorectal
cancer were treated with oxaliplatin administered as a 2-hour infusion on day 1, followed by leucovorin on days 1 and 2, and 5-FU as a 24-hour infusion for 2
consecutive days. Treatment was repeated every 2 weeks. The overall response rate was 46%, and median survival duration was 17 months. Limiting toxicities were
neutropenia and peripheral neuropathy. A second trial involving the addition of oxaliplatin, 85 mg/m 2 every 2 weeks, to the same 5-FU plus leucovorin regimen under
which patients had progressed produced an overall response rate of 20%, a median response duration of 37 weeks, and a median survival duration of 57 weeks. 489
The combination of oxaliplatin and irinotecan in patients with 5-FU-refractory colorectal cancer was recently reported. The overall response rate among the 34 treated
patients was 44%, with stable disease in another 35% and a median time to progression of 7.5 months.
RALTITREXED
Raltitrexed is transported into cells by the reduced folate carrier, metabolized to a polyglutamate species, and retained intracellularly, resulting in prolonged TS
inhibition. 490 It is the first of the specific TS inhibitors to have undergone extensive clinical evaluation, 490 and it is currently approved for treatment of colorectal cancer
by regulatory agencies in Europe, Canada, Australia, and South America.
The efficacy of raltitrexed as monotherapy for patients with advanced colorectal cancer was evaluated in three phase III clinical trials. 491 Two international trials, one
with 439 patients 492 and the other with 495 patients, 493 compared intravenous bolus raltitrexed, 3 mg/m2 repeated every 3 weeks, to daily intravenous bolus 5-FU, 425
mg/m2/d, plus leucovorin, 20 mg/m2/d for 5 days (Mayo regimen), or to 5-FU, 400 mg/m2/d, plus leucovorin, 200 mg/m 2/d (Machover regimen) repeated every 4 weeks.
The third trial was conducted in the United States 494 and compared two raltitrexed dosages (3 mg/m2 and 4 mg/m2 every 3 weeks) with the Mayo regimen. However,
because of the unacceptable toxicities seen with the 4 mg/m 2 dose, subsequent analyses were based on a two-treatment comparison with 427 patients. All three trials
produced similar response rates ranging from 14% to 19% for the raltitrexed group and from 15% to 18% for the 5-FU plus leucovorin group. In all three trials, survival
duration ranged from 10 to 12 months. The study conducted in the United States showed a significant difference in survival duration (9.7 vs. 12.7 months; P = .01)
between the two treatment groups, favoring the 5-FU with leucovorin group. The main advantage of raltitrexed is its easy schedule, allowing a single intravenous
treatment every 3 weeks.
Several studies have been conducted using hepatic arterial infusion in patients with advanced colorectal cancer with liver metastasis. Response rates have been
consistently superior for the arms using hepatic arterial infusion; however, a convincing survival advantage has never been shown ( Table 33.7-20). The use of hepatic
arterial infusion for treatment of advanced colorectal cancer still must be considered investigational.

TABLE 33.7-20. Hepatic Intraarterial Fluoropyrimidine Therapy for Liver Metastases in Colorectal Cancer

SUMMARY
After four decades, 5-FU remains the mainstay of treatment for colorectal cancer. However, the advent of newer agents has introduced new options for the treatment
of this disease. Ongoing trials are determining which agent, or combination of agents, should be considered the gold standard in treatment of advanced colorectal
cancer. The increased response rates and prolonged progression-free survival seen with the combinations of 5-FU, leucovorin, and either irinotecan or oxaliplatin are
very exciting and warrant their consideration as front-line therapy. The use of agents that are able to maintain the same efficacy as older regimens with improved
convenience and less toxicity may have a positive impact in the quality of life of patients as well. However, an improvement in survival will be needed for the
establishment of a clear new standard. For now, whenever possible, patients should be encouraged to participate in well-designed clinical trials involving new
regimens, because despite the impressive advances seen in the last few years, advanced colorectal cancer remains a highly lethal disease.

MISCELLANEOUS COLORECTAL TUMORS
CARCINOIDS
Carcinoid tumors of the GI tract, although characteristically indolent, are also quite heterogeneous with respect both to histologic and endocrine features and to
clinical presentation and behavior. Because they are relatively uncommon, most reports do not have a significant number of patients for a detailed analysis. For
decades, a series including 2837 cases published in 1975 remained the largest available reference. Modlin and Sandor recently evaluated an impressive 8305 cases.
The most frequent sites for carcinoids were the GI tract (74% of cases) and the bronchopulmonary system (25% of cases). Within the GI tract, 29% of cases occurred
in the small bowel, 19% in the appendix, and 13% in the rectum. The highest incidence rates were seen among African American men (2.12 per 100,000 per year).
This large analysis indicates that metastases are already evident at the time of diagnosis in 45% of the patients and that the overall 5-year survival rate of all
carcinoid tumors, regardless of site, is 50%. The 5-year survival rate for carcinoid tumors of the GI tract varied markedly. It was considerably lower for pancreatic
(34%), colonic (41%), and small intestinal tumors (55%) and better for appendiceal (86%), bronchopulmonary (76.6%), and rectal carcinoids (72.2%). 495 These
improved 5-year survival rates were associated with a lower incidence of invasive growth or metastatic spread. A search for additional tumors is generally advised,
because multiple carcinoids and second neoplasms are not uncommon. 496
Most carcinoid tumors are clinically silent, and the diagnosis is not made before surgery. Surgical treatment depends on the localization and size of the tumor. Small
bowel carcinoid tumors metastasize in 20% to 30% of the cases if the tumor is smaller than 1 cm. Therefore, the primary tumor should always be resected widely,
including the regional lymph nodes. Carcinoid tumors of the appendix measuring less than 1 cm usually do not metastasize. For such patients, an appendectomy is
the treatment of choice. For tumors larger than 2 cm, a right hemicolectomy should be performed. If the tumor is between 1 and 2 cm, surgical treatment depends on
the presence of positive lymph nodes, extension of the tumor into the mesoappendix or subserosal lymphatic invasion, and age of the patient. 497 Carcinoid tumors of
the colon and rectum measuring less than 2 cm rarely metastasize. Surgical treatment for patients with such small tumors is local excision, whereas for patients with
tumors larger than 2 cm, wide resection is advocated. 497
SARCOMAS
Rarely, tumors may arise directly from the stromal and smooth muscle elements in the colon or rectum. These tumors are known as smooth muscle tumors or stromal
tumors of the colon and rectum. These mesodermal tumors are essentially leiomyosarcomas. The true incidence of leiomyosarcomas in the colon and rectum is
unknown. Only small numbers of patients have been reported to date, all in small series. 498
The most common anatomic location of leiomyosarcoma is the stomach (47%), followed by small intestine (24%), rectum (11%), colon (7%), duodenum (5%), and
esophagus (5%). Symptoms and physical findings are nonspecific, with pain, palpable masses, and melena being the most common. Patients frequently present with
GI bleeding and significant anemia. The only therapy with accepted value is surgery with wide margins. Chemotherapy is of unproven value as an adjuvant and as
treatment for this type of tumor. The tumor grade is an important prognostic factor. In patients resected with curative intent who have low-grade lesions, disease-free
survival at 8 years exceeds 80%, as compared with a mean disease-free interval of only 18 months for patients with high-grade lesions. 499
Other authors have confirmed that the stage of the tumors and the presence of high-grade features are the main independent factors that affect survival. DNA ploidy
is not an independent prognostic factor for survival in patients with leiomyosarcomas. 500 Recurrences are noted at regional and distant sites. 501 The prognosis for
patients with leiomyosarcoma is guarded, and almost two-thirds of the patients die within 1 year. The use of adjuvant radiation therapy in patients with resected
leiomyosarcomas of the rectum may improve local control and allow for sphincter preservation. 501 It is unlikely that large randomized trials for the treatment of
colorectal leiomyosarcomas will ever be conducted owing to the rarity of this disease. Patients with advanced cases should be encouraged to participate in trials
designed for GI leiomyosarcomas in general.
LYMPHOMA
Colorectal lymphomas account for fewer than 1% of all colorectal cancers but account for 15% of all GI lymphomas. 502 Most cases involve the cecum and the
rectum.503 Virtually all colorectal lymphomas are non-Hodgkin's type, including both B- and T-cell types of low-, intermediate-, and high-grade histologies.
Immunohistochemical studies usually show a preponderance of B-cell phenotype. Colorectal non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is a disease that affects both the pediatric and
adult population and, although pediatric patients have an excellent prognosis, long-term survival can be expected in only approximately 50% of adult patients.
The diagnosis of colorectal lymphoma must be confirmed histologically and by the absence of evidence of primary lymphoma elsewhere by imaging studies or clinical
examination (i.e., evidence of splenomegaly, or palpable lymphadenopathy). In addition, both the peripheral smear and the bone marrow must be determined to be
normal. Colorectal lymphomas usually present with a mass, symptoms of obstruction, or signs of bleeding. 502 The clinical presentation is usually indistinguishable
from that of colorectal adenocarcinoma, and most patients are symptomatic at the time of diagnosis. 503
Patients with colon lymphoma often are treated initially with surgery. The lack of well-designed trials makes any recommendation extremely difficult. The use of
combined-modality treatment, including surgery and chemotherapy, seems to yield superior results. 504 Several authors have recommended the use of radiation
therapy, especially in cases involving low-grade lymphomas, bulky disease, positive lymph nodes, or incomplete resection. The true role of radiation therapy in colon
lymphomas is still uncertain.
Radiation therapy is more attractive in cases involving the rectum. However, patients treated with radiation therapy alone have a very poor long-term survival. 502
Whenever possible, combined-modality surgery and radiation therapy should be considered. The use of chemotherapy in earlier disease stages is controversial but
should be considered for patients with advanced-stage disease or more aggressive histologic types. Because of the rarity of this cancer, patients should be
encouraged to be treated in larger centers where there is experience in the management of lymphomas.

SMALL CELL CARCINOMA
Extrapulmonary small cell cancers are very uncommon, accounting for fewer than 1000 cases annually. 505 Histologically, small cell cancers arising from different
organs are indistinguishable, and a lung primary should always be ruled out. 506 Fewer than 100 cases have been reported since 1961, the most frequent site being
the rectum, followed by the cecum and sigmoid. 506
The presentation is similar to that of adenocarcinomas and includes weight loss, bleeding, abdominal pain, and change in bowel habits. 507 Metastasis is common,
affecting 85% of the patients at the time of diagnosis. 506 The liver is the organ most frequently involved by metastasis, but almost any organ may be affected. Patients
with localized disease should be treated aggressively with a multimodality approach, including local therapy with surgery or radiation therapy (or both) and
chemotherapy. Patients with advanced disease should receive chemotherapy. 508 The chemotherapy should be based on accepted treatment regimens used in the
treatment of small cell lung carcinomas. 506
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Tepper JE. Reflections in rectosigmoid: retro-peritoneal vs. intra-peritoneal. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14(5):1043.
2. Van Damme J. The superior mesenteric artery. New York: Thieme Medical Publishers, 1990:48.
3. Garcia-Ruiz A, Milsom JW, Ludwig K, Marchesa P. Right colonic arterial anatomy: implications for laparoscopic surgery. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39(8):906.
4. Chen Y, Liu ZY, Li RX, Guo Z. Structural studies of initial lymphatics adjacent to gastric and colonic malignant neoplasms. Lymphology 1999;32:70.
5. Parkin DM, Pisani P, Ferlay J. Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:33.
6. Ries L, Kosary CL, Hankey BF, et al. SEER cancer statistics review 19731995. Bethesda: National Cancer Institute, 1998.
7. Parkin DM, Pisani P, Ferlay J. Estimates of worldwide incidence of eighteen major cancers in 1985. Int J Cancer 1993;54(4):594.
8. Chu KC, Tarone RE, Chow W, et al. Temporal patterns in colorectal cancer incidence, survival, and mortality from 1950 through 1990. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86(13):997.
9. Nelson RL, Dollear T, Freels SPV. The relation of age, race, and gender to the subsite location of colorectal carcinoma. Cancer 1997;80:1408.
10. Akerley WL, Moritz TE, Ryan LS, et al. Racial comparison of outcomes of male Department of Veterans Affairs patients with lung and colon cancer. Arch Intern Med 1993; 153:1681.
11. Garfinkel L, Mushinski M. U.S. cancer incidence, mortality and survival: 19731996. Stat Bull Metrop Insur Co 1999;80:23.
12. Nelson RL, Persky V, Turyk M. Determination of factors responsible for the declining incidence of colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:741.
13. Steele GD, Jessup JM, Winchester DP, et al. Colorectal cancer. National cancer data base. Annu Rev Patient Care 1995;67:66.
14. Huang J, Seow A, Shi CY, Lee HP. Colorectal carcinoma among ethnic Chinese in Singapore: trends in incidence rate by anatomic subsite from 1968 to 1992. Cancer 1999;85:2519.
15. Kawazuma Y, Tanaka H, Tsukuma H, et al. Improvement of survival over time for colon cancer patients by anatomical sub-sites. Jpn J Cancer Res 1999;90:705.
16. Vogelstein B, Fearon ER, Hamilton SR, et al. Genetic alterations during colorectal-tumor development. N Engl J Med 1988;319:525.
17. Winawer SJ, Shike M. Dietary factors in colorectal cancer and their possible effects on earlier stages of hyperproliferation and adenoma formation. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84(2):74.
18. Potter JD. Colorectal cancer: molecules and populations. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:916.
19. Gertig DM, Hunter DJ. Genes and environment in the etiology of colorectal cancer. Semin Cancer Biol 1998;8:285.
20. Roberts-Thomson IC, Ryan P, Khoo KK, et al. Diet, acetylator phenotype, and risk of colorectal neoplasia. Lancet 1996;347:1372.
21. Welfare MR, Cooper J, Bassendine MF, Daly AK. Relationship between acetylator status, smoking, and diet and colorectal cancer risk in the north-east of England. Carcinogenesis
1997;18:1351.
22. Szarka CE, Pfeiffer GR, Hum ST, et al. Glutathione S-transferase activity and glutathione S-transferase mu expression in subjects with risk for colorectal cancer. Cancer Res 1995;55:2789.
23. O'Dwyer PJ, Szarka CE, Yao KS, et al. Modulation of gene expression in subjects at risk for colorectal cancer by the chemopreventive dithiolethione oltipraz. J Clin Invest 1996;98:1210.
24. Reddy B, Engle A, Katsifis S, et al. Biochemical epidemiology of colon cancer: effect of types of dietary fiber of fecal mutagens, acid and neutral sterols in healthy subjects. Stockholm Rectal
Cancer Study Group. Short-term preoperative radiotherapy for adenocarcinoma of the rectum. Am J Clin Oncol 1987;10:369.
25. Winters MD, Schlinke TL, Joyce WA, et al. Prospective case-cohort study of intestinal colonization with enterococci that produce extracellular superoxide and the risk for colorectal adenomas
or cancer. Am J Gastroenterol 1998;93:2491.
26. Johansson G, Holmen A, Persson L, et al. Dietary influence on some proposed risk factors for colon cancer: fecal and urinary mutagenic activity and the activity of some intestinal bacterial
enzymes. Cancer Detect Prev 1997;21:258.
27. de Meester C, Gerber GB. The role of cooked food mutagens as possible etiological agents in human cancer: a critical appraisal of recent epidemiological investigations. Rev Epidemiol Sante
Publique 1995;43(2):147.
28. Gerhardsson de Verdier M, Hagman U, Peters RK, et al. Meat, cooking methods and colorectal cancer: a case-referent study in Stockholm. Int J Cancer 1991;49:520.
29. Thomson B. Heterocyclic amine levels in cooked meat and the implication for New Zealanders. Eur J Cancer Prev 1999;8:201.
30. Probst-Hensch NM, Sinha R, Longnecker MP, et al. Meat preparation and colorectal adenomas in a large sigmoidoscopy-based case-control study in California (United States). Cancer Causes
Control 1997;8:175.
31. Willett WC, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, et al. Relation of meat, fat and fiber intake to the risk of colon cancer in a prospective study among women. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1664.
32. Suzuki K, Bruce WR. Increase by deoxycholic acid of the colonic nuclear damage induced by known carcinogens in C57BL/6J mice. J Natl Cancer Inst 1986;76:1129.
33. Minsky BD, Conti JA, Huang Y, Knopf K. The relationship of acute gastrointestinal toxicity and the volume of irradiated small bowel in patients receiving combined modality therapy for rectal
cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1409.
34. Glinghammar B, Holmberg K, Rafter J. Effects of colonic lumenal components on AP-1-dependent gene transcription in cultured human colon carcinoma cells. Carcinogenesis 1999;20:969.
35. Bernstein C, Bernstein H, Garewal H, et al. A bile acid-induced apoptosis assay for colon cancer risk and associated quality control studies. Cancer Res 1999;59:2353.
36. Kamano T, Mikami Y, Kurasawa T, et al. Ratio of primary and secondary bile acids in feces: possible marker for colorectal cancer? Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:668.
37. Rozen P, Fireman E, Fine N, et al. Oral calcium suppresses increased rectal epithelial proliferation of persons at risk of colorectal cancer. Gut 1989;30:650.
38. Cats A, Kleibeuker JH, van der Meer R, et al. Randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled intervention study with supplemental calcium in families with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:598.
39. Kearney J, Giovannucci E, Rimm EB, et al. Calcium, vitamin D, and dairy foods and the occurrence of colon cancer in men. Am J Epidemiol 1996;143:907.
40. De S, Mendilaharsu M, Deneo-Pellegrini H, Ronco A. Influence of dietary levels of fat, cholesterol, and calcium on colorectal cancer. Nutr Cancer 1997;29:83.
41. Baron JA, Beach M, Mandel JS, et al. Calcium supplements for the prevention of colorectal adenomas. Calcium Polyp Prevention Study Group. N Engl J Med 1999;340(2):101.
42. Whelan RL, Horvath KD, Gleason NR, et al. Vitamin and calcium supplement use is associated with decreased adenoma recurrence in patients with a previous history of neoplasia. Dis Colon
Rectum 1999;42:212.
43. Giovannucci E, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, et al. Multivitamin use, folate, and colon cancer in women in the Nurses' Health Study. Ann Med 1998;129:517.
44. Garland CF, Comstock GW, Garland FC, et al. Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D and colon cancer: eight-year prospective study. Lancet 1989;2(8673):1176.
45. Martinez ME, Giovannucci EL, Colditz GA, et al. Calcium, vitamin D, and the occurrence of colorectal cancer among women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1375.
46. Howe GR, Benito E, Castelleto R, et al. Dietary intake of fiber and decreased risk of cancers of the colon and rectum: evidence from the combined analysis of 13 case-control studies. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1992;84:1887.
47. Newberne PM, Bueche D, Riengropitak S, Schrager TF. The influence of dietary levels of vitamin A and fat on colon cancer. Nutr Cancer 1990;13:235.
48. Slattery ML, Potter JD, Samowitz W, et al. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase, diet, and risk of colon cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1999;8:513.
49. Baron JA, Sandler RSHRW, Mandel JS, et al. Folate intake, alcohol consumption, cigarette smoking, and risk of colorectal adenomas. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:57.
50. Kato I, Dnistrian AM, Schwartz M, et al. Serum folate, homocysteine and colorectal cancer risk in women: a nested case-control study. Br J Cancer 1999;79:1917.
51. Bird CL, Witte JS, Swendseid ME, et al. Plasma ferritin, iron intake, and the risk of colorectal polyps. Am J Epidemiol 1996;144:34.
52. Russo MW, Murray SC, Wurzelmann JI, et al. Plasma selenium levels and the risk of colorectal adenomas. Nutr Cancer 1997;28:125.
53. Lippman SM, Lee JJ, Sabichi AL. Cancer chemoprevention: progress and promise. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1514.
54. McKeown-Eyssen GE, Bright-See E. Dietary prevention of recurrences of adenomatous polyps in the colon and rectum. In: Proceedings of the UICC cancer congress, Budapest. Geneva: Union
Internationale Contre le Cancer, 1986.
55. Mikhailowski R, Shpitz B, Polak-Charcon S, et al. Controlled release of TGF-beta1 impedes rat colon carcinogenesis in vivo. Int J Cancer 1998;78:618.
56. Fuchs CS, Giovannucci EL, Colditz GA, et al. Dietary fiber and the risk of colorectal cancer and adenoma in women. N Engl J Med 1999;340:169.
57. Lubin F, Rozen P, Arieli B, et al. Nutritional and lifestyle habits and water-fiber interaction in colorectal adenoma etiology. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1997;6:79.
58. Greenwald P, Lanza E. Role of dietary fiber in the prevention of cancer. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Important advances in oncology. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co,
1986:37.
59. Platz EA, Giovannucci E, Rimm EB, et al. Dietary fiber and distal colorectal adenoma in men. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1997;6:661.
60. Faivre J, Giascosa A. Primary prevention of colorectal cancer through fibre supplementation. Eur J Cancer 1998;7:S29.
61. Reddy BS, Ekelund G, Bohe M, et al. Metabolic epidemiology of colon cancer: dietary pattern and fecal sterol concentrations of three populations. Nutr Cancer 1978;5:34.
62. Schloss I, Kidd MS, Tichelaar HY, et al. Dietary factors associated with a low risk of colon cancer in coloured west coast fishermen. S Afr Med J 1997;87:152.
63. Bird CL, Ingles SA, Frankl HD, et al. Serum lipids and adenomas of the left colon and rectum. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1996;5:607.
64. Forones NM, Falcao JB, Mattos D, Barone B. Cholesterolemia in colorectal cancer. Hepatogastroenterology 1998;45:1531.
65. Giovannucci E, Rimm EB, Ascherio A, et al. Alcohol, low-methionine-low-folate diets, and risk of colon cancer in men. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:265.
66. Franceschi S, La V. Alcohol and the risk of cancers of the stomach and colon-rectum. Dig Dis 1994;12:276.
67. Nagata C, Shimizu H, Kametani M, et al. Cigarette smoking, alcohol use, and colorectal adenoma in Japanese men and women. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:337.
68. Grodstein F, Martinez ME, Platz EA, et al. Postmenopausal hormone use and risk for colorectal cancer and adenoma. Ann Med 1998;128:705.
69. Newcomb PA, Storer BE. Postmenopausal hormone use and risk of large-bowel cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1067.
70. Potter JD, Bostick RM, Grandits GA, et al. Hormone replacement therapy is associated with lower risk of adenomatous polyps of the large bowel: the Minnesota Cancer Prevention Research
Unit Case-Control Study. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1996;5:779.
71. Martinez ME, Grodstein F, Giovannucci E, et al. A prospective study of reproductive factors, oral contraceptive use, and risk of colorectal cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1997;6:1.
72. Platz EA, Martinez ME, Grodstein F, et al. Parity and other reproductive factors and risk of adenomatous polyps of the distal colorectum (United States). Cancer Causes Control 1997;8:894.
73. Shike M. Diet and lifestyle in the prevention of colorectal cancer: an overview. Am J Med 1999;106:11S.
74. Lasko CM, Good CK, Adam J, Bird RP. Energy restriction modulates the development of advanced preneoplastic lesions depending on the level of fat in the diet. Nutr Cancer 1999;33:69.
75. Martinez ME, Heddens D, Earnest DL, et al. Physical activity, body mass index, and prostaglandin E2 levels in rectal mucosa. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:950.
76. Giovannucci E, Colditz GA, Stampfer MJ, Willett WC. Physical activity, obesity, and risk of colorectal adenoma in women (United States). Cancer Causes Control 1996;7:253.
77. Thune I, Lund E. Physical activity and risk of colorectal cancer in men and women. Br J Cancer 1996;73:1134.
78. Russo A, Franceschi S, La V, et al. Body size and colorectal-cancer risk. Int J Cancer 1998;78:161.

79. Ma J, Giovannucci E, Pollak M, Stampfer M. Response: re: prospective study of colorectal cancer risk in men and plasma levels of insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I and IGF-binding protein-3. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:2052.
80. Schoen RE, Tangen CM, Kuller LH, et al. Increased blood glucose and insulin, body size, and incident colorectal cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1147.
81. Will JC, Galuska DA, Vinicor F, Calle EE. Colorectal cancer: another complication of diabetes mellitus? Am J Epidemiol 1998;147:816.
82. Muscat JE, Stellman SD, Wynder EL. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and colorectal cancer. Cancer 1994;74:1847.
83. Rigas B, Goldman IS, Levine L. Altered eicosanoid levels in human colon cancer. J Lab Clin Med 1993;122:518.
84. Sheehan KM, Sheahan K, O'Donoghue DP, et al. The relationship between cyclooxygenase-2 expression and colorectal cancer. JAMA 1999;282:1254.
85. Giovannucci E, Egan KM, Hunter DJ, et al. Aspiran and the risk of colorectal cancer in women. N Engl J Med 1995;333(10):609.
86. Greenberg ER, Baron JA, Freeman DHJ, et al. Reduced risk of large-bowel adenomas among aspirin users. The Polyp Prevention Study Group. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:912.
87. Marnett LJ. Aspirin and the potential role of prostaglandins in colon cancer. Cancer Res 1992;52:5575.
88. Sturmer T, Glynn RJ, Lee IM, et al. Aspirin use and colorectal cancer: post-trial follow-up data from the Physicians' Health Study. Ann Intern Med 1998;128(9):713.
89. Reeves MJ, Newcomb PA, Trentham-Dietz A, et al. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use and protection against colorectal cancer in women. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1996;5:955.
90. Giardiello FM, Hamilton SR, Krush AJ, et al. Treatment of colonic and rectal adenomas with sulindac in familial adenomatous polyposis. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1313.
91. Hong WK, Sporn MB. Recent advances in chemoprevention of cancer. Science 1997;278:1073.
92. Tsujii M, Kawano S, Tsuji S, et al. Cyclooxygenase regulates angiogenesis induced by colon cancer cells. Cell 1998;93:705.
93. Burt RW, Bishop DT, Lynch HT, et al. Risk and surveillance of individuals with heritable factors for colorectal cancer. WHO Collaborating Centre for the Prevention of Colorectal Cancer. Bull
World Health Organ 1990;68:655.
94. Foutch PG, Mai H, Pardy K, et al. Flexible sigmoidoscopy may be ineffective for secondary prevention of colorectal cancer in asymptomatic, average risk men. Dig Dis Sci 1991;36(7):924.
95. Bussey HJR. Historical familial polyposis. In: Herrera L, ed. Familial adenomatous polyposis. New York: Alan R. Liss, 1990:1.
96. Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. Cell 1990;61:759.
96a. Hamilton RS, Lin B, Parsons RE, et al. The molecular basis of Turcot's Syndrome. N Engl J Med 1995;332:839.
97. Bresinger JD, Laken SJ, Luce MC, et al. Variable phenotype of familial adenomatous polyposis in pedigrees with 3' mutation in the APC gene. Gut 1998;43:548.
98. Nugent KP, Spigelman AD, Phillips RK. Life expectancy after colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis for familial adenomatous polyposis. Dis Colon Rectum 1993;36:1059.
99. Arvanitis ML, Jagelman DG, Fazio VW, et al. Mortality in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. Dis Colon Rectum 1990;33:639.
100. Kinzler KW, Nilbert MC, Su LK, et al. Identification of FAP locus genes from chromosome 5q21. Science 1991;253:661.
101. Powell SM, Petersen GM, Krush AJ, et al. Molecular diagnosis of familial adenomatous polyposis. N Engl J Med 1993;329(27):1982.
102. Cromwell DM, Moore RD, Brensinger JD, et al. Cost analysis of alternative approaches to colorectal screening in familial adenomatous polyposis. Gastroenterology 1998;114:893.
103. Peltomaki P, de la Chapelle A. Mutations predisposing to hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Adv Cancer Res 1997;71:93.
104. Aarnio M, Sankila R, Pukkala E, et al. Cancer risk in mutation carriers of DNA-mismatch-repair genes. Int J Cancer 1999;81:214.
105. Muir EG, Bell AJ, Barlow KA. Multiple primary carcinomata of the colon, duodenum, and larynx associated with kerato-acanthomata of the face. Br J Surg 1967;54:191.
106. Voskuil D, Vasen H, Kampman E, van't Veer P. Colorectal cancer risk in HNPCC families: development during lifetime and in successive generations. National Collaborative Group on HNPCC.
Int J Cancer 1997;72:205.
107. Marra G, Boland CR. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer: the syndrome, the genes, and historical perspectives. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1114.
108. Akiyama Y, Sato H, Yamada T, et al. Germ-line mutation of the hMSH6/GTBP gene in an atypical hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer kindred. Cancer Res 1997;57(18):3920.
109. Park JG, Vasen HF, Park KJ, et al. Suspected hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer: International Collaborative Group on Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer (ICG-HNPCC)
criteria and results of genetic diagnosis. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:710.
110. Lynch HT, Smyrk TC, Watson P, et al. Genetics, natural history, tumor spectrum, and pathology of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer: an updated review. Gastroenterology
1993;104:1535.
111. Shashidharan M, Smyrk T, Lin KM, et al. Histologic comparison of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer associated with MSH2 and MLH1 and colorectal cancer from the general
population. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:722.
112. Vasen HF, Watson P, Mecklin JP, Lynch HT. New clinical criteria for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC, Lynch syndrome) proposed by the International Collaborative group on
HNPCC. Gastroenterology 1999;116:1453.
113. Vasen HF, Mecklin JP, Khan PM, Lynch HT. The International Collaborative Group on Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer (ICG-HNPCC). Dis Colon Rectum 1991;34:424.
114. Menko FH, Wijnen JT, Khan PM, et al. Genetic counseling in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Oncology (Huntingt) 1996;10:71.
115. Aaltonen LA, Salovaara R, Kristo P, et al. Incidence of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer and the feasibility of molecular screening for the disease. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1481.
116. Prior TW, Chadwick RB, Papp AC, et al. The I1307K polymorphism of the APC gene in colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 1999;116:58.
117. Rozen P, Shomrat R, Strul H, et al. Prevalence of the I1307K APC gene variant in Israeli Jews of differing ethnic origin and risk for colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 1999;116:54.
118. Laken SJ, Petersen GM, Gruber SB, et al. Familial colorectal cancer in Ashkenazim due to a hypermutable tract in APC. Nat Genet 1997;17:79.
119. Hemminki A, Markie D, Tomlinson I, et al. A serine/threonine kinase gene defective in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Nature 1998;391:184.
120. Jass JR, Williams CB, Bussey HJ, Morson BC. Juvenile polyposisa precancerous condition. Histopathology 1988;13:619.
121. Church JM. Other polyposis syndromes. Semin Colon Rectal Surg 1995;6:61.
122. Howe JR, Mitros FA, Summers RW. The risk of gastrointestinal carcinoma in familial juvenile polyposis. Ann Surg Oncol 1998;5:751.
123. Howe JR, Roth S, Ringold JC, et al. Mutations in the SMAD4/DPC4 gene in juvenile polyposis. Science 1998;280:1086.
124. Boutron MC, Faivre J, Quipourt V, et al. Family history of colorectal tumours and implications for the adenoma-carcinoma sequence: a case control study. Gut 1995;37:830.
125. St John D, McDermott F, Hopper J, et al. Cancer risk in relatives of patients with common colorectal cancer. Ann Med 1993;118:785.
126. Fuchs CS, Giovannucci EL, Colditz GA, et al. A prospective study of family history and the risk of colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1669.
127. Pariente A, Milan C, Lafon J, Faivre J. Colonoscopic screening in first-degree relatives of patients with “sporadic” colorectal cancer: a case-control study. The Association Nationale des
Gastroenterologues des Hopitaux and Registre Bourguignon des Cancers Digestifs (INSERM CRI 9505). Gastroenterology 1998;115:7.
128. Hunt LM, Rooney PS, Hardcastle JD, Armitage NC. Endoscopic screening of relatives of patients with colorectal cancer. Gut 1998;42:71.
129. Winawer SJ, Zauber AG, Gerdes H, et al. Risk of colorectal cancer in the families of patients with adenomatous polyps. National Polyp Study Workgroup. N Engl J Med 1996;334:82.
130. Winawer SJ, Zauber AG, Gerdes H. Risk of colorectal cancer in the families of patients with adenomatous polyps. N Engl J Med 1996;334(2):82.
131. Karlen P, Lofberg R, Brostrom O, et al. Increased risk of cancer in ulcerative colitis: a population-based cohort study. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:1047.
132. Mir-Modjlessi SH, Farmer RG, Easley KA, Beck CJ. Colorectal and extracolonic malignancy in ulcerative colitis. Cancer 1986;58(7):1569.
133. Solomon MJ, Schnitzler M. Cancer and inflammatory bowel disease: bias, epidemiology, surveillance, and treatment. World J Surg 1998;22:352.
134. Levin B. Inflammatory bowel disease and colon cancer. Cancer 1992;70:1313.
135. Fogt F, Alsaigh N. Polypoid dysplasias in ulcerative colitis and sporadic adenomas: genetic approach to the differential diagnosis [Review]. Oncol Rep 1999;6:721.
136. Taylor BA, Pemberton JH, Carpenter HA, et al. Dysplasia in chronic ulcerative colitis: implications for colonoscopic surveillance. Dis Colon Rectum 1992;35:950.
137. Ekbom A, Helmick C, Zack M, Adami HO. Increased risk of large-bowel cancer in Crohn's disease with colonic involvement. Lancet 1990;336:357.
138. Sigel JE, Petras RE, Lashner BA, et al. Intestinal adenocarcinoma in Crohn's disease: a report of 30 cases with a focus on coexisting dysplasia. Am J Surg Pathol 1999;23:651.
139. Rubio CA, Befrits R. Colorectal adenocarcinoma in Crohn's disease: a retrospective histologic study. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:1072.
140. Heald RJ. Synchronous and metachronous carcinoma of the colon and rectum. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 1990;72:172.
141. Cali RL, Pitsch RM, Thorson AG, et al. Cumulative incidence of metachronous colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1993;36:388.
142. Fante R, Roncucci L, Di G, et al. Frequency and clinical features of multiple tumors of the large bowel in the general population and in patients with hereditary colorectal carcinoma. Cancer
1996;77:2013.
143. Atkin WS, Morson BC, Cuzick J. Long-term risk of colorectal cancer after excision of rectosigmoid adenomas. N Engl J Med 1992;326:658.
144. Collett JA, Platell C, Fletcher DR, et al. Distal colonic neoplasms predict proximal neoplasia in average-risk, asymptomatic subjects. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1999;14:67.
145. Rex DK, Chak A, Vasudeva R, et al. Prospective determination of distal colon findings in average-risk patients with proximal colon cancer. Gastrointest Endosc 1999;49:727.
146. Stryker SJ, Wolff BG, Culp CE, et al. Natural history of untreated colonic polyps. Gastroenterology 1987;93:1009.
147. Winawer SJ, Zauber AG, Ho MN, et al. Prevention of colorectal cancer by colonscopic polypectomy. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1977.
148. Levitt MD, Millar DM, Stewart JO. Rectal cancer after pelvic irradiation. J R Soc Med 1990;83:152.
149. Tsunoda A, Shibusawa M, Kawamura M, et al. Colorectal cancer after pelvic irradiation: case reports. Anticancer Res 1997;17:729.
150. Neugut AI, Murray TI, Garbowski GC, et al. Cholecystectomy as a risk factor for colorectal adenomatous polyps and carcinoma. Cancer 1991;68:1644.
151. Reid FD, Mercer PM, Harrison M, Bates T. Cholecystectomy as a risk factor for colorectal cancer: a meta-analysis. Scand J Gastroenterol 1996;31:160.
152. Anonymous. Cholecystectomy and the risk for colorectal cancer: a meta-analysis. ACP Journal Club 1994;120:25.
153. Jorgensen T, Rafaelsen S. Gallstones and colorectal cancerThere is a relationship, but it is hardly due to cholecystectomy. Dis Colon Rectum 1992;35:24.
154. Markowitz AJ, Winawer SJ. Management of colorectal polyps. CA Cancer J Clin 1997;47:93.
155. Ransohoff DF, Lang CA. Screening for colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1991;325:37.
156. Byrd U, Boggs HW, Slagle GW, Cole PA. Reliability of colonoscopy. Dis Colon Rectum 1989;32:1023.
157. Simmang CL, Senatore P. Practice parameters for detection of colorectal neoplasms. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:1123.
158. Froggatt NJ, Green J, Brassett C, et al. A common MSH2 mutation in English and North American HNPCC families: origin, phenotypic expression, and sex specific differences in colorectal
cancer. J Med Genet 1999;36:97.
159. Jarvinen HJ, Mecklin JP, Sistonen P. Screening reduces colorectal cancer rate in families with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 1995;108:1405.
160. Syngal S, Weeks JC, Schrag D, et al. Benefits of colonoscopic surveillance and prophylactic colectomy in patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer mutations. Ann Med
1998;129:787.
161. Rodriguez-Bigas MA, Vasen HF, Pekka-Mecklin J, et al. Rectal cancer risk in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer after abdominal colectomy. International Collaborative Group on
HNPCC. Ann Surg 1997;225:202.
162. Winawer SJ, O'Brien MJ, Waye JD, et al. Risk and surveillance of individuals with colorectal polyps. Who Collaborating Centre for the Prevention of Colorectal Cancer. Bull World Health Organ
1990;68:789.
163. Van Stolk RU, Beck GJ, Aaltonen L, et al. Adenoma characteristics at first colonscopy as predictors of adenoma recurrence and characteristics at follow-up. Gastrenterology 1998;115:13.
164. Winawer SJ, Zauber AG, O'Brien MJ. Randomized comparison of surveillance intervals after colonscopic removal of newly diagnosed adenomatous polyps. N Engl J Med 1993;328:901.
165. Provenzale D, Kowdley KV, Arora S, Wong JB. Prophylactic colectomy or surveillance for chronic ulcerative colitis? A decision analysis. Gastroenterology 1995;109:1188.
166. Manning AP, Bulgim OR, Dixon MF, Axon AT. Screening by colonoscopy for colonic epithelial dysplasia in inflammatory bowel disease. Gut 1987;28:1489.
167. Leonard-Jones JE, Mellville DM, Morson BC, et al. Precancer and cancer in extensive ulceration colitis: fndings among 401 patients over 22 years. Gut 1990;31:800.
168. Fenlon HM, Nunes DP, Schroy PC III, et al. A comparison of virtual and conventional colonoscopy for the detection of colorectal polyps. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1496.
169. Byers T, Levin B, Rothenberger D, et al. American Cancer Society guidelines for screening and surveillance for early detection of colorectal polyps and cancer: update 1997. American Cancer
Society Detection and Treatment Advisory Group on Colorectal Cancer. CA Cancer J Clin 1997;47:154.
170. Morris JB, Stellato TA, Guy BB, et al. A critical analysis of the largest reported mass fecal occult blood screening program in the United States. Am J Surg 1991;161:101.

171. Kewenter J, Brevinge H, Engaras B, et al. Results of screening, rescreening, and follow-up in a prospective randomized study for detection of colorectal cancer by fecal occult blood testing.
Results for 68,308 subjects. Scand J Gastroenterol 1994;29:468.
172. Hardcastle JD, Armitage NC, Chamberlin J, et al. Fecal occult blood screening for colorectal cancer in the general population. Cancer 1986;58:397.
173. Barry MJ, Mulley AG, Richter JM. Effect of workup strategy of the cost-effectiveness of fecal occult blood screening for colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 1987;93:301.
174. Fleisher M, Winawer SJ, Zauber AG, et al. Accuracy of fecal occult blood test interpretation. National Polyp Study Work Group. Ann Med 1991;114:875.
175. Fletcher RH. Clinical debate: Should all people over the age of 50 have regular fecal occult-blood tests? N Engl J Med 1998;338:1151.
176. Lang CA, Ransohoff DF. Fecal occult blood screening for colorectal cancer. Is mortality reduced by chance selection for screening colonoscopy? JAMA 1994;271:1011.
177. Wilking N, Petrelli NJ, Herrera L, et al. A comparison of the 25 cm rigid proctosigmoidoscope with the 65 cm flexible endoscope in the screening of patients for colorectal carcinoma. Cancer
1986;57:669.
178. Selby JV, Friedman GD, Quesenberry CP Jr, Weiss NS. A case-control study of screening sigmoidoscopy and mortality from colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1992;326:653.
179. Kavanagh AM, Giovannucci EL, Fuchs CS, Colditz GA. Screening endoscopy and risk of colorectal cancer in United States men. Cancer Causes Control 1998;9:455.
180. Atkin WS, Cuzick J, Northover JM, Whynes DK. Prevention of colorectal cancer by once-only sigmoidoscopy. Lancet 1993;341:736.
181. Mitmaker B, Begin LR, Gordon PH. Nuclear shape as a prognostic discriminant in colorectal carcinoma. Dis Colon Rectum 1991;34:249.
182. Minsky BD. Clinicopathologic impact of colloid in colorectal carcinoma. Dis Colon Rectum 1990;33:714.
183. DiSario JA, Burt RW, Kendrick ML, McWhorter WP. Colorectal cancers of rare histologic types compared with adenocarcinomas. Dis Colon Rectum 1994;37:1277.
184. Jass JR. Diagnosis of hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer. Histopathology 1998;32:491.
185. Hernanz F, Revuelta S, Redonodo C, et al. Colorectal adenocarcinoma: quality of the assessment of lymph node metastases. Dis Colon Rectum 1994;37:373.
186. Scott KW, Grace RH, Gibbons P. Five-year follow-up study of the fat clearance technique in colorectal carcinoma. Dis Colon Rectum 1994;37:126.
187. Goldstein N, Hart J. Histologic features associated with lymph node metastasis in stage T1 and superficial T2 rectal adenocarcinomas in abdominoperineal resection specimens. Identifiying a
subset of patients for whom treatment with adjuvant therapy or completion abdominoperineal resection should be considered after local excision. Am J Clin Pathol 1999;111(1):51.
188. Wong JH, Severino R, Honnebier MB, et al. Number of nodes examined and staging accuracy in colorectal carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2896.
189. Leifers GJ, Cleton-Jansen AM, van de Velde CJ, et al. Micrometastases and micro-survival in stage II colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1998;339:223.
190. Liotta L. Cancer cell invasion and metastasis. Sci Am 1992;266:54.
191. Minsky BD, Mies C, Recht A, et al. Resectable adenocarcinoma of the rectosigmoid and rectum: 1. Patterns of failure and survival. Cancer 1988;61:1408.
192. Gilchrist R, David D. Lymphatic spread of carcinoma of the rectum. Ann Surg 1948;38(108):621.
193. Rigau J, Pique JM, Rubio E, et al. Effects of long-term sulindac therapy on colonic polyposis. Ann Med 1991;115:952.
194. Brown C, Warren S. Visceral metastasis from carcinoma. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1938;66:611.
195. Dedhar S, Hannigan GE, Rak J, Kerbel RS. The extracellular environment and cancer. In: Tannock IF, Hill RP, eds. The basic science of oncology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998:197.
196. Zeng Z, Cohen AM, Hajdu S. Serosal cytologic study to determine free mesothelial penetration of intraperitoneal colon cancer. Cancer 1992;70:737.
197. Umpleby HC, Williamson RCN. Anastomotic recurrence in large bowel cancer. Br J Surg 1987;74:873.
198. Brodsky JT, Cohen AM. Peritoneal seeding following potentially curative resection of colonic carcinoma: implications for adjuvant therapy. Dis Colon Rectum 1991;34:723.
199. Minsky BD, Mies C, Rich TA, et al. Potentially curative surgery of colon cancer. The influence of blood vessel invasion. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:119.
200. Thoeni RF. Colorectal cancer. Radiologic staging. Radiol Clin North Am 1997;35:457.
201. Alauddin MM, Shahinian A, Kundu RK, et al. Evaluation of 9-[(3-18F-fluoro-1-hydroxy-2-propoxy)methyl]guanine ([18F]-FHPG) in vitro and in vivo as a probe for PET imaging of gene
incorporation and expression in tumors. Nucl Med Biol 1999;26:371.
202. Isern AM, Fernandez C, Salamanca M, et al. Ultrasonido transrectal en la estadificacion preoperatoria del adenocarcinoma de recto. Estudio transversal 19911994. GEN 1995;49(2):104.
203. Waizer A, Zitron S, Ben-Baruch D, et al. Comparative study for preoperative staging of rectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1989;32:53.
204. Hoff P, Brito R, Slaughter M, et al. Preoperative UFT, oral leucovorin (LV) and radiotherapy (RT) for patients (pts) with resectable rectal carcinoma: an oral regimen with complete pathological
responses. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:223a.
205. Griffin MR, Bergstralh EJ, Coffey RJ, et al. Predictors of survival after curative resection of carcinoma of the colon and rectum. Cancer 1987;60:2318.
206. Bognel C, Rekacewicz C, Mankarios H, et al. Prognostic value of neural invasion in rectal carcinoma: a multivariate analysis on 339 patients with curative resection. Eur J Cancer
1995;31A:894.
207. Jass JR. The pathological grading and staging of rectal cancer. Scand J Gastroenterol Suppl 1988;149:21.
208. Shepherd NA, Saraga EP, Love SB, Jass JR. Prognostic factors in colonic cancer. Histopathology 1989;14:613.
209. Fisher ER, Pail SM, Rockette H, et al. Prognostic significance of eosinophils and mast cells in rectal cancer: Findings from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (Protocol
R-01). Hum Pathol 1989;20:159.
210. Gagliardi G, Stepniewska KA, Hershman MJ, et al. New grade-related prognostic variable for rectal cancer. Br J Surg 1995;82:599.
211. Saccani Jotti G, Fontanesi M, Orsi N, et al. DNA content in human colon cancer and non-neoplastic adjacent mucosa. Int J Biol Markers 1995;10:11.
212. Sinicrope FA, Hart J, Hsu HA, et al. Apoptotic and mitotic indices predict survival rates in lymph node-negative colon carcinomas. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:1793.
213. Lanza G, Matteuzzi M, Gafa R, et al. Chromosome 18q allelic loss and prognosis in stage II and III colon cancer. Int J Cancer 1998;79:390.
214. Ogunbiyi OA, Goodfellow PJ, Herfarth K, et al. Confirmation that chromosome 18q allelic loss in colon cancer is a prognostic indicator. J Clin Oncol 1998;16(2):427.
215. Kotanagi H, Fukuoka T, Shibata Y, et al. The size of regional lymph nodes does not correlate with the presence or absence of metastasis in lymph nodes in rectal cancer. J Surg Oncol
1993;54:252.
216. Herrera-Ornelas L, Justiniano J, Castillo N, et al. Metastases in small lymph nodes from colon cancer. Arch Surg 1987;122(11):1253.
217. Wong JH, Severino R, Honnebier MB, et al. Number of nodes examined and staging accuracy in colorectal carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2896.
218. Wolmark N, Fisher B, Wieand HS. The prognostic value of the modifications of the Dukes' C class of colorectal cancer. Ann Surg 1986;203:115.
219. Fisher ER, Robinsky B, Sass R, Fisher B. Relative prognostic value of the dukes and the jass systems in rectal cancer: findings from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Projects
(Protocol R-01). Dis Colon Rectum 1989;32:944.
220. Jass JR, Ajioka Y, Allen JP, et al. Assessment of invasive growth pattern and lymphocytic infiltration in colorectal cancer. Histopathology 1996;28:543.
221. Deans GT, Heatley M, Anderson N, et al. Jass' classification revisited. J Am Coll Surg 1994;179:11.
222. Chapuis PH, Dent OF, Newland RC, et al. A n evaluation of the American Joint Committee (pTNM) staging method for cancer of the colon and rectum. Dis Colon Rectum 1986;29:6.
223. Enderlin F, Gloor F. Colorectal cancer: the relationship of staging to survival. A cancer registry study of 800 cases in St. Gallen-Appenzell. Prev Med 1986;31:85.
224. Hermanek P. Problems of pTNM classification of carcinoma of the stomach, colorectum and anal margin. Pathol Res Pract 1986;181:296.
225. American Joint Committee on Cancer. Colon and rectum. In: AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1997:83.
226. Sebbag G, Lantsberg L, Arish A, et al. Colon carcinoma in the adolescent. Pediatr Surg Int 1997;12:446.
227. Jacobs LR. Relationship between dietary fiber and cancer: metabolic, physiologic, and cellular mechanisms. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1986;183:299.
228. Minardi AJ, Sittig KM, Zibari GB, McDonald JC. Colorectal cancer in the young patient. Am Surg 1998;64:849.
229. Coburn MC, Pricolo VE, Soderberg CH. Factors affecting prognosis and management of carcinoma of the colon and rectum in patients more than eighty years of age. J Am Coll Surg
1994;179:65.
230. Gatta G, Faivre J, Capocaccia R, Ponz de Leon M. Survival of colorectal cancer patients in Europe during the period 19781989. EUROCARE Working Group. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:2176.
231. DeCosse JJ, Ngoi SS, Jacobson JS, Cennerazzo WJ. Gender and colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer Prev 1993;2:105.
232. Corman J, Arnoux R, Peloquin A, et al. Blood transfusions and survival after colectomy for colorectal cancer. Can J Surg 1986;29:325.
233. Fielding LP, Phillips RKS, Fry JS, Hittinger R. Prediction of outcome after curative resection for large bowel cancer. Lancet 1986;2:904.
234. Ghadirian P, Maisonneuve P, Perret C, et al. Epidemiology of sociodemographic characteristics, lifestyle, medical history, and colon cancer: a case-control study among French Canadians in
Montreal. Cancer Detect Prev 1998;22:396.
235. Peter RK, Pike MC, Chang WWL, et al. Reproductive factors and colon cancers. Br J Cancer 1990;61:741.
236. Fernandez E, La Vecchia C, Franceschi S, et al. Oral contraceptive use and risk of colorectal cancer. Epidemiology 1998;9:295.
237. Calle EE, Miracle-McMahill HL, Thun MJ, Heath CW Jr. Estrogen replacement therapy and risk of fatal colon cancer in a prospective cohort of postmenopausal women. J Natl Cancer Inst
1995;87:517.
238. Wilcox S, Stefanick ML. Knowledge and perceived risk of major diseases in middle-aged and older women. Health Psychology 1999;18:346.
239. Donovan JM, Syngal S. Colorectal cancer in women: an underappreciated but preventable risk. J Womens Health 1998;7:45.
240. Winawer SJ. Natural history of colorectal cancer. Am J Med 1999;106:3S.
241. Winawer SJ. Can mortality from colorectal cancer be reduced? Ann N Y Acad Sci 1995;768:60.
242. Mandel JS, Church TR, Ederer F, Bond JH. Colorectal cancer mortality: effectiveness of biennial screening for fecal occult blood. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:434.
243. Barillari P, de Angelis R, Valabrega S, et al. Relationship of symptom duration and survival in patients with colorectal carcinoma. Eur J Surg Oncol 1989;15:441.
244. Marquet RL, Busch OR, Jeekel J, et al. Are allogeneic blood transfusions acceptable in elective surgery in colorectal carcinoma? Eur J Cancer 1999;35:352.
245. Voogt PJ, van de Velde CJ, Brand A, et al. Perioperative blood transfusion and cancer prognosis. Different effects of blood transfusion on prognosis of colon and breast cancer patients. Cancer
1987;59:836.
246. Busch OR, Marquet RL, Hop WC, Jeekel J. Colorectal cancer recurrence and perioperative blood transfusions: a critical reappraisal. Semin Surg Oncol 1994;10:195.
247. Tang R, Wang JY, Chien CR, et al. The association between perioperative blood transfusion and survival of patients with colorectal cancer. Cancer 1993;72:341.
248. Weiden PL, Bean MA, Schultz P. Perioperative blood transfusion does not increase the risk of colorectal cancer. Cancer 1987;60:870.
249. Sibbering DM, Locker AP, Hardcastle JD, Armitage NC. Blood transfusion and survival in colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1994;37:358.
250. Donohue JH, Williams S, Cha S, et al. Perioperative blood transfusions do not affect disease recurrence of patients undergoing curative resection of colorectal carcinoma: a Mayo/North Central
Cancer Treatment Group study. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1671.
251. Busch OR, Hop WC, Marquet RL, Jeekel J. The effect of blood transfusions on survival after surgery for colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:1226.
252. Takahashi Y, Tucker SL, Kitadai Y, et al. Vessel counts and expression of vascular endothelial growth factor as prognostic factors in node-negative colon cancer. Arch Surg 1997;132:541.
253. Siemeister G, Martiny-Baron G, Marme D. The pivotal role of VEGF in tumor angiogenesis: molecular facts and therapeutic opportunities. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1998;17:241.
254. Koren R, Siegal A, Klein B, et al. Lymph node-revealing solution: simple new method for detecting minute lymph nodes in colon carcinoma. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:407.
255. Schneebaum S, Even-Sapir E, Cohen M, et al. Clinical applications of gamma-detection probes-radioguided surgery. Eur J Nucl Med 1999;26:S26.
256. Greenson JK, Isenhart CE, Rice R, et al. I dentification of occult micrometastases in pericolic lymph nodes of Duke's B colorectal cancer patients using monoclonal antibodies against
cytokeratin and CC49. Correlation with long-term survival. Cancer 1994;73:563.
257. Cote RJ, Houchens DP, Hitchcock CL, et al. Intraoperative detection of occult colon cancer micrometastases using 125 Iradiolabled monoclonal antibody CC49. Cancer 1996;77:613.
258. Calaluce R, Miedema BW, Yesus YW. Micrometastasis in colorectal carcinoma: a review. J Surg Oncol 1998;67:194.
259. Ichikawa Y, Ishikawa T, Momiyama N, et al. Detection of regional lymph node metastases in colon cancer by using RT-PCR for matrix metalloproteinase 7, matrilysin. Clin Exp Metastasis
1998;16:3.
260. Waldman SA, Cagir B, Rakinic J, et al. Use of guanylyl cyclase C for detecting micrometastasis in lymph nodes of patients with colon cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:310.
261. Nakamori S, Kameyama M, Furukawa H, et al. Genetic detection of colorectal cancer cells in circulation and lymph nodes. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:S29.
262. Jonas S, Windeatt S, A O-Boateng A, et al. Identification of carcinoembryonic antigen-producing cells circulating in the blood of patients with colorectal carcinoma by reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction. Gut 1996;39:717.
263. Mori K, Yamaguchi T, Maeda M. Mechanism of 201 thallium-chloride uptake in tumor cells and its relationship to potassium channels. Neurol Res 1998;20:19.
264. Eldar S, Kemeny MM, Terz JJ. Extended resections for carcinoma of the colon and rectum. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1985;161:319.

265. Quirke P, Durdey P, Dixon MF, Williams NS. Local recurrence of rectal adenocarcinoma due to inadequate surgical resection. Histopathological study of lateral tumor spread and surgical
excision. Lancet 1986;1:996.
266. Adam IJ, Mohamdee MO, Martin IG, et al. Role of circumferential margin involvement in the local recurrence of rectal cancer. Lancet 1994;344:707.
267. Haas-Kock DFM, Baeten CGMI, Jager JJ, et al. Prognostic significance of radial margins of clearance in rectal cancer. Br J Surg 1996;83:781.
268. Peethambaram P, Weiss M, Loprinzi CL, et al. An evaluation of postoperative follow-up tests in colon cancer patients treated for cure. Oncology 1997;54:287.
269. Green JB, Timmcke AE, Mitchell WT, et al. Mucinous carcinomajust another colon cancer? Dis Colon Rectum 1993;36:49.
270. Parramore JB, Wei JP, Yeh KA. Colorectal cancer in patients under forty: presentation and outcome. Am Surg 1998;64:563.
271. Schwartz B, Bresalier RS, Kim YS. The role of mucin in colon-cancer metastasis. Int J Cancer 1992;52:60.
271a. Nissan A, Guillem JG, Paty PB, et al. Signet-ring cell carcinoma of the colon and rectum: a matched control study. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:1176.
272. Secco GB, Fardelli R, Campora E, et al. Primary mucinous adenocarcinomas and signet-ring cell carcinomas of colon and rectum. Oncology 1994;51:30.
273. Minsky BD, Mies C, Rich TA, et al. Colloid carcinoma of the colon and rectum. Cancer 1987;60:3103.
274. Kawabata Y, Tomita N, Monden T, et al. Molecular characteristics of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and signet-ring-cell carcinoma of colorectum. Int J Cancer 1999;84:33.
275. Zhang H, Evertsson S, Sun X. Clinicopathological and genetic characteristics of mucinous carcinomas in the colorectum. Intl J Cancer 1999;14:1057.
276. Duesberg P, Rausch C, Rasnick D, Hehlmann R. Genetic instability of cancer cells is proportional to their degree of aneuploidy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:13692.
277. Deans GT, Williamson K, Heatley M, et al. The role of flow cytometry in carcinoma of the colon and rectum. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1993;177:377.
278. Crissman JD, Zarbo RJ, Ma CK, Visscher D.W. Histopathologic parameters and DNA analysis in colorectal adenocarcinomas 24. Pathol Annu 1989;24(2):103.
279. Witzig TE, Loprinzi CL, Gonchoroff NJ, et al. DNA ploidy and cell kinetic measurements as predictors of recurrence and survival in stages B2 and colorectal adenocarcinoma. Cancer
1991;68:879.
280. Schillaci A, Tirindelli DD, Freei M, et al. Flow cytometric analysis in colorectal carcinoma: prognostic significance of cellular DNA content. Int J Colorectal Dis 1990;5:223.
281. Rognum TO, Thorud E, Lund E. Survival of large bowel carcinoma patients with different DNA ploidy. Br J Cancer 1987;56:633.
282. Tomoda H, Kakeji Y, Furusawa M. Prognostic significance of flow cytometric analysis of DNA content in colorectal cancer: a prospective study. J Surg Oncol 1993;53:144.
283. Heimann TM, Martinelli G, Szporn A, et al. Prognostic significance of DNA content abnormalities in young patients with colorectal cancer. Ann Surg 1989;210:792.
284. Kokal WA, Gardine RL, Sheibani K, et al. Tumor DNA content in resectable, primary colorectal carcinoma. Ann Surg 1989;209:188.
285. Wiggers T, Arends JW, Schutte B, et al. A multivariate analysis of pathologic prognostic indicators in large bowel cancer. Cancer 1988;61:386.
286. Shirouzu K, Isomoto H, Kakegawa T, Morimatsu M. A prospective clinicopathologic study of venous invasion in colorectal cancer. Am J Surg 1991;162:216.
287. Minsky BD, Mies C, Recht A, et al. Resectable adenocarcinoma of the rectosigmoid and rectum: 2. The influence of blood vessel invasion. Cancer 1988;61:1417.
288. Krasna MJ, Flancbaum L, Cody RP, et al. Vascular and neural invasion in colorectal carcinoma. Incidence and prognostic significance. Cancer 1988;61:1018.
289. Minsky BD, Mies C, Rich TA, Recht A. Lymphatic vessel invasion is an independent prognostic factor for survival in colorectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:311.
290. Shirouzu K, Isomoto H, Morodomi T, Kakegawa T. Carcinomatous lymphatic permeation. Prognostic significance in patients with rectal carcinomaa long term prospective study. Cancer
1995;75:4.
291. Bouvet M, Milas M, Giacco GG, et al. Predictors of recurrence after local excision and postoperative chemoradiation therapy of adenocarcinoma of the rectum. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:26.
292. Forones NM, Tanaka M, Falcao JB. CEA as a prognostic index in colorectal cancer. Rev Paul Med 1997;115:1589.
293. Harrison LE, Guillem JG, Paty P, Cohen AM. Preoperative carcinoembryonic antigen predicts outcomes in node-negative colon cancer patients: a multivariate analysis of 572 patients. J Am
Coll Surg 1997;185:55.
294. Chapman MA, Buckley D, Henson DB, Armitage NC. Preoperative carcinoembryonic antigen is related to tumour stage and long-term survival in colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer 1998;78:1346.
295. Filella X, Molina R, Pique JM, et al. CEA as a prognostic factor in colorectal cancer. Anticancer Res 1994;14:705.
296. Feil W, Wunderlich M, Neuhild N, et al. Rectal cancer: factors influencing the development of local recurrence after radical anterior resection. Int J Colorectal Dis 1988;3:195.
297. Fisher B, Wolmark N, Rockette H, et al. Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation therapy for rectal cancer: results from NSABP protocol R-01. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:21.
298. Diederichsen AC, Zeuthen J, Christensen PB, Kristensen T. Characterisation of tumour infiltrating lymphocytes and correlations with immunological surface molecules in colorectal cancer. Eur J
Cancer 1999;35:721.
299. Fearon ER, Cho KR, Nigro JM, et al. Identification of a chromosome 18q gene that is altered in colorectal cancers. Science 1990;247:49.
300. Mehlen P, Rabizadeh S, Snipas SJ, et al. The DCC gene product induces apoptosis by a mechanism requiring receptor proteolysis. Nature 1998;395:801.
301. Saito M, Yamaguchi A, Goi T, et al. Expression of DCC protein in colorectal tumors and its relationship to tumor progression and metastasis. Oncology 1999;56:134.
302. van Triest B, Pinedo HM, van Hensbergen Y, et al. Thymidylate synthase level as the main predictive parameter for sensitivity to 5-fluorouracil, but not for folate-based thymidylate synthase
inhibitors, in 13 nonselected colon cancer cell lines. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:643.
303. Diasio RB. Clinical implications of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase inhibition. Oncology 1999;13:17.
304. Genuardi M, Viel A, Bonora D, et al. Characterization of MLH1 and MSH2 alternative splicing and its relevance to molecular testing of colorectal cancer susceptibility. Hum Genet 1998;102:15.
305. Attallah AM, Elhak NG, Nasif WA, et al. Detection of p53 protein overexpression and DNA ploidy analysis in colon cancer. Hepatogastroenterology 1997;44:1595.
306. Gryfe R, Swallow C, Bapat B, et al. Molecular biology of colorectal cancer. Curr Probl Cancer 1997;21:233.
307. Pricolo VE, Finkelstein SD, Hansen K, et al. Mutated p53 gene is an independent adverse predictor of survival in colon carcinoma. Arch Surg 1997;132:371.
308. Ahnen DJ, Feigl P, Quan G, et al. Ki-ras mutation and p53 overexpression predict the clinical behavior of colorectal cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group study. Cancer Res 1998;58:1149.
309. Itzkowitz SH. Blood group-related carbohydrate antigen expression in malignant and premalignant colonic neoplasms. J Cell Biochem Suppl 1992;16G:97.
310. Griesenberg D, Nurnberg R, Bahlo M, Klapdor R. CEA, TPS, CA 19-9 and CA 72-4 and the fecal occult blood test in the preoperative diagnosis and follow-up after resective surgery of
colorectal cancer. Anticancer Res 1999;19:2443.
311. Offerhaus GJ, Giardiello FM, Bruijn JA, et al. The value of immunohistochemistry for collagen IV expression in colorectal carcinomas. Cancer 1991;67:99.
312. Cayrol C, Knibiehler M, Ducommun B. p21 binding to PCNA causes G1 and G2 cell cycle arrest in p53-deficient cells. Oncogene 1998;16:311.
313. Jessup JM, Lavin PT, Andrews CW, et al. Sucrase-Isomaltase is an independent prognostic marker for colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1995;38:1257.
314. Ikeda Y, Mori M, Adachi Y, et al. Prognostic value of the histochemical expression of helix pomatia agglutinin in advanced colorectal cancer. A univariate and multivariate analysis. Dis Colon
Rectum 1994;37:181.
315. Nakamori S, Watanabe H, Kameyama M, et al. Expression of autocrine motility factor receptor in colorectal cancer as a predictor for disease recurrence. Cancer 1994;74:1855.
316. Matsubara N, Hietala OA, Gilmour SK, et al. Association between high levels of ornithine decarboxylase activity and favorable prognosis in human colorectal carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res
1995;1:665.
317. Andrews CW Jr, Jessup JM, Goldman H, et al. Localization of tumor-associated glycoprotein DF3 in normal, inflammatory, and neoplastic lesions of the colon. Cancer 1993;72:3185.
318. Nakamori S, Kameyama M, Imaoka S, et al. Involvement of carbohydrate antigen sialyl Lewis(x) in colorectal cancer metastasis. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:420.
319. Pello MJ. Transanal excision of large sessile villous adenomas using an endorectal traction flap. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1987;164:281.
320. Phillips RK, Spigelman AD. For debate: Can we safely delay or avoid prophylctic colectomy in familial adenomatous polyposis? Br J Surg 1996;83:769.
321. Phillips RKS. Familial adenomatous polyposis: the surgical treatment of the colorectum. Semin Colon Rectal Surg 1995;6:33.
322. Sarre RG, Jagelman DG, Beck GJ, et.al. Colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis for familial adenomatous polyposis: the risk of rectal cancer. Surgery 1986;101:20.
323. Church JM, Fazio VW, Lavery IC, et al. Quality of life after prophylactic colectomy and illeorectal anastomosis in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:1404.
324. DeCosse JJ, Cennerazzo W. Treatment options for the patient with colorectal cancer. Cancer 1992;70:1342.
325. Iwama T, Mishima Y. Factors affecting the risk of rectal cancer following rectum-preserving surgery in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. Dis Colon Rectum 1994;37:1024.
326. Fazio VW, O'Riordain MG, Lavery IC, et al. Long term functional outcome and quality of life after stapled restorative proctocolectomy. Ann Surg 1999;230:575.
327. Hojo K, Vernava AM, III, Sugihara K, Katumata K. Preservation of urine voiding and sexual function after rectal cancer surgery. Dis Colon Rectum 1991;34:532.
328. Ziv Y, Church JM, Oakley JR, et al. Results after restorative proctocolectomy and ileal pouch anal anastomosis in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis and coexisting colorectal cancer.
Br J Surg 1996;83:1578.
329. Wu J, Paul P, McGannon EA, Church JM. APC genotype, polyp number, and surgical options in familial adenomatous polyposis. Ann Surg 1998;227:57.
330. Gebert JF, Dupon C, Kadmon M, et al. Combined molecular and clinical approaches for the identification of families with familial adenomatous polyposis coli. Ann Surg 1999;229:350.
331. Evans DG, Hill J, Dudding T, et al. Molecular genetic tests in surgical management of familial adenomatous polyposis. Lancet 1997;350:1777.
332. Setti-Carraro P, Nicholls RJ. Choice of prophylactic surgery for the large bowel component of familial adenomatous polyposis. Br J Surg 1996;83:885.
333. Short note: risk of extracolonic cancer in familial adenomatous polyposis. Br J Surg 1996;83:1121.
334. Rodriguez-Bigas MA, Mahoney MC, Karakousis CP, Petrelli NJ. Desmoid tumors in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. Cancer 1994;74:1270.
335. Morson BC, Pang LSC. Rectal biopsy as an aid to cancer control and ulcerative colitis. Gut 1987;8:423.
336. Cohen A, Winawer SJ, Madoff R, Goldberg S. Operative approaches to patients with inflammatory bowel disease. In: Cohen AM, Winawer SJ, Friedman MA, eds. Cancer of the colon, rectum,
and anus. New York: McGraw Hill, 1995:379.
337. Ribeiro MB, Greenstein AJ, Sachar DB, et al. Colorectal adenocarcinoma in Crohn's disease. Ann Surg 1996;223:186.
338. Church JM. Prophylactic colectomy in patients with hereditary nonpolyposis in colorectal cancer. Ann Med 1996;28:479.
339. Scroggins CR, Mesyaely IM, Blansee CD, et al. Nonoperative management of primary colorectal cancer in patients with stage IV disease. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:651.
340. Charnely RM, Morris DL, Dennison AR, et al. Detection of colorectal metastases using intraoperative ultrasonography. Br J Surg 1991;78:45.
341. Rafaelson SR, Kronborg O, Larsen C, Fenger C. Intraoperative ultrasonography in detection of hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1995;38:355.
342. Nagorney DM. Diagnosis of liver metastases in colorectal cancer. World J Surg 1991;15:557.
343. Leen E, Angerson WJ, Wotherspoon H, et al. Comparison of the Doppler perfusion index and intraoperative ultrasonograpy in diagnosing colorectal liver metastases. Ann Surg 1994;220:663.
344. Paul MA, Blomjous JG, Cuesta MA, Meijer S. Prognostic value of negative intraoperative ultrasonography in primary colorectal cancer. Br J Surg 1996;83:1741.
345. Fazio VW, Tjandra JJ. Primary therapy of carcinoma of the large bowel. World J Surg 1991;15:568.
346. Slanetz CA, Grimson R. Effect of high and intermediate ligation on survival and recurrence rates following curative resection of colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1997; 40:1205.
347. Gall FP, Tonak J, Altendorf A. Multivisceral resections in colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1987;30:337.
348. Sales JP, Wind P, Douard R, et al. Blood dissemination of colonic epithelial cells during no-touch surgery for rectosigmoid cancer. Lancet 1999;354:392.
349. Wiggers T, Jeekel J, Arends JW, et al. No-touch isolation technique in colon cancer: a controlled prospective trial. Br J Surg 1988;75:409.
350. Ota DM. Laparoscopic resection for colon cancer: a favorable view. Important Adv Oncol 1996;227.
351. Marchesa P, Milsom JW, Hale JC, et al. Intraoperative laparoscopic liver ultrasonography for staging of colorectal cancer: initial experience. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:S73.
352. Foley EF, Kolecki RV, Schirmer BD. The accuracy of laparoscopic ultrasound in the detection of colorectal cancer liver metastases. Am J Surg 1998;176(3):262.
353. Schwenk W, Bohm B, Witt C, et al. Pulmonary function following laparoscopic or conventional colorectal resection: a randomized controlled evaluation. Arch Surg 1999;134:6.
354. Khalili T, Fleshner PR, Hiatt JR, et al. Colorectal cancer: comparison of laparoscopic with open approaches. Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:832.
355. Cost Group 1996. Early results of laparoscopic surgery for colorectal cancer: retrospective analysis of 372 patients treated by clinical outcomes of surgical therapy. Dis Colon Rectum
2000;39:S53.
356. Bokey EL, Moore JWE, Keating JP, et al. Laparoscopic resection of the colon and rectum for cancer. Br J Surg 1997;84:822.
357. Ockerling F, Reymond M, Schneider C, et al. Prospective multicenter study of the quality of oncologic resections in patients undergoing laparoscopic colorectal surgery for cancer. Dis Colon
Rectum 1998;41:936.

358. Hase K, Ueno H, Kuranaga N, et al. Intraperitoneal exfoliated cancer cells in patients with colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:1134.
359. Kim SH, Milsom JW, Gramlich TL, et al. Does laparoscopic vs conventional surgery increase exfoliated cancer cells in the peritoneal cavity during resection of colorectal cancer? Dis Colon
Rectum 1998;41:971.
360. Huang PP, Weber TK, Mendoza C, et al. Long term survival in patients with ovarian metastasis from colorectal cancer. Ann Surg Oncol 1998;5:695.
361. Sielezneff I, Salle E, Antoine K, et al. Simultaneous bilateral oopherectomy does not improve prognosis of postmenopausal women undergoing colorectal resection for cancer. Dis Colon
Rectum 1997;40:1299.
362. Nyam DC, Leong AF, Ho YH, Seow-Choen F. Comparison between segmental left and extended right colectomies for obstructing left-sided colonic carcinomas. Dis Colon Rectum
1996;39:1000.
363. Young-Fadok TM, Wolff BG, Nivatvongs S, et al. Prophylactic oophorectomy in colorectal carcinoma. Preliminary results of a randomized prospective trial. Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:277.
364. Laurie J, Moertel C, Flemming T, et al. Surgical adjuvant therapy of poor prognosis colorectal cancer with levamisole alone or combined levamisole and 5-fluorouracil: a North Central Cancer
Treatment Group and Mayo Clinic Study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1986;5:81(abst).
365. Mulcahy HE, Toner M, Patchett SE, et al. Identifying stage B colorectal cancer patients at high risk of tumor recurrence and death. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:326.
366. Mainprize KS, Hewavisinthe J, Savage A, et al. How many lymph nodes to stage colorectal carcinoma? J Clin Pathol 1998;51:165.
367. Tartter PI. Perioperative blood transfusion and colorectal cancer recurrence: a review. J Surg Oncol 1988;39:197.
368. Oberg A, Stenling R, Tavelin B, Lindmark G. Are lymph node micrometastasis of any clinical significance in Dukes stages A and B colorectal cancer? Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:1244.
369. Obrand DI, Gordon PH. Incidence and patterns of recurrence following curative resection for colorectal carcinoma. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:15.
370. Finan PJ, Ritchie JK, Hawley PR. Synchronous and early metachronous carcinomas of the colon and rectum. Br J Surg 1987;74:945.
371. Isler JJ, Brown PC, Lewis FG. The role of preoperative colonoscopy in colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1987;30:435.
372. Tate JJ, Rawlinson J, Royle GT, et al. Pre-operative or postoperative colonic examination. Br J Surg 1988;75:1016.
373. Passman MA, Pommier RF, Vetto Jt. Synchronous colon primaries have the same prognosis as solitary colon cancers. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:329.
374. Koperna T, Kisser M, Schulz F. Emergency surgery for colon cancer in the aged. Arch Surg 1997;132:1032.
375. Poon RTP, Law WL, Chu KW, Wong J. Emergency resection and primary anastomosis for left sided obstructing colorectal carcinoma in the elderly. Br J Surg 1998;85:1539.
376. The Scotia Study Group. Single stage treatment for malignant left sided colonic obstruction: a prospective randomized clinical trial comparing subtotal colectomy with segmental resection
following intraoperative irrigation. Br J Surg 1995;82:1622.
377. Carraro P, Segala M, Orlotti C, Tiberio G. Outcomes of large bowel perforation in patients with colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:1421.
378. Gordon MS, Cohen AM. Management of invasive carcinoma in pedunculated colorectal polyps. Oncology 1989;3:99.
379. Whitlow C, Gathright JB, Hebert S, et al. Long term survival after treatment of malignant colonic polyps. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:929.
380. Netzer P, Forster C, Biral R, et al. Risk factor assessment of endoscopically removed malignant colorectal polyps. Gut 1998;43:669.
381. Wilcox GM, Beck JR. Early invasive cancer in adenomatous colonic polyps: evaluation of the therapeutic options by decision analysis. Gastroenterology 1987;92:1159.
382. Ehrinpreis MN, Kinzie JL, Jaszewski R, Peleman RL. Management of the malignant polyp. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1988;17:837.
383. Willett CG, Fung CY, Kaufman DS, et al. Postoperative radiation therapy for high-risk colon cancer. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1112.
384. Shehata WM, Meyer RL, Jazy FK, et al. Regional adjuvant irradiation for adenocarcinoma of the cecum. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:843.
385. Martenson J, Willett C, Sargent D, et al. A phase III study of adjuvant radiation therapy (RT), 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and levamisole (LEV) vs. 5-FU and LEV in selected patients with resected
high risk colon cancer: initial results of INT 0130 . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:235a(abst).
386. Martenson JA, Swaminathan R, Burch PA, et al. Pilot study of continuous-infusion 5-fluorouracil, oral leucovorin, and upper-abdominal radiation therapy in patients with locally advanced
residual or recurrent upper gastrointestinal or extrapelvic colon cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:615-618.
387. O'Connell MJ, Martenson JA, Weiand HS, et al. Improving adjuvant therapy for rectal cancer by combining protracted infusion fluorouracil with radiation therapy after curative surgery. N Engl J
Med 1994;331:502.
388. Tepper JE, O'Connell MJ, Petroni GR, et al. Adjuvant postoperative fluorouracil-modulated chemotherapy combined with pelvic radiation therapy for rectal cancer: initial results of Intergroup
0114. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2030.
389. Fabian C, Shankar S, Estes N, et al. Adjuvant continuous infusion 5-FU, whole-abdominal radiation, and tumor bed boost in high-risk stage III colon carcinoma: a Southwest Oncology Group
pilot study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:457.
390. Ben-Joseph E, Court WS. Whole abdominal radiotherapy and concomitant 5-fluorouracil as adjuvant therapy in advanced colon cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1995;38:1088.
391. Dwight RW, Higgins GA, Keehan RJ. Factors influencing survival after resection in cancer of the colon and rectum. Am J Surg 1969;117:512.
392. Dwight RW, Humphrey EW, Higgins GA, Keehn RJ. FUDR as an adjuvant to surgery in cancer of the large bowel. J Surg Oncol 1973;5:243.
393. Dixon WJ, Longmire WP Jr, Holden WD. Use of triethylenethiophosphomamide as adjuvant to the surgical treatment of gastric and colorectal cancer: ten year follow-up. Ann Surg 1971;173:26.
394. Wolmark N, Fisher B, Rockette H, et al. Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy or BCG for colon cancer: results from NSABP Protocol C-01. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:30.
395. Stevenson HC, Green I, Hamilton JM, et al. Levamisole: known effects on the immune system, clinical results and future applications to the treatment of cancer. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:2052.
396. Mansour EG, Cnaan A, Davis T, et al. Combined modality therapy following resection of colorectal carcinoma in patients with non-measurable intra-abdominal metastases. An ECOG study
3282. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1990;9:107.
397. Amery WK, Bruynseels JP. Levamisole, the story and the lessons. Intl J Immunopharmacol 1992;14:481.
398. Arnaud JP, Buyse M, Nordlinger B, et al. Adjuvant therapy of poor prognosis colon cancer with levamisole: results of an EORTC double-blind randomized clinical trial. Br J Surg 1989;76:284.
399. Windle R, Bell PRF, Shaw D. Five year results of a randomized trial of adjuvant 5-fluorouracil and levamisole in colorectal cancer. Br J Surg 1987;74:569.
400. Moertel CG, Fleming TR, Macdonald JS, et al. Levamisole and fluorouracil for adjuvant therapy of resected colon carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1990;322:352.
401. Moertel CG, Fleming TR, Macdonald JS, et al. Fluorouracil plus levamisole as effective adjuvant therapy after resection of stage III colon carcinoma: a final report. Ann Med 1995;122:321.
402. Blanke CD, Messenger M, Taplin SC. Trimetrexate: review and current clinical experience in advanced colorectal cancer. Semin Oncol 1997;24:S18.
403. Poon MA, O'Connell MJ, Moertel CG, et al. Biochemical modulation of fluorouracil: evidence of significant improvement of survival and quality of life in patients with advanced colorectal
carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1407.
404. Wolmark N, Rockette H, Petrelli N, et al. Long-term results of the efficacy of perioperative portal vein infusion of 5-FU for treatment of colon cancer: NSABP C-02. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1994;A561(abst).
405. IMPACT. Efficacy of adjuvant fluorouracil and folinic acid in colon cancer. International Multicentre Pooled Analysis of Colon Cancer Trials (IMPACT) investigators. Lancet 1995;345:939.
406. O'Connell M, Mailliard J, Macdonald J, et al. An intergroup trial of intensive course 5FU and low dose leucovorin as surgical adjuvant therapy for high risk colon cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1993;12:190.
407. Mamounas EP, Wieand HS, Jones J, et al. Future directions in the adjuvant treatment of colon cancer. Oncology 1997;11:44.
408. Peeters M, Haller DG. Therapy for early-stage colorectal cancer. Oncology 1999;13:307.
409. Wolmark N, Rockette H, Mamounas EP, et al. The relative efficacy of 5-FU+ leucovorin (FU-LV), 5-FU + levamisole (FU-LEV), and 5-FU + leucovorin + levamisole (FU-LV-LEV) in patients
with Dukes' B and C carcinoma of the colon: first report of NSABP C-04. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1996;15:205.
410. O'Connel MJ, Laurie JA, Kahn M, et al. Prospectively randomized trial of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with high-risk colon cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:295.
411. Smith R, Wickerham DL, Wieand HS, et al. UFT plus calcium folinate vs 5-FU plus calcium folinate in colon cancer. Oncology 1999;13:44.
412. Saltz LB, Locker PK, Pirotta N, et al. Weekly irinotecan (CPT-11), leucovorin, (LV), and fluorouracil (FU) is superior to daily X 5 LV/FU in patients (pts) with previously untreated metastatic
colorectal cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:233a(abst).
413. Sutanto-Ward E, Sigurdson ER, Tremiterra S, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy for colorectal hepatic metastases: role of route of administration and timing. Surg Oncol 1992;1:87.
414. Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer Research. Long-term results of single course of adjuvant intraportal chemotherapy for colorectal cancer. Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer Research (SAKK).
Lancet 1995;345:349.
415. Portal vein chemotherapy for colorectal cancer: a meta-analysis of 4000 patients in 10 studies. Liver Infusion Meta-analysis Group. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:497.
416. Panettiere FJ, Goodman PJ, Costanzi JJ, et al. Adjuvant therapy in large bowel adenocarcinoma: long-term results of a Southwest Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:947.
417. Ijzermans JN, Marquet RL, Bouwman E, et al. Successful treatment of colon cancer in rats with recombinant interferon-gamma. Br J Cancer 1987;56:795.
418. Pazdur R, Ajani JA, Winn R, et al. A phase II trial of 5-fluorouracil and recombinant alpha-2a-interferon in previously untreated metastatic gastric carcinoma. Cancer 1992;69:878.
419. Wolmark N, Bryant J, Smith R, et al. Adjuvant 5-fluorouracil and leucovorin with or without interferon alfa-2a in colon carcinoma: National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project protocol
C-05. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1810.
420. Hoover HC Jr, Hanna MG Jr. Tumor-specific BCG therapy in colon cancer. Cancer Invest 1990;8:281.
421. Hoover HC Jr, Brandhorst JS, Peters LC, et al. Adjuvant active specific immunotherapy for human colorectal cancer: 6.5-year median follow-up of a phase III prospectively randomized trial. J
Clin Oncol 1993;11:390.
422. Harris J, Ryan L, Adams G, et al. Survival and relapse in adjuvant autologous tumor vaccine therapy for Dukes B and C colon cancer-EST 5283. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1994;A955(abst).
423. Vermorken J, Classen A, Gall H. Randomized phase III trial of active specific immunotherapy (ASI) vs control in patients with Dukes' B2, B3 or C colon cancer. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:5162.
424. Shaw DR, Khazaeli MB, LoBuglio AF. Mouse/human chimeric antibodies to a tumor-associated antigen: biologic activity of the four human IgG subclasses. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:1553.
425. Riethmuller G, Holz E, Schlimok G, et al. Monoclonal antibody therapy for resected Dukes' C colorectal cancer: seven-year outcome of a multicenter randomized trial. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:1788.
426. Kjeldsen BJ, Kronborg O, Fenger C, Jorgensen OD. A prospective randomized study of follow-up after radical surgery for colorectal cancer. Br J Surg 1997;84:666.
427. Pietra N, Sarli L, Costi R, et al. Role of follow-up in management of local recurrences of colorectal cancer: a prospective, randomized study. Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:1127.
428. Barillari P, Ramacciato GMG, Bovino A, et al. Surveillance of colorectal cancer: effectiveness of early detection of intraluminal recurrences on prognosis and survival of patients treated for
cure. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:388.
429. Hida JI, Yasutomi M, Shindoh K, et al. Second look operation for recurrent colorectal cancer based on carcinoembryonic antigen and imaging techniques. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:74.
430. Graham RA, Wang S, Catalano PJ, Haller DG. Postsurgical surveillance of colon cancer: preliminary cost analysis of physician examination, carcinoembryonic antigen testing, chest x-ray, and
colonoscopy. Ann Surg 1998;228:59.
431. Desch CE, Benson AB III, Smith TJ, et al. Recommended colorectal cancer surveillance guidelines by the American Society of Clinical Oncology. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1312.
432. Rosen LS. Irinotecan in lymphoma, leukemia, and breast, pancreatic, ovarian, and small-cell lung cancers. Oncology 1998;12:103.
433. Cohen AM. Comparison of positron emission tomography and computed tomography in detection of recurrent and metastatic colorectal cancer. Ann Surg Oncol 1997;4:610.
434. Valk PE, Abella-Columna-E., Haseman MK, et al. Whole body PET imaging with ( 18 )F Fluorodeoxyglucose in managment of recurrent colorectal cancer. Arch Surg 1999;134:503.
435. Flanagan FL, Dehdashti F, Ogunbiyi OA, et al. Utility of FDG-PET for investigating unexplained plasma CEA elevation in patients with colorectal cancer. Ann Surg 1998;227:319.
436. Flamen P, Stroobants S, van Cutsem E, et al. Additional value of whole-body positron emission tomography with fluorine-18-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose in recurrent colorectal cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1999;17:894.
437. Arnold MW, Young DM, Hitchcock CL, et al. Staging of colorectal cancer: Biology vs morphology. Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:1482.
438. Manayan RC, Hart MJ, Friend WG. Radioimmunoguided surgery for colorectal cancer. Am J Surg 1997;173:386.
439. Serafini AN, Klein JL, Wolff BG, et al. Radioimmunoscintigraphy of recurrent, metastatic, or occult colorectal cancer with technetium 99m-labeled totally human monoclonal antibody 88BV59:
results of pivotal, phase III multicenter studies. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1777.
440. Shen H, Kauvar L, Tew KD. Importance of glutathione and associated enzymes in drug response. Oncol Res 1997;9:295.
441. Beaumont PO, Moore MJ, Ahmad K, et al. Role of glutathione S-transferases in the resistance of human colon cancer cell lines to doxorubicin. Cancer Res 1998;58:947.
442. Danova M, Giordano M, Erba E, et al. Flow cytometric analysis of multidrug-resistance-associated antigen (P-glycoprotein) and DNA ploidy in human colon cancer. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
1992;118:575.
443. Butler RN, Butler WJ, Moraby Z, et al. Glutathione concentrations and glutathione S-transferase activity in human colonic neoplasms. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1994;9:60.

444. Hengstler JG, Bottger T, Tanner B, et al. Resistance factors in colon cancer tissue and the adjacent normal colon tissue: glutathione S-transferases alpha and pi, glutathione and aldehyde
dehydrogenase. Cancer Lett 1998;128:105.
445. O'Connell MJ. A Phase III trial of 5-fluorouracil and leucovorin in the treatment of advanced colorectal cancer. A Mayo Clinic/North Central Cancer Treatment Group Study. Cancer
1989;63:1026.
446. Cancer TMA. Toxicity of fluorouracil in patients with advanced colorectal cancer: effect of administration schedule and prognostic factors. Meta-Analysis Group in Cancer. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:3537.
447. Poon MA, O'Connell MJ, Wieand HS, et al. Biochemical modulation of fluorouracil with leucovorin: confirmatory evidence of improved therapeutic efficacy in advanced colorectal cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1991;9:1967.
448. Lokich J. Infusional 5-FU for advanced colorectal cancer. J Infusion Chemother 1995;5:208.
449. Leichman CG, Fleming TR, Muggia FM, et al. Phase II study of fluorouracil and its modulation in advanced colorectal cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1303.
450. Meta-Analysis Group in Cancer. Efficacy of intravenous continuous infusion of fluorouracil compared with bolus administration in advanced colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:301.
451. Ardalan B, Luis R, Jaime M, Franceschi D. Biomodulation of fluorouracil in colorectal cancer. Cancer Invest 1998;16:237.
452. Rustum YM, Cao S, Zhang Z. Rationale for treatment design: biochemical modulation of 5-fluorouracil by leucovorin. Cancer J Sci Am 1998;4:12.
453. Asbury RF, Boros L, Brower M, et al. 5-Fluorouracil and high-dose folic acid treatment for metastatic colon cancer. Am J Clin Oncol 1987;10:47.
454. Project ACCM. Modulation of fluorouracil by leucovorin in patients with advanced colorectal cancer: evidence in terms of response rate. Advanced Colorectal Cancer Meta-Analysis Project. J
Clin Oncol 1992;10:896.
455. Petrelli N, Douglass HO Jr, Herrera L, et al. The modulation of fluorouracil with leucovorin in metastatic colorectal carcinoma: a prospective randomized phase III trial. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1419.
456. de Gramont A, Bosset JF, Milan C, et al. Randomized trial comparing monthly low-dose leucovorin and fluorouracil bolus with bimonthly high-dose leucovorin and fluorouracil bolus plus
continuous infusion for advanced colorectal cancer: a French intergroup study. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:808.
457. Wadler S, Schwartz EL, Goldman M, et al. 5-Fluorouracil and recombinant alpha-2a-interferon: an active regimen against advanced colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1769.
458. Wadler S, Wersto R, Weinberg V, et al. Interaction of fluorouracil and interferon in human colon cancer cell lines: cytotoxic and cytokinetic effects. Cancer Res 1990;50:5735.
459. Elias L, Crissman HA. Interferon effects upon the adenocarcinoma 38 and HL-60 cell lines: antiproliferative responses and synergistic interactions with halogenated pyrimidine antimetabolites.
Cancer Res 1988;48:4868.
460. Chu E, Allegra CJ. Regulation of thymidylate synthase in human colon cancer cells treated with 5-fluorouracil and interferon-gamma. Adv Exp Med Biol 1993;339:143.
461. Grem JL, Chu E, Boarman D, et al. Biochemical modulation of fluorouracil with leucovorin and interferon: preclinical and clinical investigations. Semin Oncol 1992;19:36.
462. Hill M, Norman A, Cunningham D, et al. Royal Marsden phase III trial of fluorouracil with or without interferon alfa-2b in advanced colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1297.
463. Romanini A, Li WW, Colofiore JR, Bertino JR. Leucovorin enhances cytotoxicity of trimetrexate/fluorouracil, but not methotrexate/fluorouracil, in CCRF-CEM cells. J Natl Cancer Inst
1992;84:1033.
464. Blanke CD, Kasimis B, Schein P, et al. Phase II study of trimetrexate, fluorouracil, and leucovorin for advanced colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:915.
465. Blanke C, Cassidy J, Gerhartz H, et al. A phase II trial of trimetrexate (TMTX), 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), and leucovorin (LCV) in patients (PTS) with previously treated unresectable or metastatic
colorectal cancer (CRC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:246a(abst).
466. Liu G, Franssen E, Fitch MI, Warner E. Patient preferences for oral versus intravenous palliative chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:110.
467. Diasio RB, Lu Z. Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase activity and fluorouracil chemotherapy [Editorial]. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2239.
468. Diasio RB. The role of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) modulation in 5-FU pharmacology. Oncology 1998;12:23.
469. Taguchi T. Development of fluorinated pyrimidines in Japan. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho 1993;20:10.
470. Hoff PM, Pazdur R, Benner SE, Canetta R. UFT and leucovorin: a review of its clinical development and therapeutic potential in the oral treatment of cancer. Anticancer Drugs 1998;9:479.
471. Hoff PM, Pazdur R. UFT plus oral leucovorin: a new oral treatment for colorectal cancer. Oncologist 1998;3:155.
472. Pazdur R, Douillard JY, Skillings J, et al. Multicenter phase III study of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) or UFT in combination with leucovorin (LV) in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Proc Am
Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:263a(abst).
473. Carmichael J, Popiela T, Radstone D, et al. Randomized comparative study of Orzel (oral uracil/tegafur (UFT) plus leucovorin (LV)) versus parenteral 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) plus LV in patients
with metastatic colorectal cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:264a(abst).
474. Miwa M, Ura M, Nishida M, et al. Design of a novel oral fluoropyrimidine carbamate, capecitabine, which generates 5-fluorouracil selectively in tumours by enzymes concentrated in human liver
and cancer tissue. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:1274.
475. Ishikawa T, Sawada N, Sekiguchi F, et al. Xeloda (capecitabine), a new oral fluoropyrimidine carbamate with an improved efficacy profile over other fluoropyrimidines. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1997;A79:6(abst).
476. Cao S, Rustum YM. 5-Fluorouracil prodrug, ftorafur, modulated by uracil (UFT): preclinical and clinical prospective. Tumori 1997;83:S90.
477. Ishikawa T, Utoh M, Sawada N, et al. Tumor selective delivery of 5-fluorouracil by capecitabine, a new oral fluoropyrimidine carbamate, in human cancer xenografts. Biochem Pharmacol
1998;55:1091.
478. Meropol NJ, Creaven PJ, Petrelli NJ, et al. A Phase I and pharmacokinetic study of oral UFT and leucovorin (LV). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1994;A433.
479. Cunningham D, Pyrhonen S, James RD, et al. Randomised trial of irinotecan plus supportive care versus supportive care alone after fluorouracil failure for patients with metastatic colorectal
cancer. Lancet 1998;352:1413.
480. Porter DJ, Chestnut WG, Merrill BM, Spector T. Mechanism-based inactivation of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase by 5-ethynyluracil. J Biol Chem 1992;267:5236.
481. Wiseman LR, Adkins JC, Plosker GL, Goa KL. Oxaliplatin: a review of its use in the management of metastatic colorectal cancer. Drugs Aging 1999;14:459.
482. Brito RA, Medgyesy D, Zukowski TH, et al. Fluoropyrimidines: a critical evaluation. Oncology 1999;57[Suppl 1]:2.
483. Fukuoka M, Negoro S, Niitani H, et al. A phase I study of weekly administration of CPT-11 in lung cancer. Gan to Kagaku Ryoho 1990;17:993.
484. Pitot HC. US pivotal studies of irinotecan in colorectal carcinoma. Oncology 1998;12:48.
485. Rougier P, van Cutsem E, Bajetta E, et al. Randomised trial of irinotecan versus fluorouracil by continuous infusion after fluorouracil failure in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Lancet
1998;352:1407.
486. Becouarn Y, Ychou M, Ducreux M, et al. Phase II trial of oxaliplatin as first line chemotherapy in metastatic colorectal cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2739.
487. de Gramont A, Vignoud J, Tournigand C, et al. Oxaliplatin with high-dose leucovorin and 5-fluorouracil 48-hour continuous infusion in pretreated metastatic colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer
1997;33:214.
488. Levi F, Misset JL, Brienza S, et al. A chronopharmacologic phase II clinical trial with 5-fluorouracil, folinic acid, and oxaliplatin using an ambulatory multichannel programmable pump. High
antitumor effectiveness against metastatic colorectal cancer. Cancer 1992;69:893.
489. Andre T, Louvet C, Raymond E, et al. Bimonthly high-dose leucovorin, 5-fluorouracil infusion and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX3) for metastatic colorectal cancer resistant to the same leucovorin and
5-fluorouracil regimen. Ann Oncol 1998;9:1251.
490. Judson IR. “Tomudex” (raltitrexed) development: preclinical, phase I and II studies. Anticancer Drugs 1997;8[Suppl 2]:S5.
491. Cunningham D. Mature results from three large controlled studies with raltitrexed (“tomudex”). Br J Cancer 1998;77(S2):15.
492. Cunningham D, Zalcberg JR, Rath U, et al. Final results of a randomised trial comparing “Tomudex” (raltitrexed) with 5-fluorouracil plus leucovorin in advanced colorectal cancer. “Tomudex”
Colorectal Cancer Study Group. Ann Oncol 1996;7:961.
493. Cocconi G, Cunningham D, van Cutsem E, et al. Open, randomized, multicenter trial of raltitrexed versus fluorouracil plus high-dose leucovorin in patients with advanced colorectal cancer.
Tomudex Colorectal Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2943.
494. Pazdur R, Vincent M. Raltitrexed (Tomudex) versus 5-fluorouracil and leucovorin (5-FU + LV) in patients with advanced colorectal cancer (ACC): results of a randomized, multicenter, North
American trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;A801(abst).
495. Shebani KO, Souba WW, Finkelstein DM, et al. Prognosis and survival in patients with gastrointestinal tract carcinoid tumors. Ann Surg 1999;229:815.
496. Memon MA, Nelson H. Gastrointestinal carcinoid tumors: current management strategies. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:1101.
497. Rothmund M, Kisker O. Surgical treatment of carcinoid tumors of the small bowel, appendix, colon and rectum. Digestion 1994;55[Suppl 3]:86.
498. Iwasa K, Taniguchi K, Noguchi M, et al. Leiomyosarcoma of the colon presenting as acute suppurative peritonitis. Surg Today 1997;27:337.
499. Moertel CG, O'Fallon JR, Go VL, et al. The preoperative carcinoembryonic antigen test in the diagnosis, staging, and prognosis of colorectal cancer. Cancer 1986;58:603.
500. Chou FF, Eng HL, Sheen-Chen SM. Smooth muscle tumors of the gastrointestinal tract: analysis of prognostic factors. Surgery 1996;119:171.
501. Luna-Perez P, Rodriguez DF, Lujan L, et al. Colorectal sarcoma: analysis of failure patterns. J Surg Oncol 1998;69:36.
502. Shepherd NA, Hall PA, Coates PJ, Levison DA. Primary malignant lymphoma of the colon and rectum. A histopathological and immunohistochemical analysis of 45 cases with
clinicopathological correlations. Histopathology 1988;12:235.
503. Cheng P, Saltz L. Unusual tumors of the colon, rectum and anus. In: Raghavan D, Brecher M, Johnson D, et al., eds. Textbook of uncommon cancer. Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Sons,
1999:439.
504. Hwang WS, Yao JC, Cheng SS, Tseng HH. Primary colorectal lymphoma in Taiwan. Cancer 1992;70:575.
505. Remick SC, Hafez GR, Carbone PP. Extrapulmonary small-cell carcinoma. A review of the literature with emphasis on therapy and outcome. Medicine 1987;66:457.
506. Hoff PM, Pazdur R. Small cell carcinomas of the gastrointestinal tract. In: Raghavan D, Brecher M, Johnson D, et al., eds. Textbook of uncommon cancer. Chichester, UK: John Wiley and
Sons, 1999:463.
507. Wick MR, Weatherby RP, Weiland LH. Small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the colon and rectum: clinical, histologic, and ultrastructural study and immunohistochemical comparison with
cloacogenic carcinoma. Hum Pathol 1987;18:9.
508. Burke AB, Shekitka KM, Sobin LH. Small cell carcinomas of the large intestine. Am J Clin Pathol 1991;95:315.
509. Higgins GA, Lee LE, Dwight RW, et al. The case for adjuvant 5-fluorouracil in colorectal cancer. CCT 1978;1:35.
510. Higgins GA Jr, Amadeo JH, McElhinney J, et al. Efficacy of prolonged intermittent therapy with combined 5-fluorouracil and methyl-CCNU following resection for carcinoma of the large bowel.
A Veterans Administration Surgical Oncology Group report. Cancer 1984;53:1.
511. Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Adjuvant therapy of colon cancer: results of a prospectively randomized trial. N Engl J Med 1984;310:737.
512. Mansour EG, MacIntyre JW, Johnson R, et al. Adjuvant studies in colorectal carcinoma: experience of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG)-preliminary report. In: Gerard A, ed.
Progress and perspectives in the treatment of gastrointestinal tumors. New York: Pergamon Press, 1981:68.
513. Abdi E, Harbora D, Hanson J, McPherson T. Adjuvant chemoimmuno-and immunotherapy in stage B2 and C colorectal cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1987;6:93.
514. Laurie JA, Moertel CG, Fleming TR, et al. Surgical adjuvant therapy of large-bowel carcinoma: an evaluation of levamisole and the combination of levamisole and fluorouracil. J Clin Oncol
1989;7(10):1447.
515. Wolmark N, Rockette H, Fisher B, et al. The benefit of leucovorin-modulated fluorouracil as postoperative adjuvant therapy for primary colon cancer: results from National Surgical Adjuvant
Breast and Bowel Project protocol C-03. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1879.
516. Efficacy of adjuvant fluorouracil and folinic acid in colon cancer. International multicentre pooled analysis of colon cancer trials (impact) investigators. Lancet 2000; 345(8955):939.
517. Francini G, Petrioli R, Lorenzini L, et al. Folinic acid and 5-fluorouracil as adjuvant chemotherapy in colon cancer. Gastroenterology 1994;106:899.
518. Wolmark N, Rockette H, Mamounas E, et al. Clinical trial to assess the relative efficacy of fluorouracil and leucovorin, fluorouracil and leucovorin, fluorouracil and levamisole, and fluorouracil,
leucovorin, and levamisole in patients with Dukes' B and C carcinoma of the colon: results from National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project C-04. J Clin Oncol 1999;17(11):3553.
519. Haller D, Catalano P, Macdonald J. Fluorouracil (FU), leucovorin (LV) and levamisole (LEV) adjuvant therapy for colon cancer: five-year final report of INT-0089. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1998;17:256a(abst).
520. O'Connell MJ, Laurie JA, Kahn M, et al. Prospectively randomized trial of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with high-risk colon cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:295.
521. Petrelli N, Herrera L, Rustum Y. A prospective randomized trial of 5-fluorouracil versus 5-fluorouracil and high-dose leucovorin versus 5-fluorouracil and methotrexate in previously untreated
patients with advanced colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1559.

522. Coller FA, Kay EB, MacIntyre RS. Regional lymphatic metastasis in carcinoma of the colon. Ann Surg 1941;114:56.
523. Nordic Gastrointestinal Tumor Adjuvant Therapy Group. Superiority of sequential methotrexate, fluorouracil and leucovorin to fluorouracil alone in advanced symptomatic colorectal carcinoma:
a randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1437.
524. Valone FH, Friedman MA, Wittlinger PS, et al. Treatment of patients with advanced colorectal carcinomas with fluorouracil alone, high-dose leucovorin plus fluorouracil, or sequential
methotrexate, fluorouracil and leucovorin: a randomized trial of the Northern California oncology group. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1427.
525. Doroshaw JH, Multhauf P, Leong L, et al. Prospective randomized comparison of fluorouracil versus fluorouracil and high dose continuous infusion leucovorin calcium for the treatment of
advanced measurable colorectal cancer in patients previously unexposed to chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:491.
526. Erlichman C, Fine S, Wong A, Elhakim T. A randomized trial of fluorouracil and folinic acid in patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:469.
527. DiCostanzo F, Bartolucci R, Calabresi F, et al. Fluorouracil-alone versus high dose folinic acid and fluorouracil in advanced colorectal cancer: a randomized trial of the Italian Oncology Group
for Clinical Research (GOIRC). Ann Oncol 1992;3:371.
528. Cox J, Pazdur R, Thibault A, et al. A phase III trial of XELODA (capecitabine) in previously untreated advanced/metastic colorectal cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:265a(abst 1016).
529. Twelves C, Harper P, Van Cutsem E, et al. A phase III Trial (SO14796) of Xeloda (capecitabine) in previously untreated advanced/metastatic colorectal cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:263a(abst 1010).
530. Saltz L, Locker P, Pirotta N, et al. Weekly irinotecan (CPT-11), leucovorin (LV), and fluorouracil (FU) is superior to daily x 5 LV/FU in patients (PTS) with previously untreated metastatic
colorectal cancer (CRC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:233(abst).
531. Giacchetti S, Perpoint B, Zidani R, et al. Phase III multicenter randomized trial of oxaliplatin added to chronomodulated fluorouracil-leucovorin as first-line treatment of metastatic colorectal
cancer. J Clin Oncol 2000;18(1):136.
532. Douillard J, Cunningham D, Roth A, et al. A randomized phase III trial comparing irinotecan +5-fluorouracil (5FU) with or without oxaliplatin in advanced colorectal cancer (CRC). ASCO Virtual
Meeting. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:233a(abst 899).
533. de Gramont A, Figer A, Seymour M, et al. A randomized trial of leucovorin (LV) and 5-fluorouracil (5FU) with or without oxaliplatin in advanced colorectal cancer (CRC). Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1998;17:257a(abst 985).
534. Kemeny N, Daly J, Reichman B, et al. Intrahepatic or systemic infusion of fluorodeoxyuridine in patients with liver metastases from colorectal carcinomaa randomized trial. Ann Med
1987;107:459.
535. Hohn DC, Stagg RJ, Friedman MA, et al. A randomized trial of continuous intravenous versus hepatic intraarterial floxuridine in patients with colorectal cancer metastatic to the liver: the
Northern California oncology group trial. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1646.
536. Chang AE, Schneider PD, Sugarbaker PH, et al. A prospective randomized trial of regional vs. systemic continuous 5-FU chemotherapy in the treatment of colorectal metastases. Ann Surg
1987;206:685.
537. Martin JK, O'Connell MJ, Wieand HS, et al. Intra-arterial floxuridine vs systemic fluorouracil for hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer. Arch Surg 1990;125:1022.
538. Rougier P, Laplanche A, Huguier M, et al. Hepatic arterial infusion of floxurdine in patients with liver metastases from colorectal carcinoma: long-term results of a prospective randomized trial. J
Clin Oncol 1992;10(7):1112.

SECTION 33.8 Cancer of the Rectum
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 33.8
Cancer of the Rectum
JOHN M. SKIBBER
PAULO M. HOFF
BRUCE D. MINSKY
Introduction
Anatomy
Lymphatic Drainage
Bowel Function
Autonomic Nerves
Diagnosis
Radiologic Evaluation
Endorectal Ultrasound
Clinical Staging System
Treatment of Resectable Rectal Cancer
Site-Specific Treatment Options
Surgical Issues in Resectable Rectal Cancer
Radical Surgical Treatment Options
Treatment of Invasive Cancer by Nonradical Approaches
Selection of Patients
Local Excision Techniques
Results of Treatment of Rectal Cancer
Oncologic Results of Radical Surgical Resection Alone
Surgeon-Related Outcomes
Oncologic Results of Nonradical Approaches
Patterns of Recurrence After Radical Surgery
Radiation Therapy Alone for Resectable Rectal Cancer
Adjuvant Therapy and Sphincter-Saving Operations as an Alternative to Abdominoperineal Resection
Local Excision and Postoperative Radiation Therapy
Selection Criteria
Results
Preoperative Radiation Therapy Followed by Surgery
Local Excision
Low Anterior Resection and Coloanal Anastomosis
Preoperative Prospective Clinical Assessment
Surgical Issues in Coloanal Anastomosis
Technical Aspects of Preoperative Radiation Therapy
Clinical Experience
Treatment Recommendations
Adjuvant Radiation Therapy for Resectable Rectal Cancer
Adjuvant Postoperative Radiation Therapy
Adjuvant Preoperative Therapy
Preoperative and Postoperative Radiation Therapy
Selected Controversies in the Role of Preoperative Therapy
Prediction of Response with Tumor Markers
Does the Response of the Primary Tumor Predict Outcome?
Radical Surgery and Adjuvant Postoperative Combined Modality Therapy for Resectable Rectal Cancer
Results of Postoperative Therapy
Future of Adjuvant Therapy
Complications of Pelvic Radiation Therapy
Etiology and Manifestations
Acute Complications
Long-Term Complications
Sphincter Function
Sexual Function
Minimizing Toxicity of Radiation Therapy
Radiation Treatment Techniques
Small Bowel Contrast
Immobilization Molds and Tissue Expanders
Three-Dimensional Radiation Treatment Planning
Radiation Therapy and Surgery Sequencing
Surgical Techniques
Dietary Supplements and Radioprotectors
Treatment of Locally Advanced and Unresectable Rectal Cancer
Tumors Amenable to Potentially Curative Radical Surgery
Multivisceral Resection for Locally Advanced Rectal Cancer
Radiation Therapy
Improving the Results of Preoperative Radiation Therapy
Intraoperative Or Postoperative Radiation Therapy for Residual Disease
Subtotal Resection and Postoperative Radiation Therapy
Reirradiation Followed by Surgery
External-Beam Radiation Therapy Alone
Postoperative Radiation Therapy and Chemotherapy
Intraoperative Radiation Therapy Alone for Gross Residual Disease
Investigational Radiation Therapy Approaches
Neutron Beam Radiation Therapy
Hyperthermia
Radiosensitizers
Altered Radiation Fractionation Schemas
Treatment of Patients with Synchronous Metastatic Disease
Follow-Up After Potentially Curative Treatment
Treatment of Recurrence
Palliation of Obstruction Due to Locally Recurrent Rectal Cancer
Surgery for Locally Recurrent Rectal Cancer
Location of Recurrence
Evaluation of the Patient with Locally Recurrent Rectal Cancer
Imaging Patients with Local Recurrence
Surgery for Recurrent Disease
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Many overlapping issues in the management, biology, pathology, and staging of colon and rectal cancer are discussed in Chapter 33.7. Issues of sphincter
preservation, locoregional recurrence, and the application of multidisciplinary management in rectal cancer are the focus of this chapter.

ANATOMY
The rectum is usually divided into three portions ( Fig. 33.8-1). The lower rectum is the area 3 to 6 cm from the anal verge. The midrectum is 6 to 10 cm, and the upper
rectum extends approximately 10 to 15 cm, from the anal verge. The rectum usually reaches its upper limit at approximately 12 cm from the anal verge. Externally, its
upper extent can be identified where the tenia spread to form a longitudinal coat of muscle. The upper third of the rectum is surrounded by peritoneum on its anterior
and lateral surfaces. At the rectovesical or rectouterine pouch, the rectum becomes completely extraperitoneal. The rectum follows the curve of the sacrum in its lower
two-thirds. It enters the anal canal at the level of the levator ani. The anorectal ring is at the level of the puborectalis sling portion of the levator muscles. The location
of a rectal tumor is usually indicated by the distance between the anal verge, dentate line, or anorectal ring and the lower edge of the tumor. These points of reference
are all different. Also, these measurements differ depending on the use of a rigid or flexible endoscope.

FIGURE 33.8-1. Division of the rectum into upper, middle, and lower thirds.

LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
The majority of the lymphatic drainage of the rectum passes upward along the superior hemorrhoidal artery toward the inferior mesenteric artery. Perirectal nodes
above the midrectum drain along the superior hemorrhoidal artery. Below 7 to 8 centimeters from the anal verge, they drain laterally along the middle hemorrhoidal
artery and the iliac nodes and the obturator fossa. Hypogastric and iliac node drainage is along the aorta. Lymphatics are common in the rectovaginal septum in
women, which is analogous to the Denonvilliers' fascia in men.
BOWEL FUNCTION
Mechanisms of fecal continence include both sphincter control and creation of the neorectal angle where the rectum sweeps anteriorly and then enters the anal canal.
The floor of the pelvis is formed by the levator ani muscles, which separate the pelvis from the perineum and ischiorectal fossa. The urethra, vagina, and anus pass
through the levators.
Surgical procedures for rectal carcinoma can have marked impact on rectal function. The degree of this alteration depends on the extent of rectal resection. Other
factors affecting bowel function include postoperative radiation therapy or pelvic sepsis. These may reduce the compliance of the newly constructed rectal reservoir. 1
Although overall sphincter function usually is maintained after sphincter-preserving surgery and adjuvant therapy, subtle changes in function can be observed that
reduce discrimination between gas, liquid, or formed stool.
AUTONOMIC NERVES
An understanding of the autonomic nerve supply to pelvic organs is critical in preservation of sexual and bladder function after rectal cancer surgery. 2 The
sympathetic trunks converge over the sacral promontory to form the hypogastric plexus. These trunks run underneath the pelvic peritoneum laterally to the sidewall or
the pelvis. These trunks are lateral to the mesorectum. The fibers from these nerves follow arteries supplying the pelvic viscera. Parasympathetic fibers to the pelvic
viscera emerge from the second, third, and fourth sacral nerve roots overlying the piriformis muscle. The parasympathetic fibers proceed laterally as the nervi
erigentes to join the sympathetic fibers at the site of the pelvic plexus that is just lateral and somewhat anterior to the tips of the seminal vesicle in men. 3 Sharp section
of the mesorectum preserves these structures. 4

DIAGNOSIS
Compared to more proximal colon cancers, tumors arising in the rectosigmoid area are much more prone to present with symptoms. Although all colorectal cancers
have a high rate of occult blood in the stools, and the right-sided colon cancers are associated with a higher incidence of anemia, left colon and rectal cancers have a
higher incidence of gross bleeding. 5 Cheung and colleagues 6 evaluated prospectively 337 patients presenting with frank rectal bleeding. After making a clinical
diagnosis, flexible sigmoidoscopy followed by barium enema was performed. Excluding seven digitally palpable rectal cancers, 30 cancers (9.5%), 34 polyps (10%), 7
cases of proctocolitis (2%), and 25 cases of bleeding diverticula (7%) were detected. The authors concluded that patients with frank rectal bleeding should be
screened routinely for left colon cancer irrespective of the clinical diagnosis. 6 This recommendation highlights the fact that hemorrhoids should be considered a
diagnosis of exclusion. Patients should have a total colon examination by either a combination of flexible sigmoidoscopy and barium enema, or by a colonoscopy.
Barium enema may miss a distal cancer and should not be used alone.
Changes in the bowel habits are a common presenting feature for rectal cancers. Although the incidence of bowel obstruction appears to be lower for the rectal
lesions,5 compromise of the rectal reservoir by tumor makes symptoms common. Unexplained constipation, frequently alternating with diarrhea, and changes in the
caliber of stools are classic presenting symptoms for rectal cancer and should be promptly investigated. The entire colon should be carefully evaluated, with particular
attention to the rectosigmoid area.
Another common symptom from rectal cancer is tenesmus. This sensation results from the circumferential growth and transmural penetration by the primary tumor. It
is characterized by a sensation of urgency and inadequate emptying of the rectum. Even though some degree of tenesmus may be seen with less extensive tumors
located distally in the rectum, it is usually a sign of advanced disease. Additional symptoms of local invasion are seen with tumors that have invaded the prostate or
bladder or that have destroyed the high sacral nerve roots, causing urinary symptoms. Tumors invading posteriorly may cause buttock or perineal pain. These
symptoms imply a locally advanced tumor and poor overall prognosis.
Besides the obvious benefits from early diagnosis of colorectal cancer, appropriate staging in rectal cancer is of particular importance. Increased emphasis has been
placed on conservative surgical techniques as an alternative to radical surgery for selected patients. The goals of conservative management are to select patients
with low risk for nodal metastases and achieve local tumor control while preserving anal sphincter function. Patient selection is critical to obtain results comparable to
patients treated with radical surgery. 7 Alternatively, interest has been increasing in the use of neoadjuvant combinations of chemotherapy and radiotherapy in the
treatment of more advanced rectal cancers. 8
RADIOLOGIC EVALUATION
Computed Tomography
The intravenous pyelography that was obtained preoperatively in the past has fallen out of favor 9 and has been replaced by the use of other imaging techniques, such
as the computed tomographic (CT) scan. Although conventional CT scanners and experienced radiologists are now widely available, this test remains of limited value
in the staging of rectal cancer. It is very useful to evaluate the presence of distant metastasis, 10 to evaluate gross invasion of adjacent organs, and as a follow-up tool.

However, it still lacks sufficient accuracy to be used for preoperative staging as a single test.
Netri and colleagues (1985) preoperatively evaluated 78 patients with rectal adenocarcinoma with digital rectal examination, proctoscopy, double-contrast barium
enema, pelvic CT scan, liver ultrasound, and chest x-ray. Data obtained by each diagnostic procedure were compared with the pathologic data. CT scan had an
accuracy of 100% for detecting infiltration of the muscularis of the rectum. However, it was less accurate in identifying extrarectal tumor invasion, with an accuracy of
72%. In the evaluation of lymph node involvement, accuracy was 77%, specificity was 74%, and sensitivity was 80%. Liver metastases were detected with 94%
accuracy, 97% specificity, and 50% sensitivity. Similarly, Zheng and colleagues (1984) assessed the extent of local spread in 85 patients with rectal carcinoma. In 37
patients with carcinoma of the rectum who were scanned before surgery, good correlation was found between the extent of local invasion assessed by scanning and
by postoperative histologic assessment. Scanning was not a reliable method for assessing regional lymph node involvement.
Hundt and colleagues 11 evaluated the use of a subsecond spiral-CT scanner using two contrast medium phases in staging of 37 patients with proven colorectal
cancer (14 patients with rectal primaries). The results were compared with the findings of pathologic examination after surgery. The spiral CT had a sensitivity of 97%
in the arterial phase and 89% in the venous phase in detecting the carcinoma. The staging results were in accordance with the pathology in 30 of 37 cases (81%)
during the arterial phase and in 24 of 37 cases (65%) in the venous phase. Lymph nodes were detected in 27 of 32 patients (84%) during the venous phase. The
correct classification of the N stage was possible in 23 of 34 cases (68%). The authors concluded that the arterial phase is superior compared with the venous phase
for local tumor staging, and the venous phase is used for lymph node assessment. 11 These results are not dramatically better than the ones previously reported with
conventional CT. 12 The role of conventional CT in assessing patients with colorectal tumors is well established. However, the low accuracy of CT for identifying early
stages of primary colorectal cancers prevents its routine use for preoperative clinical staging. 13
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) remains a relatively expensive imaging method and is not as widely used as CT scanning. However, it has been extensively
studied in the diagnosis and staging of rectal cancer. 14,15 Kusunoki and colleagues (1994) used MRI to evaluate preoperatively the local extension of rectal cancer in
33 patients. The sensitivity rate was 84.2% and the specificity rate was 92.9%. In a series including 61 patients, MRI was reported to have an accuracy of 79% for
extent of local involvement, but only 58% for extent of lymph node involvement. These results were inferior to the ones obtained with the use of ultrasound in the same
population.16
MRI using an endorectal coil allows for an excellent anatomic detail of the three rectal wall layers and a very high spatial resolution. Regular MRI has been compared
with endorectal MRI and with endorectal ultrasound (EUS) for preoperative staging of rectal carcinoma. 17 In a small series, the results of the preoperative staging
were correlated with the histopathologic findings in 15 patients. MRI correctly staged 10 of 15 patients. Without the endorectal surface coil, only three of six were
correct, and with the endorectal surface coil, seven of nine were correct. The authors of this study suggested that endorectal surface coil MRI use may lead to better
staging results than with other MRI techniques and that the results with endorectal MRI could equal those of EUS for staging small tumors in the rectal wall. Another
study17 evaluated 23 patients with rectal carcinoma using endorectal MRI. The diagnostic accuracy in the evaluation of tumor extent and nodal involvement as
compared to surgical pathology was 78.2% and 78.9%, respectively. The major problem was a tendency to overstage parietal infiltration and lymph node
involvement. 17
Although not widely used in the initial staging of rectal cancer, MRI has gained respect for its results in the evaluation of local recurrences. In a small study 18
comparing the relative values of MRI versus CT in diagnosing local recurrence for rectosigmoid cancer, MRI showed superior sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy to
CT and better definition of the extent of tumor. At the time of the initial imaging, ten patients had recurrent tumor and four of the remaining eight patients later
demonstrated local recurrence. MRI demonstrated 91% sensitivity and 100% specificity, with an accuracy of 95%. CT demonstrated a sensitivity of 82% and a
specificity of 50%, with an accuracy of 68%. In four cases, MRI revealed tumor involving the sacrum and sacral nerves not apparent on CT. 18 MRI is also useful to
distinguish recurrent rectosigmoid carcinoma from benign postoperative fibrosis. 19
ENDORECTAL ULTRASOUND
The interest in developing endoscopic ultrasound as an accurate imaging technique for rectal cancer is not recent. In rectal cancer, the depth of tumor infiltration and
metastatic involvement of lymph nodes are important prognostic factors, and EUS of the rectum combines the advantages of both endoscopy and sonography,
providing information not available from other imaging diagnostic techniques ( Fig. 33.8-2). Early animal models using dogs demonstrated its superiority against
conventional CT scans, and its potential in predicting pathologic stage. 20 The superiority of EUS against CT scan has been confirmed in studies involving human
patients, 21 and it has become the preferred method of preoperative local tumor staging. 7 Hildebrandt and Feifel (1985) even proposed an ultrasonic staging system,
which corresponded to the standard pathologic staging systems (e.g., uT for ultrasound T stage, uN for ultrasound N stage).

FIGURE 33.8-2. Layers of the rectal wall on endorectal ultrasound.

Detry and colleagues 22 suggested that a low percentage of affected lymph nodes were detected by EUS and that lymph node size was the most reliable parameter to
determine tumor involvement. The group at the University Hospital of Wurzburg examined the value of EUS in the preoperative staging of 160 potentially locally
resectable tumors. The sensitivity for adenomas and T1 tumors was 81% and the specificity was 98%. For T2 tumors, the sensitivity was only 41% and the specificity,
92%. The majority of T2 tumors were overstaged. The overall staging accuracy for all tumors was 77.5%. The accuracy for lymph node staging was 83%. The authors
concluded that adenomas and T1 tumors could be assessed with a high degree of accuracy using EUS. However, T2 carcinomas tended to be overstaged. 23
Similarly, Bernini and colleagues (1996) found that EUS after adjuvant therapy for rectal cancer is of a lesser predictive value, chiefly because of overstaging.
However, a more recent report by Massari and colleagues 24 that included 85 patients affected by rectal carcinoma showed an overall accuracy in staging depth of
infiltration of 91%. Overstaging occurred in only 4% of patients, whereas understaging occurred in 5%. The overall accuracy in staging lymph node involvement was
76%, sensitivity was 69.8%, specificity was 84.4%, positive predictive value was 85.7%, and negative predictive value was 67.5%. The authors concluded that EUS is
a safe and accurate diagnostic method for staging both tumor invasion and lymph node metastatic involvement, and for selecting an appropriate surgical strategy in
patients affected by rectal cancer. 24
It is interesting to note that the accuracy of EUS is improving in more recent series, indicating that experience and new knowledge may have an impact on the staging
inaccuracies resulting from over- or underestimation of tumor depth and misinterpretation of lymph node involvement. Technical pitfalls in EUS of the rectal wall
include difficulty locating the lesion, improper balloon inflation, improper imaging plane, shadowing artifacts due to air or stool, reverberation artifacts, refraction
artifacts, and inappropriate transducer setting. Sources of error in tumor staging with EUS include interpretation differences, operator bias, tumor stenosis, peritumoral
inflammation, postbiopsy and postsurgical changes, postirradiation changes, hemorrhage, and pedunculated or villous tumors. 25 Sailer and colleagues 26 suggested
that the rectal anatomy affects staging accuracy of EUS in the lower rectum because the structure of the ampulla recti renders the examination more difficult and that
the endosonographic layers are less well defined at this level. The same study did not show a predictive value for the tumor position with respect to rectal
circumference.26 The presence of peritumoral tissue reaction (PTR) is a common cause of overstaging. Maier and colleagues 27 evaluated the preoperative EUS
results in 40 consecutive patients with biopsy-proven rectal cancer and compared them with histopathologic reports on the specimens. Twenty-eight (70%) of 40 rectal

cancers were staged correctly with EUS. PTR was responsible for the misinterpretation in six of seven overstaged cases. In a second part of the study, another 40
patients were prospectively evaluated with EUS. The thickest part of the PTR was measured, and results were compared with the histopathologic findings. Thirty-eight
(95%) of 40 cancers were staged correctly, and the presence or absence of PTR was described in 39 cases (98%). A statistically significant positive correlation was
noted between histopathologic classification of PTR and its thickness measured with EUS ( P = .0001).27
Despite the increased use of preoperative radiotherapy alone or in combination with chemotherapy for the treatment of stages II and III rectal cancers, our ability to
assess local eradication of rectal cancer after radiation therapy remains poor. Conventional imaging and clinical examination techniques are unable to safely predict
which patients do not require surgical excision after curative radiation therapy for rectal cancer. 28 The postradiation preoperative staging results of 25 patients with
rectal cancer who were found to have stage T0N0 lesions after surgery were examined. All 25 patients were staged by digital rectal examination. In addition, 13
patients were assessed using CT, six by EUS, and one by MRI. Radiologic assessment and physical examination overstaged most irradiated lesions. No technique
could reliably distinguish between postradiation fibrosis and residual cancer. 28

CLINICAL STAGING SYSTEM
The same pathologic staging systems extensively described in Chapter 33.7 are used for rectal tumors. However, the pathologic staging systems cannot be used for
making preoperative treatment decisions. Furthermore, patients treated with local modalities, such as transanal resection, do not have a lymph node pathologic
evaluation. A reliable and reproducible clinical staging system would be very useful.
Several authors have proposed innovative ways of clinically staging rectal cancer patients. Abrams (1980), for example, evaluated the gross and microscopic
pathologic features of 167 rectal cancers. He demonstrated that 63% of nonulcerated tumors were limited to the bowel wall versus only 28% of the ulcerated
ones.Zorzitto and colleagues (1982) retrospectively evaluated six clinical variables: the presence or absence of metastatic disease; whether the rectal tumor was
fixed; an annular rectal tumor; and the systemic symptoms of weight loss or anorexia, weakness, and anemia. They were able to classify patients in four clinical
stages, with substantial gradients in survival among them. However, the correlation between the clinical stage and Dukes' stage was not reliable. Several authors
have devised clinical staging systems centered in the degree of mobility of the primary tumor. However, correlation with the pathologic stage was at best 67% to 83%,
being lower for less-experienced physicians.
At the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, preoperative treatment of rectal cancers with chemotherapy and radiotherapy has become common.
Patients are routinely staged by physical examination, proctoscopy, and conventional imaging studies (i.e., chest x-ray, CT scans of abdomen and pelvis). The degree
of rectal wall involvement and the presence of involved lymph nodes are determined by EUS. Based on the results of these studies, patients are clinically classified
according to a “clinical” TNM stage. The main problem with this approach is the risk of overstaging, 29,30 especially if the EUS is done by inexperienced physicians,
because this imaging modality is highly operator-dependent. Prospective studies are still required to determine the best clinical staging for rectal cancer. The new
molecular markers and positron emission tomography (PET) should be added and explored in future clinical staging systems.

TREATMENT OF RESECTABLE RECTAL CANCER
Goals in the treatment of rectal carcinoma are local control of disease and cure, with maintenance of an acceptable quality of life. The biology of a particular patient's
tumor is the most important factor in overall outcome. Adequate surgical removal of the tumor is the major treatment factor affecting local control and cure. The
principles of the surgical management of rectal cancer are (1) removal of the primary tumor with adequate margins of normal tissue, (2) treatment of the draining
lymphatics, and (3) restoration of function. Appropriate adjuvant therapies can enhance local control, reduce systemic recurrence, and increase organ preservation.
Clinical staging by history, physical examination, proctoscopy, and imaging is appropriate for establishing resectability and proper sequencing of adjunctive therapies.
The management of rectal cancer is best planned by clinical staging that takes into account the extent and location of the primary tumor, its locoregional spread, and
presence or absence of metastatic sites.
In patients with low rectal cancer, abdominoperineal resection (APR) has been the standard of management. However, APR requires a permanent colostomy, which
adversely affects the patient's quality of life. The majority of patients with rectal cancer do not require a permanent colostomy for curative therapy. Curative excisions
can extend from endoscopic removal of malignant polyps to local excision, radical resection, or multivisceral resections.
SITE-SPECIFIC TREATMENT OPTIONS
For purposes of surgical management, the rectum is usually divided into thirds. The middle and lower thirds are extraperitoneal, whereas the upper third may be
covered on its anterior or lateral surfaces by peritoneum. The selection of an appropriate surgical technique takes into account not only the extent and location of the
tumor, but also the biologic characteristics of the tumor and the patient's overall condition ( Table 33.8-1).

TABLE 33.8-1. Surgical Procedures for Rectal Cancer

Upper Third
Recurrence patterns and cure rates for tumors in the upper third of the rectum are similar to those for the colon. Advanced tumors in this location may involve the
retroperitoneal structures (i.e., ureters, bladder, muscle) or major vessels. The lowermost edge of these tumors is usually 10 to 12 cm from the anal verge. Extirpation
of these tumors should include resection of the bowel segment containing the tumor along with the mesorectum to approximately 5 cm below the lower edge of the
tumor (Lopez-Kostner, [1998]). It is usually inappropriate to attempt local excision techniques in this area because of the relationship between the upper rectum and
peritoneal cavity and because of the poor exposure due to the distance from the anal verge.
Middle Third
The appropriate procedure for radical resection of most rectal carcinomas is a low anterior resection (LAR). This procedure encompasses the sigmoid colon, a
segment of the rectum containing the tumor with a margin of tissue below the tumor, and the mesorectum. Reconstruction is performed between the left colon and the
rectal stump. Most tumors in the middle rectum are not amenable to local excision because of the proximal extension of the tumor. APR does not reduce local
recurrence rates compared to appropriate sphincter-preservation surgery for patients with midrectal tumors.
Lower Third
Cancers in the distal rectum can require APR for adequate radial and distal margins. The entire mesorectum is included in this resection. Management of these
tumors has been most clearly affected by multidisciplinary treatment strategies that allow for adequate oncologic resection and preservation of the anal canal.
Important techniques have been proctectomy and coloanal anastomosis (CAA), as well as local excision. 31 Both of these treatments are commonly combined with

either preoperative or postoperative radiation therapy. 32
The use of staplers has evolved to make an anastomosis easier when there is a short rectal stump deep within the pelvis. The double-staple technique of Knight and
Griffin is most commonly used to restore intestinal continuity after resections in which a short rectal stump remains (Griffin, 1990). Alternative forms of local therapy
for low rectal cancers include transanal endoscopic microsurgery (TEM), endocavitary radiation, fulguration, and laser ablation.
SURGICAL ISSUES IN RESECTABLE RECTAL CANCER
This section discusses the major issues that are common to surgical procedures for rectal cancer.
Mucosal Margins
Attaining tumor-free margins at the edges of a rectal cancer resection specimen is the hallmark of curative surgical therapy. The purpose of obtaining such a margin is
to prevent local failure and effect cure.
Spread beyond the lower edge of a rectal cancer may occur by submucosal spread in intramural lymphatics. Fewer than 5% of rectal cancers show distal mucosal
spread beyond the edge of the tumor, and only 2.5% have histologic evidence of spread beyond 2 cm. These tumors commonly show aggressive biologic
characteristics. Margins may need to be increased in locally aggressive tumors, such as those showing poor differentiation or vascular and lymphatic invasion. In
these cases, the spread may be discontinuous. It does not appear that a mural mucosal margin of 5 cm is necessary to prevent local recurrence. Even margins of 1
cm have been demonstrated to provide adequate protection from local recurrence in the absence of aggressive histologic features. 33 Distal margins of more than 2 cm
do not reduce the risk of anastomotic recurrence. 34
The impact of neoadjuvant therapies on the suitability of margins is unclear at this time. However, some have proposed that distal margins may be reduced in the face
of preoperative chemoradiation. These concepts have allowed for an increase in sphincter-preserving procedures without detracting from local control and survival.
However, clinical response at the primary site can be misleading. Many patients have residual microscopic disease within the bowel wall, despite a complete response
at the mucosal surface.35 Complete excision of the primary site with margins of normal tissue is recommended.
The difference between margins reported in the literature and margins in situ at surgery can be significant. This fact is due to contraction of the specimen after its
excision and the stretching of the rectal wall. Therefore, generous gross margins can be required to assure adequate resection. A microscopically involved margin is
unacceptable for a curative resection and will not be salvaged by radiation and chemotherapy. The need for negative mural margins also applies to local excision
specimens for which a 1-cm margin of grossly normal bowel wall around the tumor is recommended for satisfactory resection. 36
Proximal Lymph Node Dissection
The lymphatic spread of rectal cancer is upward as well as lateral and distal. The proximal extent of the mesorectum and the rectosigmoid mesentery should be
included in the resection. Lymph node excision at the base of the inferior mesenteric artery does not enhance survival compared with lymph node excision just distal
to the origin of the left colon. This is particularly true for low rectal cancers in which positive nodes between the left colic origin and the inferior mesenteric artery origin
are found in fewer than 6% of resectable cases. 37 For low rectal resections or CAA, however, ligation of the inferior mesenteric artery just above its origin at the aorta
is required to eliminate tension on the anastomosis. Retroperitoneal adenopathy above the level of the inferior mesenteric artery is frequently a harbinger of occult
systemic spread that is not amenable to cure by surgery alone.
Total Mesorectal Excision
The mesentery of the rectum contains its blood supply and lymphatics in a bilobed fat packet situated immediately posterior and lateral to the thick-walled rectum.
Both are contained in the visceral layer of the endopelvic fascia. The majority of resectable primary rectal tumors and involved lymph nodes in rectal cancer
specimens are found within this structure. Nodes are involved in T1 cancers in 5.7% of cases; T2 tumors have positive nodes in 19.6%, and T3 and T4 cancers have
positive nodes in 65% and 78% of cases, respectively. 38 Involvement of the radial or circumferential margin correlates with subsequent local recurrence and poor
survival. 39 Resection of the mesorectum should extend farther distally than the acceptable margin for rectal wall transection ( Fig. 33.8-3). Because the mesorectum
tapers as it proceeds distally, it is totally excised for most middle and lower rectal cancers. More proximal rectal tumors can be treated by a mesorectal excision
extending 5 cm beyond the lower tumor edge. Total mesorectal excision has been associated with a high rate of anastomotic leak when used for upper rectal
tumors.40

FIGURE 33.8-3. Total mesorectal excision.

The work of Quirke and others (1986) has dramatically demonstrated the importance of lateral tumor spread in the local recurrence of resected rectal cancers ( Table
33.8-2). Among patients with local recurrence, tumor involvement at the circumferential margin of resection has been found in 85% of cases. Because of difficulty in
obtaining adequate exposure in the low pelvis and the surrounding structures, circumferential margins around rectal cancer can be highly variable and minimal.
Surgical experience and surgical technique have demonstrated their key role in the prevention of local recurrence by controlled sharp dissection done with attention to
these margins.41 The mechanism for involvement of the circumferential margins can be direct spread, mesenteric implants, vascular or lymphatic invasion, or
cancer-bearing lymph nodes.Up to 23% of patients can have mesorectal tumor implants aside from discrete nodes. 42 Tumor involvement of the circumferential
margins of resection is frequently due to spread in the mesorectum distal to the tumor that can be violated by blunt dissection. 43 It has been implied that a positive
circumferential margin after mesorectal excision is a prognostic factor for distant metastases also. 44

TABLE 33.8-2. Distal Mesorectal Spread in Producing an Involved Radial Margin

Circumferential clearance of rectal tumors by total mesorectal excision has become the accepted surgical procedure for the management of most rectal cancer. Total
mesorectal excision by full mobilization of the rectum along anatomic planes has been demonstrated to be effective in the surgical management of rectal cancer. 45,46
Dissection is carried out along areolar planes that allow for hemostasis, identification of important nerves, and prevention of violation of the visceral fascia investing
the mesorectum.47 This type of surgical resection for rectal cancer produces a negative surgical margin in more than 90% of resectable rectal cancers and reduces
the possibility of local recurrence.
Lateral Pelvic Lymph Node Dissection
Lymphatic drainage of the rectum not only flows proximally along the inferior mesenteric vessels, but also follows the middle rectal vessels to the lateral pelvic
sidewall and into internal iliac nodes. These nodes may be a source of recurrence. The incidence varies from 1% to 7% in resectable cases. Wide pelvic
lymphadenectomy including lateral pelvic lymph nodes has been proposed for the treatment of rectal cancer. Although there is little doubt that the presence of
metastases in such lymph nodes is a significant negative prognostic factor, no evidence supports a therapeutic benefit of the routine addition of extensive
lymphadenectomy to standard locoregional procedures. 48 Gross disease can be resected when this procedure would provide a negative margin of resection. 47 The
morbidity of this procedure is significant, with the majority of patients developing urinary dysfunction and impotence.
RADICAL SURGICAL TREATMENT OPTIONS
Patients with stage II and III rectal cancer (60% to 80% of patients with rectal cancer) have tumors that are large and biologically aggressive. They are at higher risk of
local and systemic recurrence after treatment. Accordingly, strategies have been developed to address these issues through locoregional resection and multimodality
therapy. However, adequate surgical resection and technique are the most critical treatment factors determining patient outcome.
The surgical management of stage II and III tumors is based on several issues: (1) the importance of the lateral spread of rectal cancer in local tumor recurrence; (2)
the need for total mesorectal excision to minimize pelvic recurrence; (3) restoration of function by CAA after resection of low rectal cancers; and (4) optimization of
bowel function and quality of life after low rectal anastomosis. Oncologic results of radical resection and patterns of failure are discussed later in this chapter.
Selection of Radical Excision Procedures
The surgical procedure chosen for radical excision is determined largely by tumor location. Three different operative procedures can be performed, all with adherence
to the principles of total mesorectal excision: LAR, APR, and total proctectomy with CAA. For rectal cancer patients, a major component of quality of life is sphincter
preservation. This is simple to accomplish in middle and upper rectal cancers where LAR achieves adequate removal of the tumor and surrounding lymphatics and
end-to-end anastomosis. In patients with low rectal cancers that do not involve the levators or sphincters, the anus may still be spared by proctectomy and CAA. 49
Preoperative chemoradiation may facilitate this. However, patients with levator or sphincter involvement are best managed by APR and permanent colostomy.
Abdominoperineal Resection
Preoperative planning of the stoma site and counseling about the consequences of a colostomy are critical to a successful outcome. Proper selection of a site must be
planned preoperatively with attention to belt lines, scars, and body habitus. APR involves a combined transabdominal and perineal approach to complete resection of
the rectum, mesorectum, levator muscles, and anus, with formation of a permanent colostomy. The rectum and mesorectum are mobilized via an abdominal approach
down to the levator muscles. A perineal approach is used to widely resect the levator complex and anus along with an appropriate margin of perianal skin. A
permanent end colostomy is done. As sphincter preservation (LAR and proctectomy plus CAA) has advanced, the overall proportion of rectal cancer patients
undergoing APR has decreased. 50 However, APR remains the only surgical option for some patients with rectal cancer, specifically in those patients with sphincter
complex involvement or levator muscle involvement.
Low Anterior Resection
LAR involves the transabdominal resection of a portion of the rectum as well as the mesorectum. After complete mobilization of the rectum en bloc with the
mesorectum, the rectum is divided at least 2 cm below the distal edge of the tumor (see Fig. 33.8-3). Although the length of mesorectal excision will exceed this,
evidence indicates that total mesorectal excision is not required for upper rectal cancers. Reconstruction of the rectum is then carried out between the completely
mobilized left colon and the remaining rectal stump. The use of LAR in midrectal and selected low rectal cancer has increased for two main reasons. First, the
double-stapled technique has permitted a simpler and lower anastomosis, with leak rates (clinical or radiographic) similar or better than with handsewn techniques.
Second, although 5 cm was previously felt to be the minimum acceptable distal margin, the acceptance of a 2-cm distal margin has enabled lower tumors to be
resected by LAR.51 The timing of sphincter-preserving surgery after preoperative radiation has been demonstrated to influence sphincter preservation. A 6- to 8-week
interval increases the sphincter preservation rate from 68% for a 2-week interval to 76%. 52
Proctectomy and Coloanal Anastomosis
Although LAR and APR are the traditional methods of locoregional resection in rectal cancer, proctectomy with CAA has emerged as a well-accepted surgical option
in carefully selected patients. This procedure spares patients a permanent colostomy while obtaining good functional and cancer-related outcomes. 49 A review of 117
patients from the Mayo and Cleveland Clinics provides a perspective on the current utility of proctectomy and CAA in patients with low rectal cancer. 53 The patients
were treated over a 10-year period (1981 to 1991). The median distance of the tumor from the anal verge was 6 to 7 cm. The technique used required complete
mobilization of the rectum to the levators, transanal transection of the rectum, complete mobilization of the left colon, and endoanal anastomosis ( Fig. 33.8-4). The
authors recommend loop ileostomy. The effectiveness of the procedure in preventing local recurrence was demonstrated by the low local recurrence rate of 7%. Fecal
continence was satisfactory in 78%, and overall bowel function appeared to be improved in patients who had a colonic J pouch reservoir created for the CAA. No
surgery-related deaths were reported. Early and late complications were related mainly to the anastomosis leaking and healing with a stricture.

FIGURE 33.8-4. Coloanal anastomosis.

The mobilization of the rectum is extended down to the level of the upper anal canal and levators. Lateral ligaments are divided with attention to obtaining an
adequate radial margin and to preserving the pelvic autonomic nerves. This dissection results in the complete exposure of the pelvic floor and complete excision of

the mesorectum. The fully mobilized rectum can be amputated by a transanal technique or by transection at the upper end of the anal canal with a stapler. The
reconstruction consists of delivering the mobilized left colon to the anal canal and performing an anastomosis. A hand-sewn anastomosis can be performed with
full-thickness sutures through the colon and internal sphincter. Alternatively, a stapled anastomosis may be done. A diverting stoma is then usually created.
Several groups have reported on patients who have a 6- to 10-cm colonic J pouch reservoir constructed with no additional risk or compromise of the anastomosis. 54
The formation of the colonic pouch has been compared to the straight CAA in a randomized clinical trial. Hallbook and colleagues (1996) demonstrated a reduction in
the frequency and urgency of bowel movements in the first year after pouch formation. Physiologic measures and short-term outcomes appear to be improved with the
pouch. However, these differences may disappear with time. 55 It has been suggested that lower leak rates with a colonic J pouch may be obtained because of
improved vascular supply to the apex of the pouch and the side-to-end anastomosis. 56 Postoperative problems after CAA are related to rectal capacitance and
compliance. These manifest as the problems of urgency and frequency in bowel movements. This gradually improves over the 9 to 10 months after temporary stoma
closure. Complete fecal continence usually is achieved in 85% to 100% of patients. In a series from the Mayo Clinic by Drake et al., 57 patients who had a CAA for
malignancies had a stool frequency of 2.6 per 24 hours, and only 1 of 19 patients had any incontinence. The Mayo and Cleveland Clinics study is similar to the
reports of others in describing proctectomy and CAA for rectal cancer. 58
Multivisceral Resection for Locally Advanced Rectal Cancer
Approximately 6% to 10% of rectal cancers are locally advanced in, and require extensive surgery for, complete tumor extirpation. Pelvic exenteration involving en
bloc removal of the rectum, bladder, distal ureters, and other pelvic organs can be required to obtain negative margins of resection. 59 A number of studies have
demonstrated 5-year survival rates ranging from 33% to 50% for these selected patients with locally advanced rectal cancer. Despite the ability to achieve long-range
survival rates in selected patients, the operation remains a formidable one, with significant morbidity and a mortality up to 6%. 60 Patients who undergo such resections
for primary tumors have better survival rates than those with recurrence.
Meterissian et al. 35 reported a series of 40 patients undergoing pelvic exenteration for rectal carcinoma in which tumor-free margins were obtained. The 5-year overall
survival rate was 49%, with a median survival of 56 months. Adjuvant chemoradiation appeared to provide a reduction in risk of recurrence. In the series, five patients
experienced local failure. Comparable results have been recorded by Lopez and associates (1987). Long-term local control is obtained in approximately 70% of the
patients who undergo resection with tumor-free margins. The results of such surgery cannot be separated from the benefits of adjuvant chemoradiation in this
high-risk population.
Results from surgical procedures for rectal cancer requiring multivisceral resection have improved. 61 This finding may be related to improvements in perioperative
care, patient selection, and surgical techniques. Of major importance in the management of such patients, who are often heavily radiated, is the use of vascularized
tissue flaps to accomplish healing of pelvic and perineal wounds. 62
Morbidity and Mortality from Radical Resection
The major cause of infection in procedures in which reconstruction has been done is anastomotic leak. Anastomotic leaks can occur in 2% to 5% of cases, and they
may result in subsequent stricture. 63 The consequences of pelvic sepsis can be a major cause of mortality from resection of rectal cancer. Use of a diverting stoma for
a low rectal anastomosis will not prevent anastomotic leak, but it will reduce the clinical manifestations of sepsis, the need for reoperation, and mortality.
Bladder dysfunction can be a complication of extensive pelvic dissection, especially if disruption of autonomic nerve trunks occurs. Sacral parasympathetic nerve
injuries result in loss of the awareness of the need to void. Management by intermittent catheterization, medications, or transurethral resection may be required.
Resection of the rectum for carcinoma has been associated with a high rate of erectile dysfunction or retrograde ejaculation in men. This sexual dysfunction is caused
by injury to pelvic autonomic nerves and is especially frequent in cases in which extensive lateral dissection has been done. Pelvic dissection to preserve the
hypogastric sympathetic nerve trunks arising from the preaortic plexus and the parasympathetic trunks arising from the sacral nerve roots can reduce this morbidity. 64
It is also important to realize that erectile dysfunction is not uncommon in the age group of individuals who develop sporadic rectal cancer and that factors other than
an intact autonomic nervous system can impact on a patient's sexual function after the diagnosis and management of rectal carcinoma.
With sharp nerve-sparing dissection, impotence has been reduced to a rate of 10% to 28%, or lower, in many series with resection of rectal carcinoma. 2
Creation of a stoma can produce complications requiring reoperation in 15% to 20% of patients. 65 Reconstruction of the rectum avoids a permanent colostomy.
However, bowel movements and urgency may be frequent because of the smaller neorectum. 66 The reconstructed rectum usually is composed of a more proximal
segment of left colon, which is brought down to a rectal stump of varying lengths. Improving the rectal reservoir function by construction of a colonic J pouch improves
short-term functional results. 67 Function does improve with time. The use of fiber supplements may enhance this improvement. Episodic clustering of bowel
movements is also a prominent symptom in patients with a small rectal pouch after reconstruction. Anal sphincter tone and local reflexes regulating sphincter function
are generally preserved after resection. Actual sphincter function usually is maintained in the majority of patients. Function is diminished by the presence of
postoperative pelvic sepsis or the use of postoperative radiotherapy. Operative mortality for radical resections ranges from 0.6% to 3.0%. 46,63

TREATMENT OF INVASIVE CANCER BY NONRADICAL APPROACHES
SELECTION OF PATIENTS
The criteria used to select patients for local excision are intended to make a negative-margin, full-thickness local excision technically feasible and to ensure a low risk
of lymph node metastases (Table 33.8-3). Physical assessment, CT, and EUS are helpful in the preoperative evaluation of these rectal cancer patients. Imaging
findings can be used to select patients for local excision procedures by determining the depth of tumor penetration into the rectal wall and the presence of enlarged
lymph nodes in the mesorectum. Ninety percent of rectal cancers do not meet the criteria for treatment by local excision alone because of the size or extent of the
tumor.68 Factors that can help identify patients who are at low risk for lymphatic metastases include small tumor size, absence of lymphatic and vascular invasion, well
or moderate tumor differentiation ploidy, and absence of clinical or radiologic evidence of enlarged lymph nodes. 69

TABLE 33.8-3. Indications for the Local Excision of Rectal Cancer

The major factor predicting patient survival and perirectal lymph node metastases is the depth of penetration of the primary tumor. Morson (1966) has reported that
lymphatic metastases occur with 10% of tumors confined to the submucosa, 12% of tumors invading the muscularis propria, and 58% of tumors extending beyond the
bowel wall.A study of T1 and T2 tumors treated by radical resection showed an incidence of lymphatic metastasis of 12% for T1 tumors and 22% for T2 tumors.The
incidence of lymphatic metastasis was increased by lymphatic or blood vessel invasion (BVI) and in poorly differentiated tumors. 70 Nelson et al.71 reported that 29% of

patients with lesions smaller than 2 cm in diameter had evidence of lymph node metastasis. Thus, selection for local excision based on the classic indications fails to
adequately treat a significant number of patients with lymphatic involvement. This makes the addition of adjuvant therapy to local excision a logical choice.
LOCAL EXCISION TECHNIQUES
Full-thickness local excision is effective in the treatment of selected early, low rectal cancers. Local excision is used as curative therapy for patients who have
superficial tumors, and it is used as alternative therapy in medically compromised patients and in those who refuse standard therapy. Patient selection is paramount to
using these techniques successfully, which requires an understanding of the limitations of the techniques and an appreciation of the biology of T1–2 rectal cancer.
The oncologic results of local treatment with and without adjuvant treatment are described in Adjuvant Radiation Therapy for Resectable Rectal Cancer , later in this
chapter.
The choice of technique for local excision is dictated by tumor characteristics and the surgeon's ability to have adequate exposure and control of the margins of
excision. In general, the transanal approach has less morbidity. Posterior approaches can offer the advantage of better exposure for larger lesions. However,
posterior approaches entail a higher rate of fistula formation and the potential for tumor seeding of the posterior wound. Whichever method is selected, the surgeon
must perform a full-thickness excision with at least 1-cm margins of normal tissue surrounding the tumor. An inadequate margin is a predictor of failure. 72 Piecemeal
or submucosal excision is not considered adequate surgical treatment of invasive rectal cancer. Fragmentation of the tumor is associated with an increased incidence
of local recurrence. If the lesion cannot be adequately resected by local excision, then a more standard locoregional operative approach should be used. In a curative
case, the patients should be counseled to consider local excision as a form of definitive biopsy. This is especially true when transmural penetration or adverse
histologic characteristics are found in the local excision specimen. In most instances, these patients should undergo more extensive surgical therapy.
Transanal Excision
Transanal excision is the most common method used for local excision. Size and degree of circumferential involvement predict the potential for a technically
successful transanal excision. Both adequate dilatation of the anus and a good light source are essential, and exposure is aided by the use of specialized retractors. 73
The excision is begun by marking a margin of normal tissue around the lesion, which must be greater than 1 cm. 74 The local excision is performed in a full-thickness
manner, meaning that the deep plane of dissection includes the perirectal fat. The defect usually is closed to avoid subsequent scarring. Proper orientation of the
specimen is required for pathologic assessment of the margins. Lymph nodes are usually not recovered by this technique.
Posterior Proctotomy
A posterior proctotomy is useful for large posterior lesions and provides better access to more proximal lesions. Otherwise known as a Kraske's procedure, a posterior
longitudinal incision is made just above the anus to the inferior border of the gluteus maximus. The coccyx is removed and the underlying levator muscles are divided
in a longitudinal fashion in the midline. This permits excellent exposure for mobilization of the rectum and allows for a full-thickness local excision or, alternatively, a
sleeve resection. A transsphincteric excision (Bevan's or York-Mason) involves a similar approach as the posterior proctotomy, except the entire anal sphincter is
divided posteriorly in the midline. It is critical to identify, mark, and reconstruct each portion of the sphincter complex, but if this is done, minimal functional problems
are observed. 75
Transanal Endoscopic Microsurgery
TEM, in which either submucosal (for adenomas) or full-thickness (for invasive carcinomas) excision is performed though an operating rectoscope, has emerged as an
option for the local treatment of rectal cancer. 76 It allows improved exposure compared to the transanal approach and does not carry the risk of fecal fistula or
sphincter dysfunction associated with posterior or transsphincteric proctotomy. In one series, local recurrence occurred in 2 of 16 (13%) patients with T1 lesions
undergoing TEM.76 The authors of this series believe that TEM alone is not an appropriate treatment for T2 lesions. Further follow-up and experience is required to
establish the role for TEM.
Fulguration
Fulguration can be used in highly selected patients to treat lower rectal carcinomas. 77 Chin and Eiserstat 78 have reported good results with rectal coagulation for
rectal cancers less than 4 cm in diameter that are well or moderately differentiated and less than 7.5 cm from the anal verge. Eighty-one of 114 patients with low rectal
cancers were treated primarily by electrocoagulation with curative intent, and a 65% 5-year survival rate is achieved in highly selected individuals. Stahl et al. 79
reported similar results in 33 patients treated with electrocoagulation. This is carried out through an operating proctoscope. Bipolar coagulating current is used to
coagulate the lesion along with a 1-cm margin of normal mucosa. This procedure is followed by débridement of the coagulated tissue, and the process is repeated
until no residual tumor is noted. This technique can be carried out through the entire bowel wall for posterior and lateral lesions. Although it is used for anterior
lesions, it should be carried out with caution because of the proximity of the rectovaginal septum or prostate. Complications of this procedure can include bleeding,
stricture, abscess, or perforation. The overall complication rate is 21%, and a mortality rate of 2.7% was reported.
Endoscopic Laser
Endoscopic laser may be used for palliative purposes in patients with extensive metastases for rectal obstruction or hemorrhage. It may be used as definitive therapy
in those who refuse surgery or are a poor surgical risk, as a bridge to neoadjuvant therapy, or to allow bowel preparation. It is most useful for noncircumferential
lesions that are less than 7 cm in diameter and have limited invasion. It may be combined with external-beam radiotherapy after successful recanalization. 80 Highly
selected patients with small tumors who undergo complete local destruction of the tumor with subsequent negative biopsies can occasionally be treated definitively. A
mean survival of 50 months has been achieved by Brunetaud et al. 81 in a series of patients treated by such techniques. Laser treatment can be combined with
photosensitizing agents to achieve more efficient tumor oblation. This technique of photodynamic therapy is especially useful in patients being managed for
obstruction who are otherwise unresectable.
Endocavitary Irradiation
Radiation has been used as a single modality with curative intent for selected early rectal cancers. Most investigators have used intracavitary irradiation alone for
early, noninvasive tumors. For more advanced tumors, it is combined with a temporary iridium 192 implant or external-beam radiation, or both. 82 Before delivery, the
anus is dilated and a 4-cm proctoscope is introduced. A low-energy x-ray unit is placed through the scope almost against the tumor. Generally, 50-kV x-rays, in doses
of 30 Gy per treatment, are given using this “contact” approach. Three or four such treatments over 1 month are required. Bulky tumors may require additional
irradiation with an 192Ir implant or external beam to reach the deeper pararectal tissues.

RESULTS OF TREATMENT OF RECTAL CANCER
This section presents the results after potentially curative surgery alone for clinically resectable rectal cancer. Overall, cure rates for cancers in the lower third of the
rectum are lower than those for cancers in the upper two-thirds.
ONCOLOGIC RESULTS OF RADICAL SURGICAL RESECTION ALONE
Numerous studies have compared the oncologic results of APR with those of sphincter-preserving procedures (LAR or proctectomy plus CAA). In a randomized
clinical trial intended to examine the benefit of adjuvant therapy in rectal cancer, patients who underwent APR had a higher recurrence rate than patients undergoing
LAR (P <.05).83 However, this finding was likely reflective of the larger, more advanced tumors seen in the patients undergoing APR. Several other studies involving
large numbers of rectal cancer patients have shown no significant differences in local recurrence or survival between patients undergoing APR and those undergoing
sphincter preservation. 63 Survival does not appear to be compromised.
Outstanding surgical results have indicated that total mesorectal excision is the optimal technique for the radical resection of rectal cancer ( Table 33.8-4). McAnena et
al.84 have described the long-term outcome of 57 patients treated by this approach.The mean follow-up was 4.8 years. Local recurrences were seen in only 3.5% of

the patients, and the overall 5-year survival rate was 81%. In a report by MacFarlane and coworkers 85 on patients undergoing operation exclusively, 135 patients with
Dukes' B and C rectal cancers were treated over a 13-year period with a mean follow-up of 7.5 years. None of these patients received adjuvant radiation or
chemotherapy. Despite this fact, only a 5% local recurrence rate was reported.

TABLE 33.8-4. Local Recurrence Rates after Surgery Alone

Further long-term follow-up of a larger group of patients confirmed these findings, specifically with a 10-year local recurrence rate of 4% and a 10-year disease-free
survival rate of 78%. 73 Heald (1986) reported his group's experience between 1978 and 1997 with 380 patients who underwent curative resection with a 10-year local
recurrence rate of 8%. This reduction in local recurrence rate has been reported as the reason for a high survival rate for these patients. 45 This compares favorably
with the results from the North Central Cancer Treatment Group (NCCTG) study that forms the basis for current recommendations for adjuvant therapy in the United
States in which chemotherapy and radiation were used for high-risk rectal cancers in addition to surgical resection.
In North America, similar results have been obtained with high rates of local recurrence-free survival when a total mesorectal excision is done by meticulous sharp
dissection along the pelvic sidewalls. Enker's report on this subject called for full rectal mobilization along anatomic planes to obtain complete mesorectal excision. In
a series of 42 men who underwent sphincter-preserving surgery for low rectal cancer using this technique, only one local recurrence was noted (median follow-up, 20
months).2 This result was accomplished with preservation of potency in 86.7% of patients. In 156 stage I and II rectal cancer patients treated without adjuvant therapy
between 1987 and 1995 at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, local recurrences rates were reduced to 8.3% by using mesorectal excision without
radiotherapy. 86 Zaheer (1998) reported the Mayo Clinic experience in 514 patients with surgical resection of stage I, II, and III rectal cancer. Two hundred seventy-two
of these patients had stage I disease, and 173 had stage II or III rectal cancer. The local recurrence rate for all stages was 7%, whereas the local recurrence rate for
node-positive cancers was 13%. 63
SURGEON-RELATED OUTCOMES
The frequency of local recurrence varies greatly for individual surgeons, from less than 10% to more than 50%. Norwegian surgeons have removed rectal cancer
surgery from routine surgical teaching and concentrate training in total mesorectal excision among specialized surgeons. They propose that the surgical specimens
obtained by such surgeons be audited. Where regionalization of all rectal cancer surgery has occurred, survival appears to have improved and local recurrence rates
have dropped to 7% after the addition of total mesorectal excision from historical controls, with a local recurrence rate of 23%. 50
Several studies have suggested that the surgeon is an important prognostic factor in rectal cancer. In a population-based study of 683 patients, Porter et al. (1998)
found a significant local recurrence and survival advantage in patients of both surgeons with colorectal surgery fellowship training and surgeons with a higher
caseload. In addition, a greater rate of sphincter preservation for low rectal cancer also was found to be associated with higher case loads. Other studies suggest that
hospital volume, hospital type (university vs. community), and surgeon experience improve survival and recurrence outcomes. 87
ONCOLOGIC RESULTS OF NONRADICAL APPROACHES
The incidence of lymph node metastases in patients with T1 tumors approximate the recurrence rate for T1 cancer treated by local excision alone. Studies describe a
3% to 10% rate of local recurrence after excision alone. 88 Survival rates in patients with T1 rectal carcinomas treated with local excision alone or radical resection are
90% to 100%.
In patients with T2 rectal carcinomas, the risk of lymph node metastasis is 10% to 30%. Recurrence rates may be 17% to 24% in patients with T2 tumors after local
excision alone. Survival rates are 78% to 82% with excision alone.
Many studies, mostly retrospective and single institutional studies, examine the results of local excision alone in the management of T1–2 rectal cancer ( Table
33.8-5). In a review of all published series with reasonable follow-up describing this approach, Graham et al. 88 found the combined local recurrence rate for T1 lesions
was 5% (range, 0% to 12%) and for T2 lesions was 18% (range, 8% to 27%).Lower local recurrence rates in similar patients treated by APR (0% to 10%) 89 have
brought into question the use of local excision alone for early rectal cancer. 90

TABLE 33.8-5. Patterns of Local Recurrence after Local Excision Alone

Papillon and colleagues (1992) in Lyon, France, pioneered the treatment of selected patients with rectal cancers using endocavitary irradiation. Exophytic, superficial,
well to moderately differentiated tumors without colloid histology with a maximum diameter less than 4.5 cm were treated. If the tumor was felt to invade muscle, an
interstitial 192Ir implant was added. In 245 patients, the 5-year disease-free survival rate was 76%, and the local failure rate was only 5%. Sischy and associates
(1984) have reported similar results. The local failure rate in 94 patients treated with endocavitary irradiation alone was 5%. Hull et al. (1994) reported a 71%
disease-free survival rate in 126 patients. With a median follow-up of 55 months, Schild and associates 91 reported 10% local failure and 76% 5-year survival. In 102
patients treated by Maingon et al., 82 the local failure rate was 15% and the 5-year survival was 81%. In 22 patients who were stage T1,N0 by rectal ultrasound, none
developed local failure. 92
Five-year survival rates with local treatment options vary from 50% to 90%, with many deaths secondary to intercurrent disease and not related to cancer. In selected
patients, a 10% cancer-related 5-year mortality can be expected with local excision, fulguration, or primary irradiation. For clinically staged T1 and early T2 cancers,
our treatment preference it to perform a full-thickness local excision when possible. This allows an assessment of margins and other pathologic features, thereby

providing the best determination of whether any additional therapy is needed.
In an attempt to help select the ideal combination of radiotherapeutic and surgical approaches for sphincter preservation, the Dijon clinical staging system has been
proposed. The staging system takes into account the tumor size and depth of penetration of the rectal wall. Briefly, T1A tumors are defined as superficial, exophytic,
and smaller than 3 cm; CS T1B tumors have a limited infiltrative component and are smaller than 3 cm; CS T2A tumors are superficial, exophytic, and are 3 to 5 cm in
size; CS T2B tumors have a limited infiltrative component and are 3 to 5 cm; and CS T3 tumors are deeply infiltrative or fixed, regardless of size. High-grade and
colloid tumors are excluded. The rationale for the different T stages is based on the technical parameters of endocavitary radiation. Tumors smaller than 3 cm are
easily covered with the intracavitary cone, whereas tumors 3 cm or larger require overlapping of fields and therefore a higher level of technical expertise. The
radiotherapeutic doses and techniques of Papillon (1992) were used.
According to the Dijon guidelines, patients with CS T1A tumors can be adequately treated with endocavitary radiation alone. Stages CS T1B and T2A require the
combination of endocavitary radiation and interstitial 192Ir brachytherapy, and CS T2B tumors should receive preoperative external-beam therapy followed by,
depending on the tumor response, either surgery or endocavitary radiation.
In an update from Maingon et al. 82 of 151 patients treated with this approach, the incidence of initial local control and ultimate local control by stage was 78% and
87% for T1, 58% and 79% for T2, and 54% and 69% for T3, respectively. For the Dijon stage T1 tumors (treated by endocavitary radiation alone), local failure
increased with tumor size (13% for 3 cm or smaller vs. 28% for larger than 3 cm).
Nonradical Approaches: Advanced Rectal Cancers
Patients with extensive T2 or transmural (T3) disease are not adequately treated with conservative measures such as local excision, fulguration, cryosurgery, or
endocavitary radiation alone. Those selected for radiation therapy alone are usually medically inoperable or have such advanced local disease that resection would
compromise a vital structure. In the nonradical setting, a variety of techniques have been used, including various combinations of external-beam, 192Ir interstitial
brachytherapy, and endocavitary radiation. Papillon and Berard (1992) have treated 67 patients with T2–3 rectal cancers with pelvic radiation (3 Gy × 10) followed by
endocavitary radiation. The 5-year disease free survival rate was 60%. A similar approach was reported by Kodner et al. (1993). Twenty-eight patients with invasive
but favorable tumors received 45 Gy followed 6 weeks later by 60 Gy with endocavitary radiation. Favorable tumors were defined as smaller than 3 cm, mobile, well to
moderately differentiated, and clinically confined to the rectal wall. No local failures were reported, and the cure rate was 82%. As already discussed, Maingon et al. 82
have recommended the addition of preoperative external-beam radiation or 192Ir brachytherapy for these more advanced tumors. 82
Although the best results are seen in patients who are able to have radical surgery as a component of their therapy, some patients do not undergo surgery because
they are medically inoperable, present with extensive unresectable disease grossly invading bone, have received prior pelvic radiation, or refuse surgery. In general,
they have been treated with external-beam radiation with or without chemotherapy. The largest series is from the Princess Margaret Hospital, which reports a
14-month median survival rate and 5% 5-year survival rate in 519 patients. 93 In the subset of patients in whom high doses of radiation are delivered (50 Gy or more),
the median survival is 24 months and is 13% at 5 years. Other series report similar results (14% at 3 years 94 and 31% at 2 years95); however, they have shorter
follow-up and a smaller number of patients. Selected series are seen in Table 33.8-6. In a subset of patients without metastatic disease who received more than 46
Gy, Overgaard and colleagues (1984) reported a 30% 2-year survival rate. A 30% 3-year survival rate was reported by Minsky and associates (1991).

TABLE 33.8-6. Palliative Radiotherapeutic Options (Nonsurgical)

Pelvic radiation also provides very effective palliation. In the subset of 84 patients who received more than 45 Gy in the series from the Princess Margaret Hospital,
the following presenting symptoms were palliated by 6 to 8 weeks after the completion of radiation: pain (89%), bleeding (79%), neurologic (52%), mass effect (71%),
discharge (50%), urologic (22%), and other (42%). 93 In the Thomas Jefferson University series, symptomatic relief was achieved in the following categories: pain
(65% complete, 28% partial), bleeding (100% complete), and mass effect (24% complete, 64% partial). 94 The duration of palliation was 8 to 10 months.
Even in elderly patients, pelvic radiation offers effective palliation. Valentini et al. 96 delivered combined modality therapy [38 to 45 Gy plus mitomycin C and
continuous infusion 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)] to a group of 17 patients with a median age of 79 (range, 75 to 90). Symptomatic relief was obtained in four of four patients
with pelvic pain and five of six patients with rectal bleeding. The 18% incidence of grade 3+ toxicity was similar to that reported for the general population who receive
preoperative combined modality therapy.
These data suggest that patients with advanced rectal cancers who are medically inoperable should be treated aggressively with pelvic radiation therapy as a
component of their therapy. It offers not only a defined cure rate but a high degree of palliation of symptoms.
PATTERNS OF RECURRENCE AFTER RADICAL SURGERY
Despite radical surgery, local-regional failure occurs frequently in patients with transmural or node-positive rectal cancers. The incidence of treatment failure in the
pelvis is directly related to the extent of transmural penetration (microscopic vs. gross) and the additive risks of lymph node metastases. Local failure rates as a
function of stage are listed in Table 33.8-7. Wound recurrence is rare (0.6%); however, it is a harbinger of metastatic disease. 97

TABLE 33.8-7. Local Failure after Surgery Alone for Resectable Rectal Cancer: Selected Single Institution Series

A major limitation in assessing the true incidence and patterns of failure is the heterogeneity of the series. This is due to variables such as the diagnosis by clinical,
surgical, or autopsy criteria; reporting failure as the first site or as total (cumulative) failure; whether local failure includes extrapelvic disease; whether crude or
actuarial calculations are used; the technical expertise of the surgeon 98; and whether patients have received adjuvant therapy. For example, in a series from the
Netherlands, 99 36% of patients received radiation therapy.
Based on a compilation of selected series, the incidence of local failure (as a component of failure) is less than 10% in stage T1–2N0M0; this rate increases to 15% to
35% in stages T3N0M0 and T1N1M0 and is as high as 45% to 65% in stage T3–4N1–2M0. 100,101,102 and 103 When local failure does occur, it is severely debilitating and
salvage has been of limited success. Therefore, decreasing local failure is, by itself, an important end point in the treatment of rectal cancer.

RADIATION THERAPY ALONE FOR RESECTABLE RECTAL CANCER
In most cases, radiation therapy without surgery is limited to patients who are medically inoperable. This section excludes patients amenable to a local excision and
adjuvant radiation therapy.
A variety of techniques have been used, including various combinations of external-beam irradiation, 192Ir interstitial brachytherapy, and intracavitary irradiation. In a
report from Papillon, 104 71 patients with clinical T2 or T3 rectal cancers received 3 Gy × 10 to the pelvis. Eight weeks later, an additional 25 Gy was delivered by
intracavitary irradiation and 20 to 30 Gy by 192Ir interstitial brachytherapy. The 5-year disease-free survival rate was 65%, and 62% of patients retained normal
sphincter function. Although 7% developed anal necrosis, they all healed.
In a report from the Princess Margaret Hospital, 93 42 patients with early-stage, potentially resectable (T2–3) disease who were either medically inoperable or refused
surgery received 50 Gy or more with or without 5-FU and achieved a 5-year survival rate of 21% (see Table 33.8-6). At the Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, 29 patients
received endocavitary radiation plus 39 Gy of accelerated pelvic radiation with or without brachytherapy. 105 With a median follow-up of 46 months, the local failure
rate was 38% and the 5-year survival rate was 68%.
A similar approach was reported by Myerson and coworkers (1989). Thirty patients received 45 Gy followed 6 weeks later by 30 to 90 Gy with intracavitary irradiation.
Their tumors were defined as larger than 3 cm, nonmobile, well- or moderately well-differentiated, and clinical stage T2 or pathologic stage T3. Deeply ulcerated or
infiltrating tumors were excluded. With a median follow-up of 2 years, the local failure rate was 30%, and the 2-year disease-free survival rate was 42% (55% with
salvage). Minor proctitis occurred in 17%.
As recommended for patients with advanced disease, patients with clinically resectable but medically inoperable disease should be treated aggressively with radiation
therapy as a component of their therapy.

ADJUVANT THERAPY AND SPHINCTER-SAVING OPERATIONS AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO ABDOMINOPERINEAL RESECTION
Conservative management (sphincter preservation) has been used in two broad groups of patients with distal rectal cancer as an alternative to APR. The first are
early localized tumors. In general, these include small, exophytic, mobile tumors without adverse pathologic factors [i.e., high grade, BVI, lymphatic vessel invasion
(LVI), colloid histology, or the penetration of tumor into or through the bowel wall]. 106 These selected tumors comprise 3% to 5% of all rectal cancers and are
adequately treated with a variety of local therapies alone.
The second group of patients includes those tumors that otherwise would be suitable for one of the above local therapies except for (1) invasion of tumor into or
through the muscularis propria, (2) positive lymph nodes, or (3) the presence of one or more adverse clinical or pathologic factors. In the context of conservative
management, these tumors are considered unfavorable, because local therapy alone is not adequate treatment.

LOCAL EXCISION AND POSTOPERATIVE RADIATION THERAPY
The standard surgical treatment for resectable, transmural, or node-positive rectal cancer is an LAR or APR. If the pathology confirms that the tumor penetrates
through the bowel wall or involves the mesorectal or pelvic lymph nodes, adjuvant combined modality therapy consisting of six cycles of 5-FU–based chemotherapy
plus concurrent pelvic radiation therapy is recommended. 107
Given the morbidity of standard surgery as well as the frequent need for adjuvant therapy, the use of a more conservative approach, such as local excision plus
adjuvant therapy (radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy), as primary therapy for selected cases of rectal cancer is appealing. This approach has been
successful in other anatomic sites, such as in breast cancer and sarcomas of the extremities. In the rectum, it offers an opportunity for sphincter preservation.
The results of local excision and postoperative therapy depend on a number of factors, such as the type of surgery (full-thickness vs. piecemeal excision), and
clinicopathologic factors, such as tumor size, T stage, grade, margins, and LVI. Most series include some patients who have undergone suboptimal surgery, such as a
piecemeal excision, or have positive or unassessable margins. 108 Because few of the published series have adequate numbers to perform a meaningful multivariate
analysis, it is difficult to determine the influence of these selected clinicopathologic features on one another. Until more complete data are available, a patient should
not be excluded from treatment with local excision and radiation therapy based solely on these clinicopathologic features.
Local excision has been performed both before and after radiation therapy. The advantage of performing a local excision before radiation is that pathologic details,
such as margins, depth of bowel wall penetration, and histologic features, can be well characterized. 108,109 Knowledge of these details are useful in the development of
selection criteria.
SELECTION CRITERIA
To determine which tumors have a high enough incidence of local failure or positive mesorectal or pelvic lymph nodes to require adjuvant pelvic radiation, it first must
be determined which tumors are adequately treated with local therapy alone. The selection of tumors for local therapy is based on both clinical and pathologic factors.
Clinical information such as tumor size, mobility, location, and circumference can be obtained at the time of physical examination. Accurate pathologic information is
more difficult to obtain from a biopsy. Of the available local therapies, only a full-thickness local excision provides accurate pathologic information.
Clinical
A major limitation of the series that examine local excision alone is that the analyses are univariate rather than multivariate. Therefore, clinical and pathologic factors
are not examined as independent variables. Furthermore, variation is seen in patient selection, the definition of clinical and pathologic features, and the length of
follow-up among the series. Because of these differences, it is difficult to make firm recommendations for the selection of patients for conservative management based
solely on clinical criteria. The most reasonable approach is to determine whether a local excision can be performed adequately (i.e., full thickness, nonfragmented,
and with negative margins). If so, then the clinical criteria for a local excision have been met.
Pathologic
Pathologic criteria are more objective. Patients with T1 tumors without adverse pathologic factors have a low enough incidence of local failure (5% to 10%) and
positive nodes (less than 10%) that they do not require adjuvant therapy. However, once adverse pathologic factors are present (high grade, BVI, LVI, colloid
histology, signet-ring cell). 110,111 or the tumor invades into or through the muscularis propria, 31,110 the local failure rate is at least 17% and the incidence of positive
mesorectal or pelvic nodes is at least 10% to 15%. Biggers et al. 31 reported the results of 141 patients with T2 rectal cancers who underwent local excision alone at
the Mayo Clinic. Blumberg and associates 112 found positive nodes in 10% of T1 and 17% of T2 cancers. In the combined group of 159 patients, the incidence
increased with the presence of LVI (14% for LVI vs. 33% for LVI-positive). Even in the 42 patients with the most favorable characteristics (well or moderately
differentiated, LVI-negative, T1 cancers), 7% had positive nodes. The 5-year survival rate was 65% and the local failure rate was 27%. Hager and colleagues (1983)
performed a local excision on 20 patients with T2 rectal cancers that were otherwise “low risk” (nonmucinous, well to moderately differentiated, no LVI, with negative

margins). The incidence of local failure was still 17%. Other series have reported local failure rates as high as 43% in patients with T2 cancers after either local
excision or transanal excision. 113
Willett et al. 110 reported a group of 40 patients who underwent local excision alone at the Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH). In this series, a separate analysis
was performed on those patients whose tumors had unfavorable clinical and pathologic factors. Factors including tumor size larger than 3 cm, high grade, T2 stage or
higher, vascular invasion (BVI and/or LVI), moderate or marked stromal fibrosis, a fragmented resection, and positive margins were associated with a local failure rate
of at least 20% as well as an increase in distant metastasis. Therefore, local therapy alone is inadequate for tumors with these adverse pathologic factors.
An alternative approach to pathologically determine the incidence of positive pararectal lymph nodes is ultrasound-guided biopsy. Milsom and colleagues 114 from the
Cleveland Clinic performed biopsies on 26 patients and reported an accuracy rate of 77%, with a sensitivity of 71%, a specificity of 89%, a positive predictive value of
92%, and a negative predictive value of 62%.
RESULTS
Results Compared with Radical Surgery
Because the pelvic lymph nodes are not pathologically examined at the time of a local excision, it is not possible to accurately compare, stage for stage, the results of
this approach with radical surgery.
Although data exist to help predict the incidence of positive pelvic nodes based on the clinical and pathologic features of the primary tumor, 69,115 an accurate
comparison of this approach with standard surgery requires a randomized trial. Most series select patients for adjuvant therapy based on the presence of unfavorable
clinical or pathologic features, or both. In the series from the University of Florida, 116 for example, patients had at least one or more of the following adverse features:
equivocal, close, or positive margins; T2–3 disease; perineural invasion; and had undergone a fragmented excision. Likewise in the MGH series, 117 38 of the 47
patients had T2 or high-risk T1 cancers (poorly differentiated and/or LVI).
Survival
As seen in Table 33.8-8, the 5-year actuarial survival in these selected series is approximately 80% (range, 70% to 94%). 32,116,117,118,119,120,121,122,123 and 124 In most
series, patients had T1–3 tumors and underwent a local excision followed 4 to 6 weeks later by 45 to 50 Gy to the pelvis. Some patients received an external-beam or
brachytherapy boost. In most series, a limited number of patients received 5-FU. Although not randomized, these survival data appear comparable with the results of
radical surgery alone for stage T1–2N0 disease.

TABLE 33.8-8. Local Excision plus Postoperative Therapy: Survival, Salvage, and Functional Results: Selected Series

The Intergroup Cancer and Leukemia Group B 8984 trial is the only prospective, multiinstitutional phase II trial. Patients underwent a local excision with careful
assessment of negative margins and, depending on T stage, received postoperative combined modality therapy. 125 A total of 110 eligible patients (all with negative
margins) were entered. The 51 patients with T2 disease received postoperative combined modality therapy. With a median follow-up of 48 months, the crude local
failure rate was 14%, the 6-year failure-free survival rate was 71%, and overall survival was 85%. This approach is feasible in a multiinstitutional, cooperative group
setting.
Local Failure
When the series are combined, the average crude local failure rate increases with T stage: 5% for T1, 14% for T2, and 22% for T3 ( Table 33.8-9). When the series
are combined, the crude incidence is 12% and increases with the percentage of T3 cancers included in each series.

TABLE 33.8-9. Local Excision plus Postoperative Therapy: Local Recurrence by T Stage: Selected Series

Actuarial analysis is an alternative method of determining the risk of local failure. The actuarial method, which accounts for the different length of follow-up for each
patient, offers the most accurate method of risk analysis. As with crude failure, the incidence of actuarial failure increases with increasing T stage. It was 10% in the
series of T1–2 cancers from the MGH, 117 14% from the University of Florida series in which only 2% of patients had T3 cancers, 116 and 27% in the Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center series in which 21% of patients had T3 cancers. 120
The impact of positive margins on local failure is unclear. In the Memorial Sloan-Kettering series, for the total patient group, 5-year actuarial local failure was higher in
patients with positive versus negative margins (35% vs. 23%). 120 A similar increase in crude local failure rates was reported in the Vancouver series (40% vs. 6%). 122
In contrast, no significant differences were reported in the series from Fox Chase Cancer Center 124 or the MGH.117 In the MGH series, this lack of difference may have
been related to a higher radiation dose delivered to that subset. Of the six patients with positive margins (none of whom developed local failure), five of the six
received doses of more than 60 Gy.

A full-thickness local excision is recommended because patients who undergo a piecemeal excision usually have higher local failure rates. 126
In those patients who do undergo a full-thickness excision, the impact of positive margins is unclear. Most investigators would recommend that negative margins be
obtained if technically feasible and a reexcision performed if needed, providing that it does not compromise sphincter function. If this is not possible, doses of more
than 50.4 Gy, if the small bowel is excluded from the high-dose field, are probably necessary.
In patients who undergo radical surgery for rectal cancer, 80% of local recurrences occur within the first 2 years. In contrast, the Memorial Sloan-Kettering series 120
has reported local failures at 48 months, and the MGH series 117 has reported local failures as late as 64, 72, 86, and 91 months. Furthermore, in the MGH series the
median time to local recurrence was 55 months compared with 14 months in a group of 52 patients with more favorable prognostic factors who underwent local
excision alone. Therefore, patients who are treated with local excision and postoperative adjuvant therapy require close follow-up beyond 5 years.
On a positive note, most local failures occur at the anastomotic site and not in pelvic lymph nodes. Of the 18 local failures reported in the MGH series, only one
involved the pelvic nodes. None were seen in the series from the University of Pennsylvania 32 and Catholic University. 123 Furthermore, salvage of local failures is
possible. With the exception of the University of Florida experience, in which only one of five local failures could be salvaged with an APR, most series report that at
least one-half of the patients who undergo a salvage APR can be cured: Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center reported three cures out of four 118; University of
Pennsylvania, two of two32; Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, five of eight 120; Vancouver, three of seven122; Catholic University, one of two 123; Fox Chase,
three of four124; Intergroup trial, four of seven 125; and MGH, five of nine. 117
Sphincter Function
However, a few series prospectively assess functional results. As seen in Table 33.8-8, the five series that do measure sphincter function report favorable outcomes.
Both the Memorial Sloan-Kettering 120 and Catholic University 123 series use the previously published Memorial Sloan-Kettering Sphincter Function Scale. 127 They
report 94% and 100% good to excellent function, respectively. Using a different scale, investigators from Fox Chase Cancer Center 124 reported 82% good to excellent
function, the University of Pennsylvania 32 reported 92% satisfactory function, 32 and the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center 119 reported that all patients were continent.
Chemotherapy
Limited data are available on the use of chemotherapy in patients who undergo local excision and postoperative radiation therapy. In most series, 5-FU was delivered
as a radiosensitizer rather than in the adjuvant setting. In a subgroup analysis, the MGH reported a lower 5-year actuarial local failure rate (4% vs. 19%, P = NS) but
at the same time a lower relapse-free survival rate (67% vs. 81%, P = NS) in patients receiving 5-FU–based combined modality therapy versus radiation alone. 117
Because the numbers are limited and the data are not stratified by T stage, the impact of chemotherapy is unclear. However, given the positive impact of
chemotherapy on local control and survival in patients with resectable rectal cancer reported in the randomized postoperative rectal adjuvant trials, 128 all patients
should receive two cycles of 5-FU–based therapy concurrently with radiation. For patients with T2–3 disease in whom the incidence of pelvic lymph nodes is at least
20%, an additional four cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy for a total of six cycles is recommended.
Summary
The data suggest that the approach of local excision and postoperative radiation is a reasonable alternative to radical surgery in selected patients. It should be limited
to patients with either T2 tumors, or T1 tumors with adverse pathologic factors (poorly differentiated and/or LVI). Although the local failure rates are approximately
double those reported with radical surgery, one-half of the failures can be salvaged with an APR without an apparent detriment to overall survival. Functional results
are generally good to excellent. Transmural (T3) tumors have a 25% local failure rate and are treated more effectively with radical surgery and pre- or postoperative
therapy. The results of local excision and postoperative radiation therapy are encouraging; however, randomized trials are needed to determine if this approach
ultimately has similar local control and survival rates as radical surgery.

PREOPERATIVE RADIATION THERAPY FOLLOWED BY SURGERY
Sphincter preservation is a major goal of preoperative therapy. A number of preoperative treatment approaches have been used, and their selection depends on
factors such as tumor histology, size, location, mobility, and anatomic constraints, and the technical expertise of the surgical, radiation, and medical oncologists.
An analysis of 1316 patients treated in two previously published Scandinavian trials of intensive short course radiation reveals that down-staging is most pronounced
when the interval between the completion of radiation and surgery is at least 10 days. 129 However, none of the randomized trials of intensive short course preoperative
radiation address whether the degree of down-staging is adequate to enhance sphincter preservation.
From the viewpoint of sphincter preservation, the advantage of preoperative therapy is to decrease the volume of the primary tumor. When the tumor is located in
close proximity to the dentate line, this decrease in tumor volume may allow the surgeon to perform a sphincter-preserving procedure that would not otherwise be
possible. However, patients whose tumors directly invade the anal sphincter are unlikely to undergo sphincter preservation, even after a complete response to
radiation therapy.
In general, when sphincter preservation is the goal of therapy, the use of preoperative therapy should be limited to patients who are not technically able to undergo a
local excision because of tumor size or anatomic constraints. For example, if the tumor is close to the anal sphincter, a full-thickness local excision with negative
margins may require partial removal of the sphincter, resulting in compromised sphincter function.
Two surgical approaches have been used after preoperative pelvic radiation: local excision and LAR plus CAA. To assist in the choice of the surgical procedure,
some investigators have used transrectal ultrasound for restaging after the completion of preoperative therapy. However, most series reveal that posttreatment
staging is only of modest accuracy. Williamson and colleagues 130 reported that, in 15 patients who completed preoperative combined modality therapy, 38% were
down-staged by transrectal ultrasound. At pathology, T stage was down-staged in 47% and N stage in 88%. Another series found that, in 25 patients who received
preoperative radiation, digital rectal examination, CT, and transrectal ultrasound accurately staged only 24%, 23%, and 17%, respectively, of the primary tumors that
were stage T0 at pathology. 28 Bernini and associates 30 found transrectal ultrasound correctly predicted the T and N stage in 62% and 76%, respectively. In another
series, the accuracy of transrectal ultrasound was 93% for T stage, but only 61% for N stage. 131 Newer techniques, such as color Doppler flow 132 and intracavitary MRI
coils133 and PET,134,135 and 136 are being investigated. In a comparative study of 89 patients, the accuracy of predicting T stage and N stage preoperatively was 81% and
84% with transrectal ultrasound, 65% and 57% with CT, and 81% and 63% with an MRI endorectal coil, respectively. 137
LOCAL EXCISION
The results of 25 patients who received 34.95 Gy at 2.33 Gy per fraction to a partial pelvic field followed in 6 to 8 weeks by a transanal or transsphincteric local
excision and a 20- to 25-Gy boost with afterloading 192Ir was reported by Otmezguine et al. 138 The median tumor size was 4 cm, 80% were exophytic, 72% were well to
moderately differentiated, and all were mobile. With a mean follow-up of 41 months, the local failure rate was 20%, and three of the five failures were salvaged with an
APR. Of the six patients with positive margins, two developed local failure. The 20 patients with local control had “normal” sphincter function.
In a report by Mohiuddin et al., 139 48 selected patients who met specific criteria [group I, T3 and medically unsuitable for a LAR (n = 15); group II, <T2 and <3 cm
suitable for a local excision (n = 18); or group III, T3 or >3 cm down-staged with preoperative radiation to <T2 and <3 cm] underwent a local excision after 45 to 55 Gy.
With a median follow-up of 40 months, the 5-year actuarial survival rate was 84% and the local failure rate was 10%. Local failure by group was 20% for group I, 11%
for group II, and 0% for group III. Postoperative wound complications were seen in 10%, and four patients required a subsequent colostomy (three for local failure).
Sphincter function was good to excellent in 88% of patients with an intact rectum. In an update of 44 patients with tumors of 3 cm or smaller from the dentate line
selected to undergo a local excision after preoperative radiation therapy, the local failure rate was 14% and the 5-year survival rate was 90%. 140

LOW ANTERIOR RESECTION AND COLOANAL ANASTOMOSIS

PREOPERATIVE PROSPECTIVE CLINICAL ASSESSMENT
The most accurate method by which to determine if preoperative therapy has contributed to sphincter preservation is to perform a prospective clinical assessment.
This requires that the operating surgeon examines the patient before the start of preoperative therapy and declares the type of operation required. It should be noted
that this assessment is based on an office examination and may not accurately reflect the assessment when the patient is relaxed under general anesthesia. The only
method by which to account for this potential bias is a randomized trial of preoperative versus postoperative therapy. With this randomized design, the accuracy of the
assessment could be determined, because one-half of the patients are randomized to undergo surgery before postoperative therapy.
An interval analysis of the first 116 patients enrolled on the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast Project (NSABP) R-03 randomized trial of preoperative versus
postoperative combined modality therapy has been reported by Hyams and colleagues 141 (Table 33.8-10). Because one-half of the patients were randomized to
undergo surgery before the postoperative therapy, the accuracy of the office assessment to predict the type of operation required could be determined. Of the 57
patients randomized to the postoperative combined modality arm, 26 were declared clinically to require an APR and all 26 patients underwent the procedure.
Therefore, the data suggest that the office assessment is an accurate method by which to predict the type of operation required. The incidence of postoperative
complications was similar in the preoperative and postoperative arms (33% and 30%, respectively). The results from this report should be considered preliminary,
because the trial was still open to accrual at the time of the analysis.

TABLE 33.8-10. Results of Preoperative Therapy in Patients Prospectively Declared to Require an Abdominoperineal Resection (APR)

SURGICAL ISSUES IN COLOANAL ANASTOMOSIS
Careful surgical techniques must be used when performing a CAA after preoperative therapy. To perform the anastomosis with unirradiated bowel, the splenic flexure
must be mobilized. To enhance anastomotic healing, a diverting colostomy should be performed and is closed 2 to 4 months postoperatively. For example, in the
R90-01 trial of preoperative radiation therapy, patients received 3 Gy × 13 and were randomized to either a short interval (2 weeks) or a long interval (6 to 8 weeks)
between the end of radiation and surgery. 52 Of the total of 144 patients who underwent a sphincter-preserving operation, 57 had a temporary diverting colostomy. The
incidence of anastomotic complications requiring surgery was 5% in that group compared with 23% in the 87 patients who did not undergo the temporary diverting
colostomy.
TECHNICAL ASPECTS OF PREOPERATIVE RADIATION THERAPY
If the goal of preoperative therapy is sphincter preservation, conventional doses and techniques of radiation are recommended. These include multiple-field
techniques to a total dose of 45.0 to 50.4 Gy at 1.8 Gy per fraction. Surgery should be performed 4 to 6 weeks after the completion of radiation. This design allows for
recovery from the acute side effects of radiation and enhances tumor down-staging.
Since the publication of the Swedish Rectal Cancer Trial, 142 which revealed a significant improvement in survival with intensive short course preoperative radiation,
some physicians have advocated this alternative approach. Typically, the intensive short course includes 25 Gy in five fractions followed by surgery 1 week later. Not
only are these treatment programs associated with increased surgical morbidity and mortality, 143,144 but by virtue of their design, they do not enhance sphincter
preservation. Therefore, they should be used with great caution.
CLINICAL EXPERIENCE
A total of seven series have reported results in patients with clinically resectable, invasive rectal cancer (T2–3 or T4 tethered to the vagina) who underwent a
prospective clinical assessment by their surgeon before the start of preoperative therapy and were declared to need an APR (see Table 33.8-10). All use conventional
radiation techniques and, with the exception of the R90-01 trial which used 3-Gy fractions, the remainder used standard radiation doses (1.8 to 2.0 Gy per fraction).
Two of the series are from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. The initial approach to sphincter preservation at Memorial Sloan-Kettering was preoperative
radiation therapy alone, and the results of this prospective phase I/II trial have been reported by Wagman et al. 145 The current approach at Memorial Sloan-Kettering
is preoperative combined modality therapy, which has been reported by Grann and associates. 146 Preoperative radiation therapy (without chemotherapy) was reported
by Rouanet et al. 147 from the Montpellier Cancer Institute and by Francois and associates 52 from the Lyon R90-01 trial. The other three trials used combined modality
therapy. Hyams and colleagues 141 reported an interval analysis of the ongoing NSABP R-03 phase III randomized trial of preoperative versus postoperative combined
modality therapy. The remaining trials were reported by Maghfoor and colleagues 148 from Ellis Fischel Cancer Center and Valentini et al. 149 from the Catholic
University in Rome.
Other series have been conducted in which patients receive preoperative radiation therapy followed by sphincter preservation. In the series from Papillon and
Gerard 150 from the Centre Leon Berard, patients did not undergo a prospective clinical assessment by their surgeon, and therefore, the impact of preoperative
radiation therapy on enhancing sphincter preservation cannot be determined. Thomas Jefferson University 151 has a large experience with preoperative radiation
therapy. In tumors located in the distal 2 cm of the rectum, preoperative radiation therapy allowed sphincter preservation in 91% of patients, 86% of whom had
“satisfactory” functional results. Because this trial included patients with early (T1) as well as unresectable (T4) disease, the results are not comparable to the other
series.
As seen in Table 33.8-10, sphincter-preservation rates were only 23% in the interim analysis of the NSABP R-03 trial and 44% in the R90-01 trial, whereas the other
five trials report that approximately 75% of patients are able to undergo sphincter preservation after preoperative therapy. Local failure rates vary from 0% to 17%,
and survival rates range from 100% at 2 years to 72% at 5 years. Four series report functional outcome. Wagman et al. and Valentini et al. both use the Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center Sphincter Function Scale. 152 The R90-01 trial defines normal function as a patient without soiling or requiring pads. The Montpellier
series does not define “perfect” function.
One series has reported that the detrimental effect on sphincter function associated with postoperative therapy 153,154 may not be as problematic with preoperative
therapy. The short-term 155 and long-term156 impact of preoperative radiation therapy on sphincter function has been examined by Birnbaum and colleagues. Patients
received conventional doses and techniques of radiation and were assessed objectively by anal manometry with or without transrectal ultrasound. In the 20 patients
assessed for short-term results and the ten patients assessed for long-term results, radiation therapy had a “minimal” effect on sphincter function.
The results of the R90-01 trial support the advantage of a longer interval (at least 4 weeks) between the completion of radiation and surgery. 52 A total of 201 eligible
patients were randomized to either a short interval (2 weeks) or a long interval (6 to 8 weeks). Patients randomized to the long interval had a significantly higher
incidence of clinical complete response (pathologic complete response and/or a few residual foci of cells; 26% vs. 10%, respectively; P = .0054), with no increase in
operative morbidity.

In summary, five of the seven trials suggest that preoperative therapy allows sphincter preservation in approximately 75% of patients judged clinically to require an
APR. The majority have good to excellent functional results. Given the suggestion of decreased acute toxicity and enhanced sphincter preservation with preoperative
radiation therapy, three randomized trials of conventional dose preoperative versus postoperative combined modality therapy for clinically resectable, T3 rectal cancer
have been developed. Two are from the United States (INT 0147, NSABP R-03) and one from Germany (CAO/ARO/AIO 94). All three use conventional doses and
techniques of radiation therapy and concurrent 5-FU–based chemotherapy, and they require a preoperative clinical assessment declaring the type of operation
required. However, low accrual resulted in the early closure of the INT 0147 trial and may jeopardize the NSABP R-03 trial as well. The German trial continues to
accrue patients and should help provide an answer to the relative effectiveness of preoperative versus postoperative therapy and its ability to enhance sphincter
preservation.
TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
For patients with clinically resectable disease, the preoperative approach should be used in situations in which sphincter-preserving surgery is not technically possible
at initial presentation. The decision of whether to use preoperative radiation therapy or preoperative combined modality therapy is based on the results of transrectal
ultrasound. If a transrectal ultrasound reveals T2 disease, the patient may have pathologic T2N0M0 disease; therefore, the sole reason for the preoperative therapy is
to convert the operation from an APR to an LAR plus CAA. In this setting, preoperative radiation therapy alone is recommended. If positive mesorectal or pelvic lymph
nodes are identified at the time of surgery, the patient should receive 6 months of adjuvant postoperative 5-FU–based chemotherapy. Two potential disadvantages
are associated with this approach. First, the ultrasound may under-stage approximately 10% of patients who have pathologic stage T3 disease. Second, because
preoperative radiation down-stages pelvic lymph nodes by approximately 50%, the true incidence of node-positive disease is unknown, and some node-positive
patients may not receive chemotherapy. Obviously, these disadvantages need to be weighed against the risk of overtreating these patients with combined modality
therapy.
For patients with transrectal ultrasound stage T3 disease, preoperative combined modality therapy followed by surgery and postoperative 5-FU–based chemotherapy
is recommended. This approach is based on extrapolation of the significant improvement in local control and survival in patients with T3 or N1–3 disease who receive
adjuvant postoperative combined modality therapy. Whether preoperative combined modality therapy is more effective than preoperative radiation therapy is
unknown. An ongoing randomized trial from the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) will address this question.
At the present time, the most common preoperative combined modality therapy regimens include 45.0 to 50.4 Gy of pelvic radiation at 1.8 Gy per fraction plus
concurrent bolus 5-FU plus leucovorin 146,157 or continuous infusion 5-FU. 158,159 Some have advocated 5-FU plus mitomycin C, which is more commonly used in the
treatment of anal cancer. 149 One trial using neoadjuvant 5-FU plus methotrexate followed by continuous infusion 5-FU plus concurrent radiation did not report a
benefit compared with conventional 5-FU plus leucovorin. 160 Phase I/II trials are in progress combining new systemic chemotherapeutic agents, such as raltitrexed
(Tomudex),161,162 Orzel (oral tegafur, uracil, and 5-fluorouracil plus leucovorin), 163 CPT-11,164,165 and oxaliplatin, with preoperative radiation therapy. Whether any of
these combinations will be more effective than 5-FU–based therapy remains to be determined.

ADJUVANT RADIATION THERAPY FOR RESECTABLE RECTAL CANCER
The rationale of radiation therapy is based on the patterns of failure after potentially curative surgery (see Table 33.8-7). The incidence of local failure as a
component of failure is less than 10% in stages T1–2N0M0; the incidence increases to 15% to 35% in stage T3N0M0 and is as high as 45% to 65% in stages
T3–4N1–2M0.100,101 and 102 When local failure does occur, it is severely debilitating and salvage has been of limited success. In 1936, Daland et al. (1936) stated that
the morbidity associated with local failure is often devastating, and as many as 68% of patients have one or more pelvic symptoms, including infection, ulceration,
obstruction, and intractable pain for 9 to 12 months before death. The same holds true today. Therefore, even though it does not increase survival, the ability of
radiation therapy to decrease local failure is, by itself, an important end point.
For unsubstantiated reasons, some consider colorectal adenocarcinomas to be radioresistant. This assumption has been based on the observation that these tumors
do not respond as rapidly to radiation as other histologies. The radioresistant theory was disproved in 1965 by Suit et al. (1965), who showed that the rapidity of tumor
response to radiation is not an accurate reflection of their curability. Brierley et al. (1995) reported the results of 66 patients with rectal cancer treated with radiation
therapy alone. As seen in Figure 33.8-5, of the patients who achieved a complete response to radiation therapy, only 60% had achieved the complete response by 4
months.

FIGURE 33.8-5. Time to a complete response from the start of treatment for 66 patients with inoperable rectal cancer who received radiation therapy alone and
achieved a clinical complete response. (From Brierley JD, Cummings BJ, Wong CS, et al. Adenocarcinoma of the rectum treated by radical external radiation therapy.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995:31:255, with permission.)

Some physicians contend that adjuvant therapy is not necessary if patients undergo resection with a total mesorectal excision. In one series, total mesorectal
excision, which involves sharp dissection around the integral mesentery of the hindgut, decreased the local recurrence rate to 5%. 85 These data must be interpreted
with caution for a number of reasons. First is selection bias. This operation allows the identification and exclusion of patients with more advanced disease as
compared with patients treated in the adjuvant trials in which more conventional surgery is performed. Second, some patients with T3 or N1–2 disease received
radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy (i.e., 18% in the series by Haas-Kock et al., 166 28% in the series from Enker and associates, 86 and 58% in the series
from Arenas et al.167). In a combined analysis of 1411 patients from five international centers, an undisclosed number received adjuvant radiation or combined
modality therapy. 47 Third, some series (i.e., Aitken et al. 168) exclude operative deaths. Lastly, total mesorectal excision may also be associated with higher
complication rates. In the Basingstoke Hospital experience reported by Carlsen and colleagues, 169 the anastomotic leak rate was 16% in patients who underwent total
mesorectal excision (all of whom required hospitalization) compared with a leak rate of 8% in a similar group of patients who underwent conventional surgery (with
only 25% requiring hospitalization). Poon and colleagues 170 recommend the creation of a diverting stoma to decrease the high leak rate with total mesorectal excision.
The Dutch CKVO 95-04 trial examines the role of intensive short course preoperative radiation therapy in patients who undergo a total mesorectal excision. Patients
are randomized to an intensive short course of radiation (5 Gy × 5) versus surgery alone. Postoperative radiation, which is performed with conventional doses, is
reserved for patients in the surgery-only arm who do not undergo a curative resection. Investigator participation is limited to surgeons who have demonstrated
proficiency in performing a total mesorectal excision. The trial is open to accrual.
Dahlberg and colleagues 50 report a 3% local failure rate in patients with resectable rectal cancer with the combination of total mesorectal excision and intensive short
course preoperative radiation. Because patients with clinical stage T1–3 disease were included, it is difficult to compare these results with series that are limited to T3
disease.
The use of total mesorectal excision has increased awareness of the importance of surgical technique. Careful surgical techniques are central to the successful
management of rectal cancer. However, they should be considered a valuable component of therapy, not competitive with adjuvant therapy. Given the selection bias,

higher complication rates in some series, and the fact that adjuvant therapy is used in some series, the benefits and risks of total mesorectal excision must be more
carefully documented. The total mesorectal excision series need to focus on all end points, such as local control, survival, sphincter preservation and function,
surgical morbidity and mortality, and quality of life.
Radiation therapy has been used in three major approaches to the adjuvant treatment of resectable rectal cancer. These include postoperative, preoperative, and preplus postoperative radiation therapy.
ADJUVANT POSTOPERATIVE RADIATION THERAPY
Most patients in the United States undergo surgery and, if needed, receive postoperative therapy. The primary advantage with this approach is pathologic staging.
Despite advances in preoperative imaging techniques, which allow more accurate patient selection, postoperative therapy remains the most common approach. The
primary disadvantages include an increased amount of small bowel in the radiation field 171 and a potentially hypoxic postsurgical bed, and if the patient has
undergone an APR, the radiation field must be extended to include the perineal scar.
Nonrandomized Trials
Nonrandomized data from the MGH172,173 and the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center 174,175 reveal crude local failure rates of 4% to 31% in patients with stage T3–4N0M0
disease and 8% to 53% in patients with stage T3–4N1–2M0 disease who received 4500 to 5500 cGy ( Table 33.8-11). The MGH series is the largest reported
experience from a single institution in which careful radiation techniques were used and long follow-up is available. The MGH results were compared with a historical
control group of 142 patients who underwent surgery only. Stage for stage, an improvement was seen in both local control and survival in those patients who received
postoperative radiation therapy. The MGH results of 261 patients who received postoperative radiation therapy have been updated, providing 5-year actuarial local
control data. 173 Actuarial local control by stage include 87% for T3N0M0, 83% for T4N0M0, 76% for T1–2N1–2M0, 77% for T3N1–2M0, and 23% for T4N1–2M0.

TABLE 33.8-11. Adjuvant Postoperative Radiation Therapy for Resectable Rectal Cancer: Selected Nonrandomized Trials

Wiggenraad and associates 176 treated 123 patients with postoperative radiation and correlated results with p53 status as determined by immunohistochemistry. With
a median follow-up of 40 months, no significant difference was noted in local failure or survival by p53 status.
Randomized Trials
Five randomized trials have examined the use of adjuvant postoperative radiation therapy alone in stages T3 or N1–2 rectal cancer. 83,177,178 and 179 None have shown
an improvement in overall survival. The series from Odense University is a two-arm trial comparing postoperative radiation therapy with surgery alone. In two of the
series, one of the arms included radiation plus chemotherapy [Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group (GITSG)] 83,177 or chemotherapy alone (NSABP R-01).178 In the
Mayo Clinic/NCCTG trial 79-47-51, there was no surgery-only control arm.
Two trials reveal a decrease in local failure: NSABP R-01 (16% vs. 25%, P = .06) and the Medical Research Council (21% vs. 34%, P = .001).179 These trials are
discussed at length in the section on combined modality therapy of resectable rectal cancer (see Radical Surgery and Adjuvant Postoperative Combined Modality
Therapy for Resectable Rectal Cancer, earlier in this chapter). In this section, the discussion is limited to the comparison of the radiation therapy arm compared with
the surgical control arm.
As discussed in the section on patterns of failure (see Patterns of Recurrence after Radical Surgery , earlier in this chapter), local failure rates depend on whether they
are reported as first or cumulative failure. The randomized trials usually express failure as first site of failure as opposed to the nonrandomized trials, which express
failure as cumulative failure. For example, in the Mayo Clinic/NCCTG trial, the incidence of local failure in node-positive patients was 25% when expressed as first
failure compared with 63% when expressed as cumulative failure. More favorable local failure results (local failure as the first site of failure) were reported from the
GITSG (18%)83,177 and the NSABP (15%).178
In the GITSG series, 58 patients underwent surgery alone and 50 received postoperative radiation therapy (40 to 48 Gy). No significant differences were noted in
either local failure or survival between these two arms. 83,177 Many criticisms have been leveled at the radiation therapy techniques used in the GITSG series. First,
39% of the patients treated with radiation therapy varied from the protocol specifications. Second, the radiation dose was chosen by the individual investigator
(patients could receive 40 or 48 Gy). The issue of radiation dose is important, because dose response in radiation therapy follows a sigmoidal distribution. Therefore,
a small decrease in dose can result in a large difference in local control. For example, in the Mayo Clinic/NCCTG trial 79-47-51, patients in the postoperative
radiation-alone arm who received 50.4 Gy had a slightly lower local failure rate compared with those who received 45 Gy (18% vs. 24%). Although no difference in
overall survival was reported, patients who received adjuvant radiation therapy in the NSABP trial had a borderline significant decrease in local failure compared with
surgery alone (16% vs. 25%, P = .06). 178
In the series from Odense University, 494 patients were randomized to postoperative radiation therapy (45 to 50 Gy) versus surgery alone. In patients with stage
T2–3N0 disease, no difference was noted in the incidence (6%) or mean time to local failure between the arms. In patients with stage T1–3N1–2 disease, no
difference was reported in local failure (6% vs. 9%); however, the mean time to local failure was significantly longer in patients who received radiation therapy
compared with the surgical control arm (19 months vs. 6 months, P = .01). This series also has raised many criticisms. These include a short median follow-up (3
years) and that 43% of the patients were not randomized, the radiation therapy was split course, 20 patients in the radiation arm received less than 45 Gy, and the
incidence of local failure in the surgery control arm was unusually low for node-positive cancers (9%).
The EORTC randomized 172 patients with T3 or N1–2 disease to 46 Gy versus observation. 180 No significant difference was seen in local failure or survival. An
increase was noted in chronic diarrhea and cystitis in the radiation arm; however, it must be emphasized that patients were treated with only two fields per day. As
discussed in the section on toxicity of pelvic radiation (see Complications of Pelvic Radiation Therapy , later in this chapter), this two-field technique is associated with
an increase in radiation associated toxicity.
In summary, the retrospective data suggest that postoperative radiation therapy decreases local failure. The only randomized trial, which confirms this finding (with
borderline significance), is from the NSABP. It should be noted that, of the randomized trials that compare radiation therapy to a surgical control arm, the NSABP is
the only trial in which the radiation therapy was delivered with a continuous course, in full doses, and with “modern” techniques.
ADJUVANT PREOPERATIVE THERAPY
Preoperative adjuvant therapy (most commonly radiation therapy combined with systemic chemotherapy) is an alternative to postoperative therapy. 52,141,145,146,147,148 and

149,181,182,183 and 184 The primary advantages of preoperative therapy are sphincter preservation and a lower incidence of acute toxicity.

The disadvantage of preoperative radiation therapy is the potential of overtreating patients with either early (pathologic stage T1–2N0) or metastatic disease. With
improved imaging techniques, such as EUS, 185 ultrasound-guided pararectal lymph node biopsy, 114 CT, MRI with a phased-array186 or an endorectal coil, 187 and
PET, 188 the number of patients who are overtreated is decreased. Experienced investigators report the accuracy of EUS in predicting T stage preoperatively as high
as 90%.189
Results of Adjuvant Preoperative Therapy
Nonrandomized trials of preoperative radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy have reported decreased local recurrence and, possibly, improved survival. 151
Some trials include patients with early-stage or metastatic disease. Because these patients are excluded from the postoperative adjuvant therapy trials, a randomized
trial is necessary to accurately compare the results of preoperative and postoperative therapy. The phase I/II trials in which preoperative radiation or combined
modality therapy is used to enhance sphincter preservation have been discussed in the section on sphincter preservation (see Adjuvant Therapy and
Sphincter-Saving Operations as an Alternative to Abdominoperineal Resection , earlier in this chapter) and are reviewed in Table 33.8-10.
The only randomized trial comparing preoperative versus postoperative radiation therapy (without chemotherapy) is the Uppsala trial, in which 471 patients were
randomized to receive either intensive short course preoperative radiation (25.5 Gy in five fractions) or, for patients with T3 or N1–2 disease, 60 Gy postoperatively. 190
A significant decrease was noted in local recurrence with preoperative radiation (13% vs. 22%, P = .02); however, no difference was found in 5-year survival (42% vs.
38%). Although a significant increase of perineal wound sepsis was seen in the preoperative group (33% vs. 18%, P <.01), other short- and long-term side effects
were decreased. For example, the incidence of small bowel obstruction (5% vs. 11%) and total grade 3+ toxicity (20% vs. 41%) was lower in the preoperative group
compared with the postoperative group. The increase in the incidence of perineal wound sepsis in the preoperative arm may have been related to the antiquated
radiation techniques and high dose per fraction delivered. It should be emphasized that this increase has not been reported in the series that use conventional
radiation doses and block the perineal skin in the lateral fields.
Given the advantage of the addition of concurrent chemotherapy to radiation therapy in the postoperative setting, a variety of preoperative combined modality
treatment programs have been developed. Retrospective studies suggest that preoperative combined modality therapy increases pathologic down-staging compared
with preoperative radiation therapy 191 and is associated with a lower incidence of acute toxicity compared with postoperative combined modality therapy. Most trials of
preoperative combined modality therapy primarily include patients with unresectable disease. These are discussed in the section on locally advanced and
unresectable rectal cancer (see Treatment of Locally Advanced and Unresectable Rectal Cancer , later in this chapter). Most preoperative combined modality therapy
trials for patients with clinically resectable disease have used either bolus 146 or continuous infusion 5-FU–based chemotherapy. 192
Combining the results of the published series, grade 3+ toxicity during the combined modality segment is 15% to 25%, the pathologic complete response rates are 9%
to 29%, and the incidence of local failure is 0% to 10%. The limited data do not allow a valid comparison of the results of bolus versus continuous infusion 5-FU.
Whether preoperative combined modality therapy is more effective than preoperative radiation therapy is being addressed in an ongoing randomized trial from the
EORTC. This trial will determine if bolus 5-FU plus leucovorin, either preoperatively or postoperatively, or both, is superior to preoperative radiation therapy alone.
Eleven modern randomized trials of preoperative radiation therapy (without chemotherapy) for resectable rectal cancer are ongoing. 107 All use low to moderate doses
of radiation. The Second Medical Research Trial, which revealed a significant improvement in local control, distant control, and disease-free survival is excluded from
this discussion because patients had fixed or partially fixed disease. 193
Some of the trials show a decrease in local recurrence, and in five of the trials, this difference reached statistical significance. An analysis of the trials reported before
1988 suggests that a dose-response effect may favor preoperative radiation compared with postoperative radiation. 194 Although in some trials a subset analysis has
revealed a significant improvement in survival, 195 until the Swedish Rectal Cancer Trial 142 none had reported a survival advantage for the total treatment group.
Intensive Short Course Preoperative Radiation
The first randomized trial of preoperative radiation therapy to reveal a significant improvement in survival by intent to treat was the Swedish Rectal Cancer Trial. 142 A
total of 1168 patients with clinically resectable rectal cancer were randomized to 25 Gy in five fractions, followed by surgery 1 week later versus surgery alone. With a
median follow-up of 75 months, patients randomized to the preoperative arm had a significant decrease in local failure (12% vs. 27%, P <.001) and an improvement in
5-year survival (58% vs. 48%, P = .004). A separate analysis of 798 patients from Sweden who underwent surgery alone during the same period but were not enrolled
in the randomized trial revealed a 5-year survival rate (48%) and incidence of local failure (27%) identical to the surgical control arm, providing further validation of the
surgical control arm. 196
Although the results are intriguing, these data need to be confirmed by additional studies, because the other ten randomized trials of preoperative radiation therapy
have been negative. Even if future trials confirm this survival advantage, other equally important end points in rectal cancer need to be addressed. These include
acute toxicity, sphincter preservation and function, and quality of life. Radiation fraction sizes and techniques have a major impact on these end points.
Conventional radiation techniques include the use of multiple fields rather than simple anteroposterior fields, computerized treatment planning, and customized
blocking. These techniques allow the delivery of high doses of radiation while sparing the surrounding normal tissues, such as the small bowel. The simple
anteroposterior radiation techniques commonly used with the other intensive short course radiation therapy trials, such as the Uppsala trial, 190 are associated with an
increase in toxicity.
Although prior trials of intensive short course radiation have revealed a significant increase in mortality, 143 these differences were not reported in the Swedish Rectal
Cancer Trial. This may have been related to the use of multiple-field techniques. In the Swedish Trial, patients who received radiation with multiple-field techniques
had a significant decrease in postoperative mortality compared with those who received treatment with anteroposterior techniques (3% vs. 15%, P <.001). The
postoperative mortality with surgery alone was 12%. However, the incidence of postoperative morbidity for the total group of patients receiving radiation (regardless of
the technique) was still significantly higher when compared with the surgery control arm (44% vs. 34%, P = .001). This increase is consistent with other trials of
intensive short course preoperative radiation. 144
The absence of an increase in mortality in the Swedish trial may have been related to the fact that 91% of patients received radiation using the more sophisticated
multiple-field radiation techniques. In patients who receive conventional doses and techniques of preoperative combined modality therapy, the volume of small bowel
in the radiation field may be the dose-limiting organ with radiation therapy. 197
It should be noted that even when multiple-field techniques are used, data from the Stockholm I and II trials 143 report a significant increase in postoperative mortality
when patients receive intensive short course radiation compared with surgery alone (4% vs. 1%). These high complication rates with intensive short course radiation
have not been reported in patients who receive conventional doses and techniques of preoperative radiation. In the R90-01 trial, 52 patients were treated with
multiple-field techniques but with 3-Gy fractions. The anastomotic complication rate was 17%.
Another criticism of the intensive short course preoperative radiation trials is the lack of preoperative staging. Myerson et al. 198 treated 83 patients with this approach,
and only 20 had transrectal ultrasound staging.
In summary, even with suboptimal radiation techniques, the more recent randomized preoperative trials reveal a significant decrease in local failure. Although the
intensive short course (25 Gy) of preoperative radiation therapy is used in some European countries, it is not favored in North America because (1) it is unlikely that it
could be combined with adequate doses of systemic chemotherapy; (2) it is not designed to enhance sphincter preservation; and (3) regardless of the technique, it is
still associated with a significant increase in postoperative morbidity.

PREOPERATIVE AND POSTOPERATIVE RADIATION THERAPY

The approach of using both preoperative and postoperative therapy, also known as the sandwich technique, includes a short preoperative course of radiation (5 to 15
Gy), followed by surgery, and in patients with T3N1M0 disease, an additional 40 to 45 Gy postoperatively. This approach was designed to combine the theoretical
advantages of low-dose preoperative radiation therapy (decreased tumor seeding) while reserving postoperative radiation therapy for those patients with T3 or
N1–2M0 disease. The results of this approach have been reported by a number of investigators. 199
The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) presented the results of a randomized trial of 350 patients (87% with rectal cancer) who were randomized to 5 Gy
preoperative therapy versus surgery alone (RTOG 81-15). Patients with a pathologic stage T3 or N1–2 disease received a minimum of 45 Gy postoperatively. No
chemotherapy was delivered. With a minimum follow-up of 5 years, no differences were found in local failure, distant failure, or overall survival between the arms. A
retrospective analysis of 155 patients treated at the Institut Gustave Roussy also revealed no advantage of the sandwich technique compared with preoperative
radiation. 199 Because the randomized trials of postoperative combined modality therapy reveal a significant improvement in survival, the benefits of preoperative
therapy, including down-staging and sphincter preservation, require a standard dose rather than low to intermediate doses of radiation, and because the RTOG
randomized trial was negative, the sandwich approach should be abandoned.

SELECTED CONTROVERSIES IN THE ROLE OF PREOPERATIVE THERAPY
PREDICTION OF RESPONSE WITH TUMOR MARKERS
A variety of tumor markers have been identified that may help predict those tumors that will respond favorably to preoperative therapy ( Table 33.8-12). Based on the
experience that rapidly dividing cells are more sensitive to radiation, Willett et al. 200 analyzed the proliferative index in patients with locally advanced or unresectable
disease who received preoperative radiation therapy with or without 5-FU. 200 Tumors with a higher proliferation index had a higher response rate to preoperative
therapy and, after radiation, a corresponding reduction was noted in the proliferative index. 201 In a follow-up study, the authors reported that the addition of 5-FU to
preoperative radiation decreased three markers of proliferation [mitotic counts, Ki-67, and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA)] compared with radiation therapy
alone. 202

TABLE 33.8-12. Prognostic Predictors of Response to Preoperative Therapy in Rectal Cancer

Desai and colleagues 203 reported a higher incidence of recurrence but less down-staging in PCNA-positive rectal cancers. By multivariate analysis, Neoptolemos and
associates 204 showed that this index did not add to the prognostic value of the Dukes' staging system. The proliferative index may be useful in predicting the response
to preoperative therapy. However, given the conflicting data, additional experience is needed.
In the series reported by Rich 192 of 50 patients treated with preoperative combined modality therapy, tumors with a low spontaneous apoptosis index and positive
BCL-2 staining had lower rates of down-staging. In 167 patients treated with preoperative radiation, a significant increase in down-staging in well-differentiated
cancers was reported.205 Using residual tumor cell density rather than stage as a measure, this difference did not reach statistical significance. By univariate analysis,
patients with a pathologic complete response had a nonsignificant improvement in survival. Berger and associates 206 found that well-differentiated tumors had a
greater degree of down-staging compared with moderately or poorly differentiated tumors.
In conclusion, although some tumor markers may be predictive of response, the decision to use preoperative therapy should not be made solely on their presence or
absence. The development of tumor markers to predict response and prognosis remains an active area of investigation. 207
DOES THE RESPONSE OF THE PRIMARY TUMOR PREDICT OUTCOME?
Most studies suggest that sphincter preservation is increased with a corresponding increase in the response rate of the primary tumor. It is more controversial as to
whether the response rate predicts outcome and if the subset of patients who achieve a complete response still require radical surgery.
In an analysis of 88 patients with clinical T3–4 rectal cancers who received preoperative radiation with or without 5-FU plus leucovorin, a decrease was noted in local
failure (4% vs. 15%) and a significant increase was noted in 5-year cancer-specific survival (100% vs. 45%, P = .01) in patients who achieved a complete or
near-complete response (pathologic stage T0–2N0 disease) compared with those with less of a response (pathologic stage T3–4 or N1–2). 181 Ahmad and
colleagues 182 reported a 5-year actuarial local control rate of 96% and a 91% survival rate in the subset of 49 of a total of 315 patients with clinical T3–4 disease who
achieved a complete response after preoperative radiation.
Two studies have examined whether surgery is still necessary after a complete response, and the reported results have been conflicting. Habr-Gama and
colleagues 183 treated 118 patients with clinical T1–3 rectal cancers with preoperative 50.4-Gy radiation plus 5-FU plus leucovorin. Of the 36 patients who achieved a
biopsy-proven complete response, 30 did not undergo surgery. With a median follow-up of 36 months, 28 (93%) remained without evidence of disease. In a smaller
series from Rossi et al., 184 16 patients (13 with tethered disease) received similar preoperative treatment. If they achieved a biopsy-proven complete response, they
received an additional boost of 20 to 30 Gy with brachytherapy. Of the six patients (38%) who had a complete response, they remained without evidence of disease
for a median of only 11 months.
Although the results from Habr-Gama and colleagues 183 are intriguing, radical surgery after preoperative adjuvant therapy remains the standard of care. In the subset
of patients who are either medically inoperable or refuse radical surgery, local excision may be an alternative. 140

RADICAL SURGERY AND ADJUVANT POSTOPERATIVE COMBINED MODALITY THERAPY FOR RESECTABLE RECTAL CANCER
The anatomy and natural history of rectal adenocarcinoma require attention to issues of local and systemic tumor control. Despite many clinical trials, until 1990 there
was considerable controversy about whether adjuvant therapy improved the survival rate of patients undergoing surgical resection of their primary tumors. Even a
metaanalysis of the worldwide published experience, which demonstrated a statistically significant benefit for adjuvant chemotherapy in rectal cancer patients (38%
decrease in the mortality rate), was not completely convincing for many physicians. However, a Consensus Development Conference sponsored by the National
Institutes of Health in 1990 concluded that effective adjuvant therapy exists for stages II and III (Modified Astler Coller stages B2 and C or TNM stage T3 or N1–2)
rectal cancers. This conclusion was based on the clinical data derived over the preceding 20 years. Especially important were the results of some of the randomized
studies summarized in Table 33.8-13. Two of the studies included a surgery-only control group, and four studies used surgery plus postoperative pelvic irradiation as
the means for achieving definitive local control. 83,177,208

TABLE 33.8-13. Stage T3N1–2M0 Rectal Cancer: Selected Completed Adjuvant Trials

The majority of U.S. patients undergo surgery and, if they have stage T3 or N1–2 disease, receive postoperative adjuvant combined modality therapy. The most
compelling advantage to this approach is pathologic staging. Although advances in preoperative imaging techniques allow more accurate patient selection, it still
remains the most common approach. The primary disadvantages of the postoperative approach include an increased amount of small bowel in the radiation field 171
and a potentially hypoxic postsurgical bed, and if the patient has undergone an APR, the radiation field must be extended to include the perineal scar.
RESULTS OF POSTOPERATIVE THERAPY
After the publication of the randomized trials from the GITSG 83,177 and Mayo/NCCTG (79-47-51), which revealed a significant improvement in local control
(Mayo/NCCTG) and survival (GITSG and Mayo/NCCTG) with postoperative radiation plus bolus 5-FU plus methyl chloroethylcyclohexylnitrosourea (CCNU;
lomustine), the National Cancer Institute Consensus Conference concluded in 1990 that combined modality therapy was the standard postoperative adjuvant
treatment for patients with T3 or N1–2 disease. Although radiation therapy decreases local recurrence in one-half of patients, it is the addition of 5-FU–based
chemotherapy that further decreases local recurrence to approximately 10% to 12% and is the agent responsible for increasing overall 5-year survival rates by
approximately 10% to 15% (from 50% up to 60% to 65%).
With this increase in local control and survival with the addition of chemotherapy comes an increase in acute toxicity. The incidence of grade 3+ toxicity in the
combined modality arms of the GITSG and Mayo/NCCTG 79-47-51 trials was 25% to 50%. Furthermore, the percentage of patients finishing six cycles of
chemotherapy in those trials was only 65% and 50%, respectively. Miller and colleagues 209 reported that patients who received combined modality therapy versus
radiation therapy alone in the Mayo/NCCTG 79-47-51 trial had a higher rate of severe and life-threatening diarrhea, both during radiation (20% vs. 4%, P = .001) and
at any time during treatment (22% vs. 4%, P = .001). As previously discussed, the acute toxicity with preoperative combined modality therapy may be less than in the
postoperative setting.
The majority of combined modality therapy regimens include six cycles of 5-FU–based chemotherapy plus concurrent pelvic radiation. Six cycles of chemotherapy are
thought to be necessary to treat systemic disease. However, in a randomized trial from Norway, 144 patients were randomized to postoperative radiation plus bolus
5-FU (500 to 750 mg/m2 limited to days 1 and 2 of weeks 1, 2, and 3 of radiation) versus surgery alone. 210 Despite the fact that 5-FU was delivered with
radiosensitizing doses rather than doses adequate to treat systemic disease, this combined modality therapy regimen significantly decreased local recurrence (12%
vs. 30%, P = .01) and improved 5-year survival (64% vs. 50%, P = .05). Although these results with limited-dose 5-FU are encouraging, additional experience with this
approach is needed before modifying the standard recommendation of six cycles of systemic chemotherapy.
Retrospective data suggest that there may be subsets of patients with T3N0 disease who may not require adjuvant therapy and that there may be patients with stage I
disease who should be considered for adjuvant therapy. In a review of 117 patients with T3N0 disease, Willett et al. 211 identified a favorable subset of patients with
well- or moderately differentiated cancers invading less than 2 mm into the perirectal fat who, after surgery alone, had a 10-year actuarial local failure rate of only 5%
compared with 29% in T3N0 patients without those favorable features. In a separate analysis, they identified a subset of patients with stage I disease who have an
increased incidence of local failure after an APR. 212 These results must be confirmed in a randomized trial before a change in the standard of care of combined
modality therapy can be recommended.
Since the 1990 National Cancer Institute Consensus Conference, the focus of the intergroup postoperative trials has been the identification of the optimal
chemotherapeutic agents and their method of administration. In the follow-up trial to the 79-47-51 trial, the Mayo/NCCTG designed a four-arm trial (86-47-51) to
determine if methyl CCNU was necessary, as well as to compare the relative effectiveness of 5-FU when delivered as a bolus versus a continuous infusion. 128
Because methyl CCNU did not improve either local control or survival, it is no longer recommended for use in the adjuvant treatment of rectal cancer. 213
When compared with bolus 5-FU (with or without methyl CCNU), patients who received continuous infusion 5-FU (also known as prolonged venous infusion) had a
significant decrease in the overall rate of tumor relapse (37% vs. 47%, P = .01), distant metastasis (31% vs. 40%, P = .03), as well as an improvement in 4-year
survival (70% vs. 60%, P = .005). These data suggest that, when 5-FU is used as a single agent with radiation therapy, it is more effective as a continuous infusion
compared with a bolus.
Differences were also found in the individual acute toxicities of continuous infusion and bolus 5-FU regimens. For example, during the combined modality segment,
patients who received continuous infusion 5-FU had a significant increase in grade 3+ diarrhea (24% vs. 14%, P <.01), whereas they had a significant decrease in
grade 3+ leukopenia (2% vs. 11%, P <.01) compared with bolus 5-FU.
Building on the positive results of continuous infusion 5-FU reported in the Mayo/NCCTG 86-47-51 trial, the replacement postoperative Intergroup trial INT 0114 was
designed. The primary end point of this trial is to determine whether a benefit exists to continuous infusion 5-FU throughout the entire chemotherapy course (six
cycles) as compared with continuous infusion only during the combined modality segment (two cycles) and bolus 5-FU during the remaining four cycles. The control
arm is arm 4 (bolus 5-FU, leucovorin, and levamisole). The trial opened to accrual in 1993 and is actively accruing.
The NSABP R-01 three-arm trial of comparing the postoperative methyl-CCNU, vincristine (Oncovin), and 5-FU (MOF) regimen vs. radiation therapy vs. surgery alone
revealed a significant improvement in 5-year disease-free survival (42% vs. 30%, P = .006) and overall survival (53% vs. 43%, P = .05) with postoperative MOF
chemotherapy compared with surgery.178 The advantage in overall survival of the chemotherapy arm was most evident in males (60% vs. 37%) and in males younger
than 65 years of age (44% vs. 26%). In contrast, females who received chemotherapy experienced a lower survival (37% vs. 54%). It should be emphasized that the
trial was not stratified by gender. Additional studies revealed that overexpression of thymidylate synthase in the primary tumor was associated with a worse
prognosis214 and that such patients derived the greatest benefit from adjuvant MOF chemotherapy.
As a follow-up to the R-01 trial, the NSABP designed a four-arm trial (R-02) in which patients were randomized, depending on gender, to either MOF with or without
radiation or 5-FU plus leucovorin with or without radiation. 215 A preliminary analysis revealed a significant decrease in local failure in the two combined modality
therapy arms compared with the two that included chemotherapy alone (7% vs. 11%, P = .045).215 However, this decrease in local failure did not result in an increase
in median survival. Other results are pending.
The most recent Intergroup postoperative trial to report results was INT 0114 (see Table 33.8-13).216 This was a four-arm trial in which all patients received six cycles
of postoperative chemotherapy plus concurrent radiation therapy during cycles three and four. The goal of this trial was to determine if combinations of bolus
5-FU–based chemotherapy (5-FU plus low-dose leucovorin vs. 5-FU plus levamisole vs. 5-FU and leucovorin and levamisole) were superior to single-agent 5-FU.
With a median follow-up of 4 years, no significant differences were found between the four arms (5-FU alone, 5-FU plus leucovorin, 5-FU plus levamisole, or 5-FU
and leucovorin and levamisole) in terms of local failure (12%, 9%, 13%, 9%, respectively) or 3-year survival (78%, 80%, 79%, 79%, respectively). 216 Although the total
incidence of acute grade 3+ toxicity was similar for the four arms (76%, 72%, 70%, 75%, respectively), differences were noted between the regimens. For example,
the 5-FU alone arm had a higher incidence of hematologic toxicity, whereas the 5-FU plus levamisole arm had a higher incidence of diarrhea. A subset analysis

revealed that, in all four arms, women had a significantly greater incidence of acute grade 3+ toxicity compared with men. The reason for this difference in toxicity by
gender is unclear.
The choice of which postoperative adjuvant regimen to recommend in the nonprotocol setting remains controversial. Given that the Mayo/NCCTG 86-47-51 trial
revealed that continuous infusion 5-FU is more effective than bolus 5-FU and because modulation with leucovorin, levamisole, or both did not improve the results of
bolus 5-FU alone in the INT 0114 trial, one could argue that continuous infusion 5-FU is the regimen of choice. INT 0114 directly compares continuous infusion 5-FU
with bolus 5-FU, leucovorin, and levamisole; however, the results are not yet available. Therefore, for patients not enrolled in a clinical trial, acceptable regimens at
this time include either continuous infusion 5-FU (225 mg/m 2 days 1 to 7, or 300 mg/m2 days 1 to 5) or bolus 5-FU plus modulation with leucovorin (5-FU, 325 mg/m 2,
plus leucovorin, 20 mg/m 2 bolus daily × 5), levamisole, or both. However, because the colon adjuvant trials reveal that six cycles of 5-FU plus leucovorin is as
effective as 12 cycles of 5-FU plus levamisole, 217,218 most physicians no longer use levamisole in the adjuvant treatment of either colon or rectal cancer. When a 7-day
continuous infusion of 5-FU is combined with oral leucovorin and pelvic radiation, the recommended 5-FU dose is decreased to 150 mg/m 2.219 In summary, bolus or
continuous infusion 5-FU, when combined with radiation in the treatment of rectal cancer, probably have equal efficacy, and the choice of a regimen should be based
on factors such as their acute toxicity profiles and patient compliance.

FUTURE OF ADJUVANT THERAPY
Given the increased morbidity and marginal benefits seen in the randomized trials of low- or moderate-dose adjuvant preoperative radiation, interest in treating
resectable rectal cancer with preoperative therapy was limited until the 1990s. The primary focus of clinical research in the adjuvant treatment of resectable rectal
cancer had involved the use of postoperative combined modality therapy. However, there are three reasons why the postoperative approach may not be the most
innovative one: increased toxicity, less chance of sphincter preservation, and lower chemotherapy doses.
Despite the survival advantage of postoperative combined modality therapy, it is associated with substantial toxicity. For example, the incidence of grade 3+ toxicity in
patients who received combined modality therapy in the GITSG trial was 26% for hematologic toxicity and 35% nonhematologic toxicity. 83,177 In the Mayo
Clinic/NCCTG 79-47-51 trial, the most significant grade 3+ toxicities included diarrhea (41%) and leukopenia (33%). The only grade 3+ toxicity in patients receiving
radiation therapy alone was diarrhea (5%). In the GITSG and Mayo Clinic/NCCTG trials, 35% to 50% of the patients never finished all the planned cycles of
chemotherapy. The total incidence of grade 3+ toxicity in the INT 0114 trial of postoperative radiation with 5-FU with or without leucovorin and/or levamisole
modulation was 72% to 76%.216
Preoperative radiation therapy increases the chance of sphincter preservation. By down-staging the primary tumor, preoperative irradiation allows the surgeon to
change the planned operation from an APR to a LAR and CAA. 107
Higher initial doses of chemotherapy can be delivered with preoperative than with postoperative irradiation. This difference was observed in comparing two phase I
trials of combined bolus 5-FU, high-dose leucovorin, and radiation therapy (50.4 Gy) reported from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. 220 Patients with
unresectable disease received preoperative radiation therapy and two cycles of concurrent 5-FU plus leucovorin followed by surgery and postoperative 5-FU plus
leucovorin. Patients with resectable disease received the same chemotherapy and radiation therapy in the postoperative setting. The dose of radiation and leucovorin
remained constant while the 5-FU dose was escalated. The maximal tolerated dose of 5-FU was higher with preoperative versus postoperative therapy.
Based on its toxicity, increased chance of sphincter preservation, and higher chemotherapy doses, preoperative combined modality therapy, if delivered with
appropriate doses and techniques, is an attractive approach and is a standard of care for clinical T3 disease. The NSABP R-03 and the German CAO/ARO/AIO 94
randomized trials will help determine the relative effectiveness of preoperative versus postoperative combined modality therapy.

COMPLICATIONS OF PELVIC RADIATION THERAPY
ETIOLOGY AND MANIFESTATIONS
As seen with other cancer therapies, pelvic radiation is associated with acute and long-term toxicity. Complications of pelvic radiation therapy are a function of the
volume of the radiation field, overall treatment time, fraction size, radiation energy, total dose, and technique. 221 Large field sizes, a short overall treatment time, large
fraction sizes (more than 2 Gy per fraction), orthovoltage or low-energy megavoltage radiation (cobalt 60), doses of more than 50.4 Gy when small bowel is in the
high-dose field, the use of a two-field [anteroposterior (AP)/posteroposterior (PA)] technique, treatment of only one field per day, the use of a direct perineal boost
field, and the lack of computerized dosimetry all contribute to an increased incidence of radiation complications.
Risk factors unrelated to radiation techniques include patients with pelvic inflammatory disease, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, inflammatory bowel disease, or
obesity, and patients who have had prior pelvic surgery or receive concurrent chemotherapy.
Most studies describing the tolerance of patients with inflammatory bowel disease have been limited to case reports. 222 Furthermore, most do not indicate whether the
disease is active, requiring antiinflammatory therapy, or if the patient had undergone a total proctocolectomy. 223 This factor is important because the issue of toxicity
may not be relevant for patients with ulcerative colitis who have undergone a total proctocolectomy. The most comprehensive analysis of the tolerance of patients with
inflammatory bowel disease was reported by Willett and colleagues. 224 They examined the records of 28 patients (17 colorectal patients and 11 who received
concurrent 5-FU) who were treated with 40 Gy or more of pelvic or abdominal radiation therapy. Of the 28 patients, 18 had ulcerative colitis and 10 had Crohn's
disease. Overall, 43% of patients had active disease requiring antiinflammatory therapy.
The total incidence of severe toxicity was 46%, which caused 22% of patients to stop radiation and 29% to undergo surgery for complications. Acute toxicity was
similar in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease; however, late toxicity was limited to patients with ulcerative colitis. In the 16 patients treated with specialized radiation
techniques to reduce total dose to or exclude the small and large bowel from the radiation field, the 5-year actuarial incidence of late toxicity was 23% compared with
73% in the 12 patients who were not treated with these specialized techniques ( P = .02). Unless the large bowel can be excluded from the radiation field in patients
with ulcerative colitis and the large and small bowel is excluded from the radiation field in patients with Crohn's disease, the use of radiation in patients with
inflammatory bowel disease is contraindicated.
Radiation complications also are increased in patients with collagen vascular disease. However, a report of six patients with systemic lupus erythematosus who
received chest wall radiation for breast cancer or Hodgkin's disease suggests that it is not an absolute contraindication to radiation therapy. 225
Acute (short-term) and long-term complications of pelvic radiation occur with distinct clinical courses and pathologic manifestations. 226 The most frequent serious
complication of pelvic radiation is small bowel damage. In animals, transforming growth factor-b and mast cell hyperplasia may be involved in the molecular
pathogenesis of radiation enteritis. 227
ACUTE COMPLICATIONS
Acute complications occur in all patients during treatment and include thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, dysuria, and effects on the small bowel (diarrhea, abdominal
cramping, and increased bowel frequency) and large bowel (acute proctitis, tenesmus, bloody or mucus discharge). Proctoscopic examination of the rectal mucosa
normally reveals an inflamed, edematous, and friable rectal mucosa consistent with acute radiation proctitis and should be discouraged while patients are receiving
radiation therapy. These symptoms usually are transient and resolve within a few weeks after the completion of radiation therapy. They appear to be a function of the
dose rate and fraction size more than of the total dose of radiation. The mechanism is primarily the depletion of actively dividing cells in what is otherwise a stable cell
renewal system. In the small bowel, loss of the mucosal cells results in malabsorption of various substances, including fat, carbohydrate, protein, and bile salts. The
management of bowel-related complications usually involves the use of diphenoxylate, narcotics, or both. The bowel mucosa usually recovers in 1 to 3 months after
the completion of radiation.
Dysuria occurs in 10% to 15% of patients and is usually controlled with phenazopyridine hydrochloride (Pyridium). Skin erythema most commonly occurs in skin folds
and is treated prophylactically with nonmetallic skin creams. If grade 3+ toxicity develops, a 3-day to 1-week treatment break commonly is required.

Although concurrent chemotherapy significantly improves the local control rate of radiation therapy, it increases the acute toxicity. The incidence of grade 3+ toxicity
with postoperative radiation therapy is approximately 5%, whereas in some reports it is increased to as high as 25% to 50% in patients receiving postoperative
combined modality therapy.228 In the INT 0114 trial of postoperative combined modality therapy using 50.4 Gy plus bolus 5-FU with or without leucovorin and/or
levamisole, the total incidence of grade 3+ toxicity was 72% to 76%. 216 An analysis of 204 patients who received the postoperative combined modality therapy arm of
the Mayo/NCCTG 79-47-51 trial showed the incidence of acute grade 3+ diarrhea was 22% compared with 4% who received radiation therapy alone ( P = .001).229
The acute toxicity of preoperative combined modality therapy appears to be lower than postoperative combined modality therapy. 107,171,230
LONG-TERM COMPLICATIONS
Long-term complications occur less frequently but are substantially more serious. The initial symptoms commonly occur 6 to 18 months after completion of radiation.
Complications may include persistent diarrhea, increased bowel frequency, proctitis, small bowel obstruction, perineal and scrotal tenderness, delayed perineal
wound healing, urinary incontinence, and bladder atrophy and bleeding. Injury to the vascular and supporting stromal tissues of the bowel is the presumed
pathophysiology. Schuster et al. 231 found that bile acid malabsorption due to ileal dysfunction was not an inevitable late complication of pelvic radiation, and it is not
the major determinant in the pathophysiology of chronic radiation-induced diarrhea.
The most common long-term complications are due to small bowel damage and include enteritis, adhesions, and small bowel obstruction requiring surgical
intervention. 221,232 At the MGH, 165 patients received 45 Gy postoperatively to the pelvis with a boost to the tumor bed to 50.4 Gy. 172 The incidence of long-term mild
to moderate complications was 8% [2% proctitis, 2% perineal and scrotal tenderness (resolved), 1% delayed perineal wound healing, 1% small bowel obstruction
(resolved), 1% urinary incontinence, and 1% bladder atrophy and bleeding (resolved)]. The incidence of small bowel obstruction requiring surgery was similar in the
patients who received radiation (6%) compared to a historical group of patients who were treated with surgery alone (5%).
A retrospective review of 304 patients treated with a median of 50.84 Gy of postoperative pelvic radiation at the Mayo Clinic was presented by Miller et al. 232 The
median follow-up was 5.3 years; 65% of patients received chemotherapy; and the small bowel was excluded after 50.4 Gy. The crude incidence of complications
included 4% acute enteritis, 6% chronic enteritis, and 12% chronic proctitis. The actuarial incidence of complications at 5 years included 14% proctitis and 7%
enteritis. The mean time from diagnosis to complications was 2.1 years. By multivariate analysis, the two independent factors associated with an increase in
complications were increasing age (median age, 67 years vs. 62 years) and radiation dose (median, 54 Gy vs. 50.4 Gy).
Other long-term complications, such as pelvic fractures 233,234 and lumbosacral plexopathy, 235,236 are very rare occurrences and may be caused by factors unrelated to
the radiation, such as osteoporosis or disease progression.
Overall, the incidence of small bowel obstruction requiring surgery after postoperative pelvic radiation for rectal cancer is 4% to 12% in most series and as high as
17.5% in earlier series. 172,174,175 In patients treated with surgery only, 2% to 15% may develop similar complications. Small bowel–related late complications are
directly proportional to the volume of small bowel in the radiation field. Late radiation proctitis, similar to small bowel injury, is related to the treatment volume and
dose of radiation.
SPHINCTER FUNCTION
Radiation therapy can adversely effect sphincter function; however, most series are retrospective, nonrandomized, nonblinded, retrospective telephone surveys.
Furthermore, sphincter function is affected by other factors, such as the type of operation, the functional scale used, and whether patients received conventional
radiation techniques as opposed to intensive short course radiation.
Using a retrospective telephone survey, Kollmorgen et al. 153 from the Mayo Clinic assessed the impact of postoperative combined modality therapy delivered with
conventional doses and techniques of pelvic radiation and 5-FU–based chemotherapy on bowel function and compared it with a matched group of patients who
underwent surgery alone. The 41 patients who received combined modality therapy had a significant increase in the number of bowel movements, clustering of bowel
movements, nighttime bowel movements, occasional incontinence, urgency, and wore pads more often compared with 59 patients who underwent surgery alone.
Sphincter function after a CAA was retrospectively assessed by Paty and associates. 154 The 40 patients who received pre- or postoperative radiation therapy, or both
(with or without chemotherapy) after a CAA had increased stool frequency and difficulty with evacuation compared with 41 patients who underwent surgery alone.
Unconventional radiation doses and techniques were used in 43% of patients.
In contrast with the previous studies, Birnbaum and colleagues have prospectively examined the short-term 155 and long-term156 impact of preoperative radiation
therapy on sphincter function. Patients received conventional doses and techniques of radiation and were assessed objectively by anal manometry with or without
transrectal ultrasound. In the 20 patients assessed for short-term and ten patients assessed for long-term results, radiation therapy had a minimal effect on sphincter
function. As one would predict, patients who receive preoperative radiation with intensive short course radiation have inferior function results. Patients who received 5
Gy × 5 in the Swedish Rectal Cancer Trial had a significant increase in bowel frequency, incontinence, urgency, and emptying difficulty. 237 This impaired the patient's
social life 30% of the time compared with 10% of the time with surgery alone. In another analysis of patients who received 5.1 Gy per fraction, a significant increase in
bowel frequency was found.238
SEXUAL FUNCTION
In addition to the previously discussed variables that can effect assessment of sphincter function, series examining sexual function using subjective methods have the
additional shortcoming of bias due to the sensitive nature of the questions. Answers to such questions are subjective and may be influenced by the interaction
between the patient and interviewer. Age and psychological factors, such as depression and anxiety about the diagnosis of cancer, can further influence the results.
Furthermore, it should be emphasized that both the surgery required for an APR and the psychological impact of a permanent colostomy can have an adverse impact
on sexual function.
A retrospective analysis of sexual function in men and women by Havenga and associates 3 found that radiation therapy with or without 5-FU had a negative impact
after total mesorectal excision for rectal cancer. In a review of 18 males with a median age of 70 who received 52.5 Gy with an unconventional fraction size of 2.63 Gy
per fraction for bladder cancer, 56% were able to attain an erection sufficient for intercourse compared with 72% of patients in the 6 months before the start of
radiation therapy. 239 Because the patients did not undergo surgery, receive hormonal therapy, or have prostate cancer, this study is a better indication of the impact of
radiation therapy alone.
In conclusion, although radiation can adversely affect sphincter and sexual function, the ultimate functional results are a result of a combination of therapies, including
radiation, surgery, and chemotherapy. The risk of dysfunction must be evaluated in the context of the benefit of adjuvant therapy, which includes decreased local
failure, improved survival, and, in selected patients, the ability to perform sphincter-preserving surgery as an alternative to an APR.

MINIMIZING TOXICITY OF RADIATION THERAPY
RADIATION TREATMENT TECHNIQUES
Small bowel–related complications are directly proportional to the volume of small bowel in the radiation field. 197 In patients receiving combined modality therapy, the
volume of small bowel in the radiation field limits the ability to escalate the dose of 5-FU. 171 A number of simple radiotherapeutic techniques are available to decrease
radiation-related small bowel toxicity ( Table 33.8-14).First, small bowel contrast allows identification of the location of the small bowel. The use of multiple-field
techniques (preferably a three-field technique) permits a larger volume of small bowel to be blocked from the pelvis compared with an AP/PA (two-field) technique. In
one series, the small bowel obstruction rate in patients with rectal cancer who received pelvic radiation therapy was higher with a single-field (21%) as compared with
a multiple-field technique (9%). 240 The small bowel obstruction rate increased to 30% when an extended-field radiation was used.

TABLE 33.8-14. Techniques to Minimize the Acute Toxicity to the Small Bowel from Radiation Therapy

The treatment of all fields each day results in a lower integral dose and more homogeneous dose distribution. A study by Sigmon et al. 241 suggests that patients with
endometrial or rectal cancer who receive pelvic radiation by a continuous course as compared with a planned split course have fewer chronic bowel complications.
The use of lateral fields for the boost as well as positioning the patient in the prone position further decreases the volume of small bowel in the lateral radiation fields.
The treatment should be designed with the use of computerized radiation dosimetry and be delivered by high-energy linear accelerators, which, by nature of their
depth dose characteristics, deliver a higher dose to the tumor volume while sparing the surrounding normal structures. When the perineal scar must be treated, it
should be included in the pelvic radiation fields. The use of a separate perineal field is associated with an increased risk of overlap of the radiation fields and should
be avoided.
Even in expert hands, daily variations occur in patient positioning for pelvic radiation ranging from 3.4 to 9.0 mm. 242,243 Using electronic portal imaging, Tinger et al. 244
found that errors exceeding 5 mm or 10 mm are significantly more frequent intertreatment (40% to 51%, and 3% to 23%, respectively) compared with intratreatment
(1% to 7%, and 0%, respectively). In national clinical trials, pretreatment quality control review can decrease the error rate in radiation field design. 245
The advantage to the combination of a multiple-field technique, high-energy photons, and computerized dosimetry is illustrated in Figure 33.8-6. With this
combination, a homogenous dose distribution is maintained throughout the target volume such that prescribing to the 98% isodose line covers the volume at risk and
gives only 35% to 55% of the dose to the small bowel. In contrast, when the same patient receives 60Co with an AP/PA arrangement, an inhomogeneous dose
distribution is provided throughout the target volume such that the dose must be prescribed to the 90% isodose line to cover the volume at risk, thereby giving 110%
to 130% of the dose to the small bowel. Furthermore, if computerized treatment planning was not performed and the dose was prescribed to the midplane, parts of the
tumor volume would be underdosed by 10%.

FIGURE 33.8-6. Small bowel sparing using high-energy linear accelerator radiation combined with prone three-field treatment. AP/PA,
anteroposterior/posteroanterior.

After pelvic surgery, the small bowel commonly fills the pelvis. Adhesions can form, resulting in fixed loops of small bowel in the radiation fields. In this situation,
despite treatment of the patient in the prone position, the use of multiple-field techniques may be of limited value ( Fig. 33.8-7). In contrast, when radiation therapy is
delivered preoperatively to a patient who has not undergone prior pelvic surgery, the small bowel is usually mobile. As illustrated in Figure 33.8-8, when no small
bowel fixation is present, treatment in the prone position was successful in excluding most of the small bowel from the posteroanterior field and completely from the
lateral fields.

FIGURE 33.8-7. Radiation treatment fields in a patient in the prone position receiving postoperative radiation therapy using a three-field technique. Despite the prone
position, the small bowel (arrows) remains fixed in the pelvis, and it cannot be excluded from the lateral fields.

FIGURE 33.8-8. Radiation treatment fields in a patient in the prone position receiving preoperative radiation therapy using a three-field technique. The small bowel

(arrows) is excluded from the lateral fields.

Figure 33.8-8 also illustrates the technique of placing a wire on the perineum to allow blocking in the lateral preoperative radiation fields. This technique not only
decreases acute grade 3+ skin toxicity (reported as high as 94% by Rossi et al. 184 when this techniques is not used) but decreases the high incidence of perineal
wound sepsis in those patients who have an APR (reported as high as 33% in the Uppsala trial 190). A more comprehensive review of techniques for the delivery of
pelvic radiation has been published. 221
Clinical series document the importance of field size and technique in minimizing the toxicity of pelvic radiation. In the series from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
62 patients received postoperative pelvic radiation (40 to 50 Gy plus 6- to 10-Gy boost). 174,175 Some patients received the radiation by a combination of AP/PA and a
boost with opposed laterals or a direct perineal field. In selected patients, the superior border of the field was at L2-3 and the incidence of small bowel obstruction
requiring surgery was 17.5%. When the superior border of the field was decreased to L5, the incidence of small bowel obstruction decreased to 10% to 12%. The
incidence of small bowel obstruction after surgery alone was 5%.
Various physical maneuvers to exclude the small bowel from the pelvis have been examined. Gallagher et al. 246 determined the volume, distribution, and mobility of
small bowel in the pelvis after a variety of maneuvers. Regardless of the prior surgical history, a significant decrease was seen in the average small bowel volume
when the patients were treated in the prone position with the combination of abdominal wall compression and bladder distention compared with the supine position.
Use of a four-field technique further decreased the volume of small bowel. Treatment in the prone position without abdominal wall compression was not consistently
effective in displacing small bowel and, in some patients (most commonly obese), the volume of small bowel increased.
Caspers and Hop (1983) performed a similar study in 50 patients who received pelvic radiation for bladder or prostate cancer. The use of the Trendelenburg or
inclined procubitis positions were helpful in excluding small bowel from the pelvic radiation fields, especially for obese patients. Although the prone position was less
effective than these inclined positions, it was superior to the supine position.
SMALL BOWEL CONTRAST
Small bowel contrast is essential to determine the position of small bowel during radiation simulation. It should be used routinely in patients receiving curative pelvic
radiation therapy. Herbert et al. 247 found that, in patients with endometrial and rectal cancer who had small bowel contrast used at the time of radiation simulation,
there was a change in the treatment field as well as a lower incidence of overall and chronic complications. 247 A multivariate analysis revealed that both the use of
small bowel contrast and a lower superior border of the treatment field were predictive for decreased radiation toxicity. Visualization of small bowel contributed to an
adjustment in the radiation field, resulting in a decrease in the incidence of toxicity.
IMMOBILIZATION MOLDS AND TISSUE EXPANDERS
The effectiveness of custom bowel immobilization molds (belly board) in 30 patients with pelvic malignancies has been analyzed by Shanahan et al. 248 Using a
CT-based volumetric analysis, the combination of the prone position and immobilization molds decreased the mean small bowel volume in the radiation field by 66%
compared with patients treated in the supine position without the immobilization mold. Fu and colleagues 249 reported that, when patients with pelvic malignancies were
treated in the prone position, a belly board reduced the volume of small bowel by 28% to 50%, depending on the type of prior surgery. A similar benefit using dose
volume histogram analysis in 12 patients was reported by Das and associates. 250
Pelvic tissue expanders are also effective in decreasing the volume of small bowel in the radiation field. Herbert and colleagues 251 reported a significant decrease in
small bowel volume in 14 patients who had a tissue expander compared with 63 who did not (25 cm 3 vs. 239 cm3, P <.0001). The decrease of small bowel volume was
associated with a decrease in acute toxicity. Hoffman and colleagues 252 recommended their use when native tissue is not available for small bowel exclusion. To
examine the effectiveness of a silicone rubber–molded balloon during pelvis radiation, Sezeur et al. 253 measured stool weight, steatorrhea, and a 1-antitrypsine
clearance. The tests remained stable, suggesting that the tissue expander was effective throughout the course of radiation.
It must be emphasized that any physical maneuver beyond the use of the prone position may be associated with patient discomfort, thereby leading to increased
movement and daily set-up errors. For example, Brierley and associates 254 analyzed the variation of small bowel volume in the pelvis before and during adjuvant
pelvic radiation therapy for rectal cancer. They found that the displacement of small bowel from the posterior pelvis by bladder distention was not reliably maintained
throughout the treatment course. Therefore, the previously described physical maneuvers and techniques, such as abdominal wall compression and belly boards, may
not be beneficial. The use of such techniques should be tailored to the individual patient.
Likewise, uncertainties exist with the use of small bowel contrast. Gallagher et al. 246 reported a 20% average increase in small bowel volume after full doses of pelvic
radiation when patients were reexamined after the completion of treatment.
THREE-DIMENSIONAL RADIATION TREATMENT PLANNING
Innovative techniques using three-dimensional treatment planning are being investigated. In a report from the Photon Treatment Planning Collaborative Working
Group, it was found that the most important contribution of three-dimensional treatment planning in rectal cancer was the ability to plan and localize the target and
normal tissues at all levels of the treatment volume rather than using the traditional method of planning with only a single central transverse slice and simulation films.
A slight improvement also was noted when no constraints were placed on the type of plans (i.e., when non-coplanar beams were used). A randomized trial of
conformal versus conventional radiation therapy in 266 evaluable patients with pelvic malignancies has been reported by Tait et al. 255 Although a decrease in the
volume of normal tissue volumes in the radiation field was seen with conformal versus conventional treatment (689 cm 3 vs. 792 cm3), no difference was noted in the
level of symptoms or in medication prescribed.
Investigators in Uppsala examined six patients with rectal cancer who underwent both proton and conventional photon treatment planning. 256 By dose-volume
histogram analysis, protons offered only a marginal benefit in sparing normal tissues.
RADIATION THERAPY AND SURGERY SEQUENCING
The major disadvantage of delivering radiation therapy in the postoperative setting is the increased incidence of fixed loops of small bowel in the pelvis. The potential
merits of the use of preoperative compared with postoperative radiation therapy have been previously discussed. From the issue of toxicity, the primary advantages of
preoperative radiation are decreased volume of small bowel in the radiation field and the absence of a perineal scar to be treated.
Some of the randomized trials of preoperative radiation therapy report an increased incidence of complications compared with surgery alone. However, as previously
discussed, the radiation therapy in these trials was commonly delivered with inferior techniques, such as AP/PA 60Co using large fields and fraction sizes. These
techniques all contribute to an increased incidence of radiation complications. For example, in the Stockholm Rectal Cancer Study Group, the radiation therapy was
delivered in 5-Gy fractions, the superior border was at L2, the majority of patients received 60Co with an AP/PA technique, and surgery was within 7 days of the
completion of radiation. 257 In contrast, the nonrandomized trials of preoperative radiation therapy that use higher doses with smaller fraction and field sizes reveal that,
when preoperative radiation therapy is delivered with careful radiation techniques, the toxicity is minimized.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
Surgical techniques to minimize small bowel injury include reperitonealization of the pelvic floor 258; construction of an omental pedicle flap 259; retroversion of the
uterus; placement of clips in the high-risk areas to better define the tumor volume; and the use of absorbable mesh, which temporarily removes the small bowel from
the pelvis. 260 Rodier and colleagues 261 reported their experience with polyglycolic acid mesh in 60 patients. The mesh was effective in excluding the small bowel from
the pelvis in 93% of patients with various pelvic malignancies. It was completely resorbed in 3 to 5 months, and the complication rate related to the mesh was 8%.

Thom and associates260 used a similar approach in 52 patients. They noted a prolonged postoperative ileus (median, 8.5 days), but no other unusual postoperative
compilations. In 20 patients who underwent placement of mesh, Beitler et al. 262 reported postoperative complications possibly related to mesh in five patients and a
mild postoperative ileus in 17. Because pelvic radiation therapy does not begin until approximately 4 months postoperatively, the mesh may be resorbed by that time.
DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS AND RADIOPROTECTORS
The benefit of dietary supplements and radioprotectors is controversial. Five randomized trials have examined the efficacy of various compounds to decrease bowel
toxicity. These trials have included such compounds as butyric acid to decrease chronic radiation proctitis, 263 sucralfate enemas to decrease acute radiation
proctitis, 264 olsalazine to decrease acute enteritis, and mesalazine (5-aminosalicylic acid) to decrease acute radiation enteritis. 265 All of these randomized trials have
been negative. In another randomized trial of 73 patients with pelvic malignancies, the addition of 5-aminosalicylic acid increased rather than decreased acute
radiation toxicity. Diarrhea was more frequent in the radiation plus 5-aminosalicylic acid arm compared with radiation alone (91% vs. 74%, P = .07).
In a phase II trial using an elemental diet, Craighead and Young 266 reported a decrease in acute enteritis in 17 patients with gynecologic cancer, but only 77% of the
patients complied with the diet. McArdle et al. (1986) compared the results of an elemental diet in 24 patients with bladder cancer who received 4 Gy × 5 before
cystectomy with a similar historical group of 32 patients who received a regular diet or total parenteral nutrition with the same therapy. A significant decrease was
reported in the incidence and severity of diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, abdominal cramps, and the time to the recovery of small bowel function in the patients who
received the elemental diet. The mechanism of protection of the mucosa by an elemental diet is unclear. Theories include a reduction of pancreaticobiliary secretion,
the removal of abrasive bulk in the chyme, and a decrease in the rate of crypt cell turnover.
In a phase I/II study of 13 patients with chronic radiation proctitis, oral sodium pentosanpolysulfate resulted in a complete resolution of symptoms in 82% and a partial
resolution in 9%. Although patients receiving pelvic radiation have reduced lactose absorption, the available data suggest that lactose-restricted diets do not prevent
radiation-induced diarrhea. Stryker and Bartholomew 267 examined 64 patients undergoing pelvic radiation for various malignancies who were randomized to a regular
diet, a regular diet including lactase enzyme, or a lactose-restricted diet. No significant differences were found in stool frequency or diphenoxylate usage among the
three dietary groups.
Liu et al. 268 performed a randomized trial of pelvic radiation therapy (2.25 Gy per fraction to 45 Gy) with or without the radioprotector WR-2721 in patients with
inoperable or unresectable rectal cancer. The incidence of RTOG long-term grade 3+ gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and skin toxicity was 3% in the radiation therapy
alone arm compared with 0% in the radiation therapy plus WR-2721 arm. A separate trial by Montana and colleagues (1992) showed no benefit with a topical
application of WR-2721 to the rectal mucosa. Based on these data, WR-2721 does not offer radioprotection in patients with rectal cancer who receive pelvic radiation
therapy.
Patients with gynecologic malignancies who receive pelvic radiation therapy may have a lower long-term incidence of severe toxicity with increased caffeine
consumption. One study suggested that sucralfate may decrease acute and long-term small bowel toxicity in patients receiving pelvic radiation therapy for prostate
and bladder cancer.
In summary, all cancer therapies have associated toxicities. It must be emphasized that all patients receiving pelvic radiation therapy have acute treatment-related
toxicity, and despite the use of careful treatment techniques, approximately 1% have severe long-term toxicity. These toxicities must be examined in perspective,
because the benefits of radiation therapy include significantly decreasing local failure and, in the preoperative setting, sphincter preservation. This is all the more
reason to pay careful attention to techniques, which help to decrease the acute and long-term toxicities of pelvic radiation.
The exclusion of small bowel from the treatment field is the most important factor in decreasing the toxicity. With the use of careful radiation techniques as well as
physical and surgical methods, the toxicity can be reduced to an acceptable level. In patients who have not had prior pelvic surgery, preoperative radiation therapy
(when delivered with conventional fractionation and multiple-field techniques) may have less toxicity compared with postoperative radiation therapy. 220 The results of
the ongoing randomized trials of preoperative versus postoperative combined modality therapy for resectable rectal cancer (NSABP R-03 and CAO/ARO/AIO 94) will
provide a more definitive answer. Unless a contraindication exists, the most simple techniques to decrease radiation toxicity, such as the use of small bowel contrast,
multiple-field techniques, high-energy linear accelerators, custom blocks, avoiding a direct perineal boost, and treatment in the prone position, should be part of the
standard treatment of patients receiving curative adjuvant radiation therapy.

TREATMENT OF LOCALLY ADVANCED AND UNRESECTABLE RECTAL CANCER
A significant improvement in local control and survival can be achieved for patients with primary resectable (T3) rectal cancer with the use of combined modality
therapy. 83,177 It is more difficult to obtain these results for locally advanced or unresectable cancers. For locally advanced or unresectable rectal cancers, collectively
defined as T4 disease, no uniform determination of resectability has been established. Depending on the series, T4 disease can vary from a tethered or “marginally
resectable” cancer to a fixed cancer with adherence or direct invasion of adjacent organs or vital structures. This definition has prognostic implications, because
patients with gross invasion of tumor into vital pelvic structures may be approached in a palliative rather than a curative fashion. The definition of resectability also
depends on whether the assessment is made by radiographic criteria, a clinical office examination, examination under anesthesia, or at the time of surgery. For
example, tumors thought to be unresectable at the time of clinical or radiographic examination may be found to be more mobile when the patient is relaxed under
anesthesia. Prognostic differences also exist between primary and recurrent tumors, and many series do not report the results separately. The heterogeneity of the
disease and absence of a uniform definition of resectability may explain some of the variation in results seen among the series.
TUMORS AMENABLE TO POTENTIALLY CURATIVE RADICAL SURGERY
Selected patients with primary unresectable disease may be cured with radical surgery, such as a pelvic exenteration. These include tumors invading the prostate, the
base of the bladder, or the uterus, where the disease can be resected en bloc with negative margins.
MULTIVISCERAL RESECTION FOR LOCALLY ADVANCED RECTAL CANCER
Approximately 6% to 10% of rectal cancers are locally advanced and require extensive surgery for complete tumor extirpation. Pelvic exenteration involving en bloc
removal of the rectum, bladder, distal ureters, and reproductive organs can be required to obtain negative margins of resection. 146 A number of studies have
demonstrated 5-year survival rates ranging from 33% to 50% for these selected patients with locally advanced rectal cancer. Despite the ability to achieve long-range
survival rates in selected patients, the operation remains a formidable one, with significant morbidity and a mortality of up to 6%. 60 Patients who undergo such
resections for primary tumors have better survival rates than those with recurrence.
In a report by Meterissian et al., 35 a series of 40 patients undergoing pelvic exenteration for rectal carcinoma obtained tumor-free margins. The 5-year overall survival
rate was 49% with a median survival of 56 months. Adjuvant chemoradiation appeared to provide a reduction in risk of recurrence. In the series, five patients
developed local failure. Comparable results have been recorded by Lopez et al. (1987), Kraybill et al. (1988), and Boey et al. (1982). Long-term local control is
obtained in approximately 70% of the patients who undergo resection with tumor-free margins. The results of such surgery cannot be separated from the benefits of
adjuvant chemoradiation in this high-risk population.
Improved results from surgical procedures for rectal cancer requiring multivisceral resection have occurred in more recent years. 61 This finding may be related to
improvements in perioperative care, patient selection, and surgical techniques. Of major importance in the management of such patients, who are often heavily
radiated, is the use of vascularized tissue flaps to accomplish healing of pelvic and perineal wounds. 62
Physical examination, CT scan, MRI, and cystoscopy all play a role in staging patients with locally advanced rectal cancer. Involvement of the sciatic notch indicated
by symptoms or scans predicts a situation unlikely to be helped by surgery. With CT or MRI imaging, recurrent pelvic tumor, especially following an APR, is difficult to
differentiate from scar. PET may offer a more accurate assessment. 136
RADIATION THERAPY

Preoperative Pelvic Radiation Therapy
Because surgery commonly leaves residual disease in the pelvis in patients with locally advanced or unresectable disease, the standard approach has been to use
preoperative pelvic radiation therapy. Given the increased complete response 269 and resection 157 rates when 5-FU–based chemotherapy is added to radiation in the
preoperative setting, as well as the improvement in local control in the postoperative setting, most patients receive combined modality therapy. The goals of
preoperative therapy are to convert an unresectable cancer to a resectable status and decrease the incidence of local failure.
The optimal use of preoperative radiation therapy requires full doses (45 Gy or more) and, to achieve optimal down-staging, a 4- to 6-week delay between the
completion of radiation and surgery. This discussion is limited to those series that meet these criteria.
In a seminal report from the MGH of 25 patients with recurrent or primary unresectable cancer, a complete resection with negative margins was possible in 64% of
patients after preoperative radiation therapy. Despite negative margins, the incidence of local failure was 38%. The nine patients who were unable to undergo a
complete resection were dead of disease within 28 months.
The British Medical Research Council completed a randomized trial of preoperative radiation therapy (40 Gy in 20 fractions) versus surgery alone for 279 patients
with clinical T4 primary rectal cancer. 193 Patients who received preoperative radiation had a significant decrease in local failure (36% vs. 46%, P = .04) and distant
failure (35% vs. 48%, P = .02). An improvement was noted in median survival (31 months vs. 24 months, P = NS), but no difference in survival was reported (32% vs.
28%). The 36% local failure rate after preoperative radiation is consistent with the MGH data and supports the need for additional treatment, such as intraoperative
radiation therapy (IORT).
As one would predict, the results of the patients with primary disease are more favorable than those with recurrent disease. In the MGH series, the rate of complete
resection with negative margins was 59% for patients with primary cancers 270 compared with 44% of those with recurrent cancers. 271 Limiting the analysis to the most
favorable group of patients with primary cancers and negative margins, the 5-year actuarial local failure rate was 29%, and the disease-free survival rate was 60%.
Therefore, even in the most favorable group of patients (primary cancer and negative margins), local failure is still almost 30%. At the University of Florida, in the 48%
of patients who were able to undergo a complete resection with negative margins, the local failure rate was 55% and the 5-year determinate survival rate was
20%.272,273 Tobin and colleagues 274 reported a local failure rate of 20% and a 5-year survival rate of 60% in 85 patients treated with preoperative radiation. At
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 58% of patients underwent a complete resection with negative margins after preoperative radiation, and the local failure rate
was 25%.
Tethered cancers have the most favorable outcome of all T4 cancers. In a separate report from the MGH, the results of 28 patients with tethered rectal cancers
treated with preoperative radiation were presented. 275 Tethered was defined as the sensation on the examining finger of partial tumor mobility consistent with
extensive perirectal spread and adherence but not fixation to unresectable structures. Although a complete resection with negative margins was possible in 93%, the
local failure rate was 24%. Tobin et al. 274 report a local failure rate of 14% and 5-year survival rate of 68% in 49 patients with tethered cancers treated with
preoperative radiation.
In summary, after full-dose preoperative radiation, most series report that 48% to 64% of patients are converted to a resectable status. However, despite a complete
resection and negative margins, the local failure rate varies, depending on the degree of tumor fixation, from 24% to 55%.
IMPROVING THE RESULTS OF PREOPERATIVE RADIATION THERAPY
A major limitation of pelvic radiation therapy is that the dose required to achieve an adequate level of local control, in many cases, exceeds the tolerance of the
surrounding normal tissues. In an attempt to improve the results of preoperative radiation, a number of approaches have been used. The most promising have
included IORT and the addition of systemic chemotherapy.
Intraoperative Radiation Therapy
The primary advantage of IORT is that radiation can be delivered at the time of surgery to the site with the highest risk of local failure (the tumor bed) while decreasing
the dose to the surrounding normal tissues. IORT can be delivered by two techniques: electron beam and brachytherapy. With the electron-beam technique, the
radiation is delivered by a linear accelerator and, with the use of a cone, is directed to the tumor bed. When the IORT is finished, the cone is removed and the surgery
is completed.
Brachytherapy is delivered with both low-dose and high-dose techniques. The low-dose method involves implantation of radioactive sources, with either removable
192
Ir-afterloading catheters or iodine 125 or palladium 103 permanent seeds. 276 The permanent seeds can be sutured or implanted directly into the tumor. As an
alternative, they can be placed in a Dexon mesh that is then sutured to the tumor bed. 277 Most of the low-dose brachytherapy experience has been in patients with
gross residual disease. It also has been used as an alternative to electron-beam IORT in patients with negative margins. 278 High dose-rate brachytherapy uses a
flexible multichannel applicator that conforms to the tumor bed. The applicator is positioned, and an 192Ir source is programmed to deliver a uniform dose to the area
at risk using a similar dose rate to electron-beam IORT. 278,279
The results of IORT depend on whether the patient has primary unresectable or recurrent disease and whether the margins of resection are negative or whether
microscopic or gross residual disease is present. This discussion is limited to patients who, in general, receive preoperative pelvic radiation with or without
5-FU–based chemotherapy. Most receive 45.0 to 50.4 Gy to the pelvis and 10 to 20 Gy IORT with either electrons or high dose-rate with a flexible applicator. The
lower IORT dose is used for patients with negative margins, and the higher doses are used for patients with microscopic or gross residual disease.
Primary Unresectable Disease
The largest experience and longest median follow-up in preoperative therapy followed by IORT has been reported from the MGH. 280 As seen in Table 33.8-15, for
patients with negative margins, local failure is decreased from 18% without IORT to 11% with IORT. In patients with positive margins, local failure is decreased from
83% without IORT to 43% with IORT if gross residual disease is present and to 32% with IORT if microscopic residual disease is present. For the total patient group
(with or without IORT), the 5-year disease-free survival rate was 63% for patients with negative margins and 32% for patients with positive margins. These results
underscore the importance of delivering preoperative therapy to help achieve the most complete resection possible. If negative margins cannot be obtained, then
microscopic residual is still preferable to gross residual. Series from the Mayo Clinic 281 and Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center 278 report similar local failure
rates in patients with negative margins (7% and 8%, respectively). The results of other series from Munich, 279 Heidelberg,282 and the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center283 are seen in Table 33.8-15.

TABLE 33.8-15. Primary Locally Advanced or Unresectable Rectal Cancer with and without Intraoperative Radiation (IORT): Selected Series

Recurrent Disease
In the setting of recurrent disease, the largest experience with IORT is from the Mayo Clinic. 284 In contrast with the series of patients treated for primary unresectable
disease, those with recurrent disease have less uniform treatment programs, including some who have received prior pelvic radiation 284,285 and some treated with
IORT alone.278 Selected series in which all patients received IORT are seen in Table 33.8-16.

TABLE 33.8-16. Role of Intraoperative Radiation (IORT) in Recurrent Rectal Cancer: Selected Series

At the Mayo Clinic, 119 patients received, in general, 50.4 to 54.0 Gy preoperatively followed by 7.5 to 20.0 Gy electron-beam IORT. 284 The higher IORT doses were
used for patients with residual disease. For patient with negative margins, the crude local failure rate was 6%, which increased to 18% for microscopic and 25% for
gross residual disease. The 5-year actuarial local failure rates were 27% for microscopic disease and 45% for gross residual disease. For the total patient group,
overall 5-year survival was 20%. The M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 286 Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 278 and the French IORT group reported similar local
failure rates for the total patient group (36%, 37%, and 31%, respectively). In one series of 25 patients selected to receive IORT, the 5-year survival rate was 21%. 287
In contrast, the results from the MGH were not as favorable. 285 They reported an 89% 5-year actuarial local failure rate for patients with gross residual disease and
70% for the total patient group. The 5-year disease-free survival rate was 21% for patients with negative margins and only 7% for those with positive margins.
Memorial Sloan-Kettering reported no survivors at 2 years with positive margins, 278 whereas in the Heidelberg series, the 4-year disease-free survival rate was
29%.288 In contrast to patients with recurrent disease who have negative or microscopic positive margins, it is unclear if those with positive margins benefit from
aggressive therapy.
Complications of Electron-Beam Intraoperative Radiation Therapy
Initial reports of neuropathy, vasculitis, bone necrosis, and ureteral injury in dogs who received IORT have been described. 164,165 In two series, hyperthermia
increased the neurologic complication of IORT. 289 In canines, IORT-induced secondary malignancies are seen in 15%, with most occurring with doses of more than 25
Gy.290
As the IORT data have matured, similar morbidity has been reported in humans. The incidence of toxicity depends on whether the patient has primary or recurrent
cancer. In the MGH IORT experience, the incidence of complications was higher in those with recurrent disease (10%, soft tissue or sacral injury; 10%, pelvic
neuropathy) compared with primary disease (2%, sacral necrosis or ureteral obstruction). 270,271
Higher complication rates have been reported from the Mayo Clinic. 291 In patients with primary or recurrent colorectal cancer, the incidence of peripheral neuropathy
was 32%. The symptoms of pain, numbness, and tingling resolved in 40% of patients, but only 13% had resolution of weakness. Ureteral obstruction or
hydronephrosis were seen in 63% of patients who did not have evidence of ureteral obstruction at presentation. Although no relationship was found between the
incidence of complications and the external-beam dose, the incidence of complications increased with the IORT dose.
In contrast to patients who undergo adjuvant therapy for resectable rectal cancers, it is difficult to clearly separate treatment-related complications from
disease-related complications in patients with recurrent rectal cancers. Complications such as delayed healing, infection, fistula, and neuropathy may be the result of
recurrent tumor, aggressive surgery, radiation, or a combination of these. The 2-year actuarial risk of significant complications in the 42 patients with advanced or
recurrent rectal cancer who received IORT as a component of their therapy in the RTOG 85-08 trial was 16%. 292 However, compared with a nonrandomized group
who underwent surgery without IORT, no significant increase was found in acute surgical complications in the IORT patients. 293
In summary, the phase I/II data suggest that the addition of IORT to preoperative radiation therapy improves local control compared with preoperative radiation
therapy alone. The results in the subset of patients with recurrent cancer or residual disease are not optimal. No phase III trials of IORT are in progress.
Preoperative Combined Modality Therapy
The encouraging results seen in patients with resectable rectal cancer who receive adjuvant postoperative combined modality therapy 83,177 have resulted in a shift to
preoperative combined modality therapy. A number of potential advantages to such therapy exist. First, nonrandomized data from Minsky et al. (1992) suggest that
the patients are able to tolerate higher chemotherapy doses and experience significantly lower acute toxicity compared with postoperative combined modality therapy.
Second, in patients with unresectable disease, the addition of chemotherapy to preoperative radiation therapy increases the down-staging and resectability rates. 269
Frykholm et al.294 reported an enhanced resectability rate in patients with unresectable rectal cancer who received preoperative radiation therapy, 5-FU, methotrexate,
and leucovorin rescue compared with 38 patients who received radiation alone (71% vs. 34%). Enhanced resectability is important, because patients with initially
unresectable rectal cancer who have microscopic or gross residual disease have higher local failure rates and lower survival rates compared with those patients who
undergo a complete resection. 280,284,295
The third advantage is that the start of systemic therapy is not delayed, the metastatic burden is the smallest, and few drug-resistant cells are likely to be present. 296
The fourth advantage is sphincter preservation.
A number of phase I/II trials of preoperative combined modality therapy for patients with T4 disease have been conducted. 279,280,282,283,284,285 and 286,288,295,297,298,299 and 300
Some include patients with T3 disease, thereby making interpretation of the local control and survival results difficult. 151,159,273 The majority have used 45.0 to 50.4 Gy
plus two cycles of concurrent 5-FU–based chemotherapy, with bolus 5-FU plus leucovorin or continuous infusion 5-FU, followed by surgery and an additional four
cycles of postoperative chemotherapy. Some have used methotrexate 160 or interferon. 301 Marsh et al.273 have combined chronobiologically shaped 5-FU infusion with
preoperative radiation therapy. Trials examining the use of newer chemotherapeutic agents, such as raltitrexed (Tomudex), 161,162,302 Orzel (oral tegafur, uracil, and
5-fluorouracil plus leucovorin), 163 CPT-11,164,165 and oxaliplatin, with preoperative radiation therapy are in progress.

INTRAOPERATIVE OR POSTOPERATIVE RADIATION THERAPY FOR RESIDUAL DISEASE
For a variety of reasons, some patients with locally advanced or unresectable cancer do not receive preoperative radiation therapy or, despite a preoperative
assessment of resectability, are not able to undergo a complete resection. In this setting, does IORT or postoperative pelvic radiation therapy have any benefit? As
previously discussed, the interpretation of treatment results is complicated, because many studies combine patients with primary and recurrent cancers as well as

those with gross and microscopic residual disease. Patients are randomly selected to receive chemotherapy, and some series include patients with metastatic
disease. This discussion is limited to those series in which patients have disease limited to the pelvis.
Likewise, for patients who have been unsuccessful with prior pelvic radiation, the options are limited. The standard therapy is usually palliative surgery or systemic
chemotherapy. The response rate with chemotherapy may be reduced in a pelvis that has received full-dose radiation. Is there a role for more aggressive treatment?
A variety of radiotherapeutic options for patients who have been unsuccessful with prior pelvic radiation are available and are listed in Table 33.8-17. Although these
are investigational approaches in selected patients, they may offer an improvement in local control.

TABLE 33.8-17. Failure after External Beam Radiation: Aggressive Surgical and Radiotherapeutic Options

SUBTOTAL RESECTION AND POSTOPERATIVE RADIATION THERAPY
At the Mayo Clinic, 17 patients with rectal cancer received postoperative radiation therapy (40 to 60 Gy). 303 Six received concurrent 5-FU–based systemic
chemotherapy. For the total patient group, local failure was 76% and 5-year actuarial survival was 24%. The seven patients with gross residual disease had higher
local failure (86% vs. 70%) and lower survival (14% vs. 30%) compared with the ten patients with microscopic residual disease. No clear dose-response curve
emerged, but only one patient received 56 Gy or more.
In a separate report from the Mayo Clinic, the results of 106 patients who underwent a palliative (subtotal) resection for locally recurrent rectal cancer were
presented. 304 5-FU was delivered in 48%. In the subset of 34 patients with gross residual disease who received IORT and postoperative therapy, the 3-year survival
rate was 44%. However, despite the encouraging survival rate, 40% developed local failure and 60% developed distant failure. Univariate analysis revealed a
significant improvement in survival in those patients with microscopic compared with gross residual disease, the use of IORT, a limited number of sites of tumor
fixation, and higher performance status. These data suggest that, even in patients with locally recurrent residual disease, an aggressive approach should be
considered.
Other reports have included patients with both rectal and colon cancers as well as patients with both primary and recurrent disease. At the MGH, patients received
somewhat higher doses of radiation (60 to 70 Gy) compared with the Mayo Clinic external-beam therapy alone series. 305 Seven patients received electron-beam
IORT. For the total group, local failure was 42% and the 5-year disease-free survival rate was 18%. The 23 patients with gross residual disease had a higher local
failure rate (57% vs. 30%) and a significant decrease in survival (4% vs. 42%) compared with the 30 patients with microscopic residual disease. The improvement in
local control compared with the Mayo Clinic external-beam therapy alone series may have been related to the higher radiation doses. No clear dose-response curve
was noted in patients with gross disease, but patients with microscopic residual disease who received less than 60 Gy did have a higher incidence of local failure
compared with those who received 60 Gy or more (38% vs. 26%).
Another factor that may have an impact on the local failure rate is the volume of gross residual disease. As seen in Table 33.8-15 and Table 33.8-16, this is consistent
with the experience from the MGH280,285 and the Mayo Clinic284,295 IORT series, in which patients with gross residual disease had lower survival and higher local failure
rates compared with patients with microscopic residual disease.
The dose of radiation needed to treat potential microscopic disease (after a complete resection) is 45.0 to 50.4 Gy, which is within the tolerance of the surrounding
normal tissues. However, when microscopic or gross biopsy-proven residual disease is present (after a subtotal resection), the dose of required radiation is higher.
Even in situations in which the small bowel can be excluded from the external-beam radiation field, other surrounding normal tissues limit the dose to 60 to 65 Gy,
which may be inadequate to control large volumes of gross residual tumor. Therefore, it is not surprising that the results for patients with residual disease who receive
postoperative radiation therapy are disappointing. The obvious advantage of preoperative therapy is that it decreases the primary tumor volume, thereby allowing
maximum surgery and IORT.
REIRRADIATION FOLLOWED BY SURGERY
In patients with a local recurrence who have received prior pelvic radiation, Lingareddy et al. 94 reported the use of reirradiation in a selected group of 39 patients.
They received a median dose of 36 Gy using limited lateral fields plus continuous infusion 5-FU. The whole pelvis was not treated, and the bladder and small bowel
were excluded as much as possible from the radiation field. With a median follow-up of 3 years, the 5-year actuarial local failure rate was 55% and survival was 24%.
In highly selected patients, retreatment with limited fields may be an option; however, this approach should be considered experimental.
EXTERNAL-BEAM RADIATION THERAPY ALONE
Patients selected for radiation therapy alone are usually medically inoperable or have very advanced local disease such that resection would compromise a vital
structure. This approach has been previously discussed in the section Radiotherapy Alone for Rectal Cancer 93,94 and 95,105 (see Table 33.8-6).
POSTOPERATIVE RADIATION THERAPY AND CHEMOTHERAPY
Two randomized trials of postoperative combined modality therapy versus radiation alone have been conducted in patients with medically inoperable or advanced
local disease. In the RTOG trial, 129 patients with residual, primary unresectable, or recurrent rectal cancer were randomized to radiation therapy plus concurrent
5-FU followed by maintenance 5-FU plus methyl CCNU versus radiation therapy alone. Some patients received IORT. No significant difference was reported in the
estimated actuarial 2-year survival rate in patients who received combined modality therapy compared with radiation therapy alone (44% vs. 36%). Of the patients
with gross residual disease (in either arm), 25% were without evidence of disease, 6% were locally controlled, and 50% died with a component of local failure.
The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group randomized 30 patients with recurrent, residual, or primary inoperable rectal cancer to postoperative continuous course
radiation therapy versus split course radiation therapy plus 5-FU followed by maintenance 5-FU plus methyl CCNU. The median survival in both arms was 17 months.
The five patients with primary inoperable cancer (considered gross residual) had the shortest 2-year survival rate (0%), compared with the 16 patients with recurrent
disease (25%) or the nine with residual disease (54%).
Therefore, postoperative combined modality therapy, as delivered in these two randomized trials, did not have a significant impact on survival compared with
postoperative radiation therapy alone in this subset of patients. Other chemotherapeutic agents and schedules are being investigated.
INTRAOPERATIVE RADIATION THERAPY ALONE FOR GROSS RESIDUAL DISEASE
A subset of patients with recurrent rectal cancer have clinically unresectable gross residual pelvic disease and, because of prior full-dose pelvic radiation therapy,
would require an attempt at resection without the benefit of pre- or postoperative radiation therapy, or both. Furthermore, when IORT is not available, this group of

patients is commonly approached in a palliative fashion, because surgery alone cannot control gross residual disease.
The results of 36 patients with recurrent rectal cancer who had gross residual disease remaining in the pelvis after biopsy alone or subtotal resection were reported by
Minsky et al.276 from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. With a median follow-up of 24 months, the local failure rate was 44% and the 4-year actuarial
survival rate was 25%. The local control rate was dependent on the volume of residual disease. With brachytherapy, the tumor volume is proportional to the volume of
the implant. The local failure rate was lower in those patients who underwent subtotal resection compared with a biopsy alone (33% vs. 66%), and in those with an 125I
implant volume of less than 40 cm 3 compared to 40 cm3 or more (39% vs. 100%). Severe treatment-related complications were seen in 11% of locally controlled
patients.
The experience with electron-beam IORT in this group of patients is more limited. Calvo et al. 306 reported a subgroup of five patients with gross residual or recurrent
colorectal cancer who received 10- to 80-Gy electron-beam IORT. All tumors were larger than 4 cm. With a median follow-up of 11 months, the incidence of local
failure was 40%. Complications included pelvic abscess (in one patient), pelvic pain (in two), and lower extremity neuropathy (in one). The more recent trial by
Martinez-Monge and associates 137 included patients with extrapelvic disease; therefore, it is not discussed.
In summary, the limited data suggest that IORT with electrons or brachytherapy does not improve the ultimate survival rate in this group of patients. However, it does
offer reasonable local control (56% to 60%) with acceptable morbidity. Because local control, in and of itself, is an important end point in the treatment of rectal
cancer, it is appropriate to continue to evaluate IORT as part of an overall aggressive approach in patients with residual disease who are unable to receive pelvic
radiation therapy.

INVESTIGATIONAL RADIATION THERAPY APPROACHES
A number of investigational radiation therapy approaches have been used in an attempt to enhance the treatment results in patients with both resectable and
unresectable rectal cancers and other pelvic malignancies. These include neutron beam radiation, hyperthermia, radiosensitizers, and altered radiation fractionation
schemes. Radioprotectors 263,264 and 265,268 (discussed earlier in Dietary Supplements and Radioprotectors ) and three-dimensional treatment planning 255 (discussed
earlier in Three-Dimensional Radiation Treatment Planning ) already have been described.
NEUTRON BEAM RADIATION THERAPY
The theoretical advantages of neutrons compared with more conventional radiation include increased sensitivity of hypoxic cells and more advantageous radiation
repair and sensitivity characteristics of normal tissues. The results of two randomized trials that have compared neutrons and photons in patients with unresectable
and recurrent rectal cancers were reported by Duncan et al. 307 A total of 35 patients received neutrons using a variety of techniques and doses. Not only were no
significant differences in local control or survival detected, but patients who received neutrons experienced higher acute and long-term grade 3+ skin toxicity. The
preferential absorption in fat of neutrons may have contributed to the complications seen in the skin and subcutaneous tissues. Similar severe and fatal complications
were reported in a series of 25 patients with advanced rectal cancer treated by Battermann et al. (1982). Despite the theoretical advantages, little interest has been
shown in the treatment of rectal cancer with neutrons.
HYPERTHERMIA
Hyperthermia, in conjunction with radiation, has been mostly used as a palliative modality in rectal cancer. 308,309,310,311 and 312 Its rationale is based on an in vitro
synergistic interaction of radiation and hyperthermia. The results of this combination in patients with various pelvic and abdominal malignancies has been reported in
a phase I/II trial by the RTOG. 313 The acute and long-term toxicities were acceptable; however, in 68% of the patients, the hyperthermia had to be discontinued
because of discomfort. Final results are pending. Hyperthermia has been reported to increase the neurologic complications of patients receiving IORT. 289
RADIOSENSITIZERS
Randomized clinical trials in rectal cancer have clearly shown that 5-FU is a radiosensitizer. When combined with adjuvant postoperative radiation therapy, it
significantly decreases local failure compared with radiation therapy alone. 83,177 Various mechanisms for 5-FU–mediated radiosensitization have been proposed, but
none alone explain all the interactions. 314 Nonrandomized data from Rhomberg et al. 315 suggest that razoxane may improve local control and median survival in
patients who receive radiation for inoperable recurrent rectal cancer. Other trials of radiosensitizers have not revealed a clear benefit.
ALTERED RADIATION FRACTIONATION SCHEMAS
Various fractionation programs have evolved with the goal of enhancing tumor cell damage by radiation without increasing normal tissue injury. The repair of
subcellular injury, regeneration, cell-cycle redistribution, and reoxygenation are all factors at the cellular level contributing to differences in how various normal tissues
and tumors respond to fractionated radiation. The use of hyperfractionation and accelerated fractionation schemes take advantage of some of these factors. The late
effects should be the same as or, more likely, less than conventional fractionation schemes. A phase I trial from Lausanne of postoperative accelerated
hyperfractionation (1.6 Gy twice a day to 48 Gy) reported acceptable acute toxicity. 316 Updated data from this group suggests that twice daily radiation is better
tolerated when delivered preoperatively rather than postoperatively. 317 Bozzetti et al. 318 reported a pathologic complete response rate of 9% in 59 patients with
ultrasound stage T2–3 disease who preoperatively received 1.5 Gy twice a day to 45 Gy. This rate was lower than the 14% pathologic complete response rate in 36
patients with ultrasound stage T2–3 disease who received 50.4 Gy with conventional 1.8-Gy fractions at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
The major limitation of accelerated hyperfractionation is acute normal tissue toxicity. Because it is unlikely that these altered fractionation schemes can be combined
with adequate doses of systemic chemotherapy, Movsas and colleagues 298 have limited the hyperfractionated portion to the boost. In their phase I trial of preoperative
combined modality therapy, patients receive conventional pelvic radiation plus continuous infusion 5-FU followed by a boost with escalating doses of
hyperfractionated radiation (1.2 Gy twice a day). 298 Providing that the small bowel was excluded after 52.3 Gy, the recommended dose level with this approach was
61.8 Gy.
In a randomized trial of patients receiving radiation therapy for pelvic malignancies, three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy decreased the volume of normal
tissue in the field, but did not decrease acute toxicity. 255 Other techniques, such as neutron beam radiation, hyperthermia, radiosensitizers, radioprotectors, altered
radiation fractionation schemes, and proton and three-dimensional treatment planning, are encouraging but remain experimental. 107

TREATMENT OF PATIENTS WITH SYNCHRONOUS METASTATIC DISEASE
A subset of patients present with unresectable pelvic disease and synchronous extrapelvic disease. Because the natural history of these patients is dependent on a
variety of factors, such as the volume and site(s) of metastatic disease and, in those with recurrent disease, the disease-free interval, treatment recommendations are
individualized and no standard of care has been established. The management of these patients is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 52.3. At Memorial
Sloan-Kettering, the general approach is to deliver preoperative combined modality therapy both as a therapeutic measure and to help identify those who may benefit
from an aggressive surgical approach. If after the completion of therapy a response has been seen in both the primary and metastatic site(s), then the patient is
evaluated, on a case by case basis, for surgery of the primary and metastasis.

FOLLOW-UP AFTER POTENTIALLY CURATIVE TREATMENT
Patients should follow up with their primary treatment team after curative treatment for many reasons. An important aspect of this follow-up is management of
treatment-related problems and assessment for local-regional recurrences. These may have an impact on quality of life that is not apparent from survival statistics.
Dietary modifications, including the use of a fiber supplement, may be necessary for management of bowel function. Antidiarrheal agents frequently are required. This
management can occur on an ongoing basis during follow-up, because these symptoms are most profound during the initial year after treatment and tend to abate
during the latter part of the follow-up period. In addition, patients who undergo creation of ostomies for their colorectal cancer management benefit from consultation
with an enterostomal therapist. Counseling and appropriate referral for the management of sexual or bowel dysfunction can occur during follow-up visits.

TREATMENT OF RECURRENCE
Management of recurrent disease is individualized. The treatment is based on the extent of recurrence as well as the patient's overall potential for curative therapy
and their medical condition. In most patients, recurrent disease is multifocal and treated with systemic chemotherapy. Highly selected patients can be considered for
operative therapy. Others with an unresectable recurrence may need palliation. A chief symptom requiring palliation in patients with recurrent rectal carcinoma is
obstruction. The use of salvage surgery for recurrence after local excision is presented in Recurrent Disease, earlier in this chapter. The use of surgery for lung
metastases or hepatic metastases is discussed in Chapter 52.2 and Chapter 52.3, respectively.
PALLIATION OF OBSTRUCTION DUE TO LOCALLY RECURRENT RECTAL CANCER
In patients with synchronous metastatic disease, the management of rectal obstruction can make use of a number of techniques that can help avoid palliative
colostomy. Frequently, patients in this circumstance are markedly debilitated and very poor surgical risks. These circumstances often make the risks of surgical
intervention prohibitive, especially in light of the limited potential for survival. Palliative pelvic irradiation is a useful technique in patients who have not undergone
previous radiotherapy. Palliative endoscopic placement of self-expanding metallic stents has also been used as an alternative to palliative colostomy. Success rates
can be high with stenting. In a majority of patients, this technique results in the successful placement of the stent. Many have no further complications from their
obstruction for a period of 1 to 7 months after stent placement. 319 For those in whom stent placement is unsuccessful, palliative colostomy can be performed.
Neodymium:yttrium-aluminum garnet laser treatment also can be highly successful in relieving obstruction. 320
SURGERY FOR LOCALLY RECURRENT RECTAL CANCER
Among patients with failure after curative treatment of rectal carcinoma, between 10% and 30% of recurrences are confined to the pelvis. The absence of metastatic
disease is one of the key factors in determining a patient's potential for curative surgical resection for locally recurrent disease. Local recurrences of rectal cancer
tend to be highly symptomatic, with pelvic pain, rectal obstruction, bleeding, urinary tract dysfunction, and fistulas.
LOCATION OF RECURRENCE
Localized pelvic recurrences may be classified based on the tumor location within the pelvis. Recurrences can be heterogeneous, and the pattern of extension of local
recurrence is much more infiltrative within the previous operative bed than primary rectal cancers. They tend to be in perianastatomotic tissues and more frequently
involve adjacent organs. 321 Axial recurrences appear centrally in the pelvis. These may include anastomotic recurrences after local or radical surgery. Anteriorly
based recurrences in the pelvis chiefly involve the seminal vesicles and prostate in men and the vagina and uterus or bladder in women. Posterior recurrences tend to
predominantly involve the sacrum and may extend into the pyriformis muscle, the sciatic notch, and sciatic nerve. Lateral recurrences can involve the soft tissues of
the pelvic sidewall and the iliac blood vessels and lymph nodes, as well as the obturator internus muscles and the pyriformis muscles. Recurrences may extend into
the bony sidewalls of the pelvis.
EVALUATION OF THE PATIENT WITH LOCALLY RECURRENT RECTAL CANCER
The preoperative workup of a patient with a suspected local rectal cancer recurrence involves assessment of both the presence of extrapelvic metastatic disease and
a determination of the extent of the local recurrence. Under certain circumstances, intraoperative exploration may be required to reveal an unresectable recurrence;
however, it is best to avoid this procedure because of morbidity without improvement in survival.
When patients present with locally recurrent rectal cancer, they usually are symptomatic. These symptoms may range from cramping or constipation from bowel
obstruction to pelvic or sciatic pain to dysuria and urinary tract dysfunction. Important examinations are pelvic examination in females, digital rectal examination,
proctoscopy, and cystoscopy. Examination of the inguinal lymph nodes in patients with a previous low rectal cancer can detect lymph node recurrence.
IMAGING PATIENTS WITH LOCAL RECURRENCE
When presented with a patient having locally recurrent rectal carcinoma, staging of the abdomen and pelvis, either with CT or MRI, and imaging of the pulmonary
fields with chest x-ray is required. These tests do an excellent job of identifying patients with visceral metastases; however, peritoneal implants may be missed until
surgery is done.
The operative approach is determined by the extent and location of the recurrence. Specific questions can be asked from pelvic imaging studies, such as MRI or CT,
that help to determine resectability and the procedure required. These questions pertain to (1) sacral nerve root involvement and the level at which this involvement
occurs; (2) invasion of the sciatic nerve or lumbosacral plexus; (3) extension outside the pelvis through the sciatic notch or levators; and (4) involvement of seminal
vesicles or prostate and bladder in men and involvement of vagina, cervix, and bladder in women. Although EUS can aid in the assessment of local recurrence, it is
limited because of the postoperative changes seen around a rectal anastomosis. CT scan identifies distant metastases as well as the extent of pelvic involvement.
However, postoperative or postradiation chemotherapy changes may lead to fibrosis, making it indistinguishable from recurrence. CT scanning sensitivity for detecting
pelvic recurrences is between 70% and 82%. 322,323 and 324 CT scans can also identify potential sites for fine-needle aspiration biopsies of suspected areas of
recurrence. MRI studies can be useful in evaluating the extent of local recurrence and in planning operative therapy. MRI appears to be especially useful in
determining neurologic and sacral involvement and planning for the resections of these structures.
Nuclear imaging has been reported to be useful in the pretreatment evaluation of patients with recurrent colorectal cancer. It can identify sites of occult metastatic
disease that would make pursuit of an extensive resection fruitless. Although nuclear imaging studies frequently lack the anatomic definition necessary to enhance the
determination of the local extent of disease, their ability to exclude patients with clinically undetectable metastatic disease may be of value. 325 A further discussion of
this topic is found in Chapter 33.7.
PET is a technique that has been used in conjunction with the glucose analogue [ 18F]fluorodeoxyglucose to image colorectal cancers. Accuracy in detecting sites of
recurrent colorectal cancer has been reported to approach 83% in patients with recurrent colorectal cancer. 188 PET whole body scanning has provided additional
information beyond conventional imaging. 326
SURGERY FOR RECURRENT DISEASE
In patients taken to the operating room for locally recurrent rectal cancer, cystoscopy and bilateral ureteral stent placement should be performed to facilitate
subsequent evaluation and to allow the operation to proceed with alacrity. Thorough exploration of the abdominal cavity should be carried out to assess for evidence
of metastatic disease. Specific sites to be examined are the peritoneal surface, omentum, retroperitoneal lymph nodes, and liver. If metastatic sites are found, then
consideration can be given to palliative management, such as colostomy or urologic diversion. 327 Patients with perianastomotic recurrence should undergo resection
to achieve negative margins. In most cases, this involves an APR. In perineal recurrences after APR, patients should undergo wide excision. It should be noted,
however, that the tumor presenting at the level of the perineal skin is often a small component of the overall pelvic recurrence. Most of these cases require extensive
soft tissue reconstruction for adequate closure of the excision site. Recurrences that involve adjacent structures may require pelvic exenteration to achieve negative
margins. Multiple organs may be adherent to the site of the recurrence, and these should be resected en bloc to avoid violation of the recurrent tumor. This requires
development of planes outside the normal anatomic planes used for resectable lesions. Removal of nodal disease along the internal iliac artery and wide excision of
the pelvic floor is required.
In patients with a posterior extension of pelvic recurrence, sacrectomy can be required in combination with the pelvic visceral resection. When there is limited distal
sacral and coccyx involvement, this can be resected en bloc with the pelvic viscera resected through an abdominal and perineal approach. If more extensive sacral
involvement is present, the patient can undergo a combined abdominal, perineal, and posterior approach for formal sacrectomy. 328,329 Vascular ligations of the internal
iliac vessels and nodal resection below this level are carried out through the abdominal approach as well as the division of any remaining rectal segment and division
of the ureters and construction of an ileal conduit. 330 The patient can then be turned into a prone position for subsequent resection of the perineal soft tissues,
laminectomy, and ligation of the dural sac followed by en bloc removal of the pelvic tissues. 331 Patients with extensive pelvic sidewall involvement can undergo
extended lateral resections to include obturator and internal iliac nodes as well as surrounding pelvic soft tissues. Areas of close margins can be treated with IORT or

brachytherapy techniques. 300,332 Patients who undergo such extensive soft tissue resections in the irradiated pelvis require soft tissue reconstruction with a rectus
abdominus myocutaneous flap or gracilis flap to provide for an adequately healed or vaginal reconstruction wound and to minimize complications of pelvic sepsis and
bowel obstruction. 333
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Kollmorgen CF, Meagher AP, Wolff BG, et al. The long-term effect of adjuvant postoperative chemoradiotherapy for rectal carcinoma on bowel function. Ann Surg 1994;220:676.
2. Enker WE. Potency, cure, and local control in the operative treatment of rectal cancer. Arch Surg 1992;127:1396.
3. Havenga K, Enker WE, McDermott K, et al. Male and female sexual and urinary function after total mesorectal excision with autonomic nerve preservation for carcinoma of the rectum. J Am
Coll Surg 1996;182:495.
4. Enker WE. Operative considerations in rectal cancer. In: Cohen AM, Winawer SJ, eds. Cancer of the colon, rectum, and anus. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995:561.
5. Vanek VW, Whitt CL, Abdu RA, Kennedy WR. Comparison of right colon, left colon, and rectal carcinoma. Am Surg 1986;52:504.
6. Cheung PS, Wong SK, Boey J, Lai CK. Frank rectal bleeding: a prospective study of causes in patients over the age of 40. Postgrad Med J 1988;64:364.
7. Kim DG, Madoff RD. Transanal treatment of rectal cancer: ablative methods and open resection. Semin Surg Oncol 1998;15:101.
8. Hoff PM, Lassere Y, Pazdur R, et al. Preoperative UFT and calcium folinate and radiotherapy in rectal cancer. Oncology (Huntingt) 1999;13:129.
9. Tartter PI, Steinberg BM. The role of preoperative intravenous pyelogram in operations performed for carcinoma of the colon and rectum. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1986;163:65.
10. Degen L, Beglinger C. Preoperative approach to rectal carcinoma. Swiss Surg 1997;3:240.
11. Hundt W, Braunschweig R, Reiser M. Evaluation of spiral CT in staging of colon and rectum carcinoma. Eur Radiol 1999;9:78.
12. Williams MP, Husband JE. CT scanning in carcinoma of the rectum: a review. J R Soc Med 1987;80:701.
13. Thoeni RF, Rogalla P. CT for the evaluation of carcinomas in the colon and rectum. Semin Ultrasound CT MR 1995;16:112.
14. Debatin JF, Patak MA. MRI of the small and large bowel. Eur Radiol 1999;9:1523.
15. Stoker J, Rociu E. Endoluminal MR imaging of diseases of the anus and rectum. Semin Ultrasound CT MR 1999;20:47.
16. Barbaro B, Savastano M, Sallustio G. Combined modality staging of low risk rectal cancer. Rays 1995;20:145.
17. Indinnimeo M, Grasso RF, Cicchini C, et al. Endorectal magnetic resonance imaging in the preoperative staging of rectal tumors. Int Surg 1996;81:419.
18. Pema PJ, Bennett WF, Bova JG, Warman P. CT vs MRI in diagnosis of recurrent rectosigmoid carcinoma. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1994;18:256.
19. Markus J, Morrissey B, deGara C, Tarulli G. MRI of recurrent rectosigmoid carcinoma [See comments]. Abdom Imaging 1997;22:338.
20. Senagore A, Milsom JW, Senagore P, et al. A comparison between intrarectal ultrasound and CT scanning in staging of experimental rectal tumors. J Surg Res 1988;44:522.
21. Niederhuber JE. Colon and rectum cancer. Patterns of spread and implications for workup. Cancer 1993;71:4187.
22. Detry RJ, Kartheuser AH, Lagneaux G, Rahier J. Preoperative lymph node staging in rectal cancer: a difficult challenge. Int J Colorectal Dis 1996;11:217.
23. Sailer M, Leppert R, Kraemer M, et al. The value of endorectal ultrasound in the assessment of adenomas, T1- and T2-carcinomas. Int J Colorectal Dis 1997;12:214.
24. Massari M, De S, Cioffi U, et al. Value and limits of endorectal ultrasonography for preoperative staging of rectal carcinoma. Surg Laparosc Endosc 1998;8:438.
25. Kruskal JB, Kane RA, Sentovich SM, Longmaid HE. Pitfalls and sources of error in staging rectal cancer with endorectal US. Radiographics 1997;17:609.
26. Sailer M, Leppert R, Bussen D, et al. Influence of tumor position on accuracy of endorectal ultrasound staging. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:1180.
27. Maier AG, Barton PP, Neuhold NR, et al. Peritumoral tissue reaction at transrectal US as a possible cause of overstaging in rectal cancer: histopathologic correlation. Radiology 1997;203:785.
28. Kahn H, Alexander A, Rakinic J, et al. Preoperative staging of irradiated rectal cancers using digital rectal examination, computed tomography, endorectal ultrasound, and magnetic resonance
imaging does not accurately predict T0,N0 pathology. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:140.
29. Nielsen MB, Qvitzau S, Pedersen JF, Christiansen J. Endosonography for preoperative staging of rectal tumours. Acta Radiol 1996;37:799.
30. Bernini A, Deen KI, Madoff RD, Wong WD. Preoperative adjuvant radiation with chemotherapy for rectal cancer: its impact on stage of disease and the role of endorectal ultrasound. Ann Surg
Oncol 1996;3:131.
31. Biggers OR, Beart RW Jr, Ilstrup DM. Local excision of rectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1986;29:374.
32. Rosenthal SA, Yeung RS, Weese JL, et al. Conservative management of extensive low-lying rectal carcinomas with transanal local excision and combined preoperative and postoperative
radiation therapy: report of a phase I/II trial. Cancer 1992;69:335.
33. Andreola S, Leo E, Belli F, et al. Distal intramural spread in adenocarcinoma of the lower third of the rectum treated with total rectal resection and coloanal anastomosis. Dis Colon Rectum
1997;40:25.
34. Hojo K. Anastomotic recurrence after sphincter-saving resection for rectal cancer: length of distal clearance of the bowel. Dis Colon Rectum 1986;29:11.
35. Meterissian S, Skibber J, Rich T, et al. Patterns of residual disease after preoperative chemoradiation in ultrasound T3 rectal carcinoma. Ann Surg Oncol 1994;1:111.
36. Nagle D. Full thickness local excision of favorable rectal cancer. In: Fry RD, ed. Seminars in colon and rectal surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders 1996;7:215.
37. Hida J, Yasutomi M, Fujimoto K, et al. Analysis of regional lymph node metastases from rectal carcinoma by the clearing method: justification of the use of sigmoid in J-pouch construction after
low anterior resection. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:1282.
38. Sitzler PJ, Seow-Choen F, Ho YH, Leong AP. Lymph node involvement and tumor depth in rectal cancers: an analysis of 805 patients. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:1472.
39. Hall NR, Finan PJ, al Jaberi T, et al. Circumferential margin involvement after mesorectal excision of rectal cancer with curative intent. Predictor of survival but not local recurrence? Dis Colon
Rectum 1998;41:979.
40. Hainsworth PJ, Egan MJ, Cunliffe WJ. Evaluation of a policy of total mesorectal excision for rectal and rectosigmoid cancers [See comments]. Br J Surg 1997;84:652.
41. Heald RJ. Rectal cancer: the surgical options. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:1189.
42. Reynolds JV, Joyce WP, Dolan J, et al. Pathological evidence in support of total mesorectal excision in the management of rectal cancer. Br J Surg 1996;83:1112.
43. Scott N, Jackson P, Al-Jaberi T, et al. Total mesorectal excision and local recurrences: a study of tumour spread in the mesorectum distal to rectal cancer. Br J Surg 1995;82:1031.
44. de Haas-Kock DF, Baeten CG, Jager JJ, et al. Prognostic significance of radial margins of clearance in rectal cancer [See comments]. Br J Surg 1996;83:781.
45. Heald RJ, Moran BJ, Ryall RD, et al. Rectal cancer: the Basingstoke experience of total mesorectal excision, 19781997. Arch Surg 1998;133:894.
46. Enker WE, Merchant N, Cohen AM, et al. Safety and efficacy of low anterior resection for rectal cancer. Ann Surg 1999;230:544.
47. Havenga K, Enker WE, Norstein J, et al. Improved survival and local control after total mesorectal excision or D3 lymphadenectomy in the treatment of primary rectal cancer: an international
analysis of 1411 patients. Eur J Surg Oncol 1999;25:368.
48. Moreira LF, Hizuta A, Iwagaki H, et al. Lateral lymph node dissection for rectal carcinoma below the peritoneal reflection. Br J Surg 1994;81:293.
49. Cohen AM. Colon J-pouch reconstruction after total or subtotal proctectomy. World J Surg 1993;17:267.
50. Dahlberg M, Glimelius B, Pahlman L. Changing strategy for rectal cancer is associated with improved outcome. Br J Surg 1999;86:379.
51. Wolmark N, Fisher B. An analysis of survival and treatment failure following abdominoperineal and sphincter-saving resection in Dukes' B and C rectal carcinoma. Ann Surg 1986;204:480.
52. Francois Y, Nemoz CJ, Baulieux J, et al. Influence of the interval between preoperative radiation therapy and surgery on downstaging and on the rate of sphincter-sparing surgery for rectal
cancer: the Lyon R90-01 randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2396.
53. Cavaliere F, Pemberton JH, Cosimelli M, et al. Coloanal anastomosis for rectal cancer. Long-term results at the Mayo and Cleveland Clinics. Dis Colon Rectum 1995;38:807.
54. Lazorthes F, Fages P, Chiotasso P, et al. Resection of the rectum with construction of a colonic reservoir and colo-anal anastomosis for carcinoma of the rectum. Br J Surg 1986;73:136.
55. Dehni N, Tiret E, Singland JD, et al. Long-term functional outcome after low anterior resection: comparison of low colorectal anastomosis and colonic J-pouch-anal anastomosis. Dis Colon
Rectum 1998;41:817.
56. Hallbook O, Johansson K, Sjodahl R. Laser Doppler blood flow measurement in rectal resection for carcinomacomparison between the straight and colonic J pouch reconstruction. Br J Surg
1996;83:389.
57. Drake DB, Pemberton JH, Beart RW, et al. Coloanal anastomosis in the management of benign and malignant rectal disease. Ann Surg 1987;206:600.
58. Minsky B, Cohen A, Enker W, et al. Phase I trial of postoperative 5-FU, radiation therapy, and high dose leucovorin for resectable rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;22:139.
59. Cohen AM, Minsky BD. Aggressive surgical management of locally advanced primary and recurrent rectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1990;33:432.
60. Law WL, Chu KW, Choi HK. Total pelvic exenteration for locally advanced rectal cancer. J Am Coll Surg 2000;190:78.
61. Goldberg JM, Piver MS, Hempling RE, et al. Improvements in pelvic exenteration: factors responsible for reducing morbidity and mortality. Ann Surg Oncol 1998;5:399.
62. de Hass WG, Miller MJ, Kroll WJ, et al. Perineal wound closure with the rectus abdominous flap following tumor ablation. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:400.
63. Zaheer S, Pemberton JH, Farouk R, et al. Surgical treatment of adenocarcinoma of the rectum. Ann Surg 1998;227:800.
64. Banerjee AK. Sexual dysfunction after surgery for rectal cancer [See comments]. Lancet 1999;353:1900.
65. Shellito PC. Complications of abdominal stoma surgery. Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:1562.
66. Camilleri-Brennan J, Steele RJ. Quality of life after treatment for rectal cancer. Br J Surg 1998;85:1036.
67. Hallbook O, Sjodahl R. Comparison between the colonic J pouch-anal anastomosis and healthy rectum: clinical and physiological function. Br J Surg 1997;84:1437.
68. Beart RW Jr. Predictors of recurrence after local excision. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:2.
69. Zenni GC, Abraham K, Harford FJ, et al. Characteristics of rectal carcinomas that predict the presence of lymph node metastases: implications for patient selection for local therapy. J Surg
Oncol 1998;67:99.
70. Huddy SP, Husband EM, Cook MG, et al. Lymph node metastases in early rectal cancer. Br J Surg 1993;80:1457.
71. Nelson JC, Nimr AF, Thomford NR. Criteria for the selection of “early” carcinomas of the rectum. Are they valid? Arch Surg 1987;122:533.
72. Bouvet M, Milas M, Giacco G, et al. Predictors of recurrence after local excision and postoperative chemoradiation therapy of adenocarcinoma of the rectum. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:26.
73. Nivatvongs S, Wolff BG. Technique of per anal excision for carcinoma of the low rectum. World J Surg 1992;16:447.
74. Guillem JG, Paty PB, Cohen AM. Surgical treatment of colorectal cancer. CA Cancer J Clin 1997;47:113.
75. Bevan AD. Carcinoma of the rectum: treatment by local excision. Dis Colon Rectum 1986;29:906.
76. Saclarides TJ. Transanal endoscopic microsurgery: a single surgeon's experience. Arch Surg 1998;133:595.
77. National Institutes of Health. Adjuvant therapy for patients with colon and rectum cancer. NIH Consens Statement 1991;8:1.
78. Chin BT, Eiserstat TE. Electrocoagulation of selected adenomacarcinoma of the distal rectum. In: Seminars in Colon and Rectal Surgery. WB Saunders 1996:7.
79. Stahl T, Murray JJ, Coller JA, et al. Sphincter-saving alternatives in the management of adenocarcinoma involving the distal rectum. Arch Surg 1993;128:545.
80. Kodner IJ, Shemesh EI, Fry RD, et al. Preoperative irradiation for rectal cancer: improved local control and long-term survival. Ann Surg 1989;209:194.
81. Brunetaud JM, Maundoudry V, Cochelard D. Laser in rectosigmoid tumors. Semin Surg Oncol 1995;11:319.
82. Maingon P, Guerif S, Darsouni R, et al. Conservative management of rectal adenocarcinoma by radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:1077.
83. Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Prolongation of the disease-free interval in surgically treated rectal carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1985;312:1465.
84. McAnena OJ, Heald RJ, Lockhart-Mummery HE. Operative and functional results of total mesorectal excision with ultra-low anterior resection in the management of carcinoma of the lower
one-third of the rectum. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1990;170:517.
85. MacFarlane JK, Ryall RD, Heald RJ. Mesorectal excision for rectal cancer. Lancet 1993;341:457.
86. Enker WE, Thaler HT, Cranor ML, Polyak T. Total mesorectal excision in the operative treatment of carcinoma of the rectum. J Am Coll Surg 1995;181:335.
87. Simons AJ, Ker R, Groshen S, et al. Variations in the treatment of rectal cancer: the influence of hospital type and caseload. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:641.
88. Graham RA, Garnsey L, Jessup JM. Local excision of rectal carcinoma. Am J Surg 1990;160:306.
89. Sticca RP, Rodriguez-Bibas M, Penetrante RB, Petrelli NJ. Curative resection for stage I rectal cancer: natural history, prognostic factors, and recurrence patterns. Cancer Invest 1996;14:491.

90. Weber TK, Petrelli NJ. Local excision for rectal cancer: an uncertain future. Oncology (Huntingt) 1998;12:933.
91. Schild SE, Martenson JA, Gunderson LL. Endocavitary radiotherapy of rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;3:677.
92. Gerard JP, Ayzac L, Coquard R, et al. Endocavitary irradiation for early rectal carcinomas T1 (T2). A series of 101 patients treated with the Papillon's technique. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1996;34:775.
93. Wong CS, Cummings BJ, Brierley JD, et al. Treatment of locally recurrent rectal carcinomaresults and prognostic factors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:427.
94. Lingareddy V, Ahmad NR, Mohiuddin M. Palliative reirradiation for recurrent rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:785.
95. Guiney MJ, Smith JG, Worotniuk V, et al. Radiotherapy treatment for isolated loco-regional recurrence of rectosigmoid cancer following definitive surgery: Peter McCallum Cancer Institute
experience: 19811990. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:1019.
96. Valentini V, Morganti AG, Luzi S, et al. Is chemoradiation feasible in elderly patients? A study of 17 patients with anorectal carcinoma. Cancer 1997;80:1387.
97. Merchant TE, Diamantis PA, Lauwers G, et al. Characterization of malignant colon tumors with 31P nuclear magnetic resonance phospholipid and phosphatic metabolite profiles. Cancer
1995;76:1715.
98. Stocchi L, Nelson H, Sargent D, et al. Impact of individual surgeon on rectal cancer outcome within 3 North Central Cancer Treatment Group (NCCTG) protocols. Proc ASCO 1999;18:234.
99. Kapiteijn E, Marijnen CAM, Colenbrander AC, et al. Local recurrence in patients with rectal cancer diagnosed between 1988 and 1992: a population based study in the west Netherlands. Eur J
Surg Oncol 1998;24:528.
100. Rich T, Gunderson LL, Lew R, et al. Patterns of recurrence of rectal cancer after potentially curative surgery. Cancer 1983;52:1317.
101. Minsky BD, Mies C, Recht A, et al. Resectable adenocarcinoma of the rectosigmoid and rectum. 1. Patterns of failure and survival. Cancer 1988;61:1408.
102. Gunderson LL, Sosin H. Areas of failure found at reoperation (second or symptomatic look) following “curative surgery” for adenocarcinoma of the rectum: clinicopathologic correlation and
implications for adjuvant therapy. Cancer 1974;34:1278.
103. Zaheer S, Pemberton JH, Farouk R, et al. Surgical treatment of adenocarcinoma of the rectum. Ann Surg 1998;227:800.
104. Papillon J. Present status of radiation therapy in the conservative management of rectal cancer. Radiother Oncol 1990;17:275.
105. Gerard JP, Roy P, Coquard R, et al. Combined curative radiation therapy alone in (T1) T2-3 rectal adenocarcinoma: a pilot study of 29 patients. Radiother Oncol 1996;38:131.
106. Minsky BD, Cohen AM. Conservative management of invasive rectal cancer: alternative to abdominoperineal resection. Oncology 1989;3:137.
107. Minsky BD. Adjuvant therapy for rectal cancer: results and controversies. Oncology 1998;12:1129.
108. Minsky BD. Conservative management of rectal cancer with local excision and post-operative radiation therapy. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:1343.
109. Minsky BD. Clinical experience with local excision and postoperative radiation therapy for rectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1993;36:405.
110. Willett CG, Tepper JE, Donnely S, et al. Patterns of failure following local excision and local excision and postoperative radiation therapy for invasive rectal adenocarcinoma. J Clin Oncol
1989;7:1003.
111. Willett CG, Compton CC, Shellito PC, Efird JT. Selection factors for local excision or abdominoperineal resection of early stage rectal cancer. Cancer 1994;73:2716.
112. Blumberg D, Paty PB, Guillem JG, et al. All patients with small intramural rectal cancers are at risk for lymph node metastasis. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:881.
113. Horn A, Halvorsen JF, Morild I. Transanal extirpation for early rectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1989;32:769.
114. Milsom JW, Czyrko C, Hull TL, et al. Preoperative biopsy of pararectal lymph nodes in rectal cancer using endoluminal ultrasonography. Dis Colon Rectum 1994;37:364.
115. Jessup JM, Loda M, Bleday R. Clinical and molecular prognostic factors in sphincter-preserving surgery for rectal cancer. Semin Radiat Oncol 1998;8:54.
116. Mendenhall WM, Rout WR, Vauthey JN, et al. Conservative treatment of rectal adenocarcinoma with endocavitary irradiation or wide local excision and post-operative irradiation. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:3241.
117. Chakravarti A, Compton CC, Shellito PC, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients with rectal cancer managed by local excision with and without adjuvant irradiation. Ann Surg 1999;230:49.
118. Bleday R, Breen E, Jessup JM, et al. Prospective evaluation of local excision for small rectal cancers. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:388.
119. Ota DM, Skibber J, Rich TA. M. D. Anderson Cancer Center experience with local excision and multimodality therapy for rectal cancer. Surg Oncol Clin North Am 1992;1:147.
120. Wagman R, Minsky BD, Cohen AM, et al. Conservative management of rectal cancer with local excision and post-op radiation chemotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:841.
121. Steele G, Tepper J, Herndon J, Mayer R. Failure and salvage after sphincter sparing treatment for distal rectal adenocarcinomaa CALGB coordinated intergroup study. Proc ASCO
1999;18:235a.
122. Taylor RH, Hay JH, Larsson SN. Transanal local excision of selected low rectal cancers. Am J Surg 1998;175:360.
123. Valentini V, Morganti AG, De Santis M, et al. Local excision and external beam radiotherapy in early rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;35:759.
124. Fortunato L, Ahmad NR, Yeung RS, et al. Long-term follow-up of local excision and radiation therapy for invasive rectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1995;38:1193.
125. Steele GD, Herndon JE, Bleday R, et al. Sphincter-sparing treatment for distal rectal adenocarcinoma. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:433.
126. Willett CG. Local excision followed by postoperative radiation therapy. Semin Radiat Oncol 1998;8:24.
127. Minsky BD, Cohen AM, Enker WE, Sigurdson E. Phase I/II trial of pre-operative radiation therapy and coloanal anastomosis in distal invasive resectable rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1992;23:387.
128. O'Connell MJ, Martenson JA, Weiand HS, et al. Improving adjuvant therapy for rectal cancer by combining protracted infusion fluorouracil with radiation therapy after curative surgery. N Engl J
Med 1994;331:502.
129. Graf W, Dahlberg M, Osman MM, et al. Short-term preoperative radiotherapy results in down-staging of rectal cancer: a study of 1316 patients. Radiother Oncol 1997;43:133.
130. Williamson PR, Hellinger MD, Larach SW, Ferrara A. Endorectal ultrasound of T3 and T4 rectal tumor after preoperative chemoradiation. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:45.
131. Barbaro B, Schulsinger A, Valentini V, et al. The accuracy of transrectal ultrasound in predicting the pathological stage of low-lying rectal cancer after preoperative chemoradiation therapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:1043.
132. Alexander AA, Palazzo JP, Ahmad NR, et al. Endosonographic and color Doppler flow imaging alterations observed within irradiated rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;35:369.
133. Merchant TE, Ballon D, Koutcher JA, et al. A birdcage resonator for intracavitary MR imaging. Magn Reson Imaging 1993;11:1119.
134. Kim NK, Kim MJ, Yun SH, et al. Comparative study of transrectal ultrasonography, pelvic computerized tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging in preoperative staging of rectal cancer.
Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:770.
135. Flamen P, Stroobants S, van Cutsem E, et al. Additional value of whole-body positron emission tomography with fluorine-18-2-fluoro-2-deoxy- D-glucose in recurrent colorectal cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1999;17:894.
136. Takeuchi O, Saito N, Koda K, et al. Clinical assessment of positron emission tomography for the diagnosis of local recurrence in colorectal cancer. Br J Surg 1999;86:932.
137. Martinez-Monge R, Nag S, Martin EW. Three different intraoperative radiation modalities (electron beam, high-dose-rate brachytherapy, and iodine-125 brachytherapy) in the adjuvant
treatment of patients with recurrent colorectal adenocarcinoma. Cancer 1999;86:236.
138. Otmezguine Y, Grimard L, Calitchi E, et al. A new combined approach in the conservative management of rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:539.
139. Mohiuddin M, Marks J, Bannon J. High-dose preoperative radiation and full thickness local excision: a new option for selected T3 distal rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:845.
140. Ahmad NR, Nagle DA. Preoperative radiation therapy followed by local excision. Semin Radiat Oncol 1998;8:36.
141. Hyams DM, Mamounas EP, Petrelli N, et al. A clinical trial to evaluate the worth of preoperative multimodality therapy in patients with operable carcinoma of the rectum. A progress report of
the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project protocol R0-3. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:131.
142. Swedish Rectal Cancer Trial. Improved survival with preoperative radiotherapy in resectable rectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1997;336:980.
143. Holm T, Rutqvist LE, Johansson H, Cedermark B. Postoperative mortality in rectal cancer treated with or without preoperative radiotherapy: causes and risk factors. Br J Surg 1996;83:964.
144. Holm T, Singnomklao T, Rutqvist LE, Cedermark B. Adjuvant preoperative radiotherapy in patients with rectal carcinoma. Adverse effects during long term follow-up of two randomized trials.
Cancer 1996;78:968.
145. Wagman R, Minsky BD, Cohen AM, et al. Sphincter preservation with preoperative radiation therapy and coloanal anastomosis: long term follow-up. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:51.
146. Grann A, Minsky BD, Cohen AM, et al. Preliminary results of pre-operative 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), low dose leucovorin, and concurrent radiation therapy for resectable T3 rectal cancer. Dis Colon
Rectum 1997;40:515.
147. Rouanet P, Fabre JM, Dubois JB, et al. Conservative surgery for low rectal carcinoma after high-dose radiation. Functional and oncologic results. Ann Surg 1995;221:67.
148. Maghfoor I, Wilkes J, Kuvshinoff B, et al. Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy with sphincter-sparing surgery for low lying rectal cancer. Proc ASCO 1997;16:274.
149. Valentini V, Coco C, Cellini N, et al. Preoperative chemoradiation for extraperitoneal T3 rectal cancer: acute toxicity, tumor response, and sphincter preservation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;40:1067.
150. Papillon J, Gerard JP. Role of radiotherapy in anal preservation for cancers of the lower third of the rectum. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:1219.
151. Mohiuddin M, Regine WF, Marks GJ, Marks JW. High-dose preoperative radiation and the challenge of sphincter-preservation surgery for cancer of the distal 2 cm of the rectum. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:569.
152. Minsky BD, Cohen AM, Enker WE, Paty P. Sphincter preservation with preoperative radiation therapy and coloanal anastomosis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:553.
153. Kollmorgen CF, Meagher AP, Pemberton JH, et al. The long term effect of adjuvant postoperative chemoradiotherapy for rectal cancer on bowel function. Ann Surg 1994;220:676.
154. Paty PB, Enker WE, Cohen AM, et al. Long-term functional results of coloanal anastomosis for rectal cancer. Am J Surg 1994;167:90.
155. Birnbaum EH, Dreznik Z, Myerson RJ, et al. Early effect of external beam radiation on anal sphincter: a study using anal manometry and transrectal ultrasound. Dis Colon Rectum 1992;35:757.
156. Birnbaum EH, Meyerson RJ, Fry RD, et al. Chronic effects of pelvic radiation therapy on anorectal function. Dis Colon Rectum 1994;37:909.
157. Minsky BD, Cohen A, Enker W, et al. Pre-operative 5-FU, low dose leucovorin, and concurrent radiation therapy for rectal cancer. Cancer 1994;73:273.
158. Janjan NA, Khoo VS, Abbruzzese J, et al. Tumor downstaging and sphincter preservation with preoperative chemoradiation in locally advanced rectal cancer: the M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:1027.
159. Janjan NA, Abbruzzese J, Pazdur R, et al. Prognostic implications of response to preoperative infusional chemoradiation in locally advanced rectal cancer. Radiother Oncol 1999;51:153.
160. Minsky BD, Conti J, Cohen AM, et al. Acute toxicity of neoadjuvant bolus 5-FU/methotrexate and leucovorin rescue followed by continuous infusion 5-FU plus pre-operative radiation therapy for
rectal cancer. Radiat Oncol Invest 1996;4:90.
161. James RD, Price P, Valentini V. Raltitrexed (Tomudex) concomitant with radiotherapy as adjuvant treatment for patients with rectal cancer: preliminary results of phase I studies. Eur J Cancer
1999;35:s19.
162. Valentini V, Morganti AG, Fiorentino G, et al. Chemoradiation with raltitrexed (Tomudex) and concomitant preoperative radiotherapy has potential in the treatment od stage II/III resectable
rectal cancer. Proc ASCO 1999;18:257a.
163. Feliu J, Calvillo J, Escribano A, et al. Neoadjuvant therapy of rectal carcinoma with UFT-folonic acid (LV) plus radiotherapy. Proc ASCO 1999;18:239a.
164. Mitchell E, Ahmad N, Fry RD, et al. Combined modality therapy of locally advanced or recurrent adenocarcinoma of the rectum: preliminary report of a phase I trial of chemotherapy (CT) with
CPT-11, 5-FU, and concomitant irradiation (RT). Proc ASCO 1999;18:247a.
165. Minsky BD, O'Reilly E, Wong D, et al. Daily low-dose irinotecan (CPT-11) plus pelvic irradiation as preoperative treatment of locally advanced rectal cancer. Proc ASCO 1999;18:266a.
166. Haas-Kock DFM, Baeten CGMI, Jager JJ, et al. Prognostic significance of radial margins of clearance in rectal cancer. Br J Surg 1996;83:781.
167. Arenas RB, Fichera A, Mhoon D, Michelassi F. Total mesenteric excision in the surgical treatment of rectal cancer. A prospective study. Arch Surg 1998;133:608.
168. Aitken RJ. Mesorectal excision for rectal cancer. Br J Surg 1996;83:214.
169. Carlsen E, Schlichting E, Guldvog I, et al. Effect of the introduction of total mesorectal excision for the treatment of rectal cancer. Br J Surg 1998;85:526.
170. Poon RTP, Chu KW, Ho JWC, et al. Prospective evaluation of selective defunctioning stoma for low anterior resection with total mesorectal excision. World J Surg 1999;23:463.
171. Minsky BD, Conti JA, Huang Y, Knopf K. The relationship of acute gastrointestinal toxicity and the volume of irradiated small bowel in patients receiving combined modality therapy for rectal
cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1409.
172. Tepper JE, Cohen AM, Wood WC, et al. Postoperative radiation therapy of rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:5.
173. Willett CG, Tepper JE, Kaufman DS, et al. Adjuvant postoperative radiation therapy for rectal adenocarcinoma. Am J Clin Oncol 1992;15:371.
174. Romsdahl MM, Withers HR. Radiotherapy combined with curative surgery: its use as therapy for carcinomas of the sigmoid colon and rectum. Arch Surg 1978;113:446.

175. Vigliotti A, Rich TA, Romsdahl MM, et al. Postoperative adjuvant radiotherapy for adenocarcinoma of the rectum and rectosigmoid. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:999.
176. Wiggenraad R, Tamminga R, Blok P, et al. The prognostic significance of P53 expression for survival and local control in rectal carcinoma treated with surgery and postoperative radiotherapy.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:29.
177. Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Adjuvant therapy of colon cancer: results of a prospectively randomized trial. N Engl J Med 1984;310:737.
178. Fisher B, Wolmark N, Rockette H, et al. Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation therapy for rectal cancer: results from NSABP protocol R-01. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:21.
179. Medical Research Council Rectal Cancer Working Party. Randomized trial of surgery alone versus surgery followed by post-operative radiotherapy for mobile cancer of the rectum. Lancet
1996;348:1610.
180. Arnaud JP, Nordlinger B, Bosset JF, et al. Radical surgery and postoperative radiotherapy as combined treatment in rectal cancer. Final results of a phase III study of the European
Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer. Br J Surg 1997;84:352.
181. Kaminsky-Forrett MC, Conroy T, Luporsi E, et al. Prognostic implications of downstaging following preoperative radiation therapy for operable T3-T4 rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;42:935.
182. Ahmad NR, Nagle DA, Topham A. Pathologic complete response predicts long-term survival following preoperative radiation therapy for rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:284.
183. Habr-Gama A, Santinho B, de Souza PM, et al. Low rectal cancer. Impact of radiation and chemotherapy on surgical treatment. Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:1087.
184. Rossi BM, Nakagawa WT, Novaes PE, et al. Radiation and chemotherapy instead of surgery for low infiltrative rectal adenocarcinoma: a prospective trial. Ann Surg Oncol 1998;5:113.
185. Hunerbein M, Schlag PM. Three-dimensional endosonography for staging of rectal cancer. Ann Surg 1997;25:432.
186. Hadfield MB, Nicholson AA, MacDonald AW, et al. Preoperative staging of rectal carcinoma by magnetic resonance imaging with a pelvic phased-array coil. Br J Surg 1997;84:529.
187. deSouza NM, Hall AS, Puni R, et al. High resolution magnetic resonance imaging of the anal sphincter using a dedicated endoanal coil. Comparison of magnetic resonance imaging with
surgical findings. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:926.
188. Falk PM, Gupta NC, Thorson AG, et al. Positron emission tomography for preoperative staging of colorectal carcinoma. Dis Colon Rectum 1994;37:153.
189. Herzog U, von Flue M, Tondelli P, Schuppisser JP. How accurate is endorectal ultrasound in the preoperative staging of rectal cancer? Dis Colon Rectum 1993;36:127.
190. Frykholm GJ, Glimelius B, Pahlman L. Preoperative or postoperative irradiation in adenocarcinoma of the rectum: final treatment results of a randomized trial and an evaluation of late
secondary effects. Dis Colon Rectum 1993;36:564.
191. Minsky BD. Multidisciplinary management of resectable rectal cancer. Oncology 1996;10:1701.
192. Rich TA. Infusional chemoradiation for operable rectal cancer: post-, pre-, or nonoperative management? Oncology 1997;11:295.
193. Medical Research Council Rectal Cancer Working Party. Randomized trial of surgery alone versus radiotherapy followed by surgery for potentially operable, locally advanced rectal cancer.
Lancet 1996;348:1605.
194. Glimelius B, Isacson U, Jung B, Pahlman L. Radiotherapy in addition to radical surgery in rectal cancer: evidence for a dose-response effect favoring preoperative treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1997;37:281.
195. Cedermark B, Johansson H, Rutqvist LE, Wilking N. The Stockholm I trial of preoperative short term radiotherapy in operable rectal carcinoma. Cancer 1995;75:2269.
196. Dahlberg M, Glimelius B, Pahlman L. Improved survival and reduction in local failure rates after preoperative radiotherapy. Evidence for the generalizability of the results of Swedish Rectal
Cancer Trial. Ann Surg 1999;229:493.
197. Frykholm GJ, Isacsson U, Nygard K, et al. Preoperative radiotherapy in rectal carcinomaaspects of acute adverse effects and radiation technique. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;35:1039.
198. Myerson RJ, Genovesi D, Lockett MA, et al. Five fractions of preoperative radiotherapy for selected cases of rectal carcinoma: long-term tumor control and tolerance to treatment. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:537.
199. Lusinchi A, Wibault P, Lasser P, et al. Abdominoperineal resection combined with pre- and postoperative radiation therapy in the treatment of low-lying rectal carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1997;37:59.
200. Willett CG, Warland G, Coen J, et al. Rectal cancer: the influence of tumor proliferation on response to preoperative irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:57.
201. Willett CG, Warland G, Hagan MP, et al. Tumor proliferation in rectal cancer following preoperative irradiation. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1417.
202. Willett CG, Hagan M, Daley W, et al. Changes in tumor proliferation of rectal cancer induced by preoperative 5-fluorouracil and irradiation. Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:62.
203. Desai GR, Meyerson RJ, Higashikubo R, et al. Carcinoma of the rectum: possible cellular predictors of metastatic potential and response to radiation therapy. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:1090.
204. Neoptolemos JP, Oates GD, Newbold KM, et al. Cyclin/proliferation cell nuclear antigen immunohistochemistry does not improve the prognostic power of Dukes' or Jass' classifications for
colorectal cancer. Br J Surg 1995;82:184.
205. Rich TA, Sinicrope F, Stephens C, et al. Downstaging of T3 rectal cancer after preoperative infusional chemoradiation is correlated with spontaneous apoptosis index and BCL-2 staining. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:259.
206. Berger C, de Muret A, Garaud P, et al. Preoperative radiotherapy (RT) for rectal cancer: predictive factors of tumor downstaging and residual tumor density (RTCD): prognostic implications. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:619.
207. Nicholl ID, Dunlop MG. Molecular markers of prognosis in colorectal cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1267.
208. Fisher B, Wolmark N, Rockette HE, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy or postoperative radiation for rectal cancer: five year results of NSABP R01. In: Salmon SE, ed. Adjuvant therapy of cancer V.
New York: Grune & Stratton, 1987:547.
209. Miller RC, Martenson JA, Sargent DJ, et al. Acute diarrhea during rectal adjuvant postoperative pelvic radiation therapy (RT) with or without 5-fluorouracil: a detailed analysis of toxicity from a
randomized North Central Cancer Treatment Group study. Proc ASCO 1998;17:279a.
210. Tveit KM, Guldvog I, Hagen S, et al. Randomized controlled trial of post-operative radiotherapy and short-term time-scheduled 5-fluorouracil against surgery alone in the treatment of Dukes B
and C rectal cancer. Br J Surg 1997;84:1130.
211. Willett CG, Badizadegan K, Ancukiewicz M, Shellito PC. Prognostic factors in stage T3N0 rectal cancer. Do all patients require post-operative pelvic irradiation and chemotherapy? Dis Colon
Rectum 1999;42:167.
212. Willett CG, Lewandrowski K, Donnelly S, et al. Are there patients with stage I rectal carcinoma at risk for failure after abdominoperineal resection? Cancer 1992;69:1651.
213. O'Connell M, Wieand H, Krook J, et al. Lack of value for methyl CCNU as a component of effective rectal cancer surgical adjuvant therapy. Interim analysis of intergroup protocol 86-47-51.
Proc ASCO 1991;10:134.
214. Elwell A, Xoing YP, Chang M, et al. p53, p21 and thymidylate synthase (TS) protein expression: associations with recurrence in stage II and III rectal cancer. Proc ASCO 1997;16:258.
215. Rockette H, Deutsch M, Petrelli N, et al. Effect of postoperative radiation therapy (RTX) when used with adjuvant chemotherapy in Dukes' B and C rectal cancer: results from NSABP-R02. Proc
ASCO 1994;13:193.
216. Tepper JE, O'Connell MJ, Petroni GR, et al. Adjuvant postoperative fluorouracil-modulated chemotherapy combined with pelvic radiation therapy for rectal cancer: initial results of Intergroup
0114. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2030.
217. O'Connel MJ, Laurie JA, Kahn M, et al. Prospectively randomized trial of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with high-risk colon cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:295.
218. Haller DG, Catalano PJ, Macdonald JS, Mayer RJ. Fluorouracil (FU), leucovorin (LV) and levamisole (LEV) adjuvant therapy for colon cancer: preliminary results of INT-0089. Proc ASCO
1996;15:211.
219. Martenson JA, Shanahan TG, O'Connell MJ, et al. Phase I study of 5-fluorouracil administered by protracted venous infusion, leucovorin, and pelvic radiation therapy. Cancer 1999;86:710.
220. Minsky BD, Cohen AM, Enker WE, et al. Efficacy of post-operative 5-FU, high dose leucovorin and sequential radiation therapy for clinically resectable rectal cancer. Cancer Invest 1995;13:1.
221. Minsky BD. Pelvic radiation therapy in rectal cancer: technical considerations. Semin Radiat Oncol 1993;3:42.
222. Grann A, Wallner K. Prostate brachytherapy in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:135.
223. Green S, Stock RG, Greenstein AJ. Rectal cancer and inflammatory bowel disease: natural history and implications for radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:835.
224. Willett CG, Ooi CJ, Zeitman AL, et al. Acute and late toxicity of patients with inflammatory bowel disease undergoing irradiation for abdominal and pelvic neoplasms. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 2000;46:995.
225. Rakfal SM, Deutsch M. Radiotherapy for malignancies associated with lupus. Case reports of acute and late complications. Am J Clin Oncol 1998;21:54.
226. Coia L, Myerson R, Tepper JE. Late effects of radiation therapy on the gastrointestinal tract. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:1213.
227. Richter KK, Langberg CW, Sung CC, Hauer-Jensen M. Increased transforming growth factor b (TGF-b) immunoreactivity is independently associated with chronic injury in both consequential
and primary enteropathy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:187.
228. Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Radiation therapy and fluorouracil with or without semustine for the treatment of patients with surgical adjuvant adenocarcinoma of the rectum. J Clin
Oncol 1992;10:549.
229. Miller RC, Martenson JA Jr, Sargent DJ, et al. Acute treatment-related diarrhea during postoperative adjuvant therapy for high-risk rectal carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:593.
230. Grann A, Minsky BD, Cohen AM, et al. Preliminary results of pre-operative 5-FU, low dose leucovorin, and concurrent radiation therapy for resectable T3 rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1996;36:260.
231. Schuster JJ, Stryker JA, Demers LM, Mortel R. Absence of bile acid malabsorption as a late effect of pelvic radiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1605.
232. Miller AR, Martenson JA Jr, Nelson H, et al. The incidence and clinical consequences of treatment-related bowel injury. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:817.
233. Carmichael J, Popiela T, Radstone D, et al. Randomized comparative study of Orzel [oral uracil/tegafur (UFT) plus leucovorin (LV)] versus parenteral 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) plus LV in patients
with metastatic colorectal cancer. Proc ASCO 1999;18:264a.
234. Konski A, Sowers M. Pelvic fractures following irradiation for endometrial carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;35:361.
235. Iglicki F, Coffin B, Ille O, et al. Fecal incontinence after pelvic radiotherapy: evidence for a lumbosacral plexopathy. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:465.
236. Frykholm GJ, Sintorn K, Montelius A, et al. Acute lumbosacral plexopathy after preoperative radiotherapy in rectal cancer. Radiother Oncol 1996;38:121.
237. Dahlberg M, Glimelius B, Graf W, Pahlman L. Preoperative irradiation affects functional results after surgery for rectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:543.
238. Graf W, Ekstrom K, Glimelius B, Pahlman L. A pilot study of factors influencing bowel function after colorectal anastomosis. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:744.
239. Little FA, Howard GCW. Sexual function following radical radiotherapy for bladder cancer. Radiother Oncol 1998;49:157.
240. Mak AC, Rich TA, Schultheiss TE, et al. Late complications of postoperative radiation therapy for cancer of the rectum and rectosigmoid. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;28:597.
241. Sigmon WR, Randall ME, Olds WE, et al. Increased chronic bowel complications with split-course pelvic irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;28:349.
242. Huddart RA, Nahum A, Neal A, et al. Accuracy of pelvic radiotherapy: prospective analysis of 90 patients in a randomised trial of blocked versus standard radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol
1996;39:19.
243. Creutzberg CL, Althof VGM, de Hoog M, et al. A quality control study of the accuracy of patient positioning in irradiation of pelvic fields. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;34:697.
244. Tinger A, Michalski JM, Bosch WR, et al. An analysis of intratreatment and intertreatment displacements in pelvic radiotherapy using electronic portal imaging. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1996;34:683.
245. Martenson JA Jr, Urias RE, Smalley SR, et al. Radiation therapy quality control in a clinical trial of adjuvant postoperative treatment for rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;32:51.
246. Gallagher MJ, Brereton HD, Rostock RA, et al. A prospective study of treatment techniques to minimize the volume of pelvic small bowel with reduction of acute and late effects associated with
pelvic irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1565.
247. Herbert SH, Curran WJ, Solin LJ, et al. Decreasing gastrointestinal morbidity with the use of small bowel contrast during treatment planing for pelvic radiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1991;20:835.
248. Shanahan TG, Mehta MP, Bertelrud KL, et al. Minimization of small bowel volume within treatment fields utilizing customized “belly boards.” Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:469.
249. Fu YT, Lam JC, Tze JMY. Measurement of irradiated small bowel volume in pelvic irradiation and the effect of a bellyboard. Clin Oncol 1995;7:188.
250. Das IJ, Lanciano RM, Movsas B, et al. Efficacy of a belly board device with CT-simulation in reducing small bowel volume within pelvic irradiation fields. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1997;39:67.
251. Herbert SH, Solin LJ, Hoffman JP, et al. Volumetric analysis of small bowel displacement from radiation portals with the use of a pelvic tissue expander. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1993;25:885.
252. Hoffman JP, Sigurdson ER, Eisenberg BL. Use of saline-filled expanders to protect the small bowel from radiation. Oncology 1998;12:51.

253. Sezeur A, Martella L, Abbou C, et al. Small intestine protection from radiation by means of a removable adapted prosthesis. Am J Surg 1999;178:22.
254. Brierley JD, Cummings BJ, Wong CS, et al. The variation of small bowel volume within the pelvis before and during adjuvant radiation for rectal cancer. Radiother Oncol 1994;31:110.
255. Tait DM, Nahum AE, Meyer LC, et al. Acute toxicity in pelvic radiotherapy; a randomised trial of conformal versus conventional treatment. Radiother Oncol 1997;42:121.
256. Isacsson U, Montelius A, Jung B, Glimelius B. Comparative treatment planning between proton and X-ray therapy in locally advanced rectal cancer. Radiother Oncol 1997;41:263.
257. Stockholm Rectal Cancer Study Group. Preoperative short-term preoperative radiation therapy in operable rectal cancer: a randomized trial. Cancer 1990;66:49.
258. Chen JS, Chang Chien CR, Wang JY, Fan HA. Pelvic peritoneal reconstruction to prevent radiation enteritis in rectal carcinoma. Dis Colon Rectum 1992;35:897.
259. Lechner P, Cesnik H. Abdominopelvic omentopexy: preparatory procedure for radiotherapy for rectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1992;35:1157.
260. Thom A, Baumann J, Chandler JJ, Devereux DF. Experience with high-dose radiation therapy and the intestinal sling procedure in patients with rectal carcinoma. Cancer 1992;70:581.
261. Rodier JF, Janser JC, Rodier D, et al. Prevention of radiation enteritis by an absorbable polyglycolic acid mesh sling. A 60-case multicentric study. Cancer 1991;68:2545.
262. Beitler A, Rodriguez-Bigas MA, Weber TK, et al. Complications of absorbable pelvic mesh slings following surgery for rectal carcinoma. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:1336.
263. Talley NA, Chen F, King D, et al. Short-chain fatty acid in the treatment of radiation proctitis. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over pilot trial. Dis Colon Rectum
1997;40:1046.
264. O'Brien PC, Franklin CI, Dear KBG, et al. A phase III double-blind randomised study of rectal sucralfate suspension in the prevention of acute radiation proctitis. Radiother Oncol 1997;45:117.
265. Resbeut M, Marteau P, Cowen D, et al. A randomized double blind placebo controlled multicenter study of mesalazine for the prevention of acute radiation enteritis. Radiother Oncol
1997;44:59.
266. Craighead PS, Young S. Phase II study assessing the feasibility of using elemental supplements to reduce acute enteritis in patients receiving radical pelvic radiotherapy. Am J Clin Oncol
1998;21:573.
267. Stryker JA, Bartholomew M. Failure of lactose-restricted diets to prevent radiation-induced diarrhea in patients undergoing whole pelvic irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:789.
268. Liu T, Liu Y, He S, et al. Use of radiation with or without WR-2721 in advanced rectal cancer. Cancer 1992;69:2820.
269. Minsky BD, Cohen AM, Kemeny N, et al. Enhancement of radiation induced downstaging of rectal cancer by 5-FU and high dose leucovorin chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:79.
270. Willett CG, Shellito PC, Tepper JE, et al. Intraoperative electron beam radiation therapy for primary locally advanced rectal and rectosigmoid carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:843.
271. Willett CG, Shellito PC, Tepper JE, et al. Intraoperative electron beam radiation therapy for recurrent locally advanced rectal or rectosigmoid carcinoma. Cancer 1991;67:1504.
272. Mendenhall WM, Bland KI, Pfaff WW, et al. Initially unresectable rectal adenocarcinoma treated with preoperative irradiation and surgery. Ann Surg 1986;205:41.
273. Marsh RW, Chu NM, Vauthey JN, et al. Preoperative treatment of patients with locally advanced unresectable rectal adenocarcinoma utilizing continuous chronobiologically shaped
5-fluorouracil infusion and radiation therapy. Cancer 1996;78:217.
274. Tobin RL, Mohiuddin M, Marks G. Preoperative irradiation for cancer of the rectum with extrarectal fixation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:1127.
275. Willett CG, Shellito PC, Rodkey GV, Wood WC. Preoperative irradiation for tethered rectal carcinoma. Radiother Oncol 1991;21:141.
276. Minsky BD, Cohen AM, Enker WE, et al. Intraoperative brachytherapy alone in incompletely resected recurrent rectal cancer. Radiother Oncol 1991;21:115.
277. Dibiase SJ, Rosenstock JG, Shabason L, Corn BW. Tumor bed brachytherapy with a mesh template: an accessible alternative to intraoperative radiotherapy. J Surg Oncol 1997;66:104.
278. Harrison LB, Minsky BD, Enker WE, et al. High dose rate intraoperative radiation therapy (HDR-IORT) as part of the management strategy for locally advanced primary and recurrent rectal
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:325.
279. Huber FT, Stepan R, Zimmermann F, et al. Locally advanced rectal cancer: resection and intraoperative radiotherapy using the flab method combined with preoperative or postoperative
radiochemotherapy. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:774.
280. Nakfoor BM, Willett CG, Shellito PC, et al. The impact of 5-fluorouracil and intraoperative electron beam radiation therapy on the outcome of patients with locally advanced primary rectal and
rectosigmoid cancer. Ann Surg 1998;228:194.
281. Saltz LB, Locker PK, Pirotta N, et al. Weekly irinotecan (CPT-11), leucovorin (LV), and fluorouracil (FU) is superior to daily 5 LV/FU in patients (pts) with previously untreated metastatic
colorectal cancer. Proc ASCO 1999;18:233a.
282. Kallinowski F, Eble MJ, Buhr HJ, et al. Intraoperative radiotherapy for primary and recurrent rectal cancers. Eur J Surg Oncol 1995;21:191.
283. Kim HK, Jessup JM, Beard CJ, et al. Locally advanced rectal carcinoma: pelvic control and morbidity following preoperative radiation therapy, resection, and intraoperative radiation therapy. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:777.
284. Gunderson LL, Nelson H, Martenson JA, et al. Intraoperative electron and external beam irradiation with or without 5-fluorouracil and maximum surgical resection for previously unirradiated,
locally recurrent colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:1379.
285. Wallace JH, Willett CG, Shellito PC, et al. Intraoperative radiation therapy for locally advanced recurrent rectal or rectosigmoid cancer. J Surg Oncol 1995;60:122.
286. Lowy AM, Rich TA, Skibber JM, et al. Preoperative infusional chemoradiation, selective intraoperative radiation, and resection for locally advanced pelvic recurrence of colorectal
adenocarcinoma. Ann Surg 1996;223:177.
287. Hashiguchi Y, Sekine T, Sakamoto H, et al. Intraoperative irradiation after surgery for locally recurrent rectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:886.
288. Eble MJ, Lehnert T, Treiber M, et al. Moderate dose intraoperative and external beam radiotherapy for locally recurrent rectal carcinoma. Radiother Oncol 1998;49:169.
289. Vujaskovic Z, Powers BE, Paardekoper G, et al. Effects of intraoperative irradiation (IORT) and intraoperative hyperthermia (IOHT) on canine sciatic nerve: histopathological and morphometric
studies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:1103.
290. Johnstone PAS, Laskin WB, DeLuca AM, et al. Tumors in dogs exposed to experimental intraoperative radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;34:853.
291. Gunderson LL, O'Connell MJ, Dozois RR. The role of intraoperative irradiation in locally advanced primary and recurrent rectal adenocarcinoma. World J Surg 1992;16:495.
292. Lanciano RM, Calkins AR, Wolkov HB, et al. A phase I/II study of intraoperative radiotherapy in advanced unresectable or recurrent carcinoma of the rectum: a radiation therapy oncology group
(RTOG) study. J Surg Oncol 1993;53:20.
293. Noyes RD, Weiss SM, Krall JM, et al. Surgical complications of intraoperative radiation therapy: the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group experience. J Surg Oncol 1993;50:209.
294. Frykholm G, Glimelius B, Pahlman L. Preoperative irradiation with and without chemotherapy (MFL) in the treatment of primary non-resectable adenocarcinoma of the rectum. Results from two
consecutive studies. Eur J Clin Oncol 1989;11:1535.
295. Gunderson LL, Nelson H, Martenson JA, et al. Locally advanced primary colorectal cancer: intraoperative electron and external beam irradiation + 5-FU. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1997;37:601.
296. Kelsen DP, Hilaris B, Martini N. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and surgery of cancer of the esophagus. Semin Surg Oncol 1986;2:170.
297. Chen ET, Mohiuddin M, Brodovsky H, et al. Downstaging of advanced rectal cancer following combined preoperative chemotherapy and high dose radiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1994;30:169.
298. Movsas B, Hanlon A, Lanciano R, et al. Phase I dose escalating trial of hyperfractionated pre-operative chemoradiation for locally advanced rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;42:43.
299. Videtic GMM, Fischer BJ, Perera FE, et al. Preoperative radiation with concurrent 5-fluorouracil continuous for locally advanced unresectable rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;42:319.
300. Bussieres E, Gilly FN, Rouanet P, et al. Recurrences of rectal cancers: results of a multimodal approach with intraoperative radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;34:49.
301. Perera F, Fisher B, Kocha W, et al. A phase I pilot study of pelvic radiation and alpha-2A interferon in patients with locally advanced or recurrent rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1997;37:297.
302. James RD, Price P, Smith M. Raltitrexed (Tomudex) plus radiotherapy is well tolerated and warrants further investigation in patients with advanced inoperable/recurrent rectal cancer. Proc
ASCO 1999;18:288a.
303. Schild SE, Martenson JA, Gunderson LL, Dozois RR. Long-term survival and patterns of failure after postoperative radiation therapy for subtotally resected rectal adenocarcinoma. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1989;16:459.
304. Suzuki K, Gunderson LL, Devine RM, et al. Intraoperative irradiation after palliative surgery for locally recurrent rectal cancer. Cancer 1995;75:939.
305. Allee PE, Tepper JE, Gunderson LL, Munzenrider JE. Postoperative radiation therapy for incompletely resected colorectal carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:1171.
306. Calvo FA, Algarra SM, Azinovic I, et al. Intraoperative radiotherapy for recurrent and/or residual colorectal cancer. Radiother Oncol 1989;15:133.
307. Duncan W, Arnott SJ, Jack WJL, et al. Results of two randomized trials of neutron therapy in rectal adenocarcinoma. Radiother Oncol 1987;8:191.
308. Nishimura Y, Hiraoka M, Akuta K, et al. Hyperthermia combined with radiation therapy for primarily unresectable and recurrent colorectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;23:759.
309. Graf R, Wust P, Gellermann J, et al. Phase II trial of radiation therapy with 45 Gy, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), and mitomycin-C (MMC) in patients with anal cancera rationale to add regional
hyperthermia. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:296.
310. Furuta K, Konishi F, Kanazawa K, et al. Synergistic effects of hyperthermia in preoperative radiochemotherapy for rectal carcinoma. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:1303.
311. Ohno S, Tomoda M, Tomisaki S, et al. Improved surgical results after combining preoperative hyperthermia with chemotherapy and radiotherapy for patients with carcinoma of the rectum. Dis
Colon Rectum 1997;40:401.
312. Ichikawa D, Yamaguchi T, Yoshioka Y, et al. Prognostic evaluation of preoperative combined treatment for advanced cancer in the lower rectum with radiation, intraluminal hyperthermia, and
5-fluorouracil suppository. Am J Surg 1996;171:346.
313. Emami B, Myerson RJ, Scott C, et al. Phase I/II study, combination of radiotherapy and hyperthermia in patients with deep-seated malignant tumors: report of a pilot study by the Radiation
Therapy Oncology Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:73.
314. Pu AT, Robertson JM, Lawrence TS. Current status of radiation sensitization by fluoropyrimidines. Oncology 1995;9:707.
315. Rhomberg W, Eiter H, Hergan K, Schneider B. Inoperable recurrent rectal cancer: results of a prospective trial with radiation therapy and razoxane. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:419.
316. Coucke PA, Cuttat JF, Mirimanoff RO. Adjuvant postoperative accelerated hyperfractionated radiotherapy in rectal cancer: a feasibility study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:885.
317. Coucke PA, Sartorelli B, Cuttat JF, et al. The rationale to switch from postoperative hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy to preoperative hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy in
rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:181.
318. Bozzetti F, Baratti D, Andreola S, et al. Preoperative radiation therapy for patients with T2-T3 carcinoma of the middle-to-lower rectum. Cancer 1999;86:398.
319. Turegano-Fuentes F, Echenagusia-Belda A, Simo-Muerza G, et al. Transanal self-expanding metal stents as an alternative to palliative colostomy in selected patients with malignant obstruction
of the left colon. Br J Surg 1998;85:232.
320. Eckhauser ML, Imbembo AL, Mansour EG. The role of pre-resectional laser recanalization for obstructing carcinomas of the colon and rectum. Surgery 1989;106:710.
321. Sagar PM, Pemberton JH. Surgical management of locally recurrent rectal cancer. Br J Surg 1996;83:293.
322. Romano G, Esercizio L, Santangelo M, et al. Impact of computed tomography vs. intrarectal ultrasound on the diagnosis, resectability, and prognosis of locally recurrent rectal cancer. Dis Colon
Rectum 1993;36:261.
323. Freeny PC, Marks WM, Ryan JA, Bolen JW. Colorectal carcinoma evaluation with CT: preoperative staging and detection of postoperative recurrence. Radiology 1986;158:347.
324. Farouk R, Nelson H, Radice E, et al. Accuracy of computed tomography in determining resectability for locally advanced primary or recurrent colorectal cancers. Am J Surg 1998;175:283.
325. Cohen AM, Martin EW, Lavery I, et al. Radioimmunoguided surgery using iodine 125 B72.3 in patients with colorectal cancer. Arch Surg 1991;126:349.
326. Beets G, Penninck F, Schiepers C. Clinical value of whole-body positron emission tomography with [ 18 F]fluorodeoxyglucose in recurrent colorectal cancer. Br J Surg 1994;81:1666.
327. Donat SM, Russo P. Ureteral decompression in advanced nonurologic malignancies. Ann Surg Oncol 1996;3:393.
328. Pearlman NW, Donohue RE, Stiegmann GV, et al. Pelvic and sacropelvic exenteration for locally advanced or recurrent anorectal cancer. Arch Surg 1987;122:537.
329. Wanebo HJ, Gaker DL, Whitehill R, et al. Pelvic recurrence of rectal cancer. Ann Surg 1987;205:482.
330. Temple WJ, Ketcham AC. Sacral resection for control of pelvic tumors. Am J Surg 1992;163:370.
331. Zacherl J, Schiessel R, Windhager R, et al. Abdominosacral resection of recurrent rectal cancer in the sacrum. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:1035.
332. Mohiuddin M, Marks GM, Lingareddy V, Marks J. Curative surgical resection following reirradiation for recurrent rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:643.
333. Yeh KA, Hoffman JP, Kusiak JE, et al. Reconstruction with myocutaneous flaps following total resection of locally recurrent rectal cancer. Am Surg 1995;61:581.
334. Arbman G, Nilsson E, Hallbook O, Sjodahl R. Local recurrence following mesorectal excision for rectal cancer. Br J Surg 1996;83:375.
335. Pocard M, Panis Y, Malassagne B, et al. Assessing the effectiveness of mesorectal excision in rectal cancer. Prognostic value of the number of lymph nodes found in resected specimens. Dis

Colon Rectum 1998;41:839.
336. Bailey HR, Huval WV, Max E, et al. Local excision of carcinoma of the rectum for cure. Surgery 1992;111:555.
337. Scott N, Hale A, Deakin M, et al. A histopathologic assessment of the response of rectal adenocarcinoma to combination chemo-radiotherapy. Eur J Surg Oncol 1998;24:169.
338. Tannapfel A, Nusslein S, Fietkau R, et al. Apoptosis, proliferation, bax, bcl-2, and p53 status prior to and after preoperative radiochemotherapy for locally advanced rectal cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:585.
339. Luna-Perez P, Arriola EL, Cuadra Y, et al. p53 protein overexpression and response to induction chemoradiation therapy in patients with locally advanced rectal adenocarcinoma. Ann Surg
Oncol 1998;5:203.
340. Desai GR, Meyerson RJ, Higashikubo R, et al. Carcinoma of the rectum. Possible cellular predictors of metastatic potential and response to radiation therapy. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:1090.
341. Fu CG, Tominaga O, Nagawa H, et al. Role of p53 and p21/WAF1 detection in patient selection for preoperative radiotherapy in rectal cancer patients. Dis Colon Rectum 1998; 41:58.
342. Sakakura C, Koide K, Ichikawa D, et al. Analysis of histological therapeutic effect, apoptosis rate and p53 status after combined treatment with radiation, hyperthermia, and 5-fluorouracil
suppositories for advanced rectal cancers. Br J Cancer 1998;77:159.
343. Nehls O, Klump B, Holzmann K, et al. Influence of p53 status on prognosis in preoperatively irradiated rectal carcinoma. Cancer 1999;85:2541.
344. Adell G, Sun XF, Olle S, et al. p53 status: an indicator for the effect of preoperative radiotherapy of rectal cancer. Radiother Oncol 1999;51:169.
345. Goes RN, Beart RW, Simons AJ, et al. Use of brachytherapy in management of locally recurrent rectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:1177.
346. Nag S, Martinez-Monge R, Mills J, et al. Intraoperative high dose rate brachytherapy in recurrent metastatic colorectal carcinoma. Ann Surg Oncol 1998;5:16.

SECTION 33.9 Cancer of the Anal Region
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 33.9
Cancer of the Anal Region
BRUCE D. MINSKY
JOHN P. HOFFMAN
DAVID P. KELSEN
Introduction
Epidemiology and Etiology
Incidence, Age, and Gender
Human Papilloma Virus Infection and Anal Cancer
Anal Cancer and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
Molecular and Chromosomal Abnormalities
Other Associations
Animal Studies
Anatomy
Pathology
Precancerous Changes
Squamous Cell Cancer
Natural History
Diagnosis
Staging
Prognostic Factors
Treatment
Combined Modality Therapy
Radiation Therapy Treatment Techniques
Pelvic Field
Primary Tumor Boost Field for Combined Modality Therapy Salvage at 6 Weeks
Medial and Lateral Inguinal Lymph Nodes
Complications and Critical Normal Tissues
Inguinal Node Involvement
Residual or Recurrent Cancer
Anal Margin
Anal Canal
Metastatic Disease
Follow-Up
Anorectal Melanoma
Clinical Presentation and Pathologic Features
Patterns of Spread
Treatment and Outcome
Adenocarcinoma
Sarcoma
Treatment of The Human Immunodeficiency Virus–Positive Patient
Future Directions
Prevention and Early Detection
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Anal cancers, while still uncommon tumors, have increased substantially in incidence since the 1980s. 1 As discussed in this chapter, it is possible that this increase in
incidence is due to sexual transmission of human papilloma virus (HPV). Thus, in theory at least, anal squamous cell (epidermoid) tumors may represent a
preventable disease. For almost two decades, combined modality treatment involving radiation and chemotherapy has resulted in 5-year survival rates of
approximately 80% and in sphincter preservation for most patients with squamous cell carcinomas of the anal canal. Surgical resection involving an abdominal
perineal resection (APR) is reserved for patients with local failure or progression. This approach has served as a model for other cancers of the successful use of
curative nonoperative combined modality therapy.

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY
INCIDENCE, AGE, AND GENDER
In the United States, cancers of the anal region account for 1% to 2% of all large bowel cancers and 3.9% of all anorectal carcinomas. The majority of these patients
(75% to 80%) have squamous cell carcinomas. 2 Approximately 15% have adenocarcinomas. In 1998, a total of 3300 cases of cancers of the anal region were
reported in the United States, including 1400 men and 1900 women. 1 It is estimated that there will be 500 deaths per year.
The U.S. National Cancer Database provided data to examine the epidemiology of patients with anal canal cancer. In this analysis, a total of 2339 cases of anal
carcinoma diagnosed in 1988 and 1993 were compared. There was little difference in mean age or in the male to female ratio during the 5-year period. Two-thirds of
newly diagnosed patients were women, indicating that both in the United States and in Europe, women are substantially more likely to develop anal canal cancers
than are men. Most patients were white. The proportion of patients with squamous cell carcinoma increased slightly, compromising between 75% and 80% of newly
diagnosed patients. Seventy-five percent of patients have stage I or II tumors. In this analysis, no comment was made regarding the incidence of disease in
homosexual or bisexual men.
HUMAN PAPILLOMA VIRUS INFECTION AND ANAL CANCER
HPV infection is closely correlated with squamous cell carcinoma. Frisch et al. conducted a population-based case-control study in Denmark and Sweden for patients
with anal canal cancers. 3 Two control groups (patients with adenocarcinoma of the rectum and healthy persons from the general population) were included. A variety
of behavioral factors, such as sexual activity and venereal infection, tobacco consumption, and anal inflammatory lesions, were examined. In this large study involving
417 patients with anal cancer, 534 controls with adenocarcinoma of the rectum, and 554 general population controls, a strong positive correlation was found both in
univariate and multivariate analysis for the amount of sexual activity and the risk of anal cancer. An additional association between venereal infection in both men and
women was noted. The authors concluded that sexual activity was strongly associated with the development of anal canal cancer and that HPV infection was the
presumed etiologic cause.
Anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN) is rare in heterosexual men, whereas the incidence is 5% to 30% in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)–negative homosexual
men. Similarly, such changes are rare among HIV-negative women. High-grade anal lesions that almost always contain HPV have been reported, primarily among
HIV-positive individuals. It is suspected that, similar to cervical carcinoma in which HPV is strongly associated and may be a necessary factor for development of the
disease, high-grade AIN lesions are the immediate precursors to anal cancer. 4,5 and 6

ANAL CANCER AND ACQUIRED IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROME
An association between acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and an increased risk for anal canal cancer has been noted for some time. Treatment of the
HIV-positive patient is discussed later in this chapter (see Treatment of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus–Positive Patient). Melbye et al. linked databases for AIDS
and those for cancer in American patients. 7 The relative risk (RR) of anal cancer at the time of or after AIDS diagnosis was 84.1 among homosexual men. The relative
risk of anal cancer for up to 5 years before AIDS diagnosis was 13.9. This marked increased risk of anal cancer in patients with AIDS is presumably because of
immunodeficiency, perhaps increasing susceptibility to HPV infection. A similar increase in risk has been noted for renal transplant patients undergoing

immunosuppression.8
Although earlier studies suggested that anal-receptive intercourse was directly linked to an increased risk of anal cancer, this finding has not been confirmed in more
recent larger scale trials. Particularly in women, most patients did not report sexual activity involving anal intercourse.
Goldie et al. reviewed the clinical outcome and cost effectiveness of screening for premalignant (squamous intraepithelial lesions) or malignant anal lesions in
homosexual and bisexual HIV-positive men. 9 Their analysis indicated that screening of homosexual and bisexual men who were HIV-positive, no matter what the
stage of their HIV status, prolongs quality-adjusted life expectancy.
Anal canal carcinoma has also been associated with condylomata in both the general population and in male homosexuals. 10,11 and 12 Pfister and Fuchs also noted that
HPV-16 infection has a strong association with high-grade AIN and a risk of anogenital malignancy. HPV infection alone may be insufficient for malignant
transformation, however, as many persons with HPV-positive cytology do not develop either AIN or anal carcinoma. 13
In women without a history of genital warts, anal cancer was associated with seropositivity for herpes simplex virus type 1 (RR, 4.1) and Chlamydia trachomatis (RR,
2.3).14 In men without a history of warts, there was an association with gonorrhea (RR, 17.2). Among individuals with AIDS, an increased risk of anal cancer has been
found. 7,15

MOLECULAR AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES
The E6 oncoprotein of HPV inactivates the growth-controlling p53 suppressor gene product, which may play an important role in the pathogenesis of anal cancer. 16,17
Overexpression of p53 protein has been studied in patients receiving combined modality therapy. In an analysis involving approximately 20% of patients entered into
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) protocol 87-04, in whom 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) plus radiation with or without mitomycin C was given,
immunohistochemistry for p53 overexpression was performed. Although there was a trend toward worse outcome (decreased local control and survival) in patients
overexpressing p53, this did not reach statistical significance. 18
Other investigators have studied MIB-1 in patients with anal canal carcinomas receiving radiation therapy alone or combined modality therapy. In a group of 55
patients, MIB-1 murine monoclonal antibody measuring Ki-67, used as an index of cellular proliferation, failed to predict outcome for patients treated with radiation
with or without chemotherapy. 19

OTHER ASSOCIATIONS
Anal canal carcinomas have been associated with anal fistulas and other benign conditions. In one study, 41% of anal canal carcinomas were preceded by benign
anorectal disease for at least 5 years. 20 However, two studies have now shown only a temporal relationship but no evidence of causation. 21,22 There is a high risk of
anal cancer in the first year after diagnosis of the benign lesion and a rapid decline in risk thereafter. In a study from California, however, homosexual men had an
elevated risk of anorectal squamous cell carcinoma with a history of anal fissure or fistula (RR, 9.1). 23 Anal canal cancers have been reported in patients with Crohn's
disease, but the incidence appears low. 24
Frisch et al. studied the relationship between anal canal cancers and smoking in Danish and Swedish patients. 25 A positive correlation for an increased risk of anal
canal cancer in premenopausal women who smoked versus lifelong nonsmokers was noted [odds ratio (OR), 5.6). Smoking was not statistically significantly related to
anal canal cancers in men or postmenopausal women. They suggested that suppression of estrogen may play a role for anal carcinogenesis in premenopausal
women. In the case-control study reported by Daling and colleagues, current cigarette smoking was a major risk factor in both sexes (RR, 7.7 in women and 9.4 in
men).14 This is similar to the report by Daniell, who noted that 54% of 13 women with anal cancer were current smokers, compared with only 26% of 202 age-matched
patients with colon cancer. 26 In a matched controlled study of 56 women with anal carcinoma, there were strong associations with herpes simplex virus titer, cigarette
smoking, and increasing numbers of sexual partners. In a multivariate analysis, cigarette smoking was an independent variable. 27
Prior radiation therapy may play a role in the development of anal carcinoma, as may immunosuppression. 28,29 and 30 Immunosuppressed renal transplant patients have
a 100-fold increase in anogenital tumors compared with the general population. 8 As noted previously, increasing immunosuppression in HIV-positive patients is
correlated with increased risk for anal canal cancer.
Several general conclusions with regard to etiology can be made. Anal canal carcinoma is highly correlated with HPV infection, especially HPV-16.
Immunosuppression, whether by HIV infection or iatrogenically (e.g., in the setting of renal transplantation), increases the relative risk of precursor high-grade AIN
and anal carcinoma. Increasingly severe immunodeficiency (e.g., CD4 counts less than 200/µL) also increases the risk of developing anal cancer.

ANIMAL STUDIES
Animal studies offer some clues to the genesis of anal tumors. In mice, anal carcinomas may be induced by chemical carcinogens. 31,32 In a study by Kingsnorth and
colleagues, the induction of anal squamous cell carcinomas (but not colon tumors) was promoted by epidermal growth factor (EGF). 32 The frequency of anal
squamous cell carcinomas induced by dimethylhydrazine alone was only 10%, whereas in mice treated with both dimethylhydrazine and EGF, the frequency was 33%
(P <.05). It was postulated that this potentiation was a result of EGF-stimulated squamous cell hyperplasia, with the EGF thus acting as a cocarcinogen.

ANATOMY
A clear anatomic distinction between the anal canal and the anal margin is needed because of the different natural histories of cancers that arise in these two distinct
anatomic areas. Considerable confusion exists when comparing series in the literature because of the use of different definitions of the anal canal and the anal
margin. The anatomic components of the anal canal and anal margin are illustrated in Figure 33.9-1.

FIGURE 33.9-1. Anatomy of the anal canal. A tumor in location A is always considered anal canal cancer; in location C, it is anal margin cancer. A tumor in location B
has been called canal or margin cancer, depending on institutional preference, but now should be called anal canal cancer by the American Joint Committee on
Cancer and the Union Internationale Contra le Cancer definition.

The upper or proximal limit of the anal canal is accepted as commencing at the anorectal ring. The anorectal ring is defined as the muscle bundle formed by the
junction of the upper portion of the internal sphincter, the distal portion of the longitudinal muscle, the puborectalis, and the deep portion of the external sphincter. This
ring can be identified on digital examination. The epithelium lining the anal canal at this level is columnar. The anal columns, vertical folds of mucous membranes

lined by cuboidal epithelium, start just distal to the anorectal ring and extend to the dentate line. The dentate line is defined as the demarcation between the columnar
epithelium of the proximal canal and the stratified squamous epithelium of the lower canal and is the site where the anal glands empty. The junction is not an abrupt
histologic change but rather a transition zone that extends for 6 to 12 mm and contains columnar, cuboidal, squamous, and transitional epithelia. The stratified
squamous epithelium extends from just below the dentate line to the anal verge, which is defined as the junction of the squamous epithelium with the perianal skin,
which is a keratinized squamous epithelium containing hair follicles.
Definitions of the proximal and distal extent of the anal canal have varied among authors. A number of authors have defined the distal limit of the anal canal as the
dentate line and all tumors below this as anal margin cancers. 33,34,35 and 36 Some have defined the distal extent of the anal canal to reach to the anal verge. 37,38 and 39
Others refer to anal margin tumors as tumors that arise within 5 cm of the anal verge. 37,40 The anatomic boundary used for distinguishing anal canal from anal margin
tumors alters their incidence. When the anal verge is used as the distal margin of the anal canal, 15% of tumors arise from the anal margin, but this number climbs to
30% when the dentate line is used as the distal limit. To clarify this issue, the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) and the Union Internationale Contra le
Cancer (UICC) have formed a consensus that the anal canal extends from the anorectal ring (dentate line) to the anal verge. 41,42 This is an important distinction, as
these two governing bodies agree that anal margin tumors behave in a similar fashion to skin cancers and therefore are to be classified as skin tumors and treated as
such.
The arterial supply to the distal rectum and anal canal is supplied by the superior, middle, and inferior hemorrhoidal arteries, which arise from the inferior mesenteric,
hypogastric, and internal pudendal arteries, respectively. Venous drainage follows the inflow patterns. The internal rectal sphincter motor innervation is supplied by
sympathetic fibers, whereas the sacral parasympathetics mediate the sensation of distention. The external rectal sphincter is innervated by the inferior hemorrhoidal
nerve, which is derived from the internal pudendal nerve. The lower rectal wall is supplied by the rectal plexus composed of the pelvic sympathetic and
parasympathetic nerves. The sensory component of the hair-bearing skin beyond the anal verge is innervated by the inferior hemorrhoidal branches of the internal
pudendal nerve.
The anal canal has a rich supply of lymphatics, which drain via three main routes, including the inguinal, pelvic visceral, and hypogastric nodes. 43 The lymphatics of
the anal margin drain into the inguinal-femoral nodes, which subsequently drain into the external iliac to the common iliac nodes. The lymphatic drainage of the anal
canal is primarily to the perirectal and superior rectal lymphatics, which drain to the inferior mesenteric nodes and eventually to the paraaortic nodes. Lymphatic
drainage may also drain laterally into the obturator and hypogastric nodes. Extensive interconnections exist between the lymphatic channels, which explains why
patients with distal lesions may have mesenteric nodal involvement.
Squamous tumors may arise from the entire length of the anal canal as well as develop from the anal margin. Basaloid carcinomas, which are a variant of squamous
carcinoma, arise from the epithelium just above the dentate line and are commonly referred to as cloacogenic carcinomas. The adenocarcinomas in this region arise
from the glands at the dentate line. Small cell carcinomas in this region are of neuroendocrine origin and are rare. Tumors of the anal margin include squamous
carcinoma, basal cell carcinoma, Bowen's disease, Paget's disease, verrucous carcinoma, and Kaposi's sarcoma. Malignant melanomas may arise from either
location, but more commonly from below the dentate line.

PATHOLOGY
Many different histologic cell types may occur in the anal area. 44 In addition to the more common types seen in Table 33.9-1, other rare histologic entities can arise,
such as small cell carcinomas similar to those in lung, 45 and lymphoma. Melanomas constitute 1% to 2% of all anal cancers. 46

TABLE 33.9-1. Distribution of Histologic Types in Patients with Anal Carcinoma (Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Data)

Some pathologists divide anal canal tumors into those that exhibit keratinization and those that do not 33 and further subdivide nonkeratinizing tumors into
basosquamous, basaloid, and cloacogenic carcinomas. Other investigators have found no difference in clinical outcome with such subdivisions and believe that all
histologic varieties are subsets of squamous cell carcinoma. 47,48 Most investigators currently believe that, with the exception of melanoma and sarcoma, prognosis is
much more dependent on stage than on histology. 49
An interesting difference in the presence of HPV DNA between cloacogenic and squamous carcinomas has been found. 50 When studied by in situ hybridization, all 14
cloacogenic carcinomas were HPV-negative, whereas two-thirds of the 21 squamous carcinomas were HPV-positive (mostly for types 16 to 18). In another study, 51
however, there was no difference in the percentage of HPV RNA positivity (approximately 75%) between cloacogenic and squamous carcinomas.
In the anal margin, histologies other than squamous cell carcinoma include basal cell carcinoma identical with that in skin in other areas, Bowen's disease, and
Paget's disease.52 Patients with Bowen's disease usually present with long-standing perianal pruritus. Raised irregular eczematous-appearing plaques are seen.
Biopsy of this intraepithelial neoplasm is diagnostic with large periodic acid–Schiff-negative cells. As with Bowen's disease, patients with perianal Paget's disease
frequently present with pruritus, although they may be asymptomatic or, at the other extreme, have a bleeding erythematous or eczematoid plaque. 53 The histologic
appearance reveals characteristic periodic acid–Schiff-positive large vacuolated cells. In the absence of an underlying anal canal cancer, the origin of the cells is
likely from the apocrine glands. An associated anorectal carcinoma should be excluded. Goldblum and Hart studied immunohistochemical features of specimens from
11 patients with Paget's disease and were able to distinguish two types of perianal Paget's disease. 54 One type has endodermal differentiation with
gastrointestinal-type glands containing intraluminal necrosis, signet-ring cells, CK20 positivity, and GC-DFP15 negativity. Such cases are likely to be associated with
rectal adenocarcinoma. The other type is a primary cutaneous intraepithelial neoplasm in which the Paget's cells display sweat gland differentiation, GC-DFP15
positivity, and CK20 negativity.

PRECANCEROUS CHANGES
Precancerous changes have been studied by a number of investigators. In particular, the increasing incidence of anal canal carcinomas among certain populations
(e.g., homosexual or bisexual men who are HIV-positive) has led to scrutiny of the role of AIN and dysplasia (see Epidemiology and Etiology, earlier in this chapter).
Fenger and Nielsen studied the incidence of precancerous changes in the anal canal epithelium. 55,56 Of 306 specimens of the anal transition zone, seven (2.3%)
showed squamous cell dysplasia, which was severe in only one. With an average follow-up of 27 months, no case of dysplasia had progressed to carcinoma. In a
group of 139 patients who underwent APR (most with carcinomas of the rectum but some with anal canal tumors), 15 (10.8%) had dysplasia that was thought to be
precancerous or to represent carcinoma in situ. Severe dysplasia or carcinoma in situ was seen in 13 of the 16 patients (81%) with squamous cell carcinoma of the
anal canal. They concluded that most anal canal tumors arising in the anal transition zone are preceded by multicentric areas of dysplasia.
Palefsky and colleagues 57 studied the incidence of the premalignant condition, AIN, and its relationship to anal HPV infection among homosexual men who were
HIV-positive. Infection with multiple subtypes of HPV was seen in 12% of patients; these patients had a markedly increased risk for cytologic abnormalities (RR, 39.0).

In addition, patients who had abnormal cytology were significantly more likely to have lower median T4 counts. They concluded that immunosuppressed male
homosexuals may be at significant risk for the development of anal canal neoplasia, related to the presence of HPV.
Surawicz and colleagues found that in 90 homosexual men with an abnormal examination result of the anal canal, 89% had HPV-associated changes. 58 In a
prospective study of 37 homosexual men, Palefsky and associates found a substantial increase over time in the percentage of patients with cytologic abnormalities of
the anal canal (27% to 65% over an average 17-month period). 59 There was also an increase in the presence of AIN and of identifiable HPV infection.
Flow cytometric analysis of normal epithelium along the anal transition zone and, in smaller groups of patients, of anal canal tumors has been performed in fresh
specimens by Fenger and Bichel. 60 A normal diploid population was seen in normal squamous epithelium in the anal transition zone, along with a small hyperdiploid
peak, the relevance of which was unclear. Three patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal were studied. They had a high proliferative index but near
diploid peaks. In contrast, Goldman and coworkers found that most anal tumors had an aneuploid pattern. 61 Scott and colleagues studied flow cytometry in 235
patients with resected tumors of the anal canal and perianal skin. 62 In a multivariate analysis, depth of penetration, inguinal node involvement, and DNA ploidy were of
independent prognostic significance.

SQUAMOUS CELL CANCER
NATURAL HISTORY
Anal canal carcinomas often spread by local extension, extending cephalad to involve other organs in the pelvis. Local extension to adjacent structures and into the
sphincteric muscles is common on initial presentation. Extension to the vaginal septum was seen in 9 of 76 (12%) women in the Memorial Sloan-Kettering series. 43
Although it is often stated that these tumors can invade the prostate, urethra, bladder, and seminal vesicles in male subjects, in this series the tumors approached
these organs but did not invade them. 43
Hematogenous spread appears to occur more often from tumors that arise at the dentate line or above. 63 This pattern of spread allows tumor cells into the portal
system, and liver metastases also involve the lung in 5% to 8% of patients. 43,63,64 Hematogenous metastases also involve the lung in 2% to 4% of cases 43,63,64 and
bone in 2% of cases. 64 Distant metastases occur with equal frequency independent of the histologic cell type involved. Distant metastases rarely, if ever, are seen
with anal margin tumors.
Lymphatic spread can occur via the inguinal, pelvic, and mesenteric nodes (see Anatomy, earlier in this chapter). Because routine lymphadenectomy is no longer
performed in anal cancers, the data pertaining to lymph node involvement are from historic surgical series. Many interconnections exist between these lymphatic
channels, and tumors arising above or below the dentate line may have mesenteric nodal involvement. Of 33 anal canal tumors arising below the dentate line, six had
mesenteric nodal involvement in their abdominoperineal specimens, confirming these interconnections. 43
Inguinal lymph nodes are involved in 15% to 63% of cases of anal canal tumors. 43,64,65,66 and 67 In one series, 17 of the 115 patients (15%) had inguinal nodes involved
at the time of presentation, similar to the incidence reported in other series. 43,63,64,68 Metachronous inguinal nodes appeared in 24 of 96 patients (25%), with a median
time to presentation of 12 months. Pelvic nodes are not as commonly involved, whereas mesenteric nodes are more likely to be involved if the tumors are proximal
(50%) compared with distal (14%). 43 Anal margin tumors rarely spread to the mesenteric nodes.
Survival after lymph node dissection with positive nodes at presentation ranged from 0% to 20%. 63,64,68,69,70 and 71 However, modern combined modality therapy has
greatly affected this result. Patients who have lymph node dissection for metachronous lesions have a better long-term survival, with rates up to 83%. 37,63,70,72 The
majority of these recurrences occur by 2 years but may take up to 8 years to present. 43
DIAGNOSIS
Although anal cancers are located in one of the most accessible sites of the digestive tract, these tumors are frequently misdiagnosed and a delay in treatment often
results. The initial and most common symptom is bleeding, and this occurs in more than one-half of the patients. 43,66,67,73,74,75 and 76 The bleeding is rarely substantial
and is usually attributed to hemorrhoids. Other common symptoms include pain, tenesmus, pruritus, change in bowel habits, abnormal discharge, and infrequently,
inguinal lymphadenopathy. 43,64,73,74,76 Most of these symptoms are associated with benign conditions of the anus, including fissure, fistula in ano, hemorrhoids, anal
pruritus, and anal condyloma, which results in a delay of diagnosis. The diagnosis may be further confounded because benign perianal conditions may coexist in 60%
of anal margin tumors and in 6% of anal canal tumors. 76 Patients often treat themselves for extended periods before seeking medical attention. 74 The duration of
symptoms varies from 2 weeks to longer than 4 years, with a mean of 6 months.37,47,64,67,70,74,75
Proper treatment for these tumors is often delayed due to inappropriate diagnosis at the initial evaluation in up to one-third of patients. 37,43,47,67,74,77 It has been
generally accepted that the delay in diagnosis has an adverse effect on the outcome, but this has been challenged. 43,64,78 The diagnosis may also be made indirectly
in tissues examined routinely after minor anorectal procedures. The patients with these incidental tumors have the most favorable outcomes. 39,43,79,80,81 and 82 Screening
of high-risk populations (i.e., HIV-positive homosexual men) may increase the percent of patients diagnosed with earlier stage tumors.
Diagnosis can be made on rectal examination, but anoscopy, proctoscopy, and transrectal ultrasound are important in the evaluation of these tumors. The most
common physical finding is an intraluminal mass. 64,66 The physical examination should describe the location, extent, and size of the tumor and the relationship of the
tumor to the dentate line. On palpation, the characteristically hard, indurated, inelastic quality of the tumor is detected, which may or may not be ulcerated.
Endoscopically, the tumors may appear as flat or slightly raised lesions, as raised lesions with indurated borders, or as polypoid lesions. As the tumor enlarges, it may
become fixed to adjacent structures. The use of transrectal ultrasound allows for the determination of depth of penetration and involvement of adjacent organs. 83 In
women, the vagina may be infiltrated with tumor and, although it is commonly thought in men that the prostate and seminal vesicles are involved, this is not often
confirmed pathologically. 43,69
Any suspicious lesion in the anal canal should have a biopsy taken, and this can frequently be done in an outpatient procedure. If the patient has pain or spasm
precluding this, then an examination under anesthesia is performed. An incisional biopsy is used to make the diagnosis. The lesion should be excised only if it is a
small superficial lesion. Inguinal lymphadenopathy should be aspirated to determine tumor involvement to accurately stage the patient. Inguinal lymph node dissection
is not warranted due to the associated morbidity, failure to have an effect on outcome, and the adequate control with combined modality therapy (radiation therapy
plus concurrent chemotherapy).
An extent of disease workup should include computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis to evaluate the primary tumor and to detect liver metastases. Chest
radiography is performed to determine if pulmonary metastases are present.
STAGING
In 1997 the AJCC41 and UICC42 developed a common staging system. This current staging system takes into account the fact that anal canal carcinoma is primarily
treated by combined modality therapy (or in selected cases by radiation alone). APR is reserved for patients who fail to respond to initial treatment. Thus, the TNM
classification for anal canal cancers is primarily clinical. The primary tumor is assessed for size and, for T4 tumors, invasion of local structures such as the vagina,
urethra, or bladder. The TNM classification is seen in Table 33.9-2. Nodal status is based on distance from the primary site rather than number of lymph nodes
involved. This staging system applies to carcinomas, including cloacogenic carcinomas. Melanomas and sarcomas are not included in this staging system.

TABLE 33.9-2. American Joint Committee on Cancer 1998 and the Union Internationale Contra le Cancer 1997 Joint Staging System for Anal Canal Cancer

PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
The most important prognostic factors in anal cancer are T stage and lymph node status. As seen in Table 33.9-2, these two factors, as well as the presence or
absence of metastatic disease, define the stage. The most striking difference in results is seen when comparing T1 and 2 primary cancers (smaller than or equal to 5
cm) versus T3 and 4 primary cancers (larger than 5 cm) (Tables 33.9-3, 33.9-4, and 33.9-5). The local failure rates with T3 to 4 primary cancers are approximately
50% after combined modality therapy. Because prognostic factors such as tumor size and lymph node status may be interrelated, a multivariate analysis is required to
determine if they are independent prognostic variables.

TABLE 33.9-3. Mitomycin C –Based Phase II Combined Modality Therapy Trials for Anal Cancer: Selected Series a

TABLE 33.9-4. Cisplatin -Based Phase II Combined Modality Therapy Trials for Anal Cancer: Selected Series

TABLE 33.9-5. Randomized Trials of Combined Modality Therapy for Anal Cancer

T Stage: Univariate Analysis
Salmon and colleagues found that size was significantly related to survival in a study in which radiation therapy alone was the primary treatment. 49 In another
radiation therapy alone series, size was prognostic for 5-year survival but not for primary tumor control. 84
In a series of 118 patients treated by external-beam and brachytherapy by Peiffert et al., there was an increase in local failure with T stage (T1, 11%; T2, 24%; T3,
45%; and T4, 43%) and a corresponding decrease in 5-year survival (T1, 94%; T2, 79%; T3, 53%; and T4, 19%) ( Table 33.9-6).85 Similar data were reported by
Gerard and colleagues. In 95 patients treated with combined modality therapy plus brachytherapy there was an increase in 5-year colostomy-free survival with T1 and
T2 tumors versus T3 and T4 tumors (T1, 83% and T2, 89%, vs. T3, 50% and T4, 54%). 86 Doci and associates treated 35 patients with 5-FU, cisplatin, and
external-beam radiation and reported a complete response rate of 100% for T1 and T2 cancers versus 60% for T3 cancers (see Table 33.9-4).87 The Intergroup
randomized phase III trial of radiation, 5-FU with or without mitomycin C, reported a significantly higher complete response rate by tumor size (smaller than 5 cm,
93%, vs. larger than or equal to 5 cm, 83%; P = .02) (see Table 33.9-5).88 Similar findings were reported by univariate analysis in the European Organization for
Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) randomized trial of 45 Gy with or without 5-FU/mitomycin C. 89

TABLE 33.9-6. Brachytherapy as a Component of Treatment for Anal Cancer: Selected Series

In a series from the Princess Margaret Hospital, tumor size did not appear to have a significant effect on local failure, providing the patients received the combination
of 5-FU, mitomycin C, and external-beam radiation (smaller than 4 cm, 95% vs. larger than 4 cm, 86%). 90
N Stage: Univariate Analysis
In contrast to T stage, the effect of positive lymph nodes is less clear. Furthermore, although the 1997 AJCC/UICC staging system differentiates between positive
inguinal and pelvic lymph nodes, most series do not report the data separately. It must be emphasized that, unlike rectal cancer, inguinal lymph nodes in anal cancer
are considered nodal metastasis rather than distant metastasis, and patients should be treated in a potentially curative fashion. In the historic literature, synchronous
metastases to inguinal lymph nodes have been considered an indicator of a poor prognosis. 49,70,91 However, the use of combined modality therapy has altered the
poor prognosis previously reported with positive inguinal nodes.
In a series by Cummings et al. from the Princess Margaret Hospital (see Table 33.9-3), patients with negative nodes who received combined modality therapy had a
higher 5-year cause-specific survival compared with those with positive nodes (81% vs. 57%). 92 The incidence of local failure was only 13% in patients with positive
nodes. Doci et al. found no significant difference in the complete response rate after 5-FU, cisplatin, and external-beam radiation in patients with node-positive
compared with node-negative cancers (100% vs. 92%). 87 In a separate report of 56 patients who received 5-FU, mitomycin C, and radiation, the eight patients who
had node-positive disease all achieved a complete response. 93 By univariate analysis, Allal and colleagues reported a significant increase in local failure in patients
with positive versus negative nodes who received 5-FU, mitomycin C, and radiation (36% vs. 19%; P = .03); however, this difference was not found to be significant by
multivariate analysis. 94 In patients treated with 5-FU, cisplatin, and external-beam and brachytherapy, Gerard et al. also reported no significant differences in 5-year
colostomy-free and overall survival in patients with node-positive compared with node-negative disease. 86
The Intergroup randomized phase III trial of radiation and 5-FU, with or without mitomycin C, reported a higher colostomy rate (which is an indirect measurement of
local failure) in N1 versus N0 patients (28% vs. 13%). 88 In node-negative patients, and possibly node-positive patients, the addition of mitomycin C decreased the
overall colostomy rates. The EORTC randomized trial of 45 Gy with or without 5-FU/mitomycin C also reported that patients with positive nodes experienced
significantly higher local failure ( P = .035) and lower survival ( P = .038) rates compared with node-negative patients. 89 However, there was no difference in prognosis
between N1 versus N2 and N3 disease.
Multivariate Analysis
In the series from Allal and associates, factors by univariate analysis associated with a significant increase in local failure included age younger than 66 years, male
gender, tumor extent more than one-third circumference, lymph node involvement, overall treatment time 75 days or greater, and the use of external-beam radiation
for the boost treatment.94 By multivariate analysis, however, the only variable for which there was a possible effect was overall treatment time ( P = .09). In the EORTC
randomized trial of 45 Gy with or without 5-FU/mitomycin C, multivariate analysis identified that positive nodes, skin ulceration, and male gender were independent
negative prognostic factors for local control and survival. 89 Goldman and coworkers also reported by multivariate analysis that gender was also important, with women
faring better than men. 95 In a multivariate analysis of 242 patients by Schlienger et al., T stage was the only significant prognostic factor. 96 In a further update with 286
patients analyzed by multivariate analysis, tumor size, clinically abnormal lymph nodes, and total irradiation dose influenced prognosis. 97 Constantinou and
colleagues (see Table 33.9-3) reviewed 50 patients who received combined modality therapy and found that radiation dose and percent hemoglobin were
independent prognostic factors for local control; radiation dose was an independent prognostic factor for disease-free survival; and radiation dose, percent
hemoglobin, and T stage were independent prognostic factors for survival. 98
Other Prognostic Features
Histologic cell type for squamous cancers of the anal canal (squamous vs. cloacogenic) has not been found to be of major prognostic relevance. Cloacogenic
carcinomas have been considered to have a slightly better prognosis in some series 49,99; however, in 243 patients with resectable anal canal tumors, Papillon and
Montbarbon reported a worse prognosis for patients with nonkeratinizing and basaloid carcinoma than for patients with keratinizing lesions. 84 Small cell carcinomas of
the anus are rare and, similar to extrapulmonary small cell cancers in other parts of the body, appear to have a worse prognosis, with a high propensity for systemic
dissemination.45,100
Asymptomatic patients have a better prognosis than symptomatic patients, but this may be directly related to the size of the tumor. 39 Location may be of modest
prognostic importance, with anal margin tumors having a better outcome than those in the anal canal (see Treatment, later in this chapter).
Three studies have examined DNA content (i.e., whether tumors were diploid or nondiploid); two found no prognostic effect of this factor, 61,62 whereas in one large
multivariate analysis, 100 DNA ploidy was an independent prognostic factor in the 184 patients whose tumors were analyzed for DNA. In one study, 61 grade was a
significant prognostic factor, with low-grade tumors resulting in a 5-year survival of 75% compared with only 24% for high-grade tumors. Data from the Princess
Margaret Hospital suggest the DT-diaphorase mutation is not a strong determinant of treatment outcome in patients who fail combined modality therapy. 101
Tanum and Holm reported p53 expression in 34% of patients with anal carcinoma. 102 Pretreatment biopsies from 80 patients treated on the combined modality therapy
arm of the Intergroup randomized trial were examined by immunohistochemistry for p53 expression. 103 For the total group, p53 protein was overexpressed in 47% of
tumors. By multivariate analysis, the 4-year local disease-free survival was significantly decreased in those patients whose tumors overexpressed p53 (64% vs. 88%;
P = .027). However, significant differences were not seen in disease-free or overall survival.
In a retrospective analysis from the Princess Margaret Hospital, p53 was measured by immunohistochemistry in 49 patients who received combined modality
therapy. 104 The incidence of p53 expression was 82%. By univariate analysis, p53 expression of 5% or greater was a poor prognostic factor for 5-year survival (78%
vs. 90%) compared with less than 5%. It was an independent poor prognostic factor for disease-free survival ( P = .01).
TREATMENT
Anal Margin
Cancers of the anal margin are uncommon, accounting for approximately 15% of all tumors of the anal region. They account for 15% to 25% of all squamous cell
cancers of the anus and, in general, have a different natural history and more favorable prognosis than squamous cell carcinomas of the anal canal. 105 The average
age of onset is 60 to 70 years, with a wide range. 106 Most are well to moderately differentiated, with fewer than 10% being poorly differentiated. The 1997 AJCC/UICC
staging system defines the anal margin as a cancer arising at the junction of the hair-bearing skin and the mucous membrane of the anal canal. 41,42 It must be

emphasized that these tumors are staged as skin cancers rather than anal canal cancers. There is confusion in the literature as a variety of other definitions has been
used, the most common being an area of skin measuring from 5 cm to as wide as 10 cm centered on the anal orifice. 37 To further confuse the issue, some series do
not report results of anal canal and margin separately. 107
The lymphatic drainage of anal margin cancers is different from anal canal cancers. Cancers of the anal margin drain primarily to the inguinal lymph nodes, whereas
cancers of the anal canal drain primarily to the inguinal as well as the internal iliac and superior hemorrhoidal nodes.
SURGERY. Squamous cell carcinoma of the anal margin, as in skin elsewhere, has a favorable prognosis and rarely requires radical surgery. Wide local excision of

these lesions is an attractive approach because it can be performed with primary closure and infrequently requires a split-thickness skin graft. The use of a wide local
excision implies that an adequate margin of normal tissue (1 cm) can be secured beyond the tumor without anal incontinence. If the tumor encompasses more than
one-half of the circumference of the anus, local excision should be abandoned due to poor anal control; combined modality therapy or APR are advocated. 34,37
Most authors recommend wide local excision for squamous cell carcinomas of the anal margin, 34,36,37,65,108,109 Bowen's disease,110 and Paget's disease. 77,111 Wide
excision results in control of local disease in the majority of patients. 33,34,37,112,113 Anal margin tumors rarely metastasize to visceral organs or regional lymph nodes,
and this represents an important difference between anal margin tumors and anal canal tumors. 34,68,114 High-grade intraepithelial tumors (AIN III or carcinoma in situ)
may be surgically treated. 115 Other options may include laser ablation 116 or combined modality therapy for extensive lesions that would otherwise require an APR.
Local recurrence after primary treatment of anal margin cancers is routinely treated by repeat local excision. APR or combined modality therapy is reserved for
patients with extensive disease. Of the 11 local recurrences treated at Memorial Sloan-Kettering, 43 ten had a local excision and one had an APR. 114 Of the nine
patients who survived longer than 5 years, two required a second procedure to control disease. In the same study, four patients had an inguinal node recurrence as
the only site of failure, and all underwent inguinal lymphadenectomy. Two of these patients were long-term survivors, one died of disease, and one was lost to
follow-up. The median survival exceeded 5 years. The authors concluded that few patients die from anal margin tumors.
An APR or combined modality therapy should be performed when anal margin cancers invade into deep muscle or have vascular, lymphatic, or perineural
involvement. A number of series have shown no benefit to the routine use of APR for anal margin tumors, but the small number of patients in these studies combined
with patient selection bias makes interpretation of these data difficult. 37,74,109,117
RADIATION THERAPY. Squamous cell carcinoma of the anal margin tends to be early or only moderately advanced at the time of diagnosis.

117,118
Lymph nodes are

rarely involved (0% to 15%). 72,118 Although early cancers of the anal margin are successfully treated by local excision, nonoperative treatment should be considered
for some patients. Papillon suggested that radiation therapy should be used for patients with anal margin carcinomas that are considered unresectable or patients
who have extensive or recurrent lesions; in addition, patients who are medically inoperable may be able to have radiation therapy.
Early studies of therapy for anal margin cancers used interstitial radium needle implants; however, the high incidence of radionecrosis and the relatively poor
geometry suggested that external-beam therapy was better tolerated. 118,119 Although photons are most the frequent radiation treatment, electron-beam therapy may
also be successfully used for early perianal epidermoid carcinomas. 120 Results of radiation therapy for perianal lesions, stage for stage, are similar to results for anal
canal lesions, with more extensive lesions requiring more aggressive therapy. 117,121 Some authors have recommended APR for extensive lesions. 117 Radiation therapy
with or without chemotherapy, however, appears to be an excellent alternative that yields a similar cure rate while offering sphincter preservation.
Selected series reporting the use of primary nonoperative therapy for anal margin cancers are seen in Table 33.9-7. Patients received radiation therapy (external
beam with or without brachytherapy) or combined modality therapy. The numbers of patients in each series are small, making it difficult to make definitive conclusions.
Combining the series, the overall local control rate is approximately 75% and the 5-year survival is 65% to 70%. In a retrospective analysis from Cummings, local
control with T1 and T2 disease was 100% compared with 60% for patients with T3 disease. 90 Likewise, patients who received combined modality therapy had an 88%
local control rate compared with 64% local control in patients who received external-beam radiation alone. Peiffert and associates reported the results of 32 patients
who were treated with external-beam radiation, brachytherapy, or both. Patients with node-negative disease had a 100% 5-year survival compared with 40% 5-year
survival in patients with node-positive disease. 122

TABLE 33.9-7. Treatment of Anal Margin Cancer: Selected Series

In a retrospective comparison of 54 patients with anal margin cancers with 216 patients with anal canal cancers treated with 40-Gy external-beam radiation plus
bleomycin, Friberg et al. reported better results in patients with cancers of the anal margin versus anal canal. 212 There was an improvement in 5-year survival (74%
vs. 57%), tumor-specific survival (90% vs. 68%), relapse-free survival (83% vs. 54%), and the incidence of an intact sphincter (91% vs. 58%), respectively.
In summary, squamous cell carcinoma of the anal margin is uncommon, and the literature is limited by small numbers and the lack of a standard anatomic definition. A
reasonable approach is to recommend a local excision for smaller tumors (smaller than or equal to 4 cm) that are not in direct contact with the anal verge. If the
patient requires an APR due to anatomic constraints or if a local excision would compromise sphincter function, or if the tumor is larger than 4 cm, node positive, or
both, then nonoperative treatment is an appropriate alternative. Based on the randomized trials from the EORTC or United Kingdom Coordinating Committee on
Cancer Research (UKCCCR) revealing an advantage of combined modality therapy compared with radiation therapy alone in patients with anal canal cancers
(EORTC)89 or anal canal and margin cancers (UKCCCR), 107 combined modality therapy rather than radiation therapy alone is recommended.
Anal Canal
LOCAL EXCISION. Local treatment of epidermoid tumors of the anal canal is reserved for selected patients with tumors that are smaller than 2 cm in diameter,

well-differentiated tumors, or tumors found incidentally at the time of hemorrhoidectomy. 36,45,70,123 Local excision may also be performed for patients who are medically
inoperable or who refuse a permanent colostomy.
Of 188 patients with anal canal carcinoma treated at the Mayo Clinic, 19 were treated with local excision. 45 For the 12 patients with tumors confined to the epithelium
and subepithelial connective tissues, 11 had tumors smaller than 2 cm in size and one patient had two lesions. Overall survival for these patients was 100%. One of
12 patients had a recurrence, and this patient was without evidence of disease 5 years after an APR. Patients with tumors penetrating into muscle who refused a
colostomy had a higher recurrence rate. These patients' disease often can be salvaged with an APR or combined modality therapy.
Results of local treatment for tumors smaller than 2 cm were not as favorable at Memorial Sloan-Kettering: Only three of eight patients with local excisions had
prolonged survival. 70 For more advanced lesions, high local recurrence rates and poor overall survival mitigate against the use of local excision. 37,64,66,70,75

COMBINED MODALITY THERAPY
Biopsy. With the advent of combined modality therapy, surgery for the initial diagnosis and staging of anal canal tumors should be limited to a biopsy of the primary
tumor and evaluation of the inguinal lymph nodes. For most distal lesions, the biopsy is performed under local anesthesia. A punch or incisional biopsy obtains
adequate tissue to make a histologic diagnosis. For patients with more proximal tumors or significant pain and spasm, the biopsy may require spinal or general
anesthesia. Clinically enlarged lymph nodes should be aspirated. If the cytology is nondiagnostic or demonstrates only benign disease, an open excisional biopsy of
one or two lymph nodes should be performed. Under no circumstances should a formal lymph node dissection be performed for the initial evaluation of suspicious
nodes.
Therapy. Until the late 1970s, the conventional treatment for anal canal cancer was an APR. The landmark publication that challenged this practice was a report from
Nigro et al. of three patients with squamous cell cancer of the anal canal who, after preoperative 30 Gy plus concurrent 5-FU and mitomycin C, were found to have a
pathologic complete response at the time of surgery. 124
Since that time, increasing evidence from single-arm phase II studies has indicated that initial combined modality therapy (chemotherapy plus concurrent
external-beam radiation therapy) yields a high rate of tumor regression (including a complete response rate of approximately 80% to 90%) in most patients with
squamous cell cancers of the anal canal. Surgery, most commonly an APR, is reserved for salvage. Even in patients with relatively large (larger than or equal to 5 cm)
primary cancers, although the complete response rates are lower (50% to 75%), the majority of patients may be spared a colostomy and has an excellent overall
survival.
Given that anal canal tumors are uncommon, and because the results of phase II trials using combined modality therapy are impressive, there has been, until
relatively recently, no prospective controlled randomized trials of combined modality therapy versus radiation alone or surgery alone. Results of two prospective
randomized trials from Europe of combined modality therapy versus radiation alone (EORTC 89 and UKCCCR107) support the use of combined modality therapy. In the
United States, combined modality therapy has been well established, and randomized trials focus on defining the ideal combined modality therapy regimen. For
example, the Intergroup trial (RTOG 87-04/ECOG 1289) 88 examined the role of adding mitomycin C to radiation plus 5-FU. It is unlikely that a prospective trial of
surgery versus nonoperative therapy (combined modality therapy or radiation alone) will be performed. Combined modality therapy has an acceptable toxicity profile
as well as a high disease-free and overall survival and is considered the standard of care for squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal.
The results of two randomized trials that confirm an advantage for combined modality therapy using 45-Gy external-beam pelvic radiation plus continuous infusion
5-FU and bolus mitomycin C versus radiation alone are seen in Table 33.9-5. The UKCCCR trial randomized a total of 585 patients of whom 51% had T3 disease,
20% had positive nodes, and 23% had anal margin cancers. 107 At 6 weeks after treatment, patients with 50% or greater response had additional radiation, whereas
those with less than 50% response had salvage surgery. Although the improvement in 4-year survival with combined modality therapy did not reach statistical
significance (65% vs. 58%), the improvement in crude (64% vs. 41%) and 3-year actuarial local control (61% vs. 29%) was significant. The early grade 4+ toxicity was
significantly higher (48% vs. 39%); however, the incidence of late toxicity was similar (42% vs. 38%).
In the EORTC trial, 110 patients, of whom 85% had T3 disease and 48% had positive nodes, underwent a similar randomization. 89 At 6 weeks after treatment, patients
with a partial or complete response had additional radiation, whereas those with less than a partial response had salvage surgery. Patients who received combined
modality therapy had a higher complete response rate (80% vs. 54%) and a significantly higher 5-year actuarial local control rate (68% vs. 50%) and colostomy-free
survival rate (72% vs. 40%). The overall survival rate was not significantly different (57% vs. 52%). Patients receiving combined modality therapy had a higher
incidence of ulceration.
Although neither of the randomized trials revealed a significant advantage in overall survival with combined modality therapy, given the advantage in local control and
colostomy-free survival, they helped to establish combined modality therapy as the standard of care in squamous cell cancers of the anal canal.
The Intergroup trial has established that mitomycin C is an important component of combined modality therapy. 88 A total of 291 patients (47% with T3 disease and
17% with positive nodes) were randomized to 45 Gy plus continuous infusion 5-FU with or without mitomycin C. At 6 weeks after the completion of treatment, patients
with less than a complete response had an additional 9 Gy to the primary tumor plus concurrent 5-FU and cisplatin. If there was still less than a complete response 6
weeks after the completion of this salvage therapy, an APR was performed. Patients who received mitomycin C had a higher complete response rate (92% vs. 85%)
and a significantly lower colostomy rate (9% vs. 22%) and a corresponding significant increase in colostomy-free survival (71% vs. 59%). There was little difference in
overall 4-year survival (75% vs. 70%). Early grade 4+ toxicity was significantly increased in the mitomycin C arm (23% vs. 7%). Although overall survival was not
significantly increased given the advantage in colostomy-free survival, mitomycin C is considered a necessary component of combined modality therapy.
The combined modality therapy arm using radiation, 5-FU, and mitomycin C from the Intergroup trial is the most common treatment approach in the United States.
Details are seen in Table 33.9-5. Patients received continuous course pelvic radiation to a total dose of 45 Gy (30 Gy to the whole pelvis followed by 15 Gy to the true
pelvis) and two cycles (weeks 1 and 5) of concurrent continuous infusion 5-FU (1000 mg/m 2 days 1 through 4) and bolus mitomycin C (10 mg/m 2 bolus day 1). If 6
weeks following completion of the initial treatment there was persistent disease, patients received 1 week of salvage therapy. Salvage therapy involved one cycle of
chemotherapy (continuous infusion 5-FU, 1000 mg/m 2/d 1–4; bolus cisplatin, 100 mg/m 2 day 2) and concurrent 900 cGy (limited to the primary tumor). If there was
residual disease on biopsy 6 weeks after the salvage therapy, then an APR was recommended.
There is considerable controversy as to the need for the first biopsy at 6 weeks after initial treatment. Data from the Princess Margaret Hospital suggest that
squamous cell cancers of the anus regress slowly and continue to decrease in size for 3 to 12 months after the completion of combined modality treatment. 92 Based
on these data, an increasing number of investigators advocate a more conservative approach and do not recommend a posttreatment biopsy. In the Intergroup trial, of
the 25 patients with biopsy residual disease after 45 Gy and 5-FU and mitomycin C who then received salvage therapy with 9 Gy plus 5-FU and cisplatin, 55%
achieved a complete response 6 weeks later (a total of 12 weeks after the completion of the initial 45 Gy). 88 It is unclear if the complete response was a result of the
salvage therapy or was due to an additional 6 weeks of tumor regression after initial therapy.
At the Princess Margaret Hospital, Memorial Sloan-Kettering, and other centers, if there is residual disease at the 6-week posttreatment evaluation patients do not
receive the 1 week of salvage therapy. The patients are examined every 6 weeks, and providing the tumor continues to decrease in size, no salvage therapy is
performed. If there is progression of disease or no response at 6 weeks after initial therapy, however, APR is necessary. In addition to careful physical examination,
anal ultrasound may be helpful in following the tumor. In the current Intergroup phase III anal canal cancer protocol (RTOG 98-11) ( Fig. 33.9-2), biopsy at 6 weeks
after the initial 45 Gy is optional.

FIGURE 33.9-2. Intergroup phase III anal canal cancer protocol (RTOG 98-11). CDDP, cisplatinum; 5-FU, 5-fluorouracil; LN + and –, lymph node positive and
negative; MMC, mitomycin C.

There are a subset of patients who, for a variety of reasons, undergo an excisional biopsy, such as a hemorrhoidectomy, polypectomy, or local excision, first and then
are referred for definitive combined modality therapy. Because the margins may be either negative or at most microscopically positive, is full-dose radiation (45 Gy)
necessary? Hu and colleagues treated eight patients after excision biopsy with 30 to 34 Gy plus 5-FU and mitomycin C. 82 With a median follow-up of 81 months, the
5-year actuarial local control rate was 100% and the overall survival was 88%. Although the data are limited, they do suggest that combined modality therapy with 30
Gy as opposed to 45 Gy may be an adequate dose in this select group of patients.
There are a number of phase II trials of combined modality therapy with external-beam pelvic radiation plus concurrent chemotherapy. The treatment design usually
involves the use of one or two cycles of 5-FU by continuous 24-hour infusion (750 to 1000 mg/m 2) for 4 to 5 days plus a bolus dose of mitomycin C (10 to 15 mg/m2)
given on day 1 or 2 of each cycle. If given, the second chemotherapy cycle usually begins on day 28. In those trials using cisplatin, it is substituted for mitomycin C at
a bolus dose of 75 mg/m2. The group from Humbolt University in Berlin has added regional hyperthermia to combined modality therapy. 125 However, this approach
remains investigational.
Combined modality therapy can be delivered concurrently or sequentially. In the concurrent regimen, radiation therapy and chemotherapy are initiated on the same
day. In the sequential regimen, chemotherapy is given before the start of radiation therapy. Since the report from Miller et al. that reported a complete response rate of
only 45% with sequential 5-FU, mitomycin C, and 30 Gy, almost all combined modality therapy trials have used concurrent chemotherapy plus radiation. 126 Although
concurrent therapy is favored because the need for salvage APR appears lower, there are no randomized comparison trials. For certain subgroups of high-risk
patients (e.g., large T4 tumors), induction chemotherapy followed by concurrent chemotherapy and radiation to higher doses may prove to be a useful option. This is
currently being tested in a single-arm Cancer and Leukemia Group B trial for advanced anal canal tumors. 127 Combined modality therapy trials can be broadly divided
into those that use either 5-FU and mitomycin C chemotherapy or, more recently, 5-FU and cisplatin chemotherapy.
Mitomycin C versus Cisplatin. Mitomycin C –based trials are shown in Table 33.9-3. When comparing the results, it is important to consider the percentage of patients
with T3 disease, node-positive disease, or both. With the exception of the series by Miller et al., which used sequential chemotherapy, the mean (average) results
include a complete response rate of 84% (81% to 87%), a local control rate of 73% (64% to 86%), and a 5-year survival rate of 77% (66% to 92%). These results are
comparable with the 5-FU and mitomycin C–containing combined modality arms of the three randomized trials seen in Table 33.9-5. For patients with T1 and T2
disease, the complete response rates are in excess of 90%, with ultimate local control rates after surgical salvage of 80% to 90%. In patients with T3 and T4 disease,
approximately 50% of patients require a salvage APR. If they achieve a complete response after the completion of combined modality therapy, then only 25% require
a salvage APR.
Cummings et al. reported lower acute and late grade 3+ toxicity with split-course compared with continuous-course radiation (acute, 40% vs. 75%, and late, 17% vs.
63%). Because almost all patients receiving continuous-course radiation will need a treatment break (most commonly for grade 3+ skin or hematologic toxicity), the
majority of investigators continue to recommend a continuous course, thereby giving a treatment break when needed rather than a planned break.
Although the results of 5-FU, mitomycin C, and concurrent 45 Gy are impressive, there is room for improvement, especially in patients with T3 and T4 disease. A
variety of treatment approaches have been tested. These include the use of 5-FU and cisplatin (as induction therapy or concurrently with radiation) and intensifying
the radiation dose beyond 45 Gy using external-beam or brachytherapy. The combination of 5-FU plus cisplatin is an attractive regimen because (1) patients who
have failed 5-FU and mitomycin C still respond to 5-FU and cisplatin and (2) cisplatin is an active radiation sensitizer.
Selected trials using cisplatin-based therapy are seen in Table 33.9-4. Most also use higher radiation doses compared with the mitomycin C–based trials seen in
Table 33.9-3. Although the numbers are small, with the exception of a similar average complete response rate (85%; range, 80% to 96%), the data suggest that the
average rates of local control (87%; range, 80% to 94%), colostomy-free survival (71%; range, 56% to 86%), and overall 5-year survival (89%; range, 84% to 94%)
may be higher than the mitomycin C–based regimens. It must be emphasized, however, that these differences may be due to other factors such as patient selection
bias and higher radiation doses.
The Cancer and Leukemia Group B pilot trial reported by Meropol et al. was limited to patients with T3 and T4 disease. With induction 5-FU and cisplatin and
concurrent 5-FU and cisplatin plus radiation, the complete response rate was 80%, colostomy-free survival was 56%, and crude survival was 78%. 127 The Intergroup
has developed a randomized trial (RTOG 98-11) to compare this approach with conventional 5-FU, mitomycin C, and 45 Gy (see Fig. 33.9-2).
Intensification of the Radiation Dose: External Beam. Retrospective data from the Massachusetts General Hospital, 98 M. D. Anderson Hospital,128 and others suggest
improved local control with increased radiation dose. In an attempt to improve local control and survival, two parallel pilot trials of radiation-dose intensification were
designed. In both trials, patients received 36 Gy to the pelvis (30.6 to the whole pelvis plus 5.4 Gy to the true pelvis), and, after a 2-week break, received an additional
23.4 Gy to the primary tumor with a 2- to 3-cm margin for a total dose of 59.4 Gy. The main differences between the two trials was the type of chemotherapy. The
RTOG 92-08 trial 129 (see Table 33.9-3) used concurrent 5-FU and mitomycin C, whereas the ECOG 4292 trial 130 (see Table 33.9-4) used 5-FU and cisplatin.
The RTOG 92-08 trial included 47 patients, 49% with T3 and T4 and 89% with node-positive disease. 129 With a median follow-up of 21 months, the local failure rate
was 19%, 4-year colostomy-free survival was 71%, and overall survival was 73%. Although the incidence of grade 3 to 4 toxicity (26%) was similar to a standard
regimen of 45 Gy plus 5-FU and mitomycin C used in RTOG 89-04, the 2-year colostomy rate was higher (30% vs. 7%). The reason for the increase is unclear. The
investigators postulate that it may be related to the higher percentage of patients requiring a treatment break of longer than 2 weeks (96% vs. 12%). The ECOG 4292
trial entered 19 patients and reported a 68% complete response rate 8 weeks after the completion of 59.4 Gy and a 79% grade 3+ toxicity rate. 130 In contrast, Pieffert
et al.131 and Gerard and colleagues 86 treated patients with similar doses (the boost given with either external-beam or brachytherapy) and reported higher complete
response rates (96% and 89%, respectively).
Intensification of the Radiation Dose: Brachytherapy. Brachytherapy is an ideal method by which to deliver conformal radiation for anal cancer while sparing the
surrounding normal structures such as small intestine and bladder. Much of the initial experience with brachytherapy in anal cancer was from investigators in England
and France who used radium needles. 132 Due to radiation protection concerns and a high anal necrosis rate, afterloading 192Ir catheters have replaced radium
needles. However, it is not clear that 192Ir has a lower rate of complications.
Selected series that use brachytherapy as a component of treatment of anal cancer are shown in Table 33.9-6. In most series, patients received 30 to 55 Gy of pelvic
radiation with or without 5-FU and mitomycin C or cisplatin followed by a 15- to 25-Gy boost with 192Ir afterloading catheters. Most use low dose-rate; however, some
investigators have advocated high dose-rate. 133,134 There are biologic differences between low dose- and high dose-rate brachytherapy; however, at the present time
there does not appear to be a difference in efficacy.
Combining the series, the mean results include a complete response rate of 83% (73% to 91%), local control rates of 81% (73% to 89%), and a 5-year survival rate of
70% (60% to 84%). The average complete response and local control rates appear similar to those achieved with external-beam–based combined modality therapy.
Furthermore, the 5-year survival rates appear lower. Of equal concern is the increased incidence of anal necrosis. Reports of anal necrosis rates include those of
Papillon et al. (2%), 84 Gerard et al. (15%), 86 Peiffert et al. (25%), 85 and Roed et al. (76%). 134 The incidence of severe complications included those of Sandhu et al.
(8%),135 Wagner et al. (9%), 136 and Allal et al. (12%). 137
A new technique of ultrasound-guided three-dimensional tumor reconstruction and brachytherapy has been reported by Lohnert and colleagues. 138 In patients
receiving more than 4-Gy fractions, the incidence of severe complications was 63%; however, none were seen when the dose was limited to less than 4-Gy fractions.
In summary, it is unclear if increasing the radiation dose in patients receiving combined modality therapy improves the results compared with conventional doses of 45
to 50 Gy. Although there are no randomized data, the phase II trials suggest that even in experienced hands, brachytherapy is associated with higher complication
rates than external-beam therapy.
The ideal combined modality therapy regimen and the most appropriate radiation dose to use for patients with anal canal tumors limited to the primary site have not
yet been defined. At the present time in the United States, combined modality therapy with the RTOG combined modality therapy regimen of continuous-course
radiation (45 Gy in 1.8-Gy fractions) plus two cycles of concurrent continuous infusion 5-FU on weeks 1 and 5, plus mitomycin C bolus on days 1 and 29, remains the
standard of care. This is the control arm of RTOG 98-11 seen in Figure 33.9-2. For patients with T3 and T4 disease (primary tumors larger than 5 cm) it is reasonable
to boost with an additional 5.4 to 9.0 Gy. In RTOG 98-11 the experimental arm uses the same design except it adds two cycles of induction 5-FU and cisplatin as well

as 5-FU and cisplatinum (CDDP) during the radiation. The posttreatment biopsy at 8 weeks is now optional.
Radical Surgery. With the advent of multimodality therapy for the primary treatment of patients with anal canal tumors, the role of surgery is important mostly from an
historic perspective. Because of the high propensity of anal canal tumors to recur locally, a wide perineal resection was initially proposed for treatment. 64,74,139,140 If
necessary, gluteal or perineal flaps were raised to cover the residual defect. 139 Some authors advocated the resection of the posterior vaginal wall to obtain clear
surgical margins, 30,64,66,69 whereas others thought this to be unnecessary unless the rectovaginal septum was involved. 43 Bilateral inguinal lymph node dissection was
performed in patients undergoing radical surgical resection of their primary tumor 47,63,64,71,141,142 until it was shown that prophylactic inguinal lymph node dissections
were beneficial in only 6% of patients. 34 The high morbidity with little gain led others to quickly condemn the use of this procedure. 34,37,64,65,69 Combined modality
therapy controls more than 90% of inguinal nodal disease. 92,143
Recurrence develops in up to 40% of patients having an APR for primary treatment of anal canal tumors. 45,63,66,70 The median time to recurrence is 12 to 15 months.
Local recurrence is the rule, with the majority in the pelvis and the remainder in the inguinal or pelvic nodes. 45,69,70,126 Distant metastases are less common but can be
seen in up to 31% of patients. Greenall and colleagues observed a median survival of 10 months for patients with pelvic recurrence and 7 months with visceral
metastases.70
Overall survival did not improve dramatically after the advent of radical surgery. Five-year survival rates after APR for primary treatment range from 55% to
71%.37,45,64,70,75,108,110,112,117 Survival was adversely affected by the size of the primary tumor. In patients treated at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 60% of
patients with tumors smaller than 5 cm were alive at 5 years, whereas only 40% of those with tumors larger than 5 cm were alive at 5 years. 70 Miller et al. improved
overall survival from 55% in historic controls to 82% for patients treated with a preoperative combined modality therapy regimen. 126 Of equal significance was the
preservation of anal function in the majority of patients treated with combined modality therapy.
Radiation Therapy Alone. There is a subset of patients who have been treated with radiation therapy alone. Because both the UKCCCR 107 and EORTC 89 randomized
trials have shown a significant advantage to the combined modality arm for local control (UKCCCR) and local control and colostomy-free survival (EORTC), combined
modality therapy is standard of care. However, external irradiation alone is a reasonable alternative for patients who cannot tolerate chemotherapy due to medical
contraindications.
Age alone is not a contraindication to combined modality therapy. Although some elderly patients may not tolerate chemotherapy well, less aggressive treatment in
patients older than 65 years old appeared to jeopardize their outcome in a Canadian retrospective study. 144 Studies of combined modality therapy in patients 75 years
old or older have been reported from both Valentini and colleagues 145 and Allal et al. 146 Rates of complete response, local control, and acute and long-term toxicity
were similar to those reported for the general population. Although some chemotherapy dose attenuation and radiation field modifications may be needed, combined
modality therapy in selected patients 75 years old and older should be considered.
Radiation Alone: External Beam. The results of major studies using external-beam radiation alone are seen in Table 33.9-8. The mean results include a local control
rate of 74% (61% to 100%) and a 5-year survival rate of 63% (50% to 94%). Although the series of 18 patients from Martenson and Gunderson from the Mayo Clinic
had the highest survival and local control rate, they also had a high rate of complications requiring surgery (17%). 147 In most series, local control and survival
decrease with increasing T stage. Overall, these results are comparable with those of patients who receive combined modality therapy with 45 Gy plus 5-FU and
mitomycin C. However, the mean incidence of complications requiring surgery is 10% (range, 3% to 17%), which probably reflects the high radiation doses that must
be delivered to the primary site to control this disease if radiation therapy is the sole treatment modality. Therefore, unless there is a compelling reason to avoid
systemic chemotherapy in an individual patient, combined modality therapy should remain the standard of care.

TABLE 33.9-8. Radiation Therapy Alone: Selected Series

Radiation Alone: Brachytherapy with or without External Beam. Brachytherapy (interstitial radiation) alone has the potential of curing only early lesions that are
unlikely to have spread to the lymph nodes. Historically, radium needles have been used, although interstitial implants with 192Ir are most common in modern series.
Radium needles have been used for many years at the Christie Hospital in Manchester, England, for early anal cancers. 118,121 Radium needles were the exclusive
treatment modality in 74 patients, 43 with anal canal lesions and 31 with anal margin lesions. 121 Of the 68 evaluable patients with minimum follow-up of 5 years, there
were 35 locoregional failures, of which only seven were salvaged by surgery. Local control was achieved in only 64% of tumors smaller than 5 cm in diameter and in
only 23% of tumors larger than 5 cm.
Radium needle implantation has also been used extensively by Papillon, but he has abandoned this technique because of painful local reactions and inability to
achieve lymph node control because of the small target volume. 84,119 Early studies with radium needles yielded a severe necrosis rate of approximately 25%. 148
Several studies with small numbers of patients have been reported in which external-beam radiation is combined with brachytherapy ( 137Cs, 192Ir, or radium
needles). 72,120,132,149,150 and 151 Good local control was achieved, but there was a relatively high rate of complications requiring surgery or leading to death.
The largest experience is from the Centre Leon Berard in which 221 patients with anal carcinoma were treated over a 15-year period with external-beam radiation
therapy ( 60Co) to a dose of 35 Gy, followed 2 months later by an additional 15 to 20 Gy with 192Ir implant.84,132 The investigators reported only a 3% rate of serious
complications and achieved a 65% 5-year disease-free survival and a 79% locoregional control rate. Combined brachytherapy and external irradiation may be useful
in treating extensive lesions. 152,153 and 154
Another study from France confirmed a high 5-year survival rate (61%) and good local control (75%), but a 6% rate of complications requiring surgery. 151 The
importance of treating the inguinal nodes prophylactically was illustrated in this study. In 28 N0 patients, two had an inguinal recurrence, neither of whom had
received inguinal irradiation. Both developed distant metastases and died of disease.
In summary, radiation therapy alone with either external-beam or combined with brachytherapy may yield comparable local control and survival rates with combined
modality therapy. However, it is associated with increased complication rates. In contrast to combined modality therapy in which the complications are commonly
acute (i.e., diarrhea, hematologic, skin, and nadir fever), the complications with radiation therapy alone usually involve anal necrosis requiring surgery. As seen in
Table 33.9-6, similar toxicity has been reported in patients receiving combined modality therapy plus brachytherapy. Even in experienced hands, brachytherapy is
associated with a moderate degree of anal necrosis and should be used with caution.

RADIATION THERAPY TREATMENT TECHNIQUES
A comprehensive discussion of techniques to decrease the toxicity of pelvic radiation, such as physical maneuvers, immobilization molds, dietary supplements and

radioprotectors, three-dimensional treatment planning, and other investigational approaches, is presented in Chapter 33.8 and is not discussed here. However, there
are some general principles specific to the design and delivery of radiation for anal cancer that are presented in this chapter. Last, a caveat: Technique
recommendations should be interpreted with caution. Radiation oncology, as with other medical specialties, is both an art and a science. Therefore, the
recommendations made in this chapter should serve as a guide rather than a cookbook.
The design of pelvic radiation therapy fields for anal cancer is based on knowledge of the natural history of the disease and the primary nodal drainage. Because the
internal iliac and presacral nodes are posterior in reference to the external iliac nodes, many of the normal structures in the anterior pelvis can be spared with the use
of lateral fields. As this approach underdoses the inguinal nodes, they should be supplemented with electrons. Examples of field arrangements are seen in Figure
33.9-3.

FIGURE 33.9-3. Idealized treatment fields for a clinical T2N0M0 squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal. The inguinal nodes are included in the posteroanterior
(PA) field and are supplemented with electrons.

PELVIC FIELD
A prone three-field technique (posterior plus opposed laterals) is recommended. This arrangement results in the lowest dose to the anterior structures such as the
genitalia and bladder. The underdosed inguinal nodes are then treated concurrently with electrons to bring the dose up to 100% of the prescription dose. An
alternative method is to use an anterior/posterior technique. Although this technique treats the pelvic and inguinal nodes in the same field, it results in the highest
dose to the anterior pelvic structures and skin, thereby increasing toxicity. An electron boost for the perineum is not recommended as there will be overlap between
the electron and photon fields. The portion of the perineum that needs to be treated should be included in the photon fields. The whole pelvis receives 30.6 Gy
followed by a 14.4-Gy cone down to the true pelvis for a total dose of 45 Gy.
PRIMARY TUMOR BOOST FIELD FOR COMBINED MODALITY THERAPY SALVAGE AT 6 WEEKS
If the RTOG recommendations for combined modality therapy salvage are followed, then an additional 9 Gy (concurrent with 5-FU and cisplatin) are delivered. Using
opposed laterals, the field includes the primary tumor plus a 2- to 3-cm margin in all directions. As an alternative, patients with T3 tumors can receive an additional 5.4
Gy to the primary tumor plus a 2- to 3-cm margin to a total dose of 50.4 Gy, which is delivered immediately after the 45 Gy of pelvic radiation.
MEDIAL AND LATERAL INGUINAL LYMPH NODES
After treatment of the pelvis in the prone position, the patient is treated in the supine position with electrons for inguinal nodes. The medial and lateral inguinal nodes
are outlined with a 2-cm margin in all directions. The inguinal nodes are included in the posterior pelvic photon field. They receive only exit dose from this field,
usually approximately 30% to 40% of the pelvic field prescription. This is determined from the treatment plan. Because they need to receive a total of 1.8 Gy/d, the
remaining dose should be given concurrently with electrons. The depth of the inguinal nodes can be determined from a computed tomographic scan. 155,156 If this is not
available, then a clinical estimate may be used. If the inguinal lymph nodes are positive by biopsy, a four-field technique (anterior/posterior plus opposed laterals) is
recommended as the external iliac nodes should be treated. In this setting, inguinal node dose should be 50.4 Gy.
COMPLICATIONS AND CRITICAL NORMAL TISSUES
As seen with other cancer therapies, pelvic radiation is associated with acute and long-term toxicity. Complications of pelvic radiation therapy are a function of the
volume of the radiation field, overall treatment time, fraction size, radiation energy, total dose, and technique. Large field sizes, a short overall treatment time, large
fraction sizes (greater than 2.0 Gy/d), orthovoltage or low-energy megavoltage radiation (Cobalt 60), doses of greater than 50.4 Gy when there is small bowel in the
field, the use of an anterior/posterior technique, treatment of only one field per day, the use of a direct perineal boost field, and the lack of computerized dosimetry all
contribute to an increased incidence of radiation complications. Critical normal tissues that should be considered in the treatment of anal canal cancer include bone
marrow, rectum, small bowel, bladder, and skin. The acute toxicity is due to a combination of chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Toxicities include leukopenia,
thrombocytopenia, proctitis, diarrhea, cystitis, and perineal erythema. It must be emphasized that even when pelvic radiation is delivered with appropriate doses and
techniques, almost all patients receiving combined modality therapy for anal cancer develop acute grade 3+ toxicity requiring a treatment break at some point in their
treatment courses. Approximately 1% develop long-term severe toxicity.
Unless there is a contraindication, the most simple techniques to decrease radiation toxicity, such as the use of small bowel contrast, multiple field techniques,
high-energy linear accelerators, custom blocks, avoiding a direct perineal boost, and treatment in the prone position, should be part of the standard treatment of
patients receiving curative pelvic radiation therapy. Any physical maneuver beyond the use of the prone position, such as a belly board, abdominal wall compression,
or a full bladder, may be associated with patient discomfort, thereby leading to increased movement and daily setup errors.
Radiation therapy can affect sphincter function. There is an increasing body of literature reporting the effect of radiation therapy on functional results in rectal
cancer. 157 However, it is not directly applicable to anal cancer as patients do not undergo pelvic surgery. There are limited reports of functional outcome in the anal
cancer literature. One series reports that full function was maintained in 93% of patients, 158 and a second series that used anorectal manometry reported complete
continence in 56%. 159 Both series used brachytherapy as a component of therapy. It is hoped that new trials will include a functional analysis.

INGUINAL NODE INVOLVEMENT
When examining the effect of positive lymph nodes on local control and survival, it is important to differentiate the site of nodal disease as well as synchronous versus
metachronous nodal disease. Most series do not separate N1 versus N2 versus N3 disease. However, there are data examining synchronous versus metachronous
nodal disease.
Early experience from the 1950s from Stearns et al. suggested that patients with grossly positive inguinal lymph nodes synchronous with the primary tumor were
incurable. 47 A subsequent report indicated that 2 of 13 patients survived 5 years after an APR followed 6 weeks later by inguinal lymphadenectomy. 76 Older studies
also demonstrated a small cure rate for surgical treatment of patients with synchronous unilateral inguinal nodes. 37,65
There are conflicting reports as to the prognosis of patients with synchronous nodal disease who are treated with combined modality therapy. Compared with
node-negative patients, Allal et al. report a higher rate of local failure (N1 to N3, 36%, vs. N0, 19%), 94 and the Intergroup randomized trial reports a higher colostomy
rate (N1, 28%, vs. N0, 13%).85 Although Cummings and associates from the Princess Margaret Hospital reported a local failure rate of only 13% in node-positive
patients, 5-year cause-specific survival was lower (N1 to N3, 57% vs. N0, 81%). 92 By multivariate analysis, the EORTC randomized trial reported that positive nodes
were an independent negative prognostic factor for local failure and survival. 89

In contrast, in the series of combined modality therapy plus brachytherapy from Gerard et al., patients with N1 versus N0 disease had similar 5-year disease-specific
and overall survival rates. 86 Likewise, complete response rates in the primary tumor are not affected by the presence of nodal disease. Doci and associates report
similar rates in patients receiving cisplatin-based therapy (N1 to N3, 92%, vs. N0, 100%) 87 and in a separate series of patients receiving mitomycin C–based therapy,
eight of eight patients with N1 to N3 disease achieved a complete response. 93 Overall, external-beam radiation alone 90,96,119,151 can control positive nodes in 65% of
patients, and combined modality therapy 88,89 and 90,107 can achieve nodal control in approximately 90% of patients.
The current treatment recommendations for patients with positive inguinal nodes include biopsy followed by combined modality therapy with a boost of 45.0 to 50.4 Gy
to the involved groin. Because the external iliac nodes should be treated in the pelvic radiation field, a four-field technique is recommended. Inguinal node dissection
should not be performed as part of the initial therapy; however, it may be done for isolated inguinal recurrence.
The development of unilateral metachronous inguinal lymph nodes does not carry such an ominous prognosis. After therapeutic groin dissection, the 5- to 7-year
survival rates exceeded 50% in two series, 68,114 but it was 0% in a small series reported from the Mayo Clinic. 37 Current strategies in patients with metachronous
isolated inguinal node metastases after combined modality therapy include a formal groin dissection followed by chemotherapy. The use of radiation under these
circumstances depends on prior dose and fields.

RESIDUAL OR RECURRENT CANCER
ANAL MARGIN
Locally recurrent anal margin cancers are more successfully controlled by local excision than are recurrences of anal canal cancer. 105,160 The largest reported series
of recurrent tumors included 16 of 48 patients who, after a local excision, had local recurrences (11), in the inguinal nodes (4), or both (1). 114 There were no visceral
failures. The median time to recurrence was 26 months. Ten of the patients with local recurrences underwent repeat local excision, and only one required an APR.
Nine of these patients survived longer than 5 years. All four patients with inguinal node recurrences had inguinal lymphadenectomies, and two were long-term
survivors. Although there is little reported experience with radiation therapy or combined modality therapy for patients with local recurrence after a local excision, it is
a reasonable for those who would otherwise require an APR.
ANAL CANAL
After primary treatment of anal canal tumors with combined modality therapy, patients should be evaluated for response to therapy. This is usually done 4 to 6 weeks
after the completion of therapy, but Nigro 161 recommended waiting for 8 weeks and Cummings et al. recommended at least 8 to 12 weeks.92 Depending on the initial T
stage and how soon the biopsy is performed after the completion of combined modality therapy, persistent disease is found in 10% to 25% of patients. 161,162,163 and 164
Controversy exists concerning the appropriate definition and management of patients with residual disease after combined modality therapy. Whether one waits 6 or
30 weeks after the completion of therapy, if the tumor continues to decrease in size, it has been hypothesized that the cancer is in the process of responding to the
therapy and therefore is not a treatment failure.92 Selected patients with microscopic foci of tumor may undergo local excision of persistent disease. Therefore,
patients who undergo salvage APR or further combined modality therapy within 8 weeks after the completion of initial therapy may be treated unnecessarily. Patients
with progressive residual microscopic or gross disease are candidates for either an APR or additional combined modality therapy. There are no randomized trials to
suggest which of these two alternatives are superior. APR is the most frequently reported salvage therapy, with 5-year survival rates of 30% to 58%. However, there
are also reports of successful long-term salvage with combined modality therapy. 88,165 Because there is a maximum radiation dose that pelvic structures can safely
tolerate, the decision to give additional radiation depends on careful review of the radiation fields and dosimetry.
A retrospective, nonrandomized study of patients from all of the Veterans Administration hospitals suggested that salvage surgery was superior to salvage with
chemotherapy either with or without radiation therapy, with a 53% salvage rate with surgery compared with only 19% for the conservative attempts. 166 Nigro and
others recommend a second course of combined modality therapy for patients with macroscopic disease, and several have been salvaged with this therapy. 161 If local
failure occurs after a second course of combined modality therapy and there is no evidence of extrapelvic disease, then an APR should be done.
In the RTOG randomized study, discussed in the section Combined Modality Therapy, biopsy was performed on most patients after their initial therapy. 88 For those
with positive biopsy results, salvage chemotherapy using cisplatin and 5-FU and localized boost radiation were given. Of the 27 patients who received this salvage
regimen, 24 underwent biopsy after its completion. Of these, 12 (50%) had a negative biopsy result, and five of these had no further surgery after a minimum of 3
years of follow-up. This indicates that at least some patients can have sphincter-sparing treatment despite failure to achieve a complete remission with first-line
therapy.
In a French study, local failure after radiation therapy alone occurred in 50 patients of whom 26 subsequently underwent salvage APR. 143 Local tumor control was
obtained in 12 of 26 patients (46%), and the 5-year survival was 56%. Similar local control rates and overall survival were found in 24 patients treated with APR after
failure with combined modality therapy at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. 91 Others have not had such good results with salvage APR. 167
The literature is confusing as investigators have used varying definitions of persistent and recurrent disease. Two series from France used different definitions of
persistent versus recurrent disease and reported conflicting results. 168,169 When persistent disease was defined as a recurrence up to 6 months after combined
modality therapy, surgical salvage with APR improved survival. 168 In contrast, when recurrent disease was defined as any recurrence after a clinical complete
response, regardless of the disease-free interval, patients with recurrent disease had survival rates superior to those with persistent disease. 169 In this series, of the
27 patients who underwent salvage surgery for local failure after combined modality therapy, only 44% died of disease. 169
It must be emphasized that patients should be followed closely by digital rectal examination and anoscopy (every 6 to 12 weeks) until a complete clinical response is
documented. Any local progression of disease should be defined and treated as early as possible.

METASTATIC DISEASE
Because primary combined modality therapy has been so effective, the number of patients with this uncommon malignancy who developed advanced metastatic
disease is small. Perhaps as a result, the number of chemotherapeutic agents that have been tested in patients with advanced anal canal cancer is small and the
reports are anecdotal.
Single-agent trials of doxorubicin (Adriamycin) and of cisplatin have been reported by several investigators. Fischer and colleagues reported a response to both
doxorubicin as a single agent and cisplatin at a dosage of 2 mg/kg in an elderly man with advanced disease. 170 Salem and coworkers studied cisplatin as a single
agent in three patients: One achieved a complete response and the other two had partial responses. 171 Earlier trials with 5-FU and vinblastine in small groups of
patients were ineffective. Bleomycin and vincristine were used by Livingston and colleagues in a single patient, and a partial regression was observed. 172 Combination
chemotherapy with cisplatin and 5-FU in patients with advanced disease has now been reported in small groups of patients. Responses have been reported using
both systemic and regional (hepatic-arterial) routes. Of a total of six patients described in three reports, three complete and three partial responses were noted. 173,174
and 175
In a study from France using this combination and involving seven patients with local recurrence alone and 13 patients with metastasis, there were two complete
and nine partial responses. 176 In one study, three of eight patients achieved a complete clinical response with cisplatin and fluorouracil, of whom two were 5-year
survivors. 177
A noncisplatin regimen was used by Wilking and colleagues. 178a A total of 15 patients with advanced disease received bleomycin, vincristine, and high-dose
methotrexate. Major objective regressions were seen in 3 of 12 patients with measurable tumors, but their duration of response was only 1 to 5 months. Toxicity was
severe, with four patients having probable treatment-related deaths. McGill and Quan treated 24 patients using cisplatin, bleomycin, and alkaloid. Six of 21 evaluable
patients (29%) responded. 179 Carboplatin has also been reported to have activity in this disease. 178
Although response rates in patients with metastatic disease are difficult to evaluate in view of the paucity of data, the use of neoadjuvant (induction) therapy has

allowed an assessment of the effectiveness of chemotherapy alone without the confounding variable of concurrent radiation in larger groups of patients. Most more
recent regimens involve the use of a platinum compound with 5-FU. Peiffert et al. reported the preliminary results of a trial involving induction cisplatin plus 5-FU
chemotherapy for two cycles followed by combined modality therapy. In a group of 28 evaluable patients, 72% had complete or partial responses from neoadjuvant
chemotherapy alone. The regimen used was cisplatin, 80 mg/m 2 on day 1, followed by a 4-day continuous intravenous infusion of 5-FU at 800 mg/m 2. Other
investigators have reported similar findings.
At the present time, therefore, cisplatin plus 5-FU–containing combinations appear to have a high degree of activity in patients with anal canal tumors whether used in
metastatic disease or as part of induction therapy for advanced local regional disease. The high cure rate seen with primary combined modality therapy may slow the
identification of newer agents. The use of agents with high degrees of activity in other squamous cell malignancies as part of a neoadjuvant approach may be a
strategy to identify newer agents in this disease. 180

FOLLOW-UP
Close observation of patients after treatment of anal cancer is essential, because patients with local failure are amenable to resection and may be salvaged with
long-term survival. The majority of recurrences occur within the first 3 years, and patients should be examined by physical examination and anoscopy every 6 to 12
weeks until a complete response is achieved, then every 3 months for a total of 2 years. Follow-up examinations can then be decreased to every 6 months for the next
3 years and then yearly after 5 years. The usefulness of computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis for follow-up is unclear. Transrectal ultrasound may be of
value. It must be emphasized that because the most common site of failure is at the primary tumor site, there is no substitute for physical examination. In a limited
series of 33 patients, Petrelli and colleagues report a 76% sensitivity, 86% specificity, and a 62% positive predictive value of squamous cell carcinoma
tumor–associated antigen.181

ANORECTAL MELANOMA
Anorectal melanomas are relatively rare, accounting for less than 1% of all anal canal tumors. The patients present with nonspecific complaints, which are often
attributed to benign anal conditions, and the correct diagnosis is seldom made accurately at the initial examination. This delay may be responsible for the advanced
stage seen in most at diagnosis. The stage (tumor thickness and nodal status) at presentation is the primary determinant of survival, and distant metastasis is
common.182,183,184,185,186 and 187
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND PATHOLOGIC FEATURES
Anorectal melanomas are slightly more common in women, and the median age at presentation is in the sixth decade. Most patients present with bleeding as the
initial complaint, which is often attributed to hemorrhoids. Symptoms are often present for 1 to 3 months before evaluation and also include pain, tenesmus, pruritus,
change in bowel habits, and weight loss. An initial error in diagnosis has been reported in up to 80% of patients who subsequently were diagnosed with anorectal
melanoma.182,188 The most common physical finding is a mass felt on rectal examination or seen extruding from the anus. It may appear pigmented in only one-third of
patients. 188 The tumors measure 3 to 5 cm in diameter in most cases and can be as large as 12 cm. Inguinal lymph nodes are frequently positive. The primary tumor
may arise from the skin of the anal verge, mucocutaneous junction, transitional epithelium of the anal canal, or rectal mucosa, but is seldom found more than 5 cm
from the dentate line. The diagnosis can also be made by finding an incidental melanoma in a hemorrhoid specimen. The morphologic characteristics of anorectal
melanomas are the same as for cutaneous melanomas.
PATTERNS OF SPREAD
Anorectal melanomas spread locally by direct extension upward in the submucosal plane of the rectum, but they seldom invade bladder, vagina, sacrum, or prostate.
Regional spread via the lymphatic channels is superiorly to the mesenteric system or laterally to the inguinal system. Inguinal nodes are present in 20% of patients,
and mesenteric nodes are involved in up to 65% of patients undergoing radical surgery. 188,189,190,191 and 192 Hematogenous spread is found in up to 29% of patients at
diagnosis 187,190,192 and overall in up to 69% of patients. 191 Distant metastasis is most common in the lungs, liver, and bone.
TREATMENT AND OUTCOME
The classic surgical approach for the treatment of anorectal melanoma was APR with pelvic lymph node dissection and bilateral groin dissection. 189 Because those
with inguinal metastases uniformly died of disease, this part of the procedure is no longer performed. 189,193 Because of the high systemic failure rate, several authors
have questioned the wisdom of radical surgery and have advocated wide local excision for treatment of this disease. 182,190,191,194 In the early reports from Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 189,195,196 the only long-term survivors were patients who had undergone an APR with or without lymphadenectomy. Similar results were
found at the Mayo Clinic. 193 Siegel and colleagues 182 had two long-term survivors treated with local excision and chemotherapy, and the M. D. Anderson group 191 had
one survivor at 5 years who was treated with wide local excision alone. Despite a better local control rate with APR, no series has shown a survival advantage for
patients who have had an APR compared with patients having wide local excision. 182,183,190,191 and 192,197 However, none of these studies was randomized, thus lending
potential bias in favor of local excision, which was usually performed for smaller lesions.
Several factors have been analyzed to determine their effect on outcome. Age and race are the only factors that have consistently been shown not to affect overall
survival. Size was not an important factor in the results from the study by Quan et al. 189 but had a direct effect on survival in the study by Goldman and colleagues. 190
Tumor thickness is the most important factor in determining outcome for cutaneous melanomas. Wanebo and colleagues noted three survivors at 5 years; all had
tumors less than 2 mm thick, and all were treated with an APR. 195 Of the patients with tumors larger than 2 mm, none lived 5 years, and 85% were dead by 2 years.
Another study noted three long-term survivors who had anorectal melanoma discovered incidentally at the time of hemorrhoidectomy. 192 Of the 18 patients with
mesenteric lymph node metastases, there was only one long-term survivor. 192 Female gender is associated with a better prognosis.
The inability of several authors to show a survival benefit for APR compared with wide local excision can be entirely attributed to the small numbers of patients
involved in the studies, selection bias, and the lack of the scientific method. Any relative advantage of adjuvant immunotherapies, chemotherapy, and radiation
therapy is similarly obscured and difficult to interpret. Treatment recommendations must therefore be less than absolute. A histologic margin of at least 3 mm should
be obtained if local excision is to be used. In view of probably higher local control rates, APR can still be recommended. 183,184,185 and 186,190,191 There is a clear need for
studies of sentinel node mapping and adjuvant therapies. 183,190,191

ADENOCARCINOMA
Primary adenocarcinoma of the anal canal arising from the anal glands is a rare tumor. Most adenocarcinomas in the canal represent rectal cancer with downward
spread. In general, they should be treated like adenocarcinomas of the rectum, including APR, and if T3 disease, node-positive disease, or both exist, six cycles of
adjuvant combined modality therapy with 5-FU–based chemotherapy plus preoperative or postoperative concurrent radiation therapy are given. However, the
radiation fields should include the inguinal nodes. Basik and colleagues treated ten patients with surgery and reported a median survival of 29 months. 198
Adenosquamous cancers of the anus are also rare and have an equally poor prognosis. 199 Given the squamous component, it is reasonable to treat these patients
with combined 5-FU and mitomycin C and concurrent radiation therapy. If there is residual disease, this would be followed by a salvage APR.

SARCOMA
Leiomyosarcomas of the large intestine are unusual neoplasms, accounting for less than 0.1% of all malignancies of the colon and rectum. Few cases of
leiomyosarcoma of the anus have been reported. The optimal treatment for this neoplasm is not known. The standard surgical approach is APR. Using a technique
well established for management for sarcomas of the extremities, Minsky et al. have treated several patients using local excision and 192Ir brachytherapy in an attempt
to preserve the anal sphincter. 200,201 and 202 This technique may be an alternative to APR in selected patients.

TREATMENT OF THE HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS–POSITIVE PATIENT

Given the 40- to 80-fold increase of anal cancer in the HIV-positive population compared with the general population, HIV-positive patients have received lower doses
of radiation and chemotherapy due to a concern that standard therapy may not be tolerated. 7 With a better understanding of the immunologic deficiencies seen in
HIV-positive patients, more recent reports have recommended therapy based on clinical and immunologic parameters such as a history of prior opportunistic
infections and CD4 counts.
Hoffman and associates treated 17 HIV-positive patients with a median of 51.8 Gy plus concurrent 5-FU and mitomycin C. 203 With a median follow-up of 17 months,
the nine patients with CD4 counts greater than 200 µL were all without evidence of disease with acceptable toxicity. In contrast, of the eight patients with a CD4 count
less than 200 µL, four had grade 4 toxicity and four required a colostomy for toxicity or local failure. Despite the increase in morbidity, the disease of seven (88%) was
locally controlled after salvage surgery. They recommend treating HIV-positive patients with standard doses of combined modality therapy but minimizing the radiation
fields in patients with CD4 counts less than 200 µL. Similar results were reported from Peddada et al., who treated eight HIV-positive patients with 30 Gy plus
concurrent 5-FU and mitomycin C.204 Of the four with a CD4 count less than 200 µL, three of four developed grade 4 toxicities, whereas one of the four with a CD4
count greater than 200 µL had grade 4 toxicity. However, all achieved a complete response. With a median follow-up of 38 months, four are alive without evidence of
disease, and of the four who died of HIV-related complications, all had no evidence of anal cancer at the time of death. In another report, four HIV-positive patients
without evidence of other HIV-related diseases received combined modality therapy. 205 Only one patient required a treatment break.
Management of the HIV-positive patient is complex and requires careful attention to all aspects of the patient's medical history, coexisting medical conditions, and
personal wishes. The limited experience suggests that in patients with a CD4 count greater than 200 µL who do not have signs or symptoms of other HIV-related
diseases, aggressive combined modality therapy is appropriate. They should be followed carefully, however, and frequent modifications during therapy will likely be
necessary. For those patients with a CD4 count less than 200 µL or who have signs or symptoms of other HIV-related diseases, attenuated doses of radiation,
chemotherapy, or both are recommended at the start of treatment.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS
PREVENTION AND EARLY DETECTION
Accumulating evidence has implicated HPV as a causative and perhaps necessary factor in the development of squamous cell carcinoma of the anus. Because this is
the most common histology, anal cancer may represent a preventable disease as is the case for cervical carcinoma. Both in women and in men (particularly
homosexual men) increasing use of measures for safe sex, initiated to stem the spread of AIDS, may also affect the incidence of anal cancer. Early detection and
screening in high-risk individuals (such as the use of anal cytology in male homosexuals and immunosuppressed patients) should be encouraged to diagnose the
tumor at the earliest possible stage. The use of antiviral agents in patients with HPV infection may be another method for decreasing incidence of this disease. If the
tumor is not diagnosed at a stage early enough to allow cure by surgical resection alone (the minority of cases), new approaches involving combined modality therapy
have clearly been demonstrated to offer equivalent or better results when compared with an APR. APR should be reserved for patients failing to respond to combined
modality therapy. New efforts aimed at finding better chemotherapeutic regimens for the higher risk patients (T4 and node-positive tumors) are under way. In addition,
the identification of new noncytotoxic agents capable of curative therapy without the toxicities of chemoradiation therapy should be explored.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S. Cancer statistics, 1999 CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:8.
2. Myerson RJ, Karnell LH, Menck HR. The National Cancer Data Base report on carcinoma of the anus. Cancer 1997;80:805.
3. Frisch M, Fenger C, van den Brule AJ, et al. Variants of squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal and perianal skin and their relation to human papillomaviruses. Cancer Res 1999;59:753.
4. Freidman HB, Saah AJ, Sherman ME, et al. Human papillomavirus, anal squamous intraepithelial lesions, and human immunodeficiency virus in a cohort of gay men. J Infect Dis 1998;178:45.
5. Palefsky JM, Holly EA, Ralston ML, et al. High incidence of anal high-grade squamous intra-epithelial lesions among HIV-positive and HIV-negative homosexual and bisexual men. AIDS
1998;12:495.
6. Scholefield JH, Hickson WGE, Smith JHF, et al. Anal intraepithelial neoplasia: part of a multifocal disease process. Lancet 1992;340:1271.
7. Melbye M, Cote T, Kessler L, et al. AIDS/Cancer Working Group. High incidence of anal cancer among AIDS patients. Lancet 1994;343:636.
8. Penn I. Cancers of the anogenital region in renal transplant recipients Cancer 1986;58:611.
9. Goldie SJ, Kuntz KM, Weinstein MC, et al. The clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of screening for anal squamous intraepithelial lesions in homosexual and bisexual HIV-positive
men. JAMA 1999;281:1822.
10. Prasad ML, Abcarian H. Malignant potential of perianal condyloma acuminatum. Dis Colon Rectum 1980;23:191.
11. Chuang TY, Perry HO, Kurland LT, et al. Condyloma acuminatum in Rochester, Minnesota, 19501978. Arch Dermatol 1984;120:476.
12. Zaki SR, Judd R, Coffield LM, et al. Human papillomavirus infection and anal carcinoma: retrospective analysis by in situ hybridization and the polymerase chain reaction. Am J Pathol
1992;140:1345.
13. Pfister H, Fuchs PG. Relation of papillomaviruses to anogenital cancer Dermatol Clin 1991;9:267.
14. Daling JR, Weiss NS, Hislop TG. Sexual practices, sexually transmitted diseases, and the incidence of anal cancer. N Engl J Med 1987;317:973.
15. Caussey D, Goedert JJ, Palefsky J, et al. Interaction of human immunodeficiency and papilloma viruses: association with anal epithelial abnormality in homosexual men. Int J Cancer
1990;46:214.
16. Jakate SM, Saclarides TJ. Immunohistochemical detection of mutant p53 protein and human papillomavirus-related E6 protein in anal cancers. Dis Colon Rectum 1993;36:1026.
17. Ogunbuyi OA, Scholefield JH, Smith JHF, et al. Immunohistochemical analysis of p53 expression in anal squamous neoplasia. J Clin Pathol 1993;46:507.
18. Bonin SR, Pajak TJ, Russell AH, et al. Overexpression of p53 protein and outcome of patients with chemoradiation for carcinoma of the anal canal: a report of the randomized trial RTOG
87-04. Radiation Therapy Oncology Group. Cancer 1999;85:1226.
19. Allal AS, Alonso Pentzke L, Remadi S. Apparent lack of prognostic value of MIB-1 index in anal carcinomas treated by radiotherapy. Br J Cancer 1998;77:1333.
20. Buckwalter JA, Jurayj MN. Relationship of chronic anorectal disease to carcinoma. Arch Surg 1957;75:352.
21. Frisch M, Olsen JH, Bautz A, et al. Benign anal lesions and the risk of anal cancer. N Engl J Med 1994;331:300.
22. Lin AY, Gridley G, Tucker M. Benign anal lesions and cancer. N Engl J Med 1995;332:190.
23. Holly EA, Whittemore AS, Aston DA, et al. Anal cancer incidence: genital warts, anal fissure, hemorrhoids, and smoking. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:1726.
24. Ky A, Sohn N, Weinstein MA, Korelitz BI. Carcinoma arising in anorectal fistulas of Crohn's disease. Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:992.
25. Frisch M, Glimelius B, Wohlfahrt J, et al. Tobacco smoking as a risk factor in anal carcinoma: an antiestrogenic mechanism? J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:708.
26. Daniell HW. Causes of anal carcinoma JAMA 1985;254:358.
27. Holmes F, Borek D, Medge OK, et al. Anal cancer in women. Gastroenterology 1988;95:107.
28. Wolfe HRI, Bussey HJR. Squamous cell carcinoma of the anus. Br J Surg 1968;55:295.
29. Cabrera A, Tsukada Y, Pickren JW, et al. Development of lower genital carcinomas in patients with anal carcinoma: a more than casual relationship. Cancer 1966;19:470.
30. Goligher JC, ed. Surgery of the anus, rectum, and colon. London: Bailliere, Tindall, and Cassell, 1975:815.
31. Kawaura A, Kumagai H, Shibata M, et al. Tumors of the anal region induced in mice painted with methylazoxymethanol acetate. Gann 1981;72:886.
32. Kingsnorth AN, Abu-Khalaf M, Ross JS, et al. Potentiation of 1,2-dimethylhydrazine-induced anal carcinoma by epidermal growth factor in mice. Surgery 1985;97:696.
33. Morson BC. The pathology and results of treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal and anal margin. Proc R Soc Med 1960;53:414.
34. Greenall MJ, Quan SHQ, Stearns MW, et al. Epidermoid cancer of the anal margin. Am J Surg 1985;149:95.
35. Hardy KJ, Hughes ESR, Cuthbertson AM. Squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal and anal margin. Aust NZ J Surg 1969;38:301.
36. Al-Jurf AS, Turnbull RB, Fazio VW. Local treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the anus. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1979;148:576.
37. Beahrs O, Wilson S. Carcinoma of the anus. Ann Surg 1976;184;422.
38. Kuehn PG, Beckett R, Eisenberg H. Hematogenous metastasis from epidermoid carcinoma of the anal canal. Am J Surg 1965;109:445.
39. Grodsky L. Unsuspected anal cancer discovered after minor anorectal surgery. Dis Colon Rectum 1967;10:471.
40. Cummings BJ. The treatment of anal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:1359.
41. American Joint Committee on Cancer. Anal canal. In: Fleming ID, Cooper JS, Henson DE, et al., eds. AJCC cancer staging manual. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven, 1998:91.
42. Anal canal. In: Sobin LH, Wittekind CH, eds. TNM classification of malignant tumors. New York: Wiley-Liss, 1997:70.
43. Stearns MW, Urmacher C, Sternberg SS. Cancer of the anal cana Curr Probl Cancer 1980;4:1.
44. Wood DA. Tumors of the intestines. In: Atlas of tumor pathology. Washington, DC: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 1967:200.
45. Boman BM, Moertel C, O'Connell M, et al. Carcinoma of the anal canal, a clinical and pathologic study of 188 cases. Cancer 1984;54:114.
46. Remigio PA, Der BK, Forsberg RT. Anorectal melanoma: report of two cases. Dis Colon Rectum 1976;19:350.
47. Stearns MW. Epidermoid carcinoma of the anal region. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1958;106:92.
48. Dougherty B, Evans H. Carcinoma of the anal canal: a study of 79 cases. Am J Clin Pathol 1985;83:159.
49. Salmon RJ, Zafrani B, Habib A, et al. Prognosis of cloacogenic and squamous cancers of the anal canal. Dis Colon Rectum 1986;29:336.
50. Wolber R, Dupuis B, Thiyagaratnam P, et al. Anal cloacogenic and squamous cell carcinomas. Comparative histologic analysis using in situ hybridization for human papillomavirus DNA. Am J
Surg Pathol 1990;14:176.
51. Higgins GD, Uzelin DM, Phillips GE. Differing characteristics of human papillomavirus RNA-positive and RNA-negative anal carcinomas. Cancer 1991;68:561.
52. Ordonez NG, Awalt H, Mackay B. Mammary and extramammary Paget's disease: an immunocytochemical and ultrastructural study. Cancer 1987;59:1173.
53. Tjandra J. Perianal Paget's disease: report of 3 cases. Dis Colon Rectum 1988;31:112.
54. Goldblum JR, Hart WR. Perianal Paget's disease: a histologic and immunohistochemical study of 11 cases with and without associated rectal adenocarcinoma. Am J Surg Pathol 1998;22:170.
55. Fenger C, Nielsen VT. Precancerous changes in anal canal epithelium in resection specimens. Acta Pathol Microbiol Immunobiol Scand (A) 1986;94:63.
56. Fenger C, Nielsen VT. Dysplastic changes in the anal canal epithelium in minor surgical specimens. Acta Pathol Microbiol Immunobiol Scand (A) 1981;89:463.
57. Palefsky J, Gonzalez J, Greenblatt R, et al. Anal intraepithelial neoplasia and anal papillomavirus infection among homosexual males with group IV HIV disease. JAMA 1990;263:1911.

58. Surawicz CM, Kirby P, Critchlow C, et al. Anal dysplasia in homosexual men: role of anoscopy and biopsy. Gastroenterology 1993;105:658.
59. Palefsky JM, Holly EA, Gonzales J, et al. Natural history of anal cytologic abnormalities and papillomavirus infection among homosexual men with group IV HIV disease. J Acquir Immune Defic
Syndr 1992;5:1258.
60. Fenger C, Bichel P. Flow cytometric DNA analysis of anal canal epithelium and ano-rectal tumors. Pathol Microbiol Immunobiol Scand (A) 1981;89:351.
61. Goldman S, Auer G, Erhardt K, et al. Prognostic significance of clinical stage, histologic grade, and nuclear DNA content in squamous cell carcinoma of the anus. Dis Colon Rectum
1987;30:444.
62. Scott NA, Beart RW, Weiland LH, et al. Carcinoma of the anal canal and flow cytometric DNA analysis. Br J Cancer 1989;60:450.
63. Kuehn PG, Eisenberg H, Reed JF. Epidermoid carcinoma of the perianal skin and anal canal. Cancer 1968;22:932.
64. Klotz R, Pamukcoglu T, Souilliard D. Transitional cloacogenic carcinoma of the anal canal. Cancer 1967;20:1727.
65. Dillard BM, Spratt JS, Ackerman LV. Epidermoid carcinoma of the anal margin and canal. Arch Surg 1963;86:772.
66. Clark J, Petrelli N, Herrera L, et al. Epidermoid carcinoma of the anal cana l Cancer 1986;57:400.
67. Pyper PC, Parks TG. The results of surgery for epidermoid carcinoma of the anus. Br J Surg 1985;72:712.
68. Wolfe HRI. The management of metastatic inguinal adenitis in epidermoid cancer of the anus. Proc R Soc Med 1961;61:626.
69. Welch JP, Malt RA. Appraisal of treatment of carcinoma of the anus and anal canal. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1977;145:837.
70. Greenall M, Quan SHQ, Urmacher C, et al. Treatment of epidermoid carcinoma of the anal canal. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1985;161:509.
71. Pack GT, Oropeza R. A comparative study of melanoma and epidermoid carcinoma of the anal canal: a review of 20 melanomas and 29 epidermoid carcinomas. Dis Colon Rectum
1967;10:161.
72. Frost DB, Richards PC, Montague ED, et al. Epidermoid cancer of the anorectum. Cancer 1984;53:1285.
73. Richards JC, Beahrs OH, Woolner LB. Squamous cell carcinoma of the anus, anal canal, and rectum in 109 patients. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1962;114:475.
74. Sawyers JL, Herrington JL, Main FB. Surgical considerations in the treatment of epidermoid carcinoma of the anus. Ann Surg 1963;157:817.
75. Singh R, Nime F, Mittelman A. Malignant epithelial tumors of the anal cana l. Cancer 1981;48:411.
76. Greenall MJ, Quan SHQ, DeCosse J. Epidermoid cancer of the anus. Br J Surg 1985;72:S97.
77. Berardi R, Lee S, Chen HP. Perianal extramammmary Paget's disease. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1988;167:359.
78. McDermott F, Hughes E, Pihl E. Symptoms, duration, and survival prospects in cancer of the rectum. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1931;52:350.
79. Binkley GE, Derrick WA. The association of squamous cell cancer with anal manifestations of lymphogranuloma venerum. Am J Dig Dis 1945;12:46.
80. Kuehn PG, Beckett R, Eisenberg H, et al. Epidermoid carcinoma of the perianal skin and anal canal. N Engl J Med 1964;270:614.
81. Gordon BS. Unsuspected lesions in anal tissue removed for minor conditions. Ann Surg 1956;73:741.
82. Hu K, Minsky BD, Cohen AM, et al. 30 Gy may be an adequate dose in patients with anal cancer treated with excisional biopsy followed by combined-modality therapy. J Surg Oncol
1999;70:77.
83. Goldman S, Glimelius B, Norming U, et al. Transanorectal ultrasonography in anal carcinoma: a prospective study of 21 patients. Acta Radiol 1988;29:337.
84. Papillon J, Montbarbon JF. Epidermoid carcinoma of the anal canal. Dis Colon Rectum 1987;30:324.
85. Peiffert D, Bey P, Pernot M, et al. Conservative management by irradiation of epidermoid cancers of the anal canal: prognostic factors of tumor control and complications. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1997;37:313.
86. Gerard JP, Ayzac L, Hun D, et al. Treatment of anal canal carcinoma with high dose radiation therapy and concomitant fluorouracil-cisplatinum. Long term results in 95 patients. Radiother
Oncol 1998;46:249.
87. Doci R, Zucali R, La Monica G, et al. Primary chemoradiation therapy with fluorouracil and cisplatin for cancer of the anus: results in 35 consecutive patients. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:3121.
88. Flam M, John M, Pajak T, et al. Role of mitomycin in combination with fluorouracil and radiotherapy, and salvage chemoradiation in the definitive nonsurgical treatment of epidermoid
carcinoma of the anal canal: results of a phase III randomized intergroup study. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2537.
89. Bartelink H, Roelofsen F, Eschwege F, et al. Concomitant radiotherapy and chemotherapy is superior to radiotherapy alone in the treatment of locally advanced anal cancer: results of a phase
III randomized trial of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer radiotherapy and gastrointestinal cooperative groups. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2040.
90. Cummings BJ. Anal canal. In: Perez C, Brady L, eds. Principles and practice of radiation oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1993:1015.
91. Ellenhorn JDI, Enker WE, Quan SHW. Salvage abdominoperineal resection following combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy for epidermoid carcinoma of the anus. Ann Surg Oncol
1994;1:105.
92. Cummings BJ, Keane TJ, O'Sullivan B, et al. Epidermoid anal cancer: treatment by radiation alone or by radiation and 5-fluorouracil with and without mitomycin-C. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1991;21:1115.
93. Doci R, Zucali R, Bombelli L, et al. Combined chemoradiation therapy for anal cancer. Ann Surg 1992;215:150.
94. Allal AS, Mermillod B, Roth AD, et al. The impact of treatment factors on local control in T2-T3 anal carcinomas treated by radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy. Cancer 1997;79:2329.
95. Goldman S, Glimelius B, Glas U, et al. Management of anal epidermoid carcinoma: an evaluation of treatment results in two population-based series. Int J Colorect Dis 1989;4:234.
96. Schlienger M, Krzisch C, Pene F, et al. Epidermoid carcinoma of the anal canal treatment results and prognostic variables in a series of 242 cases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:1141.
97. Schlienger M, Touboul E, Mauban S, et al. Resultats du traitement de 286 cas de cancers epidermoides du canal anal dont 236 par irradiation a visee conservatrice. Lyon Chir 1991;87:61.
98. Constantinou EC, Daly W, Fung CY, et al. Time-dose considerations in the treatment of anal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:651.
99. Serota AI, Weil M, Williams RA. Anal cloacogenic carcinoma Arch Surg 1981;116:456.
100. Shepherd NA, Scholefield JH, Love SB, et al. Prognostic factors in anal squamous carcinoma: a multivariate analysis of clinical, pathological, and flow cytometric parameters in 235 cases.
Histopathology 1990;16:545.
101. Goldberg ZI, Cummings BJ, Chapman WB, et al. Role of a DT-diaphorase mutation in the response of anal canal carcinoma to radiation, 5-fluorouracil, and mitomycin c. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1998;42:331.
102. Tanum G, Holm R. Anal carcinoma: a clinical approach to p53 and RB gene proteins. Oncology 1996;53:369.
103. Bonin SR, Qian C, Russell AH, et al. Overexpression of p53 protein is associated with decreased local disease-free survival in patients treated with chemoradiation for anal canal cancer: a
report of RTOG 87-04. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:210.
104. Wong CS, Tsao MS, Sharma V, et al. Prognostic role of p53 protein expression in epidermoid carcinoma of the anal canal. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:309.
105. Mendenhall WM, Zlotecki RA, Vauthey JN, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the anal margin. Oncology 1996;10:1843.
106. Papillon J, Chassard JL. Respective roles of radiotherapy and surgery in the management of epidermoid carcinoma of the anal margin. Dis Colon Rectum 1992;35:422.
107. UKCCCR Anal Cancer Trial Working Party. Epidermoid anal cancer: results from the UKCCCR randomised trial of radiotherapy alone versus radiotherapy, 5-fluorouracil, and mitomycin. Lancet
1997;348:1049.
108. Grinnell RS. An analysis of forty-nine cases of squamous cell carcinoma of the anus. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1954;98:29.
109. McConnell EM. Squamous cell carcinoma of the anus: a review of 96 cases. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1970;141:411.
110. Beck DE, Fazio VW, Jagelman DG, et al. Perianal Bowen's disease. Dis Colon Rectum 1988;31:419.
111. Beck DE, Fazio VW. Perianal Paget's disease. Dis Colon Rectum 1987;30:263.
112. Hardcastle JD, Bussey HJR. Results of surgical treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal and anal margin seen at St. Mark's Hospital. Proc R Soc Med 1968;61:629.
113. Turell R. Epidermoid squamous cell cancer of the perianus and anal canal. Surg Clin North Am 1962;42:1235.
114. Greenall MJ, Magill G, Quan SHQ. Recurrent epidermoid carcinoma of the anus. Cancer 1986;57:1437.
115. Scholefield JH, Ogunbuyi OA, Smith JHF, et al. Treatment of intraepithelial neoplasia. Br J Surg 1994;81:1238.
116. Brittain PC, Carlson JW, Hawley-Bowlnd C. Laser ablation of squamous cell carcinoma in situ of the anal canal: a case report. J Reprod Med 1994;39:913.
117. Schraut WH, Wang CH, Dawson PJ, et al. Depth of invasion, location, and size of cancer of the anus dictate operative treatment. Cancer 1983;51:1291.
118. Dalby JF, Pointon RS. The treatment of anal carcinoma by interstitial irradiation. Am J Radiol 1961;85:515.
119. Papillon J. Rectal and anal cancers. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1982.
120. Hintz BL, Charyulu KKN, Sudarsanam A. Anal carcinoma: basic concepts and management. J Surg Oncol 1978;10:141.
121. James RD, Pointon RS, Martin S. Local radiotherapy in the management of squamous carcinoma of the anus. Br J Surg 1985;72:282.
122. Peiffert D, Bey P, Pernot M, et al. Conservative treatment by irradiation of epidermoid carcinomas of the anal margin. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:57.
123. Gordon PH. Current statusperianal and anal canal neoplasms. Dis Colon Rectum 1990;33:799.
124. Nigro ND, Vaitkevicius VK, Considine B. Combined therapy for cancer of the anal canal: a preliminary report. Dis Colon Rectum 1974;17:354.
125. Graf R, Wust P, Gellermann J, et al. Phase II trial of radiation therapy with 45 Gy, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), and mitomycin-C (MMC) in patients with anal cancera rationale to add regional
hyperthermia. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:296.
126. Miller EJ, Quan SHQ, Thaler HT. Treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal. Cancer 1991;67:2038.
127. Meropol NJ, Niedzwiecki D, Shank B, et al. Combined-modality therapy of poor risk anal canal carcinoma; a phase II study of the Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB). Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1999;18:245.
128. Hughes LL, Rich TA, Delclos L, et al. Radiotherapy for anal cancer: experience from 19791987. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:1153.
129. John M, Pajak T, Flam M, et al. Dose escalation in chemoradiation for anal cancer: preliminary results of RTOG 92-08. Cancer J Sci Am 1996;2:205.
130. Martenson JA, Lipsitz SR, Wagner H, et al. Initial results of a phase II trial of high dose radiation therapy, 5-fluorouracil, and cisplatin for patients with anal cancer (E4292): an Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;35:745.
131. Pieffert D, Seitz JF, Rougier P, et al. Preliminary results of a phase II study of high-dose radiation therapy and neoadjuvant plus concomitant 5-fluorouracil with CDDP chemotherapy for
patients with anal canal cancer: a French cooperative study. Ann Oncol 1997;8:575.
132. Papillon J, Montbarbon JF, Gerard JP, et al. Interstitial curietherapy in the conservative treatment of anal and rectal cancers. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:1161.
133. Gerard JP, Mauro F, Thomas L, et al. Treatment of squamous cell anal canal carcinoma with pulsed dose rate brachytherapy. Feasibility study of a French cooperative group. Radiother Oncol
1999;51:131.
134. Roed H, Engelholm SA, Svendsen LB, et al. Pulsed dose rate (PDR) brachytherapy of anal carcinoma. Radiother Oncol 1996;41:131.
135. Sandhu APS, Symonds RP, Robertson AG, et al. Interstitial iridium-192 implantation combined with external radiotherapy in anal cancer: ten years experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;40:575.
136. Wagner JP, Mahe MA, Romestaing P, et al. Radiation therapy in the conservative treatment of carcinoma of the anal canal. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:17.
137. Allal A, Mermillod B, Roth AD, et al. Impact of clinical and therapeutic factors on major late complications after radiotherapy with or without concomitant chemotherapy for anal carcinoma. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:1099.
138. Lohnert M, Doniec JM, Kovacs G, et al. New method of radiotherapy for anal cancer with three-dimensional tumor reconstruction based on endoanal ultrasound and ultrasound-guided
afterloading therapy. Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:169.
139. Michaelson RA, Magill G, Quan SHQ, et al. Pre-operative chemotherapy and radiation therapy in the management of anal epidermoid carcinoma. Cancer 1983;51:390.
140. Sischy B, Doggett S, Krall J, et al. Definitive irradiation and chemotherapy for radiosensitization in management of anal carcinoma: interim report on radiation therapy oncology group study no.
8314. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:850.
141. Buxton RW. Squamous cell anal carcinoma Ann Surg 1953;67:821.
142. Cattell RB, Williams AC. Epidermoid carcinoma of the anus and rectum. Ann Surg 1943;46:336.
143. Touboul E, Schlienger M, Buffat L, et al. Epidermoid carcinoma of the anal canal. Results of curative-intent radiation therapy in a series of 270 patients. Cancer 1994;73:1569.
144. deGara CJ, Basrur V, Figueredo A, et al. The influence of age on the management of anal cancer. Hepato-Gastroenterology 1995;42:73.

145. Valentini V, Morganti AG, Luzi S, et al. Is chemoradiation feasible in elderly patients? A study of 17 patients with anorectal carcinoma. Cancer 1997;80:1387.
146. Allal A, Obradovic M, Laurencet F, et al. Treatment of anal canal carcinoma in the elderly. Feasibility and outcome of radical radiotherapy with or without concomitant chemotherapy. Cancer
1999;85:26.
147. Martenson JA, Gunderson LL. External radiation therapy without chemotherapy in the management of anal cancer. Cancer 1993;71:1736.
148. Keiling R, Grunewald JM, Achille E. Radiotherapie des cancers malpighiens de l'anus. J Radiol Electrol Med Nucl 1973;54:634.
149. Dubois JB, Garrigues JM, Pujol H. Cancer of the anal canal: report on the experience of 61 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:575.
150. Ager P, Samala E, Bosworth J, et al. The conservative management of anorectal cancer by radiotherapy. Am J Surg 1979;137:228.
151. Ng Ying Kin KNY, Pigneux J, Auvray H, et al. Our experience of conservative treatment of anal canal carcinoma combining external irradiation and interstitial implants: 32 cases treated
between 1973 and 1982. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14:253.
152. Martinez A, Edmundson GK, Cox RS, et al. Combination of external beam irradiation and multiple-site perineal applicator (MUPIT) for treatment of locally advanced or recurrent prostatic,
anorectal, and gynecologic malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:256.
153. Puthawala AA, Syed N, Gates TC, et al. Definitive treatment of extensive anorectal carcinoma by external and interstitial irradiation. Cancer 1982;50:1746.
154. Papillon J. Effectiveness of combined radio-chemotherapy in the management of epidermoid carcinoma of the anal canal. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:1217.
155. Koh WJ, Chiu M, Stelzer KJ, et al. Femoral vessel depth and the implications for groin node radiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:969.
156. Wang CJ, Chin YY, Leung SW, et al. Topographic distribution of inguinal lymph nodes metastasis: significance in determination of treatment margin for elective inguinal lymph nodes irradiation
of low pelvic tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;35:133.
157. Kollmorgen CF, Meagher AP, Pemberton JH, et al. The long term effect of adjuvant postoperative chemoradiotherapy for rectal cancer on bowel function. Ann Surg 1994;220:676.
158. Kapp KS, Geyer E, Gebhart FH, et al. Evaluation of sphincter function after external beam irradiation and Ir-192 high-dose-rate (HDR) brachytherapy +/- chemotherapy in patients with
carcinoma of the anal canal. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45s:339.
159. Vodermark D, Sailer M, Flentje M, et al. Continence and anorectal manometry after curative-intent radiation therapy for anal carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45s:340.
160. Mendenhall WM, Zlotecki RA, Vauthey JN, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the anal margin treated with radiotherapy. Surg Oncol 1996;5:29.
161. Nigro ND. The force of change in the management of squamous-cell cancer of the anal canal. Dis Colon Rectum 1991;34:482.
162. Leichman LP, Nigro N, Vaitkevicius V, et al. Cancer of the anal canal: model for preoperative adjuvant combined modality therapy. Am J Med 1985;78:211.
163. Habr-Gama A, da Silva e Sousa Jr. AH, Nadalin W, et al. Epidermoid carcinoma of the anal canal: results of treatment by combined chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Dis Colon Rectum
1989;32:773.
164. Cummings B. Concomitant radiotherapy and chemotherapy for anal cancer. Semin Radiat Oncol 1992;19:102.
165. Flam M, John M, Mowry P, et al. Definitive combined modality therapy of carcinoma of the anus: a report of 30 cases including results of salvage therapy in patients with residual disease. Dis
Colon Rectum 1987;30:495.
166. Longo WE, Vernava AM, Wade TP, et al. Recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal. Predictors of initial treatment failure and results of salvage therapy. Ann Surg 1994;220:40.
167. Zelnick RS, Haas PA, Ajlouni M, et al. Results of abdominoperineal resections for failures after combination chemotherapy and radiation therapy for anal canal cancers. Dis Colon Rectum
1992;35:574.
168. Pocard M, Tiret E, Nugent K, et al. Results of salvage abdominoperineal resection for anal cancer after radiotherapy. Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:1493.
169. Allal AS, Laurencet FM, Reymond MA, et al. Effectiveness of surgical salvage therapy for patients with locally uncontrolled anal carcinoma after sphincter-conserving treatment. Cancer
1999;86:409.
170. Fisher W, Herbst K, Sims J, et al. Metastatic cloacogenic carcinoma of the anus: sequential responses to Adriamycin and cis-dichlorodiamineplatinum (III). Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:91.
171. Salem P, Habboubi N, Naanasissie E, et al. Effectiveness of cisplatin in the treatment of anal squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:891.
172. Livingston R, Bodey G, Gottlieb J, et al. Kinetic scheduling of vincristine and bleomycin in patients with lung cancer and other malignant tumors. Cancer Treat Rep 1973;57:219.
173. Khater R, Frenay M, Bourry J, et al. Cisplatin plus 5-fluorouracil in the treatment of metastatic squamous cell carcinoma: a report of 2 cases. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:1345.
174. Ajani JA, Carrasco H, Jackson D, et al. Combination of cisplatin plus fluoropyrimidine chemotherapy effective against liver metastasis from carcinoma of the anal canal. Am J Med 1989;87:221.
175. Jaiyesimi IA, Pazdur R. Cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil as salvage therapy for recurrent metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal. Am J Clin Pathol 1993;16:536.
176. Mahjoubi M, Sadek H, Francois E, et al. Epidermoid anal canal carcinoma (EACC): activity of cisplatin (P) and continuous 5 fluorouracil (5-FU) in metastatic (M) and/or local recurrent (LR)
disease. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1990;9:114.
177. Tanum G. Treatment of relapsing anal carcinoma Acta Oncol 1993;32:33.
178. Evans TRJ, Mansi JL, Glees JP. Case report: response of metastatic anal carcinoma to single agent carboplatin. Clin Oncol 1993;5:57.
178a. Wilking N, Petrelli N, Herrera L, Mittleman A. Phase II study of combination belomycin, vincristine, and high dose methotrexate (BOM) with leucovorin rescue in advanced squamous cell
carcinoma of the anal canal. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1985;15(3):300.
179. Magill G, Quan S. Salvage chemotherapy of anal epidermoid carcinoma with cisplatin based protocols. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1989;8:117.
180. Peiffert D, Seitz JF, Rougier P, et al. Preliminary results of a phase II study of high-dose radiation therapy and neoadjuvant plus concomitant 5-fluorouracil with CDDP chemotherapy for
patients with anal canal cancer: a French cooperative study. Ann Oncol 1997;8:575.
181. Petrelli NJ, Palmer M, Herrera L, et al. The utility of squamous cell carcinoma antigen for the follow-up of patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal. Cancer 1992;70:35.
182. Siegel B, Cohen D, Jacob ET. Surgical treatment of anorectal melanomas. Am J Surg 1983;146:336.
183. Slingluff CL, Vollmer RT, Seigler HF. Anorectal melanoma: clinical characteristics and results of surgical management in twenty-four patients. Surgery 1990;107:1.
184. Wong JH, Cagle LA, Storm FK, et al. Natural history of surgically treated mucosal melanoma. Am J Surg 1987;154:54.
185. Whooley BP, Astrow AB, Toth IR, et al. Long term survival after locally aggressive anorectal melanoma. Am Surg 1998;64:245.
186. DeMatos P, Tyler DS, Siegler HF. Malignant melanoma of the mucous membranes: a review of 119 cases. Ann Surg Oncol 1998;5:733.
187. Weinstock MA. Epidemiology and prognosis of anorectal melanoma. Gastroenterology 1993;104:174.
188. Morson BC, Volkstadt H. Malignant melanoma of the anal canal J Clin Pathol 1963;16:126.
189. Quan SHQ, White JE, Deddish MR. Malignant melanoma of the anorectum. Dis Colon Rectum 1959;2:275.
190. Goldman S, Glimelius B, Pahlman L. Anorectal malignant melanoma in Swedenreport of 49 patients. Dis Colon Rectum 1990;33:874.
191. Ross M, Pezzi C, Pezzi T, et al. Patterns of failure in anorectal melanoma: a guide to surgical therapy. Arch Surg 1990;125:313.
192. Brady MS, Kavolius JP, Quan SHQ. Anorectal melanoma: a 64-year experience at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. Dis Colon Rectum 1995;38:146.
193. Chiu YS, Unni KK, Beart RW. Malignant melanoma of the anorectum. Dis Colon Rectum 1980;23:122.
194. Garnick M, Lokich JJ. Primary malignant melanoma of the rectum: rationale for conservative surgical management. J Surg Oncol 1978;10:529.
195. Wanebo HJ, Woodruff JM, Farr GH, Quan SHQ. Anorectal melanoma Cancer 1981;47:1891.
196. Pack GT, Martins FG. Treatment of anorectal malignant melanoma. Dis Colon Rectum 1960;3:15.
197. Ward MW, Romano G, Nicholls R. The surgical treatment of anorectal malignant melanoma. Br J Surg 1986;73:68.
198. Basik M, Rodriguez-Bigas MA, Penetrante R, et al. Prognosis and recurrence patterns of anal adenocarcinoma. Am J Surg 1995;169:233.
199. Cagir B, Nagy MW, Topham A, et al. Adenosquamous carcinoma of the colon, rectum, and anus. Epidemiology, distribution, and survival characteristics. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:263.
200. Minsky BD, Mies C, Rich TA. Leiomyosarcoma of the anus treated with sphincter preserving surgery and radiation therapy. J Surg Oncol 1986;32:91.
201. Minsky BD, Cohen AM, Hajdu SI. Conservative management of anal leiomyosarcoma. Cancer 1991;68:1643.
202. Grann A, Paty PB, Guillem JG, et al. Sphincter preservation of leiomyosarcoma of the rectum and anus with local excision and brachytherapy. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:1296.
203. Hoffman R, Welton ML, Klencke B, et al. The significance of pretreatment CD4 count on the outcome and treatment tolerance of HIV-positive patients with anal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1999;44:131.
204. Peddada AV, Smith DE, Rao AR, et al. Chemotherapy and low dose radiotherapy in the treatment of HIV-infected patients with carcinoma of the anal canal. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1997;37:1101.
205. Hocht S, Weigel T, Kroesen AJ, et al. Low acute toxicity of radiotherapy and radiochemotherapy in patients with cancer of the anal canal and HIV infection. Acta Oncol 1997;36:799.
206. Tanum G, Tveit K, Karlsen K, et al. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy for anal carcinoma. Cancer 1991;67:2462.
207. John M, Flam M, Palma N. Ten-year results of chemoradiation for anal cancer: focus on late morbidity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;34:65.
208. Cutuli B, Fenton J, Labib A, et al. Anal margin carcinoma: 21 cases treated at the Institut Curie by exclusive conservative radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol 1988;11:6.
209. Cheung ACY. The place of interstitial irradiation in epidermoid carcinoma of the anal margin. Endocurie Hypertherm Oncol 1989;5:140.
210. Svennson C, Goldman S, Friberg B. Radiation treatment of epidermoid cancer of the anus. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:73.
211. Touboul E, Schlienger M, Buffat L, et al. Epidermoid carcinoma of the anal margin: 17 cases treated with curative-intent radiation therapy. Radiother Oncol 1995;34:195.
212. Friberg B, Svensson C, Goldman S, et al. The Swedish national care programme for anal carcinomaimplementation and overall results. Acta Oncol 1998;37:25.
213. Eschwege F, Lasser P, Chavy A, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal: treatment by external beam irradiation. Radiother Oncol 1985;3:145.
214. Doggett SW, Green JP, Cantril ST. Efficacy of radiation therapy alone for limited squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:1069.
215. Newman G, Calverley DC, Acker BD, et al. The management of carcinoma of the anal canal by external beam radiotherapy, experience in Vancouver 19711988. Radiother Oncol 1992;25:196.

SECTION 34.1 Molecular Biology of Genitourinary Cancers
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 34.1
Molecular Biology of Genitourinary Cancers
W. MARSTON LINEHAN
BERTON ZBAR
FREDRICK LEACH
CARLOS CORDON-CARDO
WILLIAM ISAACS
Kidney Cancer
Location of a Renal Carcinoma Gene
Abnormalities in Sporadic Clear Cell Renal Carcinoma
Hereditary Renal Carcinoma (Von Hippel-Lindau Disease)
Von Hippel-Lindau Gene Mutations: Clear Cell Renal Carcinoma
Characteristics of the Von Hippel-Lindau Tumor Suppressor Gene Product
Hereditary Papillary Renal Carcinoma
Prostate Cancer
Multistep Carcinogenesis and Prostate Cancer Progression
Prostate Cancer Initiation and Progression: Genetics Versus Environment
Hereditary Prostate Cancer
Somatic Alterations in Prostate Cancer
Bladder Cancer
Cytogenetics and Interphase Cytogenetics of Bladder Tumors
Oncogenes: Molecular and Immunopathology Analyses of Bladder Tumors
Tumor Suppressor Genes: Molecular and Immunopathology Analysis of Bladder Tumors
Bladder Cancer as a Model for the Study of Tumor Progression and Future Directions
Hereditary Predispositions and Urothelial Cancer
Potential Clinical Applications
Chapter References

KIDNEY CANCER
Kidney cancer, or renal carcinoma, affects more than 30,000 Americans annually and is responsible for nearly 12,000 deaths in the United States each year. Renal
carcinoma occurs most commonly in adults between 50 and 70 years of age, although it has been reported in children as young as 3 years. 1,2 Renal carcinoma is
responsible for approximately 3% of adult malignancies, and the male to female ratio is 1.5:1. 3,4 Leatherworkers and workers exposed to asbestos have an increased
incidence of renal carcinoma. A strong correlation exists between cigarette smoking and the development renal carcinoma. 5,6 Up to 85% of renal carcinomas are of
the clear cell type; 5% to 15% of renal carcinomas are a papillary histologic variant. 7,8 An increased incidence of renal carcinoma is seen in dialysis patients with
acquired cystic disease, in which a rate 30 times higher than normal has been estimated. 9 A family history of this malignancy has been associated with an increased
risk of developing of renal carcinoma. 2
Like colon cancer, breast cancer, and retinoblastoma, renal carcinoma occurs in both a familial (hereditary) and sporadic (nonhereditary) form. It has been estimated
that up to 4% of renal carcinomas may have a hereditary basis. 2 At least four types of hereditary renal carcinoma have been categorized: renal carcinoma associated
with von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL), hereditary papillary renal carcinoma (HPRC), hereditary renal carcinoma associated with Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome, 10 and
hereditary clear cell renal carcinoma. VHL disease is a hereditary cancer syndrome with an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern in which affected individuals
develop tumors in a number of organs, including the kidney. HPRC is a newly described form of inherited renal carcinoma in which affected individuals develop
multifocal, bilateral, early-onset papillary renal carcinoma. Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome is a dominantly inherited cancer syndrome in which affected individuals are at
risk to develop cutaneous, renal, and other manifestations. The cutaneous manifestation involves fibrofolliculomas; the kidney tumors can be chromophobe renal
carcinoma, oncocytoma, or papillary renal carcinoma. 10 In the fourth, but less well understood form of inherited renal carcinoma, hereditary clear cell renal carcinoma,
patients have a predisposition to develop bilateral, multifocal clear cell renal carcinoma.
LOCATION OF A RENAL CARCINOMA GENE
The initial studies to provide information with reference to a potential location for a renal carcinoma gene came from the work of Cohen and coworkers, 11 who in 1979
reported a kindred in which affected individuals developed early-onset, bilateral, multifocal clear cell renal carcinoma. In this family, every member who developed
kidney cancer had a germline abnormality detectable on karyotypic analysis, a balanced translocation from the short arm of chromosome 3 to the long arm of
chromosome 8. Every patient who was found to have early-onset kidney cancer in this kindred had this abnormality; no patient who did not have this translocation was
found to have kidney cancer. 11 Subsequently, Pathak and coworkers 12 identified another family with a chromosome 3 to chromosome 11 translocation, and Kovaks
and colleagues13 reported a family with a chromosome 3 to chromosome 6 translocation. In both studies, the common abnormality was on the short arm of
chromosome 3 (Fig. 34.1-1).

FIGURE 34.1-1. Knudson's two-hit model was the model for scientists searching for the clear cell renal carcinoma gene. In accord with Knudson's model, both copies
of the gene for the hereditary form of renal carcinoma associated with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease are inactivated in renal carcinomas from VHL patients
(germinal inactivation of the VHL gene plus a somatic inactivation of the VHL gene). 317,318 In sporadic (nonhereditary) clear cell renal carcinoma somatic inactivation of
both copies of the VHL gene has been detected in the majority of tumors. 44 (From ref. 319, with permission.)

ABNORMALITIES IN SPORADIC CLEAR CELL RENAL CARCINOMA
These mutations in hereditary renal carcinoma led scientists to study nonhereditary renal carcinoma to determine if changes on chromosome 3 were also present in
sporadic cases. When Zbar et al. 14 studied tumor tissue from 18 patients with sporadic, nonhereditary renal carcinoma by restriction fragment polymorphism analysis,
loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on the short arm of chromosome 3 was detected in tumor tissue from 11 of 11 evaluable patients. LOH was detected in tumor tissue from
patients with localized as well as advanced disease, suggesting the presence of a gene involved in the earliest development of this neoplasm. To more precisely
define the prevalence of chromosome 3p LOH in sporadic renal carcinoma, as well as the location of a candidate gene for renal carcinoma, Anglard et al. 15 analyzed

DNA from normal and tumor tissue from 60 patients with various stages of renal carcinoma for losses of alleles at different chromosomal loci. LOH that was
independent of tumor stage was detected at one or more of ten loci tested on chromosome 3 in tumor tissue from nearly 90% of patients. 15 LOH was detected in clear
cell renal carcinoma but not in papillary renal carcinoma. These findings and those of others showed deletion of a segment of chromosome 3p to be a consistent
finding in clear cell renal carcinoma. 16,17,18,19 and 20
Although these findings pointed to the presence of a renal carcinoma gene on the short arm of chromosome 3, the chromosome 3p area of minimal deletion in the
renal tumors was too large to search by conventional cloning strategies available at the time. This then led investigators to initiate studies of the familial form of renal
carcinoma associated with VHL disease, with the supposition that the gene for VHL may be involved in the sporadic form of renal carcinoma.
HEREDITARY RENAL CARCINOMA (VON HIPPEL-LINDAU DISEASE)
VHL disease is a familial cancer syndrome in which affected individuals develop tumors in a number of organs, including kidney, cerebellum, spine, eyes, pancreas,
adrenal glands, inner ear, and epididymis. 1,2 Patients with VHL disease often develop early-onset, bilateral, multifocal renal carcinoma and multiple renal cysts.
Frequently, renal tumors are found growing inside the renal cysts. The renal carcinoma in VHL patients is uniformly clear cell renal carcinoma. 21 It has been estimated
that up to 600 clear cell renal carcinomas and 1100 benign or atypical cysts may be found per kidney in an affected VHL patient. 22 These kidney cancers are
malignant and have been reported to metastasize in up to 40% of untreated patients. The cerebellar and spinal hemangioblastomas are multifocal and marked by
extreme vascularity. Although these central nervous system tumors are benign, they can cause significant morbidity. The retinal angiomas can be the first clinical
manifestation of VHL. These benign, hypervascular retinal tumors can be detected as early as 1 year of age. One identified manifestation of VHL is a tumor that
develops in the endolymphatic sac of the inner ear. 23 These papillary tumors are low-grade malignancies that rarely metastasize but can invade locally. VHL patients
can develop islet cell tumors of the pancreas and pancreatic cysts. The islet cell tumors are rarely functional; however, they can be malignant and can spread. 24,25
Eighteen percent to 20% of VHL patients develop pheochromocytomas. 26,27 and 28 These tumors can be bilateral or extraadrenal and can be malignant. The epididymal
cystadenomas that VHL patients develop are frequently bilateral and are uniformly benign 2,29 (Fig. 34.1-2).

FIGURE 34.1-2. Physical (A) and genetic (B) map of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) region which was used to identify the VHL gene. cDNAs, complementary DNAs;
Cen., centromere; Tel., telomere. (From ref. 39, with permission.)

Localization of the von Hippel-Lindau Gene to Chromosome 3
To identify the VHL gene, studies were carried out to perform genetic linkage analysis on chromosome 3p. The VHL gene was initially mapped to a 6- to
8-centimorgan (cM) region of chromosome 3 at 3p25-26. 30,31 and 32 Subsequent multipoint linkage analysis localized the VHL gene to a 4-cM interval at 3p26 between
RAF1 and the anonymous marker D3S18.33 No evidence for genetic heterogeneity was identified. 31,32,34 However, early evidence was found for clinical heterogeneity;
kindreds with different tumor phenotypes were identified. 34 The VHL gene was found to have characteristics of a tumor suppressor gene. Tory et al. 35 studied VHL
renal carcinomas and showed loss of the chromosome 3p, which carried the wild-type allele of the VHL gene. Knudson's model 36 and the finding of frequent LOH in
sporadic renal carcinoma 14,15,16 and 17 suggested that inactivation of both copies of the VHL gene was an early step in renal carcinogenesis ( Fig. 34.1-3).

FIGURE 34.1-3. A: Distribution of von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene mutations in clear cell renal carcinoma (lower panel) and in the germline of patients with VHL
disease (upper panel). (Adapted from refs. 40 and 44.) B: Clear cell renal carcinoma is characterized by mutation of the VHL gene.

Identification of the von Hippel-Lindau Gene
A critical step in identification of the VHL gene was the finding by Yao et al. 37 and Richards et al. 38 of overlapping germline deletions in unrelated VHL kindreds. The
detection of these nested germline deletions in the VHL kindreds was crucial for detection of candidate complementary DNAs for the VHL gene. In 1993, Latif et al. 39
reported the identification of the VHL gene. In the initial report, rearrangements of the VHL gene were detected in 28 of 221 VHL kindreds. Eighteen of the
rearrangements were due to deletions of the VHL gene, including three nonoverlapping deletions. Intragenic mutations that segregated with the disease were
detected in three VHL kindreds. 39 The initial sequence of the VHL complementary DNA revealed a short open reading frame encoding only 284 amino acids, the
remainder representing a large 3' untranslated region of the gene. Neither the predicted amino acid nor the nucleotide sequences showed any significant homology to
proteins or genes in the databases. 39
Genotype and Phenotype Correlations: von Hippel-Lindau Subtype Classification
In the initial studies, Chen et al. 40 detected mutations in 85 of 114 families (75%). Stolle et al. 41 developed an improved method for detection of germline mutations in
the VHL gene and reported detection of germline mutations in the VHL gene in 99% of VHL families tested. Striking correlations were noted between the germline
mutations and the clinical phenotype. VHL families are classified as VHL type 1 (families without pheochromocytoma) and VHL type 2 (families with
pheochromocytoma). Whereas 56% of the mutations associated with VHL type 1 were insertions or microdeletions, nonsense mutations, or length mutations, 96% of
the mutations associated with VHL type 2 were missense mutations. Crossey et al. 42 detected missense VHL gene mutations in 9 of 11 families with
pheochromocytoma, and large deletions or mutations predicted to cause a truncated protein in 36 of 53 families without pheochromocytoma. When Zbar et al. 43
analyzed mutations in 473 families from North America, Europe, and Japan, germline mutations were detected in 299 of 473 families (63%) tested. Mutations
predicted to produce full length, mutant VHL proteins were detected in 89% of VHL families with pheochromocytoma with mutations detected. A mutation hot spot was
identified at a CpG island in codon 167, where 12% of the mutations were found. The codon 167 mutations were associated with a phenotype characterized by few to

no renal carcinomas and frequent pheochromocytomas. 43 Thus, three distinct cancer phenotypes are associated with germline VHL gene mutations: (1) VHL type 1
(VHL without pheochromocytoma), (2) VHL IIA (pheochromocytomas, retinal angiomas, and central nervous system hemangioblastomas), and (3) VHL IIB (VHL IIA
plus renal cancers and pancreatic involvement) ( Fig. 34.1-4).

FIGURE 34.1-4. A: Hereditary papillary renal carcinoma (HPRC) is an autosomal dominant inherited cancer syndrome320 characterized by the appearance of
bilateral, multifocal papillary renal carcinoma. B: The renal tumors are uniformly of papillary histologic pattern. C: The gene for HPRC, c-Met, is located on the long
arm of chromosome 7.321 Activating mutations of the c-Met gene are detected in the germline of affected individuals. (From refs. 320 and 74, with permission.)

VON HIPPEL-LINDAU GENE MUTATIONS: CLEAR CELL RENAL CARCINOMA
To determine the role of the VHL gene in renal carcinoma, Gnarra et al. 44 analyzed tumors and cell lines from 110 patients with sporadic, nonfamilial renal carcinoma
for VHL mutations and LOH. LOH was detected in 98% of the samples, and VHL gene mutations were observed in 57% of clear cell renal carcinomas analyzed. 44
VHL gene mutations were not detected in tumor tissue from patients with papillary renal carcinoma or with lung, breast, ovarian, cervical, prostate, or colon cancers.
The somatic VHL mutations differed from the germline mutations in that a higher percentage of somatic mutations clustered in exon 2 than were detected in the
germlines. VHL gene mutations were found in early- and late-stage clear cell renal carcinomas, and when multiple samples were tested from the same patient, the
identical mutation was found. Shuin et al. 45 detected somatic mutations in 56% of primary renal carcinomas and an 84% LOH of the VHL gene. Whaley et al. 46
detected somatic VHL in renal carcinoma and no mutations in more than180 sporadic tumors of other types. VHL gene mutations have been identified in clear cell
renal carcinomas in Europe, 42,47,48,49,50 and 51 Japan,45 and North America.44,52,53 VHL gene mutations also have been detected in tumor tissue from patients from the 3;8
translocation family described by Cohen et al. 11,44,54 and from tumor tissue from patients with 2;3 translocations, 55,56 further supporting the conclusion that the VHL
gene has an important and specific role in clear cell renal carcinoma.
Silencing of the von Hippel-Lindau Gene by DNA Methylation in Renal Carcinoma
Herman et al.57 demonstrated that hypermethylation of a normally unmethylated CpG island in the 5' region of the VHL gene provides another important mechanism
for inactivation of the VHL gene in a significant portion of clear cell renal carcinomas. In 5 of 27 (19%) of the renal tumors evaluated, hypermethylation of the VHL
gene was found. The VHL gene is expressed normally in both nonneoplastic kidney and in renal carcinomas with inactivating VHL gene mutations. However, as would
be predicted as a consequence of methylation of a 5' CpG island, none of the five renal tumors expressed the VHL gene. 57 When one of the renal carcinoma cell lines
with a hypermethylated (and silent) VHL gene was treated with the hypomethylating agent (5-aza-2'deoxycytidine), the VHL transcript was reexpressed, revealing that
methylation of the gene was associated with nonexpression. Further studies are needed to determine the prevalence of hypermethylation of the VHL gene in sporadic
clear cell renal carcinomas and the potential role of such hypomethylating agents as 5-aza-2'deoxycytidine. 2,57
The VHL Gene Has the Characteristics of a Tumor Suppressor Gene
Studies of the genetics of VHL and the VHL gene in sporadic renal cell carcinoma have determined that this kidney cancer gene fits Knudson's two-hit model for a
tumor suppressor gene. 58 In tumors from VHL patients and from patients with sporadic renal cell carcinoma, a frequent loss of the nonmutant allele is noted,
demonstrating that both copies of the VHL gene are inactivated in these tumors. 35,44,59
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE VON HIPPEL-LINDAU TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENE PRODUCT
The von Hippel-Lindau Product Is Part of a Multiprotein Complex
When the VHL gene was identified, no significant homology was identified with any known genes. The rat homologue is 88% identical to human VHL; however, it
lacks the human protein's NH 2-terminus acidic pentamer repeat. 60 Duan et al. 60 determined that the rat and human VHL proteins formed oligomeric complexes with a
number of unidentified proteins in cultured mammalian cells. A complex containing proteins of apparent molecular masses of 9 and 16 kD and VHL was the most
consistently observed. 60 When certain naturally occurring VHL missense mutations were introduced into the VHL gene in COS-7 cells, complete or partial loss of the
p16-p9 complex was observed. When the p16 and p9 proteins were purified and sequenced, they were found to be part of the elongin (SIII) complex. Elongin (SIII) is
a heterotrimer consisting of two regulatory subunits (B and C) and a transcriptionally active subunit (A) that activate transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II. 61
The VHL protein binds specifically and tightly to elongin B and C in vitro. Kibel et al. 62 demonstrated that the region of binding of the VHL protein to elongin B and C is
in a short, colinear region of the VHL protein that is frequently mutated in renal carcinomas. These studies suggest that the tumor suppression function of the VHL
protein may be associated with its ability to bind to elongin B and C. 62
Cul-2 is a Component of the von Hippel-Lindau Complex
A series of studies have been performed to determine that Cul-2 is a part of the VHL complex. 63,64 Cul-2 is from a family of proteins called cullins, which are highly
homologous to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein Cdc53p.65 Based on the apparent similarity of members of the VHL multiprotein complex with yeast proteins
(e.g., elongin C and Cul2 to Skp1 and Cdc53, respectively), a model for the regulation of hypoxia-inducible messenger RNAs (mRNAs) has been developed.
Regulation of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Messenger RNA by the von Hippel-Lindau Product
Angiogenesis is a marked feature in the clinical manifestation of VHL and sporadic clear cell renal carcinoma. A number of growth factors have been implicated in
angiogenesis, including vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). VEGF is markedly elevated in renal carcinomas and in VHL-associated tumors. 66,67,68 and 69 The
VHL gene product has been found to regulate the stability of VEGF mRNA, 66,70 potentially explaining the increased VEGF levels in these tumors and providing an
explanation for the angiogenesis associated with their development. This fact may provide unique opportunities for treatment of patients with these tumors. 53
Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Localization of the von Hippel-Lindau Gene Product
Duan et al.60 demonstrated that the VHL protein can be found both in the nucleus and the cytosol of transiently transfected cells. To define the determinants of VHL
localization, Lee et al. 71 showed that nuclear transport of VHL is tightly regulated and that it is determined by the density at which the cells are cultured. 71 When the
cells in culture are sparse, the VHL protein is found predominantly in the nucleus. When the cells in culture were grown to confluence, the VHL protein is found in the
cytoplasm. Deletion mutation analysis revealed that a putative nuclear localization signal is located in the N-terminal region of the VHL gene. This study suggests that
VHL nuclear transport is regulated by density of the cells. Understanding this novel physiologic control mechanism could provide unique insights into the role of this
multifunctional tumor suppressor gene.

HEREDITARY PAPILLARY RENAL CARCINOMA
Papillary renal carcinoma is a histologic variant of renal carcinoma that is distinct from clear cell renal carcinoma. Whereas clear cell renal carcinoma is characterized
by LOH on the short arm of chromosome 3 and mutation of the chromosome 3p VHL gene, neither chromosome 3 LOH nor VHL gene mutation are detected in tumor
tissue from patients with papillary renal carcinoma. HPRC, a distinct form of hereditary renal carcinoma, has been described. 72,73 HPRC is an autosomal dominant
form of inherited renal carcinoma that is characterized by the appearance of bilateral, multifocal papillary renal carcinoma (i.e., HPRC is distinct from VHL disease or
other inherited forms of renal carcinoma).
Hereditary Papillary Renal Carcinoma Is Characterized by Germline Mutation of the MET Gene
Genetic linkage analysis localized the HPRC gene to a 27-cM interval at chromosome 7q31.1-34. Missense mutations were identified in the tyrosine kinase domain of
the MET gene in the germline of affected members of HPRC families. 74 Subsequent studies identified MET mutations in two other large North American HPRC
families, confirming that the mutation in the MET protooncogene is the basis for HPRC. 75 Activating mutations of the MET gene have been shown to cause malignant
transformation in vitro and in vivo, implicating this gene in both hereditary and sporadic forms of papillary renal carcinoma. 74,75 and 76
These findings support the molecular genetic classification of renal carcinoma between clear cell and papillary renal carcinoma, with clear cell renal carcinoma being
characterized by VHL gene mutation. HPRC is characterized by a germline mutation of the Met protooncogene. Understanding of the fundamental genetic basis of
these forms of kidney cancer will hopefully lead to better methods for diagnosis, prevention, and therapy of patients with kidney cancer.

PROSTATE CANCER
In 1990, prostate cancer became the most common form of cancer (other than skin cancer) diagnosed in U.S. men, surpassing lung cancer. In 1999, an estimated
200,000 new prostate cancer cases were diagnosed, accounting for more than 35% of all cancers affecting men, and more than 40,000 deaths will result from this
disease. 77 Despite these figures, our understanding of the molecular genetics of prostate cancer is still in an embryonic stage. This section provides an overview of
the efforts to define and characterize genetic alteration responsible for the initiation and progression of prostate cancer. The first part of this section describes familial
prostate cancer and reviews the evidence supporting the existence of a hereditary form of the disease. The second part reviews aspects of somatic alterations found
in prostate cancer cells, and the potential role of these genetic changes in the progression of prostate cancer.
MULTISTEP CARCINOGENESIS AND PROSTATE CANCER PROGRESSION
The process of carcinogenesis is complex, requiring a number of steps. In the case of prostate cancer, evidence for this multistep requirement is readily demonstrated
in the studies of experimental carcinogenesis in rodent models. In the pioneering studies of Thompson et al., 78 expression of a single oncogene (ras) in normal
prostate cells of the mouse is insufficient for transformation; the overexpression of a second oncogene (myc) is necessary before transformation becomes a frequent
event. Even in the case of two oncogenes, not every cell expressing these becomes transformed, suggesting that further steps are necessary, presumably including
inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. Although in clinical specimens of human cancers the requirement for multiple steps is less easily demonstrated, the finding of
multiple genetic alterations as a common characteristic of human tumors supports this concept. 79
Application of the multistep concept to carcinogenesis in the human prostate would suggest that incidental or latent cancers (i.e., clinically undetected prostate
cancers found in most aged men dying from non–prostate cancer causes at autopsy) as well as putative precursor lesions [i.e., prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia
(PIN)]80 have undergone only a subset of the steps, “hits,” or mutations necessary for the emergence of the fully malignant phenotype. Furthermore, this hypothesis
would suggest that specific and discrete genetic alterations may be associated with different stages and even grades of prostate cancer. Although such a hypothesis
is attractive, no definite proof has been provided to suggest that this is the case, although certain specific mutations (e.g., in the p53 gene) have been shown to be
strongly associated with progression of prostate cancer. 81,82,83,84 and 85
What are the molecular events responsible for the progression of prostate cancer, or, in other words, why and how does prostate cancer evolve from an indolent to a
life-threatening disease? Is this evolution inevitable, or are some prostate cancers destined never to progress to advanced disease, let alone clinically detectable
disease, regardless of the time frame provided? Conversely, are some prostate cancers capable of metastasis very early in their natural history? A critical issue for
addressing these questions effectively is to understand the mechanisms of prostate cancer progression in molecular genetic terms, particularly if therapeutic
approaches aimed at blocking this progression are to be other than empirically based.
PROSTATE CANCER INITIATION AND PROGRESSION: GENETICS VERSUS ENVIRONMENT
The initiation of prostate cancer (i.e., the formation of a histologically identifiable lesion) appears to be a very frequent event, occurring in one-third of men older than
45 years. 86 Geographically, this rate of histologic cancer incidence is roughly the same worldwide. 87,88 The number of clinically manifest cases and the mortality rates,
however, differ widely among various populations, strongly suggesting important environmental factors in modulating the transition between tumor initiation and
progression. 89 This feature of prostate cancer is emphasized by studies demonstrating large increases in prostate cancer incidence in Japanese men (a low-risk
population) when they move to the United States. 90
On the other hand, studies of familial aggregation of this disease have suggested that between 5% and 10% of prostate cancers may be directly attributable to the
inheritance of dominant prostate cancer susceptibility alleles, which may act as genetic factors driving this progression independent of environmental exposure. Thus,
as with numerous other cancers, strong evidence indicates both genetic and environmental factors in the etiology of prostate cancer, with the majority of disease most
likely being a result of the interaction the two. 91
HEREDITARY PROSTATE CANCER
Although not widely recognized as having a strong familial component until more recently, evidence demonstrating familial clustering of prostate cancer has been
available as early as 1960 from studies of the Utah Mormon population, 92 and multiple subsequent studies have confirmed this observation. 93,94,95,96,97 and 98 Two large
studies are of particular interest in answering the question of whether prostate cancer clusters in families. Cannon et al. 99 published a genetic epidemiologic study on
prostate cancer in the Utah Mormon population. Notably, prostate cancer showed the fourth strongest degree of familial clustering after lip cancer, skin melanoma,
and ovarian cancer. Prostate cancer had a higher familiality than both colon and breast carcinoma, two solid tumors that are well recognized as having a genetic or
familial component.
A case-control study of patients treated for prostate cancer at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine was carried out to assess the extent of familial
aggregation in prostate cancer. 100 Extensive cancer pedigrees were obtained for 691 men with prostate cancer and 640 spouse controls. A positive family history of
prostate cancer was the only consistent risk factor found in this study. Men with a father or brother affected were twice as likely to develop prostate cancer as men
with no relatives affected. In addition, a trend of increasing risk was found with increasing number of affected family members, such that men with two or three
first-degree relatives affected had a five- and 11-fold increased risk of developing prostate cancer. Cox proportional hazards analysis in the case relatives revealed
that risk was particularly increased to relatives of younger probands (younger than 55 years).
These studies suggest a familial clustering in risk to prostate cancer but do not directly address the underlying etiologic mechanism. It is important to note that familial
clustering could as easily reflect a shared environmental risk factor as a genetic mechanism. To directly address this question and to test whether a Mendelian form of
prostate cancer could explain the observed clustering of this disease, segregation analyses have been carried out. Carter et al. 101 suggested that familial clustering of
prostate cancer was best explained by dominant inheritance of a rare (estimated population frequency = 0.003) high-risk allele. The estimated cumulative risk of
clinically evident prostate cancer revealed that the allele was highly penetrant: By 85 years of age, 88% of the carriers are projected to be affected with prostate
cancer, compared with only 5% of the noncarriers. This model suggests that the inherited form of prostate cancer may account for a significant portion (43%) of
early-onset disease (disease onset before 55 years of age), although it represents only a small proportion (9% by age 85) of all prostate cancer occurrences.
Furthermore, these analyses demonstrate that families with multiple affected members and early onset of disease are most likely to have a Mendelian form of prostate
cancer, and thus are most appropriate for linkage analysis. Additional segregation analyses by Gronberg at al. 102 and Schaid et al.103 provide further support for the

existence of dominantly acting prostate cancer susceptibility alleles.
These results emphasize that the genetics of prostate cancer are likely similar to those of colon and breast cancer, in which a subset of the disease occurs in persons
who inherit defective copies of one of a series of critical, rate-limiting steps required for neoplastic transformation. Just as linkage studies in families with multiple
members affected with these diseases were critical to the identification of colon and breast cancer susceptibility genes (e.g., APC, hMSH2, BRCA1, BRCA2), linkage
analyses in prostate cancer families are an active area of study. As of 1999, four separate loci suspected of harboring hereditary prostate cancer genes have been
reported (Table 34.1-1). Three of these loci are on chromosome 1, and the fourth is on the X chromosome. The finding of multiple distinct loci, along with the high
likelihood that multiple additional loci will be identified, emphasizes the extensive and potentially complex genetic heterogeneity that characterizes hereditary prostate
cancer. Only when these genes are cloned and characterized will their contributions to the underlying pathogenesis of this disease be assessable.

TABLE 34.1-1. Prostate Cancer Susceptibility Loci Identified by Linkage Studies

SOMATIC ALTERATIONS IN PROSTATE CANCER
Role of Oncogenes
A number of oncogenes have been examined in prostate cancer tissue and cell lines, primarily at the expression level, including ras, myc, sis, fos, EGFR, and ERBB2
(reviewed by Strohmeyer and Slamon108). Expression of each of these genes and, in some cases, overexpression when compared to normal genes has been detected
in prostate cancer cells, but at widely varying frequencies. None of these genes have been observed to undergo mutational activation in a majority of prostate
cancers, and the mechanisms responsible for their overexpression, when present, remain largely undefined. Of particular interest in this regard is the study by
Bubendorf et al., 109 which demonstrated that, whereas gene amplifications of ERBB2 and NMYC were never observed in any stage prostate cancer, the androgen
receptor gene, myc, and cyclin D1 were observed to be amplified in 22%, 11%, and 5% of hormone-refractory, metastatic prostate cancers, respectively.
RAS. Several studies provided early evidence of a potentially important role for activated ras genes in prostate cancer, particularly in rodent models. 78,110 Peehl et
al.,111 using DNA transfection experiments, were the first to demonstrate the presence of an activated K-ras gene in a human prostate cancer specimen. Subsequent
studies found low frequencies of ras gene mutations in both localized and metastatic prostate cancer (less than 4%). 112,113,114 and 115 These results, all obtained in North
American patients, demonstrate that activation of ras oncogenes via point mutation is not a common event in either the initiation or progression of prostatic neoplasia.
In contrast to these studies, other reports examining prostate tissue from Japanese men suggest that ras gene mutations do occur at significant frequencies
(approximately 25%) in prostate cancer, both in latent carcinoma 116 and clinically manifest disease. 117 These studies raise the interesting possibility that significant
differences may exist in the genetic events associated with prostate cancer in American men compared with Japanese men (wherein the latter have an approximately
fivefold lower incidence rate of clinically manifest disease).
Additionally, in this latter study, 117 human papillomavirus DNA was detected in more than 40% of the prostate cancer samples analyzed. The detection of human
papillomavirus DNA in prostate cancer from North American men is controversial, but the most recent evidence 118,119 and 120 suggests that this family of viruses is not
commonly found in prostate cancer, at least not at levels comparable to those found in cervical cancer, in which a definitive etiologic link has been established.
C-MYC. The c-myc gene has been implicated in prostate cancer since the experimental carcinogenesis studies of Thompson et al. 78 A role for c-myc overexpression
as an important aspect of prostate cancer has been suggested by the frequent finding of increased copy number of the portion of 8q containing the c-myc gene in
clinical prostate cancer specimens, particularly advanced cases. Sato et al. 121 observed that cases of prostate cancer characterized by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) as having more copies of c-myc than copies of chromosome 8 centromere were highly associated with poor outcomes.
bcl-2: An Inhibitor of Apoptosis
The bcl-2 gene is located on chromosome 18q21. It was identified because of its involvement at the breakpoint of the t(14;18) interchromosomal translocation
occurring in human follicular B-cell lymphomas. 122 This translocation results in enhanced expression of the bcl-2 gene. 123,124 The bcl-2 gene encodes for a
membrane-bound 26-kD protein. 125 bcl-2 has been demonstrated to be an oncogene, in that its induced overexpression can lead to malignant transformation. 123 bcl-2
is unique among oncogenes, however, in that its expression does not enhance the rate of cell proliferation, but instead decreases the rate of cell death. 123,124 The role
of bcl-2 in the development and progression of carcinoma of the prostate has been examined by McDonnell et al. 125 Using immunohistochemical (IHC) techniques,
bcl-2 is not usually expressed in androgen-dependent prostatic cancer cells, whereas it is expressed in androgen-independent prostatic cancer cells. 125 This
observation has been confirmed by Colombel et al. 126 These findings suggest that enhanced expression of bcl-2 protein in carcinomas of the prostate is associated
with the transition to androgen independence.
Androgen Receptor
The role of androgen in normal prostate physiology is unquestioned, because these hormones are strictly required for normal development and maintenance of
prostate growth and function. However, the role of androgens and androgen receptors ( AR) in prostate cancer is much less clear. Studies have generated a great
deal of renewed interest in this pathway and its role in the critical progression of prostate cancer to androgen independence. An initial hypothesis that loss of AR gene
expression may be important in androgen-independent disease was not supported by several studies that showed continued or even elevated AR gene expression in
androgen-independent tumors. 127,128 Newmark et al.129 were the first to report a mutated androgen receptor in a clinical specimen of prostate cancer; curiously, it was
found in a localized cancer before any hormonal therapy. This and other findings of mutations before hormonal therapy 141 would suggest that mutant AR might provide
a growth advantage, even in the presence of normal androgen levels. Kelly et al. 130 and Sartor et al. 131 described a number of patients who experienced a paradoxical
response to withdrawal of the antiandrogen, flutamide, in that a number of clinical parameters (e.g., prostate-specific antigen levels, bone pain) improved on cessation
of drug treatment. One explanation proposed for this response is that such patients harbor AR gene mutations similar to those found in the prostate cancer cell line
LNCaP (Thr to Ala change at codon 868), which alters the ligand specificity of the receptor such that both estrogens and antiandrogens, as well as androgens, act as
agonists.132,133 The frequency of such mutations in prostate cancer patients is unknown, but a study by Taplin et al. 134 found five of ten samples of hormone-refractory
prostate cancer metastatic to bone had mutations of the AR gene, and at least two of these mutations resulted in a shift in hormone specificity of AR. Visakorpi et
al.135 demonstrated that up to 30% of prostate cancer specimens from men unsuccessful with hormonal therapy are characterized by increases in copy number of the
X chromosomal region (q11-q13) containing the androgen receptor. These results suggest that instead of being insensitive to androgen, such tumors may become
supersensitive to androgen by an as yet undetermined mechanism, or perhaps sensitive to a different nonandrogen steroid hormone. Furthermore, a number of
studies suggest that via novel interaction with other growth factor or signaling pathways, the requirement for androgen binding to the receptor may be bypassed. 136,137
Thus, although the precise role of androgen and the androgen receptor is still being defined, it is possible that altered regulation of the pathway plays a fundamental
role in prostate cancer progression to androgen-independent disease.

Chromosomal Deletions in Prostate Cancer
Unlike other solid tumors, such as renal cell carcinoma, cytogenetic analyses of prostate cancer specimens have revealed few consistent chromosomal
deletions. 138,139 An early cytogenetic study by Atkin and Baker, 140 however, suggested chromosomes 7q and 10q as the sites of frequent chromosomal losses in
prostate cancer. Early studies of allelic loss by Carter et al. 141 and Kunimi et al.142 confirmed frequent LOH on chromosome 10 and also highlighted portions of
chromosomes 16 and 8 as being frequently deleted in clinical specimens of prostate cancer. Deletion mapping studies by Bergerheim et al. 143 suggested that the
critical regions resided between pter and the plasminogen activator, tissue type locus at p12-q11.2 on chromosome 8 and q22.1 and qter on chromosome 16.
Interestingly, loss of chromosome 8p in prostate cancer had been previously observed in a study by Konig et al., 145 who found cytogenetic evidence of chromosome
8p deletions in a number of prostate cancer xenografts, and suggested a correlation existed between loss of this region and the development of androgen
independence.
Of the chromosomal regions analyzed in prostate cancer, the short arm of chromosome 8 has received the most attention, because it appears to be the most frequent
site of LOH, occurring in the majority of cases of prostate cancer examined. Two or possibly three distinct regions of LOH occur on this chromosomal arm, with the
region 8p21-12 being deleted in the majority of prostate cancer precursor lesions (PIN). More distally, 8p22 is deleted in most adenocarcinomas. 145,146,147,148,149 and 150 In
this latter region, a homozygous deletion of approximately 1 megabase has been observed. 151 Subregional deletion analysis of chromosome 8p in prostate cancer has
been performed using a variety of molecular methods, all of which have confirmed a high frequency of loss in this region, especially, but not exclusively, within
chromosome band 8p22. 143,144,145,146,147,148,152,153,154,155,156 and 157 The rate of 8p22 loss reported in these regions varies from 32% to 65% in primary tumors and from 65%
to 100% in DNA derived from metastases.
Separate discrete regions of loss in more proximal regions, including 8p21 147,150 and 8p12, 148,150 have been described. Frequent loss (63%) of portions of 8p21-p12
have been identified in PIN lesions, 149 suggesting that a gene in this area may become frequently inactivated at a relatively early stage in prostate tumorigenesis.
Evidence of heterogeneity of 8p LOH among different PIN lesions within the same gland was observed. 149 A combined comparative genomic hybridization (CGH),
Southern, and microsatellite study has shown loss of chromosome 8p22-p12 in 80% of prostate cancer lymph node metastases. 158 Microcell transfer of human
chromosome 8 into a rat prostate cancer cell line has been reported to suppress metastatic ability. 159 An association of chromosome 8p loss and higher stage has
been reported. 148
Several 8p candidate tumor suppressor genes have been identified, including N33, which is located in a homozygously deleted region of 8p22. This novel gene is
expressed in many normal tissues but not in some cancers, most notably those of the colon. 160 Other candidate genes identified on this chromosomal arm include the
putative transcription factor FEZ1 161 and an androgen-regulated homeobox gene, NKX3.1. 162
The frequent loss of sequences on chromosome 8p provides a marker to determine the similarity or difference between primary prostate cancers and their
metastases. This approach has been used to determine the concordance rates for 8p loss in a series of PIN, primary, and metastatic lesions obtained from the same
patient. 153 Cases were observed in which there was a complete concordance in that all samples of cancer had retained or lost the same 8p marker, but cases also
were noted in which the PIN sample would show loss, but not the primary tumor or the lymph node tumor samples. In addition, some cases showed differences among
the multiple primary lesions within the prostate. These data and similar findings 163 demonstrate the complex genetic relationship that exists between primary and
metastatic lesions and suggest that the primary prostate cancer that gives rise to a given metastatic deposit is not easily predicted on the basis of morphologic
characteristics.
Concomitant with deletion of sequences from the short arm, chromosome 8 is frequently affected by gain of sequences on the long arm. First observed by Southern
analysis,145 a CGH study of lymph node metastases indicated that 85% of such tumors showed evidence of 8q gain, making this the most common numerical
alteration observed in this study. 158 Van den Berg et al.164 reported that gain of 8q sequences in prostate cancer was highly correlated with disease progression.
Similarly, in the CGH study of Visakorpi et al., 157 gain of 8q sequences was seen in 89% of tumor recurrences after hormonal therapy, whereas only 6% of primary
tumors showed this alteration. An obvious candidate gene that may be the target of these amplification events in prostate cancer is the oncogene c-myc, which is
located at 8q24, although most of the amplification events on 8q are large, suggesting that many genes are affected. In this respect, two other 8q genes, PSCA and
the p40 subunit of translation initiation factor 3, are found to be frequently included in the gained regions of chromosome 8 and show increased expression in a subset
of prostate cancers. 165,166
Comparative Genomic Hybridization Analysis of Prostate Cancer
Visakorpi et al. 157 used CGH to survey the genome of a series of both untreated, localized prostate cancers and tumors from patients unsuccessful on hormonal
therapy. This important study found chromosome 8p to be the most frequently deleted, followed by 13q, 6q, 16q, 18q, and 9p. In a series of nine advanced prostate
cancers from men unsuccessful with hormonal therapy, a significant increase was found in deletions of chromosome 5q and gains of chromosomes 7p, 8q, and X,
when compared to untreated primary tumor samples. Evidence has been found that the androgen receptor gene may be the target of gene amplification events on this
latter chromosome. 167 Thus, these studies confirm previous studies of allelic loss in prostate cancer and, at the same time, expand the chromosomal regions
implicated as harboring “prostate cancer genes.”
Specific Gene Alterations in Prostate Cancer
A number of genes have been found to be mutated in prostate cancer, including p53, PTEN, Rb, ras, CDKN2, AR, MXI1, and POLB, although the latter two, located
on chromosomes 10q25 and 8p11.2, respectively, remain to be confirmed. ras mutations are uncommon (fewer than 5% of cases),112,114,115 as are point mutations of
Rb,168 although loss of one copy of Rb readily occurs. To date, the most consistently observed site of point mutations is the p53 gene, and these mutations are
common only in advanced disease. Microsatellite instability is uncommon but detectable in prostate cancer, 169 and the hPMS2 gene has been found to be mutated in
a prostate cancer cell line that exhibits this phenotype. 170
P53. p53 mutations are uncommon in localized disease but become frequent in deposits of metastatic prostate cancer, particularly those to bone. 81,82,83,171,172,173 and 174
Observed heterogeneity of p53 mutations within different tumors in the same gland, and within different regions of the same gland, appears to be a somewhat unique
feature of prostate cancer. 175,176 Furthermore, LOH and point mutation of p53 do not appear to be tightly coupled in this disease. 177 A large number of studies have
examined the prognostic significance of nuclear p53 protein immunostaining in both localized and advanced prostate cancer, 178,179,180,181,182,183,184,185,186,187,188,189,190 and
191
and although the results are somewhat disparate, two conclusions can be drawn: (1) p53 staining tends to be very heterogeneous, resulting in problems for scoring
and interpretation of staining results and in inconsistencies due to sampling biases; and (2) in general, tumors with positive p53 staining are associated with a worse
prognosis.
PTEN. A series of studies have examined prostate cancer specimens for alterations in the dual function phosphatase gene PTEN and found that this gene is
inactivated by a combination of mechanisms, including hemi- and homozygous deletion, 192,193,194,195,196 and 197 point mutation,192,193,196 and promoter methylation.197
These changes are observed most commonly in advanced disease, and they may play a role in the acquisition of metastatic potential. However, McMenamin et al. 198
demonstrated that the majority of clinically localized prostate cancers had abnormal PTEN protein expression, with one in five cases being completely negative.
Wu et al. 199 demonstrated that, in prostate cancer cells lines with inactivated PTEN, the AKT/phosphoinositide 3 kinase pathway is constitutively activated due to
increased accumulation of the PTEN substrate PIP3. Activation of this pathway results in suppression of apoptosis and increased cell survival. These findings have
stimulated extensive interest in these pathways as novel therapeutic targets in advanced prostate cancer.
Rb. The importance of Rb gene inactivation in prostate cancer was initially suggested by the studies of Bookstein et al., 200,201 who demonstrated the presence of
inactivating mutations in the Rb gene in clinical specimens of prostate cancer, as well as the ability of reintroduction of a cloned copy of Rb to suppress the
tumorigenicity of DU145 prostate cancer cells, which had been shown to produce a nonfunctional truncated Rb protein. Combined CGH and LOH studies reveal that
one copy of Rb is lost in advanced prostate cancer at rates approaching 80%, 158 although limited sequencing studies suggest that point mutations are present in fewer
than 20% of clinical samples. 168 IHC studies of Rb expression demonstrate lack of expression in 10% to 22% of tumors, with a questionable correlation between tumor
LOH of Rb and lack of expression. 202,203 These data, together with LOH events on 13q that do not include Rb, suggest the presence of an additional or alternative

prostate tumor suppressor gene near the Rb locus.203
CDKN2. Much attention has been focused on the p16/CDKN2 gene, a negative regulator of cell-cycle progression located at chromosome 9p21, since the finding of
frequent homozygous deletions in a wide variety of cancer cell lines. 204 A relatively high frequency of homozygous (approximately 20%) 205 and hemizygous losses of
CDKN2 have been observed in clinical specimens of prostate cancer. 206 In the latter case, loss events in the vicinity of the CDKN2 gene are more common in
metastatic deposits of prostate cancer (43% vs. 20% in primary tumors). In a small but detectable fraction of tumors (approximately 15%), the CDKN2 gene shows
evidence of inactivation by promoter methylation. 206 Whether all of the allelic loss events at 9p21 in prostate cancer are associated with CDKN2 inactivation or
whether they reflect inactivation of a neighboring gene (e.g., p15) has not been determined.
P27 (CDKN1B). A number of studies that reduced levels of the cyclin kinase inhibitor p27 are associated with a more aggressive prostate cancer phenotype, 207,208 and
209
although the mechanism of this down-regulation is not clear. Interestingly, Kibel et al. 210 described a homozygous deletion of the p27 gene in a lethal case of
prostate cancer, and in a high frequency of LOH of p27 in advanced prostate cancers in general. Thus, it is possible that, in prostate cancer, in addition to increased
ubiquitin-mediated p27 protein degradation, which has been demonstrated in colon and other cancers, at least a subset of lesions may inactivate this gene via
deletion.
E-CADHERIN AND KAI-1. Genes whose down-regulation has been implicated in prostate cancer progression include the cell adhesion molecule genes E-cadherin
and KAI-1, which are located at chromosomes 16q22.1 (a frequent site of LOH) and 11p11.2, respectively. 211 E-cadherin protein levels are frequently reduced in
high-grade prostate cancers, and this finding has prognostic significance. 212,213 and 214 KAI-1 was identified by its ability to suppress metastasis in experimental animal
studies. 211,215 Although the predominate mechanism for down-regulation of these genes has not been determined, in the case of E-cadherin, gene inactivation via
promoter methylation has been found in prostate cancer cell lines and at a low but detectable rate in clinical specimens of prostate cancer. 216
GSTP. Similarly, the gene for the phase II detoxification enzyme glutathione S-transferase p, has also been found to be extensively methylated in the promoter region,
in a completely cancer-specific fashion, with concomitant absence of expression. 217 In fact, this methylation event, being found in more than 90% of all prostate
cancers and in PIN lesions, is the most common genomic alteration yet observed in prostate cancer. The mechanism by which this region becomes specifically
methylated in prostate cancer and the basis for its apparent selection in the carcinogenic pathway is unclear at present. Because this enzyme is a key part of an
important cellular pathway to prevent damage from a wide range of carcinogens, the inactivation of this activity may result in increased susceptibility of prostate tissue
to both tumor initiation and progression resulting from an increased rate of accumulated DNA damage. Indeed, reactivation of this or a similar cellular defense
pathway, perhaps by dietary intervention, has been proposed as a treatment strategy aimed at blocking the progression of initiated prostate cancer foci.

BLADDER CANCER
Approximately 90% of malignant tumors arising in the urinary bladder are of epithelial origin, the vast majority being transitional cell carcinomas. 218,219 Based on
morphologic evaluation and natural history, urothelial neoplasms have been classified into two groups having distinct behavior and prognosis: low-grade tumors
(always papillary and usually superficial) and high-grade tumors (either papillary or nonpapillary, and often invasive). 220 Clinically, superficial bladder tumors (stage
pTa, pTis, and pT1) account for 75% to 85% of neoplasms, whereas the remaining 15% to 25% are invasive (pT2, pT3, pT4) or metastatic (N+, M+) lesions at the time
of initial presentation. 221 More than 70% of patients affected with superficial tumors have one or more recurrences after initial treatment, and approximately one-third
of those patients progress and eventually succumb to their disease. 222,223 Because clinical staging and morphologic evaluation determine the therapeutic modality, the
pathologic assessment of tumor specimens carries significant consequences. However, it is well known that two morphologically similar tumors presenting in any
assigned stage may behave in different fashions, a fact that seriously hampers the ability to accurately predict clinical outcome. For these reasons, biologic markers
and new detection methods are being developed to monitor and identify recurrence and progression in patients treated for superficial disease. 224 The important issues
in patients presenting with muscle-invasive carcinomas include metastatic potential and response to neoadjuvant regimens. The implementation of objective predictive
assays will enhance our ability to assess tumor biologic activities and to design effective treatment regimens.
CYTOGENETICS AND INTERPHASE CYTOGENETICS OF BLADDER TUMORS
Cytogenetic studies of bladder cancer cells by karyotyping have revealed a variety of chromosomal abnormalities. Nonrandom chromosomal changes consisting of
monosomy of chromosome 9225,226 and interstitial deletions of chromosome 13 225 have been observed. Other common abnormalities include trisomy of chromosome 7,
deletions of chromosomes 11p and 3p, and chromosome 1 alterations. 227,228 and 229 However, most of these analyses were performed using small cohorts, lacking
clinicopathologic correlations, and combining superficial and muscle-invasive lesions. In one study, Tyrkus et al. 230 karyotyped 17 carcinomas in situ of the urinary
bladder and found no chromosome 9 alterations, but identified nonrandom chromosomal changes involving chromosomes 1, 5, 8, and 11.
More recent interphase cytogenetic studies have been conducted, mainly using centromeric probes, in a search for numerical alterations in bladder cancer. In
addition, new telomeric and locus-specific probes are being used to identify genetic aberrations using nonisotopic detection methods. Poddighe and collaborators 231
reported chromosomal alterations at 1q12, as well as numerical abnormalities of chromosomes 1, 7, 9, 11, and 18. 232 Waldman et al. 233 also reported numerical
aberration of chromosomes 7, 9, and 11 in 27 bladder tumors.
FISH has been used to assess erbB-2 (17q21) gene amplification and c-myc (8q24) copy number gains in bladder cancer. 234,235 Sauter et al.234 reported amplification
of erbB-2 in 10 of 141 bladder tumors using a dual labeling hybridization assay. Gene amplification was associated with protein overexpression and was found only in
tumors with aneusomy of chromosome 17, and more frequently in muscle-invasive lesions. 234 A similar approach was used for the analysis of c-myc gene copy
number on 87 bladder tumors. Obvious amplification was found in three cases, whereas 32 of the remaining 84 tumors showed a low-level c-myc copy number
increase. No association was found between low-level copy number increase and protein overexpression. However, strong association was demonstrated between
c-myc gains and tumor grade, stage, and Ki-67 labeling index, consistent with a role of chromosome 8 alterations in bladder cancer progression. 235 FISH assays also
have been used for analyses of specific gene losses. Physical p53 gene deletion (at 17p13) was examined by FISH in 151 bladder tumors. 236 17p deletion was found
to be highly correlated with tumor stage and grade ( P <.01). FISH has been used more recently to assay bladder irrigation specimens. 237 Labeled probes to
centromeric sequences for chromosomes 1, 7, 9, 11, 15, and 17 were used on samples from 76 patients monitored for recurrent bladder tumors. Significantly, 24% of
patients with history of bladder cancer but no clinical evidence of disease exhibited monosomy of chromosome 9. 237
ONCOGENES: MOLECULAR AND IMMUNOPATHOLOGY ANALYSES OF BLADDER TUMORS
The first mutation of the RAS family of oncogenes, a point mutation in codon 12 of the H-RAS gene (11p15.1), was identified in the bladder cancer cell line T24 238 and
subsequently identified in bladder cancers. 239 There has been controversy regarding the mutation frequency of RAS genes in bladder tumors. Before the advent of
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-mediated DNA amplification, it was estimated that the rate of point mutations in RAS oncogenes ranged from 10% to 16% of
samples analyzed. 240,241 and 242 The predominant alteration identified was codon 12 substitutions of the H-RAS gene, with a few cases presenting K-RAS mutations and
no mutations detected affecting N-RAS. However, two reports by Czerniak and colleagues, 243,244 using a PCR-based method, revealed that approximately 40% of
bladder tumors harbor H-RAS codon 12 mutations. Several studies have confirmed this high frequency of H-RAS point mutations. Ooi et al. 245 studied a cohort of 124
patients affected with pTa or pT1 transitional cell carcinomas. The codon 12 G to T substitution was found in nonrecurring and recurring primary tumors, as well as in
initial pTa/T1 lesions from patients who had disease progression. More recently, a prospective study by Fitzgerald et al. 246 reported the detection of mutations in exon
1 of the H-RAS gene in urine sediments from 44 of 100 patients presenting with bladder neoplasms. It should be noted that different members of the RAS family are
mutated in distinct tumor types. The frequency of K-RAS mutations in colorectal cancer is approximately 40%, 247,248 whereas mutations of N-RAS are commonly found
in hematopoietic neoplasms. 249 Moreover, evidence indicates that mutant RAS alleles are involved in the earlier phases of neoplastic transformation of colorectal
carcinomas.250 Further studies in well-characterized cohorts of patients, using tissue microdissection techniques, are required to delineate the potential role of H-RAS
mutations in bladder cancer.
Overexpression and amplification of particular growth factor receptors have been reported in bladder cancer. Neal and coworkers 251 observed increased expression of
epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR) in invasive versus superficial bladder tumors. This group of investigators also reported that overexpression of EGFR was
associated with high-grade, high-stage bladder cancer and was an independent prognostic factor. 252 Messing253 noticed that EGFR was expressed at detectable
levels in the basal layer of the normal urothelium, whereas increased expression in basal and suprabasal layers was identified in transitional cell carcinomas. Rao et
al.254 also found increased expression of EGFR in urothelial samples with dysplastic changes, postulating that overexpression of EGFR may be an early event in

bladder carcinogenesis. In a more recent study, Nguyen et al. 255 reported that overexpression of EGFR was not an independent prognostic marker in patients with
advanced bladder cancer.
Amplification of the c-erbB-2 gene was found in 1 of 14 bladder tumors in a study by Wood and collaborators. 256 This case also displayed overexpression when
analyzed for mRNA and protein levels. In addition, five cases displayed high levels of mRNA with no signs of gene amplification, and only three of these five cases
had protein overexpression. Sato et al. 257 observed c-erbB-2 protein (p185) overexpression in 23 of 88 bladder tumors analyzed and found a significant association
with overexpression and poor clinical outcome, which is an independent prognostic factor. More recently, Underwood et al. 258 studied c-erbB-2 status in 236 bladder
tumors. Sixteen of 89 patients with recurrent disease had evidence of c-erbB-2 amplification; however, gene amplification was not observed in the nonrecurrent
tumors. A strong association with disease progression and c-erbB-2 amplification was reported. Nevertheless, protein overexpression could not be linked to disease
progression. C-erbB-2 amplification was of predictive value in multivariate analysis for overall bladder cancer death; however, stage and grade remained the most
significant independent prognostic parameters. 258
A cellular protooncogene product, mdm2, has been shown to bind to p53 and act as a negative regulator, inhibiting its transcriptional transactivation activity 259 and
targeting p53 for ubiquinin-mediated degradation. 260,261 The MDM2 gene is located on the long arm of chromosome 12 (12q13-14) and encodes a 90-kD nuclear
protein.262 Lianes et al. 263 undertook a study to determine the frequency and clinical relevance of identifying MDM2 and TP53 alterations in patients affected with
bladder neoplasms. These investigators analyzed a cohort of 87 patients and observed that 26 of 87 cases had abnormally high levels of mdm2 protein; however,
only one case showed MDM2 amplification. A striking association was noted between mdm2 overexpression and low-stage/low-grade bladder tumors ( P <.01). Based
on these results, it was concluded that aberrant mdm2 phenotypes are frequent events in bladder cancer and may be involved in tumorigenesis or early tumor
progression in urothelial neoplasms. In an independent study, Barbareschi et al. 264 reported mdm2 nuclear overexpression in 5 of 25 bladder tumors analyzed, but this
survey lacked clinicopathologic correlations.
TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENES: MOLECULAR AND IMMUNOPATHOLOGY ANALYSIS OF BLADDER TUMORS
Molecular genetic studies of bladder cancer have identified abnormalities of tumor suppressor genes involved in tumor development and progression. Confirming
initial cytogenetic observations, LOH on the short arm of chromosome 11 and 9q allelic losses were reported as frequent events in bladder tumors. 265,266 It was also
observed that 17p LOH was a common event266,267 in high-grade bladder cancer. 267
In an attempt to define the role of molecular abnormalities of tumor suppressor genes in the pathogenesis and progression of human bladder cancer, a combined
molecular genetics and immunopathology approach was undertaken by Presti et al. 268 In a survey of 34 unselected patients, five suspected or known tumor
suppressor gene regions (3p21-25, 11p15, 13q14, 17p11-13, and 18q21) were studied. An IHC assay was also used for the analysis of the retinoblastoma gene
product (pRB). This study demonstrated that tumor grade correlated with deletions of 3p ( P = .004) and 17p (P = .063). Tumor stage was correlated with deletions of
3p (P = .010), 17p (P = .015), and altered pRB expression (P = .054). Vascular invasion correlated only with deletions of 17p ( P = .038). This study also revealed that
deletions of 17p (TP53 locus) and 18q (DCC gene locus) occur only in invasive tumors, whereas deletions of 3p and 11p occur in both superficial and invasive
tumors.268 Dalbagni et al. 269 followed this study by analyzing 60 paired normal and bladder tumor tissues using polymorphic DNA markers on 18 different
chromosomal arms. Allelic deletions were correlated with clinicopathologic parameters. Distinct genotypic patterns were associated with early and late stages of
bladder cancer. Correlation of genetic alterations with clinicopathologic data suggested the existence of two different genetic pathways for the evolution of superficial
bladder tumors. Briefly, 9q deletions were found in 60% of the informative cases, confirming previous reports. Superficial papillary tumors confined to the mucosa
(pTa) and almost all tumors invading the lamina propria (pT1) showed 9q alterations. In contrast, only 10 of 23 muscle-invasive tumors (pT2–4 or pT2+) had 9q
deletions. A statistically significant difference was observed when comparing 9q LOH between pT1 versus pT2+ tumors ( P = .021). Moreover, 9q deletions were the
sole abnormality found in some of the bladder lesions studied, suggesting the presence of a candidate tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 9q important in a
subset of superficial bladder tumors. None of the pTa lesions showed 5q alterations; however, three of ten T1 tumors and 8 of 26 T2+ tumors presented with 5q LOH,
indicating that 5q deletions may be involved in the transition from papillary superficial (pTa) to early invasive (pT1) tumors. Allelic loss of 17p was detected in 21 of 47
informative cases. Deletions were not identified among pTa lesions, whereas 21 of 38 invasive tumors exhibited 17p LOH. These findings support the involvement of
17p in the progression of bladder cancer. Allelic deletion of 3p was not present in any of the informative pTa neoplasms; however, 18 of 33 invasive tumors had such
alterations. A statistically significant association was reported with the various pathologic parameters of poor outcome and 3p LOH. Allelic losses of 11p, 6q, and 18q
were frequently detected in the corresponding informative bladder tumors analyzed. However, statistically significant differences were not observed between these
abnormalities and clinical pathologic parameters of poor outcome, suggesting late involvement in bladder cancer progression. Other bona fide and putative
suppressor loci analyzed in the Dalbagni et al. study showed a lower rate of LOH and lacked association with clinicopathologic parameters. 269
In a subsequent allelotyping study, Habuchi et al. 270 investigated the role of allelic losses of seven chromosomal arms (1p, 3p, 9q, 10q, 11p, 13q, and 17p) in 49
urothelial cancers. They found 9q LOH as a common event in bladder tumors, and invasive tumors showed higher frequencies of 17p and 13q losses when compared
to noninvasive lesions. Deletions of the long arm of chromosome 13, including the RB locus on 13ql4, were independently reported by two groups. 95,96 In one of these
studies, Cairns et al. 271 used intragenic RB probes and found 28 of 94 informative cases with LOH at the RB locus, with 26 of these 28 lesions being muscle-invasive
tumors.
The relevance of RB alterations in bladder cancer was disclosed in two independent studies. 272,273 Using a mouse monoclonal antibody (mAB) and IHC in frozen
tissue sections of 48 primary bladder tumors, Cordon-Cardo and collaborators 272 found normal levels of pRB expression in 34 cases. However, a spectrum of altered
patterns of expression, from undetectable pRB levels to heterogeneous expression of pRB, was observed in 14 patients. Thirteen of the 38 patients diagnosed with
muscle-invasive tumors were categorized as pRB altered, whereas only one of the ten superficial carcinomas had the altered pRB phenotype. The survival rate was
significantly decreased in pRB altered patients compared to those with normal pRB expression ( P <.001).272 Similarly, Logothetis et al. 273 found altered pRB
expression in locally advanced bladder cancer. Forty-three patients were evaluated using the Rb-WL-1 polyclonal antiserum and IHC. These investigators reported
altered pRB expression in 37% of the tumor specimens analyzed. A significant decrease in disease-free survival rate was reported for patients with documented
abnormal pRB levels. Taken together, these data suggest that altered pRB expression occurred in all grades and stages of bladder cancer but was more commonly
associated with muscle-invasive tumors. Moreover, altered patterns of pRB may become an important prognostic variable in patients presenting with invasive bladder
cancer (Fig. 34.1-5).

FIGURE 34.1-5. Schematic representation of the proposed model of bladder cancer progression as it may relate to the pathologic staging of this cancer.

The clinical implications of detecting TP53 mutations and altered patterns of its encoded product (p53) in bladder tumors has been the focus of a series of
investigations. 274,275,276,277,278,279,280,281 and 282 Early studies revealed that TP53 mutations were common events in bladder cancer and associated with tumor stage and
grade.274,275 Dalbagni et al. 276 correlated alterations of chromosome 17 with p53 nuclear overexpression in a cohort of 60 bladder tumors. Deletion of 17p correlated
with grade (P = .039) and stage (P = .004), whereas p53 nuclear overexpression correlated with grade ( P = .027), stage (P = .008), vascular invasion (P = .021), and
the presence of nodal metastases (P = .007). A strong correlation was observed between the p53 overexpression and TP53 deletions ( P <.001). Following this study,
Cordon-Cardo et al. 277 designed a study to evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of different laboratory assays directed to the identification of TP53 mutations,
including IHC with mAB PAb1801, restriction fragment length polymorphism, PCR-SSCP (single-strand confirmation polymorphism), and sequencing. 277 Using this

approach, they also tested the hypothesis that p53 nuclear overexpression detected by IHC can reliably identify the presence of mutant TP53 products in bladder
neoplasms. Nuclear immunoreactivities were observed in 26 of 42 bladder tumors analyzed. Abnormal shifts in mobility were noted in 14 of the 42 cases in distinct
exons. A strong association was noted between p53 nuclear overexpression and 17p LOH ( P <.001), as well as p53 nuclear overexpression and detection of TP53
mutations by SSCP and sequencing (P <.001). Using receiver operating curve (ROC) statistical analysis, the accuracy of detecting TP53 mutations by IHC was
estimated to be 90.3%. In addition, this study defined as an appropriate cutoff point for IHC 20% tumor cells displaying nuclear immunoreactivities (p53-positive
phenotype).
The aim of three analyses 105,278,279 was to investigate altered patterns of p53 expression with tumor progression in patients with superficial bladder tumors. Detection
of p53 nuclear overexpression was evaluated by IHC using mAB PAb1801 on deparaffinized tissue sections in tumors from 43 patients with pT1 bladder cancer, 278 54
patients with pTa neoplasms, 279 and 33 patients affected with pure pTis. 105 Nuclear p53 overexpression was correlated with clinicopathologic variables, and results
were submitted to Fisher exact test, as well as univariate and multivariate analyses. 105,278,279 The median follow-up for these cohorts of patients was 119, 110, and 124
months, respectively. Patients in each stage were stratified into two groups, using the cutoff point identified through the ROC analysis previously conducted (20%
nuclear-positive tumor cells). 277 A strong association was found between tumor progression and p53-positive phenotype in the three studies ( P <.01). Moreover,
nuclear overexpression of p53 was an independent variable associated with disease progression and death due to bladder cancer.
Two studies dealing with p53 nuclear overexpression conducted in unselected bladder cancer patients have been reported. Lipponen 280 analyzed 212 bladder tumors,
using IHC and 20% positive nuclear staining as the cutoff value. However, the primary antibody used was a purified rabbit polyserum (NCL-CM1, 1:150 dilution). The
mean follow-up time was more than 10 years. Nuclear overexpression of p53 was associated with tumor grade and disease progression. In univariate analysis, p53
overexpression predicted poor outcome in the entire cohort. However, in a multivariant survival analysis, overexpression of p53 had no independent prognostic value
over clinical stage and mitotic index. Esrig et al. 281 determined the relation between nuclear accumulation of p53 and tumor progression in a cohort of 243 patients
treated by radical cystectomy using IHC and antibody PAb1801. These investigators noticed that detection of nuclear p53 was significantly associated with an
increased risk of recurrence ( P <.001) and decreased overall survival ( P <.001). Moreover, p53-positive phenotype was an independent predictor of recurrence and
survival.
The neoadjuvant use of chemotherapy offers the advantages of bladder preservation and early treatment of micrometastases in patients diagnosed with invasive
bladder cancer. However, despite the chemosensitivity of invasive urothelial neoplasms, complete pathologic response in the primary lesion occurs in only 20% to
30% of patients. To determine whether aberrant p53 expression has independent significance for response, relapse, and survival in patients with muscle-invasive
bladder cancer treated with neoadjuvant M-VAC [methotrexate, vinblastine, Adriamycin (doxorubicin), and cisplatin] chemotherapy, Sarkis et al. 108a evaluated 90
patients who received this regimen with a median follow-up of 5.8 years. Patients whose tumors had p53-positive phenotype (n = 47) had a significantly higher
proportion of cancer deaths. Multivariate analysis revealed that p53 overexpression had independent significance for long-term survival ( P <.001).108
As already discussed, loss of genetic material on chromosome 9 is an early abnormality detected in bladder tumors. 225,266,269,270,282 More recently, the existence of two
altered loci, one in each of the chromosome 9 arms, was postulated. 283,284 A detailed analysis conducted by Orlow et al. 285 on 73 bladder tumors showed that two
regions, one on 9p at the IFN cluster (9p21) and the other on 9q associated with the q34.1-2 bands, had the highest frequencies of allelic losses. The 9p21 region has
been found to be mutated frequently in a wide variety of human tumor cell lines, and the search for a putative tumor suppressor gene in this region led to the
characterization of the so-called multiple tumor suppressor 1 (MTS1) gene. 286 It was confirmed that the MTS1 gene was the previously identified p16/INK4A/CDKN2
(p16) gene. 287 In addition to the p16 gene, the p15/INK4B/MTS2 (p15) gene is found in tandem at 9p21. 288 These genes encode members of negative cell-cycle
regulators, called cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) inhibitory molecules.287,288 and 289 The initial enthusiasm over the high frequency of mutations of these genes in cell
lines has been confirmed by genetic alterations mainly of p16, as well as deletions of p15, in human primary tumors, including bladder cancer. 290,291,292,293,294 and 295
Moreover, it has been shown that genetic alterations of p16 are independent of TP53 mutations, suggesting that p16 and p53 function in separate pathways of tumor
suppression. 294
Identification of the p14 ARF gene within the same locus as p16 and p15 links the p16/pRB and p53 pathways of tumor suppression. p16 inhibits the ability of cyclin
D1 and its associated cdk to phosphorylate pRB. Unphosphorylated pRB sequesters the transcription factor E2F1, a transcription factor necessary for cell-cycle
progression. 296 Absence of p16 (as in a homozygous deletion at chromosome 9p) allows unregulated phosphorylation of pRB and increased free E2F1. The p14ARF
gene shares a portion of the p16 transcription unit and encodes a novel protein product that interacts with and causes destabilization of the mdm-2 protein. 297,298
Decreased mdm-2 results in increased p53 availability; increased p53 can mediate cell-cycle arrest at G 1 or induce apoptosis. E2F1 causes increased expression of
the p14ARF gene, causing a negative feedback for cell-cycle progression. Lack of p14 ARF due to alterations at the p16 locus results in uninhibited mdm-2 and
decreased p53 function. Although p16 and p53 are independent, the p16 locus encodes a gene that links the p53 and pRB pathways. Therefore, genetic alterations of
the p16/p15/p14ARF locus can affect both p53 and pRB tumor suppressor function. However, it should be kept in mind that the p14ARF pathway can only modulate
p53 activity via mdm-2, and mutations of the p53 or amplification of MDM2 may be more important in complete inactivation of p53 as previously discussed.
Alternatively, genetic alterations that affect p16 and p15 may not affect p14ARF.
Orlow et al.295 have reported an overall frequency of deletions and rearrangements for the p16 and p15 genes in bladder cancer of 19% and 18%, respectively.
Moreover, this study revealed that p16 and p15 alterations were associated with low-stage, low-grade bladder tumors. It should be emphasized that only pTa and pT1,
but not pTis, lesions showed deletions of either p16 or p15. Because p16 alterations occur independently of p53 mutations 294 and p53 mutations are frequent events
in Tis bladder tumors, 105 data from that report further support the hypothesis that bladder carcinogenesis may develop through two distinct molecular pathways. 269,299
Taken together, the results suggest that p16 and p15 alterations confer selective growth advantage to urothelial tumor cells, but mutations in other genes are required
to produce an overt malignant phenotype.
BLADDER CANCER AS A MODEL FOR THE STUDY OF TUMOR PROGRESSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The molecular abnormalities reported to date, as well as the natural history of bladder cancer, have allowed the proposal of a working model for tumor development
and progression of this group of neoplastic diseases. 269,299 It is the hypothesis of several groups of investigators that some specific chromosomal abnormalities and
mutations of certain genes play a definite role in bladder tumor development, whereas other alterations seem to correlate with tumor progression. “Primary” molecular
aberrations can be defined as those directly related to the genesis of cancer. 300 These are frequently found as the sole abnormality and often are associated with
particular tumors. Primary abnormalities may have a dual nature: (1) primary events involved in the production of low-grade/well-differentiated neoplasms that
destabilize cellular proliferation, but have minimal or no effects on cellular “social” interactions or differentiation, as well as rate of cell death or apoptosis; and (2)
primary events leading to high-grade/poorly differentiated tumors that disrupt growth control, including cell-cycle and apoptosis regulators, and have a major impact
on cellular differentiation. There are evidence and data to support the idea that a target site(s) for primary event(s) in low-grade papillary superficial bladder tumors
may reside on chromosome 9. However, a candidate for the initiation of high-grade, flat carcinoma in situ lesions has not been yet elucidated. Novel approaches using
tissue microdissection techniques and molecular genetic assays are needed to shed light on this subject. Conversely, “secondary” abnormalities may be fortuitous or
may determine the biologic behavior of the tumor. 300 Multiple molecular abnormalities are identified in most human cancers studied, including bladder neoplasms, with
the accumulation rather than the order of these genetic alterations being important and probably acting synergistically. In this regard, it is noteworthy that most of the
identified genes involved in late stages of tumor progression act as major regulators of the cell cycle and apoptosis programs, such as TP53 and RB.
HEREDITARY PREDISPOSITIONS AND UROTHELIAL CANCER
In 1993, one of the genes responsible for a hereditary cancer predisposition syndrome known as hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC) was identified. 301,302
and 303 Although colon cancer is the predominant malignancy in this syndrome, Lynch and colleagues 304 previously described an increased incidence of upper tract
transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) in a subset of HNPCC families. The genes responsible for HNPCC are highly conserved DNA repair genes involved in the correction
of misincorporated deoxyribonucleotides formed during DNA replication known as mismatch repair (MMR).305 Tumors deficient for MMR display a characteristic
pattern of genetic alterations termed microsatellite instability (MSI) or replication errors.306,307 and 308 MSI is caused by slippage of the DNA polymerase at mono-, di-,
and trinucleotide tracts normally repaired by MMR proteins. 309 Almost all tumors from HNPCC patients display MSI, because the normal MMR allele is lost in these
tumors. The instability that results can cause mutations in other genes, which leads to tumorigenesis.
Subsequent studies in sporadic bladder tumors demonstrate MSI in 6% of superficial tumors, 1 and immunohistochemical analysis of one of the MMR genes (hMSH2)
revealed lack of expression in only two. 311 However, decreased expression of hMSH2 was observed in 25% of tumors, and this finding correlated with high-grade and
recurrent disease. Analysis of expression of MMR genes in bladder tumors from HNPCC patients has not been reported, and it will be interesting to determine if these

tumors display MSI. The investigation of MMR genes in urothelial malignancies may be important in management of patients with bladder cancer, because HNPCC is
the only cancer syndrome that predisposes affected individuals to TCC. Also, tumors with MMR deficiency are resistant to alkylating agents 312 sometimes used in
treatment of superficial TCC, such as thiotepa. Further investigation of these genes in urothelial malignancies seems warranted.
Are other protooncogenes involved in cell-cycle control, such as cyclin D1 and Cdk4, altered in bladder tumors? Is the genetic instability observed in some
uroepithelial carcinomas due to mutations of MMR genes? Is the deficiency in apoptotic signals responsible for lack of response to adjuvant therapy? Are
unconstrained transcription factors, such the E2F family members in the advent of RB alterations, accountable in part for the clinical phenomenon of the resistant
phenotype? To what extent do other drug resistance mechanisms, such as P glycoprotein, play a role in treatment failure? Which are the genes involved in the
phenotype of metastatic bladder cancer? These clinically relevant questions await further studies. The current need is to translate newly developed scientific
knowledge into diagnostic and therapeutic strategies, using well-characterized cohorts of patients and novel approaches to the analysis of available tissue samples.
POTENTIAL CLINICAL APPLICATIONS
Inherent in the study of the fundamental genetic events leading to bladder cancer is the hope that the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of transformation in
this malignancy may lead to insights for new treatment strategies for this disease. Another potential application of studies on molecular genetics of bladder cancer is
that detection of alterations in certain genes may lead to improved methods for early diagnosis of uroepithelial tumors. Sidransky et al. 274 have shown that
identification of alterations, such as p53 gene mutations in bladder tumors and urine samples, can provide a potentially extremely sensitive method for detection of
bladder cancer. In one instance, genetic abnormalities could be detected years before the disease was clinically apparent. 313 In a series of studies, these scientists
have demonstrated that microsatellite instability is associated with some bladder tumors and can occur early in bladder tumorigenesis. 310,314 In a blinded study in
which urine samples from 25 patients with suspicious bladder lesions were analyzed by conventional cytology and genomic instability analysis, microsatellite changes
identical to those in the tumors were detected in the urine sediment of 19 of 20 patients (95%) who were found to have bladder cancer. 315 Cytology detected cancer
cells in only 9 of 18 cases (50%). 316 These studies suggest that molecular genetic analysis for disease gene alterations and microsatellite instability may become
useful additions to current screening methods for detecting bladder cancer and may provide improved methods for prediction of clinical course in individual patients.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Linehan WM, Klausner RD. Renal carcinoma. In: Vogelstein B, Kinzler K, eds. The genetic basis of human cancer. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998:455.
2. Linehan WM, Lerman MI, Zbar B. Identification of the VHL gene: its role in renal carcinoma. JAMA 1995;273:564.
3. Wingo PA, Tong T, Bolden S. Cancer statistics, 1995. CA Cancer J Clin 1995;45:8.
4. Linehan WM, Shipley W, Parkinson D. Cancer of the kidney and ureter. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles and practices of oncology. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott
Co, 1993:1023.
5. La Vecchia C, Negri E, D'Avanzo B, Franceschi S. Smoking and renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Res 1990;50:5231.
6. Yu MC, Mack TM, Hanisch R, Cicioni C, Henderson BE. Cigarette smoking, obesity, diuretic use, and coffee consumption as risk factors for renal cell carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst
1986;77:351.
7. Kovacs G, Ishikawa I. High incidence of papillary renal cell tumours in patients on chronic haemodialysis. Histopathology 1993;22:135.
8. Bard RH, Lord B, Fromowitz F. Papillary adenocarcinoma of kidney. Urology 1982;19:16.
9. Brennan JF, Stilmant MM, Babayan RK, Siroky MB. Acquired renal cystic disease: implications for the urologist. Br J Urol 1991;67:342.
10. Toro J, Duray PH, Glenn GM, et al. Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome: a novel marker of kidney neoplasia. Arch Dermatol 1999;135:1195.
11. Cohen AJ, Li FP, Berg S, et al. Hereditary renal-cell carcinoma associated with a chromosomal translocation. N Engl J Med 1979;301:592.
12. Pathak S, Strong LC, Ferrell RE, Trindade A. Familial renal cell carcinoma with a 3:11 chromosome translocation limited to tumor cells. Science 1982;217:939.
13. Kovacs G, Brusa P, de Riese W. Tissue-specific expression of a constitutional 3;6 translocation: development of multiple bilateral renal-cell carcinomas. Int J Cancer 1989;43:422.
14. Zbar B, Brauch H, Talmadge C, Linehan WM. Loss of alleles of loci on the short arm of chromosome 3 in renal cell carcinoma. Nature 1987;327:721.
15. Anglard P, Brauch TH, Weiss GH, et al. Molecular analysis of genetic changes in the origin and development of renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Res 1991;51:1071.
16. Carroll PR, Murty VVS, Reuter V, et al. Abnormalities of chromosome region 3p12-14 characterize clear cell renal carcinoma. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1987;26:253.
17. Szucs S, Muller-Brechlin R, DeRiese W, Kovacs G. Deletion 3p: the only chromosome loss in a primary renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1987;26:369.
18. Kovacs G, Erlandsson R, Boldog F, et al. Consistent chromosome 3p deletion and loss of heterozygosity in renal cell carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:1571.
19. Presti JC, Rao PH, Chen Q, et al. Histopathological, cytogenetic, and molecular characterization of renal cortical tumors. Cancer Res 1991;51:1544.
20. Ogawa O, Kakehi Y, Ogawa K, et al. Allelic loss at chromosome 3p characterizes clear cell phenotype of renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Res 1991;51:949.
21. Poston CD, Jaffe GS, Lubensky IA, et al. Characterization of the renal pathology of a familial form of renal cell carcinoma associated with von Hippel-Lindau disease: clinical and molecular
genetic implications. J Urol 1995;153:22.
22. Walther MM, Lubensky IA, Venzon D, Zbar B, Linehan WM. Prevalence of microscopic lesions in grossly normal renal parenchyma from patients with von Hippel-Lindau disease, sporadic renal
cell carcinoma and no renal disease: clinical implications. J Urol 1995;154:2010.
23. Manski TJ, Heffner DK, Glenn GM, et al. Endolymphatic sac tumors: a source of morbid hearing loss in von Hippel-Lindau disease. JAMA 1997;277:1461.
24. Lubensky IA, Pack S, Ault D, et al. Multiple neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas in VHL patients: histopathological and molecular genetic analysis. Am J Pathol 1998;153:223.
25. Libutti SK, Choyke PL, Bartlett DL, et al. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors associated with von Hippel Lindau: diagnostic and management recommendations. Surgery 1998;124:1153.
26. Eisenhofer G, Lenders JWM, Linehan WM, et al. Plasma normetanephrine and metanephrine for detecting pheochromocytomas in von Hippel-Lindau disease and multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 2. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1872.
27. Walther MM, Keiser HR, Linehan WM. Management of hereditary pheochromocytoma in von Hippel Lindau kindreds with partial adrenalectomy. J Urol 1999;161:395.
28. Walther MM, Reiter R, Keiser HR, et al. Clinical and genetic characterization of pheochromocytoma in von Hippel-Lindau families. Comparison with sporadic pheochromocytoma gives insight
into natural history of pheochromocytoma. J Urol 1999;162:659.
29. Glenn GM, Choyke PL, Zbar B, Linehan WM. Von Hippel-Lindau disease: clinical review and molecular genetics. In: Anderson EE, ed. Problems in urologic surgery: benign and malignant
tumors of the kidney. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1990:312.
30. Seizinger BR, Rouleau GA, Ozelius LJ, et al. Von Hippel-Lindau disease maps to the region of chromosome 3 associated with renal cell carcinoma. Nature 1988;332:268.
31. Hosoe S, Brauch H, Latif F, et al. Localization of the von Hippel-Lindau disease gene to a small region of chromosome 3. Genomics 1990;8:634.
32. Maher ER, Bentley E, Yates JRW, et al. Mapping of the von Hippel Lindau disease gene to a small region of chromosome 3p by genetic linkage analysis. Genomics 1991;10:957.
33. Richards FM, Maher ER, Latif F, et al. Detailed genetic mapping of the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumour suppressor gene. J Med Genet 1993;30:104.
34. Glenn GM, Daniel LN, Choyke P, et al. Von Hippel-Lindau disease: distinct phenotypes suggest more than one mutant allele at the VHL locus. Hum Genet 1991;87:207.
35. Tory K, Brauch H, Linehan WM, et al. Specific genetic change in tumors associated with von Hippel-Lindau disease. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:1097.
36. Knudson AG. Genetics of human cancer. Annu Rev Genet 1986;20:231.
37. Yao M, Latif F, Kuzmin I, et al. Von Hippel-Lindau disease: identification of deletion mutations by pulsed field gel electrophoresis. Hum Genet 1993;92:605.
38. Richards FM, Phipps ME, Latif F, et al. Mapping the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor suppressor gene: identification of germline deletions by pulsed field gel electrophoresis. Hum Mol Genet
1993;2:879.
39. Latif F, Tory K, Gnarra JR, et al. Identification of the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor suppressor gene. Science 1993;260:1317.
40. Chen F, Kishida T, Yao M, et al. Germline mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor suppressor gene: correlation with phenotype. Hum Mutat 1995;5:66.
41. Stolle CA, Glenn G, Zbar B, et al. Improved detection of germline mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor suppressor gene. Hum Mutat 1998;12:417.
42. Crossey PA, Richards FM, Foster K, et al. Identification of intragenic mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor suppressor gene and correlation with disease phenotype. Hum Mol Genet
1994;3:1303.
43. Zbar B, Kishida T, Chen F, et al. Germline mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) gene in families from North America, Europe and Japan. Hum Mutat 1996;8:348.
44. Gnarra JR, Tory K, Weng Y, et al. Mutation of the VHL tumour suppressor gene in renal carcinoma. Nat Genet 1994;7:85.
45. Shuin T, Kondo K, Torigoe S, et al. Frequent somatic mutations and loss of heterozygosity of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene in primary human renal cell carcinomas. Cancer Res
1994;54:2852.
46. Whaley JM, Naglich J, Gelbert L, et al. Germ-line mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau tumor-suppressor gene are similar to von Hippel-Lindau aberrations in sporadic renal cell carcinoma. Am J
Hum Genet 1994;55:1092.
47. Foster K, Prowse A, van den Berg A, et al. Somatic mutations of the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumour suppressor gene in non-familial clear cell renal carcinoma. Hum Mol Genet 1994;3:2169.
48. Bailly M, Bain C, Favrot MC, Ozturk M. Somatic mutations of von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor-suppressor gene in European kidney cancers. Int J Cancer 1995;63:660.
49. Brauch H, Weirich G, Hornauer MA, et al. Trichloroethylene exposure and specific somatic mutations in patients with renal cell carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:854.
50. Brauch H, Weirich G, Hornauer M, et al. Trichloroethylene is a potential mutagen of the VHL tumor suppressor gene in renal cell cancer. N Engl J Med 2002 (submitted).
51. Kenck C, Wilhelm M, Bugert P, Staehler G, Kovacs G. Mutation of the VHL gene is associated exclusively with the development of non-papillary renal cell carcinomas. J Pathol 1996;179:157.
52. Zhuang Z, Gnarra JR, Dudley CF, et al. Detection of von Hippel-Lindau disease gene mutations in paraffin-embedded sporadic renal cell carcinoma specimens. Mod Pathol 1996;9:838.
53. Linehan WM, Zbar B, Klausner RD. Renal carcinoma. In: Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, Sly WS, Valle D, eds. The metabolic and molecular bases of inherited disease. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
54. Schmidt L, Li F, Brown RS, et al. Somatic mutations of the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor suppressor gene in renal carcinomas of patients with an inherited t(3;8) balanced translocation.
Amer Assoc Cancer Res 1995;36:582(abst).
55. Koolen MI, van der Meyden AP, Bodmer D, et al. A familial case of renal cell carcinoma and a t(2;3) chromosome translocation. Kidney Int 1998;53:273.
56. Bodmer D, Eleveld MJ, Ligtenberg MJ, et al. An alternative route for multistep tumorigenesis in a novel case of hereditary renal cell cancer and a t(2;3)(q35;q21) chromosome translocation. Am
J Hum Genet 1998;62:1475.
57. Herman JG, Latif F, Weng Y, et al. Silencing of the VHL tumor suppressor gene by DNA methylation in renal carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:9700.
58. Knudson AG. VHL gene mutation and clear-cell renal carcinomas. Cancer J 1995;1:180.
59. Lubensky IA, Gnarra JR, Bertheau P, et al. Allelic deletions of the VHL gene detected in multiple microscopic clear cell renal lesions in von Hippel-Lindau disease patients. Am J Pathol
1996;149:2089.
60. Duan DR, Humphrey JS, Chen DYT, et al. Characterization of the VHL tumor suppressor gene product: localization, complex formation, and the effect of natural inactivating mutations. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:6459.
61. Duan DR, Pause A, Burgess WH, et al. Inhibition of transcription elongation by the VHL tumor suppressor protein. Science 1995;269:1402.
62. Kibel A, IIiopoulos O, DeCaprio JA, Kaelin WG. Binding of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein to elongin B and C. Science 1995;269:1444.
63. Pause A, Lee S, Worrell RA, et al. The von Hippel-Lindau tumor-suppressor gene product forms a stable complex with human CUL-2, a member of the Cdc53 family of proteins. Proc Natl Acad

Sci U S A 1997;94:2156.
64. Lonergan KM, Iliopoulos O, Ohh M, et al. Regulation of hypoxia-inducible mRNAs by the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein requires binding to complexes containing elongins B/C and
Cul2. Mol Cell Biol 1998;18:732.
65. Elledge SJ, Harper JW. The role of protein stability in the cell cycle and cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta 1998;1377:M61.
66. Gnarra JR, Zhou S, Merrill MJ, et al. Post-transcriptional regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor mRNA by the product of the VHL tumor suppressor gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1996;93:10589.
67. Siemeister G, Weindel K, Mohrs K, et al. Reversion of deregulated expression of vascular endothelial growth factor in human renal carcinoma cells by von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor
protein. Cancer Res 1996;56:2299.
68. Berger DP, Herbstritt L, Dengler WA, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) mRNA expression in human tumor models of different histologies. Ann Oncol 1995;6:817.
69. Takahashi A, Sasaki H, Kim SJ, et al. Markedly increased amounts of messenger RNAs for vascular endothelial growth factor and placenta growth factor in renal cell carcinoma associated with
angiogenesis. Cancer Res 1994;54:4233.
70. Iliopoulos O, Jiang C, Levy AP, Kaelin WG, Goldberg MA. Negative regulation of hypoxia-inducible genes by the von Hippel-Lindau protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:10595.
71. Lee S, Chen DYT, Humphrey JS, et al. Nuclear/cytoplasmic localization of the VHL tumor suppressor gene product is determined by cell density. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:1770.
72. Zbar B, Tory K, Merino M, et al. Hereditary papillary renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 1994; 151:561.
73. Zbar B, Glenn G, Lubensky IA, et al. Hereditary papillary renal cell carcinoma: clinical studies in 10 families. J Urol 1995;153:907.
74. Schmidt L, Duh FM, Chen F, et al. Germline and somatic mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the MET proto-oncogene in papillary renal carcinomas. Nat Genet 1997;16:68.
75. Schmidt L, Junker K, Weirich G, et al. Two North American families with hereditary papillary renal carcinoma and identical novel mutations in the MET proto-oncogene. Cancer Res
1998;58:1719.
76. Jeffers M, Schmidt L, Nakaigawa N, et al. Activating mutations for the met tyrosine kinase receptor in human cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:11445.
77. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics, 1998 [published errata appear in CA Cancer J Clin 1998;48:192 and 1998;48:329]. CA Cancer J Clin 1998;48:6.
78. Thompson TC, Southgate J, Kitchener G, Land H. Multistage carcinogenesis induced by ras and myc oncogenes in a reconstituted organ. Cell 1989;56:917.
79. Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. Cell 1990;61:759.
80. Bostwick DG, Montironi R. Prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and the origins of prostatic carcinoma. Pathol Res Pract 1995;191:828.
81. Aprikian AG, Sarkis AS, Fair WR, et al. Immunohistochemical determination of p53 protein nuclear accumulation in prostatic adenocarcinoma. J Urol 1994;151:1276.
82. Navone NM, Troncoso P, Pisters LL, et al. p53 protein accumulation and gene mutation in the progression of human prostate carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1657.
83. Bookstein R, MacGrogan D, Hilsenbeck SG, Sharkey F, Allred DC. p53 is mutated in a subset of advanced-stage prostate cancers. Cancer Res 1993;53:3369.
84. Lewis WH, Yeger H, Bonetta L, et al. Homozygous deletion of a DNA marker from chromosome 11p13 in sporadic Wilms tumor. Genomics 1988;3:25.
85. Koivisto PA, Rantala I. Amplification of the androgen receptor gene is associated with P53 mutation in hormone-refractory recurrent prostate cancer. J Pathol 1999;187:237.
86. Dhom G. Epidemiologic aspects of latent and clinically manifest carcinoma of the prostate. J Clin Res Clin Oncol 1983;106:210.
87. Lee EY, To H, Shew JY, et al. Inactivation of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene in human breast cancers. Science 1988;241:218.
88. Diaz MO, Ziemin S, Le Beau MM, et al. Homozygous deletion of the alpha- and beta 1-interferon genes in human leukemia and derived cell lines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:5259.
89. Carter BS, Carter HB, Issacs JT. Epidemiologic evidence regarding predisposing factors to prostate cancer [Review]. Prostate 1990;16:187.
90. Haenszel W, Kurihara M. Studies of Japanese migrants. I. Mortality from cancer and other diseases among Japanese in the United States. J Natl Cancer Inst 1968;40:43.
91. Taylor JA. Epidemiologic evidence of genetic susceptibility to cancer [Review]. Birth Defects 1990;26:113.
92. Woolf CM. An investigation of familial aspects of carcinoma of the prostate. Cancer 1960;13:739.
93. Morganti G, Cianferrari L, Cresseri A, Arrigoni G, Lovati F. Recherches clinico-statistiques et genetiques sur les neoplasies de la prostate. Acat Genet Statis 1956;6:304.
94. Schuman LM, Mandel J, Blackard C, et al. Epidemiologic study of prostate cancer: preliminary report. Cancer Treat Rep 1971;61:181.
95. Krain LS. Some epidemiologic variables in prostatic carcinoma in California. Prev Med 1974;3:154.
96. Meikle AW, Smith JA, West DW. Familial factors affecting prostatic cancer risk and plasma sex-steroid levels. Prostate 1985;6:121.
97. Spitz MR, Currier RD, Fueger JJ, Babaian RJ, Newell GR. Familial patterns of prostate cancer: a case-control analysis. J Urol 1991;146:1305.
98. Gronberg H, Wiklund F, Damber JE. Age specific risks of familial prostate carcinoma: a basis for screening recommendations in high risk populations. Cancer 1999;86:477.
99. Cannon L, Bishop DT, Skolnick M. Genetic epidemiology of prostate cancer in the Utah Mormon genealogy. Cancer Surv 1982;1:47.
100. Steinberg GD, Carter BS, Beaty TH, Childs B, Walsh PC. Family history and the risk of prostate cancer. Prostate 1990;17:337.
101. Carter BS, Beaty TH, Steinberg GD, Childs B, Walsh PC. Mendelian inheritance of familial prostate cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:3367.
102. Gronberg H, Damber L, Damber JE, Iselius L. Segregation analysis of prostate cancer in Sweden: support for dominant inheritance. Am J Epidemiol 1997;146:552.
103. Schaid DJ, McDonnell SK, Blute ML, Thibodeau SN. Evidence for autosomal dominant inheritance of prostate cancer. Am J Hum Genet 1998;62:1425.
104. Smith JR, Freije D, Carpten JD, et al. Major susceptibility locus for prostate cancer on chromosome 1 suggested by a genome-wide search [see comments]. Science 1996;274:1371.
105. Xu J, Meyers D, Freije D, et al. Evidence for a prostate cancer susceptibility locus on the X chromosome. Nat Genet 1998;20:175.
106. Berthon P, Valeri A, Cohen-Akenine A, et al. Predisposing gene for early-onset prostate cancer, localized on chromosome 1q42.2-43. Am J Hum Genet 1998;62:1416.
107. Gibbs M, Stanford JL, McIndoe RA, et al. Evidence for a rare prostate cancersusceptibility locus at chromosome 1p36. Am J Hum Genet 1999;64:776.
108. Strohmeyer TG, Slamon DJ. Protooncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in human urological malignancies[Review]. J Urol 1994;151:1479.
108a. Sarkis AS, Bajorin DF, Reuter VE. Prognostic value of p53 nuclear overexpression in patients with invasive bladder cancer treated with neoadjuvant MVAC. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1384.
109. Bubendorf L, Kononen J, Koivisto P, et al. Survey of gene amplifications during prostate cancer progression by high-throughput fluorescence in situ hybridization on tissue microarrays
[published erratum appears in Cancer Res 1999;59:1388]. Cancer Res 1999; 59:803.
110. Treiger B, Issacs J. Expression of a transfected v-Harvey-ras oncogene in a Dunning rat prostate adenocarcinoma and the development of high metastatic ability. J Urol 1988;140:1580.
111. Peehl DM, Wehner N, Stamey TA. Activated Kiras oncogene in human prostatic adenocarcinoma. Prostate 1987;10:281.
112. Carter BS, Epstein JL, Issacs WB. ras gene mutations in human prostate cancer. Cancer Res 1990;50:6830.
113. Isaacs WB, Carter BS. Genetic changes associated with prostate cancer in humans. Cancer Surv 1991;11:15.
114. Gumerlock PH, Poonamallee UR, Meyers FJ, deVere White RW. Activated ras alleles in human carcinoma of the prostate are rare. Cancer Res 1991;51:1632.
115. Moul JW, Friedrichs PA, Lance RS, Theune SM, Chang EH. Infrequent RAS oncogene mutations in human prostate cancer. Prostate 1992;20:327.
116. Konishi N, Enomoto T, Buzard G, et al. K-ras activation and ras p21 expression in latent prostatic carcinoma in Japanese men. Cancer 1992;20:327.
117. Anwar K, Nakakuki K, Shiraishi T, et al. Presence of ras oncogene mutations and human papillomavirus DNA in human prostate carcinomas. Cancer Res 1992;52:5991.
118. Serth J, Panitz F, Paeslack U, Kuczyk MA, Jonas U. Increased levels of human papillomavirus type 16 DNA in a subset of prostate cancers. Cancer Res 1999;59:823.
119. Noda T, Sasagawa T, Dong Y, et al. Detection of human papillomavirus (HPV) DNA in archival specimens of benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostatic cancer using a highly sensitive nested
PCR method. Urol Res 1998;26:165.
120. Strickler HD, Burk R, Shah K, et al. A multifaceted study of human papillomavirus and prostate carcinoma. Cancer 1998;82:1118.
121. Sato K, Qian J, Slezak JM, et al. Clinical significance of alterations of chromosome 8 in high-grade, advanced, nonmetastatic prostate carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1574.
122. Hockenbery DM. The bcl2 oncogene and apoptosis. [Review]. Semin Immunol 1992;4:413.
123. Reed JC, Cuddy M, Slabiak T, et al. Oncogenic potential of bcl2 demonstrated by gene transfer. Nature 1988;336:259.
124. Liu J, Johnson RM, Traweek ST. Rearrangement of the BCL-2 gene in follicular lymphoma. Detection by PCR in both fresh and fixed tissue samples. Diagn Mol Pathol 1993; 2:241.
125. McDonnell TJ, Troncoso P, Brisbay SM, et al. Expression of the protooncogene bcl2 in the prostate and its association with emergence of androgenindependent prostate cancer. Cancer Res
1992;52:6940.
126. Colombel M, Symmans F, Gil S, et al. Detection of the apoptosissupressing oncoprotein bc12 in hormonerefractory human prostate cancers. Am J Pathol 1993;143:390.
127. Anderson DM, Johnson L, Glaccum MB, et al. Chromosomal assignment and genomic structure of IL15. Genomics 1995;25:701.
128. Hortnagel K, Mautner J, Strobl LJ, et al. The role of immunoglobulin kappa elements in c-myc activation. Oncogene 1995;10:1393.
129. Newmark JR, Hardy DO, Tonb DC, et al. Androgen receptor gene mutations in human prostate cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:6319.
130. Kelly WK, Slovin S, Scher HI. Steroid hormone withdrawal syndromes. Pathophysiology and clinical significance. Urol Clin North Am 1997;24:421.
131. Sartor O, Cooper M, Weinberger M, et al. Surprising activity of flutamide withdrawal when combined with aminoglutethimide in treatment of “hormone-refractory” prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1994;86:222.
132. Harris SE, Rong Z, Harris MA, Lubahn DD. Androgen receptor in human prostate adenocarcinoma LNCaP/ADEP cells contains a mutation which alters the specificity of the steroid-dependent
transcriptional activation region. Endocrinology 1990;126:93.
133. Veldscholte J, Berrevoets CA, Ris-Stalpers C, et al. The androgen receptor in LNCaP cells contains a mutation in the ligand binding domain which affects steroid binding characteristics and
response to antiandrogens [Review]. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1992;41:665.
134. Taplin ME, Bubley GJ, Shuster TD, et al. Mutation of the androgen-receptor gene in metastatic androgen-independent prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1393.
135. Visakorpi T, Hyytinen E, Koivisto P, et al. In vivo amplification of the androgen receptor gene and progression of human prostate cancer. Nat Genet 1995;9:401.
136. Culig Z, Hobisch A, Hittmair A, et al. Expression, structure, and function of androgen receptor in advanced prostatic carcinoma. Prostate 1998;35:63.
137. Craft N, Shostak Y, Carey M, Sawyers CH. A mechanism for hormone-independent prostate cancer through modulation of androgen receptor signaling by the HER-2/neu tyrosine kinase. Nat
Med 1999;5:280.
138. Brothman AR, Peehl DM, Patel AM, McNeal JE. Frequency and pattern of karyotypic abnormalities in human prostate cancer. Cancer Res 1990;50:3795.
139. Lundgren R, Mandahl N, Heim S, et al. Cytogenetic analysis of 57 primary prostatic adenocarcinomas. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1992;4:16.
140. Atkin NB, Baker MC. Chromosome study of five cancers of the prostate. Hum Genet 1985;70:359.
141. Carter BS, Ewing CM, Ward WS, et al. Allelic loss of chromosomes 16q and 10q in human prostate cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:8751.
142. Kunimi K, Bergerheim US, Larsson IL, Ekman P, Collins VP. Allelotyping of human prostatic adenocarcinoma. Genomics 1991;11:530.
143. Bergerheim US, Kunimi K, Collins VP, Ekman P. Deletion mapping of chromosomes 8, 10, and 16 in human prostatic carcinoma. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1991;3:215.
144. Macoska JA, Trybus TM, Sakr WA, et al. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of 8p allelic loss and chromosome 8 instability in human prostate cancer. Cancer Res 1994;54:3824.
145. Konig JJ, Kamst E, Hagemeijer A, et al. Cytogenetic characterization of several androgen responsive and unresponsive sublines of the human prostatic carcinoma cell line LNCaP. Urol Res
1989;17:79.
146. MacGrogan D, Levy A, Bostwick D, et al. Loss of chromosome arm 8p loci in prostate cancer: mapping by quantitative allelic imbalance. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1994;10:151.
147. Trapman J, Sleddens HFBM, van der Weiden MM, et al. Loss of heterozygosity of chromosome 8 microsatellite loci implicates a candidate tumor suppressor gene between the loci D8S87 and
D8S133 in human prostate cancer. Cancer Res 1994;54:6061.
148. Suzuki H, Emi M, Komiya A, et al. Localization of a tumor suppressor gene associated with progression of human prostate cancer within a 1.2 Mb region of 8p22-p21.3. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 1995;13:168.
149. Emmert-Buck MR, Vocke CD, Pozzatti RO, et al. Allelic loss on chromosome 8p12-21 in microdissected prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN). Cancer Res 1997;1995:2959.
150. Macoska JA, Trybus TM, Benson PD, et al. Evidence for three tumor suppressor gene loci on chromosome 8p in human prostate cancer. Cancer Res 1995;55:5390.
151. Bova GS, MacGrogan D, Levy A, et al. Physical mapping of chromosome 8p22 markers and their homozygous deletion in a metastatic prostate cancer. Genomics 1996;35:46.
152. Latil A, Baron JC, Cussenot O, et al. Genetic alterations in localized prostate cancer: identification of a common region of deletion on chromosome arm 18q. Genes Chromosomes Cancer
1994;11:119.

153. Sakr WA, Macoska JA, Benson P, et al. Allelic loss in locally metastatic, multisampled prostate cancer. Cancer Res 1994;54:3273.
154. Cher ML, MacGrogan D, Bookstein R, et al. Comparative genomic hybridization allelic imbalance and fluorescence in situ hybridization on chromosome 8 in prostate cancer. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 1995;11:153.
155. Matsuyama H, Pan Y, Skoog L, et al. Deletion mapping of chromosome 8p in prostate cancer by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Oncogene 1994;9:3071.
156. Massenkeil G, Oberhuber H, Hailemariam S, et al. P53 mutations and loss of heterozygosity on chromosomes 8p, 16q, 17p, and 18q are confined to advanced prostate cancer. Anticancer Res
1994;14:2785.
157. Visakorpi T, Kallioniemi A, Syvanen AC, et al. Genetic changes in primary and recurrent prostate cancer by comparative genomic hybridization. Cancer Res 1995;55:342.
158. Cher ML, Bova GS, Moore DH, et al. Genetic alterations in untreated metastases and androgen-independent prostate cancer detected by comparative genomic hybridization and allelotyping.
Cancer Res 1996;56:3091.
159. Ichikawa T, Nihei N, Suzuki H, et al. Suppression of metastasis of rat prostatic cancer by introducing human chromosome 8. Cancer Res 1994;54:2299.
160. MacGrogan D, Levy A, Bova GS, et al. Structure and methylation-associated silencing of a gene within a homozygously deleted region of human chromosome band 8p22. Genomics
1996;35:55.
161. Ishii H, Baffa R, Numata SI, et al. The FEZ1 gene at chromosome 8p22 encodes a leucine-zipper protein, and its expression is altered in multiple human tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1999;96:3928.
162. He WW, Sciavolino PJ, Wing J, et al. A novel human prostate-specific, androgen-regulated homeobox gene (NKX3.1) that maps to 8p21, a region frequently deleted in prostate cancer.
Genomics 1997;43:69.
163. Qian J, Bostwick DG, Takahashi S, et al. Chromosomal anomalies in prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and carcinoma detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Cancer Res 1995;55:5408.
164. Van den Berg C, Guan XY, Von Hoff D, et al. DNA sequence amplification in human prostate cancer identified by chromosome microdissection: potential prognostic implications. Clin Cancer
Res 1995;1:11.
165. Reiter RE, Sato I, Thomas G, et al. Coamplification of prostate stem cell antigen (PSCA) and MYC in locally advanced prostate cancer. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 2000;27:95.
166. Nupponen NN, Porkka K, Kakkola L, et al. Amplification and overexpression of p40 subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 in breast and prostate cancer. Am J Pathol 1999;154:1777.
167. Raskind WH, Conrad EU, Chansky H, Matsushita M. Loss of heterozygosity in chondrosarcomas for markers linked to hereditary multiple exostoses loci on chromosomes 8 and 11. Am J Hum
Genet 1995;56:1132.
168. Kubota Y, Fujinami K, Uemura H, et al. Retinoblastoma gene mutations in primary human prostate cancer. Prostate 1995;27:314.
169. Bussemakers MJG, Bova GS, Schoenberg MP, et al. Microsatellite instability in human prostate cancer. J Urol 1995;151:469A.
170. Boyer JC, Umar A, Risinger JI, et al. Microsatellite instability, mismatch repair deficiency, and genetic defects in human cancer cell lines. Cancer Res 1995;55:6063.
171. Visakorpi T, Kallioniemi O, Heikkinen A, Koivula T, Isola J. Small subgroup of aggressive, highly proliferative prostatic carcinomas defined by p53 accumulation. J Natl Cancer Inst
1991;84:883.
172. Scher HI, Kelly WK. Flutamide withdrawal syndrome: its impact on clinical trials in hormone-refractory prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1566.
173. Ruprecht RM, Rossoni LD, Haseltine WA, Broder S. Suppression of retroviral propagation and disease by suramin in murine systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1985;82:7733.
174. Chi SG, deVere White RW, Meyers FJ, et al. p53 in prostate cancer: frequent expressed transition mutations. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:926.
175. Mirchandani D, Zheng J, Miller GJ, et al. Heterogeneity in intratumor distribution of p53 mutations in human prostate cancer. Am J Pathol 1995;147:92.
176. Roy-Burman P, Zheng J, Miller GJ. Molecular heterogeneity in prostate cancer: can TP53 mutation unravel tumorigenesis? Mol Med Today 1997;3:476.
177. Brooks JD, Bova GS, Ewing CM, et al. An uncertain role for p53 gene alterations in human prostate cancers. Cancer Res 1996;56:3814.
178. Osman I, Drobnjak M, Fazzari M, et al. Inactivation of the p53 pathway in prostate cancer: impact on tumor progression. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:2082.
179. Scherr DS, Vaughan EDJ, Wei J, et al. BCL-2 and p53 expression in clinically localized prostate cancer predicts response to external beam radiotherapy [published erratum appears in J Urol
1999;162:503]. J Urol 1999;162:12.
180. Moul JW. Angiogenesis, p53, bcl-2 and Ki-67 in the progression of prostate cancer after radical prostatectomy. Eur Urol 1999;35:399.
181. Matsushima H, Sasaki T, Goto T, et al. Immunohistochemical study of p21WAF1 and p53 proteins in prostatic cancer and their prognostic significance. Hum Pathol 1998;29:778.
182. Kuczyk MA, Serth J, Bokemeyer C, et al. The prognostic value of p53 for long-term and recurrence-free survival following radical prostatectomy. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:679.
183. Ruijter E, van de Kaa C, Aalders T, et al. Heterogeneous expression of E-cadherin and p53 in prostate cancer: clinical implications. BIOMED-II Markers for Prostate Cancer Study Group. Mod
Pathol 1998;11:276.
184. Uzoaru I, Rubenstein M, Mirochnik Y, et al. An evaluation of the markers p53 and Ki-67 for their predictive value in prostate cancer. J Surg Oncol 1998;67:33.
185. Stapleton AM, Zbell P, Kattan MW, et al. Assessment of the biologic markers p53, Ki-67, and apoptotic index as predictive indicators of prostate carcinoma recurrence after surgery. Cancer
1998;82:168.
186. Matsushima H, Kitamura T, Goto T, et al. Combined analysis with Bcl-2 and P53 immunostaining predicts poorer prognosis in prostatic carcinoma. J Urol 1997;158:2278.
187. Theodorescu D, Broder SR, Boyd JC, Mills SE, Frierson HFJ. p53, bcl-2 and retinoblastoma proteins as long-term prognostic markers in localized carcinoma of the prostate. J Urol
1997;158:131.
188. Grignon DJ, Caplan R, Sarkar FH, et al. p53 status and prognosis of locally advanced prostatic adenocarcinoma: a study based on RTOG 8610. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:158.
189. Stricker HJ, Jay JK, Linden MD, Tamboli P, Amin MB. Determining prognosis of clinically localized prostate cancer by immunohistochemical detection of mutant p53. Urology 1996;47:366.
190. Shurbaji MS, Kalbfleisch JH, Thurmond TS. Immunohistochemical detection of p53 protein as a prognostic indicator in prostate cancer. Hum Pathol 1995;26:106.
191. Thomas DJ, Robinson M, King P, et al. p53 expression and clinical outcome in prostate cancer. Br J Urol 1993;72:778.
192. Cairns P, Okami K, Halachmi S, et al. Frequent inactivation of PTEN/MMAC1 in primary prostate cancer. Cancer Res 1997;57:4997.
193. Suzuki H, Freije D, Nusskern DR, et al. Interfocal heterogeneity of PTEN/MMSC1 gene alterations in multiple metastatic prostate cancer tissues. Cancer Res 1998;58:204.
194. Wang SI, Parsons R, Ittmann M. Homozygous deletion of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene in a subset of prostate adenocarcinomas. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:811.
195. Gray IC, Stewart LM, Phillips SM, et al. Mutation and expression analysis of the putative prostate tumour-suppressor gene PTEN. Br J Cancer 1998;78:1296.
196. Vlietstra R, van Alewijk D, Hermans K, van Stratum P, Trapman J. Frequent inactivation of PTEN in prostate cancer cell lines and xenografts. Cancer Res 1998;58:2720.
197. McNeal JE, Redwine EA, Freiha FS, Stamey TA. Zonal distribution of prostatic adenocarcinoma. Correlation with histologic pattern and direction of spread. Am J Surg Pathol 1988;12:897.
198. McMenamin ME, Soung P, Perera S, et al. Loss of PTEN expression in paraffin-embedded primary prostate cancer correlates with high Gleason score and advanced stage. Cancer Res
1999;59:4291.
199. Wu X, Senechal K, Neshat MS, Whang YE, Sawyers CL. The PTEN/MMAC1 tumor suppressor phosphatase functions as a negative regulator of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt pathway.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:15587.
200. Bookstein R, Shew JY, Chen PL, Scully P, Lee WH. Suppression of tumorigenicity of human prostate carcinoma cells by replacing a mutated RB gene. Science 1990;247:712.
201. Bookstein R, Rio P, Madreperla SA, et al. Promoter deletion and loss of retinoblastoma gene expression in human prostate carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:7762.
202. Ittmann MM, Wieczorek R. Alterations of the retinoblastoma gene in clinically localized, stage B prostate adenocarcinomas. Hum Pathol 1996;27:28.
203. Cooney KA, Wetzel JC, Merajver SD, et al. Distinct regions of allelic loss on 13q in prostate cancer. Cancer Res 1996;56:1142.
204. Kamb A, Gruis NA, Weaver-Feldhaus J, et al. A cell cycle regulator potentially involved in genesis of many tumor types. Science 1994;264:436.
205. Cairns P, Polascik TJ, Eby Y, et al. Frequency of homozygous deletion at p16/CDKN2 in primary human tumours. Nat Genet 1995;11:210.
206. Jarrard D, Bova GS, Ewing CM, et al. Deletional, mutational, and methylation analyses of CDKN2 (p16/MTS1) in primary and metastatic prostate cancer. Genes Chromosomes Cancer
1997;19:90.
207. Guo Y, Sklar GN, Borkowski A, Kyprianou N. Loss of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1) protein in human prostate cancer correlates with tumor grade. Clin Cancer Res
1997;3:2269.
208. Yang RM, Naitoh J, Murphy M, et al. Low p27 expression predicts poor disease-free survival in patients with prostate cancer. J Urol 1998;159:941.
209. Cote RJ, Shi Y, Groshen S, et al. Association of p27Kip1 levels with recurrence and survival in patients with stage C prostate carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:916.
210. Kibel AS, Schutte M, Kern SE, Isaacs WB, Bova GS. Identification of 12p as a region of frequent deletion in advanced prostate cancer. Cancer Res 1998;58:5652.
211. Dong JT, Lamb PW, Rinker-Schaeffer CW, et al. KAI1, a metastasis suppressor gene for prostate cancer on human chromosome 11p11.2. Science 1995;268:884.
212. Morton RA, Ewing CM, Nagafuchi A, Tsukita S, Issacs WB. Reduction of E-cadherin levels and deletion of the alpha-catenin gene in human prostate cancer cells. Cancer Res 1993;53:3585.
213. Umbas R, Issacs WB, Bringuier PP, et al. Decreased E-cadherin expression is associated with poor prognosis in patients with prostate cancer. Cancer Res 1994;54:3929.
214. Umbas R, Schalken JA, Aalders TW, et al. Expression of the cellular adhesion molecular E-cadherin is reduced or absent in high-grade prostate cancer. Cancer Res 1992;52:5104.
215. Ichikawa T, Ichikawa Y, Dong J, et al. Localization of metastasis suppressor gene(s) for prostatic cancer to the short arm of human chromosome 11. Cancer Res 1992;52:3486.
216. Graff JR, Herman JG, Lapidus RG, et al. E-cadherin expression is silenced by DNA hypermethylation in human breast and prostate carcinomas. Cancer Res 1995;55:5195.
217. Lee WH, Morton RA, Epstein JI, et al. Cytidine methylation of regulatory sequences near the class glutathione-S-transferase gene accompanies human prostatic carcinogenesis. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1994;91:11733.
218. Mostofi FK, Sobin LH, Torloni H. Histologic typing of urinary bladder tumours. In: International histological classification of tumors. Geneva: The World Health Organization, 1973.
219. Koss LG. Atlas of tumor pathology. In: Tumors of the urinary bladder, fascicle 11. Washington, DC: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 1975.
220. Tumors of the urinary tract and prostate in urinary sediment. In: Koss L, ed. Diagnostic cytology and its histopathologic basis, 4th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1992.
221. Prout GR. Bladder carcinoma and a TNM system of classification. J Urol 1997;117:583.
222. Altausen AF, Prout GR, Daly JJ. Non-invasive papillary carcinoma of the bladder associated with carcinoma in situ. J Urol 1976;116:575.
223. Reuter VE, Melamed MR. The lower urinary tract. In: Sternberg SS, ed. Diagnostic surgical pathology. New York: Raven Press, 1989.
224. Stein JP, Grossfeld GD, Ginsberg DA, et al. Prognostic markers in bladder cancer: a contemporary review of the literature. J Urol 1998;160:645.
225. Gibas Z, Prout GR, Connolly JG, Pontes JE, Sandberg AA. Nonrandom chromosomal changes in transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. Cancer Res 1984;44:1257.
226. Smeets W, Pauwels R, Laarakkers L, Debruyne F, Geraedts J. Chromosomal analysis of bladder cancer. III. Nonrandom alterations. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1987;29:29.
227. Atkin NB, Baker MC. Cytogenetic study of ten carcinomas of the bladder: involvement of chromosomes 1 and 11. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1985;15:253.
228. Babu VR, Lutz MD, Miles BJ, et al. Tumor behavior in transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder in relation to chromosomal markers and histopathology. Cancer Res 1987;47:6800.
229. Vanni R, Scarpa RM, Nieddu M, Usai E. Cytogenetic investigation on 30 bladder carcinomas. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1988;30:35.
230. Tyrkus M, Powell I, Fakr W. Cytogenetic studies of carcinoma in situ of the bladder: prognostic implications. J Urol 1992;148:44.
231. Poddighe PJ, Ramaekers FCS, Smeets WGB, Vooijs GP, Hopman AHN. Structural chromosome 1 aberrations in transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder: interphase cytogenetics combining a
centromeric, telomeric, and library DNA probe. Cancer Res 1992; 52:4929.
232. Hopman AHN, Moesker O, Smeets W, et al. Numerical chromosome 1, 7, 9, and 11 aberrations in bladder cancer detected by in situ hybridization. Cancer Res 1991;51:644.
233. Waldman FM, Carroll PR, Kerschmann R, et al. Centromeric copy number of chromosome 7 is strongly correlated with tumor grade and labeling index in human bladder cancer. Cancer Res
1991;51:3807.
234. Sauter G, Moch H, Moore D, et al. Heterogeneity of erbB-2 gene amplification in bladder cancer. Cancer Res 1993;53:2199.
235. Sauter G, Carroll P, Moch H, et al. c-myc copy number gains in bladder cancer detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Am J Pathol 1995;146:1131.
236. Sauter G, Deng G, Moch H, et al. Physical deletion of the p53 gene in bladder cancer. Am J Pathol 1994;144:756.
237. Wheeless LL, Reeder JE, Han R, et al. Bladder irrigation specimens assayed by fluorescence in situ hybridization to interphase nuclei. Cytometry 1994;17:319.
238. Reddy EP, Reynolds RK, Santos E, Barbacid M. A point mutation is responsible for the acquisition of transforming properties by the T24 bladder carcinoma oncogene. Nature 1982;300:149.
239. Feinberg AP, Vogelstein B, Droller MJ, Baylin SB, Nelkin BD. Mutation affecting the 12th amino acid of the c-Ha-ras oncogene product occurs infrequently in human cancer. Science
1983;220:1175.
240. Fujita J, Srivastava SK, Kraus MH. Frequency of molecular alterations affecting ras protooncogenes in human urinary tract tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1985;82:3849.
241. Visvanathan KV, Pocock RD, Summerhayes IC. Preferential and novel activation of Haras in human bladder carcinoma. Oncogene Res 1988;3:77.

242. Nagatava Y, Abe M, Kobayashi K, et al. Point mutations of c-ras genes in human bladder cancer and kidney cancer. Jpn J Cancer Res 1990;81:22.
243. Czerniak B, Deitch D, Simmons H, et al. Ha-ras gene codon 12 mutations and DNA ploidy in urinary bladder carcinomas. Br J Cancer 1990;62:762.
244. Czerniak B, Cohen GL, Etkind P, et al. Concurrent mutations of coding and regulatory sequences of the Ha-ras gene in urinary bladder carcinomas. Hum Pathol 1992;23:1199.
245. Ooi A, Herz F, Setsuko I, et al. Ha-ras codon 12 mutation in papillary tumors of the urinary bladder. A retrospective study. Int J Oncol 1994;4:85.
246. Fitzgerald JM, Ramchurren N, Rieger K, et al. Identification of H-ras mutations in urine sediments complements cytology in the detection of bladder tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:129.
247. Vogelstein B, Fearon ER, Hamilton SR, et al. Genetic alterations during colorectal tumor development. N Engl J Med 1988;319:525.
248. Burmer GC, Loeb LA. Mutations of the KRAS2 oncogene during progressive stages of human colon carcinomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:2403.
249. Bos JL. Ras oncogene in human cancer: a review. Cancer Res 1989;49:4682.
250. Jen J, Powel SM, Papadopoulos N, et al. Molecular determinants of dysplasia in colorectal lesions. Cancer Res 1994;54:5523.
251. Neal DE, Sharples L, Smith K, et al. Epidermal growth-factor receptors in human bladder cancer: comparison of invasive and superficial tumors. Lancet 1985;1:366.
252. Neal DE, Sharples L, Smith K, et al. The epidermal growth factor receptor and the prognosis of bladder cancer. Cancer 1990;65:1619.
253. Messing EM. Clinical implications of the expression growth factor receptors in human transitional cell carcinomas. Cancer Res 1990;50:2530.
254. Rao JY, Hemstreet GP, Hurst RE, et al. Alterations in phenotypic biochemical markers in bladder epithelium during tumorigenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:8287.
255. Nguyen PL, Swanson PE, Jaszcz W, et al. Expression of epidermal growth factor receptor in invasive transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder: a multivariate survival analysis. Am J
Clin Pathol 1994;101:166.
256. Wood D, Wartinger DD, Reuter V, et al. DNA, RNA and immunohistochemical characterization of the HER-2/neu oncogene in transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. J Urol 1991;146:1398.
257. Sato K, Moriyama M, Mori S, et al. An immunohistologic evaluation of c-erbB-2 gene product in patients with urinary bladder carcinoma. Cancer 1992;70:2493.
258. Underwood M, Barlett J, Reeves J, et al. C-erbB-2 gene amplification: a molecular marker in recurrent bladder tumors? Cancer Res 1995;55:2422.
259. Oliner JD, Kinzler KW, Metlzer PS, et al. Amplification of a gene encoding a p53 associated protein in human sarcomas. Nature 1992;358:80.
260. Kubbutat MH, Jones SN, Vousden KH. Regulation of p53 stability by Mdm2. Nature 1997;387:299.
261. Haupt Y, Maya R, Kazaz A, Oren M. Mdm2 promotes the rapid degradation of p53. Nature 1997;387:296.
262. Momand J, Zambetti G, Olson D, et al. The mdm-2 oncogene product forms a complex with the p-53 protein and inhibits TP53-mediated transactivation. Cell 1992;69:1237.
263. Lianes P, Orlow I, Zhang ZZ, et al. Altered patterns of MDM2 and TP53 expression in human bladder cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1325.
264. Barbareschi M, Girlando S, Fellin G, et al. Expression of mdm2 and p53 proteins in transitional cell carcinoma. Urol Res 1995;22:349.
265. Fearon ER, Feinberg AP, Hamilton SH, Vogelstein B. Loss of genes on the short arm of chromosome 11 in bladder cancer. Nature 1985;318:377.
266. Tsai YC, Nichols PW, Hiti AL, et al. Allelic losses of chromosomes 9, 11, and 17 in human bladder cancer. Cancer Res 1990;50:44.
267. Olumi AF, Tsai YC, Nichols PW, et al. Allelic loss of chromosomes 17p distinguishes high grade from low grade transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. Cancer Res 1990;50:7081.
268. Presti JC, Reuter VE, Galan T, et al. Molecular genetic alterations in superficial and locally advanced human bladder cancer. Cancer Res 1991;51:5405.
269. Dalbagni G, Presti J, Reuter V, Fair WR, Cardo-Cardo C. Genetic alterations in bladder cancer. Lancet 1993;324:469.
270. Habuchi T, Ogawa O, Kakehi Y, et al. Accumulated allelic losses in the development of invasive urothelial cancer. Int J Cancer 1993;53:579.
271. Cairns P, Proctor AJ, Knowles MA. Loss of heterozygosity at the RB locus in frequent and correlates with muscle invasion in bladder carcinoma. Oncogene 1991;6:2305.
272. Cordon-Cardo C, Wartinger D, Petrylak D, et al. Altered expression of the retinoblastoma gene product is a prognostic indicator in bladder caner. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992; 84:1251.
273. Logothetis CJ, Xu HJ, Ro JY, et al. Altered retinoblastoma protein expression and known prognostic variables in locally advanced bladder cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1257.
274. Sidransky D, Von Eschenbach A, Tsai YC, et al. Identification of p53 gene mutations in bladder cancer and urine samples. Science 1991;252:706.
275. Fujimoto K, Yamada Y, Okajima E, et al. Frequent association of p53 gene mutations in invasive bladder cancer. Cancer Res 1992;52:1393.
276. Dalbagni G, Presti JC, Reuter VE, et al. Molecular genetic alterations of chromosome 17 and p53 nuclear overexpression in human bladder cancer. Diagn Mol Pathol 1993;2:4.
277. Cordon-Cardo C, Dalbagni D, Saez GT, et al. TP53 mutations in human bladder cancer: genotypic versus phenotypic patterns. Int J Cancer 1994;56:347.
278. Sarkis AS, Dalbagni G, Cordon-Cardo C, et al. Nuclear overexpression of p53 protein in transitional cell bladder carcinoma: a marker for disease progression. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:53.
279. Sarkis AS, Zhang ZF, Cordon-Cardo C, et al. p53 nuclear overexpression and disease progression in Ta bladder carcinoma. Int J Oncol 1993;3:355.
280. Lipponen PK. Over-expression of p53 nuclear oncoprotein in transitional cell bladder cancer and its prognostic value. Int J Cancer 1993;53:365.
281. Esrig D, Elmajian D, Groshen S, et al. Accumulation of nuclear p53 and tumor progression in bladder cancer. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1259.
282. Miyao N, Tsai YC, Lerner SP, et al. Role of chromosome 9 in human bladder cancer. Cancer Res 1993;53:4066.
283. Cairns P, Shaw ME, Knowles MA. Preliminary mapping of the deleted region of chromosome 9 in bladder cancer. Cancer Res 1993;53:1230.
284. Ruppert JM, Tokino K, Sidransky D. Evidence for two bladder cancer suppressor loci on human chromosome 9. Cancer Res 199453:5093.
285. Orlow I, Lianes P, Lacombe L, et al. Chromosome 9 deletions and microsatellite alterations in human bladder tumors. Cancer Res 1994;54:2848.
286. Kamb A, Gruis NA, Weaver-Feldhaus J, et al. A cell cycle regulator potentially involved in genesis of many tumor types. Science 1994;264:436.
287. Serrano M, Hannon GJ, Beach D. A new regulatory motif in cell-cycle control causing specific inhibition of cyclin D/CDK4. Nature 1993;366:704.
288. Hannon GJ, Beach D. p15ink4B is a potential effector of TGF-b-induced cell cycle arrest. Nature 1994;371:257.
289. Cordon-Cardo C. Mutation of cell cycle regulators: biological and clinical implications for human neoplasias. Am J Pathol 1995;147:545.
290. Kamb A, Lui Q, Harshman K, et al. Rates of p16 (MTS1) mutations in primary tumors with 9p loss. Science 1994;265:416.
291. Spruck CH, Gonzalez-Zulueta M, Shibata A, et al. p16 gene in uncultured tumours. Nature 1994;370:183.
292. Williamson M, Elder PA, Shaw ME, Devlin J, Knowles M. P16 (CDKN2) is a major deletions target at 9p21 in bladder cancer. Hum Mol Genet 1995;4:1569.
293. Cairns P, Polascik TJ, Eby Y, et al. Frequency of homozygous deletion at p16/CDKN2 in primary human tumours. Nat Genet 1995;11:210.
294. Gruis NA, Weaver-Feldhaus J, Liu Q, et al. Genetic evidence in melanoma and bladder cancers that p16 and p53 function in separate pathways of tumor suppression. Am J Pathol
1995;146:1199.
295. Orlow I, Lacombe L, Hannon GJ, et al. Deletion of the p16 and p15 genes in human bladder tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1524.
296. Johnson DG, Schwarz JK, Cress WD, Nevins JR. Expression of transcription factor E2F1 induces quiescent cells to enter S phase. Nature 1993;365:349.
297. Pomerantz J, Schreiber-Agus N, Liegeois NJ, et al. The Ink4a tumor suppressor gene product, p19Arf, interacts with MDM2 and neutralizes MDM2's inhibition of p53. Cell 1998;92:713.
298. Zhang Y, Xiong Y, Yarbrough WG. ARF promotes MDM2 degradation and stabilizes p53: ARF-INK4a locus deletion impairs both the Rb and p53 tumor suppression pathways. Cell 1998;92:725.
299. Spruck CH, Ohneseit PE, Gonzalez-Zulueta M, et al. Two molecular pathways to transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. Cancer Res 1994;54:784.
300. Cordon-Cardo C, Dalbagni D, Sarkis A, Reuter VE. Genetics alterations associated with bladder cancer. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Important advances in oncology.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Company, 1994.
301. Peltomaki P, Aaltonen LA, Sistonen P, et al. Genetic mapping of a locus predisposing to human colorectal cancer. Science 1993;260:810.
302. Fishel R, Lescoe MK, Rao MRS, et al. The human mutator gene homolog MSH2 and its association with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. Cell 1993;75:1027.
303. Leach FS, Nicolaides NC, Papadopoulos N, et al. Mutations of a mutS homolog in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Cell 1993;75:1215.
304. Lynch HT, Ens JA, Lynch JF. The Lynch syndrome II and urological malignancies. J Urol 1990;143:24.
305. Modrich P, Lahue R. Mismatch repair in replication fidelity, genetic recombination, and cancer biology. Annu Rev Biochem 1996;65:101.
306. Aaltonen LA, Peltomaki P, Leach FS, et al. Clues to the pathogenesis of familial colorectal cancer. Science 1993;260:812.
307. Thibodeau SN, Bren G, Schaid D. Microsatellite instability in cancer of the proximal colon. Science 1993;260:816.
308. Ionov Y, Peinado MA, Malkhosyan S, Shibata D, Perucho M. Ubiquitous somatic mutations in simple repeated sequences reveal a new mechanism for colonic carcinogenesis. Nature
1993;363:558.
309. Strand M, Prolla TA, Liskay RM, Petes TD. Destabilization of tracts of simple repetitive DNA in yeast by mutations affecting DNA mismatch repair [see comments; published erratum appears in
Nature 1994;368;569]. Nature 1993;365:274.
310. Gonzalez-Zulueta M, Ruppert JM, Tokino K, et al. Microsatellite instability in bladder cancer. Cancer Res 1993;53:5620.
311. Jin TX, Furihata M, Yamasaki I, et al. Human mismatch repair gene (hMSH2) product expression in relation to recurrence of transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder. Cancer
1999;85:478.
312. Humbert O, Fiumicino S, Aquilina G, et al. Mismatch repair and differential sensitivity of mouse and human cells to methylating agents. Carcinogenesis 1999;20:205.
313. Caldas C, Hahn SA, da Costa LT, et al. Frequent somatic mutations and homozygous deletions of the p16 (MTS1) gene in pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Nat Genet 1994;8:27.
314. Mao LDJ, Tockman MS, Erozan YS, Askin F, Sidransky D. Microsatellite alterations as clonal markers for the detection of human cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:9871.
315. Bova GS, Fox WM, Epstein JI. Methods of radical prostatectomy specimen processing: a novel technique for harvesting fresh prostate cancer tissue and review of processing techniques. Mod
Pathol 1993;6:201.
316. Mao L, Schoenberg MP, Scicchitano M, et al. Molecular detection of primary bladder cancer by microsatellite analysis. Science 1996;271:659.
317. Edwards A, Hammond HA, Jin K, Caskey CT, Chakrabority R. Genetic variation at five trimeric and tetrameric tandem repeat loci in four human population groups. Genomics 1992;12:241.
318. Lokeshwar BL, Block NL. Isolation of a prostate carcinoma cell proliferation-inhibiting factor from human seminal plasma and its similarity to transforming growth factor B. Cancer Res
1992;52:5821.
319. Zbar B. Chromosomal deletions in lung cancer and renal cancer. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Important advances in oncology. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1989:41.
320. Zbar B, Tory K, Merino M, et al. Hereditary papillary renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 1994;151:561.
321. Mahul AB, Crotty TB, Tickoo SK, Farrow GM. Renal oncocytoma: a reappraisal of morphologic features with clinicopathologic findings in 80 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1997;21:1.
Vogelzang, Scardino, Shipley, et al.: Comprehensive Textbook of Genitourinary Oncology, Second Ed.

SECTION 34.2 Cancer of the Kidney and Ureter
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 34.2
Cancer of the Kidney and Ureter
W. MARSTON LINEHAN
BERTON ZBAR
SUSAN E. BATES
MICHAEL J. ZELEFSKY
JAMES C. YANG
Renal Carcinoma
Etiology
Hereditary Forms of Renal Carcinoma
Pathology
Clinical Presentation
Systemically Active Tumor-Produced Factors
Radiographic Evaluation
Staging and Prognosis
Survival
Surgical Treatment
Systemic Chemotherapy for Renal Cell Carcinoma
Biologic Therapy
Vaccines and Cellular Therapy
Antiangiogenic Agents
Carcinoma of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter
Carcinoma of the Renal Pelvis
Ureteral Carcinoma
Adjuvant Radiotherapy for Carcinoma of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter
Chemotherapy for Metastatic Carcinomas of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter
Chemotherapy for Advanced Cancer of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter
Prognostic Factors in Urothelial Cancer
Adjuvant and Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy for Cancer of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter
Summary
Chapter References

RENAL CARCINOMA
Each year in the United States, approximately 31,000 cases of kidney and upper urinary tract cancer occur, resulting in more than 11,900 deaths. 1 These tumors
account for approximately 3% of adult malignancies and occur in a male-female ratio of 1.5:1. They are more common among urban than rural residents. Although
most cases occur in persons aged 50 to 70 years, renal carcinoma has been observed in children as young as 6 months. Between 1975 and 1995, a steady and
significant increase in the incidence of renal carcinoma was seen, from 2% to 4% per year, an increase of 43% since 1973. 2,3,4 and 5
Renal carcinoma was first described by Konig in 1826. As early as 1855, Robin concluded that the renal tubular epithelium was the most probable tissue of origin of
the cancer, an observation that was confirmed by Waldeyer in 1867. In 1883, Grawitz, noting that the fatty content of the cancer cells was similar to that of adrenal
cells, concluded that the tumors arose from adrenal rests within the kidney and introduced the term stroma lipomatodes aberrata renis for these clear cell tumors. The
term hypernephroid tumors was introduced in 1984 by Birch-Hirschfeld. Since then the conceptually incorrect term hypernephroma has frequently been applied to
renal tumors.6,7
Renal carcinoma occurs in both a sporadic and a hereditary form. There are four main forms of hereditary renal carcinoma (HRC). The most studied form of HRC is
von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) syndrome. VHL syndrome is a hereditary cancer syndrome in which affected individuals are at risk to develop tumors in a number of organs,
including the kidney. 2,8 A recently described form of HRC is hereditary papillary renal carcinoma (HPRC). 9,10 Another recently described form of hereditary kidney
cancer is familial renal oncocytoma (FRO), 11 which has been found to be associated with the cutaneous condition Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome. 12 Hereditary clear cell
renal carcinoma is a rare condition that is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion in which patients develop clear cell variant renal carcinoma. In the hereditary
syndromes, the kidney cancer is often bilateral and tends to occur in a younger age group. 8 An increased incidence of renal carcinoma has also been observed in
patients with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease and tuberous sclerosis. 13
ETIOLOGY
A number of environmental, hormonal, cellular, and genetic factors have been studied as possible causal factors in the development of renal carcinoma. In studies of
risk of renal carcinoma, cigarette smoking has been found to be a definite risk factor. 14,15 and 16 A statistically significant dose response has been observed in both
genders for pack-years of cigarette use. 17 It has been estimated that 30% of renal carcinomas in men and 24% in women may be directly due to smoking. 18 Obesity is
associated with an increased risk of development of renal carcinoma, particularly in women. 19 Analgesic abuse, which is known to be associated with renal pelvis
cancer, is also associated with an increased incidence of kidney cancer. The increased risk for the development of renal carcinoma is observed primarily in patients
who abuse phenacetin-containing analgesics and develop analgesic nephropathy. 5,16,20
Environmental and occupational factors have also been associated with the development of kidney cancer. Brauch et al. 21 demonstrated an association between the
development of renal carcinoma and long-term exposure to high levels of the industrial solvent trichloroethylene. There is an increased incidence of renal carcinoma
among leather tanners, shoe workers, and workers exposed to asbestos. 22 Exposure to cadmium is associated with an increased incidence of kidney cancer,
particularly in men who smoke.23 An association between gasoline exposure and kidney cancer has been observed in animal studies. Although there is an increased
incidence of renal carcinoma reported with exposure to petroleum, tar, and pitch products, studies of oil refinery workers and petroleum products distribution workers
do not identify a definite relationship between gasoline exposure and renal cancer. There may be an increased risk of kidney cancer in older workers or in workers
exposed to gasoline for prolonged periods. 24
An increased incidence (100-fold) of renal carcinoma has been noted in patients with end-stage renal disease who develop acquired cystic disease of the kidneys. 25
Acquired cystic disease is a recently described phenomenon in which patients on long-term dialysis for renal failure develop cysts in their native kidneys. Renal
carcinoma has been found in association with the papillary hyperplasia observed in the cyst epithelium of these kidneys. The risk of developing kidney cancer has
been estimated to be greater than 30 times higher in dialysis patients with cystic changes in their kidney than in the general population. 26 It is estimated that 35% to
47% of patients on long-term dialysis will develop acquired cystic disease and that nearly 5.8% of the patients with acquired cystic disease will develop renal cancer.
Kidney cancer can develop at any time in patients with end-stage renal disease, and it can occur in kidney transplant recipients as well. It can develop in patients with
end-stage renal disease who are undergoing either hemodialysis or chronic ambulatory dialysis, but it also has been reported to occur in patients with end-stage renal
disease who are not being dialyzed. 25 Although many of these cancers are clinically insignificant and are found incidentally at autopsy or after bilateral nephrectomy,
some will follow an aggressive course. 27 Careful surveillance of patients with end-stage renal disease with ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) is
recommended.14
HEREDITARY FORMS OF RENAL CARCINOMA
Like breast cancer, colon cancer, and retinoblastoma, renal cancer occurs in both a sporadic (nonhereditary) and a hereditary form. At least four forms of HRC are

recognized: VHL, HPRC, FRO, and HRC (Table 34.2-1).224,225,226 and 227

TABLE 34.2-1. Hereditary Forms of Renal Carcinoma

von Hippel-Lindau Syndrome
The VHL syndrome, which is predicted to occur in 1 in 36,000 live births, is a familial cancer syndrome in which affected individuals have a predisposition to develop
tumors in a number of organs, including the kidneys, brain, spine, eyes, adrenal glands, pancreas, inner ear, and epididymis. 2,8,28 Forty percent of VHL patients
develop multiple, bilateral tumors or cysts in the kidneys. The renal carcinoma acquired by VHL patients is clear cell renal carcinoma. 29 These patients can have
hundreds of small clear cell tumors and cysts in their kidneys. The tumors, which tend to occur early in life, can metastasize, and the affected individual may succumb
to the malignancy. VHL patients can also develop pheochromocytoma, pancreatic cysts and islet cell tumors, retinal angiomas, central nervous system
hemangioblastomas, inner ear tumors (endolymphatic sac tumors), and epididymal cystadenomas ( Table 34.2-2).8

TABLE 34.2-2. Classification of von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) Syndrome

THE VHL GENE. Identification of the VHL gene by Latif et al. 30 in 1993 was an important step for physicians managing patients with VHL disease. Critical to
management of VHL patients is the knowledge of who is affected and who is not. Early identification of at-risk individuals is essential for initiation of early intervention
with the potential to prevent of life-threatening complications of the disease, such as metastatic kidney cancer. 2,8
VHL GERMLINE MUTATION TESTING. Identification of the VHL gene has allowed the detection of germline mutation in nearly 100% of VHL families. 31,32 The VHL
clinical features can be heterogeneous, and manifestations such as kidney cancer occult. In some families, VHL syndrome can be confused with other hereditary
cancer syndromes, such as multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2. The availability of germline mutation screening can aid the physician in making the correct diagnosis
as well as in performing presymptomatic screening in at-risk individuals. (See Chapter 34.1.)
ROLE OF THE VHL GENE IN CLEAR CELL RENAL CANCER. The VHL gene has been found to be mutated in a high percentage of tumors and cell lines from
patients with sporadic (nonhereditary) clear cell renal carcinoma. 33,34 VHL gene mutations have not been detected in either tumors from patients with papillary renal
carcinoma or from the germline of patients with HPRC. This has led to the development of a molecular genetic classification of renal carcinoma of papillary versus
clear cell (nonpapillary) renal carcinoma, 8,35 with clear cell renal carcinoma being characterized by inactivation of the VHL gene. 33,34 The determination that VHL gene
mutations can be detected in formalin-fixed tissue from patients with clear cell renal carcinoma provides a potential method for significantly improving clinicians' ability
to diagnose this disease, by analysis of either tissue blocks or tissue aspirates from patients suspected of having this disease. 36
Hereditary Papillary Renal Carcinoma
HPRC is a recently described form of HRC. 9,10 HPRC is an inherited disorder with an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern in which affected individuals develop
bilateral, multifocal papillary renal carcinoma ( Fig. 34.2-1). These tumors, which are often detected incidentally, can spread in a fashion similar to sporadic renal
carcinoma. Abdominal CT is recommended for evaluation of at-risk individuals, as even large papillary renal tumors are frequently undetectable by renal ultrasound
evaluation. 37

FIGURE 34.2-1. A: Abdominal computed tomography scan of a patient with hereditary papillary renal carcinoma, demonstrating bilateral, multifocal papillary renal
carcinoma.9,10B: Hereditary papillary renal carcinoma kindred. The black boxes and circles represent individuals found to have kidney cancer. The circles below these
represent the result of germline testing for the c-Met mutation. (From ref. 39, with permission.)

THE HPRC GENE: MET. Genetic linkage studies in HPRC kindreds localized the HPRC gene and led to the identification of the c-Met protooncogene as the gene

responsible for HPRC. 38 Germline mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the MET gene have been found in affected individuals in HPRC kindreds.
HPRC GERMLINE TESTING. Germline MET mutation testing is recommended for patients at risk for HPRC. Individuals in HPRC kindreds, those with bilateral,
multifocal papillary renal carcinoma ( Fig. 34.2-2), or those with a family history of papillary kidney cancer are considered candidates for germline testing. 39

FIGURE 34.2-2. A: A kidney from an asymptomatic man who was found to have hereditary papillary renal carcinoma (HPRC), demonstrating multifocal papillary renal
carcinoma. HPRC is a hereditary cancer syndrome in which affected individuals are at risk to develop multifocal papillary renal carcinoma. B: The histology of HPRC
renal tumors is uniformly papillary. C: Hundreds of small tumors and adenomas may be present in each kidney. HPRC is characterized by a germline mutation of the
c-Met gene, and germline testing is recommended for at-risk individuals. (From ref. 9, with permission.)

Familial Renal Oncocytoma and Birt-Hogg-Dubé Syndrome
A new, recently described form of HRC is FRO. 11 Affected individuals can develop bilateral, multifocal oncocytoma or oncocytic neoplasms in the kidney. Similar renal
manifestations have been found to occur in patients with a hereditary cutaneous syndrome, Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome (BHDS). BHDS patients have a dominantly
inherited predisposition to develop fibrofolliculomas, benign tumors of the hair follicle that appear predominantly on the face, neck, and upper trunk. Affected BHDS
individuals are at risk to develop fibrofolliculomas, renal tumors, colon polyps or tumors, and pulmonary cysts. 12 Individuals in BHDS kindreds are at risk to develop
renal tumors. The renal tumors that occur in BHDS can be clear, papillary, chromophobe, or oncocytomas and are malignant and can metastasize if not detected and
treated. Studies are currently under way to identify the gene for this hereditary cancer syndrome and to develop a test for germline testing of at-risk individuals.
PATHOLOGY
Immunohistologic and ultrastructural analysis has established that the proximal renal tubular epithelium is the true tissue of origin of renal carcinoma. Renal tumors
tend to be spherical but may vary widely in size. The average diameter is approximately 7 cm; however, renal tumors can often grow to fill the entire retroperitoneum.
Previously, renal lesions 2 cm or less in diameter were considered to be renal adenomas, while lesions 2 cm or more in diameter were considered to be carcinomas.
The distinction between benign and malignant tumors is no longer made on the basis of size but on the basis of classic histologic criteria. 40 Although renal carcinoma
tends to arise in the cortex of the kidney, it can originate in the interior of the kidney. Often a pseudocapsule is formed around the tumor by compression of
surrounding tissue. Hemorrhage and necrosis may be present and, frequently, large areas of sclerosis and fibrosis are found within the tumor. Calcification and single
or multiple fluid-filled cysts may be seen within the tumor also. Sporadic renal carcinoma appears in either kidney with equal frequency; it is most often solitary and
unilateral.
Renal tumors can be of five main cellular types: clear cell, papillary, chromophobe, oncocytoma, and collecting duct (for review, see Zambrano et al. 40). Clear cell
carcinomas contain lightly staining cells with vacuolated cytoplasm containing cholesterol-like substances, neutral lipids, phospholipids, and glycogen; these
constitute 85% of kidney cancers. 40,41 Papillary renal carcinoma makes up approximately 10% of all kidney cancers, 42 with the remainder being chromophobe,
collecting duct, and miscellaneous histologic types. Papillary renal carcinoma has been divided into two morphologic subtypes, types 1 and 2. 42 Collecting duct
carcinoma is an unusual variant of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) that is characterized by a very aggressive clinical course. It is not uncommon for a patient with
collecting duct carcinoma to present with locally or widespread advanced disease. 43 Chromophobe carcinoma, described by Thoenes et al. 44 in 1985, is characterized
by large polygonal cells with pale reticular cytoplasm. Renal oncocytoma, which consists predominantly of eosinophilic cells in a characteristic nested or organoid
pattern, is considered to be predominantly a benign lesion. 45 Whether oncocytoma can occur in a malignant form or whether so-called malignant oncocytoma is
actually a variant of chromophobe renal carcinoma is not completely understood. 40,46
The sarcomatoid variant, which can occur with any histologic subtype, 47 is associated with a significantly poorer prognosis than are nonsarcomatous renal
carcinomas.48 A median survival of only 6.6 months is reported for patients with sarcomatoid-type renal carcinoma, as compared to a 19.0-month median survival for
patients with nonsarcomatous renal carcinoma. 49 Although infrequently used in renal carcinoma, tumor grading may correlate with survival, particularly in patients with
nonmetastatic cancer.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Renal carcinoma may remain clinically occult for most of its course. The classic presentation of pain, hematuria, and flank mass occurs in only 9% of patients and
often is indicative of advanced disease. 50 A tumor in the kidney can progress unnoticed to a large size in the retroperitoneum until a metastasis appears.
Approximately 30% of patients with renal carcinoma present with metastatic disease, 25% with locally advanced renal carcinoma, and 45% with localized disease.
Some 75% of patients with metastatic renal carcinoma have metastases to the lung, 36% to soft tissues, 20% to bone, 18% to liver, 8% to cutaneous sites, and 8% to
the central nervous system.51
A considerable number of patients with renal carcinoma develop systemic symptoms of this disease ( Table 34.2-3).52 Hypochromic anemia, due to either hematuria or
hemolysis, has been observed in 29% to 88% of patients with renal carcinoma. Pyrexia is observed in 20% and cachexia, fatigue, and weight loss in 33%.
Nonmetastatic hepatic dysfunction, initially described by Stauffer in 1961, is a reversible syndrome associated with renal carcinoma that tends to occur in association
with fever, fatigue, and weight loss and resolves when the primary tumor is removed. Nonmetastatic hepatic dysfunction, which is usually associated with poor
long-term prognosis, occurs in up to 7% of patients with renal carcinoma. Abnormal hepatic function is observed in up to 40%. 53

TABLE 34.2-3. Presenting Symptoms, Laboratory Abnormalities, or Abnormalities on Physical Examination and Their Relation to Survival Rate in 309 Consecutive
Patients Undergoing Nephrectomy for Renal Carcinoma

One to five percent of patients with kidney cancer have polycythemia. 54 Renin levels often are elevated in patients with renal carcinoma but tend to return to normal
after the kidney is removed. Whether the tumor itself produces renin or whether it induces renin production by compression of adjacent tissue is unclear.
Immunocytochemical studies suggest that renal carcinoma may produce renin, which, however, may be biologically inactive. 55 Plasma fibrinogen levels may be
elevated in patients with renal carcinoma and may correlate with tumor stage, disease activity, and response to therapy. Acquired dysfibrinogenemia has also been
reported in association with renal carcinoma and can be a sensitive plasma marker for the disease and for tumor progression. 56
SYSTEMICALLY ACTIVE TUMOR-PRODUCED FACTORS
In many patients with RCC, there is evidence of tumor-produced factors that have systemic effects. Pyrexia, cachexia, abnormal liver function, increased alkaline
phosphatase levels, hypercalcemia, polycythemia, neuromyopathy, and amyloidosis have all been reported in association with RCC. 57
Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy, frequently observed in patients with advanced RCC, is believed to be caused by a tumor-produced, systemically active
bone-resorbing factor. A number of investigators have demonstrated that kidney cancer produces a factor with parathyroid hormone–like bioactivity. 58 A parathyroid
hormone–related protein that has been implicated in malignant hypercalcemia has been cloned from a human lung cancer cell line and is expressed in mammalian
cells. 59 Whether the parathyroid hormone–like factor induces paracrine or endocrine effects, such as bone resorption or hypercalcemia of malignancy, in patients with
RCC is currently being studied ( Table 34.2-4).

TABLE 34.2-4. Underlying Pathologic Conditions in 940 Asymptomatic Space-Occupying Lesions of the Kidney

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Determining whether a space-occupying renal mass is benign or malignant can be difficult. A number of diagnostic modalities are used to evaluate and stage renal
masses, including excretory urography, CT, arteriography, venography, ultrasonography, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Excretory urography is infrequently
used in the initial evaluation of renal masses but, because it is neither sensitive nor specific in RCC, a small to medium-sized tumor may be present when the
excretory urogram appears normal. Excretory urography does provide important information about the location and function of the contralateral kidney and, while this
is particularly useful when surgery is being considered, CT has replaced excretory urography in the evaluation of renal masses. 60,61 and 62
Ultrasound examination provides excellent staging and diagnostic information and can provide accurate anatomic detail of extrarenal extension of tumor, adrenal
involvement, involvement of lymph nodes, and infiltration of adjacent viscera. 60,63
Renal arteriography is infrequently used in the evaluation of patients with a suspicious renal mass ( Fig. 34.2-3). In a renal carcinoma, the arteriogram often will show
neovascularity, arteriovenous fistulas, pooling of contrast medium, and accentuation of capsular vessels. Epinephrine may be used as an aid in the diagnosis of an
equivocal renal mass. When epinephrine is infused into a normal kidney during arteriography, the renal vessels constrict; in contrast, the vessels in a renal carcinoma
do not constrict, owing to lack of musculature in the tumor vessels. 64 A renal arteriogram may be useful in evaluating an indeterminate small renal mass and as an aid
to the surgeon in defining the vasculature during the surgical removal of a large tumor. 65,66 Although renal arteriography can be performed with minimal risk, false
aneurysms, arterial emboli, hemorrhage, and decreased renal function secondary to contrast agent injection have been reported. 67 Dual-phase three-dimensional
magnetic resonance angiography can be a useful technique in depicting renal vessels before surgical therapy. This technique is very accurate for the detection of the
renal arteries, renal vein involvement, and extension into the inferior vena cava. 61

FIGURE 34.2-3. Angiographic appearance of a renal carcinoma. A: Computed tomography demonstrates a right renal carcinoma (m) with a large contralateral adrenal
metastasis (a). B: Early phase of the arteriogram demonstrates vascular changes indicative of a malignancy, with puddling and tortuosity ( arrows). C: Late phase of
the arteriogram demonstrates that the tumor (M) is relatively avascular despite its early appearance.

CT is a useful imaging technique for renal carcinoma ( Fig. 34.2-4).37,60 CT and ultrasonography have become the main modalities used to characterize renal
masses.63,68 Although arteriography and CT are equivalent in depicting renal vein involvement, CT is better for demonstrating local nodal involvement. The use of
contrast agent enhancement has greatly increased the sensitivity of CT for abnormal renal masses. 37 Contrast-enhanced CT allows the clinician to detect very small
changes in the density of a renal lesion that might indicate the presence of an early neoplastic lesion. In a comparison study, dynamic CT was superior to standard CT
arteriography, ultrasonography, and radionuclide scanning. Dynamic CT correctly demonstrated tumor involvement of the kidney, involvement of the renal fascia, or
extension into adjacent organs in all of the 22 patients studied (see Fig. 34.2-4).69

FIGURE 34.2-4. Renal vein invasion by a renal carcinoma as shown by computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging. A: Nonenhanced CT scan
shows large left renal mass with calcification (m) invading the left renal vein ( arrow). B: T1-weighted magnetic resonance image demonstrates tumor (m) and vascular
invasion (arrow). Flowing blood (v) in the left renal vein is black on this scan.

Inferior venacavography may be performed when a large renal tumor is present or when there is uncertainty about tumor involvement of the vena cava.
Ultrasonography, CT, and MRI can provide information about tumor involvement of the vena cava ( Fig. 34.2-5)61,63; however, the inferior venacavogram is the most
reliable means of accurately determining the precise extent of vena caval involvement by tumor. This information is important to the surgeon in planning the vascular
aspect of the operative procedure. MRI is very useful for staging renal carcinoma. 70,71 MRI can produce a unique three-dimensional picture of the tumor, which, in the
case of a large lesion, may be an invaluable aid to the surgeon in planning the operative approach. In patients with tumor involving the inferior vena cava,
transesophageal echocardiography has been shown to be an accurate diagnostic technique for tumor imaging to document the extent of involvement of the vena cava
(see Fig. 34.2-5).

FIGURE 34.2-5. Invasion of inferior vena cava (IVC) by renal carcinoma demonstrated by magnetic resonance imaging and venography. A: Axial T1-weighted image
demonstrates a large left renal carcinoma with extension into the left renal vein (m) with protrusion into the IVC (v). B: Sagittal T1-weighted image shows the relation
of the tumor thrombus (m) to the IVC (v) in the lateral projection. C: An anteroposterior image of the interior cavogram demonstrates tumor ( arrows) in the medial
aspect of the inferior vena cava.

No single imaging technique is best for all patients with renal carcinoma. Depending on the size of the primary tumor and the extent of extrarenal disease, excretory
urography, CT, ultrasonography, arteriography, venography, and MRI each can provide unique information in an individual case. Because CT, MRI, and
ultrasonography are outpatient procedures and are less invasive than arteriography, arteriography now is infrequently used. Multiple imaging modalities often are
combined to provide the most complete information, particularly when surgical removal of a large tumor is being considered.
STAGING AND PROGNOSIS
Robson Classification
The staging system used in the past by most physicians in the United States is the Robson modification of the system of Flocks and Kadesky ( Table 34.2-5).72 In the
Robson classification, stage I renal carcinoma is confined to the kidney. Stage II carcinoma extends through the renal capsule but is confined to Gerota's fascia, and
stage III carcinoma involves the renal vein or inferior vena cava (IIIA) or the local hilar lymph nodes (IIIB). In stage IV renal carcinoma, the tumor has spread to local,
adjacent organs (other than the adrenal gland) or to distant sites. The Robson staging system is uncomplicated and widely used. A disadvantage of this system is that
it combines stages that may have significantly different survival prognoses. In this classification system, renal inferior vena caval involvement (IIIA) is staged the same
as is local lymph node metastasis (IIIB). Although patients with stage IIIB renal carcinoma experience a greatly decreased survival, 73,74 the prognosis for patients with
stage IIIA renal carcinoma is not markedly different from that for patients with stage I or stage II renal carcinoma. Patients who have disease that involves the inferior
vena cava often have either locally advanced or micrometastatic disease. However, patients who are found to have no evidence of metastatic disease and who
undergo complete surgical excision can expect to have a reasonable chance for 5-year survival.

TABLE 34.2-5. Comparison of the Two Classification Systems for Staging of Renal Carcinoma

Tumor, Node, Metastasis Classification
The TNM (tumor, node, metastasis) classification proves a more accurate method for classifying the extent of tumor involvement. In the TNM classification, T1
denotes a tumor 7 cm or less confined to the kidney, T2 denotes a tumor more than 7 cm in greatest dimension but that is still confined to the kidney, T3 denotes
tumor that extends into the major veins or invades the adrenal gland or perinephric tissues but not beyond Gerota's fascia, and T4 denotes tumor that has extended
beyond Gerota's fascia ( Table 34.2-6).

TABLE 34.2-6. TNM Classification of Kidney Cancer

N1 denotes metastasis in a single regional lymph node; N2 denotes metastasis in more than one regional lymph node. M1 indicates distant metastasis. 75 The 1997
TNM classification of renal carcinoma appears to provide improved stratification according to survival and may have enhanced clinical utility as compared with
previous classification systems. 76
SURVIVAL
The 5-year survival initially reported by Robson et al. 72 in 1969 was 66% for stage I renal carcinoma, 64% for stage II, 42% for stage III, and only 11% for stage IV.
Except for stage I carcinoma, these survival statistics remained essentially the same for a number of years ( Table 34.2-7). However, it has since been noted that while
renal vein involvement does not have a markedly negative effect on prognosis, the 5-year survival for patients with stage IIIB RCC is only 18%. Recent studies have
reported better survival for patients with tumor confined to the kidney: approximately 95% 5- and 10-year disease-specific survival for T1 renal carcinoma and an 88%
5-year and an 81% 10-year disease-specific survival for stage T2 disease. 76 Patients with T3 renal carcinoma had a 59% 5-year survival, and those with T4 disease,
a 20% 5-year disease-specific survival. 76

TABLE 34.2-7. Summary of Published Survival Rates in Renal Carcinoma Demonstrating Improvement in Survival Over Time

In patients with N0M0 tumors, studies have detected no statistically significant difference in survival in relationship to the T stage of the disease. 77 The 5-year survival
for patients with metastatic renal carcinoma continues to be low, from 0% to 20%. 77
With the expanded use of CT scans and ultrasonography, the rate of incidentally found carcinomas of the kidney has increased. The prognosis for patients whose
tumor was diagnosed incidentally is more favorable than that for patients who present with symptoms, as the former group consists of patients with smaller tumors that
usually tend to be confined to the kidney. 78 Patients with metastatic renal carcinoma who present with humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy have a poor prognosis.
Fahn et al. 79 reported the median survival of patients with stage IV kidney cancer to be fewer than 50 days. Most studies show increased survival in patients in whom
metastatic disease has been diagnosed and in whom the following conditions obtain: (1) a long disease-free interval between initial nephrectomy and the appearance
of metastases, (2) presence of only pulmonary metastases, (3) good performance status, and (4) removal of the primary tumor. 51
SURGICAL TREATMENT
Surgery is the only known effective therapy for localized renal carcinoma. The first nephrectomy was performed by Eratus B. Walcott in Milwaukee on June 4, 1861,
on a 58-year-old man with a kidney tumor who died 15 days after surgery. 80 Professor Gustave Simon, after completing a number of experimental nephrectomies on
dogs, undertook the first deliberate, planned, and successful nephrectomy in Heidelberg on August 2, 1889, in a patient with a persistent ureteral fistula. The first
successful nephrectomy in a patient with kidney cancer was performed in 1883 by Grawitz. 80 The standard procedure today for treatment of localized renal carcinoma
is radical nephrectomy (Fig. 34.2-6). Radical nephrectomy involves complete removal of Gerota's fascia and its contents, including the kidney and the adrenal gland,
and provides a better surgical margin than simple removal of the kidney. 81 Owing to the rarity of ipsilateral adrenal metastasis and the potential morbidity associated
with adrenalectomy, many surgeons believe that a macroscopically normal ipsilateral adrenal gland should not be removed with the kidney (see Fig. 34.2-6).82,83

FIGURE 34.2-6. A: Area of lymph node dissection for radical nephroureterectomy should be from the superior mesenteric artery to the level of the inferior mesenteric
artery, with the anatomic structures identified. B: The left colon can be reflected from the anterior surface of Gerota's fascia with exposure of the renal artery before
ligation and division. The dotted line to the right of the descending colon indicates a line of incision on the left pericolic gutter that should extend superiorly to include
division of the splenocolic attachments. Ao, aorta; IVC, inferior vena cava. (From ref. 262, with permission.)

A number of different surgical approaches have been described for removal of kidney cancer. Common approaches are the anterior transperitoneal approach, the
flank approach, and the thoracoabdominal approach. The choice of surgical approach depends on the location and size of the tumor and the body habitus of the
patient. The type of incision is chosen to ensure that the tumor may safely be removed. A flank incision, with or without removal of a portion of the tenth or eleventh
rib, often is used for small tumors without venous involvement. A subcostal transabdominal incision may be used when a large tumor occupies the middle or lower

aspect of the kidney or when vascular involvement is anticipated and access to the major vessels is essential. A thoracoabdominal incision often is required when a
large middle or upper pole tumor is present.
In a thoracoabdominal incision, a rib is removed, the thoracic cavity is opened, and the diaphragm is incised. The incision then is carried down transabdominally to
allow maximal exposure of the upper abdominal region and the great vessels. In removal of a right-sided tumor, the hepatic flexure of the colon is mobilized toward
the midline away from the kidney and duodenum. The duodenum is also dissected up anteriorly and medially to the great vessels, and the renal artery and vein are
identified. The renal vessels are divided and ligated early in the surgical procedure to decrease the vascularity of the tumor so that it may be removed with a minimum
of blood loss. Following ligation of the vessels, Gerota's fascia is incised away from the posterior abdominal wall, diaphragm, and liver (pancreas and spleen on a
left-sided tumor) (see Fig. 34.2-6). Once Gerota's fascia and its contents have been dissected away from the surrounding structures and the vasculature has been
ligated with nonabsorbable suture, the specimen can be lifted out of the retroperitoneum. When there is tumor in the renal vein, the renal vein can be ligated distal to
the tumor thrombus. If there is tumor extension into the vena cava, the vena cava may need to be partially resected. If the tumor has grown into the sidewall of the
vena cava or if the vena caval involvement is too extensive for a simple partial wall resection, a portion of the vena cava itself may be resected. When the tumor is in
the right kidney, the adjacent vena cava can often be resected safely. If, however, the tumor in the left kidney and the adjacent vena cava are resected, vascular
reconstruction of the right renal vein may be needed to establish adequate venous drainage. If the suprahepatic caval extension of a renal tumor thrombus extends up
to the right atrium, cardiopulmonary bypass may be required for tumor removal ( Fig. 34.2-7).

FIGURE 34.2-7. Surgical removal of a kidney tumor in which there is tumor extension through the renal vein into the inferior vena cava.

Laparoscopic nephrectomy has been evaluated as a less invasive procedure for the removal of kidneys with a small volume of RCC. 84,85 Walther et al. 86 have also
evaluated the use of laparoscopic cytoreductive nephrectomy in patients with advanced RCC as preparation for interleukin-2 (IL-2) treatment.
Regional lymphadenectomy often is performed at the time of radical nephrectomy, although its role in prolonging survival has not been demonstrated. In a regional
lymphadenectomy, ipsilateral nodal tissue from the diaphragm to the bifurcation of the aorta as well as nodal tissue in the interaortocaval region at the hilum of the
kidney is removed. Proponents of regional lymphadenectomy point out that 5-year survival in patients with node-positive renal carcinoma is greatly decreased, and
there is no known effective therapy for metastatic renal carcinoma. If local nodes were the first site of metastasis, resection of microscopic disease might be of benefit.
Long-term survival in patients with node-positive disease who underwent lymphadenectomy has been reported. 87 The ultimate role of regional lymphadenectomy
remains to be determined in further randomized trials. In patients with locally advanced RCC (node-positive), no evidence to date supports the theory that adjuvant,
postsurgical treatment of patients with an agent such as IL-2 or interferon-a (IFN-a) increases survival. In patients in whom all visible disease has been resected
surgically, most physicians recommend treatment when residual or recurrent disease becomes detectable.
Bilateral Renal Carcinoma or Tumors in Solitary Kidneys
The treatment of patients with either bilateral renal carcinoma or renal carcinoma in a solitary kidney is challenging. Patients with tumor in a solitary kidney may be
treated by either partial nephrectomy or nephrectomy followed by dialysis or transplantation (or both). In selected patients, nephron-sparing surgery may be
recommended for patients with sporadic renal cell cancer, particularly those with a small tumor (£4 cm) or a tumor in a solitary kidney. 88,89 Extracorporeal partial
nephrectomy plus autotransplantation is an infrequently used technique that allows the surgeon accurately to remove large tumors from the center of a solitary kidney.
This ex vivo procedure entails radical excision of the kidney and division of the ureter. The kidney then is placed on a table and is intermittently perfused with a chilled
solution to enhance viability. Under optical magnification, the tumor is carefully dissected from the surrounding renal parenchyma. Care is taken to preserve the
vasculature of the normal kidney, which has been defined by preoperative arteriography. A small rim of normal tissue is removed along with the tumor to provide a
tumor-free margin of resection. After the kidney has been surgically reconstructed, it is autotransplanted back into the iliac space. Vascular anastomosis of the renal
artery and vein to the iliac vessels and ureteroureterostomy are performed.
Surgical Management of Patients with Hereditary Forms of Renal Carcinoma
Patients with hereditary forms of renal carcinoma are often challenging to manage. Individuals with VHL syndrome or HPRC can have widespread renal
involvement. 29,90,91 Surgical management in these patients involves careful parenchyma-sparing surgery, which is recommended when the renal tumors reach a
certain size threshold, generally 3 cm. The use of parenchyma-sparing surgery in these patients is based on a strategy designed to maintain the patient's renal
function as long as possible while decreasing the risk for metastasis. 92
Radiotherapy as an Adjuvant to Nephrectomy
The value of adjuvant external-beam radiotherapy for patients with RCC remains unclear. Previous reports have demonstrated increased complication rates using
conventional radiotherapeutic techniques. 93,94,95,96,97 and 98 In addition, several randomized studies performed 20 to 30 years ago showed no apparent survival benefit
with adjuvant therapy.93,94 These considerations led to an overall lack of enthusiasm for using radiotherapy in this disease. However, recent studies have suggested
that the use of more sophisticated radiation techniques is less likely to result in treatment-related complications. 99,100 In addition, previous trials testing preoperative or
postoperative radiotherapy for this disease may not have been designed in an optimal fashion to evaluate its potential benefit fully for improving outcome in high-risk
patients.
Though some retrospective reports have indicated an improvement in local tumor control or overall survival with the addition of postoperative radiotherapy, 95,101,102
subsequent randomized prospective trials could not confirm any benefit. In one randomized study reported by Finney et al., 93 the incidence of local recurrence was
7% in both the adjuvant radiotherapy and control arms. In addition, no survival advantage was detected in the radiotherapy arm. In fact, a trend for an inferior 5-year
survival outcome was observed for the adjuvant radiotherapy group (36% as compared to 47% for patients with nephrectomy), owing to a higher complication rate
observed in these patients. Ten years later, a second randomized prospective trial comparing nephrectomy and postoperative radiotherapy to nephrectomy alone
demonstrated identical results. 94 In that study, the incidence of local recurrence was reduced from 25% to 3% with adjuvant local radiotherapy. Further, the incidence
of treatment-related morbidity in these two randomized trials was unacceptably high. Severe complications were experienced in 20% to 44% of treated patients, with
an associated increased mortality rate due to radiation-related toxicities. The potential value of preoperative radiotherapy has also been tested in two randomized
trials,97,98 neither of which could demonstrate any advantage for improved local control or survival with adjuvant radiotherapy.
However, it is difficult to draw any meaningful conclusions about the safety and value of adjuvant therapy for patients with RCC who are at increased risk for local
recurrence. Previously published postoperative studies used relatively crude radiation techniques, and the radiation dose per fraction of 250 cGy to cumulative doses
of 5000 to 5500 cGy used in some reports likely directly contributed to the high gastrointestinal and liver-related toxicities observed. In addition, a significant
percentage of patients treated in these trials did not have prognostic features indicating a high risk for local recurrence for which adjuvant radiotherapy may have
been potentially beneficial. Based on patterns-of-failure studies after nephrectomy alone, 103,104 the overall local recurrence rate is low, and routine administration of
adjuvant local therapy for all patients on the basis of advanced stage only would not be expected to improve outcome. Rabinovitch et al. 103 reported on 172 patients
treated with nephrectomy alone to identify patterns of failure and risk factors for local recurrence. In that report, the 7-year actuarial local failure rate was 5%.

However, among patients with positive surgical margins or positive lymph nodes, the incidence of local recurrence was 21%. Advanced T-stage disease in the
absence of these prognostic features did not predict for local recurrence and thus is not necessarily an indication for local adjuvant therapy.
More recent reports have demonstrated that with the application of more sophisticated radiotherapeutic planning techniques, the incidence of treatment-related
complications has been minimal. Using CT-based treatment planning, Kao et al. 99 at the University of Pennsylvania retrospectively reported the outcome of
postoperative radiotherapy for selected patients with positive surgical margins or perinephric disease extension. Doses ranged from 4140 cGy to 6300 cGy using
conventional fractionation. The overall local failure and survival rates were 100% and 75%, respectively, as compared to 30% and 62%, respectively, for similar
patients at the University of Pennsylvania who underwent nephrectomy alone. Despite the higher radiation doses used, no late complications were observed.
An additional limitation of prior studies is the relatively low postoperative doses used secondary to concerns of late radiation sequelae. Several reports have
suggested that higher doses may be necessary in this disease to overcome the relative radioresistance of the renal cell histology. 105,106 With the introduction of
three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy and intensity-modulated treatment delivery systems, it now is possible to deliver higher radiation doses in the adjuvant
setting with less potential toxicity. The use of intraoperative radiation for high-risk patients may prove to be an effective approach for the delivery of high radiation
doses, with the ability to easily shield the adjacent normal gastrointestinal structures. Eble et al. 107 and Frydenberg108 reported the results of a phase I study in 11
patients with advanced-stage or locally recurrent RCC that incorporated intraoperative radiotherapy (15 to 20 Gy) in combination with fractionated external-beam
radiotherapy. The 4-year survival outcome was 75%, and no local relapses or complications were noted. In a limited number of patients with recurrent RCC, other
investigators have reported the feasibility of postoperative, hyperfractionated, high-dose-rate brachytherapy using iridium 192 as a means of effectively delivering a
high radiation dose to the postoperative bed. 109
The aforementioned studies would suggest that adjuvant radiotherapy may be of benefit for selected patients with high-risk features predicting for local recurrence
after nephrectomy. Using modern external-beam and brachytherapy techniques, higher radiation doses can now be delivered more safely and may further improve the
efficacy of radiotherapy for selected patients. Nevertheless, randomized trials limited to high-risk patients will be required to assess fully the local control benefit of
postoperative radiotherapy in this clinical setting.
Metastatic Renal Carcinoma
NEPHRECTOMY AND RESECTION OF METASTASES
Cytoreductive Nephrectomy. Adjuvant or palliative nephrectomy is not infrequently performed in patients with metastatic RCC particularly those with pain,
hemorrhage, malaise, hypercalcemia, erythrocytosis, or hypertension. Removal of the primary tumor may alleviate some or all of these abnormalities. 110 Although
there are isolated reports of regression of metastatic renal carcinoma after removal of the primary tumor, only 4 (0.8%) of 474 patients in nine series who underwent
nephrectomy experienced “regression” of metastatic foci. 111 deKernion et al. 112 reported results in 26 patients with metastatic renal carcinoma who underwent
palliative or adjuvant nephrectomy and found no increase in survival, as compared with survival in the entire group of 79 patients with metastatic renal carcinoma.
Adjuvant nephrectomy is not recommended for the purpose of inducing spontaneous regression; rather, it is performed to decrease symptoms or to decrease tumor
burden in preparation for subsequent therapy in carefully controlled environments. 113 The recent use of laparoscopic nephrectomy 86 provides a potentially less
invasive method for cytoreduction as preparation for administration of systemic therapies such as IL-2.
Resection of Metastases. Of the approximately 30% of patients with RCC who present with metastases, fewer than 4% have solitary metastases. 114 Patients with a
solitary metastasis synchronous with a primary lesion experience decreased survival when compared with patients who develop metastasis after the primary tumor is
removed.115 Surgical resection is recommended in selected patients with metastatic renal carcinoma. In a study of 59 patients with renal carcinoma who underwent
surgical resection for a solitary metastasis, 45% had a 3-year survival, and 34% survived 5 years. 114 O'Dea et al. 115 reported on patients who presented with primary
tumor in place and a solitary metastasis. Of the patients who underwent nephrectomy and who later developed metastasis, 23% lived more than 5 years after removal
of the metastatic lesions. Three of the 26 patients were alive 58, 94, and 245 months after resection of the metastatic lesions. 115 Nephrectomy and resection of
metastases will render few cures but frequently will produce some long-term survivors.
ROLE OF RADIOTHERAPY. Palliative radiotherapy for patients with symptomatic metastatic osseous lesions can be effective. Previous reports have noted response
rates of 50% to 70% after local palliative radiotherapy for patients with metastatic RCC. 105,116 In a randomized trial assessing various fractionation schemes for the
palliation of symptomatic bone metastases, renal cell histology was found to respond less favorably to standard palliative radiation regimens as compared to
metastatic breast and prostate cancers. 117 In light of the relative radioresistance of this histology, higher radiation doses are critical to achieve adequate palliation. In
general, doses of at least 50 Gy are required to achieve durable palliation. To deliver these higher doses safely, complex treatment planning often is necessary to
minimize treatment-related toxicity. Investigators from the Jefferson College of Medicine have shown that higher radiation doses were associated with an improved
palliative response. 106 In a multivariate analysis, a higher baseline performance status and the use of higher radiation doses predicted for a greater likelihood for
significant pain relief after radiotherapy for painful osseous lesions. Large-volume metastatic lesions such as those found within the renal bed require higher radiation
doses to achieve palliation and, in general, this therapy is successful in fewer than 50% of treated patients.
Brain metastases from RCC are often hemorrhagic in nature, and the rapid initiation of palliative radiotherapy may be necessary to halt potential neurologic
progression. Surgery should be considered for solitary lesions of the brain or spine, followed by postoperative radiotherapy. The results of routine administration of
short-course whole brain radiotherapy using the conventional fractionation program of 3000 cGy in ten fractions has been disappointing. 118,119 Investigators from the
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center have reported that, in the majority of treated patients with short-course whole brain radiotherapy, the cause of death was neurologic
deterioration. 119 For selected patients with good performance status or solitary lesions, radiosurgery alone or in combination with whole brain radiotherapy provides
an opportunity to deliver higher doses and should be considered. 120,121 Pomer et al.120 have shown that for patients with metastatic RCC, radiosurgery was more
effective among those with a Karnofsky performance score in excess of 70 and among those with a greater than 1-year interval from diagnosis to manifestation of
central nervous system metastases.
Osseous lesions in weight-bearing areas such as the femora should be considered for initial orthopedic stabilization, followed by postoperative radiotherapy.
Treatment with radiotherapy alone should be exercised with some caution owing to the potential for posttreatment fracture.
SYSTEMIC CHEMOTHERAPY FOR RENAL CELL CARCINOMA
Limited options are available for the systemic therapy of RCC, and no hormonal or chemotherapeutic regimen is accepted as a standard of care. Reviews surveying
phase II clinical trials for RCC have appeared at intervals (1967, 1973, 1983, 1995, and 2000), 263,264,265,266,267 and 268 without a change in the final conclusion: No
systemic chemotherapeutic or hormonal approach has provided a reasonable level of activity.
A comprehensive review by Yagoda et al. 267 encompassed 4542 patients enrolled in 83 clinical trials published from 1983 through 1993. Among 4093 evaluable
patients, a 6.0% response rate was recorded, with 53 complete responses (CRs; 1.3%) and 192 partial responses (PRs; 4.7%). Response rates in excess of 25%
were noted in eleven trials; in each case another trial incorporating the same or a comparable treatment regimen reported lower or zero response rates.
Three agents warrant particular mention: floxuridine, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), and vinblastine. One of the most intensively studied agents has been infusional floxuridine,
which, studied in both standard and circadian schedules, appears to have a level of activity above the background. Fourteen trials yielded response rates ranging
from 0% to 43%, with an average rate of 12%. Seven trials had response rates of less than 10%, and four had response rates exceeding 20%. For 5-FU, which has
been primarily used in combination with immunotherapy, responses were somewhat fewer, with an overall response rate of 10% for infusional 5-FU alone and 19% for
5-FU in combination with interferon. Similar results were reported for vinblastine, an agent initially thought to have activity in RCC. In the Yagoda series, 267 seven
trials incorporating infusional vinblastine yielded an overall response rate of 7%, whereas three trials reported no responses. Since 1993, further results with
vinblastine have been equally discouraging. As the control arm for a multidrug resistance modulator trial, vinblastine produced one PR in 80 patients; as the control
arm for an interferon trial, vinblastine produced one complete and one PR among 81 patients. 269,270
The 83 trials reported in the review by Yagoda 267 included compounds from every class of anticancer agent: antimitotics (paclitaxel and docetaxel); vinca alkaloids
(vinblastine, vindesine, and vinorelbine); anthracyclines (epirubicin, doxorubicin, and idarubicin); anthracenediones (mitoxantrone, bisantrene); alkylating agents (both
nitrosoureas and sulfonylureas, as well as ifosfamide and melphalan); metals (carboplatinum and gallium nitrate); pyrimidines (floxuridine, 5-FU, and gemcitabine);

and purines (6-thioguanine, fludarabine, and 2-deoxycoforomycin). Yagoda et al. 267 concluded that the responses may be mediated by an indirect effect on the
immune system. Considering that the response rates in these trials are higher than the frequency of spontaneous remissions, and observing the occasional complete
remission, one could speculate that the responses involve an effect triggered by the chemotherapy but mediated by the immune system. However, scientific evidence
to support this thesis is lacking. Although the majority of patients experiencing a complete remission were noted in trials including cimetidine, vinblastine, 5-FU, and
floxuridine, the CR rate ranges between 2% and 4%, which is not very different from the 1.3% CR rate noted in the entire series. These considerations favor a
conclusion that little, if any, cytotoxic activity has been exerted in renal cell cancer. It can be concluded that the best recommendation for patients with this disease,
after immunotherapy, is participation in clinical trials studying new agents or new approaches. 271,268
Hormonal Therapy in Renal Cell Cancer
Hormonal agents have also been used in systemic therapy. This strategy had its origins in studies showing that progesterone could inhibit the development of
estrogen-induced renal cell cancers in Syrian hamsters 272 and in the observation that both estrogen and progesterone receptors could be found in a portion of human
kidney cancers. 273 Subsequently, medroxyprogesterone acetate (Megace) became conventional treatment for renal cell cancer. However, multiple studies have
concluded that hormonal therapy is of no definite benefit. A series of studies collected from 1967 through 1976, using progestins or androgens included 644
patients. 265 Response rates were highest (17%) in the earliest studies. With more stringent response criteria used in the studies conducted after 1971, an overall rate
of 2% was observed. Except for its value in appetite stimulation, the use of Megace cannot be recommended in the treatment of renal cell cancer today.
Studies with antiestrogens in more recent years have yielded similar results. An overall response rate of 7% (three patients with CR) was identified in four studies
treating 146 patients with high-dose tamoxifen (100 mg/m 2/dor more).121a More recently, two CRs (3%) were reported in 63 patients receiving 40 mg of oral tamoxifen
daily in the control arm of a randomized study. 275 Similar activity was suggested also in a pilot study of high-dose toremifene (300 mg/d), a novel antiestrogen with
activity in breast cancer. 276 Thus, reported responses to treatment with hormonal therapy most likely mimic the same level of inactivity identified with most
chemotherapeutic agents.
Recent Chemotherapy Trials in Renal Cell Cancer
More recently, an effort has been made to identify new treatment targets in cancer. A limited search for phase II single agents examined in renal cell cancer and
reported since 1993 (and thus not included in earlier reviews) identified 23 published studies. These compounds, shown in Table 34.2-8, are from various
pharmaceutical classes, including taxanes, camptothecins, anthracyclines, antifolates, and alkylating agents. In recent abstracts from the American Society of Clinical
Oncology, an additional nine new agents were tested. Once again, the refractory nature of renal cell cancer is observed. One new study—the combination of
gemcitabine and 5-FU—warrants mention. In a study reported by Vogelzang at the University of Chicago, 7 PRs (17%) were observed among 39 patients receiving
gemcitabine at 600 mg/m2 on days 1, 8, and 15 and continuous-infusion 5-FU at 150 mg/m 2/d for 21 days in 28-day cycles.

TABLE 34.2-8. Phase II Studies in Renal Cell Cancer: 1993–1999

To some extent, the refractory nature of renal cell cancer highlights a general problem with anticancer agents developed over the last three decades. A review of
cytotoxic drugs introduced into clinical trial by the National Cancer Institute between 1970 and 1985 found that half of the 47 new agents adequately studied in phase
II trials could be rated as having anticancer activity. 277 Among these active compounds, 74% were active in lymphoma, 35% in leukemia, 22% in breast cancer, and
18% in ovarian cancer. Only one drug was active in colon cancer; no activity was reported with any of the 25 drugs properly tested in renal cell cancer. These data
suggested that the prevailing screening strategies for anticancer agents were biased toward agents active in leukemia and lymphoma and were not likely to identify
agents active in solid tumors. 278 Thus, the drug screen was reorganized and a 60–cell line in vitro screen was established in 1990 with cell lines derived from solid
tumors including RCC. 279 It is hoped that this effort, along with compounds under development for defined intracellular and extracellular targets, will identify agents
with activity in those tumors that are most difficult to treat. The antiangiogenesis agents currently being developed are examples of compounds with a novel approach
to this difficult problem.
Chemotherapy Combined with Interferon in Renal Cell Cancer
Interferon, one of two immunotherapeutic agents widely used in the treatment of renal cell cancer (as discussed later, in Biologic Therapy), has a modest response
rate and confers a survival advantage as a single agent. 122,122a,123 Numerous trials have been conducted combining interferon with cytotoxic chemotherapy in the hope
that the immunologic benefit from interferon would improve the response to chemotherapy. Wirth 280 identified response rates ranging from 0% to 45% among 315
patients in 11 trials combining vinblastine with IFN-a. The response rates were highest in the oldest trials, where less stringent response criteria were used.
Randomized studies have failed to provide any evidence for combining interferon with vinblastine ( Table 34.2-9).

TABLE 34.2-9. Randomized Phase III Trials with Interferon and Chemotherapy

Interferon has also been combined with floxuridine or 5-FU in multiple studies, with several reporting higher response rates than usually reported with either agent
alone. 281 However, more recent, nonrandomized, multiinstitutional studies have been disappointing, suggesting little or no benefit from combining interferon with
floxuridine given over 14 days 282 or with 5-FU.283,284
A similar evolution occurred with the combination of interferon and cis-retinoic acid; Motzer et al. 285 originally observed a 30% response rate for the combination.

However, when this trial was taken forward to a combination with IL-2, only 8 of 47 patients (17%) responded. 286 Preliminary results of a randomized trial comparing
IFN-a plus cis-retinoic acid with IFN-a alone suggest no significant difference between the two arms. 287
One potential confounding factor in all these trials may be the inclusion of patients with varying prognoses. In future studies, evaluation of data taking into account
clinical prognostic factors may help to eliminate the variation in results long observed in renal carcinoma trials. 288 To date, there is no convincing evidence that
chemotherapy adds to the effectiveness of single-agent IFN-a. 122 The combination of interferon with a cytotoxic agent in patients whose disease progressed after
treatment with IL-2 must be considered unproven, and enrollment in clinical trials is the most logical alternative.
Drug Resistance in Renal Cell Cancer
The ineffectiveness of chemotherapy can be ascribed to the primary, or intrinsic, resistance to chemotherapy, which, although poorly understood, is a hallmark of
RCC. Overexpression of the 170-kD drug transporter P glycoprotein (P-gp) and its encoding gene, MDR-1, has been most frequently cited as a mechanism of
resistance. Expression of P-gp in RCC is related to its normal tissue expression in the cell of origin, the renal proximal tubule; and the level of expression correlates
with differentiation. 289,290 and 291 Fojo et al.292 reported high levels of expression of this transporter in kidney cancer and in vitro sensitization of kidney cancer cell lines
to vinblastine with the antagonists verapamil and quinidine. Chemosensitivity studies with fresh tumor specimens demonstrated high levels of resistance in 30 of 35
samples, and overexpression of P-gp in 70% of cases. 293 Together, these findings suggest that P-gp expression could explain, at least in part, the notorious
resistance of RCC.
However, efforts to modulate P-gp by treating patients with antagonists have met with disappointing results to date. Except for a single phase I study with
doxorubicin,294 most of the trials have attempted modulation of vinblastine ( Table 34.2-10). Though the studies, at face value, suggest no role for P-gp in RCC, it can
be argued that this question is not fully resolved. 295 Most of the reversal agents used in the trials were first-generation agents with low potency, selected because they
were already in clinical use for other indications. Most of the trials incorporated vinblastine. Although vinblastine is a substrate for P-gp, renal cell cancers may have
other mechanisms of resistance to vinblastine that were not addressed by these studies. P-gp may represent an avenue to increase intracellular concentrations of an
agent, but that agent must have intrinsic activity for successful resistance reversal.

TABLE 34.2-10. Trials Testing the Reversal of P-glycoprotein–Mediated Resistance

ABC TRANSPORTERS. The broad nature of clinical resistance in renal cell cancer suggests that P-gp may be one of multiple resistance mechanisms. Recent studies
have identified the existence of an increasing number of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters, of which P-gp is the prototype. 296 These include the family of
multidrug resistance–associated proteins (MRP1 through MRP6), which have organic anion transport activity 297,298,299,300,301 and 302 and a half-ABC transporter
designated MXR/BCRP/ABCP1,303,304 and 305 which confers mitoxantrone and camptothecin resistance, bringing to three the number of transporter families expressed in
renal cell cancer and potentially linked to drug resistance. If these transporters are confirmed as being active in renal cell cancer, their inhibition offers a future
strategy for increasing drug accumulation in kidney cancer cells.
INTRACELLULAR MECHANISMS. While drug transporters would directly affect intracellular concentrations of drug, other mechanisms of drug resistance have been
identified that confer resistance at the levels of cell survival pathways, drug metabolism, and the drug target. Many of these have been examined in renal cell cancer,
but the findings are preliminary and must be validated. Cell survival in RCC may be linked to the frequently observed overexpression of the epidermal growth factor
receptor and its homologue, ErbB2 306,307,308,309 and 310 or to overexpression of the antiapoptosis protein, Bcl-2. 124,311 Alternatively, increased metabolism of anticancer
agents may be promoted by higher levels of enzymes of the cytochrome P-450 family in concert with glutathione and glutathione transferases. 312,313 Finally, decreased
levels of topoisomerase II have been observed in RCC, which could confer resistance to agents that impair cell division through inhibition of topoisomerase II. 314,315
Thus, ample evidence for intracellular mechanisms of resistance exists in RCC. The challenge is to determine the importance of such mechanisms and to identify
strategies for their circumvention.
DRUG DELIVERY. To some, the generalized resistance just described supports an argument that drug resistance in RCC is not based primarily on cellular
mechanisms. Although investigators have worked principally in other model systems, studies evaluating tumor drug delivery may cast light on the problem of drug
resistance in kidney cancer. Factors that influence drug delivery include blood flow, permeability of tumor vasculature, and drug diffusion into the interstitium, which is
affected both by properties of the drug and by interstitial pressure within the tumor. 316,317,318 and 319 Strategies aimed at identifying and reducing these physiologic
barriers to drug delivery are under investigation and could have a particular relevance to the very large tumor masses seen in renal cell cancer.
Prognostic Factors
Clinical prognostic factors relating to survival after nephrectomy have been well defined. Molecular prognostic factors that may reflect chemosensitivity have been
examined but, without reliable and effective therapy for RCC, their value cannot be determined. It could be predicted from experience in other cancers that
correlations obtained for good and poor prognosis would generally relate to the inherent biology of the tumor cell in the absence of effective therapy. Thus, markers of
differentiation and indolent biology will confer a better prognosis at the present time because of the limitations of current therapy. A frequently identified poor
prognostic factor is expression of PCNA [proliferating cell nuclear antigen] or MIB-1/Ki-67, antigens associated with cell proliferation. Disease-free and prolonged
survival is more likely in tumors with a low proliferation index. 320,321,322,323 and 324 Patients with diploid tumors are more likely to have longer disease-free intervals. 125
Interestingly, response to interferon treatment is also more likely to occur in patients whose tumors manifest a more indolent biology. 322 That finding is in contrast to
laboratory observations with chemotherapy in which a slower growth rate is associated with increased drug resistance. When effective treatment for renal cell cancer
is identified, tumor markers relevant to response to treatment can then be identified.
Although patients who have stage IV disease experience a reported median survival of 12 to 24 months, the range of survival times in this group of patients is very
broad. A variety of studies have looked at the parameters that predict survival in patients with metastatic renal cancer, and performance status is the most commonly
identified predictive parameter. Other factors that have been identified in some studies as predictors of poorer survival of patients with stage IV disease are a short
interval from initial diagnosis, multiple organ involvement, recent weight loss, previous chemotherapy, anemia, and an elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase
level.288,325 Such factors should be considered in evaluating survival in nonrandomized studies.
Summary
In conclusion, RCC is a remarkably refractory solid tumor. More resistant than most other cancers, new phase II agents have failed time and again. The explanation
for this drug resistance may lie within the tumor as an entity or within the individual cells. The broad spectrum of drugs to which RCCs are resistant suggests
tumor-based mechanisms, while resistance in even the tiniest pulmonary nodule suggests cellular mechanisms. A detailed understanding of drug resistance in renal
cell cancer is a major challenge for the new millennium. It is most likely that new agents directed against novel targets will be subject to the same mechanisms of

resistance that have plagued treatment of this disease for decades.
BIOLOGIC THERAPY
The primary therapies for widespread metastatic RCC involve the use of biologic agents. IFN-a and IL-2 are the predominant agents used, yet several major questions
remain about their application. The optimal dose and schedule have not been determined for either agent, the relative efficacy of combination therapy versus
single-agent therapy is not known, and the factors that predict or produce dramatic, durable responses in a minority of patients have not been elucidated. There has
even been debate as to whether these agents truly have benefit for patients with metastatic renal cell cancer or whether long-term survival results from chance or
spontaneous tumor regression. The experience from two decades of biologic therapy for renal cancer has clarified this latter issue, made biologic agent administration
safer, and defined the role of a number of cellular agents used in renal cancer therapy. The principle that immunotherapy can cause the complete and durable
regression of large burdens of metastatic renal cancer and melanoma in some patients has been conclusively established. The most significant goal not yet
accomplished is to increase significantly the percentage of patients who achieve these regressions. This objective will require improvements in our understanding of
current agents as well as the development of new modalities that target different biologic mechanisms.
Spontaneous Tumor Regression
Although it does not represent a bona fide treatment modality, much has been made of the phenomenon of spontaneous tumor regression in patients with advanced
renal cancer, and the mechanism is presumed to be immunologic. The practice of nephrectomy in patients with metastatic disease in the hope of inducing a
spontaneous regression has been largely abandoned owing to the disappointingly low incidence of success of this method. 126 In reviews of spontaneous tumor
regression, another striking feature is that the majority of regressions are short-lived. In one randomized study of IFN-a in patients with RCC, the placebo control
population demonstrated a singularly high response rate of 6%, but the duration of these regressions were 2 to 13 months with only one ongoing response of 9
months at the time of publication. 127 Other larger reviews show that the true incidence of this phenomenon is probably less than 1% and that the vast majority of
documented spontaneous regressions will relapse with progressive metastatic disease and require other therapy. 128,129 In addition, the few well-documented cases of
durable regressions often occurred in patients in whom life-threatening infectious or inflammatory events were possible instigators of their regression. 130 These data
indicate that spontaneous regression of RCC often is transient and is not a phenomenon that should be relied on as therapy. Furthermore, spontaneous regression
clearly cannot account for the consistent fraction of patients who achieve complete and durable regressions with some immunotherapies.
Interferons
Early studies of leukocyte interferon in the treatment of cancer reported sporadic responses in patients with RCC. 131 Subsequently, increased dosages and larger
studies were possible using recombinant IFN-a, and this experience was repeated and confirmed. The response rates in the largest studies ranged from 0% to 29%
(Table 34.2-11), with few CRs and few long-term survival data. 132,133 In a review of the literature in 1989, Quesada 134 reported an overall response rate of 16% for 654
patients. Factors that seemed to increase the likelihood of responding included good performance status, prior nephrectomy, and metastases confined to the lungs.
Nevertheless, these factors could not be used to identify patients without a significant possibility of response, and so they should serve only as general guidelines.
Few data exist on the long-term results from interferon therapy but, from the very small number of completely responding patients, it is safe to conclude that interferon
has no significant curative potential in RCC.

TABLE 34.2-11. Treatment of Metastatic Renal Cell Cancer with Interferon

Recently, randomized prospective studies have been performed to measure the benefit of IFN-a in patients with advanced renal cancer. A randomized comparison of
IFN-a versus medroxyprogesterone acetate in 335 patients demonstrated a significant prolongation of median survival (6 months for medroxyprogesterone acetate
and 8.5 months for IFN-a).135 This modest, albeit statistically significant, prolongation of survival was offset by greater symptoms and lesser quality of life in patients
receiving IFN-a. In addition, responses did not appear durable, with estimated progression-free survival at 2 years of 5% or less for both groups.
Many different types and preparations of interferons have been used in clinical trials. Early trials with “natural” interferon produced from donor leukocytes and
subsequent trials with several different subtypes of recombinant IFN-a have not suggested a difference in efficacy among these preparations. Recent trials using
IFN-b and IFN-g have indicated that these agents have either similar or less activity than IFN-a. 136 A randomized comparison of IFN-a and placebo showed no
difference in response rates or survival. 127
Interferon is one of the few biologic agents that has been tested in a randomized adjuvant study after nephrectomy. Two hundred and ninety-four patients with
completely resected T3 or T4a or N1, N2, or N3 disease were randomized to observation or to 9 months of subcutaneous lymphoblastoid interferon. 137 With a median
follow-up of 4.4 years, patients receiving interferon had similar recurrence rates and significantly worse survival than patients randomized to observation only. In view
of the limited response rate to biologic therapy and the absence of any indication that responses are related to lesser tumor burdens, there is currently no rationale for
recommending adjuvant biotherapy outside of a protocol setting.
One important consideration in evaluating interferon therapy is that the optimal dose, schedule and route of interferon administration is not yet known. Although
refinement of schedules may have the potential of increasing response rates somewhat, in view of the small benefit demonstrated to this point, it is unlikely that
randomized studies will ever be done to effectively optimize these parameters. In summary, disseminated renal cell cancer shows a small but consistent response rate
to interferon (primarily IFN-a), but these benefits must be weighed against the toxicity of chronic therapy and the lack of documented long-term benefit.
Interleukin-2
After its discovery in 1976 and the demonstration of its activities as a T-cell growth factor and activator of T cells and natural killer cells, IL-2 was used in clinical trials
against a variety of malignancies. From the first trials in 1984, renal cell cancer was identified as a tumor that could respond to IL-2 ( Fig. 34.2-8, Fig. 34.2-9, and Fig.
34.2-10).138,139 These early trials rapidly escalated the dose of IL-2 to the maximum tolerated dose and then added lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells to the
therapy, based on preclinical results. These trials initially reported response rates of 33% in RCC and, in a subsequent multicenter experience, the response rate was
16%.140 The remarkable feature of many of these responses is that they appear complete and durable. Median follow-up of greater than 10 years is available from
those early studies, and a review of the follow-up data indicates that 7% to 9% of all patients (nearly half of all those responding) had a CR and the majority of those
completely responding patients have never relapsed (see Fig. 34.2-8).141,142 and 143 This constitutes the most convincing evidence that IL-2 has clinical benefit in the
treatment of metastatic renal cell cancer and led to the approval of IL-2 by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration as the only currently approved therapy for this
disease in the United States. It should be emphasized that it is the curative potential of these responses and not their frequency that is of value ( Fig. 34.2-11).254,255

FIGURE 34.2-8. Radiographs of two patients with long-term complete regressions of pulmonary metastases from renal cancer in response to high-dose therapy with
interleukin-2 alone. In most studies, patients with only pulmonary metastases appear to have a slightly higher probability of response.

FIGURE 34.2-9. Abdominal computed tomography scans of a patient with a durable, ongoing complete response to high-dose interleukin-2 therapy, which included
the regression of extensive liver metastases.

FIGURE 34.2-10. Regression and recalcification of a large lytic metastasis of the lateral femoral condyle in a patient with widely metastatic renal cell cancer. This
patient also had a durable complete response of all soft tissue metastases with interleukin-2–based immunotherapy.

FIGURE 34.2-11. Complete responses to high-dose interleukin-2 in patients with metastatic renal carcinoma are typically durable. An actuarial curve of response
duration for patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma responding to high-dose bolus interleukin-2 is shown. Among completely responding patients, 81% have not
experienced relapse (median follow-up, 7 years), and no patients have experienced relapse beyond 3 years. Partial responses can be sustained for years but, in this
study, all partially responding patients eventually experienced relapse. (Adapted from ref. 143.)

Since those early studies, several developments have occurred. The use of LAK cells with IL-2 has been critically examined in randomized studies, and many
investigators have explored the use of lower-dose IL-2 regimens to avoid the toxicity of high-dose IL-2. Although murine models predicted that the addition of LAK
cells to IL-2 would substantially increase therapeutic efficacy, this has not proved to be true in clinical studies. A randomized comparison of high-dose intravenous
bolus IL-2 with and without LAK cells showed an insignificant difference in response rate (21% for IL-2 and 31% for IL-2 combined with LAK cells) with no difference in
survival. 144 Other studies have confirmed this 145 and, currently, there is no evidence to support the use of LAK cells in patients with RCC.
The initial rapid escalation of IL-2 to its maximum tolerated dose identified as the maximum tolerated dose 600,000 to 720,000 IU/kg by intravenous bolus given every
8 hours. On that schedule, patients tolerated approximately seven to nine consecutive doses before treatment had to be stopped for vascular leak syndrome,
hypotension, multiorgan dysfunction, and a variety of other toxicities. 146 These effects rapidly reversed after therapy was stopped but, with hypotension requiring
vasopressor support, pulmonary edema, and potential infectious complications, a 2% to 4% treatment-related mortality was initially encountered (see Fig. 34.2-10).
Since then, increased experience with IL-2, prophylactic antibiotics (when indicated), and patient screening for occult coronary disease have dramatically decreased
this mortality rate. A recent report cites 809 consecutive patients who received high-dose bolus IL-2 without a treatment-related mortality, 147 a statistic unattainable
with most multiagent chemotherapeutic regimens.
Nevertheless, the expense of intensive care unit care and the precipitous nature of toxicities on high-dose IL-2 led many investigators to try lower-dose regimens. In
particular, daily subcutaneous self-administration was adopted as a convenient and inexpensive route. In a scenario that has been replayed many times during the
development of IL-2, a multitude of small phase II studies were performed that reported short-term response rates similar to those seen with high-dose IL-2. An
outpatient, daily, self-administered regimen using an initial week (Monday through Friday) of 18 million IU (fixed dose) followed by 5 weeks at half that dose was well
tolerated and produced a response rate of 23% in 26 evaluable patients. 148 Later, continued experience with a modification of this regimen showed a 20% overall
response rate, with one ongoing CR in 47 patients 149; another group of investigators achieved an 18% response rate with a similar regimen. 150 Others reported on the
use of continuous-infusion IL-2, describing a similar response rate with less toxicity (and less overall IL-2 given over the same period). 151 A review of the literature

(Table 34.2-12) shows response rates to IL-2 monotherapy or IL-2 and LAK cells, delivered on many different schedules and at different doses, ranging from 8% to
35%, and it is clear that smaller, nonrandomized studies cannot discern whether one schedule is more effective than another. Nevertheless, lower-dose schedules
have been widely adopted before being critically evaluated. There is no question that patients with metastatic RCC can respond to these regimens and that patients
with other significant medical conditions may not be able to tolerate high-dose IL-2. In these cases, lower-dose options represent a reasonable therapeutic choice. For
those patients who are able to tolerate any of the published IL-2 regimens, it remains crucial to determine whether the added toxicity of high-dose IL-2 is associated
with any improvement in clinical efficacy.

TABLE 34.2-12. Therapy with IL-2 Alone or with LAK Cells

Such a study is under way, and an interim analysis is available. 152 This study randomized patients to receive IL-2 at either 720,000 IU/kg or 72,000 IU/kg every 8
hours by intravenous bolus to maximum tolerance (up to 15 consecutive doses). The lower dose was selected as the maximum dose that still resulted in a
well-tolerated regimen not requiring intensive care unit care and vasopressor support. This two-arm comparison constitutes the most precise determination of whether
the dose of IL-2 is important. Subsequently, a third arm was added to the trial to evaluate the widely used subcutaneous route of administration. This arm delivered
250,000 IU/kg/d for 5 days in the first week and then half that dose 5 days per week for the subsequent 5 weeks. Of course, only concurrently randomized patients are
compared in this two-phase trial. With 228 randomized patients of a projected study population of 400, it is evident that the two lower-dose regimens are associated
with lower toxicity, especially in the areas of hypotension requiring pressors (43% of courses of high-dose intravenous IL-2 vs. 4% of courses of low-dose intravenous
IL-2 and 0% with subcutaneous IL-2), thrombocytopenia, pulmonary distress, and disorientation. It is important to note that there have been no deaths in any of the
treatment arms. The interim response rates are shown in Table 34.2-13. In the two-arm comparison of high- and low-dose intravenous bolus IL-2, the respective
response rates are 19% and 10% (P = .06). The durations of the responses bear watching, as seven of nine patients completely responding to high-dose IL-2 remain
in CR beyond 2 years, whereas two of five patients completely responding to low-dose IL-2 maintained their response at 2 years. The three-arm comparison including
subcutaneous IL-2 is still preliminary, with response rates of only 16%, 4%, and 11% for high-dose intravenous, low-dose intravenous, and subcutaneous IL-2
reported.152

TABLE 34.2-13. A Randomized Study of High-Dose versus Low-Dose Interleukin-2 in Patients with Metastatic Renal Cell Cancer

Because the clinical benefit of IL-2 resides in the long-term CRs achieved, any interpretation of this study will require prolonged follow-up and survival analyses after
full accrual. As a drug that conveys great benefit to a minority of patients (who happen to possess the unidentified tumor or immune system qualities that allow them to
respond), IL-2 is unlikely to affect the median survival of patients in randomized studies, and study design must take this into account.
Other studies have addressed the issue of continuous-infusion IL-2 versus bolus IL-2. The initial nonrandomized studies using continuous-infusion IL-2 reported
response rates similar to those for bolus IL-2 but with lesser toxicities. 151 In a subsequent randomized study in which all patients received LAK cells, there was a
randomization to receive either continuous-infusion IL-2 at 18 to 22.5 million IU/m 2/d or 600,000 IU/kg/dose by bolus every 8 hours (the cumulative daily dose by bolus
was more than three times the dose by continuous infusion). 153 Both of these doses represented the respective maximally tolerated doses for these regimens, and the
few significant differences in toxicities did not favor either regimen. In this study, patients receiving LAK cells and bolus IL-2 had a 20% major response rate, as
compared to a 15% response rate for patients given LAK cells and continuous-infusion IL-2; the difference was not significant. Fortunately, it has been established
that the CRs to high-dose continuous-infusion IL-2 can be of long duration. A single-institution study of 123 patients (some also receiving LAK cells) with follow-up of
1 to 109 months reported an overall response rate of 19%, with 7% CRs and 78% of those patients sustaining their CRs at 42 to more than 109 months. 154
A more complex issue is whether any combination of cytokine or chemotherapy added to IL-2 is superior to IL-2 alone. Here again, small, nonrandomized phase II
studies have clouded this issue. Innumerable small studies have combined IL-2 with interferon and chemotherapy, and sometimes both agents, and reported
improved short-term response rates with large, overlapping confidence intervals (see Table 34.2-9). The combination of IFN-a and IL-2 is especially appealing
because both agents have independent activity against RCC, and preclinical animal models predict synergistic benefit from combining these agents. Early reports
suggested that the response rate for patients with metastatic RCC might rise from 18% to 20% with high-dose IL-2 alone to as much as 31% with high-dose IL-2 plus
interferon. 155 However, further accrual and long-term follow-up of the patients in this study did not show sufficient improvement in either response rate or survival
(when compared to historical controls from the same institution) to warrant the additional toxicity seen (see Fig. 34.2-11).156
Other investigators have been using this combination of cytokines to reduce the dose of IL-2 needed for a response and, thus, to limit toxicity. Most have employed
outpatient, subcutaneous schedules, as widely described by Atzpodien et al. 157 The initial nonrandomized reports on this regimen emphasized lesser toxicities but
similar response rates to high-dose IL-2 monotherapy. Yet when others have tried the same or similar regimens, their response rates as well as their toxicity profiles
have not been as favorable. Without randomized studies, it is impossible to reconcile these disparate results.
Some experience in randomized evaluations of IL-2 and interferon is available. Negrier et al. 158 randomized 425 patients to receive continuous-infusion, high-dose
IL-2 alone, subcutaneous IFN-a three times weekly, or both agents simultaneously. There was a significantly higher response rate to the combination (18.6%) than to
only IL-2 (6.5%) or interferon (7.5%), but this increased response rate did not translate into improved survival. This study demonstrated an unusually low response
rate to IL-2 alone, and patients with tumor progression crossed over between therapy arms. Other small randomized studies of IL-2 and interferon have also failed to
demonstrate an advantage to combination therapy, but these studies are largely underpowered. 159,160
In a further effort to enhance the efficacy of IL-2 by adding other agents, investigators have tried to exploit the reported synergy between 5-FU (which has a low
single-agent response rate against RCC) and interferon by adding this agent to IL-2 and interferon. Again, early phase II studies reported major increases in response
rates,161 but later studies did not always substantiate these findings. 162 In fact, an attempt to reproduce the initial studies exactly with 5-FU, IFN, and IL-2 (which had a

reported response rate of 49%) resulted in a PR and CR rate of 16%—exactly the same as with IL-2 alone. 163
One issue rarely addressed in evaluating these combinations is the durability of the responses. Long-term follow-up with sufficient patients to evaluate response
durations in the minority of patients showing regression is crucial to evaluating IL-2 therapies. Dutcher et al. 163 have raised a possible red flag by reviewing their
sequential use of IL-2, IL-2 plus interferon, and IL-2 plus interferon plus 5-FU. Not only did they fail to see an increased response rate as the dose of IL-2 was
moderated and other agents were added to IL-2, but their percentage of patients attaining durable CRs seemed to decrease. Although their numbers still are small
and patients were not randomized, this is a potentially important issue. If IL-2's durable responses are indeed forfeited by these combinations, then these regimens
are indistinguishable from the many ineffective chemotherapeutic agents with 15% to 25% partial or transient responses and should not be advocated.
VACCINES AND CELLULAR THERAPY
An effort to identify immune cells with reactivity to renal cancer is ongoing. The use of nonspecific activated killer cells (natural killer or LAK cells) has largely been
ineffective, but current efforts have concentrated on T cells and the induction of a T-cell response via vaccination. After the lead of melanoma research,
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) isolated from renal cancer specimens and cells from mixed lymphocyte-tumor reactions were examined for antitumor reactivity.
With some notable exceptions, 164,165,166 and 167 little specific tumor reactivity was seen. 168 Attempts to use TIL clinically have showed some promising early results
(usually combined with IL-2 and IFN-a), 169 but a randomized trial of IL-2 with and without CD8-enriched TIL was fraught with technical difficulties and showed no
augmentation in response rate or survival with cell transfer. 170 Another study of the use of peripheral blood cells nonspecifically activated by anti-CD3-stimulated
mononuclear cell supernatant (autolymphocyte therapy) appeared to be beneficial in a small randomized trial 171 but, despite the undertaking of a large multicenter
trial, no confirmatory data for this approach have been produced since that trial.
Because of the relative scarcity of tumor-reactive specific T cells against renal cancer, another approach has been the use of vaccines. Typically, whole tumor
preparations have been used because of the failure to identify broadly applicable, common tumor antigens expressed by RCC. In one study, the gene for
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) was introduced into autologous cultured renal cell cancer lines by retroviral transduction in a concept
based on preclinical studies. 172 Patients then were immunized with irradiated tumor cells secreting large amounts of GM-CSF (or control nontransduced cells) and
were evaluated for immune responses and clinical tumor regression. One PR was seen in 16 evaluable patients, and evidence was seen of cutaneous delayed-type
hypersensitivity responses generated against tumor as well as an antitumor T-cell response in the responding patient. This approach is limited by the requirement for
an autologous cultured tumor line. Other approaches are investigating the use of tumor lysates and whole tumor cells co-incubated with autologous dendritic cells to
vaccinate patients. Data on the clinical and laboratory responses generated by dendritic cell vaccines should be forthcoming soon.
Another recent early-phase trial has used a nonmyeloablative allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplant, hypothesizing that a graft-versus-tumor response may
lead to regression of metastatic renal cancer. It appears, in the single patient presented, that tumor regression did not occur until the onset of complete donor
chimerism, tapering of immunosuppression, and the appearance of mild graft-versus-host disease, supporting an immunological mechanism of action related to the
allograft. 173 Still not clear is whether there is specific recognition of tumor-associated antigens by the matched sibling allograft or whether generalized
graft-versus-host disease is leading to in situ production of cytokines, which then can treat an intrinsically cytokine-sensitive tumor (i.e., renal cancer). This is an
interesting approach, given the magnitude of the few responses seen thus far, but it remains to be confirmed by a larger experience, and the mechanism of action
requires further investigation.
ANTIANGIOGENIC AGENTS
The field of angiogenesis and its role as a target for cancer therapy has burgeoned in the last decade. New inhibitors of angiogenesis such as endostatin and
angiostatin have been discovered, 174 and old compounds such as thalidomide have found new life as antiangiogenic agents. RCC presents an attractive target for
these agents for two reasons. First, it is a tremendously vascular tumor consisting largely of capillaries and blood sinuses surrounded by malignant clear cells. In
addition, there appears to be a highly angiogenic environment within clear cell cancers, driven by tumor-elaborated vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). As
described in Chapter 34.1, the elaboration of VEGF by RCC in response to a variety of stimuli appears to be linked to the functional mutation of the VHL protein found
in nearly all clear cell renal cancers. Thus, the common genetic event that leads to clear cell RCC involves a deregulation of the VEGF pathway and, presumably,
angiogenesis is a consequence. One ongoing randomized trial is studying the use of a neutralizing antibody to human VEGF that is highly effective in slowing the
growth of VEGF-secreting human tumors implanted into nude mice. 175 The clinical trial is a blinded, placebo-controlled trial designed to determine whether survival or
time to progression are altered by the chronic administration of this antibody. A small trial of thalidomide (the highly teratogenic sedative now thought to cause
deformities via an in utero antiangiogenic mechanism) in patients with metastatic renal cancer was recently reported to produce tumor regression in some patients (R.
Amato, unpublished data). Another agent, endostatin, which showed broad preclinical activity in mice, has also just been entered into highly anticipated clinical trials.
Although this is a field of intense activity and interest, it is not yet clear whether a single antiangiogenic agent will be sufficient to interrupt the vascular supply of a
tumor. It may be that tumors use a variety of angiogenic pathways and that only with carefully combined multiagent therapy will clinically significant tumor arrest or
regression be accomplished.
Summary
In the last two decades, a burgeoning supply of new biologic agents has been made available in amounts sufficient for clinical trials by recombinant gene technology.
Most of these proteins did not meet the unrealistic expectations generated by preclinical work and entrepreneurial publicity. In the face of these disappointments,
several important principles were established in the treatment of renal cell cancer and melanoma that should not be overlooked. It has been established that purely
immunologic therapy, which has no direct, intrinsic antitumor activity, was able to cause the regression of large, metastatic tumors by stimulating host immune cells.
Even more crucial was the demonstration that some of these regressions were potentially curative, with a small but consistent fraction of patients maintaining their
CRs to IL-2 beyond 10 years. These results argue effectively that predicted pitfalls to immunotherapy such as tumor heterogeneity and antigen loss,
immunosuppression by the cancer-bearing state or tumor microenvironment, and a lack of tumor-specific antigens in human cancers are not insurmountable
problems. To increase the frequency of successful immune attack on renal cell cancer, it will be important to understand the mechanisms and cellular elements that
are responsible for these few dramatic responses. Both immune effector factors as well as tumor characteristics are likely to be involved in the successful interplay
that occurs in responding patients. The treatment of patients with renal cell cancer is likely to contribute to our future understanding of these factors and to continue at
the forefront of progress in biologic therapies for cancer.

CARCINOMA OF THE RENAL PELVIS AND URETER
CARCINOMA OF THE RENAL PELVIS
Carcinoma of the renal pelvis is a relatively rare tumor that accounts for 5% of all renal tumors. It occurs more frequently in men than in women (2:1 to 3:1). Upper
urinary tract carcinoma is a multifocal process; patients with cancer at one site in the upper urinary tract are at greater risk of developing tumors elsewhere. 256,257 and 258
The probability of multifocal occurrence is greater in patients with larger lesions and in those with carcinoma in situ. A patient with one upper tract urothelial tumor has
a 30% to 50% chance of developing a bladder tumor as well. Some 2% to 4% of patients with an upper tract urothelial tumor develop bilateral renal pelvic tumors. If a
patient has both a renal pelvic tumor and a ureteral tumor simultaneously, there is a 75% chance that a bladder tumor will develop in this patient. Alternatively, a
patient with a bladder tumor initially has a 2% to 3% chance of developing an upper tract tumor. 176
Etiologic Features and Genetics
Recent studies have demonstrated that the major cause of cancer of the renal pelvis is smoking and that cessation of smoking can eliminate a large number of these
tumors.177 A significant increase in risk for upper genitourinary (GU) tract urothelial cancer is found in smokers, the risk being highest among the heaviest smokers. 22
In 1965, Hultengren et al. 178 first identified a connection between epithelial tumors of the renal pelvis and abuse of compound analgesics. Since then, a number of
other reports 179,180 and 181 from Sweden,182 Australia, 183 the Netherlands, 184 Denmark,185 Italy,186 Germany,187 and the United States22 have demonstrated an association
between analgesic abuse and renal pelvic tumors. 188 Most of the patients ingested a significant amount (5 kg) of compound analgesic, usually containing phenacetin,
phenazone, and caffeine. 189,190 Typically, upper GU tract tumors occur in patients in whom prolonged and heavy analgesic ingestion is followed by renal papillary
necrosis.190
There is also an association between cancer of the renal pelvis and danubian endemic familial nephropathy (Balkan nephropathy). Balkan nephropathy is a slowly

progressive inflammation of the interstitium of the kidney that ultimately results in renal failure. 191 This disorder, which is prevalent in the Balkan countries (Yugoslavia,
Romania, Bulgaria, and Greece), is associated with multifocal, slow-growing, superficial, low-grade tumors of the renal pelvis. The cause of Balkan nephropathy is
unclear; however, a number of potential etiologic agents such as fungal toxins, viruses, silicates, and heavy metals have been studied. 192
An association has been observed between renal pelvic tumors and urban residence as well as occupation in the aniline dye, textile, plastics, and rubber
industries.189,192 Chronic inflammation and irritation are associated with the development of renal pelvic tumors, particularly in patients who have upper urinary tract
stones.
There are reports of kindreds exhibiting a hereditary pattern in the development of transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary tract. 193,194 Of the affected family members,
22% had upper GU tract tumors, 59% had bladder cancer, and 18% had both upper and lower GU tract tumors. 193 Upper GU tract urothelial tumors are found in
patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, which is associated with a germline abnormality in DNA mismatch repair genes. 195 Studies of the molecular
and cellular aspects of urothelial transformation should provide further insight into the etiology and mechanisms of progression and metastasis of this disease.
Pathology
Transitional cell carcinoma accounts for 90% of the tumors of the renal pelvis and can be in situ, papillary, or planar ( Table 34.2-14). Squamous cell carcinoma, which
usually is associated with chronic inflammation or infection of the renal pelvis, accounts for 7% of renal pelvic tumors. 196 Squamous cell cancer of the renal pelvis
often is deeply invasive and is associated with a worse prognosis than is transitional cell carcinoma. Adenocarcinoma of the renal pelvis has been reported in few
patients and occurs in association with inflammation, infection, or calculi. 197

TABLE 34.2-14. Classification of Tumors of the Ureter

Diagnosis and Staging
Hematuria is the initial pelvic presenting symptom in the majority of patients with renal pelvic carcinoma. Gross hematuria is present in 62% to 75%, and microscopic
hematuria is seen in 10%. The triad of flank mass, pain, and hematuria is encountered infrequently, in 20% or fewer cases, and often is associated with advanced
disease. Excretory urography frequently is used in the initial evaluation of patients with renal pelvic tumors and will often reveal a filling defect in the collecting system.
There may also be either a hydronephrotic or a nonfunctional kidney due to obstruction by a blood clot or mass. Retrograde pyelography (in which contrast medium is
injected into the ureter through an endoscope) accurately delineates upper GU tract filling defects. If there is uncertainty about the nature of a renal pelvic lesion, CT
performed before and after administration of intravenous contrast material will differentiate a tumor from another radiolucent mass such as a stone. 198,199 and 200
Angiography is not used often in the diagnostic evaluation of a suspected renal pelvic tumor. However, a renal mass that lacks the characteristic neovascularity of a
renal carcinoma may be the first indication of a renal pelvic tumor invading the renal parenchyma.
Urine cytology is useful in evaluating a renal pelvis mass, and endoscopically obtained barbotage specimens allow an accurate diagnosis to be made in
approximately 80% of cases. 201,202 Tissue can also be obtained by introducing a biopsy brush into the ureter and removing a specimen for cytologic or histologic
examination. Brush biopsy increases diagnostic accuracy to between 80% and 90%. Endoscopic ureteroscopy and percutaneous nephroscopy are techniques that
have dramatically improved the diagnosis of upper tract tumors. 203,204 and 205 Endoluminal sonographic evaluation may also be useful for diagnosis and staging. 206,207
With currently available endoscopic instruments, the renal pelvis can be inspected visually in more than 90% of patients.
The most significant prognostic factors for survival of patients with renal pelvic carcinoma are stage and grade of tumor. Renal pelvic upper urinary tract cancer is
divided into four stages by the TNM classification ( Table 34.2-15). The primary tumor is classified as low-stage (Ta, limited to mucosa; T1, lamina propria invasion)
and high-stage (T2, muscularis involvement; T3, tumor beyond the muscularis). 75 Renal pelvic tumors are graded from 1 to 3. The median survival for patients with
high-grade tumors is 14 to 16 months as compared with 67 months for patients with low-grade tumors. Median survival for patients with high-stage tumors is 13
months, whereas median survival for patients with low-stage tumors is 91 months. 176 Invasion of the renal hilum occurs in 95% of patients who ultimately develop
metastases.208

TABLE 34.2-15. Staging of Ureteral and Pelvic Tumors

Surgical Treatment
Carcinoma of the renal pelvis may be treated with a radical nephrectomy that includes removal of Gerota's fascia and its contents, total removal of the ipsilateral
ureter, and removal of a cuff of bladder. 209,210 When transitional cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis invades the renal vein or vena cava, an extensive surgical procedure
including thrombus extraction or partial vena cava resection may be required. 211
More conservative endourologic surgical excision is advocated by some who note that renal pelvic carcinoma can be bilateral and that survival of patients with
low-stage, low-grade renal pelvic carcinoma treated with a conservative surgical procedure is approximately the same as in patients treated with more radical
surgery. 203,212 The incidence of low-grade, low-stage renal pelvic carcinoma is approximately 8%, and that of bilateral disease is 2%. Often there is also a long latent
period prior to recurrence. Papillary, low-grade, low-stage tumors of the upper urinary tract often are considered amenable to endoscopic resection. However, most
clinicians offer radical surgery to patients with high-grade endoscopically defined lesions. 203 Currently, most clinicians consider that local, partial excision is potentially

appropriate for patients with a solitary kidney, with bilateral renal pelvic carcinoma, or with renal insufficiency. Treatment strategies involving percutaneous or
ureteroscopic resection of renal pelvic tumors followed by either laser irradiation or supplemental intracavitary therapy are currently being evaluated. 213,214 and 215
Follow-Up
Conscientious follow-up after surgery for renal pelvic carcinoma is essential. Urinalysis, urine cytology, and cystourethroscopy are performed every 3 months for 2 to
3 years and then less frequently. For patients who undergo a conservative upper tract procedure, periodic retrograde pyelography and ureteroscopy also are
performed.203
URETERAL CARCINOMA
Ureteral carcinoma is an uncommon neoplasm that accounts for only 1% of all malignancies of the upper GU tract. Ureteral carcinoma was first described by the
French pathologist Rayer in 1841; the first ureteral carcinoma to be removed by nephroureterectomy was reported by Vorphl in 1905. Ureteral carcinoma tends to
occur in the older age groups, predominantly in the sixth, seventh, and eighth decades of life. The male-female ratio is 2:1. The most common site for the occurrence
of a ureteral tumor is in the lower one-third of the ureter, with a lesser incidence higher up.
Histology and Etiology
Ninety percent of malignant tumors of the ureter are transitional cell carcinomas; 20% have squamous or glandular differentiation. Eight percent of the tumors are
pure squamous cell carcinomas, and 1% are adenocarcinomas. Tumors of the ureter share embryologic, morphologic, and etiologic characteristics with renal pelvic
tumors. As with renal pelvic tumors, there is an increased incidence of ureteral carcinoma associated with Balkan nephropathy, prolonged exposure to phenacetin, or
prolonged exposure to environmental agents such as aniline dyes. 216
Clinical Presentation: Grade and Stage
Hematuria is the most common presenting symptom and is present in 75% of patients with ureteral carcinoma. The hematuria is usually painless; however, colicky
pain due to obstruction by clot or by tumor occurs in up to 35%. Urinary frequency or dysuria, present in only 10% of patients with renal pelvic carcinoma, occurs in up
to 50% of patients with ureteral carcinoma. 216
As in pelvic carcinoma, the primary ureteral carcinoma is classified as grades 1 through 3 and stage Ta (limited to the mucosa), T1 (lamina propria invasion), T2
(muscularis involvement), or T3 (invasion beyond the muscularis). 75 Although up to 100% of grade 1 tumors and 85% of grade 2 tumors may be noninvasive, only
30% of grade 3 and 8% of grade 4 tumors are noninvasive. 176,216
Diagnosis
Excretory urography is an initial part of the evaluation of a suspected ureteral mass lesion. On excretory urography, the upper tract above the tumor may be
completely normal or there may be hydronephrosis or complete nonfunction. Retrograde pyelography may be performed to delineate accurately the precise location of
the ureteral lesion. Urine is collected for cytologic examination, and brush biopsy may be performed to obtain tissue for histologic examination. Advances in
ureteroscopic techniques have revolutionized the diagnosis and treatment of upper tract transitional carcinomas. 217 The flexible endoscope has greatly improved the
surgeon's ability to visualize and perform a biopsy of ureteral lesions, and its use is now part of the standard management of this disease. 217,218 Abdominal CT also
provides useful staging information, particularly with regard to extension of the tumor outside the ureter.
Treatment
Carcinoma of the ureter has historically been treated by either nephroureterectomy or partial ureterectomy. The advantage of a partial ureterectomy is that the more
conservative procedure preserves the kidney. However, mapping studies of the urothelium have demonstrated that carcinoma of the upper urinary tract is a multifocal
disease. Often atypia and carcinoma in situ are noted in multiple areas of the urothelium, particularly in high-grade, high-stage carcinomas. Small, solitary, low-grade
tumors are most often treated by endoscopic resection, fulguration, or laser photocoagulation, which allows acceptable survival and renal preservation, particularly in
patients with a solitary kidney, bilateral tumors, a poor operative risk, or impaired renal function. 203,217,218 Nephroureterectomy is recommended for patients with
high-grade or high-stage tumor and for those with disease at an unresectable location.
The surgical procedure of radical nephrectomy plus ureterectomy entails removal of the kidney and the entire contents of Gerota's fascia, the ureter, and a cuff of
bladder including the ureteral orifice and intramural ureter ( Fig. 34.2-12). Regional lymph nodes may be removed, particularly if there is indication that they are
involved. This surgical procedure may be performed using one or two incisions, depending on the patient's body habitus and the surgeon's preference. When partial
ureterectomy is performed, urinary tract continuity is reestablished with either ureteroureterostomy or ureteroneocystostomy.

FIGURE 34.2-12. The patient who will undergo a nephroureterectomy with lymph node dissection should be placed in a modified flank position and an incision made
through either line a or line b. The area of dissection is as indicated in the middle panel, being divested from the superior mesenteric artery to the bifurcation. The
ureter is removed by opening the bladder, circumscribing the orifice, and sharply dissecting the ureter from the surrounding detrusor muscle. The defect in the bladder
then is closed appropriately. (From ref. 262, with permission.)

Results of Therapy
The 5-year survival of patients with ureteral carcinoma is determined primarily by the grade and stage of the disease. Thorough endoscopic follow-up is essential at
regular intervals to rule out recurrences. 205 Endourologic techniques combined with conservative treatment of ureteral transitional cell carcinoma can be effectively
and safely used as first-line therapy for selected individuals. 212 Patients with Ta or T1 ureteral carcinoma can experience a 90% to 100% 5-year survival rate; those
with T2 disease, a 45% to 85% 5-year survival rate; and patients with T3 disease, a 25% to 30% 5-year survival rate. The 5-year survival for patients with metastatic
disease is currently 0% to 5% ( Table 34.2-16).

TABLE 34.2-16. Correlation of Survival Rate with Stage of Ureteral and Pelvic Tumors

ADJUVANT RADIOTHERAPY FOR CARCINOMA OF THE RENAL PELVIS AND URETER
In the absence of randomized prospective data, there is no consensus regarding the need for adjuvant radiotherapy for patients with renal pelvis or ureteral cancers.
Brookland and Richter 219 reported on 23 patients with stage III to IV transitional cancers of the upper GU tract. Postoperative radiotherapy (45 to 50 Gy) was given to
11 patients. Among these 11, 5 patients (45%) developed a local recurrence, as compared to 1 of 9 patients (11%) treated with a nephroureterectomy alone ( P = .23).
Cozal et al. 220 reported on 67 patients with stage I through IV upper tract transitional cell tumors. Though the authors demonstrated a reduction in the crude local
relapse rate with the administration of 45 to 50 Gy of postoperative radiotherapy as compared to patients who did not receive adjuvant therapy (26% vs. 10%), these
differences were not significant ( P = .42). Other recent retrospective reports could not demonstrate a significant benefit for adjuvant therapy for advanced-stage
disease. 221,222 and 223 These authors have highlighted the systemic nature of stage III and IV disease—namely, the high risk of distant metastases and the relative
infrequent incidence of isolated local recurrences after initial local aggressive surgical therapy, which likely explain the lack of conclusive evidence that adjuvant
radiotherapy is of any benefit. Nevertheless, as most patients in these reports were followed without the benefit of routine CT evaluations, the true incidence of a local
failure for advanced-stage patients remains unclear. Until more effective systemic regimens are available for patients with locally advanced disease, distant
metastasis appears to be the predominant mode of failure, and routine administration of adjuvant local radiotherapy is not recommended.
CHEMOTHERAPY FOR METASTATIC CARCINOMAS OF THE RENAL PELVIS AND URETER
Except for its role in the conservation and preservation of the bladder, considerations for systemic treatment of cancer of the ureter and renal pelvis are identical to
those of bladder cancer. It is believed that the biology of transitional cell carcinomas of the renal pelvis, ureter, and bladder is the same, with comparable etiology,
pathology, and pattern of spread. This paradigm is supported by the frequent occurrence of multifocal neoplastic sites in the transitional epithelium. Systemic
chemotherapy for upper urinary tract cancers mirrors that for bladder cancer and has been administered in the metastatic, adjuvant, and neoadjuvant setting. Indeed,
patients with carcinomas of the renal pelvis and ureter usually are included in clinical trials for bladder cancer, because the chemoresponsiveness of both upper and
lower urothelial cancers is considered to be comparable. A retrospective review of 203 patients in five trials of methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin (Adriamycin),
and cisplatin (M-VAC) from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center could identify no difference in response or survival between patients with bladder and
nonbladder primary sites ( Table 34.2-17).326 Because the incidence of cancer of the upper urinary tract is a fraction of that of cancer of the bladder, chemotherapeutic
trials do not address the upper urothelium separately. Hence, this section will briefly outline the issues relating to systemic treatment of upper urinary tract cancer,
drawing from the bladder cancer literature. For a more extensive discussion, the reader is referred to Chapter 34.3.

TABLE 34.2-17. Effect of Nonbladder Primary Site of Transitional Cell Carcinoma on Response to M-VAC

CHEMOTHERAPY FOR ADVANCED CANCER OF THE RENAL PELVIS AND URETER
Urothelial cancers are highly responsive to chemotherapy. After local recurrence or metastasis has developed, systemic chemotherapy is indicated. While
combination chemotherapeutic regimens, including cisplatin, are most widely used, the single-agent activity for a variety of agents is solid. Response rates ranging
from 25% to 35% have been reported for cisplatin, methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, and paclitaxel. 327 Most recently, single-agent activity of 28% for gemcitabine has
been reported. 328Table 34.2-18 includes results from both combined and single-agent chemotherapy trials.

TABLE 34.2-18. M-VAC and New Agents for Urothelial Cancer

As with other cancers that are responsive to chemotherapy, combination regimens elicit a higher response rate than do single-agent regimens. Although others have
been described, the most widely accepted regimen for bladder and other urothelial cancers has been M-VAC (methotrexate, 30 mg/m 2 on days 1, 15, and 22;
vinblastine, 3 mg/m 2 on days 2, 15, and 22; Adriamycin, 30 mg/m2 on day 2; and cisplatin, 70 mg/m 2 on day 2, in a 28-day cycle), originally described in 1985 with a
70% overall response rate. 329,330 A single-institution randomized trial comparing M-VAC with cisplatin, cyclophosphamide, and Adriamycin (CISCA) confirmed a 65%
response rate for M-VAC, including 35% of patients with a complete remission. 331 Among 110 patients enrolled in the study, 81 had a primary bladder tumor, 14 had
cancer of the renal pelvis, and 6 had cancer of the ureter. The site of origin of the tumor had no influence on response rate. A randomized intergroup study comparing

M-VAC with cisplatin monotherapy also demonstrated M-VAC to be significantly superior with regard to both response rate (39% vs. 12%) and survival (median 12.5
vs. 8.2 months).332 Long-term follow-up of this trial at 6 years confirmed the superiority of M-VAC over cisplatin alone. 333 Escalation of methotrexate to 1000 mg/m2
failed to improve response rate or median survival. 334 M-VAC is associated with significant hematologic toxicity, and studies aimed at ameliorating the toxicity or
supporting dose escalation with GM-CSF or granulocyte colony-stimulating factor have shown little benefit. 335,336
Patients experiencing a CR survive longer 337 but, despite the regular occurrence of CRs, there is a high relapse rate. In the intergroup study, only 5 of 17 patients with
CR remained disease-free from 8.5 to 39.5 months. 332 Similarly, Igawa et al.337a reported that among 51 patients who received M-VAC, 10 patients experienced CRs,
but 8 relapsed, with a median duration of response of 11.9 months. These considerations have urged the pursuit of treatment that would provide more durable benefit
with less toxicity.
For patients whose tumors progress after treatment with M-VAC, several newer agents have shown single-agent activity in urothelial cancer (see Table 34.2-18). Both
paclitaxel and gemcitabine have response rates in the 20% to 30% range. Phase II combination studies of paclitaxel with carboplatin or gemcitabine with cisplatin
have shown reproducible response rates, generally 50% to 60% in previously untreated (or adjuvant-only treated) patients. 337b Although the response rates are lower
than those seen in the original M-VAC trials, 330,331 the results are comparable to the findings of the large intergroup trial of M-VAC, which demonstrated a 39%
response rate and improved survival. 332 A recently reported phase I trial incorporated a sequential approach: doxorubicin plus gemcitabine for six 2-week cycles
followed by ifosfamide, paclitaxel, and cisplatin in four 3-week cycles. 223a A sequential approach such as this may allow the use of multiple known active agents
without compromising doses, while minimizing toxicity.
Enrollment has been completed in a large randomized study comparing gemcitabine plus cisplatin with M-VAC in metastatic transitional cell carcinoma. 337c A second
randomized study conducted by the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group is ongoing, comparing M-VAC with carboplatin and paclitaxel. 337d Patients must be
previously untreated and have advanced or metastatic urothelial cancer (from the renal pelvis, ureter, bladder, or urethra). This study should help to determine
whether M-VAC can be challenged as front-line therapy in urothelial cancer.
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS IN UROTHELIAL CANCER
The randomized trial comparing M-VAC with cisplatin alone, encompassing 255 patients, was examined for prognostic factors. 333 Factors that predicted a poor
outcome included nontransitional cell histology, poor performance status, and liver or bone metastases. Overall, fewer than 4% of patients treated with M-VAC for
advanced urothelial cancer were alive and disease-free at 6 years. Among 99 patients treated with M-VAC or CMV [cisplatin, methotrexate, and vinblastine], good
performance status, low metallothionein expression, and high tumor grade were significant predictors of response to chemotherapy. 337e Molecular factors important in
tumor progression—p53, the retinoblastoma gene product (Rb), E-cadherin, and epidermal growth factor receptor—have also been identified in urothelial cancer. 338 It
is not known whether, beyond tumor progression, these factors may play a role in determining chemosensitivity.
ADJUVANT AND NEOADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY FOR CANCER OF THE RENAL PELVIS AND URETER
The responsiveness of urothelial cancer to chemotherapy offered the possibility that adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy could improve survival in patients
undergoing curative resections. However, evidence for benefit of either strategy is limited, in part because of the large trial size that would be required to prove it. As
in advanced disease, it is believed that upper urinary tract cancers have the same responsiveness to chemotherapy as do bladder cancers. A small adjuvant trial
supporting this included 18 patients with bladder cancer and 10 patients with upper urinary tract cancer treated postoperatively with a combination of methotrexate,
vincristine, cisplatin, cyclophosphamide, Adriamycin, and bleomycin. 339 Disease-free survivals were comparable for both groups of patients.
Randomized adjuvant chemotherapy trials in bladder cancer have not provided clear support for the benefit of adjuvant treatment. 340,341,342 and 343 Several factors can be
cited for the failure of some trials to show benefit, including use of weaker chemotherapeutic regimens such as single-agent cisplatin, 340 treatment of node-negative
populations,343 and small trial size. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy before cystectomy has also been studied in bladder cancer. A study from the M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center compared neoadjuvant M-VAC (two cycles before cystectomy and three cycles afterward) with adjuvant M-VAC (five cycles after cystectomy). 344 Randomizing
98 patients, no survival difference (60% vs. 63%) between the two strategies could be seen when the study was analyzed at 31.7 months. Neoadjuvant trials in
bladder cancer have also failed to provide conclusive evidence for the benefit of chemotherapy, 327,345 including a recently reported study from an international
collaboration of trialists in which 976 patients were randomized between no chemotherapy and neoadjuvant chemotherapy consisting of three cycles of cisplatin,
methotrexate, and vinblastine prior to curative local therapy. 346 Median survival in the no-chemotherapy group was 37.5 months and, in the chemotherapy group, was
44 months. The absolute difference in 3-year survival was 5.5% (50% vs. 55.5%), an insufficient number to allow a broad recommendation for the inclusion of
chemotherapy in the initial treatment of patients with urothelial cancer. One goal of neoadjuvant therapy is the downstaging of tumor size, potentially allowing bladder
preservation. In this regard, neoadjuvant therapy seldom is applicable to patients with upper urinary tract cancer, as the only candidates for conservative surgery are
patients with low-grade, superficial, noninvasive tumors in whom the prognosis is better (85% at 5 years) and the likelihood of benefit from chemotherapy is difficult to
prove. 347,348 and 349
Most authors conclude that further randomized studies are required to prove a survival benefit for adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy in urothelial cancer.
However, some clinicians administer adjuvant chemotherapy in the absence of convincing data because of the responsiveness to chemotherapy that has been
observed in advanced disease and the incurability of recurrent or metastatic disease. Indeed, the current Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group trial for adjuvant
chemotherapy in bladder cancer is not a randomization with or without chemotherapy but rather an assignment to treatment with M-VAC or carboplatin and
paclitaxel. 337d In the absence of randomized data and specific data from upper urinary tract cancers, a decision in favor of adjuvant chemotherapy seems reasonable,
particularly in patients in whom the risk of relapse is high, in whom tumors are invasive, nodal metastases are present, or the tumor grade suggests an aggressive
biology.
SUMMARY
Cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter most frequently is a transitional cell carcinoma, as in carcinoma of the bladder. Because the biology of these urothelial cancers
is considered to be identical, treatment recommendations have followed those for bladder cancer. At present, M-VAC is the mainstay of systemic chemotherapy for
urothelial cancer; however, hematologic toxicity is significant and often results in reduced dosing. Thus, regimens with equal efficacy and less toxicity have been
pursued, and several randomized trials are currently being evaluated. Insufficient data are available to define clearly subgroups of patients who will or will not benefit
from adjuvant chemotherapy; many physicians opt for adjuvant treatment in the absence of randomized data because of the poor survival that results from tumor
recurrence.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Greenlee RT, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics 2000. CA Cancer J Clin 2000;50:7.
2. Linehan WM, Klausner RD. Renal carcinoma. In: Vogelstein B, Kinzler K, eds. The genetic basis of human cancer. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998:455.
3. Chow W, Devesa S, Warren JL, Fraumeni JF. Rising incidence of renal cell cancer in the United States. JAMA 1999;281:1628.
4. Wingo PA, Tong T, Bolden S. Cancer statistics 1995. CA Cancer J Clin 1995;45:8.
5. Vogelzang NJ, Scardino PT, Shipley WU, Coffey DS. Epidemiology of renal cell carcinoma In: Vogelzang NJ, ed. Comprehensive textbook of genitourinary oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 1998.
6. Grawitz VP. Die sogenannten lipome der niere. Pathol Anat 1883;93:39.
7. Doderlein A, Birch-Hirschfeld FV. Embryonale drusengeschwulst der nierengegend im kindesalter. Sex Organe 1894;3:88.
8. Linehan WM, Lerman MI, Zbar B. Identification of the VHL gene: its role in renal carcinoma. JAMA 1995;273:564.
9. Zbar B, Tory K, Merino M, et al. Hereditary papillary renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 1994;151:561.
10. Zbar B, Glenn G, Lubensky IA, et al. Hereditary papillary renal cell carcinoma: clinical studies in 10 families. J Urol 1995;153:907.
11. Weirich G, Glenn G, Junker K, et al. Familial renal oncocytoma: clinicopathologic study of 5 families. J Urol 1998;160:335.
12. Toro J, Duray PH, Glenn GM, et al. Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome: a novel marker of kidney neoplasia. Arch Dermatol 1999;135:1195.
13. Washecka R, Hanna M. Malignant renal tumors in tuberous sclerosis. Urology 1991;37:340.
14. Mellemgaard A, Engholm G, McLaughlin JK, Olsen JH. Risk factors for renal cell carcinoma in Denmark: I. Role of socioeconomic status tobacco use beverages and family history. Cancer
Causes Control 1994;5:105.
15. Moore MA, Park CB, Tsuda H. European registry comparisons provide evidence of shared risk factors for renal colon and gallbladder cancer development. Eur J Cancer Prev 1999;8:137.
16. Tavani A, La Vecchia C. Epidemiology of renal-cell carcinoma. J Nephrol 1997;10:93.
17. Maclure M, Willett W. A case-control study of diet and risk of renal adenocarcinoma. Epidemiology 1990;1:430.

18. McLaughlin JK, Mandel JS, Blot WJ, et al. A population-based case control study of renal cell carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1984;72:275.
19. Shapiro JA, Williams MA, Weiss NS. Body mass index and risk of renal cell carcinoma. Epidemiology 1999;10:188.
20. Gago-Dominguez M, Yuan JM, Castelao JE, Ross RK, Yu MC. Regular use of analgesics is a risk factor for renal cell carcinoma. Br J Cancer 1999;81:542.
21. Brauch H, Weirich G, Hornauer MA, et al. Trichloroethylene exposure and specific somatic mutations in patients with renal cell carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:854.
22. Ross RK, Paganini-Hill A, Landolph J, Gerkins V, Henderson BE. Analgesics cigarette smoking and other risk factors for cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter. Cancer Res 1989;49:1045.
23. deKernion JB, Smith RB. The kidney and adrenal glands. In: Paulson DF, ed. Genitourinary surgery. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1984:1.
24. McLaughlin JK, Blot WJ, Mehl ES, et al. Petroleum-related employment and renal cell cancer. J Occup Med 1985;27(9):672.
25. Doublet JD, Peraldi MN, Gattegno B, Thibault P, Sraer JD. Renal cell carcinoma of native kidneys: prospective study of 129 renal transplant patients. J Urol 1997;158:42.
26. Brennan JF, Stilmant MM, Babayan RK, Siroky MB. Acquired renal cystic disease: implications for the urologist. Br J Urol 1991;67:342.
27. MacDougall ML, Welling LW, Wiegmann TB. Renal adenocarcinoma and acquired cystic disease in chronic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1987;9:166.
28. Glenn GM, Linehan WM, Hosoe S, et al. Screening for von Hippel-Lindau disease by DNA-polymorphism analysis. JAMA 1992;267:1226.
29. Walther MM, Lubensky IA, Venzon D, Zbar B, Linehan WM. Prevalence of microscopic lesions in grossly normal renal parenchyma from patients with von Hippel-Lindau disease, sporadic renal
cell carcinoma and no renal disease: clinical implications. J Urol 1995;154:2010.
30. Latif F, Tory K, Gnarra JR, et al. Identification of the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor suppressor gene. Science 1993;260:1317.
31. Chen F, Kishida T, Yao M, et al. Germline mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor suppressor gene: correlation with phenotype. Hum Mutat 1995;5:66.
32. Stolle CA, Glenn G, Zbar B, et al. Improved detection of germline mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor suppressor gene. Hum Mutat 1998;12:417.
33. Gnarra JR, Tory K, Weng Y, et al. Mutation of the VHL tumour suppressor gene in renal carcinoma. Nat Genet 1994;7:85.
34. Shuin T, Kondo K, Torigoe S, et al. Frequent somatic mutations and loss of heterozygosity of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene in primary human renal cell carcinomas. Cancer Res
1994;54:2852.
35. Kovacs G, Wilkens L, Papp T, de Riese W. Differentiation between papillary and nonpapillary renal cell carcinomas by DNA analysis. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:527.
36. Zhuang Z, Gnarra JR, Zbar B, Linehan WM, Lubensky IA. Detection of the von Hippel-Lindau disease gene mutation by PCR and SSCP in sporadic renal cell carcinoma in paraffin-embedded
tissue. Mod Pathol 1994;7:86A.
37. Choyke PL, Walther MM, Glenn GM, et al. Imaging features of hereditary papillary renal cancers. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1997;21:737.
38. Schmidt L, Duh F-M, Chen F, et al. Germline and somatic mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the MET proto-oncogene in papillary renal carcinomas. Nat Genet 1997;16:68.
39. Schmidt L, Junker K, Weirich G, et al. Two North American families with hereditary papillary renal carcinoma and identical novel mutations in the MET proto-oncogene. Cancer Res
1998;58:1719.
40. Zambrano NR, Lubensky IA, Merino MJ, Linehan WM, Walther MM. Histopathology and molecular genetics of renal tumors: toward unification of a classification system. J Urol 1999;162:1246.
41. Walther MM, Jennings SB, Gnarra JR, Zbar B, Linehan WM. Molecular genetics of renal cell carcinoma. In: Vogelzang NJ, Scardino PT, Shipley WU, Coffey DS, eds. Comprehensive textbook
of genitourinary oncology. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1996:160.
42. Delahunt B, Eble JN. Papillary renal cell carcinoma: a clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical study of 105 tumors. Mod Pathol 1997;10:537.
43. Kirkali Z, Celebi I, Akan G, Yorukoglu K. Bellini duct (collecting duct) carcinoma of the kidney. Urology 1996;47:921.
44. Thoenes W, Storkel S, Rumpelt HJ. Human chromophobe renal cell carcinoma. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol 1985;48:207.
45. Amin M, Crotty TB, Tickoo SK, Farrow GM. Renal oncocytoma: a reappraisal of morphologic features with clinicopathologic findings in 80 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1998;21:1.
46. Noguchi S, Nagashima Y, Shuin T, et al. Renal oncocytoma containing “chromophobe” cells. Int J Urol 1995;2:279.
47. Delahunt B. Sarcomatoid renal carcinoma: the final common dedifferentiation pathway of renal epithelial malignancies. Pathology 1999;31:185.
48. Cangiano T, Liao J, Naitoh J, et al. Sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma: biologic behavior, prognosis, and response to combined surgical resection and immunotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:523.
49. Ro JY, Ayala AG, Sella A, Samuels ML, Swanson DA. Sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma: clinicopathologic. A study of 42 cases. Cancer 1987;59:516.
50. Jennings S, Linehan WM. Renal perirenal and ureteral neoplasms. In: Gillenwater JY, Grayhack JT, Howards SS, Duckett JW, eds. Adult and pediatricurology. St Louis: Mosby, 1997:643.
51. Maldazys JD, deKernion JB. Prognostic factors in metastatic renal carcinoma. J Urol 1986;136:376.
52. Samaan NA. Paraneoplastic syndromes associated with renal carcinoma: a pilot study. J Clin Oncol 1987;6:862.
53. Boxer RJ, Waisman J, Lieber MM, Mampaso FM, Skinner DG. Renal carcinoma: computer analysis of 96 patients treated by nephrectomy. J Urol 1979;122:598.
54. Da Silva JL, Lacombe C, Bruneval P, et al. Tumor cells are the site of erythropoietin synthesis in human renal cancers associated with polycythemia. Blood 1990;75:577.
55. Lindop GBM, Leckie B, Winearls CG. Malignant hypertension due to a renin-secreting renal cell carcinoma: an ultrastructural immunocytochemical study. Histopathology 1986;10:1077.
56. Dawson NA, Barr CF, Alving BM. Acquired dysfibrinogenemia. Am J Med 1985;78:682.
57. Evans BK, Fagan C, Arnold T, Dropcho EJ, Oh SJ. Paraneoplastic motor neuron disease and renal cell carcinoma: improvement after nephrectomy. Neurology 1990;40:960.
58. Thiede MA, Strewler GJ, Nissenson RA, Rosenblatt M, Rodan GA. Human renal carcinoma expresses two messages encoding a parathyroid hormonelike peptide: evidence for the alternative
splicing of a single-copy gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:4605.
59. Suva LJ, Winslow GA, Wettenhall REH, et al. A parathyroid hormonerelated protein implicated in malignant hypercalcemia: cloning and expression. Science 1987;237:893.
60. Jamis-Dow CA, Choyke PL, Jennings SB, et al. Small ( <3-cm) renal masses: detection with CT versus US and pathologic correlation. Radiology 1996;198:785.
61. Choyke P, Walther MM, Wagner JR, et al. Renal cancer: preoperative evaluation with dual-phase three-dimensional MR angiography. Radiology 1997;205:767.
62. Bechtold RE, Zagoria RJ. Imaging approach to staging of renal cell carcinoma. Urol Clin North Am 1997;24:507.
63. Habboub HK, Abu-Yousef MM, Williams RD, See WA, Schweiger GD. Accuracy of color Doppler sonography in assessing venous thrombus extension in renal cell carcinoma. AJR Am J
Roentgenol 1997;168:267.
64. Sokoloff MH, deKernion JB, Figlin RA, Belldegrun A. Current management of renal cell carcinoma. CA Cancer J Clin 1996;46:284.
65. Karp W, Ekelung L, Olafsson G, Olsson A. Computed tomography angiography and ultrasound in staging of renal carcinoma. Acta Radiol 1981;22:625.
66. Mauro MA, Wadsworth DE, Stanley RJ, McClenna BL. Renal cell carcinoma: angiography in the CT era. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1982;139:1135.
67. deKernion JB. Renal tumors. In: Walsh PC, Gittes RF, Perlmutter AD, eds. Campbell's urology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1986:1294.
68. Narumi Y, Hricak H, Presti JCJ, et al. MR imaging evaluation of renal cell carcinoma. Abdom Imaging 1997;22:216.
69. Lang EK. Comparison of dynamic and conventional computed tomography angiography and ultrasonography in the staging of renal cell carcinoma. Cancer 1984;54:2205.
70. Choyke PL. Detection and staging of renal cancer. Magn Reson Imaging Clin N Am 1997;5:29.
71. Gilfeather M, Woodward PJ. MR imaging of the adrenal glands and kidneys. Semin Ultrasound CT MR 1998;19:53.
72. Robson CJ, Churchill BM, Anderson W. The results of radical nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 1969;101:297.
73. Peters PC, Brown GL. The role of lymphadenectomy in the management of renal cell carcinoma. Urol Clin North Am 1991;10:705.
74. Siminovitch JMP, Montie JE, Straffon RA. Prognostic indicators in renal adenocarcinoma. J Urol 1983;130:20.
75. Guinan P, Sobin LH, Algaba F, et al. TNM staging of renal cell carcinoma: Workgroup No. 3, Union International Contre le Cancer (UICC) and the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC).
Cancer 1997;80:992.
76. Javidan J, Stricker HJ, Tamboli P, et al. Prognostic significance of the 1997 TNM classification of renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 1999;162:1277.
77. Giuliani L, Giberti C, Martorana G, Rovida S. Radical extensive surgery for renal cell carcinoma: long-term results and prognostic factors. J Urol 1990;143:468.
78. Tsukamoto T, Kumamoto Y, Yamazaki K, et al. Clinical analysis of incidentally found renal cell carcinomas. Eur Urol 1991;19:109.
79. Fahn HJ, Lee YH, Chen MT, et al. The incidence and prognostic significance of humoral hypercalcemia in renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 1991;145:248.
80. Gilbert JB. Diagnosis and treatment of malignant renal tumors. J Urol 1937;39:223.
81. von Knobloch R, Seseke F, Riedmiller H, et al. Radical nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma: is adrenalectomy necessary? Eur Urol 1999;36:303.
82. Wunderlich H, Schlichter A, Reichelt O, et al. Real indications for adrenalectomy in renal cell carcinoma. Eur Urol 1999;35:272.
83. Kardar AH, Arafa M, Al Suhaibani H, et al. Feasibility of adrenalectomy with radical nephrectomy. Urology 1998;52:35.
84. Ono Y, Katoh N, Kinukawa T, Matsuura O, Ohshima S. Laparoscopic radical nephrectomy: the Nagoya experience. J Urol 1997;158(3):719.
85. Higashihara E, Baba S, Murai M, et al. Learning curve and conversion to open surgery in cases of laparoscopic adrenalectomy and nephrectomy. JUrol 1998;159:650.
86. Walther MM, Lyne JC, Libutti SK, Linehan WM. Laparoscopic cytoreductive nephrectomy as preparation for administration of systemic interleukin-2 in the treatment of metastatic renal cell
carcinoma: a pilot study. Urology 1999;53:496.
87. Schafhauser W, Ebert A, Brod J, Petsch S, Schrott KM. Lymph node involvement in renal cell carcinoma and survival chance by systematic lymphadenectomy. Anticancer Res 1999;19:1573.
88. Hafez KS, Novick AC, Campbell SC. Patterns of tumor recurrence and guidelines for followup after nephron sparing surgery for sporadic renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 1997;157:2067.
89. Wunderlich H, Reichelt O, Schumann S, et al. Nephron sparing surgery for renal cell carcinoma 4 cm or less in diameter: indicated or undertreated? J Urol 1998;159:465.
90. Choyke PL, Glenn G, Walther MM, et al. The natural history of renal lesions in von Hippel-Lindau disease: a serial CT study in 28 patients. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1992;159:1229.
91. Ornstein DK, Lubensky IA, Venzon D, et al. Prevalence of microscopic tumors in normal appearing renal parenchyma from patients with hereditary papillary renal cancer. J Urol 2000;163:431.
92. Walther MM, Choyke PL, Weiss G, et al. Parenchymal sparing surgery in patients with hereditary renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 1995;153:913.
93. Finney R. Radiotherapy in the treatment of hypernephroma: a clinical trial. BrJ Urol 1973;45:26.
94. Kjaer M, Frederiksen PL, Engelholm SA. Postoperative radiotherapy in stage II and III renal adenocarcinoma. A randomized trial by the Copenhagen renal cancer study group. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:665.
95. Rafla S. Renal cell carcinoma: natural history and results of treatmen t. Cancer 1970;25:26.
96. Stein M, Kuten A, Halpern J, et al. The value of postoperative irradiation in renal cell cance r. Radiother Oncol 1992;24:41.
97. van der Werf-Messing B, van der Heul RO, Ledeboer RCH. Renal cell carcinoma tria l. Cancer Clin Trials 1978;1:13.
98. Juusela H, Malmio K, Alfthan D. Preoperative irradiation in the treatment of renal adenocarcinoma. Scand J Urol Nephrol 1977;11:277.
99. Kao GD, Malkowicz SB, Whittington R, D'Amico AV, Wein AJ. Locally advanced renal cell carcinoma: low complication rate and efficacy of postnephrectomy radiation therapy planned with CT.
Radiology 1994;193:725.
100. Kortmann RD, Becker G, Classen J, Bamberg M. Future strategies in external radiation therapy of renal cell carcinoma. Anticancer Res 1999;19:1601.
101. Bloom HJ. Adjuvant therapy for adenocarcinoma of the kidney: present position and prospects. Br J Urol 1973;45:237.
102. Riches EW, Griffiths IH, Thackray AC. New growths of the kidney and ureter. Urology 1951;12:297.
103. Rabinovitch RA, Zelefsky MJ, Gaynor JJ, Fuks Z. Patterns of failure following surgical resection of renal cell carcinoma: implications for adjuvant local and systemic therapy. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:206.
104. Schmieder RE, Delles C. Renal cell carcinoma and diureticsshould one restrict the use of diuretics? [Editorial]. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1999;14:1621.
105. Onufrey V, Mohiuddin M. Radiation therapy in the treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:2007.
106. DiBiase SJ, Valicenti RK, Schultz D, et al. Palliative irradiation for focally symptomatic metastatic renal cell carcinoma: support for dose escalation based on a biological model. J Urol
1997;158:746.
107. Eble MJ, Staehler G, Wannenmacher M. [The intraoperative radiotherapy (IORT) of locally spread and recurrent renal-cell carcinomas.] Strahlenther Onkol 1998;174:30.
108. Frydenberg M, Gunderson L, Hahn G, Fieck J, Zincke H. Preoperative external beam radiotherapy followed by cytoreductive surgery and intraoperative radiotherapy for locally advanced
primary or recurrent renal malignancies. J Urol 1994;152:15.
109. Kwiatkowski J, Schmidt B, Merkle P, Keller K. Perioperative brachytherapy as an additional therapeutic option in patients with renal cell carcinoma (RCC), either inoperable or after completed
percutaneous radiotherapy. Anticancer Res 1999;19:1597.
110. Walther MM, Patel B, Choyke PL, et al. Hypercalcemia in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma: effect of nephrectomy and metabolic evaluation. J Urol 1997;158:733.
111. Montie JE, Stewart BH, Straffon RA, et al. The role of adjunctive nephrectomy in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 1977;117:272.
112. deKernion JB, Ramming KP, Smith RB. The natural history of metastatic renal cell carcinoma: a computer analysis. J Urol 1978;120:148.

113. Walther MM, Yang JC, Pass HI, Linehan WM, Rosenberg SA. Cytoreductive surgery before high dose interleukin-2 based therapy in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Urol
1997;158:1675.
114. Middleton RG. Surgery for metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 1967;97:973.
115. O'Dea MJ, Zincke H, Utz DC. The treatment of renal cell carcinoma with solitary metastasis. J Urol 1978;120:540.
116. Halperin EC, Harisiadis L. The role of radiation therapy in the management of metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Cancer 1983;51:614.
117. Tong D, Gillick L, Hendrickson FR. The palliation of symptomatic osseous metastases: final results of the study by the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group. Cancer 1982;50:893.
118. Maor MH, Frias AE, Oswald MJ. Palliative radiotherapy for brain metastases in renal carcinoma. Cancer 1988;62:1912.
119. Wronski M, Maor MH, Davis BJ, Sawaya R, Levin VA. External radiation of brain metastases from renal carcinoma: a retrospective study of 119 patients from the M D Anderson Cancer Center.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:753.
120. Pomer S, Klopp M, Steiner HH, et al. [Brain metastases in renal cell carcinoma. Results of treatment and prognosis.] Urologe A 1997;36:117.
121. Becker G, Duffner F, Kortmann R, et al. Radiosurgery for the treatment of brain metastases in renal cell carcinoma. Anticancer Res 1999;19:1611.
121a. Rini BL, Vogelzang NJ, Dumas MC, et al. Phase II trial of weekly intravenous gemcitabine with continuous infusion fluorouracil in patients with metastatic renal cell cancer. J Clin Oncol
2000;18(12):2419.
122. Motzer RJ, Russo P. Systemic therapy for renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 2000;163(2):408.
122a. [No authors listed]. Interferon-alpha and survival in metastatic renal carcinoma: early results of a randomised controlled trial. Medical Research Council Renal Cancer Collaborators. Lancet
1999;353(9146):14.
123. Motzer RJ, Mazumdar M, Bacik J, et al. Effect of cytokine therapy on survival for patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 2000;18(9):1928.
124. Sejima T, Miyagawa I. Expression of bcl-2, p53 oncoprotein, and proliferating cell nuclear antigen in renal cell carcinoma. Eur Urol 1999;35:242.
125. Di Silverio F, Casale P, Colella D, et al. Independent value of tumor size and DNA ploidy for the prediction of disease progression in patients with organ-confined renal cell carcinoma. Cancer
2000;88(4):835.
126. Middleton AWJ. Indications for and results of nephrectomy for metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Urol Clin North Am 1980;7:711.
127. Gleave ME, Elhilali M, Fradet Y, et al. Interferon gamma-1b compared with placebo in metastatic renal-cell carcinoma. Canadian Urology and Oncology Group [see comments]. N Engl J Med
1998;338:1265.
128. Bloom HJG. Hormone-induced and spontaneous regression of metastatic renal cancer. Cancer 1973;32:1066.
129. Snow RM, Schellhammer PF. Spontaneous regression of metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Urology 1982;20:177.
130. Marcus SG, Choyke PL, Reiter R, et al. Regression of metastatic renal cell carcinoma after cytoreductive nephrectomy. J Urol 1993;150:463.
131. Quesada JR, Swanson DA, Trindade A, Gutterman JU. Renal cell carcinoma: antitumor effects of leukocyte interferon. Cancer Res 1983;43:940.
132. Quesada JR, Rios A, Swanson D, et al. Antitumor activity of recombinant-derived interferon alpha in metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1522.
133. Moss HB. Interferon therapy for renal cell carcinoma. Semin Oncol 1987;14:36.
134. Quesada JR. Role of interferons in the therapy of metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Urology 1989;34:80.
135. Medical Research Council Renal Cancer Collaborators. Interferon- a and survival in metastatic renal carcinoma: early results of a randomized controlled trial. Lancet 1999;353:14.
136. Small EJ, Weiss GR, Malik UK, et al. The treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma patients with recombinant human gamma interferon. Cancer J Sci Am 1998;4:162.
137. Trump DL, Elson P, Propert K, et al. Randomized controlled trial of adjuvant therapy with lymphoblastoid interferon (L-IFN) in resected high-risk renal cell carcinoma (HR-RCC). Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1996;15:253(abst).
138. Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT, Muul LM, et al. A progress report on the treatment of 157 patients with advanced cancer using lymphokine-activated killer cells and interleukin-2 or high-dose
interleukin-2 alone. N Engl J Med 1987;316:889.
139. Lotze MT, Chang AE, Seipp CA, et al. High-dose recombinant interleukin 2 in the treatment of patients with disseminated cancer: responses, treatment-related morbidity, and histologic findings.
JAMA 1986;256:3117.
140. Fisher RI, Coltman CA, Doroshow JH, et al. Metastatic renal cancer treated with interleukin-2 and lymphokine-activated killer cells. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:518.
141. Fisher RI, Rosenberg SA, Sznol M, Parkinson DR, Fyfe G. High-dose aldesleukin in renal cell carcinoma: long-term survival update. Cancer J Sci Am 1997;3:S70.
142. Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, Topalian SL, et al. Treatment of 283 consecutive patients with metastatic melanoma or renal cell cancer using high-dose bolus interleukin-2. JAMA 1994;271:907.
143. Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, White DE, Steinberg SM. Durability of complete responses in patients with metastatic cancer treated with high-dose interleukin-2. Ann Surg 1998;228:319.
144. Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT, Yang JC, et al. Prospective randomized trial of high-dose interleukin-2 alone or with lymphokine activated killer cells for the treatment of patients with advanced
cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:622.
145. Law TM, Motzer R, Mazumdar M, et al. Phase III randomized trial of interleukin-2 with or without lymphokine activated killer cells in the treatment of patients with advanced renal cell
carcinoma. Cancer 1995;76:824.
146. Margolin KA, Raynor MJ, Hawkins MB, et al. Interleukin-2 and lymphokine-activated killer cell therapy of solid tumors: analysis of toxicity and management guidelines. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:486.
147. Kammula US, White DE, Rosenberg SA. Trends in the safety of high dose bolus interleukin-2 administration in patients with metastatic cancer. Cancer 1998;83:797.
148. Sleijfer DT, Janssen RA, Buter J, et al. Phase II study of subcutaneous interleukin-2 in unselected patients with advanced renal cell cancer on an outpatient basis. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1119.
149. Buter J, Sleijfer DT, Winette TA, et al. A progress report on the outpatient treatment of patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma using subcutaneous recombinant interleukin-2. Semin Oncol
1993;20:16.
150. Tourani JM, Lucas V, Mayeur D, et al. Subcutaneous recombinant interleukin-2 (rIL-2) in outpatients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Results of a multicenter SCAPP1 trial. Ann Oncol
1996;7:525.
151. West WH, Tayer KW, Yannelli JR, et al. Constant-infusion recombinant interleukin-2 plus lymphokine-activated killer cells in metastatic renal cancer. N Engl J Med 1987;316:898.
152. Yang JC, Rosenberg SA. An ongoing prospective randomized comparison of interleukin-2 regimens for the treatment of metastatic renal cell cancer. Cancer J Sci Am 1997;3:S79.
153. Weiss GR, Margolin KA, Aronson FR, et al. A randomized phase II trial of continuous infusion interleukin-2 or bolus injection interleukin-2 plus lymphokine-activated killer cells for advanced
renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:275.
154. Gold PJ, Thompson JA, Markowitz DR, Neumann S, Fefer A. Metastatic renal cell carcinoma: long-term survival after therapy with high-dose continuous-infusion interleukin-2 [see comments].
Cancer J Sci Am 1997;3[Suppl 1]:S85.
155. Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT, Yang JC, et al. Combination therapy with interleukin-2 and alpha-interferon for the treatment of patients with advanced cancer. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1863.
156. Marincola FM, White DE, Wise AP, Rosenberg SA. Combination therapy with interferon alfa-2a and interleukin-2 for the treatment of metastatic cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1110.
157. Atzpodien J, Hanninen EL, Kirchner H, et al. Multiinstitutional home-therapy trial of recombinant human interleukin-2 and interferon alfa-2 in progressive metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Clin
Oncol 1995;13:497.
158. Negrier S, Escudier B, Lasset C, et al. Recombinant human interleukin-2, recombinant human interferon alfa-2a, or both in metastatic renal-cell carcinoma. Groupe Francais d'Immunotherapie
[see comments]. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1272.
159. Atkins MB, Sparano J, Fisher RI. Randomized phase II trial of high-dose interleukin-2 either alone or in combination with interferon alfa-2b in advanced renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:661.
160. Jayson GC, Middleton M, Lee SM, et al. A randomized phase II trial of interleukin 2 and interleukin 2interferon alpha in advanced renal cancer. Br J Cancer 1998;78:366.
161. Atzpodien J, Kirchner H, Hanninen EL, et al. Interleukin-2 in combination with interferon-alpha and 5-fluorouracil for metastatic renal cell cancer. Eur J Cancer 1993;29A[Suppl 5]:S6.
162. Ravaud A, Audhuy B, Gomez F, et al. Subcutaneous interleukin-2, interferon alfa-2a, and continuous infusion of fluorouracil in metastatic renal cell carcinoma: a multicenter phase II trial.
Groupe Francais d'Immunotherapie. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2728.
163. Dutcher JP, Atkins M, Fisher R, et al. Interleukin-2-based therapy for metastatic renal cell cancer: the Cytokine Working Group experience 19891997. Cancer J Sci Am 1997;3[Suppl 1]:S73.
164. Brandle D, Brasseur F, Weynants P, Boon T, Van den Eynde B. A mutated HLA-A2 molecule recognized by autologous cytotoxic T lymphocytes on a human renal cell carcinoma. J Exp Med
1996;183:2501.
165. Gaudin C, Kremer F, Angevin E, Scott V, Triebel F. A hsp70-2 mutation recognized by CTL on a human renal cell carcinoma. J Immunol 1999;162:1730.
166. Gaugler B, Brouwenstijn N, Vantomme V, et al. A new gene coding for an antigen recognized by autologous cytolytic T lymphocytes on a human renal carcinoma. Immunogenetics 1996;44:323.
167. Ronsin C, Chung-Scott V, Poullion I, et al. F A non-AUG-defined alternative open reading frame of the intestinal carboxyl esterase mRNA generates an epitope recognized by renal cell
carcinomareactive tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in situ. J Immunol 1999;163:483.
168. Belldegrun A, Muul LM, Rosenberg SA. Interleukin 2 expanded tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in human renal cell cancer: isolation, characterization, and antitumor activity. Cancer Res
1988;48:206.
169. Figlin RA, Pierce WC, Kaboo R, et al. Treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma with nephrectomy, interleukin-2, and cytokine-primed or CD8(+) selected tumor infiltrating lymphocytes from
primary tumor. J Urol 1997;158:740.
170. Figlin RA, Thompson JA, Bukowski RM, et al. Multicenter randomized phase III trial of CD8(+) tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in combination with recombinant interleukin-2 in metastatic renal
cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2521.
171. Osband ME, Lavin PT, Babayan RK, et al. Effect of autolymphocyte therapy on survival and quality of life in patients with metastatic renal-cell carcinoma. Lancet 1990;335:994.
172. Simons JW, Jaffee EM, Weber CE, et al. Bioactivity of autologous irradiated renal cell carcinoma vaccines generated by ex vivo granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor gene
transfer. Cancer Res 1997;57:1537.
173. Childs RW, Clave E, Tisdale J, et al. Successful treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma with a nonmyeloablative allogeneic peripheral-blood progenitor-cell transplant: evidence for a
graft-versus-tumor effect. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2044.
174. O'Reilly MS, Boehm T, Shing Y, et al. Endostatin: an endogenous inhibitor of angiogenesis and tumor growth. Cell 1997;88:277.
175. Kim KJ, Li B, Winer J, et al. Inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factorinduced angiogenesis suppresses tumour growth in vivo. Nature 1993;362:841.
176. Huben RP, Mounzer AM, Murphy GP. Tumor grade and stage as prognostic variables in upper tract urothelial tumors. Cancer 1988;62:2016.
177. McLaughlin JK, Silverman DT, Hsing AW, et al. Cigarette smoking and cancers of the renal pelvis and ureter. Cancer Res 1992;52:254.
178. Hultengren N, Lagergren C, Ljungqvist A. Carcinoma of the renal pelvis in renal papillary necrosis. Acta Chir Scand 1985;130:314.
179. Gago-Dominguez M, Yuan JM, Castelao JE, Ross RK, Yu MC. Regular use of analgesics is a risk factor for renal cell carcinoma. Br J Cancer 1999;81:542.
180. Stewart JH, Hobbs JB, McCredie MR. Morphologic evidence that analgesic-induced kidney pathology contributes to the progression of tumors of the renal pelvis. Cancer 1999;86:1576.
181. McCredie M, Stewart J, Smith D, Supramaniam R, Williams S. Observations on the effect of abolishing analgesic abuse and reducing smoking on cancers of the kidney and bladder in New
South Wales, Australia, 19721995. Cancer Causes Control 1999;10:303.
182. Bengtsson U, Johansson S, Angervall L. Malignancies of the urinary tract and their relation to analgesic abuse. Kidney Int 1978;13:107.
183. McCredie M, Stewart JH, Carter JJ, Turner J, Mahony JF. Phenacetin and papillary necrosis: independent risk factors for renal pelvic cancer. Kidney Int 1986;30:81.
184. Gaakeer HA, Ruiter HJ. Carcinoma of the renal pelvis following the abuse of phenacetin-containing analgesic drugs. Br J Urol 1979;51:188.
185. Jensen OM, Knudsen JB, Tomasson H, Sorensen BL. The Copenhagen case-control study of renal pelvis and ureter cancer: role of analgesics. Int J Cancer 1989;44:965.
186. Campo B, Zanitzer L, Torelli T, et al. Renal cell carcinoma and transitional cell carcinomas of the pelvis and bladder in a patient affected by chronic renal failure due to abuse of phenacetin.
Tumori 1986;72:215.
187. Rathert P, Melchior H, Lutzeyer W. Phenacetin: a carcinogen for the urinary tract? J Urol 1975;113:653.

188. Palvio DHB, Andersen JC, Falk E. Transitional cell tumors of the renal pelvis and ureter associated with capillary sclerosis indicating analgesic abuse. Cancer 1987;59:972.
189. Droller MJ. Transitional cell cancer: upper tracts and bladder. In: Walsh PC, Gittes RF, Perlmutter AD, Stamey TA, eds. Urology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1986:1343.
190. Mahony JF, Storey BG, Ibanez RC, Stewart JH. Analgesic abuse, renal parenchymal disease, and carcinoma of the kidney or ureter. Aust NZ J Med 1977;7:463.
191. Stefanovic V. Balkan endemic nephropathy: a need for novel aetiological approaches. Q J Med 1998;91:457.
192. Clayman RV, Lange PH, Fraley EE. Cancer of the upper urinary tract. In: Javadpour N, ed. In Principles and management of urologic cancer. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1983: 544.
193. Orphali SLJ, Shols GW, Hagewood J, Tesluk H, Palmer JM. Familial transitional cell carcinoma of renal pelvis and upper ureter. Urology 1986;27:394.
194. Frischer Z, Waltzer WC, Gonder MJ. Bilateral transitional cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis in the cancer family syndrome. J Urol 1985;134:1197.
195. Lynch HT, Smyrk T. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (Lynch syndrome). An updated review. Cancer 1996;78:1149.
196. Oh SJ, Lim DJ, Cho JY, Kim SH, Lee SE. Squamous cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis with invasion of the infradiaphragmatic inferior vena cava. Br J Urol 1998;82:918.
197. Blacher EJ, Johnson DE, Abdul-Karim FW, Ayala AG. Squamous cell carcinoma of renal pelvis. Urology 1985;25:124.
198. Takebayashi S, Hosaka M, Takase K, et al. Computerized tomography nephroscopic images of renal pelvic carcinoma. J Urol 1999;162:315.
199. Urban BA, Buckley J, Soyer P, Scherrer A, Fishman EK. CT appearance of transitional cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis: 2. Advanced-stage disease. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1997;169:163.
200. Urban BA, Buckley J, Soyer P, Scherrer A, Fishman EK. CT appearance of transitional cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis: 1. Early-stage disease. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1997;169:157.
201. Aslan P, Fitzgerald KB, Preminger GM. Muscle-invasive transitional cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis visualized and biopsied via semirigid ureteroscopy. Urology 1998;52:888.
202. Sadek S, Soloway MS, Hook S, Civantos F. The value of upper tract cytology after transurethral resection of bladder tumor in patients with bladder transitional cell cancer. J Urol 1999;161:77.
203. Grasso M, Fraiman M, Levine M. Ureteropyeloscopic diagnosis and treatment of upper urinary tract urothelial malignancies. Urology 1999;54:240.
204. Wong YCJ, Wagner BJ, Davis CJJ. Transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary tract: radiologic-pathologic correlation. Radiographics 1998;18:123.
205. Keeley FXJ, Bibbo M, Bagley DH. Ureteroscopic treatment and surveillance of upper urinary tract transitional cell carcinoma. J Urol 1997;157:1560.
206. Goldman SM. Endoluminal sonographic evaluation of ureteral and renal pelvic neoplasms. J Urol 1998;159:318.
207. Liu JB, Bagley DH, Conlin MJ, et al. Endoluminal sonographic evaluation of ureteral and renal pelvic neoplasms. J Ultrasound Med 1997;16:515.
208. Ozsahin M, Zouhair A, Villa S, et al. Prognostic factors in urothelial renal pelvis and ureter tumours: a multicentre Rare Cancer Network study. Eur J Cancer 1999;35:738.
209. Salomon L, Hoznek A, Cicco A, et al. Retroperitoneoscopic nephroureterectomy for renal pelvic tumors with a single iliac incision. J Urol 1999;161:541.
210. Zubac DP, Kihl B. One or two incisions for nephroureterectomy in transitional cell renal pelvis tumours. Scand J Urol Nephrol 1997;31:431.
211. Oba K, Suga A, Shimizu Y, et al. Transitional cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis with vena caval tumor thrombus. Int J Urol 1997;4:307.
212. Elliott DS, Blute ML, Patterson DE, Bergstralh EJ, Segura JW. Long-term follow-up of endoscopically treated upper urinary tract transitional cell carcinoma. Urology 1996;47:819.
213. Wong AK, Lupu AN, Shanberg AM. Laser ablation of renal pelvic transitional cell carcinoma in a solitary kidney: a 9-year follow-up. Urology 1996;48:298.
214. Patel A, Fuchs GJ. New techniques for the administration of topical adjuvant therapy after endoscopic ablation of upper urinary tract transitional cell carcinoma. J Urol 1998;159:71.
215. Okada H, Eto H, Hara I, et al. Percutaneous treatment of transitional cell carcinoma of the upper urinary tract. Int J Urol 1997;4:130.
216. Richie JP. Management of ureteral tumors. In: Skinner DG, deKernion JB, eds. Genitourinary cancer. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1978:150.
217. Tawfiek ER, Bagley DH. Upper-tract transitional cell carcinoma. Urology 1997;50:321.
218. Keeley FX, Kulp DA, Bibbo M, McCue PA, Bagley DH. Diagnostic accuracy of ureteroscopic biopsy in upper tract transitional cell carcinoma [see comments]. J Urol 1997;157:33.
219. Brookland RK, Richter MP. Postoperative irradiation of transitional cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis and ureter. J Urol 1985;133:952.
220. Cozal SC, Smalley SR, Austenfeld M, et al. Transitional cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis or ureter: patterns of failure. Urology 1995;46:796(abst).
221. Maulard-Durdux C, Dufour B, Hennequin C, et al. Postoperative radiation therapy in 26 patients with invasive transitional cell carcinoma of the upper urinary tract: no impact on survival? [see
comments]. J Urol 1996;155:115.
222. Hall MC, Womack JS, Roehrborn CG, Carmody T, Sagalowsky AI. Advanced transitional cell carcinoma of the upper urinary tract: patterns of failure survival and impact of postoperative
adjuvant radiotherapy. J Urol 1998;160:703.
223. Catton CN, Warde P, Gospodarowicz MK, et al. Transitional cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis and ureter: outcome and patterns in patients treated with postoperative radiation. Urol Oncol
1996;2:171.
223a. Dodd PM, McCaffrey JA, Hilton S, et al. Phase I evaluation of sequential doxorubicin gemcitabine then ifosfamide paclitaxel cisplatin for patients with unresectable or metastatic
transitional-cell carcinoma of the urothelial tract. J Clin Oncol 2000;18(4):840.
224. Glenn GM, Choyke PL, Zbar B, Linehan WM. Von Hippel-Lindau disease: clinical review and molecular genetics. In: Anderson EE, ed. Problems in urologic surgery: benign and malignant
tumors of the kidney. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1990:312.
225. Melmon KL, Rosen SW. Lindau's disease: review of the literature and study of a large kindred. Am J Med 1964;36:595.
226. Cohen AJ, Li FP, Berg S, et al. Hereditary renal-cell carcinoma associated with a chromosomal translocation. N Engl J Med 1979;301:592.
227. Kovacs G, Brusa P, de Riese W. Tissue-specific expression of a constitutional 3;6 translocation: development of multiple bilateral renal-cell carcinomas. Int J Cancer 1989;43:422.
228. Skinner DG, Calvin RB, Vermillion CD, Pfister RC, Leadbetter WF. Diagnosis and management of renal cell carcinoma. Cancer 1971;28:1165.
229. McNichols DW, Segura JW, Deweerd JH. Renal cell carcinoma: long-term survival and late recurrence. J Urol 1981;126:17.
230. Cherrie RJ, Goldman DG, Lindner A, deKernion JB. Prognostic implications of vena caval extension of renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 1982;128:910.
231. Selli C, Hinshaw WM, Woodard BH, Paulson DF. Stratification of risk factors in renal cell carcinoma. Cancer 1983;52:899.
232. Bassil B, Dosoretz DE, Prout GR. Validation of the tumor nodes and metastasis classification of renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 1985;134:450.
233. Golimbu M, Joshi P, Sperber A, et al. Renal cell carcinoma: survival and prognostic factors. Urology 1986;27:291.
234. Chang AY, Tu ZN, Bryan GT, et al. Phase II study of echinomycin in the treatment of renal cell carcinoma. ECOG study E2885. Invest New Drugs 1994;12:151.
235. Kish JA, Wolf M, Crawford ED, et al. Evaluation of low dose continuous infusion 5-fluorouracil in patients with advanced and recurrent renal cell carcinoma. A Southwest Oncology Group Study.
Cancer 1994;74:916.
236. De Mulder PH, Weissbach L, Jakse G, et al. Gemcitabine: a phase II study in patients with advanced renal cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1996;37:491.
237. Stadler WM, Vogelzang NJ, Amato R, et al. Flavopiridol, a novel cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor in metastatic renal cancer: a University of Chicago Phase II Consortium study. J Clin Oncol
2000;18(2):371.
238. Fossa SD, Martinelli G, Otto U, et al. Recombinant interferon alfa-2a with or without vinblastine in metastatic renal cell carcinoma: results of a European multi-center phase III study. Ann Oncol
1992;3:301.
239. Neidhart JA, Anderson SA, Harris JE, et al. Vinblastine fails to improve response of renal cancer to interferon alfa-n1: high response rate in patients with pulmonary metastases. J Clin Oncol
1991;9:832.
240. Sagaster P, Micksche M, Flamm J, Ludwig H. Randomised study using IFN-alpha versus IFN-alpha plus coumarin and cimetidine for treatment of advanced renal cell cancer. Ann Oncol
1995;6:999.
241. deKernion JB, Sarna G, Figlin R, Lindner A, Smith RB. The treatment of renal cell carcinoma with human leukocyte alpha-interferon. J Urol 1983;130:1063.
242. Quesada JR, Swanson DA, Gutterman JU. Phase II study of interferon alpha in metastatic renal-cell carcinoma: a progress report. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1086.
243. Umeda T, Niijima T. Phase II study of alpha interferon on renal cell carcinoma. Summary of three collaborative trials. Cancer 1986;58:1231.
244. Muss HB, Costanzi JJ, Leavitt R, et al. Recombinant alfa interferon in renal cell carcinoma: a randomized trial of two routes of administration. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:286.
245. Minasian LM, Motzer RJ, Gluck L, et al. Interferon alfa-2a in advanced renal cell carcinoma: treatment results and survival in 159 patients with long-term follow-up. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1368.
246. Bukowski RM, Goodman P, Crawford ED, et al. Phase II trial of high-dose intermittent interleukin-2 in metastatic renal cell carcinoma: a Southwest Oncology Group study. J Natl Cancer Inst
1990;82:143.
247. von der Maase H, Geertsen P, Thatcher N, et al. Recombinant interleukin-2 in metastatic renal cell carcinomaa European multicentre phase II study. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:1583.
248. Escudier B, Ravaud A, Fabbro M, et al. High-dose interleukin-2 two days a week for metastatic renal cell carcinoma: a FNCLCC multicenter study. J Immunother Emphasis Tumor Immunol
1994;16:306.
249. Lissoni P, Barni S, Tancini G, et al. Clinical response and survival in metastatic renal carcinoma during subcutaneous administration of interleukin-2 alone. Arch Ital Urol Androl 1997;69:41.
250. Dillman RO, Oldham RK, Tauer KW, et al. Continuous interleukin-2 and lymphokine-activated killer cells for advanced cancer: a national biotherapy study group. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1233.
250a. Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT, Yang JC, et al. Experience with the use of high-dose interleukin-2 in the treatment of 652 cancer patients. Ann Surg 1989;210:474.
251. Parkinson DR, Fisher RI, Rayner AA, et al. Therapy of renal cell carcinoma with interleukin-2 and lymphokine-activated killer cells: phase II experience with a hybrid bolus and continuous
infusion interleukin-2 regimen. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1630.
252. Negrier S, Philip T, Stoter G, et al. Interleukin-2 with or without LAK cells in metastatic renal cell carcinoma: a report of a European multicentre study. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1989;25[Suppl
3]:S21.
253. Dillman RO, Church C, Oldham RK, et al. Inpatient continuous-infusion interleukin-2 in 788 patients with cancer. Cancer 1993;71:2358.
254. Thompson JA, Shulman KL, Benyunes MC, et al. Prolonged continuous intravenous infusion interleukin-2 and lymphokine-activated killer-cell therapy for metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Clin
Oncol 1992;10:960.
255. Yang JC. Interleukin-2: clinical applications, renal carcinoma. In: Rosenberg S, DeVita V Jr, Hellman S, eds. Biologic therapy of cancer. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
256. Bennington JL, et al. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology. Tumors of the kidney, renal pelvis, and ureter. Washington, DC: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 1975.
257. Batata MA, Whitmore WF, Hilaris BS, Tokita N, Grabstald H. Primary carcinoma of the ureter: a prognostic study. Cancer 1975;35:1626.
258. Hall MC, Womack S, Sagalowsky AI, et al. Prognostic factors, recurrence, and survival in transitional cell carcinoma of the upper urinary tract: a 30-year experience in 252 patients. Urology
1998;52:594.
259. Kosmidis PA, Bacoyiannis C, Fountzilas G, et al. 5-Fluorouracil, interferon-alpha-2b, and cisplatin (FAP) for advanced urothelial cancer. A phase II study, Hellenic Cooperative Oncology Group.
Ann Oncol 1997;8:373.
260. Dimopoulos MA, Bakoyannis C, Georgoulias V, et al. Docetaxel and cisplatin combination chemotherapy in advanced carcinoma of the urothelium: a multicenter phase II study of the Hellenic
Cooperative Oncology Group. Ann Oncol 1999;10:1385.
261. Otto T, Bex A, Krege S, Walz PH, Rubben H. Paclitaxel-based second-line therapy for patients with advanced chemotherapy-resistant bladder carcinoma (M1): a clinical phase II study. Cancer
1997;80:465.
262. Paulson DF, Perez CA, Anderson T. Cancer of the kidney and ureter. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: JB
Lippincott Co, 1985:907.
263. Woodruff MW, Wagle D, Gailani SD, et al. The current status of chemotherapy for advanced renal carcinoma. J Urol 1967;97:611.
264. Talley RW. Proceedings: chemotherapy of adenocarcinoma of the kidney. Cancer 1973; 32:1062.
265. Hrushesky WJ, Murphy GP. Current status of the therapy of advanced renal carcinoma. J Surg Oncol 1977;9:277.
266. Harris DT. Hormonal therapy and chemotherapy of renal-cell carcinoma. Semin Oncol 1983;10:422.
267. Yagoda A, Abi-Bached B, Petrylak D. Chemotherapy for advanced renal cell carcinoma: 1983-1993. Semin Oncol 1995;22:42.
268. Motzer RJ, Russo P. Systemic therapy for renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 2000;163(2):408.
269. Samuels BL, Hollis DR, Rosner GL, et al. Modulation of vinblastine resistance in metastatic renal cell carcinoma with cyclosporine A or tamoxifen: a Cancer and Leukemia Group B study. Clin
Cancer Res 1997;3:1977.

270. Pyrhonen S, Salminen E, Ruutu M, et al. Prospective randomized trial of interferon alfa-2a plus vinblastine versus vinblastine alone in patients with advanced renal cell cancer. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:2859.
271. Motzer RJ, Bander NH, Nanus DM. Renal-cell carcinoma [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1996;335:865.
272. Bloom HJG, Baker WH, Dukes CE, Mitchley BCV. The oestrogen-induced renal tumour of the Syrian hamster. Hormone treatment and possible relationship to carcinoma of the kidney in man.
Br J Cancer 1963;17:611.
273. Karr JP, Pontes JE, Schneider S, Sandberg AA, Murphy GP. Clinical aspects of steroid hormone receptors in human renal cell carcinoma. J Surg Oncol 1983;23:117.
274. Concolino G, Marocchi A, Conti C, et al. Human renal cell carcinoma as a hormone-dependent tumor. Cancer Res 1978;38:4340.
275. Henriksson R, Nilsson S, Colleen S, et al. Survival in renal cell carcinomaa randomized evaluation of tamoxifen vs interleukin 2, alpha-interferon (leucocyte) and tamoxifen [see comments]. Br
J Cancer 1998;77:1311.
276. Gershanovich MM, Moiseyenko VM, Vorobjev AV, et al. High-dose toremifene in advanced renal-cell carcinoma. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1997;39:547.
277. Marsoni S, Hoth D, Simon R, et al. Clinical drug development: an analysis of phase II trials, 1970-1985. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:71.
278. Muggia FM. Closing the loop: providing feedback on drug development [editorial]. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:1.
279. Boyd MR, Paull KD. Some practical considerations and applications of the National Cancer Institute in vitro anticancer drug discovery screen. Drug Dev Res 1995;34:91.
280. Wirth MP. Immunotherapy for metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Urol Clin North Am 1993;20:283.
281. Motzer RJ, Vogelzang NJ. Chemotherapy for renal cell carcinoma. In: D Raghavan, HI Scher, SA Leibel, PH Lange, eds. Principles and practice of genitourinary oncology. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven, 1999;889.
282. Soori GS, Schulof RS, Stark JJ, et al. Continuous-infusion floxuridine and alpha interferon in metastatic renal cancer: a national biotherapy study group phase II study [see comments]. Cancer
Invest 1999;17:379.
283. Elias L, Blumenstein BA, Kish J, et al. A phase II trial of interferon-alpha and 5-fluorouracil in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma. A Southwest Oncology Group study. Cancer
1996;78:1085.
284. Igarashi T, Marumo K, Onishi T, et al. Interferon-alpha and 5-fluorouracil therapy in patients with metastatic renal cell cancer: an open multicenter trial. The Japanese Study Group Against
Renal Cancer. Urology 1999;53:53.
285. Motzer RJ, Schwartz L, Law TM, et al. Interferon alpha-2a and 13-cis-retinoic acid in renal cell carcinoma: antitumor activity in a phase II trial and interactions in vitro. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:1950.
286. Stadler WM, Kuzel T, Dumas M, Vogelzang NJ. Multicenter phase II trial of interleukin-2, interferon-alpha, and 13-cis-retinoic acid in patients with metastatic renal-cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:1820.
287. Motzer RJ, Murphy BA, Mazumdar M, et al. Randomized phase III trial of interferon alpha-2a (IFN) versus IFN plus 13-cis-retinoic acid (CRA) in patients (pts) with advanced renal cell
carcinoma (RCC). Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology ; 18:330a. 1999.
288. Motzer RJ, Mazumdar M, Bacik J, et al. Survival and prognostic stratification of 670 patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2530.
289. Nishiyama K, Shirahama T, Yoshimura A, et al. Expression of the multidrug transporter, P-glycoprotein, in renal and transitional cell carcinomas. Cancer 1993;71:3611.
290. Kanamaru H, Kakehi Y, Yoshida O, et al. MDR1 RNA levels in human renal cell carcinomas: correlation with grade and prediction of reversal of doxorubicin resistance by quinidine in tumor
explants. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:844.
291. Rochlitz CF, Lobeck H, Peter S, et al. Multiple drug resistance gene expression in human renal cell cancer is associated with the histologic subtype. Cancer 1992;69:2993.
292. Fojo AT, Shen DW, Mickley LA, Pastan I, Gottesman MM. Intrinsic drug resistance in kidney cancers is associated with expression of a human multidrug resistance gene. J Clin Oncol
1987;5:1922.
293. Mickisch GH, Roehrich K, Koessig J, et al. Mechanisms and modulation of multidrug resistance in primary human renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 1990;144:755.
294. Punt CJ, Voest EE, Tueni E, et al. Phase IB study of doxorubicin in combination with the multidrug resistance reversing agent S9788 in advanced colorectal and renal cell cancer. Br J Cancer
1997;76: 1376.
295. Sandor V, Fojo T, Bates SE. Future perspectives for the development of P-glycoprotein modulators. Drug Resistance Updates 1998;1:190.
296. Dean M, Allikmets R. Evolution of ATP-binding cassette transporter genes. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1995;5:779.
297. Borst P, Kool M, Evers R. Do cMOAT (MRP2), other MRP homologues, and LRP play a role in MDR? Semin Cancer Biol 1997;8:205.
298. Nooter K, Westerman AM, Flens MJ, et al. Expression of the multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP) gene in human cancers. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:1301.
299. Schaub TP, Kartenbeck J, Konig J, et al. Expression of the MRP2 gene-encoded conjugate export pump in human kidney proximal tubules and in renal cell carcinoma. J Am Soc Nephrol
1999;10:1159.
300. Kool M, van der Linden M, de Haas M, et al. MRP3, an organic anion transporter able to transport anti-cancer drugs. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:6914.
301. Cole SF, Deeley RG. Multidrug resistance mediated by the ATP-binding cassette transporter protein MRP. Bioessays 1998;20:931.
302. Belinsky MG, Kruh GD. MOAT-E (ARA) is a full-length MRP/cMOAT subfamily transporter expressed in kidney and liver. Br J Cancer 1999;80:1342.
303. Doyle LA, Yang W, Abruzzo LV, et al. A multidrug resistance transporter from human MCF-7 breast cancer cells [published erratum appears in Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96(5):2569]. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:15665.
304. Miyake K, Mickley L, Litman T, et al. Molecular cloning of cDNAs which are highly overexpressed in mitoxantrone-resistant cells: demonstration of homology to ABC transport genes. Cancer
Res 1999;59:8.
305. Allikmets R, Schriml LM, Hutchinson A, Romano-Spica V, Dean M. A human placenta-specific ATP-binding cassette gene (ABCP) on chromosome 4q22 that is involved in multidrug resistance.
Cancer Res 1998;58:5337.
306. Freeman MR, Washecka R, Chung LWK. Aberrant expression of epidermal growth factor receptor and HER2 messenger RNAs in human renal cancers. Cancer Res 1989;49:6221.
307. Ishikawa J, Maeda S, Umezu K, Sugiyama T, Kamidono S. Amplification and overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene in human renal-cell carcinoma. Int J Cancer
1990;45:1018.
308. Danova M, Giordano M, Torelli F, et al. HER-2/neu oncogene expression and DNA ploidy in normal human kidney and renal cell carcinoma. Eur J Histochem 1992;36:279.
309. Yoshida K, Tosaka A, Takeuchi S, Kobayashi N. Epidermal growth factor receptor content in human renal cell carcinomas. Cancer 1994;73:1913.
310. Stumm G, Eberwein S, Rostock-Wolf S, et al. Concomitant overexpression of the EGFR and erbB-2 genes in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is correlated with dedifferentiation and metastasis. Int
J Cancer 1996;69:17.
311. Tomita Y, Bilim V, Kawasaki T, et al. Frequent expression of Bcl-2 in renal-cell carcinomas carrying wild-type p53. Int J Cancer 1996;66:322.
312. Murray GI, McFadyen MC, Mitchell RT, et al. Cytochrome P450 CYP3A in human renal cell cancer. Br J Cancer 1999;79:1836.
313. Ahn H, Lee E, Kim K, Lee C. Effect of glutathione and its related enzymes on chemosensitivity of renal cell carcinoma and bladder carcinoma cell lines. J Urol 1994;151:263.
314. Volm M, Kastel M, Mattern J, Efferth T. Expression of resistance factors (P-glycoprotein, glutathione S-transferase-pi, and topoisomerase II) and their interrelationship to proto-oncogene
products in renal cell carcinomas. Cancer 1993;71:3981.
315. Scheltema JM, Romijn JC, van Steenbrugge GJ, et al. Decreased levels of topoisomerase II alpha in human renal cell carcinoma lines resistant to etoposide. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
1997;123:546.
316. Curti BD. Physical barriers to drug delivery in tumors. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 1993;14:29.
317. Jain RK. Understanding barriers to drug delivery: high resolution in vivo imaging is key [editorial; comment]. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:1605.
318. Jain RK. The next frontier of molecular medicine: delivery of therapeutics. Nat Med 1998;4:655.
319. Less JR, Posner MC, Boucher Y, et al. Interstitial hypertension in human breast and colorectal tumors. Cancer Res 1992;52:6371.
320. Aaltomaa S, Lipponen P, Ala-Opas M, et al. Expression of cyclins A and D and p21(waf1/cip1) proteins in renal cell cancer and their relation to clinicopathological variables and patient survival.
Br J Cancer 1999;80:2001.
321. Lipponen P, Eskelinen M, Hietala K, Syrjanen K, Gambetta RA. Expression of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PC10), p53 protein and c-erbB-2 in renal adenocarcinoma. Int J Cancer
1994;57:275.
322. Papadopoulos I, Rudolph P, Weichert-Jacobsen K, Thiemann O, Papadopoulous D. Prognostic indicators for response to therapy and survival in patients with metastatic renal cell cancer
treated with interferon alpha-2 beta and vinblastine. Urology 1996;48:373.
323. Tannapfel A, Hahn HA, Katalinic A, et al. Prognostic value of ploidy and proliferation markers in renal cell carcinoma. Cancer 1996;77:164.
324. de Riese WT, Crabtree WN, Allhoff EP, et al. Prognostic significance of Ki-67 immunostaining in nonmetastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1804.
325. Elson PJ, Witte RS, Trump DL. Prognostic factors for survival in patients with recurrent or metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Res 1988;48:7310.
326. McCaffrey JA, Dodd PM, Herr H, et al. Nonbladder primary site of transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) does not affect probablility of response to M-VAC or survival. Proceedings of the
Thirty-Fourth Annual Meeting of American Sociey of Clinical Oncology;17:337a. 1998.
327. McCaffrey JA, Herr HW. Adjuvant and neoadjuvant chemotherapy for urothelial carcinoma. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1997;6:667.
328. Stadler WM, Kuzel T, Roth B, Raghavan D, Dorr FA. Phase II study of single-agent gemcitabine in previously untreated patients with metastatic urothelial cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:3394.
329. Sternberg CN, Yagoda A, Scher HI, et al. Preliminary results of M-VAC (methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin and cisplatin) for transitional cell carcinoma of the urothelium. J Urol
1985;133:403.
330. Sternberg CN, Yagoda A, Scher HI, et al. Methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin for advanced transitional cell carcinoma of the urothelium. Efficacy and patterns of response and
relapse. Cancer 1989;64:2448.
331. Logothetis CJ, Dexeus FH, Finn L, et al. A prospective randomized trial comparing MVAC and CISCA chemotherapy for patients with metastatic urothelial tumors. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1050.
332. Loehrer PJS, Einhorn LH, Elson PJ, et al. A randomized comparison of cisplatin alone or in combination with methotrexate, vinblastine, and doxorubicin in patients with metastatic urothelial
carcinoma: a cooperative group study [published erratum appears in J Clin Oncol 1993;11(2):384]. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1066.
333. Saxman SB, Propert KJ, Einhorn LH, et al. Long-term follow-up of a phase III intergroup study of cisplatin alone or in combination with methotrexate, vinblastine, and doxorubicin in patients
with metastatic urothelial carcinoma: a cooperative group study. J Clin Oncol 1997;5:2564.
334. Dodd PM, McCaffrey JA, Mazumdar M, et al. Phase II trial of intermediate dose methotrexate in combination with vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin in patients with unresectable or
metastatic transitional cell carcinoma. Cancer 1999;85:1145.
335. Seidman AD, Scher HI, Gabrilove JL, et al. Dose-intensification of MVAC with recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor as initial therapy in advanced urothelial cancer [see
comments]. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:408.
336. Logothetis CJ, Finn LD, Smith T, et al. Escalated MVAC with or without recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor for the initial treatment of advanced malignant
urothelial tumors: results of a randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2272.
337. Dodd PM, McCaffrey JA, Herr H, et al. Outcome of postchemotherapy surgery after treatment with methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin in patients with unresectable or
metastatic transitional cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2546.
337a. Igawa M, Urakami S, Shiina H, et al. Long-term results with MVAC for advanced urothelial cancer: high relapse rate and low survival in patients with a complete response. Br J Urol
1995;76:321.
337b. Vogelzang NJ, Stadler WM. Gemcitabine and other new chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment of metastatic bladder cancer. Urology 1999;53:243.
337c. Oh WK, Manola J, Richie JP, et al. A phase II trial of methotrexate, cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil, and leucovorin in the treatment of invasive and metastatic urothelial carcinoma.
1999;86:1329.
337d. PDQ Summary. World Wide Web URLs: http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/pdq.html and http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/trialsrch.shtml .

Cancer

337e. Siu LL, Banerjee D, Khurana RJ, et al. The prognostic role of p53, metallothionein, P-glycoprotein, and MIB-1 in muscle-invasive urothelial transitional cell carcinoma.
1998;4:559.

Clin Cancer Res

338. Van Brussel JP, Mickisch GH. Prognostic factors in renal cell and bladder cancer. BJU Int 1999;83:902.
339. Gohji K, Higuchi A, Maruyama S, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy for invasive urothelial cancer: experience with a methotrexate, vincristine, cisplatin, cyclophosphamide, adriamycin and
bleomycin (MVP-CAB) regimen: a preliminary report. Jpn J Clin Oncol 1993;23:291.
340. Studer UE, Bacchi M, Biedermann C, et al. Adjuvant cisplatin chemotherapy following cystectomy for bladder cancer: results of a prospective randomized trial. J Urol 1994;52:81.
341. Stockle M, Meyenburg W, Wellek S, et al. Adjuvant polychemotherapy of nonorgan-confined bladder cancer after radical cystectomy revisited: long-term results of a controlled prospective
study and further clinical experience. J Urol 1995;153:47.
342. Freiha F, Reese J, Torti FM. A randomized trial of radical cystectomy versus radical cystectomy plus cisplatin, vinblastine and methotrexate chemotherapy for muscle invasive bladder cancer
[see comments]. J Urol 1996;155:495.
343. Bono A, Benvenuti C, Gibba A. Adjuvant chemotherapy in locally advanced bladder cancer: final analysis of a controlled multicentre study. Acta Urol Ital 1997;11:1241.
344. Logothetis C, Swanson D, Amato R, et al. Optimal delivery of perioperative chemotherapy: preliminary results of a randomized, prospective, comparative trial of preoperative and postoperative
chemotherapy for invasive bladder carcinoma. J Urol 1996;155:1241.
345. Does neoadjuvant cisplatin-based chemotherapy improve the survival of patients with locally advanced bladder cancer: a meta-analysis of individual patient data from randomized clinical trials.
Advanced Bladder Cancer Overview Collaboration. Br J Urol 1995;75:206.
346. Neoadjuvant cisplatin, methotrexate, and vinblastine chemotherapy for muscle-invasive bladder cancer: a randomised controlled trial. International collaboration of trialists [see comments].
Lancet 1999;354:533.
347. McCarron JP, Mills C, Vaughn EDJ. Tumors of the renal pelvis and ureter: current concepts and management. Semin Urol 1983;1:75.
348. Seaman EK, Slawin KM, Benson MC. Treatment options for upper tract transitional-cell carcinoma. Urol Clin North Am 1993;20:349.
349. Tawfiek ER, Bagley DH. Upper-tract transitional cell carcinoma. Urology 1997;50:321.
350. Mahjoubi M, Kattan J, Bonnay M, Schmitt H, Droz JP. Phase II trial of LY 186641 in advanced renal cancer. Invest New Drugs 1993;11:323.
351. Walpole ET, Dutcher JP, Sparano J, et al. Survival after phase II treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma with taxol or high-dose interleukin-2. J Immunother 1993;13:275.
352. Mertens WC, Eisenhauer EA, Jolivet J, et al. Docetaxel in advanced renal carcinoma. A phase II trial of the National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. Ann Oncol 1994;5:185.
353. Flanigan RC, Saiers JH, Wolf M, et al. Phase II evaluation of merbarone in renal cell carcinoma. Invest New Drugs 1994;12:147.
354. Law TM, Ilson DH, Motzer RJ. Phase II trial of topotecan in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma. Invest New Drugs 1994;12:143.
355. Law TM, Mencel P, Motzer RJ. Phase II trial of liposomal encapsulated doxorubicin in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma. Invest New Drugs 1994;12:323.
356. Shevrin DH, Kilton LJ, Lad TE, et al. Phase II trial of 6-thioguanine in advanced renal cell carcinoma. An Illinois Cancer Center study. Invest New Drugs 1994;12:345.
357. Witte RS, Hsieh P, Elson P, Oken MM, Trump DL. A phase II trial of amonafide, caracemide, and homoharringtonine in the treatment of patients with advanced renal cell cancer. Invest New
Drugs 1996;14:409.
358. Berg WJ, Schwartz LH, Amsterdam A, et al. A phase II study of 13-cis-retinoic acid in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma. Invest New Drugs 1997;15:353.
359. Dreicer R, Propert KJ, Kuzel T, et al. A phase II trial of edatrexate in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma. An Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group study. Am J Clin Oncol 1997;20:251.
360. Lummen G, Sperling H, Luboldt H, Otto T, Rubben H. Phase II trial of titanocene dichloride in advanced renal-cell carcinoma. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1998;42:415.
361. Vogelzang, NJ, Mani S, Schilsky RL, et al. Phase II and pharmacodynamic studies of pyrazine diazohydroxide (NSC 361456) in patients with advanced renal and colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer
Res 1998;4:929.
362. Rigos D, Weschel HW, Bichler KH. Treosulfan in the treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Anticancer Res 1999;19(2c):1549.
363. Berg WJ, McCaffrey J, Schwartz LH, et al. A phase II study of pyrazoloacridine in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma. Invest New Drugs 1998;16:337.
364. Stadler WM, Kuzel T, Shapiro C, et al. Multi-institutional study of the angiogenesis inhibitor TNP-470 in metastatic renal carcinoma [In Process Citation]. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2541.
365. Dreicer R, Smith DC, Williams RD, See WA. Phase II trial of suramin in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Invest New Drugs 1999;17:183.
366. di Palma M, Vannetzel JM, Bansadoun G, et al. Phase II study of temozolomide (TEM) in metastatic renal cell carcinoma (MRCC). Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Annual Meeting of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology; 17:330a. 1998.
367. Dumas MC, Stadler W, Mikulski S, Vogelzang NJ. Phase II clinical trial of intravenous onconase (ONC) in patients (pts) with metastatic renal cell carcinoma (MRCC). Proceedings of the
Thirty-Fourth Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology ; 17:330a. 1998.
368. Fishkin P, Stadler WM, Gibbons J, Vogelzang NJ, Vokes EE. A University of Chicago phase II consortium study (UCPC) of CI-980 in patients (PTS) metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology; 17:330a. 1998.
369. Pennington K, Gordon M, Picus JA. A phase II trial of liposomal doxorubicin (DOXIL) in the treatment of advanced renal cell cancer: a Hoosier Oncology Group (HOG) Study. Proceedings of
the Thirty-Fourth Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology; 17:339a. 1998.
370. Sauter T, Boucsein R, Thoedtmann R, et al. Multicenter phase II trial of MTA (multi-targeted antifolate, LY231514) in chemonaive patients with metastatic renal cancer (MRCC). Proceedings of
the Thirty-Fourth Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology; 17:342a. 1998.
371. Gunnett K, Motzer R, Amato R, et al. Phase II study of anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFr) antibody C225 alone in patients (pts) with metastatic renal cell carcinoma (MRCC).
Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology ;18:340a. 1999.
372. O'Shaughnessy J, Flaherty L, Fiorica J, Grove W. Phase II trial of CI-994 in patients (pts) with metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual Meeting of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology;18:349a. 1999.
373. Redman BG, Streiff RR, Nemunaitis J, et al. A phase II trial of diethylnorspermine (DENSPM) on renal cell carcinoma. Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual Meeting of the American Society of
Clinical Oncology;18:351a. 1999.
374. Rubins J, Chang A, Asbury R, Boros L, Navone L. Recombinant Human Erythropoietin (rHuEPO) in advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual Meeting of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology;18:352a. 1999.
375. Kriegmair M, Oberneder R, Hofstetter A. Interferon alfa and vinblastine versus medroxyprogesterone acetate in the treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Urology 1995; 45:758.
376. Pyrhonen S, Salminen E, Ruutu M, et al. Prospective randomized trial of interferon alfa-2a plus vinblastine versus vinblastine alone in patients with advanced renal cell cancer. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:2859.
377. Motzer RJ, Murphy BA, Mazumdar M, et al. Randomized phase III trial of interferon alpha-2a (IFN) versus IFN plus 13-cis-retinoic acid (CRA) in patients (pts) with advanced renal cell
carcinoma (RCC). Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology ;18:330a. 1999.
378. Schwartsmann G, Medina DC, Silveira LA, et al. Phase II trial of vinblastine plus nifedipine (VN) in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Brazilian Oncology Trials Group [letter].
Ann Oncol 1991;2:443.
379. Murphy BR, Rynard SM, Pennington KL, Grosh W, Loehrer PJ. A phase II trial of vinblastine plus dipyridamole in advanced renal cell carcinoma. A Hoosier Oncology Group Study. Am J Clin
Oncol 1994;17:10.
380. Motzer RJ, Lyn P, Fischer P, et al. Phase I/II trial of dexverapamil plus vinblastine for patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1958.
381. Warner E, Tobe SW, Andrulis IL, et al. Phase I-II study of vinblastine and oral cyclosporin A in metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Am J Clin Oncol 1995;18:251.
382. Agarwala SS, Bahnson RR, Wilson JW, Szumowski J, Ernstoff MS. Evaluation of the combination of vinblastine and quinidine in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. A phase I study.
Am J Clin Oncol 1995;18:211.
383. Sternberg CN, Yagoda A, Scher HI, et al. Methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin for advanced transitional cell carcinoma of the urothelium. Efficacy and patterns of response and
relapse. Cancer 1989;64:2448.
384. Seidman AD, Scher HI, Heinemann MH, et al. Continuous infusion gallium nitrate for patients with advanced refractory urothelial tract tumors. Cancer 1991;68:2561.
385. Moore MJ, Tannock IF, Ernst DS, Huan S, Murray N. Gemcitabine: a promising new agent in the treatment of advanced urothelial cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:3441.
386. Lorusso V, Pollera CF, Antimi M, et al. A phase II study of gemcitabine in patients with transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary tract previously treated with platinum. Italian Co-operative Group
on Bladder Cancer. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:1208.
387. Roth BJ, Dreicer R, Einhorn LH, et al. Significant activity of paclitaxel in advanced transitional-cell carcinoma of the urothelium: a phase II trial of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. J
Clin Oncol 1994;12:2264.
388. Papamichael D, Gallagher CJ, Oliver RT, Johnson PW, Waxman J. Phase II study of paclitaxel in pretreated patients with locally advanced/metastatic cancer of the bladder and ureter. Br J
Cancer 1997;75:606.
389. de Wit R, Kruit WH, Stoter G, et al. Docetaxel (Taxotere): an active agent in metastatic urothelial cancer; results of a phase II study in nonchemotherapy-pretreated patients. Br J Cancer
1998;78:1342.
390. McCaffrey JA, Hilton S, Mazumdar M, et al. Phase II trial of docetaxel in patients with advanced or metastatic transitional-cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1853.
391. Witte RS, Manola J, Burch PA, et al. Topotecan in previously treated advanced urothelial carcinoma: an ECOG phase II trial. Invest New Drugs 1998;16:191.
392. Einhorn LH, Roth BJ, Ansari R, et al. Phase II trial of vinblastine, ifosfamide, and gallium combination chemotherapy in metastatic urothelial carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2271.
393. Sengelov L, Nielsen OS, Kamby C, von der M. Platinum analogue combination chemotherapy: cisplatin, carboplatin, and methotrexate in patients with metastatic urothelial tract tumors. A
phase II trial with evaluation of prognostic factors. Cancer 1995;76:1797.
394. McCaffrey JA, Hilton S, Mazumdar M, et al. Phase II randomized trial of gallium nitrate plus fluorouracil versus methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin in patients with advanced
transitional-cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2449.
395. Bajorin DF, McCaffrey JA, Dodd PM, et al. Ifosfamide, paclitaxel, and cisplatin for patients with advanced transitional cell carcinoma of the urothelial tract: final report of a phase II trial
evaluating two dosing schedules. Cancer 2000;88(7):1671.
396. Bellmunt J, Guillem V, Paz-Ares L, et al. Gemcitabine/paclitaxel-based three-drug regimens in advanced urothelial cancer. Eur J Cancer 2000;36:S17.
397. Sengelov L, Kamby C, Lund B, Engelholm SA. Docetaxel and cisplatin in metastatic urothelial cancer: a phase II study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3392.
398. Zielinski CC, Schnack B, Grbovic M, et al. Paclitaxel and carboplatin in patients with metastatic urothelial cancer: results of a phase II trial. Br J Cancer 1998;78:370.
399. Redman BG, Smith DC, Flaherty L, Du W, Hussain M. Phase II trial of paclitaxel and carboplatin in the treatment of advanced urothelial carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1844.
400. Vaughn DJ, Malkowicz SB, Zoltik B, et al. Paclitaxel plus carboplatin in advanced carcinoma of the urothelium: an active and tolerable outpatient regimen. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:255.
401. Moore MJ, Winquist EW, Murray N, et al. Gemcitabine plus cisplatin, an active regimen in advanced urothelial cancer: a phase II trial of the National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials
Group. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2876.
402. Kaufman D, Raghavan D, Carducci M, et al. Phase II trial of gemcitabine plus cisplatin in patients with metastatic urothelial cancer. J Clin Oncol 2000;18(9):1921.

SECTION 34.3 Cancer of the Bladder
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 34.3
Cancer of the Bladder
HARRY W. HERR
WILLIAM U. SHIPLEY
DEAN F. BAJORIN
Introduction
Epidemiology
Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis
Cystoscopy
Pathology and Natural History
Grading
Staging
Pathogenesis
Treatment
Superficial Disease
T1 Disease
Muscle-Invading Tumors
Surgical Approaches
Radiotherapy as Definitive Treatment
Evolving Standards of Care for Muscle-Invasive Disease: Combined-Modality Approaches
Integrating Systemic Chemotherapy
Bladder Preservation
Monotherapies
Case Selection
Summary
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Urinary bladder cancers represent a spectrum of neoplasms that can be grouped into three general categories: superficial, invasive, and metastatic. Each differs in
clinical behavior, prognosis, and primary management. For treating superficial tumors, the aim is to prevent recurrences and progression to an incurable stage. For
treating invasive disease, the issue becomes how to determine which tumors can be cured with single-modality therapies (e.g., surgery), which can be treated without
surgical removal of the bladder, and which, by virtue of a high metastatic potential, require an integrated systemic approach to achieve cure. For treating metastatic
disease, combination chemotherapy is the standard; yet, despite responses in more than 50% of cases, overall cure rates remain low. Recent progress with evolving
chemotherapeutic regimens suggest that cure rates may improve in the future.
A unique aspect of bladder cancer treatment is that repeated surgical biopsy is an integral part of routine patient management, thus permitting molecular genetic
studies of tumors from specific stages of the disease. The results of these studies suggest that bladder cancers develop and progress along at least two discrete
pathways, which may account for differences in invasiveness and metastatic potential. 1 It may also explain why some tumors recur on the surface, without invasion,
while others metastasize with minimal infiltration below the epithelial layers. These considerations, along with identifying several chemotherapeutic agents active in
patients who have progressed on cisplatin-based combinations, have led to clinical trials seeking to define new standards of care. It is hoped that incorporating
molecular genetic factors into the currently used staging systems will change the paradigm of treatment so that the probability of cure is optimized and the quality of
life maintained.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Bladder cancer is the fourth most common cancer in men and the seventh most common in women. More than 54,000 cases (in 29,500 men and 14,900 women) were
diagnosed in 1999, and 12,500 individuals (8400 male and 4100 female) succumbed. 2 Bladder cancer, primarily a disease of men older than age 65, is rarely
diagnosed before the age of 40. White men receive diagnoses twice as often as black men. Additionally, the diagnosis rate is higher in urban than in rural areas.
Bladder cancer death rates declined substantially for both whites and blacks of both genders from 1973 to 1996, approximately 24% overall. 3 This decrease is likely to
be the result of more cases being diagnosed at a noninvasive stage and more effective therapies.
Cigarette smoking is the most important risk factor, although work in the dye, rubber, or leather industries is also strongly associated with bladder cancer. 4 The latency
period from initial exposure to the development of a urothelial tumor is a median of 18 years. Cigarette smoking is believed to contribute to upward of 50% of the
cancers in men and 33% of the cancers in women.5 Overall, smokers have a two- to fourfold higher relative risk of bladder cancer than nonsmokers.Smoking
contributes to the field change of the urothelium, because the urothelium from individuals who “never smoked” shows atypia in only 4% of cases versus up to 50% in
“smokers.” 5 Discontinuing smoking decreases risk, although a higher risk than nonsmokers remains for up to 10 years after smoking cessation. A high fluid intake is
associated with a decreased incidence of bladder cancer in men, and lesser intake of daily fluids proportionally increases the risk of bladder cancer. 6
Dietary components consumed in high quantities, such as fried meats and fats, are associated with bladder cancer. Vitamin A supplements appear to be protective. 7
Coffee consumption and artificial sweeteners confer little or no risk. 8 Several drugs (e.g., phenacetin) are implicated in the development of urothelial tumors, and
cyclophosphamide, used as an oncolytic or immunosuppressive agent, can increase risk ninefold. 9
Exposure to Schistosoma haematobium, a parasite found in many developing countries, is associated with an increased risk of both squamous and transitional cell
carcinomas of the bladder. 8 A link between a history of urinary tract infection and squamous cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder has been shown, 10 particularly in
paraplegics and those with bladder stones or indwelling Foley catheters. An association is not identified between infection and transitional cell tumors.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND DIAGNOSIS
The frequencies of a specific symptom at diagnosis parallel the occurrence of the three clinical subtypes. At presentation, 75% of tumors are superficial, 20% are
invasive, and up to 5% have de novo metastases. Although hematuria is the presenting sign in 80% to 90% of cases, urinary frequency, the result of irritative
symptoms or a reduction in overall bladder capacity, is common. Depending on a lesion's location and depth of invasion, ureteral obstruction may develop, resulting in
flank pain, discomfort, and overall reduced renal function. In rare cases, pain from a metastatic bone lesion or local progression of disease is the presenting sign.
Individuals older than 40 years of age who develop hematuria should have a urine specimen for cytology and undergo cystoscopy and imaging of the urinary tract with
an intravenous pyelogram or computed tomographic (CT) scan. Screening of asymptomatic subjects for hematuria has not been shown to affect overall survival,
although it does increase the probability of diagnosing the disease at an earlier stage. 11 Prospective studies are ongoing to assess the role of screening in high-risk
populations. Other urine assays have been used to diagnose disease and to follow up patients, including flow cytometry, blood group antigens (i.e., Lewis X),
cytokeratins, the bladder tumor–associated test, and tests for nuclear matrix protein, fibrin degradation product, and telomerase. None is sensitive or specific enough
to replace cystoscopy and urine cytology.
CYSTOSCOPY
The cystoscopic evaluation forms the mainstay of diagnosis and staging. It begins with an examination under anesthesia to determine whether a palpable mass is
present and, if present, whether it is movable. A cystoscope is then inserted into the bladder, and urine is obtained to determine the presence or absence of malignant

cells. The bladder is inspected visually, and a detailed notation of the size, number, location, and growth pattern (papillary or solid) of all lesions is recorded. The
status of uninvolved mucosa is also noted. These data are recorded on a detailed bladder map for future reference ( Fig. 34.3-1). Biopsy specimens are taken from
visible tumors or resected in stages to determine the histologic subtype and depth of invasion into the submucosa and muscle layers of the bladder. In cases where
there is suspected or minimal tumor invasion, a repeat biopsy is advised to ensure that all visible tumor is completely resected and to detect the presence of muscle
invasion. 12

FIGURE 34.3-1. Bladder cancer map. AP, anteroposterior; ANT, anterior; LT LAT, left lateral; RT LAT, right lateral; PA, posteroanterior; post, posterior.

Selected biopsy specimens from the “apparently” normal transitional cell epithelium and prostatic urethra are also performed to assess whether a field change has
occurred. The presence of carcinoma in situ (CIS) provides important information if organ preservation is being considered because it portends frequent tumor
recurrences. For patients with a positive cytology and no apparent tumor within the bladder, selective catheterization of the ureters is required, with retrograde studies
to evaluate for the presence of upper urinary tract disease.
The cystoscopic evaluation is also used after treatment to assess the response to therapeutic intervention. For an invasive tumor, cystoscopic biopsy is considered
clinical (T) evaluation and does not constitute pathologic (P) staging because of the recognized inability of cystoscopy to predict with certainty residual disease in the
bladder after treatment. The results of the posttreatment cystoscopy are, nevertheless, being used with increasing frequency to help to select the type of treatment
required to eradicate disease within the bladder and to determine the feasibility of bladder preservation.
The decision whether to perform additional diagnostic studies is based on the results of the cystoscopy and the pathologic studies of the tumor. An intravenous
pyelogram or CT scan is used to evaluate the upper urinary tracts. A CT scan or magnetic resonance imaging assists in distinguishing between a tumor that is
confined to the bladder (stage T2) and one that extends into perivesical fat (stage T3) and documents whether regional lymph nodes are involved (N+). None of these
can precisely predict the depth of invasion within the bladder wall. 13 The presence or absence of distal metastases can be documented with physical examination, CT,
a chest radiogram, and a radionuclide bone scan. Because bladder tumors occur in elderly individuals, a general medical evaluation is essential to document
significant comorbid conditions.
PATHOLOGY AND NATURAL HISTORY
Transitional cell carcinomas (TCCs) constitute 90% to 95% of the urothelial tumors in the United States. 14 They occur anywhere along the urinary tract from the renal
pelvis to the ureter, bladder, and proximal two-thirds of the urethra, at which point a squamous epithelium predominates. More than 90% of tumors originate in the
urinary bladder and 8% in the renal pelvis; primary tumors of the ureter and urethra constitute the remaining 2% of tumors in these locations. Pure squamous cell
tumors, defined by the presence of keratinization in the pathologic specimen, comprise 3%, adenocarcinomas 2%, and small cell carcinoma fewer than 1% of tumors
that develop in this region. Tumors of mixed histology, consisting of transitional cell and squamous or adenocarcinomatous elements, can also be identified. These
are considered variants of the transitional cell lesion, and they do not portend a worse prognosis. Adenocarcinomas may occur in the embryonal remnant of the
urachus on the bladder dome or in the periurethral tissues, or they may assume a signet cell histology. In rare cases, a lymphoma or melanoma develops in the
bladder.
Approximately 70% of newly diagnosed cases have exophytic papillary tumors that are confined to the mucosa (stage Ta) or invade the submucosa (stage T1). They
tend to be friable, with a high propensity to bleed. These tumors may recur at the same part or in other portions of the bladder and at the same or at a more advanced
stage and grade. They are generally managed endoscopically by complete resection. An estimated 50% to 70% of patients with a tumor confined to the mucosa have
a recurrence or a new occurrence of a TCC within 5 years, whereas 5% to 20% of superficial tumors progress to a more advanced stage. An important area of
research is determining which tumors will recur, which will progress to a higher stage, and which will metastasize.
GRADING
Bladder tumors are classified as low-grade (G1) or high-grade (G2, G3). 15 Grading is more important for noninvasive tumors because almost all invasive neoplasms
(T1 or greater) are high-grade. The epithelium has a thickness of less than five to seven layers, normal polarity of nuclei, and no pleomorphism. Papillary carcinomas
of low grade are considered to be relatively benign tumors that closely resemble the normal urothelium. They have more than seven layers of urothelium, normal
nuclear polarity in more than 95% of the tumor, and no or only slight pleomorphism. More important, they rarely progress to a higher stage. 15 High-grade papillary
tumors show loss of polarization of the nuclei and moderate or prominent pleomorphism. Progression to higher-stage lesions is frequent. For invasive tumors, stage is
the most important independent prognostic variable for progression and overall survival.
Primary CIS (Tis), without a concurrent exophytic tumor, constitutes 1% to 2% of newly detected cases of bladder cancer. 16 CIS is found in more than one-half the
bladders with multiple papillary tumors, either adjacent to or involving mucosal sites remote from papillary lesions. CIS is, by definition, high-grade and believed to be
a predominant precursor of invasive tumors. 17 Left untreated, CIS will develop invasive disease in 5 years in more than 50% of patients.
STAGING
The most commonly used staging systems are the Jewett-Strong-Marshall and TNM (tumor-node-metastasis) systems. 18,19 They were developed from pathologic
studies of cystectomy specimens in which the association between depth of invasion and clinical course was first identified. They are contrasted in Table 34.3-1 and
Table 34.3-2. The major difference is that the TNM system provides for the two patterns of growth and clinical behavior of superficial lesions and delineates more
clearly the extent of extravesical spread. Because of this, it is more widely used.

TABLE 34.3-1. Staging Systems for Urinary Bladder Cancer

TABLE 34.3-2. TNM Staging System for Bladder Cancer

Ta lesions grow as exophytic lesions and tend to recur but generally do not invade. If a tumor invades the layer below the mucosa, the submucosa, or lamina propria,
it is a T1 tumor. A breakpoint in both classifications is invasion into muscle, at which point surgical removal of the bladder is considered standard therapy ( Table
34.3-3). Once invasion into the muscle layer is documented, the risk of nodal and subsequent distant metastases increases. The TNM system divides
muscle-infiltrating (T2) disease into superficial (T2a) or deep (T2b) invasion but confined within the bladder. In clinical practice, the accuracy of determining the
degree of muscle infiltration is modest, at best. Even in experienced hands, the correlation between depth of invasion, based on the cystoscopic evaluation, and the
final bladder removed by cystectomy is only 70%. As treatment outcomes are further evaluated, it is becoming apparent that the most important determination is
whether the tumor is organ-confined (T2 or less) or non–organ-confined (T3 or greater). 20 The T3 category includes tumors that extend to the perivesical fat. In some
cases, surgeons take specimens from deep in the bladder wall, rendering it possible for the pathologist to determine the boundary between muscle and perivesical fat.
CT scans or magnetic resonance imaging may help to identify disease that has spread outside the bladder.

TABLE 34.3-3. Treatment Options for Muscle-Infiltrating Disease

The TNM system differentiates tumors extending into adjacent organs from those extending into perivesical fat. A tumor that grows into the prostate, vagina, uterus, or
bowel is classified as T4a, and a tumor fixed to the abdominal wall, pelvic wall, or other organs is a T4b lesion. Urothelial tumors may also grow into the prostate,
along the prostatic ducts—noninvasive lesions with a good prognosis when resected—or directly invade the prostatic stroma, which harbors a worse prognosis. 21 The
TNM system categorizes nodal disease based on the number and size of involvement. It also accounts for metastases to specific sites. Once invasion outside the
bladder20 or nodal disease 22 is documented, outcomes without systemic therapy are poor, with overall survival rates ranging from 4% to 35% at 5 years ( Table 34.3-4
and Table 34.3-5).20,22 A similar bleak prognosis is also apparent for patients with metastases, whose median survival rates range from 6 to 9 months; few patients
survive 5 years.

TABLE 34.3-4. Survival Based on Pathologic Stage

TABLE 34.3-5. Survival of Patients with Node-Positive Bladder Cancer

PATHOGENESIS
The natural history of a urothelial tumor is recurrence. Recurrences may develop at any time, at the same or separate site of the urothelial tract, and at the same or a
more advanced stage. This is termed polychronotopism and has led investigators to postulate that a field defect occurs in the urothelial tract, resulting in a genetically
unstable urothelium that facilitates the continued development of new lesions. The observation of atypia in the urothelial lining of smokers is consistent with this view.
An area of controversy is whether tumors that occur in separate sites in the urothelial tract are derived from the same clone or are polyclonal in origin. Reports by
Sidransky et al., 23 demonstrating the clonality of multiple bladder tumors from different sites, and by Miyao et al., 24 showing concordant genetic alterations in
asynchronous tumors from individual patients, suggest that disparate urothelial tumors are derived from the same neoplastic clone.
Studies of different stages and grades of bladder cancer have shown a higher frequency of genetic abnormalities in advanced-stage lesions. The changes are
classified as primary chromosomal aberrations if they are associated with the development of the disease or as secondary if they are associated with progression to a
more advanced stage.1 These changes represent the activation of protooncogenes by point mutation, amplification, or translocation that results in a gain of function
and the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes, primarily by allelic deletion and point mutation of the contralateral allele, which results in a “negative” event. In
general, deletions of 17p (the TP53 locus) and the RB gene locus are seen in patients with invasive disease, whereas aberrations of 9q occur predominantly in
superficial tumors. 25
Several studies report associations between specific pathologic and molecular markers and prognosis. 26 More significantly, tumor markers are beginning to be
incorporated into clinical practice. Caution is advised when interpreting the results of different studies because of the different sensitivities of the technique used, the
specific stage of the tumor included, the number of patients, and the follow-up interval on which the conclusions are based. An example of the differences is provided
by the reported results evaluating p53 alterations. These have variably been assessed by immunohistochemical staining, single-strand conformational polymorphism
analysis, and direct sequencing of different gene exons. With a panel of antibodies that recognize the mutated p53 protein, nuclear overexpression correlated with
grade, stage, vascular invasion, and the presence of nodal metastases. Multivariate analyses showed that p53 mutation is associated with a higher frequency of
progression to a more advanced stage and a higher rate of death from bladder cancer. 27,28 and 29 The status of p53 is currently being used to stratify patients for risk of
metastasis, probability of nonmetastasis, and response to specific chemotherapeutic regimens. Whether determinations of p53 can provide more information than
staging and grade for the choice between different treatment modalities remains to be investigated in comparative trials.

TREATMENT
Treatment selection is based on the extent or stage of disease. For certain patients, one therapeutic modality is sufficient. For others, a combined-modality approach
is required. For superficial tumors, cystoscopic resection with and without intravesical therapy is preferred. Once invasion into muscle is documented, the standard
treatment is surgical removal of the bladder. After cystectomy, and depending on whether disease is documented outside the bladder, systemic therapies may be
advised. Developing standards of care beyond single-modality approaches has been hampered by inconclusive clinical trials. Demonstrating the superiority of one
treatment approach over another requires large numbers of patients and long follow-up to be clinically meaningful. Furthermore, the higher the morbidity of the “new”
approach, the greater the reluctance to offer it to patients.
SUPERFICIAL DISEASE
The standard initial treatment of superficial bladder tumors is a complete cystoscopic resection. The majority of patients develop new tumors over time, 30% of which
progress to a higher stage. As a result, vigilant follow-up with cystoscopy, urine cytology, and repeat transurethral resections (TURs) as needed are performed every
3 to 6 months, at least for the first 5 years of follow-up. Depending on the number of lesions, the size, the depth of invasion, and the number of prior tumors in that
individual, intravesical therapy may or may not be recommended. Intravesical treatment is rarely advised for the first Ta tumor that is low-grade, although it is
recommended for high-grade Ta, Tis, and T1 lesions.
Intravesical therapies are used for two indications: therapeutic and adjuvant or prophylactic. The former refers to the clinical situation in which residual disease
remains in the bladder despite an attempt at a complete endoscopic resection. This is relatively infrequent except in cases with CIS. Prophylactic or adjuvant therapy
is applied when a patient has shown a repeated tendency to develop new lesions in the bladder. The recurrences may represent new papillary lesions, CIS, or a
combination of both.
Intravesical instillations have been performed with chemotherapeutic agents, such as thiotepa, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and mitomycin C; immunologic agents, such
as bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG); and cytokines, such as interferon and interleukin. 30,31 and 32 For all agents, the mechanism of action is debated. Although the
rationale for instilling chemotherapeutic agents initially was a postulated direct toxic effect on the tumor cells, a nonspecific inflammatory reaction is also believed to
be contributory. Side effects include the local toxicities based on the instillation itself and whether the drug is systemically absorbed. The latter depends partly on the
size of the molecule, the pH at the time of instillation, and the timing of the instillation relative to the diagnostic and therapeutic cystoscopy. All intravesical treatments
have some side effects in common, especially those related to bladder irritation, such as dysuria and frequency, but also other unique side effects specific to a
particular drug, such as myelosuppression or contact dermatitis. BCG differs in one important aspect from the chemotherapeutic agents: A small proportion of patients
develop a systemic “BCGosis” requiring treatment with tuberculostatic agents and steroids. Deaths have been reported. Allowing 2 to 3 weeks for healing after the
endoscopic resection has been performed and before chemotherapy or BCG is administered reduces the chance of severe local or systemic toxicities.
Indications for intravesical instillations vary. Generally, the indications for adjuvant therapy include two or more tumor recurrences in a given year, the presence of
diffuse Tis or multiple papillary tumors, or the identification of T1 disease that carries a high risk of stage progression. The risk of tumor recurrence and progression is
associated with tumor type (Ta, T1, or Tis), tumor grade (low vs. high), length of follow-up (5 or more years), and treatment (TUR alone or TUR plus chemotherapy or
BCG). The majority of papillomas and TaG1 tumors recur within 5 years, but they rarely invade or cause a cancer death. Recurrent tumors are treated with TUR or
fulguration (as outpatient procedures) and are a low biologic risk. On the other hand, almost all high-grade (G3) Ta tumors recur within 2 to 3 years, 20% progress in
stage within 5 years, and 30% to 40% progress by 10 years. All adjuvant treatments using thiotepa, doxorubicin, mitomycin C, or BCG decrease the probability of
tumor recurrences over TUR alone. BCG has been shown to delay tumor progression to a more advanced stage, to decrease the need for cystectomy, and to improve
survival. 33,34 and 35
Tis is generally treated by a combination of endoscopic resection followed by the intravesical instillation of BCG. 36 This recommendation is based on the results of
large-scale randomized comparisons showing its proven superiority relative to doxorubicin 37 and mitomycin C.38 In the past, thiotepa was the most widely used agent,
but it is now used less frequently because of limited efficacy and high frequency of myelosuppression. BCG is typically instilled weekly for 6 weeks. BCG eradicates
Tis for more than 1 year in 70% of cases and prevents subsequent disease for 5 years in 60% of cases and for up to 10 years in 40% of cases. 36
Treatment-predictive information is provided by follow-up evaluation after 3 and 6 months and whether the bladder has been rendered tumor free, both endoscopically
and cytologically. 35 If it is not, some urologists recommend a repeat course of treatment. The maintenance role of BCG treatments has been debated. Some feel that
regular treatment beyond the initial 6-week course further delays tumor recurrence and progression. Others believe that continued BCG not only increases the
frequency of complications but fails to reduce tumor progression. 39 Patients who have recurrent or persistent tumors after one or two cycles of intravesical therapy are
often considered for cystectomy.
TUR alone is generally sufficient for noninvasive papillary (Ta) tumors. In some patients, the disease does not recur and, if no disease is documented after several
sequential 3-month evaluations, the follow-up can be restricted to a yearly examination. In other cases in which recurrences are documented, more frequent and
longer follow-up is essential. In these cases, intravesical therapy has been shown to diminish both the probability of recurrences and the number of tumors
documented at a given recurrence. 40 Because the probability of progression to a more advanced stage is low, however, no definitive benefit of delayed progression or
improved survival has been shown.The decision to administer such therapy must be balanced by the adverse effects and potential benefit of therapy. Intravesical
therapy is commonly recommended if the number of recurrent episodes during a 24-month period exceeds two 41 and if a large part of the urinary bladder wall is
covered with tumors. Repeat cystoscopic examinations are generally advised at 3- to 6-month intervals, depending on the number of tumor recurrences, for the first 5
years, and annually thereafter in the absence of tumor recurrence. 42
Were it possible to determine which tumors were destined to progress to an invasive stage, early cystectomy would be preferred. Currently, no single factor or
combination of factors has been useful in guiding treatment selection for patients with superficial disease. Some surgeons suggest radical surgery in patients with

multiple tumors and frequent recurrences, especially if such tumors recur despite BCG therapy. Other agents undergoing clinical trials for BCG-refractory bladder
tumors include gemcitabine, taxanes, broperimine, and valrubicine (AD 32).
Recurrences after intravesical treatment can develop anywhere that transitional epithelium exists, including the renal pelvis, ureters, and urethra. In fact, one
consequence of the “successful” treatment of tumors in the bladder is an increase in the frequency of extravesical recurrences. 43 In patients with multifocal CIS, the
risk of developing an upper tract tumor is 15% at 5 years, 25% at 10 years, and 33% with 15-year follow-up. Tumor involvement of the prostatic urethra and ducts may
be detected in 10% to 15% of cases in 5 years and in 20% to 40% within 10 years. Patients with a positive cytology and no obvious tumor in the bladder need careful
monitoring of the upper tracts. 44 Tumors of the upper tract are particularly difficult to manage, because contact between a topical therapeutic agent and the diseased
urothelium is limited. The development of tumors in extravesical sites is cited as evidence of the “field change” theory of carcinogenesis. Selected tumors in the ureter
or renal pelvis may be managed by ureteroscopic resection or, in some cases, by instilling BCG through the renal pelvis. Tumors of the prostatic urethra are
frequently managed by cystectomy, particularly if a complete resection cannot be accomplished.
The prevalence of panurothelial tumor diathesis suggests that chemoprevention strategies will be needed as an adjunct to active therapy directed against the primary
bladder tumors. Broperimine, an interferon inducer, and fenretinide (4-HPR), a synthetic retinoid, are being investigated as oral chemoprevention agents, but neither
appears to be effective (National Cancer Institute and Bladder Cancer Italian Trial Group [BLINST], unpublished data, 1999).
T1 DISEASE
The T1 tumor is an invasive (lamina propria) neoplasm. Virtually all are high-grade, and one-half the cases have associated Tis. Recurrence rates are 50% by 1 year,
80% by 3 years, and 90% within 5 years. 45 Considering progression, 50% of T1G3 cases develop invasive disease within 5 years; this number rises to 80% if
associated Tis is in the pathologic specimen. Because of the high risk of progression, T1 tumors are generally treated with intravesical therapy. BCG reduces tumor
recurrence in 50% of patients and reduces the progression rate to 15% at 5 years and 50% at 10 years. These rates mean that 50% of patients with T1 tumors will
develop a muscle-invasive cancer in 10 years, despite the best available conservative therapy. Each present and recurrent T1 tumor has a 5% to 10% probability of
distant metastasis. The survival rate is 70% at 5 years with BCG therapy and resembles that achieved after immediate radical cystectomy. On the other hand, patients
who relapse with recurrent T1 tumors within 6 months to 1 year after an adequate trial of TUR and BCG (one or two courses) are best treated currently with
cystectomy.46
MUSCLE-INVADING TUMORS
Therapies for muscle-infiltrating disease can be divided into bladder-sparing and non–bladder-sparing (see Table 34.3-3). The standard treatment is surgical removal
of the entire organ by radical cystectomy. In appropriately selected cases, an aggressive TUR may be adequate, although this is controversial. 47 In other cases, a
resection is combined with radiation or chemotherapy. These combined-modality approaches are limited to selected cases. End points include time to recurrence, in
either the primary or a distant site, disease-free status, and overall survival.
Radical cystectomy achieves the best local control of invasive bladder cancer. The exact indications vary between institutions. Most physicians recommend
cystectomy for (1) muscle-invading tumors unsuitable for segmental resection, (2) low-stage tumors unsuitable for conservative management (i.e., because of
multicentric and frequent recurrences resistant to intravesical instillations), (3) high-grade tumors (T1G3) associated with Tis, or (4) bladder symptoms, such as
frequency or hemorrhage, rendering the patient a “bladder cripple.” Survival distributions are expected to vary for patients who undergo treatment for these
indications.
SURGICAL APPROACHES
Radical cystectomy in men involves the en bloc removal of the bladder, prostate, seminal vesicles, and proximal urethra, with a wide margin of pelvic adipose tissue
and peritoneum. Loss of sexual function is often a consequence of the operation. In women, the procedure involves an anterior exenteration to remove the bladder,
urethra, uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, anterior vaginal wall, and surrounding fascia. Pelvic lymph nodes are also removed.
Urinary flow is directed through a conduit diversion or a continent reservoir, a bladder substitute. In the standard ileal conduit, urine drains directly from the ureters
through a segment of ileum to the skin surface, where it is collected. No internal reservoir is created. A few patients with this form of diversion develop hypochloremic
acidosis, hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, and uremia. Ureteral obstruction and urinary tract infection are also relatively common.
Continent reservoirs are becoming increasingly popular and include external continent stomas, which the patient self-catheterizes at regular intervals, and internal,
orthotopic neobladders that can be fashioned in both men and women. All involve the creation of a low-pressure reservoir from a detubularized segment of bowel that
is then anastomosed to either abdominal wall (Indiana pouch) or the urethra (neobladder) ( Fig. 34.3-2).48,49 When an anastomosis to the urethra is created, primarily
in men without urethral disease, the patient can void in the natural position. Complication rates are acceptable and most patients achieve urinary continence. An
indication for urethrectomy precludes the creation of a urethral anastomosis, such as documented CIS or exophytic tumor in the urethra but also tumors that involve
the bladder neck, rendering spread to the urethra likely. In addition, elderly or infirm patients or those with locally extensive tumors who are at high risk of local
recurrence are better served with an ileal conduit. An ileal stoma has fewer complications than continent diversions and is less demanding on the patient for daily
care.

FIGURE 34.3-2. The ileoneobladder (A) and the Indiana reservoir (B).

Medical clearance before cystectomy is essential and includes optimizing cardiac medication and nutritional status. Complications of the operation include those
typical for major surgery and those specific to the cystectomy. Among the former are adverse reactions to the agents used during anesthesia, blood loss and
complications secondary to blood transfusions, pulmonary depression, myocardial damage secondary to prolonged anesthesia time or blood loss, and wound
infection. Complications specific to cystectomy include rectal perforation and pelvic abscesses. Early and late complications associated with the urinary diversion
procedure include intestinal obstruction, acute pyelonephritis, ureteral obstruction, stomal stenosis, intestinal fistula, renal calculus, and ureteroileal urinary leakage.
Outcomes are usually reported on the basis of 5-year survival rates. As Table 34.3-4 and Table 34.3-5 show,20,22 survival rates vary inversely with depth of invasion
and lymph node status. In most cases, patients succumb to distant disease, believed to be the result of the continued growth of micrometastases present at the time of
surgery. This, in turn, has led to the integration of systemic chemotherapy to manage these tumors. Survival is also improved and complications are minimized in
patients who undergo cystectomy by experienced surgeons in centers that treat a high volume of bladder cancer. 50
RADIOTHERAPY AS DEFINITIVE TREATMENT
In some countries, external-beam radiotherapy is considered standard but not in the United States. It is also recommended for patients deemed unfit for cystectomy,
based on either comorbid conditions or disease extent. In most series, despite negative selection, results are inferior to those observed with radical surgery. These

results are partially because of the difficulty of rendering the bladder tumor-free by external-beam radiation alone and the continued risk for developing new tumors in
the retained bladder.
In most cases, treatments are delivered in five daily fractions a week, ranging from 2.0 to 2.5 Gy to a total treatment dosage of 55 to 65 Gy without interruptions. In
designing the radiation fields to treat a patient with bladder cancer, the target is best defined by information from the planning cystogram, the CT scan, the
cystoscopic and bimanual examinations, and having the bladder empty to assist setup reproducibility and adequate coverage of the tumor at each treatment. Even
with these efforts, a prospective CT study from Manchester reported significant movement in the bladder target volume, with possible underdosing of the tumor in
one-third of the evaluated patients. 51 Thus, care must be taken to ensure that the target volume is well defined and adequate margins are included, especially
posteriorly.52,53
The initial complete response (CR) rate (T0), based on clinical restaging with a cystoscopy and biopsy after conventional radiation, is 40% to 52% ( Table
34.3-6).54,55,56,57 and 58 For patients who do not respond completely or whose disease progresses locally without metastases and who are medically fit, a salvage
cystectomy is performed. When radiation is used in patients with T2 to T4 disease, the probability of keeping the bladder free of disease at 5 years ranges from 35%
to 45%; overall survival is from 23% to 40%. Toxicities are classified as acute or chronic, with radiation delivery to the rectum and bladder being dose-limiting, and
include symptoms of an irritated bowel and bladder, inflammation of the skin, and fatigue. A persistent proctitis, with bleeding and secretion of mucus, is rare but does
occur, and bowel obstruction may be severe enough to require a colostomy. A markedly reduced bladder capacity resulting from fibrosis may render a cystectomy or
urinary diversion necessary. Sexual function can also be impaired. Occurrence of secondary tumors in the urinary bladder or the surrounding tissue is a potential late
complication. Radiation techniques have evolved with surgical techniques, encouraging the therapeutic index to improve in both increased radiation dosage to tumor
and decreased exposure of normal tissue with three-dimensional treatment planning.

TABLE 34.3-6. Local Control Based on Clinical Staging Radiotherapy Alone

EVOLVING STANDARDS OF CARE FOR MUSCLE-INVASIVE DISEASE: COMBINED-MODALITY APPROACHES
Developing treatment guidelines for tumors of a specific stage is easier than applying guidelines to an individual patient. For example, although the standard
treatment of an invasive bladder tumor is radical cystectomy, numerous reports in the literature of selected series of patients treated by TUR alone, partial cystectomy,
external-beam radiotherapy, chemotherapy, or combinations of these appear to have comparable survival rates. Given the choice, most patients prefer a
bladder-sparing approach, yet cumulative results suggest that some of these alternatives produce inferior survival rates as compared to radical surgery if salvage
cystectomy for local recurrence is not done promptly. Refining the choice of treatment to optimize quality of life without compromising cure is difficult, because
preservation of a tumor-free bladder still has some risk of the subsequent development of a superficial or an invasive tumor.
In the 1970s and 1980s, four randomized phase III trials compared preoperative irradiation and immediate cystectomy to external-beam radiotherapy with cystectomy
deferred for recurrence. Three of the four trials (involving a total of 442 patients from the United Kingdom, Denmark, and the United States National Bladder Cancer
Group) found no significant difference in survival. 59,60 and 61 However, a trial of 67 patients from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center (MDACC) is the only phase III study,
to our knowledge, that shows a statistically significant survival advantage to immediate versus deferred cystectomy. 62 Combined-modality treatment with bladder
preservation as an alternative to cystectomy is still investigational, and we recommend that such therapy be administered by dedicated multimodality teams. This
treatment may be considered a reasonable alternative, if careful cystoscopic surveillance is conducted, in patients who are deemed unfit for cystectomy and for those
definitely seeking an alternative to radical cystectomy.
Strong inferential data also suggest improved outcomes for which randomized trials are not truly definitive. The role of postoperative or adjuvant chemotherapy is one
such scenario. Difficulties are encountered in interpreting both negative and positive outcomes. In a negative-outcomes trial designed in 1980 with the best available
therapy at the time, for example, only 19% of patients enrolled actually received full doses of the planned chemotherapy. 63 Not administering treatment virtually
guarantees failure. Furthermore, instead of being representative of the population of bladder cancer patients as a whole, many trials enroll only highly selected
patients. This situation is illustrated in a study in which only 17 of 41 randomly selected patients completed therapy in a specific treatment program; these patients
were derived from 453 patients with invasive disease seen at the treating institution over the same interval. 64 Extrapolating these results to all patients can be
misleading. If a treatment is associated with significant morbidity or may increase mortality, the question becomes: What is the level of benefit a physician requires to
adopt the approach as a standard? Considering the difficulties encountered in completing clinical trials in this disease, a more effective developmental strategy might
be conducting trials in populations who have specific high-risk factors for developing metastatic disease and in whom treatment effects can be discerned rapidly.
Preoperative Radiotherapy
In the 1970s, moderate-dose preoperative radiation, either 20 Gy by accelerated fractionation or 40 to 50 Gy with conventional fractionation, was the standard. The
results showed that radiotherapy alone could eradicate disease in the resected specimen and the regional lymph nodes in a small but definite proportion of
patients. 65,66 The technique was largely abandoned when no survival benefit was observed in randomized comparisons. 67
A recent trial at the MDACC identified a clinical subset for whom radiotherapy might be beneficial. The trial included 135 patients with clinical stage T3 tumors who
were treated by either preoperative radiotherapy and cystectomy (92 patients) or cystectomy without irradiation (43 patients), using modern-day surgical techniques
and adjunctive multiagent chemotherapy.68 Although no survival benefit was observed, the results showed a significant decrease in pelvic recurrence rates from 28%
to 9% at 5 years for patients with T3 disease who received radiation. No difference was observed for patients with T2 disease. Because the true rate of pelvic
recurrences after radical surgery is not known, as disease in most patients who experience relapse systemically is not restaged locally, the study raises the question
whether precystectomy radiation might be an option for patients who present with extravesical tumors.With drawbacks including the potential effect on the ability to
create internal urinary reservoirs with irradiated bowel, the question requires prospective evaluation.
Postoperative Radiotherapy
When a positive surgical margin is documented after cystectomy, local recurrence rates are high with or without chemotherapy.However, no randomized trial has
evaluated the use of postoperative radiation for patients with transitional cell tumors. A Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) phase II trial of postoperative
irradiation reported the incidence of small bowel obstruction or fistula in 30% of patients. 69 Recently, investigators using multivariate analysis in a retrospective study
of 92 patients from Milan reported that patients without evidence of nodal metastases receiving 50.4 Gy after radical cystectomy had significantly improved
cancer-specific and disease-specific survival rates. 70 With a median follow-up of 36 months, one of 32 irradiated patients has required reoperation for bowel toxicity.
While encouraging, this result requires longer follow-up to be considered for further prospective evaluation. One randomized trial evaluating postoperative
radiotherapy has been completed in Egypt for patients with squamous cell carcinomas. 71 In this trial, the rate of pelvic recurrences was reduced from 50% to 10% in
the irradiated patients. It must be noted that squamous cell tumors seen in the Middle East tend to recur locally and have a low metastatic rate as compared to the
transitional cell tumors that occur in North America, which have a high metastatic rate.

Deferred Cystectomy: Treatment with External-Beam Radiation and Salvage Cystectomy
Four randomized trials have addressed the question of whether a regimen of preoperative radiation and immediate cystectomy compares with one of external-beam
radiotherapy followed by a salvage cystectomy for radiation failures. A small trial with 67 patients showed a difference in survival at 5 years, 62 and a second showed a
lower frequency of pelvic recurrence but no survival difference with combined modality therapy. 59 Based on the sample sizes, a 25% difference, either negative or
positive, could not be excluded ( Table 34.3-7; S. D. Cutler, personal communication, 1983). 59,60,62 Nevertheless, the trials do suggest that deferring a cystectomy until
local progression is documented does not appear to affect adversely the rate of metastases or to compromise overall survival.

TABLE 34.3-7. Randomized Trials of Irradiation Plus Cystectomy versus Radiation and Deferred (Salvage) Cystectomy

INTEGRATING SYSTEMIC CHEMOTHERAPY
The major cause of death in patients with invasive bladder cancer is metastatic disease. In most cases, the course of tumor relapse supports the concept that
micrometastases are present at the time of initial therapy. The primary role for chemotherapy in the perioperative setting is to increase survival. Additionally, a
substantial number of studies address the use of chemotherapy alone and concurrent with radiotherapy to preserve the native bladder. Specific considerations in
evaluating chemotherapy's role in patients presenting with invasive disease include the activity of the various combinations of multiagent therapy—as judged by the
proportion of patients with known metabolic diseases who achieve complete remissions and are ultimately cured—and the number of patients needed to prove the
benefit of currently available therapies. Reviewing the activity of chemotherapy in metastatic disease provides insight into the studies exploring perioperative
chemotherapy.
Chemotherapy
Urothelial cancer is a chemotherapy-sensitive neoplasm. A broad number of single agents with different mechanisms of action are effective ( Table
34.3-8).61,72,73,74,75,76,77 and 78 Complete responses using older agents are rare; most produce partial responses, with response durations of approximately 3 to 4 months.
Recently, several agents were identified as active in phase I and II studies, including docetaxel, paclitaxel, gemcitabine, piritrexim, and ifosfamide. Observations
distinguishing these new, active agents from older drugs are moderate activity as both first- and second-line therapy 79,80; favorable toxicity profiles 73,76; drug
metabolism independent of renal excretion 61; and CR in metastatic disease to a single agent. 73,76

TABLE 34.3-8. Cumulative Results with Single-Agent Chemotherapy Used in Metastatic or Unresectable Disease

Combination Chemotherapy: Randomized Trial Results
Clinical outcomes (i.e., response and survival) are better for multiagent therapy than those observed with single-agent treatment in advanced TCC. The regimens
most extensively studied in the 1980s were cisplatin, cyclophosphamide, and Adriamycin (CISCA); cisplatin, methotrexate, and vinblastine (CMV); and methotrexate,
vinblastine, Adriamycin, and cisplatin (M-VAC; Table 34.3-9).74,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90,91,92,93,94,95,96,97,98,99,100,101,102,103,104 and 105 These regimens demonstrate strikingly
similar CR and overall response proportions in 20% to 22% and 50% to 60% of patients, respectively. The comparable efficacy and toxicity of the various regimens
were discerned by randomized trial results. The CMV combination was superior to methotrexate and vinblastine without cisplatin;CMV was associated with
significantly longer progression-free survival (4.5 months vs. 2.5 months) and 1-year survival (28% vs. 16%). 83 M-VAC was superior to single-agent cisplatin in both
response and survival. 84 In the only direct comparison of cisplatin-based combinations, M-VAC was superior to CISCA. 85 Despite the popularity of the CMV regimen,
median survival in one randomized trial was only 7 months; CMV has not been directly compared with M-VAC. It is concluded from these studies that cisplatin-based
therapy should be the primary consideration for all patients requiring chemotherapy, and that M-VAC should be the regimen of choice.

TABLE 34.3-9. Cisplatin - and Carboplatin-Containing Regimens Used to Treat Urothelial Carcinoma

Undermining the favorable response data for M-VAC in advanced TCC are the toxicity of the regimen and the disappointing long-term survival. Approximately 20% to
30% of patients develop neutropenia and fever, and 10% to 20% experience mucositis. 84 Diminished renal function, a decrease in auditory acuity, and peripheral
neuropathy may also be seen. Death as a complication of M-VAC therapy occurs in 3% to 4% of patients. 81,84 Despite promising overall response proportions, the
median survival for patients receiving M-VAC is consistently reported to be approximately 1 year, 81,84,85 and follow-up of the intergroup trial reported that only 3.7% of
M-VAC patients remained continuously relapse-free at 6 years. 106
Impact of Pretreatment Prognostic Factors and Postchemotherapy Surgery
Several analyses demonstrated that pretreatment prognostic features affect the outcome of patients treated with M-VAC chemotherapy for metastatic TCC. 84,106,107
Prognostic factors predicting poor response and survival are bone or liver metastases (determined either by radiographic abnormality or by an elevated baseline
alkaline phosphatase) and poor performance status. The intergroup study by Loehrer et al. 84 reported a median survival of 18.2 months for patients with the most
favorable combination of prognostic features, compared with only 4.4 months for patients with the least favorable combination; none of the patients with liver or bone
metastasis and only one patient with Karnofsky performance score (KPS) of less than 80% survived for 6 years. 106 The impact of prognostic features on survival was
further emphasized in an analysis of more than 200 patients with metastatic or unresectable disease treated with M-VAC in Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center
(MSKCC) phase I and II trials. The median survival was 14.8 months at a median follow-up of 40 months, and 5-year survival was 17%; at the time of the report, 19 of
the 203 patients (9%) were alive. Three strata with distinctly different long-term survival rates were developed using the presence of any visceral metastasis and a
KPS of less than 80. 108 No patient with both a poor KPS and visceral metastases experienced long-term survival, in contrast to an 11% 5-year survival in patients with
either a poor KPS or visceral disease and a 33% likelihood of 5-year survival in patients with none of these poor-risk features.
Several studies show that postchemotherapy resection of persistent viable cancer in selected patients after M-VAC and CMV chemotherapy for unresectable or
metastatic disease enhances long-term survival in patients who would have otherwise succumbed to their disease. 109,110 and 111 Criteria to select the optimal candidates
are not uniform. However, retrospective analysis from MSKCC suggests that benefit is greatest in patients who have had a major response to chemotherapy and have
persistent disease restricted to the primary lesion or a single site of metastatic disease in a lymph node or lung. 111
Dose-Intensity Studies
One strategy for improving therapeutic response is to increase drug delivery (or dose intensity in milligrams per square meter per week). This approach appeared
promising because of a dose-response relationship suggested for cisplatin and doxorubicin and evidence of benefit in patients failing standard-dose therapy when
hematopoietic growth factors were given to increase drug dose in the salvage setting. 112 Trials have reported dose-intensive therapy with M-VAC using either
recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor or human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. 113,114,115 and 116 These studies demonstrated that
it is possible to increase drug delivery by as much as 60% over standard-dose M-VAC either by increasing the doses of the individual agents or decreasing the
cycling intervals (or both). Toxicities seen with the dose-intense regimens range from side effects that resemble standard-dose M-VAC to substantially increased
toxicity and an increased toxic death rate. 113,116 Despite more intensive chemotherapy, the CR proportions for these studies still approximate 20%, suggesting no
meaningful impact on survival. A randomized trial in the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) is evaluating whether dose-intense
M-VAC improves survival over standard-dose therapy.
NEW CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC REGIMENS. Developing new agents and combining agents is necessary if improvement in long-term survival or reduction of
chemotherapy-associated toxicity (or both) is to be achieved. In combination chemotherapy trials, several cytotoxic agents introduced in this decade are undergoing
evaluation for treating urothelial tumors. The most extensively studied agents are gemcitabine, a deoxycytidine analog with structural similarities to cytarabine, and
the taxanes: paclitaxel and docetaxel.
Most combination regimens include a platinum analog, either cisplatin or carboplatin, in part because of the reported complementary or synergistic actions of these
new agents with platinum analogs. The single-agent activity of carboplatin in urothelial cancer appears less than that observed with cisplatin (see Table
34.3-8).61,72,73,74,75,76,77 and 78 Controversy exists as to whether the efficacy of carboplatin combinations compares favorably with cisplatin combinations. A small,
randomized phase II trial compared M-VAC with the carboplatin-based regimen of methotrexate, carboplatin, and vinblastine. 117 Relative to M-VAC, the
carboplatin-containing regimen produced a lower response proportion (52% vs. 39%) and shorter median survival (16 vs. 9 months). Criticisms of the trial included the
phase II natureof the study (i.e., a small number of patients) and the lack of doxorubicin in the carboplatin arm.
Cisplatin combinations are associated with greater renal, neurologic, and auditory toxicity; they are more difficult to administer to patients who have renal impairment
or other medical comorbidities. In contrast, carboplatin is not only more feasible in the patient with impaired renal function or medical comorbidities, it is more easily
administered in the outpatient setting. Although carboplatin has greater myelosuppression, this toxicity is easily managed by adjusting the dose according to the
patient's creatinine clearance to provide a predetermined area under the plasma concentration–time curve (AUC) of the drug. The controversy surrounding the
efficacy of carboplatin- versus cisplatin-containing therapy in phase II trials is being addressed by ongoing and planned randomized phase III trials.
NEW TWO- AND THREE-DRUG COMBINATIONS AS FIRST-LINE THERAPY. The combinations of either paclitaxel (42% to 55% single-agent activity) 61,76 or
docetaxel (31% activity) 78,118 with cisplatin (at 70 to 75 mg/m 2/course) have been evaluated in four phase II trials. 86,87,88 and 89 Three trials evaluating paclitaxel at 135 to
175 mg/m2 over 3 hours in combination with cisplatin produced overall response rates ranging from 62% to 72% and CR rates ranging from 10% to 34%. 86,87 and 88
Responses were predominantly in lymph node and lung metastases; however, some patients with liver or adrenal metastases also responded. 87 A median survival of
13 months was reported in one of the trials. 86 Myelosuppression and neurotoxicity were the most common toxicities. This two-drug combination is active, generally
well tolerated, and can be given in the outpatient setting. Docetaxel (75 mg/m 2) and cisplatin had a major response in 60% of patients; 7 of 25 (28%) patients
achieved CR, with a median survival rate of 13.6 months. 89 The most predominant toxicity was granulocytopenia, but fluid retention, neuropathy, and mucositis were
also observed. No plans exist to compare further either the paclitaxel-cisplatin or the docetaxel-cisplatin doublet to standard therapy.
The paclitaxel-carboplatin doublet has been evaluated in numerous phase II trials. The initial phase I–phase II trial exploring paclitaxel doses of 150 to 225 mg/m 2 in a
3-hour infusion plus carboplatin at an AUC of 6 every 3 weeks reported an overall response rate of 51%. 90 Trials 90 through 97 of more than 200 patients treated with
paclitaxel (150 to 225 mg/m 2) and carboplatin (AUC of 5 to 6) have provided several important observations. The regimen is well tolerated; myelosuppression is the
most common toxicity, but granulocytopenic fever and cycling delays for hematologic toxicity are uncommon. Neurotoxicity is commonly observed but is not severe.
Response rates vary, ranging from 14% to 65%, with CR rates ranging from 0% to 40%. Efficacy is highest among patients with lymph node metastases, but patients
with lung and liver metastases also respond. No clear dose-response correlations exist for either paclitaxel or carboplatin. Mature results are not available for all
studies, but the survival rate ranges from 8.5 to 9.5 months in the three trials reporting survival data. 95,96 and 97 It is as yet unclear whether this doublet has survival
inferior to the approximately 1-year survival seen with M-VAC or that the reported phase II results are affected by pretreatment prognostic factors, 88 the small number
of patients resulting in wide confidence intervals of efficacy parameters, or the inclusion of previously treated patients. 95,96 and 97
Gemcitabine (single-agent activity of 22% to 28%) 73,74 and 75,79 has been examined in combination with cisplatin. Von der Maase et al. 98 reported on 37 assessable
patients using a weekly regimen of both gemcitabine and cisplatin. Although the response rate was 41%, toxicity was severe, with granulocytopenia of at least grade 3
in 46% and thrombocytopenia of at least grade 3 in 71% of patients. The schedule of gemcitabine at 1000 mg/m 2 on days 1, 8, and 15 and cisplatin on day 1 was
explored in two separate trials conducted in the United States and Canada. 99,100 Kaufman et al.99 explored this schedule with an initial cisplatin dose of 100 mg/m 2.
Toxicity was excessive, so the dose of cisplatin was reduced to 75 mg/m 2, resulting in better patient tolerance. The overall response proportion in 38 assessable
patients was 59%. Moore et al. 100 reported a 57% overall response rate with a 21% CR proportion using the same dose and schedule of gemcitabine and a cisplatin
dose of 70 mg/m2. This regimen is well tolerated, with predominantly hematologic toxicity and a reported median survival of 14 months. The gemcitabine-carboplatin
combination is also active, with a 68% overall response proportion. 101
The three-drug combination of ifosfamide, paclitaxel (Taxol), and cisplatin (platinum) (ITP) recycled every 4 weeks was reported by MSKCC investigators to be
effective and tolerable in previously untreated patients with advanced TCC. 102,103 Thirty of 44 (68%) assessable patients (95% confidence interval, 52% to 81%)
demonstrated a major response (10 complete [23%], 20 partial [45%]), with durations of response ranging from 4 to 36 months. At a median follow-up of 28 months,
the median survival was 20 months. 103 Eleven (25%) patients are disease-free. The median survival of 20 months in this trial is the best reported result for
unresectable or metastatic TCC patients receiving chemotherapy and is greater than previously observed experiences with M-VAC (median survival, 12 to 13

months).81 The possibility exists that adding ifosfamide to a cisplatin-based combination may enhance survival; alternatively, the improved survival may be a
consequence of favorable pretreatment prognostic factors and aggressive postchemotherapy surgery.
The combinations of gemcitabine, paclitaxel, and either cisplatin or carboplatin have been reported in two separate trials. 104,105 The cisplatin-containing triplet,
reported for 29 assessable patients, demonstrated a 79% response proportion. 104 Myelosuppression and asthenia were the predominant toxicities. Investigators at
Wayne State University explored the paclitaxel-gemcitabine-carboplatin regimen, building on prior experience with the paclitaxel-carboplatin regimen. In 19
assessable patients, 11 (58%) had a major response. 105
Tu et al. 119 evaluated paclitaxel, cisplatin, and methotrexate every 3 weeks in 25 previously treated patients. Partial responses lasting from 2 to more than 9 months
were achieved in ten patients (40%), including three of seven patients with liver metastases. The primary toxicity was hematologic, with 9 of 25 patients experiencing
severe neutropenia, resulting in six episodes of neutropenic fever requiring hospitalization. Severe thrombocytopenia, defined as grade 3 or greater, occurred in 8 of
25 patients. Meyers et al. 120 evaluated the triplet of paclitaxel-carboplatin-methotrexate in 23 assessable patients. Adjunctive care included leucovorin and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). Fourteen of 23 patients (61%) responded, including four complete responses, resulting in a median survival of 16 months. The
primary toxicities were neutropenia and neurotoxicity. Leucovorin was subsequently eliminated from the regimen, and reduction of the carboplatin dose to AUC 5
allowed deletion of G-CSF. 121
Gallium nitrate as second-line therapy sponsored first-line combinations. The initial report of the three-drug regimen of vinblastine, ifosfamide, and gallium nitrate had
a 67% major response rate.122 Activity was confirmed in the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) trial, with 44% of patients responding. 123 Toxicity was
substantial; ocular blindness, arrhythmias, and myelosuppression were reported. A separate randomized phase II study examined the efficacy of gallium nitrate plus
fluorouracil versus dose-intense M-VAC, finding only marginal activity for the gallium combination (12% major response proportion). 124 The toxicity profile and the cost
of administering gallium nitrate on a 5-day inpatient schedule limit further study. Seven of 15 (47%) patients obtained a major response to the combination of
paclitaxel, vinblastine, and cisplatin. 125 Calvo et al. 126 evaluated the paclitaxel-cisplatin- luorouracil triplet in both chemotherapy-naïve and previously treated patients.
Among 12 patients, eight partial (67%) responses were observed, for an overall response rate of 75%. Grade 3 or 4 toxicity included neutropenia, thrombocytopenia,
mucositis, diarrhea and vomiting, and paralytic ileus.
SECOND-LINE THERAPY AND FIRST-LINE REGIMENS WITHOUT PLATINUM ANALOGS. Regimens devoid of a platinum analog have not been extensively
studied. Sweeney et al. 80 reported the combination of ifosfamide, 1000 mg/m 2 days 1 to 4, plus paclitaxel, 135 mg/m 2 by 24-hour infusion on day 4 of a 3-week cycle,
using G-CSF support. Twenty-six patients were evaluable for response: Two of 13 patients (15%) treated in a second-line setting responded with CR, as did 4 (1 CR,
3 partial responses) of 13 (31%) previously untreated patients. The authors concluded that ifosfamide did not add to paclitaxel activity as first-line therapy and that
paclitaxel did not increase the second-line activity of ifosfamide. The ECOG is currently exploring the combination of docetaxel and gemcitabine in
chemotherapy-naïve patients, and the Hoosier Oncology Group is evaluating the combination of paclitaxel and gemcitabine.
Limited experience exists for the paclitaxel-carboplatin combination in patients with prior therapy or preexisting renal impairment. Otto et al. 127 performed a phase II
trial of this doublet in combination with an antimotility agent (acellular pertussis vaccine) in 18 patients with cisplatin- and methotrexate-resistant metastatic cancer; 4
(22%) patients responded, including 2 CR (11%). It is implied from these studies that multiple-agent regimens offer no advantage over single-agent therapy in patients
eligible for second-line therapy.
Randomized Trials: Developing a New Standard of Chemotherapy for Advanced Disease
Initiatives to develop a new standard of therapy with greater efficacy, better tolerance, or both are essential to improve conventional therapy. Randomized comparison
to M-VAC is a critical step in this process, and two randomized comparisons to M-VAC recently have been reported. Preliminary data for improved drug delivery with
dose-intense M-VAC prompted a large, prospective trial conducted by the EORTC that compares dose-intense M-VAC with conventional M-VAC to evaluate response
and survival differences. A preliminary analysis demonstrated that the response rate was slightly higher in the high-dose M-VAC arm, but no statistical differences in
the median survival were observed, suggesting no substantial benefit by increasing drug delivery of all four drugs simultaneously. 128 Longer follow-up is necessary to
determine whether dose-intense M-VAC results in any meaningful impact on long-term survival. The second international, multicenter randomized trial compared the
gemcitabine-cisplatin doublet, a combination with identified activity and good patient tolerance, to the M-VAC combination. Preliminary analysis in this trial with more
than 400 patients demonstrated that the complete and overall response proportions were similar, with no statistical differences. 129 The survival distributions with early
follow-up were also comparable, but long-term survival rates were not available. Drug tolerance and toxicity profiles favored the gemcitabine-cisplatin doublet. The
two-drug combination was associated with delivery of a greater number of chemotherapy cycles, a smaller incidence of treatment-related death, and a lower incidence
of infectious complications. Based on the results of this randomized trial, gemcitabine and cisplatin should be considered a conventional chemotherapy standard for
TCC.
Two randomized trials are ongoing. 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) combined with interferon-a alone and together with cisplatin has been reported to be active. 130 A randomized
comparison of the 5-FU, interferon-a, and cisplatin combination and M-VAC regimens in chemotherapy-naïve patients is ongoing at the MDACC. The second trial
ongoing in the ECOG compares the paclitaxel-carboplatin regimen with M-VAC. Carboplatin and paclitaxel is a regimen that has a favorable toxicity profile; it is easy
to administer, has activity in phase II studies, and is frequently used in clinical practice. However, questions remain regarding the efficacy of this regimen in relation to
M-VAC; this controversy is being addressed by comparing the paclitaxel-carboplatin regimen to standard M-VAC to determine whether this new doublet has similar
efficacy with less toxicity. The phase II data for combination of gemcitabine, paclitaxel, and cisplatin have been encouraging. 104 An international randomized trial has
been proposed to compare this triplet to standard therapy.
A chemotherapy hypothesis novel to urothelial cancer is being tested at MSKCC. The Norton-Simon model, a mathematical prediction of chemotherapy sensitivity
based on gompertzian growth rates displayed by malignant tumors, predicts that efficacy is increased with sequenced “dose-dense” therapy using either single agents
or combination regimens compared to either alternating chemotherapeutic regimens or combination chemotherapy in which maximal doses of each agent are limited
by overlapping toxicity. 131,132 The sequence of Adriamycin plus gemcitabine (AG) followed by the ITP combination is under evaluation for treating unresectable or
metastatic TCC. A phase I study explored the feasibility of doxorubicin at 30 to 50 mg/m 2 plus gemcitabine at 1000 to 2000 mg/m 2 every 2 weeks for six treatment
cycles with G-CSF in the AG/ITP sequence. 133 Among the 14 patients assessable for response to the entire sequence, complete regression was observed in 3 (21%),
and more than 50% regression occurred in 6 (43%), for an overall response rate of 64%. All six patients at the highest dose levels responded. The most common
grade 3 and grade 4 toxicities were anemia and neutropenia. A preliminary report of an MSKCC phase II trial of AG at a doxorubicin dose of 50 mg/m 2 and
gemcitabine dose of 2000 mg/m2 followed by ITP is associated with an encouraging CR proportion of more than 30%. 134 An attempt to confirm the high CR proportion
of this sequenced approach has been proposed in the cancer and leukemia group B.
NEOADJUVANT AND ADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY ROLES IN MUSCLE-INVASIVE DISEASE. Given the chemosensitivity of urothelial cancer, attempts to improve
the survival of patients with muscle-invasive disease have focused on administering chemotherapy at the time of definitive treatment of the primary tumor, most
commonly in the perioperative setting. This approach attempts to enhance cure based on the putative advantages of greater efficacy in a smaller volume of disease
and greater cure rate in patients whose disease is restricted to nodal sites rather than visceral sites. 84,108
Several considerations arise in analyzing the trial data. First, the odds of reducing mortality by perioperative chemotherapy are independent of the absolute odds of
that event occurring in the absence of chemotherapy. For example, a group of pT4 or N+ patients (or both) would be expected to have an 80% death rate. A
hypothetical 20% chemotherapy benefit in mortality will reduce the actual mortality from 80% to 64% (i.e., survival improves from 20% to 36%). However, the same
20% chemotherapeutic benefit would reduce mortality of pT2 patients from the expected 25% to only 20% (i.e., survival improves from 75% to 80%). Therefore, the
heterogeneity of patient accrual will significantly affect the number of patients necessary to prove efficacy. Second, the trials should be large enough to detect
important differences. A trial of adequate power and acceptable false-positive rate to detect a 10% survival advantage of one approach over the other (i.e., the
demonstration of a 60% survival rate for patients receiving chemotherapy as compared to a 50% survival in those who receive local therapy alone) requires randomly
selecting 1000 patients. Four hundred patients are required to detect a 15% difference and 200 to detect a 20% difference. Studies that are substantially
underpowered but detect a survival difference must be reviewed with caution, since the demonstration of survival benefit may reflect a false-positive result. Third,
optimal trial design requires studying optimal chemotherapy to assess survival benefit.
DILEMMA: ADJUVANT OR NEOADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY. If a survival benefit is conferred by perioperative chemotherapy, that benefit should be evident
whether the chemotherapy is administered in an adjuvant or neoadjuvant setting. Lessons learned in treating other malignancies show that if chemotherapy is
effective, survival benefit is conferred in either setting. However, such data do not exist for urothelial cancer, and advantages and disadvantages of each approach

exist.
Adjuvant Chemotherapy. The major advantages for adjuvant chemotherapy are the following: (1) The risk of relapse is best predicted by pathologic stage, (2) the
removal of the bladder eliminates the risk for new tumors, and (3) any potential risk of delay in surgery that may compromise cure is reduced. Radical cystectomy
allows the treatment decision regarding chemotherapy to be based on the pathologic risk of recurrence, restricting chemotherapy to patient subsets most likely to
benefit from chemotherapy, such as patients with pT3 to pT4 or positive lymph node (N+) disease. In addition to removing the bladder and reducing the risk of new
tumor formation, repeated cystoscopy is not needed to evaluate for recurrent tumor.
The major disadvantages are that (1) drug delivery may be more difficult after surgery and (2) response to chemotherapy cannot be objectively measured. Clinical
trials evaluating adjuvant therapy do not have a surrogate end point for response; therefore, long patient follow-up is necessary to determine disease recurrence and
survival. Historically, patients have had more difficulty in tolerating adjuvant chemotherapy after a radical cystectomy, so drug delivery, particularly cisplatin-based
therapy, may be more difficult to give in the adjuvant setting.
Nonrandomized data suggest a survival benefit for adjuvant chemotherapy. 135 In a study performed at MDACC, patients who did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy
(not referred for chemotherapy, refused chemotherapy, or were considered medically unfit) were subdivided into a high-risk subgroup (defined as having resected
nodal metastases, extravesical involvement of tumor, lymph-vascular permeation of the primary tumor, or pelvic visceral invasion) and low-risk subgroup (having none
of the above). These untreated patients were compared to those in a second high-risk group that received adjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin, doxorubicin, and
cyclophosphamide. The 5-year, disease-free survival for the treated high-risk group was twice that of the untreated high-risk group and equaled that observed for the
low-risk group. These data imply that adjuvant chemotherapy is beneficial for high-risk treated patients, but the absence of randomization and patient selection may
have biased the results.
Five randomized trials have examined adjuvant therapy in muscle-invasive disease ( Table 34.3-10).64,136,137,138 and 139 Three trials have not shown benefit of
single-agent cisplatin; the combination of cisplatin, vinblastine, and methotrexate; or a regimen of 5-FU and doxorubicin. Two trials suggest a benefit for
chemotherapy over observation alone after cystectomy. 64,139 In a University of Southern California (USC) trial, patients with pT3 or pT4 or node-positive disease were
randomly assigned to either observation or four cycles of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin. 64 A significant delay in time to progression was observed for
patients who received chemotherapy (70% compared to 46% disease-free survival at 3 years; P = .001), and the improvement in survival (4.3 years vs. 2.4 years) was
also statistically significant ( P = .0062). Flaws in this trial include (1) low numbers of patients, (2) premature termination of the study, (3) the statistical methodology,
and (4) the use of nonstandardized chemotherapy. Investigators in the Mainz trial 139 studied 49 patients with pT2 to pT4 or node-positive TCC who were randomly
chosen to receive M-VAC or CMV and either doxorubicin or epirubicin or to undergo observation. However, patients in the observation arm did not routinely receive
chemotherapy at relapse. A significant reduction in the risk of tumor recurrence was observed in the adjuvant chemotherapy arm: 3 of 18 (17%) patients who received
chemotherapy experienced relapse as compared to 18 of 23 (78%) untreated patients ( P = .0007). A survival benefit was reported in a follow-up report with additional
patients entered into the study. 140

TABLE 34.3-10. Randomized Trials of Adjuvant Chemotherapy versus Observation in Patients with Muscle-Invasive Urothelial Cancer

Collectively, these trials fail to prove definitively that adjuvant chemotherapy provides a survival benefit in muscle-invasive TCC. The trials performed to date are
substantially flawed. Problems encountered in the interpretation of results include (1) insufficient numbers of patients, raising the possibility of false interpretation, (2)
inadequate chemotherapy, or (3) premature closure. Despite the reported activity of cisplatin-based chemotherapy in more advanced disease over the last 15 years,
the hypothesis that multiagent chemotherapy may be beneficial after cystectomy for muscle-invasive disease has not been adequately tested.
Both nonrandomized and randomized data suggest that adjuvant chemotherapy delays tumor progression; however, a survival benefit has not been definitively
proven. The MSKCC approach for nonprotocol patients with muscle-invasive disease is to consider four cycles of adjuvant M-VAC for patients with at least T3,N0
primary tumors and any patients with node-positive disease provided that they can tolerate aggressive chemotherapy. If such patients cannot tolerate M-VAC therapy,
surveillance is recommended. These treatment recommendations are based on the following data: (1) Cure can be achieved in patients with node-positive disease
treated with chemotherapy followed by cystectomy 111; (2) M-VAC must be considered the most efficacious regimen based on randomized comparisons to single-agent
cisplatin and to the combination of cisplatin, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide 84,85; and (3) independent prognostic factors for survival in the advanced disease
setting are a good performance status (reflecting lower tumor burden) and disease restricted to lymph nodes; cure is greatest in patients with both features. 108
Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy. The major advantages of the neoadjuvant approach are the response of the primary lesion, which has prognostic importance, and the
degree of response, which can be used to recommend further treatment. 141,142 Response of a primary lesion to combination therapy is associated with improved
long-term survival. In a report of 125 patients on multiple trials of cisplatin-based therapy followed by definitive surgery, 91% of the responders (£ pT1 at cystectomy)
were disease-free, in contrast to only 37% of nonresponders (³pT2 at cystectomy). 143 A major response to neochemotherapy can also result in preservation of the
bladder by repeated and aggressive transurethral resections or by a partial cystectomy. 144,145 Patients whose disease is not responding appropriately can be referred
for definitive cystectomy.
Major disadvantages of neoadjuvant chemotherapy include a marked discordance between the clinical and pathologic response to chemotherapy and persistent risk
of new bladder tumor formation in the preserved bladder. Approximately 30% of bladder tumors staged as T0 after completing neoadjuvant chemotherapy will have
persistent muscle-invasive disease if a cystectomy is performed. 146 Second, even in the patient whose tumor is in complete pathologic response after chemotherapy,
the bladder remains at risk for new muscle-invasive bladder tumors that may result in the need for cystectomy. Herr et al. 147 reported a 56% incidence of new bladder
tumors in patients 10 years after bladder preservation with neoadjuvant M-VAC and conservative surgery; 30% of the patients had invasive disease requiring a
cystectomy.
Studies evaluating chemotherapy in the neoadjuvant setting include both phase III trials examining survival advantage and phase II studies examining response or
potential bladder preservation (or both). The latter studies are not controlled for patient selection, cystoscopic resection, staging and restaging techniques, and
chemotherapeutic regimens. Most randomized studies of neoadjuvant chemotherapy failed to show a survival benefit for chemotherapy ( Table
34.3-11).55,148,149,150,151,152,153,154,155,156,157,158 and 159 Similar to the adjuvant trials, these studies suffer from suboptimal regimens of chemotherapy or small sample size.
The only reported trial with enough power to detect a 10% difference in survival is the intergroup trial performed by the Medical Research Council and the EORTC
evaluating CMV for three cycles followed by the participating institutions' recommended management of the primary lesion versus similar primary tumor management
without neoadjuvant chemotherapy. 159 Primary tumor management in this trial included cystectomy, radiotherapy, or both. With an accrual of 976 patients, a 5.5%
advantage in 3-year survival for patients receiving neoadjuvant CMV was observed. The survival advantage was not statistically significant, because the trial was
powered to detect a 10% survival advantage, the minimal benefit discerned by these collaborating investigators to substantiate the routine use of chemotherapy. Trial
interpretation is difficult, as not all patients underwent similar treatment of the primary tumor; it is possible that benefit might be different in patients treated with
cystectomy versus those treated with radiotherapy.

TABLE 34.3-11. Results of Randomized Trials of Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy in Patients with Muscle-Invasive Urothelial Cancer

A Nordic Cooperative Bladder Cancer Study Group trial explored neoadjuvant doxorubicin plus cisplatin, and the ongoing Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG) trial is
evaluating neoadjuvant M-VAC.152 The Scandinavian trial explored doxorubicin and cisplatin prior to low-dose preoperative radiotherapy and cystectomy. This trial
with 325 patients reported nonsignificant survival differences in patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy [59% in the chemotherapy arm vs. 51% in the control arm
(P = .1), with cancer-specific survival rates of 64% and 54%, respectively]. The authors reported a 15% survival benefit in the subset of patients with T3 and T4
disease (P = .03) but no differences in patients with T1 and T2 disease. A multivariate analysis revealed that chemotherapy and T stage were independent prognostic
factors for survival and that the relative death risk for patients who received chemotherapy was 0.69 as compared to the control group. Results from the SWOG trial of
neoadjuvant chemotherapy are awaited with great interest. This neoadjuvant trial evaluates the use of M-VAC chemotherapy, a regimen that many feel is the optimal
conventional standard, for three cycles followed by cystectomy versus cystectomy alone. The accrual goal was reached in 1998, and results should be available in the
year 2001.
Ongoing Clinical Trials Evaluating Adjuvant and Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy. The combination of paclitaxel and carboplatin is active in urothelial cancer and well
tolerated when carboplatin is dosed to a predetermined AUC according to the patient's renal function. The activity and tolerance of this regimen are the basis of a
randomized adjuvant trial designed by the ECOG. This proposed trial will randomly choose approximately 330 patients with either pT4N0M0 or pT(any)N+M0 tumors
after cystectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection to receive either four cycles of M-VAC or four cycles of paclitaxel plus carboplatin.
Current MSKCC trials are testing the hypothesis of maximizing individual drugs or combinations of agents devoid of overlapping toxicities according to the model
originally proposed by Norton and Simon. 132 After local control surgery, enrolled patients receive sequential, dose-intensive gemcitabine and doxorubicin, then either
paclitaxel and cisplatin or paclitaxel and carboplatin, depending on renal function. The studies are designed to determine the feasibility, drug delivery, specific toxicity,
and the noncomparative efficacy of a dose-intensive sequential chemotherapeutic regimen for high-risk resectable transitional cell urothelial cancer (extravesical,
extraureter, extrapelvic disease or positive regional lymph nodes).
BLADDER PRESERVATION
Evolving data show that the categorical recommendation of surgically removing the bladder in all cases with invasive disease is outdated. It is nevertheless important
to stress that the primary goal of treatment is survival, and sparing the bladder is justified only when (1) it has a high likelihood of eradicating the tumor in the bladder,
(2) the risk of recurrence is low, and (3) bladder function is not compromised. A patient who has had multiple recurrences before an invasive tumor developed may not
be an appropriate candidate for such an approach because of the potential risk of future recurrences. Thus, for patients with invasive bladder cancer after multiple
prior superficial tumors or for those with poor bladder capacity, surgical removal of the bladder and creation of an internal urinary reservoir, if possible, is preferable.
Many groups have reported favorable cure rates with bladder-preserving methods in selected patients with tumors who met certain criteria, with cystectomy reserved
for those who do not meet the criteria. Because it is uncertain which factors predict a favorable outcome if the bladder is left in situ, any approach inevitably requires
both physician judgment (selection) and some patient risk. With these caveats in mind, factors that have been associated with a favorable outcome include tumor size
(£4 cm), confined to the bladder (stage T2), and a CR to initial therapy as judged by a cystoscopy and biopsy performed after induction therapy. Selection by tumor
response allows for prompt cystectomy, if the disease is persistent, and minimizes the risk of metastatic dissemination from failed initial local therapy. Importantly, any
patient in whom the bladder is left in place must be monitored continually for recurrent disease in the bladder, because virtually all series show new tumors, both
superficial and invasive, developing after successful bladder-sparing treatments.
MONOTHERAPIES
Transurethral Resection Alone
Three studies suggest that a maximal or aggressive TUR alone may control some muscle-invasive bladder tumors. 47,160,161 and 162 One study evaluated 466
consecutively referred patients with muscle-invasive disease by a repeat TUR. Twenty-five percent (118 patients) were followed up conservatively after the second
TUR failed to document residual muscle invasion. Of these 118 patients, 77 (65%) remained free of invasive tumor beyond 5 years with an intact bladder. The overall
5-year survival rate of these 77 patients was 83%. Tumors most amenable to TUR alone tended to be papillary, solitary, 2 cm or less in size, minimally invasive into
muscle, and not associated with Tis, a palpable mass, or hydronephrosis. 161,162 These are the same tumor characteristics that are most favorable for bladder
preservation in general. 163
Partial Cystectomy
Approximately 5% to 10% of invasive tumors develop in a location where a curative resection by partial cystectomy is possible. This is most frequently accomplished
when a lesion develops on the dome of the bladder, where a 2-cm margin of resection can be obtained, no association with CIS in other bladder sites exists, and
bladder capacity is adequate once the tumors are removed. Tumors in the bladder neck and trigone are relative contraindications to the procedure. 164,165 A wide
segmental resection of the bladder's dome is the recommended surgical procedure for urachal carcinoma.
Radiotherapy Alone
Several series of patients treated with radiotherapy alone provide the benchmark against which new treatment approaches are judged. As noted, responses based on
clinical grounds alone range from 40% to 52%, of which 30% to 40% are durable (see Table 34.3-6).54,55,56,57 and 58 The most consistently reported factors predictive for
a successful outcome are clinical stage (T2), tumor size (<5 cm maximum diameter), and the absence of ureteral obstruction. 163,166
Recent data suggest that the proportion of complete responses may be improved with accelerated fractionation schemes. In an older randomized trial with 168
patients unsuited for cystectomy with T2 to T4 tumors, hyperfractionated (not accelerated) external-beam irradiation alone (i.e., 1.0 Gy three times daily to a total dose
of 84 Gy) was shown to be superior to conventional treatment (e.g., 2.0 Gy daily to 64 Gy) with respect to survival at 5 years (27% vs. 18%) and CR rate (41% vs.
25%), without a significant increase in toxicities. 167 In a series at the Royal Marsden Hospital, 66% (56 of 85) of patients were found to be tumor-free after a
cystoscopic examination was performed 3 to 6 months after treatment of twice-daily fractions of 1.8 to 2.0 Gy, 5 days per week, to a dosage of 57.6 to 64 Gy. 168
Prospective trials are ongoing, and the published results of a phase III trial from the United Kingdom are expected in 2000. 169
Interstitial Brachytherapy
Interstitial brachytherapy combined with external-beam irradiation and conservative surgery has been used successfully in some European centers in highly selected
cases. The approach requires close cooperation between urologists and radiation oncologists. Candidates include patients with solitary, nonrecurrent, or clinical
stage T2 and T3a tumors less than 5 cm in diameter, with adequate bladder capacity. Local control rates are 75% to 80%, with 5-year survival rates of 50% to

76%.170,171,172 and 173 The approach has not been widely adopted in the United States because it is judged more invasive than transurethral surgery followed by
chemotherapy and radiotherapy.
Results with Chemotherapy Alone
The demonstration of CRs in advanced disease led to subsequent trials evaluating preoperative or neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients with invasive disease in the
1980s.174 A prerequisite for safe bladder preservation is eradicating the tumor in the bladder. Published reports based on clinical (cystoscopic) staging showed CRs in
up to 50% of cases; however, when the same reports are evaluated for the proportion of tumors free of disease at cystectomy, a more modest 20% to 30% rate based
on pathologic grounds alone, pathologic complete response (PCR) is observed. 173,174 Of equal concern is that the ability to predict which bladders clinically free of
tumor by cystoscopic staging (T0) will actually be pathologically free of tumor at cystectomy (P0). Understaging in up to 30% to 40% of cases has been observed in
selected series. 174 Thus, cumulative data show that chemotherapy alone is inadequate therapy to control the primary tumor for most patients. Analyses also show that
the proportion of bladders rendered free of tumor varies inversely with T stage. 175 PCR rates are less than 10% in patients with pT3 to pT4 disease or a palpable mass
at presentation. Cumulatively, the data show that chemotherapy alone is inadequate as monotherapy if the primary goal is to preserve bladder function.
Bladder Sparing: Combined-Modality Approaches
The 20% to 40% success rates achieved with single-modality approaches are, when used nonselectively, inferior to contemporary cystectomy series in which local
control rates for pelvic disease approach 90%. The evolution of combined-modality approaches aimed at bladder preservation began with reports suggesting that the
combination of an aggressive TUR followed by radiation alone or in combination with multidrug systemic chemotherapy could increase the proportion of bladders that
are rendered tumor-free. These strategies are based on the principle that final treatment of the bladder is determined by the response to initial therapy, whether
unimodality or multimodality. 141,148,163,174,176,177,178,179,180 and 181
Table 34.3-12 142,144,178,179,182,183,184,185,186 and 187 shows results of combined-modality therapies for survival and survival with a bladder
preserved. 181,182,183,184,185,186,187,188,189,190,191 and 192 The ideal candidate for bladder preservation has clinical stage T2 primary tumor, no associated ureteral obstruction,
visibly complete TUR, and a documented CR after induction by chemotherapy or chemoradiation. Combined-modality treatment as an alternative to cystectomy is still
investigative; it is recommended that such therapy be administered by dedicated multimodality teams.

TABLE 34.3-12. Recent Results of Various Combined-Modality Therapies for Survival and Survival with Bladder Preserved

Chemotherapy Followed by Partial Cystectomy
Only 5% to 10% of invasive tumors present in a location amenable to a curative resection by partial cystectomy at diagnosis. 165 In appropriately selected cases, the
approach has the advantage of surgically removing the diseased portion of the bladder, with definitive staging of the bladder and lymph nodes. After a response to
chemotherapy, less extensive surgery may be necessary to achieve control. The proportion of tumors that could be removed by partial—as opposed to
radical—cystectomy increased to 27% after M-VAC was used. 178 Early results, confirmed by Sternberg et al., 179 were excellent for this highly selected patient group.
However, the long-term risk of recurrent disease is substantial. Herr et al. 147 reported that salvage cystectomy was necessary in one-third of the patients, owing to new
muscle-invasive neoplasms.
Chemotherapy Combined with Radiotherapy
The strategy of combining chemotherapy and radiotherapy evolved from clinical trials performed in the 1980s, which showed the importance of a complete endoscopic
resection of the tumor within the bladder before radiation 163 and, in a randomized comparison, a higher rate of local control in the bladder using concurrent cisplatin
and radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone. 148 At the same time, laboratory studies demonstrated that several cytotoxic agents, particularly cisplatin and 5-FU, could
sensitize tumor tissue to radiation and increase the killing of tumor cells in a synergistic fashion. 180
Chemotherapy has been combined with radiotherapy in concurrent, sequential, and alternating fashions. 181 No optimal schedule has been defined. Nevertheless,
several reports 182,183,184,186,187,188,189 and 190 show that radiation adds to TUR and systemic chemotherapy to maintain the bladder free of tumor. These reports suggest a
higher response rate after TUR and chemoradiation therapy (74%)than after TUR and chemotherapy (20% to 30%) as well as 5-year survival rates with the bladder
(range, 36% to 44%), which are within the limits of comparing nonrandomized series. These survival rates appear to be superior to those reported with conservative
surgery and chemotherapy alone [20% at 5 yearsand 33% at 30 months (median follow-up)]. When the results are analyzed, the number of patients with tumor-free
bladders must be considered in the context of the total number of patients entered into a study, as was done in the previously mentioned series (see Table
34.3-12).142,144,178,179,182,183,184,185,186 and 187 Considering the number of retained bladders relative to the number of patients who complete therapy artificially inflates the
outcome. Finally, it must be remembered that the results of contemporary trials, though encouraging, do not exclude the possibility that a bladder-sparing approach
may result in reduced survival compared to radical surgery. 147
The highly selective natureof patients treated with combined modality approaches the limits of comparisons of survival distributions between these patients and those
treated by more conventional means. These caveats notwithstanding, in contemporary combined-modality series, 5-year survival rates in the range of 45% to 52%
have been reported. 182,184,190,191 Three included radiation with a cisplatin-based regimen. Perhaps a reason why the survival rates with complete TUR of the bladder
and chemoradiation are higher than those of other reported experiences is that patients who are at high risk for local failure are identified early and are referred for
immediate cystectomy. At what point the patient is designated to have experienced failure of treatment and is referred for cystectomy is controversial. For example, in
the Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) series, patients first undergo an aggressive TUR followed by two cycles of CMV chemotherapy. A cystoscopy is
performed 8 weeks from the initial TUR, and the response is assessed. All patients then receive radiation to a maximum of 40 Gy and two concurrent doses of
cisplatin. A third cystoscopy is performed and, if residual disease is documented, the patient is referred for cystectomy. In this series, 41% of the patients without a CR
(T0) after TUR and chemotherapy at cystoscopy were rendered tumor-free by concurrent radiation of 40 Gy. 175 The policy of referring nonresponding patients for
surgery before definitive radiation doses has been effective and used successfully by other groups. 182,184,191 No increase in surgical complications has been observed.
In any case, it is unlikely that the “window of surgical curability” would be closed with monitoring at these frequent time intervals. This practice differs from a treatment
policy of salvage cystectomy, in that tumor regrowth is not required before a patient is referred for surgery.
Evidence that the optimal dose and schedule of chemoradiation have not been developed is provided by a nevertheless encouraging report from Paris evaluating
cisplatin and 5-FU with concomitant twice-daily high-dose-fraction pelvic irradiation. 191 To evaluate the efficacy and safety of the regimen, initially all patients were
restaged both clinically and pathologically. All 18 patients who were clinically T0 proved to have no tumor at cystectomy (P0). As a result of this experience, the group
changed their treatment policy to focus more on selective bladder preservation. This high rate (100%) of PCR in patients who were CRs (T0) appears to be a marked
improvement over the experience of others using neoadjuvant chemotherapy, in which approximately 50% of patients judged to be clinically T0 after induction are
confirmed pathologically at cystectomy. 141 In an update of the Parisian experience, 74% of referred patients have retained their bladders. Equally encouraging is that

only 10% of these have developed new tumors within the preserved bladder. In the MGH, RTOG, and Erlangen studies, CR rates at cystoscopic rebiopsy after
induction range from 70% to 80%, of which 83% to 89% (representing 58% to 72% of all referred patients) remain free from invasive recurrence. The RTOG has
recently evaluated the Paris approach in 34 patients and found a 65% clinical CR (T0) rate. 193
The concern that a conserved, irradiated bladder functions poorly has also been answered by recent reports after modern radiation techniques. In the Erlangen
experience, only three cystectomies were necessary for bladder shrinkage among 192 preserved bladders, for an incidence of 1.6%. 183 An analysis of bladder function
in 72 patients successfully treated with 60 Gy in 30 fractions found no differences in urinary and rectal function as compared with an age- and gender-matched control
group. Similarly, the MGH reported excellent tolerance in 21 women treated by bladder conservation using chemoradiation. 192 With a median follow-up of 56 months,
all patients were continent and free of dysuria and hematuria. Bladder function improved or was unchanged after treatment in 91% of the patients, and no patients
reported a compromise in bowel or sexual function. In an update of 106 consecutively entered patients on prospective protocols at the MGH, including induction by
TUR of tumor, two cycles of methotrexate, cisplatin, and vinblastine chemotherapy followed by 64.8-Gy irradiation with concomitant cisplatin, none of the 76 patients
whose bladders were preserved had to undergo a cystectomy for shrinkage or bleeding. The median follow-up of the 76 patients who had no cystectomy for tumor
was 59 months.
After multimodality organ-preserving therapy, 20% to 30% of patients may subsequently develop superficial tumors. These tumors are usually amenable to standard
management with TUR and intravesical agents. Of 18 patients (24%) who developed either Ta or CIS among the 76 patients with initial bladder presentation at MGH,
14 have been maintained in remission by TUR and intravesical drug therapy, with 15 to 49 months of follow-up after development of their new superficial tumor. 181
Obviously, all patients treated by multimodality bladder-preserving therapies must be willing to return to the urologist for regular cystoscopic follow-up so that TUR,
intravesical chemotherapy, or cystectomy can be used at the earliest opportunity, if necessary.
CASE SELECTION
Developing a coherent strategy for treating invasive bladder tumors will ultimately require designing and completing comparative trials. The Medical Research
Council–EORTC international study, involving almost 1000 patients, was a landmark trial in that it was the first study with a sufficient number of patients to detect a
survival difference for chemotherapy. Similarly, the SWOG intergroup trial evaluating neoadjuvant chemotherapy is also important because it tests M-VAC, shown to
be the most active chemotherapeutic regimen, with a sufficient number of patients to detect a survival difference.
A novel approach in selecting patients for perioperative chemotherapy is incorporating prognostic markers of the primary tumor to allow a more precise definition of
metastatic risk. Clinical prognostic factors predicting adverse outcome include depth of invasion, presence or absence of a palpable mass, and presence or absence
of hydronephrosis. Several molecular markers have also been investigated. 190 Invasive bladder tumors that have a dysfunctional retinoblastoma ( Rb) gene product or
mutant p53,29,194,195 and 196 implied by immunohistochemistry assays,197,198 are at increased risk of metastatic disease. These molecular markers must be validated in
clinical trials of appropriate sample sizes to determine their clinical utility.
Two ongoing investigational trials explore the use of p53 mutations in urothelial cancer. Studies at USC determined that patients whose tumors had mutant p53 were
more likely to have disease recurrence and death ( P <.0001) than patients whose primary tumor had wild-type p53. 29 At MSKCC, the p53 status of the tumors in
patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy showed similar results. Patients whose primary tumors had nuclear staining of p53 protein by immunohistochemistry,
which implied mutant p53, were three times more likely to die from disease than were those patients whose tumor staining was consistent with wild-type p53. 195 In the
latter study, the use of both clinical stage and p53 status could predict patients with a favorable outcome. Patients with good prognostic features [i.e., wild-type p53
and low stage of disease (T2 tumors)], had a 77% survival at 5 years after neoadjuvant chemotherapy; bladder preservation and survival were more frequent in
patients whose tumors had wild-type p53. 199 A prospective trial attempts bladder preservation in patients with wild-type p53 tumors. USC investigators are testing a
different hypothesis; preliminary retrospective data from their center suggest that adjuvant chemotherapy enhances survival in patients whose tumors have mutant
p53.200 Based on these data, patients with mutant p53 tumors are randomly assigned to receive either adjuvant M-VAC chemotherapy or observation after cystectomy
to assess a survival advantage associated with adjuvant chemotherapy.

SUMMARY
Urinary bladder cancer is a common disease, with increasing incidence but a decreasing mortality. Several carcinogens of the urothelium and risk groups have been
identified, such as aromatic amines, combustible gases, a dietary component in meat or fat, the drug phenacetin, and tobacco smoking. An understanding of the
pathogenesis of the disease is evolving, and at least two pathways lead to urinary bladder cancer. Mutations in p53, Rb, and as yet uncharacterized genes on
chromosome 9 are common and probably important. Urinary bladder cancers typically present with macroscopic hematuria. The clinical course of the disease is
strongly heterogeneous. Superficial TaG1 lesions almost never progress and can easily be handled with an endoscopic resection. Recurrent and high-grade
superficial bladder tumors can be controlled in most cases with repeated TURs and intravesical BCG, with cystectomy reserved for refractory tumors.
Muscle-invasive disease may require both a locally aggressive therapy and systemic therapy of micrometastases for cure. Metastatic urinary bladder cancer is a
fast-growing and often lethal malignancy. In the latter stage, only a small proportion of patients are currently cured with chemotherapy. Newer chemotherapeutic
regimens may improve survival of patients with advanced disease. Current refinements in therapy include identifying subgroups of patients with superficial disease in
whom the intensity of follow-up can be reduced or intravesical therapy is needed. For muscle-invasive disease, efforts are being made to identify patients for whom
organ preservation is possible without compromising overall survival, as well as those with subclinical micrometastases for whom systemic therapy is needed for cure.
Efforts to improve therapy include better surgical techniques, computed three-dimensional treatment planning for more precise delivery of external-beam radiotherapy,
and the incorporation of newly identified chemotherapeutic agents into combination regimens.
For most patients, combined-modality approaches are essential to optimal management. It is likely that the improved overall survival observed during the last two
decades will continue. With the increasing focus on preventive measures, such as the cessation of smoking 201 and reducing exposure to known carcinogens, the
incidence of the disease is likely to decrease, and the current trend of reduced bladder cancer mortality is likely to continue.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Cordon-Cardo C, Dalbagni G, Sarkis AS, Reuter VE. Genetic alterations associated with bladder cancer. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Important advances in oncology.
Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1994:71.
2. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics, 1999. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49(8):1.
3. Hankey BF, Silverman DT. SEER cancer statistics review, 19731996. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1362.
4. Silverman DT, Levin LI, Hoover RN, Hartge P. Occupational risks of bladder cancer in the United States: I. White men. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:1472.
5. International Agency for Cancer Research. Overall evaluations of carcinogenicity: an updating of IARC monographs,volumes 1 to 42. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic
Risk of Chemicals to Humans, Supplement 7. Lyon, France: IARC, 1987.
6. Michaud DS, Spiegelman D, Clinton SK, et al. Fluid intake and the risk of bladder cancer in men. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1390.
7. Steineck G, Hagman U, Gerhardsson M, Norell SE. Vitamin A supplements, fried foods, fat and urothelial cancer. A case-referent study in Stockholm in 198587. Int J Cancer 1990;45:1006.
8. Silverman DT, Hartge P, Morrison AS, Devesa SS. Epidemiology of bladder cancer. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1992;6:1.
9. Levine LA, Richie JP. Urological complications of cyclophosphamide. J Urol 1989;141:1063.
10. Kantor AF, Hartge P, Hoover RN, Fraumeni JF Jr. Epidemiological characteristics of squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma of the bladder. Cancer Res 1988;48:3853.
11. Messing EM, Young TB, Hunt VB, Wehbie JM, Rust P. Urinary tract cancers found by homescreening with hematuria dipsticks in healthy men over 50 years of age. Cancer 1989;64:2361.
12. Herr HW. The value of a second transurethral resection in evaluating patients with bladder tumors. J Urol 1999;162:74.
13. Herr HW. Routine CT scan in cystectomy patients: does it change management? Urology 1996;47:324.
14. Reuter VE. Pathology of bladder cancer: assessment of prognostic variables and response to therapy. Semin Oncol 1990;17:524.
15. Epstein JI, Amin MB, Reuter VR, Mostofi FK. The World Health Organization/International Society of Urological Pathology consensus classification of urothelial (transitional cell) neoplasms of
the urinary bladder. Bladder Consensus Conference Committee. Am J Surg Pathol 1998;22:1435.
16. Norming U, Nyman CR, Tribukait B. Comparative flow cytometric deoxyribonucleic acid studies on exophytic tumor and random mucosal biopsies in untreated carcinoma of the bladder. J Urol
1989;142:1442.
17. Farrow GM. Pathology of carcinoma in situ of the urinary bladder and related lesions. J Cell Biochem Suppl 1992:39.
18. Jewett HJ, Strong GH. Infiltrating carcinoma of the bladder: relation of depth of penetration of the bladder wall to incidence of local extension in metastases. J Urol 1946;55:366.
19. American Joint Committee on Cancer. Urinary bladder. In: Fleming ID, ed. AJCC cancer staging manual. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1997:241.
20. Herr HW. Uncertainty and outcome of invasive bladder tumors. Urol Oncol 1996;2:92.
21. Herr HW, Donat SM. Prostatic tumor relapse in patients with superficial bladder tumors: 15-year outcome. J Urol 1999;161:1854.
22. Vieweg J, Gschwend JE, Herr HW, Fair WR. Pelvic lymph node dissection can be curative in patients with node positive bladder cancer. J Urol 1999;161:449.
23. Sidransky D, Frost P, von Eschenbach A, et al. Clonal origin bladder cancer. N Engl J Med 1992;326:737.
24. Miyao N, Tsai YC, Lerner SP, et al. Role of chromosome 9 in human bladder cancer. Cancer Res 1993;53:4066.

25. Cairns P, Shaw ME, Knowles MA. Initiation of bladder cancer may involve deletion of a tumour-suppressor gene on chromosome 9. Oncogene 1993;8:1083.
26. Cordon-Cardo C, Dalbagni G, Saez GT, et al. p53 mutations in human bladder cancer: genotypic versus phenotypic patterns. Int J Cancer 1994;56:347.
27. Sarkis AS, Dalbagni G, Cordon-Cardo C, et al. Detection of p53 mutations in superficial (T1) bladder carcinomas as a marker for disease progression. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:53.
28. Sarkis AS, Dalbagni G, Cordon-Cardo C, et al. Association of p53 nuclear overexpression and tumor progression in carcinoma in situ of the bladder. J Urol 1994;52:388.
29. Esrig D, Elmajian D, Groshen S, et al. Accumulation of nuclear p53 and tumor progression in bladder cancer. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1259.
30. Lamm DL, Griffith JG. Intravesical therapy: does it affect the natural history of superficial bladder cancer? Semin Urol 1992;10:39.
31. Herr HW. Intravesical therapy. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1992;6:117.
32. Kilbridge KL, Kantoff P. Intravesical therapy for superficial bladder cancer: is it a wash? J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1.
33. Herr HW, Schwalb DM, Zhang ZF, et al. Intravesical bacille Calmette-Guérin therapy prevents tumor progression and death from superficial bladder cancer: ten-year follow-up of a prospective
randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1404.
34. Cookson MS, Herr HW, Zhang ZF, et al. The treated natural history of high risk superficial bladder cancer: 15- year outcome. J Urol 1997;158:62.
35. Herr HW, Badalament RA, Amato DA, et al. Superficial bladder cancer treated with bacille Calmette-Guérin: a multivariate analysis of factors affecting tumor progression. J Urol 1989;141:22.
36. Hudson MA, Herr HW. Carcinoma in situ of the bladder. J Urol 1995;153:564.
37. Lamm DL, Blumenstein BA, Crawford ED, et al. A randomized trial of intravesical doxorubicin and immunotherapy with bacille Calmette-Guérin for transitional-cell carcinoma of the bladder. N
Engl J Med 1991;325:1205.
38. Lamm DL, Crawford ED, Blumenstein BA, et al. A randomized comparison of BCG and mitomycin-C prophylaxis in stage Ta and T1 transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. J Urol
1993;149:282.
39. Badalament RA, Herr HW, Wong GY, et al. A prospective randomized trial of maintenance versus nonmaintenance intravesical bacille Calmette-Guérin therapy of superficial bladder cancer. J
Clin Oncol 1987;5:441.
40. Oosterlinck W, Kurth KH, Schroder F, et al. A prospective European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Genitourinary Group randomized trial comparing transurethral
resection followed by a single intravesical instillation of epirubicin or water in single stage Ta, T1 papillary carcinoma of the bladder. J Urol 1993;149:749.
41. Holmang S, Hedelin H, Anderstrom C, et al. Recurrence and progression in low grade papillary urothelial tumors. J Urol 1999;162:702.
42. Hall RR, Parmar MK, Richards AB, Smith PH. Proposal for changes in cystoscopic follow up of patients with bladder cancer and adjuvant intravesical chemotherapy. Br Med J 1994;308:257.
43. Herr HW. Extravesical tumor relapse in patients with superficial bladder tumors. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1099.
44. Schwalb MD, Herr HW, Sogani PC, et al. Positive urinary cytology following a complete response to intravesical bacille Calmette-Guérin therapy: pattern of recurrence. J Urol 1994;152:382.
45. Herr HW, Jakse G, Sheinfeld J. The T1 bladder tumor. Semin Urol 1990;8:254.
46. Herr HW. Tumour progression and survival in patients with T1G3 bladder tumours: 15-year outcome. BrJ Urol 1997;80:762.
47. Solsona E, Iborra I, Ricos JV, Monros JL, Dumont R. Feasibility of transurethral resection for muscle-infiltrating carcinoma of the bladder: prospective study. J Urol 1992;147:1513.
48. Kock NG, Nilson AE, Norlen L, et al. Urinary diversion via a continent ileum reservoir: clinical experience. ScandJ Urol Nephrol 1978;49[Suppl]:23.
49. Hautmann RE, Miller K, Steiner U, Wenderoth U. The ileal neobladder: 6 years of experience with more than 200 patients. J Urol 1993;150:40.
50. Begg CB, Cramer LD, Hoskins WJ, Brennan MF. Impact of hospital volume on operative mortality for major cancer surgery. JAMA 1998;280:1747.
51. Turner S, Swindell R, Bowl N, et al. Bladder movement during radiation therapy for bladder cancer: implication for treatment planning. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:199.
52. Marks LB, Shipley WU. Techniques for external beam irradiation of patients with invasive carcinoma of the urinary bladder. In: Levitt SH, Khan FM, Potish RA, eds. Levitt & Tapley's
technological basis of radiation therapy: practical clinical application, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1992:335.
53. Sur RK, Clinkard J, Jones WG, et al. Changes in target volume during radiotherapy treatment of invasive bladder carcinoma. Clin Oncol 1993;5:30.
54. Jenkins BJ, Caulfield MJ, Fowler CG, et al. Reappraisal of the role of radical radiotherapy and salvage cystectomy in the treatment of invasive (T2/T3) bladder cancer. BrJ Urol 1988;62:343.
55. Shearer RJ, Chilvers CF, Bloom HJ, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy in T3 carcinoma of the bladder. A prospective trial: preliminary report. BrJ Urol 1988;62:558.
56. Gospodarowicz MK, Hawkins NV, Rawlings GA, et al. Radical radiotherapy for muscle invasive transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder: failure analysis. J Urol 1989;142:1448.
57. Mameghan H, Fisher R, Mameghan J, et al. Analysis of failure following definitive radiotherapy for invasive transitional cell carcioma of the bladder. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:247.
58. De Neve W, Lybeert ML, Goor C, Crommelin MA, Ribot JG. Radiotherapy for T2 and T3 carcinoma of the bladder: the influence of overall treatment time. Radiother Oncol 1995;36:183.
59. Sell A, Jakobsen A, Nerstrom B, et al. Treatment of advanced bladder cancer category T2, T3 and T4a. A randomized multicenter study of preoperative irradiation and cystectomy versus
radical irradiation and early salvage cystectomy for residual tumor. DAVECA protocol 8201. Danish Vesical Cancer Group. ScandJ Urol Nephrol Suppl 1991;138:193.
60. Bloom HJ, Hendry WF, Wallace DM, Skeet RG. Treatment of T3 bladder cancer: controlled trial of pre-operative radiotherapy and radical cystectomy versus radical radiotherapy. Br J Urol
1982;54:136.
61. Dreicer R, Gustin DM, See WA, Williams RD. Paclitaxel in advanced urothelial carcinoma: its role in patients with renal insufficiency and as salvage therapy. J Urol 1996;156:1606.
62. Miller LS. Bladder cancer: superiority of preoperative irradiation and cystectomy in clinical stages B2 and C. Cancer 1977;39:973.
63. Einstein AB, Coombs J, Pearse H, et al. Cisplatin (CP) adjuvant therapy following pre-operative radiotherapy plus radical cystectomy (RT+RCy) for invasive bladder carcinoma: a randomized
trial of the National Bladder Cancer Group (NBCG). J Urol 1985;133:222.
64. Skinner DG, Daniels JR, Russell CA, et al. The role of adjuvant chemotherapy following cystectomy for invasive bladder cancer: a prospective comparative trial. J Urol 1991; 145:459.
65. Whitmore WF Jr, Batata MA, Ghoneim MA, Grabstald H, Unal A. Radical cystectomy with or without prior irradiation in the treatment of bladder cancer. J Urol 1977;118:184.
66. Shipley WU, Cummings KB, Coombs LJ, et al. 4,000 RAD preoperative irradiation followed by prompt radical cystectomy for invasive bladder carcinoma: a prospective study of patient
tolerance and pathologic downstaging. J Urol 1982;127:48.
67. Crawford ED, Das S, Smith JA Jr. Preoperative radiation therapy in the treatment of bladder cancer. Urol Clin North Am 1987;14:781.
68. Cole CJ, Pollack A, Zagars GK, et al. Local control of muscle-invasive bladder cancer: preoperative radiotherapy and cystectomy versus cystectomy alone. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1995;32:331.
69. Reisinger SA, Mohiuddin M, Mulholland SG. Combined pre- and postoperative adjuvant radiation therapy for bladder cancera ten year experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:463.
70. Cozzarini C, Pelegrini D, Fallini M, et al. Reappraisal of the role of adjuvant radiotherapy in muscle-invasive transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1999;45:221(abst 144).
71. Zaghloul MS, Awwad HK, Akoush HH, et al. Postoperative radiotherapy of carcinoma in bilharzial bladder: improved disease free survival through improving local control. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1992;23:511.
72. Mottet-Auselo N, Bons-Rosset F, Costa P, Louis JF, Navratil H. Carboplatin and urothelial tumors. Oncology 1993;50[Suppl 1]:28.
73. Moore MJ, Tannock IF, Ernst DS, Huan S, Murray N. Gemcitabine: a promising new agent in the treatment of advanced urothelial cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:3441.
74. Stadler WM, Kuzel T, Roth B, Raghavan D, Dorr FA. Phase II study of single-agent gemcitabine in previously untreated patients with metastatic urothelial cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:3394.
75. Lorusso V, Pollera CF, Antimi M, et al. A phase II study of gemcitabine in patients with transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary tract previously treated with platinum. Italian Co-operative Group
on Bladder Cancer. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:1208.
76. Roth BJ, Dercer R, Einhorn LH, et al. Significant activity of paclitaxel in advanced transitional cell caricnoma of the urothelium: a Phase II trial of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. J
Clin Oncol 1994;12:2264.
77. Bajorin DF, Scher HI. Chemotherapy for urothelial cancer. In: Ernstoff MS, Heaney JA, Peschel RE, eds. Urologic cancer. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Science, 1997:321.
78. de Wit R, Kruit WH, Stoter G, et al. Docetaxel (Taxotere): an active agent in metastatic urothelial cancer; results of a phase II study in non-chemotherapy-pretreated patients. Br J Cancer
1998;78:1342.
79. De Lena M, Gridelli C, Lorusso V, et al. Gemcitabine activity (objective responses and symptom improvement) in resistant stage IV bladder cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1996;15:246.
80. Sweeney CJ, Williams SD, Finch DE, et al. A Phase II study of paclitaxel and ifosfamide for patients with advanced refractory carcinoma of the urothelium. Cancer 1999;86:514.
81. Sternberg C, Yagoda A, Scher HI, et al. Methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin and cisplatinum for advanced transitional cell carcinoma of the urothelium: efficacy and patterns of response and
relapse. Cancer 1989;64:2448.
82. Harker W, Meyers FJ, Freiha FS, et al. Cisplatin, methotrexate, and vinblastine (CMV): an effective chemotherapy regimen for metastatic transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary tract. A
Northern California Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1463.
83. Mead GM, Russel K, Clark P, et al. A randomized trial comparing methotrexate and vinblastine (MV) with cisplatin, methotrexate and vinblastine (CMV) in advanced transitional cell carcinoma:
results and a report on prognostic factors in a Medical Research Council study. Br J Cancer 1998;78:1067.
84. Loehrer P, Einhorn LH, Elson PJ, et al. A randomized comparison of cisplatin alone or in combination with methotrexate, vinblastine, and doxorubicin in patients with metastatic urothelial
carcinoma: a Cooperative Group Study. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1066.
85. Logothetis CJ, Dexeus F, Sella A, et al. A prospective randomized trial comparing CISCA to MVAC chemotherapy in advanced metastatic urothelial tumors. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1050.
86. Burch PA, Richardson RL, Cha SS, et al. Combination paclitaxel and cisplatin is active in advanced urothelial carcinoma (UC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:329a(abst).
87. Dreicer R, Roth B, Lipsitz S, et al. Cisplatin and paclitaxel in advanced carcinoma of the urothelium: a Phase II trial of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG). Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1998;17:320a(abst 1233).
88. Murphy BA, Johnson DR, Smith J, et al. Phase II trial of paclitaxel (P) and cisplatin (C) for metastatic or locally unresectable urothelial cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1996;15:245(abst 617).
89. Sengelov L, Kamby C, Lund B, Engelholm SA. Docetaxel and cisplatin in metastatic urothelial cancer: a phase II study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3392.
90. Vaughn D, Malkowicz S, Zlotick B, et al. Phase I trial of paclitaxel/carboplatin in advanced carcinoma of the urothelium. Semin Oncol 1997;24:S2.
91. Vaughn DJ. Review and outlook for the role of paclitaxel in urothelial carcinoma. Semin Oncol 1999;26:117.
92. Redman BG, Smith DC, Flaherty L, Du W, Hussain M. Phase II trial of paclitaxel and carboplatin in the treatment of advanced urothelial carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1844.
93. Zielinski CC, Schnack B, Grbovic M, et al. Paclitaxel and carboplatin in patients with metastatic urothelial cancer: results of a phase II trial. Br J Cancer 1998;78:370.
94. Bauer J, Stalder M, Roth A, et al. Phase II trial of paclitaxel (P) plus carboplatin (C) in advanced urothelial tract cancer (UTC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:326a(abst).
95. Droz JP, Mottet N, Prapotrich D, et al. Phase II study of paclitaxel and carboplatin in patients with advanced transitional cell carcinoma of the urothelium: preliminary results. Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1998;17:316a(abst).
96. Vaughn DJ, Malkowitcz SB, Zotlick B, et al. Paclitaxel plus carboplatin in advanced carcinoma of the urothelium: an active and tolerable outpatient regimen. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:255.
97. Small E, Lew D, Petrylak D, Crawford ED. Carboplatin and paclitaxel (Carbo/Tax) for advanced transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the urothelium. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:333a(abst).
98. von der Maase H, Anderson L, Crino L, Weissbach L, Dogliotti L. A phase II study of gemcitabine and cisplatin in patients with transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the urothelium. Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1997;16:324a(abst).
99. Kaufman D, Stadler W, Carduccii M, et al. Gemcitabine (Gem) plus cisplatin (CDDP) in metastatic transitional cell carcinoma (TCC): final results of a phase II study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1998;17:320a(abst).
100. Moore MJ, Winquist EW, Murray N, et al. Gemcitabine plus cisplatin, an active regimen in urothelial cancer: a phase II trial of the National Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:2876.
101. Santoro A, Santoro M, Maiorino L, Forestieri V, Forestieri P. Phase II trial of gemcitabine plus carboplatin for urothelial transitional cell carcinoma in advanced or metastatic stage. Ann Oncol
1998;9[Suppl 2]:647.
102. Bajorin DF, McCaffrey JA, Hilton S, et al. Treatment of patients with transitional cell carcinoma of the urothelial tract with ifosfamide, paclitaxel, and cisplatin: a phase II trial. J Clin Oncol
1998;16.
103. McCaffrey JA, Dodd PM, Hilton S, et al. Ifosfamide + paclitaxel + cisplatin (ITP) chemotherapy for patients (pts) with unresectable or metastatic transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1999;18:329a(abst 1267).
104. Bellmunt J, Guillem V, Paz-Ares L, et al. A phase II trial of paclitaxel, cisplatin and gemcitabine (TCG) in patients (pts) with advanced transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the urothelium. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:332a(abst).
105. Vaishampayan U, Smith D, Redman B, et al. Phase II evaluation of carboplatin, paclitaxel, and gemcitabine in advanced urothelial carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:333a(abst).

106. Saxman S, Propert K, Einhorn L, et al. Long term follow-up of a phase III intergroup study of cisplatin alone or in combination with methotrexate, vinblastine and doxorubicin in patients with
metastatic urothelial cancer: a cooperative group study. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2564.
107. Geller NL, Sternberg CN, Penenberg D, Scher H, Yagoda A. Prognostic factors for survival of patients with advanced urothelial tumors treated with methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and
cisplatin chemotherapy. Cancer 1991;67:1525.
108. Bajorin DF, Dodd PM, Mazumdar M, et al. Long-term survival in metastatic transitional cell carcinoma and prognostic factors predicting outcome to chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3173.
109. Donat SM, Herr HW, Bajorin DF, et al. Methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin and cisplatin chemotherapy and cystectomy for unresectable bladder cancer. J Urol 1996;156:368.
110. Miller R, Freiha F, Reese J, Ozen H, Torti F. Surgical restaging of patients with advanced transitional cell carcinoma of the urothelium treated with cisplatin, methotrexate, and vinblastine:
update of the Stanford University experience. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;10:167.
111. Dodd PM, McCaffrey JA, Herr H, et al. Outcome of post-chemotherapy surgery after treatment with methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin in patients with unresectable or
metastatic transitional cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2546.
112. Logothetis CJ, Dexeus FH, Sella A, et al. Escalated therapy for refractory urothelial tumors: methotrexate-vinblastine-doxorubicin-cisplatin plus unglycosylated recombinant human
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:667.
113. Loehrer PJ, Elson P, Dreicer R, et al. A phase III study: escalated dosages of methotrexate (M), vinblastine (V), doxorubicin (A), and cisplatin (C) plus rhG-CSF in advanced urothelial
carcinoma: an ECOG trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11:201.
114. Logothetis C, Finn L, Amato R, Hossan E, Sella A. Escalated (ESC) MVAC rhGM-CSF (Schering-Plough) in metastatic transitional cell carcinoma (TCC): preliminary results of a randomized
trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11:202.
115. Seidman AD, Scher HI, Gabrilove JL, et al. Dose-intensification of methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin with recombinant granulocyte-colony stimulating factor as initial therapy
in advanced urothelial cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;11:414.
116. Sternberg C, de Mulder P, van Oosterom AT, Fossa S, Chemotherapy Committee of the EORTC GU Group. Intensified M-VAC chemotherapy and recombinant human
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) in patients with advanced urothelial tract tumors. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11:210.
117. Bellmunt J, Ribas A, Eres N, et al. Carboplatin-based versus cisplatin-based chemotherapy in the treatment of surgically incurable advanced bladder cancer. Cancer 1997;80:1966.
118. McCaffrey JA, Hilton S, Mazumdar M, et al. Phase II trial of docetaxel in patients with advanced or metastatic transitional-cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1853.
119. Tu S-M, Hossan E, Amato R, Kilbourn R, Logothetis CJ. Paclitaxel, cisplatin and methotrexate combination chemotherapy is active in the treatment of refractory urothelial malignancies. J Urol
1995;154:1719.
120. Meyers FJ, Miller TR, Williams SG, et al. Response to a taxol based chemotherapy regimen in advanced transitional cell carcinoma is independent of p53 expression. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:333a(abst).
121. Meyers FJ, Edelman MJ, Houston J, Lauder I. Phase I/II trial of paclitaxel, carboplatin and methotrexate in advanced transitional cell carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998; 17:317a(abst).
122. Einhorn LH, Roth BJ, Ansari R, et al. Phase II trial of gallium nitrate, vinblastine and ifosfamide in metastatic urothelial cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2271.
123. Dreicer R, Propert KJ, Roth BJ, Einhorn LH, Loehrer PJ. Vinblastine, ifosfamide, and gallium nitratean active regimen in patients with advanced carcinoma of the urothelium. A phase II trial of
the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (E5892). Cancer 1997;79:110.
124. McCaffrey JA, Hilton S, Mazumdar M, et al. Phase II randomized trial of gallium nitrate plus fluorouracil versus methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin in patients with advanced
transitional-cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2449.
125. McLaren B, Gallagher CJ, Mason M, Melesi G, Oliver RTD. Paclitaxel, vinblastine, cisplatin (PVC) in patients with advanced transitional cell cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1997;16:337a(abst).
126. Calvo E, Aramendia JM, Garcia-Foncillas J, et al. Paclitaxel (T) combination chemotherapy in untreated and in resistant stage IV transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the urinary bladder: a
retrospective study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:330a(abst).
127. Otto T, Bex A, Krege S, Walz PH, Rubben H. Paclitaxel-based second-line therapy for patients with advanced chemotherapy-resistant bladder carcinoma (M1): a clinical Phase II study. Cancer
1997;80:465.
128. Sternberg CN, De Mulder P, Fossa S, et al. Interim toxicity analysis of a randomized trial in advanced urothelial tract tumors of high-intensity MVAC chemotherapy (HD-MVAC) and
recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) versus classic MVAC chemotherapy(EORTC 30924). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2000 (in press).
129. von der Masse H, Hansen SW, Roberts JT, et al. Gemcitabine and cisplatin (GC) versus methotrexate, vinblastine, adrimycin and cisplatin (MVAC) chemotherapy in advanced or metastatic
transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the urothelium: a large randomized, multicenter, multinational phase III study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2000 (in press).
130. Logothetis CJ, Hossan E, Sella A, Dexeus FH, Amato RJ. Fluorouracil and recombinant human interferon alfa-2a in the treatment of metastatic chemotherapy-refractory urothelial tumors. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:285.
131. Norton L, Simon R, Brereton HD, et al. Predicting the course of Gompertzian growth. Nature 1976;264:542.
132. Norton L, Simon R. The Norton-Simon hypothesis revisited. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:163.
133. Dodd PM, McCaffrey JA, Hilton S, et al. Phase I evaluation of sequential doxorubicin + gemcitabine (AG) then ifosfamide + paclitaxel + cisplatin (ITP) for patients (pts) with unresectable or
metastatic transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:330a(abst).
134. Maluf F, Bajorin DF. Preliminary analysis of a phase II study of doxorubicin and gemcitabine (AG) followed by ifosfamide, paclitaxel and cisplatin (ITP) sequenced therapy in transitional cell
carcinoma (TCC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2000 (in press).
135. Logothetis CJ, Johnson DE, Chong C, et al. Adjuvant cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin chemotherapy for bladder cancer: an update. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1590.
136. Richards B, Bastable JR, Freedman L, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy with doxorubicin (Adriamycin) and 5-fluorouracil in T3, NX, MO bladder cancer treated with radiotherapy. Br J Urol
1983;55:386.
137. Freiha F, Reese J, Torti F. A randomized tral of radical cystectomy versus radical cystectomy plus cisplatin, vinblastine and methotrexate chemotherapy for muscle-invasive bladder cancer. J
Urol 1996;155:495.
138. Studer U, Bacchi M, Biederman C, et al. Adjuvant cisplatin chemotherapy following cystectomy for bladder cancer: results of a prospective randomized trial. J Urol 1994;152:81.
139. Stockle M, Meyenburg W, Wellek S, et al. Non organ-confined bladder cancer: improved survival after radical cystectomy by three adjuvant cycles of M-VAC/M-VEC. J Urol 1992;147:446A.
140. Stockle M, Meyenburg W, Wellek S, et al. Adjuvant polychemotherapy of nonorgan-confined bladder cancer after radical cystectomy revisited: long-term results of a controlled prospective
study and further experience. J Urol 1995;153:47.
141. Scher H, Herr H, Sternberg C, et al. Neo-adjuvant chemotherapy for invasive bladder cancer: experience with the M-VAC regimen. Br J Urol 1989;64:250.
142. Schultz P, Herr HW, Zhang ZF, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for invasive bladder cancer: prognostic factors for survival of patients treated with M-VAC with 5-year follow-up. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:1394.
143. Splinter TA, Scher HI, Denis L, et al. The prognostic value of the pathological response to combination chemotherapy before cystectomy in patients with invasive bladder cancer. European
Organization for Research on Treatment of CancerGenitourinary Group. J Urol 1992;147:606.
144. Herr HW, Scher HI. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and partial cystectomy for invasive bladder cancer. Cancer Treat Res 1992;59:99.
145. Sternberg CN, Arena MG, Calabresi F, et al. Neoadjuvant M-VAC (methotrexate, methotrexate, adriamycin and cisplatin) for infiltrating transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. Cancer
1993;72:1975.
146. Scher HI, Kantoff PW. Chemotherapy for muscle-infiltrating bladder cancer. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1992;6:169.
147. Herr HW, Bajorin DF, Scher HI. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and bladder-sparing surgery for invasive bladder cancer: ten-year outcome. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1298.
148. Coppin CM, Gospodarowicz MK, James K, et al. Improved local control of invasive bladder cancerby concurrent cisplatin and preoperative or definitive radiation. The National CancerInstitute
of Canada Clinical Trials Group. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2901.
149. Wallace DM, Raghavan D, Kelly KA, et al. Neo-adjuvant (pre-emptive) cisplatin therapy in invasive transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. Br J Urol 1991;67:608.
150. Cortesi E. Neoadjuvant treatment for locally advanced bladder cancer: a prospective randomized clinical trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:237.
151. Rintala E, Hannisdahl E, Fossa SD, Hellsten S, Sander S. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy in bladder cancer: a randomized study. Nordic Cystectomy Trial I. ScandJ Urol Nephrol 1993;27:355.
152. Malmstrom PU, Rintala E, Wahlqvist R, et al. Five-year followup of a prospective trial of radical cystectomy and neoadjuvant chemotherapy: Nordic Cystectomy Trial I. The Nordic Cooperative
Bladder Cancer Study Group. J Urol 1996;155:1903.
153. Martinez Pineiro JA, de la Pena JJ, Hidalgo L, et al. Aggressive preoperative chemotherapy in infiltrating bladder carcinoma with a combination of cisplatin, cyclophosphamide and adriamycin.
Preliminary report. Arch Esp Urol 1986;39:33.
154. Curotto A, Canobbio C, Orsatti M, et al. Chemo-radiotherapy in locally advanced bladder cancer: neo-adjuvant treatment. In: Giuliani LS, Boccardo F, Pescatore D, eds. Vol. 3. Munchen, FRG:
Sympomed, 1994:433.
155. Logothetis C, Swanson D, Amato R, et al. Optimal delivery of perioperative chemotherapy: preliminary results of a randomized, prospective, comparative trial of preoperative and postoperative
chemotherapy for invasive bladder carcinoma. J Urol 1996;155:1241.
156. Shipley WU, Winter KA, Kaufman DS, et al. An RTOG phase III trial (89-03) of neo-adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with invasive bladder cancertreated with selective bladder preservation
by combined radiation therapy and chemotherapy. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:311a.
157. Crawford ED, Natale RB, Burton H. Southwest Oncology Group Study (8710): trial of cystectomy alone versus neo-adjuvant M-VAC and cystectomy in patients with locally advanced bladder
cancer(Intergroup Trial 0080). Prog Clin Biol Res 1991;353:111.
158. Sternberg CN. Neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy in locally advanced bladder cancer. Semin Oncol 1996;23:621.
159. Neoadjuvant cisplatin, methotrexate, and vinblastine chemotherapy for muscle-invasive bladder cancer: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 1999;354:533.
160. Henry K, Miller J, Mori M, Loening S, Fallon B. Comparison of transurethral resection to radical therapies for stage B bladder tumors. J Urol 1988;140:964.
161. Herr HW. Conservative management of muscle-infiltrating bladder cancer: prospective experience. J Urol 1987;138:1162.
162. Kata EJ, Herr HW. The role of transurethral resection for muscle invasive bladder carcinoma. J Urol 1993;149:316.
163. Shipley WU, Prout GR Jr, Kaufman SD, Perrone TL. Invasive bladder carcinoma. The importance of initial transurethral surgery and other significant prognostic factors for improved survival
with full-dose irradiation. Cancer 1987;60:514.
164. Dandekar NP, Tongaonkar HB, Dalal AV, Kulkarni JN, Kamat MR. Partial cystectomy for invasive bladder cancer. J Surg Oncol 1995;60:24.
165. Sweeney P, Kursh ED, Resnick MI. Partial cystectomy. Urol Clin North Am 1993;19:701.
166. Shipley WU, Rose MA. Bladder cancer. The selection of patients for treatment by full-dose irradiation. Cancer 1985;55:2278.
167. Naslund I, Nilsson B, Littbrand B. Hyperfractionated radiotherapy of bladder cancer. A ten-year follow-up of a randomized clinical trial. Acta Oncol 1994;33:397.
168. Cole DJ, Durrant KR, Roberts JT, et al. A pilot study of accelerated fractionation in the radiotherapy of invasive carcinoma of the bladder. Br J Radiol 1992;65:792.
169. Horwich A, Pendlebury S, Dernaley DP. Organ conservation in bladder cancer. Eur J Cancer 1995;31:208.
170. Van der Werf-Messing BHP, Menon RS, Hop WCJ. Cancerof the urinary bladder category T2, T3 treated by interstitial radium implant: second report. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;9:481.
171. Wijnmalen A, Van der Werf-Messing BHP. Factors influencing the prognosis in bladder cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:559.
172. Moonen LM, Horenblas S, van der Voet JC, Nuyten MJ, Bartelink H. Bladder conservation in selected T1G3 and muscle-invasive T2-T3a bladder carcinoma using combination therapy of
surgery and iridium-192 implantation. Br J Urol 1994;74:322.
173. Steineck G, Scher HI. Integrated therapy for advanced bladder cancer. Curr Opin Urol 1994;4:281.
174. Scher HI. Chemotherapy for invasive bladder cancer: neoadjuvant versus adjuvant. Semin Oncol 1990;17:555.
175. Scher HI, Yagoda A, Herr HW, et al. Neoadjuvant M-VAC (methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin and cisplatin) effect on the primary bladder lesion. J Urol 1988;139:470.
176. Shipley WU, Prout GR Jr, Einstein AB, et al. Treatment of invasive bladder cancerby cisplatin and radiation in patients unsuited for surgery. JAMA 1987;258:931.
177. Hall RR. Bladder preserving treatment: the role of transurethral surgery alone and with combined modality therapy. In: Vogelzang NJ, Scardino PT, Shipley WU, Coffey DS, eds.
Comprehensive textbook of genitourinary oncology. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1995:509.
178. Herr HW, Scher HI. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and partial cystectomy for invasive bladder cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:975.
179. Sternberg CN, Pansodoro V, Lauretti S, et al. Neoadjuvant M-VAC (methotrexate, vinblastine, adriamycin, and cisplatin) chemotherapy and bladder preservation for muscle-infiltrating
transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. Urol Oncol 1995;1:127.

180. Sauer R, Dunst J, Altendorf-Hofmann A, et al. Radiotherapy with and without cisplatin in bladder cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:687.
181. Shipley WU, Kaufman DS, Heney NM, et al. An update of combined modality therapy for patients with muscle invading bladder cancerusing selective bladder preservation or cystectomy. J Urol
1999;162:445.
182. Tester W, Porter A, Asbell S, et al. Combined modality program with possible organ preservation for invasive bladder carcinoma: results of RTOG protocol 85-12. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1993;25:783.
183. Dunst J, Sauer R, Schrott KM, et al. Organ-sparing treatment of advanced bladder cancer: a 10-year experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:261.
184. Tester W, Caplan R, Heaney J, et al. Neoadjuvant combined modality program with selective organ preservation for invasive bladder cancer: results of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group
phase II trial 8802. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:119.
185. Kachnic LA, Kaufman DS, Zietman AL, et al. Selective bladder preservation by combined modality therapy for invasive bladder cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;1:271(abst).
186. Given RW, Parsons JT, McCarley D, Wajsman Z. Bladder-sparing multimodality treatment of muscle-invasive bladder cancer: a five-year follow-up. Urology 1995;46:499.
187. Srougi M, Simon SD. Primary methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin and cisplatin chemotherapy and bladder preservation in locally invasive bladder cancer: a 5-year followup. J Urol
1994;151:593.
188. Geller NL, Scher HI, Parmar MK, Dalesio O, Kaye S. Can we combine available data to evaluate the effects of neoadjuvant chemotherapy for invasive bladder cancer? Semin Oncol
1990;17:628.
189. Sternberg CN, Raghaven D, Ohi Y, et al. Neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy in advanced diseasewhat are the effects on survival and prognosis? IntJ Urol 1995;2[Suppl]:76.
190. Kaufman DS, Shipley WU, Griffin PP, et al. Selective bladder preservation by combination treatment of invasive bladder cancer. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1377.
191. Housset M, Maulard C, Chretien Y, et al. Combined radiation and chemotherapy for invasive transitional-cell carcinoma of the bladder: a prospective study. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2150.
192. Kachnic LA, Shipley WU, Griffin PP, et al. Combined modality treatment with selective bladder conservation for invasive bladder cancer: long-term tolerance in the female patient. Cancer J Sci
Am 1996;2:79.
193. Shipley WU, Winter KA, Kaufman DS, et al. Initial results of RTOG 95-06: a phase I/II trial of transurethral surgery and fractionated twice-daily radiation with concurrent cisplatin and
5-fluorouracil followed either by selective bladder preservation or cystectomy for patients with muscle-invading bladder cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:222(abst 145).
194. Lipponen PK. Over-expression of p53 nuclear oncoprotein in transitional-cell bladder cancerand its prognostic value. Int J Cancer 1993;53:365.
195. Sarkis AS, Bajorin DF, Reuter VE, et al. Prognostic value of p53 nuclear overexpression in patients with invasive bladder cancertreated with neoadjuvant MVAC. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1384.
196. Wu CS, Pollack A, Czerniak B, et al. Prognostic value of p53 in muscle-invasive bladder cancertreated with preoperative radiotherapy. Urology 1996;47:305.
197. Cordon-Cardo C, Wartinger D, Petrylak D, et al. Altered expression of the retinoblastoma gene product: prognostic indicator in bladder cancer. J NatlCancer Inst 1992;84:1251.
198. Logothetis CJ, Xu H, Ro JY, et al. Altered expression of retinoblastoma protein and known prognostic variables in locally advanced bladder cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1256.
199. Herr HW, Bajorin DF, Scher HI, Cordon-Cardo C, Reuter VE. Can p53 help select patients with invasive bladder cancerfor bladder preservation? J Urol 1999;161:20.
200. Cote RJ, Esrig D, Groshen S, Jones PA, Skinner DG. p53 and the treatment of bladder cancer. Nature 1997;385:123.
201. Fleshner N, Garland J, Moadel A, et al. Influence of smoking status on the disease-related outcomes of patients with tobacco-associated superficial transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder.
Cancer 1999;86:2337.

SECTION 34.4 Cancer of the Prostate
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 34.4
Cancer of the Prostate
PETER R. CARROLL
KEITH L. LEE
ZVI Y. FUKS
PHILIP W. KANTOFF
Introduction
Normal Prostate Anatomy and Histology
Pathology and Patterns of Progression of Prostate Cancer
Premalignant Lesions (Prostatic Intraepithelial Neoplasia)
Staging
Epidemiology
Chemoprevention and Diet
Prostate Cancer Early Detection
Use of Total Serum Prostate-Specific Antigen Level and Digital Rectal Examination for Prostate Cancer Early Detection
Prostate Biopsy and its Impact on Risk Assessment
To Screen or Not to Screen?
Initial Cancer Staging and Risk Assessment
Imaging
Pretreatment Serum Prostate-Specific Antigen Level, Tumor Stage, Cancer Grade, and Volume
The Impact of Risk Assessment on Treatment Selection
Treatment Selection for Nonmetastatic (T1–T3N0M0) Disease
Natural History and Surveillance Alone
Radical Prostatectomy
Radiation Therapy
Androgen Ablation Plus Radiation Therapy
Interstitial Therapy
Cryotherapy
Management of Local Failure After Surgery, Radiation Therapy, and Cryotherapy
Treatment Selection for Advanced Disease: Metastatic and Local Regional Disease
Androgen Deprivation
Secondary Hormonal Therapy
Measuring Response
Prognostic Factors
Chemotherapy
Palliation
Future Therapies: Novel Targets
Growth Factor and Growth Factor Receptors as Targets
Signal Transduction Pathways
Differentiation Therapy
Antimetastatic Therapy
Immunotherapy
Angiogenic Approaches
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Prostate cancer is a significant health care problem in the United States due to its high incidence and mortality, the costs associated with its detection and treatment,
and the fact that no consensus exists on what constitutes the best form of treatment for any stage of this disease. Excluding superficial skin cancers, prostate cancer
is the most common malignancy afflicting American men.
Since the advent in the late 1980s of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level as an effective screening test, the medical community has witnessed a dramatic increase in
the incidence of prostate cancer cases. Between 1985 and 1992, the age-adjusted incidence in the United States more than doubled, reaching a peak of more than
190 cases per 100,000 in 1992. 1 Perhaps reflecting stage migration or more effective treatment for localized disease, 5-year cancer survival rates have increased
from approximately 70% in the early 1980s to more than 90% a decade later. 1 Since 1992, the incidence rate has steadily declined.
To date, no conclusive data confirm that screening reduces disease morbidity and mortality. Observations that support screening and early detection include the
following: PSA screening improves detection of clinically important tumors without significantly increasing the detection of unimportant tumors; the disease is more
burdensome at later stages; most PSA-detected tumors are curable using current techniques; and there is no cure for metastatic disease. However, until properly
conducted trials of screening are completed, the benefits and risks of prostate cancer's early detection and the associated treatment methods should be discussed
carefully with patients.

NORMAL PROSTATE ANATOMY AND HISTOLOGY
The prostate is an ovoid structure located between the urinary bladder superiorly and the pelvic floor inferiorly ( Fig. 34.4-1). The urethra traverses this gland, entering
its base below the bladder neck and exiting at the narrowed apex at the level of the urogenital diaphragm. The anterior surface of the prostate is attached to the pubis,
and the posterior surface is flattened with a midline depression that lies against the rectal ampulla. The lateral and inferior surfaces of the gland are in contact with the
levator ani muscles. The levator ani muscles have an almost vertical orientation, funneling inferiorly to surround the rectum and bracket the striated urethral sphincter
and middle and apical portions of the prostate. 2 The ejaculatory ducts enter the posterior surface laterally and pass obliquely toward the midline, where they end at
the verumontanum on the posterior surface of the prostatic urethra. Because of the gland's location deep within the pelvis behind the pubic bone, surgical as well as
radiation-based approaches to expose and target the prostate and protect surrounding structures may be challenging.

FIGURE 34.4-1. Prostate and regional anatomy.

The prostate's anterior surface and the adjacent lateral pelvic floor are covered by the periprostatic fascia, which is formed by the prostatic and levator fasciae. Lateral
to the gland, this layer is called the endopelvic fascia, and it covers both the pelvic floor and important underlying neurovascular structures. The prostatic venous
plexus (of Santorini), a rich network of tributary veins that serve as the primary penile drainage, is seen within this fascial covering. Erectile nerves to the corpora
cavernosa travel outside the prostatic capsule in the lateral pelvic fascia between the prostate and the rectum (see Fig. 34.4-1). The cavernous nerves arise from the
pelvic plexus, contain both sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers, and pass beneath the arch of the pubis to supply the corpora cavernosa and the corpus
spongiosum. These end in a network of nerve fibers around the cavernous vessels at the penile hilum. Appreciating these anatomic relationships intraoperatively is
essential to avoid unnecessary injury and bleeding. 3 The prostatic capsule, composed of condensed smooth muscle and connective tissue, blends with the prostatic
sheath on the anterior and anterolateral surfaces of the gland and with the anterior lamella of Denonvilliers' fascia on the posterior gland surface. 4 The puboprostatic
ligaments extend anterolaterally from the surface of the gland to fix the apex of the prostate to the pubis. 5 At both the apex and base, no clear capsule separates the
prostate from the striated urethral sphincter or bladder neck, respectively. Prostatic glands can be seen in the substance of the urethral sphincter, and smooth muscle
fibers from the detrusor blend with the muscular coat of the prostate. Separating the prostate from the rectum is a layer of fascia, Denonvilliers' fascia, derived from
two layers of pelvic peritoneum in the retrovesical space.
While voluntary control of voiding begins with relaxation of the striated sphincter in the membranous urethra, smooth muscle components of the bladder neck and
prostate contribute to continence in men. 6 The preprostatic sphincter is composed of muscle elements from the bladder. These muscles encircle the urethra and travel
along and insert into the urethra more distally. The preprostatic sphincter provides resistance to urine leakage and retrograde seminal ejaculation. A passive prostatic
sphincter is located distal to the verumontanum and is related closely to the striated muscle elements of the prostatomembranous sphincter. 7
The prostatic striated sphincter forms a thick muscle layer over the anterior surface of the gland. Distally, these fibers almost completely surround the gland, except
for a posterior gap at the apex, and merge with muscles of the membranous urethral sphincter. Fibers of the membranous striated sphincter encircle the urethra,
originating at the anterior decussation of the prostatic sphincter and inserting at the perineal body at the level of the perineal membrane. These sphincteric fibers
insert broadly over the surface of the prostatic fascia near the apex and play an important role in regaining continence after radical prostatectomy. 8,9 and 10
The primary arterial supply to the prostate comes from the prostatovesical artery that descends inferiorly along the bladder base. The origin of this artery is variable,
but it usually comes from the anterior division of the internal iliac artery. The prostatic artery divides at the base of the prostate into the large posterolateral branch
and the smaller anterior branch. The superolateral gland may receive arterial supply from the middle and superior rectal arteries. Urethral branches from the prostatic
artery enter the capsule posterolaterally below the bladder neck to supply the transitional zone and periurethral glands. Capsular branches, traveling in the
neurovascular bundle posterolaterally to the gland, enter the capsule more distally and laterally, to supply the central and peripheral zones. Prostate parenchymal
veins, as well as veins draining all deep pelvic structures, intercommunicate with the prostatic venous plexus lying within the periprostatic fascia on the anterior
surface of the gland. 11 The deep dorsal vein of the penis emerges beneath the symphysis pubis between the puboprostatic ligaments to join this plexus. The majority
of venous blood drains directly into the prostatic and inferior vesical veins to the internal iliac veins.
Seminal emission is a neural process mediated within the prostate. With sexual activity, parasympathetic nerves stimulate the prostatic acini to produce secretions.
Sympathetic nerve activity closes the preprostatic sphincter, preventing retrograde ejaculation, and increases smooth muscle tone in both the prostatic parenchyma
and capsule to deposit secretions in the urethra (emission). 12,13 Ejaculation occurs with contraction of the striated bulbospongiosus muscle.
Preganglionic sympathetic nerves to the preprostatic sphincter and smooth musculature of the prostate gland originate at spinal level L2-3 and pass through the
sympathetic chain ganglia to the superior hypogastric plexus. Here they synapse with postganglionic noradrenergic nerves, the cell bodies of which lie in the pelvic
plexus lateral to the bladder and prostate. Parasympathetic innervation to the prostatic epithelium originates in the pelvic splanchnic nerves from spinal levels S2-4.
These preganglionic neurons synapse in the prostatic plexus, located between the seminal vesicles and the prostate, and send short postganglionic fibers into the
prostate stroma. Somatic motor output from the pudendal nerve arises from S1-3 and innervates the pubococcygeus muscle of the external striated sphincter. Some
contribution to external sphincter tone may also come from the pelvic nerve. 14,15,16 and 17 The prostatic nerve, which includes sympathetic, parasympathetic, and somatic
fibers, travels with the neurovascular bundle and sends off main branches at the level of the prostate base. This nerve continues posterolaterally along the prostate
and divides into apical branches and a branch to the ejaculatory duct. The main branches pierce the prostatic capsule, then travel along the fibromuscular trabeculae
as acinar branches before reaching their terminals at muscular and glandular cells. Afferent nerves from the prostate travel through the pelvic plexus to reach sensory
tracts in the spinal cord.
Lymph capillaries emerge from the fibrous stroma and anastomose to form a lobular network of channels. The major route of lymphatic drainage occurs along the
prostatic artery to the obturator and internal iliac nodes. Secondary lymphatic drainage originates at the base of the prostate, where lymphatic trunks travel along the
medial border of the seminal vesicles to drain into the external iliac nodes. Two more minor routes are along capsular lymphatics on the posterior surface of the gland
to the sacral and internal iliac lymph nodes.
The internal structure of the prostate has been organized into lobes or zones. Early descriptions of five lobes were based on the embryologic concept of the prostate
beginning as five groups of epithelial buds that branch off of the urogenital sinus between gestational weeks 11 and 16. By successively branching and rebranching, a
complex system of ducts is formed circumferentially around the urethra, forming anterior, posterior, median, and two lateral lobes. However, the zonal description of
prostate structure is more commonly used in clinical practice today. 18 According to this scheme, the prostate consists of two primary areas: the peripheral zone and
the central zone. In the normal gland of young adults, these two zones make up 95% of the prostate mass. The remaining 5% of the gland is made up of the
transitional zone, an anterior fibromuscular segment, and a preprostatic sphincter zone. It is well recognized that prostate cancer occurs primarily in the peripheral
zone, while the adenomatous growth of benign prostatic hypertrophy occurs primarily in the transitional zone.
The prostatic parenchyma is composed primarily of glandular epithelium, yet 30% of its mass is composed of muscular elements. The secretory epithelium of the
prostate is contained within tubuloalveolar glands with a simple branching architecture. These glands are lined with simple cuboidal or columnar epithelium under
which lie flattened basal cells. Stromal smooth muscle and connective tissue surround most of the acini. Ducts draining each gland enter the urethra in several
locations. Periurethral glands, not connected to the deep network of acini, drain into the urethra.

PATHOLOGY AND PATTERNS OF PROGRESSION OF PROSTATE CANCER
Approximately 75% of prostate cancers will arise in the peripheral zone of the gland. Another 15% may occur in the central zone, and 10% to 15% will be located in
the transitional zone. Carcinoma within the peripheral zone of the gland may be palpable, on digital rectal examination (DRE), as firm nodules or induration. However,
it is not uncommon for cancers to be nonpalpable. Gross examination of cancerous tissue in prostatectomy specimens often reveals a similarly firm and gritty texture
on palpation; however, lesions can be extremely difficult to differentiate visually from the surrounding normal prostatic parenchyma. 19 Histologically, 95% of prostate
cancers or more are adenocarcinomas derived from prostatic acinar cells. Carcinomas tend to be multifocal and show heterogeneous glandular patterns of malignant
growth.20 The glands are typically small or medium-sized, lined with a single layer of cuboidal or low columnar epithelium. The outer basal layer, found in normal and
hyperplastic glands, usually is absent in carcinoma. In suspicious lesions, immunohistochemical staining for basal cells can assist in diagnosis. 21 Cancerous acini are
irregularly shaped and packed closely together with varying amounts of stroma. In some poorly differentiated tumors, cells in cords or sheets may replace the
glandular pattern. Perineurial, lymphatic, and vascular invasions are common and are reliable signs of malignancy. The mechanism of transformation from benign to
malignant adenocarcinomas is unclear; however, androgen stimulation appears to play an important role in pathogenesis. 22
Similar to other cancers, prostate adenocarcinomas are graded histologically. Pathologic interpretation of needle biopsy and prostatectomy specimens focuses on the
degree of glandular differentiation, cytologic atypia, and nuclear abnormalities. Several grading systems have been proposed, of which the Gleason system is the
most commonly used.23,24 This grading system recognizes the fact that prostate cancer is a multifocal disease with heterogeneous glandular patterns. Thus, two
individual scores, each ranging from 1 to 5, are given to the two most predominant histologic patterns of prostate cancer. The two scores are added together to give
the Gleason sum. Sums of 2 to 4 represent well-differentiated disease; 5 to 7, moderately differentiated disease; and 8 to 10, poorly differentiated disease ( Fig.
34.4-2). In well-differentiated cancers, groups of small acini are spaced closely “back to back,” with little intervening stroma and a loss of the normal myoepithelium
that surrounds the glandular elements. Histologically, glands may show luminal distention with mucin (so-called colloid carcinoma) or may take on a cribriform or
papillary organization. 25,26 Moderately differentiated cancers are characterized by more haphazardly organized acini, more pronounced nuclear anaplasia, and
infiltration of surrounding normal glands. In poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, cells appear to be in sheets or cords, and glandular components may not be
discernible. There is pronounced nuclear anaplasia, and invasion of surrounding tissue may be seen. When comparing patients with similar Gleason sums, it is
important to note that the major Gleason pattern score may have additional prognostic value. For instance, patients with 3+4 disease tend to do better than those with

4+3 disease. In our experience, 3-year actuarial PSA failure–free survival rates in patients treated with prostatectomy are approximately 82% for the former group and
77% for the latter.

FIGURE 34.4-2. Prostate cancer histology. A: Gleason grade 2 (200×). Glands are medium-sized and well developed, with only mild variation in gland size and
shape, luminal blue mucin, and no basal cell layer. The glands are tightly packed with minimal intervening stroma and grow in circumscribed nodules, with a minimal
peripheral infiltrative pattern. Nuclear features of malignancy include mild nuclear enlargement, granular chromatin, and nucleoli. B: Gleason grade 3 (200×). Glands
are well developed, with more profound variation in contour and morphology. The glands grow in an infiltrative pattern as seen here, with extension into extraprostatic
tissues. C: Gleason grade 4 (200×). Malignant cells have trabecular and glandular growth pattern, forming small solid nests and abortive, fused glandular lumens.
This tumor has a highly infiltrative pattern with scattered small angulated nests. Malignant nuclear features include marked nuclear enlargement and macronucleoli.
D: Gleason grade 5 (200×). Highly infiltrative growth pattern with single cells and small nests of malignant epithelial cells. Cytologic features include marked nuclear
pleomorphism and anisonucleosis with irregular contours, coarse irregular chromatin distribution, and macronucleoli.

The histology of the remaining 5% of prostate cancers is heterogeneous, arising from stromal, epithelial, or ectopic cells. Nonadenocarcinoma variants can be
categorized into two groups—epithelial and nonepithelial—based on the cellular origin. Epithelial variants consist of endometrioid, mucinous, signet-ring, adenoid
cystic, adenosquamous, squamous cell, transitional cell, and neuroendocrine carcinoma and comedocarcinoma. Among the nonepithelial variants are
rhabdomyosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, osteosarcoma, angiosarcoma, carcinosarcoma, malignant lymphoma, and metastatic neoplasms (Table 34.4-1). An
appreciation of histologic variants is important, because treatment and prognosis may be different.

TABLE 34.4-1. Examples of Nonadenocarcinoma Prostate Cancer Cell Types

Endometrioid carcinoma involves the prostatic urethra and periurethral prostatic ducts in the region of the verumontanum. Histologically, it resembles endometrial
adenocarcinoma of the uterus with complex glands lined by stratified columnar epithelium. 27,28 Clinically, this variant is more aggressive than simple adenocarcinoma
and often is associated with metastases and a poorer prognosis. Another epithelial variant is mucinous adenocarcinoma. It is characterized by large accumulations of
extracellular mucin and luminal distention. 26,29 Overall prognosis is similar to that of adenocarcinoma. Signet-ring cell carcinoma is characterized by large cytoplasmic
vacuoles that displace the nucleus and frequently is associated with poorly differentiated and aggressive adenocarcinoma. 30 Associations with mucinous
adenocarcinoma are not uncommon, and vacuoles may or may not be filled with mucin. The prognosis for patients with primary signet-ring cell carcinoma is poor, with
a 3-year survival rate of 27%. 31 Comedocarcinoma is characterized by nests of cells with central necrosis. Comedocarcinoma resembles poorly differentiated
adenocarcinoma (Gleason grade 5) and usually carries a poor prognosis. 32 A rare variant with a better prognosis is adenoid cystic carcinoma. Histologically, lesions
resemble basal cell hyperplasia, and disease usually is organ-confined. 33,34
Squamous cell carcinoma of the prostate accounts for 0.5% to 1% of all prostate cancers and sometimes is difficult to differentiate from disease originating from the
bladder and urethra. 35 Such histologic features as keratinization and intercellular bridging are seen, as is the lack of glandular differentiation. Clinically, patients
present in fashions similar to those with adenocarcinoma; however, serum tumor markers such as acid phosphatase and PSA will remain normal. 35,36,37 and 38 This
epithelial variant is more aggressive than adenocarcinoma, with an average survival after diagnosis of approximately 14 months. 39 Primary transitional cell carcinoma
(TCC) of the prostate has also been reported, although secondary spread from the bladder is much more common. 40 Primary prostatic TCC does not respond to
hormonal therapy but has been shown to respond to combination therapy. 41 Prognosis is variable, and TCC is best treated with primary surgery or combinations of
chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and surgery. Neuroendocrine tumors of the prostate are rare and can present with paraneoplastic syndromes. 42,43 Most patients tend
to present with advanced disease at the time of diagnosis. 44
Nonepithelial nonadenocarcinomas of the prostate are rare. Sarcomas represent fewer than 0.1% of prostate cancers and tend to occur in younger patients. 45 The two
most common types are rhabdomyosarcoma and leiomyosarcoma. The former is the most common prostatic tumor in the pediatric age group, whereas the latter tends
to occur in adults. 46 Both are extremely aggressive and tend to invade locally and hematogenously. Pathologically, rhabdomyosarcomas are solid neoplasms, with a
histologic appearance that ranges from primitive mesenchyma to well-differentiated, myofiber-type cells. 47 Leiomyosarcomas tend to be bulky, with diffuse infiltration
into the periprostatic soft tissues. Histologically, lesions show interlacing spindle cells, eosinophilic cytoplasm, and nuclear atypia accompanied by necrosis and
hemorrhage.48 A multidisciplinary approach to treatment, including surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy, is usually recommended. 44 A third nonepithelial
cancer of the prostate is malignant lymphoma. It usually affects young men and frequently is associated with non-Hodgkin's and Hodgkin's lymphoma. 49 On histologic
examination, lesions resemble lymph nodes consisting of small-cleaved lymphocytic cells or large diffuse lymphomas. Prognosis is usually poor, and prostatectomy
may not prolong survival. Other metastases to the prostate include leukemia and local extension from rectal or bladder primary cancers. Metastases from other organs
are rare. 45
Prostate cancer may spread locally or distantly. Cancers can invade the seminal vesicles and bladder base proximally and the urethra distally. Extension through the
prostatic capsule and into the periprostatic tissues is not uncommon; however, rectal invasion posteriorly is rare, owing to separation of the two organs by
Denonvilliers' fascia. Lymphatic spread most often occurs in a stepwise manner and follows the normal pattern of lymphatic drainage. The obturator nodes are the
primary sites of lymphatic metastases, followed by the perivesical, hypogastric, iliac, presacral, and paraaortic nodes. Hematogenous metastases primarily affect the
bones and occur in up to 85% of patients who die of prostate cancer. 50 The axial skeleton is particularly vulnerable, as the preprostatic and periprostatic venous
complex communicates with Batson's plexus of the presacral veins. Osseous sites of involvement, in decreasing order of frequency, include the lumbar spine,
proximal femur, pelvis, thoracic spine, ribs, sternum, and skull. Bone metastases are typically osteoblastic (80%). Osteolytic (5%) and mixed osteoblastic-osteolytic
(15%) lesions are less common. Hematogenous spread to viscera can occur, but widespread visceral dissemination is rare. Lung and liver metastases are seen in
approximately 25% and 20% of patients, respectively, with end-stage prostate cancer. The current tumor, node, and metastasis (TNM) staging system for prostate

cancer is presented in Table 34.4-2.

TABLE 34.4-2. Prostate Cancer Staging

PREMALIGNANT LESIONS (PROSTATIC INTRAEPITHELIAL NEOPLASIA)
Prostate carcinoma often is accompanied by atypical lesions such as intraductal dysplasia or prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN). It has been estimated that
approximately 70% of prostate tissue ultimately removed for carcinoma will also harbor PIN. 19,51,52 A presumptive precursor lesion to prostate cancer, PIN is
characterized by large glands separated by modest amounts of stroma with an overall normal-appearing architecture. 53,54 Glandular cells appear basophilic with
enlarged nuclei, hyperchromatism, and anaplasia. Categorized into low- and high-grade PIN, the latter is associated with significant epithelial hyperplasia. Unlike
carcinoma, however, the basal cell layer surrounding the dysplastic cells remains intact. Moreover, an intact basement membrane has been demonstrated in PIN, in
contrast to moderately and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. 55 High-grade PIN has a zonal distribution similar to that of adenocarcinoma and appears to be
directly associated with cancer grade and stage. 52 In our experience, roughly 50% of patients with an initial diagnosis of high-grade PIN alone will later demonstrate
carcinoma on repeat biopsy. 56 Moreover, high-grade PIN may be associated with aggressive disease and a poorer prognosis. 57 However, its true prognostic value
requires further research, as cancers in the transitional zone seldom are accompanied by PIN and as many as 70% of early carcinomas may lack any high-grade
PIN.51
The DNA content (ploidy) of cancerous lesions may correlate with patient outcomes. Patients with diploid cancers generally have better survival outcomes than do
those with aneuploid cancers. 58,59 In a study of nearly 900 patients with pathologically non–organ-confined disease (pT3), Hawkins et al. 60 showed that DNA ploidy
was a significant prognostic factor for both clinical and biochemical failure–free survival. Others have reported that immunohistochemical staining for p27, a nuclear
protein inhibitor of the cell cycle, may be of value. Decreased p27 expression is seen with more aggressive disease. Cheville et al. 61 showed that patients with low p27
expression had higher-grade tumors, increased tumor aneuploidy, and higher incidences of seminal vesicle and nodal invasion than did men with normal p27
expression.

STAGING
In addition to histologic examination, staging is also important in patient risk assessment and prognosis. The two most commonly used staging systems are the tumor,
node, and metastasis TNM system and the Jewett staging system (see Table 34.4-2).19,62 In the Jewett staging system are four stages of prostate cancer, A to D, with
subclassifications within each stage. Stage A disease is clinically nonpalpable disease found incidentally during surgery for benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Stage
A1 disease is well differentiated and involves less than 5% of a pathologic specimen. Stage A2 involves more than 5% of a specimen or is moderate to poorly
differentiated. Stage B (T2) cancers are clinically palpable but confined to the prostate. Stage B1 cancers are 1.5 cm in diameter or smaller and involve only one lobe
of the prostate. Stage B2 involves either several nodules in both lobes or a lesion larger than 1.5 cm. Stage C (T3 and T4) tumors are non–organ-confined with
invasion of soft tissue outside the prostate. Stage C1 tumors invade through the prostatic capsule but have a negative surgical margin. Margins are positive for stage
C2 tumors, and C3 tumors invade the seminal vesicles. Stage D cancer is metastatic, with D1 referring to microscopical pelvic lymph node involvement and D2 to
disease involving bones or distant organs (or both). Most clinicians use the TNM system.
Given that autopsy studies show a high prevalence of histologic evidence of prostate cancer in men (>30%) who die of other diseases, there is some concern that
many cancers currently detected may be “insignificant” or of such low biologic potential that treatment is not necessary and possibly harmful. 63 Cancer grade, cancer
stage, serum PSA level, and the age and health of the patient most often define the risk associated with a prostate cancer. Tumor volume also correlates with risk,
although it cannot be determined in vivo with precise accuracy as yet. Generally, those cancers that exceed 0.5 mL are more likely to be associated with extraprostatic
disease as compared to smaller cancers. 64 Approximately 20% of autopsy or incidental cancers exceed this size. Similarly, higher-grade cancers (Gleason score 4 or
5) are also more likely to be associated with extracapsular disease and cancer progression as compared to lower-grade cancers. According to criteria of cancer size,
grade, and stage, the vast majority of cancers currently identified by early detection efforts appear to be clinically significant. Indeed, at least one-third have adverse
features, including extracapsular extension (ECE), seminal vesicle invasion, lymph node metastases, or very high-grade histology, all of which are associated with a
significant risk of cancer progression, certainly without treatment and often with treatment.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Excluding superficial skin cancers, prostate cancer is the most common malignancy afflicting American men. In 1999, some 179,300 new cases were diagnosed, and
an estimated 37,000 prostate cancer deaths occurred, making it the second most common cause of cancer death, after lung cancer, in American men. 1
Beginning in the late 1980s, PSA screening became a common practice, and the incidence of prostate cancer cases increased dramatically as a direct result.
Between 1985 and 1992, the age-adjusted incidence in the United States more than doubled, reaching a peak of more than 190 cases per 100,000 in 1992. 1 This
increase was not unanticipated, as the introduction of any effective screening test should lead to detection of earlier-stage disease in more patients (i.e., stage
migration). 65,66 Stage migration has, in fact, occurred in the United States, and approximately three-fourths of prostate cancer cases diagnosed now are recognized
while the disease is still clinically organ-confined, as compared to only one-fourth prior to the introduction of PSA screening. 67,68 Perhaps reflecting patients' earlier
disease stage at presentation and more effective treatment for localized disease, 5-year cancer survival rates have increased from approximately 70% in the early
1980s to more than 90% a decade later. 1 Since 1992, the incidence rate has declined steadily as the pool of men with no previous diagnosis of lower-staged disease
became slowly exhausted. Incidence rates today are approaching those before PSA screening.
Worldwide, prostate cancer ranks third in cancer incidence and sixth in cancer mortality among men. There is, however, a notable variability in incidence and mortality
among world regions. The incidence per 100,000 is low in Japan and China at 8.51 and 1.08, respectively, and is intermediate in regions of Central America (24.77)
and Western Africa (23.85). In North American countries, where PSA screening is widely adopted (e.g., in the United States), the incidence may be as high as 95.1
per 100,000. 69 Although less variable than incidence, there remains a 30-fold difference in the age-standardized mortality rate between global regions, ranging from
0.7 per 100,000 in China, to 18.5 per 100,000 in North America, to 22.2 per 100,000 in the Caribbean. 69 The basis for this difference is multifactorial and has been
attributed to more aggressive screening and diagnosis in aging populations, genetic predisposition, and environmental causes.
Predominantly a disease of elderly men, the clinical diagnosis of prostate cancer is rare before age 40 but increases steadily thereafter. Autopsy studies worldwide
have shown that histologic disease increases with age and that roughly three-fourths of men older than 80 years will have some evidence of latent disease. 70,71,72,73,74
and 75
In parallel, more than 80% of clinically apparent disease occurs in men older than 65 years. 1 In the United States, it is estimated that 1 in 55 men between the
ages of 40 and 59 will develop clinically apparent disease. This incidence climbs almost exponentially to 1 in 7 for men between 60 and 79. This association is also
reflected in mortality rates, as prostate cancer accounts for 10.8% of cancer-related deaths in men between 60 and 79 years of age and 24.6% in those older than 80.
As the proportion of older men increases in our population, the impact of prostate cancer will continue to grow. In fact, the doubling of age-adjusted mortality rates in

Taiwan over the past three decades has been attributed mainly to aging of the population. 76
Ethnic and racial differences are also seen in disease incidence and mortality. African Americans are in the highest-risk group, with an incidence of 224.3 cases per
100,000 for the period between 1990 and 1995. The incidence in white and Asian counterparts during that same period was considerably lower at 150.3 and 82.2 (per
100,000), respectively. 1 In addition, African Americans tend to present with more advanced disease and may have poorer overall prognosis than their white
counterparts. It has been reported that African Americans are 1.3 to 1.8 times more likely to present with distant disease and, stage for stage, African Americans have
lower survival rates. 77,78 The underlying cause for this difference has been attributed to social, economic, educational, hereditary, and dietary differences. 78,79,80,81 and 82
Conlisk et al. 83 reported that among African Americans, disease stage at presentation was inversely correlated with income and health insurance status. When one
controls for access to medical care, the difference in disease stage at presentation and survival persists. 77,84,85 Recent reports from nations with a large concentration
of black patients demonstrate a high incidence of the disease nationally, suggesting a genetic association. 86,87 Several investigators have shown that differences in
testosterone levels or androgen receptor gene activity may contribute to the racial differences observed in prostate cancer. 88,89,90, and 91
Migrant studies, particularly of Asian men, also suggest an environmental, social, or dietary etiology in prostate cancer. When migrants from a low-risk country such
as Japan move to the United States, a high-risk nation, their prostate cancer incidence and mortality become severalfold higher than native Japanese
counterparts.92,93 Other investigators have found a positive correlation between the number of years since migration to the United States and cancer risk. 80 Although
diagnostic biases exist between countries, the upward shift in risk nevertheless seems real. This rise in clinically detectable disease may be related to differences in
diet. High fat intake has been positively associated with increased risk in these studies and may, in part, explain the rising incidence of prostate cancer in Japan, as
dietary habits become more Westernized. 94
Family history of prostate cancer also contributes to risk. It has been reported that men with prostate cancer are two to three times more likely than controls to have at
least one first- or second-degree relative with prostate cancer. 95,96 and 97 Keetch et al.95 reported that a patient with prostate cancer is 3.1 and 4.3 times more likely than
a control to give a history of prostate cancer in his father and brother, respectively. Together with the observation that clustering of prostate cancer cases exists in
some high-risk families, a hereditary component clearly exists. 98,99 However, the role of specific gene activity and molecular mechanisms of disease remains largely
unsolved and continues to be an area of active research. A word of caution is warranted in interpreting family history studies, however, as they are subject to recall,
self-selection, and socioeconomic biases. 100,101 and 102
The role of vasectomy and prostate cancer risk remains controversial. Retrospective and prospective cohort epidemiologic studies have demonstrated a relative risk
of approximately 1.6 in men who underwent vasectomy.103,104,105 and 106 However, others could not confirm these findings and suggest that earlier studies were flawed
by detection, control selection, and publication biases. 95,107,108,109 and 110 In a recent metaanalysis that included five cohort and nine case-control studies, no causal
association was found. 108
In summary, prostate cancer is a disease of older men worldwide. It is more common in Westernized countries, in those with a family history of the disease, and in
African Americans. The cause is likely multifaceted, with genetic, dietary, and social modifiers. Further investigation is necessary to elucidate the role and significance
of each factor in prostate cancer induction and progression.

CHEMOPREVENTION AND DIET
Chemoprevention is the administration of medicines or other agents to prevent, slow, or reverse cancer progression. The concept of primary chemoprevention for
prostate cancer has gained much interest in the 1990s because of the disease's high prevalence, slowly progressive nature, and long latency period. 111,112 and 113 The
ideal therapeutic intervention would arrest disease progression during this latency period and decrease the incidence of clinical disease. The success of
chemoprevention, however, depends on consideration of several important factors. First, because “healthy” men are treated, the therapeutic agent must offer low to
no toxicity and no side effects and must require a simple dosing regimen. Second, epidemiologic and laboratory evidence should support the agent's efficacy. Finally,
the ideal patient is one at high risk for developing clinical disease and motivated to adhere to chronic dosing of chemopreventive agents. 114
To date, several promising chemopreventive agents have been identified and are under laboratory and clinical investigation. 115,116,117,118,119 and 120 Finasteride is among
the agents now being tested in a large, phase III, randomized clinical trial, the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT). 115,121,122 A joint effort of the Southwest
Oncology Group (SWOG), the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG), and the Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB), the PCPT is a 10-year study of
18,882 men, aged 55 or older, with normal DRE and a PSA level of less than 3.0 ng/mL, who have been randomized to either placebo or the 5a-reductase inhibitor
finasteride (5 mg/d).123 Given prostate cancer's slowly progressive nature, the end point of prostate cancer mortality will not be pursued because of long study
duration and large sample size requirements. Instead, the primary end point of prostate cancer period prevalence, as determined by sextant prostate biopsy, is used.
The PCPT is designed to have greater than 90% power in detecting a 25% reduction in period prevalence of biopsy-proven disease when it reaches its end point in
mid-2004.
The use of finasteride to prevent disease seems rational, given that prostate cancer is androgen-responsive. 124,125,126 and 127 An inhibitor of 5a-reductase, finasteride
blocks the conversion of testosterone to its active metabolite dihydrotestosterone (DHT) and lowers the prostatic androgen levels. 128 Bologna et al.124,129 have shown
that finasteride can attenuate in vitro prostate cancer cell growth in a dose-dependent manner, and others suggest that the lower incidence of prostate cancer among
Japanese men may be associated with lower 5a-reductase activity. In addition, as a chemopreventive agent taken chronically, finasteride is well absorbed orally and
does not appear to have any clinically relevant drug interactions or toxicity. 130 The frequency of side effects is low and includes decreased libido, impotence, and
decreased ejaculate volume.123,128
Dietary manipulations have also gained much interest. 131,132 and 133 Epidemiologic studies have shown that the incidence of clinically significant prostate cancer is much
lower in parts of the world where people eat a predominantly low-fat, plant-based diet. 69,134 In addition, migrant studies demonstrate that when men from a low-risk
country move to the United States and begin eating a Westernized diet, their rates of prostate cancer increase severalfold and approach that of the host country. 92
However, which component of a certain diet increases prostate cancer risk remains unclear. Researchers have suggested fat, soy, green tea, lycopene, selenium, and
vitamins, among others, as modifiers of prostate cancer risk.
Dietary fat intake is positively associated with prostate cancer risk and may be a rational target for chemoprevention. In a case-control study from the Physicians'
Health Study, those who had higher plasma a-linolenic acid levels (a fatty acid found in animal fat) had a two- to threefold increase in prostate cancer risk as
compared to those with lower a-linolenic acid levels. 135 Similarly, in a prospective cohort study of more than 47,000 men, Giovannucci et al. 136 found that fat intake
was directly correlated with risk of advanced disease and, specifically, animal fat, red meat, and a-linolenic acid were associated with the greatest risk [relative risk
(RR) = 1.63, 2.64, and 3.43, respectively]. 136 Others have studied saturated fat and reported an attributable risk of 13% for saturated fat intake in excess of 26 g/d as
compared to diets with less than 13 g/d. This suggests that 13% of prostate cancer cases may be preventable by reducing saturated fat intake to less than 13 g/d. 137
In a recent prospective case-control study of men in whom prostate cancer was diagnosed, Fradet et al. 138 found that survival was inversely associated with saturated
fat intake. As compared to men ingesting less than 10.8% of dietary calories from saturated fat, those ingesting more than 13.2% had three times the risk of dying
from prostate cancer (RR = 3.13) and were more likely to develop bone metastasis (RR = 3.4) at a median follow-up of 5.2 years. 138
Evidence supporting a relationship between prostate cancer and dietary fat also comes from animal studies. Wang et al. 139 injected prostate cancer cells (LNCaP) into
mice and placed them on a “typical American” diet containing 40% fat. In 3 weeks, prostate tumor growth was noted. The researchers then divided the animals into
subgroups receiving diets containing approximately 40%, 30%, 20%, 10%, and 2% of calories as fat. Progression of prostate cancer ceased or was reversed in some
animals placed on 10% to 20% fat diets. This was in contrast to continued tumor growth in groups ingesting higher amounts of fat. PSA levels were also lower in mice
on the 2% fat diet as compared to those on the 40% fat diet. 139
On a molecular level, much remains unknown. Myers and Ghosh 140 recently postulated that the risk seen with high fat intake may be linked to 5-lipoxygenase products
of arachidonic acid (a ubiquitous fatty acid found in animal fat) and that inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase could lead to prostate cancer cell death and apoptosis. However,
the significance of genetic polymorphisms for 5-lipoxygenase and the role of other fatty acid metabolic pathways in prostate cancer risk remain elusive.
The worldwide difference in prostate cancer incidence may also be associated with dietary intake of soy proteins. In Asian countries such as Japan and the Republic

of Korea, where prostate cancer incidence and mortality are just a fraction of that in North America, consumption of soy in the form of tofu, soy milk, tempeh, and miso
is noted to be up to 90-fold higher than soy consumption in the United States. 134 In a cross-national study of more than 40 nations, Hebert et al. 134 found soy, on a
per-calorie basis, to be the most protective dietary factor. This protective role may be associated with soy's phytoestrogenic components genistein and daidzein.
Genistein and daidzein are isoflavonoids with weak estrogenic effect that may have the ability to delay growth of precancerous prostate lesions and prostate
tumors.116,141 Davis et al.141 showed that genistein inhibits prostate cancer cell growth in culture and induces apoptosis through cell-cycle gene regulation in a
dose-dependent manner. Others have demonstrated that genistein is an inhibitor of tyrosine kinase and suggest that genistein may act through inhibition of
up-regulated tyrosine kinases in proliferative cancerous states. 131,142,143 Although the association between soy and cancer risk seems convincing, a causal role
remains obscure and awaits the rigors of prospective randomized studies. However, given that soy products are generally well tolerated and provide a cost-effective
source of isoflavonoids, the scientific community's interest in soy as a chemopreventive agent will likely continue. 120
To explain the difference in cancer incidence and mortality between nations, researchers have also suggested a chemopreventive role for green tea, a beverage
consumed in high quantities in Asia. 117,144In vitro studies by Yang et al. 145 showed that polyphenol extracts from tea inhibited growth of cancerous cell lines and
induced cellular apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, in vivo studies by Mohan and Gupta et al. 146,147 found that tea polyphenols inhibited ornithine
decarboxylase, a testosterone-induced enzyme that is up-regulated in prostate cancer. Tea polyphenols' inhibition of ornithine decarboxylase in effect attenuates
testosterone in the prostatic milieu and may be an important target for chemoprevention.
Tomatoes are rich sources of the carotenoid lycopene. With its potent antioxidant activity, lycopene may protect cellular components from reactive oxygen radical
species and lower prostate cancer risk. Epidemiologic data show that lycopene consumption is associated with decreased risk as well as a possible reduction in
prostate tumor growth.148 In a cohort study of approximately 14,000 Adventist men over a 6-year period, consumption of tomato products was associated with lower
prostate cancer risk. 149 This finding was substantiated in a prospective cohort study from the Health Professionals Study, where lycopene intake from tomato-based
foods was found to be inversely associated with risk. 150 The investigators reported that men ingesting two or more servings of tomato sauce per week had a 36%
reduction in cancer risk as compared to counterparts who did not consume tomato sauce. Little is known, however, regarding lycopene's exact mechanism of action or
the specific role of different isomers in prostate tissue metabolism.
The role of another antioxidant, vitamin E, as a chemopreventive remains controversial. Epidemiologic and in vivo data are often conflicting, despite promising in vitro
studies. 118,151,152,153 and 154 Part of the difficulty in elucidating vitamin E's effect in chemoprevention is that oral supplements frequently contain different forms of vitamin
E than that found naturally in foods. Given the fact that vitamin E exists as potentially eight different compounds, and that isoforms such as g-tocopherol have been
shown to have greater inhibitory effects on prostate cancer cell growth than a-tocopherol, further evaluation of vitamin E is warranted. 154
Selenium has also been reported to lower prostate cancer risk. In a double-blinded clinical trial designed to determine whether selenium could lower skin cancer
recurrences, Clark et al. 155 found that men randomized to receiving selenium had a 63% reduction in prostate cancer incidence as compared to those randomized to
receiving placebo. Similar findings were demonstrated in a nested case-control trial of the Health Professionals Follow-Up Study. The investigators found that higher
selenium intake, as reflected in nail selenium levels, was significantly protective (odds ratio = 0.35 when comparing the highest and lowest quintile). 156In vivo studies
in the human prostate cancer cell lines have also shown that selenium inhibits cancer cell growth at physiologic doses and that its protective effect may be mediated
through an androgen-sensitive gene that encodes for a selenium-binding protein. 157,158
Attention has also focused on vitamin D's antiproliferative and prodifferentiation effect on the prostate. 159,160 Investigators have demonstrated that
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 [1,25(OH)2D3], the active metabolite of vitamin D, inhibits cellular proliferation in primary prostate cancer tissue cultures and in prostate
cancer cell lines such as PC3, DU145, and LNCaP. 119,161,162 Moreover, epidemiologic evidence shows an inverse relationship between prostate cancer risk and
ultraviolet radiation, the primary source of endogenous vitamin D synthesis. 163,164 This observation has led some to suggest that higher rates of prostate cancer in the
elderly may be due in part to decreased sun exposure or a decline in the body's ability to synthesize 1,25(OH) 2D3 with aging.160 Similarly, others have proposed that
the higher risk in men of African descent may be related to higher skin melanin content, which would decrease endogenous vitamin D production. 114 Taken together,
vitamin D and its synthetic analogues may prove to be useful chemopreventive agents for prostate cancer.
Although a relationship between diet and prostate cancer is apparent, whether manipulating the diet will lead to changes in cancer risk is the subject of ongoing
clinical trials. In considering the future development of rational chemoprevention trials and test compounds, one must appreciate the interdependence between the
practical aspects of clinical trial design and the mechanisms in disease progression. 165,166 A better understanding of the latter may lead to clinical trials that are less
restrained by the need for large sample populations and prolonged follow-up. For example, it has been shown that urokinase-mediated cell surface proteolysis and
angiogenesis in human prostate cancer cells are important in metastasis and that specific inhibition could decrease the metastatic potential of cancerous cells. 167,168
From this work, one could postulate the design of a chemopreventive agent aimed at preventing metastasis in patients who present with localized disease. As
compared to primary chemoprevention, this may be easier to implement clinically as patients are more likely to be motivated and compliant with chronic therapy. Thus,
a multidisciplinary approach that reflects our understanding of prostate carcinogenesis and tumor invasion is critical to study design of future chemoprevention trials.

PROSTATE CANCER EARLY DETECTION
Prostate cancer screening or early detection has been accomplished using DRE, measurement of serum PSA (and its various forms), transrectal ultrasonography
(TRUS), and combinations of these tests. Although DRE can detect prostate cancer, it detects fewer cancers than does PSA testing and, unfortunately, many cancers
detected using DRE are either locally or regionally advanced. 169 Although serum PSA is a better screening test than DRE, DRE should not be abandoned, as it may
detect some cancers associated with a normal serum PSA level. Therefore, DRE should be combined with serum PSA testing. TRUS should not be used a first-line
screening study as it lacks high specificity, is relatively expensive, and adds little information to that already gained by the use of serum PSA testing and DRE. 170
TRUS is used to guide prostate biopsy in those patients who have an elevated serum PSA level, an abnormal DRE, or both ( Fig. 34-4.3).

FIGURE 34.4-3. Transrectal ultrasound image showing a characteristic hypoechoic abnormality (arrow) consistent with prostate cancer.

PSA is a serine protease produced by benign and malignant prostate tissues. Although it is produced in small amounts elsewhere, including breast tissue,
endometrium, and in a few malignancies other than prostatic cancer, it should be considered to be organ-specific clinically. 171,172,173,174 and 175 PSA circulates in the
serum as uncomplexed (free or unbound) or complexed (bound) forms.176,177 and 178 Serum PSA is largely complexed by endogenous protease inhibitors, the most
common being a1-antichymotrypsin. Other proteins bind a smaller fraction.
Serum PSA may be elevated transiently in cases of prostatitis and after endoscopic urethral manipulation, prostatic biopsy and, to a more limited extent,
ejaculation.179,180 Routine DRE actually has little effect on serum PSA, but most physicians defer PSA testing after such an examination. 181 The half-life of serum PSA
is 2.2 to 3.2 days. 182,183 Therefore, one should wait approximately 4 to 8 weeks after significant prostate manipulation, such as that which occurs with prostatitis or
prostate biopsy, before obtaining serum PSA. It should be emphasized that the most common cause for an elevated serum PSA level is BPH, the incidence of which

increases with age, as does the incidence of prostate cancer.
Serum PSA concentrations can be decreased by treatment with agents that lower serum testosterone, such as luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone (LHRH)
agonists and antagonists, antiandrogens such as flutamide, and the 5a-reductase inhibitor finasteride, which is used for the management of presumed BPH and
male-pattern baldness. Finasteride also lowers PSA levels by an average of 50%. 184 Therefore, one can correct for the effect of finasteride on PSA by doubling the
PSA level. 185 Use of a-adrenergic antagonists such as terazosin (also used to manage obstructive voiding symptoms) has no appreciable effect on serum PSA
levels.186
USE OF TOTAL SERUM PROSTATE-SPECIFIC ANTIGEN LEVEL AND DIGITAL RECTAL EXAMINATION FOR PROSTATE CANCER EARLY DETECTION
The risk of prostate cancer correlates with serum PSA concentrations and DRE findings. The positive predictive value of a serum PSA level between 4.0 ng/mL and
10 ng/mL is approximately 20% to 30%. 187,188,189,190 and 191 For levels in excess of 10 ng/mL, the positive predictive value increases to 42% to 71.4%. The use of DRE
complements serum PSA testing (Table 34.4-3).

TABLE 34.4-3. Probability of Prostate Cancer Based on Serum Prostate-Specific Antigen and Digital Rectal Examination

The majority of cancers (>80%) detected by serum PSA are clinically significant as defined by cancer grade and volume. 192 In contrast to the use of DRE alone for
early detection of prostate cancer, the majority of PSA-detected cancers are confined clinically. However, as many as 40% of cancers detected by the use of serum
PSA and DRE may have evidence of ECE, usually capsular penetration, if the prostate is removed surgically and examined pathologically. 192
The frequency of PSA testing remains a matter of some debate. In men with a normal DRE and a PSA level in excess of 2.5 ng/mL, PSA testing should be performed
annually, as approximately 50% of these patients may convert to having a PSA level exceeding 4.0 ng/mL. 193,194 The test can be performed biannually in those with a
normal DRE and serum PSA level lower than 2.5 ng/mL, as conversion in this group is much less likely. The likelihood of curable prostate cancer, either
organ-confined or with ECE associated with low to intermediate cancer grade, is similar in men who have prostate cancer associated with serum PSA levels lower
than 4.0 ng/mL and in those with levels of 4.0 to 5.0 ng/mL. Therefore, cure is not likely to be compromised in those with very low serum PSA levels initially who
experience a limited rise in the PSA level over time.
Enhancing Prostate-Specific Antigen Test Performance
A number of different strategies have been developed to enhance PSA test performance, by increasing sensitivity in certain populations or specificity in others. These
strategies include use of age-specific reference ranges, PSA velocity, PSA density, and the molecular forms of PSA (free or complexed PSA).
PSA density is a measurement that attempts to correct for elevated PSA levels due to BPH. PSA density is defined as the total serum PSA level divided by the
prostate gland volume (in milliliters) measured by TRUS. 195 As prostate gland volume increases with increasing amounts of BPH, PSA should rise as well. Prostate
cancer releases more PSA into the serum than does BPH. 196 The use of PSA density is limited by the need to perform TRUS, variations in the accuracy of TRUS to
measure volume, and the fact that PSA levels due to BPH are a product of the ratios of both the stromal and epithelial components of BPH, which vary from patient to
patient. Some have suggested that a PSA density cutoff of 0.15 may better discriminate between patients with elevated serum PSA levels due to BPH and those with
elevated levels due to cancer. 197 Catalona et al.198 showed that as many as 50% of prostate cancers may be missed if one uses this PSA density cutoff to determine
the need for prostate biopsy. Still others have failed to show any utility for the use of PSA density in men with a normal DRE and PSA levels between 4.0 and 10.0
ng/mL.199 As BPH tends to occur in the transitional zone of the prostate and not in the central or peripheral zones, attempts to improve prostate cancer detection using
transitional zone PSA density have been developed. 200,201 However, like PSA density, these calculations are subject to error, require TRUS, and do not seem to be
superior to the use of PSA testing alone in most patients. In addition, the failure to identify prostate cancer in those with larger prostate glands may simply be a
product of biopsy sampling errors rather than true absence of the disease.
Age-specific PSA reference ranges are an attempt to compensate for the fact that the standard reference range of 0.0 to 4.0 ng/mL does not reflect age-related
volume changes in the prostate due to BPH. A single cutoff may, therefore, be inappropriate for all ages. Many investigators have proposed age-related reference
ranges to improve test sensitivity in younger men (who have less BPH and, therefore, would be expected to have lower levels of PSA) and to improve test specificity
in older men (who are more likely to have BPH and higher PSA values that accompany it). 202 Race may also have an impact on PSA levels, an issue that has been
addressed by several authors ( Table 34.4-4). Using age-specific reference ranges, cancer detection rates will increase 8% to 18% in men younger than 60 years and
will decrease 4% to 22% in older men. Use of age-specific reference ranges decreases the overall biopsy rate in men undergoing screening. The biopsy rate has
been shown to decrease approximately 21% in older men undergoing screening if age-specific reference ranges are used. However, the overall cancer detection rate
will also decrease, as fewer elderly men, the group most likely to have prostate cancer, will undergo prostate biopsy. In one series, the overall cancer detection rate
fell from 5.7% using the standard PSA cutoff point of 4.0 ng/mL to 3.8% using age-specific reference ranges. Of the T1c or nonpalpable cancers missed in the older
patient population, the vast majority have favorable pathologic features suggesting that they may be of low biologic potential in this age group and that failure to
detect them may have little impact on patient mortality or morbidity. Use of age-specific reference ranges remains controversial: Some investigators have shown no
benefit to their use as compared to use of the standard cutoff point of 4.0 ng/mL. Others have also argued cogently the likelihood that organ-confined cancers are
similar in men with serum PSA values between 2.5 and 6.0 ng/mL, suggesting that any lead time gained by use of age-specific reference ranges will not likely
translate into improved outcomes and that the increased costs—monetary, physical, and psychological—associated with the increased biopsy rates in men younger
than 60 years may not be justified.

TABLE 34.4-4. Age-Adjusted Prostate-Specific Antigen Reference Ranges

PSA velocity refers to the rate of changes in serum PSA over time. PSA velocity is calculated using the following equation: 1/2 (PSA2 – PSA1/time 1) + (PSA3 –
PSA2/time 2), where PSA1 is the first, PSA2 the second, and PSA3 the third PSA measurement. Time represents the interval (in years) between PSA measurements.
At least three PSA measurements obtained over 24 months or at least 12 to 18 months apart are required for maximal accuracy. In the initial study, significant
differences in PSA velocity were noted in patients found to have cancer and BPH many years before cancer diagnosis. Carter et al. 203,204 found that a PSA velocity
exceeding 0.75 ng/mL was highly predictive of prostate cancer using one assay (sensitivity 72% and specificity 95%). The use of PSA velocity is limited by the fact
that multiple measurements using the same assay over a relatively long period are necessary for accuracy. In addition, there is substantial biologic and laboratory
variability in serum PSA testing, and some suggest that only increases in serum PSA greater than 25% are likely to represent changes due to prostatic disease (BPH
or cancer).
Perhaps the greatest enhancement of PSA testing has been based on the knowledge that PSA exists in the serum in both free (or unbound) and complexed forms
(bound to serum proteins). Stenman et al. 176 made the observation that the free form of serum PSA exists in a higher fraction in men without prostate cancer than in
those with the disease. Others observed that the specificity of PSA testing for the detection of prostate cancer could be enhanced by calculating the free-to-total PSA
ratio as compared to using total PSA alone. 205 Partin et al. 206 conducted a multiinstitutional trial evaluating the performance of both total and free-to-total PSA for the
detection of prostate cancer in men with serum PSA levels between 4.0 and 10.0 ng/mL using the Hybritech assay (Hybritech, Inc., San Diego, CA). All men had a
normal DRE and underwent systematic TRUS-guided prostate biopsy. Of 773 men, 379 (49%) were ultimately found to have prostate cancer. As expected, the total
PSA was higher and free fraction was lower in those with prostate cancer as compared to those without the disease. Using a free PSA cutoff of 20% to provide 95%
sensitivity, these researchers could achieve a specificity of 20%, eliminating 20% of unnecessary biopsies. For patients who had a normal DRE and total PSA
concentration between 4.0 and 10.0 ng/mL, the probability of prostate cancer was 56%, 20%, and 8% for those with free PSA fractions of 0% to 10%, 15% to 20%,
and more than 25%, respectively. Catalona et al. 206 also demonstrated that the use of the percentage of free PSA in men with total serum PSA concentrations
between 4.0 and 10 ng/mL could eliminate 29% of unnecessary biopsies, if a cutoff of 20% free PSA was used as an indicator for prostate biopsy. Others have
performed similar studies using the same or different assays and patient populations (i.e., ranges of total PSA). 205,207,208,209,210,211,212 and 213 In these studies, the
sensitivity and specificity for cancer detection varied from 71% to 100% and 24% to 95%, respectively, using cutoff points ranging from 14% to 28%.
As 13% to 20% of men with serum PSA concentrations between 2.6 and 4.0 ng/mL (upper limit of normal) will be found to have prostate cancer within 5 years, some
have examined the usefulness of percentage of free PSA for the early detection of prostate cancer in these men. 171,176,214 Catalona et al.208 used percentage of free
PSA to screen 914 men aged 50 years or older who had normal DREs and total PSA concentrations between 2.6 and 4.0 ng/mL. Using a cutoff point of 27% free
PSA, 90% of cancers were detected and 18% of unnecessary biopsies were eliminated. The positive predictive value of percentage of free PSA at this cutoff point
was 24%, and 81% of 52 men who underwent radical prostatectomy were found to have organ-confined cancers. Of these cancers, 83% were considered to be
clinically significant based on cancer volume, stage, and grade. Others have shown similar findings using a different PSA cutoff point. 215
The percentage of free PSA may also be of value in predicting cancer aggressiveness. Carter et al. 216 measured both total and percentage of free PSA serially in men
from whom serum had been stored before the diagnosis of prostate cancer. Stored sera from men with aggressive cancers as defined by stage (T3, nodal or bone
metastases), grade (³7), or positive margins at the time of radical prostatectomy were compared to sera from men with less aggressive cancers (none of the previously
mentioned features). Although total PSA levels were not different between both groups measured serially before the diagnosis, a statistically significant difference
between the two groups with respect to percentage of free PSA was noted. All eight patients with aggressive cancers from whom serum was available for testing 10
years before diagnosis had free PSA fractions of 14% or less.
Clinicians should be aware of several issues when determining whether to use percentage of free PSA and in interpreting results of the assay. Age, prostate volume,
and method of serum storage before processing may influence PSA ratios. Samples should be processed within 3 hours or stored at –70°C if processing is delayed;
otherwise, the free PSA fraction may be degraded. 217 Lower free PSA cutoff points may be possible in smaller gland volumes (i.e., <40 cm 3) while still maintaining an
acceptable detection sensitivity of 90%. 207 Several analytical issues must be understood. Assays performed by different methods may yield different results. 191,218,219
The percentage of free PSA cutoff point advised by manufacturers of these assays varies. Therefore, clinicians must be well acquainted with the methods used for
free PSA testing before interpreting the results. Finally, it must be emphasized that use of percentage free PSA improves specificity of detection; some cancers will be
missed. Both physicians and patients must be aware of this, as some will find any decrement in sensitivity unacceptable. Percentage of free PSA testing may be used
best when determining the need for a second prostate biopsy in patients with a normal DRE, a total serum PSA between 4.0 and 10 ng/mL, and a previously negative
biopsy.
Future Refinements
Similar to use of percentage of free PSA, several investigators have assessed the measurement of complexed PSA (PSA bound to a 1-antichymotrypsin) for the
detection of prostate cancer. Brawer et al. 220 measured total, complexed, and free PSA in 75 men with prostate cancer and in 225 who had benign findings on prostate
biopsy. At 95% sensitivity, the specificities of total, free, and complexed PSA were 21.8%, 15.4%, and 26.5%, respectively. Sokoll et al. 221 reported similar findings
and improved specificity for complexed PSA as compared to total PSA in men with total serum PSA concentrations between 4.0 and 10.0 ng/mL.
The ProstAsure Index (Horus Global HealthNet, Hilton Head Island, SC) examines the relationships between several variables, such as PSA, age, and prostatic acid
phosphatase, using an artificial neural network to predict the risk of prostate cancer. Babaian et al. 222 compared the ProstAsure Index with percentage of free PSA for
prostate cancer detection in 54 men with prostate cancer, 77 with BPH, and 94 with no evidence of either. A comparison of the receiver operating characteristics
curves for both tests demonstrated that the area under the curve for the ProstAsure Index was higher than that for percentage of free PSA (0.95 vs. 0.86,
respectively), suggesting a small but significant advantage for the index.
Other serum proteins have been identified that may, in the future, play a role in prostate cancer detection and evaluation. Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA)
is a 750–amino acid type 2 transmembrane glycoprotein distinct from PSA. Serum levels of PSMA are increased in patients with prostate cancer. Human kallikrein-2 is
a serum protease that bears considerable homology to PSA. Neither PSMA nor human kallikrein-2 currently is being used routinely for prostate cancer early
detection, but refinements in development of serum assays, as well as novel imaging and treatment techniques targeting these and yet-to-be discovered proteins, may
have a significant impact on prostate cancer early detection, staging, and treatment.
PROSTATE BIOPSY AND ITS IMPACT ON RISK ASSESSMENT
Prostate biopsy is indicated in men with an elevated serum PSA level, an abnormal DRE, or a combination of the two. Prostate biopsy is best performed under TRUS
guidance using a spring-loaded biopsy device coupled to the transrectal probe. 223,224 Although prostate biopsy can be done using a transperineal approach, the
transrectal approach facilitates more accurate needle placement and tissue sampling. Rather than just sampling an area abnormal on the basis of DRE or TRUS
imaging, systematic biopsy strategies have been developed that improve cancer detection and risk assessment. DRE and TRUS each lack the sensitivity and
specificity to guide performance of lesion-directed biopsy only. Traditionally, six (sextant) biopsies have been taken in most patients along a parasagittal line between
the lateral edge and the midline of the prostate at the apex, midgland, and base bilaterally ( Fig. 34.4-4).225 Recently, several investigators have assessed the impact
of increasing the number of biopsies as well as sampling specific portions or zones of the prostate. 225,226 and 227 Investigators have shown that more laterally directed
biopsies of the peripheral zone will increase detection rates by 14% to 20% over the more traditional sextant technique. Chang et al. 225 analyzed a biopsy scheme that
involved tissue from a minimum of eight sites, including bilateral apex, midlobar midgland, parasagittal midgland, and lateral base (see Fig. 34.4-4). They found that
the parasagittal biopsies at the base added very little unique information to this scheme.

FIGURE 34.4-4. Prostate biopsy schemes. A: Traditional sextant (six-biopsy) technique. B: More contemporary technique, which samples the peripheral zone more
laterally and improves cancer detection rates. (From ref. 225, with permission.)

As up to 30% of lesions may originate in the transitional zone, many investigators have examined the utility of specific transitional zone biopsies. 228,229,230 and 231 Most
have found that routine transitional zone biopsies add little unique information to that gained from routine peripheral zone biopsy schemes. Therefore, transitional
zone biopsy should be considered in those with a high suspicion of prostate cancer based on serum PSA level and who have undergone previous peripheral zone
biopsy without cancer detection. Patients should be advised that a negative prostate biopsy does not completely exclude cancer, as 13% to 31% of patients with an
initially negative biopsy will be found to have cancer on subsequent biopsy. 232,233
Although the primary goal of prostate biopsy is cancer detection, the information gained from the results, if positive, can be of considerable value in initial risk
assessment. The number of cores with cancer as well as the cancer grade determined by biopsy correlate with the risk of ECE and cancer progression. As biopsy
samples only a portion of the prostate, accurate grading may be hampered by sampling errors. Grade as measured by biopsy will correlate exactly with that
determined by analysis of the entire prostate after radical prostatectomy 31% to 59% of the time. 234,235 Most often, needle biopsy underestimates cancer grade.
Grading errors appear to be more limited with the use of contemporary biopsy schemes, which have increased (>6) the number of cores taken. 236
Prostate cancer volume correlates with both the risk of extracapsular disease and outcome after treatment. Although cancer volume currently is not well assessed by
imaging, analysis of the number of biopsy cores involved with cancer as well as the extent of cancer within each core appears to be of value in this regard. Patients
with multiple positive biopsies are at an increased risk of both ECE and recurrence after initial therapy. One series reported on 257 consecutive radical prostatectomy
patients and demonstrated that the number of positive sextant biopsies and the Gleason score correlated with ECE ( P<.0001 and P = .0004, respectively) in a
comparison of patients with and without ECE. 237 With respect to serologic recurrence, patients with fewer than three positive biopsies and a Gleason score of less
than 7 were at a low risk for recurrence irrespective of preoperative PSA levels (14% risk with a mean follow-up of 2 years). 237 Other investigators have substantiated
these findings, noting that patients in whom more than 50% of biopsy cores are involved with cancer are at an increased risk of both ECE and disease recurrence
after radical prostatectomy. 238,239 and 240 Knowledge of the number of cores involved may give important information not provided by analysis of the PSA level, Gleason
grade, and local T stage alone. 241
Although TRUS-guided prostate biopsy usually is very well tolerated by patients, approximately 24% of those undergoing the procedure will find it very painful.
Hematospermia and hematuria are common, occurring in approximately 40% to 50% of patients. 242,243 and 244 High fever is rare, occurring in 2.9% to 4.2% of patients.
Antibiotic prophylaxis is commonly given, although the necessity for it has been questioned by some. 242 Recent use of aspirin or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents
is not a contraindication for this procedure. 244
TO SCREEN OR NOT TO SCREEN?
The case for prostate cancer screening is supported by the following facts: The disease is burdensome; PSA testing improves detection of clinically important tumors
without significantly increasing the detection of unimportant tumors; most PSA-detected tumors are curable using current techniques; and there is no cure for
metastatic disease. In addition, several investigators have shown a reduction in cause-specific mortality with screening. 245,246 and 247 In a community-based, prospective,
randomized trial of men between the ages of 45 and 80 years, Labrie et al. 245 showed that patients randomized to PSA screening had a cause-specific mortality equal
to one-third that of unscreened men. However, this study must be interpreted with caution, as fewer than 20% of men in this study were randomized to screening. In
an independent, population-based, case-control study that looked at screening with DRE, Jacobsen et al. 246 showed an association between decreased mortality and
screening. However, the causal relationship between screening and decreased mortality remains to be proven. In the Prostate, Lung, Colon, Ovarian Trial supported
by the National Cancer Institute, men are randomized to screening (with DRE and PSA testing) and to no screening, with cancer-specific mortality as the end point.
However, the fact that therapy is not standardized and that screening will occur over only a limited period may make interpretation of results difficult. The efficacy of
treatment also is currently being examined in Scandinavia, where two randomized trials compare watchful waiting with radiation or radical prostatectomy. A similar
trial, Prostatectomy Versus Observation for Clinically Localized Carcinoma of the Prostate (PIVOT), is accruing patients in the United States. Patients must be
informed of the risks and benefits of screening before it is carried out. It appears that many men who undergo screening in certain health care settings have no
knowledge of having the test performed, suggesting that more discussion of this test with patients must occur. 248 If screening and eventual treatment are to be offered
to asymptomatic patients, they should be offered to those whose age and health status are such that they may benefit from early detection of a disease that may have
a protracted natural history (Table 34.4-5). An algorithm for early detection is outlined in Figure 34.4-5.

TABLE 34.4-5. Average Life Expectancy and Life Expectancy Correlated with Patient's Perception of Health Status

FIGURE 34.4-5. Algorithm for the early detection of prostate cancer. *Whether one uses total prostate-specific antigen (PSA) or its variations (i.e., percentage free or
age-referenced prostate-specific antigen testing) for the initial screening for the disease is a matter of debate (see text). DRE, digital rectal examination; PIN, prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia; TRUS, transrectal ultrasonography.

INITIAL CANCER STAGING AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Historically, initial risk assessment was based on clinical staging—that is, the assessment of anatomic extent of the disease on the basis of physical examination and
imaging. Although clinical stage (TNM) correlates with outcome, in a large percentage of patients who are believed to have organ-confined disease, evidence of
disease beyond the prostate is identified at the time of radical prostatectomy. Alternatively, some patients with high-risk pathologic features may not experience
disease recurrence. Therefore, many clinicians have focused their efforts on better risk assessment schemes that predict the likelihood of disease recurrence if
patients are treated and the likelihood of clinical progression if patients undergo initial surveillance. This more modern concept of risk assessment is a product of the
knowledge that disease may be better characterized by analyzing many criteria (e.g., serum PSA level, Gleason grade, cancer volume) in combination with clinical
stage, as compared to the use of staging alone.
An accurate assessment of risk before definitive treatment is attempted would allow for a more realistic assessment of the likelihood of cure with various treatment
options and, therefore, better treatment selection. In addition, such assessment would allow for more accurate prediction of who may be candidates for neoadjuvant or
adjuvant treatment or novel clinical trials owing to the presence of high-risk cancer features.
IMAGING
Imaging plays an important role in staging. Both cross-sectional imaging of the pelvis and imaging of the bones (with radionuclide bone scanning) often are
performed. However, imaging can be costly, and patients at low risk of advanced disease can be spared the cost and morbidity of cross-sectional imaging and
radionuclide bone scanning. With the advent of widespread screening for prostate cancer, considerable stage migration has occurred, and the incidence of metastatic
and regionally advanced prostate cancer has decreased. Several investigators have proposed guidelines for prostate cancer imaging that limit costs without
compromising significantly the accuracy of staging. However, a recent analysis of the use of cross-sectional imaging [computed tomography (CT) or magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)] and bone scanning in a large cohort of patients cared for by urologists suggests that bone scans, CT, and MRI are overused, certainly in
low-risk patients (i.e., PSA <10 ng/mL, stage <T2c, grade <7). 249 In this latter group, 66% of patients were undergoing bone scans, and 24% either CT or MRI.
Radionuclide bone scanning has replaced the use of plain films for the detection of prostate cancer metastases. Although sensitive, bone scans have a low specificity.
False-positive scans can occur due to trauma, degenerative disease, or Paget's disease. Lee and Oesterling et al. 250,251 have conducted investigations to assess the
ability of serum PSA level to predict bone scan findings ( Fig. 34.4-6). In a cancer population representative of newly diagnosed patients in the United States, serum
PSA level was the best predictor of bone scan results. Of 852 patients with newly detected prostate cancer, 66% had a serum PSA concentration of less than 10
ng/mL. The likelihood of a positive bone scan due to metastases was 0.6% and 2.6% for those with serum PSA concentrations between 10.1 and 15 ng/mL and 15.1
and 20 ng/mL, respectively. Use of tumor grade, local tumor stage, or a combination of these variables did not enhance the predictive power of PSA testing. Many
others have confirmed these results. 252,253 On the basis of these results, one can omit the bone scan in patients with newly diagnosed, untreated prostate cancer who
are asymptomatic and have serum PSA concentrations of less than 20 ng/mL and certainly in those with serum PSA concentrations of less than 15 ng/mL. Given that
there is some risk of bone metastases in this population, it is reasonable to perform a bone scan in those patients with either very high-grade or very high-stage
disease.

FIGURE 34.4-6. Radionuclide bone scan showing increased uptake consistent with prostate cancer metastases.

Cross-sectional imaging of the pelvis with CT or MRI in patients with prostate cancer generally is performed to exclude lymph node metastases in patients who are
believed to be candidates for definitive local therapy ( Fig. 34.4-7). However, the incidence of lymph node metastases is currently low (<5%), and imaging is costly and
its sensitivity limited. One review of the literature encompassing 15 series and 1354 patients with an incidence of lymph node metastases of 22% revealed a
sensitivity of CT and MRI of approximately 36% and a specificity of 97%. 254 The authors of this review suggested that only those patients with a very high risk of lymph
node metastases (i.e., 45%) would benefit from cross-sectional imaging. Such patients would include those with a normal bone scan, Gleason score greater than 6, a
palpable abnormality on DRE (i.e., T2 to T4 disease), and a serum PSA level of greater than 25 ng/mL. 255

FIGURE 34.4-7. A computed tomography scan showing the presence of retroperitoneal adenopathy due to metastatic prostate cancer.

Radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies directed at PSMA have been used to stage newly diagnosed patients and identify sites of cancer recurrence after definitive
therapy. Prostascint (Cytogen Corporation, Princeton, NJ) uses a murine monoclonal antibody labeled with indium 111 for the detection of lymph node and other soft
tissue metastases.256,257 Imaging is performed 72 to 120 hours after administration of the agent. The sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive value of the test in
one patient population with a 37% incidence of nodal metastases was 75%, 86%, and 79%, respectively. In a more recent study of 160 patients imaged before pelvic
lymph node dissection, the sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values for immunoscintigraphy were 62%, 72%, 62%, and 72%, respectively. 258
The authors found the test, when considered in conjunction with certain combinations of PSA level and Gleason score, was effective in predicting the risk of lymph

node metastases. The test has not gained wide popularity owing to difficulties with accurate interpretation, its cost, and the fact that similar information about risk may
be gained by use of the serum PSA level, cancer grade, and cancer stage.
Whereas metastatic and regionally advanced disease are relatively uncommon at presentation, ECE and seminal vesicle invasion are not uncommon, occurring in
approximately 20% to 40% and 8% of patients at presentation, respectively. Such patients are at an increased risk of recurrence with various forms of local therapy,
and pretreatment knowledge of ECE would allow for more effective local therapy to be delivered (e.g., wide surgical excision, wider field, higher dose or combination
radiation therapy). Whereas CT is a less reliable and efficient test for assessment of ECE or seminal vesicle invasion, as compared to other imaging modalities, both
MRI using an endorectal probe and TRUS are used commonly to assess the integrity of the prostatic capsule and seminal vesicles. The performance of CT, MRI
(body coil alone and endorectal coil), and TRUS in this regard is reviewed in Table 34.4-6 and Table 34.4-7. Given the wide range of test performance noted, other
parameters of risk such as cancer grade, serum PSA level, and the number of positive biopsy samples must be taken into account when interpreting the results of
either endorectal MRI or TRUS. Whereas TRUS is performed at the time of biopsy, endorectal MRI is, for the most part, used for staging only after a diagnosis has
been made. Endorectal MRI may be of some value in staging intermediate-risk patients but provide little additional information in both low- and high-risk patients.

TABLE 34.4-6. Accuracy of Imaging for the Detection of Extracapsular Extension

TABLE 34.4-7. Accuracy of Imaging for the Detection of Seminal Vesicle Invasion

The routine use of endorectal imaging is limited due to problems with interobserver variability and variable diagnostic accuracy. The development of endorectal
surface coils has allowed the application of three-dimensional magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) to the evaluation of prostate cancer. Significantly higher
choline and lower citrate levels are observed in areas of prostate cancer as compared with either normal prostate tissue or BPH ( Fig. 34.4-8). Therefore, MRS may
allow for estimation of prostate cancer volume and may improve sensitivity and specificity of cancer detection when combined with endorectal MRI. The addition of
MRS to MRI recently was evaluated with respect to any improvements in cancer staging and localization. When more than 4.5 voxels per slice of prostate were
involved with cancer, the risk of extracapsular invasion was 43%. If more than 6 voxels were involved, this risk rose to 75%. The impact of MRS on the accuracy of
staging (detection of ECE) was most apparent when inexperienced readers were evaluating the images, suggesting that the use of such technology may be most
helpful in improving the accuracy of radiologists with less experience in magnetic resonance interpretation. 259,260 With regard to cancer localization in patients with
biopsy-proven prostate cancer, MRS in conjunction with MRI allows for improved ability to localize cancer to a sextant. 261 When either MRI or MRS was positive for
cancer, a sensitivity of 91% was achieved. When both were positive at the same site, a specificity of 92% was achieved. Nonetheless, more experience with this
technique is necessary before it can be used routinely to guide and deliver treatment.

FIGURE 34.4-8. A: Representative reception-profile corrected T2-weighted fast spin-echo axial image taken from a volume data set demonstrating a large tumor in
the right midgland: low T2-weighted signal intensity ( arrow). B: T2-weighted fast spin-echo axial image with overlying point resolved spectroscopy (PRESS) selected
volume (bold white box) and phase-encoded grid (fine white line) taken from a three-dimensional array of spectra. C: Corresponding 0.24-mL proton spectra with the
major prostatic metabolites (choline-, creatine-, and citrate-labeled). Spectra in regions of cancer (left side of image) demonstrate elevated choline and reduced citrate
relative to regions of healthy peripheral zone tissue. The prostate metabolite levels that are observed in different regions of zonal anatomy, benign prostatic
hypertrophy, and cancer are described in detail in the text. D: Images can also be created from prostatic metabolite levels and overlaid on the corresponding
anatomic images. The red area is where (choline + creatine) citrate ratios were greater than 3 standard deviations of healthy peripheral zone values.

PRETREATMENT SERUM PROSTATE-SPECIFIC ANTIGEN LEVEL, TUMOR STAGE, CANCER GRADE, AND VOLUME
Pretreatment serum PSA level is used extensively in both pretreatment risk stratification and in predicting the outcome after definitive local treatment. 262,263 and 264 The
serum concentration of PSA correlates well with cancer volume and stage. However, considerable overlap exists, making use of serum PSA alone inaccurate for
clinical staging in most patients. Use of serum PSA level in conjunction with cancer grade and stage adds considerable sensitivity and specificity to the prediction of
lymph node status as compared to the use of PSA level alone. Investigators have published nomograms and probability curves that aid in predicting pathologic cancer
stage. 265,266,267 and 268 Use of such nomograms allows a better assessment of preoperative risk and more appropriate selection of initial treatment ( Table 34.4-8). It is
important to note, however, that these aid in predicting the pathologic extent of disease and not necessarily the cure rates with treatment. In addition, they do not take
into account other cancer features that may be predictive. As mentioned earlier in Prostate Biopsy and Its Impact on Risk Assessment, the number of positive prostate
biopsies correlates with risk: Those patients in whom more than 50% of biopsy specimens prove positive or in whom two to three of three biopsy specimens on one

side are positive are more likely to have ECE.

TABLE 34.4-8. Prediction of Pathologic Stage Using Digital Rectal Examination, Prostate-Specific Antigen, and Tumor Grade

By the use of Gleason grade, local tumor stage, percentage of biopsy specimens involved with cancer, and serum PSA level, pretreatment risk may be assigned.
Table 34.4-9 is a summary of the findings from multiple analyses and can serve as a broad-based guide for pretreatment risk stratification. Future refinements in
imaging and the use of molecular markers may further improve risk assessment. 269,270 and 271

TABLE 34.4-9. Pretreatment Risk Assessment

THE IMPACT OF RISK ASSESSMENT ON TREATMENT SELECTION
The information presented suggests that risk assessment is possible and that it provides both patients and clinicians with important information. Low-risk patients are
very good candidates for definitive local therapy using standard techniques. On the basis of age, comorbidity, and the long natural history of this disease in some
cases, certain patients may be candidates for surveillance alone. High-risk patients are unlikely to be cured with standard therapy and are ideal candidates for clinical
trials. Combined-modality therapy may be especially important in this group of patients. 272 Intermediate-risk patients are candidates for modifications of standard
therapy, given a significant risk of recurrence and the emerging knowledge that wide surgical excision and adjuvant radiation therapy may be useful after radical
prostatectomy and that dose escalation, improved targeting, and combined-modality radiation therapy may have value over standard radiation therapy techniques in
this population. 273,274,275,276 and 277

TREATMENT SELECTION FOR NONMETASTATIC (T1–T3N0M0) DISEASE
There is no consensus as to what constitutes the best form of treatment for any stage of prostatic disease. Treatment is indicated in those who are symptomatic and
those who are at high risk of dying of prostate cancer or developing symptoms of the disease. Given that most patients in whom the disease is currently being
detected fall into either the low- or intermediate-risk groups, immediate and aggressive treatment may not be necessary in some patients. Such patients must be
informed of the potential risks and benefits of all forms of treatment as well as surveillance, which is an option for some patients. Treatment decisions should be based
on cancer stage and grade as well as patient age and health. Both patient and physician bias may play a strong role in treatment selection, inasmuch as precise
guidelines for treatment are not available for the majority of patients. Given the protracted and, in some cases, indolent nature of the disease, disease progression
may be avoided using a variety of treatment methods. Indeed, the morbidity of different treatment regimens may guide treatment selection in some patients.
Both patients and physicians must interpret the results (morbidity and cancer control rates) of various forms of treatment with caution. Often, the morbidity of treatment
is reported using physicians' estimates. However, physicians generally underestimate the impact of the disease in almost all health-related quality-of-life domains. 278
Given the protracted nature of prostate cancer, only a limited number of patients may die of their disease. Therefore, outcome often is assessed using end points
other than cause-specific survival, the most common being PSA levels. After radical prostatectomy, the PSA level should fall to undetectable, usually within 6 weeks
of surgery. A persistently detectable PSA level predicts clinical recurrence, although disease may not return for many years and may not lead to death. 279 After
cryotherapy and radiation therapy, PSA continues to be produced in most patients. What constitutes an acceptable PSA level after either form of treatment is a matter
of some debate. Whereas some argue that low (i.e., <0.5 ng/mL) nadir levels should be reached, the American Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology
(ASTRO) defines biochemical recurrence after radiation therapy as three consecutive rises in serum PSA level above nadir. 280,281 Failure cannot occur until nadir is
reached. This method of defining outcome is very sensitive to the length of follow-up and the frequency of PSA testing.
NATURAL HISTORY AND SURVEILLANCE ALONE
Certain prostate cancers may grow slowly. In addition, many patients with this disease are elderly and may have concomitant illnesses. Therefore, watchful waiting or
surveillance alone may be an appropriate form of management for selected patients with prostate cancer. Contemporary series documenting the true natural history of
untreated prostate cancer are limited. Many series are composed of only carefully selected patients, many of whom may have received some form of treatment, often
androgen deprivation, during follow-up.
Several investigators have reported the likelihood of local and distant tumor progression in patients who were untreated or who were treated with noncurative intent
(i.e., androgen deprivation) ( Table 34.4-10). The risk of local progression in these series ranges from 8% to 84%, while the risk of progression to metastatic disease
ranges from 6% to 74%. The results should be interpreted with caution, as most patients were older (i.e., >70 years old) and had low-grade or low-stage disease (or
both). Furthermore, follow-up in these studies ranged from 4 to 14 years after diagnosis, and such differences likely account for the wide range of local and distant
progression reported. Therefore, the results may underestimate the risk of disease progression in the general population of patients with prostate cancer, most
notably in those who present at a younger age (i.e., <65 years). The definition of local progression in the majority of these series was based on changes in DRE,
which is an imprecise measure. Two studies by Egawa et al. 282 and Rana et al.283 have defined local progression by the development of bladder outlet obstructive
symptoms necessitating surgical intervention. These were the only studies in which distant progression exceeded local progression. Finally, it must be emphasized
that the use and timing of androgen deprivation therapy varied between studies. 282,283,284,285,286,287,288 and 289

TABLE 34.4-10. Estimates of Local and Metastatic Tumor Progression in Prostate Cancer Patients Who Remain Untreated and in Those Who Are Treated with
Noncurative Intent

The risk of death due to prostate cancer in these series varies. Prostate cancer caused or contributed to death in 34% to 62% of the patients who died. 290,291,292,293,294
and 295 In a study of 514 prostate cancer patients, all of whom died between 1988 and 1991 and received immediate or deferred androgen deprivation therapy only, Aus
et al.291 found that prostate cancer caused or contributed to death in 62% of the study population. When analyzing only those patients with clinically localized disease
at diagnosis (M0), 50% still died as a result of prostate cancer. Gronberg et al. 293 examined 6514 similar patients, in all of whom prostate cancer was diagnosed in
Northern Sweden between 1971 and 1987. Follow-up in this series ranged from 7 to 23 years after initial diagnosis. Fifty-five percent of the patients who died during
this time died as a result of prostate cancer. In a series of 451 prostate cancer patients from the Connecticut Tumor Registry, Albertsen et al. 290 reported that prostate
cancer was the underlying cause of death in 34% of those who died after a mean follow-up of 15.5 years.
Brasso et al.295 found that prostate cancer caused a significant excess mortality in untreated patients, with the number of actual deaths being approximately 1.6-fold
greater than the expected number of deaths in the general population. Similarly, Rana et al. 283 reported that actuarial survival was 17% less at 5 years and 15% less
at 10 years after diagnosis for 199 prostate cancer patients who were managed conservatively, as compared to age-matched controls. Others have shown that
patients with prostate cancer may lose a significant number of years of life when their disease is managed conservatively. 290,294 Stattin et al. 294 reported a life
expectancy of 6.3 years in 186 prostate cancer patients who were managed with delayed androgen deprivation after transurethral prostatectomy, as compared to a
10.2-year life expectancy for age-matched controls. Finally, several investigators have reported disease-specific survival for prostate cancer patients who were
untreated or treated with noncurative intent. Disease-specific survival ranged from 60% to 98% at 5 years, 34% to 92% at 10 years, and 62% to 81% at 15 years after
diagnosis (Table 34.4-11).282,283,284,285,286,287,288 and 289,296,297

TABLE 34.4-11. Estimates of Disease-Specific Survival in Prostate Cancer Patients Who Remain Untreated and in Those Who Are Treated with Noncurative Intent

The risk of prostate cancer progression is intimately related to stage and grade of the disease at the time of diagnosis. 283,285,287,288 and 289,291,294,295,298 Patients with
metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis fare significantly worse than do patients with clinically localized disease at presentation. Brasso et al. 295 reported that the
median survival was 3.7 years for patients with clinically localized prostate cancer, 1.8 years for patients with regionally advanced disease, and only 1.1 years for
patients with metastatic disease at diagnosis. In the subset of patients surviving for at least 10 years after diagnosis, prostate cancer was the underlying cause of
death in 61% of patients with clinically localized disease and in 76% of patients with advanced disease at diagnosis. Johansson et al. 288 reported outcomes for 642
patients, most of whom were treated with immediate or delayed androgen deprivation. While the 15-year corrected survival was 81% for patients with clinically
organ-confined disease (stage T0 to T2) and 57% for patients with clinical stage T3 or T4 disease at diagnosis, the 15-year corrected survival was only 6% for
patients with metastases at diagnosis. In a study of 514 prostate cancer patients treated with immediate or deferred androgen deprivation, Aus et al. 291 reported that
the median survival of patients with localized disease at diagnosis was 82 months, as compared to only 26 months for patients with metastases at diagnosis. In those
with clinically localized disease, T stage correlates with outcome. The risk of local and distant cancer progression and, ultimately, death rises with T stage. The risk of
metastatic progression at 10 to 15 years after diagnosis is approximately 25% to 34% for those with T3 disease, whereas it is 13% to 20% for those with stage T1 and
T2 disease. 285,287,288 Similarly, 10- to 15-year overall and disease-specific survival is better for those with T1 and T2 disease (62% to 90%), as compared to that
associated with T3 and T4 disease (57% to 70%). 288,289,298 It should be noted that the risk of progression from stage T1 or T2 disease to T3 disease is approximately
70% at 10 years in those managed conservatively. 285 Aus et al. 291 found that 10% of patients with clinical stage T1a disease, 47% with clinical stage T1b disease,
52% with clinical stage T2a disease, 53% with clinical stage T2b to T3 disease, and 70% with clinical stage T4 disease ultimately died of prostate cancer. 291
Tumor grade may be the most important factor predicting disease progression and survival in prostate cancer patients managed conservatively. In a review of 828
prostate cancer patients obtained from six nonrandomized studies of men treated with observation and delayed androgen deprivation, Chodak et al. 297 reported that
poorly differentiated disease was the single most important predictor of disease-specific survival. The likelihood of remaining metastasis-free 10 years after diagnosis
for patients with well-, moderately, and poorly differentiated tumors was 81%, 58%, and 26%, respectively. Disease-specific survival 10 years after diagnosis was 87%
for patients with well- or moderately differentiated disease and only 34% for patients with poorly differentiated disease. 297 Similar results with respect to
disease-specific survival and prostate cancer–related death have been reported in a number of other studies ( Table 34.4-12).282,290,291,299 Moreover, poorly
differentiated disease remains a significant predictor of prostate cancer–related death when adjusting for other factors such as tumor stage and patient
age.282,283,294,297 In these studies, the relative risk of prostate cancer–related death ranges from 2.6 to 3.6 for patients with moderately differentiated disease and from
6.1 to 12.9 for patients with poorly differentiated disease as compared to patients with well-differentiated prostate cancers.

TABLE 34.4-12. Outcome of Conservative Management of Prostate Cancer According to Histologic Tumor Grade

In one of the best-performed studies on prostate cancer natural history done to date, Albertsen et al. 290,299 examined the impact of tumor grade on long-term survival
among prostate cancer patients who were treated with either observation or immediate or delayed androgen deprivation. In their initial study, these authors
determined that tumor grade correlated with death due to prostate cancer. Nine percent of patients with well-differentiated, 28% of patients with moderately
differentiated, and 51% of patients with poorly differentiated disease died as a result of their prostate cancer within 15 years of diagnosis. 290 These authors also
compared the survival of prostate cancer patients treated conservatively with the expected survival of the general population. Age-adjusted survival for men with
well-differentiated, Gleason score 2 to 4 tumors was not significantly different from that of the general population. In contrast, the maximum expected loss-of-life
expectancy was 4 to 5 years for men with Gleason score 5 to 7 tumors and 6 to 8 years for men with Gleason score 8 to 10 tumors as compared to the general
population.290 In a subsequent study, these authors developed a competing risk analysis to estimate the probability of dying from prostate cancer in 767 men, aged 55
to 74 years, all of whom remained untreated or received immediate or delayed androgen deprivation only. 299 Tumor grade had the most important impact on the risk of
prostate cancer–related death for these patients: 4% to 7% of men with Gleason score 2 to 4 disease, 6% to 11% of patients with Gleason score 5 disease, 18% to
30% of patients with Gleason score 6 disease, 42% to 70% of patients with Gleason score 7 disease, and 60% to 87% of patients with Gleason score 8 to 10 disease
died of prostate cancer within 15 years of diagnosis. 299 Others have reported similar findings (see Table 34.4-12).
Watchful waiting or surveillance alone for prostate cancer is an option for all patients with the disease. However, progression is likely in many, and the risk correlates
with cancer stage and grade. Patients best suited for this approach may be those who are older and have low-grade or low-stage disease and in those with significant
comorbidity. In such patients, the morbidity of treatment may outweigh the risks of significant disease progression. Patients being followed up with surveillance only
need to be advised that end points for intervention for those on watchful waiting regimens have not been defined.
RADICAL PROSTATECTOMY
Radical prostatectomy can be performed through a lower abdominal incision (radical retropubic prostatectomy) or through a perineal incision (radical perineal
prostatectomy). With the former technique, lymphadenectomy can be performed simultaneously. With radical perineal prostatectomy, lymphadenectomy can be
performed through a separate incision, laparoscopically, or deleted in those at very low risk of lymph node metastases. Recently, a laparoscopic approach to radical
prostatectomy has been developed. 300,301 Although early reports suggest that this technique is feasible and is associated with limited morbidity and acceptable
positive margin and biochemical control rates, long-term follow-up in suitable patient populations is not yet available.
Contemporary series of patients with localized prostate cancers suggest that few patients harbor lymphatic disease (4% to 9%), and the risk of lymph node
metastases can be quantitated as described previously in Imaging. Whereas high-risk patients benefit from lymphadenectomy, low-risk patients may forgo
lymphadenectomy and be treated with definitive local therapy, whether irradiation or radical prostatectomy. 302,303
Lymphadenectomy should be considered if the Gleason score is 5 to 6 and the PSA level is at least 20 ng/mL or if the Gleason score is 7 or higher and the PSA level
is at least 15 ng/mL. Patients with clinical stage C (T3) disease should also be considered as candidates for the procedure.
Radical retropubic prostatectomy is performed through a lower midline incision. The rectus abdominis muscles are separated in the midline, and the retropubic space
is entered. A fixed retractor is placed. Lymphadenectomy may be performed selectively as described. Lymph node dissection has been modified over the last several
years to include lymph node tissue in areas most likely to harbor disease. The limits of dissection, therefore, most often include the obturator nerve posteriorly, the
common iliac artery superiorly, the circumflex iliac vein inferiorly, and the internal aspect of the external iliac vein laterally.
Exposure of the prostate when performing a radical retropubic prostatectomy is undertaken by first incising the endopelvic fascia from the area of the puboprostatic
ligaments along the lateral edge of the prostate to its base ( Fig. 34.4-9). Fibers of the levator ani are separated from the apex of the prostate. The fascia and overlying
dorsal vein complex generally are gathered and suture-ligated to facilitate exposure and prevent bleeding from the complex once it is cut to allow access to the
urethra (Fig. 34.4-10). The puboprostatic ligaments, which provide anterior support of the urethra, are left intact over the urethra, but any attachments to the prostate
are incised. Preservation of the puboprostatic ligaments facilitates earlier and more complete return of urinary continence as compared to previous techniques, which
incised these ligaments over the urethra. Care is taken during the apical dissection of the prostate simultaneously to preserve the urethra's distal continence
mechanism and to excise all prostate tissue. The urethral incision should be carried posteriorly beyond the urethra to include Denonvilliers' fascia, thereby ensuring
complete cancer excision.

FIGURE 34.4-9. Radical prostatectomy. Incision is made in the lateral prostatic fascia to allow for nerve preservation or excision, depending on clinical stage and
grade of disease.

FIGURE 34.4-10. Radical prostatectomy, showing exposure of the seminal vesicles and ligation of the ampullae.

Penile erection is a neurovascular phenomenon, and the nerves and arterial blood supply (neurovascular bundles) crucial to potency run posterolaterally along either
side of the prostate (Fig. 34.4-11). These bundles may be spared during surgery in an effort to preserve potency. However, ECE, when it does occur, may occur in the
region of the neurovascular bundles. These bundles should be preserved cautiously in those at high risk of ECE. In addition, return of potency after a nerve-sparing

radical prostatectomy is not only a function of technique but also of patient age and preoperative function. Older patients and those with poor preoperative potency
may not benefit from a nerve-sparing approach. The neurovascular bundles can be located using anatomic landmarks. During nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy,
the lateral prostatic fascia is incised. The neurovascular bundles run deep to this fascia at approximately the 5- and 7-o'clock positions along the posterolateral
surface of the prostate. Small vascular branches to the prostate may be taken using small clips or sutures. The neurovascular bundles are at the most risk for damage
at the time of urethral dissection and transection, ligation of the lateral pedicles, and dissection of the seminal vesicles. However, a nerve stimulation device may
facilitate identification and preservation. 304,305 Electrical stimulation may result in smooth muscle relaxation of penile tissue and expansion of corporal sinusoids,
resulting in increased penile blood flow, girth, and length. Either intracavernous pressure or penile circumference monitoring can note such changes. Early experience
using a commercially available intraoperative, nerve-stimulating device and continuous monitoring of penile circumference during stimulation suggests that use of
such a device may allow for better preservation of erectile function.

FIGURE 34.4-11. Typical endorectal magnetic resonance image of the prostate demonstrating the relationship of the neurovascular bundles ( arrows) to the prostate.

The lateral pedicles, branches of the prostatic and rectal arteries, are located alongside the prostate. Dissection proceeds superiorly, exposing the seminal vesicles
and ampullae of the vas deferens. The ampullae are clipped or tied before being cut, and each seminal vesicle is excised in its entirety. The prostate then is
separated from the bladder neck circumferentially. Once the prostate is removed, the bladder neck is closed to a smaller size, if necessary. The bladder neck is
sutured to the urethral stump using interrupted suture material over a urethral catheter.
Hospitalization is limited to 2 or 3 days in most situations. The urethral catheter is removed generally between 5 and 14 days after the procedure. Approximately
one-half of patients will gain almost immediate urinary control. In the remaining patients, continence will return progressively within 3 to 6 months, rarely longer. Little
additional urinary control occurs beyond 12 months. Erectile function in those who have undergone a nerve-sparing approach generally takes longer to return than
does urinary continence. Patients may require use of sildenafil (Viagra), vacuum devices, or intracavernous injection therapy, at least initially.
Radical prostatectomy for patients with clinically localized disease is generally well tolerated, with excellent outcomes. In a series of more than 600 men treated with
prostatectomy, Trapasso et al. 306 reported a 10-year crude survival rate of 86% and a cause-specific survival of 94%. In an independent analysis of 3170 men treated
at a different institution, Zincke et al. 307 reported similar 10-year crude and cause-specific survival rates of 75% and 90%, respectively. In addition, Zincke's group
found that crude survival rates at 10 and 15 years after surgery were similar to those of age-matched men from the general population. 307 This finding suggests that
carefully selected patients with clinically localized prostate cancer that is treated with prostatectomy can expect to live as long as cohorts without prostate cancer in
their community.
However, clinical disease staging is far from perfect, as up to 50% of patients believed to have organ-confined prostate cancer at the time of surgery are later found to
have disease beyond the prostate. 262,265,307,308 and 309 In addition, cancer recurrences are not uncommon in intermediate- to high-risk patients. 59 Given the protracted
nature of this disease and the fact that residual and recurrent disease may respond to salvage therapy such as radiation or hormonal ablation, postoperative follow-up
with sensitive serum PSA assays has become increasingly important. 262,310,311,312 and 313 Today, most clinical investigators report patient outcomes in terms of freedom
from biochemical failure as well as clinical disease-free survival, in addition to crude and cause-specific survival. Biochemical failure is defined as either the
persistence of a detectable PSA level postoperatively or the elevation of postoperative PSA to a detectable from a previously undetectable postoperative level. Total
serum PSA has a half-life of 2 to 3 days, and its clearance follows first-order elimination kinetics; thus, the duration between surgery and PSA nadir generally takes
several weeks and varies as a function of the patient's preoperative PSA level. 314 Postoperative follow-up regimens reflect PSA elimination kinetics and usually
consist of symptom assessment and measurement of serum PSA every 3 months for the first year, biannually for the second year and third year, and annually
thereafter. Clinical disease-free survival refers to freedom from detectable local or metastatic disease as assessed by the physician using physical examination, DRE,
needle biopsy, radioisotope studies, and other traditional imaging modalities. Of note, studies from the early PSA era frequently used higher PSA cutoffs (e.g., 0.6
ng/mL). However, as the sensitivity of PSA assays improved over the last decade, most clinical investigators now use much lower cutoff points.
In the majority of cases, the first sign of disease recurrence or persistence is biochemical failure. 262,279,315,316 In two contemporary prostatectomy series from the
Cleveland Clinic and Johns Hopkins Hospital totaling more than 2000 patients, not one patient showed signs of clinical disease in the absence of PSA failure. 262,279
Indeed, with the current patient follow-up regimen, nearly all recurrent clinical and metastatic disease is preceded by a rising PSA level, and only a few sporadic cases
have been reported in the absence of detectable serum PSA. 317 After biochemical (PSA) failure, up to 68% of men will progress to detectable clinical disease at a
median follow-up of 19 months. With adjuvant therapy such as irradiation or androgen deprivation at the time of PSA failure, the rate of progression to clinical disease
is reportedly lower, at 21%. 262 Metastatic disease after PSA failure occurs in 34% of patients without adjuvant or salvage therapy, and investigators have reported a
median actuarial time to metastases of 8 years from the time of PSA failure. 279 For those who develop metastatic disease, the median actuarial time to death was 5
years from the time of metastasis.
Several academic institutions have reported their experience in treating patients with clinically localized disease. The overall 5- and 10-year actuarial PSA
progression-free rates range from 59% to 83% and 47% to 74%, respectively ( Table 34.4-13).262,306,307,318,319,320,321 and 322 The variability in outcomes likely reflects
differences in patient selection, surgical technique, and definition of biochemical failure, as those with higher preoperative serum PSA levels, Gleason scores, disease
stage, and positive surgical margin status tend to fare worse than counterparts with lower values or negative margins. 262,322,323 Reflecting the natural history of disease
progression, clinical disease-free rates are higher, at 84% to 86% (5 years) and 72% to 78% (10 years).

TABLE 34.4-13. Comparison of Actuarial Survival Outcomes for Patients Treated with Radical Prostatectomy

The risk of disease progression and adverse outcomes varies directly with increasing pathologic disease stage, preoperative PSA level, and prostatectomy Gleason

scores. 59,262,308,322,324 Whereas PSA relapse-free survival is approximately 80% to 84% for those with T2 disease, it falls to 57% to 67% for those with T3 disease. If
one looks at all T stages, those patients who present with serum PSA levels of 10 ng/mL or less have PSA relapse-free survival rates of 80% to 95%, as compared to
those with initial serum PSA levels of 10.1 to 20 ng/mL (48% to 75%) and those with levels in excess of 20 ng/mL (31% to 55%). Cancers with Gleason scores of 6 or
less are associated with PSA relapse-free survival rates of 75% to 92%, as compared to PSA relapse-free survival rates of approximately 62% to 67% and 38% to
52% for Gleason 7 and 8 to 10 cancers, respectively. PSA relapse-free survival correlates with the risk assessment scheme outlined in Table 34.4-9. At the University
of California at San Francisco (UCSF), 92%, 75%, and 44% of low-, intermediate-, and high-risk patients, respectively, managed by radical prostatectomy were free of
relapse at 5 years. DNA aneuploidy, seminal vesicle invasion, and positive surgical margin status have also been reported to influence survival outcomes
negatively. 59,273,323
Complications
With increasing experience, the mortality and morbidity associated with radical prostatectomy has declined dramatically. Perioperative mortality in academic centers is
exceedingly rare, at approximately 0.2%. 307,325 Intraoperative rectal injury and the need for a colostomy has decreased from 1% and 0.2%, respectively, for the period
prior to 1988 to 0.6% and 0.06% for the period after. Similarly, complications such as myocardial infarction (0.1% to 0.4%), deep venous thrombosis (1.1%),
pulmonary embolism (0.75%), blood transfusions (<5%), anastomotic stricture (4%), inguinal hernia (1%), and incisional hernia (0.6%) are becoming less common. In
the series by Catalona et al., 325 the incidence of stricture decreased with surgical experience from 6.0% for the first 1000 patients treated to 1.1% in the last 870
patients. As surgical experience continues to grow and techniques are refined, complication rates are likely to decrease further.
A more frequent surgical complication that can significantly influence patients' quality of life is incontinence, both urinary and fecal. Urinary continence is normally
maintained by the bladder neck, prostatic smooth muscle, and external striated sphincter. 8 After surgery, the immediate postoperative incontinence rate may be as
high as 80%, though more contemporary series report a much lower rate of immediate incontinence. 326,327 Fortunately, the majority of patients (86% to 92%) recover
urinary continence within the first postoperative year with observation. 326,327 Some investigators have recommended pelvic floor exercises in the early postoperative
period to enhance and expedite recovery of continence; however, the long-term benefits remain unclear. 328,329
Depending on the patient's age, definition of incontinence, method of assessment, and surgical technique, incontinence rates at 1 year vary from 3% to
36%.307,325,327,330,331,332 and 333 Across three institutions that included nearly 3000 patients, approximately 90% will be continent at 1 year, when continence is defined as
no regular use of pads or no leakage with moderate exercise. 325,326 and 327 In a multivariate analysis of risk factors for urinary incontinence, Eastham et al. 327 reported
that decreasing age, preservation of both neurovascular bundles, an absence of an anastomotic stricture, and use of a modified surgical technique about the striated
urinary sphincter were independently associated with superior urinary outcomes. Continence appears to be equally well preserved with both the retropubic and
perineal approaches. 327,334 Severe and persistent incontinence, defined as leakage with normal activity or the need for three or more pads per day, occurs in 1% to 6%
of patients, and the use of an artificial sphincter, collagen injection therapy, or surgical sling procedure should be considered in such patients. 307,327,335,336,337 and 338
A rare complication of surgery is fecal incontinence. Defined as the involuntary loss of liquid or solid stool, fecal incontinence may be caused by direct injury to the
internal and external sphincters during perineal prostatectomy or by prolonged retraction of these segments during the procedure leading to neurologic compromise.
However, the exact mechanism of injury remains elusive. In a validated patient survey, Bishoff et al. 327 initially evaluated 227 patients treated at two institutions and
reported new-onset fecal incontinence rates of 5% and 18% for patients treated with the retropubic and perineal surgical approach, respectively. Although fecal
incontinence was most often very limited, patients treated with perineal prostatectomy fared worse in terms of incontinence frequency and volume of leakage. Given
the negative impact on patients' quality of life and that patients with fecal incontinence may not report their problem to health care providers, physicians must take a
proactive role in assessing this complication.
Maintenance of sexual function has been a major concern for patients and physicians alike. With the advent of the nerve-sparing approach to radical retropubic
prostatectomy, more than two-thirds of preoperatively potent patients treated by an experienced surgical team can anticipate return of potency without sacrificing
cancer control.279,325,339,340 Such rates are not reported by all investigators. 341,342 Return of potency after radical prostatectomy depends on many factors, including
preoperative potency status, cancer stage, patient age, and whether one or both neurovascular bundles are spared. In clinical studies, potency usually is defined as
the ability to sustain an erection sufficient for penetration and intercourse. Catalona et al. 325 reported recovery of potency in 68% and 47% of preoperatively potent
men treated with bilateral or unilateral nerve-sparing surgery, respectively. Furthermore, younger patients reported superior outcomes. With a follow-up period of at
least 18 months, 90% of men between the ages of 40 and 49 years were potent, as compared to 80%, 60%, and 47% of counterparts in their 50s, 60s, and 70s,
respectively. Although not statistically significant, the authors reported a trend for better potency outcomes in men with lower preoperative PSA levels and lower
disease stage. All studies suggest that the patients most likely to benefit from nerve-sparing surgery are those who are young, potent, and sexually active and have
focal disease. It also appears that return of spontaneous erections after nerve-sparing surgery may be improved with early use of either sildenafil or intracavernous
injection therapy. 343,344
In summary, radical prostatectomy is a safe operation for properly selected patients and offers excellent cancer control. Cause-specific survival at 10 years is greater
than 90%, and 70% of patients will be free of any signs of disease at 5 years. Major complications are rare, and the complication rate decreases with the surgeon's
experience. With current refinements in technique, significant urinary incontinence is rare, and preservation of potency is possible in selected patients. Patients most
likely to benefit from this approach are those who have long life expectancies and have either organ-confined disease or limited ECE, which can be excised
completely.
Recurrence after Radical Prostatectomy and Role of Neoadjuvant and Adjuvant Therapy
Given the cancer recurrence and secondary treatment rates after radical prostatectomy, some investigators have tested the hypothesis that these rates could be
reduced by neoadjuvant androgen deprivation. 345 Such therapy could decrease the likelihood of positive surgical margins, leading to a decrease in local recurrence
rates. Every randomized trial performed to date has shown that neoadjuvant androgen deprivation significantly decreases the rate of positive surgical margins. 346,347
and 348 The rates of positive surgical margins were decreased by approximately 40% to 60% with neoadjuvant androgen deprivation. Unfortunately, this has not
translated into any improvement in clinical or biochemical control rates. In a contemporary trial reported by Klotz and other members of the Canadian Urologic
Oncology Group, 349 213 patients with localized prostate cancer were randomized to radical prostatectomy alone (n = 101) or 12 weeks of cyproterone acetate followed
by surgery (n = 112). The probability of biochemical progression at 36 months was similar for the groups treated by surgery alone or cyproterone acetate followed by
surgery: 30.1% versus 40.2% (P = .3233), respectively. This and similar trials are ongoing. Failure to demonstrate a small, but significant, benefit to neoadjuvant
therapy may be due to insufficient follow-up, short duration of androgen deprivation, insufficient power of some trials to demonstrate a benefit, or inclusion in the trials
of large numbers of either very low-risk or high-risk patients. Most trials used 3 months of androgen deprivation preoperatively. Some suggest that extending the
length of time of neoadjuvant androgen deprivation before surgery may translate into improved outcomes, as further decreases in prostate and cancer volume and
serum PSA levels occur after 3 months.350,351 It is clear, however, that neoadjuvant androgen deprivation cannot substitute for careful preoperative risk assessment
and meticulous surgical technique.
For those who have undergone radical prostatectomy, several models have been proposed to identify patients at very high risk for relapse. Partin et al. 352 developed a
model from a cohort of patients from one center and validated it on a second cohort of patients from the same center. Additional independent validation was
performed.353 In this model, 80% of failures occur within 4 years of radical prostatectomy, with a median time to failure of 14 to 16 months. The model was defined as:
R w = (0.061 × PSAST) + (0.54 × postoperative Gleason sum) + (1.87 × specimen confined). Variables were defined as follows: PSAST = 10/(1 + e 6.8704 – 0.9815 × PSA);
specimen confined was defined as 1 if there was capsular penetration with positive surgical margins or positive seminal vesicles and was otherwise defined as 0.
Patients were considered to be at high risk for serologic relapse, as demonstrated by an R w exceeding 5.75. From a practical standpoint, an R w will exceed 5.75 if (1)
the cancer is confined to the surgical specimen, PSA level is at least 7.3, and Gleason score is 10; (2) there is ECE with positive margins or seminal vesicle invasion,
PSA level is at least 5.4, and the Gleason score is 7; or (3) there is ECE with positive margins or seminal vesicle invasion and the Gleason score exceeds 8.
A second model for patients with pathologically capsule-confined prostate cancer has been proposed by D'Amico et al. 354 The model was defined as: Vca =
cancer-specific PSA/PSA leak into serum per cubic centimeter of cancer. Variables were defined as follows: cancer-specific PSA = PSA (preoperative) – [0.2 × 0.33 ×
TRUS prostate volume]. PSA leak is a constant, as a function of Gleason sum. V ca will exceed 4.0 cc in patients with pathologically capsule-confined prostate cancer
if (1) Gleason score is 6 and PSA level exceeds 18, (2) Gleason score is 7 and PSA level exceeds 14, or (3) Gleason score is 8, 9, or 10. Recently, Kattan et al. 355
developed a preoperative nomogram for disease recurrence after radical prostatectomy. The nomogram is used by locating a patient's position on a number of

predictor variable scales. Each scale has corresponding prognostic points. The point total for all variables is summed, and this sum corresponds to the 5-year PSA
progression-free survival likelihood.
From the preceding information, one can broadly identify patients who would be at high risk of relapse for whom adjuvant therapy after radical prostatectomy may be
of most benefit. High-risk patients would be those having the following clinical and pathologic findings: (1) positive seminal vesicles, (2) Gleason score 6 and PSA
level greater than 18, (3) Gleason score 7 and PSA level greater than 14, (4) Gleason score 8, 9, or 10 and any PSA level, and (5) those with positive surgical
margins. Low-risk patients include those with a low pretreatment PSA level (i.e., <10 ng/mL), stage T1c or T2a disease, Gleason grades 1 through 3 disease, and
clear surgical margins.
Optimal treatment for patients with adverse disease characteristics, as well as the timing of such treatment, remains controversial. Standard second treatment options
after radical prostatectomy include radiation therapy with or without androgen deprivation or androgen deprivation alone. Adjuvant treatment, if given, can be tailored
to the risk of relapse as well as to the pattern of suspected relapse (local vs. distant). Distant relapse may be more likely in those with high-grade disease, lymph node
metastasis, and very high pretreatment PSA levels, as well as in those patients whose serum PSA level fails to fall to undetectable levels immediately after surgery.
Patients at high risk of distant relapse are ideal candidates for experimental adjuvant systemic therapy, whereas those at risk of local relapse are candidates for
radiation delivered to the prostatic bed.
The impact of positive surgical margins on outcome is a matter of controversy. Despite careful case selection before radical prostatectomy, between 14% and 41% of
patients have tumor extending to the surgical margin on final pathologic analysis, with 33% to 62% of these patients failing radical prostatectomy based on the
presence of a detectable serum PSA level. 356,357,358 and 359
Radiation therapy may be given after surgery (adjuvant radiation), on the basis of adverse disease characteristics such as positive surgical margins, or after a
documented disease recurrence (therapeutic radiation), on the basis of either biopsy-proven recurrence or biochemical failure alone. Proponents of adjuvant radiation
argue that treatment is more effective when the local tumor burden is minimal and that series to date show that patients who undergo adjuvant radiation have been
shown to achieve and maintain an undetectable serum PSA level in 77% to 94% of such cases. 360,361,362 and 363 However, despite improved local tumor control, no
survival advantage has been demonstrated with adjuvant radiation. Studies have shown that between 42% and 70% of patients with positive surgical margins will
maintain undetectable serum PSA levels without adjuvant therapy (Table 34.4-14).364,365,366,367 and 368 Pathologic factors such as the location, extent, and number of
positive margins may have an impact on the likelihood of disease recurrence in this setting. 368

TABLE 34.4-14. Likelihood of Maintaining an Undetectable Serum Prostate-Specific Antigen in Patients with a Positive Surgical Margin

To date, no published studies have compared immediate versus delayed treatment in a prospective randomized fashion. Although the Southwest Oncology Group has
instituted a randomized trial examining this question, the results of this study are not yet available. A decision to give adjuvant radiation is based on (1) the likelihood
of cancer recurrence with adjuvant radiation, (2) the likelihood of cancer recurrence with surveillance alone, (3) the efficacy of radiation when given for biochemical
recurrence (efficacy of therapeutic radiation), and (4) the morbidity of radiation. Grossfeld et al. 369 at UCSF created and tested a decision analysis model to help
determine the preferred management of a positive surgical margin after radical prostatectomy. The model suggested that immediate radiation may be the preferred
course of management for patients with a positive surgical margin and a high likelihood of recurrent local (rather than distant) disease. Such patients included those
with low- to intermediate-grade disease (Gleason score <8), multiple positive margins, and no evidence of seminal vesicle invasion. For patients with no evidence of
seminal vesicle invasion and all tumor grades, the model gave an equal value to surveillance and immediate adjuvant radiation. Surveillance was still recommended
for patients with a preoperative PSA level of less than 15 ng/mL and for those with a single positive margin. However, the authors stressed that their model, which was
based on literature-and institution-based estimates of the efficacy of adjuvant and delayed radiation, may be useful to physicians and patients who can apply
individualized probability estimates and utility values for determining their preferred course of management postoperatively. Further research is needed to confirm
these results and to determine whether adjuvant radiation therapy is appropriate for patients with other adverse disease characteristics such as established ECE.
RADIATION THERAPY
Curative Potential of Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy was introduced as a curative modality for localized prostate cancer in the 1950s, largely due to the work of Malcolm Bagshaw 409,410 of Stanford
University. Using emerging techniques of megavoltage radiation therapy, it became possible to deliver tumoricidal dose levels to prostate tumors without excessive
damage to the skin and the normal tissues surrounding the prostate. 409,410 This approach continues to represent the basic tenet of curative radiation therapy in
prostate cancer, although systems of treatment planning and delivery have since advanced to improve precision and decrease toxicity. The ability of radiation to cure
localized prostate cancer has thus improved consistently over the past three decades. 410,411,412,413,414 and 415
Failure of radiation therapy to control localized prostate cancer results most frequently from resistance of tumor clonogens to the dose levels used and from failure to
cover the entire target volume with the prescribed tumor dose. Before CT became available for treatment planning, tumor target volumes were assumed from planar
radiographic images and frequently were inaccurate. 416 To compensate for target volume uncertainties, treatment volumes were classically increased to include a
wide safety margin, thus including substantial portions of bladder and rectum in the high-dose region. Because of the high sensitivity of pelvic organs to radiation, the
ability to deliver prostate doses exceeding 70 Gy with conventional megavoltage techniques was seriously compromised. 417,418 and 419 Whereas clinical data have
indicated a need for higher doses to achieve maximal local tumor control, 420 conventional radiation therapy techniques have, in many cases, fallen short of the levels
required to eradicate the tumor. 421 Further, while CT-assisted treatment planning has significantly improved the anatomic definitions of the tumor target, 422,423 wide
safety margins have remained a common practice to compensate for uncertainties in patient positioning and organ motion. Finally, because computers available for
treatment planning were, until recently, slow and limited in performance, calculations of dose distributions were restricted to a limited number of planes within the
target volume, and the dose to the rest of the tumor was assumed based on reasonable, albeit imprecise, projections. Hence, the problem of geographic misses and
tumor underdosage have continued to contribute to a high frequency of local tumor failure.
Advances in computer technology have enabled the implementation of three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy (3D-CRT) as an approach to overcome some of
these problems. 415,421 Three-dimensional treatment planning is based on the ability to define each pixel anatomically within the entire 3D space of irradiated tissues
and to calculate precisely the dose delivered at each point. It uses advanced imaging technology for tumor and normal organ segmentation, new algorithms for dose
calculations, and computer-aided optimization to generate treatment plans that conform the prescribed dose to the tumor while maximally excluding the adjacent
normal organs. The ability to exclude the normal tissues from the volume receiving high-dose irradiation has permitted significant increases in tumor dose without a
concomitant increase in normal tissue toxicity. 415 The improved precision also decreased the risks of anatomic tumor misses and underdosage, further improving the
potential for local tumor cure. Indeed, a recent outcome assessment involving the use of postirradiation biopsies provided conclusive evidence for the effects of
3D-CRT and dose escalation on the local cure of prostate cancer, thus defining new standards for curative radiation therapy in this disease. 415

Effect of Dose on Local Tumor Control
Several studies have addressed the relationship between radiation dose and local control in prostate cancer. 415,424,425,426,427,428 and 429 The biologic effects of radiation on
tumor and normal tissues result in dose-response patterns that translate into sigmoid-shaped curves when plotted graphically. 430,431 Because human tumors consist of
heterogeneous clonogen populations with regard to radiation sensitivity, 432 it was suggested that tumor control curves would be relatively shallow, representing
population averages for clones of different radiosensitivities. 433,434 The available clinical data mostly confirm this hypothesis, reporting tumor control curves with g50
values of approximately 2. 435,436,437,438,439,440 and 441 The validity of this model to prostate cancer was confirmed recently at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center
(MSKCC) in a postirradiation biopsy study of 150 patients who did not receive neoadjuvant androgen deprivation therapy. 415,442 The diagnostic accuracy of
posttreatment biopsies depends, among other factors, on the time interval from completion of treatment to biopsy. 443,444,445 and 446 For example, Scardino and
Wheeler 443 reported that 32% of patients with a positive biopsy at 12 months after radiation therapy had a negative pathologic specimen at 24 months. As
recommended by the ASTRO consensus statement,447 biopsies were performed in the MSKCC study at 2.5 years or longer after 3D-CRT. The tumor dose was
increased gradually in consecutive groups of patients, from 64.8 Gy to 81.0 Gy by increments of 5.4 Gy. Figure 34.4-12 shows that the rate of negative biopsies
increased linearly from 48% in patients receiving 64.8 Gy to 94% after 81 Gy. The calculated g50 value for this set of data is 2.22. There was a concomitant increase
in PSA relapse-free survival in patients receiving the high-dose range, providing further evidence for a significant effect of dose escalation on the cure of human
prostate cancer.

FIGURE 34.4-12. Tumor control curve, showing effect of radiation dose on the rate of negative prostate biopsies.

Serum Prostate-Specific Antigen as a Surrogate for Defining Tumor Control after Radiation Therapy
After pelvic irradiation, serum PSA level generally declines over 1 to 2 years, but usually it is not reduced to undetectable levels, as 70% of patients receiving
radiation therapy for rectal and other nonprostatic tumors have PSA levels of less than 1.0 ng/mL for extended periods after irradiation. 448 On the basis of these data,
it was suggested that cure of localized prostate cancer with radiation would be associated with maintained PSA profiles of less than 1.0 ng/mL. 449,450 It also was
suggested that an increased serum PSA level from such postirradiation nadir values can serve as an indicator of disease relapse. Reviewing the emerging data in the
field, the ASTRO consensus statement451 has established a definition for PSA relapse as three consecutive rising PSA values from an established nadir value. The
date of failure was defined as the midpoint between the last postirradiation nadir value and the first of the three consecutive increases. This guideline did not stipulate
a specific nadir value that is associated with a complete response. However, multiple studies employing multivariate analyses have indicated that a PSA nadir of less
than 1 ng/mL represents an independent variable in predicting long-term PSA relapse-free survival. 450,452,453 For example, Kavadi et al.450 reported that the 5-year PSA
relapse-free survival for patients who achieved nadir levels of less than 1.0 ng/mL was 17%, as compared to 70% for patients with posttreatment nadir levels
exceeding 1.0 ng/mL. In this study, nadir levels of 50.5 ng/mL did not provide for improved prediction of outcome. The Eastern Virginia Medical School, 453 however,
reported 5-year PSA relapse-free survival of 91% and 72% in patients with postirradiation nadir levels of less than 0.5 ng/mL and 0.5 to 1.0 ng/mL, respectively ( P =
.06).
Shipley et al. 454 defined the long-term pattern of PSA response in an outcome study of a multiinstitutional pooled cohort of 1765 patients with T1 to T2 prostate
cancer, treated with advanced external-beam techniques to doses ranging from 63 to 79 Gy (median dose, 69.4 Gy). Nadir posttreatment PSA values of £1.0 ng/mL
were recorded in 80% of the patients, and only 12.8% had values in excess of 2.0 ng/mL. The overall 5-year PSA relapse-free survival was 65.8%, and of the 448
patients followed for more than 5 years, only 5% relapsed from the fifth to the eighth year. Though this study provided evidence that the majority of PSA relapses
occur within the first 5 years after radiation therapy, it did not provide evidence that PSA relapse connotes anatomic relapse and that a nonrising profile correlates
with lack of tumor relapse. The MSKCC posttherapy biopsy study 415,442 did, however, address this issue. Of patients undergoing biopsy at more than 2.5 years after
treatment, 50 of 51 (98%) with a posttreatment PSA nadir of not more than 1.0 ng/mL and a nonrising PSA profile had negative biopsies, as compared with only 21 of
42 (50%) of those with a similar nadir but with a rising PSA profile ( P<.001). Of patients with a PSA nadir of more than 1.0 ng/mL, 7 of 10 (70%) of those with a
nonrising PSA profile and 21 of 47 (45%) with a rising PSA profile had negative biopsy specimens ( P = .2). Taken together, these data strongly suggest that in
early-stage patients in whom PSA levels of not more than 1.0 ng/mL are nadir, a maintained PSA relapse-free profile serves to indicate a 95% likelihood of permanent
tumor control after radiation therapy.
Definition of Target Volume
Carcinoma of the prostate is frequently multifocal, involving more than one lobe of the gland. 455 Therefore, the clinical target volume (CTV) for irradiation consists of
the total prostatic gland, including the seminal vesicles, as visualized on CT. Capsular involvement with or without periprostatic invasion has been demonstrated in
15% to 66% of radical prostatectomy specimens from patients with stage TI or T2 disease. 456,457 and 458 Hence, the prostatic capsule and the immediate periprostatic
tissues are incorporated in the CTV. The planning target volume (PTV) encompasses the CTV and an additional 1.0-cm margin of tissue to compensate for patient
setup uncertainties and organ motion. 459,460
The inclusion of pelvic lymph nodes in the CTV has been an issue of continued controversy. Lymph node metastases are common in prostate cancer, and their
frequency correlates with stage, tumor volume, and histologic grade. 461,462 and 463 The major lymph node–bearing areas that drain the prostate include the external iliac,
hypogastric, presacral, and internal pudendal nodes. These chains of nodes can be encompassed by treatment fields that involve a major portion of the pelvis. 464
Several old retrospective studies have suggested that pelvic irradiation in addition to limited prostatic fields improves disease-free survival and results in fewer pelvic
failures in T2 or T3 patients. 465,466 and 467 Most studies were conducted in the pre-PSA era and without staging laparotomies, leaving open questions regarding the
extent of lymph node involvement and their response to therapy. However, Seaward et al. 467 described treatment results in 201 patients considered to be at high risk
for lymph node involvement based on combined pretreatment profiles of PSA levels and Gleason scores. The risk of positive nodes (N+ ³15%) was calculated using
the equation [N+ = 2/3(PSA) + (GS – 6) × 10], as suggested by Roach et al. 468 Freedom from PSA failure was significantly improved in 117 patients who received
whole pelvis irradiation, as compared to 84 patients whose treatment was limited to the prostate only (median PSA relapse-free survival of 34.3 months vs. 21.0
months; P = .0001). Prospective randomized studies in patients undergoing staging laparotomy, carried out by the Stanford group, 469,470 suggested that prophylactic
lymph node irradiation may be of benefit only in patients with T1 and T2 disease. However, multiple other studies failed to demonstrate a benefit of prophylactic whole
pelvis irradiation. 471,472,473,474,475 and 476 The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group study (RTOG 77-06), which randomized 449 patients with T1b or T2N0M0 tumors to
receive either prostatic or prostatic plus whole pelvis irradiation after bipedal lymphography or staging laparotomy, 475,476 reported no significant differences in local
control and survival (median follow-up of 12 years). The actuarial rates of local relapse at 12 yearsere 27% for prostate irradiation alone and 22% for prostate plus
pelvic irradiation ( P = .2), and the actuarial survival rates were 43% and 38%, respectively ( P =.4). Based on these observations, it is generally accepted that elective
pelvic irradiation is unlikely to affect the outcome of treatment, and pelvic lymph nodes generally are not included in the CTV for treatment planning.
Simulation and Treatment Planning

CONVENTIONAL (TWO-DIMENSIONAL) EXTERNAL-BEAM RADIATION THERAPY. Treatment is most frequently planned in the supine position at 100 cm source-axis distance,

and immobilization devices are increasingly used to reduce patient motion during treatment. Localization skin marks are placed on the patient that correspond to a
standardized treatment isocenter, a midline point near the center of the prostate located 1 cm inferior and 6 cm posterior to the upper border of the symphysis pubis.
Simulation radiographs are obtained in the treatment position from the level of L5-S1 to 1.0 cm caudal to the ischial tuberosities. The target volume and the
surrounding normal organs are drawn on orthogonal planar radiographs produced on conventional simulators or on digitally reconstructed radiographs generated from
CT images obtained by CT simulators. To assist in defining the PTV, it is customary to use urinary bladder and rectal catheters and contrast media. A No. 16 Foley
catheter is introduced into the bladder, and the balloon is inflated with 5 mL of 90% Hypaque solution. The balloon is pressed against the bladder trigone with light
pressure, and the catheter is taped to the thigh. In addition, 30 mL of low-density Hypaque (30%) is introduced into the bladder. A second Foley catheter is placed in
the rectum and the balloon is inflated with air and pressed against the internal sphincter of the rectum to indicate the location of the anus. Low-density Hypaque (30%)
is also placed in the rectum to outline the rectal wall.
The superior border of the prostatic field usually is located approximately 2 cm above the Foley balloon and includes nearly 30% of the bladder detected by the
contrast media (Fig. 34.4-13A and Fig. 34.4-13B). The inferior border is located short of the internal anal sphincter. The anterior margin is at the posterior cortex of
the pubic bone, and the posterior border extends 6 to 10 mm posterior to the anterior rectal wall, sparing the posterior rectal wall. The right and left lateral margins are
usually marked at 3.5 to 4.0 cm from the isocenter (see Fig. 34.4-13A and Fig. 34.4-13B). When there is an indication to treat the pelvic nodes, the inferior border
usually is extended to the ischial tuberosities and the superior border to the top surface of L5 (see Fig. 34.4-13C and Fig. 34.4-13D). The lateral borders are placed
approximately 1 cm lateral to the widest diameter of the pelvic inlet, but the superior and inferior corners are trimmed to protect as much bone marrow as possible.
The anterior border of the lateral field extends to the anterior aspect of the pubic symphysis, while the posterior margin is established at the midlumen of the rectum
inferiorly and at the midsacral bone superiorly (see Fig. 34.4-13C and Fig. 34.4-13D). The patient receives tattoo marks at the anterior and two lateral triangulation
points in a single transverse plane, corresponding to the isocenter of the treatment field.

FIGURE 34.4-13. Simulation radiographs of a case planned for treatment with four-field conventional technique. A: Anteroposterior localization film of the prostate
planning target volume (PTV) and the planned rectangular treatment field. Contrast material (Hypaque) has been placed in the urinary bladder and the rectum, and
the balloons of the Foley catheters placed in the bladder and rectum. The setup point (SP) is marked on the patient's skin. The center point for the treatment field is
designated (R). B: Lateral localization of the prostate PTV and the prostatic field (C) and (D). Pelvic fields designed in this patient to treat the pelvic lymph nodes
electively. (From ref. 464, with permission.)

Treatment plans typically consist of an isocentric four-field box, designed to include the prostate, seminal vesicles, and periprostatic tissues. The cross sections of the
beams may be shaped with Cerrobend blocks to protect, surrounding normal tissues, as the situation permits. The daily PTV dose is 1.8 to 2.0 Gy, delivered five times
per week with all fields treated at each session, to a total dose of 65 to 70 Gy in 7 to 8 weeks. When the pelvic nodes are treated, radiation is planned first to the
entire pelvic field to a dose of 45 to 50 Gy in 5 weeks. The prostate PTV then is boosted to a dose of 20 Gy, raising the dose to the primary prostatic tumor to a total of
65 to 70 Gy. To improve the tolerance of treatment, a “sandwich” technique has been proposed in which the delivery to the large pelvic field is split and the small
boost field is delivered in between. 477 This technique permits a rest period and a partial recovery of the bowel and bladder from the toxic effects of the initial pelvic
field irradiation.
THREE-DIMENSIONAL CONFORMAL RADIATION THERAPY. Although 3D treatment-planning systems vary in detail, all are based on common principles. The simulation

consists of a combination of conventional and CT-assisted procedures. Conventional simulators can be used to determine the positioning of the patient, to define a
provisional isocenter, and to produce reference localization skin marks. CT images are used to segment the prostate and normal organs and to generate
high-resolution 3D reconstructions. The CT data are also used in calculations of dose distribution, as modern dose calculation formalisms are based on electron
density ratios of the anatomic structures included in the treatment fields. 421 Several algorithms are in use for 3D dose calculations, but the more advanced methods,
such as the pencil-beam convolution algorithm with pixel-by-pixel inhomogeneity corrections, 421 are required for maximal accuracy.
Treatment is planned in the supine or prone position 478 within individually fabricated immobilization casts to ensure reproducible positioning during repeated treatment
sessions.479 Because prostatic displacement during a course of radiation therapy was shown to be affected by rectal and bladder volumes, 480 some studies have
recommended that the simulation and each treatment session be carried out with the patient's bladder and rectum emptied, to reduce daily variations in prostate
location and geometry. The tumor target and the critical normal structures are segmented on every CT slice where they appear. The PTV extends from 1.0 cm caudal
to the apex of the prostate to 1.0 cm cephalad to the superior tips of the seminal vesicles and encompasses the prostate with a 1.0-cm margin, except posteriorly at
the interface with the rectum, where some investigators have suggested the use of a 0.6-cm margin to reduce the risk of rectal toxicity. 479 The target volume and the
normal organs then are reconstructed by the computer in 3D and are displayed with the beam's-eye view technique. 481 The most commonly used beam arrangement
consists of six coplanar fields (two lateral opposed fields and two pair of oblique fields) shaped to conform the PTV. 482 Dose calculations then are performed and the
adequacy of target coverage by the prescription dose is evaluated on displays of isodose or color-wash distributions ( Fig. 34.4-14) and by dose-volume histograms.483
The target dose is either prescribed to the median International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurement (ICRU 50) reference point 484 or to the maximum
isodose surface distribution that completely encompasses the PTV. 482 Some investigators have suggested that the rectal wall dose be restricted to no more than 30%
of the prescription dose, the bladder wall dose to 50%, and the bowel dose (when bowel happens to be included in the PTV) to 65%, to decrease the risk of toxicity. 485
When radiation cannot be administered without exceeding these limits, a 3-month course of neoadjuvant androgen deprivation has been suggested to decrease the
target volume. Significant reductions in PTV and, consequently, in normal tissue volumes carried to the prescription dose have been observed in nearly 90% of
patients treated with this approach. 485 Beam apertures are automatically shaped by the treatment planning computer, applying continuously varying apertures with a
margin of 0.5 cm around the outline of the tumor target, to account for beam penumbra. Cerrobend blocks or multileaf collimators then are used to shape the planned
treatment fields. To assure that treatment is delivered as planned, automated on-line electronic portal imaging has also become available recently. In the future, portal
imaging may also provide on-line automated corrections of patient setup errors during the treatment session through computer-driven feedback mechanisms.

FIGURE 34.4-14. Color wash displays of the dose distribution of a six-field coplanar prostate three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy plan with 15-MV x-rays.
The planned treatment consists of one pair of lateral and two pairs of oblique fields. The dose distribution is shown on (A) axial, (B) sagittal, and (C) coronal

computed tomography reconstructions of the prostate and surrounding normal tissue at the mid-plan of planning target volume (PTV). The boundaries of the PTV are
shown in yellow dots. The red region represents the prescription isodose distribution, and the yellow region corresponds to approximately 70% to 80%, green to 45%
to 70%, and blue to 45% or less of the prescription dose.

INTENSITY-MODULATED RADIATION THERAPY. For details of simulation and treatment planning using intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), see Chapter 29.4.

Tolerance of Treatment and Late Complications
Doses of 70 Gy or less, when delivered with conventional (two-dimensional) external-beam irradiation, are fairly well tolerated. However, grade 2 [RTOG/European
Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) scoring scheme; Table 34.4-15] or higher acute rectal morbidity or urinary symptoms requiring
medication (or both) occur in approximately 60% of patients. 486 Symptoms typically appear during the third week of treatment and resolve within days to weeks after its
completion. Acute intestinal symptoms, especially those associated with whole pelvis irradiation, are most commonly relieved with diet manipulations. Otherwise,
medications such as diphenoxylate hydrochloride (Lomotil) are appropriate to relieve symptoms. Internal and external hemorrhoids may become inflamed during a
course of therapy. These symptoms often are best treated with sitz baths and cortisone suppositories. Acute urinary symptoms are treated with phenazopyridine
hydrochloride (Pyridium), nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents, or a-adrenergic blockers such as terazosin. Zelefsky et al. 487 recently reported that a-adrenergic
blockers were significantly more effective than nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents, resulting in significant resolution of urinary symptoms in 66% and moderate
improvement in 22%; in only 12% was minimal relief to no improvement observed. In contrast, among patients treated with ibuprofen, only 16% experienced
significant symptom relief, 28% exhibited moderate improvement, and 56% demonstrated minimal to no response.

TABLE 34.4-15. Radiation Therapy Oncology Group–European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Scoring Scheme for Acute and Late Rectal and
Bladder Morbidity

Late complications develop within 3 to 6 months after completion of radiation therapy. Zelefsky et al. 415 reported that the median time to onset of grade 2 or worse late
rectal toxicity was 12 months, with a range of 3 to 39 months. Similarly, Teshima et al. 488 from the Fox Chase Cancer Center reported median times to occurrence of
grade 2 and 3 rectal toxicities at 13 and 18 months, respectively. The incidence of late complications in patients receiving conventional radiation therapy doses of 70
Gy is low. An analysis of 1020 patients treated in two large RTOG trials demonstrated an incidence of chronic urinary sequelae (i.e., cystitis, hematuria, urethral
stricture, or bladder contracture) requiring hospitalization in 7.3% of cases, but the incidence of urinary complications requiring major surgical interventions was only
0.5%.489 More than one-half of chronic urinary complications were urethral strictures, occurring mostly in patients who had undergone a previous transurethral radical
prostatectomy. The incidence of chronic intestinal sequelae (chronic diarrhea, proctitis, rectal or anal stricture, rectal bleeding, or ulcer) requiring hospitalization for
diagnosis and minor intervention was 3.3%, with only 0.6% of patients experiencing bowel obstruction or perforation. Fatal complications were extremely uncommon
(0.2%).
The risk of late complications increases when radiation doses exceed 70 Gy. Leibel et al. 490 reported 6.9% grade 3 to 4 complications in 174 prostate cancer patients
treated with doses exceeding 70 Gy, as compared with 3.5% after treatment with less than 70 Gy. Sandler et al. 491 reported that the actuarial incidence of grade 3 to 4
rectal toxicity for patients who received doses in excess of 68 Gy was 9% at 3 years, as compared to 2% for those who received lower doses. Schultheiss et al. 492
reported late toxicity in 712 patients treated with conventional or conformal radiation techniques. The risk of late toxicity strongly correlated with the central axis dose.
The 5-year incidence of grade 2 or 3 late rectal toxicity was 27%, 35%, 43% for central axis doses of 71 to 74 Gy, 74 to 77 Gy, and 77 Gy or more, respectively
(P<.001).
Rectal complications have also been correlated with the volume of anterior rectal wall receiving a given dose (the so-called volume effect). Benk et al., 493 from the
Massachusetts General Hospital, reported dose-volume patterns and their relationship with rectal bleeding in patients treated with 50.4 Gy whole pelvis photon-beam
radiation therapy followed by 25.2 cobalt-gray equivalents (CGE) delivered via a 160-MeV perineal proton beam boost. A logistic regression analysis revealed ten
dose-volume combinations that were more likely associated with late rectal bleeding, ranging from 60 CGE delivered to 70% of the anterior rectal wall to 75 CGE
involving 30% of the rectal wall. When portions of the anterior rectal wall were exposed to 75 CGE, the actuarial incidence of bleeding at 40 months was 61% when
40% or more of the wall received this dose, as compared with 19% when less than 40% of the wall was exposed ( P = .0036). Lee et al.494 reported that among
patients receiving PTV doses of less than 76 Gy, the use of a rectal block significantly reduced the incidence of grade 2 to 3 rectal toxicity, from 22% without a block
to 7% with a block (P = .003). These data indicated the need to spare the rectal wall maximally when protocols of high-dose therapy are implemented, to improve the
local outcome in prostate cancer.
3D-CRT has been developed, in part, to address this issue. The ability of the 3D approach to reduce rectal and bladder toxicities has been demonstrated in several
studies. The Fox Chase Cancer Center 495 reported acute grade 2 gastrointestinal or genitourinary morbidity with 3D-CRT in 84 of 247 patients (34%), as compared
with 93 of 162 patients (57%) treated with conventional radiation therapy techniques ( P <.001). Dearnaley et al. 496 randomized patients to receive a dose of 64 Gy
with conformal or conventional techniques. The late grade 2 rectal toxicity was 5% for 3D-CRT patients, as compared with 15% for the conventional plan ( P = .01).
Leibel et al. 442 have recently updated the MSKCC series of 1100 patients treated with 3D-CRT. In consecutive groups of patients, the tumor dose was gradually
increased from 64.8 Gy to 86.4 Gy by increments of 5.4 Gy. The rate of grade 3 rectal bleeding requiring one or more transfusions or one or more laser cauterization
procedures was 1%, and the rate of grade 3 urethral stricture was 1%. All strictures occurred in patients who previously underwent transurethral prostate resections.
The 5-year actuarial risk of grade 2 rectal bleeding for patients receiving 64.8 to 70.2 Gy was 6%, as compared to 17% for those treated with 75.6 to 81 Gy ( P<.001).
The rising rate of grade 2 rectal bleeding with increasing 3D-CRT dose 442 indicated that dose escalation would require improved 3D-CRT techniques to decrease the
volume of exposed rectal wall and decrease the risk of rectal toxicity. IMRT provides this option. A recent study from MSKCC compared 20 patients in whom
concomitant 3D-CRT and IMRT were planned.497 Only 9% ± 3% of the rectal wall would have received 75 Gy with the IMRT plan, as compared with 14% ± 3% with a
routine six-field 3D-CRT plan ( P<.01). There was also a significant improvement of the percentage PTV receiving the prescription dose (81 Gy) with IMRT. These data
indicated that IMRT significantly improves the conformality of the radiation treatment in prostate cancer. To validate the expected decrease in toxicity, the incidence of
rectal bleeding was recorded in 61 patients treated to 81 Gy with routine six-field 3D-CRT and was compared with the rates in 171 patients treated to the same dose
with IMRT. Figure 34.4-15 shows that the 2-year actuarial risk of grade 2 to 3 rectal bleeding was 2% for IMRT and 10% for conventional 3D-CRT ( P <.001). Only one
patient in each treatment group developed grade 3 rectal bleeding.

FIGURE 34.4-15. Radiation toxicity. Actuarial risk of grade 2–3 rectal bleeding in 232 patients treated with conventional three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy
(3D-CRT) or intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT).

Sexual function is preserved in 73% to 82% within the first 12 to 15 months after irradiation, 498,499 but erectile potency diminishes with advancing time, with only 30%
to 61% of patients maintaining their potency at 5 years or longer after irradiation. 500 The etiology of erectile dysfunction after radiation therapy appears to be related to
vascular disruption caused by treatment as opposed to radiation damage to the nerve bundles. 501 Doppler blood flow studies of the corporal vasculature in patients
with erectile dysfunction after radiation therapy suggested that arteriogenic rather than cavernosal or neurogenic dysfunction underlie this toxicity. 501 Patients who
develop impotence after radiation therapy can be effectively treated with intracavernosal prostaglandin injection therapy. 502 Preliminary observations with sildenafil in
these patients demonstrated a 74% response rate. 503 Improved responses to the medication were noted among patients with normal erectile function prior to radiation
therapy, as compared to those with declining pretreatment function. 503
Results of Treatment
Before the PSA era, the outcome of radiation therapy was assessed by DRE, radiography, and isotope scans. Although outcome assessment by this method is
somewhat imprecise, especially with regards to local control, it nonetheless appeared that the long-term results of radiation therapy in TI and T2 disease were similar
to those observed with radical prostatectomy. 411,412,455,456,457 and 458,477 Using a hazard function over successive 5-year intervals, Coleman et al. 504 reported that with the
exception of very small tumors, there was a similar constant risk of relapse for surgery and radiation therapy throughout a follow-up period of 20 years. Stage for
stage, the survival outcome was similar for the surgical and radiation series. Hanks 411,505 reported a 14% 10-year cause-specific mortality in 104
lymphadenectomy-staged patients with stages T1b to T2N0 disease treated in the RTOG trial 77-06. Eighty-seven percent of the patients were clinically free of local
recurrences, 79% were free of distant metastases, and 67% were free of any failure. The survival rate was nearly identical to the expected survival in a life table for an
age-matched control population throughout the 10 years of observation (63% observed vs. 59% expected at 10 years). 411,505 It has been frequently stated that
although the results of radiation and radical surgery are comparable up to 10 years, at longer follow-up periods there may be a selective, rapid decrement in survival
and disease-free survival for irradiated patients. Table 34.4-16 summarizes published long-term results with conventional external-beam irradiation, indicating
outcome data for irradiated patients at 15 years that are similar to published data for radical prostatectomy. 412,505,506 and 507,507a,507b

TABLE 34.4-16. Results of Conventional External-Beam Radiation Therapy in Stage T1 through T3 Carcinoma of the Prostate

With the introduction of PSA level as a surrogate for defining tumor control after definitive therapy, it became evident that more failures can be documented after
definitive therapy than had previously been appreciated. For example, Zietman et al. 508 reported clinical relapse-free survival of 65% at 10 years in 504 T1 or T2
patients, as compared with freedom from PSA relapse in only 40% of patients. Other studies have confirmed that PSA relapse precedes evidence of anatomic
relapse, frequently by more than 2 years. 509,510 The study by Zietman et al. 508 also reported that of the 60% of patients who exhibited a PSA relapse, local progression
by 10 years was found in only 13%. These data suggest that most of the rise in PSA level originates from distant metastases. However, Zagars et al. 511 reported that
in 80% of PSA relapsing patients, the rise in PSA was associated with a local failure only. The latter study also reported that the rate of PSA relapse in stage T1 or
T2a patients was 26% at 5 years, suggesting that radiation therapy cure may occur substantially less frequently than had previously been assumed.
This issue was addressed further by Kupelian et al., 512 who reviewed 298 stage T1 or T2 patients treated with radical prostatectomy and 253 treated with radiation
therapy. The 5-year PSA relapse-free survival rates for radiation versus surgery were 43% and 57%, respectively. Multivariate analysis of time to failure showed that
pretreatment PSA level and biopsy Gleason scores were independent predictors of PSA relapse. Based on these parameters, a low risk (pretreatment PSA of £10.0
ng/mL and Gleason score £6) and high risk (PSA >10.0 ng/mL or Gleason score ³7) were defined. For low-risk patients, the 5-year PSA relapse-free survival rates for
radiation versus surgery were 81% and 80%, while for the high-risk group the rates were 26% versus 37%, respectively. Zagars 510 reported 94% 6-year PSA
relapse-free survival in T1 or T2 patients with a PSA level of 4 ng/mL or less and a Gleason score of 2 to 6, 70% for patients with a PSA level of 4 ng/mL or less and a
Gleason score of 7 to 10, or a PSA level of 4 to 10 ng/mL and a Gleason score of 2 to 7, and 60% for patients with a PSA level exceeding 4 and a Gleason score of 8
or more.
Shipley et al. 454 further defined the prognostic subgroups for PSA outcome in T1 and T2 patients treated with radiation therapy. This study entailed a multiinstitutional
pooled cohort of 1765 patients treated with advanced external-beam techniques to doses ranging from 63 to 79 Gy (median dose, 69.4 Gy). The overall 5-year PSA
relapse-free survival was 65.8%. Recursive partitioning analysis of initial PSA, palpation stage, and Gleason score yielded four prognostic groups. Patients with a
PSA level of less than 9.2 ng/mL had a 5-year PSA relapse-free survival rate of 81%, whereas for patients with PSA levels between 9.2 and 19.7 ng/mL, it was 69%;
for those whose PSA level was at least 19.7 ng/mL and who had a Gleason score of 2 to 6, it was 47%, and for patients with a PSA level of 19.7 ng/mL or more and a
Gleason score of 7 to 10, the rate was 29%.
The validity of patient stratification by pretreatment variables as an approach to predict the outcome of treatment has been confirmed by multiple groups and has
become standard in the field. Using proportional hazard regression analysis, most studies have identified pretreatment PSA, palpation stage, the Gleason score, and
the dose as independent variables that affect long-term outcome. Different combinations of these prognostic variables have been suggested to generate risk groups
for PSA relapse. Figure 34.4-16 shows the outcome data generated from the MSKCC 3D-CRT dose escalation database. 415,442 The tumor dose was gradually
increased by increments of 5.4 Gy from 64.8 Gy to 86.4 Gy. A dose of 64.8 Gy was given to 96 patients, 70.2 Gy to 268 patients, 75.6 Gy to 446 patients, 81.0 Gy to
250 patients, and 86.4 Gy to 40 patients. The 5-year actuarial PSA relapse-free survival for patients with favorable prognostic indicators (stage T1 or T2, pretreatment
PSA level £10.0 ng/mL, and Gleason score £6) receiving 64.8 to 70.2 Gy was reported as 80%, compared to 91% for those receiving at least 75.6 Gy ( P = .03). The
corresponding rates for patients with intermediate prognosis (one of the prognostic indicators having a higher value) were 47% versus 70% ( P = .004) and, for the
group with unfavorable prognosis (two or more of the prognostic indicators having higher values), were 27% versus 47% ( P = .04). Androgen deprivation did not
improve PSA relapse-free survival in any of the risk groups. This study defines the critical role of dose in affecting the long-term cure of prostate cancer with radiation.

Combined with the results of posttreatment biopsies obtained in patients followed for 2.5 years (see Fig. 34.4-12), these data suggest that at least 81 Gy may be
required for a maximal probability of cure. The data also demonstrate that a significant proportion of patients with unfavorable prognostic indicators may still have
disease that is confined to the prostate and therefore is potentially curable with radiation alone.

FIGURE 34.4-16. Risk of treatment failure after three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy. (Data from refs. 415, 442.)

Investigators from the Fox Chase Cancer Center 513 have reported a direct relationship between radiation dose and 5-year PSA relapse-free survival in patients
treated to doses ranging from 66 to 79 Gy. The study matched by stage and grade 357 patients treated with at least 74 Gy 3D-CRT and 357 patients treated with less
than 74 Gy with either conventional or conformal techniques. The 5-year PSA relapse-free survival rates were 71% and 56% for the high- and low-dose groups,
respectively (P = .003). There was also a dose effect on 5-year freedom from distant metastases (97% vs. 88%; P = .0004), cause-specific survival (99% vs. 94%; P =
.007), and overall survival (88% vs. 79%; P = .01). Roach et al. 514 reported an advantage for using higher doses of 3D-CRT in patients with poorly differentiated
histologies. Among 50 patients with pretreatment PSA levels of less than 20 ng/mL, the PSA relapse-free survival at 3 years was 83% for patients treated with more
than 71 Gy and 0% for those treated to lower doses ( P = .03).
Zagars et al.515 also observed a dose effect on the outcome in a retrospective analysis of 94 patients with localized prostate cancer treated with high-dose 3D-CRT
(74 to 78 Gy) and 844 patients treated with conventional-dose irradiation (60 to 70 Gy). For analysis, patients were divided into three groups reflecting low (<67 Gy),
intermediate (67 to 77 Gy), and high (>77 Gy) treatment dose. The 3-year PSA relapse-free survival rates were 61%, 74%, and 96%, for the low-, intermediate-, and
high-dose groups, respectively ( P <.01). When patients were stratified by the pretreatment PSA level, clinical stage (T1 or T2 vs. T3 or T4), or Gleason score ( £6 vs.
7 to 10), statistically improved PSA outcome was observed in all subgroups except for those with pretreatment PSA levels of less than 4.0 ng/mL. To further prove the
impact of dose on the outcome, these investigators randomized 304 patients to receive either 70 Gy using a four-field conventional technique or the same treatment
plus a six-field conformal boost to a total dose of 78 Gy. 516 The overall 4-year PSA relapse-free survival was 72% for the 70-Gy patients and 77% for the 78-Gy
patients (P = .21). A significant difference was nonetheless observed in patients with a pretreatment PSA level exceeding 10 ng/mL (47% for the 70-Gy and 68% for
the 78-Gy patients; P <.01), with the most striking effect observed in T1 and T2 patients in this subgroup (55% for the 70-Gy and 93% for the 78-Gy patients; P =
.003). The difference in the PSA outcome for patients with a pretreatment PSA level of less than 10 ng/mL was not significant. Further follow-up will be required to
assess the impact of dose on the latter group of patients.
ANDROGEN ABLATION PLUS RADIATION THERAPY
The discovery that both normal and tumor prostate cells are sensitive to androgen ablation has led to its use as either neoadjuvant or adjuvant treatment in
combination with radiation therapy. The rationale for this neoadjuvant approach is to debulk large prostate glands prior to irradiation and possibly to sensitize the
tumor to the lethal effect of radiation, whereas adjuvant therapy is designed to eradicate residual disease, remaining either locally or at remote sites, after radiation
therapy. Several groups have demonstrated the effectiveness of neoadjuvant androgen deprivation in decreasing the size of the prostate prior to radiation therapy,
thus improving the ability to deliver maximal radiation doses without exceeding normal tissue tolerance. 517,518 and 519 For example, Zelefsky et al.519 demonstrated that 3
months of leuprolide acetate and flutamide (Eulexin) reduced the prostate PTV by a mean of 25% (range, 3% to 52%). Further, two posttreatment biopsy series
demonstrated improved local control when neoadjuvant androgen ablation was used, suggesting either an additive effect or a sensitizing effect induced by androgen
deprivation. Zelefsky et al. 415 reported a 10% incidence of positive biopsies (3 of 31) in patients pretreated for 3 months with androgen deprivation, as compared with
46% (48 of 105) in those patients who received radiation therapy alone ( P <.001). The relative distribution of the prognostic risk groups and the prescribed dose did
not differ significantly between the two groups. Laverdiere et al. 520 reported preliminary results of a randomized trial of stage T2 and T3 prostate cancer patients who
underwent biopsy at 24 months after radiation therapy. Patients treated for 3 months with neoadjuvant androgen deprivation followed by 64 Gy of radiation therapy
had a 28% incidence of tumor-positive biopsy specimens, as compared to a 65% incidence in those patients receiving radiation alone. However, androgen deprivation
given for 3 months before and 6 months after 64-Gy radiation therapy was associated with only a 5% rate of positive biopsies, consistent with an additive rather than a
radiation-sensitizing effect.
The clinical value of the neoadjuvant approach was tested in RTOG trial 86-10. 521 Patients with large T2, T3, and T4 prostate tumors were randomized to either
receive 2 months of leuprolide and Eulexin before and during radiation therapy or radiation without androgen ablation. The cumulative incidence of local progression
at 5 years was 46% for patients undergoing androgen ablation and 71% for patients receiving radiation alone ( P <.001). Progression-free survival rates, including the
ability to maintain normal PSA levels, were 36% and 15%, respectively ( P <.001). There was, however, no difference in survival. The use of neoadjuvant androgen
ablation in patients with locally confined disease (stage T1 to T2a) and a good prognosis currently is being tested by RTOG trial 94-08. Patients are stratified by
pretreatment PSA level and Gleason score. It should be emphasized, however, that the use of androgen ablation is associated with significant side effects, such as
hot flashes, loss of libido, impotence, decrease in muscle tone, and anemia, which can significantly impair the quality of life of treated patients.
Use of the adjuvant approach has been tested in two prospectively randomized studies. RTOG trial 85-31 522 involved 977 T3 or T4 patients treated with whole pelvis
irradiation to 45 Gy plus a prostate boost to 20 to 25 Gy. Patients were randomized to receive adjuvant goserelin initiated during the last week of radiation and
continued indefinitely until relapse or initiated on evidence of postirradiation relapse. Actuarial local relapse-free survival at 5 years was 84% for the adjuvant arm and
71% for the radiation-alone arm ( P <.0001). The corresponding rates for freedom from distant metastases and disease-free survival were 83% versus 70% ( P <.001)
and 60% versus 44% (P <.0001). The actuarial 5-year PSA relapse-free survival was 53% for the adjuvant group versus 20% for the radiation-alone group ( P <.0001).
There was, however, no difference in the overall 5-year survival (75% vs. 71%; P = .52). In contrast, EORTC trial 22863 did show a survival advantage for patients
who received adjuvant androgen ablation. 523 In this study, 415 patients with locally advanced prostate cancer were randomly assigned to receive radiation therapy
alone (50 Gy to the pelvis plus a 20-Gy prostatic boost) or radiation therapy plus goserelin initiated before radiation therapy and continued after irradiation until
relapse. The actuarial 5-year disease-free survival (clinical) was 85% in the combined-treatment group and 48% for the radiation therapy group ( P <.001). The local
recurrence-free survival was 97% versus 77% ( P <.001), PSA relapse-free survival was 81% versus 43% (P <.001), and metastasis-free survival was 98% versus
56% (P <.001), respectively. The overall survival at 5 years was 79% for the adjuvant group versus 62% for the radiation alone group ( P = .001). The validity of the
latter observation has been questioned, because the survival level for the radiation-alone group (62%) appears significantly lower than published rates in similar
patients. 524 Hence, while addition of adjuvant androgen ablation to definitive radiation therapy has been associated with a highly significant improvement in local
control and freedom from disease progression, its impact on survival remains an open question.
INTERSTITIAL THERAPY
The basic paradigm of interstitial brachytherapy is based on the principle that deposition of radiation energy in tissues decreases exponentially as a square function of
the distance from the radiation source. Thus, while tumor tissue infiltrated with radioactive sources would receive maximal doses of radiation, there will be a rapid
falloff of the dose in surrounding normal tissues. Over the years, a range of isotopes (e.g., 226Ra, 198Au, 125I, 192Ir, 103Pd) have been tested, and the techniques have
evolved from free-hand implantation to ultrasonography- and CT-guided template systems. 525,526,527,528 and 529 Retropubic implantation of the prostate with 125I sources
was the technique of choice until a decade ago. 525,527,529 Long-term follow-up, however, indicated that local failure was significantly increased within nearly all stages
as compared with external-beam–treated patients. 529,530 and 531 The causes for local failure in these patients are not fully known, but difficulties in achieving a

geometrically acceptable distribution of seeds and a homogeneous dose distribution within the prostate have been regarded as major factors affecting this outcome.
More recently, new approaches of percutaneous transperineal implantation have been developed. These systems use sophisticated diagnostic localization
procedures for source placement and new methods of dosimetry and computer-aided optimization of treatment planning that improve the ability to produce
homogeneous dose distribution within the target volume. 526,527,532,533 The most popular approach has been the TRUS-guided implantation of 125I or 103Pd sources with
or without supplemental external-beam irradiation. 527,532,533 Treatment planning is based on CT or TRUS, with images obtained at 5-mm intervals. Isodose distributions
are provided at each 5-mm increment throughout the treatment volume to determine the precise localization of seed placement and the source strength required to
achieve a dose of 160 Gy with 125I or 115Gy with 103Pd. Implantation is performed while the patient lies in a dorsal lithotomy position and is under spinal anesthesia. A
needle guidance template is attached to an ultrasound apparatus and is placed against the perineum. Needles containing the radioactive sources are inserted
through the template under TRUS guidance with supplemental fluoroscopy. Compliance of source placement with the pretreatment plan is determined by direct
visualization on biplanar ultrasonography. After implantation, 5-mm-thick CT images of the prostate are obtained, and isodose contours are calculated to evaluate the
dose that will actually be delivered to the prostate and the surrounding normal tissues. Wallner et al. 526,534 has recently described a method for 3D CT-based
pretreatment planning and an implantation technique using individualized template devices that permit more precise source placement within the target volume.
The technologic improvements in transperineal ultrasound-based or CT-planned permanent seed implantation have enhanced the ability of this modality to target high
radiation doses to the prostate more precisely than in the past. Concomitantly, treatment results have improved significantly, especially in patients with favorable-risk
disease. Three- to 5-year PSA relapse-free survival rates have ranged between 76% and 96%. 535,536,537 and 538 A recent study by Blasko et al. 535 reported the results in
138 T1c to T2 patients with Gleason scores of 6 or less. PSA decreased gradually to levels of less than 1.0 ng/mL over the first 4 years after implantation in 97%, and
the actuarial PSA relapse-free survival at 5 years was 93%. Priestly and Beyer 536 reported a rate of 94% PSA relapse-free survival at 5 years for T1 patients, 70% for
T2a and T2b patients, and 34% for T1c patients. In contrast, Storey et al. 537 failed to demonstrate effects of stage and Gleason score on the PSA outcome in 206
patients. Freedom from PSA failure correlated, however, with pretreatment PSA levels. Actuarial 5-year freedom from failure was 76% in patients with a pretreatment
PSA level of not more than 10 ng/mL, 51% for patients with values of in excess of 10 ng/mL, and 84% for patients with a PSA level of less than 4 ng/mL. Stock et al. 538
demonstrated a dose response for 125I prostate implants. Using TG43 guidelines, dose-volume histograms were calculated. The dose delivered to the gland was
defined as the D90 (dose delivered to 90% of prostate tissue as defined by CT). Patients receiving a D90 dose of less than 140 Gy had a 4-year relapse-free survival
of 68%, as compared with 92% for those receiving a D90 dose of at least 140 Gy ( P = .02). Two-year posttreatment biopsies were negative in 70% (33 of 47) of
patients with a D90 of less than 140 Gy, as compared with a rate of 83% (24 of 29) in patients with a D90 of at least 140 Gy ( P = .2).
In the absence of a randomized trial comparing 3D-CRT and permanent interstitial implantation for early-stage prostatic cancer, it has become a challenge to select
the most appropriate treatment for a given patient. Zelefsky et al. 539 recently addressed this issue. Their study compared patients with favorable-risk prostate cancer
treated with either 3D-CRT (n = 137) or transperineal 125I implantations (n = 145). The 3D-CRT dose range was 64.8 to 81.0 Gy, and the implant dose range was 110
to 257 Gy (median, 150 Gy). The 5-year PSA relapse-free survival rates for the 3D-CRT and the implant groups were 88% and 82%, respectively ( P = .09). Protracted
grade 2 urinary symptoms persisting for 12 to 70 months were observed in 45 (31%) of the implant patients. In contrast, the 5-year actuarial likelihood of late grade 2
urinary toxicity for the 3D-CRT group was only 8%. The 5-year actuarial likelihood of developing a urethral stricture (grade 3 urinary toxicity) for the 3D-CRT and
implant groups was 2% and 12%, respectively (P <.0002). The 5-year actuarial probabilities of rectal toxicity were not significantly different. The 5-year likelihood of
posttreatment erectile dysfunction among patients who were potent prior to treatment was 43% for the 3D-CRT and 53% for the implant group ( P= .52). These data
demonstrated that 3D-CRT and transperineal 125I implantation are each associated with an excellent PSA outcome, but issues of quality of life associated with
treatment toxicities may serve as guidelines for therapy selection in the individual patient.
CRYOTHERAPY
Loening et al., 540 at the University of Iowa, first popularized cryosurgical ablation of prostate cancer in 1969. In their technique, the posterior surface of the prostate,
seminal vesicles, and bladder base were exposed through a perineal incision. A cryoprobe then was inserted first into the perivesical fascia and later into the
ampullae, seminal vesicles, and entire prostate. The technique was monitored by visual and tactile inspection only. Such therapy resulted in coagulative necrosis of
epithelial elements and replacement with fibrous stroma. Outcomes (survival and recurrence) were related to stage and grade. Approximately 41% of patients
eventually had evidence of persistent or recurrent disease. At that time, the technique compared favorably with other treatment modalities with respect to survival.
However, morbidity was significant and included urethral sloughing of tissue, urethrorectal or urethrocutaneous fistula development, bladder neck obstruction, and
urinary incontinence. Porter et al. 541 updated the outcomes of 51 men who underwent cryosurgery alone using this early technique for the management of prostate
cancer between 1973 to 1977. Cancer recurrence was documented in 78.4% of the men, and 47.1% died of prostate cancer. Local recurrence was documented in at
least 67% of those undergoing the procedure. Kaplan-Meier analyses demonstrated median progression-free and overall survival times of 34 and 75 months,
respectively.
Despite this early experience, there has been a resurgence of interest in cryosurgery as a less invasive form of treatment for localized prostate cancer. This interest
stems from technical innovations including improved percutaneous techniques, expertise in TRUS, improved cryotechnology, and a better understanding of
cryobiology.
Freezing of the prostate is carried out using a multiprobe cryosurgical device. 542 The two parameters that correlate with the likelihood of cell destruction are the
cooling rate during freezing and the lowest temperature achieved. 543 Damage may occur due to chemical injury or intracellular ice formation. Cellular destruction
occurs as a result of freezing of the extracellular compartment and withdrawal of water from the cells occurring at –15°C, intracellular ice formation occurring at –20°
to –40°C, thawing (which results in recrystallization), and tissue thrombosis. 544 Cell death requires temperatures lower than –20°C. However, temperatures as low as
–40°C may be necessary to ensure complete freezing of the intracellular compartment. This fact has important clinical implications to the urologist performing
cryosurgery, as the hyperechoic edge of the ice ball visualized is 0° to –2°C, and temperatures as low as –20° to –40°C are inside this edge. Therefore, one must
extend the ice ball well beyond the edge of the prostate to ensure adequate tissue ablation. Rapid freezing allows for minimal loss of intracellular water and, therefore,
the maximal chance of intracellular ice formation. Passive warming, which occurs slowly (over 15 to 20 minutes) after the cryoprobes are allowed to thaw, results in
formation of larger ice crystals, a process called recrystallization, and this process further destroys tissues. After one episode of freezing, the cells are very vulnerable
to additional cycles, and a second freezing cycle will allow for destruction of surviving cells. The destructive process may be facilitated by thrombosis of small vessels
and the resulting tissue anoxia.
The ice balls generated by current methods are elliptic in shape, with the maximal radius at the tip. The radius is directly proportional to the rate of flow of liquid
nitrogen. At high flow rates, the gradient from the outer edge—which, as mentioned, is at 0°C—to the zone at 20°C is narrow, approximately 2 mm. At low flow rates,
this gradient is widened. The ice ball is approximately 4 cm long. Therefore, it is frequently necessary to pull the cryoprobes back toward the apex of the prostate after
the initial freezing at the base, to ensure complete destruction of the gland.
Patients, after induction of regional or general anesthesia, are placed in the lithotomy position. A urethral warming device is placed to preserve the urethra and avoid
sloughing of tissue postoperatively. This device circulates heated water. An ultrasound transducer is inserted into the rectum, and volume measurements are made of
the prostate and cancer or cancers. Using a needle guide, an 18-gauge, hollow-core needle is inserted into the prostate under TRUS guidance. Once in position, a
0.038 J-tipped guidewire is advanced through the needle to the proximal extent of the prostatic capsule. Cannulas and dilators are passed over the wires to facilitate
placement of five or more cryoprobes. Generally, two probes are placed anteromedially, two posterolaterally, and one posteriorly. Liquid nitrogen is circulated through
these needles, and the resulting freezing zones, or ice balls, can be monitored by ultrasonography. The anterior probes are activated first and allowed to extend
posteriorly and laterally. Once these have reached the desired position, thawing is begun, and the posterior probes are activated. Most often, two freeze-thaw cycles
are performed, certainly in the area of cancer. In addition, if the ice ball does not adequately extend to the apex of the prostate, the cryoprobes are pulled backward
into the apex, and additional freezing is carried out. In areas of ECE, greater propagation of the freeze zone is permitted laterally. If necessary, an additional probe
may be placed in any area of gross ECE.
Androgen deprivation before cryosurgery should be considered in patients with large glands or extensive local disease, as such therapy serves to shrink the prostate
and cancer, allows for even distribution of the cryoprobes, eliminates steep temperature gradients between the probes, reduces bulky extracapsular disease, and may
allow for widening of the periprostatic space and better protection of surrounding structures.
Patients who undergo cryosurgery alone rarely require hospitalization, and the procedure usually is performed on a “come and go” basis. A urethral catheter is left in
place for 3 weeks, as such a period of urethral catheterization appears to be associated with a lower likelihood of postoperative tissue sloughing and urinary retention
as compared to use of a suprapubic tube alone or shorter periods of urethral catheterization. Patients are followed with serial PSA measurements and assessment of

symptom scores. TRUS-guided biopsies of the prostate should be considered in most patients at 6 to 12 months after the procedure, certainly in those who fail to
reach PSA nadirs of less than 0.4 ng/mL or in those whose serum PSA falls to a low level initially but rises later.
The efficacy of various forms of treatment for prostate cancer can be assessed by analyzing several end points. Commonly, patients who have been treated with
cryotherapy have undergone repeat prostatic biopsy 6 to 12 months after the procedure. The positive biopsy rate after cryoablation ranged between 7.7% and 25%.
These results must be analyzed cautiously as not all patients treated underwent biopsy, some patients received neoadjuvant androgen deprivation (which could have
affected biopsy data), and false-negative biopsy results are not uncommon, certainly in those with limited disease before treatment. Not surprisingly, there is a
relationship between clinical stage and the likelihood of a positive posttreatment biopsy after cryotherapy. The likelihood of a positive biopsy is approximately 9% for
those with clinical stage T1 or T2 disease and at least 21% for those with T3 disease. 545,546 Interestingly, benign epithelium, often very focal, has been seen in up to
71% of patients after cryotherapy. The significance of benign epithelium is unknown, and such findings may represent areas of the prostate not frozen to low
temperatures, perhaps, in the area of the urethral warmer.
It must be recognized that certain areas of the prostate or seminal vesicles are more likely to be sites of treatment failure. It appears that recurrence is more common
in cancers located at the apex (9.5%) and seminal vesicles (43.8%), in contrast to those located in the midgland (4.1%) and base (0%). 547 Similarly, Bahn et al.548
noted that the apex and, to some extent, the seminal vesicles were more likely to harbor residual disease as compared to the rest of the prostate.
Serum PSA level after definitive treatment such as radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy has been shown to be an important determinant of eventual outcome.
What constitutes an acceptable PSA level after cryotherapy has not been well evaluated. Radiation or cryotherapy does not result in complete destruction of all
prostate tissue. Detectable levels of PSA may be due to either malignant or benign epithelial elements. Therefore, a low but stable PSA after cryotherapy may not be
associated with disease progression. A similar situation has been noted for patients who undergo radiation therapy. This issue was addressed recently at UCSF by
Shinohara et al., 549 who correlated the rates of biochemical and biopsy failure with the PSA nadir after cryosurgical treatment of prostate cancer in 132 patients who
underwent 145 cryosurgical ablation procedures. Follow-up included PSA testing at 3, 6, and 12 months and every 6 months thereafter. Biopsies were performed at 6
months, and biochemical failure was defined as a PSA nadir of at least 0.5 ng/mL or subsequent PSA elevation of at least 0.2 ng/mL. Biochemical and biopsy failures
were correlated with PSA nadir values after cryosurgery (<0.1 ng/mL, 0.1 to 0.4 ng/mL, 0.5 to 1.5 ng/mL, and >1.5 ng/mL). Biochemical failure (subsequent rise in
PSA of 0.2 ng/mL or more) was lowest in those who achieved PSA nadirs of less than 0.1 ng/mL (21%) but was common in those with higher nadir values. Biopsy
failure was lowest in those with nadirs of less than 0.1 ng/mL (1.5%) and in those with nadirs of not more than 0.4 ng/mL (10%). In contrast, 55% of the patients with
nadir values of 0.5 ng/mL or more had biopsy failure. Both biochemical and biopsy failure tended to occur within the first 12 months after treatment (i.e., 96% and 88%
of the biochemical and biopsy failures, respectively). Based on this single study, a PSA nadir of not more than 0.4 ng/mL should be achieved after cryotherapy. Higher
values are associated with a significant risk of continued PSA elevation and a high likelihood of residual disease detected on prostatic biopsy.
Greene et al. 550 similarly showed that a serum PSA level in excess of 0.5 ng/mL was highly predictive of biopsy and biochemical failure after cryotherapy. Long 551
recently analyzed a very well-characterized series of 145 patients. The crude rates of maintaining either a negative biopsy or a serum PSA level of less than 0.3
ng/mL at 6 and 24 months after the procedure were 87% and 73%, respectively. However, the overall actuarial rate at 42 months of maintaining a serum PSA level of
less than 0.3 ng/mL was 59%.
Koppie et al.552 recently reported intermediate-terms results of cryotherapy in 176 patients who underwent 207 cryosurgical procedures for clinically localized (stages
T1 through T4) prostate cancer using a multiprobe cryosurgical device. The patient population was composed of men who generally had intermediate- or high-risk
disease (T3 or T4 disease in 61%). Actuarial biochemical recurrence-free survival rates at 1 year and 3 years after treatment for those patients undergoing primary
cryosurgery (excluding repeat procedures and patients who failed previous radiation or radical prostatectomy) were 62% and 49%, respectively. PSA nadir ( P = .001)
and pretreatment serum PSA level (P = .008) were significantly associated with outcome after cryosurgery. Outcome correlated with pretreatment risk status. Actuarial
biochemical recurrence-free survival 1 year and 3 years after cryosurgery was 82% and 69% for low-risk patients and 58% and 45% for intermediate- to high-risk
patients, respectively ( P = .048). Neoadjuvant androgen deprivation was not shown to improve outcome significantly after cryosurgery. Prostate biopsy was performed
after 167 procedures and proved to be positive in 64 (38%) such cases.
Impotence is the most common complication of cryotherapy, occurring in more than 80% of the men who are potent before cryotherapy and who undergo complete
(bilateral) treatment of the prostate. Impotence is a product of damage to the neurovascular bundles during the freezing process. Clearly, some patients who are
impotent just after the procedure will regain erectile function with time. However, this number appears to be limited, and most men who become impotent after the
procedure require long-term treatment for this condition.
Sloughing of tissue occurs in approximately 3% to 10% of patients. The likelihood of either urinary retention due to necrotic tissue obstruction or stricture formation is
related to the type of urethral warmer used. Sloughing of urethral tissue, urinary retention, incontinence, and stricture disease are much less common in those patients
treated with effective, commercially available urethral warming devices. 553 In addition, leaving the urethral catheter in place for a prolonged period rather than relying
on suprapubic urinary drainage will further decrease the likelihood of this complication. Sosa et al., 553 in a multicenter review, reported the following incidence of early
complications: urinary retention for longer than 1 month, 6.8%; pain, 9.4%; infections, 13.4%; and fistula formation, 1.4%. Complications are much more common in
those who undergo cryoablation for management of local disease recurrence after radiation therapy. In this patient population, urinary incontinence is common,
occurring in 42% of patients, and is usually moderate to severe in nature. 554 Resolution of incontinence will occur in approximately one-half of these patients within 1
year of treatment. Therefore, early and aggressive treatment of incontinence should be delayed until it is ascertained that resolution will not occur.
Options for treatment of incontinence, should it persist, are limited. Collagen injection should be delayed 12 to 15 months after the procedure to allow for healing.
Although complete resolution of incontinence is unlikely, significant improvement may be noted in some patients after collagen injection. The use of an artificial
sphincter is an option, but additional endoscopic procedures may be necessary, and revision is likely in some patients.
MANAGEMENT OF LOCAL FAILURE AFTER SURGERY, RADIATION THERAPY, AND CRYOTHERAPY
A significant number of men who undergo standard local treatment for prostate cancer will experience biochemical recurrence, which may herald the development of
clinical recurrence in some. A recent analysis of patients enrolled in a disease registry of prostate cancer patients demonstrated that 22% of patients who received
initial treatment with radical prostatectomy, radiation therapy, or cryotherapy required a second form of prostate cancer treatment within 3 years of initial therapy. 555
Similar results have been reported by others. 556
Serial PSA measurements provide the most reliable method of detecting recurrence, as tumor progression rarely occurs in the absence of PSA elevation.
Distinguishing between local recurrence and distant failure is crucial to subsequent treatment decisions. Physical examination of the prostate or surgical bed by DRE
is neither sensitive nor specific for the detection of local recurrence after any form of local therapy. PSA kinetics, in conjunction with pretreatment pathologic stage and
grade, may provide the best means of identifying the location of tumor recurrence. Patients with low-grade or low-stage disease and PSA levels of less than 10 ng/mL
at the time of initial therapy are most at risk for local recurrence, whereas those with seminal vesicle invasion, high-grade cancers (Gleason score >7), positive lymph
nodes, or initial serum PSA levels exceeding 20 ng/mL are more likely to experience failure distantly. A PSA velocity of less than 0.75 ng/mL/y was observed in 94%
of patients with local recurrence after radical prostatectomy. 557 Conversely, more than 50% of men with metastatic disease had a PSA velocity greater than 0.75
ng/mL/y. Clearly, a PSA doubling time of less than 6 months suggests distant disease. 306
Patients with detectable or increasing PSA levels after either surgery or radiation therapy, respectively, may be candidates for local imaging complemented by
TRUS-guided biopsy. After surgery, anastomotic biopsy may be positive for local recurrence in 40% to 50% of patients with detectable levels of PSA. 558 However,
anastomotic biopsy generally is not necessary after radical prostatectomy, as treatment decisions can be made on the basis of PSA kinetics alone. Indications for
TRUS-guided biopsy after either radiation or other forms of focal therapy such as cryotherapy are not clear. Most would agree that such biopsies should be
considered in those patients treated with radiation therapy or cryotherapy who show serial elevations in serum PSA level after reaching a PSA nadir. Nadir levels of
PSA usually are reached within 8 to 18 months after external-beam irradiation, longer with brachytherapy, and within 3 months after cryotherapy. Both endorectal MRI
complemented by spectroscopy and monoclonal antibody imaging may complement the use of PSA kinetics to define the site of recurrence after local therapy. 559
However, CT, MRI, and bone scans rarely are required in the early evaluation of asymptomatic patients with biochemical failure after radical prostatectomy, radiation
therapy, and cryoablation (Fig. 34.4-17). In the absence of symptoms, the probability of a positive bone scan due to metastatic disease is less than 5% until the serum
PSA level exceeds 40 ng/mL.560,561 Radioimmunoscintigraphy using an antibody to PSMA has been used to identify the site of recurrence in those patients who
experience biochemical failure after radical prostatectomy. The sensitivity and specificity for the detection of recurrence is highly variable, ranging between 44% and
90% and 36% and 86%, respectively. 562 In most patients, this procedure may add little prognostic information over that gained by analysis of posttreatment PSA

kinetics and pretreatment cancer grade, stage, and serum PSA level.

FIGURE 34.4-17. Algorithm for evaluation of those with biochemical failure after radical prostatectomy (RP), radiation therapy (RT), or cryotherapy for presumed
localized prostate cancer. PSA, prostate-specific antigen.

Treatment options after radical prostatectomy include surveillance alone, systemic therapy, or radiation to the prostatic bed. In general, 30% to 65% of men who
undergo therapeutic, or salvage, radiation therapy after radical prostatectomy will develop and maintain undetectable PSA levels ( Table 34.4-17). Schild et al.563
reported an overall 50% disease-free survival at 3 years; however, 78% of those patients with a pre–radiation therapy PSA level of less than 1.0 ng/mL were
disease-free, whereas only 18% of men with a PSA level greater than 1.0 ng/mL remained disease-free. Others have reported similar findings, suggesting that
therapeutic radiation after surgery should be applied early. Patients most likely to benefit from salvage radiation after prostatectomy include those with low- to
moderate-grade tumors with an undetectable postoperative PSA that rises after more than 1 year. The exact timing of radiation therapy has yet to be determined,
although a pre–radiation therapy PSA cutoff of 2.0 ng/mL currently appears reasonable. Such therapy is usually well tolerated, although transient changes in bowel
and bladder function may occur. In a study of 294 men who underwent radiation therapy after surgery, no significant long-term impact of postoperative radiation was
seen on either urinary continence or erectile dysfunction. 564,565 Although both brachytherapy and cryotherapy have been used to manage local recurrences after
radical prostatectomy, the experience with these modalities is very limited.

TABLE 34.4-17. Probability of an Undetectable Prostate-Specific Antigen Level after Therapeutic Radiation for a Detectable Prostate-Specific Antigen Level after
Prostatectomy

Androgen deprivation is the most common form of secondary treatment (88%) after radiation therapy. 566 Such therapy generally is considered palliative rather than
curative.
Curative forms of secondary treatment should be considered in properly selected patients. Salvage radical prostatectomy is one option. Cause-specific survival after
this procedure ranges from 70% to 90% and 30% to 50% at 8 to 10 years, respectively. In a series from Tefilli et al., 564 all patients with organ-confined disease were
disease-free at 34 months. Amling et al. 569 reported a 10-year disease-free survival of 43% in 108 patients, similar to the results from Rogers et al. 567 and Moul et
al.568 DNA ploidy, preoperative serum PSA level, and Gleason score were significant predictors of outcome postoperatively. Those patients most likely to benefit from
salvage surgery include those with favorable disease characteristics before radiation therapy and those with PSA kinetics after radiation therapy consistent with local
rather than distant recurrence. Complications of salvage prostatectomy are more common than after primary prostatectomy. Urinary incontinence is seen in 20% to
60% of patients, bladder neck contracture occurs in approximately 20%, and impotence is virtually universal. Rectal injury occurs in fewer than 10% of patients and
rarely necessitates fecal diversion. Contemporary series report better outcomes due to improved patient selection, earlier identification of failure, and improved
surgical technique.
The largest series of patients treated with cryoablation for local recurrence after primary radiation therapy was reported by Greene and Pisters et al. 550,570 from the M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center. Negative sextant biopsies were noted in 77% of patients 6 months after cryoablation. However, only 45 of 150 patients (30%) had a
persistently undetectable PSA level with a mean follow-up of 13.5 months. Incontinence was common, and up to 50% of such patients may require transurethral
resection for urinary retention and obstructive voiding symptoms. Impotence occurred in at least 80% of men. An effective urethra warming device was determined to
be essential to minimize tissue sloughing. Complications such as urethrorectal fistula, abscess formation, and urethral stricture were rare. Additional radiation is an
option also.
Grado et al. 571 followed 49 patients treated with brachytherapy after biopsy-proven primary radiation therapy failure. Actuarial biochemical-free survival was 34% at 5
years and was associated with a post-salvage PSA nadir of less than 0.5 ng/mL. Local disease control was 98%; only a single patient demonstrated local, clinical
failure. These results are encouraging, especially given the treatment population. The median age was 73.3 years, and 71% had locally advanced disease at initial
presentation. Ninety percent of the cancers were moderately to poorly differentiated on prebrachytherapy biopsies. Complications were similar to those seen in
patients undergoing primary brachytherapy.
For those patients whose cancers recur after cryotherapy, the choice of secondary treatment is not well defined. Repeat freezing has been reported, as has salvage
prostatectomy. In the subset of patients at UCSF who underwent multiple cryotherapy procedures, 67% had no cancer on subsequent biopsies but only 33% achieved
long-term, favorable PSA values. 552 Radical prostatectomy is an option, but morbidity may be significant. Radiation treatment can be used after cryoablation and,
unlike cryotherapy after radiation, salvage radiation therapy after cryotherapy appears to be associated with minimal morbidity.
New forms of salvage therapy are being developed and refined. Both high-intensity focused ultrasonography and radiofrequency interstitial ablation are being studied
and appear to have promise in local control of prostate cancer. 572,573 These methods induce coagulative necrosis of tissue. In preliminary studies, primary
high-intensity focused ultrasonography achieved short-term, local control in 60% to 80% of patients. Radiofrequency ablation was able to produce predictable lesions
in prostates prior to radical prostatectomy. The long-term efficacy and morbidity of these new forms of focal therapy require further study.
Finally, many patients in whom local therapy fails, as evidenced by rising PSA levels, may not develop clinical evidence of disease. 279 Therefore, observation alone is
an option in low-risk, asymptomatic patients in whom primary therapy fails. In such patients, the morbidity and cost of secondary therapy must be carefully considered
and compared to the risk of clinical progression of disease.

TREATMENT SELECTION FOR ADVANCED DISEASE: METASTATIC AND LOCAL REGIONAL DISEASE
The spectrum of advanced prostate cancer has changed considerably over the last 10 years since the introduction and widespread use of PSA screening. Prostate
cancer is diagnosed in fewer patients at a time when their disease is overtly metastatic. Most cancers are detected earlier, frequently at an asymptomatic stage.
Nonetheless, a large number of patients still die of prostate cancer despite earlier detection, which reflects the existence of occult metastatic disease. 1 A redefinition
of advanced disease in the current era would seem appropriate, given these changes. Advanced disease might include patients who, at time of diagnosis, have
poor-risk features but no overt metastases. One might include two other subsets of patients as having advanced disease: patients who demonstrate cancer
progression after either local therapy or androgen ablative therapy, as evidenced solely by a rise in the serum PSA level. With improvements in our understanding of
risk stratification, the traditional stage-based therapy may become obsolete, replaced by multifactor stratification schemes and biologically based therapies. However,
until the paradigm has changed, we must discuss treatment based on stage or modality.
ANDROGEN DEPRIVATION
Overview
Androgen deprivation remains the mainstay of therapy for patients with advanced prostate cancer. Because androgen may play a role as both a survival factor and a
growth factor for prostatic carcinoma cells, interference with the androgen-signaling pathway will generate clinically meaningful remissions in the majority of patients.
These remissions are manifest by a reduction in symptoms related to disease, if they exist, and a reduction in the serum PSA level. A decline in serum PSA level
reflects, in part, a decrease in the cellular production of PSA, as the PSA gene promoter is, in part, androgen-regulated 574; thus, withdrawal of androgen will reduce
the production of PSA protein. In addition, the reduction in serum PSA level may reflect the consequence of metabolic changes in the cell or a reduction in the
prostate cancer cell mass, presumably through induction of cell death pathways. It is likely that the remission sustained by the vast majority of patients reflects a
composite of all of these phenomena, although conceivably one or another mechanism may dominate in any one individual.
The majority of circulating androgen is produced by the testicles in the form of testosterone, and the remainder is produced by the adrenal glands, which synthesize
the so-called adrenal androgens. These adrenal androgens may contribute up to 40% of the androgen detected within the prostate. 575 Androgen deprivation is
achieved through surgical (orchiectomy) or chemical (gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues) castration. Estrogens and progestational agents, which are less
frequently used, will also reduce androgen levels through nuclear receptor–mediated activity. Antiandrogens (androgen receptor antagonists) or agents that interfere
with the adrenal production of androgens, such as ketoconazole or aminoglutethimide, also are used.
Most of the data that currently exists regarding the comparative efficacy of androgen ablative strategies and the overall management of patients with advanced
disease have been acquired through studies involving patients with radiographic evidence of metastatic disease (M+). How applicable the results of these studies are
to patients with earlier stages of advanced prostate cancer is uncertain. Nonetheless, in the M+ population, response durations to androgen deprivation average 12 to
18 months.576 Even in this far-advanced group of patients, heterogeneity exists, as evidenced by the fact that a minority of patients will demonstrate no biochemical or
clinical disease progression 5 years after initiating therapy. An increase in serum PSA level remains the earliest indicator of relapse, although a small subset of
patients (<5%) will experience relapse even in the absence of serum PSA progression. Optimal therapy for patients with earlier disease (i.e., locally advanced patients
or those who experience relapse after local therapy) remains undefined. Significant side effects exist as a result of treatment with androgen deprivation therapy, and
the cost of therapy can be significant as well. Thus, the choice and timing of treatment depends on several factors, including the stage of disease, whether symptoms
are present, the rate of disease progression, patient preference, and a full knowledge of the toxicity profiles of the drugs used.
Timing of Androgen Deprivation Therapy
Although it is assumed that androgen deprivation therapy is life-prolonging, this has never been formally proven. Nonetheless, it is likely that androgen deprivation
therapy delays the onset of radiographic progression or symptoms in an otherwise asymptomatic man, presumably by reducing the overall tumor cell mass. Whether
the earlier initiation of androgen deprivation therapy increases survival duration has long been debated. In theory, it seems reasonable that the earlier the initiation of
androgen deprivation therapy, the better the outcome. This would follow from the assumption that, as tumors evolve and acquire more genetic change, the proportion
of hormone-refractory cells in the tumor increases.
Three studies now offer evidence that supports the earlier initiation of androgen deprivation therapy. In a study conducted by Bolla et al., 577 415 men with locally
advanced or high-grade prostate cancer were randomized to receive either external-beam radiation therapy alone or external-beam radiation therapy plus 3 years of
androgen deprivation therapy. Cyproterone acetate (a steroidal antiandrogen) and goserelin administration were begun at the time of radiation. The cyproterone
acetate was continued for a duration of 1 month, whereas the goserelin was continued for 3 years. Patients were followed for a median duration of 3 years. The
actuarial 5-year survival for the radiation-alone group was 62% [95% confidence interval (CI), 52% to 72%] and for the radiation-plus-goserelin group was 79% (95%
CI, 72% to 86%) (P = .001). The survival benefit observed in the combination-therapy arm suggested a benefit to the earlier institution of androgen deprivation
therapy. This study has been criticized for the relatively brief duration of follow-up (median, 3 years) at the time of publication and for the long duration of androgen
deprivation therapy. 578
Another study, conducted by the British Medical Research Council (MRC), 579 enrolled and randomized 938 men with locally advanced or metastatic prostate cancer to
receive either early androgen deprivation therapy (orchiectomy or LHRH analogue) or delayed androgen deprivation therapy. In this study, disease progression
(defined as a conversion from M0 to M+ or, alternatively, local progression requiring treatment) occurred more frequently and earlier in the delayed treatment arm ( P
<.001). In addition, deaths attributable to prostate cancer occurred more frequently in the delayed-therapy arm (257 vs. 203; P = .001). This study has been criticized
because of the potential bias created by differing follow-up schedules between arms, resulting in some of the men never actually receiving androgen deprivation
therapy in the delayed androgen deprivation therapy arm. 578
The third study that supports earlier intervention is a study by Messing et al., 580 in which 98 men who had undergone a radical prostatectomy and were found to have
pathologically documented metastatic disease to lymph nodes were randomized to receive either early androgen deprivation therapy (LHRH analogue or orchiectomy
plus an antiandrogen) or deferred therapy. A dramatic and statistically significant difference in survival duration in favor of the early androgen deprivation therapy arm
was found. After a median of 7.1 years, 7 of 47 men in the immediate therapy arm, as compared to 18 of 51 men in the delayed therapy arm, had died ( P = .02). Three
men died of prostate cancer in the immediate therapy arm, as compared to 16 men in the delayed therapy arm ( P <.01). At the time of the last follow-up, 36 men in the
immediate treatment arm versus 9 in the delayed treatment arm were alive without evidence of detectable serum PSA or clinical evidence of disease ( P <.001).
Although these three studies suggest that early androgen deprivation therapy may confer a survival advantage over delayed therapy, these studies do not define the
optimal timing of androgen deprivation therapy for patients in the modern era. Little justification can be made for withholding androgen deprivation therapy when
radiographic evidence of metastatic disease is present. However, for patients earlier in their disease course (i.e., patients who have undergone definitive local therapy
but who are at high risk of relapse or patients with rising serum PSA levels after local therapy), the appropriate timing of treatment remains to be defined. Given the
heterogeneity in the biologic behavior of tumors in the patient population with rising serum PSA levels after local therapy, several factors should be considered during
decision making regarding timing. These factors include those that predict the rapidity of onset of clinical symptoms such as PSA velocity, tumor grade, and the time
since local therapy was implemented. 581 In addition, patient factors that potentially affect quality of life should be taken into account. These include patient anxiety, on
the one hand, and the short-term and long-term impact of androgen deprivation, on the other.
Prognostic Factors
Most of the studies that have analyzed predictive and prognostic factors of response and survival in patients undergoing androgen deprivation therapy have done so
in patients with radiographic evidence of metastatic disease (M+). In such studies, factors that reflect more extensive disease are associated with a poorer
prognosis. 582,583,584,585,586 and 587 Two such factors are performance status and the presence or absence of symptoms. More quantifiable parameters include the number
of bone metastases, the presence of appendicular bone disease in addition to axial bone disease, and higher serum alkaline phosphatase levels. Serum PSA levels
are not consistently a predictor of response duration or survival. This apparent paradox may reflect the high variability in PSA production between tumors at the
cellular level. In addition, the fact that less well differentiated tumors produce less PSA may mute a direct relationship. 588 As a posttreatment dynamic factor, some
studies indicate that normalization of serum PSA level may be associated with a better outcome. 583,589,590 However, Eisenberger et al. 591 found in a randomized study
of more than 1300 men with metastatic prostate cancer in which orchiectomy was compared to orchiectomy plus flutamide that, although the serum PSA level

normalized (PSA <4) more frequently in men receiving the combination treatment, no difference in survival between the two arms was seen. Patients with visceral
metastases582,583 and patients with lower serum testosterone levels 587 prior to treatment appear to have a poorer outcome. To date, no molecular markers that predict
response and response duration to androgen deprivation therapy have been identified.
Monotherapy
ORCHIECTOMY. Surgical castration (orchiectomy) remains the standard for patients who will require permanent androgen deprivation therapy. It has the advantages of

convenience and cost (as compared to other modalities) and abrogates compliance issues. In addition, clinical response is rapid after the procedure is performed. In
patients with symptomatic metastatic disease, significant improvement in symptoms can be achieved within 24 to 48 hours after orchiectomy. Many patients will
choose alternative treatments because of the psychological impact of surgical castration or the desire to be treated with androgen deprivation in an intermittent
fashion.
LUTEINIZING HORMONE–RELEASING HORMONE ANALOGUES. Peptide analogues of LHRH, which possess partial agonistic or antagonistic affects, have been used

extensively in the treatment of prostate cancer. The commercially approved agents goserelin and leuprolide are partial agonists. These agents will initially cause a
transient increase in luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone production, followed by a decline. Consequently, serum testosterone levels decrease
within weeks of initial administration. In patients with radiographic evidence of metastases, there is concern that this “flare” in serum LH and testosterone levels within
the first couple of weeks after therapy is initiated may worsen existing disease. 592,593 Thus, these agents are commonly used in conjunction with an antiandrogen such
as flutamide, nilutamide, or bicalutamide, which blocks ligand binding to the androgen receptor. In one trial, flutamide was shown to abrogate the clinical effects of the
serum LH and testosterone flare.594
The LHRH analogues are as effective as other modalities in the treatment of patients with advanced prostate cancer. Randomized studies have demonstrated the
equal efficacy of LHRH analogues to orchiectomy 595 and to diethylstilbestrol (DES). 596 Depot formulations have been developed that permit monthly or, alternatively,
every-3- and -4-month administration. Depot formulations allowing yearly dosing will soon become available. Pure LHRH antagonists have been developed and are
currently in clinical trials. Their niche may be in the treatment of patients with symptomatic metastatic disease who are initiating androgen ablative therapy. Because
an LH flare should not occur with these agents, their use may obviate the need for concomitant use of an antiandrogen.
ESTROGENS. Estrogens such as DES inhibit LHRH production by the hypothalamus and LH production by the pituitary and, thus, reduce serum levels of testosterone.

Whether the entire salutary effect of estrogens is a result of their ability to lower testosterone, which is well established, or a result of other independent mechanisms
remains unknown. The presence of estrogen receptors in prostate epithelium suggests that there may be a direct effect. 597 Estrogen therapy was the first exogenous
therapy for prostate cancer. In the first Veterans Administration Cooperative Urological Research Group study (VACURG I), patients were randomized to one of four
arms: DES, 5 mg alone; orchiectomy alone; DES, 5 mg, plus orchiectomy; or DES, 5 mg, plus placebo. 598 Although the overall survival of patients randomized to DES
was the same as for those randomized to orchiectomy, the cancer-specific mortality was lower in the DES-treated group. In this study, the possible therapeutic benefit
of DES, 5 mg/d, was offset by an increase in cardiovascular mortality. In VACURG II, patients were randomized to different doses of DES (0.2 mg, 1 mg, and 5 mg) or
placebo. 598 The survival of men treated with 1 mg and 5 mg was equivalent, but there was greater toxicity with 5 mg. In another study, men were randomized to
leuprolide, 1 mg/d, or to DES, 3 mg/d. Equal efficacy was seen, although the cardiovascular complication rate was higher with DES, 3 mg/d, as compared to
leuprolide. Although DES, 1 mg/d, appears to be effective in patients with advanced disease, a significant proportion of men do not achieve castration levels of serum
testosterone. 599 In practice, estrogens are used infrequently because of their side effects and their lack of availability, although there is a resurgence of interest in
agents that target the estrogen receptor.
ANTIANDROGENS. The antiandrogens are competitive inhibitors of testosterone at the androgen receptor. Two classes of antiandrogens are in clinical use, the first of

which is the steroidal antiandrogens, which include cyproterone acetate (Androcur) and megestrol acetate (Megace). The second group is nonsteroidal
antiandrogens, which include flutamide (Eulexin), bicalutamide (Casodex), and nilutamide (Anandron). The steroidal antiandrogens have broader activity than their
nonsteroidal counterparts. In addition to their effect on the androgen receptor, they possess progestational and glucocorticoid activity. The steroidal antiandrogens
suppress testosterone through their feedback effects at the pituitary and hypothalamus. As monotherapy, neither cyproterone acetate nor megestrol acetate is
capable of suppressing serum androgen levels completely or indefinitely and, as a result, these agents rarely are used as monotherapy.
In contrast, nonsteroidal antiandrogens act principally through the androgen receptor. Through theses agents' stimulation of the hypothalamus, serum testosterone
levels may increase or remain unchanged as compared to pretherapy levels. The nonsteroidal antiandrogens have been used in three clinical settings: first, as part of
combined androgen blockade (in conjunction with surgical or chemical castration); second, as salvage monotherapy in patients who were previously treated with
androgen deprivation therapy; and third, as initial therapy without surgical or chemical castration. When used in this last setting, they have the potential advantage of
allowing potency to be maintained as serum levels of testosterone are maintained. Small clinical trials 600 have been conducted that demonstrated both their efficacy
(as determined by their ability to lower serum PSA levels) as sole agents and in conjunction with 5a-reductase inhibitors 601 (which inhibit conversion of testosterone to
the more potent form, DHT) and their ability to preserve potency in a proportion of men. However, in two randomized studies, nonsteroidal antiandrogens were found
not to be as effective as castration. In one study of 92 patients with M+ prostate cancer, flutamide (250 mg t.i.d.) was compared to DES (1 mg t.i.d.). 602 A significant
difference in survival was observed in favor of DES. Median survivals were 43.2 and 28.5 months, respectively ( P = .04). In another study, orchiectomy was compared
to 50 mg/d of bicalutamide. 603 In this study, survival duration was superior with orchiectomy. It should be noted that, in retrospect, this dose of bicalutamide was
suboptimal. Another study in which patients were randomized to goserelin plus flutamide or to bicalutamide, 150 mg/d, was conducted. 604 Progression-free and overall
survival were equivalent in both arms. In two other studies that were combined for publication, bicalutamide, 150 mg/d, was equivalent to orchiectomy or goserelin for
M0 patients but proved inferior for M+ patients. 605 Antiandrogens should therefore not be used as monotherapy in patients with M+ disease. Their use as monotherapy
in patients with earlier disease may be equivalent to castration; however, longer follow-up is needed.
COMPARISON OF MONOTHERAPEUTIC AGENTS. Numerous trials have compared the efficacy of the various monotherapeutic agents. The most comprehensive analysis

of these studies was performed by the Technology Evaluation Center, an evidence-based practice center for the Agency of Health Care Policy and Research. 606 The
conclusions, based on a metaanalysis of ten trials that included 1908 patients, were that no difference in survival existed between patients treated with LHRH agonists
or patients treated with orchiectomy or DES and no difference in survival existed between patients treated with the different LHRH agonists.
Combined Androgen Blockade
The role of adrenal androgens in supporting prostate cancer cell growth is uncertain. The adrenal androgens are relatively weak as compared to testosterone. The
concept of combined androgen blockade (CAB) was developed by Labrie et al. 607 in an effort to try to suppress testicular androgen production and block adrenal
androgens to afford a better androgen deprivation strategy. In the mid-1980s, Labrie et al. 607 demonstrated dramatic responses of patients with metastatic prostate
cancer to a combination of chemical or surgical castration and an antiandrogen. In 1989, Crawford et al. 608 published the results of a National Cancer
Institute–sponsored intergroup trial (INT-0036) in which 603 men with M+ prostate cancer were randomized to either leuprolide, 1 mg/d SC, or to leuprolide plus
flutamide, 250 mg PO t.i.d. CAB resulted in a significant improvement to disease progression over time and a significant difference in median survival in favor of CAB
(median survival, 28.3 months vs. 35.6 months; P = .035), as compared to leuprolide alone.
Two other studies demonstrated an improvement in survival associated with CAB. In the EORTC trial, 326 men were randomized to either goserelin, 3.6 mg SC for 4
weeks plus flutamide 250 mg PO t.i.d., or orchiectomy. 609 An improvement in median survival was again observed with CAB (34.4 months vs. 27.1 months; P = .02). In
the other study, 457 men were randomized to orchiectomy or to orchiectomy plus nilutamide. 610 An improvement in survival was again observed (37.1 months vs. 29.8
months; P = .04) in favor of CAB.
Most randomized studies to date, however, have not shown an advantage of CAB, although some of these studies have been criticized for being too small, having
inadequate follow-up, or for using steroidal antiandrogens. The largest study to date (INT-105) was a study of 1387 men with M+ prostate cancer in which orchiectomy
was compared to orchiectomy plus flutamide.591 Interestingly, although there was a difference in the frequency with which patients achieved a serum PSA level of less
than 4.0 ng/mL [74% (95% CI, 69.4 to 78.2) vs. 61.5% (95% CI, 56.4 to 66.4); P <.001], there was no difference in overall survival between the two groups.
A metaanalysis was performed by the Prostate Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group, 611 which sought to reconcile all the studies of CAB. Overall, no benefit was
observed for CAB. Criticisms of this particular metaanalysis included the validity of combining studies in which steroidal and nonsteroidal antiandrogens were used
and the inclusion of trials that used LHRH analogues but did not use short-term antiandrogen therapy to block the flare. In a second metaanalysis, which excluded
studies published only as abstracts, those that did not present data on survival, and those that used short-term antiandrogens, a benefit was seen for CAB (RR, 0.78;

95% CI, 0.67 to 0.90).612 In a third metaanalysis, no benefits were seen at 2 years, although a modest benefit was observed at 5 years (hazard ratio, 0.861; 95% CI,
0.78 to 0.95).613 In summary, if a benefit exists for CAB in patients with M+ disease, it is extremely modest.
One caveat in drawing conclusions from these studies is that the majority of patients who were randomized were patients with M+ disease. Far fewer M0 patients were
included. Thus, while it is reasonable to conclude that the benefits of CAB in patients with M+ prostate cancer is minimal, at best, for patients with earlier disease, it is
less clear. In current practice, antiandrogens should be used at least for a short duration (1 to 2 months) when an LHRH analogue is used in patients with M+ disease.
In M+ patients, antiandrogens are of uncertain value when an orchiectomy is performed. However, for patients with earlier forms of disease, given the paucity of
relevant data, CAB is a reasonable option. Furthermore, it is important to note that the binding affinity of the currently used antiandrogens for the androgen receptor is
relatively low. As more potent or more specific antiandrogens are developed, these issues may need to be readdressed.
PERIPHERAL ANDROGEN BLOCKADE. The efficacy of antiandrogens as monotherapy may be less than that of chemical or surgical castration. Nonetheless, this therapy

has the potential appeal of sparing sexual function and reducing other treatment-related side effects, including hot flashes. The strategy of combining an antiandrogen
with a 5a-reductase inhibitor (which reduces the conversion of testosterone to DHT) has also been explored. In one study, the addition of a 5a-reductase inhibitor
(finasteride) added further antiandrogenic effect to that which already was achieved by an antiandrogen alone, as measured by a further reduction in serum PSA level
after the achievement of a nadir with flutamide. 601 Other studies have demonstrated PSA responses and the maintenance of potency in men treated with the
combination.600,614 In one randomized phase II study, there was no difference in the percentage of decrease in serum PSA level when finasteride plus flutamide was
compared to goserelin plus flutamide or to goserelin plus finasteride. 615 This approach, although appealing, should still be regarded as experimental. Larger studies
have not yet been completed, nor have phase III randomized studies yet been performed that compare this strategy to standard therapies, with survival as an end
point.
INTERMITTENT HORMONAL THERAPY. The scientific basis for intermittent hormonal therapy is that hormonally dependent clones of prostate cancer cells may potentially

prevent the growth of hormonally independent cells through the elaboration of growth inhibitory factors. Alternatively, the reintroduction of androgen after androgen
withdrawal may result in the generation of differentiated tumor cells. 616 It might be advantageous, therefore, to allow the reintroduction of androgen after androgen
withdrawal to delay the emergence of an androgen-independent phenotype. This has been substantiated in some tumor models (Shionogi and LNCaP) 617,618 but not
others (Dunning). 619 Practically speaking, this treatment involves continuing androgen ablation until adequate testosterone suppression is achieved and then
maintaining suppression for some time. This is followed by the discontinuance of therapy and then readministration of therapy at an arbitrary point determined by
serum PSA progression. A number of pilot studies testing the feasibility of this approach have been performed. 616,620,621 In general, these studies have suggested that
the quality of life of patients treated with this approach may be better and that patients can be maintained off of androgen deprivation therapy for significant periods.
Although this approach has wide appeal, it still should be regarded as investigational. A large, randomized intergroup study is now under way comparing continuous
hormonal therapy to intermittent hormonal therapy.
SIDE EFFECTS OF THERAPY. Although there is a growing appreciation of the breadth and significance of side effects of androgen ablation, comprehensive prospective

studies are lacking and, therefore, the frequency of side effects is difficult to quantify. The most frequently described side effects of testosterone suppression are loss
of libido, decreased sexual performance, and hot flashes. 613 It appears that the majority of patients are so affected. More subtle, nonquantifiable effects include fatigue
and mood changes.613 The fatigue that results is probably multifactorial. Decreases in serum testosterone level result in a reduction of muscle and red cell mass. In
addition, psychological effects, which result in fatigue, may be operable. Other observable side effects are decreased body hair, peripheral edema, and
gynecomastia.613 Peripheral edema appears to be more common with LHRH analogues, whereas gynecomastia is more frequent and more severely associated with
estrogens, with antiandrogen monotherapy, or with combined antiandrogen and 5a-reductase inhibitor use. The observed incidence of cardiovascular events,
including thromboembolic events, is relatively low with all agents and may well be the anticipated rate in the generally elderly population having an underlying
malignancy.613 The exception to this is estrogens, which reproducibly are associated with higher rates of thromboembolic and cardiovascular events, 613 although this
effect may depend on dose and route of administration. Although the incidence of osteopenia and vitamin D deficiency in middle-aged and elderly men has been
underappreciated, androgen ablative therapy is likely associated with further bone loss, 622,623 and 624 which may result in the greater potential for osteoporotic fractures.
Whether bisphosphonates or other agents will prevent these side effects or whether selective androgen receptor modulators will decrease the degree of bone loss is
under investigation.
Recurrent Disease after Primary Androgen Ablative Therapy
After androgen ablation, the serum PSA level almost always decreases and achieves a nadir value. This nadir is maintained for a variable period, reflecting
(presumably) the inherent composition of the tumor with regard to sensitivity to androgen ablation and the growth kinetics of the remaining androgen-independent cell
population. The earliest manifestation of relapse, in most circumstances, is a rise in serum PSA level. Although some patients will manifest a clinical relapse without a
rise in their serum PSA level, this is unusual and may be more frequently associated with prostate cancers that exhibit neuroendocrine differentiation. It is important to
note that although the serum PSA level in general correlates with tumor cell mass in all stages of disease, this relationship is altered after androgen deprivation
therapy. Serum PSA levels generally are lower per tumor cell volume as compared to pretherapy levels. The velocity of serum PSA increase at the time of relapse
after androgen therapy may or may not parallel the serum PSA velocity prior to androgen deprivation therapy, presumably reflecting the kinetics of the tumor in these
two different stages. In general, however, the serum PSA increase that is seen after androgen ablative therapy predates the onset of radiographic and clinical
evidence of disease progression by months, if not years. The PSA velocity in this setting is predictive of survival.
The mechanism by which prostate cancer cells grow independent of androgen is uncertain. Whether this represents clonal evolution of cells acquiring an
androgen-independent phenotype through mutations or epigenetic phenomena or through the growth of a preexistent cell type, such as a stem cell, the growth of
which was always androgen-independent is uncertain. Nonetheless, the designations assigned to this stage of disease, including androgen-independent,
androgen-refractory, hormone-independent , and hormone-refractory, have been used often and interchangeably. Until better genetic stratification of tumors in this
stage of disease occurs, there is little value in separating out by name these different categories.
SECONDARY HORMONAL THERAPY
Prostate cancer epithelial cells maintain their ability to grow in response to the administration of androgens even after primary androgen deprivation therapy stops
working. Two trials in which androgen was readministered to patients demonstrated more rapid disease progression. 625,626 Two studies have compared the outcomes
of patients in a retrospective fashion if primary androgen deprivation was maintained. In one study, discontinuance of androgen deprivation after failure was an
independent predictor of survival, 627 while it failed to be a factor in another study. 628 It is current practice to maintain androgen deprivation (castrate levels of
testosterone) even after primary androgen withdrawal stops working. Tumor progression after primary androgen ablation is poorly understood mechanistically and is
likely multifactorial. A small subset of patients who experience relapse actually have noncastrate levels of testosterone. Therefore, it is reasonable to check serum
testosterone levels at this point and to recommend surgical castration if castrate levels have not been achieved. It had not been until the advent and use of PSA
testing that there was some appreciation of the utility of secondary hormonal manipulations after primary androgen deprivation therapy had failed. The implication of
serum PSA decline with secondary therapy has not been studied but, in general, for the sake of consistency, a 50% decline in serum PSA level in this setting has
been considered a benchmark for response.
Antiandrogen Withdrawal Responses
One of the most interesting observations made in the last decade was the recognition that the withdrawal of antiandrogen therapy (while maintaining testosterone
suppression) may be associated with biochemical (PSA) and, in some cases, symptomatic and objective responses. 629 Such responses were described initially in the
context of withdrawal of flutamide 630,631 and 632 but have since been described on withdrawal of bicalutamide 633,634 and nilutamide.635,636 Withdrawal responses occur in
approximately 25% of patients (range, 15% to 50%). The likelihood of response may correlate with the duration of exposure to the antiandrogen. Other factors such as
the type of initial therapy used, whether the antiandrogen was used as part of CAB or was added at the time of disease progression, and other clinical variables have
not proven to be predictive of an antiandrogen withdrawal response. Antiandrogen responses generally are observed within a few weeks after withdrawal of the
antiandrogen. Responses that occur after withdrawal of bicalutamide may occur later (i.e., up to 8 weeks), perhaps because of this agent's longer serum half-life. 633
The typical duration of antiandrogen withdrawal response is 3 to 4 months, although withdrawal responses may last several years. The mechanism of antiandrogen
withdrawal has not yet been defined; however, it is likely that at least one mechanism is the emergence of prostate cancer cells with mutated androgen receptors that
respond to an antiandrogen as an agonist rather than an antagonist. 637,638,639,640 and 641 In fact, when studies have been performed looking for mutated androgen
receptors, they are almost exclusively detected in the context of treatment with CAB. Because of the potential benefit of discontinuance of the antiandrogen and the
fact that this maneuver is nontoxic and usually is required for enrollment into most clinical trials, it is very reasonable to initiate antiandrogen withdrawal as the first

approach for patients whose disease is progressing while they are being treated with antiandrogen therapy. Whether subsequent reintroduction of the same
antiandrogen is useful has not been studied.
As mentioned, secondary hormonal maneuvers will elicit responses in patients whose tumors are progressing while they are on primary androgen ablative therapy.
The mechanism of these responses probably is multifactorial and likely includes (1) a further reduction in testosterone in those patients who have not achieved a
complete reduction of testosterone, (2) blockade of the effect of residual serum androgens through binding of the androgen receptor, (3) reduction in adrenal
androgen production, and (4) binding of agents to other nuclear receptors, such as the estrogen receptor, in the prostate cancer cell.
Antiandrogens
Although the nonsteroidal antiandrogens bind the androgen receptor, it is interesting that non–cross-resistance exists between these agents. Scher et al. 642 treated 51
patients who had tumor progression after primary androgen ablative therapy with bicalutamide (200 mg/d). Twelve (24%) patients responded. More frequent
responses (in 10 of 26 patients, or 38%) were seen in patients previously treated with flutamide. In another study, Joyce et al. 643 treated 31 patients with bicalutamide,
150 mg/d. Seven patients responded, six of whom had received prior flutamide. Interestingly, the two most impressive responses were those patients who had
experienced a flutamide withdrawal response. Responses to nilutamide after flutamide have also been noted. 644 However, no reports of flutamide activity after
bicalutamide treatment have been published.
Adrenal Androgen Inhibitors
The rationale behind using adrenal androgen inhibitors is that approximately 5% to 10% of circulating androgen is derived from the adrenal gland and that a higher
proportion of androgen within prostate cancer cells may be of adrenal origin. The two most commonly used agents in this setting are aminoglutethimide and
ketoconazole, both of which have frequently been used in conjunction with corticosteroids. Therefore, it is difficult to ascertain the true activity of aminoglutethimide
and ketoconazole as single agents, as corticosteroids have activity in this disease. Ketoconazole, which inhibits cytochrome P-450 and suppresses both testicular and
adrenal androgen production, has significant activity. In one study of men treated with ketoconazole (1200 mg/d) plus hydrocortisone, 30 of 48 patients experienced a
decline in serum PSA of greater than 50%. 645 The median duration of response was 3.5 months. Ketoconazole is active at lower doses (i.e., 200 mg t.i.d.) and less
toxic, though the comparative efficacy of low versus higher doses has not been studied. The need to combine ketoconazole with a corticosteroid particularly at the
lower dose is uncertain. Because ketoconazole requires an acidic stomach pH for optimal absorption, patients are instructed not to take antacids, H 2 blockers, or
proton pump inhibitors. The drug should be ingested between meals. Ketoconazole causes nausea and vomiting in 15% of patients, which necessitates
discontinuance in some cases. In addition, liver function test abnormalities are seen and, therefore, liver function should be monitored.
Glucocorticoids
Glucocorticoids also have significant activity in prostate cancer. Kelly et al. 646 treated 30 men with hormone-refractory prostate cancer with hydrocortisone, 40 mg/d,
and observed a response rate of 20%. Tannock et al. 647 compared prednisone, 10 mg/d, to prednisone plus mitoxantrone. Twenty-two percent of patients treated with
glucocorticoids alone responded. This was also seen in a CALGB study comparing hydrocortisone, 40 mg/d, to hydrocortisone plus mitoxantrone. 648 Twenty-two
percent of patients responded (PSA decline) to hydrocortisone alone. In another study, 16% of 230 patients receiving hydrocortisone responded, as assessed by
declines in serum PSA level. 649
Megestrol acetate has very modest activity in prostate cancer. Dawson et al. 650 found that, in a randomized study of 160 mg versus 640 mg of megestrol acetate, 12%
of patients responded (PSA decline). Because megestrol acetate, which is more commonly used to treat anorexia or hot flashes, may cause a clinical flare in disease,
patients in whom this agent is used should be monitored closely.
Estrogens
DES has activity as secondary therapy in patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer. In one study, 9 of 21 (43%) patients responded by PSA criteria. 651
Interestingly, PC-SPES, a nutritional supplement consisting of eight different herbs, clearly has activity in prostate cancer. DiPaola et al. 652 demonstrated that this
concoction had estrogenic activity in vitro and serum PSA–lowering activity in men with prostate cancer. It was associated with estrogen-like side effects, including
gynecomastia. Interestingly, however, Kameda et al. 653 treated with PC-SPES 34 patients with androgen-independent prostate cancer; all patients had rising serum
PSA levels after androgen deprivation and had undergone antiandrogen withdrawal. Fifty-three percent of the patients had a greater than 50% decline in PSA level.
Whether the activity of PC-SPES in patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer is strictly through its estrogenic properties or is modulated by other mechanisms
remains to be determined.
MEASURING RESPONSE
One of the most difficult issues in assessing the potential benefits of different forms of therapy in hormone-refractory prostate cancer is the difficulty in measuring
response. Few patients have measurable disease, as most patients have osteoblastic bone metastases in which changes are difficult to quantify. Many studies have
suggested that a decline in serum PSA level is of biologic importance and clinical significance. Myers et al. 654 demonstrated that a decline in PSA of 50% or greater
was associated with prolonged survival in patients treated with suramin. Similarly, an analysis of 110 patients treated at MSKCC with a variety of agents demonstrated
that a 50% or greater decline in PSA level was associated with a 21-month median survival, as compared to an 8-month median survival in those without such
declines. 655 In the CALGB study comparing hydrocortisone to hydrocortisone plus mitoxantrone, patients who achieved a greater than 50% decline in PSA level
survived longer than those who did not. 648 A 75% decrease in PSA level was not associated with better survival than was a 50% decline. In this study, minor (<50%)
declines in PSA level were not associated with altered survival.
These studies formed the foundation for the consensus report of the PSA working group in assessing clinical trials in hormone-refractory prostate cancer. 656 The
benchmark was set at a minimum 50% decline in PSA level. Although this is a useful benchmark, it is important to note that some potentially effective agents may not
decrease PSA. It also is important to note that some agents have direct effects on PSA production such that it may be difficult to assess their activity through serum
PSA changes alone.
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
The main utility of prognostic factors in patients with advanced cancers is that they help to stratify patients into groups entering into clinical trials. In addition, use of
prognostic factors may give some insight into predictive factors for response. Although many studies have addressed this issue, few have been useful. In a recent
review,657 nine studies contained sufficient numbers of patients to perform multivariate analysis. 658,659,660,661,662,663,664 and 665 The most reproducibly important factors that
emerged were performance status and hemoglobin level. Other factors of importance appeared to be serum levels of lactate dehydrogenase, alkaline phosphatase,
and acid phosphatase.
CHEMOTHERAPY
The traditional view of cytotoxic chemotherapy for prostate cancer is that it had little or no impact on the natural history of the disease. In 1985, Eisenberger et al. 666
reviewed 17 randomized clinical trials that involved 1464 patients. The complete and partial response rate in these trials was 4.5%. In a review of 26 chemotherapy
trials performed between 1987 and 1991, the overall response rate was 8.7%. 667 Over the last 5 to 10 years, however, increasing evidence of clinical efficacy of
chemotherapy in prostate cancer has emerged. Nonetheless, no trial to date has demonstrated a survival benefit for patients treated with chemotherapy for prostate
cancer. The perception of increased efficacy of chemotherapy is the result of several factors. Increased use of the serum PSA level in monitoring activity in clinical
trials has suggested that some of the older drugs that previously were believed to be inactive are, in fact, active in this disease. Patients are being placed on clinical
trials at an earlier stage because of the recognition that elevations in serum PSA level precede clinical relapse. Furthermore, newer drug combinations have been
developed that have greater activity and, finally, better supportive measures, including antiemetics and growth factor support, have allowed clinicians to treat a
relatively elderly population in a safer fashion.
Two recently published phase III trials demonstrated the utility of mitoxantrone plus a corticosteroid in hormone-refractory prostate cancer. The first study compared

prednisone (10 mg/d) to prednisone (10 mg/d) plus mitoxantrone (12 mg IV every 3 weeks). 647 One hundred and sixty-one patients with hormone-refractory prostate
cancer and pain requiring analgesics were entered into the trial. The primary end point in this trial was a significant impact on pain as measured by a drop of 2 points
on a 6-point pain scale. Twenty-three (29%) of 80 patients who received mitoxantrone plus prednisone, as compared to 10 (12%) of 81 patients who received
prednisone alone, achieved this palliative response ( P = .01). In addition, the duration of the palliation was longer for those patients who received mitoxantrone plus
prednisone (median duration, 43 weeks vs. 18 weeks; P <.0001). In another study, hydrocortisone given as a split dose of 30 mg in the morning and 10 mg in the
evening was compared to hydrocortisone plus mitoxantrone, 14 mg/m 2 given every 3 weeks. 648 Two hundred and forty-two patients with metastatic hormone-refractory
prostate cancer were randomized in this trial. The primary end point for this study was an improvement in survival with mitoxantrone plus hydrocortisone as compared
to hydrocortisone alone. No difference in survival was observed (12.6 months vs. 12.3 months). More patients responded (as measured by a greater than 50% decline
in PSA level) with mitoxantrone plus hydrocortisone than with hydrocortisone alone (38% vs. 22%; P = .008). Pain responses were more frequent in the combination
arm. These two studies led to U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval of mitoxantrone for the treatment of hormone-refractory prostate cancer.
Estramustine-Based Chemotherapy
Estramustine is a conjugate of estrogen mustard and estradiol. Originally synthesized to permit the selective delivery of an alkylating agent into an estrogen
receptor–positive cancer cell, more recent studies have shown that estramustine possesses little alkylating activity and may work by inhibiting mitosis through binding
microtubular proteins in the nuclear matrix. Estramustine preferentially enters cells that possess the estramustine-binding protein, a protein in high concentration in
prostatic epithelial cells. As a single agent, estramustine has modest activity. Its activity is related in part to its estrogenic properties but, in addition, perhaps to its
microtubular inhibitory properties. Eighteen phase II trials involving 634 patients with hormone-refractory disease demonstrated an objective response rate to
estramustine of 19%.668
When it was realized that estramustine had microtubular inhibitory properties, in vitro studies were performed that demonstrated synergy of this drug with other agents
involved in microtubular assembly. Three trials were conducted involving estramustine and vinblastine. 669,670 and 671 The doses chosen in these studies generally were
estramustine, 10 mg/kg/d, along with weekly vinblastine, 4 mg/m 2. Of 92 patients entered into these three phase II studies, PSA responses were observed in 44 of 88
patients (50%), and objective responses were seen in 6 of 25 patients (24%) with measurable disease. The value of adding estramustine to vinblastine was
questioned in a randomized study in which 201 patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer were randomized to either vinblastine alone, 4 mg/m 2/wk, or
vinblastine plus estramustine, 600 mg/m 2/d.672 Although there was a difference in median survival between the two groups—11.9 months for the combination versus
9.2 months for vinblastine alone—this did not reach statistical significance ( P = .08). Patients who were treated with the combination had a longer progression-free
survival (3.7 months vs. 2.2 months; P<.001). PSA responses were more frequent in the combination arm (25.2% vs. 3.2%; P <.0001). Interestingly, more frequent
gastrointestinal toxicity but less frequent granulocytopenia was seen in the estramustine arm. This study supported the concept that estramustine added activity to
vinblastine.
Other estramustine combinations have been investigated. The combination of estramustine and etoposide also showed in vitro synergy. Four trials have been
conducted with this combination, enrolling a total of 205 patients. 664,673,674 and 675 PSA responses were seen in 106 of 190 patients (56%), and measurable responses
were noted in 40 of 82 patients (49%). Estramustine has been combined with vinorelbine in three trials. 676,677 and 678 One of seven patients with measurable disease
responded, and 21 of 47 patients (45%) had a PSA response. Another strategy has been to combine estramustine with the taxanes. Interestingly, one small study of
23 patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer examined the activity of taxol given as a 24-hour constant infusion at a dose of 135 to 170 mg/m 2.679 In that study,
one patient had a partial response, but no patient had a decline in serum PSA level of greater than 50%. In the one published study in which estramustine was
combined with paclitaxel, 4 of 9 patients (44%) had a measurable response, and 17 of 32 (53%) had a PSA response. 680 In a parallel strategy, docetaxel was
combined with estramustine. Picus and Schultz 681 demonstrated that docetaxel, when given alone, was active in prostate cancer. In this study, 16 of 35 patients (46%)
responded to docetaxel (75 mg/m 2) given every 3 weeks. Petrylak et al. 682 treated 34 patients with estramustine, 280 mg t.i.d., plus docetaxel, 40 to 80 mg/m 2 every 21
days. Twenty of 34 patients (59%) had more than a 50% decline in PSA level. Kreis et al. 683 observed that 14 of 17 patients (82%) treated with estramustine, 14
mg/kg, and docetaxel, 40 to 80 mg/m2, responded. The dose-limiting toxicity was grade IV leukopenia and grade III fatigue and diarrhea. CALGB completed a phase II
study of estramustine and docetaxel in 40 patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer. 684 Eleven of nineteen men (58%) who were evaluable for response had a
PSA response. Because of the significant activity seen with estramustine plus docetaxel, a comparative study is now under way comparing docetaxel plus
estramustine to mitoxantrone plus prednisone.
Three-drug regimens have emerged, including estramustine, etoposide, and paclitaxel. In a study of 40 patients, 10 of 22 patients (45%) with measurable disease
responded, and 26 of 40 patients (65%) had a PSA response. 663 In another study, estramustine, etoposide, and vinorelbine were used. 685 Two of three patients with
measurable disease responded, and 14 of 25 patients (56%) had a PSA response. Kelly et al. 686 treated 56 patients with a combination of carboplatin (AUC 6), taxol
(60 to 100 mg/m2/wk), and estramustine (10 mg/m2 in three divided doses). A 50% PSA decline was seen in 63% of patients (95% CI, 50% to 76%). Unfortunately, the
incidence of deep venous thrombosis reported in this study was 25%.
Clearly, these three-drug combinations are active. Some questions still remain about estramustine-based regimens. First and foremost, are they active enough to
prolong survival? Second, what is the contribution of estramustine to these combinations and what is the optimal dosing of estramustine? What are the optimal doses
and schedules of the taxanes, and what are the comparative values of three-drug versus two-drug combinations? Finally, what are the details of their activity in early
disease?
Other Agents
A number of other drugs are active in patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer, including cyclophosphamide. Raghaven et al. 687 treated 30 patients with
hormone-refractory prostate cancer with oral cyclophosphamide at a dose 100 mg/m 2 for 14 days. Eighteen (60%) had significant improvement in symptoms, whereas
6 (20%) had objective responses.
Doxorubicin has been used in the context of hormone-refractory prostate cancer as well. No study has looked at a single-agent doxorubicin regimen in the post-PSA
era. However, this drug has been combined with other agents. A popular regimen was the combination of 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and mitomycin C. In one trial,
48% of 62 patients (i.e., 30 patients) responded. 688 However, in two larger, multicenter studies, response rates were much lower. 689,690 Another combination that has
been tried is doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide. In one study, 5 of 15 patients (33%) with measurable disease had a response, and 46% of patients enrolled had a
greater than 50% decline in PSA levels. 691
A regimen popularized at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center has been a combination of doxorubicin and ketoconazole. In one study, 39 patients were treated with
weekly doxorubicin (20 mg/m2) and daily ketoconazole (1200 mg/d). 692 A PSA decline of greater than 50% was seen in 21 of 38 patients (55%). Seven of twelve
patients had a measurable partial response. This regimen has been used as an alternating regimen with estramustine and vinblastine. In one study at the M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center of 46 patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer, 31 patients (67%) had a greater than 50% decline in PSA level, and 12 of 16 patients
(75%) had a measurable response. 693
PALLIATION
Bisphosphonates
Prostate cancer has a strong propensity to spread to bone. Osteoblastic metastases are seen most commonly, principally in the axial structures (pelvis, vertebral
bodies) but also in the appendicular structures (long bones, ribs, etc.). This propensity has been a subject of research for many years. One explanation was that tumor
cells gained access to vertebral and pelvic bones by retrograde flow through Batson's plexus of paravertebral veins. Other explanations include a similarity between
the growth factor requirements that support prostate cancer cell growth and osteoblast growth. Some such factors include osteopontin, osteonectin, insulin-like growth
factor (IGF), fibroblast growth factor, transforming growth factor-b, and endothelin-1 (ET-1). 694 Although prostate cancer is primarily an osteoblastic disease, as
evidenced by the preponderance of sclerotic bone lesions, it is not uncommon to see mixed blastic and lytic disease. The extent of bone turnover of metastatic bone
sites, as measured by a variety of parameters, is high. Bone resorption is mediated through various factors via osteoclastic activity. The value of bisphosphonates in
reducing biochemical and clinical parameters of prostate cancer–mediated bone disease is uncertain. Several large, multiinstitutional, randomized trials have now
been completed that should clarify these issues. Bisphosphonates have also been used in the context of preventing osteoporosis in patients undergoing androgen

deprivation therapy. The value in this setting also remains uncertain, although randomized studies should answer this question.
Radiopharmaceuticals
Radiopharmaceuticals in use are of two general types. The first type are bone-seeking radioisotopes. Strontium 89 is the only approved agent of this type. In a
randomized study, strontium 89 was shown to be superior to placebo with respect to bone pain palliation. 695 Pain relief usually occurs within a few weeks after
treatment, although 15% of patients will experience a flare in pain within the first 2 weeks. Strontium 89 requires redosing every 3 months. It is generally well
tolerated, although progressive bone marrow suppression may occur with repeat dosing. The mechanism of its activity is uncertain, but it is rare to see pain relief
coupled with a decline in serum PSA level.
Two trials have been completed that test the value of adding strontium 89 at the time of radiation therapy for symptomatic bone pain relief. In one study, 305 patients
with symptomatic bone pain were randomized, after receiving radiation therapy, to receive strontium 89 or hemibody radiation. 696 Twelve weeks after treatment, there
was no difference in the degree of improvement in bone pain. However, fewer patients developed new painful areas when strontium 89 was used (47% vs. 65%;
P<.01). In another trial, patients who had undergone palliative radiation therapy to a bone lesion were randomized to either strontium 89 therapy or no further
therapy. 697 There was no difference in overall survival. However, analgesic consumption was reduced when strontium 89 was used. Fewer patients had new painful
lesions, and the interval before additional radiation therapy was needed was longer for those receiving strontium 89.
The second general type of radiopharmaceutical in clinical use is a radioisotope coupled to a bisphosphonate. For these agents, homing to bone is based on the
ability of bisphosphonate to adhere to the surface of bone. The currently approved agent in this class is samarium 153 ETDMP (ethylenediaminetetramethylene
phosphonate) which, in addition to emitting short-rangeb-particles, is a g-particle emitter as well. Because of this, imaging is possible.

FUTURE THERAPIES: NOVEL TARGETS
GROWTH FACTOR AND GROWTH FACTOR RECEPTORS AS TARGETS
Some of the most promising targets for cancer therapy are growth factors and growth factor (tyrosine kinase) receptors. Some of the relevant pathways include such
growth factor and receptor pathways as epidermal growth factor (EGF), transforming growth factor-b, IGF-1 and IGF-2, and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). For
several reasons, these growth factors and their tyrosine kinase receptors can be viewed as potential targets in prostate cancer. First, epidemiologic studies suggest
that growth factor levels may be involved in either the development or progression of prostate cancer (e.g., IGF-1). 698 Second, some of these growth factors or
receptors are dysregulated in different stages of prostate cancer. 699,700 Third, therapeutics such as small molecules and antibodies have been developed against
these targets. Finally, there is evidence that targeting these pathways will be effective in cancer therapy. Specifically, an inhibitor of the Ab1 tyrosine kinase used for
the treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia has been shown to be effective. Furthermore, Herceptin, an antibody directed against Her-2/neu, is an effective
therapeutic agent when coupled with chemotherapy in the treatment of breast cancer. 701
A number of growth factors and receptors are potential targets in prostate cancer, as altered expression of growth factor or receptor can be demonstrated particularly
in the context of hormone-refractory prostate cancer. Her-2/neu overexpression can be demonstrated in prostate cancers. 702,703 and 704 Overexpression of Her-2/neu
may be a mechanism of androgen-independent growth, perhaps through activation of the androgen receptor pathway. 705 Clinical trials involving Herceptin alone and
coupled with chemotherapeutic agents currently are under way. The EGF family of receptors is present in normal and malignant prostate epithelium. 706 EGF
receptors, when activated by EGF or TGF-a, can stimulate prostate epithelial cell growth. Mechanistically, this may occur through activation of the androgen receptor
pathway, suppression of p27, or activation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase. The EGF pathway is potentially a good target for prostate cancer. Antibodies
directed against the receptor (C225), as well as small-molecule inhibitors, have been developed and are in clinical trials.
PDGF has been shown to regulate prostate epithelial stromal interactions in a paracrine fashion. 707 The receptor may be overexpressed in metastatic,
hormone-refractory disease. 708 Small-molecule inhibitors have been developed, but clinical trials have not yet been reported.
Nerve growth factor (NGF) is highly concentrated in the prostate. 709 NGF and a related family of peptides, the neurotrophins, influence proliferation, differentiation,
and survival of epithelial cells through activation of trk receptors. Trk receptors are expressed in most malignant prostate epithelial tumors. 710 Trk receptor antagonists
have been developed and are in clinical trials.
IGF-1 levels may be related to prostate cancer development and progression. In vitro, IGF-1 is mitogenic to prostate cancer cell lines. 711 Although the development of
specific IGF-1 receptor inhibitors is in progress, none are in clinical testing. Somatostatin analogues have been used because of their ability to lower serum IGF-1
levels. Thus far, no activity has been noted.
ET-1, a potent vasoconstrictor and mitogen for malignant epithelial cells, is overexpressed in the prostatic epithelium. 712 Receptors for ET-1 are expressed in the
stroma (ET-B) and epithelium (ET-A). ET-1 plasma levels are higher in patients with advanced disease as compared to those with localized disease or normal
controls. 713 An ET-A receptor antagonist, ABT-627, has recently undergone clinical testing and has shown promising results with respect to pain control and disease
stabilization.
SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION PATHWAYS
The downstream target pathways of the cell surface growth factor receptors are the MAP kinase, phosphoinositide 3 (PI3) kinase, and phospholipase C pathways.
The MAP kinase cascade involves a series of serine threonine and tyrosine kinases that are activated by cell surface signals. EGF, NGF, PDGF, and Her-2/neu all
activate MAP kinases and, thus, this pathway may be a relevant target. Currently, inhibitors of MAP kinase are being developed.
The PI3-kinase pathway also is activated by cell surface receptors and may turn out to be a highly relevant pathway in prostate cancer. PTEN, a dual-specificity
phosphatase, has been demonstrated to have tumor suppressor activity. 714 In the case of prostate cancer, PTEN is frequently mutated. 715 In addition, PTEN
expression appears to correlate with tumor aggressiveness. 716 PTEN normally dephosphorylates lipid substrates of PI3-kinase, including Akt. It appears that Akt is
up-regulated in PTEN-mutated cells. Akt, in turn, has the capability of activating several pathways that control proliferation and cell survival. Components of this
pathway are, therefore, potentially critical targets in the treatment of prostate cancer. Inhibitors of PI3-kinase and Akt are in development, though they are not yet in
clinical trials.
DIFFERENTIATION THERAPY
Differentiation therapy refers to a form of treatment that causes cancer cells to differentiate into a less malignant phenotype or to undergo programmed cell death.
This has been demonstrated to be an effective modality for the treatment of promyelocytic leukemia. Several agents are currently in clinical trials in prostate cancer,
including phenylacetate and phenylbutyrate and several nuclear receptor agonists, including vitamin D analogues, retinoic acid analogues, and peroxisome
proliferator–activated receptor gamma (PPARg) analogues.
Phenylacetate and phenylbutyrate cause growth arrest and differentiation of prostate cancer cells in culture. 717 These agents have a range of effects including histone
acetylation, inhibition of isoprenylation, glutamine depletion, alterations in lipid metabolism, and DNA methylation. Both agents have shown activity in early clinical
trials in prostate cancer patients.
The retinoids are compounds that bind to two classes of nuclear receptors, the retinoic acid receptors and the retinoid X receptors. The retinoids cause differentiation
of epithelial cells. In vitro, the activity of different retinoids is variable, ranging from growth inhibition to growth stimulation. Thus far, clinical trials with retinoids in
prostate have been disappointing. The drug liarazole, which has a range of activities including inhibition of retinoid acid metabolism, has shown activity in prostate
cancer. 718 In one phase III study comparing liarazole to cyproterone acetate, 20% of patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer responded to liarazole. 719
Interest in vitamin D and its analogues is based on epidemiologic data linking low levels of vitamin D and vitamin D receptor polymorphisms to prostate cancer

risk,720,721 as well as in vitro data demonstrating a growth-inhibitory effect of these compounds. Noncalcemic vitamin D analogues are now in clinical trials.
PPARg, a receptor involved in fat cell differentiation, is also present in epithelial cells. 722 Agonists of PPARg have a growth-inhibitory effect on prostatic cancer cells in
vitro.723 Promising results have been achieved with troglitazone in very early studies.
ANTIMETASTATIC THERAPY
The process of metastasis is complex and involves multiple steps. A fundamental step in this process is degradation of the extracellular matrix, which involves
enzymes known as matrix metalloproteinase. One agent, Marimastat, a selective but non-specific matrix metalloprotease inhibitor, has been tested in patients with
prostate cancer. 724 The drug is well tolerated and now is the subject of a prospective, randomized, controlled trial.
IMMUNOTHERAPY
Several immunotherapeutic approaches are currently being investigated in patients with prostate cancer. One such regimen is a coupled antibody approach, in which
antibodies are directed against tumor-specific antigens coupled to a toxin or radioisotope. Currently in clinical trials is an antibody directed against PSMA coupled to
an a-particle emitter. Another approach is vaccination with antigens enriched on tumor cells, such as specific complex carbohydrate moieties. Still another approach
involves mucin 1 (MUC1), an epithelial mucin glycoprotein vaccination with an adjuvant. Incorporating the PSA gene into a herpesvirus vector is another
immunotherapeutic modality. A novel approach employs dendritic cells (antigen-presenting cells) loaded with a specific tumor antigen such as PSA, PSMA, or acid
phosphatase. The loaded dendritic cells are infused into the patient in an effort to stimulate an immune response. Several clinical trials of this nature are in progress.
One can also augment the production of specific cytokines that stimulate the immune system. One popular approach has been the use of granulocyte-megakaryocyte
colony-stimulating factor administered exogenously or delivered in autologous or allogeneic prostate cancer cells. Clinical trials incorporating these different
approaches are currently being conducted.
ANGIOGENIC APPROACHES
Angiogenesis is a complex, multistep process that is fundamental to tumor growth and metastasis. This process appears to be important in the growth and
progression of localized prostate cancer, as evidenced by a correlation between microvessel density and prognosis in this disease. Whether angiogenesis is
important in the establishment of bone metastasis in prostate cancer is uncertain. One of the important mediators of angiogenesis is vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF). A number of strategies have been developed and directed at VEGF, including VEGF antibodies and small-molecule inhibitors of the VEGF receptors (Flk and
KDR). These agents are in clinical trials currently.
A number of additional agents with in vitro antiangiogenic properties have been developed (TNP-470, endostatin, etc.) and also are in clinical trials.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Cancer statistics, 1999. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:8.
2. Brooks JD, Chao WM, Kerr J. Male pelvic anatomy reconstructed from the visible human data set. J Urol 1998;159:868.
3. Di Lollo S, Menchi I, Brizzi E, et al. The morphology of the prostatic capsule with particular regard to the posterosuperior region: an anatomical and clinical problem. Surg Radiol Anat
1997;19:143.
4. Sattar AA, Noel JC, Vanderhaeghen JJ, Schulman CC, Wespes E. Prostate capsule: computerized morphometric analysis of its components. Urology 1995;46:178.
5. Steiner MS. The puboprostatic ligament and the male urethral suspensory mechanism: an anatomic study. Urology 1994;44:530.
6. Oelrich TM. The urethral sphincter muscle in the male. Am J Anat 1980;158:229.
7. Light JK, Rapoll E, Wheeler TM. The striated urethral sphincter: muscle fibre types and distribution in the prostatic capsule. Br J Urol 1997;79:539.
8. Burnett AL, Mostwin JL. In situ anatomical study of the male urethral sphincteric complex: relevance to continence preservation following major pelvic surgery. J Urol 1998;160:1301.
9. Myers RP, Goellner JR, Cahill DR. Prostate shape, external striated urethral sphincter and radical prostatectomy: the apical dissection. J Urol 1987;138:543.
10. Myers RP. Male urethral sphincteric anatomy and radical prostatectomy. Urol Clin North Am 1991;18:211.
11. Myers RP. Anatomical variation of the superficial preprostatic veins with respect to radical retropubic prostatectomy. J Urol 1991;145:992.
12. Elbadawi A, Mathews R, Light JK, Wheeler TM. I mmunohistochemical and ultrastructural study of rhabdosphincter component of the prostatic capsule. J Urol 1997;158:1819.
13. Hollabaugh RS Jr, Dmochowski RR, Steiner MS. Neuroanatomy of the male rhabdosphincter. Urology 1997;49:426.
14. Shafik A, Doss S. Surgical anatomy of the somatic terminal innervation to the anal and urethral sphincters: role in anal and urethral surgery. J Urol 1999;161:85.
15. Strasser H, Klima G, Poisel S, Horninger W, Bartsch G. Anatomy and innervation of the rhabdosphincter of the male urethra. Prostate 1996;28:24.
16. Vaalasti A, Hervonen A. Autonomic innervation of the human prostate. Invest Urol 1980;17:293.
17. Zvara P, Carrier S, Kour NW, Tanagho EA. The detailed neuroanatomy of the human striated urethral sphincter. Br J Urol 1994;74:182.
18. McNeal JE. The prostate and prostatic urethra: a morphologic synthesis. J Urol 1972;107:1008.
19. Cotran RS, Kumar V, Robbins SL. Robbins pathologic basis of disease, 5th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1994:1023.
20. Mostofi FK, Davis CJ Jr, Sesterhenn IA. Pathology of carcinoma of the prostate. Cancer 1992;70:235.
21. Wojno KJ, Epstein JI. The utility of basal cell-specific anti-cytokeratin antibody (34 beta E12) in the diagnosis of prostate cancer. A review of 228 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1995;19:251.
22. McNeal JE. Origin and development of carcinoma in the prostate. Cancer 1969;23:24.
23. Gleason DF, Mellinger GT. Prediction of prognosis for prostatic adenocarcinoma by combined histological grading and clinical staging. J Urol 1974;111:58.
24. Gleason DF. Histologic grading of prostate cancer: a perspective. Hum Pathol 1992;23:273.
25. McNeal JE, Reese JH, Redwine EA, Freiha FS, Stamey TA. Cribriform adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Cancer 1986;58:1714.
26. McNeal JE, Alroy J, Villers A, et al. Mucinous differentiation in prostatic adenocarcinoma. Hum Pathol 1991;22:979.
27. Bostwick DG, Kindrachuk RW, Rouse RV. Prostatic adenocarcinoma with endometrioid features. Clinical, pathologic, and ultrastructural findings. Am J Surg Pathol 1985;9:595.
28. Ro JY, Ayala AG, Wishnow KI, Ordonez NG. Prostatic duct adenocarcinoma with endometrioid features: immunohistochemical and electron microscopic study. Semin Diagn Pathol 1988;5:301.
29. Ro JY, Grignon DJ, Ayala AG, et al. Mucinous adenocarcinoma of the prostate: histochemical and immunohistochemical studies. Hum Pathol 1990;21:593.
30. Torbenson M, Dhir R, Nangia A, Becich MJ, Kapadia SB. Prostatic carcinoma with signet ring cells: a clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical analysis of 12 cases, with review of the
literature. Mod Pathol 1998;11:552.
31. Saito S, Iwaki H. Mucin-producing carcinoma of the prostate: review of 88 cases. Urology 1999;54:141.
32. Tannenbaum M. Urologic pathology: the prostate. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1977:419.
33. Grignon DJ, Ro JY, Ordonez NG, Ayala AG, Cleary KR. Basal cell hyperplasia, adenoid basal cell tumor, and adenoid cystic carcinoma of the prostate gland: an immunohistochemical study.
Hum Pathol 1988;19:1425.
34. Young RH, Frierson HF Jr, Mills SE, et al. Adenoid cystic-like tumor of the prostate gland. A report of two cases and review of the literature on “adenoid cystic carcinoma” of the prostate. Am J
Clin Pathol 1988;89:49.
35. Mott LJ. Squamous cell carcinoma of the prostate: report of 2 cases and review of the literature. J Urol 1979;121:833.
36. Little NA, Wiener JS, Walther PJ, Paulson DF, Anderson EE. Squamous cell carcinoma of the prostate: 2 cases of a rare malignancy and review of the literature. J Urol 1993;149:137.
37. Okamoto T, Ogiu K, Sato M, et al. Primary squamous cell carcinoma of the prostate: a case report. Hinyokika Kiyo 1996;42:67.
38. Corder MP, Cicmil GA. Effective treatment of metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the prostate with Adriamycin. J Urol 1976;115:222.
39. Sarma DP, Weilbaecher TG, Moon TD. Squamous cell carcinoma of prostate. Urology 1991;37:260.
40. Reese JH, Freiha FS, Gelb AB, Lum BL, Torti FM. Transitional cell carcinoma of the prostate in patients undergoing radical cystoprostatectomy. J Urol 1992;147:92.
41. Alexander SJ, Lee SS, Bekhrad A. Transitional cell carcinoma of the prostate: response to treatment with cisplatinum and cyclophosphamide. J Urol 1984;131:975.
42. Matzkin H, Braf Z. Paraneoplastic syndromes associated with prostatic carcinoma. J Urol 1987;138:1129.
43. Tetu B, Ro JY, Ayala AG, et al. Small cell carcinoma of prostate associated with myasthenic (Eaton-Lambert) syndrome. Urology 1989;33:148.
44. Efros MD, Fischer J, Mallouh C, Choudhury M, Georgsson S. Unusual primary prostatic malignancies. Urology 1992;39:407.
45. Bostwick DG. Pathology of the prostate. In: Contemporary issues in surgical pathology, vol 15. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1990:250.
46. Schild HH, Schweden FJ, Lang EK. Computed tomography in urology. Stuttgart: Thieme Medical Publishers, 1992:381.
47. Agrons GA, Wagner BJ, Lonergan GJ, Dickey GE, Kaufman MS. From the archives of the AFIP. Genitourinary rhabdomyosarcoma in children: radiologic-pathologic correlation. Radiographics
1997;17:919.
48. Limon J, Dal Cin P, Sandberg AA. Cytogenetic findings in a primary leiomyosarcoma of the prostate. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1986;22:159.
49. Claikens B, Oyen R, Goethuys H, Boogaerts M, Baert AL. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the prostate in a young male. Eur Radiol 1997;7:238.
50. Narayan P. Neoplasms of the prostate gland. In: Tanagho EA, McAninch JW, eds. Smith's general urology, 14th ed. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1995:392.
51. Epstein JI. Nonpalpable preneoplastic lesions of the prostate. In: Raghavan D, Scher HI, Leibel SA, Lang P, eds. Principles and practice of genitourinary oncology. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1997:387.
52. Qian J, Wollan P, Bostwick DG. The extent and multicentricity of high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia in clinically localized prostatic adenocarcinoma. Hum Pathol 1997;28:143.
53. de la Torre M, Haggman M, Brandstedt S, Busch C. Prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and invasive carcinoma in total prostatectomy specimens: distribution, volumes and DNA ploidy. Br J Urol
1993;72:207.
54. Erbersdobler A, Gurses N, Henke RP. Numerical chromosomal changes in high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) and concomitant invasive carcinoma. Pathol Res Pract
1996;192:418.
55. Bostwick DG, Leske DA, Qian J, Sinha AA. Prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and well differentiated adenocarcinoma maintain an intact basement membrane. Pathol Res Pract 1995;191:850.
56. Park S, Shinohara K, Grossfeld GD, Presti JCJ, Carroll PR. Prostate cancer on repeat biopsy in men with an initial biopsy of atypical adenomatous hyperplasia or high grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia. J Urol 1999;161:1243.

57. Wilcox G, Soh S, Chakraborty S, Scardino PT, Wheeler TM. Patterns of high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia associated with clinically aggressive prostate cancer. Hum Pathol
1998;29:1119.
58. Di Silverio F, D'Eramo G, Buscarini M, et al. DNA ploidy, Gleason score, pathological stage and serum PSA levels as predictors of disease-free survival in C-D1 prostatic cancer patients
submitted to radical retropubic prostatectomy. Eur Urol 1996;30:316.
59. Lerner SE, Blute ML, Bergstralh EJ, et al. Analysis of risk factors for progression in patients with pathologically confined prostate cancers after radical retropubic prostatectomy. J Urol
1996;156:137.
60. Hawkins CA, Bergstralh EJ, Lieber MM, Zincke H. Influence of DNA ploidy and adjuvant treatment on progression and survival in patients with pathologic stage T3 (PT3) prostate cancer after
radical retropubic prostatectomy. Urology 1995;46:356.
61. Cheville JC, Lloyd RV, Sebo TJ, et al. Expression of p27kip1 in prostatic adenocarcinoma. Mod Pathol 1998;11:324.
62. Miller GJ. Pathology of palpable prostate cancer. In: Raghavan D, Scher HI, Leibel SA, Lang P, eds . Principles and practice of genitourinary oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven
Publishers, 1997: 395.
63. Franks LM. Latent carcinoma of the prostate. J Pathol Bacteriol 1954;68:603.
64. Stamey TA, Freiha FS, McNeal JE, et al. Localized prostate cancer. Relationship of tumor volume to clinical significance for treatment of prostate cancer. Cancer 1993;71:933.
65. Jacobsen SJ, Katusic SK, Bergstralh EJ, et al. Incidence of prostate cancer diagnosis in the eras before and after serum prostate-specific antigen testing. JAMA 1995;274:1445.
66. Gann PH. Interpreting recent trends in prostate cancer incidence and mortality [editorial]. Epidemiology 1997;8:117.
67. Smith DS, Catalona WJ. The nature of prostate cancer detected through prostate specific antigen based screening. J Urol 1994;152:1732.
68. Catalona WJ, Smith DS, Ratliff TL, Basler JW. Detection of organ-confined prostate cancer is increased through prostate-specific antigen-based screening. JAMA 1993;270:948.
69. Parkin DM, Pisani P, Ferlay J. Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:33.
70. Breslow N, Chan CW, Dhom G, et al. Latent carcinoma of prostate of autopsy in seven areas. Int J Cancer 1977;20:680.
71. Holund B. Latent prostatic cancer in a consecutive autopsy series. Scand J Urol Nephrol 1980;14:29.
72. Guileyardo JM, Johnson WD, Welsh RA, Akazaki K, Correa P. Prevalence of latent prostate carcinoma in two U.S. populations. J Natl Cancer Inst 1980;65:311.
73. Billis A. Latent carcinoma and atypical lesions of prostate. An autopsy study. Urology 1986;28:324.
74. Sakr WA, Haas GP, Cassin BF, Pontes JE, Crissman JD. The frequency of carcinoma and intraepithelial neoplasia of the prostate in young male patients. J Urol 1993;150:379.
75. Shiraishi T, Watanabe M, Matsuura H, et al. The frequency of latent prostatic carcinoma in young males: the Japanese experience. In Vivo 1994;8:445.
76. Chang CK, Yu HJ, Chan KW, Lai MK. Secular trend and age-period-cohort analysis of prostate cancer mortality in Taiwan. J Urol 1997;158:1845.
77. Powell IJ, Schwartz K, Hussain M. Removal of the financial barrier to health care: Does it impact on prostate cancer at presentation and survival? A comparative study between black and white
men in a Veterans Affairs system. Urology 1995;46:825.
78. Ndubuisi SC, Kofie VY, Andoh JY, Schwartz EM. Black-white differences in the stage at presentation of prostate cancer in the District of Columbia. Urology 1995;46:71.
79. Burks DA, Littleton RH. The epidemiology of prostate cancer in black men. Henry Ford Hosp Med J 1992;40:89.
80. Whittemore AS, Kolonel LN, Wu AH, et al. Prostate cancer in relation to diet, physical activity, and body size in blacks, whites, and Asians in the United States and Canada. J Natl Cancer Inst
1995;87:652.
81. Krongrad A, Lai H, Lamm SH, Lai S. Mortality in prostate cancer. J Urol 1996;156:1084.
82. Haas GP, Sakr WA. Epidemiology of prostate cancer. CA Cancer J Clin 1997;47:273.
83. Conlisk EA, Lengerich EJ, Demark-Wahnefried W, Schildkraut JM, Aldrich TE. Prostate cancer: demographic and behavioral correlates of stage at diagnosis among blacks and whites in North
Carolina. Urology 1999;53:1194.
84. Pienta K, Demers R, Hoff M, et al. Effect of age and race on the survival of men with prostate cancer in the metropolitan Detroit tricounty area, 1973 to 1987. Urology 1995;45:93.
85. Polednak AP. Cancer mortality in a higher-income black population in New York State. Comparison with rates in the United States as a whole. Cancer 1990;66:1654.
86. Osegbe DN. Prostate cancer in Nigerians: facts and nonfacts. J Urol 1997;157:1340.
87. Glover FE Jr, Coffey DS, Douglas LL, et al. The epidemiology of prostate cancer in Jamaica. J Urol 1998;159:1984.
88. Ross R, Bernstein L, Judd H, et al. Serum testosterone levels in healthy young black and white men. J Natl Cancer Inst 1986;76:45.
89. Coetzee GA, Ross RK. Re: prostate cancer and the androgen receptor [letter]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:872.
90. Giovannucci E, Stampfer MJ, Krithivas K, et al. The CAG repeat within the androgen receptor gene and its relationship to prostate cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:3320.
91. Ross RK, Pike MC, Coetzee GA, et al. Androgen metabolism and prostate cancer: establishing a model of genetic susceptibility. Cancer Res 1998;58:4497.
92. Shimizu H, Ross RK, Bernstein L, et al. Cancers of the prostate and breast among Japanese and white immigrants in Los Angeles County. Br J Cancer 1991;63:963.
93. Hirayama T. Epidemiology of prostate cancer with special reference to the role of diet. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1979;(53):149.
94. Kakehi Y. Epidemiology and clinical features of prostate cancer in Japan. Nippon Rinsho 1998;56:1969.
95. Keetch DW, Rice JP, Suarez BK, Catalona WJ. Familial aspects of prostate cancer: a case control study. J Urol 1995;154:2100.
96. Bratt O, Kristoffersson U, Lundgren R, Olsson H. Familial and hereditary prostate cancer in southern Sweden. A population-based case-control study. Eur J Cancer 1999;35:272.
97. Schuurman AG, Zeegers MP, Goldbohm RA, van den Brandt PA. A case-cohort study on prostate cancer risk in relation to family history of prostate cancer. Epidemiology 1999;10:192.
98. Gibbs M, Stanford JL, McIndoe RA, et al. Evidence for a rare prostate cancersusceptibility locus at chromosome 1p36. Am J Hum Genet 1999;64:776.
99. Cooney KA. Hereditary prostate cancer in African-American families. Semin Urol Oncol 1998;16:202.
100. Norrish AE, McRae CU, Cohen RJ, Jackson RT. A population-based study of clinical and pathological prognostic characteristics of men with familial and sporadic prostate cancer. BJU Int
1999;84:311.
101. Zhu K, McKnight B, Stergachis A, Daling JR, Levine RS. Comparison of self-report data and medical records data: results from a case-control study on prostate cancer. Int J Epidemiol
1999;28:409.
102. Taylor KL, DiPlacido J, Redd WH, et al. Demographics, family histories, and psychological characteristics of prostate carcinoma screening participants. Cancer 1999;85:1305.
103. Giovannucci E, Ascherio A, Rimm EB, et al. A prospective cohort study of vasectomy and prostate cancer in US men. JAMA 1993;269:873.
104. Giovannucci E, Tosteson TD, Speizer FE, et al. A retrospective cohort study of vasectomy and prostate cancer in US men. JAMA 1993;269:878.
105. Hsing AW, Wang RT, Gu FL, et al. Vasectomy and prostate cancer risk in China. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1994;3:285.
106. Platz EA, Yeole BB, Cho E, et al. Vasectomy and prostate cancer: a case-control study in India. Int J Epidemiol 1997;26:933.
107. Zhu K, Stanford JL, Daling JR, et al. Vasectomy and prostate cancer: a case-control study in a health maintenance organization. Am J Epidemiol 1996;144:717.
108. Bernal-Delgado E, Latour-Perez J, Pradas-Arnal F, Gomez-Lopez LI. The association between vasectomy and prostate cancer: a systematic review of the literature. Fertil Steril 1998;70:191.
109. John EM, Whittemore AS, Wu AH, et al. Vasectomy and prostate cancer: results from a multiethnic case-control study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:662.
110. Lesko SM, Louik C, Vezina R, Rosenberg L, Shapiro S. Vasectomy and prostate cancer. J Urol 1999;161:1848.
111. Szarka CE, Grana G, Engstrom PF. Chemoprevention of cancer. Curr Probl Cancer 1994;18:6.
112. Lippman SM, Benner SE, Hong WK. Cancer chemoprevention. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:851.
113. Kelloff GJ, Lieberman R, Steele VE, et al. Chemoprevention of prostate cancer: concepts and strategies. Eur Urol 1999;35:342.
114. Ekman P. Genetic and environmental factors in prostate cancer genesis: identifying high-risk cohorts. Eur Urol 1999;35:362.
115. Feigl P, Blumenstein B, Thompson I, et al. Design of the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT). Control Clin Trials 1995;16:150.
116. Moyad MA. Soy, disease prevention, and prostate cancer. Semin Urol Oncol 1999;17:97.
117. Gupta S, Ahmad N, Mukhtar H. Prostate cancer chemoprevention by green tea. Semin Urol Oncol 1999;17:70.
118. McCormick DL, Rao KV. Chemoprevention of hormone-dependent prostate cancer in the Wistar-Unilever rat. Eur Urol 1999;35:464.
119. Skowronski RJ, Peehl DM, Feldman D. Actions of vitamin D 3, analogs on human prostate cancer cell lines: comparison with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3. Endocrinology 1995;136:20.
120. Barnes S, Peterson TG, Coward L. Rationale for the use of genistein-containing soy matrices in chemoprevention trials for breast and prostate cancer. J Cell Biochem Suppl 1995;22:181.
121. Gormley GJ. Chemoprevention strategies for prostate cancer: the role of 5 alpha-reductase inhibitors. J Cell Biochem Suppl 1992;16H:113.
122. Thompson IM Jr, Coltman CA Jr, Crowley J. Chemoprevention of prostate cancer: the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial. Prostate 1997;33:217.
123. Coltman CA Jr, Thompson IM Jr, Feigl P. Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT) update. Eur Urol 1999;35:544.
124. Bologna M, Muzi P, Biordi L, Festuccia C, Vicentini C. Finasteride dose-dependently reduces the proliferation rate of the LnCap human prostatic cancer cell line in vitro. Urology 1995;45:282.
125. Klocker H, Culig Z, Eder IE, et al. Mechanism of androgen receptor activation and possible implications for chemoprevention trials. Eur Urol 1999;35:413.
126. Mooradian AD, Morley JE, Korenman SG. Biological actions of androgens. Endocr Rev 1987;8:1.
127. Lu S, Tsai SY, Tsai MJ. Regulation of androgen-dependent prostatic cancer cell growth: androgen regulation of CDK2, CDK4, and CKI p16 genes. Cancer Res 1997;57:4511.
128. Sudduth SL, Koronkowski MJ. Finasteride: the first 5 alpha-reductase inhibitor. Pharmacotherapy 1993;13:309.
129. Ross RK, Bernstein L, Lobo RA, et al. 5-Alpha-reductase activity and risk of prostate cancer among Japanese and US white and black males. Lancet 1992;339:887.
130. Presti JC Jr, Fair WR, Andriole G, et al. Multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled study to investigate the effect of finasteride (MK-906) on stage D prostate cancer. J Urol
1992;148:1201.
131. Denis L, Morton MS, Griffiths K. Diet and its preventive role in prostatic disease. Eur Urol 1999;35:377.
132. Clinton SK, Giovannucci E. Diet, nutrition, and prostate cancer. Annu Rev Nutr 1998;18:413.
133. Yip I, Heber D, Aronson W. Nutrition and prostate cancer. Urol Clin North Am 1999;26:403.
134. Hebert JR, Hurley TG, Olendzki BC, et al. Nutritional and socioeconomic factors in relation to prostate cancer mortality: a cross-national study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1637.
135. Gann PH, Hennekens CH, Sacks FM, et al. Prospective study of plasma fatty acids and risk of prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:281.
136. Giovannucci E, Rimm EB, Colditz GA, et al. A prospective study of dietary fat and risk of prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1571.
137. Hankin JH, Zhao LP, Wilkens LR, Kolonel LN. Attributable risk of breast, prostate, and lung cancer in Hawaii due to saturated fat. Cancer Causes Control 1992;3:17.
138. Fradet Y, Meyer F, Bairati I, Shadmani R, Moore L. Dietary fat and prostate cancer progression and survival. Eur Urol 1999;35:388.
139. Wang Y, Corr JG, Thaler HT, et al. Decreased growth of established human prostate LNCaP tumors in nude mice fed a low-fat diet. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1456.
140. Myers CE, Ghosh J. Lipoxygenase inhibition in prostate cancer. Eur Urol 1999;35:395.
141. Davis JN, Singh B, Bhuiyan M, Sarkar FH. Genistein-induced upregulation of p21WAF1, downregulation of cyclin B, and induction of apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. Nutr Cancer
1998;32:123.
142. Akiyama T, Ishida J, Nakagawa S, et al. Genistein, a specific inhibitor of tyrosine-specific protein kinases. J Biol Chem 1987;262:5592.
143. Griffiths K, Morton MS, Denis L. Certain aspects of molecular endocrinology that relate to the influence of dietary factors on the pathogenesis of prostate cancer. Eur Urol 1999;35:443.
144. Katiyar SK, Mukhtar H. Tea consumption and cancer. World Rev Nutr Diet 1996;79:154.
145. Yang GY, Liao J, Kim K, Yurkow EJ, Yang CS. Inhibition of growth and induction of apoptosis in human cancer cell lines by tea polyphenols. Carcinogenesis 1998;19:611.
146. Mohan RR, Challa A, Gupta S, et al. Overexpression of ornithine decarboxylase in prostate cancer and prostatic fluid in humans. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:143.
147. Gupta S, Ahmad N, Mohan RR, Husain MM, Mukhtar H. Prostate cancer chemoprevention by green tea: in vitro and in vivo inhibition of testosterone-mediated induction of ornithine
decarboxylase. Cancer Res 1999;59:2115.
148. Gann PH, Ma J, Giovannucci E, et al. Lower prostate cancer risk in men with elevated plasma lycopene levels: results of a prospective analysis. Cancer Res 1999;59:1225.
149. Mills PK, Beeson WL, Phillips RL, Fraser GE. Cohort study of diet, lifestyle, and prostate cancer in Adventist men. Cancer 1989;64:598.
150. Giovannucci E, Ascherio A, Rimm EB, et al. Intake of carotenoids and retinol in relation to risk of prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1767.
151. Chan JM, Stampfer MJ, Giovannucci EL. What causes prostate cancer? A brief summary of the epidemiology. Semin Cancer Biol 1998;8:263.
152. Kamat AM, Lamm DL. Chemoprevention of urological cancer. J Urol 1999;161:1748.
153. Hsing AW, Comstock GW, Abbey H, Polk BF. Serologic precursors of cancer. Retinol, carotenoids, and tocopherol and risk of prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:941.

154. Moyad MA, Brumfield SK, Pienta KJ. Vitamin E, alpha- and gamma-tocopherol, and prostate cancer. Semin Urol Oncol 1999;17:85.
155. Clark LC, Dalkin B, Krongrad A, et al. Decreased incidence of prostate cancer with selenium supplementation: results of a double-blind cancer prevention trial. Br J Urol 1998;81:730.
156. Yoshizawa K, Willett WC, Morris SJ, et al. Study of prediagnostic selenium level in toenails and the risk of advanced prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1219.
157. Yang M, Sytkowski AJ. Differential expression and androgen regulation of the human selenium-binding protein gene hSP56 in prostate cancer cells. Cancer Res 1998;58:3150.
158. Webber MM, Perez-Ripoll EA, James GT. Inhibitory effects of selenium on the growth of DU-145 human prostate carcinoma cells in vitro. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1985;130:603.
159. Konety BR, Johnson CS, Trump DL, Getzenberg RH. Vitamin D in the prevention and treatment of prostate cancer. Semin Urol Oncol 1999;17:77.
160. Peehl DM. Vitamin D and prostate cancer risk. Eur Urol 1999;35:392.
161. Feldman D, Skowronski RJ, Peehl DM. Vitamin D and prostate cancer. Adv Exp Med Biol 1995;375:53.
162. Peehl DM, Skowronski RJ, Leung GK, et al. Antiproliferative effects of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 on primary cultures of human prostatic cells. Cancer Res 1994;54:805.
163. Schwartz GG, Hulka BS. Is vitamin D deficiency a risk factor for prostate cancer? (Hypothesis). Anticancer Res 1990;10:1307.
164. Hanchette CL, Schwartz GG. Geographic patterns of prostate cancer mortality. Evidence for a protective effect of ultraviolet radiation. Cancer 1992;70:2861.
165. Sylvester R, Collette L. Statistical considerations of chemoprevention clinical trials in prostate cancer. Eur Urol 1999;35:519.
166. van der Meijden AP. Practical aspects of clinical trials on chemoprevention of prostate cancer. Eur Urol 1999;35:515.
167. Crowley CW, Cohen RL, Lucas BK, et al. Prevention of metastasis by inhibition of the urokinase receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:5021.
168. Evans CP, Elfman F, Parangi S, et al. Inhibition of prostate cancer neovascularization and growth by urokinase-plasminogen activator receptor blockade. Cancer Res 1997;57:3594.
169. Thompson IM, Ernst JJ, Gangai MP, Spence CR. Adenocarcinoma of the prostate: results of routine urological screening. J Urol 1984;132:690.
170. Coley CM, Barry MJ, Fleming C, et al. Should Medicare provide reimbursement for prostate-specific antigen testing for early detection of prostate cancer? II: Early detection strategies. Urology
1995;46:125.
171. Polascik TJ, Oesterling JE, Partin AW. Prostate specific antigen: a decade of discoverywhat we have learned and where we are going. J Urol 1999;162:293.
172. Yu H, Diamandis EP, Sutherland DJ. Immunoreactive prostate-specific antigen levels in female and male breast tumors and its association with steroid hormone receptors and patient age. Clin
Biochem 1994;27:75.
173. Yu H, Diamandis EP. Prostate-specific antigen in milk of lactating women. Clin Chem 1995;41:54.
174. Yu H, Diamandis EP. Measurement of serum prostate specific antigen levels in women and in prostatectomized men with an ultrasensitive immunoassay technique. J Urol 1995;153:1004.
175. Levesque M, Hu H, D'Costa M, Diamandis EP. Prostate-specific antigen expression by various tumors. J Clin Lab Anal 1995;9:123.
176. Stenman UH, Leinonen J, Alfthan H, et al. A complex between prostate-specific antigen and alpha 1-antichymotrypsin is the major form of prostate-specific antigen in serum of patients with
prostatic cancer: assay of the complex improves clinical sensitivity for cancer. Cancer Res 1991;51:222.
177. Lilja H, Christensson A, Dahlen U, et al. Prostate-specific antigen in serum occurs predominantly in complex with alpha 1-antichymotrypsin. Clin Chem 1991;37:1618.
178. McCormack RT, Rittenhouse HG, Finlay JA, et al. Molecular forms of prostate-specific antigen and the human kallikrein gene family: a new era. Urology 1995;45:729.
179. Nadler RB, Humphrey PA, Smith DS, Catalona WJ, Ratliff TL. Effect of inflammation and benign prostatic hyperplasia on elevated serum prostate specific antigen levels. J Urol 1995;154:407.
180. Tchetgen MB, Song JT, Strawderman M, Jacobsen SJ, Oesterling JE. Ejaculation increases the serum prostate-specific antigen concentration. Urology 1996;47:511.
181. Chybowski FM, Bergstralh EJ, Oesterling JE. The effect of digital rectal examination on the serum prostate specific antigen concentration: results of a randomized study. J Urol 1992;148:83.
182. Oesterling JE, Chan DW, Epstein JI, et al. Prostate specific antigen in the preoperative and postoperative evaluation of localized prostatic cancer treated with radical prostatectomy. J Urol
1988;139:766.
183. Stamey TA, Yang N, Hay AR, et al. Prostate-specific antigen as a serum marker for adenocarcinoma of the prostate. N Engl J Med 1987;317:909.
184. Guess HA, Heyse JF, Gormley GJ. The effect of finasteride on prostate-specific antigen in men with benign prostatic hyperplasia. Prostate 1993;22:31.
185. Gormley GJ, Ng J, Cook T, et al. Effect of finasteride on prostate-specific antigen density. Urology 1994;43:53.
186. Roehrborn CG, Oesterling JE, Olson PJ, Padley RJ. Serial prostate-specific antigen measurements in men with clinically benign prostatic hyperplasia during a 12-month placebo-controlled
study with terazosin. HYCAT Investigator Group. Hytrin Community Assessment Trial. Urology 1997;50:556.
187. Woolf SH. Screening for prostate cancer with prostate-specific antigen. An examination of the evidence. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1401.
188. Cooner WH, Mosley BR, Rutherford CL Jr, et al. Prostate cancer detection in a clinical urological practice by ultrasonography, digital rectal examination and prostate specific antigen. J Urol
1990;143:1146.
189. Catalona WJ, Richie JP, Ahmann FR, et al. Comparison of digital rectal examination and serum prostate specific antigen in the early detection of prostate cancer: results of a multicenter
clinical trial of 6,630 men. J Urol 1994;151:1283.
190. Ellis WJ, Chetner MP, Preston SD, Brawer MK. Diagnosis of prostatic carcinoma: the yield of serum prostate specific antigen, digital rectal examination and transrectal ultrasonography. J Urol
1994;152:1520.
191. Brawer M. Prostate-specific antigen. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:264.
192. Epstein JI, Walsh PC, Carmichael M, Brendler CB. Pathologic and clinical findings to predict tumor extent of nonpalpable (stage T1c) prostate cancer. JAMA 1994;271:368.
193. Carter HB, Epstein JI, Chan DW, Fozard JL, Pearson JD. Recommended prostate-specific antigen testing intervals for the detection of curable prostate cancer. JAMA 1997;277:1456.
194. Smith DS, Catalona WJ, Herschman JD. Longitudinal screening for prostate cancer with prostate-specific antigen. JAMA 1996;276:1309.
195. Benson MC, Whang IS, Pantuck A, et al. Prostate specific antigen density: a means of distinguishing benign prostatic hypertrophy and prostate cancer. J Urol 1992;147:815.
196. Stamey TA, Kabalin JN, McNeal JE, et al. Prostate specific antigen in the diagnosis and treatment of adenocarcinoma of the prostate: II. Radical prostatectomy treated patients. J Urol
1989;141:1076.
197. Seaman E, Whang M, Olsson CA, et al. PSA density (PSAD). Role in patient evaluation and management. Urol Clin North Am 1993;20:653.
198. Catalona WJ, Richie JP, deKernion JB, et al. Comparison of prostate specific antigen concentration versus prostate specific antigen density in the early detection of prostate cancer: receiver
operating characteristic curves. J Urol 1994;152:2031.
199. Brawer MK, Aramburu EA, Chen GL, Preston SD, Ellis WJ. The inability of prostate specific antigen index to enhance the predictive value of prostate specific antigen in the diagnosis of
prostatic carcinoma. J Urol 1993;150:369.
200. Kalish J, Cooner WH, Graham SD Jr. Serum PSA adjusted for volume of transition zone (PSAT) is more accurate than PSA adjusted for total gland volume (PSAD) in detecting
adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Urology 1994;43:601.
201. Zlotta A, Djavan B, Marberger M, Schulman C. Prostate specific antigen density of the transition zone: a new effective parameter for prostate cancer prediction. J Urol 1997;157:1315.
202. Oesterling JE, Cooner WH, Jacobsen SJ, Guess HA, Lieber MM. Influence of patient age on the serum PSA concentration. An important clinical observation. Urol Clin North Am 1993;20:671.
203. Carter HB, Pearson JD, Waclawiw Z, et al. Prostate-specific antigen variability in men without prostate cancer: effect of sampling interval on prostate-specific antigen velocity. Urology
1995;45:591.
204. Carter HB, Pearson JD. Prostate-specific antigen velocity and repeated measures of prostate-specific antigen. Urol Clin North Am 1997;24:333.
205. Christensson A, Bjork T, Nilsson O, et al. Serum prostate specific antigen complexed to alpha 1-antichymotrypsin as an indicator of prostate cancer. J Urol 1993;150:100.
206. Catalona WJ, Smith DS, Wolfert RL, et al. Evaluation of percentage of free serum prostate-specific antigen to improve specificity of prostate cancer screening. JAMA 1995;274:1214.
207. Partin AW, Catalona WJ, Southwick PC, et al. Analysis of percent free prostate-specific antigen (PSA) for prostate cancer detection: influence of total PSA, prostate volume, and age. Urology
1996;48:55.
208. Catalona WJ, Smith DS, Ornstein DK. Prostate cancer detection in men with serum PSA concentrations of 2.6 to 4.0 ng/mL and benign prostate examination. Enhancement of specificity with
free PSA measurements. JAMA 1997;277:1452.
209. Chen YT, Luderer AA, Thiel RP, et al. Using proportions of free to total prostate-specific antigen, age, and total prostate-specific antigen to predict the probability of prostate cancer. Urology
1996;47:518.
210. Luderer AA, Chen YT, Soriano TF, et al. Measurement of the proportion of free to total prostate-specific antigen improves diagnostic performance of prostate-specific antigen in the diagnostic
gray zone of total prostate-specific antigen. Urology 1995;46:187.
211. Bangma CH, Rietbergen JB, Kranse R, et al. The free-to-total prostate specific antigen ratio improves the specificity of prostate specific antigen in screening for prostate cancer in the general
population. J Urol 1997;157:2191.
212. Elgamal AA, Cornillie FJ, Van Poppel HP, et al. Free-to-total prostate specific antigen ratio as a single test for detection of significant stage T1c prostate cancer. J Urol 1996;156: 1042.
213. Prestigiacomo AF, Lilja H, Pettersson K, Wolfert RL, Stamey TA. A comparison of the free fraction of serum prostate specific antigen in men with benign and cancerous prostates: the best case
scenario. J Urol 1996;156:350.
214. Gann PH, Hennekens CH, Stampfer MJ. A prospective evaluation of plasma prostate-specific antigen for detection of prostatic cancer. JAMA 1995;273:289.
215. Vashi AR, Wojno KJ, Henricks W, et al. Determination of the “reflex range” and appropriate cutpoints for percent free prostate-specific antigen in 413 men referred for prostatic evaluation using
the AxSYM system. Urology 1997;49:19.
216. Carter HB, Partin AW, Luderer AA, et al. Percentage of free prostate-specific antigen in sera predicts aggressiveness of prostate cancer a decade before diagnosis. Urology 1997;49:379.
217. Woodrum D, French C, Shamel LB. Stability of free prostate-specific antigen in serum samples under a variety of sample collection and sample storage conditions. Urology 1996;48:33.
218. Brawer M, Daum P, Petteway J, Werner M. Assay variability in serum prostate specific antigen determination. Prostate 1995;26:1.
219. Nixon R, Meyer G, Blase A, et al. Comparison of 3 investigational assays for the free form of prostate specific antigen. J Urol 1998;160:420.
220. Brawer M, Meyer G, Letran J. Measurement of complexed PSA improves specificity for early detection of prostate cancer. Urology 1998;52:372.
221. Sokoll L, Bruzek D, Cox J, et al. Is complexed PSA alone clinically useful? J Urol 1998;159:234.
222. Babaian RJ, Fritsche HA, Zhang Z, et al. Evaluation of prostAsure index in the detection of prostate cancer: a preliminary report. Urology 1998;51:132.
223. Hodge KK, McNeal JE, Terris MK, Stamey TA. Random systematic versus directed ultrasound guided transrectal core biopsies of the prostate. J Urol 1989;142:71.
224. Hodge KK, McNeal JE, Stamey TA. Ultrasound guided transrectal core biopsies of the palpably abnormal prostate. J Urol 1989;142:66.
225. Chang JJ, Shinohara K, Bhargava V, Presti JC Jr. Prospective evaluation of lateral biopsies of the peripheral zone for prostate cancer detection. J Urol 1998;160:2111.
226. Eskew LA, Bare RL, McCullough DL. Systematic 5 region prostate biopsy is superior to sextant method for diagnosing carcinoma of the prostate. J Urol 1997;157:199.
227. Norberg M, Egevad L, Holmberg L, et al. The sextant protocol for ultrasound-guided core biopsies of the prostate underestimates the presence of cancer. Urology 1997;50:562.
228. Terris MK, Pham TQ, Issa MM, Kabalin JN. Routine transition zone and seminal vesicle biopsies in all patients undergoing transrectal ultrasound guided prostate biopsies are not indicated. J
Urol 1997;157:204.
229. Chang JJ, Shinohara K, Hovey RM, Montgomery C, Presti JC Jr. Prospective evaluation of systematic sextant transition zone biopsies in large prostates for cancer detection. Urology
1998;52:89.
230. Bazinet M, Karakiewicz PI, Aprikian AG, et al. Value of systematic transition zone biopsies in the early detection of prostate cancer. J Urol 1996;155:605.
231. Fleshner NE, Fair WR. Indications for transition zone biopsy in the detection of prostatic carcinoma. J Urol 1997;157:556.
232. Durkan GC, Greene DR. Elevated serum prostate specific antigen levels in conjunction with an initial prostatic biopsy negative for carcinoma: who should undergo a repeat biopsy? BJU Int
1999;83:34.
233. Fogarty KT, Arger PH, Shibutani Y, et al. Follow-up of benign hypoechoic peripheral zone lesions of the prostate gland: US characteristics and cancer prevalence. Radiology 1994;191:69.
234. Babaian RJ, Grunow WA. Reliability of Gleason grading system in comparing prostate biopsies with total prostatectomy specimens. Urology 1985;25:564.
235. Bostwick DG. Gleason grading of prostatic needle biopsies. Correlation with grade in 316 matched prostatectomies. Am J Surg Pathol 1994;18:796.
236. Thickman D, Speers WC, Philpott PJ, Shapiro H. Effect of the number of core biopsies of the prostate on predicting Gleason score of prostate cancer. J Urol 1996;156:110.
237. Huland H, Hammerer P, Henke RP, Huland E. Preoperative prediction of tumor heterogeneity and recurrence after radical prostatectomy for localized prostatic carcinoma with digital rectal,
examination prostate specific antigen and the results of 6 systematic biopsies. J Urol 1996;155:1344.
238. D'Amico AV, Whittington R, Malkowicz SB, et al. Combined modality staging of prostate carcinoma and its utility in predicting pathologic stage and postoperative prostate specific antigen
failure. Urology 1997;49:23.
239. Borirakchanyavat S, Bhargava V, Shinohara K, et al. Systematic sextant biopsies in the prediction of extracapsular extension at radical prostatectomy. Urology 1997;50:373.

240. Presti JC Jr, Shinohara K, Bacchetti P, Tigrani V, Bhargava V. Positive fraction of systematic biopsies predicts risk of relapse after radical prostatectomy. Urology 1998;52:1079.
241. Wills ML, Sauvageot J, Partin AW, Gurganus R, Epstein JI. Ability of sextant biopsies to predict radical prostatectomy stage. Urology 1998;51:759.
242. Enlund AL, Varenhorst E. Morbidity of ultrasound-guided transrectal core biopsy of the prostate without prophylactic antibiotic therapy. A prospective study in 415 cases. Br J Urol 1997;79:777.
243. Rietbergen JB, Kruger AE, Kranse R, Schroder FH. Complications of transrectal ultrasound-guided systematic sextant biopsies of the prostate: evaluation of complication rates and risk factors
within a population-based screening program. Urology 1997;49:875.
244. Rodriguez LV, Terris MK. Risks and complications of transrectal ultrasound guided prostate needle biopsy: a prospective study and review of the literature. J Urol 1998;160:2115.
245. Labrie F, Candas B, Dupont A, et al. Screening decreases prostate cancer death: first analysis of the 1988 Quebec prospective randomized controlled trial. Prostate 1999;38:83.
246. Jacobsen SJ, Bergstralh EJ, Katusic SK, et al. Screening digital rectal examination and prostate cancer mortality: a population-based case-control study. Urology 1998;52:173.
247. Roberts RO, Bergstralh EJ, Katusic SK, Lieber MM, Jacobsen SJ. Decline in prostate cancer mortality from 1980 to 1997, and an update on incidence trends in Olmsted County, Minnesota. J
Urol 1999;161:529.
248. Federman D, Goyal S, Kamina A, Peduzzi P, Concato J. Informed consent for PSA screening: Does it happen? Effect Clin Pract 1999;2:152.
249. Kindrick AV, Grossfeld GD, Stier DM, et al. Use of imaging tests for staging newly diagnosed prostate cancer: trends from the CaPSURE database. J Urol 1998;160:2102.
250. Lee CT, Oesterling JE. Using prostate-specific antigen to eliminate the staging radionuclide bone scan. Urol Clin North Am 1997;24:389.
251. Oesterling JE, Martin SK, Bergstralh EJ, Lowe FC. The use of prostate-specific antigen in staging patients with newly diagnosed prostate cancer. JAMA 1993;269:57.
252. Levran Z, Gonzalez JA, Diokno AC, Jafri SZ, Steinert BW. Are pelvic computed tomography, bone scan and pelvic lymphadenectomy necessary in the staging of prostatic cancer? Br J Urol
1995;75:778.
253. Gleave ME, Coupland D, Drachenberg D, et al. Ability of serum prostate-specific antigen levels to predict normal bone scans in patients with newly diagnosed prostate cancer. Urology
1996;47:708.
254. Wolf JS Jr, Cher M, Dall'era M, et al. The use and accuracy of cross-sectional imaging and fine needle aspiration cytology for detection of pelvic lymph node metastases before radical
prostatectomy. J Urol 1995;153:993.
255. Rees MA, Resnick MI, Oesterling JE. Use of prostate-specific antigen, Gleason score, and digital rectal examination in staging patients with newly diagnosed prostate cancer. Urol Clin North
Am 1997;24:379.
256. Kahn D, Williams RD, Seldin DW, et al. Radioimmunoscintigraphy with 111Indium labeled CYT-356 for the detection of occult prostate cancer recurrence. J Urol 1994; 152:1490.
257. Hinkle GH, Burgers JK, Neal CE, et al. Multicenter radioimmunoscintigraphic evaluation of patients with prostate carcinoma using indium-111 capromab pendetide. Cancer 1998;83:739.
258. Manyak MJ, Hinkle GH, Olsen JO, et al. Immunoscintigraphy with indium-111-capromab pendetide: evaluation before definitive therapy in patients with prostate cancer. Urology 1999;54:1058.
259. Tsuda K, Yu KK, Coakley FV, et al. Detection of extracapsular extension of prostate cancer: role of fat suppression endorectal MRI. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1999;23:74.
260. Yu KK, Scheidler J, Hricak H, et al. Prostate cancer: prediction of extracapsular extension with endorectal MR imaging and three-dimensional proton MR spectroscopic imaging. Radiology
1999;213:481.
261. Scheidler J, Hricak H, Vigneron DB, et al. Prostate cancer: localization with three-dimensional proton MR spectroscopic imagingclinicopathologic study. Radiology 1999;213:473.
262. Kupelian PA, Katcher J, Levin HS, Klein EA. Stage T1-2 prostate cancer: a multivariate analysis of factors affecting biochemical and clinical failures after radical prostatectomy. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:1043.
263. Narayan P, Gajendran V, Taylor SP, et al. The role of transrectal ultrasound-guided biopsy-based staging, preoperative serum prostate-specific antigen, and biopsy Gleason score in prediction
of final pathologic diagnosis in prostate cancer. Urology 1995;46:205.
264. Oesterling JE. Prostate specific antigen: a critical assessment of the most useful tumor marker for adenocarcinoma of the prostate. J Urol 1991;145:907.
265. Partin AW, Kattan MW, Subong EN, et al. Combination of prostate-specific antigen, clinical stage, and Gleason score to predict pathological stage of localized prostate cancer. A
multi-institutional update. JAMA 1997;277:1445.
266. Kleer E, Larson-Keller JJ, Zincke H, Oesterling JE. Ability of preoperative serum prostate-specific antigen value to predict pathologic stage and DNA ploidy. Influence of clinical stage and tumor
grade. Urology 1993;41:207.
267. Kleer E, Oesterling JE. PSA and staging of localized prostate cancer. Urol Clin North Am 1993;20:695.
268. Kattan MW, Eastham JA, Stapleton AM, Wheeler TM, Scardino PT. A preoperative nomogram for disease recurrence following radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90:766.
269. Yu KK, Hricak H, Grossfeld GD, Carroll PR. Prediction of patient outcome after radical prostatectomy by imaging: choice of outcome measure. Acad Radiol 1998;5[Suppl 2]:S347.
270. D'Amico AV, Schnall M, Whittington R, et al. Endorectal coil magnetic resonance imaging identifies locally advanced prostate cancer in select patients with clinically localized disease. Urology
1998;51:449.
271. D'Amico AV, Chang E, Garnick M, et al. Assessment of prostate cancer volume using endorectal coil magnetic resonance imaging: a new predictor of tumor response to neoadjuvant androgen
suppression therapy. Urology 1998;51:287.
272. Bolla M, Gonzalez D, Warde P, et al. Improved survival in patients with locally advanced prostate cancer treated with radiotherapy and goserelin. N Engl J Med 1997;337:295.
273. Epstein JI, Pound CR, Partin AW, Walsh PC. Disease progression following radical prostatectomy in men with Gleason score 7 tumor. J Urol 1998;160:97.
274. Epstein JI. The role of perineural invasion and other biopsy characteristics as prognostic markers for localized prostate cancer. Semin Urol Oncol 1998;16:124.
275. Hanks GE, Hanlon AL, Schultheiss TE, et al. Dose escalation with 3D conformal treatment: five year outcomes, treatment optimization, and future directions. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;41:501.
276. Hanks GE. Strategies for improving the outcome of patients with poor prognosis prostate cancers. Acta Oncol 1998;37:5.
277. Hanks GE, Hanlon AL, Pinover WH, Horwitz EM, Schultheiss TE. Survival advantage for prostate cancer patients treated with high-dose three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy. Cancer J
Sci Am 1999;5:152.
278. Litwin MS, Lubeck DP, Henning JM, Carroll PR. Differences in urologist and patient assessments of health related quality of life in men with prostate cancer: results of the CaPSURE database.
J Urol 1998;159:1988.
279. Pound CR, Partin AW, Eisenberger MA, et al. Natural history of progression after PSA elevation following radical prostatectomy. JAMA 1999;281:1591.
280. Critz FA, Levinson AK, Williams WH, Holladay DA, Holladay CT. The PSA nadir that indicates potential cure after radiotherapy for prostate cancer. Urology 1997;49:322.
281. Panel A. Consensus statement: guidelines for PSA following radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:1035.
282. Egawa S, Go M, Kuwao S, et al. Long-term impact of conservative management on localized prostate cancer. A twenty-year experience in Japan. Urology 1993;42:520.
283. Rana A, Chisholm GD, Khan M, Rashwan HM, Elton RA. Conservative management with symptomatic treatment and delayed hormonal manipulation is justified in men with locally advanced
carcinoma of the prostate. Br J Urol 1994;74:637.
284. George NJ. Natural history of localised prostatic cancer managed by conservative therapy alone. Lancet 1988;1:494.
285. Adolfsson J, Carstensen J. Natural course of clinically localized prostate adenocarcinoma in men less than 70 years old. J Urol 1991;146:96.
286. Warner J, Whitmore WF Jr. Expectant management of clinically localized prostatic cancer. J Urol 1994;152:1761.
287. Adolfsson J, Steineck G, Hedlund PO. Deferred treatment of clinically localized low-grade prostate cancer: actual 10-year and projected 15-year follow-up of the Karolinska series. Urology
1997;50:722.
288. Johansson JK, Holmberg L, Johansson S, Bergstrom R, Adami HO. Fifteen-year survival in prostate cancer: a prospective population-based study in Sweden. JAMA 1997;277:467.
289. Adolfsson J, Steineck G, Hedlund PO. Deferred treatment of locally advanced nonmetastatic prostate cancer: a long-term followup. J Urol 1999;161:505.
290. Albertsen PC, Fryback DG, Storer BE, Kolon TF, Fine J. Long-term survival among men with conservatively treated localized prostate cancer. JAMA 1995;274:626.
291. Aus G, Hugosson J, Norlen L. Long-term survival and mortality in prostate cancer treated with noncurative intent. J Urol 1995;154:460.
292. Hugosson J, Aus G, Bergdahl C, Bergdahl S. Prostate cancer mortality in patients surviving more than 10 years after diagnosis. J Urol 1995;154:2115.
293. Gronberg H, Damber L, Jonson H, Damber JE. Prostate cancer mortality in northern Sweden, with special reference to tumor grade and patient age. Urology 1997;49:374.
294. Stattin P, Bergh A, Karlberg L, Tavelin B, Damber JE. Long-term outcome of conservative therapy in men presenting with voiding symptoms and prostate cancer. Eur Urol 1997;32:404.
295. Brasso K, Friis S, Juel K, Jorgensen T, Iversen P. Mortality of patients with clinically localized prostate cancer treated with observation for 10 years or longer: a population based registry study.
J Urol 1999;161:524.
296. Byar DP, Corle DK. VACURG randomized trial of radical prostatectomy for stages I and II prostate cancer. Urology 1981;17[Suppl]:7.
297. Chodak GW, Thisted RA, Gerber GS, et al. Results of conservative management of clinically localized prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 1994;330:242.
298. Adolfsson J. Deferred treatment of low grade stage T3 prostate cancer without distant metastases. J Urol 1993;149:326.
299. Albertsen PC, Hanley JA, Gleason DF, Barry MJ. Competing risk analysis of men aged 55 to 74 years at diagnosis managed conservatively for clinically localized prostate cancer. JAMA
1998;280:975.
300. Guillonneau B, Vallancien G. Laparoscopic radical prostatectomy: the Montsouris experience. J Urol 2000;163:418.
301. Guillonneau B, Vallancien G. Laparoscopic radical prostatectomy: the Montsouris technique. J Urol 2000;163:1643.
302. Bishoff JT, Reyes A, Thompson IM, et al. Pelvic lymphadenectomy can be omitted in selected patients with carcinoma of the prostate: development of a system of patient selection. Urology
1995;45:270.
303. Narayan P, Fournier G, Gajendran V, et al. Utility of preoperative serum prostate-specific antigen concentration and biopsy Gleason score in predicting risk of pelvic lymph node metastases in
prostate cancer. Urology 1994;44:519.
304. Klotz L, Herschorn S. Early experience with intraoperative cavernous nerve stimulation with penile tumescence monitoring to improve nerve sparing during radical prostatectomy. Urology
1998;52:537.
305. Klotz L. Advances in nerve sparing for radical prostatectomy. Urology 1999;54:956.
306. Trapasso JG, deKernion JB, Smith RB, Dorey F. The incidence and significance of detectable levels of serum prostate specific antigen after radical prostatectomy. J Urol 1994; 152:1821.
307. Zincke H, Oesterling JE, Blute ML, et al. Long-term (15 years) results after radical prostatectomy for clinically localized (stage T2c or lower) prostate cancer. J Urol 1994;152:1850.
308. Blute ML, Bostwick DG, Seay TM, et al. Pathologic classification of prostate carcinoma: the impact of margin status. Cancer 1998;82:902.
309. Badalament RA, Miller MC, Peller PA, et al. An algorithm for predicting nonorgan confined prostate cancer using the results obtained from sextant core biopsies with prostate specific antigen
level. J Urol 1996;156:1375.
310. Medini E, Medini I, Reddy PK, Levitt SH. Delayed/salvage radiation therapy in patients with elevated prostate specific antigen levels after radical prostatectomy. A long term follow-up. Cancer
1996;78:1254.
311. Eulau SM, Tate DJ, Stamey TA, Bagshaw MA, Hancock SL. Effect of combined transient androgen deprivation and irradiation following radical prostatectomy for prostatic cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:735.
312. Do T, Parker RG, Do C, et al. Salvage radiotherapy for biochemical and clinical failures following radical prostatectomy. Cancer J Sci Am 1998;4:324.
313. Ditonno P, Battaglia M, Selvaggi FP. Adjuvant hormone therapy after radical prostatectomy: indications and results. Tumori 1997;83:567.
314. Sokoll LJ, Chan DW. Prostate-specific antigen. Its discovery and biochemical characteristics. Urol Clin North Am 1997;24:253.
315. Lange P, Ercole CJ, Lightner D, et al. The value of serum prostate specific antigen determinations before and after radical prostatectomy. J Urol 1989;141:873.
316. Stein A, deKernion JB, Smith RB, Dorey F, Patel H. Prostate specific antigen levels after radical prostatectomy in patients with organ confined and locally extensive prostate cancer. J Urol
1992;147:942.
317. Safa AA, Reese DM, Carter DM, et al. Undetectable serum prostate-specific antigen associated with metastatic prostate cancer: a case report and review of the literature. AmJ Clin Oncol
1998;21:323.
318. Catalona WJ, Smith DS. 5-year tumor recurrence rates after anatomical radical retropubic prostatectomy for prostate cancer. J Urol 1994;152:1837.
319. Partin AW, Pound CR, Clemens JQ, Epstein JI, Walsh PC. Serum PSA after anatomic radical prostatectomy. The Johns Hopkins experience after 10 years. Urol Clin North Am 1993;20:713.
320. Ohori M, Abbas F, Wheeler TM, et al. Pathological features and prognostic significance of prostate cancer in the apical section determined by whole mount histology. J Urol 1999;161:500.
321. Iselin CE, Box JW, Vollmer RT, et al. Surgical control of clinically localized prostate carcinoma is equivalent in African-American and white males. Cancer 1998;83:2353.

322. Pound CR, Partin AW, Epstein JI, Walsh PC. Prostate-specific antigen after anatomic radical retropubic prostatectomy. Patterns of recurrence and cancer control. Urol Clin North Am
1997;24:395.
323. Epstein JI, Partin AW, Sauvageot J, Walsh PC. Prediction of progression following radical prostatectomy. A multivariate analysis of 721 men with long-term follow-up. Am J Surg Pathol
1996;20:286.
324. Patel A, Dorey F, Franklin J, deKernion JB. Recurrence patterns after radical retropubic prostatectomy: clinical usefulness of prostate specific antigen doubling times and log slope prostate
specific antigen. J Urol 1997;158:1441.
325. Catalona WJ, Carvalhal GF, Mager DE, Smith DS. Potency, continence and complication rates in 1,870 consecutive radical retropubic prostatectomies. J Urol 1999;162:433.
326. Goluboff ET, Saidi JA, Mazer S, et al. Urinary continence after radical prostatectomy: the Columbia experience. J Urol 1998;159:1276.
327. Bishoff JT, Motley G, Optenberg SA, et al. Incidence of fecal and urinary incontinence following radical perineal and retropubic prostatectomy in a national population. J Urol 1998;160:454.
328. Mathewson-Chapman M. Pelvic muscle exercise/biofeedback for urinary incontinence after prostatectomy: an education program. J Cancer Educ 1997;12:218.
329. Chang PL, Tsai LH, Huang ST, et al. The early effect of pelvic floor muscle exercise after transurethral prostatectomy. J Urol 1998;160:402.
330. Kerr LA, Zincke H. Radical retropubic prostatectomy for prostate cancer in the elderly and the young: complications and prognosis. Eur Urol 1994;25:305.
331. Heathcote PS, Mactaggart PN, Boston RJ, et al. Health-related quality of life in Australian men remaining disease-free after radical prostatectomy. Med J Aust 1998;168:483.
332. Ojdeby G, Claezon A, Brekkan E, Haggman M, Norlen BJ. Urinary incontinence and sexual impotence after radical prostatectomy. Scand J Urol Nephrol 1996;30:473.
333. Dore B, Gremmo E, Ingrand P, et al. Simplified vesico-urethral anastomosis after radical retropubic prostatectomy for cancer. A preliminary comparative study. J Urol 1995;101:113.
334. Gray M, Petroni GR, Theodorescu D. Urinary function after radical prostatectomy: a comparison of the retropubic and perineal approaches. Urology 1999;53:881.
335. Haab F, Trockman BA, Zimmern PE, Leach GE. Quality of life and continence assessment of the artificial urinary sphincter in men with minimum 3.5 years of followup. J Urol 1997;158:435.
336. Huland H. The risks outweigh the benefits of radical prostatectomy in localised prostate cancer: the argument against. Eur Urol 1996;29:31.
337. Smith DN, Appell RA, Rackley RR, Winters JC. Collagen injection therapy for post-prostatectomy incontinence. J Urol 1998;160:364.
338. Schaeffer AJ, Clemens JQ, Ferrari M, Stamey TA. The male bulbourethral sling procedure for post-radical prostatectomy incontinence. J Urol 1998;159:1510.
339. Walsh PC, Donker PJ. Impotence following radical prostatectomy: insight into etiology and prevention. J Urol 1982;128:492.
340. Walsh PC, Partin AW, Epstein JI. Cancer control and quality of life following anatomical radical retropubic prostatectomy: results at 10 years. J Urol 1994;152:1831.
341. Talcott JA, Rieker P, Propert KJ, et al. Patient-reported impotence and incontinence after nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1117.
342. Litwin MS, Hays RD, Fink A, et al. Quality-of-life outcomes in men treated for localized prostate cancer. JAMA 1995;273:129.
343. Zippe CD, Kedia AW, Kedia K, Nelson DR, Agarwal A. Treatment of erectile dysfunction after radical prostatectomy with sildenafil citrate (Viagra). Urology 1998;52:963.
344. Lowentritt BH, Scardino PT, Miles BJ, et al. Sildenafil citrate after radical retropubic prostatectomy. J Urol 1999;162:1614.
345. Gleave ME, Sato N, Goldenberg SL, et al. Neoadjuvant androgen withdrawal therapy decreases local recurrence rates following tumor excision in the Shionogi tumor model. J Urol
1997;157:1727.
346. Fair WR, Cookson MS, Stroumbakis N, et al. The indications, rationale, and results of neoadjuvant androgen deprivation in the treatment of prostatic cancer: Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center results. Urology 1997;49:46.
347. Soloway MS, Sharifi R, Wajsman Z, et al. Randomized prospective study comparing radical prostatectomy alone versus radical prostatectomy preceded by androgen blockade in clinical stage
B2 (T2bNxM0) prostate cancer. The Lupron Depot Neoadjuvant Prostate Cancer Study Group. J Urol 1995;154:424.
348. Goldenberg SL, Klotz LH, Srigley J, et al. Randomized, prospective, controlled study comparing radical prostatectomy alone and neoadjuvant androgen withdrawal in the treatment of localized
prostate cancer. Canadian Urologic Oncology Group. J Urol 1996;156:873.
349. Klotz LH, Goldenberg SL, Jewett M, et al. CUOG randomized trial of neoadjuvant androgen ablation before radical prostatectomy: 36-month post-treatment PSA results. Canadian Urologic
Oncology Group. Urology 1999;53:757.
350. Gleave ME, Goldenberg SL, Jones EC, et al. Optimal duration of neoadjuvant androgen withdrawal therapy before radical prostatectomy in clinically confined prostate cancer. Semin Urol Oncol
1996;14:39.
351. Gleave ME, Goldenberg SL, Jones EC, Bruchovsky N, Sullivan LD. Biochemical and pathological effects of 8 months of neoadjuvant androgen withdrawal therapy before radical prostatectomy
in patients with clinically confined prostate cancer. J Urol 1996;155:213.
352. Partin AW, Piantadosi S, Sanda MG, et al. Selection of men at high risk for disease recurrence for experimental adjuvant therapy following radical prostatectomy. Urology 1995;45:831.
353. Bauer JJ, Connelly RR, Seterhenn IA, et al. Biostatistical modeling using traditional preoperative and pathological prognostic variables in the selection of men at high risk for disease recurrence
after radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer. J Urol 1998;159:929.
354. D'Amico A, Whittington R, Schultz D, et al. Outcome based staging for clincally localized adenocarcinoma of the prostate. J Urol 1997;158:1422.
355. Kattan MW, Wheeler TM, Scardino PT. Postoperative nomogram for disease recurrence after radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1499.
356. Ohori M, Wheeler TM, Kattan MW, Goto Y, Scardino PT. Prognostic significance of positive surgical margins in radical prostatectomy specimens. J Urol 1995;154:1818.
357. Paulson DF. Impact of radical prostatectomy in the management of clinically localized disease. J Urol 1994;152:1826.
358. Watson RB, Civantos F, Soloway MS. Positive surgical margins with radical prostatectomy: detailed pathological analysis and prognosis. Urology 1996;48:80.
359. D'Amico AV, Whittington R, Malkowicz SB, et al. A multivariate analysis of clinical and pathological factors that predict for prostate specific antigen failure after radical prostatectomy for
prostate cancer. J Urol 1995;154:131.
360. McCarthy JF, Catalona WJ, Hudson MA. Effect of radiation therapy on detectable serum prostate specific antigen levels following radical prostatectomy: early versus delayed treatment. J Urol
1994;151:1575.
361. Coetzee LJ, Hars V, Paulson DF. Postoperative prostate-specific antigen as a prognostic indicator in patients with margin-positive prostate cancer, undergoing adjuvant radiotherapy after
radical prostatectomy. Urology 1996;47:232.
362. Petrovich Z, Lieskovsky G, Freeman J, et al. Surgery with adjuvant irradiation in patients with pathologic stage C adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Cancer 1995;76:1621.
363. Zietman AL, Coen JJ, Shipley WU, Althausen AF. Adjuvant irradiation after radical prostatectomy for adenocarcinoma of prostate: analysis of freedom from PSA failure. Urology 1993;42:292.
364. Syndikus I, Pickles T, Kostashuk E, Sullivan LD. Postoperative radiotherapy for stage pT3 carcinoma of the prostate: improved local control. J Urol 1996;155:1983.
365. Freeman JA, Lieskovsky G, Cook DW, et al. Radical retropubic prostatectomy and postoperative adjuvant radiation for pathological stage C (PcN0) prostate cancer from 1976 to 1989:
intermediate findings. J Urol 1993;149:1029.
366. Gibbons RP, Cole BS, Richardson RG, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy following radical prostatectomy: results and complications. J Urol 1986;135:65.
367. Epstein JI. Incidence and significance of positive margins in radical prostatectomy specimens. Urol Clin North Am 1996;23:651.
368. Lowe BA, Lieberman SF. Disease recurrence and progression in untreated pathologic stage T3 prostate cancer: selecting the patient for adjuvant therapy. J Urol 1997;158:1452.
369. Grossfeld GD, Tigrani VS, Nudell D, et al. Management of a positive surgical margin after radical prostatectomy: decision analysis. J Urol 2000 (in press).
370. Hammerer P, Huland H. Systematic sextant biopsies in 651 patients referred for prostate evaluation. J Urol 1994;151:99.
371. Oesterling JE, Jacobsen SJ, Chute CG, et al. Serum prostate-specific antigen in a community-based population of healthy men. Establishment of age-specific reference ranges. JAMA
1993;270:860.
372. Morgan TO, Jacobsen SJ, McCarthy WF, et al. Age-specific reference ranges for prostate-specific antigen in black men. N Engl J Med 1996;335:304.
373. Oesterling JE, Kumamoto Y, Tsukamoto T, et al. Serum prostate-specific antigen in a community-based population of healthy Japanese men: lower values than for similarly aged white men. Br
J Urol 1995;75:347.
374. Welch HG, Albertsen PC, Nease RF, Bubolz TA, Wasson JH. Estimating treatment benefits for the elderly: the effect of competing risks. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:577.
375. Ebert T, Schmitz-Drager BJ, Burrig KF, et al. Accuracy of imaging modalities in staging the local extent of prostate cancer. Urol Clin North Am 1991;18:453.
376. Engeler CE, Wasserman NF, Zhang G. Preoperative assessment of prostatic carcinoma by computerized tomography. Weaknesses and new perspectives. Urology 1992;40:346.
377. Platt JF, Bree RL, Schwab RE. The accuracy of CT in the staging of carcinoma of the prostate. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1987;149:315.
378. Salo JO, Kivisaari L, Rannikko S, Lehtonen T. Computerized tomography and transrectal ultrasound in the assessment of local extension of prostatic cancer before radical retropubic
prostatectomy. J Urol 1987;137:435.
379. Bates TS, Gillatt DA, Cavanagh PM, Speakman M. A comparison of endorectal magnetic resonance imaging and transrectal ultrasonography in the local staging of prostate cancer with
histopathological correlation. Br J Urol 1997;79:927.
380. Presti JC Jr, Hricak H, Narayan PA, et al. Local staging of prostatic carcinoma: comparison of transrectal sonography and endorectal MR imaging. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1996;166:103.
381. Deasy NP, Conry BG, Lewis JL, et al. Local staging of prostate cancer with 0.2 T body coil MRI. Clin Radiol 1997;52:933.
382. Tuzel E, Sevinc M, Obuz F, Sade M, Kirkali Z. Is magnetic resonance imaging necessary in the staging of prostate cancer? Urol Int 1998;61:227.
383. Rorvik J, Halvorsen OJ, Albrektsen G, et al. MRI with an endorectal coil for staging of clinically localised prostate cancer prior to radical prostatectomy. Eur Radiol 1999;9:29.
384. Ikonen S, Karkkainen P, Kivisaari L, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging of clinically localized prostatic cancer. J Urol 1998;159:915.
385. Bates TS, Cavanagh PM, Speakman M, Gillatt DA. Endorectal MRI using a 0.5 T mid-field system in the staging of localized prostate cancer. Clin Radiol 1996;51:550.
386. Perrotti M, Kaufman RP Jr, Jennings TA, et al. Endo-rectal coil magnetic resonance imaging in clinically localized prostate cancer: Is it accurate? J Urol 1996;156:106.
387. Bartolozzi C, Menchi I, Lencioni R, et al. Local staging of prostate carcinoma with endorectal coil MRI: correlation with whole-mount radical prostatectomy specimens. Eur Radiol 1996;6:339.
388. Sheu MH, Wang JH, Chen KK, Chiang H, Teng MH. Prostate cancer: local staging with endorectal magnetic resonance imaging. Chung Hua I Hsueh Tsa Chih (Taipei) 1998; 61:243.
389. Anderson PR, Hanlon AL, Patchefsky A, Al-Saleem T, Hanks GE. Perineural invasion and Gleason 7-10 tumors predict increased failure in prostate cancer patients with pretreatment PSA <10
ng/ml treated with conformal external beam radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:1087.
390. Bluestein DL, Bostwick DG, Bergstralh EJ, Oesterling JE. Eliminating the need for bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy in select patients with prostate cancer. J Urol 1994;151:1315.
391. D'Amico AV, Whittington R, Malkowicz SB, et al. A multivariable analysis of clinical factors predicting for pathological features associated with local failure after radical prostatectomy for
prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:293.
392. D'Amico AV, Whittington R, Malkowicz SB, et al. Role of percent positive biopsies and endorectal coil MRI in predicting prognosis in intermediate-risk prostate cancer patients. Cancer J Sci Am
1996;2:343.
393. Gerber G, Thisted R, Chodak G, et al. Results of radical prostatectomy in men with locally advanced prostate cancer: multi-insititutional pooled analysis. Eur Urol 1997;32:385.
394. Green GA, Hanlon AL, Al-Saleem T, Hanks GE. A Gleason score of 7 predicts a worse outcome for prostate carcinoma patients treated with radiotherapy. Cancer 1998;83:971.
395. Hanks GE, Lee WR, Schultheiss TE. Clinical and biochemical evidence of control of prostate cancer at 5 years after external beam radiation. J Urol 1995;154:456.
396. Kuban DA, el-Mahdi AM, Schellhammer PF. Prostate-specific antigen for pretreatment prediction and posttreatment evaluation of outcome after definitive irradiation for prostate cancer. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:307.
397. Roach M 3rd, Lu J, Pilepich MV, et al. Long-term survival after radiotherapy alone: radiation therapy oncology group prostate cancer trials. J Urol 1999;161:864.
398. Schellhammer PF, el-Mahdi AM, Kuban DA, Wright GL Jr. Prostate-specific antigen after radiation therapy. Prognosis by pretreatment level and post-treatment nadir. Urol Clin North Am
1997;24:407.
399. Zagars GK, Pollack A, Kavadi VS, von Eschenbach AC. P rostate-specific antigen and radiation therapy for clinically localized prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:293.
400. Zagars GK, Ayala AG, von Eschenbach AC, Pollack A. The prognostic importance of Gleason grade in prostatic adenocarcinoma: a long-term follow-up study of 648 patients treated with
radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:237.
401. Zincke H, Bergstralh EJ, Blute ML, et al. Radical prostatectomy for clinically localized prostate cancer: long-term results of 1,143 patients from a single institution. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2254.
402. Hudson MA, Catalona WJ. Effect of adjuvant radiation therapy on prostate specific antigen following radical prostatectomy. J Urol 1990;143:1174.
403. Schild SE, Buskirk SJ, Wong WW, et al. The use of radiotherapy for patients with isolated elevation of serum prostate specific antigen following radical prostatectomy. J Urol 1996;156:1725.
404. Wu JJ, King SC, Montana GS, McKinstry CA, Anscher MS. The efficacy of postprostatectomy radiotherapy in patients with an isolated elevation of serum prostate-specific antigen. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:317.
405. Morris MM, Dallow KC, Zietman AL, et al. Adjuvant and salvage irradiation following radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:731.
406. Forman JD, Meetze K, Pontes E, et al. Therapeutic irradiation for patients with an elevated post-prostatectomy prostate specific antigen level. J Urol 1997;158:1436.

407. Cadeddu JA, Partin AW, DeWeese TL, Walsh PC. Long-term results of radiation therapy for prostate cancer recurrence following radical prostatectomy. J Urol 1998;159:173.
408. vander Kooy MJ, Pisansky TM, Cha SS, Blute ML. Irradiation for locally recurrent carcinoma of the prostate following radical prostatectomy. Urology 1997;49:65.
409. Bagshaw MA, Kaplan HS, Sagerman RH. Linear accelerator supervoltage therapy: VII. Carcinoma of the prostate. Radiology 1965;85:121.
410. Ray GR, Cassady JR, Bagshaw MA. Definitive radiation therapy of carcinoma of the prostate: a report of 15 years experience. Radiology 1973;106:407.
411. Hanks GE, Asbell S, Krall JM, et al. Outcome for lymph node dissection negative T1-b, T2 (A2,B) prostate cancer treated with external beam radiation therapy in RTOG 77-06. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:1099.
412. Perez CA, Hanks GE, Leibel SA, et al. Localized carcinoma of the prostate (stages T1B, T1C, T2, and T3). Review of management with external beam radiation therapy. Cancer 1993;72:3156.
413. Horwitz EM, Hanlon AL, Hanks GE. Update on the treatment of prostate cancer with external beam irradiation. Prostate 1998;37:195.
414. Shipley WU, Thames HD, Sandler HM, et al. Radiation therapy for clinically localized prostate cancer. A multi-institutional pooled analysis. JAMA 1999;281:1598.
415. Zelefsky MJ, Leibel SA, Gaudin PB, et al. Dose escalation with three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy affects the outcome in prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;41:491.
416. Ten Haken RK, Perez-Tamayo C, Tesser RJ, et al. Boost treatment of the prostate using shaped fixed fields. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;16:193.
417. Lawton CA, Won M, Pilepich MV, et al. Long-term treatment sequelae following external beam irradiation for adenocarcinoma of the prostate: analysis of RTOG studies 7506 and 7706. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:935.
418. Leibel SA, Hanks GE, Kramer S. Patterns of care outcomes studies: results of the national practice in adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:401.
419. Smit WGJM, Helle PA, Van Putte WLJ, et al. Late radiation damage in prostate cancer patients treated by high dose external radiotherapy in relation to rectal dose. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1990;18:23.
420. Hanks GE, Martz KL, Diamond JJ. The effect of dose on local control of prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:1299.
421. Fuks Z, Leibel SA, Kutcher GJ, Mohan R, Ling CC. Three dimensional conformal treatment: a new frontier in radiation therapy. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Important
advances in oncology. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1991:151.
422. Munzenrider JE, Pilepich M, Rene-Ferrero JB, Tchakarova I, Carter BL. Use of body scanner in radiotherapy treatment planning. Cancer 1979;40:170.
423. Goitein M. The utility of computed tomography in radiation therapy: an estimate of outcome. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1979;5:1799.
424. Zelefsky MJ, Leibel SA, Kutcher GJ, et al. The feasibility of dose escalation with three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy in patients with prostatic carcinoma. Cancer J Sci Am 1995;1:42.
425. Forman JD, Duclos M, Shamsa F, Porter AT, Orton C. Hyperfractionated conformal radiotherapy in locally advanced prostate cancer: results of a dose escalation study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1996;34:655.
426. Roach M 3rd, Meehan S, Kroll S, et al. Radiotherapy for high grade clinically localized adenocarcinoma of the prostate. J Urol 1996;156:1719.
427. Pollack A, Zagars GK. External beam radiotherapy dose response of prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:1011.
428. Hanks GE, Hanlon AL, Pinover WH, Horwitz EM, Schultheiss TE. Survival advantage for prostate cancer patients treated with high-dose three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy. Cancer J
Sci Am 1999;5:152.
429. Hanks GE, Hanlon AL, Schultheiss TE, et al. Dose escalation with 3D conformal treatment: five year outcomes, treatment optimization, and future directions. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;41:501.
430. Porter EH. The statistical dose-cure relationships for irradiated tumors. Br J Radiol 1980;53:336.
431. Hendry JH, Moore JV. Is the steepness of dose-incidence curves for tumour control or complications due to variation before or as a result of irradiation? Br J Radiol 1984;57:1045.
432. Roberts SA, Hendry JH. A realistic closed-form radiobiological model of clinical tumor-control data incorporating intertumor heterogeneity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:689.
433. Zagars GK, Schultheiss TE, Peters LP. Inter-tumor heterogeneity and radiation dose control curves. Radiother Oncol 1987;8:353.
434. Thames HD, Schultheiss TE, Hendry JH, et al. Can modest escalations of dose be detected as increased tumor control? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;22:241.
435. Moore JV, Hendry JH, Hunter RD. Dose-incidence curves for tumour control and normal tissue injury, in relation to the response of clonogenic cells. Radiother Oncol 1983;1:143.
436. Thames HD Jr, Peters LJ, Spanos WS Jr, Fletcher GF. Dose response of squamous cell carcinomas of the upper respiratory and digestive tracts. Br J Cancer 1980;41[Suppl 4]:35.
437. Metz CE, Tokars RP, Kronman HB, Griem ML. Maximum likelihood estimation of dose-response parameters for therapeutic operating characteristic (TOC) analysis of carcinoma of the
nasopharynx. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8:1185.
438. Harwood AR, Beale FA, Cummings BJ, et al. Supraglottic laryngeal carcinoma: an analysis of dose-time-volume factors in 410 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:311.
439. Peters LJ, Fletcher GH. Causes of failure of radiotherapy in head and neck cancer. Radiother Oncol 1983;1:53.
440. Williams MV, Denekamp J, Fowler JF. Dose-response relationships for human tumors: implications for clinical trials of dose modifying agents. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:1703.
441. Fowler JF. Potential for increasing the differential response between tumors and normal tissues: can proliferation rate be used? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:641.
442. Leibel SA, Fuks Z, Zelefsky MJ, et al. The treatment of localized prostate cancer with three-dimensional conformal and intensity modulated radiation therapy at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center. In: Purdy J, Grant W III, Palta J, Butler B, Perez C, eds. 3D conformal radiation therapy and intensity modulated radiation therapy in the next millennium. Madison, WI: Advanced
Medical Publishing (in press).
443. Scardino PT, Wheeler TM. Local control of prostate cancer with radiotherapy: frequency and prognostic significance of positive results of post-irradiation biopsy. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr
1988;7:95.
444. Kuban DA, El-Mahdi AM. Local control after radiation for prostatic carcinoma: significance and assessment. Semin Radiat Oncol 1993;3:221.
445. Crook JM, Bahadur YA, Robertson SJ, Perry GA, Esche BA. Valuation of radiation effect, tumor differentiation, and prostate specific antigen staining in sequential prostate biopsies after
external beam radiotherapy for patients with prostate carcinoma. Cancer 1997;79:81.
446. Laverdiere J, Gomez JL, Cusan L, et al. Beneficial effect of combination hormonal therapy administered prior and following external beam radiation therapy in localized prostate cancer. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997; 37:247.
447. Consensus Statements on Radiation Therapy of Prostate Cancer. Guidelines for prostate re-biopsy after radiation and for radiation therapy with rising prostate-specific antigen levels after
radical prostatectomy. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1155.
448. Willett CG, Zietman AL, Shipley WU, Coen JJ. The effect of pelvic radiation therapy on serum levels of prostate specific antigen. J Urol 1994;151:1579.
449. Zietman AL, Coen JJ, Shipley WU, Willett CG, Efird JT. Radical radiation therapy in the management of prostatic adenocarcinoma: the initial prostate specific antigen value as a predictor of
treatment outcome. J Urol 1994;151:640.
450. Zelefsky MJ, Leibel SA, Wallner KE, Whitmore WF Jr, Fuks Z. The significance of normal serum PSA in the follow-up after definitive radiation therapy for prostatic cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;
13:459.
451. Consensus Statement: Guidelines for PSA following radiation therapy. American Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology Consensus Panel. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:1035.
452. Kavadi VS, Zagars GK, Pollack A. Serum prostate-specific antigen after radiation therapy for clinically localized prostate cancer: prognostic implications. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1994;30:279.
453. Schellhammer PF, el-Mahdi AM, Wright GL Jr, Kolm P, Ragle R. Prostate-specific antigen to determine progression-free survival after radiation therapy for localized carcinoma of prostate.
Urology 1993;42:1320.
454. Shipley WU, Thames HD, Sandler HM, et al. Radiation therapy for clinically localized prostate cancer: a multi-institutional pooled analysis. JAMA 1999;281:1598.
455. Byar DP, Mostofi FK. Carcinoma of the prostate: prognostic evaluation of certain pathologic features in 208 radical prostatectomies examined by the step-section technique. Cancer 1972;30:5.
456. Stamey TA, Villers AA, McNeal JE, Link PC, Freiha FS. Positive surgical margins at radical prostatectomy: importance of the apical dissection. J Urol 1990;143:1166.
457. Catalona WJ, Bigg SW. Nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy: evaluation of results after 250 patients. J Urol 1990;143:538.
458. Walsh PC. Radical prostatectomy, preservation of sexual function, cancer control: the controversy. Urol Clin North Am 1987;14:663.
459. ICRU Report 50. Prescribing, recording, and reporting photon beam therapy. Bethesda: International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements, 1993.
460. Kutcher GJ, Mageras GS, Leibel SA. Control, correction. and modeling of setup errors and organ motion. Semin Radiat Oncol 1995;5:134.
461. Barzell W, Beam MA, Hilaris BS, Whitmore WF. Prostatic adenocarcinoma: relationship of grade and local extent to the pattern of metastases. J Urol 1977;118:278.
462. Fowler JE, Whitmore WE. The incidence and extent of pelvic lymph node metastases in apparently localized prostatic cancer. Cancer 1981;47:2941.
463. Donahue RE, Mani JH, Whitesel JA, et al. Pelvic lymph node dissection: guide to patient management in clinically locally confined adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Urology 1982;20:559.
464. Bagshaw MA. A technique for external beam radiotherapy of carcinoma of the prostate. In: Levitt SH, Tapley NV, eds. Technological basis of radiotherapy: practical clinical applications.
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1984:244.
465. McGowan DG. The value of extended field radiation therapy in carcinoma of the prostate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:1333.
466. Ploysongsang SS, Aron BS, Shehata WM. Radiation therapy in prostate cancer: Whole pelvis with prostate boost or small field to prostate? Urology 1992;40:18.
467. Seaward SA, Weinberg V, Lewis P, et al. Improved freedom from PSA failure with whole pelvic irradiation for high-risk prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:1055.
468. Roach M 3rd, Marquez C, Yuo HS, et al. Predicting the risk of lymph node involvement using the pre-treatment prostate specific antigen and Gleason score in men with clinically localized
prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;28(1):33.
469. Bagshaw MA. Radiotherapetic treatment of prostatic carcinoma with pelvic node involvement. Urol Clin North Am 1984;2:297.
470. Spaas PG, Bagshaw MA, Cox RS. The volume of extended field irradiation in surgically staged carcinoma of the prostate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:Sl.
471. Zagars GK, von Eschenbach AC, Johnson DE, Oswald MJ. Stage C adenocarcinoma of the prostate: an analysis of 551 patients treated with external beam radiation. Cancer 1987; 60:1489.
472. Rosen E, Cassady JR, Connolly J, Chaffey JT. Radiotherapy for prostate carcinoma: the JCRT experience (19681978) II. Factors related to tumor control and complications. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1985;11:725.
473. Aristizabal SA, Steinbronn D, Heusinkveld RS. External beam radiotherapy in cancer of the prostate: the University of Arizona experience. Radiother Oncol 1984;1:309.
474. Perez AA, Pilepich MV, Zivnuska F. Tumor control in definitive irradiation of localized carcinoma of the prostate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:523.
475. Asbell SO, Krall JM, Pilepich MV, et al. Elective pelvic irradiation in stage A2, B carcinoma of the prostate: analysis of RTOG 77-06. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:1307.
476. Asbell SO, Caplan RJ, Perez CA, et al. Impact of surgical staging on evaluating the radiotherapeutic outcome in RTOG #77-06. A phase III study for T1b-T2N0M0 prostatic carcinoma. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:S1.
477. Bagshaw MA, Kaplan ID, Cox RC. Radiation therapy for localized disease. Cancer 1993;71:939.
478. Zelefsky MJ, Happersett L, Leibel SA, et al. The effect of treatment positioning on normal tissue dose in patients with prostate cancer treated with three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:13.
479. Leibel SA, Kutcher GJ, Mohan R, et al. Three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. Semin Radiat Oncol 1992; 2:274.
480. Zelefsky MJ, Crean D, Mageras GS, et al. Quantification and predictors of prostate position variability in 50 patients evaluated with multiple CT scans during conformal radiotherapy. Radiother
Oncol 1999;50:225.
481. Goitein M, Abrams M, Rowell D, Pollari H, Wiles J. Multi-dimensional treatment planning: II. Beam's eye-view, back projection, and projection through CT sections. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1983;9:789.
482. Leibel SA, Zelefsky MJ, Kutcher GJ, et al. Three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy in localized carcinoma of the prostate: interim report of a phase I dose-escalation study. J Urol
1994;152:1792.
483. Drzymala RE, Mohan R, Brewster L, et al. Dose-volume histograms. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:71.
484. ICRU Report 50. Prescribing, recording, and reporting photon beam therapy. Bethesda: International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements, 1993.
485. Zelefsky MJ, Lebiel SA, Burman CM, et al. Neoadjuvant hormonal therapy improves the therapeutic ration in patients with bulky prostatic cancer treated with three-dimensional conformal
radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:755.
486. Soffen EM, Hanks GE, Hunt MA, Epstein BE. Conformal static field radiation therapy treatment of early prostate cancer versus non-conformal techniques: a reduction in acute morbidity. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:485.
487. Zelefsky MJ, Ginor RX, Fuks Z, Leibel SA. Efficacy of selective alpha1 blocker therapy in the treatment of acute urinary symptoms during radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:567.

488. Teshima T, Hanks GE, Hanlon AL, Peter RS, Schultheiss TE. Rectal bleeding after conformal 3D treatment of prostate cancer: time to occurrence, response to treatment and duration of
morbidity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:77.
489. Lawton CA, Wong M, Pilepich MV, et al. Long-term treatment sequelae following external beam irradiation for adenocarcinoma of the prostate: analysis of RTOG studies 7506 and 7706. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:935.
490. Leibel SA, Hanks GE, Kramer S. Patterns of care outcomes studies: results of the national practice in adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:401.
491. Sandler HM, McLaughlin PW, Ten Haken RK, et al. Three dimensional conformal radiotherapy for the treatment of prostate cancer: low risk of chronic rectal morbidity observed in a large series
of patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;33:797.
492. Schultheiss TE, Lee WR, Hunt MA, et al. Late GI and GU complications in the treatment of prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:3.
493. Benk VA, Adams JA, Shipley WU, et al. Late rectal bleeding following combined x-ray and proton high dose irradiation for stages T3-T4 prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1993;26:551.
494. Lee WR, Hanks GE, Hanlon AL, Schultheiss TE, Hunt MA. Lateral rectal shielding reduces late rectal morbidity following high dose three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy for clinically
localized prostate cancer: further evidence for a significant dose effect. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;35:251.
495. Hanks GE, Schultheiss TE, Hunt MA, Epstein B. Factors influencing incidence of acute grade 2 morbidity in conformal and standard radiation treatment of prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1995;31:25.
496. Dearnaley DP, Khoo VS, Norman AR, et al. Comparison of radiation side-effects of conformal and conventional radiotherapy in prostate cancer: a randomised trial. Lancet 1999;353:267.
497. Zelefsky MJ, Fuks Z, Happersett L, et al. Clinical experience with intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) in prostate cancer. Radiother Oncol 1999 (in press).
498. Bagshaw MA, Cox RS, Ray GR. Status of radiation treatment of prostate cancer at Stanford University. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1988;7:4760.
499. Banker FL. The preservation of potency after external beam irradiation for prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;15:219.
500. Shipley WU, Zietman AL, Hanks GE, et al. Treatment related sequelae following external beam radiation for prostate cancer: a review with an update in patients with stages TI and T2 tumor. J
Urol 1994;152:1799.
501. Zelefsky MJ, Eid JF. Elucidating the etiology of erectile dysfunction after definitive therapy for prostatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:129.
502. Pierce LJ, Whittington R, Hanno PM, et al. Pharmacologic erection with intracavernosal injection for men with sexual dysfunction following irradiation: a preliminary report. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1991;21:1311.
503. Zelefsky MJ, McKee AB, Lee H, Leibel SA. Efficacy of oral sildenafil in patients with erectile dysfunction after radiotherapy for carcinoma of the prostate. Urology 1999;53:775.
504. Coleman CN, Beard CJ, Kantoff PW, Gelman R. Rate of relapse following treatment for localized prostate cancer: a critical analysis of retrospective reports. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1994;28:303.
505. Hanks GE, Krall JM, Hanlon AL, et al. Patterns of care and RTOG studies in prostate cancer: long-term survival, hazard rate observations, and possibilities of cure. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1994;28:39.
506. Zietman AL, Shipley WU. Randomized trials in loco-regionally confined prostate cancer: past, present and future. Semin Radiat Oncol 1993;3:210.
507a. Perez CA, Lee HK, Georgiou A, et al. Technical and tumor-related factors affecting outcome of definitive irradiation for localized carcinoma of the prostate.
1993;26:581.

Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys

507b. Zagars GK, von Eschenbach AC, Johnson DE, Oswald MJ. The role of radiation therapy in stages A2 and B adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14:701.
508. Zietman AL, Shipley WU, Willett GC. Residual disease after radical surgery or radiation therapy for prostate cancer. Clinical significance and therapeutic implications. Cancer 1993;71:959.
509. Pollack A, Zagars GK, Kavadi VS. Prostate-specific antigen doubling time and disease relapse after radiotherapy for prostate cancer. Cancer 1994;74:670.
510. Zagars GK. Prostate-specific antigen as an outcome variable for TI and T2 prostate cancer treated by radiation therapy. J Urol 1994;152:1786.
511. Zagars GK, Pollack A, von Eschenbach AC. Prostate cancer and radiation therapythe message conveyed by serum prostate-specific antigen. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;33:23.
512. Kupelian P, Katcher J, Levin H, et al. Eternal beam radiotherapy versus radical prostatectomy for clinical stage T1-2 prostate cancer: therapeutic implications of stratification by pretreatment
PSA levels and biopsy Gleason scores. Cancer J Sci Am 1997;3:78.
513. Hanks GE, Hanlon AL, Pinover WH, Horwitz EM, Schultheiss TE. Survival advantage for prostate cancer patients treated with high-dose three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy. Cancer J
Sci Am 1999;5:152.
514. Roach M 3rd, Meehan S, Kroll S, et al. Radiotherapy for high grade clinically localized adenocarcinoma of the prostate. J Urol 1996;156:1719.
515. Zagars GK, Pollack A, von Eschenbach AC. Prognostic factors for clinically localized prostate carcinoma: analysis of 938 patients irradiated in the prostate specific antigen era. Cancer
1997;79:1370.
516. Pollack A, Zagars GK, Smith LG, Antolak JA, Rosen II. Preliminary results of a randomized dose escalation study comparing 70 Gy to 78 Gy for the treatment of prostate cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:146.
517. Green N, Bodner H, Broth E, et al. Improved control of bulky prostate carcinoma with sequential estrogen and radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:971.
518. Sandler HM, Perez-Tamayo C, Ten Haken RK, Lichter AS. Dose escalation for stage C (T3) prostate cancer: minimal rectal toxicity observed using conformal therapy. Radiother Oncol
1992;23:53.
519. Zelefsky MJ, Lebiel SA, Burman CM, et al. Neoadjuvant hormonal therapy improves the therapeutic ration in patients with bulky prostatic cancer treated with three-dimensional conformal
radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:755.
520. Laverdiere J, Gomez JL, Cusan L, et al. Beneficial effect of combination hormonal therapy administered prior and following external beam radiation therapy, in localized prostate cancer. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:247.
521. Pilepich MV, Krall JM, al-Sarraf M, et al. Androgen deprivation with radiation therapy compared with radiation therapy alone for locally advanced prostatic carcinoma: a randomized comparative
trial of the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group. Urology 1995;45:616.
522. Pilepich MV, Caplan R, Byhardt RW, et al. Phase III trial of androgen suppression using goserelin in unfavorable prognosis carcinoma of the prostate treated with definitive radiotherapy: report
of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group Protocol 85-31. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1013.
523. Bolla M, Gonzalez D, Warde P, et al. Improved survival in patients with locally advanced prostate cancer treated with radiotherapy and goserelin. N Engl J Med 1997;337:295.
524. Pollack A, Zagars GK. Androgen ablation in addition to radiation therapy for prostate cancer: Is there true benefit? Semin Radiat Oncol 1998;8(2):95.
525. Whitmore WF Jr, Hilaris B, Grabstald H. Retropubic implantation of iodine 125 in the treatment of prostatic cancer. J Urol 1972;108:918.
526. Wallner K, Chiu-tsao ST, Roy J, et al. An improved method for computerized tomographyplanned transperineal 125 iodine prostate implants. J Urol 1991;146:90.
527. Blasko JC, Ragde H, Grimm PD. Transperineal ultrasound-guided implantation of the prostate: morbidity and complications. Scand J Urol Nephrol Suppl 1991;137:113.
528. Seyed NAM, Puthawala A, Austin P, et al. Temporary iridium 192 implant in the management of carcinoma of the prostate. Cancer 1992;69:2515.
529. Kuban DA, EL-Mahdi AM, Schellhammer PF. I-125 interstitial implantation for prostate cancer. What have we learned in 10 years? Cancer 1989;69:2515.
530. Fuks Z, Leibel SA, Wallner KE, et al. The effect of local control on metastatic dissemination in carcinoma of the prostate: long-term results in patients treated with 125I implantation. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:537.
531. Kuban DA, EL-Mahdi AM. Local control after radiation for prostatic carcinoma: significance and assessment. Semin Radiat Oncol 1993;3:221.
532. Blasko J, Grimm PD, Ragde H. Brachytherapy and organ preservation in the management of carcinoma of the prostate. Semin Radiat Oncol 1993;3:240.
533. Anderson LL. Plan optimization and dose evaluation in brachytherapy. Semin Radiat Oncol 1993;3:290.
534. Wallner K, Roy J, Harrison L. Dosimetry guidelines to minimize urethral and rectal morbidity following transperineal I-125 prostate brachytherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:465.
535. Blasko JC, Wallner K, Grimm PD, Ragde H. Prostate specific antigen based disease control following ultrasound guided 125 iodine implantation for stage T1/T2 prostatic carcinoma. J Urol
1995;154:1096.
536. Priestly JB Jr, Beyer DC. Guided brachytherapy for treatment of confined prostate cancer. Urology 1992;40:27.
537. Storey MR, Landgren RC, Cottone JL, et al. Transperineal 125 iodine implantation for treatment of clinically localized prostate cancer: 5-year tumor control and morbidity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1999;43:565.
538. Stock RG, Stone NN, Tabert A, Iannuzzi C, DeWyngaert JK. A dose-response study for I-125 prostate implants. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:101.
539. Zelefsky MJ, Wallner KE, Ling CC, et al. Comparison of the 5-year outcome and morbidity of three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy versus transperineal permanent iodine-125 implantation
for early-stage prostatic cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:517.
540. Loening S, Bonney W, Fallon B, et al. Cryotherapy. Prostate 1984;5:199.
541. Porter M, Ahaghotu C, Loening S, See W. Disease-free and overall survival after cryosurgical monotherapy for clinical stages B and C carcinoma of the prostate: a 20-year followup. J Urol
1997;158:1466.
542. Chang Z, Finkelstein J, Ma H, et al. Development of a high performance multiprobe cryosurgical device. Biomed Instrum Technol 1994;28:383.
543. Mazur P. Cryobiology: the freezing of biological systems. Science 1970;168:939.
544. Zippe C. Cryosurgical ablation for prostate cancer. Semin Urol 1995;13:148.
545. Connolly J, Shinohara K, Presti J, Carroll P. Should cryosurgery be considered a therapeutic option in localized prostate cancer? Urol Clin North Am 1996;23:623.
546. Connolly J, Shinohara K, Carroll P. Cryosurgery for locally advanced prostate cancer. Semin Urol Oncol 1997;15:244.
547. Shinohara K, Rhee B, Presti J, Carroll P. Cryosurgical ablation of the prostate: patterns of cancer recurrence. J Urol 1997;158:2206.
548. Bahn D, Lee F, Solomon H, et al. Prostate cancer: US-guided percutaneous cryoablation. Radiology 1995;194:551.
549. Shinohara K, Rhee B, Presti J, Carroll P. Cryosurgical ablation of prostate cancer: patterns of cancer recurrence. J Urol 1997;158:2206.
550. Greene G, Pisters L, Scott S, Eschenbach AV. Predictive value of prostate specific antigen nadir following salvage cryotherapy. J Urol 1997;157:419A.
551. Long J. Preliminary outcomes following cryosurgical ablation of the prostate in patients with clinically localized prostate carcinoma. J Urol 1998;159:477.
552. Koppie TM, Shinohara K, Grossfeld GD, Presti JC Jr, Carroll PR. The efficacy of cryosurgical ablation of prostate cancer: the University of California, San Francisco experience. J Urol
1999;162:427.
553. Sosa R, Martin T, Lynn K. Cryosurgical treatment of prostate cancer: a multicenter review of complications. J Urol 1996;155:401A.
554. Cespedes R, Pisters L, Eschenbach AV, McGuire E. Long-term followup of incontinence and obstruction after salvage cryosurgical ablation of the prostate: results in 143 patients. J Urol
1997;157:237.
555. Grossfeld GD, Stier DM, Flanders SC, et al. Use of second treatment following definitive local therapy for prostate cancer: data from the caPSURE database. J Urol 1998;160:1398.
556. Lu-Yao GL, Potosky AL, Albertsen PC, et al. Follow-up prostate cancer treatments after radical prostatectomy: a population-based study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:166.
557. Partin AW, Pearson JD, Landis PK, et al. Evaluation of serum prostate-specific antigen velocity after radical prostatectomy to distinguish local recurrence from distant metastases. Urology
1994;43:649.
558. Connolly JA, Shinohara K, Presti JC Jr, Carroll PR. Local recurrence after radical prostatectomy: characteristics in size, location, and relationship to prostate-specific antigen and surgical
margins. Urology 1996;47:225.
559. Silverman JM, Krebs TL. MR imaging evaluation with a transrectal surface coil of local recurrence of prostatic cancer in men who have undergone radical prostatectomy. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1997;168:379.
560. Freitas JE, Gilvydas R, Ferry JD, Gonzalez JA. The clinical utility of prostate-specific antigen and bone scintigraphy in prostate cancer follow-up. J Nucl Med 1991;32:1387.
561. Cher ML, Bianco FJ Jr, Lam JS, et al. Limited role of radionuclide bone scintigraphy in patients with prostate specific antigen elevations after radical prostatectomy. J Urol 1998;160:1387.
562. Elgamal AA, Troychak MJ, Murphy GP. ProstaScint scan may enhance identification of prostate cancer recurrences after prostatectomy, radiation, or hormone therapy: analysis of 136 scans of
100 patients. Prostate 1998;37:261.

563. Schild SE, Buskirk SJ, Wong WW, et al. The use of radiotherapy for patients with isolated elevation of serum prostate specific antigen following radical prostatectomy. J Urol 1996;156:1725.
564. Tefilli MV, Gheiler EL, Tiguert R, et al. Quality of life in patients undergoing salvage procedures for locally recurrent prostate cancer. J Surg Oncol 1998;69:156.
565. Formenti SC, Lieskovsky G, Simoneau AR, et al. Impact of moderate dose of postoperative radiation on urinary continence and potency in patients with prostate cancer treated with nerve
sparing prostatectomy. J Urol 1996;155:616.
566. Grossfeld G, Steir D, Flanders S, et al. Use of second treatment following definitive local therapy for prostate cancer: data from the CaPSURE database. J Urol 1998;160:1398.
567. Rogers E, Ohori M, Kassabian VS, Wheeler TM, Scardino PT. Salvage radical prostatectomy: outcome measured by serum prostate specific antigen levels . J Urol 1995;153: 104.
568. Moul JW, Paulson DF. The role of radical surgery in the management of radiation recurrent and large volume prostate cancer. Cancer 1991;68:1265.
569. Amling CL, Lerner SE, Martin SK, et al. Deoxyribonucleic acid ploidy and serum prostate specific antigen predict outcome following salvage prostatectomy for radiation refractory prostate
cancer. J Urol 1999;161:857.
570. Pisters LL, Perrotte P, Scott SM, Greene GF, von Eschenbach AC. Patient selection for salvage cryotherapy for locally recurrent prostate cancer after radiation therapy. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:2514.
571. Grado GL, Collins JM, Kriegshauser JS, et al. Salvage brachytherapy for localized prostate cancer after radiotherapy failure. Urology 1999;53:2.
572. Gelet A, Chapelon JY, Bouvier R, Pangaud C, Lasne Y. Local control of prostate cancer by transrectal high intensity focused ultrasound therapy: preliminary results. J Urol 1999;161:156.
573. Zlotta AR, Djavan B, Matos C, et al. Percutaneous transperineal radiofrequency ablation of prostate tumour: safety, feasibility and pathological effects on human prostate cancer. Br J Urol
1998;81:265.
574. Spitzweg C, Zhang S, Bergert ER, et al. Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) promoter-driven androgen-inducible expression of sodium iodide symporter in prostate cancer cell lines. Cancer Res
1999;59(9):2136.
575. Geller J, Albert JD, Nochstein DA, et al. Comparison of prostatic cancer tissue dehydrotestosterone levels at the time of relapse following orchiectomy or estrogen therapy. J Urol 1984;132:693.
576. Crawford ED, Eisenberger MA, McLeod DG, et al. A controlled trial of leuprolide with and without flutamide in prostatic carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1989;321:419.
577. Bolla M, Gonzalez D, Warde P, et al. Improved survival in patients with locally advanced prostate cancer treated with radiotherapy and goserelin. N Engl J Med 1997;337(5):295.
578. Raghavan D. Prostate cancer management under scrutiny: one man's meta-analysis is another man's poisson. J Clin Oncol 199917(11):3371.
579. Immediate versus differed treatment for advanced prostatic cancer: initial results of the Medical Research Council trial. Medical Research Council Prostate Cancer Working Party Investigators
Group. Br J Urol 1997;79:235.
580. Messing EM, Manola J, Sarosdy M, et al. Immediate hormonal therapy compared with observation after radical prostatectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy in men with node-positive prostate
cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;341(24):1781.
581. Pound CR, Partin AW, Eisenberger MA, et al. Natural history or progression after PSA elevation following radical prostatectomy. JAMA 1999;281(17):1591.
582. Crawford ED, Eisenberger MA, McLeod DG, et al. A controlled trial of leuprolide with and without flutamide in prostatic carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1989;321:419.
583. Eisenberger MA, Crawford ED, Wolf M, et al. Prognostic factors in stage D2 prostate cancer: important implications for future trials. Results of a Cooperative Intergroup Study (INT 0036).
Semin Oncol 1994;21:613.
584. Soloway MS, Hardeman SW, Hickey D, et al. Stratification of patients with metastatic prostate cancer based on extent of disease on initial bone scan. Cancer 1988;61:195.
585. Mulders PFA, Dijkman GA, Fernandez del Morel P, et al. Analysis of prognostic factors in disseminated prostatic cancer: an update. Cancer 1990;65:2758.
586. De Voogt HJ, Suciu S, Sylvester R, et al. Multivariate analysis of prognostic factors in patients with advanced prostatic cancer: results from 2 European Organization for Research on Treatment
of Cancer trials. J Urol 1989;141:883.
587. Chodak GW, Vogelzang NJ, Caplan RJ, et al. Independent prognostic factors in patients with metastatic (stage D2) prostate cancer: the Zoladex Study Group. JAMA 1991; 265:618.
588. Partin AW, Carter HB, Chan DW, et al. Prostate specific antigen in the staging of localized prostate cancer: influence of tumor differentiation, tumor volume and benign hyperplasia. J Urol
1990;143:747.
589. Miller JI, Ahmann FR, Drach GW, et al. Clinical usefulness of serum prostate specific antigen after hormonal therapy of metastatic prostate cancer. J Urol 1992;147:956.
590. Matzkin H, Eber P, Todd B, et al. Prognostic significance of changes in prostate-specific markers after endocrine treatment of stage D2 prostatic cancer. Cancer 1992;70: 2302.
591. Eisenberger MA, Blumenstein BA, Crawford ED, et al. Bilateral orchiectomy with or without flutamide for metastatic prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 1998;339(15):1036.
592. Waxman J, Man A, Hendry WF, et al. Importance of early tumor exacerbation in patients treated with long-acting analogues of gonadotrophin releasing hormone for advanced prostatic cancer.
Br Med J 1985;291:1387.
593. Thompson IM, Zeidman EJ, Rodriguez FR. Sudden death due to disease flare with luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone agonist therapy for carcinoma of the prostate. J Urol 1990;144:1479.
594. Labrie F, Dupont A, Belanger A, Lachance R. Flutamide eliminates the risk of disease flare in prostatic cancer patients treated with a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone agonist. J Urol
1987;138(4):804.
595. Soloway MS, Chodak G, Vogelzang NJ, et al. Zoladex versus orchiectomy in treatment of advanced prostate cancer: a randomized trial. Urology 1991;37:46.
596. The Leuprolide Study Group. Leuprolide versus diethylstilbestrol for metastatic prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 1984;311:1281.
597. Bonkhoff H, Fixemer T, Hunsicker I, Remberger K. Estrogen receptor expression in prostate cancer and premalignant prostatic lesions. Am J Pathol 1999;155(2):641.
598. Byar DP. The Veterans Administration Cooperative Urological Research Group's studies of cancer of the prostate. Cancer 1973;32:1126.
599. Shearer RJ, Hendry WF, Sommerville IF, et al. Plasma testosterone: an accurate monitor of hormone treatment of prostatic cancer. Br J Urol 1973;45:668.
600. Fleshner NE, Fair WR. Anti-androgenic effects of combination finasteride plus flutamide in patients with prostatic carcinoma. Br J Urol 1996;78(6):907.
601. Brufsky A, Fontaine-Rothe P, Berlane K, et al. Finasteride and flutamide as potency-sparing androgen-ablative therapy for advanced adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Urology 1997;49(6):913.
602. Chang A, Yeap B, Davis T, et al. Double-blind, randomized study of primary hormonal treatment of stage D2 prostate carcinoma: flutamide versus diethylstilbestrol. J Clin Oncol
1996;14(8):2250.
603. Iversen P, Tveter K, Varenhorst E. Randomized study of Casodex 50 MG monotherapy vs. orchiectomy in the treatment of metastatic prostate cancer. The Scandinavian Casodex Cooperative
Group. Scand J Urol Nephrol 1996;30(2):93.
604. Boccardo F, Rubagotti A, Barichello M, et al. Bicalutamide monotherapy versus flutamide plus goserelin in prostate cancer patients: results of an Italian Prostate Cancer Project study. J Clin
Oncol 1999;7:2027.
605. Tyrrell CJ, Kaisary AV, Iversen P, et al. A randomised comparison of “Casodex” (bicalutamide) 150 mg monotherapy versus castration in the treatment of metastatic and locally advanced
prostate cancer. Eur Urol 1998;33(5):447.
606. Agency for Health Care Policy and Research. Relative effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of methods of androgen suppression in the treatment of advanced prostatic cancer. Evidence
Report/Technology Assessment, no. 4:51, 1999.
607. Labrie F, Dupont A, Belanger A, et al. Combination therapy with flutamide and castration (LHRH agonist or orchiectomy) in advanced prostate cancer: a marked improvement in response and
survival. J Steroid Biochem 1985;23:833.
608. Crawford ED, Eisenberger MA, Mcleod DG, et al. A controlled trial of leuprolide with or without flutamide in prostatic carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1989;321:419.
609. Denis LJ, Keuppens F, Smith PH, et al. Maximal androgen blockade: final analysis of EORTC phase III trial 30853. EORTC genitourinary tract cancer cooperative group and the EORTC data
center. Eur Urol 1998;33(2):144.
610. Janknegt RA, Abbou CC, Baroletti R, et al. Orchiectomy and nilutamide or placebo as treatment of metastatic prostatic cancer in a multinational double-blind randomized trial. J Urol
1993;149:77.
611. Prostate Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group. Maximum androgen blockade in advanced prostate cancer: an overview of 22 randomized trials with 3283 deaths in 5710 patients. Lancet
1995;346(8970):265.
612. Caubet JF, Tosteson TD, Dong EW, et al. Maximum androgen blockade in advanced prostate cancer: a meta-analysis of published randomized controlled trials using nonsteroidal
antiandrogens. Urology 1997;49(1):71.
613. Agency for Health Care Policy and Research. Relative effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of methods of androgen suppression in the treatment of advanced prostatic cancer. Evidence
Report/Technology Assessment, no. 4:73.
614. Sandhu SS, Matveev VB, Kaisary AV. Finasteride plus flutamide for prostatic carcinoma. Br J Urol 1997;80(2):360.
615. Kirby R, Robertson C, Turkes A, et al. Finasteride in association with either flutamide or goserelin as combination hormonal therapy in patients with stage M1 carcinoma of the prostate gland.
International Prostate Health council (IPHC) Trial Study Group. Prostate 1999;402(2);105.
616. Kirby R, Robertson C, Turkes A, et al. Finasteride in association with either flutamide or goserelin as combination hormonal therapy in patients with stage M1 carcinoma of the prostate gland.
International Prostate Health Council (IPHC) Trial Study Group. Prostate 1999;402(2):105.
617. Klotz LH, Herr HW, Morse MJ, Whitmore WF Jr. Intermittent endocrine therapy for advanced prostate cancer. Cancer 1986;58(11):2546.
618. Sato N, Gleave ME, Bruchovsky N, et al. Intermittent androgen suppression delays progression to androgen-independent regulation of prostate-specific antigen gene in the LNCaP prostate
tumor model. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1996;58(2):139.
619. Trachtenberg J. Experimental treatment of prostatic cancer by intermittent hormonal therapy. J Urol 1987;137(4):785.
620. Oliver RT, Williams G, Paris AM, Blandy JP. Intermittent androgen deprivation after PSA-complete response as a strategy to reduce induction of hormone-resistant prostate cancer. Urology
1997;49(1):79.
621. Goldenberg SL, Bruchovsky N, Gleave ME, Sullivan LD, Akakura K. Intermittent androgen suppression in the treatment of prostate cancer: a preliminary report. Urology 1995;45(5):839.
622. Wei JT, Gross M, Jaffe CA, et al. Androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer results in significant loss of bone density. Urology 1999;54(4):607.
623. Townsend MF, Sanders WH, Northway RO, Graham SD Jr. Bone fractures associated with luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone agonists used in the treatment of prostate carcinoma. Cancer
1997;79(3):545.
624. Daniell HW, Dunn SR, Ferguson DW, et al. Progressive osteoporosis during androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer. J Urol 2000;163(1):181.
625. Fowler JE, Whitmore WF. The response of metastatic adenocarcinoma of the prostate to exogenous testosterone. J Urol 1981;126:372.
626. Manni A, Bartholomew M, Caplan R, et al. Androgen priming and chemotherapy in advanced prostate cancer: evaluation of determinants of clinical outcome. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1456.
627. Taylor CD, Elson P, Trump DL. Importance of continued testicular suppression in hormone refractory prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2167.
628. Hussain M, Wolf M, Marshall E, et al. Effects of continued androgen-deprived therapy and other prognostic factors on response and survival in phase II chemotherapy trials for
hormone-refractory prostate cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group Report. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1868.
629. Scher HI, Zhang Z-F, Cohen L, et al. Hormonally relapsed prostatic cancer: lessons from the flutamide withdrawal syndrome. Adv Urol 1995;8:61.
630. Small EJ, Srinivas S. The antiandrogen withdrawal syndrome: experience in a large cohort of unselected patients with advanced prostate cancer. Cancer 1995;76:1428.
631. Figg WD, Sartor O, Cooper MR, et al. Prostate specific antigen decline following the discontinuation of flutamide in patients with stage D2 prostate cancer. Am J Med 1995;98:412.
632. Herrada J, Dieringer P, Logothetis CJ. Characterization of patients with androgen-independent prostatic carcinoma whose serum prostate specific antigen decreased following flutamide
withdrawal. J Urol 1996;155:620.
633. Schellhammer P, Venner P, Haas G, et al. Prostate specific antigen decrease after withdrawal of antiandrogen therapy with bicalutamide or flutamide in patients receiving combined androgen
blockade. J Urol 1997;157:1731.
634. Nieh PT. Withdrawal phenomenon with the antiandrogen Casodex. J Urol 1995;153:1070.
635. Gomella LG, Ismail M, Nathan FE. Antiandrogen withdrawal syndrome with nilutamide. J Urol 1997;157:1366.
636. Huan SD, Gerridzen RG, Yau JC, et al. Antiandrogen withdrawal syndrome with nilutamide. Urology 1997;49:632.
637. Gaddipati JP, McLeod DG, Heidenberg HB, et al. Frequent detection of codon 877 mutation in the androgen receptor gene in advanced prostate cancers. Cancer Res 1994;54:2861.
638. Taplin ME, Bubley GJ, Shuster TD, et al. Mutation of the androgen-receptor gene in metastatic androgen-independent prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1393.
639. Tilley WD, Buchanan G, Hickey TE, et al. Mutations in the androgen receptor gene are associated with progression of human prostate cancer to androgen independence. Clin Cancer Res
1996;2:277.
640. Figg WD, McCall NA, Reed E, et al. The in vitro response of four antisteroid receptor agents on the hormone responsive prostate cancer cell line LNCaP. Oncol Rep 1995;2:295.
641. Wilding G, Chen M, Gelman EP. Aberrant response in vitro of hormone-responsive prostate cancer cells to antiandrogens. Prostate 1989;14:103.

642. Scher HI, Liebertz C, Kelly WK, et al. Bicalutamide for advanced prostate cancer: the natural versus treated history of disease. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2928.
643. Joyce R, Fenton MA, Rode P, et al. High dose bicalutamide for androgen independent prostate cancer: effect of prior hormonal therapy. J Urol 1997;159:149.
644. Eastham JA, Sartor O. Nilutamide response after flutamide failure in postorchiectomy progressive prostate cancer. J Urol 1998;159:990.
645. Small EJ, Baron AD, Fippin L, et al. Ketoconazole retains activity in advanced prostate cancer patients with progression despite flutamide withdrawal. J Urol 1997;4:1204.
646. Kelly WK, Curley T, Leibertz C, et al. Prospective evaluation of hydrocortisone and suramin in patients with androgen-independent prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2208.
647. Tannock I, Osoba D, Stockler M, et al. Chemotherapy with mitoxantrone plus prednisone alone for symptomatic hormone-resistant prostate cancer: a Canadian randomized study with palliative
end points. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1756.
648. Kantoff P, Halabi S, Conaway M, et al. Hydrocortisone with or without mitoxantrone in men with hormone-refractory prostate cancer: results of the CALGB 9182 study. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:2506.
649. Small EJ, Marshall ME, Reyno L, Meyers F, Natale R. Superiority of suramin + hydrocortisone (S + H) over placebo + hydrocortisone (P + H): results of a multi-center double-blind phase III
study in patients with hormone refractory prostate cancer (HRPC). Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:308a.
650. Dawson NA, Small EJ, Conaway M, et al. Megestrol acetate (MA) in men with hormone-refractory prostate cancer (HRPC): prostate specific antigen (PSA) response and antiandrogen
withdrawal (AAWD). Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) 9181 [abstract]. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1996;15:241.
651. Smith DC, Redman BG, Flaherty LE, et al. A phase II trial of oral diethylstilbestrol as a second-line hormonal agent in advanced prostate cancer. Urology 1998;52(2):257.
652. DiPaola RS, Zhang H, Lambert GH, et al. Clinical and biologic activity of an estrogenic herbal combination (PC-SPES) in prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 1998;339(12):785.
653. Kameda H, Small EJ, Reese DM, et al. A phase II study of PC-SPES, an herbal compound for the treatment of advanced prostate cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:320a(abst 1230).
654. Myers C, Cooper M, Stein C, et al. Suramin: a novel growth factor antagonist with activity in hormone-refractory metastatic prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:881.
655. Kelly WK, Scher HI, Mazumdar M, et al. Prostate specific antigen as a measure of disease outcome in hormone-refractory prostatic cancer. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:607.
656. Bubley GJ, Carducci M, Dahut W, et al. Eligibility and response guidelines for phase II clinical trials in androgen-independent prostate cancer: recommendations from the prostate-specific
antigen working group. J Clin Oncol 1999;11:3461.
657. George DJ, Kantoff PW. Prognostic indicators in hormone refractory prostate cancer. Urol Clin North Am 1999;26(2):303.
658. Dewys WD, Begg CB, Brodovsky H, et al. A comparative clinical trial of Adriamycin and 5-Fluorouracil in advanced prostatic cancer: prognostic factors and response. Prostate 1983;4:1.
659. Emrich LJ, Priore RL, Murphy GP, et al. Prognostic factors in patients with advanced prostate cancer. Cancer Res 1985;45:5173.
660. Fossa SD, Paus E, Lindegaard M, et al. Prostate-specific antigen and other prognostic factors in patients with hormone-resistant prostate cancer undergoing experimental treatment. Br J Urol
1992;69:175.
661. Petrylak DP, Scher HI, Li Z, et al. Prognostic factors for survival of patients with bidimensionally measureable metastatic hormone-refractory prostate cancer treated with single-agent
chemotherapy. Cancer 1992;70:2870.
662. Langlotz C, Schnall M, Pollack H. Staging of prostate cancer: accuracy of MRI imaging. Radiology 1995;194:645.
663. Sridhara R, Eisenberger MA, Sinibaldi VJ, et al. Evaluation of prostate-specific antigen as a surrogate marker for response of hormone-refractory prostate cancer to suramin therapy. J Clin
Oncol 1995;13:2944.
664. Pienta KJ, Redman B, Hussain M, et al. Phase II evaluation or oral estramustine and oral etoposide in hormone-refractory adenocarcinoma of the prostate. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2005.
665. Smith DC, Dunn RL, Strawderman MS, et al. Change in serum prostate-specific antigen as a marker for response to cytotoxic therapy for hormone-refractory prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:1835.
666. Eisenberger MA, Simon R, O'Dwyer PJ, et al. A re-evaluation of nonhormonal cytotoxic chemotherapy in treatment of prostatic carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:827.
667. Yagoda A, Petrylak D. Cytotoxic chemotherapy for advanced hormone-resistant prostate cancer. Cancer 1993;71[Suppl 3]:1098.
668. Benson R, Hartley-Asp B. Mechanisms of action and clinical uses of estramustine. Cancer Invest 1990;8(34):375.
669. Amato RJ, Ellerhorst J, Bui C, et al. Estramustine and vinblastine for patients with progressive androgen-independent adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Urol Oncol 1995;1:168.
670. Seidman AD, Scher HI, Petrylak D, et al. Estramustine and vinblastine: use of prostate specific antigen as a clinical trial end point for hormone refractory prostatic cancer. J Urol 1992;147:931.
671. Hudes GR, Greenberg R, Krigel RL, et al. Phase II study of estramustine and vinblastine, two microtubule inhibitors, in hormone-refractory prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1754.
672. Hudes G, Einhorn L, Ross E, et al. Vinblastine versus vinblastine plus oral estramustine phosphate for patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer: a Hoosier Oncology Group and Fox
Chase Network phase III trial. J Clin Oncol 1999;17(10):3160.
673. Pienta KJ, Redman BG, Bandekar R, et al. A phase II trial of oral estramustine and oral etoposide in hormone refractory prostate cancer. Urology 1997;50:401.
674. Dimopoulos MA, Panopoulos C, Bamia C, et al. Oral estramustine and oral etoposide for hormone refractory prostate cancer. Urology 1997;50:754.
675. Cruciani G. Phase II oral estramustine and oral etoposide in hormone refractory adenocarcinoma of the prostate: Instituto Oncologico Romagnolo, Gruppo Onco-Urologico. Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1998;17:329a.
676. Reese D, Burris H, Belledgrun A, et al. A phase I/II study of navelbine (vinorelbine) and estramustine in the treatment of hormone refractory prostate cancer (HRPC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1996;15:A673[abst].
677. Natale RB, Zarefsky S. Phase I/II trial of estramustine with Taxotere (T) or Vinorelbine (V) in patients (pts) with metastatic hormone refractory prostate cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1998;17:338a.
678. Carles J, Domenech M, Gelabert-Mas A, et al. Phase II study of estramustine and vinorelbine in hormone refractory prostate carcinoma patients. Acta Oncol 1998;37:187.
679. Roth BJ, Yeap BY, Wilding G, et al. Taxol in advanced, hormone-refractory carcinoma of the prostate: a phase II trial of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Cancer 1993;72:2457.
680. Hudes GR, Nathan F, Khater C, et al. Phase II trial of 96-hour paclitaxel plus oral estramustine phosphate in metastatic hormone refractory prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:3156.
681. Picus J, Schultz M. Docetaxel (Taxotere) as monotherapy in the treatment of hormone-refractory prostate cancer: preliminary results. Semin Oncol 1999;26[Suppl 17]:14.
682. Petrylak DP, Macarthur RB, O'Connor J, et al. Phase I trial of docetaxel with estramustine in androgen-independent prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:958.
683. Kreis W, Budman DR, Fetten J, et al. Phase I trial of the combination of daily estramustine phosphate and intermittent docetaxel in patients with metastatic hormone refractory prostate
carcinoma. Ann Oncol 1999;10:33.
684. Savarese D, Taplin ME, Halabi S, et al. A phase II study of docetaxel (Taxotere), estramustine, and low-dose hydrocortisone in men with hormone-refractory prostate cancer: preliminary results
of cancer and leukemia group B Trial 9780. Semin Oncol 1999;26[Suppl 17]:39.
685. Colleoni M, Graiff C, Vicario G, et al. Phase II study of estramustine, oral etoposide, and vinorelbine in hormone refractory prostate cancer. AmJ Clin Oncol 1997;20:383.
686. Kelly WK, Curley T, Slovin S, et al. Paclitaxel, estramustine phosphate and carboplatin (TEC) in patients with advanced prostate cancer (submitted).
687. Raghaven D, Cox K, Pearson BS, et al. Oral cyclophosphamide for the management of hormone refractory prostate cancer. Br J Urol 1993;72:625.
688. Logothetis CJ, Samuels ML, von Eschenbach AC, et al. Doxorubicin, mitomycin-C, and 5-fluorouracil (DMF) in the treatment of metastatic hormonal refractory adenocarcinoma of the prostate,
with a note on the staging of metastatic prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:368.
689. Blumenstein B, Crawford ED, Saiers JH, et al. Doxorubicin, mitomycin C and 5-fluorouracil in the treatment of hormone refractory adenocarcinoma of the prostate: a Southwest Oncology Group
study. J Urol 1993;150:411.
690. Laurie JA, Hahn RG, Therneau TM, et al. Chemotherapy for hormonally refractory advanced prostate carcinoma: a comparison of combined versus sequential treatment with mitomycin C,
doxorubicin, and 5-fluorouracil. Cancer 1992;69:1440.
691. Small EJ, Srinivas S, Egan B, et al. Doxorubicin and dose-escalated cyclophosphamide with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor for the treatment for hormone-resistant prostate cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1996;14:1617.
692. Sella A. Kilbourn R, Amato R, et al. Phase II study of ketoconazole combined with weekly doxorubicin in patients with androgen-independent prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:683.
693. Ellerhorst JS, Tu S-M, Amato RJ, et al. Phase II trial of alternating weekly chemohormonal therapy for patients with androgen-independent prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:2371.
694. Eisenberger MA, Reyno LM, Jodrell DI, et al. Suramin: an active drug for prostate cancer. Interim observations in a phase I trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:611.
695. Reyno LM, Egorin MJ, Eisenberger MA, et al. Development and validation of a pharmacokinetically based fixed dosing scheme for suramin. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2187.
696. Bolger JJ, Dearnaley DP, Kirk D, et al. Strontium-89 (Metastron) versus external beam radiotherapy in patients with painful bone metastases secondary to prostatic cancer: preliminary report of
a multicenter trial. Semin Oncol 1993;20:32.
697. Porter AT, McEwan AJB, Powe JE, et al. Results of a randomized phase III trial to evaluate the efficacy of strontium-89 adjuvant to local field external beam irradiation in the management of
endocrine resistant prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:805.
698. Chan JM, Stampfer MJ, Giovannucci E, et al. Plasma insulinlike growth factor-I and prostate cancer risk: a prospective study. Science 1998;279(5350):563.
699. Ware JL. Growth factor network disruption in prostate cancer progression. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1998;17:443.
700. Foster BA, Kaplan PJ, Greenberg NM. Peptide growth factors and prostate cancer: new models, new opportunities. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1998;17:317.
701. Pegram MD Lipton A, Hayes DF, et al. Phase II study of receptor-enhanced chemosensitivity using recombinant humanized anti-p185HER/neu monoclonal antibody plus cisplatin in patients
with HER-2/neu-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer refractory to chemotherapy treatment. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2659.
702. Ross JS, Sheehan C, Hayner-Buchan AM, et al. HER-2/neu gene amplification status in prostate cancer by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Hum Pathol 1997;28:827.
703. Kallakury BV, Sheehan CE, Ambros RA, et al. Correlation of p34cdc2 cyclin-dependent kinase overexpression, CD44s downregulation, and HER-2/neu oncogene amplification with recurrence
in prostatic adenocarcinomas. J Clin Oncol 1998;16: 1302.
704. Mark HF, Feldman D, Das S, et al. Fluorescence in situ hybridization study of HER-2/neu oncogene amplification in prostate cancer. Exp Mol Pathol 1999;66:170.
705. Craft N, Shostak Y, Carey M, et al. A mechanism for hormone-independent prostate cancer through modulation of androgen signaling by the Her-2/neu tyrosine kinase. Nat Med 1999;5:280.
706. Maddy SQ, Chisholm GD, Hawkins RA, et al. Localization of epidermal growth factor receptors in the human prostate by biochemical and immunocytochemical methods. J Endocrinol
1987;113:147.
707. Peehl DM, Sellers RG. Basic FGF, EGF, and PDGF modify TGFb-induction of smooth muscle cell phenotype in human prostatic stromal cells. Prostate 1998;35:125.
708. Fudge K, Wang CY, Stearns ME. Immunohistochemistry analysis of platelet-derived growth factor A and B chains and platelet-derived growth factor alpha and beta receptor expression in
benign prostatic hyperplasias and Gleason-graded human prostate adenocarcinomas. Mod Pathol 1994;7(5):549.
709. Harper GP, Barde YA, Burnstock YA, et al. Guinea pig prostate is a rich source of nerve growth factor. Nature 1979;350:678.
710. Pflug BR, Dionne C, Kaplan DR, et al. Expression of a trk high affinity nerve growth factor receptor in human prostate. Endocrinology 1995;136:262.
711. Iwamura M, Sluss PM, Casamento JB, et al. Insulin-like growth factor I: action and receptor characterization in human prostate cancer cell lines. Prostate 1993;22(3):243.
712. Casey ML, Byrd W, MacDonald PC. Massive amounts of immunoreactive endothelin in human seminal fluid. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1992;74:223.
713. Kobayashi S, Tang R, Wang B, et al. Localization of endothelin receptors in the human prostate. J Urol 1994;151(3):763.
714. Myers MP, Pass I, Batty IH, et al. The lipid phosphatase activity of PTEN is critical for its tumor suppressor function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:13513.
715. Wu X, Senechal K, Neshat MS, Whang YE, Sawyers CL. The PTEN/MMAC1 tumor suppressor phosphatase functions as a negative regulator of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt pathway.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95(26):15587.
716. Ali IU, Division of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer Institute. Mutational spectra of PTEN/MMAC1 gene: a tumor suppressor with lipid phosphatase activity. J Natl Cancer Inst
1999;91(22):1922.
717. Samid D, Shack S, Myers CE. Selective growth arrest and phenotype reversion of prostate cancer cells in vitro by nontoxic pharmacological concentrations of phenylacetate. J Clin Invest
1993;91(5):2288.
718. Dijkman GA, Gernandez del Moral P, Bruynseels J, et al. Liarozole (R75251) in hormone-resistant prostate cancer patients. Prostate 1997;33:26.
719. Debruyne FMJ, Murray R, Fradet Y, et al. Liarozolea novel treatment approach for advanced prostate cancer: results of a large randomized trial versus cyproterone acetate. Urology
1998;52:72.
720. Corder EH, Guess HA, Hulka BS, et al. Vitamin D and prostate cancer: a prediagnostic study with stored sera. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1993;2(5):467.
721. Ingles SA, Ross RK, Yu MC, et al. Association of prostate cancer risk with genetic polymorphisms in vitamin D receptor and androgen receptor. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89(2): 166.
722. Tontonoz P, Hu E, Spiegelman BM. Stimulation of adipogenesis in fibroblasts by PPARg2, a lipid-activated transcription factor. Cell 1994;79:1147.
723. Kubota T, Koshizuka K, Williamson EA, et al. Ligand for Peroxisome Proliferator-activated receptor g (Troglitazone) has potent anti-tumor effect against human prostate cancer both in vitro and

in vivo. Cancer Res 1998;58:3344.
724. Steward WP. Marimastat (BB2516): current status of development. CancerChemother Pharmacol 1999;43:S56.

SECTION 34.5 Cancer of the Urethra and Penis
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 34.5
Cancer of the Urethra and Penis
HARRY W. HERR
GUIDO DALBAGNI
DEAN F. BAJORIN
WILLIAM U. SHIPLEY
Introduction
Carcinoma of the Male Urethra
Symptoms
Pathology
Evaluation and Staging
Treatment
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Carcinoma of the Female Urethra
Etiology
Symptoms
Pathology
Evaluation and Staging
Treatment
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Combined Modality Therapy
Cancer of the Penis
Etiology
Symptoms
Pathology
Staging
Treatment
Surgery
Chemotherapy
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Primary cancer of the urethra and penis is uncommon. The rarity of tumors involving the penis and urethra has contributed to the lack of a standardized approach in
the management of patients with these neoplasms.
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common cancer in the penis and urethra. The patterns of spread, treatment approaches, and prognosis are related to the extent
of disease and the region of the urethra or penis involved by the tumor. Carcinoma of the penis often remains localized for prolonged periods. When metastasis
occurs, it follows a stepwise pattern; first, to the inguinal (groin) lymph nodes and, second, to the pelvic lymph nodes. Distant dissemination occurs later. A favorable
natural history permits cure of most localized penile cancers and of many with inguinal metastases. Urethral carcinoma in both males and females tends to invade
locally and metastasize to regional lymph nodes early in its evolution. Most of these tumors are far advanced locally when diagnosed. This feature accounts for the
relative poor prognosis of urethral cancer despite aggressive management. 1

CARCINOMA OF THE MALE URETHRA
Carcinoma of the male urethra is extremely rare. Approximately 600 cases have been reported. Urethral carcinoma has been reported in boys as young as 13 years of
age and in men in their 90s, although most patients are older than 50 years of age. Significant etiologic factors have not been identified, but chronic inflammation
appears to play a role in the initiation of disease, because many patients have prior sexually transmitted disease, urethritis, or urethral stricture. The incidence of
urethral stricture in men with carcinoma of the urethra ranges from 24% to 76%. The most frequent site of stricture and malignancy is the bulbomembranous urethra.
No racial predisposition has been noted.
SYMPTOMS
The lesion is often insidious at onset with symptoms attributed to benign urethral disease with stricture rather than to malignancy. Men often present with a palpable
urethral mass or obstructive symptoms. On occasion, pain associated with urethral fistula or periurethral abscess may herald the presence of a male urethral cancer.
Urethral stricture or bleeding in a man without a history of trauma or venereal disease should suggest the possibility of urethral carcinoma. Because of the nonspecific
nature of the symptoms, diagnosis is often delayed. 2 The most common presenting symptoms are listed in Table 34.5-1. Most reflect local involvements by the lesion.

TABLE 34.5-1. Cancer of the Urethra and Penis

PATHOLOGY
Tumors of the male urethra can be categorized according to histology of the cells lining the anatomic region of origin ( Fig. 34.5-1). The epithelium of the prostatic
urethra gives rise to transitional cell carcinoma that is histologically and clinically distinct from adenocarcinoma commonly associated with the prostatic glands, but
that is identical to the bladder urothelium. Tumors originating in the area of the trigone or bladder neck with direct extension into the prostatic urethra may be
mistakenly diagnosed as primary urethral carcinoma unless careful examination and biopsy excludes the vesical neck as the site of origin. Male urethral carcinoma
occurs in the bulbomembranous urethra in 60%, penile urethra in 30%, and prostatic urethra in 10%. Histologically, 80% of male urethral cancers are squamous cell
carcinoma, 15% are transitional cell carcinoma, and approximately 5% are adenocarcinoma and undifferentiated tumors. 1

FIGURE 34.5-1. Anatomy and pathology of male urethral carcinoma.

Male urethral carcinoma spreads by direct extension to adjacent structures and usually involves the vascular spaces of the corpus spongiosum and the periurethral
tissues. Carcinoma of the bulbomembranous urethra extends to the urogenital diaphragm, prostate, perineum, and scrotal skin. Hematogenous spread is uncommon
except in advanced disease. Metastasis occurs by lymphatic embolization to regional lymph nodes. The lymphatics from the anterior urethra drain into the superficial
and deep inguinal lymph nodes and occasionally to the external iliac lymph nodes. The lymphatics from the posterior urethra drain into the external iliac, obturator,
and hypogastric nodes. Tumors of the anterior urethra usually metastasize to the inguinal nodes, and tumors of the posterior urethra most commonly spread to the
pelvic nodes, although exceptions occur. Palpable inguinal lymph nodes occur in approximately 20% of cases and almost always represent metastatic disease. 3
EVALUATION AND STAGING
The diagnosis is made by transurethral biopsy. The extent of local involvement is determined by careful inspection and palpation of the external genitalia and
perineum at the time of cystourethroscopy and by bimanual examination with the patient under anesthesia. Needle biopsy is occasionally helpful in determining local
extent of neoplasm. Cytologic studies of voided urine may be helpful for diagnosing some patients. Computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
may help to evaluate the pelvic and paraaortic nodes. Local soft tissue and bone extension are best evaluated by an MRI scan.
The tumor, node, and metastasis (TNM) staging system is commonly used to assess carcinoma of the urethra 4 (Table 34.5-2). The TNM staging classification is based
on depth of invasion of the primary tumor, the presence or absence of regional lymph node involvement, and distant metastasis.

TABLE 34.5-2. Tumor (T), Node (N), Metastasis (M) Classification of Carcinoma of the Urethra

TREATMENT
Surgical excision is the primary therapy for carcinoma of the male urethra. The extent of surgery depends on the location and stage of the tumor. In general, anterior
urethral carcinoma is more amenable to surgical control and has a better prognosis than posterior urethral carcinoma. Although some instances of tumor control by
irradiation have been reported, in general, radiation has been reserved for patients with early-stage lesions of the anterior urethra who refuse surgery. Radiation
therapy has the advantage of preserving the penis but may result in urethral stricture and chronic edema and does not prevent new tumor occurrences in the retained
urethra. Combination chemotherapy has achieved encouraging results in patients with metastatic urothelial cancer and is now being integrated more frequently with
irradiation and definitive surgery in patients with locally advanced urethral carcinomas. 5
SURGERY
Table 34.5-3 shows 5-year survival rates in cancer of the male urethra according to stage, site, and surgical treatment. 6,7,8,9 and 10

TABLE 34.5-3. Five-Year Survival Rate in Cancer of the Male Urethra

Carcinoma of the Distal Urethra
Carcinoma of the penile urethra may be treated by transurethral resection (TUR), local excision, partial amputation, or radical amputation with or without
emasculation. For a superficial papillary or an in situ tumor, TUR and fulguration is sufficient. For a tumor infiltrating the corpus and localized to the distal half of the
penis, a partial amputation with a 2-cm margin proximal to the visible or palpable tumor is the accepted treatment. If the infiltrating tumor is located in the proximal
penile urethra or involves the entire urethra, radical amputation is necessary. This procedure may involve emasculation if the scrotal skin or genitalia are involved.
Ilioinguinal groin node dissection is indicated only if the inguinal nodes are palpable. There is no evidence of benefit from prophylactic groin dissection. Carcinoma
involving the distal or penile urethra generally enjoys a more favorable prognosis than cancers involving the entire or more proximal regions of the urethra.

Carcinoma of the Bulbomembranous Urethra
Transurethral or segmental resection may be adequate for treatment of early superficial tumors involving the bulbomembranous urethra, but such cases are rare. Most
patients present with an infiltrating bulky tumor with invasion of surrounding structures. Approximately one-third of these patients are locally understaged and later
prove to have pelvic or groin metastasis. The overall survival of patients in this group is poor despite a distinctly radical surgical approach, but radical excision offers
the best opportunity for long-term disease control and the lowest incidence of local recurrence. Postoperative morbidity is high. Despite the dismal prognosis,
experience suggests that when local control of the tumor can be achieved, overall long-term results are favorable. Such tumors tend to be locally extensive and are
apt to recur locally with inadequate local treatment. Metastasis appears to be a late event, which has led to aggressive combined therapy approaches in patients with
bulky posterior urethral carcinoma.
Treatment Results for Carcinoma of the Bulbomembranous and Anterior Urethra
Surgery alone gives suboptimal results in the management of male urethral carcinoma. In the Dinney et al. series, 11 two of five patients with tumors of the anterior
urethra and none of the four patients with tumors of the bulbomembranous urethra were alive after being treated by surgery alone. In the Dalbagni et al. series, 12 7 of
18 patients (38%) with tumors of the anterior urethra are disease-free, and 4 of 28 patients (14%) with tumors of the bulbar urethra are disease-free.
Radiation therapy alone was ineffective, as summarized by Zeidman et al. 13 Patients who receive radiation therapy followed by salvage surgery seem to fare worse
than if surgery was performed in integrated fashion. A combination of preoperative irradiation (20 to 60 cGy) followed by surgical excision of the inferior pubic rami
with partial symphysiectomy, anterior perineum, urogenital diaphragm, and genitalia, en bloc with the pelvic organs and lymph nodes, may improve local control and
survival. 10 Results suggest that approximately one-third of patients undergoing such extended excision of locally advanced neoplasms can be salvaged.
The integration of chemotherapy used as systemic therapy, and radiosensitization followed by surgery, can be successful in both the bulbomembranous and prostatic
urethra. Anecdotal reports document successful treatment using M-VAC [methotrexate, vinblastine, Adriamycin (doxorubicin), and cisplatin] for transitional cell tumors
and 5-fluorouracil (FU) plus either mitomycin-C or cisplatin for squamous cell carcinoma. 5,14,15,16,17,18 and 19 Three reports substantiate the use of mitomycin-C plus FU
chemotherapy integrated with radiation therapy and surgery for squamous cell carcinoma. Baskin and Turzan 16 reported the first case of penile-preserving surgery for
carcinoma of the male urethra with combined FU plus mitomycin-C and radiotherapy followed by distal urethrectomy. Licht et al. 17 reported one complete response
among two patients treated with similar chemotherapy and radiation for a squamous cell carcinoma of the urethra with lymph node metastasis. Oberfield 18 reported
genital preservation in two patients with an invasive squamous cell carcinoma of the bulbar urethra with this chemotherapy regimen plus radiation. In the series by
Gheiler et al., 19 four patients with high-stage tumors were treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy and radiation before surgery, two of whom were rendered
disease-free. Success using cisplatin and FU has been reported in both squamous cell carcinoma 14 and adenocarcinoma. 20
Primary Carcinoma of the Prostatic Urethra
Primary carcinoma arising from the prostatic urethra is rare. Tumors may be transitional or adenocarcinoma, and the diagnosis is based on a solitary tumor in the
prostatic urethra without associated coexisting or preexisting urothelial tumors within the bladder and the bladder neck. There are no characteristic symptoms of this
lesion. Patients generally present with hematuria or obstructive urinary symptoms. Prostatic induration on rectal examination represents advanced disease. The
serum prostate-specific antigen and acid phosphatase values are normal. Diagnosis depends on transurethral biopsy of the prostate.
Superficial lesions of the prostatic urethra are managed successfully by transurethral resection in the majority of patients. However, such tumors are uncommon. In
most instances, the tumor involves the bulk of the prostate with variable extension to the bulbomembranous urethra or to the bladder neck and trigone. In this
situation, cystoprostatectomy and urethrectomy is the treatment of choice. In limited experience, the overall 5-year survival rate of patients treated with radical
surgery, with or without preoperative irradiation, is poor. Combined modality therapy offers a prospect for improved results. For example, a total of 11 patients with
advanced tumors of the prostate, prostatic urethra, or bulbomembranous urethra received neoadjuvant chemotherapy (i.e., M-VAC). Of ten evaluable patients, four
(40%) were downstaged to complete clinical remission, including three of five with transitional cell tumors of the prostate and prostatic urethra. 5 In selected
responding patients, conservative transurethral resection or prostatectomy rather than pelvic exenteration can be entertained. Most patients, however, are best
treated with a combination of aggressive surgery, irradiation, and chemotherapy, although the optimal strategy using these modalities is not established. 14,15
RADIATION THERAPY
Radiation therapy alone and postoperative radiation are rarely implemented in the management of men with urethral carcinoma. The most common approach has
been external-beam radiotherapy, using various techniques to deliver 50 to 60 cGy in 5 to 9 weeks. The long-term results of radiotherapy have been mixed, with the
best results reported for patients with distal lesions, for whom the outcome is similar to that reported with surgery. 21

CARCINOMA OF THE FEMALE URETHRA
Carcinoma of the urethra is unusual among genitourinary tract neoplasms in that it occurs more often in women than in men. Tumors present most commonly in
postmenopausal and older women, with 75% of patients older than 50 years of age. The disease is more prevalent among whites than other races.
ETIOLOGY
The cause of urethral carcinoma in women has not been established with certainty, although a causal relationship is reported with chronic irritation, urinary tract
infection, and malignancy. Proliferative lesions, such as caruncles, papillomas, adenomas, and polyps, have been associated with subsequent malignancy.
Leukoplakia of the urethra is considered a premalignant lesion and is treated with wide local excision.
SYMPTOMS
Most patients present with urinary frequency, hesitancy, obstruction, and a palpable urethral mass. Tumors may present as a papillary growth within the urethra and
may later become a soft fungating mass that bleeds easily. Ulcerative lesions may produce a foul-smelling discharge. The lesion may be detected first as a
submucosal mass in the anterior wall of the vagina. Spread from the primary lesion is by local extension and infiltration with subsequent involvement of the bladder
neck, vagina, or vulva. It may be difficult on initial physical examination to differentiate malignant tumors of the urethra from those of the vulva or vagina.
Lymphatics of the anterior urethra and labia drain to the superficial and then deep inguinal nodes, whereas the posterior urethra drains to the external iliac,
hypogastric, and obturator lymph nodes. These boundaries are not distinct, and anatomic crossovers are possible. Clinically palpable inguinal nodes are found in
one-third of patients, but histologic confirmation of malignancy is made in more than 90% of this group. 22,23 Pelvic node involvement occurs in 20%, and an additional
15% of patients develop metastatic nodal disease during follow-up. Metastasis outside the pelvis at the time of initial presentation is uncommon.
PATHOLOGY
Stratified squamous epithelium lines the distal two-thirds of the female urethra, and transitional epithelium lines the proximal one-third ( Fig. 34.5-2). The submucosa
of the urethra contains numerous periurethral glands. Tumor histology is a reflection of the site, with squamous cell carcinoma being the predominant tumor type and
usually presenting in the proximal two-thirds of the urethra. In general, carcinomas of the anterior urethra are low grade and less extensive. Carcinomas of the
proximal or entire urethra are of higher grade and locally advanced. Squamous cell carcinoma accounts for approximately 60%; transitional cell carcinoma, 20%;
adenocarcinoma, 10%; undifferentiated tumors and sarcomas, 5%; and melanoma, 2%. Histologic characteristics do not appear to significantly affect the prognosis,
and different histologic types are often treated in a similar fashion.

FIGURE 34.5-2. Anatomy and pathology of female urethral carcinoma.

EVALUATION AND STAGING
A pelvic examination under anesthesia combined with urethroscopy, cytoscopy, and biopsies is performed. Cytologic evaluation of the urine may be of value.
Radiographic evaluation consists of a chest x-ray and CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis. A barium enema and bone scan should be obtained in symptomatic
patients.
There has been no universally accepted staging system for female urethral carcinoma. The TNM staging system has been adapted to female urethral cancer (see
Table 34.5-2), but the practical fact is that staging, treatment, and prognosis are simplified by dividing tumors into anterior and low-stage versus posterior or entire
urethra and advanced stage.
TREATMENT
The most significant prognostic factor for local control and survival is the anatomic location and extent of the tumor. Treatment is based primarily on the tumor stage at
the time of presentation. Table 34.5-4 8,24 shows 5-year survival rates in female urethral cancer of both early and advanced stage after treatment.

TABLE 34.5-4. Five-Year Survival Rate in Female Urethral Cancer

Most urethral cancers in women are locally advanced when detected and involve the proximal one-third or entire urethra. Such lesions clearly do worse than localized,
low-grade, anterior urethral lesions. Poor prognosis attributed to urethral cancers in women is because of the advanced stage (high tumor volume), adjacent organ
involvement, inability to obtain a clear surgical margin (because of soft tissue infiltration), nodal disease, morbidity of extensive treatment, and inadequate systemic
therapy for metastatic tumor. Single-modality therapy often fails for advanced cases and is successful only in selected cases.
SURGERY
Local excision is often sufficient in selected patients with carcinoma of the distal urethra. For example, meatal tumors, if diagnosed early, are associated with an
excellent 5-year survival rate. Such tumors are superficial and well localized. The incidence of lymph node metastasis with distal urethral carcinoma is low. Local
excision controls the primary tumor, and urinary continence is maintained.
For tumors involving the proximal urethra or extending beyond the urethra into the adjacent structures, more aggressive treatment is required. When surgery is
considered, extensive resection is necessary, including total urethrectomy, cystectomy with pelvic lymph node dissection, and removal of most (if not all) of the
vagina. Extended excision to include resection of adjacent pubic symphysis and urogenital diaphragm similar to that for proximal male urethral cancer has resulted in
local control of a few cases of far advanced urethral carcinoma. Even extensive surgery, however, often fails because of soft tissue infiltration by the tumor beyond the
confines of the bladder neck, urethra, and vagina. Local recurrence after surgery alone is common. Anterior exenteration alone led to 10% to 17% 5-year survival and
a local recurrence rate of 67%. 25 Garden et al.26 reported 41% and 31% 5- and 10-year actuarial survival rates, respectively, with a 5-year local control rate of 64%
with radiation therapy. Dalbagni et al. 27 reported an overall 5-year survival rate of 32%—that is, the rates were 78% for low-stage and 22% for high-stage tumors, 54%
for tumors of the anterior urethra, and 25% and 18% for tumors of the posterior and whole urethra, respectively. No difference was found in survival between women
treated with radiation or surgery. 27
In cases of palpable inguinal nodes, inguinal lymphadenectomy has been advocated. Inguinal lymph node dissection is usually not performed in the absence of
palpable disease in the groin. 28,29
RADIATION THERAPY
Irradiation alone, as with surgical excision, may control small lesions in the distal urethra. Radiation of these small lesions can be accomplished with brachytherapy
without additional external-beam irradiation. 30 Interstitial or intracavitary irradiation delivering a 50 to 65 Gy tumor dose has been demonstrated to be sufficient to
control small distal urethral lesions.
Tumors of the proximal urethra, bladder neck invasion, or involvement of the entire urethra require combined external irradiation and brachytherapy. External
irradiation is delivered to the primary tumor site and regional lymph node. The groin should receive prophylactic irradiation to 50 Gy if there is no palpable
adenopathy. In the presence of palpable inguinal lymph nodes, bolus is added to the groin and the total dose is increased from 60 to 65 Gy. The pelvis is treated to
50 Gy by the combined whole pelvis and split field technique. The pelvic side wall can be boosted to 60 Gy in the presence of lymphadenopathy as detected by CT
scan. The primary tumor site is boosted with brachytherapy (one or two implants using iridium 192) to bring the total tumor dose from 70 to 80 Gy, depending on tumor
size. Complications from irradiation include bowel obstruction, fistula formation, urethral stricture, and incontinence. Radiation therapy alone controls only
approximately one-third of cases of advanced disease, and severe complications occur in 15% to 40% of patients. 31,32,33 and 34
COMBINED MODALITY THERAPY
Although the number of cases of advanced female urethral carcinoma is small, it is obvious that either extensive surgery alone or high-dose irradiation alone
produces an unacceptably high morbidity rate and low tumor control rate. This fact has led to combined treatment strategies with chemotherapy, radiation therapy,

and surgery in women with advanced urethral cancer. M-VAC chemotherapy and irradiation followed by surgery have been used in patients with transitional cell
carcinoma, and those with squamous cell carcinoma have received combined mitomycin-C and 5-fluorouracil and irradiation followed by surgery. 3,35,36 and 37 Long-term
results from combined modality therapy are unavailable.

CANCER OF THE PENIS
Carcinoma of the penis represents 2% of urogenital cancers. Although rare in North America, tumors of the penis account for 10% to 12% of all malignancies in males
among populations in which circumcision is not a common practice. 38
Penile cancer is the most common genitourinary cancer in Paraguay, representing 45% to 76% of all genitourinary malignancies. 39 In Uganda, where circumcision is
usually not performed, penile cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in males. 40 Although malignant penile lesions have been found in young men, most
patients are older than 50 years.
ETIOLOGY
Most penile cancers occur in uncircumcised men, suggesting an irritative effect of smegma combined with poor hygiene. Carcinoma is rare among men who were
circumcised in the neonatal period, but circumcision performed at puberty or in adulthood does not have the same protective potential as circumcision at birth. 41,42
Although the annual age-adjusted incidence of carcinoma of the penis for males in the United States is only 1 per 100,000, the lifetime risk of penile cancer
developing in uncircumcised males may be as high as 1 in 600. 42 Smegma, the product of bacterial action on desquamated epithelial cells is carcinogenic in animal
systems, although the specific component responsible for malignant degeneration in human males has not been identified.
Conflicting reports support and deny the association of penile carcinoma with cervical carcinoma in sexual partners or with herpetic infection. No compelling data
support the assertion that penile cancer is a sexually transmitted disease. 43 No persistent etiologic relation has been documented between carcinoma of the penis and
the venereal diseases of syphilis, granuloma inguinale, or chancroid. Evidence that human papillomavirus (HPV) may be causative is scanty, although HPV
transfection alters human epithelial cell differentiation in vitro and has not been ruled out as a potential cause of some cases of penile cancer. 44
SYMPTOMS
The most common presenting manifestation of penile cancer is a mass or persistent sore or ulcer of the glans, foreskin, or shaft of the penis. Most penile carcinomas
are painless, and there may be significant ulceration and bleeding. Less commonly, the initial symptoms are related to inguinal lymphadenopathy. 45
It has been estimated that more than one-half of patients delay more than 1 year in seeking treatment after the appearance of the lesion, although such delays are
uncommon in the United States. Any delay in the recognition, diagnosis, and therapy of penile carcinoma significantly worsens its prognosis. 45
PATHOLOGY
Penile carcinoma is most often squamous cell in origin, although malignant melanoma, basal cell carcinoma, Bowen's disease (carcinoma in situ), mesenchymal
tumors (including Kaposi's sarcoma), metastatic lesions, and leukemic or lymphomatosis infiltrates may involve the penis. Several premalignant lesions have been
identified (Table 34.5-5).

TABLE 34.5-5. Premalignant Lesions of the Penis

STAGING
The initial diagnosis is made by incisional or excisional biopsy. Physical examination determines the extent of local invasion and the status of the inguinal lymph
nodes that are essential to proper staging. A CT or MRI scan to evaluate the pelvic and abdominal lymph nodes may also be helpful. The TNM classification ( Table
34.5-6) is used to determine the stage of the primary tumor and to quantify nodal metastasis. Nodal status is the most significant prognostic variable predicting
survival. 46 The incidence of groin metastasis (palpable or not) increases with T category of the primary lesion. Nodal disease occurs in 20% of T1 tumors and in 47%
to 66% of T2–4 penile cancers. 47

TABLE 34.5-6. Tumor (T), Node (N), Metastasis (M) Classification of Penile Cancer

TREATMENT
Treatment depends on the local extent of the primary neoplasm and the status of the regional lymph nodes. Wide excision or partial penectomy with or without
inguinal lymph node dissection is the most commonly accepted treatment for small and well localized tumors. 48,49 Radiotherapy may be effective for some patients
with noninvasive small lesions and may avoid the functional sacrifice associated with penectomy. 50 Radiation may be associated with necrosis or urethral stenosis,
resulting in a nonfunctioning penis. Several investigations have demonstrated that local relapses after radiotherapy can be salvaged by a partial or total amputation of

the penis without apparently affecting the prognosis, although this approach remains controversial. 51
Paramount to treatment planning is a consideration of the lymphatic drainage of the penis ( Fig. 34.5-3). The skin of the penis and the lymphatics of the prepuce drain
primarily into the superficial inguinal nodes. Bilateral drainage occurs as a result of the freely anastomosing system and crossover at the base of the penis. The glans
is drained by the superficial inguinal nodes, but along with those of the corpora, the lymphatics of the glans penis empty into the deep inguinal and iliac nodes. The
superficial nodes are located in the deep portion of Camper's fascia above the deep fascia of the thigh, the fascia lata. The superficial lymphatics drain into the deep
inguinal lymphatics surrounding the femoral vessels and then to the external iliac, common iliac, and paraaortic lymphatic channels. Tumor invasion of the corpora
cavernosa or the posterior urethra may lead to deep pelvic lymphatic metastasis to internal iliac and obturator nodes.

FIGURE 34.5-3. Lymphatic drainage of the penis.

SURGERY
Surgery aims to control the primary neoplasm and is involved in the evaluation and therapy of nodal disease. Bilateral pelvic and inguinal node dissection is indicated,
where possible, for any positive groin metastasis detected at the time of or within 6 months of treatment of the penile tumor. This is because lymphatic crossover at
the base of the penis accounts for at least 60% contralateral groin metastasis, even in the face of unilateral palpable inguinal nodes. 50,52 Delayed (6 months or more)
appearance of unilateral groin metastasis requires only ipsilateral ilioinguinal node dissection.
Treatment of Primary Lesion
Surgical therapy involves removal of the lesion with adequate margins to minimize the risk of local recurrence. Small tumors that are limited to the prepuce are treated
by circumcision alone. Lesions that on physical examination involve only the skin may be controlled by wide excisional biopsy. Partial or total penectomy is indicated
for lesions that because of their size, invasiveness, or location on the shaft are not amenable to more conservative treatment. Partial penectomy includes a 2-cm
margin of normal shaft proximal to the primary tumor. For extensive lesions approaching the base of the penis, total penectomy is accomplished with excision of both
corpora and creation of a perineal urethrostomy. Local recurrence after a properly planned and executed partial or total penectomy is rare. 52,53 and 54
Management of Regional Lymph Nodes
Several factors determine the role of regional lymphadenectomy in patients with penile cancer. First, 50% of patients with squamous cell penile cancer have palpable
inguinal lymph nodes at diagnosis. In one-half of these cases, inguinal adenopathy represents benign inflammatory changes associated with ulcerated or infected
penile lesions. Clinical assessment of the lymph nodes should be delayed until after a 4- to 6-week course of antibiotic therapy. Persistent adenopathy after 6 weeks
warrants biopsy and therapy. Second, approximately 20% of patients with no palpable adenopathy have occult lymphatic metastases. Third, lymph node dissection
can be curative for the majority of patients with isolated tumor-bearing inguinal nodes.
Overall, 50% of patients with positive inguinal nodes can be rendered disease-free by surgical resection. 53 The volume of lymph node disease and its location appear
to be important predictors of success. In one study of 119 patients, unilateral inguinal node involvement had a median 5-year survival rate of 56%, compared with 9%
of patients with bilateral inguinal node metastases, extranodal disease, or iliac node involvement. 54,55 Cure is unlikely by surgical means if the pelvic lymph nodes are
involved.
The primary controversy in the surgical management of penile cancer concerns the role of lymph node dissection if there is no clinically identifiable inguinal disease.
The overall incidence of false-negative nodes in T1 and T2 disease is approximately 20%, but late nodal extension to the groin after adequate excision of the primary
occurs in only 5% to 11% of patients. Routine lymph node dissection is therefore difficult to justify for low-stage primary disease. In patients with advanced (T3, T4)
invasive primary tumors, the likelihood of nodal metastases increases, and in some series, two-thirds of patients with clinically negative nodes have histologically
confirmed metastasis on lymph node dissection. 56 The significant morbidity that may accompany groin dissection and the lack of controlled prospective studies to
document the benefit of early “prophylactic” versus late “therapeutic” groin dissection has led many surgeons and centers to delay lymphadenectomy until clinical
evidence of lymph node involvement exists.
Ekstrom and Edsmyr52 identified a 50% disease control rate among patients who had node dissection delayed until adenopathy was evident. Frew and colleagues 57
could identify no cancer deaths among patients in whom lymph node excision was deferred until clinical node disease was found. Beggs and Spratt 58 reported no
significant adverse effect on survival in patients with delayed groin dissection. However, others have reported a significant decrease in 5-year survival rates in
patients with therapeutic rather than prophylactic groin dissection and have suggested that delayed surgery is inappropriate. 59 One study showed that 62% of patients
survived 5 years if the lymph node dissection was done concomitantly with the primary therapy of the penile lesion, as opposed to an 8% survival rate among those
who underwent lymphadenectomy when it became obvious that the nodes were pathologically involved. 47 Most patients who benefited from groin dissection had
locally advanced penile cancers. The current recommendation is that, among patients with low-stage (T1, T2) penile cancer and palpably negative groins, expectant
management is reasonable in that delayed inguinal lymph node dissection for clinically positive nodes does not seem to compromise long-term survival when
compared with patients who never develop inguinal lymphadenopathy. 60 However, for locally advanced (T3, T4) tumors, a “prophylactic” bilateral lymph node
dissection may result in improved survival among patients with clinically undetected inguinal metastasis. 56
Cabanas61 described a technique of “sentinel node” biopsy followed by formal node dissection if metastatic disease is found. In Cabanas' series, inguinal-femoral-iliac
node involvement was not demonstrated without a positive sentinel node biopsy. However, Perinetti and colleagues 62 have reported patients with negative sentinel
node biopsies who later developed unresectable bilateral groin disease. A modified or extended sentinel lymph node dissection also has been advocated to cure
those patients with limited inguinal disease and to reduce the morbidity of a formal radical ilioinguinal lymphadenectomy. However, Pettaway 63 reported that, among
14 patients who underwent a negative modified superficial inguinal dissection, 5 relapsed with incurable groin metastasis from 3 to 21 months later. Thus, radical
ilioinguinal lymphadenectomy is the procedure of choice if groin dissection is indicated.
The operation is performed essentially as described by Whitmore and Vagaiwala. 64 Bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection is performed. The dissection limits are
defined by the genitofemoral nerve laterally, the bladder medially, the bifurcation of the common iliac artery superiorly, and the fascia covering the obturator internus
and levator ani muscles inferiorly. Cloquet's node is removed from the femoral canal.
The inguinal incision is planned to provide adequate margins surrounding lymph nodes containing obvious tumor and simultaneously to remove the area of skin at
greatest risk of devitalization and necrosis. An elliptical incision is made over the inguinal ligament from the anterosuperior iliac spine to the pubic tubercle. The
borders of the ellipse parallel the inguinal ligament and extend 4 to 6 cm in vertical diameter at the widest point. Because penile cancers appear to involve the
inguinal lymph nodes by tumor embolization rather than through permeation of lymphatic channels, wide thin skin flaps and a thorough dissection, skeletonizing the
femoral vessels as is required for malignant melanoma, are not required. The nodes in the superficial and deep inguinal areas are completely removed from the

inguinal ligament to the apex of the femoral triangle in the groin ( Fig. 34.5-4). With this technique, the incidence of postoperative wound necrosis is markedly reduced.

FIGURE 34.5-4. Anatomic limits of groin dissection.

Radiation Therapy
The main advantage for radiation therapy in penile tumors is that it provides an option of functional preservation of the penis. However, for radiation to represent an
alternative to surgery, it must yield comparable local control rates with minimal toxic effects. Several series report initial rates of local control in 80% to 90% of patients
treated with radiotherapy, but 10% to 20% eventually relapse and require surgical salvage. 65,66 and 67 Furthermore, inadequate control of the primary tumor risks
interval metastasis and a reduced cure rate.
Radiation techniques have included interstitial implantation of radium needles, 192Ir sources, or external-beam radiotherapy. The use of brachytherapy has been
limited to small tumors. Results from a series of 50 patients implanted with 192Ir wires showed that the tumor was controlled in 95% of the patients with noninfiltrating
tumors of 4 cm or less, with the penis conserved in 80% without major impairments of function. 68 When external-beam radiotherapy is used, treatment is usually
delivered with a custom-made plastic or wax mold to ensure a uniform dose distribution and to overcome the skin-sparing effects of supervoltage beams. Circumcision
is usually recommended before radiotherapy to minimize radiation morbidity associated with cellulitis of the prepuce and the adjacent structures. The whole shaft of
the penis is treated to 40 Gy in 20 fractions in 4 weeks, and the primary lesion is boosted to a total dose of 60 Gy. Superficial small lesions can be treated with
localized fields using superficial x-rays or electron beams carried to a similar dose.
External-beam radiotherapy of low-stage tumors usually produces 70% to 80% local success rates. Local failures appear in 20% of patients, but some can be
salvaged with surgery. If prophylactic or therapeutic lymph node dissection cannot be performed, external-beam radiotherapy to the inguinal and pelvic lymph nodes
carried to 50 Gy may provide palliation for some patients. 69,70
The Royal Marsden Hospital has recently updated their experience with treating 101 patients with radiation for carcinomia of the penis. This group reported an 30%
local recurrence rate in patients treated with at least 60Gy of external-beam radiation therapy. However, local control was eventually achieved in 71 of 74 patients with
stage I disease, which included retreatment with salvage surgery in 17 patients who had local recurrence following radiation. Unfortunately, very little quality of life
information has been published following treatment of penile cancer. However, a recent study from the Norwegian Radium Hospital reports clear results of sexual
performance using a formal prospective analysis. This study found that the overall sexual function was preserved or only slightly diminished in 10 of the 12 irradiated
patients. However, the analysis also showed that the overall sexual function was normal in only one of five men following wide local excision and in only two of nine
men after partial penectomy.
CHEMOTHERAPY
Chemotherapy for urethral and penile carcinoma varies with the histology of the lesion. For patients with pure transitional tumors, cisplatin-combination regimens have
shown efficacy. The results with chemotherapy for squamous cell tumors of the penis vary according to the extent of disease, with higher rates of response for
locoregional (inguinal) than metastatic (pelvic and beyond) disease. Antitumor activity has been demonstrated with single-agent bleomycin, methotrexate, and
cisplatin.71,72 Partial responses occur in up to one-third of patients, but complete remissions are rare.
Large trials evaluating the role of multiagent chemotherapy in advanced carcinoma of the penis are uncommon. However, cisplatin-based regimens predominate the
recent literature. Early trials evaluated the cisplatin/cyclophosphamide/bleomycin combination, 73,74 with clinical responses seen in 4 of 13 patients; cisplatin was given
by either the peripheral or the intraarterial route. The cisplatin/bleomycin/methotrexate regimen has been the most extensively studied. 75,76 and 77 The M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center experience was first reported by Dexeus and colleagues. 75 Sella et al. 76 subsequently reported on 26 assessable patients with squamous cell
carcinoma of the genitourinary tract, 20 of whom had penile cancer. The complete and partial response proportions were 15% and 50%, respectively; results were not
characterized by the site of the primary tumor. Haas et al. 77 reporting for the Southwest Oncology Group, evaluated this three-drug regimen in 40 patients with locally
advanced or unresectable disease, none of whom had prior chemotherapy. Complete response was seen in 12.5% and a major response in 32.5% of patients. The
median duration of response was 16 weeks, and the median survival was 28 weeks. Toxicity was substantial, including five treatment-related deaths.
Other reports showed activity of cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil, a combination that has been extensively evaluated in head and neck tumors. Hussein and colleagues 78
treated six men with recurrent or unresectable squamous cell carcinoma of the penis. Overall, one complete response and five partial responses were documented,
including two patients with unresectable disease who were rendered disease-free by surgery. Fisher and coworkers 79 treated five patients with biopsy-proven
unresectable disease and reported major responses in four patients, including two men who were pathologically free of disease at surgery. Shammas et al. 80 treated
eight patients, two of whom responded.
Most regimens studied in penile cancer use older agents. More recent studies have identified new, active agents in squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix and head
and neck, including ifosfamide, paclitaxel, docetaxel, gemcitabine, and vinorelbine (Navelbine). Single and multiagent regimens that include these new drugs are
active in squamous cell carcinoma of other origins; they have not been pursued as yet in penile cancer. In summary, chemotherapy is sufficiently active in penile
cancer to consider its inclusion in multimodality therapy for patients with bulky or fixed inguinal metastases.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Grabstalt H. Tumors of the urethra in men and women. Cancer 1973;32:1236.
2. Mandeler JT, Pool TL. Primary carcinoma of the male urethra. J Urol 1966;96:67.
3. Hopkins SG, Nag SK, Soloway MS. Primary carcinoma of male urethra. Urology 1984;23:128.
4. Beahrs O, Henson D, Hutter R, Kennedy BJ. Manual for staging of cancer, 4th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1992:209.
5. Scher HI, Yagoda A, Herr HW, et al. Neoadjuvant M-VAC chemotherapy for extravesical urinary tract tumors. J Urol 1988;139:470.
6. Ray B, Canto AK, Whitmore WF. Experience with primary carcinoma of the male urethra. J Urol 1977;177:591.
7. Zeidman EJ, Desmond P, Thompson IM. Surgical treatment of carcinoma of the male urethra. Urol Clin North Am 1992;19:359.
8. Grigsby PW. Carcinoma of the urethra in women. Int J Rad Onc Biol Phys 1998;41:535.
9. Stewart PAH, Anderson CK, Williams RE, et al. Urethral tumors. Br J Urol 1978;50:583.
10. Klein FA, Whitmore WF, Herr HW, et al. Inferior pubic rami resection with en bloc radical excision of invasive proximal urethral carcinoma. Cancer 1983;51:1238.
11. Dinney CPN, Johnson DE, Swanson DA, et al. Therapy and prognosis for male anterior urethral carcinoma: an update. Urology 1994;43:506.
12. Dalbagni G, Zhang ZE, Lacombe L, Herr H. Male urethral carcinoma: analysis of treatment outcome. Urology 1999;53:1126.
13. Zeidman EJ, Desmond P, Thompson IM. Surgical treatment of carcinoma of the urethra. Urol Clin North Am 1992;19:359.
14. Hussein AM, Benedetto P, Sridhar A. Chemotherapy with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil for penile and urethra squamous cell carcinomas. Cancer 1990;65:433.
15. Johnson DW, Kessler JF, Ferrigni RG, et al. Low-dose combined chemotherapy/radiotherapy for management of locally advanced urethral squamous cell carcinoma. J Urol 1989;141:615.
16. Baskin LS, Turzan C. Carcinoma of the male urethra: management of locally advanced disease with combined chemotherapy, radiotherapy and penile-preserving surgery. Urology 1992;39:21.
17. Licht MR, Klein EA, Bukowski R, et al. Combination radiation and chemotherapy for the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the male and female urethra. J Urol 1995;153:1616.
18. Oberfeld RA, Zinman LN, Leibenhaut M, et al. Management of invasive squamous cell carcinoma of the bulbomembranous male urethra with co-ordinated chemo-radiotherapy and genital

preservation. Br J Urol 1996;78:573.
19. Gheiler EL, Tefeli MV, Tiguert R, et al. Management of primary urethral cancer. Urology 1998;52:487.
20. Tefilli MV, Gheiler EL, Shekarriz B, et al. Primary adenocarcinoma of the urethra with metastasis to the glans penis: successful treatment with chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Urology
1998;52:517.
21. Heysek RV, Parsons JR, Drylie DM, et al. Carcinoma of the male urethra. J Urol 1985;134:753.
22. Grabstalt H, Hilaris B, Henschike U, et al. Cancer of the female urethra. JAMA 1966;197:835.
23. Desai S, Libertino JA, Zinman L. Primary carcinoma of the female urethra. J Urol 1973;110:693.
24. Narayan P, Conety B. Surgical treatment of female urethral carcinoma. Urol Clin North Am 1992;19:373.
25. Terry PJ, Cookson MS, Sarosdy MF. Carcinoma of the urethra and scrotum. In: Raghavan D, Scher HI, Leibel SA, Lange P, eds. Principles and practice of genitourinary oncology. Philadelphia:
LippincottRaven Publishers, 1997:347.
26. Garden AS, Zagars GK, Declos L. Primary carcinoma of the female urethra: results of radiation therapy. Cancer 1993;71:3102.
27. Dalbagni G, Zhang ZF, Lacombe L, Herr HW. Female urethral carcinoma. Analysis of treatment outcome and a plea for a standardized management strategy. Br J Urol 1998;82:835.
28. Bracken RB, Johnson DE, Miller LS, et al. Primary carcinoma of the female urethra. J Urol 1976;116:188.
29. Hopkins SC, Vider M, Nag SK, et al. Carcinoma of the female urethra: reassessment of the modes of therapy. J Urol 1983;129:958.
30. Mayer R, Fowler JE, Clayton M. Localized urethral cancer in women. Cancer 1987;60:1548.
31. Grigsby PW, Corn BW. Localized urethral tumors in women: indications for conservative versus exenterative therapies. J Urol 1992;147:1516.
32. Sailer SL, Shipley WU, Wang CC. Carcinoma of the female urethra: a review of results with radiation therapy. J Urol 1988;140:1.
33. Taggart CG, Castro JR, Rutledge FN. Carcinoma of the female urethra. AJR Am J Roengenol 1972;114:145.
34. Prempree T, Amoremarn R, Patanaphan V. Radiation therapy in primary carcinoma of the female urethra. Cancer 1984;54:729.
35. Johnson DW, Kessler JF, Ferrigni RC, et al. Low dose combined chemotherapy/radiotherapy in the management of locally advanced urethral squamous cell carcinoma. J Urol 1989;141:615.
36. Calra J, Cortes E, Chen S, et al. Effective multimodality treatment for advanced epidermoid carcinoma of the female genital tract. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:917.
37. Tran LN, Krieg RM, Szabo RJ. Combination chemotherapy and radiotherapy for a locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the urethra: a case report. J Urol 1995;153:422.
38. Hanash K, Furlow W, Utz D, et al. Carcinoma of the penis: a clinicopathologic study. J Urol 1970;140:291.
39. Riveros M, Lebrone RF. Geographical pathology of cancer of the penis. Cancer 1963;16:798.
40. Dodge OG, Owor R, Templeton AC. Tumors of the male genitalia: recent results. Cancer Res 1973;41:132.
41. Jackson SM. The treatment of carcinoma of the penis. Br J Surg 1966;53:33.
42. Koenen M, McCurdy S. Circumcision and the risk of cancer of the penis: a life-able analysis. Am J Dis Child 1980;134:484.
43. Hellberg D, Valentin J, Eklun D, et al. Penile cancer: is there an epidemiological role for smoking and sexual behavior? BMJ 1987;295:1306.
44. Moriyama N, Hagasey Y, Ukei T, et al. In situ hybridization study of human papilloma virus from penile cancer. Jpn J Urol 1990;81:1706.
45. Hardner GJ, Bhanalaph T, Murphy GP, et al. Carcinoma of the penis: analysis of therapy in 100 consecutive cases. J Urol 1972;108:428.
46. Horenblas S, Van Tinteren H. Squamous cell carcinoma of the penis: prognostic factors of survival; analysis of tumor, nodes and metastasis classification system. J Urol 1994;151:1239.
47. Ornellas AA, Seixas AL, Marota A, et al. Surgical treatment of invasive squamous cell carcinoma of the penis: retrospective analysis of 350 cases. J Urol 1994;151:1244.
48. Skinner DJ, Ledbetter WR, Kelley SP. The surgical management of squamous cell carcinoma of the penis. J Urol 1972;107:273.
49. Persky L, DeKernion JD. Carcinoma of the penis. CA Cancer J Clin 1986;36:258.
50. Fraley EE, Zhang G, Lange PH. Cancer of the penis: prognosis and treatment plans. Cancer 1985;55:1618.
51. Sagerman RH, Yu WS, Chun CT, et al. External beam irradiation of carcinoma of the penis. Radiology 1984;152:183.
52. Ekstrom T, Edsmyr F. Cancer of the penis: a clinical study of 292 cases. Acta Chir Scand 1958;155:25.
53. Johnson DE, Lo RK. Management of regional lymph nodes in penile carcinoma: five year results following therapeutic groin dissection. Urology 1984;24:308.
54. Horenblas S, Van Tinteren H, Delemarre JFM, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the penis: treatment of the primary tumor. J Urol 1992;147:1533.
55. Srinivas V, Morse MJ, Herr HW, et al. Penile cancer: relation of extent of nodal metastasis to survival. J Urol 1987;137:880.
56. Horenblas S, Van Tinteren H, Delemare JFM, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the penis: treatment of the regional nodes. J Urol 1993;149:492.
57. Frew ID, Jeffries JD, Swinney J. Carcinoma of the penis. Br J Urol 1967;39:398.
58. Beggs JH, Spratt JS. Epidermoid carcinoma of the penis. J Urol 1964;91:166.
59. McDougal WS, Kirchner FK, Edwards RH, et al. Treatment of carcinoma of the penis: the case of primary lymphadenectomy. J Urol 1986;136:38.
60. Theodorescu D, Fair WR, Herr HW, et al. Pure expectant management of patients with T1-4 N0M0 penile cancer. J Urol 1995;153:247A.
61. Cabanas RM. An approach for the treatment of penile carcinoma. Cancer 1977;39:456.
62. Perinetti EP, Crane DD, Catalona WJ. Unreliability of sentinel lymph node biopsy for staging penile carcinoma. J Urol 1980;124:734.
63. Pettaway CA, Pisters LL, Dinney CN, et al. Sentinel lymph node dissection for penile carcinoma. J Urol 1995;154:1999.
64. Whitmore WF, Vagaiwala MR. A technique of ilioinguinal lymph-node dissection of carcinoma of the penis. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1984;159:573.
65. Grabstalt H, Kelley CD. Radiation therapy of penile cancer: six to ten years follow-up. Urology 1980;15:575.
66. Haile K, Delcos L. The place of radiation therapy in the treatment of carcinoma of the distal end of the penis. Cancer 1987;45:1980.
67. Salverria JC, Hope-Stone HF, Paris AMI, et al. Conservative treatment of carcinoma of the penis. Br J Urol 1979;51:32.
68. Mazeron JJ, Langlois D, Lobo PA, et al. Interstitial radiation therapy for carcinoma of the penis using iridium 192 wires. J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:1891.
69. Gerbaulet A, Labin P. Radiation therapy of cancer of the penis: indications, advantages and pitfalls. Urol Clin North Am 1992;19:325.
70. Jones WG, Fossa SD, Hammers H, et al. Penis cancer: a review by the joint radiotherapy committee of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC)
genitourinary and radiotherapy groups. J Surg Oncol 1989;40:227.
70a. Farin R, Norman AR, Steele CG, et al. Treatment results and prognostic factors in 101 men treated with squamous carcinoma of the penis. Int J Rad Onc Biol Phys 1997;38:713.
70b. Opjordsmoen S, Waehre H, Aass N, et al. Sexuality in patients treated for penile cancer: patients' experience and doctors' judgement. Eur J Urol 1994;73:554.
71. Ahmed T, Sklaroff R, Yagoda A. Sequential trials of methotrexate, cisplatin and bleomycin for penile cancer. Cancer 1984;132:465.
72. Gagliano R, Blumenstein BA, Crawford ED, et al. Cisplatin in the treatment of advanced epidermoid carcinoma of the penis: a Southwest Oncology Group study. J Urol 1989;141:66.
73. Dexeus FH, Logothetics CJ, Sipahi H. Chemotherapy for advanced squamous carcinoma of the male external genital track and urethra. In: Johnson DE, Logothetics CJ, Von Eschenbach AC,
eds. Systemic therapy for genitourinary cancers. Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers, 1989:255.
74. Eisenberger MA. Chemotherapy for carcinomas of the penis and urethra. Urol Clin North Am 1992;19:333.
75. Dexeus FH, Fitz K, Avishay S, et al. Chemotherapy (CHEMO) for advanced squamous cell carcinoma (SC) of the male genital tract: the MD Anderson experience. J Urol 1990;143:352A.
76. Sella A, Robinson E, Carrasco CH, et al. Phase II study of methotrexate, cisplatin, and bleomycin combination chemotherapy (CHT) system. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1994;13:252.
77. Haas GP, Blumenstein BA, Gagliano RG, et al. Cisplatin, methotrexate and bleomycin for the treatment of carcinoma of the penis: a Southwest Oncology Group study. J Urol 1999;161:1823.
78. Hussein AM, Benedetto P, Sridkar KS. Chemotherapy with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil for penile and urethral squamous cell carcinomas. Cancer 1990;65:433.
79. Fisher HAG, Baroda JH, Horton J, et al. Neoadjuvant therapy with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil for stage III squamous cell carcinoma of the penis. J Urol 1990;143:352A.
80. Shammas FV, Ous S, Fossa SD. Cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil in advanced cancer of the penis. J Urol 1992;147:630.

CHAPTER 35 Cancer of the Testis
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 35
Cancer of the Testis
GEORGE J. BOSL
DEAN F. BAJORIN
JOEL SHEINFELD
ROBERT J. MOTZER
R. S. K. CHAGANTI
Introduction
Background: Incidence
Epidemiology
Cryptorchidism
Diethylstilbestrol
Klinefelter's Syndrome
Others
Initial Presentationand Management
Symptoms and Signs
Diagnosis
Histology
Carcinoma in Situ
Seminoma
Nonseminomatous Germ Cell Tumors
Biology
Immunohistochemical Markers
Staging
Tumor Imaging
Serum Tumor Markers
Staging Classifications
Management of Clinical Stage I Disease
Seminoma
Nonseminomatous Germ Cell Tumors
Management of Clinical Stage II (Low Tumor Burden)
Seminoma
Nonseminomatous Germ Cell Tumors
Identification of Relapse
Management of Stage II and Stage III Disease (High Tumor Burden)
Good-Prognosis Germ Cell Tumor
Poor- (And Intermediate-) Risk Germ Cell Tumor
Management of Residual Disease
Management of Relapse After Chemotherapy
Conventional Dose Salvage Therapy
High-Dose Therapy
Prognostic Factors: Salvage Chemotherapy
New Agents
Role of Surgery
Treatment Sequelae
Chemotherapy
Midline Tumors of Uncertain Histogenesis
Other Testicular Tumors
Leydig Cell Tumors
Sertoli Cell Tumors
Granulosa Cell Tumors
Gonadoblastoma
Mesothelioma
Sarcomas
Adenocarcinoma of the Rete Testis
Epidermoid Cyst
Lymphoma
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Cancers of the testis make up a morphologically and clinically diverse group of neoplasms ( Table 35-1). The overwhelming majority are primary in the testis, and most
of these are germ cell tumors (GCTs). The management of each neoplasm is dependent on the histology and influenced by the anatomy of the testis and its lymphatic
and vascular drainage. GCT is a highly curable disease requiring proper management at all stages.

TABLE 35-1. Histologic Classification of Testicular Neoplasms

BACKGROUND: INCIDENCE
GCTs are the most common solid tumor in men between the ages of 20 and 35 years. There are three modal peaks: infancy, ages 25 to 40, and approximately age
60. A solid testicular mass in a man aged 50 or greater is usually a lymphoma. The incidence of GCTs appears to be increasing. An estimated 7000 new cases (6900
testis) and 300 deaths caused by germ cell tumors of all primary sites will be reported in the United States in 2000. 1 The incidence of testis cancer varies significantly
according to geographic area. The reported incidence is highest in Scandinavia, Switzerland, Germany, and New Zealand; intermediate in the United States and
Great Britain; and lowest in Africa and Asia. The rising risk of testicular GCT incidence is associated with a birth cohort effect in both the United States and Europe. 2,3

EPIDEMIOLOGY
GCTs are seen principally in young whites, and rarely in African Americans. The published ratio between white and African American patients is approximately 4:1 to
5:1, although it was closer to a 40:1 ratio in the U.S. military. 4 In African Americans, GCT behaves similarly to that of the general population. 5 Familial clustering has
been observed, particularly among siblings. 6
The cause of GCT is unknown. Random genetic events occurring during the early stages of meiosis seem to be responsible for the malignant transformation of germ
cells (see Biology, later in this chapter). A few congenital developmental defects predispose to the disease.
CRYPTORCHIDISM
The risk of GCT occurring in the cryptorchid testis is several times the risk in normally descended testes. Between 5% and 20% of patients with a history of
cryptorchidism develop a tumor in the normally descended testis. 7 An abdominal cryptorchid testis is more likely to develop GCT than an inguinal cryptorchid testis. 7
The protective effect of orchiopexy is difficult to quantify, but most data suggest a reduced likelihood of GCT if orchiopexy is performed before puberty. If the testis is
inguinal, hormonally functioning, and easily examined, surveillance is recommended. If the testis is not amenable to orchiopexy or cannot be adequately examined,
orchiectomy is recommended.
DIETHYLSTILBESTROL
Exogenous administration of estrogens to pregnant mice causes testicular maldescent and dysgenesis in offspring. Cryptorchidism and dysgenesis have also been
reported in the male children of women exposed to diethylstilbestrol or oral contraceptives. Despite anecdotes associating diethylstilbestrol exposure with the
development of GCT, epidemiologic studies have failed to identify such an association. 8
KLINEFELTER'S SYNDROME
Klinefelter's syndrome is characterized by testicular atrophy, absence of spermatogenesis, a eunuchoid habitus, and gynecomastia. It is diagnosed by a 47,XXY
karyotype. Klinefelter's syndrome patients have an increased incidence of mediastinal GCT.
OTHERS
A history of trauma is frequently noted by patients with testicular cancer; however, no evidence supports a direct causal relationship. Rather, the trauma usually
prompts examination. Viral orchitis, usually secondary to mumps, may result in testicular atrophy. However, epidemiologic studies have failed to identify viral infection
as a cause. More recently, testicular cancer has been reported in men infected with the human immunodeficiency virus. However, too few data support a higher
incidence in individuals infected with human immunodeficiency virus, and the results of treatment are similar. 9,10 Reports implicating vasectomy as a cause of GCT
have not been confirmed in cohort analysis. 11

INITIAL PRESENTATIONAND MANAGEMENT
SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
The pathognomonic presentation of a primary testicular tumor is a painless testicular mass that may range in size from a few millimeters to several centimeters.
However, the painless testicular mass occurs in only a minority of patients. The majority present with more diffuse testicular pain, swelling, hardness, or some
combination of these findings. Since infectious epididymitis or orchitis, or a combination of the two, is more common, a trial of antibiotic therapy is often required in
questionable cases. Acute testicular pain, simulating testicular torsion, occurs less frequently and may represent intratumoral hemorrhage. If the testicular discomfort
does not abate or findings do not revert to normal within 2 to 4 weeks, a testicular ultrasound is indicated. On ultrasound, the typical testicular tumor is intratesticular
and may produce one or more discrete hypoechoic masses. A pattern of multiple, diffuse calcifications in the testis has been associated with GCT. 12 Higher stage at
presentation has been associated with delay in diagnosis, 13 and the experience of the treatment unit with the management of GCT appears to influence survival. 14,15
and 16

DIAGNOSIS
A radical inguinal orchiectomy, using an inguinal incision with early high ligation of the spermatic cord at the deep inguinal ring, minimizes local tumor recurrence and
aberrant lymphatic spread and is the only acceptable therapeutic and diagnostic procedure. The vasal and vascular components are doubly clamped and divided
separately; their respective stumps are pushed into the retroperitoneal space to facilitate removal of the gonadal vessels at the time of retroperitoneal lymph node
dissection (RPLND). The testicle and spermatic cord are removed en bloc, avoiding any spillage, and meticulous hemostasis is achieved. A transscrotal orchiectomy
is contraindicated, because it permits the development of alternate lymphatic drainage pathways to the inguinal and pelvic lymph nodes and leaves intact the
spermatic cord from the external to the internal ring. In the rare situation in which the diagnosis of a testicular tumor is in question, then an inguinal incision is required
for an open biopsy. The testis can then be examined in situ in a sterile field and an appropriate biopsy taken with minimal risk of scrotal or inguinal contamination.
Regardless of the preoperative diagnosis, all potential, primary testicular malignancies should be managed through an inguinal approach.
Extragonadal GCTs account for fewer than 10% of GCT. The mediastinum and retroperitoneum are the most common primary sites. Pineal tumors, occurring most
frequently in children, are usually GCT. Because of their unique access to the meninges, the metastatic pattern of pineal GCT includes intradural sites along the
neuraxis and is infrequently systemic. The management of pineal GCT is discussed in Chapter 43. In extremely rare circumstances, primary GCTs have been found in
unusual sites such as the sacrum, thyroid, paranasal sinuses, and soft tissues of the head and neck. 17,18 In patients with extragonadal presentations of GCT, a
testicular ultrasound is required. The management of extragonadal and testicular GCT is the same, and primary site is an independent factor in staging and risk
classification.

HISTOLOGY
GCT is classified into two major subgroups: seminoma and nonseminoma. Three classifications are summarized in Table 35-2. The Mostofi adaptation of the
Dixon/Moore classification 19 was largely adopted by the World Health Organization and is the classification most commonly used in North America and Europe. 20 The
British Tumor Panel's modification of the classification developed by Pugh is widely used in Great Britain and Australia. 21

TABLE 35-2. Comparison of Three Classifications of Germ Cell Tumors

CARCINOMA IN SITU
Carcinoma in situ (CIS)22 (intratubular germ cell neoplasia) precedes invasive testicular GCT in virtually all cases of typical and anaplastic seminoma and all
nonseminomatous histologies in the adult. CIS is frequently present in retroperitoneal presentations and is rarely, if ever, present in mediastinal presentations. 23 It has
not been described in spermatocytic seminoma and rarely in tumors arising in prepubertal patients. 24,25 Cytologically, CIS preceding seminoma and nonseminoma is
identical. The median time for progression of CIS to invasive disease is 5 years. 26,27 In the general population, the incidence of CIS is low, 28 whereas in men with
impaired fertility, the incidence is approximately 0.5%. 29,30 The incidence of CIS is 2% to 5% in both cryptorchid testes and the contralateral testis in patients with a
documented prior testicular GCT. 31,32
SEMINOMA
Seminoma accounts for approximately 50% of all GCT and most frequently appears in the fourth decade of life. The typical or classic form consists of sheets of large
cells with abundant cytoplasm and round, hyperchromatic nuclei with prominent nucleoli. A lymphocytic infiltrate, granulomatous reaction with giant cells, or both, are
frequently present. Trophoblastic giant cells capable of producing human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) are present in 15% to 20% of tumors. The presence of
syncytiotrophoblastic giant cells in an otherwise pure seminoma does not influence prognosis or treatment. Anaplastic seminoma is an older term used when three or
more mitotic figures are seen per high-power field, and it has no clinical or prognostic importance. Stage for stage, anaplastic seminoma is similar in response and
prognosis to classical seminoma. 33
An atypical form of seminoma has been described with unusual immunohistochemical features. Although the cells cytologically resemble classical seminoma,
lymphocytic infiltrate and granulomatous reaction are absent, necrosis is more common, and the nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio is higher. These tumors must be
distinguished morphologically from solid variants of embryonal carcinoma and yolk sac tumor. Atypical seminoma frequently shows cytoplasmic expression of
low-molecular-weight keratin or the type 1 precursor to the blood group antigens, whereas typical seminoma stains negative. 34 Electron microscopic studies have
shown that the individual tumor cells acquire cytoplasmic cytokeratin intermediate filaments, suggesting epithelial differentiation. There has been no specific
association of atypical seminoma with an adverse prognosis, and its management is currently the same as any other seminoma.
Spermatocytic seminoma is a rare histologic variant seen almost exclusively in men above the age of 45. The relationship of spermatocytic seminoma to other GCTs
is not clear, since it is not associated with CIS or bilaterality, does not express placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP) (see Immunohistochemical Markers, later in this
chapter), and has not been shown to have the same genetic abnormalities as other GCTs. Metastatic potential is minimal.
NONSEMINOMATOUS GERM CELL TUMORS
Nonseminomatous histology makes up approximately 50% of all GCTs and most frequently presents in the third decade of life. Most tumors are mixed, consisting of
two or more cell types. Seminoma may be a component, but the definition of a pure seminoma excludes the presence of any nonseminomatous cell type. The
presence of any nonseminomatous cell type (other than syncytiotrophoblasts) imparts the prognosis and management principles of a nonseminomatous tumor.
Embryonal Carcinoma
Embryonal carcinoma is the most undifferentiated somatic cell type. Individual cells are epithelioid in appearance and may be arranged in glandular or tubular nests
and cords or as solid sheets of cells. Tumor necrosis and hemorrhage are frequently observed.
Choriocarcinoma
Choriocarcinoma, by definition, consists of both cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts. If cytotrophoblasts are not present, then the diagnosis of choriocarcinoma
cannot be made. Pure choriocarcinoma is an extremely rare presentation usually associated with widespread hematogenous metastases and high levels of HCG.
Hemorrhage into the primary tumor is frequent and is an occasional severe complication when it spontaneously occurs at a metastatic site. 35 Elements of
choriocarcinoma are frequently found in mixed tumors but appear to have no prognostic importance. 36 Syncytiotrophoblastic giant cells can be seen as a component
of any GCT (including pure seminoma). They impart no prognostic value by themselves.
Yolk Sac Tumor
Yolk sac tumor (endodermal sinus tumor) is often confused with a glandular form of embryonal carcinoma. This tumor mimics the yolk sac of the embryo and produces
a-fetoprotein (AFP). The cells may have a papillary, glandular, microcystic, or solid appearance and may be associated with Schiller-Duval bodies, which are
perivascular arrangements of epithelial cells with an intervening extracellular space. Rarely, embryoid bodies resembling the early embryo can be seen. Yolk sac
histology is infrequently the only histologic subtype in adult GCT except in the mediastinum where pure yolk sac tumors account for a minority of primary tumors.
Teratoma
Teratoma is composed of somatic cell types from two or more germ layers (ectoderm, mesoderm, or endoderm) and is derived from a totipotential, malignant
precursor cell (embryonal carcinoma or yolk sac tumor). Mature teratoma consists of adult-type differentiated elements such as cartilage, glandular epithelium, nerve
tissue, or other differentiated cell types. Immature teratoma generally refers to a tumor with partial somatic differentiation, similar to that seen in a fetus. Both mature
and immature teratomas are histologically benign. Teratoma with malignant transformation refers to a form of teratoma in which one of its components, either
immature or mature, develops aggressive growth and histologically resembles another malignancy. These usually take the form of sarcomas (most frequently
embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma), and, less frequently, carcinomas (e.g., enteric-type adenocarcinoma), neuroectodermal tumors, or combinations of these. 37 Acute
nonlymphocytic leukemias have arisen in the context of mediastinal nonseminomatous GCT, but not from other primary sites. 38 In a review of 41 cases of pure mature
or immature teratoma of the testis, 26 (63%) displayed retroperitoneal or systemic metastases, with or without increased levels of serum tumor markers. 39 Therefore, a
primary testicular tumor in a postpubertal boy or man that displays only histologically mature or immature teratoma must be considered to be a fully malignant GCT,
and management should proceed as if malignant components are present.
BIOLOGY
Adult human male GCTs make up a unique system for the study of the mechanism of transformation of a totipotential germ cell in lineage differentiation. The
pluripotentiality of the tumor cells manifests as histologic differentiation into germ cell–like undifferentiated (seminoma), primitive zygotic (embryonal carcinoma),
embryonal-like somatically differentiated (teratoma), and extraembryonically differentiated (choriocarcinoma and yolk sac tumor) phenotypes. Until fairly recently, the
molecular mechanisms of germ cell transformation, GCT differentiation, or GCT chemotherapy sensitivity and resistance were poorly understood. More recent studies
of GCTs have suggested that (1) overexpression of cyclin D2 is an early, possibly oncogenic, event in germ cell tumorigenesis; (2) differentiation in GCTs may be
governed by several possibly interacting pathways such as loss of regulators of germ cell totipotentiality and of embryonic development, and genomic imprinting; and
(3) chemotherapy sensitivity and resistance may be rooted in part in a p53-dependent apoptotic pathway.
Mechanism of Germ Cell Transformation
Genetic analysis of male GCTs has yielded important data relevant to the mechanism of germ cell transformation. 40 Virtually 100% of tumors show increased copy
number of 12p, as one or more copies of i(12p) or as tandem duplications of 12p, in situ or transposed elsewhere in the genome (Fig. 35-1).40 This chromosomal
marker has been observed as early as CIS, suggesting that it is among the earliest, if not the earliest, genetic change associated with the origin of these tumors. 40 A
candidate gene, CCND2, mapped to 12p13, has been identified as the possible driver gene on 12p whose deregulated expression may lead to GCT development. 41 It
is abundantly expressed in CIS as well as in many lineages of GCTs. 41 Cyclin D2 is one of the D-type cyclins that, along with the cyclin-dependent kinases cdk4,
cdk6, or both, regulates the phosphorylation of pRB and controls the G 1/S cell-cycle checkpoint. 42 Disruption of this checkpoint through amplification or

overexpression of D-type cyclins is known to be one of the important pathways in human tumor development. 42

FIGURE 35-1. A: Karyotype of a male germ cell tumor cell line with hyperdiploid chromosome number containing three copies (***) of i(12p) chromosomes. Arrows
indicate abnormal chromosomes. M1 through M6 are unidentified marker chromosomes. B: Abnormalities of 12p in male germ cell tumor showing three normal
chromosomes 12 and an i(12p). C: Tandem duplication of 12p in i(12p) negative tumor. Abnormally banded marker chromosome (left) revealed chromosome 12
material by chromosome 12 painting probe (middle) and 12p painting probe identified the region of amplification to be 12p (right).

The precursor of all GCTs is considered to be CIS; however, the stage of germ cell development at which transformation occurs is not known. Two models of origin of
CIS cells have been proposed. One model proposed by Skakkebaek and colleagues 43,44 suggested that fetal gonocytes that have escaped normal development into
spermatogonia may undergo abnormal cell division mediated by a kit receptor/stem cell factor (kit ligand) paracrine loop, leading to uncontrolled proliferation of
gonocytes. Such gonocytes have been postulated to be susceptible to subsequent invasive growth through the mediation of postnatal and pubertal gonadotrophin
stimulation. This hypothesis is based on a consideration of immunophenotypic markers expressed by gonocytes and CIS cells, types of abnormal germ cells seen in
developmental disorders that predispose to GCTs, and epidemiology of GCT incidence. 43 A second model proposed by Chaganti and colleagues takes into account
four established genetic properties of GCTs, namely, increased 12p copy number, expression of cyclin D2 in CIS, consistent near triploid-tetraploid chromosome
numbers, and abundant expression of wild-type p53. 45 According to this model, aberrant chromatid exchange events during meiotic crossing over may lead to
increased 12p copy number and overexpression of cyclin D2. In a cell containing unrepaired DNA breaks (recombination-associated), overexpressing cyclin D2 may
block a p53-dependent apoptotic response and lead to reinitiation of cell-cycle and genomic instability. 45 A role for cyclin D2 in the development of GCTs has also
been suggested by Sicinski et al. 46 through studies of mice homozygously inactivated (mutant) for the CCND2 gene, and expression of CCND2 mRNA in ovarian
granulosa cell tumors and testicular GCT cell lines. In germ cells that have reentered cell cycle following cyclin D2 activation, downstream events such as loss of
tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) brought about by genomic instability may lead to neoplastic progression. Extensive molecular genetic analysis has identified
genomic, functional (expression), or both kinds of loss of several known TSGs such as RB1, DCC, and NME, and genomic loss at several previously recognized as
well as novel chromosomal sites. 40,47
Embryonal-Like Differentiation in Germ Cell Tumors
Male GCTs display, albeit in a spatially and temporally abnormal manner, patterns of differentiation that mimic stages normally undergone by the developing zygote.
Among GCTs, seminoma can be viewed as transformed germ cells that have retained the inhibitory mechanism for zygotic-like differentiation, a feature of germ cells
before fertilization. The in vivo expression patterns of kit receptor and stem cell factor in GCTs are consistent with such a view. Thus, the kit receptor, which normally
is expressed by spermatogonia and primary spermatocytes, 48 is expressed mainly by CIS and seminoma.49 On the other hand, nonseminoma appear to down-regulate
kit and up-regulate stem cell factor, consistent with their loss of germ cell phenotype and acquisition of somatic fates. 49 The key developmental difference between
seminoma and nonseminoma appears to be the loss of ability to retain germ cell–like totipotentiality by the former.
A great deal of effort has been directed toward understanding the mechanistic basis of decisions that determine the nature and regulation of proliferation and
differentiation signals in the developing zygote. 50,51 In this context, GCTs and derived embryonal carcinoma cell lines provide a unique opportunity to study embryonal
versus extraembryonal pathways of differentiation, as well as development of somatic lineage. Analysis of genome-wide allelic loss in GCTs showed an overall higher
loss in the highly differentiated teratomas compared with the less differentiated embryonal carcinomas. 52 These studies identified chromosomal sites that may harbor
effector genes such as transcription factors whose loss may prompt either induction of differentiation or lineage decision.
The ability of GCTs to undergo an embryonal-like developmental program without the contribution of a maternal complement has obvious implications to genomic
imprinting. Parental imprints are erased in normal germ cells before meiosis, and new imprinting patterns are laid down during gametogenesis and again during
embryogenesis. 53,54 Therefore, the target cell for transformation proposed in our model, the meiotic spermatocyte, would be imprint-erased, which is consistent with
observations of biallelic expression in GCTs of IGF2 and H19 genes which normally show monoallelic expression in postfertilization somatic tissues. 55,56 A possible
mechanism by which embryonal and extraembryonal types of major differentiation paths are initiated in imprint-erased transformed germ cells may be differential
methylation of critical chromosomal regions.
Chemotherapy Resistance of Germ Cell Tumors
Molecular genetic studies of GCTs that are clinically resistant to cisplatin-based chemotherapy have identified a subset that harbors TP53 gene mutations,57 a
molecular alteration not normally associated with GCTs. 58,59 Evaluation of the cellular response to cisplatin in one GCT-derived cell line with a TP53 gene mutation
indicated a relative resistance to cisplatin, in contrast to the extreme sensitivity of another GCT-derived cell line with wild-type TP53.57 Presumably, the cisplatin
resistance of this subset of GCTs is rooted in their inability to mount an apoptotic response after drug exposure because of an inactivating TP53 gene mutation. On
the whole, these tumors display higher than normal levels of wild-type p53, 60,61 with somewhat lower levels in mature teratomas.62 Thus, somatic differentiation
associated with a decline in p53 levels may make up a cellular setting for the operation of selective pressure for TP53 gene mutation.
A cohort of cisplatin-resistant GCTs has been analyzed for the presence of amplified DNA sequences, 63 a genetic abnormality often associated with tumor
progression and resistance to therapy. In this study, comparative genomic hybridization was performed on a panel of GCTs consisting of 17 resistant and 17 sensitive
tumors.63 High-level amplification of eight chromosomal regions (other than 12p) was detected in five resistant tumors, but in none of the sensitive group. 63 Once the
identity and function of the amplified genes are determined, they may become relevant to the understanding of chemotherapy resistance of GCTs and other tumor
types.
Male GCTs offer a system in which the cellular factors portending exquisite sensitivity to chemotherapy can be studied. Some studies have described a reduced
ability of GCT cell lines to repair DNA lesions induced by cisplatin. 64,65 Although the precise biochemical link between the induction of physical damage in DNA and
the cellular response to it is unclear, in general, cells treated with DNA-damaging agents respond either by induction of a delay in the cell cycle at the G 1 to S phase
boundary, or by the induction of apoptosis, both of which are thought to be mediated by p53. 66 It has also been suggested that the rapid apoptotic response of GCTs
on exposure to chemotherapeutic agents may be caused by a high ratio of the proapoptotic bax protein to the antiapoptotic bcl-2 protein, favoring apoptosis. 67 This
has been substantiated in a limited number of GCT cell lines and needs to be further investigated at the in vivo level. 67 However, other in vitro studies have suggested
that bcl-xL, a bcl-2-related antiapoptotic protein, may act as the regulator of DNA damage-induced cell death in GCTs, rather than bcl-2. 68 In these studies, exogenous
overexpression of bcl-2 in a GCT cell line resulted in sensitization of the cell line to DNA damage-induced cell death. Associated with this sensitization was a
decreased endogenous expression of bcl-x L with little or no change in the level of bax expression. A much attenuated apoptotic response to cisplatin has been
observed in somatically differentiated GCT cell lines, reflecting the relative resistance of teratoma elements of GCT specimens. 69 The elucidation of the molecular
mechanisms whereby the unique apoptotic response to chemotherapeutic agents is achieved in GCTs will contribute to the understanding of how such a response is
achieved, as well as show how resistance may be circumvented in GCTs and other tumor types.

IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL MARKERS
Seminoma do not display differentiation in vitro or in vivo and do not express markers of somatic differentiation such as low-molecular-weight keratins, vimentin, or
blood group antigens. 34,70 However, essentially all seminoma express PLAP and kit receptor CD117. 49,71,72 Embryonal carcinoma and yolk sac tumor do display some
somatic differentiation. Surface expression of low-molecular-weight keratins (e.g., AE-1, CAM 5.2) and the type 1 precursor substance of the blood group antigens is
invariable. 34,70 Most embryonal carcinoma, but not seminoma, also express the CD30 antigen, originally described as a marker of Hodgkin's disease and anaplastic
large cell lymphoma.73,74 and 75 Vimentin expression is limited to mesenchymal components of mature teratoma and interstitial and other support cells. In tumors of
uncertain histogenesis, immunohistochemical studies that include PLAP, kit receptor, and low-molecular-weight keratins may be useful in establishing a diagnosis. It
should be remembered that cytokeratins are expressed by all epithelial tumors, and PLAP immunoreactivity is present in a small subset of epithelial neoplasms,
especially (but not limited to) those of Müllerian origin.

STAGING
A comprehensive evaluation is necessary to define the extent of disease and to determine the appropriate treatment, and should include pathologic examination of the
primary tumor, physical examination, determination of serum concentrations of AFP and HCG, and radiographic studies.
Anatomic Considerations
The initial route of metastasis is lymphatic drainage to retroperitoneal lymph nodes ( Fig. 35-2). From the testes, several lymphatic vessels emerge from the
mediastinum testis and accompany the gonadal vessels in the spermatic cord. Where the spermatic vessels cross ventral to the ureter, some of these lymphatics
diverge medially and drain into the retroperitoneal lymph node chain, whereas others follow the spermatic vessels to their origin. Lymph nodes located lateral or
anterior to the inferior vena cava are called paracaval or precaval nodes, respectively. Interaortocaval nodes are those nodes between the inferior vena cava and the
aorta. Nodes anterior or lateral to the aorta are preaortic or paraaortic nodes, respectively. The primary landing zone for a right testicular tumor lies in the
interaortocaval nodes immediately below the renal vessels, and the ipsilateral distribution includes the paracaval, preaortic, and right common iliac. The primary
landing zone for a left testicular tumor lies in the true paraaortic nodes just below the left renal vessels, and the ipsilateral distribution for the left testis includes the
paraaortic, preaortic, and left common iliac nodes. Metastatic nodal disease in more caudal areas such as the common iliac, external iliac, or inguinal lymph nodes is
usually secondary to large volume of disease with retrograde spread. If the patient has undergone a herniorrhaphy, vasectomy, or other transscrotal procedure
unrelated to the tumor, additional attention should be paid to pelvic and inguinal lymph nodes.

FIGURE 35-2. Retroperitoneal lymph nodes.

Contralateral retroperitoneal metastasis is represented by involvement of nodes usually associated with a tumor from the opposite side. For example, paraaortic
lymphadenopathy in the presence of a right-sided primary tumor is considered contralateral. Contralateral spread is more common with right-sided tumors, rare with
left-sided primaries, and usually in the setting of large-volume disease.
Retroperitoneal lymphatics continue cephalad and empty into the cisterna chyle via the right and left lumbar trunks. Lymphatic involvement above the retroperitoneal
nodes results in involvement of the retrocrural nodes. Supradiaphragmatic spread occurs via the thoracic duct, leading to posterior mediastinal and left
supraclavicular lymph node involvement. The anterior mediastinum is not part of this usual nodal hierarchy.
TUMOR IMAGING
Plain chest radiography and computed tomography (CT) are the most important radiologic investigations in determining extent of disease and treatment. The role of
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is limited.
Computed Tomography
CT is the most effective radiographic technique for identifying metastatic involvement both above and below the diaphragm. Well-circumscribed pulmonary lesions
less than 5 mm may be detected, and although these may represent metastases, many lesions in this size range represent benign processes, and their clinical
importance depends on clinical stage. In seminoma, such lesions are usually benign.
CT scan of the abdomen is the best technique for identifying retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy and has replaced intravenous pyelography and lymphangiography. The
abdominal CT scan is normal in 70% of newly diagnosed seminoma and at least one-third of newly diagnosed nonseminoma. Because GCTs may grow rapidly,
treatment decisions should be made within 4 weeks of the last abdominal CT scan. Lymph nodes in the primary landing zones measuring 10 to 20 mm are involved by
GCT approximately 70% of the time and those measuring 4 to 10 mm are involved 50% of the time. 76,77,78 and 79 The duodenum and proximal jejunum must be
adequately opacified by oral contrast. In evaluation of the postchemotherapy mass, the CT scan is unable to distinguish between residual malignant tumor, teratoma,
and necrosis or fibrosis; a normal postchemotherapy CT scan does not preclude the presence of disease.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Like CT scanning, MRI can identify enlarged lymph nodes. Although MRI occasionally provides valuable preoperative information regarding vascular anatomy and the
patency of the great vessels in patients with bulky retroperitoneal disease following chemotherapy, it adds little in the management of most patients with GCT. Both
MRI and CT are equally unable to detect viable GCT after chemotherapy.
Lymphangiography
Historically, lymphangiography was used to determine the extent of retroperitoneal involvement in both seminoma and nonseminoma. In most patients, CT scanning
has replaced it. The role of lymphangiography is limited to patients with stage I seminoma. In patients with seminoma, lymphangiography may reduce normal tissue
irradiation by permitting more precise ports and identifying where a boost of radiation may be needed for abnormal nodes seen on lymphangiography but not evident
on CT scan.
Positron Emission Tomography
Studies have compared positron emission tomography (PET) with CT for the evaluation of patients with newly diagnosed disease or residual disease after

chemotherapy. Although early studies suggest that PET may be more sensitive than CT, disease less than 0.5 cm was not detected. 80 In patients with residual
disease, PET has not been consistently able to identify residual viable malignant GCT and does not detect teratoma. 81,82 and 83 Therefore, insufficient data exist to
recommend PET as part of staging or in the evaluation of residual disease after chemotherapy.
SERUM TUMOR MARKERS
a-Fetoprotein
AFP is a 70,000 molecular-weight glycoprotein produced in the liver, gastrointestinal tract, and fetal yolk sac, and its secretion in GCT is restricted to
nonseminomatous histology, usually embryonal cell carcinoma or endodermal sinus tumor. AFP is detected by radioimmunoassay and reported in nanograms per
milliliter. The normal adult concentration is usually less than 15 ng/mL. The serum half-life is 5 to 7 days. In patients with pure seminoma, elevated serum
concentrations of AFP reflect an undetected nonseminomatous element. An increased serum AFP concentration is present in 10% to 20% of clinical stage I, 20% to
40% of low-burden clinical stage II, and 40% to 60% of high-burden disease. Because of stage migration, the frequency and degree of increased AFP concentrations
in patients with advanced tumors has declined. 84
Human Chorionic Gonadotropin
HCG is a glycoprotein composed of two subunits and is produced by syncytiotrophoblasts. The a subunit is identical to that of luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating
hormone, and thyroid-stimulating hormone. The b subunits of HCG, luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and thyroid-stimulating hormone are
homologous but have distinct amino acid sequences. 85 Elevated serum concentrations can be found in patients with pure seminoma as well as those with
nonseminomatous GCT. Most vendors have adopted the World Health Organization Third International Standard (code number 75/537) resulting in some uniformity in
the radioimmunoassays to detect the HCG b subunit. The serum half-life is 18 to 36 hours.
Approximately 10% to 20% of clinical stage I, 20% to 30% of low-volume clinical stage II, and 40% of patients with advanced nonseminomatous GCT present with
elevated serum concentrations of HCG; the frequency and degree to which the HCG is elevated has decreased over time. 84 Approximately 15% to 25% of patients
with advanced pure seminoma have increased serum concentrations of HCG. 86 False elevations of HCG secondary to either cross-reactivity of the antibody with
luteinizing hormone, treatment-induced hypogonadism, or pituitary production of HCG have been reported. 87,88 and 89
Lactate Dehydrogenase
The serum level of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) has independent prognostic significance in patients with advanced GCT and should be determined in all patients.
Increases in the serum concentration are a reflection of tumor burden, growth rate, and cellular proliferation. LDH comprises multiple isoenzymes, but, in practice, the
combined LDH value for all isoenzymes is used for clinical decision making. Comparison of one laboratory with another is possible by using ratios of the detected
level to the upper limit of normal for the individual assay. 90 Increased serum LDH concentrations are observed in approximately 60% of nonseminomatous GCT
patients with advanced disease and in 80% of patients with advanced seminoma. 86,91
STAGING CLASSIFICATIONS
Revised tumor, nodes, and metastases (TNM) and stage groupings of the American Joint Committee on Cancer and the Union Internationale Centre le Cancre were
adopted in 1997 (Table 35-3A and Table 35-3B).92 For the first time, an S category for the serum concentrations of AFP, HCG, and LDH was incorporated because of
its independent prognostic significance. Broadly, stage I disease is confined to the testis, stage II disease is restricted to the retroperitoneum, and stage III disease
represents involvement of supradiaphragmatic or other nodal sites, or visceral disease. Levels of AFP, HCG, and LDH determine overall stage.

TABLE 35-3A. TNM Staging of Testis Tumors: American Joint Committee on Cancer 92

TABLE 35-3B. TNM Staging of Testis Tumors: American Joint Committee on Cancer 92

Factors Affecting Staging of the Primary Tumor (T Stage)
The T stage of the primary lesion (not size), histology, and serum tumor marker concentrations predict the likelihood of retroperitoneal disease. For nonseminomatous
GCT, the presence of either lymphatic or vascular invasion or both has been associated with a higher likelihood of retroperitoneal metastases (approximately 50%)
and is now included in the definition of T2. invasion through the tunica albuginea into tunica vaginalis (also T2), spermatic cord (T3), or scrotum (T4) is an additional
adverse feature.
Reproducible prognostic factors predicting retroperitoneal disease in seminoma have not been identified. A Princess Margaret Hospital study of seminoma patients
treated with radiation therapy identified anaplastic histology, invasion of the tunica, and invasion of the epididymis as prognostic for relapse. 93 However, other studies
have failed to confirm these findings. 94,95 Similarly, the presence of increased serum concentrations of HCG are not consistently associated with a poor
prognosis. 86,96,97

Factors Affecting Staging of Regional (Retroperitoneal) Nodes (N Stage)
Metastatic disease to retroperitoneal lymph nodes is considered to be stage II disease. The classification of retroperitoneal lymph node involvement is based either on
pathologic evaluation after RPLND or clinical evidence of retroperitoneal lymph node involvement (see Table 35-3A and Table 35-3B).
PATHOLOGIC STAGING. The number and size of retroperitoneal lymph nodes found at RPLND have prognostic importance. 98,99,100,101 and 102 Most retrospective studies

report a less than or equal to 35% incidence of recurrent disease when fewer than six nodes are involved with tumor, and the largest node is less than 2 cm, and no
extranodal tumor extension is evident. More extensive tumor involvement is generally associated with a recurrence rate of greater than or equal to 50%. Once lymph
node involvement is demonstrated, the histology of the primary tumor, and the presence or absence of vascular invasion in the primary tumor do not appear to add
prognostic value.
CLINICAL STAGING. The transverse diameter of the largest lymph node has been used to subcategorize stage II disease (see Table 35-3A and Table 35-3B). For

seminoma, the size of retroperitoneal adenopathy usually dictates the treatment modality. Relapse proportions after definitive radiation therapy for seminoma increase
progressively from approximately 15% for nodes less than 5 cm to approximately 40% to 60% for nodes greater than 5 cm. 93,103 In nonseminoma, treatment decisions
are based on retroperitoneal lymph node size, location of the adenopathy, and the presence and degree of increase in serum tumor marker concentrations.
Prognostic Factors in Advanced Disease
Because 70% to 80% of patients with advanced GCT are cured with modern cisplatin-based chemotherapy, it has become necessary to stratify patients according to
the likelihood of cure. Although survival is the best reflection of cure, complete response is often used as a surrogate for cure, since few patients relapse after being
rendered free of disease. Histology, metastatic site, primary site, and serum tumor marker concentrations are independent prognostic variables and have been shown
to predict the likelihood of cure. Patients who are more likely to be cured (good-risk or good-prognosis subgroup) constitute the majority of GCT patients with
advanced disease and should be treated with regimens that have maximum efficacy with minimal toxicity. In contrast, patients who are unlikely to be cured (poor risk
or poor prognosis) constitute the minority of patients. For them, more effective therapy is needed; toxicity is an important but secondary issue.
Between 1980 and 1997, several classification algorithms were used to assign good- and poor-risk status based on the extent of disease, specific sites of disease,
pretreatment serum tumor marker concentrations, or all these factors. The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) 104 and Indiana University 105 allocation
criteria were the most frequently used criteria in the United States and Medical Research Council and European Organization for the Research and Treatment of
Cancer (EORTC)106 criteria in Europe (Table 35-4). A comparison of these four risk criteria in advanced nonseminomatous GCT demonstrated marked differences
and revealed that the allocation to either good- or poor-risk categories was in agreement in only 56% of patients. 107 Substantial numbers of patients assigned
good-risk status by stringent criteria were classified as poor risk by those that were less stringent. The proportion cured in the poor-risk group increases with less
stringent algorithms. 107

TABLE 35-4. Comparison of Four Poor-Risk Classification Algorithms

The International Germ Cell Cancer Collaborative Group (IGCCCG), representing GCT clinical trialists from Europe, North America, and Australia, analyzed data from
over 5000 patients treated with platinum-based chemotherapy in order to develop a common classification system. The IGCCCG found that the independent
prognostic factors for progression-free survival for patients with nonseminomatous GCT included pretreatment levels of LDH, HCG, and AFP; site of the primary tumor
(i.e., mediastinal vs. testis or retroperitoneal); and the presence of nonpulmonary visceral metastases (such as bone, brain, or liver metastases). 108 Nonpulmonary
visceral metastasis was the only significant prognostic factor in seminoma patients. Investigators agreed on three strata of good-, intermediate-, and poor-prognosis
patients with nonseminomatous GCT; no poor-risk stratum could be defined in seminoma ( Table 35-5). The marker cutoff values were incorporated into the revised
TNM classification. 92 Hence, the IGCCCG grouping should be used in future clinical trials and in treatment decision making for patients requiring initial chemotherapy
for advanced disease.

TABLE 35-5. Germ Cell Tumor Risk Classification: International Consensus 108

MANAGEMENT OF CLINICAL STAGE I DISEASE
SEMINOMA
Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy remains the treatment of choice for patients with clinical stage I seminoma. The ipsilateral hemiscrotum does not require therapy unless gross tumor
spillage has taken place. A randomized trial shows that a simple paraaortic portal excluding the ipsilateral iliac and pelvic nodes is as effective as the dog-leg portal in
overall survival. Although more pelvic relapses may be seen, the toxicity appears less ( Fig. 35-3A).109 This more restricted portal may be considered a standard of
care. Conventional fractionation for clinical stage I disease is 150 to 180 cGy/d for five sessions per week using high-energy linear accelerator beams to a total dose
of 2500 to 3000 cGy. Elective, prophylactic radiation therapy to the mediastinum is contraindicated. 110 The contralateral testis should be shielded during treatment.
Proper shielding results in an exposure less than 1% of the total dose. For left-sided primary testicular tumors, the left renal hilum must be encompassed. Treatment
of pelvic lymph nodes is sometimes required for T4 primary tumors or for scrotal violations with tumor spillage. An involved spermatic cord margin at the internal ring

may also require field extension. The relapse rate within the irradiated portal after adequate radiation therapy is negligible. The systemic relapse rate, usually
presenting as a supraclavicular mass, averages 4% to 5% ( Table 35-6), and the death rate is under 2%. 95,109,110,111,112,113 and 114

FIGURE 35-3. A: Paraaortic portal for clinical stage I seminoma. B: Contoured anterior and posterior radiation treatment fields for men with clinical stage IIA or IIB left
testicular cancer. The diagonally shaded area is an individually made, 8-cm-thick Cerrobend block.

TABLE 35-6. Treatment of Seminoma with Radiation Therapy: Outcome and Relapse Patterns

Observation
Although the dose of radiation therapy is low and the cure rate exceptionally high, long-term sequelae include the potential for an increased incidence of
gastrointestinal neoplasms (see Treatment Sequelae, later in this chapter). 115,116 As a consequence, surveillance has been studied as the only management after
orchiectomy, to be followed by chemotherapy at relapse (Table 35-7).93,117 The relapse rate is approximately 15%, but the median time to relapse is approximately 12
months, longer than that observed for nonseminomatous GCT. Moreover, relapses have occurred at intervals more than 5 years from diagnosis. 93 In addition, over 5
years of follow-up, surveillance is also approximately 30% less expensive. 118 Therefore, in the United States, observation for clinical stage I seminoma is not
considered routine.

TABLE 35-7. Observation in the Management of Clinical Stage I Germ Cell Tumors

NONSEMINOMATOUS GERM CELL TUMORS
Nonseminomatous GCT is thought to be radioresistant, although one randomized trial reported no retroperitoneal relapse after radiation therapy. 119 However,
radiation therapy plays no role in its initial management, since chemotherapy for subsequent relapse might be compromised and the systemic relapse rate is higher
than for seminoma. 119 If a patient has clinical stage I disease at the conclusion of initial staging, the choice of management options depends on specific histologic
features and the status of serum tumor marker concentrations.
Retroperitoneal Lymph Node Dissection
Because of predictable lymphatic metastatic spread, the conventional approach to patients with clinical stage I nonseminomatous GCT has been the modified,
bilateral RPLND (Fig. 35-4A). Adequate exposure for RPLND can be achieved through either a thoracoabdominal or transabdominal approach. The standard bilateral
infrahilar RPLND template, which remains the standard against which therapeutic alternatives are judged, includes the precaval, paracaval, interaortocaval, preaortic,
paraaortic, and common iliac lymph nodes bilaterally.

FIGURE 35-4. A: Standard modified bilateral retroperitoneal lymph node dissection. B: Modified nerve-avoiding template for right testicular tumors. C: Modified

nerve-avoiding template for left testicular tumors. L., left; R., right; v., vein.

Despite refinement of radiologic imaging, 15% to 40% of patients are clinically understaged. Retroperitoneal metastases are found in approximately 30% of patients
judged preoperatively to be clinical stage I. Retroperitoneal relapse occurs in approximately 20% to 25% of patients on clinical stage I surveillance protocols. 120,121,122
and 123

Infield recurrence is rare after a properly performed RPLND, which is a curative procedure, and surgical mortality is less than 1%. Major complications are unusual but
can include pancreatitis, renal vascular or ureteral injuries, chylous ascites, aortic wall necrosis, bowel obstruction, pulmonary emboli, hemorrhage, and wound
dehiscence. Minor complications include lymphocele, atelectasis, wound infection, and prolonged ileus. 124,125
In the past, most patients undergoing bilateral RPLND experienced retrograde ejaculation and subsequent infertility. An improved understanding of the neuroanatomy
of seminal emission and ejaculation, the pattern of retroperitoneal metastasis for right- and left-sided tumors, and surgical mapping studies 126,127 led to modification of
infrahilar surgical boundaries and techniques.
NEUROANATOMY. Antegrade ejaculation requires coordination of three separate events: (1) closure of the bladder neck, (2) seminal emission, and (3) ejaculation. The

sympathetic fibers that mediate seminal emission emanate primarily from the T-12 to L-3 thoracolumbar spinal cord. In the midretroperitoneum, after leaving the
sympathetic trunk, the fibers converge toward midline and form the hypogastric plexus near the aortic bifurcation. From the hypogastric plexus, sympathetic fibers
travel via pelvic nerves to innervate the vas deferens, seminal vesicles, prostate, and bladder neck. Ejaculation is mediated by combined autonomic and somatic
innervation originating at the sacral and lumbar spinal cord levels. Sympathetic stimulation tightens the bladder neck, while pudendal somatic innervation from S-2 to
S-4 causes relaxation of the external urethral sphincter and rhythmic contraction of bulbourethral and perineal muscles. Preservation of ejaculatory capacity requires
preservation of paravertebral sympathetic ganglia and their fibers, which converge at the superior hypogastric plexus around the aortic bifurcation. Sympathetic
chains and postganglionic sympathetic fibers can be prospectively identified, meticulously dissected, and preserved.
NERVE-SPARING RETROPERITONEAL LYMPH NODE DISSECTION. Nerve-sparing RPLND may be of two types: nerve-dissecting or nerve-avoiding. Despite pathologic

stage II disease in patients selected for this procedure, recurrences in the retroperitoneum are rare. 128,129 and 130 Modified, nerve-avoiding RPLND templates were
designed to avoid the hypogastric plexus and contralateral sympathetic fibers responsible for ejaculation in clinical stage I or IIA disease ( Figs. 35-4B and C). These
template dissections do not attempt to identify specific nerve fibers. Rather, their design minimizes trauma to the hypogastric plexus by limiting the contralateral
dissection to the level above the takeoff of inferior mesenteric artery. This method avoids transsection of the contralateral nerves and results in preservation of
ejaculation rates in approximately 50% to 80% of patients. 128,131,132 These rates are higher for a right-sided, nerve-avoiding template dissection compared with
modified, left-sided dissection.
Preservation of ejaculation appears to be more successful when nerves are prospectively identified and spared, compared with modified template dissection, although
duration of operation is usually longer for the former. With nerve dissection, approximately 95% of patients are left with normal ejaculatory status postoperatively.
Regardless of technique, retrograde ejaculation is a potential risk with any RPLND; therefore, preoperative sperm banking is recommended. a-Adrenergic drugs such
as ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, and imipramine occasionally promote antegrade ejaculation in a subset patients who are anejaculatory following RPLND. 133 The low
number of reported such cases suggests substantial case selection, and many patients do not respond to a-adrenergic stimulation. Transrectal electroejaculation
provides an option for patients who fail sympathomimetic agents. 134
Several investigators have reported that laparoscopic retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (LRPLND) for clinical stage I nonseminomatous testicular cancer is
technically feasible. 135 After a lengthy learning curve, postoperative morbidity, operative blood loss and length of hospital stay may be significantly less compared with
open surgery. 136 However, several important points must be emphasized. First, surgical templates are limited to the ipsilateral side with omission of interaortocaval
dissection for left-sided tumors. 136 Second, therapeutic efficacy is difficult to assess, since all patients with retroperitoneal disease, regardless of tumor volume, were
treated with postoperative chemotherapy, including two patients with microscopic metastases who received three cycles of cisplatin, etoposide, bleomycin (BEP). 136,137
Finally, available follow-up is short. Late relapses are potentially catastrophic with inadequate control of the retroperitoneum. 138,139 In patients with clinical stage I
disease experiencing a late relapse (greater than 2 years after initial treatment), the retroperitoneum was the most common site of recurrence. 138 Furthermore, 11 of
12 patients with low-volume retroperitoneal disease, and three with high-volume disease had received adjuvant cisplatin-based chemotherapy. 138 Therefore, LRPLND
is not routine and should only be considered by those who are experts.
Observation
The driving forces for observation studies in clinical stage I patients were the infertility resulting from RPLND (due to retrograde ejaculation), the frequent absence of
therapeutic benefit (i.e., orchiectomy was a curative procedure or systemic disease occurred in the absence of retroperitoneal disease), and the ability of
cisplatin-based chemotherapy to cure systemic disease. Approximately 25% of patients with T1N0M0 disease and normal serum tumor markers relapse during
surveillance (see Table 35-7).121,122 and 123,140,141 A higher likelihood of retroperitoneal, systemic, or both kinds of relapse is associated with T2 to T4 tumors (T2 now
includes lymphatic or vascular invasion). Some studies suggest that a high percentage of embryonal carcinoma also predicts a higher likelihood of relapse. 141,142
However, the correlation between lymphatic and vascular invasion and the presence of embryonal carcinoma is high, and general agreement on histologic criteria for
relapse independent of vascular or lymphatic invasion does not exist. The retroperitoneum is the site of relapse in approximately two-thirds of patients, the lungs or
markers alone in approximately one-third, and other visceral sites much less frequently. With observation, there is a slightly higher likelihood that both chemotherapy
and modified bilateral RPLND ( not nerve-sparing) will be needed in order to achieve the same cure rate.
Patients with clinical stage I nonseminomatous GCT with a T1 tumor and serum tumor markers that are normal or declining at half-life should be offered both surgical
and observation options. If RPLND is chosen, it should be of the nerve-sparing type, thereby preserving ejaculatory capacity in the majority of patients. Frequent CT
scans of the abdomen are unnecessary once an RPLND has been performed. If surveillance is chosen, then a possibly unnecessary RPLND is avoided, limiting
therapy to orchiectomy alone in at least 70% of the patients (i.e., those who never relapse). Patient compliance cannot be overemphasized. A physical examination,
chest radiography, and determinations of AFP and HCG levels are required at monthly intervals in the first year, every other month in the second year, quarterly in the
third year, and less frequently thereafter. An abdominal CT scan is required quarterly in the first year, every 4 months in the second year, and every 6 months
beginning in the third year. Visits and evaluations should be annual in the fifth year and beyond. In both situations, relapses are extremely uncommon after two years
and have only rarely been observed after 5 years.
Chemotherapy
There are limited data regarding chemotherapy as initial treatment of clinical stage I disease when the risk of retroperitoneal disease is high. In three reports of
patients receiving two cycles of cisplatin-based chemotherapy, fewer than 5% relapsed and approximately 1% died of GCT. 143,144 and 145 Although this approach avoids
RPLND and the duration of therapy is brief, these patients are exposed to the transient (e.g., myelosuppression), permanent (e.g., neuropathy), and delayed (e.g.,
Raynaud's phenomenon, acute leukemia) toxicities of chemotherapy.
Rarely, patients with clinical stage I disease are found to have persistently elevated serum concentrations of AFP, HCG, or both after orchiectomy. If these markers
increase or plateau at an elevated level after a period of observation, metastatic disease is present. This group of patients should receive initial systemic
chemotherapy, since the disease is often not limited to the retroperitoneum. 146,147 An RPLND should be done only if clinical studies at the conclusion of therapy
demonstrate new disease.

MANAGEMENT OF CLINICAL STAGE II (Low Tumor Burden)
SEMINOMA
Low-tumor-burden stage II seminoma includes all patients with retroperitoneal metastases measuring less than 5 cm in maximum transverse diameter (clinical stages

IIA and IIB; see Table 35-6).110,112,113,148 Radiation therapy is the treatment of choice for most patients with these stages of disease. A dog-leg radiation portal is used.
Fractionation is the same as that of patients with clinical stage I disease, except that a boost of approximately 500 to 750 rads is administered to involved lymph
nodes (see Fig. 35-3B). Relapses occur in from 5% to 15%, and death from seminoma is rare. Prophylactic mediastinal radiation therapy is not indicated, since
relapses solely in the anterior or posterior mediastinum are infrequent (see Table 35-6). The combination of supradiaphragmatic and infradiaphragmatic radiation
therapy results in chemotherapy intolerance, a high rate of treatment-related mortality due to chemotherapy, and a greater than expected death rate from disease due
to the inability to administer adequate doses of chemotherapy. 149
There are exceptions to the need for radiation therapy for clinical stage I and nonbulky clinical stage II seminoma. (1) A horseshoe kidney is a contraindication to
retroperitoneal radiation therapy due to the high likelihood of radiation-induced renal failure. Observation is preferred in clinical stage I, and primary chemotherapy is
the treatment of choice for clinical stage II. (2) Patients who develop a second metachronous testicular GCT and who have undergone a prior RPLND or received
radiation therapy should be observed frequently if clinical stage I disease is present and undergo primary chemotherapy in the unlikely event that the disease is
confined to residual retroperitoneal lymph nodes. (3) Inflammatory bowel disease may also be a contraindication to radiation therapy. A discussion with an
experienced radiation oncologist is indicated under such circumstances. If the decision is not to administer radiation therapy, then the management policies noted
previously for patients with a horseshoe kidney should be followed.
NONSEMINOMATOUS GERM CELL TUMORS
Low-tumor-burden clinical stage II nonseminomatous GCT encompasses disease ipsilateral to the primary tumor, at or below the renal hilum, not associated with
tumor-related back pain, and limited to the primary landing zone. The presence of suprahilar or retrocrural lymphadenopathy, bilateral retroperitoneal nodal
metastases, back pain, or contralateral lymph nodes (even if the ipsilateral lymph nodes do not appear to be involved) generally implies unresectable disease (e.g.,
tumor-associated back pain) or a higher likelihood of metastatic disease (suprahilar and retrocrural adenopathy), and initial chemotherapy is preferred. Ipsilateral
solitary lymph nodes less than 3 cm are best handled by RPLND. Lymph nodes between 3 to 5 cm, even if solitary, may be associated with more extensive disease
than can be detected on abdominal CT scan.
Retroperitoneal Lymph Node Dissection
The standard approach to patients with clinical stage IIA and some IIB tumors has been RPLND. The priority is to perform a definitive therapeutic operation, following
which there is a minimum likelihood of infield recurrence. Margins of resection should not be compromised in an attempt to maintain ejaculatory function.
Nerve-sparing dissection may be possible, depending on the location and volume of disease.
An important exception to this approach may be patients with clinical stage IIA or IIB and elevated serum tumor markers. Investigators at MSKCC reported that
elevated serum tumor markers pre-RPLND were the most significant predictor for (1) relapse in patients with low-volume (pN1) retroperitoneal disease who did not
receive adjuvant chemotherapy, and (2) for persistent nonseminomatous GCT (usually persistent marker elevation) despite complete resection of high-volume (pN2,
pN3) retroperitoneal disease. 150 Elevated serum tumor markers usually reflect systemic disease, and these patients should be considered for primary cisplatin-based
chemotherapy. However, for patients with apparent low-volume disease and normal markers, RPLND is often therapeutic and cost effective. 151
Adjuvant Chemotherapy
Surveillance is a treatment choice for compliant patients with fewer than six involved nodes and none greater than 2 cm ( Table 35-8).98,101,102,152,153 Surveillance
requires close monitoring, and chemotherapy is reserved for patients who relapse. Patient compliance, psychological factors, age, or other issues may make adjuvant
chemotherapy the preferred choice in rare patients. Three or four cycles of cisplatin-based therapy are required at relapse according to disease status at that time.

TABLE 35-8. Pathologic Stage II Nonseminomatous Germ Cell Tumors: Surveillance for Minimal Nodal Involvement at Retroperitoneal Lymph Node Dissection

Adjuvant chemotherapy remains a strong consideration in patients when greater than or equal to six nodes are involved, any node is greater than 2 cm, or there is
extranodal extension. In the late 1970s, treatment programs based on cisplatin, vinblastine, and bleomycin were given as adjuvant therapy following RPLND, and
nearly 100% of patients survived relapse free. 98,154 Considerable treatment-related morbidity was associated with these regimens, prompting efforts to reduce toxicity.
Two cycles of cisplatin-based chemotherapy are nearly always effective in preventing relapse ( Table 35-9).99,102,154,155 and 156 A randomized trial showed that
observation with standard treatment at relapse and two cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy had equivalent survival. 102 Etoposide has replaced vinblastine in adjuvant
regimens. A more recent study showed that etoposide plus cisplatin alone is adequate, and that bleomycin is unnecessary as part of adjuvant therapy. 156

TABLE 35-9. Cisplatin -Containing Adjuvant Chemotherapy Trials

IDENTIFICATION OF RELAPSE
Careful periodic follow-up after locoregional therapy is required after radiation therapy for clinical stage I, IIA, and IIB seminoma during observation for clinical stage I
nonseminomatous GCT, and after RPLND without adjuvant chemotherapy. After radiation therapy, a chest radiograph, determination of serum concentrations of AFP
and HCG, and a physical examination should be performed every 6 weeks to 3 months in the first year, every 3 to 4 months in the second year, and less frequently
thereafter. An abdominal CT scan should be done at the conclusion of radiation therapy. Following RPLND, a chest radiograph, determinations of serum
concentrations of AFP and HCG, and a physical examination are required every 1 to 2 months in the first year, every 2 to 3 months in the second, and less frequently

in the third year and beyond, with annual visits to detect late relapse and second primary tumors after the fifth year. Provided that follow-up has been adequate,
virtually all of these patients relapse with low-volume disease and are cured with chemotherapy.

MANAGEMENT OF STAGE II AND STAGE III DISEASE (HIGH TUMOR BURDEN)
High-burden disease includes all patients with extensive or bulky retroperitoneal, supradiaphragmatic nodal or visceral metastases, including patients with stage IIC
seminoma. This last group has a high relapse rate with radiation therapy alone (see Table 35-6).110,111,148,157 Cisplatin-based chemotherapy cures 70% to 80% of those
patients. Early clinical trials developed effective regimens such as cisplatin, vinblastine, and bleomycin 158 and cisplatin, vinblastine, bleomycin, dactinomycin, and
cyclophosphamide, 91 eliminated maintenance therapy,159 and replaced vinblastine with etoposide. 158 Adjunctive surgery was shown to be essential to achieving a
disease-free state. Although the majority of patients was cured, significant adverse events were observed, including treatment mortality, myelosuppression, pulmonary
fibrosis, Raynaud's phenomenon, coronary artery disease, nephrotoxicity, and intestinal ileus. 158,160,161 Good- and poor-risk allocation algorithms were developed and
clinical trials performed to address issues represented by different risks of treatment failure. The commonly used standard treatment regimens are summarized in
Table 35-10.

TABLE 35-10. Commonly Used Chemotherapy Regimens for Metastatic Germ Cell Tumors

GOOD-PROGNOSIS GERM CELL TUMOR
Good-risk patients are those with a high likelihood of cure. All good-risk allocation criteria identify patients with a high probability of complete response. Response
proportions range from 88% to 95% with favorable survival distributions. 107 Since the advent of good-risk stratification, trials have focused on eliminating bleomycin
from treatment regimens, reducing the number of cycles of therapy, and substituting carboplatin for cisplatin ( Table 35-11).162,163,164,165,166,167 and 168

TABLE 35-11. Randomized Trials in Good-Prognosis Germ Cell Tumors

A randomized trial performed by Indiana University examined the duration of therapy 162 in 184 patients who received either four cycles of BEP administered over 12
weeks or three cycles administered over 9 weeks. Bleomycin was discontinued for any clinically evident pulmonary toxicity. A disease-free status was achieved by
98% of patients receiving three cycles, and 92% survived, compared with a 97% disease-free status and 92% survival among patients treated with four cycles.
Three randomized clinical trials have evaluated the elimination of bleomycin from regimens containing etoposide and cisplatin. Etoposide and cisplatin (EP) for four
cycles was compared with a five-drug, bleomycin-containing regimen (cisplatin, vinblastine, bleomycin, dactinomycin, and cyclophosphamide) in 164 evaluable
patients and was found to be therapeutically equivalent. 163 A subsequent analysis evaluated late relapse in patients receiving EP, and none were observed with a
median follow-up of 5 years. 169 A randomized trial of cisplatin and etoposide with (BEP) and without bleomycin (EP) was erformed by the EORTC in 395 patients. The
dose of etoposide in this study was 360 mg/m2 per cycle, with the dose modifications for thrombocytopenia in contrast to 500 mg/m 2 per cycle without dose
attenuations in American trials. The bleomycin arm was more toxic, including Raynaud's phenomenon in 8% of patients and two patients who died of pulmonary
toxicity. Complete response was lower in EP patients (87% vs. 95%, P = .0075), but no differences were observed in relapses, time to progression, or survival with
over 7 years of follow-up. 164 It can be concluded from this study that bleomycin cannot be deleted from good-risk therapy when European doses of etoposide are
used.
A French trial directly compared three cycles of BEP to four cycles of EP in 250 patients. This trial used standard doses of bleomycin (30 U/week days 1, 8, and 15 of
each cycle) and an etoposide dose of 100 mg/m 2 on days 1 through 5 (total 500 mg/m 2/cycle) in both arms of the trial. 168The criteria for good risk were those
developed by the Institute Gustave Roussy; 97% of patients were good-risk by the IGCCCG criteria. With a median follow-up of 24 months, the survival was similar in
both arms [97% for BEP (three cycles) vs. 96% for EP (four cycles)]. Finally, three cycles of BEP were compared with three cycles of EP in 166 patients. 165 The
number of patients with persistent or progressive carcinoma, relapse or viable cancer at postchemotherapy surgery was the end point. An interim analysis revealed an
increased number of adverse events in the two-drug arm, resulting in early termination of the study.
Two randomized trials have evaluated the substitution of carboplatin for cisplatin. In a multiinstitutional trial of 265 patients, four cycles of carboplatin plus etoposide
were compared with four cycles of EP.166 Although the proportions of complete response did not differ significantly, patients receiving carboplatin plus etoposide had
an inferior event-free (incomplete response or relapse) ( P = .02) and relapse-free (P = .005) survival, and significantly worse myelosuppression requiring platelet
transfusions and hospitalization for granulocytopenic fever. In subset analysis, carboplatin plus etoposide was inferior to EP in both seminoma and nonseminoma
patients. The Medical Research Council and EORTC conducted a confirmatory, randomized trial comparing carboplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin with BEP in 598
patients. Bleomycin was administered at 30 U once every 3 weeks. Complete response was greater in patients allocated to BEP (94% vs. 87%, P = .009). Survival
was inferior in carboplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin ( P = .003), with BEP patients experiencing a 3-year survival of 97% compared with 90% for carboplatin,
etoposide, and bleomycin patients. Conventional dose carboplatin therapy is inferior to cisplatin therapy in GCT patients.
Although good-risk studies differ in eligibility criteria, an efficacy threshold has been reached. Cisplatin-based therapy (greater than or equal to 100 mg/m 2/cycle) is
required; there is no role for carboplatin-based therapy. Four cycles of EP and three cycles of BEP using a 500 mg/m 2 cumulative dose of etoposide per course are
therapeutically equivalent in randomized comparison. 168

POOR- (AND INTERMEDIATE-) RISK GERM CELL TUMOR
Between 20% and 30% of patients with advanced GCT fail to achieve durable, complete response to first-line, cisplatin-containing chemotherapy. In general, clinical
trials for the poor-risk subgroup attempt to improve efficacy by evaluating regimens that have been effective in salvage therapy, substituting a new agent for an
existing one or incorporating a dose-intensive regimen. Numerous studies have evaluated the importance of increased serum tumor marker concentrations, number of
metastatic sites, size of specific tumor site, site of metastasis (e.g., liver), site of primary tumor (extragonadal or gonadal), and histology 104,105 in an attempt to identify
poor-risk patients. Unlike good-risk criteria, the choice of poor-risk selection algorithm is critical. If the criteria are insufficiently stringent, then a proportion of good-risk
patients will be treated and unnecessarily exposed to the enhanced toxicity of intensive therapy. In addition, the response proportion will be inflated, making therapy
appear more effective than is warranted. The lack of uniform predictive criteria was addressed by the IGCCCG criteria. 108 Durable complete responses occur in 75%
and 40% of intermediate- and poor-risk patients, respectively. Because the optimal chemotherapy regimen has not been determined, clinical trials designed to cure an
increased proportion of patients remain a priority, and such patients should be treated on clinical trials.
Conventional Dose Therapy
The results of randomized studies conducted in poor-risk patients are shown in Table 35-12.106,158,170 and 173 A randomized trial comparing BEP to cisplatin, vinblastine,
and bleomycin showed that etoposide-containing therapy was superior to vinblastine-based therapy in the subset of poor-risk patients (Indiana advanced disease
class).158 One randomized trial suggested that a regimen with cisplatin, 200 mg/m 2, etoposide, vinblastine, and bleomycin was superior to cisplatin, 100 mg/m 2,
vinblastine, and bleomycin. 170 A subsequent randomized trial showed that BEP, 200 mg/m2, had equal efficacy but greater toxicity than standard BEP 171; the
apparently improved efficacy of cisplatin, 200 mg/m 2, etoposide, vinblastine, and bleomycin was attributable to etoposide. The role of ifosfamide was tested in a
randomized trial; there was no therapeutic benefit of ifosfamide, cisplatin, and etoposide over BEP, and toxicity with ifosfamide, cisplatin, and etoposide was more
severe. 174 These results paralleled the absence of survival benefits among consecutive phase II trials of conventional dose, cisplatin-based therapy conducted at
MSKCC.91,175 Therefore, in poor-risk patients, four cycles of BEP remain the standard regimen with which investigational regimens should be compared. Likewise, in
intermediate-risk patients by IGCCCG criteria, four cycles of BEP is considered standard therapy.

TABLE 35-12. Results of Randomized Trials in Patients with Poor-Risk Germ Cell Tumors

High-Dose Therapy
The success of high-dose, carboplatin-containing chemotherapy in the treatment of patients with refractory disease led to its incorporation into initial therapy.
Stringent selection criteria and rapid hematopoietic reconstitution are required to minimize treatment-related morbidity and mortality.
Two pilot studies clarify high-dose therapy requirements in this setting. In these studies conducted at MSKCC, 58 poor-risk patients were first identified based on
clinical presentation, and further selected to receive high-dose therapy based on the clearance of AFP, HCG, or both from serum during standard induction therapy. If
the half-life was prolonged, treatment was changed to two-drug, high-dose therapy (etoposide plus carboplatin). 176,177 Hematopoietic reconstitution was rapid, only one
treatment-related death was observed, and an improved survival trend was observed when this approach was compared with historic poor-risk experience with
conventional dose, cisplatin-combination therapy. 176,177
One randomized trial of dose-intensified therapy failed to show a therapeutic benefit. 178 Greater treatment-related morbidity and mortality and lower survival were
observed in the high-dose therapy arm. However, the trial was flawed because of a lower dose intensity of cisplatin and a lower total dose of cisplatin in the high-dose
arm. Since cisplatin, 200 mg/m 2, is not superior to cisplatin 100 mg/m 2,171 the choice of cisplatin over carboplatin did not permit an adequate dose escalation to
overcome resistance.
An ongoing national randomized trial is comparing four cycles of BEP to two cycles of BEP followed by two cycles of three-drug, high-dose therapy in poor- and
intermediate-risk patients, and patients should participate if possible.
MANAGEMENT OF RESIDUAL DISEASE
Adjunctive surgical resection of residual disease after chemotherapy is an integral part of the comprehensive management of all patients with advanced GCT. 179,180 In
general, surgical exploration is indicated when serum tumor marker concentrations have normalized and residual radiographic abnormalities are present. Increased
serum concentrations of AFP and HCG after chemotherapy are often characterized by unresectable, viable GCT, and salvage chemotherapy is usually recommended
for these patients. 179 Necrotic debris and fibrosis, teratoma, and viable carcinoma can be found at any resected site. Since the relapse rate of patients with necrosis
and fibrosis or mature or immature teratoma is 5% to 10% following complete resection of residual disease at all sites, no further therapy is required. 181,182,183 and 184 If
viable GCT is present at any site but all disease is completely resected, 30% to 50% of patients relapse following two additional cycles of therapy. Survival is poor
among those who do not receive additional chemotherapy. 183,185
Retroperitoneum
NONSEMINOMATOUS GERM CELL TUMORS. In the retroperitoneum, necrosis and fibrotic debris make up 45% to 50% of pathologic findings, teratoma another 35%, and

viable GCT the remaining 15% to 20% ( Table 35-13).181,183,184,186,187,188 and 189 A bilateral RPLND is required, and retrograde ejaculation is the principal long-term
consequence.

TABLE 35-13. Pathologic Findings in the Retroperitoneum after Chemotherapy in Patients with Advanced Germ Cell Tumors

There is general agreement over the need to resect all sites of measurable residual disease. Since nearly 50% of resected residual retroperitoneal tumors have only
necrosis and fibrosis, many studies have attempted to predict their presence. Among 80 patients with sequential CT scans before and after chemotherapy at Indiana
University, neither viable GCT nor teratoma was found among 15 patients if no teratoma was present in the primary tumor and the retroperitoneal tumor volume (not
diameter) by CT scan had decreased by less than or equal to 90%. 183 Conversely, teratoma in the primary tumor predicts the presence of teratoma or viable GCT in
the postchemotherapy resection despite reduction in the original tumor mass. 181,183,184
Other data suggest that RPLND may be needed regardless of postchemotherapy size. The definition of a normal CT scan has not been consistent. Lymph node
diameters of less than or equal to 10 mm, 190 less than or equal to 15 mm,191 and less than or equal to 20 mm192 have been reported to represent normal CT scans
after chemotherapy. Fossa et al. reported that 12 of 37 (30%) patients with normal postchemotherapy serum tumor marker concentrations and CT scan (all nodes less
than or equal to 10 mm) had teratoma, and one patient had viable GCT. 191 Toner et al. reported that 8 of 39 (21%) patients with residual masses less than 1.5 cm had
viable residual malignancy or teratoma. 181 CT criteria alone are not sufficiently reliable to distinguish viable tumor or teratoma from necrosis. PET scanning has been
studied as a technique to detect necrosis and fibrosis, but teratoma was not reliably predicted. 81,82
The decision to recommend postchemotherapy surgery depends on the frequency of viable carcinoma, the biologic potential of teratoma, and the morbidity of RPLND.
If viable carcinoma is present, it is partially drug-resistant and will progress. The cure rate of relapsed disease to ifosfamide-based therapy is approximately 25%. 193,194
and 195 If viable disease is completely resected and two additional cycles of cisplatin-based therapy are administered, the cure rate is 50% to 70%. 181,185 Teratoma may
be found in metastatic sites despite its absence in the primary tumor. Toner et al. reported that among 75 patients without teratoma in the primary tumor who
underwent resection of a residual mass, 25 (33%) had teratoma at a metastatic site. 181 Mature teratoma may grow rapidly (growing teratoma syndrome),196,197 become
unresectable, or cause vascular or ureteral obstruction. 198 Malignant transformation of teratoma (i.e., the development of non–germ cell malignant elements such as
sarcoma or carcinoma) is present in a minority of resected retroperitoneal teratoma. 37,199 These are clonal in origin with the original GCT and do not represent second
primary cancers.200,201 and 202 Surgery is the only therapy (except for leukemia) for this subset of tumors that would otherwise recur and fail to respond to additional
chemotherapy. Late local recurrence (defined as greater than 2 years after therapy) of both teratoma and viable GCT is more common when teratoma is present at a
metastatic site,139,203,204 underscoring the need for initial complete surgical resection. Late recurrences of malignant GCT are often chemotherapy resistant, and
chance of survival is poor. 203,204,205,206,207
The complication rate of RPLND following chemotherapy is higher than that of primary RPLND. 124,208 Large-volume residual disease, postchemotherapy desmoplastic
reaction, prior exposure to bleomycin, and more extensive retroperitoneal dissection increase the technical demands of the procedure. Careful monitoring of
intraoperative and postoperative oxygen concentration (particularly in patients who have received bleomycin), meticulous fluid management with strict replacement
criteria, and an emphasis on colloid rather than crystalloid have reduced pulmonary toxicity and nearly eliminated perioperative death from acute respiratory distress
syndrome.179
Ejaculatory dysfunction and sterility are common sequelae of the standard, modified bilateral RPLND, particularly after primary chemotherapy. 124 Nerve-avoiding
RPLND templates are not acceptable alternatives for residual disease after chemotherapy, since there is a higher risk of disease in sites outside the limits of the
nerve-avoiding template in patients with a prior high-volume disease. 209 However, in selected patients without severe postchemotherapy desmoplastic changes, it is
occasionally technically possible to identify individual sympathetic nerves. Wahle et al. reported that among 296 patients who underwent postchemotherapy RPLND,
a select subset of 40 (13.5%) patients underwent nerve-dissecting RPLND after chemotherapy. 210 The majority of these 40 patients had relatively low-volume
unilateral adenopathy before induction chemotherapy. With a minimum of 1-year follow-up, 34 of 38 (89%) patients reported normal ejaculation; nine patients reported
ten pregnancies. There were no infield recurrences. 210 The best oncologic approach in patients requiring postchemotherapy RPLND remains a bilateral dissection
with a nerve-sparing approach limited to a minority of patients.
In summary, all residual retroperitoneal disease should be resected. The need for postchemotherapy RPLND is controversial when the postchemotherapy CT scan,
usually of the retroperitoneum, is interpreted as normal. Multivariate analyses show that approximately 20% of patients predicted to have necrosis (fibrosis) have
either teratoma or viable GCT. 181,211 No single criterion or combination of criteria predict a negative pathology with sufficient accuracy to eliminate the risk of residual
teratoma or viable GCT and obviate postchemotherapy RPLND. The risks of residual teratoma must be weighed against the growth and metastatic potential of viable
GCT and the morbidity of the procedure.
SEMINOMA. The approach to the patient with pure seminoma and a postchemotherapy residual mass is controversial. Two important features distinguish seminoma

from nonseminomatous tumors. First, teratoma in the residual mass is rare. Second, a complete RPLND following chemotherapy is often not technically feasible,
secondary to the severe desmoplastic reaction and obliteration of tissue planes. 212 Consequently, perioperative morbidity has been reported to be higher for
seminoma than for nonseminomatous GCT. 213,214
A number of studies evaluated this issue in seminoma patients. 149,212,213,214,215,216 and 217 Loehrer et al. reported that among 62 patients, 13 underwent attempted surgical
excision of residual disease and three (23%) had residual malignancy. 149 The size of residual mass was not considered predictive. Fossa et al. reported 39 patients,
15 of whom received prior radiation therapy. 214 Twelve patients underwent exploration for residual disease; three (25%) had viable seminoma. One postoperative
death due to pulmonary toxicity was observed. In a cohort of 45 patients, the size of residual mass was highly correlated with the site of the initial tumor but was not
associated with the risk of recurrence. 212 These data support the notion that the majority of patients with persistent radiographic abnormalities do not have residual
malignant disease.
The experience at MSKCC differed. Bilateral RPLND was not usually possible or attempted; surgery was often limited to resection of the residual mass or multiple
biopsies of the residual radiographic abnormality. In an initial cohort of 104 patients, 8 of 30 (27% of patients with a residual mass greater than 3 cm) relapsed or had
residual seminoma.217 No postoperative deaths occurred. Conversely, among 74 tumors measuring less than 3 cm in diameter, no viable tumor was identified, and
only two patients (3%) relapsed at the site of residual disease. Neither of these had undergone operation. Fewer tumors greater than 3 cm were present among
patients treated after 1987 compared with those treated before 1987. Those investigators concluded that resection or biopsy of the residual masses greater than or
equal to 3 cm was preferable to observation. If viable seminoma was documented, additional therapy was required. 217
In summary, residual masses less than 3 cm should be observed. Controversy exists regarding the minority of patients with a residual mass measuring greater than or
equal to 3 cm. Radiation therapy to the area of residual disease is feasible, but approximately 75% of patients would receive it unnecessarily and it did not appear to
reduce the likelihood of recurrence. 212 Careful observation is an alternative, but relapse with subsequent ifosfamide-based salvage chemotherapy has a low cure rate
(see Prognostic Factors: Salvage Chemotherapy, later in this chapter). Surgical resection that can identify residual disease and direct immediate therapy has low
morbidity given modern techniques and perioperative care. 217 All factors (e.g., size, site, patient age) must be considered in making this therapeutic decision.
Lung and Mediastinal Resections
Resection of residual disease at sites other than the retroperitoneum is less controversial. There is a higher likelihood of teratoma, viable cancer at nonretroperitoneal
sites, or both, with the highest likelihood seen in the mediastinum, probably because residual disease in the mediastinum is usually associated with a mediastinal
primary tumor.181 Size of the pretreatment and the postchemotherapy pulmonary nodule does not correlate with final histology. Different histologies may also be
present in each lung. Therefore, residual intrathoracic disease should always be resected. 218,219
Other Procedures
A small percentage of patients requires operation at multiple sites, usually the retroperitoneum and lung and (less frequently) the neck. 220 Histology at different sites is
not predictable based on histology at one site. When the histologic specimen from the retroperitoneum is compared with that from a second site, the histologies are

dissimilar in approximately 35% of cases. 182,218,219 When the lung and retroperitoneum are simultaneously involved, multiple, separate procedures may be required,
but simultaneous bilateral thoracic and retroperitoneal resections are possible. 221 If a primary testis tumor is present and an orchiectomy is not performed before
chemotherapy, then it should be performed after chemotherapy, as that testis may harbor viable residual disease. 222,223 Studies confirm that all sites of residual
disease should generally be resected regardless of histologic findings at the initial procedure.

MANAGEMENT OF RELAPSE AFTER CHEMOTHERAPY
Twenty percent to 30% of patients with advanced GCT relapse or fail to achieve a complete response to conventional cisplatin-based chemotherapy. Effective (and
curative) second- and third-line salvage offer further treatment options.
CONVENTIONAL DOSE SALVAGE THERAPY
After the single-agent activity of ifosfamide was identified, 224,225 it was combined with cisplatin and etoposide or cisplatin and vinblastine in patients whose disease
was resistant to two prior regimens (Table 35-14).193,194 and 195,226,227 and 228 In this heavily pretreated group, between 25% and 35% of patients achieved a complete
response, and 15% to 27% remained in durable complete remission. 226,229 Nephrotoxicity and severe neutropenia were extremely common. Results suggesting an
improved complete response rate when paclitaxel is substituted for vinblastine await completion of ongoing phase II studies. 230

TABLE 35-14. Ifosfamide -Based Salvage Regimens for Relapsed and Refractory Germ Cell Tumors

HIGH-DOSE THERAPY
The chemosensitivity of GCT, the dose-response phenomena for individual drugs, the rare occurrence of bone marrow metastasis, and a young patient population
permit consideration of high-dose therapy. More recent studies have included carboplatin and etoposide with or without an oxazaphosphorine (cyclophosphamide or
ifosfamide) and show that a proportion of patients can be cured. In three relatively large series conducted in patients with refractory, progressive GCT, 15% to 21% of
patients remained alive and disease-free with long-term follow-up ( Table 35-15).231,232,233,234 While these series demonstrate the curative potential of high-dose
therapy, the majority of patients with cisplatin-refractory GCT die of disease, and new drugs and strategies are still needed. Studies incorporating paclitaxel are
ongoing.

TABLE 35-15. High-Dose Carboplatin-Containing Chemotherapy in Patients with Refractory, Progressive Germ Cell Tumor

The major toxicities of dose-intensive therapy are hematologic and infectious, with most studies reporting a 10% to 12% treatment-related death rate. 235 Hematopoietic
growth factor support decreases the duration of neutropenia and hospitalization. 236 Peripheral blood-derived stem cells have largely replaced the use of autologous
bone marrow, and a randomized trial showed that peripheral blood-derived stem cells result not only in rapid neutrophil reconstitution but also faster platelet
engraftment.237
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS: SALVAGE CHEMOTHERAPY
Despite an occasional cure, the majority of patients receiving salvage chemotherapy fail to achieve a durable complete response and are subsequently considered for
high-dose chemotherapy. Prognostic factors can be used to predict which patients are most likely to benefit from conventional dose salvage therapy. Patients with a
testis primary site and a prior complete response have a better prognosis, and conventional dose cisplatin salvage therapy (vinblastine, ifosfamide, and cisplatin) is
reasonable in these patients. 238 Patients with an incomplete response to initial therapy or a relapsing extragonadal nonseminomatous GCT have a less than 10%
3-year survival response to conventional dose, cisplatin-containing salvage therapy. 238 In these circumstances, a dose-intensive program, a novel treatment strategy,
or a new agent should be considered. The contribution of serum tumor marker concentrations to prognosis in this group of patients has not been established.
Prognostic factors can also be used to identify patients most likely to benefit from salvage high-dose, stem cell–supported, carboplatin-containing chemotherapy.
Patients with primary mediastinal GCT refractory to initial and salvage chemotherapy, patients with absolute refractory disease (rising markers or radiographic
evidence of progressive disease within 4 weeks of cisplatin therapy), and patients with high HCG levels rarely achieve a complete response. 233,239 These patients
should be considered for phase II studies. All other patients are candidates for a high-dose approach.
NEW AGENTS
A number of single-agent trials have been conducted against refractory GCT. 240,241,242,243,244 and 245 Of note, ifosfamide, paclitaxel, and oral etoposide and gemcitabine
have demonstrated antitumor activity. 239,245,246 and 247 Because paclitaxel is synergistic with cisplatin and oxazaphosphorines in vitro, it is being studied in dose-intensive
therapy with peripheral blood-derived, stem cell support, and in conventional dose therapy with ifosfamide plus cisplatin. Oral etoposide plays a palliative role in
refractory GCT.
ROLE OF SURGERY
histologic findings of resected masses following second-line or salvage chemotherapy differ from those observed following primary therapy. Viable tumor occurs in

approximately 50% of specimens, teratoma in 40%, and necrosis in only 10%. 185 Additional standard-dose chemotherapy adds no benefit to patients with viable
nonseminomatous GCT in the resected specimen after salvage chemotherapy, as opposed to clear benefit with two additional cycles following complete resection of
nonseminomatous GCT after primary chemotherapy.
In general, surgery should be avoided in patients in whom serum tumor marker concentrations remain elevated. While this general rule holds true, surgery has
curative potential in a highly select group of patients with increased marker levels, even after salvage chemotherapy. In a study at Indiana University, 38 of 48 (79%)
such patients were rendered grossly free of disease, 29 (60%) normalized markers, and ten (21%) had no evidence of disease with a median follow-up of 46
months.248 Eastham et al. observed that 6 of 16 (31%) patients undergoing resection of residual disease in the face of elevated serum tumor markers were cured. 249
Five of these six patients had retroperitoneal disease only. Finally, Wood et al. examined 15 patients refractory to cisplatin-based therapy who underwent surgical
resection of a solitary site of residual disease despite elevated markers at MSKCC. 250 Seven patients (47%) remained free of disease. These are all highly selected
patients. At MSKCC, only 4% of patients with refractory disease were surgical candidates when markers were elevated after salvage chemotherapy. Only a small
subset of patients with chemotherapy-resistant disease can be cured with surgery. Patients with a solitary retroperitoneal mass and increased AFP seemed to be the
best candidates. Technically difficult, this surgery should be performed at a tertiary center.

TREATMENT SEQUELAE
CHEMOTHERAPY
Acute and subacute chemotherapy toxicity frequently occurs but is generally controllable. Control of nausea and vomiting is extremely important in order to maintain
adequate hydration. Concurrent administration of a 5-HT 3 antagonist with dexamethasone is superior to a 5-HT 3 antagonist alone. 251 Since cisplatin induces delayed
emesis, administration of oral metoclopramide and a benzodiazepine plus dexamethasone for 2 to 4 days after therapy is sometimes necessary. While these
antiemetic regimens now permit the administration of 5-day, low-dose, cisplatin-based programs in the office or other outpatient settings, an occasional patient
develops severe nausea and vomiting and should be hospitalized in order to protect renal function.
Nephrotoxicity from cisplatin occurs to some extent in all patients and is cumulative. Due to the effect of cisplatin on proximal tubules, progressive reduction in
glomerular filtration and cumulative hypomagnesemia may result, associated with an increase in serum creatinine from pretreatment baseline, 252,253 particularly after
ifosfamide-based salvage chemotherapy. 229 Nephrotoxicity may be severe in patients receiving high-dose chemotherapy in the salvage setting but does not appear to
influence response rate or hematologic recovery. 254 Reports of an increased frequency of diastolic hypertension and cardiac events have appeared, 255 and longer
follow-up is needed to establish this association with greater certainty. There are also reports of increased mean cholesterol levels, increased low-density and
decreased high-density lipoprotein levels, and increased weight years after chemotherapy for GCT. 256,257
Myelosuppression frequently occurs. 158,163,166,193,195 Anemia occurs in virtually all patients, but infrequently results in the need for red blood cell transfusions in those
previously untreated. Grade 4 thrombocytopenia (platelet count less than 50,000) is distinctly uncommon with primary cisplatin-based therapy, but frequent during
salvage chemotherapy. Neutropenic fever occurs in approximately 10% to 15% of patients receiving EP, is more common with the addition of bleomycin, and occurs in
more than 50% of patients receiving salvage chemotherapy. Hematopoietic growth factors are recommended prophylactically following neutropenic fever but do not
improve survival when given. 258 Severe anemia, neutropenia and neutropenic fever, and thrombocytopenia often accompany ifosfamide-based salvage therapy;
hematopoietic growth factor support should be used prophylactically from the beginning of salvage therapy.
Peripheral neuropathy occurs in a majority of patients receiving vinblastine. 259,260 Replacing vinblastine with etoposide decreased the frequency of neuropathy,
although cisplatin still causes symptomatic neuropathy in a minority of patients. Auditory toxicity from cisplatin is often associated with reduced high-tone hearing and,
less frequently, tinnitus, but patients rarely require hearing aids.
Pulmonary toxicity from bleomycin is rare but can be fatal. In one randomized trial, it resulted in approximately one-half of the treatment-induced deaths. 158 In
good-risk patients, a reduction in the number of bleomycin doses from 12 to 9 resulted in no bleomycin-related, treatment-related deaths. 162 Pulmonary function tests
(vital capacity and diffusion capacity of carbon monoxide) have been used to dictate changes in bleomycin administration. 91,163 However, the diffusion capacity of
carbon monoxide may not predict clinically significant bleomycin-induced lung damage. 261
Vascular toxicity, most prominently as Raynaud's phenomenon, occurs in a minority (less than 10%) of patients receiving bleomycin administered by weekly bolus. It
occurs in the absence of cisplatin (albeit less frequently). 158,160,260 The substitution of etoposide for vinblastine did not reduce the incidence of Raynaud's
phenomenon.158 Erectile dysfunction may be associated with Raynaud's phenomenon as a sign of microvascular angiopathy. 262 Other vascular events include
pulmonary emboli,91 angina and myocardial infarction. 161,260 Coronary artery disease resulting from mediastinal radiation therapy is well recognized and emphasizes
the need to avoid mediastinal radiation therapy in the management of patients with seminoma.
Infertility is an important consideration. A minority of patients is infertile at diagnosis. Reduced spermatogenesis and higher follicle-stimulating hormone levels
compared with healthy men are frequent in newly diagnosed patients. 263 A similar impairment of testicular function occurs in men with CIS (intratubular germ cell
neoplasia).264 However, paternity in patients on surveillance for clinical stage I disease did not seem to be reduced. 265 A standard, modified bilateral RPLND causes
retrograde ejaculation in nearly all patients. Nerve-dissecting and nerve-avoiding RPLND reduce, but do not eliminate, that risk. Chemotherapy may affect the
germinal epithelium directly, and Leydig cell insufficiency is frequent. 266,267 After chemotherapy, persistent oligospermia and abnormal forms and motility have been
reported,268 but conception may occur despite oligospermia.
Second malignancies are rare. Metachronous GCT appearing in the contralateral testis occurs in approximately 2% to 3% of all patients. 269 After the second
orchiectomy, replacement testosterone is required to maintain normal serum testosterone levels, secondary sexual characteristics, and sexual function. Etoposide
causes secondary leukemia characterized by translocations involving chromosome 11q in fewer than 0.5% of patients receiving a total dose less than 2000
mg/m2270,271 and as many as 6% of patients receiving total etoposide doses of greater than 3000 mg/m 2.272 However, reports showed acute leukemia in 0.8% to 1.3%
of patients receiving median cumulative etoposide doses greater than 2400 mg/m 2.273 The latent period is short, averaging 2 to 4 years.
The incidence of gastrointestinal malignancies increased after radiation therapy or radiation therapy plus chemotherapy. 115,116 The relative risk increases with time and
is greatest after 10 years. 115 Stomach cancer is the most prevalent gastrointestinal tumor. An excess of soft tissue sarcoma has also been observed. 115,274 The latent
interval is long, and radiation therapy was implicated in the majority. 116,274 These second malignancies do not outweigh the enormous benefits of treatment
intervention. Along with the risk of recurrence, these second primary neoplasms emphasize the need for long-term follow-up of treated patients.
Sarcoidosis appears more frequently in GCT patients. 275 Strictly speaking, it is not a sequela of therapy. It occurs both before and after GCT diagnosis. Paratracheal
adenopathy or pulmonary nodules without retroperitoneal adenopathy or elevated serum tumor marker levels, particularly in patients with seminoma, suggest the
possible presence of sarcoidosis and should lead to biopsy.

MIDLINE TUMORS OF UNCERTAIN HISTOGENESIS
A subset of patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma of unknown histogenesis and uncertain primary site achieve complete response and long-term survival
following treatment with cisplatin-combination therapy. 276,277 In a series of 220 patients, 26% of patients achieved a complete response; the 10-year actuarial survival
was 16%.277 Because of cisplatin sensitivity, predominant midline tumor distribution, and occurrence in relatively young patients, the presence of unrecognized
extragonadal GCT was suggested despite the absence of increased serum concentration of AFP, HCG, or both in most cases. 276,277 Since i(12p) is a specific
chromosomal marker characterizing GCT,200 genetic analysis was undertaken. i(12p) and chromosome 12 aneuploidy were identified by conventional or molecular
cytogenetic analysis or Southern blot analysis for 12p copy number, permitting a diagnosis of GCT in approximately 30% of such tumors. 278 A significantly greater
complete plus partial response proportion to cisplatin-based therapy and longer survival were associated with the presence of a GCT genetic marker. 278 Genetic
analyses also identified other tumors such as primitive neuroectodermal tumors, lymphoma, desmoplastic small cell tumor, melanoma, and clear cell sarcoma,
indicating that this group of midline tumors has a heterogeneous histogenesis. Therefore, genetic analysis using conventional and molecular techniques has both

diagnostic and prognostic value.

OTHER TESTICULAR TUMORS
LEYDIG CELL TUMORS
Leydig cell (interstitial cell) tumors account for approximately 2% of testicular tumors. 279,280 Approximately 75% appear in adults who present with a palpable mass or
testicular swelling indistinguishable from GCT. A minority has gynecomastia or decreased libido. The remaining 25% of cases present in children, sometimes with
signs of sexual pseudoprecocity such as pubic hair, voice change, or enlarged genitalia. 279 A testicular mass associated with virilization in a prepubertal patient is a
Leydig cell tumor until proven otherwise. There is no association between Leydig cell tumors and cryptorchidism. These tumors consist of tightly packed polygonal
cells with eosinophilic granular cytoplasm and round nuclei with prominent nucleoli. Characteristic intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies (Rinke crystals) are seen in
approximately 25% to 40% of cases.280 A radical inguinal orchiectomy is required, and clinical staging includes a chest radiography, CT scan of the abdomen and
pelvis, and studies for urinary and serum steroids.
Most Leydig cell tumors are benign. Malignant potential is difficult to predict. Vascular invasion, cellular atypia, tumor necrosis, infiltrative margins, increased mitotic
rate, tumor size less than 5 cm and older age at presentation have been reported to be predictive of malignant potential. 280,281 and 282 Metastases are the only reliable
criteria of malignancy. The most frequent sites of metastatic spread are the regional lymph nodes followed by lung, liver, and bone. RPLND is reasonable in selected
cases with adverse features. 282 Metastatic Leydig cell tumors are radioresistant and chemoresistant. For metastatic disease, particularly that which secretes steroids,
ortho-para-DDD, a potent inhibitor of steroidogenesis, has produced responses, but cure is not possible. 283
SERTOLI CELL TUMORS
Sertoli cell tumors (SCT) account for fewer than 1% of primary testicular neoplasms. They are subclassified into classic, large cell calcifying (LCCSCT), and
sclerosing. 284,285 SCT present as a painless, enlarging mass requiring a radical inguinal orchiectomy. LCCSCT are noted for multifocality, familial tendency, and
bilaterality. An association has been reported between LCCSCT, pituitary adenoma, adrenocortical hyperplasia, cardiac myxoma, and pigmented skin and mucosal
lesions.286 Precocious puberty is commonly noted in boys with LCCSCT, whereas feminization occurs in approximately 25% of classical SCT but is rare in LCCSCT. 284
A testicular mass associated with feminization in a prepubertal patient is a classic SCT until proven otherwise.
Most SCT are benign and require RPLND only if accompanied by retroperitoneal adenopathy. Metastases are the only reliable indicator of malignancy, occurring in
fewer than 10% of cases.279 The most common sites for metastatic spread are retroperitoneal lymph nodes, mediastinal nodes, lungs, liver, and bone. Sclerosing SCT
and LCCSCT have minimal metastatic potential. Radiation therapy and chemotherapy are ineffective.
GRANULOSA CELL TUMORS
Granulosa cell tumors histologically resemble adult-type granulosa cell tumors of the ovary. Gynecomastia and increased estrogen secretion are common. These
tumors are extremely rare; their metastatic potential appears limited. Radical orchiectomy is required.
Juvenile granulosa cell tumors are the most common gonadal stromal neoplasms in early childhood, and the morphology may be confused with a yolk sac tumor.
These patients usually present with maldescended testes, ambiguous genitalia, and an abnormal karyotype.
GONADOBLASTOMA
Gonadoblastoma are composed of sex cord elements admixed with germ cells. Often bilateral, they occur in men with chromosome abnormalities and those with
dysgenetic gonads. Metastases from the GCT element may occur.
MESOTHELIOMA
Mesothelioma of the tunica vaginalis may invade the testis and frequently extend to the internal ring. Surgical intervention requires radical orchiectomy and complete
excision of the spermatic cord and hemiscrotum. Retroperitoneal or inguinal metastases may occur if the testis is invaded or if vascular invasion is present.
Aggressive surgery is the only useful therapy.
SARCOMAS
ADENOCARCINOMA OF THE RETE TESTIS
This highly malignant neoplasm arises from the collecting system of the testis. 2,279 Located posteriorly, it often invades adjacent structures such as the cord and
epididymis. Over one-half of patients present with metastatic disease. Survival rates are poor, with 30% to 50% dying within 1 year. These tumors generally do not
respond to either radiation therapy or chemotherapy. 279 Following radical orchiectomy, RPLND may be curative in some patients with minimal retroperitoneal
involvement.
EPIDERMOID CYST
Epidermoid cysts of the testis usually present between the second and fourth decades. 288 They are usually asymptomatic and discovered incidentally. These tumors
are round, firm, and sharply demarcated on gross examination. Microscopically, the cyst is lined with stratified squamous epithelium. The adjacent testicular
parenchyma is benign, and no CIS is present. The histogenesis of these tumors is uncertain. The clinical behavior of these tumors is uniformly benign; consequently,
patients require no further therapy following resection. Testicular ultrasound may be diagnostic, in which case enucleation of the mass is sufficient treatment.
Nevertheless, thorough histologic sampling must be performed to rule out a mature teratoma.
LYMPHOMA
Lymphoma is the most common secondary tumor of the testicle and the most frequent testicular neoplasm in men older than age 50. 279,280 Approximately 40% of
patients report systemic symptoms such as fatigue, weight loss, and fever. Painless testicular enlargement is common, whereas bilateral involvement occurs in
approximately one-third of patients. 289 Radical orchiectomy establishes the diagnosis and cures a small subset of patients. However, most cases are associated with
systemic disease. Central nervous system as well as bone marrow diseases are common. Survival is generally poor. Management of lymphoma is discussed in
Chapter 45.
Metastatic Carcinoma
Metastatic carcinoma to the testicle is rare and usually associated with diffuse systemic disease. 279 Bilateral involvement is noted in 15% of cases. The most common
primary sites include prostate, lung, melanoma, and kidney. Treatment may include radical orchiectomy with further therapy dictated by the primary tumor.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Greenlee RT, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics 2000. CA: Cancer J Clin 2000;50:7.
2. McKiernan JM, Goluboff E, Liberson G, Golden R, Fisch H. Rising risk of testicular cancer by birth cohort in the United States from 1973 to 1995. J Urol 1999;162:361.
3. Bergstrom R, Adami H-O, Mohner M, et al. Increase in testicular cancer incidence in six European countries: a birth cohort phenomenon. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:727.
4. Daniels JL, Stutzman R, McLeod D. A comparison of testicular tumors in black and white patients. J Urol 1981;125:341.
5. Moul J, Schanne F, Thompson I, et al. Testicular cancer in blacks. A multicenter experience. Cancer 1994;73:388.
6. Forman D, Olier R, Brett A, et al. Familial testicular cancer: a report of the UK family register, estimation of risk and an HLA Class 1 sib-pair analysis. Br J Cancer 1992;65:255.

7. Batata M, Chu F, Hilaris B, Whitmore W, Golbey R. Testicular cancer in cryptorchids. Cancer 1982;49:1023.
8. Schottenfeld D, Warshauer M, Sherlock S, et al. The epidemiology of testicular cancer in young adults. Am J Epidemiol 1980;112:232.
9. Timmerman J, Northfelt D, Small E. Malignant germ cell tumors in men infected with the human immunodeficiency virus: natural history and results of therapy. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1291.
10. Bernardi D, Salvioni R, Vaccher E, et al. Testicular germ cell tumors and human immunodeficiency virus infection: a report of 26 cases. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2705.
11. Moller H, Knudsen L, Lynge E. Risk of testicular cancer after vasectomy: cohort study of over 73,000 men. Br J Med 1994;309:295.
12. Renshaw AA. Testicular calcifications: incidence, histology and proposed pathological criteria for testicular microlithiasis. J Urol 1998;160:1625.
13. Bosl GJ, Vogelzang NJ, Goldman A, et al. Impact of delay in diagnosis on clinical stage of testicular cancer. Lancet 1981;2:970.
14. Feuer E, Frey C, Brawley O, et al. After a treatment breakthrough: a comparison of trial and population-based data for advanced testicular cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:368.
15. Collette L, Sylvester RJ, Stenning SP, et al. Impact of the treating institution on survival of patients with “poor-prognosis” metastatic nonseminoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:839.
16. Feuer EJ, Sheinfeld J, Bosl GJ. Does size matter? Association between number of patients treated and patient outcome in metastatic testicular cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:816.
17. Dehner L, Mills A, Talerman A, et al. Germ cell neoplasms of head and neck soft tissues: a pathologic spectrum of teratomatous and endodermal sinus tumors. Hum Pathol 1990;21:309.
18. Heffner D, Hyams V. Teratocarcinosarcoma (malignant teratoma?) of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses: a clinicopathologic study of 20 cases. Cancer 1984;53:2140.
19. Dixon FJ, Moore RA. Atlas of tumor pathology. Washington, DC: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 1952:32.
20. Mostofi FK, Sesterhenn IA. Revised International Classification of Testicular Tumors. In: Jones WG, Harnden P, Appleyard I, eds. Germ cell tumors III. Oxford: Pergamon, 1994:153.
21. Pugh RCB. Pathology of the testis. Oxford: Blackwell, 1976.
22. Jacobsen G, Henriksen OB, von der Maase H. Carcinoma in situ of testicular tissue adjacent to malignant germ-cell tumors: a study of 105 cases. Cancer 1981:2660.
23. Daugaard G, von der Masse H, Olsen J, Rorth M, Skakkebaek NE. Carcinoma-in-situ testis in patients with assumed extragonadal germ-cell tumors. Lancet 1987;2:528.
24. Muller J, Skakkebaek NE, Parkins MC. The spermatocytic seminoma: views on pathogenesis. Int J Androl 1987;10:1047.
25. Manivel JC, Simonton S, Wold LE, Dehner L. Absence of intratubular germ cell neoplasia in testicular yolk sac tumors in children. An histochemical and immunohistochemical study. Arch
Pathol Lab Med 1988;112:641.
26. Skakkebaek ME, Berthelsen JG, Muller J. Carcinoma in situ of the undescended testis. Urol Clin North Am 1982;8:377.
27. von der Maase H, Rorth M, Walbom-Jorgensen S, et al. Carcinoma in situ of contralateral testis in patients with testicular germ cell cancer: study of 27 cases in 500 patients. BMJ(Clin Res)
1986;293:293.
28. Giwercman A, Muller J, Skakkebaek NE. Prevalence of carcinoma in situ and other histopathological abnormalities in testes from 399 men who suffered sudden unexpected death. J Urol
1991;145:77.
29. Pryor JP, Cameron KM, Chilton CP, et al. Carcinoma in situ in testicular biopsies from men presenting with infertility. Br J Urol 1983;55:780.
30. Skakkebaek NE. Carcinoma in situ of the testis: frequency and relationship to invasive germ cell tumors in infertile men. Histopathology 1978;2:157.
31. Berthelsen JG, Skakkebaek NE, von der Maase H, Sorensen B. Screening for carcinoma in situ of the contralateral testis in patients with germinal testicular cancer. BMJ 1982;285:1683.
32. Giwercman A, Grindsted J, Hansen B, et al. Testicular cancer risk in boys with maldescended testis: a cohort study. J Urol 1987;138:1214.
33. Cockburn A, Vugrin D, Batata M, Hajdu S, Whitmore W. Poorly differentiated (anaplastic) seminoma of the testis. Cancer 1984;53:1991.
34. Motzer RJ, Reuter VE, Cordon Cardo C, Bosl GJ. Blood group-related antigens in human germ cell tumors. Cancer Res 1988;48:5342.
35. Motzer RJ, Bosl GJ. Hemorrhage: a complication of metastatic testicular choriocarcinoma. Urology 1987;30:119.
36. Bosl GJ, Geller N, Cirrincione C, et al. Interrelationships of histopathology and other clinical variables in patients with germ cell tumors of the testis. Cancer 1983;51:2121.
37. Motzer RJ, Amsterdam A, Prieto V, et al. Teratoma with malignant transformation: diverse malignant histologies arising in men with germ cell tumors. J Urol 1998;159:133.
38. Nichols C, Roth B, Heerema NA, et al. Hematologic neoplasia associated with primary mediastinal germ cell tumors. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1425.
39. Leibovitch I, Foster R, Ulbright T, Donohue J. Adult primary pure teratoma of the testis. The Indiana Experience. Cancer 1995;75:2244.
40. Chaganti RSK, Murty VVVS, Bosl GJ. Molecular genetics of male germ cell tumors. In: Vogelzang NJ, Shipley WU, Scardino PT, Coffey DS, eds. Comprehensive textbook of genitourinary
oncology. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1996:932.
41. Houldsworth J, Reuter V, Bosl G, Chaganti R. Aberrant expression of cyclin D2 is an early event in male germ cell tumorigenesis. Cell Growth Differ 1997;8:293.
42. Weinberg RA. The retinoblastoma protein and cell cycle control. Cell 1995;81:323.
43. Skakkebaek NE, Rajpert-de Meyts E, Jorgensen N, et al. Germ cell cancer and disorders of spermatogenesis: an environmental connection? APMIS 1998;106:3.
44. Skakkebaek NE, Berthelsen JG, Giwercman A, Muller J. Carcinoma in situ of the testis: possible origin from gonocytes and precursors of all types of germ cell tumors except spermatocytoma.
Int J Androl 1987;10:19.
45. Chaganti RSK, Houldsworth J. The cytogenetic theory of the pathogenesis of human adult male germ cell tumors. APMIS 1998;106:80.
46. Sicinski P, Donaher JL, Geneg Y, et al. Cyclin D2 is an FSH-responsive gene involved in gonadal cell proliferation and oncogenesis. Nature 1996;384:470.
47. Murty VVVS, Chaganti RSK. A genetic perspective of male germ cell tumors. Semin Oncol 1998;25:133.
48. Loveland KL, Schlatt S. Stem cell factor and c-kit in the mammalian testis: lessons originating from Mother Nature's gene knockouts. J Endocrinol 1997;153:337.
49. Rajpert-de Meyts E, Skakkeback NE. Expression of the c-kit protein product in carcinoma in situ and invasive testicular germ cell tumors. Int J Androl 1994;17:85.
50. Conlon I, Raff M. Size control in animal development. Cell 1999;96:235.
51. Edlund T, Jessell TM. Progression from extrinsic to intrinsic signaling in cell fate specification: a view from the nervous system. Cell 1999;96:211.
52. Murty VVVS, Bosl GJ, Houldsworth J, et al. Allelic loss and somatic differentiation in human male germ cell tumors. Oncogene 1994;9:2245.
53. Barlow D. Imprinting: a gamete's point of view. Trends Genet 1993;9:285.
54. Lyon MF. Epigenetic inheritance in mammals. Trends Genet 1993;9:123.
55. Van Grup RJHLM, Oosterhuis JW, Kalscheuer V, Marimas ECM, Looijenga LHJ. Biallelic expression of the H19 and IGF2 genes in human testicular germ cell tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst
1994;86:1070.
56. Looijenga LHJ, Verkerk AJMH, Dekker MC, et al. Genomic imprinting in testicular germ cell tumours. APMIS 1998;106:187.
57. Houldsworth J, Xiao H, Murty VV, et al. Human male germ cell tumor resistance to cisplatin is linked to TP53 gene mutation. Oncogene 1998;16:2345.
58. Heimdal K, Lothe LA, Lystad S, et al. No germline TP53 mutations detected in familial and bilateral testicular cancer. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1993;6:92.
59. Peng H-Q, Hogg D, Malkin D, et al. Mutations of the p53 gene do not occur in testis cancer. Cancer Res 1993;53:3574.
60. Bartkova J, Bartek J, Lukas J, et al. p53 Protein alterations in human testicular cancer including pre-invasive intratubular germ-cell neoplasia. Int J Cancer 1991;49:196.
61. Schenkman NS, Sesterhenn IA, Washington L, et al. Increased p53 protein does not correlate to p53 gene mutations in microdissected testicular germ cell tumors. J Urol 1995;154:617.
62. Heidenreich A, Schenkman NS, Sesterhenn IA, et al. Immunohistochemical and mutational analysis of the p53 tumor suppressor gene and the bcl-2 oncogene in primary testicular germ cell
tumours. APMIS 1998;106:90.
63. Rao PH, Houldsworth J, Palanisamy N, et al. Chromosomal amplification is associated with cisplatin resistance of human male germ cell tumors. Cancer Res 1998;58:4260.
64. Koberle B, Grimaldi KA, Sunters A, et al. DNA repair capacity and cisplatin sensitivity of human testis tumour cells. Int J Cancer 1997;70:551.
65. Koberle B, Masters JRW, Hartley JA, Wood RD. Defective repair of cisplatin-induced DNA damage caused by reduced XPA protein in testicular germ cell tumours. Curr Biol 1999;9:273.
66. Levine AJ. p53, the cellular gatekeeper for growth and division. Cell 1997;88:323.
67. Chresta C, Masters J, Hickman J. Hypersensitivity of human testicular tumours to etoposide-induced apoptosis is associated with functional p53 and a high Bax-Bcl-2 ratio. Cancer
1996;56:1834.
68. Arriola EL, Rodriguez-Lopez AM, Hickman JA, Chresta CM. Bcl-2 overexpression results in reciprocal downregulation of Bcl-X(L) and sensitizes human testicular germ cell tumours to
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. Oncogene 1999;18:1457.
69. Timmer-Bosscha H, de Vries EG, Meijer C, Oosterhuis JW, Muldcer NH. Differential effects of all-trans retinoic acid, docsahexaenoic acid, and hexadecylphosphocholiine on cisplatin-induced
cytotoxicity and apoptosis in a cisplatin sensitive and resistant human embryonal carcinoma cell line. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1998;41:469.
70. Battifora H, Sheibani K, Tubbs R, Kopinski M, Sun T-T. Antikeratin antibodies in tumor diagnosis. Cancer 1984;54:843.
71. Manivel J, Jessurun J, Wick M, Dehner L. Placental alkaline phosphatase immunoreactivity in testicular germ-cell neoplasms. Am J Surg Pathol 1987;11:21.
72. Izquierdo M, VanDer Valk P, Van Ark-Otte J, et al. Differential expression of the c-kit proto-oncogene in germ cell tumours. J Pathol 1995;177:253.
73. Ferreiro JA. Ber-H2 expression in testicular germ cell tumors. Hum Pathol 1994;25:522.
74. Hittmair A, Rogatsch H, Hobisch A, Mikuz G, Feichtinger H. CD30 expression in seminoma. Hum Pathol 1996;27:1166.
75. Suster S, Huxzar M, Bubis JJ, Geiger B. Fibrosarcoma of the urinary bladder: study of a case showing extensive chondroid differentiation. Arch Surg 1987;111:767.
76. Lien H, Stenwig A, Ous S, Fossa S. Influence of different criteria for abnormal lymph node size on reliability of computed tomography in patients with nonseminomatous testicular cancer. Acta
Radiol Diagn 1986;27:199.
77. Fernandez E, Moul J, Foley J, Colon E, McLeod D. Retroperitoneal imaging with third and fourth generation computed axial tomography in clinical stage I nonseminomatous germ cell tumors.
Urology 1994;44:548.
78. Leibovitch I, Foster R, Kopecky K, Donohue J. Improved accuracy of computerized tomography based clinical staging in low stage nonseminomatous germ cell cancer using size criteria of
retroperitoneal lymph nodes . J Urol 1995;154:1759.
79. Hilton S, Herr H, Teitcher J, Begg C, Castellino R. CT detection of retroperitoneal lymph node metastases in patients with clinical stage I testicular nonseminomatous germ cell cancer:
assessment of size and distribution criteria. AJR 1997;169:521.
80. Albers P, Bender H, Yilmaz H, et al. Positron emission tomography in the clinical staging of patients with stage I and II testicular germ cell tumors. Urology 1999;53:808.
81. Stephens AW, Gonin R, Hutchins GD, Einhorn L. Positron emission tomography evaluation of residual radiographic abnormalities in postchemotherapy germ cell tumor patients. J Clin Oncol
1996;14:1637.
82. Cremerius U, Effert PJ, Adam G, et al. FDG PET for detection and therapy control of metastatic germ cell tumor. J Nucl Med 1998;39:815.
83. Ganjoo KN, Chan RJ, Sharma M, Einhorn LH. PET scans in the evaluation of post-chemotherapy (PC) residual masses in patients with seminoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3457.
84. Bosl GJ, Geller NL, Chan EY. Stage migration and the increasing proportion of complete responders in patients with advanced germ cell tumors. Cancer Res 1988;48:3524.
85. Vaitukaitis JL. Human chorionic gonadotropin as a tumor marker. Ann Clin Lab Sci 1974;4:276.
86. Mencel PJ, Motzer RJ, Mazumdar M, et al. Advanced seminoma: treatment results, survival, and prognostic factors in 142 patients. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:120.
87. Catalona WJ, Vaitukaitis JL, Fair WR. Falsely positive specific human chorionic gonadotropin assays in patients with testicular tumors: conversion to negative with testosterone administration. J
Urol 1979;122:126.
88. Odell WD, Griffin J. Pulsatile secretion of human chorionic gonadotropin in normal adults. N Engl J Med 1987;317:1688.
89. Fowler JE, Platoff GE, Kubrock CA, Stutzman RE. Commercial radioimmunoassay for beta subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin: falsely positive determinations due to elevated serum
luteinizing hormone. Cancer 1982;49:136.
90. Bajorin D, Mazumdar M, Meyers M, et al. Metastatic germ cell tumors: modeling for response to chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:707.
91. Bosl GJ, Gluckman R, Geller N, et al. VAB-6: An effective chemotherapy regimen for patients with germ-cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1493.
92. Fleming I, et al., ed. AJCC Cancer Staging Handbook. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven, 1998.
93. Warde P, Gospodarowicz MK, Panzarella T, et al. Stage I testicular seminoma: results of adjuvant irradiation and surveillance. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2255.
94. Vaeth M, Schultz HP, von der Maase H, et al. Prognostic factors in testicular germ cell tumors. Acta Radiol Oncol 1984;23:271.
95. Zagars GK, Babian RJ. Stage I testicular seminoma: rationale for postorchidectomy radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:155.
96. Butcher DN, Gregory WM, Gunter PA, et al. The biological and clinical significance of HCG-containing cells in seminoma. Br J Cancer 1985;51:473.
97. Peckham MJ. Surveillance following orchiectomy for clinical stage I testicular germ-cell malignancy. Prog Clin Biol Res 1985;203:523.
98. Vogelzang NJ, Fraley EE, Lange PH, et al. Stage II nonseminomatous testicular cancer: a 10-year experience. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:171.
99. Vugrin D, Whitmore W, Cvitkovic E, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy with VAB-3 of stage II-B testicular cancer. Cancer 1981;48:233.

100. Ozols RF, Ihde DC, Linehan WM, Young RC. Management of high risk patients with advanced testis cancer: National Cancer Institute approach. Semin Oncol 1988;15:335.
101. Richie JP, Kantoff PW. Is adjuvant chemotherapy necessary for patients with stage B1 testicular cancer? J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1393.
102. Williams SD, Stablein DM, Einhorn LH, et al. Immediate adjuvant chemotherapy versus observation with treatment at relapse in pathological stage II testicular cancer. N Engl J Med
1987;317:1433.
103. Zagars G, Babaian J. The role of radiation in stage II testicular seminoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:163.
104. Bosl GJ, Geller N, Cirrincione C, et al. Multivariate analysis of prognostic variables in patients with metastatic testicular cancer. Cancer Res 1983;43:3403.
105. Birch R, Williams S, Cone A, et al. Prognostic factors for favorable outcome in disseminated germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:400.
106. de Wit R, Stoter G, Sleijfer DT, et al. Four cycles of BEP versus an alternating regimen of PVB and BEP in patients with poor-prognosis metastatic testicular non-seminoma; a randomised
study of the EORTC Genitourinary Tract Cancer Cooperative Group. Br J Cancer 1995;71:1311.
107. Bajorin D, Katz A, Chan E, et al. Comparison of criteria for assigning germ cell tumor patients to “good risk” and “poor risk” studies. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:786.
108. IGCCCG. International Germ Cell Consensus classification: a prognostic factor-based staging system for metastatic germ cell cancers. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:594.
109. Fossa SD, Horwich A, Russell JM, et al. Optimal planning target volume for stage I testicular seminoma: a Medical Research Council randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1146.
110. Thomas G, Rider W, Dembo A, et al. Seminoma of the testis: results of treatment and patterns of failure after radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8:165.
111. Hamilton C, Horwich A, Easton D, Peckham M. Radiotherapy for stage I seminoma testis: results of treatment and complications. Radiother Oncol 1986;6:115.
112. Willan B, McGowan D. Seminoma of the testis: a 22-year experience with radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:1769.
113. Hanks G, Herring D, Kramer S. Patterns of care outcome studies: results of the national practice in seminoma of the testis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:1413.
114. Fossa S, Aass N, Kaalhus O. Radiotherapy for testicular seminoma stage I: treatment results and long-term post-irradiation morbidity in 365 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;16:383.
115. van Leeuwen F, Stiggelbout A, van den Belt-Dusebout A, et al. Second cancer risk following testicular cancer: a followup study of 1,909 patients. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:415.
116. Wanderas EH, Fossa SD, Tretli S. Risk of subsequent non-germ cell cancer after treatment of germ cell cancer in 2006 Norwegian male patients. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:253.
117. Horwich A. Surveillance for stage I seminoma of the testis. In: Horwich A, ed. Testicular cancer: investigation and management. London: Chapman and Hall, 1991:109.
118. Sharda NN, Kinsella TJ, Ritter MA. Adjuvant radiation versus observation: a cost analysis of alternate management schemes in early-stage testicular seminoma. J Clin Oncol 1996; 14:2933.
119. Rorth M, Jacobsen GK, von der Maase H, et al. Surveillance alone versus radiotherapy after orchiectomy for clinical stage I nonseminomatous testicular cancer. Danish Testicular Cancer Study
Group. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1543.
120. Sharir S, Jewett MAS, Sturgeon JFG, et al. Progression detection of stage I nonseminomatous testis cancer on surveillance: implications for the followup protocol. J Urol 1999;161:472.
121. Gels M, Hoekstra H, Sleijfer D, et al. Detection of recurrence in patients with clinical stage I nonseminomatous testicular germ cell tumors and consequences for further followup: a single-center
10-year experience. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1188.
122. Read G, Stenning S, Cullen M, et al. Medical Research Council prospective study of surveillance for stage I testicular teratoma. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1762.
123. Nicolai N, Pizzocaro G. A surveillance study of clinical stage I nonseminomatous germ cell tumors of the testis: 10-year followup. J Urol 1995;154:1045.
124. Baniel J, Foster R, Rowland R, Donohue J. Complications of primary retroperitoneal lymph node dissection. J Urol 1994;152:424.
125. Birhle R, Donohue J, Foster R. Complications of retroperitoneal lymph node dissection. Urol Clin North Am 1988;15:237.
126. Donohue J, Zachary J, Maynard B. Distribution of nodal metastases in nonseminomatous testis cancer. J Urol 1982;128:315.
127. Ray B, Hadju S, Whitmore WFJ. Distribution of retroperitoneal lymph node metastases in testicular germinal tumors. Cancer 1974;33:340.
128. Donohue JP, Thornhill JA, Foster RS, Rowland RG, Bihrle R. Retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy for clinical stage A testis cancer (1965 to 1989): modifications of technique and impact on
ejaculation. J Urol 1993;149:237.
129. Jewett MAS. Nerve sparing technique for retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy in testis cancer. Urol Clin North Am 1990;17:449.
130. Donohue JP, Foster RS. Retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy in staging and treatment. The development of nerve-sparing techniques. Urol Clin North Am 1998;25:461.
131. Richie J. Clinical stage I testicular cancer: the role of modified retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy. J Urol 1990;144:1160.
132. Fossa S, Klepp O, Ous S, et al. Unilateral retroperitoneal lymph node dissection in patients with nonseminomatous testicular tumor in clinical stage I. Eur Urol 1984;10:17.
133. Nijman J, Jager S, Boer P, et al. The treatment of ejaculation disorders after retroperitoneal lymph node dissection. Cancer 1982;50:2967.
134. Ohl D. Electroejaculation. Urol Clin North Am 1993;20:181.
135. Rassweiler JJ, Seemann O, Henkel TO, et al. Laparoscopic retroperitoneal lymph node dissection for nonseminomatous germ cell tumor: indication and limitation. J Urol 1996;156:1108.
136. Janetschek G, Hobisch A, Holtl L, et al. Retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy for clinical stage I nonseminomatous testicular tumor: laparoscopy versus open surgery and impact of learning curve.
J Urol 1996;156:89.
137. Bianchi G, Beltrami P, Giusti G, et al. Unilateral laparoscopic retroperitoneal lymph node dissection for clinical stage I nonseminomatous germ cell testicular neoplasm. Eur Urol 1998;33:190.
138. Baniel J, Foster RS, Einhorn L, Donohue J. Late relapse of clinical stage I testicular cancer. J Urol 1995;154:1370.
139. Cespedes RD, Peretsman SJ. Retroperitoneal recurrences after retroperitoneal lymph node dissection for low-stage nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. Urology 1999;54:548.
140. Dunphy C, Ayala A, Swanson D, Ro J, Logothetis C. Clinical stage I nonseminomatous and mixed germ cell tumors of the testis. Cancer 1988;62:1202.
141. Sogani PC, Perrotti M, Herr HW, et al. Clinical stage I testis cancer: long-term outcome of patients on surveillance. J Urol 1998;159:855.
142. Heidenreich A, Sesterhenn IA, Mostofi FK, Moul JW. Prognostic risk factors that identify patients with clinical stage I nonseminomatous germ cell tumors at low risk and high risk for metastasis.
Cancer 1998;83:1002.
143. Pont J, Holtl W, Kosak D, et al. Risk-adapted treatment choice in stage I nonseminomatous testicular germ cell cancer by regarding vascular invasion in the primary tumor: a prospective trial. J
Clin Oncol 1990;8:16.
144. Oliver RTD, Raja M, Ong J, Gallagher C. Pilot study to evaluate impact of a policy of adjuvant chemotherapy for high risk stage I malignant teratoma on overall relapse rate of stage I cancer
patients. J Urol 1992;148:1453.
145. Cullen M, Stenning S, Parkinson M, et al. Short course adjuvant chemotherapy in high risk stage I nonseminomatous germ cell tumours of the testis (NSGCTT): an MRC(UK) study report. Proc
ASCO 1995;14:244(abst).
146. Davis B, Herr H, Fair W, Bosl GJ. The management of patients with nonseminomatous germ cell tumors of the testis with serologic disease only after orchiectomy. J Urol 1994;152:111.
147. Saxman S, Nichols C, Foster R, et al. The management of patients with clinical stage I nonseminomatous testicular tumors and persistently elevated serologic markers. J Urol 1996;155:587.
148. Gregory C, Peckham M. Results of radiotherapy for stage II testicular seminoma. Radiother Oncol 1986;6:285.
149. Loehrer PJ, Birch R, Williams SD, Greco A, Einhorn LH. Chemotherapy of metastatic seminoma: the Southeastern Cancer Study Group experience. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1212.
150. Sheinfeld J, Rabbani F, Mohsein H, et al. Elevated serum tumor markers (STM) prior to 1o RPLND predicts clinical outcome and requirements for systemic chemotherapy in patients with pN1,
N2 and N3 nonseminomatous germ cell tumor (NSGCT). Proc ASCO 1999;18:308a.
151. Baniel J, Roth B, Foster R, Donohue J. Cost and risk benefit in the management of clinical stage II nonseminomatous testicular tumors. Cancer 1995;75:2897.
152. Harlapp J, Weissbach L, Bussar-Maatz R. Adjuvant chemotherapy in nonseminomatous testicular tumor stage II. Int J Androl 1987;10:277.
153. Rabbani F, Sheinfeld J, Mohseni H, et al. Prognostic factors for relapse in patients with low volume (pN1) nonseminomatous germ cell tumor (NSGCT) following primary retroperitoneal
lymphadenectomy (RPLND). J Urol 1999;161:157.
154. Weissbach L, Hartlapp JH. Adjuvant chemotherapy of metastatic stage II nonseminomatous testis tumor. J Urol 1991;146:1295.
155. Vugrin D, Whitmore WF, Herr HW, Sogani P, Golbey RB. VAB-6 combination chemotherapy in resected stage II-B testis cancer. Cancer 1983;51:5.
156. Motzer RJ, Sheinfeld J, Mazumdar M, et al. Etoposide and cisplatin adjuvant therapy for patients with pathologic stage II germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2700.
157. Warde P, Gospodarowicz M, Panzarella T, et al. Management of stage II seminoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:290.
158. Williams SD, Birch R, Einhorn LH, et al. Treatment of disseminated germ-cell tumors with cisplatin, bleomycin, and either vinblastine or etoposide. N Engl J Med 1987;316:1435.
159. Einhorn LH, Williams SD, Troner M, Birch R, Greco FA. The role of maintenance therapy in disseminated testicular cancer. N Engl J Med 1981;305:727.
160. Vogelzang NJ, Bosl GJ, Johnson K, Kennedy BJ. Raynaud's phenomenon: a common toxicity after combination chemotherapy for testicular cancer. Ann Intern Med 1981;95:288.
161. Vogelzang NJ, Frenning DH, Kennedy BJ. Coronary artery disease after treatment with bleomycin and vinblastine. Cancer Treat Rep 1980;64:1159.
162. Einhorn LH, Williams SD, Loehrer PJ, et al. Evaluation of optimal duration of chemotherapy in favorable-prognosis disseminated germ cell tumors: a Southeastern Cancer Study Group
protocol. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:387.
163. Bosl GJ, Geller NL, Bajorin D, et al. A randomized trial of etoposide + cisplatin versus vinblastine + bleomycin + cisplatin + cyclophosphamide + dactinomycin in patients with good-prognosis
germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1231.
164. de Wit R, Stoter G, Kaye SB, et al. I mportance of bleomycin in combination chemotherapy for good-prognosis testicular nonseminoma: a randomized study of the European Organization for
Research and Treatment of Cancer Genitourinary Tract Cooperative Group. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1837.
165. Loehrer PJ, Johnson DH, Elson P, Einhorn LH, Trump D. Importance of bleomycin in favorable-prognosis disseminated germ cell tumors: an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Trial. J Clin
Oncol 1995;13:470.
166. Bajorin DF, Sarosdy MF, Pfister DG, et al. Randomized trial of etoposide and cisplatin versus etoposide and carboplatin in patients with good-risk germ cell tumors: a multi-institutional study. J
Clin Oncol 1993;11:598.
167. Horwich A, Sleijfer D, Fossa S, et al. Randomized trial of bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin compared with bleomycin, etoposide, and carboplatin in good-prognosis metastatic
nonseminomatous germ cell cancer: a multi-institutional medical research council/European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer trial. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1844.
168. Culine S, Kerbrat P, Bouzy J, et al. Are 3 cycles of bleomycin, etoposide and cisplatin (3BEP) or 4 cycles of etoposide and cisplatin (4EP) equivalent regimens for patients (pts) with good-risk
metastatic non seminomatous germ cell tumors (NSGCT)? Preliminary results of a randomized trial. Proc ASCO 1999;18:309.
169. Bajorin DF, Geller NL, Weisen SF, Bosl GJ. Two-drug therapy in patients with metastatic germ cell tumors. Cancer 1991;67:28.
170. Nichols CR, Williams SD, Loehrer PJ, et al. Randomized study of cisplatin dose intensity in poor-risk germ cell tumors: a Southeastern Cancer Study Group and Southwest Oncology Group
protocol. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1163.
171. Ozols RF, Ihde DC, Linehan WM, et al. A randomized trial of standard chemotherapy vs a high-dose chemotherapy regimen in the treatment of poor prognosis nonseminomatous germ-cell
tumors. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1031.
172. Nichols CR, Loehrer PJ, Einhorn LH, Propert K, Vogelzang NJ. Phase III study of cisplatin, etoposide and bleomycin (PVP16B) or etoposide, ifosfamide and cisplatin (VIP) in advanced stage
germ cell tumors; an intergroup trial. Proc ASCO 1995;1995.
173. Kaye S, Mead G, Fossa S, et al. Intensive induction-sequential chemotherapy with BOP/VIP-B compared with treatment with BEP/EP for poor-prognosis metastatic nonseminomatous germ cell
tumor: a randomized Medical Research Council/European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:692.
174. Nichols CR, Catalano P, Crawford ED, et al. Randomized comparison of cisplatin and etoposide and either bleomycin or ifosfamide in treatment of advanced disseminated germ cell tumors; an
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, Southwest Oncology Group, and Cancer and Leukemia Group B study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1287.
175. Bosl G, Geller N, Vogelzang N, et al. Alternating cycles of etoposide plus cisplatin and VAB-6 in the treatment of poor-risk patients with germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:436.
176. Motzer RJ, Mazumdar M, Gulati SC, et al. Phase II trial of high-dose carboplatin and etoposide with autologous bone marrow transplantation in first-line therapy for patients with poor-risk germ
cell tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1828.
177. Motzer RJ, Mazumdar M, Bajorin DF, et al. High-dose carboplatin, etoposide, and cyclophosphamide with autologous bone marrow transplantation in first-line therapy for patients with poor-risk
germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2546.
178. Chevreau C, Droz J, Pico J, et al. Early intensified chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow transplantation in first line treatment of poor risk non-seminomatous germ cell tumours. Eur Urol
1993;23:213.
179. Sheinfeld J, Bajorin D. Management of the postchemotherapy residual mass. Urol Clin North Am 1993;20:133.
180. Einhorn LH, Williams SD, Mandelbaum I, Donohue JP. Surgical resection in disseminated testicular cancer following chemotherapeutic cytoreduction. Cancer 1981;48:904.
181. Toner GC, Panicek D, Heelan R, et al. Adjunctive surgery after chemotherapy for nonseminomatous germ cell tumors: recommendations for patient selection. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1683.
182. Donohue JP, Rowland RG. The role of surgery in advanced testicular cancer. Cancer 1984;54:2716.
183. Donohue J, Rowland R, Kopecky K, et al. Correlation of computerized tomographic changes and histological findings in 80 patients having radical retroperitoneal lymph node dissection after

chemotherapy for testis tumor. J Urol 1987;137:1176.
184. Fossa SD, Qvist H, Stenwig AE, et al. Is postchemotherapy retroperitoneal surgery necessary in patients with nonseminomatous testicular cancer and minimal residual tumor masses? J Clin
Oncol 1992;10:569.
185. Fox EP, Weathers T, Williams S, et al. Outcome analysis for patients with persistent germ cell nonteratomatous germ cell tumor in post-chemotherapy retroperitoneal lymph node dissections. J
Clin Oncol 1993;11:1294.
186. Tait D, Peckham MJ, Hendry WF, et al. Post-chemotherapy surgery in advanced non-seminomatous germ cell testicular tumors: the significance of histology with particular reference to
differentiated (mature) teratoma. Br J Cancer 1984;50:601.
187. Gelderman WA, Schraffordt Koops H, Sleijfer DT, et al. Results of adjuvant surgery in patients with stage III and IV nonseminomatous testicular tumors after cisplatin-vinblastine- bleomycin
chemotherapy. J Surg Oncol 1988;38:227.
188. Harding MJ, Brown IL, MacPherson SG, Turner MA, Kaye SB. Excision of residual masses after platinum based chemotherapy for non-seminomatous germ cell tumours. Eur J Cancer Clin
Oncol 1989;25:1689.
189. Steyerberg EW, Keizer HJ, Fossa SD, et al. Resection of residual retroperitoneal masses in testicular cancer: evaluation and improvement of selection criteria. The ReHiT study group.
Re-analysis of histology in testicular cancer. Br J Cancer 1996;74:1492.
190. Fossa SD, Aass N, Ous S, et al. Histology of tumor residuals following chemotherapy in patients with advanced nonseminomatous testicular cancer. J Urol 1989;142:1239.
191. Fossa SD, Ous S, Lien HH, et al. Post-chemotherapy lymph node histology in radiologically normal patients with metastatic nonseminomatous testicular cancer. Urology 1989;141:557.
192. Mead G, Stenning S, Parkinson M. The second Medical Research Council study of prognostic factors in nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1991;10:85.
193. Harstrick A, Schmoll HJ, Wilke H, et al. Cisplatin, etoposide, and ifosfamide salvage therapy for refractory or relapsing germ cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1549.
194. Loehrer P, Gonin R, Nichols C, et al. Vinblastine plus ifosfamide plus cisplatin as initial salvage therapy in recurrent germ cell tumor. J Clin Oncol 1998;15:2500.
195. Motzer RJ, Bajorin DF, Vlamis V, Weisen S, Bosl GJ. Ifosfamide-based chemotherapy for patients with resistant germ cell tumors: the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center Experience.
Semin Oncol 1992;19:8.
196. Panicek DM, Toner GC, Heelan RT, Bosl GJ. Nonseminomatous germ cell tumors: enlarging masses despite chemotherapy. Radiology 1990;175:499.
197. Lorigan JG, Eftekhari F, David CL, et al. The growing teratoma syndrome: an unusual manifestation of treated nonseminomatous germ cell tumors of the testis. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1988;151:325.
198. Morgentaler A, Garnick MB, Richie JP. Metastatic testicular teratoma invading the inferior vena cava. J Urol 1988;140:149.
199. Little J, Foster R, Ulbright T, Donohue J. Unusual neoplasms detected in testis cancer patients undergoing postchemotherapy retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy. J Urol 1994;152:1144.
200. Bosl GJ, Ilson DH, Rodriguez E, et al. Clinical relevance of the i(12p) marker chromosome in germ cell tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:349.
201. Chaganti RSK, Ladanyi M, Samaniego F, et al. Leukemic differentiation of a mediastinal germ cell tumor. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1989;1:83.
202. Rodriguez E, Reuter VE, Mies C, et al. Abnormalities of 2q: a common genetic link between rhabdomyosarcoma and hepatoblastoma? Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1991;3:122.
203. Loehrer PJ, Hui S, Clark S, et al. Teratoma following cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy for nonseminomatous germ cell tumors: a clinicopathological correlation. J Urol 1986;135:1183.
204. Sonneveld DJA, Sleijfer DT, Koops HS, et al. Mature teratoma identified after postchemotherapy surgery in patients with dissected nonseminomatous testicular germ cell tumors. Cancer
1998;82:1343.
205. Bajorin DF, Herr HW, Motzer RJ, Bosl GJ. Current perspectives on the role of adjunctive surgery in combined modality treatment of patients with germ cell tumors. Semin Oncol 1992;19:148.
206. Borge N, Fossa SD, Ous S, et al. Late recurrence of testicular cancer. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1248.
207. Roth BJ, Greist A, Kubilis PS, Williams SD, Einhorn LH. Cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy for disseminated germ cell tumors: long-term follow-up. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1239.
208. Skinner DG, Melamud A, Lieskovsky G. Complications of thoracoabdominal retroperitoneal lymph node dissection. J Urol 1982;127:1107.
209. Wood DPJ, Herr H, Heller G, Bosl G. Distribution of retroperitoneal metastases after chemotherapy in patients with nonseminomatous germ cell tumors of the testis. J Urol 1992;148:1812.
210. Wahle G, Foster R, Bihrle R, et al. Nerve sparing retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy after primary chemotherapy for metastatic testicular carcinoma. J Urol 1994;152:428.
211. Streyerberg E, Keizer H, Fossa S, et al. Prediction of residual retroperitoneal mass histology after chemotherapy for metastatic nonseminomatous germ cell tumor: multivariate analysis of
individual patient data from six study groups. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1177.
212. Horwich A, Paluchowska B, Norman A, et al. Residual mass following chemotherapy of seminoma. Ann Oncol 1997;8:37.
213. Ellison MF, Mostofi FK, Flanigan RC. Treatment of the residual retroperitoneal mass after chemotherapy for advanced seminoma. J Urol 1988;140:618.
214. Fossa SD, Borge L, Gass N, et al. The treatment of advanced metastatic seminoma: experience in 55 cases. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1071.
215. Friedman EL, Garnick MB, Stomper PC, et al. Therapeutic guidelines and results in advanced seminoma. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1325.
216. Peckham MJ, Horwich A, Hendry WF. Advanced seminoma: treatment with cis-platinum-based combination chemotherapy or carboplatin (JM8). Br J Cancer 1985;52:7.
217. Puc H, Heelan R, Mazumdar M, et al. Management of residual mass in advanced seminoma: results and recommendations from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. J Clin Oncol
1996;14:454.
218. Tiffany P, Morse MJ, Bosl G, et al. Sequential excision of residual thoracic and retroperitoneal masses after chemotherapy for stage III germ cell tumors. Cancer 1986;57:978.
219. Gels ME, Hoekstra HJ, Sleijfer DT, et al. Thoracotomy for postchemotherapy resection of pulmonary residual tumor mass in patients with nonseminomatous testicular germ cell tumors:
aggressive surgical resection is justified. Chest 1997;112:967.
220. See WA, Laurenzo JF, Dreicer R, Hoffman HT. Incidence and management of testicular carcinoma metastatic to the neck. J Urol 1996;155:590.
221. Brenner PC, Herr HW, Morse MJ, et al. Simultaneous retroperitoneal, thoracic, and cervical resection of postchemotherapy residual masses in patients with metastatic nonseminomatous germ
cell tumors of the testis [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1765.
222. Leibovitch I, Little JSJ, Foster RS, et al. Delayed orchiectomy after chemotherapy for metastatic nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. J Urol 1996;155:952.
223. Simmonds P, Mead G, Lee A, et al. Orchiectomy after chemotherapy in patients with metastatic testicular cancer. Cancer 1995;75:1018.
224. Wheeler BM, Loehrer PJ, Williams SD, Einhorn LH. Ifosfamide in refractory male germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:28.
225. Scheulen ME, Niederle N, Bremer K, et al. Efficacy of ifosfamide in refractory malignant disease and uroprotection by mesna: results of a phase II study with 151 patients. Cancer Treat Rep
1983;10:93.
226. Loehrer PJ, Lauer R, Roth BJ, et al. Salvage therapy in recurrent germ cell cancer: ifosfamide and cisplatin plus either vinblastine or etoposide. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:540.
227. Ghosn M, Droz JP, Theodore C, et al. Salvage chemotherapy in refractory germ cell tumors with etoposide (VP-16) plus ifosfamide plus high-dose cisplatin. Cancer 1988;62:24.
228. Pizzocaro G, Salvoni R, Piva L. High activity, moderate toxicity modified cisplatin, etoposide, ifosfamide (PEI) salvage therapy for germ-cell testicular tumors (GCTT). Proc ASCO 1990;9:131.
229. Motzer RJ, Cooper K, Geller NL, et al. The role of ifosfamide plus cisplatin-based chemotherapy as salvage therapy for patients with refractory germ cell tumors. Cancer 1990;66:2476.
230. Motzer R, Green G, McCaffrey J, et al. Paclitaxel (T), ifosfamide (I), and cisplatin (P) as first-line salvage therapy for relapsed germ cell tumor (GCT) patients with favorable prognostic
features. Proc ASCO 1998;17:322A.
231. Broun ER, Nichols CR, Kneebone P, et al. Long-term outcome of patients with relapsed and refractory germ cell tumors treated with high-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow
rescue. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:124.
232. Linkesch W, Greinix HT, Hocker P, Krainer M, Wagner A. Longterm follow up of phase I/II trial of ultra-high carboplatin, VP16, cyclophosphamide with ABMT in refractory or relapsed NSGCT.
Proc ASCO 1993;12:232(abst).
233. Motzer R, Mazumdar M, Bosl G, et al. High-dose carboplatin, etoposide, and cyclophosphamide for patients with refractory germ cell tumors: treatment results and prognostic factors for
survival and toxicity. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1098.
234. Siegert W, Beyer J, Strohscheer I, et al. High-dose treatment with carboplatin, etoposide, and ifosfamide followed by autologous stem-cell transplantation in relapsed or refractory germ cell
cancer: a phase I/II study. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1223.
235. Motzer RJ, Gulati SC, Crown JP, et al. High-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow rescue for patients with refractory germ cell tumors: early intervention is better tolerated. Cancer
1992;69:550.
236. Motzer RJ, Gulati SC, Tong WP, et al. Phase I trial with pharmacokinetic analyses of high-dose carboplatin, etoposide, and cyclophosphamide with autologous bone marrow transplantation in
patients with refractory germ cell tumors. Cancer Res 1993;53:3730.
237. Beyer J, Schwella N, Zingsem J, et al. Hematopoietic rescue after high-dose chemotherapy using autologous peripheral-blood progenitor cells or bone marrow: a randomized comparison. J Clin
Oncol 1995;13:1328.
238. Motzer RJ, Geller NL, Tan CC, et al. Salvage chemotherapy for patients with germ cell tumors. The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center experience (19791989). Cancer 1991;67:1305.
239. Beyer J, Kramar A, Mandanas R, et al. High-dose chemotherapy as salvage treatment in germ cell tumors: a multivariate analysis of prognostic variables. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2638.
240. Murphy BA, Motzer RJ, Bosl G. Phase II study of iproplatin (CHIP) in patients with cisplatin-refractory germ cell tumors; the need for alternative strategies in the investigation of new agents in
GCT. Invest New Drugs 1992;10:327.
241. Motzer RJ, Dmitrovsky E, Miller WH, et al. Suramin for germ cell tumors: in vitro growth inhibition and results of a phase II trial. Cancer 1993;72:3313.
242. Moasser M, Motzer R, Khoo K-S, et al. all-trans Retinoic acid for treating germ cell tumors. Cancer 1995;16:680.
243. Puc H, Bajorin D, Bosl GJ, Amsterdam A, Motzer R. Phase II trial of topotecan in patients with cisplatin-refractory germ cell tumors. Invest New Drugs 1995;13:163.
244. Motzer RJ, Bajorin DF, Schwartz LH, et al. Phase II trial of paclitaxel shows antitumor activity in patients with previously treated germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2277.
245. Motzer RJ, Mazumdar M, Sheinfeld J, et al. Sequential dose-intensive paclitaxel, ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide salvage therapy for germ cell tumor patients. J Clin Oncol
2000;18:1173.
246. Einhorn L, Stender M, Williams S. Phase II trial of gemcitabine in refractory germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:509.
247. Bokemeyer C, Gerl A, Schöffski P, et al. Gemcitabine in patients with relapsed or cisplatin-refractory testicular cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:512.
248. Murphy B, Breeden E, Donohue J, et al. Surgical salvage of chemorefractory germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:324.
249. Eastman J, Wilson T, Russell C, Ahlering T, Skinner D. Surgical resection in patients with nonseminomatous germ cell tumor who fail to normalize serum tumor markers after chemotherapy.
Urology 1994;43:3275.
250. Wood DP, Herr HW, Motzer RJ, et al. Surgical resection of solitary metastases after chemotherapy in patients with non-seminomatous germ cell tumors and elevated serum tumor markers.
Cancer 1992;70:2354.
251. Research TIGfA. Dexamethasone, granisetron, or both for the prevention of nausea and vomiting during chemotherapy for cancer. N Engl J Med 1995;332:2.
252. Vogelzang NJ, Torkenson JL, Kennedy BJ. Hypomagnesemia, renal dysfunction, and Raynaud's phenomenon in patients treated with cisplatin, vinblastine, and bleomycin. Cancer
1985;56:2765.
253. Bosl GJ, Leitner S, Atlas S, et al. Increased plasma renin and aldosterone in patients treated with cisplatin-based chemotherapy for metastatic germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1684.
254. Beyer J, Rick O, Weinknecht S, et al. Nephrotoxicity after high-dose carboplatin, etoposide and ifosfamide in germ-cell tumors: incidence and implications for hematologic recovery and clinical
outcome. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;20:813.
255. Hansen S, Groth S, Daugaard G, Rossing N, Rorth M. Long-term effects on renal function and blood pressure of treatment with cisplatin, vinblastine, and bleomycin in patients with germ cell
cancer. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1728.
256. Gietema J, Sleijfer D, Willemse P, et al. Long-term follow-up of cardiovascular risk factors in patients given chemotherapy for disseminated nonseminomatous testicular cancer. Ann Intern Med
1992;116:709.
257. Raghavan D, Cox K, Childs A, Grygiel J, Sullivan D. Hypercholesterolemia after chemotherapy for testis cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1386.
258. Fossa S, Kaye S, Mead G, et al. Filgrastim during combination chemotherapy of patients with poor-prognosis metastatic germ cell malignancy. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:716.
259. Hansen SW, Helweg-Larsen S, Trojaborg W. Long-term neurotoxicity in patients treated with cisplatin, vinblastine, and bleomycin for metastatic germ cell cancer. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1457.
260. Meinardi MT, Gietema JA, Van Der Graff WTA, et al. Cardiovasular morbidity in long-term survivors of metastatic testicular cancer. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:1725.
261. McKeage M, Evans B, Atkinson C, et al. Carbon monoxide diffusing capacity is a poor predictor of clinically significant bleomycin lung. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:779.
262. van Basten J, Hoekstra H, van Driel M, et al. Sexual dysfunction in nonseminoma testicular cancer patients is related to chemotherapy-induced angiopathy. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2442.
263. Petersen PM, Skakkebaek NE, Vistisen K, Rorth M, Giwercman A. Semen quality and reproductive hormones before orchiectomy in men with testicular cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:941.

264. Petersen PM, Giwercman A, Hansen SW, et al. I mpaired testicular function in patients with carcinoma-in-situ of the testis. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:173.
265. Herr H, Bar-Chama N, O'Sullivan M, Sogani P. Paternity in men with stage I testis tumors on surveillance. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:733.
266. Howell SJ, Radford JA, Ryder WDJ, Shalet SM. Testicular function after cytotoxic chemotherapy: evidence of Leydig cell insufficiency. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1493.
267. Brennemann W, Stoffel-Wagner B, Helmers A, et al. Gonadal function of patients treated with cisplatin based chemotherapy for germ cell cancer. J Urol 1997;158:844.
268. Stephenson W, Poirier S, Rubin L, Einhorn L. Evaluation of reproductive capacity in germ cell tumor patients following treatment with cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:2278.
269. Wanderas EH, Fossa SD, Tretli S. Risk of a second germ cell cancer after treatment of a primary germ cell cancer in 2201 Norwegian male patients. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:244.
270. Bajorin DF, Motzer RJ, Rodriquez E, Murphy B, Bosl GJ. Acute nonlymphocytic leukemia in germ cell tumor patients treated with etoposide-containing chemotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst
1993;85:60.
271. Nichols CR, Breeden ES, Loehrer PJ. Secondary leukemia associated with a conventional dose of etoposide: review of serial germ cell tumor protocols. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:36.
272. Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Hansen ST, Larsen SO, et al. Increased risk of myelodysplasia and leukemia after etoposide, cisplatin, and bleomycin for germ-cell tumors. Lancet 1991;338:359.
273. Kollmannsberger C, Beyer J, Droz JP, et al. Secondary leukemia following high cumulative doses of etoposide in patients treated for advanced germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3386.
274. Jacobsen G, Mellemgaard A, Engelholm S, Moller H. Increased incidence of sarcoma in patients treated for testicular seminoma. Eur J Cancer 1993;29A:664.
275. Toner GC, Bosl GJ. Sarcoidosis, “sarcoid-like lymphadenopathy,” and testicular germ cell tumors. Am J Med 1990;89:651.
276. Hainsworth JD, Greco FA. Poorly differentiated carcinoma and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of unknown primary site. Semin Oncol 1993;20:279.
277. Hainsworth JD, Johnson DH, Greco FA. Cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy in the treatment of poorly differentiated carcinoma and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of unknown
primary site: results of a 12-year experience. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:912.
278. Motzer R, Rodriguez E, Reuter V, et al. Molecular and cytogenetic studies in the diagnosis of patients with poorly differentiated carcinomas of unknown primary site. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:274.
279. Thrasher J, Frazier H. Non-germ cell testicular tumors. Probl Urol 1994;8:167.
280. Mostofi F, Price EJ. Tumors of the male genital system. In: Hartmann W, Cowan W, eds. Atlas of tumor pathology. Washington: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 1973:85.
281. Grem J, Robins H, Wilson K, et al. Metastatic Leydig cell tumor of the testis: report of three cases and review of the literature. Cancer 1986;58:2116.
282. Kim I, Young R, Scully R. Leydig cell tumors of the testis: a clinicopathological analysis of 40 cases and review of the literature. Am J Surg Pathol 1985;9:177.
283. Schwarzman MI, Russo P, Bosl GJ, Whitmore WF. Hormone-secreting metastatic interstitial cell tumor of the testis. J Urol 1989;141:620.
284. Anderson G. Sclerosing Sertoli cell tumor of the testis: a distinct histological subtype. J Urol 1995;154:1756.
285. Proppe K, Scully R. Large-cell calcifying Sertoli cell tumor of the testis. Am J Clin Pathol 1980;74:607.
286. Carney J, Gordon H, Carpenter P, Shenoy B, Go V. The complex myxomas, spotty pigmentation, and endocrine overactivity. Medicine 1985;64:270.
287. Russo P, Brady MS, Conlon K, et al. Adult urologic sarcoma. J Urol 1992;147:1032.
288. Gilbaugh J, Kelalis P, Dockerty M. Epidermoid cysts of the testes. J Urol 1967;97:876.
289. Sussman E, Hajdu S, Kieberman P, et al. Malignant lymphoma of the testis: a clinicopathologic study of 37 cases. J Urol 1977;118:1004.

CHAPTER 36.1 Molecular Biology of Gynecologic Cancers
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 36.1
Molecular Biology of Gynecologic Cancers
SETSUKO KUKI CHAMBERS
Endometrial Cancer
Microsatellite Instability
Loss Of Heterozygosity Studies and Tumor Suppressor Genes
Oncogenes
Hormone-Related Molecular Abnormalities
Molecules Involved in Adhesion and Invasion
Ovarian Cancer
Clonality
Brca1 and Brca2 Genes
Other Tumor Suppressor Genes
Oncogenes and Growth Factors
Drug Resistance
Molecules Involved in Adhesion, Motility, Invasion, Angiogenesis, and Metastasis
Cervical and Vulvar Cancer
Human Papillomavirus
Human Papillomavirus E6/E7 Genes
Molecular Cofactors Important to Cervical Carcinogenesis
Molecular Abnormalities in Cervical Adenocarcinomas
Non–Human Papillomavirus-Related Molecular Abnormalities in Cervical Cancers
Molecular Abnormalities in Vulvar Cancers
Chapter References

ENDOMETRIAL CANCER
Although endometrial cancer, the most common gynecologic cancer, carries the best prognosis, it is important to differentiate between the classic endometrioid
tumors, which tend to be estrogen-dependent and well differentiated, from other less common high-risk uterine malignancies, such as uterine papillary serous
carcinomas (UPSC), clear cell carcinomas, mixed Müllerian tumors, or sarcomas, which appear to have a different biology.
MICROSATELLITE INSTABILITY
The replication error (RER+) phenotype is characteristic of cancers arising in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) kindreds (a familial cancer
syndrome with a high incidence of colon, endometrial, and gastric cancers, and a lower incidence of ovarian and pancreatic cancers), and also is found in
approximately 20% to 25% of sporadic endometrial cancers. Microsatellite instability appears to occur at the same frequency in the acknowledged precursor of
endometrial cancer, complex atypical hyperplasia, as it does in the sporadic endometrial cancer cases. 1 The RER+ phenotype per se does not appear to correlate
with clinicopathologic features of the tumors or clinical outcome; thus, the hereditary form of endometrial cancer alone does not appear to portend a worse prognosis
than the sporadic form. Mutation of the transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b) type II receptor gene is common in RER+ colon and gastric cancers but uncommon in
RER+ endometrial cancers, even those arising in HNPCC kindreds. 2 This suggests that the genesis of RER+ tumors, even within the same familial cancer syndrome,
is not the same. Although inactivation of both alleles of either hMSH2 and hMLH1 (DNA mismatch repair genes) appears to underlie microsatellite instability in tumors
of HNPCC kindreds, similar to the findings in sporadic colon cancers, sporadic endometrial cancers have not been associated with mutations of any of the known
human mismatch repair genes.3 Instead, hypermethylation of the hMLH1 promoter region (which is linked to attenuation of MLH1 expression in sporadic RER+
colorectal carcinomas) was observed in 71% of sporadic RER+ endometrial cancer cases. 3 In contrast, 25% of uterine sarcomas, an entity not recognized to be part
of a familial cancer syndrome, exhibit microsatellite instability that may be related to a mutation in the hMSH2 gene. 4 Microsatellite instability does not appear to be a
feature of the UPSC or clear cell carcinomas. 5
LOSS OF HETEROZYGOSITY STUDIES AND TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENES
Unlike most other cancers studied to date, regions of sustained allelic loss in most chromosomes characterize endometrial cancer. Regions of chromosomal
abnormality commonly found in this disease are listed in Table 36.1-1. Chromosome 17p is frequently involved, which contains the p53 gene known to confer a poor
prognosis in endometrial cancers when mutated, and which plays an important role in the transition to carcinoma from atypical hyperplasia. Other frequently involved
regions include 3p, 10q, and 18q. The PTEN tumor suppressor gene is contained on chromosome 10q; mutations of this gene occur in complex atypical hyperplasia,
as well as in one-third of endometrial cancers, 1 but it is not a common feature of UPSC.6 Unexpectedly, in endometrial cancers, this finding mutation of PTEN tumor
suppressor gene is associated with lack of overexpression of p53, as well as with early stage and improved clinical outcome. 6 Chromosome 18q contains the DCC
gene, a putative tumor suppressor gene frequently mutated in colon cancers. Chromosome 18 was found to be capable of suppressing tumorigenicity of endometrial
cancer cells in nude mice by the procedure of microcell fusion, with DCC expression elevated in most of the suppressed hybrids. 7

TABLE 36.1-1. Common Regions of Chromosomal Abnormalities

ONCOGENES
K-ras activating point mutations in codons 12 and 13 have been implicated in the development of atypical endometrial hyperplasias and endometrioid carcinomas in
Asian women, as well as in colon cancers. Studies of endometrial cancers arising in women in the United States, however, show the prevalence of such mutations to
be significantly lower. 8 Notable was the almost complete absence of K-ras mutations in UPSC when compared to the usual endometrioid tumors. 8 In contrast,
mutation-dependent and -independent inactivation of p53 is observed in the large majority of UPSC cases. 9
Overexpression of HER-2/neu has been associated with advanced-stage, deep myometrial invasion, and poor survival in endometrial cancers in several studies.
Gene amplification did not underlie all cases of HER-2/ neu overexpression, although both gene amplification and overexpression were each associated with poor

outcome.10 When multivariate analysis was used to determine whether HER-2/ neu was an independent prognostic factor in endometrial cancers when taking into
account other molecular features such as DNA ploidy, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), or p53 status, HER-2/ neu did not achieve significance. 11 Both c-myc
gene amplification and c-fms12 overexpression also have been associated with advanced-stage and high-grade endometrial cancers.
HORMONE-RELATED MOLECULAR ABNORMALITIES
Estrogen acts as a tumor promoter for the classic endometrioid cancers, with the well- and moderately differentiated tumors containing significant levels of estrogen or
progesterone receptors or both. Aromatase cytochrome P-450 is part of the complex responsible for conversion of C19 steroids to estrogen; its increased expression
in endometrial cancers but not in normal endometria suggest a role in promotion of neoplastic proliferation. 13 Two different functional isoforms of both the estrogen
and progesterone receptors have been described that may account for some of the tissue-specific differences in the effects of hormones and their antagonists on the
breast as compared with the endometrium.
Tamoxifen, an estrogen receptor antagonist/agonist, has been associated with an increased risk of development of endometrial cancers. Although studies using
murine models have been generally reassuring in regards to the safety of the selective estrogen receptor modulator, raloxifene, on the endometrium, clinical studies
to date have been plagued by short follow-up. The molecular mechanisms for the antiestrogenic actions of raloxifene relate to a specific molecular perturbation at
aspartate 351 of the ligand-binding domain of the estrogen receptor, on its binding to raloxifene. 14
MOLECULES INVOLVED IN ADHESION AND INVASION
Integrin (cell adhesion molecules) expression inversely correlates with grade in endometrial cancers, with the loss of the b 1 integrin associated with lymph node
metastases.15 Variant forms of CD44 (a molecule important for cell adhesion and migration) are less frequently expressed in endometrial cancers than in normal
endometria, and its absence was significantly associated with an increased propensity for lymph–vascular space invasion. 16 These data suggest that CD44 may play
an important role in the function of the normal endometria, where it is strongly expressed near the basement membrane, and its loss may be related to invasion and
metastasis.

OVARIAN CANCER
Most of the breakthroughs in understanding the molecular basis for ovarian cancer have been in the area of hereditary epithelial ovarian cancer syndromes, which
affect 5% to 10% of ovarian cancer patients. Much work is still needed to understand the biology underlying sporadic ovarian cancers, which invariably present as
advanced-stage disease and have a poor long-term outcome.
CLONALITY
In the search for the precursors of invasive epithelial ovarian cancer, molecular studies have been performed on normal ovaries; on benign, borderline, and invasive
cancers; and on cancers with adjacent benign-appearing cysts. Such studies have been greatly aided by the ability to culture normal, immortalized, and transformed
ovarian surface epithelial cells, as well as transformed cells originating from benign ovarian neoplasms. Evidence for a unifocal origin for these cancers appears to
predominate, with bilateral ovarian cancers and metastases sharing common molecular features. Studies of microsatellite instability (which occurs in 17% of cases but
appears not to be related to family history 17) and studies of X chromosome inactivation support the clonal origin of these cancers. This is contrasted to the multifocal
origin proposed for a proportion (25%) of the papillary serous carcinomas of the peritoneum; these tumors of multifocal origin are associated with germline BRCA1
(breast cancer gene) mutations. 18 Interestingly, loss of heterozygosity studies, and K-ras and p53 mutation analyses, do not demonstrate shared findings between
borderline or benign neoplasms and invasive cancers, suggesting that these entities are not the precursors of invasive epithelial ovarian cancers. For instance,
frequent loss of heterozygosity of a portion of Xq on the inactive X chromosome was seen in borderline tumors, but not in low-grade invasive ovarian cancers. 19
Notably, p53 mutations, which are absent in solitary borderline and benign neoplasms, are present along with allelic loss of chromosome 11p in benign-appearing
cysts adjacent to the invasive cancers. 20 Similarly, common genetic alterations (such as loss of heterozygosity involving the same allele) were observed in
endometrioid and clear cell ovarian carcinomas and adjacent endometriosis. 21
BRCA1 AND BRCA2 GENES
Unlike most epithelia, division of normal ovarian surface epithelial cells gives rise to two daughter cells with equal growth potential. 22 This provides a mechanism for
the involvement of tumor suppressor genes in the development of ovarian cancer, in that repeated division of these cells can unmask such recessive mutations. In
addition to being a tumor suppressor gene, BRCA1 may function as a transcription factor, as well as conferring protection against DNA damage. The latter mechanism
also has been proposed as a function of BRCA2. Mutations of BRCA1 (unlike BRCA2) can account for the large majority of the familial cases of breast-ovarian cancer
syndrome and site-specific ovarian cancers. 23 Among breast-ovarian cancer families, there is significant evidence for heterogeneity of risk among BRCA1-mutation
carriers. Assuming two BRCA1 alleles exist, one allele would confer a lifetime breast cancer risk of 62% and an ovarian cancer risk of 11%, whereas the other allele
confers a 39% breast cancer risk and a 42% ovarian cancer risk by age 60 years, with the first allele representing 71% of the mutations. 24 BRCA1 mutations
specifically localized to the 5' region may increase the risk for ovarian cancer in these patients. 25 BRCA2 mutations confer susceptibility to ovarian cancer with a
significantly lower penetrance than for BRCA1. Compared to population-control cases, familial ovarian cancer in general, including disease associated with BRCA1 or
BRCA2 mutations, are more frequently associated with advanced stage and, hence, a poorer clinical outcome. 26 Stage for stage, however, BRCA1 mutations do not
appear to result in a survival difference. Serous tumors appear to be a hallmark of BRCA1 mutation–associated ovarian cancers, and germline BRCA1 mutations have
been reported to occur in papillary serous carcinomas of the peritoneum with a frequency comparable to that in epithelial ovarian cancers. 27 However, no morphologic
changes can differentiate normal ovaries removed prophylactically from carriers of a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation from ovaries removed from noncarriers; thus,
identification of a premalignant lesion remains elusive. 28
In sporadic ovarian cancer, which represents 95% of ovarian cancer cases, few mutations of BRCA1 or BRCA2 were detected, whereas frequent allelic losses that
included the BRCA1 region of chromosome 17q were demonstrated (see Table 36.1-1 for regions of chromosomal abnormality commonly associated with ovarian
cancer). 29 These and other data suggest the involvement of additional tumor suppressor genes in the etiology of most of the sporadic ovarian cancers, including one
or two that possibly are localized distal to the BRCA1 gene. An intriguing finding is the fact that, present in the germline of patients with sporadic ovarian cancer, is a
Taq1 restriction fragment length polymorphism in an intron within the sequences encoding the hormone- binding domain of the progesterone receptor gene. 30 This
finding may be associated with coding region mutations of the gene and may contribute to tumorigenesis.
OTHER TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENES
Functional wild-type p53 has been shown to be required for sensitivity to a variety of chemotherapeutic drugs and radiation, playing a crucial role in the execution of
the common end pathway of apoptosis. p53 mutation of one allele predisposes the cell to the loss of wild-type p53 function, which has been shown in ovarian cancer
cells to lead to the development of platinum resistance in vitro.31 In ovarian cancers, p53 mutations, which are seen in 50% of advanced cases, 32 are associated with
high grade and poor survival, but not with clinical chemoresistance. p53 mutations appear to arise before the onset of ovarian cancer metastasis, but are not present
in the germline of patients with familial ovarian cancer phenotypes. 33 p53 has been explored as a target for gene therapy in ovarian cancer by several groups.
Similarly, other proapoptotic genes, such as the BAX gene, have been the focus of gene therapy efforts at ovarian selective tumor expression. 34
Other putative tumor suppressor genes in ovarian cancer include GPC3 (whose promoter is hypermethylated leading to gene silencing), Noey2 (ARH1, an imprinted
tumor suppressor gene), OVCA1, and DOC-2, among others. The widespread loss of heterozygosity found in invasive ovarian cancers indicates that there may be
several other tumor suppressor genes inactivated during tumorigenesis. The search for such genes (and likewise oncogenes) in ovarian cancer has been greatly
facilitated by the advent of technologies such as complementary DNA microarray, 35 comparative genomic hybridization, differential display, and serial analysis of gene
expression.
ONCOGENES AND GROWTH FACTORS
Cytokines which may act via autocrine or paracrine routes on ovarian cancer cells include EGF, TGF-b, tumor necrosis factor, interleukin-6 (IL-6), lysophosphatidic
acid (LPA), heregulin, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and the macrophage colony-stimulating factor (CSF-1). Ovarian cancer cells have been shown to

contain receptors for these cytokines and thus are capable of responding by phenotypic change, including growth stimulation or inhibition depending on the stimuli.
Coexpression of CSF-1 and the protooncogene c-fms (which encodes for the CSF-1 receptor) in ovarian cancer metastases portends a poor outcome. 36 Other
oncogenes activated in ovarian cancer include K-ras (mutated in 40% of mucinous tumors), HER-2/ neu (which does not appear to be related to poor prognosis in
ovarian cancer, unlike breast cancer), c-myc, PIK3CA [the catalytic subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase(PI3-kinase)], and AKT-2 (which is activated by several
mitogenic growth factors and serves as a downstream effector of PI3-kinase). Of interest, BRCA1- or BRCA2-linked ovarian cancers do not appear to develop through
mutations of K-ras or amplification of HER-2/ neu, c-myc, or AKT-2. 37 Both tyrosine kinase growth factor receptors and protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTP) may also
play an important role: overexpression of PTP1B in ovarian cancers has been correlated with the expression of the tyrosine kinase receptors EGFR, HER-2/ neu, and
c-fms.38
DRUG RESISTANCE
The phenomenon of platinum resistance remains the most germane for ovarian cancer patients, although with the inclusion of paclitaxel in first-line therapy, acquired
classic multidrug resistance (mdr) is also a relevant mechanism. The first relationship between genomic aberrations in ovarian cancer (gains at specific loci on
chromosomes 1q and 13q) and platinum resistance has been described. 39
Augmented DNA repair at several levels appears to contribute significantly to platinum resistance. In ovarian cancers, elevated levels of ERCC-1 and XPAC,
rate-limiting DNA repair genes, are found in clinically platinum-resistant tumors. However, because overexpression of ERCC-1 in vitro leads to increased platinum
sensitivity, the relative role of the different DNA repair genes in this process remains unclear. Elevated intracellular levels of glutathione, which lead to increased
intracellular detoxification of platinum, generally correlate with in vitro platinum resistance and have been reported to confer poor survival. 40 In platinum-resistant
ovarian cancer cells, an elevated level of g-glutamylcysteine synthetase, an enzyme that contributes to biosynthesis of glutathione, is associated with increased c-jun
expression. 41 On the other hand, glutathione S-transferase (GST) levels do not consistently correlate with platinum resistance in vitro or in vivo. In ovarian cancer, two
GST null genotypes have been found to be associated with lack of responsiveness to platinum or other alkylating agents and with poor survival, which is thought to be
due to the contribution of the GST null phenotype to loss of p53 function. 42
Other interactions between cytokines or oncogenes and modulation of platinum activity have been reported in ovarian cancer. IL-6 has been shown to block apoptosis
induced by platinum in ovarian cancer cells. 43 The addition of antibody to HER-2/ neu enhances chemosensitization of platinum in ovarian cancer cells. 44 Similarly,
antisense down-regulation of c-raf or c-myc has been used to sensitize activity of platinum in several tumors. Anti-fas antibody-mediated apoptosis is enhanced by
low-dose platinum in resistant ovarian cancers. 45
On the other hand, overexpression of BAX is associated with chemosensitivity to platinum and paclitaxel, as well as to an improved disease-free survival rate in
ovarian cancer. 46 p53 mutations result in the loss of ability of p53 to transactivate BAX in platinum-resistant ovarian cancer cells. 47 IL-1a, through inhibition of DNA
repair, also sensitizes the activity of platinum in ovarian cancer cells 48; and tumor necrosis factor, an apoptosis inducer, can ameliorate platinum resistance in ovarian
cancer cells. Transfection of the cytokeratin 18 gene, which encodes an intermediate filament protein into platinum-resistant ovarian cancer cells, leads to a marked
increase in platinum sensitivity. 49
The prevalence of MDR-1 overexpression in ovarian cancer appears to depend on the sensitivity of the methodology used. There is agreement, however, that
acquired mdr is clinically relevant for these patients. Mutated p53 can contribute to classic mdr because it can transcriptionally activate the MDR-1 promoter, a
phenomenon that is repressed by wild-type p53. Proteins associated with the mdr phenotype and expressed in MDR-1–negative cancers are MRP (MDR-associated
protein involved in glutathione conjugate transport) and LRP (lung resistance protein). LRP appears to correlate with clinical chemoresistance (remarkably, both to
agents associated with classic mdr, as well as to the class of platinum/alkylating agents) among ovarian cancer patients. 50
Aside from mdr, the other major mechanism of paclitaxel resistance involves stimulation of expression of the b-tubulin genes in the resistant ovarian cancers. 51
Antisense down-regulation of b-tubulin sensitizes these cells to paclitaxel.
MOLECULES INVOLVED IN ADHESION, MOTILITY, INVASION, ANGIOGENESIS, AND METASTASIS
The cell adhesion molecules CD44 and E-cadherin both are expressed when ovarian cancer cells are attached to peritoneal mesothelium, but such expression is lost
when the cells are found in ascites fluid. 52 The b1 integrin is also found to be an important mediator of ovarian cancer cell adhesion to peritoneal cells. 53
Urokinase-type plasminogen activator is the primary plasminogen activator found in ovarian cancer tissues and, along with the matrix metalloproteinases (in
particular, MMP-2 and -9), are important to the biology of invasion and metastasis of ovarian cancer. Inhibitors of urokinase 54 have been shown to block invasive
capacity of ovarian cancer cells, whereas a synthetic matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor decreases tumor burden (an effect that is even more pronounced in the
presence of platinum 55) in mice bearing human ovarian cancer xenografts. Urokinase has been shown to be inducible by CSF-1, a cytokine important to in vivo
metastasis in ovarian cancer, 56 with CSF-1–induced invasion being mediated by urokinase activity, 54 and CSF-1–induced motility being mediated by PAI-1 activity.
Urokinase-stimulated invasion is also induced by LPA, which also enhances drug resistance. 57 VEGF, a critical mediator of tumor angiogenesis, is expressed in
abundant amounts in ascites and in the malignant ovary. 58 It is notable that molecules important to these related biologic phenotypes, such as E-cadherin and nm23
(associated with absence of lymph node metastasis), also may have putative tumor suppressor function, based on loss of heterozygosity studies or sequence
analysis.

CERVICAL AND VULVAR CANCER
The study of the role of viruses in the carcinogenesis of lower genital tract malignancies (thought to be a field effect) has focused on cervical cancer, the third most
common gynecologic cancer in the United States. Extension of those studies to vulvar cancer have led to support for two separate etiologies of vulvar cancer: one
related to human papillomavirus (HPV), with epidemiologic risk factors similar to that for cervical cancer, and the other not appearing to be HPV-related.
HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS
That HPV is a critical factor for cervical carcinogenesis and that the HPV E6 and E7 genes are oncogenic is clearly established. Infection of human keratinocytes by
the oncogenic HPV subtypes leads to abnormalities in differentiation and growth; however, only after long-term culture of immortalized cells does an occasional clone
become tumorigenic in nude mice, suggesting that HPV infection alone is not sufficient for cervical carcinogenesis. This theory is supported by data from transgenic
mice studies, in which E6/E7 genes can give rise to hyperplastic and neoplastic lesions of epithelial cell types after a latent period; however, epidermoid cervical
cancers have not been noted. Cervical cancers of mesenchymal origin were noted to arise after a long latent period in some of the female progeny of transgenic mice
into whom HPV-18 LCR/E6/E7 was introduced. 59 Although the majority of invasive cancers contain integrated forms of HPV, usually at fragile sites, which result in cis
activation of protooncogenes such as c-myc, and the large majority of dysplasias contain episomal forms of HPV, this is not always the case. In invasive cancers,
HPV-18 is always found to be integrated in the host genome, whereas HPV-16 can be found in an episomal location one-third of the time. When DNA integration
occurs, it does so by preferentially disrupting the E2 open reading frame (thus the negative effect of the E2 protein on E6/E7 transcriptional activity) or in such a way
that transcriptional initiation from host sequences give rise to overexpression of E6/E7. High-level transcription of E6/E7 is seen in cervical intraepithelial neoplasia
grade 3 (CIN 3) and invasive cancers when compared to CIN 1 and CIN 2. On immortalization of normal cells, E7 appears to be responsible for chromosomal
instability and aneuploidy, whereas E6 may have a promoting effect by inhibition of DNA repair through interfering with wild-type p53 function. When inoculated in
nude mice, those clones that are not tumorigenic display low-level E6/E7 transcription, whereas those which are tumorigenic continue to express high levels of E6/E7.
HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS E6/E7 GENES
On binding with the retinoblastoma (Rb) protein, E7, a potent viral oncoprotein that cooperates with activated ras in transforming assays, frees key cell-cycle proteins
from Rb-imposed negative transcriptional regulation. Whereas for the high-risk HPV subtypes 16/18, E7/Rb binding is five- to tenfold more efficient than for HPV 6/11,
mutations that affect E7 binding to Rb do not interfere with the capacity to confer immortalization. Similarly, mutations that interfere with E7's transforming properties
do not appear to affect Rb binding; thus, the picture is complex.
Likewise, the mechanism for E6 promotion of oncogenesis is not clear. E6 promotes ubiquitin binding to p53, which tags such cells for degradation; thus, on DNA
damage, the normal cellular response of induction of wild-type p53 is not seen in HPV-infected cells. Experimental evidence suggests that a p53 polymorphism with

arginine at codon 72 is more susceptible to E6-induced degradation in vivo than with proline at that site. 60 However, the observation that individuals homozygous for
the arginine-encoding allele may be more susceptible to HPV-associated squamous cell cancers than heterozygotes 60 has not been confirmed by larger studies. 61
The suggestion has been made that, instead, this p53 polymorphism may predispose to the development of cervical adenocarcinomas in Asians. 62 Although E6 binds
to p53 protein in HPV 16/18 subtypes (not in HPV 6/11), no such correlation is seen in vivo between low p53 expression and E6 overexpression. Furthermore, there is
evidence that endogenous p53 protein in HPV-infected cancer cells is competent to activate a downstream target gene, despite coexpression of the viral E6 protein. 63
The development of HPV vaccines has been an intense focus of investigation. Prophylactic HPV vaccine strategies have used noninfective, non–viral
DNA-containing, antigenic papilloma virus–like particles. Development of therapeutic HPV vaccines has been somewhat more problematic in that sustained cellular
immunity against oncogenic E6 or E7 proteins has been difficult to achieve. New approaches include the use of autologous dendritic cells pulsed with HPV-specific
tumor antigens, such as E7, to stimulate tumor-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). 64 Dendritic cells are thought to be effective stimulators not only to produce
and maintain primary CTLs, but also to stimulate established CTL lines.
MOLECULAR COFACTORS IMPORTANT TO CERVICAL CARCINOGENESIS
Because HPV infection is not sufficient for cervical carcinogenesis, attention has focused on molecular cofactors important to this process, such as co-infection by
herpes simplex virus 2, and the presence of activated Ha-ras; the latter results in rearrangements and amplifications of the HPV-16 sequence. Many positive and
negative transcriptional regulators of E6/E7 transcription have been identified. The presence of the glucocorticoid response element 5' of the HPV genome probably
underlies the clinical progression of HPV infection seen in pregnancy. Although retinoic acid represses HPV transcription in normal and malignant cells, its induction
of retinoic acid receptor beta is restricted to normal cells. Both the retinoic acid receptor beta gene and a locus on chromosome 11q23 may have tumor-suppressive
properties in squamous cell cancers. Loss of heterozygosity studies demonstrate allelic loss of many chromosomes, including 11q, but most frequently involving 3p,
6p, and 18q (see Table 36.1-1).65
The immune response is likely to be key in determining malignant transformation of HPV-infected cervical epithelium. The consequences of human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) infection include a dramatic increase in the risk for cervical dysplasia and invasive cancer, the degree of which correlates with the level of
immunosuppression. Loss of expression of HLA class I alleles, along with interference with the transporter associated with antigen presentation in cervical cancers, is
common; such changes may influence specific immunogenic presentation by tumors. 66 In addition, the finding of certain HLA class II haplotypes in the cancer (when
compared to cervical DNA from controls), which may influence the immune response to specific HPV-encoded epitopes, may contribute to the development of cervical
neoplasia.67 In fact, the HLA DQB1 locus shows evidence for allelic association with invasive cervical cancer in HPV-positive patients. 68 This genotype thus appears
to increase the risk for development of cervical cancer in these patients. Similar findings are seen when HLA class II haplotypes in CIN were compared to controls; the
HLA DQB1 haplotype was significantly more highly associated with CIN. 69
In general, more than 90% of squamous cell cervical cancers contain HPV DNA, and only rarely are p53 mutations seen. Nuclear c-myb expression is correlated with
the presence of HPV; c-myb can transactivate the HPV-16 promoter, 70 as it can transactivate HIV-1 and c-myc. In most studies, HPV status was not a strong
independent prognosticator of outcome in cervical cancer patients 71; however, there appears to be a trend for HPV-negative tumors to do worse. Among
HPV-negative cancers, p53 mutations appear to be more common, although HPV-negative cancers that do not contain p53 mutations exist. The latter also do not
contain MDM2 gene (capable of binding to p53) amplifications. 72 Among HPV-negative tumors, c-myc overexpression has been associated with an increased risk of
metastasis in early-stage disease.
MOLECULAR ABNORMALITIES IN CERVICAL ADENOCARCINOMAS
The presence of both HPV-16 and -18 has been demonstrated in cervical adenocarcinomas, with HPV-18 predominating in cervical adenocarcinoma cell lines. p53
mutations in this disease are associated with advanced-stage and high-grade cases, whereas those tumors containing HPV DNA tend to be of an early stage and low
grade. Overexpression of HER-2/neu is seen in 25% of cervical adenocarcinomas, which is strongly associated with advanced stage. Reduced expression of nm23
and overexpression of HER-2/neu may relate to poor prognosis in these tumors. 73 Molecular findings in cervical adenocarcinomas appear to differ from those seen in
adenocarcinomas arising in the endometrium, which do not contain HPV DNA. The frequency of K-ras mutations and the pattern of p53 mutations differ between the
two groups74; K-ras mutations appear to be an infrequent event in cervical cancers in most studies, which is in contrast to endometrial adenocarcinomas.
NON–HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS-RELATED MOLECULAR ABNORMALITIES IN CERVICAL CANCERS
Expression of cell-cycle genes, such as bcl-1 and bcl-2, have been studied in cervical cancer. Bcl-1 (cyclin D1) is capable of binding to the Rb protein and is
overexpressed or amplified in the majority of cervical and vulvar cancer cell lines 75; its level of expression is elevated by activated c-fms. Overexpression of bcl-2,
which protects against apoptosis and differentiation, was not found to relate to HPV status but was more likely to be seen in CIN 3 rather than low-grade dysplasias.
Thus, its expression may be an early event important to malignant transformation. 76In vitro, increased bcl-2 expression is noted in cervical cancer cell lines which
contain an inactive p53. 77In vivo, overexpression of bcl-2 is strongly correlated with radioresistance, 78 and on multivariate analysis, poor outcome. 79 Overexpression of
EGFR also is found to be an independent predictor for poor prognosis in cervical cancer. 80
Proteinases capable of degrading extracellular matrix may underlie the propensity of cervical cancer to invade adjacent tissues. Both the expression 81 and activity of
metalloproteinases have been described in cervical cancers, with more activity seen in this disease than in ovarian or endometrial cancers. 82 Expression of MMP-2 is
correlated with that of TIMP-2 in cervical cancer cells, and their coexpression is associated with advanced stage and poor survival. 83 The opposite finding is seen for
expression of TIMP-1, a specific inhibitor of the matrix metalloproteinases. In fact, the ratio of matrix metalloproteinases to TIMP-1 is increased in those cervical
cancers and their surrounding stroma that have a poor prognosis. 81 Furthermore, morphologic and immunohistochemical markers of angiogenesis correlate with poor
outcome in cervical cancer. 84 Many cervical cancers secrete significant levels of VEGF, the adenocarcinomas in particular. 85
MOLECULAR ABNORMALITIES IN VULVAR CANCERS
Molecular studies support two etiologies of vulvar cancer: (1) vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia grade 3 associated with basaloid and warty carcinomas, the majority of
which appear to be associated with the presence of HPV and epidemiologic risk factors similar to that seen for cervical cancer, such as smoking and herpes simplex
virus 2 infection; and (2) keratinizing squamous cell carcinomas, which contain little HPV DNA. 86 Thus, HPV is detected less often in vulvar cancers (approximately
one-half of the cases contain HPV-16 or -18) than in cervical cancers, with those being HPV-positive having a better prognosis. 87 Similar to cervical cancers, there is
higher prevalence of p53 mutations in HPV-negative vulvar cancers when compared to HPV-positive tumors, 88 and p53 overexpression in vulvar cancers appears to
relate to poor overall survival. 89 Vulvar squamous cell carcinomas exhibit a broad range of allelic losses, irrespective of HPV status. 90 Furthermore, the divergent
patterns of loss of heterozygosity observed suggest that only some, but not most, genetic alterations in adjacent vulvar epithelium or vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia
are related to the invasive cancers. 91
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Yoshinaga K, Sasano H, Furukawa T, et al. The PTEN, BAX, and IGFRII genes are mutated in endometrial atypical hyperplasia. Jpn J Cancer Res 1998;89:985.
2. Myeroff LL, Parsons R, Kim SJ, et al. A transforming growth factor b receptor type II gene mutation common in colon and gastric but rare in endometrial cancers with microsatellite instability.
Cancer Res 1995;55:5545.
3. Gurin CC, Federici MG, Kang L, Boyd J. Causes and consequences of microsatellite instability in endometrial carcinoma. Cancer Res 1999;59:462.
4. Risinger JI, Umar A, Boyer JC, et al. Microsatellite instability in gynecological sarcomas and in hMSH2 mutant uterine sarcoma cell lines defective in mismatch repair activity. Cancer Res
1995;55:5664.
5. Berchuck A, Maxwell GL, Risinger JI, et al. Mutation of the PTEN and beta-catenin genes and microsatellite instability are characteristic of endometrioid endometrial cancers. Int J Gynecol
Cancer 1999;9[suppl 1]:78.
6. Risinger JI, Hayes K, Maxwell GL, et al. PTEN mutation in endometrial cancers is associated with favorable clinical and pathologic characteristics. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:3005.
7. Yamada H, Sasaki M, Honda T, et al. Suppression of endometrial carcinoma cell tumorigenicity by human chromosome 18. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1995;13:18.
8. Caduff RF, Johnston CM, Frank TS. Mutations of the Ki-ras oncogene in carcinoma of the endometrium. Am J Pathol 1995;146:182.
9. Kovalev S, Marchenko ND, Gugliotta BG, et al. Loss of p53 function in uterine papillary serous carcinoma. Human Pathol 1998;29:613.
10. Saffari B, Jones LA, El-Naggar A, et al. Amplification and overexpression of HER-2/neu (c-erbB2) in endometrial cancers: correlation with overall survival. Cancer Res 1995;55:5693.
11. Lukes AS, Kohler MF, Pieper CF, et al. Multivariate analysis of DNA ploidy, p53, and HER-2/neu as prognostic factors in endometrial cancer. Cancer 1994;73:2380.
12. Kacinski BM, Carter D, Mittal K, et al. High level expression of fms proto-oncogene mRNA is observed in clinically aggressive human endometrial adenocarcinomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1988;15:823.

13. Bulun SE, Economos K, Miller D, Simpson ER. CYP19 (aromatase cytochrome P450) gene expression in human malignant endometrial tumors. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994:79:1831.
14. Levenson AS, Jordan VC. The key to the antiestrogenic mechanism of raloxifene is amino acid 351 (aspartate) in the estrogen receptor. Cancer Res 1998;58:1872.
15. Lessey BA, Albelda S, Buck CA, et al. Distribution of integrin cell adhesion molecules in endometrial cancer. Am J Pathol 1995;146:717.
16. Fujita N, Yaegashi N, Ide Y, et al. Expression of CD44 in normal human versus tumor endometrial tissues: possible implication of reduced expression of CD44 in lymph-vascular space
involvement of cancer cells. Cancer Res 1994;54:3922.
17. King BL, Carcangiu ML, Carter D, et al. Microsatellite instability in ovarian neoplasms. Br J Cancer 1995;72:376.
18. Schorge JO, Muto MG, Welch WR, et al. Molecular evidence for multifocal papillary serous carcinoma of the peritoneum in patients with germline BRCA1 mutations. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90:797.
19. Cheng PC, Gosewehr JA, Kim TM, et al. Potential role of the inactivated X chromosome in ovarian epithelial tumor development. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:510.
20. Zheng J, Benedict WF, Xu HJ, et al. Genetic disparity between morphologically benign cyst contiguous to ovarian carcinomas and solitary cystadenomas. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1146.
21. Jiang X, Morland SJ, Hitchcock A, Thomans EJ, Campbell IG. Allelotyping of endometriosis with adjacent ovarian carcinoma reveals evidence of a common lineage. Cancer Res 1998;58:1707.
22. Godwin AK, Testa JR, Hamilton TC. The biology of ovarian cancer development. Cancer 1993;71:530.
23. Gayther SA, Russell P, Harrington P, et al. The contribution of germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations to familial ovarian cancer: no evidence for other ovarian cancer-susceptibility genes. Am
J Hum Genet 1999;65:1021.
24. Easton DF, Ford D, Bishop DT, and the Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium. Breast and ovarian cancer incidence in BRCA1-mutation carriers. Am J Hum Genet 1995;56:265.
25. Shattuck-Eidens D, McClure M, Simard J, et al. A collaborative survey of 80 mutations in the BRCA1 breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene: implications for presymptomatic testing and
screening. JAMA 1995;273:535.
26. Pharoah PDP, Easton DF, Stockton DL, et al. Survival in familial, BRCA1-associated, and BRCA2-associated epithelial ovarian cancer. Cancer Res 1999;59:868.
27. Bandera CA, Muto MG, Schorge JO, et al. BRCA1 gene mutations in women with papillary serous carcinoma of the peritoneum. Obstet Gynecol 1998;92:596.
28. Stratton JF, Buckley CH, Lowe D, Ponder BA. Comparison of prophylactic oophorectomy specimens from carriers and noncarriers of a BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation. J Natl Cancer Inst
1999;91:626.
29. Takahashi H, Behbakht K, McGovern PE, et al. Mutation analysis of the BRCA1 gene in ovarian cancers. Cancer Res 1995;55:2998.
30. McKenna NJ, Kieback DG, Carney DN, et al. A germline Taq1 restriction fragment length polymorphism in the progesterone receptor gene in ovarian carcinoma. Br J Cancer 1995; 71:451.
31. Brown R, Clugston C, Burns P, et al. Increased accumulation of p53 protein in cisplatin-resistant ovarian cell lines. Int J Cancer 1993;55:678.
32. Berchuk A, Kohler MF, Marks JR, et al. The p53 tumor suppressor gene frequently is altered in gynecologic cancers. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:246.
33. Buller RE, Skilling JS, Kaliszewski S, Neimann T, Anderson B. Absence of significant germ line p53 mutations in ovarian cancer patients. Gynecol Oncol 1995;58:368.
34. Tai YT, Strobel T, Kufe D, Cannistra SA. In vivo cytotoxicity of ovarian cancer cells through tumor-selective expression of the BAX gene. Cancer Res 1999;59:2121.
35. Wang K, Gan L, Jeffery E, et al. Monitoring gene expression profile changes in ovarian carcinomas using cDNA microarray. Gene 1999;229:101.
36. Rhei E, Bogomolniy F, Federici MG, et al. Molecular genetic characterization of BRCA1- and BRCA2-linked hereditary ovarian cancers. Cancer Res 1998;58:3193.
37. Chambers SK, Kacinski BM, Ivins CM, Carcangiu ML. Overexpression of epithelial CSF-1 and CSF-1 receptor: a poor prognostic factor in epithelial ovarian cancer; contrasted with a positive
effect of stromal CSF-1. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:999.
38. Weiner JR, Hurteau JA, Kerns BJM, et al. Overexpression of the tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B is associated with human ovarian carcinomas. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:1177.
39. Kudoh K, Takano M, Koshikawa T, et al. Gains of 1q21-q22 and 13q12-q14 are potential indicators for resistance to cisplatin-based chemotherapy in ovarian cancer patients. Clin Cancer Res
1999;5:2526.
40. Tanner B, Hengstler JG, Dietrich B, et al. Glutathione, glutathione S-transferase A and aldehyde dehydrogenase content in relationship to drug resistance in ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol
1997;65:54.
41. Yao KS, Godwin AK, Johnson SW, et al. Evidence for altered regulation of g-glutamylcysteine synthetase gene expression among cisplatin-sensitive and cisplatin-resistant human ovarian
cancer cell lines. Cancer Res 1995:55:4367.
42. Howells REJ, Redman CWE, Dhar KK, et al. Association of glutathione S-transferase GSTM1 and GSTT1 null genotypes with clinical outcome in epithelial ovarian cancer. Clin Cancer Res
1998;4:2439.
43. Ishioka S, van Haaften-Day C, Sagae S, Kudo R, Hacker NF. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) does not change the expression of Bcl-2 protein in the prevention of cisplatin-induced apoptosis in ovarian
cancer cell lines. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 1999;25:23.
44. Langton-Webster BC, Xuan JA, Brink JR, Salomon DS. Development of resistance to cisplatin is associated with decreased expression of the gp185 c-erbB-2 protein and alterations in growth
properties and responses to therapy in an ovarian tumor cell line. Cell Growth Differ 1994;5:1367.
45. Uslu R, Jewett A, Bonavida B. Sensitization of human ovarian tumor cells by subtoxic CDDP to anti-fas antibody-mediated cytotoxicity and apoptosis. Gynecol Oncol 1996;62:282.
46. Tai YT, Lee S, Niloff E, Weisman C, Strobel T, Cannistra SA. Bax protein expression and clinical outcome in epithelial ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2583.
47. Perego P, Giarola M, Righetti SC, et al. Association between cisplatin resistance and mutation of p53 gene and reduced bax expression in ovarian carcinoma cell systems. Cancer Res
1996;56:556.
48. Benchekroun MN, Parker R, Dabholkar M, Reed E, Sinha BK. Effects of interleukin-1 alpha on DNA repair in human ovarian carcinoma (NIH:OVCAR-3) cells: implications in the mechanism of
sensitization of cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II). Mol Pharmacol 1995;47:1255.
49. Parekh HK, Simpkins H. The differential expression of cytokeratin 18 in cisplatin-sensitive and -resistant human ovarian adenocarcinoma cells and its association with drug sensitivity. Cancer
Res 1995;55:5203.
50. Izquierdo MA, Scheffer GL, Flens MJ, et al. Major vault protein LRP-related multidrug resistance. Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:979.
51. Kavallaris M, Kuo DYS, Burkhart CA, et al. Taxol-resistant epithelial ovarian tumors are associated with altered expression of specific beta-tubulin isotypes. J Clin Invest 1997;100:1282.
52. Cannistra SA, Kansas GS, Niloff J, et al. Binding of ovarian cancer cells to peritoneal mesothelium in vitro is partly mediated by CD44H. Cancer Res 1993;53:3830.
53. Lessan K, Aguiar DJ, Oegema T, Siebenson L, Skubitz AP. CD44 and beta 1 integrin mediate ovarian carcinoma cell adhesion to peritoneal mesothelial cells. Am J Pathol 1999;154:1525.
54. Chambers SK, Wang Y, Gertz RE, Kacinski BM. Macrophage colony stimulating factor mediates invasion of ovarian cancer cells through urokinase. Cancer Res 1995;55:1578.
55. Giavazzi R, Garofalo A, Ferri C, et al. Batimastat, a synthetic inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases, potentiates the antitumor activity of cisplatin in ovarian carcinoma xenografts. Clin Cancer
Res 1998;4:985.
56. Folk NL, Azodi M, Ivins CM, et al. Enhanced ovarian cancer metastasis by the macrophage colony stimulating factor (CSF-1). 2000 ( submitted).
57. Xu Y, Gaudette DC, Boynton JD, et al. Characterization of an ovarian cancer activating factor in ascites from ovarian cancer patients. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:1223.
58. Sowter HM, Corps AN, Evans AL, et al. Expression and localization of the vascular endothelial growth factor family in ovarian epithelial tumors. Lab Invest 1997;77:607.
59. Comerford SA, Maika SD, Laimins LA, et al. E6 and E7 expression from the HPV 18 LCR: development of genital hyperplasia and neoplasia in transgenic mice. Oncogene 1995;10:587.
60. Storey A, Thomas M, Kalita A, et al. Role of a p53 polymorphism in the development of human papillomavirus-associated cancer. Nature 1998;393:229.
61. Sonoda Y, Saigo PE, Boyd J. p53 and genetic susceptibility to cervical cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;9:557.
62. Yang YC, Chang CL, Chen ML. Effect of p53 polymorphism on susceptibility of cervical cancer in Taiwan. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1999;9:104(abst).
63. Butz K, Whitaker N, Denk C, et al. Induction of the p53-target gene GADD45 in HPV-positive cancer cells. Oncogene 1999;18:2381.
64. Santin AD, Hermonat PL, Ravaggi A, et al. Induction of human papillomavirus-specific CD4(+) and CD8(+) lymphocytes by E7-pulsed autologous dendritic cells in patients with human
papillomavirus type 16- and 18-positive cervical cancer. J Virol 1999;73:5402.
65. Mullokandov MR, Kholodilov NG, Atkin NB, et al. Genomic alterations in cervical carcinoma: losses of chromosome heterozygosity and human papilloma virus tumor status. Cancer Res
1996;56:197.
66. Keating PJ, Cromme FV, Duggan-Keen M, et al. Frequency of down-regulation of individual HLA-A and -B alleles in cervical carcinomas in relation to TAP-1 expression. Br J Cancer
1995:72:405.
67. Apple RJ, Erlich HA, Klitz W, et al. HLA DR-DQ associations with cervical carcinoma show papillomavirus-type specificity. Nat Genet 1994;6:157.
68. Neuman RJ, Huettner PC, Lina LI, et al. Association between DQB1 and cervical cancer in patients with human papillomavirus and family controls. Obstet Gynecol 2000;95:134.
69. Odunsi K, Terry G, Ho L, Cuzick J, Ganesan TS. Susceptibility to human papillomavirus-associated cervical intra-epithelial neoplasia is determined by specific HLA DR-DQ alleles. Int J Cancer
1996;67:595.
70. Nurnberg W, Artuc M, Nawrath M, et al. Human c-myb is expressed in cervical carcinomas and transactivate the HPV-16 promoter. Cancer Res 1995;55:4432.
71. Ikenberg H, Sauerbrei W, Schottmuller U, Spitz C, Pfleiderer A. Human papillomavirus DNA in cervical carcinomacorrelation with clinical data and influence on prognosis. Int J Cancer
1994;59:322.
72. Miwa K, Miyamoto S, Kato H, et al. The role of p53 inactivation in human cervical cell carcinoma development. Oncogene 1995;10:219.
73. Mandai M, Konishi I, Koshiyama M, et al. Altered expression of nm23-H1 and c-erbB-2 proteins have prognostic significance in adenocarcinoma but not in squamous cell carcinoma of the
uterine cervix. Cancer 1995;75:2523.
74. Jiko K, Tsuda H, Sato S, Hirohashi S. Pathogenic significance of p53 and c-Ki-ras gene mutations and human papillomavirus DNA integration in adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix and
uterine isthmus. Int J Cancer 1994;59:601.
75. Kurzrock R, Ku S, Talpaz M. Abnormalities in the PRAD1 (CYCLIN D1/BCL-1) oncogene are frequent in cervical and vulvar squamous cell carcinoma cell lines. Cancer 1995;75:584.
76. Saegusa M, Takano Y, Hashimura M, Shoji Y, Okayasu I. The possible role of bcl-2 expression in the progression of tumors of the uterine cervix. Cancer 1995;76:2297.
77. Liang XH, Mungal S, Ayscue A, et al. Bcl-2 protooncogene expression in cervical carcinoma cell lines containing inactive p53. J Cell Biochem 1995;57:509.
78. Pillai MR, Jayaprakash PG, Nair MK. Bcl-2 immunoreactivity but not p53 accumulation associated with tumour response to radiotherapy in cervical carcinoma. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
1999;125:55.
79. Tjalma W, DeCuyper E, Weyler J, et al. Expression of bcl-2 in invasive and in situ carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;178:113.
80. Kersemaekers AM, Fleuren GJ, Kenter GG, et al. Oncogene alterations in carcinomas of the uterine cervix: overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor is associated with poor
prognosis. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:577.
81. Nuovo GJ, MacConnell PB, Simsir A, Valea F, French DL. Correlation of the in situ detection of polymerase chain reactionamplified metalloproteinase complementary DNAs and their inhibitors
with prognosis in cervical carcinoma. Cancer Res 1995;55:267.
82. Tamakoshi K, Kikawa F, Nawa A, et al. Characterization of extracellular matrixdegrading proteinase and its inhibitor in gynecologic cancer tissues with clinically different metastatic form.
Cancer 1995;76:2565.
83. Davidson B, Goldberg I, Kopolovic J, et al. MMP-2 and TIMP-2 expression correlates with poor prognosis in cervical carcinomaa clinicopathologic study using immunohistochemistry and mRNA
in situ hybridization. Gynecol Oncol 1999;73:372.
84. Tjalma W, Van Marck E, Weyler J, et al. Quantification and prognostic relevance of angiogenic parameters in invasive cervical cancer. Br J Cancer 1998;78:170.
85. Santin AD, Hermonat PL, Ravaggi A, et al. Secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor in adenocarcinoma and squamous carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Obstet Gynecol 1999;94:78.
86. Trimble CL, Hildesheim A, Brinton LA, Shah KV, Kurman RJ. Heterogeneous etiology of squamous carcinoma of the vulva. Obstet Gynecol 1996;87:59.
87. Ansink AC, Krul MRL, DeWeger RA, et al. Human papillomavirus, lichen sclerosus, and squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva: detection and prognostic significance. Gynecol Oncol
1994;52:180.
88. Lee YY, Wilczynski SP, Chumakov A, Chih D, Koeffler HP. Carcinoma of the vulva: HPV and p53 mutations. Oncogene 1994;9:1655.
89. Kohlberger P, Kainz C, Breitenecker G, et al. Prognostic significance of immunohistochemically detected p53 expression in vulvar carcinoma. Cancer 1995;76:1786.
90. Pinto AP, Lin MC, Mutter GL, et al. Allelic loss in human papillomaviruspositive and negative vulvar squamous cell carcinomas. Am J Pathol 1999;154:1009.
91. Lin MC, Mutter GL, Trivijsilp P, et al. Patterns of allelic loss (LOH) in vulvar squamous carcinomas and adjacent noninvasive epithelia. Am J Pathol 1998;152:1313.

SECTION 36.2 Cancer of the Cervix, Vagina, and Vulva
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 36.2
Cancer of the Cervix, Vagina, and Vulva
PATRICIA J. EIFEL
JONATHAN S. BEREK
JAMES T. THIGPEN
Carcinoma of the Cervix
Epidemiology
Natural History and Pattern of Spread
Pathology
Clinical Manifestations
Diagnosis, Clinical Evaluation, and Staging
Treatment
Carcinoma of the Cervical Stump
Carcinoma of the Cervix During Pregnancy
Carcinoma of the Vagina
Epidemiology
Natural History and Pattern of Spread
Pathology
Diagnosis, Clinical Evaluation, and Staging
Prognostic Factors
Treatment
Carcinoma of the Vulva
Epidemiology
Natural History and Pattern of Spread
Pathology
Diagnosis, Clinical Evaluation, and Staging
Prognostic Factors
Treatment
Chapter References

CARCINOMA OF THE CERVIX
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The American Cancer Society estimated that 12,800 new cases of invasive cervical cancer would be diagnosed in the United States in 1999. 1 During the same year,
4800 patients were expected to die of cervical cancer; this represents approximately 1.8% of all cancer deaths in women and 18% of deaths from gynecologic
cancers. However, for women aged 20 to 39 years, cervical cancer remains the second leading cause of cancer deaths after breast cancer. 1 In the United States,
age-adjusted death rates from cervical cancer have declined steadily since statistics on the disease were first collected in the 1930s. Although this improvement is
primarily because of the adoption of routine screening programs including pelvic examinations and cervical cytologic evaluation, the death rates from cervical cancer
had begun to decrease before the implementation of Papanicolaou (Pap) screening, suggesting that other unknown factors may have played some role. 2,3
Squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix and its intraepithelial precursor follow a pattern typical of sexually transmitted disease. The risk of cervical cancer is increased
in prostitutes and in women who have first coitus at a young age, have multiple sexual partners, have sexually transmitted diseases, or bear children at a young age.
Promiscuous sexual behavior in male partners is also a risk factor. 4,5 Other factors that may be associated with cervical cancer include cigarette smoking,
immunodeficiency, vitamin A or C deficiency, and oral contraceptive use. 6 In the United States, the incidence of cervical cancer is greatest in American Indian, African
American, Vietnamese, and Hispanic women.7,8 and 9
International incidences of cervical cancer tend to reflect differences in cultural attitudes toward sexual promiscuity and the penetration of mass screening programs.
Some of the lowest incidences are in the United States, China, North Africa, and the Middle East, where estimated crude rates of cervical cancer are less than 10 per
100,000.10 However, cervical cancer continues to be the leading cause of cancer deaths for women in many developing countries. Incidences are particularly high in
Latin America, Southern and Eastern Africa, India, and Polynesia. 10,11 In the United States, Hispanic women have approximately twice the incidence and Vietnamese
women approximately five times the incidence of white women.12 The incidence is also higher in African Americans than in whites, although this difference has been
steadily decreasing, particularly for women less than 50 years old.
A number of studies suggest that the incidence of cervical adenocarcinoma has been increasing, particularly among women in their 20s and 30s. 13,14 and 15 Several
investigators have reported a correlation between cervical adenocarcinoma and prolonged oral contraceptive use. 16,17 However, the likelihood of a causative
relationship is less certain because of the many potential confounding risk factors. 18
Molecular and epidemiologic studies have demonstrated a strong relationship between human papillomavirus (HPV), cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN), and
invasive carcinomas of the cervix. 19,20 HPV DNA has been identified in more than 95% of cervical carcinomas 21; HPV DNA transcripts and protein products have also
been identified in invasive cervical carcinomas. 22,23 and 24 In high-grade CIN and invasive carcinoma, papillomavirus DNA is typically integrated into the human genome
rather than remaining in an intact viral capsid. 25 It has been theorized that integration of HPV DNA in the human genome, possibly at the E2 site, causes persistent
transcription of the E6 and E7 genes. Functional inactivation of p53 by E6 protein or of Rb by E7 protein disrupts normal cell-cycle control mechanisms. 26,27 and 28 As
the sensitivity and specificity of tests for HPV DNA have improved, it has become increasingly apparent that most of the covariables that have historically been
associated with an increased risk of cervical cancer (e.g., age at first coitus, number of partners, socioeconomic status, and so forth) are surrogates for HPV
infection. 29,30 Investigators have suggested a number of cofactors that may contribute to disease progression. However, in more recent epidemiologic studies,
cigarette smoking was the only consistent independent contributor to the risk of cervical cancer development after controlling for HPV infection. 30 Taken together, the
molecular and epidemiologic data provide compelling evidence that HPV infection plays a central causative role in the development of cervical neoplasia. 29,30 and 31
More than 100 HPV subtypes have been identified, and many of these have now been isolated, sequenced, and cloned. 32,33 Approximately 25 subtypes are tropic to
the genital tract mucosa. Types 6 and 11 usually cause benign genital warts (condyloma acuminata) but are occasionally associated with invasive cervical lesions.
Types 16, 18, 31, 35, and 39 are commonly associated with high-grade CIN and invasive cervical cancer ( Table 36.2-1).34 HPV 18 has been associated with poorly
differentiated carcinomas, an increased incidence of lymph node involvement, a poor response to treatment, and a high rate of disease recurrence, whereas HPV 16
has been associated with large cell keratinizing tumors and a lower recurrence rate. 35,36 and 37 Although the overall prevalence of HPV DNA is similar between
countries, significant variation has been found in the prevalence of some less common HPV types; for example, HPV 45 is most common in western Africa, whereas
HPV 39 and HPV 59 are rarely found outside Central and South America. 21 The strong correlation between high-risk HPV subtypes and carcinoma has led to the
suggestion that HPV detection and typing be incorporated into mass screening programs 38,39 and has encouraged efforts to develop a prophylactic HPV vaccine. 40

TABLE 36.2-1. Relationship between Human Papillomavirus Type and Cervical Pathology

In 1993 the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention added cervical cancer to the list of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome–defining neoplasms. 41 However, the
impact of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) on the incidence and virulence of cervical cancer remains uncertain. 42,43,44,45
and 46
Although several studies suggest that the incidence of CIN is higher in HIV-positive women than in the general population, 47,48 overlap in risk factors for the two
diseases may influence these results. Although Serraino et al. 46 reported a possible increase in the risk of invasive cervical cancer in European HIV-positive women,
several studies in Africa 42 and a large epidemiologic study in the United States 44 have failed to reveal any significant linkage. However, changes in cell-mediated
immunity may play a role in the development of cervical cancer, 48,49 and 50 and some investigators 43,51,52 have suggested that cervical cancer is a more aggressive
disease in immunosuppressed patients. For these reasons, regular surveillance with Pap smears, pelvic examination, and colposcopy (when indicated) should be part
of the routine care of HIV-positive women.
NATURAL HISTORY AND PATTERN OF SPREAD
Most cervical carcinomas arise at the junction between the primarily columnar epithelium of the endocervix and the squamous epithelium of the ectocervix. This
junction is a site of continuous metaplastic change; this change is most active in utero, at puberty, and during a first pregnancy and declines after menopause. The
greatest risk of neoplastic transformation coincides with periods of greatest metaplastic activity. Virally induced atypical squamous metaplasia developing in this
region can progress to higher grade squamous intraepithelial lesions.
The mean age of women with CIN is approximately 15 years younger than that of women with invasive cancer, suggesting a slow progression of CIN to invasive
carcinoma.53,54 In a 13-year observational study of women with CIN 3, Miller 55 found that disease progressed in only 14%, whereas it remained the same in 61% and
disappeared in the remainder. Syrjanen et al. 56 reported spontaneous regression in 38% of high-grade HPV-associated squamous intraepithelial lesions. However, in
a large prospective study, Richart and Barron 57 reported mean times to development of carcinoma in situ of 58, 38, and 12 months for patients with mild, moderate, or
severe dysplasia, respectively, and predicted that 66% of all dysplasias would progress to carcinoma in situ within 10 years.
Once tumor has broken through the basement membrane, it may penetrate the cervical stroma directly or through vascular channels. Invasive tumors may develop as
exophytic growths protruding from the cervix into the vagina or as endocervical lesions that can cause massive expansion of the cervix despite a relatively
normal-appearing cervical portio. From the cervix, tumor may extend superiorly to the lower uterine segment, inferiorly to the vagina, or into the paracervical spaces
by way of the broad or uterosacral ligaments. Tumor may become fixed to the pelvic wall by direct extension or by coalescence of central tumor with regional
adenopathy. Tumor may also extend anteriorly to involve the bladder or posteriorly to the rectum, although rectal mucosal involvement is a rare finding at initial
presentation.
The cervix has a rich supply of lymphatics organized in three anastomosing plexuses that drain the mucosal, muscularis, and serosal layers. 58 The lymphatics of the
cervix also anastomose extensively with those of the lower uterine segment, possibly explaining the high frequency of uterine extension from endocervical primary
tumors. The most important lymphatic collecting trunks exit laterally from the uterine isthmus in three groups ( Fig. 36.2-1).58,59 The upper branches, which originate in
the anterior and lateral cervix, follow the uterine artery, are sometimes interrupted by a node as they cross the ureter, and terminate in the uppermost hypogastric
nodes. The middle branches drain to deeper hypogastric (obturator) nodes. The lowest branches follow a posterior course to the inferior and superior gluteal, common
iliac, presacral, and subaortic nodes. Additional posterior lymphatic channels arising from the posterior cervical wall may drain to superior rectal nodes or may
continue upward in the retrorectal space to the subaortic nodes overlying the sacral promontory. Anterior collecting trunks pass between the cervix and bladder along
the superior vesical artery and terminate in the internal iliac nodes.

FIGURE 36.2-1. The lymphatic system of the female genital organs. [Reprinted from ref. 481, with permission; adapted from Meigs JV (ed). Surgical treatment of
cancer of the cervix. New York: Grune & Stratton, 1954:90.]

Table 36.2-2 summarizes the reported incidences of pelvic and paraaortic node involvement for patients who underwent lymphadenectomy as part of primary surgical
treatment or before radiotherapy for cervical carcinomas. 60,61,62,63,64,65,66,67,68,69,70,71,72,73,74,75,76,77,78,79,80,81,82 and 83 The incidences reported for patients who underwent
radical hysterectomy vary widely, probably reflecting differences in the criteria used by surgeons to select patients for radical surgery rather than for primary radiation
treatment. Many series excluded patients with extrapelvic disease. Variations in the completeness of lymphadenectomies and histologic processing may also lead to
underestimates of the true incidence of regional spread from carcinomas of the cervix. 60,84

TABLE 36.2-2. Rates of Lymph Node Metastasis in Patients with Carcinoma of the Cervix

Cervical cancer usually follows a relatively orderly pattern of metastatic progression initially to primary echelon nodes in the pelvis, then to paraaortic nodes and
distant sites. Even patients with locoregionally advanced disease rarely have detectable hematogenous metastases at initial diagnosis of their cervical cancer. The
most frequent sites of distant recurrence are lung, extrapelvic nodes, liver, and bone. 85,86 Although early studies suggested that the lumbar spine was a relatively
frequent site of skeletal metastases, more recent studies using abdominal imaging demonstrate that most patients with isolated lumbar spine involvement actually
have direct extension of disease from paraaortic nodes. 87
PATHOLOGY
Cervical Intraepithelial Neoplasia
Several systems have been developed for classifying cervical cytologic findings ( Table 36.2-3). Although criteria for the diagnosis of CIN vary somewhat between
pathologists, the important characteristics of this lesion are cellular immaturity, cellular disorganization, nuclear abnormalities, and increased mitotic activity. The
degree of neoplasia is determined on the basis of the extent of the mitotic activity, immature cell proliferation, and nuclear atypia. If mitoses and immature cells are
present only in the lower third of the epithelium, the lesion is usually designated CIN 1. Lesions involving the middle or upper third are diagnosed as CIN 2 or CIN 3,
respectively.

TABLE 36.2-3. Comparison of Cytology Classification Systems

The term cervical intraepithelial neoplasia, as proposed by Richart, 88 refers only to a lesion that may progress to invasive carcinoma. Although CIN 1 to 2 is sometimes
referred to as mild to moderate dysplasia, CIN is now preferred over dysplasia. Because the word dysplasia means “abnormal maturation,” proliferating metaplasia
without mitotic activity has sometimes been erroneously called dysplasia.
The Bethesda system of classification, designed to further standardize reporting of cervical cytologic findings, was developed after a National Cancer Institute
consensus conference in 1988 and was refined in 1991. 89 This system, which separates condylomata and CIN 1, classified as low-grade squamous intraepithelial
lesions, from high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions, is meant to replace the Papanicolaou system and is now widely used in the United States. The Bethesda
system introduced the term atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance. This uncertain diagnosis is now the most common abnormal Pap test result. 90 In
United States laboratories, 1.6% to 9.0% of Pap smears are reported as having atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance. 91 Although most reflect a
benign process, approximately 5% to 10% are associated with underlying high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions, and one-third or more of high-grade squamous
intraepithelial lesions are heralded by a finding of atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance on a Pap smear. 92
Adenocarcinoma In Situ
The diagnosis of adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS) is made when normal endocervical gland cells are replaced by tall, irregular columnar cells with stratified,
hyperchromatic nuclei and increased mitotic activity, but the normal branching pattern of the endocervical glands is maintained and there is no obvious stromal
invasion. Approximately 20% to 50% of women with cervical AIS also have squamous CIN, and AIS is often an incidental finding in patients operated on for squamous
carcinoma.93,94 Because AIS is frequently multifocal, cone biopsy margins are unreliable. 93,95
Microinvasive Carcinoma
Because the definition of microinvasive carcinoma is based on the maximum depth and linear extent of involvement, this diagnosis can only be made after
examination of a specimen that includes the entire neoplastic lesion and cervical transformation zone. This requires a cervical cone biopsy.
The earliest invasion appears as a protrusion of cells from the stromoepithelial junction; these cells are better differentiated than the adjacent noninvasive cells and
have abundant pink-staining cytoplasm, hyperchromatic nuclei, and small- to medium-sized nucleoli. 96 As the tumor progresses, invasion occurs at multiple sites, and
its depth and linear extent become measurable. The depth of invasion should be measured with a micrometer from the base of the epithelium to the deepest point of
invasion. Lesions that have invaded less than 3 mm [International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) stage IA1] rarely metastasize; 5% to 10% of
tumors that invade 3 to 5 mm (FIGO stage IA2) have positive pelvic lymph nodes. 97,98 and 99
Although investigators occasionally label small adenocarcinomas as microinvasive, the term probably should not be used for these tumors. Because invasive
adenocarcinomas may originate either from the mucosal surface or from the periphery of underlying glands, no reliable method has been found for measuring the
depth of invasion of these tumors. For this reason adenocarcinomas are generally classified as either AIS or invasive carcinoma (FIGO stage IB).
Invasive Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Between 80% and 90% of cervical carcinomas are squamous. A number of systems have been used to grade and classify squamous carcinomas, but none have
consistently been demonstrated to predict prognosis. One of the most commonly used systems categorizes squamous neoplasms as large cell keratinizing, large cell
nonkeratinizing, or small cell carcinoma. 100 Small cell squamous carcinomas have small- to medium-sized nuclei, open chromatin, small or large nucleoli, and
abundant cytoplasm. Most authorities believe that patients with small cell squamous carcinoma have a poorer prognosis than those with large cell neoplasms with or
without keratin. However, small cell squamous carcinoma should not be confused with anaplastic small cell carcinoma. The latter resembles oat cell carcinoma of the
lung because it contains small tumor cells that have scanty cytoplasm, small round to oval nuclei, small or absent nucleoli, finely granular chromatin, and high mitotic
activity.101 Approximately 30% to 50% of anaplastic small cell carcinomas display neuroendocrine features. Small cell anaplastic carcinomas behave more
aggressively than poorly differentiated small cell squamous carcinomas; most investigators report survival rates of less than 50% even for patients with early stage I
disease. 102,103 and 104
Adenocarcinoma
Invasive adenocarcinoma may be pure or mixed with squamous cell carcinoma (adenosquamous carcinoma). A wide variety of cell types, growth patterns, and
degrees of differentiation have been observed. Approximately 80% of cervical adenocarcinomas are made up predominantly of cells whose differentiated features

resemble endocervical glandular epithelium with intracytoplasmic mucin production. The remaining tumors are populated by endometrioid cells, clear cells, intestinal
cells, or a mixture of more than one cell type. By histologic examination alone, some of these tumors are indistinguishable from those arising elsewhere in the
endometrium or ovary.
Minimal-deviation adenocarcinoma (adenoma malignum) is a rare, extremely well differentiated adenocarcinoma that is sometimes associated with Peutz-Jeghers
syndrome.105,106 Because the branching glandular pattern strongly resembles normal endocervical glands, minimal-deviation adenocarcinoma may not be recognized
as malignant in small biopsy specimens. Earlier studies reported a dismal outcome for women with this tumor, but more recently, patients have been reported to have
a favorable prognosis if the disease is detected early. 107,108
Young and Scully 109 have described a villoglandular papillary subtype of adenocarcinoma that primarily affects young women, appears to metastasize infrequently,
and has a favorable prognosis. Glucksmann and Cherry 110 were the first to describe glassy cell carcinoma, a form of poorly differentiated adenosquamous carcinoma
with cells that have abundant eosinophilic, granular, ground-glass cytoplasm; large round to oval nuclei; and prominent nucleoli. Other rare variants of
adenosquamous carcinoma include adenoid basal carcinoma and adenoid cystic carcinoma. 111 Adenoid basal carcinoma is a well-differentiated tumor that
histologically resembles basal cell carcinoma of the skin and tends to have a favorable prognosis. Adenoid cystic carcinomas consist of basaloid cells in a cribriform
or cylindromatous pattern and tend to have aggressive behavior with frequent metastases, although the natural history of these tumors may be long. Whether the
prognoses of these rare subtypes are different from those of other adenocarcinomas of similar grade is uncertain.
A variety of neoplasms may infiltrate the cervix from adjacent sites presenting differential diagnostic problems. In particular, it may be difficult or impossible to
determine the origin of adenocarcinomas involving the endocervix and uterine isthmus. Although endometrioid histology suggests endometrial origin and mucinous
tumors in young patients are most often of endocervical origin, both histologic types can arise in either site. 112 Metastatic tumors from the colon, breast, or other sites
may involve the cervix secondarily. Malignant mixed Müllerian tumors, adenosarcomas, and leiomyosarcomas arise occasionally in the cervix but more often involve it
secondarily. Primary lymphomas and melanomas of the cervix are extremely rare.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Preinvasive disease is usually detected during routine cervical cytologic screening. Early invasive disease may not be associated with any symptoms and is also
detected during screening examinations. The earliest symptom of invasive cervical cancer is usually abnormal vaginal bleeding, often following coitus or vaginal
douching. This may be associated with a clear or foul-smelling vaginal discharge. Pelvic pain may result from locoregionally invasive disease or from coexistent pelvic
inflammatory disease. Flank pain may be a symptom of hydronephrosis, often complicated by pyelonephritis. The triad of sciatic pain, leg edema, and hydronephrosis
is almost always associated with extensive pelvic wall involvement by tumor. Patients with advanced tumors may have hematuria or incontinence from a vesicovaginal
fistula caused by direct extension of tumor to the bladder. External compression of the rectum by a massive primary tumor may cause constipation, but the rectal
mucosa is rarely involved at initial diagnosis.
DIAGNOSIS, CLINICAL EVALUATION, AND STAGING
Diagnosis
The long preinvasive stage of cervical cancer, the relatively high prevalence of the disease in unscreened populations, and the sensitivity of cytologic screening make
cervical carcinoma an ideal target for cancer screening. In the United States, screening with cervical cytologic examination and pelvic examination has led to more
than a 70% decrease in the mortality from cervical cancer since 1940. 1,113 Only nations with comprehensive screening programs have experienced substantial
decreases in cervical cancer death rates during this period.
Authorities disagree about the optimal frequency of cervical cancer screening. In a 1988 consensus statement, the American Cancer Society and other medical
groups recommended annual Pap smears beginning at age 18 years or with the onset of sexual activity and added that, after three or more consecutive normal annual
examinations, the cytologic evaluation could be performed less frequently at the discretion of the physician. 114,115 For patients who have had repeated negative test
results, the marginal gain from screening more often than every 3 years decreases sharply. 116,117 and 118 The United States Preventative Services Task Force has
recommended that screening be discontinued after age 65 years if results have been consistently normal, and the Canadian Task Force suggests that the screening
interval be extended to 5 years after age 35 if previous studies have been normal. 115 Although these groups have suggested tailoring the frequency of Pap smears to
patient risk, practical definitions of low and high risk remain controversial. As a result, most clinicians continue to recommend that their patients be screened more
frequently than recommended by the national guidelines. 115 The rate of false-negative findings on the Pap test is approximately 10% to 15% in women with invasive
cancer. 53,54,114 The sensitivity of the test may be improved by ensuring adequate sampling of the squamocolumnar junction and the endocervical canal; smears without
endocervical or metaplastic cells are inadequate and must be repeated. Because AIS originates near or above the transformation zone, it may be missed with
conventional cervical smears. Detection of high endocervical lesions may be improved when specimens are obtained with a cytobrush. Also, because hemorrhage,
necrosis, and intense inflammation may obscure the results, the Pap smear is a poor way to diagnose gross lesions; these should always be biopsied.
Patients with abnormal findings on cytologic examination who do not have a gross cervical lesion must be evaluated by colposcopy and directed biopsies. Following
application of a 3% acetic acid solution, the cervix is examined under 10- to 15-fold magnification with a bright, filtered light that enhances the acetowhitening and
vascular patterns characteristic of dysplasia or carcinoma. The skilled colposcopist can accurately distinguish between low- and high-grade dysplasia, 119,120 and 121 but
microinvasive disease cannot consistently be distinguished from intraepithelial lesions on colposcopy. 122,123
If no abnormalities are found on colposcopic examination or if the entire squamocolumnar junction cannot be visualized in a patient with an atypical Pap smear result,
endocervical curettage should be performed. Some authorities advocate the routine addition of endocervical curettage to colposcopic examination to minimize the risk
of missing occult cancer within the endocervical canal. 122,123 and 124 However, it is probably reasonable to omit this step in previously untreated women if the entire
squamocolumnar junction is visible with a complete ring of unaltered columnar epithelium in the lower canal.
Cervical cone biopsy is used to diagnose occult endocervical lesions and is an essential step in the diagnosis and management of microinvasive carcinoma of the
cervix. The geometry of the cone is individualized and tailored to the geometry of the cervix, the location of the squamocolumnar junction, and the site and size of the
lesion. Cervical cone biopsy yields an accurate diagnosis and decreases the incidence of inappropriate therapy when (1) the squamocolumnar junction is poorly
visualized on colposcopy and a high-grade lesion is suspected, (2) a high-grade dysplastic epithelium extends into the endocervical canal, (3) the cytologic findings
suggest a high-grade dysplasia or carcinoma in situ, (4) a microinvasive carcinoma is found on directed biopsy, (5) the endocervical curettage specimens show
high-grade CIN, or (6) the cytologic findings are suspicious for AIS. 55,114,125
Clinical Evaluation of Patients with Invasive Carcinoma
All patients with invasive cervical cancer should be evaluated with a detailed history and physical examination, with particular attention paid to inspection and
palpation of the pelvic organs with bimanual and rectovaginal examinations. Standard laboratory studies should include a complete blood cell count and renal function
and liver function tests. All patients should have chest radiography to rule out lung metastases and an intravenous pyelogram [or computed tomography (CT)] to
determine the kidney's location and to rule out ureteral obstruction by tumor. Cystoscopy and either a proctoscopy or a barium enema study should be done in
patients with bulky tumors.
Many clinicians obtain CT or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans to evaluate regional nodes, but the accuracy of these studies is compromised by their failure to
detect small metastases and because patients with bulky necrotic tumors often have enlarged reactive lymph nodes. 126,127 In a large Gynecologic Oncology Group
(GOG) study that compared the results of radiographic studies with subsequent histologic findings, Heller et al. 126 found that 79% of the cases with paraaortic lymph
node involvement were detected by lymphangiography, whereas only 34% were detected by CT. Unfortunately, lymphangiography is no longer available in many
centers. More recent studies suggest that positron emission tomography may be a sensitive noninvasive method of evaluating the regional nodes of patients with
cervical cancers. 128 MRI can provide useful information about the distribution and depth of invasion of tumors in the cervix 129,130 and 131 but tends to yield less accurate
assessments of the parametrium.132,133

Clinical Staging
FIGO has defined the most widely accepted staging system for carcinomas of the cervix. 134,135 The latest (1994) update of this system is summarized in Table 36.2-4.
Since the earliest versions of the cervical cancer staging system 136 there have been numerous changes, particularly in the definition of stage I disease. 137 Preinvasive
disease was not placed in a separate category until 1950, and the stage IA category for “cases with early stromal invasion” was first described in 1962. Cases of early
stromal invasion and occult invasion were redistributed between stages IA1, IA2, and IB occult several times until 1985, when FIGO eliminated stage IB occult and provided
the first specific definitions of microinvasive disease (stages IA1 and IA2). In 1994 these definitions were changed again, and, for the first time, stage IB tumors were
subdivided according to tumor diameter (see Table 36.2-4). Although these changes have gradually improved the discriminatory value of the staging system, the
many fluctuations in the definitions of stages IA and IB have complicated our ability to compare the outcomes of patients whose tumors were staged and treated
during different periods. 137 In addition, many gynecologic oncologists in the United States use the Society of Gynecologic Oncologists' definition of a microinvasive
carcinoma (i.e., tumor that “invades the stroma in one or more places to a depth of 3 mm or less below the base of the epithelium and in which lymphatic or vascular
involvement is not demonstrated”), a definition that still differs from the current FIGO classification. 138

TABLE 36.2-4. International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics Staging of Carcinoma of the Cervix (1994)

FIGO stage is based on careful clinical examination and the results of specific radiologic studies and procedures. These should be performed and the stage should be
assigned before any definitive therapy is administered. The clinical stage should never be changed on the basis of subsequent findings. When it is doubtful to which
stage a particular case should be allotted, the case should be assigned to the earlier stage. According to FIGO, 134 “a growth fixed to the pelvic wall by a short and
indurated, but not nodular, parametrium should be allotted to stage IIb.” A case should be classified as stage III “only if the parametrium is nodular to the pelvic wall or
if the growth itself extends to the pelvic wall.” In its rules for clinical staging, FIGO states that palpation, inspection, colposcopy, endocervical curettage, hysteroscopy,
cystoscopy, proctoscopy, intravenous urography, and radiographic examination of the lungs and skeleton may be used for clinical staging. Suspected bladder or
rectal involvement should be confirmed by biopsy. Findings of bullous edema or malignant cells in cytologic washings from the urinary bladder are not sufficient to
diagnose bladder involvement. FIGO specifically states that findings on examinations such as lymphangiography, laparoscopy, CT scan, and MRI are of value for
planning therapy but, because these are not yet generally available and the interpretation of results is variable, should not be the basis for changing the clinical stage.
Examination under anesthesia is desirable but not required. The rules and notes outlined in the FIGO staging system are integral parts of the clinical staging system
and should be strictly observed to minimize inconsistencies in staging between institutions.
Although most clinicians use the FIGO classification system, a number of European groups use a staging system that divides stage IIB tumors according to the extent
of parametrial involvement and divides stage III tumors according to whether there is unilateral or bilateral pelvic wall fixation. Until the mid 1980s most reports from
The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center used a similar staging system that also categorized patients with bulky endocervical tumors in a special
category. 137 Although surgically treated patients are sometimes classified according to a tumor, node, metastases (TNM) pathologic staging system, this practice has
not been widely accepted because it cannot be applied to patients who are treated with primary radiotherapy. 139
Surgical Evaluation of Regional Spread
In the 1970s, studies of diagnostic preradiation lymph node dissection used a transperitoneal approach that led to unacceptable morbidity and mortality from
radiation-related bowel complications, particularly after treatment with high radiation doses and extended fields. 81,140 More recently, extraperitoneal dissection, which
induces fewer bowel adhesions, has been recommended. With this approach, postradiation bowel complications occur in fewer than 5% of patients. 141 A number of
groups are currently investigating the use of laparoscopic lymph node dissection to evaluate patients with cervical cancer. 142,143 This approach reduces the length of
postoperative hospitalization. However, the rate of late complications from radiotherapy following laparoscopic lymphadenectomy has not yet been determined.
Although the indications for surgical staging are controversial, advocates argue that the procedure identifies patients with microscopic paraaortic or common iliac
node involvement who can benefit from extended-field irradiation. Some investigators have also suggested, on the basis of first principles and encouraging results
with regard to control of pelvic disease, that debulking of large pelvic nodes before radiotherapy may improve outcome. 144,145 Because patients with radiographically
positive pelvic nodes are at greatest risk for occult metastasis to paraaortic nodes, these patients may have the greatest chance of benefiting from surgical staging.
Some authors have advocated pretreatment blind biopsy of the scalene node in patients with positive paraaortic nodes and in patients with a central recurrence who
are being considered for pelvic exenteration. The reported incidence of supraclavicular metastasis varies widely (5% to 20% or more) for patients with positive
paraaortic lymph nodes. 146,147
Prognostic Factors
Although rates of survival and control of pelvic disease in cervical cancer patients are correlated with FIGO stage, prognosis is also influenced by a number of tumor
characteristics that are not included in the staging system. Clinical tumor diameter is strongly correlated with prognosis for patients treated with radiation ( Fig.
36.2-2)148,149 or surgery. 63,65,150,151 For this reason, FIGO modified the stage I category so that these tumors are subdivided according to clinical tumor diameter (i.e.,
less than or equal to 4 or greater than 4 cm). 135 For patients with more advanced disease, other estimates of tumor bulk, such as the presence of medial versus lateral
parametrial involvement in FIGO stage IIB tumors or of unilateral versus bilateral parametrial or pelvic wall involvement, have also been correlated with outcome. 152,153
and 154 The predictive value of the staging system itself may, in part, reflect an association between the stage categories and the primary tumor volume. Operative
findings often do not agree with clinical estimates of parametrial or pelvic wall involvement, 69,155,156 and some authors have found that the predictive power of stage
diminishes or is lost when comparisons are corrected for differences in clinical tumor diameter. 75,157

FIGURE 36.2-2. Relationship between tumor diameter and the disease-specific survival rates of 1526 patients with stage IB squamous cell carcinomas of the cervix
treated with radiotherapy at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. Numbers in parentheses represent the number of patients at risk at 10 or 20 years. (Reprinted from ref.
148, with permission.)

Lymph node metastasis is also an important predictor of prognosis. For patients treated with radical hysterectomy for stage IB disease, survival rates are usually
reported as 85% to 95% for patients with negative nodes and 45% to 55% for those with lymph node metastases. 61,63,158 Inoue and Morita 159 reported that survival was
correlated with the size of the largest node, and several authors have reported correlations between the number of involved pelvic lymph nodes and
survival. 62,150,158,160 Survival rates for patients with positive paraaortic nodes treated with extended-field radiotherapy vary between 10% and 50% depending on the
extent of pelvic disease and paraaortic lymph node involvement ( Table 36.2-5).77,78,80,81,140,161,162,163,164,165,166,167 and 168

TABLE 36.2-5. Results of Extended-Field Radiation Therapy to the Paraaortic Nodes for Biopsy-Proven Paraaortic Node Metastases from Carcinoma of the Cervix

For patients treated with radical hysterectomy, other histologic parameters that have been associated with a poor prognosis are lymph-vascular space invasion (LVSI)
(Table 36.2-6),62,150,151,158,169,170,171,172 and 173 deep stromal invasion (greater than or equal to 10 mm or greater than 70% invasion), 62,63,67,71,150,151,158 and parametrial
extension.62,71,155,174 Roman and colleagues175 reported a correlation between the quantity of LVSI (percent of histopathologic sections containing LVSI) and the
incidence of lymph node metastases. A strong inflammatory response in the cervical stroma tends to predict a good outcome. 176 Uterine body involvement is
associated with an increased rate of distant metastases in patients treated with radiation or surgery. 177,178,179 and 180

TABLE 36.2-6. Relationship between Lymph-Vascular Space Invasion, Pelvic Node Involvement, and Recurrence Rate in Patients Treated with Radical Hysterectomy

Several investigators have reported similar survival rates for patients with squamous carcinomas and those with adenocarcinomas. 84,181,182,183,184 and 185 However, other
investigators have drawn the opposite conclusion, noting unusually high pelvic relapse rates in patients treated surgically for adenocarcinomas and poorer survival
rates among patients treated with surgery or irradiation for cervical adenocarcinomas. 186,187,188,189,190 and 191 In a multivariate analysis of 1767 patients treated with
radiation for FIGO stage IB disease, Eifel and colleagues 188 reported a highly significant independent correlation between histologic features and survival. Using Cox
regression analysis, the relative risk of death from cancer for 106 patients with adenocarcinomas 4 cm or more in diameter was determined to be 1.9 times that for
patients with squamous tumors (P <.01) (Fig. 36.2-3). Pelvic disease control rates were similar for patients with squamous carcinomas and those with
adenocarcinomas, but there was a significantly higher incidence of distant metastases in patients with adenocarcinomas. Although the prognostic significance of
histologic grade has been disputed for squamous carcinomas, there is a clear correlation between the degree of differentiation and the clinical behavior of
adenocarcinomas.189,192,193,194 and 195

FIGURE 36.2-3. Relationship between histologic type and the disease-specific survival rates of 903 patients treated at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center for stage IB
carcinomas of the cervix measuring 4 cm or greater in diameter. Numbers in parentheses represent the number of patients at risk at 10 or 20 years. AC,
adenocarcinoma; SCC, squamous cell carcinoma. (Reprinted from ref. 188, with permission.)

Several studies have demonstrated a relationship between hemoglobin level and prognosis in patients with locally advanced cervical cancer. 196,197 and 198 The strongest
evidence that anemia plays a causative role in pelvic recurrence comes from a small 1978 randomized study conducted at the Princess Margaret Hospital. 196 All
patients were maintained at a hemoglobin level of at least 10 gm%, but those in the treatment arm were maintained, through the use of transfusions, at hemoglobin
levels of at least 12.5 gm%. The locoregional recurrence rate was significantly higher for the 25 anemic patients in the control arm than it was for the patients who
received transfusions. Unfortunately, the results of this small study have never been confirmed, and subsequent studies aimed at overcoming the theoretical
radiobiologic consequences of intratumoral hypoxia (hypoxic cell sensitizers, hyperbaric oxygen breathing, neutron therapy) have not been

successful. 199,200,201,202,203,204 and 205 Several investigators have correlated low intratumoral oxygen tension levels with a high rate of lymph node metastases and poor
survival. 206,207 and 208
The serum concentration of squamous cell carcinoma antigen appears to correlate with the stage and size of squamous carcinomas and the presence of lymph node
metastases.209,210,211 and 212 However, investigators disagree about the independent predictive value of this test. Other clinical and biologic features that have been
investigated for their predictive power, with variable results, include patient age, 158,213,214,215 and 216 peritoneal cytology, 217,218 platelet count, 219,220 tumor vascularity, 221,222
DNA ploidy or S phase,223,224 and HPV subtype.35,225,226 In two studies of patients with histologically negative lymph nodes, investigators have reported higher rates of
disease recurrence when a polymerase chain reaction assay of the lymph nodes was strongly positive for HPV DNA. 227,228
TREATMENT
A number of factors may influence the choice of local treatment, including tumor size, stage, histologic features, evidence of lymph node involvement, risk factors for
complications of surgery or radiation, and patient preference. However, as a rule, intraepithelial lesions are treated with superficial ablative techniques; microinvasive
cancers invading less than 3 mm (stage IA1) are managed with conservative surgery (excisional conization or extrafascial hysterectomy); early invasive cancers
(stages IA2 and IB1 and some small stage IIA tumors) are managed with radical surgery or radiotherapy; and locally advanced cancers (stages IB2 through IVA) are
managed with radiotherapy. Selected patients with centrally recurrent disease after maximum radiotherapy may be treated with radical exenterative surgery; pelvic
recurrence after hysterectomy is treated with irradiation. The results of randomized trials 229,230,231,232 and 233 have led to the addition of concurrent cisplatin-containing
chemotherapy to radiotherapy for patients whose cancers have a high risk of local-regional recurrence.
Preinvasive Disease (Stage 0)
Patients with noninvasive squamous lesions can be treated with superficial ablative therapy (cryosurgery or laser therapy) or with loop excision if (1) the entire
transformation zone has been visualized colposcopically, (2) directed biopsies are consistent with Pap smear results, (3) endocervical curettage findings are negative,
and (4) there is no suspicion of occult invasion on cytologic or colposcopic examination. If patients do not meet these criteria, a conization should be performed.
With cryotherapy, abnormal tissue is frozen with a supercooled metal probe until an ice ball forms that extends 5 mm beyond the lesion. Because cryonecrosis tends
to be patchy and may be inadequate after a single freeze, the tissue should be frozen a second time after it has visibly thawed. 234,235 Another common and equally
effective technique ablates tissue with a carbon dioxide laser beam. After laser ablation there is less distortion and more rapid healing of the cervix, but the procedure
requires more training and more expensive equipment than does cryosurgery.
Many practitioners now consider loop diathermy excision to be the preferred treatment for noninvasive squamous lesions. With this technique, a charged electrode is
used to excise the entire transformation zone and distal canal. Although control rates are similar to those achieved with cryotherapy or laser ablation, 236 loop
diathermy is easily learned, is less expensive than laser excision, and preserves the excised lesion and transformation zone for histologic evaluation. 237,238,239 and 240
However, some authorities think that low-grade lesions may be overtreated with this method. 241 Because loop excision may inadequately treat disease within the
cervical canal and complicate further treatment, this technique should not be considered an alternative to formal excisional conization when microinvasive or invasive
cancer is suspected or for patients with AIS.
Cryotherapy, laser excision, and loop excision are all outpatient office procedures that preserve fertility. Although recurrence rates are low (10% to 15%) and
progression to invasion rare (less than 2% in most series), life long surveillance of these patients must be maintained. The risk of recurrence may be somewhat
increased in women with HPV type 16 or 18. 236 Treatment with vaginal or type I abdominal hysterectomy currently is reserved for women who have other gynecologic
conditions that justify the procedure; invasive cancer still must be excluded before surgery to rule out the need for a more extensive operative procedure.
Microinvasive Carcinoma (Stage IA)
The standard treatment for patients with stage IA1 disease is total (type I) or vaginal hysterectomy. Because the risk of pelvic lymph node metastases from these
minimally invasive tumors is less than 1%, pelvic lymph node dissection is not usually recommended. 71,123,242
Selected patients with tumors that meet the Society of Gynecologic Oncologists' definition of microinvasion (FIGO stage IA1 disease without LVSI) and who wish to
maintain fertility may be adequately treated with a therapeutic cervical conization if the margins of the cone are negative. In 1991, Burghardt et al. 243 reported one
recurrence (which was fatal) in 93 women followed for more than 5 years after therapeutic conization for minimal (less than 1 mm) microinvasion. Morris et al. 244
reported no invasive recurrences in 14 patients followed for a mean of 26 months after conization for tumors invading 0.5 to 2.8 mm. However, patients who have this
conservative treatment must be followed closely with periodic cytologic evaluation, colposcopy, and endocervical curettage.
Diagnostic or therapeutic conization for microinvasive disease is usually performed with a cold knife or carbon dioxide laser on a patient under general or spinal
anesthesia. Because an accurate assessment of the maximum depth of invasion is critical, the entire specimen must be sectioned and carefully handled to maintain
its original orientation for microscopic assessment. Complications occur in 2% to 12% of patients, are related to the depth of the cone, and include hemorrhage,
sepsis, infertility, stenosis, and cervical incompetence. 245 The width and depth of the cone should be tailored to produce the least amount of injury while providing
clear surgical margins.
For patients whose tumors invade 3 to 5 mm into the stroma (FIGO stage IA2), the risk of nodal metastases is approximately 5%. 65,99 Therefore, a bilateral pelvic
lymphadenectomy should be performed in conjunction with a modified radical (type II) hysterectomy. Modified radical hysterectomy is a less extensive procedure than
a classic radical hysterectomy ( Fig. 36.2-4). The cervix, upper vagina, and paracervical tissues are removed after careful dissection of the ureters to the point of their
entry to the bladder. The medial half of the cardinal ligaments and the uterosacral ligaments are also removed. With this treatment, significant urinary tract
complications are rare and cure rates exceed 95%. 246,247 and 248

FIGURE 36.2-4. The pelvic ligaments and spaces. Dotted lines indicate the tissues removed with a type II or type III hysterectomy. (Reprinted from ref. 541, with
permission.)

Although surgical treatment is standard for in situ and microinvasive cancer, patients with severe medical problems or other contraindications to surgical treatment can
be successfully treated with radiotherapy. Grigsby and Perez 249 reported a 10-year progression-free survival rate of 100% in 21 patients with carcinoma in situ and in
34 patients with microinvasive carcinoma treated with radiation alone. Hamberger et al. 250 reported that all patients with stage IA disease and 89 (96%) of 93 patients
with small stage IB disease (less than one cervical quadrant involved) were disease free 5 years after treatment with intracavitary irradiation alone.

Stages IB and IIA
Early stage IB cervical carcinomas can be treated effectively with combined external-beam irradiation and brachytherapy or with radical hysterectomy and bilateral
pelvic lymphadenectomy. The goal of both treatments is to destroy malignant cells in the cervix, paracervical tissues, and regional lymph nodes. Studies indicate that
selected subgroups of patients who require radiotherapy also benefit from concurrent chemotherapy. 229,230 and 231
Overall survival rates for patients with stage IB cervical cancer treated with surgery or radiation usually range between 80% and 90%, suggesting that the two
treatments are equally effective (Table 36.2-7).63,66,67,72,148,149,251,252,253,254,255,256,257,258,259,260,261 and 262 However, biases introduced by patient selection, variations in the
definition of stage IA disease, and variable indications for postoperative radiotherapy or adjuvant hysterectomy confound comparisons about the efficacy of
radiotherapy versus surgery. Because young women with small, clinically node-negative tumors tend to be favored candidates for surgery and because tumor
diameter and nodal status are inconsistently described in published series, it is difficult to compare the results reported for patients treated with the two modalities.

TABLE 36.2-7. Five-Year Survival Rates for Patients with International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics Stage IB Carcinoma of the Cervix

In 1997, Landoni and colleagues reported results from the only prospective trial comparing radical surgery with radiotherapy alone. 263 In their study, patients with
stage IB or IIA disease were randomly assigned to receive treatment with type III radical hysterectomy or a combination of external-beam and low dose-rate
intracavitary radiotherapy. In the surgical arm, findings of parametrial involvement, positive margins, deep stromal invasion, or positive nodes led to the use of
postoperative pelvic irradiation in 62 (54%) of 114 patients with tumors 4 cm or smaller in diameter and in 46 (84%) of 55 patients with tumors measuring less than 4
cm. Patients in the radiotherapy arm received a relatively low total dose of radiation to the cervix, with a median dose to point A of 76 Gy. With a median follow-up of
87 months, the 5-year actuarial disease-free survival rates for patients treated in the surgery and radiotherapy groups were 80% and 82%, respectively, for patients
with tumors that were 4 cm or smaller and 63% and 57%, respectively, for patients with larger tumors. The authors reported a significantly higher rate of complications
in the patients treated with initial surgery, and they attributed this finding to the frequent use of combined modality treatment in this group.
For patients with stage IB1 squamous carcinomas, the choice of treatment is based primarily on patient preference, anesthetic and surgical risks, physician
preference, and an understanding of the nature and incidence of complications with radiotherapy and hysterectomy (described in detail here). For patients with similar
tumors, the overall rate of major complications is similar with surgery and radiotherapy, although urinary tract complications tend to be more frequent after surgical
treatment and bowel complications are more common after radiotherapy. Surgical treatment tends to be preferred for young women with small tumors because it
permits preservation of ovarian function and may cause less vaginal shortening. Radiotherapy is often selected for older, postmenopausal women to avoid the
morbidity of a major surgical procedure.
Some surgeons have also advocated the use of radical hysterectomy as initial treatment for patients with stage IB2 tumors. 264,265 and 266 However, patients who have
tumors measuring more than 4 cm in diameter usually have deep stromal invasion and are at high risk for lymph node involvement and parametrial extension.
Because patients with these risk factors have an increased rate of pelvic disease recurrence, surgical treatment is usually followed by postoperative irradiation, which
means that the patient is exposed to the risks of both treatments. Consequently, many gynecologic and radiation oncologists believe that patients with bulky (stage
IB2) carcinomas are better treated with radical radiotherapy.
Two prospective randomized trials 229,230 indicate that patients who are treated with radiation for bulky central disease benefit from concurrent administration of
cisplatin-containing chemotherapy. A third study suggests that patients who require postoperative radiation because of findings of lymph node metastasis or involved
surgical margins also benefit from concurrent chemoradiation. 231 These studies are discussed in more detail in the following sections.
RADICAL HYSTERECTOMY. The standard surgical treatment for stage IB and stage IIA cervical carcinomas is radical (type III) hysterectomy and bilateral pelvic lymph

node dissection. This procedure involves en bloc removal of the uterus, cervix, and paracervical, parametrial, and paravaginal tissues to the pelvic side walls
bilaterally, with removal of as much of the uterosacral ligaments as possible (see Fig. 36.2-4). The uterine vessels are ligated at their origin, and the proximal third of
the vagina and paracolpium are resected. For women younger than 40 to 45 years, the ovaries usually are not removed. If intraoperative findings suggest a need for
postoperative pelvic irradiation, the ovaries may be transposed out of the pelvis.
Intraoperative and immediate postoperative complications of radical hysterectomy include blood loss (average 0.8 L), ureterovaginal fistula (1% to 2%), vesicovaginal
fistula (less than 1%), pulmonary embolus (1% to 2%), small bowel obstruction (1% to 2%), and postoperative fever secondary to deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary
infection, pelvic cellulitis, urinary tract infection, or wound infection (25% to 50%). 267 Subacute complications include lymphocyst formation and lower extremity edema,
the risk of which is related to the extent of the node dissection. Lymphocysts may obstruct a ureter, but hydronephrosis usually improves with drainage of the
lymphocyst.268 The risk of complications may be increased in patients who receive preoperative or postoperative irradiation.
Although most patients have transient decreased bladder sensation after radical hysterectomy, with appropriate management severe long-term bladder complications
are infrequent. However, chronic bladder hypotonia or atony occurs in approximately 3% to 5% of patients, despite careful postoperative bladder drainage. 269,270
Bladder atony probably results from damage to the bladder's innervation and may be related to the extent of the parametrial and paravaginal dissection. 271,272 Radical
hysterectomy may be complicated by stress incontinence, but reported incidences vary widely and may be influenced by the addition of postoperative
radiotherapy. 273,274 Patients may also experience constipation and, rarely, chronic obstipation after radical hysterectomy.
RADIOTHERAPY AFTER RADICAL HYSTERECTOMY. The role of postoperative irradiation in patients with cervical carcinoma is still being defined. Most investigators have

reported that postoperative irradiation decreases the risk of pelvic recurrence in patients whose tumors have high-risk features (lymph node metastasis, deep stromal
invasion, insecure operative margins, or parametrial involvement). 275,276,277,278,279 and 280 However, because the patients who received postoperative radiotherapy in
these studies were selected for the high-risk features of their tumors, it is difficult to determine the impact of adjuvant irradiation on survival.
The GOG281 reported results of a prospective trial testing the benefit of adjuvant pelvic irradiation in patients who have an intermediate risk of recurrence after radical
hysterectomy for stage IB carcinoma. Patients were eligible if they had at least two of the following risk factors: greater than one-third stromal invasion, lymphatic
space involvement, or clinical diameter of at least 4 cm. Patients with metastases to the pelvic lymph nodes were excluded. After radical hysterectomy, 277 patients
were randomly assigned to receive 46.0 to 50.6 Gy of adjuvant radiotherapy to the pelvis or no further treatment. Overall, there was a 47% reduction in the risk of
recurrence with adjuvant radiotherapy (P = .008). In this preliminary analysis, follow-up was too immature for a significance level to be assigned to the overall survival
comparison, but there were 18 deaths (13%) in the radiotherapy arm versus 30 (21%) in the radical hysterectomy only arm (relative mortality, 0.64). 281
Although pelvic irradiation also reduces the risk of recurrence for patients with pelvic lymph node metastases or parametrial involvement, the risk of pelvic and distant
recurrence remains high for these women.278,282 Some authors have hypothesized that the dose of radiation that can be given safely after surgery may be inadequate
to control microscopic disease in a surgically disturbed, hypovascular site. 283 If this were true, it would be an argument for primary radiotherapeutic management of

tumors with known high-risk features. Preliminary results of a prospective study conducted by the Southwest Oncology Group suggest that administration of
cisplatin-containing chemotherapy concurrent with adjuvant pelvic irradiation may improve the rate of control of pelvic disease and the rate of survival for patients with
lymph node metastases, parametrial involvement, or involved surgical margins. 231
The overall risk of major complications (particularly small bowel obstruction) is probably increased in patients who receive postoperative pelvic irradiation, but
inconsistencies in the methods of analysis and the relatively small number of patients in most series make studies of this subject difficult to
interpret. 263,265,280,284,285,286,287 and 288 Bandy et al.289 reported that patients who were irradiated after hysterectomy had more long-term problems with bladder contraction
and instability than those treated with surgery alone.
RADICAL RADIOTHERAPY. Radiotherapy also achieves excellent survival and pelvic disease control rates in patients with stage IB cervical cancers. Eifel et al.

148

reported a 5-year disease-specific survival rate of 90% for 701 patients treated with radiation alone for stage IB1 squamous tumors less than 4 cm in diameter. The
central and pelvic tumor control rates were 99% and 98%, respectively. Disease-specific survival rates were 86% and 67% for patients with tumors measuring 4.0 to
4.9 cm or 5 cm or more in diameter, respectively. Pelvic tumor control was achieved in 82% of patients with tumors of 5 cm or more in diameter. Perez et al. 149 and
Lowrey et al.252 reported similar excellent disease control rates for patients with stage IB tumors treated with radiotherapy. Survival rates for patients with FIGO stage
IIA disease treated with irradiation range between 70% and 85% and are also strongly correlated with tumor size. 149,152,252 For patients with bulky tumors, studies
suggest that results may be improved further with concurrent administration of chemotherapy. 229,230
As with radical surgery, the goal of radiation treatment is to sterilize disease in the cervix, paracervical tissues, and regional lymph nodes in the pelvis. Patients are
usually treated with a combination of external-beam irradiation to the pelvis and brachytherapy. Clinicians balance external and intracavitary treatment in different
ways for these patients, weighting one or the other component more heavily. However, brachytherapy is a critical element in the curative radiation treatment of all
carcinomas of the cervix. Even relatively small tumors that involve multiple quadrants of the cervix are usually treated with total doses of 80 to 85 Gy to point A. The
dose may be reduced by 5% to 10% for small superficial tumors. Although patients with small tumors may be treated with somewhat smaller fields than patients with
more advanced locoregional disease, care must still be taken to cover adequately the obturator, external iliac, low common iliac, and presacral nodes. Radiation
technique is discussed in more detail in the next section.
IRRADIATION FOLLOWED BY HYSTERECTOMY. In a 1969 report from M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Durrance and colleagues

290

reported a lower pelvic recurrence rate
for patients with bulky endocervical tumors (greater than or equal to 6 cm) treated with external-beam and intracavitary irradiation followed by extrafascial
hysterectomy than for those treated with radiation alone. Many groups subsequently adopted combined treatment as a standard approach to bulky stage IB or IIA
disease. However, in a 1992 update of the M. D. Anderson experience, Thoms and colleagues 157 suggested that the differences observed in earlier reports may have
resulted from a tendency to select patients with massive tumors (greater than or equal to 8 cm) or clinically positive nodes for treatment with radiation alone. When
these patients were excluded, pelvic disease control rates were similar with the two approaches.
In 1991, Mendenhall et al. 291 reported no difference in pelvic disease control or survival rates for patients treated before or after the University of Florida adopted a
policy (in the mid-1970s) of using combined treatment for patients with bulky (greater than or equal to 6 cm) tumors. In a study of 1526 patients with stage IB
squamous carcinomas, Eifel and colleagues 148 reported central tumor recurrence rates of less than 10% for tumors as large as 7.0 to 7.9 cm treated with radiation
alone, suggesting that the margin for possible improvement with adjuvant hysterectomy is small. Perez and Kao 292 also found that central recurrences were rare if
adequate doses of irradiation (greater than 80 Gy to point A) were delivered. Addition of concurrent chemotherapy should further reduce the margin for improvement
with adjuvant hysterectomy.230
There is, therefore, no clear evidence that adjuvant hysterectomy improves the outcome of patients with a bulky stage IB or IIA tumor, although many clinicians
continue to recommend combined treatment.293 When combined treatment is planned, the dose of intracavitary irradiation is usually reduced by 15% to 25%. A type I,
extrafascial hysterectomy is usually performed, in which the cervix, adjacent tissues, and a small cuff of the upper vagina in a plane outside the pubocervical fascia
are removed. This procedure involves minimal disturbance of the bladder and ureters. Intrafascial hysterectomy is not used for cervical cancer because it does not
remove all cervical tissue, 294 and radical hysterectomy is avoided after high-dose irradiation because of an increased risk of urinary tract complications. 295
In 1991, the GOG completed a prospective randomized trial of irradiation with or without extrafascial hysterectomy in patients with stage IB tumors of 4 cm or more in
diameter. Preliminary analysis demonstrated no significant improvement in the survival rate of patients who had an adjuvant hysterectomy. 296
CHEMOTHERAPY FOLLOWED BY RADICAL SURGERY. During the 1990s, a number of investigators reported the results of treating patients with bulky stage IB or stage II

cervical carcinomas with a combination of neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by radical surgery. 297,298 and 299 Neoadjuvant chemotherapy has usually included
cisplatin and bleomycin plus one or two other drugs ( Table 36.2-8). The results of uncontrolled studies cannot be easily compared with the results with more
traditional treatments because the series are small and often have short follow-up and the criteria for patient selection are not always clear. Some or all of the patients
in each of these series received postoperative pelvic irradiation, but detailed descriptions of this additional treatment are not always given. Only one prospective
randomized trial has compared radical hysterectomy followed by postoperative radiotherapy with chemotherapy followed by surgery and irradiation. 299 In this study,
Sardi et al. observed similar outcomes with the two treatments for patients who had tumors smaller than 60 cm 3 (measured ultrasonographically), but they reported a
significantly better projected 4-year disease-free survival with neoadjuvant chemotherapy for patients who had larger tumors. However, most patients had been
followed for less than 3 years at the time of the report. Ultimately, the cost and morbidity of this triple-modality treatment may only be justified if it proves to be more
effective than treatment with radiation or chemoradiation alone. However, studies comparing these approaches have not yet been reported.

TABLE 36.2-8. Response Rates to Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy in Patients with Previously Untreated Locally Advanced Cervical Cancer

Stages IIB, III, and IVA
Radiotherapy is the primary local treatment for most patients with locoregionally advanced cervical carcinoma. The success of treatment depends on a careful
balance between external-beam radiotherapy and brachytherapy, optimizing the dose to tumor and normal tissues and the overall duration of treatment. Five-year
survival rates of 65% to 75%, 35% to 50%, and 15% to 20% are reported for patients treated with radiotherapy alone for stage IIB, IIIB, and IV tumors,
respectively.134,149,152,154,214,252 In a French Cooperative Group study of 1875 patients treated with radiotherapy according to Fletcher guidelines, Barillot et al. 152
reported 5-year survival rates of 70%, 45%, and 10% for patients with stage IIB, IIIB, and IVA tumors, respectively ( Fig. 36.2-5). With appropriate radiotherapy, even
patients with massive locoregional disease have a significant chance for cure.

FIGURE 36.2-5. Relationship between International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage and the actuarial survival rates of 1383 patients with invasive
carcinoma of the cervix treated with radiotherapy. (Reprinted from ref. 253, with permission.)

External-beam irradiation is used to deliver a homogeneous dose to the primary cervical tumor and to potential sites of regional spread. An initial course of external
irradiation may also improve the efficacy of subsequent intracavitary treatment by shrinking bulky endocervical tumor (bringing it within the range of the high-dose
portion of the brachytherapy dose distribution) and by shrinking exophytic tumor that might prevent satisfactory placement of vaginal applicators. For this reason,
patients with locally advanced disease usually begin with a course of external-beam treatment. Subsequent brachytherapy exploits the inverse square law to deliver a
high dose to the cervix and paracervical tissues while minimizing the dose to adjacent normal tissues.
Although many clinicians delay intracavitary treatment until pelvic irradiation has caused some initial tumor regression, breaks between external-beam and
intracavitary therapy should be discouraged, and every effort should be made to complete the entire treatment in less than 7 to 8 weeks. The favorable results
documented in reports from large single-institution studies have been based on policies that dictate relatively short overall treatment durations (less than 8 weeks), 300
and several studies in patients with locally advanced cervical cancer have suggested that longer treatment courses are associated with decreased pelvic disease
control and survival rates. 301,302,303,304 and 305
EXTERNAL-BEAM TECHNIQUE. High-energy photons (15 to 18 MV) are usually preferred for pelvic treatment because they spare superficial tissues that are unlikely to

be involved with tumor. At these energies, the pelvis can be treated either with four fields (anterior, posterior, and lateral fields) or with anterior and posterior fields
alone (Fig. 36.2-6). When high-energy beams are not available, four fields are usually used because less-penetrating 4- to 6-MV photons often deliver an
unacceptably high dose to superficial tissues when only two fields are treated. However, lateral fields must be designed with great care because clinicians' estimates
of the location of potential sites of disease on a lateral radiographic view may be inaccurate. In particular, standard anterior and posterior borders that have been
described in the past may shield regions at risk for microscopic regional disease in the presacral and external iliac nodes and in the presacral and cardinal ligaments;
care must also be taken not to underestimate the posterior extent of central cervical disease in patients with bulky tumors. 306,307 and 308

FIGURE 36.2-6. Typical fields used to treat the pelvis with a four-field technique. When lateral fields are used to treat cervical cancers, particular care must be taken
to adequately encompass the primary tumor and potential sites of regional spread in the radiation fields.

The caudad extent of disease can be determined by placing radiopaque seeds in the cervix or at the lowest extent of vaginal disease. Information gained from
radiologic studies can also improve estimates of disease extent. Lymphangiograms are helpful in tailoring blocks, particularly at the anterior border of lateral fields.
MRI and CT scans can improve clinicians' understanding of uterine position and thus help clinicians design anterior and posterior field borders. In fact, some
investigators have argued that these studies should be obtained routinely for patients with bulky disease to avoid errors in lateral field design. 309 However, when all
these factors are considered, differences in the volume treated with a four-field or a high-energy two-field technique may be small. For this reason, some clinicians
prefer to use the simpler technique for patients with bulky tumors.
Tumor response should be evaluated with periodic pelvic examinations to determine the best time to deliver brachytherapy. Some practitioners prefer to maximize the
brachytherapy component of treatment and begin as soon as the tumor has responded enough to permit a good placement (with very bulky tumors this may still
require greater than or equal to 40 Gy). Subsequent pelvic irradiation is delivered with a central block. A somewhat higher total paracentral dose can be delivered with
this approach, but greater reliance is placed on the complex match between the brachytherapy dose distribution and the border of the central shield. This may result
in overdoses to medial structures such as the ureters 310 or underdosage of posterior uterosacral disease. 311 For these reasons, other clinicians prefer to give an initial
dose of 40 to 45 Gy to the whole pelvis, believing that the ability to deliver a homogeneous distribution to the entire region at risk for microscopic disease and the
additional tumor shrinkage achieved before brachytherapy outweighs other considerations. However, external-beam doses of more than 40 to 50 Gy to the central
pelvis tend to compromise the dose deliverable to paracentral tissues and increase the risk of late complications. 154
ROLE OF PARAAORTIC IRRADIATION. The role of ex- tended field irradiation in the treatment of cervix cancer is still being defined. Numerous small series of patients

with documented paraaortic node involvement demonstrate that some enjoy long-term survival (see Table 36.2-5).77,80,140,161,162,163 and 164,166,167 Patients with microscopic
involvement have a better survival than do those with gross lymphadenopathy, but even 10% to 15% of patients with gross lymphadenopathy appear to be curable
with aggressive management. Survival is also strongly correlated with the bulk of central disease. A 1991 study by Cunningham et al. 167 reported a 48% 5-year
survival rate in patients who had paraaortic node involvement discovered at exploration for radical hysterectomy that was then aborted. This experience with patients
who had small, radiocontrollable primary disease demonstrates that patients with paraaortic node metastases can often be cured if their primary disease can be
sterilized. This indicates that patients may have extensive regional spread without distant metastases and provides an argument for surgical staging in high-risk
patients.
Two randomized prospective trials have addressed the role of prophylactic paraaortic irradiation in patients without known paraaortic node involvement. In a study
conducted by the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group, 367 patients with primary stage IIB or stage IB or IIA tumors more than 4 cm in diameter were randomly
assigned to receive either standard pelvic radiotherapy or extended-field radiotherapy before brachytherapy. 312 No consistent method was used to evaluate the
paraaortic nodes. For the 337 evaluable patients, absolute survival was significantly better for those treated with extended fields than for those treated with standard
pelvic radiotherapy (67% vs. 55% at 5 years; P = .02) (Fig. 36.2-7). There was no significant difference in disease-free survival ( P = .56).

FIGURE 36.2-7. Overall survival rates for patients with stage IB, IIA, or IIB carcinoma of the cervix treated with irradiation to the pelvis alone or to the pelvic and
paraaortic nodes on Radiation Therapy Oncology Group study 79-20. (Reprinted from ref. 312, with permission.)

A second trial, from the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer, involved a similar randomization between pelvic irradiation and extended
fields but had very different eligibility criteria. 313 This study included patients with bulky stage IIB (involving distal vagina or lateral parametrium) and III disease and
patients with stage I disease or less bulky stage IIB disease who had positive pelvic nodes on lymphangiography or at surgery. The 4-year disease-free survival rates
for patients treated with pelvic or extended fields were not significantly different (49.8% and 53.3%, respectively). However, the rate of paraaortic node recurrence was
significantly higher in the pelvic field group, and for patients in whom local control was achieved, the rate of distant metastases was 2.8 times greater if treatment was
with pelvic irradiation only ( P <.01).
Both studies revealed an increased rate of enteric complications in patients treated with extended fields. In the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group study, 312 most
small bowel obstructions occurred in patients who had undergone pretreatment transperitoneal staging. The European Organization for Research and Treatment of
Cancer 313 did not mention a relationship between surgical staging and enteric complications.
Taken together, these data clearly indicate that some paraaortic metastases are not detected by radiographic studies and that patients with occult disease can be
cured if the paraaortic nodes are included in radiation fields. However, the addition of concurrent chemotherapy to the regimen of many patients with locally advanced
disease increases the importance of careful selection of patients for large field irradiation because of the greater acute toxicity when chemotherapy is combined with
extended-field radiotherapy. 314,315 and 316
BRACHYTHERAPY TECHNIQUE. Fletcher described three conditions that should be met for successful cervical brachytherapy: (1) the geometry of the radioactive

sources must prevent underdosed regions on and around the cervix, (2) an adequate dose must be delivered to the paracervical areas, and (3) mucosal tolerance
must be respected.317 Although some clinicians have proposed a number of variations on the low-rate intracavitary brachytherapy techniques practiced at M. D.
Anderson, Fletcher's conditions continue to dictate the character, intensity, and timing of brachytherapy for cervical cancer.
Brachytherapy is usually delivered using afterloading applicators that are placed in the uterine cavity and vagina. A number of different intracavitary systems have
been used; in the United States, variations of the Fletcher-Suit-Delclos low dose-rate system are still used most commonly. 293,317,318,319 and 320 The intrauterine tandem
and vaginal applicators are carefully positioned, usually with the patient under anesthesia, to provide an optimal relationship between the system and adjacent tumor
and normal tissues. Vaginal packing is used to hold the tandem and colpostats in place and to maximize the distance between the sources and the bladder and
rectum. Radiographs should be obtained at the time of insertion to verify accurate placement, and the system should be repositioned if positioning can be improved.
Encapsulated radioactive sources are inserted in the applicators after the patient has returned to her hospital bed, reducing exposure to personnel during applicator
placement. Remote afterloading devices that further reduce personnel exposure are often used in departments that treat many patients with gynecologic disease.
Although 226Ra was used to treat most patients before the 1980s, it has gradually been replaced by 137Cs, which produces a similar dose distribution and avoids the
radiation protection problems caused by the radon gas by-product of radium decay.
Brachytherapy Dose Ideal placement of the uterine tandem and vaginal ovoids produces a pear-shaped distribution, delivering a high dose to the cervix and
paracervical tissues and a reduced dose to the rectum and bladder ( Fig. 36.2-8).

FIGURE 36.2-8. Posteroanterior and lateral views of a Fletcher-Suit-Delclos applicator system in a patient with invasive carcinoma of the cervix. Units on the isodose
contours are cGy/h. A, point A; B, bladder reference point; R, rectal reference point.

Treatment dose has been specified in a number of ways, making it difficult to compare experiences. Paracentral doses are most frequently expressed at a single
point, usually designated point A. This reference point has been calculated in a number of different ways, but it is usually placed 2 cm lateral and 2 cm superior to the
external cervical os, in the central plane of the intracavitary system (see Fig. 36.2-8). Point A lies approximately at the crossing of the ureter and the uterine artery, but
it bears no consistent relationship to the tumor or target volume. Point A was originally developed as part of the Manchester treatment system (a modification of the
earlier Paris system). It was meant to be used in the context of a detailed set of rules governing the placement and loading of the intracavitary system. Today this
context is often lost.
Other measures have been used to describe the intensity of intracavitary treatment. Mg-hrs or mgRaEq-hrs are proportional to the dose of radiation at relatively
distant points from the system and therefore give a sense of the dose to the whole pelvis. In 1985 the International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements
recommended use of total reference air Kerma, expressed in mGy at 1 m, as an alternative to mg-hrs that allows for the use of various radionuclides. 321 The
International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements also defined reference points for estimating the dose to the bladder and rectum. These points have
been widely, although not universally, accepted. Although normal tissue reference points provide useful information about the dose to a portion of normal tissue,
several studies have demonstrated that they consistently underestimate the maximum dose to those tissues. 322,323 and 324
Whatever system of dose specification is used, emphasis should always be placed on optimizing the relationship between the intracavitary applicators and the
cervical tumor and other pelvic tissues. Source strengths and positions should be carefully chosen to provide optimal tumor coverage without exceeding normal tissue
tolerance. However, optimized source placement can rarely correct for a poorly positioned applicator.
A detailed description of the characteristics of an ideal intracavitary system and of the considerations that influence source strength and position are beyond the
scope of this chapter but can be found elsewhere. 320,321,325 However, an effort should always be made to deliver at least 85 Gy (with low dose-rate brachytherapy) to
point A for patients with bulky central disease. If the intracavitary placement has been optimized, this can usually be accomplished without exceeding a dose of 75 Gy

to the bladder reference point or 70 Gy to the rectal reference point, doses that are usually associated with an acceptably low risk of major complications. 326,327 The
dose to the surface of the lateral wall of the apical vagina should not usually exceed 130 to 140 Gy. 325 Suboptimal placements occasionally force compromises in the
dose to tumor or normal tissues. To choose a treatment that optimizes the therapeutic ratio in these circumstances requires experience and a detailed understanding
of factors that influence tumor control and normal tissue complications.
A total dose (external-beam and intracavitary) of 50 to 55 Gy appears to be sufficient to sterilize microscopic disease in the pelvic nodes in most patients. It is
customary to boost the dose to a total of 60 to 65 Gy in lymph nodes known to contain gross disease and in heavily involved parametria.
Brachytherapy Dose Rate Traditionally, cervical brachytherapy has been performed with sources that yield a dose rate at point A of approximately 40 to 50 cGy/h.
These low dose rates permit repair of sublethal cellular injury, preferentially spare normal tissues, and optimize the therapeutic ratio. In an effort to reduce the 3 to 4
days of hospitalization needed to deliver an appropriate dose of low dose-rate irradiation, some investigators have explored the use of intermediate dose-rate
brachytherapy (80 to 100 cGy/h). However, in a randomized trial, Haie-Meder et al. 328 reported a significant increase in complications when the dose rate was doubled
from 40 to 80 cGy/h, indicating that the total dose must be reduced and the therapeutic ratio of treatment may be compromised with higher dose rates. On the basis of
laboratory studies, Amdur and Bedford have suggested that differences in the magnitude of the dose-rate effect between tumor and normal tissues may in part reflect
differences in the half-times for repair of sublethal radiation damage. 329
During the past two decades, computer technology has made it possible to deliver brachytherapy at very high dose rates (greater than 100 cGy/min) using a
high-activity 60Co or 192Ir source and remote afterloading. High dose-rate intracavitary therapy is now being used for radical treatment of cervical cancer by a number
of groups, including several in Japan, Canada, and Europe, and more recently by some groups in the United States. 330,331,332,333,334,335,336,337 and 338 Clinicians have found
this approach attractive because it does not require that patients be hospitalized and may be more convenient for the patient and the physician. However, unless it is
heavily fractionated, high dose-rate brachytherapy loses the radiobiologic advantage of low dose-rate treatment, potentially narrowing the therapeutic window for
complication-free cure. 339,340 Advocates of high dose-rate treatment disagree about the number of fractions and total dose that should be delivered. Published
experiences suggest that survival rates are roughly similar to those achieved with traditional low dose-rate treatment, but these experiences are difficult to compare
because of the same potential problems of selection bias that confound other nonrandomized comparisons. 336,339 Many of the retrospective reviews provide
incomplete descriptions of tumor and treatment details. 336 Two purported randomized trials 335,337 also have been criticized for methodologic flaws. The use of high
dose-rate brachytherapy for cervical cancer continues to be a source of controversy.
INTERSTITIAL BRACHYTHERAPY. Several groups have advocated the use of interstitial brachytherapy to treat patients whose anatomy or tumor distribution make it

difficult to obtain an ideal intracavitary placement. Interstitial implants are usually placed transperineally, guided by a Lucite template that encourages parallel
placement of hollow needles that penetrate the cervix and paracervical spaces; needles are usually loaded with 192Ir. Advocates of the procedure describe the
relatively homogeneous dose distribution achieved with this method, the ease of inserting implants in patients whose uteri are difficult to probe, and the ability to place
sources directly into the parametrium. Early reports were enthusiastic, describing these theoretical advantages and high initial local control rates, but these early
reports rarely included sufficient numbers of patients or had long enough follow-up to provide long-term survival rates. 341,342,343,344 and 345
In two of the larger early series, Syed and colleagues reported an encouraging projected 5-year survival rate of 53% for 26 patients with stage IIIB disease, 345 and
Martinez and colleagues reported an 83% local control rate in 37 patients with stage IIB and IIIB disease. 344 However, survival results from two more recent reports
have been disappointing. In a 1995 review of the combined experiences of Stanford and the Joint Center for Radiation Therapy, the 3-year disease-free survival rates
for patients with stage IIB and IIIB disease were only 36% and 18%, respectively. Local control rates were 22% and 44%, respectively, and for patients with local
control, the rate of complications requiring surgical intervention was high. 346 A 1997 report of the Irvine experience also described disappointing survival rates of 21%
and 29%, respectively, for stage IIB and IIIB, again with a high rate of major complications.
Several groups have been exploring the use of transrectal ultrasound, MRI, or laparoscopic guidance, 347,348 and 349 interstitial hyperthermia, 350 and high dose-rate
interstitial therapy 351 to improve local control and complication rates. However, outside of an investigational setting, interstitial treatment of primary cervical cancers
should probably be limited to patients who cannot accommodate intrauterine brachytherapy and patients with distal vaginal disease that requires a boost with
interstitial brachytherapy.
COMPLICATIONS OF RADICAL RADIOTHERAPY. During radiotherapy of the pelvis, most patients have mild fatigue and mild to moderate diarrhea that usually is

controllable with antidiarrheal medications; some patients have mild bladder irritation. When extended fields are treated, patients may have nausea, gastric irritation,
and mild depression of peripheral blood counts. Acute symptoms may be increased in patients receiving concurrent chemotherapy. Unless the ovaries have been
transposed, all premenopausal patients who receive pelvic radiotherapy experience ovarian failure by the completion of treatment.
Perioperative complications of intracavitary therapy include uterine perforation, fever, and the usual risks of anesthesia. Thromboembolisms are rare. 352,353 In a review
of 4043 patients who had 7662 intracavitary applications for cervical cancer, Jhingran and Eifel 354 reported 11 patients (0.3%) with thromboembolisms, four of which
were fatal. All four fatal pulmonary embolisms were in patients with advanced pelvic wall disease.
Estimates of the risk of late complications of radical radiotherapy vary according to the grading system, duration of follow-up, method of calculation, treatment method,
and prevalence of risk factors in the study population. However, most reports quote an overall risk of major complications (requiring transfusion, hospitalization, or
surgical intervention) of 5% to 15%. In a report from the Patterns of Care Study, Lanciano et al. 355 reported an actuarial risk of 8% at 3 years. In a study of 1784
patients with stage IB disease, Eifel et al. 356 reported an overall actuarial risk of major complications of 7.7% at 5 years. Although the actuarial risk was greatest during
the first 3 years of follow-up, there was a continuing risk to surviving patients of approximately 0.3% per year, resulting in an overall actuarial risk of 14% at 20 years.
In a 1999 review of 1456 patients treated with radiation alone, Perez et al. 326 reported a crude incidence of severe complications (requiring surgical intervention or
more than 4 weeks of hospitalization) of 5% for patients with stage IB cervical cancer and 9% to 10% for patients with more advanced disease.
During the first 3 years after treatment, rectal complications are most common and include bleeding, stricture, ulceration, and fistula. In the study by Eifel and
colleagues,356 the risk of major rectosigmoid complications was 2.3% at 5 years. Major gastrointestinal complications were rare 3 years or more after treatment, but a
constant low risk of urinary tract complications persisted for many years ( Fig. 36.2-9). The actuarial risk of developing a fistula of any type was 1.7% at 5 years.

FIGURE 36.2-9. Rates of major rectal and urinary tract complications in 1784 patients with stage IB carcinomas of the cervix treated with radiotherapy. Complication
rates were calculated actuarially, and patients who died without experiencing a major complication were censored at the time of death. (Reprinted from ref. 356, with
permission.)

Small bowel obstruction is an infrequent complication of standard radiotherapy for patients without special risk factors. The risk is increased dramatically in patients
who have undergone transperitoneal lymph node dissection. 141,355,356 However, there appears to be little added risk if the operation is performed with a retroperitoneal
approach. 141 Other factors that can increase the risk of small bowel complications in patients treated for cervical cancer include pelvic inflammatory disease, thin body

habitus, and the use of high doses or large volumes of external-beam irradiation, particularly with low-energy treatment beams and large daily fraction
sizes.154,355,356,357 and 358
Most patients treated with radical radiotherapy have some agglutination and telangiectasia of the apical vagina. More significant vaginal shortening can occur,
particularly in elderly, postmenopausal women and those with extensive tumors treated with a high dose of irradiation. 356,359 Vaginal function can be optimized with
appropriate estrogen support and vaginal dilatation.
CONCURRENT CHEMORADIATION. Reports of five prospective randomized trials

229,230,231,232 and 233
have provided compelling evidence that the addition of concurrent

cisplatin-containing chemotherapy to standard radiotherapy improves the pelvic disease control and survival rates in selected patients with local, regionally advanced
cervical cancer. Although these studies differed in their inclusion criteria, treatment specifics, and control treatments, each demonstrated reduction in the relative risk
of recurrence of 30% to 50% with cisplatin-containing chemoradiation ( Table 36.2-9).

TABLE 36.2-9. Prospective Randomized Trials That Investigate the Role of Concurrent Radiotherapy and Cisplatin-Containing Chemotherapy for Patients with
Loco-Regionally Advanced Cervical Cancer

Individual investigators and multiinstitutional groups have been exploring combinations of chemotherapy and radiation in patients with cervical cancer for more than
25 years. However, until relatively recently, studies had failed to demonstrate a clear benefit. An early GOG study compared radiation alone with radiation and
concurrent hydroxyurea. 360 This study appeared to show some benefit from the combination, but it was criticized because many patients were treated without
brachytherapy or with very low doses of radiation and because 93 (49%) of the 190 patients randomized were excluded from the analysis as ineligible or unevaluable.
Nevertheless, the GOG continued to include hydroxyurea in the control arm of subsequent studies. The first of these 361 compared hydroxyurea (80 mg/kg given twice
per week during external-beam irradiation) with misonidazole, a nitroimidazole hypoxic cell sensitizer that has since been demonstrated to be of no benefit in several
trials that compared misonidazole with a placebo. 202,204 Final analysis of this study 361 showed a marginal advantage in progression-free survival ( P = .05) and survival
(P = .07) for patients treated with hydroxyurea.
Two subsequent GOG studies232,233 randomly assigned patients with stage IIB to IVA disease to receive either hydroxyurea or cisplatin-containing chemotherapy
during external-beam irradiation. All three of the cisplatin-containing arms had local control and survival rates superior to those for the control (hydroxyurea and
radiation) arms. In a third study, 229 patients with stage IB tumors measuring at least 4 cm in diameter were randomly assigned to receive radiation alone or radiation
plus weekly cisplatin before extrafascial hysterectomy. Patients who received cisplatin were more likely to have a complete histologic response and were more likely
to be disease free at the time of preliminary analysis. A fourth study, cosponsored by the Southwest Oncology Group and the GOG, 231 included patients who were
treated with radical hysterectomy and were found to have pelvic lymph node metastases, positive margins, or parametrial involvement. Patients were randomly
assigned to receive postoperative pelvic irradiation alone or combined with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). In a preliminary analysis, patients who received
chemotherapy in this study also had a better disease-free survival rate.
During this time, the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 230 also conducted a trial in which radiotherapy alone (including prophylactic paraaortic irradiation) was
compared with pelvic irradiation plus concurrent cisplatin and 5-FU. This is the only study in which chemotherapy was administered during both the brachytherapy and
external-beam components of treatment. The results of this trial were released early when highly significant differences were detected in the rates of local control,
distant metastasis, overall survival, and disease-free survival favoring the treatment arm that included chemotherapy. Although acute toxic effects of treatment were
greater with chemotherapy, the dose and duration of radiation were similar in the two arms, and in an early analysis, there was no significant difference in the
incidence of late treatment-related complications.
This work clearly demonstrates that the addition of concurrent cisplatin-containing chemotherapy benefited patients with locally advanced cervical cancer who were
treated with radiation in these studies. However, all of the studies explicitly excluded patients with evidence of paraaortic lymph node metastases, poor performance
status, or impaired renal function. In the future, clinicians will be challenged to determine how these favorable results can be generalized to patients with cervical
cancer who may not have been included in the prospective trials because of severe medical or social problems and to the developing nations where invasive cervical
cancer is epidemic.
These studies raise other interesting questions that will undoubtedly be the subjects of future studies. Of four different cisplatin-containing regimens, only two were
compared directly. It is unclear from the results which regimen achieves the most favorable therapeutic ratio and whether the inclusion of 5-FU in several of the
studies contributed importantly to the results. However, smaller studies have suggested that 5-FU is an effective radiation sensitizer in cervical cancers, 362,363 and the
GOG is currently comparing radiation plus continuous-infusion 5-FU with radiation and cisplatin in patients with locally advanced disease. Other drugs that are being
studied for their radiosensitizing effects in patients with advanced disease are paclitaxel, 364 carboplatin, 365 and mitomycin C.366,367 Extended-field irradiation (including
the aortic nodes) has proven effective in the treatment of patients with known or suspected aortic node metastasis, 312 but the role of extended-field irradiation needs to
be clarified in the context of these new results. Combinations of extended-field irradiation and chemotherapy appear to be feasible, but the acute toxicity is
considerable, and late toxicity may be greater than with extended-field radiation alone. 314,316,368
NEOADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY. A number of investigators have explored the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy for locally advanced cervical carcinoma, trying to

exploit the encouraging response rates that have been reported for multiple-agent, cisplatin-containing regimens in previously untreated patients (see Table
36.2-8).297,299,369,370,371,372,373,374,375,376,377,378,379,380,381,382,383,384 and 385 To test this approach, a number of prospective randomized trials were conducted comparing radiation
alone with neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by radiation ( Table 36.2-10).373,376,377,378,379,380 and 381 Unfortunately, of the seven trials that have been published,
five373,377,378,380,381 demonstrated no benefit from neoadjuvant therapy and two 376,379 demonstrated a significantly better survival rate with radiation alone. In one small
trial from South America,376 patients treated with bleomycin, vincristine, methotrexate, and cisplatin followed by radiation had a significantly poorer survival rate than
did those treated with radiation alone. In addition, patients who failed to complete radiotherapy (and were excluded from the analysis) were more frequent in the
neoadjuvant chemotherapy arm. Bleomycin toxicity (responsible for four of the deaths) contributed to the poor survival rate of patients treated with neoadjuvant
chemotherapy in this study. Tattersall and colleagues 379 compared neoadjuvant chemotherapy (cisplatin and epirubicin) followed by radiotherapy with radiotherapy
alone. This study was discontinued when an interim analysis revealed a significantly poorer outcome for patients who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy ( P = .02).

TABLE 36.2-10. Results of Prospective Randomized Trials That Compared Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy Followed by Radiation Therapy with Radiation Therapy Alone
in Patients with Locally Advanced Cervical Cancer

In another interesting study, published by Chauvergne and colleagues, 373 patients who had a complete or partial response to chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy
had a significantly better outcome than did those who had a poorer response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. However, there were no significant differences in the
overall response rates, disease-free survival rates, or median survival between patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy and those treated with radiation
alone.
In summary, despite the high rate of response of locally advanced cervical cancers to initial chemotherapy, none of the randomized studies reported to date has
demonstrated an improvement in outcome when neoadjuvant chemotherapy was added to radical radiotherapy. In many ways this recapitulates the experience with
treatment of locally advanced head and neck cancers, in which it has been hypothesized that the failure of neoadjuvant chemotherapy to influence outcome may
reflect cross-resistance of tumor cells to drugs and radiation or accelerated repopulation of tumor clones induced by neoadjuvant chemotherapy. 386,387 and 388
More recently, a number of investigators have begun to explore combinations of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with radical surgery in patients with bulky central
disease. 297,299,383,384 and 385,389 Only one randomized trial addressing this approach has been published, 299 although a number of other studies have been completed or
are in progress. In their study, Sardi and colleagues 299 randomly assigned 205 patients to receive radical hysterectomy with or without neoadjuvant chemotherapy. All
patients received postoperative pelvic irradiation. The authors reported a higher rate of resectability (100% vs. 85%) and a better survival rate (81% vs. 66%) for
patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. There have not yet been any comparisons between this approach and radiotherapy alone or combined with
chemotherapy.
INTRAARTERIAL CHEMOTHERAPY. Intraarterial infusion of chemotherapeutic agents delivered in the neoadjuvant setting, concurrent with radiotherapy, or as salvage

treatment for recurrent disease has generated interest for some years because of the distinct arterial supply to the central pelvis. 362,390,391 and 392 A number of drugs
have been used in small pilot studies, but 5-FU and cisplatin have been the most popular in this setting. Unfortunately, this technique is difficult and invasive, the
toxicity reported in some series has been substantial, and the results have been variable in several small series of patients. However, occasional optimistic reports
have maintained some interest in this approach, particularly for concurrent intraarterial chemotherapy and irradiation.
Stage IVB
Patients who present with disseminated disease almost always have incurable disease. The care of these patients must emphasize palliation of symptoms with
appropriate pain medications and localized radiotherapy. Tumors may respond to chemotherapy, but responses are usually short.
SINGLE-AGENT CHEMOTHERAPY. Many drugs have been studied for their activity in patients with recurrent or metastatic carcinoma of the cervix. Approximately 20 have

yielded response rates (partial and complete) of at least 15% and may be of therapeutic value ( Table
36.2-11).363,393,394,395,396,397,398,399,400,401,402,403,404,405,406,407,408,409,410,411,412,413,414,415,416,417,418,419,420,421,422,423,424,425,426,427,428 and 429

TABLE 36.2-11. Cytotoxic Drugs Active Against Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Cervix (Response Rate ³15%)

Several of the platinum compounds have been evaluated in greater detail. Cisplatin has been studied in a variety of doses and schedules. 409,411,412 These studies have
demonstrated activity of the drug at a dose of 50 mg/m 2 given intravenously at a rate of 1 mg/min every 3 weeks. Although there appears to be a small but statistically
significant increase in the response rate with a doubling of the dose to 100 mg/m 2, this has not resulted in a detectable improvement in the rates of progression-free or
overall survival. More prolonged infusion of the same dose over 24 hours yields a similar response rate with less nausea and vomiting, although the development of
more effective antiemetic agents reduces the clinical importance of this observation. The response rates with other platinum compounds (i.e., carboplatin and
iproplatin) are lower than those observed with cisplatin, which remains the platinum compound of choice for patients with cervical carcinomas.
Ifosfamide has been studied as a single agent in patients with recurrent cervical cancer in at least five phase II trials. 399,402,403,405,430 Response rates ranged between
33% and 50% in three studies that were conducted in patients who had received no previous chemotherapy. 399,403,405,430 However, the response rates were much lower
in two phase II trials that included patients who had received prior systemic chemotherapy, with only three partial responses (8%) in 36 patients. 399,402
COMBINATION CHEMOTHERAPY. Most reports of combination chemotherapy for carcinoma of the cervix have described small, uncontrolled phase II trials of drug

combinations that have included at least some agents with known activity. Although response rates have varied widely, data from these phase II studies provide no
firm evidence that any of the studied combinations are superior to single-agent therapy for patients with disseminated or recurrent cervical cancer. 431 However,
combinations based on ifosfamide and cisplatin and those based on 5-FU and cisplatin have attracted significant interest and deserve further discussion.
Several small phase II studies have evaluated treatment with combinations of ifosfamide and either cisplatin or carboplatin in patients who had not received prior
radiotherapy. Response rates for these combinations ranged between 50% and 62% ( Table 36.2-12).404,432,433 and 434 A number of investigators have combined
bleomycin with ifosfamide and a platinum compound. Three studies that included patients who had not had prior radiotherapy reported response rates of 65% to
100%.435,436 and 437 Reports of treatment with these drugs in previously irradiated patients have yielded mixed but generally lower response rates of between 13% and
72%.434,435,436,437 and 438

TABLE 36.2-12. Platinum-Containing Chemotherapy Combinations Used to Treat Cervical Carcinomas: Contrast between Results in Patients Treated before or after
Pelvic Irradiation

Combinations of cisplatin and continuous infusion 5-FU, 439,440 and 441 cisplatin and paclitaxel, 442 or cisplatin and vinorelbine 443 also produce high response rates in
previously untreated patients. Again, response rates decrease significantly if patients have had previous irradiation. 440,444
In 1996, the GOG445 reported results of a large prospective randomized trial comparing cisplatin alone with cisplatin plus ifosfamide and cisplatin plus mitolactol in
patients with advanced or recurrent cervical cancers. The addition of ifosfamide to cisplatin improved the response rate (33% vs. 19%, P = .02) and progression-free
survival rate (4.6 vs. 3.2 months, P <.05), but was associated with significantly greater toxicity (leukopenia, peripheral neuropathy, renal toxicity, and encephalopathy)
and did not significantly improve the overall median survival. The addition of mitolactol did not improve the response rate or survival duration. Other phase III
randomized trials that are ongoing or have been completed recently will evaluate the benefit of adding bleomycin to cisplatin and ifosfamide and will test the addition
of paclitaxel or topotecan to cisplatin.
PALLIATIVE RADIOTHERAPY. Localized radiotherapy can provide effective pain relief for symptomatic metastases in bone, brain, lymph nodes, or other sites. A rapid

course of pelvic radiotherapy can also provide excellent relief of pain and bleeding for patients who present with incurable disseminated disease. 446,447 and 448
Special Problems
TREATMENT OF LOCALLY RECURRENT CARCINOMA OF THE CERVIX.

After Radical Surgery. Patients should be evaluated for possible recurrent disease if a new mass develops; if, in irradiated patients, the cervix remains bulky or
nodular or cervical cytologic findings are abnormal 3 months or more after irradiation; or if symptoms of leg edema, pain, or bleeding develop after initial treatment.
The diagnosis must be confirmed with a tissue biopsy, and the extent of disease should be evaluated with appropriate radiographic studies, cystoscopy, proctoscopy,
and serum chemistry studies before treatment is administered.
The treatment of choice for patients who have an isolated pelvic recurrence after initial treatment with radical hysterectomy alone is aggressive radiotherapy.
Treatment for patients with an isolated central recurrence is similar to that for patients with a primary carcinoma of the vagina. Most patients are treated with
external-beam radiotherapy with or without brachytherapy. Implants may need to be inserted under laparoscopic or laparotomy guidance. Pelvic wall recurrences are
often treated with external-beam irradiation alone, although intraoperative therapy may contribute to local control in selected patients. 449,450 and 451 Reported survival
rates usually range between 20% and 40% for patients treated with radical radiotherapy. 452,453,454 and 455 Patients with central recurrence usually have a better
prognosis than those with pelvic wall recurrence. Ijaz and colleagues 452 reported a survival rate of 69% 5 years after radical radiotherapy for 16 patients who had
isolated vaginal recurrences that did not involve the pelvic wall. Only 18% of patients who had recurrences that were fixed to the pelvic wall or that involved pelvic
lymph nodes survived 5 years. Several authors have reported significantly lower salvage rates for patients with locally recurrent adenocarcinoma. 452,456 Thomas and
colleagues 457 reported encouraging results in a group of patients treated with radiation and concurrent chemotherapy, but further studies will be needed to determine
whether this approach is superior to radiotherapy alone.
After Definitive Irradiation. In some cases, patients who have an isolated central recurrence after radiotherapy can be cured with surgical treatment. Because the
extent of disease may be difficult to evaluate and the risk of serious urinary tract complications from pelvic surgery is high after high-dose radiotherapy, surgical
salvage treatment usually requires a total pelvic exenteration. Less extensive operations, such as radical hysterectomy or anterior exenteration, are reserved for
selected patients with small tumors confined to the cervix or lesions that do not encroach on the rectum, respectively. 458,459 and 460
Tumor involvement of the pelvic sidewall is a contraindication to exenteration but may be difficult to assess if there is extensive radiation fibrosis. The triad of
unilateral leg edema, sciatic pain, and ureteral obstruction almost always indicates unresectable disease on the sidewall. Although advanced age is usually
considered a contraindication to pelvic exenteration, Matthews and colleagues 461 reported a 5-year survival rate of 46% and an operative mortality of 11% for selected
patients who underwent exenteration at the age of 65 years or older compared with a 5-year survival rate of 45% and an operative mortality of 8.5% for younger
patients. In all cases, preparation for total pelvic exenteration must involve careful counseling of the patient and family regarding the extent of surgery and
postoperative expectations.
The operation begins with a thorough inspection of the abdomen for evidence of intraperitoneal spread or disease in the pelvic sidewall or paraaortic lymph nodes.
Despite careful preoperative evaluation, approximately 30% of operations are aborted intraoperatively. 462 Frozen section biopsies are done of suspicious areas. If the
biopsy findings are negative, the surgeon proceeds to remove the bladder, rectum, vagina, uterus, ovaries, fallopian tubes, and all other supporting tissues in the true
pelvis. A urinary conduit, a transverse or sigmoid colostomy, and a neovagina are created.
Postoperative recuperation may take as long as 3 months. The surgical mortality is less than 10%, with most postoperative complications and deaths related to
sepsis, pulmonary thromboembolism, and intestinal complications such as small bowel obstruction and fistula formation. 463,464 Gastrointestinal complications may be
reduced by using unirradiated segments of bowel and by closing pelvic floor defects with omentum, rectosigmoid colon, or myocutaneous flaps. 267 Advances in low
colorectal anastomosis and techniques for creating continent urinary reservoirs have improved the quality of life for selected patients. 465,466 and 467
The 5-year survival rates for patients who undergo anterior or total pelvic exenteration are 33% to 60% and 20% to 46%, respectively. 459,465,468,469 and 470 Several groups
are exploring the role of intraoperative irradiation to treat patients with recurrent disease that involves the pelvic wall. 449,450 and 451 However, patients with bulky central
disease, positive lymph nodes, or 1 year or less between initial treatment and exenteration have a poor prognosis. 469
TREATMENT AFTER SIMPLE HYSTERECTOMY WITH UNSUSPECTED INVASIVE CANCER. Every patient who undergoes a planned hysterectomy should be carefully screened

to rule out invasive cervical cancer before the procedure. 471 However, whenever an unexpected diagnosis of invasive cancer is made in a hysterectomy specimen, the
patient should be immediately referred for additional treatment because pelvic radiotherapy produces excellent pelvic disease control rates and survival rates for most
patients in this setting. 472,473,474 and 475
Patients may be classified according to the extent of disease at the time of referral for posthysterectomy treatment into the following groups: (1) microinvasive cancer,
(2) tumor confined to the cervix with negative surgical margins, (3) positive surgical margins but no gross residual tumor, (4) gross residual tumor by clinical
examination documented by biopsy, and (5) patients referred for treatment more than 6 months after hysterectomy (usually for recurrent disease). 472 In a report of the
results of radiotherapy in 123 patients, Roman et al. 475 reported survival rates of 79% and 59% for patients in groups 2 and 3, respectively. In contrast, the survival
rate for 30 patients with gross disease (groups 4 and 5) was 41% ( P = .0001).
Patients with less than 3 mm of invasion without lymph-vascular invasion usually require no treatment after simple hysterectomy. Patients with more extensive
involvement who have negative margins require 45 to 50 Gy of pelvic radiotherapy to treat the pelvic nodes and paracolpal tissues. Most clinicians follow this with

vaginal intracavitary therapy, delivering an additional vaginal surface dose of 30 to 50 Gy. Patients with positive margins may benefit from a somewhat higher dose of
external-beam irradiation through reduced fields designed to include the region at highest risk (e.g., parametria, posterior bladder wall). Patients in groups 3 and 4
reported in the series by Roman and colleagues 475 were usually treated with 65 Gy of external-beam therapy with or without intracavitary therapy. The role of
interstitial therapy in this setting is not well documented.

CARCINOMA OF THE CERVICAL STUMP
Although supracervical hysterectomy was once a popular treatment for benign uterine conditions, enthusiasm for the procedure has declined since the 1950s and it is
rarely performed today. As a result, carcinomas of the cervical stump are less common than they once were and are usually seen in elderly women. Tumors are
usually subclassified as coincidental tumors (diagnosed within 2 years of supracervical hysterectomy) or true cervical stump carcinomas (diagnosed less than 2 years
after hysterectomy). Tumors classified as coincidental were probably present at the time of supracervical hysterectomy and are said to have a relatively poor
prognosis, although the number of cases in most series is small.
The natural history, staging, and workup of cervical stump carcinomas are the same as for carcinomas of the intact uterus. If possible, the cervix should be probed at
the beginning of treatment to determine the length of the uterine canal. MRI may be an important aid to treatment planning in these patients.
Patients with stage IA1 disease may be treated with simple trachelectomy, and selected stage IA2 or small stage IB tumors may be treated with radical trachelectomy
and pelvic lymph node dissection. However, most patients are treated with irradiation alone using a combination of external-beam therapy and brachytherapy.
The altered geometry and short uterine canal in these patients complicate treatment planning. However, in most cases the endocervical canal is 2 cm or longer and,
after a course of external-beam irradiation, patients can be adequately treated with intracavitary therapy. The endocervical canal is usually loaded with 20 to 30
mgRaEq of cesium, depending on the length of the endocervical canal, and vaginal ovoids are loaded according to their diameter and position. Remote afterloading
systems provide somewhat greater flexibility in source loading. If the endocervical canal cannot accommodate any sources, a boost dose may be delivered to the
tumor with interstitial therapy, transvaginal irradiation, or reduced fields of external-beam irradiation. However, brachytherapy should be used whenever possible.
Barillot et al. 476 reported a survival rate of 81.5% for patients treated with combined brachytherapy and external-beam irradiation versus 38.5% for those treated with
external-beam irradiation alone. Several authors have advocated interstitial therapy, using techniques described for apical vaginal carcinomas, for patients with
bulkier lesions. Vaginal ovoids alone rarely deliver an adequate dose to the cervix.
Most investigators have reported survival rates similar to those for patients with carcinomas of the intact cervix. In a series of 263 patients, Miller and colleagues 477
reported survival rates of 91%, 77%, and 40% for patients with stage I, II, and III tumors, respectively. Similar survival rates have been reported in other large
series. 476,478,479 Miller and colleagues 477 reported a somewhat higher complication rate for cervical stump carcinomas than for carcinomas of the intact cervix, but
others have not observed this difference. 476,479
CARCINOMA OF THE CERVIX DURING PREGNANCY
Estimates of the incidence of invasive cervical cancer during pregnancy range from 0.02% to 0.9%. 480,481 Estimates of the incidence of pregnancy in patients with
invasive cervical cancer usually range between 0.5% and 5.0%. Hacker and colleagues 480 reported an incidence of cervical carcinoma in situ of 0.013% in pregnant
women.
Diagnosis is often delayed because bleeding is erroneously attributed to pregnancy-related complications. All pregnant patients should have a careful pelvic
examination and Pap smear at their first antenatal visit. Any suspicious lesion should be biopsied. If the Pap smear result is positive for malignant cells and the
diagnosis of invasive cancer cannot be made with colposcopy and biopsy, a diagnostic conization may be necessary. Because conization subjects the mother and
fetus to complications, it should be performed only in the second trimester and only in patients with inadequate colposcopy and strong cytologic evidence of invasive
cancer. Conization in the first trimester of pregnancy is associated with an abortion rate of up to 33%. 480,482 Conservative conization under colposcopic guidance may
reduce the risk. 483
It appears to be safe to delay definitive treatment of patients with carcinoma in situ or stage IA disease until the fetus has matured. 480,481,484 Patients with less than 3
mm of invasion and no LVSI may be followed to term and delivered vaginally. A vaginal hysterectomy may be performed 6 weeks after childbirth if further childbearing
is not desired. Patients with 3 to 5 mm of invasion and those with LVSI may also be followed to term. The infant may be delivered by a cesarean section, which is
followed immediately by modified radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection. 485
Patients with more than 5 mm of invasion should be treated as having frankly invasive carcinoma of the cervix. Treatment depends on the stage of gestation and the
wishes of the patient. Modern neonatal care affords a 75% survival rate for infants delivered at 28 weeks of gestational age and 90% for those delivered at 32 weeks.
Fetal pulmonary maturity can be determined by amniocentesis, and prompt treatment can be instituted when pulmonary maturity is documented. It is probably wise to
avoid delays in therapy of more than 4 weeks whenever possible although this guideline is controversial. 481,482,486 For most women with stage IB1 tumors, the
recommended treatment is classic cesarean section followed by radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymph node dissection. There should be a thorough discussion of the
risks and options with both parents before any treatment is undertaken.
Patients with stage II to IV tumors and some patients with bulky stage IB cervical cancers should be treated with radiotherapy. If the fetus is viable, it is delivered by
classic cesarean section and radiotherapy is begun postoperatively. If the pregnancy is in the first trimester, external-beam irradiation can be started with the
expectation that spontaneous abortion will occur before the delivery of 40 Gy. In the second trimester, a delay of therapy may be entertained to improve the chances
of fetal survival. If the patient wishes to delay therapy, it is important to ensure fetal pulmonary maturity before delivery is undertaken.
Compared with other cervical cancer patients, those with cervical cancer during pregnancy have slightly better overall survival because an increased proportion have
stage I disease. The diagnosis of cancer in the postpartum period tends to be associated with a more advanced clinical stage and a corresponding decrease in
survival. However, studies differ in their conclusions about whether pregnancy has an independent influence on the prognosis of patients with cervical cancer. 481,487,488
Patients who are diagnosed with invasive cervical cancer shortly after a vaginal delivery appear to be at risk for recurrence in the site of their episiotomy. At least 13
cases demonstrating this unusual pattern of failure have been reported. 489,490 and 491

CARCINOMA OF THE VAGINA
Carcinomas of the vagina are rare, accounting for only approximately 2% to 3% of gynecologic malignancies. 492,493 According to FIGO, cases should be classified as
vaginal carcinomas only when “the primary site of the growth is in the vagina.” 494 A tumor that is limited to the urethra should be classified as a primary urethral
cancer, and a tumor that has extended from the vulva to involve the vagina should be classified as a primary vulvar cancer. Also, according to FIGO, any tumor that
has extended to the cervical portio and has reached the area of the external os should be classified as a cervical carcinoma. For this reason, in patients with an intact
uterus, it is probable that many tumors that originated in the apical vagina are actually classified as cervical cancers. This may explain why a large percentage (30%
to 50%) of patients diagnosed with vaginal carcinoma have had a prior hysterectomy (preventing classification of their tumors as primary cervical cancers). 495,496,497 and
498

More commonly, the vagina is a site of metastasis or direct extension from tumors originating in other genital sites, such as the cervix or endometrium, or from
extragenital sites, including the rectum and bladder.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN) often accompanies CIN and is thought to have a similar etiology. 499 VAIN lesions are more often seen in the upper third of the
vagina and may be either extensions from adjacent areas of CIN or separate lesions. 500 Kalogirou and associates 501 found 41 cases of VAIN in 993 patients followed
with cytologic examination and colposcopy after hysterectomy for CIN. Most VAIN lesions were in the upper vagina, particularly in the vault angles of the suture line.

Because the vagina does not have a transformation zone of immature epithelial cells susceptible to HPV infection, HPV-induced vaginal lesions are thought to arise in
areas of squamous metaplasia that develop during healing of mucosal abrasions caused by coitus, tampon use, or other trauma. 499 Invasive vaginal carcinoma has
also been associated with chronic irritant vaginitis, particularly that caused by chronic use of a vaginal pessary. 502 Schraub et al. 503 reported that 80% of vaginal
cancers arising in patients who used pessaries were in the posterior fornix or posterior wall of the vagina. Investigators have also reported an association between
vaginal carcinoma and infection with HPV similar to that found for invasive cervical cancer. 502,504 Ikenberg and colleagues 504 found HPV DNA in 10 of 18 patients with
invasive vaginal cancer.
Pride and colleagues 505 suggested that pelvic irradiation might be a predisposing factor in some cases. However, viral and other risk factors independent of the mode
of treatment undoubtedly place some of these patients at risk for multiple primary tumors. In a review of 301 patients with vaginal cancer, Chyle and associates 495
found that 56 had a prior history of carcinoma in situ of the cervix, 22 had a history of invasive cervical cancer, and two had prior in situ carcinomas of the vagina.
Primary invasive carcinoma of the vagina is predominantly a disease of elderly women, with 70% to 80% of cases presenting in women older than 60 years. 494
However, FIGO data494 suggest that the age of peak incidence may have decreased since the early 1960s, when the highest incidence was among women in their
80s. Except for clear cell carcinomas, which are associated with maternal diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure, invasive vaginal carcinomas are extremely rare in women
younger than 40 years.494,506
In 1971, Herbst and colleagues 507 first reported a highly significant association between clear cell carcinomas of the vagina and maternal ingestion of DES during
pregnancy. This led to the establishment of a registry to gather information about cases of clear cell carcinoma in the United States. The peak number of
DES-associated cases occurred in 1975, when 33 were reported to the registry. 508 The peak risk period for exposed women in the United States is between the ages
of 15 and 22 years; the youngest patient reported was 7 years old. The oldest patient reported so far was 42 years old at diagnosis, but the risk to women older than
40 years is still unknown because women in the first exposed cohort are just reaching their fifth decade. Because only approximately 1 of every 1000 women exposed
to DES in utero develops clear cell carcinoma, 509 investigators have tried to define other risk factors for development of the disease. The risk of clear cell carcinoma
has been associated with initiation of DES early during pregnancy, a maternal history of early miscarriage, and premature birth. 508,510 Sharp and Cole510 found a
correlation between adolescent obesity in exposed girls and the development of vaginal clear cell carcinoma. Infection with HPV may be a cofactor in some cases. 511
Among 14 cases of clear cell carcinoma studies by Waggoner and colleagues, 511 three contained HPV 31 DNA; ten of the remaining HPV-negative tumors had p53
protein detected by immunohistochemistry, suggesting a mutation of p53.
Although the risk of clear cell carcinoma of the vagina is small in DES-exposed women, 45% of these patients have areas of vaginal adenosis, and 25% have
structural abnormalities of the uterus, cervix, or vagina. Fortunately, awareness of the risks of in utero DES exposure has led to a dramatic reduction in the use of high
doses of estrogen to prevent miscarriage, and the number of young women who need to be followed for this problem is declining. There is as yet no evidence that
DES-exposed women are at risk for malignancies other than clear cell carcinoma. 512
NATURAL HISTORY AND PATTERN OF SPREAD
Approximately 50% of vaginal cancers arise in the upper third of the vagina. 495,498,506,513 Although Plentl and Friedman 513 reported that tumors arise more commonly on
the posterior wall, more recent reviews have reported a more even distribution of lesions arising on the anterior, posterior, and lateral walls. 495,498 Tumors may exhibit
an exophytic or ulcerative, infiltrating pattern of growth.
Tumors may invade directly to involve adjacent structures such as the urethra, bladder, and rectum. Despite the proximity of these structures, fewer than 10% of
vaginal cancers are found to be stage IVA at presentation. 494,498,506,514 However, extensive infiltration of the suburethra or rectovaginal septum is common and
frequently influences treatment planning. Vaginal cancers may also spread laterally to the paravaginal space and pelvic wall. Although tumors arising in the vagina
undoubtedly can spread superiorly to involve the cervix and uterus, this usually leads to their classification as cervical cancers, according to FIGO convention.
The vagina is supplied with a fine anastomosing network of lymphatics in the mucosa and submucosa. Despite the continuity of lymphatic vessels within the vagina,
Plentl and Friedman 515 found a regular pattern of regional drainage from specific regions of the vagina. The lymphatics of the vaginal vault communicate with those of
the lower cervix, draining laterally to the obturator and hypogastric nodes. The lymphatics of the posterior wall anastomose with those of the anterior rectal wall,
draining to the superior and inferior gluteal nodes. The lymphatics of the lower third of the vagina communicate with those of the vulva and drain either to the pelvic
nodes or with the vulvar lymphatics to the inguinofemoral lymph nodes. Plentl and Friedman summarized their description of the lymphatic drainage of the vagina with
the comment that, except for the lateral external iliac group, all lymph nodes of the pelvis may at one time or other serve as primary sites of regional drainage for
vaginal lymph.515
Few data are available concerning the incidence of spread of vaginal cancer to the pelvic lymph nodes. In a review of early reports, Plentl and Friedman 515 quoted an
overall incidence of positive nodes of 21%. More recent studies suggest that the incidence of positive pelvic nodes in patients with stage II disease is at least 25% to
30%, emphasizing the importance of regional treatment for these patients. 516,517 Inguinal node metastases generally occur only in patients whose tumors involve the
lower third of the vagina. 495,514
The most frequent site of hematogenous metastasis is the lung. Less frequently, vaginal cancers may metastasize to liver, bone, or other sites. 494,495
PATHOLOGY
Eighty percent to 90% of primary vaginal malignancies are squamous cell carcinomas. 492,494 Grossly, these tumors may be nodular, ulcerative, or exophytic plaques of
any size. Histologically, they are similar to squamous tumors from other sites. Approximately one-third of these tumors are keratinizing, and more than one-half are
nonkeratinizing, moderately differentiated lesions.
Verrucous carcinoma is an uncommon variant of squamous cell carcinoma that presents as a warty, fungating mass. 518 Histologically, verrucous carcinoma is
composed of large papillary fronds covered by dense keratin. Its deep margin creates a pushing border of well-oriented rete ridges. This tumor rarely metastasizes but
can extensively infiltrate into surrounding tissues, including the rectum and coccyx. Wide surgical excision is the treatment of choice in this situation.
Approximately 5% to 10% of primary vaginal neoplasms are adenocarcinomas, although the incidence may vary with the proportion of women in the population who
were exposed to DES in utero.492,494,507 Clear cell carcinomas of the vagina are usually polypoid but may have tubulocystic or solid patterns. Adenocarcinomas not
associated with DES exposure occur primarily in postmenopausal women. The differential diagnosis of adenocarcinoma occurring in the vagina is often difficult, as it
must be distinguished from metastatic tumors originating in other sites. 519 Histologic patterns include clear cell, mucinous, adenosquamous, papillary, and
undifferentiated. It has been hypothesized that these tumors may arise in foci of adenosis, from mesonephric rests, or from foci of endometriosis in the vagina. 520,521
Primary small cell carcinomas of the vagina are rare; fewer than 20 cases have been reported in the literature. 522,523 and 524 They are histologically indistinguishable
from neuroendocrine small cell carcinomas of the lung or cervix and like these tumors may coexist with squamous or adenocarcinoma elements.
Primary vaginal melanomas represent approximately 3% of primary vaginal cancers and fewer than 20% of genital melanomas. 492,494 Primary vaginal melanomas are
thought to arise from melanocytes in areas of melanosis or atypical melanocytic hyperplasia. 525 They usually originate in the lower third of the vagina and occur at a
mean age of 55 years, with an age range of 22 to 83 years. They tend to have a poorer prognosis than vulvar melanomas, with 5-year survival rates of 15% to 20%
after treatment with surgery, radiation, or both. 526,527
Approximately 3% of vaginal cancers are sarcomas; approximately two-thirds of these are leiomyosarcomas, but endometrial stromal sarcomas, malignant mixed
Müllerian tumors, and other types have been reported. 528 Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (sarcoma botryoides) is a highly malignant sarcoma that occurs in children
up to 6 years of age. This tumor usually forms soft nodules that fill and protrude from the vagina. The prognosis for children with this tumor has improved with the use

of multimodality therapy including surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation. 529
DIAGNOSIS, CLINICAL EVALUATION, AND STAGING
Most patients with VAIN and approximately 10% to 20% of patients with invasive disease are asymptomatic at presentation; in these cases carcinoma is usually
diagnosed during investigation of an abnormal Pap smear result. Colposcopic evaluation in the case of abnormal cytologic findings should always include a detailed
examination of the entire vagina and cervix, even when there is an obvious cervical lesion, because patients can present with multiple areas of abnormality. Women
who have persistent positive Pap smear results after treatment of CIN should be examined carefully for VAIN.
Approximately 50% to 60% of patients with invasive cancer present with abnormal vaginal bleeding, frequently after coitus or vaginal douching. Patients may also
present with complaints of vaginal discharge, a palpable mass, dyspareunia, or pain in the perineum or pelvis. 506,530,531 and 532
According to FIGO, the rules for clinical staging of patients with carcinoma of the vagina are the same as those for clinical staging of patients with cervical cancer. 494
The workup should include careful examination of the cervix and vagina and bimanual examination. All patients should have chest roentgenography, complete blood
count, and biochemical profile. Cystoscopy and ureteroscopy are strongly recommended for patients with large tumors or tumors involving the anterior vaginal wall.
Proctoscopy is indicated for lesions involving the posterior vaginal wall. A barium enema or skeletal films may also be needed in selected cases. The kidneys should
be localized and the rare case of hydronephrosis ruled out with either classical intravenous pyelography or a pyelography obtained with a CT scan. However, it should
again be emphasized that the FIGO rules for clinical staging prohibit the use of other information obtained from CT, MRI, lymphangiography, or surgical staging to
change clinical stage even though these studies may aid in the determination of disease extent.
The FIGO categories for staging of vaginal cancers are listed in Table 36.2-13.494 Because this is a clinical staging system, the classification of lesions as stage I or II
is probably subjective. In general, thin (less than 0.5 cm), relatively exophytic tumors tend to be classified as stage I, and thicker, infiltrating tumors and those with
obvious paravaginal nodularity tend to be classified as stage II. Perez and colleagues 514 use a modification of the FIGO system that distinguishes tumors that infiltrate
the parametrium (stage IIB) from those with paravaginal submucosal extension only (stage IIA). They reported a 5-year survival rate of 55% for patients whose tumors
were classified as stage IIA versus 35% for those whose tumors were classified as stage IIB. 514

TABLE 36.2-13. International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics Clinical Staging of Carcinoma of the Vagina

FIGO does not specify how tumors should be classified when the inguinal nodes are clinically positive. The stage descriptions state that tumors that have spread
beyond the true pelvis should be classified as stage IVB, but many clinicians ignore inguinal node status in assigning stage and thus generate confusion in the
literature on this subject. The American Joint Committee on Cancer 533 has suggested a TNM staging system that classifies patients with unilateral inguinal metastases
as N1 (stage III) and those with bilateral nodes as N2 (stage IVA), but this system is rarely used. Patients with inguinal metastases are sometimes cured with
locoregional treatment; Kucera and Vavra 530 report uncorrected 5-year survival rates of 29% for patients with clinically suspicious inguinal nodes and 44% for patients
with clinically negative groins.
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
The rates of local control, distant metastasis, and survival in vaginal carcinoma are all correlated strongly with tumor stage ( Table 36.2-14).495,506,514,530,532,534,535,536 and
537
Tumor size also appears to be an important predictor of outcome. Chyle and colleagues 495 reported a higher rate of local and distant failure for tumors larger than
5 cm in diameter; Kirkbride and associates 506 reported a significantly better survival rate for patients with tumors smaller than 4 cm in diameter; and Stock and
colleagues 498 reported better survival when disease was limited to one-third of the vaginal canal.

TABLE 36.2-14. Carcinoma of the Vagina: Survival Rates According to Clinical Stage

Most investigators have been unable to find a correlation between tumor site and outcome. 495,506,514,530,532,534,535 However, Chyle and colleagues 495 reported higher
rates of local recurrence and overall relapse in patients with posterior wall lesions, and Kucera and Vavra 530 reported a better survival rate for patients whose tumors
involved the upper third of the vagina. Tumors that involve the entire vagina tend to have a poorer prognosis, probably reflecting the larger size of these lesions. 495,530
Exophytic tumors may have a better prognosis than those with infiltrating or necrotic lesions. 514 Investigators disagree about the influence of histologic grade and type
on outcome. Several investigators have reported a correlation between increasing grade of squamous carcinomas and recurrence, 495,538,539 whereas others have
found no correlation. 497,505,540 Chyle and coinvestigators 495 reported significantly poorer survival and local control rates for patients with adenocarcinoma, but other
investigators 506,517,540 found no difference in outcome for patients with squamous carcinomas or adenocarcinomas.
TREATMENT
Stage 0
Patients with only HPV infection or VAIN 1 do not require treatment. These lesions often regress spontaneously, are frequently multifocal, and recur quickly after
attempts at ablative therapy. VAIN 2 is usually treated by laser ablation. However, VAIN 3 is more likely to harbor an invasive lesion. Hoffman and colleagues 499
reported finding occult invasion in upper vaginectomy specimens from 9 (28%) of 32 patients who had surgery for VAIN 3. It has been recommended that VAIN 3

lesions located in dimples of the vaginal cuff of older patients be locally excised before definitive treatment to rule out occult invasion. 541
VAIN 3 lesions that have been adequately sampled to rule out invasion can be treated with laser ablation. Cryosurgery should not be used in the vagina because the
depth of injury cannot be controlled and inadvertent injury to the bladder or rectum may occur. Superficial fulguration with electrosurgical ball cautery may be used
under colposcopic control, with the epithelial tissue wiped away as it is ablated to allow observation of the depth of destruction. Local excision is an excellent method
of treatment for small upper vaginal lesions. Rarely, total vaginectomy is required for extensive VAIN 3 lesions. The vagina should then be reconstructed with a
split-thickness skin graft. However, this aggressive treatment should not be used for VAIN 2.
Although progression of stage 0 lesions to invasive disease is uncommon, the risk is sufficient to warrant close follow-up of patients treated for VAIN. In a review of
136 cases of carcinoma in situ of the vagina, Benedet and Saunders 542 found only four cases (3%) that progressed to invasive cancer with up to 30 years of follow-up.
Cheng and colleagues 543 reported four cases of invasive cancer that developed in 35 patients who were followed after wide local excision for VAIN.
VAIN can also be treated effectively with intracavitary radiotherapy, 495,506,514 but this treatment is usually reserved for patients with multifocal, multiply recurrent
disease or high operative risk. Treatment is usually delivered using 137Cs loaded in a plastic vaginal cylinder 3 to 4 cm in diameter. Chyle et al. 495 reported a 17%
recurrence rate at 10 years in 37 patients treated with a vaginal surface dose of 70 to 80 Gy. Perez et al. 514 reported only one recurrence (5%) in 20 patients treated
with a vaginal surface dose of 60 to 70 Gy. The single vaginal recurrence was distal to the region treated with brachytherapy, and the authors emphasize the
importance of treating the entire vagina to avoid marginal recurrences. More recently, some authors have reported results using fractionated high-dose-rate
intracavitary therapy to treat VAIN. MacCloud and colleagues 544 reported control of VAIN 3 in 11 of 14 patients followed for 36 to 115 months after treatment; in these
patients, the vaginal surface was treated with a total dose of 34 to 45 Gy in four to ten fractions. One patient had progression to invasive disease. The authors
observed no severe complications with this treatment. However, Ogino and colleagues 545 reported adhesive vaginitis and rectal bleeding in two patients treated to the
entire vagina with a less conservative fractionation schedule.
Stage I
Radiotherapy is often the treatment of choice for stage I disease because if surgery is used, total vaginectomy or even exenteration may be needed to obtain
satisfactory resection margins. However, surgery has a definite role in selected cases. 498 Early tumors that involve the upper posterior vagina can be removed with a
radical hysterectomy and partial vaginectomy (if the uterus is in situ) or with a radical upper vaginectomy (if the patient has had a prior hysterectomy) and bilateral
pelvic lymphadenectomy. Some surgeons advocate broader indications for surgical treatment of stage I disease. 498,517 Stock and associates498 reported a 5-year
disease-free survival rate of 56% for 15 patients with stage I disease treated with surgery alone (local excision, partial vaginectomy, or radical vaginectomy). One
patient in whom disease recurred had successful salvage treatment with irradiation, and two patients who received postoperative irradiation were cured of their
disease. Among six patients in the series of Stock et al. who 498 were treated with definitive irradiation, the disease-free survival rate was 80%; one patient in whom
disease recurred had successful salvage treatment with pelvic exenteration. For patients with a prior history of pelvic irradiation, radical surgery (usually pelvic
exenteration) is indicated and is often curative.
Disease-specific survival rates for patients with stage I disease treated with definitive irradiation range from 75% to 95%. 495,514,530,532,546 Selected patients with small,
superficial tumors may be treated with brachytherapy alone. Perez et al. 514 achieved pelvic tumor control in 22 (88%) of 25 selected patients with stage I disease
treated with brachytherapy alone. They recommended a dose of 60 to 70 Gy calculated 5 mm beyond the plane of the implant or vaginal mucosa (vaginal surface
dose of 80 to 120 Gy). Thicker stage I tumors should be treated with a combination of external-beam irradiation and brachytherapy with an aim to deliver 40 to 50 Gy
to the pelvic nodes and 70 to 75 Gy to the tumor.
Stage II
Because investigators rarely define their criteria for distinguishing stage I from stage II disease or for selecting patients for various treatments, different institutional
experiences cannot be easily compared. Reported disease-specific survival rates range from 50% to 80%. Data suggest that most patients with stage II disease
require treatment with a combination of external-beam irradiation and brachytherapy. Perez and colleagues 514 achieved pelvic tumor control in only 4 (36%) of 11
selected patients with stage II tumors treated with brachytherapy alone, compared with 54 (67%) of 81 patients treated with a combination of external-beam irradiation
and brachytherapy. Chyle et al. 495 reported a local recurrence rate (in the vagina) of 11% in 18 patients treated with brachytherapy (usually interstitial implant) alone,
but did not report the rate of pelvic wall relapse in this patient subset.
Brachytherapy should be tailored to the volume and distribution of the tumor and its response to external-beam irradiation. For tumors that flatten to less than 5 mm in
thickness, the dose to the vagina may be boosted using intracavitary sources in a vaginal cylinder. Because the thickness of apical vaginal tumors may be difficult to
assess in patients who have had a hysterectomy, an examination under anesthesia is often needed to determine whether intracavitary therapy will cover the tumor
adequately. Transvaginal ultrasound or MRI may also be helpful in treatment planning. When the uterus is intact, tumors high in the posterior fornix can often be
treated with a tandem and ovoids. Larger tumors usually require a boost with interstitial therapy or additional external-beam irradiation. Most authors emphasize the
importance of brachytherapy in the treatment of vaginal cancer. 514,532,546 However, brachytherapy must be designed to treat the entire vaginal tumor. Chyle and
colleagues 495 argue that tumors that cannot adequately be covered with brachytherapy can often be cured with external-beam irradiation alone using carefully
designed shrinking fields. They reported three (11%) vaginal recurrences in 28 patients with stage II disease treated with external-beam irradiation alone, compared
with 12 (21%) recurrences in 58 patients treated with combined external-beam irradiation and brachytherapy.
Selected patients with stage II disease may be cured with radical surgery. 498 However, total radical vaginectomy or pelvic exenteration is often required to remove the
tumor, and results with radical surgery do not appear better than those achieved with radiotherapy alone. Primary radical surgery is usually indicated for patients who
have previously had pelvic radiotherapy.
Stages III and IVA
Most authors report disease-specific survival rates of between 30% and 50% for patients with stage III disease and between 15% and 30% for patients with stage IVA
disease. 495,506,514,530 Stage III and IVA tumors are usually bulky, highly infiltrative lesions involving most or all of the vagina as well as the pelvic wall, bladder, or
rectum. The extent of these tumors and the proximity of critical normal tissue structures make their management a formidable technical challenge. Pelvic recurrence
rates are high in most series; the risk of distant metastasis is also relatively high, although distant relapse is often accompanied by locoregional recurrence.
All patients require treatment with external-beam irradiation. Most authors advocate the use of brachytherapy whenever possible. However, Chyle and colleagues 495
reported a fairly high rate of freedom from relapse (47% at 10 years) in a series of patients with stage III disease in which the majority of patients (40 of 55) were
treated with external-beam irradiation alone. Brachytherapy is undoubtedly an important part of disease management in some patients. However, in some cases
interstitial therapy does not provide adequate coverage of tumors that are large and intimately associated with critical structures. In these cases, it may be appropriate
to place greater emphasis on external-beam treatment.
For selected patients with stage IVA disease who are in otherwise good medical condition, a pelvic exenteration with vaginal reconstruction using a gracilis
myocutaneous flap or rectus abdominis myocutaneous flap may be the treatment of choice, particularly if a rectovaginal or vesicovaginal fistula is present. 465,516,547
RADIOTHERAPY TECHNIQUE. External-beam fields must include the primary lesion and the regional lymph nodes. Fields should be individualized according to the

primary site. Radiopaque markers placed at the distal edge of the tumor help to define the lower border, which often includes a portion of the introitus. Treating the
patient in an open (frog-leg) position can often reduce the severity of vulvar cutaneous reactions.
When tumors involve the lower third of the vagina, pelvic fields should be enlarged to include at least the medial inguinal lymph nodes. When four fields are used to
treat the pelvis, care must be taken to cover all the draining lymph nodes. Lateral fields should adequately cover posterior perirectal nodes, particularly when the
primary lesion involves the posterior vaginal wall.
Intracavitary brachytherapy is of little value in the treatment of locally advanced vaginal cancers because the dose falls off rapidly from the surface of a vaginal
cylinder. In general, the dose at a 5-mm depth is only 50% to 65% of the dose at the vaginal surface. Interstitial brachytherapy can provide better coverage of thick

vaginal tumors. Vaginal implants can be inserted free-hand, a technique that requires experience but permits excellent control of the position of sources with respect
to the vaginal surface and rectal mucosa, which can be palpated as the needles are positioned ( Fig. 36.2-10). Vaginal implants may also be positioned using a
perineal template. This technique provides a more homogeneous dose distribution because it facilitates parallel positioning of sources, but the template interferes
somewhat with the brachytherapist's ability to monitor the placement of needles with respect to the rectal and vaginal mucosa. When tumors involve the vaginal apex
in patients who have had a hysterectomy, laparoscopic or laparotomy guidance may be needed to ensure accurate needle placement.

FIGURE 36.2-10. Interstitial implant of a squamous carcinoma involving the anterior and right lateral wall of the vagina. Needles were placed transperineally, while
the position of the needles was monitored by fingers in the vagina and rectum. A plastic cylinder in the vagina displaced uninvolved tissues away from the needles,
which were loaded with iridium 192 sources. Needles were placed and sources were selected to deliver a somewhat higher dose to the thickest portion of the tumor
on the right lateral wall of the vagina. Isodose contours represent the dose rates (in cGy/h) delivered to tissues in a coronal plane at the approximate center of the
implant (A) and in a transverse plane through the center of the implant (B).

Several authors have reported a correlation between higher doses of radiation and lower rates of pelvic recurrence. 514,532,540 Chyle and associates 495 did not report a
significant correlation between tumor dose and outcome. However, dose-response analyses can be misleading because the total dose of radiation prescribed for a
vaginal tumor is often influenced by its size, extent, and initial response to irradiation, all of which determine the feasibility of delivering high-dose brachytherapy.
When good brachytherapy coverage of the tumor can be accomplished, an effort should be made to treat the tumor to a dose of 75 to 85 Gy. When brachytherapy is
not possible, some patients may be cured with external-beam irradiation alone using shrinking pelvic fields to deliver a tumor dose of 60 to 66 Gy. Treatment can
usually be completed in less than 6 to 7 weeks and should not be protracted unnecessarily. Lee and colleagues 546 reported a significantly lower pelvic recurrence rate
in patients whose entire treatment course was completed in 9 weeks or less.
COMPLICATIONS OF RADIOTHERAPY. The close proximity of the bladder and rectum makes them vulnerable to damage when invasive vaginal cancers are treated with

radiotherapy. In their review of 301 patients treated with definitive irradiation, Chyle and colleagues 495 reported a 19% actuarial incidence of serious complications at
20 years (the crude complication rate was 13%). The most frequent complications were fistulae (ten patients); rectal ulceration, proctitis, or stricture (ten patients);
urethral stricture (six patients); vaginal ulceration or necrosis (eight patients); and small bowel obstruction (seven patients). Others have reported similar major
complication rates. 496,506,514,530,540 There have been no comprehensive studies of vaginal function in women with vaginal cancer treated with radiotherapy. Kirkbride
and colleagues506 reported that 45 of 128 irradiated patients in their study had vaginal stenosis. The severity of vaginal morbidity is probably related to the damage to
vaginal mucosa and submucosa from tumor infiltration, ulceration, and infection; the age and menopausal status of the patient; and the radiation dose and the amount
of vaginal tissue treated to high doses.
Vaginal Clear Cell Carcinoma
The treatment of vaginal clear cell carcinoma is similar to that of squamous cell carcinoma. However, most women with vaginal clear cell carcinoma are young, so an
effort should be made to preserve vaginal and ovarian function whenever possible. Conventional treatments for stage I and II disease include radical hysterectomy,
vaginectomy, and lymphadenectomy with formation of a neovagina using a split-thickness skin graft, and radical radiotherapy. Senekjian and colleagues 548 reported
on the use of local therapy alone in 43 patients with stage I disease who were reported to the Registry for Research on Hormonal Transplacental Carcinogenesis.
Patients treated with local excision alone had a recurrence rate of more than 40% at 10 years. However, 17 patients who were treated with local irradiation
(brachytherapy or transvaginal orthovoltage cone irradiation) with or without local excision had a 10-year recurrence rate of less than 10%. Of 41 assessable patients
treated with local therapy in Senekjian and colleagues' 548 report, eight had had 15 pregnancies and 12 live births. Retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy may be indicated
when local treatment is considered for stage I lesions, which are reported to have an overall rate of pelvic lymph node metastases of 17%. 549 When larger or more
advanced lesions are treated with whole pelvic irradiation, ovarian transposition should be considered before radiotherapy.
The overall actuarial 10-year survival rate for patients treated for vaginal clear cell carcinoma is 79%. The survival rates for patients with stage I and II tumors are
90% and 80%, respectively. 548,550,551 Most recurrences occur within 3 years of initial therapy. However, recurrences have been reported to occur as many as 10 to 20
years after treatment.552,553 Approximately one-third of relapses are first detected at distant sites, most commonly the lungs or extrapelvic lymph nodes.
ROLE OF CHEMOTHERAPY. Because primary vaginal carcinomas are rare, few reports have specifically addressed the role of chemotherapy in the treatment of this

disease. Chemotherapeutic management is usually based on extrapolations from experience with the treatment of carcinomas of the cervix. For this reason, patients
who have metastatic or recurrent vaginal carcinoma that is no longer amenable to locoregional treatment are sometimes treated with cisplatin-based chemotherapy
even though the efficacy of this treatment is not well documented in the literature. Thigpen and colleagues 554 reported one complete and no partial responses in 16
patients with vaginal cancers treated with cisplatin 50 mg/m 2 every 3 weeks. In another GOG study, no responses were observed in 16 patients treated with etoposide
for advanced vaginal cancers. 555 Reports of the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy or concurrent chemoradiation are anecdotal. 556,557 and 558 However, vaginal
carcinoma resembles cervical carcinoma in its location, pattern of spread, histologic appearance, relationship to HPV infection, and response to radiotherapy. It may
therefore be reasonable to extrapolate from randomized trials demonstrating a benefit from concurrent chemoradiation in patients with locally advanced cervical
cancer229,230,232,559 to justify a similar approach in selected patients with high-risk invasive vaginal cancers.

CARCINOMA OF THE VULVA
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Invasive vulvar carcinoma is a rare disease that accounts for approximately 4% of gynecologic cancers. 1,560 In the United States, invasive vulvar cancer occurs with an
average annual age-adjusted incidence rate of 1.2 cases per 100,000 woman-years. 561 The median age of patients diagnosed with invasive vulvar cancer is
approximately 65 to 70 years; the incidence peaks in women older than 75 years at approximately 20 per 100,000. 560,561 and 562 In contrast, vulvar intraepithelial
neoplasia (VIN) tends to occur in younger women; the median age of women diagnosed with VIN is 45 to 50 years. Although investigators have not demonstrated an
overall increase in the incidence of invasive vulvar cancer, studies in the United States and Europe suggest that the incidence of VIN has more than doubled since the
early 1970s. 561,563,564 This increase has been particularly marked in women younger than 55 years. 561,563 The relatively stable incidence of invasive cancer despite a
steady increase in patients diagnosed with VIN could suggest that the etiologic factors for the two conditions are different, that diagnostic procedures have improved,
or that effective treatment of VIN has prevented a significant increase in the incidence of invasive disease.
Evidence that HPV may play a role in the pathogenesis of cervical cancer has led investigators to look for HPV infection in patients with vulvar neoplasms. Eighty
percent to 90% of VIN lesions contain HPV 16 or other HPV types. However, although more than 90% of invasive cervical cancers are associated with HPV, only 30%
to 50% of invasive vulvar carcinomas are associated with evidence of HPV infection. 565,566,567,568 and 569
Epidemiologic, histopathologic, and viral data suggest that patients with invasive squamous cell carcinomas of the vulva can be divided into at least two groups whose
tumors may have different etiologies: one that is associated with HPV infection and one that is not. 561,566,568,570,571 HPV-positive tumors tend to occur in younger women

(35 to 55 years), are often associated with VIN, are frequently multifocal, and tend to form less keratin than do HPV-negative tumors. Patients with HPV-positive
tumors are also more likely to have CIN and to have the risk factors typically associated with cervical cancers (multiple sexual partners, early age at first intercourse,
low socioeconomic status, and cigarette smoking). 571,572 and 573 In contrast, HPV-negative tumors usually occur in older women (55 to 85 years), are often associated
with vulvar inflammation or lichen sclerosis (but rarely with VIN), are generally unifocal, and are usually well differentiated with exuberant keratin formation. 566,567,568 and
569 Although a number of investigators have reported this distinct grouping of patients with vulvar cancer, others have found greater overlap. 570,574,575
Several investigators have reported a high incidence of p53 mutations in HPV-negative tumors. 576,577 and 578 Lee and colleagues 576 found missense mutations of p53 in
four (44%) of nine HPV-negative tumors but in only one (8%) of 12 HPV-positive tumors. They postulated that alteration in p53 activity, either through point mutations
or through E6-mediated loss of p53 function in HPV-infected cells, could be important in the development of vulvar neoplasms.
NATURAL HISTORY AND PATTERN OF SPREAD
The female external genitalia include the mons pubis, labia majora, labia minora, clitoris, vestibular bulb, vestibular glands (including Bartholin's glands), and
vestibule of the vagina. Together, these structures form the vulva. The region between the posterior commissure of the labia and the anus is termed the gynecologic
perineum. Approximately 70% of vulvar squamous carcinomas involve the labia majora or minora, most frequently the labia majora. 579,580 and 581 Approximately 15% to
20% involve the clitoris, and a similar proportion involve or arise in the perineum. In approximately 10% of cases, the lesion is too extensive to permit determination of
the original site, and in approximately 5% of cases, the lesion is multifocal. Vulvar tumors may extend locally to invade adjacent structures, including the vagina,
urethra, and anus; advanced vulvar tumors may invade adjacent pelvic bones.
A rich network of anastomosing lymphatics that frequently crosses the midline drains the vulva. Even minimally invasive vulvar tumors may spread to regional lymph
nodes (Table 36.2-15).579,582,583,584 and 585 In most cases, initial regional metastasis is to the superficial inguinal lymph nodes that are located between Camper's fascia
and the fascia lata; tumors may then metastasize secondarily to the deep femoral lymph nodes located along the femoral vessels and then to the pelvic lymph nodes
(Fig. 36.2-11).580,586 However, metastases have been reported to the deep femoral lymph nodes without involvement of the superficial inguinal lymph nodes, especially
from carcinomas of the clitoris and Bartholin's glands. 580,586,587 and 588 Theoretically, tumors involving the clitoris can also spread directly to the obturator nodes through
lymphatics that follow the dorsal vein of the clitoris, although evidence of this route is rarely seen in practice. Despite the extensive anastomosis of lymphatics in the
region, metastasis of vulvar carcinoma to contralateral lymph nodes is uncommon in patients with well-lateralized T1 lesions. 541

TABLE 36.2-15. Relationship between Depth of Stromal Invasion and Inguinal Lymph Node Metastases in Patients with Squamous Cell Carcinomas of the Vulva

FIGURE 36.2-11. Inguinal-femoral lymph nodes. (From Hacker NF. Vulvar cancer. In: Hacker NF, Moore JG, eds. Essentials of obstetrics and gynecology.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1992:618,with permission.)

The lungs are the most common sites of hematogenous metastasis.
PATHOLOGY
As classified by the International Society for the Study of Vulvar Disease, nonneoplastic epithelial disorders of the vulva (previously termed vulvar dystrophies) include
lichen sclerosis, squamous hyperplasia, and other dermatoses. 589 Approximately 10% of these lesions have cellular atypia and are termed VIN. Histologically, VIN is
characterized by disruption of the normal epithelial architecture, varying degrees of cytoplasmic and nuclear maturation, and giant cells with abnormal nuclei. 570,590
VIN lesions are assigned a grade from one to three according to their degree of maturation. Invasive cancers have been associated with two types of VIN. 570 The most
common VINs contain nuclear atypia throughout the epithelial layers and are frequently associated with HPV. These lesions are sometimes subdivided into warty and
basaloid types, which have greater and lesser degrees of differentiation, respectively. 570 In the second subset of VINs, atypia is largely confined to the basal layers of
the epithelium. These lesions tend to occur in older women and are not usually associated with HPV but are commonly adjacent to areas of lichen sclerosis or
hyperplasia. Buscema and Woodruff 591 estimated that approximately 4% of patients treated for VIN develop a subsequent invasive cancer.
Paget's disease of the vulva, a rare intraepithelial lesion located in the epidermis and skin adnexa, accounts for 1% to 5% of vulvar neoplasms. Histologically, vulvar
Paget's disease is characterized by large, pale, mucopolysaccharide-rich cells that are positive for periodic acid–Schiff. Electron microscopic studies have suggested
that Paget's cells derive from apocrine cells in the stratum germinativum of the epidermis. 592 Paget's disease usually occurs in postmenopausal women, who often
present with symptoms of vulvar pruritus and discomfort. 593 Grossly, Paget's lesions appear eczematoid or, when extensive, may be raised and velvety with persistent
weeping.594 Approximately 5% to 10% of newly diagnosed Paget's lesions are associated with underlying adenocarcinoma arising locally in a vulvar vestibular gland
or skin appendage or from a distant site such as the breast or rectum. 593 It has been suggested that Paget's disease with underlying adenocarcinoma represents a
different process than other types of intraepithelial Paget's disease because the other types rarely progress to invasive adenocarcinoma. 595
The term microinvasive carcinoma of the vulva should be used with caution. The methods and criteria used to define microinvasive carcinoma of the cervix cannot be
applied to carcinoma of the vulva. Stromal invasion by vulvar carcinomas is not measured in a uniform manner, and strict criteria for the diagnosis of microinvasive
vulvar cancer have not been defined. VIN is not routinely seen adjacent to invasive vulvar cancer, and the transition from normal tissue to invasive cancer can be
abrupt. Elongated rete pegs may extend 6 mm or more from the basement membrane and are sometimes misconstrued as invasive cancer. The International Society
of Gynecologic Pathologists recommends that the depth of stromal invasion be measured vertically from the most superficial basement membrane to the deepest
tumor. Tumor thickness is defined as the distance between the granular layer of epidermis and the deepest tumor. Lymph node metastases from tumors less than 1
mm in depth or thickness are extremely rare (see Table 36.2-15).579,582,583 and 584 For this reason, FIGO now includes a stage IA subcategory in its staging system for

tumors that invade less than 1 mm (Table 36.2-16).560 However, the risk of inguinal lymph node metastasis rises steeply as the depth of invasion exceeds 1 mm.

TABLE 36.2-16. International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics Staging of Carcinoma of the Vulva (1994)

More than 90% of invasive vulvar cancers are squamous cell carcinomas. Atypical keratinization is the hallmark of invasive vulvar cancer. Most squamous carcinomas
are well differentiated, but mitoses may be noted. 596 Approximately 5% of vulvar cancers are anaplastic carcinomas that may consist of large immature cells, spindle
sarcomatoid cells, or small cells. Vulvar carcinomas consisting of small cells may resemble small cell anaplastic carcinomas of the lung or Merkel's cell tumors and
have demonstrated an aggressive biologic behavior in the few reported cases. 597,598 and 599 Verrucous carcinoma is a rare, very well-differentiated form of vulvar
carcinoma that usually presents in the fifth or sixth decade of life as a large, locally invasive lesion. 598 On microscopic examination, the tumor has a papillary,
exophytic appearance; tumor cells retain a normal appearance of maturation and demonstrate minimal atypia. Even with extensive local invasion, lymph node
metastasis from verrucous carcinoma is rare.
The diagnosis of Bartholin's gland carcinoma is based on clinical findings of a tumor arising in the anatomic location of Bartholin's glands and on the histologic
appearance. Biopsy of a tumor arising from a Bartholin's gland usually reveals adenocarcinoma, but squamous cell carcinomas, transitional cell carcinomas (arising
from the duct and histologically indistinguishable from transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder), and adenoid cystic carcinomas have also been reported. 588
Rare cases of primary mammary adenocarcinoma of the vulva have been reported, presumably arising in aberrant mammary tissue occurring along the embryonic
milk line.600 Other rare carcinomas that may occur in the vulva include basal cell carcinomas 601 and sebaceous carcinomas.602
Malignant melanomas of the vulva account for approximately 2% to 4% of primary vulvar malignancies and 1% to 3% of melanomas arising in women. 603,604 Vulvar
melanoma occurs most frequently in women older than 60 years of age, but 10% to 20% of vulvar melanomas occur in women younger than 40 years. 604
Approximately 50% of vulvar melanomas involve the labium majus, but tumors may also arise on the labium minus, clitoris, or perineum. 604,605 and 606 In a large Swedish
series, 57% of vulvar melanomas were of the mucosal lentiginous type, 22% were nodular, and 16% were superficial spreading or lentiginous. 606 Most investigators
have reported a correlation between depth of invasion or Breslow thickness and outcome. 605,607,608 However, because the vulvar epithelium sometimes lacks a
well-developed papillary dermis, which makes it difficult to assign Clark's levels of invasion, Chung and colleagues proposed a modification of the Clark system that is
often used to categorize patients with vulvar melanoma. 609,610 Other factors that have been associated with a poorer prognosis are ulceration, clinical amelanosis, and
older age. 607 Diagnosis is made by biopsy of any suspicious pigmented or nonpigmented lesion, particularly if it is nodular or indurated or has a perilesional halo.
Vulvar sarcomas constitute 1% to 2% of vulvar malignancies and include leiomyosarcomas, rhabdomyosarcomas, angiosarcomas, neurofibrosarcomas, and
epithelioid sarcomas. The prognosis appears to depend on three main determinants: lesion size, tumor contour, and mitotic activity. Lesions greater than 5 cm in
diameter with infiltrating margins, extensive necrosis, and more than five mitotic figures per ten high-power fields are the most likely to recur after surgical
resection.611,612
DIAGNOSIS, CLINICAL EVALUATION, AND STAGING
Patients with VIN may complain of vulvar pruritus, irritation, or a mass, but up to 50% of these patients are asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis. 613,614 Patients with
invasive vulvar cancer usually complain of a vulvar mass and chronic vulvar pruritus. Advanced lesions may bleed and are often exquisitely tender.
Because VIN can have many manifestations, any new vulvar lesion should be biopsied. Once the diagnosis of VIN has been established, the entire vulva, cervix, and
vagina should be carefully examined because patients often have multifocal or multicentric involvement. 613,614 and 615 Colposcopic examination may help to define the
extent of disease.
Diagnosis of invasive vulvar lesions requires a wedge biopsy of the lesion with surrounding skin and with underlying dermis and connective tissue so the pathologist
can adequately evaluate the depth of stromal invasion. This procedure can usually be performed in the physician's office under local anesthesia. Excisional biopsy is
preferred for lesions smaller than 1 cm in diameter.
Patients with invasive disease require additional evaluation for regional and metastatic disease. All patients with invasive disease require a careful physical
examination including a detailed pelvic examination, chest radiography, and biochemical profile. Cystoscopy and proctoscopy should be performed in patients with
advanced lesions or with tumors that are near the urethra or anus, respectively. Patients who complain of bone pain or who have tumor fixed to pelvic bones should
have appropriate skeletal radiography. CT or MRI scans can be obtained to evaluate deep inguinal and pelvic lymph nodes for possible regional metastasis.
In 1983, FIGO adopted a clinical TNM staging system for vulvar cancer. This system was based on a clinical assessment of the primary tumor and regional lymph
nodes. However, several studies have demonstrated poor correlation between clinical assessment of the inguinal lymph nodes and pathologic findings. 251,616,617 In a
study of 588 patients with tumors that invaded 5 mm or deeper, Homesley and colleagues 616 reported that although 93% of patients with fixed or ulcerated nodes had
metastatic tumor, 24% of those with clinically negative nodes had inguinal lymph node metastases and 24% of patients with suspicious but mobile nodes had negative
findings at lymphadenectomy. In 1988 the FIGO staging system was modified to incorporate the more accurate information gained from surgical assessment of
regional lymph nodes. The staging system was revised again in 1994 to create a separate stage IA for minimally invasive lesions (see Table 36.2-16).560
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
The risk of regional metastases of vulvar carcinoma and the prognosis for cure after treatment are correlated with a number of clinical and pathologic features. Clinical
tumor diameter is strongly predictive of outcome and has been incorporated in the FIGO staging system ( Table 36.2-17; see Table 36.2-16). Other factors that have
consistently been correlated with outcome include depth of invasion, tumor thickness, and the presence or absence of LVSI. 251,616,618,619 and 620 These features tend to
be correlated with one another, and all are predictive of lymph node metastasis. More than 75% of patients with LVSI have positive inguinal nodes. 582,616,621 Studies of
the relationship between tumor grade and outcome have drawn varying conclusions, possibly reflecting the inconsistent criteria used to grade vulvar
tumors.259,582,616,617,621,622 Other factors that tend to be associated with prognosis include the amount of keratin, the mitotic rate, and the tumor growth
pattern.582,618,623,624 Aneuploid tumors appear to have a poorer prognosis than diploid tumors, but ploidy tends to be correlated with other prognostic factors and may
not be an independent predictor of outcome. 625,626 Several authors have reported that tumors containing HPV DNA have a poorer prognosis than HPV-negative
tumors.565,569 Some investigators have reported a worse prognosis for patients aged 70 years or older, whereas others have found no correlation between prognosis
and age.579,616,622,623

TABLE 36.2-17. Relative Survival by Tumor Diameter and Surgical Groin Node Status

Prognosis is strongly correlated with the presence and number of inguinal node metastases (see Table 36.2-17). In a study of 586 patients treated in two GOG trials,
Homesley and colleagues 619 reported 5-year survival rates of 91% for patients with negative inguinal lymph nodes and 75%, 36%, and 24%, respectively, for patients
with one or two, three or four, or five or six positive nodes. None of the 16 patients with seven or more nodes involved with tumor survived. Patients with bilateral node
involvement had a survival rate of 25%, compared with 71% for those with unilateral node involvement. The authors did not state whether patients with bilateral nodal
disease had a poorer prognosis than did patients with a similar number of unilateral metastases. Homesley and colleagues 627 reported that patients with pelvic node
metastases had a particularly poor survival rate: Among patients treated with surgery alone, 3-year survival rates were 23% for patients with pelvic node metastases
versus 73% for patients with only inguinal node involvement. For this reason, FIGO has categorized tumors that have spread to the pelvic nodes as stage IV.
However, it should be remembered that most of these series include patients who did not receive postoperative irradiation. It is not possible from available data to
define the prognosis of patients who received multidisciplinary treatment for vulvar cancer metastatic to pelvic lymph nodes.
In 1995, van der Velden and colleagues 628 published a detailed study of nodal prognostic factors in 71 patients with inguinal node metastases from vulvar carcinomas.
Patients with extranodal spread or more than two positive nodes received adjuvant radiotherapy to an unspecified dose. The most powerful predictor of outcome in
their study was extranodal tumor extension: 28 (63%) of 44 patients with extranodal tumor died of disease versus three (14%) of 22 without this finding. In Cox
regression analysis, none of the other factors studied (tumor size, number of nodes, FIGO stage, nodal size, degree of nodal replacement, laterality) added to the
predictive power of extranodal extension. Origoni and colleagues reported similar findings in a series of 53 patients with positive nodes. 629
Studying the relationship between surgical margins and tumor recurrence, Heaps and colleagues 618 reported no local failures in 91 patients whose closest tumor
margin (deep or at the skin surface) was 8 mm or more in the fixed specimen. Ten (43%) of 23 patients with margins of 4.8 mm or less experienced a local recurrence,
as did 8 (62%) of 13 patients with margins between 4.8 mm and 8.0 mm.
TREATMENT
The traditional operative approach to invasive carcinoma of the vulva, radical en bloc resection of the vulva and inguinofemoral nodes, was developed at the
beginning of the twentieth century, was popularized during subsequent decades, and remained the standard of care until the early 1980s. 630,631 and 632 Radiotherapy
was thought to have little role in the treatment of vulvar cancer. Although this surgical approach achieved 5-year survival rates of 60% to 70%, the surgery caused
significant physical and psychological complications, and patients with multiple positive nodes continued to have a poor prognosis. In 1981, Hacker and colleagues 633
demonstrated that a less morbid surgical approach, operating through separate vulvar and groin incisions, achieved cure rates similar to those achieved with the
traditional radical vulvectomy. Since then, there has been a continuing trend toward less radical surgery for early- stage disease. In addition, prospective and
retrospective studies have established the role of radiotherapy in the curative management of locoregionally advanced disease.
Preinvasive Disease (Vulvar Intraepithelial Neoplasia)
After invasive carcinoma has been excluded by a sufficient number of excisional biopsies, the treatment of VIN should be as conservative as possible. Focal lesions
can be simply excised. Multiple lesions can be excised separately or, if confluent, with a larger single excision. This approach is generally well tolerated and provides
material for histologic assessment. When there is more extensive VIN, the lesions can be vaporized with a CO 2 laser. This method may provide an alternative to more
extensive operations but does not yield a specimen for histologic inspection.
Extensive, diffuse VIN may require a wider excision, particularly if the lesion involves the perianal skin. These lesions are sometimes treated with a partial vulvectomy
of the superficial skin (called skinning vulvectomy). Whenever possible, the vulvar skin should be sutured primarily, but a split-thickness skin graft is sometimes
needed to close the defect.
VIN often recurs at or near the margins of resection, even when the histopathologic analysis demonstrates that the initial lesions were completely resected.
Presumably this phenomenon reflects the multifocal nature of the condition. 615 In fact, VIN can recur within the donor skin from split-thickness grafts. 541
T1 and T2
Invasive vulvar tumors can usually be treated effectively without the complications of en bloc radical vulvectomy and inguinal node dissection. Today, most
gynecologic oncologists advocate an individualized approach to early invasive vulvar carcinomas. 583,634,635,636,637 and 638 Overall 5-year disease-specific survival rates for
stage I (T1N0M0) and stage II (T2N0M0) disease are approximately 98% and 85%, respectively. 619
Most T1 and selected T2 lesions can be controlled locally with a radical wide local excision. A wide and deep excision of the lesion is performed, with the incision
extended down to the inferior fascia of the urogenital diaphragm. An effort should be made to remove the lesion with a 2-cm margin of normal tissue in all directions
unless this would require sacrifice of the anus or urethra. The surgical defect is closed in two layers. Small T1 lesions that invade 1 mm or less can be managed with
local resection alone because the risk of regional spread is small (see Table 36.2-15). Patients with more invasive tumors must also have surgical or radiation
treatment of the inguinal nodes as discussed here.
Larger T2 tumors may require radical vulvectomy to obtain acceptable tumor clearance with negative margins. En bloc resection of the vulva and inguinal nodes was
once believed to be necessary to prevent recurrences in the soft tissue intervening between the vulva and regional nodes; however, most surgeons now perform the
operation through separate vulvar and groin incisions. Although recurrences have been reported in this tissue bridge, these appear to be rare, and the risk of
complications is significantly decreased when separate incisions are used. 633,637,638,639 and 640
Wound seroma is the most common acute complication of radical vulvectomy and inguinal node dissection, occurring in approximately 15% of cases. 583,635 Other
acute complications include urinary tract infection, wound cellulitis, temporary anterior thigh anesthesia from femoral nerve injury, thrombophlebitis, and, rarely,
pulmonary embolus.583,627,635,637,639 The most common chronic complication is leg edema, but this risk has decreased from approximately 30% to 15% with the use of
separate groin incisions. 638 Other chronic complications including genital prolapse, urinary stress incontinence, temporary weakness of the quadriceps muscle, and
introital stenosis. Rare late complications include pubic osteomyelitis, femoral hernia, and rectoperineal fistula. These risks are less when separate incisions are used
and are further reduced when radical local excision of the primary lesion is done instead of radical vulvectomy. 635,638,641,642
T3 and T4
Primary tumors that involve the anus, rectum, rectovaginal septum, or proximal urethra pose a difficult problem because adequate surgical clearance can be obtained
only by combining a pelvic exenteration with radical vulvectomy and bilateral groin node dissection. Although some patients may be cured with this ultraradical
surgery, the risks of acute and long-term complications of the procedure are substantial. 643,644 and 645 For this reason, a number of investigators have explored the use

of combined surgery and irradiation to spare critical structures in patients with locally advanced disease.
In some cases, patients with T3 tumors that minimally involve the external urethra or anus can undergo initial vulvectomy without sacrifice of major organ function if
close margins are accepted near critical structures. Postoperative radiotherapy can then be delivered to prevent local recurrence. 646,647 and 648 Although local
recurrences are frequently successfully controlled with additional surgery, Faul and colleagues 649 reported an overall 5-year survival rate of only 40% after the first
local recurrence and emphasized the importance of achieving local control. These authors reported a significant reduction in the local failure rate (from 58% to 16%)
when tumors that were within 8 mm of the operative margins were irradiated after surgery. 649 In such cases, the vulva may be treated with opposed anterior and
posterior photon fields (if the inguinal regions also require treatment) or with an appositional perineal electron beam. 648,650 The vulva should receive a total dose of 50
to 65 Gy depending on the proximity of disease to the surgical margin.
In the early 1980s, several investigators 651,652,653,654 and 655 reported results of preoperative radiotherapy in small series of patients with locally advanced disease. These
reports indicated that modest doses of radiation (45 to 55 Gy) produced dramatic tumor responses in some patients with T3 and T4 disease, permitting organ-sparing
surgery without sacrifice of tumor control. Hacker and colleagues 654 reported that four of eight patients with T3 to T4 tumors treated preoperatively with 44 to 54 Gy
had no residual tumor in the vulvectomy specimen and that seven of these eight had local control of their disease. More recently, investigators have emphasized the
use of concurrent chemoradiation in this setting.
Chemotherapy in Locoregionally Advanced Disease
To reduce the need for morbid ultraradical surgery and to improve locoregional control rates, a number of investigators have explored combinations of chemotherapy
with radiation and surgery in patients with locally advanced vulvar carcinoma. 556,656,657,658,659,660,661,662,663,664,665,666,667 and 668 Most studies have used combinations of
cisplatin, 5-FU, and mitomycin C, extrapolating from the high response rates observed with use of this treatment for locally advanced carcinomas of the cervix and
head and neck and from studies that have demonstrated the efficacy of these drugs as radiosensitizers in the treatment of carcinomas of the anus. Treatment
schedules usually include a 4- to 5-day infusion of 5-FU combined with one of the other two drugs, with this course repeated every 3 to 4 weeks ( Table 36.2-18).
Studies have usually included small numbers of patients with advanced local or regional disease. However, most investigators have observed impressive responses
that often appear to be better than would be expected with radiation alone. Randomized trials have not been done and may be difficult to perform because of the small
number of patients with locally advanced vulvar cancer. However, trials that demonstrated improved local control and survival when concurrent cisplatin-containing
chemotherapy was added to radiation treatment of cervical cancers 229,230,232 and improved colostomy-free survival when mitomycin C and 5-FU were added to
radiation treatment of anal cancer 669 suggest that this approach may be also be useful treatment of women with vulvar cancer.

TABLE 36.2-18. Concurrent Chemoradiotherapy in the Management of Locally Advanced or Recurrent Carcinoma of the Vulva

Only one study has investigated the role of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in the treatment of locally advanced vulvar cancer. Benedetti-Panici and colleagues 670 treated
21 patients with stage IVA vulvar cancers with two to three cycles of cisplatin, bleomycin, and methotrexate followed by radical surgery. Two (10%) of 21 patients had
partial responses of their vulvar tumors, and 14 (67%) had partial responses of regional nodes. Ninety percent of the tumors were considered operable, but the 3-year
survival rate was only 24%.
Caution is warranted in designing aggressive treatment protocols for patients with vulvar cancers, who typically are elderly and often have concurrent medical
problems. Serious pulmonary toxicity has been observed in a number of patients treated on studies that included bleomycin. 664,668,671 In the largest published series of
patients treated with mitomycin C and 5-FU, hematologic tolerance was acceptable, but the administered dose of mitomycin C was somewhat lower than that generally
used in the treatment of anal cancers. 666
Treatment of Regional Disease
Effective regional treatment is the single most important factor in the curative management of early vulvar cancer. Although patients with vulvar recurrences can often
have their disease successfully controlled with additional local treatment, patients who suffer inguinal recurrences are rarely curable.
All patients with primary tumors that invade more than 1 mm must have their inguinal nodes treated. Traditional management includes a bilateral radical inguinal
lymph node dissection. Today, this is usually performed through separate groin incisions. An ellipse of skin is removed 1 cm below and parallel to the groin crease. 633
The incision is extended down to the fascia lata and 2 cm above the inguinal ligament to remove the inguinal nodes. The saphenous vein is tied off, the fascia lata is
split, and the femoral nodes are dissected. A suction drain is placed, and the wound closed in two layers.
At one time, pelvic node resection was also performed in all patients with invasive vulvar cancer. When subsequent studies demonstrated that pelvic node metastases
were found only in patients with clinically suspicious or multiple positive inguinal nodes, use of the procedure was limited to patients determined intraoperatively to
have positive inguinal nodes. 672,673 and 674
Then, in 1986, Homesley and colleagues 627 published results of a randomized, prospective study that compared pelvic node resection with inguinal and pelvic
irradiation in patients with inguinal node metastases from carcinoma of the vulva. All patients were initially treated with radical vulvectomy and inguinal
lymphadenectomy. Patient randomization was done intraoperatively after frozen section evaluation of the inguinal nodes. This trial was closed prematurely, after 114
eligible patients had been entered, when interim analysis revealed a survival advantage for the radiation treatment arm ( P = .03). The difference was most marked for
patients with clinically positive or multiple histologically positive groin nodes ( Fig. 36.2-12). For patients with two or more positive nodes, the 2-year survival rates
were 63% and 37% for the radiotherapy and pelvic node resection groups, respectively. Analysis of failure patterns reveals that the largest difference between
treatment groups was in the number of inguinal failures ( Fig. 36.2-13). With the publication of this study, most practitioners abandoned routine pelvic node dissection,
and postoperative radiotherapy became standard for most patients with inguinal node metastases.

FIGURE 36.2-12. Survival rates of 114 patients with invasive squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva who were entered on a Gynecologic Oncology Group protocol in
which patients with positive groin nodes after radical vulvectomy and bilateral inguinal lymphadenectomies were randomly assigned to receive pelvic lymph node
dissection or postoperative irradiation to the pelvis and inguinal nodes ( P = .004). (From ref. 627, with permission.)

FIGURE 36.2-13. Sites of recurrence in 114 patients with invasive squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva who were entered on a Gynecologic Oncology Group
protocol in which patients with positive groin nodes after radical vulvectomy and bilateral inguinal lymphadenectomies were randomly assigned to receive pelvic lymph
node dissection or postoperative irradiation to the pelvis and inguinal nodes. (From ref. 627, with permission.)

Most of the serious acute and subacute complications of radical vulvectomy are related to the lymph node dissection, although these risks have decreased somewhat
with the use of separate groin incisions. 674,675,676 and 677 Complications include wound disruption or infection in 50% to 75% of cases, chronic lymphedema in 20% to
50%, and a perioperative mortality of 2% to 5%. Patients who undergo vulvectomy without inguinal node dissection have significantly shorter hospital stays and fewer
complications.674,675,677
Although radical inguinal lymphadenectomy has historically been considered the treatment of choice for regional management of invasive vulvar carcinoma, several
retrospective studies have suggested that regional radiotherapy may be an effective and less morbid way of preventing recurrence in patients with clinically negative
groins. In a review of 91 patients who had elective treatment of the inguinal nodes for cancers with primary drainage to the inguinal nodes, Henderson and
colleagues 678 observed only two recurrences after treatment with 45 to 50 Gy over 5 weeks, and both of these occurred outside the treatment fields. In a retrospective
review of 42 patients with invasive vulvar carcinomas, Petereit and colleagues 675 found no difference in the groin recurrence rate for patients with clinically negative
inguinal nodes treated with radical lymphadenectomy or radiotherapy, even though the irradiated patients in their series had more advanced primary tumors. The
complications of treatment, including lymphedema, wound separation, and infection, and the length of hospitalization were greater for patients who had had
lymphadenectomy. Leiserowitz and colleagues 679 reported no groin recurrences in 23 patients with locally advanced, clinically N0 vulvar cancers after prophylactic
treatment of the groins with concurrent chemoradiation.
In 1992 the GOG reported the results of a trial that randomly assigned patients with clinically negative inguinal nodes to receive inguinal node irradiation or radical
lymphadenectomy (followed by inguinopelvic irradiation in patients with positive nodes) after resection of the primary tumor. 677 The study was closed after entry of only
58 patients, when an interim analysis demonstrated a significantly higher rate of inguinal recurrence and death in the irradiated group. The authors concluded that
lymphadenectomy was the superior treatment, although the morbidity rate of lymphadenectomy was greater than that of groin irradiation. However, the radiotherapy
techniques used in this study have since been criticized. CT scans were not consistently obtained to verify the position and size of inguinal nodes. Patients were
treated with anterior appositional fields, the dose was prescribed at a depth of 3 cm, and the use of electrons (usually 12 meV) was emphasized. This method of
treatment can lead to significant underdosage of the inguinofemoral nodes, which frequently extend to a depth of more than 5 to 8 cm. 680,681 Because of these
criticisms, the study's results and the role of radiation in the primary management of clinically negative inguinal nodes remains controversial.
Some surgeons have tried to reduce surgical complications by reducing the extent of lymph node dissections. Burke and colleagues 641 reported four (5%) groin
recurrences in 74 patients with T1 to T2 tumors treated with wide local excision and superficial inguinal lymphadenectomy (unilateral or bilateral depending on the
location of the tumor). In a prospective study of patients with favorable primary lesions (T1, less than or equal to 5 mm thick, no LVSI), the GOG 682 reported nine (7%)
inguinal recurrences in 121 patients who had negative findings on ipsilateral superficial inguinal lymphadenectomy. A number of investigators have explored the use
of intraoperative lymphatic mapping to identify a sentinel node that would predict the presence or absence of regional metastases. 683,684,685 and 686 Preliminary studies
suggest that a sentinel node can be identified in most patients. Further study will be needed to determine whether this procedure can be used to more accurately
identify patients who can be successfully treated without the morbidity of radical regional treatment.
Treatment of Metastatic Disease
A number of reports document the use of single-agent chemotherapy in patients with metastatic or recurrent squamous cell carcinomas of the vulva. Several
anecdotal reports published in the 1970s suggest that bleomycin may be an active agent, but the response rate has not yet been documented in a prospective phase
II trial, and the optimal dose and schedule have not been determined. 687,688 and 689 Single-agent phase II studies of cisplatin, etoposide, mitoxantrone, and
piperazinedione have failed to document any objective responses. 555,690 Data on the use of combination chemotherapy in this setting are anecdotal, and no series
includes more than nine patients. In the absence of reliable data specific to carcinoma of the vulva, clinicians often use combinations that have had some activity in
the treatment of cervical cancer. However, there are as yet few data to indicate that chemotherapy can provide effective palliation for patients with metastatic or
recurrent vulvar carcinoma that is not amenable to locoregional treatments.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, et al. Cancer statistics, 1999. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:8.
2. Brinton LA, Tashima KT, Lehman HF, et al. Epidemiology of cervical cancer by cell type. Cancer Res 1987;47:1706.
3. Wingo PA, Tong T, Bolden S. Cancer statistics, 1995. CA Cancer J Clin 1995;45:8.
4. Bosch FX, Castellsague X, Munoz N, et al. Male sexual behavior and human papillomavirus DNA: key risk factors for cervical cancer in Spain. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1060.
5. Skegg DCG, Corwin PA, Paul C. Importance of the male factor in cancer of the cervix. Lancet 1982;2:581.
6. Meanwell CA. The epidemiology and etiology of cervical cancer. In: Blackledge GRP, Jordan JA, Shingleton HM, eds. Textbook of gynecologic oncology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1991:250.
7. American Cancer Society. Cancer facts and figures1997. Atlanta, GA: American Cancer Society, 1997.
8. Baquet CR, Horm JW, Gibbs T, et al. Socioeconomic factors and cancer incidence among blacks and whites. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:551.
9. Freeman HP. Cancer in the socioeconomically disadvantaged. CA Cancer J Clin 1989;39:266.
10. Parkin DM, Pisani P, Ferlay J. Estimates of the worldwide incidence of 25 major cancers in 1990. Int J Cancer 1999; 80:827.
11. Whelan SL, Parkin DM, Masuyer E. Patterns of cancer in five continents. Lyons: International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1990.
12. Herrero R. Epidemiology of cervical cancer. J Natl Cancer InstMonogr 1996;21:1.
13. Parazzini F, LaVecchia C. Epidemiology of adenocarcinoma of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1990;39:40.
14. Vizcaino AP, Moreno V, Bosch FX, Munoz N, Barros-Dios XM, Parkin DM. International trends in the incidence of cervical cancer. I. Adenocarcinoma and adenosquamous cell carcinomas. Int J
Cancer 1998;75:536.
15. Zheng T, Holford TR, Ma Z, et al. The continuing increase in adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix: a birth cohort phenomenon. Int J Epidemiol 1996;25:252.
16. Thomas DB, Ray RM. Oral contraceptives and invasive adenocarcinomas and adenosquamous carcinomas of the uterine cervix. The World Health Organization Collaborative Study of
Neoplasia and Steroid Contraceptives. Am J Epidemiol 1996;144:281.
17. Ursin G, Peters RK, Henderson BE, et al. Oral contraceptive use and adenocarcinoma of cervix. Lancet 1994;344:1390.
18. Stubblefield PG. Oral contraceptives and neoplasia. J Reprod Med 1984;29:524.
19. Bergeron C, Barrasso R, Beaudenon S, et al. Human papillomaviruses associated with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. Great diversity and distinct distribution in low- and high-grade lesions.
Am J Surg Pathol 1992;16:641.
20. Durst M, Gissman L, Ikenberg H, Hausen H. A papillomavirus DNA from a cervical carcinoma and its prevalence in cancer biopsy specimens from different geographic regions. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1983;80:3812.

21. Bosch FX, Manos MM, Munoz N, et al. Prevalence of human papillomavirus in cervical cancer: a worldwide perspective. International Biological Study on Cervical Cancer (IBSCC) Study Group
[see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:796.
22. Arends MJ, Buckley CH, Wells M. Aetiology, pathogenesis, and pathology of cervical neoplasia. J Clin Pathol 1998;51:96.
23. Pillai MR, Halabi S, McKalip A, et al. The presence of human papillomavirus-16/-18 E6, p53, and Bcl-2 protein in cervicovaginal smears from patients with invasive cervical cancer. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1996;5:329.
24. Sano T, Oyama T, Kashiwabara K, Fukuda T, Nakajima T. Expression status of p16 protein is associated with human papillomavirus oncogenic potential in cervical and genital lesions. Am J
Pathol 1998;153:1741.
25. Winkler B, Richart RM. Human papillomavirus and gynecologic neoplasia. Curr Probl Obstet Gynecol Fertil 1987;10:49.
26. Choo KB, Pan CC, Han SH. Integration of human papillomavirus type 16 into cellular DNA of cervical carcinoma: preferential deletion of the E2 gene and invariable retention of the long control
region and the E6/E7 open reading frames. Virology 1987;161:259.
27. Kessler I. Epidemiological aspects of uterine cervix cancer. In: Lurain JR, Sciarra J, eds. Gynecology and obstetrics. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1990:1.
28. Scheffner M, Werness BA, Huibregtse JM, Levine AJ, Howley PM. The E6 oncoprotein encoded by human papillomavirus types 16 and 18 promotes the degradation of p 53. Cell 1990;63:1129.
29. Richart RM, Masood S, Syrjanen KJ, et al. Human papillomavirus. International Academy of Cytology Task Force summary. Diagnostic cytology towards the 21st century: an international
expert Conference and Tutorial. Acta Cytol 1998;42:50.
30. Schiffman MH. Recent progress in defining the epidemiology of human papillomavirus infection and cervical neoplasia. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:394.
31. National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Conference Statement on Cervical Cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1997;66:351.
32. Harnish DG, Belland LM, Scheid EE, et al. Evaluation of human papillomavirus-consensus primers for HPV detection by the polymerase chain reaction. Mol Cell Probes 1999;13:9.
33. Bernard HU, Chan SY, Manos MM, et al. Identification and assessment of known and novel human papillomaviruses by polymerase chain reaction amplification, restriction fragment length
polymorphisms, nucleotide sequence, and phylogenetic algorithms. J Infect Dis 1994;170:1077.
34. Joste NE, Rushing L, Granados R, et al. Bethesda classification of cervicovaginal smears: reproducibility and viral correlates. Hum Pathol 1996;27:581.
35. Burger RA, Monk BJ, Kurosaki T, et al. Human papillomavirus type 18: association with poor prognosis in early stage cervical cancer [see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1361.
36. Tseng CJ, Tseng LH, Lai CH, et al. Identification of human papillomavirus types 16 and 18 deoxyribonucleic acid sequences in bulky cervical cancer after chemotherapy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1997;176:865.
37. Walker J, Bloss JD, Liao SV, et al. Human papillomavirus genotype as a prognostic indicator in carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Obstet Gynecol 1989;74:781.
38. Fait G, Daniel Y, Kupferminc MJ, et al. Does typing of human papillomavirus assist in the triage of women with repeated low-grade, cervical cytologic abnormalities? [see comments]. Gynecol
Oncol 1998;70:319.
39. Meijer CJ, Helmerhorst TJ, Rozendaal L, et al. HPV typing and testing in gynaecological pathology: has the time come? [comment]. Histopathology 1998;33:83.
40. Sherman ME, Schiffman MH, Strickler H, et al. Prospects for a prophylactic HPV vaccine: rationale and future implications for cervical cancer screening. Diagn Cytopathol 1998;18:5.
41. Buehler JW, Ward JW. A new definition for AIDS surveillance. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:390.
42. Beral V, Newton R. Overview of the epidemiology of immunodeficiency-associated cancers. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1998;23:1.
43. Franceschi S, Dal Maso L, Arniani S, et al. Risk of cancer other than Kaposi's sarcoma and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in persons with AIDS in Italy. Cancer and AIDS Registry Linkage Study. Br
J Cancer 1998;78:966.
44. Goedert JJ, Cote TR, Virgo P, et al. Spectrum of AIDS-associated malignant disorders. Lancet 1998;351:1833.
45. Rabkin CS, Biggar RJ, Baptiste MS, et al. Cancer incidence trends in women at high risk of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Int J Cancer 1993;55:208.
46. Serraino D, Carrieri P, Pradier C, et al. Risk of invasive cervical cancer among women with, or at risk for, HIV infection. Int J Cancer 1999;82:334.
47. Maiman M, Fruchter RG, Guy L, et al. Human immunodeficiency virus infection and invasive cervical carcinoma. Cancer 1993;71:402.
48. Schafer A, Friedmann W, Mielke M, et al. The increased frequency of cervical dysplasia-neoplasia in women infected with the human immunodeficiency virus is related to the degree of
immunosuppression. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;164:593.
49. Buehler JW, Hanson DL, Chu SY. The reporting of HIV/AIDS deaths in women. Am J Public Health 1992;82:1500.
50. Castello G, Esposito E, Stellato G, et al. Immunological abnormalities in patients with cervical carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1986;25:61.
51. Schwartz LB, Carcangiu ML, Bradham L, et al. Rapidly progressive squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix coexisting with human immunodeficiency virus infection: clinical opinion. Gynecol
Oncol 1991;41:255.
52. Serur E, Fruchter RG, Maiman M, et al. Age, substance abuse, and survival of patients with cervical carcinoma. Cancer 1995;75:2530.
53. Kivlahan C, Ingram E. Papanicolaou smears without endocervical cells. Are they inadequate? Acta Cytol 1986;30:258.
54. Walton RJ. Editorial: the task force on cervical cancer screening programs. Can Med Assoc J 1976;114:981.
55. Miller AB. Control of carcinoma of the cervix by exfoliative cytology screening. In: Coppleson M, ed. Gynecologic oncology. Fundamental principles and clinical practice. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1981:381.
56. Syrjanen KV, Kataja V, Vyliskoski M, et al. Natural history of cervical human papillomavirus lesions does not substantiate the biological relevance of the Bethesda system. Obstet Gynecol
1992;79:675.
57. Richart RM, Barron BA. A follow-up study of patients with cervical dysplasia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1969;105:386.
58. Plentl AA, Friedman EA. Lymphatics of the cervix uteri. In: Lymphatic system of female genitalia. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1971:75.
59. Netter FH. The CIBA collection of medical illustrations. Vol. 2. Reproductive system. Summit, NJ: CIBA Pharmaceutical, 1988.
60. Girardi F, Haas J. The importance of the histologic processing of pelvic lymph nodes in the treatment of cervical cancer. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1993;3:12.
61. Averette HE, Nguyen HN, Donato DM, et al. Radical hysterectomy for invasive cervical cancer. A 25-year prospective experience with the Miami technique. Cancer 1993;71:1422.
62. Kamura T, Tsukamoto N, Tsuruchi N, et al. Multivariate analysis of the histopathologic prognostic factors of cervical cancer in patients undergoing radical hysterectomy. Cancer 1992;69:181.
63. Alvarez RD, Potter ME, Soong SJ, et al. Rationale for using pathologic tumor dimensions and nodal status to subclassify surgically treated stage IB cervical cancer patients. Gynecol Oncol
1991;43:108.
64. Ayhan A, Tuncer ZS. Radical hysterectomy with lymphadenectomy for treatment of early stage cervical cancer: clinical experience of 278 cases. J Surg Oncol 1991;47:175.
65. Delgado G, Bundy BN, Fowler WC, et al. A prospective surgical pathological study of stage I squamous carcinoma of the cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol
1989;36:314.
66. Lee Y-N, Wang KL, Lin M-H, et al. Radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymph node dissection for treatment of cervical cancer: a clinical review of 954 cases. Gynecol Oncol 1989;32:135.
67. Fuller AF, Elliott N, Kosloff C, et al. Determinants of increased risk for recurrence in patients undergoing radical hysterectomy for stage IB and IIA carcinoma of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol
1989;33:34.
68. Barber H. Cervical cancer: pelvic and para-aortic lymph node sampling and its consequences. Baillieres Clin Obstet Gynaecol 1988;2:769.
69. Burghardt E, Pickel H, Haas J, et al. Prognostic factors and operative treatment of stages IB to IIB cervical cancer. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987;156:988.
70. Creasman WT, Soper JT, Clarke-Pearson D. Radical hysterectomy as therapy for early carcinoma of the cervix. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1986;155:964.
71. Boyce J, Fruchter R, Nicastri A, et al. Prognostic factors in stage I carcinoma of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1981;12:154.
72. Piver MS, Chung WS. Prognostic significance of cervical lesion size and pelvic node metastases in cervical carcinoma. Obstet Gynecol 1975;46:507.
73. Boronow RC. Stage I cervix cancer and pelvic node metastasis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1977; 127:135.
74. Sudarsanam A, Charyulu K, Belinson J, et al. Influence of exploratory celiotomy on the management of carcinoma of the cervix. A preliminary report. Cancer 1978;41:1049.
75. Stehman FB, Bundy BN, Disaia PJ, et al. Carcinoma of the cervix treated with radiation therapy. I. A multivariate analysis of prognostic variables in the Gynecologic Oncology Group. Cancer
1991;67:2776.
76. LaPolla JP, Schlaerth JB, Gaddis O, et al. The influence of surgical staging on the evaluation and treatment of patients with cervical carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1986;24:194.
77. Berman ML, Keys H, Creasman W, et al. Survival and patterns of recurrence in cervical cancer metastatic to periaortic lymph nodes (a Gynecologic Oncology Group study). Gynecol Oncol
1984;19:8.
78. Ballon SC, Berman ML, Lagasse LD, et al. Survival after extraperitoneal pelvic and paraaortic lymphadenectomy and radiation therapy in cervical carcinoma. Obstet Gynecol 1981;57:90.
79. Lagasse LD, Creasman WT, Singleton HM, et al. Results and complications of operative staging in cervical cancer: experiences of the Gynecologic Oncology Group. Gynecol Oncol 1980;9:90.
80. Buchsbaum H. Extrapelvic lymph node metastases in cervical carcinoma. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1979;133:814.
81. Wharton JT, Jones HWI, Day T, et al. Preirradiation celiotomy and extended-field irradiation for invasive carcinoma of the cervix. Obstet Gynecol 1977;49:333.
82. Nelson JH, Boyce J, Macasaet M, et al. Incidence, significance, and follow-up of para-aortic lymph node metastases in late invasive carcinoma of the cervix. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1977;128:336.
83. Guthrie RT, Buchsbaum HJ, White AJ, et al. Para-aortic lymph node irradiation in carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Cancer 1974;34:166.
84. Kjorstad KE, Kjolvenstvedt A, Strickert T. The value of complete lymphadenectomy in radical treatment of cancer of the cervix, stage IB. Cancer 1984;54:2215.
85. Fagundes H, Perez CA, Grigsby PW, et al. Distant metastases after irradiation alone in carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:197.
86. Van Nagell JR, Rayburn W, Donaldson ES, et al. Therapeutic implications of patterns of recurrence in cancer of the uterine cervix. Cancer 1979;44:2354.
87. Kim RY, Weppelmann B, Salter MM, et al. Skeletal metastases from cancer of the uterine cervix: frequency, patterns, and radiotherapeutic significance. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1987;13:705.
88. Richart RM. Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. Pathology annual. Vol 8. East Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1973:301.
89. Kurman RJ, Solomon D. The Bethesda system for reporting cervical/vaginal cytologic diagnoses: definitions, criteria, and explanatory notes for terminology and specimen adequacy. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1994.
90. Manos MM, Kinney WK, Hurley LB, et al. Identifying women with cervical neoplasia: using human papillomavirus DNA testing for equivocal Papanicolaou results [see comments]. JAMA
1999;281:1605.
91. Davey DD, Naryshkin S, Nielsen ML, et al. Atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance: interlaboratory comparison and quality assurance monitors. Diagn Cytopathol 1994;11:390.
92. Kinney WK, Manos MM, Hurley LB, et al. Where's the high-grade cervical neoplasia? The importance of minimally abnormal Papanicolaou diagnoses. Obstet Gynecol 1998;91:973.
93. Azodi M, Chambers SK, Rutherford TJ, et al. Adenocarcinoma in situ of the cervix: management and outcome. Gynecol Oncol 1999;73:348.
94. Jaworski RD, Pacey NF, Greenberg ML, et al. The histologic diagnosis of adeno-carcinoma in situ and related lesions of the cervix uteri: adeno-carcinoma in situ. Cancer 1988;61:1171.
95. Wolf JK, Levenback C, Malpica A, et al. Adenocarcinoma in situ of the cervix: significance of cone biopsy margins. Obstet Gynecol 1996;88:82.
96. Fu YS, Berek JS. Minimal cervical cancer: definition and histology. Rec Res Cancer Res 1988; 106:47.
97. Creasman WT, Zaino RJ, Major FJ, et al. Early invasive carcinoma of the cervix (3 to 5 mm invasion): risk factors and prognosis. A Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1998;178:62.
98. Fu YS, Reagan J. Pathology of the uterine cervix, vagina, and vulva. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1989.
99. Maiman MA, Fruchter RG, DiMaio TM, et al. Superficially invasive squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. Obstet Gynecol 1988;72:399.
100. Robert ME, Fu YS. Squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a review with emphasis on prognostic factors and unusual variants. Semin Diagn Pathol 1990;7:173.
101. Albores-Saavedra J, Gersell D, Gilks CB, et al. Terminology of endocrine tumors of the uterine cervix: results of a workshop sponsored by the College of American Pathologists and the
National Cancer Institute. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1997;121:34.
102. Abeler VM, Holm R, Nesland JM, et al. Small cell carcinoma of the cervix. A clinicopathologic study of 26 patients. Cancer 1994;73:672.
103. Morris M, Gershenson DM, Eifel PJ, et al. Treatment of small cell carcinoma of the cervix with cisplatin, doxorubicin, and etoposide. Gynecol Oncol 1992;47:62.
104. Sevin BU, Method MW, Nadji M, et al. Efficacy of radical hysterectomy as treatment for patients with small cell carcinoma of the cervix. Cancer 1996;77:1489.
105. Gilks CB, Young R, Aguirre P, et al. Adenoma malignum (minimal deviation adenocarcinoma) of the uterine cervix. A clinicopathological and immunohistological analysis of 26 cases. Am J
Surg Pathol 1989;13:717.
106. Kaku T, Enjoji M. Extremely well-differentiated adenocarcinoma (“adenoma malignum”). Int J Gynecol Pathol 1983;2:28.

107. Hirai Y, Takeshima N, Haga A, et al. A clinicocytopathologic study of adenoma malignum of the uterine cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1998;70:219.
108. Kaminski PF, Norris HJ. Minimal deviation carcinoma (“adeonoma malignum”) of the cervix. Int J Gynecol Pathol 1983;2:141.
109. Young RH, Scully RE. Villoglandular papillary adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix. A clinicopathologic analysis of 13 cases. Cancer 1989;63:1773.
110. Glucksmann A, Cherry CP. Incidence, histology, and response to radiation of mixed carcinomas (adenoacanthomas) of the uterine cervix. Am J Surg Pathol 1956;12:134.
111. Ferry JA, Scully RE. “Adenoid cystic” carcinoma and adenoid basal cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a study of 28 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1988;12:134.
112. Ross JC, Eifel PJ, Cox RS, et al. Primary mucinous adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. A clinicopathologic and histochemical study. Am J Surg Pathol 1983;7:715.
113. Koss LG, Stewart FW, Foote FW, et al. Some histological aspects of behavior of epidermoid carcinoma in situ and related lesions of the uterine cervix. Cancer 1963;16:1160.
114. American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology. Technical Bulletin. Washington, DC: ACOG, 1987.
115. Dewer MA, Hall K, Perchalski J. Cervical cancer screening. Past success and future challenge. Prim Care 1992;19:589.
116. Boyce JG, Fruchter RG. Lengthening the interval between Pap smears. Contemp Obstet Gynecol 1992;37a:82.
117. Eddy GL. Screening for cervical cancer. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:214.
118. Fahs MC, Mandelblatt J, Schechter C, et al. Cost effectiveness of cervical cancer screening for the elderly. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:520.
119. Reid R, Herschman BR, Crum CP, et al. Genital warts and cervical cancer. V. The tissue basis of colposcopic change. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1984;149:293.
120. Reid R, Stanhope CR, Herschman BR, et al. Genital warts and cervical cancer. IV. A colposcopic index for differentiating subclinical papillomaviral infection from cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1984;149:815.
121. Reid R, Scalzi P. Genital warts and cervical cancer. VII. An improved colposcopic index for differentiating benign papillomaviral infections from high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 1985;153:611.
122. Benedet JL, Anderson GH, Boyes DA. Colposcopic accuracy in the diagnosis of microinvasive and occult invasive carcinoma of the cervix. Obstet Gynecol 1985;65:557.
123. Kolstad P. Follow-up study of 232 patients with stage Ia1 and 411 patients with stage Ia2 squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix (microinvasive carcinoma). Gynecol Oncol 1989;33:265.
124. Townsend DE, Richart RM. Diagnostic errors in colposcopy. Gynecol Oncol 1981;12:259.
125. Van Nagell JR, Greenwell N, Powell DF, et al. Microinvasive carcinoma of the cervix. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1983;145:981.
126. Heller PB, Malfetano JH, Bundy BN, et al. Clinical-pathologic study of stage IIB, III, and IVA carcinoma of the cervix: extended diagnostic evaluation for paraaortic node metastasisa
Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1990;38:425.
127. Roy C, Le Bras Y, Mangold L, et al. Small pelvic lymph node metastases: evaluation with MR imaging. Clin Radiol 1997;52:437.
128. Rose PG, Adler LP, Rodriguez M, et al. Positron emission tomography for evaluating para-aortic nodal metastasis in locally advanced cervical cancer before surgical staging: a
surgicopathologic study. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:41.
129. Hawnaur JM, Johnson RJ, Buckley CH, et al. Staging, volume estimation and assessment of nodal status in carcinoma of the cervix: comparison of magnetic resonance imaging with surgical
findings. Clin Radiol 1994;49:443.
130. Martin AJ, Poon CS, Thomas GM, et al. MR evaluation of cervical cancer in hysterectomy specimens: correlation of quantitative T2 measurement and histology. J Magn Reson Imaging
1994;4:779.
131. Toita T, Kakinohana Y, Shinzato S, et al. Tumor diameter/volume and pelvic node status assessed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for uterine cervical cancer treated with irradiation. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:777.
132. Lien HH, Blomlie V, Iversen T, et al. Clinical stage I carcinoma of the cervix. Value of MR imaging in determining invasion into the parametrium. Acta Radiol 1993;34:130.
133. Shiraiwa M, Joja I, Asakawa T, et al. Cervical carcinoma: efficacy of thin-section oblique axial T2-weighted images for evaluating parametrial invasion. Abdom Imaging 1999;24:514.
134. Benedet J, Odicino F, Maisonneuve P, et al. Carcinoma of the cervix uteri. J Epidemiol Biostat 1998;3:5.
135. International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics. Staging announcement. FIGO staging of gynecologic cancers; cervical and vulva. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1995;5:319.
136. League of Nations Health Organization. Inquiry into the results of radiotherapy in cancer of the uterus. Atlas illustrating the division of cancer of the uterine cervix into four stages according to
the anatomo-clinical extent of the growth. Stockholm: Norstedt & Söner, 1938.
137. Eifel PJ. Problems with the clinical staging of carcinoma of the cervix. Semin Radiat Oncol 1994;4:1.
138. Seski JC, Murray RA, Morley G. Microinvasive squamous carcinoma of the cervix. Definition, histologic analysis, late results of treatment. Obstet Gynecol 1977;50:410.
139. American Joint Committee on Cancer. Cervix uteri. In: Beahrs O, Henson D, Hutter R, et al., eds. Manual for staging of cancer. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1988:151.
140. Piver MS, Barlow JJ, Krishnamsetty R. Five-year survival (with no evidence of disease) in patients with biopsy-confirmed aortic node metastases from cervical carcinoma. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1981;139:575.
141. Weiser EB, Bundy BN, Hoskins WJ, et al. Extraperitoneal versus transperitoneal selective paraaortic lymphadenectomy in the pretreatment surgical staging of advanced cervical carcinoma (a
Gynecologic Oncology Group study). Gynecol Oncol 1989;33:283.
142. Chi DS, Curtin JP. Gynecologic cancer and laparoscopy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 1999;26:201.
143. Possover M, Krause N, Plaul K, et al. Laparoscopic para-aortic and pelvic lymphadenectomy: experience with 150 patients and review of the literature. Gynecol Oncol 1998;71:19.
144. Cosin JA, Fowler JM, Chen MD, et al. Pretreatment surgical staging of patients with cervical carcinoma: the case for lymph node debulking. Cancer 1998;82:2241.
145. Hacker NF, Wain GV, Nicklin JL. Resection of bulky positive lymph nodes in patients with cervical carcinoma. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1995;5:250.
146. Manetta A, Podczaski ES, Larson JE, et al. Scalene lymph node biopsy in the preoperative evaluation of patients with recurrent cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1989;33:332.
147. Vasilev SA, Schlaerth JB. Scalene lymph node sampling in cervical carcinoma: a reappraisal. Gynecol Oncol 1990;37:120.
148. Eifel PJ, Morris M, Wharton JT, et al. The influence of tumor size and morphology on the outcome of patients with FIGO stage IB squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:9.
149. Perez CA, Grigsby PW, Nene SM, et al. Effect of tumor size on the prognosis of carcinoma of the uterine cervix treated with irradiation alone. Cancer 1992;69:2796.
150. Kristensen GB, Abeler VM, Risberg B, et al. Tumor size, depth of invasion, and grading of the invasive tumor front are the main prognostic factors in early squamous cell cervical carcinoma.
Gynecol Oncol 1999;74:245.
151. Sevin BU, Lu Y, Bloch DA, et al. Surgically defined prognostic parameters in patients with early cervical carcinoma. A multivariate survival tree analysis. Cancer 1996;78:1438.
152. Barillot I, Horiot JC, Pigneux J, et al. Carcinoma of the intact uterine cervix treated with radiotherapy alone: a French cooperative study: update and multivariate analysis of prognostics factors.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:969.
153. Lanciano RM, Won M, Hanks GE. A reappraisal of the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging system for cervical cancer. Cancer 1992;69:482.
154. Logsdon MD, Eifel PJ. FIGO stage IIIB squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix: an analysis of prognostic factors emphasizing the balance between external-beam and intracavitary
radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:763.
155. Inoue T, Okumura M. Prognostic significance of parametrial extension in patients with cervical carcinoma stages IB, IIA, and IIB. A study of 628 cases treated by radical hysterectomy and
lymphadenectomy with or without postoperative irradiation. Cancer 1984; 54:1714.
156. Schmitz H. The classification of uterine carcinoma for the study of the efficacy of radiation therapy. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1920;7:383.
157. Thoms WW, Eifel PJ, Smith TL, et al. Bulky endocervical carcinomas: a 23-year experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;23:491.
158. Delgado G, Bundy B, Zaino R, et al. Prospective surgical-pathological study of disease-free interval in patients with stage IB squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology
Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1990;38:352.
159. Inoue T, Chihara T, Morita K. The prognostic significance of the size of the largest nodes in metastatic carcinoma from the uterine cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1984;19:187.
160. Inoue T, Morita K. The prognostic significance of number of positive nodes in cervical carcinoma stages IB, IIA, and IIB. Cancer 1990;65:1923.
161. Tewfik HH, Buchsbaum HJ, Latourette HB, et al. Para-aortic lymph node irradiation in carcinoma of the cervix after exploratory laparotomy and biopsy-proven positive aortic nodes. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8:13.
162. Komaki R, Mattingly RF, Hoffman RG, et al. Irradiation of para-aortic lymph node metastases from carcinoma of the cervix or endometrium: preliminary results. Radiology 1983;147:245.
163. Rubin SC, Brookland R, Mikuta JJ, et al. Para-aortic nodal metastases in early cervical carcinoma: long-term survival following extended-field radiotherapy. Gynecol Oncol 1984;18:213.
164. Brookland RK, Rubin S, Danoff BF. Extended-field irradiation in the treatment of patients with cervical carcinoma involving biopsy proven para-aortic nodes. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1984;10:1875.
165. Nori D, Valentine E, Hilaris BS. The role of paraaortic node irradiation in the treatment of cancer of the cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:1469.
166. Podczaski E, Stryker JA, Kaminski P, et al. Extended-field radiation therapy for carcinoma of the cervix. Cancer 1990;66:251.
167. Cunningham M, Dunton C, Corn B, et al. Extended-field radiation therapy in early-stage cervical carcinoma: survival and complications. Gynecol Oncol 1991;43:51.
168. Kim PY, Monk BJ, Chabra S, et al. Cervical cancer with paraaortic metastases: significance of residual paraaortic disease after surgical staging. Gynecol Oncol 1998;69:243.
169. Boyce JG, Fruchter RG, Nicastri AD, et al. Vascular invasion in stage I carcinoma of the cervix. Cancer 1984;53:1175.
170. Burke TW, Hoskins WJ, Heller PB, et al. Prognostic factors associated with radical hysterectomy failure. Gynecol Oncol 1987;26:153.
171. Chung CK, Nahhas WA, Stryker JA, et al. Analysis of factors contributing to treatment failures in stages IB and IIA carcinoma of the cervix. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1980;138:550.
172. Fuller AF, Elliott N, Kosloff C, et al. Lymph node metastases from carcinoma of the cervix, stages IB and IIA: implications for prognosis and treatment. Gynecol Oncol 1982;13:165.
173. Nahhas WA, Sharkey FE, Whitney CW, et al. The prognostic significance of vascular channel involvement and deep stromal penetration in early cervical carcinoma. Am J Clin Oncol
1983;6:239.
174. Zreik TG, Chambers JT, Chambers SK. Parametrial involvement, regardless of nodal status: a poor prognostic factor for cervical cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1996;87:741.
175. Roman T, Souhami L, Freeman C, et al. High dose rate afterloading intracavitary therapy in carcinoma of the cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:921.
176. Kainz C, Gitsch G, Tempfer C, et al. Vascular space invasion and inflammatory stromal reaction as prognostic factors in patients with surgically treated cervical cancer stage IB to IIB.
Anticancer Res 1994;14:2145.
177. Grimard L, Genest P, Girard A, et al. Prognostic significance of endometrial extension in carcinoma of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1986;31:301.
178. Mitani Y, Yukinari S, Jimi S, Iwasaki H. Carcinomatous infiltration into the uterine body in carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1964;89:984.
179. Noguchi H, Shiozawa I, Kitahara T, et al. Uterine body invasion of carcinoma of the uterine cervix as seen from surgical specimens. Gynecol Oncol 1988;30:173.
180. Perez CA, Camel HM, Askin F, et al. Endometrial extension of carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a prognostic factor that may modify staging. Cancer 1981;48:170.
181. Grigsby PW, Perez CA, Kuske RR, et al. Adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix: lack of evidence for a poor prognosis. Radiother Oncol 1988;12:289.
182. Kilgore LC, Soong SJ, Gore H, et al. Analysis of prognostic features in adenocarcinoma of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1988;31:137.
183. Miller BE, Flax SD, Arheart K, et al. The presentation of adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix. Cancer 1993;72:1281.
184. Shingleton HM, Gore H, Bradley DH, et al. Adenocarcinoma of the cervix. I. Clinical evaluation and pathologic features. Obstet Gynecol 1981;139:799.
185. Waldenström A-C, Hrovath G. Survival of patients with adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix in western Sweden. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1999;9:18.
186. Chen RJ, Lin YH, Chen CA, et al. Influence of histologic type and age on survival rates for invasive cervical carcinoma in Taiwan. Gynecol Oncol 1999;73:184.
187. Eide TJ. Cancer of the uterine cervix in Norway by histologic type, 19701984. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;79:199.
188. Eifel PJ, Burke TW, Morris M, et al. Adenocarcinoma as an independent risk factor for disease recurrence in patients with stage IB cervical carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1995;59:38.
189. Hopkins M, Morley GW. A comparison of adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. Obstet Gynecol 1991;77:912.
190. Kleine W, Rau K, Schwoeorer D, et al. Prognosis of adenocarcinoma of the cervix uteri: a comparative study. Gynecol Oncol 1989;35:145.
191. Lai C-H, Hsueh S, Hong J-H, et al. Are adenocarcinomas and adenosquamous carcinomas different from squamous carcinomas in stage IB and II cervical cancer patients undergoing primary
radical surgery? Int J Gynecol Cancer 1999;9:28.
192. Eifel PJ, Burke TW, Delclos L, et al. Early stage I adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix: treatment results in patients with tumors <4 cm in diameter. Gynecol Oncol 1991;41:199.
193. Berek JS, Hacker NS, Fu YS, et al. Adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix: histologic variables associated with lymph node metastasis and survival. Obstet Gynecol 1985;65:46.
194. Matthews CM, Burke TW, Tornos C, et al. Stage I cervical adenocarcinoma: prognostic evaluation of surgically treated patients. Gynecol Oncol 1993;49:19.
195. Raju K, Kjorstad KE, Abeler V. Prognostic factors in the treatment of stage IB adenocarcinoma of the cervix. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1991;1:69.

196. Bush R. The significance of anemia in clinical radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:2047.
197. Girinski T, Pejovic-Lenfant M, Bourhis J, et al. Prognostic value of hemoglobin concentrations and blood transfusions in advanced carcinoma of the cervix treated by radiation therapy: results of
a retrospective study of 386 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;16:37.
198. Kapp DS, Fischer D, Gutierrez E, et al. Pretreatment prognostic factors in carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a multivariable analysis of the effect of age, stage, histology and blood counts on
survival. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:445.
199. Brady LW, Plenk HP, Hanley JA, et al. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy for carcinoma of the cervix stages IIB, IIIA, IIIB and IVA: results of a randomized study by the Radiation Therapy Oncology
Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:990.
200. Dische S, Anderson PJ, Sealy R, et al. Carcinoma of the cervixanaemia, radiotherapy and hyperbaric oxygen. Br J Radiol 1983;56:251.
201. Dische S, Chassagne D, Hope-Stone HF, et al. A trial of Ro 03-8799 (pimonidazole) in carcinoma of the uterine cervix: an interim report from the Medical Research Council Working Party on
Advanced Carcinoma of the Cervix. Radiother Oncol 1993;26:93.
202. Grigsby PW, Winter K, Wasserman TH, et al. Irradiation with or without misonidazole for patients with stages IIIB and IVA carcinoma of the cervix: final results of RTOG 80-05. Radiation
Therapy Oncology Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:513.
203. Maor MH, Gillespie BW, Peters LJ, et al. Neutron therapy in cervical cancer: results of a phase III RTOG study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14:885.
204. Overgaard J, Bentzen SM, Kolstad P, et al. Misonidazole combined with radiotherapy in the treatment of carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;16:1069.
205. Sundfør K, Trope C, Suo Z, et al. Normobaric oxygen treatment during radiotherapy for carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Results from a prospective controlled randomized trial. Radiother Oncol
1999;50:157.
206. Fyles AW, Milosevic M, Wong R, et al. Oxygenation predicts radiation response and survival in patients with cervix cancer [published erratum appears in Radiother Oncol 1999;50:371].
Radiother Oncol 1998;48:149.
207. Höckel M, Vorndran B, Schlenger K, et al. Tumor oxygenation: a new predictive parameter in locally advanced cancer of the uterine cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1993;51:141.
208. Sundfør K, Lyng H, Rofstad EK. Tumour hypoxia and vascular density as predictors of metastasis in squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Br J Cancer 1998;78:822.
209. Bolger BS, Dabbas M, Lopes A, et al. Prognostic value of preoperative squamous cell carcinoma antigen level in patients surgically treated for cervical carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1997;65:309.
210. Duk JM, Groenier KH, de Bruijn HWA, et al. Pretreatment serum squamous cell carcinoma antigen: a newly identified prognostic factor in early-stage cervical carcinoma. J Clin Oncol
1996;14:111.
211. Hong JH, Tsai CS, Chang JT, et al. The prognostic significance of pre- and posttreatment SCC levels in patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix treated by radiotherapy. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:823.
212. Massuger LF, Koper NP, Thomas CM, et al. Improvement of clinical staging in cervical cancer with serum squamous cell carcinoma antigen and CA 125 determinations. Gynecol Oncol
1997;64:473.
213. Alvarez RD, Soong SJ, Kinney WK, et al. Identification of prognostic factors and risk groups in patients found to have nodal metastasis at the time of radical hysterectomy for early-stage
squamous carcinoma of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1989;35:130.
214. Lanciano RM, Won M, Coia L, et al. Pretreatment and treatment factors associated with improved outcome in squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a final report of the 1973 and 1978
Patterns of Care Studies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:667.
215. Rutledge FN, Mitchell MR, Munsell M, et al. Youth as a prognostic factor in carcinoma of the cervix: a matched analysis. Gynecol Oncol 1992;44:123.
216. Spanos WJ, King A, Keeney E, et al. Age as a prognostic factor in carcinoma of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1989;35:66.
217. Estape R, Angioli R, Wagman F, et al. Significance of intraperitoneal cytology in patients undergoing radical hysterectomy. Gynecol Oncol 1998;68:169.
218. Kashimura M, Sugihara K, Toki N, et al. The significance of peritoneal cytology in uterine cervix and endometrial cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1997;67:285.
219. Hernandez E, Heller PB, Whitney C, et al. Thrombocytosis in surgically treated stage IB squamous cell cervical carcinoma (a Gynecologic Oncology Group study). Gynecol Oncol 1994;55:328.
220. Lopes A, Daras V, Cross PA, et al. Thrombocytosis as a prognostic factor in women with cervical cancer. Cancer 1994;74:90.
221. Höckel M, Schlenger K, Mitze M, et al. Tumor vascularitya novel prognostic factor in advanced cancer of the uterine cervix. Proc SocGynecol Oncol 1995:48.
222. Wiggins DL, Granai CO, Steinhoff MM, et al. Tumor angiogenesis as a prognostic factor in cervical carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1995;56:353.
223. Gasinska A, Urbanski K, Jakubowicz J, et al. Tumour cell kinetics as a prognostic factor in squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix treated with radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol 1999;50:77.
224. Kristensen GB, Kaern J, Abeler VM, et al. No prognostic impact of flow-cytometric measured DNA ploidy and S-phase fraction in cancer of the uterine cervix: a prospective study of 465
patients. Gynecol Oncol 1995;57:79.
225. Lombard I, Vincent-Salomon A, Validire P, et al. Human papillomavirus genotype as a major determinant of the course of cervical cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2613.
226. Duggan MA, McGregor SE, Benoit JL, et al. The human papillomavirus status of invasive cervical adenocarcinoma: a clinicopathological and outcome analysis. Hum Pathol 1995;26:319.
227. Ikenberg H, Wiegering I, Pfisterer J, et al. Human papillomavirus DNA in tumor-free regional lymph nodes: a potential prognostic marker in cervical cancer. Cancer J Sci Am 1996;2:28.
228. Kobayashi Y, Yoshinouchi M, Tianqi G, et al. Presence of human papilloma virus DNA in pelvic lymph nodes can predict unexpected recurrence of cervical cancer in patients with histologically
negative lymph nodes. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:979.
229. Keys HM, Bundy BN, Stehman FB, et al. Cisplatin, radiation, and adjuvant hysterectomy for bulky stage IB cervical carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1154.
230. Morris M, Eifel PJ, Lu J, et al. Pelvic radiation with concurrent chemotherapy compared with pelvic and paraaortic radiation for high-risk cervical cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1137.
231. Peters WAI, Liu PY, Barrett R, et al. Concurrent chemotherapy and pelvic radiation therapy compared with pelvic radiation therapy alone as adjuvant therapy after radical surgery in high-risk
early-stage cancer of the cervix. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:1606.
232. Rose PG, Bundy BN, Watkins J, et al. Concurrent cisplatin-based chemotherapy and radiotherapy for locally advanced cervical cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1144.
233. Whitney CW, Sause W, Bundy BN, et al. A randomized comparison of fluorouracil plus cisplatin versus hydroxyurea as an adjunct to radiation therapy in stages IIB-IVA carcinoma of the cervix
with negative para-aortic lymph nodes: a Gynecologic Oncology Group and Southwest Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1339.
234. Creasman WT, Hinshaw WM, Clarke-Pearson DL. Cryosurgery in the management of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. Obstet Gynecol 1984;63:145.
235. Schantz A, Thormann L. Cryosurgery for dysplasia of the uterine ectocervix. A randomized study of the efficacy of the single- and double-freeze technique. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
1984;1984:417.
236. Mitchell MF, Tortolero-Luna G, Cook E, et al. A randomized clinical trial of cryotherapy, laser vaporization, and loop electrosurgical excision for treatment of squamous intraepithelial lesions of
the cervix. Obstet Gynecol 1998;92:737.
237. Gunasekera PC, Phipps JM, Lewis BV. Large loop excision of the transformation zone (LLETZ) compared to carbon dioxide laser in the treatment of CIN: a superior mode of treatment. Br J
Obstet Gynecol 1990;97:995.
238. Murdoch JB, Grimshaw RN, Monaghan JM. Loop diathermy excision of the abnormal cervical transformation zone. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1991;1:105.
239. Burger MPM, Hollema H. The reliability of the histologic diagnosis in colposcopically directed biopsy. A plea for LETZ. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1993;3:385.
240. Wright TC, Richart RM, Ferenczy A, et al. Comparisons of specimens removed by CO 2 laser conization and loop electrosurgical excision procedure. Obstet Gynecol 1992;79:147.
241. Alvarez RD, Helm CW, Edwards R, et al. Prospective randomized trial of LLETZ versus laser ablation in patients with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. Gynecol Oncol 1994; 52:175.
242. Simon NL, Gore H, Shingleton HM, et al. A study of superficially invasive carcinoma of the cervix. Obstet Gynecol 1986;68:19.
243. Burghardt E, Girardi F, Lahousen M, et al. Microinvasive carcinoma of the uterine cervix (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage IA). Cancer 1991;67:1037.
244. Morris M, Mitchell MF, Silva EG, et al. Cervical conization as definitive therapy for early invasive squamous carcinoma of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1993;51:193.
245. Luesley DM, McCrum A, Terry PB, et al. Complications of cone biopsy related to the dimensions of the cone and the influence of prior colposcopic assessment. Br J Obstet Gynecol
1985;92:158.
246. Magrina JF, Goodrich MA, Weaver AL, et al. Modified radical hysterectomy: morbidity and mortality. Gynecol Oncol 1995;59:277.
247. Sevin BU, Nadji M, Avarette HE, et al. Microinvasive carcinoma of the cervix. Cancer 1992;70:2121.
248. Copeland LJ, Silva EG, Gershenson DM, et al. Superficially invasive squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1992;45:307.
249. Grigsby PW, Perez CA. Radiotherapy alone for medically inoperable carcinoma of the cervix: stage IA and carcinoma in situ. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:375.
250. Hamberger AD, Fletcher GH, Wharton JT. Results of treatment of early stage I carcinoma of the uterine cervix with intracavitary radium alone. Cancer 1978;41:980.
251. Boyce J, Fruchter RG, Kasambilides E, et al. Prognostic factors in carcinoma of the vulva. Gynecol Oncol 1985;20:364.
252. Lowrey GC, Mendenhall WM, Million RR. Stage IB or IIA-B carcinoma of the intact uterine cervix treated with irradiation: a multivariate analysis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:205.
253. Horiot JC, Pigneux J, Pourquier H, et al. Radiotherapy alone in carcinoma of the intact uterine cervix according to G. H. Fletcher guidelines: a French cooperative study of 1383 cases. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14:605.
254. Liu W, Meigs JV. Radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy. A review of 473 cases including 244 for primary invasive carcinoma of the cervix. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1955;69:1.
255. Hoskins WJ, Ford J, Lutz M, et al. Radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy for the management of early invasive cancer of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1976;4:278.
256. Volterrani F, Feltre L, Sigurta D, et al. Radiotherapy versus surgery in the treatment of cervix stage Ib cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:1781.
257. Inoue T. Prognostic significance of the depth of invasion relating to nodal metastases, parametrial extension, and cell types. A study of 628 cases with stage IB, IIA, and IIB cervical cancer.
Cancer 1984;54:3035.
258. Kenter GG, Ansink AC, Heintz APM, et al. Carcinoma of the uterine cervix stage I and IIA: results of surgical treatment: complications, recurrence, and survival. Eur J Surg Oncol 1989;15:55.
259. Hopkins MP, Reid GC, Vettrano I, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva: prognostic factors influencing survival. Gynecol Oncol 1991;43:113.
260. Burghardt E, Hofmann HMH, Ebner F, et al. Results of surgical treatment of 1028 cervical cancers studied with volumetry. Cancer 1992;70:648.
261. Montana GS, Fowler WC, Varia MA, et al. Analysis of results of radiation therapy for stage IB carcinoma of the cervix. Cancer 1987;60:2195.
262. Coia L, Won M, Lanciano R, et al. The Patterns of Care Outcome Study for cancer of the uterine cervix. Results of the second national practice survey. Cancer 1990;66:2451.
263. Landoni F, Maneo A, Colombo A, et al. Randomised study of radical surgery versus radiotherapy for stage Ib-IIa cervical cancer. Lancet 1997;350:535.
264. Alvarez RD, Gelder MS, Gore H, et al. Radical hysterectomy in the treatment of patients with bulky early stage carcinoma of the cervix uteri. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1993;176:539.
265. Bloss JD, Berman ML, Mukhererjee J, et al. Bulky stage IB cervical carcinoma managed by primary radical hysterectomy followed by tailored radiotherapy. Gynecol Oncol 1992;47:21.
266. Rettenmaier MA, Casanova DM, Micha JP, et al. Radical hysterectomy and tailored postoperative radiation therapy in the management of bulky stage IB cervical cancer. Cancer 1989;63:2220.
267. Orr JW, Shingleton HM, Hatch KD, et al. Correlation of perioperative morbidity and conization-radical hysterectomy interval. Obstet Gynecol 1982;59:726.
268. Hatch KD, Parham G, Shingleton H, et al. Ureteral strictures and fistulae following radical hysterectomy. Gynecol Oncol 1984;19:17.
269. Green T. Ureteral suspension for prevention of ureteral complications following radical Wertheim hysterectomy. Obstet Gynecol 1966;28:1.
270. Mann WJ, Orr JW, Shingleton HM, et al. Perioperative influences on infectious morbidity in radical hysterectomy. Gynecol Oncol 1981;11:207.
271. Forney JP. The effect of radical hysterectomy on bladder physiology. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1980;138:374.
272. Sasaki H, Yoshida T, Noda K, et al. Urethral pressure profiles following radical hysterectomy. Obstet Gynecol 1982;59:101.
273. Ralph G, Tamussino K, Lichtenegger W. Urological complications after radical hysterectomy with or without radiotherapy for cervical cancer. Arch Gynecol Obstet 1990;248:61.
274. Farquharson DI, Shingleton HM, Soong SJ, et al. The adverse effects of cervical cancer treatment on bladder function. Gynecol Oncol 1987;27:15.
275. Gonzales DG, Ketting BW, Van Bunningen B, et al. Carcinoma of the uterine cervix stage IB and IIA: results of postoperative irradiation in patients with microscopic infiltration in the
parametrium and/or lymph node metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;16:389.
276. Hogan WM, Littman P, Griner L, et al. Results of radiation therapy given after radical hysterectomy. Cancer 1982;49:1278.
277. Kinney WK, Alvarez RD, Reid GC, et al. Value of adjuvant whole-pelvis irradiation after Wertheim hysterectomy for early-stage squamous carcinoma of the cervix with pelvic nodal metastasis:
a matched-control study. Gynecol Oncol 1989;34:258.
278. Morrow CP. Is pelvic radiation beneficial in the postoperative management of stage Ib squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix with pelvic node metastases treated by radical hysterectomy and
pelvic lymphadenectomy? Gynecol Oncol 1980;10:105.
279. Remy JC, Di Maio T, Fruchter RG, et al. Adjunctive radiation after radical hysterectomy in stage IB squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1990;38:161.
280. Soisson AP, Soper JT, Clarke-Pearson DL, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy following radical hysterectomy for patients with stage IB and IIA cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1990;37:390.
281. Sedlis A, Bundy BN, Rotman MZ, et al. A randomized trial of pelvic radiation therapy versus no further therapy in selected patients with stage IB carcinoma of the cervix after radical

hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy: a Gynecologic Oncology Group Study. Gynecol Oncol 1999;73:177.
282. Chatani M, Nose T, Masaki N, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy after radical hysterectomy of cervical cancer. Prognostic factors and complications. Strahlenther Onkol 1998;174:504.
283. Russell AH, Tong DY, Figge DC, et al. Adjuvant postoperative pelvic radiation for carcinoma of the uterine cervix: pattern of cancer recurrence in patients undergoing elective radiation
following radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:211.
284. Barter JF, Soong SJ, Shingleton HM, et al. Complications of combined radical hysterectomypostoperative radiation therapy in women with early stage cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol
1989;32:292.
285. Fiorca JV, Roberts WS, Greenberg H, et al. Morbidity and survival patterns in patients after radical hysterectomy and postoperative adjuvant pelvic radiotherapy. Gynecol Oncol 1990; 36:343.
286. Montz FJ, Holschneider CH, Solh S, et al. Small bowel obstruction following radical hysterectomy: risk factors, incidence and operative findings. Gynecol Oncol 1994;53:114.
287. Snijders-Keilholz A, Hellebrekers BW, Zwinderman AH, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy following radical hysterectomy for patients with early-stage cervical carcinoma (19841996). Radiother Oncol
1999;51:161.
288. Thomas GM, Dembo AJ. Is there a role for adjuvant pelvic radiotherapy after radical hysterectomy in early stage cervical cancer? Int J Gynecol Cancer 1991;1:1.
289. Bandy LC, Clarke-Pearson DL, Soper JT, et al. Long-term effects on bladder function following radical hysterectomy with and without postoperative radiation. Gynecol Oncol 1987;26:160.
290. Durrance FY, Fletcher GH, Rutledge FN. Analysis of central recurrent disease in stages I and II squamous cell carcinomas of the cervix on intact uterus. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1969;106:831.
291. Mendenhall WM, McCarty PJ, Morgan LS, et al. Stage IB-IIA-B carcinoma of the intact uterine cervix greater than or equal to 6 cm in diameter: is adjuvant extrafascial hysterectomy beneficial?
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:899.
292. Perez CA, Kao MS. Radiation therapy alone or combined with surgery in the treatment of barrel-shaped carcinoma of the uterine cervix (stages IB, IIA, IIB). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1985;11:1903.
293. Eifel PJ, Moughan J, Owen JB, et al. Patterns of radiotherapy practice for patients with squamous carcinoma of the uterine cervix. A Patterns of Care Study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1999;43:351.
294. Piver MS, Rutledge F, Smith JP. Five classes of extended hysterectomy for women with cervical cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1974;44:265.
295. Rotman M, John MJ, Moon SH, et al. Limitations of adjunctive surgery in carcinoma of the cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1979;5:327.
296. Keys H, Bundy B, Stehman F, et al. Adjuvant hysterectomy after radiation therapy reduces detection of local recurrence in “bulky” stage IB cervical cancer without improving survival: results of
a prospective randomized GOG trial. Cancer J Sci Am 1997;3:117.
297. Benedetti Panici P, Scambia G, Greggi S, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and radical surgery in locally advanced cervical carcinoma. Prognostic factors for response and survival. Cancer
1991;67:372.
298. Eddy GL. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy before surgery in cervical cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1996;21:93.
299. Sardi JE, Giaroli A, Sananes C, et al. Long-term follow-up of the first randomized trial using neoadjuvant chemotherapy in stage Ib squamous carcinoma of the cervix: the final results. Gynecol
Oncol 1997;67:61.
300. Eifel P, Thames H. Has the influence of treatment duration on local control of carcinoma of the cervix been defined? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:1527.
301. Fyles AW, Pintilie M, Kirkbride P, et al. Prognostic factors in patients with cervix cancer treated by radiation therapy: results of a multiple regression analysis. Radiother Oncol 1995;35:107.
302. Girinski T, Rey A, Roche B, et al. Overall treatment time in advanced cervical carcinomas: a critical parameter in treatment outcome. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:1051.
303. Lanciano RM, Pajak TF, Martz K, et al. The influence of treatment time on outcome for squamous cell cancer of the uterine cervix treated with radiation: a Patterns-of-Care Study. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:391.
304. Perez CA, Grigsby PW, Castro-Vita H, et al. Carcinoma of the uterine cervix. I. Impact of prolongation of overall treatment time and timing of brachytherapy on outcome of radiation therapy. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:1275.
305. Petereit DG, Sarkaria JN, Chappell R, et al. The adverse effect of treatment prolongation in cervical carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:1301.
306. Greer BE, Koh WJ, Figge DC, et al. Gynecologic radiotherapy fields defined by intraoperative measurements. Gynecol Oncol 1990;38:421.
307. Kim RY, McGinnis LS, Spencer SA, et al. Conventional four-field pelvic radiotherapy technique without CT treatment planning in cancer of the cervix: potential geographic miss. Radiother
Oncol 1994;30:140.
308. Thomas L, Chacon B, Kind M, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging in the treatment planning of radiation therapy in carcinoma of the cervix treated with the four-field pelvic technique. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:827.
309. Russell AH. Contemporary radiation treatment planning for patients with cancer of the uterine cervix. Semin Oncol 1994;21:30.
310. McIntyre JF, Eifel PJ, Levenback C, et al. Ureteral stricture as a late complication of radiotherapy for stage IB carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Cancer 1995;75:836.
311. Chao C, Williamson JF, Grigsby PW, et al. Uterosacral space involvement in locally advanced carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:397.
312. Rotman M, Pajak M, Choi K, et al. Prophylactic extended-field irradiation of para-aortic lymph nodes in stages IIB and bulky IB and IIA cervical carcinomas. Ten-year treatment results of RTOG
79-20. JAMA 1995;274:387.
313. Haie C, Pejovie MH, Gerbaulet A, et al. Is prophylactic para-aortic irradiation worthwhile in the treatment of advanced cervical carcinoma? Results of a controlled clinical trial of the EORTC
radiotherapy group. Radiother Oncol 1988;11:101.
314. Grigsby PW, Lu JD, Mutch DG, et al. Twice-daily fractionation of external irradiation with brachytherapy and chemotherapy in carcinoma of the cervix with positive para-aortic lymph nodes:
phase II study of the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 92-10. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:817.
315. Malfetano JH, Keys H. Aggressive multimodality treatment for cervical cancer with paraaortic lymph node metastases. Gynecol Oncol 1991;42:44.
316. Varia MA, Bundy BN, Deppe G, et al. Cervical carcinoma metastatic to para-aortic nodes: extended-field radiation therapy with concomitant 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin chemotherapy: a
Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998; 42:1015.
317. Fletcher GH. Female pelvis. In: Fletcher GH, ed. Textbook of radiotherapy. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1980.
318. Delclos L, Fletcher GH, Sampiere V, et al. Can the Fletcher gamma ray colpostat system be extrapolated to other systems? Cancer 1978;41:970.
319. Delclos L, Fletcher GH, Moore EB, et al. Minicolpostats, dome cylinders, other additions and improvements of the Fletcher-Suit afterloadable system: indications and limitations of their use. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:1195.
320. Delclos L. Gynecologic cancers: pelvic examination and treatment planning. In: Levitt S, Tapley N, eds. Technological basis of radiation therapy: practical clinical applications. Philadelphia: Lea
& Febiger, 1984:193.
321. International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements. Dose and volume specification for reporting intracavitary therapy in gynecology. Vol. 38. Bethesda, MD: International
Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements, 1985:1.
322. Kapp KS, Stuecklschweiger GF, Kapp DS, et al. Dosimetry of intracavitary placements for uterine and cervical carcinoma: results of orthogonal film, TLD, and CT-assisted techniques.
Radiother Oncol 1992;24:137.
323. Ling CC, Schell MC, Working KR, et al. CT-assisted assessment of bladder and rectum dose in gynecological implants. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:1577.
324. Schoeppel SL, LaVigne ML, Martel MK, et al. Three-dimensional treatment planning of intracavitary gynecologic implants: analysis of ten cases and implications for dose specification. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;28:277.
325. Eifel PJ, Morris M, Delclos L, et al. Radiation therapy for cervical carcinoma. In: Dilts PVJ, Sciarra JJ, eds. Gynecology and obstetrics. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1993:1.
326. Perez CA, Grigsby PW, Lockett MA, et al. Radiation therapy morbidity in carcinoma of the uterine cervix: dosimetric and clinical correlation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:855.
327. Roeske JC, Mundt AJ, Halpern H, et al. Late rectal sequelae following definitive radiation therapy for carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a dosimetric analysis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1997;37:351.
328. Haie-Meder C, Kramar A, Lambin P, et al. Analysis of complications in a prospective randomized trial comparing two brachytherapy low dose rates in cervical carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1994;29:1195.
329. Amdur RJ, Bedford JS. Dose-rate effects between 0.3 and 30 Gy/h in a normal and a malignant human cell line [see comments]. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:83.
330. Akine Y, Arimoto H, Ogino T, et al. High-dose-rate intracavitary irradiation in the treatment of carcinoma of the uterine cervix: early experience with 84 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1988;14:893.
331. Ito H, Kumagaya H, Shigematsu N, et al. High dose rate intracavitary brachytherapy for recurrent cervical cancer of the vaginal stump following hysterectomy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1991;20:927.
332. Kapp KS, Stuecklschweiger GF, Kapp DS, et al. Prognostic factors in patients with carcinoma of the uterine cervix treated with external-beam irradiation and IR-192 high-dose-rate
brachytherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:531.
333. Newman H, James K, Smith C. Treatment of cancer of the cervix with a high-dose-rate afterloading machine (the Cathetron). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:931.
334. Orton CG, Seyedsadr M, Somnay A. Comparison of high and low dose rate remote afterloading for cervix cancer and the importance of fractionation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:1425.
335. Patel FD, Sharma SC, Neigi PS, et al. Low dose rate vs. high dose rate brachytherapy in the treatment of carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a clinical trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1993;28:335.
336. Petereit DG, Pearcey R. Literature analysis of high dose rate brachytherapy fractionation schedules in the treatment of cervical cancer: is there an optimal fractionation schedule? Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:359.
337. Shigematsu Y, Nishiyama K, Masaki N, et al. Treatment of carcinoma of the uterine cervix by remotely controlled afterloading intracavitary radiotherapy with high-dose rate: a comparative
study with a low-dose rate system. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:351.
338. Stitt JA, Fowler JF, Thomadsen BR, et al. High dose rate intracavitary brachytherapy for carcinoma of the cervix: the Madison system: I. Clinical and radiobiological considerations. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:383.
339. Eifel PJ. High dose-rate brachytherapy for carcinoma of the cervix: high tech or high risk? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:383.
340. Scalliet P, Gerbaulet A, Dubray B. HDR versus LDR gynecological brachytherapy revisited. Radiother Oncol 1993;28:118.
341. Aristizabal SA, Woolfitt B, Valencia A, et al. Interstitial parametrial implants in carcinoma of the cervix stage II-B. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:445.
342. Fontanesi J, Dylewski G, Photopulos G, et al. Impact of dose on local control and development of complications in patients with advanced gynecological malignancies treated by interstitial
template boost technique. Endocuriether Hyperther Oncol 1993;9:115.
343. Gaddis O, Morrow CP, Klement V, et al. Treatment of cervical carcinoma employing a template for transperineal interstitial Ir 192 brachytherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983; 9:819.
344. Martinez A, Edmundson GK, Cox RS, et al. Combination of external-beam irradiation and multiple-site perineal applicator (MUPIT) for treatment of locally advanced or recurrent prostatic,
anorectal, and gynecologic malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:391.
345. Syed AMN, Puthwala AA, Neblett D, et al. Transperineal interstitial-intracavitary “Syed-Neblett” applicator in the treatment of carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Endocuriether Hyperther Oncol
1986;2:1.
346. Hughes-Davies L, Silver B, Kapp D. Parametrial interstitial brachytherapy for advanced or recurrent pelvic malignancy: the Harvard/Stanford experience. Gynecol Oncol 1995;58:24.
347. Stock RG, Chan K, Terk M, et al. A new technique for performing Syed-Neblett template interstitial implants for gynecologic malignancies using transrectal-ultrasound guidance. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:819.
348. Recio FO, Piver MS, Hempling RE, et al. Laparoscopic-assisted application of interstitial brachytherapy for locally advanced cervical carcinoma: results of a pilot study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1998;40:411.
349. Erickson B, Gillin MT. Interstitial implantation of gynecologic malignancies. J Surg Oncol 1997;66:285.
350. Gupta AK, Vicini FA, Frazier AJ, et al. Iridium-192 transperineal interstitial brachytherapy for locally advanced or recurrent gynecological malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1999;43:1055.
351. Demanes DJ, Rodriguez RR, Bendre DD, et al. High dose rate transperineal interstitial brachytherapy for cervical cancer: high pelvic control and low complication rates. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1999;45:105.
352. Corn BW, Shaktman BD, Lanciano RM, et al. Intra- and perioperative complications associated with tandem and colpostat application for cervix cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1997;64:224.

353. Dusenbery KE, Carson LF, Potish RA. Perioperative morbidity and mortality of gynecologic brachytherapy. Cancer 1991;67:2786.
354. Jhingran A, Eifel PJ. Perioperative and postoperative complications of intracavitary radiation for FIGO stage I-III carcinoma of the cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:151.
355. Lanciano RM, Martz D, Montana GS, et al. Influence of age, prior abdominal surgery, fraction size, and dose on complications after radiation therapy for squamous cell cancer of the uterine
cervix. A Patterns of Care Study. Cancer 1992;69:2124.
356. Eifel PJ, Levenback C, Wharton JT, et al. Time course and incidence of late complications in patients treated with radiation therapy for FIGO stage IB carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:1289.
357. Potish RA. Importance of predisposing factors in the development of enteric damage. Am J Clin Oncol 1982;5:189.
358. Van Nagell JR, Parker JC, Maruyama Y, et al. The effect of pelvic inflammatory disease on enteric complications following radiation therapy for cervical cancer. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1977;128:767.
359. Bruner DW, Lanciano R, Keegan M, et al. Vaginal stenosis and sexual function following intracavitary radiation for the treatment of cervical and endometrial carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1993;27:825.
360. Hreshchyshyn MM, Aron BS, Boronow RC, et al. Hydroxyurea or placebo combined with radiation to treat stages IIIB and IV cervical cancer confined to the pelvis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1979;5:317.
361. Stehman FB, Bundy BN, Thomas G, et al. Hydroxyurea versus misonidazole with radiation in cervical carcinoma: long-term follow-up of a Gynecologic Oncology Group trial. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:1523.
362. Chaney AW, Eifel PJ, Logsdon MD, et al. Mature results of a pilot study of pelvic radiotherapy with concurrent continuous infusion intra-arterial 5-FU for stage IIIB-IVA squamous cell carcinoma
of the cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:113.
363. Thomas G, Dembo A, Ackerman I, et al. A randomized trial of standard versus partially hyperfractionated radiation with or without concurrent 5-fluorouracil in locally advanced cervical cancer.
Gynecol Oncol 1998;69:137.
364. Chen MD, Paley PJ, Potish RA, et al. Phase I trial of taxol as a radiation sensitizer with cisplatin in advanced cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1997;67:131.
365. Muderspach LI, Curtin JP, Roman LD, et al. Carboplatin as a radiation sensitizer in locally advanced cervical cancer: a pilot study. Gynecol Oncol 1997;65:336.
366. Rakovitch E, Fyles AW, Pintilie M, et al. Role of mitomycin C in the development of late bowel toxicity following chemoradiation for locally advanced carcinoma of the cervix.
Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1997;38:979.
367. Christie DR, Bull CA, Gebski V, et al. Concurrent 5-fluorouracil, mitomycin C and irradiation in locally advanced cervix cancer. Radiother Oncol 1995;37:181.
368. Malfetano JH, Keys H, Cunningham MJ, et al. Extended-field radiation and cisplatin for stage IIB and IIIB cervical carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1997;67:203.
369. Symonds RP, Habeshaw T, Watson ER, et al. Combination chemotherapy prior to radical radiotherapy for stage III and IV carcinoma of the cervix. Clin Radiol 1987;38:273.
370. Kirsten F, Atkinson K, Coppleson J, et al. Combination chemotherapy followed by surgery or radiotherapy in patients with locally advanced cervical cancer. Br J Obstet Gynecol 1987;94:583.
371. Lara PC, Garcia-Puche JL, Pedraza V. Cisplatin-ifosphamide as neoadjuvant chemotherapy in stage IIIB cervicaluterine squamous-cell carcinoma. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1990;26(Suppl):36.
372. Tobias J, Buxton EJ, Blackledge G, et al. Neoadjuvant bleomycin, ifosfamide and cisplatin in cervical cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1990;26(Suppl):59.
373. Chauvergne J, Rohart J, Héron JF, et al. Essai randomisé de chimiothérapie initiale dans 151 carcinomes du col utérin localement étendus (T2b-N1, T3b, MO). Bull Cancer 1990; 77:1007.
374. Sardi J, Sananes C, Giarole A, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy in locally advanced carcinoma of the cervix uteri. Gynecol Oncol 1990;38:486.
375. Park TK, Choi DH, Kim SN, et al. Role of induction chemotherapy in invasive cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1991;41:107.
376. Souhami L, Gil R, Allan S, et al. A randomized trial of chemotherapy followed by pelvic radiation therapy in stage IIIB carcinoma of the cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;9:970.
377. Tattersall MHN, Ramirez C, Coppleson M. A randomized trial comparing platinum-based chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy vs. radiotherapy alone in patients with locally advanced
cervical cancer. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1992;2:244.
378. Kumar L, Kaushal R, Nandy M, et al. Chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone in locally advanced cervical cancer: a randomized study. Gynecol Oncol 1994;54:307.
379. Tattersall MHN, Larvidhaya V, Vootiprux V, et al. Randomized trial of epirubicin and cisplatin chemotherapy followed by pelvic radiation in locally advanced cervical cancer. Am J Clin Oncol
1995;13:444.
380. Sundfør K, Trope CG, Hogberg T, et al. Radiotherapy and neoadjuvant chemotherapy for cervical carcinoma. A randomized multicenter study of sequential cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil and
radiotherapy in advanced cervical carcinoma stage 3B and 4A. Cancer 1996;77:2371.
381. Leborgne F, Leborgne JH, Doldán R, et al. Induction chemotherapy and radiotherapy of advanced cancer of the cervix: a pilot study and phase III randomized trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1997;37:343.
382. Kim DS, Moon H, Kim KT, et al. Two-year survival: preoperative adjuvant chemotherapy in the treatment of cervical cancer stages Ib and II with bulky tumor. Gynecol Oncol 1989;33:225.
383. Dottino PR, Plaxe S, Beddoe A, et al. Induction chemotherapy followed by radical surgery in cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1991;40:7.
384. Fontanelli R, Spatti G, Raspagliesi F, et al. A preoperative single course of high-dose cisplatin and bleomycin with glutathione protection in bulky stage IB/II carcinoma of the cervix. Ann Oncol
1992;3:117.
385. Lai CH, Hsueh S, Chang TC, et al. Prognostic factors in patients with bulky stage IB or IIA cervical carcinoma undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy and radical hysterectomy. Gynecol Oncol
1997;64:456.
386. Potish RA, Twiggs LB. On the lack of demonstrated clinical benefit of neoadjuvant cisplatinum therapy for cervical cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:975.
387. Tannock IF, Browman G. Lack of evidence for a role of chemotherapy in the routine management of locally advanced head and neck cancer. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1121.
388. Withers HR, Taylor JMG, Maciejewski B. The hazard of accelerated tumor clonogen repopulation during radiotherapy. Acta Oncol 1988;27:131.
389. Kim D, Moon H, Hwang Y, et al. Preoperative adjuvant chemotherapy in the treatment of cervical cancer stage IB, IIA, and IIB with bulky tumor. Gynecol Oncol 1988;29:321.
390. Morris M, Eifel PJ, Burke TW, et al. Treatment of locally advanced cervical cancer with concurrent radiation and intra-arterial chemotherapy. Gynecol Oncol 1995;57:72.
391. Rettenmaier MA, Moran MF, Ramsinghani NF, et al. Treatment of advanced and recurrent squamous carcinoma of the uterine cervix with constant intraarterial infusion of cisplatin. Cancer
1988;61:1301.
392. Roberts WS, Lapolla JP, Greenberg H, et al. Continuous intra-arterial cisplatin combined with radiotherapy in locally advanced squamous carcinoma of the cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology
Group pilot study. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1995;5:335.
393. Muscato M, Perry M, Yarbro J. Chemotherapy of cervical carcinoma. Semin Oncol 1982; 9:373.
394. Omura G, Velez G, Birch R. Phase II randomized study of doxorubicin, vincristine, and 5-FU. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:901.
395. Thigpen T, Vance R, Balducci, et al. Chemotherapy in the management of advanced or recurrent cervical and endometrial carcinoma. Cancer 1981;48:658.
396. Lira-Puerto V, Piccart M, Wiemik P, et al. A comparison of U.S. and Mexican experience with single drug therapy in advanced cervical cancer (NCI-PAHO and ECOG study). Proc ASCO
1985;4:117.
397. Stehman FB, Blessing JA, McGehee R, et al. A phase II evaluation of mitolactol in patients with advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin
Oncol 1989;7:1892.
398. Stehman FB, Blom J, Blessing JA, et al. Phase II trial of galactitol 1,2:5,6-dianhydro (NSC 132313) in the treatment of advanced gynecologic malignancies: a Gynecologic Oncology Group
study. Gynecol Oncol 1983;15:381.
399. Sutton GP, Blessing JA, Adcock L, et al. Phase II study of ifosfamide and mesna in patients with previously treated carcinoma of the cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Invest New
Drugs 1989;7:341.
400. Sutton GP, Blessing JA, Photopoulos G, et al. Phase II experience with ifosphamide/mesna in gynecologic malignancies: preliminary report of Gynecologic Oncology Group studies. Semin
Oncol 1989;15:381.
401. Thigpen T, Lambuth B, Vance R. Ifosfamide in the management of gynecologic cancers. Semin Oncol 1990;17:11.
402. Perez C, Kurman R, Stehman F, et al. Uterine cervix. In: Hoskins W, Perez C, Young R, eds. Principles and practice of gynecologic oncology. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1992:591.
403. Meanwell C, Mould J, Blackledge G, et al. Phase II study of ifosfamide in cervical cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:727.
404. Cervellino JC, Araujo CE, Sanchez O, et al. Cisplatin and ifosfamide in patients with advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Acta Oncol 1995;34:257.
405. Hannigan EV, Dinh TV, Doherty MG. Ifosfamide with mesna in squamous carcinoma of the cervix: phase II results in patients with advanced or recurrent disease. Gynecol Oncol 1991;43:123.
406. McGuire WP, Arseneau J, Blessing JA, et al. A randomized comparative trial of carboplatin and iproplatin in advanced squamous carcinoma of the uterine cervix: Gynecologic Oncology Group
study. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1462.
407. Baker L. Cis-platin in treatment of cervical and endometrial cancer patients. In: Prestayko J, Crooke S, Carter S, eds. Cisplatin : current status and new developments. New York: Academic
Press, 1980:403.
408. Baker L, Boutselis J, Alberts D, et al. Combination chemotherapy for patients with disseminated carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Proc ASCO 1985;4:120.
409. Bonomi P, Blessing J, Stehman F, et al. Randomized trial of three cisplatin dose schedules in squamous-cell carcinoma of the cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol
1985;3:1079.
410. Cohen C, Castro-Marin A, Deppe G, et al. Chemotherapy of advanced or recurrent cervical cancer with platinum IIa preliminary report. Proc ASCO 1978;19:401.
411. Thigpen T, Shingleton H, Homesley H, et al. Cis-platinum in treatment of advanced or recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. Cancer 1981;48:899.
412. Thigpen JT, Blessing JA, DiSaia PJ, et al. A randomized comparison of a rapid versus prolonged (24 hr) infusion of cisplatin in therapy of squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a
Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1989;32:198.
413. Cavins J, Geisler H. Treatment of advanced, unresectable, cervical carcinoma already subjected to complete irradiation therapy. Gynecol Oncol 1978;6:256.
414. Freeman R, Herson J, Wharton T, et al. Single agent chemotherapy for recurrent carcinoma of the cervix. Cancer Clin Trials 1980;3:345.
415. Greenberg B, Kardinal C, Pajek T, et al. Adriamycin versus adriamycin and bleomycin in advanced epidermoid carcinoma of the cervix. Cancer Treat Rep 1977;61:1383.
416. Malkasian G, Decker D, Green S, et al. Treatment of recurrent and metastatic carcinoma of the cervix: comparison of doxorubicin with a combination of vincristine and 5-fluorouracil. Gynecol
Oncol 1981;11:235.
417. Piver M, Barlow J, Xynos F. Adriamycin alone or in combination in 100 patients with carcinoma of the cervix or vagina. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1978;131:311.
418. Wallace H, Hreshchyshyn M, Wilbanks G, et al. Comparison of the therapeutic effect of adriamycin alone versus adriamycin plus vincristine versus adriamycin plus cyclophosphamide in the
treatment of advanced carcinoma of the cervix. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:1435.
419. Wasserman T, Carter S. The integration of chemotherapy into combined modality treatment of solid tumors: VIII. Cervical cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1977;4:25.
420. Thigpen JT. Single agent chemotherapy in carcinoma of the cervix. In: Surwit E, Alberts D, eds. Cervix cancer. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff, 1987:119.
421. Arseneau JC, Bundy B, Dolan T, et al. Phase II study of Baker's antifol in advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. Am J Clin Oncol 1982;5:61.
422. Malkasian G, Decker D, Jorgensen E. Chemotherapy of carcinoma of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1976;5:109.
423. Look KY, Blessing JA, Levenback C, et al. A phase II trial of CPT-11 in recurrent squamous carcinoma of the cervix: a gynecologic oncology group study. Gynecol Oncol 1998;70:334.
424. Takeuchi S, Dobashi K, Fujimoto S, et al. A late phase II study of CPT-11 on uterine cervical cancer and ovarian cancer. Research Groups of CPT-11 in Gynecologic Cancers. Gan To Kagaku
Ryoho 1991;18:1681.
425. Verschraegen CF, Levy T, Kudelka AP, et al. Phase II study of irinotecan in prior chemotherapy-treated squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:625.
426. Morris M, Brader KR, Levenback C, et al. Phase II study of vinorelbine in advanced and recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1094.
427. Conroy JF, Lewis GCJ, Blessing JA, et al. ICRF-159 in patients with advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Am J Clin Oncol 1984;7:131.
428. Kudelka AP, Winn R, Edwards CL, et al. Activity of paclitaxel in advanced or recurrent squamous cell cancer of the cervix. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:1285.
429. McGuire WP, Blessing JA, Moore D, et al. Paclitaxel has moderate activity in squamous cervix cancer. A Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:792.
430. Cervellino J, Araujo C, Pirisi C, et al. Ifosfamide and mesna at high doses for the treatment of cancer of the cervix: a GETLAC study. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1990;26:S1.
431. Thigpen T, Vance R, Khansur T. Carcinoma of the uterine cervix: current status and future directions. Semin Oncol 1994;21(Suppl 2):543.
432. Chiara S, Consoli R, Falcone A, et al. Cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil in advanced and recurrent cervical cancer. Tumori 1988;74:471.
433. Kuhnle H, Meerpohl HG, Eiermann W, et al. Phase II study of carboplatin/ifosfamide in untreated advanced cervical cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1990;26:S33.

434. Ramm K, Vergote I, Kaem J, et al. Bleomycin-ifosfamide-cisplatinum (BIP) in pelvic recurrence of previously irradiated cervical carcinoma: a second look. Gynecol Oncol 1992;46:203.
435. Buxton EJ, Meanwell CA, Hilton C, et al. Combination bleomycin, ifosfamide, and cisplatin chemotherapy in cervical cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:359.
436. Kumar L, Bhargava V. Chemotherapy in recurrent and advanced cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1991;40:107.
437. Murad AM, Triginelli SA, Ribalta JCL. Phase II trial of bleomycin, ifosfamide, and carboplatin in metastatic cervical cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:55.
438. Tay SK, Lai FM, Soh LT, et al. Combined chemotherapy using cisplatin ifosfamide and bleomycin (PIB) in the treatment of advanced and recurrent cervical carcinoma. Aust N Z J Obstet
Gynaecol 1993;32:263.
439. Bonomi P, Blessing J, Ball H, et al. A phase II evaluation of cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil in patients with advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study.
Gynecol Oncol 1989;37:354.
440. Kaern J, Trope C, Kjorstad KE, et al. A phase II study of 5-fluorouracil/cisplatin in recurrent cervical cancer. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen 1990;110:2759.
441. Weiss G, Green S, Hannigan E, et al. A phase II trial of cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil with allopurinol for recurrent or metastatic carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a Southwest Oncology Group trial.
Gynecol Oncol 1990;37:354.
442. Papadimitriou CA, Sarris K, Moulopoulos LA, et al. Phase II trial of paclitaxel and cisplatin in metastatic and recurrent carcinoma of the uterine cervix. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:761.
443. Pignata S, Silvestro G, Ferrari E, et al. Phase II study of cisplatin and vinorelbine as first-line chemotherapy in patients with carcinoma of the uterine cervix. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:756.
444. Brader KR, Morris M, Levenback C, et al. Chemotherapy for cervical carcinoma: factors determining response and implications for clinical trial design. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1879.
445. Omura GA, Blessing J, Vaccarello L, et al. A randomized trial of cisplatin versus cisplatin + mitolactol versus cisplatin + ifosfamide in advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix by the
Gynecologic Oncology Group. Gynecol Oncol 1996;60:120.
446. Boulware RJ, Caderao JB, Delclos L, et al. Whole pelvis megavoltage irradiation with single doses of 1000 rad to palliate advanced gynecologic cancers. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1979;5:333.
447. Spanos WJ, Wasserman T, Meoz R, et al. Palliation of advanced pelvic malignant disease with large fraction pelvic radiation and misonidazole: final report of RTOG phase I/II study. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:1479.
448. Spanos WJ, Perez CA, Marcus S, et al. Effect of rest interval on tumor and normal tissue responsea report of phase III study of accelerated split course palliative radiation for advanced pelvic
malignancies (RTOG-8502). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:399.
449. Höckel M, Baussmann E, Mitze M, et al. Are pelvic side-wall recurrences of cervical cancer biologically different from central relapses? Cancer 1994;74:648.
450. Mahé MA, Gérard JP, Dubois JB, et al. Intraoperative radiation therapy in recurrent carcinoma of the uterine cervix: report of the French Intraoperative Group on 70 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1996;34:21.
451. Stelzer KJ, Koh WJ, Greer BE, et al. The use of intraoperative radiation therapy in radical salvage for recurrent cervical cancer: outcome and morbidity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;172:1881.
452. Ijaz T, Eifel PJ, Burke T, et al. Radiation therapy of pelvic recurrence after radical hysterectomy for cervical carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1998;70:241.
453. Jobsen JJ, Leer JWH, Cleton FJ, et al. Treatment of locoregional recurrence of carcinoma of the cervix by radiotherapy after primary surgery. Gynecol Oncol 1989;33:368.
454. Potter ME, Alvarez RD, Gay FL, et al. Optimal therapy for pelvic recurrence after radical hysterectomy for early-stage cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1990;37:74.
455. Larson DM, Copeland LJ, Stringer CA, et al. Recurrent cervical carcinoma after radical hysterectomy. Gynecol Oncol 1988;30:381.
456. Wang CJ, Lai CH, Huang HJ, et al. Recurrent cervical carcinoma after primary radical surgery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999;181.
457. Thomas GM, Dembo AJ, Black B, et al. Concurrent radiation and chemotherapy for carcinoma of the cervix recurrent after radical surgery. Gynecol Oncol 1987;27:254.
458. Coleman RL, Burke TW, Morris M, et al. Intra-operative radiographs to confirm the adequacy of lymph node resection in patients with suspicious lymphangiograms. Gynecol Oncol 1994;51:362.
459. Hatch KD, Shingleton H, Soong S, et al. Anterior pelvic exenteration. Gynecol Oncol 1988; 31:205.
460. Rutledge S, Carey MS, Prichard H, et al. Conservative surgery for recurrent or persistent carcinoma of the cervix following irradiation: is exenteration always necessary? Gynecol Oncol
1994;52:353.
461. Matthews CM, Morris M, Burke TW, et al. Pelvic exenteration in the elderly patient. Obstet Gynecol 1992;79:773.
462. Miller B, Morris M, Rutledge F, et al. Aborted exenterative procedures in recurrent cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1993;50:94.
463. Orr JWJ, Shingleton HM, Hatch KD, et al. Gastrointestinal complications associated with pelvic exenteration. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1983;145:325.
464. Roberts WS, Cavanaugh D, Bryson SC, et al. Major morbidity after pelvic exenteration: a seven-year experience. Obstet Gynecol 1987;69:617.
465. Berek JS, Hacker NF, Lagasse LD. Rectosigmoid colectomy and reanastamosis to facilitate resection of primary and recurrent gynecologic cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1984;64:715.
466. Rowland RG, Mitchell ME, Bihrle R. Alternative techniques for a continent urinary reservoir. Urol Clin North Am 1987;14:797.
467. Penalver MA, Barreau G, Sevin BU, et al. Surgery for the treatment of locally recurrent disease. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1996;21:117.
468. Rutledge RN, Smith JP, Wharton JT, et al. Pelvic exenteration: an analysis of 296 patients. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1977;129:881.
469. Shingleton HM, Soong SJ, Gelder MS, et al. Clinical and histopathologic factors predicting recurrence and survival after pelvic exenteration for cancer of the cervix. Obstet Gynecol
1989;73:1027.
470. Stanhope CR, Webb MJ, Podratz KC. Pelvic exenteration for recurrent cervical cancer. Clin Obstet Gynecol 1990;33:897.
471. Roman L, Morris M, Eifel P, et al. Reasons for inappropriate simple hysterectomy in the presence of invasive cancer of the cervix. Obstet Gynecol 1992;79:485.
472. Andras EJ, Fletcher G, Rutledge F. Radiotherapy of carcinoma of the cervix following simple hysterectomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1973;115:647.
473. Heller PB, Barnhill DR, Mayer AR, et al. Cervical carcinoma found incidentally in a uterus removed for benign disease. Obstet Gynecol 1986;67:187.
474. Hopkins MP, Peters WA, Anderson W, et al. Invasive cervical cancer treated initially by standard hysterectomy. Gynecol Oncol 1990;36:7.
475. Roman LD, Morris M, Mitchell MF, et al. Prognostic factors for patients undergoing simple hysterectomy in the presence of invasive cancer of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1993;50:179.
476. Barillot I, Horiot JC, Cuisenier J, et al. Carcinoma of the cervical stump: a review of 213 cases. Eur J Cancer 1993;29A:1231.
477. Miller BE, Copeland LJ, Hamberger AD, et al. Carcinoma of the cervical stump. Gynecol Oncol 1984;18:100.
478. Igobeli P, Kapp DS, Lawrence R, et al. Carcinoma of the cervical stump: comparison of radiation therapy factors, survival, and patterns of failure with carcinoma of the intact uterus. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:153.
479. Kovalic JJ, Perez CA, Grigsby PW, et al. The effect of volume of disease in patients with carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:905.
480. Hacker NF, Berek JS, Lagasse LD, et al. Carcinoma of the cervix associated with pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1982;59:735.
481. Shingleton HM, Orr JW. Cancer of the cervix. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1995:344.
482. Averette HE, Nasser N, Yakow SL, et al. Cervical conization in pregnancy. Analysis of 180 operations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1970;106:543.
483. Tseng CJ, Horng SG, Soong YK, et al. Conservative conization for microinvasive carcinoma of the cervix. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997;176:1009.
484. Woodrow N, Permezel M, Butterfield L, et al. Abnormal cervical cytology in pregnancy: experience of 811 cases. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 1998;38:161.
485. Seago DP, Roberts WE, Johnson VK, et al. Planned cesarean hysterectomy: a preferred alternative to separate operations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999;180:1385.
486. Duggan B, Muderspach LI, Roman L, et al. Cervical cancer in pregnancy: reporting on planned delay in therapy. Obstet Gynecol 1993;82:598.
487. Hopkins MP, Morley GW. The prognosis and management of cervical cancer associated with pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1992;80:9.
488. Zemlickis D, Lishner M, Degendorfer P, et al. Maternal and fetal outcome after invasive cervical cancer in pregnancy. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1956.
489. Cliby WA, Dodson MK, Podratz KC. Cervical cancer complicated by pregnancy: episiotomy site recurrences following vaginal delivery. Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:179.
490. Copeland LJ, Saul PB, Sniege N. Cervical adenocarcinoma: tumor implantation in the episiotomy sites of two patients. Gynecol Oncol 1987;28:230.
491. Van den Broek NR, Lopes AD, Ansink A, et al. “Microinvasive” adenocarcinoma of the cervix implanting in an episiotomy scar. Gynecol Oncol 1995;59:297.
492. Creasman WT, Phillips JL, Menck HR. The National Cancer Data Base report on cancer of the vagina. Cancer 1998;83:1033.
493. Parker SL, Tong T, Bolden S, et al. Cancer statistics, 1997. CA Cancer J Clin 1997;47:5.
494. Shepherd J, Sideri M, Benedet J, et al. Carcinoma of the vagina. J Epidemiol Biostat 1998;3:103.
495. Chyle V, Zagars GK, Wheeler JA, et al. Definitive radiotherapy for carcinoma of the vagina: outcome and prognostic factors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996:891.
496. Eddy GL, Jenrette JMI, Creasman WT. Effect of radiotherapeutic technique on local control in primary vaginal carcinoma. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1993;3:399.
497. Gallup DG, Talledo OE, Shah KJ, Hayes C. Invasive squamous cell carcinoma of the vagina: a 14-year study. Obstet Gynecol 1987;69:782.
498. Stock RG, Chen ASJ, Seski J. A 30-year experience in the management of primary carcinoma of the vagina: analysis of prognostic factors and treatment modalities. Gynecol Oncol
1995;56:45.
499. Hoffman MS, De Cesare LS, Roberts WS, et al. Upper vaginectomy for in situ and occult, superficially invasive carcinoma of the vagina. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;166:30.
500. Lenehan PM, Meffe F, Lickrish GM. Vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia: biological aspects and management. Obstet Gynecol 1986;68:333.
501. Kalogirou D, Antoniou G, Karakitsos P, et al. Vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN) following hysterectomy in patients treated for carcinoma in situ of the cervix. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol
1997;18:188.
502. Merino MJ. Vaginal cancer: the role of infectious and environmental factors. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;165:1255.
503. Schraub S, Sun XS, Maingon P, et al. Cervical and vaginal cancer associated with pessary use. Cancer 1992;69:2505.
504. Ikenberg H, Runge M, Göppinger A, et al. Human papillomavirus DNA in invasive carcinoma of the vagina. Obstet Gynecol 1990;76:432.
505. Pride GL, Schultz AE, Chuprevich TW, et al. Primary invasive squamous carcinoma of the vagina. Obstet Gynecol 1979;53:218.
506. Kirkbride P, Fyles A, Rawlings GA, et al. Carcinoma of the vaginaexperience at the Princess Margaret Hospital (19741989). Gynecol Oncol 1995;56:435.
507. Herbst AL, Ulfelder H, Poskanzer DC. Adenocarcinoma of the vagina: an association of maternal stilboestrol therapy with tumour appearing in young women. N Engl J Med 1971;284:878.
508. Herbst AL, Anderson SA, Hubby MM, et al. Risk factors for the development of diethylstilbestrol associated clear cell adenocarcinoma: a case-control study. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1986;154:814.
509. Melnick S, Cole P, Anderson D, et al. Rates and risks of diethylstilbestrol-related clear-cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina and cervix. An update. N Engl J Med 1987;316:514.
510. Sharp GB, Cole P. Identification of risk factors for diethylstilbestrol-associated clear cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina: similarities to endometrial cancer. Am J Epidemiol 1991;134:1316.
511. Waggoner SE, Anderson SM, Van Eyck S, et al. Human papillomavirus detection and p53 expression in clear-cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina and cervix. Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:404.
512. Hatch EE, Palmer JR, Titus-Ernstoff L, et al. Cancer risk in women exposed to diethylstilbestrol in utero. JAMA 1998;280:630.
513. Plentl AA, Friedman EA. Clinical significance of the vaginal lymphatics. In: Lymphatic system of female genitalia. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1971:57.
514. Perez CA, Grigsby PW, Garipagaoglu M, et al. Factors affecting long-term outcome of irradiation in carcinoma of the vagina. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:37.
515. Plentl AA, Friedman EA. Lymphatics of the vagina. In: Lymphatic system of female genitalia. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1971:51.
516. Al-Kurdi M, Monagnan JM. Thirty-two years experience in management of primary tumors of the vagina. Br J Obstet Gynecol 1981;88:1145.
517. Davis KP, Stanhope CR, Garton GR, et al. Invasive vaginal carcinoma: analysis of early-stage disease. Gynecol Oncol 1991;42:131.
518. Isaacs JH. Verrucous carcinoma of the female genital tract. Gynecol Oncol 1976;4:259.
519. Matias-Guiu X, Lerma E, Prat J. Clear cell tumors of the female genital tract. Semin Diagn Pathol 1997;14:233.
520. Addison WA, Hammond CB, Parker RT. The occurrence of adenocarcinoma in endometriosis of the rectovaginal septum during progestational therapy. Gynecol Oncol 1979;8:193.
521. Yaghesezian H, Palazzo JP, Finkel GC, et al. Primary vaginal adenocarcinoma of the intestinal type associated with adenosis. Gynecol Oncol 1992;45:62.
522. Joseph RE, Enghardt MH, Doering DL, et al. Small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the vagina. Cancer 1992;70:784.
523. Miliauskas JR, Leong AS. Small cell (neuroendocrine) carcinoma of the vagina. Histopathology 1992;21:371.
524. Prasad CJ, Ray JA, Kessler S. Primary small cell carcinoma of the vagina arising in a background of atypical adenosis. Cancer 1992;70:2484.
525. Lee RB, Buttoni L, Dhru K, et al. Malignant melanoma of the vagina: a case report of progression from preexisting melanosis. Gynecol Oncol 1984;19:238.
526. Buchanan DJ, Schlaerth J, Kurosaki T. Primary vaginal melanoma: thirteen-year disease-free survival after wide local excision and review of recent literature. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1998;178:1177.
527. Ragnarsson-Olding B, Johansson H, Rutqvist LE, et al. Malignant melanoma of the vagina. Cancer 1993;71:1893.
528. Peters WA, Kumar NB, Andersen WA, et al. Primary sarcoma of the adult vagina: a clinicopathologic study. Obstet Gynecol 1985;65:699.

529. Andrassy RJ, Wiener ES, Raney RB, et al. Progress in the surgical management of vaginal rhabdomyosarcoma: a 25-year review from the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group. J
Pediatr Surg 1999;34:731.
530. Kucera H, Vavra N. Radiation management of primary carcinoma of the vagina: clinical and histopathological variables associated with survival. Gynecol Oncol 1991;40:12.
531. Manetta A, Pinto J, Larson J, et al. Primary invasive carcinoma of the vagina. Obstet Gynecol 1988;72:77.
532. Spiritos N, Doshi B, Kapp D, et al. Radiation therapy for primary squamous cell carcinoma of the vagina: Stanford University experience. Gynecol Oncol 1989;35:20.
533. American Joint Committee on Cancer. Vagina. In: Beahrs O, Henson D, Hutter R, et al., eds. Manual for staging of cancer. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1988:169.
534. Eddy GL, Marks RD, Miller MC, et al. Primary invasive vaginal carcinoma. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;165:292.
535. Macnaught R, Symonds R, Hole D, et al. Improved control of primary vaginal tumours by combined external-beam and interstitial radiotherapy. Clin Radiol 1986;37:29.
536. Nori D, Hilaris B, Stanimir G, et al. Radiation therapy of primary vaginal carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:1471.
537. Rubin SC, Young J, Mikuta JJ. Squamous carcinoma of the vagina: treatment, complications, and long-term follow-up. Gynecol Oncol 1985;20:346.
538. Vavra N, Seifert M, Kucera H, et al. Die Strahlentherapie des primären Vaginalkarzinoms und der Einfluß histologischer und klinischer Faktoren auf die Prognose. Strahlenther Onkol
1991;167:1.
539. Marcus R, Million R, Daly J. Carcinoma of the vagina. Cancer 1978;42:2507.
540. Peters W, Kumar N, Morley G. Carcinoma of the vagina. Factors influencing outcome. Cancer 1985;55:892.
541. Berek JS, Hacker NF. Practical gynecologic oncology. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1994.
542. Benedet JL, Saunders BH. Carcinoma in situ of the vagina. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1984;148:695.
543. Cheng D, Ng TY, Ngan HY, et al. Wide local excision (WLE) for vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN). Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1999;78:648.
544. MacLeod C, Fowler A, Dalrymple C, et al. High-dose-rate brachytherapy in the management of high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia of the vagina. Gynecol Oncol 1997;65:74.
545. Ogino I, Kitamura T, Okajima H, et al. High-dose-rate intracavitary brachytherapy in the management of cervical and vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia [see comments]. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1998;40:881.
546. Lee WR, Marcus RB, Sombeck MD, et al. Radiotherapy alone for carcinoma of the vagina: the importance of overall treatment time. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:983.
547. Benson C, Soisson AP, Carlson J, et al. Neovaginal reconstruction with a rectus abdominis myocutaneous flap. Obstet Gynecol 1993;81:871.
548. Senekjian E, Frey K, Anderson D, et al. Local therapy in stage I clear cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina. Cancer 1987;60:1319.
549. Scully RE, Welch WR. Pathology of the female genital tract after prenatal exposure to diethylstilbestrol. In: Herbst AL, Bern HA, eds. Developmental effects of diethylstibestrol (DES) in
pregnancy. New York: Thieme-Stratton, 1981:26.
550. Senekjian E, Frey K, Stone C, et al. An evaluation of stage II vaginal clear cell adenocarcinoma according to substages. Gynecol Oncol 1988;31:56.
551. Wharton J, Fletcher G, Delclos L. Invasive tumors of the vagina: clinical features and management. In: Coppleson M, ed. Gynecologic oncology: fundamental principles and clinical practice.
Vol. 1. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1981:345.
552. Fishman DA, Williams S, Small W Jr, et al. Late recurrences of vaginal clear cell adenocarcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1996;62:128.
553. Jones WB, Tan LK, Lewis JL. Late recurrence of clear cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina and cervix: a report of three cases. Gynecol Oncol 1993;51:266.
554. Thigpen T, Blessing J, Homesley HD, et al. Phase II trial of cisplatin in advanced or recurrent cancer of the vagina: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1986;23:101.
555. Slayton R, Blessing J, Beecham J, et al. Phase II trial of etoposide in the management of advanced or recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva and carcinoma of the vagina. Cancer
Treat Rep 1987;71:869.
556. Evans LS, Kersh CR, Constable WC, et al. Concomitant 5-fluorouracil, mitomycin-C, and radiotherapy for advanced gynecologic malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:901.
557. Umesaki N, Kawamura N, Tsujimura A, et al. Stage II vaginal cancer responding to chemotherapy with irinotecan and cisplatin: a case report. Oncol Rep 1999;6:123.
558. Yordan E, Deppe G, Malviya V, et al. Chemotherapy of vulvar and vaginal malignancies. In: Deppe G, ed. Chemotherapy of gynecologic cancer. New York: Wiley-Liss, 1990:107.
559. Eifel PJ. Concurrent chemotherapy and radiation: a major advance for women with cervical cancer [editorial; comment]. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1334.
560. Shepherd J, Sideri M, Benedet J, et al. Carcinoma of the vulva. J Epidemiol Biostat 1998;3:111.
561. Sturgeon SR, Brinton LA, Devesa SS, et al. In situ and invasive vulvar cancer incidence trends (19731987). Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;166:1482.
562. Mabuchi K, Bross DS, Kessler II. Epidemiology of cancer of the vulva. A case-control study. Cancer 1985;55:1843.
563. Iversen T, Tretli S. Intraepithelial and invasive squamous cell neoplasia of the vulva: trends in incidence, recurrence, and survival rate in Norway. Obstet Gynecol 1998;91:969.
564. Jones RW, Baranyai J, Stables S. Trends in squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva: the influence of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia. Obstet Gynecol 1997;90:448.
565. Ansink AC, Krul MR, De Weger RA, et al. Human papillomavirus, lichen sclerosus, and squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva: detection and prognostic significance. Gynecol Oncol
1994;52:180.
566. Bloss JD, Liao SY, Wilczynski SP, et al. Clinical and histologic features of vulvar carcinomas analyzed for human papillomavirus status: evidence that squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva
has more than one etiology. Hum Pathol 1991;22:711.
567. Crum CP. Carcinoma of the vulva: epidemiology and pathogenesis. Obstet Gynecol 1992; 79:448.
568. Hørding U, Junge J, Daugaard S, et al. Vulvar squamous cell carcinoma and papillomaviruses: indications for two different etiologies. Gynecol Oncol 1994;52:241.
569. Monk BJ, Burger RA, Lin F, et al. Prognostic significance of human papillomavirus (HPV) DNA in primary invasive vulvar cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1995;85:709.
570. Crum CP, McLachlin CM, Tate JE, et al. Pathobiology of vulvar squamous neoplasia. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:63.
571. Trimble CL, Hildesheim A, Brinton LA, et al. Heterogeneous etiology of squamous carcinoma of the vulva. Obstet Gynecol 1996;87:59.
572. Hording U, Daugaard S, Junge J, et al. Human papillomaviruses and multifocal genital neoplasia. Int J Gynecol Pathol 1996;15:230.
573. Mitchell MF, Prasay CJ, Silva EG, et al. Second genital primary squamous neoplasms in vulvar carcinoma: viral and histopathologic correlates. Obstet Gynecol 1993;81:13.
574. Park JS, Jones RW, McLean MR, et al. Possible etiologic heterogeneity of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia. A correlation of pathologic characteristics with human papillomavirus detection by in
situ hybridization and polymerase chain reaction. Cancer 1991;67:1599.
575. Haefner HK, Tate JE, McLachlin CM, et al. Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia: age, morphological phenotype, papillomavirus DNA, and coexisting invasive carcinoma. Hum Pathol 1995;26:147.
576. Lee YY, Wilczanski SP, Chumakov A, et al. Carcinoma of the vulva: HPV and p53 mutations. Oncogene 1994;9:1655.
577. Pilotti S, D'Amato L, Della Torre G, et al. Papillomavirus, p53 alteration, and primary carcinoma of the vulva. Diagn Mol Pathol 1995;4:239.
578. Sliutz G, Schmidt W, Tempfer C, et al. Detection of p53 point mutations in primary human vulvar cancer by PCR and temperature gradient gel electrophoresis. Gynecol Oncol 1997;64:93.
579. Andreasson B, Nyboe J. Predictive factors with reference to low-risk of metastases in squamous cell carcinoma in the vulvar region. Gynecol Oncol 1985;21:196.
580. Plentl AA, Friedman EA. Clinical significance of the vulvar lymphatics. In: Lymphatic system of female genitalia. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1971:27.
581. Shimm DS, Fuller AF, Orlow EL, et al. Prognostic variables in the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva. Gynecol Oncol 1986;24:343.
582. Binder SW, Huang I, Fu YS, et al. Risk factors for the development of lymph node metastasis in vulvar squamous carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1990;37:9.
583. Hacker NF, Berek JS, Lagasse LD, et al. Individualization of treatment for stage I squamous cell vulvar carcinoma. Obstet Gynecol 1984;63:155.
584. Hoffman JS, Kumar NB, Morley GW. Microinvasive squamous carcinoma of the vulva: search for a definition. Obstet Gynecol 1983;61:615.
585. Ross MJ, Ehrmann RL. Histologic prognosticators in stage I squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva. Obstet Gynecol 1987;70:774.
586. DiSaia PJ, Creasman WT, Rich WM. An alternative approach to early cancer of the vulva. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1979;133:825.
587. Chu J, Tamimi HK, Figge DC. Femoral node metastases with negative superficial inguinal nodes in early vulvar cancer. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1983;61:408.
588. Leuchter RL, Hacker NF, Voet RL, et al. Primary carcinoma of the Bartholin gland: a report of 14 cases and review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol 1982;60:361.
589. Ridley CM, Frankman O, Jones IS, et al. New nomenclature for vulvar disease: report of the Committee on Terminology of the International Society for the Study of Vulvar Disease. J Reprod
Med 1990;35:483.
590. Wilkinson EJ. The 1989 presidential address. International Society for the Study of Vulvar Disease. J Reprod Med 1990;35:981.
591. Buscema J, Woodruff JD. Progressive histobiologic alterations in the development of vulvar cancer. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1980;138:146.
592. Koss LG, Brockunier AJ. Ultrastructural aspects of Paget's disease of the vulva. Arch Pathol 1969;87:592.
593. Fanning J, Lambert HC, Hale TM, et al. Paget's disease of the vulva: prevalence of associated vulvar adenocarcinoma, invasive Paget's disease, and recurrence after surgical excision. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 1999;180:24.
594. Lee RA, Dahlin DC. Paget's disease of the vulva with extension into the urethra, bladder and ureters: a case report. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1981;140:834.
595. Hart WR, Millman JB. Progression of intraepithelial Paget's disease of the vulva to invasive carcinoma. Cancer 1977;40:2333.
596. Buscema J, Stern JL, Woodruff JD. Early invasive carcinoma of the vulva. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1981;140:563.
597. Gil-Moreno A, Garcia-Jimenez A, Gonzalez-Bosquet J, et al. Merkel cell carcinoma of the vulva. Gynecol Oncol 1997;64:526.
598. Japese H, van Dinh T, Woodruff JD. Verrucous carcinoma of the vulva: study of 24 cases. Obstet Gynecol 1982;60:462.
599. Loret de Mola JR, Hudock PA, Steinetz C, et al. Merkel cell carcinoma of the vulva. Gynecol Oncol 1993;51:272.
600. Irvin WP, Cathro HP, Grosh WW, et al. Primary breast carcinoma of the vulva: a case report and literature review. Gynecol Oncol 1999;73:155.
601. Feakins RM, Lowe DG. Basal cell carcinoma of the vulva: a clinicopathologic study of 45 cases. Int J Gynecol Pathol 1997;16:319.
602. Carlson JW, McGlennen RC, Gomez R, et al. S ebaceous carcinoma of the vulva: a case report and review of the literature. Gynecol Oncol 1996;60:489.
603. Raber G, Mempel V, Jackisch C, et al. Malignant melanoma of the vulva. Report of 89 patients. Cancer 1996;78:2353.
604. Weinstock MA. Malignant melanoma of the vulva and vagina in the United States: patterns of incidence and population-based estimates of survival. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;171:1225.
605. Phillips GL, Bundy BN, Okagaki T, et al. Malignant melanoma of the vulva treated by radical hemivulvectomy. A prospective study of the Gynecologic Oncology Group. Cancer 1994;73:2626.
606. Ragnarsson-Olding BK, Kanter-Lewensohn LR, Lagerlof B, et al. Malignant melanoma of the vulva in a nationwide, 25-year study of 219 Swedish females: clinical observations and
histopathologic features. Cancer 1999;86:1273.
607. Ragnarsson-Olding BK, Nilsson BR, Kanter-Lewensohn LR, et al. Malignant melanoma of the vulva in a nationwide, 25-year study of 219 Swedish females: predictors of survival. Cancer
1999;86:1285.
608. Trimble EL, Lewis JL, Williams LL, et al. Management of vulvar melanoma. Gynecol Oncol 1992;45:254.
609. Chung AF, Woodruff JM, Lewis JLJ. Malignant melanoma of the vulva: a report of 44 cases. Obstet Gynecol 1975;45:638.
610. Tasseron EWK, van der Esch EP, Hart AAM, et al. A clinicopathological study of 30 melanomas of the vulva. Gynecol Oncol 1992;46:170.
611. Curtin JP, Saigo P, Slucher B, et al. Soft-tissue sarcoma of the vagina and vulva: a clinicopathologic study. Obstet Gynecol 1995;86:269.
612. Nirenberg A, Östör AG, Slavin J, et al. Primary vulvar sarcomas. Int J Gynecol Pathol 1995;14:55.
613. Bernstein SG, Kovac BR, Townsend DE, et al. Vulvar carcinoma in situ. Obstet Gynecol 1983; 61:304.
614. Friedrich EG, Wilkenson EJ, Fu YS. Carcinoma in situ of the vulva: a continuing challenge. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1980;136:830.
615. Kuppers V, Stiller M, Somville T, et al. Risk factors for recurrent VIN. Role of multifocality and grade of disease. J Reprod Med 1997;42:140.
616. Homesley HD, Bundy BN, Sedlis A, et al. Prognostic factors for groin node metastasis in squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva (a Gynecologic Oncology Group study). Gynecol Oncol
1993;49:279.
617. Sedlis A, Homesley H, Bundy BN, et al. Positive groin lymph nodes in superficial squamous cell vulvar cancer. A Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987;156:1159.
618. Heaps JM, Fu YS, Montz FJ, et al. Surgical-pathologic variables predictive of local recurrence in squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva. Gynecol Oncol 1990;38:309.
619. Homesley HD, Bundy BN, Sedlis A, et al. Assessment of current International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging of vulvar carcinoma relative to prognostic factors for survival (a
Gynecologic Oncology Group study). Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;164:997.
620. Husseinzadeh N, Wesseler T, Schellhas H, et al. Significance of lymphoplasmocytic infiltration around tumor cell in the prediction of regional lymph node metastases in patients with invasive
squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva: a clinico-pathologic study. Gynecol Oncol 1989;34:200.
621. Husseinzadeh N, Wesseler T, Schneider D, et al. Prognostic factors and the significance of cytologic grading in invasive squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva: a clinicopathologic study.
Gynecol Oncol 1990;36:192.

622. Kürzl R, Messerer D. Prognostic factors in squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva: a multivariate analysis. Gynecol Oncol 1989;32:143.
623. Pinto AP, Signorello LB, Crum CP, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva in Brazil: prognostic importance of host and viral variables. Gynecol Oncol 1999;74:61.
624. Smyczek-Gargya B, Volz B, Geppert M, et al. A multivariate analysis of clinical and morphological prognostic factors in squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva. Gynecol Obstet Invest
1997;43:261.
625. Kaern J, Iversen T, Tropé EO, et al. Flow cytometric DNA measurements in squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva: an important prognostic method. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1992;2:169.
626. Mariani L, Conti L, Atlante G, et al. Vulvar squamous carcinoma: prognostic role of DNA content. Gynecol Oncol 1998;71:159.
627. Homesley HD, Bundy BN, Sedlis A, et al. Radiation therapy versus pelvic node resection for carcinoma of the vulva with positive groin nodes. Obstet Gynecol 1986;68:733.
628. van der Velden J, Lindert ACM, Lammes FB, et al. Extracapsular growth of lymph node metastases in squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva. The impact on recurrence and survival. Cancer
1995;75:2885.
629. Origoni M, Sideri M, Garsia S, et al. Prognostic value of pathological patterns of lymph node positivity in squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva stage III and IVA FIGO. Gynecol Oncol
1992;45:313.
630. Bassett A. Traitement chirurgical operatoire de l'epithelioma primitif du clitoris. Rev Chir 1912;46:546.
631. Taussig FJ. Cancer of the vulva: an analysis of 155 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1940;40:764.
632. Way S. Carcinoma of the vulva. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1960;79:692.
633. Hacker NF, Leuchter RS, Berek JS, et al. Radical vulvectomy and bilateral inguinal lymphadenectomy through separate groin incisions. Obstet Gynecol 1981;58:574.
634. Burke TW, Stringer CA, Gershenson DM, et al. Radical wide excision and selective inguinal node dissection for squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva. Gynecol Oncol 1990;38:328.
635. Farias-Eisner R, Cirisano FD, Grouse D, et al. Conservative and individualized surgery for early squamous carcinoma of the vulva: the treatment of choice for stage I and II (T 1-2 N0-1 M0)
disease. Gynecol Oncol 1994;53:55.
636. Iverson T, Abeler V, Aalders J. Individualized treatment of stage I carcinoma of the vulva. Obstet Gynecol 1981;57:85.
637. Lin JY, DuBeshter V, Angel C, et al. Morbidity and recurrence with modifications of radical vulvectomy and groin dissection. Gynecol Oncol 1992;47:80.
638. Magrina JF, Gonzalez-Bosquet J, Weaver AL, et al. Primary squamous cell cancer of the vulva: radical versus modified radical vulvar surgery. Gynecol Oncol 1998;71:116.
639. Grimshaw RN, Murdoch JB, Monaghan JM. Radical vulvectomy and bilateral inguinal-femoral lymphadenectomy through separate incisionsexperience with 100 cases. Int J Gynecol Cancer
1993;3:18.
640. Schulz MJ, Penalver M. Recurrent vulvar carcinoma in the intervening tissue bridge in early invasive stage I disease treated by radical vulvectomy and bilateral groin dissection through
separate incisions. Gynecol Oncol 1989;35:383.
641. Burke TW, Levenback C, Coleman RL, et al. Surgical therapy of T1 and T2 vulvar carcinoma: further experience with radical wide excision and selective inguinal lymphadenectomy. Gynecol
Oncol 1995;57:215.
642. Thuesen B, Andreasson B, Bock JE. Sexual function and somatopsychic reactions after local excision of vulvar intra-epithelial neoplasia. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1992;71:126.
643. Grimshaw RN, Ghazal Aswad S, Monaghan JM. The role of ano-vulvectomy in locally advanced carcinoma of the vulva. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1991;1:15.
644. Hoffman MS, Cavanagh D, Roberts WS, et al. Ultraradical surgery for advanced carcinoma of the vulva: an update. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1993;3:369.
645. Hopkins MP, Morley GW. Pelvic exenteration for the treatment of vulvar cancer. Cancer 1992;70:2835.
646. Alberti W, Katsilieris I, Schulz U, et al. Indikationen und Ergebnisse der postoperativen Radiotherapie des Vulvakarzinoms. Stralentherapie und Onkologie 1986;162:488.
647. Pao WM, Perez CA, Kuske RR, et al. Radiation therapy and conservation surgery for primary and recurrent carcinoma of the vulva: report of 40 patients and a review of the literature. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14:1123.
648. Perez CA, Grigsby PW, Chao C, et al. Irradiation in carcinoma of the vulva: factors affecting outcome. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:335.
649. Faul CM, Mirmow D, Huang Q, et al. Adjuvant radiation for vulvar carcinoma: improved local control. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:381.
650. Perez CA, Grigsby PW, Galakatos A, et al. Radiation therapy in management of carcinoma of the vulva with emphasis on conservation therapy. Cancer 1993;71:3707.
651. Acosta AA, Given FT, Frazier AB, et al. Preoperative radiation therapy in the management of squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva: preliminary report. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1978;132:198.
652. Boronow RC. Combined therapy as an alternative to exenteration for locally advanced vulvo-vaginal cancer: rationale and results. Cancer 1982;49:1085.
653. Fairey RN, MacKay PA, Benedet JL, et al. Radiation treatment of carcinoma of the vulva, 19501980. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;151:591.
654. Hacker NF, Berek JS, Juillard GJF, et al. Preoperative radiation therapy for locally advanced vulvar cancer. Cancer 1984;54:2056.
655. Jafari K, Magalotti M. Radiation therapy in carcinoma of the vulva. Cancer 1981;47:686.
656. Moore DH, Thomas GM, Montana GS, et al. Preoperative chemoradiation for advanced vulvar cancer: a phase II study of the Gynecologic Oncology Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;42:79.
657. Cunningham MJ, Goyer RP, Gibbons SK, et al. Primary radiation, cisplatin, and 5-fluorouracil for advanced squamous carcinoma of the vulva. Gynecol Oncol 1997;66:258.
658. Landoni F, Maneo A, Zanetta G, et al. Concurrent preoperative chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil and mitomycin C and radiotherapy (FUMIR) followed by limited surgery in locally advanced and
recurrent vulvar carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1996;61:321.
659. Lupi G, Raspagliesi F, Zucali R, et al. Combined preoperative chemoradiotherapy followed by radical surgery in locally advanced vulvar carcinoma. A pilot study. Cancer 1996;77:1472.
660. Wahlen SA, Slater JD, Wagner RJ, et al. Concurrent radiation therapy and chemotherapy in the treatment of primary squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva. Cancer 1995;75:2289.
661. Eifel PJ, Morris M, Burke TW, et al. Preoperative continuous infusion cisplatinum and 5-fluoruouracil with radiation for locally advanced or recurrent carcinoma of the vulva. Gynecol Oncol
1995;59:51.
662. Koh WJ, Wallace HJ, Greer BE, et al. Combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy in the management of local-regionally advanced vulvar cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;26:809.
663. Russell AH, Mesic JB, Scudder SA, et al. Synchronous radiation and cytotoxic chemotherapy for locally advanced or recurrent squamous cancer of the vulva. Gynecol Oncol 1992;47:14.
664. Scheistroen M, Trope C. Combined bleomycin and irradiation in preoperative treatment of advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva. Acta Oncol 1992;32:657.
665. Berek JS, Heaps JM, Fu YS, et al. Concurrent cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil chemotherapy and radiation therapy for advanced-stage squamous carcinoma of the vulva. Gynecol Oncol
1991;42:197.
666. Thomas G, Dembo A, DePetrillo A, et al. Concurrent radiation and chemotherapy in vulvar carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1989;34:263.
667. Levin W, Goldberg G, Altaras M, et al. The use of concomitant chemotherapy and radiotherapy prior to surgery in advanced stage carcinoma of the vulva. Gynecol Oncol 1986;25:20.
668. Iversen T. Irradiation and bleomycin in the treatment of inoperable vulval carcinoma. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1982;61:195.
669. Cummings B. Anal canal carcinomas. In: Meyer JL, Vaeth JM, eds. Frontiers in radiation oncology. Vol. 26. Basel: Karger, 1992:131.
670. Benedetti-Panici P, Greggi S, Scambia G, et al. Cisplatin, bleomycin, and methotrexate preoperative chemotherapy in locally advanced vulvar carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1993;50:49.
671. Mäkinen J, Salmi T, Grönroos M. Individually modified treatment of invasive squamous cell vulvar cancer: 10-year experience. Ann Chir Gynaecol 1987;76(Suppl):68.
672. Figge DC, Gaudenz R. Invasive carcinoma of the vulva. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1974;119:382.
673. Hacker NF, Berek JS, Lagasse LD, et al. Management of regional lymph nodes and their prognostic influence in vulvar cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1983;61:408.
674. Morley GW. Infiltrative carcinoma of the vulva: results of surgical treatment. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1976;124:874.
675. Petereit DG, Mehta MP, Buchler DA, et al. A retrospective review of nodal treatment for vulvar cancer. Am J Clin Oncol 1993;16:38.
676. Podratz KC, Symmonds RE, Taylor WF. Carcinoma of the vulva: analysis of treatment failures. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1982;143:340.
677. Stehman FB, Bundy BN, Thomas G, et al. Groin dissection versus groin radiation in carcinoma of the vulva: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992; 24:39.
678. Henderson RH, Parsons JT, Morgan L, et al. Elective ilioinguinal lymph node irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:811.
679. Leiserowitz GS, Russell AH, Kinney WK, et al. Prophylactic chemoradiation of inguinofemoral lymph nodes in patients with locally extensive vulvar cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1997;66:509.
680. Eifel PJ. Vulvar carcinoma: radiotherapy or surgery for the lymphatics? Front Radiat Ther Oncol 1994;28:218.
681. Koh WJ, Chiu M, Stelzer KJ, et al. Femoral vessel depth and the implications for groin node radiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:969.
682. Stehman FB, Bundy BN, Dvoretsky PM, et al. Early stage I carcinoma of the vulva treated with ipsilateral superficial inguinal lymphadenectomy and modified radical hemivulvectomy: a
prospective study of the Gynecologic Oncology Group. Obstet Gynecol 1992;79:490.
683. Ansink AC, Sie-Go DM, van der Velden J, et al. Identification of sentinel lymph nodes in vulvar carcinoma patients with the aid of a patent blue V injection: a multicenter study. Cancer
1999;86:652.
684. Bowles J, Terada KY, Coel MN, et al. Preoperative lymphoscintigraphy in the evaluation of squamous cell cancer of the vulva. Clin Nucl Med 1999;24:235.
685. Levenback C, Burke TW, Morris M, et al. Potential applications of intraoperative lymphatic mapping in vulvar cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1995;59:216.
686. Terada KY, Coel MN, Ko P, et al. Combined use of intraoperative lymphatic mapping and lymphoscintigraphy in the management of squamous cell cancer of the vulva. Gynecol Oncol
1998;70:65.
687. Deppe G, Cohen C, Bruckner H. Chemotherapy of squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva: a review. Gynecol Oncol 1979;7:345.
688. Sirisabya N. Clinical trials of bleomycin on female genital cancer: a preliminary report. J Med Assoc Thai 1974;56:101.
689. Yahia C, Fuller AF, Cloud LP. Successful long-term palliation of stage IV vulvar carcinoma with operation and bleomycin sulfate. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1978;130:360.
690. Thigpen JT, Blessing JA, Homesley H, et al. Phase II trials of cisplatin and piperazinedione in advanced or recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva: a Gynecologic Oncology Group
study. Gynecol Oncol 1986;23:358.

SECTION 36.3 Cancers of the Uterine Body
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 36.3
Cancers of the Uterine Body
THOMAS W. BURKE
PATRICIA J. EIFEL
FRANCO M. MUGGIA
Endometrial Carcinoma
Clinical Overview
Epidemiology
Natural History and Routes of Spread
Diagnosis and Pretherapy Evaluation
Risk Factors
Staging
Treatment of Primary Disease
Treatment of Recurrent Disease
Outcome and Survival
Uterine Sarcomas
Tumor Types
Clinical Presentation
Evaluation
Treatment
Outcome and Survival
Chapter References

ENDOMETRIAL CARCINOMA
CLINICAL OVERVIEW
Tumors of the uterine fundus comprise the most common group of gynecologic malignancies. Annual incidence figures for the United States have remained stable at
approximately 36,000 cases during the 1990s. Deaths from disease occur in 6000 women per year. 1 The large proportion of survivors with these cancers reflects a
disease course characterized by early onset of symptoms and well-established diagnostic guidelines. Nevertheless, women with high-risk or advanced disease have a
poor prognosis and account for the most uterine cancer deaths. 2
A general classification of uterine fundal cancers is provided in Table 36.3-1. Approximately 90% of tumors arise within the epithelium of the uterine lining and are
categorized as endometrial carcinomas. Within this group, 90% of cancers are typical endometrial adenocarcinomas. 3 The typical endometrial carcinomas are further
subdivided into three architectural grades based on the percentage of solid tumor growth: Grade 1 cancers have identifiable endometrial glands and are well
differentiated ( Fig. 36.3-1), whereas grade 3 tumors demonstrate a solid growth pattern and are poorly differentiated. 4 Rare cell types, including papillary serous
carcinoma, clear cell carcinoma, papillary endometrioid carcinoma, and mucinous carcinoma, account for the remaining 10% of cases. Adenosquamous carcinomas
are now classified as typical endometrial adenocarcinomas with squamous differentiation. In general, all of these uncommon cell types are associated with a later age
of onset, greater risk for extrauterine metastases, and poorer prognosis when compared with typical grade 1 adenocarcinomas. 5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13 and 14

TABLE 36.3-1. Classification of Uterine Fundal Cancer

FIGURE 36.3-1. Adenocarcinomas of the endometrium are graded on the basis of their architectural pattern. A complex, branching, glandular pattern without solid
areas, as seen in this photomicrograph, is characteristic of grade 1 cancers.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
The normal endometrium is a hormonally responsive tissue. Estrogenic stimulation produces cellular growth and glandular proliferation, which is cyclically balanced
by the maturational effects of progesterone. 15 Abnormal proliferation and neoplastic transformation of the endometrium has been associated with chronic unopposed
exposure to estrogenic stimulation. It is currently believed that estrogen-associated endometrial cancers progress through a premalignant stage described as atypical
adenomatous hyperplasia. This phase is characterized by increases in gland number and complexity as well as cytologic atypia. Although serial observations of
women with adenomatous hyperplasia are scarce, it is estimated that at least one-third of such cases progress to carcinoma. 16
The best-recognized risk factors for the development of endometrial carcinoma can be related to chronic estrogen exposure. These include oral intake of exogenous
estrogen (without progestins), estrogen-secreting tumors, low parity, extended periods of anovulation, early menarche, and late menopause. 17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24 and 25

Pregnancy represents a 9-month period of relatively intense progesterone stimulation by the placenta. Consequently, women with multiple pregnancies have a lower
risk of endometrial lesions on the basis of this protective hormonal effect. Both menarche and menopause are commonly associated with absent or irregular ovulation,
so women who experience early onset or late cessation of ovarian function are more likely to have additional estrogenic exposure. 26 Morbidly obese women also have
a greater risk of endometrial cancer, presumably because their adipocytes are able to convert androstenedione of adrenal origin to estrone, a weak circulating
estrogen.
Epidemiologic studies have consistently identified women with diabetes mellitus and hypertension as having an increased risk of endometrial carcinoma. This risk
remains independent of other known factors in multivariate analyses. It has not been possible to connect these relatively common medical conditions to the
“estrogenic hypothesis” of endometrial carcinogenesis. Epidemiologic risk factors for endometrial cancer are listed in Table 36.3-2.

TABLE 36.3-2. Epidemiologic Risk Factors for Endometrial Carcinoma

There is extensive current interest in the potential connection between long-term tamoxifen use as adjuvant therapy for women with breast cancer and the
development of endometrial cancers. Although primarily an estrogen antagonist, tamoxifen also has some agonist properties. The diagnosis of endometrial cancer
among a few women taking tamoxifen on the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project trial has raised concerns about the safety of such therapy. 27 Some
pathology reviews of tamoxifen-associated endometrial tumors have identified a preponderance of poor-prognosis tumors, whereas others have noted a majority of
low-risk lesions. 28,29,30,31,32 and 33 A confounding variable is the known increased risk of endometrial tumors in women with breast cancer. 34 This issue is complex and
evolving. On the basis of current information, it seems reasonable to conclude that (1) if an association between tamoxifen and endometrial carcinoma exists, the
overall risk is small compared with the risk of recurrent breast cancer, and (2) women receiving long-term tamoxifen therapy should be monitored carefully for uterine
abnormalities. Ultrasonic assessment of the contour and thickness of the endometrium is frequently used to monitor such patients, but its value is unproven. Certainly,
any woman with abnormal vaginal bleeding should be evaluated promptly by biopsy. Exposure to adjuvant tamoxifen therapy should be limited to 5 years. The
development of new selective estrogen receptor modulators that do not have stimulatory effects on the endometrium should eliminate all such risk for women who may
benefit from antiestrogen therapy.
NATURAL HISTORY AND ROUTES OF SPREAD
Endometrial carcinoma is a disease of postmenopausal women. The average age at diagnosis is usually about 60 years. Women with high-risk tumors, such as grade
3 adenocarcinoma, papillary serous carcinoma, and clear cell carcinoma, tend to be slightly older. All endometrial lesions originate in the glandular component of the
uterine lining. Their initial growth forms a polypoid mass within the uterine cavity ( Fig. 36.3-2). This tumor mass is friable and often contains areas of superficial
necrosis. Consequently, postmenopausal bleeding is the hallmark symptom for more than 90% of patients. Because most women and their physicians recognize that
this as an ominous finding, prompt diagnosis is common.

FIGURE 36.3-2. Endometrial cancers develop as polypoid lesions that gradually expand to fill the uterine cavity. This well-differentiated tumor involves both the
anterior and posterior uterine walls throughout the entire fundus. Scattered areas of superficial necrosis give rise to the hallmark symptom of postmenopausal
bleeding.

With further growth, the primary tumor may extend to involve a greater proportion of the endometrial surface and ultimately extend to the lower uterine segment and
cervix. Invasion into the myometrium occurs simultaneously. The uterus has a rich and complex lymphatic network. Channels draining the superior portion of the
fundus parallel the ovarian vessels and empty into the paraaortic lymph nodes in the upper abdomen. Lymphatics from the middle and lower portions of the uterus
travel through the broad ligaments to the pelvic nodes. A few small lymphatic vessels course through the round ligaments to the superficial inguinal nodes. As a result
of this extensive network, nodal metastases can occur at any level and in any combination. 35
Tumors that penetrate the uterine serosa may directly invade adjacent tissues, such as the bladder, colon, or adnexae, or they may exfoliate into the abdominal cavity
to form implant metastases. Small tumor fragments may also gain access to the peritoneal cavity by traversing the fallopian tubes. However, the clinical importance of
this potential mechanism of spread is uncertain. Hematogenous dissemination is observed but uncommon. Sites of distant spread include lung, liver, bone, and brain.
DIAGNOSIS AND PRETHERAPY EVALUATION
A diagnosis of endometrial carcinoma should be considered in postmenopausal women with any vaginal bleeding, perimenopausal women with heavy or prolonged
bleeding, and premenopausal women with abnormal bleeding patterns who are obese or oligo-ovulatory. Although a formal dilatation and curettage has been the
standard technique for diagnosis, outpatient endometrial biopsy has replaced it in most situations. 36,37 and 38 A correctly performed endometrial biopsy includes an
adequate amount of tissue obtained from multiple passes through the uterus, and it has a diagnostic accuracy equivalent to that of surgical curettage under
anesthesia. Operative sampling may be necessary in unusual patients, such as those with cervical stenosis, inadequate outpatient biopsy, or inability to tolerate an
outpatient examination and procedure. Asymptomatic women with endometrial cancer occasionally have abnormal glandular components detected by routine cervical
cytology (Fig. 36.3-3). Because the Papanicolaou (Pap) smear is designed to sample the cervical epithelium, this method of diagnosis is uncommon. Fewer than 50%
of women with known endometrial cancer have an abnormal Pap smear.39,40

FIGURE 36.3-3. This photomicrograph shows two small tissue fragments demonstrating the typical features of adenocarcinoma. Although not universally seen, such
findings are sometimes identified on routine cervical cytology specimens and lead to the diagnosis of endometrial cancer in an asymptomatic woman.

Endometrial carcinoma is a surgically treated and staged tumor. Consequently, the focus of the pretreatment evaluation is on the detection of unresectable disease
and a determination of operative risk. For patients with disease that is clinically limited to the uterus by physical examination, a straightforward evaluation that
includes laboratory studies, a chest radiograph, and an electrocardiogram is adequate. A serum CA-125 assay should be considered in women with high-risk
histologic types because it may be predictive of occult extrauterine disease and may be useful as a tumor marker. 41,42 and 43 More sophisticated imaging studies such
as ultrasound, computed tomography, intravenous pyelography, and magnetic resonance imaging rarely provide information that is not determined after surgical
exploration. These studies should be reserved for patients with advanced disease or prohibitive surgical risks. Many women with endometrial cancer are elderly and
have associated medical conditions, particularly obesity, diabetes, and hypertension. The pretreatment medical evaluation should be individualized based on findings
obtained from the medical history and general physical examination.
RISK FACTORS
Histopathologic risk factors have been extensively evaluated since the late 1970s. 44,45,46,47,48 and 49 For convenience, these can be grouped into uterine and extrauterine
categories. Major prognostic factors associated with the uterine component of the tumor are grade or cell type, depth of myometrial invasion, and tumor extension to
the cervix. Less important are extent of uterine cavity involvement, 50 lymph–vascular space invasion, 51 and tumor vascularity. Obviously, women whose tumors have
spread beyond the uterus have a poorer prognosis. The major extrauterine risk factors are adnexal metastases, pelvic or paraaortic lymph node spread, positive
peritoneal cytology, peritoneal implant metastases, and distant organ metastases.
A detailed analysis of nearly 1000 patients has been presented by the Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG). 49 The relative risks for the various histologic factors
evaluated in that study are summarized in Table 36.3-5. The risk for developing recurrent disease was greatest in women whose tumors had metastasized to pelvic or
paraaortic lymph nodes, demonstrated gross intraperitoneal spread, or contained unequivocal lymph–vascular space invasion. Not surprisingly, an exceptionally high
incidence of recurrence was noted in cases with two or more risk factors. Based on the findings of this and other surgical staging trials, the International Federation of
Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) adopted a surgical staging system for uterine fundal cancers in 1988. 4

TABLE 36.3-5. Frequency of Recurrence in Patients with Positive Risk Factors

In addition to the more classic histologic risk factors, several studies have examined archival specimens to evaluate a number of potential molecular markers. Data
suggesting a prognostic role for DNA ploidy, S-phase fraction, oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, AgNOR, and nuclear morphometric features should be
considered preliminary. 52,53,54,55,56,57,58 and 59 Further prospective study in larger numbers of fresh tissue specimens may lead to a refinement of risk assessment. This
would be particularly useful if it permitted the identification of the small percentage of otherwise low-risk patients who are destined to develop recurrent disease. Data
reported by Lim and colleagues 60 suggest that this approach is possible using ploidy and p53 overexpression as markers.
Some women have a genetic predisposition for endometrial cancer. Endometrial tumors are a component of some of the cancer family syndromes identified and
evaluated by Lynch and colleagues. 61,62 Within these unique families, the risk of developing endometrial cancer may approach 50%. However, cancer syndromes
account for relatively few cases of endometrial carcinoma overall. Endometrial cancer is also more common in women with a previous cancer of the breast, colon, or
ovary. Dual neoplasms may occur simultaneously or metachronously. The time interval between the diagnosis of the two neoplasms may be as long as 10 years. 34
STAGING
Before 1988, uterine fundal cancers were staged clinically. The clinical staging system stratified patients with early disease on the basis of a fractional biopsy
specimen from both the endocervix and the endometrium as well as the depth of the uterine cavity and physical examination ( Table 36.3-3). These techniques for
assessment of disease volume and spread were found to be erroneous in as many as one-third of cases when compared with histopathologic findings at the time of
laparotomy. 63,64 In addition, women with small-volume disease in retroperitoneal nodes or the peritoneal cavity were rarely identified during clinical staging. The
clinical system was abandoned because the accumulating data from surgical staging reports was more accurate and allowed stratification of similar risk groups for
adjuvant and adjunctive therapy trials. Consequently, the surgical staging system approved at the 1988 FIGO meeting is currently used for most patients with uterine
fundal cancers (Table 36.3-4). Risk factors incorporated into this system include depth of myometrial invasion, tumor extension to the cervix, tumor spread to adnexal
organs, peritoneal cytology, retroperitoneal lymph node metastases, and spread to abdominal or distant sites. The clinical staging criteria have been retained for
patients who do not undergo surgical exploration as a part of their initial treatment. Patients in this group are those with obviously advanced cancers who would not
benefit from tumor resection by hysterectomy and those with medical conditions that preclude an operative procedure.

TABLE 36.3-3. Clinical Staging of Uterine Fundal Tumors a

TABLE 36.3-4. Surgical Staging of Uterine Fundal Tumors a

TREATMENT OF PRIMARY DISEASE
Surgical Resection and Operative Staging
Resection of the primary tumor by total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is the mainstay of therapy for uterine cancers. 65 Because
endometrial cancer originates in the fundus, adequate surgical margins can usually be achieved by simple extrafascial hysterectomy. Salpingo-oophorectomy is
recommended because the ovary is a relatively common site of occult metastasis and because most women are already postmenopausal and no longer have
hormonal function from the organ. Removal of the uterus is curative treatment for most stage I cases. The more extensive radical hysterectomy has been
recommended for selected patients with gross tumor involvement of the cervix. 66,67 However, combined therapy, using both external-beam pelvic irradiation and
extrafascial hysterectomy, is more frequently used in such cases. 68,69,70,71 and 72 The increased expansion of endoscopic surgery has permitted its application in
endometrial cancer. The staging portion of the operation is performed endoscopically followed by a transvaginal hysterectomy. Among surgical teams skilled in these
techniques, the results appear to be equivalent to those obtained by open laparotomy. 73 Some evidence also suggests that aggressive cytoreduction may improve
survival in women with extrauterine disease. 74
The surgical staging system for uterine fundal tumors identifies certain histopathologic prognostic features for stage and substage assignment but does not define a
specific surgical approach required to accomplish staging. The additional operative procedures associated with surgical staging produce a small, but definite,
increase in operative risk. Most reported complications are related to organ injury during biopsy or hemorrhage from vascular injury during node sampling. 75,76 and 77
Patients who have extensive intraperitoneal staging procedures also have a greater risk of bowel injury if they receive postoperative external irradiation. 78
Who should undergo surgical staging? Some advocate an extended staging procedure for all women with endometrial cancer. Our approach has been to limit surgical
staging to patients at risk for occult disease spread. We routinely perform staging procedures in women with grade 2 or 3 adenocarcinomas and those with variant
histologic tumor types. This group typically represents approximately one-third of cases. For patients with grade 1 adenocarcinoma, we estimate the depth of
myometrial invasion intraoperatively by making a visual estimate 79 and evaluating a frozen section ( Fig. 36.3-4). Extended staging procedures are only performed
when significant myometrial invasion (more than 50%) is identified. Using this stratified approach to surgical staging minimizes surgical risk for patients with low-risk
tumors while maximizing the chance for detecting occult extrauterine disease in those patients at risk ( Fig. 36.3-5).

FIGURE 36.3-4. The depth of myometrial invasion can be estimated by visually examining a cut section of the uterine wall taken at the level of the tumor. A clear line
distinguishes polypoid tumor growth from myometrium in this surgical specimen. The accuracy of intraoperative visual estimates can be enhanced by using frozen
section analysis in selected cases.

FIGURE 36.3-5. Schematic representation of a staging algorithm. Patients with grade 1 (G1) typical endometrial adenocarcinoma have an exploratory laparotomy with
peritoneal cytology, total abdominal hysterectomy (TAH), and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO). The depth of myometrial invasion and extension to the cervix

are evaluated intraoperatively. Those with low-risk features have no further therapy, whereas those with high-risk features undergo an extended staging operation. All
patients with grade 2 or 3 (G2/3) endometrial tumors and those with variant histologic types (papillary serous, papillary endometrioid, clear cell) undergo an extended
staging procedure.

An equally important question is what procedures constitute an adequate staging effort. After the collection of cytology specimens and completion of the
hysterectomy, the staging assessment is focused on two general areas—the peritoneal cavity and the retroperitoneal lymph nodes. Many gynecologic oncologists
have adopted a staging approach similar to that used for women with epithelial ovarian carcinoma. Evaluation of the peritoneal cavity begins with a careful visual and
palpatory inspection. Abnormal areas from peritoneal or serosal surfaces are biopsied. In the absence of obvious disease spread, random biopsies from multiple
peritoneal sites are obtained. Cytology or histology samples, or both, are also taken from the diaphragm. A portion of the omentum is removed. When we examined
our peritoneal staging procedures in a group of at-risk women, we found that occult peritoneal spread is relatively uncommon. 80 Although directed biopsy of palpably
suspicious areas often detected metastatic disease, random biopsies were rarely positive. Peritoneal cytology and omental biopsy, coupled with directed biopsy from
abnormal sites, provided accurate and reliable information regarding intraperitoneal disease.
The lymphatic drainage of the uterine fundus is complex. Cancers may access either the pelvic or paraaortic nodes, and occasionally the inguinal nodes, on either
side. Consequently, detecting retroperitoneal lymph node spread is a potentially difficult problem. Various techniques for lymph node evaluation have been proposed,
including palpation with biopsy of abnormal nodes, single lymph node biopsy, selective lymphadenectomy, and full node dissection. 81,82 and 83 We believe that a
systematic and selective approach to lymphadenectomy reliably detects occult metastases and accurately portrays the true lymph node status. 84 More limited
approaches are clearly less accurate. Kilgore and colleagues' suggestion that complete lymphadenectomy may carry a therapeutic advantage deserves further
investigation. 85
The primary goal of surgical staging is to provide an accurate assessment of disease spread at the time therapy is initiated. For patients with tumors confined to the
uterus, those in the low-risk subgroup (grade 1 tumor with superficial myometrial invasion) are adequately treated by hysterectomy alone. Fortunately, such cases
account for most women with endometrial cancer. Women with tumors demonstrating high-risk features have an incidence of recurrent disease of 25% to 40% and are
excellent candidates for adjuvant therapy trials. Patients with more advanced disease warrant additional postoperative adjunct treatment.
Radiotherapy
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE. Within a few years of Marie Curie's discovery in 1895, radium was used to treat uterine cancers. Early reports of pathologic complete

responses to radiation, encouraging survival rates with combined treatment, and the reduction of postoperative vaginal recurrences fueled enthusiasm for combined
treatment.86,87 By the 1950s, preoperative irradiation followed by hysterectomy had become standard treatment for early-stage endometrial cancer in the United States
and other countries, although a few clinicians argued the advantages of selective postoperative irradiation. 88,89 The development of megavoltage radiotherapy in the
1950s reduced the risk of pelvic irradiation and increased the use of this modality to prevent pelvic recurrences. In more recent years, clinicians increasingly have
come to appreciate the value of operative findings as a guide to the selection of adjuvant treatment. Because preoperative irradiation has never been proven to be
more effective than tailored postoperative radiation therapy, its use has declined in favor of treatment with initial surgery. 65,90,91 Moreover, although radiation therapy
has been clearly demonstrated to reduce the rate of pelvic disease recurrence after hysterectomy, the influence of adjuvant irradiation on the survival rate of patients
with endometrial carcinoma has never been clearly determined. As a result, investigators continue to disagree about the role that adjuvant radiotherapy should play in
the management of uterine carcinomas.
Several factors have made it difficult to study the value of adjuvant treatment. Because most newly diagnosed endometrial carcinomas are clinically confined to the
uterus, with cure rates of 80% to 90% after treatment with hysterectomy alone, the margin for improvement is small. To detect any advantage from adjuvant treatment,
studies must have many patients or must be confined to subgroups that are at high risk for recurrence. The influences of physicians' biases on the selection of
patients for adjuvant treatment have limited the value of retrospective studies. Retrospective experiences are also difficult to compare because of changes that have
been made in the classification systems for staging and grading neoplasms and the relatively recent recognition of special high-risk histologic subtypes. For these
reasons, the selection of treatment is based primarily on clinicians' understandings of the risk factors for recurrence and the natural history of the disease,
impressions gained from inconclusive studies, and physician or patient preference.
PREOPERATIVE IRRADIATION. The primary goal of preoperative intracavitary irradiation is to prevent vaginal recurrences. Bedwinek et al.

92

observed an inverse
correlation between the dose of intracavitary treatment and the incidence of distant metastases in their patients, but other investigators have not confirmed this result.
Intrauterine applicators are usually loaded with 35 to 40 mgRaEq of cesium and left in place for approximately 72 hours for a total exposure of 3500 to 4000
mgRaEq-hr. Vaginal applicators are loaded to deliver 60 to 70 Gy to the surface of the apical vagina over the same period. Inserting additional sources in the form of
Heyman or Simon capsules may increase the dose to the fundus. After this dose of radiation, hysterectomy can be safely performed within 2 to 3 days. 93,94 Immediate
hysterectomy is usually preferred because important prognostic information about the depth of tumor infiltration is retained. Although the popularity of preoperative
irradiation has declined, some groups still support its use for patients with grade 2 or 3 tumors. Preoperative irradiation is not indicated for patients with grade 1
tumors that are clinically confined to the uterus, because low-grade carcinomas are usually superficial and have a very low risk of recurrence after treatment with
hysterectomy alone.
The theoretical arguments for preoperative irradiation are strongest for patients with uterine cancers that grossly involve the cervix, because preoperative intracavitary
techniques deliver a greater dose to the paracervical tissues than is possible with postoperative vaginal irradiation. Combined preoperative external-beam and
intracavitary irradiation may be indicated for patients with nonserous tumors that extensively infiltrate the cervix. However, when external-beam irradiation is given
preoperatively, hysterectomy should be delayed 4 to 6 weeks.
Because radiation therapy has been used to treat high-risk endometrial carcinoma for many years, few unselected series of patients treated with surgery alone have
been reported. In early series, overall vaginal recurrence rates were as high as 15% to 25% 87,95 However, changes in the staging of disease and methods of reporting
results make it difficult to relate these results to current experience. A few authors have reported much lower vaginal recurrence rates after surgery alone and have
suggested that the wide range of reported local recurrence rates may, in part, reflect variations in surgical technique that influence the risk of tumor cell
implantation. 96,97
Most data suggest that irradiation reduces the incidence of vaginal recurrence from 10% to 15% to less than 5% for patients with high-risk disease. In a compilation of
series published between 1967 and 1973, Jones 87 reported an overall incidence of vaginal recurrences of 4.6% in patients treated with preoperative radium compared
with 10.6% in patients treated with surgery alone. Subsequent series reported vaginal relapse rates of 0% to 5% for patients with clinical stage I disease treated with
preoperative intracavitary irradiation ( Table 36.3-5).93,94,97,98,99,100,101,102 and 103 However, these results cannot be compared with the recurrence rates of patients not
treated with radiation because, in nearly all studies, patients who had a higher risk of recurrence were selected to receive combined treatment ( Table 36.3-6).

TABLE 36.3-6. Rates of Vaginal Recurrence for Patients Treated with Hysterectomy for Endometrial Carcinoma

POSTOPERATIVE REGIONAL IRRADIATION. For many years, the only prospective randomized study that had evaluated the benefit of postoperative pelvic irradiation was

one conducted at the Norwegian Radium Hospital and published in 1980. 104 Patients with clinical stage I adenocarcinomas underwent total abdominal hysterectomy
and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Those proven to have metastases at laparotomy were excluded from the study, but no consistent surgical evaluation was
performed. The remaining 540 patients received 60 Gy with brachytherapy to the surface of the apical vagina and were then randomized either to receive 40 Gy of
pelvic radiotherapy or no further treatment.
Although patients who received pelvic irradiation in this study had a lower rate of pelvic recurrences, there was no significant improvement in overall disease-specific
survival. The data suggested that the survival rate of patients with deeply invasive grade 3 104 tumors may be improved with radiotherapy, but the number of patients in
this subset was small, and the result was not statistically significant. The authors suggested that regional irradiation may have failed to improve the survival rate
because patients whose pelvic disease was controlled recurred instead at distant sites. However, local control appeared to be most improved for patients with tumors
that deeply invaded the myometrium, whereas the higher rate of distant metastases was seen primarily in irradiated patients with superficial or no muscle invasion.
However, although the Norwegian study is one of the largest published series of patients with endometrial cancer, few patients with high-risk disease and relatively
few disease-related deaths were reported. As a result, the study was unable to demonstrate or rule out moderate differences in survival rates between patient
subgroups.
Several studies that document 80% to 90% survival rates for patients with high-risk disease treated with postoperative radiotherapy provide indirect evidence of the
efficacy of regional irradiation. 49,105,106,107,108,109,110 and 111 Carey and colleagues 111 reported an 81% 5-year relapse-free survival rate for 157 patients with clinical stage I
disease and high-risk features (deep myometrial invasion, grade 3, adenosquamous histology, or cervical involvement) who were prospectively treated with a
standardized treatment protocol. The local recurrence rate was 29% in 28 patients who refused recommended pelvic radiotherapy compared with 4% in those who
received the treatment as per protocol ( P = .03). Overall recurrence rates (29% vs. 16%) were not significantly different. In another prospective phase II trial, Piver
and Hempling108 reported a 5-year survival rate of 88% in 41 patients who received postoperative pelvic radiotherapy for deeply invasive or grade 3 tumors that were
surgically staged with a finding of negative paraaortic nodes. Only one patient had disease recurrence within the radiation treatment field. Kucera et al. 107 reported a
survival rate of 88% for 229 patients who had infiltration of the outer one-third of the myometrium or grade 2 or 3 tumors that involved the middle third. This survival
rate was not significantly different from that of 376 patients who had more favorable tumors treated with hysterectomy and vaginal irradiation alone (91%). The GOG
reported a 70% projected 5-year survival rate in 63 patients who had metastases to the pelvic nodes without paraaortic node involvement. 49 Of these studies, only one
(that by Carey and colleagues 111) excluded patients with papillary serous neoplasms from the analysis. Because the tendency of serous tumors to recur
intraperitoneally is not adequately addressed with local treatment, their inclusion in studies of adjuvant pelvic irradiation tends to obscure its possible benefit to
patients with high-risk endometrioid tumors.
The GOG completed a randomized trial comparing surgery with surgery plus pelvic radiation therapy in 448 women with intermediate risk endometrial
adenocarcinoma.112 The dose of pelvic radiation was 50.4 Gy, and brachytherapy was not used in either arm. All patients underwent complete surgical staging and
only those with FIGO stage IB, IC, or occult stage II disease were eligible. With a median follow-up of 56 months, the estimated 2-year progression-free interval was
96% for patients who received adjuvant radiation therapy versus 88% for those treated only with surgery ( P = .004). Disease recurred in the pelvis in three patients
treated with adjuvant radiation and in 17 patients treated with surgery alone. Overall survival rates for patients treated with or without adjuvant radiation were 96% and
89%, respectively, at 36 months; this difference was not statistically significant ( P = .09). This study clearly confirms the ability of postoperative irradiation to reduce
local recurrence, although some of this reduction may have been achievable with brachytherapy alone. Opponents of adjuvant irradiation argue that survival was not
improved by adjuvant treatment. However, follow-up of this study is still incomplete, and the inclusion of patients with very favorable (e.g., stage IB, grade 1) tumors
may dilute a survival benefit to remaining patients (if it exists).
These studies suggest that pelvic radiotherapy is indicated for patients with endometrioid or mucinous tumors that are confined to the pelvis and have features that
predict a high risk of recurrence in the pelvis. The potential benefit of treatment should be carefully balanced against the risk of complications, particularly for patients
with a history of pelvic infection, multiple abdominal surgical procedures, or severe diabetes mellitus. Patients whose tumors invade the myometrium by more than
50% or involve the cervical stroma, lymph–vascular spaces, or pelvic lymph nodes are at highest risk for pelvic recurrence and are usually treated with external-beam
radiation to the true pelvis. Other risk factors may be used to select treatment for tumors with intermediate risk factors (e.g., grade 2 tumors invading to the middle
third of the myometrium). Schink et al. 113 reported that tumors measuring less than 2 cm in diameter rarely involved pelvic nodes, whereas those involving the entire
uterine cavity had a high risk of pelvic nodal involvement and disease recurrence even when the outer half of the myometrium was not invaded. Patients with
intermediate risk factors in the uterus who have had extensive nodal dissections without demonstration of nodal involvement are less likely to benefit from regional
irradiation, particularly in view of the possible increased risk of late complications in patients who have had staging lymphadenectomies. 114,115 and 116
Pelvic radiotherapy is usually delivered using a four-field technique or anteroposterior opposed fields with 15 to 20 MV photons to a total dose of 40 to 50 Gy. Serious
complications are observed in 2% to 5% of patients who receive this treatment, but complications may be greater for patients who have had a staging
lymphadenectomy.114,115 and 116 Corn and colleagues 116 also reported a correlation between external-beam irradiation and the risk of complications. Some clinicians give
additional intracavitary irradiation to the vaginal cuff after pelvic radiotherapy, although investigators disagree about the benefit of this treatment. Bliss and Cowie 117
reported a lower vaginal recurrence rate (10% vs. 0%) in patients who had intracavitary irradiation added to external-beam irradiation, but gastrointestinal toxicity was
also increased. In contrast, Randall et al. 118 reported no difference in local control or complication rates when the vaginal cuff received an intracavitary radiation
boost. Several authors 117,119,120 have reported increased complication rates when an intracavitary boost was added to 45 to 50 Gy of external-beam radiotherapy to the
pelvis; however, these groups tended to give relatively high doses (more than 50 Gy) or rapid dose rates (more than 70 cGy/hr) to the vaginal surface.
EXTENDED-FIELD IRRADIATION. Extended-field irradiation appears to be effective treatment for patients with nonserous endometrial cancer metastatic to paraaortic

nodes. Between 30% and 50% of patients survive 5 years with this treatment ( Table 36.3-7).49,121,122,123,124,125,126,127 and 128 Survival rates are not clearly different for
patients with gross or microscopic nodal involvement. 125,129 In their review of 50 patients, Corn et al. 124 reported a lower rate of recurrence in paraaortic lymph nodes in
patients who had had a lymph node dissection in addition to extended-field irradiation. However, multivariate analysis suggested that the risk of recurrence was not
significantly decreased by combined treatment. In another study, Onda and colleagues 128 reported a 5-year survival rate of 75% for 20 patients treated with
lymphadenectomy followed by cisplatin-containing chemotherapy and extended-field irradiation. Further study is needed to determine whether this excellent survival
rate is reproducible.

TABLE 36.3-7. Survival Rate of Patients Treated with Extended-Field Irradiation for Endometrial Carcinoma Metastatic to Paraaortic Lymph Nodes

WHOLE ABDOMINAL IRRADIATION. The poor prognosis of uterine papillary serous carcinomas and their tendency to spread and recur intraabdominally have led

radiation oncologists to explore the value of treatment with whole abdominal irradiation. The 68% abdominal recurrence rate reported by Greven et al. 130 in patients
with pathologic stage III papillary serous or clear cell carcinomas after treatment with pelvic or extended-field radiotherapy demonstrate why smaller radiation fields
are usually inadequate for this disease. Although whole abdominal radiotherapy is accepted by many clinicians as a standard treatment for papillary serous

carcinoma, there are as yet only anecdotal reports supporting its efficacy. 123,131,132 Potish123 reported long-term survival in five (57%) of nine patients who had
intraperitoneal spread from uterine papillary serous carcinoma at diagnosis, and Malipeddi et al. 131 reported survival durations of 102 to 133 months in five of ten
patients treated with whole abdominal irradiation. Three of the patients who survived more than 5 years had been diagnosed with pathologic stage IIIA disease.
Treatment techniques are similar to those used to treat patients with primary ovarian carcinomas.
Some authors have advocated the use of whole abdominal irradiation for patients with tumors of other histologic subtypes. 133 The number of patients treated in these
series is insufficient to determine whether the treatment is better than locoregional irradiation or even whether it is beneficial. Most studies suggest that
intraabdominal dissemination is an uncommon pattern of spread in patients with nonserous histologic subtypes, even when malignant cells are seen in peritoneal
washings taken at the time of hysterectomy. Although some have advocated whole abdominal irradiation to treat patients with positive peritoneal cytology, there is
little evidence that this finding predicts a pattern of intraabdominal recurrence in patients with the more common endometrioid subtypes of endometrial carcinoma.
Thus, treatment directed specifically at the positive cytology may not be warranted. 134
The GOG is comparing whole abdominal radiation therapy with chemotherapy (cisplatin and doxorubicin) for patients with FIGO (1988) stage III and IV disease (less
than 2 cm residual). 133 This study will be of particular interest for its comparison of the two treatments in patients with papillary serous tumors, although it will also
include patients with nonserous stage III tumors for whom the risk of intraabdominal dissemination is probably small.
POSTOPERATIVE VAGINAL IRRADIATION. Some patients with minimally invasive grade 2 or noninvasive grade 3 tumors have a significant risk of vaginal recurrence

despite a relatively low risk of pelvic node metastases. Implantation of tumor cells in the vaginal cuff incision may be an important mechanism of recurrence in these
cases.
Postoperative intracavitary irradiation appears to be a very effective method of preventing vaginal cuff recurrences. Calais et al. 101 reported no differences between
the survival and vaginal recurrence rates of patients treated with preoperative or postoperative intracavitary radiation. Reported rates for central recurrence range
from 0% to 5% for patients treated with postoperative intracavitary irradiation alone, with the variation partly reflecting the different selection criteria used by various
groups.87,98,99,101,107,108,111,135,136
A variety of different types of intracavitary applicators have been used to treat the vaginal cuff. Radioactive sources are usually placed in vaginal ovoids or in a plastic
dome-shaped vaginal cylinder. The arrangement of sources and shape of the cylinder are designed to deliver a homogeneous dose to the apical vaginal surface.
Additional sources may be used to treat the mid-vagina if desired. Because the dose of radiation decreases rapidly to approximately 50% to 60% of the surface dose
at a depth of 0.5 cm beneath the vaginal mucosa, the dose to adjacent normal tissues is substantially less than the vaginal surface dose.
In the past, radiation was usually administered at low dose rates. Typically, the apical one-third to one-half of the vaginal surface was treated to a total dose of 60 to
70 Gy (30 to 40 Gy at 0.5 cm depth) at a dose rate of 90 to 100 cGy/hr (50 to 60 cGy/hr at 0.5 cm depth). With this treatment, most investigators report a risk of major
complications of approximately 1% to 2%. 98,103,104,108,119 The complication rates tend to be higher with higher total doses and when more than one-half of the vaginal
length is treated, although this has not been studied rigorously.
Today, fractionated high dose-rate intracavitary irradiation is increasingly being used as an alternative to low dose-rate irradiation to treat the vaginal cuff. This
approach is more convenient for the patient and the physician and less costly than inpatient low dose-rate irradiation. 137 The use of high dose-rate brachytherapy has
been less controversial in this setting than in the treatment of primary cervical cancer because only a modest dose of radiation is needed to prevent tumor recurrence
in the vagina and because placement of the vaginal cylinder requires little manipulation and no sedation.
There is no clear consensus about the ideal dose or fractionation schedule for high dose-rate vaginal brachytherapy. Sorbe and Smeds 135 compared four fractionation
schemes—4 × 9.0 Gy, 5 × 6.0 Gy, 6 × 5.0 Gy, and 6 × 4.5 Gy, prescribed at a tissue depth of 1.0 cm—in 404 patients who received intracavitary irradiation alone
(without external-beam irradiation) after hysterectomy. The rates of acute and late complications were strongly correlated with fraction size. Eighty-eight percent of
patients treated with 4 × 9.0 Gy had significant late rectal complications. Because the authors prescribed treatment at 1.0-cm depth, the total dose and dose per
fraction at the mucosal surface were much higher than the specified dose.
Most authors have recommended more conservative fractionation schemes. Treatment is usually prescribed at the surface or 5 mm beneath the mucosa. When the
dose is prescribed at 5 mm beneath the mucosa, it should be remembered that the rectal mucosa will receive a total dose (and dose per fraction) that is similar to the
prescribed dose. In some reports, investigators have recommended a number of fractionation schemes including, for example, 6 × 6 Gy, 138 3 × 7 Gy,139 4 × 8.5 Gy,140
and 2 × 16.2 Gy,141 with doses specified at the vaginal surface. All have reported vaginal recurrence rates of less than 1.5% for patients with relatively favorable
tumors.
RADIOTHERAPY ALONE. Although hysterectomy is the primary treatment of most endometrial carcinomas, radiotherapy alone is also an effective treatment that is

sometimes indicated for patients who are medically inoperable or who have unresectable disease. Most authors report disease-specific survival rates of 75% to 85%
and local recurrence rates of 10% to 20% for patients with clinical stage I to II disease treated with radiation alone. Prognosis is usually correlated with clinical stage
and histologic grade. 142,143,144,145,146,147 and 148 Kupelian et al. 146 found that the survival rate of patients with papillary serous tumors was significantly poorer than that for
patients with other histologic types of endometrial cancer. However, the disease-specific survival rate of 43% was not obviously different from that commonly reported
for treatment of this tumor with hysterectomy alone.
Some authors recommend treatment with a combination of external-beam and intracavitary irradiation. 144,147,148 However, very good local control and survival rates
also have been reported after treatment with brachytherapy alone. 145,146 Patients who have low-grade tumors that do not expand the uterus are probably effectively
treated with intracavitary irradiation alone. Patients with large uterine cavities, cervical involvement, or grade 3 tumors may benefit from a course of external-beam
irradiation before intracavitary treatment.
Brachytherapy must cover the uterine fundus adequately when treatment will not include a hysterectomy. A single uterine tandem with increased activity in the highest
source may be sufficient for patients who have a very small uterine cavity. A number of applicator systems, such as the Heyman capsule or Simon afterloading
systems, have been devised to improve the dose to the fundus in patients with larger uterine cavities. Both of these afterloading systems are used to pack the uterine
cavity with radium or cesium sources to expand the dose distribution to the fundus. In some cases, two tandems can be placed in the right and left cornua of the
uterus and loaded to achieve the desired distribution. Magnetic resonance imaging may be helpful in planning treatment.
Several groups have reported results of treatment with high dose-rate intracavitary radiation for patients with inoperable endometrial cancer. 149,150 and 151 In the largest
of these series, Knocke and colleagues 150 reported results for 280 patients, most of whom had clinical stage I to II disease. Treatment appeared to be well tolerated,
but the local recurrence rates were somewhat higher than those reported from earlier series. In particular, local control rates for patients with clinical stage IB and II
tumors were only approximately 60%. This rate may possibly reflect a suboptimal distribution to the uterine fundus from the single-channel tandem applicator used in
their treatments. Nguyen and Petereit 151 reported good uterine disease control rates (88%) but a high rate of perioperative morbidity and two perioperative deaths in
36 patients treated with high dose-rate brachytherapy for clinical stage I disease. Although this approach may offer advantages over low dose-rate brachytherapy for
selected patients who are deemed medically inoperable, sedation may still be required to optimize applicator insertion. Deep venous thrombosis, a possible
complication of prolonged bed rest during low dose-rate applications, can also be encouraged by prolonged lithotomy positioning for high dose-rate procedures. 151,152
Whatever method of brachytherapy is used, these patients should only be treated by experienced brachytherapists in a well-controlled environment with adequate
monitoring and emergency medical support.
Systemic Adjuvants
HORMONES.

Historical Background. The original observations by Kelley and Baker 153 documenting the responsiveness of metastatic endometrial adenocarcinoma to progestogens
encouraged the organization of the Endometrial Surgical Adjuvant Study Group in 1965, the forerunner of the GOG. This group's initial trial failed to demonstrate an
effect of medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) on recurrences after surgical treatment of stage I endometrial cancer. 154 Nevertheless, it stimulated the interest of
gynecologic oncologists in collaborative clinical trials and led directly to a grant application in support of GOG activities that began in May 1971. More recent studies

have focused on the role of adjuvant progestogens on higher risk populations with stage I or clinically occult stage II cancer.
Adjuvant Hormonal Studies. Progestogens have been widely used to treat metastatic endometrial cancer. Although no adjuvant effect of MPA was shown in the initial
randomized study, optimistic results were obtained using adjunctive progestogens in women with stage I endometrial cancer compared retrospectively with patients
treated only with local modalities. 155,156 Subsequent randomized studies, however, again failed to demonstrate survival differences. 157,158 and 159 Accordingly, some have
argued for performing clinical trials on a better-selected population—for example, those with a greater chance of recurrence or with features that might render them
more responsive to progestogens. However, such selection criteria produce the paradox that higher-risk tumors are less likely to be hormone responsive. Subset
analyses have documented an unfavorable relative survival in “receptor-poor” versus “receptor-rich” stage I endometrial cancer treated with MPA. Studies have been
initiated in Germany comparing higher doses of MPA (1000 mg orally daily) with tamoxifen and with observation in patients with stage I cancer and with
nonrandomized use of MPA in women with stage II disease. However, because no fully published results from such newer adjuvant therapy trials have appeared,
adjuvant hormonal therapy can only be recommended in the context of clinical trials. Similarly, nonrandomized experience with progestogens given as induction
therapy before, or in lieu of, surgery in patients with preinvasive or minimally invasive disease, or in patients who are poor surgical risks, attests to their biologic
activity but does not represent an established indication. 160
In addition to the use of adjuvant progestogens alone, a large Italian study of women with FIGO stage I cancers randomized patients with invasion beyond one-third of
the myometrium to either external radiation or external irradiation plus MPA. No differences were seen among arms. 158
CYTOTOXIC CHEMOTHERAPY. Cytotoxic chemotherapy has been considered as an adjuvant treatment in certain circumstances when the risk of distant recurrence

exceeds 20%. These circumstances include (1) any stage II tumor, (2) clear cell or papillary serous histology, (3) absence of hormone receptors, (4) preoperative
finding of elevated CA-125, and (5) selected stage I disease with deep myometrial invasion. A study from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in patients with some of
these adverse prognostic factors reported a favorable experience after adjuvant cisplatin, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide therapy. 161,162 Confirmation from
randomized studies is lacking, however.
Because the only randomized study of adjuvant chemotherapy yielded negative results (GOG 34, a study comparing adjuvant doxorubicin to no further therapy after
surgery and radiation for stage I and occult stage II high-risk endometrial cancer), 49 the GOG has subsequently launched studies to evaluate other adjunct modalities.
In July 1995, GOG 99, which randomized all cell types (except papillary serous and clear cell) of surgical stage I or occult stage II endometrial cancers to either no
additional treatment or pelvic radiotherapy, was closed to accrual. In a simultaneous trial, GOG 94 treated all papillary serous and clear cell tumors, regardless of
stage, with whole abdominal radiation. Patients with other cell types and optimally debulked clinical stage III or IV were also eligible for this study.
New clinical trials have been proposed to compare combination chemotherapy (doxorubicin and cisplatin) and pelvic radiation in women with stage IB, IC, IIA, and IIB
endometrial cancers. It is hoped that better patient selection, higher dose intensity, use of a more active drug regimen, and avoidance of the toxicities seen in GOG 34
from doxorubicin after pelvic radiation will allow systemic therapy to demonstrate a benefit, even though this combination regimen does not enhance survival in
patients with advanced disease. 163 A resurgence of interest in consolidation therapy with simultaneous irradiation and chemotherapy is likely as paclitaxel and
cisplatin are more tolerable in such situations than doxorubicin. In addition, drug combinations have been proposed before local irradiation in high-risk patients (those
with papillary serous/clear cell histology, pathologic stage III and IVA disease, and earlier stages beyond IA if they have at least any two of the following unfavorable
risk factors: grade 3 disease, more than one-third myometrial invasion, cervical stromal invasion, and vascular space involvement).
TREATMENT OF RECURRENT DISEASE
Treatment Failure
Treatment failure in low-risk patients is exceedingly rare. In our series investigating surveillance strategies, we had only one failure in this group. 164 Tumor recurrence
is most common in women with advanced-stage disease or those with high-risk features in their primary tumor. Late recurrence is uncommon, and virtually all failures
are clinically evident within 3 years of original diagnosis. 164,165 and 166
One-half of patients whose tumors recur are symptomatic. A targeted examination and diagnostic evaluation should readily lead to the correct diagnosis. The
remaining group with treatment failure have their recurrence detected during routine surveillance. Although the Pap smear and chest radiograph may detect an
asymptomatic recurrence, this clinical scenario is rare. Most recurrences are detected by physical examination. Serum CA-125 levels may be useful in monitoring
patients for the development of recurrent disease, especially those who have papillary serous carcinomas or intraperitoneal disease. 42,167 Follow-up intervals of 6 to
12 months coupled with prompt evaluation of symptomatic patients seems to be an appropriate approach to surveillance. Routine use of diagnostic studies beyond
cytology and the selective use of CA-125 is probably not cost effective.
The patterns of recurrence depend on initial disease distribution. Patients with advanced primary disease tend to have abdominal or systemic failure. Approximately
one-third of recurrences seen in women whose primary tumors were confined to the uterus are limited to the pelvis; the remaining two-thirds have some component of
distant failure. 3 It is important to identify those cases with isolated pelvic recurrence because some can be salvaged by radiotherapy or ultraradical surgery. 168,169
Conversely, treatment of systemic recurrence is largely palliative.
Systemic Agents
HORMONE THERAPY.

Overview of Clinical Studies. Progestogens have been used in the management of recurrent endometrial cancer after the original report by Kelly and Baker in 1961 153
used the parenterally administered hydroxyprogesterone caproate. 153,170,171 and 172 Beneficial results from these trials were mostly confined to a subset of patients with
well-differentiated tumor, metastases to the lung, and a long disease-free interval between diagnosis of the primary tumor and the development of metastases.
Subsequent trials, using MPA or megestrol acetate, explored the use of high-dose progestogen therapy on better-selected patients through the study of hormone
receptor content of tumors and limiting therapy to receptor-positive cases, paralleling breast cancer strategies. 172,173 Overall, fewer than 30% of patients (even with the
best selection) show objective responses, and the survival of patients with metastatic disease is disappointingly short, except for a rare, extremely
hormone-responsive patient. Earlier series reporting very long median survival rates reflect carefully selected patients or loose criteria of response. 153,170
No dose-response effect for progestogens has been proven. 174 Although some responders have very long survival rates, the median duration of response in most
studies does not exceed 10 months. The results of treatment with tamoxifen are generally inferior to those obtained with progestogens. 175 It remains to be seen
whether tamoxifen in sequential combination with progestogens (to modulate receptors) will have an advantage over progestogen therapy alone.
Other hormonal manipulations are increasingly under study. These include not only combinations of tamoxifen and MPA, but also other selective estrogen receptor
modulators such as raloxifene, luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and antagonists, aromatase inhibitors, and miscellaneous other drugs ( Table
36.3-8).176,177,178,179 and 180 It is likely that the same subset of patients responds to these hormonally directed therapies, and no obvious advantage of one agent over
another has emerged to date. Moreover, results from small studies may be discordant, reflecting the importance of patient selection in maximizing the probability of
response.

TABLE 36.3-8. Selected Series of Hormonally Based Therapy in Women with Advanced Endometrial Cancer

Biologic and Pharmacologic Considerations. The presence of estrogen and progesterone receptors in tumors has been shown to correlate with well-differentiated
cancers and with response to progestogens. 181,182,183 and 184 Sequentially alternating tamoxifen and MPA or megestrol acetate regimens are based on the concept of
up-regulation of progesterone receptors by the antiestrogen. 179 Other laboratory studies indicate the presence of specific binding sites for LHRH and for androgen
receptors. 185 Supplementing clinical observations with molecular correlates of response may bring out some differences that are currently not apparent and also
possibly lead to crossover hormonal therapies, a concept that has been useful in breast cancer treatment. The rational selection of specific hormonal manipulations
from laboratory findings may become more feasible with the wider applicability of molecular immunohistochemical probes.
CYTOTOXIC CHEMOTHERAPY.

Overview of Clinical Trials. Most women with recurrent or stage IV endometrial cancers, except for those with well-differentiated and receptor-positive metastases,
must be assessed for treatment with cytotoxic chemotherapy. Doxorubicin and its analogue epirubicin have shown reproducible antitumor activity in phase II and III
trials.186,187 These phase III studies have indicated that the addition of cyclophosphamide to doxorubicin improves neither response nor survival rates and suggest that
the incorporation of progestogens does not improve results 187,188 and 189 (Table 36.3-9). A number of other drugs studied by the GOG and others also have shown little
efficacy but often have been used in combinations. On the other hand, cisplatin and carboplatin both show consistent antitumor activity, 187,191,192,193,194,195,196 and 197 and
a phase III study combining cisplatin with doxorubicin showed superior progression-free survival over doxorubicin alone. 190 However, the overall median survival rate
for patients receiving doxorubicin plus cisplatin was not improved. Other agents with single-agent activity include paclitaxel, 198,199 ifosfamide,200 and oral
etoposide. 201,202 Paclitaxel (250 mg/m2) given on a 24-hour infusion schedule and requiring cytokine support with filgrastim showed remarkable activity, 198 with four
complete responses and six partial responses among 28 patients. A 24-hour infusion of 150 mg/m 2 is being tested in phase III studies in combination with doxorubicin.
Shorter infusions of paclitaxel have activity with less myelosuppression 199 and are often used in combination with carboplatin 203 or in three-drug combinations. 204
Regimens of platinums and taxanes also have activity against papillary serous cancers 205 and are, therefore, replacing doxorubicin-containing regimens in this
condition. 167 On the other hand, the addition of intraperitoneal cisplatin to doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide did not have an encouraging outcome. 206 In ongoing
pilot studies with radiation, platinums and particularly cisplatin are favored. 207

TABLE 36.3-9. Cytotoxic Drug Trials Showing Activity in Women with Endometrial Carcinoma

Carboplatin is the preferred drug when added to paclitaxel because of its lower incidence of severe neurotoxicity relative to cisplatin.
Biologic and Pharmacologic Considerations. Laboratory and clinical studies should better define the role of systemic chemotherapy in relation to various known
biologic factors in an analogous way to how pathologic features and hormone receptors have assisted in refining hormonal therapies. Endometrial cancers commonly
express P-glycoprotein (Pgp). Studying the mechanisms of drug resistance mediated by multidrug resistance gene 1(MDR1)-mediated Pgp may assist in identifying
doxorubicin- and paclitaxel-resistant tumors. 208 Moreover, mutations in p53 occur somewhat concordantly with the expression of Pgp and may help to define a more
resistant subpopulation. A relationship between progesterone and the expression of Pgp also has been postulated 209; prior progestogen therapy might lead to
changes in Pgp expression. The epidermal growth factor receptor and HER-2/neu are also likely to be important in determining chemosensitivity and outcome, as well
as therapeutic targets. 210,211 Studies are beginning to focus on special subtypes, such as papillary serous and clear cell carcinomas, that not only have a propensity to
metastasize early but may also have altered drug sensitivities. Several investigators have known that p53 mutations are more frequent in these cell types and are
indicative of poor prognosis. Microsatellite instability, persistence of bcl-2191, and high proliferation indices may also be of prognostic significance.
Radiotherapy
Vaginal recurrences of endometrial carcinomas can often be successfully treated with radiation therapy if there is no evidence of extrapelvic disease. For patients
whose initial treatment was hysterectomy alone, vaginal recurrence is usually treated with a combination of external-beam irradiation and intracavitary or interstitial
brachytherapy, depending on the extent and distribution of disease. Technical considerations are similar to those for primary vaginal carcinoma.
With this treatment, reported 5-year survival rates for patients who have isolated recurrences in the vaginal apex are usually 40% to 60%. 212,213,214,215,216,217 and 218
Outcome is correlated with the recurrent tumor's grade, size, and extent and the time to recurrence. 212,214,215 and 216 Sears et al.216 reported 5-year survival rates of 74%
and 30% for patients with tumors measuring 2 cm or less, or more than 2 cm, respectively, which suggests that early detection and treatment may be important. These
authors also reported significantly better survival rates for patients who had a portion of their treatment given with brachytherapy. Distal vaginal recurrences are less
common but may also be cured with irradiation if there is no other evidence of recurrent cancer. 212,213,216,219,220 If possible, the inguinal nodes should be treated when
the distal vagina is involved.
The prognosis is much poorer for patients who have recurrent tumor on the pelvic wall. 213,214,216 However, there are anecdotal reports of prolonged disease-free
survival after locoregional treatment. 213,216 Recurrence isolated to inguinal nodes should be treated aggressively because cures have been reported after treatment
with irradiation. 221
Surgery
Surgery plays a limited role in the management of recurrent endometrial cancer. Although cytoreduction is probably valuable for women with advanced primary
cancers, secondary cytoreduction after failure of primary therapy has no real role because of the lack of effective regional or systemic therapy. Two legitimate

indications for surgical management are attempted curative resection of central pelvic recurrence by exenteration and palliative treatment in selected clinical
situations.
Historically, ultraradical resection of recurrent endometrial cancer has not been recommended because of the perception that systemic spread was too common.
However, reviews that have examined carefully evaluated patients have identified a subset of women whose recurrence is limited to the pelvis. 222 Cure rates of 40% to
50% have been obtained after resection by pelvic exenteration. These values are comparable to those reported for the treatment of central recurrence in patients with
cervix cancer.223,224 Consequently, patients who have recurrent disease that is clinically limited to the central pelvis and have not been successful with radiotherapy
should be considered candidates for curative resection. A diligent search for subclinical metastatic disease should be carried out before exploration and at the time of
operation.
Palliative surgery is largely limited to patients with intraabdominal recurrences causing bowel obstruction or pain. Candidates for palliative operations must have
realistic expectations as to the goals of surgery, and the planned procedure should have a reasonable chance of achieving the desired goal. The patient's life
expectancy and clinical status should be adequate for the proposed procedure and the anticipated recovery. The operation performed should be the minimum
procedure with the lowest risk capable of correcting the problem. Heroic operations attempted in patients with no chance for long-term survival are pointless.
OUTCOME AND SURVIVAL
Long-term survival of patients with endometrial cancer is clearly related to their surgical stage and substage. Representative 5-year survival rates by stage are 90%
for stage I, 60% for stage II, 40% for stage III, and 5% for stage IV. Because the vast majority of patients have stage I disease and because there is a wide variation in
survival based on risk profile within this stage, most research into postoperative adjuvant therapy is aimed at subsets of stage I patients. It is anticipated that the
routine use of surgical staging will result in a more homogeneous subgrouping of similar risk patients and allow a more reliable prediction of survival potential.
Selected patients with advanced disease that can be encompassed by surgical resection with or without adjunctive irradiation can be cured. However, few patients
meet such criteria. Although patients with disseminated disease frequently respond to cytotoxic therapy, such responses tend to be short and provide a limited
improvement in progression-free survival. As was suggested earlier, posttreatment surveillance for recurrence should be used to identify candidates for clinical trials
of new agents or therapeutic approaches.

UTERINE SARCOMAS
TUMOR TYPES
Tumors with a malignant mesenchymal component account for approximately 10% of uterine fundal neoplasms. Pure uterine sarcomas of the homologous type arise
from native elements, as is seen in endometrial stromal sarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, and sarcomas of nonspecific supporting tissues (fibrous tissue, vessels,
lymphatics). Heterologous sarcomas may contain elements with nonnative differentiation, such as skeletal muscle, bone, and cartilage. 225 The malignant mixed
Müllerian tumor (MMT) is a mixture of carcinoma and sarcoma. Although any combination is possible, serous carcinoma admixed with endometrial stromal sarcoma is
the most common histologic type. The adenosarcoma is a rare mixed tumor in which a benign epithelial component is mixed with a sarcomatous element.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Uterine sarcomas exhibit the typical gross features of similar tumors at other sites—firm, fleshy growth with areas of hemorrhage and necrosis. The initial growth
phase of most sarcomas is within the fundal portion of the uterus. If the tumor involves the endometrial cavity, postmenopausal or abnormal vaginal bleeding is
common. Tumors that have a polypoid growth configuration may prolapse through the cervix to present as an upper vaginal mass. This presentation is most often
seen with MMTs.
Extensive local growth is another common clinical presentation. Once the tumor has penetrated the uterine serosa, it can rapidly attach to adjacent pelvic structures or
loops of bowel positioned in the pelvis ( Fig. 36.3-6). This locally advanced pelvic tumor presentation is typical of leiomyosarcoma. Patients with locally advanced
cancers have symptoms related to an expanding pelvic mass (fullness, pressure, pain, urinary frequency) or to entrapment and destruction of adjacent organs
(hematuria, tenesmus, rectal bleeding, bowel obstruction, fistula).

FIGURE 36.3-6. Uterine sarcomas tend to present as large, fleshy central pelvic tumors. This leiomyosarcoma has replaced most of the uterine fundus and penetrated
the serosa to engulf the adnexa and directly contact intraperitoneal structures.

As is seen for epithelial tumors of the uterus, distant spread from uterine sarcomas may occur by a variety of mechanisms. Intraabdominal and retroperitoneal nodal
metastases are frequently associated with the MMT. 226 This is not surprising because the epithelial component is usually papillary serous carcinoma and
predominates within metastatic sites. Consequently, patients with advanced MMT follow a clinical pattern similar to that of women with epithelial ovarian cancer. All
uterine sarcomas have a propensity for hematogenous dissemination. Pulmonary metastases are most frequently observed. Other sites include liver, bone, and brain.
Women with distant spread at the time of diagnosis have symptoms and examination findings based on the location of their disease.
EVALUATION
Uterine sarcoma should be suspected in any postmenopausal women with an enlarging central pelvic mass. If the tumor projects into the uterine cavity or has partially
prolapsed through the cervix, an endometrial or direct biopsy should provide a tissue diagnosis. Evaluation by an experienced pathologist is critical because uterine
sarcomas are rare and the biopsy material is often fragmented or necrotic. Tumors originating within the uterine wall require exploratory laparotomy and hysterectomy
to establish a diagnosis. Because primary therapy usually includes hysterectomy, the preoperative evaluation should focus on a search for disease at common
metastatic sites and assessment of operative risk.
When the diagnosis of sarcoma is known or suspected, the pretreatment evaluation should include a careful history and physical examination, chest radiograph, and
laboratory studies. The CA-125 level may be elevated in some cases, particularly in MMT tumors with peritoneal spread. Other markers have not been consistently
useful. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis may be helpful in identifying occult extrauterine disease. Cystoscopy, proctosigmoidoscopy, and barium
enema should be performed in patients with advanced pelvic disease. Brain, bone, or liver imaging should be considered in patients with abnormal physical or
laboratory findings.
TREATMENT
Surgery

Patients in whom the diagnosis of uterine sarcoma is not anticipated often undergo hysterectomy for a presumed diagnosis of uterine leiomyoma or “central” pelvic
mass. Although most of these cases are not surgically staged, many are apparently stage I tumors. When the diagnosis of sarcoma is established and hysterectomy is
technically feasible, surgical resection of the primary tumor should be attempted. Such surgery may be curative for tumors confined to the uterus. Because of the
overall poor prognosis associated with uterine sarcomas, we proceed with extended surgical staging similar to that used for patients with endometrial adenocarcinoma
when disease is clinically limited to the uterus. Although a survival benefit to surgical staging has not been demonstrated, knowledge of the true extent of disease is
helpful in selecting therapy options.
In more extensive disease cases, resection or debulking of the central tumor can provide important palliation of bleeding and pain. Tumor reduction may enhance the
ability of postoperative adjunctive therapy to extend survival, but this concept is not as well established as in epithelial ovarian tumors. The aggressiveness of the
surgical approach must include a balance between the desire to remove as much tumor as possible and the risks of additional operative procedures. Patients with
widespread or bulky unresectable disease should not be subjected to high-risk operations under the guise of cytoreduction.
Occasionally, surgical intervention is indicated in women with advanced or recurrent disease, but such situations are clinically uncommon. Some women have
obtained long-term survival and apparent cure after resection of an isolated pulmonary metastasis. 167,227,228 Exploration to palliate bowel obstruction or fistula is
appropriate in selected refractory disease patients who have a good performance status and reasonable projected survival time. Potentially morbid palliative
operations in women with terminal disease should be avoided whenever possible.
Radiotherapy
MIXED MÜLLERIAN TUMOR. The role of radiation therapy in the management of carcinosarcoma is controversial. Patients are frequently treated with postoperative

pelvic radiotherapy, but irradiation has never been proven to influence survival. Retrospective comparisons of treatments are invariably biased by physicians'
tendencies to select treatment on the basis of known prognostic indicators. No randomized study has directly compared patients with similar prognostic features who
were treated with or without radiotherapy.
Most retrospective reviews of patients with carcinosarcoma have demonstrated a lower rate of pelvic tumor recurrence in patients who received postoperative pelvic
irradiation. 229,230,231,232,233,234,235,236,237,238 and 239 In most cases, this has not resulted in a demonstrable improvement in the survival rate. However, few studies have
evaluated risk factors that could have influenced treatment selection. Potential bias and the small number of patients in most studies have made it impossible to
determine the efficacy of treatment.
The GOG retrospectively evaluated its experience in two studies. 233,240 Hornback et al.233 reviewed the influence of pelvic radiotherapy in a study originally designed
to evaluate the role of doxorubicin. In this study, radiotherapy was given at the discretion of the investigator. In 109 patients with stage I or II disease (95 of whom had
carcinosarcoma), the pelvis was the first site of recurrence in five of 49 patients (10%) who had radiation therapy versus 14 of 60 patients (23%) treated with surgery
alone. However, irradiated patients had a higher rate of distant metastasis, and no significant difference in the 2-year survival rate was reported. In a more recent
review of another GOG study, the pelvis was reported to be the first site of recurrence in 17% and 24% of patients with carcinosarcoma treated with or without
postoperative irradiation, respectively. The overall relapse rates were not significantly different. As with other reviews, because the tumor stage, grade, and depth of
invasion and rates of lymph node involvement were not compared for patients receiving different treatments, the efficacy of radiotherapy cannot be determined from
these studies.
LEIOMYOSARCOMA AND ENDOMETRIAL STROMAL SARCOMA. Few studies have separately reported control rates for patients treated with radiotherapy for

leiomyosarcoma, and the numbers of patients are too small to evaluate efficacy. 233,236,240 Patients with close surgical margins may benefit from postoperative
irradiation. Because lymph node metastasis from leiomyosarcoma is uncommon, treatment of the operative bed (usually the lower pelvis) may be sufficient in most
cases.
Several authors reporting small series of patients with endometrial stromal tumors have commented on the role of radiotherapy, either suggesting that it is
effective 241,242 and 243 or ineffective.244 Berchuck et al.242 reported dramatic responses in two of three patients who had measurable tumor. One patient remained free of
disease for more than 10 years after treatment. However, reports of radiotherapy for these tumors are little more than anecdotal, and further study is needed to define
the role of radiotherapy adequately.
Chemotherapy and Hormonal Therapy
Differences in the management of metastatic uterine leiomyosarcomas and MMTs with respect to systemic chemotherapy have been established, and separate trials
are conducted for these two entities ( Table 36.3-10 and Table 36.3-11). Endometrial stromal sarcomas are less common and usually not included in clinical trials.
Because antitumor activity of chemotherapy regimens has been documented in advanced stages, several trials are ongoing or planned in earlier stages of disease.
Evidence to support the use of chemotherapy as an adjuvant to surgery is not yet forthcoming. One randomized study of the addition of doxorubicin after surgery in
stage I and II uterine sarcomas yielded no advantage for the adjuvant chemotherapy group. 245

TABLE 36.3-10. Selected Cytotoxic Drug Trials in Uterine Leiomyosarcomas

TABLE 36.3-11. Selected Cytotoxic Drug Trials in Uterine Mixed Mesodermal Tumors

In mixed mesodermal tumors of stage I, II, and III, a GOG trial begun in 1993 is comparing whole abdominal radiation to chemotherapy with cisplatin and
ifosfamide.179 These trials require several years to complete, a difficulty compounded by the evolving nature of the adjuvant treatments that are applied.
LEIOMYOSARCOMA. Doxorubicin was shown to be an effective drug against leiomyosarcomas arising in the uterus.

246

Drug combinations were claimed to improve
results in both childhood and adult sarcomas of extrauterine origin, but the addition of dacarbazine to doxorubicin did not improve the survival of patients with
metastatic uterine sarcomas beyond that obtained with doxorubicin alone. 246 Response rates were, however, significantly better in the doxorubicin plus dacarbazine
arm. A subsequent randomized study also performed by the GOG failed to show that the addition of cyclophosphamide in modest doses was advantageous over
doxorubicin by itself. 247 The alkylating agent ifosfamide has modest activity 248 but does not add substantially to the therapeutic efficacy of doxorubicin. 249,250 Other
drugs, such as cisplatin, 251,252 etoposide,253,254 and paclitaxel, 179,255 also have been evaluated and have modest to minimal activity. A combination of hydroxyurea,
etoposide, and dacarbazine had antitumor activity without major toxicities. 256
and cisplatin 254 have greater antitumor activity against uterine MMT than does doxorubicin. Accordingly, the two drugs in
combination have been explored in all stages and also compared with ifosfamide alone 258 in advanced, persistent, or recurrent disease. The results indicate an
advantage for the combination in terms of responses and progression-free survival, but nearly equivalent median survival at a cost of increasing toxicity. The
combination is being administered to completely resected stage I and II MMTs of the uterus (GOG 117), but the assessment will require a comparison to historical
controls. Taxanes, such as paclitaxel, have been evaluated, 179 and this agent has already formed part of an active combination with the pegylated liposomal
doxorubicin, Doxil. 259 Experience with a number of other platinum-based combinations has been reported in very small series. These should be regarded as leads for
future trials rather than a reliable indicator of activity. 260
MIXED MÜLLERIAN TUMOR. Ifosfamide

257

ENDOMETRIAL STROMAL SARCOMA. The systemic treatment of endometrial stromal sarcoma is guided by reports from individual institutions 242,244,261,262 and case

reports.263,264 The tumor's relative rarity does not support the conduct of clinical trials. Because of the presence of hormonal receptors in low-grade (fewer than ten
mitoses per high-power field) tumors, hormonal therapy has been advocated. 261,265 However, high-grade tumors are treated with chemotherapy. 263,265 Investigation of
biologic and pharmacologic issues may point the way for hypothesis-driven drug trials.
BIOLOGIC AND PHARMACOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS. The growth of benign leiomyomas is under both estrogenic and progestogenic control.

266,267
Accordingly, the study

of receptors and hormone-action inhibitors for antitumor activity may be relevant to the management of malignant smooth muscle tumors. 268 Receptors also have been
studied in endometrial stromal sarcomas 269,270 and justify exploration of inhibition or depletion of hormonal mediators in the management of these tumors.
Overexpression in MDR2 and mutations in p53 have been noted in some uterine sarcomas, but not in leiomyomas. 271 For the development of cytotoxic therapy, the
role of MDR1-mediated Pgp expression in determining resistance to doxorubicin has been investigated in a cell line from a leiomyosarcoma of the uterus and its
doxorubicin-resistant derivative. 271 Drugs that are substrates for Pgp may restore sensitivity to doxorubicin in this resistant variant. Trials of such resistance-reversing
agents, including the cyclosporin analogue PSC-833, may lead to a reassessment of the potential for drugs such as doxorubicin, taxanes, and vinca alkaloids in the
treatment of these traditionally refractory tumors. 272
OUTCOME AND SURVIVAL
Stage is the most significant predictor of outcome for women with uterine sarcomas. Patients whose tumors are confined to the uterus have a survival rate of 60% to
70% after surgical resection. Major sites of failure include the pelvis, upper abdomen, and lung. Few well-conducted prospective adjuvant therapy trials have been
accomplished, so a precise role for either adjuvant irradiation or chemotherapy remains undefined. As has been noted for endometrial carcinoma, adjuvant pelvic
irradiation may reduce the rate of pelvic failure without improving survival if more patients succumb to distant failure. Pelvic irradiation and local tumor control may be
an important issue in tumors with extension to the cervix. However, so few patients are placed in this category that meaningful treatment data are not available.
Very few patients with tumor spread outside of the uterus can be curatively treated. Some women with small-volume regional disease have obtained long-term survival
after external-beam irradiation. However, most patients with advanced or recurrent disease ultimately experience disease progression and die. These women are
excellent candidates for new therapeutic trials.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, et al. Cancer statistics, 1999. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:8.
2. Boronow RC. Endometrial cancer: not a benign disease. Obstet Gynecol 1976;47:630.
3. Burke TW, Heller PB, Woodward JE, et al. Treatment failure in endometrial carcinoma. Obstet Gynecol 1990;75:96.
4. Creasman WT. New gynecologic cancer staging. Obstet Gynecol 1990;75:287.
5. Ng ABP, Reagan JW, Storasli JP, et al. Mixed adenosquamous carcinoma of the endometrium. Am J Clin Pathol 1973;59:765.
6. Silverberg SG, De Giorgi LS. Clear cell carcinoma of the endometrium: clinical, pathologic, and ultrasonic findings. Cancer 1973;31:1127.
7. Kurman RJ, Scully RE. Clear cell carcinoma of the endometrium: an analysis of 21 cases. Cancer 1976;37:872.
8. Salazar OM, DePapp EW, Bonfiglio TA, et al. Adenosquamous carcinoma of the endometrium: an entity with an inherent poor prognosis? Cancer 1977;40:119.
9. Alberhasky RC, Connelly PJ, Christopherson WM. Carcinoma of the endometrium. IV. Mixed adenosquamous carcinoma: a clinical-pathological study of 68 cases with long-term follow-up. Am
J Clin Pathol 1982;77:655.
10. Christopherson WM, Alberhasky RC, Connelly PJ. Carcinoma of the endometrium. I. A clinicopathologic study of clear-cell carcinoma and secretory carcinoma. Cancer 1982;49:1511.
11. Hendrickson M, Ross J, Eifel P, et al. Uterine papillary serous carcinoma: a highly malignant form of endometrial adenocarcinoma. Am J Surg Pathol 1982;6:93.
12. Jeffrey JF, Krepart GV, Lotocki RJ. Papillary serous adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. Obstet Gynecol 1986;67:670.
13. Chambers JT, Merino M, Kohorn EI, et al. Uterine serous papillary carcinoma. Obstet Gynecol 1987;69:109.
14. Sutton GP, Brill L, Michael H, et al. Malignant papillary lesions of the endometrium. Gynecol Oncol 1987;27:294.
15. Ehrlich CA, Young PCM, Cleary RE. Cytoplasmic progesterone and estradiol receptors in normal, hyperplastic, and carcinomatous endometrial: therapeutic implications. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1981;141:539.
16. Kurman RJ, Kaminski PF, Norris HJ. The behavior of endometrial hyperplasia: a long-term study of “untreated” hyperplasia in 170 patients. Cancer 1985;56:403.
17. Wynder EL, Escher GC, Mantel N. An epidemiological investigation of cancer of the endometrium. Cancer 1966;19:489.
18. MacMahon B. Risk factors for endometrial cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1974;2:122.
19. Smith DC, Prentice R, Thompson DJ, et al. Association of exogenous estrogen and endometrial carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1975;293:1164.
20. Ziel HK, Finkle WD. Increased risk of endometrial carcinoma among users of conjugated estrogens. N Engl J Med 1975;297:1167.
21. Gray LA, Christopherson WM, Hoover RN. Estrogens and endometrial cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1977;49:385.
22. Antunes CMF, Stolley PD, Rosenshein NB. Endometrial cancer and estrogen use: report of a large case-control study. N Engl J Med 1979;300:9.
23. Davies JL, Rosenshein NB, Antunes CMF. A review of the risk factors for endometrial carcinoma. Obstet Gynecol Surv 1981;36:107.
24. Ernster VL, Bush TL, Huggins GR, et al. Benefits and risks of menopausal estrogen and/or progestin hormone use. Prev Med 1988;17:201.
25. Parazzina F, La Vecchia C, Bocciolone L, et al. Review: the epidemiology of endometrial cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1991;41:1.
26. McPherson CP, Sellers TA, Potter JD, et al. Reproductive factors and endometrial cancer. The Iowa Women's Health Study. Am J Epidemiol 1996;143:1195.
27. Fisher B, Constantino JP, Redmond CK, et al. Endometrial cancer in tamoxifen-treated breast cancer patients: findings from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP)
B-14. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:527.
28. Killackey MA, Hakes TB, Pierce VK. Endometrial adenocarcinoma in breast cancer patients receiving antiestrogens. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:237.
29. Malfetano JH. Tamoxifen-associated endometrial carcinoma in postmenopausal breast cancer patients. Gynecol Oncol 1990;39:82.
30. DeMuylder X, Neven P, DeSomer M. Endometrial lesions in patients undergoing tamoxifen therapy. Int J Gynecol Obstet 1991;36:127.
31. Gal D, Kopel S, Bashevkim M, et al. Oncogenic potential of tamoxifen on endometrial of postmenopausal women with breast cancer: a preliminary report. Gynecol Oncol 1992;42:120.
32. Barakat RR, Wong G, Curtin JP, et al. Tamoxifen use in breast cancer patients who subsequently develop corpus cancer is not associated with a higher incidence of adverse histologic features.
Gynecol Oncol 1994;95:164.
33. Silva EG, Tornos CS, Mitchell MF. Malignant neoplasms of the uterine corpus in patients treated for breast carcinoma: the effects of tamoxifen. Int J Gynecol Pathol 1994;13:248.
34. Mitchell MF, Reddoch J, Atkinson EN, et al. Patients with both breast and endometrial hyperplasia or cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1993;49:143(abst).
35. Burke TW, Levenback C, Tornos C, et al. Intraabdominal lymphatic mapping to direct selective pelvic and paraaortic lymphadenectomy in women with high-risk endometrial cancer: results of a
pilot study. Gynecol Oncol 1996;62:169.
36. Greenwood SM, Wright DJ. Evaluation of the office endometrial biopsy in the detection of endometrial carcinoma and atypical hyperplasia. Cancer 1979;43:1474.
37. Koss LG, Schreiber K, Moussouris H, et al. Endometrial carcinoma and its precursors: detection and screening. Clin Obstet Gynecol 1982;25:44.
38. Grimes DA. Diagnostic office curettageheresy no longer. Contemp Obstet Gynecol 1986;28:96.
39. Eddy GL, Strumpf KB, Wojtowycz MA, et al. Biopsy findings in five hundred thirty-one patients with atypical glandular cells of uncertain significance as defined by the Bethesda system. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 1997;177:1188.
40. Eddy GL, Wojtowycz MA, Piraino PS, Mazur MT. Papanicolaou smears by the Bethesda system in endometrial malignancy: utility and prognostic importance. Obstet Gynecol 1997;90:999.
41. Patsner B, Mann WJ, Cohen H, et al. Predictive value of preoperative serum CA 125 levels in clinically localized and advanced endometrial carcinoma. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988;158:399.
42. Rose PG, Sommers RM, Reale FR, et al. Serial CA-125 measurements for evaluation of recurrence in patients with endometrial carcinoma. Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:12.
43. Sood AK, Buller RE, Burger RA, et al. Value of preoperative CA 125 level in the management of uterine cancer and prediction of clinical outcome. Obstet Gynecol 1997;90:441.

44. Connelly PJ, Alberhasky RC, Christopherson WM. Carcinoma of the endometrium. III. Analysis of 865 cases of adenocarcinoma and adenoacanthoma. Obstet Gynecol 1982;59:569.
45. Hendrickson M, Ross J, Eifel P, et al. Adenocarcinoma of the endometrium: analysis of 265 cases with carcinoma limited to the uterine corpus. Gynecol Oncol 1982;13:373.
46. Christopherson WM, Connelly PJ, Alberhasky RC. Carcinoma of the endometrium. V. An analysis of prognosticators in patients with favorable subtypes and stage I disease. Cancer
1983;51:1705.
47. Boronow RC, Morrow CP, Creasman WT, et al. Surgical staging in endometrial cancer: clinical-pathologic findings of a prospective study. Obstet Gynecol 1984;63:823.
48. DiSaia PJ, Creasman WT, Boronow RC, et al. Risk factors and recurrence patterns in stage I endometrial cancer. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;151:1009.
49. Morrow C, Bundy B, Kurman R, et al. Relationship between surgical-pathological risk factors and outcome in clinical stage I and II carcinoma of the endometrium: a Gynecologic Oncology
Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1991;40:55.
50. Schink JC, Lurain JR, Wallemark CB, et al. Tumor size in endometrial cancer: a prognostic factor for lymph node metastasis. Obstet Gynecol 1987;70:216.
51. Hanson MB, van Nagell JR Jr, Powell DE, et al. The prognostic significance of lymph-vascular space invasion in stage I endometrial cancer. Cancer 1985;55:1753.
52. Wilkinson N, Buckley CH, Chawner L, et al. Nucleolar organizer regions in normal, hyperplastic, and neoplastic endometrial. Int J Gynecol Pathol 1990;9:55.
53. Enomoto T, Inoue M, Perantoni AO, et al. K-ras activation in premalignant and malignant epithelial lesions of the human uterus. Cancer Res 1991;51:5308.
54. Hetzel DJ, Wilson TO, Kenney GL, et al. HER-2/neu expression: a major prognostic factor in endometrial cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1992;47:179.
55. Lukes AS, Kohler MF, Pieper CF, et al. Multivariable analysis of DNA ploidy, p53, and HER-2/neu as prognostic factors in endometrial cancer. Cancer 1994;73:2380.
56. Miller B, Morris M, Silva E. Nucleolar organizer regions: a potential prognostic factor in adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. Gynecol Oncol 1994;54:137.
57. Trere D, Melchiorri C, Chieco P, et al. Interphase AgNOR quantity and DNA content in endometrial adenocarcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1994;53:202.
58. Pisani AL, Barbuto DA, Chen D, et al. HER-2/neu, p53, and DNA analyses as prognosticators for survival in endometrial carcinoma. Obstet Gynecol 1995;85:729.
59. Heffner HM, Freedman AN, Asirwatham JE, Lele SB. Prognostic significance of p53, PCNA, and c-erbB-2 in endometrial adenocarcinoma. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol 1999;20:8.
60. Lim P, Aquino-Parsons CF, Wong F, et al. Low-risk endometrial carcinoma: assessment of a treatment policy based on tumor ploidy and identification of additional prognostic indicators.
Gynecol Oncol 1999;73:191.
61. Lynch HT, Krush AJ, Larsen AL, et al. Endometrial carcinoma: multiple primary malignancies, constitutional factors and heredity. Am J Med Sci 1966;252:381.
62. Lynch HT, Krush AJ, Thomas RJ, et al. Cancer family syndrome. In: Lynch EHT. Cancer genetics. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas Publisher, 1976:355.
63. Cowles TA, Magrina JF, Masterson BJ, et al. Comparison of clinical and surgical staging in patients with endometrial carcinoma. Obstet Gynecol 1985;66:413.
64. Creasman WT, DeGeest K, DiSaia PJ, et al. Significance of true surgical pathologic staging: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999;181:31.
65. Society of Gynecologic Oncologists. Practice guidelines: uterine corpus-endometrial cancer. Oncology 1998;12:122.
66. Park RC, Patow WE, Petty WM, Zimmerman EA. Treatment of adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. Gynecol Oncol 1974; 2:60.
67. Rutledge F. The role of radical hysterectomy in adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. Gynecol Oncol 1974;2:331.
68. Hernandez W, Nolan JF, Morrow CP, et al. Stage II endometrial carcinoma: two modalities of treatment. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1978;131:171.
69. Kinsella TJ, Bloomer WD, Lavin PT, et al. Stage II endometrial carcinoma: 10-year follow-up of combined radiation and surgical treatment. Gynecol Oncol 1980;10:290.
70. Onsrud M, Aalders J, Abeler V, et al. Endometrial carcinoma with cervical involvement (stage II): prognostic factors and value of combined radiological-surgical treatment. Gynecol Oncol
1982;13:76.
71. Eltabbakh GH, Moore AD. Survival of women with surgical stage II endometrial cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1999;74:80.
72. Feltmate CM, Duska LR, Chang YC, et al. Predictors of recurrence in surgical stage II endometrial adenocarcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1999;73:407.
73. Childers JN, Brzechffa PR, Hatch KD, et al. Laparoscopic assisted surgical staging (LASS) of endometrial carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1993;51:33.
74. Chi DS, Welshinger M, Venkatraman ES, Barakat RR. The role of surgical cytoreduction in stage IV endometrial carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1997;67:56.
75. Moore DH, Fowler WC Jr, Walton LA, et al. Morbidity of lymph node sampling in cancers of the uterine corpus and cervix. Obstet Gynecol 1989;74:180.
76. Clarke-Pearson D, Cliby W, Soper J, et al. Morbidity and mortality of selective lymphadenectomy in early stage endometrial cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1991;40:168(abst).
77. Orr JW, Holloway RW, Orr P, et al. Surgical staging of uterine cancer: an analysis of perioperative morbidity. Gynecol Oncol 1991;42:209.
78. Weiser EB, Bundy BN, Hoskins WJ, et al. Extraperitoneal versus transperitoneal selective paraaortic lymphadenectomy in the pretreatment surgical staging of advanced cervical carcinoma (a
Gynecologic Oncology Group study). Gynecol Oncol 1989;33:283.
79. Doering DL, Barnhill DR, Weiser EB, et al. Intraoperative evaluation of depth of myometrial invasion in stage I endometrial adenocarcinoma. Obstet Gynecol 1989;74:930.
80. Marino BD, Burke TW, Tornos C, et al. Staging laparotomy for endometrial carcinoma: assessment of peritoneal spread. Gynecol Oncol 1995;56:34.
81. Larson DM, Johnson K, Olson KA. Pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy for surgical staging of endometrial cancer: morbidity and mortality. Obstet Gynecol 1992;79:998.
82. Girardi F, Petru E, Heydarfadai M, et al. Pelvic lymphadenectomy in surgical treatment of endometrial cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1993;49:177.
83. Kim YB, Niloff JM. Endometrial carcinoma: analysis of recurrence in patients treated with a strategy minimizing lymph node sampling and radiation therapy. Obstet Gynecol 1993;82:175.
84. Chuang L, Burke TW, Tornos C, et al. Staging laparotomy for endometrial carcinoma: assessment of retroperitoneal lymph nodes. Gynecol Oncol 1995;58:189.
85. Kilgore L, Partridge E, Alvarez R, et al. Adenocarcinoma of the endometrium: survival comparisons of patients with and without pelvic node biopsies. Gynecol Oncol 1995;56:29.
86. Heyman J. The so-called Stockholm method and the results of treatment of uterine cancer at the Radiumhemmet. Acta Radiol 1935;22:129.
87. Jones HW. Treatment of adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. Obstet Gynecol Surv 1975;30:147.
88. Javert C, Douglas R. Treatment of endometrial adenocarcinoma. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1956;75:580.
89. Keller D, Kempson FL, Levine G, et al. Management of the patient with early endometrial carcinoma. Cancer 1974;33:1108.
90. Partridge EE, Shingleton HM, Menck HR. The National Cancer Data Base report on endometrial cancer. J Surg Oncol 1996;61:111.
91. Maggino T, Romagnolo C, Landoni F, et al. An analysis of approaches to the management of endometrial cancer in North America: a CTF study Gynecol Oncol 1998;68:274.
92. Bedwinek J, Galakatos A, Camel M, et al. Stage I, grade III adenocarcinoma of the endometrium treated with surgery and irradiation. Sites of failure and correlation of failure rate with irradiation
technique. Cancer 1984;54:40.
93. Ohlsen JD, Johnson GH, Stewart JR, et al. Combined therapy for endometrial carcinoma: preoperative intracavitary irradiation followed promptly by hysterectomy. Cancer 1977;39:659.
94. Underwood PB, Lutz MH, Kreutner A, et al. Carcinoma of the endometrium: radiation followed immediately by operation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1977;128:86.
95. Rutledge FN, Tan SK, Fletcher GH. Vaginal metastases from adenocarcinoma of the corpus uteri. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1958;75:167.
96. Lewis GC, Mortel R, Slack NH. Adenocarcinoma of the body of the uterus. J Obstet Gynecol Br Comm 1977;77:342.
97. Eifel PJ, Ross J, Hendrickson M, et al. Adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. Analysis of 256 cases with disease limited to the uterine corpus: treatment options. Cancer 1983;52:1026.
98. Bean HA, Bryant AJS, Carmichael JA, et al. Carcinoma of the endometrium in Saskatchewan: 1966 to 1971. Gynecol Oncol 1978;6:503.
99. Piver MS, Yazigi R, Blumenson L, et al. A prospective trial comparing hysterectomy, hysterectomy plus vaginal radium, and uterine radium plus hysterectomy in stage I endometrial carcinoma.
Obstet Gynecol 1979;54:85.
100. Reddy S, Lee MS, Hendrickson FR. Pattern of recurrences in endometrial carcinoma and their management. Radiology 1979;133:737.
101. Calais G, Vitu L, Descamps P, et al. Preoperative or postoperative brachytherapy for patients with endometrial carcinoma stage I and II. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:523.
102. Sause WT, Fuller DB, Smith WG, et al. Analysis of preoperative intracavitary cesium application vs postoperative external beam radiation in stage I endometrial carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1990;18:1013.
103. Grigsby PW, Perez CA, Kuten A, et al. Clinical stage I endometrial cancer: results of adjuvant irradiation and patterns of failure. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:379.
104. Aalders J, Abeler V, Kolstad P, et al. Postoperative external irradiation and prognostic parameters in stage I endometrial carcinoma. Obstet Gynecol 1980;56:419.
105. Marchetti DL, Piver MS, Tsukada Y, et al. Prevention of vaginal recurrence of stage I endometrial adenocarcinoma with postoperative vaginal radiation. Obstet Gynecol 1986;67:399.
106. Torrisi JR, Barnes WA, Popescu G, et al. Postoperative adjuvant external-beam radiotherapy in surgical stage I endometrial carcinoma. Cancer 1989;64:1414.
107. Kucera H, Vavra N, Weghaupt K. Benefit of external irradiation in pathologic stage I endometrial carcinoma: a prospective clinical trial of 605 patients who received postoperation and additional
pelvic irradiation in the presence of unfavorable prognostic factors. Gynecol Oncol 1990;38:99.
108. Piver MS, Hempling RE. A prospective trial of postoperative vaginal radium/cesium for grade 1-2 less than 50% myometrial invasion and pelvic radiation therapy for grade 3 or deep
myometrial invasion in surgical stage I endometrial adenocarcinoma. Cancer 1990;66:1133.
109. Stryker JA, Podczaski E, Kaminski P, et al. Adjuvant external beam therapy for pathologic stage I and occult stage II endometrial carcinoma. Cancer 1991;67:2872.
110. Podczaski E, Kaminski P, Gurski K, et al. Detection and patterns of treatment failure in 300 consecutive cases of “early” endometrial cancer after primary surgery. Gynecol Oncol 1992;47:323.
111. Carey MS, O'Connell GJ, Johanson CR, et al. Good outcome associated with a standardized treatment protocol using selective postoperative radiation in patients with clinical stage I
adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. Gynecol Oncol 1995;57:138.
112. Roberts JA, Brunetto VI, Keys HM, et al. A phase III randomized study of surgery vs surgery plus adjunctive radiation therapy in intermediate-risk endometrial adenocarcinoma (GOG No. 99).
Gynecol Oncol 1998;68:135(abst).
113. Schink JC, Rademaker AW, Miller DS, et al. Tumor size in endometrial cancer. Cancer 1991;67:2791.
114. Lewandowski G, Torrisi J, Potkul RK, et al. Hysterectomy with extended surgical staging and radiotherapy versus hysterectomy alone and radiotherapy in stage I endometrial cancer: a
comparison of complication rates. Gynecol Oncol 1990;36:401.
115. Greven KM, Lanciano RM, Herbert SH, et al. Analysis of complications in patients with endometrial carcinoma receiving adjuvant irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:919.
116. Corn BW, Lanciano RM, Greven KM, et al. I mpact of improved irradiation technique, age and lymph node sampling on the severe complication rate of surgically staged endometrial cancer
patients: a multivariate analysis. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:510.
117. Bliss P, Cowie VJ. Endometrial carcinoma: does the addition of intracavitary vault caesium to external beam therapy postoperatively result in improved control or increased morbidity? Clin
Oncol 1992;4:373.
118. Randall ME, Wilder J, Greven K, et al. Role of intracavitary cuff boost after adjuvant external irradiation in early endometrial carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:49.
119. Murrell DS, Orton CG. Survival and complications in stage I carcinoma of corpus uteri receiving post-operative irradiation. Radiother Oncol 1988;12:281.
120. Jereczek-Fossa B, Jassem J, Nowak R, et al. A. Late complications after postoperative radiotherapy in endometrial cancer: analysis of 317 consecutive cases with application of linearquadratic model. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:329.
121. Komaki R, Mattingly RF, Hoffman RG, et al. Irradiation of para-aortic lymph node metastases from carcinoma of the cervix or endometrium: preliminary results. Radiology 1983;147:245.
122. Feuer G, Calanog A. Endometrial carcinoma. Treatment of positive paraaortic nodes. Gynecol Oncol 1987;27:104.
123. Potish RA. Abdominal radiotherapy for cancer of the uterine cervix and endometrium. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;16:1453.
124. Corn B, Lanciano R, Greven K, et al. Endometrial cancer with para-aortic adenopathy: patterns of failure and opportunities for cure. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:223.
125. Rose P, Cha S, Tak W, et al. Radiation therapy for surgically proven para-aortic node metastasis in endometrial carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:229.
126. Hicks ML, Piver MS, Puretz JL, et al. Survival in patients with paraaortic lymph node metastases from endometrial adenocarcinoma clinically limited to the uterus. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1993;26:607.
127. Blythe JG, Edwards E, Heimbecker P. Paraaortic lymph node biopsy: a twenty-year study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997;176:1157.
128. Onda T, Yoshikawa H, Mizutani K, et al. Treatment of node-positive endometrial cancer with complete node dissection, chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Br J Cancer 1997; 75:7836.
129. Potish R. Radiation therapy of periaortic node metastases in cancer of the uterine cervix and endometrium. Radiology 1987;165:567.
130. Greven KM, Lanciano RM, Corn B, et al. Pathologic stage III endometrial carcinoma. Prognostic factors and patterns of recurrence. Cancer 1993;71:3697.
131. Malipeddi P, Kapp DS, Teng NN. Long-term survival with adjuvant whole abdominopelvic irradiation for uterine papillary serous carcinoma. Cancer 1993;71:3076.
132. Grice J, Ek M, Greer B, et al. Uterine papillary serous carcinoma: evaluation of long-term survival in surgically staged patients. Gynecol Oncol 1998;69:69.
133. Randall ME, Spirtos NM, Dvoretsky P. Whole abdominal radiotherapy versus combination chemotherapy with doxorubicin and cisplatin in advanced endometrial carcinoma (phase III):
Gynecologic Oncology Group study no. 122. Monogr Natl Cancer Inst 1995;19:13.
134. Kadar N, Homesley H, Malfetano J. Positive peritoneal cytology is an adverse factor in endometrial carcinoma only if there is other evidence of extrauterine disease. Gynecol Oncol
1991;46:145.

135. Sorbe BG, Smeds AC. Postoperative vaginal irradiation with high dose rate afterloading technique in endometrial carcinoma stage I. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;18:305.
136. Elliott P, Green D, Coates A, et al. The efficacy of postoperative vaginal irradiation in preventing vaginal recurrence in endometrial cancer. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1994;4:84.
137. Pinilla J. Cost minimization analysis of high-dose-rate versus low-dose-rate brachytherapy in endometrial cancer. Gynecology Tumor Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:87.
138. Thomas H, Pickerine GL, Dunn P, et al. Treating the vaginal vault in carcinoma of the endometrium using the Buchler afterloading system. Br J Radiol 1991;64:1044.
139. Weiss E, Hirnle P, Arnold-Bofinger H, et al. Adjuvant vaginal high-dose-rate afterloading alone in endometrial carcinoma: patterns of relapse and side effects following low-dose therapy.
Gynecol Oncol 1998;71:72.
140. MacLeod C, Fowler A, Duval P, et al. High-dose-rate brachytherapy alone post-hysterectomy for endometrial cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:1033.
141. Noyes WR, Bastin K, Edwards SA, et al. Postoperative vaginal cuff irradiation using high dose rate remote afterloading: a phase II clinical protocol. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:1439.
142. Landgren RC, Fletcher GH, Delclos L, Wharton JT. Irradiation of endometrial cancer in patients with medical contraindication to surgery or with unresectable lesions. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1976;126:148.
143. Jones D, Stout R. Results of intracavitary radium treatment for adenocarcinoma of the body of the uterus. Clin Radiol 1986;37:169.
144. Grigsby P, Kuske R, Perez C, et al. Medically inoperable stage I adenocarcinoma of the endometrium treated with radiotherapy alone. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:483.
145. Lehoczky O, Bosze P, Ungar L, et al. Stage I endometrial carcinoma: treatment of nonoperable patients with intracavitary radiation therapy alone. Gynecol Oncol 1991;43:211.
146. Kupelian PA, Eifel PJ, Tornos C, et al. Treatment of endometrial carcinoma with radiation therapy alone. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:817.
147. Rose PG, Baker S, Kern M, et al. Primary radiation therapy for endometrial carcinoma: a case controlled study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:585.
148. Rouanet P, Dubois JB, Gely S, et al. Exclusive radiation therapy in endometrial carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;26:223.
149. Nguyen C, Souhami L, Roman TN, et al. High-dose-rate brachytherapy as the primary treatment of medically inoperable stage I-II endometrial carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1995;59:370.
150. Knocke TH, Kucera H, Weidinger B, et al. Primary treatment of endometrial carcinoma with high-dose-rate brachytherapy: results of 12 years of experience with 280 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1997;37:359.
151. Nguyen TV, Petereit DG. High-dose-rate brachytherapy for medically inoperable stage I endometrial cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1998;71:196.
152. Petereit DG, Sarkaria JN, Chappell RJ. Perioperative morbidity and mortality of high-dose-rate gynecologic brachytherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:1025.
153. Kelley RM, Baker W. Progestational agents in the treatment of carcinoma of the endometrium. N Engl J Med 1961;264:216.
154. Lewis GC, Slack NH, Mortel R, et al. Adjuvant progestogen therapy in primary definitive treatment of endometrial cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1974;2:368.
155. Bonte J. Hormonothérapie adjuvante par medroxyprogestérone dans le traitement de l'adénocarcinome endométrial au stade I. Med et Hyg 1977;35:4193.
156. Kauppila A, Grönroos M, Neiminen U. Adjuvant progestin therapy in endometrial carcinoma. Prog Cancer Res Ther 1983;25:219.
157. Kauppila A. Progestin therapy of endometrial breast and ovarian carcinoma. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1984;63:441.
158. DePalo G, Merson M, Del Vecchio M, et al. A controlled clinical study of adjuvant medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) therapy in pathologic stage I endometrial carcinoma with myometrial
invasion. Proc Ann Meet Am Soc Clin Oncol 1985;4:121(abst).
159. Macdonald RR, Thorogood J, Mason MK. A randomized trial of progestogens in the primary treatment of endometrial carcinoma. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1988;95:166.
160. Piver MS. Progesterone therapy for malignant peritoneal cytology surgical stage I endometrial adenocarcinoma. Semin Oncol 1988;15:50.
161. Stringer CA, Gershenson DM, Burke TW, et al. A djuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide (PAC) for early-stage high-risk endometrial cancer: a preliminary
analysis. Gynecol Oncol 1990;38:305.
162. Burke TW, Gershenson DM, Morris M, et al. P ostoperative adjuvant cisplatin, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide (PAC) chemotherapy in women with high-risk endometrial carcinoma.
Gynecol Oncol 1994;55:47.
163. Morrow CP, Bundy BN, Homesley HD. Doxorubicin as an adjuvant following surgery and radiation therapy in patients with high-risk endometrial carcinoma, stage I, and occult stage II: a
Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1990;36:166.
164. Reddoch JM, Burke TW, Morris M, et al. Surveillance for recurrent endometrial carcinoma: development of a follow-up scheme. Gynecol Oncol 1995;59:221.
165. Shumsky AG, Stuart GCE, Brasher P, et al. An evaluation of routine follow-up of patients treated for endometrial carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1994;55:229.
166. Salvesen HB, Akslen LA, Iversen T, Iversen OE. Recurrence of endometrial carcinoma and the value of routine follow up. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1997;104:1302.
167. Levenback C, Burke TW, Silva E, et al. Uterine papillary serous carcinoma (UPSC) treated with cisplatin, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide (PAC). Gynecol Oncol 1992;46:317.
168. Brown JM, Dockerty MB, Symmonds RE, et al. Vaginal recurrence of endometrial carcinoma. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1968;100:544.
169. Phillips GL, Prem KA, Adcock LL, et al. Vaginal recurrence of adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. Gynecol Oncol 1982;13:232.
170. Reifenstein EC. Hydroxyprogesterone caproate therapy in advanced endometrial cancer. Cancer 1971;27:485.
171. Piver MS, Barlow JJ, Lurain JR, et al. Medroxyprogesterone acetate (Depo-Provera) vs hydroxyprogesterone caproate (Delalutin) in women with metastatic endometrial adenocarcinoma.
Cancer 1980;45:268.
172. Podratz KC, O'Brien PC, Malkasian GD, et al. Effects of progestational agents in treatment of endometrial carcinoma. Obstet Gynecol 1985;66:106.
173. Lentz SS, Brady MF, Major FJ, et al. High dose megestrol acetate in advanced or recurrent endometrial cancer: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:357.
174. Thigpen JT, Brady M, Alvarez RD, et al. Oral medroxy-progesterone acetate in the treatment of advanced or recurrent endometrial carcinoma: a dose-response study by the Gynecologic
Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1736.
175. Thigpen JT, Brady MF, Homesley HD, et al. Tamoxifen in the treatment of advanced or recurrent endometrial carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol (submitted).
176. Jeyarajah AR, Gallagher CJ, Blake PR, et al. Long-term follow-up of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone analog treatment for recurrent endometrial cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1996;63:47.
177. Covens A, Thomas G, Shaw P, et al. A phase II study of leuprolide in advanced/recurrent endometrial cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1997;64:126.
178. Rose PG, Van Le L, Bell J, Walker JL, Lee JB. A phase II study of anastrazole in advanced or persistent endometrial carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol.
(submitted).
179. Blessing J. Gynecologic Oncology Group Statistical Office, Buffalo, NY.Unpublished data.
180. Mandeli J. New York Gynecologic Oncology Group, Mt. Sinai Hospital, New York. Unpublished data.
181. Rendina GM, Donadio C, Fabri M, et al. Tamoxifen and medroxyprogesterone therapy for advanced endometrial carcinoma. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1984;17:285.
182. Creasman WT, Soper JT, McCarty KS Jr, et al. Influence of cytoplasmic steroid receptor content on prognosis of early stage endometrial carcinoma. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;151:922.
183. Liao BS, Twiggs LB, Leung BS, et al. Cytoplasmic estrogen and progesterone receptors as prognostic parameters in primary endometrial carcinoma. Obstet Gynecol 1986;67:463.
184. Ehrlich CE, Young PCM, Stehman FB, et al. Steroid receptors and clinical outcome in patients with adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988;158:796.
185. Chatzaki E, Bax CM, Eidne KA, et al. The expression of gonadotropin-releasing hormone and its receptor in endometrial cancer, and its relevance as an autocrine growth factor. Cancer Res
1996;56:2059.
186. Calero F, Rodriguez-Escudero F, Jimeno J, et al. Clinical evaluation of epirubicin in endometrial adenocarcinoma and uterine cervix carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1989;8:156.
187. Thigpen JT, Blessing JA, DiSaia PJ, et al. A randomized comparison of doxorubicin alone versus doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide in the management of advanced or recurrent endometrial
carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1408.
188. Horton J, Elson P, Gordon P, Hahn R, Creech R. Combination chemotherapy for advanced endometrial cancer. An evaluation of three regimens. Cancer 1982;49:2441.
189. Cohen CJ, Bruckner HW, Deppe G, et al. Multidrug treatment of advanced and recurrent endometrial carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Obstet Gynecol 1984;63:719.
190. Thigpen T, Blessing J, Homesley H, et al. Phase III trial of doxorubicin cisplatin in advanced or recurrent endometrial carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG) study. Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1993;12:(abst 830):261.
191. Tropé C, Grundsell H, Johnsson JE, et al. A phase II study of cisplatinum for recurrent corpus cancer. Eur J Cancer 1980;16:1025.
192. Seski JC, Edwards CL, Herson J, et al. Cisplatin chemotherapy for disseminated endometrial cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1982;59:225.
193. Thigpen JT, Blessing JA, Lagasse LD, et al. Phase II trial of cisplatin as second-line chemotherapy in patients with advanced or recurrent endometrial carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology
Group study. Am J Clin Oncol 1984;7:253.
194. Long HJ, Pfeifle DM, Wieand HS, et al. Phase II evaluation of carboplatin in advanced endometrial carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:276.
195. Thigpen JT, Blessing JA, Homesley J, et al. Phase II trial of cisplatin as first-line chemotherapy in patients with advanced and recurrent endometrial carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group
study. Gynecol Oncol 1989;33:68.
196. Green JB, Green S, Alberts DS, et al. Carboplatin therapy in advanced endometrial cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1990;75:696.
197. Burke TW, Munkarah A, Kavanagh JJ. Treatment of advanced or recurrent endometrial carcinoma with single-agent carboplatin. Gynecol Oncol 1993;51:397.
198. Ball HG, Blessing JA, Lentz SS, et al. A phase II trial of Taxol in advanced and recurrent adenocarcinoma of the endometrium: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol
1996;62:278.
199. Lincoln S, Blessing JA, Lee RB, et al. Evaluation of paclitaxel (Taxol) in the treatment of recurrent or persistent endometrial carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol
(submitted).
200. Sutton GP, Blessing JA, DeMars LR, et al. A phase II Gynecologic Oncology Group trial of ifosfamide and mesna in advanced or recurrent adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. Gynecol Oncol
1996;63:25.
201. Rose PG, Blessing JA, Lewandowski GS, et al. A phase II trial of prolonged oral etoposide (VP-16) as second-line therapy for advanced and recurrent endometrial carcinoma: a Gynecologic
Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1996;63:101.
202. Poplin EA. Phase II trial of oral etoposide in recurrent or refractory endometrial adenocarcinoma: a Southwest Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1999;74:432.
203. Price FV, Edwards RP, Kelley JL, Kunschner AJ, Hart LA. A trial of outpatient paclitaxel and carboplatin for advanced, recurrent, and histologic high-risk endometrial carcinoma: preliminary
report. Semin Oncol 1997;24[Suppl 15]:78.
204. Lissoni A, Gabriele A, Gorga G, et al. Cisplatin-, epirubicin- and paclitaxel-containing chemotherapy in uterine adenocarcinoma. Ann Oncol 1997;8:969.
205. Le TD, Yamada SD, Rutgers JL, et al. Complete response of a stage IV uterine papillary serous carcinoma to neoadjuvant chemotherapy with Taxol and carboplatin. Gynecol Oncol
1999;73:461.
206. Chambers JT, Chambers SK, Kohorn EI, et al. Uterine papillary serous carcinoma treated with intraperitoneal cisplatin and intravenous doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide. Gynecol Oncol
1996;60:438.
207. Reisinger SA, Asbury R, Liao SY, et al. A phase I study of weekly cisplatin and whole abdominal radiation for the treatment of stage III and IV endometrial carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology
Group pilot study. Gynecol Oncol 1996;63:299.
208. Pastan I, Gottesman M. Multiple-drug resistance in human cancer. N Engl J Med 1987;316:1388.
209. Yang CP, DePinho SG, Greenberger LM, et al. Progesterone interacts with P-glycoprotein in multidrug-resistant cells and in the endometrium of gravid uterus. J Biol Chem 1989;264:782.
210. Berchuck A, Soisson AP, Olt GJ, et al. Epidermal growth factor receptor expression in normal and malignant endometrium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:1247.
211. Esteller M, Garcia A, Martinez i Palones JM, Cabero A, Reventos J. Detection of c-erbB-2/neu and fibroblast growth factor-3/INT-2 but not epidermal growth factor receptor gene amplification in
endometrial cancer by differential polymerase chain reaction. Cancer 1995;75:2139.
212. Curran WJ, Whittington R, Peters AJ, et al. Vaginal recurrences of endometrial carcinoma: the prognostic value of staging by a primary vaginal carcinoma system. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1988;15:803.
213. Poulsen MG, Roberts SJ. The salvage of recurrent endometrial carcinoma in the vagina and pelvis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:809.
214. Kuten A, Grigsby PW, Perez CA, et al. Results of radiotherapy in recurrent endometrial carcinoma: a retrospective analysis of 51 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:29.
215. Morgan JD, Reddy S, Sarin P, et al. Isolated vaginal recurrences of endometrial carcinoma. Radiology 1993;189:609.
216. Sears JD, Greven KM, Hoen HM, et al. Prognostic factors and treatment outcome for patients with locally recurrent endometrial cancer. Cancer 1994;74:1303.
217. Ackerman I, Malone S, Thomas G, et al. Endometrial carcinomarelative effectiveness of adjuvant irradiation vs therapy reserved for relapse [see comments]. Gynecol Oncol 1996;60:177.
218. Charra C, Roy P, Coquard R, et al. Outcome of treatment of upper third vaginal recurrences of cervical and endometrial carcinomas with interstitial brachytherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;40:421.
219. Aalders JG, Abeler V, Kolstad P. Recurrent adenocarcinoma of the endometrium: a clinical and histopathological study of 379 patients. Gynecol Oncol 1984;17:85.

220. Greven KM. Interstitial radiation for recurrent cervix or endometrial cancer in the suburethral region. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:831.
221. Foote RL, Schray MF, Wilson TO, Malkasian GD Jr. Isolated peripheral lymph node recurrence of endometrial carcinoma. Cancer 1988;61:2561.
222. Morris M, Alvarez RD, Kinney WK, et al. Treatment of recurrent adenocarcinoma of the endometrium with pelvic exenteration. Gynecol Oncol 1996;60:288.
223. Barber HRK, Brunschwig A. Treatment and results of recurrent cancer of corpus uteri in patients receiving anterior and total pelvic exenteration, 19471963. Cancer 1968;22:949.
224. Rutledge FN. Pelvic exenteration: an update of the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Hospital experience and review of the literature. In: Rutledge FN, Gershenson DM, eds. Gynecologic
cancer: diagnosis and treatment strategies, vol 7. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1987.
225. Ober WB. Uterine sarcomas: histogenesis and taxonomy. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1959;75:568.
226. Spanos WJ Jr, Peters LJ, Oswald MJ. Patterns of recurrence in malignant mixed müllerian tumor of the uterus. Cancer 1986;57:155.
227. McCormack PM, Martin M. The changing role of surgery for pulmonary metastases. Ann Thorac Surg 1979;28:139.
228. Mountain CF, McMurtrey MJ, Hermes KE. Surgery for pulmonary metastasis: a 20-year experience. Ann Thorac Surg 1984;38:323.
229. Salazar OM, Dunne ME. The role of radiation therapy in the management of uterine sarcomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:899.
230. Sorbe B. Radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy as adjuvant treatment of uterine sarcomas. Gynecol Oncol 1985;20:281.
231. Wheelock JB, Krebs HB, Schneider V, et al. Uterine sarcoma: analysis of prognostic variables in 71 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;151:1016.
232. George M, Pejovic MH, Kramar A. Uterine sarcomas: prognostic factors and treatment modalitiesstudy on 209 patients. Gynecol Oncol 1986;24:58.
233. Hornback NB, Omura G, Major FJ. Observations on the use of adjuvant radiation therapy in patients with stage I and II uterine sarcoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:2127.
234. Echt G, Jepson J, Steel J, et al. Treatment of uterine sarcomas. Cancer 1990;66:35.
235. Larson B, Silfverswärd C, Nilsson B, et al. Endometrial stromal sarcoma of the uterus. A clinical and histopathological study. The Radiumhemmet series 19361981. Eur J Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Biol 1990;35:239.
236. Moskovic E, Macsweeney E, Law M, et al. Survival, patterns of spread and prognostic factors in uterine sarcoma: a study of 76 patients. Br J Radiol 1993;66:1009.
237. Gerszten K, Faul C, Kounelis S, et al. The impact of adjuvant radiotherapy on carcinosarcoma of the uterus. Gynecol Oncol 1998;68:8.
238. Chauveinc L, Deniaud E, Plancher C, et al. Uterine sarcomas: the Curie Institut experience. Prognosis factors and adjuvant treatments. Gynecol Oncol 1999;72:232.
239. Ferrer F, Sabater S, Farrus B, et al. Impact of radiotherapy on local control and survival in uterine sarcomas: a retrospective study from the Grup Oncologic Catala-Occita. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1999;44:47.
240. Major FJ, Blessing JA, Silverberg SG, et al. Prognostic factors in early-stage uterine sarcoma. Cancer 1993;71:1702.
241. Rose PG, Boutselis JG, Sachs L. Adjuvant therapy for stage I uterine sarcoma. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987;156:660.
242. Berchuck A, Rubin SC, Hoskins WJ, et al. Treatment of endometrial stromal tumors. Gynecol Oncol 1990;36:60.
243. Larson B, Silfverswärd C, Nilsson B, et al. Mixed Müllerian tumours of the uterusprognostic factors: a clinical and histopathologic study of 147 cases. Radiother Oncol 1990;17:123.
244. DeFusco PA, Gaffey TA, Malkasian GD, et al. Endometrial stromal sarcoma: review of Mayo Clinic experience, 19451980. Gynecol Oncol 1989;35:8.
245. Omura GA, Blessing JA, Major FJ, et al. A randomized clinical trial of adjuvant Adriamycin in uterine sarcoma: a GOG study. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1240.
246. Omura GA, Major FJ, Blessing JA, et al. A randomized study of Adriamycin with and without dimethyl triazenoimidazole carboxamide in advanced uterine sarcomas. Cancer 1983;52:626.
247. Muss HB, Bundy B, DiSaia PJ, et al. Treatment of recurrent or advanced uterine sarcoma. A randomized trial of doxorubicin versus doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide (a phase III trial of the
Gynecologic Oncology Group). Cancer 1985;55:1648.
248. Sutton GP, Blessing JA, Barrett RJ, et al. Phase II trial of ifosfamide and mesna in leiomyosarcoma of the uterus: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;166:556.
249. Hawkins RE, Wiltshaw E, Mansi JL. Ifosfamide with and without Adriamycin in advanced uterine leiomyosarcoma. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1990;26:S26.
250. Sutton G, Blessing JA, Malfetano HH. Ifosfamide, doxorubicin and mesna in the treatment of metastatic uterine leiomyosarcomas. Gynecol Oncol 1996;62:226.
251. Thigpen JT, Blessing JA, Wilbanks GD. Cisplatin as second-line chemotherapy in the treatment of advanced or recurrent leiomyosarcoma of the uterus. A phase II trial of the Gynecologic
Oncology Group. Am J Clin Oncol 1986;9:18.
252. Thigpen JT, Blessing JA, Beecham J, et al. Phase II trial of cisplatin as first-line chemotherapy in patients with advanced or recurrent uterine sarcomas: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J
Clin Oncol 1991;9:162.
253. Slayton RE, Blessing JA, Angel C, et al. Phase II trial of etoposide in the management of advanced and recurrent leiomyosarcoma of the uterus: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Cancer
Treat Rep 1987;71:1303.
254. Thigpen T, Blessing JA, Yordan E, et al. Phase II trial of etoposide in leiomyosarcoma of the uterus: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1996;63:120.
255. Sutton G, Blessing JA, Ball H. Phase II trial of paclitaxel in leiomyosarcoma of the uterus: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1999;74:346.
256. Currie JL, Blessing JL, Muss HB, et al. Combination chemotherapy with hydroxyurea, dacarbazine (DTIC), and etoposide in treatment of uterine leiomyosarcoma: a Gynecologic Oncology
Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1996;61:27.
257. Sutton GP, Blessing JA, Rosenshein N, et al. Phase II trial of ifosfamide and mesna in mixed mesodermal tumors of the uterus (a Gynecologic Oncology Group study). Am J Obstet Gynecol
1989;161:309.
258. Sutton GP, Brunetto V, Kilgore L, et al. A phase III trial of ifosfamide alone or in combination with cisplatin in the treatment of advanced, persistent, or recurrent carcinosarcoma of the uterus: a
Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1998;68:137(abst).
259. Hornreich G, Muggia FM, Wadler S, et al. Phase II combination Doxil-paclitaxel (PacliDox) in uterine carcinomas and sarcomasan active regimen. A NYGOG study. Gynecol Oncol
2000;76:265(abstr).
260. Thigpen JT. Cisplatin in gynecologic carcinosarcoma (correspondence). J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1365.
261. Gadducci A, Sartori E, Landoni F, et al. Endometrial stromal sarcoma: analysis of treatment failures and survival. Gynecol Oncol 1996;63:247.
262. Nordal RR, Kristensen GB, Kaern J, et al. The prognostic significance of surgery, tumor size, malignancy grade, menopausal status, and DNA ploidy in endometrial stromal sarcoma. Gynecol
Oncol 1996;62:254.
263. Yamawaki T, Shimizu Y, Hasumi K. Treatment of stage IV “high-grade” endometrial stromal sarcoma with ifosfamide, Adriamycin, and cisplatin [Case Report]. Gynecol Oncol 1997;64:265.
264. Irvin W, Pelkey T, Rice L, et al. Endometrial stromal sarcoma of the vulva arising in extraovarian endometriosis: a case report and literature review. Gynecol Oncol 1998;71:313.
265. Scribner DR Jr, Walker JL. Low-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma preoperative treatment with Depo-Lupron and Megace. Gynecol Oncol 1998;71:458.
266. Sutton GP, Stehman FB, Michael H, et al. Estrogen and progesterone receptors in uterine sarcomas. Obstet Gynecol 1986;68:709.
267. Hitti IF, Glasber SS, McKenzie C, et al. Uterine leiomyosarcoma with massive necrosis diagnosed during gonadotropin releasing hormone analog therapy for presumed uterine fibroid. Fertil
Steril 1991;56:778.
268. Madsen WE, Das Gupta TK, Walker MJ. The influence of glucocorticoids on the growth of a human leiomyosarcoma cell line, SK-LMS-1. Int J Cancer 1989;44:1034.
269. Katz L, Merino M, Sakamoto H, et al. Endometrial stromal sarcoma: a clinicopathologic study of 11 cases with determination of estrogen and progestin receptor levels in three tumors. Gynecol
Oncol 1987;26:87.
270. Tosi P, Sforza V, Sanpietro R. Estrogen receptor content, immunohistochemically determined by monoclonal antibodies in endometrial stromal sarcoma. Obstet Gynecol 1989;73:75.
271. Hall KL, Teneriello MG, Taylor RR, et al. Analysis of Ki-ras, p53, and MDM2 genes in uterine leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas. Gynecol Oncol 1997;65:330.
272. Gosland MP, Lum BL, Sikic BI. Reversal by cefoperazone of resistance to etoposide, doxorubicin, and vinblastine in multidrug resistant human sarcoma cells. Cancer Res 1989;49:6905.
273. Poulsen HK, Jacobsen M, Bertelsen K, et al. Adjuvant radiation therapy is not necessary in the management of endometrial carcinoma stage I, low-risk cases. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1996;6:38.
274. Rose PG, Blessing JA, Soper JT, et al. Prolonged oral etoposide in recurrent or advanced leiomyosarcoma of the uterus: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1998;70:267.
275. Miller DA, Blessing JA, Kilgure LJ, et al. A phase II trial of topotecan in patients with advanced, persistent or recurrent uterine leiomyosarcomas: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Am J
Clin Oncol (in press).
276. Currie JL, Blessing JA, McGehee R, Soper JT, Berman M. Phase II trial of hydroxyurea, dacarbazine (DTIC), and etoposide (VP-16) in mixed mesodermal tumors of the uterus: a Gynecologic
Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1996;61:94.
277. Thigpen JT, Blessing JA, Orr JW, et al. Phase II trial of cisplatin in the treatment of patients with advanced or recurrent mixed mesodermal sarcomas of the uterus: a Gynecologic Oncology
Group study. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:271.

SECTION 36.4 Gestational Trophoblastic Diseases
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 36.4
Gestational Trophoblastic Diseases
FRANCO M. MUGGIA
PATRICIA J. EIFEL
THOMAS W. BURKE
Introduction
Epidemiology
Pathology and Biology
Clinical Diagnosis and Human Chorionic Gonadotropin
Choriocarcinoma
Clinical Features and Staging
Treatment
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Gestational trophoblastic disease encompasses a spectrum of interrelated conditions spanning proliferative changes resulting from an abnormal fertilization to highly
malignant lesions such as choriocarcinoma. Four distinct clinicopathologic entities have been described: molar pregnancy (including complete and partial hydatidiform
moles), invasive mole (chorioadenoma destruens), placental-site trophoblastic tumors, and choriocarcinoma. Although these constitute fewer than 1% of gynecologic
malignancies, they are highly important to recognize because of their life-threatening potential and their high curability if treated early and by experienced centers.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Gestational trophoblastic disease most commonly follows molar pregnancy but may also occur after normal or ectopic pregnancies and spontaneous or therapeutic
abortions. Its incidence varies widely among various populations, with figures as high as 1 in 120 pregnancies in some areas of Asia and South America, compared to
1 in 1200 in the United States. 1 The risk is fivefold greater in women older than 40 years 2 and is also increased in those younger than 20 years. 2 Prior molar
pregnancies, lower socioeconomic status, and blood group A women married to group O men are at higher risk. 1,2 and 3 Parity, ethnicity, nutritional factors, and
cigarette smoking have been examined as risk factors, but no clear association has been found. However, oral contraceptives and the number of sexual partners
before the index pregnancy appear to double the risk of gestational trophoblastic tumors. 4

PATHOLOGY AND BIOLOGY
Hydatidiform moles (complete and partial) are characterized by clusters of hydropic villi, and trophoblastic hyperplasia with atypia. Partial moles show a variable
amount of focal trophoblastic hyperplasia and have identifiable fetal or embryonic tissues. Invasive moles (chorioadenoma destruens) have findings similar to
complete moles but display a greater tendency to invade surrounding tissues. The rare placental-site trophoblastic tumors 5—initially named trophoblastic
pseudotumors—are derived from intermediate trophoblast cells [which secrete placental lactogen in greater amounts than human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)], and
they present clinically as nodules in the endometrium and myometrium after removal of a mole. Microscopically, these tumors show no chorionic villi and are
characterized by a proliferation of cells with oval nuclei and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. They usually arise after nonmolar abortion or a term pregnancy, but
occasionally after hydatidiform mole and, in one case, after a metastatic gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. 6 Choriocarcinomas consist of invasive and anaplastic
trophoblastic tissue made up of cytotrophoblastic and syncytiotrophoblastic elements, obligatory secretion of HCG, and rich vascularity. Commonly accompanying the
trophoblastic neoplasia are one or more theca lutein ovarian cysts that are a result of HCG stimulation. Rarely, the malignancy can coexist with an intact pregnancy. 7
Treatment has evolved based on prognostic-factor risk classification and staging and not on pathologic features.
Cytogenetics has provided clues as to the origin of hydatidiform moles: Most complete moles have a 46XX karyotype, with the minority being 46XY. All X
chromosomes are from paternal origin. These are believed to arise from fertilization of an empty ovum by a haploid sperm that then undergoes duplication. Maternal
mitochondrial DNA has been identified. 8 On the other hand, partial moles contain both maternal and parental chromosomes, are triploid, and their sex chromosomes
are typically XXY. Presumably, as a result of fertilization of a normal ovum by two sperms, if the extra haploid set is of parental origin, a partial mole arises. If the extra
haploid set is of maternal origin, then a trisomic fetus develops. 9,10
The molecular biology of trophoblastic malignant transformation has been explored; insulin-like growth factor from parental chromosomes, and growth factors
released through immunologic mechanisms have been studied. 11,12 Overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor has been described. 13 The epidermal
growth factor is capable of modulating the expression of placental lactogen in a rat choriocarcinoma line. 14 Mutations in p53 have not been found. 15

CLINICAL DIAGNOSIS AND HUMAN CHORIONIC GONADOTROPIN
A molar pregnancy is suspected with first-trimester bleeding, a uterus larger than expected for gestational age, and absence of fetal heart sounds and fetal parts in
association with a markedly elevated HCG level. Iron-deficiency anemia is common at diagnosis because of recurrent bleeding. Other signs include hyperemesis, the
passage of “prune juice–like'' clots and even actual grape-like villi, toxemia during the first or second trimester, presence of ovarian enlargement with theca lutein
cysts, and hyperthyroidism. Invasive moles may cause rupture of the uterus. Rupture of an ovarian cyst and metastatic disease may rarely be the presentation of an
otherwise unrecognized or silent gestational trophoblastic disease. In fewer than 1% of molar pregnancies, a normal fetal (twin) pregnancy may coexist. Radiologic
procedures, particularly ultrasonography, are used to suggest the diagnosis. HCG determinations are of central importance in the diagnosis, treatment, follow-up, and
likely pathogenesis of gestational trophoblastic disease.
HCG consists of a and b chains, and its primary function is the maintenance of the corpus luteum during pregnancy. The a chain is cross-reactive with luteinizing
hormone and with thyrotropin (previously thyroid-stimulating hormone). The b-2 subunit (b-HCG) is unique to HCG and has been used for the radioimmunoassay of
HCG in the presence of luteinizing hormone. 16 Normally, HCG peaks at 10 to 12 weeks of gestation, and actual levels and serial changes in b-HCG are essential to
diagnose and track the outcome of trophoblastic disease. After evacuation of a molar pregnancy, b-HCG titers usually disappear in 8 to 10 weeks. 17 Persistence may
indicate local and, less often, metastatic disease: From the New England Trophoblastic Disease Center experience, 15% of women with a complete mole and 5.5% of
women with partial moles developed nonmetastatic trophoblastic disease. 18 A b-HCG level of 100,000 mIU/mL or more, a uterine size greater than expected from
gestational age, and the presence of theca lutein ovarian cysts larger than 6 cm in diameter identify women at high risk for persistent gestational trophoblastic disease
after evacuation of a complete mole. For these women, the risk of subsequent nonmetastatic manifestations is 31%, and 8.8% develop metastases, contrasting with
3.5% and 0.6%, respectively, for women without these risk factors. Such a risk may be reduced by chemoprophylaxis with short courses of methotrexate and
dactinomycin. 19 Although such use of preventive chemotherapy is controversial, serial b-HCG measurements are essential in both high- and low-risk groups. Weekly
HCG measurements until three nondetectable determinations, followed by monthly tests for 6 months, are advised. In addition, effective contraception during the
entire period of follow-up is essential to avoid confusing the clinical picture.
Other tumor marker measurements may assist in the management of gestational trophoblastic disease: The placental-site trophoblastic tumor produces low levels of
HCG but may be identified by measurement of placental lactogen. 20 The serum CA-125 has been found useful as a predictor of persistence of molar disease. 21
Finally, the ratio of serum to cerebrospinal fluid b-HCG has been used to identify brain metastases if such a ratio is less than 60:1. 22

CHORIOCARCINOMA
CLINICAL FEATURES AND STAGING

Metastatic disease occurs in 4% of patients after local management of hydatidiform moles and very rarely after term pregnancies (1 in 40,000) or abortions. Rapid
growth and a high propensity for hemorrhage make this tumor a medical emergency. Metastases are found in lung (80%), vagina (30%), pelvis (20%), brain (10%),
and liver (10%). Other rare sites are the spleen, kidneys, and gastrointestinal tract. 18 The lungs are often involved with multiple lesions, and at times this involvement
is massive at presentation, leading to respiratory insufficiency. 23 On the other hand, early detection in the asymptomatic state may take place through computed
tomography in cases with persistent moles. The central nervous system is seldom involved in the absence of pulmonary metastases.
Anatomic staging of choriocarcinoma (I, confined to corpus; II, metastases to pelvis and vagina; III, pulmonary metastases with or without uterine, pelvic, or vaginal
involvement; and IV, other metastases, such as brain, liver, kidneys, or gastrointestinal tract) is seldom used. Therapeutic planning relies on the scoring system based
on prognostic factors that was developed at the Charing Cross Hospital by Bagshawe 24 and later adopted by other groups, including the World Health Organization
(Table 36.4-1). The importance of this scoring system lies in the identification of a high-risk choriocarcinoma that requires more intensive use of drug combinations to
achieve cures and prevent emergence of resistance.

TABLE 36.4-1. Prognostic Scoring System for Gestational Trophoblastic Disease

The total score for a patient is obtained by adding the individual scores for each prognostic factor, with a score of 4 being considered low risk, a score of 5 to 7 as
intermediate risk, and a score of greater than 7 as high risk.
TREATMENT
Chemotherapy is highly effective for all forms of gestational trophoblastic disease. The curative effects of methotrexate in a disease that had previously resulted in the
death of 60% of patients with disease confined to the uterus and 90% of patients with metastatic disease heralded the era of modern chemotherapy. 25 The current
challenges are to provide the proper follow-up after evacuation of hydatidiform moles, to balance drug administration with surgical interventions when more invasive
trophoblastic disease is present, and finally to tailor the type of chemotherapy to the risk group of gestational trophoblastic disease that has been identified. The
scoring system in Table 36.4-1 assists in reaching decisions, but the expertise of a multidisciplinary team cannot be overemphasized. In particular, hysterectomy and
single-agent chemotherapy must be considered in stage I disease depending on the patient's desire for future fertility. In this circumstance, chemotherapy reduces
dissemination during surgery and treats any occult metastases not previously detected.
The therapeutic regimens for low-risk disease based on the scoring that has been developed have sought to maximize efficacy while minimizing toxicity. As shown in
Table 36.4-2, these regimens have consisted of methotrexate by itself or with leucovorin rescue or dactinomycin. Monitoring with b-HCG to document a prompt 1 log
or greater reduction in the titer in 18 days, along with continued monthly monitoring of negative values for 1 year, is standard practice. In small series, most patients
failing to achieve a satisfactory response to methotrexate were adequately treated with dactinomycin 26 or etoposide.27 Myeloid leukemia and secondary cancers are a
concern with etoposide, 28 which is not encouraging for its use in low-risk patients. Therefore, current Gynecologic Oncology Group studies for low-risk disease are
comparing methotrexate with dactinomycin and also assessing dactinomycin in patients not responding to methotrexate.

TABLE 36.4-2. Drug Regimens for Gestational Trophoblastic Disease

In intermediate- and high-risk patients, combination chemotherapy is the treatment of choice, and the serum EMA-CO (etoposide, dactinomycin, and folinic acid;
vincristine and cyclophosphamide) combination (see Table 36.4-2) is most commonly used. This combination was introduced after recognition of the activity of
etoposide, even after failure of other drug regimens, including those for low risk plus cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, hydroxyurea, and 5-fluorouracil. 24
The Gynecologic Oncology Group has used a combination of methotrexate, dactinomycin, and chlorambucil (MAC) with excellent results in intermediate risk
patients. 29 Familiarity with one regimen ensures greater safety and proper application.
Results with EMA-CO are excellent in intermediate risk and most high-risk disease patients. 24 However, approximately 20% of patients, predominantly high-risk or
intermediate risk who are methotrexate resistant, 30 do not show a complete response. Some of these patients may be salvaged, or could be treated when
methotrexate resistance is identified, with regimens containing cisplatin. Deaths from choriocarcinoma usually result either from very late presentations leading to
complications such as respiratory failure or central nervous system hemorrhage, or from the development of drug resistance if the tumor burden is excessive at the
outset or if treatment has not been sufficiently aggressive. In any event, as for germ cell tumors and other gynecologic cancer, resistance to cisplatin determines an
unfavorable outcome. Experimental strategies to overcome such resistance include dose intensification, analog development, and use of new drugs such as taxanes
and topoisomerase I inhibitors, although experience is limited. 29 In addition, radiation and surgical resection of metastases may play a role. Specifically, radiation
given concomitantly with chemotherapy has been advocated from the outset in patients who have brain metastases to decrease the risk of hemorrhage. A dose of
3000 cGy given over 10 fractions has been found satisfactory. 31
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Buckley JD. The epidemiology of molar pregnancy and choriocarcinoma. Clin Obstet Gynecol 1984;27:153.
2. Bagshawe KD, Dent J, Webb J. Hydatidiform mole in England and Wales. 19731983. Lancet 1986;2:673.
3. Bagshawe KD, Rawlings G, Pike MC, et al. The ABO group in trophoblastic neoplasia. Lancet 1971;1:553.
4. Palmer JR, Driscoll SG, Rosenberg L, et al. Oral contraceptive use and risk of gestational trophoblastic tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:635.
5. Kurman RJ, Main CS, Chen HC. Intermediate trophoblast: a distinctive form of trophoblast with specific morphological, biochemical, and functional features. Placenta 1984;5:349.
6. Steigrad SJ, Cheung AP, Osborn RA. Choriocarcinoma co-existent with an intact pregnancy: case report and review of the literature. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 1999;25:197.

7. Schneider D, Halperin R, Segal M, Bukovsky I. Placental-site trophoblastic tumor following metastatic gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. Gynecol Oncol 1996;63:267.
8. Wallace DC, Surti U, Adams CW, et al. Complete moles have paternal chromosomes but maternal mitochondrial DNA. Hum Genet 1982;61:145.
9. Lawler S, Fisher RA, Dent J. A prospective genetic study of complete and partial hydatidiform moles. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;164:1270.
10. McFadden DE, Kalousek DK. Two different phenotypes of fetuses with chromosomal triploidy: correlation with parental origin of the extra haploid set. Am J Med Genet 1991;38:535.
11. Cross JC, Werb Z, Fisher SJ. Implantation and the placenta: key pieces of the development puzzle. Science 1994;266:1508.
12. Roberts DJ, Mutter GL. Advances in the molecular biology of gestational trophoblastic disease. J Reprod Med 1994;39:201.
13. Steller MA, Mok SC, Yeh J. Effects of cytokines on epidermal growth factor receptor expression by malignant trophoblast cells in vitro. J Reprod Med 1994;39:208.
14. Sun Y, Robertson MC, Duckworth ML. The effects of epidermal growth factor/transforming growth factor alpha on the expression of placental lactogen I and II mRNAs in a rat choriocarcinoma
cell line. Endocrinol J 1998;45:297.
15. Cheung AN, Srivastava G, Chung LP, et al. Expression of the p53 gene in trophoblastic cells in hydatidiform moles and normal human placentas. J Reprod Med 1994;39:223.
16. Vaitukaitis JL, Braunstein GID, Ross GT. A radioimmunoassay which specifically measures human chorionic gonadotropin in the presence of human luteinizing hormone. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1976;38:453.
17. Goldstein DP. Endocrine assay in chorionic tumors. Clin Obstet Gynecol 1978;18:41.
18. Berkowitz RS, Bernstein MR, Laborde O, et al. Subsequent pregnancy experience with gestational trophoblastic disease. New England Trophoblastic Disease Center, 19651992. J Reprod Med
1994;39:228.
19. Berkowitz RS, Goldstein DP, Bernstein MR. Ten years' experience with methotrexate and folinic acid as primary therapy for gestational trophoblastic disease. Gynecol Oncol 1986;23:111.
20. Driscoll SG. Placental site chorioma: the neoplasm of the implantation site trophoblast. J Reprod Med 1984;29:821.
21. Koonings PP, Schlaerth JB. CA125: a marker for persistent gestational trophoblastic disease? Gynecol Oncol 1993;49:240.
22. Athanassiou A, Begent RHL, Newlands ES, et al. Central nervous system metastases of choriocarcinoma: twenty-three years' experience at Charing Cross Hospital. Cancer 1983;52:1728.
23. Kelly MP, Rustin GJS, Ivory C, et al. Respiratory failure due to choriocarcinoma: a study of 103 dyspneic patients. Gynecol Oncol 1988;29:199.
24. Bagshawe KD. Treatment of high-risk choriocarcinoma. J Reprod Med 1984;29:813.
25. Li MC, Hertz R, Spence DB. Effect of methotrexate therapy upon choriocarcinoma and chorioadenoma. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1956;93:361.
26. Hoffman MS, Fiorica JV, Gleeson NC, et al. A single institution experience with weekly intramuscular methotrexate for nonmetastatic gestational trophoblastic disease. Gynecol Oncol
1996;60:292.
27. Mangili G, Garavaglia E, Frigerio L, et al. Management of low-risk gestational trophoblastic tumors with etoposide (VP16) in patients resistant to methotrexate. Gynecol Oncol 1996;61:218.
28. Soto-Wright V, Goldstein DP, Bernstein MR, Berkowitz RS. The management of gestational trophoblastic tumors with etoposide, methotrexate, and actinomycin D. Gynecol Oncol 1997;64:156.
29. Curry SL, Blessing JA, DiSaia PJ, et al. A prospective randomized comparison of methotrexate, dactinomycin and chlorambucil versus methotrexate, dactinomycin, cyclophosphamide
doxorubicin, melphalan, hydroxyurea and vincristine in “poor prognosis” metastatic gestational trophoblastic disease: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Obstet Gynecol 1989;73:357.
30. Kim SJ, Bae SN, Kim JH, et al. Risk factors for the prediction of treatment failure in gestational trophoblastic tumors treated with EMA/CO regimen. Gynecol Oncol 1998;71:247.
31. Yordan EL Jr, Schlaerth JB, Gaddis O, et al. Radiation therapy in the management of gestational choriocarcinoma metastatic to the central nervous system. Obstet Gynecol 1987;69:627.
32. Li-Pai C, Shu-No C, Jian-Xuan F, et al. PEBA regimen (cisplatin, etoposide, bleomycin, and Adriamycin) in the treatment of drug-resistant choriocarcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1995;56:231.
33. Sutton GP, Soper JT, Blessing JA, et al. Ifosfamide alone and in combination in the treatment of refractory malignant gestational trophoblastic disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;167:489.

SECTION 36.5 Ovarian Cancer, Fallopian Tube Carcinoma, and Peritoneal Carcinoma
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 36.5
Ovarian Cancer, Fallopian Tube Carcinoma, and Peritoneal Carcinoma
ROBERT F. OZOLS
PETER E. SCHWARTZ
PATRICIA J. EIFEL
Ovarian Cancer
Pathogenesis
Histologic Classification of Epithelial Tumors
Diagnosis and Symptoms
Staging
Postsurgical Staging
Screening
Prognostic Factors
Management of Early-Stage Disease
Treatment of Advanced-Stage Ovarian Cancer
Treatment of Recurrent Ovarian Cancer
Experimental Therapy
Borderline Tumors
Sex Cord–Stromal Tumors
Extraovarian Peritoneal Carcinoma
Germ Cell Tumors of the Ovary
Pathology
Diagnosis
Patterns of Metastasis
Surgical Management
Management of Dysgerminomas
Nondysgerminomatous Germ Cell Tumors
Fallopian Tube Cancer
Chapter References

OVARIAN CANCER
On the basis of distinct clinical and pathologic features, ovarian carcinomas can be separated into three major entities: epithelial carcinomas, germ cell tumors, and
stromal carcinomas. The vast majority of ovarian carcinomas are epithelial in origin, accounting for more than 90% of the estimated 25,200 new cases of ovarian
cancer diagnosed in 1999 in the United States. 1 Fallopian tube carcinomas and extraovarian peritoneal carcinomas are much less common, but because of marked
similarities to ovarian epithelial carcinomas in their biology and clinical presentation, these tumors also are considered in this chapter. Approximately 14,500 women
died in the United States of ovarian cancer in 1999, making this tumor the leading cause of death from a gynecologic cancer. 1 Overall, ovarian cancer accounts for 4%
of all cancer diagnoses and 5% of all cancer deaths. The lifetime risk of further development of ovarian cancer is approximately 1.5%, and 1 woman in 100 will die of
the disease.2
The vast majority of epithelial ovarian carcinomas are diagnosed in postmenopausal women, and the median age at diagnosis is 63 years. The age-specific incidence
increases from 15 to 16 per 100,000 in the 40 to 44 age group to a peak rate of 57 per 100,000 in the 70 to 74 age group. 3 Since the late 1970s, there has been little
change in incidence or mortality rates. 4 However, a statistically significant increase in 5-year survival rates has been seen—36% in 1970 versus 50% in 1994. 1 This
improvement in survival is likely the result of more effective platinum-based chemotherapy and improvements in surgery and supportive care. African American
women in the United States have a lower incidence (10.3 per 100,000 women) compared with white women, 5 and the stage-specific 5-year survival rates for white and
African American women are similar: localized disease, 96% versus 91%; regional, 80% versus 78%; and advanced disease, 28% versus 24%, respectively. 1
The biology and carcinogenesis of ovarian cancer is detailed elsewhere in this text (see Chapter 36.1). Hormonal, environmental, and genetic factors all have been
identified as playing an important role in the development of ovarian cancer.
A family history is the single most important risk factor for the development of ovarian cancer. However, the vast majority of ovarian cancers are sporadic in nature.
Fewer than 10% of cases can be defined as hereditary ovarian cancer (at least two first-degree relatives with ovarian cancer) in which predisposition for the disease
follows a classic pattern of autosomal dominant transmission with a variable degree of penetrance. Two distinct clinical syndromes associated with hereditary ovarian
cancer have been identified in which there is a germline inheritance of a mutant gene that is transmitted in an autosomal dominant manner and leads to increased
susceptibility to ovarian cancer. The hereditary breast-ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC) is the most common of these and accounts for 85% to 90% of all hereditary
ovarian cancer cases currently identified. 5 The majority of these tumors are associated with mutations of the BRCA1 locus, in which more than 100 mutations have
been thus far identified. A second breast-ovarian cancer susceptibility gene, BRCA2, has been localized to chromosome 13q12. 6 BRCA2 shares structural and
functional similarities with BRCA1 and also appears to be involved in cell progression and cell differentiation.
Initial family pedigree studies revealed multiple cases of ovarian cancer without any increase in breast cancer, and this finding led to the possibility of a site-specific
form of ovarian cancer.7 However, linkage studies have failed to identify additional loci other than BRCA1, which suggests site-specific manifestation is not a distinct
hereditary syndrome but rather represents a variant of HBOC in which early-onset breast cancer is infrequent. 5 It also has been demonstrated that hereditary ovarian
cancer is a component of the hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer syndrome (HNPCC). 8 HNPCC is an autosomal dominant genetic syndrome that is also known
as Lynch syndrome II.9
Ovarian cancer associated with germline mutations of BRCA1 appears to present with distinct clinical and pathologic features compared with sporadic ovarian
cancer. 10 The vast majority of BRCA1-associated cancers are serous adenocarcinomas, with an average age at diagnosis of 48 years. BRCA1-associated cancer may
have a more favorable course than sporadic ovarian cancer. In a study by Rubin et al. 10 they reported a median survival of 77 months in 43 patients with advanced
BRCA1-associated disease compared with 29 months for matched controls. These results have been confirmed in some, but not all, retrospective studies. A large
prospective study is currently in progress by the Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG) to compare the clinical course of sporadic ovarian cancer with that associated
with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations.
Close surveillance and screening with transvaginal sonography is frequently used in women at high risk for hereditary ovarian cancer, although there is no evidence
yet that such an approach decreases mortality. 11 The National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Panel has recommended that prophylactic oophorectomy
be strongly considered in women with hereditary ovarian cancer at age 35 years or after childbearing is completed. However, an increased risk remains for peritoneal
carcinomatosis in women with hereditary ovarian cancer, which persists after prophylactic oophorectomy. Oral contraceptives, however, may reduce the risk of
ovarian cancer in women with mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene. Narod et al. 12 demonstrated that use of oral contraceptives for 6 or more years is associated
with a 60% reduction in risk in a study of 207 women with hereditary ovarian cancer with 161 of their sisters as controls. These data strongly suggest that oral
contraceptive use should be considered in the prevention of cancer in women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. In addition, it is essential that patient education and
counseling by trained geneticists be part of any risk-assessment program.
PATHOGENESIS
The common epithelial tumors account for 60% of all ovarian neoplasms and for 80% to 90% of ovarian malignancies. The remaining tumors arise from germ or
stromal cells. The epithelial tumors arise from the surface epithelium, or serosa, of the ovary. During embryogenesis, the lining of the celomic cavity consists of
mesothelial cells of mesodermal origin, and the gonadal ridge is covered by serosal epithelium. Müllerian ducts, which give rise to the fallopian tubes, uterus, and

vagina, are the result of invagination of the mesothelial lining. When the epithelium becomes malignant, it can express a variety of Müllerian-type differentiations.
Serous carcinomas can resemble the fallopian tube, mucinous tumors the endocervix, endometrioid carcinomas the endometrium, and clear cell tumors can resemble
endometrial glands occurring in pregnancy. It is thought that germ cell tumors originate in a primitive streak and can migrate to the gonads. The mesenchyma gives
rise to the ovarian stroma, and stromal tumors arise from this cell type.
The most common form of dissemination of epithelial tumors throughout the peritoneal cavity is by exfoliation of malignant cells through the surface of the ovarian
capsule. The circulation of the peritoneal fluid to the undersurface of the right hemidiaphragm facilitates the widespread dissemination of malignant tumor cells. All
intraperitoneal surfaces are at risk. In addition, the omentum is a frequent site of tumor growth. Tumor spread also occurs via the lymphatics from the ovary. A primary
source of drainage follows the ovarian blood supply in the infundibulopelvic ligament to lymph nodes around the aorta and vena cava to the level of the renal vessels.
There is also lymphatic drainage through the broad ligament and parametrial channels; consequently, pelvic sidewall lymphatics, including the external iliac,
obturator, and hypergastric chains, are also frequent sites of lymphatic metastases from ovarian primary tumors. More rarely, spread may occur along the course of
the round ligament, resulting in involvement of inguinal lymph nodes. Spread to lymph node is common, and approximately 10% of patients with ovarian cancer that
appears to be localized to the ovaries have metastases to paraaortic lymph nodes. Retroperitoneal lymph node involvement is found in the majority of cases of
advanced ovarian cancer when the disease has spread throughout the peritoneal cavity.
The dissemination of ovarian cancer can be clinically occult. As is described later in the section Staging, surgical staging requires meticulous histologic examination
of visually normal tissues throughout the peritoneal cavity because microscopic disease frequently is detected in the undersurfaces of the diaphragm and other
peritoneal sites. Hematogenous metastases to extraabdominal sites can occur but is uncommon. There can be direct extension of the tumor from the ovary to involve
the peritoneal surfaces of the bladder, rectosigmoid, and pelvic peritoneum.
HISTOLOGIC CLASSIFICATION OF EPITHELIAL TUMORS
Table 36.5-1 details the classification of common epithelial tumors that has been developed by the World Health Organization and the International Federation of
Gynecology and Obstetrics. 13 The nomenclature for these tumors reflects the cell type, location of the tumor, and degree of malignancy, ranging from benign epithelial
tumors to tumors of low malignant potential to invasive carcinomas. Tumors of low malignant potential (“borderline malignancy”) have an excellent prognosis
compared with invasive carcinomas, and their clinical behavior and management is described later in the section Borderline Tumors. Tumors of low malignant
potential are characterized by epithelial papillae with atypical cell clusters, cellular stratification, nuclear atypia, and increased mitotic activity. The differentiation
between these tumors and carcinomas is primarily made on the architectural basis of invasion. Frankly malignant tumors are characterized by an infiltrative
destructive growth pattern, with malignant cells growing in a disorganized pattern and dissection into stromal planes.

TABLE 36.5-1. World Health Organization Classification of Malignant Ovarian Tumors

The invasive epithelial carcinomas are characterized by histologic type and grade (the degree of cellular differentiation). The histologic type has limited prognostic
significance independent of clinical stage. Histologic grade is an important independent prognostic factor in patients with early-stage epithelial tumors. Grading
systems have been based on cytologic detail or a pattern grading classification based on the degree to which a tumor forms papillary structures or glands versus solid
tumor. The relative prognostic value of histologic subtype and grade compared with other surgical and biologic factors is discussed in the section Prognostic Factors.
DIAGNOSIS AND SYMPTOMS
Epithelial cancers of the ovary have been described as a silent killer because the overwhelming majority of patients present with disease that has spread outside of
the ovary and indeed outside of the pelvis at the time of initial presentation. Approximately 70% of patients with epithelial cancers of the ovary present with stage III or
IV disease, whereas 70% of patients with germ cell ovarian malignancies present with stage I disease. 14 Unlike epithelial cancers, ovarian germ cell malignancies
tend to stretch and twist the infundibulopelvic ligament, causing severe pain while the disease is still confined to the ovary. Functioning ovarian tumors of the sex
cord–stromal type may present with symptoms suggestive of excessive endogenous estrogen or androgen production. Granulosa cell tumors occurring in
premenarchal women present with precocious puberty. Women in the reproductive years with granulosa cell tumors present with amenorrhea, and postmenopausal
women may present with postmenopausal bleeding. Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors may present with symptoms of virilization.
Abdominal discomfort and bloating are the most common symptoms experienced by women with epithelial ovarian cancers, followed by vaginal bleeding,
gastrointestinal symptoms, and urinary tract symptoms. Patients presenting with nonspecific lower abdominal discomfort and bloating require a prompt and careful
pelvic examination. Not performing routine rectovaginal pelvic examinations may result in women with relatively early-stage ovarian cancer having a delay in
diagnosis. Papanicolaou smear screening is inadequate for identifying ovarian cancer, although 1% to 2% of women seen at the Yale–New Haven Medical Center
with ovarian cancer have an abnormality on their Papanicolaou smear suggesting the presence of an adenocarcinoma not of cervical origin.
Barber and Graber 15 have recommended that a palpable ovary in a postmenopausal woman is an indication for surgery. This report in 1971 predated the modern era
of ultrasound technology. The identification of an adnexal mass on routine pelvic examination is now an indication for diagnostic ultrasound evaluation. Advances in
endovaginal ultrasound and color Doppler flow techniques have resulted in identifying characteristics of pelvic masses that either make them highly suggestive to be
benign or highly suggestive for malignancy ( Fig. 36.5-1). Morphology indices have been developed to indicate the likelihood of pelvic masses being malignant. Kurjak
et al.16 has reported that particular color Doppler flow patterns and resistive indices are characteristic of malignant pelvic masses. Taylor and Schwartz 17 have
presented data suggesting that resistive indices and pulsatility indices are not always effective in distinguishing benign masses from pelvic masses. As a general rule,
an adnexal mass suspicious for malignancy by ultrasound morphology criteria is probably the best technique available short of biopsying the mass to identify which
masses are most likely malignant.

FIGURE 36.5-1. Endovaginal ultrasound with color Doppler flow studies demonstrating an epithelial ovarian cancer. (Courtesy of Dr. Kenneth J. W. Taylor.)

The most common complaints associated with ovarian malignancies in the pediatric population are pain, abdominal swelling, and pelvic mass. Ovarian masses in
premenarchal women require prompt evaluation and an exploratory laparotomy, because functional cysts do not occur in this group. Most premenarchal women with
adnexal masses have benign disease.
Small ovarian cysts are often identified with use of ultrasound examinations of postmenopausal ovaries. Approximately 8% to 9% of postmenopausal women who do
not have clinically palpable ovaries are found by ultrasound examination to have ovarian cysts between 1.5 to 3.0 cm in size. 18 These cysts do not need to be
removed if they appear to be unilocular and are associated with a normal level of CA-125 and normal color Doppler flow studies. Postmenopausal women with
complex pelvic masses, simple cysts in association with elevated serum CA-125 levels, or simple cysts in association with abnormal color Doppler flow studies should
undergo prompt surgery.
Enlarged ovaries in reproductive-age women are relatively common and frequently are due to either functioning ovarian cysts, such as endometriomas and corpus
luteum cysts, or to benign ovarian cysts. Women found to have such cysts are evaluated with serum CA-125 levels. CA-125 levels are often elevated in such patients
and can be misleading if one uses the standard cutoff of 35 U/mL to distinguish benign cysts from malignancy in menstruating women. Studies suggest that a CA-125
cutoff from 65 to 200 U/mL is necessary to distinguish benign cysts from malignant cysts in premenopausal women. 19
Cysts that appear by ultrasound criteria to be functional in nature may be followed through several menstrual cycles. Often they disappear over this short observation
interval. Functional cysts may also disappear when oral contraceptives are used. Neoplastic cysts do not disappear under the influence of oral contraceptives. Rising
values of serial CA-125 assays obtained during the observation period are an indication that a malignancy may be present. In turn, CA-125 values that are stable or
declining generally reflect the presence of a functional cyst. CA-125 assays should always be obtained when a woman is not actively menstruating, because menses
have been associated with marked elevation of serum CA-125.
Computed tomographic (CT) scans are useful in preoperatively evaluating the extent of disease when a pelvic mass is present. CT scans are most useful when
combined with oral and intravenous contrast. They allow assessment of retroperitoneal lymph nodes in the paraaortic area and the identification of intraperitoneal and
mesenteric implants.
Diagnostic laparoscopy is now being used for evaluation of unexplained pelvic pain and small adnexal masses. The difficulty with the laparoscopic approach to the
evaluation of pelvic masses is rupturing a malignant tumor. In general, if a stage IA ovarian tumor can be removed intact, there is little evidence that additional therapy
has a major impact on survival. Survival in this situation is extremely good. However, once an ovarian malignancy has been ruptured, patients are treated with either
radiation therapy or cytotoxic chemotherapy. 20 Both treatment modalities carry with them physical as well as psychological trauma. Although there is no solid evidence
that rupture of an early-stage ovarian malignancy decreases survival, avoidance of rupture of an ovarian neoplasm should be the routine method of approaching
ovarian masses suspicious for malignancy.
Another technique for the diagnosis of ovarian cancer is peritoneal cytology. Aspiration of obvious ascites for cytologic assessment is routinely performed to identify
malignant cells. If no ascites is present, saline may be instilled percutaneously or through the vaginal apex to flush the abdominal cavity and pelvis. The fluid is then
withdrawn and sent for cytologic assessment. This diagnostic technique is quite uncomfortable for the patient and has been associated with poor patient acceptance
and high false-positive results. Culdocentesis is not routinely used in the United States for the evaluation of a woman with possible ovarian cancer.
Serum CA-125 is the gold standard for tumor markers in the evaluation of pelvic masses, particularly epithelial ovarian cancers. Serum a-fetoprotein (AFP) and
human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) have been helpful in recognizing preoperatively the presence of an endodermal sinus tumor, embryonal carcinoma,
choriocarcinoma, or mixed germ cell tumor.14 However, most young women with these diseases are not recognized preoperatively to have a malignancy. Levels of
AFP and HCG are best applied in serially monitoring the effectiveness of therapy. Failure to identify preoperatively elevations of these markers does not preclude one
from using them postoperatively in determining efficacy and duration of treatment for these diseases. 14
In summary, a woman suspected of having ovarian cancer requires a preoperative workup that should include a CT scan to evaluate the extent of disease in both the
pelvis and the upper abdomen and to rule out occult alternative primary sites for the origin of the disease, such as the pancreas. A serum CA-125 measurement is
useful because 80% of women with advanced ovarian cancer have elevations of CA-125. The marker may be used as a secondary support for ovarian cancer being
present preoperatively, and it may be used postoperatively to confirm the effectiveness of therapy. Radiologic studies of the upper intestinal tract as well as the lower
tract are not routinely recommended unless the patient is having symptoms related to the intestinal tract. A barium enema or Hypaque enema can be very helpful in
determining whether there is compromise of the sigmoid colon lumen in women with obstructive symptoms.
Patients with a preoperative evaluation consistent with the diagnosis of ovarian cancer would do best if referred to a gynecologic oncologist. Survival data suggests
that those patients operated on by gynecologic oncologists for early-stage and late-stage disease do better in terms of progression-free and overall survival, at least
in part because of more aggressive cytoreductive surgery performed by gynecologic oncologists and more appropriate surgical staging of the patient before initiating
treatment.
STAGING
Ovarian cancer is a surgically staged disease. Thus, it is important for physicians to be thoroughly familiar with the International Federation of Gynecologists and
Obstetricians (FIGO) staging system for primary carcinomas of the ovary 21 (Table 36.5-2). As described earlier in the section Pathogenesis, ovarian cancer spreads
by direct extension to neighboring organs by exfoliating cells into the peritoneal cavity that can implant on parietal and visceral peritoneum throughout the peritoneal
cavity. It also disseminates by lymphatic spread, particularly to the pelvic sidewall lymph nodes (external iliac and obturator chains) and along the gonadal vessels to
the upper common iliac and paraaortic lymph node chains ( Fig. 36.5-2). Surgical staging procedures must evaluate sites to which ovarian cancer is likely to spread.

FIGURE 36.5-2. Ovarian cancer spread pattern. (From Young RC, Perez CA, Hoskins WV. Cancer of the ovary. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds.
Cancer: principles and practice of oncology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1993:1226, with permission.)

TABLE 36.5-2. International Federation of Gynecologists and Obstetricians Stage Grouping for Primary Carcinoma of the Ovary (1998)

Complete surgical staging is a necessity to properly evaluate the patient and to determine whether additional therapy should be recommended. Proper surgical
staging requires that a vertical incision be used that extends from the pelvis into the upper abdomen. Subumbilical incisions do not allow the surgeon to perform
complete surgical staging. On entering the peritoneal cavity, any fluid present should be aspirated and sent for cytologic studies. Peritoneal fluid, even if limited to the
pelvis, is more likely to yield malignant cells than are cytologic washings. 22 If no fluid is present, however, one should routinely irrigate the pelvis and paracolic spaces
with normal saline. The fluid is then aspirated and sent to the cytology lab for evaluation. Careful inspection of the abdominal cavity should then be performed.
Adhesions should be lysed to restore normal anatomy. Samples of the adhesions should be sent for microscopic evaluation.
If intraperitoneal carcinomatosis is not present, it is most appropriate to first resect the ovarian tumor and then to proceed with surgical staging. For women who are
operated on for a tumor seemingly limited to one ovary, if preservation of fertility is an issue, the grossly normal opposite ovary should be biopsied or any implants on
the ovarian surface should be excised. Preservation of fertility should be considered in any women of reproductive age with either a borderline malignant tumor of the
ovary or an invasive epithelial cancer grossly confined to one ovary. A frozen section assessment of any abnormality involving the contralateral ovary helps guide the
surgeon in determining whether to remove that ovary. Samples of pelvic peritoneum from the area of the ipsilateral infundibulopelvic and round ligaments, the
cul-de-sac of Douglas, and urinary bladder are obtained. Pelvic retroperitoneal lymph nodes are removed in all patients with unilateral tumors. Patients in whom
bilateral disease is suspected undergo bilateral pelvic lymph node sampling. Any enlarged pelvic retroperitoneal lymph nodes are removed, regardless of their
locations. Lymphadenectomy is an important part of staging ovarian cancers, particularly when the disease is grossly limited to one ovary. In this situation, up to 20%
of women have been found to have paraaortic lymph node metastases. 23
The vertical incision is then extended to assess disease in the upper abdomen. If gross disease is not present in the omentum, an intracolic omentectomy is sufficient
for diagnostic purposes. When disease is present in the omentum, the omentum should be excised from the greater curvature of the stomach ( Fig. 36.5-3). The upper
abdominal evaluation continues with a careful inspection of the right hemidiaphragm, liver serosa, and parenchyma. If no disease is visually present, a 1 cm X 2 cm
piece of peritoneum is excised off of the suprahepatic diaphragm, care being given not to remove underlying musculature and create a pneumothorax. The spleen is
then carefully inspected, as is the left diaphragm. The paracolic spaces are then evaluated, and large strips of peritoneum (3 cm X 5 cm) are removed from the left
and right paracolic spaces if no obvious disease is present. The large bowel is then carefully inspected. The small intestine is evaluated, and any implants present on
bowel or its mesentery are removed. The colon, either the ascending or the descending colon, is then mobilized to expose the paraaortic area. If the peritoneal cavity
has been freed of bulky tumor such that the maximum residual tumor is less than 1 cm in stage III patients, retroperitoneal lymph nodes are removed by taking the fat
pad from the upper half of the common iliac artery up to the level of the renal vessels. However, if bulky residual disease (greater than 1 cm) is left in the upper
abdomen, there is no role for paraaortic lymphadenectomy. 24 An international prospective randomized trial is now being conducted to determine the role of systematic
pelvic and paraaortic lymphadenectomy for advanced ovarian cancer in women with 1 cm or smaller intraperitoneal residual tumor. 25 In postmenopausal women or
women in whom fertility is no longer desired, one should routinely perform a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and total abdominal hysterectomy. The hysterectomy is
performed because the serosal surface of the uterus is a large peritoneal surface for implantation of malignant cells. In addition, field effects may be present whereby
the epithelium of the fallopian tubes or uterus are involved with premalignant or malignant processes. The latter changes cannot be grossly recognized at the time of
surgery.

FIGURE 36.5-3. Excising omentum off stomach. A, artery. (From Young RC, Perez CA, Hoskins WV. Cancer of the ovary. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA,
eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1993:1226, with permission.)

POSTSURGICAL STAGING
Understaging occurs rather frequently at the time of the initial surgery for ovarian malignancies, especially when the preoperative diagnosis is that of a benign
process. This leads to use of inappropriate incisions that does not allow complete surgical staging when the diagnosis of a malignancy is recognized intraoperatively.
At other times, it is due to a lack of familiarity with commonly accepted surgical staging procedures.
The issue of the inadequately staged early-stage patient with ovarian cancer is a difficult one. The simplest solution for such patients is to subject them to a properly
performed staging laparotomy performed by a gynecologic oncologist. However, if this is not possible or practical, an alternative is to obtain a CT scan and a CA-125.
If the CT scan and CA-125 are normal and the tumor was one of low malignant potential, no further therapy is recommended at the Yale–New Haven Medical Center.
If the tumor is an invasive epithelial malignancy, we would consider giving single-agent chemotherapy, such as carboplatin, to such a patient. However, no
prospective randomized series of patients have been reported using this approach. If the CT scan is positive, a surgical procedure to remove gross disease should be
performed.
Postoperative reevaluation by laparotomy or laparoscopy has been advocated by some authors. 26 Earlier laparoscopic surgical staging papers revealed that as much
as 30% to 40% of patients originally thought to have FIGO stage I or II disease actually had disease in the upper abdomen. 26 Complications as a result of earlier
laparoscopic procedures had been relatively limited and included pneumothorax, bleeding requiring transfusions, wound infections, and hypotension. 26 More recently,
more thorough laparoscopic techniques have been described that allow for paraaortic lymph node dissections and omentectomies. 27 As the degree of the
aggressiveness of laparoscopic surgical procedures advances, the complications become more significant.
SCREENING
Successful screening for ovarian cancer, by definition, would decrease mortality and morbidity from the disease. With currently available tests, routine screening for
ovarian cancer cannot be recommended. Successful screening for any malignancy requires detection either at a time when the disease is in its early stages or in a
precancerous stage without invasive features. Although the patterns of spread of ovarian cancer have been well defined, the precise natural history is poorly

understood. It has not been established that untreated stage I routinely progresses to more advanced stages. Even if an orderly progression from stage I to stage IV
takes place, the time frame for such a progression remains to be established. The entire peritoneum is at risk because peritoneal carcinomatosis may develop after an
oophorectomy. Furthermore, the syndrome of extraovarian peritoneal carcinomatosis is characterized by widespread intraperitoneal epithelial carcinoma in the
presence of histologically normal ovaries. In addition, there is no direct evidence for a premalignant lesion in ovarian cancer. As noted, no experimental data suggest
that an ovarian cyst can progress to a borderline tumor that can, in turn, lead to an invasive carcinoma.
The primary reason that screening is not recommended, however, is because the currently available screening techniques (ovarian palpation, transvaginal ultrasound,
and serum CA-125 determinations) are not sufficiently accurate for general screening. These tests have been limited by their sensitivity and specificity. Because a
laparotomy is required to diagnose ovarian cancer, the positive predictive value (PPV) for screening is the primary consideration due to the cost, morbidity, and even
mortality associated with unnecessary laparotomies for a false-positive screening test. 28 The PPV is defined as the ratio of a true-positive test (laparotomy) to
true-positive plus false-positives. Most investigators think that the PPV of a laparotomy should be at least 10%. 29
Whereas pelvic examinations continue to be routinely recommended for women, ovarian palpation has not been established as a useful screening procedure. Most
screening studies have used either serum tumor markers or ultrasonography or both. Although serum CA-125 levels correlate with progression or regression of
established disease 29 and are also useful in the preoperative evaluation of a pelvic mass, the test does not have sufficient specificity to be used as a routine screen
for ovarian cancer. 28 Besides ovarian cancer, many other conditions can be associated with an elevated CA-125 level, including cirrhosis, peritonitis, pancreatitis,
endometriosis, uterine leiomyomata, benign ovarian cysts, and pelvic inflammatory disease.
In a Swedish study,30 CA-125 levels were measured annually in 550 women older than 40 years. In women with levels greater than 30 U/mL, sequential CA-125 levels
were obtained every 3 months, along with pelvic examinations and transabdominal ultrasounds performed every 6 months. In this study, 175 women were found to
have elevated CA-125 levels, and six ovarian cancers were detected.
Transvaginal ultrasonography is a more specific alternative to both transabdominal ultrasonography 31 and CA-125 screening. In studies from the University of
Kentucky of more than 3000 asymptomatic postmenopausal women, the PPV was less than 10%.32 In an effort to improve the unacceptably high rate of false-positive
results with transvaginal ultrasonography, color Doppler imaging also has been studied in an effort to identify areas of vascularization that are associated with
malignancy.33 However, the addition of color Doppler imaging has not yet been established to improve the overall efficacy of ultrasonographic screening.
Several large screening trials have used a sequential combination of serum CA-125 and ultrasonography. In an English study, 22,000 volunteers without a family
history of ovarian cancer underwent screening with serum CA-125 that was followed by abdominal ultrasonography for elevations of greater than 30 U/mL. 34 Women
underwent a laparotomy for any detectable ovarian abnormality. In this study, 11 women had ovarian cancer, seven with stage III or IV disease. The PPV was less
than 10% for early-stage disease. Table 36.5-3 summarizes the results of uncontrolled trials of ovarian cancer screening in more than 36,000 women. 35 A total of 41
cases of ovarian cancer were identified, but only 12 were in women with stage I disease. In the 29 women who were diagnosed with advanced-stage ovarian cancer, it
is unlikely that survival would have been significantly improved by an earlier diagnosis because the disease had already spread throughout the peritoneal cavity.
Screening may ultimately be more effective in women with a positive family history of ovarian cancer. 36 At this point, however, no evidence shows that even screening
such a high-risk population has an impact on morbidity and mortality.

TABLE 36.5-3. Uncontrolled Trials of Ovarian Cancer Screening

Several large ovarian cancer screening trials are currently in progress. The National Cancer Institute's Prostate, Lung, Colon, Ovarian Cancer (PLCO) trial compares
screening with an annual CA-125 measurement, transvaginal ultrasound, and pelvic examination to usual medical care in 76,000 women aged 60 through 74. 37 The
participants in the study will be followed for 10 years. A European multicentric study headquartered at St. Bartholomew's Hospital in London will evaluate 120,000
postmenopausal women randomized to receive no screening or screening with transvaginal ultrasound followed by color flow Doppler examinations in women with
abnormal transvaginal ultrasounds. In addition, serial CA-125 levels will be used to determine which participants should go on to the next stage of screening. Studies
are also in progress to identify more sensitive tumor markers. Macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) has been detected in epithelial ovarian tumors and in
70% of the serum or ascites of patients with diagnosed carcinomas. 38 Serum M-CSF levels, together with CA-125 levels, may be more predictive than CA-125 levels
alone. Similarly, OVX-1 is a newly developed antibody that may also complement CA-125. 39 The combination of these two antibodies has been more accurate in
predicting the presence of residual disease at second-look surgical procedures. Furthermore, a panel of CA-125, M-CSF, and OVX-1 was shown to identify
early-stage ovarian cancer with extremely high sensitivity and moderate specificity in preliminary studies. 40 The levels of these tumor markers and their rate of change
over time are being prospectively analyzed to help identify an individual's risk of ovarian cancer. Lysophosphatidic acid, which had previously been shown to be
elevated in malignant ascites, may also have utility as a predictive biomarker for ovarian cancer, because an elevated level was found in nine of ten patients with
early-stage disease. 41 Additional studies of sensitivity and specificity are in progress.
Inasmuch as screening has not been effective in diagnosing early-stage ovarian cancers, prophylactic oophorectomies have been advocated by some for women in
high-risk groups. However, women still are at risk for peritoneal carcinomatosis even after normal ovaries have been removed. A multicenter prospective evaluation of
the role of prophylactic oophorectomy in high-risk individuals is in progress. Preliminary results support a protective effect of an oophorectomy, although peritoneal
carcinomatosis occurs at a higher rate in this group of women than in the general population. 42 Karlan et al. 43 have reported on the findings of peritoneal serous
papillary carcinoma in women at high risk by family history for ovarian cancer. These investigators performed BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutation studies on four
patients who developed serous carcinomas of the peritoneum and found that three of the four had BRCA1 mutations. None of the patients with peritoneal serous
papillary carcinomas was recognized before intraabdominal carcinomatosis was evident. 43
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
At the conclusion of a comprehensive laparotomy, the clinical findings and the histology are used to select postoperative therapy. In addition, new prognostic factors
are being evaluated that may be used to identify groups of patients in whom more specific biologic treatments or more aggressive therapy is indicated.
Clinicopathologic findings determined to be clinically useful include the following:
FIGO stage
Histologic subtype
Histologic grade
Factors associated with tumor dissemination
Malignant ascites
Malignant peritoneal washings
Tumor excrescences on ovarian surface
Ruptured capsule

Dense ovarian adhesions
Volume of residual disease after cytoreductive surgery
The tumor stage remains the most important prognostic variable. Few trials provide an accurate assessment regarding the long-term survival of patients with
early-stage ovarian cancer because earlier studies often included inadequately staged patients. Stage I patients with well- or moderately well–differentiated tumors
have a greater than 90% 5-year survival rate. 20 Patients with stage I disease with poor prognostic features are often included in treatment protocols for patients with
stage II disease. This group of patients has been termed early-stage disease with unfavorable characteristics. However, limited information is available regarding the
actual survival impact of some of the factors used to characterize patients as having an unfavorable prognosis. Rupture of the capsule increases the stage to IC. In a
Swedish series, however, no adverse effect on survival could be established for early-stage patients in whom the capsule was ruptured during surgery. 44 Furthermore,
in contrast to the established adverse effect of malignant ascites, there is limited information regarding the prognostic significance of positive peritoneal cytology.
Recently, tumor adherence in the presence of dense adhesions has also been considered an adverse prognostic factor, and such patients should be considered as
having stage II disease even in the absence of pathologic confirmation. 45 Tumor size, bilaterality, and cytologically negative ascites have no prognostic significance.
The most reliable long-term survival data on accurately staged early-stage ovarian cancer patients is derived from studies of the GOG. In these studies, unfavorable
prognosis early-stage ovarian cancer patients have a five-year survival rate of approximately 80%. 20
Patients with stage III disease have a 5-year survival rate of approximately 15% to 20% that is dependent in large part on the volume of disease present in the upper
abdomen. Patients with stage IV disease have less than a 5% 5-year survival.
Volume of residual disease after cytoreductive surgery for patients with advanced ovarian cancer has a significant impact on survival. After the administration of
postoperative cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy, 5-year survival rates for patients with optimal stage III disease (defined as no residual nodule greater than 1
cm in diameter) is approximately 35%. 46
The true prognostic impact of histologic subtype and grade in patients with epithelial ovarian cancer remains to be determined. In patients with early-stage ovarian
cancer, grade is an accepted determinant of risk and used to assign postoperative therapy as discussed earlier in the section Management of Early-Stage Disease.
Studies have also identified an adverse prognostic effect of clear cell histology in early-stage ovarian cancer. 20,47 In advanced-stage patients, mucinous histology and
clear cell histology also have been shown to have an adverse prognostic significance. 47 In a GOG analysis, no negative second-look laparotomies in patients with
mucinous or clear cell tumors were performed. Some studies also have demonstrated that histologic grade has an impact on survival in patients with advanced-stage
disease.
Serum CA-125 levels frequently reflect the volume of disease and, as such, in multivariate analysis, preoperative levels have not exerted an independent prognostic
effect on survival. 48 However, postoperative CA-125 levels were shown to be an independent prognostic variable. 49 Most studies also have demonstrated that serum
CA-125 levels after three cycles of chemotherapy are accurate predictors for the probability of a patient achieving a complete remission. 49 However, the CA-125 level
after three cycles of chemotherapy cannot be used as a guide for treatment decisions because of the lack of predictive power.
The prognostic significance of age on survival of patients with ovarian cancer has been recognized. 50 Median survival is at least 2 years longer in women younger
than age 65 compared with those older than 65.
The prognostic significance of DNA ploidy and S-phase fraction have been examined in ovarian cancer. 51 Investigators in Europe have now included aneuploidy in
their selection of high-risk early-stage ovarian cancer patients for adjuvant therapy. 51 Controversy remains, however, as to the nature of the relationship between
histologic grade and degree of aneuploidy. In the GOG, aneuploidy has not been included as a criteria for risk in early-stage disease.
A series of new molecular factors have been proposed to have prognostic significance in ovarian cancer ( Table 36.5-4).52,53 and 54 These factors include markers of
proliferation, drug resistance, serum cytokine levels, growth factor receptors or signal transduction pathways, genes associated with metastases, and oncogene
expression. Most of these factors have been identified in retrospective studies without multivariate analysis or confirmation in larger studies. These factors were
developed from experimental studies in the biology of ovarian cancer (described in Chapter 36.1). Currently, none of these markers is routinely used to select therapy
for patients with ovarian cancer.

TABLE 36.5-4. Experimental Prognostic Factors in Ovarian Cancer

MANAGEMENT OF EARLY-STAGE DISEASE
A subset of patients with early-stage ovarian cancer definitely has been shown not to require any additional postoperative therapy after a comprehensive staging
laparotomy. Patients with stage IA or IB disease with well- or moderately well–differentiated tumors have a 5-year survival rate of more than 90% without any adjuvant
treatment.20 Patients with favorable prognosis early-stage ovarian cancer (stage IA and IB with grade 1 and 2 tumors) were randomized in an earlier GOG study to
receive no treatment or oral intermittent melphalan (0.2 mg/kg daily for 5 days) with repeat cycles every 4 to 6 weeks for a total of 12 courses or 18 months of therapy.
With a median follow-up of more than 6 years, only six deaths have been reported in 81 patients: four in the observation group and two in patients who received
melphalan. Disease-free survival and overall survival is shown in Figure 36.5-4. Patients with favorable prognosis early-stage ovarian cancer can be spared the acute
and chronic toxicities of chemotherapy, including myeloproliferative disorders such as leukemia.

FIGURE 36.5-4. Disease-free (A) and overall (B) survival of patients with early-stage ovarian cancer. The top two curves represent patients with favorable prognoses
randomized to observation or melphalan. The lower two curves represent patients with unfavorable prognoses randomized to either phosphorus 32 or melphalan.
(From ref. 20, with permission.)

The optimum treatment of early-stage ovarian cancer patients with unfavorable prognosis remains an area of controversy. Opinions differ as to not only what modality
of treatment should be used (external-beam radiotherapy, intraperitoneal radioisotopes, or chemotherapy) but also with regard to the role of immediate therapy or to
delay of treatment until disease progression. Furthermore, as noted, consensus has not been established as to the prognostic significance of some clinicopathologic
features, such as positive peritoneal cytologies and a surgically ruptured capsule with contamination of the pelvis with cyst fluid. Clinicopathologic factors currently
used by the GOG to define unfavorable prognosis early-stage disease include FIGO stage II and IC, clear cell histology, and grade 3 tumors.
External-Beam Radiotherapy
Although cisplatin- or paclitaxel-containing chemotherapy has become the standard initial treatment for patients with unfavorable prognosis early-stage ovarian cancer
in all but a few centers, a number of studies have demonstrated that carefully applied whole abdominal radiotherapy is also a highly effective treatment for some
patients.
Early nonrandomized studies suggested that pelvic disease control and survival were improved when patients with early-stage ovarian carcinoma were treated with
postoperative pelvic radiation. In particular, patients with stage II disease had consistently better survival rates if the pelvis was treated ( Table 36.5-5).55,56,57,58,59,60,61
and 62
However, these studies also demonstrated the importance of the coelomic pattern of metastatic spread, which limited the benefit of pelvic irradiation.

TABLE 36.5-5. Results of Early Series Comparing Postoperative Pelvic or Lower Abdominal Radiation versus Surgery Alone for Stage II Carcinoma of the Ovary

On the basis of these findings and encouraging responses of ovarian carcinoma to alkylating agents, investigators at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center conducted a
prospective trial that compared pelvic and whole abdominal irradiation with pelvic irradiation and single-agent chemotherapy (melphalan). 63 Patients who had stage I
to III ovarian carcinomas with less than 2 cm of residual disease after surgery were included. Abdominal treatment was delivered with cobalt ( 60Co) using the moving
strip technique. Each strip was treated with 26 to 28 Gy in 8 to 12 fractions with partial shielding of the liver and kidneys. The authors reported that survival rates were
similar for patients treated in the two arms, but the rate of serious bowel complications was higher for patients who received whole abdominal irradiation. It was
concluded that chemotherapy was a superior treatment, and subsequent clinical trials at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center and throughout the United States focused
on the search for more effective chemotherapy.
Four years later, Dembo and associates 64 published the results of a similar prospective randomized study conducted at the Princess Margaret Hospital in Toronto.
Patients with stage IB or II ovarian cancer were randomized to one of three treatment arms: pelvic irradiation, pelvic plus whole abdominal irradiation, or pelvic
irradiation plus single-agent chemotherapy. Patients with “asymptomatic” stage III disease were randomized only between the last two arms. Although the treatment
arms were similar to those of the M. D. Anderson trial, the details of the treatments differed significantly from that study. Patients on the chemotherapy arm received
chlorambucil, an alkylating agent that has since been demonstrated to yield poorer response rates than melphalan. The total dose of abdominal strip irradiation (22.5
Gy) and the daily fraction size (2.25 Gy) were less than those used in the M. D. Anderson trial, but the liver was not shielded and particular care was taken to include
the domes of the diaphragm in the treatment fields.
Of 190 patients entered on the study, 132 had a hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy performed at their initial laparotomy. Of these 132 (who were
considered to have minimal residual disease), the 50 who received whole abdominal irradiation had significantly better rates of survival and abdominal disease control
than did patients who received pelvic irradiation with chlorambucil ( Table 36.5-6). Although the study has been criticized for using inconsistent surgical staging
methods, it undoubtedly demonstrates the efficacy of abdominopelvic irradiation for at least some subsets of patients with minimal residual disease. Subsequent
analysis of patients treated at Princess Margaret Hospital demonstrated that patients who had grade 1; stage I or II, grade 2; or stage I or II, grade 3 disease and no
gross residual tumor after surgery were most likely to have a prolonged disease-free interval after abdominopelvic irradiation ( Table 36.5-7).65,66

TABLE 36.5-6. Survival Rates and Relapse Sites for 116 Patients with Stage IB, II, and Asymptomatic III Ovarian Cancer Who Had a Total Hysterectomy and
Bilateral Salpingo-Oophorectomy Completed at Initial Operation a

TABLE 36.5-7. Proportion of 325 Patients in Whom Disease Recurred after Treatment with Abdominopelvic Irradiation between 1971 and 1981

Differences in the chemotherapy and radiotherapy techniques described above may explain the apparently contradictory results of the two trials. An imbalance in the
proportion of stage IA patients may have favored the chemotherapy arm in the M. D. Anderson trial, but subset analysis by stage also failed to suggest an advantage
with whole abdominal irradiation. 65 The high total dose and fraction size per strip used at M. D. Anderson may explain the high rate of severe enteric complications
compared with the 3% to 4% rate reported at Princess Margaret Hospital. 67
A number of other reports document that patients with postoperative residual disease have been cured with abdominopelvic irradiation alone; relapse-free survival
rates of 40% to 60% at 10 to 15 years have been reported for patients with residual gross disease measuring less than 2 cm ( Table 36.5-8).68,69,70,71,72,73 and 74
Collectively, these studies demonstrate the efficacy of abdominopelvic irradiation and its superiority over pelvic radiotherapy alone. They also indicate that irradiation
alone is insufficient treatment for most patients with gross residual disease, particularly when the residuum is extrapelvic.

TABLE 36.5-8. Evidence for Cure of Ovarian Cancer by Abdominopelvic Radiotherapy: Long-Term Outcome in Patients with Stage II and III Disease and Macroscopic
Residuum

Randomized data comparing abdominopelvic irradiation with modern cisplatin- or paclitaxel-based chemotherapy have been difficult to obtain. Although retrospective
studies do not demonstrate a clear advantage of one treatment over the other for patients with minimal residual disease, physician biases are strong and several
multiinstitutional trials addressing this question have been closed prematurely because of inadequate patient accrual. In 1993, Redman and coworkers 75 published
the results of a randomized trial comparing abdominopelvic irradiation with single-agent cisplatin in 40 patients with microscopic residual disease, stages IC to III. The
5-year survival rates were 58% and 62% in the two arms, respectively, but the power of the study was weak because of the small number of patients. In 1994, Chiara
and colleagues76 reported results of a second study comparing whole abdominal radiotherapy with cisplatin and cyclophosphamide in 70 patients with high-risk stage
I or II disease. This study was compromised by poor accrual and protocol violations; 8 (24%) of the 34 patients assigned to receive radiotherapy were treated with
chemotherapy. Projected 5-year survival rates for those treated with radiation (25 patients) or chemotherapy (44 patients) were 53% and 71%, respectively ( P = .16).
However, these studies still leave us with an incomplete understanding of the role of radiotherapy in initial management of ovarian cancer. Although pelvic irradiation
was routinely added to early treatments with single alkylating agents, it generally has been abandoned since platinum-containing regimens became standard. Early
studies of pelvic radiation therapy alone and the success of whole abdominal plus pelvic irradiation in selected patients indicate that radiation is an active agent and
suggest that pelvic irradiation may be a useful addition to chemotherapy for selected patients who have a high risk of pelvic recurrence. However, no study has ever
been done to determine whether pelvic irradiation could improve the control rates achieved with modern chemotherapy.
Whole Abdominal Radiotherapy Technique
The 60Co moving strip technique was developed at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in the 1960s to improve the acute tolerance of patients to large whole
abdominal fields of radiation. The abdomen was divided into horizontal strips of 2.5 cm each; two to four contiguous strips were treated each day, moving down
gradually until the whole abdomen had received the prescribed dose of irradiation. Subsequent studies suggested that large stationary megavoltage fields could be
tolerated, and they were technically less difficult to deliver. 58 Dembo and coworkers77 subsequently reported a randomized comparison of open field whole abdominal
irradiation (22 Gy in 22 fractions) with the moving strip technique (22.5 Gy in ten fractions per strip), demonstrating lower complication rates and comparable tumor
control with the simpler open field technique.
The high rate of subdiaphragmatic recurrences observed after treatment with early “whole abdominal” fields that did not completely cover the diaphragms illustrate the
critical importance of covering the entire peritoneal cavity. More recently, in a review of a prospective multiinstitutional trial, Klaassen and colleagues 78 reported a
significantly poorer survival rate for patients whose whole abdominal radiation fields were found to deviate seriously from protocol specifications.
Patients should always be simulated under fluoroscopy, and fields should provide a 1-cm margin on the maximum cephalad excursion of the diaphragmatic domes
under quiet respiration. It is often necessary to flash the lateral abdominal wall and to include the entire bony pelvis in whole abdominal fields to avoid excluding
peritoneal surfaces. In obese patients with poor abdominal tone, the fields may need to extend laterally beyond the bony pelvis. This is particularly true when the
patient is treated in the prone position. The thickness of the abdominal wall should be considered in choosing the energy of the radiation beam. When fields are
designed using CT scans of the whole abdomen, coverage of peritoneal surfaces can be assured. The total dose of whole abdominal irradiation varies between 22
and 30 Gy depending on the fractionation scheme, use of concurrent chemotherapy, and patient tolerance. Posterior kidney blocks are placed to limit the renal dose
to 15 to 18 Gy, and a portion of the liver may be shielded during part of the treatment, limiting the dose to 22 to 25 Gy. The true pelvis is usually treated to a higher
dose of 45 to 50 Gy, either after whole abdominal irradiation or concurrently as a “field within a field” (not to exceed a total daily dose to the pelvis of 180 cGy).
Martinez and coworkers 73 have suggested boosting the dose to the paraaortic nodes and medial diaphragms with a T-shaped field in selected patients.
Chemotherapy that is given before or after irradiation can influence normal tissue tolerance and should be considered in estimations of organ tolerance.
Intraperitoneal Radioisotopes
The characteristic transcolonic pattern of dissemination of ovarian cancer first led clinicians to treat patients with intraperitoneal isotopes in the 1950s, and this
treatment is still used by some practitioners for a selected group of patients with minimal disease. The isotope that is usually used is chromic phosphate ( 32P). 32P
decays with a half-life of 14.3 days, emitting b-particles with a mean energy of 0.69 MeV. Because the average penetration of these particles in soft tissue is less than
1 to 2 mm, treatment with chromic phosphate is inappropriate for patients who have macroscopic residual disease. Because the goal is to distribute the isotope evenly
over peritoneal surfaces, patients with intraabdominal adhesions that inhibit the flow of the isotope-containing fluid are poor candidates for this treatment.
Intraabdominal distribution is usually evaluated before treatment by scanning the patient after an intraabdominal injection of technetium 99m sulfur colloid. If a good
distribution is confirmed, the patient is treated with 10 to 20 mCi of chromic phosphate diluted in saline and then is positioned to optimize distribution. It is estimated
that this dose delivers 20 to 40 Gy of radiation to the peritoneal surface. However, nonuniform distribution can produce variations in the dose of tenfold or more.
A GOG study, published in 1990, randomized 141 patients with poorly differentiated stage IA to B, stage IC, or completely resected stage II disease to receive either
melphalan (0.2 mg/kg/d for 5 days, repeated every 4 to 6 weeks for 12 cycles) or intraperitoneal 32P (15 mCi at the time of surgery).20 The 5-year survival rates of 81%
and 78% for patients treated with melphalan or 32P, respectively, were not significantly different. Toxic effects were acceptable for most patients on both arms.
However, four (6%) patients treated with 32P required an operation for small bowel obstruction, and two (3%) patients treated with melphalan developed leukemia. The
authors concluded that intraabdominal 32P was the preferred treatment for these patients because of its limited toxicity and no known risk for causing leukemia.
Three randomized studies have compared 32P with cisplatin-containing chemotherapy 79,80 and 81; none demonstrated a significant difference in survival between the two
treatments. Vergote and colleagues 80 randomized 347 patients who had no gross residual disease after laparotomy to receive intraperitoneal 32P (7 to 10 mCi) or

cisplatin (six courses of 50 mg/m 2 each). The estimated 5-year survival rates were 83% and 81%, respectively ( P = .6). Although the dose of 32P was relatively low, 12
(9%) of 136 patients who had this treatment experienced small bowel obstructions compared with 2% of patients treated with cisplatin. For this reason, the authors
recommended cisplatin as standard treatment.
In a GOG study, Young and colleagues 81 compared intraabdominal 32P with combination chemotherapy (cisplatin and cyclophosphamide) for patients with high-risk
early-stage disease. The 5-year survival rates were 76% and 84%, respectively ( P = .08). One toxic death was reported in each treatment arm, but these authors also
concluded that the greater risk of bowel complications with 32P outweighed the hematologic complications of chemotherapy; on this basis, the authors recommended
chemotherapy as the preferred treatment.
The most common complication of 32P administration is transient abdominal pain in 15% to 20% of patients. Chemical or infectious peritonitis is a rare complication
that occurs in 2% to 3% of patients. The most serious late complication of treatment is small bowel obstruction, which has been reported in 5% to 10% of patients
treated with 32P alone. This risk increases to an unacceptable rate of 20% to 30% when intraperitoneal 32P is combined with external-beam radiotherapy, an approach
that is no longer recommended.
These clinical trials, however, did not establish whether any form of adjuvant therapy was, in fact, superior to no immediate treatment for patients with early-stage
ovarian cancer with unfavorable prognostic features. The Italian Inter-regional Cooperative Group of Gynecologic Oncology has conducted a randomized trial with a
no-treatment arm in patients with stage I or IB, grade 2 or 3 tumors who are randomized to receive cisplatin (50 mg/m 2 for six cycles) or to observation. 82 With a
median observation time of 76 months, overall survival rates between the two treatment arms is similar (88% with cisplatin vs. 82% in the control group), although
there is a marked improvement in disease-free survival for patients treated with cisplatin (83% vs. 65%). The absence of a larger difference in overall survival reflects
the ability of cisplatin-based chemotherapy to salvage patients at the time of recurrence. Two additional trials, in which there is a no-treatment arm, are also in
progress in Europe for early-stage ovarian cancer patients ( Table 36.5-9). The Scandinavian randomized trial is similar in design to that of the Italian study. In an
English trial, however, the randomization is between observation and treatment with single-agent carboplatin. Unlike the Scandinavian study, the English trial has no
requirement for extensive surgical staging.

TABLE 36.5-9. Clinical Trials in Early-Stage Ovarian Cancer

The current GOG trial for patients with early-stage ovarian cancer with unfavorable prognosis compares three cycles against six cycles of a treatment with paclitaxel
and carboplatin (see Table 36.5-9). The details of this combination are discussed later in the section Paclitaxel Combination Therapy.
It is apparent that the optimum postoperative treatment for patients with early-stage ovarian cancer with unfavorable prognostic features remains to be established.
Pending the results of the ongoing clinical trials, treatment options include chemotherapy with cisplatin or carboplatin, total abdominal and pelvic irradiation, and
paclitaxel-based chemotherapy. In addition, a no-treatment option can be considered, although this choice has been shown to be associated with a decrease in
disease-free survival. Second-look operations after completion of adjuvant therapy are not routinely recommended.
TREATMENT OF ADVANCED-STAGE OVARIAN CANCER
The generally accepted treatment for patients with either stage III or IV (advanced stage) ovarian cancer has been similar—cytoreductive surgery, when feasible,
followed by chemotherapy.
Cytoreduction
Aggressive surgery to remove virtually all gross tumor (i.e., cytoreductive surgery or tumor debulking surgery) has become an integral part of initial surgery for
management of ovarian cancer. The theoretical benefits of cytoreductive surgery are to remove large necrotic tumors with poor blood supplies and to remove large
tumors that are in a slower growth phase, leaving behind tumors that are more sensitive to the effects of chemotherapy. Theoretically, all patients with stage III and IV
disease are candidates for cytoreductive surgery. Stage IV patients, based on the presence of parenchymal liver disease, enlarged retrocrural lymph nodes,
supraclavicular lymph nodes, mediastinal metastases, and parenchymal lung metastases may not be candidates for optimal cytoreductive surgery. In addition, we
have found that women who have disease on CT scan that involves the porta hepatis or is associated with suprarenal lymphadenopathy or omental metastases that
extend into the hilum of the spleen frequently have such advanced disease at the time of the cytoreductive surgery that the likelihood of optimal cytoreduction being
accomplished is virtually nil. Women with stage IV disease based only on the presence of malignant pleural effusion have been able to undergo optimal cytoreductive
surgery. Its impact on their survival has been questioned. 83 Studies have suggested that an optimal surgical cytoreductive effort should be performed in women with
stage IV disease, even when parenchymal liver disease is recognized preoperatively. 84,85 If patients can be optimally cytoreduced to less than 1 to 2 cm maximum
diameter of residual tumor, their median survival has varied from 25 to 40 months, whereas those women who were suboptimally cytoreduced had median survival
rates of 10 to 18 months. Interestingly, the stage IV patients optimally cytoreduced in three of the four series had a superior survival to optimally cytoreduced patients
with stage III ovarian cancer treated in prospective randomized trials by the GOG. 46
Successful surgical management of stage III or IV ovarian cancer requires meticulous attention to surgical techniques to avoid complications and a thorough
knowledge of abdominal and pelvic anatomy to allow the successful accomplishment of cytoreductive surgery. In general, it is wisest to start with an incision in the
lower abdomen to free the pelvis of cancer, then work up into the upper abdomen to attempt to clear it of cancer, then complete the procedure with paraaortic and
pericaval retroperitoneal lymph node sampling or resection if optimal cytoreduction has been accomplished within the peritoneal cavity. The goal of optimal
cytoreductive surgery is complete removal of all palpable or visible tumor. A minimal goal of cytoreductive surgery is to reduce the residual tumor to less than 1 cm
and preferably less than 0.5 cm in maximum diameter.
On entering the abdominal cavity, normal anatomy is restored by lysing adhesions and freeing organs from adherent tumor. Frequently the pelvis is completely filled
with tumor. By identifying the round ligaments and suture ligating and dividing them, the pelvic retroperitoneum can be entered and the external iliac arteries and
veins, the hypogastric arteries, and the ureters can be rapidly identified. Accomplishing this allows ligation of the infundibulopelvic ligaments with the ovarian vessels;
resection of peritoneum, along with the attached vessels down to the tumor mass; and dissection of the ovarian mass off of, or with, the underlying peritoneum to
elevate the mass from the pelvic sidewall. By dividing the utero-ovarian ligaments and fallopian tubes, one can then remove the mass. At times, it may be necessary
to resect small bowel or sigmoid colon in continuity with the ovarian mass. An end-to-end or side-to-side anastomosis restores bowel continuity. Less frequently a
colostomy is necessary. Once each of the ovaries has been removed, a hysterectomy is performed. At times, ovarian cancers infiltrate into the uterus and it is
necessary to take the uterus out en bloc with the ovarian tumor. Implants in the cul-de-sac may be resected using retroperitoneal dissection. Sigmoid colon implants
usually involve epiploic appendices, which can be resected without performing a sigmoid colon resection. Retroperitoneal lymph nodes are routinely removed from the
external iliac artery and vein, hypogastric arteries, and the obturator fossa. An appendectomy is routinely performed.
Having resected the pelvic disease, a complete omentectomy is performed and large masses implanting on peritoneal surfaces, including the diaphragm, are
removed. Once the abdomen has been cleared of disease, or the maximum residual disease is less than 1 cm, the fat pad overlying and surrounding the aorta and
vena cava is removed, as are lymph nodes involved with metastatic disease in this area. In general, if large residual tumor volume is left within the peritoneal cavity,

there is not much benefit in resecting retroperitoneal disease. However, when intraperitoneal disease has been optimally cytoreduced to less than 1-cm maximal
residual tumor volume, retroperitoneal lymphadenectomies are appropriate.
Impact of Primary Cytoreductive Surgery
The clinical rationale for cytoreductive surgery has been ascribed to Griffiths, 86 who demonstrated in 1974 that survival was directly effected by the initial degree of
cytoreductive surgery for women with advanced-stage ovarian cancer. In a retrospective review, patients with no residual disease had a mean survival of 39 months
compared with 29 months for residual disease of less than 0.5 cm, 18 months for residual disease of 0.6 to 1.5 cm, and 11 months for those who were not cytoreduced
below 1.5 cm. None of the latter patients survived beyond 26 months. Women who underwent optimal cytoreductive surgery had similar survival rates to women who
had minimal-size abdominal metastases at the initial surgery. Subsequent to that report, numerous series have confirmed that aggressive cytoreductive surgery to 2
cm of residual tumor or less significantly enhances survival for patients. Most patients participated in trials in which multidrug chemotherapy was used, usually
involving cisplatin-based chemotherapy. A review of nine reports, in which primary cytoreductive surgery resulted in disease of less than 2 cm or greater than 2 cm,
demonstrated a mean survival in the optimally cytoreduced group of 29.4 months compared with 13.4 months in the group in whom cytoreductive surgery was
suboptimal86,87,88,89,90,91,92,93 and 94 (Table 36.5-10).

TABLE 36.5-10. Effect of Residual Disease at the Conclusion of Primary Cytoreductive Surgery on Survival

Two metaanalyses gave conflicting views on the survival impact of cytoreductive surgery. 95,96 Hunter et al. 95 reviewed a total of 58 separate studies containing 6962
patients to determine whether maximum cytoreduction surgery benefits the survival of women with advanced ovarian cancer. These authors looked at the median
survival times of groups of women with advanced ovarian cancer and used multiple linear regression techniques to analyze the effects on median survival. The
variables studied were the proportion of each cohort undergoing maximum cytoreductive surgery, the use of cisplatin chemotherapy, the dose intensity of the
chemotherapy, the proportion of each cohort with stage IV disease, and the year of publication of the study. The use of cisplatin chemotherapy resulted in an
increased survival time of 53% [95% confidence intervals (CI), 35% to 73%]. For each 0.2 unit increase in dose intensity, the increase in median survival time was
11.1% (95% CI, 6% to 17%, P = .001). Stage IV disease had a negative impact on survival. For each 10% increase in the number of stage IV patients in the study, a
negative survival increase of 2.6% (95% CI, –0.1% to –5.4%) was found. For each 10% increase in the percentage of women who underwent maximum cytoreductive
surgery, the increase in survival was only 4.1% (95% CI, –0.6% to 9.1%, P = .089) (Fig. 36.5-5). This study concluded that cytoreductive surgery has only a small
effect on the survival of women with advanced ovarian cancer and that the type of treatment used (i.e., cisplatin) was far more important.

FIGURE 36.5-5. Graph of log median survival time (MST; in months) versus percent maximum cytoreductive surgery (MCS) for 76 cohorts for which dose intensity
could be calculated after adjustments for effects of dose intensity, percent stage IV, and platinum chemotherapy. (From ref. 95, with permission.)

Allen et al. 96 performed metaanalyses on 12 reports of women with stage III ovarian cancer in which they could determine that patients either had no residual disease,
residual disease less than or equal to 2 cm, or residual disease greater than 2 cm, and on four reports of stage IV ovarian cancer for which similar analyses were
possible. The results of these metaanalyses were consistent with survival benefits accruing to patients with no residual disease and residual disease less than or
equal to 2 cm after surgery for stage III and IV disease when compared with patients with residual tumor masses greater than 2 cm. These authors, however, indicated
that the survival benefit for women with small residual tumor probably reflects more the biology of the tumor and suggests that less-invasive tumors may be more
chemotherapy-sensitive than those tumors in which optimum cytoreductive surgery was not possible. To date, no prospective randomized trials have been performed
assessing the value of cytoreductive surgery in advanced ovarian cancer.
Three GOG studies give important insight into the impact of cytoreductive surgery in advanced ovarian cancer. The first demonstrated that removing all gross tumor
defines true optimal cytoreductive surgery. Women treated with cisplatin-based chemotherapy who had no gross disease left had a progression-free interval of 42
months compared with 20 months for those with residual disease of less than 1 cm. 97 The second study revealed that women who had 1 to 2 cm residual tumor had a
significant survival improvement compared with those who had more than 2 cm of residual tumor. 98 This third study refuted early data suggesting that women
undergoing optimal cytoreductive surgery have similar survival as those patients initially found at surgery to have low-volume disease. 46 The latter study reported on
348 women with 1 cm or less residual tumor, 200 of whom initially had abdominal disease of 1 cm or less. When implants were present on parietal or visceral
peritoneum, even when optimally cytoreduced, survival rates significantly decreased. Indeed, the best survival for stage III patients observed were those whose initial
macroscopic tumor was less than 1 cm in the omentum and associated with either no disease or microscopic disease in other abdominal sites ( P = .0001). Those with
the poorest survival had tumors initially greater than 1 cm involving omentum and had gross disease in other abdominal sites ( Fig. 36.5-6). This study refutes early
data suggesting that women undergoing optimal cytoreductive surgery have the same survival as those patients initially found at surgery to have low-volume disease.
The study demonstrates that biologic factors responsible for bulk disease may be as important as technical ability to resect the disease.

FIGURE 36.5-6. Survival time by initial maximum omental (Omen.) and abdominal (Abdom.) tumor diameter. Micro, microscopic. (From ref. 46, with permission.)

Aggressive cytoreductive surgery incurs complications. Chen and Bochner 99 reported on 60 patients who underwent optimal cytoreductive surgery. These patients
had a 5% operative morbidity. Blythe and Wahl 100 have looked at quality of life in optimal residual disease (less than 2 cm in diameter) and suboptimal residual
disease (more than 2 cm in diameter) and found that 75% of the optimal group were judged to have good or good-to-fair quality of life, but only 18% of the suboptimal
group achieved this quality of life. It has been argued that perhaps those women who are able to be optimally cytoreduced have biologically less virulent disease than
those patients in whom optimal cytoreductive surgery cannot be achieved. This question has yet to be answered as there are no data from prospective randomized
trials available.
CT scans have been used to identify the extent of ovarian cancer metastases and, in particular, to identify disease in the upper abdomen that may result in technical
difficulties leading to significant residual tumor at the completion of attempted cytoreductive surgery. These sites include parenchymal liver disease, confluent sheets
of tumor on the diaphragm and serosa of the liver, porta hepatis infiltration, omental replacement with metastatic tumor that extends into the hilum of the spleen, and
suprarenal lymph node metastases. Although it is possible to resect some of these sites, CT scan findings in general reflect less than the actual findings at the time of
surgery, but CT scan findings frequently indicate which patients have disease present that can be routinely surgically cytoreduced to optimal levels. We have used
this information at the Yale–New Haven Medical Center to avoid initially performing possible suboptimal cytoreductive surgery in such patients and have offered those
patients neoadjuvant chemotherapy. 101,102 Fifty-nine consecutive women with advanced malignancies compatible with ovarian cancer based on a physical
examination, CT scans, and cytologic or histologic specimens underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy with platinum-based combination regimens at the Yale–New
Haven Medical Center. 103 Forty-one subsequently underwent cytoreductive surgery. Their overall progression-free survival rates were compared with those of 206
consecutive women with stage III and IV epithelial ovarian cancers treated with conventional cytoreductive surgery followed by the same platinum-based combination
chemotherapy.103 No statistical difference was observed in the overall survival or in progression-free survival between the group treated with neoadjuvant
chemotherapy and the conventionally treated patients, despite the neoadjuvant patients being statistically older than the conventionally treated ones and having a
statistically poorer performance status than the conventionally treated group. Women undergoing cytoreductive surgery after neoadjuvant chemotherapy had a
statistically improved overall survival ( P <.0001) compared with those who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy but did not undergo surgery. Surwit et al. 104 used
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in 29 women with advanced ovarian cancer. The latter authors followed log decreases in serum CA-125 levels and compared those
decreases in CA-125 levels to survival. A two-log decrease in CA-125 before surgery resulted in a median survival of 37 months, whereas patients with less than 1 log
response in CA-125 had a survival of 18 months. The hospital stays, operative time, and blood loss at the time of surgery were substantially reduced in women who
received neoadjuvant chemotherapy compared with studies published in the literature. 104 In addition, complications such as pneumonia, febrile episodes, and wound
infections also appeared to be substantially reduced in Surwit's series. These results were consistent with the Yale–New Haven series as well.
The initial experience with neoadjuvant chemotherapy in the management of women with advanced disease who do not appear to be surgically resectable or have
evidence for stage IV disease suggests that neoadjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin-based treatment may be as effective as the conventional approach of
chemotherapy after suboptimal cytoreductive surgery. 101,102 Paclitaxel-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy is now being used at the Yale–New Haven Medical Center.
Potential advantages of neoadjuvant chemotherapy appear to be a much more rapid improvement in quality of life, a less expensive treatment program for patients
and, when surgery is ultimately performed, an easier operation requiring shorter hospitalization. Prospective randomized trials incorporating neoadjuvant
chemotherapy in the management of advanced-stage ovarian cancer are definitely needed.
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapeutic agents from a wide variety of different classes have been shown to produce responses in patients with ovarian cancer. Numerous combination
chemotherapy regimens have been studied, and comparisons have been made of individual drugs with combinations. Since the mid-1990s, a new chemotherapeutic
combination consisting of the combination of paclitaxel and a platinum compound has been accepted as the standard of care in the United States.
PLATINUM COMPOUNDS. Before demonstration of the marked activity of paclitaxel in ovarian cancer, platinum compounds were considered to be the most active agents

in this disease. Several clinical trials compared platinum-containing combinations to non–platinum-containing regimens. The largest trial was performed by the
GOG105 in which 120 patients received cyclophosphamide plus Adriamycin and were compared with 107 patients who were treated with cyclophosphamide,
Adriamycin, and cisplatin (CAP). The CAP regimen was deemed superior based on a higher overall response rate (51% vs. 26%), longer progression-free duration
(13.1 months vs. 7.7 months), and an improvement in overall survival rate (15.7 months vs. 9.7 months). A metaanalysis of 45 clinical trials in ovarian cancer
confirmed the survival benefit of immediate cisplatin-based treatment compared with treatment with a non–platinum-containing regimen. 106 The metaanalysis also
demonstrated a modest survival advantage for platinum combinations when compared with treatment with single-agent cisplatin.
The development of carboplatin as a less toxic analogue led to several prospective randomized trials comparing single-agent carboplatin to cisplatin in previously
untreated patients with advanced disease. The longest study currently has a minimum follow-up of 8 years, and no statistically significant differences in survival have
been found—5-year survival rates of 15% and 19% for cisplatin and carboplatin, respectively. 107 Similarly, an updated metaanalysis that included all clinical trials
comparing single-agent carboplatin with single-agent cisplatin also has failed to detect any significant differences in progression-free interval or in overall survival for
these drugs.108 In addition, combination chemotherapy regimens containing carboplatin have been compared with cisplatin-containing regimens. 109,110 In North
America, carboplatin plus cyclophosphamide was compared with cisplatin plus cyclophosphamide by the Southwest Oncology Group 109 and by the National Cancer
Institute of Canada. 110 No survival differences were reported in these trials. However, some investigators have suggested that in certain subsets of patients, the
cisplatin treatment may be superior. A European trial compared CHAP-5 (cyclophosphamide, hexamethylmelamine, Adriamycin, and cisplatin) with CHAC, in which
carboplatin replaced cisplatin. 111 Complete remission rate for the cisplatin regimen was 32% compared with 27% for the CHAC combination. A trend toward
improvement in the survival rate was seen for patients with less than 1 cm of disease who were randomized to the cisplatin regimen. In patients with bulky disease, no
survival differences were found.
In these studies, platinum-based regimens were routinely administered for six cycles. Prospective randomized trials have compared five cycles with ten cycles 112 or six
with 12,113 and no statistically significant differences have been reported in survival for patients treated with the greater number of cycles. However, numerous
questions remain regarding the role of dose and dose intensity of these agents in the overall treatment of patients with ovarian cancer. Cisplatin dose intensity
(expressed as mg/m2/wk) was studied retrospectively in 33 published trials in ovarian cancer. 114 This retrospective analysis provided evidence for the importance of
dose with regard to response and survival. Doses of cisplatin beyond 100 mg/m 2 have been associated with unacceptable toxicity, primarily neurotoxicity. Several
prospective clinical trials have compared differences in cisplatin dose intensity ( Table 36.5-11). In the GOG trial, 485 patients with bulky stage III or IV disease were
randomized to receive either eight cycles of cisplatin (50 mg/m 2) plus cyclophosphamide (500 mg/m2) every 3 weeks, or four cycles of cisplatin (100 mg/m 2) plus
cyclophosphamide (1000 mg/m2) every 3 weeks.116 This study demonstrated that a regimen could be administered at double the dose intensity of cisplatin with
increased grade 3 and 4 myelotoxicity. However, no significant difference was noted in overall response rate or survival for patients who received the high-dose
regimens. Two similar studies from Italy also were not able to demonstrate any improvement for patients who received double-dose intensity of cisplatin. 117,118 In
contrast, the study from the West Scotland's Clinical Trial Group compared two different cisplatin plus cyclophosphamide regimens and initially reported an
improvement in survival for patients receiving the higher-dose intensity. 214 In this trial, patients with stage IC to IV disease were randomized to treatment with either 50
mg/m2 (low dose) or 100 mg/m2 (high dose) cisplatin, with all patients receiving 750 mg of cyclophosphamide. With the longer follow-up, the differences in survival
appear to be decreasing. 120 There currently is no evidence that a dose of cisplatin greater than 75 mg/m 2/cycle should be routinely used in combination chemotherapy

for patients with advanced ovarian cancer.

TABLE 36.5-11. Randomized Trials of Cisplatin Dose Intensity

In contrast to cisplatin, carboplatin is rapidly excreted in the kidney. The area under the concentration-time curve is dependent on glomerular filtration rate (GFR).
Retrospective studies have identified a correlation between response and toxicity and area under the curve (AUC), with a plateau reached for response at an AUC of
6 to 7. 121 Formulas have been developed to individualize dose based on AUC and patients' renal function. In Calvert's formula, the dose (mg) = AUC × [GFR + 25]. 122
In these studies, GFR was estimated by 51CrEDTA clearance. Creatinine clearance, however, can be used to approximate GFR and can be measured or estimated
with age and serum creatinine. Prospective randomized trials have been performed in which patients with advanced ovarian cancer have been randomized to different
AUCs covering a twofold difference in dose intensity. In a study from the Danish Ovarian Cancer Study Group, there was no increased efficacy for patients
randomized to receive an AUC of 4 versus 8. 123 All patients in this trial also received cyclophosphamide. In the trial from the United Kingdom, 125 patients received
carboplatin dosed to an AUC of 6 or 12. Greater grade 4 toxicity in patients scheduled to receive an AUC of 12 subsequently was found, which led to substantial dose
reduction.
Several randomized trials also have explored cisplatin plus cyclophosphamide versus doxorubicin-containing combinations. In the GOG trial, 125 349 patients with
advanced disease were randomized to receive either cisplatin plus cyclophosphamide or a PAC combination (cisplatin, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide). No
significant differences were reported with regard to complete remission rates (30% vs. 33%), progression-free interval (median, 22.7 months vs. 24.6 months), or
overall survival rate (median, 31.2 vs. 38.9 months). In contrast, a large Italian trial has reported a significantly higher, surgically confirmed, complete remission rate
(62% vs. 40%) and a 10-month increase in median survival for patients treated with PAC compared with cyclophosphamide and cisplatin (CP). 126 Two separate
metaanalyses pooling the data from these clinical trials has identified a survival benefit between 5% and 7% from years 2 to 6 for patients with the doxorubicin
regimens.127,128 Direct comparison of these regimens, however, has been somewhat limited by differences in toxicity and dose intensity. Only the GOG study was
performed with regimens that produced comparable hematologic toxicity. Although the metaanalysis suggested that the addition of doxorubicin slightly prolonged
survival, a large prospective comparison [International Collaborative Ovarian Neoplasms (ICON) trial II] of single-agent carboplatin (AUC = 5) versus the PAC regimen
did not demonstrate any differences in either progression-free survival or overall survival rates. 129
Before the demonstration of the role of paclitaxel in the initial chemotherapy of patients with advanced ovarian cancer, standard chemotherapy regimens in the United
States consisted primarily of either cisplatin (75 mg/m 2) or carboplatin (dosed to an AUC of 6 to 7, or approximately 350 mg/m 2) together with cyclophosphamide (at a
dose of 600 to 750 mg/m 2). In contrast, many clinicians in Europe continue to use the PAC regimen or single-agent carboplatin.
PACLITAXEL COMBINATION CHEMOTHERAPY. Taxanes are a new class of cytotoxic agents with a unique mechanism of action. Paclitaxel and docetaxel both have been

demonstrated to have activity in platinum-resistant patients. 130,131 The taxanes exert their cytotoxicity primarily by their effect on microtubules. Taxanes bind to
microtubules and shift their equilibrium toward microtubular assembly, leading to a cell-cycle arrest in G 2/M. Premedication with steroids, cimetidine, and
diphenhydramine has essentially eliminated the hypersensitivity reactions that limited early phase I trials. Of particular importance in the phase II trials, which
demonstrate an overall response rate of 30% to 40%, was the observation that paclitaxel was active in patients who had disease progression while receiving cisplatin
or had a duration of remission of less than 6 months. In the GOG trial of 43 patients, 27 were defined as platinum-resistant. 130 The overall response rate in this subset
of patients was 33%, compared with the overall response rate of 37%. Toxicities of paclitaxel include alopecia, myalgia, and myelosuppression (primarily neutropenia
with little effect on platelets). The activity of paclitaxel was confirmed in other phase II trials. 132
Based on these results, a series of prospective randomized trials have compared platinum and paclitaxel versus regimens without paclitaxel ( Table 36.5-12). The
GOG study133 randomized almost 400 patients with suboptimal stage III and IV disease to paclitaxel plus cisplatin or to cyclophosphamide plus cisplatin. The
paclitaxel regimen was superior with regard to response rate, complete remission, second-look rate, progression-free survival, and overall survival ( Fig. 36.5-7). In
this group of patients with poor prognosis and advanced disease, a 14-month improvement in median survival (24 months vs. 38 months) is seen in patients treated
with the paclitaxel combination. The results of this study were confirmed by a European/Canadian trial that had a similar randomization. 134 In this trial, however,
paclitaxel was administered at 175 mg/m2 in a 3-hour infusion instead of the 24-hour infusion used in the GOG trial. Furthermore, in the latter trial, in contrast to GOG
111, patients initially randomized to the nonpaclitaxel combination were frequently crossed over at the time of disease progression if they were initially randomized to
cisplatin plus cyclophosphamide. Nevertheless, the results of this trial also showed a 10-month improvement in overall survival for patients treated initially with
paclitaxel plus cisplatin. 134 The subsequent trial by the GOG in the same group of patients was a three-arm study in which patients were randomized to receive
single-agent cisplatin (100 mg/m 2), single-agent paclitaxel (200 mg/m 2), or the combination of cisplatin plus paclitaxel as described earlier in this section. 135 In this
protocol (GOG 132), most patients randomized to single-agent treatment actually received both drugs in sequence, as patients were routinely crossed to the other
arm before clinical progression was noted through either persistent disease radiographically or findings of residual disease at second-look laparotomy. Although no
difference was found in median survival between any treatment approach and GOG 132, six cycles of combination chemotherapy were judged to be the preferable
regimen because of decreased toxicity.

FIGURE 36.5-7. Disease-free (A) and overall (B) survival of patients with suboptimal stage III and IV ovarian cancer randomized to treatment with cisplatin plus
cyclophosphamide (solid line) or cisplatin plus paclitaxel ( dotted line). (From ref. 133, with permission.)

TABLE 36.5-12. Randomized Trials of Paclitaxel plus Platinum in Advanced Ovarian Cancer

The preliminary results of the European trial (ICON III) comparing carboplatin plus paclitaxel versus single-agent carboplatin or combination chemotherapy versus a
PAC regimen also have been reported. 136 Mature survival data and subset analysis are awaited. Although the initial results did not demonstrate any significant
difference in survival rate, the current recommendation that initial chemotherapy consist of paclitaxel plus a platinum compound was not altered by the results of this
trial.
Although a series of prospective randomized trials and two metaanalyses demonstrated equivalent activity of carboplatin versus cisplatin, concern still remained that
carboplatin was the inferior platinum compound in patients with optimal stage III disease. Consequently, three prospective randomized trials have been performed
throughout the world comparing cisplatin plus paclitaxel versus carboplatin plus paclitaxel ( Table 36.5-13).137,138 and 139 Bookman et al.140 initially reported that these
two drugs could be combined at full therapeutic doses if carboplatin was dosed according to AUC considerations and if paclitaxel was administered at 175 mg/m 2 in a
3-hour infusion. The selection of a 3-hour paclitaxel infusion was based on a prior European/Canadian trial 132 in which patients with previously treated advanced
ovarian cancer were randomized in a two-by-two bifactor design to receive paclitaxel by 24- or 3-hour infusion and one of two different doses of paclitaxel (175 mg/m 2
or 135 mg/m2). A 3-hour infusion at 175 mg/m 2 was the preferred paclitaxel dose schedule for patients with ovarian cancer because of decreased neutropenia and a
trend toward increased efficacy at the higher dose. The GOG pilot study demonstrated the safety and efficacy of paclitaxel (175 mg/m 2) in a 3-hour infusion together
with carboplatin (dosed to an AUC of 7.5). 140 The overall response rate to this combination was 75%, with 67% of 24 patients with measurable disease achieving a
clinical complete remission. The median dose of carboplatin was 470 mg/m 2 when using the Calvert formula to select an AUC of 7.5 ( Fig. 36.5-8). This dose of
carboplatin, even when combined with paclitaxel at 175 mg/m 2, was higher than that usually used in combinations when the drug is empirically dosed based on body
surface area (300 to 350 mg/m2).

FIGURE 36.5-8. Comparison of carboplatin dosage by area under the curve (AUC) and body surface in ovarian cancer patients receiving combination chemotherapy
with paclitaxel and carboplatin. Most patients received an AUC of 7.5, which corresponds to a mean dose (based on body surface area) of 471 mg/m 2. (From ref. 140,
with permission.)

TABLE 36.5-13. Randomized Trials of Carboplatin plus Paclitaxel versus Cisplatin plus Paclitaxel

All three randomized trials comparing cisplatin plus paclitaxel versus carboplatin with paclitaxel have been presented in preliminary form and all have come to the
same conclusion. GOG 158 137 was the largest of these trials and was different from the European studies in that only patients with optimal stage III disease were
eligible. More than 800 patients were randomized to cisplatin (75 mg/m 2) plus paclitaxel (135 mg/m 2 at 24-hour infusion) versus carboplatin (AUC = 7.5) plus paclitaxel
(175 mg/m2 in a 3-hour infusion). Patients were well balanced for prognostic factors. No difference was found in median times to progression between these two
regimens, and the hazard ratio was 0.90 (95% CI, 0.76 to 1.11), which essentially excludes the possibility that carboplatin plus paclitaxel is inferior to cisplatin plus
paclitaxel. In addition, increased metabolic and gastrointestinal toxicity was associated with the cisplatin regimen. Survival comparisons between the two treatment
arms await further penetration of the data. The Arbeitsgemeinschaft Gynaekologische Onkologie trial 138 incorporated the quality-of-life instrument in its comparison of
cisplatin plus paclitaxel versus carboplatin plus paclitaxel and demonstrated the superiority of the carboplatin combination. Based on these clinical trials, carboplatin
plus paclitaxel is now generally accepted to be the preferred platinum regimen for treatment of patients with advanced ovarian cancer.
Numerous issues still remain regarding the optimal use of paclitaxel with carboplatin in patients with ovarian cancer. The importance of dose and schedule of
paclitaxel has not been established. Phase II trials of high-dose paclitaxel (250 mg/m 2) had reported a response rate of 48%, 141 which was higher than other phase II
trials using lower doses. The GOG has completed a randomized trial of two different doses of paclitaxel. This trial showed that high-dose paclitaxel (250 mg/m 2) had
only a modest effect in patients with recurrent ovarian cancer. 142 The overall response rate was 36% versus 27.5% for a 175 mg/m 2 dose. Survival was similar—12.5
months versus 11.9 months. However, even with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) support, substantially greater toxicity was seen with the higher dose
schedule. Additional studies are currently in progress in Europe in previously untreated patients with advanced ovarian cancer who are randomized to receive two
different doses of paclitaxel, with all patients receiving the same carboplatin dose. No survival data are yet available from these trials. The optimal number of cycles of
paclitaxel plus carboplatin to be used as initial therapy for patients also remains to be determined. No evidence suggests that increasing the number of cycles of
cisplatin plus cyclophosphamide improves outcome. Prospective randomized trials are, however, in progress in which patients who achieve a clinical complete
remission with paclitaxel plus carboplatin are randomized to maintenance paclitaxel therapy for 3 to 12 months. Until the completion of these trials, standard
chemotherapy for patients with advanced ovarian cancer consists of six cycles of paclitaxel (175 mg/m 2 in a 3-hour infusion) plus carboplatin dosed to an AUC of 5.0

to 7.5.
Management after Induction Chemotherapy
The majority of previously untreated patients achieve a clinical complete remission after induction chemotherapy. Clinical complete remission is defined as no
evidence of disease on physical examination or by radiographic studies, together with a normal CA-125. However, between 50% and 75% of advanced-disease
patients ultimately relapse from a clinical remission. Even patients who are surgically confirmed to be in a complete remission (negative second look) still remain at
high risk with a relapse rate of 30% to 50% after platinum-based chemotherapy.
SECOND-LOOK SURGERY. Second-look surgery is a carefully planned systematic surgical approach to evaluating patients who have completed a program of

chemotherapy and who, by clinical examination and by diagnostic imaging studies, are free of evidence of persistent cancer. The purpose of the second-look
operation is to completely explore the abdominal cavity, sample any abnormalities found, and biopsy peritoneal surfaces where microscopic ovarian cancer is likely to
be found. If disease is present, additional therapy should be routinely recommended.
Second-look operations were originally introduced by Wangenstein et al. 143 for evaluating patients with colon cancer. It was then applied in a series of studies to
ovarian cancer management. The surgery is performed through a vertical incision that allows access to the peritoneal cavity from the pelvis to the diaphragm. On
entering the abdominal cavity, washings of the paracolic and pelvic spaces are performed. Adhesions are lysed and sent for histologic assessment. Sampling then
begins in the pelvis with removal of large strips of peritoneum (2 cm × 3 cm) from the pelvic side walls in the areas of the round ligaments and the infundibulopelvic
ligaments, from the bladder flap peritoneum, and from the cul-de-sac peritoneum. Epiploic appendices of the sigmoid colon are removed. The retroperitoneal spaces
are examined, and any residual lymph node or fatty tissues surrounding the external iliac artery, vein, or hypogastric artery are removed.
Remnants of omentum are then removed, as are large strips (3 cm × 5 cm) of peritoneum in the right and left pericolic spaces. The diaphragm is carefully inspected;
any abnormalities are removed. If no abnormalities are present, a strip of peritoneum overlying the inferior surface of the diaphragm also is removed. The bowel is
carefully inspected. Any nodules on the bowel surfaces are removed. Any mesenteric implants are removed. The retroperitoneal space is then explored by mobilizing
the bowel. The paraaortic and vena cava areas are explored, and nodularities and fat pads are removed. The anterior abdominal wall peritoneum is also sampled. At
the completion of the procedure, somewhere between 20 and 40 biopsies of peritoneum and fat pads, including the retroperitoneal lymph node–bearing areas, should
have been obtained. The thoroughness of the second-look operation is determined less by the number of samples obtained and more by the size of the sheets of
peritoneum that are stripped off. The larger the volume of tissue available for the pathologist to inspect, the greater the chances are that occult disease will be
identified.
The most important factors determining whether a second-look operation is negative are cancer stage at the initial operation and the volume of residual disease at
that operation.144,145 Patients with stage I disease have a very high incidence of negative second-look operations, whereas those with advanced disease have a
significantly lower incidence of negative second-look surgeries. Patients with no residual disease after primary cytoreductive surgery have a 77% incidence of
negative second-look operations. Those with less than 2 cm of residual disease have an approximately 45% incidence of negative second-look surgeries, and those
with disease greater than 2 cm have no more than a 25% incidence. 145 The timing of second-look surgery has changed over the years. With the introduction of
cisplatin and doxorubicin chemotherapy in the 1970s, prolonged chemotherapy was no longer indicated. As noted, randomized clinical trials did not demonstrate any
improvement after six cycles of platinum-based treatment. Second-look operations only are routinely recommended for women participating in clinical trials.
Second-look operations are not without complications. A report by Rubin and Lewis 145 analyzing 682 second-look surgeries suggested that the overall rate of
morbidity was approximately 19%. A typical problem associated with this operation is infections in the surgical incision, the urinary tract, and the lungs. Some reports
also have indicated the presence of bleeding and the need for blood transfusions. Experience at the Yale–New Haven Medical Center would suggest that incidence of
recurrent ovarian cancer after a negative second-look operation was in the 15% to 20% range; however, others have reported recurrence rates as high as 50% within
1 year.
The greatest value of second-look surgery is assessing patients on clinical protocols in which an answer to a question regarding therapeutic efficacy is being asked or
for patients who are willing to go on to second-line therapy in a research format when the status of their cancer is important to answer clinical research questions.
Advances in laparoscopic surgery have led to recommendations for laparoscopy as an alternative to laparotomy. 27,146 Laparoscopic surgery can be useful if the
patient is found to have disseminated miliary-type cancer and can avoid a laparotomy. However, if the patient has focal disease, it may be missed at second-look
laparoscopy because of technical reasons, or it may not be resectable through a laparoscope and a second-look laparotomy must be performed. Gynecologic
oncologists skilled with advanced laparoscopic techniques are now providing data suggesting that, in their hands, laparoscopic second-look operations are
comparable to laparotomies.
Patients at highest risk for recurrent disease after achieving a complete remission are those who had large-volume disease before initiation of chemotherapy and
those with more poorly differentiated tumors. 147 The overall survival rate for patients with recurrent ovarian cancer is poor, and it depends on a multiplicity of factors,
the most important being the length of the initial disease-free interval. However, the vast majority of patients with recurrent ovarian cancer ultimately succumb to their
disease. Consequently, numerous clinical strategies are being studied in an effort to prevent or delay recurrences in patients who achieve a clinical complete
remission.
RADIOTHERAPY AFTER OR COMBINED WITH CHEMOTHERAPY. Numerous small phase I and II studies have used whole abdominal irradiation as salvage treatment for

patients with minimal residual disease after chemotherapy. Some authors have reported 3-year progression-free survival rates as high as 25% to 35% and occasional
10- to 15-year disease-free survivors among patients treated with abdominal irradiation after an incomplete response to chemotherapy. 148,149,150 and 151 However, others
have reported high complication rates and have been discouraged by the short duration of most remissions, particularly for patients with high-grade disease or
macroscopic residual tumor. 152,153 Reported 5-year survival rates for patients treated with abdominal irradiation after a negative second-look laparotomy have been
approximately 60% to 70%, but are not clearly different from reported survival rates with platinum-based chemotherapy alone.
Two randomized trials have compared whole abdominal irradiation with additional consolidative chemotherapy for patients with minimal disease after surgical
cytoreduction and platinum-containing chemotherapy. Bruzzone and associates 154 randomized patients who had minimal or no residual disease after chemotherapy
[doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), and cisplatin or carboplatin] to receive whole abdominal irradiation or three more cycles of chemotherapy. The study was
closed after accruing only 41 patients because disease progression had been observed in 55% of patients treated with radiation versus 29% of those treated with
additional chemotherapy (P = .08). The authors recommended treatment with chemotherapy, but the small number of patients and short median follow-up weaken the
conclusions of their study. In a second study by Lambert and coworkers, 155 254 patients with stage IIB to IV disease received five monthly courses of carboplatin and
second-look laparotomy. The 117 patients who had residual disease of 2 cm or less after secondary cytoreduction were then randomized to receive either five
additional courses of carboplatin or whole abdominal irradiation (24 Gy in 5 weeks). The authors reported no statistical difference in survival or disease-free survival
rates between the two treatment arms.
Although a small proportion of patients treated with whole abdominal irradiation for microscopic residual disease after chemotherapy enjoy long disease-free intervals,
the control rates appear to be much poorer than those reported for patients treated with initial radiation for a similar volume of residual disease. A number of factors
may contribute to these disappointing results. Patients who have not responded completely to chemotherapy may have disease that is inherently more aggressive
than that of patients chosen for primary treatment with whole abdominal irradiation. Radiotherapy is often compromised because of poor hematologic tolerance after
aggressive chemotherapy, which further decreases the probability of the tumor being sterilized. It also has been suggested that cytoreductive treatments (surgery,
irradiation, or chemotherapy) may stimulate the proliferation of clonogenic tumor cells. Consequently, to overcome rapid repopulation, higher doses of radiation may
be required to sterilize tumor cells that remain after a course of chemotherapy.
Hoskins and colleagues 156 have reported encouraging results for a regimen that integrated whole abdominal irradiation in the initial treatment of patients with minimal
residual disease after cytoreduction. In their study, radiation was given after the first three of six cycles of cisplatin and cyclophosphamide. Comparison with the
results of similar patients treated during a later time with six cycles of chemotherapy alone favored the alternating regimen, particularly for patients with stage I
disease (P = .04).
Clinical trials of other modalities focused on preventing or delaying recurrence after initial chemotherapy are in progress: consolidation with high-dose chemotherapy,

whole abdominal irradiation, intraperitoneal 32P, intraperitoneal chemotherapy with cisplatin, intraperitoneal immunotherapy, and additional cycles of systemic
chemotherapy and hormonal therapy with agents such as tamoxifen. Randomized trials addressing these modalities have been limited by slow accrual, and currently
there is no evidence that consolidation treatment is able to improve survival after six cycles of initial treatment with paclitaxel plus a platinum compound.
TREATMENT OF RECURRENT OVARIAN CANCER
The selection of treatment modalities and drug regimens for patients with recurrent ovarian cancer is based on the initial chemotherapy regimen used and on the
nature of the initial response to treatment. Patients with recurrent ovarian cancer can be broadly divided into two subsets with a markedly different prognosis. Patients
whose disease recurs with a disease-free interval of less than 6 months have a worse prognosis that approaches that of patients who progress while receiving their
initial chemotherapeutic regimen. In contrast, patients who have a disease-free interval of more than 6 months or 1 year have a markedly improved prognosis,
primarily because of the increased efficacy of salvage chemotherapy. In patients with a long disease-free interval, secondary cytoreductive surgery can be considered
in select subsets of patients.
Secondary Cytoreductive Surgery
Primary cytoreductive surgery has well-documented benefits in the management of women with advanced ovarian cancer. The possibility that secondary cytoreductive
surgery (i.e., surgery performed to remove known persistent or recurrent disease after initiating chemotherapy) may be beneficial to patients has been suggested by
numerous authors.144 Berek et al.157 reported that secondary cytoreductive surgery could be performed on 12 of 32 patients (38%), and their tumors were reduced to
less than 1.5 cm of residual disease. The median survival for that group was 20 months, compared with 5 months for the 20 patients whose disease could not be
optimally cytoreduced. The patients most likely to undergo optimal cytoreductive surgery were those who previously had optimal primary cytoreduction, less than 1000
mL of ascites, and a tumor size of less than 5 cm at the second operation. The interval from the primary to secondary surgery should be longer than 12 months.
Factors that did not have an impact on secondary cytoreductive surgery included patient age, tumor grade, type of chemotherapy, and the presence or absence of
bowel obstruction. Subsequently, Segna et al. 158 reported their experience with secondary cytoreductive surgery. They too were able to show that if optimal secondary
cytoreductive surgery could be performed, patients lived longer before succumbing to ovarian cancer. Factors that influenced successful efforts in cytoreductive
surgery were a time interval of more than 1 year between the original operation and the secondary cytoreductive surgery and having optimal cytoreductive surgery
performed at the initial operation. It is the current recommendation at the Yale–New Haven Medical Center that women who would be suitable for secondary
cytoreductive surgery at the time of recurrence are those who have had more than a 1-year time interval between the initial operation and the diagnosis of recurrence.
These women preferably had optimal cytoreductive surgery performed at the initial operation. However, if a review of the operative report suggests that an aggressive
attempt at optimal cytoreductive surgery was not performed, this would make them suitable for secondary cytoreductive surgery.
Neijt et al. 159 compared the survival of women who underwent optimal cytoreductive surgery with the survival of women who were unsuccessfully optimally
cytoreduced but in whom, generally after three cycles of cisplatin-based chemotherapy, a secondary cytoreductive surgery was attempted. Those patients who
underwent optimal secondary cytoreductive surgery had a statistically improved survival rate compared with those who were unable to undergo optimal secondary
cytoreductive surgery. However, those patients who were optimally secondarily cytoreduced did not have a survival rate comparable to those patients who had optimal
cytoreduction performed at the initial operation ( Fig. 36.5-9).

FIGURE 36.5-9. Survival after cytoreductive surgery leading to tumor residuals of 1 cm or smaller at the staging laparotomy (staging) or during chemotherapy
(intervention cytoreductive surgery). (From ref. 159, with permission.)

van der Burg et al. 160 reported on the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancers (EORTC) experience with debulking surgery after induction
chemotherapy for advanced ovarian cancer. Three hundred nineteen of 425 patients with advanced epithelial ovarian cancer who had more than 1 cm in diameter of
residual tumor after primary surgery received three cycles of cyclophosphamide and cisplatin and were randomized to undergo secondary cytoreductive surgery or no
surgery. Both groups received additional chemotherapy. The progression-free and overall survival rates were both significantly longer in the group that underwent
surgery (P = .01) (Fig. 36.5-10). The difference in survival was 6 months. At 2 years after initial diagnosis, 56% of the group that underwent surgery were alive, as
opposed to 46% of the group that did not. In an update, the 5-year survival rate was 23% for the surgery group and 12% for the nonsurgery group. 161 A multivariate
analysis determined that debulking surgery was an independent prognostic factor ( P = .012) for survival. After adjusting for all other prognostic factors, the risk of
dying was reduced by 33% (95% CI, 10% to 50%; P = .008). This study statistically confirmed improved survival with optimal secondary cytoreductive surgery.
However, secondary cytoreductive surgery does not make up for inadequate cytoreductive surgery performed at the initial operation.

FIGURE 36.5-10. Survival of patients with advanced epithelial ovarian cancer who did not have debulking surgery and patients who had such surgery, according to
whether the lesions were less than 1 cm in diameter before cytoreduction, less than 1 cm after cytoreduction (optimal), or more than 1 cm after cytoreduction
(suboptimal). (From ref. 160, with permission.)

Palliative surgery may be necessary in women with advanced ovarian cancer. This surgery may involve a colostomy for relief of a large bowel obstruction, lyses of
adhesions, and surgical management of small bowel obstruction. Small bowel obstruction is a common complication as ovarian cancer advances and becomes
refractory to chemotherapy. In considering surgery to relieve small bowel obstruction, the time from the original diagnosis and treatment of the ovarian cancer to the
time of the obstruction is important, as is the adequacy of the initial cytoreductive surgery. Women who present with small bowel obstruction during the initial course
of chemotherapy and who have not undergone optimal cytoreductive surgery generally have biologically aggressive tumors for which the role for surgery of the small
bowel is minimal. A palliative gastrostomy tube may be most appropriate in this situation. In turn, women who have had prolonged periods during which they were free
of disease, usually lasting more than 1 year from the original diagnosis, do benefit from small bowel surgery to relieve obstruction. However, a pseudo–small bowel
obstruction pattern can be seen in women with advanced ovarian cancer with intraabdominal carcinomatosis, which occurs when ovarian cancer cells infiltrate the

myenteric plexus of the small bowel. Surgery generally plays no role in management of these patients. Medical treatment with metoclopramide, which stimulates
motility of the upper gastrointestinal tract without stimulating gastric, biliary, or pancreatic secretions, may at times be helpful. Large bowel obstruction, particularly
sigmoid colon obstruction, is relieved by performing colostomies and can allow the patient to have significant prolongation of life and improved quality of life if the
disease is confined to the pelvis.
Chemotherapy for Recurrent Disease
Patients with ovarian cancer who had a response to chemotherapy and then relapsed after a disease-free interval of more than 6 months are considered drug
sensitive. These patients are routinely retreated with single-agent carboplatin or paclitaxel. The likelihood of achieving a secondary response to either of these agents
is based on the length of the disease-free interval. 162 Single-agent carboplatin has a more favorable toxicity profile than cisplatin and remains the preferable platinum
compound for treatment of recurrent disease. Some studies have suggested that the weekly administration of paclitaxel may be superior to the use of the traditional
3-week schedule in patients with recurrent ovarian cancer, 163 although prospective randomized trials comparing these two different schedules are currently in
progress. In addition to the “platinum-free” interval, the probability of response to second-line chemotherapy is related to additional clinical factors. Eisenhauer et
al.164 identified three factors in a multivariate analysis of 704 patients who received prior treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy as independent predictors of
response: serous histology, number of disease sites, and tumor size. 164 Time from last treatment, when evaluated as a continuous variable, was not found to be an
independent prognostic factor and was highly correlated with tumor size.
Retreatment with combination chemotherapy also has been used in patients with recurrent ovarian cancer. Rose et al. 165 reported that second-line therapy with
paclitaxel plus carboplatin produced a 70% clinical complete remission rate, with an additional 20% of patients achieving a partial response in patients who had
previously demonstrated sensitivity to this combination when used as initial treatment. The majority of patients developed recurrence with a median interval of 9
months. Although the response rate with combination chemotherapy appears to be higher than reported for single agents, this study does not establish a clinical
necessity for using combination chemotherapy in drug-sensitive ovarian cancer patients at the time of recurrence. It is possible that the same long-term survival rates
could have been achieved by use of these drugs in sequence. For most patients, the appropriate choice of second-line treatment consists of single-agent
chemotherapy with combinations reserved primarily for patients who have a prolonged disease-free interval.
For patients who did not respond to platinum- or paclitaxel-based retreatment or who developed resistance to these drugs when used as second-line agents,
numerous other agents have been shown to have activity. However, response rates are significantly lower in patients who have platinum- or paclitaxel-resistant
ovarian cancer, and these patients should be encouraged to enter experimental clinical trials. Drugs that have been shown to be active in patients with platinum- and
paclitaxel-resistant ovarian cancer include topotecan, 166,167 oral etoposide, 168 gemcitabine,169 liposomal doxorubicin, 170 and vinorelbine. 171
Topotecan, a second-generation semisynthetic camptothecin analogue, has been extensively evaluated in patients with recurrent ovarian cancer. In a phase III
randomized comparison with paclitaxel, similar response rates were reported in patients who had received initial therapy with an alkylating agent and platinum. 172
Bookman et al.167 reported on 139 patients with recurrent ovarian cancer in whom 81% had resistant disease. The overall response rate was 13.7%, with a 12.4%
response rate in platinum-resistant patients. Median survival was 47 weeks. Grade 4 neutropenia was the primary toxicity that occurred in 82% of the patients.
The GOG performed a phase II trial of oral etoposide in both platinum-sensitive and platinum-resistant patients. 168 Among 41 platinum-resistant patients, a 27%
response rate, including a 7% clinical response rate, was noted. Median survival time in the platinum-resistant patients was 10.8 months. Grade 3 or 4 hematologic
toxicity was common. Gemcitabine, a novel pyrimidine analogue with activity against other solid tumors, including lung cancer and pancreatic cancer, was shown in
phase II studies also to have significant activity in patients resistant to platinum or to the combination of platinum and paclitaxel. 169 Similarly, with liposomal
doxorubicin, a response rate of 26% was observed in platinum-resistant patients with a median progression-free survival rate of 5.7 months. Grade 3 and 4
nonhematologic skin and mucosal toxicities were common.
In addition to these newer drugs, older agents, such as hexamethylmelamine and ifosfamide, also have activity in platinum-resistant patients, although it appears that
in patients with resistance to both platinum and paclitaxel, the response rates are low (approximately 10%).
Hormonal therapy has long been used in the treatment of patients with refractory ovarian cancer. 173,174 The overall response rate of progestational agents and
antiestrogens has been approximately 10% to 15%. A large GOG study, however, reported an 18% response rate for tamoxifen administered at a dose of 20 mg orally
twice per day, including a 10% clinical complete remission rate. 173 The majority of patients achieving a response in this study had elevated levels of estrogen receptor.
Hormonal therapy continues to be a viable therapeutic option for patients who cannot tolerate or who have been unsuccessful with numerous cytotoxic regimens.
Tamoxifen also has been recommended as the initial salvage therapy for patients who have a rising CA-125 level as the only manifestation of their disease. 174,175
Although a rising CA-125 level in a patient in a clinical complete remission is highly predictive of a symptomatic recurrence (median time to physical or radiographic
evidence of recurrent disease is 4 to 6 months), there is no evidence that immediate treatment with salvage chemotherapy is more effective than reserving such
treatment for when other manifestations of recurrent disease appear. A trial is ongoing in the United Kingdom in which patients with elevated markers are randomized
to immediate systemic therapy or to treatment at the time of symptomatic progression.
Palliative Radiotherapy
Radiation therapy can play an important role in palliation of patients with incurable ovarian cancer. Symptoms from a growing pelvic mass frequently dominate the
final months of life for patients with terminal ovarian cancer, causing pain, bleeding, and rectal narrowing. Palliative pelvic radiotherapy can provide rapid relief and, in
some cases, may prevent or delay the need for diverting colostomy.
Palliative treatment courses are designed to be convenient and to achieve rapid symptom relief. At the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, palliation of pelvic disease has
been achieved using two single-fraction treatments of 10 Gy each to the true pelvis delivered 1 month apart. 176 Treatment is delivered using 18 to 25 MeV photons. In
a report of 42 patients who had advanced ovarian cancer and were treated with this approach, Adelson and coworkers 176 reported that tumors in 19% of patients
partially or completely responded to irradiation after one fraction and 75% responded after two fractions. Toxicity was minimal if treatment was limited to two fractions
(20 Gy). However, they reported major hemorrhagic complications in four of eight patients who survived more than 6 months after three fractions. Spanos and
colleagues 177 reported a high rate of gastrointestinal complications (49% at 1 year) in patients who were treated with three fractions of 10 Gy each and misonidazole
for a variety of advanced pelvic malignancies.
The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group investigated the efficacy of a multiple daily fraction split-course regimen (14.8 Gy delivered at 3.7 Gy per fraction in 2 days) in
patients with advanced pelvic malignancies. 178 Treatment was repeated every 2 to 4 weeks for a total dose of up to 44.4 Gy. A complete or partial tumor response was
reported in 34% of patients (42% of those completing three courses), and toxic effects were acceptable. The interval between fractions had no significant influence on
the response rate.
Other authors have reported relief of pelvic pain, bleeding, large bowel obstruction, pulmonary compromise, bone pain, and other symptoms of metastatic disease with
radiotherapy using a variety of fractionation schemes. 179 Patients with isolated cerebral metastases should be treated with combined surgical resection, postoperative
whole brain irradiation, and chemotherapy, if possible. 180 With this treatment, some patients survive for more than 3 years. Survival after treatment with radiation alone
is usually less than 6 months.
Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy
Clinical trials evaluating direct intraperitoneal installation of antineoplastic agents were based on the biology of ovarian cancer and on pharmacologic modeling
studies. 181 Physiologic and anatomic characteristics of the peritoneal cavity and the chemical properties of antineoplastic drugs suggested that the intraperitoneal
administration of anticancer agents in a large volume would lead to a pharmacologic advantage compared with intravenous therapy. A series of phase I studies
demonstrated that large-volume intermittent dialysis was feasible via a semipermanent Tenckhoff catheter ( Table 36.5-14). These studies demonstrated that, despite
a significant number (20% to 30%) of instances in which uniform distribution of drugs containing dialysate could not be achieved because of adhesions, overall
intraperitoneal therapy was technically feasible and associated with a marked pharmacologic advantage defined as the ratio of antineoplastic agent in the dialysate
compared with blood levels. The development of implantable peritoneal access devices (Port-A-Cath) facilitated patient acceptance and decreased the complication
rate. Most recently, paclitaxel has been evaluated via the intraperitoneal route. 181 Intraperitoneal administration led to a marked pharmacologic advantage, and 61% of

patients who had microscopic disease before intraperitoneal paclitaxel achieved a response to therapy.

TABLE 36.5-14. Pharmacokinetic Advantage Associated with Intraperitoneal Administration of Selected Cytotoxic Agents

Phase II trials demonstrated that cisplatin had the highest activity when administered via the intraperitoneal route to patients with recurrent ovarian cancer.
Intraperitoneal chemotherapy had no advantage in patients with bulky disease. However, in patients with small-volume residual ovarian cancer, responses were
observed (40%) in those patients who had prior response to intravenous cisplatin. 182 Because this is the same group of patients who also had the greatest benefit
from retreatment with systemic cisplatin, 183 the possibility remained that the primary benefit of intraperitoneal therapy in these trials was due to systemic absorption
and delivery to the tumor via the microcirculation.
More recently, intraperitoneal chemotherapy has been compared with intravenous therapy in randomized trials. A large prospective randomized study of
intraperitoneal cisplatin (100 mg/m 2) combined with intravenous cyclophosphamide (600 mg/m2) compared with intravenous cisplatin (100 mg/m 2) and intravenous
cyclophosphamide in patients with optimal advanced ovarian cancer was initiated in the late 1980s 184 (Table 36.5-15). Patients eligible for this intergroup study all had
residual tumor masses of less than 2 cm at the completion of cytoreductive surgery. The intraperitoneal arm was considered to be superior based on pathologically
confirmed complete remission (40% vs. 31%, P = .10) and patient survival (median survival, 49 months vs. 41 months) and a decrease in the death-hazard ratio to
0.76 for the patients treated with intraperitoneal therapy. In addition, clinical hearing loss and neutropenia were more frequent and more severe in patients receiving
intravenous cisplatin. During the long duration of this study, standard intravenous chemotherapy for ovarian cancer has changed from cisplatin plus
cyclophosphamide to carboplatin plus paclitaxel. Consequently, it remains to be determined whether intraperitoneal cisplatin produces a similar advantage when
combined with intravenous paclitaxel. A prospective randomized trial comparing intravenous cisplatin and paclitaxel to an experimental arm consisting of two cycles of
carboplatin dosed to an AUC of 9 followed by six cycles of intraperitoneal cisplatin and intravenous paclitaxel has been completed. 185 Recurrence-free survival was
increased in the experimental arm by 5.1 months, although there is no statistically significant difference in overall survival. The experimental arm had significantly
increased toxicity. Based on these results and the activity of intraperitoneal paclitaxel, the GOG is conducting another randomized trial in which patients with optimal
stage III disease are comparing standard intravenous paclitaxel plus cisplatin to an experimental regimen of intravenous paclitaxel on day 1, intraperitoneal cisplatin
on day 2, and intraperitoneal paclitaxel on day 8.

TABLE 36.5-15. Intraperitoneal Cisplatin in Previously Untreated Ovarian Cancer

A separate phase III trial of intraperitoneal chemotherapy is in progress in Europe. Patients with a surgically confirmed complete remission to standard induction
chemotherapy are randomized to receive six cycles of intraperitoneal cisplatin as a consolidation regimen compared with observation. No results are available from
this trial.
EXPERIMENTAL THERAPY
High-Dose Chemotherapy with Hematologic Support
Standard-dose chemotherapy produces response rates in more than 70% of patients with advanced ovarian cancer. However, most patients develop disease
recurrence, at which point salvage therapy has limited curative potential. Because of the high response rate to standard-dose chemotherapy and because of
retrospective studies identifying a relationship between dose intensity and response, numerous clinical studies have evaluated high-dose chemotherapy with
hematologic support. However, no established role has yet been determined for high-dose chemotherapy with hematologic support in the routine treatment of patients
with advanced ovarian cancer.
The initial trials used autologous bone marrow rescue in heavily treated patients who were treated with single agents followed by transplantation. Subsequently,
combinations of high-dose alkylating agents and platinum compounds were evaluated. Shpall et al. 186 summarized the results of phase I and phase II trials in ovarian
cancer patients. The overall response rate is approximately 70% to 80%; however, the median duration of response is less than 10 months.
More recently, Stiff et al. 187 reported on the results with high-dose chemotherapy with hematologic support in 100 patients with recurrent or persistent ovarian cancer.
They performed a univariate and multivariate analysis to identify factors associated with prolonged survival after high-dose chemotherapy. Cisplatin sensitivity and
bulk of disease were identified as the best predictors for progression-free survival. Median progression-free and overall survival rates for 20 patients with
platinum-sensitive disease with less than 1 cm of volume were 19 and 30 months, respectively. In the absence of a prospective randomized trial, there is no evidence
that this approach produces superior results in patients with platinum-sensitive small-volume disease compared with what could be achieved with traditional
second-line chemotherapy.
In this and other studies, it is apparent that the most favorable group of patients in whom additional trials with high-dose chemotherapy are indicated consists of
patients who have both chemotherapy-sensitive tumors as well as a low tumor burden. Preclinical and clinical studies also suggest that multiple applications of
high-dose chemotherapy may be superior to single courses. The combination of peripheral stem cell transfusions with hematopoietic growth factors has permitted the
evaluation of multiple courses of high-dose therapy in patients with ovarian cancer. Investigators at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center 188 performed phase I
and II studies of dose escalation of paclitaxel with high-dose cyclophosphamide and peripheral blood stem cell transfusions in chemotherapy-naïve patients with
advanced ovarian cancer. Induction therapy consisted of two cycles of cyclophosphamide (3 g/m 2) plus escalating doses of paclitaxel (from 150 to 350 mg/m 2)
followed by G-CSF and leukopheresis to harvest peripheral stem cells. Patients then received four courses of rapidly cycled carboplatin and cyclophosphamide (1500
mg/m2 per course) with hematopoietic rescue. Multiple cycles of high-dose chemotherapy could be safely administered with hematopoietic support. The overall

response rate was 100%, with 34% of the patients achieving a surgically confirmed complete response. A similar trial was reported by Schilder et al. 189 in previously
untreated patients using a regimen that included high-dose carboplatin, paclitaxel, and topotecan. In high-risk patients with bulky disease, a 67% clinical complete
response rate was reported.
Based on these results, the GOG is conducting a pilot study of multiple cycles of high-dose chemotherapy followed by peripheral stem cell transfusion in patients with
small-volume disease. If it can be demonstrated that such an approach is feasible in a multicenter study, then a larger prospective randomized comparison against
standard doses of chemotherapy in previously untreated patients will be performed. In addition, clinical trials are planned in evaluating the role of multiple cycles of
high-dose chemotherapy as a consolidation treatment in patients who achieve an initial response to induction chemotherapy. There is no evidence from clinical trials
that high-dose chemotherapy has significant curative potential in patients who have either bulky residual disease or drug-resistant tumors. At present, high-dose
chemotherapy with hematologic support should be considered an experimental procedure, and patients should be entered on clinical trials evaluating safety and
efficacy.
New Drug Combinations
The standard chemotherapy for ovarian cancer now consists of paclitaxel plus a platinum compound. Although the majority of patients achieve a response to therapy,
time to progression is 22 months for patients with optimal stage III disease and 18 months for patients with suboptimal stage III and stage IV disease. As noted earlier
in the section Chemotherapy for Recurrent Disease, a series of new agents have been shown to have activity in ovarian cancer, including topotecan, gemcitabine,
oral etoposide, and encapsulated doxorubicin. New combinations based on the activity of paclitaxel and platinum are currently being evaluated.
Hansen et al.190 reported on a phase II trial of gemcitabine in combination with paclitaxel and carboplatin. This combination resulted in a response rate of 100%, with
the majority of patients having suboptimal disease. Herben et al. 191 reported that the three-drug combination of paclitaxel, cisplatin, and topotecan also produced a
high response rate (60% clinical complete response and 27% partial response) in previously untreated patients, but was associated with significant neutropenia that
required large dose reductions in all three agents and G-CSF support. With the large number of active compounds available for recurrent disease, numerous new
potential combinations and sequences are under consideration. Currently, preclinical models have not been shown to be predictive in identifying the clinical activity of
new combinations. Empirical phase I and phase II trials are in progress and will be followed by prospective randomized comparisons of three-drug combinations and
sequential therapy to determine if there is any clinical benefit in the combination of paclitaxel and carboplatin compared with standard treatment.
Reversal of Drug Resistance
The molecular mechanisms associated with drug resistance, the primary factor that limits the curative potential of any salvage therapy in patients with ovarian cancer,
are being extensively studied. Resistance to alkylating agents and platinum compounds has been shown to be multifactorial, and specific biochemical resistance
pathways include (1) decreases in drug accumulation; (2) increased inactivation in the cytosol via detoxification enzymes, such as glutathione S-transferase, or by
direct binding to nonprotein thiols such as glutathione; and (3) increased activity of DNA repair enzymes that remove lethal DNA adducts. For the taxanes, at least two
mechanisms of acquired resistance have been identified in cells made resistant by prolonged exposure in vitro. In paclitaxel-resistant cells, increased expression of
the membrane P glycoprotein efflux pump is seen, which leads to partial cross-resistance to bulky natural products, including vinca alkaloids and anthracyclines. In
addition, paclitaxel-resistant cells have structure alterations in a and b tubulin protein subunits, which form an integral part of microtubules.
The inhibitor of g-glutamylcysteine synthetase, buthionine sulfoximine, has entered phase II trials based on a phase I trial that demonstrated the agent could be safety
administered while producing an 80% reduction in growth-stimulating hormone levels in circulating lymphocytes in the majority of drug-resistant patients. 192
Furthermore, growth-stimulating hormone depletion in tumor cells was also documented in this study. In the phase II trial, drug-resistant patients are receiving the
combination of buthionine sulfoximine plus melphalan.
Additional clinical trials aimed at reversing drug resistance to platinum compounds are focused on DNA repair pathways. In platinum-resistant tumors, increased
expression of nucleotide excision repair enzymes has been demonstrated, in particular XPA and ERCC1. 193 Previous studies had demonstrated that platinum
sensitivity could be restored by inhibition of DNA polymerase a with aphidicolin. 194 Clinical evaluation of aphidicolin has been limited by drug availability. Current
clinical trials are using inhibitors of ribonucleotide reductase (e.g., gemcitabine and hydroxyurea) in combination with cisplatin.
Combinations of cyclosporin and cisplatin have also been studied in platinum-resistant patients. 195 Cyclosporin and nonnephrotoxic and nonimmunosuppressive
analogues, such as PSC 833, have the potential to reverse platinum resistance by down-regulation of oncogenes involved in signal transduction, which are elevated
in platinum-resistant tumors. 193 These drugs are also potent inhibitors of the multidrug resistance (MDR)-1 efflux pump, although this pathway is not involved in
platinum resistance. A GOG trial 195 reported a 25% response rate in platinum-resistant patients treated with cyclosporin and cisplatin. Larger trials with the less toxic
PSC 833 are in progress.
Platinum resistance also has been linked to increased expression of c-erbB-2. Antibodies to c-erbB-2 in combination with cisplatin have shown synergistic cell kill in
vitro.196 Clinical evaluation of such a combination is in progress.
Numerous clinical trials have explored the potential to reverse the multidrug resistance phenotype in ovarian cancer. Three distinct patterns of this phenotype have
been identified: (1) the classic MDR-1 (P glycoprotein) mechanism associated with natural products, such as the vinca alkaloids and doxorubicin; (2) altered
topoisomerase (atypical MDR) phenotype, primarily associated with drugs involving inhibition of topoisomerase II, such as etoposide; and (3) multidrug
resistance–associated protein (MRP). The clinical importance of each of these mechanisms of drug resistance in ovarian cancer has not been established. Tumors
from doxorubicin-treated patients (approximately 30% to 50%) have higher levels of immunostaining of P glycoprotein than do tumors from untreated patients
(approximately 10% to 15%), suggesting that MDR expression is at least associated with resistance to natural products. 197 However, because doxorubicin has not
been routinely used as part of induction regimens, clinical trials of MDR inhibition in ovarian cancer have had decreased interest. The identification of the prominent
role of paclitaxel in ovarian cancer has led to new interest in modulation of natural product resistance. It is clear, however, that paclitaxel resistance is multifactorial
and includes alteration in molecular species and levels of tubulin, which may be more important than MDR.
Clinical studies have identified the association of MRP expression and drug resistance. 198 The frequency of MRP expression in ovarian cancer remains to be
determined. One study suggests that an associated drug-resistant protein (Lrp) may have prognostic significance in ovarian cancer. 199
Immunotherapy and Gene Therapy in Ovarian Cancer
Genetic alterations in oncogene and suppressor gene function and the immunobiology of ovarian cancer are reviewed elsewhere in this text. Abnormalities in
suppressor gene function, particularly TP53, are common in ovarian cancer. Cisplatin sensitivity is associated with TP53 function, with loss of function usually
resulting in resistance. 193 Loss of TP53 function may inhibit the drug-induced pathways of apoptosis. In experimental models of gene therapy, sensitivity to cisplatin
can be restored in resistant cell lines by reintroduction of p53 into tumor cells. 200
An additional potential gene therapy in ovarian cancer relates to molecular chemotherapy in which a gene product can selectively sensitize tumor cells to an agent not
ordinarily toxic. Adenoviral-mediated delivery of herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase has been shown to selectively synthesize human ovarian cancer cells to
ganciclovir, and clinical evaluation is planned for this combination.
The immunotherapy of ovarian cancer has evolved from the administration of nonspecific immunostimulants, such as Corynebacterium parvum to more specific
therapies targeting antigens and surface receptors present on tumor cells. Interleukin-2 (IL-2) has been studied extensively in ovarian cancer patients, either as a
single agent administered intraperitoneally or as part of adoptive immunotherapy together with lymphokine activated killer cells. In initial studies with IL-2 and
lymphokine activated killer cells, peritoneal toxicity was unacceptable. 201 Subsequent trials with lower doses of IL-2 produced acceptable toxicity, and the preliminary
report described apparent durable responses in selected patients with recurrent ovarian cancer treated with intraperitoneal IL-2. 202
Antibody conjugates (either with antineoplastic drug, biologic toxin, or radioisotopes) also have been evaluated in early trials in ovarian cancer patients. On the basis
of prolonged survival observed in a pilot study in patients with small-volume residual disease treated with iodine 131–labeled monoclonal antibody directed against an
ovarian cancer phosphatase, 203 a larger confirmatory trial of this conjugate is planned in Europe.

BORDERLINE TUMORS
Epithelial tumors of low malignant potential (borderline malignant potential tumors), are unusual in that they have the capacity to metastasize yet the required
treatment seems to be limited to surgery for the overwhelming majority of patients. The different pathologic and biologic natures of these tumors were not recognized
by FIGO until 1971 and the World Health Organization in 1973. 204 Borderline malignant potential tumors are distinguished from benign mucinous and serous tumors
by the presence of epithelial budding, multilayering of the epithelium, increased mitotic activity, and nuclear atypia. However, they are also associated with absence of
stromal invasion. These tumors can be quite large in size, with the serous tumors having mean diameters varying between 7 and 12 cm and bilaterality ranging from
33% to 75%.205 Mucinous tumors of borderline malignant potential tend to be larger, with a mean diameter of 17 to 20 cm, and can be associated with pseudomyxoma
peritonei. One must always be certain to rule out the possibility of a synchronous appendiceal primary tumor when dealing with the latter entity.
Borderline malignant potential tumors represent approximately 4% to 14% of all ovarian malignancies. The mean age of women developing tumors of low malignant
potential is 40 years, approximately 20 years earlier than the mean age for women with epithelial cancers of the ovary. Ovarian tumors of low malignant potential have
been associated with infertility and ovulation induction. 206
Ovarian tumors of low malignant potential are staged in the same manner as epithelial cancers (see Table 36.5-1). However, their survival rate, stage for stage, is far
superior. Kurman and Trimble207 reported that the survival for 538 women with tumors of low malignant potential who had stage I disease was 99% with a mean
follow-up of 7 years. The survival for 415 women with stage II and III disease was 92% with a mean follow-up of 7 years. The causes of death in this review were
radiation-associated complications in three patients, chemotherapy-associated complications in nine, and bowel obstruction in eight. Eight women died from invasive
carcinoma, and 18 died of disease without any additional information. Noteworthy was the fact that more patients died of treatment-related complications than died of
bowel obstruction from progressive disease.
Management of patients with low malignant potential tumors of the ovary is similar to that of the surgical management of invasive cancer. However, preservation of
fertility should be routinely performed in young women. Tazelaar et al. 208 found no evidence of microscopic disease in grossly normal ovaries that were bivalved in 61
patients with stage I low malignant potential tumors of the ovary. Women with advanced disease or who have completed childbearing should undergo total abdominal
hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with complete cancer staging. If intraabdominal disease is present, aggressive cytoreductive surgery should be
performed.
The evidence is scant to suggest that treatment beyond that of the initial surgery has any beneficial role. This is true for stage II and III disease as well as for stage I
disease. Appropriate adjuvant therapy has yet to be identified in the management of women with tumors of low malignant potential. Trope et al. 209 studied adjuvant
therapy in 253 women with stage I and II ovarian tumors of low malignant potential in four randomized trials at the Norwegian Radium Hospital between 1970 and
1984. Adjuvant treatment consisted of (1) external radiation and intraperitoneal radioactive gold, or external radiation alone; (2) intraperitoneal radioactive gold or
phosphorus followed by no further treatment or thiotepa; (3) thiotepa versus no further treatment; and (4) cisplatin versus intraperitoneal phosphorus. No differences
in the two arms in any of the four randomized studies could be identified. It was recommended that adjuvant radiation and chemotherapy were not indicated in patients
with stage I or II ovarian tumors of low malignant potential. A series of 94 patients reported by Chambers et al. 210 from Yale–New Haven Medical Center did not reveal
any significant impact on adjuvant therapy for women with ovarian tumors of low malignant potential. Barnhill et al. 211 reported on 146 women with stage I serous
tumors of low malignant potential. No adjuvant therapy was offered, and with a median follow-up of 42.4 months (range 1.6 to 108.0), no patient has developed a
recurrence.
Attempts to identify women who might be at increased risk for recurrence based on flow cytometry studies have not demonstrated consistent results. 212,213 Evidence
has yet to be presented confirming that routinely treating patients whose tumors are aneuploid provides survival benefit. Surgery should be the main treatment
approach for this disease. Chemotherapy should be reserved for progressive disease that does not respond to surgical management.

SEX CORD–STROMAL TUMORS
Ovarian sex cord–stromal tumors represent approximately 5% of all ovarian cancers. In general, they tend to present with stage I disease and frequently are
associated with hormonal effects, such as precocious puberty, amenorrhea, postmenopausal bleeding, or virilizing symptoms. Granulosa cell tumors are the most
common of the sex cord–stromal tumors and may be associated with endometrial hyperplasia and endometrial carcinoma. One cannot always tell the steroid
production of the malignancies based on histologic appearance. For example, granulosa cell tumors have been reported to be associated with virilization.
Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors have been associated with endometrial cancer. 214 Pascale et al. 215 have demonstrated that, in virilized women, the findings of increased
serum testosterone with normal gonadotropin levels and gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist suppression of gonadotropins leading to normalization of
testosterone levels suggest that various ovarian androgen-secreting tumors are not autonomous but apparently depend on gonadotropin stimulation.
Willemsen et al. 216 reported on 12 patients who developed granulosa cell tumors. All patients in the series underwent ovarian hyperstimulation for the treatment of
infertility. All patients received clomiphene citrate and gonadotropins or both. Willemsen et al. 216 postulated that granulosa cell tumors may already be present in the
ovaries and are simply waiting for a hormone trigger or that the increased follicle-stimulating hormone concentrations used in ovulation induction are oncogenic to
granulosa cells. 216 However, it is also possible that the discovery of granulosa cells during ovarian stimulation is coincidental.
Surgical staging of sex cord–stromal tumors is the same as that for epithelial ovarian cancers (see Table 36.5-1). Surgical management of sex cord–stromal tumors is
based on the stage of the tumor as well as the age of the patient. In general, premenarchal women or patients presenting in the reproductive years tend to have stage
I disease in most series. A unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is all that is routinely necessary for the management of this disease. The role for adjuvant therapy in
younger women has not been demonstrated. However, in women who have completed childbearing, surgery should be more aggressive, including a bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy and total abdominal hysterectomy along with standard surgical staging. Women older than age 40 at diagnosis are more likely to experience a
recurrence of granulosa cell tumors, and it is for that reason that adjuvant therapy is recommended by some 214 in the older age population, although definitive
evidence for its efficacy in preventing or delaying recurrences is lacking.
Patients with advanced-stage disease (i.e., stage II to IV) may benefit from additional therapy. Cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy has been the most
frequently used treatment. However, few series have been reported, and they involve small numbers of women with granulosa cell tumors. Colombo et al. 217
demonstrated that primary treatment of six women with advanced granulosa cell tumor was effective using cisplatin, vinblastine, and bleomycin (the PVB regimen).
However, their experience with the PVB regimen in five patients with recurrent disease was complicated by significant toxicity, leading to two deaths. 217 Pectasides et
al.218 reported on ten patients with advanced or recurrent granulosa cell tumor treated with cisplatin, Adriamycin, and cyclophosphamide (CAP). Five complete and
one partial response was obtained. One of the pathologically complete respondents, however, relapsed 48 months after the onset of chemotherapy. Homesley et al. 219
reported a collaborative group experience using bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin combination chemotherapy in the treatment of women with sex cord–stromal
tumors. Forty-eight of the 57 tumors were granulosa cell tumors. For the series as a whole, 35 patients (61.4%) receiving this combination chemotherapy regimen had
complete responses. Eighteen of the 35 underwent second-look surgery. Fourteen of the 18 patients had pathologically negative second-look results, four patients
had a partial response, 14 patients had stable disease, and two patients had progression of disease among the 55 patients evaluable for response. Sixteen patients
received the chemotherapy after primary surgery, nine of whom had received the chemotherapy because of positive peritoneal cytology and seven for the treatment of
gross residual disease. Eleven of 16 primary treatment patients (68.8%) are free of progressive disease, whereas 21 of 41 (51.2%) were free of disease when they
were treated only after recurrent disease was noted.
The overall survival in two large series of granulosa cell tumors was 85% and 90%, with one series reporting 100% survival for stage I disease and the other reporting
94% survival for stage I disease at 5 years.
The current recommendations at Yale–New Haven Medical Center for women with early-stage granulosa cell tumors are surgery only for those younger than 40 and
surgery followed by etoposide and carboplatin chemotherapy for women older than 40 who have stage I disease. For women older than 40 or for any woman with
advanced-stage or recurrent disease, we recommend doxorubicin, cisplatin, and etoposide. Serum inhibin levels may be useful in monitoring for relapse. 220 However,
there is at least anecdotal experience that it may be elevated for unexplained reasons. Another tumor marker, Müllerian inhibiting substance (MIS), is usually
undetectable in females before puberty. 221 Gustafson et al. 221 reported that elevated MIS levels dramatically declined in two girls with granulosa cell tumors after
surgery. MIS may be an effective marker for granulosa cell tumors and Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors. Lane et al. 222 have demonstrated preoperative elevations of MIS in
six of eight subjects (75%) with juvenile granulosa cell tumors and seven of nine (78%) with adult granulosa cell tumors. None of 21 women with normal or

nondetectable MIS levels developed recurrent granulosa cell tumors, but incompletely resected or recurrent disease was associated with elevated MIS levels in 6 of
15 patients.
Roush et al.223 performed flow cytometric DNA ploidy and S-phase fraction analysis on 18 women with granulosa cell tumors of the ovary. Eleven of the tumors were
diploid and 7 were aneuploid. Only one of ten (10%) with euploid tumors died of disease, whereas four out of five (80%) with aneuploid tumors died of the disease.
This observation did not reach statistical correlation. Perhaps in the future flow cytometric studies may be useful in identifying which group of patients might benefit
from adjuvant therapy as opposed to observation.
Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors occur much less often than granulosa cell tumors yet are the second most common sex cord–stromal tumor. Their management is the same
as that of granulosa cell tumors in terms of staging, surgical management, and adjuvant chemotherapy. Rare forms of sex cord–stromal tumors include sex cord
tumors with annular tubules associated with the Peutz-Jeghers syndrome that are usually confined to the ovaries and can be treated with surgery alone. Thecomas
rarely are malignant. Malignant thecomas would be treated in the same manner as granulosa cell tumors.
Recurrent sex cord–stromal tumors are treated with surgical resection followed by adjuvant therapy. If the recurrence is isolated and could be encompassed in a
radiation field, older literature suggests that radiation therapy may be of value if the malignancy is a granulosa cell tumor. The natural history of granulosa cell tumors
is to be slow growing. Although late recurrences occur, it is difficult to know for certain whether it is the resection of the recurrent cancer or resection followed by the
radiation therapy that has had an impact on prolonging patient survival. Patients with extensive recurrences should be treated with cisplatin-based combination
chemotherapy.

EXTRAOVARIAN PERITONEAL CARCINOMA
The diagnosis and management of women who present with intraperitoneal carcinomatosis can represent a diagnostic and therapeutic problem. In some patients, the
primary site is unknown, and peritoneal carcinomatosis can present as part of the syndrome of adenocarcinomas of unknown primary site. Adenocarcinomas of
unknown primary site who present with peritoneal carcinomatosis can respond to chemotherapy with platinum-based regimens. In a series of 18 women treated with a
platinum-based regimen, median survival was 23 months, and five patients had complete remissions and long-term survival. 224 The histologic classification and
nomenclature of peritoneal carcinomatosis has been unclear and has included terms such as mesothelioma, peritoneal papillary serous carcinoma, extraovarian
serous carcinoma, and paraovarian cystadenocarcinoma. Although embryologically the germinal epithelium of the ovary and the mesothelium of the peritoneal cavity
are derived from the same celomic epithelium, a subset of peritoneal tumors can be morphologically identified that have a more favorable clinical behavior in response
to therapy compared with peritoneal mesotheliomas. 225 It has been proposed that the former disease process be termed peritoneal adenocarcinoma (serous) of
Müllerian type.225 The serous type of peritoneal carcinomatosis is the most common. However, other histologic types of peritoneal carcinomatosis resulting from the
common ancestry of celomic epithelium are possible, including mucinous, endometrioid, clear cell, and mixed peritoneal adenocarcinoma of Müllerian type. Using the
proposed terminology, when an uncommon subtype other than serous is present, it can be encompassed in the description. Malignant mesotheliomas have a different
histologic pattern and, in most cases, can be separated from the Müllerian-type peritoneal adenocarcinomas. Peritoneal mesotheliomas are more aggressive tumors,
with a survival rate of usually less than 1 year. Furthermore, in women they are relatively less common than peritoneal adenocarcinomas of Müllerian type.
Most patients with extraovarian peritoneal carcinomatosis have signs and symptoms similar to those women who present with advanced-stage ovarian cancer. At
surgery, these women frequently have ascites with diffuse peritoneal carcinomatosis. Attempts at cytoreductive surgery usually are made, although no evidence
supports survival benefit in those women with peritoneal carcinomatosis who undergo optimum cytoreductive surgery. This may be due to the fact that although no
tumor nodule larger than 1.5 cm is left behind, these women have innumerable such nodules throughout the peritoneal cavity and their actual tumor burden after
cytoreductive surgery remains substantial. It appears that approximately 50% of patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis can be successfully surgically cytoreduced.
Survival for patients with Müllerian peritoneal adenocarcinoma is similar to that reported for advanced ovarian cancer. In a large study from the University of
California, Los Angeles, the median survival of patients who received chemotherapy after primary cytoreductive surgery was 28.4 months. 225 Patients who received
cisplatin-based chemotherapy had a substantially longer survival rate (57% living longer than 23 months) than patients who were not treated with cisplatin-based
regimens. Based on the pattern of metastases and chemosensitivity to platinum-based chemotherapy, it seems prudent that current therapy for this group of patients
should include cytoreductive surgery followed by chemotherapy with paclitaxel plus a platinum compound.

GERM CELL TUMORS OF THE OVARY
Germ cell tumors of the ovary are much less common than epithelial ovarian neoplasms. However, because they are highly curable and because they affect primarily
young women of childbearing potential, appropriate management by specialists is exceedingly important. Germ cell tumors account for 2% to 3% of all ovarian
cancers in Western countries. They almost always occur in younger women, and their peak incidence is in the early 20s. An increased incidence of germ cell tumors
is found in Asian and black societies, and these tumors represent as many as 15% of all ovarian cancers in these populations.
PATHOLOGY
Table 36.5-1 provides the World Health Organization classification for germ cell tumors of the ovary. Serum tumor markers for HCG and AFP are useful in the
diagnosis and management of these tumors. They are often divided clinically into dysgerminoma and nondysgerminoma germ cell tumors.
DIAGNOSIS
Abdominal pain, pelvic fullness, and urinary symptoms are common in patients with germ cell tumors of the ovary. In a minority of patients (approximately 10%),
abdominal pain can be severe, usually the result of hemorrhage, rupture, or torsion of the tumor. Abdominal distention can also be a symptom and often is associated
with ascites.
Patients frequently have a palpable adnexal mass that should be ultrasonographically evaluated. Surgical exploration is usually required in masses of 8 cm or larger.
Serum levels of HCG and AFP are useful in the diagnosis of some germ cell tumors.
PATTERNS OF METASTASIS
In contrast to epithelial tumors, approximately 60% to 70% of germ cell tumors are stage I at diagnosis. 226 Stage II and IV are relatively uncommon, and stage III
accounts for approximately 25% to 30% of tumors. Primary germ cell tumors can be very large and often are greater than 20 mL in size. With the notable exception of
dysgerminoma, bilateral ovarian involvement is not common. Multiple peritoneal surfaces are often involved in addition to frequent lymph node involvement. These
tumors also appear to have a greater tendency for hematogenous metastases compared with epithelial tumors, and liver and lung involvement can be observed.
Ascites is infrequent (approximately 20% of cases).
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT
The importance of initial surgical approach for the treatment of germ cell tumors of the ovary cannot be overemphasized. 226 Most patients can have fertility preserved,
and the type of operative procedure is dictated by operative findings. In most cases, the contralateral ovary and the uterus can be preserved. Even in those situations
of dysgerminoma in which the incidence of bilaterality is more common, bilateral oophorectomy is not routinely necessary because postoperative chemotherapy is
curative and fertility can be preserved. In cases in which the contralateral ovary is grossly abnormal, cystectomy or biopsy can be performed and bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy performed in the case of a dysgenetic gonad.
The principles with regard to surgical staging of germ cell tumors are similar to those described for epithelial tumors. After a large transverse incision, the entire
peritoneal cavity should be carefully inspected. In the absence of ascites, peritoneal washings should be obtained and all fluids should be histologically examined. If
disease is grossly confined to the pelvis, random biopsies should be performed analogous to surgical staging of early-stage epithelial ovarian carcinomas. Particular
emphasis should be paid to paraaortic and pelvic lymph nodes because these are more commonly involved than in epithelial tumors. Although sampling of suspicious
nodes is indicated for staging, no evidence suggests that lymphadenectomy is beneficial. Cytoreductive surgery is recommended as for epithelial tumors of the ovary.
However, it must be emphasized that, even in the presence of widespread metastatic disease, because of the efficacy of chemotherapy, the contralateral ovary can

frequently be preserved.
There is no role for routine second-look operations in patients with a germ cell tumor who are clinically free of disease after chemotherapy. In particular, if the primary
tumor was completely resected and did not contain teratoma, second-look procedures after chemotherapy are of no established benefit 227 (Table 36.5-16). In some
patients with a teratomatous tumor, however, a second-look procedure may be beneficial. Such patients may have residual mature teratoma, particularly if the initial
resection was incomplete and postchemotherapy removal of benign teratomas is beneficial. Unresected teratomas in males with testicular cancer have been known to
progress and lead to significant morbidity unless completely resected. Although experience with germ cell tumors of the ovary is not as extensive, the presumption
remains that teratomas can lead to life-threatening complications and should be removed after initial chemotherapy.
MANAGEMENT OF DYSGERMINOMAS
Dysgerminomas are the most common malignant germ cell tumors of the ovary and often have been considered the female equivalent of a seminoma. In contrast to
nondysgerminomatous tumors, dysgerminomas are more frequently stage I, involve both ovaries, spread to retroperitoneal lymph nodes, and are markedly sensitive
to radiotherapy. Because these tumors are also exquisitely sensitive to cisplatin-based chemotherapy, the role of curative radiation therapy has decreased.
Furthermore, current chemotherapy usually does not result in ovarian ablation.
The vast majority of patients with dysgerminoma are diagnosed with early-stage disease. Because preservation of fertility is an important issue for most of these
women, all carefully staged patients with stage IA disease can be observed without compromising cure because only 15% to 25% of patients recur and they can be
successfully salvaged. 227,228 Until the demonstration that metastatic dysgerminoma could be cured with cisplatin-based chemotherapy, most patients with stage I
disease and all patients with higher stages were treated with radiotherapy. Virtually all early-stage patients were cured of their disease. Even in patients with stage III
disease treated with radiation therapy, the 5-year survival rate was 80% to 90%, although recurrence-free survival was substantially lower.
The GOG evaluation of platinum-based chemotherapy in dysgerminomas has followed reports on the efficacy of different regimens in testicular cancer. 228 In the early
1980s, ovarian germ cell tumors were treated with the PVB regimen. 229 Subsequently, based on studies in testicular cancer that demonstrated increased efficacy and
less toxicity for the bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin (BEP) regimen, this regimen has been used in patients with metastatic germ cell tumors, including
dysgerminoma (see Table 36.5-16). With a median follow-up of more than 2 years, 17 of 18 patients with advanced-stage dysgerminoma treated with one of these
platinum-based regimens are disease free. 228 Based on these results in advanced disease, the current approach within the GOG is to examine the role of carboplatin
(400 mg/m2) and etoposide (120 mg/m2 on days 1 to 3) in completely resected stage IB to III patients with dysgerminoma.

TABLE 36.5-16. Second-Look Laparotomy in Germ Cell Tumors of the Ovary

NONDYSGERMINOMATOUS GERM CELL TUMORS
The vast majority of nondysgerminomatous germ cell tumors of the ovary are treated with surgery followed by combination chemotherapy.
The immature teratomas are the second most common germ cell malignancy, accounting for 10% to 20% of all ovarian tumors seen in women younger than 20 years.
The tumors rarely occur in postmenopausal women and most commonly occur between the ages of 10 and 20 years. These tumors contain elements resembling
embryologically derived tissues and can occur in combination with other germ cell tumors (mixed germ cells). Occasionally, they are the source of excessive steroids,
and patients can present with sexual pseudoprecosity. Tumor markers for AFP and HCG are negative unless a mixed germ cell tumor is present.
The most important prognostic feature, and that which is used to dictate therapy, is the grade of the lesion. In stage IA, grade 1 lesions, 5-year survival rates are
greater than 90%, and no evidence suggests that chemotherapy improves outcome. However, this is the only subset of patients with immature teratomas in whom
chemotherapy should not be used. Even patients with stage IA, grade 2 and 3 disease have such a high relapse rate that postoperative chemotherapy is
indicated. 226,227,228 and 229
In patients whose tumors are confined to the ovary, unilateral oophorectomy or salpingo-oophorectomy should be performed. As noted, contralateral tumor
involvement is rare in germ cell tumors other than dysgerminoma. The most frequent sites of dissemination are the peritoneum and retroperitoneal lymph nodes.
Widespread dissemination to lungs, liver, or brain are uncommon. Before the development of effective chemotherapy, prognosis for patients with advanced-stage
germ cell tumor was poor. The same combination that was found to be curative in disseminated testicular cancer quickly replaced nonplatinum regimens such as
vincristine, dactinomycin, and cyclophosphamide. The PVB regimen produced a survival rate of 71% in a heterogeneous group of germ cell patients. 229 The current
chemotherapy regimen of choice for patients with nondysgerminomatous germ cell tumors is the BEP regimen ( Table 36.5-17). In the GOG trial, 89 of 93 stage I,
stage II, and stage III patients with completely resected tumor are disease free after three courses of this regimen. 229

TABLE 36.5-17. Bleomycin , Etoposide, and Cisplatin Regimen in Germ Cell Tumors

Although no prospective comparison has been performed between PVB and BEP in patients with advanced-stage germ cell tumor of the ovary, the latter regimen is
preferred because of the results of the randomized trial in patients with advanced testicular cancer in which the superiority of BEP was established. 230 In that trial,
PVB produced a 70% 4-year survival rate in patients with metastatic, far-advanced testicular tumors, which was inferior to results obtained with BEP. Furthermore, the
BEP regimen was less toxic than PVB because of elimination of vinblastine-related neuromuscular toxicities.

Endodermal sinus (yolk sac) tumors are derived from the primitive yolk sac and are the third most frequent germ cell tumor of the ovary. These tumors secrete AFP,
which can be used as a marker for response and recurrence. Similar to other germ cell tumors, a unilateral oophorectomy can be performed because the tumors are
rarely, if ever, bilateral. Most patients have early-stage disease, but all patients, regardless of stage and extent of initial surgery, are treated with platinum-based
chemotherapy.231 No evidence supports a correlation between extent of initial surgery and survival. Before the development of effective chemotherapy, 2-year survival
was only 20%. However, with platinum-based chemotherapy, the complete response rate is approximately 60%.
Embryonal carcinoma and nongestational choriocarcinoma of the ovary are both extremely rare. Embryonal carcinomas can secrete both AFP and HCG, whereas
pure choriocarcinomas secrete only HCG. Due to the rarity of these tumors, long-term results with chemotherapy have not been specifically described. However, the
recommended treatment approach consists of unilateral oophorectomy or salpingo-oophorectomy followed by combination chemotherapy with the BEP regimen. 231
Similarly, mixed germ cell tumors of the ovary that contain two or more elements should also be treated with surgery followed by combination chemotherapy.
Prognosis in mixed germ cell tumors is related to the relative amount of the most aggressive malignant component. The most frequent combination consists of
elements of endodermal sinus tumor and dysgerminoma. Mixed germ cell tumors may secrete any combination of markers, depending on the histologic components of
the tumor.

FALLOPIAN TUBE CANCER
Primary malignant neoplasms of the fallopian tube are exceedingly rare, and only a few hundred new cases are diagnosed annually in the United States, making it the
least common site of origin for a malignant neoplasm of the female genital tract. Most fallopian tube carcinomas present as papillary serous adenocarcinomas.
Intraperitoneal dissemination of fallopian tube carcinomas is similar to that observed with epithelial ovarian cancer. However, there appears to be a higher propensity
to spread outside the peritoneal cavity. Survival has been shown to be dependent on the depth of invasion of the tumor in the fallopian tube. 232 For intermucosal
lesions, 5-year survival is 91%, compared with 53% for tumors with mucosal wall invasion, and less than 25% in those situations in which the tumor has penetrated
the tubal serosa. In addition to the depth of invasion, histologic differentiation and lymphatic capillary space involvement also have been shown to be of prognostic
significance. 233 In cases of metastatic disease, the distinction between metastatic ovarian carcinoma can be difficult. Criteria frequently used to confirm the diagnosis
of a primary fallopian tube carcinoma include tumor in the fallopian tube and rising from the endosalpinx, histologic pattern reproducing the epithelium of the mucosa
with a papillary pattern, evidence for transition between benign and malignant tubal epithelium in the wall, and less tumor in the ovaries than in the tubes. In difficult
cases, tumors are at times referred to as tubo-ovarian carcinoma. A minority of fallopian tube carcinomas are bilateral at the time of diagnosis. In contrast to patients
with ovarian cancer, the majority of patients with tubal carcinoma are diagnosed with disease confined to the tubes and pelvic structures.
Patients with fallopian tube carcinomas appear to have a shorter history of symptoms compared with those with epithelial ovarian carcinomas. 233 The most common
symptom is postmenopausal vaginal bleeding. Abdominal pain and leukorrhea are also common. Tubal distention produces more intense pain than is usually reported
by patients with ovarian cancer, and these symptoms may account for the fact that more patients present with earlier stage carcinoma than patients with epithelial
ovarian cancer in whom the absence of specific symptoms may account for more disseminated disease.
The surgical management of patients with fallopian tube carcinoma is identical to those with epithelial ovarian cancer. 233 Survival is improved in that group of patients
in whom cytoreductive surgery is successful. Similarly, postoperative chemotherapy for fallopian tube carcinoma is analogous to that for patients with epithelial
ovarian cancer. Currently, no data have been reported on the role of paclitaxel in this tumor. However, based on similar responses to cisplatin-based chemotherapy, it
appears that the combination of paclitaxel plus a platinum compound should be considered the current chemotherapy regimen of choice for fallopian tube carcinoma.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:8.
2. Yancik R. Ovarian cancer. Age contrasts in incidence, histology, disease stage at diagnosis, and mortality. Cancer 1993;71:517.
3. Yancik R, Ries LG, Yates JW. Ovarian cancer in the elderly: an analysis of surveillance, epidemiology and end results program data. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1986;154:639.
4. Ries LAG, Kosary CL, Hankey BF, et al., eds. SEER cancer statistics review: 19731994. NIH publication no. 97-2789. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, 1997.
5. Boyd J. Molecular genetics of hereditary ovarian cancer. Oncology 1998;12:399.
6. Wooster R, Neuhausen SL, Mangion J, et al. A strong candidate for the breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene BRCA2. Science 1994;266:66.
7. Lynch HT, Bewtra C, Lynch JF. Familial ovarian cancer clinical nuances. Am J Med 1983;81:1073.
8. Bewtra C, Watson P, Conway T, et al. Hereditary ovarian cancer: a clinicopathologic study. Int J Gynecol Pathol 1992;11:180.
9. Lynch HT, Kimberling W, Albano WA, et al. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. (Lynch syndrome I and II). I. Clinical description of resource. Cancer 1985;56:934.
10. Rubin SC, Benjamin I, Behbakht K, et al. Clinical and pathological features of ovarian cancer in women with germ-line mutations of BRCA1. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1413.
11. Boyd J, Rubin SC. Hereditary ovarian cancer: molecular genetics and clinical implications. Gynecol Oncol 1997;64:196.
12. Narod SA, Risch H, Moslehi R, et al. Oral contraceptives and the risk of hereditary ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med 1998;339:424.
13. Scully RE. Tumors of the ovary and maldeveloped gonads, fallopian tube, and broad ligament. In: Young RH, Clement PB, eds. Atlas of tumor pathology, 3rd series. Washington, DC: Armed
Forces Institute of Pathology, 1996:27.
14. Fishman DA, Schwartz PE. Current approaches to diagnosis and treatment of ovarian germ cell malignancies. Curr Opinion Obstet Gynecol 1994;6:98.
15. Barber HRK, Graber EA. The PMPO syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 1971;38:921.
16. Kurjak A, Shalan H, Kupesic S, et al. An attempt to screen asymptomatic women for ovarian and endometrial cancer with transvaginal color and pulsed Doppler sonography. J Ultrasound Med
1994;13:295.
17. Taylor KJW, Schwartz PE. Screening for early ovarian cancer. Radiology 1994;192:1.
18. Schwartz PE, Taylor KJW. Ovarian cancer: epidemiological perspectives with developments in early diagnosis. In: Popkin DR, Peddle LJ, eds. Women's health today. Perspective on current
research and clinical practice. The proceedings of the XIV World Congress of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Montreal, September 1994. New York: Parthenon Publishing Group, 1994:257.
19. Chen D, Schwartz PE, Li X, Yang Z. Evaluation of CA125 levels in differentiating malignant from benign tumors in patients with pelvic masses. Obstet Gynecol 1988;72:23.
20. Young RC, Walton LA, Ellenberg SS, et al. Adjuvant therapy in stage I and stage II epithelial ovarian cancer: results of two prospective randomized trials. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1021.
21. Pecorelli S, Odicino F, Maisonneuve P, et al. Carcinoma of the ovary. J Epidemiol Biostat 1998;3:75.
22. Schwartz PE, Chambers SK, Chambers JT, Tilton K, Foemmer R. CA125 in peritoneal washings and fluid: correlation with plasma CA125 and peritoneal cytology. Obstet Gynecol 1989;73:339.
23. Delgado G, Chun B, Caglar H, et al. Para-aortic lymphadenectomy in gynecologic malignancies confined to the pelvis. Obstet Gynecol 1978;50:418.
24. Scarabelli C, Gallo A, Zarrelli A, Visentin C, Campagnutta E. Systematic pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy during cytoreductive surgery in advanced ovarian cancer: potential benefit on
survival. Gynecol Oncol 1995;56:328.
25. Hacker NF. Systematic pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy for advanced ovarian cancertherapeutic advance or surgical folly? Gynecol Oncol 1995;56:325.
26. Ozols RF, Fisher RI, Anderson T, Makuch R, Young RC. Peritoneoscopy in the management of ovarian cancer. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1981;140:611.
27. Childers JM, Lang J, Surwit EA, Hatch KD. Laparoscopic surgical staging of ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1995;59:25.
28. Schapira MM, Matchar DB, Young MJ. The effectiveness of ovarian cancer screening. A decision analysis model. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:838.
29. Jacobs I. Genetic, biochemical, and multimodal approaches to screening for ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1994;55:S22.
30. Einhorn N, Sjövall K, Knapp RC, et al. Prospective evaluation of serum CA 125 levels for early detection of ovarian cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1992;80:14.
31. Campbell S, Bhan V, Royston P, Whitehead MI, Collins WP. Transabdominal ultrasound screening for early ovarian cancer. BMJ 1989;299:1363.
32. DePriest PD, van Nagell JR, Gallion HH, et al. Ovarian cancer screening in asymptomatic postmenopausal women. Gynecol Oncol 1993;51:205.
33. Karlan BY, Platt LD. The current status of ultrasound and color Doppler imaging in screening for ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1994;55:S28.
34. Jacobs I, Davies AP, Bridges J, et al. Prevalence screening for ovarian cancer in postmenopausal women by CA 125 measurement and ultrasonography. BMJ 1993;306:1030.
35. Westhoff C. Current status of screening for ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1994;55:S39.
36. Bourne TH, Campbell S, Reynolds K, et al. The potential role of serum CA 125 in an ultrasound-based screening program for familial ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1994;52:379.
37. Kramer BS, Gohagan J, Prorok PC, Smart C. A National Cancer Institute sponsored screening trial for prostatic, lung, colorectal, and ovarian cancers. Cancer 1993;71:589.
38. Ramakrishnan S, Xu FJ, Brandt SJ, et al. Elevated levels of macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF) in serum and ascites from patients with epithelial ovarian cancer. Proc Soc Gynecol
Oncol 1990:21:40.
39. Xu FJ, Yu YH, Daly L, et al. OVX1 radioimmunoassay complements CA-125 for predicting the presence of residual ovarian carcinomas at second-look surgical surveillance procedures. J Clin
Oncol 1993;11:1506.
40. Woolas RP, Xu FJ, Jacobs IJ, et al. Elevation of multiple serum markers in patients with stage I ovarian cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1748.
41. Xu Y, Shen Z, Wiper DW, et al. Lysophosphatidic acid as a potential biomarker for ovarian and other gynecologic cancers. JAMA 1998;280:719.
42. Struewing JP, Watson P, Easton DF, et al. Effectiveness of prophylactic oophorectomy in inherited breast/ovarian cancer families. Am J Human Genetics 1994;55:384,A70(abst).
43. Karlan BY, Baldwin RL, Lopez-Luevanos ES, et al. Peritoneal serous papillary carcinoma, a phenotypic variant of familial ovarian cancer: implications for ovarian cancer screening. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 1999;180:917.
44. Sjövall K, Nilsson B, Einhorn N. Different types of rupture of the tumor capsule and the impact of survival in early ovarian carcinoma. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1994;4:333.
45. Dembo AJ, Davy M, Stenwj AE, et al. Prognostic factors in patients with stage I epithelial ovarian cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1990;75:263.
46. Hoskins WJ, Bundy BN, Thigpen JT, Omura GA. The influence of cytoreductive surgery on recurrence-free interval and survival in small volume stage III epithelial ovarian cancer: a
Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1992;47:159.
47. Omura GA, Brody MF, Homesley HD, et al. Long-term follow-up and prognostic factor analysis in advanced ovarian carcinomas: the Gynecologic Oncology Group experience. J Clin Oncol
1991;9:1138.
48. Makar APH, Kristensen GB, Kaern J, et al. Prognostic value of pre- and postoperative serum CA-125 levels in ovarian cancer: new aspects and multivariate analysis. Obstet Gynecol
1992;79:1002.
49. Fayers PM, Rustin G, Wood R, et al. The prognostic value of serum CA-125 in patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma: an analysis of 573 patients by the Medical Research Council Working
Party on gynaecological cancer. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1993;3:285.

50. Markman M, Lewis JL, Saigo P, et al. Impact of age on survival of patients with ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1993;49:236.
51. Kaern J, Trope CG, Kristensen GB, Tveit KM, Pettersen EO. Evaluation of deoxyribonucleic acid ploidy and S-phase fraction as prognostic parameters in advanced epithelial ovarian
carcinoma: a prospective study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:479.
52. Bookman MA. Factoring outcomes in ovarian cancer [Editorial]. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:325.
53. van der Zee AGJ, Hollema HH, deBruijn A, et al. Cell biological markers of drug resistance in ovarian carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1995;58:165.
54. van der Zee AGJ, Hollema H, Suurmeijer AJH, et al. Value of P-glycoprotein, glutathione S-transferase pi, c-erb B-2, and p53 as prognostic factors in ovarian carcinomas. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:70.
55. Barr W, Cowell MAC, Chatfield WR. The management of ovarian carcinomaa review of 420 cases. Scott Med J 1970;15:250.
56. Clark DGC, Hilaris B, Roussis C, Brunschwig A. The role of radiation therapy (including isotopes) in the treatment of carcinoma of the ovary. Results of 614 patients treated at Memorial
Hospital, New York, NY. In: Ariel IM, ed. Progress in clinical cancer, vol 5. New York: Grune & Stratton, 1973:227.
57. Dalley VM. Radiotherapy in malignant disease of the ovary. Proc Royal Soc Med 1969; 62:359.
58. Fuks F. External radiotherapy of ovarian cancer: standard approaches and new frontiers. Semin Oncol 1975;2:253.
59. Kent SW, McKay DG. Primary cancer of the ovary. An analysis of 349 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1960;80:430.
60. Munnell LW. The changing prognosis and treatment in cancer of the ovary. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1968;100:790.
61. Ross WM. Primary carcinoma of the ovary. A review of 150 cases with an appraisal of the fallopian tube as a pathway of spread. Cancer Med Assoc J 1966;94:1035.
62. Van Orden DA. Ovarian carcinoma. The problems of staging and grading. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1966;94:195.
63. Delclos L, Smith JP. Ovarian cancer with special regard to types of radiotherapy. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1975;42:129.
64. Dembo A, Bush R, Beale F, et al. Ovarian carcinoma: improved survival following abdominopelvic irradiation in patients with a completed pelvic operation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1979;134:793.
65. Carey MS, Dembo AJ, Simm JE, et al. Testing the validity of a prognostic classification in patients with surgically optimal ovarian carcinoma: a 15-year review. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1993;3:24.
66. Dembo A. The sequential multiple modality treatment of ovarian cancer. Radiother Oncol 1985;3:187.
67. Dembo AJ. Abdominopelvic radiotherapy in ovarian cancer. Cancer 1985;55:2285.
68. Dembo AJ. Epithelial ovarian cancer: the role of radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;22:835.
69. Fuller DB, Sause WT, Plenk HP, Menlove RL. Analysis of postoperative radiation therapy in stage I through III epithelial ovarian carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:897.
70. Goldberg N, Peschel RE. Postoperative abdominopelvic radiation therapy for ovarian cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;14:425.
71. Leers WH, Kock HCLV. The evaluation of postoperative irradiation in patients with early-stage ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1987;28:41.
72. Lindner H, Willich H, Atzinger A. Primary adjuvant whole abdominal irradiation in ovarian carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:1203.
73. Martinez A, Schray MF, Howes AE, Bagshaw MA. Postoperative radiation therapy for epithelial ovarian cancer: the curative role based on a 24-year experience. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:901.
74. Weiser EB, Burke TW, Heller PB, et al. Determinants of survival of patients with epithelial ovarian carcinoma following whole abdomen irradiation (WAR). Gynecol Oncol 1988;30:201.
75. Redman CWE, Mould J, Warwick J, et al. The West Midlands epithelial ovarian cancer adjuvant therapy trial. Clin Oncol 1993;5:1.
76. Chiara S, Conte P, Franzone P, et al. High-risk early-stage ovarian cancer. Randomized clinical trial comparing cisplatin plus cyclophosphamide versus whole abdominal radiotherapy. Am J
Clin Oncol 1994;17:72.
77. Dembo AJ, Bush RS, Beale FA, et al. A randomized clinical trial of moving strip versus open field whole abdominal irradiation in patients with invasive epithelial cancer of ovary. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:97.
78. Klaassen D, Shelley W, Starreveld A, et al. Early stage ovarian cancer: a randomized clinical trial comparing whole abdominal radiotherapy, melphalan, and intraperitoneal chromic phosphate:
a National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group report. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1254.
79. Bolis G, Colombo N, Pecorelli S, et al. Adjuvant treatment for early epithelial ovarian cancer: results of two randomized clinical trials comparing cisplatin to no further treatment or chromic
phosphate (32P). Am J Clin Oncol 1995;6:887.
80. Vergote IB, Vergote-De Vos LN, Abeler VM, et al. Randomized trial comparing cisplatin with radioactive phosphorus or whole-abdomen irradiation as adjuvant treatment of ovarian cancer.
Cancer 1992;69:741.
81. Young RC, Brady MF, Nieberg RM, et al. Randomized clinical trial of adjuvant treatment of women with early (FIGO IIIA high risk) ovarian cancerGOG #95. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:357a(abst).
82. Bolis G, Colombo N, Pecorelli S, et al. Adjuvant treatment for early epithelial ovarian cancer: results of two randomised clinical trials comparing cisplatin to no further treatment or chromic
phosphate (32P). Ann Oncol 1995;6:887.
83. Goodman HM, Harlow BL, Sheets EE, et al. The role of cytoreductive surgery in the management of stage IV epithelial ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1992;46:367.
84. Bristow RE, Montz FJ, La Gasse LD, Leuchter RS, Karlan BY. Survival impact of surgical cytoreduction in stage IV epithelial ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1999;72:278.
85. Curtin JP, Mauk R, Venkatraman ES, Barakat RR, Hoskins WJ. Stage IV ovarian cancer: impact of surgical debulking. Gynecol Oncol 1997;64:9.
86. Griffiths CT. Surgical resection of tumor bulk in the primary treatment of ovarian carcinoma. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1975;42:101.
87. Hacker NF, Berek JS, Lagasse LD, et al. P rimary cytoreductive surgery for epithelial ovarian cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1983;61:413.
88. Vogl SE, Pagano M, Kaplan BH, et al. Cisplatin based combination chemotherapy for advanced ovarian cancer: high overall response rate with curative potential only in women with small
tumor burdens. Cancer 1983;51:2024.
89. Pohl R, Dallenback-Hellweg G, Plugge T, et al. Prognostic parameters in patients with advanced malignant ovarian tumors. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol 1984;3:160.
90. Delgado G, Oram DH, Petrilli ES. Stage III ovarian cancer: the role of a maximal surgical reduction. Gynecol Oncol 1984;19:293.
91. Piver MS, Lele SB, Marchetti DL, et al. The impact of aggressive debulking surgery and cisplatin chemotherapy on progression-free survival in stage III and IV ovarian carcinoma. J Clin Obstet
Gynecol 1988;6:983.
92. Neijt JP, ten Bokkel Huinink WW, van der Burg ME, et al. Long-term survival in ovarian cancer. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:1367.
93. Redman JR, Petrini GR, Saigo PE, et al. Prognostic factors in advanced ovarian carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:515.
94. Conte PF, Bruzzone M, Hiara S, et al. A randomized trial comparing cisplatin plus cyclophosphamide versus cisplatin, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide in advanced ovarian cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1986;4:965.
95. Hunter RW, Alexander NDE, Soutter WP. Meta-analysis of surgery in advanced ovarian carcinoma: is maximum cytoreductive surgery an independent determinant of prognosis? Am J Obstet
Gynecol 1992;166:504.
96. Allen DG, Heintz APM, Touw FWMM. A meta-analysis of residual disease and survival in stage III and IV carcinoma of the ovary. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol 1995;16:349.
97. Omura GA, Bunda BN, Berek JS, et al. Randomized trial of cyclophosphamide plus cisplatin with or without doxorubicin in ovarian carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin
Oncol 1989;7:457.
98. Hoskins WJ, McGuire WP, Brady MF, et al. The effect of diameter of largest residual disease on survival after primary cytoreductive surgery in patients with suboptimal residual epithelial
ovarian cancer. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:974.
99. Chen SS, Bochner R. Assessment of morbidity in primary cytoreductive surgery for advanced ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1985;20:190.
100. Blythe JG, Wahl TP. Debulking surgery: does it increase the quality of survival? Gynecol Oncol 1982;14:396.
101. Chambers JT, Chambers SK, Voyneck IM, Schwartz PE. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy in stage X ovarian carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1990;37:327.
102. Schwartz PE, Chambers JT, Makuch R. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for advanced ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1994;53:33.
103. Schwartz PE, Rutherford TJ, Chambers JT, Kohorn EI, Thiel RP. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for advanced ovarian cancer: long-term survival. Gynecol Oncol 1999;72:93.
104. Surwit E, Childers J, Atlas I, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for advanced ovarian cancer. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1996;6:356.
105. Omura G, Blessing JA, Ehrlich CE, et al. A randomized trial of cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin with or without cisplatin in advanced ovarian carcinoma. Cancer 1987;56:1725.
106. Stewart LA, for the Advanced Ovarian Cancer Trialists Group (AOCTG). Chemotherapy in advanced ovarian cancer: an overview of randomized clinical trials. BMJ 1991;303:884.
107. Taylor AE, Wiltshaw E, Gore MR, et al. Long-term follow-up of the first randomized study of cisplatin using carboplatin for advanced epithelial ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2066.
108. Aabo K, Adams M, Adnitt P, et al. Chemotherapy in advanced ovarian cancer: four systematic meta-analyses of individual patient data from 37 randomized trials. Br J Cancer 1998;78:1749.
109. Alberts DS, Green S, Hannigan EV, et al. Improved therapeutic index of carboplatin plus cyclophosphamide versus cisplatin plus cyclophosphamide: final report by the Southwest Oncology
Group of a phase III randomized trial in stages III and IV ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:706.
110. Swenerton K, Jeffrey J, Stuart G, et al. Cisplatin-cyclophosphamide versus carboplatin-cyclophosphamide in advanced ovarian cancer: a randomized phase III study of the National Cancer
Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:718.
111. ten Bokkel Huinink WW, van der Burg MEL, van Oosterom AT, et al. Carboplatin in combination therapy for ovarian cancer. Cancer Treat Rev 1988;15:9.
112. Hakes T, Hoskins W, Jones W, et al. Randomized prospective trial of 5 versus 10 cycles of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and cisplatin (CAP) in stage III and IV ovarian cancer. Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1990;9:156.
113. Bertelsen K, Jakobsen A, Stroyer I, et al. A prospective randomized comparison of 6 and 12 cycles of cyclophosphamide, Adriamycin, and cisplatin in advanced epithelial ovarian cancer: a
Danish Ovarian Study Group trial (DACOVA). Gynecol Oncol 1993;49:30.
114. Levin L, Hryniuk WM. Dose intensity analysis of chemotherapy regimens in ovarian carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1978:5:756.
115. Hong Kong Ovarian Carcinoma Study Group. A randomized study of high dose versus low dose cisplatin combined with cyclophosphamide in the treatment of advanced ovarian cancer.
Chemotherapy 1989;35:221.
116. McGuire WP, Hoskins WJ, Brady MF, et al. Assessment of dose-intensive therapy in suboptimally debulked ovarian cancer: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1589.
117. Columbo N, Piltelli MR, Parma G, et al. Cisplatin dose intensity in ovarian cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1993;12:255.
118. Conte PF, Bruzzone M, Carino F, et al. High dose versus low dose cisplatin in combination with cyclophosphamide and epidoxorubicin in suboptimal ovarian cancer: a randomized study of the
Gruppo Oncologico Nord-Ovest. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:351.
119. Kaye SB, Lewis CR, Paul J, et al. Randomised study of two doses of cisplatin with cyclophosphamide in epithelial ovarian cancer. Lancet 1992;340:329.
120. Kaye SB, Paul J, Cassidy J, et al. Mature results of a randomized trial of two doses of cisplatin for the treatment of ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2113.
121. Jodrell DI, Egorin MJ, Canetta RM, et al. Relationships between carboplatin exposure and tumor response and toxicity in patients with ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:520.
122. Calvert AH, Newell DR, Gumbrell LA, et al. Carboplatin dosage: prospective evaluation of a simple formula based on renal function. J Clin Oncol 1989;7;1748.
123. Jakobsen A, Bertelsen K, Andersen JE, et al. Dose-effect study of carboplatin in ovarian cancer: a Danish Ovarian Cancer Group study. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:193.
124. Gore ME, Mainwaring PN, Ahern R, et al. Randomized trial of dose-intensity with single-agent carboplatin in patients with epithelial ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2426.
125. Omura G, Bundy B, Berek J, et al. Randomized trial of cyclophosphamide plus cisplatin with or without doxorubicin in ovarian carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol
1989;7:457.
126. Conte PD, Bruzzone M, Chiara S, et al. A randomized trial comparing cisplatin plus cyclophosphamide versus cisplatin, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide in advanced ovarian cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1986;4:965.
127. Omura GA, Buyse M, Marsoni S, et al. CP versus CAP chemotherapy of ovarian carcinoma: a meta-analysis. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1668.
128. A'Hern RP, Gore ME. Impact of doxorubicin on survival in advanced ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:726.
129. The ICON Collaborators. ICON 2: randomized trial of single-agent carboplatin against three-drug combination of CAP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin) in women with ovarian
cancer. Lancet 1998;352:1571.
130. Thigpen JT, Blessing JA, Ball H, et al. Phase II trial of paclitaxel in patients with progressive ovarian carcinoma after platinum-based chemotherapy: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J
Clin Oncol 1994;12:1748.
131. Piccart MJ, Gore M, ten Bokkel Huinink W, et al. Docetaxel: an active new drug for treatment of advanced epithelial ovarian cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:676.
132. Eisenhauer EA, ten Bokkel Huinink WW, Swenerton KD, et al. European-Canadian randomized trial of paclitaxel in relapsed ovarian cancer: high-dose versus low-dose and long versus short
infusion. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2654.

133. McGuire WP, Hoskins WJ, Brady MF, et al. Cyclophosphamide and cisplatin compared with paclitaxel and cisplatin in patients with stage III and stage IV ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med
1996;334:1.
134. Stuart G, Bertelsen K, Mangioni C, et al. Updated analysis shows a highly significant improved overall survival (OS) for cisplatin-paclitaxel as first line treatment of advanced ovarian cancer:
mature results of the EORTC-GCCG, NOCOVA, NCIC CTG and Scottish Intergroup trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:361a.
135. Muggia FM, Braly PS, Brady MR, et al. Phase III trial of cisplatin or paclitaxel versus their combination in suboptimal stage III and IVE epithelial ovarian cancer: Gynecologic Oncology Group
study #132. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:A1257.
136. Harper P, ICON collaborators. A randomized comparison of paclitaxel (T) and carboplatin (J) versus a control arm of single agent carboplatin (J) or CAP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and
cisplatin): 2075 patients randomized into the 3rd International Collaborative Ovarian Neoplasms study (ICON3). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:356a.
137. Ozols RF, Bundy BN, Clarke-Pearson D, et al. Randomized phase III study of cisplatin (CIS)/paclitaxel (PAC) versus carboplatin (CARBO)/PAC in optimal stage III epithelial ovarian cancer
(OC): a Gynecologic Oncology Group trial (GOG 158). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:356a(abst 1373).
138. duBois A, Lueck HJ, Meier W, et al. Cisplatin/paclitaxel vs carboplatin/paclitaxel in ovarian cancer: update of an Arbeitsgemeinschaft Gynaekologische Onkologie (AGO) study group trial. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:356a(abst 1374).
139. Neijt JP, Hansen M, Hansen SW, et al. Randomized phase III study in previously untreated epithelial ovarian cancer FIGO stage IIB, IIC, III, IV comparing paclitaxel-cisplatin and
paclitaxel-carboplatin. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:1259.
140. Bookman MA, McGuire WP, Kilpatrick D, et al. Carboplatin and paclitaxel in ovarian carcinoma: a phase I study of the Gynecologic Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1895.
141. Kohn EC, Sarosy G, Bicher A, et al. Dose-intense Taxol: high response rate in patients with platinum-resistant recurrent ovarian cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:18.
142. Omura GA, Brady MF, Delmore JE, et al. A randomized trial of paclitaxel (T) at 2 dose levels and filgrastim (G; G-CSF) at 2 doses in platinum (P) pretreated epithelial ovarian cancer (OVCA):
a Gynecologic Oncology Group, SWOG, NCCTG and ECOG study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1996;15:280(abst 755).
143. Wangenstein OH, Lewis FJ, Tongen L. The second look in cancer surgery. Lancet 1951;71:303.
144. Schwartz PE, Smith JP. Second look operations in ovarian cancer. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1980;138:1124.
145. Rubin SR, Lewis JLJ. Second look surgery in ovarian carcinoma. Crit Rev Oncol Hemat 1988;8:75.
146. Berek JS, Griffiths CT, Levinthal JM. Laparoscopy for second-look evaluation in ovarian cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1981;58:192.
147. Rubin S, Hoskins W, Saigo P, et al. Prognostic factors for recurrence following negative second-look laparotomy in ovarian cancer patients treated with platinum-based chemotherapy. Gynecol
Oncol 1991;42:137.
148. Cmelak AJ, Kapp DS. Long-term survival with whole abdominopelvic irradiation in platinum-refractory persistent or recurrent ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1997;65:453.
149. Fein DA, Morgan LS, Marcus RB Jr, et al. Stage III ovarian carcinoma: an analysis of treatment results and complications following hyperfractionated abdominopelvic irradiation for salvage. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:169.
150. Morgan L, Chafe W, Mendenhall W, Marcus R. Hyperfractionation of whole-abdomen radiation therapy: salvage treatment of persistent ovarian carcinoma following chemotherapy. Gynecol
Oncol 1988;31:122.
151. Schray M, Martinez A, Howes A, et al. Advanced epithelial ovarian cancer: salvage whole abdominal irradiation for patients with recurrent or persistent disease after combination chemotherapy.
J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1433.
152. Fuks Z, Rizel S, Biran S. Chemotherapeutic and surgical induction of pathological complete remission and whole abdominal irradiation for consolidation does not enhance the cure of stage III
ovarian carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:509.
153. Hoskins W, Lichter A, Wittingham R, et al. Whole abdominal and pelvic irradiation in patients with minimal disease at second-look surgical reassessment for ovarian carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol
1985;20:271.
154. Bruzzone M, Repetto L, Chiara S, et al. Chemotherapy versus radiotherapy in the management of ovarian cancer patients with pathological complete response or minimal residual disease at
second look. Gynecol Oncol 1990;38:392.
155. Lambert HE, Rustin GJS, Gregory WM, Nelstrop AE. A randomized trial comparing single-agent carboplatin with carboplatin followed by radiotherapy for advanced ovarian cancer: a North
Thames Ovary Group study. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:440.
156. Hoskins PJ, Swenerton KD, Wong F, et al. Platinum plus cyclophosphamide plus radiotherapy is superior to platinum alone in “high-risk” epithelial ovarian cancer (residual negative and either
stage I or II, grade III, or stage III, any grade). Int J Gynecol Cancer 1995;5:134.
157. Berek JS, Hacker NF, Lagasse LD, et al. Survival of patients following secondary cytoreductive surgery in ovarian cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1983;61:189.
158. Segna RA, Dottino P, Mandeli P, Konsker K, Cohen CJ. Secondary cytoreduction for ovarian cancer following cisplatin therapy. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:434.
159. Neijt J, ten Bokkel Huinink W, van der Burg ME, et al. Randomized trial comparing two combination chemotherapy regimens (CHAP-5 vs CP) in advanced ovarian carcinoma. J Clin Oncol
1987;5:1157.
160. van der Burg ME, van Lent M, Buyse M, et al. The effect of debulking surgery after induction chemotherapy on the prognosis in advanced epithelial ovarian cancer. Gynecologic Cancer
Cooperative Group of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer. N Engl J Med 1995;332:629.
161. van der Burg MEL, van Lent M, Kobierska A, et al. After 6 years follow-up intervention debulking surgery remains an independent prognostic factor for survival in advanced epithelial ovarian
cancer. An EORTC Gynecologic Cancer Cooperative Group study. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1997;7[Suppl 2]:28.
162. Ozols RF. Treatment of recurrent ovarian cancer: increasing options“recurrent” results. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2177.
163. Fennelly D, Aghajanian C, Shapiro F, et al. Phase I pharmacologic study of paclitaxel administered weekly in patients with relapsed ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:187.
164. Eisenhauer EA, Vermorken JB, van Glabbeke M. Predictors of response to subsequent chemotherapy in platinum pretreated ovarian cancer: a multivariate analysis of 704 patients. Ann Oncol
1997;8:963.
165. Rose PG, Fusco N, Fluellen L, Rodriguez M. Second-line therapy with paclitaxel and carboplatin for recurrent disease following first-line therapy with paclitaxel and platinum in ovarian or
peritoneal carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1494.
166. Hoskins P, Eisenhauer E, Beare S, et al. Randomized phase II study of two schedules of topotecan in previously treated patients with ovarian cancer: a National Cancer Institute of Canada
Clinical Trials Group study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2233.
167. Bookman MA, Malmstrom H, Bolis G, et al. Topotecan for the treatment of advanced epithelial ovarian cancer: an open-label phase II study in patients treated after prior chemotherapy that
contained cisplatin or carboplatin and paclitaxel. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3345.
168. Rose PG, Blessing JA, Mayer AR, Homesley HD. Prolonged oral etoposide as second-line therapy for platinum-resistant and platinum-sensitive ovarian carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology
Group study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:405.
169. Lund B, Hansen OP, Theilade K, Hansen M, Neijt JP. Phase II study of gemcitabine (2',2'-difluorodeoxycytidine) in previously treated ovarian cancer patients. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1530.
170. Muggia FM, Hainsworth JD, Jeffers S, et al. Phase II study of liposomal doxorubicin in refractory ovarian cancer: antitumor activity and toxicity modification by liposomal encapsulation. J Clin
Oncol 1997;15:987.
171. Bajetta E, DiLeo A, Biganzoli L, et al. Phase II study of vinorelbine in patients with pretreated advanced ovarian cancer: activity in platinum-resistant disease. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2546.
172. ten Bokkel Huinink W, Gore M. Carmichael J, et al. Topotecan versus paclitaxel for the treatment of recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2183.
173. Hatch KD, Beecham JB, Blessing JA, Creasman WT. Responsiveness of patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma to Tamoxifen. Cancer 1991;68:269.
174. van der Velden J, Gitsch G, Wain GV, Friedlander ML, Hacker NF. Tamoxifen in patients with advanced epithelial ovarian cancer. Int J Gynecol Cancer 1995;5:301.
175. Ozols RF. Update of the NCCN ovarian cancer practice guidelines. Oncology (Huntingt) 1997;11:95.
176. Adelson MD, Wharton JT, Delclos L, Copeland L, Gershenson D. Palliative radiotherapy for ovarian cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:17.
177. Spanos WJ, Wasserman T, Meoz R, et al. Palliation of advanced pelvic malignant disease with large fraction pelvic radiation and misonidazole: final report of RTOG phase I/II study. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:1479.
178. Spanos WJ, Perez CA, Marcus S, et al. Effect of rest interval on tumor and normal tissue responsea report of phase III study of accelerated split course palliative radiation for advanced pelvic
malignancies (RTOG-8502). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:399.
179. Corn BW, Lanciano RM, Boente M, et al. Recurrent ovarian cancer. Effective radiotherapeutic palliation after chemotherapy failure. Cancer 1994;74:2979.
180. Rodriguez GC, Soper JT, Berchuck A, et al. Improved palliation of cerebral metastases in epithelial ovarian cancer using a combined modality approach including radiation therapy,
chemotherapy, and surgery. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1553.
181. Markman M. Intraperitoneal therapy of ovarian cancer. Semin Oncol 1998;25:356.
182. McClay EF, Howell SB. A review: intraperitoneal cisplatin in the management of patients with ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1990;36:1.
183. Markman M, Rothman R, Hakes T, et al. Second-line platinum therapy in patients with ovarian cancer previously treated with cisplatin. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:389.
184. Alberts DS, Liu PY, Hannigan EV, et al. Intraperitoneal cisplatin plus intravenous cyclophosphamide versus intravenous cisplatin plus intravenous cyclophosphamide for stage III ovarian
cancer. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1950.
185. Markman M, Bundy B, Benda J, et al. Randomized phase III study of intravenous (IV) cisplatin (CIS)/paclitaxel (PAC) versus moderately high dose IV carboplatin (CARB) followed by IV PAC
and intraperitoneal (IP) CIS in optimal residual ovarian cancer (OC): an intergroup trial (GOG, SWOG, ECOG). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:361a.
186. Shpall E, Slemmer S, Bearman S. High dose chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow support for the treatment of epithelial ovarian cancer. In: Markman M, Hoskins WJ, eds. Cancer of the
ovary. New York: Raven Press, 1993:327.
187. Stiff PJ, Bayer R, Kerger C, Potkul RK, et al. High-dose chemotherapy with autologous transplantation for persistent/relapsed ovarian cancer: a multivariate analysis of survival for 100
consecutively treated patients. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1309.
188. Aghajanian C, Fennelly D, Shapiro F, et al. Phase II study of “dose-dense” high-dose chemotherapy treatment with peripheral-blood progenitor-cell support as primary treatment for patients with
advanced ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1852.
189. Schilder RJ, Johnson S, Gallo J, et al. Phase I trial of multiple cycles of high-dose chemotherapy supported by autologous peripheral blood stem cells. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2198.
190. Hansen SW, Anderson H, Boman K, et al. Gemcitabine, carboplatin, and paclitaxel (GCP) as first-line treatment of ovarian cancer FIGO stages IIBIV. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:357a.
191. Herben VMM, Nannan Panday VR, Richel DJ, et al. Phase I and pharmacologic study of the combination of paclitaxel, cisplatin, and topotecan administered intravenously every 21 days as
first-line therapy in patients with advanced ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:747.
192. O'Dwyer PJ, Hamilton TC, LaCreta FP, et al. Phase I trial of buthionine sulfoximine in combination with melphalan in patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:249.
193. Dabholkar M, Reed E. Cisplatin. Cancer Chemother Biol Response Modif 1996;16:88.
194. Masuda H, Ozols RF, Lai GM, et al. Increased DNA repair as a mechanism of acquired resistance to cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) in human ovarian cancer cells lines. Cancer Res
1988;48:5713.
195. Manetta A, Borman M, Boyle J, et al. Cyclosporin enhancement of cisplatin activity in refractory ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1992;45:80.
196. Pietras RJ, Fendly BM, Chazin VR, et al. Antibody to HER-2/neu receptor blocks DNA repair after cisplatin in human breast and ovarian cancer cells. Oncogene 1994;9:1829.
197. Bourhis J, Goldstein LJ, Riou G, et al. Expression of a human multidrug resistance gene in ovarian carcinomas. Cancer Res 1989;49:5062.
198. Kruh GD, Chan A, Myers K, et al. Expression complementary DNA library transfer establishes mrp as a multidrug resistance gene. Cancer Res 1994;54:1649.
199. Izquierdo MA, van der Zee AGJ, Vermorken JB, et al. Drug resistanceassociated marker lrp for prediction of response to chemotherapy and prognoses in advanced ovarian carcinoma. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1994;87:1220.
200. Berchuck A, Bast RC. p53-based gene therapy of ovarian cancer: magic bullet? Gynecol Oncol 1995;59:169.
201. Steis RG, Urba WJ, van der Molen LA, et al. Ten-year follow-up of patients receiving cisplatin, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide chemotherapy for advanced epithelial ovarian carcinoma. J
Clin Oncol 1989;7:223.
202. Edwards RP, Lembersky BC, Kunschner AJ. Intraperitoneal interleukin-2 (IL-2) produces durable responses for refractory ovarian cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:333.
203. Epenetos AA, Hooker G, Krausz T, et al. Antibody-guided irradiation of advanced ovarian cancer with intraperitoneally administered radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies. J Clin Oncol
1987;5:1980.
204. Serov SF, Scully RE, Sobin LH. International histologic classification and staging of tumors. 9. Histologic typing of ovarian tumors. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1973.
205. Trimble EL, Trimble CL. Epithelial ovarian tumors of low malignant potential. In: Markman M, Hoskins WJ, eds. Cancer of the ovary. New York: Raven Press, 1993:415.

206. Goldberg GL, Runowicz CD. Ovarian carcinoma of low malignant potential, infertility, and induction of ovulationis there a link? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;166:853.
207. Kurman RJ, Trimble CL. The behavior of serous tumors of low malignant potential: are they ever malignant? Int J Gynecol Pathol 1993;12:120.
208. Tazelaar HD, Bostwick DG, Ballon SC, Hendrickson MR, Kempson RL. Conservative treatment of borderline ovarian tumors. Obstet Gynecol 1985;66:417.
209. Trope C, Kaern J, Vergote IB, Kristensen G, Abeler V. Are borderline tumors of the ovary overtreated both surgically and systemically? A review of four prospective randomized trials including
253 patients with borderline tumors. Gynecol Oncol 1985;51:236.
210. Chambers JT, Merino MJ, Kohorn EI, Schwartz PE. Borderline ovarian tumors. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988;159:1088.
211. Barnhill OR, Kurman RJ, Brady MF, et al. Preliminary analysis of the behavior of stage I ovarian serous tumors of low malignant potential: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:2752.
212. Friedlander ML, Hedley DW, Swanton C, Russell P. Prediction of long-term survival by flow cytometric analysis of the cellular DNA content in patients with advanced ovarian cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1988;6:282.
213. Kaern J, Trope C, Kjorstad KE, Abeler V, Pettersen EO. Cellular DNA content as a new prognostic tool in patients with borderline tumors of the ovary. Gynecol Oncol 1990;38:452.
214. Schwartz PE, Smith J. Management of ovarian stromal tumors. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1976; 125:402.
215. Pascale MM, Pugeat M, Roberts M, et al. Androgen suppressive effects of GnRH agonist in ovarian hyperthecosis and virilizing tumours. Clin Endocrinol 1994;41:571.
216. Willemsen W, Kruitwagen R, Bastiaans B, Hanselaar T, Rolland R. Ovarian stimulation and granulosa-cell tumour. Lancet 1993;341:986.
217. Colombo N, Sessa C, Landoni F, et al. Cisplatin, vinblastine, and bleomycin combination chemotherapy in metastatic granulosa cell tumor of the ovary. Obstet Gynecol 1986; 67:265.
218. Pectasides D, Alevizakos N, Athanassiou AE. Cisplatin-containing regimen in advanced or recurrent granulosa cell tumours of the ovary. Ann Oncol 1992;3:316.
219. Homesley HD, Bundy BN, Hurteau JA, Roth LM. Bleomycin, etoposide and cisplatin combination therapy of ovarian granulosa cell tumors and other stromal malignancies: a Gynecologic
Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1999;72:131.
220. Healy KL, Burger HG, Mamers P, et al. Elevated serum inhibin concentrations in postmenopausal women with ovarian tumors. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1539.
221. Gustafson ML, Lee MM, Asmundson L, MacLaughlin DT, Donahoe PK. Müllerian inhibiting substance in the diagnosis and management of intersex and gonadal abnormalities. J Pediatr Surg
1993;28:439.
222. Lane AH, Fuller AF Jr, Kehas J, Donahoe PK, MacLaughlin DT. Diagnostic utility of müllerian inhibiting substance determination in patients with primary and recurrent granulosa cell tumor.
Gynecol Oncol 1999;73:51.
223. Roush GR, El-Naggar AK, Abdul-Karim FW. Granulosa cell tumor of the ovary: a clinicopathologic flow cytometric DNA analysis. Gynecol Oncol 1995;56:430.
224. Strand CM, Grosh WW, Baxter J, et al. Peritoneal carcinomatosis of unknown primary site in women. Ann Intern Med 1989;111:213.
225. Fowler JM, Nieberg RK, Schooler TA, Berek JS. Peritoneal adenocarcinoma (serous) of müllerian type: a subgroup of women presenting with peritoneal carcinomatosis. Int J Gynecol Cancer
1994;4:43.
226. Williams SD. Current management of ovarian germ cell tumors. Semin Oncol 1994;8:53.
227. Williams SD. Ovarian germ cell tumors: an update. Semin Oncol 1998;25:407.
228. Williams SD, Blessing JA, Hatch KD, Homesley HD. Chemotherapy of advanced dysgerminoma: trials of the Gynecologic Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1950.
229. Williams SD, Blessing JA, Moore DH, Homesley HD, Adcock L. Cisplatin, vinblastine, and bleomycin in advanced and recurrent ovarian germ-cell tumors. Ann Intern Med 1989;111:22.
230. Williams SD, Birch R, Einhorn L, et al. Disseminated germ cell tumors: chemotherapy with cisplatin plus bleomycin plus either vinblastine or etoposide. N Engl J Med 1987;316:1435.
231. Williams S, Blessing JA, Liao SY, Ball H, Hanjani P. Adjuvant therapy of ovarian germ cell tumors with cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin: a trial of the Gynecologic Oncology Group. J Clin
Oncol 1994;12:701.
232. Schiller HM, Silverberg SG. Staging and prognosis in primary carcinoma of the fallopian tube. Cancer 1971;28:389.
233. Markman M, Zaino R, Busowski J, Barakat R. Carcinoma of the fallopian tube. In: Hoskins WJ, Perez CA, Young RC, eds. Principles and practice of gynecologic oncology. Philadelphia: JB
Lippincott Co, 1992:783.

SECTION 37.1 Molecular Biology of Breast Cancer
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 37.1
Molecular Biology of Breast Cancer
ROBERT B. DICKSON
MARC E. LIPPMAN
Genetics
Familial Disease
Cytogenetic Studies
Oncogenes and Suppressor Genes of Breast Cancer Progression
Steroid and Growth Factor Pathways of Cellular Regulation
Steroid Receptors
Growth Factor Pathways in the Normal and Malignant Gland
Signal Transduction and Nuclear Oncogenes
The Cell Cycle and Cell Death
Tumor Suppressor Genes
Cyclins, Cyclin-Dependent Kinases, and Inhibitors
Process of Malignant Progression
Implications of Molecular Biology for Tumor Prevention, Early Detection, Prognosis, and Response to Therapy
Chapter References

GENETICS
FAMILIAL DISEASE
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an introduction to the cellular, genetic, biochemical, and molecular bases of breast cancer. Although the roles of steroid
hormones have occupied breast cancer researchers since the 1950s, the roles of growth factors did not begin to emerge until the 1980s. The 1980s also saw the
discovery of many of the oncogenes and suppressor genes driving progression of the disease and highlighted their connections to growth factor and steroid
regulatory pathways. The 1990s witnessed the discovery of genes causing the familial forms of breast cancer. The final decade of the twentieth century also ushered
in major advances in our understanding of the cell cycle, DNA repair, and cell death (apoptosis) and their regulation.
Much excitement has been generated over the successes in identifying the inherited defects in somatic genes responsible for hereditary and familial breast cancers
(Table 37.1-1). Although hereditary breast cancers occurring in defined syndromes are characterized by a very high penetrance of multiple types of cancer, breast
cancer families may also display a lower penetrance and not be so clearly associated with elevated risk for multiple other types of cancer. The incidence of the former
category is estimated at 1% of breast cancer cases, whereas the latter make up approximately 5% to 10% of cases. 1 Most researchers in the field of hereditary
genetics of breast cancer have focused on genes that conformed to the two-hit hypothesis, which states that a point mutation might be inherited in one allele of a
candidate gene at a putative susceptibility locus and that loss of heterozygosity (LOH) or another genetic alteration might occur in the other allele of that locus later in
life, leading to cancer.

TABLE 37.1-1. Major Genetic Defects in Breast Cancer

The first triumph in the identification of genes leading to the multicancer syndromes that include breast cancer was the demonstration that the TP53 gene (on
chromosome 17p13) is responsible for the Li-Fraumeni syndrome of hereditary breast cancers, sarcomas, and other tumor types. 1,2 and 3 As is discussed later in the
section The Cell Cycle and Cell Death , mutations in this gene had been previously described in the context of progression of sporadic cancers of the breast and other
organs. More recently, mutations in the PTEN (or MMAC1) gene (on chromosome 10q22-23) have been described in Cowden's syndrome of hereditary breast
cancers and multicutaneous lesions. 4 This gene also is discussed later in the context of growth factor signal transduction, but it may not be commonly mutated in
sporadic breast cancers. Other studies have implicated mutations of the STK11/LKB1 gene (on chromosome 19) in the Peutz-Jeghers syndrome of hamartomatous
polyps, breast cancers, gastrointestinal cancers, and reproductive cancers, 5 and the MLH1 and MLH2 genes in the Muir-Torre syndrome of gastrointestinal and
genitourinary tumors and breast cancer. 6 Finally, although initially proposed to do so, mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia gene do not appear to contribute to the risk
of developing breast cancer. 7
Two important genes that confer risk for the more pervasive, familial forms breast cancer have been identified. Carriers of these mutant genes may display a wide
range of levels of increased risk of cancer, and the genes are quite prevalent in certain populations. King and coworkers 8 first localized BRCA-1 (for breast cancer
and ovarian cancer-1) to chromosome 17q21. The gene was subsequently cloned and found to be novel, containing an amino terminal, a zinc- and DNA-binding “ring
finger” motif, a carboxyl terminal BRCT (BRCA carboxy terminal) domain, and a nuclear localization sequence as recognizable motifs. 9 Interestingly, mutations in this
gene are particularly prevalent in breast cancer of Ashkenazi Jewish women; however, some of these women belong to families nearly devoid of multiple afflicted
members.1 The detection of BRCA-1 mutations in women with no familial association of the disease also has been reported in other studies comparing different
carrier populations, emphasizing the variable penetrance of inherited risk conferred by this gene. Mutations in the BRCA-1 gene have been verified in familial breast
and ovarian cancer patients, but surprisingly, mutations have not been detected in sporadic breast cancers. Thus, BRCA-1 does not appear to be a classic tumor
suppressor gene of relevance to both tumor onset and progression. However, studies have observed that the BRCA-1 protein may have an aberrant, cytoplasmic
localization in breast cancer cell lines from sporadic tumors, suggesting that a nonclassic mode of functional inactivation could be at work in this tumor type. 10 Other
studies have suggested that decreased expression of the BRCA-1 protein also occurs during the progression of sporadic breast cancers. 11 Consistent with these
findings are observations that antisense oligonucleotides directed against the BRCA-1 messenger RNA (mRNA) enhance the proliferation of breast tumor cells and
mammary epithelial cells in culture in vitro. Correspondingly, other studies have demonstrated that retroviral transfer of the nonmutated BRCA-1 gene selectively
inhibits growth of breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo in nude mice. 12
A separate body of work has identified a separate locus, termed BRCA-2 (on chromosome 13q13), which is associated with familial cancers of the female and male
breast and, to a lesser extent, of the ovaries. This gene also has been cloned; it shares homology with BRCA-113 and its encoded protein is now thought to function
biochemically in a fashion very similar to BRCA-1. However, although BRCA-2 confers risk of female breast cancer, its effects on risk of ovarian cancer appear
smaller than the risk conferred by BRCA-1. In addition, mutations of BRCA-2 confer risk of male breast cancer and (to a more limited extent) several other cancers,
such as prostate cancer, pancreatic cancer, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, basal cell carcinoma, bladder carcinoma, and fallopian tube tumors. Breast cancers of BRCA
carriers are, overall, of similar prognostic significance when matched for other characteristics to the sporadic cases of breast cancer in noncarriers, although they also

show more often a high nuclear grade and p53 mutations. 1
As already noted, the structure and function of the two BRCA proteins appear to be similar. Each appears to serve as an important regulator of cell-cycle “checkpoint
control” mechanisms, involving cell-cycle arrest, cell death (apoptosis), and DNA repair. BRCA-1 appears to directly interact with the p53 protein (leading to induction
of a cell-cycle inhibitor, p21), the RNA polymerase holoenzyme, the transcription factor CREB, and two novel proteins termed BAP1 and BARD1. Both BRCA-1 and
BRCA-2 are also found in complexes with Rad51, a protein important for the cellular response to DNA damage. 1 In addition, BRCA-1 is phosphorylated by the ATM
(ataxia telangiectasia mutated) kinase in response to DNA damage. 14 Thus, the roles of both BRCA proteins are now emerging as central gatekeepers of genomic
stability. 1 In studies of mice bearing a conditional knockout of the BRCA-1 gene, its further functions have emerged: mammary ductal morphogenesis and checkpoint
control in the G 2/M phase of the cell cycle. 15,16 Finally, and perhaps most interesting of all, the normal BRCA-1 protein appears to function to suppress the signaling of
mammary epithelial cells by the estrogen receptor. 17 This observation may place the BRCA proteins at center stage in control of the sex steroid–regulated pathways,
long suspected to induce breast cancer. 18
CYTOGENETIC STUDIES
Breast cancers, like other forms of malignancy, are thought to progress by accumulation of a series of genetic and resulting phenotypic changes in the pathways
regulating cellular proliferation, differentiation, death (apoptosis or necrosis), DNA repair, tissue compartmentalization, and responses to therapy. Although several
specific genetic alterations (discussed later in Oncogenes and Suppressor Genes of Breast Cancer Progression ) have been identified with high frequency and proven
relevance in breast cancer, certainly many more important genetic changes remain to be fully elucidated. Using classic cytogenetic methodologies and studies of
LOH, genetic regions identified as frequently rearranged, amplified, deleted, or otherwise altered have been commonly detected on chromosomes 1, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11,
13, 15, 16, 17, 18, and 20. More recently, the powerful techniques of comparative genomic hybridization and chromosome painting followed by spectral karyotyping
have allowed implication of additional chromosome regions, including areas of 10, 12, and 22. 19,20 Although they have only begun to be used in this type of study, the
techniques of comparative genomic hybridization and spectral karyotyping allow rapid analysis of subtle genomic imbalances and chromosomal rearrangements.
Using these techniques, the benign lesions termed fibroadenomas are observed to be largely devoid of genetic imbalances (although they do contain some
chromosomal defects), whereas aneuploid breast tumors contain far more chromosomal aberrations than diploid breast tumors. 20 Considering genetic changes on a
broad scale, it appears that breast cancer (in contrast to certain other common epithelial tumors, such as colon cancer) is primarily characterized by chromosomal
instability, as opposed to point mutagenesis. These chromosomal changes may arise from defects in the centrosomes and in the associated spindle apparatus of
mammary epithelial cells. However, the exact pathogenesis of these defects remains obscure. 21,22
ONCOGENES AND SUPPRESSOR GENES OF BREAST CANCER PROGRESSION
The most common genetic abnormalities in the progression both of sporadic and familial breast cancers (as in many other types of solid tumors) appear to be losses
of heterozygosity at multiple loci (see Table 37.1-1). As noted earlier, an LOH event uncovers the functional consequences of a mutation in an allele of a tumor
suppressor gene by removal of the dominant, normal allele. At the present time, in addition to the TP53 gene and the two BRCA loci noted earlier, LOH on 13q, 9p,
and 16q are known to involve specifically the tumor suppressor genes RB-1 (retinoblastoma-1), CDKN2 (encoding the p16 protein), and CDH1 (encoding the
E-cadherin protein), respectively. RB-1 and CDKN2 regulate the cell cycle, whereas CDH1 primarily regulates differentiation and tissue compartmentalization. Other
suspected tumor suppressor genes involved in the progression of breast cancer have been proposed to reside on 6q, 7q, 11p, 11q, 15q, 17q, 20, and 22. It is notable
that two types of DNA alteration can lead to suppressor gene inactivation on one allele, before LOH of the other allele. For example, although point mutation may be
more common for TP53 and Rb, gene methylation may be more common for CDKN2 and CDH1.23 In some cases, genomic areas containing tumor suppressor genes
also are susceptible to complete loss or deletion of both alleles. Certain tumor suppressor gene candidates, such as the gene encoding the p27 cell-cycle regulatory
protein,24 exhibit the characteristic of haploid insufficiency, whereby (in contrast to TP53, BRCA-1, BRCA-2, PTEN, CDKN2, and CDH1) a single normal copy of the
gene is not fully suppressive of cancer. For this type of suppressor gene, mutation deletion and LOH are not common. 24
The second most common type of cytogenetic alteration in breast cancer appears to be gene amplification. The initial step in gene amplification is thought to be the
formation of extrachromosomal, self-replicating units termed double-minute chromosomes. These genetic elements then later become permanently incorporated into
chromosomal regions and are termed homogeneous-staining regions. An amplified genetic unit (amplicon) is initially much larger than the actual size of the principal
gene of biologic importance to tumorigenesis. Thus, silent or irrelevant genes may be detected coamplified with one or more expressed genes on an amplicon. The
principal, best-established amplified and functional genes for tumorigenesis (also called dominant oncogenes) detected to date in breast cancer are the growth factor
receptor c-ERBB2, the nuclear transcription factor c-MYC, and the cell-cycle kinase regulator CCND1. A significant amount of work remains to be done to identify
other potentially important oncogenes in breast cancer. For example, DNA gains are common on 6q, 8p, 8q, 11q, 12q, 13q, and 20q. In each of these cases, however,
the specific genes involved in driving the chromosome amplification process are still under active investigation. 20,25

STEROID AND GROWTH FACTOR PATHWAYS OF CELLULAR REGULATION
STEROID RECEPTORS
The estrogen and progesterone receptors are dimeric, gene-regulatory proteins. Estrogen and progesterone are well-established endocrine steroid regulators that
modulate multiple aspects of mammary gland pathology. These two hormones work together to direct mammary epithelial growth, differentiation, and survival. 18,26,27
Although both steroids are commonly thought to be of primary importance for tumors arising in the reproductively competent years between puberty and menopause,
local aromatization of adrenal androgens provides additional estrogens in the postmenopausal years. Both estrogen and progesterone act through their nuclear
receptors (ER and PR, respectively) to modulate transcription of target genes. 26 Genes encoding the receptors for each class of steroids are members of a single
large superfamily of transcription-modulating factors. ERs may exist in either homodimeric or heterodimeric species, composed of a and b receptors. In contrast, the
PR is always a heterodimeric protein. Research on each system has defined additional, alternately spliced and mutated receptor forms. The biologic roles of these
additional variant receptor subunits is under current investigation. Each steroid receptor dimer is also associated with other proteins, including heat-shock proteins, to
allow ligand-binding association with its cognate, palindromic DNA elements. Other studies also have defined coactivational and corepressive proteins (CBP/p300,
SRC-1, TIF2, AIB-1, N-CoR, SMRT, NSD1), which also interact with steroid receptors and function to modulate histone acetylation and deacetylation, a critical
process thought to allow full access of the DNA to steroid receptors. DNA interaction of steroid receptors occurs through zinc finger structures of the receptors and
promotes formation of a stable initiation complex to facilitate the transcription of responsive genes. Of considerable interest is the observation that the cell-cycle
regulator cyclin D1 (product of the CCND1 gene) also interacts with the ER to promote its transcriptional activity. 26,27 Superimposed on this complexity, each receptor
is able to adopt multiple conformations, depending on the characteristics of interaction of the steroid (or nonsteroid ligand) with the receptor binding pocket. For
example, the estrogen receptor can adopt at least three distinct conformations, depending on the antiestrogen bound. 28 Other studies suggest that the signal
transduction pathways induced by growth factors and hormones may directly or indirectly regulate steroid receptor function. For example, cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP), epidermal growth factor (EGF), heregulin (an EGF family member), and insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1 appear to be able to modulate the
activity of the estrogen receptor through phosphorylation; receptor phosphorylation modulates as well the steroid specificity of receptors for transactivation of steroid
responsive genes. 26,29,30 The steroids are also well known for their ability to modulate directly the expression of cell-cycle regulatory genes known as nuclear
protooncogenes, such as c-MYC, and the EGF receptor (EGFR)/HER-2 growth factor–receptor pathways. 31,32 The nuclear protooncoproteins and other cell-cycle
regulatory proteins, such as cyclin D1, represent points of regulatory convergence of both steroid and growth factor pathways in cells. These findings describe a
complex role for growth factors in the expression of progressively more malignant phenotypes and in escape from normal hormonal control.
Because the growth of breast cancer is often regulated by the female sex steroids, determinations of the cellular concentrations of ER and PR in the tumor are
currently used to predict which patients have a good prognosis and which may also benefit from antihormonal therapy. Although these assays were originally
designed as radioligand techniques, they are more commonly performed today using radioimmunoassay and immunohistochemical technologies. Although extremely
useful, it has been repeatedly noted that these assays do not provide perfect prognostic tools for the disease. Although more than 60% of human breast cancers are
ER-positive, no more than two-thirds of these ER-positive tumors respond to endocrine therapy. 26,33,34,35 and 36 In addition, 5% to 10% of the patients designated as
ER-negative appear initially to respond to endocrine therapy. 26,37 To improve the value of determinations of the ER for tumor prognosis, the presence of the
estrogen-regulated PR protein is now routinely performed. In many breast tumor cell lines and in normal ER-containing tissues, such as the endometrium and brain,
PR expression also has been shown to be positively regulated by estrogen. 26,38 It is still not known whether ER regulates PR in normal human mammary epitheliums
in precisely the same subpopulation of ductal and lobular luminal cells, although this supposition is considered to be likely. It is of interest that the ER and PR appear
to be strongly up-regulated in ductal carcinoma in situ and in hormone-dependent breast cancer, relative to normal mammary epithelium. Whereas the ER- and
PR-positive epithelial cell populations are distinct from the majority of proliferative cells in the normal gland, in cancer these cells grow rapidly. It is of interest that in

histologically normal breast tissue adjacent to cancer, the epithelium also displays an aberrant, proliferative response to estrogen. 39,40 As already noted, other studies
have made a connection between the ER and the tumor suppressor BRCA-1; expression of the normal form of BRCA-1 suppresses the transactivational activity of the
ER.17
It is not clear what relationship exists between ER-positive and ER-negative forms of the disease. Several ER-negative breast cancer cell lines do not transcribe the
ER mRNA because of an extensive methylation of the 5' promoter of the gene. 41 Treatment of ER-negative breast cancer cells in vitro with azacytidine, an inhibitor of
gene methylation, resulted in expression of a functional ER. 42 However, the generality of this mechanism to clinical breast cancer is not yet certain. Central questions
in breast cancer research focus on mechanisms of desensitization of the disease to antihormonal therapy and design of strategies to maintain antihormonal
responses in patients. Studies have suggested that tamoxifen resistance of breast cancer may be associated with cellular hypersensitization to the weakly estrogenic
effects of the drug, perhaps due to expression of receptor-associated regulatory proteins, receptor mutation, or selection for variant receptor isoforms. 26,43,44 and 45
Several variant receptor isoforms are under investigation with respect to the latter possibility. An exon 5–deleted ER variant lacks the hormone binding domain,
displaying constitutively active, hormone-independent, transactivational characteristics. This receptor isoform is elevated in tamoxifen-relapsing breast cancer.
Expression of an exon 4–deleted ER variant correlates with low histologic grade and high PR. Expression of other deletions in exons 2 and 4 or 3 to 7 are associated
with high grade and high ER content. 26
Although measurement of PR improves the predictability of hormone dependency of a tumor, this relationship remains imperfect. Retrospective clinical studies have
demonstrated that, among ER-positive tumors, only 70% of those that are also PR-positive, and 25% to 30% of PR-negative tumors, respond to hormone therapy. The
reasons for these discrepancies are unclear but may include laboratory error, differential metabolism of tamoxifen, the ability of a mutated ER or PR to regulate gene
expression in the absence of ligand, the ability of defective or phosphorylated ER or PR to bind ligand but not regulate gene expression, or the ability of either
defective or phosphorylated receptors to induce constitutive synthesis of otherwise regulated proteins. 26 Clearly, a challenge for the future is the development of
routine, potentially more informative assays of ER and PR functionally. Another major hope is that study of other genetic changes in breast cancer, including those in
growth factors, their receptors, and their signaling, will also improve our ability to predict functionality of the steroid receptor pathways relative to therapeutic
outcomes.
The ER cannot be clearly classified either as an oncoprotein or tumor suppressor protein. Although it is thought to mediate the onset and progression of the disease,
unexpected results were obtained when the ER was expressed endogenously in ER-positive breast cancer lines and compared to its heterotypic expression in
formerly ER-negative lines. In striking contrast to its normal function in ER-positive cell lines, ER expressed in ER-negative cell lines functions to suppress cell growth,
in spite of its normal action to regulate expression of certain hormonally responsive genes. 46,47 Thus, the multiple differences between ER-positive and ER-negative
breast cancer appear to include incompatible growth regulatory mechanisms. We also do not understand the molecular basis for a lack of expression of PR in certain
ER-positive breast cancers. A cell hybridization study with an antiestrogen resistant, ER-positive, but PR-negative sublime of MCF-7 has shown that loss of PR
expression is a recessive phenotype in this system. 48 Finally, it should be noted that pathways of estrogen metabolism may be modulated in the pathophysiology of
the disease. For example, the enzyme aromatase, which is responsible for conversion of adrenal androgens to estrogen in the postmenopausal breast and in other
tissues, has been suggested as a potential, oncoprotein-like molecule in breast cancer. 49
Increased expression and altered isozyme patterns of the family of cellular enzymes termed protein kinase C (PKC) also have been implicated during malignant
progression of breast cancer. 50 This enzyme family can act to down-modulate ER mRNA, to activate ER function, to independently induce some estrogen-responsive
genes with AP-1 sites in their promoters, and to allow expression of more invasive cellular characteristics. 51 The PKC family contains at least nine cytoplasmic-nuclear
enzymes, each of which possesses serine-threonine specificity for phosphate in addition to other cellular proteins 52; different isotypes serve different cellular
functions. The activity of PKC is known to be regulated by hormones and growth factors during normal lactational differentiation and to contribute to the regulation of
casein expression. 52 PKC activity has been suggested to be elevated in ER-negative and drug-resistant breast cancer relative to ER-positive breast cancer.
Treatment of ER-positive breast cancer with an activator of PKC, such as the phorbol ester 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate, leads to rapid down-regulation of
ER, destabilization of its mRNA, and phosphorylation of the ER protein, coincident with modulation of its function. 53,54,55 and 56 Phosphorylation of ER and PR (induced
by estrogen itself) by growth factor pathways (such as IGF-1), heregulin, cAMP, dopamine agonists, and other hormones may also constitutively activate the steroid
receptors. 57,58,59 and 60 Other current studies have suggested that receptors for other steroids (potential cancer prevention agents, retinoids, vitamin D) may modulate
ER/PR function by modulating their chromatic interactions. 61,62
GROWTH FACTOR PATHWAYS IN THE NORMAL AND MALIGNANT GLAND
The natural secretory products of the mammary epithelial cell, colostrum and milk, are abundant sources of growth factors. 63 Growth factors in the normal gland
probably serve multiple purposes in the development of the newborn, in mammary growth, and in mammary carcinogenesis. A large body of literature has shown that
estrogen, antiestrogens, progestins, and antiprogestins strongly regulate certain growth factors and receptors of the EGF and transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b)
families, as well as growth factors, receptors, and secreted binding proteins of the IGF family ( Table 37.1-2).64,65 EGF, apparently the most abundant milk-derived
growth factor, is an important regulator both of the proliferation and the differentiation of the mouse mammary gland in vivo and of mouse mammary explants in
vitro.66,67 It also has been observed that circulating mouse salivary gland–derived EGF may potentiate spontaneous mammary tumor formation in the mouse model
and promote the growth of the tumors once they are formed. 66,68 EGF, or other members of this growth factor family, are also required supplements for the clonal
anchorage-dependent growth, in vitro, of normal human mammary epithelial cells.69 In contrast, human breast cancer cells in culture are largely independent of this
exogenous requirement. However, most breast cancer cell lines retain EGFRs and appear to be stimulated in their growth by their own autocrine or paracrine
production of this family of factors. 33,65

TABLE 37.1-2. Sex Hormone Regulation of Growth Factor Systems in Breast Cancer

Direct modulation of signal transduction pathways of EGF and its family members, as well as their indirect regulation by other unrelated growth factors are proving to
be critical during mammary development. The EGF family consists of, at present, four receptors and more than six growth factors in mammals, and an additional
half-dozen growth factors encoded only by certain mammalian viruses. TGF-a and amphiregulin, close structural and functional homologs of EGF, can produce
qualitatively the same proliferative effects as EGF in mouse mammary explants and in cultured human and mouse mammary epithelial cell lines. 65,67 Each of these
factors is also produced in proliferative, early ductal development; amphiregulin is also produced in the lobuloalveolar development of pregnancy. 70 However, the
detailed localization patterns and functions of each family member differ. 71,72 For example, an immunohistochemical study in the mouse gland has revealed that
expression of TGF-a is highest in the basal epithelial, proliferative end-bud cap cells, whereas expression of EGF is in scattered ductal luminal secretory cells. 73
Hepatocyte growth factor, a non-EGF family factor, also appears to be involved in ductal morphogenesis. 74 The EGF-related neuregulin subfamily of isoforms
(including heregulin) is expressed primarily in the mammary stroma and appears to modulate the lobuloalveolar development of pregnancy. 75 TGF-a, a
heparin-binding family member termed amphiregulin, and their common receptor, the EGFR, are all detected in vitro in proliferating human mammary epithelial cells in
culture. TGF-a mRNA levels are relatively low in explanted, primary cultures of resting epithelial organoids 76,77; the entire system appears tightly coupled to
proliferation in the normal gland. TGF-a and amphiregulin are known to act as autocrine autostimulatory growth factors in normal and immortalized human mammary
epithelial cells in mass culture; an anti-EGFR antibody or heparin, respectively, reversibly inhibited proliferation. 77,78 and 79 Although the majority of work on the biology

of the EGF family has focused on regulation of proliferation, it is now clear that many other aspects of mammary biology may be under its control, such as cell
differentiation and survival. The complex heterodimerization pattern of the EGFR family may play a role in governing the multiple responses of this system. 80,81
Since the early work of DeLarco, Todaro, Sporn, and others, overexpression of EGF family members has been thought to contribute to progression of multiple types of
cancer. Specifically, in early studies, the level of secretion of TGF-a in breast cancer, fibroblasts, and other cell types was correlated with expression of oncogenes. In
breast cancer, a direct correlation among TGF-a production, expression of the c-rasH oncogene, and malignant transformation was demonstrated in
vitro.82,83,84,85,86,87,88 and 89 Subsequent work in human breast cancer and in benign proliferative breast disease has also established that TGF-a overexpression is very
common.84,85
The development of transgenic technology has allowed additional correlation of expression of TGF-a, amphiregulin, and cripto-1 (another EGF family member, but
with an unrelated receptor type) with mammary tumors induced by a wide range of oncogenes. 86 This technology also has allowed study of the effect of
overexpression of TGF-a under the control of mammary-selective mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) or metallothionine promoters in the mammary glands of mice.
The multiple conclusions of these studies implicate TGF-a–induced proliferation, TGF-a–blocked differentiation, and TGF-a–suppressed, postlactational glandular
regression in mammary hyperplasia and tumorigenesis. 87,88,89,90,91 and 92 More recently, transgenic expression of the EGF subfamily known as neuregulins also has
been shown to lead to mammary tumorigenesis.
Although observations of overexpression of EGF family growth factors have led to significant biologic insights into breast cancer, the greatest clinical impact has come
from study of EGF family receptors. Gene amplification and resultant overexpression of EGFR-related c-erbB 2 (HER-2/neu) protein is found in approximately 25% of
human breast cancer cases 93 (see Table 37.1-1). In addition, expression of the EGFR occurs in 40% of breast tumors, but in the absence of gene amplification.
Expression of each protein signifies poor prognosis for the patient. 94 Current studies are addressing the frequency and relevance of expression of the additional,
EGFR-related c-erbB3 and c-erbB4 receptors in breast cancer. Transgenic mouse studies also have been successfully used to confirm the oncogenic potential of the
c-erbB2 oncoprotein. Interestingly, activational mutations in the extracellular domain of the c-erbB 2 oncoprotein were commonly detected in transgenic mouse
mammary carcinomas, but this type of mutation has not been described in human breast cancer. 95 Stimulation of cells through the EGFR family may also sensitize
cells to other carcinogenic insults. For example, expression of a TGF-a transgene accelerates the progression of carcinogen-initiated mouse mammary tumors. 96 In
summary, the etiologic evidence is compelling for EGF family growth factors and their receptors in mammary tumorigenesis after combining data from human
pathologic studies and from transgenic mouse models.
In human breast cancer cell lines in vitro, autocrine growth dependence of cells on the TGF-a/EGFR system also has been documented in one ER-negative breast
cancer cell line—the MDA-MB-468. It is clear in this line that a rare gene amplification of the EGFR sensitizes the cells to autocrine function of TGF-a. This line, thus
representative only of a small percentage of breast cancers, expresses more than 10 6 EGFRs (per cell). TGF-a and amphiregulin are also induced by estrogen in
hormone-dependent MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Antisense TGF-a complementary DNA, anti–TGF-a antibodies, and anti-erbB 2 ribozymes partially block
estrogen-induced growth in vitro,97,98,99,100,101 and 102 strongly suggesting a hormone-inducible type of autocrine system. The potential clinical relevance of this type of
system is significant. Possible autocrine functions of other EGF family members in breast cancer have not yet been fully evaluated, although high expression of
neuregulins has been reported in some cell lines in vitro. A number of studies have more closely addressed the functions of the neuregulin subfamily in their
interactions with the EGFR-related c-erbB 3 and c-erbB4 proteins in breast cancer. The neuregulins appear to act in vitro with biphasic effects: Low levels are
proliferative, whereas higher levels may inhibit epithelial proliferation. The neuregulins also appear to promote differentiation and induce casein synthesis in the
developing gland and in breast cancer cells. 75,103,104 To summarize available data, autocrine function of the EGFR ligand system may be most critical in normal gland
growth and early stages of breast tumorigenesis, as contrasted with later stages of the disease. Paracrine, tumor-host interactive functions of this family of factors
(discussed later in Process of Malignant Progression) may then begin to dominate its functions as the disease progresses. Strategies using toxic, genetically
engineered EGFR ligand bacterial toxin fusion proteins (termed oncotoxins) or humanized, anti–c-erbB 2 or anti-EGFR antibodies, either alone or coupled with toxins
or other therapeutic drugs ( immunotoxins), could possibly find future therapeutic utility, because a large portion of hormone-independent breast cancers express
significant levels of these receptors. 83,93,105,106
A second growth factor family of potential importance in cancer is the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family. 107 Members of this family also have been implicated in
mammary gland growth and malignant transformation. These growth factors bind to heparin, require a heparin cofactor for proper presentation to and interaction with
receptors, and accumulate in the extracellular matrix after their release from cells. Some FGF isoforms do not possess a signal sequence of secretion, but all forms
appear to be released by cells by one or more mechanisms. Although FGF-1 and FGF-4 are expressed during the ductal growth phase of the mouse mammary gland
in luminal ductal epithelial cells, expression of FGF-2 and FGF-7 are primarily stromal. FGF-1, FGF-2, and FGF-7 have been detected in mammary preneoplasias,
tumors, and cell lines, but not in levels significantly higher than normal. FGF-3 (also known in the mouse as int-2) is a well-known oncogenic growth factor activated in
the mouse mammary gland by MMTV insertional mutagenesis. FGF-4 also has been associated with metastasis of certain mouse mammary tumors.108 However,
although amplification of the genes encoding FGF-3 and FGF-4 have been observed in human breast cancer, these two genes are seldom expressed at the protein
level. This finding appears to be the result of their co-amplification with other more important genes located nearby on the chromosomes (genes encoding c-erbB 2 and
cyclin D1, respectively). In the human mammary gland, FGF-1 and FGF-2 have been localized both to myoepithelial and to epithelial cells. Although studies in vitro
have implicated FGF-2 as an autocrine growth factor in immortalized human mammary epithelial cells, 109 expression of FGF-2 in clinical human breast cancer is
correlated with a good prognosis. Although FGF-1 also has been detected in human breast cancer, it is localized primarily to macrophages 110; its biologic role is not
fully known, but it could potentially contribute to inflammation and angiogenesis. FGF receptors (FGFR) 1–4 each have been localized (and the gene encoding
FGFR1 occasionally amplified) in human breast cancer. 111,112 and 113 Receptor heterodimerization is likely to represent a locus of control for FGFR function. Several of
the FGF family members have been shown to promote tumor growth and dissemination of metastasis in xenograft models of human breast cancer, at least partially
through effects on the tumor vasculature. However, the complete relevance of these observations to the pathophysiology of human breast cancer is still under
investigation. 114
TGF-b, a family of at least three growth factors distinct from FGF and EGF families, is also present in the normal and malignant mammary epithelium and in human
milk.115,116 Receptors for TGF-bs comprise a family of heterodimeric serine-threonine kinases. 117 TGF-bs are profoundly negative in their proliferative effects on ductal
epithelial proliferation in mouse mammary glands in vivo27 and on most other epithelial cell types. Expression of TGF-b family members is suppressed by estrogen
and progesterone. 27,65 All three TGF-b isoforms are detected at the mRNA level in the developing mouse mammary epithelium. All isoforms of TGF-b, once produced,
are retained in the stromal matrix surrounding the mammary ducts, but TGF-b is absent from the matrix of growing end buds and lateral branches. 118 Glandular
production of TGF-b decreases, along with its stromal accumulation around alveoli during midpregnancy and lactation; TGF-b is suppressive of lactation. 119,120 and 121
However, TGF-b is again elevated as postlactational glandular regression occurs. 122 The role of TGF-b also has been examined by using a transgenic mouse
approach. Targeted expression of TGF-b in the pregnant mammary epithelium with an MMTV promoter leads to inhibition of both alveolar development and
lactation. 120 All three TGF-b isoforms have been detected in the human gland, with a similar distribution to that observed in the mouse. Paradoxically, TGF-b
production increases with malignant progression in breast cancer. Its accumulation may have significance for development of the characteristic fibrous desmoplastic
stroma of breast cancer, 123 tumor angiogenesis, and immune suppression. 124 Thus, although serving a growth-inhibitory role in the normal gland, progression to
cancer may be associated with desensitization of this pathway. Overproduction of TGF-b may thus contribute to aberrant tumor-host interactions in breast
cancer. 118,125,126 It is of interest, at least in some cell lines in vitro, that TGF-b may even stimulate tumor cell invasion. 127 An active area of current investigation involves
study of inactivating mutations in the TGF-b receptor. To date, however, loss of TGF-b receptor by mutation or by loss of expression has been observed in colon
cancer and retinoblastoma, respectively. 128
A complex regulatory system is also emerging from studies of the insulin-like growth factors. Whereas the IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) is a heterodimeric tyrosine kinase,
closely related to the insulin receptor, the IGF-2R is an unrelated binding protein also capable of interacting with TGF-b and with cathepsin D. IGF-2 production, as
well as cellular responsiveness to IGFs, is stimulated by estrogen and inhibited by antiestrogens in some hormone-dependent breast cancer cell lines. IGF-2 is
thought to be a potential autocrine growth factor in breast cancer; in contrast, IGF-1 is synthesized in the tumor stroma and is considered to have important paracrine
growth and survival-stimulatory actions in the disease. Transgenic mouse models have demonstrated that mammary expression of IGF-1 causes ductal hypertrophy
and suppression of postlactational involution and that IGF-2 expression can lead to mammary cancer. The cellular responsiveness to IGFs appears to be modulated
by estrogens and antiestrogens as a result of regulation of both receptors (type 1 being induced and type 2 repressed); IGF-binding proteins 2, 4, and 5 (each of
which are estrogen-induced); IGF-binding protein 3 (which is estrogen inhibited), and the signal transduction docking phosphoprotein insulin receptor substrate 1
(IRS-1) (which is estrogen-induced). The biologic functions of the IGF binding proteins (BP) are not fully understood, although BP-1 appears inhibitory of the actions
of IGF-1, even with in vivo models. Although BP-3 may contribute to poor prognosis of breast cancer, BP-4 and IGF-1R correlates with good prognosis. IGF-2R is
under active investigation as a tumor suppressor gene in cancers of the breast and other tissues. Its gene is subject to frequent LOH and, possibly, mutations in

breast cancer.129,130,131 and 132
It should be noted that, at present, several dozen other growth factors have been identified in breast cancer, but their consideration is beyond the scope of this
chapter; this information is reviewed elsewhere. 133 To summarize some of these data, prolactin 134 and mammary-derived growth factor-1 might be autocrine positive
factors in breast cancer, and mammary-derived growth inhibitor and mammostatin may serve negative growth functions. 133 In addition, hepatocyte growth
factor/scatter factor is a stromal-derived paracrine-acting stimulator both of epithelial growth and of tumor angiogenesis. Finally, vascular endothelial growth factor,
pleiotropin, and platelet-derived growth factor may serve as angiogenic, vascularization-inducing factors in breast cancer. 65,133 Other growth factors under hormonal
regulation in breast cancer probably remain undiscovered; future investigations should evaluate this possibility. Many studies have also established that steroid
regulation of growth factors is important in the uterus and, possibly, the prostate gland, as well as in the breast. 133
SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION AND NUCLEAR ONCOGENES
Unifying, mechanistic links between the proliferative actions of growth- and survival-modulatory steroids, growth factors, and integrins in diverse tissues are
represented by the multiple classes of nuclear protooncogenes and other transcription factors (see Table 37.1-1).65,135 These transcription-regulating proteins mediate
convergent pathways of regulatory stimuli directly through steroid action, through growth factor–induced mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, through other
cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases (Fak, Src) or phospholipase C–PKC, through cytokine-induced JAK-STAT pathways, through TGF-bfamily–induced SMAD molecules,
and through integrin-induced Fak/Src pathways. The MAP kinase pathways are central pathways for the proliferative and survival stimuli exerted through the EGFR,
the c-erbB 2 receptor, and the insulin receptor type 1 families. Receptors trigger this pathway through autophosphorylation and subsequent binding to src homology
2/3 (SH2/SH3) or phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB) domains of signal transduction adaptor proteins. After mitogenic growth factor treatment of many types of cells,
including normal and malignant breast epithelial cells, and a cascade of protein phosphorylations, c-Myc, AP-1–acting (c-fos, c-Jun, and Jun B), c-Myb, and Ets
protooncogenes and ATF, EIK, SRF, and NFKB transcription factors are commonly observed to be induced. The protein products of at least three nuclear
protooncogenes, c-MYC, c-FOS, and c-JUN, are also induced by both estrogen and progesterone in breast cancer. Progestins additionally induce c-JUNB.133,135 Not
surprisingly, tamoxifen down-modulates c-MYC expression during treatment-induced regression of patient tumors. 136 c-MYC, c-FOS, and c-JUN induction also have
been shown to occur in human mammary epithelial cells in vitro and in the rat uterus in response to estrogen treatment in vivo.137,138 and 139 Cyclin D1 also appears to
be a central nuclear protooncogene-like molecule further downstream of AP-1 and other mitogenic transcriptional controls. Not only does it regulate the G 1 phase of
the cell cycle, but similar to the AIB-1 (amplified in breast cancer) protein, it also appears to directly modulate in a positive way the transactivational ability of the
estrogen receptor. 140,141
c-Fos and c-Jun proteins contain specific domains that allow them to form a heterodimeric complex that can interact with the gene promoter consensus sequence
termed AP-1. In an analogous manner, the c-Myc protein, of central importance to estrogenic stimulation of breast cancer cells, dimerizes with another protein termed
Max (or Myn in the mouse) to modulate genes through a different consensus sequence, termed an E-box (and possibly other sequences). The cellular supply of Max
that is available for productive dimerization with c-Myc depends on its interaction with its other family members, termed Mad and Mxi1. The interaction of Max with
either of these proteins serves to reduce its availability for interactions with Myc and may exert negative transactivational through E-box sites. Myc-Max dimers are
known to induce proliferation, apoptosis, and chromosomal instability, depending on the cellular context and degree of expression. Myc-Max interaction with the TATA
binding protein represents one transactivational mechanism to stimulate basal transcription. A second specific transactivational mechanism involves E-box promoter
genes such as those encoding the CAD (carbamoyl phosphate synthetase–aspartate transcarbamoylase–dihydro orotase), DHFR (dihydrofolate reductase), and ODC
(ornithine decarboxylase) enzymes. 142 However, multiple c-Myc–regulated genes do not appear to possess E-boxes, and E-box–interactive sequences do not appear
to be required for c-Myc effects on proliferation and apoptosis. 143
Several other c-Myc–interactive proteins exist in addition to the TATA binding protein and Max; they include TRRAP, BIN1, DAM, p107, YY1, MIZ1, and TFII-1. Thus,
multiple other potential mechanisms may exist for transactivational and transcriptional suppressive effects of c-Myc. 142 Estrogen and progesterone induce c-Myc; the
latter appears to primarily modulate the mammary epithelial cell cycle both by inducing the synthesis of cyclin E and the CDC25A phosphatase and by triggering the
degradation of p27 (kip1), resulting in an active CDK2. Activation of CDK2 results in inhibitory phosphorylation of Rb and promotes cell-cycle progression though
G1/S. Additional primary effects of c-Myc appear to be induction of cyclin A to activate CDK2 and induction of the E 2F1 transcription factor to promote cell-cycle
progression through S. 142,144,145
Although much is known about the cellular and molecular biology of c-Myc, it is clearly an understudied oncoprotein in breast cancer. It appears to be central to the
disease in two respects. First, antisense oligonucleotides directed against the c-Myc mRNA have been used to block estrogen-induced proliferation in breast cancer
cells. 146 Second, amplification of the c-MYC gene is now known to be one of the most common genetic alterations in breast cancer; approximately one-fifth of breast
cancers contain this genetic change. A putative (but currently unidentified) suppressor gene on chromosome 1p32-pter is proposed to control c-MYC amplification in
breast cancer.144,147 Despite its apparent importance, study of c-MYC gene expression in breast cancer has been slow because of difficulties in measuring its encoded
protein in tumor biopsies. Specifically, the protein has a very short half-life, 148 and there have been a lack of suitable monoclonal antibodies capable of staining
paraffin sections. A few studies focusing on gene amplification have shown that c-MYC is associated with poor prognosis, high S phase, and postmenopausal
disease, although the latter has not been confirmed. 144,147 Based on several investigations in various epithelial malignancies, including those of the ovary and liver,
c-MYC amplification is thought to cooperate with TGF-a with EGFR overexpression and with downstream signaling pathways. Thus, dual stimulation of the EGFR
pathway and c-Myc may serve a general cooperative function in epithelial transformation. 149,150 and 151
The c-Myc protein may, therefore, act in multiple systems to regulate gene expression, promote cell proliferation, inhibit differentiation, modulate cell adhesion, and
effect immune recognition. Central to these effects is its role to specifically regulate initiation of DNA replication. Overall, gene regulatory activities of the protein also
encompass both activation and suppression of gene expression; modulation of the cell cycle; activation of apoptosis (programmed cell death); and modulation of DNA
metabolism, DNA dynamics, energy metabolism, and macromolecular synthesis. It is also known that the c-Myc protooncogene product can immortalize cells. Of
current interest, the role of c-Myc to induce apoptosis depends on p19 ARF-mediated activation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene, at least in fibroblasts. However, this
mechanism has not yet been demonstrated in mammary cancer.142,148 A variety of other malignancy-associated biologic consequences of c-MYC amplification also
have been described. Very pertinent to the process of malignant progression, some reports have suggested that expression of the c-MYC gene may allow
amplification of other genes, (e.g., ODC and DHFR)142, alter cellular resistance to cis-platinum and other DNA strand scission–inducing drugs, 152 and act to suppress
differentiation in association with the decrease of collagen gene transcription. 153 The c-Myc protein may also inhibit transcription of the rat neu oncogene (c-ERB2
homologue).154 However, the importance of this interaction for human breast cancer is not yet known. Nevertheless, c-MYC amplification appears not to be closely
associated with c-ERBB2 amplification in primary breast cancer. c-Myc may also relate to the aging and senescence process; increased expression of c-Myc in
multiple tissue types with aging may reflect cumulative proliferation-associated disregulation and has been proposed to contribute to aberrant mitogenic responses of
the tissue in postmenopausal breast cancer. 155 However, increased expression of the c-Myc partner Mxil is also enhanced during aging and may attenuate the effects
of c-Myc.156
The c-MYC gene and other oncogenes have been introduced into immortalized human or mouse mammary epithelial cells using an amphotrophic retroviral vector.
These studies have observed that either c-Myc or the simian virus 40T nuclear oncoproteins (but not v-Ras H or v-Mos cytoplasmic oncoproteins) allowed the cells to
grow in soft agar in response to FGF-1, FGF-2, EGF, or TGF-a. 157 Because mammary fibroblasts produce EGF- and FGF-related growth factors 158 and because their
conditioned media could support transforming growth of nuclear oncogene–transfected mammary epithelial cells, these observations have supported a role in vivo for
stromal-epithelial interactions. Such a synergistic interaction has been observed in vitro in TGF-a/c-Myc bitransgenic mice. Co-overexpression of these two gene
products allows rapid (10 weeks) onset of highly proliferative mammary tumors, independent of sex hormones in either gender. 150,151 Thus, an amplified c-MYC gene
may function in breast cancer to allow growth factors or hormones to act to drive aberrant, transformed growth. 145

THE CELL CYCLE AND CELL DEATH
TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENES
Seminal studies by Broca in the nineteenth century 159 established that breast cancer can have a familial pattern of onset in 5% to 10% of cases. In addition, it has
been observed that families with a very high incidence of the disease sometimes display a high incidence of additional cancer(s), such as ovarian cancer. A
hypothesis has been proposed that such families inherit a defective or lost allele encoding a tumor suppressor gene. This hypothesis was based largely on work by
Knudson, who suggested that the inactivation of two alleles of a gene was required in the disease known as retinoblastoma, 160 and Harris, who demonstrated that

certain chromosomes could suppress malignancy in vitro in cell hybrid studies. 161 This concept has led to the discovery of several tumor suppressor genes in breast
cancer, some regulating the cell cycle and cell death, and others regulating different aspects of the progression of the disease.
The first tumor suppressor gene shown to confer risk of an inherited breast cancer syndrome was termed TP53, and more recently, the PTEN gene was implicated in
this respect. Also, the two BRCA genes (see Table 37.1-1) are responsible for a larger group of patients with an inherited pattern of breast cancer ( BRCA-2) and
breast plus ovarian cancers (BRCA-1). It is now widely accepted that BRCA-1, BRCA-2, and PTEN all function as tumor suppressor genes. However, in contrast to
TP53, their mutations are uncommon in sporadic breast cancers. Conversely, three other well-established tumor suppressor genes, CDKN2 (p16), RB-1, and CDH1
(E-cadherin), are commonly altered (mutation, methylation, LOH, and deletion) in sporadic breast cancer but do not appear to be involved in conferring familial risk of
the disease (see Table 37.1-1).
During the malignant progression of breast cancer to its fully metastatic state, mutation, inactivation, loss, or down-regulated expression of tumor suppressing genes
commonly occurs. Estimated incidences of these processes for the relevant, known suppressor genes are as follows: TP53, 30% to 40%; RB-1, 15% to 20%; CDKN2,
20% to 30%; and CDH1, 20% to 30%. 135 Tumor suppressor genes appear to function in four major ways: as antiproliferative or antisurvival factors, as DNA-repair
inducers, and as differentiation-promoting agents. BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 serve roles to direct repair of damaged DNA. The ATM protein (described earlier as a
suspected tumor suppressor) detects the damage and transmits the signal to the BRCA proteins, while multiple other proteins, such as Rad51 and p53, serve roles
downstream of the BRCAs.162,163 E-cadherin, a suppressor that works through an unrelated pathway, serves to strengthen homotypic interactions of mammary
epithelial cells and maintain their differentiated status; in addition, it promotes sequestration of b-catenin (a proliferation-promoting protein that regulates the T-cell
factor (TCF) class of transcription factors). 164 p53, by inducing the p21 protein (Waf-1/CIP-1), also inhibits proliferation, whereas the p16 protein also serves to inhibit
the cell cycle; both p53 and p16 suppressor proteins ultimately promote phosphorylation and inactivation of Rb to block G 1 and G1/S transit of the cell cycle. 165,166
Although Rb is thought to be a central tumor suppressor protein in breast cancer, it appears to be understudied at present, particularly with respect to its mutation
status. PTEN serves to suppress cell survival and proliferation by dephosphorylating phosphoinositides to prevent their activation of the three AKT signal transduction
kinases.167,168 and 169 Beyond the scope of this chapter is the consideration of literally dozens of additional candidate tumor suppressor genes that also function on
these cellular pathways (see also the section Process of Malignant Progression).135
Study of the TP53 gene has provided remarkable insights into multiple areas of cancer biology. TP53 is a tumor suppressor gene, but when mutated in one of several
sensitive regions, its conformation changes, its stability increases, and its regulatory properties are radically altered. Mutation can confer a loss of tumor suppressor
activity and gain of tumor promotion function. 170 The nonmutated p53 gene product is an oligomeric DNA binding protein that functions to trigger cellular responses to
DNA damage; it has been termed the “guardian of the genome.” p53 functions both by protein-protein interactions and by regulation of transcription. The p53 protein
appears to function in the context of DNA damage as a G 1/S and G2/M checkpoint controller to slow cell growth and induce DNA repair; cell death is triggered in a
process termed apoptosis if damage is too severe for repair. It is of particular importance for the progression of many cancers, including breast cancer, that mutation
of p53 is associated with enhanced genetic instability. 171 Certain viral proteins, although they are probably not relevant to breast cancer, are known to inactivate p53
as a critical event in viral carcinogenesis. 170
It is not yet fully clear what molecular events induce (through protein stabilization) the p53 protein. However, it is well known that UV irradiation and double-strand
DNA breaks are strong inducers of p53 stabilization through the DNA-dependent protein kinase and the ATM gene product. ATM is a signal transduction protein with
high homology to phosphatidyl–insitol-3 kinase. 172 Of uncertain molecular bases are observations that inhibitors of PKC inhibitors, serine-threonine phosphatases,
and cAMP can prevent p53-mediated responses. On a molecular level, p53 induces growth arrest in multiple points of the cell cycle through induction of p21, a
multipotent inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), which blocks cell-cycle progression (discussed later in Cyclins, Cyclin-Dependent Kinases, and Inhibitors );
p21 also blocks a catalytic inhibitor of a DNA replication termed proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). A very important, specific consequence of p21 induction is
the inhibition of cyclin E–CDK2-catalyzed phosphorylation of the Rb protein. Hypophosphorylation of Rb allows its function as an additional cell-cycle inhibitor. p53 is
also thought to directly modulate transcription of Rb and to directly bind a partner of Rb (termed p107) at the protein level. 173 Additionally, p53 induces transcription of
genes encoding cyclin G, ERCC (excision repair cross-complementing), and Gadd 45 (growth arrest DNA damage protein), all proteins thought to be involved in DNA
repair. A third general process triggered by p53 is apoptotic death. This process is quite distinct from necrotic death in that it requires ATP, the cell condenses the
chromation of its nucleus, the nucleus undergoes fragmentation, and the cell maintains an intact plasma membrane until the final stage, at which point terminal cells
are consumed by macrophages.170,173 Negative regulators of p53 are thought to include its phosphorylation by several kinases, its nuclear exclusion by unknown
mechanisms, and its complexation with a protein called MDM-2 (murine double-minute gene-2), itself a p53-inducible protein and an oncogene (at least in some
cancers other than breast cancer). 173
The most extreme result of p53 induction is apoptosis. A protein whose transcription is directly inhibited on this pathway is Bcl-2 174 (Table 37.1-3). Bcl-2 is an
apoptosis-preventing protein, commonly expressed in breast cancer in p53-mutated cells. 175 Bcl-2 is localized in the mitochondria, nuclear membrane, and
endoplasmic reticulum. It functions, along with a homologue termed BclxL, to suppress the function of Bax, a death-inducing protein; many Bcl family members act to
form mitochondrial pores of differential ionic permeability. Several other stimulatory and inhibitory family members exist, including Bclx S, a promoter of apoptotic
death. This entire system functions to regulate death by regulating a series of regulatory cysteine proteases within the cell. The apoptotic system is thought to be
triggered by hypoxia or by a shift in the redox potential of the cell; Bcl-2 and Bclx L protect against death (induced by proapoptotic Bax) by modulating mitochondrial
permeability and regulating mitochondrial release of cytochrome C. 170,171 In addition, two family members of p53, called p73 and p63, are under current study for their
p53-like properties. 176,177

TABLE 37.1-3. Cell Death (Apoptosis) Regulatory Factors in Breast Cancer

Although quite complex, the balance of life/apoptosis is critically regulated in cancer progression and response to therapy (see Table 37.1-3). Estrogen, progesterone,
TGF-a, EGF, and insulin all appear to suppress apoptosis and promote survival of breast cancer model systems. Antiestrogens, antiprogestins, TGF-b, and the
overexpressed c-Myc oncoprotein can induce apoptosis unless countered with a survival-promoting, environmental influence. Current research is focused on how
these factors regulate the apoptotic pathway(s). 178,179 The system has clear implications for response of breast cancer to radiation, antihormonal and biologic
therapies, chemotherapy, and even gene therapy. For example, it has been suggested that estrogen promotes chemotherapy resistance of breast cancer by induction
of Bcl-2,180 that p53 mutation results in resistance to chemotherapy, 181 and that experimental gene therapy with bclx can differentially kill tumor cells and sensitize
them to chemotherapy but spare bone marrow cells.182,183 Gene therapy addressing the p53 gene directly has also been proposed. 170
The RB-1 gene product also has tumor suppressor functions and is a nuclear protein. When mutated in one of several critical regions, the function of the gene product
is inactivated. The Rb protein is also functionally inactivated by phosphorylation; this phosphorylation is catalyzed by one or more cyclin-dependent protein kinases. It
is of interest that a large number of cellular growth regulatory proteins, such as members of the c-Myc, CDK, and E 2F-1 families, bind the Rb protein or its family
members. Rb appears to function to restrict cellular entry into the S phase of the cell cycle ( Table 37.1-4). Hypophosphorylated Rb binds E 2F-1 and DF-1 family
members to restrict access of these transcription factors to the chromatin. The result is a blockade of transcription from genes involved in G 1/S progression and S
phase in the cell cycle. 165,184

TABLE 37.1-4. The Cell Cycle

CYCLINS, CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASES, AND INHIBITORS
Growth factors and inhibitors, as well as oncogenes and tumor suppressors, function to a large extent in the G 1 phase of the cell cycle. The cell cycle (see Table
37.1-4) is directly controlled by an ordered series of CDKs, their positive regulatory subunits (cyclins), and their inhibitors. Early G 1 is driven by the three cyclin D
family members bound to CDK4 and CDK6. In the next portion of the cycle, the G 1/S transition is driven by cyclin E–CDK2. The S phase is driven by cyclin A–CDK2,
and then the G 2/M transition is driven by cyclin B/A–CDC2 (CDK1).
As important regulators of the epithelial cell cycle in breast cancer, tyrosine kinase receptor-acting growth factors and sex steroids induce both c-Myc and cyclin D1.
c-Myc itself appears to suppress D1 in cycling cells, induce cyclin E (and possibly CDC25A), and trigger the proteosome-mediated destruction of the CDK1 p27 (kip1)
and activation of CDK2. Cyclin D1–CDK4 is inhibited by the CDKI called p15 (INK4), by the tumor suppressive CDK1 p16 (MTS1 or INK4b), and by p18 and p19,
more recently defined CDK1s of the same family. Cyclin D–CDK4 and cyclin E–CDK2 are also each inhibited by the CDK1 termed p21 (Waf-1/CIP-1), which is
induced by p53; by p27 (kip1); and by p57 (kip2), which may be involved in cellular senescence. It has been shown that synthesis of CDK4 is inhibited by TGF-b;
overexpression of CDK4 leads to TGF-b resistance. p27 is also of note because it is induced by growth-inhibitory TGF-b. Rb is phosphorylated and inactivated both
by the cyclin D–CDK4 and by the cyclin E–CDK2 kinases. Many the effects of multiple regulators of G 1 and G1/S are thus integrated by their collective effects on
phosphorylation of Rb. c-Myc also disregulates S phase by inducing cyclin (to activate CDK1) and E 2F-1. P53 also functions later in the cycle; its mutation not only
abrogates the G 1/S checkpoint, but also a post–M spindle assembly checkpoint. 135,185,186
As should now be evident, a major body of work has begun to implicate cyclins as likely oncogenes and CDK inhibitors as likely tumor suppressors (see Table 37.1-1).
These studies have shown that the genes encoding cyclin D1 and cyclin E are commonly amplified and deregulated, respectively, in breast cancer. The amplification
of the cyclin D1 (CCND1) gene occurs in approximately 30% of breast cancer cases; its prognostic significance is under current investigation. 187,188 It is of note that
the genes for both cyclin D1 and cyclin E can function as mammary cancer–inducing oncogenes when driven by the MMTV promoter in the transgenic mouse. 189
Deletion of the gene-encoding cyclin D1 ( ccnd1) in a mouse model results in failure of lobuloalveolar development of the mammary gland. 190 More recent studies,
initially in cancer cell lines, have also implicated the cyclin inhibitor p16 [MTS-1(multiple tumor suppressor-1)] and p27 (kip-1) as major tumor suppressors; the
CDKN2 gene (encoding p16) is commonly inactivated by gene methylation, 191 whereas the gene encoding p27 is commonly down-regulated. Finally, the RB-1 gene is
commonly mutated, deleted, and down-regulated in breast cancer. The result of all of these common aberrations seems to be similar—defective G 1/S transitions in the
mammary epithelial cell cycle. 192

PROCESS OF MALIGNANT PROGRESSION
Evidence is rapidly accumulating that the development of cancer is a process that not only involves disregulation of proliferative factors and activation of oncogenes
but also disregulation of inhibitory factors and loss of suppressor gene function ( Fig. 37.1-1). Studies in breast cancer have served to underscore the role of germline
deletion or mutation of suppressor genes in the familial forms of the disease, and somatic gene amplifications, mutations, deletions, and rearrangements during
malignant progression of the disease. Malignant progression of breast cancer involves a progressive deterioration of the normal mechanisms of cell-cycle
progression. DNA repair, apoptotic controls, and tissue compartmentalization break down (through angiogenesis and tumor invasion) until the highly abnormal state of
metastatic disease is reached. Early aberrations in proliferation probably only slightly perturb the pathways activated by systemic hormones (estrogen and
progesterone) and local growth factors (such as TGF-a). The actual mechanisms for these early hyperactive proliferative controls to induce benign breast disease or
premalignant atypical ductal or lobular carcinoma are not at all clear at the present time. Some studies have shown that genetic damage is minimal in these early
lesions, although this area of study is only in its earliest stages. 193

FIGURE 37.1-1. Summary of the genetic and phenotypic alteration of mammary epithelial cells associated with the onset and progression of breast cancer.

An interesting, current area of research into mechanisms of onset of breast cancer involves the DNA replication–associated enzyme telomerase. High levels of
expression of this enzyme have been shown to lead to cell immortalization, a widely hypothesized early step in human tumorigenesis. One study has implicated the
catalytic subunit of this enzyme (hTERT) plus two oncogenes—simian virus 40T (a viral oncogene that inactivates both p53 and Rb) and the mutant form of the signal
transduction protein c-RasH—in converting human embryonic kidney cells to cancer. 194 Telomerase overexpression has been detected in the earliest stages of breast
cancer; it is known to be induced both by estrogen and by c-Myc. Thus, telomerase disregulation may serve a subtle, early function in breast
tumorigenesis—replicative immortality. 195,196,197 and 198
The next steps in tumorigenesis almost entirely involve spontaneous gene amplification, LOH, and mutations, which arise because of overactive cell cycles or
defective cell death that are largely due to abnormal cell-cycle checkpoint controls. Once these types of genetic alterations begin to occur, a cascade of further
genetic changes occurs, resulting from overall genomic and chromosomal instability. Familial disease may bypass one or more steps in this cascade. The
mechanisms for genetic instability and accumulation of further mutations in other cancers, such as colon cancer, have been proposed to initially depend on
overexpression of a mutator gene termed MSH2.199 To date, however, these mechanisms have not been fully evaluated for breast cancer, and mismatch repair
defects appear to be associated primarily with later stages of progression and metastasis of breast cancer. In contrast to colon cancer, centrosomal defects appear to
predominate in early breast cancer, potentially causing the chromosomal type of instability. 22
Almost certainly, the most important consequences of these molecular changes initially relate to limited effectiveness of antihormonal therapy, chemotherapy, and

radiation therapy. The mechanisms of failure of antihormonal therapy in hormone receptor–positive disease may potentially relate to sensitization of the tumor to very
low levels of sex hormones and to the partially estrogenic properties of the clinically utilized hormonal antagonists, such as tamoxifen. Chemotherapy resistance in
breast cancer is also not fully understood, but probably involves altered cell death responses and altered metabolism of the drugs. 200,201 Resistance to radiation is also
not fully understood, but probably involves defects in the ATM pathway (including BRCA proteins and p53), leading to DNA damage–induced death. 172 Full
consideration of mechanisms of resistance to each of these therapeutic modalities is beyond the scope of this chapter; however, the answers probably lie in the
events made possible by genetic instability, aberrant proliferation, and defective death mechanisms. During treatment-associated malignant progression, as additional
amplifications, LOHs, and mutations occur, the cancer cells with the greatest capacity for growth, invasion, or survival undergo positive selection. Other cells may be
more susceptible to necrotic or apoptotic death. 202,203 Some studies have detected genetic changes in histologically normal tissue surrounding breast tumors,
consistent with this clonal evolution hypothesis. 204,205
The oncogenes, suppressor genes, growth factors, and sex hormones discussed in this chapter may also interact in critical patterns during treatment-associated
disease progression. For example, certain common patterns of cytogenetic alterations exist in breast tumors, possibly the signature of distinct pathways of
progression. 206 Many studies have now used cell lines in vitro and in the transgenic mouse in an attempt to sort out the biologic roles of likely tumor etiologic factors
and their interactions. 207 From these studies, it appears that certain acquired genetic changes may interact unfavorably with residual growth regulatory pathways
operant in the normal tissue. One example already discussed is the unfavorable interaction between cyclin D1 and the estrogen receptor. 140 Several other examples
may include the interaction of amplified c-ERBB2 or c-MYC genes in the presence of an autocrine- or paracrine-activated EGFR system. 207,208c-ERBB2 amplification
in association with downstream overexpression of the signal transduction c-RASH gene is also an unfavorable interaction. 208,209 The tyrosine kinase signal
transduction pathways (such as c-Ras H) that govern proliferation, survival, or both, also clearly interact with c-Myc in cellular models in vitro and in transgenic mouse
models of mammary cancer.151,207,209,210 and 211 Another type of synergistic interaction may result from c-Myc expression in association with overexpression of
apoptosis-suppressing Bcl-2. A final example is that of p53. Mutated p53 may interact unfavorably with c-crbB 2 by blocking apoptotic pathways. 207,212
Study of the interactions of growth regulatory pathways with mutations in genes involved in signal transduction cell-cycle and cell-death pathways is thus in its infancy.
A major approach for the future understanding of this phenomenon will involve increased use of the transgenic and gene knockout mouse models, with the eventual
hope of establishing the biochemical and cellular bases of various patterns of malignant progressions. Future studies aimed at detailed characterization of the
interaction of ER, PR, growth factors, protooncogenes, and suppressor genes with various therapeutic approaches in these animal models are thus likely to shed
much light on their interactive roles in the onset and progression of breast cancer. At present, however, few studies in vivo have focused on combinations of genetic
alterations thought to be important in human disease or on the use of transgenic models for studies of treatment-induced resistance and disease progression to
metastasis.
The ultimate event that leads to mortality from breast cancer is metastasis. Two separate but apparently interactive cellular processes seem to occur to allow
metastasis of the disease: tumor angiogenesis and loss of proper tissue compartmentalization (invasion). It is not yet fully established whether genetic or phenotypic
changes underlie these alterations. However, several molecular determinants have been proposed to relate to each process. Loss of cell-cell attachment, altered cell
substratum attachment, and altered cytoskeletal organization play a role in regulating cellular invasion. In addition, cell locomotion, proteolysis, and the ability to
survive and proliferate at distant sites also must contribute. 213,214 and 215 Although acquisition of this group of characteristics is responsible for a cancer to locally invade
host tissue, the ability of a tumor to distribute itself to distant sites also requires the development of a tumor vasculature—the complex process of angiogenesis. 216,217
Some studies have shown that metastatic alterations may have at least some genetic basis 218 and that distant metastases are more likely to exhibit dominance of a
malignant clone than primary tumors. 219 Because of space limitations, we cannot discuss the processes of angiogenesis and metastasis further here; the reader is
directed to the more general chapter covering some of these processes earlier in this volume ( Chapter 9).

IMPLICATIONS OF MOLECULAR BIOLOGY FOR TUMOR PREVENTION, EARLY DETECTION, PROGNOSIS, AND RESPONSE TO
THERAPY
A major hope in the study of genetic changes in breast cancer is that they lead to development of new prevention and early detection strategies, therapies, and
prognostic tools. In the area of prevention, there is much current work to establish more rapid, accurate, and cost-effective assays of BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 mutations
to better identify women with a familial propensity for breast cancer. In addition, the gene(s) responsible for a significant number of breast cancer families remain to be
identified, and the bases (genetic and/or environmental) for the variable penetrance of the BRCA genes remain to be determined. Women at high risk will undoubtedly
be the population of emphasis for future prevention trials. Although the benefits of prophylactic mastectomy and oophorectomy are now established, tamoxifen is also
known to be an effective prevention strategy. A major, current trial is comparing tamoxifen to raloxifene (an antiestrogen thought to produce fewer endometrial cancers
and to provide other benefits). However, new pharmacologic or dietary strategies are needed, particularly to prevent ER-negative breast cancer. 220,221 and 222
In the area of early detection, we now know that overproduction of growth factors such as TGF-a and hepatocyte growth factor are very common, but they have not yet
been shown to distinguish benign proliferative disease from malignant disease. 223,224 and 225 However, exciting results have been reported in the area of chromosomal
instability. It is possible that detection of telomerase expression or the ability to detect subtle genetic alterations will provide useful new approaches for marking the
onset of cancer. Development of new nipple aspirate methodologies and blood and urinary assays for growth factors, growth factor receptors, autoantibodies to
oncoproteins, and tumor DNA are also currently under way. 226,227,228 and 229
In the area of prognosis and response to therapy, much hope has been vested in development of more accurate and rapid methods for immunohistochemical and
fluorescent in situ methodologies for characterization of oncogenes, suppressor genes, and related proteins. 230 Serum and plasma assays for growth factors are also
of interest, in addition to more classical tumor markers of CA15.3 and CEA (carcinoembryonic antigen) for determining prognosis and response to therapy. Sensitive
assays to detect tumor-derived cells and DNA in the blood are also under development. Obviously, detection of ER and PR in tumors has led the way for integration of
molecular markers into clinical decisions regarding prognosis and response to therapy. Pure antiestrogens and aromatase inhibitors are now in clinical trials for
ER-positive, relapsing tumors. More recently, detection of the c-erbB 2 oncoprotein has also proven its value for characterization of poor-prognosis tumors, as well as
for those that are likely to have a poor response to adjuvant hormonal therapy and chemotherapy. Although technically more difficult to measure, EGFR is of interest
for future study of tumors likely to have a poor prognosis and poor response to hormonal therapy. Because of common expression or overexpression of these two
receptors in breast cancer, they are now targets of new experimental therapies that use antibodies to their extracellular domains and couple or gene-fuse these
antibodies to toxic moieties. 231,232 and 233
A large group of studies have confirmed that 20% to 30% of breast tumors contain an amplification of the c-ERBB2 gene and overexpress the encoded receptor
protein. c-ERBB2 is also overexpressed in a very high portion of ductal carcinoma in situ.234,235 Expression of the c-erbB2 protein is associated with an elevated mitotic
rate; it correlates with poor clinical response to certain chemotherapeutic and antihormonal drugs (5-fluorouracil, methotrexate, Cytoxan, and tamoxifen-containing
regimens) and insensitivity to tamoxifen in vitro.235,236 c-erbB 2 expression is also associated with poor prognosis in patients who do not receive treatment with
chemotherapeutic or antihormonal drugs. 237,238,239,240 and 241 Although one might postulate that c-ERBB2 gene amplification directly modulates metastatic capacity
based on data with tumor models, its association with poor prognosis would appear to relate to other features of tumor biology still to be fully elucidated.
The c-erbB 2 protein also holds significant interest for breast tumor immunology. Certain antibodies to the extracellular domain of the c-erbB 2 protein seem to sensitize
cells to killing by cis-platinum, carboplatinum, and doxorubicin in vivo. It is thought that the mechanism of this effect is interference with DNA repair mechanisms. 242,243
The shed extracellular domain of c-erbB 2 protein may represent a useful, antigenic blood-borne marker of breast cancer burden, 244 and the c-erbB2 protein itself may
be a new target of immunotherapy of cancer, 243,245,246 as with EGFR. 247 Specifically, a humanized, anti–c-erbB 2 antibody termed herceptin is showing promise in
clinical trials. 243 More recent results also suggest the possibility of active immunotherapy targeting the c-erbB 2 protein; a lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate in breast cancer
was shown to indicate good prognosis for an erbB 2-positive subset of patients. This study noted production of growth-inhibitory antibodies by peripheral lymphocytes
from these patients. 243,248
Although many studies have demonstrated the prognostic significance of c-erbB 2 expression for lymph node–positive patients, the role of the oncoprotein in the
malignant process is not clear. For example, many established human breast cancer cell lines overexpressing c-erbB 2 are frequently of poor tumorigenicity in the
nude mouse. This fact could theoretically be due to a lack of coexpression of a heterodimeric receptor partner or a ligand, or to coinduction of a suppressive
phosphatase.249 Overexpression of c-erbB 2 in immortalized breast epithelial and breast cancer cell lines has suggested that it is only weakly transforming in vitro, and

it has not significantly induced or enhanced a tumorigenic phenotype in vivo in several studies. 250 However, in the transgenic mouse, c-erbB 2 expression results in
long-latency, metastatic breast tumors. 251 Association of the c-erbB 2 protein with, and activation of, the c-Src oncoprotein in this model are thought to be critical in the
tumorigenic pathway. Because the c-erbB 2 protein can heterodimerize with other receptor family members, co-overexpression of all family members and
cross-dimerization must eventually be taken into account in prognostic and therapeutic studies. Of interest in this respect are studies identifying a constitutively active,
variant form of EGFR in human cancers. 252
As we have emphasized, nuclear protooncogenes are common mechanistic links between the actions of growth-promoting steroids and growth factors in diverse
tissues. Although amplification of the c- MYC nuclear protooncogene is one of the most common genetic alterations in breast cancer (approximately 20% of breast
cancers contain this amplicon), it must be the target of much future investigation because of its central role in a diversity of cellular processes. 147,253,254,255,256 and 257
Study of c-MYC gene expression in breast cancer has been hampered by immunologic and stability difficulties in measuring the protein in tumor biopsies, but new
fluorescence in situ and polymerase chain reaction methodologies are likely to improve c-Myc studies in human breast cancer. The c-Myc protein has a very short
half-life, and only now are high-quality monoclonal antibodies capable of staining paraffin sections becoming available. In spite of these difficulties, several studies
have shown that amplification of the c-MYC gene is clearly associated with poor prognosis. 147,256,257 In addition, in in vivo and in vitro models, EGF family growth
factors have been shown to dramatically interact with the c-Myc oncogene product in tumorigenesis. These studies provide food for thought in development of future
clinical studies, such as those targeting the EGFR or c-erbB 2 together with c-Myc.258
There also is significant hope that studies of c-Myc will aid in the prediction of tumor response to therapy. Expression of Myc may also alter cellular resistance to
cis-platinum and other DNA strand scission–inducing drugs, 259 and it may suppress differentiation in association with decreased collagen gene transcription. 260 c-MYC
amplification is clearly not associated with c- ERBB2 amplification in primary breast cancer 261; rather, it identifies a subset of biologically different, poor-prognosis
tumors. These studies also suggest that tumors containing either of these two important amplicons may be of such different biologic significance that the amplicons
are mutually incompatible. 262,263 ans 264
Another major effort in better understanding breast tumor prognosis and response to therapy surrounds the genes involved in controlling cell death and DNA repair.
Specifically, the TP53 gene, whose protein product has the potential to mediate apoptotic death induced by virtually all forms of adjuvant therapy, is easily measured
by immunohistochemical methodology. A major caveat is that pathologists cannot be certain that the accumulation of p53 protein they measure is due to mutation
rather than to induction from a proapoptotic stimulus. Much effort will go into improvements in p53 methodology. Data, so far, clearly indicate that TP53
overexpression confers poor prognosis and likelihood of a poor response to endocrine therapy and chemotherapy, 265,266 but much additional study needs to apply
high-throughput mutation analysis to routine assay. TP53 also is widely discussed as a potential gene for gene therapy trials of cancer. Three regulators downstream
of p53 are also promising. First, loss of Rb detected by immunohistochemistry appears to indicate poor prognosis, 267 as does expression of bcl-2 and down-regulation
of Bax.268,269,270 and 271 However, more studies must be carried out on RB-1 mutation analyses and detection of other Bcl family members. Finally, a new area of study is
the identification of poor-prognosis and response-to-therapy genes by use of high throughput complementary DNA chip assay analyses. Such studies have the
potential to improve tumor diagnosis and prognosis. 272,273
Studies of metastasis have suggested that quantification of tumor angiogenesis and deposition of the extracellular matrix protein (termed tenascin) may be of value in
evaluating this critical transition of the disease. To supplement the traditional lymph node biopsy measurements, promising new drugs are in clinical trial for blockade
of angiogenesis. 274 Metastasis itself seems to depend on the elaboration of proteases (such as urokine/plasminogen activator and matrix metalloproteases), the most
promising of which for prognostic significance is the cognate inhibitor urokinase PAI-1 (plasminogen activator inhibitor-1). New drugs, such as marimastat, are
currently in clinical trials studying blockade of proteases. This will be a very active area of future drug development. 275,276 Finally, the adhesive changes that
metastatic cells undergo are of major interest. Loss of expression of E-cadherin (and acquisition of a mesenchymal phenotype marked by the intermediate filament
vimentin), loss of a 2b1 integrin, overexpression of a 67-kD laminin binding protein, and overexpression of a variant form of the hyaluronic acid receptor (CD44) are all
of poor prognosis or correlated with poor tumor grade in early clinical studies. 277,278,279,280,281,282 and 283 Much larger studies are needed to fully evaluate the clinical
significance of these metastasis-associated cellular changes.
In summary, although a very large number of genetic and phenotypic alterations have been suggested in breast cancer, only a handful have been fully identified and
brought to clinical study. It is quite encouraging that study of each of these genes and phenotypic changes has provided its own unique perspective to the biology of
the disease. The challenge for the future, however, is to take advantage of this knowledge to improve detection of familial risk; develop prevention strategies; improve
early detection, clinical diagnosis, and prediction of therapeutic outcome; develop therapies; and rapidly apply more novel biologic therapeutics. 284 It is our prediction
that future discovery in breast cancer will focus on the molecular bases of processes involved in treatment failure—invasion, angiogenesis, metastasis, and resistance
to therapy. Central to these hopes are the development of new technologies for high throughput analyses of pathologic material (such as laser capture
microdissection techniques, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and other molecular cytogenetic methods), complementary DNA chip array assay methods, SAGE
(serial analysis of gene expression), and other cutting-edge RNA and protein analysis techniques. It is essential that new technologies be brought to improve tumor
diagnosis and prediction of response to existing therapies. These approaches should also result in discovery of new targets for more biologic-based therapies and
prevention strategies for breast cancer. Prospects for clinical translation of basic molecular biologic results appear to be bright.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. De Michele A, Weber BL. Inherited genetic factors. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2000:221.
2. Malkin D, Li FP, Strong LC, et al. Germ line p53 mutations in a familial syndrome of breast cancer, sarcomas, and other neoplasms. Science 1990;250:1233.
3. Srivastava S, Zou ZQ, Pirollo K, Blattner W, Chang EH. Germ line transmission of a mutated p53 gene in a cancer-prone family with Li Fraumeni syndrome. Nature 1990;348:747.
4. Liaw D, Marsh DJ, Li J, et al. Germline mutations of the PTEN gene in Cowden disease, an inherited breast and thyroid cancer syndrome. Nature Genet 1997;16:64.
5. Hamminki A, Tomlinson I, Markie D. Localization of a susceptibility locus for PJS to 19p using comparative genomic hybridization and targeted linkage analysis. Nature Genet 1997;115:87.
6. Anderson DE. An inherited form of large bowel cancer: Muir's syndrome. Cancer 1980;45[Suppl 15]:1103.
7. Fitzgerald MG, Bean JM, Hedge SR, et al. Heterozygous ATM mutations do not contribute to early onset of breast cancer. Nature Genet 1997;15:307.
8. Hall JM, Lee MK, Newman B, et al. Linkage of early-onset familial breast cancer to chromosome 17q21. Science 1990;250:1684.
9. Miki Y, Swensen J, Shattuck-Eidens D, et al. A strong candidate for the breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene BRCA-1. Science 1994;266:66.
10. Chen Y, Chen C, Riley D, et al. Aberrant subcellular localization of BRCA-1 in breast cancer. Science 1995;270:789.
11. Thompson ME, Jensen RA, Obermiller PS, Page DL, Holt JT. Decreased expression of brca1 accelerates growth and is often present during sporadic breast cancer progression. Nature Genet
1995;9:444.
12. Holt JT, Thompson ME, Szabo C, et al. Growth retardation and tumour inhibition by BRCA1. Nature Genet 1996;12:298.
13. Wooster R, Bignell G, Lancaster J, et al. Identification of the breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA2. Nature 1995;378:789.
14. Cortez D, Wang Y, Qin J, Elledge SJ. Requirement of ATM-dependent phosphorylation of brca1 in the DNA damage response to double-strand breaks. Science 1999;286:1162.
15. Xu X, Wagner KU, Larson D, et al. Conditional mutation of BRCA1 in mammary epithelial cells results in blunted ductal morphogenesis and tumour formation. Nature Genet 1999;22:37.
16. Xu X, Weaver Z, Linke SP, et al. Centrosome amplification and a defective G 2-M cell cycle checkpoint induce genetic instability in BRCA1 exon 11 isoform-deficients cells. Mol Cell 1999;3:389.
17. Fan S, Wang JA, Yuan R, et al. BRCA1 inhibition of estrogen receptor signaling in transfected cells. Science 1999;284:1354.
18. Dickson RB, Stancel G. Estrogen-mediated processes in normal and cancer cells. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000 (in press).
19. Schrock E, du Manoir S, Veldman T, et al. Multicolor spectral karyotyping of human chromosomes. Science 1996;273:494.
20. Ried T, Just KE, Holtgreve-Grez H, et al. Comparative genomic hybridization of formalin fixed, paraffin embedded breast tumors reveals different patterns of chromosomal gains and losses in
fibroadenomas and diploid and aneuploid carcinomas. Cancer Res 1995;55:5415.
21. Nicolson GL. Breast cancer metastasisassociated genes: role in tumour progression to the metastatic state. Biochem Soc Symp 1996;63:231.
22. Pihan GA, Purohit A, Wallace J, et al. Centrosome defects and genetic instability in malignant tumors. Cancer Res 1998;58:3974.
23. Brenner AJ, Aldaz CM. Chromosome 9p allelic loss and p16/CDKN2 in breast cancer and evidence of p16 inactivation in immortal breast epithelial cells. Cancer Res 1995;55:2892.
24. Fero ML, Randel E, Gurley KE, Roberts JM, Kemp CJ. The murine gene p27Kip1 as haplo-insufficient for tumor suppression. Nature 1998;396:177.
25. Knuulila S, Borkquist AM, Autio K, et al. DNA copy number amplification in human neoplasms. Am J Pathol 1998;152:1107.
26. Elledge RM, Fuqua SAW. Estrogen and progesterone receptors. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 2000:471.
27. Dickson RB, Russo J. Biochemical control of breast development. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 2000:15.
28. Spencer TE, Jenster G, Burcin MM, et al. Steroid receptor coactivator-1 is a histone acetyltransferase. Nature 1997;389:194.
29. McDonnell DP, Clemm DL, Hermann T. Analysis of the estrogen receptor function in vitro reveals three distinct classes of antiestrogen. Mol Endocrinol 1995;9:659.
30. Fujimoto N, Katzenellenbogen BS. Alteration in the agonist/antagonist balance of antiestrogens by activation of protein kinase A signaling pathways in breast cancer cells: antiestrogen
selectivity and promoter dependence. Mol Endocrinol 1994;8:296.
31. Suchard M, Landers JP, Sandhu NP, Spelsberg TC. Steroid hormone regulation of nuclear proto-oncogenes. Endocrine Rev 1993;14:659.
32. Dickson RB, Lippman ME. Estrogenic regulation of growth and polypeptide growth factor secretion in human breast carcinoma. Endocrine Rev 1987;8:29.
33. Osborne CK, Hamilton B, Titus G, Livingston RB. Epidermal growth factor stimulation of human breast cancer cells in culture. Cancer Res 1980;40:2361.
34. Allegra JC, Lippman ME. Estrogen receptor status and the disease-free interval in breast cancer. Recent Results Cancer Res 1980;71:20.

35. DeSombre E, Green G, Jensen E. Estrophilin and endocrine responsiveness of breast cancer. In: McGuire W, ed. Hormones, receptors and breast cancer. New York: Raven Press, 1978:1.
36. Paridaens R, Sylvester RJ, Ferrazzi E, et al. Clinical significance of the quantitative assessment of estrogen receptors in advanced breast cancer. Cancer 1980;46:2889.
37. Edwards DP, Chamness GC, McGuire WL. Estrogen and progesterone receptor proteins in breast cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta 1979;560:457.
38. Eckert RL, Katzenellenbogen BS. Human endometrial cells in primary tissue culture: modulation of the progesterone receptor level by natural and synthetic estrogens in vitro. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 1981;52:699.
39. Clarke RB, Howell A, Anderson E. Estrogen sensitivity of normal human breast tissue in vivo and implanted into athymic nude mice: analysis of the relationship to progesterone receptor
expression. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1998;45:121.
40. Khan SA, Sachdeva A, Naim S, et al. The normal breast epithelium of women with breast cancer displays an aberrant response to estradiol. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1999;8:867.
41. Ottaviano YL, Issa JP, Parl FF, et al. Methylation of the estrogen receptor gene CpG island marks loss of estrogen receptor expression in human breast cancer cells. Cancer Res 1994;54:2552.
42. Ferguson AT, Lapidus RG, Baylin SB, Davidson NE. Demethylation of the estrogen receptor gene in estrogen receptornegative breast cancer cells can reactivate estrogen receptor gene
expression. Cancer Res 1995;55:2279.
43. Masamura S, Santer SJ, Heitjan DF, et al. Estrogen deprivation causes estradiol hypersensitivity in human breast cancer cells. Endocrinology 1995;136:2918.
44. Catherino WH, Wolf DM, Jordan VC. A naturally occurring estrogen receptor mutation results in increased estrogenicity of a tamoxifen analog. Mol Endocrinol 1995;9:1053.
45. Murphy LC, Hilsenbeck SG, Dotzlaw H, et al. Relationship of clone 4 estrogen receptor variant messenger RNA expression to human breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:235.
46. Jiang SY, Jordan VC. Growth regulation of estrogen receptornegative breast cancer cells transfected with complementary DNAs for estrogen receptor. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:580.
47. Touitou I, Vignon F, Cavailles V, Rochefort H. Hormonal regulation of cathepsin D following transfection of the estrogen or progesterone receptor into three sex steroid hormone resistant cancer
cell lines. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1991;40:231.
48. Paik S, Hartmann DP, Dickson RB, Lippman ME. Antiestrogen resistance in ER positive breast cancer cells. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1994;31:301.
49. Tekmal RR, Santen RJ. Local estrogen production: is aromatase an oncogene? In: Manni A, ed. Contemporary endocrinology: endocrinology of breast cancer. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press,
1999:79.
50. Martinez-Lacaci I, Dickson RB. Dual regulation of mitogenic growth factor pathways in breast cancer by sex steroids and protein kinase C. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1996;57.
51. Ways DK, Kukoly CA, de Vente J, et al. MCF-7 breast cancer cells transfected with protein kinase C-alpha exhibit altered expression of other protein kinase C isoforms and display a more
aggressive neoplastic phenotype. J Clin Invest 1995;95:1906.
52. Dekker LV, Parker PJ. Protein kinase Ca question of specificity. Trends Biochem Sci 1994;19:73.
53. Tzukerman M, Zhang XK, Pfahl M. Inhibition of estrogen receptor activity by the tumor promoter 12-O-tetradecanylphorbol-13-acetate: a molecular analysis. Mol Endocrinol 1991;5:1983.
54. Saceda M, Knabbe C, Dickson RB, et al. Post-transcriptional destabilization of estrogen receptor mRNA in MCF-7 cells by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate. J Biol Chem 1991;266:17809.
55. Joel PB, Traish AM, Lannigan DA. Estradiol and phorbol ester cause phosphorylation of serine 118 in the human estrogen receptor. Mol Endocrinol 1995;9:1041.
56. Kato S, Endoh H, Masuhiro Y, et al. Activation of the estrogen receptor through phosphorylation by mitogen-activated protein kinase. Science 1995;270:1491.
57. Power RF, Conneely OM, O'Malley BW. New insights into activation of the steroid hormone receptor superfamily. Trends Pharmacol Sci 1992;13:318.
58. Power RF, Mani SK, Codina J, Conneely OM, O'Malley BW. Dopaminergic and ligand-independent activation of steroid hormone receptors. Science 1991;254:1636.
59. Aronica SM, Katzenellenbogen BS. Stimulation of estrogen receptormediated transcription and alteration in the phosphorylation state of the rat uterine estrogen receptor by estrogen, cyclic
adenosine monophosphate, and insulin-like growth factor-1. Mol Endocrinol 1993;7:743.
60. Pietras RJ, Arboleda J, Reese DM, et al. HER-2 tyrosine kinase pathway targets estrogen receptor and promotes hormone-independent growth in human breast cancer cells. Oncogene
1995;10:2435.
61. Segars JH, Marks MS, Hirschfeld S, et al. Inhibition of estrogen-responsive gene activation by the retinoid X receptor beta: evidence for multiple inhibitory pathways [published erratum appears
in Mol Cell Biol 1993;13:3840]. Mol Cell Biol 1993;13:2258.
62. Salbert G, Fanjul A, Piedrafita FJ, et al. Retinoic acid receptors and retinoid X receptor-alpha down-regulate the transforming growth factor-beta 1 promoter by antagonizing AP-1 activity. Mol
Endocrinol 1993;7:1347.
63. Grosvenor CE, Picciano MF, Baumrucker CR. Hormones and growth factors in milk. Endocr Rev 1993;14:710.
64. Cullen KJ, Lippman ME. Stromal-epithelial interactions in breast cancer. Cancer Treat Res 1992;61:413.
65. Dickson R, Lippman ME. Growth factors in breast cancer. Endocrine Rev 1995;16:559.
66. Kurachi H, Okamoto S, Oka T. Evidence for the involvement of the submandibular gland epidermal growth factor in mouse mammary tumorigenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1985;82:5940.
67. Vonderhaar BK. Regulation of development of the normal mammary gland by hormones and growth factors. Cancer Treat Res 1988;40:251.
68. Oka T, Tsutsumi O, Kurachi H, Okamoto S. The role of epidermal growth factor in normal and neoplastic growth of mouse mammary epithelial cells. Cancer Treat Res 1988;40:343.
69. Ram TG, Kokeny KE, Dilts CA, Ethier SP. Mitogenic activity of neu differentiation factor/heregulin mimics that of epidermal growth factor and insulin-like growth factor-I in human mammary
epithelial cells. J Cell Physiol 1995;163:589.
70. Liscia DS, Merlo G, Ciardiello F, et al. Transforming growth factor-alpha messenger RNA localization in the developing adult rat and human mammary gland by in situ hybridization. Dev Biol
1990;140:123.
71. Martinez-Lacaci I, Bianco C, DeSantis M, Salomon DS. Epidermal growth factorrelated peptides and their cognate receptors in breast cancer. In: Bowcock A, ed. Breast cancer: molecular
genetics, pathogenesis, and therapeutics. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 1999:31.
72. Brandt BH, Roetger A, Dittmar T, et al. c-erbB-2/EGFR as dominant heterodimerization partners determine a motogenic phenotype in human breast cancer cells. FASEB J 1999;13:1939.
73. Snedeker SM, Brown CF, Di Augustine RP. Expression and functional properties of transforming growth factor alpha and epidermal growth factor during mouse mammary gland ductal
morphogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:276.
74. Wang Y, Selden AC, Morgan N, Stamp GW, Hodgson HJ. Hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor expression in human mammary epithelium. Am J Pathol 1994;144:675.
75. Yang U, Spitzer E, Meyer D, et al. Sequential requirement of scatter factor/hepatocyte growth factor (SF/HGF) and neu differentiation factor/heregulin (NDF/HRG) in the morphogenesis and
differentiation of the mammary gland. J Cell Biol 1995;131:215.
76. Valverius EM, Ciardiello F, Heldin NE, et al. Stromal influences on transformation of human mammary epithelial cells overexpressing c-myc and SV40T. J Cell Physiol 1990;145:207.
77. Bates SE, Valverius EM, Ennis BW, et al. Expression of the transforming growth factor-alpha/epidermal growth factor receptor pathway in normal human breast epithelial cells. Endocrinology
1990;126:596.
78. Li S, Plowman GD, Buckley SD, Shipley GD. Heparin inhibition of autonomous growth implicates amphiregulin as an autocrine growth factor for normal human mammary epithelial cells. J Cell
Physiol 1992;153:103.
79. Kenney N, Johnson G, Selvam M, et al. Transforming growth factor a (TGFa) and amphiregulin (AR) as autocrine growth factors in nontransformed, immortalized 184A1N4 human mammary
epithelial cells. Mol Cell Differ 1993;1:163.
80. Earp HS, Dawson TL, Li X, Yu H. Heterodimerization and functional interaction between EGF receptor family members: a new signaling paradigm with implications for breast cancer research.
Breast Cancer Res Treat 1995;35:115.
81. Pinkas-Kramarski R, Alroy I, Yarden Y. ErbB receptors and EGF-like ligands: cell lineage determination and oncogenesis through combinatorial signaling. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia
1997;2:97.
82. Ciardiello F, McGeady ML, Kim N, et al. Transforming growth factor-alpha expression is enhanced in human mammary epithelial cells transformed by an activated c-Ha-ras protooncogene but
not by the c-neu protooncogene, and overexpression of the transforming growth factor-alpha complementary DNA leads to transformation. Cell Growth Differ 1990;1:407.
83. Dickson R, Lippman M. Control of human breast cancer by estrogen, growth factors, and oncogenes. In: Lippman M, Dickson R, eds. Breast cancer: cellular and molecular biology. Boston:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988:119.
84. Graus-Porta D, Beerli RR, Daly JM, Hynes NE. ErbB-2, the preferred heterodimerization partner of all ErbB receptors, is a mediator of lateral signaling. EMBO J 1997;16:1647.
85. Parham DM, Jankowski J. Transforming growth factor alpha in epithelial proliferative diseases of the breast. J Clin Pathol 1992;45:513.
86. Kenney N, Smith G, Maroulakou I, et al. Detection of amphiregulin and Cripto-1 in mammary tumors from transgenic mice. Mol Carcinog 1996;15:44.
87. Jhappan C, Stahle C, Harkins RN, et al. TGF alpha overexpression in transgenic mice induces liver neoplasia and abnormal development of the mammary gland and pancreas. Cell
1990;61:1137.
88. Coleman S, Daniel CW. Inhibition of mouse mammary ductal morphogenesis and down-regulation of the EGF receptor by epidermal growth factor. Dev Biol 1990;137:425.
89. Sandgren EP, Luetteke NC, Palmiter RD, Brinster RL, Lee DC. Overexpression of TGF alpha in transgenic mice: induction of epithelial hyperplasia, pancreatic metaplasia, and carcinoma of the
breast. Cell 1990;61:1121.
90. Matsui Y, Halter SA, Holt JT, Hogan BL, Coffey RJ. Development of mammary hyperplasia and neoplasia in MMTV-TGF alpha transgenic mice. Cell 1990;61:1147.
91. Smith GH, Sharp R, Kordon EC, Jhappan C, Merlino G. Transforming growth factor alpha promotes mammary tumorigenesis through selective survival and growth of secretory epithelial cells.
Am J Pathol 1995;147:1081.
92. Sandgren EP, Schroeder JA, Qui TH, et al. Inhibition of mammary gland involution is associated with transforming growth factor alpha but not c-myc-induced tumorigenesis in transgenic mice.
Cancer Res 1995;55:3915.
93. Hynes NE, Stern DF. The biology of ErbB-2/neu/HER-2 and its role in cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta 1994;1198:165.
94. Chrysogelos SA, Dickson RB. EGF receptor expression, regulation, and function in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1994;29:29.
95. Dankort DL, Muller WJ. Transgenic models of breast cancer metastasis. In: Dickson RB, Lippman ME, eds. Mammary tumor cell cycle, differentiation, and metastasis. Boston: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1996:71.
96. Coffey RJ Jr, Meise KS, Matsui Y, et al. Acceleration of mammary neoplasia in transforming growth factor alpha transgenic mice by 7,12-dimethylbenzanthracene. Cancer Res 1994;54:1678.
97. Kenney NJ, Saeki T, Gottardis M, et al. Expression of transforming growth factor alpha antisense mRNA inhibits the estrogen-induced production of TGF alpha and estrogen-induced
proliferation of estrogen-responsive human breast cancer cells. J Cell Physiol 1993;156:497.
98. Bates SE, McManaway ME, Lippman ME, Dickson RB. Characterization of estrogen responsive transforming activity in human breast cancer cell lines. Cancer Res 1986;46:1707.
99. Reddy K, Yee D, Hilsenbeck S, et al. Inhibition of estrogen-induced breast cancer cell proliferation by reduction in autocrine transforming growth factor a expression. Cell Growth Differ
1994;5:1215.
100. Qi CF, Liscia DS, Normanno N, et al. Expression of transforming growth factor alpha, amphiregulin and Cripto-1 in human breast carcinomas. Br J Cancer 1994;69:903.
101. Martinez-Lacaci I, Saceda M, Plowman GD, et al. Estrogen and phorbol esters regulate amphiregulin expression by two separate mechanisms in human breast cancer cell lines. Endocrinology
1995;136:3983.
102. Tang CK, Concepcion SZW, Milan M, et al. Ribozyme-mediated down-regulation of ErbB-4 in estrogen receptorpositive breast cancer cells inhibits proliferation both in vitro and in vivo. Cancer
Res 1999;59:5315.
103. Holmes WE, Sliwkowski MX, Akita RW, et al. Identification of heregulin, a specific activator of p185ErbB2. Science 1992;256:1205.
104. Wen D, Peles E, Cupples R, et al. Neu differentiation factor: a transmembrane glycoprotein containing an EGF domain and an immunoglobulin homology unit. Cell 1992;69:559.
105. Ennis B, Valverius E, Lippman M, et al. Anti EGF receptor antibodies inhibit the autocrine stimulated growth of MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells. Mol Endocrinol 1989;3:1830.
106. Pastan I, Chaudhary V, FitzGerald DJ. Recombinant toxins as novel therapeutic agents. Annu Rev Biochem 1992;61:331.
107. Kern FG. The role of fibroblast growth factors in breast cancer pathogenesis and progression. In: Bowcock A, ed. Breast cancer: molecular genetics, pathogenesis, and therapeutics. Totowa,
NJ: Humana Press, 1999:59.
108. Coleman-Krnacik S, Rosen JM. Differential temporal and spatial gene expression of fibroblast growth factor family members during mouse mammary gland development. Mol Endocrinol
1994;8:218.
109. Souttou B, Hamelin R, Crepin M. FGF2 as an autocrine growth factor for immortal human breast epithelial cells. Cell Growth Differ 1994;5:615.
110. Kern FG. The role of angiogenesis in the transition to hormone independence and acquisition of the metastatic phenotype. In: Manni A, ed. Endocrinology of breast cancer. Totowa, NJ:
Humana Press, 1999:169.
111. Adnane J, Gaudray P, Dionne CA, et al. BEK and FLG, two receptors to members of the FGF family, are amplified in subsets of human breast cancers. Oncogene 1991;6:659.

112. McLeskey SW, Ding IY, Lippman ME, Kern FG. MDA-MB-134 breast carcinoma cells overexpress fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptors and are growth-inhibited by FGF ligands. Cancer Res
1994;54:523.
113. Theillet C, Adelaide J, Lonason G, et al. FGFR1 and PLAT genes and DNA amplification at 8p12 in breast and ovarian cancers. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1993;7:219.
114. McLeskey SW, Zhang L, Kharbanda S, et al. Fibroblast growth factoroverexpressing models of angiogenesis and metastasis in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1996;39:103.
115. McCune BK, Mullin BR, Flanders KC, et al. Localization of transforming growth factor-beta isotypes in lesions of the human breast. Hum Pathol 1992;23:13.
116. Koli KM, Arteaga CL. Transforming growth factor-beta and breast cancer. In: Bowcock A, ed. Breast cancer: molecular genetics, pathogenesis, and therapeutics. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press,
1999:95.
117. Wrana JL, Attisano L, Wieser R, Ventura F, Massague J. Mechanism of activation of the TGF-beta receptor. Nature 1994;370:341.
118. Koli KM, Arteaga CL. Complex role of tumor cell transforming growth factor (TGF)-betas on breast carcinoma progression. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 1996;1:373.
119. Knabbe C, Lippman ME, Wakefield LM, et al. Evidence that transforming growth factor-beta is a hormonally regulated negative growth factor in human breast cancer cells. Cell 1987;48:417.
120. Robinson SD, Silberstein GB, Roberts AB, Flanders KC, Daniel CW. Regulated expression and growth inhibitory effects of transforming growth factor-beta isoforms in mouse mammary gland
development. Development 1991;113:867.
121. Mieth M, Boehmer FD, Ball R, Groner B, Grosse R. Transforming growth factor-beta inhibits lactogenic hormone induction of beta-casein expression in HC11 mouse mammary epithelial cells.
Growth Factors 1990;4:9.
122. Jhappan C, Geiser AG, Kordon EC, et al. Targeting expression of a transforming growth factor beta 1 transgene to the pregnant mammary gland inhibits alveolar development and lactation.
EMBO J 1993;12:1835.
123. Schedin PJ, Thackray LB, Malone P, et al. Programmed cell death and mammary neoplasia. In: Dickson RB, Lippman ME, eds. Mammary tumor cell cycle, differentiation, and metastasis.
Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996:3.
124. Stampfer MR, Yaswen P, Alhadeff M, Hosoda J. TGF beta induction of extracellular matrix associated proteins in normal and transformed human mammary epithelial cells in culture is
independent of growth effects. J Cell Physiol 1993;155:210.
125. Arteaga CL, Hurd SD, Winnier AR, et al. Anti-transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta antibodies inhibit breast cancer cell tumorigenicity and increase mouse spleen natural killer cell activity:
implications for a possible role of tumor cell/host TGF-beta interactions in human breast cancer progression. J Clin Invest 1993;92:2569.
126. Zugmaier G, Paik S, Wilding G, et al. Transforming growth factor beta 1 induces cachexia and systemic fibrosis without an antitumor effect in nude mice. Cancer Res 1991;51:3590.
127. Welch DR, Fabra A, Nakajima M. Transforming growth factor beta stimulates mammary adenocarcinoma cell invasion and metastatic potential. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:7678.
128. Brattain MG, Ko Y, Banerji SS, Wu G, Willson JKV. Defects of TGF-beta receptor signaling in mammary cell tumorigenesis. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 1996;1:365.
129. Richert MM, Wood TL. Expression and regulation of insulin-like growth factors and their binding proteins in the normal breast. In: Manni A, ed. Contemporary endocrinology: endocrinology of
breast cancer. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 1999:39.
130. Cullen KJ, Kaup SS, Rasmussen AA. Interactions between stroma and epithelium in breast cancer: implications for tumor genesis growth and progression. In: Manni A, ed. Contemporary
endocrinology: endocrinology of breast cancer. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 1999:155.
131. Lee AV, Yee D. Role of the IGF system in breast cancer proliferation and progression. In: Manni A, ed. Contemporary endocrinology: endocrinology of breast cancer. Totowa, NJ: Humana
Press, 1999:187.
132. Oates AJ, Schumaker LM, Jenkins SB, et al. The mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor 2 receptor (M6P/IGF2R), a putative breast tumor suppressor gene. Breast Cancer Res Treat
1998;47:269.
133. Dickson RB, Lippman ME. Autocrine and paracrine growth factors in the normal and neoplastic breast. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000:303.
134. Vonderhaar BK. Prolactin and its receptors in human breast cancer. In: Manni A, ed. Contemporary endocrinology: endocrinology of breast cancer. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 1999:261.
135. Dickson RB, Lippman ME. Oncogenes and suppressor genes. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 2000:281.
136. Le Roy X, Escot C, Brouillet JP, et al. Decrease of c-erbB-2 and c-myc RNA levels in tamoxifen-treated breast cancer. Oncogene 1991;6:431.
137. Chiappetta C, Kirkland JL, Loose-Mitchell DS, Murthy L, Stancel GM. Estrogen regulates expression of the jun family of protooncogenes in the uterus. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1992;41:113.
138. Murphy LJ. Estrogen induction of insulin-like growth factors and myc proto-oncogene expression in the uterus. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1991;40:223.
139. Leygue E, Gol-Winkler R, Gompel A, et al. Estradiol stimulates c-myc proto-oncogene expression in normal human breast epithelial cells in culture. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1995;52:299.
140. Neuman E, Ladha MH, Lin N, et al. Cyclin D1 stimulation of estrogen receptor transcriptional activity independent of cdk4. Mol Cell Biol 1997:17:5338.
141. Anzick SL, Kononen J, Walker RL, et al. AIB1, a steroid receptor coactivator amplified in breast and ovarian cancer. Science 1997;277:965.
142. Dang CV. c-Myc target genes involved in cell growth, apoptosis, and metabolism. Mol Cell Biol 1999;19:1.
143. Xiao Q, Claassen G, Shi J, et al. Transactivation-defective c-MycS retains the ability to regulate proliferation and apoptosis. Genes Dev 1998;12:3803.
144. Nass SJ, Dickson RB. Defining a role for c-myc in breast tumorigenesis. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1997;44:1.
145. Nass SJ, Dickson RB. Epidermal growth factordependent cell cycle progression is altered in mammary epithelial cells which overexpress c-myc. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:1813.
146. Watson PH, Pon RT, Shiu RPC. Inhibition of c-myc expression by phosphorothioate antisense oligonucleotide identifies a critical role for c-myc in the growth of human breast cancer. Cancer
Res 1991;51:3996.
147. Deming SL, Nass SJ, Dickson RB, Trock BJ. C-Myc amplification in breast cancer: a meta analysis of its frequency and association with risk factors. Proc Annu Meet AACR 1999;40:1358(abst).
148. Dang CV, Resar LMS, Emison E, et al. Function of the c-myc oncogenic transcription factor. Exp Cell Res 1999;253:63.
149. Lee LW, Raymond VW, Tsao MS, et al. Clonal cosegregation of tumorigenicity with overexpression of c-myc and transforming growth factor a genes in chemically transformed rat liver
epithelial cells. Cancer Res 1991;51:5238.
150. Amundadottir LT, Nass S, Berchem G, Johnson MD, Dickson RB. Cooperation of TGFa and c-myc in mouse mammary tumorigenesis: coordinated stimulation of growth and suppression of
apoptosis. Oncogene 1996;13:757.
151. Amundadottir LT, Johnson MD, Merlino GT, Smith GH, Dickson RB. Synergistic interaction of transforming growth factor a and c-myc in mouse mammary and salivary gland tumorigenesis. Cell
Growth Differ 1995;6:737.
152. Sklar MD, Prochownik EV. Modulation of cis-platinum resistance in friend erythroleukemia cells by c-myc. Cancer Res 1991;51:2118.
153. Yang BS, Geddes TJ, Pogulis RJ, de Crombrugghe B, Freytag SO. Transcriptional suppression of cellular gene expression by c-myc. Mol Cell Biol 1991;11:2291.
154. Suen TC, Hung MC. c-myc reverses neu-induced transformed morphology by transcriptional repression. Mol Cell Biol 1991;11:354.
155. Semsei I, Ma S, Cutler RG. Tissue and age specific expression of the myc protooncogene family throughout the lifespan of the C57BL/6J mouse strain. Oncogene 1989;4:465.
156. Schreiber-Agus N, Meng Y, Hoang T, et al. Role of Mxi1 in ageing organ systems and the regulation of normal and neoplastic growth. Nature 1998;393:483.
157. Valverius EM, Ciardiello F, Heldin NE, et al. Stromal influences on transformation of human mammary epithelial cells overexpressing c-myc and SV40T. J Cell Physiol 1990;145:207.
158. Cullen KJ, Lippman ME. Stromal-epithelial interactions in breast cancer. In: Lippman ME, Dickson RB, eds. Genes, oncogenes and hormones. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1992:413.
159. Broca P. Traite des Tumeurs. Paris: Asselin, 1866.
160. Knudson AG Jr. Mutation and cancer: statistical study of retinoblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1971;68:820.
161. Harris H, Miller OJ, Klein G, Worst P, Tachibana T. Suppression of malignancy by cell fusion. Nature 1969;223:363.
162. Venkitaraman AR. Breast cancer genes and DNA repair. Science 1999;286:1100.
163. Chen CF, Li S, Zhong Z, et al. Association of BRCA1 with the hRad50. Science 1999;285:747.
164. Christofori G, Semb H. The role of the cell-adhesion molecule E-cadherin as a tumour-suppressor gene. Trends Biochem Sci 1999;24:73.
165. Kaelin WG Jr. Functions of the retinoblastoma protein. Bioessays 1999;21:950.
166. Fung YK, T'Ang A. The role of the retinoblastoma gene in breast cancer development. Cancer Treat Res 1992;61:59.
167. Ahmad S, Singh N, Glazer RI. Role of AKT1 in 17B-estradiol- and insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I)-dependent proliferation and prevention of apoptosis in MCF-7 breast carcinoma cells.
Biochem Pharmacol 1999;58:425.
168. Datta SR, Brunet A, Greenberg ME. Cellular survival: a play in three Akts. Genes Dev 1999;13:2905.
169. Weng LP, Smith WM, Dahia PLM, et al. PTEN suppresses breast cancer cell growth by phophatase activitydependent G1 arrest followed by cell death. Cancer Res 1999;59:5808.
170. Elledge RM, Lee W. Life and death of p53. Bioessays 1995;17:923.
171. Cullotta E, Koshland D. Molecules of the year: p53 sweeps through cancer research. Science 1993;262:1958.
172. Lavin MF, Khanna KK, Beamish H, et al. Relationship of the ataxia-telangiectasia protein ATM to phosphoinositide 3-kinase. Trends Biochem Sci 1996;20:382.
173. Cox LS, Lane DP. Tumor suppressors, kinases and clamps: how p53 regulates the cell cycle in response to DNA damage. Bioessays 1996;18:501.
174. Hockenbery DM. Bcl-2, a novel regulator of cell death. Bioessays 1995;17:631.
175. Silvestrini R, Veneroni S, Daidone MG, et al. The bcl-2 protein: a prognostic indicator strongly related to p53 protein in lymph nodenegative breast cancer patients. J Natl Cancer Inst
1994;86:499.
176. Reed JC. Dysregulation of apoptosis in cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2941.
177. Agarwal ML, Taylor WR, Chernov MV, Chernova OB, Stark GR. The p53 network. J Biol Chem 1998;273:1.
178. Wang T, Phang J. Effects of estrogen on apoptotic pathways in human breast cancer cell line MCF-7. Cancer Res 1995;55:2487.
179. Merlo GR, Basolo F, Fiore L, Duboc L, Hynes NE. p53-dependent and p53-independent activation of apoptosis in mammary epithelial cells reveals a survival function of EGF and insulin. J Cell
Biol 1995;128:1185.
180. Teixeira C, Reid JC, Pratt MA. Estrogen promotes chemotherapeutic drug resistance by a mechanism involving bcl-2 proto-oncogene expression in human breast cancer cells. Cancer Res
1995;55:3902.
181. Foekens JA, Buessecker F, Peters HA, et al. Plasminogen activator inhibitor-2: prognostic relevance in 1012 patients with primary breast cancer. Cancer Res 1995;55:1423.
182. Clark M, Apel I, Benedict M, et al. A recombinant bcl-x s adenovirus selectively induces apoptosis in cancer cells but not in normal bone marrow cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:11024.
183. Sumantran VN, Ealovega MW, Nunez G, Clarke MF, Wicha MS. Overexpression of Bcl-XS sensitizes MCF-7 cells to chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. Cancer Res 1995;55:2507.
184. Chellappan SP, Hiebert S, Mudryj M, Horowitz JM, Nevins JR. The E2F transcription factor is a cellular target for the RB protein. Cell 1991;65:1053.
185. Obaya AJ, Mateyak MK, Sedivy JM. Mysterious liaisons: the relationship between c-myc and the cell cycle. Oncogene 1999;18:2934.
186. Nijjar T, Wigington D, Garbe JC, et al. p57KIP2 expression and loss of heterozygosity during immortal conversion of cultured human mammary epithelial cells. Cancer Res 1999;59:5112.
187. Zukerberg LR, Yang WI, Gadd M, et al. Cyclin D1 (PRAD1) protein expression in breast cancer: approximately one-third of infiltrating mammary carcinomas show overexpression of the cyclin
D1 oncogene. Mod Pathol 1995;8:560.
188. Keyomarsi K, Conte D Jr, Toyofuku W, Fox MP. Deregulation of cyclin E in breast cancer. Oncogene 1995;11:941.
189. Wang TC, Cardiff RD, Zukerberg L, et al. Mammary hyperplasia and carcinoma in MMTV-cyclin D1 transgenic mice. Nature 1994;369:669.
190. Sicinski P, Donaher JL, Parker SB, et al. Cyclin D1 provides a link between development and oncogenesis in the retina and breast. Cell 1995;82:621.
191. Herman JG, Merlo A, Mao L, et al. Inactivation of the cDK2N2/p16/MTS1 gene is frequently associated with aberrant methylation in all common human cancers. Cancer Res 1995;55:4525.
192. Nielsen NH, Loden M, Cajander J, Emdin SO, Landberg G. G1-S transition defects occur in most breast cancers and predict outcome. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1999;56:105.
193. Lizard-Nacol S, Lidereau R, Collin F, et al. Benign breast disease: absence of genetic alterations at several loci implicated in breast cancer malignancy. Cancer Res 1995;55:4416.
194. Hahn WC, Counter CM, Lundberg AS, et al. Creation of human tumour cells with defined genetic elements. Nature 1999;400:464.
195. Zakien VA. Telomeres. Beginning to understand the end. Science 1995;270:1601.
196. Hiyama E, Gollahon L, Kataoka T, et al. Telomerase activity in human breast tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:116.
197. Greenberg RA, O'Hagan RC, Deng H, et al. Telomerase reverse transcriptase gene is a direct target of c-myc but is not functionally equivalent in cellular transformation. Oncogene
1998;18:1219.

198. Kyo S, Takakura M, Kanaya T, et al. Estrogen activates telomerase. Cancer Res 1999;59:5917.
199. Fishel R, Lescoe MK, Rao MR, et al. The human mutator gene homolog MSH2 and its association with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. Cell 1994;77:167.
200. Dickson RB, Lippman ME. Drug and hormonal resistance in breast cancer. New York: Ellis Horwood, 1996:1.
201. Aoyagi H, Dickson RB. Programmed cell death and its resistance in breast cancer chemotherapy. Pathogenesis 1999;1:143.
202. Sato T, Akiyama F, Sakamoto G, Kasumi F, Nakamura Y. Accumulation of genetic alterations and progression of primary breast cancer. Cancer Res 1991;51:5794.
203. Callahan R, Cropp C, Merlo GR, et al. Genetic and molecular heterogeneity of breast cancer cells. Clin Chim Acta 1993;217:63.
204. Deng G, Lu Y, Zolotnikov G, et al. Loss of heterozygosity in normal tissue adjacent to breast carcinomas. Science 1996;274:2057.
205. O'Connell P, Pekkel V, Fuqua SAW, et al. Analysis of loss of heterozygosity in 399 premalignant breast lesions at 15 genetic loci. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:697.
206. Dickson RB. The molecular basis of breast cancer. In: Kurzrock R, Talpaz M, eds. Molecular biology in cancer medicine, 2nd ed. London: Martin Dunitz, 1999:287.
207. Amundadottir LT, Merlin GT, Dickson RB. Transgenic models of breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1996;39:119.
208. Ciardiello F, Gottardis M, Basolo F, et al. Additive effects of c-erbB-2, c-Ha-ras, and transforming growth factor-alpha genes on in vitro transformation of human mammary epithelial cells. Mol
Carcinog 1992;6:43.
209. Dati C, Muraca R, Tazartes O, et al. C-erbB-2 and ras expression levels in breast cancer are correlated and show a co-operative association with unfavorable clinical outcome. Int J Cancer
1991;47:833.
210. Rosfjord EC, Dickson RB. Growth factors, apoptosis, and survival of mammary epithelial cells. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 1999;4:229.
211. Sinn E, Muller W, Pattengale P, et al. Coexpression of MMTV/v-Ha-ras and MMTV/c-myc genes in transgenic mice: synergistic action of oncogenes in vivo. Cell 1987;49:465.
212. Li B, Rosen J, McMenamin-Balano J, et al. Neu/erbB 2 in transgenic cooperates with p53-172H during mammary tumorigenesis in transgenic mice. Mol Cell Biol 1997;17:3155.
213. Liotta LA, Steeg PS, Stetler-Stevenson WG. Cancer metastasis and angiogenesis: an imbalance of positive and negative regulation. Cell 1991;64:327.
214. Sierra A, Lloveras B, Castellsague X, et al. Bcl-2 expression is associated with lymph node metastasis in human ductal breast carcinoma. Int J Cancer 1995;60:54.
215. Rosfjord E, Dickson RB. Cell adhesion and metastasis. In: Bowcock A, ed. Contemporary approaches to breast cancer. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 1999:285.
216. Ellis LM, Nicolson GL, Fidler IJ. Concepts and mechanisms of breast cancer metastasis. In: Bland KI, Copeland EM, eds. The breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1998:564.
217. Folkman J. Angiogenesis in breast cancer. In: Bland KI, Copeland EM, eds. The breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1998:586.
218. Davies BR, Barraclough R, Rudland PS. Induction of metastatic ability in a stably diploid benign rat mammary epithelial cell line by transfection with DNA from human malignant breast
carcinoma cell lines. Cancer Res 1994;54:2785.
219. Cornetta K, Moore A, Johannessohn M, Sledge GW. Clonal dominance detected in metastases but not primary tumors of retrovirally marked human breast carcinoma injected into nude mice.
Clin Exp Metastasis 1994;12:3.
220. Lerman C, Peshkin BN. Psychosocial issues in BRCA1/2 testing. In: Bowcock AM, ed. Breast cancer: molecular genetics, pathogenesis, and therapeutics. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press,
1998:247.
221. Jordan VC, Costa AF. Chemoprevention. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000:265.
222. Jordan C, Morrow M. Tamoxifen, raloxifene, and the prevention of breast cancer. Endocr Rev 1999;20:253.
223. Gregory H, Thomas CE, Willshire IR, et al. Epidermal and transforming growth factor alpha in patients with breast tumours. Br J Cancer 1989;59:605.
224. Perroteau I, Salomon D, De Bortoli M, et al. Immunological detection and quantitation of alpha transforming growth factors in human breast carcinoma cells. Breast Cancer Res Treat
1986;7:201.
225. Macias A, Perez R, Hagerstrom T, Skoog L. Identification of transforming growth factor alpha in human primary breast carcinomas. Anticancer Res 1987;7:1271.
226. Eckert K, Granetzny A, Fischer J, Nexo E, Grosse R. A mr 43,000 epidermal growth factorrelated protein purified from the urine of breast cancer patients. Cancer Res 1990;50:642.
227. Li Z, Bustos V, Miner J, et al. Propagation of genetically altered tumor cells derived from fine-needle aspirates of primary breast carcinoma. Cancer Res 1998;58:5271.
228. Khan SA, Masood S, Miller L, Numann PJ. Random fine needle aspiration of the breast of women at increased breast cancer risk and standard risk controls. Breast J 1998;4:420.
229. Salven P, Perhoniemi V, Tykka H, Maenpaa H, Joensuu H. Serum VEGF levels in women with a benign breast tumor or breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1999;53:161.
230. Hayes DR, Bast RC, Desch CE, et al. Tumor marker utility grading system: a framework to evaluate clinical utility of tumor markers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1456.
231. Muss HB, Thor AD, Berry DA, et al. C-erbB-2 expression and response to adjuvant therapy in women with node-positive early breast cancer [published erratum appears in N Engl J Med
1994;331:211]. N Engl J Med 1994;330:1260.
232. Berns EM, Foekens JA, van Staveren IL, et al. Oncogene amplification and prognosis in breast cancer: relationship with systemic treatment. Gene 1995;159:11.
233. Fox S, Smith K, Hollyer J. The epidermal growth factor receptor as a prognostic marker: results of 370 patients and a review of 3009 patients. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1994;29:41.
234. Gusterson B, Machin L, Gullick W, et al. Immunohistochemical distribution of c-erbB-2 in infiltrating and in situ breast cancer. Int J Cancer 1988;42:842.
235. Paik S, Hazan R, Fisher ER, et al. Pathologic findings from the national surgical adjuvant breast and bowel project: prognostic significance of erbB-2 protein overexpression in primary breast
cancer. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:103.
236. Benz C, Sarup J, Scott G, et al. Estrogen-dependent, tamoxifen-resistant tumorigenic growth of MCF-7 cells transfected with Her2/neu. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1992;24:85.
237. Thor AD, Berry DA, Budman DR, et al. Erb B 2, p53, and efficacy of adjuvant therapy in lymph nodepositive cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1346.
238. Sunderland MC, McGuire WL. Oncogenes as clinical prognostic indicators. Cancer Treat Res 1991;53:3.
239. Gusterson B, Gelber R, Bettelheim R, et al. Prognostic importance of c-erbB-2 expression in breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1049.
240. Anbazhagan R, Gelber RD, Bettelheim R, Goldhirsch A, Gusterson BA. Association of c-erbB-2 expression and S-phase fraction in the prognosis of node positive breast cancer. Ann Oncol
1991;2:47.
241. Toikkanen S, Helin H, Isola J, Joensuu H. Prognostic significance of HER-2 oncoprotein expression in breast cancer: a 30-year follow-up. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1044.
242. Hancock MC, Langton BC, Chan T, et al. A monoclonal antibody against the c-erbB-2 protein enhances the cytotoxicity of cis-diaminedichloroplatinum against human breast and ovarian tumor
cell lines. Cancer Res 1991;51:4575.
243. Cheever MA, Disis ML. Immunology and immunotherapy. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2000:811.
244. Langton BC, Crenshaw MC, Chao LA, et al. An antigen immunologically related to the external domain of gp185 is shed from nude mouse tumors overexpressing the c-erbB-2 (HER-2/neu)
oncogene. Cancer Res 1991;51:2593.
245. Wels W, Harwerth IM, Mueller M, Groner B, Hynes NE. Selective inhibition of tumor cell growth by a recombinant single-chain antibody-toxin specific for the erbB-2 receptor. Cancer Res
1992;52:6310.
246. Carter P, Presta L, Gorman CM, et al. Humanization of an anti-p185HER2 antibody for human cancer therapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:4285.
247. Pastan I, Fitz Gerald D. Recombinant toxins for cancer treatment. Science 1991;254:1173.
248. Pupa SM, Menard S, Andreola S, Colnaghi MI. Antibody response against the c-erbB-2 oncoprotein in breast carcinoma patients. Cancer Res 1993;53:5864.
249. Zhai Y, Beittenmiller H, Wang B, et al. Increased expression of specific tyrosine protein phosphatases in human breast epithelial cells neoplastically transformed by the neu oncogene. Cancer
Res 1993;53:2272.
250. Pierce JH, Arnstein P, Di Marco E, et al. Oncogenic potential of erbB-2 in human mammary epithelial cells. Oncogene 1991;6:1189.
251. Guy CT, Muthuswamy SK, Cardiff RD, Soriano P, Muller WJ. Activation of the c-Src tyrosine kinase is required for the induction of mammary tumors in transgenic mice. Genes Dev 1994;8:23.
252. Ekstrand AJ, Sugawa N, James CD, Collins VP. Amplified and rearranged epidermal growth factor genes in human glioblastomas: effects of type II mutation on receptor function. Biochem
Biophys Res Comm 1991;178:1413.
253. Bonilla M, Ramirez M, Lopez-Cueto J, Gariglio P. In vivo amplification and rearrangement of c-myc oncogene in human breast tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:665.
254. Cline MJ, Battifora H, Yokota J. Proto-oncogene abnormalities in human breast cancer: correlations with anatomic features and clinical course of disease. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:999.
255. Varley JM, Swallow JE, Brammar WJ, Whittaker JL, Walker RA. Alterations to either c-erbB-2(neu) or c-myc proto-oncogenes in breast carcinomas correlate with poor short-term prognosis.
Oncogene 1987;1:423.
256. Berns EM, Klijn JG, van Putten WL, et al. c-myc amplification is a better prognostic factor than HER2/neu amplification in primary breast cancer. Cancer Res 1992;52:1107.
257. Escot C, Theillet C, Lidereau R, et al. Genetic alteration of the c-myc protooncogene (myc) in human primary breast carcinomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1986;83:4834.
258. Jamerson MH, Johnson MD, Dickson RB. Dual regulation of proliferation and apoptosis: c-myc in bitransgenic murine mammary tumor models. Oncogene 2000;19:1065.
259. Sklar MD, Prochownik EV. Modulation of cis-platinum resistance in friend erythroleukemia cells by c-myc. Cancer Res 1991;51:2118.
260. Yang BS, Geddes TJ, Pogulis RJ, de Crombrugghe B, Freytag SO. Transcriptional suppression of cellular gene expression by c-myc. Mol Cell Biol 1991;11:2291.
261. Gullick WJ, Tuzi NL, Kumas S, et al. c-erbB 2and c-myc genes and their expression in normal tissues and in human breast cancer. In: Cancer cells 7: molecular diagnostics of human cancer.
New York: Cold Spring Harbor Press, 1989:393.
262. Baselga J, Norton L, Albanell J, Kim YM, Mendelsohn J. Recombinant humanized anti-HER2 antibody (Herceptin) enhances the antitumor activity of paditaxel and doxorubicin against
HER-2/neu overexpressing human breast cancer xenografts. Cancer Res 1998;58:2825.
263. Pietras RJ, Poen JC, Gailardo D, et al. Monoclonal antibody to HER-2/neu receptor modulates repair of radiation-induced damage and enhances radiosensitivity of human breast cancer cells
overexpressing this oncogene. Cancer Res 1999;59:1347.
264. Pietras RJ, Regram MD, Fino RS, Moneval DA, Slamon DJ. Remission of human breast cancer xenografts on therapy with humanized monoclonal antibody to HER-2 receptor and DNA
reactive drugs. Oncogene 1998;17:2235.
265. Fan S, Smith ML, Rivet DJ II, et al. Disruption of p53 function sensitizes breast cancer MCF-7 cells to cisplatin and pentoxifylline. Cancer Res 1995;55:1649.
266. Domagala W, Striker G, Szadowska A, et al. p53 protein and vimentin in invasive ductal NOS breast carcinomarelationship with survival and sites of metastases. Eur J Cancer 1994;30A:1527.
267. Pietilainen T, Lipponen P, Aaltomaa S, et al. Expression of retinoblastoma gene protein (RB) in breast cancer as related to established prognostic factors and survival. Eur J Cancer
1995;31A:329.
268. Bhargava V, Kell DL, van de Rijn M, Warnke RA. Bcl-2 immunoreactivity in breast carcinoma correlates with hormone receptor positivity. Am J Pathol 1994;145:535.
269. Gasparini G, Barbareschi M, Doglioni C, et al. Expression of bcl-2 protein predicts efficacy of adjuvant treatments in operable node-positive breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1995;2:189.
270. Krajewski S, Blomqvist C, Franssila K, et al. Reduced expression of proapoptotic gene BAX is associated with poor response rates to combination chemotherapy and shorter survival in women
with metastatic breast adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res 1995;55:4471.
271. Bonetti A, Zaninelli M, Leone R, et al. bcl-2 but not p53 expression is associated with resistance to chemotherapy in advanced breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:2331.
272. Nacht M, Ferguson AT, Zhang W, et al. Combining serial analysis of gene expression and array technologies to identify genes differentially expressed in breast cancer. Cancer Res
1999;59:5464.
273. Sgroi DC, Teng S, Robinson G, et al. In vivo gene expression profile analysis of human breast cancer progression. Cancer Res 1999;59:5656.
274. Fox SB, Harris AL. Angiogenesis as a diagnostic and therapeutic target. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 2000:799.
275. Duffy MJ, Reilly D, McDermott E, et al. Urokinase plasminogen activator as a prognostic marker in different subgroups of patients with breast cancer. Cancer 1994;74:2276.
276. Foekens JA, Peters HA, Look MP, et al. The urokinase system of plasminogen activation and prognosis in 2780 breast cancer patients. Cancer Res 2000;60:636.
277. Kaufmann M, Heider KH, Sinn HP, et al. CD44 variant exon epitopes in primary breast cancer and length of survival. Lancet 1995;345:615.
278. Montero MD, Zavagno G, Meggiolaro F, et al. Vimentin and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) expression on node negative breast carcinomas and their correlations with pathologic
variables and prognosis. Breast J 1995;4:175.
279. Heimann R, Ferguson D, Gray S, Hellman S. Assessment of intratumoral vascularization (angiogenesis) in breast cancer prognosis. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1998;52:147.
280. Locopo N, Fanelli M, Gasparini G. Clinical significance of angiogenic factors in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1998;52:159.
281. Linderholm B, Tavelin B, Grankvist K, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor is of high prognostic value in node-negative breast carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3121.
282. Bergers G, Javaherian K, Lo KM, Folkman J, Hanahan D. Effects of angiogenesis inhibitors on multistage carcinogenesis in mice. Science 1999;284:808.

283. Malonne H, Langer I, Kiss R, Atassi G. Mechanisms of tumor angiogenesis and therapeutic implications: angiogenesis inhibitors. Clin Exp Metastasis 1999;17:1.
284. Rosen N, Sepp-Lorenzino L, Lippman ME. Biologic therapy. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morro M, Osborne CK, eds. Disease of the breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2000:825.

SECTION 37.2 Malignant Tumors of the Breast
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 37.2
Malignant Tumors of the Breast
ERIC P. WINER
MONICA MORROW
C. KENT OSBORNE
JAY R. HARRIS
Introduction
Risk Factors for Breast Cancer
Familial Factors
Inherited Predisposition to Breast Cancer
Hormonal Factors
Lifestyle and Dietary Factors
Benign Breast Disease
Environmental Factors
Management of the High-Risk Patient
Breast Cancer Prevention
Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators
Other Pharmacologic Agents to Lower Breast Cancer Risk
Prophylactic Mastectomy
Biopsy Techniques for Suspicious Breast Lesions
Ductal Carcinoma in Situ
Treatment Options
Microinvasive Carcinoma
Summary
Lobular Carcinoma in Situ
Staging of Breast Cancer
American Joint Committee on Cancer Rules for Classification
Anatomy
Tumor, Node, Metastasis Classification
Definition of Tumor, Node, Metastasis Classification
Histopathologic Type
Local Management of Invasive Breast Cancer
Guidelines for Patient Selection
Contraindications for Breast-Conservation Treatment with Radiation Therapy
Nonmitigating Factors
Conservative Surgery Without Radiation Therapy
Preoperative Chemotherapy
Technique and Complications of Breast-Conserving Surgery
Technique and Complications of Mastectomy
Oncologic Considerations in Immediate Reconstruction
Indications for Postoperative Radiation Therapy
Complications of Radiation Therapy
Local Recurrence
Local Recurrence after Mastectomy
Breast Recurrence after Breast-Conserving Therapy
Breast Reconstruction
Special Therapeutic Problems
Paget's Disease of the Nipple
Male Breast Cancer
Breast Cancer During Pregnancy
Occult Primary with Axillary Metastases
Prognostic and Predictive Factors
Adjuvant Drug (Systemic) Therapy
Adjuvant Tamoxifen
Hormonal Interventions other Than Tamoxifen
Adjuvant Chemotherapy
Use of Anthracyclines in the Adjuvant Setting
Dose Intensity and Dose Density in Adjuvant Treatment
Incorporation of the Taxanes into Adjuvant Therapy
Selection of Adjuvant Regimen and Decision Making about Adjuvant Treatment
Preoperative Chemotherapy
Therapy of Locally Advanced and Inflammatory Breast Cancer
Role of Systemic Therapy
Integration of Systemic and Local Therapies
Inflammatory Breast Cancer
Follow-Up after Primary Treatment
Management of Patients with Metastatic Breast Cancer
Goals of Therapy in Patients with Metastatic Breast Cancer
Evaluation of Patients with Suspected Metastatic Breast Cancer
Local Versus Systemic Therapy
Cytotoxic Chemotherapy for Metastatic Breast Cancer
Combination Versus Single-Agent Chemotherapy
Duration of Chemotherapy
Dose and Schedule of Chemotherapy
High-Dose Chemotherapy with Hematopoietic Support
Trastuzumab (Herceptin)
Quality of Life and Supportive Care Issues
New Treatment Approaches
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Breast cancer has a major impact on the health of women. Approximately 183,000 women are diagnosed with invasive breast cancer each year and nearly 41,000
women die of the disease. 1 In American women, breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the second leading cause of cancer death. 1 In women
aged 40 to 55, breast cancer is the leading cause of all mortality. There has been a slight decline in breast cancer mortality overall, 1 which can be attributed both to
the success of early detection programs and to advances in treatment, particularly developments in systemic therapy. Data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and
End Results (SEER) program indicate that white women in the United States have a 13.1% lifetime risk of developing breast cancer, whereas African American
women have a 9.6% lifetime incidence. 2 The lifetime risk of dying from breast cancer is 3.4% for both African American and white women in the United States.
For several decades there had been a dramatic increase in the incidence of invasive breast cancer. While the incidence of invasive breast cancer has leveled off, 1 the
number of in situ cancers, particularly ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), has been on the rise. SEER data indicate that there was a 130% increase in in situ cancers in
whites and a 190% increase in African Americans from 1983 to 1996. 2 It is estimated that in situ carcinoma was diagnosed in almost 40,000 women in the United

States in 1999. 1 The increase in in situ cancers, particularly DCIS, is largely a result of the increasing use of screening mammography.
In this chapter, we describe the salient features of breast cancer, stressing practical information of importance to clinicians and findings that are new since the last
edition of this text. The increasing incidence of in situ cancer and the more complex management issues surrounding DCIS are reflected in an expanded section
dealing with these issues. For more details about breast cancer, the interested reader is referred to a related textbook in this series devoted exclusively to diseases of
the breast. 3

RISK FACTORS FOR BREAST CANCER
Multiple factors are associated with an increased risk of developing breast cancer, including increasing age, family history, exposure to female reproductive hormones
(both endogenous and exogenous), dietary factors, benign breast disease, and environmental factors. The majority of these factors convey a small to moderate
increase in risk for any individual woman. It has been estimated that approximately 50% of women who develop breast cancer have no identifiable risk factor beyond
increasing age and female gender. 4 Since breast cancer is such an overwhelmingly female disease, gender is often not even considered among the risk factors. The
importance of age is sometimes overlooked as well. Many women, particularly young women, overestimate their risk of developing breast cancer. 5 As can be seen in
Table 37.2-1, age plays a major role in breast cancer risk. 2 In women under 30, breast cancer is extremely uncommon. From 1992 to 1996, the incidence of breast
cancer in women aged 35 to 39 was 59 per 100,000; however, in women 55 to 59, the incidence was 296 per 100,000. The annual incidence continues to rise, albeit
more gradually, as a woman enters her 60s and 70s.

TABLE 37.2-1. Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Incidence and Mortality Age-Specific Rates by Race from 1992 to 1996 a

FAMILIAL FACTORS
A family history of breast cancer has long been recognized as a risk factor for the disease. The majority of women diagnosed with breast cancer do not have a family
member with the disease, and only 5% to 10% have a true hereditary predisposition to breast cancer. 6 Many women with a positive family history overestimate their
risk of developing breast cancer, 7 and women considering genetic testing have been shown to overestimate their chance of having a mutation. 8 Overall, the risk of
developing breast cancer is increased 1.5- to 3.0-fold if a woman has a mother or sister with breast cancer. 9,10 Family history, however, is a heterogeneous risk factor
with different implications depending on the number of relatives with breast cancer, the exact relationship, the age at diagnosis, and the number of unaffected
relatives. For example, there may be minimal elevation in breast cancer risk for a woman whose mother was diagnosed with breast cancer at an advanced age and
who has no other family history of the disease. In contrast, a woman who has multiple family members diagnosed with early-onset breast cancer is at a much higher
risk of developing the disease. 11 Even in the absence of a known inherited predisposition, women with a family history of breast cancer face some level of increased
risk, likely from some combination of shared environmental exposures, unexplained genetic factors, or both. For women with a limited family history, assessment tools
such as the Gail model may be helpful in providing a quantitative estimate of breast cancer risk. 12 Of note, the Gail model was used in the National Surgical Adjuvant
Breast Project (NSABP) breast cancer prevention study with tamoxifen.
INHERITED PREDISPOSITION TO BREAST CANCER
The identification of the two tumor suppressor genes BRCA1 13 and BRCA214 has provided new insights into the understanding of breast cancer genetics. When a
woman has a mutation in either of these genes, she faces a markedly increased lifetime risk of developing breast cancer. 15,16 and 17 The possibility of a mutation in
either BRCA1 or BRCA2 should be considered when breast cancer is diagnosed at a young age (i.e., less than 45 to 55), when multiple relatives are affected, when
there is a history of other cancers in the family (particularly ovarian cancer), or any combination of these factors. Although an increased risk of ovarian cancer is seen
in families with both BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, the presence of ovarian cancer in a family member of a woman with breast cancer is more consistent with a
mutation in BRCA1.15 Both BRCA1 and BRCA2 are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and can be passed to offspring through either maternal or paternal
lineage. A number of models have been developed to help clinicians estimate the chance of identifying a gene mutation. 18,19
In 1990, chromosome 17q21 was identified as the likely location for a breast cancer susceptibility gene. 20 The BRCA1 gene was ultimately cloned in 1994. 13
Mutations in BRCA1 are associated with a 50% to 85% risk of developing breast cancer during a woman's lifetime, with a particularly striking predisposition to
early-onset breast cancer. 21,22 The risk of ovarian cancer is elevated, though not to the same extent as breast cancer. Nevertheless, the presence of both early-onset
breast cancer and ovarian cancer in either a single individual or within a family is highly suggestive of a BRCA1 mutation. Men with BRCA1 mutations do not appear
to be at increased risk of breast cancer, but are probably at increased risk of prostate cancer and possibly of colon cancer. 23 The BRCA1 gene is large, with 24 coding
regions and 1863 amino acids; hundreds of mutations have been described throughout the gene. As a result, screening for a mutation in BRCA1 is costly and time
consuming. Polymorphisms in the gene are not uncommon and probably do not convey an elevated cancer risk.
BRCA2 is located on chromosome 13 and is an even larger gene than BRCA1. 14 Women with BRCA2 mutations are thought to be at a similar risk of developing
breast cancer as those with BRCA1 mutations. 16,24 There is an increased risk of ovarian cancer in women with BRCA2 mutations, although to a lesser degree than
with BRCA1. Men with BRCA2 mutations develop breast cancer with a lifetime incidence that is estimated to be 6%. 25 In addition, there are a variety of other cancers
that appear to be associated with BRCA2; however, studies to date remain limited.
In the general population, it is estimated that between 1 in 500 and 1 in 800 individuals carry a BRCA1 mutation. BRCA2 mutations are even less common. 26 In
contrast, mutations in either BRCA1 or BRCA2 occur in approximately 1 in 40 individuals of Ashkenazi Jewish background. 22 Within this population, three founder
mutations (185delAG and 5382 insC in BRCA1 and 6174delT in BRCA2) appear to have been passed on for generations. Because of the higher gene frequency in
individuals of Ashkenazi descent, the chance of finding a mutation in an Ashkenazi Jewish woman with a personal history, family history, or both of breast cancer,
ovarian cancer, or both is much higher than in a non-Ashkenazi. Because of the high frequency of the founder mutations in this group of individuals, genetic testing
can begin with an assessment for the presence of the three mutations. In Ashkenazi Jewish women diagnosed with breast cancer at age 40 or earlier, it has been
estimated that 20% or more have a mutation. 27
Genetic testing should be preceded by a careful evaluation of an individual's personal cancer history and family history. The implications of genetic testing for both
the individual and the extended family are considerable, and these issues should be addressed in genetic counseling session(s) before any testing. A more extensive
discussion of this issue is found elsewhere in this text.
There are many unanswered questions about both BRCA1 and BRCA2. Since the genes are large and mutations can be highly variable in location, an important issue
is whether all mutations convey the same level of risk. It is unknown to what extent breast cancer risk is modified by other genes, hormonal factors, or environmental
exposures. For example, preliminary reports have suggested that early pregnancy is not protective, 28 although oophorectomy appears to lower breast cancer risk. 29
For women with mutations who have not developed breast cancer, a variety of strategies have been considered to lower risk and are described later, in Breast Cancer

Prevention.
Women with BRCA1-associated breast cancers are thought to have a high proportion of high-grade, hormone receptor–negative cancers, although it is not clear that
their overall outcome is different from that of women with sporadic breast cancer. 30,31 and 32 The tumors in women with BRCA2 mutations do not appear to have
distinctive features and bear a closer resemblance to sporadic breast cancer. 32 At this time, it is not known whether a woman's genetic status should influence
management decisions when breast cancer is diagnosed. Women with mutations have a higher risk of developing contralateral cancers, but their clinical course has
otherwise not been shown to be different from other women with breast cancer. 31 For this reason, there are insufficient data to indicate that either local or systemic
management of the patient with a mutation should differ from what is the standard of care based on stage, tumor grade, receptor status, and general health status.
Breast cancer is also observed as part of other familial syndromes, including Li-Fraumeni syndrome, 33 Cowden syndrome,34 Muir syndrome,35 and
ataxia-telangiectasia. 36
HORMONAL FACTORS
The development of breast cancer in many women appears to be related to female reproductive hormones. Epidemiologic studies have consistently identified a
number of breast cancer risk factors, each of which is associated with increased exposure to endogenous estrogens. Early age at menarche, nulliparity or late age at
first full-term pregnancy, and late age at menopause increase the risk of developing breast cancer. 12,37 In postmenopausal women, obesity38 and postmenopausal
hormone therapy,39 both of which are positively correlated with plasma estrogen levels and plasma estradiol levels, 40,41 are associated with increased breast cancer
risk. Furthermore, in utero exposure to high concentrations of estrogen may also increase breast cancer risk. 42,43
The age-specific incidence of breast cancer increases steeply with age until menopause. After menopause, although the incidence continues to increase, the rate of
increase decreases to approximately one-sixth of that seen in the premenopausal period. This dramatic slowing of the rate of increase in the age-specific incidence
curve suggests that ovarian activity plays a major role in the etiology of breast cancer. The relative risk of developing breast cancer for a woman with natural
menopause before age 45 is one-half that of a woman whose menopause occurs after age 55. 44 There is substantial evidence that estrogen deprivation via iatrogenic
premature menopause can reduce breast cancer risk. Epidemiologic studies have shown that premenopausal women who undergo oophorectomy without hormone
replacement have a markedly reduced risk of breast cancer later in life. Oophorectomy before age 50 decreases breast cancer risk, with an increasing magnitude of
risk reduction as the age at oophorectomy decreases. 45 In a small study of women undergoing ovarian ablation as part of adjuvant breast cancer treatment,
contralateral breast cancer rates were reduced compared with women not undergoing ovarian ablation. 46 Recent data from women with BRCA1 mutations suggest that
early oophorectomy has a substantial protective effect on breast cancer risk in this population as well. 29
Age at menarche and the establishment of regular ovulatory cycles are strongly linked to breast cancer risk. 47,48 Earlier age at menarche is associated with an
increased risk of breast cancer 48; there appears to be a 20% decrease in breast cancer risk for each year that menarche is delayed. 47 Of note, hormone levels
through the reproductive years in women who experience early menarche may be higher than in women who undergo a later menarche. 49 Additionally, late onset of
menarche results in a delay in the establishment of regular ovulatory cycles, although there is some controversy over whether this delay confers any additional
protective effect. 50,51 From these data regarding menarche and menopause, it seems likely that the total duration of exposure to endogenous estrogen is an important
factor in breast cancer risk.
The relationship between pregnancy and breast cancer risk appears more complicated. Age at first full-term pregnancy clearly influences breast cancer risk. Based on
epidemiologic studies, women whose first full-term pregnancy occurs after age 30 have a two- to fivefold increase in breast cancer risk in comparison with women who
have a first full-term pregnancy before approximately age 18. 52,53 Nulliparous women are at greater risk for the development of breast cancer than parous women, with
a relative risk of about 1.4. 52 During pregnancy, mammary cells differentiate into mature breast cells prepared for lactation. After this differentiation, these cells have a
longer cell cycle, allowing more time for DNA repair in G 1.54 Breast cancer risk increases transiently after a pregnancy. 55 The increased risk, which lasts approximately
10 years, is then associated with a more durable protective effect. 55,56 The reason for the increased risk has been hypothesized to be the increase in proliferation,
growth, and maturation of breast cells preparing for lactation, leading to the development of mutations. Alternatively, risk may increase secondary to the effect of high
levels of hormones on subclinical cancers.
Studies of lactation on breast cancer risk have had inconsistent results. Studies have suggested that a long duration of lactation reduces breast cancer risk in
premenopausal women.57,58
The effect of abortion, whether spontaneous or induced, on breast cancer risk is less clear. Several studies have found that termination of a pregnancy not only
negates any protective effect, but, in fact, increases breast cancer risk. 59 More recent studies, including a large population-based cohort comprised of 1.5 million
Danish women,60 show no increase in long-term risk after early termination of a pregnancy. 61,62 These apparently contradictory effects of pregnancy on risk have been
explained in a variety of ways. As breast tissue undergoes differentiation as a result of hormonal changes of a full-term pregnancy, these fully differentiated cells may
be less likely to undergo malignant transformation. In incomplete pregnancy, the breast is exposed only to the high estrogen levels of early pregnancy. These
unopposed high levels theoretically could be responsible for an increased risk in women who do not carry the pregnancy to term and thus do not experience the full
mammary differentiation in preparation for lactation. Despite these theoretical arguments, at this time there is no conclusive evidence that early termination of a
pregnancy has any effect on breast cancer risk.
The effects of exogenous hormones, in the form of hormone replacement therapy and oral contraceptives, on breast cancer risk have been studied extensively.
Metaanalyses of the effect of hormone replacement therapy demonstrate small, but statistically significant, increases in risk (relative risks, 1.02 to 1.35) for
users. 39,63,64 Risk appears to increase with current use and duration of use. This finding is consistent with studies demonstrating that postmenopausal women with
higher concentrations of endogenous estrogen levels have a greater risk of developing breast cancer than women with lower estrogen levels. 40,41 More recent studies
have found statistically significant increases in risk in women taking both estrogen and progestin compared with those taking estrogen alone for hormone
replacement.65,66 It is of interest that several more recent studies suggest that breast cancer arising in women on hormone replacement therapy may be histologically
more favorable. 67,68 Furthermore, the increased risk of breast cancer appears to be reduced after cessation of hormone replacement therapy and may actually
disappear after approximately 5 years. 68
Overall, there is no convincing evidence of a significantly increased risk of breast cancer in women who have used oral contraceptives. 69,70 Some studies suggest that
a slightly increased risk of breast cancer is seen in women who are younger than 35 and who use oral contraceptives, possibly related to duration and/or recency of
use.69,71 Studies of subsets of patients, including those with a family history of breast cancer or a history of benign breast disease, have not produced consistent
findings. 72
LIFESTYLE AND DIETARY FACTORS
A possible relationship between breast cancer and diet has been suggested by the large international variation in breast cancer incidence rates. Studies of immigrant
groups suggest that these differences are not due solely to genetic factors. 73,74 Japanese women immigrating to the United States and first-generation American-born
Japanese women were found to have an incidence of breast cancer almost equal to that of whites in the same area and considerably higher than that of women in
Japan.74 Because national per capita fat consumption correlates with incidence and mortality from breast cancer, many investigators have sought to determine the
relationship between fat intake and breast cancer risk. Kinlen compared breast cancer rates of nuns who ate no or very little meat with single British women who ate
regular diets and observed no differences. 75 Breast cancer mortality among Seventh Day Adventists, a group that adheres to a diet low in animal fats, is not
significantly lower than expected when compared with the general population. 76 A pooled analysis of seven prospective cohort studies involving 337,819 women
demonstrated no difference in breast cancer risk between women in the highest and lowest quintile of fat intake. 77 Furthermore, this study and other more recent
studies have also been unable to detect any relation between risk of breast cancer and consumption of specific types of fats. 77,78 and 79 Thus, over the range of fat
intake seen in western societies, there is no apparent association between breast cancer risk and fat intake in adults. Any effect of fat intake during childhood or
adolescence, however, cannot be ruled out based on available data.
Examination of the relationship between energy balance and breast cancer has been more revealing. Data have been consistent for a positive association between

birth weight and breast cancer. 43,80 Most case-control and cohort studies of attained height, a variable highly correlated with age at menarche, and risk of breast
cancer suggest a positive relationship. 81 Although being overweight during early adult life has been associated with a lower incidence of premenopausal breast
cancer, 38,82 weight gain after age 18 is associated with a significantly increased risk in postmenopausal breast cancer. 38,83 The protection conferred by increased
weight early in life is thought to be secondary to increased irregularity of menstrual cycles in these women, suggesting their exposure to endogenous estrogens is
decreased. 84 The increased risk with weight gain in later adult life has been explained by increased estrogen levels in these women secondary to increased
production in adipose tissue. 38
These findings are also consistent with the possible influence of physical activity on breast cancer risk. A premenopausal woman's level of physical activity, even if
moderate, can have an effect on the likelihood of ovulatory cycles and, for this reason, may alter breast cancer risk. 85,86 Furthermore, physical activity influences body
fat stores, the principal source of estrogen in postmenopausal women.
Multiple studies suggest a positive association between alcohol intake and breast cancer risk. A large metaanalysis demonstrated a relative risk of 1.1 for one drink
per day, 1.2 for two drinks per day, and 1.4 for three drinks per day. 87 Additional data from prospective studies confirm this increase in risk. 88 The effect of alcohol
intake, which is associated with increased estrogen levels, appears to be mitigated by high folic acid intake. 89
Many investigators have examined the effects of specific dietary components on breast cancer risk. Despite the lack of evidence that fiber or individual vitamins and
minerals confer any significant protective effect, it appears that a diet high in fruits and vegetables may decrease breast cancer risk. 90,91
BENIGN BREAST DISEASE
Benign breast lesions are classified as proliferative or nonproliferative. Nonproliferative disease is not associated with an increased risk of breast cancer, whereas
proliferative disease without atypia results in a small increase in risk (relative risk, 1.5 to 2.0). Atypical hyperplasia is associated with a greater risk of cancer
development (relative risk, 4.0 to 5.0). 92
Dupont and Page found a marked interaction between atypia and a family history of a first-degree relative with breast cancer. 92 This subgroup of patients had a risk
11-fold that of women with nonproliferative breast disease. The absolute risk of breast cancer development in women with a positive family history and atypical
hyperplasia was 20% at 15 years, compared with 8% in women with atypical hyperplasia and a negative family history of breast carcinoma. Proliferative breast
disease appears to be more common in women with a significant family history of breast cancer than in controls, further supporting its significance as a risk factor. 94
Of note, however, the majority of breast biopsies done for clinical indications demonstrate nonproliferative disease. In Dupont and Page's study of 10,000 breast
biopsies, 69% had nonproliferative changes and only 3.6% demonstrated atypical hyperplasia. 92 No increased risk of breast cancer development has been observed
in women with a diagnosis of proliferative disease who have used estrogens after breast biopsies. 93
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS
Exposure to ionizing radiation, either secondary to nuclear explosion or medical diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, increases breast cancer risk. Because of the
long latency period for radiation-induced breast cancers, in addition to the increased sensitivity to mutagenic damage in a developing breast, radiation exposure after
age 40 produces a minimal increase in risk, while exposure early in life carries the greatest risk. A markedly increased risk of breast cancer development has been
reported in women who received mantle irradiation for the treatment of Hodgkin's disease before age 15. 95 Other environmental factors, including exposure to
electromagnetic fields and organochlorine pesticides, have been suggested to increase breast cancer risk, but further data are needed before drawing firm
conclusions.

MANAGEMENT OF THE HIGH-RISK PATIENT
A woman's risk of developing breast cancer is influenced by a range of factors. There is no formal definition of what constitutes high risk. Without question, women
who carry mutations in either BRCA1 or 2 or who have a family history consistent with genetically transmitted breast cancer are considered to be at higher risk than
those in the general population. 6,22 A second and much less common group of high-risk women consists of those individuals who have received mantle irradiation,
usually for treatment of Hodgkin's disease. 95,96 Women with lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) or atypical hyperplasia on breast biopsy are also considered high risk.
Although a variety of hormonal factors (e.g., early menarche, late age at first full-term pregnancy) affect breast cancer risk on a population basis, these conditions
have a relatively small effect on risk for any individual woman.
In approaching women concerned about breast cancer risk, it is important to recognize that many women overestimate their risk of developing breast cancer. 7,97 In
one study, respondents overestimated their probability of dying from breast cancer within 10 years by more than 20-fold. 97 A number of studies have demonstrated
that overestimation of risk is associated with psychological morbidity and, in some cases, avoidance of proven screening measures. 98,99 Providing women with an
accurate assessment of breast cancer risk may have a number of benefits, including allaying anxiety and facilitating treatment decisions 100 (Table 37.2-2).

TABLE 37.2-2. Potential Benefits of Breast Cancer Risk Assessment

The first step in determining a woman's risk of developing breast cancer is to take a thorough history, evaluating for the presence of known risk factors. Of these,
family history, age, and the presence of a premalignant lesion on previous breast biopsy are probably the most significant. Because of the substantially higher risk of
identifying a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation in women of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, ethnic background should also be established. It can be helpful to provide women
who are concerned about their breast cancer risk with a numeric risk estimate. A number of models for risk assessment are available, of which the Gail model 14,101 and
a model developed by Claus and colleagues from the Cancer and Steroid Hormone Study 11 are the most frequently used. The Gail model, which calculates a woman's
risk of developing breast cancer based on age at menarche, age at first live birth, number of previous breast biopsies, the presence or absence of atypical
hyperplasia, and the number of first-degree female relatives with breast cancer, has been used in the NSABP breast cancer prevention trials. Efforts to validate the
Gail model in different settings have produced variable results. In the Nurses' Health Study cohort, the Gail model was found to overestimate breast cancer risk, 102
although, in other settings, it has proven to be more accurate. 103 In the NSABP prevention trial, the Gail model performed extremely well, with a ratio of observed to
predicted cancers in study participants of 1.03 (95% confidence interval, 0.88 to 1.22). 104 In general, the Gail model is thought to underestimate risk in women with
strong family histories, at least in part because it only incorporates a family history in first-degree relatives. The Claus model, on the other hand, takes into account
both first- and second-degree relatives, although it does not include other risk factors. Not surprisingly, the numeric assessments produced by different models may
produce discordant estimates. 105 The widespread use of the Gail model as part of the NSABP prevention trials has led to its general acceptance in clinical practice. In
communicating model-based estimates to high-risk women, the limitations of these models should be emphasized. Clinicians should also be aware that women who
are anxious about their breast cancer risk may continue to overestimate their risk of developing the disease even after receiving individualized counseling. 7

Although there is extensive literature on breast cancer screening in the general population, there are few data available on which to base screening recommendations
in women with inherited susceptibility genes or other factors that markedly increase breast cancer risk. For high-risk women over the age of 40, annual mammography
is recommended.106 The area of greatest controversy is in screening women under the age of 40. An expert panel has recommended that women with an inherited
susceptibility gene should perform monthly breast self-examinations, undergo a clinical breast examination once or twice a year, and have annual mammograms
beginning between the ages of 25 and 35. 107x The role of more frequent mammograms (i.e., twice annually), digital mammography, or magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) is uncertain. Ongoing studies are addressing these issues.

BREAST CANCER PREVENTION
The identification of risk factors associated with the development of breast cancer has led to an effort to prevent breast cancer in women at increased risk. Numerous
strategies have been considered, including risk factor modification, lifestyle alteration, drug therapy, and prophylactic surgery. Only preliminary evidence suggests
that behavioral approaches can be used to alter breast cancer risk, 86,108 and, unfortunately, most of the known risk factors for breast cancer are not easily modifiable.
Few women would be willing to modify the age at which they have a first pregnancy in an effort to lower breast cancer risk. While early menopause may be associated
with lower breast cancer risk, there are adverse psychological and physical consequences of premature menopause. Some investigators have attempted to alter a
woman's natural hormonal milieu to lower breast cancer risk, and it is possible that such approaches might have future promise. 109 To date, however, most efforts to
lower a woman's risk of developing breast cancer have focused on pharmacologic interventions.
SELECTIVE ESTROGEN RECEPTOR MODULATORS
Adjuvant trials of tamoxifen have demonstrated clear reductions in the development of contralateral breast cancers in women treated with tamoxifen. 110 These data, as
well as preclinical evidence supporting a role for tamoxifen in breast cancer prevention, 111,112 led to the development of the NSABP's Breast Cancer Prevention Trial
and to various studies in Europe.
The NSABP trial, known as P-1, randomized over 13,000 patients to either tamoxifen for 5 years or to a placebo. 113 To be eligible, women 35 years of age or older
had to have at least a 1.66% chance of developing breast cancer over the ensuing 5 years based on the Gail model. Because of the elevated risk associated with
age, any woman over the age of 60 was eligible for the trial. Overall, women randomized to 5 years of tamoxifen experienced a 49% decrease in invasive breast
cancer, with similar risk reduction seen in women both younger than 50 and older than 50. The benefits of tamoxifen were seen across all patient subgroups ( Table
37.2-3) and were highly statistically significant. Despite the high level of statistical significance, the absolute benefit from tamoxifen is of relatively small magnitude,
even if one also considers the cases of DCIS prevented by tamoxifen (69 cases in the placebo arm and 35 in women on tamoxifen). To date, the benefit seen with
tamoxifen only applies to the prevention of estrogen receptor (ER)–positive cancers; in P-1, there was no reduction in the risk of ER-negative cancers. While there is
reason to believe that the beneficial effects of tamoxifen may extend beyond 5 years, 110 it is unknown to what degree a 5-year course of tamoxifen affects a woman's
lifetime risk of developing breast cancer.

TABLE 37.2-3. Incidence of Invasive Breast Cancer in Women Participating in P-1

The benefits associated with tamoxifen must also be balanced against the potential risks, in terms of both serious toxicities and adverse consequences with respect to
quality of life. 113,114 Increases in both endometrial cancer and thromboembolic events were seen in women on tamoxifen, although more commonly in older women (50
and older) than their younger counterparts. Based on these findings, it is thought that tamoxifen may be most beneficial in younger women with an elevated risk of
developing breast cancer. 115
The findings from NSABP P-1 must also be considered in light of two European studies evaluating tamoxifen. 116,117 Both the Royal Marsden Hospital chemoprevention
trial and the Italian prevention trial failed to demonstrate a protective effect of tamoxifen. The studies were considerably smaller than P-1 (2494 in the Royal Marsden
trial and a total of 5408 in the Italian), and a number of explanations have been offered to explain the negative results. The Royal Marsden trial, for example, may
have included a substantial number of women from families with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, and the Italian study results could have been compromised by poor
compliance with the study medication. Nevertheless, the European findings provide a sobering counterpoint to the P-1 study. These results, as well as recognition of
the limitations of what has been learned from P-1, underscore the need for further research in this area. At present, the need to individualize decision making about
tamoxifen in the prevention setting cannot be overemphasized.
Raloxifene, another selective ER modulator, has also been shown to lower the risk of developing invasive breast cancer. In a randomized trial in postmenopausal
women with osteoporosis, two doses of raloxifene (60 or 120 mg) were compared with placebo. Treatment with raloxifene not only led to an improvement in bone
density and fracture risk, but also appeared to prevent breast cancer. 118,119 Among 5129 women randomized to raloxifene, there were a total of 13 cases of breast
cancer, compared with 27 cases among 2576 who were assigned to placebo (relative risk, 0.24; 95% confidence interval, 0.13 to 0.44). Like tamoxifen, raloxifene
increased the risk of thromboembolic disease (relative risk, 3.1; 95% confidence interval, 1.5 to 6.2) but did not appear to increase the risk of endometrial cancer. The
follow-up of patients on the trial was relatively short (median, 40 months), and women participating in the trial were generally not at increased risk of developing breast
cancer (apart from the increased risk associated with increasing age). The NSABP is now conducting a second-generation prevention trial (P-2) in which tamoxifen
and raloxifene are being compared directly in postmenopausal women who are at increased risk of developing breast cancer. Until the results of that trial or additional
data are available, the routine use of raloxifene to lower a woman's risk of developing breast cancer cannot be recommended. 120,121
OTHER PHARMACOLOGIC AGENTS TO LOWER BREAST CANCER RISK
Ongoing trials are evaluating a wide range of other agents to lower a woman's risk of developing breast cancer. A randomized Italian study indicated that fenretinide,
a differentiating agent in the retinoid family, lowers the risk of contralateral cancers. 122 Unfortunately, symptomatic nyctalopia is a problem for approximately 10% of
patients taking this agent. 123 A U.S. Intergroup trial comparing tamoxifen plus placebo versus tamoxifen plus N-(4-hydroxyphenyl) Retinamide was stopped
prematurely, making it unlikely that there will be a definitive answer as to whether N-(4-hydroxyphenyl) Retinamide plays a role in a woman's risk of developing breast
cancer. Trials involving other differentiating agents, aromatase inhibitors, and vaccines are ongoing, but it is unlikely that there will be any commercially available
agent to lower breast cancer risk in the next several years.
PROPHYLACTIC MASTECTOMY
For years it has been assumed that prophylactic mastectomy would lower a woman's risk of developing breast cancer. Since a small amount of breast tissue remains
following mastectomy, the level of protection was debated. In a retrospective but rigorously conducted analysis at the Mayo Clinic, Hartmann et al. have demonstrated
a 90% reduction in breast cancer risk as a result of prophylactic mastectomy. 124 Most women and their physicians consider prophylactic mastectomy to be an extreme
procedure125; however, for certain high-risk women, such as those with an inherited genetic predisposition, it is currently an option. Modeling studies have

demonstrated that prophylactic mastectomy in women with BRCA1 mutations may result in a modest improvement in survival. 126,127 The decision to proceed with
prophylactic surgery should be considered carefully. Unlike many other choices that high-risk women may face, this is one that is irreversible and should not be made
without carefully considering all the available options. Women who are considering prophylactic mastectomy with reconstruction should also recognize the potential
short- and long-term complications associated with breast reconstruction (see Breast Reconstruction, later in this chapter).

BIOPSY TECHNIQUES FOR SUSPICIOUS BREAST LESIONS
In this section, the various techniques employed to biopsy suspicious palpable and mammographic breast lesions are described. The major techniques used to
diagnose palpable breast masses are fine-needle aspiration (FNA), core-cutting needle biopsy, and excisional biopsy. (Incisional biopsy is occasionally used to
diagnose large breast masses, but this technique has largely been replaced by the less invasive aspiration or core biopsy.) The advantages and disadvantages of the
three techniques are listed in Table 37.2-4. Both FNA and core biopsy are office procedures. Excisional biopsy, with rare exceptions, is an outpatient procedure that
can be done using local anesthesia.

TABLE 37.2-4. Biopsy Techniques for Palpable Masses

The main issue surrounding the use of FNA is the risk of false-negative results. Large series of FNA have demonstrated a sensitivity of 87%, an incidence of
insufficient specimens ranging from 4% to 13%, and a false-negative rate of 4.0% to 9.6%. 128,129 and 130 Fibrotic tumors, infiltrating lobular, tubular, and cribriform
histologies, and physician inexperience have all been found to be sources of false-negative aspirate results. 128,131,132 False-positive aspirates are extremely
uncommon and are reported in fewer than 1% of cases in most large series. 128,129,130,131 and 132 FNA does not, however, reliably distinguish invasive cancer from DCIS,
potentially leading to the overtreatment of gross DCIS.
Core-cutting needle biopsy has many of the advantages of FNA, in addition to which it provides histologic details of the lesion. The accuracy of core biopsy is similar
to that reported for FNA, with sensitivities of 79% to 94%. 133,134 Shabot et al.135 prospectively compared the diagnostic accuracy of FNA and core-cutting needle biopsy
in 81 women. The accuracy of FNA was 96%, compared with 79% for the core-cutting needle technique. No false-positive results were observed in any of these
reports.133,134 and 135
Excisional biopsy has been the standard technique used in diagnosing breast masses. This method affords the physician complete evaluation of tumor size and
histologic characteristics before selecting definitive local therapy. When an excisional biopsy is performed, an attempt should be made to remove a small margin of
grossly normal tissue around the tumor. Kearney and Morrow 136 used such an approach in 239 patients with cancer and obtained negative margins in 95% of cases,
thus avoiding the need for a reexcision as part of definitive breast-conserving therapy. Proper specimen handling with inking of the margins facilitates this approach.
There is no evidence that a one-step procedure (i.e., biopsy under general anesthesia followed by definitive surgery if positive) is associated with any survival benefit
compared with biopsy followed by definitive surgery at a later time.
Until relatively recently, nonpalpable, mammographically detected lesions have been routinely approached by needle-localized excisional biopsy. The most important
factor in the success of this approach is how close the localizing needle is placed to the mammographic abnormality. Gallagher et al. 137 reported wire placement to
within 2 mm of the target in 96% of cases, allowing excision with a median specimen volume of 6.0 cm, and 96% of the lesions were removed with a single specimen.
Specimen radiography is an essential part of the biopsy procedure done for microcalcifications in order to confirm that the calcifications are present in the biopsy
specimen. Although nonpalpable masses can frequently be identified grossly at the time of biopsy, specimen radiography is also useful to ensure that the gross lesion
corresponds to the mammographic abnormality. Failure to excise the mammographic lesion is reported in fewer than 5% of cases in most modern series. 138,139 and 140
When this occurs, persistence of the lesion on mammogram should be confirmed and repeat biopsy undertaken.
Frozen section is generally reliable in the diagnosis of palpable breast masses, but indications for its use in the evaluation of nonpalpable breast lesions are limited.
The abnormalities being sought by needle-localization biopsy are usually small and are often histologically borderline and difficult to diagnose on frozen section.
Sacchini et al. 141 noted a discordance rate of 12% between the frozen-section diagnosis and the final histologic diagnosis in a study of 403 nonpalpable lesions.
Errors in distinguishing atypical hyperplasia from DCIS accounted for most of the discrepancies. Tinnemans et al. 142 had two false-positive results in a series of 297
nonpalpable lesions diagnosed by frozen section, as well as a 3% incidence of false-negative results. Because needle-localization biopsy is rarely undertaken with a
plan to proceed to definitive therapy at the same operation, a careful examination of the entire lesion with paraffin sections is generally the more prudent course.
An alternative approach to the diagnosis of nonpalpable abnormalities is the image-guided breast biopsy, using either stereotactic mammography or ultrasound to
guide needle placement. The choice of technique is dependent on the visibility of the lesion. In general, ultrasound guidance is more rapid and does not require
breast compression, making it better tolerated. Stereotactic guidance is reserved for lesions not visualized on ultrasound.
A review of seven series comparing stereotactic core biopsies with surgical excision demonstrates sensitivities ranging from 71% to 100% for the core-biopsy
technique in a selected group of patients. 143 In a series in which core biopsy was performed using automated 14-gauge biopsy devices, sensitivities of 92% to 100%
were reported, and insufficient specimens were rare. 144 Extensive experience has been gained with these techniques, and a number of indications for surgical biopsy
after core biopsy have been identified. These include lack of concordance between the radiographic finding and the histologic diagnosis, a diagnosis of radial scar, or
atypical hyperplasia. 145 Atypical hyperplasia on a core biopsy is associated with DCIS in 30% to 50% of cases, 145,146,147 and 148 while radial scar may be difficult to
distinguish from a well-differentiated carcinoma that has elicited a fibrous reaction.
For mammographic abnormalities that are benign, core biopsy is clearly less traumatic and more cost effective than needle localization and excision. For highly
suspicious abnormalities (BI-RADS 5), the benefits are less clear. Two studies have demonstrated that, for experienced surgeons, the likelihood of obtaining negative
margins with a single operative procedure for excision of nonpalpable abnormalities is the same whether or not a core-biopsy diagnosis of carcinoma is obtained
before surgery. 148,149 However, Morrow et al.148 prospectively evaluated the number of operations needed to complete local therapy in 409 patients with nonpalpable
cancer approached initially with core biopsy or needle localization and excision. Core biopsy reduced the number of operations for all types of lesions except when
patients were treated by lumpectomy alone. This suggests that for small calcified lesions with a high likelihood of being pure DCIS, surgical excision may remain the
diagnostic procedure of choice.

DUCTAL CARCINOMA IN SITU
DCIS, also known as intraductal carcinoma, is an entity distinct in both its clinical presentation and its biologic potential from LCIS, the other lesion classified as
noninvasive carcinoma. The widespread use of screening mammography has resulted in a significant increase in the detection rate of DCIS, and the acceptance of
breast-conserving therapy for the treatment of invasive carcinoma has led to changes in the management of women with DCIS. Uncertainty exists as to the proportion
of women with mammographically detected DCIS who will develop invasive carcinoma during their lifetimes. This has led to a debate regarding whether all DCIS

should be treated as early-stage carcinoma with either mastectomy or lumpectomy and irradiation, or whether some DCIS can be excised and observed.
An abnormal mammographic report of clustered microcalcifications is currently the most common presentation of DCIS. DCIS can also present as a mass or
pathologic nipple discharge, or can be identified as an incidental finding in a breast biopsy. In many reports of mammographically directed biopsies, DCIS accounts
for one-half or more of the malignancies identified. 140,150
The widespread use of screening mammography has resulted in a remarkable increase in the incidence (or detection rate) of DCIS. 151 This increase in the incidence
of DCIS has been observed in women both younger than and older than 50 years of age, and in both white and African American women. This dramatic increase in
the number of DCIS cases has led some authors to suggest that screening results in the detection of biologically indolent DCIS that is unlikely to become clinically
significant during a woman's lifetime. The findings that patients with lesions detected by screening have a higher frequency of grade 3 lesions than patients with
lesions not detected by screening 152 and that the risk factors for DCIS and invasive carcinoma are similar 153 argue against this point.
DCIS is characterized pathologically by a proliferation of presumably malignant epithelial cells within the mammary ductal-lobular system, without light microscopic
evidence of invasion into the surrounding stroma. However, DCIS encompasses a heterogeneous group of pathologic lesions that differ in their growth pattern and
cytologic features. At present, there is no universal agreement as to how best to subclassify these lesions. Proposed classification schemes for DCIS have variously
emphasized (1) architectural features or growth pattern of the neoplastic cells within the ductal-lobular system, (2) cytologic features of the neoplastic cells, and (3)
cellular necrosis, singly and in combinations. The traditional system for classifying DCIS was based primarily on architectural pattern and recognized five major
subtypes: comedo, cribriform, micropapillary, papillary, and solid. DCIS is commonly subdivided into the comedo type and the noncomedo type (which encompasses
the other variants). This is based on the observations that the comedo type usually appears more malignant cytologically and is more often associated with
invasion 154,155 than are the other DCIS types. Classification systems based primarily on architecture have a number of limitations: (1) many DCIS display a mixture of
patterns, (2) the correlation between architecture and nuclear grade is not very high, and (3) interobserver reproducibility in the categorization of DCIS lesions by
architectural pattern is poor. 156 Several newer systems classify DCIS lesions primarily on the basis of nuclear grade, necrosis, or both, with architectural pattern given
secondary or no consideration. 156,157,158,159 and 160 In 1997, a consensus conference was convened in an attempt to reach agreement on the classification of DCIS. 161
While the panel did not endorse any one system of classification, there was agreement that certain features be routinely documented in pathology reports of DCIS
lesions. These include nuclear grade (low, intermediate, or high grade), the presence of necrosis (comedo or punctate), cell polarization, and architectural pattern(s).
A number of biologic markers in DCIS lesions have been evaluated. These studies have generally shown that comedo or high-grade lesions more frequently than
noncomedo or low-grade lesions lack estrogen and PR, 162,163 and 164 overexpress the HER-2/neu (c-erbB-2) oncogene,162,163,164,165 and 166 show mutations of the p53
tumor suppressor gene with accumulation of its protein product, 162,163,164,165,166 and 167 and demonstrate angiogenesis in the surrounding stroma. 168,169
Axillary lymph node involvement in patients with mammographically detected DCIS is a rare event. In one series of 189 patients with DCIS, most of whose tumors
were detected by mammography alone, none showed metastases on axillary dissection. 170 A National Cancer Data Base review of 10,946 patients with DCIS who had
an axillary dissection between 1985 and 1991 demonstrated that only 406 (3.6%) of this group had axillary metastases. 171
A frequently encountered issue related to DCIS is the identification of small foci of invasive carcinoma, so-called microinvasion. Unfortunately, this term has not been
applied in a consistent, standardized manner, and the histologic diagnosis of microinvasion is not straightforward. In the 1997 edition of the AJCC Cancer Staging
Manual,172 microinvasion is defined for the first time as “the extension of cancer cells beyond the basement membrane into the adjacent tissues with no focus more
than 0.1 cm in greatest dimension” and are staged as T1mic, a subset of T1 breast cancer. The staging manual further states that “when there are multiple foci of
microinvasion, the size of only the largest focus is used to classify the micro-invasion” and that the size of the individual foci should not be added together. Given the
problems with both the definition and pathologic diagnosis of microinvasion, the clinical significance of this lesion is controversial. The reported incidence of axillary
lymph node involvement in patients given the diagnosis of microinvasion ranges from 0% to 20%. 173,174,175,176,177,178 and 179 The management of this condition is
discussed in the next section, Treatment Options.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
A variety of local treatments, ranging from excision alone to mastectomy, have been proposed for DCIS. Making comparisons among retrospective reports is difficult
because of differences in patient populations, lack of standardization of surgical and radiotherapeutic techniques, and changes in treatment practice over time.
Mastectomy is a curative treatment for approximately 98% to 99% of patients with DCIS, whether gross or mammographic. 180,181 and 182 Of note, patients with initial
biopsies that showed DCIS but who later had invasive carcinoma identified in the mastectomy specimens were excluded from these reports. Recurrences after
mastectomy are almost all invasive carcinomas and may present as a chest wall or axillary recurrence or as distant metastases without evidence of local recurrence.
Mastectomy is a highly effective treatment for DCIS, but it is a relatively radical approach to a lesion that may not progress to invasive carcinoma during the patient's
lifetime. It also seems somewhat paradoxical that a woman with an invasive carcinoma should be able to preserve her breast, whereas the reward for screening and
early detection is a mastectomy. The acceptance of breast-conserving therapy for the treatment of invasive carcinoma has led to its use also as a treatment for DCIS.
Treatment of DCIS by mastectomy has not been directly compared with treatment by excision and irradiation, and it is unlikely that such a trial will ever be done. In
many cases, the assumption has been made that since these two treatments result in equivalent survival for patients with invasive carcinoma, the same will be true for
patients with DCIS. This assumption is flawed, due to the difference in the risk of metastatic disease between patients with invasive carcinoma and those with DCIS.
In patients with invasive carcinoma, the risk of metastatic disease is largely present at diagnosis and is not greatly altered by local recurrence in the breast. In patients
with DCIS, on the other hand, the risk of metastases at diagnosis is negligible, and an invasive local recurrence carries with it the potential risk of breast cancer
mortality. Therefore, the anticipated incidence of invasive recurrence and the results of salvage therapy should determine the suitability of excision and irradiation as
a treatment for DCIS. A number of nonrandomized studies are available to address this issue. 183,184,185,186 and 187 Solin and associates 183,184 reported the results of 268
women with 271 breasts with DCIS treated with excision and irradiation at ten institutions in Europe and the United States. At a median follow-up of 10.3 years, the
15-year actuarial rate of local failure was 19%. It is noteworthy that although the local failure rate in this study was relatively high, the 15-year cause-specific survival
was 96%. The methods of mammographic and pathologic evaluation and the extent of surgical resection employed in this study would probably not be considered
adequate today (e.g., only 15% underwent reexcision, and margin status was unknown in 120 cases; 46%). In spite of these caveats, this study is noteworthy for the
large number of patients and relatively long duration of follow-up, and the low cause-specific mortality is reassuring. An examination of the subset of patients with
mammographically detected lesions from this series (n = 110) did not reveal a significantly lower rate of local failure than that seen in the group as a whole, 188 a
finding also reported by Hiramatsu et al. 185
Because one-half of the local failures seen after breast-conserving therapy for intraductal carcinoma are invasive carcinoma, the outcome of salvage treatment of
these recurrences is important. In a separate report, Solin and coworkers 189 described 42 cases of local failure in 274 cases of DCIS treated with excision plus
irradiation. The median follow-up after salvage treatment was 3.7 years. Nineteen of the recurrences (45%) were DCIS, and 14 of these were detected by
mammography alone. All of the women with DCIS recurrences remain free of disease after mastectomy, with a median follow-up of 4.7 years. Five patients with
invasive recurrence had developed distant metastases, either simultaneously with the recurrence (one patient) or subsequently (four patients). Chest wall recurrences
were seen in three patients who had salvage mastectomy for an invasive recurrence, and all of these women developed distant metastases. Of the entire group of 42
women with recurrence, 36 patients (86%) were alive and free of disease, 4 patients (10%) died of disease, 1 patient is alive with disease, and 1 patient died of other
causes. Similarly high rates of salvage have been reported in other studies 190; however, the ultimate breast cancer mortality resulting from breast-conserving therapy
cannot yet be assessed given the available follow-up in these studies.
A number of investigators have also examined the use of excision alone as a treatment 190,191,192,193,194 and 195 (Table 37.2-5). Patients treated with this approach are
highly selected, usually on the basis of low histologic grade, small lesion size, or both. The percentage of patients with DCIS in the study population meeting these
selection criteria is usually not stated, making it unclear how many women with DCIS are candidates for this type of treatment. In general, the results show rates of
local recurrence that are higher than that seen with excision combined with irradiation. A 1999 publication by Silverstein et al. suggests that the rate of local
recurrence will be low if there is an adequate margin of resection (defined as greater than 10 mm). 194 There are, however, several limitations of the study that are
worth noting. First, the group of 93 patients treated by wide excision alone who had margins greater than 10 mm is highly selected. The median size of the lesion was
only 9 mm, and only 23% showed comedo necrosis. The patients were cared for by a dedicated team of surgeons, radiologists, and pathologists, and the specimens
were routinely handled by total sequential embedding, an ideal technique for assessing margins, but uncommonly used because of its expense. In addition, since
these patients were seen more recently in the series compared with the irradiated patients, their follow-up time is shorter, estimated to be approximately 5 years as a
median, with many less than 3 years. Therefore, this data set does not allow the conclusion that the full range of DCIS lesions can be managed by wide excision

alone.

TABLE 37.2-5. Results of Treatment of Ductal Carcinoma In Situ by Excision Alone

To date, there have been two clinical trials with published results in women with DCIS randomized to excision alone or excision plus radiation therapy (RT) 190,196
(Table 37.2-6). Both trials involved patients with DCIS treated with an excision yielding histologically negative surgical margins defined as tumor-filled ducts not
touching an inked surface. The NSABP has reported the 8-year results of trial B-17. 190 In this study, 818 women were randomized to excision alone or excision plus
5000 cGy of irradiation to the breast. Eighty percent of the women in the study had tumors detected by mammographic screening. At 90 months of follow-up, a
persistent reduction was seen with RT. The 8-year incidence of invasive recurrence was significantly reduced from 13.4% to 3.9% by irradiation, and the incidence of
recurrent DCIS was also significantly reduced from 13.4% to 8.2%. The European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer has reported the 4-year results
of trial 10853. 196 In this study, 1010 women were randomized to excision alone or excision plus 5000 cGy of irradiation to the breast. Seventy-one percent of the
women in the study had tumors detected by mammographic screening. With a median follow-up of 51 months, a 38% reduction in the annual incidence of ipsilateral
breast recurrence was observed in the irradiated group. The 4-year incidence of invasive recurrence was significantly reduced from 8% to 4% by irradiation and the
incidence of recurrent DCIS was also reduced from 8% to 5%. The overall survival is the same for the two groups, as is the incidence of distant metastases. Of note,
the baseline recurrence rate with excision alone was similar in the two trials, but the reduction with RT was somewhat greater in the NSABP trial (59% reduction)
compared with the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer trial (38% reduction). In addition, the local benefit of RT for both DCIS trials is lower
than that seen for trials of RT for invasive cancers treated by excision.

TABLE 37.2-6. Results of Randomized Clinical Trials Testing the Value of Radiation Therapy after Excision

The identification of women at high risk of developing invasive carcinoma after breast-conserving therapy for apparently localized DCIS would be extremely helpful.
The NSABP has reported the results of two analyses of the pathologic features of 623 of the 824 patients enrolled in protocol B-17. 197,198 In the initial report, moderate
or marked comedo necrosis and uncertain or involved margins were associated with an increased risk of local failure. While radiation reduced the risk of failure in all
subgroups, the absolute benefit was greatest in those patients at highest risk for recurrence. 197 After 8 years, an analysis of nine histologic features, including
margins, histologic type, nuclear grade, tumor size, and comedo necrosis, demonstrated that only comedo necrosis significantly predicted for an increased risk of
ipsilateral breast recurrence in multivariate analyses. Breast recurrence was much greater in unirradiated patients with moderate or marked comedo necrosis
compared with patients with absent or slight comedo necrosis. The addition of RT eliminated most of the risk associated with this factor, with 13% of those with absent
or slight comedo necrosis and 14% with moderate or marked comedo necrosis recurring after RT at 8 years. 198 Margin involvement was of borderline significance, but
only a minority of patients had involved margins.
Several studies have suggested that age may influence the risk of local recurrence after breast-conserving therapy. Solin et al. 184 noted a 25% incidence of local
failure in patients aged 50 or younger treated with excision and irradiation compared with 2% in patients older than 50, in spite of the fact that nuclear grade, tumor
size, and margin status did not differ between groups. The median time to local failure was also shorter in the younger patients (4.9 vs. 8.7 years). Similar findings
using a cutoff of 40 years was noted by Van Zee et al. and Fourquet et al. 199,200 Other studies have suggested that a family history of breast cancer may affect the risk
of local failure after excision and irradiation. 185,186
Attempts have been made to incorporate the size of the lesion, its histologic features, and the extent of the surgical excision into a prognostic index that would direct
treatment selection. One such index is the Van Nuys Prognostic Index, which assigns equally weighted scores of 1, 2, or 3 for histologic type, width of the surgical
margin, and size of the lesion. 201 Lesions with low Van Nuys Prognostic Index scores are said to be suitable for excision alone; those with intermediate scores (5 to 7)
require the addition of irradiation; and those with high scores require mastectomy. While such a simplification of the decision-making process is attractive, there are a
number of limitations to this index. 202 As noted previously, the latest information from this group now suggests that margin width is the key prognostic factor, with
lesion size and histologic type much less important. 194 Until the Van Nuys Prognostic Index is validated, it should not substitute for an individualized assessment of
the risks and benefits of the available treatment options for DCIS.
Tamoxifen has been shown to reduce the risk of both invasive and intraductal carcinoma in women at increased risk for breast cancer development 112 and to reduce
contralateral breast cancer incidence when used as an adjuvant treatment in women with breast cancer. 203 The initial results of NSABP protocol B-24, in which 1804
patients with DCIS treated by lumpectomy and RT were randomized to tamoxifen (20 mg daily) or placebo for 5 years, have been reported with a mean follow-up of 62
months204 (Table 37.2-7). Overall, the risk of ipsilateral recurrence of any type (invasive or noninvasive) or of new contralateral breast cancers was reduced from
13.0% to 8.8% at 5 years, a highly significant reduction. These benefits need to be weighed against the potential risks of treatment, which are lowest in patients aged
less than 50201 and those who have had a prior hysterectomy.

TABLE 37.2-7. Results of National Surgical Adjuvant Breast Project Protocol B-24: Addition of Tamoxifen to Lumpectomy and Radiotherapy

The available information on DCIS suggests that, although all patients can be treated with mastectomy, many are candidates for treatment with excision and
irradiation, and a smaller group may be appropriately treated with excision alone. When thinking about treatment selection, it is useful to consider (1) the risk for
breast cancer recurrence, (2) the risk for an invasive breast cancer, and (3) the risk for dying of breast cancer as well as the patient's perception of the risks and
benefits of the treatment options. The available data on breast-conserving treatment (BCT) with irradiation generally show recurrence rates of 10% to 15% at 10
years. Approximately one-half of these recurrences are invasive carcinoma, for a 10-year risk of 5% to 7%. Assuming that the risk of dying of breast cancer is
one-third or less the risk of developing an invasive cancer, the risk of breast cancer death with BCT is approximately 2% at 10 years. (If the risk of local recurrence is
5% to 10%, then the breast cancer mortality risk is reduced proportionally.) The risk for death 10 years after a mastectomy for DCIS is 1% to 2%, with nearly all breast
cancer mortality seen by that time. In contrast, given the long-term risk of a breast cancer recurrence after BCT, comparisons of breast cancer mortality 30 years after
treatment could show greater differences in survival between women having mastectomy and those treated with excision and RT. However, the use of tamoxifen will
significantly reduce the risk of invasive recurrence. Whether RT is necessary for all patients with DCIS treated with a breast-sparing approach remains uncertain.
Retrospective data indicate that highly selected patients, usually those with small, low-grade (none or slight comedo necrosis) DCIS with widely negative margins,
have a low local recurrence rate after excision alone. The effect of tamoxifen on recurrence when RT is not given is uncertain, since this approach has not been
directly studied in clinical trials.
While developments in molecular biology may one day allow us to predict more precisely which lesions progress to invasive carcinoma, efforts must now be directed
toward minimizing local recurrence in women treated with a breast-conserving approach. The initial step in the evaluation of patients with DCIS is determination of the
extent of the lesion. Because most patients with DCIS have nonpalpable mammographic lesions, careful mammographic evaluation before treatment selection is
critical. The routine use of magnification views as part of the mammographic evaluation allows the detection of additional calcifications that reduce the discrepancy
between the pathologic and the mammographic extent, particularly for well-differentiated DCIS. The goals of surgery are to remove all suspicious microcalcifications
and to achieve negative margins of resection. Needle localization should be used to guide the biopsy, and, if the calcifications are extensive, bracketing wires are
useful to aid in complete excision. Specimen mammography is essential to confirm the excision of calcifications. In cases in which calcifications are extensive or
approach the edge of the surgical specimen (even when the margins are negative), postexcision mammography is useful to confirm the removal of all suspicious
calcifications. It is important to recognize that, although DCIS lesions are not clinically detectable, they may be quite large. Morrow et al. found that contraindications
to breast preservation were present in 33% of patients with DCIS compared with only 10% of patients with stage I invasive carcinoma. 205 Extensive disease, which
could not be encompassed with a cosmetic resection, was the major contraindication to BCT in patients with DCIS.
A detailed pathologic evaluation is also needed and should include orientation and inking of the specimen before sectioning as well as measurement of both
specimen and, if present, tumor size. Because accurate measurement of microscopic DCIS is often difficult, reporting the number of blocks in which DCIS is present
and the total number of blocks is useful. If DCIS is present on only one slide, then it is useful to note its size. The correlation of microcalcifications with DCIS (i.e.,
calcifications noted in DCIS, calcifications in adjacent benign breast tissue, or both) and the margin status should be noted. If margins are involved, the extent of
involvement should be stated, and when negative, the proximity of the lesion to the margin should be noted.
Clinical trials currently in design or open for accrual in the United States include (1) a randomization following excision to clear margins of 3 mm and tamoxifen to RT
or no RT (Radiation Therapy Oncology Group, Intergroup) and (2) trials of wide excision alone (Harvard, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group).
MICROINVASIVE CARCINOMA
As previously discussed, microinvasive carcinoma has been a poorly defined pathologic entity. Similar to DCIS, it is being diagnosed more frequently because of the
increased use of screening mammography.
The limited available data on patients with microinvasive carcinoma suggest that axillary lymph node metastases are infrequent and the prognosis after surgical
treatment is excellent.173,174,175 and 176,178,179,206,207 and 208 Because of variability in the definition of microinvasion, results from the literature are applicable to an individual
patient only if microinvasion is defined in the same way. Since the incidence of axillary node metastases is low, axillary dissection is not routinely indicated. Survival in
patients with microinvasive carcinoma seems to be intermediate between that for DCIS and that for small invasive carcinomas. The use of BCT in these patients
should follow the same guidelines for careful mammographic and pathologic evaluation with the requirement for negative margins of resection as for patients with an
extensive intraductal component–positive invasive carcinoma.
SUMMARY
DCIS represents a heterogeneous group of lesions of varying malignant potential. Total (simple) mastectomy is associated with a cure rate of 98% to 99% for all types
of DCIS. Patients with localized DCIS are candidates for breast-sparing surgery and irradiation. Detailed mammography and careful pathologic evaluation are
essential to confirm the localized nature of the lesion and judge the adequacy of resection. The goals of surgery are to remove all suspicious microcalcifications and
to achieve negative margins of resection. Excision alone may be an appropriate treatment for selected women with small (less than 1 to 2 cm) low-grade DCIS lesions
with clearly negative margins. Axillary dissection is not indicated in DCIS. In women with large high-grade lesions undergoing mastectomy, a low axillary sampling
obviates the need for reoperation if invasion is identified. The use of tamoxifen should be considered to reduce the risk of ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence after
breast-conserving surgery and to reduce the risk of contralateral breast cancer. A detailed discussion of the risks and benefits of the various options must be
undertaken to allow each woman with DCIS to make an informed treatment choice.

LOBULAR CARCINOMA IN SITU
LCIS is not detectable on macroscopic examination and is always an incidental microscopic finding in breast tissue removed for another reason. 209 Given this, the
incidence of LCIS in the general population is unknown. Reviews of large series of benign breast biopsies done for clinical abnormalities have found that only 0.5% to
3.6% are LCIS.210,211,212 and 213 LCIS is also an uncommon finding in autopsy studies. 214 In all reports, LCIS is noted to be more common in younger women, with the
mean age at diagnosis usually reported to be between 44 and 46 years,with 80% to 90% of cases of LCIS occurring in premenopausal women. 210,211,212 and 213 LCIS is
reported to occur approximately ten times more frequently in white women than in African American women in the United States. 215 The frequency with which LCIS is
diagnosed is increasing, with one series 216 reporting a 15% increase in the number of cases seen from 1973 to 1988. Although some of this increase is due to greater
recognition of LCIS as a pathologic entity, the major factor responsible appears to be the increased number of breast biopsies that are performed as a result of
screening mammography. A review217 of 6287 mammographically generated biopsies showed that LCIS was present in 2.3% of total cases, accounting for 9.8% of
mammographically detected lesions classified as malignancies. No specific mammographic findings are associated with LCIS. Several studies have examined the
distribution of LCIS in an involved breast and the contralateral breast. Multicentric LCIS is identified in 60% to 80% of mastectomy specimens. 218,219 and 220 In addition,
LCIS is frequently noted to be bilateral. 211
In contrast with DCIS, which is heterogeneous in its histologic appearance, the histologic features of LCIS show little variation and are usually easily recognized. LCIS
is most often characterized by a solid proliferation of small cells, with small, uniform, round-to-oval nuclei, and variably distinct cell borders. Some cases of LCIS are,

however, characterized by larger cells with larger nuclei that show some degree of pleomorphism. LCIS is typically present in the terminal duct-lobular units and
distends and distorts the involved spaces. In some instances, LCIS cells involve extralobular ducts. The growth within these ducts may be either solid or pagetoid (i.e.,
the LCIS cells are insinuated between the duct basement membrane and the native ductal epithelial cells).
LCIS has a low proliferative rate, 221,222 is typically positive for ER, 221,222 and 223 and rarely, if ever, shows overexpression of HER-2/ neu221,222 or accumulation of the p53
protein.221,222 In addition, LCIS is characterized by loss of expression of the adhesion molecule E-cadherin. 224 While the diagnosis of LCIS is usually straightforward,
there is no sharp dividing line between atypical lobular hyperplasia and LCIS. In some patients, LCIS may involve foci of sclerosing adenosis and produce a pattern
that mimics invasive carcinoma. Also, the distinction between LCIS and DCIS is sometimes problematic. 225
The major issue in the management of LCIS is the risk for invasive carcinoma after a diagnosis of LCIS. Six series 210,211,212 and 213,215,225 with long-term follow-up
address the malignant potential of LCIS after biopsy alone ( Table 37.2-8). With the exception of one study, 225 the studies show that LCIS is associated with an
increased risk for the development of breast carcinoma that is approximately seven to ten times that of the index population. In addition, the five studies with long-term
follow-up agree that the risk for subsequent cancer development is equal in both breasts. Most carcinomas that develop in women with LCIS are infiltrating ductal, not
infiltrating lobular carcinoma. 211,212,227 However, the incidence of infiltrating lobular carcinoma is significantly elevated compared with the 5% to 10% incidence
observed among breast cancers in the general population. More recent information about invasive cancer risk associated with a diagnosis of LCIS comes from the
NSABP tamoxifen prevention trial. 113 There were 826 women with LCIS in this study, and the average annual rate of invasive carcinoma development among the
placebo group was 12.99 per 1000 women. The use of tamoxifen reduced this risk to 5.69, a relative risk of 0.44.

TABLE 37.2-8. Follow-Up Studies of Lobular Carcinoma In Situ

The observations that most women with LCIS do not develop breast cancer, that the risk for breast cancer is bilateral, and that most tumors are infiltrating ductal
carcinomas give credence to the hypothesis that LCIS is a risk factor for cancer development. One management option for the woman with LCIS is careful
observation, as would be done for any woman known to be at increased risk for breast cancer development due to a positive family history or prior personal history of
breast cancer. The use of tamoxifen in women electing observation only is worthy of consideration. An alternative for women unwilling to accept the risk for breast
cancer development (approximately 1% per year) associated with a policy of careful observation is bilateral simple mastectomy, usually with immediate reconstruction.
Treatment strategies addressing one breast, such as unilateral simple mastectomy with contralateral biopsy, would seem illogical because the risk of LCIS is bilateral
regardless of the findings of the contralateral biopsy. The effectiveness of a program of careful follow-up in detecting potentially curable carcinoma in a population of
high-risk women is uncertain. A metaanalysis of 389 reported cases of LCIS followed for a mean of 10.9 years reported a breast cancer mortality of 2.8%, although
16.4% of the group developed carcinoma. 229 In contrast, of 391 women treated initially with mastectomy, breast cancer mortality was 0.9%. However, many of these
series antedate the use of modern mammography, and uniform clinical follow-up was not used.
Wide surgical excision and histologically negative margins are not needed when careful follow-up is chosen given that LCIS is known to be a multifocal lesion.
Similarly, RT has no role in the management of LCIS. When observation is elected, it is recommended that women with LCIS be examined at 4- to 6-month intervals
and obtain annual mammograms. Because the increased risk of breast cancer persists indefinitely, observation must last for the patient's lifetime. The choice between
careful observation with or without tamoxifen and bilateral prophylactic mastectomy can only be made by the patient who thoroughly understands the risk she
assumes. Surgical treatment of LCIS is not an emergency, and detailed discussions of treatment options are important for patients to overcome the confusion often
associated with this diagnosis.

STAGING OF BREAST CANCER
Staging refers to the grouping of patients according to the extent of their disease. It is useful in (1) determining the choice of treatment for individual patients, (2)
estimating their prognosis, and (3) comparing the results of different treatment programs. Staging can be based on either clinical or pathologic findings. Currently,
staging of cancer is determined by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), which is jointly sponsored by the American Cancer Society and the American
College of Surgeons. The AJCC system is a clinical and pathologic staging system and is based on the TNM system, in which T refers to tumor, N to nodes, and M to
metastasis. The current edition, the fifth, published in 1997 172 is given verbatim below. It provides rules for classification, definition of the anatomy, and stage
groupings. Of particular note in the 1997 classification are the new changes: (1) the designation of T1mic for invasive cancers with microinvasion measuring 0.1 cm or
less in greatest dimension, and (2) the designation of pN1a for nodal micrometastasis (none larger than 0.2 cm).
The many changes in the AJCC system over time and its complexity have limited its use and usefulness. In addition, the current system does not address present-day
issues, such as a patient's suitability for BCT or the risk of distant relapse with and without systemic therapy. In practice, most clinicians simply use the tumor size and
the histologic findings of axillary dissection, often grouped for convenience into negative, one to three positive nodes, four to nine positive nodes, and ten or more
positive nodes.
AMERICAN JOINT COMMITTEE ON CANCER RULES FOR CLASSIFICATION
Clinical Staging
Clinical staging includes physical examination, with careful inspection and palpation of the skin, mammary gland, and lymph nodes (axillary, supraclavicular, and
cervical), imaging, and pathologic examination of the breast or other tissues to establish the diagnosis of breast carcinoma. The extent of tissue examined
pathologically for clinical staging is less than that required for pathologic staging (see next section, Pathologic Staging). Appropriate operative findings are elements
of clinical staging, including the size of the primary tumor and chest wall invasion, and the presence or absence of regional or distant metastasis.
Pathologic Staging
Pathologic staging includes all data used for clinical staging, surgical exploration, and resection as well as pathologic examination of the primary carcinoma, including
not less than excision of the primary carcinoma with no macroscopic tumor in any margin of resection by pathologic examination. A case can be classified pT for
pathologic stage grouping if there is only microscopic, but not macroscopic, involvement at the margin. If there is tumor in the margin of resection by macroscopic
examination, it is coded TX because the extent of the primary tumor cannot be assessed. If there is no clinical evidence of axillary metastasis, resection of at least the
low axillary lymph nodes (level 1; i.e., those lymph nodes located lateral to the lateral border of the pectoralis minor muscle) should be performed for pathologic (pN)
classification. Such a resection ordinarily includes six or more lymph nodes. Metastatic nodules in the fat adjacent to the mammary carcinoma within the breast,
without evidence of residual lymph node metastases are classified as regional lymph node metastases (N). Pathologic stage grouping includes any of the following
combinations: pT pN pM, or pT pN cM, or cT cN pM.
ANATOMY

Primary Site
The mammary gland, situated on the anterior chest wall, is composed of glandular tissue within a dense fibroareolar stroma. The glandular tissue consists of
approximately 20 lobes, each of which terminates in a separate excretory duct in the nipple.
Regional Lymph Nodes
The breast lymphatics drain by way of three major routes: axillary, transpectoral, and internal mammary. Intramammary lymph nodes are considered with, and coded
as, axillary lymph nodes for staging purposes; metastasis to any other lymph node is considered distant (M1), including supraclavicular, cervical, or contralateral
internal mammary. The regional lymph nodes are presented here:
1. Axillary (ipsilateral): interpectoral (Rotter's) nodes and lymph nodes along the axillary vein and its tributaries that may be (but are not required to be) divided into
the following levels:
a. Level I (low axilla): lymph nodes lateral to the lateral border of pectoralis minor muscle
b. Level II (midaxilla): lymph nodes between the medial and lateral borders of the pectoralis minor muscle and the interpectoral (Rotter's) lymph nodes
c. Level III (apical axilla): lymph nodes medial to the medial margin of the pectoralis minor muscle including those designated as subclavicular, infraclavicular,
or apical
Note: Intramammary lymph nodes are coded as axillary lymph nodes.
2. Internal mammary (ipsilateral): lymph nodes in the intercostal spaces along the edge of the sternum in the endothoracic fascia
Any other lymph node metastasis is coded as a distant metastasis (M1), including supraclavicular, cervical, or contralateral internal mammary lymph nodes.
Metastatic Sites
All distant visceral sites are potential sites of metastasis. The four major sites of involvement are bone, lung, brain, and liver, but this widely metastasizing disease has
been found in many other sites.
TUMOR, NODE, METASTASIS CLASSIFICATION
Primary Tumor
The clinical measurement used for classifying the primary tumor (T) is the one judged to be most accurate for that particular case (e.g., physical examination or
imaging such as a mammogram). The pathologic tumor size for classification (T) is a measurement of only the invasive component. For example, if there is a 4.0-cm
intraductal component and a 0.3-cm invasive component, the tumor is classified T1a. The size of the primary tumor is measured for T classification before any tissue
is removed for special studies, such as for ERs.
Microinvasion of Breast Carcinoma
Microinvasion is the extension of cancer cells beyond the basement membrane into the adjacent tissues with no focus more than 0.1 cm in greatest dimension. When
there are multiple foci of microinvasion, the size of only the largest focus is used to classify the microinvasion. (Do not use the sum of all the individual foci.) The
presence of multiple foci of microinvasion should be noted, as it is with multiple larger invasive carcinomas.
Multiple Simultaneous Ipsilateral Primary Carcinomas
The following guidelines are used when classifying multiple simultaneous ipsilateral primary (infiltrating, macroscopically measurable) carcinomas. These criteria do
not apply to one macroscopic carcinoma associated with multiple separate microscopic foci: (1) Use the largest primary carcinoma to classify T. (2) Enter into the
record that this is a case of multiple simultaneous ipsilateral primary carcinomas. Such cases should be analyzed separately.
Simultaneous Bilateral Breast Carcinomas
Each carcinoma is staged as a separate primary carcinoma in a separate organ.
Inflammatory Carcinoma
Inflammatory carcinoma is a clinicopathologic entity characterized by diffuse brawny induration of the skin of the breast with an erysipeloid edge, usually without an
underlying palpable mass. Radiologically there may be a detectable mass and characteristic thickening of the skin over the breast. This clinical presentation is due to
tumor embolization of dermal lymphatics. The tumor of inflammatory carcinoma is classified T4d.
Paget's Disease of the Nipple
Paget's disease of the nipple without an associated tumor mass (clinical) or invasive carcinoma (pathologic) is classified Tis. Paget's disease with a demonstrable
mass (clinical) or an invasive component (pathologic) is classified according to the size of the tumor mass or invasive component.
Skin of Breast
Dimpling of the skin, nipple retraction, or any other skin change except those described under T4b and T4d may occur in T1, T2, or T3 without changing the
classification.
Chest Wall
Chest wall includes ribs, intercostal muscles, and serratus anterior muscle, but not pectoral muscle.
DEFINITION OF TUMOR, NODE, METASTASIS CLASSIFICATION
Definitions for classifying the primary tumor (T) are the same for clinical and for pathologic classification ( Table 37.2-9). The telescoping method of classification can
be applied. If the measurement is made by physical examination, the examiner will use the major headings (T1, T2, or T3). If other measurements, such as
mammographic or pathologic, are used, the telescoped subsets of T1 can be used.

TABLE 37.2-9. Tumor, Node, and Metastasis Classification of Breast Cancer

HISTOPATHOLOGIC TYPE
The histologic types and grades are presented in Table 37.2-10.

TABLE 37.2-10. Histopathologic Types and Grades

LOCAL MANAGEMENT OF INVASIVE BREAST CANCER
This section describes the multidisciplinary approach to the local management of breast cancer by addressing the use of mastectomy, conservative surgery (CS), and
RT in a coordinated fashion, as well as by considering the integration of local and systemic treatment.
Modified radical mastectomy is still the most common surgical treatment for patients with invasive breast cancer in the United States. 230,231 The term modified radical
mastectomy is used to describe a variety of surgical procedures, but all involve complete removal of the breast, the underlying pectoral fascia, and some of the
axillary nodes. Whereas the modified radical mastectomy may not seem to differ significantly from the radical mastectomy, it represents a major departure from
Halstedian principles of en bloc cancer surgery. The switch to modified radical mastectomy occurred when it became recognized that treatment failure after breast
cancer surgery usually is caused by the systemic dissemination of cancer cells before surgery, rather than an inadequate operative procedure. In addition, by the
1970s, fewer patients with large tumors with fixation to the pectoral muscle were being seen, making modified radical mastectomy feasible for most women. Two
prospective randomized trials demonstrated no difference in survival between patients treated with modified radical and radical mastectomy. These findings were
confirmed in two prospective randomized trials. 232,233 Perhaps the most influential of the studies refuting the Halstedian concept was the NSABP B-04 trial. 234 In this
trial, clinically node-negative patients were randomized to radical mastectomy, simple mastectomy and nodal irradiation, or simple mastectomy with axillary
observation and delayed dissection if positive nodes developed. The failure of this trial to demonstrate a difference in survival between groups was the final proof that
the Halstedian concept of breast cancer did not apply to the majority of patients and was a landmark in our understanding of the local therapy of breast cancer. Today,
there are few, if any, indications for radical mastectomy.
The strategy behind BCT is to remove the bulk of the tumor surgically and to use moderate doses of radiation to eradicate any residual cancer. The application of this
strategy requires an understanding of the extent and distribution of cancer in a breast with an apparently localized tumor. This issue has been clarified as a result of
the work of Holland and coauthors. 235,236 In their initial study, 235 mastectomy specimens with unicentric tumors 4 cm or less in size were evaluated using 5-mm
sections, radiography of these thin slices, and an average of 20 blocks per specimen for histologic evaluation. Only 39% of specimens showed no evidence of cancer
beyond the reference tumor. In 20%, there was additional cancer, but this was confined to within 2 cm of the reference tumor. Forty-one percent of cases had residual
cancer more than 2 cm from the reference tumor; of these, two-thirds had pure intraductal carcinoma and one-third had mixed intraductal and invasive carcinoma ( Fig.
37.2-1). Local recurrence in the breast occurs at or near the site of the primary tumor in most cases, 237,238,239 and 240 emphasizing that this multifocal involvement is
biologically important. In a subsequent study, the amount of residual intraductal carcinoma was evaluated. 236 Approximately 10% of patients had prominent intraductal
carcinoma (defined as a total of six or more low-power fields of intraductal carcinoma) extending more than 2 cm from the reference tumor. These studies indicate that
the extent and amount of microscopic cancer in the vicinity of a primary tumor, known as multifocality, is variable. These results imply that the extent of surgical
resection required in BCT varies from patient to patient.

FIGURE 37.2-1. Frequency of additional cancer foci at increasing distance from a clinically unifocal reference tumor. Two hundred sixty-four mastectomy specimens
were studied from patients with breast cancers measuring 4 cm or less and judged to be unifocal based on clinical findings. Thirty-nine percent of cases (group A)
showed no additional cancer foci beyond the reference tumor. In 20% of cases (group B), additional foci were found but were restricted to within 2 cm of the reference
tumor. Forty-one percent of the cases showed cancer foci further than 2 cm from the reference tumor, including 27% in which the additional foci were entirely
intraductal (group C) and 14% in which they were invasive and intraductal (group D).

The published results of modern, prospective randomized clinical trials comparing CS and RT and mastectomy have all shown equivalent survival between the two
treatment approaches,241,242,243,244,245,246 and 247 and an overview of all the trials (including an unpublished one) has demonstrated comparable survival 248 (Fig. 37.2-2).

These data demonstrate that survival for most breast cancer patients is not dependent on choice of local therapy. In addition to the results of these trials, numerous
reports from centers in Europe and North America on the use of CS and RT have demonstrated high rates of local tumor control with satisfactory cosmetic
results. 249,250,251,252 and 253

FIGURE 37.2-2. Overview analysis of trials of conservative surgery and radiotherapy versus mastectomy. The squares represent the odds ratio of the annual death
rate in the radiotherapy group compared with the control group. The vertical line is an odds ratio of 1, and the 99% confidence interval (CI) is shown by the horizontal
line. Squares to the right of the vertical indicate a survival benefit for mastectomy. BCG, Breast Cancer Group; BCT, breast-conserving treatment; BMFT,
Bundesminsterium für Forschung und Techologie; CRC, Cancer Research Campaign; EORTC, European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer; INT,
Instituto Nazionale per lo studio e al Cura dei Tumori; IT, Instituto Tumori; NCI, National Cancer Institute; NSABP, National Surgical Adjuvant Breast Project; SE,
standard error. (Reprinted from Anonymous. Effects of radiotherapy and surgery in early breast cancer. An overview of the randomized trials. Early Breast Cancer
Trialists Collaborative Group. N Engl J Med 1995;333(22):1444, with permission.)

Despite the consistency of the evidence, the use of BCT in the United States has shown relatively slow acceptance and considerable geographic variation. 230,231
Studies indicate that fewer than 50% of women with stage I and II breast carcinoma are treated with BCT. 230,231 The available data indicate that a minority of patients
have contraindications to BCT, 254,255 and that these are readily identified with standard clinical tools, such as physical examination and mammography including
magnification views. 256 National studies indicate that physicians continue to use inappropriate selection criteria for BCT. 230
The rates of recurrence in the breast at 7 to 18 years ranged from 7% to 19% in the randomized studies using widely varying surgical and RT
techniques. 241,242,243,244,245,246 and 247 In the corresponding patients treated with mastectomy, 4% to 14% of patients developed local recurrence, emphasizing that
mastectomy does not guarantee freedom from local recurrence, even in women with clinical stage I and II breast carcinoma. The nonrandomized studies with the
longest follow-up describe a persistent risk of recurrence in the breast through 20 years of follow-up. 251,252 and 253,257 These results have been contrasted to those seen
after mastectomy, in which most local failures occur in the first 3 years following surgery. The annual incidence rate for a recurrence at or near the primary site is
constant for years 2 through 7 after treatment, and then decreases to a low level by 10 years after treatment. 253 In contrast, the annual incidence rate for recurrence
elsewhere in the breast increases slowly to a rate of approximately 0.7% per year at 8 years and remains stable. 253 Recurrences in the skin of the treated breast are a
rare event associated with a poor prognosis. 258 Whole breast irradiation is effective at eradicating multicentric breast carcinoma, but it does not prevent the
subsequent development of new cancers.
A number of factors have been identified that influence the risk for local recurrence after BCT. Young age has consistently been observed to be associated with an
increased risk of local recurrence after breast-conserving surgery and RT. 259,260,261,262 and 263 However, young age has similarly been associated with a worse outcome
after mastectomy.264,265 In young women with a family history suggestive of an inherited breast cancer susceptibility, BCT is associated with a higher rate of opposite
breast cancer compared with young women without such a family history. 266 This is consistent with the findings of an increased risk of opposite breast cancer in young
patients with mutations undergoing mastectomy.31,267 The rate of local recurrence in young patients with a positive family history is, if anything, lower than in patients
with a negative family history. This might be explained by the findings linking BRCA1 and 2 with radiation repair genes, 268,269 or by a greater likelihood of localized
(extensive intraductal component–negative) cancers in patients with mutations compared with patients without mutations. 270 However, patients with mutations appear
to be at risk for late new primaries in the treated breast. 271 Of note, patients with a mutation do not appear to be at an increased risk for adverse effects from RT. 272,273
Thus, BCT appears to be an acceptable option for patients with a suspected or known mutation, although these patients need to be apprised of the increased risk of a
second breast cancer, either in the opposite or, over time, in the treated breast. Many of these patients, particularly those with favorable presentations, elect bilateral
mastectomy. A modeling study suggests that bilateral mastectomy may be associated with a modest gain in survival. 127
An extensive intraductal component has been shown to be an important risk factor for local recurrence when margins of resection are not evaluated. 274 An extensive
intraductal component has been found to be a marker for a large residual tumor burden in the involved quadrant of the breast 236,275 such that moderate-dose RT is not
able to eradicate it. In such patients, a larger breast resection is commonly required to ensure adequate removal. Results have shown that the microscopic margins of
resection are the major selection factor for BCT ( Tables 37.2-11 and 37.2-12). Patients with negative margins of excision (typically defined as the absence of either
invasive or ductal in situ disease directly at an inked surface) have generally been observed to have low rates of local recurrence following treatment with CS and
RT.276,277,278,279,280,281,282,283,284 and 285 In particular, patients with an extensive intraductal component, but with negative inked margins of excision, are not at an increased
risk of local recurrence. 279,280 and 281,286 The outcome of patients with close margins of excision has been less clear. In part, this reflects variability in the definition of
close margins and, perhaps, the effect of institutional policies calling for escalated radiation doses based on the proximity of cancer cells to the margin of resection. In
the Joint Center for Radiation Therapy (JCRT) experience shown in Table 37.2-12, there was no significant difference in recurrence rates between patients with close
margins (less than or equal to 1 mm) compared with patients with margins greater than 1 mm using similar doses. 279 Some studies have suggested a high rate of local
recurrence at 10 years in patients with close margins; however, the number of patients in these series and the actual follow-up time is limited. 278,281

TABLE 37.2-11. Recurrence Rates (%) following Conservative Surgery and Radiation Therapy by Margin Status

TABLE 37.2-12. Eight-Year Outcome Related to Margins of Resection (Joint Center for Radiation Therapy)

Long-term data on the use of BCT in patients with positive margins are more limited. In most analyses, positive margins have been associated with a high risk of
breast cancer recurrence. 276,277,278,279 and 280,283,284 and 285 At the JCRT, patients with positive margins had a considerably higher risk of breast cancer recurrence than
patients with negative margins. 279 The 8-year crude rate of breast recurrence was 18% for patients with positive margins. However, patients with focally positive
margins (any invasive or in situ ductal carcinoma at the margin in three or fewer low-power microscopic fields) had a 14% rate of recurrence compared with a 27% rate
in patients with greater than focally positive margins. These data suggest that patients with focally positive margins can be considered for BCT. As discussed in this
section, the use of adjuvant systemic therapy results in a large reduction in local recurrence in patients treated with CS and RT. In the JCRT series, among the 45
patients with focally positive margins who received adjuvant systemic therapy, the 8-year local recurrence rate was 8% (95% confidence interval, 1% to 18%). 279
Additional experience is needed to confirm this finding. Patients with more than focally positive margins require more surgery given the significantly higher rate of
breast cancer recurrence.
The use of adjuvant systemic therapy is an important factor associated with recurrence in the breast when used in conjunction with CS and RT. This is most clearly
demonstrated in three randomized clinical trials. In the NSABP B-13 trial, node-negative, ER-negative patients were randomized to chemotherapy or to a no-treatment
control group. Among the 235 patients treated with CS and RT, the 8-year rate of recurrence in the ipsilateral breast was 13.4% without chemotherapy and only 2.6%
with chemotherapy.287 Similar results are seen with adjuvant tamoxifen. In NSABP trial B-14, node-negative, ER-positive patients were randomized to tamoxifen or to a
placebo. Among the 1062 patients treated with CS and RT, the 10-year rate of recurrence in the ipsilateral breast was 14.7% without tamoxifen and only 4.3% with
tamoxifen.288 A similar result was seen in the Stockholm Breast Cancer Study Group among node-negative patients randomized to tamoxifen or to a placebo. 289
Among the 432 patients treated with CS and RT, the 10-year rate of recurrence in the ipsilateral breast was 12% without tamoxifen and only 3% with tamoxifen.
GUIDELINES FOR PATIENT SELECTION
Based on the extensive information available from prospective and retrospective studies, there is a general consensus on the criteria for patient selection for the use
of BCT. It is now established that, in most cases, BCT results in a cosmetically satisfactory breast and that it provides survival rates equivalent to those seen after
mastectomy. The American College of Surgeons, the American College of Radiology, the College of American Pathologists, and the Society of Surgical Oncology
have jointly provided standards of care for BCT and most recently published their report in 1998. 290 Key portions of this report are summarized here and additional
comments are provided in parentheses.
CONTRAINDICATIONS FOR BREAST-CONSERVATION TREATMENT WITH RADIATION THERAPY
Absolute Contraindications
Women with two or more primary tumors in separate quadrants of the breast or with diffuse malignant-appearing microcalcifications are not considered
candidates for breast-conservation treatment.
A history of previous therapeutic irradiation to the breast region that, combined with the proposed treatment, would result in an excessively high total radiation
dose to a significant volume is another absolute contraindication.
Pregnancy is an absolute contraindication to the use of breast irradiation. However, in many cases, it may be possible to perform breast-conserving surgery in
the third trimester and to treat the patient with irradiation after delivery.
Finally, persistent positive margins after reasonable surgical attempts absolutely contraindicate BCT with radiation. The importance of a single focally positive
microscopic margin needs further study and may not be an absolute contraindication (see updated results from the JCRT in Local Management of Invasive
Breast Cancer, earlier in this chapter).
Relative Contraindications
A history of collagen vascular disease is a relative contraindication to BCT because published reports indicate that such patients tolerate irradiation poorly. 291
Most radiation oncologists will not treat patients with scleroderma or active lupus erythematosus, considering either an absolute contraindication. In contrast,
rheumatoid arthritis is not a contraindication. 292
Patients with multiple gross tumors in the same quadrant and indeterminate calcifications must be carefully assessed for suitability because studies in this area
are not definitive.
Tumor size is not an absolute contraindication to BCT, although few reports have been published about treating patients with tumors larger than 4 to 5 cm.
However, a relative contraindication is the presence of a large tumor in a small breast in which an adequate resection would result in significant cosmetic
alteration.
Breast size can be a relative contraindication. Women with large or pendulous breasts can be treated by irradiation if reproducibility of patient setup can be
ensured and it is technically possible to obtain adequate dose homogeneity.
NONMITIGATING FACTORS
The presence of clinical or pathologic involvement in axillary nodes should not prevent the treatment.
Concern about not being able to detect a recurrence is not a contraindication. The changes associated with recurrence can usually be detected at an early stage
by physical examination and mammography.
The delivery of irradiation to the breast does not result in a meaningful risk of second tumors in the treated area or in the untreated area.
Tumor location is not a factor in the choice of treatment. Tumors in a superficial subareolar location occasionally may require the resection of the nipple-areolar
complex so that negative margins can be achieved, but this does not affect outcome. The patient and her physician need to assess whether such a resection is
preferable to mastectomy.
A family history of breast cancer is not a contraindication to breast conservation. Little is known about the risk of breast recurrence in patients with hereditary
breast cancer, but currently this is not a contraindication to BCT. (However, such patients should be apprised of their increased risk of a second breast cancer.)
A high risk of systemic relapse is not a contraindication for breast conservation, but is a determinant of the need for adjuvant therapy.
CONSERVATIVE SURGERY WITHOUT RADIATION THERAPY
An unresolved question is whether RT is necessary in all patients with invasive breast cancer after CS. Six randomized clinical trials with published results have
compared CS alone with CS and RT in patients with early-stage breast cancer. 241,242,293,294,295 and 296 These trials vary with regard to patient selection, the details of the
surgery and RT, the use of adjuvant systemic therapy, and the length of follow-up. The results of these various trials are shown in Table 37.2-13. These trials all show
a large reduction in the rate of local recurrence after RT, with an average crude rate of reduction of approximately 75% (range, 63% to 89%). None of the six trials
shows a significant survival benefit for RT; however, in the trials with published data, the survival rate is slightly better for irradiated patients than for nonirradiated
patients. A large trial (or perhaps a metaanalysis of multiple smaller trials) is necessary to detect a small, but clinically significant difference in survival, if it in fact

exists.

TABLE 37.2-13. Outcome in the Trials Comparing Conservative Surgery with and without Radiation Therapy

Attempts have been made to identify a subgroup of patients (based on various clinical and histologic features) that has a low risk of local recurrence after CS alone. It
was not possible to identify such a subgroup within the Ontario and NSABP randomized trials. Local recurrence rates are generally lower in trials using more
extensive surgery than in those using lumpectomy and in older patients than in younger patients. The JCRT attempted to identify such a subgroup in a prospective
single-arm trial in which patients with favorable disease were offered the option of CS alone. The criteria for entry onto this protocol were tumor size of 2 cm or less,
histologically negative axillary nodes, absence of both lymphatic vessel invasion and an extensive intraductal component in the cancer, and no cancer cells visualized
within 1 cm of inked margins.297 All but one patient had a negative reexcision. This trial was stopped shortly before reaching its accrual goal of 90 patients because of
stopping rules ensuring against an excessively high local recurrence rate. The latest analysis includes the results in 81 patients. The median age of patients in this
trial was 66 years, and median pathologic size of the cancers was 9 mm. With a median follow-up of 92 months, 19 of the patients have developed a recurrence in the
ipsilateral breast, for a crude local recurrence rate of 23%. Based on the results of this prospective study, it was concluded that, even in a highly selected group of
breast cancer patients, there is a substantial risk of early local recurrence after treatment with wide excision alone.
The use of adjuvant systemic therapy substantially reduces the rate of local recurrence in patients treated with CS and RT, 287,288 and 289 but does not seem to reduce
greatly the rate of local recurrence after CS alone. There are no published trials directly comparing CS with and without either chemotherapy or tamoxifen. Information
on this is available from indirect comparisons within randomized clinical trials for both adjuvant chemotherapy and tamoxifen. In the NSABP trial B-06, an indirect
comparison of the effect of adjuvant chemotherapy can be made. Node-positive patients treated with lumpectomy and adjuvant chemotherapy but without RT had a
12-year rate of recurrence in the breast of 41% compared with only 5% for node-positive patients treated with lumpectomy, RT, and chemotherapy ( P <.001).241 In
comparison, node-negative patients treated with lumpectomy without RT had a 12-year rate of recurrence in the breast of 32% compared with 12% for node-negative
patients treated with lumpectomy with RT. A similar observation, suggesting that systemic therapy further decreases the rate of local recurrence when combined with
RT, but not in its absence, is also seen in indirect comparisons within the Milan trials. 242 In the Scottish trial, patients with ER-negative cancers were treated with
adjuvant cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil (CMF) chemotherapy. With a median follow-up of approximately 5.7 years, the crude rate of local
regional recurrence was 44% among patients treated with CS, but without RT, compared with only 14% among patients treated with RT. 295
There is particular interest in avoiding RT in older patients. It is often less convenient for such patients to receive RT, and their local recurrence rate appears lower
after CS alone compared with younger patients. 298,299 and 300 The results of retrospective studies of CS alone with or without adjuvant tamoxifen have shown variable
results. 301,302 The Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) and other groups in North America have completed a prospective randomized clinical trial testing the value
of RT in older breast cancer patients treated by CS and tamoxifen; at this time there are no results from the trial. In NSABP B-21, women with tumors smaller than 1
cm with negative axillary lymph nodes were randomized to tamoxifen alone, breast irradiation alone, or breast irradiation plus tamoxifen. With an average follow-up of
73 months, 24.4% of women in the tamoxifen-only arm had an ipsilateral recurrence, compared to 11.7% of women who received breast irradiation plus tamoxifen.
The difference was highly statistically significant. Based on these results, the investigators thought it unlikely that tamoxifen could be substituted for radiation in this
patient population. 300a
In conclusion, the use of breast irradiation after CS is associated with a large reduction in the rate of local recurrence. The available data from the randomized trials
do not show a survival benefit; however, none of the available trials has the statistical power to eliminate a small survival difference. A subset at low risk of local
recurrence following CS has not been clearly identified, and RT is currently considered standard. The addition of adjuvant systemic therapy to CS alone has not been
demonstrated to decrease local recurrence. In elderly patients, particularly those with significant comorbidity, RT is commonly omitted because of the practical
difficulties of delivering such therapy in this group of patients.
PREOPERATIVE CHEMOTHERAPY
The successful application of preoperative chemotherapy in locally advanced breast cancer has led to a number of studies in patients with stage I and II breast
carcinoma to determine if the use of preoperative chemotherapy would allow breast conservation in patients who would otherwise be treated with mastectomy. Early
studies demonstrated a high response rate to preoperative chemotherapy with conversion of patients initially thought to be unsuitable for BCT to be considered
reasonable candidates for breast conservation. 303,304 In addition to increasing the number of patients who can undergo BCT, a second goal of preoperative therapy is
to improve survival. The available randomized trials suggest that the use of preoperative chemotherapy does reduce the use of mastectomy, but does not improve
survival. 305,306 and 307 Of note, however, in the NSABP trial B-18, 306 an analysis of breast recurrence rates among patients initially eligible for lumpectomy and those who
were eligible only after down-staging by chemotherapy demonstrated a local failure rate of 6.9% in those thought to be candidates for lumpectomy before
chemotherapy compared with 14.5% in those who required down-staging (P = .04). Similar findings were noted in a trial from France. 308 Further experience is
therefore needed to identify down-staged patients who can be effectively managed by BCT. A major practical problem with the use of preoperative chemotherapy to
increase rates of BCT is the determination of the extent of residual viable tumor that must be resected. The clinical assessment of response is relatively inaccurate
using clinical examination and mammography. Given this, we approach these patients by initially resecting any clinically or mammographically abnormal tissue. If
viable tumor is present throughout the specimen, a reexcision is carried out even if the initial margins are negative. If further viable tumor is present in the reexcised
specimen, a reevaluation of the patient's suitability for BCT is undertaken. Marking the extent of the tumor before chemotherapy with stereotactically placed clips or
skin tattoos is useful for determining the tumor location in patients who have a complete clinical response and may aid in assessing the need for resection of residual
abnormalities in patients with a partial response.
The definitive role of neoadjuvant therapy in operable breast cancer remains undefined. There appears to be no rationale, outside of a clinical trial, for its routine use
in patients who are suitable candidates for BCT. Initial chemotherapy is appropriate when a large tumor in a small breast would necessitate mastectomy and the
patient desires BCT. However, in the study of Morrow et al., 254 this contraindication to BCT was present in only 6% of 336 patients with stage I and stage II carcinoma.
The potential for a higher risk of breast recurrence should be discussed with the patient, and the pathology carefully reviewed before deciding that the patient is a
suitable candidate for BCT.
TECHNIQUE AND COMPLICATIONS OF BREAST-CONSERVING SURGERY
The goal of breast-conserving surgery is to minimize the risk of local recurrence while leaving the patient with a cosmetically acceptable breast. The most common
form of breast-conserving surgery used in the United States is referred to as lumpectomy. The surgical technique of lumpectomy differs from that used for mastectomy
in that lumpectomy is not an en bloc cancer operation. Quadrantectomy is another type of breast-conserving surgery that is designed to remove an anatomic segment
of breast tissue and frequently includes removal of the overlying skin and underlying pectoral fascia. Because excision of a large amount of breast tissue is the major
factor responsible for a poor cosmetic outcome after BCT, lumpectomy is considered the appropriate initial surgical approach in the United States. Other surgical
factors that influence the cosmetic appearance are the size and placement of the incision, the management of the lumpectomy cavity, and the extent of axillary
dissection.

A number of technical aspects of lumpectomy are worth emphasizing. In general, the incision should be placed directly over the area of the tumor. This is true even
when a biopsy is performed for a mammographically detected lesion. In the upper part of the breast, incisions should be curvilinear or transverse and follow the
natural skin creases (Langer's lines) of the breast. In the lower part of the breast, the choice of a curvilinear or radial incision depends on the contour of the patient's
breast, the distance from the skin to the tumor, and the amount of breast tissue to be resected. It is not necessary to remove skin (except for superficial tumors) or to
remove needle tracks from core-needle biopsies or FNAs. Preservation of the subcutaneous fat and the avoidance of thin skin flaps is also important in maintaining
normal breast contour. Raising flaps is necessary only to allow access to the tumor. Meticulous hemostasis is important because a large hematoma distorts the
appearance of the breast and makes reexcision and follow-up evaluation more difficult. The presence of a postbiopsy hematoma, however, is not a contraindication to
BCT. It is best to avoid reapproximation of the breast tissue since this can result in distortion of the breast contour, which may not be apparent with the patient supine
on the operating table. The best cosmetic results usually are obtained by allowing the lumpectomy cavity to fill in with serum and fibrin. Drainage of the lumpectomy
cavity should be avoided. Finally, the incision should be closed with a subcuticular suture to avoid cross-hatching of the skin.
A critical step in lumpectomy is the evaluation of the completeness of excision of the tumor. To allow adequate histologic evaluation, the specimen should be removed
as a single piece of tissue and should not be transected unless the pathologist is present. The use of marking sutures to orient the specimen for the pathologist allows
reporting of the status of individual margins. Gross inspection of the specimen in the operating room allows identification of positive or close margins, facilitating
immediate reexcision. Frozen-section histologic study is sometimes useful to evaluate grossly suspicious areas, but the routine use of frozen sections to evaluate
grossly normal margins is of doubtful value. The ideal amount of grossly normal breast tissue around the tumor that should be resected as part of a lumpectomy is
uncertain. A resection of 0.5 to 1.0 cm of grossly normal breast tissue results in histologically negative margins in a large percentage of patients. 136 Larger resections
may be necessary for invasive ductal carcinomas with an extensive intraductal component 309 and for infiltrating lobular carcinomas. 310
When axillary dissection is performed as part of breast-conserving surgery, a separate incision should be used, except in patients with tumors high in the tail of the
breast. A curvilinear incision at the edge of the hair-bearing axillary skin provides the best cosmetic result. The incision should not extend anterior to the fold of the
pectoralis major or posterior to the latissimus dorsi.
The primary indications for a reexcision are positive or unknown histologic margins of resection on the initial excision. Several studies have demonstrated residual
carcinoma in approximately one-half of cases when reexcision is performed for positive or unknown margins. 308,311 No consensus exists on the best technique for
reexcision. When reexcision is done within 1 to 2 weeks of the biopsy, it is not usually possible to reexcise an entire biopsy cavity as a single specimen without
sacrificing large amounts of breast tissue. One author's (M. M.) technique of reexcision in most cases is to reexcise each of the walls of the biopsy cavity separately. If
the initial specimen is marked with orienting sutures, reexcision can be limited to the involved margins. Otherwise, thin pieces of tissue are shaved off each wall of the
biopsy cavity and sent as separate specimens, with the new margin surface marked for the pathologist. When longer intervals have elapsed between the biopsy and
the time of reexcision, contraction of the biopsy cavity may allow excision of the entire cavity as a single specimen without sacrificing excessive amounts of breast
tissue. The status of the final margin should be used to determine the patient's suitability for BCT. Kearney and Morrow 136 found that 86 of 90 patients undergoing
reexcision for positive or unknown margins were satisfactory candidates for BCT.
There are relatively few complications of breast-conserving surgery. Wound infection is infrequent, although rates of infection may be increased when reexcision is
performed. The late occurrence of breast abscess after BCT has been reported. 312 The median time to abscess development was 5 months (range, 1.5 to 8.0 months).
The only factor found to correlate with abscess formation was larger size of the lumpectomy specimen. Cellulitis of the breast occurring at a median of 4 months after
BCT also has been reported in approximately 3% of cases. 313
TECHNIQUE AND COMPLICATIONS OF MASTECTOMY
Modified radical mastectomy involves the complete removal of the breast tissue, the underlying fascia of the pectoralis major muscle, and the removal of some of the
axillary lymph nodes. Modified radical mastectomy is performed through an elliptical transverse incision, which encompasses the nipple-areola complex and the
biopsy scar if an open biopsy has been performed. The nipple-areola complex and the biopsy incision must be removed, but the remainder of the skin of the breast
can be preserved in early-stage breast cancer if needed for breast reconstruction. With a skin-sparing procedure, additional exposure to allow complete excision of
the breast tissue is achieved by incision rather than excision of the skin. Skin flaps are created in the plane between the subcutaneous fat and the underlying breast
tissue. Because of the variability in the amount of subcutaneous fat, no single thickness is appropriate for all skin flaps. To encompass all breast tissue, the dissection
should extend superiorly to the inferior border of the clavicle, medially to the lateral border of the sternum, inferiorly to the superior extent of the rectus sheath, and
laterally to the latissimus dorsi muscle. The fascia of the pectoralis major muscle can safely be preserved when needed for breast reconstruction. In general, however,
excision posterior to the fascia provides a convenient plane for ensuring removal of most of the breast tissue. With the breast attached inferiorly and laterally, axillary
dissection is carried out. Closed suction drains are then placed in the apex of the axilla and beneath the inferior skin flap. Skin closure is accomplished with a
subcuticular suture. Pressure dressings are not needed with suction drains and may compromise blood supply.
The term total mastectomy refers to the removal of the entire breast including the axillary tail of Spence, with preservation of both pectoral muscles and the axillary
nodes. The indications for total mastectomy include (1) patients with DCIS who elect mastectomy, (2) patients undergoing prophylactic surgery to prevent the
development of breast cancer, (3) patients who develop a recurrence in the breast after BCT that had included an axillary dissection, and, on rare occasion, (4)
patients with metastatic disease undergoing mastectomy for local control of the primary tumor.
Mastectomy is an extremely safe operative procedure. 314 For patients with serious comorbid conditions who are at an unacceptably high risk for general anesthesia,
mastectomy can be done using a combination of local anesthesia, intercostal blocks, and intravenous sedation. The reported incidence rate of wound infection with
mastectomy ranges from 6% to 14%.315,316 The most common organisms are streptococcus or Staphylococcus aureus.316 Factors that predispose to infection include
the use of a two-step procedure (i.e., open biopsy preceding mastectomy) and prolonged suction catheter drainage. 316,317 A single dose of antibiotics (86%
cephalosporin) has been shown to reduce the incidence of wound infection by 38%. 318,319 However, because the overall incidence of infection in these patients is so
low, the cost effectiveness of routine antibiotic prophylaxis for all patients undergoing mastectomy has not been established. A selective policy of antibiotic
administration to high-risk patients (e.g., prior biopsy, anticipation of long operating time) seems to be most appropriate. Necrosis of the skin flaps is a relatively
uncommon problem today, but was reported in 8% to 60% of cases, particularly in earlier series of patients undergoing radical mastectomy. 320,321 Factors associated
with skin-flap necrosis include denuding the subcutaneous fat from the flaps, closure under tension, infection, and use of a vertical incision and occlusive pressure
dressings.315,316,322 Skin incisions should be planned to allow tension-free closure. Pressure dressings are not necessary when suction drains are used, and suspected
cellulitis should be promptly treated with antibiotics. Seroma formation occurs in 100% of patients after mastectomy and should be considered a side effect, rather
than a complication, of the procedure. Prolonged lymphatic drainage after mastectomy is primarily related to extensive node involvement followed by obesity and the
performance of a two-step procedure. 323 Prolonged seroma formation, in addition to requiring multiple physician visits, may be associated with delayed wound healing
and an increased risk of infection. 315,316,320 Seroma formation can be minimized by leaving drains in place until their combined output is less than 40 mL/24 hours.
Fluid collections should be managed by aspiration every other day. Some advocated the use of tacking sutures to obliterate the axillary dead space and attach the
skin flaps to the pectoral muscle, 321 but this has not been established. Phantom breast syndrome has been long recognized. 324 In one prospective study,325 phantom
pain was reported in 13% of patients at 3 weeks, and nonpainful phantom sensations were present in an additional 15%. Similar incidences were seen at 1 year and
at 6 years. The cause of this syndrome is unknown.
ONCOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS IN IMMEDIATE RECONSTRUCTION
The switch from radical mastectomy to modified radical mastectomy and advances in plastic surgical technique have made immediate breast reconstruction an option
for most patients who undergo mastectomy. A number of concerns about immediate reconstruction have been raised and the available information addressing these
concerns comes from retrospective studies. The incidence of local failure in patients undergoing breast reconstruction appears to be comparable with patients treated
by mastectomy alone.326,327 and 328 Similarly, the ability to detect local recurrence does not appear altered by immediate reconstruction. 329,330 and 331 There is, however, a
greater risk of problems in patients undergoing immediate reconstruction who require postmastectomy RT, specifically among patients receiving implants. 332,333 This
includes patients in whom the implants are placed beneath latissimus dorsi or transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous (TRAM) flaps. In contrast, patients
reconstructed with the TRAM flap without an implant appear to tolerate postoperative RT better. 334,335 Immediate reconstruction does create technical problems in the
administration of RT. With immediate reconstruction, it can be more difficult to treat the internal mammary nodes and to boost the chest wall. Communication before
mastectomy between the surgeon and the radiation oncologist is useful to make decisions on an individual basis. In summary, immediate breast reconstruction has
not been shown to increase the incidence of local failure or impede the detection of local recurrence. In the hands of an experienced reconstructive surgeon, the
incidence of complications associated with the procedure is low, and the need for postoperative systemic therapy should not be considered a contraindication to

immediate reconstruction. In patients with larger tumors or clinically positive nodes, in whom there is a high likelihood that postoperative chest wall RT will be
administered, it may be prudent to avoid implant reconstruction or forego immediate reconstruction altogether.
INDICATIONS FOR POSTOPERATIVE RADIATION THERAPY
Postoperative RT refers to the use of irradiation to the chest wall and draining lymph node regions as an adjuvant treatment after mastectomy. Postoperative RT has
been clearly shown to reduce the rate of local regional tumor recurrence (i.e., recurrence on the chest wall or in the axillary, internal mammary, or supraclavicular
lymph nodes) by treating residual microscopic disease that has spread beyond the margin of surgical resection. In the absence of postoperative RT, there is a
substantial risk of local recurrence after modified radical (or even radical) mastectomy, principally related to the presence and extent of axillary nodal involvement. If
axillary nodes are involved, local recurrence is seen in 10% to 30% of patients, whereas if axillary nodes are uninvolved, local recurrence is seen in only
approximately 5% of patients. 336,337 Once a local recurrence is clinically manifest, it can be effectively controlled in only approximately one-half of patients. 338,339 and 340
Therefore, postoperative RT can benefit high-risk patients simply by preventing local recurrence.
Despite the clear-cut improvement in local control with adjuvant RT, 341 its effect on survival remains controversial. Assessing the survival value of postoperative RT
requires evaluation within large, prospective randomized clinical trials. There are six published trials in which patients were randomized after radical, modified radical,
or total mastectomy to postoperative RT or no further treatment in the absence of systemic therapy. 342,343,344,345,346,347,348,349,350 and 351 Some of these are among the
earliest clinical trials performed in medicine. In many of these trials, RT was given using orthovoltage equipment and in most trials techniques were used that
delivered considerable doses to the heart and are now considered outmoded. Despite this, the use of postoperative RT clearly reduced the incidence of local
recurrence, but none of these trials demonstrated a clear-cut improvement in the survival rate. In addition, some of these trials showed a late increase in cardiac
mortality in patients treated with RT compared with unirradiated patients. 342,343 The most modern of these trials was conducted at the Radiumhemmet in Stockholm
between 1971 and 1976. 345,346 In this trial, 644 patients with operable breast cancer were treated with modified radical mastectomy and randomized to postoperative
RT or no further treatment. With a median follow-up time of 16 years, node-negative patients had a decreased rate of local recurrence with postoperative RT, but
there was no effect on distant metastases or survival. For node-positive patients, the use of postoperative RT was associated with not only a decrease in local
recurrence, but also a decrease in distant metastasis ( P = .02). An overview of randomized trials of postoperative RT after mastectomy with or without axillary
dissection showed no difference in survival when patients treated with RT were compared with those treated without RT over the first 10 years after surgery. 352 After
10 years, however, there was a lower rate of survival associated with the use of RT, but this was not statistically significant. When cause-specific mortality data were
examined, there was an excess of cardiac deaths among patients treated with RT, but this was offset by a reduced number of deaths from breast cancer, especially in
the more recent trials. An overview reanalysis published in 2000 showed similar results. 353 These studies suggest that if increased cardiovascular mortality associated
with adjuvant irradiation can be avoided by the use of appropriate techniques, a benefit in survival will be seen.
There are a number of studies that have examined the rate of local recurrence in patients treated with mastectomy and adjuvant chemotherapy, but without
RT.354,355,356 and 357 In the largest of these, the rate of local recurrence in 2016 node-positive patients entered into Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group adjuvant
systemic therapy trials was examined.356 The 10-year rate of local regional recurrence (with or without simultaneous distant failure) was 12.9% for patients with one to
three positive nodes and 28.7% with greater than or equal to four positive nodes. Similar results are observed in the other studies. 354,355,357 These studies, as well as
the trials described here, demonstrate a moderate risk of local regional recurrence in node-positive patients treated with mastectomy and adjuvant systemic therapy,
particularly when four or more nodes are involved.
A number of studies have examined the issue of adding postoperative RT to adjuvant chemotherapy ( Table 37.2-14).357,358,359,360,361,362,363,364,365,366 and 367 The two largest
of these are from the Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group (DBCG). In DBCG trial 82b, 1708 premenopausal patients who had undergone mastectomy for
pathologic stage II or III breast cancer were randomly assigned to eight cycles of CMF plus local regional RT or to nine cycles of CMF alone. 357 With a median
follow-up of 114 months, the 10-year rate of local regional recurrence was reduced from 32% to 9% with RT, and overall survival was improved from 45% to 54% with
RT (both P values <.01) (Fig. 37.2-3). In DBCG trial 82c, 1375 postmenopausal patients who had undergone mastectomy for pathologic stage II or III breast cancer
were randomly assigned to tamoxifen for 1 year plus local regional RT or to tamoxifen alone. 358 With a median follow-up time of 123 months, the 10-year rate of local
regional recurrence was reduced from 35% to 8% with RT, and overall survival was improved from 36% to 45% with RT (both P values <.05) (Fig. 37.2-4). In a smaller
trial from British Columbia, 318 node-positive premenopausal patients treated with modified radical mastectomy were similarly randomized to adjuvant CMF
chemotherapy and postoperative RT or to chemotherapy alone. The results of the British Columbia trial were similar to those of the DBCG trial 82b. 359 Of note, the
magnitude of the improvement seen in these trials is similar to that seen with adjuvant systemic therapy (chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, or both) and suggests that
all node-positive patients should receive postmastectomy RT. A metaanalysis published in 2000 showed a survival benefit for local regional RT in node-positive
women treated with modified radical mastectomy and adjuvant systemic therapy.368 For a number of reasons, however, these trials have not resulted in the universal
use of postoperative RT in node-positive patients, particularly those with only one to three positive nodes. One reason is that the worldwide overview of all trials of
postoperative RT only shows a small, but not statistically significant survival benefit. 344 A more substantial reason relates to the issue of generalizing from these
results due to differing surgical and systemic treatments. The extent of axillary surgery performed in these trials was less than that performed in the United States, and
the rates of local regional recurrence, especially axillary recurrences, observed in the Danish trials were greater than observed in U.S. series. In particular, as noted
previously, series of patients with one to three positive nodes treated by modified radical mastectomy and adjuvant chemotherapy from the United States show rates
of local regional recurrence in the range of 10%, 352,353,354,355 and 356 compared with approximately 30% in the two Danish trials. Also, systemic therapy in the Danish
trials may have been suboptimal by current standards. What seems clear is that these trials address an important principle about the value of establishing local
regional control in the presence of systemic therapy. Without detracting from the importance or validity of the principle, it is legitimate to question the clinical
implications of these results for practice in the United States. The final reason for the failure of these trials to translate directly into clinical practice is the concern
about long-term complications of postoperative RT, especially late cardiac mortality. This is especially relevant in patients receiving chemotherapy with potential
cardiac toxicity, such as doxorubicin (Adriamycin). To address the issues raised by the available data on postoperative RT, the American Society of Therapeutic
Radiology and Oncology sponsored a symposium on postoperative RT and invited a panel to hear the latest information on this topic and to develop a Consensus
Summary Statement. The panel was composed of three radiation oncologists, a medical oncologist, a surgical oncologist, and a consumer activist.

TABLE 37.2-14. Randomized Trials Testing the Value of Postoperative Radiation Therapy Used in Conjunction with Adjuvant Systemic Therapy

FIGURE 37.2-3. Survival results in the Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group trial 82b comparing cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil (CMF)
chemotherapy and radiation therapy with chemotherapy alone in premenopausal patients treated with mastectomy.

FIGURE 37.2-4. Survival results in the Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group trial 82c comparing tamoxifen (TAM) and radiation therapy (RT) with tamoxifen alone
in postmenopausal patients treated with mastectomy.

The panel agreed to the statements outlined in the next sections. 369
Patient Selection
Postoperative RT may be given to improve local control or to improve survival. Patients with four or more positive lymph nodes should receive postoperative RT to
improve local control. There may also be a survival benefit in these patients. The data regarding patient selection for survival advantage are less clear, but the most
recent evidence suggests that the greatest survival benefit is seen in node-positive patients with low tumor burdens (i.e., fewer positive nodes or smaller tumors).
Radiation therapy in these patients for survival benefit is worthy of consideration, pending more definitive data. To establish the survival benefit of postoperative RT in
patients with one to three positive nodes, a large randomized clinical trial should be performed. (Such a large Intergroup trial was subsequently approved.)
Technique
Although both recent trials demonstrating a survival benefit with postoperative RT included treatment to the chest wall, axilla, supraclavicular area, and the internal
mammary nodes, there is controversy about what sites require treatment. In all patients, the chest wall should be treated. The value of including the internal mammary
nodes is uncertain and is currently being studied in a large European randomized controlled trial. In patients with positive axillary nodes, the internal mammary nodes
are known to be also involved in approximately 30% of cases. Treatment of this area is, therefore, worthy of serious consideration, provided that it can be done with
acceptable morbidity. Following a level I and II axillary dissection, the use of a third field to treat the axillary apex and supraclavicular area is appropriate for selected
node-positive patients, particularly those with four or more positive nodes. A posterior axillary radiation field is not routinely indicated after a level I and II axillary
dissection. However, if there is concern about the completeness of surgery, the addition of a posterior axillary field may be appropriate. Careful attention must be paid
to the morbidity of treatment. In particular, postoperative RT has the potential to cause late cardiac mortality in patients with left-sided cancers. Therefore, the amount
of heart (and also lung) in the treatment field must be minimized and documented. Computed tomographic (CT) treatment planning is useful in accomplishing this
goal.
COMPLICATIONS OF RADIATION THERAPY
Possible complications of RT include arm edema, brachial plexopathy, decreased arm mobility, soft tissue necrosis, rib fractures, radiation pneumonitis,
carcinogenesis (e.g., contralateral breast cancer and sarcoma), and radiation-related heart disease. Information on heart toxicity and carcinogenesis is reviewed here.
The data on complications after both postmastectomy RT and RT administered as part of BCT are reviewed.
Injury to the heart is a possible complication after RT. The long-term results from the early trials on postoperative RT using outmoded techniques show an increased
risk of cardiac mortality. A more recent population study showed an increased risk of fatal myocardial infarctions for patients receiving left-sided breast RT compared
with right-sided breast RT 370; however, the techniques of RT are not described. A large institution study on patients treated with modern techniques (without adjuvant
chemotherapy) did not show an increased risk with long follow-up. 371 In the Stockholm postmastectomy trial discussed previously, late cardiac mortality was seen, but
this was clearly related to the amount of heart irradiated. 372 Late cardiac mortality has not been seen in institution-based studies using limited cardiac irradiation with
CMF chemotherapy, 373,374 but may possibly occur with RT and high-dose doxorubicin. 375 CT simulation allows for three-dimensional visualization of anatomic
structures including the heart and can be useful in selecting techniques to greatly limit the volume of irradiated heart. 376
One possible complication of RT for breast cancer is the induction of another breast cancer. Breast tissue is known to be sensitive to radiation carcinogenesis. The
latency period between exposure and the detection of induced cancers is at least 5 years, and this risk persists for many decades. The risk of carcinogenesis
increases with doses up to 10 Gy, then seems to level off and decline so that for doses in the therapeutic range (greater than 45 Gy), the risk seems to be small. 377,378
Because the dose to the opposite breast from a course of RT is in the range of 1 to 3 Gy, tumor induction in the contralateral breast is of greater potential concern
than in the ipsilateral breast. Age at exposure to radiation is the other important risk factor for carcinogenesis in human breast tissue. 378,379 and 380 The highest risk
occurs in female subjects exposed at the youngest age. With increasing age, the risk of carcinogenesis declines. The risk for women older than 40 years of age
seems to be negligible, but not zero. A number of studies have addressed the risk of contralateral breast cancer after postoperative RT. Boice and colleagues
conducted a case-control study in a cohort of 41,109 patients diagnosed with breast cancer between 1935 and 1982 in Connecticut. 381 Among women who survived
for at least 10 years, RT was associated with a small, but marginally significant, elevation in the risk of a contralateral breast cancer (relative risk, 1.33). The
increased risk associated with RT was evident among women who were younger than 45 years of age when they were treated (relative risk, 1.59), but not among
older women (relative risk, 1.01). In another case-control study from Denmark, 382 the incidence of a second primary breast cancer in the contralateral breast was
examined among 56,540 women with a first primary breast cancer diagnosed between 1943 and 1978. In that study, RT was not associated with an increased risk of
contralateral breast cancer (relative risk, 1.04). It is possible to estimate the increased absolute risk of contralateral breast cancer given the elevated relative risk for
patients aged 45 or younger seen in the study by Boice et al. 381 The risk may actually be lower, as is suggested by the Danish study. For patients aged 45 years or
younger, the risk of contralateral breast cancer within 15 years is approximately 11% without RT and increased to approximately 12% to 13% with the addition of RT.
The risk of contralateral breast cancer within 30 years is approximately 22% without RT and increases to approximately 25% to 26% with RT. Thus, the risk of
contralateral breast cancer in young patients, which is already higher than that for older patients, is likely to be further increased to a small extent by the use of RT.
Sarcomas of soft tissue or bone are a rare, but well-documented complication of RT. In a report from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, a total of 48 patients
with a prior history of breast cancer and subsequent treatment-related sarcomas were seen at the institution over a 43-year period. 383 Lymphangiosarcoma of the
extremity accounted for 22, or 46%, of the series. Most of these patients had been treated with radical mastectomy and postoperative RT. The other 26 sarcomas
occurred within a RT treatment field and were considered radiation related. Twenty-one of these 26 patients were diagnosed with a soft tissue sarcoma and 5 with a
bone sarcoma. The median latency interval between the diagnosis of breast cancer and the development of sarcoma was 11 years (range, 4 to 44) and was similar for
the two types of sarcomas. The survival of these patients was poor. In a registry study from Sweden, 13,490 patients with breast cancer diagnosed between 1960 and
1980 were followed through 1988. 384 Nineteen sarcomas were reported, whereas 8.7 were expected (relative risk, 2.2; absolute risk, 1.7/10 4 person-years). Twelve of
the sarcomas appeared within the radiation fields. Of particular interest is that a high percentage of sarcomas after treatment with CS and RT are
angiosarcomas. 385,386 The typical initial clinical appearance of this sarcoma is as reddish, purplish, or bluish nodules or as skin discoloration. There are often many
such areas. These initial findings can be subtle, and diagnosis is commonly not made until more advanced signs are present. Of note, the latency period for this

radiation-induced sarcoma is shorter than for other sarcomas, with some occurring before 5 years.
Lung cancer also appears to be increased in patients irradiated for breast cancer. The latency period from RT to diagnosis is approximately 10 years. In a
case-referent study reported by Inskip and others 387 using the Connecticut Tumor Registry, there was a small increased risk of lung cancer among 10-year survivors
of breast cancer associated with the use of postoperative RT (relative risk, 1.8; 95% confidence interval, 0.8 to 3.8). The relative risk for the period 15 years or more
after RT was 2.8 (95% confidence interval, 1.0 to 8.2); however, it can be difficult to distinguish a late metastasis of breast cancer to lung from a new primary lung
cancer even with a tissue specimen. This increased relative risk suggests that there would be approximately nine cases of RT-induced lung cancer per year among
10,000 breast cancer patients who survived at least 10 years. Similar findings were noted in a study using the SEER database. 388 Another study from this same group
suggested that the effects of smoking and RT are multiplicative, 389 although this relation has not been established with certainty. 390 These studies all examined the
risk of lung cancer after local regional irradiation, and the risk may be less after more localized breast irradiation.
Sequencing of Systemic Therapy and Radiation Therapy
Clinicians are now commonly faced with the necessity of combining systemic therapy and RT in patients after CS and after mastectomy. Given (1) the variable agents,
duration, and intensity of CT regimens, (2) variations in RT and surgical techniques, and, chiefly, (3) the limited data from randomized clinical trials addressing this
question, the optimal sequencing approach is unresolved. The major goal in sequencing is to obtain the highest rate of survival; however, additional important goals
are to maintain a low rate of local recurrence and a low rate of complications. The options for combining RT and CT are (1) CT first followed by RT; (2) RT first
followed by CT; (3) RT and CT simultaneously; or (4) some number of cycles of CT, then RT, and then more CT (commonly referred to as sandwich therapy). In
considering this issue, it would be useful to know whether a delay in either CT or RT decreases its effect, what the complication rate is for each sequence option, and
whether prior RT affects the ability to give maximal doses of CT. It seems plausible that delays in the initiation of CT will decrease its effectiveness; however, firm data
demonstrating this are not available. As previously described, the use of preoperative CT has not clearly improved survival compared with conventionally timed
adjuvant chemotherapy.391 Retrospective reviews of patients treated either with mastectomy or BCT examining the influence of the delay of CT on outcome have
demonstrated conflicting results. 392,393 and 394 The information available on whether a delay in the initiation of RT to give CT first leads to a increased local recurrence
rate is also conflicting. 394,395,396,397,398,399,400 and 401 The results from two NSABP adjuvant studies in node-positive breast cancer (B-15 and B-16) did not show any effect
with delays of 12 weeks.402
Prospective randomized clinical trials are required to test formally the effect of sequencing of CT and RT on outcome. The Dana-Farber/Beth Israel/JCRT trial is the
only published trial specifically designed to address this issue. In this trial, 244 patients at moderate or high risk for relapse (almost all node-positive) were randomly
assigned to receive either (1) RT followed by cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, methotrexate (with leucovorin), fluorouracil, and prednisone given every 21 days for
four cycles or (2) CT followed by RT. 403 With a median follow-up of 58 months, the 5-year crude incidence of first sites of recurrence suggested that local recurrence
was greater with delayed RT and distant recurrence was greater with delayed CT. The overall actuarial rate of distant failure was higher in the RT-first arm (37% vs.
25%; P = .05), thus favoring the CT-first arm. This trial does not specifically address the question of sequencing in node-negative patients or with longer than 12
weeks of chemotherapy. One can hypothesize that the effect of delay in the initiation of RT is related to the extent of the breast surgery and the final margin status;
namely, a delay of 12 to 16 weeks is important only for patients with limited breast surgery and close or positive margins. This hypothesis is suggested by a subset
analysis of the JCRT trial; however, this trial was not large enough to allow for such analysis. At this writing, there are two ongoing unpublished trials in France. In the
Arcosein trial, approximately 700 patients treated with breast-conserving surgery will be randomized either to (1) mitoxantrone, cyclophosphamide, and fluorouracil
given every 3 weeks for six cycles followed by RT, or (2) concurrent CT and RT using the same drugs. In the other trial, patients are randomized either to (1)
epirubicin, cyclophosphamide, and fluorouracil followed by RT, or (2) concurrent mitoxantrone, cyclophosphamide, and fluorouracil and RT.
Another important question regarding sequencing is whether RT and CT can be given simultaneously without an increase in complications or a decrease in the
cosmetic outcome. The use of simultaneous RT and CT has the advantage of eliminating the necessity for delaying one of the modalities and perhaps providing an
additive or synergistic interaction between the RT and CT. It has been reported, however, that the concurrent use of CMF chemotherapy and full-dose RT can result
in greater skin reactions compared with patients treated sequentially, 404,405 as well as a decrease in the long-term cosmetic result. 404 It may be possible to combine
CMF and RT in other, more tolerable ways. At the University of Pennsylvania, 210 patients were treated with concurrent CF and RT, followed by six cycles of CMF,
with excellent results. 406 The JCRT has conducted a prospective pilot study of a modified concurrent CMF and RT regimen using reduced doses of RT designed to
lessen treatment side effects by anticipating the known interaction of CMF and RT. 407 One hundred twelve patients with zero to three positive lymph nodes were
entered into this prospective study. Patients received six cycles of CMF given every 28 days. On day 14 of cycle 1, patients started tangential field RT, consisting of
39.6 Gy in 22 fractions to the whole breast and a 16-Gy boost to the tumor bed using electrons. The most common acute toxicity observed during or shortly after RT
was moist desquamation (seen in 50% of patients). Grade 4 neutropenia was noted in 16 patients during RT, but only one patient required hospitalization. Radiation
pneumonitis (grade 2) was noted in only one patient. Fifty-one patients were evaluable for cosmetic scoring by JCRT physicians 2 years (± 6 months) after the end of
CT: 47% had excellent, 43% had good, and 10% had fair cosmetic scores. Seventy-nine percent of patients (89 of 112) were evaluable for CT dosages delivered;
overall, 93% of patients received at least 85% of all drug doses. Thus, it seems feasible to consider the administration of concurrent treatment with CMF and reduced
doses of RT; however, longer term data are required to substantiate this.
Doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide (AC) given every 3 weeks for four cycles are currently used more widely than CMF, given its shorter course and at least
equivalent outcome. With the substantial interaction between doxorubicin and RT, it does not seem feasible to combine these modalities concurrently even with
reduced doses of RT. When AC is used, the results of the JCRT Upfront-Outback trial provide strong support for the use of AC × 4 followed by RT in all moderateand high-risk patients. Preliminary results suggest that AC × 4 followed by Taxol × 4 may further improve outcome compared with AC × 4 alone; the optimal timing of
RT in this setting is uncertain. Given that the positive results in this trial were obtained using RT after completion of Taxol, it generally seems best to use this
approach. 408 Studies are under way testing the feasibility of AC × 4 followed by concurrent Taxol and RT; however, there is a report of early-onset pneumonitis using
this approach 503 and another report showing none. 409
Axillary Treatment
Axillary treatment in the form of a complete dissection was, for many years, standard management in patients with invasive breast cancer. As dictated by the
Halstedian concept of breast cancer spread, axillary dissection was considered a critical component of the surgical cure of the disease. The axillary nodes were
considered the filter before spread of cancer cells to distant sites. Axillary dissection is also known to be useful in assessing prognosis and ensuring local tumor
control in the axilla. By the 1970s, there was increasing evidence that axillary dissection had a limited effect on survival. This was most convincingly demonstrated in
the NSABP trial B-04. In this trial, patients with clinically negative axillary nodes were randomized to radical mastectomy, total mastectomy with observation of the
axillary nodes and a delayed dissection if positive nodes appeared, or total mastectomy with RT to the regional lymphatics. 234 No statistically significant difference in
the 10-year survival rate was found among the groups, despite the fact that approximately 40% of the patients undergoing axillary dissection had positive nodes and a
similar percentage were presumed to have positive nodes in the observation-only arm. While this study emphasizes that axillary dissection is not of survival benefit for
the majority of patients, the number of patients in this trial was insufficient to rule out a small, but clinically important survival benefit. 410 Also of note is that 25% to
30% of the 20-year survivors reported in a series of patients treated with radical mastectomy alone had positive axillary nodes, 411,412,413 and 414 suggesting that, for a
small number of patients, axillary dissection may be therapeutic. The therapeutic potential of axillary dissection is also supported by the survival benefits noted in the
more recent trials of postmastectomy RT. 415,416 and 417
With the general recognition that axillary dissection was principally a prognostic, rather than therapeutic, procedure, a number of studies were undertaken to
determine the extent of axillary surgery needed to determine whether nodes were positive or negative. Many of these studies examined the likelihood of skip
metastases (i.e., involvement of nodes in the upper axilla; level III) in the absence of involvement in the lower (level I or II) nodes. Involvement of level III is clearly
rare when both levels I and II are negative. 418,419 There is considerable variability in the literature on the risk of skip metastases to level II. Much of this variability may
be due to variations in the definition of which nodal tissues constitute levels I and II. These disparate observations have led some authors to conclude that a level I
dissection provides accurate staging information, 420 while most have concluded that removal of both levels I and II is required. 421,422 A level I and II dissection is
effective at providing local control in the axilla. Among patients treated with a level I and II dissection as part of BCT, axillary recurrence rates of less than 3% have
been reported. 423,424,425 and 426 When patients undergo more limited random axillary sampling procedures, the likelihood of local recurrence is related to the number of
lymph nodes removed. The 5-year probability of an axillary recurrence is approximately 20% in patients with no lymph nodes examined and approximately 10% when
only one to two negative nodes are removed. At least six to ten nodes need to be removed to avoid misclassification and to optimize local control in the
axilla.234,426,427,428 and 429 While a level I and II dissection is generally well tolerated, there are occasionally complications. Major complications, including injury or
thrombosis of the axillary vein and injury to the motor nerves of the axilla, are infrequent. Minor complications are more common and include seroma formation,

shoulder dysfunction, loss of sensation in the distribution of the intercostobrachial nerve, and edema of the arm and breast.
A number of developments have led to a reexamination of the need for axillary dissection in all patients. Under discussion is the routine use of adjuvant systemic
therapy in many patients with node-negative breast cancer, the increasing use of BCT, and the increasing number of patients with small, mammographically detected
cancers with a low risk of axillary metastases. One approach to avoiding axillary dissection is to identify cancers with a low risk of nodal metastases. The incidence of
axillary nodal involvement is known to be related principally to tumor size. However, axillary node metastases are still seen in 12% to 37% of cancers measuring 1 cm
or less, 170,429,430,431,432,433,434 and 435 and in a number of studies, the incidence of metastases does not decrease appreciably even with cancers 0.5 cm or smaller. 429,432,434
The only groups of patients with invasive carcinoma regularly identified as having nodal metastases in fewer than 5% of cases are those with microinvasive tumors,
those with grade 1 tumors less than 5 mm,415 and those with pure tubular carcinomas less than 1 cm. 436,437 However, most patients continue to undergo axillary
dissection, even in these favorable groups. A Patterns of Care study examining axillary surgery in 17,151 patients with stage I and II carcinoma undergoing BCT in
1994 found that overall, 93% had an axillary dissection. Even in patients with grade 1 tumors, favorable histologic subtypes, or tumors less than 5 cm, 88% or more
underwent axillary dissection.
The new technique of lymphatic mapping and sentinel node biopsy offers the possibility of reliably identifying patients with axillary node involvement with a
low-morbidity operation, allowing axillary dissection to be limited to patients with nodal metastases who can benefit from the procedure. The sentinel node is defined
as the first node receiving lymphatic drainage from a tumor, and the absence of metastases in the sentinel node reliably predicts the absence of metastases in the
remaining axillary nodes. This concept was popularized by Giuliano et al. in malignant melanoma and later adapted to breast cancer. 438 Multiple studies have now
confirmed that a sentinel node can be identified in more than 90% of cases, with experience, and predicts the status of the remaining nodes with 90% to 95%
accuracy439,440,441,442,443 and 444 (Table 37.2-15).

TABLE 37.2-15. Studies of Lymphatic Mapping and Sentinel Node Biopsy

The sentinel node can be identified using isosulfan blue dye, radiolabeled colloids, or a combination of the two agents. Similar success rates are reported for the
techniques, and a randomized trial demonstrated no difference in the rate of sentinel node identification, predictive value of the sentinel node, or learning curve for
isosulfan blue dye alone compared with the blue dye plus technetium sulfur colloid. 445 Approximately 20 to 30 cases appear to be necessary to master the sentinel
biopsy technique, with individual learning curves varying widely. 444,445 and 446
A number of contraindications to sentinel node biopsy have been identified, including the presence of suspicious axillary adenopathy, evidence of locally advanced
breast cancer, use of preoperative chemotherapy, multifocal or multicentric tumor, prior axillary surgery, and a pregnant or lactating patient. In addition, virtually no
information on accuracy of the procedure for tumors larger than 5 cm is available. Lymphatic mapping and sentinel node biopsy have prompted renewed interest in
the role of the internal mammary nodes in breast cancer. A small number of internal mammary node biopsies have been reported in patients whose
lymphoscintigraphy results have failed to demonstrate axillary drainage, but the need for internal mammary node biopsy remains to be defined.
Sentinel node biopsy offers the pathologist the opportunity to perform a much more detailed examination of one or two nodes than is possible when evaluating an
entire axillary specimen. It has been known for more than 30 years that approximately 20% of lymph nodes in which no tumor is seen after routine processing and
light microscopy contain tumor cells that can be identified by serial sectioning or immunohistochemistry. 447,448,449 and 450 Early studies did not find these
micrometastases to be prognostically significant, and these techniques were not practical for use on an entire axillary specimen. With the ability to examine only one
or two sentinel nodes, there is renewed interest in the possibility of using immunohistochemistry for ultra staging. However, prospective confirmation of the
significance of tumor cells detected by immunohistochemistry is lacking. The retrospective studies that indicate prognostic significance show a wide variation in the
magnitude of this effect, 451,452 and 453 making patient counseling difficult. The results of two prospective clinical trials being carried out by the American College of
Surgeons Clinical Oncology Group and the NSABP to address these issues will provide important information regarding the clinical significance of micrometastases.
An additional important unresolved issue is the need for completion axillary dissection when a positive sentinel node is identified. The initial sentinel node studies
demonstrated that the sentinel node is the only tumor-containing node in 40% to 60% of cases, and fewer than 20% of patients have more than three involved
nodes.438,439,440,441,442,443,444 and 445 A positive sentinel node establishes the need for systemic therapy, and, in patients undergoing breast-conserving surgery, radiation
of the breast includes a significant portion of the low axilla, helping to maintain local control. However, the possibility that axillary dissection has some therapeutic
benefit for patients with involved nodes cannot be excluded, making abandonment of completion axillary dissection unwise. The need for axillary dissection in sentinel
node–positive patients is being addressed in a prospective randomized trial by the American College of Surgeons Clinical Oncology Group.
The initial results of lymphatic mapping and sentinel node biopsy are extremely promising. However, data on the long-term outcome of sentinel node biopsy alone in
unselected populations and information on the ability of surgeons outside of centers of expertise doing a low volume of breast surgery are needed before it can be
determined if sentinel node biopsy will replace axillary dissection as the standard of care for the node-negative or node-positive breast cancer.

LOCAL RECURRENCE
LOCAL RECURRENCE AFTER MASTECTOMY
Local recurrence following mastectomy usually presents as one or more asymptomatic nodules in or under the skin of the chest wall, typically located in or near the
scar of the mastectomy.454 A few patients present with diffuse chest wall involvement, more commonly seen in patients with locally advanced tumors originally.
Carcinoma en cuirasse is a distinct form of diffuse infiltration of the skin or subcutaneous tissues of the chest wall with woody induration and spread of tumor well
beyond the limits of standard surgical or RT boundaries. Approximately 80% of local recurrences appear by 5 years after mastectomy and nearly all occur by 10
years. 264,367,455 However, local recurrences occurring 15 to 50 years after initial surgery have been reported. It is possible that some of these late recurrences may
represent new secondary cancer arising in residual breast tissue. 456
It is unclear how often chest wall recurrences progress to be symptomatic. In some series, only 25% to 30% of patients develop significant morbidity. 367,457 However, in
one series of 100 patients with local regional recurrence, 62 had one or more significant symptoms before death. 458 Despite aggressive local treatment, most patients
with an isolated local recurrence following mastectomy eventually manifest distant metastases. In a series of patients with local, regional, or both local and regional
recurrence treated at the JCRT, the 5- and 10-year actuarial rates of freedom from distant metastases were 30% and 7%, respectively. 459 The corresponding rates of
overall survival were 50% and 26%. However, patients surviving without disease 15 or more years after treatment with RT have been described. More recent series
appear to include patients with more favorable disease and suggest that favorable subsets of patients with local recurrence can be identified based on factors
discussed here. 460,461,462 and 463
A number of prognostic factors for survival following local recurrence have been identified. 459,460,461,462,463,464 and 465 The interval between mastectomy and local
recurrence (called the disease-free interval) is the most reliable indicator of the time to subsequent distant failure and overall survival. This likely reflects the intrinsic

growth rate of the tumor. For example, at the JCRT, the relapse-free survival at 3 years was 20% for patients treated with aggressive RT who had isolated local
recurrences less than 24 months after initial surgery, compared with 36% in patients who had isolated local recurrences at 24 months or longer after surgery. 459 The
respective 10-year survival rates were 7% versus 36%, with similar results found in nearly all RT series. Lymph node status at the time of mastectomy and the number
of sites and the size of recurrence also appear to influence prognosis. In patients with a long disease-free interval, limited disease capable of being resected, limited
initial axillary involvement, or both limited disease and involvement, the prognosis may be favorable. 460,461,462 and 463
Patients undergoing skin-sparing mastectomy do not appear to be at a greater risk of local recurrence than patients undergoing more conventional mastectomy, 466 but
further experience is needed to confirm this.
Patients with local recurrence after mastectomy should have a complete restaging to rule out distant metastases. In particular, a CT scan of the chest and abdomen
and a bone scan is recommended since many patients have additional sites of involvement only discovered in this manner. 467 MRI or positron emission tomography
scans may provide additional information. 468,469 Limited local excision has been used in some patients, with further local failure occurring in over one-half of patients
so treated. 338 For highly selected patients, local control rates in excess of 75% have been reported with wide local excision of skin and subcutaneous tissue or partial
or full-thickness chest wall resection, with some patients surviving 5 years or more. 470,471 and 472 RT has been the standard form of local treatment for patients with local
recurrence after mastectomy. The volume of disease remaining at the time of RT is a critical determinant of the likelihood of achieving long-term local control, and
gross excision is recommended if feasible. In patients with initially unresectable disease, the use of initial systemic therapy should be strongly considered. Patients
with a recurrence in one portion of the chest wall or draining lymph node areas should receive RT to the entire chest wall. Patients with chest wall recurrence may
subsequently have recurrences in the supraclavicular region (and the axillary region if not previously dissected) if only the chest wall is irradiated. 464,465 In general, the
higher the dose of RT delivered, the less likely is an in-field failure, and doses in the range of 60 Gy to the site of recurrence are recommended, even following gross
excision. However, even with technically optimal RT, further local recurrence is seen in a significant minority of patients. Attempts to improve this have included the
addition of hyperthermia; however, this treatment is still limited by technical limitations, complications, and inconclusive support for its use in randomized trials. 473,474
The use of hyperfractionated, accelerated RT has not shown improved results. 475 Photodynamic therapy has shown some utility in previously treated patients, 476 but
its role in the primary treatment of local recurrence has not been established.
It is not clear whether using adjuvant systemic therapy in conjunction with local treatment can prolong disease-free or overall survival time. While a number of
retrospective studies have suggested a benefit to adjuvant systemic therapy, 464,465,477,478 the only randomized trial addressing this issue is from Switzerland and has
only a limited number of patients (n = 167). 479,480 Entry in this trial was restricted to patients with a positive or undetermined ER assay, disease-free interval greater
than 1 year, and three or fewer nodules, each 3 cm or smaller in diameter, without fixation. Randomized patients underwent complete gross tumor resection and RT
and were randomly allocated to receive either tamoxifen until relapse or to observation. With a median follow-up of 6.3 years, the 5-year relapse-free survival rates
were 59% and 36% in the tamoxifen and observation arms, respectively ( P = NS). However, this difference had nearly disappeared by 8 to 9 years, and the overall
survival rates were the same in both groups. This trial was not large enough to suggest a clinically important advantage for adjuvant systemic therapy.
At present, the available information does not clearly identify which patients benefit from the different available treatments or at what point in the course of the disease
treatment should be instituted. Local treatment of patients with no evidence of distant metastases reduces morbidity for many and may increase survival time for some
patients and is, therefore, generally recommended. This is particularly true in patients with favorable prognostic factors. In patients with a hormone-receptor–positive
cancer, hormonal therapy is often considered in addition to local treatment, given the suggestion of benefit in some studies and the limited toxicities associated with
such treatment. While the value of adjuvant chemotherapy in this situation is not established, it appears reasonable to use it for patients who have not been
previously treated. In patients with an inoperable recurrence, it is reasonable to use neoadjuvant systemic therapy to facilitate definitive local treatment. No
information is available regarding the benefits of reapplying chemotherapy in patients who had received initial adjuvant systemic therapy. In patients with concurrent
or prior distant metastases, appropriate systemic therapy should be used, with RT reserved for patients with persistent local symptoms.
BREAST RECURRENCE AFTER BREAST-CONSERVING THERAPY
As previously noted, the large majority of recurrences in the treated breast following CS and RT are at or near the site of the primary tumor. 253 The risk of this type of
recurrence is relatively constant from years 2 to 7 following treatment and then declines. Recurrences at a distance from the primary tumor are more common at
longer follow-up times. Both mammography and physical examination are useful in detecting a recurrence in the breast following CS and RT, with the majority of
recurrences evident on mammography with or without findings on physical examination. 481,482 The findings on physical examination associated with a recurrence may
be subtle, especially when the primary tumor was of infiltrating lobular histology. Changes in the physical examination that occur more than 2 years following the
completion of RT should be viewed as suspicious. Recurrence in the nipple alone, presenting as Paget's disease, can also occur.
There can be substantial overlap in the radiologic appearance between benign and malignant lesions following treatment. Ultrasound is sometimes helpful in
distinguishing benign and malignant masses. MRI scans may also be useful, but this is not yet established. 483,484 In patients with suspicious findings, prompt biopsy is
recommended. Mammographic or ultrasound-directed core-needle biopsy is an increasingly used approach to confirm the diagnosis.
The large majority of breast recurrences are operable, and the majority of patients are alive 5 years after recurrence. 244,485,486,487,488 and 489 The results appear to be
better than for patients with local recurrence after mastectomy, except possibly for patients with early recurrence for whom prognosis is equally poor after mastectomy
and BCT. 490 Factors that influence prognosis in patients with operable disease are not well established. The most important prognostic factor in patients undergoing
mastectomy in the JCRT experience was the histology of the recurrence. 485 There was no further evidence of disease among the 24 patients with only noninvasive
cancer or predominantly noninvasive disease with only focal areas of invasion. In contrast, 38% of patients (38 of 99) with predominantly infiltrating tumors developed
a further recurrence, usually distant. A small minority of patients present with skin involvement following BCT, and these patients have a poor prognosis. 258
In patients with a breast recurrence, appropriate staging for distant metastases should be performed before definitive therapy. The standard treatment for an isolated
breast recurrence is mastectomy. Subsequent chest wall recurrences occur in fewer than 10% of patients treated with mastectomy. Postoperative complications
following mastectomy are rare. Wide local excision alone is associated with a substantial risk of further breast failure and uncontrolled local disease. 485,488,491 There is
limited experience with reirradiation for patients with a breast recurrence. 492,493 and 494 Many patients treated with mastectomy for local recurrence desire breast
reconstruction. Immediate reconstruction with a myocutaneous flap is psychologically advantageous and also promotes tissue healing. The risk of complications
following reconstruction is slightly greater than in patients who have not had prior RT, and the overall cosmetic results may not be quite as favorable. Previously
irradiated patients have tolerated submuscularly placed tissue expanders poorly.
The role of adjuvant systemic therapy following breast recurrence has not been established. In patients with an invasive recurrence, the risk of distant recurrence is
substantial, and the use and concerns of adjuvant systemic therapy are similar to those described previously (see Local Recurrence after Mastectomy, earlier in this
chapter).

BREAST RECONSTRUCTION
As discussed, breast reconstruction is an important option for a breast cancer patient undergoing mastectomy to consider and should routinely be discussed with the
patient before definitive surgery. The only contraindications to breast reconstruction are the presence of significant comorbid conditions that would interfere with the
patient's ability to tolerate a longer operative procedure in the case of immediate reconstruction or additional procedures in the case of delayed reconstruction. In
patients who may require postoperative chest wall irradiation, implant reconstructions should be avoided since the risk of implant loss is high after RT. 495 However,
TRAM flap reconstructions appear to tolerate postoperative RT well. 334 Patient age, 496 need for adjuvant chemotherapy,330 or poor long-term prognosis are not
contraindications to reconstruction.
The simplest technique for breast reconstruction involves the use of available tissue and placement of an implant. This approach is best for women with small or
moderate-sized breasts with minimal ptosis and requires adequate skin to cover an implant of a size similar to the contralateral breast. The use of limited skin
excision, with operative exposure gained by incision, usually leaves enough skin to cover an implant. Oncologic surgeons now generally agree that the only skin that
it is necessary to excise for reasons of cancer control is the nipple-areola complex and the biopsy scar. If insufficient skin is available to achieve symmetry with the
contralateral breast or for larger or ptotic breasts, a tissue expander may be employed. This technique involves placement of a prosthesis that is only partially inflated
beneath the pectoral muscle. Using a subcutaneous injection port, the prosthesis is gradually filled with saline over a period of weeks to months until the desired

breast size and shape are achieved.
Silicone breast implants have been available for over 30 years. In January 1992, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) declared that silicone gel–filled
implants could not be used until more information was available about their long-term safety. This moratorium, however, did not apply to saline-filled implants, and the
FDA later recommended that gel-filled implants be allowed in breast cancer patients pending the results of further study. The major recognized complication of
implants is the development of capsular contracture, an excessive scar formation around the implant that may lead to deformity and pain of the breast. Other
complications of implants include rupture of the implant and leakage of silicone through the intact implant capsule. The incidence of these complications is uncertain.
A major concern regarding the use of silicone implants arose after uncontrolled reports suggested an increased incidence of connective tissue disease in women with
implants.497,498 and 499 However, in 1995 the American Society of Rheumatologists concluded that scientific evidence does not support an association between implants
and connective tissue disease. A metaanalysis of 13 epidemiologic studies and other publications on this topic identified a relative risk of 0.76 for any connective
tissue disease and 0.98 for scleroderma in patients with breast implants. 500 Similar risks were reported by Silverman et al. 501 after a metaanalysis of 4000 cases.
Another technique of reconstruction is the use of myocutaneous flaps to transfer skin, fat, and muscle from distant parts of the body. The most commonly used flaps
are the latissimus dorsi and TRAM flaps. The use of a flap for reconstruction requires a more lengthy and involved operative procedure than the implant method, and
postoperative recovery is somewhat longer because there are two separate incision sites. The latissimus flap is often used in conjunction with a prosthesis because,
in most cases, the flap alone provides insufficient bulk to achieve symmetry. With the latissimus flap, there is only a 1% incidence of complete flap loss. 502 The TRAM
flap usually allows an adequate breast mound to be fashioned without the use of a prosthesis, but its blood supply is more tenuous than that of the latissimus flap,
with major necrosis reported in 5% of patients and partial necrosis in as many as 31% of patients. 330,503 For some patients, the removal of extra tissue from the lower
abdomen is an advantage to this procedure. Abdominal wall herniation is seen in 2% to 5% of patients following this procedure, but this percent is dependent on the
skill and experience of the operator. Long-term cigarette smoking (more than 20 pack-years) has an acute and chronic effect on microcirculation and, in many centers,
is a contraindication to the procedure. If these myocutaneous flaps are not available or suitable for use, it is possible to transfer composite tissues from distant sites
and to perform a microvascular anastomosis to nearby vessels. 504 This technique, known as a free flap, requires a skilled microsurgeon and prolonged operating time
and is only occasionally chosen for primary reconstruction. The potential benefits and complications of the various reconstructive procedures are listed in Table
37.2-16.

TABLE 37.2-16. Types of Reconstruction after Mastectomy

Regardless of the technique of reconstruction chosen, the creation of a breast mound is the chief goal in breast reconstruction. Surgery on the contralateral breast,
such as reduction or mastopexy, may be required to achieve symmetry. Reconstruction of a nipple-areola complex is another secondary procedure that some patients
elect to undergo in order to improve cosmetic appearance. The patient's own nipple should not be used for this purpose because recurrent carcinoma due to
persistence of breast tissue on the nipple has been reported. Microscopic involvement of the nipple is seen in 30% of mastectomy specimens, but is frequently not
apparent at the time of gross pathologic examination. The nipple can be reconstructed using a variety of local flap techniques or by the use of full-thickness skin
grafts. Tattooing of the grafts produces a color match to the patient's own areola and allows any site to be used as the donor. 505 Tissue from the contralateral nipple
should not be used for nipple reconstruction because of the concern of transferring breast tissue to the reconstruction site.

SPECIAL THERAPEUTIC PROBLEMS
PAGET's DISEASE OF THE NIPPLE
Paget's disease of the nipple is a rare form of breast cancer that is characterized clinically by eczematoid changes of the nipple. Associated symptoms include itching,
erythema, and nipple discharge. 506,507 and 508 Paget's disease is diagnosed histologically by the presence of large cells, with pale cytoplasm and prominent nucleoli
(known as Paget's cells) involving the epidermis of the nipple. In approximately 45% of women with Paget's disease, a breast mass is detected at presentation, and in
most of the remainder, infiltrating or intraductal carcinoma is identified in the mastectomy specimen. 506,507,508 and 509 The average age of women with Paget's disease
does not differ from that of women with other forms of breast cancer, but symptoms are frequently present for 6 months or more before diagnosis. 506,509 The relation
between the changes observed in the nipple and the underlying breast cancer remains a matter of controversy. One theory suggests that the nipple involvement
represents the migration of malignant cells from the underlying breast tumor. The alternate hypothesis suggests that Paget's cells are a separate disease process
originating in epidermis.
Paget's disease has traditionally been treated with mastectomy. The rationales for this approach are the need to sacrifice the nipple-areola complex, the fact that the
subareolar ducts may be diffusely involved with tumor, and the observation that carcinoma may be found at a considerable distance from the nipple. 506,507,508 and 509 A
limited experience with breast-conserving procedures in the management of Paget's disease has been described. Paone and Baker reported five patients who
underwent excision of the nipple with a wedge resection of underlying breast tissue, who remained free of disease at 10-year follow-up. 508 Lagios and coworkers
reported five patients with no palpable breast mass and negative mammogram results treated by excision of the nipple-areola complex, who remained free of
parenchymal recurrence at a mean follow-up of 50 months. 510 One patient, treated with only partial nipple excision, developed recurrent Paget's disease at 12 months,
which was resected. In contrast, four of ten patients treated by Dixon et al. with excision alone had local recurrences after a median follow-up of 40 months. 511 Twenty
selected patients with Paget's disease without clinical or radiologic evidence of parenchymal breast cancer were treated with RT alone or excision plus RT at the
Institut Curie from 1960 to 1984. 512 At a median follow-up of 7.5 years, three patients had recurrent disease in the nipple-areola region and were treated with
mastectomy. The 7-year actuarial probability of survival with the breast preserved was 81%. Bulens et al., using similar selection criteria, reported no local or distant
failures in a group of 13 patients treated with breast irradiation alone. 513 Osteen collected a total of 79 patients treated by local excision with or without RT, with nine
local recurrences. 514
When considering therapeutic options in Paget's disease, it is helpful to think of the condition as DCIS involving the nipple, usually associated with additional
intraductal or invasive carcinoma in the underlying breast parenchyma. The extent of the underlying involvement determines the patient's suitability for BCT. Detailed
mammographic evaluation (including magnification views of the subareolar region) and histologic evaluation with margin assessment are essential components of this
evaluation. For patients with evidence of diffuse involvement or disease at a distance from the nipple, mastectomy remains the standard therapy. In patients with
disease localized to the subareolar area or the nipple-areola complex, BCT can be considered. This treatment requires removal of the entire nipple-areola complex
and some of the underlying ductal region. In carefully selected patients, local failure rates with this approach appear to be similar to those reported for other breast
carcinomas. The prognosis in Paget's disease is related to the stage of the disease and appears to be similar to that of women with other types of breast carcinoma. If
invasive breast cancer is found, adjuvant systemic treatment should follow the same guidelines used for other patients with invasive cancer.
MALE BREAST CANCER
Cancer of the male breast is an uncommon disease, accounting for less than 1% of all cases of breast carcinoma. 515,516 According to SEER data, approximately 1600
cases of male breast cancer and 400 deaths were expected to occur in 1999. 2 In one study, a family history of female breast or ovarian cancer was reported in 30% of
men with breast cancer. 517 As described previously (see Inherited Predisposition to Breast Cancer , earlier in this chapter), studies have demonstrated that germline

mutations of BRCA2 are associated with an increased risk of male breast cancer, as well as early-onset breast cancer in women. In the absence of a family history,
however, a BRCA2 mutation is unlikely to be found in a man with breast cancer. An initial report suggested that BRCA2 might account for approximately 15% of male
breast cancer; however, a high percentage of patients in this study had a family history of female breast cancer. 518 The only population-based study using male
patients from a cancer registry found a much lower (4%) incidence of BRCA2 mutations. 517 Other factors that increase the risk of male breast cancer include
Klinefelter's syndrome, hepatic schistosomiasis, and radiation exposure. 519,520 and 521 Except for men with Klinefelter's syndrome, the presence of gynecomastia does
not seem to be associated with an increased risk of breast carcinoma; however, microscopic changes of gynecomastia are commonly seen histologically in male
breast cancer.522,523
Male breast cancer typically presents as a mass beneath the nipple-areola complex. 523,524 Ulceration of the nipple is a frequent sign, although isolated nipple
discharge is uncommon. The mean age of men with breast carcinoma is between 60 and 70, slightly higher than that of women with the disease. 525 Infiltrating ductal
carcinoma is the most common tumor type, but Paget's disease of the nipple and inflammatory carcinoma have been reported in men. 522,525 LCIS is not seen in the
male breast, and infiltrating lobular carcinoma is rare. 522,523 and 524 As many as 80% of male breast carcinomas are hormone-receptor positive, 526,527 and an inverse
correlation exists between receptor positivity and age, similar to that seen in women. 527
The standard local treatment for male breast carcinoma is mastectomy. If the tumor is not fixed to the pectoral muscle, a modified radical mastectomy can be
performed. If muscle involvement is limited, a portion of this structure can be removed. For patients with extensive involvement of the pectoral muscle, a radical
mastectomy may be required.524 BCT for male breast carcinoma is rarely feasible given the small size of the breast and the subareolar location of the cancer in most
men. Patients may, however, occasionally express an interest in this approach to therapy.
The survival rate of men with breast cancer is similar to that of women after controlling for differences in stage. 528,529 As in women, axillary nodal status is the major
predictor of outcome.523,524,530 In a report of 335 cases of male breast cancer, 84% of node-negative patients survived 10 years, compared with 44% of those with one
to three positive nodes and 14% with four or more positive nodes, not dissimilar to that seen with female patients. 531 Age at diagnosis and tumor size were also
significant in a multivariate analysis of prognostic factors in the study of Hulthorn et al. 530 Borgen and coauthors 524 found that only duration of symptoms and axillary
nodal status were significant predictors of outcome.
The benefit of adjuvant systemic therapy in male breast cancer has not been evaluated in randomized clinical trials, although men with metastatic breast cancer are
thought to have a similar course and response to treatment as women with the disease. 532 By extrapolation, this experience has guided the approach to adjuvant
therapy in men with early-stage disease. The administration of adjuvant tamoxifen to men with stage II and III disease resulted in a 55% 5-year survival, compared
with 28% in historic controls receiving no systemic treatment. 533 Two small retrospective studies 534,535 suggest that survival is improved by adjuvant systemic
chemotherapy. In the absence of definitive data, guidelines for the use of adjuvant therapy in men should be the same as those employed in women and guided by
prognosis and hormone receptor status. Similarly, decisions about the use of radiation should parallel the treatment of female breast cancer. For those men who
choose to have CS, radiation is mandatory. Postmastectomy radiation appears to decrease local regional recurrence, but does not have a substantial effect on
survival. 536 Two trials that report an overall survival for women undergoing postmastectomy radiation 357,359 suggest that radiation should be considered following
mastectomy in men with nodal involvement.
The use of systemic therapy in male patients with metastatic breast cancer should also follow the guidelines set for female patients. Tamoxifen, megestrol acetate
(Megace), aromatase inhibitors, and surgical castration are the principal treatments, although antiandrogens and luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone agonists
have been reported to be effective. 537 Response rates of 50% to 80% to hormonal therapy are reported, and responses to second-line therapy are commonly
seen.538,539 and 540 The traditional method of hormonal manipulation has been orchiectomy. A literature review found a 67% response rate to this treatment, which
increased to 80% when only receptor-positive cancers were considered. 538 Tamoxifen has a similar response rate and has become increasingly popular as a first-line
hormonal manipulation, but tamoxifen may not be as well tolerated in men as in women. 541 Orchiectomy is now often reserved for patients who have failed multiple
other therapies. 539,540,542 Chemotherapy is useful as palliative treatment. In general, the spectrum of activity with chemotherapeutic agents is similar to what has been
seen in women with breast cancer, although much of the information is anecdotal.
BREAST CANCER DURING PREGNANCY
Breast cancer is not a common complication of pregnancy; however, when the two occur simultaneously, it presents a complex clinical challenge. Older studies
indicated that approximately 7% to 14% of breast cancer occurring in women of childbearing age was complicated by a concurrent pregnancy. 543,544 A review of
416,441 pregnancies found an incidence of 2.2 breast cancers per 10,000 pregnancies. 545 The demographic changes that have led to delays in childbearing have
increased the proportion of breast cancer cases that are now associated with pregnancy. It has been suggested that breast cancer may complicate 1 in 1000
pregnancies. 546
The clinical presentation of breast cancer during pregnancy is typically a palpable mass. The mass or thickening may initially be attributed to the breast changes
expected with pregnancy. Nipple discharge, including a thin, sometimes bloody discharge from multiple ducts, may be a normal accompaniment of pregnancy. On the
other hand, a persistent, unilateral, bloody discharge during pregnancy requires further investigation.
Mammography is not as useful in pregnant patients as in those who are not pregnant because of the increased density in breast parenchyma associated with
pregnancy. 546 Moreover, the increase in breast size during pregnancy also may make detection more difficult. As is the case with nonpregnant patients, an
unremarkable mammogram should not lead to a decision to forego biopsy in a patient with a palpable mass. Delays in diagnosis are not uncommon in pregnant
women, most likely due to the difficulty of examining the breast of a pregnant woman and the reluctance of many physicians to suspect breast cancer in a relatively
young, gravid patient.
Breast cancer during pregnancy has been thought to be a particularly virulent disease, but much of the poor prognosis may be due to advanced disease at the time of
diagnosis. Petrek et al. compared 56 pregnant breast cancer patients treated at Memorial Hospital from 1960 to 1980 with 166 nonpregnant women of the same age
treated in the same period. 547 Sixty-one percent of the pregnant women and 38% of the nonpregnant women had positive lymph nodes; 31% of the pregnant women
had T1 tumors compared with 50% of their counterparts.
After correction for tumor stage and age, most studies indicate that survival in women treated during pregnancy is similar to that seen in nonpregnant women. 547,548,549
and 550 In the series by Petrek et al., 547 node-negative pregnant patients had a 77% 10-year survival compared with 75% for nonpregnant patients. The corresponding
10-year survival figures for node-positive patients were 25% and 41%, respectively, and were not statistically different. In contrast, a multiinstitutional study of 407
patients aged 20 to 29 at the time of cancer diagnosis found a relative risk of cancer death of 2.83 (95% confidence interval, 1.24 to 6.45) for the 26 patients whose
cancer was diagnosed during pregnancy compared with those who had never been pregnant. 551
After a diagnosis is made, the pregnant patient with breast cancer should meet with a multidisciplinary team, including a medical, surgical, and radiation oncologist, as
well as with her obstetrician. 552 In addition, psychosocial support for the patient and her family is critical. An initial evaluation should include an assessment of the
extent of the disease, with an emphasis on symptoms suggestive of advanced disease and a thorough physical examination. Mammography can be performed safely
throughout the course of pregnancy. Diagnostic studies, such as bone scans and CT scans, should be avoided early in the pregnancy, particularly during the period
of organogenesis. These studies are not essential in the initial evaluation of most women with localized breast cancer.
For women in the first or second trimester, the question of pregnancy termination is inevitably raised. While some treatment approaches are feasible during
pregnancy, others are contraindicated. Depending on the patient's specific situation, continuing the pregnancy may or may not compromise the usual breast cancer
treatment. Even when deviations from the usual treatment are required, it is unclear to what extent such changes or delays affect a woman's odds of remaining free
from recurrent breast cancer. The concerns about compromising care must be balanced, by the woman, her family, and her physicians, with the desire to continue the
pregnancy. The woman facing these issues must also consider the possibility that if she receives chemotherapy, her ability to conceive another child could be
compromised.553,554 There is no clear evidence that pregnancy termination changes overall survival, 548 but the limitations of all studies that have examined this issue
should be recognized. In general, clinicians and patients must understand that the disease outcomes for pregnant women with breast cancer are less well understood
than for the general population of women with breast cancer.

In the setting of a pregnancy, options for local therapy need to be considered carefully. Radiation to the breast is contraindicated at all times during pregnancy
because of the inability to shield the developing fetus from scatter. If a woman is in her third trimester, the use of CS is reasonable as radiation can be administered
after the delivery with only a minimal delay in treatment. For women who are in their first or second trimesters, delaying radiation for 3 to 8 months is of far greater
concern as it may increase the risk of local recurrence. 403 However, if a woman is going to receive a course of adjuvant chemotherapy during pregnancy, radiation
may not be planned for several months. If the inability to administer radiation during pregnancy leads to a substantially longer time to the initiation of radiation than
would usually be the case, serious consideration should be given to proceeding directly to mastectomy. Reconstruction with a TRAM flap is contraindicated because
of the effect on the abdominal wall. 555 Other forms of reconstruction are not generally recommended because of the additional anesthesia time required by
reconstruction and the difficulty achieving symmetry in a pregnant woman.
The vast majority of young women with breast cancer receive some type of adjuvant systemic therapy as part of their treatment. Such treatment decisions are
particularly complex in the pregnant patient. The potential benefits of treatments for the mother must be considered within the context of risks to the fetus. In general,
all chemotherapeutic agents should be avoided during the first trimester because of the risk to the fetus. When chemotherapy is administered during the first
trimester, there is an increased risk of spontaneous abortion, compromised fetal viability, and major organ malformations. 556,557 Certain agents, such as methotrexate
and 5-fluorouracil, appear to be particularly problematic in terms of fetal malformation. 558,559 Cyclophosphamide and other alkylator agents have also been associated
with fetal malformation in the first trimester. 558 Exposure of the fetus to chemotherapy after the first trimester does not appear to increase the risk of major fetal
malformation.556 However, there are reports of low birth weight, growth retardation, and fetal demise when exposure occurs after the first trimester. 560 Chemotherapy
does cross the placenta, so there is the potential for fetal bone marrow suppression and other organ toxicity. Fetal myocardial necrosis has been reported with the
third-trimester administration of an anthracycline, 561 but other fetal abnormalities have not been reported with this agent. 562,563 Many clinicians remain concerned about
the potential late cardiac effects of in utero anthracycline exposure to the fetus. There are no data concerning the safety of in utero taxane exposure.
When adjuvant chemotherapy is administered during pregnancy, many clinicians opt for an anthracycline-based regimen, such as four cycles of doxorubicin and
cyclophosphamide. Chemotherapy should not be administered until the second trimester, and even then many physicians try to delay chemotherapy for as many
weeks as possible to allow for further fetal development. 556 Adjuvant chemotherapy for women in their third trimesters is often delayed until after delivery, often with
the plan of delivering the baby several weeks early.
A regimen of fluorouracil, Adriamycin, and cyclophosphamide chemotherapy has been used by investigators at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in a total of 24
pregnant women during their second and third trimesters. 552 Birth weights, Apgar scores, and general health of the newborns were reported to be normal. In France,
generally favorable short-term outcomes (median follow-up, 42.3 months) have been reported for children exposed to a range of chemotherapy regimens during the
second and third trimesters. 564 Adjuvant tamoxifen has not been shown to be safe in women during pregnancy.
In the rare situation that a gravid patient has metastatic disease, treatment decisions are even more difficult and must be tailored to the individual situation. For
women with rapidly progressive disease, there may be few options apart from proceeding with systemic therapy, regardless of gestational age.
OCCULT PRIMARY WITH AXILLARY METASTASES
It is relatively uncommon for breast cancer to present as an axillary nodal metastasis without a palpable lesion in the breast. In a study of over 10,000 patients treated
for primary breast cancer at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center between 1975 and 1988, occult primaries with axillary metastases accounted for 0.35% of the
cancers.565 Similarly, 0.5% of 12,000 breast cancers treated at the National Cancer Institute in Milan were found to be occult primaries with axillary metastases. 566
Although malignant axillary adenopathy may be secondary to a variety of primary solid tumors, as well as lymphoma, breast cancer is by far the most common
diagnosis in a woman presenting with isolated axillary adenopathy. Before undergoing biopsy, a woman should have a complete physical examination and bilateral
mammography. Chest radiography should be obtained, particularly in those with a smoking history. Once a diagnosis is established, additional radiologic studies
looking for another primary tumor are rarely helpful in the absence of specific symptoms. 565,566 and 567 The presence of positive hormone receptors further suggests a
diagnosis of breast cancer, although other primary tumors (i.e., lung carcinoma) can also be positive for ER.
Several series suggest that MRI may be able to detect otherwise occult cancers in the breast and may be helpful in planning local therapy. 568 In one small series, MRI
identified the primary cancer in 9 of 12 patients presenting with axillary disease. 569 In another series from the University of Pennsylvania, MRI of the breast detected
occult cancers in 19 of 22 women with a mean size of 17 mm.570 A German study using MRI detected occult invasive cancer in 6 of 14 women. 571 Case reports also
describe the use of positron emission tomography scanning to identify occult lesions. 572 The absence of a lesion on either mammography or MRI does not rule out the
possibility of disease within the breast.
In the past, it was generally recommended that women with axillary disease (in the setting of an occult primary) undergo mastectomy. 573 Table 37.2-17 summarizes
the results of mastectomy in 228 patients. Overall, a primary tumor was found in 64% of patients, with the highest rate of detection in some of the older studies in
which patients did not routinely undergo mammography. The size of the cancers identified at mastectomy has varied. Contrary to what some might expect, some of
the cancers identified are of moderate size. Rosen and Kimmel reported a median tumor size of 1.5 cm (range, 0.1 to 6.6 cm), 579 and Baron et al. noted that 45% of
the cancers were multifocal.565 These findings have important implications for BCT in these women, although it is likely that the use of MRI to detect occult cancers
would decrease the proportion of women identified with unsuspected tumors at the time of mastectomy.

TABLE 37.2-17. Results of Mastectomy in 228 Women with Axillary Disease in the Setting of an Occult Primary Tumor

There are a number of reports of using BCT in patients with occult primaries. 566,580,581,582 and 583 The obvious objection to this approach is that there may be a relatively
large tumor, multifocal disease, or both in the breast that might not be well controlled with radiation. Results with this approach have been mixed. A series of 44
patients treated at the Institut Curie with relatively high-dose whole breast irradiation (median dose, 60 Gy) reported a 9% risk of ipsilateral breast recurrence at 8
years. 581,582 Ellerbroek et al. reported a 17% 5-year actuarial rate of ipsilateral breast recurrence in a group of 16 women treated with breast conservation. 567 There
has been no apparent survival difference associated with breast conservation in comparison with mastectomy, but randomized trials in women with occult primaries
have not been performed. Furthermore, the series are sufficiently small that it would be misleading to draw anything but the most tentative conclusions regarding the
survival equivalence of this approach. Whether or not a mastectomy is performed, some form of axillary surgery should be performed in women presenting with
palpable axillary disease because of the limited ability of radiation to control gross axillary disease.
Overall survival for women with occult primary tumors is similar to the survival of patients with comparable axillary involvement in the setting of known primary tumors.
Some investigators have suggested that survival may even be slightly better for those with occult primary tumors. 582 Given the fact that tumor size is of prognostic
significance even in patients with positive nodes, it is not surprising that those with occult primary tumors (often with minimal disease in the breast) could have a
slightly better prognosis than the general population of node-positive patients. Systemic treatment for patients with occult primary tumors and axillary involvement

should reflect the current standard of care for patients with node-positive breast cancer.
Phyllodes Tumor
The term phyllodes tumor includes a group of lesions of varying malignant potential ranging from completely benign tumors to fully malignant sarcomas. Clinically,
phyllodes tumors are smooth, rounded, multinodular lesions that may be indistinguishable from fibroadenomas. Skin ulceration is seen with large tumors, but this is
usually due to pressure necrosis rather than invasion of the skin by malignant cells. Histologically, phyllodes tumor, like fibroadenoma, is composed of epithelial
elements and a connective tissue stroma.
Phyllodes tumors are classified as benign, borderline, or malignant based on the nature of the tumor margins (pushing or infiltrative) and presence of cellular atypia,
mitotic activity, and overgrowth in the stroma. 584 There is disagreement about which of these criteria is most important, although most experts favor stromal
overgrowth. The percentage of phyllodes tumors classified as malignant ranges from 23% to 50%. 585,586 Axillary metastases are reported in less than 5% of cases, but
are a poor prognostic sign when present. Metastases more commonly follow the pattern seen with sarcomas (with the lung as the most common site) and
histologically resemble sarcomas. They occur in 6% to 22% of cases and are considerably more common in the malignant subtype. 584,585,586 and 587 Approximately 20%
of phyllodes tumors recur locally if excised with no margin or a margin of a few millimeters of normal breast tissue, regardless of whether they are benign or
malignant. 588 A wide excision with a 2-cm margin of normal breast tissue is appropriate therapy for benign and borderline phyllodes tumors unless they are so large
that this is not cosmetically feasible. In the past, many authors have advocated mastectomy for the management of malignant phyllodes tumors. 588,589 Since phyllodes
tumors are not multicentric, there is no clear-cut biologic rationale for mastectomy, and series have reported the successful treatment of malignant phyllodes tumors
with wide excision. 590,591 The use of systemic therapy for malignant phyllodes tumors is based on the guidelines for treating sarcomas.

PROGNOSTIC AND PREDICTIVE FACTORS
Some of the key decisions in the current management of primary breast cancer involve the need for prognostication and the optimal selection of therapy. A prognostic
factor is defined as a biologic or clinical measurement that is associated with disease-free or overall survival in the absence of adjuvant systemic therapy. A
predictivefactor is any measurement associated with response or lack of response to a particular therapy. Estrogen receptor status has been clearly shown to be a
predictive factor for hormonal therapy, in both the adjuvant and metastatic disease settings. Prognostication is especially important in identifying patients whose
prognoses are so favorable that adjuvant systemic therapy is unnecessary. Prognostic factors can also be useful in identifying patients whose prognoses with
conventional treatment are so poor as to warrant consideration of more aggressive investigational therapies.
It should be stressed that evaluating potential prognostic and predictive factors requires caution. Individual studies often evaluate many factors and report only the
statistically significant ones. To be useful, potential factors require validation in a separate large data set in which multivariate analysis allows for the assessment of
the potential factor when adjusted for other known factors. 592,593 and 594 It has also been recognized that certain prognostic factors may only be important in the first 5
years after primary treatment, but not with long-term follow-up.
The most established prognostic factor is the number of positive axillary lymph nodes based on at least a level I or II axillary dissection and a detailed histologic
evaluation. An adequate axillary dissection usually contains at least ten lymph nodes. As the number of involved lymph nodes increases, relapse rates increase, and
survival rates decrease. 595 Patients are often grouped as having negative nodes, one to three positive nodes, four to nine positive nodes, or ten or more positive
nodes. Given the morbidity of axillary dissection and controversies about its therapeutic value, many patients are now undergoing sentinel node biopsy or no axillary
surgery (see Axillary Treatment, earlier in this chapter).
Tumor size, one of the first prognostic variables accurately quantified, is also a valuable prognostic factor. Tumor size refers to the maximal size of the invasive
component measured on microscopic sections. Tumor size correlates with the number of histologically involved nodes, but has independent prognostic significance.
Tumor size is particularly useful in patients with pathologically negative nodes. Patients with negative nodes and tumor size less than 1 cm have a favorable
prognosis. 432,596,597 This appears true even for patients with mammographically detected cancers, except perhaps those showing casting-type calcifications. 598
Tumor grade is commonly provided on pathology reports, and several investigators have demonstrated that it is an important prognostic factor in individual series.
The use of tumor grade, however, has been limited by poor reproducibility. 599,600 The most widely used grading systems for breast cancer are the
Scarff-Bloom-Richardson classification and Fisher's nuclear grade, although both systems are frequently used in modified versions. 601,602 Other pathologic factors,
such as lymphatic and vascular invasion and the presence of necrosis, have been found to be important prognostic factors in individual series, but are similarly limited
by poor reproducibility.
Among clinical factors, young patient age has been reported to be an adverse prognostic factor by some, 260,603 but not all, investigators. In two large studies, breast
cancer patients younger than 35 years of age had a worse prognosis than older patients. In both studies, young patients were more likely than older patients to have
adverse prognostic factors, but young age remained a significant prognostic factor in multivariate analysis. At the 1998 Sixth International Conference on Adjuvant
Therapy of Breast Cancer, young patient age was first recognized as an adverse prognostic factor. 604
Of the biochemical measurements, the most important is the presence or absence of ER and PR in the tumor. In the past, the receptor status was determined by a
dextran-coated charcoal biochemical assay. More recently, nearly all laboratories are using an immunohistochemistry assay (estrogen and progesterone receptor
immunohistochemical assay, ERICA and PRICA). ERICA is preferable in that it does not require fresh tissue, allows correlation with histology, and can be performed
even on very small lesions. Although hormone receptor status correlates with prognosis, it does so only weakly. Furthermore, several studies have reported that ER is
a prognostic factor for 5-year disease-free survival, although the curves tend to merge with longer follow-up. 605,606 This suggests that ER status is a measure of
proliferative capacity, rather than metastatic potential. Despite this, hormone receptor determination is of critical importance as a predictive factor for hormonal
therapy. In addition, the 1998 Overview on the use of adjuvant chemotherapy [see Adjuvant Drug (Systemic) Therapy, later in this chapter] showed that its
effectiveness was somewhat greater in ER-poor cancers than in ER-positive cancers, thus establishing ER as a weak predictive factor for adjuvant chemotherapy.
The identification of micrometastases in bone marrow using antibodies to various epithelial antigens has also been evaluated for its prognostic significance. A
metaanalysis of 20 published studies reported in 1998, including 2494 patients using a variety of techniques, concluded that the presence of micrometastases did not
contribute independent prognostic information. 607 More recently, a group using a monoclonal antibody to bind an antigen on cytokeratins not present on bone marrow
cells showed a strong correlation between the presence of cytokeratin-positive cells in the bone marrow and 4-year survival. 608 This study raised the possibility that
standardized procedures for (1) the preparation of bone marrow specimens, (2) the use of antibodies and staining technique, and (3) the criteria for defining positively
stained cells may allow for the routine use of this procedure. Additional follow-up and future studies are needed to establish this before its use in routine clinical
practice.
Measures of proliferation have been another area for the evaluation of prognostic factors. This includes mitotic index, thymidine labeling index, flow cytometry, and
several antibodies to cell-cycle–associated antigens. One of the concerns in the use of these various measures of proliferation is ensuring standardization. The most
thoroughly evaluated of these in the United States has been DNA flow cytometry. Flow cytometry can be performed on fresh tissue specimens, frozen biopsy samples,
needle aspirates taken directly from the tumor, or paraffin-embedded tissues. The technique produces a measure of DNA content (DNA ploidy) and the distribution of
cells in the cell cycle. Of particular interest has been the percent of cells in the S phase. In 1997, a review of the experience with S-phase fraction determined by flow
cytometry concluded that standardization and quality control must be improved before it can be routinely used. 609
Studies are also under way to determine whether S-phase fraction is a predictive factor for the use of chemotherapy. Studies using antibodies to Ki-67 and
proliferating cell nuclear antigen have shown encouraging early results but are not established. To date, there have been relatively few studies that have directly
compared different measures of proliferation.
There has also been interest in the prognostic value of growth factors and their receptors. Of these growth factors, the greatest interest has been in HER-2/ neu. The
gene is located on chromosome 17q21 and is transcribed into a 4.5-kb mRNA, which is translated into a 185-kD glycoprotein. While multiple studies have
demonstrated the negative impact of HER-2/neu overexpression on the progress of node-positive patients, the role of HER-2/ neu in node-negative patients is less
clear. 610 There is evidence, however, that HER-2/neu may be a useful predictive factor. Several retrospective studies suggest that only patients whose tumors have
little or no detectable levels of HER-2/ neu derive considerable benefit from cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil regimens, and, in a study

from CALGB, that patients whose tumors have high levels of HER-2/neu derive greater benefit from dose-intensive Cytoxan, Adriamycin, and 5-fluorouracil
regimens.611 A study from the NSABP that compared adjuvant treatment with and without Adriamycin demonstrated that patients with HER-2/neu–negative tumors had
the same outcome with or without Adriamycin, whereas patients with HER-2/neu–positive tumors who did not receive Adriamycin had significantly worse prognoses. 612
Similar results were also seen in a trial from the Southwest Oncology Group study. 613 With the growing use of HER-2/ neu testing, the most reliable method to
determine HER-2/neu status must be established.614
It has also been suggested that HER-2/neu status may predict response to endocrine therapy. 615 Among patients treated with adjuvant tamoxifen, those with
HER-2/neu–positive tumors tend to have shorter disease-free and overall survival times compared with patients with low HER-2/ neu levels. 616 However, the data
supporting an interaction between HER-2/ neu expression and adjuvant tamoxifen therapy is not conclusive, and patients with ER-positive and HER-2/ neu–positive
cancers should still receive adjuvant hormonal therapy. Ongoing trials are testing the combined use of tamoxifen and trastuzumab (Herceptin) in these patients.
There are a large number of investigations of other potential prognostic and predictive factors; however, it is beyond the scope of this chapter to review each of them.
None has been established for routine use in clinical care, including nm23, p53, cathepsin D, and other measures of tumor invasiveness, measures of angiogenesis,
and evolving microarray technology.

ADJUVANT DRUG (SYSTEMIC) THERAPY
It is thought that occult metastases (or micrometastases) are commonly present when patients first present with operable breast cancer. This view is based on the fact
that, even following effective local treatment, many patients develop metastatic involvement over time and improvements in local control have been shown to provide,
at best, only a small decrease in distant metastases. 248,617 Given this, improving the long-term outlook for newly diagnosed breast cancer patients with early-stage
disease can only be accomplished with improvements in systemic therapy.
Beginning more than three decades ago, many clinical trials were organized to test the value of various drugs as an adjunct or adjuvant to local treatment. These
trials, described in detail here, have demonstrated significant improvements in survival for treated patients compared with controls. Adjuvant chemotherapy, hormonal
therapy, or both are now in widespread use around the world. Since its introduction, there has been a decrease in the death rate from breast cancer, suggesting a
beneficial effect on public health. In many populations, it has been difficult to distinguish the life-saving effects of screening mammography from those of adjuvant
systemic therapy since these two interventions were introduced at approximately the same time. In one large population-based study from British Columbia in which
this issue was studied, the use of adjuvant systemic therapy by itself had a direct beneficial effect on the death rate from breast cancer. 617
Over 100 prospective randomized clinical trials of adjuvant therapy have been conducted. More than 15 years ago, the Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative
Group was formed to organize this vast body of information. This group has provided a composite analysis of all randomized trials of the treatment of primary breast
cancer performed worldwide.618 The major portion of this activity has focused on adjuvant drug therapy; the results of the 1995 Overview are summarized in Table
37.2-18.110,619 The 1995 Overview (published in 1998) provided important new insights related to the value of tamoxifen in premenopausal women and the utility of
chemotherapy in postmenopausal women.

TABLE 37.2-18. Adjuvant Drug Therapy: Percentage Reduction in the Annual Odds of Either Recurrence or Death (from Any Cause)

In the Overview, the number of events (either relapse or death) in the treatment and control arms of individual trials are scored to determine an
expected-minus-observed value and an odds ratio indicative of the value of the treatment. When a treatment is beneficial in a given trial, the
expected-minus-observed value is negative, and the odds ratio is less than 1.0. Similar studies are grouped together, and a combined expected-minus-observed
value and overall odds ratio can then be calculated. In combining the results of similar studies, each expected-minus-observed value and odds ratio are weighted by
the relative size of each experiment so that a large study with more events counts more. This statistical method provides an estimate of the effectiveness of a certain
therapy based on the entirety of all available data from randomized trials (see Table 37.2-18).
In examining the results of the Overview, it is important to distinguish those results that are generated from a direct comparison of randomized arms and those results
that are indirect comparisons of treatment results across different studies. For example, an indirect comparison would use data from trials comparing chemotherapy
versus no treatment with trials comparing ovarian ablation versus no treatment to compare the relative benefits of chemotherapy versus ovarian ablation. The results
of direct comparisons provide solid information for use in making treatment decisions, whereas the results of indirect comparisons should be used in generating
hypotheses to be tested in additional studies.
The results of the breast cancer metaanalysis suggest an important principle; namely, that the proportional reduction in the risk of relapse as a result of a treatment is
generally constant regardless of the patient's absolute risk of relapse ( Table 37.2-19). To illustrate this, assume that a therapy reduces the annual odds of relapse by
one-third. If we treat patients who are expected to have recurrences at a rate of 15% per year, only approximately 20% of patients would be free of disease at the end
of 10 years without therapy. Reducing the rate of recurrence by one-third with therapy reduces the annual relapse rate to 10%. At this reduced recurrence rate, 35%
of patients would be free of disease at 10 years, for an absolute improvement of 15%. If we apply the same therapy to a group of patients expected to develop
recurrent disease at 1.5% per year, we would lower the recurrence rate to 1.0% per year with therapy. In turn, the percentage of patients who develop recurrence
would decline from 14% to 10% at 10 years. In this situation, the absolute improvement is only 4%. In some situations, such as a woman with a tumor that is less than
1 cm with negative nodes, the absolute benefits might be even smaller.

TABLE 37.2-19. Absolute Reduction in Mortality at 10 Years per 100 Patients Treated

Clinicians should consider the effect of an adjuvant therapy in terms of both disease-free and overall survival. Ultimately, the goal of adjuvant treatment is to prolong
survival. Some clinicians would argue that an improvement in disease-free survival, in and of itself, justifies the use of adjuvant treatment since recurrence is often
associated with substantial morbidity. Any improvement in disease-free survival must be considered in the context of the short- and long-term toxicity of adjuvant
treatment. In general, improvement in disease-free survival usually translates into survival benefits as well. For this reason, it is reasonable to consider disease-free
survival in making treatment decisions, particularly if the studies in question have a sufficiently short follow-up such that an overall survival advantage would not yet
emerge.
ADJUVANT TAMOXIFEN
Tamoxifen was initially considered a promising candidate for adjuvant treatment because of its efficacy against advanced disease and relative lack of toxicity. In the
Overview analysis, over 37,000 patients were randomized in 55 trials examining the effect of adjuvant tamoxifen at a dose of 20 to 40 mg/d for at least 1 year. The trial
has yielded no clear evidence that 40 mg is superior to 20 mg, in addition to which, the higher dose is more expensive and possibly more toxic. As a result, the
standard dose of tamoxifen is 20 mg/d.
As shown in Table 37.2-18, the benefits of tamoxifen are substantial and are seen in both premenopausal and postmenopausal women. Tamoxifen, taken for
approximately 5 years, reduces the annual odds of disease recurrence by 47% and the annual odds of death by 26%. The degree of benefit is similar in younger and
older women. The benefits of tamoxifen administered for 5 years were similar despite the presence or absence of chemotherapy. This finding represented a change
from the previous Overview, at least for premenopausal women. Importantly, the benefits seen with tamoxifen were only seen in women with ER-positive tumors.
There appeared to be no benefit from adjuvant tamoxifen in ER-poor patients in terms of either recurrence or death ( Table 37.2-20).110

TABLE 37.2-20. Effects of Tamoxifen for 5 Years According to Estrogen-Receptor Level

In terms of duration of tamoxifen therapy, 5 years of treatment is the standard of care ( Table 37.2-21).110 Once women with ER-poor tumors were excluded from the
analysis, indirect comparisons indicated that 5 years were superior to 2 years or less. This finding is supported by the results of two individual studies comparing 2
years versus 5 years of tamoxifen.620,621 It remains uncertain whether more than 5 years of tamoxifen could be superior to 5 years. In both the NSABP B-14 trial and a
trial from Scotland, patients randomized to more than 5 years of therapy appeared to have a greater risk of recurrence. 288,622 An Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
trial suggested that the continuation of tamoxifen beyond 5 years may delay relapse in ER-positive patients; however, there was no difference in survival in this
study.623 At present, the available data would support stopping tamoxifen at 5 years. Of note, there are both preclinical and clinical data (withdrawal responses in the
metastatic setting) to suggest that tamoxifen may act as a growth agonist after variable periods of exposure. 624 If this is the case, it is not difficult to imagine that the
withdrawal of tamoxifen could, in and of itself, be of benefit. Tamoxifen lowers the risk of disease recurrence even after it has been discontinued. 110 Women
randomized to 5 years of tamoxifen had a 33% annual reduction in recurrence after 5 years (when they were no longer taking tamoxifen) compared with women who
never took tamoxifen. For mortality, the proportional reduction after 5 years was similar to the proportional reduction seen during the first 5 years.

TABLE 37.2-21. Duration of Tamoxifen

In general, tamoxifen appears to have greater benefit in women with strongly positive ERs. 110 In the trials evaluating 5 years of tamoxifen, the proportional reduction in
annual recurrence was 43% for patients who had moderately ER-positive tumors (less than 100 fmol) and 60% for women with strongly ER-positive tumors (greater
than 100 fmol). Similar trends were seen for mortality. Despite the predictive value of progesterone receptors (PR) in patients with advanced disease, PR status did
not appear to affect the benefits of tamoxifen in patients with ER-positive tumors. There were insufficient numbers of patients with ER-negative, PR-positive tumors in
the Overview to draw any definite conclusions about the benefits of tamoxifen in this subgroup. In clinical practice, such patients are usually considered to have
hormonally responsive disease, and similar recommendations for adjuvant tamoxifen therapy should be made for ER-negative, PR-positive patients as for those with
ER-positive tumors.
As noted previously, the substantial benefits of adjuvant tamoxifen appear to be confined to patients with positive hormone receptor results. This finding represents a
change from previous publications of the Overview. A total of 8000 women with ER-poor tumors were randomized to tamoxifen or no tamoxifen. Although the 10%
reduction in the annual odds of recurrence is statistically significant, the absolute benefit is of small magnitude. The proportional reduction in terms of mortality is even
smaller, and there is no trend for improved outcome with longer duration of treatment. Given these results, women who are shown to have negative hormone receptor
status should not be treated with tamoxifen to prevent a systemic recurrence.
With growing interest in the measurement of HER-2/ neu or c-erbB-2, there has been concern raised about the role of tamoxifen in women with both positive hormone
receptors and HER-2/neu overexpression. In the metastatic setting, trials have suggested relative resistance to hormonal therapy in patients with HER-2/ neu
overexpression. 625 In the adjuvant setting, a retrospective analysis of the Italian GUN-1 trial suggested that patients with ER-positive, HER-2/ neu overexpressing
tumors had a worse outcome with tamoxifen than those who received no hormonal intervention. 626 A retrospective analysis of a large CALGB trial failed to detect a
negative interaction between tamoxifen and HER-2/neu.627 At this time, HER-2/neu overexpression does not preclude the use of adjuvant tamoxifen in a patient who is
otherwise an appropriate candidate.
In addition to its effect on recurrence and mortality in trials of 5 years of therapy, tamoxifen has also been shown to reduce the incidence of contralateral tumors.
There was a 47% reduction in the annual odds of developing a contralateral cancer. The reduction in contralateral tumors was independent of the hormone receptor
status of the primary tumor. These findings are consistent with the results of individual trials, 288 the NSABP tamoxifen prevention trial,113 and the results seen with the

use of tamoxifen in women with DCIS.204
The serious toxicities of tamoxifen and the common side effects are listed in Table 37.2-22. In individual trials, the Overview, and the tamoxifen prevention trial, there
has been an unequivocal increase in the incidence of endometrial cancer in women taking tamoxifen. The excess risk over 10 years is estimated to be four cases of
endometrial cancer per 1000 women. In NSABP B-14, there was a 0.16% annual risk of developing endometrial cancer on tamoxifen. 113 The breast cancer prevention
trial has strongly suggested that endometrial cancer is primarily a problem for women over 50. 113 Thromboembolic complications were also seen more frequently in
older women.

TABLE 37.2-22. Adverse Effects of Tamoxifen

Tamoxifen has been reported to have positive effects on bone density in postmenopausal women. 628 In the NSABP prevention study, there was a reduction in
osteoporotic fractures with tamoxifen that almost reached statistical significance. 113 The clinical significance of this finding is uncertain, and the effects of tamoxifen on
bone have not been compared with the bone effects of agents approved to prevent or treat osteoporosis. In premenopausal women, there has been concern raised
about accelerated bone loss. 629 Although tamoxifen does lower cholesterol levels, 630 there was no improvement in cardiac or vascular events with tamoxifen in the
Overview.110 In the NSABP prevention study, there was no difference in the frequency of fatal myocardial infarction, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or angina requiring
surgical intervention. 113
In patients who are receiving chemotherapy, tamoxifen can be administered either following the completion of treatment or concurrently with chemotherapy. While
there have been theoretical concerns raised about tamoxifen reducing tumor growth rates and interfering with the effects of chemotherapy, 631 this has not been
observed clinically. Clinical studies indicate that thromboembolic complications are increased when the two treatments are administered concurrently. 632 Outside of a
clinical trial, either approach is reasonable. A similar concern has been raised about a potential negative interaction of tamoxifen and radiation, but this has not been
supported by clinical data. Tamoxifen, which was administered concurrently with radiation, lowered the rate of ipsilateral breast recurrences by 61% in NSABP
B-14.113
Which patients with invasive breast cancer should receive tamoxifen? It is possible to answer this question with less equivocation than in the past. All women who
have positive lymph nodes or tumors greater than 1 cm in the setting of positive hormone receptors should receive adjuvant tamoxifen for a period of 5 years. For
women with small tumors (T1a or T1b) and negative lymph nodes, the risk of a systemic recurrence is relatively low, and decisions about tamoxifen need to be
considered carefully. For the majority of such women, the benefits of tamoxifen probably outweigh the risks. This is particularly the case for a woman who has
undergone CS plus radiation and in whom tamoxifen will not only decrease the risk of a systemic recurrence but will also lower the chance of an ipsilateral recurrence
or a new contralateral primary. Since the life-threatening toxicities of tamoxifen (endometrial cancer and thromboembolic disease) are more common in women over
50, these toxicities should be considered when making decisions about tamoxifen in this older group of women who are at low risk of recurrence. The decision to
continue tamoxifen needs to be reevaluated in women who experience unpleasant side effects. While tamoxifen is usually well tolerated, some patients have a more
difficult time with side effects than others. In summary, it is reasonable to consider the use of tamoxifen and to discuss the pros and cons of treatment in any woman
diagnosed with a hormone receptor–positive or unknown breast cancer. Tamoxifen should not be administered to women with negative hormone receptor status
unless the main goal of treatment is to prevent a second primary tumor. It should be recognized, however, that for the majority of women with invasive breast cancer,
the risk of a systemic recurrence is far higher than the risk of developing a second primary tumor.
HORMONAL INTERVENTIONS OTHER THAN TAMOXIFEN
Although tamoxifen is the mainstay of adjuvant hormonal therapy for patients with breast cancer, questions still remain about the role of ovarian ablation in the
management of women with stage I or II disease. If anything, this area has become even more complex in recent years as a result of new findings from clinical trials.
Twelve randomized trials using either surgical or radiation ablation were judged to be of adequate quality to be included in the Overview. 633,634 Of these studies that
included 3456 women, seven evaluated ovarian ablation as the sole adjuvant treatment and five looked at ovarian ablation in combination with chemotherapy. Many
of the trials were underpowered; some included both premenopausal and postmenopausal women, and only the trials that included chemotherapy had information on
ER assays. Despite the fact that most of the individual trials had failed to detect a difference in overall survival, the combined analysis of the 12 studies indicated a
highly significant improvement in both recurrence rates and survival for ovarian ablation ( Table 37.2-23).634 Not surprisingly, this benefit was confined to women who
were under 50 at the time of randomization. There was no significant benefit seen with ovarian ablation in the 1354 women who were over 50, most of whom would
have already experienced menopause. The absolute improvement in survival at 15 years associated with ovarian ablation in the older subgroup was 2.5%, a
difference that was not statistically significant. Of interest, the benefits of ovarian ablation appeared to be far less dramatic in women who also received
chemotherapy. The explanation for this finding may lie in the fact that at least some of the benefit associated with chemotherapy may be due to treatment-induced
menopause that occurs in a substantial proportion of premenopausal women.

TABLE 37.2-23. Metaanalysis of the Effects of Ovarian Ablation

A U.S. Intergroup Trial prospectively studied the value of adding a luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone agonist to a course of adjuvant cyclophosphamide,
Adriamycin, and 5-fluorouracil in premenopausal, receptor-positive, node-positive patients. 635 Women were randomized to chemotherapy alone, chemotherapy plus 5
years of goserelin, or chemotherapy plus 5 years of goserelin and 5 years of tamoxifen. The addition of goserelin and tamoxifen resulted in an improvement in 5-year
relapse-free survival from 67% to 78% ( P <.01), a difference that is likely attributable to tamoxifen. The addition of goserelin alone resulted in much smaller
improvement in relapse-free survival that was not statistically significant. In a subset analysis, there was the suggestion of greater benefit with goserelin in women

under the age of 40, who would be less likely to experience chemotherapy-induced menopause. 635
Several European studies have also addressed the role of ovarian ablation in women with early-stage breast cancer. Investigators in Sweden randomized 732
premenopausal women with positive hormone receptors to nine cycles of intravenous CMF every 3 weeks or ovarian ablation. After a median follow-up of 68 months,
there was no difference in either disease-free or overall survival. 636 In another trial, the combination of goserelin for 3 years and tamoxifen for 5 years was compared
with six cycles of intravenous CMF (day 1, 8 every 28 days) in 1045 premenopausal women with hormone receptor–positive breast cancer. 637 There was no difference
in survival between the two arms, although patients on the hormonal therapy had a statistically significant improvement in relapse-free survival after a median
follow-up of 42 months. Finally, in a smaller but more mature trial, there was no difference seen between intravenous CMF (every 3 weeks for six to eight cycles) and
ovarian ablation in approximately 300 premenopausal women. 638 In women with higher levels of ER expression, there was the suggestion of a better outcome with
ovarian ablation; conversely, women with low ER expression appeared to have a better outcome with chemotherapy.
The results of these studies are of great interest, and indirect comparisons in the Overview suggest that ovarian ablation and chemotherapy are similar in the
magnitude of their effects. It remains unclear where ovarian ablation fits into the treatment paradigm for women with early-stage breast cancer. Any conclusions must
be tempered by the recognition that the database on ovarian ablation is far less extensive than on either chemotherapy or tamoxifen. While ovarian ablation may be
comparable with chemotherapy in selected premenopausal patients, there are insufficient data to suggest that ovarian ablation should be substituted for
chemotherapy as a routine practice. The potential negative consequences of ovarian ablation in women with breast cancer have not been fully investigated and could
be even greater in some women than a course of chemotherapy. It also remains unclear to what extent ovarian ablation adds to benefits seen with tamoxifen in
premenopausal women. For many clinicians, the pressing clinical question is whether ovarian ablation is of additional benefit in the premenopausal woman who has
received chemotherapy, is taking tamoxifen, and continues to have menstrual cycles. In the absence of additional data, there are insufficient data to recommend such
a treatment approach at this time.
Far more limited data are available about other adjuvant hormonal therapies. While toremifene has been shown to be equivalent to tamoxifen in the metastatic
setting, 639 its activity in the adjuvant setting has not been established. There are insufficient data to support the use of any other antiestrogens as adjuvant treatment
for early-stage breast cancer, including raloxifene.
In postmenopausal women, ongoing studies are evaluating aromatase inhibitors in place of tamoxifen, in conjunction with tamoxifen, and following 2 to 5 years of
tamoxifen. Given the activity of aromatase inhibitors in the metastatic setting, these agents may ultimately play a role in the adjuvant therapy of postmenopausal
women.

ADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY
The first trials of adjuvant chemotherapy were launched in the 1950s, but it was not until the late 1960s that the first modern trials of combination chemotherapy were
initiated. Since the 1970s, randomized trials have addressed many fundamental questions related to adjuvant chemotherapy. Adjuvant chemotherapy initially was
administered to women with positive nodes; a series of trials published in the late 1980s extended the use of adjuvant chemotherapy to node-negative women as
well.640,641 and 642
Two early trials had a major effect on the care of women with breast cancer and the design of future studies. 643,644 The NSABP compared the use of melphalan for 2
years versus no adjuvant therapy in 349 women with node-positive disease. At the same time, Bonadonna and colleagues in Milan evaluated 12 months of CMF
versus no adjuvant treatment in 386 women. Both studies showed a statistically significant improvement in disease-free survival, with subset analyses strongly
suggesting most of the benefit was in women under the age of 50. The studies demonstrated a trend toward improved survival with chemotherapy, although the
survival comparisons did not reach statistical significance. CMF quickly became the standard care for node-positive patients, particularly those who were
premenopausal at the time of diagnosis. Twenty-year follow-up of the Milan trial has demonstrated a persistent advantage for the premenopausal women who
received CMF, with a difference in survival of 47% versus 22%. 645
Additional randomized trials have been completed since 1980. Many of these trials have been substantially larger than the early studies, thereby increasing the power
of the trials to detect small but clinically meaningful differences. These trials have contributed to our understanding of the optimal duration of therapy, 646 the role
anthracyclines play, 647,648 and the benefits of treatment in both node-negative 640 and postmenopausal patients. 649,650
There are many unanswered questions about the optimal use of adjuvant chemotherapy in women with operable breast cancer, however, one can argue that more is
known about adjuvant chemotherapy for women with breast cancer than almost any other topic in clinical oncology. At the present time, there is no woman with
invasive breast cancer for whom we can say there is no benefit associated with adjuvant chemotherapy, but for many women the absolute benefit is exceedingly
small. In such settings, the potential benefits of treatment need to be carefully balanced against the side effects and potential risks of treatment. Breast cancer is a
heterogeneous malignancy with a highly variable natural history. While the extent of disease (or stage of disease) partially reflects the underlying biology of the
cancer, a more comprehensive understanding of the molecular biology and genetics of breast cancer is needed. Ultimately, this understanding will allow us to tailor
therapies for specific patient subgroups and to target therapies to different tissue types. Until we gain a better understanding of subgroup differences, we are forced to
consider the risks and benefits of treatments across broad populations, as best exemplified by the Overview analysis. 619
It is difficult to overestimate the importance of the Oxford Overview analysis 618,619 in furthering our understanding of the role that adjuvant chemotherapy plays in
women with breast cancer. The results of 69 randomized trials involving approximately 30,000 women were included in the third and most recent analysis and
publication of the Overview. 619 Although any metaanalysis has limitations, the large number of women included in the analysis allows for comparisons that cannot be
made in individual trials.
Table 37.2-24 outlines the benefits of polychemotherapy (combination chemotherapy) in comparison with no chemotherapy in a total of 47 trials involving 17,000
women. In some of these trials, women received additional treatment (i.e., tamoxifen) as well, but all study participants were randomized to receive multiple courses of
combination chemotherapy or no chemotherapy. As can be seen, there is a highly significant benefit for combination chemotherapy compared with no chemotherapy.
For the population as a whole, polychemotherapy reduced the annual odds of recurrence by approximately 25% and the annual odds of death by approximately 15%.
The reduction in recurrence as a result of chemotherapy was greatest during the first 5 years following diagnosis, although there was still a significant, although
smaller, proportional reduction in recurrence as a result of chemotherapy even after 5 years. The effect of chemotherapy on survival was seen during the first 5 years
and persisted to an equal or greater extent during the next 5 years. The fact that the survival curves continued to separate after 5 years is not surprising; recurrences
of breast cancer during the first 5 years after a diagnosis may lead to death from breast cancer during the subsequent 5-year period. This finding underscores the
importance of following women with early-stage breast cancer for an extended period of time to obtain a full picture of the effect of a therapy on long-term survival.
The effect of adjuvant chemotherapy on women under age 50 is illustrated in Figure 37.2-5.

TABLE 37.2-24. Effects of Combination Chemotherapy across Entire Patient Population in Overview Analysis

FIGURE 37.2-5. Effect of polychemotherapy on recurrence and mortality in women less than 50 years of age. (From ref. 619, with permission.)

In the Overview analysis, the proportional reductions in recurrence and mortality are similar in node-negative and node-positive patients. 619 Given the better prognosis
of node-negative patients, especially those node-negative patients with small tumors (i.e., less than 1 cm), the absolute benefit of therapy in women with negative
lymph nodes is much smaller than in those who have positive nodes. It is estimated from the Overview data that an average node-negative patient under age 50
would have an absolute improvement in survival at 10 years of 7% (an improvement from 71% to 78%). In contrast, the absolute improvement for a node-positive
patient under age 50 is estimated to be 11% (an improvement from 42% to 53%). 619 Given the mix of trials included in the Overview, the actual benefits of
chemotherapy may be somewhat greater in a compliant patient population without significant comorbidity in whom full doses are delivered. 651
There is a strong relationship in the Overview between age and the magnitude of benefit seen with chemotherapy, with younger women having a proportionally
greater reduction in both recurrence and mortality than women aged 50 to 69. The Overview includes data on only approximately 600 women aged 70 or older, thus
limiting any conclusions that can be drawn regarding this subgroup. Since over one-third of all women diagnosed with breast cancer in the United States are over the
age of 70, 1 it is unfortunate that additional data are not available. The reductions in recurrence and mortality by age are detailed in Table 37.2-25. Although the
benefit of chemotherapy is less in older women, the Overview shows a statistically significant advantage for chemotherapy across all age groups (up to age 69).

TABLE 37.2-25. Effect of Age on Outcome with Adjuvant Chemotherapy

The age-related findings in the Overview are consistent with observations made in the earlier trials 643,644 (i.e., that the benefit of chemotherapy is greater in younger
women than in an older patient population). The more substantial benefit of chemotherapy in younger patients, as well as the established benefits of ovarian ablation
in premenopausal women,634 suggests that adjuvant chemotherapy may be working both through a direct cytotoxic effect on the tumor and an endocrine effect by way
of the induction of menopause (which occurs in a substantial number of premenopausal women receiving chemotherapy). 553 It should be noted, however, that not all
studies show a consistent relationship between the induction of menopause secondary to chemotherapy and disease outcome. 652,653 It has been difficult to separate
the effects of age and menopausal status because of their high degree of correlation. It is of interest, however, that in the Overview, postmenopausal women under
the age of 50 appeared to derive a similar benefit from chemotherapy as did premenopausal women under 50. 619 This finding would suggest that
chemotherapy-induced ovarian ablation is not the primary factor leading to improvement in disease-free survival and overall survival with chemotherapy. If
chemotherapy is less effective in older women, there are multiple possible explanations for this phenomenon apart from the ovarian ablation hypothesis. Women over
the age of 50 may have a different biologic mix of tumors; the fact that there are age-related differences in tumor biology is suggested by the differences in hormone
receptor status across age. Older women may also tend to receive lower doses of therapy and are more subject to competing causes of mortality. Finally, it should be
noted that several studies 640,642,643 have suggested that the age-related differences in outcome with adjuvant chemotherapy may be less significant than was
previously thought.
Other subjects addressed in the 1998 Overview include the influence of hormone receptor status on decisions regarding therapy and the utility of tamoxifen in
conjunction with adjuvant chemotherapy.619 While chemotherapy was beneficial to a highly significant degree in patients with both ER-negative and ER-positive
tumors, there was a trend for greater benefit in women with ER-negative tumors. This finding was seen particularly in women aged 50 to 69 in whom the proportional
reduction in recurrence was almost twice as great (30% ± 5 vs. 18% ± 4) in patients with ER-negative tumor compared with those who had ER-positive tumors. The
administration of tamoxifen (in addition to chemotherapy) did not appear to have a substantial effect on the benefits of chemotherapy. In other words, the proportional
risk reductions from chemotherapy were similar whether or not a woman received tamoxifen; however, the number of younger women receiving chemoendocrine
therapy in the Overview was small. 619
The Overview has provided additional findings of clinical significance. Among these findings, shorter duration therapy (3 to 6 months) appears to be as effective as
longer therapy. In addition, anthracycline-containing regimens appear to be superior to non–anthracycline-containing regimens. A total of 11 randomized trials
involving 5942 patients compared CMF with an anthracycline-containing regimen. Overall, anthracycline-containing therapy resulted in a proportional recurrence
reduction of 12% and a proportional mortality reduction of 11%. The mortality reduction, which resulted in an absolute improvement in survival at 5 years of 2.7%, was
of borderline statistical significance. 619 Finally, the Overview did not demonstrate a preponderance of deaths from other causes as a result of chemotherapy, including
deaths from other neoplasms and deaths from vascular events. 619
USE OF ANTHRACYCLINES IN THE ADJUVANT SETTING
The use of anthracycline-based therapy merits further comment. The finding from the Overview, suggesting a small incremental benefit with anthracyclines, has been
seen in some individual trials as well. 654 A U.S. Intergroup trial involving almost 2700 patients compared six cycles of CMF with six cycles of cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, and fluorouracil (CAF) in high-risk, node-negative patients. 648 The trial demonstrated a 2% improvement (one-sided P = .03) in survival for the
Adriamycin-containing arm in both premenopausal and postmenopausal women. A Canadian trial comparing CMF and CEF (cyclophosphamide, epirubicin,
fluorouracil) demonstrated an improvement in both disease-free and overall survival for the epirubicin-containing arm. 647 This trial led to the Food and Drug
Administration's approval of epirubicin as adjuvant therapy in the United States. To date, epirubicin-containing adjuvant regimens have been much more popular in
Europe than in the United States.
NSABP B-15 randomized node-positive patients to CMF or four cycles of AC administered every 3 weeks. Although there was no difference in disease-free survival or
overall survival between the two arms, the AC arm has been widely adopted as a standard of care. The shorter duration of the treatment of the regimen and the
relative ease of administration has led to the regimen's popularity. Whether or not four cycles of AC (lasting approximately 3 months) is equivalent to one of the longer
anthracycline-containing regimens (which have often included fluorouracil) remains uncertain. Of interest, using a nonanthracycline regimen, the International Breast

Cancer Study Group demonstrated that three cycles of CMF was inferior to six. 655
Retrospective analyses from a number of studies suggest that the HER-2/ neu status of the tumor may influence the relative benefit of anthracycline-containing
regimens. Studies have suggested that either more intensive anthracycline-containing regimens 611 or the mere addition of an anthracycline to a
non–anthracycline-containing regimen 612,613 may be particularly beneficial in patients whose tumors overexpress HER-2/ neu. Patients who were HER-2/neu–negative
in these studies appeared to derive far less benefit from the addition or intensification of an anthracycline. 612,613 Small retrospective studies have also suggested
relative resistance of HER-2–positive disease to CMF-type regimens. 656 Given the retrospective nature of all of the analyses described previously, it remains uncertain
to what extent the benefit of anthracyclines reported in individual trials and in the Overview is a function of HER-2/ neu status. The use of an anthracycline-containing
regimen has become the standard of care in patients with HER-2/ neu overexpression (who are receiving chemotherapy) and in most patients with multiple positive
lymph nodes. In women with HER-2/neu–negative tumors who are at low to moderate risk of recurrence, CMF-type regimens represent a reasonable standard of care.
CMF-type regimens are also appropriate for patients who cannot tolerate an anthracycline. There is great interest in investigating the newer nonanthracycline
regimens in this population as well.
DOSE INTENSITY AND DOSE DENSITY IN ADJUVANT TREATMENT
Dose intensity in adjuvant therapy has been of major interest since 1980. A retrospective review of the initial Milan CMF study suggested that patients who received a
greater proportion of the intended chemotherapy dose had a superior outcome to those who had more extensive dose reductions. 657 This study, as well as trials in the
metastatic setting and preclinical models, led to the development of a series of prospective randomized trials that tested the hypothesis that more dose-intensive
treatment would improve clinical outcome for patients with node-positive breast cancer.
The Cancer and Leukemia Group B compared three doses and schedules of CAF chemotherapy. Approximately 1550 patients were randomized to either (1) four
cycles of low-dose CAF; (2) six cycles of moderate-dose CAF; or (3) four cycles of high-dose CAF. The total doses in the moderate- and high-dose arms were
identical, and the low-dose arm received one-half of the total dose of either of the other groups. The high-dose arm used doses of cyclophosphamide and Adriamycin
(600 mg/m2 and 60 mg/m2, respectively) that are now considered the standard of care. 653,658 A statistically significant improvement in disease-free survival and overall
survival at a median follow-up of 9 years in favor of the moderate- or high-dose arms in comparison with the low-dose arm ( P <.0001 and P <.004 for the two
comparisons) was seen. The absolute improvement in 5-year survival between the high- and low-dose arms was 7% (79% vs. 72%). These results are consistent with
either a dose-response relationship (progressive improvement in outcome with dose escalation) or a threshold effect. 653
Three additional trials have evaluated dose escalations with either cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, or both. In an Intergroup trial, four cycles of AC chemotherapy
were administered to over 3100 women with node-positive breast cancer. The dose of cyclophosphamide was fixed at 600 mg/m 2, but women were randomized to
Adriamycin doses of 60 mg/m2, 75 mg/m2, and 90 mg/m2. Despite increased acute toxicity with higher doses of doxorubicin, there was no evidence of an improvement
in either disease-free survival or overall survival. 659 Although the median follow-up from the trial is relatively brief, the results do not support the use of more than 60
mg/m2 per cycle. In two NSABP trials (B-22 and B-25), the dose of Adriamycin was kept constant at 60 mg/m 2, and women were randomized to receive 600 or 1200
mg/m2 of cyclophosphamide. Despite the increased dose, there was no improvement in disease-free survival or overall survival. 660 In B-25, the cyclophosphamide
dose was escalated from 1200 to as high as 2400 mg/m 2 for four cycles. Toxicity on the higher dose arms appeared to be greater, including an increased number of
cases of acute leukemia and myelodysplasia. Although a subset analysis of women with four to nine nodes suggested a slight improvement for the high-dose arm in
terms of disease-free survival and overall survival, this was not seen in other nodal subgroups. Dose escalation of cyclophosphamide beyond 600 mg/m 2 as part of
combination adjuvant therapy is unlikely to be of substantial benefit and does not appear to be worth the added toxicity. While other studies have used higher than
standard doses of cyclophosphamide, at present there is no established role for escalating doses above the 600 mg/m 2 cycle range in clinical practice. 661
The ultimate test of dose intensity has been the use of very high doses of chemotherapy, usually alkylating agents, in combination with autologous bone marrow or
peripheral stem cell support. An initial report from Peters et al. suggested that this approach, when used in women with ten or more positive nodes, improved
disease-free survival in comparison with historical controls. 662 A series of randomized trials have been conducted over the past decade comparing high-dose
chemotherapy with less intensive treatment programs. Many of these trials have been reported, while others are still accruing or maturing.
To date, there is little evidence that the use of high-dose chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow or peripheral stem cell support improves disease outcomes in
the adjuvant setting. In the largest of the adjuvant trials, Peters et al. randomized over 800 women with ten or more positive lymph nodes to four cycles of CAF
chemotherapy followed by an intermediate-dose consolidation versus the same induction therapy followed by high-dose cisplatin, carmustine, and cyclophosphamide
with stem cell support.663 With a median follow-up of 37 months, there was no significant difference in either event-free or overall survival ( Table 37.2-26). Of note, the
overall survival in the intermediate-dose group was 70%, far higher than many would have anticipated from the historic controls. While there were fewer relapses in
the high-dose arm, this difference was offset by an increase in the number of toxic deaths on the high-dose arm. Additional follow-up is still needed, but other
randomized trials have failed to demonstrate a significant benefit for treatment with high-dose chemotherapy administered with bone marrow or stem cell support. 664,665
It is premature to draw definite conclusions, but at this time, high-dose chemotherapy with peripheral stem cell support cannot be recommended as adjuvant therapy
outside of controlled clinical trials.

TABLE 37.2-26. Results of Adjuvant Trial Comparing High-Dose Chemotherapy with Bone Marrow Support versus Intermediate-Dose Chemotherapy

INCORPORATION OF THE TAXANES INTO ADJUVANT THERAPY
Because of the demonstrated activity of the taxanes in the treatment of metastatic breast cancer, 666,667 both paclitaxel and docetaxel have been incorporated into
adjuvant chemotherapy trials. While the results of trials with docetaxel are not yet available, four cycles of paclitaxel have been shown to improve disease-free and
overall survival in node-positive patients. Henderson et al. randomized women to AC × 4 followed by paclitaxel (175 mg/m 2 every 3 weeks × 4) or no additional
treatment. The addition of paclitaxel resulted in a 22% proportional reduction in the risk of recurrence and a 26% proportion reduction in mortality. These data were
recently updated at an FDA hearing; at 36 months' follow-up, 73% of patients randomized to AC were alive and disease-free compared with 77% of women who
received paclitaxel. The absolute improvement in survival was 3% (84% to 87%). The benefit of paclitaxel was similar in premenopausal and postmenopausal women,
but patients with hormone receptor–negative tumors appeared to have a greater reduction in risk than those with positive hormone receptor status [Taxol (paclitaxel)
package insert].
Although four cycles of AC followed by four cycles of paclitaxel have become a widely accepted standard program for node-positive breast cancer, there are many
questions remaining about this regimen. First, is the improvement in women who received paclitaxel entirely due to paclitaxel itself or is it related to the longer
duration of therapy? Second, is the benefit of paclitaxel in hormone receptor–positive patients sufficiently large that it should be a routine component of the adjuvant
regimen? This question is particularly relevant in the woman with positive receptors who has a small tumor, generally favorable prognostic factors, and a small
number of positive lymph nodes. Finally, how will the use of other paclitaxel schedules (i.e., weekly treatment) and the use of docetaxel compare with the benefit seen
in the study described previously? Ongoing trials are addressing these issues.

SELECTION OF ADJUVANT REGIMEN AND DECISION MAKING ABOUT ADJUVANT TREATMENT
There is no single adjuvant regimen that has emerged as the treatment of choice for all women with breast cancer. Although anthracycline-containing regimens have
gained tremendous popularity in clinical practice and are, in some cases, superior to CMF, 619,647,648 there remains a role for CMF-type regimens in many women with
breast cancer. Table 37.2-27 lists the adjuvant regimens that are acceptable in a nonprotocol setting.

TABLE 37.2-27. Acceptable Adjuvant Regimens Outside of a Clinical Trial

It is impossible to identify a group of women with invasive breast cancer in which there is absolutely no benefit to be gained from adjuvant chemotherapy. In some
patient subgroups, the benefits are of extremely small magnitude and should be carefully considered in light of the risks associated with treatment. Women with
tumors less than or equal to 0.5 cm (T1a) with negative lymph nodes should not be treated with chemotherapy because of their favorable natural history. 669 Because
of the limited toxicities associated with tamoxifen, the reduction in recurrence risk as a result of tamoxifen treatment, and the possibility that chemotherapy may be
somewhat less effective in patients with ER-positive tumors, 619 the decision to add chemotherapy to tamoxifen in a woman who is at relatively low risk of recurrence
can be particularly difficult. The acute side effects of chemotherapy (e.g., myelosuppression, emesis, mucositis, infection, fatigue) can have a substantial effect on
short-term quality of life. In addition, the persistent or late effects of treatment, such as premature menopause, weight gain, and a slightly increased risk of leukemia,
must also be considered. 670
Patient preferences play an important role in decision making about adjuvant therapy. Surveys have demonstrated that some women are willing to accept the side
effects of chemotherapy for small improvements in their risk of recurrence or death from breast cancer. 671,672 In one survey, the median acceptable life extension in
exchange for a course of chemotherapy was 3 to 6 months, and over one-half of those surveyed indicated that they would take chemotherapy for a survival benefit of
1% or less. 672 It is unclear to what extent such surveys are representative of the general population, but there are clearly many women who accept the short-term
toxicity and inconvenience of chemotherapy in exchange for a small improvement in outcome. In most preference studies, there is considerable variability across
patients. 671,672 Ultimately, it is hoped that adjuvant therapy will be better tailored to the tumor, so that women do not need to consider such tradeoffs (i.e., a toxic
treatment for a small benefit). Until we succeed in this endeavor, it is incumbent on oncologists to describe the potential advantages and disadvantages of adjuvant
treatment to their patients.
PREOPERATIVE CHEMOTHERAPY
For the past two decades, preoperative chemotherapy has been administered to patients with locally advanced breast cancer. More recently, a number of randomized
trials have been performed in which preoperative therapy has been administered to women with operable disease. 307,673,674 In general, preoperative therapy has been
successful in downstaging tumors, both decreasing the size of the tumor and decreasing the number of axillary lymph nodes involved with tumor. It is extremely rare
for tumors to progress during preoperative therapy, and the proportion of women who can undergo CS following preoperative treatment is increased. 306 The response
to preoperative therapy is a predictor of disease-free and overall survival. 673 To date, however, there is no evidence that preoperative therapy improves overall
survival when compared with postoperative treatment. 306,675 Ongoing studies may be helpful in determining whether the response to preoperative therapy can be used
to individualize postsurgical treatment. Until additional data are available, the primary advantage of preoperative therapy is to increase the chance of
breast-conserving CS in women who are otherwise borderline candidates for this procedure.

THERAPY OF LOCALLY ADVANCED AND INFLAMMATORY BREAST CANCER
The term locally advanced breast cancer encompasses a heterogeneous group of patients including those with neglected, slow-growing tumors as well as those with
biologically aggressive disease. Locally advanced breast cancer is a relatively uncommon presentation in the economically developed world, accounting for only 5%
of cases in major centers, and no more than 20% in other locations. In most other parts of the world, however, locally advanced breast cancer is more common,
accounting for at least one-half of all cases. This difference is thought to be due to variations in public awareness and attitudes, as well as the availability of medical
resources, including screening mammography. Biologic differences between populations may also play a role (as discussed later, in Inflammatory Breast Cancer).
The relative infrequency of locally advanced breast cancer has limited the speed of clinical progress in this area.
The definition of locally advanced breast cancer is variable. All investigators include patients with inoperable stage IIIB, while some also include patients with
operable stage III, stage IV by virtue of positive supraclavicular lymph nodes, or both. Management recommendations and prognosis might vary according to which of
these definitions is used. For example, it might not be necessary to recommend preoperative chemotherapy for a patient with IIIA breast cancer that could be removed
surgically. A reader of this literature needs to be certain which of the various definitions is used.
ROLE OF SYSTEMIC THERAPY
Historically, the results in treating patients with locally inoperable breast cancer using surgery and RT were uniformly poor. More aggressive local treatment did little
to improve survival rates, but did result in increased complications. The results, however, improved greatly with the development of effective chemotherapy. 676,677,678 and
679
This is related in part to the ability of chemotherapy to convert most cases of inoperable primary breast cancer to operable disease. In addition, these patients
likely experience the same benefit in decreasing rates of recurrence and death as do patients with stage I and II disease treated with postoperative chemotherapy.
Since systemic therapy results in a proportional reduction in the risk of systemic recurrence, the absolute benefit in patients with locally advanced disease may be
considerable. In the Overview analysis, the benefit of systemic therapy was equally apparent in adjuvant trials that included stage III patients.
The response rates to preoperative chemotherapy are high, possibly related to the presence of an intact blood supply. The use of preoperative treatment allows (1)
the early initiation of systemic therapy in a disease with a high distant failure rate, (2) a reduction in the extent of the operative procedure needed to render the patient
grossly free of disease, and (3) the opportunity to observe directly the response to treatment (an in vivo chemosensitivity assay). Should the tumor not respond to the
initial chemotherapy regimen, substitution with other drugs or the timely initiation of RT may be beneficial. Clinical response is usually determined by physical
examination, but can be supplemented by mammography and/or ultrasonography. It is important to note, however, that clinical response does not always correlate
with pathologic response. 680 Up to one-third of patients found to be histologically free of disease have residual abnormalities by palpation or imaging after induction
chemotherapy. Conversely, approximately one-third of patients thought to be in complete remission on clinical grounds still have residual disease on pathologic
examination. Pathologic response is the best indicator of response to treatment, and patients with a complete pathologic response have a favorable prognosis. 681
Newer imaging methods, such as MRI,682 may improve the ability to judge response.
A wide variety of chemotherapy regimens have been used as preoperative treatment, with most incorporating doxorubicin. These regimens generally produce
response rates in at least two-thirds of patients with a complete pathologic remission rate of approximately 10% to 20%. There is no evidence that one
doxorubicin-containing regimen is better than another; neoadjuvant treatment is generally given to maximal response. The optimal duration and sequencing of

preoperative and postoperative therapy has not been determined. 683 Attempts are under way to determine if there are molecular predictors of response to neoadjuvant
therapies.684,685 and 686 Tamoxifen is used in patients with hormone receptor–positive cancers, although it is generally administered following the completion of
chemotherapy.
INTEGRATION OF SYSTEMIC AND LOCAL THERAPIES
Following successful neoadjuvant chemotherapy, a variety of options for local treatment have been investigated. These include RT alone, simultaneous RT and
chemotherapy, and surgery alone. In many but not all cases, further chemotherapy is employed after local treatment. Surgery following neoadjuvant chemotherapy
permits a pathologic assessment of response, the rapid reintroduction of chemotherapy, and the use of lower doses of RT. The most typical approach is to use an
anthracycline-containing chemotherapy as induction, followed by modified radical mastectomy, additional chemotherapy, and then consolidative RT. It appears
feasible to do an immediate breast reconstruction using a flap in this setting, 687 although it may delay the initiation of adjuvant chemotherapy and make RT technically
more difficult. Clinical trials and experience have confirmed that a combined modality approach is an effective way to achieve local control and also to provide a
substantial rate of long-term survival. 676
The high response rates seen with induction chemotherapy have stimulated interest in the use of BCT for selected patients with locally advanced breast cancer. Good
results have been reported in some series, 676,688,689 but the experience using this approach is still limited, and data from randomized, prospective trials are not
available. Should breast conservation be contemplated, all of the usual considerations apply, including a mammographic evaluation that does not demonstrate diffuse
disease. The conservative resection should obtain clear margins with an acceptable cosmetic result. Criteria for determining the extent of surgery in a conservative
resection following induction chemotherapy have not been established, and the long-term local control rates remain uncertain.
In general, prognostic factors predictive of good outcome in patients with locally advanced breast cancer are the same as in lower stages of primary breast cancer;
namely, smaller tumor size, slower growth rate, better differentiation, and fewer involved axillary lymph nodes. In addition to these classical factors, the response of
locally advanced cancers to preoperative chemotherapy is an additional important prognostic factor. As noted, evidence from many series indicates that patients with
rapidly responding cancers and those who achieve a complete remission have a better outcome than patients who do not have a good response to chemotherapy.
Patients with inflammatory breast cancer appear to have a different clinical course than other patients with locally advanced cancer. An important distinction should be
drawn between locally advanced disease by virtue of rapid growth and those that are locally advanced by virtue of neglect of a slowly growing cancer. Patients with
these neglected cancers have a more indolent course than similarly staged patients with rapidly growing cancer. This distinction is better discerned by a careful
history than by any laboratory study including flow cytometry.
INFLAMMATORY BREAST CANCER
Although frequently grouped with other locally advanced cases, inflammatory breast cancer is a distinct clinical and pathologic entity. It is defined by the presence of
diffuse brawny edema of the skin of the breast with an erysipeloid edge, usually without an underlying palpable mass. The clinical presentation is due to tumor
embolization of dermal lymphatics. While dermal lymphatic invasion is required for the diagnosis as specified by the current AJCC staging system, patients with the
clinical presentation, but without evidence of dermal lymphatic invasion, also have a poor prognosis with local treatment only. It is common for patients with
inflammatory breast cancer to give a history of having been treated unsuccessfully with antibiotics before their referral to a breast cancer specialist. Inflammatory
breast cancer is uncommon in the United States and in most of Europe, but is seen much more frequently in North Africa. European women living in Morocco have
presented with this particularly virulent form of primary breast cancer, suggesting the existence of a specific etiologic agent. The identity of such a putative agent
remains elusive. Inflammatory breast cancer has become more common in the United States. Data from SEER show that between 1975 and 1977 and 1990 and 1992,
the incidence doubled, increasing among whites from 0.3 to 0.7 cases per 100,000 person-years and among African Americans from 0.6 to 1.1 cases. 690
Nearly all patients with inflammatory breast cancer are dead within 5 years in the absence of systemic therapy. In addition, the historic results of surgical treatment
demonstrate a difficulty in obtaining clear margins and a high local recurrence rate. Preoperative chemotherapy in patients with inflammatory breast cancer produces
a response rate in the vicinity of 80%, and most patients can go on to surgical resection with clear margins. As in other patients with locally advanced breast cancer,
the most typical approach is to use an anthracycline-containing chemotherapy as induction, followed by surgery, then additional chemotherapy, and then
consolidative RT. With the combined modality approach, over 70% of patients achieve local tumor control. This is particularly true in patients whose tumors respond
well to initial chemotherapy. In patients with inflammatory breast cancer who successfully complete a combined modality treatment, prognosis is dramatically improved
when compared with the prechemotherapy era. Currently, approximately one-half of patients treated with combined modality treatment survive for 5 years and
approximately 35% of the patients have been reported to be disease free at 10 years. 676,691 This improvement may reflect the biology of rapidly growing disease and
its preferential effect of chemotherapy.
Improving the results in locally advanced breast cancer can be achieved by a number of means. It may be possible to decrease the incidence of locally advanced
breast cancer by diminishing any socioeconomic factors that impede early diagnosis. Further improvements in the results of treating patients with locally advanced
breast cancer require even better systemic therapy. In this regard, there is great interest in including patients with locally advanced disease in clinical trials of novel
systemic therapies. Locally advanced disease affords a special research opportunity (i.e., the ability to obtain primary tumor tissue before and after chemotherapy to
correlate with response and other clinical parameters).

FOLLOW-UP AFTER PRIMARY TREATMENT
There are over 2 million breast cancer survivors in the United States. As screening programs identify more patients with earlier stage disease, and as the number of
women diagnosed with DCIS continues to rise, there will be even more women living with a personal history of breast cancer. Women with a history of invasive breast
cancer are at risk of developing metastatic disease. Most recurrences are detected within 5 to 10 years after diagnosis, but later recurrences can occur. 692 Women
with both invasive and noninvasive breast cancer face a 0.5% to 1.0% annual risk of developing a contralateral cancer, 693 and this risk is even higher in women
diagnosed with a first breast cancer at a younger age and those with an inherited predisposition. 694 In addition, women who have been treated for breast cancer are at
risk for complications related to their treatment and face a variety of health-related decisions (e.g., pregnancy, hormone replacement therapy, prevention of
osteoporosis) that may need to be carefully considered in light of their breast cancer history. 671
Although extensive testing to identify early presentations of metastatic disease is probably not warranted, there is a strong rationale for having a physician
knowledgeable about breast cancer care follow the patient after completion of treatment. While many follow-up visits after breast cancer treatment may seem routine
to the physician, the visit provides both the clinician and the patient with the opportunity to address a wide range of issues. Table 37.2-28 outlines the specific goals of
follow-up care.

TABLE 37.2-28. Goals of Follow-Up Care after Treatment for Early-Stage Breast Cancer

Contrary to what many patients expect,695 early diagnosis of metastatic disease by performing frequent, extensive, or both kinds of testing has not been shown to

improve survival. Two randomized trials have compared simple follow-up regimens consisting of periodic physical examination and routine mammography with more
intensive evaluation including radiographic studies (chest radiography, bone scan, liver ultrasound) and laboratory studies (complete blood counts and liver function
tests) in women after treatment of early-stage breast cancer. 696,697 More intensive follow-up resulted in a slightly earlier time at which systemic recurrences were
detected; however, there was no difference in overall survival. Some physicians have argued that more intensive follow-up schedules might improve quality of life by
providing patients with added reassurance, allowing treatment of metastatic disease before a patient develops symptoms, or both. These arguments are not supported
by quality-of-life assessments performed as part of one of the large randomized follow-up studies. 696 With the development of ever more accurate methods of
detecting low-volume metastatic disease (i.e., spiral CT or positron emission tomographic scanning), there is the potential to detect metastatic disease even earlier
than in the randomized trials discussed previously. The routine monitoring of tumor markers may also allow for the detection of metastatic disease at an earlier point
in a patient's clinical course. 698 There is little reason to believe that early detection of metastatic disease as a result of monitoring tumor markers would result in an
improvement in either survival or quality of life; the routine use of tumor markers in patients who have completed breast cancer therapy is generally not recommended
and can be particularly problematic. 699 An elevated marker may be the first sign of an impending recurrence, but a thorough search for metastatic disease may be
negative even in the presence of an elevated marker. 700 There is no treatment that has proven to be of benefit to patients with elevated tumor markers who have no
evidence of disease, and such situations are almost always anxiety provoking for patients. Early intervention in asymptomatic patients with metastatic breast cancer
has not been demonstrated to improve clinical outcome. For this reason, the identification of metastatic disease in an asymptomatic patient could theoretically lead to
the initiation of toxic therapy that could have a negative effect on a patient's quality of life and, at the same time, not improve her overall survival. 700
The American Society of Clinical Oncology has published evidence-based recommendations for follow-up care after a diagnosis of breast cancer. 701 A physical
examination and history (emphasizing symptoms that could be due to metastatic disease) are recommended every 3 to 6 months for the first 3 years after diagnosis
and every 6 to 12 months for the subsequent 2 years. Even for patients who are 5 or more years postdiagnosis, annual follow-up is recommended. Women should be
advised to do breast self-examinations on a monthly basis and to have annual mammography and gynecologic examinations. Routine laboratory testing (including
tumor markers) and radiologic studies are not recommended. Patients with signs or symptoms of recurrent disease should be rigorously evaluated. These
recommendations have been issued in the context of the presently available therapies for patients with recurrent breast cancer. If treatments become available in the
years ahead that can prolong the lives of women diagnosed with asymptomatic, low-volume, metastatic disease, recommendations for follow-up care will need to be
altered.

MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS WITH METASTATIC BREAST CANCER
The management of patients with metastatic breast cancer is a topic familiar to most medical oncologists. Although the majority of women diagnosed with breast
cancer today will never experience a systemic recurrence, approximately 41,000 women in the United States will die of metastatic breast cancer in 2000. 1 The median
survival for women with metastatic breast cancer is in the range of 2 to 3 years, but there is great variability. Indeed, there are even a small number of patients with
metastatic disease who will receive a course of chemotherapy and remain relapse-free for a decade or longer ( Fig. 37.2-6).702

FIGURE 37.2-6. Overall survival curves of 1544 patients (excluding 37 patients with insufficient information to determine response status) with metastatic breast
cancer receiving front-line chemotherapy according to response to therapy. Deaths from any cause were included. CR, complete response; MR, minimal response;
NC, no change; PD, progressive disease; PR, partial response.

The heterogeneity of patients with metastatic breast cancer must be emphasized. Rarely, patients with metastatic breast cancer succumb to their disease within
weeks of a diagnosis; others live with the disease for many years. Many patients have metastatic involvement that is confined to bone or soft tissue, while others have
predominantly visceral disease. CNS involvement is relatively unusual as a presenting sign or symptom of metastatic disease. 703 It is important, both in the approach
to individual patients and in considering clinical trial results, to have an understanding of the variability of metastatic breast cancer. Table 37.2-29 outlines the clinical
and laboratory characteristics of patients with metastatic breast cancer who have an indolent versus aggressive clinical course. No single factor explains the
heterogeneity that is seen clinically. It is uncertain to what extent the administration of prior adjuvant therapy affects a patient's prognosis in the setting of advanced
disease. There are reports of patients responding to chemotherapy in the metastatic setting even after receiving the identical therapy in the adjuvant setting. 704 On the
other hand, a patient who develops an early recurrence following treatment with an effective adjuvant regimen (i.e., CA followed by paclitaxel followed by tamoxifen)
almost certainly has a relatively poor outlook in the metastatic setting.

TABLE 37.2-29. Factors That Affect Prognosis in Patients with Metastatic Breast Cancer

GOALS OF THERAPY IN PATIENTS WITH METASTATIC BREAST CANCER
The two primary goals in the treatment of patients with metastatic breast cancer are (1) improvement or maintenance of quality of life and (2) prolongation of survival.
The measurement of response rates in either clinical trials or clinical practice is useful only to the extent that response is a surrogate for survival, quality of life, or
both. Maintenance of quality of life is achieved by controlling disease-related symptoms, minimizing toxicity from treatment, and limiting the intrusion of the patient's
disease and treatment on her life. Historically, it has been difficult to demonstrate that treatment prolongs survival, but there has been an assumption on the part of
many medical oncologists that treatment of metastatic breast cancer extends survival. More recently, several trials have demonstrated that more effective therapy has
been able to prolong survival in women with metastatic breast cancer. These trials have included studies of hormonal agents, chemotherapeutic agents, and
combinations of chemotherapy and Herceptin. 666,667,705,706 While the median prolongation in survival has been a matter of months, these trials have demonstrated an
important principle (i.e., more effective treatment of metastatic breast cancer can extend the lives of our patients). In selecting a treatment program, close attention
must be paid to the patient's symptoms, the pace of her disease, and her preferences and ability to tolerate the therapy.

EVALUATION OF PATIENTS WITH SUSPECTED METASTATIC BREAST CANCER
All patients who are thought to have metastatic breast cancer should undergo a careful physical examination and a thorough history. Historically, it was considered
mandatory to biopsy a first site of metastatic disease to confirm the diagnosis. In the case of patients with chest wall or lymph node involvement, pleural effusions, or
other easily assessable disease, obtaining biopsy or cytologic proof of metastatic disease can be accomplished with minimal difficulty. If a more complicated
procedure is needed, which could place the patient at greater discomfort or risk, physician judgment must be exercised. In the patient with a history of breast cancer
who has unequivocal radiologic evidence of advanced breast cancer, a biopsy can often be deferred. If there is any question as to whether the patient has cancer or
any suspicion that the patient may have a second primary (i.e., widespread pure lytic bone lesions and anemia suggestive of multiple myeloma) that would require
alternative treatment, a biopsy is essential. In the case of a woman with a history of breast cancer who presents with a solitary pulmonary nodule, a resection of the
lesion is usually required since a high percentage of these lesions may be primary lung cancers. 707 A biopsy to establish metastatic disease provides an opportunity to
reassess the hormone receptor status of the tumor. While few tumors evolve from ER negative to ER positive, more frequently there can be loss of hormone receptors
over time.624 With the availability of Herceptin, the result of a HER-2/ neu assay is often important in making treatment decisions, although this can often be assessed
from specimens of the primary tumor.
Recommendations for the laboratory and radiographic evaluation of patients with newly diagnosed metastatic breast cancer have been established by the National
Cancer Center Network.120 Routine blood work consisting of complete blood counts and liver function tests are recommended. In addition, chest radiographs and bone
scans are recommended. The decision to proceed with other radiographic studies can be based on symptoms, although many physicians obtain a baseline
assessment of liver involvement with a CT scan or MRI, particularly if the presence of liver metastases would change treatment. Since intracranial involvement is
extremely rare in newly diagnosed patients in the absence of CNS symptoms, a CT or MRI of the brain is not usually recommended for a woman with a new diagnosis
in the absence of symptoms.700 The use of tumor markers in the management of patients with breast cancer remains controversial. 708 It is reasonable to obtain a
carcinoembryonic antigen and CA 27-29 level, looking for an elevation in either of these proteins. If elevated, they can be followed to determine if rising or falling
levels correlate with the patient's disease status. Caution should be used in changing a treatment regimen based on tumor makers alone. If tumor makers are negative
at the time of diagnosis, they can be checked again when the patient has disease progression, as they are more commonly elevated in patients with more extensive
disease.
LOCAL VERSUS SYSTEMIC THERAPY
Patients with a chest wall recurrence, a single site of bone involvement, pleural disease, or other localized sites can often be managed with local therapy alone. In
such situations, systemic therapy may be delayed until there is evidence of disease progression. There is a small group of patients with isolated metastatic disease
who remain disease-free for an extended period of time after local therapy to the involved site. This situation is best exemplified by the patient who presents with an
isolated chest wall recurrence. Although patients with isolated chest wall recurrence should receive definitive local treatment, local therapy is not mandatory in
minimally symptomatic patients who present with isolated sites of distant disease (i.e., a single bone lesion). As previously mentioned, isolated pulmonary nodules
generally should be resected because these often represent a second primary. There are reports of resection of hepatic metastases, 709 but this approach cannot be
recommended as standard practice.
In certain situations, patients treated with local therapy for an isolated recurrence may also be considered for adjuvant systemic therapy. A phase II trial of fluorouracil,
Adriamycin, and cyclophosphamide chemotherapy for patients with stage IV but no evidence of disease suggested an improvement in relapse-free survival in
comparison with historic controls. It should be noted, however, that the majority of these patients had not received prior adjuvant chemotherapy. 710 A retrospective
review of 96 patients with isolated recurrence demonstrated an improvement in disease-free survival and overall survival for those patients who received some form of
systemic therapy although the majority received hormonal therapy as opposed to chemotherapy. 711 Other investigators have reported less promising results with the
use of chemotherapy in this setting. 464 In such situations, the toxicity of a course of chemotherapy must be balanced against the largely theoretical benefits. The use
of chemotherapy in the patient with stage IV but no evidence of disease has its greatest appeal in the patient with a hormone receptor–negative tumor who has never
received cytotoxic chemotherapy, but the benefits in this setting remain uncertain. In contrast, it is reasonable to have a lower threshold to prescribe a hormonal
therapy in the patient with positive hormone receptors, with the hope that treatment will delay the time to progression. A randomized trial in 167 ER-positive patients
with locoregional recurrence demonstrated an improvement in median disease-free survival (26 vs. 82 months) with the addition of tamoxifen to locoregional
treatment.479 This difference was largely related to a reduction in local recurrence; there was no difference in 5-year overall survival. The role of second-line hormonal
therapy in women who develop a breast recurrence on tamoxifen is unknown.
In patients with widespread disease, local therapy is often used to provide palliation for specific symptoms. Radiation to bone lesions, CNS disease, or, less
commonly, soft tissue disease, can be effective in controlling disease. At times, local therapy is administered in conjunction with systemic therapy, although one must
be careful about the potential increase in toxicity that may be seen with the concurrent administration of chemotherapy and radiation. Decisions about the use of local
therapy in the patient with advanced disease can be complex. Such decisions should be guided by the patient's symptoms or impending symptoms, the extent to
which those symptoms can be relieved by supportive care, and the chance that a change in systemic therapy will provide effective palliation for the local disease.
Administration and Choice of Systemic Therapy
The vast majority of patients with metastatic breast cancer receive some form of systemic therapy. The initial question is whether to consider hormonal therapy or
chemotherapy. Because of the limited toxicity with most hormonal therapies, patients who have hormone receptor–positive tumors and a limited to moderate disease
burden should generally receive hormonal therapy. Patients with both estrogen and progesterone receptor positivity are more likely to respond to hormonal therapy
than are those with ER-positive/PR-negative or ER-negative/PR-positive tumors. 624 A trial of hormonal therapy may be justified even in the presence of negative
hormone receptors since a small number of patients with ER-negative/PR-negative tumors respond to a hormonal intervention. 712 The key issues that the clinician
must consider in proceeding with initial hormonal therapy are whether or not the patient is likely to respond to the treatment and whether the patient would be
adversely affected if she did not respond to treatment and was started on chemotherapy 2 to 3 months later. Visceral disease, particularly low-volume and
asymptomatic disease, is not a contraindication to the use of hormonal therapy; however, the patient with extensive visceral disease is probably better served by
chemotherapy. If a patient with a hormone receptor–positive cancer is initially treated with chemotherapy, the clinician should consider returning to hormonal therapy
at some point in the future.
Table 37.2-30 lists the commercially available hormonal therapies for premenopausal and postmenopausal women. In general, there is little evidence that one
hormonal therapy is substantially more effective than another. As a result, the ease of administration and tolerability usually dictates the choice of treatment.

TABLE 37.2-30. Hormonal Therapy for Women with Metastatic Breast Cancer

In premenopausal women who have never received hormonal therapy, tamoxifen is generally the treatment of choice. A small randomized trial has suggested that
tamoxifen and ovarian ablation are equivalent in efficacy. 713 In patients who respond to tamoxifen, the duration of response is often in excess of a year and may

extend for several years in a minority of patients. 714 Medical or surgical ovarian ablation is usually the second-line hormonal therapy of choice in women who are
premenopausal, particularly those who have responded to tamoxifen. European trials have evaluated the use of a combination of ovarian ablation and tamoxifen in
patients with metastatic breast cancer. In some studies, there has been a suggestion of an improved overall response rate, 715,716 but it remains unclear if this
approach is superior to sequential therapy. Aromatase inhibitors are not active in premenopausal women because of the high levels of circulating estrogen from the
ovaries. Aromatase inhibitors can be used in conjunction with ovarian ablation, although there is little published information about this combination. Megestrol acetate
remains the usual third-line hormonal therapy. The subgroup of premenopausal women with hormone receptor–positive tumors can, at times, have an extended
survival in the metastatic setting. Faulkson et al. have reported a median survival of approximately 5 years in a group of hormone receptor–positive, premenopausal
women who were initially treated with chemotherapy plus oophorectomy. 717 If anything, many clinicians may tend to undervalue the benefits of hormonal therapy in
premenopausal women with positive hormone receptor status.
In postmenopausal women, tamoxifen remains the usual first-line therapy. In the metastatic setting, toremifene is an acceptable alternative based on the equivalence
demonstrated between the two agents in randomized trials. 625 Since many women with metastatic breast cancer have either developed disease progression on
tamoxifen or have had a recent course of adjuvant tamoxifen, there are fewer and fewer patients receiving antiestrogens when they present with metastatic disease.
The aromatase inhibitors (i.e., anastrozole, letrozole, and exemestane) have all been demonstrated in randomized clinical trials to be equivalent or superior to
megestrol acetate.718,719 Exemestane, a steroidal aromatase inhibitor that irreversibly inhibits aromatase activity, has been shown to have a survival advantage in
comparison with Megace.719 All three agents are generally well tolerated and are not associated with the bothersome weight gain that is seen with Megace. 718 It is
unknown, at this time, if one aromatase inhibitor is superior to another. A randomized trial demonstrated the equivalence of anastrozole (Arimidex) and tamoxifen in
patients who had had no prior hormonal therapy, 720 making it reasonable to consider these agents as first-line therapy even in patients who have never received
tamoxifen. Objective response rates to the aromatase inhibitors have been in the 10% to 20% range, but a substantial number of patients in these trials have had
disease stabilization for 6 months or longer. 718,719,721 Megestrol acetate remains a third-line therapy, and patients rarely are treated with either androgens or high-dose
estrogen as fourth- and fifth-line therapy.
In both premenopausal and postmenopausal women, occasional responses can be seen with withdrawal of either high-dose estrogen (now rarely used), tamoxifen, or
progestins.722,723 Withdrawal responses are relatively rare and are more commonly seen when a patient has had a prior response to the hormonal manipulation. The
possibility of withdrawing tamoxifen (without additional therapy) can be considered in the patient with low-volume, indolent, ER-positive disease who has either been
on adjuvant tamoxifen for several years or has had a documented response in the metastatic setting.
Assessing the response of patients to hormonal therapy can be complex. Many patients treated with hormonal therapy have bone-only disease, making response
assessment complex. In addition, it can take up to several months to see a response in some patients, whereas others have more rapid disease regressions. A flare
phenomenon with worsening bone pain, increasing soft tissue lesions, hypercalcemia, or all three is seen in a small percentage of patients who are started on
hormonal therapy. 724,725 Flares have been seen with high-dose estrogen, tamoxifen, progestins, and androgens and occur within the first days to weeks of treatment. A
portion of patients who have a flare go on to respond to endocrine therapy. With either hormonal therapy or chemotherapy, there can be a rise in tumor marker levels,
alkaline phosphatase, or both early in the course of therapy, with a subsequent decline. Clinicians should not continue hormonal therapy in patients with rapid or
unequivocal evidence of disease progression. In the minimally symptomatic patient, it is often prudent to continue therapy for several months if there is an uncertainty
concerning the response to treatment. In these situations, it is important to explain to patients that a change in therapy in the near future may be necessary, but that
there is little to be lost by continuing the hormonal approach with close monitoring of disease status.
A question that often arises is how many hormonal regimens to administer before moving on to chemotherapy. In a patient who has had a prior response to (or
extended disease stabilization with) hormonal therapy, there is a reasonable chance of observing a response with another hormonal approach. There are patients
who respond to a second hormonal therapy, even if their disease progressed through a first agent. 721 In making a clinical decision as to whether to consider a second,
third, or even fourth hormonal approach, the clinician needs to weigh the therapeutic index of another hormonal agent versus that of chemotherapy. The chance of
observing a response with each successive hormonal regimen decreases. However, if the patient continues to have relatively indolent disease and will not be harmed
by delaying therapy that may have a higher chance of producing an objective response (i.e., chemotherapy), it is reasonable to try another hormonal therapy, even if
the likelihood of obtaining a response is small. For that matter, it is important to reconsider the potential advantages of another trial of hormonal therapy, even in a
patient who has received intervening chemotherapy.
Resistance to hormonal therapies ultimately develops in virtually all patients with advanced disease. The mechanisms responsible for resistance to hormonal therapy
are not fully understood 726 and are currently being investigated. Identifying new hormonal agents, such as pure antiestrogens, new selective ER modulators, and
antiprogestins, is a priority. Ongoing studies are also addressing the potential of using hormonal therapies with other agents, such as differentiating compounds, to
enhance disease control.
CYTOTOXIC CHEMOTHERAPY FOR METASTATIC BREAST CANCER
Although hormonal therapy is usually the treatment of choice for patients with hormone receptor–positive cancer, almost all patients eventually develop
hormone-refractory disease, and many patients with metastatic breast cancer have negative hormone receptor status. For these patients, chemotherapy is the
treatment of choice, with the goal of ongoing symptom control and modest prolongation of survival. The use of chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer has evolved
since 1990. Multiple new agents are now available, 727 many of which have a favorable toxicity profile. Clinical trials have addressed a variety of fundamental issues
related to the administration of chemotherapy to patients with metastatic breast cancer, such as the value of single agents versus combination therapy and the
appropriate duration of therapy.
Table 37.2-31 lists the agents commercially available for patients with advanced breast cancer. While some of these have official Food and Drug Administration
approval for the treatment of breast cancer, others have simply become part of the standard armamentarium as a result of general clinical acceptance. There is no
rigid order in which agents or regimens should be administered. CMF and CAF were long considered the standard of care for initial chemotherapy treatment of
advanced disease, but the development of the taxanes and a variety of other agents has given physicians and patients far greater flexibility in making treatment
decisions. The taxanes and doxorubicin are usually considered the most active agents for the treatment of advanced disease, but the activity of any agent is most
dependent on the characteristics of the patient population, particularly the extent of prior therapy. There are few compelling data that one regimen is markedly
superior to another or promotes improved long-term survival. 728 The precise order in which treatments are administered is unlikely to affect overall survival. The
CALGB has demonstrated that initial treatment with an investigational agent (in patients who did not have visceral crisis) does not compromise either overall survival
or response to a subsequent doxorubicin-based regimen. 729 The availability of new agents, such as the taxanes, has improved overall survival, 666,667 but the order in
which treatments are delivered (i.e., taxane as first-line vs. second-line therapy) is unlikely to have a major effect on long-term outcome.

TABLE 37.2-31. Active Chemotherapeutic Agents in the Treatment of Metastatic Breast Cancer

In patients who have received no prior chemotherapy in the metastatic setting, objective response rates of 25% to 55% have been seen in multicenter randomized
trials.667,730,731 and 732 Higher response rates are seen in single-institution, phase II trials. 733,734 It is likely that the percentage of patients who derive some palliative

benefit from chemotherapy is higher than the reported response rates in multicenter trials. The median duration of response with most first-line chemotherapy
regimens is in the range of 6 to 12 months, with a shorter duration of response seen in patients who are treated in the second- and third-line setting.
COMBINATION VERSUS SINGLE-AGENT CHEMOTHERAPY
For several decades, the use of combination chemotherapy was considered the standard of care. More recently, several trials have compared combination therapy
with the use of single agents in the treatment of advanced breast cancer. 666,667,730,735 In a large Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group trial, Sledge and colleagues
randomized patients to one of three arms: single-agent Adriamycin, single-agent paclitaxel, or a combination of the two. Patients initially randomized to the
single-agent arms were crossed over to the alternate agent at the time of progression. Although there was a statistically significant improvement in response rate and
time to progression on the combination arm, there was no difference in either survival or quality of life. 730,736 If one considers the secondary responses with the
crossover therapy, there is even less reason to view combination therapy as a superior approach. A Finnish trial that randomized patients to combination or
single-agent therapy in both the first- and second-line setting also failed to show any appreciable difference in disease outcomes. 735 A major advantage of
single-agent therapy is the ability to assess whether a given agent is of benefit to the patient. When a patient responds to combination therapy, it is never clear
whether she is benefiting from a single drug in the regimen or from all of the agents. While the administration of combination therapy remains a common practice, it is
most appropriate in highly symptomatic patients in whom the higher response rate seen with combination therapy may be worth the added toxicity. Numerous trials
have also compared the use of chemotherapy alone versus the combination of chemotherapy and hormonal agents. 737,738 In general, these trials have demonstrated
either higher response rates, longer time to progression, or both with the combination treatment, as well as a benefit in terms of survival.
DURATION OF CHEMOTHERAPY
Several trials have examined how long chemotherapy should be continued in patients with stable or responding disease. Muss and colleagues treated 250 patients
with initial CAF chemotherapy and randomized almost 150 women with stable or responsive disease to maintenance chemotherapy or observation. Although there
was a 6-month prolongation in time to disease progression for women on maintenance therapy, there was no difference in overall survival. 739 Findings from other
investigators have been quite similar. 740 Of note, a very brief course of treatment may not only shorten time to progression, but it may also compromise quality of
life.741 Coates and colleagues randomized Australian patients to continuous chemotherapy versus intermittent therapy (three cycles only) with reinstitution of treatment
at the time of disease progression. 741 The two groups had an equivalent overall survival, but the intermittent group had a lower response rate, shorter time to
progression, and inferior quality of life. Since the maximal response to chemotherapy often occurs after approximately 4 to 6 months of treatment, one interpretation of
this trial is that the failure to treat patients until they achieved a maximal response to therapy perhaps compromised quality of life.
The question of how long to continue chemotherapy is frequently raised in discussions with patients. Assuming a patient has had 4 to 6 months of chemotherapy and
has stable or responsive disease, there is no evidence that continuing treatment will have an effect on her overall survival. When a patient experiences progression of
disease, treatment (at times with the same regimen) can always be resumed. In the patient who was initially symptomatic, has had excellent palliation of her
symptoms, and has minimal toxicity with treatment, chemotherapy can be continued with the goal of delaying disease progression.
DOSE AND SCHEDULE OF CHEMOTHERAPY
A large number of trials have addressed questions that relate to either the dose or schedule of chemotherapy. In general, higher response rates have been seen with
regimens that are in the standard-dose range than those in which the doses are reduced substantially. Low-dose CMF has been found to be inferior to standard-dose
therapy (600 mg/m2; 40 mg/m2; 600 mg/m2).742 Lower responses rates or more rapid disease progression have been demonstrated with other agents when doses have
been reduced below the usually accepted range. 743,744 The clinician must balance the potential benefits and toxicities of different dose levels. To date, there is little
convincing evidence to show that escalating doses of chemotherapy to levels that require growth factor support has a substantial effect on disease outcome. In
addition, some of these regimens result in a marked increase in toxicity. 745
Questions exist about the optimal schedule for many cytotoxic agents. By changing the schedule of many agents, there is the suggestion that both efficacy and toxicity
can be altered. The NSABP compared 3-hour versus 24-hour paclitaxel administration in patients with locally advanced or metastatic disease. 746 Although a
significantly higher response rate was observed with the longer infusion (54% vs. 44%), there was no difference in survival, and the longer infusion was much more
inconvenient. Initial reports of weekly taxanes 734,747 have been encouraging, and these dose-dense schedules are being compared with the standard every 3 week
regimens in randomized trials of interest. A European trial compared classical CMF (day 1 and 8 with oral cyclophosphamide) with an every 3 week regimen. The
classical regimen, which is more dose dense, resulted in a higher response rate and an improvement in overall survival. 748 With the availability of oral fluorouracil
agents749 and liposomally encapsulated agents, such as doxorubicin (Doxil), 750 it is possible to increase the duration of exposure to cytotoxic agents without
committing patients to ambulatory infusion pumps or frequent clinic visits.
HIGH-DOSE CHEMOTHERAPY WITH HEMATOPOIETIC SUPPORT
Beginning in the mid-1980s, trials were initiated evaluating the role of high-dose chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow support. These studies were based on
preclinical models and the hope that dose escalation would result in prolongation of survival. 751 Multiple phase I and II trials in women with metastatic breast cancer
suggested that high-dose chemotherapy resulted in high response rates, generally in excess of 70%. In addition, a small proportion of patients (approximately 10% to
15%) remained free of disease progression for several years following therapy. 752,753 and 754 In general, patients with a low disease burden, long disease-free interval,
and absence of visceral involvement appeared to have the most favorable outcome after high-dose therapy. 755,756 and 757 Based on preliminary trials, thousands of
women in the United States underwent treatment with high-dose chemotherapy throughout the late 1980s and 1990s.
More recently, the mature results of a randomized trial comparing high-dose chemotherapy with prolonged conventional chemotherapy have been published.
Stadtmauer and colleagues enrolled 553 women with metastatic breast cancer onto a trial designed to determine if high-dose chemotherapy would improve disease
outcomes.758 Of the original cohort, 310 women had a response to initial chemotherapy, and 199 of these women were ultimately randomized to receive either
high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell support versus prolonged treatment with CMF. With a median follow-up of 37 months, there was no evidence that high-dose
therapy improved either time to progression or overall survival. Subgroup analyses looking at demographic variables, response (complete vs. partial response) to
induction treatment, and disease characteristics failed to identify a population of patients that had a better outcome with high-dose therapy than with CMF. In another
study, Berry et al. retrospectively compared the outcomes of 560 women registered with the Autologous Bone Marrow Transplant Registry with 657 patients who
participated in a series of CALGB trials using conventional dose chemotherapy. 759 All patients included in the analysis were 60 years of age or younger and had
chemotherapy-sensitive disease. In a multivariate model, there was no difference in survival between the two groups of patients. The investigators could not identify
any patient subgroup who had a better outcome with high-dose therapy. Thus, despite the initial enthusiasm for high-dose chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer,
this approach appears unlikely to have a substantial effect on the natural history of the disease. 760
TRASTUZUMAB (HERCEPTIN)
The development of Herceptin has been a major advance in the treatment of HER-2/ neu–positive metastatic breast cancer. As previously noted, approximately 25% to
30% of all breast cancers overexpress HER-2/neu, a 185-kD transmembrane glycoprotein receptor. These tumors have a more aggressive natural history, a higher
risk of recurrence, a higher frequency of visceral disease at first recurrence, and a lower likelihood of ER positivity. Herceptin, a humanized recombinant
anti–HER-2/neu antibody, has been evaluated in a series of clinical trials as both a single agent and in combination with chemotherapy.
In a multinational trial, women with HER-2/neu–overexpressing metastatic breast cancer were randomized to receive chemotherapy alone or chemotherapy plus
Herceptin.705,761 Patients who had not received an anthracycline in the adjuvant setting were randomized to AC with or without Herceptin. Those patients who had
received an adjuvant anthracycline-containing regimen received paclitaxel with or without Herceptin. Chemotherapy was continued in stable or responding patients for
a minimum of six cycles. In the absence of disease progression, Herceptin was administered weekly at a dose of 2 mg/kg for 1 year or longer. Table 37.2-32
summarizes the results of the trial.

TABLE 37.2-32. Benefit of Herceptin When Added to Chemotherapy

The benefit of Herceptin was seen both in patients who received AC and in those who received paclitaxel. In addition, the survival benefit was noted despite the fact
that approximately two-thirds of the women randomized to chemotherapy alone ultimately received Herceptin on an open-label extension protocol at the time of
disease progression. While Herceptin was generally well tolerated, there was a 19% incidence of grade III or IV cardiac dysfunction on the AC plus Herceptin arm;
with the combination of Herceptin and paclitaxel, the frequency of serious cardiac toxicity was only 4%. 705
In a large single-agent trial, Cobleigh and colleagues treated 222 women with refractory metastatic breast cancer (one or two prior chemotherapy regimens). 762 As a
single agent, Herceptin was well tolerated. Five percent of the study population developed cardiac dysfunction; however, all these patients had either received prior
anthracyclines or had preexisting cardiac disease. The overall response rate in this group of pretreated patients was 15%, with a median duration of response of 9.1
months. In another single-agent trial, Vogel et al. reported a response rate of 25% in 112 women with HER-2/ neu–overexpressing metastatic breast cancer.763
Although none of these patients had received chemotherapy in the metastatic setting, over one-half had received prior doxorubicin in the adjuvant setting. Taken
together, these two trials clearly demonstrate the activity of Herceptin administered as a single agent.
There is compelling evidence to consider the use of Herceptin in the initial management of women with HER-2/ neu–positive, hormone-refractory metastatic breast
cancer; however, there are a multitude of unanswered questions about the use of Herceptin in clinical practice. It is unknown how long Herceptin should be
administered, whether it should be continued with second-line chemotherapy after disease progression, or if single-agent therapy (followed by chemotherapy) is better
or worse than combination treatment. Many of these questions will be answered through future clinical trials; others will depend on gaining a fuller understanding of
the complex mechanism of action of Herceptin and its probable role in sensitizing breast cancer to the effects of chemotherapy. It is unlikely that there is any role for
Herceptin in patients whose tumors do not overexpress HER-2/ neu. Discussions continue regarding the optimal methods to assess HER-2/ neu overexpression.
Additional trials are needed to test combinations of Herceptin with other cytotoxic agents. Promising preliminary reports have appeared using combinations of
Herceptin plus vinorelbine, 764 Herceptin plus docetaxel, 765 and Herceptin plus weekly paclitaxel. 766 Finally, the role of Herceptin in both the neoadjuvant and adjuvant
setting will be the focus of a number of clinical trials in the years ahead.
QUALITY OF LIFE AND SUPPORTIVE CARE ISSUES
A growing emphasis has been placed on quality-of-life issues in women with metastatic breast cancer. This interest has been reflected by an increasing effort to
measure quality of life in clinical trials. 736,741,767,768 Although only a small number of randomized trials in women with metastatic breast cancer have demonstrated
differences in quality of life, 741,769 this research has likely led to a greater awareness of quality-of-life issues in clinical practice.
Many of the newer chemotherapy and hormonal agents have fewer side effects, or at least a more manageable side-effect profile than agents that were available a
decade ago. In many ways, the emphasis on single-agent therapy can be viewed as a step forward from a quality-of-life standpoint. There is also an ongoing effort to
make breast cancer treatment more convenient for patients. Virtually all therapy is administered in the outpatient setting, and there is a growing interest in the
development of oral chemotherapeutic agents. Patient surveys have documented a strong preference for oral treatment, but only if the oral therapy can be
administered without compromising efficacy. 770,771
With the heightened interest in quality-of-life issues, there has also been a greater emphasis on supportive care measures. The use of bisphosphonates in women
with lytic bone lesions has become a standard of practice. 772 Treatment with bisphosphonates does not improve survival, but does have an important effect on the
frequency of bone-related complications such as pain, the need for palliative radiation, and hypercalcemia. There is a growing awareness of fatigue, its relationship
with anemia, and the potential benefits of treatment with erythropoietin. 773 Nausea and vomiting, while still a problem with many chemotherapy regimens, are far better
controlled with the judicious use of some of the newer antiemetic agents. 774 While the availability of these newer supportive care measures represents a major
advance in the care of women with breast cancer, the clinician needs to weigh carefully the advantages and disadvantages of each of these supportive care
interventions.
NEW TREATMENT APPROACHES
It is difficult to know which of the therapies currently in development will have a future role in the treatment of women with breast cancer. There is renewed interest in
immune-based treatments, including vaccines, monoclonal antibodies, and approaches using dendritic cells. Ongoing trials are evaluating a range of novel
therapeutics, including differentiating agents and angiogenesis inhibitors. As our basic understanding of breast cancer grows, it is likely that there will be a whole new
generation of targeted molecular therapies, allowing clinicians to increase the efficacy and decrease the toxicity of treatment for women with breast cancer.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Greenlee RT, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics, 2000. CA Cancer J Clin 2000;50:7.
2. Ries LAG, Kosary CL, Hankey BF, et al., eds. SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 19731996. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, 1999.
3. Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
4. Madigan M, Ziegler R, Benichon C, et al. Proportion of breast cancer cases in the United States explained by well established risk factors. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1681.
5. Phillips KA, Glendon G, Knight J. Putting the risk of breast cancer in perspective. N Engl J Med 1999;340:141.
6. Claus EB, Schildkraut JM, Thompson WE, Risch NJ. The genetic attributable risk of breast and ovarian cancer. Cancer 1996;77:2318.
7. Lerman C, Lustbader E, Rimer B, et al. Effects of individualized breast cancer risk counseling: a randomized trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:286.
8. Bluman LG, Rimer BK, Berry DA, et al. Attitudes, knowledge and risk perceptions of women with breast and/or ovarian cancer considering testing for BRCA1 and BRCA2. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:1040.
9. Ottman R, King M, Pike M, et al. Practical guide to estimating risk in familial breast cancer. Lancet 1983;2:556.
10. Anderson D. Genetic study of breast cancer: identification of a high risk group. Cancer 1974;34:1090.
11. Claus EG, Risch N, Thompson WD. Autosomal dominant inheritance of early-onset breast cancer: implications for risk prediction. Cancer 1994;73:643.
12. Gail MH, Brinton LA, Byar DP, et al. Projecting individualized probabilities of developing breast cancer for white females who are being examined annually. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:1879.
13. Miki Y, Swensen J, Shattuck-Eidens D, et al. A strong candidate for the breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene BRCA1. Science 1994;266:66.
14. Wooster R, Neuhausen SL, Mangion J, et al. Localization of a breast cancer susceptibility gene, BRCA2, to chromosome 13q12-13. Science 1994;265:2088.
15. Frank TS, Manley SA, Olopade OI, et al. Sequence analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2: correlation of mutations with family history and ovarian cancer risk. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1969.
16. Easton DF, Steele L, Fields P, et al. Cancer risks in two large breast cancer families linked to BRCA2 on chromosome 13q 12-13. Am J Hum Genet 1997;61:120.
17. Easton DF, Ford D, Bishop T, and the Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium. Breast and ovarian cancer incidence in BRCA1-mutation carriers. Am J Hum Genet 1995;56:265.
18. Berry DA, Parmigiani G, Sanchez J, et al. Probability of carrying a mutation of breast-ovarian cancer gene BRCA1 based on family history. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:227.
19. Couch FJ, DeShano ML, Blackwood MA, et al. BRCA1 mutations in women attending clinics that evaluate the risk of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1416.
20. Hall JM, Lee MK, Newman B, et al. Linkage of early-onset familial breast cancer to chromosome 17q21. Science 1990;250:1684.
21. Ford D, Easton D, Bishop T, et al. Risks of cancer in BRCA1 mutation carriers. Lancet 1994;343:692.
22. Struewing JP, Hartge P, Wacholder S, et al. The risk of cancer associated with specific mutations of BRCA1 and BRCA2 among Ashkenazi Jews. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1401.
23. Arason A, Barkardottir RB, Elgisson V. Linkage analysis of chromosome 17q markers and breast-ovarian cancer in Icelandic families, and possible relationship to prostatic cancer. Am J Hum
Genet 1993;52:711.
24. Phelan CM, Lancaster JM, Tonin P, et al. Mutation analysis of the BRCA2 gene in 49 site-specific breast cancer families. Nat Genet 1996;13:120.
25. Wooster R, Bignell G, Lancaster J. Identification of the breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA2. Nature 1995;378:789.
26. Ford D, Easton DF, Peto J. Estimates of the gene frequency of BRCA1 and its contribution to breast and ovarian cancer incidence. Am J Hum Genet 1995;57:1457.

27. Fitzgerald MG, MacDonald DJ, Krainer M, et al. Germ-line BRCA1 mutations in Jewish and non-Jewish women with early-onset breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1996;334:143.
28. Jernstrom H, Lerman C, Ghadirian P, et al. Pregnancy and risk of early breast cancer in carriers of BRCA1 and BRCA2. Lancet 1999;354:1846.
29. Rebbeck TR, Levin AM, Eisen A, et al. Breast cancer risk after bilateral prophylactic oophorectomy in BRCA1 mutation carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1475.
30. Lee JS, Wacholder S, Struewing J, et al. Survival after breast cancer in Ashkenazi Jewish BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;92:259.
31. Robson M, Gilewski T, Haas B, et al. BRCA-associated breast cancer in young women. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1642.
32. Noguchi S, Kasugai T, Miki Y, et al. Clinicopathologic analysis of BRCA1 or BRCA2 associated hereditary breast carcinoma in Japanese women. Cancer 1999;85:2200.
33. Malkin D, Li F, Strong L, et al. Germ line p53 mutations in a familial syndrome of breast cancer, sarcomas, and other neoplasms. Science 1990;250:1233.
34. Brownstein M, Wolf M, Bikowski J. Cowden's disease: a cutaneous marker of breast cancer. Cancer 1978;41:2393.
35. Hall N, Williams M, Murday V, et al. Muir-Torre syndrome: a variant of the cancer family syndrome. J Med Genet 1994;31:627.
36. Swift M, Reitnauer P, Morrell D, et al. Breast and other cancers in families with ataxia-telangiectasia. N Engl J Med 1987;316:1289.
37. Rosner B, Colditz G. Nurses' Health Study. Log-incidence model of breast cancer incidence. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:359.
38. Huang Z, Hankinson SE, Colditz GA, et al. Dual effects of weight and weight gain on breast cancer risk. JAMA 1997;278:1407.
39. Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer. Breast cancer and hormone replacement therapy: collaborative reanalysis of data from 51 epidemiological studies of 52,705 women
with breast cancer and 108,411 women without breast cancer. Lancet 1997;350:1047.
40. Hankinson SE, Willett WC, Manson JE, et al. Plasma sex steroid hormone levels and risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1292.
41. Cauley JA, Lucas FL, Kuller LH, et al. Elevated serum estradiol and testosterone concentrations are associated with a high risk for breast cancer. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:270.
42. Trichopoulos D. Hypothesis: does breast cancer originate in utero? Lancet 1990;335:939.
43. Ekbom A, Hsieh C, Lipworth L, et al. Intrauterine environment and breast cancer risk in women: a population-based study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:71.
44. Trichopoulos D, MacMahon B, Cole P. Menopause and breast cancer risk. J Natl Cancer Inst 1972;48:605.
45. Helzlsouer KJ. Epidemiology, prevention, and early detection of breast cancer. Curr Opin Oncol 1995;7:489.
46. Nissen-Meyer R. Primary breast cancer: the effect of primary ovarian irradiation. Ann Oncol 1991;2:343.
47. MacMahon B, Trichopoulos D, Brown J. Etiology of human breast cancer: a review. J Natl Cancer Inst 1973;50:21.
48. Kelsey JL, Gammon MD, John EM. Reproductive factors and breast cancer. Epidemiol Rev 1993;15:233.
49. MacMahon B, Trichopoulos D, Brown J. Age at menarche, urine estrogens and breast cancer risk. Int J Cancer 1982;30:427.
50. Henderson B, Ross R, Ludd H. Do regular ovulatory cycles increase breast cancer risk? Cancer 1985;45:1206.
51. MacMahon B, Trichopoulos D, Brown J. Age at menarche, probability of ovulation and breast cancer risk. Int J Cancer 1982;29:12.
52. MacMahon B, Cole P, Lin T. Age at first birth and breast cancer risk. Bull WHO 1970;43:209.
53. Trichopoulos D, Hsieh C, MacMahon B. Age at first birth and breast cancer risk. Int J Cancer 1983;31:701.
54. Russo J, Tay L, Russo I. Differentiation of the mammary gland and susceptibility to carcinogenesis. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1982;2:5.
55. Bruzzi P, Negri E, La Vecchia C. Short term increase in risk of breast cancer after full term pregnancy. BMJ 1988;47:757.
56. Rosner B, Colditz G, Willett W. Reproductive risk factors in a prospective study of breast cancer: the Nurses' Health Study. Am J Epidemiol 1994;139:819.
57. Newcomb P, Storer B, Longnecker M, et al. Lactation and a reduced risk of premenopausal breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1994;330:81.
58. Prevention of cancer in the next millennium: report of the Chemoprevention Working Group of the American Association for Cancer Research. Cancer Res 1999;59:4743.
59. Brind J, Chinchilli V, Severs W, Summy-Long J. Induced abortion as an independent risk factor for breast cancer: a comprehensive review and meta-analysis. J Epidemiol Comm Health
1996;50:481.
60. Melbye M, Wohlfahrt J, Olsen J. Induced abortion and the risk of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1997;336:81.
61. Adami H, Bergstrom R, Lund E, et al. Absence of association between reproductive variables and the risk of breast cancer in young women in Sweden and Norway. Br J Cancer 1990;62:122.
62. Newcomb P, Storer B, Longnecker M, et al. Pregnancy termination in relation to risk of breast cancer. JAMA 1996;275:283.
63. Steinberg K, Thacker S, Smith S, et al. A meta-analysis of the effect of estrogen replacement therapy on the risk of breast cancer. JAMA 1991;265:1985.
64. Sillero-Arenas M, Delgado-Rodriguez M, Rodigues-Canteras R, et al. Menopausal hormone replacement therapy and breast cancer: a meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 1992;79:286.
65. Schairer C, Lubin J, Troisi R, et al. Menopausal estrogen and estrogen-progestin replacement therapy and breast cancer risk. JAMA 2000;283:485.
66. Ross R, Paganini-Hill A, Wan P, Pike M. Effect of hormone replacement therapy on breast cancer risk: estrogen versus estrogen plus progestin. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000;16:328.
67. Salmon R, Ansquer Y, Asselain B, et al. Clinical and biological characteristics of breast cancers in post-menopausal women receiving hormone replacement therapy for menopause. Oncol Rep
1999;6:699.
68. Gapstur S, Morrow M, Sellers T. Hormone replacement therapy and risk of breast cancer with a favorable histology: results of the Iowa Women's Health Study. JAMA 1999;281:2091.
69. Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer. Breast cancer and hormonal contraceptives: collaborative reanalysis of individual data on 53,297 women with breast cancer and
100,239 women without breast cancer from 54 epidemiological studies. Lancet 1996;47:1713.
70. Hankinson S, Colditz G, Manson J, et al. A prospective study of oral contraceptive use and risk of breast cancer (Nurses' Health Study, United States). Cancer Causes Control 1997;8:65.
71. Wingo P, Lee N, Ory H, et al. Age specific differences in the relationship between oral contraceptive use and breast cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1991;78:161.
72. Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer. Breast cancer and hormonal contraceptives: further results. Contraception 1996;54(Suppl):1S.
73. McMichael A, Giles G. Cancer in migrants to Australia: extending descriptive epidemiological data. Cancer Res 1988;48:751.
74. Buell P. Changing incidence of breast cancer in Japanese-American women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1973;51:1479.
75. Kinlen L. Meat and fat consumption and cancer mortality: a study of strict religious orders in Britain. Lancet 1982;1:946.
76. Phillips R, Garfinkel L, Kuzma J. Mortality among California Seventh Day Adventists for selected cancer sites. J Natl Cancer Inst 1980;65:1097.
77. Hunter D, Spiegelman D, Adami H, et al. Cohort studies of fat intake and the risk of breast cancera pooled analysis. N Engl J Med 1996;334:356.
78. Willett W, Stampfer M, Colditz G. Dietary fat and risk of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1987;316:22.
79. Holmes M, Hunter D, Colditz G, et al. Association of dietary intake of fat and fatty acids with risk of breast cancer. JAMA 1999;281:914.
80. Michels K, Trichopoulos D, Robins J, et al. Birthweight as a risk factor for breast cancer. Lancet 1996;348:1542.
81. Hunter D, Willett W. Diet, body size, and breast cancer. Epidemiol Rev 1993;15:110.
82. Rich-Edwards J, Goldman M, Willett W, et al. Adolescent body mass index and ovulatory infertility. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;171:171.
83. Ziegler R, Hoover R, Nomura A, et al. Relative weight, weight change, height, and breast cancer risk in Asian-American women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:650.
84. Hankinson S, Willett W, Manson J, et al. Alcohol, height, and adiposity in relation to estrogen and prolactin levels in postmenopausal women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;87:1297.
85. Thune I, Brenn T, Lund E, Gaard M. Physical activity and the risk of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1269.
86. Rockhill B, Willett W, Hunter D, et al. A prospective study of recreational physical activity and breast cancer risk. Arch Intern Med 1999;159:2290.
87. Longnecker M. Alcoholic beverage consumption in relation to risk of breast cancer: meta-analysis and review. Cancer Causes Control 1994;5:73.
88. Gapstur S, Potter J, Sellers T, et al. Increased risk of breast cancer with alcohol consumption in postmenopausal women. Am J Epidemiol 1992;136:1221.
89. Zhang S, Hunter D, Hankinson S, et al. A prospective study of folate intake and the risk of breast cancer. JAMA 1999;281:1632.
90. Freudenheim J, Marshall J, Vena J, et al. Premenopausal breast cancer risk and intake of vegetables, fruits, and related nutrients. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:340.
91. American Institute for Cancer Research WCRF. Food, nutrition and the prevention of cancer: a global perspective. Washington, DC: American Institute for Cancer Research, 1997.
92. Dupont W, Page D. Risk factors for breast cancer in women with proliferative breast disease. N Engl J Med 1985;312:146.
93. Dupont W, Page D, Parl F, et al. Estrogen replacement therapy in women with a history of proliferative breast disease. Cancer 1999;85:1277.
94. Skolnick M, Cannon-Albright L, Goldgar D, et al. Inheritance of proliferative breast disease in breast cancer kindreds. Science 1990;250:1715.
95. Gervais-Fagnou DD, Girouard C, Laperriere N, Pintillie M, Goss PE. Breast cancer in women following supradiaphragmatic irradiation for Hodgkin's disease. Oncology 1999;57:224.
96. Aisenberg AC, Finkelstein DM, Doppke KP, et al. High risk of breast carcinoma after irradiation of young women with Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1997;79:1203.
97. Black WC, Nease RF Jr, Tosteson AN. Perceptions of breast cancer risk and screening effectiveness in women younger than 50 years of age. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:720.
98. Cappelli M, Surh L, Humphreys L, et al. Psychological and social determinants of women's decisions to undergo genetic counseling and testing for breast cancer. Clin Genet 1999;55:419.
99. Watson M, Lloyd S, Davidson J, et al. The impact of genetic counseling on risk perception and mental health in women with a family history of breast cancer. Br J Cancer 1999;79:868.
100. Armstrong K, Eiszen A, Weber B. Assessing the risk of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2000;342:564.
101. Benichou J, Gail MJ, Mulvihil JJ. Graphs to estimate an individualized risk of breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:103.
102. Spiegelman D, Colditz GA, Huner D, Hertzmark E. Validation of the Gail et al model for predicting individual breast cancer risk. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:600.
103. Bondy M, Lustbader ED, Halabi S, Ross E, Vogel VG. Validation of a breast cancer risk assessment model in women with a positive family history. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:620.
104. Costantino JP, Gail MH, Pee D, et al. Validation studies for models projecting the risk of invasive and total breast cancer incidence. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1541.
105. McGuigan KA, Ganz PA, Breant C. Agreement between breast cancer risk estimation methods. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1315.
106. Gail M, Rimer B. Risk-based recommendations for mammographic screening for women in their forties. J Clin Oncol 1998;19:3105.
107. Burke W, Daly M, Garber J, et al. Recommendations for follow-up care of individuals with an inherited predisposition to cancer: II. BRCA1 and BRCA2. JAMA 1997;277:997.
108. Verloop J, Rookus MA, van der Kooy K, van Leeuwen FE. Physical activity and breast cancer risk in women aged 20-54 years. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000;92:128.
109. Spicer DV, Ursin G, Parisky YR. Changes in mammographic densities induced by a hormonal contraceptive designed to reduce breast cancer risk. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:408.
110. Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group. Tamoxifen for early breast cancer: an overview of the randomised trials. Lancet 1998;352:930.
111. Nayfield SG, Karp JE, Ford LG, Dorr FA, Kramer FS. Potential role of tamoxifen in prevention of breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:1450.
112. Radmacher MD, Simon R. Estimation of tamoxifen's efficacy for preventing the formation and growth of breast tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000;92:48.
113. Fisher B, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Tamoxifen for prevention of breast cancer: report of the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project P-1 study. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90:1371.
114. Day R, Ganz PA, Costantino JP. Health-related quality of life and tamoxifen in breast cancer prevention: a report from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project P-1 Study. J Clin
Oncol 1999;17:2659
115. Gail MH, Costantino JP, Bryant J, et al. Weighing the risks and benefits of tamoxifen treatment for preventing breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1829.
116. Powles T, Eeles R, Ashley S, et al. Interim analysis of the incidence of breast cancer in the Royal Marsden Hospital tamoxifen randomised chemoprevention trial. Lancet 1998;352:98.
117. Veronesi U, Maisonneuve P, Costa A, et al. Prevention of breast cancer with tamoxifen: preliminary findings from the Italian randomised trial among hysterectomised women. Italian Tamoxifen
Prevention Study. Lancet 1998;352:93
118. Ettinger B, Black DM, Mitlak BH, et al. Reduction of vertebral fracture risk in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis treated with raloxifene: results from a 3-year randomized clinical trial.
Multiple Outcomes of Raloxifene Evaluation (MORE) Investigators. JAMA 1999;282:637.
119. Cummings SR, Eckert S, Krueger KA, et al. The effect of raloxifene on risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women: results from the MORE randomized trial. JAMA 1999;281:2189.
120. NCCN Breast Cancer Risk-Reduction Guidelines. Oncology 1999;13:241.
121. Chlebowski RT, Collyar DE, Somerfield MR, Pfister DG. American Society of Clinical Oncology technology assessment on breast cancer risk reduction strategies: tamoxifen and raloxifene. J
Clin Oncol 1999;17:1939.
122. Veronesi U, De Palo G, Marubini E, et al. Randomized trial of fenretinide to prevent second breast malignancy in women with early breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1847.
123. Decensi A, Fontana V, Fioreto M, et al. Long-term effects of fenretinide on retinal function. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:80.
124. Hartmann LC, Schaid DJ, Woods JE, et al. Efficacy of bilateral prophylactic mastectomy in women with a family history of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;340:77.
125. Eisen A, Weber BL. Prophylactic mastectomythe price of fear. N Engl J Med 1999;340:137.
126. Schrag D, Kuntz KM, Garber JE, Weeks JC. Decision analysiseffects of prophylactic mastectomy and oophorectomy on life expectancy among women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. N
Engl J Med 1997;336:1465.

127. Schrag D, Kuntz KM, Garber JE, Weeks JC. Life expectancy gains from cancer prevention strategies for women with breast cancer and BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. JAMA 2000;283:617.
128. Kline T, Joshi L, Neal H. Fine needle aspiration of the breasts: diagnoses and pitfalls. Cancer 1979;44:1458.
129. Bell D, Hajdu S, Urban J, et al. Role of aspiration cytology in the diagnosis and management of mammary lesions in office practice. Cancer 1983;51:1182.
130. Hammond S, Keyhai-Rofagha S, O'Toole R. Statistical analysis of fine needle aspiration of the breast: a review of 678 cases plus 4,265 cases from the literature. Acta Cytol 1987;31:276.
131. Lamb J, Anderson T. Influence of cancer histology on the success of fine needle aspiration of the breast. J Clin Pathol 1989;42:733.
132. Barrow G, Anderson J, Lamb J, et al. Fine needle aspiration of breast cancer: relationship of clinical factors to cytology results in 689 primary malignancies. Cancer 1986;58:1493.
133. Fentiman I, Millis R, Hayward J. Value of needle biopsy in outpatient diagnosis of breast cancer. Arch Surg 1980;115:652.
134. Minkowitz S, Moskowitz R, Khafif R, et al. Tru-Cut needle biopsy of the breast: an analysis of its specificity and sensitivity. Cancer 1986;57:320.
135. Shabot M, Goldberg I, Schick P, et al. Aspiration cytology is superior to Tru-Cut needle biopsy in establishing the diagnosis of clinically suspicious breast masses. Ann Surg 1982;196:122.
136. Kearney T, Morrow M. Effect of re-excision on the success of breast conserving surgery. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:303.
137. Gallagher W, Cardenosa G, Rubens J, et al. Minimal-volume excision of nonpalpable breast lesions. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1989;153:957.
138. Meyer J, Eberlein T, Stomper P, et al. Biopsy of occult breast lesions. JAMA 1990;263:2341.
139. Thompson W, Bowen J, Dorman B, et al. Mammographic localization and biopsy of nonpalpable breast lesions: a 5-year study. Arch Surg 1991;126:730.
140. Alexander H, Candela F, Dershaw D, et al. Needle localized mammographic lesions: results and evolving treatment strategy. Arch Surg 1990;125:1441.
141. Sacchini V, Luini A, Agresti R, et al. Nonpalpable breast lesions: analysis of 952 operated cases. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1995;32:59.
142. Tinnemans J, Wobbes T, Holland R, et al. Mammographic and histopathologic correlation of nonpalpable lesions of the breast and the reliability of frozen section diagnosis. Surg Gynecol
Obstet 1987;165:523.
143. Morrow M. When can stereotactic core biopsy replace excisional biopsy? A clinical perspective. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1995;36:1.
144. Venta LH. Image-guided biopsy of nonpalpable breast lesions. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2000.
145. Bassett L, Winchester DP, Caplan RB, et al. Stereotactic core-needle biopsy of the breast: a report of the Joint Task Force of the American College of Radiology, American College of
Surgeons, and College of American Pathologists. CA Cancer J Clin 1997;47:171.
146. Liberman L, Cohen MA, Dershaw DD, et al. Atypical ductal hyperplasia diagnosed at stereotaxic core biopsy of breast lesions: an indication for surgical biopsy. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1995;164:1111.
147. Burbank F. Stereotactic breast biopsy of atypical ductal hyperplasia and ductal carcinoma in situ lesions: improved accuracy with directional, vacuum-assisted biopsy. Radiology 1997;202:843.
148. Morrow M, Venta L, Stinson T, et al. Is core biopsy the diagnostic procedure of choice for all mammographic abnormalities? Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:79a.
149. Liberman L, LaTrenta LR, Dershaw DD, et al. Impact of core biopsy on the surgical management of impalpable breast cancer. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1997;168:495.
150. Morrow M, Schmidt R, Cregger B, Hassett C, Cox S. Preoperative evaluation of abnormal mammographic findings to avoid unnecessary breast biopsy. Arch Surg 1994;129:1091.
151. Ernster VL, Barclay J, Kerlikowske K, Grady D, Henderson IC. Incidence and treatment for ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. JAMA 1996;275:913.
152. Pandya S, Mackarem G, Lee AKC, et al. Ductal carcinoma in situ: the impact of screening on clinical presentation and pathologic features. Breast J 1998;4:146.
153. Gapstur S, Morrow M, Ellman A, Sellers TA. Risk factors for breast cancer differ by histologic type: results of the Iowa Women's Health Study. JAMA 1999;281:2091.
154. Schwartz GF, Patchefsky AS, Finklestein SD, et al. Nonpalpable in situ ductal carcinoma of the breast: predictors of multicentricity and microinvasion and implications for treatment. Arch Surg
1989;124:29.
155. Silverstein MJ, Waisman JR, Gamagami P, et al. Intraductal carcinoma of the breast (208 cases): clinical factors influencing treatment choice. Cancer 1990;66:102.
156. European Commission Working Group on Breast Screening Pathology. Consistency achieved by 23 European pathologists in categorizing ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast using five
classifications. Hum Pathol 1998;9:1056.
157. Lagios MD, Margolin FR, Westdahl PR, Rose MR. Mammographically detected duct carcinoma in situ: frequency of local recurrence following tylectomy and prognostic effect of nuclear grade
on local recurrence. Cancer 1989;63:618.
158. Poller DN, Silverstein MJ, Galea M, et al. Ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast: a proposal for a new simplified histological classification association between cellular proliferation and c-erbB-2
protein expression. Mod Pathol 1994;7:257.
159. Silverstein MJ, Poller DN, Waisman JR, et al. Prognostic classification of breast ductal carcinoma in situ. Lancet 1995;345:1154.
160. Holland R, Peterse JL, Millis RR, et al. Ductal carcinoma in situ: a proposal for a new classification. Semin Diagn Pathol 1994;11:167.
161. The Consensus Conference Committee. Consensus conference of the classification of ductal carcinoma in situ. Cancer 1997;80:1798.
162. Bose S, Lesser ML, Norton L, Rosen PP. Immunophenotype of intraductal carcinoma. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1996;120:81.
163. Albonico G, Querzoli P, Ferretti, S, Rinaldi R, Nenci I. Biological profile of in situ breast cancer investigated by immunohistochemical technique. Cancer Detect Prev 1998;22:313.
164. Rudas M, Neumayer R, Gnant MF, et al. p53 protein expression, cell proliferation, and steroid hormone receptors in ductal and lobular in situ carcinomas of the breast. Eur J Cancer
1997;33:39.
165. Mack L, Kerkvliet N, Doig G, O'Malley FP. Relationship of a new histological categorization of ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast with size and the immunohistochemical expression of p53,
c-erbB-2, bcl-2 and ki-67. Hum Pathol 1997;28:974.
166. Poller DN, Roberts EC, Bell JA, et al. p53 protein expression in mammary ductal carcinoma in situ: relationship to immunohistochemical expression of estrogen receptor c-erbB-2 protein. Hum
Pathol 1993;24:463.
167. O'Malley FP, Vnencak-Jones CL, Dupont WD. p53 mutations are confined to comedo type ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast: immunohistochemical and sequencing data. Lab Invest
1994;71:67.
168. Guidi AJ, Fischer L, Harris JR, Schnitt SJ. Microvessel density and distribution in ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;85:614.
169. Engels K, Fox SB, Whitehouse RM, Gatter KC, Harris AL. Distinct angiogenic patterns are associated with high-grade in situ ductal carcinomas of the breast. J Pathol 1997;181:207.
170. Silverstein MJ, Gierson ED, Waisman JR, et al. Axillary lymph node dissection for T1a breast carcinoma: is it indicated? Cancer 1994;73:664.
171. Winchester DP, Menck HR, Osteen RT, Kraybill W. Treatment trends for ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:207.
172. American Joint Committee on Cancer. AJCC cancer staging manual. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven, 1997:172.
173. Schuh ME, Nemoto T, Penetrante R, Rosner D, Dao TL. Intraductal carcinoma. Analysis of presentation, pathologic findings, and outcome of disease. Arch Surg 1986;121:1303.
174. Rosner D, Lane WW, Penetrante R. Ductal carcinoma in situ with microinvasion. A curable entity using surgery alone without need for adjuvant therapy. Cancer 1991;67:1498.
175. Wong JH, Kopald KH, Morton DL. The impact of microinvasion on axillary node metastases and survival in patients with intraductal breast cancer. Arch Surg 1990;125:1298.
176. Lagios MD. Microinvasion in ductal carcinoma in situ. In: Silverstein MJ, ed. Carcinoma in situ of the breast. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1997:241.
177. Elston CW, Ellis IO, eds. Diagnostic histopathology of the breast. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1998:242.
178. Silver SA, Tavassoli FA. Mammary ductal carcinoma in situ with microinvasion. Cancer 1998;82:2382.
179. Silverstein MJ. Ductal carcinoma in situ with microinvasion. In: Silverstein MJ, ed. Ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1997:557.
180. Silverstein MJ. Van Nuys experience by treatment. In: Silverstein MJ, ed. Ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1997:443.
181. Kinne DW, Petrek JA, Osborne MP, et al. Breast carcinoma in situ. Arch Surg 1989; 124:33.
182. Cataliotti L, Distante V, Pacini P. Florence experience. In: Silverstein MJ, ed. Ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1997:449.
183. Solin LJ, Recht A, Fourquet A, et al. Ten-year results of breast-conserving surgery and definitive irradiation for intraductal carcinoma (ductal carcinoma in situ) of the breast. Cancer
1991;68:2337.
184. Solin LJ, Kurtz J, Fourquet A, et al. Fifteen year results of breast-conserving surgery and definitive breast irradiation for the treatment of ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. J Clin Oncol
1996;14:754
185. Hiramatsu H, Bornstein BA, Recht A, et al. Local recurrence after conservative surgery and radiation therapy for ductal carcinoma in situ: possible importance of family history. Cancer J Sci Am
1995;1:55.
186. McCormick B, Rosen PP, Kinne D, Cox L, Yahalom J. Duct carcinoma in situ of the breast: an analysis of local control after conservation surgery and radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1991;21:289.
187. Kestin LL, Goldstein NS, Lacerna MD, et al. Factors associated with local recurrence of mammographically detected ductal carcinoma in situ in patients given breast-conserving therapy.
Cancer 2000;88:596.
188. Solin LJ, McCormick B, Recht A, et al. Mammographically detected clinically occult ductal carcinoma in situ (intraductal carcinoma) treated with breast-conserving surgery and definitive breast
irradiation. Cancer J Sci Am 1996;2:158.
189. Solin LJ, Fourquet A, McCormick B, et al. Salvage treatment for local recurrence following breast conserving surgery and definitive irradiation for ductal carcinoma in situ (intraductal
carcinoma) of the breast. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:3.
190. Fisher B, Dignam J, Wolmark N, et al. Lumpectomy and radiation therapy for the treatment of intraductal breast cancer: findings from National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-17.
J Clin Oncol 1998;16:441.
191. Arnesson LG, Olsen K. Linköping experience. In: Silverstein MJ, ed. Ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1997:373.
192. Carpenter R, Boulter PS, Cooke T, et al. Management of screen detected ductal carcinoma of the female breast. Br J Surg 1989;76:564
193. Schwartz GF. Treatment of subclinical ductal carcinoma in situ by local excision and surveillance: a personal experience. In: Silverstein MJ, ed. Ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1997:353.
194. Silverstein MJ, Lagios MD, Groshen S, et al. The influence of margin width on local control of ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1455.
195. Hetelekidis S, Collins L, Silver B, et al. Predictors of local recurrence following excision alone for ductal carcinoma in situ. Cancer 1999;85:427.
196. Julien J-P, Bijker N, Fentiman IS, et al. Radiotherapy in breast conserving treatment for ductal carcinoma in situ: first results of EORTC randomized phase III trial 10853. Lancet 2000;355:528.
197. Fisher ER, Costantino J, Fisher B, et al. Pathologic findings from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast Project (NSABP) Protocol B-17. Intraductal carcinoma (ductal carcinoma in situ). Cancer
1995;75:1310.
198. Fisher ER, Dignam J, Tan-Chiu E, et al. Pathologic findings from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast Project (NSABP) eight-year update Protocol B-17. Cancer 1999; 86:429.
199. Van Zee K, Liberman L, Samli B, et al. Long-term follow up of women with ductal carcinoma in situ treated with breast-conserving surgery. Cancer 1999;86:1757.
200. Fourquet A, Zafrani B, Campana F, Clough KB. Institut Curie experience. In: Silverstein MJ, ed. Ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1997:391.
201. Silverstein MJ, Lagios MD, Craig PH, et al. A prognostic index for ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. Cancer 1996;77:2267.
202. Schnitt SJ, Harris JR, Smith BL. Developing a prognostic index for ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. Are we there yet? Cancer 1996;77:2189.
203. Mamounas EP, Bryant J, Fisher B, Wickerham DL, Wolmark N. Primary breast cancer (PBC) as a risk factor for subsequent contralateral breast cancer (CBC): NSABP experience from nine
randomized adjuvant trials. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1998;50:230.
204. Fisher B, Dignam J, Wolmark N, et al. Tamoxifen in treatment of intraductal breast cancer: National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-24 randomized controlled trial. Lancet
1999;353:1993.
205. Morrow M, Bucci C, Rademaker A. Medical contraindications are not the major factor in the underutilization of breast conserving therapy. J Am Coll Surg 1998;186:269.
206. Akhtar S, Zablow A, Michaelson RA, Hutter RVP, Leitner SP. Predictors of axillary lymph node metastases in small (one centimeter or less) T1a,b primary breast cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1998;17:120a(abst).
207. Penault-Llorca F, Le Bouedec G, Pomel C, et al. Microinvasive carcinoma of the breast: is axillary lymph node dissection indicated? Lab Invest 1998;78:25A(abst).
208. Prasad ML, Giri G, Hoda S. Clinicopathologic features of microinvasive (<1mm) carcinoma of the breast. Lab Invest 1998;78:25A(abst).
209. Foote FW Jr, Stewart FW. Lobular carcinoma in situ: a rare form of mammary carcinoma. Am J Pathol 1941;17:491.
210. Page DL, Kidd TE Jr, Dupont WD, et al. Lobular neoplasia of the breast: higher risk for subsequent invasive cancer predicted by more extensive disease. Hum Pathol 1991;22:1232.
211. Haagensen CD, Bodian C, Haagensen DE. Lobular neoplasia (lobular carcinoma in situ) breast carcinoma: risk and detection. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1981:238.
212. Wheeler JE, Enterline HT, Roseman JM, et al. Lobular carcinoma in situ of the breast: long-term follow-up. Cancer 1974;34:554.

213. Andersen JA. Lobular carcinoma in situ of the breast: an approach to rational treatment. Cancer 1977;39:2597.
214. Alpers CE, Wellings SR. The prevalence of carcinoma in situ in normal and cancer associated breats. Hum Pathol 1985;16:796.
215. Rosen PP, Kosloff C, Lieberman PH, Adair F, Braun DW Jr. Lobular carcinoma in situ of the breast. Detailed analysis of 99 patients with average follow-up of 24 years. Am J Surg Pathol
1978;2:225.
216. Lemanne D, Simon M, Martino S, et al. Breast carcinoma in situ: greater rise in ductal carcinoma in situ vs lobular carcinoma in situ. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1991;10:45.
217. Frykberg ER, Bland KI. In situ breast carcinoma. Adv Surg 1993;26:29.
218. Lewison EF, Finney GG Jr. Lobular carcinoma in situ of the breast. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1968;126:1280.
219. Carter D, Smith RL. Carcinoma in situ of the breast. Cancer 1977;40:1189.
220. Lambird PA, Shelley WM. The spatial distribution of lobular in situ mammary carcinoma. Implications for size and site of breast biopsy. JAMA 1969;210:689.
221. Albonico G, Querzoli P, Ferretti S, Rinaldi R, Nenci I. Biological profile of in situ breast cancer investigated by immunohistochemical technique. Cancer Detect Prev 1998;22:313.
222. Rudas M, Neumayer R, Gnant MF, et al. p53 protein expression, cell proliferation and steroid hormone receptors in ductal and lobular in situ carcinomas of the breast. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:39.
223. Bur ME, Zimarowski MJ, Schnitt SJ, Baker S, Lew R. Estrogen receptor immunohistochemistry in carcinoma in situ of the breast. Cancer 1992;69:1174.
224. Vos CB, Cleton-Jansen AM, Berx G, et al. E-cadherin inactivation in lobular carcinoma in situ of the breast; an early event in tumorigenesis. Br J Cancer 1997;76:1131.
225. Fisher ER, Costantino J, Fisher B, et al. Pathologic findings from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast Project (NSABP) protocol B-17. Five-year observations concerning lobular carcinoma in
situ. Cancer 1996;78:1403.
226. Bodian CA, Perzin KH, Lattes R. Lobular neoplasia. Long term risk of breast cancer and relation to other factors. Cancer 1996;78:1024.
227. Salvadori B, Bartolic C, Zurrida S, et al. Risk of invasive cancer in women with lobular carcinoma in situ of the breast. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:35.
228. Ottesen GL, Graversen HP, Blichert-Toft M, Zedeler K, Andersen JA. Lobular carcinoma in situ of the female breast: short-term results of a prospective nationwide study. Am J Surg Pathol
1993;17:14.
229. Bradley SJ, Weaver DW, Bouwman DL. Alternatives in the surgical management of in situ breast cancer: a meta-analysis of outcome. Am Surg 1990;58:428.
230. Morrow M, Winchester DP, Chmiel JS, et al. Factors responsible for the under-utilization of breast-conserving therapy. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:98a(abst).
231. Lazovich D, Solomon CC, Thomas DB, et al. Breast conservation therapy in the United States following the 1990 National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Conference on the
treatment of patients with early stage breast cancer. Cancer 1999;86:628.
232. Turner L, Swindell R, Bell W. Radical versus modified radical mastectomy for breast cancer. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 1981;63:239.
233. Maddox W, Carpenter J, Laws H, et al. A randomized prospective trial of radical (Halsted) mastectomy versus modified radical mastectomy in 311 breast cancer patients. Ann Surg
1983;198:207.
234. Fisher B, Redmond C, Fisher ER, et al. Ten-year results of a randomized clinical trial comparing radical mastectomy and total mastectomy with or without radiation. N Engl J Med
1985;312:674.
235. Holland R, Veling S, Mravunac M, Hendriks JH. Histologic multifocality of T 1s, T 1-2 breast carcinomas: implications for clinical trials of breast conserving treatment. Cancer 1985;56:979.
236. Holland R, Connolly J, Gelman R, et al. Histologic multifocality of Tis, T1-2 breast carcinomas: implications for clinical trials of breast conserving treatment. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:113.
237. Lagios M, Richards V, Rose M, Yee E. Segmental mastectomy without radiotherapy: short-term follow-up. Cancer 1983;52:2173.
238. Montgomery A, Greening W, Levene A. Clinical study of recurrence rate and survival time of patients with carcinoma of the breast treated by biopsy excision without any other therapy. J R Soc
Med 1978;71:339.
239. Targart R. Partial mastectomy for breast cancer. BMJ 1978;2:1268.
240. Freeman C, Belliveau N, Kim T, Boivin JF. Limited surgery with or without radiotherapy for early breast carcinoma. J Can Assoc Radiol 1981;32:125.
241. Fisher B, Anderson S, Redmond CK, et al. Reanalysis and results after 12 years of follow-up in a randomized clinical trial comparing total mastectomy with lumpectomy with or without
irradiation in the treatment of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1456.
242. Veronesi U, Salvadori B, Luini A, et al. Breast conservation is a safe method in patients with small cancer of the breast. Long-term results of three randomized trials on 1,973 patients. Eur J
Cancer 1995;31A:1574.
243. Jacobson JA, Danforth DN, Cowan KH, et al. Ten-year results of a comparison of conservation with mastectomy in the treatment of stage I and II breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1995;332:907.
244. van Dongen JA, Bartelink H, Fentiman IS, et al. Factors influencing local relapse and survival and results of salvage treatment after breast conserving therapy in operable breast cancer:
EORTC trial 1081, breast conservation compared with mastectomy in TNM stage I and II breast cancer. Eur J Cancer 1992;28A:801.
245. Arriagada R, Le MG, Rochard F, Contesso G, for the Institut Gustave-Roussy Breast Cancer Group. Conservative treatment versus mastectomy in early breast cancer: patterns of failure with
15 years of follow-up data. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1558.
246. van Dongen JA, Bartelink H, Fentiman IS, et al. Randomized clinical trial to assess the value of breast-conserving therapy in stage I and II breast cancer: EORTC 10801 trial. J Natl Cancer Inst
1992;11:15.
247. Blichert-Toft M, Rose C, Andersen JA, et al. Danish randomized trial comparing breast conservation therapy with mastectomy: six years of life-table analysis. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr
1992;11:19.
248. Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group. Effects of radiotherapy and surgery in early breast cancer: an overview of the randomized trials. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1444.
249. Clark RM, Wilkinson RH, Mahoney LJ, Reid JG, MacDonald WD. Breast cancer: a 21-year experience with conservative surgery and radiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8:967.
250. Fowble B, Solin L, Schultz D, Goodman RL. Ten-year results of conservative surgery and irradiation for stage I and II breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:269.
251. Fourquet A, Campana F, Zafrani B, et al. Prognostic factors of breast recurrence in the conservative management of early breast cancer: a 25-year follow-up. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1989;17:719.
252. Kurtz J, Amalric R, Brandone H, et al. Local recurrence after breast-conserving surgery and radiotherapy: frequency, time course, and prognosis. Cancer 1989;63:1912.
253. Gage I, Recht A, Gelman R, et al. Long-term outcome following breast conserving surgery and radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;33:245.
254. Morrow M, Bucci C, Rademaker A. Medical contraindications are not a major factor in the underutilization of breast conserving therapy. J Am Coll Surg 1998;186:269.
255. Foster RS, Farwell ME, Costanza MC. Breast therapy for breast cancer: patterns of care in a geographic region and estimation of potential applicability. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:275.
256. Morrow M, Schmidt R, Hassett C. Patient selection for breast conservation therapy with magnification mammography. Surgery 1995;118:621.
257. Harris J, Recht A, Amalric R, et al. Time course and prognosis of local recurrence following primary radiation therapy for early breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:37.
258. Gage I, Schnitt S, Recht A, et al. Skin recurrences after breast conserving therapy for early stage breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:480.
259. Kurtz J, Jacquemier J, Amalric R, et al. Why are local recurrences (LR) after breast-conserving surgery more frequent in younger patients? J Clin Oncol 1990;8:591.
260. Nixon AJ, Neuberg D, Hayes EF, et al. Relationship of patient age to pathologic features of the tumor and prognosis for patients with stage I or II breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:888.
261. de la Rochefordiere A, Mouret-Fourme E, de Ricke Y, et al. Local and distant relapses in relation to age following breast-conserving surgery and irradiation in premenopausal patients with
breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:180(abst).
262. Vrieling C, Collette L, Fourquet A, et al. The higher local recurrence rate after breast conserving therapy in young patients explained by larger tumor size and incomplete excision at first
attempt? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:125(abst).
263. de la Rochefordiere A, Asselain B, Campana G, et al. Age as a prognostic factor in premenopausal breast carcinoma. Lancet 1993;341:1039.
264. Donegan W, Perez-Mesa C, Watson F. A biostatistical study of locally recurrent breast carcinoma. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1966;122:529.
265. Matthews R, McNeese M, Montague E, Oswald MJ. Prognostic implications of age in breast cancer patients treated with tumorectomy and irradiation or with mastectomy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1988;14:659.
266. Chabner E, Nixon A, Gelman R, et al. Family history and treatment outcome in young women after breast-conserving surgery and radiation therapy for early-stage breast cancer. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:2045.
267. Verhoog LC, Brekelmans CTM, Seynaeve C, et al. Survival and tumour characteristics of breast cancer patients with germline mutations of BRCA1. Lancet 1998;351:316.
268. Scully R, Chen J, Plug A, et al. Association of BRCA1 with Rad51 in mitotic and meiotic cells. Cell 1997;88:265.
269. Sharan SK, Morimatsu M, Albrecht U, et al. Embryonic lethality and radiation hypersensitivity mediated by Rad51 in mice lacking BRCA. Nature 1997;386:804.
270. Marcus JN, Watson P, Page DL, et al. Hereditary breast cancer: pathobiology, prognosis, and BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene linkage. Cancer 1996;77:697.
271. Smith TE, Harrold EV, Matloff BC, et al. BRCA 1,2 status, family history and ipsilateral breast tumor relapse following conservative surgery and radiation therapy. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:624a(abst).
272. Pierce L, Strawderman M, Narold S, et al. No deleterious effects of radiotherapy in women who are heterozygous for a BRCA-1 or BRCA-2 mutation following breast conserving therapy. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:86a(abst).
273. Gaffney DK, Brohet RM, Lewis CM, et al. Response to radiation therapy and prognosis in breast cancer patients with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. Radiother Oncol 1998;47:129.
274. Harris JR. Breast-conserving therapy as a model for creating new knowledge in clinical oncology. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;35:641.
275. Schnitt S, Connolly J, Khettry U, et al. Pathologic findings on reexcision of the primary site in breast cancer patients considered for treatment by primary radiation therapy. Cancer 1987;59:675.
276. Borger J, Kemperman H, Hart A, et al. Risk factors in breast-conservation therapy. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:653.
277. Dewar JA, Arriagada R, Benhamou S, et al. Local relapse and contralateral tumor rates in patients with breast cancer treated with conservative surgery and radiotherapy (Institute
Gustave-Roussy 19701982). IGR Breast Cancer Group. Cancer 1995;76:2260.
278. Freedman G, Fowble B, Hanlon A, et al. Patients with close or positive margins treated with conservative surgery and radiation have an increased risk of breast recurrence that is delayed by
adjuvant systemic therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:1005.
279. Park CC, Mitsumori M, Nixon A, et al. Outcome at 8 years after breast conserving surgery and radiation therapy for invasive breast cancer: influence of margin status and systemic therapy on
local recurrence. J Clin Oncol 2000;18(8)1668.
280. Anscher MS, Jones P, Prosnitz LR, et al. Local failure and margin status in early-stage breast carcinoma treated with conservation surgery and radiation therapy. Ann Surg 1993;218:22.
281. Smitt MC, Nowels KW, Zdeblich MJ, et al. The importance of the lumpectomy surgical margin status in long term results of breast conservation. Cancer 1995;76:259.
282. Peterson ME, Schultz DJ, Reynolds C, et al. Outcomes in breast cancer patients relative to margin status after treatment with breast-conserving surgery and radiation therapy: the University of
Pennsylvania experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2000 (in press).
283. Wazer DE, Schmidt-Ullich RK, Ruthazer R, et al. Factors determining outcome for breast-conserving irradiation with margin-directed dose escalation to the tumor bed. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1998;40:851.
284. Pittinger TP, Maronian NC, Poulter CA, Peacock JL. Importance of margins status in outcome of breast-conserving surgery for carcinoma. Surgery 1994;116:605.
285. Cowen D, Largillier R, Bardou V-J, et al. Positive margins after conservative treatments impacts local control and possibly survival in node-negative breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;42:126(abst).
286. Fisher ER, Sass R, Fisher B, et al. Pathologic findings from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast Project (Protocol 6) II: relation of local breast recurrence to multicentricity. Cancer
1986;57:1717.
287. Fisher B, Dignam J, Mamounas HP, et al. Sequential methotrexate and fluorouracil for the treatment of node-negative breast cancer patients with estrogen-receptor negative tumors: eight year
results from NSAPB B-13 and first report of findings from NSABP B-10 comparing methotrexate and fluorouracil with conventional cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and fluorouracil. J Clin
Oncol 1996;14:1982.
288. Fisher B, Dignam J, Bryant J, et al. Five versus more than five years of tamoxifen therapy for breast cancer patients with negative lymph nodes and estrogen receptor-positive tumors. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1996;88:1529.
289. Dalberg K, Johansson H, Johansson U, Rutqvist L, for the Stockholm Breast Cancer Study Group. A randomized trial of long term adjuvant tamoxifen plus postoperative radiation therapy
versus radiation therapy for patients with early stage breast carcinoma treated with breast-conserving surgery. Cancer 1998;82:2204.
290. American College of Radiology, American College of Surgeons, College of American Pathologists and the Society of Surgical Oncology. Standards for diagnosis and management of invasive
breast carcinomas. CA Cancer J Clin 1998;48:83.
291. Fleck R, McNeese MD, Ellerbroek NA, Hunter TA, Holmes FA. Consequences of breast irradiation in patients with pre-existing collagen vascular diseases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys

1989;17:829.
292. Morris MM, Powell SN. Irradiation in the setting of collagen vascular disease: acute and late complications. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2728.
293. Liljegren G, Holmberg L, Bergh J, et al. 10-year results after resection with and without postoperative radiotherapy for stage I breast cancer. A randomized trial. J Natl Cancer Inst
1999;17:2326.
294. Clark RM, Whelan T, Levine M, et al. Randomized clinical trial of breast irradiation following lumpectomy and axillary dissection for node-negative breast cancer: an update. Ontario Clinical
Oncology Group. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1659.
295. Forrest AP, Stewart HJ, Everington D, et al. Randomised controlled trial of conservation therapy for breast cancer: 6-year analysis of the Scottish trial. Scottish Cancer Trials Breast Group.
Lancet 1996;348:708.
296. Renton SC, Gazet JC, Ford HT, Corbishley C, Sutcliffe R. The importance of the resection margin in conservative surgery for breast cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol 1996;22:17.
297. Lim M, Nixon A, Gelman R, et al. A prospective study of conservative surgery alone without radiotherapy in selected patients with stage I breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat
1999;57:34(abst).
298. Nemoto T, Patel J, Rosner D, et al. Factors affecting recurrence in lumpectomy without irradiation for breast cancer. Cancer 1991;67:2079.
299. Kantorowitz DA, Poulter CA, Sischy B, et al. Treatment of breast cancer among elderly women with segmental mastectomy or segmental mastectomy plus postoperative radiotherapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;15:263.
300. Reed MWR, Morrison JM. Wide local excision as the sole primary treatment in elderly patients with carcinoma of the breast. Br J Surg 1989;76:898.
300a. Wolmark N, Dignam J, Margolese R, et al. The role of radiotherapy and tamoxifen in the management of node negative invasive breast cancer <1 cm treated with lumpectomy: preliminary
results of NSABP protocol B-21. Proc ASCO 2000;19;abst 271.
301. Martelli G, DePalo G, Rossi N, et al. Long-term follow-up of elderly patients with operable breast cancer treated with surgery without axillary dissection plus adjuvant tamoxifen. Br J Surg
1995;72:1251.
302. Lee KS, Plowman PN, Gilmore OJA, Gray R. Tamoxifen in breast conservation therapy. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther 1995;33:281.
303. Bonadonna G, Veronesi U, Brambilla C, et al. Primary chemotherapy to avoid mastectomy in tumors with diameters of three centimeters or more. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990; 82:1539.
304. Smith IE, Jones AL, O'Brien ME, et al. Primary medical (neoadjuvant) chemotherapy for operable breast cancer. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1993;29A:1796.
305. Powles TJ, Hickish TF, Makris A, et al. Randomized trial of chemoendocrine therapy started before or after surgery for treatment of primary breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:547.
306. Fisher B, Brown A, Mamounas E, et al. Effect of preoperative chemotherapy on local-regional disease in women with operable breast cancer: findings from National Surgical Adjuvant Breast
and Bowel Project B-18. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2483.
307. Fisher B, Bryant J, Wolmark N, et al. Effect of preoperative chemotherapy on the outcome of women with operable breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2672.
308. Avril A, Faucher A, Bussieres E, et al. Results of 10 years of a randomized trial of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancers larger than 3 cm. Chirurgie 1998;123:247.
309. Vicini F, Eberlein T, Connolly J, et al. The optimal extent of resection for patients with stages I or II breast cancer treated with conservative surgery and radiotherapy. Ann Surg 1992;214:200.
310. Clarke D, Martinez A. Identification of patients who are at high risk for locoregional breast cancer recurrence after conservative surgery and radiotherapy: a review article for surgeons,
pathologists, and radiation and medical oncologists. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:474.
311. Gwin J, Eisenberg B, Hoffman J, et al. Incidence of gross and microscopic carcinoma in specimens from patients with breast cancer after re-excision lumpectomy. Ann Surg 1993;218:729.
312. Keidan R, Hoffman J, Weese J, et al. Delayed breast abscesses after lumpectomy and radiation therapy. Am Surg 1990;56:440.
313. Rescigno J, McCormick B, Brown A, Myskowski PL. Breast cellulitis after conservative surgery and radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:163.
314. Schneiderman M, Axtell L. Deaths among female patients with carcinoma of the breast treated by a surgical procedure only. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1979;148:193.
315. Say C, Donegan W. A biostatistical evaluation of complications from mastectomy. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1974;138:370.
316. Aitken D, Minton J. Complications associated with mastectomy. Surg Clin North Am 1983;63:1331.
317. Beatty J, Robinson G, Zaia J, et al. A prospective analysis of nosocomial wound infection after mastectomy. Arch Surg 1983;118:1421.
318. Platt R, Zucker J, Zaleznik D, et al. Perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis and wound infection following breast surgery. J Antimicrob Chemother 1993;(Suppl B)31:43.
319. Platt R, Zucker J, Zaleznik D, et al. Prophylaxis against wound infection following herniorrhaphy or breast surgery. J Infect Dis 1992;166:556.
320. Budd D, Cochran R, Sturtz O, Fouty WJ Jr. Surgical morbidity after mastectomy operations. Am J Surg 1978;135:218.
321. Chilson T, Chan F, Lonser R, Wu TM, Aitken DR. Seroma prevention after modified radical mastectomy. Am Surg 1992;58:750.
322. Jolly P, Viar W. Reduction of morbidity after radical mastectomy. Am Surg 1981;47:377.
323. Petrek JA, Peters M, Nori S, et al. Axillary lymphadenopathy: a prospective randomized trial of thirteen factors influencing drainage, including early or delayed arm mobilization. Arch Surg
1991;125:378.
324. Jamison K, Wellisch DK, Katz RL, Pasnau RO. Phantom breast syndrome. Arch Surg 1979;114:93.
325. Kroner K, Knudsen UB, Lundley H, Hvid H. Long-term phantom breast syndrome after mastectomy. Clin J Pain 1992;8:346.
326. Johnson C, Van Heerden J, Donohue J, et al. Oncological aspects of immediate breast reconstruction following mastectomy for malignancy. Arch Surg 1989;124:819.
327. Petit J, Le M, Mouriesse H, et al. Can breast reconstruction with gel-filled silicone implants increase the risk of death and second primary cancer in patients treated by mastectomy for breast
cancer? Plast Reconstr Surg 1994;94:115.
328. Kroll S, Ames F, Singletary S, et al. The oncologic risks of skin preservation at mastectomy when combined with immediate reconstruction of the breast. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1991;172:17.
329. Noone R, Frazier T, Noone G, et al. Recurrence of breast carcinoma following immediate reconstruction: a 13-year review. Plast Reconstr Surg 1994;90:96.
330. Eberlein T, Crespo L, Smith B, et al. Prospective evaluation of immediate reconstruction after mastectomy. Ann Surg 1993;218:29.
331. Noone R, Murphy J, Spear S, et al. A six-year experience with immediate reconstruction for mastectomy for cancer. Plast Reconstr Surg 1985;76:258.
332. Victor SJ, Brown DM, Horwitz EM, et al. Treatment outcome with radiation therapy after breast augmentation or reconstruction in patients with primary breast carcinoma. Cancer 1998;82:1303.
333. Evans GRD, Schusterman MA, Kroll SS, et al. Reconstruction and the radiated breast: is there a role for implants? Plast Reconstr Surg 1995;96:1111.
334. Hunt KA, Baldwin BJ, Strom E, et al. Feasibility of postmastectomy radiation therapy after TRAM flap breast reconstruction. Ann Surg Oncol 1997;4:377.
335. Williams JK, Carlson GW, Bostwick J 3rd, Bried JT, Mackay G. The effects of radiation treatment after TRAM flap breast reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg 1997;100:1153.
336. Valagussa P, Bonadonna G, Veronesi U. Patterns of relapse and survival following radical mastectomy: analysis of 716 consecutive patients. Cancer 1978;41:1170.
337. Fisher B, Wolmark N, Bauer M, Redmond C, Gebhardt M. The accuracy of clinical nodal staging and of limited axillary dissection as a determinant of histologic nodal status in carcinoma of the
breast. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1981;152:765.
338. Bedwinek J, Lee J, Fineberg B, Ocwieza M. Prognostic indicators in patients with isolated localregional recurrence of breast cancer. Cancer 1981;47:2232.
339. Aberizk W, Silver B, Henderson IC, Cady B, Harris JR. The use of radiotherapy for treatment of isolated localregional recurrence of breast cancer after mastectomy. Cancer 1986;58:1214.
340. Chen K, Montague E, Oswald M. Results of irradiation in the treatment of loco-regional breast cancer recurrence. Cancer 1985;56:1269.
341. Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group. Effects of radiotherapy in early breast cancer. An overview of the randomized trials. N Engl J Med 1995;1444:55.
342. Jones JM, Ribeiro GG. Mortality patterns over 34 years of breast cancer patients in a clinical trial of post-operative radiotherapy. Clin Radiol 1989;40:204.
343. Host H, Brennhovd IO, Loeb M. Postoperative radiotherapy in breast cancerlong-term results from the Oslo study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:727.
344. Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Group. Treatment of early breast cancer; world-wide experience, 19851990. Vol. 1. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
345. Rutqvist L, Pettersson D, Johansson H. Adjuvant radiation therapy versus surgery alone in operable breast cancer: long-term follow-up in a randomized clinical trial. Radiother Oncol
1993;26:104.
346. Rutqvist LE, Lax I, Fornander T, Johansson H. Cardiovascular mortality in a randomized trial of adjuvant radiation therapy versus surgery alone in primary breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1992;22:887.
347. Fisher B, Slack NH, Cavanaugh PJ, Gardner B, Ravdin IG. Postoperative radiotherapy in the treatment of breast cancer: results of the NSABP clinical trial. Ann Surg 1970;172:711.
348. Lythgoe JP, Palmer MK. Manchester regional breast study: 5 and 10 year results. Br J Surg 1982;69:693.
349. Haybittle JL, Brinkley D, Houghton J, A'Hern RP, Baum M. Postoperative radiotherapy and late mortality: evidence from the Cancer Research Campaign trial for early breast cancer. BMJ
1989;298:1611.
350. Stewart H, Jack W, Forrest A, et al. South-east Scottish trial of local therapy in node negative breast cancer. Breast 1994;3:31.
351. Turnbull AR, Turner DT, Chant AD, et al. Treatment of early breast cancer. Lancet 1978;2:7.
352. Cuzick J, Stewart H, Rutqvist L, et al. Cause-specific mortality in long-term survivors of breast cancer who participated in trials of radiotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:447.
353. Anonymous. Favourable and unfavourable effects on long-term survival of radiotherapy for early breast cancer: an overview of the randomised trials. Early Breast Cancer Trialists Collaborative
Group. Lancet 2000;355(9217)1757.
354. Stefanik D, Goldberg R, Byrne P, et al. Localregional failure in patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:660.
355. Fowble B, Gray R, Gilchrist K, et al. Identification of a subgroup of patients with breast cancer and histologically positive axillary nodes receiving adjuvant chemotherapy who may benefit from
postoperative radiotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1107.
356. Recht A, Gray R, Davidson N, et al. Locoregional failure 10 years after mastectomy and adjuvant chemotherapy with or without tamoxifen without irradiation: experience of the Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1689.
357. Overgaard M, Hansen PS, Overgaard J, et al. Postoperative radiotherapy in high-risk premenopausal women with breast cancer who receive adjuvant chemotherapy. Danish Breast Cancer
Cooperative Group 82b Trial. N Engl J Med 1997;337:949.
358. Overgaard M, Jensen M-B, Overgaard J, et al. Randomized controlled trial evaluating postoperative radiotherapy in high-risk postmenopausal breast cancer patients given adjuvant tamoxifen:
report from the Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group DBCG g2c Trial. Lancet 1999;353:1641.
359. Ragaz J, Jackson SM, Le N, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy in node-positive premenopausal women with breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1997;337:956.
360. Griem KL, Henderson IC, Gelman R, et al. The 5-year results of a randomized trial of adjuvant radiation therapy after chemotherapy in breast cancer patients treated with mastectomy. J Clin
Oncol 1987;5:1546.
361. Velez-Garcia E, Carpenter JT Jr, Moore M, et al. Postsurgical adjuvant chemotherapy with or without radiotherapy in women with breast cancer and positive axillary nodes: a South-Eastern
Cancer Study Group (SEG) Trial. Eur J Cancer 1992;28A:1833.
362. Martinez A, Ahmann D, O'Fallon J, et al. An interim analysis of the randomized surgical adjuvant trial for patients with unfavorable breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10(Suppl
2):106.
363. Muss H, Cooper R, Brockschmidt J, et al. A randomized trial of adjuvant chemotherapy with and without radiation therapy for stage II breast cancer: 11-year follow-up of Piedmont Oncology
Association (protocol no. 74176). Breast Cancer Res Treat 1989;14:185.
364. McArdle C, Crawford D, Dykes E, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy in breast cancer. Br J Surg 1986;73:264.
365. Blomqvist C, Tiusanen K, Elomaa I, et al. The combination of radiotherapy, adjuvant chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide-doxorubicin-ftorafur) and tamoxifen in stage II breast cancer. Long-term
follow-up results of a randomised trial. Br J Cancer 1992;66:1171.
366. Buzdar AJ, Blumenschein GR, Smith TL, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy with fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide, with or without Bacillus Calmette-Guerin and with or without
irradiation in operable breast cancer. A prospective randomized trial. Cancer 1984;53:384.
367. Tennvall-Nittby L, Tengrup I, Landberg T. The total incidence of loco-regional recurrence in a randomized trial of breast cancer TNM stage II. The South Sweden Breast Cancer Trial. Acta
Oncol 1993;32:641.
368. Whelan TJ, Julian J, Wright J, et al. Does locoregional radiation therapy improve survival in breast cancer? A meta-analysis. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:1220.
369. Harris JR, Halpin-Murphy P, McNeese M, et al. Consensus statement on postmastectomy therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:989.
370. Paszat L, Mackillop WJ, Groome PA, et al. Mortality from myocardial infarction following postlumpectomy radiotherapy for breast cancer: a population-based study in Ontario, Canada. Int J

Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:755.
371. Nixon AJ, Manola J, Gelman R, et al. No long-term increase in cardiac-related mortality after breast-conserving surgery and radiation therapy using modern techniques. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:1374.
372. Gyenes G, Rutqvist LE, Liedberg A, Fornander T. Long-term cardiac morbidity and mortality in a randomized trial of pre- and postoperative radiation therapy versus surgery alone in primary
breast cancer. Radiother Oncol 1998;48:185.
373. Gustavsson A, Bendahl P-O, Cwikiel M, et al. No serious late cardiac effects after adjuvant radiotherapy following mastectomy in premenopausal women with early breast cancer. Radiother
Oncol 1999;43:745.
374. Hojris I, Overgaard M, Christensen JJ, et al. Morbidity and mortality of ischemic heart disease in 3083 high-risk breast cancer patients given adjuvant systemic treatment with or without
postmastectomy irradiation. Radiother Oncol 1998;48(Suppl 1):S120(abst).
375. Shapiro CL, Hardenbergh PH, Gelman R, et al. Cardiac effects of adjuvant doxorubicin and radiation therapy in breast cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3493.
376. Lu H-M, Cash E, Nixon A, et al. The impact of CT-simulation on the planning of tangential fields for left breast treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:159(abst).
377. Goss PE, Sierra S. Current perspectives on radiation-induced breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:338.
378. Mattsson A, Ruden B-I, Hall P, Wilking N, Rutqvist LE. Radiation-induced breast cancer: long-term follow-up of radiation for benign breast disease. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1679.
379. Committee on the Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiations, Board on Radiation Effects Research Commission on Life Sciences, National Research Council. Health effects of exposure to low
levels of ionizing radiation: BEIR V. Washington, DC: National Academy, 1990.
380. Tokunaga M, Land C, Tokuoka S, et al. Incidence of female breast cancer among atomic bomb survivors, 19501985. Radiat Res 1994;138:209.
381. Boice JD Jr, Harvey EB, Blettner M, Stovall M, Flannery JT. Cancer in the contralateral breast after radiotherapy for breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1992;326:781.
382. Storm H, Andersson M, Boice J Jr, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy and risk of contralateral breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1245.
383. Brady MS, Garfein CF, Petrek JA, Brennan MF. Post-treatment sarcoma in breast cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 1994;1:66.
384. Karlsson P, Holmberg E, Johansson K-A, et al. Soft tissue sarcoma after treatment for breast cancer. Radiother Oncol 1996;38:25.
385. Strobbe LJ, Peterse HL, van Tinteren H, et al. Angiosarcoma of the breast after conservative therapy for invasive cancer, the incidence and outcome. An unforseen sequela. Breast Cancer Res
Treat 1998;47:101.
386. Marchal C, Weber B, de Lafontan B, et al. Nine breast angiosarcomas after conservative treatment for breast carcinoma: a survey from French comprehensive cancer centers. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1999;4:113.
387. Inskip P, Stovall M, Flannery J. Lung cancer risk and radiation dose among women treated for breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:983.
388. Neugut AI, Robinson E, Lee WC, et al. Lung cancer after radiation therapy for breast cancer. Cancer 1993;71:3054.
389. Neugut A, Murray T, Santos J, et al. Increased risk of lung cancer after breast cancer radiation therapy in cigarette smokers. Cancer 1994;73:1615.
390. Inskip P, Boice J Jr. Radiotherapy-induced lung cancer among women who smoke [Editorial]. Cancer 1994;73:1541.
391. Smith IE, Gregory K. The sequencing of systemic and local therapies in primary breast cancer. Semin Breast Dis 1999;2:110.
392. Glucksberg H, Rivkin S, Rasmussen S, et al. Combination chemotherapy (CMFVP) versus L-phenylalanine mustard (L-PAM) for operable breast cancer with positive axillary nodes: a
Southwest Oncology Group study. Cancer 1982;50:423.
393. Buzdar A, Smith T, Powell KC, et al. Effect of timing of initiation of adjuvant chemotherapy on disease-free survival in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1982;2:163.
394. Recht A, Come S, Gelman R, et al. Integration of conservative surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy for the treatment of early-stage node-positive breast cancer: sequencing, timing, and
outcome. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1662.
395. Buchholz T, Austin-Seymour M, Moe R, et al. Effect of delay in radiation in the combined modality treatment of breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;26:23.
396. Buchholz TA, Hunt KK, Amosson CM, et al. Sequencing of chemotherapy and radiation in lymph node-negative breast cancer. Cancer J Sci Am 1999;5:159.
397. Hartsell W, Recine D, Griem K, Murthy AK. Delaying the initiation of intact breast irradiation for patients with lymph node positive breast increases the risk of local recurrence. Cancer
1995;76:2497.
398. Buzdar A, Kau S, Smith T, et al. The order of administration of chemotherapy and radiation and its effect on local control of operable breast cancer. Cancer 1993;71:3680.
399. McCormick B, Norton L, Yao TJ, Yahalom J, Petrek JA. The impact of the sequence of radiation and chemotherapy on local control after breast-conserving surgery. Cancer J Sci Am 1996;2:39.
400. Wallgren A, Bernier J, Gelber RD, et al. Timing of radiotherapy and chemotherapy following breast conserving surgery for patients with node-positive breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1996;35:649.
401. Leonard CE, Wood ME, Zhen B, et al. Does administration of chemotherapy before radiotherapy in breast patients treated with conservative surgery negatively impact local control? J Clin
Oncol 1995;13:2906.
402. Mamounas EP, Fisher B, Bryant J, et al. Does delaying breast irradiation in order to administer adjuvant chemotherapy increase the rate of ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence (IBTR)? Results
from two NSABP adjuvant studies in node-positive breast cancer (B-15 and B-16). Breast Cancer Res Treat 1996;41:219(abst).
403. Recht A, Come SE, Henderson IC, et al. The sequencing of chemotherapy and radiation therapy after conservative surgery for patients with early-stage breast cancer. N Engl J Med
1996;334:1356.
404. Botnick L, Come S, Rose C, et al. Primary breast irradiation and concomitant adjuvant chemotherapy. In: Harris J, Hellman S, Silen W, eds. Conservative management of breast cancer.
Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1983:321.
405. Meek A, Order S, Abeloff M, et al. Concurrent radiochemotherapy in advanced breast cancer. Cancer 1983;51:1001.
406. Markiewicz DA, Fox KR, Schultz DJ, et al. Concurrent chemotherapy and radiation for breast conservation treatment of early-stage breast cancer. Cancer J Sci Am 1998;4:185.
407. Dubey AK, Recht A, Come SE, et al. Concurrent CMF and radiation therapy for early stage breast cancer: results of a pilot study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:877.
408. Taghian AG, Assad S, Kuter I, et al. Increased risk of radiation pneumonitis in breast cancer patients treated by concomitant taxol and radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1999;45:316(abst).
409. Bellon JR, Lindsley KL, Ellis GK, et al. Feasibility of concurrent radiation therapy and paclitaxel or docetaxel chemotherapy in the management of locally advanced breast cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:309(abst).
410. Harris J, Osteen R. Patients with early breast cancer benefit from effective axillary treatment. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1985;5:17.
411. Adair F, Berg J, Joubert L, et al. Long term follow-up of breast cancer patients: the 30 year report. Cancer 1974;33:1145.
412. Brinkley D, Haybittle J. The curability of breast cancer. Lancet 1975;2:95.
413. Fentiman I, Cuzick J, Millis R. Which patients are cured of breast cancer? BMJ 1984;289:1108.
414. Rosen P, Groshen S, Saigo P, et al. A long-term follow-up study of survival in stage I (T1N0M0) and stage II (T1N1M0) breast carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:355.
415. Ravdin PM. Can patient and tumor characteristics allow prediction of axillary lymph node status? Semin Breast Dis 1998;1:141.
416. Brenin D, Morrow M, Moughan J, et al. Management of axillary lymph nodes in breast cancer: a national pattern of care study of 17,151 patients. Ann Surg 1999;230:686.
417. Morton DL, Duan-Ren W, Wong JH, et al. Technical details of intraoperative lymphatic mapping and sentinel node biopsy in the management of primary melanoma. Arch Surg 1992;127:392.
418. Rosen P, Martin M, Kinne D, et al. Discontinuous or “skip” metastases in breast carcinoma: analysis of 1228 axillary dissections. Ann Surg 1983;197:276.
419. Veronesi U, Rilke F, Luini A, et al. Distribution of axillary node metastases by level of invasion. Cancer 1987;59:682.
420. Boova R, Bonanni R, Rosato F. Patterns of axillary nodal involvement in breast cancer. Ann Surg 1982;196:642.
421. Danforth D, Findlay P, McDonald H, et al. Complete axillary lymph node dissection for stage I-II carcinoma of the breast. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:655.
422. Pigott J, Nichols R, Maddox W, et al. Metastases to the upper levels of the axillary nodes in carcinoma of the breast and its implications for nodal sampling procedures. Surg Gynecol Obstet
1984;158:255.
423. Halverson K, Taylor M, Perez C, et al. Regional nodal management and patterns of failure following conservative surgery and radiation therapy for stage I and II breast cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1993;26:593.
424. Recht A, Pierce S, Abner A, et al. Regional node failure conservative surgery and radiotherapy for early stage breast carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:988.
425. Siegel B, Mayzel K, Love S. Level I and II axillary dissection in the treatment of early-stage breast cancer. Arch Surg 1990;125:1144.
426. Fowble B, Solin L, Schultz D, et al. Frequency sites of relapse, and outcome of regional node failures following surgery and radiation for early breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1989;17:703.
427. Kjaergaard J, Blichert-Toft M, Andersen J, et al. Probability of false negative nodal status in conjunction with partial axillary dissection in breast cancer. Br J Surg 1985;72:365.
428. Graversen H, Blichert-Toft M, Andersen J, et al. Breast cancer: risk of axillary recurrence in node-negative patients following partial dissection of the axilla. Eur J Surg Oncol 1988;14:407.
429. Axelsson C, Mouridsen H, Zedeler K, et al. Axillary dissection of level I and II lymph nodes is important in breast cancer classification. Eur J Cancer 1992;28A:1415.
430. Cady B, Stone M, Wayne J. New therapeutic possibilities in primary invasive breast cancer. Ann Surg 1993;183:338.
431. Baker L. Breast Cancer Detection Demonstration Project: five-year summary report. Cancer 1982;32:194.
432. Carter C, Allen C, Henson D. Relation of tumor size, lymph node status and survival in 24,740 breast cancer cases. Cancer 1989;63:181.
433. Chadha M, Chabon A, Friedmann P, et al. Predictors of axillary lymph node metastases in patients with T1 breast cancer. Cancer 1994;73:359.
434. Dewar J, Sarrazin D, Benhamou E, et al. Management of the axilla in patients treated at Institut Gustave-Roussy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:475.
435. Wilson R, Donegan W, Mettlin C, et al. The 1982 national survey of carcinoma of the breast in the United States by the American College of Surgeons. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1984;159:309.
436. McDivitt R, Boyce W, Gersell D. Tubular carcinoma of the breast: clinical and pathological observations concerning 135 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1982;6:401.
437. Peters G, Wolff M, Haagensen C. Tubular carcinoma of the breast: clinical-pathologic correlations based on 100 cases. Ann Surg 1981;193:138.
438. Giuliano AE, Kirgan DM, Guenther JM, Morton DL. Lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymphadenectomy for breast cancer. Ann Surg 1994;220:391.
439. Giuliano AE, Jones RC, Brennan M, Statman R. Sentinel lymphadenectomy in breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2345.
440. Veronesi U, Paganelli G, Vitale G, et al. Sentinel lymph node biopsy and axillary dissection for breast cancer: results in a large series. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:368.
441. Shons A, Joseph E, Cox CE, et al. Predictors of sentinel lymph node metastases in the lymphatic mapping of breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1997;46:24(abst).
442. Guenther JM, Krishnamoorthy M, Tan LR. Sentinel lymphadenectomy for breast cancer in a community managed care setting. Cancer J Sci Am 1997;3:336.
443. Borgstein PJ, Pijpers R, Comans EF, et al. Sentinel lymph node biopsy in breast cancer: guidelines and pitfalls of lymphoscintigraphy and gamma probe detection. J Am Coll Surg
1998;186:275.
444. Krag D, Weaver D, Ashikaga T, et al. The sentinel node in breast cancer. A multicenter validation study. N Engl J Med 1998;337:941.
445. Morrow M, Rademaker AW, Bethke KP, et al. Learning sentinel node biopsy: results of a prospective randomized trial of two techniques. Surgery 1999;126:714.
446. Cox CE, Pendas S, Cox JM, et al. Guidelines for lymphatic mapping of patients with breast cancer. Ann Surg 1998;227:645.
447. Pickren JW. Significance of occult metastases. A study of breast cancer. Cancer 1961;14:1266.
448. Fisher ER, Swamidoss S, Lee CM, et al. Detection and significance of occult axillary node metastases in patients with invasive breast cancer. Cancer 1978;42:2025.
449. Rosen PP, Saigo PE, Braun DW Jr, Beattie EJ Jr, Kinne DW. Occult axillary lymph node metastases from breast cancers with intramammary lymphatic tumor emboli. Am J Surg Pathol
1982;6:639.
450. Wilkinson EJ, Hause LL, Hoffman RG, et al. Occult axillary lymph node metastases in invasive carcinoma: characteristics of the primary tumor and significance of the metastases. Pathol Annu
1982;17:67.
451. International (Ludwig) Breast Cancer Study Group. Prognostic importance of occult axillary lymph node micrometastases from breast cancers. Lancet 1990;335:1565.
452. McGuckin MA, Cummings MC, Walsh MD, et al. Occult axillary node metastases in breast cancer: their detection and prognostic significance. Br J Cancer 1996;73:88.
453. Clare SE, Sener SF, Wilkens W, et al. Prognostic significance of occult lymph node metastases in node-negative breast cancer. Ann Surg Oncol 1997;4:447.
454. Gilliland MD, Barton RM, Copeland EM. The implications of local recurrence of breast cancer as the first site of therapeutic failure. Ann Surg 1983;197:284.
455. Zimmerman K, Montague E, Fletcher G. Frequency, anatomical distribution and management of local recurrences after definitive therapy for breast cancer. Cancer 1966;19:67.
456. Mackarem G, Roche CA, Silverman ML, Hughes KS. The development of new, primary noninvasive carcinoma of the breast 29 years after bilateral radical mastectomy. Breast J 1998;4:51.

457. Marshall K, Redfern A, Cady B. Local recurrences of carcinoma of the breast. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1974;139:406.
458. Bedwinek JM, Fineberg B, Lee J, Ocwieza M. Analysis of failures following local treatment of isolated local-regional recurrence of breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:581.
459. Aberizk WJ, Silver B, Henderson IC, Cady B, Harris JR. The use of radiotherapy for treatment of isolated locoregional recurrence of breast carcinoma after mastectomy. Cancer 1986;58:1214.
460. Ballo MT, Strom EA, Singletary SE, et al. Predicting outcome in patients with locoregionally recurrent breast carcinoma after mastectomy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:310(abst).
461. Hsi RA, Antell A, Schultz DJ, Solin LJ. Radiation therapy for chest wall recurrence of breast cancer after mastectomy in a favorable subgroup of patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;42:495.
462. Kamby C, Sengelov L. Pattern of dissemination and survival following isolated locoregional recurrence of breast cancer. A prospective study with more than 10 years of follow up. Breast
Cancer Res Treat 1997;45:181.
463. Willner J, Kiricuta IC, Kolbl O. Locoregional recurrence of breast cancer following mastectomy: always a fatal event? Results of univariate and multivariate analysis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1997;37:853.
464. Halverson KJ, Perez CA, Kuske RR, et al. Locoregional recurrence of breast cancer: a retrospective comparison of irradiation alone versus irradiation and systemic therapy. Am J Clin Oncol
1992;15:93.
465. Schwaibold F, Fowble BL, Solin LJ, Schultz DJ, Goodman RL. The results of radiation therapy for isolated local regional recurrence after mastectomy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:299.
466. Newman LA, Kuerer HM, Hunt KK, et al. Presentation, treatment, and outcome of local recurrence after skin-sparing mastectomy and immediate breast reconstruction. Ann Surg Oncol
1998;5:620.
467. Cheng JC, Cheng SH, Lin K-J, et al. Diagnostic thoracic-computed tomography in radiotherapy for loco-regional recurrent breast carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:607.
468. Kramer S, Schulz-Wendtland R, Hagedorn K, Bautz W, Lang N. Magnetic resonance imaging in the diagnosis of local recurrences in breast cancer. Anticancer Res 1998;18(3C):2159.
469. Hathaway PB, Mankoff DA, Maravilla KR, et al. Value of combined FDG PET and MR imaging in the evaluation of suspected recurrent local-regional breast cancer: preliminary experience.
Radiology 1999;210:807.
470. Salvadori B, Rovini D, Squicciarini P, et al. Surgery for local recurrences following deficient radical mastectomy for breast cancer: a selected series of 39 cases. Eur J Surg Oncol 1992;18:438.
471. McCormack PM, Bains MS, Burt ME, et al. Local recurrent mammary carcinoma failing multimodality therapy: a solution. Arch Surg 1989;124:158.
472. Kroll SS, Schusterman MA, Larson DL, Fender A. Long-term survival after chest-wall reconstruction with musculocutaneous flaps. Plast Reconstr Surg 1990;86:697.
473. International Collaborative Hyperthermia Group. Radiotherapy with or without hyperthermia in the treatment of superficial localized breast cancer: results from five randomized controlled trials.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;35:731.
474. Lee HK, Antell AG, Perez CA, et al. Superficial hyperthermia and irradiation for recurrent breast carcinoma of the chest wall: prognostic factors in 196 tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;40:365.
475. Ballo MT, Strom EA, Singletary SE, et al. Local-regional control of recurrent breast carcinoma after mastectomy: does hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy improve local control? Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:105.
476. Mang TS, Allison R, Hewson G, Snider W, Moskowitz R. A phase II/III clinical study of tin ethyl etiopurpurin (Purlytin)-induced photodynamic therapy for the treatment of recurrent cutaneous
metastatic breast cancer. Cancer J Sci Am 1998;4:378.
477. Mora EM, Buzdar AU, Johnston DA. Aggressive therapy for locoregional recurrence after mastectomy in stage II and III breast cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 1996;3:162.
478. Juan O, Lluch A, de Paz L, et al. Prognostic factors in patients with isolated recurrences of breast cancer (stage IV-NED). Breast Cancer Res Treat 1999;53:105.
479. Borner M, Bacchi M, Goldhirsch A, et al. First isolated locoregional recurrence following mastectomy for breast cancer: results of a phase III multicenter trial comparing systemic treatment with
observation after excision and radiation. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2071.
480. Borner MM, Bacchi M, Castiglione M. Possible deleterious effect of tamoxifen in premenopausal women with locoregional recurrence of breast cancer. Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:2173.
481. Sadowsky NL, Semine A, Harris JR. Breast imaging: a critical aspect of breast conserving treatment. Cancer 1990;65:2113.
482. Dershaw DD. Mammography in patients with breast cancer treated by breast conservation (lumpectomy with or without radiation). AJR Am J Roentgenol 1995;164:309.
483. Dao TH, Rahmouni A, Campana F, et al. Tumor recurrence versus fibrosis in the irradiated breast: differentiation with dynamic gadolinium-enhanced MR imaging. Radiology 1993;187:751.
484. Mumtaz H, Davidson T, Hall-Craggs MA, et al. Comparison of magnetic resonance imaging and conventional triple assessment in locally recurrent breast cancer. Br J Surg 1997;84:1147.
485. Abner AL, Recht A, Eberlein T, et al. Prognosis following salvage mastectomy for recurrence in the breast after conservative surgery and radiation therapy for early-stage breast cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1993;11:44.
486. Doyle TH, Schultz DJ, Peters CA, Solin LJ. Long term results of local recurrence after breast conservation therapy for invasive breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:309(abst).
487. Kemperman H, Borger J, Hart A, et al. Prognostic factors for survival after breast conserving therapy for stage I and II breast cancer. The role of local recurrence. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:690.
488. Dalberg K, Mattsson A, Sandelin K, Rutqvist LE. Outcome of treatment for ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence in early-stage breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1998;49:69.
489. Chaudary MA, Nagadowska M, Smith P, Gregory W, Fentiman IS. Local recurrence after breast conservation treatment: outcome following salvage mastectomy. Breast 1998;7:33.
490. van Tienhoven G, Voogd AC, Peterse JL, et al. Prognosis after treatment for loco-regional recurrence after mastectomy or breast conserving therapy in two randomised trials (EORTC 10801
and DBCG-82TM). Eur J Cancer 1999;35:32.
491. Spitalier J-M, Ayme Y, Brandone H, Amalric R, Kurtz JM. Treatment of mammary recurrences after breast conservation. Breast Dis 1991;4:20(abst).
492. Resch A, Mock U, Fellner C, et al. Breast conserving surgery and PDR-brachytherapy for recurrent breast cancer after primary breast conserving treatment including EBT and
HDR-brachytherapypreliminary results. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:S159(abst).
493. Mullen EE, Deutsch M, Bloomer WD. Salvage radiotherapy for local failures of lumpectomy and breast irradiation. Radiother Oncol 1997;42:25.
494. Deutsch M. Repeat high dose partial breast irradiation after lumpectomy for in-breast tumor recurrences following initial lumpectomy and radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;42:255(abst).
495. Barreau-Pouhaer L, Le M, Rietjens M, et al. Risk factors for failure of immediate breast reconstruction with prosthesis after total mastectomy for breast cancer. Cancer 1992;70:1145.
496. August D, Wilkins E, Rea T. Breast reconstruction in older women. Surgery 1994;115:663.
497. Weissman M, Vecchione D, Albert L, et al. Connective tissue disease following breast augmentation: a preliminary test of the human adjuvant disease hypothesis. Plast Reconstr Surg
1988;82:626.
498. van Nunen S, Gatenby P, Basten A. Post-mammoplasty connective tissue disease. Arthritis Rheum 1982;25:694.
499. Kumagai Y, Shiokawa Y, Medsger T, et al. Clinical spectrum of connective tissue disease after cosmetic surgery. Arthritis Rheum 1984;27:1.
500. Perkins LL, Clark BD, Klein PJ, Cook RR. A metaanalysis of breast implants and connective tissue disease. Ann Plast Surg 1995;35:561.
501. Silverman BS, Brown SL, Bright RA, Kaczmarek TS. A critical assessment of the relationship between silicone breast implants and connective tissue diseases. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol
1996;23:74.
502. Schneider W, Hill L, Brown R. Latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap for breast reconstruction. Br J Plast Surg 1981;30:286.
503. Bunkis J, Walton R, Mathes S. Experience with the transverse lower rectus abdominis operation for breast reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg 1983;72:819.
504. Shaw W. Microvascular free flap breast reconstruction. Clin Plast Surg 1984;11:333.
505. Becker H. The use of intradermal tattoo to enhance the final result of nipple areola reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg 1986;77:673.
506. Nance F, DeLoach D, Welsh R, et al. Paget's disease of the breast. Ann Surg 1970;171:684.
507. Ashikari R, Park K, Huvos A. Paget's disease of the breast. Cancer 1970;26:680.
508. Paone J, Baker R. Pathogenesis and treatment of Paget's disease of the breast. Cancer 1981;48:825.
509. Maier W, Rosemond G, Harasym E. Paget's disease in the female breast. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1969;128:1253.
510. Lagios M, Westdahl P, Rose M, Concanon S. Paget's disease of the nipple: alternative management in cases without and with minimal extent of underlying breast carcinoma. Cancer
1984;54:545.
511. Dixon R, Galea MH, Ellis IO, Elston CW, Blamey RW. Paget's disease of the nipple. Br J Surg 1991;78:722.
512. Fourquet A, Campana F, Viehl P. Paget's disease of the nipple without detectable breast tumor: conservative management with radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:1463.
513. Bulens P, Vanuytsel L, Rinders A, et al. Breast conserving treatment of Paget's disease. Radiother Oncol 1990;17:305.
514. Osteen R. Paget's disease of the nipple. In: Harris J, Hellman S, Henderson I, Kinne D, eds. Breast diseases. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1991:797.
515. Sasco AJ, Lowenfels AB, Pasker-DeJong P. Epidemiology of male breast cancer: a meta-analysis of published case-control studies and discussion of selected aetiological factors. Int J Cancer
1993;53:538.
516. Gradishar WJ. Male breast cancer. In: Harris J, Lippman M, Morrow M, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
517. Friedman LS, Gayther SA, Kurosaki T, et al. Mutation analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in a male breast cancer population. Am J Hum Genet 1997;60:313.
518. Couch FJ, Farid LM, DeShano ML, et al. BRCA2 germline mutations in male breast cancer cases and breast cancer families. Nat Genet 1996;13:123.
519. Jackson A, Muldal S, Ockey C, et al. Carcinoma of the male breast in association with Klinefelter syndrome. BMJ 1965;1:223.
520. El Gazarerli M, Abdul-Aziz A. On biliharziasis and male breast cancer in Egypt: a preliminary report and review of the literature. Br J Cancer 1963;17:566.
521. Eldar S, Nash E, Abrahamson J. Radiation carcinogenesis in the male breast. Eur J SurgOncol 1989;15:274.
522. Axelsson J, Andersson A. Male breast cancer. World J Surg 1983;7:281.
523. Heller K, Rosen P, Schottenfeld D. Male breast cancer: a clinicopathologic study of 97 cases. Ann Surg 1978;188:60.
524. Borgen P, Wong G, Vlamis V, et al. Current management of male breast cancer: a review of 104 cases. Ann Surg 1992;215:451.
525. Thomas DB. Breast cancer in men. Epidemiol Rev 1993;15:220.
526. Treves N. Inflammatory carcinoma of the breast in the male patient. Surgery 1953;34:810.
527. Friedman M, Hoffman P, Dandolos E. Estrogen receptors in male breast cancer: clinical and pathologic correlations. Cancer 1981;47:134.
528. Vetto J, Jun SY, Padduch D, Eppich H, Shih R. Stages at presentation, prognostic factors, and outcome of breast cancer in males. Am J Surg 1999;177:379.
529. Willsher PC, Leach IH, Ellis IO, et al. A comparison outcome of male breast cancer with female breast cancer. Am J Surg 1997;173:185.
530. Hulthorn R, Friberg S, Hulthorn K. Male breast carcinoma. II. A study of the total material reported to the Swedish Cancer Registry 19581967 with respect to treatment, prognostic factors, and
survival. Acta Oncol 1987;26:327.
531. Guinee V, Olsson H, Moller T, et al. The prognosis of breast cancer in males: a report of 335 cases. Cancer 1993;71:154.
532. Goss PE, Reid C, Pintilie M, Lim R, Miller N. Male breast carcinoma: a review of 229 patients who presented to the Princess Margaret Hospital during 40 years: 19551996. Cancer 1999;85:629.
533. Ribeiro G, Swindell R. Adjuvant tamoxifen for male breast cancer. Br J Cancer 1992;65:252.
534. Bagley C, Wesley M, Young R, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy in males with cancer of the breast. Am J Clin Oncol 1987;10:55.
535. Patel H, Buzdar A, Hortobagyi G. Role of adjuvant chemotherapy in male breast cancer. Cancer 1989;64:1583.
536. Schuchardt U, Seegenschmiedt MH, Mirschner MJ, Renner H, Sauer R. Adjuvant radiotherapy for breast carcinoma in men: a 20-year clinical experience. Am J Clin Oncol 1996;19:330.
537. Jaiyesimi I, Buzdar A, Sahin A, et al. Carcinoma of the male breast. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:771.
538. Volm M, Gradishar W. How to diagnose and manage male breast cancer. Contemp Oncol 1994;4:17.
539. Anelli M, Anelli A, Tran K, et al. Tamoxifen administration is associated with a high rate of treatment-limiting symptoms in male breast cancer patients. Cancer 1994;74:74.
540. Bezwoda W, Hesdorffer C, Dansey R. Breast cancer in men: clinical features, hormone receptor status, and response to therapy. Cancer 1987;60:1337.
541. Kraybill W, Kaufman R, Kinne D. Treatment of advanced male breast cancer. Cancer 1981;47:2185.
542. Lopez M, DiLauro L, Lazzaro B, et al. Hormonal treatment of disseminated male breast cancer. Oncology 1985;42:345.
543. Applewhite R, Smith L, Divicenu F. Carcinoma of the breast with pregnancy and lactation. Ann Surg 1973;39:101.
544. Treves N, Holleb A. A report of 549 cases of breast cancer in women 35 years of age or younger. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1958;107:271.
545. Torres J, Mickal A. Carcinoma of the breast in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 1975;18:219.
546. Sorosky JI, Scott-Conner CE. Breast disease complicating pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 1998;25:353.

547. Petrek J, Dukoff R, Rogatko A. Prognosis of pregnancy associated breast cancer. Cancer 1991;67:869.
548. King R, Welch J, Martin J, et al. Carcinoma of the breast associated with pregnancy. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1985;160:228.
549. Deemarksy L, Neishadt E. Breast cancer and pregnancy. Breast 1989;7:17.
550. Anderson B, Petrek J, Byrd D, et al. Pregnancy influences breast cancer stage at diagnosis in women 30 years of age and younger. Ann Surg Oncol 1996;3:204.
551. Guinee V, Olsson H, Moller T, et al. Effect of pregnancy on prognosis for young women with breast cancer. Lancet 1994;343:1587.
552. Berry DL, Theriault RL, Holmes FA, et al. Management of breast cancer during pregnancy using a standardized protocol. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:855.
553. Burstein HJ, Winer EP. Reproductive issues. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow ME, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000:1051.
554. Bines J, Oleske DM, Cobleigh MA. Ovarian function in premenopausal women treated with adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1718.
555. Lawrence WT, McDonald HD. Pregnancy after breast reconstruction with a transverse rectus abdominis musculocutaneous flap. Ann Plast Surg 1986;16:354.
556. Partridge AH, Garber JE. Long-term outcomes of children exposed to antineoplastic agents in utero. (in press).
557. Doll DC, Ringenberg S, Yarbro JW. Antineoplastic agents and pregnancy. Semin Oncol 1989;16:337.
558. Weibe VJ, Sipila PEH. Pharmacology of antineoplastic agents in pregnancy. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 1994;16:75.
559. Caligiuri MA, Mayer RJ. Pregnancy and leukemia. Semin Oncol 1989;16:388.
560. Zemlickis D, Lishner M, Degendorfer P, et al. Fetal outcome after in utero exposure to cancer chemotherapy. Arch Intern Med 1992;152:573.
561. Schaison G, Jacquillat C, Auclerc G, et al. Les fisques foeto-embryonnaines des chimiotherapies. Bull Cancer 1979;66:165.
562. Turchi JJ, Villasis C. Anthracyclines in the treatment of malignancy in pregnancy. Cancer 1988;61:435.
563. Garber JE. Long-term follow-up of children exposed in utero to antineoplastic agents. Semin Oncol 1989;16:437.
564. Giacalone PL, Laffargue F, Benos A. Chemotherapy for breast carcinoma during pregnancy: a French national survey. Cancer 1999;86:2266.
565. Baron P, Moore M, Kinne D. Occult primary cancer presenting with axillary metastases. Arch Surg 1990;125:210.
566. Vezzoni P, Balestrazi A, Bignami P. Axillary lymph node metastases from occult carcinoma of the breast. Tumori 1979;65:87.
567. Ellerbroek N, Holmes F, Singletary E. Treatment of patients with isolated axillary nodal metastases from an occult primary carcinoma consistent with breast origin. Cancer 1990;66:1461.
568. Henry-Tillman RS, Harms SE, Westbrook KC, Korourian S, Klimberg VS. Role of breast magnetic resonance imaging in determining breast as a source of unknown metastatic
lymphadenopathy. Am J Surg 1999;178:496.
569. Morris EA, Schwartz LH, Dershaw DD, et al. MR imaging of the breast in patients with occult primary breast carcinoma. Radiology 1997;205:437.
570. Orel SG, Weinstein SP, Schnall MD, et al. Breast MR imaging in patients with axillary node metastases and unknown primary malignancy. Radiology 1999;212:543.
571. Schorn C, Fischer U, Luftner-Nagel S, Westerhof JP, Grabbe E. MRI of the breast in patients with metastatic disease of unknown primary. Eur Radiol 1999;9:470.
572. Scoggins CR, Vitola JV, Sandler MP, Atkinson JB, Frexes-Steed M. Occult breast cancer presenting as an axillary mass. Am Surg 1999;65:1.
573. Ashikari R, Rosen PP, Urban JA, Senoo T. Breast cancer presenting as an axillary mass. Ann Surg 1976;183:415.
574. Haagensen C. In:Diseases of the breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1971:486.
575. Owen H, Dockerty M, Gray H. Occult carcinoma of the breast. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1954;98:302.
576. Patel J, Nemoto T, Rozner D, et al. Axillary lymph node metastasis from an occult breast cancer. Cancer 1981;47:2923.
577. Westbrook K, Gallagher H. Breast carcinoma presenting as an axillary mass. Am J Surg 1963;106:460.
578. Fitts WT, Steiner GC, Enterline HT. Prognosis of occult carcinoma of the breast. Am J Surg 1963;106:460.
579. Rosen P, Kimmel M. Occult breast carcinoma presenting with axillary lymph node metastases: a followup study of 48 patients. Hum Pathol 1990;21:518.
580. Kemeny M, Rivera D, Terz J, et al. Occult primary adenocarcinoma with axillary metastases. Am J Surg 1986;152:43.
581. Campana F, Forquet A, Ashby M. Presentation of axillary lymphadenopathy without detectable breast primary (T0N1B): experience at Institut Curie. Radiol Oncol 1989;15:321.
582. Forquet A, de la Rochefordiere A, Campana C. Occult primary cancer with axillary metastases. In: Harris J, Lippman M, Morrow M, Hellman S, eds. Diseases of the breast, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia: LippincottRaven, 2000:703.
583. Whillis D, Brown PW, Rodger A. Adenocarcinoma from an unknown primary presenting in women with an axillary mass. Clin Oncol 1990;2:189.
584. Rowell M, Perry R, Hsiu J, et al. Phyllodes tumor. Am J Surg 1993;165:376.
585. Treves N. A study of cystosarcoma phyllodes. Ann NY Acad Sci 1964;114:922.
586. Salvadori B, Cusumano F, Del Bo R, et al. Surgical treatment of phyllodes tumors of the breast. Cancer 1989;63:2532.
587. Oberman H. Cystosarcoma phyllodes: a clinicopathologic study of hypercellular periductal stromal neoplasms of the breast. Cancer 1965;18:697.
588. Petrek J. Phyllodes tumors. In: Harris J, Lippman M, Morrow M, Hellman S, eds. Diseases of the breast, 1st ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott–Raven, 1996:863.
589. West L, Weiland L, Clagett O. Cystosarcoma phyllodes. Ann Surg 1971;173:520.
590. Reinfuss M, Mitus J, Smolak K, et al. Malignant phyllodes tumors of the breast: a clinical and pathological analysis of 55 cases. Eur J Cancer 1993;29A:1252.
591. Palmer M, De Risi D, Pelikan A, et al. Treatment options and recurrence potential for cystosarcoma phyllodes. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1990;170:193.
592. McGuire WL. Breast cancer prognostic factors: evaluation guidelines. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:154.
593. Gasparini G, Pozza F, Harris AL. Evaluating the potential usefulness of new prognostic and predictive indicators in node-negative breast cancer patients. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1206.
594. Hayes DF, Trock B, Harris AL. Assessing the clinical impact of prognostic factors: when is “statistically significant” clinically useful? Breast Cancer Res Treat 1998;52:305.
595. Saez RA, McGuire WL, Clark GM. Prognostic factors in breast cancer. Semin Surg Oncol 1989;5:102.
596. Rosen PP, Groshen S, Saigo PE, et al. A long-term follow-up study of survival in stage I (T 1N0M0) and stage II (T 1N1M0) breast carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:355.
597. McGuire WL, Clark GM. Prognostic factors and treatment decisions in axillary-node-negative breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1756.
598. Tabar L, Chen H-H, Duffy SW, et al. A novel method for prediction of long-term outcome of women with T1a, T1b, and 10-14 mm invasive breast cancers: a prospective study. Lancet
2000;355:429.
599. Harvey JM, de Klerk NH, Sterrett GF. Histological grading in breast cancer: interobserver agreement, and relation to other prognostic factors including ploidy. Pathology 1992;24:63.
600. Dalton LW, Page DL, Dupont WD. Histologic grading of breast carcinoma. A reproducibility study. Cancer 1994;73:2765.
601. Fisher ER, Redmond C, Fisher B. Histologic grading of breast cancer. Pathol Ann 1980;15:239.
602. le Doussal V, Tubiana-Hulin M, Friedman S, et al. Prognostic value of histologic grade nuclear components of Scarff-Bloom-Richardson (SBR): an improved score modification based on a
multivariate analysis of 1262 invasive ductal breast carcinomas. Cancer 1989;64:1914.
603. Albain KS, Allred DC, Clark GM. Breast cancer outcome and predictors of outcome: are there age differentials? J Natl Cancer Inst Mongr 1994;16:35.
604. Goldhirsch A, Glick JH, Gelber RD, Senn H-J. Meeting highlights: international consensus panel on the treatment of breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1601.
605. Adami H-O, Graffman S, Lindgren A, et al. Prognostic implication of estrogen receptor content in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1985;5:293.
606. Mason BH, Holdaway IM, Mullins PR, et al. Progesterone and estrogen receptors as prognostic variables in breast cancer. Cancer Res 1983;43:2985.
607. Funke I, Schraut W. Meta-analysis of studies on bone marrow micrometastases: an independent prognostic impact remains to be substantiated. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:557.
608. Braun S, Pantel K, Muller P, et al. Cytokeratin-positive cells in the bone marrow and survival of patients with stage I, II or II breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2000;342:525.
609. Wenger CR, Clark GM. S-phase fraction and breast cancer: a decade of experience. Breast Cancer Res 1997;51:255.
610. Ravdin PM, Chamness GC. The c-erbB-2 proto-oncogene as a prognostic and predictive marker in breast cancer: a paradigm for the development of other macromolecular markersa review.
Gene 1995;159:19.
611. Thor AD, Berry DA, Budman D, Muss HB, Kute T. erbB-2, p 53, and efficacy of adjuvant therapy in lymph node-positive breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1346.
612. Paik S, Bryant J, Park C, et al. erbB-2 and response to doxorubicin in patients with axillary lymph node-positive, hormone receptor-negative breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1361.
613. Ravdin PM, Green S, Albain KS, et al. Initial report of the SWOG biological correlative study of c-erbB-2 expression as a predictor of outcome in a trial comparing adjuvant CAF T with
tamoxifen (T) alone. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:97a(abst).
614. Clark GM. Should selection of adjuvant chemotherapy for patients with breast cancer be based on erbB-2 status? [editorial]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1320.
615. De Placido S, Carlomagno C, De Laurentiis M, et al. c-cerbB2 expression predicts tamoxifen efficacy in breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1998;52:55.
616. Sjögren S, Inganãs M, Lindgren A, et al. Prognostic and predictive value of c-erbB-2 overexpression in primary breast cancer, alone and in combination with other prognostic markers. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:462.
617. Fisher B, Redmond C, Poisson R, et al. Eight-year results of a randomized clinical trial comparing total mastectomy and lumpectomy with or without irradiation in the treatment of breast cancer.
N Engl J Med 1989;320:822.
618. Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group. Systemic treatment of early breast cancer by hormonal, systemic or immune therapy: 133 randomized trials involving 31,000 recurrences and
24,000 deaths among 75,000 women. Lancet 1992;339:1.
619. Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group. Polychemotherapy for early breast cancer: an overview of the randomised trials. Lancet 1998;352:930.
620. Swedish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group. Randomized trial of two versus five years of adjuvant tamoxifen for postmenopausal early stage breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1543.
621. Current Trials Working Party of the Cancer Research Campaign Breast Cancer Trials Group. Evaluating tamoxifen duration in women aged fifty years or older with breast cancer. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1996;88:1834.
622. Stewart HJ, Forrest AP, Everington D, et al. Randomized comparison of 5 years of adjuvant tamoxifen with continuous therapy for operable breast cancer. The Scottish Cancer Trials Breast
Group. Br J Cancer 1996;74:297.
623. Tormey DC, Gray R, Falkson HC (for the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group). Postchemotherapy adjuvant tamoxifen therapy beyond five years in patients with lymph node-positive breast
cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1828.
624. Osborne CK. Tamoxifen in the treatment of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;339:1609.
625. Hayes DF, Van Zyl JA, Hacking A, et al. Randomized comparison of tamoxifen and two separate doses of toremifene in postmenopausal patients with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:2556.
626. Carlomagno C, Perrone F, Gallo C, et al. c-erbB2 overexpression decreases the benefit of adjuvant tamoxifen in early-stage breast cancer without axillary lymph node metastases. J Clin Oncol
1996;14:2702.
627. Muss H, et al. Lack of interaction of tamoxifen (T) use and ErbB2/HER-2/neu expression in CALGB 8541: a randomized adjuvant trial of three different doses of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin
and fluorouracil (CAF) in node positive primary breast cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:68a(abst 256).
628. Love RR, Mazess RB, Barden HS, et al. Effects of tamoxifen on bone mineral density in postmenopausal women with breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1992;326:852.
629. Powles TJ, Hickish T, Kanis JA, Tidy A, Ashley S. Effect of tamoxifen on bone mineral density measured by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry in healthy premenopausal and postmenopausal
women. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:78.
630. Love RR, Wiebe DA, Newcomb PA, et al. Effects of tamoxifen on cardiovascular risk factors in postmenopausal women. Am Intern Med 1991;115:860.
631. Osborne CK, Kitten L, Arteaga CL. Antagonism of chemotherapy induced cytotoxicity for human breast cancer by antiestrogens. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:710.
632. Pritchard KI, Paterson AH, Paul NA, et al. Increased thromboembolic complications with concurrent tamoxifen and chemotherapy in a randomized trial of adjuvant therapy for women with
breast cancer. National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group Breast Cancer Site Group. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2731.
633. Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group. Effects of adjuvant tamoxifen and of cytotoxic therapy on mortality in early breast cancer: an overview of 61 randomised trials among 28,896
women. N Engl J Med 1988;319:1681.
634. Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group. Ovarian ablation in early breast cancer: overview of the randomised trials. Lancet 1996;348:1189.
635. Davidson N, O'Neil A, Habermann T, et al. Effect of chemohormonal therapy in premenopausal node(+), receptor(+) breast cancer: an Eastern Cooperative Group Phase III Intergroup Trial.
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18(abst 249).
636. Ejlertsen B, Dombernowsky P, Mouridsen HT, et al. Comparable effect of ovarian ablation and CMF chemotherapy in premenopausal hormone receptor positive breast cancer patients. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18(abst 248).

637. Jakesz R, Hausmaninger H, Samonigg H, et al. Comparison of adjuvant therapy with tamoxifen and goserelin vs. CMF in premenopausal stage I and II hormone-responsive breast cancer
patients: four-year results of Austrian Breast Cancer Study Group (ABCSG). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18(abst 250).
638. Scottish Cancer Trials Breast Group and ICFR Breast Unity, Guy's Hospital. Adjuvant ovarian ablation versus CMF chemotherapy in premenopausal women with pathological stage II breast
carcinoma: the Scottish Trial. Lancet 1993;341:1293.
639. Hayes DF, Van Zyl JA, Hacking A, et al. Randomized comparison of tamoxifen and two separate doses of toremifene in postmenopausal patients with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:2556.
640. Fisher B, Redmond C, Dimitrov NV, et al. A randomized clinical trial evaluating sequential methotrexate and fluorouracil in the treatment of patients with node-negative breast cancer who have
estrogen-receptor-negative tumors. N Engl J Med 1989;320:473.
641. Mansour EG, Gray R, Shatila AH, et al. Efficacy of adjuvant chemotherapy in high-risk node-negative breast cancer intergroup study. N Engl J Med 1989;320:485.
642. Mansour EG, Gray R, Shatila AH, et al. Survival advantage of adjuvant chemotherapy in high-risk node-negative breast cancer: ten-year analysisan intergroup study. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:3486.
643. Bonadonna G, Brusamolino E, Valagussa P, et al. Combination chemotherapy as an adjuvant treatment in operable breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1976;294:405.
644. Fisher B, Carbone P, Economou SG, et al. L-Phenylalanine mustard (L-PAM) in the management of primary breast cancer: a report of early findings. N Engl J Med 1975;292:117.
645. Bonadonna G, Valagussa P, Moliterni A, Zambetti M, Brambilla C. Adjuvant cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil in node-positive breast cancer: the results of 20 years of
follow-up. N Engl J Med 1995;332:901.
646. Tancini G, Bonadonna G, Valagussa P, et al. Adjuvant CMF in breast cancer: comparative 5-year results of 12 versus 6 cycles. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:2.
647. Levine MD, Bramwell VH, Pritchard KI, et al. Randomized trial of intensive cyclophosphamide, epirubicin, and fluorouracil chemotherapy compared with cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and
fluorouracil in premenopausal women with node-positive breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2651.
648. Hutchins L, Green S, Ravdin P, et al. CMF versus CAF with and without tamoxifen in high-risk node-negative breast cancer patients and a natural history follow-up study in low-risk
node-negative patients: first results of intergroup trial INT 0102. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:1a(abst 2).
649. Fisher B, Redmond C, Legault-Poisson S, et al. Postoperative chemotherapy and tamoxifen compared with tamoxifen alone in the treatment of positive-node breast cancer patients aged 50
years and older with tumors responsive to tamoxifen: results from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-16. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1005.
650. Fisher B, Dignam J, Wolmark N. Tamoxifen and chemotherapy for lymph node-negative, estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1673.
651. Osborne CK, Ravdin PM. Adjuvant systemic therapy of primary breast cancer. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 2000:599.
652. Pagani O, O'Neil A, Castiglione M, et al. Prognostic impact of amenorrhoea after adjuvant chemotherapy in premenopausal women with axillary node involvement: results of the International
Breast Cancer Study Group Trial VI. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:632.
653. Budman DR, Berry D, Cirrincione CT, et al. Dose and dose intensity as determinates of outcome in the adjuvant treatment of breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1205.
654. Fisher B, Redmond C, Wickerham DL, et al. Doxorubicin-containing regimens for the treatment of stage II breast cancer: the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project experience. J
Clin Oncol 1989;7:572.
655. International Breast Cancer Study Group. Duration and reintroduction of adjuvant chemotherapy for node-positive premenopausal breast cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1885.
656. Gusterson BA, Gelber RD, Goldhirsch A, et al. Prognostic importance of c-erbB-2 expression in breast cancer. International (Ludwig) Breast Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1049.
657. Bonadonna G, Valagussa P. Dose-response effect of adjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1981;304:10
658. Wood WC, Budman DR, Korzun AH, et al. Dose and dose intensity of adjuvant chemotherapy for stage II, node-positive breast carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1994;330:1253.
659. Henderson IC, Berry D, Demetri G, et al. Improved disease-free and overall survival (OS) from the addition of sequential paclitaxel but not from the escalation of doxorubicin dose level in the
adjuvant chemotherapy of patients with node-positive primary breast cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:101a(abst 390A).
660. Fisher B, Anderson S, Wickerham L, et al. Increased intensification and total dose of cyclophosphamide in a doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide regimen for the treatment of primary breast cancer:
findings from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-22. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1858.
661. Fisher B, Anderson S, CeCillis A, et al. Further evaluation of intensified and increased dose of cyclophosphamide for the treatment of primary breast cancer: findings from the National Surgical
Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-25. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3374.
662. Peters WP, Ross M, Vredenburgh JJ, et al. High-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow support as consolidation after standard-dose adjuvant therapy for high-risk primary breast
cancer. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1132.
663. Peters W, Rosner G, Vredenbergh J, et al. A prospective, randomized comparison of two doses of combination alkylating agents as consolidation after CAF in high-risk primary breast cancer
involving ten or more axillary lymph nodes. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:1a(abst 2).
664. Hortobagyi GN, Buzdar AU, Theriault RL, et al. Randomized trial of high-dose chemotherapy and blood cell autografts for high-risk primary breast carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000;92:225.
665. Rodenhuis S, Richel DJ, van der Wall E, et al. Randomised trial of high-dose chemotherapy and haemopoietic progenitor-cell support in operable breast cancer with extensive axillary
lymph-node involvement. Lancet 1998;352:515.
666. Nabholtz JM, Senn HJ, Bezwoda WR, et al. Prospective randomized trial of docetaxel versus mitomycin plus vinblastine in patients with metastatic breast cancer progressing despite previous
anthracycline-containing chemotherapy. 304 Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1413.
667. Bishop JF, Dewar J, Toner GC, et al. Initial paclitaxel improves outcome compared with CMFP combination chemotherapy as front-line therapy in untreated metastatic breast cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1999;17:2355.
668. Goldhirsch A, Coates AS, Colleoni M, Castiglione-Gertsch M, Gelber RD. Adjuvant chemoendocrine therapy in postmenopausal breast cancer: cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and
fluorouracil dose and schedule may make a difference. International Breast Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1358.
669. Bonadonna G, Zambetti M, Valagussa P. Sequential or alternating doxorubicin and CMF regimens in breast cancer with more than three positive nodes. JAMA 1995;273:542.
670. Burstein HJ, Winer EP. Primary care for survivors of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2000 (in press).
671. Lindley C, Vasa S, Sawyer W, Winer E. Quality of life and preferences for treatment following systemic adjuvant therapy for early stage breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1380.
672. Ravdin PM, Siminoff IA, Harvey JA. Survey of breast cancer patients concerning their knowledge and expectations of adjuvant therapy. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:515.
673. Bonadonna G, Valagussa P, Brambilla C, et al. Primary chemotherapy in operable breast cancer: eight-year experience at the Milan Cancer Institute. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:93.
674. Wolff AC, Davidson NE. Primary systemic therapy in operable breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:1558.
675. Hortobagyi GN. Treatment of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1998;339:974.
676. Hortobagyi GN, Singletary SE, Strom EA. Treatment of locally advanced and inflammatory breast cancer. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast, 2nd
ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000:645.
677. DeLena M, Zucali R, Viganotti G, Valagussa P, Bonadonna G. Combined chemotherapy-radiotherapy approach in locally advanced (T 3b-T4) breast cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1978;1:53.
678. Valagussa P, Zambetti M, Bignami PD, et al. T3b-T4 breast cancer: factors affecting results in combined modality treatment. Clin Exp Metastasis 1983;1:191.
679. Swain SM, Sorace RA, Bagley CS, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy in the combined modality approach of locally advanced nonmetastatic breast cancer. Cancer Res 1987;47:3889.
680. Herrada J, Iyer RB, Atkinson EN, et al. Relative value of physical examination, mammography, and breast sonography in evaluating the size of the primary tumor and regional lymph node
metastases in women receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy for locally advanced breast carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:1565.
681. Kuerer HM, Newman LA, Smith TL, et al. Clinical course of breast cancer patients with complete pathologic primary tumor and axillary lymph node response to doxorubicin-based neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:460
682. Trecate G, Ceglia E, Stabile F, et al. Locally advanced breast cancer treated with primary chemotherapy: comparison between magnetic resonance imaging and pathologic evaluation of
residual disease. Tumori 1999;85:220.
683. Zambetti M, Oriana S, Quattrone P, et al. Combined sequential approach in locally advanced breast cancer. Ann Oncol 1999;10:305.
684. Mackay HJ, Cameron D, Rahilly M, et al. Reduced MLH1 expression in breast tumors after primary chemotherapy predicts disease-free survival. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:87.
685. Willsher PC, Pinder SE, Gee JM, et al. c-erbB2 expression predicts response to preoperative chemotherapy for locally advanced breast cancer. Anticancer Res 1998;18:3695.
686. Honkoop AH, van Diest PJ, de Jong JS, et al. Prognostic role of clinical, pathological and biological characteristics in patients with locally advanced breast cancer. Br J Cancer 1998;77:621.
687. Newman LA, Kuerer HM, Hunt KK, et al. Feasibility of immediate breast reconstruction for locally advanced breast cancer. Ann Surg 1999;230:72.
688. Merajver SD, Weber BL, Cody R, et al. Breast conservation and prolonged chemotherapy for locally advanced breast cancer: the University of Michigan experience. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2873.
689. Clark J, Rosenman J, Cance W, Halle J, Graham M. Extending the indications for breast-conserving treatment to patients with locally advanced breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;42:345.
690. Chang S, Parker SL, Pham T, Buzdar AU, Hursting SD. Inflammatory breast carcinoma incidence and survival: the surveillance, epidemiology, and end results program of the National Cancer
Institute, 19751992. Cancer 1998;82:2366.
691. Ueno NT, Buzdar AU, Singletary SE, et al. Combined-modality treatment of inflammatory breast carcinoma: twenty years of experience at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol 1997;40:321.
692. Saphner T, Tormey DC, Gray R. Annual hazard rates of recurrence for breast cancer after primary therapy. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2738.
693. Dawson LA, Chow E, Goss PE. Evolving perspectives in contralateral breast cancer. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:2000.
694. Bernstein LJ, Thompson WD, Risch N, Holford TR. The genetic epidemiology of second primary breast cancer. Am J Epidemiol 1992;136:937.
695. Muss HB, Tell GS, Case LK, Roberson P, Atwell BM. Perceptions of follow-up care in women with breast cancer. Am J Clin Oncol 1991;14:55.
696. GIVIO Investigators. Impact of follow-up testing on survival and health-related quality of life in breast cancer patients. JAMA 1994;271:1587.
697. Del Turco MR, Palli D, Cariddi A, et al. Intensive diagnostic follow-up after treatment of primary breast cancer. JAMA 1994;271:1593.
698. Chan DW, Beveridge RA, Muss H, et al. Use of Truquant BR radioimmunoassay for early detection of breast cancer recurrence in patients with stage II and stage III disease. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:2322.
699. American Society of Clinical Oncology. Clinical practice guidelines for the use of tumor markers in breast and colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2843.
700. Hayes DF. Evaluation of patients after primary therapy. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2000:709.
701. American Society of Clinical Oncology. Recommended breast cancer surveillance guidelines. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2149.
702. Greenberg PAC, Hortobagyi GN, Smith TL, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients with complete remission following combination chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol
1996;14:2197.
703. Posner JB. Neurologic complications of cancer. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 1995.
704. Valagussa P, Tancini G, Bonadonnna G. Salvage treatment of patients suffering relapse after adjuvant chemotherapy. Cancer 1986;58:1411.
705. Norton L, Slamon D, Leyland-Jones, B, et al. Overall survival advantage to simultaneous chemotherapy plus the humanized anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody Herceptin in HER2-overexpressing
metastatic breast cancer. Cancer 1998;83:1142.
706. Kaufmann M, Bajetta E, Diriz LY, et al. Exemestane is superior to megestrol acetate after tamoxifen failure in postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer: results of a phase III
randomized double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:1399.
707. Cahan WG, Castro EB. Significance of a solitary lung shadow in patients with breast cancer. Ann Surg 1975;181:137.
708. Hayes DF, Bast RC, Desch CE, et al. Tumor marker utility grading system: a framework to evaluate clinical utility of tumor markers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1456.
709. Seifert JK, Weigel TF, Gonner V, Boltger TC, Junginer T. Liver resection for breast cancer metastases. Hepato-Gastroenterology 1999;46:2935.
710. Blumenchein GR, Pinnameni K, Buzdar A, et al. Combined regional and systemic therapy in breast cancer patients with an isolated metastasis with or without prior chemotherapy. Adjuvant
Ther Cancer 1984;4:316.
711. Juan O, Lluch A, de Paz L, et al. Prognostic factors in patients with isolated recurrences of breast cancer (stage IV-NED). Breast Cancer Res Treat 1999;53:105.
712. Osborne CK, Yochmowitz MG, Knight WA IIII, McGuire W. The value of estrogen and progesterone receptors in the treatment of breast cancer. Cancer 1980;46:(Suppl):2884.
713. Ingle JN, Krook JE, Green SJ, et al. Randomized trial of bilateral oophorectomy versus tamoxifen in premenopausal women with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:178.

714. Sunderland MC, Osborne CK. Tamoxifen in premenopausal patients with metastatic breast cancer: a review. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1283.
715. Klijn JGM, Blarney RW, Boccardo F, et al. Combination LHRH-agonist plus tamoxifen treatment is superior to medical castration alone in premenopausal metastatic breast cancer. Breast
Cancer Res Treat 1998;50:227.
716. Jonat W, Kaufmann M, Blamey RW, et al. A randomized study to compare the effect of the luteinising hormone releasing hormone (LHRH) analogue goserelin with or without tamoxifen in preand perimenopausal patients with advanced breast cancer. Eur J Cancer 1995;2:137.
717. Faulkson G, Holcroft C, Gelman RS, et al. Ten-year follow-up study of premenopausal women with metastatic breast cancer: an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:1453.
718. Buzdar A, Jonat W, Howell A, Jones S, Blomqvist C. Anastrozole, a potent and selective aromatase inhibitor, versus megestrol acetate in postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer:
results of overview analysis of two phase III trials. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2000.
719. Kaufmann M, Bajetta E, Yves Dirix L, et al. Exemestane is superior to megestrol acetate after tamoxifen failure in postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer: results of a phase III
randomized double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:1399.
720. Nabholtz JM, Bonneterre J, Buzdar AU, et al. Preliminary results of two multi-center trials comparing the efficacy and tolerability of Arimidex (anastrozole) and tamoxifen in postmenopausal
women with advanced breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1999;57:31(abst 27).
721. Dombernowsky P, Smith I, Falkson G, et al. Letrozole, a new oral aromatase inhibitor for advanced breast cancer: double-blind randomized trial showing a dose effect and improved efficacy
and tolerability compared with megestrol acetate. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:453.
722. Howell A, Dodwell DJ, Anderson H, Redford J. Response after withdrawal of tamoxifen and progestens in advanced breast cancer. Cancer 1992;3:611.
723. Belani CP, Pearl P, Whitley NO, Aisner J. Tamoxifen withdrawal response. Report of a case. Arch Intern Med 1989;149:449.
724. Clarysse A. Hormone induced tumor flare. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1985;21:585.
725. Plotkin D, Lechner JJ, Jung WE, Rosen PJ. Tamoxifen flare in advanced breast cancer. JAMA 1978;240:2644.
726. Ellis MJ, Hayes DF, Lippman ME. Treatment of metastatic breast cancer. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins 2000:749.
727. Burstein HJ, Bunnell CA, Winer EP. New agents and schedules for advanced breast cancer. Semin Oncol (in press).
728. Fossati R, Confalonieri C, Torri V, et al. Cytotoxic and hormonal treatment for metastatic breast cancer: a systematic review of published randomized trials involving 31,510 women. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:3439.
729. Constanza ME, Weiss RB, Henderson IC, et al. Safety and efficacy of using a single agent or a phase II agent before instituting standard combination chemotherapy in previously untreated
metastatic breast cancer patients: reports of a randomized studyCALGB 8642. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1397.
730. Sledge GW Jr, Neuberg D, Ingle J, Martino S, Wood W. Phase III trial of doxorubicin vs. paclitaxel vs. doxorubicin + paclitaxel as first-line therapy for metastatic breast cancer: an intergroup
trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:1a(abst 2).
731. Chan S, Friedrichs K, Noel D. Prospective randomized trial of docetaxel versus doxorubicin in patients with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2341.
732. Paridaens R, Biganzoli L, Bruning P. Paclitaxel versus doxorubicin as first-line single-agent chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer: a European organization for research and treatment of
cancer randomized study with cross-over. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:724.
733. Ravdin PM, Burris HA, Cook G, et al. Phase II trial of docetaxel in advanced anthracycline-resistant or anthracenedione-resistant breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2879.
734. Seidman AD, Hudis CA, Albanel J, et al. Dose-dense therapy with weekly 1 hour paclitaxel infusions in the treatment of metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3353.
735. Joensuu H, Holli K, Heikkinen M, et al. Combination chemotherapy versus single-agent therapy as first- and second-line treatment in metastatic breast cancer: a prospective randomized trial. J
Clin Oncol 1998;16:3720.
736. Neuberg D, Sledge GW Jr, Fettig J, Cella D, Wood W. Changes in quality of life (QOL) during induction therapy in patients enrolled in a randomized trial of Adriamycin, Taxol, and Adriamycin
plus Taxol in metastatic breast cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:54a(abst 185).
737. Sledge GW, Hu P, Falkson G. Comparison of chemotherapy with chemohormonal therapy as first-line therapy for metastatic, hormone-sensitive breast cancer: an Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:262.
738. Perry MC, Kardinal CG, Korzun AH, et al. Chemohormonal therapy in advanced carcinoma of the breast: Cancer and Leukemia Group B Protocol 8081. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1534.
739. Muss H, Case LD, Richards F. Interrupted versus continuous chemotherapy in patients with metastatic breast cancer. The Piedmont Oncology Association. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1342.
740. Gregory RK, Powles RJ, Chang JC, Ashley S. A randomized trial of six versus twelve courses of chemotherapy in metastatic carcinoma of the breast. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:2194.
741. Coates A, Gebski V, Bishop JF, et al. Improving the quality of life during chemotherapy for advanced breast cancer. A comparison of intermittent and continuous treatment strategies. N Engl J
Med 1987;317:1490.
742. Tannock I, Boyd N, De Boer G, et al. A randomized trial of two dose levels of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil chemotherapy for patients with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1988;6:1377.
743. Bastolt L, Dalmark M, Gjedde SB, et al. Dose-response relationship of epirubicin in the treatment of postmenopausal patients with metastatic breast cancer: a randomized study of epirubicin at
four different dose levels performed by the Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group. J Clin Oncol 1990;14:1146.
744. Nabholtz JM, Gelmon K, Bontenbal M, et al. Multicenter, randomized comparative study of two doses of paclitaxel in patients with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1858.
745. Winer E, Berry D, Duggan D, et al. Failure of higher dose paclitaxel to improve outcome in patients with metastatic breast cancerresults from CALGB 9342. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1998;17:101a(abst 388).
746. Smith RE, Brown AM, Mamounas EP. Randomized trial of 3-hour versus 24-hour infusion of high-dose paclitaxel in patients with metastatic or locally advanced breast cancer: National Surgical
Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project protocol B-26. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3403.
747. Burstein HJ, Manola J, Younger J, et al. Docetaxel administered on a weekly basis for metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:1212.
748. Engelsman E, Klijn JCM, Rubens RD, et al. “Classical” CMF versus a 3-weekly intravenous CMF schedule in postmenopausal patients with advanced breast cancer: an EORTC Breast Cancer
Cooperative phase III trial (10808). Eur J Cancer 1991;27:966.
749. Blum JL, Jones SE, Buzdar AU, et al. Multicenter phase II study of capecitabine in paclitaxel-refractory metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:485.
750. Ranson MR, Carmichael J, O'Byrne K, et al. Treatment of advanced breast cancer with sterically stabilized liposomal doxorubicin: results of a multicenter phase II trial. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:3185.
751. Hryniuk W, Bush H. The importance of dose intensity in chemotherapy of metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;2:1281.
752. Peters WP, Shpall EJ, Jones RB, et al. High-dose combination alkylating agents with bone marrow support as initial treatment for metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1368.
753. Kennedy MJ, Beveridge RA, Rowley SD, et al. High-dose chemotherapy with reinfusion of purged autologous bone marrow following dose-intense induction as initial therapy for metastatic
breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:920.
754. Antman K, Ayash L, Elias A, et al. A phase II study of high-dose cyclophosphamide, thiotepa, and carboplatin with autologous marrow support in women with measurable advanced breast
cancer responding to standard-dose therapy. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:102.
755. Ayash LJ, Wheeler C, Fairclough D, et al. Prognostic factors for prolonged progression-free survival with high dose autologous stem cell support for breast cancer in North America. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:2043.
756. Rizzieri DA, Vredenburgh JJ, Jones R. Prognostic and predictive factors for patients with metastatic breast cancer undergoing aggressive induction therapy followed by high-dose chemotherapy
with autologous stem-cell support. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3064.
757. Rowlings PA, Williams SF, Antman KH. Factors correlated with progression-free survival after high-dose chemotherapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for metastatic breast
cancer. JAMA 1999;282:1335.
758. Stadtmauer E, O'Neill A, Goldstein L. Conventional-dose chemotherapy compared with high dose-chemotherapy plus autologous hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation for metastatic breast
cancer. N Engl J Med 2000;342:1069.
759. Berry DA, Broadwater G, Perry MC, et al. Conventional- vs high-dose therapy for metastatic breast cancer: comparison of Cancer and Leukemia Group B and Blood and Marrow Transplant
Registry patients. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:128a(abst 490).
760. Lippman M. Editorial: high-dose chemotherapy plus autologous bone marrow transplantation for metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2000;15:1119.
761. Slamon D, Leyland-Jones B, Shak S, et al. Addition of Herceptin (humanized anti-HER2 antibody) to first line chemotherapy for HER2 overexpressing metastatic breast cancer markedly
increases anticancer activity: a randomized multinational controlled phase III trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:98a(abst 377).
762. Cobleigh MA, Vogel C, Tripathy D, et al. Multinational study of the efficacy and safety of humanized anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody in women who have HER2 overexpressing metastatic
breast cancer that has progressed after chemotherapy for metastatic disease. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2639.
763. Vogel CL, Cobleigh MA, Tripathy D, et al. Efficacy and safety of Herceptin as a single agent in first-line treatment of HER2 overexpressing metastatic breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat
1998:50(abst 23).
764. Burstein HJ, Kuter I, Richadson PG, et al. Herceptin and vinorelbine for HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer: a phase II study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2000:19(abst 392).
765. Burris HA 3rd. Docetaxel (Taxotere) in HER-2-positive patients and in combination with trastuzumab (Herceptin). Semin Oncol 2000;27(2 Suppl 3):19.
766. Fornier M, Seidman AD, Esteva FJ, et al. Weekly Herceptin + 1 hour Taxol: phase II study in HER2 overexpressing and non-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;126a(abst 482).
767. Winer EP. Quality-of-life research in patients with breast cancer. Cancer 1994;74(Suppl):410.
768. Tao ML, Ganz PA. Techniques in the assessment of quality of life. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow ME, Osborne CK, eds. Diseases of the breast, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins, 2000:1103.
769. Kornblith AB, Hollis DR, Zuckerman E, et al. Effect of megestrol acetate on quality of life in a dose-response trial in women with advanced breast cancer. The Cancer and Leukemia Group B. J
Clin Oncol 1993;11:2081.
770. Liu G, Franssen E, Fitch MI, Warner E. Patient preferences for oral versus intravenous palliative chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:110.
771. DeMario MD, Ratain MJ. Oral chemotherapy: rationale and future directions. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3362.
772. Hortobagyi GN, Theriault RL, Porter L, et al. Efficacy of pamidronate in reducing skeletal complications in patients with breast cancer and lytic bone metastases. Protocol 19 Aredia Breast
Cancer Study Group. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1785.
773. Demetri GD, Kris M, Wade J, Cella D. Quality-of-life benefit in chemotherapy patients treated with epoietin alfa is independent of disease response or tumor type: results from a prospective
community oncology study. Procrit Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3412.
774. Gralla RJ, Osoba D, Kris MG, et al. Recommendations for the use of antiemetics: evidence-based, clinical practice guidelines. American Society of Clinical Oncology. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:2971.

SECTION 37.3 Rehabilitation after Treatment for Cancer of the Breast
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 37.3
Rehabilitation after Treatment for Cancer of the Breast
JOSEPH J. DISA
JEANNE A. PETREK
Introduction
Delayed Versus Immediate Reconstruction
Prosthetic Reconstruction
Autologous Tissue Reconstruction
Postmastectomy after Breast Irradiation
Skin-Sparing Mastectomy with Immediate Reconstruction
Lymphedema
Etiologic Factors
Prevention of Lymphedema after Axillary Treatment
Lymphedema Treatments
Medications
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Breast reconstruction after mastectomy has grown in popularity since the 1970s. The era of diagnosis with less extensive cancers has ushered in less extensive total
mastectomies, including “skin sparing” with an incision only around the areola. Presently, the typical patient has many choices, not only regarding the cancer
management but also regarding multiple surgical options after mastectomy.
The first consideration after mastectomy is whether to reconstruct the breast. Not performing breast reconstruction is the simplest approach. The patient then faces
postmastectomy appearance and the need, in most women, for an external prosthesis to restore appearance and weight balance. Mastectomy forms first began as
individually made cotton fluff-filled forms. Then foam rubber forms were manufactured with holes in the back for metal weights to add stability and gravity. Now almost
all weighted breast prostheses are made of solid silicone materials. The variably shaped breast forms are also available in several skin colors. It is very rare, but
possible, to require custom manufacturing of the form for irregular mastectomy defects.
The external prosthesis is completely concealed in a bra with an adjustable built-in pocket specially constructed to accommodate it. Wearing the weighted prosthesis
should help the body maintain its posture and balance and may prevent back and neck strain. With the concern that the prosthesis could become dislodged, even with
such a specially fitted bra or swimsuit, adherent forms have now become popular. Using a variety of surgical adhesives, the form adheres to the chest wall or to a
backing on the skin of the chest wall, so that the form can be removed every night while the backing can remain for a week or more. In retrospective studies, 1,2 the
differences among those opting for breast reconstruction, those wearing external prostheses, and those doing neither were explored.
The American Cancer Society sponsors the program Reach to Recovery (1-800-ACS-2345), which began in 1952, a time in which all volunteers had undergone
mastectomy. Today, the survivor-to-patient outreach and support include volunteers who have had breast conservation and postmastectomy reconstruction. At the
physician's request, trained volunteers meet with the patient to discuss several aspects of recovery, including physiologic, psychological, and cosmetic rehabilitation.
Resources for the patient include breast prostheses information with knowledge of local resources, clothing suggestions, and even an exercise booklet and aids.

DELAYED VERSUS IMMEDIATE RECONSTRUCTION
If breast reconstruction is elected, the next decision is timing, immediate (at the time of the mastectomy) or delayed. The traditional concept of performing the
mastectomy, proceeding with adjuvant therapy, and delaying reconstruction until the completion of adjuvant therapy is being supplanted by the increasing use of
immediate reconstruction. In a mastectomy without immediate reconstruction, it is difficult to “save” any extra native breast skin because, with the volume of the breast
missing, there is excess skin folding and wrinkling. The first large report of immediate reconstruction was in 1982 by Georgiade et al. 3 In their series of 62 patients, the
authors concluded that immediate breast reconstruction in selected patients offered the advantages of improved aesthetic results, decreased cost, less morbidity, and
no adverse effect on cancer management.
Because the mastectomy and reconstruction are performed under a single anesthetic, the total hospital costs and convalescent time are reduced when compared to
mastectomy and delayed reconstruction. 4 Immediate reconstruction reduces physical morbidity by limiting the total number of anesthetics and reducing the need for a
symmetry procedure on the opposite breast.5 Critical landmarks for optimizing breast form and symmetry are the inframammary fold, which is preserved, and the
breast skin envelope, which can be preserved and maintained in its native state with immediate reconstruction.
Current methods of reconstruction can be broadly classified into autologous tissue or prosthetic material. Autologous tissue reconstruction uses the patient's own
tissue (skin, subcutaneous tissue, and muscle) from another site to reconstruct the missing breast. Prosthetic reconstruction uses a process known as tissue
expansion to create a “pocket” for the ultimate placement of a breast implant. There are occasional indications for a combination of both autologous tissue and an
implant. The selection of the reconstructive technique is based on anatomic patient factors, including the laxity and thickness of the remaining chest wall skin, the
condition of the chest wall musculature, the size of the opposite breast, and the availability of suitable autologous tissue donor sites. To identify the appropriate
method of reconstruction, the anatomic factors are considered with cancer treatment goals and the patient's expectations, as well as, most important, clinical factors
(diabetes, obesity, other chronic illnesses) because operative complexity and postoperative recovery varies.

PROSTHETIC RECONSTRUCTION
Breast reconstruction using prosthetic materials involves the use of tissue expanders and permanent breast implants. Initially, implants were placed directly under the
skin in the mastectomy space, but the results were limited by the available skin envelope and capsular contracture. 6,7 The development of tissue expanders allowed
for greater control over the size of the skin envelope, thus resulting in the ability to use larger prostheses for symmetry. Current techniques use a complete
submuscular placement of the tissue expander, with coverage by pectoralis major, serratus anterior, and occasionally the anterior rectus sheath. 6
A biodimensional textured surface tissue expander is placed either at the time of mastectomy, which increases the operative time of less than 1 hour, or in a delayed
fashion, during a separate later operation. The area is allowed to heal for approximately 10 to 14 days, at which time fluid expansion is commenced. Using an
integrated valve within the expander, saline is injected into the expander percutaneously until the appropriate size is reached ( Fig. 37.3-1). Adjuvant chemotherapy
can be commenced during the expansion process. The exchange to a permanent breast implant takes place after the chemotherapy course. Using a two-stage
method of implant reconstruction allows for maximum control of the implant pocket and optimal symmetry with the contralateral breast ( Fig. 37.3-2). When indicated,
contralateral symmetry procedures such as augmentation mammoplasty, reduction mammoplasty, or mastopexy (breast lift), are accomplished when the tissue
expander is exchanged to a permanent implant.

FIGURE 37.3-1. Complete submuscular placement of the tissue expander at the time of mastectomy (left). Percutaneous approach to expansion using a complete
submuscular integrated valve tissue expander ( right).

FIGURE 37.3-2. A: After expansion is complete, the pocket is overexpanded relative to the normal breast to maximize ptosis and implant projection. B: The same
patient subsequent to exchange of the tissue expander to a permanent saline breast implant followed by nipple-areola reconstruction and tattooing.

The author (J. J. D.) reported results with 770 consecutive patients undergoing tissue expansion over a 10-year period. In this series, premature removal of the tissue
expander secondary to wound-related complications or persistent disease was necessary in only 1.8% of the patients. 8 The advantages of tissue expander implant
reconstruction are the simplicity, reliability, and avoidance of donor site morbidity. The disadvantages of this technique relate to the use of prosthetic material and
include infection, leakage of the implant, capsular contracture, and differences in texture and symmetry when compared to the contralateral breast, which can lead to
multiple surgical procedures on the opposite breast.
Breast implants available for reconstruction vary in size, shape, surface texturing, and fill material. In general, implants are either round or anatomic in shape, with a
smooth or textured surface, and saline or silicone gel–filled. Currently, saline-filled breast implants are available, and use of silicone gel implants requires enrollment
in a silicone adjunct study sponsored by the implant manufacturers, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, and the Institution Review Board where the procedure is
being performed. Despite the moratorium placed on the general use of silicone gel implants, to date there is no convincing cause and effect between “human adjuvant
disease” and the use of silicone gel implants. 9

AUTOLOGOUS TISSUE RECONSTRUCTION
The most predictable results in breast reconstruction involve the use of autologous tissue. In general, use of the patient's own tissue results in a reconstruction that
can closely match the opposite breast in size, shape, and texture. Depending on the volume of the tissue transferred and the volume of the contralateral breast,
autologous tissue breast reconstruction sometimes also requires an implant.
Methods of autologous tissue breast reconstruction include local flaps and distant flaps. Local flaps, including the latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap and the pedicled
transverse rectus abdominus myocutaneous (TRAM) flap, rely on transposition of muscle, subcutaneous tissue, and skin into the mastectomy defect based on the
attached native blood supply of the muscle. Distant flap breast reconstruction mandates the use of microvascular free tissue transfer. The most common distant tissue
donor site is the free TRAM flap. Other donor sites include the inferior gluteal flap, the superior gluteal flap, the deep inferior epigastric artery perforator flap, and the
Rubens flap. Reconstruction using these tissues relies on harvesting the flap with its discreet vascular pedicle. The vascular pedicle is then anastomosed using
microsurgical technique to appropriate recipient vessels in the mastectomy site, usually the thoracodorsal and internal mammary vessels.
The latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap with an overlying skin island can be transposed from the back into the mastectomy defect ( Fig. 37.3-3). The advantages of the
latissimus flap are in its ease of harvest and minimal donor site morbidity, compared to other sites. 10 The chief disadvantage of the latissimus flap is that concomitant
use of a breast implant is often necessary due to the limited volume of tissue provided ( Fig. 37.3-4). Without a simultaneous implant placement, the latissimus dorsi
flap is reserved for small breasts.

FIGURE 37.3-3. Design of the latissimus flap and skin island ( left). Transposition of the myocutaneous latissimus dorsi flap into the mastectomy defect ( center).
Latissimus flap breast reconstruction with the placement of a breast implant underneath the latissimus dorsi flap ( right).

FIGURE 37.3-4. Right breast reconstruction with latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap and permanent implant. The implant was necessary to achieve symmetry with the
opposite breast.

The most common method of autologous tissue breast reconstruction is with the TRAM flap 11 because of the texture and the large volume, both of which match the
other breast (Fig. 37.3-5). The blood supply to the skin island and lower abdominal fat is derived from perforating vessels through the underlying rectus abdominus
muscle. Depending on the increasing volume necessary to match the other breast, the TRAM flap can be transferred on a single pedicle (usually the contralateral
superior epigastric), double pedicle (using both rectus muscles and their associated superior epigastric vessels), or as a free flap (based on the deep inferior
epigastric vessels) 12 (Fig. 37.3-6).

FIGURE 37.3-5. Design of an unipedicled transverse rectus abdominus myocutaneous (TRAM) flap on the lower abdomen ( left). Elevation of the TRAM flap based on
the left rectus abdominus muscle (center). Right breast reconstruction with unipedicled TRAM flap after closure of donor site and inset of flap ( right).

FIGURE 37.3-6. A: Anatomy of transverse rectus abdominus myocutaneous (TRAM) flap on the lower abdomen. The flap is centered over the rectus abdominus
muscles and is supplied by the superior epigastric vessels and the deep inferior epigastric vessels. B: Intraoperative appearance of a bipedicled TRAM flap after
harvest and before transposition into the mastectomy defect.

The TRAM flap allows the reconstructive surgeon the most versatility and design. Thus, the flap can be sculpted to closely match the contralateral breast in unilateral
reconstruction, or itself in bilateral reconstruction ( Fig. 37.3-7). The use of a breast implant is rarely indicated with a TRAM flap, because an ample amount of tissue
exists in properly selected patients. The lower abdominal donor site scar is easily hidden with conventional clothing. Despite the obvious advantages of the TRAM
flap, not everyone is a candidate. Thin patients may not have an adequate amount of tissue at the donor site, whereas obese patients have a much higher risk for
local and systemic complications. 13 Total flap loss with the free TRAM flap can occur, but the risk is generally accepted to be less than 2%. 14,15 Use of the rectus
abdominus muscle results in 10% loss in abdominal wall strength in unilateral reconstruction and 40% loss when both muscles are harvested. 16 Lower abdominal
bulging and hernia formation occurs in fewer than 10% of patients and can be minimized by surgical techniques that maximize preservation of the rectus muscles. 17

FIGURE 37.3-7. Bilateral breast reconstruction with transverse rectus abdominus myocutaneous flaps and subsequent nipple-areola reconstruction. The use of
autologous tissue conveys a natural appearance to the breast reconstruction.

Other methods of autologous tissue reconstruction include the gluteus free flap based on the superior or inferior gluteal vessels, and the Rubens flap based on the
deep circumflex iliac artery. These techniques are technically demanding and do not offer the same high-quality tissue available with a TRAM flap. Therefore, their
use is reserved for patients desiring breast reconstruction that are not candidates for more conventional methods.

POSTMASTECTOMY AFTER BREAST IRRADIATION

Breast reconstruction after local failure in the irradiated breast presents a unique challenge for both the oncologic and reconstructive surgeon. The late effects of
radiation are characterized clinically by a loss of skin elasticity, fibrosis, and decreased blood supply. The postradiation fibrosis severely limits the ability of the tissue
expander to create a satisfactory pocket for the permanent implant. There is an increased incidence of infection, skin necrosis, and expander extrusion when
attempting to expand the irradiated skin and muscle chest wall, as well as a high rate of capsular contracture in the final result. The lack of projection of the permanent
implant and capsular contracture detracts from the final aesthetic result. 18,19
Increasing the success of breast reconstruction after prior irradiation involves the use of autologous tissue. Depending on the method, this procedure can be
performed with or without a breast implant. The transfer of the ipsilateral latissimus dorsi muscle with a cutaneous skin island into the mastectomy defect delivers a
large volume of healthy nonirradiated tissue into the defect. In conjunction with a tissue expander, the flap can be expanded without difficulty, and ultimately a
permanent implant can be placed with improved aesthetics and a decreased incidence of complications. 20
In a series 21,22 of 680 consecutive patients who underwent TRAM flap breast reconstruction, 108 patients had had previous irradiation, and no difference was found in
flap survival in the two groups. There was, however, increased incidence of infection and fat necrosis in the radiated group, which detracts from the final aesthetic
result. The effects of irradiation on the mastectomy flaps predisposes to ischemia and may increase scar formation. 20

SKIN-SPARING MASTECTOMY WITH IMMEDIATE RECONSTRUCTION
Although autologous tissue breast reconstruction can create a breast mound that resembles the breast in shape and consistency, one drawback is the color difference
between the native breast skin and the flap skin (from the distant site), which conveys a “patch-like” appearance ( Fig. 37.3-8). The technique of skin-sparing
mastectomy is accomplished through one incision around the areola with preservation of the entire breast skin envelope. When necessary, a counterincision in the
axilla is used to expose blood vessels, to remove lymph nodes, or for microsurgical flap transfer. The skin island from the flap is confined to the zone of the
nipple-areola complex ( Fig. 37.3-9A,B). Subsequent nipple reconstruction covers the skin island completely, thereby virtually eliminating all visible scars ( Fig.
37.3-9C), and the reconstructed breast is almost indistinguishable from the other. Importantly, long-term follow-up of selected patients has not shown a difference in
local recurrence rates after skin-sparing mastectomy versus traditional mastectomy. 23,24 and 25 Technical advances using complete skin-sparing techniques have
resulted in reconstructed breasts that are virtually indistinguishable from the native breast in terms of color, texture, and appearance. 23

FIGURE 37.3-8. Right breast reconstruction after mastectomy for failed breast-conservation therapy with an unipedicled transverse rectus abdominus myocutaneous
(TRAM) flap. The skin island on the TRAM flap has been used to replace the radiated skin from the breast mound.

FIGURE 37.3-9. A: Design of circumareolar incision for complete skin-sparing mastectomy and axillary counterincision for exposure of lymph nodes and blood
vessels. B: Complete skin-sparing mastectomy with free transverse rectus abdominus myocutaneous (TRAM) flap and reconstruction before nipple-areola
reconstruction in another patient. C: Right breast reconstruction with a free TRAM flap after complete skin-sparing mastectomy. The patient has undergone right
nipple-areola reconstruction and tattooing. Using this complete skin-sparing approach, the periareolar mastectomy incision is barely visible.

Nipple-areola reconstruction can be accomplished simply in the outpatient setting. One method is simply tattooing a nipple and areola onto the breast mound to
imitate the color and size of the opposite nipple-areola complex. Alternatively, a local flap can be raised on the breast mound to create the nipple projection, or a skin
graft can be placed (Fig. 37.3-10). Although the nipple reconstruction lacks sensation and the erectile function of the natural nipple, it provides an important visual
suggestion of normalcy and decreases the stigmata of mastectomy.

FIGURE 37.3-10. A: Nipple-areola reconstruction using a tattooing technique only. B: Left breast reconstruction after complete skin-sparing mastectomy with a
pedicled transverse rectus abdominus myocutaneous flap, and subsequent nipple-areola reconstruction using a local flap followed by tattooing.

LYMPHEDEMA
Aside from recurrence, lymphedema is the most dreaded sequelae of breast cancer treatment. Approximately 15% to 20% of breast cancer patients have developed

lymphedema after breast cancer treatment. Therefore, of perhaps 2 million current breast cancer survivors after axillary dissection, approximately 400,000 cope daily
with the disfigurement, discomfort, and disability of arm and hand swelling.
Lymphedema is the result of a functional overload of the lymphatic system in which lymph volume exceeds transport capabilities. The functioning lymph system
removes large molecules that reach the interstitial space by filtration, cellular metabolism, or secretion. The buildup of interstitial macromolecules leads to an increase
in oncotic pressure in the tissues, producing more edema, and the blocked lymphatic vessels raise hydrostatic pressure proximally in the system. Persistent swelling
and stagnant protein eventually lead to fibrosis and provide an excellent culture medium for repeated bouts of cellulitis and lymphangitis. With dilatation of the
lymphatics, the internal valves become incompetent, causing further stasis.
The reported incidence of lymphedema has varied greatly and depends in part on the extent of axillary treatment, the interval between axillary treatment and
measurement, methods used to define lymphedema, and the completeness of the patient population follow-up.
All reports on the incidence of lymphedema, including the seven selected ones from a review, 26 are retrospective, and in each of these reports, the denominator (i.e.,
the number of patients at risk for developing lymphedema in a particular population) is imprecise or unknown. The incidence varied from 6% to 30%, with the lowest
incidence of lymphedema having the shortest follow-up. 26
ETIOLOGIC FACTORS
Almost all previous studies find that the incidence and the degree of lymphedema is correlated to the extent of surgical dissection as more nodes are excised.
However, two large studies 27,28 could not demonstrate this relationship, perhaps because rather small differences in extent of axillary dissection were assessed.
Regardless of the number of lymph nodes excised, surgeons should attempt to carefully preserve the fatty axillary tissue containing the invisible lymphatic trunks
around the vein and to dissect the tissue only inferior to the axillary vein.
In every study that has evaluated this issue, the addition of radiation therapy directed to the dissected axilla was a strong predictor of lymphedema. 26 Of particular
importance is that even when the intent is to radiate the breast only (such as after lumpectomy), some radiation dosage may reach the axilla depending on
radiotherapy technique and patient anatomy. Specific breast radiotherapy techniques with the goal to avoid the dissected axilla and the pathophysiology of
radiation-related lymphedema have been reviewed. 29 For precise radiation technique, it may be helpful for the surgeon to mark axillary dissection by radiopaque clips,
and the area can then be seen on the simulation films.
It is biologically intuitive that sentinel lymph node biopsy of one or few nodes should decrease the risk of lymphedema. However, the sentinel node operation is not
always so limited, and it is theoretically possible that indeed the sentinel node may be at the level of the axillary vein (and the lymph trunks), thereby theoretically
predisposing the patient to lymphedema. The risk of lymphedema has not yet been assessed in the follow-up of patients treated with sentinel lymph node technology.
Furthermore, if axillary radiotherapy is added after sentinel node biopsy, there is the risk of lymphedema. In series reporting axillary radiotherapy but no axillary
surgery at all, lymphedema incidence ranged from 2% to 5%. 29
Beyond these two definite factors—extent of surgical dissection and radiation to the axilla—a wide range of possible etiologic factors has not been evaluated
systematically. Older age at diagnosis was reported to be a significant factor in one study, 30,31 but was unrelated to lymphedema incidence in another, 32 and curiously
was not noted in others. Similar disagreement holds for dominant hand on the operated side, 32,33 obesity,27,34 surgical technique, 31 and postoperative course. 35,36
PREVENTION OF LYMPHEDEMA AFTER AXILLARY TREATMENT
Because controlling lymphedema requires daily attention, and because “curing” lymphedema has not been accomplished, emphasis must be placed on prevention.
Nevertheless, without evidence-based knowledge of etiologic factors, the list of posttreatment arm precautions is based on intuitive reasoning. As a background, it is
important to remember that each woman has a congenitally different anatomy, which also is probably uniquely prone to degenerative conditions, similar to the
remainder of the vascular system. This has been studied thus far in a limited fashion with lymphoscintigraphy. 37 The individual patient factors, combined with surgical
and radiation treatment factors, must be the main determinants, notwithstanding the fact that lymphedema may occur several years after treatment. Events or
activities, such as exercise, in the subsequent years and decades have not been studied to state which are causative factors and to what degree.
Arm and hand precautions are loosely based on two overarching principles: (1) Do not increase lymph production, which is directly proportional to blood flow, and (2)
do not increase blockage to lymph transport. Heat (such as that in a sauna), significant infections, and vigorous arm exercise increase blood flow in the arm and
thereby increase lymph production. Obstruction of lymph flow may result from tight arm garments or from infections with ensuing fibrosis and stenosis of lymphatic
vessels.
The patient is instructed as follows:
1. Avoid puncturing or injuring the skin in any way. Use meticulous skin and nail/cuticle care. Pay immediate attention and use standard first aid care.
2. Avoid vaccinations, injections, blood pressure monitoring, blood drawing, and intravenous administration in that arm.
3. Avoid constricting sleeves or jewelry and wear a padded bra strap (to avoid supraclavicular area compression).
4. Avoid heat, such as with sunburns or tanning, baths, and saunas.
5. Avoid violent exercises and strenuous exertion. Consider vigorous aerobic arm exercise only when compression garments support the arm.
No data govern any of these recommendations. In the only studies that reported on bilateral axillary dissections, there was no higher risk of lymphedema in those
women over those who had unilateral axillary dissection. 26,38 This calls into question whether blood drawing, intravenous administration, blood pressure monitoring,
and injections are proven to hasten the development of lymphedema. On the other hand, breaking the skin barrier, even during medical procedures, could
theoretically predispose to infection, and blood pressure monitoring could cause soft tissue trauma. Data for any of the other arm and hand precautions are also
intuitive and not evidence-based.
All patients after axillary dissection are instructed in the arm and hand care precautions, which may, however, be too severe for those at low risk and yet not
aggressive enough for those at highest risk. Because lymphedema development may occur even several decades 39 after the axillary treatment, patients are
admonished to follow these demanding precautions for the remainder of their lives.
LYMPHEDEMA TREATMENTS
Therapeutic nihilism (i.e., no treatment at all) is deplorable, although common. The fact that the average clinician is ill-prepared to recognize early signs of
lymphedema must be remedied because the sooner the treatment is started, the less treatment is required to prevent further progression.
In the past, the treatment of established lymphedema has varied from none at all to a host of aggressive surgical procedures. Between the extremes are various
combined conservative treatments, the most important of which are elevation, compression garments, centripetal massage and exercises, pneumatic compression
devices, and the complete (or complex) decongestive physiotherapy (CDP) program.
Complete Decongestive Physiotherapy
CDP has been widely available in Europe for many years. The program was founded on the fact that lymphedema exists in an entire body quadrant, although it is
most distressing in the arm or hand. The program includes skin care, gentle specific massage known as manual lymph drainage (MLD), low stretch multilayer
compression bandaging (followed by a fitted compression garment when edema is reduced), and therapeutic exercises with the garment or bandages in place.
The modification and features of the various CDP programs by Vodder, 40 Leduc,41 Foldi, 42 and Casley-Smith43 have been reviewed in the 1998 American Cancer
Society Workshop on Breast Cancer Treatment–Related Lymphedema. Although the principles followed are the same for each school, the massage techniques vary
somewhat in the degree of pressure, motion, and timing of strokes. Additionally, the Leduc technique uses low intermittent pneumatic pressure (<40 mm Hg) pumps,

and the Casley-Smith group uses benzopyrone medication.
A typical program is given below. CDP must be performed by skilled, specially trained therapists. During the treatment phase, the patient is given one or two daily 75
to 90 minute treatments over 1 to 4 weeks. In the maintenance phase, which is continued indefinitely, the patient maintains and optimizes the results by applying
some of the techniques learned in the treatment phase, such as wearing an elastic sleeve during the day, bandaging (as described below) the affected limb overnight,
and exercising for 15 minutes a day while wearing the bandages.
MLD, or manual lymph therapy, is a delicate massage technique that stimulates lymph vessels to contract more frequently and that directs and channels fluid toward
adjacent, functioning lymph basins. MLD begins with stimulation of the lymph vessels and nodes in unaffected and opposite basins (neck, contralateral axilla,
ipsilateral groin). Edema fluid and obstructed lymphatics are made to drain toward functioning lymph basins across the midline of the body, down toward the groin,
over the top of the shoulder, around the back, and so forth. Finally, in segmented order, massage of the involved trunk, then shoulder, upper arm, forearm, wrist, and
hand is performed. Multilayer low-stretch bandaging is done immediately after MLD. Bandages are wrapped from the fingertips to the axilla with maximal pressure
distally and less pressure proximally. This is done by using many layers of minimally elastic cotton bandages, beneath which layers of foam rubber padding are
inserted to ensure uniform pressure distribution or to increase pressure in areas that are particularly fibrotic. The bandaged patient is next guided through exercises
involving active range of motion with the muscles and joints functioning within the closed space of the bandaging. Isometric exercise is generally avoided.
After volume reduction has been accomplished, well-fitted custom-made compressive garments (see next section) continue ongoing control of edema. The patient
should be re-measured and the garment replaced every 3 months. The prescribed exercises continue in the low-stretch multilayer bandages, which are also worn
overnight. The patient and family is trained to continue the maintenance program at home. Follow-up visits to the center usually take place at least at 6-month
intervals.
Although this increasingly popular technique appears more successful in reversing lymphedema than other modalities, the availability of patient services and
treatment centers that can practice CDP are limited. The patient availability 44 and the professional education for physical therapists 45 has been reviewed. The theory
and clinical application of the four schools of manual lymphatic technique are reviewed in the American Cancer Society monograph by their representative
faculty.40,41,42 and 43
Elevation and Elastic Garments
Although elevation is helpful in reducing swelling through use of gravity, it is impractical. A patient with lymphedema should be fitted with an elastic sleeve from wrist
to axilla, if the edema is mild, or after swelling reduction, if the edema is moderate. A separate gauntlet or handpiece allows the patient to wash her hands without
removing the sleeve.
The compression classes are as follows:
I. 20 to 30 mm Hg
II. 30 to 40 mm Hg
III. 40 to 50 mm Hg
IV. 50 to 60 mm Hg
For upper extremity lymphedema, a class II or III support is generally required. The person measuring the lymphedematous arm and hand should be specifically
trained in fitting such garments and in instructing the patient in proper application. A statistically significant reduction in edema has been reported in women who wore
garments for 6 consecutive hours per day. 46 Using these garments during exercise, physical activity, and air travel is recommended.
Pneumatic Pumps
The standard sequential system is a multichamber pump that delivers the compression at the same pressure in each garment section from distal to proximal tissues.
The gradient sequential system delivers pressures that differ by approximately 10 mm Hg between each chamber, with the higher pressures delivered to the distal
chamber. A minimum of 1 hour each pumping session with the arm elevated is required, and lower pressures for longer periods are more effective than higher
pressures for a shorter time. Individualized and tailored pumping programs should be prescribed by a physical therapist, based on measurable efficacy and
tolerability, as known by the serial assessment before the patient is placed on a home program.
The various devices have been reported in several controlled studies 47,48 and 49 to reduce lymphedema. Although theoretically attractive to use machinery for the
pumping action on the arm lymphatics, pumping has not been as clinically effective as would be hoped. It has been hoped that pneumatic compression devices or
“pumps” could duplicate the beneficial effects of massage. 50 However, the pumps force protein-rich edema fluid toward the shoulder but not through the axillary
blockage. Rationale and controversies about pumps have been reviewed. 50,51
MEDICATIONS
Diuretics are not effective in high-protein edemas such as lymphedema. Although the diuretics can temporarily mobilize water, the osmotic pressure from the
increased protein in the interstitial space causes rapid re-accumulation of edema.
Benzopyrones belong to a group of drugs that include the bioflavonoids and the coumarins. The former occurs widely in nature, especially in fruits and vegetables.
Benzopyrones may improve chronic lymphedema by stimulating macrophage activity for increased proteolysis and thereby removal of stagnant, excess protein in the
tissue spaces, which results in less oncotic pressure and edema fluid. In 1993, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial of 5,6-benzo-a-pyrone
demonstrated its efficacy in an Australian study. 52 Although the effect was mild, it was statistically significant. However, in a similar study design, a larger number of
breast cancer patients in an American multicenter study led by the Mayo Clinic were reported. No value was found with the benzopyrone beyond the placebo effect. 53
Furthermore, 6% of these study subjects had serious elevation of liver function tests.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Hart SS, Meyerowitz BE, Apolone G, et al. Quality of life among mastectomy patients using external breast prostheses. Tumori 1997;83:581.
2. Reaby LL. Breast restoration decision making: enhancing the process. Cancer Nurs 1998;21:196.
3. Georgiade G, Georgiade N, McCarty KS Jr, Seigler HF. Rationale for immediate reconstruction of the breast following modified radical mastectomy. Ann Plast Surg 1982;8:20.
4. Khoo A, Kroll SS, Reece GP, et al. A comparison of resource costs of immediate and delayed breast reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg 1998;101:964.
5. Elliot LF, Hartrampf CR Jr. Breast reconstruction: progress in the past decade. World J Surg 1990;14:763.
6. Gruber RP, Kahn RA, Lash H, Maser MR. Breast reconstruction following mastectomy: a comparison of submuscular and subcutaneous techniques. Plast Reconstr Surg 1981;67:312.
7. Asplund O. Capsular contracture in silicone gel and saline filled breast implants after reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg 1984;73:270.
8. Disa JJ, Ad-El DD, Cohen SM, et al. The premature removal of tissue expanders in breast reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg 1999;104:1662.
9. Gabriel SE, O'Fallon WM, Kurland LT, et al. Risk of connective-tissue diseases and other disorders after breast implantation. N Engl J Med 1994;330:1697.
10. Bostwick J III, Scheflan M. The latissimus dorsi musculocutaneous flap: a one stage breast reconstruction. Clin Plast Surg 1980;7:71.
11. Hartrampf CR, Scheflan M, Black PW. Breast reconstruction with a transverse abdominal island flap. Plast Reconstr Surg 1982;69:216.
12. Grotting JC, Urist MM, Maddox WA, Vasconez LO. Conventional TRAM flap versus free microsurgical TRAM flap for immediate breast reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg 1989; 83:828.
13. Kroll SS, Netscher DT. Complications of TRAM flap breast reconstruction in obese patients. Plast Reconstr Surg 1989;84:886.
14. Hidalgo DA, Disa JJ, Cordeiro PG, Hu Q. A review of 716 consecutive free flaps for oncologic surgical defects: refinement in donor-site selection and technique. Plast Reconstr Surg
1998;102:722.
15. Schusterman MA, Kroll SS, Miller MJ, et al. The free transverse rectus abdominus musculocutaneous flap for breast reconstruction: one center's experience with 211 consecutive cases. Ann
Plast Surg 1994;32:234.
16. Kind GM, Rademaker AW, Mustoe TA. Abdominal-wall recovery following TRAM flap: a functional outcome study. Plast Reconstr Surg 1997;99:417.
17. Reece GP, Kroll SS. Abdominal wall complications: prevention and treatment. Clin Plast Surg 1998;25:235.
18. Disa JJ, Petrek JA. Surgical management after local failure in the irradiated breast. Semin Breast Dis 1999;2:252.
19. Schuster RH, Kuske RR, Young VL, Fineberg B. Breast reconstruction in women treated with radiation therapy for breast cancer: cosmesis, complications, and tumor control. Plast Reconstr
Surg 1992;90:445.
20. Kroll SS, Schusterman MA, Reece GP, et al. Breast reconstruction with myocutaneous flaps in previously irradiated patients. Plast Reconstr Surg 1994;93:460.
21. Williams JK, Bostwick J III, Bried JT, et al. TRAM flap breast reconstruction after radiation treatment. Ann Surg 1995;221:756.

22. Williams JK, Carlson GW, Bostwick J III, et al. The effects of radiation treatment after TRAM flap breast reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg 1997;100:1153.
23. Hidalgo DA, Borgen PJ, Petrek JA, et al. Immediate reconstruction after complete skin-sparing mastectomy with autologous tissue. J Am CollSurg 1998;187:17.
24. Toth BA, Forley BG, Calabria R. Retrospective study of skin-sparing mastectomy in breast reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg 1999;104:77.
25. Carlson GW, Bostwick J III, Styblo TM, et al. Skin-sparing mastectomy: oncologic and reconstructive considerations. Ann Surg 1997;225:570.
26. Petrek JA, Heelan MC. Incidence of breast carcinoma-related lymphedema. Cancer 1998;83:2776.
27. Werner RS, McCormick B, Petrek JA, et al. Arm edema in conservatively managed breast cancer: obesity is a major predictive factor. Ther Radiol 1991;180:177.
28. Dewar JA, Sarrazin D, Benhamou E, et al. Management of the axilla in conservatively treated breast cancer: 592 patients treated at Institut Gustave-Roussy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1987;13:475.
29. Meek AG. Breast radiotherapy and lymphedema. Cancer 1998;83:2788.
30. Delouche G, Bachelot F, Premont M, et al. Conservation treatment of early breast cancer: long term results and complications. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:29.
31. Pezner RD, Patterson MP, Hill LR, et al. Arm lymphedema in patients treated conservatively for breast cancer: relationship to patient age and axillary node dissection technique. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:2079.
32. Kissin MW, Querci della Rovere G, Easton D, et al. Risk of lymphoedema following the treatment of breast cancer. Br J Surg 1986;73:580.
33. Ivens D, Hoe AL, Podd CR, et al. Assessment of morbidity from complete axillary dissection. Br J Cancer 1992;66:136.
34. Larson D, Weinstein M, Goldberg I, et al. Edema of the arm as a function of the extent of axillary surgery in patients with stage III carcinoma of the breast treated with primary radiotherapy. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1575.
35. Tadych K, Donegan WL. Postmastectomy seromas and wound drainage. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1987;165:483.
36. West JP, Ellison JB. A study of the causes and prevention of edema of the arm following radical mastectomy. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1959;109:359.
37. Bourgeois P, Leduc O, Leduc A. Imaging techniques in the upper management and prevention of posttherapeutic upper limb edemas. Cancer 1998;83:2805.
38. Mortimer PS, Bates SO, Brassington HD, et al. The prevalence of arm lymphedema following treatment for breast cancer. QJM 1996;89:377.
39. Brennan MJ, Weitz J. Lymphedema 30 years after radical mastectomy. Am J Phys MedRehabil 1992;71:12.
40. Kasseroller RG. The Vodder school: the Vodder method. Cancer 1998;83:2840.
41. Leduc O, Leduc A, Bourgeois P, Belgrado JP. The physical treatment of upper limb edema. Cancer 1998;83:2835.
42. Foldi E. The treatment of lymphedema. Cancer 1998;83:2833.
43. Casley-Smith JR, Boris M, Weindorf S, Lasinski B. Treatment for lymphedema of the armthe Casley-Smith method: a noninvasive method produces continued reduction. Cancer 1998;83:2843.
44. Thiadens SRJ. Current status of education and treatment resources for lymphedema. Cancer 1998;83:2864.
45. Augustine E, Corn M, Danoff J. Lymphedema management training for physical therapy students in the United States. Cancer 1998;83:2869.
46. Bertelli G, Venturini M, Forno G, et al. An analysis of prognostic factors in response to conservative treatment of postmastectomy lymphedema. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1992;175:455.
47. Pappas CJ, O'Donnell TF Jr. Long-term results of compression treatment for lymphedema. J Vasc Surg 1992;16:555.
48. Richmand DM, O'Donnell TF Jr, Zelikovski A. Sequential pneumatic compression for lymphedema: a controlled trial. Arch Surg 1985;120:1116.
49. Zanolla R, Monzeglio C, Balzarini A, et al. Evaluation of the results of three different methods of postmastectomy lymphedema treatment. J Surg Oncol 1984;26:210.
50. Brennan MJ, Miller LT. Overview of treatment options and review of the current role and use of compression garments, intermittent pumps, and exercise in the management of lymphedema.
Cancer 1998;83:2821.
51. Rinehart-Ayres ME. Conservative approaches to lymphedema treatment. Cancer 1998; 83:2828.
52. Casley-Smith JR, Morgan RG, Piller NB. Treatment of lymphedema of the arms and legs with 5,6-benzo-pyrone. N Engl J Med 1993;16:1158.
53. Loprinzi CL, Kugler JW, Sloan JA, et al. Lack of effect of coumarin in women with lymphedema after treatment for breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;340:346.

SECTION 38.1 Molecular Biology of Endocrine Tumors
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 38.1
Molecular Biology of Endocrine Tumors
TERRY C. LAIRMORE
SAMUEL A. WELLS, JR.
JEFFREY F. MOLEY
Introduction
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Syndromes
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 1
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2 Syndromes
Molecular Pathogenesis of Sporadic Thyroid Neoplasms
Epidemiologic and Genetic Factors Associated with Thyroid Neoplasia
Follicular Adenomas
Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma
Follicular Thyroid Carcinoma
Anaplastic Thyroid Carcinoma
Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma
Genetic Abnormalities in Parathyroid Neoplasms
Benign Parathyroid Neoplasms
Mutations in the Men1 Gene and Role of Other Tumor Suppressor Genes
Activation of the Prad1 Protooncogene by Chromosomal Gene Rearrangement
Other Genetic Loci Implicated in Familial Hypercalcemic Syndromes
Familial Benign Hypercalcemia
Neonatal Severe Hyperparathyroidism
Hereditary Hyperparathyroidism–Jaw Tumor Syndrome
Parathyroid Carcinoma
Genetic Abnormalities in Adrenal Neoplasms
Sporadic Pheochromocytomas
Familial Pheochromocytomas Arising in Patients with Von Hippel-Lindau Syndrome And Neurofibromatosis Type 1
Adrenocortical Adenomas and Carcinomas
Summary
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The transformation of a cell from the normal to the malignant phenotype is a result of a stepwise accumulation of genetic defects that render the cell unresponsive to
or independent of normal cellular growth signals. Defects in a variety of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes have been described in endocrine neoplasms.
Characterization of these specific molecular defects has yielded insight into the mechanisms of tumorigenesis in these tissues and, in some cases, provided clinically
applicable diagnostic or prognostic information. Identification of the germline mutations associated with the multiple endocrine neoplasia types 1 and 2 (MEN 1, MEN
2) syndromes has led to the advent of direct DNA testing for individuals at risk. In patients with a hereditary form of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), early
thyroidectomy may be performed on the basis of DNA mutational analysis at a time when the MTC is occult and likely curable. Finally, the molecular defects that occur
in tumors arising in the familial endocrine neoplasia syndromes have been found to play an important role in tumorigenesis of sporadic neoplasms arising in the same
endocrine tissues.

MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA SYNDROMES
MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA TYPE 1
Clinical Features
MEN 1 is characterized by the development of parathyroid hyperplasia, neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas and duodenum, and adenomas of the anterior pituitary
gland. 1 In addition, affected patients develop bronchial and thymic carcinoids, benign thyroid and adrenocortical tumors, subcutaneous lipomas, cutaneous
angiofibromas,2 and spinal ependymomas3 with increased frequency. More than 90% of patients inheriting a MEN1 gene mutation develop hyperparathyroidism (HPT)
by the second or third decade of life. Depending on the method of study, 35% to 75% of mutation carriers develop neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas and
duodenum that are frequently malignant. The neuroendocrine tumors in patients with MEN 1 result in symptoms due to either excess secretion of a specific hormone
product or the effects of the tumoral process itself. The malignant duodenopancreatic tumors and intrathoracic tumors account for the majority of the disease-related
morbidity and mortality in MEN1 gene mutation carriers. 4,5
Genetics
MEN1 TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENE. In 1988, the MEN1 predisposition gene was mapped to chromosome 11q13 by a combination of studies of the loss of chromosome

sequences in tumor DNA and genetic linkage analysis using markers from chromosome 11. 6 The frequent occurrence of chromosome deletions encompassing the
11q13 interval in tumor DNA supports the hypothesis that the MEN1 gene is a classic tumor suppressor gene. The normal protein encoded by a tumor suppressor
gene is presumed to function as a negative control or “brake” on unregulated cellular growth and proliferation, such that complete elimination of its function by
mutation or deletion of both homologous copies would be expected to result in unregulated cell growth. The multifocal involvement characteristically observed in
affected endocrine tissues presumably reflects the chance occurrence of multiple “second hits.”
The MEN1 tumor suppressor gene encodes a predicted 610–amino acid protein product termed menin.7 The structure of the MEN1 gene consists of ten exons, with
the first exon being untranslated. The 2.8-kilobase menin messenger RNA (mRNA) transcript is ubiquitously expressed and may be detected in lymphocytes, thymus,
pancreas, thyroid, the gonads, and other tissues. Similar to the protein products of most previously described tumor suppressor genes, evidence has been provided
that menin is a nuclear protein. 8
The diverse array of reported MEN1 mutations includes missense, nonsense, frameshift, and mRNA splicing defects that are distributed throughout the nine coding
exons as well as the intervening intronic sequences. The MEN1 gene mutations in a series of 25 separate kindreds with MEN 1 are depicted graphically in Figure
38.1-1. To date, more than 100 germline MEN1 mutations have been reported in the literature, 7,9,10,11,12,13,14,15 and 16 and there are almost as many distinct mutations as
there are separate families. Approximately two-thirds of the reported mutations in the MEN1 gene result in truncation of the C-terminal portion of the menin protein. No
specific genotype-phenotype correlations have been established to date.

FIGURE 38.1-1. Germline mutations in the MEN1 gene in a set of 25 independent kindreds. The mutations are distributed throughout the nine coding exons of the
gene. Five splicing defects and two missense mutations are depicted above the MEN1 gene, and seven nonsense and six frameshift mutations are depicted below the
MEN1 gene. The position of the mutation is reported as the codon in which it occurs relative to the open reading frame. The position of the splicing defects are
reported as the number of bases 3' or 5' to the nearest exon [(+) indicates 3' direction and (–) indicates 5' direction relative to the exon]. For the deletions, insertions,
and splicing defects, uppercase letters refer to exon nucleotides and lowercase letters refer to intron nucleotides. aPreviously reported mutations; bmutations that
occur in more than one family. (Reprinted from ref. 16, with permission.)

CELLULAR BIOLOGY OF MENIN PROTEIN PRODUCT. The precise role of menin in the regulation of cell growth has yet to be elucidated. Menin binds to the JunD

transcriptional regulation factor and may function to inhibit JunD-activated transcription. 17 The nucleotide sequence of menin is highly conserved, with an overall
homology of 97% between the human and murine genes.18 In the mouse embryo, MEN1 expression appears as early as gestational day 7 and ultimately is detectable
at high levels in diverse tissue, including testis and the central nervous system. These findings support a broad role for the menin protein product in regulating cell
growth that is not limited to the tissues affected in MEN 1. Lymphocytes from patients with a heterozygous germline mutation in the MEN1 gene have been shown to
exhibit increased premature centromere division in cell culture when exposed to an alkylating agent. 19 The finding of increased chromosomal instability suggests that
the MEN1 gene product may normally function in part to maintain the integrity of DNA.
MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA TYPE 2 SYNDROMES
Clinical Features
The MEN 2 syndromes include MEN 2A, MEN 2B, and familial, non-MEN medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC). These syndromes are inherited in an autosomal
dominant fashion and are caused by germline mutations in the RET protooncogene. The most consistent feature of MEN 2 syndromes is MTC, which is multifocal,
bilateral, and usually occurs at a young age ( Fig. 38.1-2). There is almost complete penetrance of MTC in these syndromes; almost all persons who inherit the
disease allele develop MTC. Other features of the syndromes are variably expressed, with incomplete penetrance. These features are summarized in Table 38.1-1.

FIGURE 38.1-2. Features of patients with hereditary medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). A: Bisected thyroid gland from a patient with multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 2A (MEN 2A), showing multicentric, bilateral foci of MTC. B: Adrenalectomy specimen from patient with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B (MEN 2B),
demonstrating pheochromocytoma.C: Megacolon in patient with MEN 2B. D: Midface and tongue of patient with MEN 2B, showing characteristic tongue notching
secondary to plexiform neuromas. (A courtesy of Dr. S. A. Wells. B–D courtesy of Dr. R. Thompson. Reprinted from JF Moley, Medullary thyroid carcinoma. In: Clark
O, Duh Q-Y, eds. Textbook of endocrine surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1997, with permission.)

TABLE 38.1-1. Clinical Features of Sporadic MTC, MEN 2A, MEN 2B, and FMTC

MTCs are derived from the thyroid C cells, also called parafollicular cells, which migrate from the neural crest. C cells comprise 1% of the total thyroid mass and are
dispersed throughout the gland, with the highest concentration in the upper poles ( Fig. 38.1-3). The C cells are so named because of their unique ability to secrete
the hormone calcitonin. Calcitonin is a specific tumor marker for MTC. It is extremely useful in the screening of individuals predisposed to the hereditary forms of the
disease and in the follow-up of patients who have been treated. C cells also are capable of secreting other hormones, including carcinoembryonic antigen.

FIGURE 38.1-3. Photomicrograph of medullary thyroid carcinoma showing nests and sheets of small, uniform cells with scant to moderate amounts of amphophilic
cytoplasm infiltrating around normal thyroid follicles. (Reprinted from Moley JF, Lairmore TC, Phay JE, Hereditary endocrinopathies. Curr Probl Surg 1999;36:653,
with permission.)

Patients with MEN 2A develop multifocal, bilateral MTC, associated with C-cell hyperplasia. Approximately 42% of affected patients develop pheochromocytomas,
which may also be multifocal and bilateral and usually are associated with adrenal medullary hyperplasia. HPT develops in 25% to 35% of patients and is due to
hyperplasia, which may be asymmetric, with one or more glands becoming enlarged. 20 Parathyroid carcinoma has been reported in one patient with MEN 2A. 21
Cutaneous lichen amyloidosis has been described in some patients with MEN 2A. 22 In this entity, macular amyloidosis presents as brownish plaques of multiple tiny
papules, usually in the interscapular area. Microscopically, these lesions demonstrate a hyperplastic epidermis, acanthosis, lymphocytic infiltrate, and amyloid
goblets. Hirschsprung's disease is infrequently associated with MEN 2A. 23,24 and 25 This disease is characterized by the absence of autonomic ganglion cells within the
distal colonic parasympathetic plexus, resulting in obstruction and megacolon.
In MEN 2B, 40% to 50% of patients develop pheochromocytomas, and all individuals develop neural gangliomas, particularly in the mucosa of the digestive tract,
conjunctiva, lips, and tongue. MEN 2B patients also have megacolon, skeletal abnormalities, and markedly enlarged peripheral nerves. MEN 2B patients do not
develop HPT. MTC develops at a very young age (infancy) and appears to be the most aggressive form of hereditary MTC, although its aggressiveness may be
related more to the extremely early age of onset than to the biologic virulence of the tumor. MTC in MEN 2B is rarely curable.
FMTC is characterized by the development of MTC without any other endocrinopathies. 26 MTC in these patients has a later age of onset and follows a more indolent
clinical course than MTC in patients with MEN 2A and MEN 2B. Occasional patients with FMTC never manifest clinical evidence of MTC (symptoms or a lump in the
neck), though biochemical testing and histologic evaluation of the thyroid usually demonstrates MTC.
Genetics
THE RET PROTOONCOGENE. In 1987, the gene for MEN 2A was localized to the pericentromeric region of chromosome 10 (10q11.2) by linkage analysis.

27,28

Subsequent studies demonstrated that the predisposition gene for MEN 2B and FMTC mapped to the same region as MEN 2A. 29,30 The RET protooncogene resides
within this critical region, which made it an obvious candidate gene for the MEN 2 syndromes.
The RET protooncogene was first discovered based on its ability to transform mouse NIH 3T3 fibroblasts in culture. 31 The transforming RET sequences first identified
represented a rearrangement of RET that occurred in vitro during the transfection assay. 32 Sequence analysis of the RET protooncogene showed that it is a member
of the receptor tyrosine kinase gene family. 33RET was mapped to the proximal region of the long arm of chromosome 10 in 198934 and was shown to be expressed at
high levels in both MTCs and pheochromocytomas. 35
RET mutations were identified in the constitutional DNA of MEN 2A and FMTC patients in 1993. 36,37 Mulligan et al. 36 identified RET mutations in association with MEN
2 using an expression-based mutational analysis system. Analysis of genomic DNA from MEN 2A family members proved that the variants identified in the
complementary DNAs (cDNAs) were also in the constitutional DNA of affected family members and not in individuals unaffected by MEN 2A. All mutations resulted in
substitution of cysteine residues clustered near the transmembrane domain of RET. In all but one, MEN 2A tumor heterozygosity for the mutant and wild-type RET
allele was retained. Mulligan et al. 36 suggested a dominant or dominant-negative mechanism for RET mutation in the development of MTC and pheochromocytomas in
MEN 2A.36
Donis-Keller et al. 37 used single-strand conformational variant (SSCV) and sequence analysis to identify mutations in RET in the constitutional DNA of patients with
MEN 2A and FMTC. Both MEN 2A and FMTC were shown to be associated with mutations that result in substitution of cysteine residues in the extracellular portion of
RET immediately adjacent to the transmembrane domain. Unexpectedly, the same mutations were found to characterize MEN 2A and FMTC kindreds.
Subsequent investigations demonstrated mutations of RET in MEN 2B patients. 38,39 In 95% of cases of MEN 2B, the RET protooncogene mutation is a missense
methionine-to-threonine (ATG to ACG) change at codon 918 in exon 16. This codon is positioned within the tyrosine kinase catalytic core of the intracellular domain.
Two families with MEN 2B have been described that have a codon 883 mutation in the tyrosine kinase domain of RET.40
More than 30 missense mutations have been described in MEN 2A and FMTC kindreds ( Table 38.1-2).41,42 Most of these mutations result in nonconservative changes
in cysteine residues, although changes in Glu, Val, Met, Leu, and Tyr have also been described. Several of these mutations have been shown to result in
“gain-of-function” in the RET protein product, with increased intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity or alterations of substrate recognition (or both) and transforming
capability. 43 The RET protooncogene encodes a protein with three domains: a cysteine-rich extracellular receptor domain, a hydrophobic transmembrane domain, and
an intracellular tyrosine kinase catalytic domain ( Fig. 38.1-4). The RET gene consists of at least 20 exons 44 and is expressed as five major mRNA species.45,46 The
RET gene product is expressed in a limited number of cell types in the normal individual, including the thyroid C cells, the adrenal medulla, and parts of the brain. The
gene is important in the embryonic development of the enteric nervous system and the kidneys. 47

TABLE 38.1-2. RET Mutations in Hereditary Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma

FIGURE 38.1-4. Diagram of RET gene product delineating locations of germline mutations found in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A and familial, non-MEN
medullary thyroid carcinoma (ovals), germline mutations in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B ( diamond), and mutations in hereditary Hirschsprung's disease

(triangles). As mentioned in the text, the RET gene product is thought to create a dimer that forms a complex with glial-derived neurotrophic factor receptor-a or
neurturin. The RET gene product is divided into the intracellular, transmembrane, and extracellular domains. ATP, adenosine triphosphate. (Adapted from Moley JF,
Kim S, Molecular genetics in surgical oncology. Austin: RG Landes, 1994, with permission.)

Glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and neurturin are ligands to the receptor domain of the RET gene product. 48,49,50,51,52,53 and 54 GDNF is a 32-kD protein dimer
that was first purified from glial cell lines and is a potent neurotrophic survival factor for motor neurons. A glycophosphatidylinositol-linked protein called GDNF
receptor-a (GDNFR-a) is a cofactor in the signaling heterodimeric complex with RET. Current evidence suggests that GDNF binds directly to GDNFR-a and indirectly
with RET. When triggered by ligand, wild-type RET dimerizes with another RET molecule, and this dimerization is responsible for phosphorylation and activation of
the tyrosine kinase domain, with subsequent downstream signal transduction events. RET molecules that contain MEN 2A-type mutations are constitutively dimerized
and therefore activated. In contrast, the mutation responsible for MEN 2B does not result in constitutive dimerization but changes the substrate specificity of the
tyrosine kinase domain, which results in transformation.
OTHER RET GENOTYPE-PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS.

Cutaneous Lichen Amyloidosis. Interscapular lesions of cutaneous lichen amyloidosis (CLA) have been described in several families with MEN 2A. 22 The total number
of patients described with this entity is fewer than 100. In a 634®Tyr mutation was reported in one family with MEN 2A and CLA, and in two other families, a 634®Arg
mutation was described that segregated with both MEN2A and CLA.55
Hyperparathyroidism. HPT in MEN 2A is caused by parathyroid hyperplasia; the hypercalcemia is mild and often asymptomatic. HPT clusters in some families with
MEN 2A. Whether specific MEN2A mutations are associated with a higher incidence of HPT remains controversial. Mulligan et al. 56 previously described a strong
correlation between C634R mutation and HPT in families with MEN 2A, but other studies have been unable to confirm this relationship definitively. 57,58 and 59
Hirschsprung's Disease. Hirschsprung's disease is characterized by absence of autonomic ganglion cells within the distal colonic parasympathetic plexus, resulting in
obstruction and proximal megacolon. Approximately 80% of Hirschsprung's disease cases are sporadic, and the remainder are familial. A subset of familial
Hirschsprung's cases have been found to be associated with germline mutations of RET.24,56 Most of these are inactivating and loss-of-function (frameshift and
nonsense) mutations and are not associated with the MEN 2A phenotype. Several families, however, have been described in which Hirschsprung's disease
cosegregates with either MEN2A or FMTC (missense codon 618 or 620 mutations). 60 Additionally, a few Hirschsprung's disease patients have been described with
missense mutations in codon 609 or 620 who have no evidence of MEN 2A or MTC. 23,25,56 It is interesting to note that the Hirschsprung's disease phenotype can be
associated with either loss-of-function or gain-of-function mutations of RET. All patients with MEN 2B (missense codon 918 mutation) have megacolon and chronic
colonic motility disturbances, though they usually do not require surgery for this (see Fig. 38.1-2C).61
RET Mutations in Sporadic Tumors. Mutations in the RET protooncogene have also been found in sporadic MTCs. 37,40,62,63 and 64 The most frequent mutation in
sporadic MTCs is the M918T mutation found in MEN 2B. Mutations have been found in other regions of the extracellular and intracellular domains. Missense,
deletions, and insertion mutations have been described. 41,65 Somatic RET mutations in sporadic pheochromocytomas are unusual but have also been described. 41
Other Dominant Oncogenes in Medullary Thyroid Carcinomas and Pheochromocytomas. Absence of amplification of N-MYC, C-MYC, and ERB-B2 has been reported
in MTCs and pheochromocytomas. Roncalli et al. 66 reported that N-myc expression in more than 10% of tumor cells, as detected by immunohistochemistry, was
associated with poorer survival, sporadic disease, and male gender. These investigators found no evidence of gene amplification and did not determine the basis for
the overexpression.66 Our group reported absence of mutation of the H-RAS, N-RAS, and K-RAS genes in a series of pheochromocytomas and MTCs analyzed by
direct sequencing. 67 Likewise, examination of nerve growth factor and nerve growth factor receptor (p75) showed no abnormality at the DNA or RNA levels. 68
Other Tumor Suppressor Genes in Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma and Pheochromocytoma. Several studies have evaluated loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at tumor
suppressor loci in pheochromocytomas and MTCs; these are summarized in Table 38.1-3. The cumulative data indicate a higher-than-background incidence of LOH
in pheochromocytomas on chromosome arms 1p, 3p, 17p, and 22q.69,70 In MTCs, the report by Mulligan et al. 70 suggests a significant incidence of 1p LOH; however,
evaluation of other chromosomal arms yielded no consistent findings. Lack of significant LOH on 10q, at the RET locus, supports the hypothesis that the RET
protooncogene acts as a dominant oncogene as opposed to a tumor suppressor gene. 71 Chromosome 1 is the largest chromosome, and LOH analysis on 1p in
pheochromocytomas suggests a very large region of deletion. Our studies have indicated that the entire short arm of 1p is lost in pheochromocytomas from patients
with MEN 2A and MEN 2B.69 Fine mapping of the region of deletion suggests a possible common breakpoint in the centromeric region defined by the markers D1S514
and D1S442.72

TABLE 38.1-3. Loss of Heterozygosity in Pheochromocytomas and Medullary Thyroid Carcinomas

The high rate of LOH on 3p in pheochromocytomas suggests an as-yet undefined tumor suppressor locus. 70,73 LOH on 17p suggests possible involvement of the
TP53 gene.74 Existing reports on TP53 mutations in pheochromocytomas are conflicting. Two Japanese groups reported no evidence of TP53 mutations in
pheochromocytomas.75,76 In contrast, a Chinese group reported TP53 mutations in five of six tumors tested.77 Four of these mutations were in exon 4. Our group
reported a series of 22 pheochromocytomas and 29 MTCs that were screened with four different markers for LOH on 17p. 74 SSCV analysis of exons 4 through 9 of
the TP53 gene was performed in 20 of the pheochromocytomas and in 22 of the MTCs. The expression of p53 was determined by immunohistochemistry in 19
pheochromocytomas and in 17 MTCs, using two different antibodies (D01 and D07) on both frozen and paraffin-embedded tissues. LOH was demonstrated on 17p in
4 of the 22 pheochromocytomas and in none of the MTCs. No mutations were detected in any of the tumors screened by SSCV analysis. Immunohistochemical
staining of frozen and paraffin-embedded tumor sections did not show p53 overexpression in any of the tumors examined. These findings indicate that mutations in
the TP53 gene are an uncommon event in the tumorigenesis of hereditary and sporadic pheochromocytomas and MTCs. 74
Pheochromocytomas also occur in neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, both of which are caused by mutations in tumor suppressor
genes. NF1 gene expression was decreased or absent in 7 of 20 pheochromocytomas from patients with MEN 2 and sporadic disease. 78 Because NF1 is ubiquitously
expressed, its lack of expression indicates that NF1 may play a role in the development or progression of pheochromocytomas from patients who do not have NF1.
Because of the extremely large size of the NF1 gene, mutational analysis has not yet been performed. Mutational analysis of the VHL gene in non-VHL
pheochromocytomas has not been reported.
There have been no reports of the involvement of DNA repair genes ( MLH1, MSH2) in development or progression of pheochromocytomas or MTCs, and replication
error or repeats have not been a consistent finding in these tumors (J. F. Moley, unpublished data).

Preventive Surgery for MEN 2A Gene Carriers
Individuals with MEN 2A and FMTC are virtually certain to develop MTC at some point in their lives (usually before age 30 years). Therefore, at-risk family members
who are found to have inherited a RET gene mutation are candidates for thyroidectomy, regardless of their stimulated plasma calcitonin levels. In a series from
Washington University in St. Louis, Wells et al. 79 reported the performance of preventive surgery in 13 asymptomatic RET mutation carriers. One hundred thirty-two
individuals from seven different kindreds affected by MEN 2A were screened. Of the 132 individuals, 48 had an established diagnosis of MEN 2A, and 58 were at 50%
risk for inheriting the disease but had no clinical evidence of endocrine neoplasia. Twenty-six unaffected spouses of MEN 2A kindred members served as controls. All
individuals were evaluated for the presence of RET gene mutations. PCR- and sequence-based direct mutation analysis of genomic DNA from the 58 individuals at
50% risk for MEN 2A identified 21 individuals who had inherited a RET mutation associated with disease. The other thirty-seven family members had two normal RET
alleles. All 26 unaffected control individuals had normal RET alleles. After meeting with genetic counselors, who informed them of the pattern of disease inheritance
and the basis for the genetic tests, total thyroidectomy was offered to all 21 individuals who were found to have inherited a RET mutation. The patients ranged in age
from 6 to 21 years (mean, 13.2 years). In 12 of the 21 patients (mean age, 12 years; range, 6–21 years), the stimulated plasma calcitonin levels were within normal
limits. In the remaining nine patients (mean age, 15.1 years, range, 8–20 years), the stimulated plasma calcitonin levels were elevated.
Of the 12 genetically positive individuals with normal stimulated plasma calcitonin levels, 6 patients (or, in the case of minors, their parents) decided against having an
immediate thyroidectomy, for reasons of convenience of timing or because they preferred to wait until calcitonin levels were elevated. Of the nine family members with
elevated stimulated plasma calcitonin levels, two wished to delay thyroidectomy for several months for personal reasons. In the remaining 13 individuals (six with
normal plasma calcitonin levels and seven with elevated levels), total thyroidectomy, lymph node dissection, and parathyroid autotransplantation were performed.
After thyroidectomy and parathyroid autotransplantation, patients were placed on thyroid hormone, calcium, and vitamin D supplementation. Approximately 8 weeks
after the operation, the oral calcium and vitamin D were stopped. Two weeks after the oral calcium and vitamin D replacement were stopped, the serum calcium
concentration was within the normal range in each patient. Of the seven patients whose preoperative plasma calcitonin levels were elevated, each had microscopic
evidence of MTC on histologic examination. Two of the seven had macroscopic disease. Of the six patients with normal preoperative plasma calcitonin levels,
macroscopic MTC (n = 1), microscopic MTC (n = 2), or C-cell hyperplasia only (n = 3) was evident. A total of 212 lymph nodes were resected from the central zone of
the neck (14.5 per patient), none of which was found, on histologic examination, to contain metastases. In each of the 13 patients, the stimulated plasma calcitonin
levels were normal after total thyroidectomy.
Lips et al.,80 in a series from the Netherlands, identified 14 young members of families affected by MEN 2A who had normal calcitonin testing but who were found to
be MEN2A gene carriers by DNA testing. Thyroidectomy was performed on 8 of these 14, and foci of MTC were identified in all 8.
In a later report of preventive thyroidectomies in RET mutation carriers, Wells et al. 81 at Washington University in St. Louis reported a series of 49 children with MEN
2A and MEN 2B. In this series, 14 children had a prophylactic thyroidectomy based on genetic testing. The average age of the children at the time of surgery was 10.5
years. Postoperative calcitonin levels were all undetectable, and no evidence of recurrent MTC was found during a mean follow-up of 1.3 years. In an interim report of
3-year follow-up of the earliest group of 18 patients, no recurrence of disease was noted. 82
The finding of carcinoma in the thyroid glands of many of these young patients with normal stimulated calcitonin testing indicates that the operation was therapeutic,
not prophylactic. 81,83 There is some urgency, therefore, to applying this genetic test to other at-risk individuals and performing thyroidectomy on those who test
positive genetically. The ideal age for performance of thyroidectomy in those patients found to be genetically positive has not been determined unequivocally. It is
reasonable to perform surgery in 6-year-old patients with MEN 2A and FMTC. Patients with MEN 2B should undergo thyroidectomy during infancy, because of the
aggressiveness and earlier age of onset of MTC in these patients. 61,84 Patient follow-up over the next decades will determine whether there is a significant rate of
recurrence after preventive thyroidectomy. At present, it is advisable to follow up these patients with stimulated plasma calcitonin levels every 1 to 2 years. These
patients must also continue to be followed for the development of pheochromocytomas and HPT.

MOLECULAR PATHOGENESIS OF SPORADIC THYROID NEOPLASMS
The thyroid follicular cell is highly differentiated, with the ability to concentrate iodide and synthesize thyroglobulin. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) is the major
regulator of differentiated function of follicular cells and also functions as a growth factor for follicular cells via a cyclic adenosine monophosphate–mediated signal
transduction pathway. In addition, thyroid cell growth and proliferation are influenced by a variety of growth factors and cytokines, as well as by the amount of iodine in
the diet. Presumably, a host of genetic and environmental factors may result in unregulated growth or loss of differentiated function and confer a proliferative
advantage to certain follicular cells, resulting in nodule formation. 85 Progression of benign adenomatous nodules to differentiated carcinoma is speculative at present,
but good evidence exists for the development of anaplastic carcinomas from well-differentiated tumors. 86,87 and 88 A schematic model of the proposed events in thyroid
follicular cell tumorigenesis is shown in Figure 38.1-5.

FIGURE 38.1-5. Flow diagram of proven and postulated events in thyroid follicular cell tumorigenesis. Mutations in the RAS oncogene are believed to be early events
in the genesis of follicular neoplasms. Activation of the RET and TRK receptor tyrosine kinases is specific to papillary thyroid carcinomas. The association of
mutations in the TP53 tumor suppressor gene with undifferentiated thyroid tumors suggests that mutations in TP53 are a critical event in the progression of follicular
carcinoma to anaplastic carcinoma.

EPIDEMIOLOGIC AND GENETIC FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH THYROID NEOPLASIA
Papillary thyroid carcinoma accounts for 85% of differentiated thyroid carcinomas in iodine-sufficient countries. 89 In areas of iodine deficiency or endemic goiter, an
overall increased incidence of thyroid cancer is noted, attributable to a higher proportion of follicular carcinomas and anaplastic thyroid carcinomas (which often arise
from preexisting follicular carcinomas). 90,91,92 and 93 The incidence of thyroid neoplasia is also increased in certain hereditary syndromes, including familial
adenomatous polyposis coli, Cowden's disease, and MEN 1. Exposure to external radiation in childhood is a strong risk factor for the subsequent development of
benign and malignant thyroid nodules. 94,95,96,97 98 Point mutations of K-RAS have been detected in 60% of radiation-related thyroid tumors. 99
FOLLICULAR ADENOMAS
A local proliferative advantage may be provided to a thyroid follicular cell by genetic mutational events, environmental factors, or the local influence of cytokines or
growth factors. Clonal expansion of cells with a growth advantage leads to nodule formation.
Mutations in all three members of the RAS oncogene family (K-RAS, N-RAS, and H-RAS) have been detected in thyroid neoplasms. 100RAS mutations are detected
with equal frequency in benign and malignant thyroid neoplasms 101 and are believed to represent an early event in follicular cell tumorigenesis. 102RAS mutations occur
predominantly in follicular thyroid carcinomas, with most of the mutations occurring at codon 61 of H- RAS and N-RAS.101,103,104 By contrast, RAS mutations are a rare
event in papillary thyroid carcinomas. It appears that RAS mutations are not sufficient for transformation of the thyroid cell; additional genetic events are required. In

cooperation with other oncogenes, 105 transformation of thyroid cells in vitro with mutant RAS is associated with loss of differentiation, including decreased iodide
uptake and expression of thyroid peroxidase. 106
Mutational events affecting receptors or intermediates along the adenylate cyclase–cyclic adenosine monophosphate signal transduction pathway may contribute to
the formation of hyperfunctioning adenomas. A subset of hyperfunctioning adenomas has been shown to harbor somatic mutations in the gene encoding the TSH
receptor (TSHR) that result in constitutive activation of downstream events. 107 Mutations in the G protein intracellular mediator of adenylate cyclase (G S) have been
detected in 25% of hyperfunctioning thyroid nodules. 108,109 Therefore, a unifying molecular theme in the pathogenesis of hyperfunctioning nodules is inappropriate
activation of the TSH signal transduction pathway, which is a result of specific gene mutations altering a key mediator of an otherwise well-balanced cascade.
Finally, deletion of chromosomal sequences from the 11q13 region has been demonstrated in 14% of follicular adenomas, 110 suggesting that inactivation of a tumor
suppressor gene in this region may play a role in follicular cell tumorigenesis in a subset of tumors.
PAPILLARY THYROID CARCINOMA
Activation of receptor tyrosine kinases ( RET/PTC, NTRK1, MET), whether by chromosomal rearrangement or gene amplification, is associated with the transformation
of follicular cells to papillary thyroid carcinoma. 111,112 The RET protooncogene was first discovered based on its ability to transform mouse NIH 3T3 fibroblasts in
culture. 31 The transforming RET sequences first identified represented a rearrangement of RET that occurred in vitro during the transfection assay. 32 Fusco et al. 113
subsequently demonstrated that DNAs from 25% of papillary carcinomas or their lymph node metastases also were positive in transfection assays. The transforming
sequences in papillary carcinomas, originally believed to be a unique oncogene termed PTC (for papillary thyroid carcinoma), were shown to represent in vivo
chromosomal rearrangements that resulted in the juxtaposition of sequences encoding the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain of RET with 5' sequences from one of
three unrelated genes. 111,113,114,115,116 and 117 The most frequent form of activated RET/PTC results from a paracentric inversion of chromosome 10q, 116 which in turn
incites the gene fusion of D10S170 (H4) sequences with the catalytic domain of RET (Fig. 38.1-6). The frequency of RET rearrangements in papillary carcinomas may
be as high as 33%, 113,118 but a lower frequency has been found in other studies, 119,120 perhaps reflecting either racial or environmental factors influencing thyroid
tumorigenesis in different geographic regions.

FIGURE 38.1-6. Chromosome 10q inversion in papillary thyroid carcinoma. A: Two representative chromosome 10 homologues from tumor cells of patients 1 and 2
showing inv(10)(q11.2q21) ( arrows). B: Schematic view of the paracentric inversion of chromosome 10q generating the transforming sequence RET/PTC. (From ref.
116, with permission.)

Activation of NTRK1 (tropomyosin receptor kinase), which encodes a cell surface receptor for nerve growth factor, has also been detected in some papillary
carcinomas.111 The NTRK1 oncogene is generated by a chromosomal rearrangement that juxtaposes the tyrosine kinase domain of NTRK1 and the 5' region of the
TPR gene, both mapping to chromosome 1q23-24.121,122 Finally, the MET oncogene, which also encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase, is amplified and overexpressed in
70% of papillary and poorly differentiated carcinomas but in only 25% of follicular carcinomas. 123,124 Activation of MET by amplification 124 and the presence of a
rearranged, activated form of RET125,126 and 127 have been suggested as predictors of aggressive biologic behavior and poor prognosis in papillary carcinomas.
However, because of the generally excellent prognosis of these tumors, larger studies will be required to confirm these observations.
Activation of receptor tyrosine kinases by the common mechanism of gene rearrangement that brings the tyrosine kinase domain under the control of inappropriate
upstream regulators derived from any of several “activating genes” appears to be specific for the transformation of follicular cells into papillary thyroid carcinoma.
FOLLICULAR THYROID CARCINOMA
Numerous chromosomal deletions have been detected in thyroid neoplasms, suggesting a role for multiple tumor suppressor genes in the initiation or progression of
these tumors. Although sporadic follicular thyroid tumors exhibit allelic chromosomal loss of chromosome 11q13 sequences with increased frequency, 110 one study
failed to find accompanying mutations in the MEN1 gene in the remaining normal allele, suggesting that a tumor suppressor gene other than MEN1 might be involved
in tumorigenesis of these neoplasms. 128 In addition to the 11q13 deletions described in follicular adenomas, Herrmann et al. 129 have presented evidence for
chromosome 3p deletions specific to follicular carcinomas and proposed that inactivation of a tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 3p is important in the
progression from follicular adenoma to carcinoma.
ANAPLASTIC THYROID CARCINOMA
Point mutations in the TP53 tumor suppressor gene are frequent in anaplastic thyroid carcinomas but not in differentiated thyroid tumors. 130,131 This suggests that the
TP53 mutation is a critical event in the progression of follicular carcinoma to anaplastic carcinoma. Wild-type TP53 encodes a nuclear phosphoprotein that functions
as a transcriptional regulator believed to influence cell-cycle arrest or programmed cell death in response to genetic damage. Disruption of this protective function
appears to be relevant to the progression of thyroid neoplasms to an aggressive, undifferentiated phenotype. Codons 273 130,131 and 248131 are hot spots for TP53
mutation in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.
MEDULLARY THYROID CARCINOMA
The molecular genetic alterations associated with sporadic medullary carcinoma of the thyroid were discussed earlier in Other RET Genotype-Phenotype
Correlations.

GENETIC ABNORMALITIES IN PARATHYROID NEOPLASMS
BENIGN PARATHYROID NEOPLASMS
Neoplasms of the parathyroid glands are almost always benign and occur with increased frequency in postmenopausal women, after neck irradiation, or as a
component of several distinct familial syndromes. Benign parathyroid adenomas in patients with primary HPT have a proliferative defect (increase in cellular mass) as
well as a defect in regulating parathyroid hormone (PTH) release in response to the extracellular calcium concentration (set-point abnormality). 132 In different
parathyroid tumors, at least three specific genetic defects have been uncovered, including activation of an oncogene, inactivation of the MEN1 tumor suppressor
gene, and mutations in the cell surface calcium-sensing receptor.
MUTATIONS IN THE MEN1 GENE AND ROLE OF OTHER TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENES

Patients with MEN 1 inherit one mutated copy of the MEN1 gene in the germline and therefore require only one chance additional somatic event (deletion, point
mutation) to result in the loss of the remaining functional copy of the gene within an individual parathyroid cell. Presumably, the relatively likely combined occurrence
of these genetic events leads to the asynchronous development of multiglandular parathyroid neoplasms (parathyroid hyperplasia) in affected individuals. LOH for
markers in the MEN1 gene region has been demonstrated not only in MEN 1–related parathyroid tumors but also in approximately 30% of sporadic parathyroid
adenomas.133,134,135 and 136 As previously suspected from studies of chromosome 11q13 LOH in DNA from sporadic parathyroid adenomas, loss of MEN1 gene function
now is known to be responsible for a subset of the parathyroid adenomas in patients with sporadic primary HPT. In this subset, the occurrence of a sporadic
parathyroid adenoma presumably requires the chance occurrence of two somatic inactivating events (one involving each homologous copy of the MEN1 gene).
A study by Heppner et al.137 identified somatic mutations in one allele of the MEN1 gene in tumor DNA from 7 of 33 parathyroid adenomas. In each of these tumors, a
chromosome deletion was detected that eliminated the remaining wild-type copy of the MEN1 gene in tumor DNA. Farbeno et al. 138 screened 45 sporadic adenomas
from 40 patients with nonfamilial HPT by LOH and SSCV analysis. LOH for chromosome 11q13 was present in 13 (29%) of the tumors and, in six of these cases,
somatic mutation was detected in the remaining copy of the MEN1 gene. These findings suggest that a subset of sporadic parathyroid adenomas is caused by a
combination of somatic genetic events within a parathyroid cell that inactivate both copies of the MEN1 tumor suppressor gene.
ACTIVATION OF THE PRAD1 PROTOONCOGENE BY CHROMOSOMAL GENE REARRANGEMENT
In a small subset of parathyroid adenomas (approximately 5%), a pericentromeric inversion of chromosome 11 has been detected that results in a gene
rearrangement involving the PTH gene on 11p15 and the parathyroid adenoma 1 (PRAD1) oncogene or cyclin D1 on 11q13. 139,140 As a consequence of the breakpoint
and rejoining in 11q13, the PTH transcriptional regulatory sequences and its noncoding exon 1 are placed immediately upstream of the PRAD1 protooncogene intact
promoter and its five exons (Fig. 38.1-7). This rearrangement results in inappropriate or unregulated expression of PRAD1 in response to the parathyroid
tissue–specific transcriptional regulatory elements of the PTH gene. It has been suggested that the subset of patients with the PRAD1 chromosomal rearrangement
tend to have larger tumors and are more often symptomatic than are other patients with this disease. 132

FIGURE 38.1-7. A: Schematic diagram illustrating the pericentromeric inversion of chromosome 11 deduced to have caused the observed rearrangement involving
the PTH gene and the PRAD1 gene in a subset of parathyroid adenomas. The tumor's other copy of chromosome 11, which contains an intact PTH gene, is not
shown. B: Diagram of the directly observed molecular structure of the PTH/ PRAD1 DNA rearrangement in a subset of parathyroid adenomas and its functional
consequences. X represents the chromosome breakpoint between the PTH gene regulatory region, plus PTH noncoding exon 1 ( solid light vertical bar) and part of its
first intron, from 11p15 (left), and the intact promoter and 5 exons of the PRAD1 gene from 11q13. (Reprinted from ref. 132, with permission.)

OTHER GENETIC LOCI IMPLICATED IN FAMILIAL HYPERCALCEMIC SYNDROMES
FAMILIAL BENIGN HYPERCALCEMIA
Familial benign hypercalcemia (hypocalciuric hypercalcemia) 141,142 is a dominantly inherited condition characterized by mild hypercalcemia, low urinary calcium
excretion, and the absence of symptoms or the complications of hypercalcemia. The features of familial benign hypercalcemia are important to recognize and
distinguish from other hypercalcemic disorders, because surgery fails to result in correction of the calcium level. 143,144,145,146,147,148 and 149
Pollak et al. 150 demonstrated that mutations in the human calcium-sensing receptor gene are associated with familial benign hypocalcemia as well as neonatal severe
HPT (NSHPT). Parathyroid cells from patients with familial benign hypercalcemia are characterized by an abnormally increased set point for extracellular calcium. 151
The germline mutations that are associated with familial benign hypercalcemia are heterozygous, inactivating mutations in the calcium-sensing receptor gene. 152 The
reported mutations include point mutations, nonsense mutations, or insertions that are postulated to result in varying degrees of loss of the receptor's calcium-sensing
function. 150,153,154,155 and 156
NEONATAL SEVERE HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
NSHPT is characterized by severe hypercalcemia, failure to thrive, dehydration, pathologic fractures and rib cage deformities, respiratory distress, and hypotonia in
the newborn. The disorder usually requires urgent total parathyroidectomy in the first few weeks of life, although some have achieved a favorable outcome with
intensive medical management. 157
In some cases, NSHPT results from homozygous mutations (mutations on both homologous alleles) that cause loss of function of the calcium-sensing receptor gene.
HEREDITARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM–JAW TUMOR SYNDROME
The autosomal dominant inheritance of HPT without any associated features and without any apparent association to the MEN syndromes has been described in
several families. 158,159 and 159 HPT–jaw tumor syndrome (HPT-JT) is recognized as a distinct syndrome characterized by the autosomal dominant inheritance of
recurrent parathyroid adenomas, fibroosseous jaw tumors, Wilms' tumor, and parathyroid carcinoma. 161 The onset of hypercalcemia typically occurs in childhood or
the second decade of life. The association may not be recognized in many cases because the jaw lesions occur asynchronously in relation to the parathyroid tumors
and may occur in some patients without HPT. The parathyroid tumors may be single or multiple but have a tendency toward recurrence after subtotal
parathyroidectomy. The parathyroid adenomas in the familial HPT-JT syndrome often are cystic, a finding that occasionally is noted in primary sporadic HPT. The
specific gene responsible for the HPT-JT syndrome remains to be identified. 161,162

PARATHYROID CARCINOMA
Molecular defects with a possible role in progression to the malignant phenotype have also been sought in tumor DNA from parathyroid carcinomas. Although one
study failed to detect evidence of mutations in exons 5, 7, and 8 of the TP53 gene in parathyroid carcinomas, 163 another study reported allelic loss of TP53 in two of
six informative parathyroid carcinomas. 164 None of 20 informative parathyroid adenomas exhibited deletions of TP53. Most recently, the retinoblastoma tumor
suppressor gene has been shown to be inactivated in most parathyroid carcinomas but not in adenomas. 165

GENETIC ABNORMALITIES IN ADRENAL NEOPLASMS

SPORADIC PHEOCHROMOCYTOMAS
The molecular genetic alterations associated with sporadic pheochromocytomas were discussed earlier in Genetics under Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2
Syndromes.
FAMILIAL PHEOCHROMOCYTOMAS ARISING IN PATIENTS WITH VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME AND NEUROFIBROMATOSIS TYPE 1
Pheochromocytomas occur in association with the VHL and NF1 syndromes. VHL syndrome is characterized by the development of retinal, cerebellar, and spinal
hemangioblastomas, pancreatic and renal cysts, renal carcinomas, pheochromocytomas, neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas, epididymal cysts, and
endolymphatic sac tumors. The original mapping of the VHL gene by positional cloning to chromosome 3p was reported in 1993. 166 The VHL tumor suppressor gene
encodes a protein that regulates the transcription of DNA to mRNA by RNA polymerase II. 167 Clinical heterogeneity exists in patients with the VHL syndrome. In type
1, pheochromocytomas do not occur. Pheochromocytomas are associated with type 2a, but renal cell carcinomas do not occur. Finally, in type 2b, both
pheochromocytomas and renal cell carcinomas develop. The preceding classification has been related also to apparent genotype-phenotype correlations associated
with mutations in the VHL gene.168
Mutations in the tumor suppressor gene for NF1 on chromosome 17q were identified in 1990. 169,170 Pheochromocytomas occur in approximately 1% to 2% of patients
with NF1. Bilateral tumors occur with increased frequency compared with sporadic cases of pheochromocytomas.
ADRENOCORTICAL ADENOMAS AND CARCINOMAS
Several lines of evidence suggest a role for mutation or loss of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene in adrenocortical neoplasms. First, LOH for markers from 17p has
been consistently demonstrated in adrenocortical carcinomas but not in benign adrenocortical adenomas or hyperplasia. 171 Frequent LOH has also been detected for
markers on chromosome 11p and 13q.171 It is of interest to note that adrenocortical carcinomas occur with increased frequency in patients with the Li-Fraumeni
syndrome, who have been shown to harbor germline mutations in TP53,172 and in patients with the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, which is associated with a defect
on chromosome 11p15.173 Sequence analysis has also demonstrated point mutations in the TP53 gene in adrenocortical carcinomas 174 and in adrenal adenomas in
some77 but not all 174 studies. Point mutations of G protein genes have been detected in a variety of endocrine tumors, including adrenocortical tumors. 108,175 Mutations
of the adrenocorticotropic hormone receptor have not been detected in adrenal neoplasms. 176
In one study of 35 adrenocortical lesions (six hyperplasias, 19 adenomas, ten adrenocortical carcinomas), LOH at 11q13 was detected in 31% of the tumors
analyzed. 177 The frequency of LOH for this region was significantly greater in adrenocortical carcinomas (60%) than in benign lesions (11%). However, inactivating
mutations of the MEN1 gene were demonstrated in almost none of the tumors with LOH at 11q13. The authors concluded that the MEN1 gene appears not to play a
significant role in the development of benign or malignant adrenocortical neoplasms. 177

SUMMARY
A variety of genetic abnormalities in both oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes have been identified in endocrine neoplasms. The study of tumors developing in
the inherited endocrine cancer syndromes has provided valuable insight into genetic events that likely play a role in the genesis of sporadic tumors developing in the
same endocrine tissues. The advent of direct DNA testing for germline mutations in the RET protooncogene that are responsible for the MEN 2 syndromes has made
possible early thyroidectomy at a time when hereditary MTC is likely occult and curable. The identification of germline mutations in the MEN1 gene will allow direct
genetic testing and an enhanced understanding of the mechanisms of tumorigenesis of related endocrine tumors.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Marx S, Spiegel AM, Skarulis MC, et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1: clinical and genetic topics. Ann Intern Med 1998;129:484.
2. Darling TN, Skarulis MC, Steinberg SM, et al. Multiple facial angiofibromas and collagenomas in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Arch Dermatol 1997;133:853.
3. Kato H, Uchimura I, Morohoshi M, et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 associated with spinal ependymoma. Intern Med 1996;35:285.
4. Wilkinson S, Teh BT, Davey KR, et al. Cause of death in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Arch Surg 1993;128:683.
5. Doherty GM, Olson JA, Frisella MM, et al. Lethality of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. World J Surg 1997;22:581.
6. Larsson C, Skogseid B, Öberg K, et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 gene maps to chromosome 11 and is lost in insulinoma. Nature 1988;332:85.
7. Chandrasekharappa SC, Guru SC, Manickamp P, et al. Positional cloning of the gene for multiple endocrine neoplasia-type 1. Science 1997;276:404.
8. Guru SC, Goldsmith PK, Burns AL, et al. Menin, the product of the MEN1 gene, is a nuclear protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998;95:1630.
9. Lemmens I, Van de Ven WJM, Kas K, et al. Identification of the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) gene. Hum Mol Genet 1997;6:1177.
10. Agarwal SK, Kester MB, Debelenko LV, et al. Germline mutations in the MEN1 gene in familial multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and related states. Hum Mol Genet 1997;6:1169.
11. Mayr B, Apenberg S, Rothamel T, et al. Menin mutations in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia. Eur J Endocrinol 1997;137:684.
12. Shimizu S, Tsukada T, Futami H, et al. Germline mutations of the MEN1 gene in Japanese kindreds with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Jpn J Cancer Res 1997;88:1029.
13. Bassett JHD, Forbes SA, Pannett AAJ, et al. Characterization of mutations in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Am J Hum Genet 1998;62:232.
14. Kishi M, Tsukada T, Shimizu SW, et al. A large germline deletion of the MEN1 gene in a family with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Jpn J Cancer Res 1998;89:1.
15. Olufemi SE, Green JS, Manickam P, et al. Common ancestral mutation in the MEN1 gene is likely responsible for the prolactinoma variant of MEN 1 (MEN1 Burin) in four kindreds from
Newfoundland. Hum Mutat 1998;11:264.
16. Mutch MG, Dilley WG, Sanjurjo F, et al. Germline mutations in the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 gene: evidence for frequent splicing defects. Hum Mutat 1999;13:175.
17. Agarwal SK, Guru SC, Heppner C, et al. Menin interacts with the AP1 transcription factor JunD and represses JunD-activated transcription. Cell 1999;96:143.
18. Stewart C, Parente F, Piehl F, et al. Characterization of the mouse Men1 gene and its expression during development. Oncogene 1998;17:2485.
19. Sakurai A, Katai M, Itakura Y, et al. Premature centromere division in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1999;109:138.
20. Howe JR, Norton JA, Wells SA Jr. Prevalence of pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A: results of long-term follow-up. Surgery 1993;114:1070.
21. Jenkins PJ, Satta MA, Simmgen M, et al. Metastatic parathyroid carcinoma in the MEN 2A syndrome. Clin Endocrinol 1997;47:747.
22. Gagel RF, Levy ML, Donovan DT, et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A associated with cutaneous lichen amyloidosis. Ann Intern Med 1989;111:802.
23. Romeo G, Ronchetto P, Luo Y, et al. Point mutations affecting the tyrosine kinase domain of the RET proto-oncogene in Hirschsprung's disease. Nature 1994;367:377.
24. Edery P, Lyonnet S, Mulligan LM, et al. Mutations of the RET proto-oncogene in Hirschprung's disease. Nature 1994;367:378.
25. Decker RA, Peacock ML. Occurrence of MEN 2A in familial Hirschsprung's disease: a new indication for genetic testing of the RET proto-oncogene. J Pediatr Surg 1998;33:207.
26. Farndon JR, Leight GS, Dilley WG, et al. Familial medullary thyroid carcinoma without associated endocrinopathies: a distinct clinical entity. Br J Surg 1986;73:278.
27. Mathew CGP, Chin KS, Easton DF, et al. A linked genetic marker for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A on chromosome 10. Nature 1987;328:527.
28. Simpson NE, Kidd KK, Goodfellow PJ, et al. Assignment of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A to chromosome 10 by genetic linkage. Nature 1987;328:528.
29. Norum RA, Lafreniere RG, O'Neal LW, et al. Linkage of the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B gene (MEN2B) to chromosome 10 markers linked to MEN2A. Genomics 1990;8:313.
30. Lairmore TC, Howe JR, Korte JA, et al. Familial medullary thyroid carcinoma and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B map to the same region of chromosome 10 as multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 2A. Genomics 1991;9:181.
31. Takahashi M, Ritz J, Cooper GM. Activation of a novel human transforming gene, ret, by DNA rearrangement. Cell 1985;42:581.
32. Takahashi M, Cooper GM. ret transforming gene encodes a fusion protein homologous to tyrosine kinases. Mol Cell Biol 1987;7:1378.
33. Takahashi M, Buma Y, Iwamoto T, et al. Cloning and expression of the ret proto-oncogene encoding a tyrosine kinase with two potential transmembrane domains. Oncogene 1988;3:571.
34. Ishizaka Y, Itoh F, Tahira T, et al. Human ret proto-oncogene mapped to chromosome 10q11.2. Oncogene 1989;4:1519.
35. Santoro M, Rosati R, Grieco M, et al. The ret proto-oncogene is consistently expressed in human pheochromocytomas and thyroid medullary carcinomas. Oncogene 1990;5:1595.
36. Mulligan LM, Kwok JBJ, Healey CS, et al. Germ-line mutations of the RET proto-oncogene in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. Nature 1993;363:458.
37. Donis-Keller H, Dou S, Chi D, et al. Mutations in the RET proto-oncogene are associated with MEN 2A and FMTC. Hum Mol Genet 1993;2:851.
38. Hofstra RMW, Landsvater RM, Ceccherini I, et al. A mutation in the RET proto-oncogene associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B and sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma.
Nature 1994;367:375.
39. Carlson KM, Dou S, Chi D, et al. Single missense mutation in the tyrosine kinase catalytic domain of the RET protooncogene is associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1994;91:1579.
40. Smith DP, Houghton C, Ponder BAJ. Germline mutation of RET codon 883 in two cases of de novo MEN 2B. Oncogene 1997;15:1213.
41. Eng C, Mulligan LM. Mutations of the RET proto-oncogene in the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 syndromes, related sporadic tumors, and Hirschprung disease. Hum Mutat 1997;9:97.
42. Berndt I, Reuter M, Saller B, et al. A new hot spot for mutations in the ret proto-oncogene causing familial medullary thyroid carcinoma and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 1998;83:770.
43. Santoro M, Carlomagno F, Romano A, et al. Activation of RET as a dominantly transforming gene by germline mutations of MEN2A and MEN2B. Science 1995;267:381.
44. Kwok JBJ, Gardner E, Warner JP, et al. Structural analysis of the human ret proto-oncogene using exon trapping. Oncogene 1993;8:2575.
45. Tahira T, Ishizaka Y, Itoh F, et al. Characterization of ret proto-oncogene mRNAs encoding two isoforms of the protein product in a human neuroblastoma cell line. Oncogene 1990;5:97.
46. Tahira T, Ishizaka Y, Itoh F, et al. Expression of the ret proto-oncogene in human neuroblastoma cell lines and its increase during neuronal differentiation induced by retinoic acid. Oncogene
1991;6:2333.
47. Schuchardt A, D'Agati V, Larsson-Blomberg L, et al. Defects in the kidney and enteric nervous system of mice lacking the tyrosine kinase receptor Ret. Nature 1994;367:380.
48. Sánchez MP, Silos-Santiago I, Frisén J, et al. Renal agenesis and the absence of enteric neurons in mice lacking GDNF. Nature 1996;382:70.
49. Pichel JG, Shen L, Sheng HZ, et al. Defects in enteric innervation and kidney development in mice lacking GDNF. Nature 1996;382:73.

50. Moore MW, Klein RD, Farinas I, et al. Renal and neuronal abnormalities in mice lacking GDNF. Nature 1996;382:76.
51. Trupp M, Arenas E, Fainzilber M, et al. Functional receptor for GDNF encoded by the c- ret proto-oncogene. Nature 1996;381:785.
52. Durbec P, Macos-Gutierrez CV, Kilkenny C, et al. GDNF signalling through the Ret receptor tyrosine kinase. Nature 1996;381:789.
53. Jing S, Wen D, Yu Y, et al. GDNF-Induced activation of the ret protein tyrosine kinase is mediated by GDNFR-a, a novel receptor for GDNF. Cell 1996;85:1113.
54. Treanor JJS, Goodman L, de Sauvage F, et al. Characterization of a multicomponent receptor for GDNF. Nature 1996;382:80.
55. Hofstra RM, Sijmons RH, Stelwagen T, et al. Ret mutation screening in familial cutaneous lichen amyloidosis associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia. J Invest Dermatol 1996;107:215.
56. Mulligan LM, Eng C, Healey CS, et al. Specific mutations of the RET proto-oncogene are related to disease phenotype in MEN 2A and FMTC. Nat Genet 1994;6:70.
57. Schuffenecker I, Billaud M, Calender A, et al. Ret proto-oncogene mutations in French MEN 2A and FMTC families. Hum Mol Genet 1994;3:1939.
58. Frank-Raue K, Hoppner W, Frilling A, et al. Mutations of the ret proto-oncogene in German multiple endocrine neoplasia families: relation between genotype and phenotype. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 1996;81:1780.
59. Schuffenecker I, Virally-Monod M, Brohet R, et al. Risk and penetrance of primary hyperparathyroidism in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A families with mutations at codon 634 of the RET
proto-oncogene. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998;83:487.
60. Borst MJ, VanCamp JM, Peacock ML, Decker RA. Mutational analysis of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A associated with Hirschsprung's disease. Surgery 1995;117:386.
61. O'Riordain DS, O'Brien T, et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B: more than an endocrine disorder. Surgery 1995;118:936.
62. Eng C, Smith DP, Mulligan LM, et al. A novel point mutation in the tyrosine kinase domain of the RET proto-oncogene in sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma and in a family with FMTC.
Oncogene 1995;10:509.
63. Bolino A, Schuffenecker I, Luo Y, et al. RET mutations in exons 13 and 14 of FMTC patients. Oncogene 1995;10:2415.
64. Marsh KJ, Learoyd DL, Andrew SD, et al. Somatic mutations in the RET proto-oncogene in sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma. Clin Endocrinol 1996;44:249.
65. Musholt P, Musholt T, Goodfellow P, et al. “Cold” SSCV for mutation analysis of the RET proto-oncogene. Surgery 1997;122:363.
66. Roncalli M, Viale G, Grimelius L, et al. Prognostic value of N-myc immunoreactivity in medullary thyroid carcinoma. Cancer 1994;74:134.
67. Moley JF, Brother MB, Wells SA, et al. Low frequency of ras gene mutations in neuroblastomas, pheochromocytomas, and medullary thyroid cancers Cancer Res 1991;51:1596.
68. Moley JF, Wallin GK, Brother MB, et al. Oncogene and growth factor expression in MEN 2 and related tumors. Henry Ford Hosp Med J 1992;40:284.
69. Moley J, Brother M, Fong C, et al. Consistent association of 1p loss of heterozygosity with pheochromocytomas from patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 syndromes. Cancer Res
1992;52:770.
70. Mulligan LM, Gardner E, Smith BA, et al. Genetic events in tumour initiation and progression in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1993;6:166.
71. Nelkin BN, Nakamura Y, White RW, et al. Low incidence of loss of chromosome 10 in sporadic and hereditary human medullary thyroid carcinoma. Cancer Res 1989;49:4114.
72. Moley JF, Marshall HN. 1p deletions in human pheochromocytomas share a common pericentromeric breakpoint and do not involve imprinting. Am J Hum Genet 1994;55:A347.
73. Dou S, Toshima K, Liu L, et al. Identification of chromosomal loci for tumor suppressor loci implicated in progression of pheochromocytoma and medullary thyroid carcinoma. Am J Hum Genet
1994;55[Suppl]:A20.
74. Herfarth K, Wick M, Marshall H, et al. Absence of TP53 alterations in pheochromocytomas and medullary thyroid carcinomas. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1997;20:24.
75. Yoshimoto K, Iwahana H, Fukuda A, et al. Role of p53 mutations in endocrine tumorigenesis: mutation detection by polymerase chain reactionsingle strand conformation polymorphism. Cancer
Res 1992;52:5061.
76. Yana I, Nakamura T, Shin E, et al. Inactivation of the p53 gene is not required for tumorigenesis of medullary thyroid carcinoma or pheochromocytoma. Jpn J Cancer Res 1992;83:1113.
77. Lin SR, Lee YJ, Tsai JH. Mutations of the p53 gene in human functional adrenal neoplasms. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;78:483.
78. Gutmann DH, Geist RT, Rose K, et al. Loss of neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) gene expression in pheochromocytomas from patients without NF1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1995;13:104.
79. Wells SA Jr, Chi D, Toshima K, et al. Predictive DNA testing and prophylactic thyroidectomy in patients at risk for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. Ann Surg 1994;220:237.
80. Lips CJM, Landsvater RM, Höppener JWM, et al. Clinical screening as compared with DNA analysis in families with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. N Engl J Med 1994;331:828.
81. Skinner MA, DeBenedetti MK, Moley JF, et al. Medullary thyroid carcinoma in children with multiple endocrine neoplasia types 2A and 2B. J Pediatr Surg 1996;31:177.
82. Wells SA Jr, Skinner MA. Prophylactic thyroidectomy, based on direct genetic testing, in patients at risk for the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 syndromes. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes
1998;106:29.
83. Lairmore TC, Frisella MM, Wells SAJ. Genetic testing and early thyroidectomy for inherited medullary thyroid carcinoma. Ann Med 1996;28:401.
84. Norton JA, Froome LC, Farrell RE, et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type IIb. Symp Endocr Surg 1979;59:109.
85. Farid NR, Shi Y, Zou M. Molecular basis of thyroid cancer. Endocr Rev 1994;15:202.
86. Williams ED. The aetiology of thyroid tumors. Clin Endocrinol Metab 1979;8:193.
87. Moore JHJ, Bacharach B, Choi HY. Anaplastic transformation of metastatic follicular carcinoma of the thyroid. J Surg Oncol 1985;29:216.
88. Venkatesh YS, Ordonez NG, Schultz PN, et al. Anaplastic carcinoma of the thyroid: a clinicopathologic study of 121 cases. Cancer 1990;66:321.
89. Hay ID. Papillary thyroid carcinoma. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1990;19:545.
90. Wahner HW, Cuello C, Correa P, et al. Thyroid carcinoma in an endemic goiter area, Cali, Colombia. Am J Med 1966;40:58.
91. Heitz P, Moser SH, Staub JJ. Thyroid cancer. A study of 573 thyroid tumors and 161 autopsy cases observed over a thirty year period. Cancer 1976;37:2329.
92. Williams ED, Doniach I, Bjarnason O, et al. Thyroid cancer in an iodide rich area: a histopathological study. Cancer 1977;39:215.
93. Belfiore A, La Rosa GL, La Porta GA, et al. Cancer risk in patients with cold thyroid nodules: relevance of iodine intake, sex, age and multinodularity. Am J Med 1992;93:363.
94. Rallison ML, Dobyns BM, Keating FR, et al. Thyroid nodularity in children. JAMA 1975;233:1069.
95. McTiernan AM, Weiss NS, Daling JR. Incidence of thyroid cancer in women in relation to previous exposure to radiation therapy and history of thyroid disease. J Natl Cancer Inst 1984;73:575.
96. Schneider AB, Shore-Freedman E, Ryo UY, et al. Radiation-induced tumors of the head and neck following childhood irradiation. Medicine 1985;64:1.
97. Shore RE, Woodard E, Hildreth N, et al. Thyroid tumors following thymus irradiation. J Natl Cancer Inst 1985;74:1177.
98. Hamilton TE, van Belle G, LoGerfo JP. Thyroid neoplasia in Marshall islanders exposed to nuclear fallout. JAMA 1987;258:629.
99. Wright PA, Williams ED, Lemoine NR, et al. Radiation-associated and “spontaneous” human thyroid carcinomas show a different pattern of ras oncogene mutation. Oncogene 1991;6:471.
100. Suarez HG, du Villard JA, Severino M, et al. Presence of mutations in all three ras genes in human thyroid tumors. Oncogene 1990;5:565.
101. Karga H, Lee JK, Vickery ALJ, et al. Ras oncogene mutations in benign and malignant thyroid neoplasms. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1991;73:832.
102. Namba H, Rubin SA, Fagin JA. Point mutations of ras oncogenes are an early event in thyroid tumorigenesis. Mol Endocrinol 1990;4:1474.
103. Shi YF, Zou MJ, Schmidt H, et al. High rates of ras codon 61 mutation in thyroid tumors in an iodide-deficient area. Cancer Res 1991;51:2690.
104. Lemoine NR, Mayall ES, Wyllie FS, et al. High frequency of ras oncogene activation in all stages of human thyroid tumorigenesis. Oncogene 1989;4:159.
105. Fusco A, Berlinghieri MT, Di Fiore PP, et al. One- and two-step transformation of rat thyroid epithelial cells by retroviral oncogenes. Mol Cell Biol 1987;7:3365.
106. Francis-Lang H, Zannini M, De Felice M, et al. Multiple mechanisms of interference between transformation and differentiation in thyroid cells. Mol Cell Biol 1992;12:5793.
107. Parma J, Duprez L, Van Sande J, et al. Somatic mutations of the thyrotropin receptor gene cause hyperfunctioning thyroid adenomas. Nature 1993;365:649.
108. Lyons J, Landis CA, Harsh G, et al. Two G protein oncogenes in human endocrine tumors. Science 1990;249:635.
109. Suarez HG, du Villard JA, Caillou B, et al. Gsp mutations in human thyroid tumors. Oncogene 1991;6:677.
110. Matsuo K, Tang S-H, Fagin JA. Allelotype of human thyroid tumors: loss of chromosome 11q13 sequences in follicular neoplasms. Mol Endocrinol 1991;5:1873.
111. Bongarzone I, Pierotti MA, Monzini N, et al. High frequency of activation of tyrosine kinase oncogenes in human papillary thyroid carcinoma. Oncogene 1989;4:1457.
112. Santoro M, Carlomagno F, Hay ID, et al. Ret oncogene activation in human thyroid neoplasms is restricted to the papillary cancer subtype. J Clin Invest 1992;89:1517.
113. Fusco A, Grieco M, Santoro M, et al. A new oncogene in human thyroid papillary carcinomas and their lymph-nodal metastases. Nature 1987;328:170.
114. Grieco M, Santoro M, Berlingieri MT, et al. PTC is a novel rearranged form of the ret proto-oncogene and is frequently detected in vivo in human thyroid papillary carcinomas. Cell 1990;60:557.
115. Ishizaka Y, Ushijima T, Sugimura T, et al. cDNA cloning and characterization of ret activated in a human papillary carcinoma cell line. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1990;168:402.
116. Pierotti MA, Santoro M, Jenkins RB, et al. Characterization of an inversion on the long arm of chromosome 10 juxtaposing D10S170 and RET and creating the oncogenic sequence RET/PTC.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992;89:1616.
117. Sozzi G, Bongarzone I, Miozzo M, et al. A t(10;17) translocation creates the RET/PTC2 chimeric transforming sequence in papillary thyroid carcinoma. Genes Chromosomes Cancer
1994;9:244.
118. Bongarzone I, Butti MG, Coronelli S, et al. Frequent activation of ret protooncogene by fusion with a new activating gene in papillary thyroid carcinomas. Cancer Res 1994;54:2979.
119. Wajjwalku W, Nakamura S, Hasegawa Y, et al. Low frequency of rearrangements of the ret and trk proto-oncogenes in Japanese thyroid papillary carcinomas. Jpn J Cancer Res 1992;83:671.
120. Zou M, Shi Y, Farid NR. Low rate of ret proto-oncogene activation (PTC/retTPC) in papillary thyroid carcinomas from Saudi Arabia. Cancer 1994;73:176.
121. Morris CM, Hao QL, Heisterkamp N, et al. Localization of the TRK proto-oncogene to human chromosome bands 1q23-1q24. Oncogene 1991;6:1093.
122. Greco A, Pierotti MA, Bongarzone I, et al. TRK-T1 is a novel oncogene formed by the fusion of TPR and TRK genes in human papillary thyroid carcinomas. Oncogene 1992;7:237.
123. Di Renzo MF, Narsimhan RP, Olivero M, et al. Expression of the Met/HGF receptor in normal and neoplastic human tissues. Oncogene 1991;6:1977.
124. Di Renzo MF, Olivero M, Ferro S, et al. Overexpression of the c-MET/HGF receptor gene in human thyroid carcinomas. Oncogene 1992;7:2549.
125. Jhiang SM, Caruso DR, Gilmore E, et al. Detection of the PTC/ret TPC oncogene in human thyroid cancers. Oncogene 1992;7:1331.
126. Jhiang SM, Smanik PA, Mazzaferri EL. Development of a single-step duplex RT-PCR detecting different forms of ret activation, and identification of the third form of in vivo ret activation in
human papillary thyroid carcinomas. Cancer Lett 1994;78:69.
127. Jhiang SM, Mazzaferri EL. The ret/PTC oncogene in papillary thyroid carcinoma. J Lab Clin Med 1994;123:331.
128. Nord B, Larsson C, Wong FK, et al. Sporadic follicular thyroid tumors show loss of a 200-kb region in 11q13 without evidence for mutations in the MEN1 gene. Genes Chromosomes Cancer
1999;26:35.
129. Herrmann MA, Hey ID, Bartelt DHJ, et al. Cytogenetic and molecular genetic studies of follicular and papillary thyroid cancers. J Clin Invest 1991;88:1596.
130. Fagin JA, Matsuo K, Karmarkar A, et al. High prevalence of mutations of the p53 gene in poorly differentiated human thyroid carcinomas. J Clin Invest 1992;91:179.
131. Ito T, Seyama T, Mizuno T, et al. Unique association of p53 mutations with undifferentiated but not with differentiated carcinomas of the thyroid gland. Cancer Res 1992;52:1369.
132. Arnold A. Genetic basis of endocrine disease 5. Molecular genetics of parathyroid gland neoplasia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993;77:1108.
133. Thakker RV, Bouloux P, Wooding C, et al. Association of parathyroid tumors in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 with loss of alleles on chromosome 11. N Engl J Med 1989;321:218.
134. Radford DM, Ashley SW, Wells SA Jr, et al. Loss of heterozygosity of markers on chromosome 11 in tumors from patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome type 1. Cancer Res
1990;50:6529.
135. Byström C, Larsson C, Blomberg C, et al. Localization of the MEN1 gene to a small region within chromosome 11q13 by deletion mapping in tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:1968.
136. Friedman E, DeMarco L, Gejman PV, et al. Allelic loss from chromosome 11 in parathyroid tumors. Cancer Res 1992;52:6804.
137. Heppner C, Kester MB, Agarwal SK, et al. Somatic mutation of the MEN1 gene in parathyroid tumours. Nat Genet 1997;16:375.
138. Farnebo F, Teh BT, Kytola S, et al. Alterations of the MEN1 gene in sporadic parathyroid tumors. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998;83:2627.
139. Arnold A, Hyung GK, Gaz RD, et al. Molecular cloning and chromosomal mapping of DNA rearranged with the parathyroid hormone gene in a parathyroid adenoma. J Clin Invest 1989;83:2034.
140. Motokura T, Bloom T, Kim HG, et al. A novel cyclin encoded by a bcl1-linked candidate oncogene. Nature 1991;350:512.
141. Jackson CE, Boonstra CE. The relationship of hereditary hyperparathyroidism to endocrine adenomatosis. Am J Med 1967;43:727.
142. Foley TPJ, Harrison HC, Arnaud CD, et al. Familial benign hypercalcemia. J Pediatr 1972;81:1060.
143. Heath HI, Purnell DC. Urinary cyclic 3',5'-adenosine monophosphate responses to exogenous and endogenous parathyroid hormone in familial benign hypercalcemia and primary
hyperparathyroidism. J Lab Clin Med 1980;96:974.
144. Marx SJ, Attie MF, Levine MA, et al. The hypocalciuric or benign variant of familial hypercalcemia: clinical and biochemical features in fifteen kindreds. Medicine 1981;60:397.
145. Paterson CR, Gunn A. Familial benign hypercalcaemia. Lancet 1981;2:61.
146. Attie MF, Gill JRJ, Stock JL, et al. Urinary calcium excretion in familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia: persistence of relative hypocalciuria after induction of hypoparathyroidism. J Clin Invest

1983;72:667.
147. Law WMJ, Bollman S, Kumar R, et al. Vitamin D metabolism in familial benign hypercalcemia (hypocalciuric hypercalcemia) differs from that in primary hyperparathyroidism. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 1983;58:744.
148. Law WM, Heath HI. Familial benign hypercalcemia (hypocalciuric hypercalcemia): clinical and pathogenetic studies in 21 families. Ann Intern Med 1985;102:511.
149. Heath HI. Familial benign (hypocalciuric) hypercalcemia, a troublesome mimic of mild primary hyperparathyroidism. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1989;18:723.
150. Pollak MR, Brown EM, Chou Y-HW, et al. Mutations in the Ca 2+-sensing receptor gene cause familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia and neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism. Cell
1993;75:1297.
151. Khosla S, Ebeling PR, Firek AF, et al. Calcium infusion suggests a “set-point” abnormality of parathyroid gland function in familial benign hypercalcemia and more complex disturbances in
primary hyperparathyroidism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993;76:715.
152. Brown EM. Mutations in the calcium-sensing receptor and their clinical implications. Horm Res 1997;48:199.
153. Aida K, Koishi S, Inoue M, et al. Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia associated with mutation in the human Ca 2+-sensing receptor gene. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1995;80:2594.
154. Chou Y-H, Pollak M, Brandi M, et al. Mutations in the human Ca 2+-sensing receptor gene that cause familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia. Am J Hum Genet 1995;56:1075.
155. Janicic N, Pausova Z, Cole DEC, et al. Insertion of an Alu sequence in the Ca 2+-sensing receptor gene in familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia and neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism. Am J
Hum Genet 1995;56:880.
156. Pearce S, Trump D, Wooding C, et al. Calcium-sensing receptor mutations in familial benign hypercalcaemia and neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism. J Clin Invest 1995;96:2683.
157. Heath HI. Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia. In: Bilezikian J, Marcus R, Levine M, eds. The parathyroids. New York: Raven Press, 1994:699.
158. Goldsmith RE, Sizemore GW, Chen I-W, et al. Familial hyperparathyroidism; description of a large kindred and a review of the literature. Ann Intern Med 1976;84:36.
159. Wassif WS, Moniz CF, Friedman E, et al. Familial isolated hyperparathyroidism: a distinct genetic entity with an increased risk of parathyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993;77:1485.
160. Jackson CE, Norum RA, Boyd SB, et al. Hereditary hyperparathyroidism and multiple ossifying jaw fibromas: a clinically and genetically distinct syndrome. Surgery 1990;108:1006.
161. Szabó J, Heath B, Hill VM, et al. Hereditary hyperparathyroidismjaw tumor syndrome: the endocrine tumor gene HRPT2 maps to chromosome 1q21-q31. Am J Hum Genet 1995;56:944.
162. Teh BT, Farnebo F, Twigg S, et al. Familial isolated hyperparathyroidism maps to the hyperparathyroidismjaw tumor locus in 1q21-q32 in a subset of families. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1998;83:2114.
163. Hakim JP, Levine MA. Absence of p53 point mutations in parathyroid adenoma and carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;78:103.
164. Cryns VL, Rubio MP, Thor AD, et al. p53 abnormalities in human parathyroid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;78:1320.
165. Cryns VL, Thor A, Xu H-J, et al. Loss of the retinoblastoma tumor-suppressor gene in parathyroid carcinomas. N Engl J Med 1994;330:757.
166. Latif F, Tory K, Gnarra J, et al. Identification of the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor suppressor gene. Science 1993;260:1317.
167. Duan DR, Pause A, Burgess WH, et al. Inhibition of transcription elongation by the VHL tumor suppressor protein. Science 1995;269:1402.
168. Crossey PA, Richards FM, Foster K, et al. Identification of intragenic mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumour suppressor gene and correlation with disease phenotype. Hum Mol
Genet 1994;3:1303.
169. Cawthon RM, Weiss R, Xu G, et al. A major segment of the neurofibromatosis type 1 gene: cDNA sequence, genomic structure, and point mutations. Cell 1990;62:193.
170. Wallace MR, Marchuk DA, Andersen LB, et al. Type 1 neurofibromatosis gene: identification of a large transcript disrupted in three NF1 patients. Science 1990;249:181.
171. Yano T, Linehan M, Anglard P, et al. Genetic changes in human adrenocortical carcinomas. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;7:518.
172. Srivastava S, Zou Z, Pirollo K, et al. Germ-line transmission of a mutated p53 gene in a cancer-prone family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Nature 1990;348:747.
173. Ping AJ, Reeve AE, Law DJ, et al. Genetic linkage of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome to 11p15. Am J Hum Genet 1989;44:720.
174. Reincke M, Karl M, Travis WH, et al. p53 mutations in human adrenocortical neoplasms: immunohistochemical and molecular studies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;78:790.
175. Williamson EA, Johnson SJ, Foster S, et al. G protein gene mutations in patients with multiple endocrinopathies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1995;80:1702.
176. Latronico AC, Reincke M, Mendonça BB, et al. No evidence for oncogenic mutations in the adrenocorticotropin receptor gene in human adrenocortical neoplasms. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1995;80:875.
177. Gortz B, Roth J, Speel EJM, et al. MEN1 gene mutation analysis of sporadic adrenocortical lesions. Int J Cancer 1999;80:373.
178. Khosla S, Patel VM, Hay ID, et al. Loss of heterozygosity suggests multiple genetic alterations in pheochromocytomas and medullary thyroid carcinomas. J Clin Invest 1991;87:1691.
179. Yang K-P, Nguyen CV, Castillo SG, et al. Deletion mapping on the distal third region of chromosome 1p in multiple endocrine neoplasia type IIA. Anticancer Res 1990;10:527.
180. Mathew CGP, Smith BA, Thorpe K, et al. Deletions of genes on chromosome 1 in endocrine neoplasia. Nature 1987;328:524.
181. Shin E, Fujita S, Takami K, et al. Deletion mapping of chromosome 1p and 22q in pheochromocytoma. Jpn J Cancer Res 1993;84:402.

SECTION 38.2 Thyroid Tumors
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 38.2
Thyroid Tumors
DOULAS L. FRAKER
MONICA SKARULIS
VIRGINIA LIVOLSI
Introduction
Thyroid Nodules
Well-Differentiated Thyroid Carcinoma
Demographics and Epidemiology
Etiology
Pathology
Clinical Findings in Well-Differentiated Thyroid Cancer
Natural History and Prognosis
Treatment of Well-Differentiated Thyroid Cancer
Anaplastic Thyroid Cancer
Medullary Thyroid Cancer
Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis
Treatment
Thyroid Lymphoma
Secondary Thyroid Malignancy
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Cancers of the endocrine glands or organs are rare, as they will account for only 1.5% of the estimated 1.22 million new cases of non–skin cancer and 0.21% of the
estimated 563,100 cancer deaths in the United States in 1999. 1 Thyroid cancer is overwhelmingly the most common type of endocrine malignancy, accounting for the
majority of the deaths due to endocrine cancers. It was estimated that in 1999 there would be 18,100 new cases of thyroid cancer (more than 90% of the total new
endocrine cancers) and 1400 deaths due to thyroid cancer, which is 60% of the total deaths due to endocrine malignancies ( Table 38.2-1).1 Compared to the number
of thyroid cancers, there are approximately 800 cases of endocrine pancreas tumors (not all malignant), 2 550 adrenal cancers, 130 pituitary gland cancers, and 65
parathyroid gland cancers. The discrepancy between the total number of cases of all endocrine cancers arising in the thyroid (91%) and the total proportion of
endocrine cancer deaths (60%) reflects the relatively indolent nature and long-term survival associated with thyroid malignancies.

TABLE 38.2-1. Incidence and Proportion of All Endocrine Cancers and Relative Proportions of Different Primary Thyroid Cancer Subtypes

Within the broad category of thyroid cancers, there are many types, each with a distinctive epidemiology, natural history, treatment, and prognosis. The general
categories of thyroid cancer are well-differentiated malignancies, anaplastic cancer, medullary thyroid cancer (MTC), and other unusual cancers, such as lymphoma,
sarcoma, and other rare malignancies. 3 The normal thyroid is composed histologically of two main parenchymal cell types. Follicular cells line the colloid follicles,
concentrate iodine, and are involved in the production of thyroid hormone. These cells give rise to well-differentiated cancers and, almost certainly, anaplastic thyroid
cancer (ATC). The second cell type is the parafollicular or C cell, which produces calcitonin and is the cell of origin for MTC. Stromal and immune cells of the thyroid
are responsible for sarcoma and lymphoma, respectively. Of the 18,100 new cases of thyroid cancer each year, approximately 90% of malignant thyroid nodules are
well-differentiated cancers, 5% to 9% are MTC, 1% to 2% are anaplastic cancers, 1% to 3% are lymphoma, and fewer than 1% are sarcoma and other rare tumors. 3
Within the category of well-differentiated thyroid cancers, there are various histologic subtypes. These descriptive subgroupings have evolved since the 1980s with an
improved understanding of the biology of these different types. Initial categories included papillary, follicular, and mixed tumor with variable areas of both papillary and
follicular histology. Several studies have documented that these mixed tumors with any area of papillary features have the same natural history and prognosis as
papillary thyroid cancer without follicular feratures. 3,4 This category of mixed papillary and follicular carcinoma should be grouped with papillary carcinoma; even those
that are composed entirely of follicles should be included (diagnosed as the follicular variant of papillary carinoma).The major cytologic feature shared by all members
of this group, regardless of the histologic pattern, is the characteristic nucleus. A third category of lesions grouped with differentiated thyroid carcinoma is the Hürthle
cell or oncocytic carcinoma. Although there are controversies about whether Hürthle cell neoplasms can behave in a benign fashion, most authors now accept the
concept of benign and malignant lesions with this cytology. 5 The clinical behavior of these lesions is somewhat more aggressive than usual follicular carcinomas, and
some authors prefer to include these lesions in the intermediate malignancy group. The distribution of well-differentiated thyroid cancer subgroups in some reports
shows that 80% to 85% are papillary, with 10% to 15% of cases being follicular and 3% to 5% Hürthle cell carcinomas. 3 These published figures may not reflect
adequate pathologic recognition of the follicular variant of papillary carcinoma, and true follicular carcinoma may represent 5% or fewer of well-differentiated thyroid
cancers in countries with iodine-sufficient diets. 4 Therefore, as 90% of all thyroid cancers are well-differentiated and 85% to 95% of all well-differentiated tumors are
papillary tumors, papillary thyroid cancer accounts for 75% to 80% of all thyroid cancers.
This chapter is organized to present the key clinical aspects of well-differentiated thyroid cancers, anaplastic cancers, MTCs, thyroid lymphoma, and secondary
thyroid malignancies. As the vast majority of thyroid cancers present as thyroid nodules, yet only a minority of all thyroid nodules are malignant, a general discussion
of the incidence, evaluation, and management of thyroid nodules precedes discussion of specific clinical conditions.

THYROID NODULES
The prevalence of thyroid nodules depends on the population under study; gender, age, and history of exposure to ionizing radiation strongly influence the results of
various large studies, as does the method by which the nodules are being detected (physical examination, ultrasonography, or pathology). There is clearly an
age-dependent increase in thyroid nodules 6; in one pathologic study, up to 90% of women older than 70 years and 60% of men older than 80 years had nodular
goiter. 7 All studies show that women develop nodules more frequently than men, although reports of the female to male ratio vary from 1.2:1 to 4.3:1. 8 An increased
tendency to develop thyroid nodules is demonstrated in groups exposed to ionizing radiation, especially during childhood. In a study at the Michael Reese Hospital,
38.4% of patients who received radiation before age 16 years developed palpable thyroid nodules. 9 In patients with Hodgkin's disease treated with mantle radiation,
3% developed thyroid nodules. 10
Most thyroid nodules are found in asymptomatic patients either during routine physical examination of the neck or because the patient notices a mass in the neck. By

obtaining information from the history and physical examination, one assesses the risk of malignancy in that individual. In general, there is a 5% to 10% chance of
malignancy in all thyroid nodules for the total population 11; however, men and patients at the extremes of age are at higher risk for malignancy. Nodules found in a
patient with a history of childhood neck irradiation carry a 33% to 37% chance of malignancy. 12,13 The presence of a solitary nodule is of greater concern than a
thyroid with multiple nodules; however, a dominant nodule or a nodule that changes size in the setting of a multinodular goiter should be investigated to exclude
carcinoma. Patients with Graves' disease who develop a nodule may have a higher risk of cancer. 14,15 Whether the co-occurrence of Graves' disease affects the
aggressiveness of the thyroid carcinoma is a topic of controversy. 16,17 However, the occurrence of carcinoma in autonomously functioning nodules is extremely rare. 8
Although not specific for malignancy, a history of rapid increase in size, dyspnea, dysphagia, hoarseness, and the development of a Horner's syndrome are worrisome
symptoms. Tender nodules are more often associated with thyroiditis and are likely to be benign. A family history of thyroid cancer or pheochromocytoma should
suggest MTC in the setting of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2a (MEN 2A) or MEN 2B. 19 Other inherited disorders to be aware of are Gardner's syndrome 20 and
Cowden's disease, 21 both of which are associated with benign and malignant thyroid neoplasms. On examination of the neck, attention to the firmness, mobility, and
size of the nodules, their adherence to surrounding structures, and the presence of adenopathy are important clues to the presence of carcinoma. However, these
features, with the exception of cervical lymphadenopathy, lack specificity for malignancy. 22
Thyroid function testing should be performed to identify underlying thyroid pathology and not to differentiate benign from malignant nodules. Subclinical
hyperthyroidism, sometimes seen only as a suppressed thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), may be secondary to an autonomously functioning nodule. In this case,
one determines whether the nodule is functional with a radionuclide scan by iodine uptake. Tests of serum thyroglobulin (Tg) levels are not helpful in distinguishing
benign from malignant thyroid nodules. 18 Routine measurement of serum calcitonin may be useful to identify patients with sporadic medullary carcinoma of the thyroid
preoperatively 23; however, the cost-effectiveness of this practice requires further evaluation. 24 The majority of both benign and malignant thyroid nodules are
hypofunctional when compared to normally functioning thyroid tissue; thus, the finding of a “cold nodule” on 123I or 99Tc scanning is nonspecific. Radionuclide scans
are also helpful in determining the functional status of nodules in patients with multinodular thyroid disease to focus a biopsy on cold nodules. 18 A hyperfunctioning or
hot nodule is rarely malignant in an adult. 18
High-resolution ultrasonography is a useful adjunct to the clinical examination for size assessment of nodules, for the detection of multiple nodules not discerned by
palpation, and for assisting in fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of nodules. 25,26 Despite advances in technology allowing more sensitive detection of blood flow in
thyroid pathology, differences in echogenicity or vascularity cannot distinguish benign from malignant lesions. 27 Ultrasonography identifies whether a lesion is cystic
or solid, and the vast majority of cystic lesions are benign. A more cost-effective method to identify a cyst is fine-needle aspiration (FNA) with return of fluid and
disappearance of the nodule after aspiration. Cysts larger than 4 cm in size and having a partially solid component and those that recur after three aspirations may
warrant biopsy, as these conditions are more likely to be associated with malignancy. 3
The single most important study in the evaluation of thyroid nodules is the FNAB. The impact this procedure has had on clinical practice is reflected by a reduction of
the total number of thyroid surgeries performed, a greater proportion of malignancies removed at surgery, and an overall reduction in the cost of managing patients
with nodules.8 The accuracy of cytologic diagnosis from fine-needle biopsy ranges from 70% to 97% 25 and is highly dependent on the skill of the person performing
the biopsy and that of the cytopathologist interpreting it. The results of FNAB are most commonly divided into the following categories: benign or negative (colloid
nodule or hyperplastic nodule), indeterminate (all follicular neoplasms, including those with Hürthle cell changes), suspicious or malignant (papillary, anaplastic,
medullary, and lymphoma), and insufficient sample. Reviews of this technique provide insight into the results typically obtained at the time of fine-needle biopsy of the
nodules: 70% are classified as benign (range, 53% to 90%), 4.0% as malignant (range, 1% to 10%), 10% as suspicious or indeterminate (range, 5% to 23%), and
17% as insufficient sample (range, 15% to 20%). 28
The malignant potential of follicular neoplasms cannot be determined by cytologic evaluation; thus, the biopsies from all such lesions are generally classified as
suspicious or indeterminate, and most come to surgical resection. The cells from follicular adenomas and follicular carcinomas appear identical; only by identifying
capsular or vascular invasion can cancer be diagnosed. 18 Specimens with predominantly Hürthle cells must be treated in the same fashion; however, extensive
Hürthle cell changes can be seen in Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Malignancy is found in 10% to 20% of follicular nodules that are classified as indeterminateon biopsy. 18,29
Attempts to develop more discriminating cytologic subclassifications to improve the yield of malignancy found at surgery have not proven highly successful, nor are
they easily adopted at other institutions. A new technique to improve the sensitivity of FNA in this situation has been to perform polymerase chain reaction analysis for
telomerase, which is an enzyme expressed in virtually all malignant cancers but not expressed in benign or normal tissue. 30 Preliminary studies have demonstrated
increased telomerase activity in thyroid cancers, and this may serve as a useful adjunct to improve the sensitivity of this category of suspicious or indeterminate FNAB
with more appropriate surgical procedures. 31,32
Biopsies classified as benign or negative are safely followed up medically with the caveat that false-negative results occur in 1% to 6% of cases. 28 Clinical judgment
should dictate the course of action in these cases; if a large, hard nodule is fixed to surrounding tissue and is painful, surgery should be performed despite a negative
aspirate. Sampling error occurring during biopsy of large, cystic hemorrhagic nodules or simple misdiagnosis account for many of the false-negative results. 33
False-positive results for malignancy occur in 3% to 6% of all biopsies. 28 The cytologic features of Hashimoto's thyroiditis frequently lead to these false-positive
interpretations. 33 With experienced cytopathologists, this false-positive rate should decrease to less than 1%. 34
Benign thyroid nodules can be followed up carefully by routine physical examination or, more precisely, by ultrasonography and do not generally require repeat
biopsy.18 Thyroxine suppression therapy is widely used; however, randomized controlled studies have indicated that thyroxine therapy is not superior to placebo. 35,36
and 37

Attention to potential side effects of long-term thyroxine therapy has stirred controversy. The creation of a subclinical hyperthyroid state by suppressive doses of
thyroxine increases the incidence of osteoporosis. 15 There is evidence that postmenopausal women who are not on estrogen replacement therapy are at higher risk
for bone demineralization while on suppressive doses of thyroxine. 38 Patients on long-term suppressive therapy may have cardiac symptoms (tachycardia,
arrhythmias),39 and those at high risk for recurrence of thyroid cancer may receive less aggressive suppression and judicious use of b-adrenergic blockers to prevent
atrial arrhythmias. 39

WELL-DIFFERENTIATED THYROID CARCINOMA
DEMOGRAPHICS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
The incidence of both papillary and follicular thyroid carcinomas in terms of gender distribution is similar, with approximately a 2.5-fold excess in favor of female
individuals as compared to male individuals ( Table 38.2-2).3,40,41,42,43,44,45 and 46 The median age at diagnosis is earlier in women than in men for both papillary and
follicular subtypes and tends to be earlier for papillary cancer as compared to follicular cancer in either gender (see Table 38.2-2).42,434445 and 46 Specifically, median
age at diagnosis in white women is between 40 and 41 years, whereas for white men, it is 44 to 45 years for papillary carcinoma. 3 For follicular thyroid carcinoma, the
median age at diagnosis is 48 for white women as compared to 53 for white men. 3 Well-differentiated thyroid cancer has a greater incidence in whites than in blacks
of both genders.7 The relative proportion of age-adjusted incidence rates is slightly more than twofold higher for whites. One significant difference in the incidence in
terms of race is that the proportion of well-differentiated thyroid carcinomas that are follicular is increased greatly in blacks as compared to whites. It is reported that
follicular carcinoma accounts for 15% of all well-differentiated tumors in whites as compared to 34% in blacks. 3

TABLE 38.2-2. Age, Gender Distribution, Proportion of Papillary or Follicular and Extent of Disease at Presentation for Several Institutional Series of
Well-Differentiated Thyroid Cancer

ETIOLOGY
Radiation exposure to the thyroid gland is the only risk factor known definitively to increase the incidence of well-differentiated thyroid cancer. 47,48 Thyroid exposure to
radiation can occur in two ways: from external sources or from ingestion of radioactive material. Data regarding external exposure to the thyroid comes primarily from
two sources. One is medically administered external-beam irradiation, and the second is environmental exposure, previously related to nuclear weapons attacks or
weapons testing and, more recently, from nuclear power plant accidents. Internal exposure occurs by ingestion of radioisotopes of iodine that concentrate in the
thyroid gland from either medical treatment with radioactive iodine or by ingestion of these radioisotopes from the fallout from nuclear weapons explosions or power
plant accidents. The relative risks of radiation exposure from these different sources has been well studied, and variables, such as age at exposure, radiation dose,
and latent period to developing cancers, have been defined. 48 However, radiation accounts for only a small portion of the total annual cases of well-differentiated
thyroid cancer.49 Other potential factors that may predispose to thyroid neoplasms include diet (particularly content of iodine), effects of steroid hormones, and other
occupational exposures. 47,50
Case-control studies, 51,52 as well as detailed institutional reviews of large populations of patients 9,53 undergoing childhood irradiation, show that there is an inverse
relationship between increased risk of thyroid cancer and age of exposure to radiation. Relative risk is also linearly related to exposure dose, at least up to 2000
rads. 9,54 The latent period after exposure is at least 3 to 5 years, and there is no apparent drop-off in the increased risk even after 40 years after the radiation
exposure.54 One of the best analyzed databases regarding childhood radiation for medical purposes comes from Schneider et al. 9,53,54 at the University of Chicago.
They have intensively analyzed more than 3000 patients who were irradiated between 1939 and 1962. More than one-third of these patients developed thyroid
nodules, and 318 patients were documented to have thyroid cancer. 53 The large populations studied by Schneider et al. showed that increased relative risk of thyroid
carcinoma was low and thyroid cancers were rare between 5 and 10 years after radiation exposure. 54 The majority of cases occurred between 20 and 40 years after
exposure. However, even after 40 years, the relative risk as compared to a nonirradiated population was still increased. 54 For these reasons, the large cohort of
patients who underwent childhood irradiation for benign medical conditions between 1920 and 1960 are now between the ages of 40 and 80, and this population still
has an increased risk of developing thyroid carcinoma as compared to nonirradiated patients.
Although the use of radiation for benign conditions has not been practiced since the 1960s, there is increased use of radiation treatments for neoplastic conditions,
including infants, children, and young adults. 55 The majority of this patient population is made up of patients with either Hodgkin's or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma but also
includes long-term survivors of Wilms' tumor of the kidneys or neuroblastoma in which there is some scatter to the thyroid gland. 10,55 The young age at treatment for
neuroblastoma and Wilms' tumor (mean age, 2 and 3 years, respectively) and the relatively high-dose of thyroid exposure (660 rads and 310 rads, respectively) has
led to a dramatic increase in relative risk of 350 for neuroblastoma patients and 132 for survivors of Wilms' tumors for the development of thyroid cancer. 51 Relative
risks between 16 and 80 have been reported in this patient population of adolescents and young adults treated for lymphoma. 10,55 In the adult patient population
treated with therapeutic radiation for malignancies, there is a drop-off in risk reflecting the importance of age at exposure. A large study of more than 150,000 women
treated with radiation for cervical cancer had an estimated thyroid exposure of 11 rads, with a relative risk of 2.35, compared to nonirradiated age-matched controls. 56
A second type of radiation exposure to the thyroid gland is via ingestion of radioisotopes that concentrate in the thyroid. These isotopes come from two sources:
medical administration either for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes using radioactive iodine, 57 and environmental exposure to fallout from nuclear weapons or nuclear
accidents. The most common exposure is due to 131I administered for diagnostic thyroid scans. A typical nuclear medicine study exposes the thyroid to the equivalent
of approximately 50 rads of external-beam radiation exposure. 58 A large study of more than 35,000 diagnostic scans between 1951 and 1969 showed a very minimal
increase in the number of thyroid cancers, with 50 actual cases versus 39.4 cases predicted. 58 A second, more significant medical exposure is therapeutic 131I
administered for ablation of thyroid tissue, with the equivalent of 6000 to 10,000 mL to treat Graves' disease. 59 Despite this high radiation dose, there is a
standardized increased incidence ratio of only 1.32 for thyroid cancer, 59 as the high-dose 131I most likely destroys the thyroid parenchyma.
A more dangerous type of ingestion of radioisotopes of iodine comes from exposure to nuclear fallout. 60,61 Data from fallout exposure comes from nuclear
weapon–testing sites at the Marshall Islands 60 and Nevada in the 1950s, 61 as well as the 1986 nuclear power plant explosion at Chernobyl. 62 The positive results in
these studies compared to the lack of risk of the medical use of 131I is most likely due to other high-energy short-lived isotopes, such as 129I and 132I to 135I present in
fallout that are more damaging but are not present in radioisotope drugs. An early study completed 4.5 years after the event at Chernobyl suggested no increased risk
of thyroid nodules. 63 More recent studies show a steady sequential increase in the diagnosis of pediatric thyroid cancer as early as 3 years and increasing from 5 to
now 10 years since the incident. 62 This data reflect the importance of age at exposure, as this increased incidence occurs primarily in children.
The natural history and pathology of radiation-associated thyroid cancer has been well documented in the aforementioned epidemiologic studies. 9,50 The vast majority
of cases have a papillary histology, and these behave in the same way as nonradiation-associated papillary cancers. 9
Although the data relating radiation exposure of the thyroid gland and subsequent development of carcinoma are definitive, the majority of patients who developed
well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma have absolutely no history of radiation exposure. A study from the Connecticut Tumor Registry shows that 9% of thyroid cancer
could be related to radiation exposure, meaning 91% of cases have no identifiable risk factor. 49 Other factors, including dietary influences, sex hormones,
environmental exposures, or increased genetic susceptibility, have been studied, with very mixed results and no clear associations. Dietary influences have primarily
focused on the level of iodine in the diet. 47,50,64 Iodine-deficient diets or diets that include a large intake of vegetables from the crucifer family (which block iodine
uptake) may lead to increased TSH levels and are considered goitrogenic, with a modest increase in follicular cancers. 64 Increased iodine intake due to shellfish
occurs in the geographic areas with the highest incidence of predominantly papillary thyroid cancer, such as Iceland, Norway, and Hawaii. 65
There is no clear familial syndrome or genetic disease associated with the development of well-differentiated thyroid cancer, although one study has suggested a
propensity to multifocal well-differentiated thyroid cancer in a small number of families. 66 However, none of the described oncogenes for well-differentiated thyroid
cancer (RET, MNG-1, TCO) were found to be involved in evaluation of 56 kindreds. 67,68 This contrasts with MTC, in which a variety of genetic syndromes now are
being defined at the molecular level (see later in Treatment of Familial Medullary Thyroid Cancer and Table 38.2-10).65
PATHOLOGY
Thyroid malignancies are derived from either follicular cells (papillary, follicular, Hürthle cell, and anaplastic carcinomas) or C cells (medullary carcinoma, described
later in Medullary Thyroid Cancer).69,70 The degree of clinical malignancy varies greatly among the types of carcinoma: It is convenient to consider these tumors as
falling into three categories with increasing clinical aggressiveness: well-differentiated (papillary carcinoma, follicular carcinoma), intermediate differentiation (Hürthle
cell carcinoma, some variants of papillary carcinoma, insular carcinoma), and undifferentiated (anaplastic carcinoma).
Papillary carcinoma constitutes approximately 80% to 85% of malignant epithelial thyroid tumors in developed countries where sufficient iodine is present in the

diet.3,71 Grossly, papillary carcinomas have a variable appearance from minute subcapsular white scars to large tumors greater than 5 to 6 cm that grossly extend
outside the thyroid gland. Cystic change, calcification, and even ossification may be identified.
Microscopically, papillary carcinomas are characterized by the presence of papillae, but some variants contain no papillary areas, are totally follicular in pattern, and
are identified as a follicular variant. 72 The term mixed papillary and follicular carcinoma is no longer used, because the great majority of papillary carcinomas of the
thyroid do contain some follicular areas ( Fig. 38.2-1). Biologically, all these tumors, independent of their degree of follicular pattern, show similar clinical
characteristics. 69,70,73 The World Health Organization defines papillary thyroid cancer as “a malignant epithelial thyroid neoplasm with a distinctive set of nuclear
features. The nuclei of papillary carcinoma are enlarged and ovoid and contain thick nuclear membranes, small nucleoli often pressed against the nuclear membrane,
intranuclear grooves, and intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions.” 73,74 Because the nuclei are enlarged, they frequently overlap each other, which is a helpful clue in both
the cytologic preparations and histologic slides. Papillary carcinoma has a propensity to invade lymphatic spaces and, therefore, leads to microscopic multifocal
lesions in the gland as well as a high incidence of regional lymph node metastases. 73 The latter may be the presenting symptom of a thyroid papillary carcinoma as, in
some cases, a primary tumor is very small (less than a few millimeters).

FIGURE 38.2-1. A: Classic papillary carcinoma. Note the papilla with its fibrovascular core. The nuclei are enlarged, are elongated rather than round, and have
irregular nuclear outlines. (Hematoxylin and eosin, ×250.) B: Follicular variant of papillary carcinoma. The tumor cells are arranged in follicles; note the characteristic
nuclei throughout the lesion. (Hematoxylin and eosin, ×250.)

Certain variants of papillary carcinoma have been shown to be more aggressive clinically, but these make up a minority of all papillary carcinomas. The more
aggressive variants include the so-called tall cell variant, in which the cells are at least twice as long as they are wide 75; the columnar variant, which shows a curious
clear cytoplasm 76; and the diffuse sclerosis variant, which is found more commonly in young individuals and adolescents. 77 This sclerosis variant permeates the
thyroid lymphatics and has a 100% incidence of regional lymph node metastases at the time of diagnosis. All these high-risk variants are associated with significant
mortality at 5 years, ranging between 25% and 90%. 75,78
True follicular thyroid carcinoma is a rare tumor comprising approximately 5% to 10% of thyroid malignancies in nonendemic goiter areas of the world. 3 Before iodine
prophylaxis via iodinated salt, follicular carcinoma was much more frequently diagnosed. In addition, the pathologic dictum—that any tumor with a pattern that is 50%
or more characteristic of follicular carcinoma should be diagnostically placed in a follicular carcinoma category—has been shown to be incorrect. Indeed, most of the
follicular pattern thyroid malignancies represent the follicular variant of papillary carcinoma and share its biological features, natural history, and prognosis. 73
Follicular thyroid carcinoma is unifocal and thickly encapsulated and shows invasion of the capsule or the vessels. Because of the diagnostic confusion, it is difficult to
collect statistics about the survival rate or the metastatic potential of true follicular carcinoma. 79 Most studies show that if capsular invasion but not vascular invasion is
present, the prognosis is excellent, with 85% to 100% of patients surviving at least 10 years of follow-up. 79,80
A variant of follicular neoplasms is the Hürthle cell neoplasm. In 1894, Hürthle described a thyroid cell that was later shown to be the parafollicular C cell. 5 For this
reason, the designation of cells and their tumors as Hürthle cells is historically incorrect as these lesions are actually derived from thyroid follicular cells. 5 The
preferred pathologic term is oncocytic. However, because a large body of literature exists on the subject of Hürthle cells and Hürthle cell neoplasms, this
nomenclature will be used. The Hürthle cell tumor of the thyroid is one of the most controversial lesions in this organ. Initially, all such lesions, despite the histologic
features, were considered to be malignant; hence, it was recommended that they all be treated aggressively. 81 However, many studies have evaluated the clinical
pathologic features of thyroid Hürthle cell tumors and have shown that, on average, only 33% show histologic evidence of malignancy or invasive growth and may
metastasize.82,83 Hürthle cell tumors that do not demonstrate invasion microscopically behave as adenomas and may be treated conservatively.
CLINICAL FINDINGS IN WELL-DIFFERENTIATED THYROID CANCER
The typical clinical presentation for a patient with well-differentiated thyroid cancer is development of an asymptomatic thyroid nodule. 8,11 Other symptoms may
infrequently precede or occur simultaneously with development of a nodule, including hoarseness, dyspnea, and dysphagia, reflecting local invasion of the recurrent
laryngeal nerve, the trachea, and the esophagus, respectively. 84,85 A small subset of patients present with palpable cervical lymphadenopathy without an identifiable
mass in the thyroid. Because most patients with well-differentiated thyroid cancer are euthyroid, complaints related to thyroid dysfunction are rare, and thyroid function
test results tend to be normal. Certain aspects of the clinical history are relevant to the differential diagnosis, including a prior history of radiation exposure (increased
risk of papillary cancer), family history (increased risk of familial MTC), and rapid rate of growth of the thyroid nodule (increased likelihood of ATC or thyroid
lymphoma), but may also represent a spontaneous hemorrhage into a benign cyst. A second category of patients diagnosed with thyroid nodules consists of those in
whom the nodule is not palpable but is diagnosed by imaging studies obtained for other clinical indications. 86 For example, patients undergoing neck ultrasonography
for parathyroid disease or undergoing neck magnetic resonance imaging studies for cervical spine disease may have unappreciated nodular disease within the
thyroid. 87
Any new palpable thyroid nodule or any lesion larger than 1.0 cm identified by neck imaging should be initially assessed by FNAB (described previously in Thyroid
Nodules).88 Nodules smaller than 1.0 cm may be followed intermittently (6 to 12 months) with ultrasonography and should be subjected to biopsy only when the nodule
becomes larger than 1.0 cm.18 Management decisions in these patients are based on the FNA results modified by certain factors of the clinical history. 8,28 Potential
management options include careful observation typically combined with thyroid suppression, alternative or repeat diagnostic studies, or surgical excision. The goal of
management of these patients is to avoid missing an enlarging carcinoma that could be morbid to the patients if the disease is not recognized and treated balanced
against the goal of avoiding unnecessary surgical procedures for benign pathology. 8,89 An algorithm of management based on FNA as the initial procedure is shown in
Figure 38.2-2. Decisions regarding patient management in four of the five categories of possible results from the FNA are relatively straightforward. Patients with
malignant lesions detected by FNA should undergo surgical resection. The extent of this resection is controversial and is discussed in detail later in Treatment of
Well-Differentiated Thyroid Cancer: Surgery . Patients with a benign FNA result should be followed up intermittently, and nodules that enlarge should be resubmitted
to biopsy. 18 The controversial point regarding these patients is the use of thyroid suppression. 35,36 and 37 Although common clinical practice is to suppress patients who
have benign nodules by FNA using thyroid hormone, objective data that this practice alters the clinical course are lacking. Some investigators argue that patients with
a prior history of radiation should have all thyroid lesions surgically resected once they are noted without a biopsy. 3 Although the proportion of these patients with
carcinoma is relatively increased, the majority (65%) still do not have malignant lesions. 9

FIGURE 38.2-2. A flow diagram for management of thyroid nodules based on fine-needle aspiration as the initial procedure.

Patients with an inadequate biopsy should submit to a repeat biopsy, as one-half of the time this provides definitive results. 33 Often, patients with small lesions that
are not discrete and are difficult to palpate as well as patients with large lesions with areas of necrosis or hemorrhage have inadequate sampling results. Repeat FNA
with ultrasonographic guidance to ensure that the aspiration specimen is taken from a solid component of the lesion may be helpful. 26,86 Nodules in patients in whom a
diagnosis cannot be obtained by repeat FNA even with ultrasonographic assistance should be studied with nuclear medicine scans to determine the functional status
of the nodule.27 Functional nodules have a small chance of being malignant, whereas hyperfunctional nodules in adults are unlikely to harbor malignant lesions and
require no further study other than close follow-up. 18
Cystic lesions should be aspirated until all the fluid is removed. 90 After the cyst fluid aspiration, the area is studied with ultrasonography, and any residual solid
component is sent for biopsy by FNA using ultrasound guidance. Cysts that have a complex cyst and solid component, are recurrent after three separate aspirations,
and are larger than 4 cm may warrant open biopsy, as these conditions are more likely to be associated with malignancies. 3,90 Patients who have a cyst resolve and
then recur should undergo repeat cyst aspiration, with biopsy reserved for patients with recurrent lesions despite three prior successful aspirations.
Most investigators recommend surgical resection of lesions classified as indeterminate or suspicious by FNA to establish definitive diagnosis. 91 Analysis of subgroups
in this category show the majority of aspirates “suggestive of a follicular neoplasm” and, to a lesser extent, “suspicious for papillary” or “Hürthle cell features.” 92 In a
large series from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 22% of patients with suspicious FNA eventually were shown to have cancer; of these patients, virtually all
biopsies suggested papillary cancer on the initial cytology report, and the majority with follicular or Hürthle features and who were older were the patients who proved
to have malignant lesions. 92 Analyses such as these may establish criteria for selective surgical management of patients with suspicious nodules on FNA. Any
patients with an indeterminate or suspicious FNA with other risk factors, such as prior radiation exposure or local symptoms, should have nodules surgically resected.
For patients with no risk factors and stable nodules, some investigators have advocated using nuclear medicine thyroid scans to determine patient management. 3 A
cold mass clearly has a higher risk for being a carcinoma as compared to a warm or hot mass by this nuclear medicine scan, and patients with functional or
hyperfunctioning nodules can be followed up clinically.
NATURAL HISTORY AND PROGNOSIS
The natural history and prognosis of well-differentiated thyroid cancer has been intensively studied since the 1980s. 93,94,95,96,97,98 and 99 Clear definition of risk factors
associated with poor outcome have allowed more selective and less morbid treatment recommendations. In general, well-differentiated thyroid cancer is one of the
most indolent solid neoplasms, with favorable long-term survival. 94,96 However, a small proportion of patients with papillary cancer and a slightly larger proportion of
patients with follicular thyroid cancer do die from disease-related causes. 94,95,97 and 98 As opposed to other solid neoplasms, one major difference is that regional lymph
node metastases appear to have no strong correlation with overall survival in most, 94,95 and 96,99 but not all, series 93,98 but do consistently correlate with local recurrence.
At presentation, approximately two-thirds of patients have disease that is localized to the thyroid. The median size of tumors is between 2.0 and 2.5 cm in most large
series. 40,41 and 42,100,101 Patients with papillary carcinomas smaller than 1.0 cm are considered to have minimal or occult papillary thyroid cancer (papillary
microcarcinoma).3 In North American studies, the incidence of occult papillary tumors ranges between 0.5% and 14.0%, with a greater proportional incidence in older
age groups. Studies from Scandinavia report up to one-third of patients with minimal papillary thyroid cancers. 3 There is clearly a large discrepancy between this
incidence of one-fourth to one-third of patients having occult papillary thyroid cancer and the incidence of 40 per 1 million patient population of clinically significant
disease. This discrepancy would argue strongly that these minimal lesions have a different biology than the clinically apparent thyroid cancers. For this reason,
standard practice is not to investigate or submit to biopsy nodules that are smaller than 1.0 cm, except in the setting of familial MTC. 88 However, a proportion of
patients who present with metastases to cervical lymph nodes may have a clinically occult lesion. 102
Approximately 33% to 61% of patients with papillary thyroid cancer will have involvement of clinically apparent cervical lymph nodes at the time of diagnosis (see
Table 38.2-2).42,43,45,100,101,103 The reported incidence of positive cervical lymph node metastases in follicular thyroid cancers is much lower, ranging between 5% and
20%, with a median of approximately 10%. 42,43,45,57,100,101 However, this is probably an overestimate, as many series of follicular thyroid carcinomas include follicular
variants of papillary carcinoma that have the natural history of papillary thyroid cancer and metastasize to lymph nodes with a high incidence. Some argue that the
frequency of true lymphatic metastases from follicular thyroid carcinoma to regional lymph nodes may be extremely unusual, being less than 1%, 4 although one report
from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) reported a 31% incidence of lymph node metastases in follicular carcinoma. 103 If patients with papillary
cancer have lymph nodes studied in great detail, the incidence of micrometastases in lymph nodes increases to 80%. 3 The clinical significance of these
micrometastases in some ways parallels the significance of the microscopic foci of intrathyroidal disease, as it is very common but does not progress and change
clinical outcome.
Hürthle cell neoplasms generally have the same natural history and survival as follicular tumors 79; however, the incidence of nodal metastases is greater than that of
follicular carcinomas but not as high as papillary cancers. 103 Another difference that may have an impact on outcome is that these lesions do not tend to take up
radioactive iodine with the efficiency of papillary tumors. 104
Only a small minority of patients have metastatic hematogenous disease at the time of diagnosis. 32,36,41,100 In a large series from Mazzaferri and Jhiang, 42 1% to 2% of
papillary thyroid cancer patients and 2% to 5% of follicular thyroid cancer patients had distant metastases outside the neck or mediastinum at the time of diagnosis
(Fig. 38.2-3). One series of 1038 patients from the MSKCC reported 44 patients (47%) presenting with metastases at diagnosis, including 2.3% of patients with
papillary cancer and 11% with follicular cancer. 105 Having distant metastases at the time of presentation is a strong predictor of very poor outcome. Between 50% and
90% of these patients die secondary to their thyroid malignancy. 42 In the 44 patients in this category in the MSKCC series, there was a 43% long-term survival. 105

FIGURE 38.2-3. A flow diagram for well-differentiated thyroid cancer showing the extent of disease at the time of diagnosis, the natural history, and the

outcome-based specific disease patterns. (Adapted from refs. 5 and 49.)

In the overall population with papillary thyroid cancer, there is a 90% to 95% long-term disease-free survival and a 70% to 80% long-term disease-free survival for
patients with follicular cancers. The 20% of patients in this group who develop recurrent disease includes a majority with local cervical recurrences either in lymph
nodes or the thyroid bed and a minority of patients with distant metastases to the lung, bone, and liver. 3,42 Once again, patients who do develop distant metastases
have a poorer outcome, with 50% to 90% disease-specific deaths, whereas patients with locally recurrent disease in the neck have long-term survivals between 70%
and 90% even in the presence of persistent cervical disease. 42
Overall survival in well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma from various institutional series shows a better 10-year survival for papillary cancer, ranging between 74% and
93% as compared to follicular cancer, with 10-year survivals of 43% to 94%. 106 Although many institutions have reported their data based on these histologic
subcategories, a more meaningful system is to categorize patients according to defined risk factors more pertinent to generating prognostic information. Groups at
both the Lahey Clinic 41,107,108 and the Mayo Clinic44,45,109,110 and 111 have considerable databases that define prognostic risk factors for well-differentiated thyroid cancer.
The two dominant factors in both series are the age at diagnosis and the presence of distant metastases. 107,109 All systems also include some measurement of the size
of the lesion and other factors, such as local invasion or grade of the tumor, which have impact on outcome. In general, younger patients do well with
well-differentiated thyroid cancer. Cady and Rossi 107 defined low-risk age categories as men younger than 40 and women younger than 50 years. The Mayo Clinic
takes age into account using a numerical factor in a formula calculating a prognostic score (PS) that does not discriminate according to gender. Although historical
data report follicular cancer as having worse outcome than papillary thyroid cancer, Donohue et al. 100 showed that if one corrects for age and other prognostic
variables, the outcome is similar within these two pathologic subcategories.
As stated, patients who have distant metastatic disease either at presentation or with recurrence do much worse. 42,106 Similarly, patients with local invasion or
high-grade lesions have a worse prognosis. The risk categorization schema developed by the Lahey Clinic group incorporating these components carries the acronym
AMES (age, metastatic disease, extrathyroidal extension, size) (Table 38.2-3).107 Using this system, low-risk patients can be identified who have a long-term overall
survival of 98% and overall disease-free survival of 95% as compared to 54% and 45%, respectively, for high-risk patients ( Table 38.2-4). A group from Canada
added an assessment of DNA content by flow cytometry to the AMES categorization and showed that high-risk patients with aneuploid tumors have essentially zero
long-term survival in a small number of patients. 112 The initial system developed by the Mayo Clinic group 109 carried the acronym AGES (age, tumor grade, tumor
extent, tumor size; see Table 38.2-3). A mathematical formula to develop a PS with different weights on these factors was developed. The scoring system showed that
patients with a PS of less than 4 had a 99% 20-year survival, whereas patients with a PS greater than 6 had a 13% 20-year survival, with graded categories in
between (see Table 38.2-4).109 A more recent modification of this system is seen in MACIS (metastasis, age at diagnosis, tumor extent subdivided into completeness
of resection and invasion, and tumor size).113 Using this system, the score of less than 6 yields a 20-year survival of 99%, and a score of more than 8 results in a
20-year survival of only 24%. On the basis of these scoring systems that have been verified by other institutions, the aggressiveness of treatment can be balanced
against the possible treatment risks and costs. Clearly, if subgroups of patients with 99% 20-year survivals can be prospectively identified, aggressive therapy with
potential life-long complications cannot be justified in this subpopulation. Sanders and Cady 114 reexamined the AMES criteria for a group of thyroid cancer patients
treated between 1980 and 1990. Survival rate for the low-risk groups was 98% and for the high-risk group was 47%, consistent with data collected over the previous
four decades. As has been published by this group before, there was no significant improvement in survival with total thyroidectomy or radioactive iodine therapy
(discussed later in Radioiodine Therapy ).155

TABLE 38.2-3. Schema for Categorizing Patients with Well-Differentiated Thyroid Cancer by Prognostic Risk Categories

TABLE 38.2-4. Survival or Disease-Free Survival in Patients with Well-Differentiated Thyroid Cancer Based on Various Prognostic Classification Schemes

The Mayo Clinic group applied the AMES criteria to its long-term database, evaluating 1685 patients treated between 1940 and 1991 in the low-risk category with
papillary thyroid cancer. 115 The 30-year rate for disease-specific mortality was 2%; for distant metastases, it was 3% in this patient population. With 20-year follow-up,
there was a 4% rate of local recurrence and an 8% rate of nodal recurrence. These two reports verify the criteria established much earlier for prediction of outcome in
well-differentiated thyroid cancer. 114,115 The importance of age, extrathyroidal extension, and distant metastases play an important role in the American Joint
Committee on Cancer staging of thyroid cancer (Table 38.2-5).116

TABLE 38.2-5. American Joint Committee on Cancer Staging System for Thyroid Cancer

There is no large database that has verified this adaptation of the AMES and MACIS staging system into the TNM (tumor-node-metastasis) classification used by the
American Joint Committee on Cancer. However, a very similar staging system was developed by the National Thyroid Cancer Treatment Cooperative Study registry,
which initiated collection of data in 1987. 117 A report of more than 1500 patients analyzed by this staging system showed that 5-year disease-specific survivals for
papillary thyroid cancer in stage I and II were 100%, 93.8% for stage III, and 78.5% for stage IV (<.0001). 117 The disease-free survival similarly showed a high
correlation with stages I through IV papillary carcinoma, having survivals of 94.4%, 92.5%, 82.7%, and 30%, respectively ( P<.0001). A comparison of the ability of this
prospective registry to predict for patients being disease-free over long-term follow-up produced slightly higher correlation values than the AMES classification but
slightly lower than the MACIS and TNM classifications. 117
TREATMENT OF WELL-DIFFERENTIATED THYROID CANCER
Surgery
The key decisions in the surgical management of thyroid nodules or cancers (or both) is whom to operate on and how extensive a resection to perform. The
development of FNAB and the proven accuracy of those results since the mid-1980s has significantly decreased the number of patients who present with thyroid
nodules and need to undergo surgical exploration for diagnosis. 8,89 Consequently, FNA has increased the proportion of nodules that are surgically excised and turn
out to be cancer. The algorithm outlined in Figure 38.2-2 is a guide for deciding which patients should undergo surgical resection based on an initial assessment by
FNAB.
Before the development and widespread use of preoperative FNA of thyroid nodules, surgeons frequently relied on frozen-section test results obtained during the
procedure to guide them. 118 The utility of frozen-section diagnosis for thyroid nodules is controversial. The situations in which the frozen section may be useful is for
patients who have suspicious FNA results. Specifically, patients with suspicious cytology (e.g., follicular neoplasm or possible follicular variant of papillary carcinoma)
or patients with a nondiagnostic FNA on repeated biopsies underwent surgical resection with an unknown diagnosis of malignancy. Most of the lesions in the
indeterminate FNA category are follicular neoplasms, the majority of which are benign. As previously described in the section Pathology, capsular and vascular
invasion determine malignancy, and the ability to render an accurate interpretation on frozen-section analysis is very limited. A large series from Chen et al. 119 at
Johns Hopkins University examined this patient population. They reported that 87% of frozen sections rendered no useful information, whereas 5% gave inaccurate
results. Their conclusions were that obtaining frozen sections did more harm than good in addition to the expense incurred. A similar series from Bonner et al. 120 also
reported that frozen-section interpretation of lesions diagnosed as follicular or Hürthle cell neoplasms on FNA is fraught with error. The recommended approach in
this group of patients is to perform excision of the thyroid lobe harboring the nodule and to wait for the definitive pathologic report. If the lesion turns out to be a
follicular carcinoma with characteristics that place a patient at high risk, such as significant capsular invasion or angioinvasion, 18 a completion total or near total
thyroidectomy is performed during a second operation to remove the contralateral thyroid lobe. 121,122 In cases suspicious for a follicular variant of papillary carcinoma,
the presence of specific nuclear features that define papillary thyroid cancer may be identifiable on frozen-section analysis. For this reason, patients with FNA results
that are read as follicular neoplasm with some features of papillary nuclei should undergo lobectomy and intraoperative assessment (frozen section, touch
preparation) to attempt identification of a follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer.
A long-standing controversy among endocrine surgeons has existed regarding the extent of surgical resection for well-differentiated thyroid cancer. 3 This question
may never be answered definitively by a clinical trial, as the expense and number of patients needed for trials of this indolent low-risk disease are overwhelming. 123
Acceptable surgical procedures to remove a thyroid neoplasm include a lobectomy, a subtotal thyroidectomy, a near-total thyroidectomy, and a total thyroidectomy.
The entire thyroid lobe on the side of the primary cancer is taken out as completely as possible for any of these procedures. The difference comes in the management
of the contralateral lobe and how this choice relates to outcome as well as operative morbidity. Arguments typically put forth for either more conservative therapy or
more aggressive surgery are listed in Table 38.2-6. In a thyroid lobectomy, the contralateral lobe is not dissected but is simply examined visually and by palpation for
abnormalities. A subtotal thyroidectomy leaves a rim of 2 to 4 g of tissue in the upper lateral portion of the contralateral thyroid lobe. 124 By leaving thyroid in this
location, two things are accomplished. First, the recurrent laryngeal nerve as it enters the larynx at the ligament of Berry is not dissected and consequently does not
present a risk for injury. Second, the blood supply to the superior parathyroid gland on that side is less likely to be disrupted by leaving a rim of tissue in this location.
A near-total thyroidectomy leaves a much smaller amount of normal tissue (<1 g) immediately adjacent to the ligament of Berry. This maneuver may offer some
protection to the recurrent laryngeal nerve, but it offers minimal benefit in terms of preserving the blood supply of the upper parathyroid. A total thyroidectomy implies
that every effort is made to excise all thyroid tissue, leaving no gross or macroscopic residual thyroid in either lobe. The difference between a total thyroidectomy and
a near-total thyroidectomy usually depends on the particular anatomy of the thyroid in any given patient. There may be a small ledge of thyroid tissue, called the
tubercle of Zuckerkandl, at the ligament of Berry that may limit safe resection of the entire thyroid.

TABLE 38.2-6. Arguments for and against Conservative or More Radical Surgery for Well-Differentiated Thyroid Cancer

The real increased risk of performing a total thyroidectomy versus a lesser resection may be in the long-term incidence of hypocalcemia ( Table 38.2-7). A study from
the Mayo Clinic spanning the years between 1946 and 1970 reported a 32% incidence of permanent hypocalcemia after total thyroidectomy versus only a 0.3%
incidence after a subtotal procedure. 109 More recent series report much less permanent morbidity and show variable results comparing the patients undergoing
subtotal with those undergoing total thyroidectomy. Virtually all experienced surgeons should be able to perform total thyroidectomies with less than 1% recurrent
nerve injuries, with the long-term risk of hypoparathyroidism of 2% to 9%. 125

TABLE 38.2-7. Long-Term Complications of Total versus Subtotal Thyroidectomy

The most compelling argument for performing a unilateral lobectomy or a subtotal thyroidectomy are the data that come from the definition of prognostic factors for
this disease. These rating scales identified by the acronyms AMES or AGES have been used to evaluate thousands of patients (see later in Natural History and
Prognosis).107,109,113 A low-risk patient defined by the AMES criteria has a 20-year survival of 99% with a 20-year disease-free survival of more than 95%. 106 If
prognostic factors can accurately diagnose patients with such excellent outcome, the added benefit of a total thyroidectomy as well as postoperative iodine therapy
may not be worth the potential morbidity for the patient. However, careful medical surveillance for cancer in the contralateral lobe as well as recurrence must be
maintained. Furthermore, in situations in which a small thyroid remnant is left, the true morbidity of treating this patient with ablative doses of 131I (if indicated) is
relatively minimal. 126 In fact, it is typical for patients with a surgical report of a “total thyroidectomy” that there is residual thyroid tissue within the bed of the thyroid
identified on the postresection diagnostic scan, as actually a near-total thyroidectomy was performed. This small thyroid remnant is then ablated with postoperative
131
I treatments. Radioiodine ablation of an intact lobe of the thyroid lobectomy is associated with considerably more symptoms. 127
A very large review from the Mayo Clinic of 1685 patients with papillary thyroid cancer treated between 1940 and 1991 has been reported with a long-term
follow-up. 115 Based on surgeons' preference, 1468 patients underwent a near-total or total thyroidectomy (87%), while 195 patients (12%) had a unilateral resection.
With a 20-year follow-up, the incidence of local recurrence with unilateral resection was 14% and, for bilateral resection, it was 2%. 115 Similarly, the incidence of
recurrent cervical lymph node metastases after unilateral resection was 19% as compared to 6% after bilateral resection ( P=.0001). Despite this very clear difference
in recurrence rates, there was no translation of benefit in terms of disease-specific survival or distant metastases. The overall mortality at 30 years for patients with
either unilateral resection or bilateral resection was approximately 2%. These results further confirm the excellent predictive outcome of the AMES low-risk criteria
with long-term follow-up. 115 The authors concluded that although no survival benefit is gained from bilateral thyroid resection, the significant improvement in local
recurrence with a minimal operative morbidity in the hands of experienced surgeons would lead to recommendation of near-total or total thyroidectomy for even this
low-risk category of patients. Arguing with the opposing viewpoint, Sanders and Cady also provided a long-term review of their personal series and came to the
conclusion that there was no benefit in performing bilateral resection versus unilateral resection for low-risk patients.
For patients in a high-risk category, there is much less disagreement regarding the extent of surgery, although there are still some proponents of less than total or
near-total thyroidectomy. An analysis of 303 patients with high-risk papillary thyroid cancer showed an improvement in overall survival (relative risk ratio, 0.37) but not
cancer-specific mortality or disease-free survival. 128 In this nonrandomized study, no effect of extent of surgery was seen in patients with follicular thyroid cancer. 128 A
report by Wanebo et al. 129 in a smaller number of high-risk patients reported that 10-year disease-specific survival was 82% with total thyroidectomy, 78% with
subtotal thyroidectomy, and 89% with unilateral lobectomy. Again, neither of these retrospective reviews was a prospective randomized study and, for reasons
discussed later in Radioactive Therapy, in terms of effectiveness of adjuvant postoperative radioiodine treatments and ease of follow-up with serum Tg
measurements, the vast majority of investigators would agree that a total or near-total thyroidectomy is indicated for high-risk patients. For patients with extrathyroidal
extension, the en bloc resection of invaded structures should be performed. If the tumor is on the anterior thyroid, this provides minimal morbidity to the patients, as
resection of the overlying strap muscles, such as the sternal thyroid, causes no symptoms postoperatively. For posterior tumors, direct invasion of the trachea and
esophagus should be resected with either partial tracheal resection and primary closure or resection of the esophagus muscular layer, again with closure and
drainage. 130 This aggressive strategy for extrathyroidal extension at the first operation offers the best chance for local control.
The surgical management of lymph node metastases from well-differentiated thyroid cancer is also somewhat controversial. 131,132 133 Most experts agree that a
procedure somewhere between “berry-picking” of clinically positive nodes and a formal modified radical neck dissection is the ideal treatment. For patients who have
bulky and obviously pathologic lymph node metastases, a formal neck dissection is indicated. 134 As noted in Natural History and Prognosis , particularly in lower-risk
younger patients, the presence of metastatic disease to lymph nodes does not carry the connotation of worse prognosis of other solid neoplasms. Although lymph
node metastases correlate with increased local recurrence, they do not carry a worse prognosis in several series. 94,96,99 The lymph nodes typically involved are the
level VI on paratracheal lymph nodes in the cervical compartment and the level III and IV lymph nodes lateral to the internal jugular vein in the midneck or lower neck.
During any thyroid resection, these lymph node areas should be palpated. Lymph nodes that are abnormal because they are firm or large should be subjected to
biopsy with frozen-section pathologic evaluation. If positive for metastatic cancer, these lymph node areas should be completely dissected.
The technique of sentinel lymph node biopsy that has been used for melanoma and breast cancer has been applied to thyroid cancer using isosulfan blue. 135
Seventeen patients had thyroid mapping, with successful removal of sentinel lymph nodes in 15 (88%) and 2 failures due to retrosternal lymph nodes. Of 12 patients
with cancer, 5 had positive lymph nodes (42%: 3 level VI, 2 level IV) for metastases and, in 2 patients, the sentinel node was the only node positive for cancer. 135
Whether this technique has a role in thyroid cancer in which the significance of nodal metastases is less than in breast cancer remains to be seen.
Some investigators have noted a positive correlation with lymph node metastases and outcome 93,95 and have argued for more routine formal dissections on that
basis. 136 Tisell et al., 137 who have widely promoted microdissection of all lymphatic tissue for MTC, reported their results applying the same technique to papillary
thyroid cancer. In their series of 195 patients, there was a 70% incidence of lymph node metastases in men and a 4% to 5% incidence of lymph node metastases in
women. With long-term follow-up, only three patients (1.6%) of this series died, partially due to locally recurrent thyroid cancer, all living more than 17 years after the
initial surgery. 137 A different strategy was used by a group from Germany: For well-differentiated cancer, a modified radical neck dissection was performed routinely
only for T4 lesions. 138 For other-stage primary tumors, only if there were positive cervical lymph nodes was a modified radical neck dissection performed at the time of
initial surgery. After a mean of 6.5 years of follow-up, 77 patients (31%) underwent reoperation because of regional tumor recurrence. In the subgroup of patients with
papillary thyroid cancer, the incidence of regional recurrence for T2 lesions was 45% in those without initial neck dissection versus 3% for those with an initial neck
dissection; 77% of patients for T3 lesions without initial lymph node dissection had local recurrence as compared to 36% with initial dissection, and patients with T4
tumors had a 75% recurrence rate without initial node dissection versus 33% with an initial node dissection ( P<.0001).138 It is not clear from this study with limited
follow-up whether this decreased incidence of regional recurrence has an impact on survival and warrants a modified radical neck dissection for all patients with
positive central neck lymph nodes at the time of initial thyroidectomy.
Radioiodine Therapy
The postoperative treatment of patients with well-differentiated thyroid cancer, particularly relating to radioiodine therapy, is controversial. The lack of well-designed,
randomized controlled studies and the low probability that any large multicenter treatment studies will ever come to fruition force the clinician to rely on retrospective
studies and surveys of practice habits. 139,140
All patients who have undergone a total or near-total thyroidectomy for a follicular carcinoma or a papillary carcinoma larger than between 1.0 and 1.5 cm should be
considered candidates for radioiodine ablation. 131I ablation of residual normal thyroid is important after what is thought to be complete resection of the primary tumor
to aid in the detection of metastatic disease and to destroy residual microscopic cancer. Normal thyroid tissue takes up 131I more avidly than does cancer 140 and thus
prevents full visualization of the true extent of disease. Furthermore, 131I ablation removes the contribution of normal thyroid tissue serum Tg, an important tumor
marker in the follow-up of postoperative patients. 141,142 Most important, many studies have documented that 131I ablation decreases cancer death, 128,143 tumor
recurrence,128,144 and development of distant metastases. 128,145 Despite such data for large patient populations, Cady and Rossi 107 and Sanders and Cady114 observed
that an enhanced survival has not been documented with the use of radioiodine ablation in the Lahey Clinic series, particularly in “low-risk” patients defined by AMES
criteria.
The dose of 131I for ablation is not standardized. Some recommend low-dose ablation with less than 30 mCi given on an outpatient basis. This approach should be
reserved for low-risk young patients who may benefit from an overall lower radiation exposure and who accept the fact that several low radioiodine doses may be
necessary before successful ablation. Several studies demonstrating proper diagnostic scan preparation with sufficiently elevated TSH and adherence to a low-iodine
diet describe disparate rates of successful ablations using less than 30 mCi ranging from 27% to 83%. 146,147
Higher ablative doses ranging from 100 to 150 mCi should be used for older, high-risk patients, particularly those known to have an incomplete resection of the
primary tumor, an invasive primary tumor, or metastases. Beierwaltes et al. 148 demonstrated that 87% of their patients were ablated with an initial dose of 100 to less
than 200 mCi. No significant differences were noted when doses from 100 to 200 mCi or more were used, leading to a recommendation of an optimal ablative dose of

100 to 149 mCi. 148 The goal of dosimetry is to derive the dose of 131I that will deliver no more than 200 cGy to the blood, with no more than 120 mCi retained at 48
hours or 80 mCi in the presence of pulmonary metastases. This decreases the risk of bone marrow damage and radiation fibrosis in patients with metastatic lung
disease. The methods used to perform dosimetry are generally modifications of the protocol developed by Benua and Leeper 149 and others. One recommended
approach is for all patients with metastatic disease treated with repeated therapeutic doses of 131I to undergo dosimetric quantification of the highest, safe dose, using
a ceiling of 300 mCi. Other investigators recommend a standard fixed dose that may vary according to the site of uptake. 150 For example, a dose of 150 mCi is given
for residual or recurrent thyroid bed carcinoma with or without metastases, up to 200 mCi for bone metastases, and a reduced dose of 75 mCi for diffuse pulmonary
metastases to prevent radiation pneumonitis and fibrosis.
Lymph node metastases were found in up to 42% of patients at time of initial therapy in one large study by Mazzaferri and Jhiang. 151 Radioiodine is indicated in these
patients to decrease recurrences that may have an impact on long-term survival. 77,152
Pulmonary metastases are frequently detected exclusively on radioiodine scanning. Sclumberger reported an increase in this observation, noting the rate of negative
chest radiograph results in patients with metastatic disease to have increased from 13% to 43%. 141 Earlier detection of pulmonary metastases before development of
gross chest film abnormalities is thought to be due to the use of Tg screening and the enhanced sensitivity of 131I scanning. This same group reported on 23 patients
who had diffuse pulmonary metastases seen only on radioiodine scanning, of which almost 90% had no further uptake and a decrease in the serum Tg after 131I
therapy. Bone metastases may require several modalities for adequate therapy. Surgery may be needed for orthopedic stabilization or palliation of pain. External
radiation may be used in combination with radioactive iodine in difficult cases. 154
Ablation of residual thyroid is typically performed at approximately 6 weeks after near-total or total thyroidectomy. Most, but not all, centers perform a diagnostic scan
followed by ablative 131I therapy. To optimize uptake by both residual thyroid and thyroid cancer, patients are rendered hypothyroid with a goal of increasing TSH. To
accomplish this, thyroid replacement after thyroidectomy is triiodothyronine, as it has a much shorter half-life than thyroxine, and it is discontinued 2 weeks before
treatment. In response to this hypothyroid state, TSH must achieve levels of greater than 25 to 30 µU/mL to obtain optimal uptake of radioiodine. A low-iodine diet is
instituted 1 to 2 weeks before scanning to enhance the uptake and retention of radioiodine. 155
Just as there is lack of consensus regarding ablation and therapeutic doses of 131I, the diagnostic scanning dose is as controversial. The ideal dose achieves high
sensitivity in detecting residual thyroid tissue, thyroid cancer, and metastatic foci and reduces the potential for sublethal radiation “stunning” of thyroid tissue that
prevents optimal uptake of future 131I therapy. Although it is clear that higher scanning doses improve visualization of thyroid remnants and metastases, 156 even
conventional scanning doses of 4 to 5 mCi of 131I were found to diminish therapeutic radioiodine uptake. 157 Park et al. 158 have suggested that diagnostic scanning with
123
I may prevent the stunning effect. One strategy is to use a 5-mCi 131I diagnostic dose followed by a whole body scan at 48 hours, with treatment following in most
cases in 24 to 96 hours after whole body scanning. A posttherapy whole body scan is obtained after 5 to 7 days to determine the extent of disease. 159 Follow-up
diagnostic scanning should be performed at 6- to 12-month intervals, and treatment should continue until there is no further uptake, the serum Tg is in the “athyreotic”
range, or complications of 131I therapy arise.
Medical management of malignant lesions includes thyroxine therapy to suppress TSH, which is invaluable in preventing tumor recurrences. The degree to which one
suppresses TSH is a point of debate. It is advisable to keep the TSH at or below the normal range (range, 0.5 to 5 µU/mL) in patients who are thought to be without
evidence of disease and to maintain a lower TSH (0.1 µU/mL) in patients with residual neck disease, metastases, or recurrent disease. A large review by the National
Cancer Treatment Cooperative Registry of 693 patients reported for all papillary thyroid patients that TSH levels did not predict disease progression. 160 In high-risk
papillary cancer, patient TSH was a predictor of risk ( P=.03) but not when radioiodine therapy was included in the analysis ( P=.004).160 The degree of thyroid
suppression in these cases is dictated by balance of the risk of recurrent thyroid cancer and the overall medical condition of patients, particularly their cardiovascular
status.
THYROGLOBULIN MEASUREMENTS. Tg, an important tumor marker in the follow-up of thyroid cancer patients, is the protein that provides a matrix for thyroid hormone

synthesis within thyroid follicles and is critical in the storage of thyroid hormone within the thyroid gland. 161 After successful thyroidectomy and ablation of residual
normal or cancerous thyroid tissue by radioiodine, the Tg will be in the athyreotic range. Levels above the athyreotic range are indicative of persistent, functioning
residual thyroid tissue or carcinoma. If there is detectable serum Tg in the circumstance of suppressive thyroxine therapy, it is a true indicator of persistent or
recurrent thyroid carcinoma. However, thyroxine may suppress Tg in patients with metastatic disease; therefore, the test is more sensitive in the setting of thyroid
hormone suppressive therapy withdrawal and frank hypothyroidism documented by an elevated TSH.
At the time of thyroid hormone withdrawal for both initial postoperative scans and for subsequent follow-up scans, Tg is measured in conjunction with the diagnostic
whole body scan and may be more sensitive than the scan in detecting cancer, as demonstrated by several investigators. 142,162 Pineda et al.142 treated 17 patients with
150 to 300 mCi 131I who had negative diagnostic whole body scan results but serum Tg measurements above 8 ng/mL (range, 8 to 480 ng/mL) detected at the time of
hypothyroidism.142 Posttherapy scan results were positive in the thyroid bed or at sites of distant metastases in 16 of 17 patients. After repeated therapeutic doses
given under similar conditions, 8 of 13 patients had a positive scan result after a second therapeutic dose, and five of five were positive after a third treatment.
Lowering of Tg was demonstrated as was a decrease in uptake demonstrated on subsequent posttherapy scans.
Since this initial report, 142 there has been a great deal of debate regarding the optimal management of patients who are whole body iodine scan–negative but
Tg-positive. This debate has included discussions of the false-negative rate of Tg, and alternative imaging studies, including positron emission tomography (PET)
scans as well as sestamibi, technetium-sestamibi scans, and thallium 201 scans. 140 Without question, there are patients who have negative whole body iodine scan
results but have definite recurrent and metastatic well-differentiated thyroid cancer. PET scans have been reported to have sensitivities of identifying the occult
disease in 82% 163 and 71% 164 in this patient population. In the series of patients studied at MSKCC, the PET scan result changed clinical management in 19 of 37
patients. 164 In patients with elevated Tg levels, PET scans had a positive predictive value of 92%; in patients with a low Tg value, PET scans had a negative predictive
value of 93%.164 A study from the University of Southern California reported that 100% of patients imaged by PET with elevated or rising Tg had evidence of disease,
although only 17 of these 24 patients had this recurrence confirmed (biopsy or alternative imaging studies). 165 Alternative imaging methods, including sestamibi scans
as well as 201Tl scans, could detect thyroid cancer metastases even in patients with false-negative normal Tg level results. 140,166
The relatively routine use of radioiodine ablation in this patient population who are Tg-positive and whole body scan–negative has been debated in the literature. 140
Most experts agree that a selective approach incorporating prognostic features of the primary tumor (age of patient, extrathyroidal extension) should come into play
regarding management of these patients. It should also be understood that a variety of patients with autoantibodies to Tg may have spurious results that are most
commonly false-negative results but also have the potential for false-positive test results. 167 The controversy in this area speaks to the need for a randomized trial that
may be conducted by one of the North American cooperative groups to answer the question of radioiodine treatment in this patient population. An even more elegant
way to detect residual tumor may be use of the polymerase chain reaction technique for application of Tg messenger RNA circulating in peripheral blood. 168 The
clinical relevance of this molecular detection method remains to be seen.
ADJUVANTS TO RADIOIODINE THERAPY. The success of radioiodine therapy is dependent on residual thyroid tissue concentrating iodine avidly under the stimulation of

elevated TSH. In some circumstances, stimulation by endogenous TSH is impossible, as in the case of hypopituitarism, or is contraindicated, as in patients with
central nervous system metastases in whom the hypothyroid state could lead to acute swelling and complications. Lithium can be used to increase the therapeutic
effects of 131I by decreasing its turnover and effectively increasing its half-life at oral doses of 400 to 800 mg daily for 7 days. 169 A study from the National Institutes of
Health reported an estimated increased radiation exposure to the tumor by taking lithium of 2.29-fold after an 131I treatment dose.170
The availability of recombinant human TSH has led to a large study that reported comparing diagnostic whole body iodine scans after standard thyroxine withdrawal
compared to scans obtained with recombinant human thyroid-stimulating hormone (rhTSH). 171 In 127 patients with a diagnosis of well-differentiated thyroid cancer in
this study, rhTSH, 0.9 mg, was injected once daily intramuscularly for 2 days. The day after the final injection, patients received between 3 and 5 mCi of 131I and were
scanned 48 hours later. At least 4 weeks later, patients underwent standard thyroxine withdrawal with an endogenous TSH at least more than 25 U/mL. The results of
several parameters of this study are shown in Table 38.2-8.171 There were 65 patients who had concordant negative scan results (51% of the patient population). In
the additional 62 patients (49% of population) who had positive scan results, both scans were positive in 41; only the standard thyroxine withdrawal study result was
positive in 18, and only the rhTSH scan result was positive in 3. These results analyzed in a different way demonstrate that the rhTSH scan was equivalent to or better
than the standard scan in 86% of the patients but inferior to the standard withdrawal scan in 14% ( P<.001).171 This difference in scan results culminated in an
alteration of therapy in 13% of the patients who were then treated with high-dose radioactive iodine based on the standard scan alone. On the other hand, there was a
highly significant worsening of symptoms of hypothyroidism ( P<.001) and dysphoric mood states (P<.001) after withdrawal of thyroid hormone as compared to

rhTSH.171 The rhTSH was shown to be safe with only some mild nausea side effects. The serum Tg was studied at the point of peak TSH levels before both these
scans in 35 patients. It was elevated more than 5 ng/mL in 14 of 35 patients with the standard withdrawal scan and 13 of 35 patients with the rhTSH scan. These
results would indicate that in low- to moderate-risk patients, the use of recombinant thyrotropin may be indicated in follow-up annual scans, with near-equivalent
efficacy of thyroid withdrawal but none of the morbidity for the patients.

TABLE 38.2-8. Comparison of Whole Body Iodine Scans and Scans Obtained after Injection of Recombinant Human Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone

COMPLICATIONS OF RADIOIODINE THERAPY. The most common side effects from radioiodine therapy include sialadenitis, nausea, and temporary bone marrow

suppression. 127 Amifostine, (Ethyol) which has been used as a radioprotector of head and neck cancer, significantly reduced sialadenitis from radiation treatment for
thyroid cancer.172 Testicular function and spermatogenesis are transiently impaired but appear to recover with time. 173 In a study comparing fertility rates, birth rates,
and prematurity between women treated with 131I and those not treated, there were no significant differences. 174 One noted that three of six patients who became
pregnant within the first year after radioactive treatment had children with significant congenital anomalies. 175
There is a dose-dependent relationship between 131I therapy and the development of leukemia. The incidence increases when the total cumulative dose is greater
than 800 mCi and can be avoided by treating at widely spaced intervals (6 to 12 months) with activity between 100 and 200 mCi. 176 A higher incidence of bladder
carcinoma has been seen in patients who have received high cumulative doses of radioiodine. 177 Urine dilution by adequate hydration and frequent voiding can
reduce the radiation exposure to the bladder wall.
Chemotherapy and Radiation Therapy
The most effective nonsurgical treatment for well-differentiated thyroid cancer is, without question, ablation with radioiodine. 140,154 Other conventional modes of
neoplastic treatment—chemotherapy, and external-beam radiation therapy—demonstrate much poorer results and, consequently, are much less studied. The best
single chemotherapeutic agent for this tumor is doxorubicin (Adriamycin) with partial response rates of 30% and up to 45% in some series. 178 Combination therapy
with Adriamycin and cisplatin has produced disappointing results that were no better than single-agent trials, and the toxicity was worse.
For surgically unresectable local disease that has not responded to radioiodine, the best treatment may be a combination of hyperfractionated radiation treatments
plus Adriamycin. Response rates of more than 80% have been reported using this regimen, although even in this situation, complete responses are rare and limited in
duration.178 Adjuvant radiation therapy for grossly resected well-differentiated thyroid cancer has not generally been thought to be beneficial 179,180 until one recent
retrospective study. This study by Farahati et al., 181 a retrospective review, analyzed patients with T4 primary lesions (evidence of extrathyroidal extension) who
underwent radiation (n = 99) compared to those who did not (n = 70). 181 Patients received a uniform treatment course of total thyroidectomy with initial ablative
radioactive iodine, with or without 5000 to 6000 rads of external-beam radiation therapy to the neck and mediastinum, followed by a second ablative dose of
radioactive iodine. The group that had radiation treatments had recurrent disease in 4% of cases (3 of 75 patients), while the group who did not receive radiation had
recurrences in 26% (13 of 50 patients; P=.0001).181 This benefit for radiation extended only to the subgroup of patients with lymph node–positive disease. In patients
with papillary thyroid cancer who were lymph node–negative, there were 1 of 47 patients (2%) with recurrence with radiation therapy and 2 of 21 patients (9.5%)
without radiation therapy had recurrences, which was not statistically significant ( P=.27). In patients with T4 lesions and positive lymph nodes who received radiation,
there were 2 recurrences in 28 (7.1%) and there were 13 recurrences in 29 patients without radiation therapy (44.8%; P=.002). These results would suggest that
patients with T4 papillary thyroid cancer, particularly with positive lymph nodes, should undergo external-beam radiation therapy to the neck. This patient population
should be studied in a prospective manner to determine the benefit of that additional therapy. This retrospective review showed not only an improvement in local
recurrence but an improvement in distant metastases in this subgroup. 181

ANAPLASTIC THYROID CANCER
ATC is one of the most aggressive and difficult human malignancies to treat and subsequently is one of the most lethal. As opposed to the excellent long-term survival
for well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma, ATC in most series has a median survival of 4 to 5 months from the time of diagnosis, with rare long-term survivors. 182,183 and
184

The proportional incidence of ATC compared to the total number of thyroid carcinomas is variable but appears to be declining over time. Historically, ATC was said to
constitute 5% to 15% of all thyroid carcinomas in the United States 182 and between 10% to 50% in European series. 3 Current epidemiologic studies indicate that this
lethal form of thyroid cancer has decreased to between 1% and 3% of the total number of cases. 183 Institutional reviews over a distinct period support the apparent
real decrease in the incidence of ATC. One of the largest single-institution series, from the Mayo Clinic, spans the years 1946 to 1971. 182 During that time, 1161
patients with thyroid cancer had their primary treatment at Mayo Clinic, including 82 cases of ATC or 7.1% of the total. Later single-institution series from Loyola (1966
to 1989)185 and Roswell Park (1968 to 1992) 183 reported respective incidences of 5% and 2.7%. The decrease over time may be partially related to iodine prophylaxis
and an overall decrease in endemic iodine-deficient goiter in North America.
Patients with ATC differ epidemiologically from patients with well-differentiated thyroid neoplasms, with a median age two to three decades older and with a more
equal gender distribution ( Table 38.2-9).182,183,184 and 185 Median age at diagnosis ranges between 63 and 74 years. In most series, including the largest one from the
Mayo Clinic with 82 patients, 182 there are equal number of male and female patients, but some series show a predilection for women near the ratio that is commonly
reported for well-differentiated thyroid cancer.

TABLE 38.2-9. Clinical Series of Anaplastic Thyroid Carcinomas with Demographic Data, Total Percentage of Thyroid Cancer, and Survival

ATC is commonly related to a prior or a concurrent diagnosis of well-differentiated thyroid cancer or benign nodular thyroid disease. This association of ATC with prior
or concurrent well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma suggests two features of the biology of this tumor. First, ATC may arise via the dedifferentiation of prior
well-differentiated thyroid cancer, and the aggressive growth pattern of this anaplastic tumor may replace all previous evidence of well-differentiated tumor. 186 Also,
the close association between ATC and well-differentiated thyroid cancer suggests that the risk factors are similar. 185
The natural history, clinical presentation, and outcome of ATC reflect the biology of this tumor as an undifferentiated, rapidly growing neoplasm with invasive
characteristics. The patients uniformly present with a palpable mass that is reported to be increasing in size during the period of observation. The median tumor size
in patients with ATC from Roswell Park Cancer Institute was 8 to 9 cm, with a range of 3 to 20 cm as compared to the usual size of 2 to 3 cm for well-differentiated
thyroid cancer.183 Invasion to the trachea, larynx, or recurrent laryngeal nerve leads to hoarseness at diagnosis and, in a subset of these patients, an invasion to the
esophagus may cause dysphagia.
The majority of patients with ATC die from aggressive local regional disease, primarily with upper airway respiratory failure. At the time of diagnosis, 25% to 50% of
patients may have synchronous pulmonary metastases. 182,183 and 184 However, it is usually the local growth causing obliteration of the airway that causes the patient's
demise. For this reason, aggressive local therapy is indicated in all patients who can tolerate it and in whom it is technically possible. As opposed to well-differentiated
thyroid cancer, 131I plays no role in the treatment of recurrent or metastatic disease for this tumor. Therefore, total or near-total thyroidectomy is not as important in
ATC, except as needed to obtain local control. 182
Survival after the diagnosis of ATC is very poor. With the median survival in most series being less than 5 months from the time of diagnosis, this is one of the most
rapidly lethal tumors known in clinical oncology. 182,183 and 184 The majority of patients die due to local recurrence, although distant metastases occur primarily in lung,
bone, and liver. External radiation has been used with limited success to treat locally recurrent ATC. One study from London reported 10 of 17 patients with an
objective response to accelerated radiation (three complete responses and seven partial responses) but toxicity to the esophagus was considerable. 187 In the
mid-1980s, Kim and Leeper 188 reported improved responses with a combination of radiation therapy and relatively low-dose Adriamycin as an apparent synergistic
agent, achieving responses in 84% of 19 patients, although still having a median survival of only 12 months. Adriamycin is the single most effective chemotherapeutic
for ATC, and it has been shown that Adriamycin plus platinum is more effective than Adriamycin alone. A review from the National Cancer Database reports a 10-year
survival of 14% for ATC. 189 Early diagnosis with aggressive surgical therapy supplemented by external-beam radiation therapy and Adriamycin-based chemotherapy
is the most appropriate treatment for patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.

MEDULLARY THYROID CANCER
MTC was recognized in the 1950s by Hazard et al. 190 as a distinct clinicopathologic entity. Since this description, sequential pathologic, biochemical, and molecular
genetic studies have progressed to render this one of the best characterized solid malignancies of the thyroid. 65,191 In 1959, Hazard described MTC as a solid thyroid
neoplasm without follicular histology but with a high degree of lymph node metastases that accounted for 3.5% of thyroid cancers in a review at the Cleveland
Clinic. 190 Over the next 10 years, investigators identified and described the parafollicular C cell that produces calcitonin, which lowers serum calcium. 191 In 1966 and
1967, Williams 192,193 suggested that MTC arose from this C-cell population. This hypothesis was confirmed by a number of investigators who documented elevated
serum calcitonin from patients with MTC. During the decade of the 1970s, Wells et al 194 extended the measurement of calcitonin by defining a provocative test that
rendered this hormonal tumor marker one of the most sensitive and specific in all of oncology. Understanding of the familial associations of MTC with corollary genetic
studies reported in the 1980s and early 1990s 191 has defined molecular changes that are important for inherited MTC and may have implications for sporadic MTC as
well.195
MTC constitutes as few as 3% 4 or as many as 12%191 of most institutional series of detectible thyroid cancers. As opposed to well-differentiated thyroid cancer, MTC
is not associated with radiation exposure, but it does occur in distinct familial syndromes. Sporadic or nonfamilial MTC accounts for 60% to 70% of cases, with three
distinct familial syndromes accounting for the remainder. 191 MTC is the most prominent clinical diagnosis in MEN 2a and MEN 2B ( Table 38.2-10).196 In 1986, familial
MTC with none of the associated features of MEN 2a or MEN 2B was described. 197 Appreciation of this syndrome has shifted the percentage of incidence of sporadic
MTC as a function of the total number of cases of MTC from 80% to 60% and even lower in some series. In addition to the presence or absence of other associated
endocrine abnormalities, each of these familial forms of MTC has a unique natural history and prognosis. 191 Furthermore, studies have identified specific genetic
changes associated with each type (see Table 38.2-10).195

TABLE 38.2-10. Characteristics of Sporadic and Various Familial Forms of Medullary Thyroid Cancer

Parafollicular, or C cells, arise embryologically from the neural crest and have characteristics shared with other cells with a similar origin. 171 The C cells are located
primarily in the upper and middle thirds of the thyroid lobes, with a particular concentration posteriorly. This feature is important to surgical therapy, as this is the
location in which the recurrent laryngeal nerve passes under the ligament of Berry and enters the larynx. Therefore, complete thyroid resection is necessary for this
condition, because MTC typically arises in this upper portion of the thyroid gland where the C cells are concentrated.
Grossly, MTC may be circumscribed or infiltrative and is usually yellow. Histologically, this tumor can be described as having a wide variety of patterns, including
glandular, solid, spindle-cell, oncocytic, clear cell, papillary pattern, small cell, 198 and giant cell. The nuclei of MTC resemble those of neuroendocrine tumors in other
areas of the body. They are usually round and have a stippled “pepper-and-salt” chromatin. 198 Pathologic features associated with a poor prognosis include presence
of necrosis (P=.001), squamous pattern (P=.002), presence of oxyphil cells in the tumor and absence of cells with intermediate cytoplasm ( P=.02), and less than 50%
calcitonin immunoreactivity ( P=.04).199
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND DIAGNOSIS
The clinical symptoms at the time of presentation vary, dependent on the situation for each patient. Patients with familial MTC who are identified by screening with
stimulation tests 191 or with molecular analysis 200 are universally identified before any macroscopic mass or lesion. Sporadic patients typically present with an
asymptomatic mass in the thyroid.191 Patients with bulky disease with extremely high levels of calcitonin may have severe secretory diarrhea as a principal symptom.
Before the definition of the molecular change for familial MTC, 200 basal and stimulated serum calcitonin levels were used to screen patients. 191 Sequential calcitonin
testing is still important as a tumor marker for following up patients with MTC.
Various nuclear medicine imaging studies have been evaluated in patients with MTC to identify gross and occult metastases. MTC does not concentrate iodine, so 131I
thyroid scans are of no utility. 201 Similarly, thallium as well as technetium scans have been used with minimal benefit in this disease. 131I metaiodobenzylguanidine
scans have been useful in pheochromocytoma and neuroblastoma and have been studied for MTC but do not identify a large proportion of the lesions. 202 Other

studies have used radiolabeled anti–-carcinoembryonic antigen antibody 203 or anticalcitonin antibody but with limited success. Several studies have used
somatostatin receptor scintigraphy in the setting of MTC. 204,205 Like other amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation (APUD) cells, C cells may express a high level
of somatostatin receptors, and pharmacologic developments of radiolabeled agents, based on analogs that bind to somatostatin receptor, have been studied for use
in treating MTC. In general, the results are better than any other nuclear medicine agent; however, occult lesions smaller than 1 cm 204 as well as liver lesions still are
missed with this technique.
TREATMENT
General Approaches
Chemotherapy and external-beam radiation therapy are ineffective against MTC, rendering surgical resection the only definitive therapy. 206,207 For patients with
sporadic MTC who are not identified by biochemical or genetic screening, the appropriate operation in most cases is total thyroidectomy with central node dissection.
Total thyroidectomy is indicated in this sporadic setting because a small proportion of lesions may be bilateral and because it may not be clear at the time of operation
whether a patient is an index case of familial disease or the disorder is a true sporadic case. Because all familial syndromes have a high propensity for bilateral
tumors, total thyroidectomy is indicated except possibly for patients having nonfamilial syndromes and small lesions (<1.0 cm). 208 However, one report of 80 patients
with sporadic MTC smaller than 1 cm showed that 11% had clinically involved lymph nodes, 31% had pathologically involved lymph nodes, and 5% had distant
metastases.207 Combined with this thyroid resection, a central lymph node dissection is performed, removing lymphoid tissue from the level of the hyoid bone to the
innominate vessels inferiorly and laterally to the jugular vein. Lymph nodes lateral to the jugular vein are sampled and, if there is any evidence of metastatic spread in
this area, a formal modified radical neck dissection is performed. 209
The incidence of positive lymph nodes correlates with the size of the primary lesion at the time of diagnosis. It has been reported that for lesions smaller than 1 cm,
there can still be an 11% incidence of positive nodal disease, whereas in patients with tumors larger than 2 cm, 60% will have positive cervical lymph nodes. 208
Combining all cases of MTC, between 15% and 75% have spread to the lymph nodes at the time of diagnosis. 191 For this reason, Duh et al. 208 advocated a formal
modified radical neck dissection for any lesion larger than 2 cm on the side in which it is located, with a central node dissection on the contralateral side.
The incidence of distant metastases at the time of diagnosis varies with the clinical setting. Twelve percent of patients with sporadic MTC have distant metastases,
whereas 20% of those with MEN 2B have metastatic spread but only 3.3% of patients with MEN 2a. 191,196 Patients with familial non-MEN MTC also have a favorable
clinical condition similar to MEN 2a, with 2% of patients presenting with distant metastases. 179 Moley et al.206 have instituted staging laparoscopy to identify liver
metastases in patients undergoing thyroid resection and lymph node dissection. For MTC, liver metastases are often the site of metastatic disease and are often
radiologically occult. By performing laparoscopy, the incidence of biochemical cure has increased because patients with unresectable liver disease are eliminated
from the therapy pool.
The outcome of treatment of patients with sporadic MTC has improved. An early review published in 1970 reported 5- and 10-year survival rates of 48% and 12%,
respectively.191 More recent studies show a 5-year survival of between 80% and 90% and 10-year survival between 70% and 80% for combined series of familial and
sporadic MTC.208,209 and 210 The series from the National Cancer Database confirms this improved survival, with a 75% 10-year survival for MTC. 189 It is interesting to
note that the natural history and prognosis for the various subtypes of MTC correlate with described genetic changes. The two groups with the worst outcome
(sporadic and MEN 2B) have similar genetic changes in the RET oncogene, as do the two types with favorable outcome (familial non-MEN and MEN 2B). 200
One controversial area in the surgical management of patients with MTC is the proper approach to patients who have persistently elevated basal or stimulated
calcitonin after resection of all gross disease. 205,211,212,213,214 and 215 In many of these cases, imaging studies with conventional techniques of ultrasonography, computed
tomography, or magnetic resonance imaging, plus newer techniques of somatostatin receptor scintigraphy, 204 demonstrate no areas of disease. One strategy to
identify the region from which elevated calcitonin is coming is to perform selected venous sampling with systemic pentagastrin or calcium stimulation. 205 The key
clinical question is: In these patients, who have occult MTC with no radiographic or clinical evidence by which to localize residual tumor but with persistently abnormal
calcitonin levels, is the natural history altered by aggressive attempts to excise the occult disease surgically? Excision attempts generally do not produce
normalization of calcitonin levels. The best results come from Tisell, who performs meticulous 12-hour neck dissections, often removing 40 to 60 additional cervical
lymph nodes in patients with occult MTC. 214 In a series of 11 patients, he had four that had normalized calcitonin levels, with another four that had dramatic
improvement in their calcitonin levels. However, even these improvements in the calcitonin levels do not necessarily translate into improved survival. Thirty-one
patients were identified, all of whom had gross disease resected at initial operation at the Mayo Clinic but had documented elevated postoperative calcitonin. 215 With
a median follow-up of almost 12 years, only 11 patients developed clinically or radiographically apparent recurrent disease, and these 11 patients were reoperated at
that time. None of these patients normalized their calcitonin levels after reoperation. Important is that the overall 5- and 10-year survival rates in this population were
90% and 86%, respectively, with only two patients dying specifically from MTC. 215 Both patients had sporadic MTC with very aggressive invasive primary lesions and
died of distant metastases 2 to 2.5 years after diagnosis. Even though there is no alternative therapy to surgical resection for MTC, the data regarding the prognosis
of occult MTC plus the lack of success even with very extensive reoperations to normalize calcitonin would argue that the best course of action in this patient
population is close follow-up and operation only when clinically apparent disease is present.
For patients with metastatic MTC, surgical resection may still offer the best chance of survival as well as long-term palliation. In 16 patients with metastatic MTC at
Johns Hopkins, 21 palliative reoperations were performed. These procedures included neck reoperations in 11 cases but also removal of mediastinal masses and
liver metastases as well as other miscellaneous lesions. All patients had clear relief of their index symptoms, typically diarrhea and fatigue, and had a median survival
rate of 8.2 years. 216
The results of MTC treatment with external-beam radiation therapy 217 or chemotherapeutics are disappointing. 218,219 Radiation administered at a dose of more than
5000 rads to a large Y-shaped anterior field without laryngeal shielding necessary to treat these patients causes significant local toxicity. Dysphagia as well as
dyspnea can be severe in certain individuals. Furthermore, treatment with this radiation dose has not definitively been shown to decrease local recurrences. One
large study from France of 59 patients reported local recurrences within the radiation field in 30% of patients. 217 Chemotherapeutics used in treatment of MTC include
Adriamycin, dacarbazine, streptozocin, and 5-fluorouracil. 218 Single-agent response rates are poor, with aggressive Adriamycin regimens producing 20% to 30%
objective responses. A study of combination chemotherapy showed that a regimen of 5-fluorouracil, streptozocin, and dacarbazine produces objective responses in
only 15%.218 The poor outcome of treatment of metastatic disease validates the treatment recommendation to diagnose patients with MTC early and treat with initial
aggressive surgery.
Due to failure of chemotherapy and radiation therapy to offer significant benefit for patients with MTC, innovative therapeutic strategies for MTC have been developed,
such as the use of gene therapy. This technique primarily uses adenovirus to transduce either interleukin-2 or suicide gene, such as herpes simplex virus thymidine
kinase.220,221 Other more directed gene therapies would rely on the expression of calcitonin only from MTC and have use of selective promoter in front of a suicide
gene or other targeted transgene.
Treatment of Familial Medullary Thyroid Cancer
An increasing number of patients are identified in one of the three familial settings of MTC that are diagnosed using biochemical or genetic screening. 200 Routine use
of provocative biochemical testing to diagnose MTC led to a significant decrease in the age of diagnosis, a significant decrease in the incidence of lymph node
metastases, and a significant increase in the number of patients cured biochemically at these earlier operations. 191 This strategy has been extended to an earlier
stage with the description of the mutations in the RET oncogene present in the MEN 2a. 200 At Washington University, Wells et al. 200 use a molecular genetic
screening technique to identify patients who are carriers of the MEN 2a mutation as infants or young children. Before any abnormality in basal or stimulated calcitonin,
these patients undergo a total thyroidectomy, a total parathyroidectomy, and a parathyroid autograft. Pathologic evaluation on these children's thyroid identifies either
C-cell hyperplasia or microscopic or macroscopic MTC. In the initial trial, no patients treated with this strategy had evidence of lymph node metastases, and this
surgical strategy should be curative.
The genetic test for the mutations in the RET protooncogene have become commercially available, and many individuals are reporting series based on early
operation for patients identified by RET mutation. A review has noted that in a total of 209 patients treated in this manner, 3.4% had normal thyroid glands with no
evidence of C-cell hyperplasia or MTC. 222 It was also noted that in these patients undergoing prophylactic operations, there was an 8.6% incidence of lymph node
metastases. Based on these results, it is thought that a prophylactic central neck dissection should be performed at the time of this prophylactic thyroidectomy, based

on genetic testing. Because this oncogene was one of the first to be defined that led to a therapeutic procedure, there has been appropriate attention paid to the
psychosocial impact of genetic testing. A study from Lyon, France suggests that patients who are in this situation of being kindreds undergoing genetic testing are
frustrated regarding this stressful process. 223

THYROID LYMPHOMA
Thyroid lymphoma is a relatively rare disease constituting fewer than 1% of all lymphomas and accounting for 2% of extranodal non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (see
Chapter 45.3).224 Almost all these thyroid lymphomas are non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, 225 with the majority (70% to 90%) being intermediate grade and the remainder
being high grade. 226 Many are considered mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas or MALTomas and show plasmacytic differentiation and may be associated
with similar lesions in extranodal sites especially in the gastrointestinal tract. 231
The majority of patients with thyroid lymphoma all have disease on one side of the diaphragm with a proportion confined to the thyroid (stage IE) and the majority with
thyroid disease plus cervical or mediastinal lymph nodes (stage IIE). 227 The incidence of this disease may be changing, primarily due to improved recognition and
diagnosis of thyroid lymphoma. Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit saw seven cases of thyroid lymphoma in 20 years before 1976 and 30 cases in the 8 years after
1976.225 One hypothesis to explain the incidence increase is that these patients were previously diagnosed as having anaplastic thyroid carcinoma and, with better
understanding and more sophisticated diagnostic tools, such as immunohistochemistry, these patients are being correctly categorized as having thyroid lymphoma.
In most series, there is a strong female predominance, ranging from 3:1 in the large Mayo Clinic series 228 to 6.5:1 from Brown University227 and up to 8:1 for the
Vancouver, British Columbia study. 226 The median age in most series at diagnosis places patients in the seventh decade of life, similar to what is seen for ATC and
much older than patients with well-differentiated thyroid cancer. 226,227 and 228 Between 10% and 30% of patients report a symptom or combination of symptoms relating
to local invasion, including hoarseness, dyspnea with stridor, or dysphagia. 226 Patients with thyroid lymphoma virtually never have hyperthyroidism but frequently have
hypothyroidism. These hypothyroid patients have evidence of autoimmune thyroiditis or Hashimoto's thyroiditis, either by biopsy or from the pathologic specimen. 225
The optimal treatment for thyroid lymphoma has evolved with the success of combination chemotherapy used in the treatment of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and with
the ability to obtain an accurate diagnosis without invasive surgery by large-needle or core needle biopsy. Skarsgard et al. 226 argued that the role of surgery in this
disease is simply to obtain adequate tissue for diagnosis and that the primary treatment should be external-beam radiation combined with an Adriamycin-based
chemotherapy regimen. Using this strategy at his institution, the 5-year survival was 70%, and the 4-year disease-free survival was also 70%. Others have argued that
in the 20% to 30% minority of patients who have no extrathyroidal extension, excellent survival is achieved by surgical excision plus postoperative radiation
therapy. 224 Patients with extrathyroidal disease either by direct extension or lymph node involvement should be considered to have systemic disease. Although some
endocrine surgeons argue that attempts to clear the trachea to avoid airway obstruction should be performed if at all possible in all patients, 224 others report that the
rapid use of radiation therapy (starting the day after the diagnostic biopsy procedure) produces the same beneficial results. 226,227 All would agree that the efficacy in
long-term survival using a combination of radiation therapy and chemotherapy render aggressive surgical resection with a sacrifice of recurrent laryngeal nerve or
possibly resulting in hypoparathyroidism contraindicated for thyroid lymphoma.

SECONDARY THYROID MALIGNANCY
Involvement of the thyroid gland by malignant metastases from other sites is rare, accounting for fewer than 1% of thyroid malignancies in most clinical series
involving surgical resection or FNA biopsies. 229,230 On the other hand, the incidence of thyroid metastases identified on autopsy series is greater and can range
between 2% and 26% in autopsy series, probably depending on the thoroughness of the examination by the pathologists. 229 From these autopsy series, the most
predominant malignancies metastatic to the thyroid are breast and lung, each accounting for 25% of the total. 229 Melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, and gastrointestinal
tract malignancies each account for approximately 10% of these secondary malignancies from autopsy studies. A variety of other miscellaneous diagnoses account
for the remainder.
For the more clinically relevant situation in which the thyroid metastasis is detected premortem, the most common primary site is renal cell carcinoma, accounting for
23% of 111 such cases combined from the literature. 229 The next most common sites are breast (16%), lung (15%), melanoma (5%), and colon and larynx (4.5%
each). Occasionally, the thyroid metastasis may be the initial presentation of an occult primary from a gastrointestinal source or renal primary. Because FNA biopsy is
the diagnostic tool used to evaluate thyroid nodules as the initial step, an awareness of the potential of the secondary metastases is important for interpretation of
these biopsy results.
Dependent on the clinical situation, some of these patients may need thyroidectomy for palliation of local symptoms. Thyroid metastases may grow at a rapid rate and
can cause airway obstruction. In one large institutional series from Toronto, 8 of 11 patients derived benefit from a thyroidectomy after premortem diagnosis of
secondary metastases.230
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics, 1999. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:8.
2. Jensen RT, Norton JA. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas. In: Yamada T, Alpers BH, Owyang C, Powell DW, Silverstein FE, eds. Textbook of gastroenterology. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co,
1995:2131.
3. Jossart GH, Clark OH. Well-differentiated thyroid cancer. Curr Probl Surg 1994;31(12):937.
4. LiVolsi VA, Asa SL. The demise of follicular carcinoma of the thyroid gland. Thyroid 1994;4(2):233.
5. LiVolsi VA, Bronner MP. Oxyphilic (Ashkenazi-Hürthle cell) tumors of the thyroid: microscopic features predict biologic behavior. Surg Pathol 1988;1(2):137.
6. Mariotti S, Franceshi C, Cossarizza A, Pinchera A. The aging thyroid. Endocrine Rev 1995;16:686.
7. Denham MJ, Willis EJ. A clinico-pathological survey of thyroid glands in old age. Gerontology 1980;26:160.
8. Burch HB. Evaluation and management of the solid thyroid nodule. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1995;24:663.
9. Schneider AB. Radiation-induced thyroid tumors. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1990;19:495.
10. Hancock SL, Cox RS, McDougall IR. Thyroid diseases after treatment of Hodgkins' disease. N Engl J Med 1991;325:599.
11. Mazzaferri EL. Thyroid cancer in thyroid nodules: finding a needle in the haystack. Am J Med 1992;93:359.
12. DeGroot LJ, Reilly M, Pinnamenneni K, et al. Retrospective and prospective study of radiation-induced thyroid disease. Am J Med 1983;74:852.
13. Schneider AB, Shore-Freedman E, Ryo UY, et al. Radiation-induced tumors of the head and neck following childhood irradiation. Medicine 1985;64:1.
14. Farbota LM, Calandra DB, Lawrence AM, et al. Thyroid carcinoma in Graves' disease. Surgery 1985;98:1148.
15. Shapiro SJ, Friedman NB, Perzik SL, et al. Incidence of thyroid carcinoma in Graves' disease. Cancer 1970;26:1261.
16. Hales IB, McElduff A, Crummer P, et al. Does Graves' disease or thyrotoxicosis affect the prognosis of thyroid cancer? J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1992;75:886.
17. Mazzaferri EL. Management of a solitary thyroid nodule. N Engl J Med 1993;328:553.
18. Singer PA, Cooper DS, Daniels GH, et al. Treatment guidelines for patients with thyroid nodules and well-differentiated thyroid cancer. Arch Intern Med 1996;156(19):2165.
19. Raue F, Frank-Raue K, Grauer A. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2: clinical features and screening. Endocrinol Clin North Am 1994;23:137.
20. Bell B, Mazzaferri EL. Thyroid cancer in familial polyposis coli: case report and literature review. Dig Dis Sci 1993;38:185.
21. Shapiro SD, Lambert WC, Schwartz RA. Cowden's disease. A marker for malignancy. Int J Dermatol 1988;27:232.
22. Hammings JF, Goslings BM, Van Steenis GJ, et al. The value of fine needle aspiration biopsy in patients with nodular thyroid disease divided into groups of suspicion of malignant neoplasms
on clinical grounds. Arch Intern Med 1990;150:113.
23. Pacini F, Fontanelli M, Fugazzola L, et al. Routine measurement of serum calcitonin in nodular thyroid diseases allows the preoperative diagnosis of unsuspected sporadic medullary thyroid
carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;78:826.
24. Dunn JT. When is a nodule a sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma? [Editorial]. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;78:824.
25. Hagag P, Strauss S, Weiss M. Role of ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy in evaluation of nonpalpable thyroid nodules. Thyroid 1998;8(11):989.
26. Danese D, Schiacchitano S, Farsetti A, Andreoli M, Pontecorvi A. Diagnostic accuracy of conventional versus sonography-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of thyroid nodules. Thyroid
1998;8(1):15.
27. Shimamoto K, Endo T, Ishigaki T, et al. Thyroid nodules: evaluation with color Doppler ultrasonography. J Ultrasound Med 1993;12:673.
28. Caruso D, Mazzaferri EL. Fine needle aspiration biopsy in the management of thyroid nodules. Endocrinologist 1991;1:194.
29. Gharib H, Goellner JR, Zinsmeister AR, et al. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the thyroid. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:25.
30. Cheng AJ, Lin JD, Chang T, Wang TC. Telomerase activity in benign and malignant human thyroid tissues. Br J Cancer 1998;77(12):2177.
31. Saji M, Westra WH, Chen H, et al. Telomerase activity in the differential diagnosis of papillary carcinoma of the thyroid. Surgery 1997;122(6):1137.
32. Umbricht CB, Saji M, Westra WH, et al. Telomerase activity: a marker to distinguish follicular thyroid adenoma from carcinoma. Cancer Res 1997;57(11):2144.
33. Hall TL, Layfield LJ, Phillippe A, Rosenthal DL. Sources of diagnostic error in fine needle aspiration of the thyroid. Cancer 1989;63:718.
34. Carson HJ, Castelli MJ, Gattuso P. Incidences of neoplasia and Hashimoto's thyroiditis: a fine needle aspiration study. Diagn Cytopathol 1996;14:38.
35. Gharib H, James EH, Charboneau JW, et al. Suppressive therapy with levothyroxine for solitary thyroid nodules: a double-blind controlled clinical study. N Engl J Med 1987;317:70.
36. Cheung PSY, Lee JMH, Boey JH. Thyroxine suppression of benign thyroid nodules: a prospective randomized study. World J Surg 1989;13:818.
37. Reverter JL, Lucas A, Salinas I, et al. Suppressive therapy with levothyroxine for solitary thyroid nodules. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 1992;36:25.

38. Ross DS. Subclinical hyperthyroidism: possible danger of overzealous thyroxine replacement therapy. Mayo Clin Proc 1988;63:1223.
39. Biondi B, Fazio S, Carella C, et al. Cardiac effects of long-term thyrotropin-suppressive therapy with levothyroxine. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993;77:334.
40. Fritts LL, Crombie HD, Allen LW, Deckers PJ. Surgical treatment options for well-differentiated thyroid cancer: more is not necessarily better. Contemp Surg 1993;42:197.
41. Cady B, Rossi R, Silverman M, Wool M. Further evidence of the validity of risk group definition in differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Surgery 1985;98(6):1171.
42. Mazzaferri EL, Jhiang SM. Long-term impact of initial surgical and medical therapy on papillary and follicular thyroid cancer. Am J Med 1994;97:418.
43. Simpson WJ, McKinney SE, Carruthers JS, et al. Papillary and follicular thyroid cancer: prognostic factors in 1,578 patients. Am J Med 1987;83:479.
44. Brennan MD, Bergstralh EJ, van Heerden JA, McConahey WM. Follicular thyroid cancer treated at the Mayo Clinic, 1946 through 1970: initial manifestations, pathologic findings, therapy, and
outcome. Mayo Clin Proc 1991;66:11.
45. McConahey WM, Hay ID, Woolner LB, van Heerden JA, Taylor WF. Papillary thyroid cancer treated at the Mayo Clinic, 1946 through 1970: initial manifestations, pathologic findings, therapy
and outcome. Mayo Clin Proc 1986;61:978.
46. Harness JK, Thompson NW, McLeod MK, Eckhauser FE, Lloyd RV. Follicular carcinoma of the thyroid gland: trends and treatment. Surgery 1984;96(6):971.
47. Francheschi S, Boyle P, Maisonneuve P, et al. The epidemiology of thyroid carcinoma. Crit Rev Oncogen 1993;4:25.
48. Shore RE. Issues and epidemiological evidence regarding radiation-induced thyroid cancer. Radiat Res 1992;131:98.
49. Ron E, Kleinerman RA, Boice JD Jr, et al. A population-based case-control study of thyroid cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;79:1.
50. Binter G, Lax S, Eber O. The impact of geographical, clinical, dietary and radiation-induced features in epidemiology of thyroid cancer. Eur J Cancer 1993;29A:1547.
51. Shore RE, Woodard E, Hildreth N, et al. Thyroid tumors following thymus irradiation. J Natl Cancer Inst 1985;74:1177.
52. Ron E, Modan B, Preston D, et al. Thyroid neoplasia following low-dose radiation in childhood. Radiat Res 1989;120:516.
53. Schneider AB, Recant W, Pincky SM, et al. Radiation-induced thyroid carcinoma. Clinical course and results of therapy in 296 patients. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:405.
54. Schneider AB, Ron E, Lubin J, Stovall M, Gierlowski TC. Dose-response relationships for radiation-induced thyroid cancer and thyroid nodules: evidence for the prolonged effects of radiation on
the thyroid. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993;77:362.
55. Tucker MA, Jones PHM, Boice JD Jr, et al. Therapeutic radiation at a young age is linked to secondary thyroid cancer. Cancer Res 1991;51:2885.
56. Boice JD Jr, Engholm G, Lkeinerman RA, et al. Radiation dose and second cancer risk in patients treated for cancer of the cervix. Radiat Res 1988;116:3.
57. Hallquist A, Hardell L, Degerman A, Wingren G, Boquist L. Medical diagnostic and therapeutic ionizing radiation and the risk for thyroid cancer: a case control study. Eur J Cancer Prev
1994;3:259.
58. Holm LE, Wiklund KE, Lundell GE, et al. Thyroid cancer after diagnostic doses of iodine-131: a retrospective cohort study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:1132.
59. Holm LE, Hall P, Wiklund K, et al. Cancer risk after iodine-131 therapy for hyperthyroidism. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:1072.
60. Hamilton TE, van Belle G, LoGerfo JP. Thyroid neoplasia in Marshall islanders exposed to nuclear fallout. JAMA 1987;258:629.
61. Kerber RA, Till JE, Simon SL, et al. A cohort study of thyroid disease in relation to fallout from nuclear weapons testing. JAMA 1993;270:2076.
62. Nikiforov Y, Gnepp DR. Pediatric thyroid cancer after the Chernobyl disaster. Cancer 1994;74:748.
63. Mettler FA Jr, Williamson MR, Royal HD, et al. Thyroid nodules in the population living around Chernobyl. JAMA 1992;268:616.
64. Franceschi S, Levi F, Negri E, Fassina A, LaVecchia C. Diet and thyroid cancer: a pooled analysis of four European case-control studies. Int J Cancer 1991;48:395.
65. Glattre E, Haldorsen T, Berg JP, Stensvold I, Solvoll K. Norwegian case-control study testing the hypothesis that seafood increases the risk of thyroid cancer. Cancer Causes Control 1993;4:11.
66. Grossman RF, Tu SH, Duh QY, et al. Familial nonmedullary thyroid cancer. Arch Surg 1995;130:892.
67. Lesueur F, Stark M, Tocco T, et al. Genetic heterogeneity in familial nonmedullary thyroid carcinoma: exclusion of linkage to RET, MNG1, and TCO in 56 families. NMTC Consortium. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 1999;84(6):2157.
68. Goodfellow PJ, Wells SA. RET gene and its implications for cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87(20):1515.
69. Rosai J, Carcangiu ML, DeLellis RA. Tumors of the thyroid gland. In: Atlas of tumor pathology, 3rd series, fascicle 5. Washington DC: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 1993.
70. LiVolsi VA. Surgical pathology of the thyroid. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1990.
71. Hay ID. Papillary thyroid carcinoma. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1990;19:545.
72. Hay ID. Papillary thyroid carcinoma. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1990;19:545.
73. Tielens ET, Sherman SI, Hruban RH, Ladenson PQ. Follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma: a clinicopathologic study. Cancer 1994;73(2):425.
74. Chan JK, Saw D. The grooved nucleus. A useful diagnostic criterion of papillary carcinoma of the thyroid. Am J Surg Pathol 1986;10:672.
75. Johnson TL, Lloyd RV, Thompson NW, Beierwaltes WH, Sisson JC. Prognostic implications of the tall cell variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma. Am J Surg Pathol 1988;12(1):22.
76. Gaertner EM, Davidson M, Wenig B. The columnar cell variant of thyroid papillary carcinoma. Am J Surg Pathol 1995;19:940.
77. Carcangiu ML, Bianchi S. Diffuse sclerosing variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma: clinicopathologic study of 15 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1989;13:1041.
78. Ruter A, Nishiyama R, Lennquist S. Tall-cell variant of papillary thyroid cancer: disregarded entity? World J Surg 1997;21(1):15.
79. Cooper DS, Schneyer CR. Follicular and Hürthle cell carcinoma of the thyroid. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1990;19(3):577.
80. van Heerden JA, Hay ID, Goellner RJ, et al. Follicular thyroid carcinoma with capsular invasion alone: a nonthreatening malignancy. Surgery 1992;112:1130.
81. Gundry SR, Burney RE, Thompson NW, Lloyd R. Total thyroidectomy for Hürthle cell neoplasm of the thyroid. Arch Surg 1983;118:529.
82. Gosain AK, Clark OH. Hürthle cell neoplasms: malignant potential. Arch Surg 1984;119:515.
83. Grant SC, Barr D, Goeliner JR, Hay ID. Benign Hürthle cell tumors of the thyroid: a diagnosis to be trusted? World J Surg 1988;12:488.
84. Friedman M. Surgical management of thyroid carcinoma with laryngotracheal invasion. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1990;23(3):495.
85. Ballantyne A. Resections of the upper aerodigestive tract for locally invasive thyroid cancer. Am J Surg 1994;168:636.
86. Cochand-Priollet B, Guillausseau PJ, Chagnon S, et al. The diagnostic value of fine-needle aspiration biopsy under ultrasonography in nonfunctional thyroid nodules: a prospective study
comparing cytologic and histologic findings. Am J Med 1994;97:152.
87. Stark DD, Clark OH, Gooding GAW, Moss AA. High resolution ultrasound and computerized tomography of thyroid lesions in patients with hyperparathyroidism. Surgery 1983;94:863.
88. Mazzaferri EL. NCCN thyroid carcinoma practice guidelines. Oncology 1999;13:391.
89. Hamburger JI. Diagnosis of thyroid nodules by fine needle biopsy: use and abuse. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;70(2):335.
90. Clark OH, Okerlund MD, Cavalieri RR, Greenspan FS. Diagnosis and treatment of thyroid, parathyroid, and thyroglossal duct cysts. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1979;48:983.
91. Block MA, Dailey GE, Robb JA. Thyroid nodules indeterminate by needle biopsy. Am J Surg 1983;146:72.
92. Tyler DS, Winchester DJ, Caraway NP, Hickey RC, Evans DB. Indeterminate fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the thyroid: identification of subgroups at high risk for invasive carcinoma. Surgery
1994;116:1054.
93. Schelfhout LJDM, Creutzberg CL, Hamming JF, et al. Multivariate analysis of survival in differentiated thyroid cancer: the prognostic significance of the age factor. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol
1988;24(2):331.
94. Joensuu H, Klemi PJ, Paul R, Tuominen J. Survival and prognostic factors in thyroid carcinoma. Acta Radiol Oncol 1986;25:243.
95. Torres J, Volpato RD, Power EG, et al. Thyroid cancer. Cancer 1985;56:2298.
96. Harness JK, McLeod MK, Thompson NW, Noble WC, Burney RE. Deaths due to differentiated thyroid cancer: a 46-year perspective. World J Surg 1988;12:623.
97. Staunton MD. Thyroid cancer: a multivariate analysis on influence of treatment on long-term survival. Eur J Surg Oncol 1994;20:613.
98. Akslen LA, Haldorsen T, Thoresen SO, Glattre E. Survival and causes of death in thyroid cancer: a population-based study of 2479 cases from Norway. Cancer Res 1991;51:1234.
99. Cunningham MP, Duda RB, Recant W, et al. Survival discriminants for differentiated thyroid cancer. Am J Surg 1990;160:344.
100. Donohue JH, Goldfien SD, Miller TR, Abele JS, Clark OH. Do the prognoses of papillary and follicular thyroid carcinomas differ? Am J Surg 1984;148:166.
101. Brooks JR, Starnes HF, Brooks DC, Pelkey JN. Surgical therapy for thyroid carcinoma: a review of 1249 solitary thyroid nodules. Surgery 1988;104:940.
102. Allo MD, Christianson W, Koivunen D. Not all “occult” papillary carcinomas are “minimal.” Surgery 1988;104:971.
103. Shaha AR, Shah JP, Loree TR. Patterns of nodal and distant metastasis based on histologic varieties in differentiated carcinoma of the thyroid. Am J Surg 1996;172(6):692.
104. Caplan RH, Abellera RM, Kisken WA. Hürthle cell neoplasms of the thyroid gland: reassessment of functional capacity. Thyroid 1994;4(3):243.
105. Shaha AR, Shah JP, Loree TR. Differentiated thyroid cancer presenting initially with distant metastasis. Am J Surg 1997;174(5):474.
106. Rossi RL, Cady B, Silverman ML, et al. Surgically incurable well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Arch Surg 1988;123:569.
107. Cady B, Rossi R. An expanded view of risk-group definition in differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Surgery 1988;104:947.
108. Rossi RL, Cady B, Silverman ML, Wool MS, Horner TA. Current results of conservative surgery for differentiated thyroid carcinoma. World J Surg 1986;10:612.
109. Hay ID, Grant CS, Taylor WF, McConahey WM. Ipsilateral lobectomy versus bilateral lobar resection in papillary thyroid carcinoma: a retrospective analysis of surgical outcome using a novel
prognostic scoring system. Surgery 1987;102(6):1087.
110. Zimmerman D, Hay ID, Gough IR, et al. Papillary thyroid carcinoma in children and adults: Long-term follow-up of 1039 patients conservatively treated at one institution during three decades.
Surgery 1988;104:1157.
111. Grant CS, Hay ID, Gough IR, et al. Local recurrence in papillary thyroid carcinoma: Is extent of surgical resection important? Surgery 1988;104:954.
112. Pasieka JL, Zedenius J, Auer G, et al. Addition of nuclear DNA content to the AMES risk-group classification for papillary thyroid cancer. Surgery 1992;112:1154.
113. Hay I, Bergstralh E, Goellner J, Ebersold J, Grant C. Predicting outcome in papillary thyroid carcinoma: development of a reliable prognostic scoring system in a cohort of 1779 patients
surgically treated at one institution during 1940 through 1989. Surgery 1993;114:1050.
114. Sanders LE, Cady B. Differentiated thyroid cancer: re-examination of risk groups and outcome of treatment. Arch Surg 1998;133(4):419.
115. Hav ID, Grant CS, Bergstralh EJ, et al. Unilateral total lobectomy: is it sufficient treatment for patients with AMES low-risk papillary thyroid carcinoma? Surgery 1998;124(6):958.
116. American Joint Committee on Cancer. Thyroid gland. In: Fleming ID, Cooper JS, Henson DE, et al., eds. AJCC cancer staging manual, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997:63.
117. Sherman SI, Brierley JD, Sperling M, et al. Prospective multicenter study of thyroid carcinoma treatment. Cancer 1998;83(5):1012.
118. Hamburger JI, Hamburger SW. Declining role of frozen section in surgical planning for thyroid nodules. Surgery 1985;98(2):307.
119. Chen H, Nicol TL, Udelsman R. Follicular lesions of the thyroid. Ann Surg 1995;222(1):101.
120. Bonner MP, Hamilton RH, LiVolsi VA. Utility of frozen section analysis in follicular lesions of the thyroid. Endocr Pathol 1994;5:154.
121. DeGroot LJ, Kaplan EL. Second opinion for “completion” of thyroidectomy in treatment of differentiated thyroid cancer. Surgery 1991;110:936.
122. DeJong SA, Demeter JG, Lawrence AM, Paloyan E. Necessity and safety of completion thyroidectomy for differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Surgery 1992;112:734.
123. Udelsman R, Lakatos E, Ladenson P. Optimal surgery for papillary thyroid carcinoma. World J Surg 1996;20(1):88.
124. Friedman M, Pacella BL Jr. Total versus subtotal thyroidectomy. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1990;23(3):413.
125. Flynn MB, Lyons KJ, Tarter JW, Ragsdale TL. Local complications after surgical resection for thyroid carcinoma. Am J Surg 1994;168:404.
126. Logue JP, Tsang RW, Brierley JD, Simpson WJ. Radioiodine ablation of residual tissue in thyroid cancer: relationship between administered activity, neck uptake and outcome. Br J Radiol
1994;67:1127.
127. DiRusso G, Kern KA. Comparative analysis of complications from I-131 radioablation for well-differentiated thyroid cancer. Surgery 1994;116:1024.
128. Taylor T, Specker B, Robbins J, et al. Outcome after treatment of high-risk papillary and non-Hürthle cell follicular thyorid carcinoma. Ann Intern Med 1998;129(8):622.
129. Wanebo H, Coburn M, Teates D, Cole B. Total thyroidectomy does not enhance disease control or survival even in high risk patients with differentiated thyroid cancer. Ann Surg
1998;227(6):912.
130. Talpos GB. Tracheal and laryngeal resections for differentiated thyroid cancer. Am Surg 1999;65(8):754.
131. McGregor GI, Luoma A, Jackson SM. Lymph node metastases from well-differentiated thyroid cancer. Am J Surg 1998;149:608.
132. King WWK, Li AKC. What is the optimal treatment of nodal metastases in differentiated thyroid cancer? Aust N Z J Surg 1994;64:815.
133. Moley JF, Wells SA. Compartment-mediated dissection for papillary thyroid cancer. Langenbecks Arch Surg 1999;384(1):9.
134. Sako K, Marchetta FC, Razack MS, Shedd DP. Modified radical neck dissection for metastatic carcinoma of the thyroid. Am J Surg 1985;150:498.

135. Kelemen PR, Van Herle AJ, Giuliano AE. Sentinel lymphadenectomy in thyroid malignant neoplasms. Arch Surg 1998;133(3):288.
136. Ozaki O, Ito K, Kobayashi K, Suzuki A, Manabe Y. Modified neck dissection for patients with nonadvanced, differentiated carcinoma of the thyroid. World J Surg 1988;12:825.
137. Tissel LE, Nilsson B, Molne J, et al. Improved survival of patients with papillary thyroid cancer after surgical microdissection. World J Surg 1996;20(7):848.
138. Simon D, Goretzki PE, Witte J, Roher HD. Incidence of regional recurrence guiding radicality in differentiated thyroid carcinoma. World J Surg 1996;20(7):860.
139. Solomon BL, Wartofsky L, Burman KD. Current trends in the management of well differentiated papillary thyroid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1996;81:333.
140. Wartofsky L, Sherman SI, Gopal J, Schlumberger M, Hay ID. The use of radioactive iodine in patients with papillary and follicular thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998;83(12):4195.
141. Schlumberger M. Can iodine-131 whole body scan be replaced by thyroglobulin measurement in the postsurgical follow-up of differentiated thyroid carcinoma? J Nucl Med 1992;33:172.
142. Pineda JD, Lee T, Ain K, Reynolds JC, Robbins J. Iodine-131 therapy for thyroid cancer patients with elevated thyroglobulin and negative diagnostic scan. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1995;80:1488.
143. Krishnamurthy GT, Blahd WH. Radioiodine I-131 therapy in the management of thyroid cancer. A prospective study. Cancer 1977;40:195.
144. Samaan NA, Maheshwari YK, Nader S, et al. Impact of therapy for differentiated carcinoma of the thyroid: an analysis of 706 cases. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1983;56:1131.
145. Massin JP, Savoie JC, Garnier H, et al. Pulmonary metastases in differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Study of 58 cases with implication for the primary tumor treatment. Cancer 1984;53:982.
146. DeGroot LJ, Reilly M. Comparison of 30- and 50-mCi doses of iodine-131 for thyroid ablation. Ann Intern Med 1982;96:51.
147. McCowan KD, Adler RA, Ghaed N, et al. Low-dose radioiodide thyroid ablation in postsurgical patients with thyroid cancer. Am J Med 1976;61:52.
148. Beierwaltes WH, Rabbani R, Dmowchowski C, et al. An analysis of “ablation of thyroid remnants” with 131-I in 511 patients from 19471984: experience at University of Michigan. J Nucl Med
1984;25:1287.
149. Bonua RS, Leeper RD. A method and rationale for treatment thyroid carcinoma with the largest, safe dose of 131-I. In: Medeiros-Neto G, Gaitan E, eds. Frontiers in thyroidology. New York:
Plenum Medical, 1986:1317.
150. Mazzaferri EL. Carcinoma of follicular epithelium: radioiodine and other treatment and outcomes. In: Braverman LE, Utiger RD, eds. Werner and Ingbar's the thyroid: a fundamental and clinical
text, 6th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1991:1138.
151. Mazzaferri EL, Jhiang SM. Long-term impact of initial surgical and medical therapy on papillary and follicular thyroid cancer. Am J Med 1994;97:418.
152. Mazzaferri EL, Young RL, Oertel JE, et al. Papillary thyroid carcinoma: the impact of therapy in 576 patients. Medicine 1977;56:171.
153. Harwood J, Diarck OI, Dunphy JE. Significance of lymph node metastasis in differentiated thyroid cancer. Cancer 1979;43:810.
154. Sweeney DC, Johnson GS. Radioiodine therapy for thyroid cancer. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1995;24:803.
155. Lakshmanan M, Schaffer A, Robbins J, et al. A simplified low iodine diet in 131-I scanning and therapy for thyroid cancer. Clin Nucl Med 1988;13:966.
156. Ramanna L, Waxman A, Brachman MB, et al. Treatment rationale in thyroid carcinoma: effect of scan dose. Clin Nucl Med 1985;10:687.
157. Jeevanram RK, Shah DH, Sharma M, et al. Influence of initial large dose on subsequent uptake of therapeutic radioiodine in thyroid cancer patients. Nucl Med Biol 1986;13:277.
158. Park HM, Perkins OW, Edmondson JW, et al. Influence of diagnostic radioiodines in the uptake of ablative doses of iodine-131. Thyroid 1994;4:49.
159. Sherman SI, Tielens ET, Sostre S, et al. Clinical utility of post-treatment radioiodine scans in the management of patients with thyroid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;78:629.
160. Cooper DS, Specker B, Ho M, et al. Thyrotropin suppression and disease progression in patients with differentiated thyroid cancer: results from the National Thyroid Cancer Treatment
Cooperative Registry. Thyroid 1998;8(9):737.
161. Dunn JT. Thyroglobulin: chemistry and biosynthesis. In: Braverman LE, Utiger RD, eds. Werner and Ingbar's the thyroid: a fundamental and clinical text, 6th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co,
1991:98.
162. Pacini F, Lippi F, Formica N, et al. Therapeutic doses of iodine-131 reveal undiagnosed metastases in thyroid cancer patients with detectable serum thyroglobulin. J Nucl Med 1987;28:1888.
163. Dietlein M, Scheidhauer K, Voth E, Theissen P, Schicha H. Fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography and iodine-131 whole body scintigraphy in the follow-up of
differentiated thyroid cancer. EurJ Nucl Med 1997;24(11):1342.
164. Wang W, Macapinlac H, Larson SM, et al. [18F]-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography localizes residual thyroid cancer in patients with negative diagnostic 131I whole body
scans and elevated serum thyroglobulin levels. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999;84(7):2291.
165. Conti PS, Durski JM, Bacqai F, Grafton ST, Singer PA. Imaging of locally recurrent and metastatic thyroid cancer with positron emission tomography. Thyroid 1999;9(8):797.
166. Seabold JE, Gurll N, Schurrer ME, Aktay R, Kirchner PT. Comparison of 99m Tc-methoxyisobutyl isonitrile and 201T1 scintigraphy for detection of residual thyroid cancer after 131I ablative
therapy. J Nucl Med 1999;40(9):1434.
167. Spencer CA, Takeuchi M, Kazaroxyan M, et al. Serum thyroglobulin autoantibodies: prevalence, influence on serum thyroglobulin measurement, and prognostic significance in patients with
differentiated thyroid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998;83:1121.
168. Ringel MD, Ladenson PW, Levine MA. Molecular diagnosis of residual and recurrent thyroid cancer by amplification of thyroglobulin mRNA in peripheral blood. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1998;83:4435.
169. Pons F, Carpio I, Estorch M, et al. Lithium as an adjuvant of iodine-131 when treating patients with well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Clin Nucl Med 1987;8:644.
170. Koong SS, Reynolds JC, Movius EG, et al. Lithium as a potential adjuvant to 131I therapy of metastatic, well differentiated thyroid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999;84(3):912.
171. Ladenson PW, Braverman LE, Mazzaferri EL, et al. Comparison of administration of recombinant human thyrotropin with withdrawal of thyroid hormone for radioactive iodine scanning in
patients with thyroid carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1997;337(13):888.
172. Bohuslavizki KH, Brenner W, Klutmann S, et al. Radioprotection of salivary glands by amifostine in high-dose radioiodine therapy. J Nucl Med 1998;39(7):1237.
173. Pacini F, Gasperi M, Fugazzda L, et al. Testicular function in patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma treated with radioiodine. J Nucl Med 1994;35:1418.
174. Dottorini ME, Lomuscio G, Mazzuchelli I, et al. Assessment of female fertility and carcinogenesis after 131-I therapy for differentiated thyroid carcinoma. J Nucl Med 1995;36:21.
175. Ayala C, Navarro E, Rodriguez JR, et al. Conception after iodine-131 therapy for differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 1998;8(11):1009.
176. Van Nostrun D, Neutze J, Atkins F. Side effects of “rational dose” iodine-131 therapy for metastatic well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma. J Nucl Med 1986;27:1519.
177. Edmonds CJ, Smith T. The long-term hazards of the treatment of thyroid cancer with radioiodine. Br J Radiol 1986;59:45.
178. Ekman ET, Lundell G, Tennvall J, Wallin G. Chemotherapy and multimodality treatment in thyroid carcinoma. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1990;23(3):523.
179. Tubiana M, Haddad E, Schlumberger M, et al. External radiotherapy in thyroid cancers. Cancer 1985;55:2062.
180. O'Connell MEA, A'Hern RP, Harmer CL. Results of external beam radiotherapy in differentiated thyroid carcinoma: a retrospective study from the Royal Marsden Hospital. Eur J Cancer
1994;30A:733.
181. Farahati J, Reiners C, Stuschke M, et al. Differentiated thyroid cancer. Impact of adjuvant external radiotherapy in patients with perithyroidal tumor infiltration (stage pT4). Cancer
1996;77(1):172.
182. Nel CJ, van Heerden JA, Goellner JR, et al. Anaplastic carcinoma of the thyroid: a clinicopathologic study of 82 cases. Mayo Clin Proc 1985;60:51.
183. Tan RK, Finley RK, Driscoll D, et al. Anaplastic carcinoma of the thyroid: a 24-year experience. Head Neck 1995;17:41.
184. Tennvall J, Lundell G, Hallquist A, et al., Swedish Anaplastic Thyroid Cancer Group. Combined doxorubicin, hyperfractionated radiotherapy, and surgery in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. Cancer
1994;74:1348.
185. Demeter JG, DeJong SA, Lawrence AM, Paloyan E. Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma: risk factors and outcome. Surgery 1991;110:956.
186. Harada T, Ito K, Shimaoka K, Hosoda Y, Yakumaru K. Fatal thyroid carcinoma. Anaplastic transformation of adenocarcinoma. Cancer 1977;39:2588.
187. Mitchell G, Huddart R, Harmer C. Phase II evaluation of high dose accelerated radiotherapy for anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. Radiother Oncol 1999;50(1):33.
188. Kim JH, Leeper RD. Treatment of anaplastic giant and spindle cell carcinoma of the thyroid gland with combination Adriamycin and radiation therapy: a new approach. Cancer 1983;52:954.
189. Hundahl SA, Fleming ID, Fremgen AM, Menck HR. A National Cancer Database report on 53,856 cases of thyroid carcinoma treated in the U.S., 19851995. Cancer 1998;83(12):2638.
190. Hazard JB, Hawk WA, Crile G. Medullary (solid) carcinoma of the thyroida clinicopathologic entity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1959;19:152.
191. Brunt LM, Wells SA Jr. Advances in the diagnosis and treatment of medullary carcinoma. Endocr Surg 1987;67(2):263.
192. Williams ED. Histogenesis of medullary carcinoma of the thyroid. J Clin Pathol 1966;19:114.
193. Williams ED. Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid gland. J Clin Pathol 1967;20:395.
194. Wells SA Jr, Baylin SB, Linehan WM, et al. Provocative agents and the diagnosis of medullary carcinoma of the thyroid gland. Ann Surg 1978;188:139.
195. Komminoth P. The RET proto-oncogene in medullary and papillary thyroid carcinoma. Molecular features, pathophysiology and clinical implications. Virchows Arch 1997;431(1):1.
196. O'Riordain DS, O'Brien T, Weaver AL, et al. Medullary thyroid carcinoma in multiple endocrine neoplasia types 2A and 2B. Surgery 1994;116:1017.
197. Farndon JR, Leight GS, Dilley WG, et al. Familial medullary thyroid carcinoma without associated enodcrinopathies: a distinct clinical entity. Br J Surg 1986;73:278.
198. Albores-Saavedra J, LiVolsi VA, Williams ED. Medullary carcinoma. Semin Diagn Pathol 1985;2:102.
199. Franc B, Rosenberg-Bourgin M, Caillou B, et al. Medullary thyroid carcinoma: search for histological predictors of survival (109 proband cases analysis). Hum Pathol 1998;29(10):1078.
200. Wells SA Jr, Chi DD, Toshima K, et al. Predictive DNA testing and prophylactic thyroidectomy in patients at risk for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. Ann Surg 1994;220:237.
201. Sone T, Fukunaga M, Otsuka N, et al. Metastatic medullary thyroid cancer: localization with iodine-131 Metaiodobenzylguanidine. J Nucl Med 1985;26:604.
202. Thomas CC, Cowan RJ, Albertson DA, Cooper MR. Detection of medullary carcinoma of the thyroid with I-131 MIBG. Clin Nucl Med 1994;19(12):1066.
203. Edington HD, Watson CG, Levine G, et al. Radioimmunoimaging of metastatic medullary carcinoma of the thyroid gland using an indium-11-labeled monoclonal antibody to CEA. Surgery
1988;104:1004.
204. Frank-Raue K, Bihl H, Dorrt U, et al. Somatostatin receptor imaging in persistent medullary thyroid carcinoma. Clin Endocrinol 1995;42:31.
205. Krausz Y, Rosier A, Guttmann H, et al. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy for early detection of regional and distant metastases of medullary carcinoma of the thyroid. Clin Nucl Med
1999;24(4):256.
206. Moley JF, Debenedetti MK, Dilley WG, Tisell LE, Wells SA. Surgical management of patients with persistent or recurrent medullary thyroid cancer. J Intern Med 1998;243(6):521.
207. Evans DB, Fleming JB, Lee JE, Cote G, Gagel RE. The surgical treatment of medullary thyroid carcinoma. Semin Surg Oncol 1999;16(1):50.
208. Duh QY, Sancho JJ, Greenspan FS, et al. Medullary thyroid carcinoma. The need for early diagnosis and total thyroidectomy. Arch Surg 1989;124:1206.
209. Pelizzo MR, Bernante P, Piotto A, et al. The extent of surgery for thyroid medullary cancer. Tumori 1994;80:427.
210. Modigliani E, Cohen R, Campos JM, et al. Prognostic factors for survival and for biochemical cure in medullary thyroid carcinoma: results in 899 patients. The GETC Study Group. Clin
Endocrinol 1998;48(3):265.
211. Chi DD, Moley JF. Medullary thyroid carcinoma: genetic advances, treatment recommendations, and the approach to the patient with persistent hypercalcitoninemia. Surg Oncol Clin North Am
1998;7(4):681.
212. McHenry CR, Oppenheim DS, Murphy T, et al. Familial nonmultiple endocrine neoplasia medullary thyroid carcinoma: an evolving clinical entity. Surgery 1992;112:729.
213. Block MA, Jackson CE, Tashjian AH Jr. Management of occult medullary thyroid carcinoma. Arch Surg 1978;113:368.
214. Tisell LE, Hansson G, Jansson S, Salander H. Reoperation in the treatment of asymptomatic metastasizing medullary thyroid carcinoma. Surgery 1986;99(1):60.
215. van Heerden JA, Grant CS, Gharib H, Hay ID, Ilstrup DM. Long-term course of patients with persistent hypercalcitoninemia after apparent curative primary surgery for medullary thyroid
carcinoma. Ann Surg 1990;212(4):395.
216. Chen H, Roberts JR, Ball DW, et al. Effective long-term palliation of symptomatic, incurable metastatic medullary thyroid cancer by operative resection. Ann Surg 1998;227(6):887.
217. Nguyen TD, Chassard JL, Lagarde P, et al. Results of postoperative radiation therapy in medullary carcinoma of the thyroid: a retrospective study by the French Federation of Cancer
Institutesthe Radiotherapy Cooperative Group. Radiother Oncol 1992;23:1.
218. Schlumberger M, Abdelmoumene N, Delisle NJ, Couette JE, Groupe d'Etude des Tumeurs a Calcitonine (GETC). Treatment of advanced medullary thyroid cancer with an alternating
combination of 5 FU-streptozocin and f FU-dacarbazine. Br J Cancer 1995;71:363.
219. Orlandi F, Caraci P, Berruti A, et al. Chemotherapy with dacarbazine and 5-fluorouracil in advanced medullary thyroid cancer. Ann Oncol 1994;5:763.
220. Zhang R, Straus FH, DeGroot LJ. Effective genetic therapy of established medullary thyroid carcinomas with murine interleukin-2: dissemination and cytotoxicity studies in a rat tumor model.
Endocrinology 1999;140(5):2152.
221. Soler MN, Milhaud G, Lekmine F, et al. Treatment of medullary thyroid carcinoma by combined expression of suicide and interleukin-2 genes. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1999;48(23):91.

222. Kebebew E, Tresler PA, Siperstein AE, Duh QY, Clark OH. Normal thyroid pathology in patients undergoing thyroidectomy for finding a RET gene germline mutation: a report of three cases and
review of the literature. Thyroid 1999;9(2):127.
223. Freyer G, Dazord A, Schlumberger M, et al. Psychosocial impact of genetic testing in familial medullary-thyroid carcinoma: a multicentric pilot evaluation. Ann Oncol 1999;10(1):87.
224. Friedberg MH, Coburn MC, Monchik JM. Role of surgery in stage IE non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the thyroid. Surgery 1994;116:1061.
225. Hamburger JI, Miller JM, Kini SR. Lymphoma of the thyroid. Ann Intern Med 1983;99:685.
226. Skarsgard ED, Connors JM, Robins RE. A current analysis of primary lymphoma of the thyroid. Arch Surg 1991;126:1199.
227. Rosen IB, Sutcliffe SB, Gospodarowicz MK, Chua T, Simpson WJ. The role of surgery in the management of thyroid lymphoma. Surgery 1988;104:1095.
228. Devine RM, Edis AJ, Banks PM. Primary lymphoma of the thyroid: a review of the Mayo Clinic experience through 1978. World J Surg 1981;5:33.
229. Haugen BRE, Nawaz S, Cohn A, et al. Secondary malignancy of the thyroid gland: a case report and review of the literature. Thyroid 1994;4(3):297.
230. Rosen IB, Walfish PG, Bain J, Bedard YC. Secondary malignancy of the thyroid gland and its management. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2(3):252.
231. Kossev P, LiVolsi VA. Lymphoid lesions of the thyroid: review in light of the Revised European-American Lymphoma Classification and upcoming World Health Organization Classification.
Thyroid 1999;9:1273.

SECTION 38.3 Parathyroid Tumors
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 38.3
Parathyroid Tumors
DOUGLAS L. FRAKER
Introduction
Primary Hyperparathyroidism
Pathology
Epidemiology
Clinical Presentation
Natural History
Differential Diagnosis
Treatment
Outcome
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Parathyroid neoplasia is a common endocrine problem, whereas parathyroid carcinoma is exceptionally rare. 1 Parathyroid carcinomas, as opposed to other endocrine
tumors that become less hormonally active when malignant, are hyperfunctional and characterized by severe elevations of serum calcium with associated renal and
bone symptoms.2 The clinical course is variable, but typically follows a pattern of local recurrence in the neck with late distant metastases to lung, bone, and liver.
The initial report of a parathyroid carcinoma was made by de Quervain in 1909. 3 He described a patient with a large locally invasive neck mass that was parathyroid
on histologic evaluation. The tumor was definitely malignant as the patient developed lung metastases after removal of the neck mass, but no signs or symptoms of
hypercalcemia were described. The initial description of severe hypercalcemia associated with parathyroid cancer was made three decades later by Armstrong. 4 The
rarity of parathyroid carcinoma limits reports to primarily small institutional series with occasional reviews of all experience reported in the medical literature. Even
institutions such as the Massachusetts General Hospital 5 or the Mayo Clinic 3 with extensive clinical interest in this disease have only one to two dozen cases in
clinical reviews spanning four to five decades. A detailed review by Obara and Fujimoto 2 identified 270 cases of parathyroid carcinoma in the English literature
between 1933 and 1991. An article from the National Cancer Database in the United States identified 286 cases of parathyroid cancer reported between 1985 and
1995.6 This single report more than doubles the number of cases in the literature for this rare disease. The epidemiology, pathology, clinical course, treatment, and
prognosis of this rare malignancy is described in relation to the much more common diagnoses of parathyroid adenoma and hyperplasia.

PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
The vast majority of parathyroid cancers are functional with excess production of parathyroid hormone (PTH) which results in the clinical syndrome of primary
hyperparathyroidism (HPT). The pathology of HPT can be grouped into three general categories: a single parathyroid adenoma (83% to 85% of cases), multiglandular
hyperplasia (15%), and parathyroid cancer (0.5% to 3.0%). 7 The proportion of HPT patients who truly have parathyroid cancer is likely to be well under the 2% of
cases more recently quoted. 2 The epidemiologic and pathologic characteristics of these three general categories of HPT are shown in Table 38.3-1.

TABLE 38.3-1. Comparison of the Various Causes of Primary Hyperparathyroidism

PATHOLOGY
Schantz and Castleman defined the pathologic criteria used to distinguish parathyroid carcinoma from benign parathyroid adenoma in a classic article in 1973. 8 Thick
fibrous bands, pleomorphic cells in a trabecular pattern, and a high incidence of mitotic figures are the chief distinguishing features 8,9 (Fig. 38.3-1 and see Table
38.3-1). Invasion of the glandular capsule and vascular invasion are also found with parathyroid carcinoma. However, as with other endocrine neoplasms, the
diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma strictly is difficult on histologic evaluation using the criteria outlined previously. 10,11 There is a spectrum of these changes present
in benign adenomas, atypical adenomas, and true carcinomas. Even histologic evidence of capsular or vascular invasion is not pathognomonic for parathyroid cancer
as spontaneous hemorrhage in large benign parathyroid adenomas may result in a similar histologic appearance. 12

FIGURE 38.3-1. Pathologic characteristics that are used to define a lesion as a parathyroid carcinoma are shown in these two panels. A: A low-power view
demonstrates dense fibrous bands with the cells arranged in a trabecular pattern ( arrowheads) and evidence of capsular invasion ( arrows). B: A high-power view
documents a high number of mitotic figures ( arrows) in one single field of view.

In addition to the histologic criteria, both the clinical course and the gross pathology observed at operation help to define a lesion as parathyroid cancer. 12 The typical

clinical presentation is discussed in greater detail here, but parathyroid carcinoma tends to have a higher serum calcium level, more marked symptoms of HPT, and
larger lesions that may be palpable in the neck. The operating surgeon finds a large lesion that is more firm than typical adenomas. 10 The color of parathyroid
carcinoma is frequently gray-brown versus the red-brown of benign lesions, reflecting the increased fibrous stroma within these tumors. 10 Most important, parathyroid
carcinoma may locally invade into adjacent structures such as the ipsilateral thyroid gland or overlying strap muscles of the neck. This gross pathologic feature is
infrequently seen with benign lesions. 8,9 and 10
In the past decade, several groups have used flow cytometry to analyze DNA content in parathyroid carcinomas compared with adenomas. In three series, a
consistent proportion between 31% and 56% of parathyroid carcinomas were documented to be aneuploid. 13,14 and 15 The DNA content of parathyroid adenomas is not
as consistent, with one group reporting no aneuploidy in 32 patients 13 and other groups reporting proportions in the range of one-third aneuploid similar to parathyroid
carcinoma.2 A second piece of information that these studies report is that aneuploidy is a prognostic indicator for parathyroid carcinoma. August reported that four
out of five patients with aneuploid parathyroid carcinoma died of disease with the fifth alive with extensive recurrence, while four of four patients with diploid
parathyroid carcinoma were cured with no evidence of recurrence after parathyroid surgery. 15
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The incidence of parathyroid cancer is most commonly reported in the context of primary HPT. Most endocrine surgeons report 0.5% to 4.0% of all HPT as being
parathyroid carcinoma (Table 38.3-2). Because the estimate of the annual incidence of primary HPT is reported to be 1 per 2000, 1 then if 1% of HPT is parathyroid
cancer, the incidence of this malignancy would be approximately 0.5 per 100,000 persons. This incidence is clearly an overestimation as it would place the annual
number of parathyroid cancers in the United States more than 1000 new cases, which greatly exceeds the actual number. Several tertiary institutions have reported
their total experience with parathyroid carcinoma over several decades in the setting of more than 1000 cases of primary HPT. The Mayo Clinic, 3 the Cleveland
Clinic, 16 and the University of Michigan 17 reported an overall proportion of parathyroid cancer in HPT of 0.6%, 0.47%, and 0.37% (see Table 38.3-2). However, even
these numbers may be overestimates as these tertiary institutions are more likely to be referred these patients with this rare diagnosis. A review from a tertiary referral
center in Padua, Italy, reported 5.2% of all patients operated on for HPT between 1980 and 1996 were parathyroid cancers. 18 This unusually high proportion does not
appear to be an overestimation due to inaccurate pathology as 13 of 16 had metastases and two had multiple local recurrences. Thompson at the University of
Michigan reported an incidence of two parathyroid carcinomas in 1450 initial parathyroid operations for HPT over the past two decades at the University of Michigan
for a percentage of 0.14%. 17 The National Cancer Database reported 286 cases of parathyroid cancer in a 10-year period. This group believed that it captured 60% to
80% of all cancers in the United States during that time interval. If that estimate is correct, then there are only 36 to 48 cases of parathyroid cancer annually in the
United States. With an incidence of 0.015 per 100,000 population, parathyroid cancer is one of the most rare of all human cancers. Because of this low incidence,
there is no American Joint Committee on Cancer Staging system for parathyroid cancer. 6

TABLE 38.3-2. Demographics, Proportion of Primary Hyperparathyroidism That Is Parathyroid Cancer, Tumor Size, and Calcium Levels in More Recent Institutional
Series of Parathyroid Cancer

The gender distribution is equal or has a slight female preponderance in most series and differs from benign parathyroid adenomas, which have a higher female
predominance2,6,7,9 (see Table 38.3-2). The age at diagnosis can vary between 19 and 81 and the median age in most series is between 45 and 51 years. The large
National Cancer Database series had essentially an equivalent gender distribution (51% male and 49% female subjects) and a mean and median age of 54.5 and
55.1 years, respectively. There was also no disproportional incidence by race in this report with 76.2% non-Hispanic white, 12.2% black, 7.3% Hispanic, and 4.2%
others.6 There are no documented etiologic causes for this malignancy, although there is a familial association in a few series. Parathyroid cancer has been reported
and documented in members of multiple endocrine neoplasia 1 kindreds. 19 In this autosomal dominant disease, the predominant endocrine abnormality is
multiglandular benign hyperplasia of the parathyroids. Familial non–multiple endocrine neoplasia 1 associated parathyroid cancer has been reported in siblings 20 and
in one report, several relatives across two generations had parathyroid carcinoma. 21 This study also reported other relatives with primary HPT who had atypical
adenomas, implying a connection between this benign pathologic entity and true parathyroid carcinoma. External radiation exposure has been correlated with
parathyroid neoplasms, but virtually all reports describe an association between radiation and the more common parathyroid adenoma, although there are isolated
case reports of patients with parathyroid carcinoma who had a history of radiation treatments in the distant past. 22 Patients with renal failure typically experience
secondary HPT with nonclonal hyperplasia of all parathyroid glands, but 13 cases of parathyroid cancer have been reported in the literature in this clinical setting. 23
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Because virtually all parathyroid carcinomas are functional, meaning they produce high and unregulated levels of PTH, the signs and symptoms of this disease relate
primarily to the consequences of this hormone excess. Specifically, various manifestations of renal disease associated with hypercalcemia and hypercalcuria such as
renal stones, renal colic, nephrocalcinosis, renal insufficiency, or all of these manifestations occur in up to 90% of cases 24,25 (Table 38.3-3). Also, the prevalence of
bone disease related to calcium absorption with osteoporosis and bone pain is much greater in parathyroid carcinoma than in patients with parathyroid adenoma, 26,27
with up to 70% of patients manifesting the symptoms. In nonmalignant parathyroid disease, it is unusual to have both renal and bone symptomatology documented at
the time of diagnosis. 28 However, these symptoms are present simultaneously at diagnosis in up to 50% of patients with parathyroid carcinoma (see Table 38.3-3).

TABLE 38.3-3. Comparison of the Incidence of Signs and Symptoms at Presentation in Patients with Parathyroid Carcinoma versus Parathyroid Adenoma

These amplified symptoms reflect the increased magnitude of the biochemical disturbances seen with parathyroid carcinoma. The level of total serum calcium is
significantly elevated in virtually all series of parathyroid carcinoma, with the mean values between 15 and 16 mg/dL compared with 11 to 12 mg/dL seen with

parathyroid adenomas 2,25 (see Table 38.3-3). Similarly, the PTH level in parathyroid carcinoma is consistently higher than for benign parathyroid disease, with more
than 70% of patients having a greater than fivefold increase over the upper limits of normal for PTH. 2,29 Because of the high degree of hypercalcemia, it is unusual for
patients to be asymptomatic at presentation with parathyroid carcinoma compared with patients with benign causes of HPT who are asymptomatic in more than 50%
of cases in some series.26,27 Up to 14% of patients with parathyroid carcinoma may present with hypercalcemic crisis manifested by a depressed level of
consciousness, dehydration, and extreme hypercalcemia. 5 The size of the typical parathyroid carcinoma is much larger than benign lesions. The median maximal
diameter in most series is between 3.0 and 3.5 cm compared with approximately 1.5 cm for benign adenomas 8,9 (see Table 38.3-2). This large mass translates into a
significant number of patients who present with a palpable neck mass ranging between 22% and 50% of cases. 9,24,25 Again, it is extremely unusual for patients with
benign lesions to have palpable abnormalities in the neck, and this is a clinical sign that strongly suggests parathyroid carcinoma. In 10% of cases, patients with
parathyroid carcinoma present with symptoms of hoarseness caused by compression or invasion of recurrent laryngeal nerve and vocal cord paresis. 2
NATURAL HISTORY
The best information regarding the natural history of parathyroid carcinoma comes from a detailed review of 163 cases reported between 1981 and 1989 2
(summarized in Table 38.3-4). At initial presentation, few patients with parathyroid carcinoma have metastases either to regional lymph nodes (less than 5%) or
distant sites (less than 2%). In the National Cancer Database series of 286 patients, only 16 (5.6%) had lymph node metastases noted at the time of initial surgery. 6
This report did not comment on the incidence of distant metastases and has a relatively short follow-up interval. A higher proportion of parathyroid carcinomas are
locally invasive into the thyroid gland, overlying strap muscles, recurrent laryngeal nerve, trachea, or esophagus. Some patients are not identified preoperatively or
intraoperatively as having parathyroid carcinoma and undergo parathyroid procedures as if to treat parathyroid adenoma. Only after review of the pathology following
this resection, or when these patients have either local recurrences or metastases is a correct diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma made. The incidence of not
recognizing parathyroid carcinomas at initial operation ranges between 11% from the Lahey Clinic series (one in nine), 30 to 36% in the M. D. Anderson series (5 of
14), 29 and up to 86% in the Cleveland Clinic series (six of seven). 16

TABLE 38.3-4. Clinicopathologic Features, Natural History, and Outcome in Patients with Prarthyroid Carcinoma

After surgical treatment, 40% to 60% of patients have recurrent disease at some point typically in the range of 2 to 5 years after the initial resection. 29,31 Since
parathyroid carcinomas are functional, serial measurements of calcium or PTH serve as ideal tumor markers for this malignancy. In patients followed closely,
hypercalcemia precedes physical evidence of recurrent disease in most cases. The most common location of recurrence is regionally either in the tissues of the neck
or in cervical lymph nodes, accounting for two-thirds of the recurrent cases. 2 Often the local recurrences in the neck are difficult to identify as they may be small,
multifocal, and involve the scar from the previous procedure. Use of ultrasound, sestamibi-thallium scanning, 32,33 and more recently positron emission tomographic
scanning, 34 may aid in this difficult diagnosis. Distant metastases occur in 25% of patients, primarily in the lungs but also in the bone and liver 2,35 (see Table 38.3-4).
More recently published series have reported a higher incidence of recurrence than prior studies. In nine patients from Brazil with parathyroid cancer with long-term
follow-up, five had local or nodal neck recurrence (55%), three had lung metastases (33%), and one had bone metastasis (11%). 36 In a study of 16 patients from Italy,
13 had distant metastases (nine lung alone, four lung plus bone) and 2 others had local neck recurrences. 8 The reasons for this high incidence of recurrence between
94% and 100% may be due to more accurate pathologic diagnosis excluding patients with atypical adenomas.
Patients who experience parathyroid carcinoma typically die of metabolic consequences and not directly from malignant growth. 35 For this reason, surgical treatment
to debulk parathyroid carcinoma, if possible, is indicated as medical management of the hypercalcemia of parathyroid carcinoma is difficult (see Treatment, later in
this chapter). The median survival after recurrent parathyroid cancer ranges between 3 and 5 years, with isolated case reports of patients surviving several decades
with intermittent surgical debulking. 31
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Other non-HPT causes of hypercalcemia can be ruled out primarily by the biochemical studies of serum PTH simultaneous with total and ionized serum calcium.
Secondary HPT in the setting of renal failure is clinically obvious by the concomitant renal disease. There are isolated reports of development of parathyroid
carcinoma in this clinical setting as well, however. 37 Once the diagnosis of primary HPT is established, the histopathologic diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma may be
difficult as discussed previously. 10,12 Supporting evidence of malignancy comes from markedly elevated calcium levels (greater than 14.0 mg/dL) and larger gland
sizes (greater than 3.0 cm). In most reported institutional series, it is likely that parathyroid carcinoma is overdiagnosed. 17,38 In one such study, a careful review of the
pathology in the context of the clinical course identified more than one-half of the patients with previously diagnosed parathyroid carcinomas as more appropriately
considered as benign or atypical adenomas. 38 This difficulty in correctly identifying parathyroid carcinoma is also reflected by the wide variation in clinical outcome
between different series. Some series report long-term disease-free survival at rates greater than 75%. One explanation for series in which outcomes are much better
than the norm is that they include in their analysis patients with atypical parathyroid adenomas that were not truly malignant. 17 Other investigators take an opposite
approach and include only cases in their institutional reviews that recur locally or manifest distant metastases. 28 This approach may underestimate the true incidence
of cases of parathyroid carcinoma because there is a subgroup with this disease that may be cured with an aggressive initial resection.
Local recurrence of parathyroid neoplasms after initial resection does not necessarily establish the diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma. Two patterns of benign lesions
that recur locally have been described. First, patients with a single parathyroid adenoma may have partial or incomplete resection of a gland such that there is an
isolated regrowth after the initial procedure in the exact position where the first abnormal gland was removed. 39 The recurrent gland grows in an area of fibrosis and
scar, and may well give the gross appearance of an invasive carcinoma, but detailed pathologic analysis of the initial or recurrent specimen shows no evidence of
carcinoma in terms of mitotic figures, cellular appearance, or fibrous bands. A second category of nonmalignant recurrent disease is a condition called
parathyromatosis. 37,40 Parathyromatosis is a diffuse seeding of the cervical tissue with parathyroid cells that implant and grow. This occurs when lesions that are being
excised have the capsule ruptured and are spilled or when lesions are partially removed with a raw surface of the adenoma exposed to the field of dissection. This
condition is much more difficult to treat than isolated local recurrence and is tantamount to a nonmetastasizing locally recurrent carcinoma, and this condition has
been described with lesions that have absolutely no pathologic or clinical manifestations of parathyroid carcinoma.
TREATMENT
The only effective treatment of parathyroid cancer is surgical resection. The most important component to achieve a favorable outcome is recognition by the operating
surgeon that a lesion is likely to be a parathyroid cancer, which allows performance of the appropriate en bloc resection of the tumor with all potential areas of
invasion at the initial operation ( Fig. 38.3-2).30,31 Patients with extremely high serum calcium levels (greater than 13.5 mg/dL) should lead the physician to suspect
parathyroid cancer preoperatively. Other clinical features that suggest parathyroid cancer are a palpable mass and hoarseness. Intraoperatively, if a large lesion is
identified, particularly if it is firm or scirrhous, then the operating surgeon should assume the lesion is parathyroid cancer and do an en bloc resection. The practice of
minimally invasive parathyroidectomy, which is appropriate in the vast majority of patients with HPT, should be altered in these clinical situations. 41 Parathyroid cancer
typically invades the ipsilateral thyroid lobe, and resection of the tumor with one or both thyroid lobes is frequently required to perform an adequate operation. 30 In
most series, long-term results in terms of local recurrence are significantly improved when an en bloc excision including thyroid is done as opposed to cases in which

only the parathyroid cancer is removed. 30,31 The recognition and diagnosis of parathyroid cancer preoperatively correlates strongly with a favorable outcome. In a
small series of seven patients from the Cleveland Clinic, six had parathyroid carcinomas that were not appreciated until after the procedure. 16 All of these patients had
recurrences, whereas the one case that was known to be a parathyroid cancer preoperatively underwent an en bloc resection with long-term disease-free survival.
The recurrent laryngeal nerve may be intimately involved or invaded by the parathyroid cancer. In these situations, patients frequently have preoperative hoarseness
due to the tumor invasion of the nerve. 2 Because the nerve is at risk for loss of function due to the malignant process itself, it is appropriate to resect the recurrent
laryngeal nerve if necessary to perform an en bloc excision during the initial procedure for parathyroid cancer. The increased potential for long-term local control
achieved by this approach outweighs the complication of postoperative vocal cord paralysis, which can be improved with techniques such as Teflon injection into the
paralyzed cord. Assessment of cervical lymph nodes, particularly level 6 paratracheal nodes and levels 3 and 4 internal jugular nodes, should be performed with node
dissection only for enlarged or firm lesions.

FIGURE 38.3-2. En bloc resection of an isolated recurrence of a parathyroid carcinoma as shown after a partial dissection. The parathyroid cancer is resected
together with overlying strap muscles and the left lobe of the thyroid gland. This en bloc specimen is being retracted laterally in clamps. The midline structure is the
trachea that is completely cleared of surrounding tissues. This patient is alive and well with no evidence of recurrent disease or recurrent hypercalcemia 3 years after
this resection for an isolated local recurrence.

For most cases of recurrent parathyroid carcinoma confined to the neck, the most appropriate treatment is aggressive reresection. However, as opposed to the initial
procedure in which the success rate is up to 40% to 60%, it is unusual to obtain long-term cures in patients who have to undergo reresection. 5 In a large series from
the Mayo Clinic, no patients who underwent reresection were cured. 3 However, there are selective patients described in the literature who have disease-free intervals
greater than 10 years after two or three local resections in the neck. 11,17 The benefit of sacrificing the recurrent laryngeal nerve is greatly decreased in patients
undergoing reresection for recurrent parathyroid cancer as most recurrences are multifocal. If a recurrent nodule involves the recurrent laryngeal nerve, there are
most likely other areas of parathyroid cancer that are adherent to the trachea, esophagus, and great vessels of the neck. Since it is impossible to remove all of these
vital structures, one is unlikely to obtain a cure by taking the nerve. However, in certain circumstances in which there is an isolated local recurrence that is involving
the nerve, it again should be sacrificed with an en bloc resection as those patients' conditions, in rare instances, may be salvaged by an aggressive surgical
procedure (see Fig. 38.3-2).
Nonsurgical forms of therapy for parathyroid carcinoma have generally poor results such that surgical treatment of distant metastases is appropriate in certain
situations. Pulmonary metastases as well as bone metastases should be resected, if possible, primarily to debulk tumor to decrease the magnitude of the
hypercalcemia. 42,43 However, occasionally long-term salvage is achieved in this group of patients with aggressive surgical treatment.
Radiation therapy, in general, does not result in meaningful antitumor responses. 44 Isolated case reports of long-term control exist, and radiation therapy should be
used in patients with unresectable recurrent cervical disease. 11 Various chemotherapeutic agents alone or in combination have been used for treatment of parathyroid
carcinoma with limited success. 44 Dacarbazine alone or in combination with 5-fluorouracil and cyclophosphamide have been reported to result in objective responses,
including one complete response in a patient with pulmonary metastases. 44,45 Other combination therapies have resulted in rare responses. Part of the problem with
the medical treatment of parathyroid carcinoma is that the rarity of this disease does not allow systematic evaluation of various combination therapies.
The second aspect of medical management for metastatic parathyroid carcinoma relates to the treatment of the hypercalcemia. 40Acute therapy of patients with
hypercalcemic crises or high serum calcium levels is similar to that used for other causes of symptomatic hypercalcemia. Volume loading with loop diuretics causing a
forced diuresis is the initial therapy. For patients with parathyroid carcinoma, the ultimate management of the hypercalcemia is directed at the tumor to decrease the
level of PTH, if possible, by surgical treatment. In situations in which surgical resections are no longer possible, the treatment of hypercalcemia is difficult, and this
metabolic abnormality is the primary cause of death for the majority of these patients. 26,27,31 The most effective agents in this setting are the bisphosphonates that
inhibit osteoclast bone resorption. 44,46 Two agents available in the United States are etidronate and pamidronate. Other agents used in other settings of
hypercalcemia such as plicamycin (formerly mithramycin) and calcitonin have limited benefit. 44 Gallium nitrate has also been used as an inhibitor of bone
reabsorption, but is limited by nephrotoxicity. 17,47 All agents used to date in the setting of high tumor burden from parathyroid carcinoma have a limitation that the
patients become refractory after initial treatment. Newer generations of more potent bisphosphonates may hold some promise for symptomatic management of this
group of patients.44
OUTCOME
The ability to achieve long-term survival in patients with parathyroid carcinoma ranges between 18% and 78% in various series. 2,5,24,25,48 The 5- and 10-year overall
survival rates for patients with resected parathyroid carcinoma are shown in Table 38.3-5. A summary of 251 patients analyzed shows a 5-year survival of 57% and a
10-year survival of 39%. The National Cancer Database reported a 5-year survival at 55.5% and a 10-year survival of 49.1% in 286 patients treated. 6 These two large
series accounted for the majority of cases of parathyroid cancer in the literature and provides an accurate assessment of outcome. The majority of patients who have
recurrences after initial surgery ultimately succumb to this disease because there is a much lower rate of salvage after second or third procedures. For patients with
local recurrences or distant metastases, only between 0% and 15% have long-term cures after secondary resections as there is no meaningful nonsurgical therapy.

TABLE 38.3-5. Five- and 10-Year Survival after Surgical Excision of Parathyroid Cancer

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Heath H 3rd, Hodgson SF, Kennedy MA. Primary hyperparathyroidism: incidence, morbidity, and potential economic impact in a community. N Engl J Med 1980;302:189.

2. Obara T, Fujimoto Y. Diagnosis and treatment of patietns with parathyroid carcinoma: an update and review. World J Surg 1991;15:738.
3. van Heerden JA, Weiland LH, ReMine WH, et al. Cancer of the parathyroid glands. Arch Surg 1979;114:475.
4. Armstrong HG. Primary carcinoma of the parathyroid gland with report of a case. Bull Acad Med 1938;11:105.
5. Wang C, Gaz RD. Natural history of parathyroid carcinoma: diagnosis, treatment and results. Am J Surg 1985;149:522.
6. Hundahl SA, Fleming ID, Fremgen AM, et al. Two hundred eighty-six cases of parathyroid carcinoma treated in the U.S. between 19851995. A National Cancer Database Report. Cancer
1999;86:538.
7. Rossi RL, ReMine SG, Clerkin EP. Hyperparathyroidism. Surg Clin North Am 1985;65:187.
8. Schantz A, Castleman B. Parathyroid carcinoma: a study of 70 cases. Cancer 1973;31:600.
9. Fujimoto Y, Obara T. How to recognize and treat parathyroid carcinoma. Surg Clin North Am 1987;56:343.
10. Smith JF, Coombs RRH. Histologic diagnosis of carcinoma of the parathyroid gland. J Clin Pathol 1984;37:1370.
11. Levin KE, Galante M, Clark OH. Parathyroid carcinoma versus parathyroid adenoma in patients with profound hypercalcemia. Surgery 1987;101:649.
12. LiVolsi VA, Hamilton R. Intraoperative assessment of parathyroid gland pathology: a common view from the surgeon and the pathologist. Am J Clin Pathol 1994;102:365.
13. Levin KE, Chew KL, Ljung BM, et al. Deoxyribonucleic acid cytometry helps identify parathyroid carcinomas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1988;67:779.
14. Obara T, Fujimoto Y, Hirayama A, et al. Flow cytometric DNA analysis of parathyroid tumors with special reference to its diagnostic and prognostic value in parathyroid carcinoma. Cancer
1990;65:1789.
15. August DA, Flynn SD, Jones MA, et al. Parathyroid carcinoma: the relationship of nuclear DNA content to clinical outcome. Surgery 1993;113:290.
16. Hakaim AG, Esselstyn CB Jr. Parathyroid carcinoma: 50-year experience at The Cleveland Clinic Foundation. Cleve Clin J Med 1993;60:331.
17. Sandelin K, Thompson NW, Bondeson L. Metastatic parathyroid carcinoma: dilemmas in management. Surgery 1991;110:978.
18. Favia G, Lumachi F, Polistina F, et al. Parathyroid carcinoma: sixteen new cases and suggestions for correct management. World J Surg 1998,22:1225.
19. Mallette LE, Bilezikian JP, Ketcham AS, et al. Parathyroid carcinoma in familial hyperparathyroidism. Am J Med 1974;57:642.
20. Wassif WS, Moniz CF, Friedman E, et al. Familial isolated hyperparathyroidism: a distinct genetic entity with an increased risk of parathyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrin Metabol 1993;77:1485.
21. Streeten EA, Weinstein LS, Norton JA, et al. Studies in a kindred with parathyroid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metabol 1992;75:362.
22. Takeichi N, Dohi K, Ito H, et al. Parathyroid tumors in atomic bomb survivors in Hiroshima: a review. J Radiat Res Suppl 1991;189.
23. Takami H, et al. Parathyroid carcinoma in a patient receiving long-term hemodialysis. Surgery 1999;125:239.
24. Shane E, Bilezikian JP. Parathyroid carcinoma: a review of 62 patients. Endocr Rev 1982;3:218.
25. Wynne AG, van Heerden J, Carney JA, et al. Parathyroid carcinoma: clinical and pathologic features in 43 patients. Medicine 1992;71:197.
26. Lafferty FW. Primary hyperparathyroidism. Arch Intern Med 1981;141:1761.
27. Nikkila MT, Saaristo JJ, Koivula TA. Clinical and biochemical features in primary hyperparathyroidism. Surgery 1989;105:148.
28. Vetto JT, Brennan MF, Woodruf J, et al. Parathyroid carcinoma: diagnosis and clinical history. Surgery 1993;114:882.
29. Anderson BJ, Samaan NA, Vassilopoulou-Sellin R, et al. Parathyroid carcinoma: features and difficulties in diagnosis and management. Surgery 1983;94:906.
30. Cohn K, Silverman M, Corrado J, et al. Parathyroid carcinoma: the Lahey Clinic experience. Surgery 1985;98:1095.
31. Sandelin K, Auer G, Bondeson L, et al. Prognostic factors in parathyroid cancer: a review of 95 cases. World J Surg 1992;16:724.
32. Lu G, Shih WJ, Ziu JY. Technetium-99m MIBI uptake in recurrent parathyroid carcinoma and brown tumors. J Nucl Med 1995;36:811.
33. Al-Sobhi S, Ashari LH, Ingemansson S. Detection of metastatic parathyroid carcinoma with Tc-99m sestamibi imaging. Clin Nucl Med 1999;24:21.
34. Neumann D, Esselstyn CB, Siciliano D, et al. Preoperative imaging of parathyroid carcinoma by positron emission tomography. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1994;103:741.
35. Sandelin K, Tullgren O, Farnebo LO. Clinical course of metastatic parathyroid cancer. World J Surg 1994;18:594.
36. Cordeiro AC, Montenegro FLM, Klucsar MAV, et al. Parathyroid carcinoma. Am J Surg 1998;175:52.
37. Rosen IB, Young JEM, Archibald SD, et al. Parathyroid cancer: clinical variations and relationship to autotransplantation. CJS 1994;37:465.
38. McKeown PP, McGarity WC, Sewell CW. Carcinoma of the parathyroid gland: Is it overdiagnosed? Am J Surg 1984;147:292.
39. Fraker DL, Travis WD, Merendino JJ, et al. Locally recurrent parathyroid neoplasms as a cause for recurrent and persistent primary hyperparathyroidism. Ann Surg 1991;213:58.
40. Rattner DW, Marrone GC, Kasdon E, et al. Recurrent hyperparathyroidism due to implantation of parathyroid tissue. Am J Surg 1985;149:745.
41. Norman J, Denham D. Minimally invasive radioguided parathyroidectomy in the reoperative neck. Surgery 1998;124:1088.
42. Flye MW, Brennan MF. Surgical resection of metastatic parathyroid carcinoma. Ann Surg 1981;193:425.
43. Obara T, Okamoto T, Ito Y, et al. Surgical and medical management of patients with pulmonary metastasis from parathyroid carcinoma. Surgery 1993;114:1040.
44. Shane E. Parathyroid carcinoma. Curr Ther Endocrinol Metab 1994;5:522.
45. Calandra DB, Cheijfec G, Foy BK, et al. Parathyroid carcinoma: biochemical and pathologic response to DTIC. Surgery 1984;96:1132.
46. Newrick PG, Braatvedt GD, Webb AJ, et al. Prolonged remission of hypercalcaemia due to parathyroid carcinoma with pamidronate. Postgrad Med J 1994;70:231.
47. Warrell RP, Issacs M, Alcock NW, et al. Gallium nitrate for treatment of refractory hypercalcemia from parathyroid carcinoma. Ann Intern Med 1987;107:683.
48. Holmes EC, Morton DL, Ketcham AS. Parathyroid carcinoma: a collective review. Ann Surg 1968;169:631.
49. Shortell CK, Andrus CH, Phillips CE, et al. Carcinoma of the parathyroid gland: a 30-year experience. Surgery 1991;110:704.
50. Wise SR, Quigley M, Saxe AW, et al. Hyperparathyroidism and cellular mechanisms of gastric acid secretion. Surgery 1990;108:1058.

SECTION 38.4 Adrenal Tumors
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 38.4
Adrenal Tumors
JEFFREY A. NORTON
HOP N. LE
Pathology of the Adrenal Cortex
Hyperplasia
Adrenal Cortical Adenoma
Adrenal Cortical Carcinoma
Clinical Presentations of Adrenal Cortical Neoplasms
Cushing's Syndrome (Hypercortisolism)
Conn's Syndrome (Primary Aldosteronism)
Incidental Adrenal Mass
Sex Hormone Excess
Treatment of Adrenal Cortical Neoplasms
Adrenal Cortical Adenoma
Adrenal Cortical Carcinoma
Chemotherapy
Ectopic Adrenocorticotropic Hormone Syndrome
Pheochromocytoma
Oncogene
Pathology
Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis
Localization Studies
Management
Malignant Pheochromocytomas
Chapter References

PATHOLOGY OF THE ADRENAL CORTEX
HYPERPLASIA
The term hyperplasia is defined as an increased number of cells. 1 It is a pathologic change associated with increased function or compensatory change. When a
pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)–secreting tumor produces hypercortisolism (Cushing's disease), the most common form of endogenous
hypercortisolism, the adrenal gland is approximately twice normal size. The weight of each hyperplastic adrenal is between 6 and 12 g (normal adrenal weighs
between 3 and 6 g). Microscopically there is a widened inner zone of the compact zona reticularis and a sharply demarcated outer zone of clear cells. Adrenal glands
in ectopic ACTH syndrome are larger in size, weighing between 12 and 30 g. Macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (3-cm adrenocortical nodules weighing between 30
and 100 g) usually is a secondary response of the adrenal to ACTH, but may occur with primary adrenal pathology. Primary pigmented micronodular adrenal
hyperplasia (1- to 5-mm nodules with pigmented appearance and normal glandular weight) is more likely to be autonomous and to occur in children 2 and can occur in
a familial pattern. 2

ADRENAL CORTICAL ADENOMA
Adrenal adenoma is a benign neoplasm of adrenal cortical cells that may possess functional autonomy. 1 In general, an adenoma does not exceed 5 cm in diameter
nor 100 g in weight. Some cellular pleomorphism and tumor necrosis may be present, but is rare. It is not possible to describe the exact functional type of neoplasm
based solely on histology, although there are consistent differences. Adenomas produce syndromes of hypercortisolism and hyperaldosteronism and seldom produce
adrenogenital syndromes. Tumors larger than 6 cm that produce adrenogenital syndromes are usually carcinoma. Pleomorphism, tumor necrosis, and mitotic activity
are more common in malignant tumors. The prognosis of adrenal cortical adenoma producing Cushing's syndrome is excellent, and surgical resection invariably
produces cure. The prognosis of adrenal cortical adenomas producing hyperaldosteronism may not be as favorable. Resection is followed by a favorable response in
blood pressure and serum level of potassium; however, 30% of patients develop recurrent hypertension. Adenomas that produce the adrenogenital syndrome have
the least favorable outcome, because many of these tumors are really carcinomas. 3

ADRENAL CORTICAL CARCINOMA
Adrenal cortical carcinoma is a malignant neoplasm of adrenal cortical cells demonstrating partial or complete histologic and functional differentiation. Adrenal cortical
carcinomas are rare and compose between 0.05% and 0.20% of all cancers. This incidence translates to a rate of only 2 per million in the world population. Women
develop functional adrenal cortical carcinomas more commonly than men. However, men develop nonfunctioning malignant adrenal tumors more often than women.
There is a bimodal occurrence by age, with a peak incidence less than 5 years and a second peak in the fourth and fifth decade. Adrenal cortical carcinoma has been
described as part of a complex hereditary syndrome, including sarcoma, breast, and lung cancer. 4 Studies suggest that loss of heterozygosity on the short arm of
chromosome 11 (11p) may be important in the pathogenesis of adrenocortical cancer. 5 Germline P53 mutations do not appear to be involved. 6 In a study from a
region in Brazil with a tenfold higher incidence of adrenocortical cancer, eight of nine tumors had an increase in genetic material in the chromosomal region 9q34,
suggesting that these changes may also be important. 7 In addition, deficiency of 21-hydroxylase (P-450c21), an essential enzyme for zona glomerulosa and
fasciculata function, has also been implicated. Prevalence of heterozygous germline mutations in the P-450c21 gene has been noted to be increased in patients with
adrenocortical tumors.8 The myriad of genetic changes seen in different studies of these tumors may explain the association of adrenocortical cancer with complex
hereditary syndromes.
Adrenal cortical carcinomas are greater than 6 cm in size and weigh between 100 and 5000 g. Areas of necrosis and hemorrhage are common. Invasion and
metastases also occur. Microscopically, the appearance is variable. Cells with big nuclei, hyperchromatism, and enlarged nucleoli are all consistent with malignancy. 1
Nuclear pleomorphism is more common in tumors larger than 500 g. Vascular invasion and many mitoses are diagnostic of malignancy. Broad desmoplastic bands
are associated with metastatic potential of tumors. The diagnosis of malignancy in cortical tumors that weigh between 50 and 100 g is less certain. Furthermore, the
distinction between adrenal and renal carcinoma may also be difficult. Immunostaining for vimentin, epithelial membrane antigen, cytokeratin, and blood group
antigens may be used to distinguish the two diagnoses. Adrenal tumors stain positive for vimentin, whereas renal carcinoma is negative for vimentin but positive for
the others. 9 Although the difference in natural history between benign and malignant adrenal cortical neoplasms is clear, it is not always possible to histologically
separate one from the other. The only reliable, single criterion is the presence of nodal or distant metastases. The data used to differentiate benign from malignant
adrenocortical neoplasms include whether and what type of hormone is produced, amount of tumor necrosis, fibrosis, inhibin, 21-hydroxylase deficiency, vascular
invasion, mitoses, and tumor weight (Table 38.4-1). The detection of mitotic activity and venous invasion suggest a malignant tumor. 10 Aneuploidy is also associated
with cancer.11 Quantitative nuclear analysis demonstrates that nuclei from adrenal cancers are larger than adenomas, and DNA density is diploid in adenomas and
aneuploid in carcinomas. 12 A final criterion is based on the observation that cells from carcinomas produce abnormal amounts of androgens and 11-deoxysteroids. 13
However, this is merely suggestive of malignancy, because only 10% of malignant tumors produce masculinization whereas the rest secrete cortisol, aldosterone, or
nothing (see Table 38.4-1).

TABLE 38.4-1. Diagnosis of Malignancy in Adrenal Cortical Neoplasm

CLINICAL PRESENTATIONS OF ADRENAL CORTICAL NEOPLASMS
CUSHING'S SYNDROME (HYPERCORTISOLISM)
Signs
Cushing's syndrome, or hypercortisolism, is the result of excessive secretion of ACTH by a pituitary tumor, cortisol by an adrenal tumor, or ACTH by an ectopic
source. Determining the cause of the hypercortisolism involves performing multiple tests in a logical sequence ( Fig. 38.4-1). Treatment should aim to cure the
hypercortisolism and eliminate any tumor that threatens the patient's health, while minimizing the chance of endocrine deficiency or long-term dependence on
medications. 14 The signs and symptoms of hypercortisolism are ubiquitous and diverse; nearly every organ in the body is affected. 15 However, there is no single
symptom or sign that is common to every patient. Although hypercortisolism is the most common presentation for adrenal cortical neoplasms, Cushing's syndrome is
rare, with an estimated incidence of only 10 per million population. 16 Cushing's syndrome can also rarely occur in children. 16 The most common cause of
hypercortisolism is iatrogenic administration of steroids to treat other diseases. The most common cause of endogenous hypercortisolism is a pituitary tumor that
makes ACTH, or Cushing's disease. Hypercortisolism is not usually associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1), although it can be present in this
familial syndrome. It has been reported to be present in 5% of patients with sporadic Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES) and 19% of patients with ZES and MEN 1. 17

FIGURE 38.4-1. Flow diagram for evaluation of a patient with suspected hypercortisolism. ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; Bil., bilateral; cal, calcitonin; CT,
computed tomography; Dex, dexamethasone; MR, magnetic resonance imaging; nl, normal; PP, pancreatic polypeptide; PPNAD, primary pigmented nodular
adrenocortical disease; VIP, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide.

Progressive weight gain is the most universal symptom of patients with hypercortisolism. Obesity is usually truncal, and patients have thin extremities due to muscle
wasting. Increased fat in the dorsal neck region combined with kyphosis secondary to osteoporosis gives the appearance of a “buffalo hump.” Serial photographs
show a rounding of the face. Increased blood pressure is mild and caused by excess mineralocorticoid secretion. Striae are reliable clinical signs of Cushing's
syndrome. Hirsutism consists of excessive fine hair on face, upper back, and arms. Virilization, including clitoromegaly, deep voice, and balding, suggest
adrenocortical carcinoma. Glucose intolerance with hyperglycemia is common, and patients may present with diabetes mellitus. Weakness secondary to muscle
atrophy is a common complaint and is especially common in ectopic ACTH syndrome with hypokalemia. Menstrual irregularity or amenorrhea is common in women,
whereas men with Cushing's syndrome have loss of libido or impotency. In children, the most common presenting sign is obesity and an arrest of normal growth with
short stature. Dilatation of blood vessels and thinning of the subcutaneous tissue give the face a ruddy appearance. Mental changes vary from mild depression to
severe psychosis and appear to correlate directly with serum levels of cortisol and ACTH. Hypokalemia worsens the weakness associated with Cushing's syndrome
and suggests the diagnosis of adrenocortical carcinoma or ectopic ACTH syndrome. Immunosuppression results in unusual infections, including cryptococcosis,
aspergillosis, nocardiosis, Pneumocystis carinii, and necrotizing fasciitis. 18,19,20 and 21 The early diagnosis of Cushing's syndrome depends primarily on a knowledge of
the many different signs and symptoms of the disorder and a high clinical index of suspicion. 22
Workup and Diagnosis
The initial step in the workup of a patient with presumptive hypercortisolism is to establish biochemically whether hypercortisolism is, in fact, present. The second step
is to determine whether the hypercortisolism is “pituitary dependent” or “pituitary independent,” and the final step is to determine the exact etiology (see Fig. 38.4-1).
Current laboratory testing allows the correct diagnosis in nearly every case. 14,15
ESTABLISHING HYPERCORTISOLISM. Urinary excretion of unmetabolized (“free”) cortisol is directly proportional to the amount of free cortisol in the plasma. As the

cortisol-binding globulin becomes saturated (plasma cortisol levels of 20 µg/dL), small increases in cortisol secretion produce exponential increases in urinary free
cortisol. This amplification effect makes 24-hour urinary free cortisol the single best measurement to discriminate normal from hypercortisolemic states. The overnight
single-dose dexamethasone test (see Fig. 38.4-1) works because of lack of normal feedback (Fig. 38.4-2) that occurs in all forms of hypercortisolism. Normal subjects
given 1 mg of dexamethasone orally at 11:00 p.m. have plasma cortisol levels of less than 5 µg/dL at 8:00 a.m. the next day. Patients with endogenous
hypercortisolism do not suppress and have cortisol levels greater than 5 µg/dL. The major disadvantage of this test is a 3% incidence of false-negatives (patients with
Cushing's syndrome whose levels suppress). This test may also have false-positives (3%), including depression, alcoholism, stress, and primary cortisol resistance. A
normal single-dose dexamethasone test and urinary free cortisol (less than 100 µg/d in most laboratories) virtually exclude the diagnosis of hypercortisolism.

FIGURE 38.4-2. Model of cortisol secretion indicates the mechanism of dexamethasone suppression and corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) stimulation of normal
cortisol secretion. ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone.

ETIOLOGY OF HYPERCORTISOLISM. Patients with pituitary tumor (Cushing's disease) respond to 1 µg/kg corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) by increasing plasma

ACTH and cortisol levels, whereas patients with depression or other stress diseases have a blunted ACTH response to CRH 23 (see Fig. 38.4-1 and Fig. 38.4-2). The
CRH test also distinguishes pituitary tumor from ectopic secretion of ACTH. Twenty-nine of 33 patients with Cushing's disease had increased plasma ACTH and
cortisol levels after a CRH test, whereas none of 8 with ectopic ACTH responded. 24 Patients with Cushing's syndrome have abnormalities in the diurnal rhythm of
plasma levels of cortisol and ACTH. Serial samples over days are necessary because patients with Cushing's disease can have episodic secretion of cortisol.
Nevertheless, a low midnight cortisol level (less than 2 µg/dL) excludes the diagnosis of endogenous hypercortisolism. Determination of plasma ACTH levels may also
be helpful. Patients with primary adrenal tumors or hyperplasia have undetectable or low plasma ACTH levels, those with pituitary-dependent hypercortisolism have
intermediate levels, and those with ectopic ACTH-producing tumors have very high levels; approximately 60% of these patients have ACTH levels greater than 300
pg/mL. Radioimmunoassays for ACTH in plasma have been difficult to perform reliably and interpret because of platelet-associated proteases that degrade ACTH.
Samples must be collected using recommended procedures, including prechilled tubes on ice. Urinary 17-ketosteroids can help the differential diagnosis of
hypercortisolism. Low levels (less than 10 mg/d) suggest an adrenal adenoma, and very high levels (more than 60 mg/d) occur more commonly in patients with
adrenal cancer and ectopic ACTH. Hypokalemia is seen in most patients with ectopic ACTH (16 of 16 in one series) and in only 10% of patients with Cushing's
disease. 25
The standard dexamethasone suppression test is the most useful test in establishing the cause of hypercortisolism (see Fig 38.4-1 and Fig 38.4-2). The expected
results are that urinary free cortisol levels will be markedly suppressed when normal subjects receive a low dose (2 mg) of dexamethasone, but levels do not suppress
in patients with Cushing's syndrome. High-dose dexamethasone (8 mg/d) suppresses urinary levels of free cortisol to less than 50% of baseline levels in patients with
pituitary-dependent hypercortisolism (Cushing's disease), but it does not suppress levels in patients with primary adrenal causes of hypercortisolism or ectopic ACTH
syndrome. This single test makes the diagnosis of Cushing's syndrome and determines the cause of hypercortisolism with an accuracy rate of approximately 95%.
The metyrapone test, which is a stimulation test in patients with pituitary Cushing's disease, can be complementary to the dexamethasone suppression test, and
combining both tests results in greater accuracy than with either test alone. 26
RADIOLOGIC EVALUATION OF HYPERCORTISOLISM. Computed tomography (CT) scans of the sella detect a tumor in only 0% to 15% of patients with pituitary-dependent

Cushing's disease, and detect minor abnormalities in 23% to 60%. Most ACTH-secreting tumors are microadenomas (less than 5 mm). Pituitary magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) studies, even with gadolinium, have similar resolution. In patients with pituitary-dependent hypercortisolism, CT and MR may be normal, but bilateral
petrosal sinus sampling for ACTH concentrations detects the side with a tumor in most cases. 27 Data indicate that this study is the single best method to differentiate a
pituitary from an ectopic ACTH-producing tumor. The study requires bilateral sampling of the inferior petrosal sinus and peripheral veins for plasma ACTH levels
before and after CRH. A petrosal sinus to peripheral plasma ACTH level of greater than 3 after CRH administration correctly identifies patients with Cushing's disease
(sensitivity, 100%) with few false-positive results (specificity, 100%). Furthermore, petrosal sinus sampling provides correct localization of the ACTH-producing
microadenoma in most patients.27 It is the study of choice both to diagnose and localize pituitary tumors in patients with Cushing's disease.
Adrenal CT can detect normal adrenal glands in most patients. CT can reliably distinguish cortical hyperplasia from tumor. 28 CT has great sensitivity (more than 95%);
however, it lacks specificity. In a patient with Cushing's syndrome, early detection of an adrenal neoplasm by CT simplifies the workup. CT can be used to image the
primary tumor plus local and distant metastases in patients with cancer. In these cases, the primary tumor is usually greater than 6 cm. 29 Approximately 15% of
patients with Cushing's syndrome have a primary adrenal neoplasm as the source of the hypercortisolism. Unilateral adrenal tumors require the detection of a normal
adrenal gland on the contralateral side. Adrenal hyperplasia may also be detected if both glands appear enlarged. MRI may be able to add specificity to the sensitivity
of CT. MRI may be able to distinguish adrenal adenoma from carcinoma and pheochromocytoma by the appearance on the T2-weighted image. Adenomas appear
darker than the liver on the T2 MRI. Carcinomas, whether primary adrenocortical or metastatic, appear as bright as or slightly brighter than the liver on T2 image.
Pheochromocytomas appear much brighter (three times) than the liver on T2 MRI. 29
Radioisotope imaging of adrenals using labeled iodocholesterol, such as 131I-6-b-iodomethylnorcholesteral, can be used to distinguish adenoma from hyperplasia. 30 It
can help differentiate a benign cortical neoplasm (adenoma), which usually takes up iodocholesterol (images), from a malignant cortical neoplasm (carcinoma), which
usually does not. 31,32 This is not absolute, however, because adrenal cortical carcinomas may take up iodocholesterol and be “hot” on scan. 33 Iodocholesterol scan
can be helpful in micronodular hyperplasia in which bilateral uptake confirms the diagnosis. It can image ectopic rests of adrenal tissue. The disadvantages of
radioiodocholesterol scans are exposure to radiation, limited isotope availability, and poor imaging of malignant adrenal neoplasms.
INTERPRETATION OF WORKUP FOR CUSHING'S SYNDROME. Once the biochemical tests confirm endogenous hypercortisolism, the remainder of the workup can pinpoint

its cause. If it is caused by an adrenal cortical neoplasm, the workup will produce the following results: (1) imaging of the tumor on CT and MRI, (2) low plasma ACTH
levels with elevated serum cortisol levels, and (3) no suppression of urinary free cortisol level with high-dose dexamethasone. If criterion number 1 is absent but
numbers 2 and 3 are present, primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease should be ruled out by iodocholesterol scan (see Fig. 38.4-1). If criteria numbers 1
and 3 are present but ACTH levels are consistently elevated, urinary catecholamines, vanillylmendelic acid (VMA), and metanephrines should be measured because
the patient may have an ACTH-producing pheochromocytoma.34
In ectopic ACTH syndrome, one finds (1) enlargement of both adrenals on CT, (2) elevated plasma ACTH levels, (3) no suppression with high-dose dexamethasone,
and (4) no evidence of pituitary ACTH secretion on petrosal sinus sampling. 35 Bronchial carcinoid tumors are the most common site of ectopic ACTH secretion and
are potentially curable. Lobectomy is required, because a significant proportion has nodal metastases. Some bronchial ACTH-producing carcinoid tumors may
suppress with dexamethasone, but the false suppression of ectopic ACTH-producing tumors is rare. 35 Malignant tumors, such as Ewing's sarcoma, have been rarely
determined to secrete a CRH-like factor that causes Cushing's syndrome. 36 Studies from the Netherlands suggest that OctreoScan (somatostatin receptor
scintigraphy) may be useful to image the source of ectopic ACTH. It correctly identifies 80% of ACTH-secreting carcinoid tumors (either bronchial or thymic
carcinoids). 37
In Cushing's disease (pituitary adenoma), one expects to find (1) bilateral hyperplasia of the adrenal glands, (2) normal or mildly elevated plasma ACTH levels, (3) no
suppression with low-dose dexamethasone and suppression with high-dose dexamethasone, and (4) localization with petrosal sinus sampling. Occasionally (less than
5% of instances) results may be confused with ectopic ACTH syndrome. This is not common, 38 however, and most studies show that petrosal sinus sampling
eliminates the ambiguity.
CONN'S SYNDROME (PRIMARY ALDOSTERONISM)
Signs, Symptoms, and Diagnosis
Aldosterone overproduction with elevated plasma levels is the cause of hypertension in patients with primary aldosteronism, or Conn's syndrome. The most common
cause of primary aldosteronism is an aldosterone-producing adenoma; next is idiopathic hyperplasia and last is carcinoma. Secondary aldosteronism, which occurs
with renal artery stenosis, cirrhosis, and conditions of decreased kidney perfusion, is diagnosed by an increase in plasma renin activity.
Hypertension, hypokalemia, hyperaldosteronism, and decreased plasma renin levels are essential for the diagnosis of primary aldosteronism. Primary
hyperaldosteronism is also associated with weakness, muscle cramps, polyuria, and polydipsia. These clinical signs are due to hypokalemia. Hypertension is usually
not severe and is mostly diastolic (diastolic pressure more than 90 mm Hg).
The serum potassium level is usually less than 3.5 mEq/L. 39 Another possible diagnosis is essential hypertension treated with diuretics, although patients with that
diagnosis seldom have potassium levels less than 3.5 mEq/L. All diuretics and antihypertensive medications should be stopped and 24-hour urinary potassium
excretion measured. In most patients with primary aldosteronism, 24-hour urinary excretion of potassium is greater than 30 mEq. Patients with primary
hyperaldosteronism have elevated plasma levels of aldosterone and low levels of renin activity. Measurement of messenger RNA (mRNA) in the kidney and adrenal

gland of patients with aldosteronoma also has demonstrated decreased levels of renin mRNA. 40 The plasma aldosterone-renin ratio is usually greater than 30. Final
evidence for the diagnosis of primary hyperaldosteronism relies on the inability to lower plasma aldosterone levels and raise plasma renin activity after captopril. 41
The patient takes 25 mg of captopril orally in the morning. Two hours later, plasma levels of aldosterone and renin activity are measured. In normal subjects and
patients with essential hypertension, captopril decreases plasma aldosterone levels and increases plasma renin activity. In patients with primary aldosteronism,
plasma levels of aldosterone and renin activity do not change. A post-captopril plasma aldosterone level greater than 15 ng/dL and an aldosterone-renin ratio greater
than 50 are diagnostic of primary aldosteronism ( Table 38.4-2).

TABLE 38.4-2. Diagnosis of Primary Aldosteronism

Adenoma versus Hyperplasia
Once the diagnosis of primary aldosteronism is established, the next important consideration is the etiology—whether the patient has idiopathic adrenal hyperplasia
(IAH) or a tumor that produces aldosterone ( Table 38.4-3). The exact cause is critical because drug treatment is indicated for IAH, and surgery is indicated for a
neoplasm. Measurement of plasma aldosterone concentrations with respect to postural changes is a relatively quick biochemical test to differentiate between the two.
A decrease or no change in the serum level of aldosterone measured at 8:00 a.m. and noon in the upright position after overnight recumbence is consistent with an
adenoma. The accuracy of this test is between 75% and 100%.

TABLE 38.4-3. Etiology of Primary Aldosteronism: Idiopathic Adrenal Hyperplasia (IAH) versus Neoplasm

CT can image approximately 75% to 90% of aldosteronomas. 42 CT may miss small tumors. The contralateral adrenal cortex in a patient with an aldosteronoma
appears thin on CT. Iodocholesterol scans with 131I-b-iodomethyl-19-norcholesterol can image 88% of aldosteronomas. The advantage of these nuclear studies over
CT is the provision of functional information about the neoplasm. In patients with IAH, the scan shows symmetrical uptake in both adrenal glands; and in patients with
adrenal carcinoma causing hyperaldosteronism, the study may show no uptake by the tumor, whereas in adenomas tumor uptake is usually evident.
The single study of choice to determine if hyperaldosteronism is caused by a tumor or hyperplasia is sampling of the adrenal veins for aldosterone. 42 The procedure is
performed by simultaneous selective catheterization of both adrenal veins and a peripheral vein. Serum levels of aldosterone and cortisol are measured at each site
before and after ACTH. Aldosteronomas make aldosterone in response to ACTH. A unilateral elevation of aldosterone level or of the aldosterone-cortisol ratio
indicates the presence of an aldosterone-secreting adenoma. Bilateral levels of aldosterone that are similar and greater than peripheral levels are consistent with IAH.
Adrenal venous sampling for aldosterone (96%) is more sensitive than CT (75%) and adrenal venography (78%) in prospective comparisons. 42 If CT is nondiagnostic,
venous sampling is the study of choice to distinguish a tumor from hyperplasia.
Treatment
The management of primary aldosteronism depends on the diagnosis. Idiopathic adrenal hyperplasia is best managed medically with spironolactone or amiloride in
conjunction with other antihypertensive drugs. Another drug with potential for managing the hypokalemia and hypertension associated with primary aldosteronism
(both IAH and adenoma) is the calcium channel blocker nifedipine. Because aldosteronomas are usually small benign adenomas, it is now preferable to use a
laparoscopic approach for unilateral adrenalectomy in patients with aldosteronoma. The laparoscopic approach is associated with less pain and morbidity. 43,44
Results for resection of an aldosteronoma have not been entirely satisfactory. A high percentage of patients initially become normotensive and normokalemic
postoperatively (approximately 95% dependent on accurate diagnosis). However, 20% to 30% of patients develop recurrent hypertension within 2 to 3 years. This has
caused some physicians to advise against surgery and recommend long-term medical management. This therapy has been demonstrated to effectively control blood
pressure and serum level of potassium in patients with aldosteronoma for periods of up to 5 years. 45 Aldosterone-producing adrenocortical carcinomas are rare (2% of
all carcinomas). 46 Treatment is similar to other patients with adrenal carcinoma and is discussed later (see the section Treatment of Adrenal Cortical Neoplasms).
INCIDENTAL ADRENAL MASS
High-resolution CT scans have resulted in a new diagnostic problem: an incidental adrenal mass detected by CT. Unexpected adrenal masses are seen in 0.6% of
abdominal CT scans. The majority of these are benign adrenal cortical adenomas, which occur in 9% of autopsies. 47 However, one report indicates that an
asymptomatic 3-cm adrenal mass that was followed subsequently was found to be metastatic adrenocortical carcinoma. 48 Of 311 incidentally discovered adrenal
tumors, adrenocortical carcinoma was diagnosed in 21 cases (7%). 49
The suggested evaluation of an incidental adrenal mass (incidentaloma) is given in Figure 38.4-3. Two questions arise. Is the tumor functional? Is it cancer?

FIGURE 38.4-3. Flow diagram for management of incidentaloma. +, yes; –, no; CT, computed tomography; VMA, vanillylmendelic acid.

The first step in evaluation of an incidentally discovered adrenal mass is a careful history and physical examination, including blood pressure. 50 The clinician should
examine for evidence of weight change, weakness or hypokalemia, Cushing's syndrome, hypertension, virilization, feminization, change in menstruation, and
evidence of occult malignancy (stool guaiac, pap smear, anemia). Laboratory evaluation should consist of a 24-hour urine collection for free cortisol, VMA,
metanephrines, and catecholamines. Twenty-four-hour urinary levels of free cortisol are indicated to rule out Cushing's syndrome. Patients with incidentalomas and
no stigmata of Cushing's syndrome have been identified who have occult hypercortisolism. These individuals are fairly uncommon but can be identified by measuring
a 24-hour urine sample for free cortisol or a low-dose dexamethasone suppression test. 51 If urinary levels of catecholamines or catecholamine metabolites are
elevated, the diagnosis is pheochromocytoma (see the section regarding management in Pheochromocytoma, later). In addition, the serum potassium concentration is
used to exclude an aldosteronoma. Plasma levels of aldosterone and renin activity should be measured in any patient with hypertension and hypokalemia. Hormonal
screening for an excess of androgens or estrogens is limited to patients with clinical signs suggestive of these disorders. 50
The size of an adrenal mass on CT is an important determinant of a potentially malignant tumor. Adrenal cortical carcinomas are generally greater than 6 cm in
diameter, and benign lesions are less than 6 cm. Nevertheless, a smaller lesion should not be totally ignored. Early diagnosis may lead to discovery of a small adrenal
cortical carcinoma, which may lead to better prognosis and survival. Patients with primary adrenal cancers less than 5 cm in size have a better prognosis than those
with larger tumors. Most recently, because of decreased morbidity with laparoscopic excision, some have advocated surgery for incidentalomas of 4 cm in size,
especially in younger patients. 52 CT can accurately image normal glands, hyperplastic adrenal glands, and neoplasms, but it can only distinguish benign from
malignant neoplasms by criteria such as size, direct invasion, or distant metastases. 53
Fine-needle aspiration for cytology of an adrenal mass has limited ability to differentiate benign from malignant primary adrenal lesions. Fine-needle aspiration may
be catastrophic in a patient with an unsuspected pheochromocytoma, 53 so urinary catecholamines are indicated to exclude a pheochromocytoma before needle
biopsy. In patients with suspected metastatic disease to the adrenal or lymphoma, needle aspiration may be helpful. 47 In patients with known primary cancers,
fine-needle aspiration can reliably diagnose adrenal metastasis. 90 Because it cannot distinguish between benign and malignant primary adrenal tumors, fine-needle
aspiration cytology is not routinely recommended.
The suggested approach to an asymptomatic adrenal mass is outlined in Figure 38.4-3. Biochemical assessment should be performed to exclude hormonal function of
the tumor. The size of the tumor is assessed. Size greater than 4 cm is an indication for surgical resection, especially in a younger patient. The incidence of cancer in
solid adrenal masses equal to 6 cm is estimated to be between 35% and 98%. 50 Laparoscopic excision of tumors smaller than 6 cm in size is recommended because
of less pain and morbidity. Laparoscopic excision of large adrenal tumors (greater than 6 cm) is not recommended because a high proportion of these tumors are
malignant. 54 However, some suggest that size is not a contraindication to the laparoscopic approach. 55 We prefer the open anterior approach to malignant adrenal
tumors because of fewer long-term wound complications and higher likelihood of complete tumor excision. 56 If the tumor is hormonally functional, adrenalectomy is
indicated and is usually performed laparoscopically. If the patient has a history of cancer, fine-needle aspiration can be considered to exclude adrenal metastases. If
the mass is smaller than 4 cm and nonfunctional, a repeat follow-up CT examination in 3 to 6 months is indicated to again determine size. If size increases, surgical
excision is necessary.50 If there is no change at 6 months, it is most likely an adenoma, and subsequent CT scans are unnecessary. It is hoped that the evaluation
provides early surgical intervention for functional or malignant adrenal masses and exclusion of nonfunctional benign adrenal adenomas.
SEX HORMONE EXCESS
Adrenocortical carcinoma may present with excessive sex hormone secretion. Virilization or feminization may be combined with hypercortisolism, or the tumor may
produce only estrogen or testosterone. In children, the clinical signs of increased androgen production include increased growth, premature development of pubic and
facial hair, acne, genital enlargement, increased muscle mass, and deep voice. In women, the clinical signs of excess androgen production include hirsutism, acne,
amenorrhea, infertility, increased muscle mass, deep voice, and temporal balding. In children, the clinical signs of increased estrogen production include
gynecomastia in boys and precocious breast enlargement and vaginal bleeding in girls. In adult men, hyperestrogenism presents with gynecomastia, decreased
sexual drive, impotence, and infertility. In adult women, hyperestrogenism presents primarily with irregular menses in premenopausal women and dysfunctional
uterine bleeding or vaginal bleeding in postmenopausal women. The workup requires 24-hour urinary 17-ketosteroids, 17-hydroxysteroids, urinary free cortisol and,
depending on virilization or feminization, serum determination of testosterone or estrogen.
Virilization secondary to an adrenal neoplasm may accompany Cushing's syndrome, and if it does occur, it usually indicates adrenal cortical carcinoma. Virilization in
the absence of Cushing's syndrome may also occur due to adrenal cortical adenoma 57 or carcinoma.58 Of course, there are many other disorders that cause
virilization in women and children; however, in working up a patient with virilization, an imaging study of both adrenals, either CT or MRI, is indicated to rule out an
adrenal neoplasm.

TREATMENT OF ADRENAL CORTICAL NEOPLASMS
ADRENAL CORTICAL ADENOMA
The definitive treatment of benign adrenal adenoma is surgical resection of the adrenal gland with the adenoma. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy is rapidly becoming the
procedure of choice to remove benign adrenal tumors. 43,52 It is clearly indicated for smaller tumors (less than 6 cm) because it is associated with less pain and shorter
convalescence.59,60 In patients who are undergoing resection of an adrenal tumor that causes Cushing's syndrome, steroid replacement during and after surgery is
necessary. Mineralocorticoid replacement is not required. Postoperative glucocorticoid replacement is indicated until complete recovery of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (see Fig. 38.4-2). Glucocorticoid replacement may be necessary for as long as 2 years. 61 Surgical resection of an adenoma is
curative. 61 Larger lesions weighing between 50 and 100 g that appear benign histologically (no mitoses and no vascular invasion) need careful long-term follow-up to
exclude carcinoma.
ADRENAL CORTICAL CARCINOMA
The mainstay of treatment of adrenal cortical carcinoma is complete resection of all gross tumor. If the carcinoma is intimately associated with the kidney, liver, or
diaphragm on the right or pancreas on the left, it may be necessary to remove part or all of the contiguous structures at the time of definitive surgery. It is important to
consider that the best time for curative resection is the initial time. The surgeon needs adequate imaging of the extent of disease, which can be achieved by CT, MRI,
or both. CT or MRI should include the chest to rule out metastatic disease above the diaphragm. If the right adrenal is involved and the inferior vena cava is
compressed, either an inferior vena cava contrast study or caval ultrasound is useful to assess tumor extension into the cava. If resection of one kidney is indicated,
either an intravenous pyelogram or an intravenous contrast CT is necessary to be certain the contralateral kidney is functioning. A complete bowel preparation is used
in case the tumor invades the bowel. Even though patients with hypercortisolism have impaired healing, adrenal tumor resection can be performed with acceptable
morbidity and an operative mortality of 3%. 62
Adrenal cortical carcinoma can occur in adults and children. It occurs in children younger than 6 years, with a higher incidence in girls than boys. The median age in

children with adrenal cancer is 4 years. Virilization is the most common presenting feature (93%). Some children may also present with precocious puberty or
Cushing's syndrome.63,64 Some children with adrenal cancer can be cured by complete surgical resection. Approximately 65% of children with adrenocortical cancer
can be cured by complete surgical resection of tumor. 63 In a multivariate analysis of predictors of outcome, only primary tumor size greater than 200 cm 3
independently identified a poor-prognosis group of children who may require more aggressive adjuvant therapy after surgery. 63 One study of children with
adrenocortical cancer demonstrated that virilization was the most common presenting symptom, followed by Cushing's syndrome. 65 The overall 5-year survival rate
was 49%, and when all tumor was removed, it was 70%.65
The second peak age of occurrence of adrenal cancer is between 40 and 50 years, and approximately 70% of these patients present with hormonal syndromes. 46 The
surgical staging of adrenal carcinoma is as follows:
I. Tumor less than 5 cm without local invasion, nodal, or distant metastases
II. Same as stage I except tumor more than 5 cm
III. Tumor with local invasion or positive lymph nodes
IV.Tumor with local invasion and positive lymph nodes or distant metastases (Table 38.4-4)
Most patients (70%) present with stage III or IV disease. 46,66

TABLE 38.4-4. Staging Criteria for Adrenal Cortical Carcinoma

The definitive initial treatment for all stage disease, including locally aggressive stage III disease, is en bloc resection, which may include the adjacent kidney. This
procedure may require a combined thoracoabdominal approach. Surgical resection of localized disease can be curative. 46,66 Some recommend adjuvant mitotane
therapy after surgical resection to improve survival. 67 Doses between 1.5 and 2.0 g/d are well tolerated and may prolong survival. 68 However, others do not
recommend mitotane therapy because it has not been proven to prolong survival. 69 In an analysis of 105 adult patients with adrenal cancer, only 80 were able to
undergo surgery for possible cure, and the median disease-free interval postoperatively was 12 months. 69 The overall 5-year survival rate was 22%. 69 In most series,
the 5-year survival rate is between 20% and 35%. 70 In a series from Italy, the 5-year survival rate after surgical resection in 129 cases was 35%. 71 In another series
from Goteborg, Sweden, complete surgical resection was routinely combined with 1 year of mitotane therapy. Eighteen patients were treated, and the 5-year survival
rate was 58% based on the Kaplan-Maier method. 72 Age over 40 years and the presence of metastases at the time of diagnosis correlated with a poor prognosis. 69 If
complete resection of tumor cannot be achieved, tumor debulking should be attempted to decrease the amount of cortisol-secreting tissue and to minimize
complications due to tumor mass. Patients who undergo definitive resection should undergo monitoring of steroid hormone levels postoperatively. Accurate
measurement of urinary levels requires switching the glucocorticoid replacement therapy from hydrocortisone to dexamethasone. CT and MRI are also used to detect
local recurrences and pulmonary metastases. If a recurrence is detected, it can be removed surgically. Prolonged remissions have been reported after resection of
hepatic, pulmonary, and cerebral metastases from adrenal cortical carcinoma. 73,74 and 75 Patients with recurrent adrenal cortical carcinoma who can be surgically
resected have improved survival over those who cannot. In 52 cases of recurrent disease, the 5-year survival rate of reoperated cases was 50% versus 8% for
nonoperated cases. 76 When complete resection of tumor metastases is not possible, near total resection may still be helpful in some hormonally productive, slow
growing adrenal cortical cancers. 76 Palliation of bony metastases may be achieved by radiation therapy. 46 Abdominal radiation therapy may be useful in 65% of
patients with local recurrences not amenable to resection, and the treatment has even relieved bowel obstruction. However, it does not appear to improve the duration
of survival. 46
CHEMOTHERAPY
Once the patient has recurrent or metastatic adrenal cortical carcinoma, chemotherapy with o,p-DDD (mitotane) usually is started. 77 Therapy is initiated at a dose of 2
to 6 g daily in two or three divided doses and increased until adverse reactions occur. Adverse reactions include gastrointestinal toxicity (anorexia, nausea, vomiting,
and diarrhea), neuromuscular toxicity (depression, dizziness, tremors, headache, confusion, and weakness), and skin rash. Seventy-nine percent of treated patients
develop some gastrointestinal toxicity, 50% develop neuromuscular toxicity, and 15% develop a skin rash. 77 Mitotane is associated with prolongation of the bleeding
time and abnormal platelet aggregation. 78 A decrease in urinary 17-hydroxysteroids and 17-ketosteroids occurs in 67% of patients treated due to a direct effect on
steroid metabolism, and a partial response occurs in approximately 35% of patients treated with mitotane. It is important to measure blood levels of o,p-DDD and
achieve serum levels higher than 14 µg/mL. In one study, patients who had blood levels of less than 10 µg/mL had no demonstrable therapeutic effects, whereas
seven of eight patients who had levels greater than 14 µg/mL had objective responses and subsequently lived significantly longer. 79 Unfortunately, the difference
between efficacy and toxicity is small, and levels greater than 20 µg/mL are associated with symptoms of neuromuscular toxicity. 79
Tumor responses usually occur in the first 6 weeks after the initiation of mitotane treatment. Although most patients who demonstrate an objective response to
o,p-DDD subsequently relapse, there have been a few long-term survivors with metastatic adrenocortical carcinoma treated with mitotane. Mitotane may be an
unpleasant drug, and when clinical toxicity is present, the dose must be adjusted to minimize side effects. Because patients with adrenocortical carcinoma are rare,
there have been no controlled studies to establish that mitotane can significantly alter the natural course of adrenocortical carcinoma. Some suggest that adjuvant
o,p-DDD improves survival after initial surgery for adrenocortical carcinoma, 67 although most experts do not recommend it as an adjuvant drug after total resection of
primary adrenocortical cancer. 69,80 In a report of 59 patients with adrenal cancer who received mitotane therapy at a dose between 7 and 10 g/day, 37 patients were
evaluable for tumor response. 69 Of the 37 patients, only 8 (22%) had a documented partial response. 69 Mitotane has been reported to have a 20% response rate. 81
Most experts do not recommend mitotane for the management of patients with adrenocortical cancer. 76,82,83 and 84 However, others argue that the dose of drug is critical
and that the dose of mitotane must be pushed to toxicity to see reasonable response rates. 85,86 When one achieves a measurable serum mitotane level greater than
14 µg/mL, mitotane appears to have a more favorable impact on survival. Lower serum levels have no impact at all. 86 At best, the response rate with mitotane alone is
60%, and few complete responses have been reported. 87 Mitotane has clear benefit to help control hypercortisolism. In one retrospective review, two inoperable
patients were treated preoperatively with mitotane and streptozotocin, and each had a 50% reduction in primary tumor size. One patient also had complete regression
of pulmonary metastases. Tumor was resected in both patients, and both were treated with more chemotherapy postoperatively. Both patients have remained
completely free of disease for 9 and 5 years postoperatively. 88 Chemotherapy has been combined with mitotane treatment. Eighteen patients with advanced adrenal
cortical carcinoma were treated with etoposide (VP16), 100 mg/m 2/day, and cisplatin, 100 mg/m2, every 4 weeks plus mitotane. A complete response was seen in
three cases and a partial response in three cases, for an overall response rate of 33%. 89 Because of the in vitro finding that mitotane is able to reverse multidrug
resistance, it has also combined with etoposide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin in a (n = 28) Italian multicenter trial of patients with advanced metastatic adrenal cortical
carcinoma. A complete response was achieved in two patients and partial responses in 13, for an overall response rate of 54%. 90 Patients treated with mitotane plus
chemotherapy have prolonged survival over patients treated with chemotherapy alone. 91
Chemotherapy regimens besides o,p-DDD have been ineffective against adrenal cortical carcinoma. Partial responses have been reported with regimens based on
doxorubicin 84 and alkylating agents. Promising regimens include cisplatin and etoposide. In three studies including these drugs in patients with metastatic adrenal
cortical carcinoma who failed mitotane, there were seven responses in eight patients, including one complete response, 92 although the complete responder had a

duration of only 1 year. Another active regimen includes 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cisplatin, which has produced 3 responders in 13 patients treated. 93 One
patient had a complete response that lasted for 42 months. 93 Patients who have not responded to mitotane have been effectively treated with a combination of
cisplatin and etoposide. 94
Suramin is known to inhibit the binding of growth factors, including epidermal growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor, and transforming growth factor-b, to tumor
receptors and may reduce tumor growth by antagonizing these factors. 95 It has been used as a phase 1 agent in 21 patients with metastatic adrenal cortical cancer
who have failed other therapy, and 3 partial responses (14%) were seen with no complete responses. 95,96 Suramin has toxicity related to blood coagulation, and some
patients have had thrombocytopenia and hemorrhage (C. A. Stein, R. LaRocca, C. E. Myers, personal communication, 1991). In another study of nine patients with
metastatic adrenal cortical carcinoma treated with suramin, cumulative doses between 8 and 30 g were administered over 1 to 15 months. One-third had a partial
response, and the remainder had progression or stabilization. Toxicity included polyneuropathy, coagulopathy, and thrombocytopenia. 97 Suramin has had limited
efficacy and serious toxicity. 97 Suramin does not appear to be an effective agent in adrenal cancer.
In vitro studies in a soft agar system suggest that the new midazole tetrazirione compound 8-carbamoyl-3-methylimidazo(5,1-d)-1,2,3,5 tetrazin-4(3H)-1
(temozolomide) is very active against adrenal cortical carcinoma. 98 Paclitaxel also has been shown to be effective against the adrenocortical carcinoma cell line,
human NCI-H295, in in vitro studies. 99 Taxol also has been effective in in vitro studies against a steroid-secreting malignant adrenal cortical carcinoma cell line. 100
Gossypol has been shown in experimental studies of adrenal cancer to inhibit tumor growth and prolong survival of mice. 101 However, in phase 1 human studies with
metastatic adrenal cancer, it had a partial response rate of 20%. One 5-year-old child with metastatic adrenal cancer had a near complete response to oncovin,
cisplatin, epipodophyllotoxin, and cytoxan. 102 Steroid hormone receptors have been detected in vitro in adrenal cortical carcinomas, indicating dependence on
progesterone and glucocorticoid. However, in vivo studies of therapy related to manipulation of receptors have not been done. The available chemotherapy agents
and results are summarized in Table 38.4-5. Mitotane is a first-line chemotherapy drug, and combination regimens including cisplatin and other drugs are the
preferred second-line choices. Adrenal cortical carcinoma is rare and malignant. Most patients present with stage III and IV tumors (see Table 38.4-4). Metastatic
sites of adrenal cancer are lymph nodes (68%), lung (71%), liver (42%), and bone (26%). 103 Surgical cure may only be feasible in stage I or stage II tumors (tumors
confined to the adrenal gland).

TABLE 38.4-5. Chemotherapy Agents Used to Treat Adrenocortical Carcinoma

In patients with invasion of contiguous structures at presentation, median survival is 2.3 years. 46 Patients who present with stage I disease have a 50% 5-year survival
rate compared with patients who present with either stage II or III disease, who have a 10% 5-year survival rate. 82 In patients with tumors confined to the adrenal
gland, the mean duration of survival is 5 years. 46 For all patients, the 5-year survival rate is between 10% and 35%, indicating that most patients present with locally
advanced or distant disease. 69,104,105 Most clinicians still recommend aggressive surgical resection of locally recurrent or metastatic cancer in these patients, but one
study demonstrates that, even with this aggressive intervention, the 5-year survival rate is only approximately 10% to 20%. 75 These data indicate the poor prognosis
of all patients with adrenal cortical carcinoma and support the use of adjuvant systemic chemotherapy or radiotherapy for resectable lesions (stages I to III). Based on
the current evidence, however, adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation therapy is not recommended because effective regimens have not yet been documented.
Future challenges for better treatment of adrenal cortical carcinoma include earlier diagnosis and better adjuvants than o,p-DDD. Earlier diagnosis can be facilitated
by an index of suspicion of hormonal excess during history and physical examinations. Changes in body appearance and menstrual history are important clues to
earlier diagnosis. The use of MRI to differentiate benign from malignant incidentalomas of the adrenal may help clinicians find early resectable adrenal cortical
cancers. Drugs such as cisplatin and etoposide or mitotane combined with chemotherapy 106 may be useful in the management of these difficult patients.

ECTOPIC ADRENOCORTICOTROPIC HORMONE SYNDROME
The first report of a patient who exhibited features of Cushing's syndrome had an oat cell carcinoma of the bronchus secreting a peptide now called corticotrophin, or
ACTH. Similar patients who had adrenal hyperplasia without pituitary tumors were reported over the next 30 years, but it was Christy 107 and Liddle108 who established
the presence of ACTH-like material in tumors other than pituitary tumors, in the blood, and in subnormal quantities in the pituitary itself. 107,108 The name ectopic ACTH
syndrome was introduced in 1962. 108
The diagnosis of ectopic ACTH syndrome is based on the metabolic evaluation of the patient who presents with hypercortisolism. An early clue to the diagnosis is the
presence of Cushing's syndrome and severe hypokalemia (potassium level under 3.3 mEq/L). The diagnosis is based primarily on high plasma ACTH and cortisol
levels, which do not change with high-dose dexamethasone or administration of CRH, and results of petrosal sinus sampling that demonstrate low levels of ACTH
draining the pituitary gland that do not change with CRH. Once the diagnosis is established, the primary therapeutic goal is to find and eradicate the neoplasm that is
secreting ACTH. When this is accomplished by surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy, long-term cures can be achieved. The main clinical problems have been
finding the source of ectopic ACTH in some patients and treating the aggressive underlying tumor in others. The causative tumors, in approximate order of frequency,
are as follows:
1. Oat cell or small cell lung cancer
2. Carcinoid tumor of the bronchus
3. Epithelial carcinoma of the thymus or thymic carcinoids
4. Pancreatic islet cell tumor
5. Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid gland
6. Pheochromocytoma
7. Gut carcinoids
8. Ovarian adenocarcinoma
9. Pancreatic cystadenoma
10. Adenocarcinoma of unknown site
Other than small cell carcinoma of the lung, the most common cause of ectopic ACTH syndrome is either bronchial or thymic carcinoid tumors. The recommended
radiographic procedures to localize ACTH-producing tumors include chest and abdominal CT, chest and abdominal MRI, urinary catecholamines to screen for
pheochromocytoma, plasma levels of calcitonin to rule out medullary thyroid carcinoma, and inferior petrosal sinus sampling with CRH in patients in whom the
differential diagnosis of Cushing's disease (pituitary) is unclear. Any suspicious finding in the chest or abdomen can be unequivocally confirmed by fine-needle
aspiration and radioimmunoassay for ACTH in the aspirate.
The goal of therapy for patients with ectopic ACTH production is to find and treat (usually resect, unless it is oat cell carcinoma) the neoplasm that is the source of
ACTH. Cancer resection is indicated for patients with bronchial carcinoid tumors (lobectomy with lymph nodes) because 50% will have positive lymph node

metastases. Despite this clear malignant potential, approximately 75% of patients are cured by surgical resection. 109 The proper therapy for ACTH-producing
neoplasms depends on the diagnosis (exact tumor that produces ACTH) and extent of disease.
Any of these tumors may be malignant and may metastasize. Therefore, in some patients with ectopic ACTH production, the primary disease cannot be eradicated
and therapy must be directed toward correcting the life-threatening metabolic and hormonal abnormalities. Hypokalemia and excess mineralocorticoid activity may be
managed with potassium supplementation and spironolactone. Hypercortisolism may be managed with metyrapone, aminoglutethimide, or mitotane. Bilateral
adrenalectomy is recommended for patients who have ectopic ACTH secondary to tumors that cannot be localized despite diligent radiographic efforts and for
patients who have stable, but unresectable, metastatic disease whose hypercortisolism cannot be managed medically.
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
Pheochromocytomas are rare tumors that rise from chromaffin cells in the adrenal medulla and elsewhere. Pheochromocytomas secrete catecholamines and cause
intermittent, episodic, or sustained hypertension. Pheochromocytomas can present with either lactic acidosis or unexplained fever. In autopsy series, only 0.005% to
0.1% of persons have unsuspected pheochromocytomas. 1 When urinary catecholamines are measured in hypertensive patients, pheochromocytoma is present in only
0.1% of patients. Although these tumors are rare, it is important to diagnose and localize pheochromocytomas. Sustained hypertension caused by a
pheochromocytoma is curable with tumor resection. Sudden death is associated with pheochromocytoma. Pheochromocytomas may be malignant. Earlier diagnosis
and therapy may lessen the probability of death from malignancy and improve the prognosis. Incidence of malignancy in pheochromocytomas is as low as 5% and as
high as 46% in different series. 110 Extraadrenal tumors may be more commonly cancerous. Pheochromocytomas may be associated with endocrine and nonendocrine
inherited disorders. Bilateral adrenal medullary pheochromocytomas are components of MEN 2a and MEN 2B. Some recommend unilateral adrenalectomy in some
MEN 2a patients as long as careful follow-up of the contralateral adrenal gland with urinary catecholamines is maintained. 111 Familial pheochromocytoma also has
been described. Affected individuals have bilateral adrenal pheochromocytomas and no other manifestation of MEN syndromes. In other families, extraadrenal
pheochromocytomas have been reported, sometimes in the same location (bladder, etc.) in affected individuals. Pheochromocytomas occur in approximately 25% of
patients with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease 112 and in fewer than 1% of patients with neurofibromatosis and von Recklinghausen's disease. 113
Pheochromocytomas produce catecholamines, which result in clinical symptoms of anxiety attacks, episodic hypertension, or sustained hypertension. Severe,
symptomatic paroxysmal hypertension with symptoms that are not related to stress or emotional distress are the most common presenting complaint of patients with
pheochromocytoma.114 However, pheochromocytomas may also produce other hormones, including ACTH; therefore, patients may have concomitant Cushing's
syndrome. Pheochromocytomas may produce many other peptide hormones, including somatostatin, calcitonin, oxytocin, and vasopressin.
ONCOGENE
Pheochromocytomas originate from the neural crest and may develop by arrest at various points during normal differentiation. The ras oncogene does not appear to
be involved in the tumoral process of pheochromocytoma, because one study failed to detect any abnormality of ras gene sequence in ten pheochromocytomas. 115
Loss of heterozygosity at specific loci may help localize tumor suppressor genes involved in the formation of various familial and sporadic pheochromocytomas. Of 41
tumors tested, significant allelic losses were found on chromosome 1p (42%), 3p (16%), 17p (24%), and 22q (31%). Furthermore, there appeared to be a correlation
between loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 1p with urinary excretion of metanephrine and loss of heterozygosity on chromosomes 1p, 3p, and 17p with tumor
volume.116 Because pheochromocytomas are part of the VHL syndrome, investigators have studies the role of the tumor suppressor gene CUL2, whose product
interacts with the VHL tumor suppressor in the pathophysiology of sporadic pheochromocytomas. It does not appear to have a significant effect, because only 1 of 26
tumors had a mutation.117
PATHOLOGY
Pheochromocytomas arise from chromaffin cells. Chromaffin cells are widespread and associated with sympathetic ganglia during fetal life. After birth, most
chromaffin cells degenerate, and the majority remain in the adrenal medulla. This may explain why approximately 90% of pheochromocytomas are in the adrenal
medulla. Extraadrenal pheochromocytomas may arise anywhere, including the carotid body, intracardiac, along the aorta (both thoracic and abdominal), and within
the urinary bladder. The most common extraadrenal location is the organ of Zuckerkandl, which is near the origin of the inferior mesenteric artery to the left of the
aortic bifurcation. Extraadrenal pheochromocytomas may more often be malignant. Bilateral adrenal pheochromocytomas occur in familial syndromes, including MEN
2a and MEN 2B.118
Data from series of patients with sporadic pheochromocytomas indicate that the right adrenal gland more commonly harbors a tumor than the left gland. 119
Pheochromocytomas resected from hypertensive patients usually measure between 3 and 5 cm in diameter and weigh approximately 100 g. 120 These tumors appear
tan to gray in color and have a soft smooth consistency. Larger tumors may be cystic or have necrotic areas and often have calcification. Microscopically,
pheochromocytomas resemble the cell of origin. Tumors are usually arranged in cords or alveolar patterns. 1 Tumors may be composed of cords of cells lining vascular
structures that have an angiomatous appearance. Tumors are generally clearly separated from the adrenal cortex by a thin band of fibrous tissue. Extension of the
pheochromocytoma into the cortex or vascular invasion may occur in benign neoplasms. 1
The pathologic distinction between benign and malignant pheochromocytomas is not clear, and pathologists have relied on the reported benign natural history of most
pheochromocytomas. However, some reports indicate that more pheochromocytomas than expected are malignant. In one large series, the tumor recurrence rate was
10% and most recurrences occurred within 5 years. 119 In another series, the recurrence rate was 23%, 121 and in another it was 46%. 122 Certainly these results partly
reflect the referral pattern of tertiary institutions, but they may also reflect a true higher malignancy rate than originally suggested. Malignant tumors tend to be larger
and weigh more, although this is not an absolute criterion 1 (Table 38.4-6). Staining for the nuclear proliferation marker MIB-1 is positive in 50% of malignant
pheochromocytomas and negative in benign tumors. It is preliminary data, but it may be a useful marker for malignancy. 123 The only absolute criterion for malignancy
is the presence of secondary tumors in sites where chromaffin cells are not usually present and visceral metastases. Benign pheochromocytomas may demonstrate
marked nuclear pleomorphism, whereas paradoxically, malignant ones demonstrate less. 1 Malignant pheochromocytomas usually have many more mitoses than
benign tumors, but capsular and vascular invasion occurs with equal frequency in both. 1 Nuclear DNA ploidy may be a predictive indicator of malignant potential. 124
Flow cytometry has been used to define a subgroup of patients with pheochromocytoma who have malignant tumor. Tumor whose DNA ploidy studies demonstrated
tetraploidy or polyploidy and aneuploidy had a significantly higher chance of a malignant course than most tumors, which were normally diploid. It has been observed
that neuropeptide Y gene expression by tumors may be used to distinguish benign from malignant pheochromocytomas. Neuropeptide Y mRNA was expressed in 9 of
9 benign tumors and only 4 of 11 malignant tumors, suggesting that expression of this gene is seen more often in benign pheochromocytomas. 125 Others have
attempted to differentiate patients with benign and malignant pheochromocytomas by serum levels of neuron-specific enolase and neuropeptide Y, but observed
differences were not significant. 126 Finally, studies indicate that size of tumor (weight) correlated best with malignant potential, as did amount of necrosis 127 (see Table
38.4-6).

TABLE 38.4-6. Differentiation of Benign versus Malignant Pheochromocytomas

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS
Patients with pheochromocytomas can present with a range of symptoms, from mild labile hypertension to sudden death secondary to a hypertensive crisis,
myocardial infarction, or cerebral vascular accident. The classic patient describes “spells” of paroxysmal headaches, pallor, palpitations, hypertension, and
diaphoresis. In 50% of patients, the hypertension is intermittent, whereas in the others it is sustained. In 90% of children with pheochromocytomas, the hypertension is
sustained. Patients may have signs of chronic hypovolemia, such as orthostatic hypotension or lactic acidosis secondary to excess a-catecholaminergic stimulation
and vasoconstriction. Most patients have mild weight loss, but obesity does not rule out pheochromocytoma. Diabetes mellitus may be induced.
The diagnosis of pheochromocytoma is based on measuring catecholamines and metabolites in the urine ( Fig. 38.4-4). If a pheochromocytoma is suspected clinically
or a patient has a history of familial pheochromocytoma, MEN 2a, or MEN 2B, the best study is a 24-hour urine test for catecholamines, metanephrine, and VMA. In a
report describing the testing of 64 patients, 30 of whom had pheochromocytomas, 24-hour urine collections for VMA, dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine
were analyzed. The 24-hour urinary levels of VMA and norepinephrine had the greatest sensitivity (97%), whereas the levels of VMA had the best specificity (91%). 128
Another study also reports that urinary measurement of catecholamine, VMA, and metanephrine levels were the most sensitive screening test. 129 Methods are now
available to measure plasma catecholamines using a radioenzymatic assay. This can provide a more direct measurement of catecholamine excess, but there have
been conflicting reports comparing the value of urinary or plasma catecholamines in the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. As the plasma studies become more
reliable, they may be a more sensitive and specific method than the urinary assay. However, it depends on the laboratory and the method, because studies still report
that urinary measurements are more sensitive than plasma. 130

FIGURE 38.4-4. Flow diagram for diagnosis, localization, preoperative preparation, treatment, and follow-up of a patient with a pheochromocytoma. CT, computed
tomography; MIBG, metaiodobenzylguanidine; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; VMA, vanillylmendelic acid.

The clonidine suppression test has become the test of choice to determine whether a patient with borderline urinary or plasma catecholamine level has a
pheochromocytoma.131 It is the study of choice to diagnose pheochromocytomas in patients with plasma catecholamine concentrations between 500 and 2000
pg/mL.132 In normal subjects and patients with idiopathic hypertension, clonidine suppresses plasma levels of epinephrine and norepinephrine. In patients with
pheochromocytoma, clonidine does not suppress levels. Only two incorrect diagnoses have been reported using the clonidine suppression test: one false-positive and
one false-negative. 133 An overnight method of this test has also been reported based on the measurement of urinary levels of norepinephrine and epinephrine. 131
LOCALIZATION STUDIES
CT and MRI are the two radiologic (nonnuclear medicine) procedures of choice to localize pheochromocytomas (see Fig. 38.4-4). Both are noninvasive and sensitive,
being able to detect tumors approximately 1 cm in diameter. MRI may be more specific because of the increased signal intensity on the T2-weighted image. CT has
some advantages over MRI. CT scanners currently have greater resolution and greater availability. In a Mayo Clinic study of 52 patients with pheochromocytoma, CT
detected 51 of 52 tumors, including 9 of 10 bilateral tumors. 134 In another study, unenhanced high-resolution CT detected pheochromocytomas in six of six patients
who had tumors found at surgery, including two extraadrenal retroperitoneal tumors. 135 MRI also has remarkable resolution. In seven patients with
pheochromocytomas demonstrated on CT, MRI imaged all primary lesions as well as metastases to the chest, retroperitoneum, and liver. Because it has no radiation
exposure, it can be used to image a pheochromocytoma during pregnancy. In one analysis, CT imaged 16 of 19 pheochromocytomas (84%), whereas MRI imaged 12
of 15 (75%) for comparable sensitivity. 136 In addition, MRI successfully imaged an intrapericardial pheochromocytoma and distinguished it from the cardiac chambers
and surrounding great vessels, which could not be determined by CT.
Another important technique for the localization of pheochromocytomas is nuclear scanning after the administration of labeled metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) (see
Fig. 38.4-4). The compound is similar to norepinephrine and is taken up and concentrated in adrenergic tissue. 131I-MIBG has been studied in 400 patients to localize
suspected pheochromocytoma.137 The sensitivity of MIBG scanning was 78% in sporadic pheochromocytoma, 91% in malignant pheochromocytoma, and 94% in
familial pheochromocytoma. The overall sensitivity was 87%. The specificity was nearly 100% in all categories and overall. 131I-MIBG at another institution
demonstrated a sensitivity of 77% and a specificity of 96%, 138 and two other institutions had similar findings. 139,140 More recent data confirm previous studies and
demonstrate that labeled MIBG is a useful diagnostic and imaging study for the detection and localization of pheochromocytoma. 128 In three studies from three
different institutions, it had a sensitivity of 86% and correctly diagnosed and imaged tumor in 71 of 83 patients. 128,136 It appears that MIBG scanning is safe,
noninvasive, and efficacious for the localization of pheochromocytomas, including those that arise in nonadrenal sites, and malignant disease. Metastatic bone
involvement by pheochromocytoma can be imaged by 131I-MIBG, but standard bone scintigraphy may be more sensitive. In summary, MIBG scanning images
catecholamine-producing tumors with a high specificity and sensitivity. Whereas CT and MRI reflect changes in morphology, scintigraphic imaging relies on tissue
function. 140 False-positive results with MIBG scintigraphy are rare (but tumors such as medullary thyroid carcinoma and neuroblastoma can image), which accounts
for the high specificity (98% to 100%) of the study. False-negative results can occur and have an incidence of approximately 13% to 20%, 128,136 which lowers
sensitivity. It appears that these false-negatives may be more common with multiple tumors and metastatic disease in the same patient.
MANAGEMENT
Preoperative Preparation
Once the diagnosis is established and the tumor localized, preoperative preparation includes a-adrenergic blockade. Patients are started on phenoxybenzamine, 10
mg orally two or three times daily (see Fig. 38.4-4). If tachycardia develops (heart rate more than 100 beats/min), b-adrenergic blocking agents (propranolol) are
added before surgery. Propranolol should never be started before a blockade because unopposed vasoconstriction may worsen hypertension. Phenoxybenzamine
increases the total blood and plasma volume in patients with pheochromocytoma. In addition, lactic acidosis may be present in patients with pheochromocytoma
related to the effect of catecholamines on peripheral circulation. The measurement and correction of arterial blood pH should be performed in all patients before the
induction of anesthesia and surgery.
a-Methyltyrosine is a competitive inhibitor of tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate-limiting step in catecholamine biosynthesis. Treatment with a-methyltyrosine (metyrosine)
reduces catecholamine production by 50% to 80% in patients with pheochromocytoma. The usual dose is 250 mg four times daily, which may be increased to a
maximum dose of 3 to 4 g/day.141 It has been used preoperatively to prepare some patients with pheochromocytoma and unusual cardiac complications for surgery,
and it may be used to treat hypertensive crisis in patients with pheochromocytoma. 140,142 Studies suggest that it is most effective when combined with
phenoxybenzamine.143 Others have successfully used the calcium-antagonist nifedipine with phenoxybenzamine or nicardipine alone (60 to 120 mg every 24 hours) to
control labile hypertensive episodes in patients with pheochromocytoma. 144 Either of these newer drug strategies appear to work as well as or better than the more
traditional strategy of phenoxybenzamine.

Intraoperative Management
If the patient is elderly or has had cardiac complications, he or she should be transferred to the intensive care unit the day before surgery and a Swan-Ganz catheter
should be inserted. This allows correction of hemodynamic imbalances and optimization of cardiac performance. The morning of operation, an arterial catheter and
peripheral intravenous catheters should be inserted. Arterial blood gas should be measured to rule out acidosis. During surgery, especially during manipulation of the
tumor, marked increases in blood pressure may occur; hypertensive episodes should be controlled with either a-adrenergic blocking agents like regitine or agents that
directly relax arterial and venous smooth muscle like sodium nitroprusside. Nitroprusside is the preferred drug because of its rapid onset and short duration. It is
administered via a continuous intravenous infusion with a pump, and the blood pressure is continuously titrated to acceptable levels. The use of preoperative
preparation with oral a-adrenergic blocking agents and intraoperative adjustment and regulation of blood pressure with nitroprusside has greatly facilitated the
surgical resection of pheochromocytoma and has reduced operative morbidity and mortality.
The operation is performed using a transabdominal incision, either a bilateral subcostal or a long midline incision. Preoperative localization studies, such as CT, MRI,
and 131I-MIBG, guide the exploration, but the entire abdomen should be carefully visualized and palpated. Others argue that localization procedures are so sensitive
and specific that more direct approaches may be preferred. 145 Small intraadrenal pheochromocytomas have been removed using laparoscopic techniques.
Laparoscopic procedures appear to decrease pain and shorten the time to recovery. Most pheochromocytomas are well localized. However, in instances of malignant
pheochromocytomas or multiple pheochromocytomas in known or unsuspected MEN syndromes, some tumors may be missed. Extraadrenal pheochromocytomas may
be difficult to find. The most common locations of intraabdominal extraadrenal pheochromocytoma are in the hilar region of the kidneys and in the chromaffin tissue
along the aorta from the celiac axis to the aortic bifurcation. The organ of Zuckerkandl at the aortic bifurcation is the most common extraadrenal location.
Pheochromocytomas have been described within the urinary bladder. Multiple locations, metastatic potential, and multiple tumors all support the necessity for a
complete exploration of the entire abdominal cavity. The “rule of ten” may be of value in the management of pheochromocytomas: Ten percent are malignant, 10% are
extraadrenal, and 10% are bilateral. In patients with MEN 2, some suggest that nearly 100% either have or will develop bilateral benign adrenal medullary
pheochromocytomas,146 whereas others suggest that the incidence of bilaterality, although high, may be significantly less (70%). 147
MALIGNANT PHEOCHROMOCYTOMAS
Malignant pheochromocytomas are thought not to occur in MEN syndromes and to be present in approximately 10% of patients with pheochromocytoma. Two reports
indicate that substantially more than 10% of sporadic pheochromocytoma may be malignant. 121,122 In one study, 25 of 69 (36%) patients had malignant
pheochromocytomas diagnosed by recurrent or metastatic disease 121; in another study using the same criteria, 81 of 176 (46%) patients with pheochromocytomas had
malignant disease. 122 In the later study, original histologic review by blinded pathologists did not discriminate malignant versus benign neoplasms with accuracy.
Pathologic analysis was not helpful in predicting which tumors were malignant. 122 Patients who developed metastases did not develop them until 0.2 to 28.7 years
after their initial surgery. Incidence of detection for the first 9 years was 5% per year. Males were more likely to develop metastatic pheochromocytoma. Imaging with
131I-MIBG was usually able to detect recurrent or metastatic pheochromocytoma. Some recommend yearly 131I-MIBG scans to detect recurrent disease in all patients
after resection of pheochromocytoma. 122 New studies indicate that octreotide scintigraphy may also be useful to image malignant metastatic pheochromocytoma. 148 If
the tumor is imaged by somatostatin receptor scintigraphy, octreotide therapy may have potent antitumor effects. 149 Others recommend lifetime follow-up with
measurement of blood pressure and urinary levels of catecholamines. 121 The detection of recurrent or metastatic pheochromocytoma should be based on the same
methods as detection of primary or initial pheochromocytoma. These methods include urinary and serum catecholamine measurement, the clonidine suppression test,
CT scanning, MRI, and 131I-MIBG scanning. Careful follow-up requires some, but not necessarily all, of these studies on a yearly basis (see Fig. 38.4-4). It appears
that with careful follow-up the incidence of malignant pheochromocytoma may be greater than 10% and may approach 30% to 50%.
The basic principles in the treatment of malignant pheochromocytoma have been to surgically resect recurrences or metastases whenever possible and to treat
hypertensive symptoms by catecholamine blockade. 150 Even in pediatric patients, surgical resection of metastatic and recurrent pheochromocytoma has been shown
to prolong survival. 151 Painful bony metastases, which may be diagnosed by either 131I-MIBG scans or standard bone nuclide scans, respond well to radiotherapy. Soft
tissue masses or bony masses generally respond well to radiation therapy if doses of 40 Gy or more can be administered. 124 Localized or solitary soft tissue masses,
even when metastatic to the liver or lung, may be successfully resected surgically. Standard chemotherapy regimens including doxorubicin plus streptozotocin and
carmustine plus doxorubicin have not had efficacy in the treatment of malignant pheochromocytomas.
Survival data of patients with malignant pheochromocytoma are difficult to obtain because of the rarity and indolence of the tumor. In a large series from the Mayo
clinic, the 5-year survival rate was 36%. 150 Others report a 5-year survival rate of 60% in 15 patients with malignant pheochromocytoma. 152 In this study, patients were
treated primarily by aggressive surgery and medical blood pressure control. 152 In a final series, patients who succumbed from malignant pheochromocytoma did so
within 3 years of the appearance of metastases. 153
The early success with streptozotocin in the treatment of neuroendocrine tumors of the gastrointestinal tract suggested that it might also be useful in the treatment of
malignant pheochromocytomas. Streptozotocin has had mixed responses in patients with malignant pheochromocytoma. Initial work with streptozotocin was
disappointing and suggested no role for it in the treatment of malignant pheochromocytoma. 153 However, Feldman154 treated one patient with a good response and
suggested that the dosage schedule might be important in obtaining a beneficial result. He provided additional 3-year follow-up on that patient and noted that the
patient maintained an 85% reduction in urinary homovanillic acid levels and a 73% reduction in urinary VMA levels with normal renal function despite 66 g of
streptozotocin. 155 Other investigators have tried this regimen and noted no response and deterioration of renal function. It may be that some patients with malignant
pheochromocytoma respond to streptozotocin chemotherapy, but many do not, and it does not appear to play a major role in the treatment of patients with these rare
tumors.
Because of the high sensitivity (85%) and specificity (100%) of 131I-MIBG to image pheochromocytomas, its use in higher doses to treat recurrent or metastatic
pheochromocytomas has been implemented. Current imaging modalities of pheochromocytoma permit relatively accurate dosimetry to the tumor on the basis of the
diagnostic dose of 131I-MIBG administered. If uptake by primary or metastases is high, it is possible to deliver very high radiation doses by increasing the administered
activity. Specific activity of 131I-MIBG of 200 mCi in 5 mg has now been achieved. With the remarkable ability of MIBG to image tumors, one would expect its ability to
treat metastatic or recurrent tumors to be equally effective; however, the results have not been very dramatic. Treatment response in patients with
pheochromocytomas can be measured by catecholamine secretion and standard tumor size measurements. Blood pressure control of a few patients with malignant
pheochromocytoma has been facilitated by 131I-MIBG therapy.156 One trial reports the use of 131I-MIBG therapy in 15 patients with malignant pheochromocytoma.
Patients were treated with 131I-MIBG (specific activity 740 MBq/mg) every 3 months. The typical patients received three doses. The absorbed cumulative tumor dose
was 12 to 155 Gy. A beneficial response to treatment was observed in nine patients (60%), four never responded, and others had a slight response. No complete
responses were observed. Five patients had measurable partial responses to treatment, and seven had clear hormonal responses. Toxicity included pancytopenia in
one patient that resolved after discontinuation of therapy. 156 In another study of 12 patients treated with 131I-MIBG, 5 (42%) reduced catecholamine levels and 2
decreased tumor size (17%). 157 Vetter and colleagues 158 reported two patients with malignant pheochromocytomas treated with 131I-MIBG who had minor reduction in
tumor size but no change in catecholamine secretion. There were no reported complete responses until more recently. 156,157 and 158 Targeted radiotherapy with
131
I-MIBG is effective in 58% of malignant pheochromocytomas with objective responses. 159 One report documented a 4-year biochemical and imageable complete
response with 131I-MIBG treatment in one patient.160 Another report documents significant partial responses in three patients treated with 131I-MIBG.156
Neuroblastomas are aggressive tumors of neural crest origin that occur in children and have no association with hypertension. All patients with neuroblastoma have
high plasma levels of dopa. Patients with benign pheochromocytomas have elevated plasma levels of norepinephrine or epinephrine, and none have elevated plasma
levels of dopa. Sixty percent of patients with malignant pheochromocytomas have elevated plasma levels of dopa, in contrast to benign pheochromocytoma. The
similarity between malignant pheochromocytoma and neuroblastoma is further supported by the astonishing responsiveness of malignant pheochromocytomas to
therapy that is effective in treating neuroblastomas. 161 Combination of cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and dacarbazine has an 80% response rate for metastatic
neuroblastoma 162 and has been used in patients with metastatic pheochromocytoma. The chemotherapy regimen consists of cyclophosphamide, 750 mg/m 2
intravenously, on day 1, vincristine, 1.4 mg/m2 intravenously, on day 1, and dacarbazine, 600 mg/m 2 intravenously, on days 1 and 2, repeated every 21 days. Doses
of cyclophosphamide and dacarbazine have been increased or decreased on the basis of neurotoxicity. This regimen has now been reported in 14 patients with
metastatic pheochromocytoma.161 The ability to respond to the chemotherapy regimen correlated with plasma norepinephrine level before therapy. One patient had a
complete response (both biochemical and imageable) that lasted for 9 months. One other patient also had a biochemical complete response, and a total of eight
(57%) patients had clear decreases in 24-hour levels of urinary catecholamines. Seven patients (50%) also had at least a 50% decrease in the measurable size of
tumor. Biochemical response (urinary catecholamines) correlated well with response evaluated on imaging studies. The median duration of response was greater than

18 months. All responding patients have had dramatic improvement in hypertension control and performance status. The regimen has been well tolerated, and toxicity
has been mild.161 Hypertensive crises after cytotoxic drug therapy in patients with pheochromocytoma have been reported, 162 but this potentially life-threatening
complication is not a problem with adequate a-adrenergic blockade. Single cases have been reported to have complete responses with cyclophosphamide, vincristine,
and dacarbazine (CVD).163 Three additional patients have been treated with CVD, resulting in partial responses. 164
Patients with malignant pheochromocytomas have been treated with both chemotherapy and radioactive MIBG in a study protocol. Six patients with metastatic
pheochromocytoma were treated with three doses of 131I-MIBG followed by a year of chemotherapy with CVD given in 21-day cycles. Three patients had significant
partial responses to 131I-MIBG, and two patients had further partial responses to chemotherapy. The combination therapy produced additive antitumor effects. 165 Two
additional patients with metastatic pheochromocytomas also have been treated with CVD with partial responses. 166 Table 38.4-7 lists possible treatment regimens for
metastatic pheochromocytoma.

TABLE 38.4-7. Treatment of Metastatic Malignant Pheochromocytoma

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Page DL, DeLellis RA, Hough AJ. Tumors of the adrenal. In: Atlas of tumor pathology. Washington: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 1986.
2. Travis WD, Tsokos M, Doppman JL, et al. Primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease. Am J Surg Pathol 1989;13:921.
3. Hough AJ, Hollifield JW, Page DL, Hartmann WH. Diagnostic factors in adrenal cortical tumors. Am J Clin Pathol 1979;72:390.
4. Lynch HT, Katz DA, Bogard PJ, Lynch JF. The sarcoma, breast cancer, lung cancer, and adrenocortical carcinoma syndrome revisited. Am J Dis Child 1985;139:134.
5. Henry I, Grandjovans S, Couillin P, et al. Tumor-specific loss of 11 p 15.5 alleles in del 11 p 13 Wilms tumor and in familial adrenocortical carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:3247.
6. James LA, Kelsey AM, Birch JM, Varley JM. Highly consistent genetic alterations in childhood adrenocortical tumors detected by comparative genomic hybridization. Br J Cancer 1999;81:300.
7. Figueiredo BC, Stratakis CA, Sandrini R, et al. Comparative genomic hybridization analysis of adrenocortical tumors of childhood. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999;84:1116.
8. Beuschlein F, Schulze T, Mora P, et al. Steroid 21-hydroxylase mutations and 21-hydroxylase messenger ribonucleic acid expression in human adrenocortical tumors. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1998;83:2585.
9. Wick MR, Cherwitz DL, McGlennen RC, Dehner LP. Adrenocortical carcinoma: an immunohistochemical comparison with renal cell carcinoma. Am J Pathol 1986;122:343.
10. Weiss LM, Medeiros LJ, Vickery AL. Pathologic features of prognostic significance in adrenocortical carcinoma. Am J Surg Pathol 1989;13:202.
11. Hosaka Y, Rainwater LM, Grant CS, et al. Adrenocortical carcinoma: nuclear deoxyribonucleic acid ploidy studied by flow cytometry. Surgery 1987;102:1027.
12. Scarpelli M, Montironi R, Mazzucchelli R, Thompson D, Bartels PH. Distinguishing cortical adrenal gland adenomas from carcinomas by their quantitative nuclear features. Anal Quant Cytol
Histol 1999;21:31.
13. O'Hare MJ, Monaghan P, Neville AM. The pathology of adrenocortical neoplasia: a correlated structural and functional approach to the diagnosis of malignant disease. Hum Pathol 1979;10:137.
14. Orth DN. Cushing's syndrome. N Engl J Med 1995;332:791.
15. Perry RR, Nieman LK, Cutler GB, et al. Primary adrenal causes of Cushing's syndrome: diagnosis and surgical management. Ann Surg 1989;210:59.
16. Magiakou MA, Mastorakos G, Oldfield EH, et al. Cushing's syndrome in children and adolescents: presentation, diagnosis and therapy. N Engl J Med 1994;331:629.
17. Maton PN, Gardner JD, Jensen RT. Cushing's syndrome in patients with the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. N Engl J Med 1986;315:1.
18. Kramer M, Corrado ML, Bacci V, et al. Pulmonary cryptococcosis and Cushing's syndrome. Arch Intern Med 1983;143:2179.
19. Fulkerson WJ, Newman JH. Endogenous Cushing's syndrome complicated by Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. Am Rev Respir Dis 1984;129:188.
20. Graham BS, Tucker WS Jr. Opportunistic infections in endogenous Cushing's syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:334.
21. Cunningham DS, Cutler GB Jr. Spontaneous vulvar necrotizing fasciitis in Cushing's syndrome. South Med J 1994;87:837.
22. Corenblum B, Kwan T, Gee S, Wong NC. Bedside assessment of skin-fold thickness. A useful measurement for distinguishing Cushing's disease from other causes of hirsutism and
oligomenorrhea. Arch Int Med 1994;154:777
23. Chrousos GP, Schuermeyer TH, Doppman J, et al. Clinical applications of corticotropin-releasing factor. Ann Intern Med 1985;102:344.
24. Nieman LK, Chrousos GP, Oldfield EH, et al. The ovine corticotropin-releasing hormone stimulation test and the dexamethasone suppression test in the differential diagnosis of Cushing's
syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:862.
25. Howlett TA, Drury PL, Perry L, et al. Diagnosis and management of ACTH-dependent Cushing's syndrome: comparison of the features in ectopic and pituitary ACTH production. Clin Endocrinol
1986;24:699.
26. Avgerinos PC, Yanovski JA, Oldfield EH, Nieman LK, Cutler GB Jr. The metyrapone and dexamethasone suppression tests for the differential diagnosis of the adrenocorticotropin-dependent
Cushing syndrome: a comparison. Ann Int Med 1994;121:318.
27. Oldfield EH, Doppman JL, Nieman LK, et al. Petrosal sinus sampling with and without corticotropin-releasing hormone for the differential diagnosis of Cushing's syndrome. N Engl J Med
1991;325:897.
28. Doppman JL, Nieman LK, Travis WD, et al. CT or MR imaging of massive macronodular adrenocortical disease: a rare cause of autonomous primary adrenal hypercortisolism. J Comput Assist
Tomogr 1991;15:773.
29. Dunnick NR. Adrenal carcinoma. Radiol Clin North Am 1994;32:99.
30. Bierwaltes WH, Sisson JC, Shapiro JC, Shapiro B. Diagnosis of adrenal tumors with radionuclide imaging Spec Top Endocrinol Metab 1984;6:1.
31. Schteingart DE, Seabold JE, Gross MD, Swanson DP. Iodocholesterol adrenal tissue uptake and imaging in adrenal neoplasms. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1981;52:1156.
32. Fig LM, Gross MD, Shapiro B, et al. Adrenal localization in the adrenocorticotropic hormoneindependent Cushing syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:547.
33. Pasieka JL, McLeod MK, Thompson NW, Gross MD, Schteingart DE. Adrenal scintigraphy of well-differentiated (functioning) adrenocortical carcinomas: potential surgical pitfalls. Surgery
1992;112:884.
34. Spark RF, Connolly PB, Gluckin DS, et al. ACTH secretion from a functioning pheochromocytoma. N Engl J Med 1979;301:416.
35. Limper AH, Carpenter PC, Scherthauer B, Staats BA. The Cushing syndrome induced by bronchial carcinoid tumors. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:209.
36. Preeyasombat C, Sirikulchayanonta V, Mahachokelertwattana P, Sriphraprodang A, Boonpucknairig S. Cushing's syndrome caused by Ewing's sarcoma secreting corticotropin releasing
factor-like peptide. Am J Dis Child 1992;146:1103.
37. de Herden WW, Krenning EP, Malchoff CD. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy: its value in tumor localization in patients with Cushing's syndrome caused by ectopic corticotropin or
corticotropin-releasing hormone secretion. Am J Med 1994;96:305.
38. Boggan JE, Tyrrell JB, Wilson CB. Transsphenoidal microsurgical management of Cushing's disease: report of 100 cases. J Neurosurg 1983;59:195.
39. Weinberger MH, Grim CE, Hollifield JW, et al. Primary aldosteronism: diagnosis, localization and treatment. Ann Intern Med 1979;90:386.
40. Shionoiri H, Hirawa N, Ueda S. Renin gene expression in the adrenal and kidney of patients with primary aldosteronism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1992;74:103.
41. Lyons DG, Kern DC, Brown RD, et al. Single dose captopril as a diagnostic test for primary aldosteronism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1983;57:892.
42. Geisinger MA, Zelch M, Bravo E, et al. Primary hyperaldosteronism: comparison of CT, adrenal venography, and venous sampling. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1983;141:299.
43. Go H, Takeda M, Imai T, et al. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy for Cushing's syndrome: comparison with primary aldosteronism. Surgery 1995;117:11.
44. Querin S, Pomp A. Early experience with laparoscopic approach for adrenalectomy. Surgery 1993;114:1120.
45. Ghose RP, Hall PM, Bravo EL. Medical management of aldosterone producing adenomas. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:105.
46. Cohn K, Gottesman L, Brennan M. Adrenocortical carcinoma. Surgery 1986;100:1170.
47. Candel AG, Gattuso P, Reyes CV, Prinz RA, Castelli MJ. Fine needle aspiration biopsy of adrenal masses in patients with extra-adrenal malignancy. Surgery 1993;114:1132.
48. Hofle G, Gasser RW, Lhotta K, et al. Adrenocortical carcinoma evolving after diagnosis of preclinical Cushing's syndrome in an adrenal incidentaloma. A case report. Horm Res 1998;50:237.
49. Kasperlik-Zaluska AA, Migdalska BM, Makowska AM. Incidentally found adrenocortical carcinoma. A study of 21 patients. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:1721.
50. Ross NS, Aron DC. Hormonal evaluation of the patient with an incidentally discovered adrenal mass. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1401.
51. Reincke M, Nieke J, Krestin GP, et al. Preclinical Cushing's syndrome in adrenal “incidentalomas”: comparison with adrenal Cushing's syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1992;75:826.
52. Michel LA, deCanniere L, Hamoir E, et al. Asymptomatic adrenal tumours: criteria for endoscopic removal. Eur J Surg 1999;165:767.
53. McCorkell SJ, Miles NL. Fine-needle aspiration of catecholamine-producing adrenal masses: a possibly fatal mistake. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1985;145:113.
54. Kolomecki K, Pomorski L, Kuzdak K, Narebski J, Wichman R. The surgical treatment of incidentaloma. Neoplasma 1999;46:124.
55. Henry JF, Defechereux T, Gramatica L, Raffaelli M. Should laparoscopic approach be proposed for large and/or potentially malignant adrenal tumors? Langenbecks Arch Surg 1999;38:366.
56. Buell JF, Alexander HR, Norton JA, Yu KC, Fraker DL. Bilateral adrenalectomy for Cushing's syndrome: anterior versus posterior approach. Ann Surg 1997;225:63.
57. Gabrilove JL, Seman AT, Sabet R, Mitty HA, Nicolis GL. Virilizing adrenal adenoma with studies on the steroid content of the adrenal venous effluent and a review of the literature. Endocr Rev
1981;2:462.
58. Gabrilove JL, Frieberg EK, Nicolis GL. Peripheral blood steroid levels in Cushing's syndrome due to adrenocortical carcinoma or adenoma. Urology 1983;22:576.
59. Wells SA, Merke DP, Cutler GB Jr, Norton JA, Lacroix A. The role of laparoscopic surgery in adrenal disease. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998:831:3041.
60. Linos DA, Stylopoulos N, Boukis M, et al. Anterio, posterio, laparoscopic approach for management of adrenal tumors. Am J Surg 1997;173:120.
61. Doherty GM, Nieman LK, Cutler GB Jr, Chrousos GP, Norton JA. Time to recovery of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis after curative resection of adrenal tumors in patients with
Cushing's syndrome. Surgery 1990;108:1085.

62. van Heerden JA, Young WF Jr, Grant CS, Carpenter PC. Adrenal surgery for hypercortisolism-surgical aspects. Surgery 1995;117:466.
63. Ribeiro RC, Sandrini Neto R, Schell MJ, et al. Adrenocortical carcinoma in children: a study of 40 cases. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:67.
64. Chudler RM, Kay R. Adrenocortical carcinoma in children. Urol Clin North Am 1989;16:469.
65. Teinturier C, Pauchard MS, Brugieres L, et al. Clinical and prognostic aspects of adrenocortical neoplasms in childhood. Med Pediatr Oncol 1999;32:106.
66. Henley DJ, van Heerden JA, Grant CS, Carney JA, Carpenter PC. Adrenal cortical carcinoma: a continuing challenge. Surgery 1983;94:226.
67. Kasperlik-Zaluska AA, Migdalska BM, Zgliczynski S, Makowska AM. Adrenal carcinoma: a clinical study and treatment results of 52 patients. Cancer 1995;75:2587.
68. Dickstein G, Shechner C, Arad E, Best LA, Nativ O. Is there a role for low doses of mitotane as adjuvant therapy in ACC? J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998;83:3100.
69. Luton JP, Cerdas S, Billaud L, et al. Clinical features of adrenocortical carcinoma: prognostic factors and the effect of mitotane therapy. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1195.
70. Demure MJ, Somberg LB. Functioning and nonfunctioning adrenocortical carcinoma: clinical presentation and therapeutic strategies. Surg Clin North Am 1998:7:791.
71. Crucitti F, Bellantone B, Ferrante A, Boscherini M, Crucitti P. Italian registry for ACC. Surgery 1996;119:161.
72. Khorram-Manesh A, Ahlman H, Jansson S, et al. Adrenocortical carcinoma: surgery and mitotane for treatment and steroid profiles for follow-up. World J Surg 1998;22:605.
73. Appelqvist P, Kostiainen S. Multiple thoracotomy combined with chemotherapy in metastatic adrenal cortical carcinoma: a case report and review of the literature. J Surg Oncol 1983;24:1.
74. Potter DA, Strott CA, Javadpour N, Roth JA. Prolonged survival following six pulmonary resections for metastatic adrenal cortical carcinoma: a case report. J Surg Oncol 1984;25:273.
75. Jensen JC, Pass HI, Sindelar WF, Norton JA. Recurrent or metastatic disease in select patients with adrenocortical carcinoma. Arch Surg 1991;126:457.
76. Ballantone R, Ferrante A, Boscherini M, et al. Role of reoperation in recurrence of ACC: results from 188 cases collected in the Italian National Registry for ACC Surgery 1997; 122:1212.
77. Gutierrez ML, Crooke ST. Mitotane (o,p-DDD). Cancer Treat Rev 1980;7:49.
78. Ajani JA, Levin B, Wallace S. Systemic and regional therapy of advanced islet cell tumors. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1989;18:923.
79. Van Slooten H, Moolenaar AJ, Van Seters AP, Smeek D. The treatment of adrenocortical carcinoma with o,p-DDD: prognostic implications of serum levels monitoring. Eur J Clin Oncol
1984;20:47.
80. Vassilopoulou-Sellin R, Guinee VF, Klein MJ. Impact of adjuvant mitotane on the clinical course of patients with adrenal cancer. Cancer 1993;71:3119.
81. Decker RA, Elson P, Hogan TF. ECOG mitotane and Adriamycin in patients with ACC. Surgery 1991;110:1006.
82. Bodie B, Novick AC, Pontes JE, et al. The Cleveland Clinic experience with adrenal cortical carcinoma. J Urol 1989;141:257.
83. Venkatesh S, Hickey RC, Sellin RV, Fernandez JF, Samoan NA. Adrenal cortical carcinoma. Cancer 1989;64:765.
84. Decker RA, Elson P, Hogan TF, et al. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group study 1989: mitotane and Adriamycin in patients with advanced adrenocortical carcinoma. Surgery 1991;110:1006.
85. Haak HR, Van Seters AP, Moolenaar AJ. Mitotane therapy of adrenocortical carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1990;322:758.
86. Haak HR, Hermans J, van de Velde CS, et al. Optimal treatment of adrenocortical carcinoma with mitotane: results in a consecutive series of 96 patients. Br J Cancer 1994;69:947.
87. Kornely E, Schlaghecke R. Complete remission of metastasized adrenocortical carcinoma under o,p-DDD. Exp Clin Endocrinol 1994;102:50.
88. Grondal S, Cedermark B, Eriksson B, et al. Adrenocortical carcinoma. A retrospective study of a rare tumor with a poor prognosis. Eur J Surg Oncol 1990;16:500.
89. Bonacci R, Gigliotti A, Baudin E, et al. Cytotoxic therapy with etoposide and cisplatin in advanced adrenocortical carcinoma. Br J Cancer 1998;78,546.
90. Berruti A, Terzolo M, Pia A, Angeli A, Dogliottti L. Mitotane associated with etoposide, doxorubicin and cisplatin in treatment of advance ACC. Cancer 1998;10:2194.
91. Barzon L, Fallo F, Sonino N, Daniele O, Boscaro M. ACC: experience in 45 patients. Oncology 1997;54:490.
92. Berruti A, Terzolo M, Paccotti P. Favorable response of metastatic ACC to etoposide, Adriamycin and cisplatin. Tumori 1992;78:345.
93. Schlumberger M, Brugieres L, Gicquel C, et al. 5-Fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cisplatin as treatment for adrenal cortical carcinoma. Cancer 1991;67:2997.
94. Zidan J, Shpendler M, Robinson E. Treatment of metastatic ACC with etoposide and cisplatin after failure with mitotane. Am J Clin Oncol 1996;19:229.
95. Stein CA, LaRocca RV, Thomas R, McAtee N, Myers CE. Suramin: an anticancer drug with a unique mechanism of action. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:499.
96. LaRocca RV, Stein CA, Danesi R, et al. Suramin in adrenal cancer: modulation of steroid hormone production, cytotoxicity in vitro and clinical antitumor effect. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1990;71:497.
97. Arit W, Reincke M, Siekmann L, Winkelmann W, Allolio B. Suramin in adrenocortical cancer: limited efficacy and serious toxicity. Clin Endocrinol 1994;41:299.
98. Raymond E, Izbicka E, Soda H, et al. Activity of temozolomide against human tumor colony-forming units. Clin Cancer Res 1997;10:1769.
99. Fallo F, Pilon C, Barzon L, et al. Paclitaxel is an effective antiproliferative agent on the human NCI-H295 adrenocortical carcinoma cell line. Chemotherapy 1998;44:129.
100. Fallo F, Pilon C, Barzon L, et al. Effects of Taxol on the human NCI-H295 adrenocortical carcinoma cell line. Endocr Res 1996;22:709.
101. Wu YW, Chek CL, Knazck RA. An in vitro study of antitumor effects of gossypol in human SW-13 adrenocortical carcinoma. Cancer Res 1989;49:3754.
102. Avico M, Bossi G, Livieri C. Partial response after intensive chemotherapy in a child. Med Pediatr Oncol 1992;20:246.
103. Didolkar MS, Bescher RA, Elias EG, Moore RH. Natural history of adrenal cortical carcinoma: a clinicopathologic study of 42 patients. Cancer 1981;47:2153.
104. Icard P, Chapuis Y, Andreassian B, Bernard A, Proye C. Adrenocortical carcinoma in surgically treated patients: a retrospective study on 156 cases by the French Association of Endocrine
Surgery. Surgery 1992;112:972.
105. Pommier R, Brenna MF. An 11 year experience with adrenocortical cancer. Surgery 1992;112:1963.
106. Bates SE, Shieh CY, Mickley LA, et al. Mitotane enhances cytotoxicity of chemotherapy in cell lines expressing a multidrug resistance gene (mdr-1/P-glycoprotein) which is also expressed by
adrenocortical carcinomas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1991;73:18.
107. Christy NP. Adrenocorticotrophic activity in plasma of patients with Cushing's syndrome associated with pulmonary neoplasms. Lancet 1961;1:85.
108. Liddle GW, Island D, Meador CK. Normal and abnormal regulation of corticotropin secretion in man. Recent Prog Horm Res 1962;18:125.
109. Pass HI, Doppman JL, Nieman L, et al. Management of the ectopic ACTH syndrome due to thoracic carcinoids. Ann Thorac Surg 1990;50:52.
110. Proye C, Vix M, Goropoulos A, Kulo P, Leconte-Houcke M. High incidence of malignant pheochromocytomas. J Endocrinol Invest 1992;15:651.
111. Lairmore TC, Ball W, Baylin SB, Wells AS Jr. Management of pheochromocytomas in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 syndromes. Ann Surg 1993;217:595.
112. Loughlin KR, Gittes RF. Urological management of patients with von Hippel-Lindau's disease. J Urol 1986;136:789.
113. Nakagawara A. Malignant pheochromocytoma with ganglioneuroblastomatous elements in a patient with von Recklinghausen's disease. Cancer 1985;55:2794.
114. Mann SJ. Severe paroxysmal hypertension (pseudopheochromocytoma): understanding the cause and treatment. Arch Intern Med 1999;159:670.
115. Moley JF, Brother MB, Wells SA, et al. Low frequency of ras gene mutations in neuroblastomas, pheochromocytomas and medullary thyroid cancers. Cancer Res 1991;51:1596.
116. Khosia S, Patel VM, Hay ID, et al. Loss of heterozygosity suggests multiple genetic alterations in pheochromocytomas and medullary thyroid carcinomas. J Clin Invest 1991; 87:1691.
117. Duerr EM, Gimm O, Neuberg DS, et al. Differences in allelic distribution of two polymorphisms in the VHL-associated gene CUL2 in pheochromocytoma patients without somatic CUL2
mutations. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999;84:3207.
118. Lips KJM, Van der Sluys Veer J, Struyvenberg A, et al. Bilateral occurrence of pheochromocytoma in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome type 2a (Sipple's syndrome). Am J
Med 1981;70:1051.
119. Remine WH, Chong GC, van Heerden JA, Sheps SG, Harison EG. Current management of pheochromocytoma. Ann Surg 1974;179:740.
120. Sutton MGS, Sheps SG, Lie JT. Prevalence of clinically unsuspected pheochromocytoma. Review of a 50 year autopsy series. Mayo Clin Proc 1981;56:354.
121. Scott HW, Halter SA. Oncologic aspects of pheochromocytoma: the importance of follow-up. Surgery 1984;96:1061.
122. Beierwaltes WH, Sisson JC, Shapiro B, et al. Malignant potential of pheochromocytoma. Proc American Association of Cancer Research 1986;27:617.
123. Brown HM, Komorowski RA, Wilson SD, Demeure MJ, Zhu YR. Predicting metastasis of pheochromocytomas using DNA flow cytometry and immunohistochemical markers of cell proliferation:
a positive correlation between MIB-1 staining and malignant tumor behavior. Cancer 1999;86:1583.
124. Sheps SG, Jiang NS, Klec GG, van Heerden JA. Recent developments in the diagnosis and management of pheochromocytoma. Mayo Clin Proc 1990;65:88.
125. Helman LJ, Cohen PS, Averbuch SD, et al. Neuropeptide Y expression distinguishes malignant from benign pheochromocytoma. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1720.
126. Grouzmann E, Gicquel C, Pluin PF, et al. Neuropeptide Y and neuron specific enolase levels in benign and malignant pheochromocytomas. Cancer 1990;66:1833.
127. Medeiros LJ, Wolf BC, Balogh K, Federman M. Adrenal pheochromocytoma. A clinicopathologic review of 60 cases. Hum Pathol 1985;16:580.
128. Hanson MW, Feldman JM, Beam CA, Leight GS, Coleman E. Iodine 131labelled metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy and biochemical analyses in suspected pheochromocytoma. Arch Intern
Med 1991;151:1397.
129. Samaan NA, Hickey RC, Shutts PE. Diagnosis, localization and management of pheochromocytoma. Cancer 1988;62:2451.
130. Duncan MW, Compton P, Lazarus L, Smythe GA. Measurement of norepinephrine and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylglycol in urine and plasma for the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. N Engl J Med
1988;319:136.
131. MacDougall IC, Isles CG, Stewart H, et al. Overnight clonidine suppression test in the diagnosis and exclusion of pheochromocytoma. Am J Med 1988;84:993.
132. Bravo EL, Tarazi RC, Fouad FM, Vidt DG, Gifford RW. Clonidine suppression test: a useful aid in the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. N Engl J Med 1981;305:623.
133. Taylor HC, Mayes D, Anton AH. Clonidine suppression test for pheochromocytoma: examples of misleading results. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1986;63:238.
134. Welch TJ, Sheedy PF, van Heerden JA, et al. Pheochromocytoma: value of computed tomography. Radiology 1983;148:501.
135. Radin DR, Ralls PW, Boswell WD, et al. Pheochromocytoma: detection by unenhanced CT. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1986;146:741.
136. Velchik MG, Alavi A, Kressel HY, Engelman K. Localization of pheochromocytoma: MIBG, CT and MRI correlation. J Nucl Med 1989;30:328.
137. Shapiro B, Copp JE, Sisson JC, et al. Iodine-131 metaiodobenzylguanidine for the locating of suspected pheochromocytoma: experience in 400 cases. J Nucl Med 1985; 26:576.
138. Swenson SJ, Brown MJ, Sheps SG, et al. Use of 131I-MIBG scintigraphy in the evaluation of suspected pheochromocytoma. Mayo Clin Proc 1985;60:299.
139. Koizumi M, Endo K, Sakahara H, et al. Computed tomography and 131I-MIBG scintigraphy in the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. Acta Radiologica Diag 1986;27:305.
140. Fischer M, Galanski M, Winterberg B, Vetter H. Localization procedures in pheochromocytoma and neuroblastoma. Cardiology 1985;72:143.
141. Perry RR, Keiser HR, Norton JA, et al. Surgical management of pheochromocytoma with the use of metyrosine. Ann Surg 1990;212:621.
142. Imperato-McGinley J, Gautier T, Ehlers K, et al. Reversibility of catecholamine-induced dilated cardiomyopathy in a child with a pheochromocytoma. N Engl J Med 1987;316:793.
143. Steinsapir J, Carr AA, Prisant LM, Bransome ED Jr. Metyrosine and pheochromocytoma. Arch Intern Med 1997;157:901.
144. Proye C, Thevenin D, Cecat P, et al. Exclusive use of calcium channel blockers in preoperative and intraoperative control of pheochromocytomas: hemodynamics and free catecholamine
assays in ten consecutive patients. Surgery 1989;106:1149.
145. Irvin GL, Fishman LM, Sher JA, Yeung LK, Irane H. Pheochromocytoma lateral vs anterior operative approach. Ann Surg 1989;209:774.
146. Carneyl JA, Sizemore GW, Sheps SG. Adrenal medullary disease in multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2. Am J Clin Pathol 1976;66:279.
147. Cance WG, Wells SAJ. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type IIa. Curr Probl Surg 1985;22:1.
148. Kopf D, Bockisch A, Steinert H, et al. Octreotide scintigraphy and catecholamine response to an octreotide challenge in malignant pheochromocytoma. Clin Endocrinol 1997;46:39.
149. Tenenbaum F, Schlumberger M, Lumbroso J, Parmentier C. Beneficial effects of octreotide in a patient with metastatic paraganglioma. Eur J Cancer 1996;32:737.
150. van Heerden JA, Sheps SG, Hamberger B, et al. Pheochromocytoma: current status and changing trends. Surgery 1982;91:367.
151. Ein SH, Weitzman S, Thornes P, Seagram CG, Filler RM. Pediatric malignant pheochromocytoma. J Pediatric Surg 1994;29:1197.
152. Guo JZ, Gong LS, Chen SX, Luo BY, Xu MY. Malignant pheochromocytoma: diagnosis and treatment in fifteen cases. J Hypertens 1989;7:261.
153. Scott WH, Reynolds V, Green N, et al. Clinical experience with malignant pheochromocytoma. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1982;154:801.
154. Feldman JM. Treatment of metastatic pheochromocytoma with streptozotocin. Arch Intern Med 1983;143:1799.
155. Feldman JM. [In reply to a letter to the editor by Gross DJ, Schlank E, Ipp E.] Arch Intern Med 1985;145:368.
156. Krempf M, Lumbroso J, Mornex R, et al. Use of m-[131I]iodobenzylguanidine in the treatment of malignant pheochromocytoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1991;72:455.
157. Feldman JM, Frankel N, Coleman RE. Platelet uptake of the pheochromocytoma-scanning agent 131I-meta-iodobenzylguanidine. Metabolism 1984;33:397.
158. Vetter H, Fischer M, Muller-Rensing R, Vetter W, Winterberg B. [ 131I]-meta-iodobenzylguanidine in treatment of malignant pheochromocytomas. Lancet 1983;2:107.
159. Troncone L, Rufini V. 131I-MIBG therapy of neural crest tumors [review]. Anticancer Res 1997;17:1823.
160. Nakabeppu Y, Nakajo M. Radionuclide therapy of malignant pheochromocytoma with 131I-MIBG. Ann Nucl Med 1994;8:259.
161. Averbuch SD, Steakley CS, Young RC, et al. Malignant pheochromocytoma: effective treatment with a combination of cyclophosphamide, vincristine and dacarbazine. Ann Intern Med

1988;109:267.
162. Finklestein JZ, Klemperer MR, Evans A, et al. Multiagent chemotherapy for children with metastatic neuroblastoma: a report from children's cancer study group. Med Pediatr Oncol 1979;6:179.
163. Tato A, Orte L, Diz P, Quereda C, Ortuno J. Malignant pheochromocytoma, still a therapeutic challenge. Am J Hypertens 1997;10:479.
164. Tada K, Okuda Y, Yamashita K. Three cases of malignant pheochromocytomas treated with cyclophosphamide, vincristine and dacarbazine combination chemotherapy and
alpha-methyl-p-tyrosine to control hypercatecholaminemia. Horm Res 1998;49:295.
165. Sisson JC, Shapiro B, Shulkin BL, et al. Treatment of malignant pheochromocytomas with 131I-MIBG (metaiodobenzylguanidine) and chemotherapy. Am J Clin Oncol 1999; 22:364.
166. Berruti A, Terrzolo M, Pia A, Angeli A, Dogliotti L. Mitotane associated with etoposide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin in the treatment of advanced adrenocortical carcinoma. Italian Group for the
Study of Adrenal Cancer. Cancer 1998;83:2194.
167. Zidan J, Shpendler M, Robinson E. T reatment of metastatic adrenal cortical carcinoma with etoposide (VP-16) and cisplatin after failure with o,p'DDD. Clinical case reports. Am J Clin Oncol
1996;19:229.
168. Noshiro T, Honma H, Shimizu K, et al. Two cases of malignant pheochromocytoma treated with cyclophosphamide, vincristine and dacarbazine in a combined chemotherapy. Endocr J
1996;43:279.
169. Arai A, Naruse M, Naruse K, et al. Cardiac malignant pheochromocytoma with bone metastases. Intern Med 1998;37:940.

SECTION 38.5 Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 38.5
Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors
H. RICHARD ALEXANDER
ROBERT T. JENSEN
Introduction
Pathogenesis, Pathologic Features and Tumor Biology
Generally Malignant Neoplasms
Generally Benign Neoplasms: Insulinoma
Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis
Gastrinoma
Insulinoma
Nonfunctioning Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors
Other Rare Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors
Imaging and Localization of Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors
Treatment of Resectable Disease
Gastrinoma
Surgery To Cure Gastrinoma
Insulinoma
Other Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors
Treatment of Metastatic Disease
Chemotherapy
Hormonal Therapy with Somatostatin Analogs
Interferon-a
Hepatic Artery Embolization
Surgical Treatment
Liver Transplantation
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Pancreatic endocrine (or neuroendocrine) tumors (PETs) are uncommon neoplasms that share a number of features. 1,2 Histologically, they are classified as apudomas
and share cytochemical features with melanoma, pheochromocytoma, carcinoid tumors, and medullary thyroid carcinoma. 2 All amine precursor uptake and
decarboxylation (APUD) neoplasms have the capacity to synthesize and secrete polypeptide products that have specific endocrine hormone activity. Except for
insulinoma, each is malignant in most (more than 60%), if not all, cases ( Table 38.5-1). Each type is a vascular tumor sharing with the other types a similar
radiographic appearance and metastatic patterns of spread (primarily to regional lymph nodes and liver).

TABLE 38.5-1. Enteropancreatic Endocrine Tumors

PETs are considered functional if they are associated with a clinical syndrome due to ectopic hormone release or nonfunctional if not associated with clinical
symptoms. In the latter category are pancreatic polypeptide (PP) tumors (PPomas), as the hormone causes no specific symptoms. 1,3 In addition, some PETS are
associated with no known hormone elevation and histologically are indistinguishable from functional tumors. 1
In general, PETs are uncommon. Functional PETs are reported to have a prevalence of 10 per million population. 4 The prevalence in unselected autopsy studies is
0.5% to 1.5%, with fewer than 1 of 1000 being functional. 1,5 The incidence of clinically significant PETs is 3.6 to 4 per million population per year; nonfunctional PETs
or PPomas are reported to account for 15% to 30% of all PETs. 3,6 Gastrinomas or PPomas are the most common malignant PETs, whereas insulinoma is the most
common benign PET. Gastrinomas usually are clinically recognized because of the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES) and have been studied extensively. 7,8 and 9 This
chapter presents information in a format that reflects the many similarities of PETs, though detailed discussions of each tumor type are provided for those tumors
associated with unique issues.

PATHOGENESIS, PATHOLOGIC FEATURES, AND TUMOR BIOLOGY
GENERALLY MALIGNANT NEOPLASMS
In 1955, Zollinger and Ellison described two patients with severe peptic ulcer disease treatable only by total gastrectomy because of extreme hypersecretion of gastric
acid associated with a non-b islet cell tumor of the pancreas. 10 Analysis of tumor extracts via enzymatic degradation and amino acid analysis demonstrated that the
secretagogue in the tumor was identical to human antral gastrin 11,12; hence, these tumors are called gastrinomas. Studies estimate that the ZES occurs in one-half to
three patients per million population per year and varies from half as common to 1.2 times as common as insulinomas. 13
Almost all the early clinical manifestations are due to gastric acid hypersecretion secondary to hypergastrinemia. 14 Effective control of the gastric hypersecretion
either medically or surgically abolishes all clinical manifestations such as peptic ulcer disease or diarrhea. 14,15 Along with basal gastric acid hypersecretion,
hypergastrinemia causes trophic changes in the gastric mucosa, 16 with the result that patients with ZES have increased numbers of parietal cells and an increased
maximum acid secretory capacity. 14,16 Many patients with ZES have diarrhea and, in some patients, it is the sole presenting manifestation. The diarrhea is a result of
acid hypersecretion causing direct injury to the small intestinal mucosa, inactivation of pancreatic lipase, and precipitation of bile acids. ZES patients with diarrhea
become asymptomatic when the gastric acid hypersecretion is controlled, even though the hypergastrinemia remains unchanged. 14
Gastrin in both normal subjects and patients with ZES has been found in a number of different molecular sizes. In gastrinoma, gastrin 17 (G 17) is the major gastrin
component, composing 74% to 80% of the total immunoreactivity, with “big gastrin” or gastrin 34 (G 34), making up most of the remainder.17 In contrast, in sera from
normal subjects and patients without gastrinoma, G 34 contributes more than 60% of the total gastrin immunoreactivity. 14 In addition to G17 and G34, smaller and larger
forms of gastrin have been described in sera and gastrinomas from patients with ZES. 2,8,9,18,19 Also, a large-molecular-weight progastrin has been described in plasma

and tumors of patients with gastrinomas. 20,21 High amounts of progastrin have been found in patients with gastrinoma metastatic to liver. 20 The relative amount of G 17,
the amount of NH2-terminal fragments, and the ratio of the amount of G 17 amino-terminal immunoreactivity to the amount of G17 carboxy-terminal immunoreactivity
have been shown to be predictive of the extent of the gastrinoma by some investigators 22 but not others.20
In recent studies, the proportion of gastrinomas found at surgery in the duodenum and in lymph nodes near the pancreatic head has increased to greater than
50%,23,24,25 and 26 such that 65% to 90% of all gastrinomas found at surgery occur in the pancreatic head and duodenal area ( Table 38.5-2).23,25 Gastrinomas have also
been reported to occur occasionally in other sites such as the liver, stomach, jejunum, mesentery, common bile duct, heart, and spleen ( Fig. 38.5-1).14,28 In women,
ovarian gastrinomas can occur and are functionally indistinguishable from other gastrinomas. 14,27,28 and 29

TABLE 38.5-2. Sites of Apparent Primary Gastrinoma

FIGURE 38.5-1. Patient with a primary gastrinoma of the common bile duct, illustrating several important features of the disease. Computed tomography scan after
selective angiography (A) shows a 1.5-cm enhancing nodule (arrow) at neck of gallbladder just above the head of the pancreas, which is also seen on somatostatin
receptor scintigraphy (B). C: At surgical exploration, a discrete mass is seen within the wall of the common bile duct ( arrow shows primary tumor; 1, gallbladder; 2,
cystic duct; 3, common bile duct). The primary tumor after resection (D) was a primary intracholedochal gastrinoma (E), and the adjacent lumen of the bile duct (L) is
lined by normal epithelium. The tumor showed typical aggregation of neuroendocrine cells and dense vasculature characteristic of neuroendocrine tumors (F).
Immunoperoxidase stained positive for chromogranin, synaptophysin, and gastrin. (From ref. 29.)

At present, the cell of origin of gastrinomas and other PETs remains obscure. Recent studies have provided evidence that duodenal gastrinoma, which usually
contains many well-differentiated gastrin-containing (G) cells (in contrast to pancreatic gastrinoma), originates from gastrin cells in the duodenal crypts and Brunner's
glands. 30,31 Because pancreatic gastrinomas are pleomorphic with heterogeneous cell types, it has been proposed that they originate from a multipotential,
endocrine-programmed stem cell that undergoes somewhat inappropriate and incomplete differentiation toward the G cell. 30,31 As G cells are not normally present in
the adult pancreas, pancreatic gastrinomas are generally considered ectopic, whereas gastrinomas in areas that normally contain G cells (duodenum, stomach,
jejunum) are considered entopic. 14,32
In early studies in which patients presented late in the course of their disease, gastrinomas were found at surgery in most patients with ZES (81% to 94%). 33 In
subsequent studies of patients undergoing potentially curative surgery, no gastrinomas were found in as many as 50% of patients. 34 Recent studies have shown that
almost all the missed gastrinomas were in the duodenum. 25 Now that exploration of the duodenum is being performed routinely, gastrinomas are found in more than
90% of patients. 35
In early studies, 60% to more than 90% of patients with ZES had a malignant gastrinoma, 32,33,36,37 whereas in recent studies only one-half of patients have a malignant
gastrinoma at the time of diagnosis. Metastases usually are to peripancreatic lymph nodes and to the liver. 14 Bone metastases have been reported in approximately
30% of patients with metastatic gastrinoma in the liver. 38,39 and 40 The diagnosis of malignancy is complicated by the fact that no histologic criteria predict malignancy,
which can be established only by the presence of metastases. 2,14 Even metastatic disease can be difficult to establish, because a number of cases of extrapancreatic
gastrinoma localized in lymph nodes have been described with no evidence of primary tumor. Some of these cases have apparently been cured by excision of lymph
nodes, which suggests that the gastrinoma was not metastatic but rather originated in the lymph node. 41
Numerous studies have attempted to identify predictors of malignancy in gastrinomas as well as other PETs. Clinically, tumor size has been shown to be an important
predictor of liver metastases but not lymph node metastases. 26 Liver metastases occurred in 4% of gastrinomas less than 1 cm in diameter, in 28% of tumors
measuring 1.1 to 2.9 cm, and in 61% of tumors larger than 3 cm. 26 In several prospective studies, duodenal gastrinomas have been found to be malignant with
metastatic spread in 48% to 75% of cases. 25,26,42 In one large study involving 90 patients with ZES with pancreatic or duodenal gastrinomas, an equal percentage had
lymph node metastases (48% and 47%, respectively), showing that, as regards lymph node metastases, the malignant potential of ectopic and entopic gastrinomas
does not differ. 26 However, in this same study, 5% of patients with duodenal gastrinomas had liver metastases, which was significantly less ( P <.00001) than the 52%
incidence in patients with pancreatic gastrinomas. Because most duodenal gastrinomas are small (80% <1 cm) and most pancreatic gastrinomas are large (70% ³ 3
cm), it remains unclear whether tumor size and location are independent predictors.
Recent studies have attempted to use assessments of nuclear DNA to differentiate benign from malignant gastrinomas and other PETs. 2,43 DNA ploidy analysis in
some studies did not predict prognosis. 2 However, in a study of 59 patients with gastrinomas, 54% were diploid, 15% near-diploid, 0% pure tetraploid, and 25%
nontetraploid aneuploid, while another 5% exhibited multiple stem line aneuploidy. 44 All patients with multiple stem line aneuploidy had widespread metastases, and
the results of the DNA analysis correlated with disease extent. 44 Silver staining of nuclear organizer regions, expression of the proliferating nuclear antigen, and
expression of the cell cycle–associated antigen Ki-67, have all been reported to be potentially useful in differentiating benign from malignant PETs. 43 Chromosomal
abnormalities have recently been reported in PETs in five of nine patients, but such alterations were not associated with more aggressive tumor behavior. 45 The
protooncogene HER-2/neu recently was reported to be overexpressed in gastrinomas from 11 patients, with no mutations in the ras gene and a mutation in the p53
gene in only 1 of 11 patients. 46 No correlation with malignancy and HER-2/ neu was found, but a previous study by the same investigators on carcinoid tumors of the
gastrointestinal tract found a trend toward increased HER-2/ neu copy number and aggressiveness. 47 Similarly, no abnormal expression of p53 protein was found in
PETs in another study. 43
One study showed allelic loss on chromosome 11q13 in gastric carcinoids from patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) and ZES, suggesting that
the pathogenesis of these tumors is similar to that of the pancreatic and parathyroid tumors that develop in MEN 1 patients. 48,49 Using positional cloning, the gene for

MEN 1 has been located on chromosome 11q13,50 and approximately 30% of gastrinomas occurring in the sporadic setting have mutations in the gene. 51
Approximately 20% of patients with ZES have a familial form and demonstrate evidence of MEN 1 (Wermer's syndrome). MEN 1 is an autosomal dominant trait
characterized by hyperplasia or tumors of multiple endocrine organs, hyperparathyroidism being the most common abnormality. 52 Islet cell tumors of the pancreas are
the second most common abnormality, occurring in 82% of MEN 1 patients, with 57% having ZES and 25% insulinomas. 52,53 and 54 Pituitary and adrenal adenomas are
less common. Patients with MEN 1 with ZES differ from sporadic cases in that they frequently present at a younger age; their tumors are almost always multiple and
frequently small and, in some studies, patients with MEN 1 have an increased survival rate as compared with sporadic cases. 7,26,54
Immunocytochemical studies of tumors from patients with ZES have demonstrated gastrin in 90% to 100% in some studies and in 56% to 78% in others. 14 This
difference may be due to differences in tissue fixation or type of gastrin antibody used or to a low content of gastrin in small tumors. Recent studies have
demonstrated that more than 50% of tumors also demonstrated other peptides, including PP in 17% to 50%, insulin in 20% to 33%, glucagon in 0% to 33%,
somatostatin in 0% to 33%, and adrenocorticotropic hormone–like immunoreactivity in 0% to 30%. 14,54 In one report that reviewed seven different
immunocytochemical studies involving tumors from 75 patients with ZES, gastrin was found in 80%, insulin in 30%, human PP (HPP) in 35%, glucagon in 29%, and
somatostatin in 21%. 55 Therefore, it has become increasingly difficult, if not impossible, to determine which of the hormones found in a tumor by immunocytochemistry
are clinically important in a given patient. 14 The endocrine nature of the tumor is not always apparent and, at present, to obtain a precise classification, a combination
of clinical and biochemical data and immunocytochemical studies for peptides as well as for chromogranins, neuron-specific enolase, and synaptophysin frequently
are necessary.56,57
Plasma elevations of peptides other than gastrin frequently occur in ZES. 14 A prospective study in 45 consecutive cases of ZES demonstrated increased
concentrations in plasma of another peptide besides gastrin in 62%. 55 Motilin was the peptide most often present at abnormally high levels (29%), and neurotensin
and gastrin-releasing peptide were elevated in 20% and 10%, respectively. HPP was elevated in plasma in 27% of patients, which compares with plasma HPP
elevations of 10% to 60% described previously. 58,59 Some investigators have proposed that plasma HPP elevations might be a useful marker for identifying patients
with metastatic liver disease, 60 but other researchers do not agree. 61 Despite frequent reports of finding insulin, glucagon, or somatostatin by immunocytochemical
study, as well as occasional ZES patients with a concomitant insulinoma 62 or glucagonoma, no patient had increased amounts of these peptides in plasma in the
aforementioned prospective study of 45 patients. 55 The presence or absence of abnormal plasma levels of a particular peptide or the extent of elevation did not
correlate with location of tumor, extent of tumor, or the presence or absence of a particular symptom. 63 Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) production in PETs,
particularly in ZES patients, is associated with a very aggressive tumor phenotype. 40,64
Elevated concentrations of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) subunits (a or b chains) in sera or in the tumor by immunocytochemistry occur in some patients with
gastrinoma and may be predictive of malignancy. 57 In a study of 30 patients with ZES, 57% of patients with malignant and 45% with benign disease had elevated
concentrations of a-HCG in plasma. 65 Seven patients had elevated levels of b-HCG in plasma, with four having malignant disease. This study demonstrates that
elevated plasma concentrations of a- or b-HCG are not useful in predicting malignancy.
Chromogranin A is a 48-kD protein that is co-stored and co-released with peptide hormones from gastrointestinal tract endocrine cells and tumors 57 and is not
produced by nonendocrine cells. Immunocytochemical staining for chromogranin A has shown its presence in gastrinomas, carcinoids, antral G cells, and fundic
enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells of the stomach. 57,66 Elevated levels in the plasma are reported to be one of the best markers for PETs, although chromogranin levels
also are elevated in carcinoid and other neuroendocrine tumors. 57 In a recent study of 72 patients with PETs or carcinoid tumors, 99% had elevated plasma
chromogranin A levels, 88% chromogranin B levels, and 6% chromogranin C levels. 67 In another study, plasma chromogranin A levels were measured in 112 patients
with ZES, and the value correlated significantly with fasting serum gastrin (FSG) levels. 68 However, there was no correlation between the plasma level of
chromogranin A and the amount of tumor, presence or absence of metastatic disease, or presence or absence of MEN 1. 68
Histologic studies have demonstrated the general similarity of PETs and carcinoid tumors. 1,2 Different histologic classifications have been proposed based on growth
patterns, including a glandular pattern, solid nests of cells (solid pattern), a trabecular or ribbon-like structure (gyriform pattern), and unclassified pattern. 1,2,14 Similar
patterns have been demonstrated in tumors from patients with other endocrine tumors, and the type of histologic pattern does not correlate with the type of hormone
produced, clinical symptoms, or malignancy. Ultrastructural classifications have all been proposed on the basis of the type of granules seen, but this also does not
correlate with malignancy or clinical features. 2,14
GENERALLY BENIGN NEOPLASMS: INSULINOMA
Insulinomas were first recognized by Whipple, 69 who described 30 patients with hypoglycemia and pancreatic adenomas. Whipple's triad consists of the characteristic
symptoms of hypoglycemia associated with blood glucose levels of less than 50 mg/dL and immediate relief after ingestion of glucose and have, for many years,
remained the major criteria for the diagnosis of insulinoma. 69 Insulinomas usually occur in patients between the ages of 20 and 75 years. The average age at
presentation is between 44 and 46 years, and there is a preponderance of women in most series (60%). 1,70,71
Insulinomas are the opposite of gastrinomas, in that whereas 60% to 90% of gastrinomas are malignant, only 5% to 11% of insulinomas are malignant. 1,70,71,72 and 73
Most insulinomas are found to be solitary benign pancreatic nodules, often encapsulated, with only 2% to 10% of patients having multiple tumors. 1,70,71 In a patient
with multiple insulinomas, MEN 1 should be suspected. 52 Insulinomas are uniformly distributed throughout the entire pancreas and are usually less than 1.5 cm in
maximum diameter.72,73

CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Resection is the only curative modality for patients with PETs, and the success of operation is contingent on establishing the correct diagnosis, determining whether a
patient may belong to a MEN kindred, performing appropriate radiographic imaging studies to assess the location of the primary tumor and the extent of regional or
distant metastatic spread, and ensuring adequate medical management of the functional sequelae of excess hormone production preoperatively.
GASTRINOMA
Gastrinomas are slightly more common in men (60%) than in women (40%). The mean age at diagnosis is 45 to 50 years, and approximately 20% of patients have
MEN 1. The most common presentation in patients with ZES is abdominal pain in 26% to 58%, which usually cannot be differentiated from pain caused by other
common acid peptic disorders. 8,9,74 However, in some studies, a significant proportion of individuals (14% to 25%) have no peptic ulcer or abdominal pain at the time
of diagnosis. 74 Diarrhea is the initial symptom in 37% to 73% of patients and, in 15% to 18%, it is the only symptom. In one study involving 122 patients with ZES,
esophageal symptoms, endoscopic abnormalities, or both were present in 61% of patients. 75 In early studies, up to 93% of patients had a peptic ulcer and, in 36%, the
ulcers were multiple or in unusual locations. 8,9 Although the decreased severity of peptic ulcer disease at diagnosis suggests that in patients with ZES diagnoses are
being made earlier, in almost all series a delay of 3 to 6 years still exists between the onset of symptoms and diagnosis. 76 Intestinal perforation, especially of the
jejunum, is a presenting event in up to 7% of patients with ZES. 77
The diagnosis should be suspected on the basis of the clinical presentation and established in almost all patients by demonstrating elevated basal gastric acid
secretion [basal acid output (BAO)] and fasting hypergastrinemia. 7 Between 38% and 68% of patients have a solitary peptic ulcer, and 14% to 25% have no peptic
ulcer. ZES should be suspected in the clinical setting of peptic ulcer with diarrhea, familial peptic ulcer, peptic ulcer in unusual locations, and recurrent or resistant
peptic ulcer. ZES should be particularly suspected in patients with peptic ulcers that persist or recur despite treatment for Helicobacter pylori infection or with
H 2-receptor antagonists, in patients with severe esophagitis, and in patients with duodenal ulcers without H pylori infection. 74H pylori is present in 90% to 98% of
patients with idiopathic duodenal ulcer disease, and 90% heal with H pylori eradication; in ZES, fewer than 50% of patients have H pylori infection. In all patients who
have peptic ulcer disease severe enough to require gastric surgery, at least one preoperative FSG level should be obtained.
To make the diagnosis of ZES, it is necessary to demonstrate an FSG elevated above 200 pg/mL and an elevated BAO. 8,74,78 The FSG concentration usually is
obtained first, and only rarely do normal values occur in patients with ZES. 79,80 Although nearly 32% of patients with ZES have an FSG of at least 1000 pg/mL, in the

remaining two-thirds the FSG is elevated but not to the level of 1000 pg/mL. 81 Two general types of disorders other than ZES are also known to cause elevation in
FSG: those associated with gastric acid hypersecretion and those associated with hypochlorhydria or achlorhydria, including chronic gastritis, gastric cancer, and
pernicious anemia and in postvagotomy patients. 8,9 One of the most common causes of FSG elevation is drug-induced hypergastrinemia due to inhibition of acid
secretion with H +K+-ATPase inhibitors (omeprazole, lansoprazole). 8 Similarly, H pylori infection can, on occasion, cause elevations of FSG in the range seen in ZES. 82
No absolute level of elevation in FSG distinguishes patients with disorders of acid hypersecretion versus hyposecretion; they can be distinguished only by direct
assessment of acid output. If facilities are not available to measure the BAO, then a simple determination of the pH of the gastric contents (while the patient is not
taking antisecretory medications) should be performed. A pH of 2.5 or higher virtually excludes the diagnosis of ZES. 78
The most commonly used secretory criteria for diagnosing ZES are a BAO of at least 15 mEq/h in patients who have not undergone previous acid-reducing operations
and at least 5 mEq/h in patients who have had previous acid-reducing operations. 8,74 The mean BAO in various series ranged from 34 to 53 mEq/h for patients with a
history of previous acid-reducing surgery. 14 A BAO of at least 15 mEq/h will include up to 99% of patients with ZES and exclude 90% of patients with routine duodenal
ulcers. In patients who have undergone previous acid-reducing surgery, the mean BAO exceeds 5 mEq/h in most studies but, in 6% to 45% of ZES patients, is less
than 5 mEq/h. 78 Patients with ZES also have an elevated maximum acid output (MAO) and an elevated BAO/MAO ratio that often exceeds 0.6. 74,83 However,
diagnostic criteria based on the MAO or BAO/MAO ratio offer no advantage over an elevated BAO alone. 8,9
If a patient has an FSG of at least 1000 pg/mL and a gastric pH of less than 2.5, then the diagnosis of ZES generally is established. 1,74 The only other disorder that
can mimic ZES in this capacity is retained gastric antrum syndrome, an uncommon condition that occurs in patients who have undergone a Billroth II
gastroenterostomy with a portion of antrum left attached to the excluded proximal duodenal stump. This diagnosis can be excluded in patients after gastric surgery by
the secretin stimulation test and by gastric 99mTc pertechnetate scanning. In patients with only moderately elevated FSG levels and a gastric pH of less than 2.5, ZES
must be differentiated from retained gastric antrum syndrome, H pylori infection, chronic gastric outlet obstruction, antral G-cell hyperplasia, massive small bowel
resection and, rarely, chronic renal failure. These conditions are best distinguished from ZES by the use of various gastrin-provocative tests, including the secretin
test,84,85 calcium infusion test, 53,85 and meal test.86 The sensitivity of the secretin stimulation test is superior to the calcium and meal-provocative tests and is the one
most commonly used.87 Gastrin levels after secretin increased by 110 pg/mL in 93%, by more than 200 pg/mL in 87%, 81 and by more than 50% in 85%87 of patients
with ZES. Because of its ease, lack of side effects, high sensitivity, and very low occurrence of false-positive outcomes, the secretin test is the diagnostic provocative
test of choice; a rise in gastrin of 200 ng/mL is diagnostic. The calcium infusion test should be reserved for the rare patient in whom ZES is strongly suspected but the
secretin test is negative. 81
Antral G-cell hyperplasia is reported to mimic ZES clinically, with elevated FSG and BAO. 88 This syndrome frequently occurs in patients after vagotomy, is due to
increased numbers of antral G cells, is curable by antrectomy, may be associated with H pylori infections, and is differentiated from ZES by a negative secretin test
and an exaggerated (at least 100% increase) postmeal serum gastrin level. Antral G-cell hyperfunction is similar to antral G-cell hyperplasia except that there are
normal numbers of G cells and the syndrome is frequently familial, with autosomal dominant inheritance, and is associated with hyperpepsinogenemia I. 89 This
syndrome was reported to be distinguishable from ZES by its association with a negative secretin test and an exaggerated increase in postprandial serum gastrin. 81,89
In patients with ZES, only 30% had a greater than 100% increase and 10% had a greater than 150% increase in the postprandial serum gastrin level. 86 Therefore, the
meal test actually is frequently positive in patients with ZES and does not reliably differentiate ZES from antral syndromes.
Chronic gastric outlet obstruction can be difficult to distinguish from ZES because the obstruction can be caused by ZES or it can mimic ZES and be secondary to
other causes of duodenal obstruction. 90 ZES can be differentiated from the other causes of obstruction by a secretin test and prolonged gastric suction. 91 Massive
small bowel resection can cause a transient hypergastrinemia and elevation of BAO and can be distinguished from ZES by history and the secretin test. Chronic renal
failure and H pylori infections can cause hypergastrinemia, which is usually associated with acid hyposecretion, although occasionally it may be associated with acid
hypersecretion82,92 and can be differentiated from ZES by the secretin test.
INSULINOMA
The clinical symptoms of insulinoma are due to hypoglycemia in almost all instances. 4,70,71 Most symptoms are neuroglycopenic in nature and include visual
disturbances (59%), confusion (51%), altered consciousness (38%), and weakness (32%). Seizures occur but are uncommon (23%). 4,70,71 Symptoms also can occur
due to excess catecholamine release (adrenergic symptoms), such as sweating (43%) and tremulousness (23%). 71 In one study, 49% of patients had both
neuroglycopenic and adrenergic symptoms, 38% had neuroglycopenic symptoms only, and 12% had adrenergic symptoms only. 4 Symptoms are characteristically
associated with fasting, a delayed meal, or exercise.
The diagnosis of insulinoma can be established only by documenting symptomatic hypoglycemia with inappropriately elevated serum insulin levels during a monitored
fast (Table 38.5-3).4 Hypoglycemia usually is defined as a blood glucose level of less than 50 mg/dL in the fasting state. In healthy individuals, the blood glucose
value usually does not decrease to less than 70 mg/dL after an overnight fast. In more than 97% of individuals, a supervised fast of 48 hours or less will be sufficient
to diagnose insulinoma by the development of clinical symptoms and a plasma glucose level of less than 50 mg/dL. 4 In addition, patients with the diagnosis will
usually have serum insulin levels greater than 5 µU/mL, and 97% will have levels greater than 10 µU/mL. An insulin-glucose ratio greater than 0.3 is typical. 93 In some
normal obese subjects, because of hyperinsulinemia due to insulin resistance, the fasting plasma insulin-glucose ratio may be elevated and may mimic the pattern in
insulinoma.70,71 In these patients, the fasting glucose is normal and, with prolonged fasting, the blood glucose level does not decrease to less than 55 mg/dL.

TABLE 38.5-3. Common Diagnostic Criteria for Insulinoma

A number of other conditions can cause fasting hypoglycemia with increased plasma insulin levels, including causes of organic hyperinsulinism due to pancreatic islet
cell disease aside from insulinoma, factitious use of excessive insulin or hypoglycemia agents, or autoantibodies against the insulin receptor. 1,4,70,94,95 To differentiate
insulinoma from these other conditions, additional tests are useful, including plasma determination of proinsulin, C-peptide level, antibodies to insulin, and plasma
sulfonylurea levels. Because endogenous insulin is synthesized as a precursor, proinsulin, quantification of the higher-molecular-weight component, called the
proinsulin-like component, is useful. In patients with surreptitious use of insulin or oral hypoglycemia agents, the proinsulin level is either normal or decreased. 95 The
measurement of C peptide has proven useful in differentiating organic hypersecretion of insulin from patients surreptitiously using insulin because commercial insulin
preparations contain no C peptide. In insulinoma, the characteristic finding is either an elevated or normal plasma C-peptide concentration, whereas in patients
surreptitiously using insulin, the plasma insulin level is high and the C-peptide level low. 70,71,95
NONFUNCTIONING PANCREATIC ENDOCRINE TUMORS
Nonfunctioning PETs and PPomas present in the fourth and fifth decade of life. 4,32,96 PPomas release the hormone pancreatic polypeptide, which has no known
functional sequelae. 1 Originally it was thought that nonfunctioning PETs did not release any hormone products, but these lesions have since been shown to secrete
chromogranins, a-HCG or b-HCG subunits, or other peptides that do not cause symptoms. 57 Increasingly, what in the past were believed to be nonfunctioning PETs

now are appreciated to have elevated plasma PP levels. In one study, one-half to three-fourths of PETs not associated with any clinical syndrome and classified as
nonfunctioning were found to be PPomas. Elevated plasma PP is specific for endocrine pancreatic tumors; of 53 patients with adenocarcinoma of the pancreas, none
had elevated plasma PP levels. 97 Currently, no data are available to suggest that nonfunctioning PETs without elevated PP and PPomas differ in biologic behavior or
presentation. 1 Immunohistochemically nonfunctioning PETs and PPomas can stain positively for numerous other gastrointestinal peptides. In one series of 30
nonfunctioning tumors, 50% displayed insulin-like immunoreactivity, 30% glucagon, 43% PP, and 13% somatostatin, and only 13% stained for no peptide. 98 With
these tumors, symptoms arise largely from mechanical or mass effects of the neoplasm, and therefore the tumors are diagnosed late, when they are quite large and
locally invasive.
They are usually solitary tumors except in patients with MEN 1, in whom multiple adenomas are seen. 2,3 The tumors are distributed throughout the pancreas at a
pancreatic head-body-tail ratio of 7:1:1.5. 4 The malignancy rate varies from 64% to 92%. 97
Chromogranin A and B levels are elevated in almost all patients with nonfunctioning PETs. 67 Elevated plasma levels of PP do not establish the diagnosis of a PPoma
even when a pancreatic mass is present. Plasma PP levels are reported to be elevated in 22% to 71% of patients with functional PETs in various studies, 1,99 as well
as in nonpancreatic carcinoid tumors. Furthermore, elevated plasma levels of PP can occur in other situations such as old age; after bowel resection; with alcohol
abuse; during certain infections; in chronic noninfective inflammatory disorders, acute diarrhea, chronic renal failure, diabetes, chronic relapsing pancreatitis, and
hypoglycemia; or after eating. 99,100 To increase the specificity of an elevated plasma level for a PPoma, an atropine suppression test may be used. In one study of 48
patients with elevated plasma PP levels, atropine (1 mg intramuscularly) did not suppress PP levels in any of the 18 patients with PETs but did suppress the level by
50% in all patients without tumors. 59
Patients present with abdominal pain in 36% and jaundice in 28% of cases; in 16% of patients, the tumors are found incidentally at surgery and, in the remaining
patients, a variety of symptoms due to the tumor mass are present. 1,101 The average delay from onset of symptoms until diagnosis varied from 5 months to 2 to 7
years. 97
OTHER RARE PANCREATIC ENDOCRINE TUMORS
The VIPoma syndrome, also commonly called the Verner-Morrison syndrome, was first described by Verner and Morrison in 1958. 102 Because of the resemblance of
the diarrheal fluid to that seen in patients with cholera, the terms pancreatic cholera and endocrine cholera 103 and the abbreviation WDHA32 (watery diarrhea,
hypokalemia, and achlorhydria) have also been used for this condition. The tumors occur in a bimodal distribution. The mean age for adults at diagnosis is 50 years,
with a range of 32 to 81 years. There is a female predominance. In children, the mean age at diagnosis is 2 to 4 years, with a range of 10 months to 9 years. 104
In adults, more than 80% of VIPomas are located in the pancreas, 1,4 with rare cases caused by intestinal carcinoids or pheochromocytomas that produce vasoactive
intestinal peptide (VIP). 105 VIPomas are usually large solitary tumors. 1,106 In one series, only 2% of tumors were multiple, with 50% to 75% reported to be in the
pancreatic tail. 105 One- to two-thirds of patients with VIPomas have metastases at the time of diagnosis or surgery. 103 Characteristically in children younger than 10
years, and rarely in adults (5% of cases), VIPoma syndrome is due to a ganglioneuroma or ganglioneuroblastoma. These extrapancreatic tumors are less often
malignant (10%) than are pancreatic VIPomas. 105
Using immunocytochemical studies, 34% to 38% of VIPomas also stain for HPP, 19% for glucagon, 10% for somatostatin, 5% for insulin, and 0% for gastrin. 98,107
VIPomas also elaborate the peptide histidine methionine (PHM-27), a 27–amino acid peptide that shares with VIP a common precursor peptide,
pre-pro-VIP/PHM-27.1,2,103 The presence of immunoreactive VIP is strongly suggestive for VIPoma, as this peptide rarely is found in other pancreatic endocrine tumors
(10 of 104 pancreatic endocrine tumors in one study). 107
Plasma levels of VIP are consistently elevated in patients with the VIPoma syndrome and appear to be responsible for the functional syndrome ( Table 38.5-4).1,103,105
A continuous infusion of VIP for 10 hours in normal human subjects to achieve plasma levels similar to those seen in patients with the VIPoma syndrome produced
watery diarrhea in 6 to 7 hours. 108 The principal features of VIPoma syndrome are the presence of severe secretory diarrhea associated with hypokalemia and
dehydration. 1,103,104 and 105 The diarrhea is copious, all patients with VIPoma producing more than 3 L/d. 103,105 A volume of less than 700 mL/d has been proposed to rule
out the diagnosis of VIPoma. 109 Cramping pain or colic is reported in 35% to 63% of patients. 103,105 Gross steatorrhea usually is not present; in one study, none of 52
patients with VIPomas had 24-hour fecal fat greater than 15 g/d 105 and, in another study, 84% of the patients did not have steatorrhea. 103 Weight loss is almost
universally present. 105 Erythematous flushing of the head or trunk area is characteristic and reported in 23% of patients. The clinical laboratory studies invariably
demonstrate hypokalemia (83% to 100%) and, to a lesser degree, hypercalcemia (41%), hypochlorhydria (70%), and mild hyperglycemia (18%). 1,103,104 and 105
Hypokalemia is often severe, potassium levels being less than 2.5 mmol/L at some time in 93% of patients. 105

TABLE 38.5-4. Symptoms Commonly Associated with Rare Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors

The diagnosis of VIPoma requires the documentation of an elevated plasma concentration of VIP and the presence of a large volume of secretory diarrhea. 1,103,110 A
large number of possible causes for the diarrhea can be excluded by fasting the patient because, in patients with VIPomas, the diarrhea persists during fasting. 1,103,109
The diarrheal fluid should be characteristic of a secretory diarrhea, 109 wherein the stool electrolytes can account for all of the stool water osmolality [(sodium +
potassium) × 2 = measured osmolality]. 109 Other diseases can produce a chronic, large-volume secretory diarrhea and can be confused with VIPoma, one such
syndrome being the pseudo-VIPoma syndrome.109 Other causes of such diarrhea include ZES and chronic laxative abuse. 111 In addition, some cases of secretory
diarrhea are of unknown origin. 111,112
The range for normal fasting plasma VIP levels in most laboratories is 0 to 170 pg/mL. 104,105 In one series of patients with VIPomas, the mean value was 965 pg/mL,
and the lowest value was 225 pg/mL. 104 In contrast, in another large study, the mean value in patients with VIPomas was 675 pg/mL, the highest value seen in a
normal patient being 53 pg/mL and the lowest value seen in a VIPoma patient being 160 pg/mL. 105
In 1942, the association of a pancreatic tumor with a skin rash was first described. 113 Then, in 1966, McGavran et al. 114 reported a patient with an elevated fasting
glucagon level, dermatitis, diabetes, and a pancreatic endocrine tumor. Later, in 1973, Wilkinson 115 described the rash associated with this endocrine tumor as
necrolytic migratory erythema. Mallinson et al. 116 specifically established the association of a cutaneous rash with glucagon-producing tumors of the pancreas when
they reported nine cases in 1974.
Most glucagonomas are large at the time of diagnosis, the average size being between 5 and 10 cm. Glucagonomas have a predilection for arising in the pancreatic
tail in 50% to 80% of patients. 117 In one study, 22% of these tumors were in the head, 14% in the body, and 51% in the pancreatic tail. 118 Most glucagonomas are
malignant, and the most common site of metastatic spread is the liver. Less commonly, there is spread to lymph nodes, bone, and mesentery. In most cases,

glucagonomas are within the pancreas; however, a glucagonoma associated with the typical clinical syndrome was found in the proximal duodenum. 117
Glucagonomas usually occur as a single tumor, although in 10% of patients in one series, multiple tumors or diffuse involvement by a single mass was found. 117
Glucagonomas usually occur in middle to late age, with only 16% of cases occurring in individuals younger than 40 years and most occurring at 50 to 70 years of
age.117 The typical dermatitis occurs in 64% to 90% of patients, diabetes mellitus or glucose intolerance in 83% to 90%, weight loss in 56% to 90%, diarrhea in 14% to
15%, abdominal pain in 12%, and thromboembolic disease with venous thrombosis in 24% and with pulmonary emboli in 11%; occasionally, psychiatric disturbances
also are seen (see Table 38.5-4).1,117,118 and 119 Laboratory abnormalities include anemia in 44% to 85% of patients, hypoaminoacidemia in 26% to 100%,
hypocholesterolemia in 80%, and renal glycosuria. 1,118
The pathophysiology of the glucagonoma syndrome is related to the known actions of glucagon. Glucagon stimulates glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis, ketogenesis,
lipolysis, and insulin secretion, as well as affecting gastrointestinal tract secretion, inhibiting pancreatic and gastric secretion, inhibiting intestinal motility, and
increasing heart rate and contractility. Hyperglycemia in glucagonoma results from the increased hepatic glycogenolysis and glyconeogenesis. Weight loss has been
attributed to the known catabolic effects of glucagon. 119 It has not been clearly established that the skin rash is due to the hyperglucagonemia per se, because in
numerous patients given large doses of glucagon over extended periods of time, the skin rash did not develop. 1,119 Possibly, the glucagon-induced
hypoaminoacidemia that develops in 80% to 95% of patients may be involved, because correction of the hypoaminoacidemia has been shown to correct the dermatitis
without changing plasma glucagon concentrations in some patients. 1,119,120 The similarity of the lesions to those seen in patients with zinc deficiencies has resulted in
trials of zinc therapy in some patients, with observed benefit 119; however, plasma zinc levels are normal in most cases.
Glucagon is one of the most frequently recognized peptides in immunocytochemical studies of PETs, though in many cases it is not associated with any syndrome. In
one series of 1366 autopsy cases, a frequency of 0.8% adenomas was reported, and all contained glucagon-producing cells. 98,119 The morphology of most
glucagon-producing tumors demonstrates no general features that distinguish them from other PETs. 1,98,117,119
The presence of cutaneous lesions often precedes the diagnosis of the syndrome for long periods, with a mean of 6 to 8 years and a maximum of 18 years. Typically,
the rash starts as an erythematous patch, usually at periorofacial or intertriginous areas such as the groin, buttocks, thighs, or perineum, and then spreads laterally.
The lesions later become raised, with superficial, central blistering. The top of the bullae frequently detach or rupture, leaving eroded areas that crust. The lesions
tend to heal in the center, while the edges continue to spread with a crusting well-defined edge. Healing is associated with the development of hyperpigmentation.
This entire sequence characteristically takes 1 to 2 weeks, so that while some new lesions are developing, others are healing; therefore, a mixed pattern of erythema,
bullous formation with epidermal separation, crusting, and hyperpigmentation together with normal skin can occur. The histopathology can be as varied as the clinical
presentation. 117 Glossitis or angular stomatitis is reported to occur in 34% to 68% of patients.
Once the diagnosis is suspected, it can be confirmed by establishing the presence of a marked elevation in plasma glucagon concentration. In most laboratories, the
upper limit of normal for fasting glucagon concentration is 150 to 200 pg/mL. In one large review of glucagonomas, only two patients had a plasma glucagon level of
200 to 500 pg/mL, four patients had a level between 500 and 1000 pg/mL, and 52 patients had a level in excess of 1000 pg/mL. 118 These results are in agreement
with another study,117 in which the mean plasma glucagon concentration in 73 cases of glucagonoma was 2110 ± 334 pg/mL, with a range of 550 to 6600 pg/mL and
no result of less than 500 pg/mL. Hyperglucagonemia (generally <500 pg/mL) is reported to occur in chronic renal insufficiency, diabetic ketoacidosis, prolonged
starvation, acute pancreatitis, acromegaly, hypercortisolism, septicemia, severe burns, severe stress (trauma, exercise), familial hyperglucagonemia, and hepatic
insufficiency. 117,119
Somatostatinomas release somatostatin, a hormone that inhibits numerous endocrine and exocrine functions. Release of almost all gastrointestinal tract hormones,
including insulin, glucagon, gastrin, secretin, cholecystokinin, and motilin, is inhibited by somatostatin. In addition to the inhibition of endocrine secretions,
somatostatin has direct effects on a number of target organs, including inhibition of gastric acid secretion, increased intestinal motility, and reduced intestinal
absorption of fat. In 1977, the first two cases of somatostatinoma were described by Ganda et al. 121 and Larsson et al.122 Somatostatinomas are the least common
PET, fewer than 50 cases having been described. 123 Patients characteristically have diabetes mellitus, gallbladder disease, diarrhea, weight loss, steatorrhea, and
hypochlorhydria (see Table 38.5-4).1,97,103,124,125
Somatostatinomas occur in the pancreas in 56% to 75% of cases, and the remainder occur in the upper small intestine. 97,125 The tumors have a predilection for the
pancreatic head and occur there two to three times as often as in the body or tail. 97,125 In 90% of patients, the tumors are solitary 125 and range from 1.5 to 10.0 cm in
diameter. Tumors demonstrate evidence of metastatic spread at diagnosis or operation in 70% to 92% of patients. 97,125 Metastases usually occur in the liver (75% of
patients with metastases) but also in the regional lymph nodes (31%) and, less frequently, in bone. 97,125
Electron-microscopical studies show that the secretory granules are typical of those in D cells in 89% of the tumors examined. 97,125 Immunocytochemical analysis
shows somatostatin-like immunoreactive material in tumors that, in addition, contained insulin (33%), calcitonin (27%), and gastrin (13%).
The mean age of patients is affected with somatostatinomas is 50 years. 97,125 For patients with intestinal somatostatinomas, 43% were women, as compared with 66%
with pancreatic tumors. 125 Diabetes mellitus was present in 95% of patients with pancreatic tumors and in 21% of those with intestinal tumors. 97 Gallbladder disease
was seen in 94% of pancreatic and 36% of intestinal tumor patients, and weight loss was noted in 90% of pancreatic and 44% of intestinal cases. 97 Steatorrhea and
hypochlorhydria occurred in 83% to 86% of pancreatic tumor cases but in only 12% to 17% of intestinal tumor cases. 1,97 Symptoms attributable to excess somatostatin
release are seen in no more than 45% of patients in some studies. 123
GRFomas are the most recently described PET syndrome and feature excessive release of growth hormone–releasing factor (GRF). 126,127 and 128 In reviews of
GRFomas, 29% to 30% originated in the pancreas, 53% in the lung, and 10% in small intestinal tumors, and there was a rare case in the adrenal gland. 129,130
Multiple pancreatic tumors have been reported in 30% of patients with GRFomas in one series. 129 Approximately 40% of all GRFomas occur in patients with ZES and,
in another 40%, Cushing's syndrome was present. 1,129 Tumors generally are large (>6 cm), varying from 1 to 25 cm in diameter. 129 In one series, tumor size, GRF
levels, and the presence of metastases were not related. 129
On light-microscopical studies, typical features of a PET are seen, the lesion being composed of trabecular or solid nests and sheets of uniform tumor cells. 123,129 In
electron-microscopical studies, tumor cells containing 100- to 250-nm secretory granules are seen. 129,131,132 and 133 Immunochemical studies demonstrated
GRF-immunoreactive material in all tumors examined, with 10% to 80% of cells possessing GRF. 123,129,130 GRF-immunoreactive materials were seen in 31% of all
PETs in one study 134 but in 0% to 100% in other pathological studies, 126,127,129,135 although very few of these patients had acromegaly. The known actions of GRF as a
stimulant of growth hormone release account for the clinical presentation with acromegaly. 126,127,129,135
Patients are between 15 and 63 years old, the average age being 38. 123,129,130 Patients with intestinal GRFomas tend to be younger, with two of three patients in one
study being younger than 20 years. 129 A female preponderance (73%) is seen for all GRFomas. Acromegalic features are indistinguishable from those of patients with
classical acromegaly and include enlargement of hands and feet, facial changes, skin changes, headache, and peripheral nerve entrapment. 123,129,130,135 The diagnosis
should be suspected in any patient with acromegaly who does not have a pituitary adenoma imaged by magnetic resonance modalities or with an abdominal mass 123
and is confirmed by measuring plasma GRF levels.

IMAGING AND LOCALIZATION OF PANCREATIC ENDOCRINE TUMORS
Relatively precise localization of the gastrinoma has become an increasingly important factor in evaluating patients with ZES. 83,136 With the increased ability to control
gastric acid hypersecretion with antisecretory drugs, emergency total gastrectomy rarely is necessary now, allowing the clinician time to determine the location and
extent of the gastrinoma. The ability for long-term control of gastric acid hypersecretion has made tumor growth and possible metastatic spread an increasingly
important determinant of long-term survival. 14,15,26,37 Preoperative imaging studies can identify patients with metastatic disease to the liver or other sites so that
unnecessary surgery can be prevented. Gastrinomas frequently are multiple and extrapancreatic, and accurate imaging assists in determining the nature of the
operative procedure. Imaging studies identify resectable metastatic disease to the liver in up to 15% of patients. 137 For insulinoma, the extent of preoperative imaging

necessary to ensure an operative cure has not been clearly defined. 138,139,140 and 141 It is generally agreed that some preoperative localization is essential, primarily
because insulinomas are frequently small (90% <2 cm in diameter) and, to a lesser extent, because metastatic spread should be identified to prevent unnecessary
surgery. However, the question of the extent of localization studies that should be performed in occult insulinomas has not yet been resolved. 142,143 and 144
A number of different techniques, including abdominal ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT) scanning, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), selective
abdominal angiography, selective venous sampling for gastrin from portal venous tributaries (PVS), intraarterial secretin with hepatic venous gastrin sampling (IAS),
somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS), endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) preoperatively, intraoperative ultrasonography (IOUS), and intraoperative endoscopy
(IOE) with transillumination of the duodenum at surgery have all been reported as helpful in localizing gastrinomas.
Ultrasonography has a low sensitivity for localizing both primary and metastatic tumors, but, in a prospective study, 145 it was recommended that this imaging modality
continue to be used because it has high specificity, is noninvasive and, on occasion, localizes gastrinomas not found by other modalities. 145 The CT scan detects
nearly 50% of all primary and metastatic liver disease; however, its ability to detect primary tumors has been shown to be directly related to tumor size, 136 detecting
0% of tumors less than 1 cm in diameter, 30% of those between 1 and 3 cm, and 95% of tumors more than 3 cm in diameter. Frequently, small primary tumors, which
are being increasingly found in the duodenum (<1 cm), usually are missed by CT. 23,25,136,146 Furthermore, CT scan is less sensitive for detecting extrahepatic,
extrapancreatic gastrinomas than pancreatic gastrinomas. In a large, prospective study, selective angiography was found to detect 68% of primary tumors and 86% of
hepatic metastases.147 The ability to detect tumors was location-dependent: Of gastrinomas in the pancreatic head, 90% were found, as were 80% in the body, 45% in
the tail, and 34% in the duodenum; 50% of extrapancreatic, extrahepatic, and extraduodenal tumors also were found. 147 In a comparative study, angiography detected
20% more hepatic metastases than did CT scanning (68%), and the combination detected 96% of all liver metastases. 38
Improvements in the sensitivity of MRI have increased its usefulness in localizing gastrinomas and other PETs. A prospective study from the years 1986 to 1987
reported that MRI was less sensitive than either CT scanning or angiography, 148 but a recent study using current, improved MRI technology was more sensitive than
either angiography or CT scanning for metastatic disease. 149 However, MRI remains less sensitive than angiography for primary tumor. 149 For insulinomas,
ultrasonography localizes 33%, MRI 46%, CT scanning 35%, dynamic CT scanning 66%, selective arteriography 63%, and all imaging studies combined
80%.1,70,71,143,144
Pancreatic endocrine tumors frequently have a high density of somatostatin receptors, and scanning after injection of the radiolabeled long-acting somatostatin
analog octreotide localizes pancreatic endocrine tumors. 150,151,152,153 and 154 This technique is one of the most sensitive methods for localizing primary
gastrinomas38,39,152,153,155,156,157,158 and 159: 60% of primary gastrinomas and more than 90% of metastases to liver. 38 The sensitivity of SRS in identifying gastrinoma in
patients prior to operation increases with tumor size: Only 30% of tumors less than 1.1 cm and 64% of those 1.1 to 2.0 cm are detected, as compared to 96% of
tumors larger than 2 cm.146 SRS appears to be the procedure of choice to screen ZES patients for the presence of bone metastases. In a study of 115 patients with
ZES, 8 (7%) were determined to have bone metastases.160 Bone scan was positive in 52 patients, resulting in a very low specificity. SRS and MRI were positive in 6
and 7 patients, respectively. Because it is noninvasive and highly sensitive and has the ability to image the entire body for metastatic foci, SRS is recommended as
the initial procedure of choice in cases of gastrinoma and for all PETs except insulinomas ( Fig. 38.5-2).39 SRS is reported to localize 53% of insulinomas but, because
such lesions frequently have low densities of somatostatin receptors, this number may be higher than what can be routinely achieved. 151

FIGURE 38.5-2. Example of somatostatin receptor scintigraphy sensitivity in detecting gastrinoma. A patient with biochemically confirmed Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
underwent initial imaging studies. The magnetic resonance image (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) scan did not show any lesion. However, somatostatin
receptor scintigraphy (SRS) showed a positive signal in the right upper quadrant, which was confirmed to be a 1.4-cm gastrinoma resected from the anterior lateral
wall of the second part of the duodenum at surgical exploration. (From ref. 39.)

EUS is being used increasingly to localize PETs. 152,161,162 and 163 It is reported to localize 75% of primary gastrinomas 152,161,162 and 163 and to be particularly useful for
intrapancreatic tumors. Whether EUS can image small duodenal gastrinomas is unclear. 164 However, EUS is an invasive procedure, and the additional information
obtained over SRS or current MRI techniques is unproven. Recently, EUS was reported to have a high sensitivity, localizing 80% of insulinomas, even though 15%
were no more than 1 cm in diameter.162
PVS has been reported to be useful for functional localization of gastrinomas. 136 However, in a prospective study, a combination of PVS and standard CT and MRI
imaging yielded results only marginally better than imaging alone in identifying gastrinomas. 165 In this study, neither the magnitude of the gastrin gradient nor its
presence or absence correlated with whether a gastrinoma would be found at surgery. A gradient greater than 50% is reported to occur in 68% of all patients with
ZES. PVS requires expertise, is time-consuming, and is associated with some morbidity, primarily abdominal pain at the catheter insertion site. 165,166 These
drawbacks, combined with limited availability and the fact that 70% to 80% of gastrinomas are near the duodenum–pancreatic head, had led most 165 (but not all 167)
investigators to conclude that PVS has limited usefulness in ZES. This experience is in marked contrast to the use of PVS for insulinomas, where it has proven to be
extremely valuable in localizing lesions throughout the pancreas. 141,142
Most gastrinomas (91%) demonstrate a paradoxical release of gastrin with intravenous injection of secretin. 81 This characteristic has been used to localize
gastrinomas selectively by injecting secretin intraarterially into various abdominal arteries and collecting venous samples from the hepatic veins for assays of
gastrin. 168 Injection into the arterial supply of the tumor area causes a marked increase in gastrin. 168 In a recent comparative study, IAS was found to localize the
gastrinoma as frequently as the much more technically difficult PVS. 169
PVS for insulin can accurately localize an insulinoma to the exact region of the pancreas (head, body, tail) in nearly all patients. PVS, which requires considerable
expertise and is highly invasive, is now being replaced by the intraarterial injection of calcium (IAC) during angiography, with hepatic venous insulin sampling. A
recent preoperative study reported that 80% of insulinomas could be localized using this method. 144 In two studies, composed of 12 and 23 patients with insulinoma,
PVS142 and IAC144 correctly localized the tumor in 75% and 88% of cases, respectively. In another study of 35 patients with insulinoma in whom radiologic studies
imaged the tumors in 46%, PVS localized the tumor in 100%. 170 PVS localizes tumors to only a general area of the pancreas, and the insulinoma may be so small that
it cannot be localized by palpation at surgery within this area. However, IOUS has been increasingly reported to be useful in localizing insulinomas at the time of
surgery. 142,171 In one study of 12 patients with negative imaging studies in whom 75% had a PVS gradient localizing the insulinoma to the appropriate pancreatic area,
at surgery insulinomas could be localized by palpation in only 41%. 142 IOUS identified insulinomas in five additional patients and was the single best modality in
locating the insulinoma at surgery. 142
The use of IOUS in a recent prospective study was demonstrated to change operative management in 10% of all ZES cases, either by localizing additional
gastrinomas or by determining that a gastrinoma was malignant. 172 IOUS localized 22 of 23 pancreatic gastrinomas found at surgery but only 7 of 12 extrapancreatic
gastrinomas. All five of the gastrinomas missed were in the duodenum. 172
Even though gastrinomas frequently occur in the duodenum (see Table 38.5-2), they are rarely seen by routine upper gastrointestinal endoscopy because they are

small and submucosal. IOE of the duodenum at surgery has been attempted and found useful in localizing small gastrinomas not found by other modalities. 173 In a
recent prospective study, 12 duodenal gastrinomas were found at surgery in 10 patients. 173 IOE detected 10 of the 12 (83% sensitivity), which was significantly greater
than either standard preoperative imaging, which detected 3 (25% sensitivity) or IOUS and palpation, which detected 5 (42% sensitivity). IOE with transillumination
detects 20% more duodenal tumors than does palpation, 174 and duodenotomy detects an additional 15%. Endoscopic transillumination also is often helpful in
establishing the placement of the duodenotomy incision. 174

TREATMENT OF RESECTABLE DISEASE
GASTRINOMA
In ZES patients, gastric acid hypersecretion must be controlled because most patients will not be cured after surgical exploration. 76,175 If acid hypersecretion is
controlled, patients have an excellent quality of life; however, long-term prognosis is being increasingly determined by the malignant nature of the gastrinoma. 26 As
many as 90% of gastrinomas may be malignant; therefore, it is important to consider surgical therapy directed at the primary and metastatic disease, if feasible ( Fig.
38.5-3).

FIGURE 38.5-3. Flow diagram showing a proposed workup for patients with newly diagnosed sporadic Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES). After biochemical
confirmation of disease, an initial screening study with somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) should be performed. Patients who have results positive for
metastases should undergo additional imaging studies. If disease is confined to the liver, then resection or other therapies, as shown, should be considered. For
patients who have a locally positive result, endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) should be considered, after which patients undergo exploration with curative intent. If
somatostatin receptor scintigraphy is negative, then angiography with selective secretin stimulation should be performed. CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic
resonance imaging; US, ultrasonography.

Management of Gastric Acid Hypersecretion
Years ago, patients with ZES required total gastrectomy to control gastric acid hypersecretion. Before effective medical management, the operation was commonly
done as an emergency procedure and carried a mortality rate of 15%. 33 Operative results were unsatisfactory for patients who had less than a total gastrectomy, with
most patients developing recurrent ulcer disease, often with lethal complications, within days of surgery. 33 With the development of increasingly effective medical
therapy, the mortality for patients with ZES undergoing total gastrectomy has decreased. Though an early study claimed that total gastrectomy could lead to
regression of the gastrinoma in some patients, 176 subsequent studies have failed to substantiate this claim. 37,176,177 There is no evidence that either medical therapy of
gastric hypersecretion or total gastrectomy affects the growth rate of the gastrinoma. 14
Numerous studies have demonstrated that gastric acid hypersecretion can now be controlled medically over the long term in every patient who will reliably take oral
medication—the H+K+-ATPase inhibitor omeprazole or lansoprazole. 76,175,178,179 The availability of these agents and their long duration of action have greatly simplified
management because they can be taken once or twice per day. Therefore, most authorities recommend that total gastrectomy be reserved for patients who are
unreliable, do not have access to routine medical follow-up, or cannot or will not take oral medication. 14,76 In all other patients, medical therapy is the treatment of
choice. Although parietal cell vagotomy in patients with ZES in whom no tumor was found at surgery decreased the BAO by 66%, most patients still needed some
antisecretory drug. 34 At present, routine performance of parietal cell vagotomy is not recommended. 174
In patients with ZES and the MEN 1 syndrome, medical control of gastric hypersecretion can be greatly facilitated by correction of the hyperparathyroidism that is
almost invariably present by the time ZES develops. 52 Correction of hyperparathyroidism may reduce the FSG concentration, increase the responsiveness to a given
dose of antisecretory medication, or decrease the BAO. 180 Therefore, in patients with ZES and MEN 1 with hyperparathyroidism, parathyroidectomy should be
performed before any contemplated surgical procedure to control acid hypersecretion.
The results of medical treatment of gastric acid hypersecretion have been reviewed extensively. 3,14,76,175 H2-receptor antagonists (cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine)
alone or in combination with anticholinergic agents (propantheline, isopropamide) and, more recently, the substituted benzimidazole (omeprazole), which functions as
an H+K+-ATPase inhibitor, have been used successfully in the long-term treatment of gastric hypersecretion in ZES. The number of patients in whom medical therapy
fails varies greatly in different series 14,175: For cimetidine, the reported failure rate varies from 0% to 65%, 14,175,181 for ranitidine from 0% to 40%, 14,175,182 and for
omeprazole and lansoprazole from 0% to 7.5%. 14,76,175,178,179 The failure rate for famotidine has been reported as 0% in several series. 14,175,183 In general, studies have
shown that relief of symptoms does not adequately reflect the effectiveness of antisecretory therapy. Most studies have demonstrated that in order to assess the
adequacy of antisecretory therapy, gastric acid secretion must be measured while the patient is taking medication. 14
The amount of antisecretory medication varies widely from patient to patient; thus, the optimal dose of medication must be determined for each patient initially and
must periodically be reevaluated. 14,175 Recent studies have shown that if enough antisecretory drug is used to decrease gastric acid secretion to less than 10 mEq/h
for the hour prior to the next dose of medications in patients with no history of gastric surgery and to less than 5 mEq/h in patients with a history of acid-reducing
procedures or severe esophageal disease, peptic ulcers will heal and complications of peptic ulcer disease will be prevented. 14,76,175 To reduce acid output to these
levels before the next dose of medication, patients frequently require more than twice the usual dose of H 2-receptor antagonist or three times the usual dose of
omeprazole recommended for idiopathic peptic ulcer disease. 14,76,175 In recent studies, the median doses were 3.6 g/d for cimetidine (range, 1.2 to 12.6 g/d), 1.2 g/d
for ranitidine (range, 0.45 to 6.0 g/d), 0.25 g/d for famotidine (range, 0.05 to 0.8 g/d), 20 to 80 mg/d for omeprazole (range, 20 to 360 mg/d), and 30 to 120 mg/d for
lansoprazole. 14,76,175 The long-term use of these doses of H 2 antagonists and omeprazole has proven to be both effective and safe. 14,175 Except for antiandrogen side
effects (impotence, gynecomastia, and breast tenderness) with high-dose cimetidine in up to 60% of male patients, long-term treatment with cimetidine in women or
with ranitidine, famotidine, or omeprazole in patients of either gender has been shown to be safe. 14,175 Omeprazole has been associated with the development of
hepatitis that resolved after discontinuation of the drug. 184
The long-term use of omeprazole has caused concern about toxicity, because female rats given long-term omeprazole (or other potent inhibitors of gastric acid
secretion) have developed proliferation of gastric ECL cells and, in some cases, carcinoid tumors of the stomach. 16,185 Results from a number of studies have led
most185 (but not all 186) investigators to conclude that the ECL hyperplasia and gastric carcinoid tumor formation in these animal models were most likely secondary to
drug-induced achlorhydria and the resultant hypergastrinemia and not secondary directly to a toxic action of the antisecretory drug. Hyperplasia of gastric endocrine
cells occurs in patients with ZES. Quantitative studies indicate that gastric ECL cells are increased approximately twofold, independent of administration of
antisecretory agents. 14,187,188 and 189 In two studies in which omeprazole treatment was prolonged for up to 4 years, there was no statistical increase in gastric ECL cells
owing to use of this drug. 187 In 15 of the 16 patients reported with gastric carcinoids and ZES in whom the presence or absence of MEN 1 could be determined, 14 had
MEN 1.14 These data suggest that the presence of MEN 1 may be an important predisposing factor to the development of gastric carcinoids in patients with ZES. 188 In
patients with ZES without MEN 1, 0.6% had gastric carcinoid tumors in one study 190 and, in another study, 0% had gastric carcinoid tumors. 191 In contrast, in patients
with MEN 1, 13% in a U.S. study 190 and 30% in a French study 191 had gastric carcinoids. These data demonstrate further the importance of the presence of MEN 1 in

determining the development of gastric carcinoids.
Most patients with ZES require H 2 antagonists every 4 to 8 hours to inhibit gastric secretion adequately, whereas omeprazole or lansoprazole has a very long duration
of action (>48 hours), allowing most patients to require omeprazole only once or twice daily. 14,175 The usual starting dose for omeprazole is 60 mg/d, although a
proportion of patients are better controlled with a twice-daily dose. Patients with ZES with complicated disease (previous gastric surgery, moderate to severe
esophageal disease, or MEN 1), usually require a higher dose and are best treated by starting with 40 mg twice daily. 14,175 Recent studies show that in patients with
uncomplicated ZES, the dose of omeprazole or lansoprazole can be reduced over time in more than 85% of patients. 179,192 It is recommended, though, that because of
these drugs' acid lability, patients not be started on these low doses until they are proven safe and effective. 179,192
For patients presenting with a complication who cannot take oral antisecretory medication and for patients undergoing surgery, it is important that acid secretion be
adequately controlled parenterally. Studies have shown that continuous infusions of cimetidine (median dose, 3 mg/kg/h) or ranitidine (median dose, 1 mg/kg/h) or
bolus doses of omeprazole (injectable, 60 mg every 12 hours; not yet available in the United States) are all effective. 14,175 Recently, a new parenteral proton pump
inhibitor, pantoprazole, has been shown to produce a dose-dependent decrease in acid output in volunteers stimulated with pentagastrin. 193 These drugs should be
continued until oral antisecretory agents can be restarted.
SURGERY TO CURE GASTRINOMA
In a number of studies, the 5-year survival rate for all patients with ZES was 62% to 87%, and the 10-year survival was 47% to 77%. 26,194,195,196,197,198 and 199 A recent
comprehensive report from the National Institutes of Health cited long-term outcome in 151 consecutive ZES patients who underwent operation with curative intent 35:
Among patients with sporadic gastrinoma, 34% were biochemically and radiographically free of disease at 10 years, as compared to no patients with MEN 1 and ZES.
The overall 10-year survival was 94% ( Fig. 38.5-4). In another study from the same institution, a multivariate analysis of factors associated with long-term (>5-year)
cure was performed.200 Age, gender, duration of symptoms or disease, and severity of disease (as reflected by the level of BAO, FSG, or secretin stimulation test) did
not predict outcome. Only a diagnosis of MEN 1 was inversely correlated with cure. In addition, the status of preoperative imaging studies (either positive or negative),
tumor size, and number of tumors resected did not correlate with cure. However, a normal postoperative FSG and secretin stimulation test did independently and
significantly predict cure.

FIGURE 38.5-4. Disease-free (A) and disease-specific (B) survival in patients with the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES). A: Kaplan-Meier plot of disease-free survival
after surgical exploration to resect and potentially cure gastrinoma. Twenty-eight patients with ZES and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 underwent 32 surgical
explorations, and 123 patients with sporadic ZES underwent 144 surgical explorations. Data are presented based on number of operative procedures rather than
number of patients. Results show the percentage of the total number of surgical patients in each group who are disease-free at the indicated time. B: Kaplan-Meier
plot of survival specific for ZES. Four deaths occurred, secondary to progressive metastatic disease in three cases and a paradoxical cerebral embolus
postoperatively through a patent foremen ovale valley in one case. MEN1, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1; NIH, National Institutes of Health. (From ref. 35.)

Though the growth of gastrinoma is generally slow, in long-term studies of patients originally treated by total gastrectomy, 57% of deaths were due to tumor
progression. 33,37 Therefore, with the ability to control gastric acid hypersecretion, the malignant potential of the tumor is an increasingly important determinant of
long-term prognosis. The extent of the tumor and whether MEN 1 is present or absent have been reported to determine survival rates. 194,195,201 In patients with no
tumor found at laparotomy or in whom tumor is completely resected, 5- and 10-year survival rates are 90% to 100%, respectively. 25,194 Patients without liver
metastases had a 5-year survival rate of 95%, and 10-year survival rates were 90%. 26 In contrast, patients with liver metastases had a 5-year survival rate of only 53%
and a 10-year survival of 30% (Fig. 38.5-5).26 In most studies in patients without liver metastases, a difference in survival is noted between patients whose tumors
were resected completely and those in whom tumors were resected and recurred or in whom tumors were incompletely resected. There was, however, no difference in
survival rate between patients with complete resection and those with no tumor found at surgery. In two studies, patients with MEN 1 are reported to have a better 5and 10-year survival rate than patients without MEN 1, 194 whereas in other studies, the difference was not significant. 26,195,201 One study demonstrated a significant
difference in the percentage of patients with ZES with MEN 1 (6%) who presented with liver metastases, as compared with non–MEN 1 patients (22%, P = .03), with
no difference in survival rate for the patients without liver metastases between MEN 1 and non–MEN 1 patients. 26 The presence of concurrent Cushing's syndrome
may also be associated with a poor prognosis. 202

FIGURE 38.5-5. Survival based on the presence or absence of liver metastases in patients with the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES). Survival rates were evaluated
using death due to ZES-related causes. Six of 158 patients with no liver metastases died; 17 patients developed liver metastases during the follow-up period, of whom
4 died; and 23 of 37 patients who presented with liver metastases on initial evaluation have died. (Data from ref. 40.)

Hence, because of the excellent prognosis for patients with gastrinomas that are resected and the evidence of increased importance of the malignancy in determining
survival, surgical resection of gastrinoma should be considered in all patients with ZES. 35 After gastric acid hypersecretion is adequately controlled medically, it must
be determined whether the patient has sporadic ZES (ZES without MEN 1) or whether ZES is present with MEN 1. 14 The role of surgery is controversial in patients
with MEN 1.203,204 and 205
A recent study has addressed the question of whether surgical resection of the tumor alters its natural history. 206 In this study, only 3% of patients with ZES
undergoing tumor resection developed liver metastases during follow-up, whereas significantly more patients treated medically developed liver metastases (26%, P
<.003) (Fig. 38.5-6). Two deaths occurred owing to metastatic disease in the nonoperated group, as compared with no disease-specific deaths in the surgical group
(P = .085). Although this was not a randomized study, the two groups did not differ in clinical or laboratory characteristics or time of follow-up (15.4 ± 1.5 years [no

surgery] vs. 14.0 ± 0.8 years [surgery] from onset). This study strongly suggests that surgery alters the natural history of ZES and therefore should be recommended
in patients without MEN 1. Additional studies reported after 1986 also indicate a higher cure rate, averaging approximately 40%, for patients with ZES who undergo
operation; however, there was wide variation, from 17% to 100%. 23,25,195,207,208,209,210 and 211

FIGURE 38.5-6. Incidence of liver metastases that developed in patients with the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, some of whom had undergone surgery with curative
intent while others were merely observed. Of 98 patients who underwent operation, 3 developed liver metastases at a mean follow-up of 6 years (range, 0.7 to 16.8
years), as compared to 6 of 26 patients who did not undergo operation, with a mean follow-up of 8.7 years (range, 1.5 to 19.0 years). (From ref. 206.)

In most recent series, the improvement in outcome after surgical exploration and resection with curative intent is due to a number of factors. First, because gastric
acid hypersecretion can be managed in all patients with antisecretory agents, surgical exploration can be done electively and safely. 14,25,35,212 Second, patients can be
effectively screened to eliminate occult metastatic unresectable disease, thereby improving patient selection for potentially curative surgery. 38,39,152 Furthermore, the
knowledge that small duodenal primary tumors are more frequent than previously was appreciated has resulted in increased detection and resection of these lesions
than in earlier studies. 35,42,79 In a 10-year prospective analysis of surgical outcome in patients with ZES, the overall percentage of patients free of disease at 5 years
was 30%,25 consistent with the updated outcome from the same institution. 35 In addition, ectopic gastrinoma can occur in a variety of other locations, including small
bowel mesentery, common bile duct, and ovary.29
At laparotomy, the entire pancreas as well as the duodenum should be dissected and exposed. 23,25,171,213 IOUS and transillumination of the duodenum should be
performed.23,25 Duodenotomy in the anterior wall of the second part of the duodenum also should be performed. 23,25,171,213 Palpation alone can identify 65% of
duodenal gastrinomas, endoscopic transillumination an additional 20% of tumors, and duodenotomy an additional 15% of tumors not localized by any other
modality.174 For duodenal tumors, 71% are in the first part of the duodenum, 21% in the second part, and 8% in the third part. 42 Using this approach to carefully
evaluate the duodenum, gastrinomas have been found in all patients undergoing operation, 35 71% of such lesions being duodenal. 76 At laparotomy, if a gastrinoma is
found as a solitary lesion in the liver, it should be removed, provided the resection can be performed safely. If gastrinoma is found in the pancreatic head, it should be
enucleated. 23,211 If extensive gastrinoma not amenable to eradication is found in the pancreatic head area, performing a pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple's
operation) for potential cure is controversial. 214,215 A Whipple procedure cured 11 of 12 patients with tumors localized by imaging studies and PVS to the
peripancreatic head area. 211 However, no studies have demonstrated an increased survival rate overall in patients with ZES after pancreaticoduodenectomy. Because
of the possible morbidity and mortality associated with this operation and the excellent long-term prognosis of these patients, it has not yet been established whether
the adverse consequences of a pancreaticoduodenectomy might outweigh the adverse consequences of unresected occult gastrinoma. If no gastrinoma is found at
surgery, as occurs in 7% to 30% of cases overall, a blind distal pancreatectomy should not be performed, because 65% to 90% of gastrinomas are now found in the
pancreatic head or duodenum 23,25,212 and because such an approach has not improved cure rates.
At surgery, the use of IOUS is recommended to localize additional lesions, to confirm the significance of a palpated mass, and to establish the relationship between
the tumor and the pancreatic duct. 172,216,217,218 and 219 For either pancreatic or duodenal primary tumors, any abnormal or suspicious lymph nodes in that area should be
excised. In some patients undergoing exploration, disease may be limited to one or more lymph nodes. 41 Despite the inability to identify a primary site of disease in
the duodenum or pancreas, long-term biochemical cures can be achieved. In one study of 13 patients who had disease limited to resected lymph nodes, 43%
remained biochemically cured with a median follow-up of 5.3 years. 41
At present, the role of surgery in the treatment of patients with ZES and MEN 1 is unclear. 53,54,205,212 A recent study reported that in eight patients (six surgical cases
and two autopsy reports) with ZES and MEN 1, gastrinomas were found in the duodenum in all. 220 In all six patients whose tumors were surgically resected, the gastrin
values were normal postoperatively, and this study raised the possibility that these patients could be cured. However, a number of limitations exist for this study; for
example, cure cannot be established without a secretin provocative test, which was not reported in this study. A recent prospective study involving ten consecutive
patients with ZES and MEN 1 demonstrated that no patients could be cured by simple tumor enucleation even after duodenotomy. 221 Cure was not possible short of
pancreaticoduodenectomy, because 30% of patients had more than 20 duodenal tumors and 86% of patients had positive lymph nodes. This study also demonstrated
that 20% of patients with MEN 1 and ZES had pancreatic gastrinomas. 221 Another recent study reported three patients with MEN 1 and ZES who were cured by a
Whipple procedure. 211 In 77 patients with MEN 1 and ZES, the only independent factor associated with the development of liver metastases was a pancreatic primary
tumor measuring greater than 3 cm. 222 Operation with curative intent in 118 patients did not influence survival. Currently, because of the excellent prognosis of these
patients, the ability to control acid secretion medically, the presence of other pancreatic tumors, and the morbidity of this procedure, it is not routinely recommended.
Our recommendation is to operate on patients with MEN 1 and ZES when a tumor of at least 2.5 cm is seen on imaging studies. 8,9,203 This policy is based on the
recent observation that metastases to the liver correlated with tumor size. 26 If the tumor is in the pancreatic head, it is enucleated if possible, and, if in the pancreatic
tail, it is resected and a duodenal exploration is performed.
Because most patients with sporadic ZES undergoing operation and resection will have persistent or recurrent disease, the role of reoperation in these patients
warrants consideration. In a series of 17 patients who had previously undergone an operation with curative intent, reoperations were performed on the basis of
biochemically documented recurrent disease and one or more positive imaging studies. 18,223 In those undergoing reoperation, it was possible to identify and resect
disease in 17 of 18 cases, with biochemical cures in all, although median follow-up was short (34 months). Of note, the site of recurrent disease identified at
reoperation was related to the initial operative findings. For example, in those in whom lymph node disease was resected initially, most patients had lesions identified
in the duodenum at reoperation. In contrast, in those who had a primary duodenal or pancreatic lesion initially resected, recurrence was commonly identified in
regional lymph nodes. Because of the increased potential risk of complications associated with reoperation in this setting, reoperation should be considered carefully.
INSULINOMA
Medical Therapy for Hypoglycemia of Insulinoma
The simplest form of nonsurgical treatment for insulinoma is dietary management. 1,70,71 and 72 Many insulinoma patients begin ingesting frequent small meals to
alleviate symptoms prior to seeking medical evaluation, and a significant percentage report weight gain in the year prior to diagnosis. Slowly absorbed oral nutrients
such as cornstarch, bread, potatoes, and rice are recommended. 1,224
A number of drugs have been reported to control the hyperinsulinemia, with octreotide and diazoxide being the most effective. 1,70,71 and 72 Diazoxide, a benzthiazide
analog, directly inhibits insulin release from b cells through stimulation ofa-adrenergic receptors and also has an extrapancreatic hyperglycemic effect, possibly by
inhibiting cyclic adenosine monophosphate phosphodiesterase, which enhances glycogenolysis. 1,70,71 and 72 The major side effects of diazoxide are sodium retention,
gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea and, occasionally, hirsutism. Edema can result from the sodium retention, and the addition of a diuretic such as
trichlormethiazide, a benzothiadiazine derivative, can correct the edema as well as augment the hyperglycemic effect. 1,70,71 and 72 Diazoxide should be initiated, with
150 to 200 mg given in two to three divided doses per day and, if not effective, increased to a maximum of 600 to 800 mg/d. 1,70,71 The calcium channel inhibitor
verapamil has been used, either alone or in combination with other drugs, to help control hypoglycemia in a small number of patients, 1 as has propranolol. 72,225

Phenytoin (Dilantin) inhibits the release of insulin from b cells and has been used successfully to treat a small number of patients with refractory hypoglycemia. 72,226
Maintenance doses of 300 to 600 mg/d are used, but it is reported that in only one-third or fewer patients is the hyperglycemic effect of phenytoin of any clinical
significance. 72 Glucocorticoids (prednisone, 1 mg/kg) and glucagon, either alone or with diazoxide, have also been used in a few patients. 72
Octreotide controls symptoms and hypoglycemia in 40% to 60% of patients. 1,70,71,227,228 This drug is generally well tolerated and usually is initiated at doses of 50 µg
subcutaneously two or three times daily, which can be increased to 1500 µg/d. 228 The main side effects are gastrointestinal, such as bloating and abdominal
cramping, and include long-term side effects such as malabsorption and cholelithiasis. 1,70,71,228 Besides improving symptoms, octreotide decreases plasma insulin
levels in 65% of patients. 228 However, most patients were treated for less than 1 week preoperatively, so the long-term efficacy is not known in a significant number of
patients. Octreotide also decreases plasma glucagon levels and growth hormone secretion; hence, it may worsen the hypoglycemia in some patients. 70
Surgical Therapy
All insulinomas without evidence of metastases should be surgically removed, regardless of the severity of symptoms. Of all insulinomas, 80% to 90% are benign
isolated lesions that are cured by complete surgical removal. 1,70,71 and 72,94,138,139 and 140 The extent of preoperative imaging necessary for successful outcome of
resection of presumed benign solitary pancreatic insulinoma is controversial. 138,139 and 140 Because insulinomas are exclusively located within the pancreatic
parenchyma, thorough exploration and intraoperative evaluation with inspection, palpation, and IOUS can result in successful resection in the vast majority of patients
undergoing operation. IOUS has been advocated as an important adjunct in operation for insulinoma, not only in identifying lesions at the time of surgery but as an aid
in enucleating the lesion by identifying the relationship between the tumor in the pancreatic parenchyma and the adjacent pancreatic duct. This is particularly
important in the case of lesions located in the head of the pancreas, where a resection other than enucleation would require pancreaticoduodenectomy. Selective
arterial stimulation of the splanchnic vessels supplying the pancreas using the secretagogue calcium can produce a subsequent rise in insulin levels obtained from
catheters positioned at the orifice of the hepatic veins. 144 The sensitivity of this test is almost 90% and allows one to direct attention to a particular region of the
pancreas at the time of operation. Blind distal pancreatectomy has been used in the past in an attempt to cure insulinoma in patients in whom no lesion could be
identified, based on the appreciation that insulinomas can be distributed anywhere in the pancreatic parenchyma and resection of a large portion of normal pancreatic
tissue should therefore have a reasonable cure rate for occult disease. However, given the current status of available localization studies, this practice should be
largely unnecessary. With careful inspection and the use of IOUS, the number of people with occult lesions that cannot be identified at the time of operation should be
fewer than 5%.138,141 In this setting, our recommendation would be to proceed with distal pancreatectomy only in the face of a position insulin step-up in the hepatic
veins after selective intraarterial stimulation with calcium demonstrates a bona fide step-up in the splenic artery as compared to the gastroduodenal or hepatic
arteries.
The liver must always be explored for evidence of metastatic disease, and the entire abdomen must be explored to rule out rare extrapancreatic tumors that primarily
secrete insulinoma-related growth factors (IGFs). IGF-secreting tumors that cause hypoglycemia usually are of mesodermal origin and have considerable tumor bulk
by the time hypoglycemia symptoms occur.71 The entire pancreas must be explored for other tumors, since multifocal tumors occur in up to 10% of all cases. 1,70,71
Isolated lesions of the tail may be enucleated or removed en bloc by distal pancreatectomy. Body and head lesions require enucleation with careful dissection to
avoid damage to the main pancreatic duct and its attendant morbidity. Even in cases of documented metastatic disease, refractory debilitating symptoms may be an
indication for debulking the pancreatic lesions, as metastases are not always secretory. Removal of peripancreatic lymph nodes may be curative for malignant
insulinoma if no liver metastases are present. 93,224
The documentation of metastatic disease, either at the time of surgery or by imaging studies, is the only accurate means of diagnosing malignant insulinoma. Unlike
all other PETs, malignant insulinomas are uncommon, occurring in only 5% to 11% of all cases of insulinoma. Malignant primary insulinomas usually are not occult
and have a mean size of 6 cm, which is more than three times as large as benign insulinomas. 1,70,71 and 72,229 The median disease-free survival after curative resection
of malignant insulinomas was 5 years in one series. 229 The recurrence rate was 63%, the median interval to recurrence was 2.8 years, and the median survival with
recurrent tumor was 19 months. Palliative re-resection was associated with a median survival of 4 years, whereas median survival after biopsy was only 11 months. 229
Surgical resection of primary and metastatic insulinomas is desirable when possible. 229 Malignant insulinomas, like other PETs, may respond to chemotherapy and
treatment with octreotide.1,71,228 The use of these agents for all malignant PETs is described later in Treatment of Metastatic Disease.
OTHER PANCREATIC ENDOCRINE TUMORS
The remainder of the PETs are relatively infrequent and include VIP-producing tumors (VIPomas), glucagonomas, ACTHomas, somatostatinomas, and GRF
pancreatic tumors (GRFomas). Each of these PETs is usually malignant.
The treatment is surgical, if possible, even in the more than 60% of cases in which metastases are present at the time of diagnosis ( Fig. 38.5-7).3 Of 25 cases of
nonfunctional PETS in one series, a Whipple procedure was performed in 20% of patients, partial or total pancreatectomy in 25%, and tumor excision in 10%. 101 The
survival rates were 60% at 3 years and 44% at 5 years in this series. 101 The cure rate of these tumors at present is low because of their late recognition.

FIGURE 38.5-7. Flow diagram illustrating the general approach and management strategy for patients with pancreatic endocrine tumors (PET). Once the diagnosis
has been established, initial staging studies are performed to determine the absence or presence of metastatic disease. A variety of palliative options are available to
control the functional sequelae of hormone excess for increasing tumor burden. For those patients who have isolated liver metastases, resection should be performed
when possible. Other regional therapies that may cause durable palliation of symptoms or disease control in the liver should be attempted. For those patients who
have local regional disease, resection should be considered. MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.

The first treatment objective in patients with VIPomas, even before considering the diagnosis, is the replenishment of fluid and electrolyte losses to correct the
profound hypokalemia, dehydration, and acidosis that usually are present. The patients may require 5 L/d or more of fluid and more than 350 mEq/d of potassium. 104
In the past, numerous drugs have been reported to control, to varying degrees, the diarrheal output in small numbers of VIPoma patients; among these agents are
prednisone (60 to 100 mg/d), clonidine, indomethacin, phenothiazines, lithium carbonate, propranolol, metoclopramide, loperamide, lidamidine, angiotensin II, and
norepinephrine. 1,103,104
Octreotide, a long-acting somatostatin analog, can control the diarrhea in both the short and long term in 87% of patients with VIPoma, and it is now the agent of
choice.1,103,227,228 In recent reviews of treatment of 20 and 25 patients with VIPomas with octreotide, the drug completely abolished diarrhea in 10% of patients in the
first study and in 65% in the other and improved the diarrhea in 90% in the first study and in 95% in the other. 1,227,228 In some patients, responses have been reported
to be short-lived, or a patient may respond initially to a low dose (50 to 100 µg three times daily) but subsequently may require a larger dose to control the diarrhea
and may even become refractory to doses up to 1200 µg/d. 228 In nonresponsive patients or in patients whose symptoms recur, the administration of glucocorticoids
concomitantly with octreotide has proven effective in a small number of cases. 228 With octreotide treatment, plasma VIP concentrations decreased in 80% to 88% of

patients. 226,228
After imaging studies have been conducted to localize the primary VIPoma and determine the extent of the tumor, surgical excision for cure should be considered in
all patients without metastatic disease. In one series, surgical resection of a pancreatic VIPoma relieved all symptoms in 17 patients (33%), 105 and 30% were cured in
another series. 230 Surgical removal with complete control of all symptoms was possible in 78% of all patients with VIP-producing ganglioneuroblastomas. 105
For patients with glucagonomas, medical therapy with octreotide improves dermatitis in 54% to 90% of patients, with complete disappearance of this symptom in up to
30%.1,227,228 In one study, diarrhea improved in four of six patients and resolved in two of six patients. Diabetes mellitus was not improved with octreotide treatment. 228
The diabetes mellitus was severe enough to require oral hypoglycemia agents in 42% of patients and insulin in 27%. Plasma glucagon levels decreased in 80% to
90% of patients but only decreased to the normal range in 10% to 20% of patients on octreotide treatment. 1,227,228
In 50% to 80% of patients, metastases are already present at the time of diagnosis. 1,117,118 and 119 Surgical resection has been successful in a number of patients with
resectable disease, 1,118,119 but the exact percentage of cases that can be cured is not known. In one large review involving 92 cases of glucagonoma, only 16 of the
malignant cases were treated by surgical resection alone. Seven cases exhibited normal plasma glucagon levels after resection and, in the five cases that had no
evidence of metastatic spread, plasma glucagon levels postoperatively were normal in two. Even if a patient eventually develops a recurrence, an extended
disease-free interval may be attained that is beneficial. 119 A number of studies have reported a benefit to patients even if surgical debulking only can be
accomplished.117,118 and 119 In patients with widely metastatic disease in whom surgical debulking is not possible, various chemotherapeutic agents are used and are
discussed later in Treatment of Metastatic Disease.
Most somatostatinomas are found at the time of laparotomy for cholecystectomy or during gastrointestinal imaging studies for various nonspecific complaints such as
abdominal pain or diarrhea. 97,125 The symptoms produced by somatostatinomas are less pronounced and less specific than those seen with other PETs and probably
do not reach a detectable level until patients develop high somatostatin blood levels late in the course of the disease. Though the plasma levels of somatostatin
usually are elevated in pancreatic somatostatinomas, in duodenal or small-intestinal tumors these levels may fail to be conclusive. 123,231
Duodenal somatostatinomas are increasingly associated with von Recklinghausen's disease. 231 In a recent review, 27 duodenal somatostatinomas with or without von
Recklinghausen's disease were compared with pancreatic somatostatinomas without von Recklinghausen's disease. 231 The cases of somatostatinomas with von
Recklinghausen's disease were similar to the sporadic duodenal cases in that they rarely were associated with the somatostatinoma syndrome, additional hormone
production was infrequent, and they were less frequently malignant (30% vs. 71%).
The number of patients undergoing successful complete resection ranges from 60% to 80%. 83,96 In one series, 65% of patients were reported to have undergone
successful resection, but the percentage actually cured was not stated. 232 In a number of patients, a combination of surgical resection and cytotoxic therapy was
used,97,125,233 and 60% of the patients were alive 6 months to 5 years after diagnosis. Because of the malignant nature of these tumors, if imaging studies demonstrate
a possible resectable tumor, results suggest that patients with somatostatinomas will benefit from surgical resection.
In patients without metastatic disease, surgical resection of a GRFoma should be carried out. Surgical resection results in resolution of the GRFoma
syndrome,126,129,234 but the long-term cure rate is unknown. Before surgery and in those patients with nonresectable lesions, various agents may reduce plasma growth
hormone levels. Even though dopamine agonists such as bromocriptine are successful and widely used in patients with classic acromegaly, 135 rarely is it possible to
normalize plasma growth hormone levels in patients with GRFomas. 123,128 Octreotide is now the agent of choice. 1,123,135 In all cases thus far described, octreotide
significantly suppressed or normalized growth hormone and IGF-1 levels 135,228,235,236 and 237 and, in some cases, this was associated with pituitary shrinkage. 235,237 In
75% of cases, octreotide decreased plasma GRF levels by more than 50%. 123
In a few studies in patients with PETs secreting the peptide neurotensin, a neurotensinoma syndrome has been proposed. 1,3,55,97 Clinical features of patients with
possible neurotensinomas include hypokalemia, weight loss, diabetes mellitus, cyanosis, hypotension, and flushing in a patient with a PET. 97 In a review of six cases,
one-half of the patients were cured by resection of the pancreatic endocrine tumor, and the remaining one-half improved with chemotherapy. 97 Elevated plasma
neurotensin levels have been measured in patients with VIPomas, and their symptoms did not differ from those with normal levels; a similar result was found in
patients with gastrinomas. 55
Patients with PETs and Cushing's syndrome (ACTHoma) have been reported. 64,202 In recent studies, 4% to 16% of Cushing's syndrome cases attributable to an
ectopic ACTH syndrome originated from a pancreatic tumor. Cushing's syndrome is reported in 19% of patients with the ZES syndrome and MEN 1. In these patients,
the disease was of pituitary origin and was mild. Cushing's syndrome also occurs in sporadic cases of ZES and, in one prospective study, it was found in 5% of all
cases.1,202 In these patients, the Cushing's syndrome was severe due to the ectopic ACTH production and occurred with metastatic pancreatic endocrine tumors,
which responded poorly to chemotherapy; hence, the disease was associated with a poor prognosis. 202 The occurrence of Cushing's syndrome as the only
manifestation of a PET occurs in 37% to 60% of cases and may precede any other hormonal syndrome.
Hypercalcemia resulting from a PET secreting a parathyroid hormone–related protein or to an unknown hypercalcemia substance that mimics the action of parathyroid
hormone and causes hyperparathyroidism has been reported. 238,239 and 240 The tumor is generally large and metastatic to the liver by the time of diagnosis, 238,240
although in one recent case, radical resection of a pancreatic tail tumor with subsequent treatment with chemotherapy resulted in a total remission for 5 years. 239
TREATMENT OF METASTATIC DISEASE
The treatment of all metastatic PETs is considered as a unit because, in most respects, cytotoxic protocols and surgical approaches are the same. The long-term
natural history of most functional PETs (malignant insulinomas, VIPomas, glucagonomas, GRFomas, somatostatinomas) is not known because, until recently,
effective treatment for the functional syndrome did not exist and therefore patients often died of complications of the hormonal excess rather than from the tumor per
se.1,40 In a study including 212 patients with ZES who had well-controlled gastric acid hypersecretion, 31% had died at a mean follow-up of almost 14 years. 40
One-half of these deaths were due to tumor progression, particularly in bone and liver, and to ectopic ACTH production. In a recent large study involving 185 patients
with ZES in which no patient died from acid-related problems, the 10-year survival rate was not significantly different among patients in whom no tumor was found
(only 8%), patients in whom tumor was completely resected, and patients in whom tumor was resected without biochemical cure (84%, 96%, and 93%, respectively). 26
However, in patients with unresectable disease, the 10-year survival rate was only 30%. This study demonstrates that the development of metastatic liver disease is
the primary determinant of survival. 26 Currently, no data are available to suggest that survival for patients with other PETs will differ from that for patients with ZES
and, in fact, limited data from PPomas, of which most were metastatic, reported mean survival of 4.3 years 3 and a 5-year survival rate of 44%, 101 which is similar to
patients with metastatic gastrinomas. Most authorities would agree that treatment directed to metastatic unresectable liver disease is indicated. However, at present,
there is no agreement about when therapy should be started or the efficacy of various therapeutic options, because of the small numbers of patients treated with
various protocols. Chemotherapy either alone or combined with cytoreductive surgery, hepatic arterial embolization alone or with chemotherapy, hormonal therapy
with the long-acting somatostatin analog octreotide, interferon, or hepatic transplantation have all been reported to be useful in small numbers of cases. 241,242
CHEMOTHERAPY
Almost all studies that include significant numbers of patients and investigate the effects of chemotherapeutic agents on PETs include all types of PETs, often
combined with carcinoids. Whether these results can be extrapolated to each histologic type is unclear at present. Three studies have demonstrated no difference in
response rates of various PETs to streptozotocin (STZ) 243,244 and 245; however, only small numbers of patients with different type of PETs were included. Other studies
have shown a variable response of gastrinomas, glucagonomas, and VIPomas to chemotherapeutic agents such as dacarbazine (DTIC) or STZ, suggesting that
differences may exist. Finally, other studies suggest that functioning tumors respond better than nonfunctioning tumors 243,246,247 and, among functioning tumors, insulin
and VIP-secreting PETs may be more sensitive to STZ-based therapies. 246,247 Therefore, it should not be considered established that each tumor responds equally to
chemotherapy.
Except for STZ243,244,248,249 or chlorozotocin, 245,250 single-agent chemotherapy with various other agents (doxorubicin, 251 etoposide,252 carboplatin, 253 DTIC,254 and
tubercidin 255) has had limited efficacy (Table 38.5-5). STZ, a glycosamine nitrosourea compound originally derived from a Streptomyces species, has been in clinical

use since 1967. 256,257 In preclinical studies, it was found to have cytotoxic effects on pancreatic islet cells 258 and has generally been used, usually in combination with
other agents, for the treatment of metastatic PETs.13,218,243,245,249,259,260,261,262,263,264 and 265 The current first-line regimen is the combination of STZ and doxorubicin. 245
This recommendation is based on a prospective study that demonstrated that STZ and doxorubicin were superior to STZ and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) or chlorozotocin
alone (response rates of 69%, 45%, and 30%, respectively). 245 Median durations of response were 18 months for the doxorubicin combination, 14 months for the 5-FU
combination, and 17 months for the chlorozotocin group. Survival for patients treated with the doxorubicin combination was significantly longer. In a previous
prospective study, STZ alone in 42 patients produced a response rate of 36%, with 12% showing a complete response, whereas STZ plus 5-FU had demonstrated a
response rate of 63%, with 33% of patients having a complete response. 243

TABLE 38.5-5. Drug Therapy for Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors and Gastrinomas

STZ combined with 5-FU or 5-FU plus doxorubicin causes an objective response in up to 80% of patients with metastatic gastrinoma. For all PETs, the combination of
STZ plus 5-FU gave a response rate of 63%, which was significantly better than the 40% response rate with STZ alone. 243 However, in a prospective study of ten
patients with progressive metastatic gastrinoma to the liver, chemotherapy with STZ, 5-FU, and doxorubicin resulted in only a 40% objective response rate, no
complete remissions, and no statistical difference in survival in responders versus nonresponders. 218 In another study of a similar group of 22 patients, only 5% of
patients demonstrated an objective decrease in tumor size. 263 Therefore, the precise role and efficacy of chemotherapy in patients with metastatic gastrinoma has not
been established.
Also, when chemotherapy should be initiated in a given patient with metastatic disease has not been clearly determined. 218 Recently, it has become apparent that the
time course of tumor progression in patients with metastatic untreated gastrinoma is highly variable. 266 Of 19 patients evaluated, 26% showed no tumor growth over a
mean follow-up of 29 months, 32% had marginal progression (<50% increase in tumor volume), and 42% had rapid growth in less than 1 year. Some patients have
been followed up for 20 years with stable metastatic disease, 37 although most die within 5 years, with the mean survival being 3 to 5 years. 14,15,137,267 Of the two
research groups with considerable experience with metastatic gastrinoma, one group proposed that patients be treated with chemotherapy when they become
symptomatic.243 However, if gastric acid hypersecretion is controlled adequately, symptoms due to the tumor arise only very late in the course of the disease. Another
group proposed that, after the initial evaluation, patients be reassessed in 3 to 6 months and those patients with evidence of increasing size of hepatic metastases be
treated with chemotherapy. 218 No studies have recommended chemotherapy for patients with metastases only to regional lymph nodes.
STZ causes nausea and vomiting in almost all patients, dose-related renal dysfunction (including proteinuria) in 20% to 70%, decrease in creatinine clearance in 20%
to 70%, abnormalities in hepatic function in 29%, and leukopenia and thrombocytopenia in 6% to 9%. 218,268,269 In one study, nine patients suffered from chronic renal
failure, and seven required dialysis; thus, use of STZ must be carefully monitored. 245 The nausea and vomiting can now be controlled in almost all patients using
5-HT 3 antagonists such as ondansetron, so that the renal dysfunction is the major dose-limiting toxic effect. Chlorozotocin is structurally closely related to STZ, 268,270
but it causes less nausea and vomiting than does STZ. Patient response to chlorozotocin alone 245,250 or in combination with 5-FU 270 is, in general, similar to that to
STZ (see Table 38.5-5).
Etoposide, dactinomycin, and cisplatin alone have been used in a few cases but are generally not effective. 248 The combination of etoposide and cisplatin was
evaluated in 14 patients with metastatic PETs, and the results were compared with those in metastatic carcinoid tumors (13 patients) or anaplastic neuroendocrine
tumors (18 patients: 6 pancreas; 8 stomach or intestine; 1 lung; 3 unknown). 271 This study was performed because recent work has demonstrated that these two
agents are effective in small cell lung cancer, which has neuroendocrine features histologically similar to those seen in PETs. Sixty-seven percent of the anaplastic
neuroendocrine tumors, 14% of the PETs, and 0% of the metastatic carcinoid tumors demonstrated partial to complete regression. 271
Other etoposide combinations including doxorubicin, cisplatin, and 5-FU have been tried in a small number of patients with limited success (i.e., response rate of
20%).272 Glucagonomas are reported to respond frequently to dacarbazine, 1,118,273,274,275 and 276 including some cases of complete remission, whereas in other PETs, the
response rate is low.
HORMONAL THERAPY WITH SOMATOSTATIN ANALOGS
Hormonal therapy with the long-acting somatostatin analog octreotide is effective in controlling the symptoms due to a number of different PETs or carcinoid-like
tumors, including VIPomas, glucagonomas, GRFomas, insulinomas, gastrinomas, and carcinoids. 277,278,279,280,281 and 282 In animal studies, somatostatin analogs can
inhibit tumor growth283 and the growth of transplantable insulinomas and chondrosarcomas. 284 More than 90% of all PETs except insulinomas possess somatostatin
receptors, 1,151,154,277 which may mediate the action of somatostatin on these tumors. Hormonal treatment with octreotide is reported to cause a decrease in tumor size
in 8 of 66 patients with PETs in one review. 228 A decrease in hepatic metastases in 3 of 22 patients has been noted in different reports of gastrinoma treated with
octreotide. 228 However, another study of nine patients with metastatic gastrinoma treated with octreotide for 1 to 11 months reported no benefit. 285 In subsequent
studies, octreotide infrequently caused a decrease in PET tumor size, 279,280,282 but stabilization of disease was more commonly seen in 25% to 50% of patients, and
increased survival was not demonstrated in these studies. 278,279 and 280,282,286 These results must be extended to a larger, multicenter study, but they suggest that
octreotide may have a cytostatic effect and, by decreasing the tumor growth rate, may increase survival.
INTERFERON-a
Interferon-a has been reported to be effective at controlling symptoms in patients with PETs. 270,272,279,287 In a review of numerous series involving 322 patients with
various neuroendocrine tumors, 43% of the patients showed a biochemical response (>50% decrease in hormone levels) and 12% showed a decrease in tumor size
with interferon-a treatment either alone or in combination with other agents. 272 Of 57 patients with PETs, 47% had a biochemical response and 12% experienced
decreased tumor size. The mean duration of the response was 20 months (range, 2 to 96 months). Disease stabilization was seen in 25%. There was no difference in
the response rate between patients with or without previous chemotherapy. 272
In another study of 11 patients with metastatic gastrinoma to the liver that was increasing in size, interferon-a (5 million U/d) failed to decrease tumor size in any
patients but slowed tumor growth in 3 patients. 288
These results suggest that the effect of interferon-a on PETs is similar to that of octreotide in that it has minimal tumoricidal activity, with PETs rarely regressing with
treatment. However, interferon-a may stabilize the disease in a significant percentage of patients and possibly extend survival, although with PETs this has not yet
been proven. Interferon has been used with 5-FU, 289 octreotide, 272 and 5-FU plus STZ, 272 though in such small numbers of patients that clear assessment of any
advantages of these combinations is not possible.
HEPATIC ARTERY EMBOLIZATION

Hepatic artery embolization with or without postocclusion chemotherapy has been used successfully in small numbers of patients with metastatic PETs to the
liver. 110,247,290,291,292 and 293 It is reported in some studies that 68% to 100% of patients demonstrated symptomatic improvement with this therapy. 290,292,294 In one study
involving 111 patients, hepatic arterial occlusion was combined with chemotherapy in 64% of the patients, using doxorubicin plus dacarbazine or STZ plus 5-FU. 247
Objective remissions were observed in 60% of the patients treated with embolization alone and in 80% of patients treated with added chemotherapy. 247 With
embolization alone, the median duration of the remission was 4 months and, with chemoembolization, it was 18 months. Chemoembolization using doxorubicin in
iodized oil combined with either gelatin powder or sponge particles has recently been reported in two studies to improve symptoms in 68% to 100% of patients and to
decrease tumor size or hormonal markers in 57% to 100% of patients. 292,294 Side effects include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and fever usually lasting 3 to 10
days,290 with severe complications (including hepatic failure, infection, acute renal failure, and death) occurring in 10% to 15%. 290,295 Until recently, it often was difficult
to establish the true extent of the metastatic disease and, therefore, to decide which patients might be most helped by this procedure. With the availability of SRS, it
should now be possible to accomplish this in most cases. In a patient with a symptomatic PET and diffusely metastatic disease to the liver but minimal or no bone
metastases, in whom hormone symptoms cannot be controlled by octreotide, chemotherapy, or other medical treatment, hepatic artery embolization should be
considered.
SURGICAL TREATMENT
Systemic removal of all resectable tumor has been recommended in general for PETs 110,296,297,299 and 300 and, if possible, for VIPomas, 103,301 glucagonomas,118,119
GRFomas,123 and somatostatinomas.302 The data of Zollinger et al. 15 suggest that removal of all resectable tumor, termed debulking or cytoreductive surgery, prolongs
life expectancy. No studies to date have evaluated debulking surgery in a controlled, prospective manner. It is important to differentiate between the possible benefit
of such surgery in patients with gastrinomas or nonfunctional tumors and the potential benefit in patients with functional PETs for whom poor medical therapy for the
hormonal excess state might ensue. In the former group, the procedure must extend life or relieve tumor symptoms to be worthwhile, whereas in the latter group,
improved ability to control the hormonal excess state in situations without effective medical therapy may be a major benefit.
A number of studies have provided data dealing with this approach. 296,297,299,300 One study involved 17 patients with potentially resectable metastatic PETs, 296 and the
second evaluated 74 patients with metastatic neuroendocrine tumors (50 carcinoid, 23 islet cell, and 1 atypical tumor). 297 In the first study, in 80% of cases, the tumor
was completely excised at surgery, and the survival rate was 79% at 5 years, with a mean follow-up of 3 years. 296 In this study, patients with extensive metastatic
disease had a 5-year survival rate of 28%, equal to that in inoperable patients, whereas patients with limited resection had significantly prolonged survivals ( P = .02).
In the second study, 36 hepatic lobectomies or extended hepatectomies and 38 nonanatomic liver resections were performed. Perioperative mortality was 2.7%,
morbidity 24%, and 4-year survival 73%; 90% of patients experienced symptomatic improvement postoperatively. 297 Norton et al. 137 reported the successful resection
of all metastatic disease in 5 of 20 patients with ZES with extensive disease, 2 of whom have maintained normal gastrin levels postoperatively. A series of 38 patients
with PETs confined to liver who underwent resection was compared to 23 patients with comparable tumor burden but technically unresectable disease. 299 Survival
was significantly longer in those who underwent resection, although other factors may also have influenced outcome. The conclusion of each of these studies was that
resection of metastatic disease to liver should be considered in selected patients with neuroendocrine tumors. 110,296,297,299 It is important to remember that this may be
possible in only a small proportion (9% in one study 303 and 5% in another296) of all patients with metastatic PETs in the liver. Furthermore, at present, whether such an
approach actually increases survival is not clear (see Fig. 38.5-3, Fig.38.5-7). This approach may be required in patients with symptomatic tumors in whom octreotide
or the use of chemotherapy alone is not reducing plasma hormone levels sufficiently, so that symptoms remain poorly controlled. 1
LIVER TRANSPLANTATION
Liver transplantation has been attempted in small numbers of patients with metastatic PETs. 304,305,306,307 and 308 Each of the reported series involves small numbers of
cases. All these studies recommend that liver transplantation be considered in selected cases, especially patients without extrahepatic disease. In the largest series
of 31 patients who underwent liver transplantation for neuroendocrine tumors, 15 were for carcinoid and 16 were for PETs. 309 Survival rates were significantly higher
for the carcinoid patients (69% alive at 5 years) than for the PET patients (8% alive at 4 years). It appears from this small number of cases that long-term cure is
uncommon, with recurrence to liver being most common. Whether liver transplantation is more effective in PET cases than in other metastatic tumors and whether it
appreciably prolongs survival remains undetermined.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Jensen RT, Norton JA. Management of metastatic pancreatic endocrine tumors. In: Feldman M, Scharschmidt BF, Sleisenger MH, eds. Gastrointestinal and liver disease. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, 1998:871.
2. Kloppel G, Schroder S, Heitz PU. Histopathology and immunopathology of pancreatic endocrine tumors. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas: recent advances in
research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:120.
3. Eriksson B, Oberg K. PPomas and nonfunctioning endocrine pancreatic tumors: clinical presentation, diagnosis, and advances in management. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine
tumors of the pancreas: recent advances in research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:208.
4. Metz DC. Diagnosis and treatment of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. Semin Gastrointest Dis 1995;6:67.
5. Weil C. Gastroenteropancreatic endocrine tumors. Klin Wochenschr 1985;63:433.
6. Dent RB, van Heerden JA, Weiland LH. Nonfunctioning islet cell tumors. Ann Surg 1981;193:185.
7. Mignon M, Jais P, Cadiot G, Yedder DB, Vatier J. Clinical features and advances in biological diagnostic criteria for Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors
of the pancreas: recent advances in research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:223.
8. Jensen RT. Gastrin-producing tumors. In: Arnold A, ed. Endocrine neoplasms. Amsterdam: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997:293.
9. Jensen RT. Gastrinoma. Bailliere's Clin Gastroenterol 1996;10:603.
10. Zollinger RM, Ellison EH. Primary peptic ulceration of the jejunum associated with islet cell tumors of the pancreas. Ann Surg 1955;142:709.
11. Gregory RA, Grossman MI, Tracy HJ, Bentley PH. Nature of the gastric secretagogue in Zollinger-Ellison tumors. Lancet 1967;2:543.
12. Gregory RA, Tracy JH, Agarwal KL. Amino acid constitution of two gastrins isolated from Zollinger-Ellison tumor tissue. Gut 1969;10:603.
13. Eriksson B, Oberg K, Skogseid B. Neuroendocrine pancreatic tumors. Acta Oncol 1989;28:373.
14. Jensen RT, Gardner JD. Gastrinoma. In: Go VLW, DiMagno EP, Gardner JD, et al., eds. The pancreas: biology, pathobiology, and disease. New York: Raven Press, 1993:931.
15. Zollinger RM, Ellison EC, Fabri PJ, et al. Primary peptic ulceration of the jejunum associated with islet cell tumors: twenty-five year appraisal. Ann Surg 1980;192:422.
16. Willems G. Trophic action of gastrin on specific target cells in the gut. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas: recent advances in research and management. Basel: S
Karger, 1995:30.
17. Dockray GJ, Walsh JH, Passaro E Jr. Relative abundance of big and little gastrins in the tumors and blood of patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Gut 1975;16:353.
18. Dockray GJ, Walsh JH. Amino terminal gastrin fragment in serum of Zollinger- Ellison syndrome patients. Gastroenterology 1975;68:222.
19. Hilsted L, Bardram LC. Terminally glycine extended gastrins in serum and tumors from patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 1986;64:136.
20. Bardram L. Progastrin in serum from Zollinger-Ellison patients: an indicator of malignancy? Gastroenterology 1990;98:1420.
21. Pauwels S, Desmond H, Dimaline R, Dockray GJ. Identification of progastrin in gastrinoma antrum and duodenum by a novel radioimmunoassay. J Clin Invest 1986;77:376.
22. Kothary PC, Fabri PJ, Gower W, et al. Evaluation of NH 2-terminus gastrins in gastrinoma syndrome. J Endocrinol Metab 1986;62:970.
23. Norton JA, Doppman JL, Collen MJ, et al. Prospective study of gastrinoma localization and resection in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Ann Surg 1986;204:468.
24. Wolfe MM, Alexander RW, McGuigan JE. Extrapancreatic extraintestinal gastrinoma: effective treatment by surgery. N Engl J Med 1982;306:1533.
25. Norton JA, Doppman JL, Jensen RT. Curative resection in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome: results of a 10-year prospective study. Ann Surg 1992;215:8.
26. Weber HC, Venzon DJ, Fishbein VA, et al. Determinants of metastatic rate and survival in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES): a prospective long-term study. Gastroenterology
1995;108:1637.
27. Maton PN, Macken SM, Norton JA, et al. Ovarian carcinoma as a cause of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Gastroenterology 1989;97:464.
28. Primrose JN, Maloney M, Wells M, Bulgin O, Johnston D. Gastrin-producing ovarian mucinous cystadenomas: a cause of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Surgery 1988;104:830.
29. Wu PC, Alexander HR, Bartlett DL, et al. A prospective analysis of the frequency, location, and curability of ectopic (nonpancreaticoduodenal nonnodal) gastrinoma. Surgery 1997;122:1176.
30. Solcia E, Capella C, Buffa R, et al. Endocrine cells of the gastrointestinal tract and related tumors. Pathol Annu 1979;9:163.
31. Solcia E, Capella C, Buffa R, Frigerio G, Fiocca R. Pathology of the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. In: Fenoglio CM, Wolff M, eds. Progress in surgical pathology. 1980;1:119.
32. Friesen SR. Tumors of the endocrine pancreas. N Engl J Med 1982;306:580.
33. Fox PS, Hofmann JW, Wilson SD, DeCosse JJ. Surgical management of the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Surg Clin North Am 1974;54:394.
34. Richardson CT, Peters MN, Feldman M. Treatment of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome with exploratory laparotomy, proximal gastric vagotomy, and H 2-receptor antagonists. Gastroenterology
1985;89:357.
35. Norton JA, Fraker DL, Alexander HR, et al. Surgery to cure the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. N Engl J Med 1999;341:635.
36. Ellison EC, Wilson SD. The Zollinger-Ellison syndrome: re-appraisal and evaluation of 260 registered cases. Ann Surg 1964;160:512.
37. Zollinger RM, Martin EW, Carey LC. Observations on the post-operative tumor growth of certain islet cell tumors. Ann Surg 19761;84:525.
38. Gibril F, Reynolds JC, Doppman JL, et al. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy: its sensitivity compared with that of other imaging methods in detecting primary and metastatic gastrinomas. A
prospective study. Ann Intern Med 1996;125:26.
39. Termanini B, Gibril F, Reynbolds JC, et al. Value of somatostatin receptor scintigraphy: a prospective study in gastrinoma of its effect on clinical management. Gastroenterology 1997;112:335.
40. Yu F, Venzon DJ, Serrano J, et al. Prospective study of the clinical course, prognostic factors, causes of death, and survival in patients with long-standing Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. J Clin
Oncol 1999;17:615.
41. Arnold WS, Fraker DL, Alexander HR, et al. Apparent lymph node primary gastrinoma. Surgery 1994;116:1123.

42. Thom AK, Norton JA, Axiotis CA, Jensen RT. Location, incidence, and malignant potential of duodenal gastrinomas. Surgery 1991;110:1086.
43. Bordi C, Viale G. Analysis of cell proliferation and tumor antigens of prognostic significance in pancreatic endocrine tumors. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas:
recent advances in research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:45.
44. Metz DC, Kuchnio M, Fraker DL, et al. Flow cytometry and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome: relationship to clinical course. Gastroenterology 1993;105:799.
45. Long PP, Hruban RH, Lo R, et al. Chromosome analysis of nine endocrine neoplasms of the pancreas. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1994;77:55.
46. Evers BM, Rady PL, Sandoval K, et al. Gastrinomas demonstrate amplification of the HER-2/ neu proto-oncogene. Ann Surg 1994;219:596.
47. Evers BM, Rady PL, Tyring SK, et al. Amplification of the HER-2/ neu protooncogene in human endocrine tumors. Surgery 1992;112:211.
48. Cadiot G, Laurent-Puig P, Thuille B, et al. Is the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 gene a suppressor for fundic argyrophil tumors in the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome? Gastroenterology
1993;105:579.
49. Debelenko LV, Zhuang Z, Emmert-Buck MR, et al. Allelic deletions on chromosome 11a13 in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1associated and sporadic gastrinomas and pancreatic endocrine
tumors. Cancer Res 1997;57:2238.
50. Chandrasekharappa SC, Guru SC, Manickam P, et al. Positional cloning of the gene for multiple endocrine neoplasiatype 1. Science 1997;276:404.
51. Goebel SU, Heppner C, Burns AL, et al. Genotype/phenotype correlation of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 gene mutations in sporadic gastrinomas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2000;85:116.
52. Eberle F, Grun R. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type I. Adv Intern Med Pediatr 1981;5:76.
53. Mignon M, Cadiot G, Rigaud D, et al. Management of islet cell tumors in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas:
recent advances in research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:342.
54. Metz DC, Jensen RT, Bale AE, et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1: clinical features and management. In: Bilezekian JP, Levine MA, Marcus R, eds. The parathyroids. New York: Raven
Press, 1994:591.
55. Chiang H, O'Dorisio TM, Huang SC, et al. Multiple hormone elevations in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome: prospective study of clinical significance and of development of a second
symptomatic pancreatic endocrine tumor syndrome. Gastroenterology 1990;99:1565.
56. Mukai K, Greider MH, Grotting JC, Rosai J. Retrospective study of 77 pancreatic endocrine tumors using the immunoperoxidase method. Am J Surg Pathol 1982;6:387.
57. Eriksson B. Tumor markers for pancreatic endocrine tumors, including chromogranins HCG-alpha and HCG-beta. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas: recent
advances in research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:121.
58. Bloom SR, Adrian TE, Bryant MG, Polak JM. Pancreatic polypeptide: a marker for Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Lancet 1978;1:1155.
59. Adrian TE, Uttenthal LD, Williams SJ, Bloom SR. Secretion of pancreatic polypeptide in patients with pancreatic endocrine tumors. N Engl J Med 1986;315:287.
60. Taylor IL, Rotter J, Walsh JH, Passaro E Jr. Is pancreatic polypeptide a marker for Zollinger-Ellison syndrome? Lancet 1978;1:845.
61. Langstein HN, Norton JA, Chiang HCV, et al. The utility of circulating levels of human pancreatic polypeptide as a marker of islet cell tumors. Surgery 1990;108:1109.
62. Sheppard BC, Norton JA, Doppman JL, et al. Management of islet cell tumors in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia; a prospective study. Surgery 1989;106:1108.
63. Mathew CGP, Easton DF, Nakamura Y, et al. Presymptomatic screening for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A with linked DNA markers. Lancet 1991;337:7.
64. Amikura K, Alexander HR, Norton JA, et al. Role of surgery in management of adrenocorticotropic hormoneproducing islet cell tumors of the pancreas. Surgery 1995;118:1125.
65. Bardram L, Agner T, Hagen C. Levels of alpha subunits of gonadotropin can be increased in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome both in patients with malignant tumors and apparently benign disease.
Acta Endocrinol 1988;118:135.
66. Wiedenmann B, Waldherr R, Buhr H, et al. Identification of gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine cells in normal and neoplastic human tissue with antibodies against synaptophysin,
chromogranin A, secretogranin I (chromogranin B), and secretogranin II. Gastroenterology 1988;95:1364.
67. Stridsberg M, Oberg K, Li Q, Engstrom U, Lundqvist G. Measurements of chromogranin A, chromogranin B (secretogranin I), chromogranin C (secretogranin II), and pancreastatin in plasma
and urine from patients with carcinoid tumours and endocrine pancreatic tumours. J Endocrinol 1995;144:49.
68. Goebel SU, Serrano J, Yu F, et al. Prospective study of the value of serum chromogranin A or serum gastrin levels in the assessment of the presence, extent, or growth of gastrinomas. Cancer
1999;85:1470.
69. Whipple AO. The surgical therapy of hyperinsulinism. J Int Chir 1938;3:237.
70. Creutzfeldt W. Insulinomas: clinical presentation, diagnosis, and advances in management. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas: recent advances in research and
management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:148.
71. Comi RJ, Gorden P, Doppman JL. Insulinoma. In: Go VLW, ed. The pancreas: biology, pathobiology, and disease. New York: Raven Press, 1993:979.
72. Fajans SS, Vinik AI. Insulin-producing islet cell tumors. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1989;18:45.
73. Stefanini P, Carboni M, Patrassi N, Basoli A. Beta-islet cell tumor of the pancreas: results of a study on 1067 cases. Surgery 1974;75:597.
74. Hirschowitz BI. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome: pathogenesis, diagnosis, and management. Am J Gastroenterol 1997;92:44S.
75. Miller LS, Vinayek R, Frucht H, et al. Reflux esophagitis in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Gastroenterology 1990;98:341.
76. Jensen RT, Fraker DL. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome: advances in treatment of the gastric hypersecretion and the gastrinoma. JAMA 1994;271:1.
77. Waxsman I, Gardner JD, Jensen RT, Maton PN. Peptic ulcer perforation as the presentation of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Dig Dis Sci 1991;36:19.
78. Maton PN. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome: recognition and management of acid hypersecretion. Drugs 1996;52:33.
79. Zimmer T, Stolzel U, Bader M, et al. Brief report: a duodenal gastrinoma in a patient with diarrhea and normal serum gastrin concentrations. N Engl J Med 1995;333:634.
80. Jais P, Mignon M. Normal serum gastrin concentration in gastrinoma. Lancet 1995;346:1421.
81. Frucht H, Howard JM, Slaff JF. Secretin and calcium provocative tests in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome: a prospective study. Ann Intern Med 1989;111:713.
82. Metz DC, Weber HC, Orbuch M, et al. Helicobacter pylori infection: a reversible cause of hypergastrinemia and hyperchlorhydria which can mimic Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Dig Dis Sci
1995;40:153.
83. Alexander HR Jr, Jensen RT, Doppman JL. Pancreatic endocrine tumors. In: Torosian M, ed. Integratedcancer management: surgery, medical oncology, and radiation oncology. New York:
Marcel Dekker, 1999:241.
84. Deveney CW, Deveney KS, Jaffe BM, Janes RS, Way LW. Use of calcium and secretin in the diagnosis of gastrinoma (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome). Ann Intern Med 1979;87:680.
85. Isenberg JI, Walsh JH, Passaro E Jr, Moore EW, Grossman MI. Unusual effect of secretin on serum gastrin, serum calcium, and gastric acid secretion in a patient with suspected
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Gastroenterology 1972;62:626.
86. Frucht H, Howard JM, Stark HA, et al. Prospective study of meal provocative gastrin testing in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Am J Med 1989;87:528.
87. Lamers CBH, van Tongeren JHM. Comparative study of the value of calcium secretin and meal stimulated increase in serum gastrin in the diagnosis of the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Gut
1979;18:128.
88. Friesen SR, Tomita T. Pseudo-Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Hypergastrinemia, hyperchlorhydria without tumor. Ann Surg 1981;194:481.
89. Taylor IL, Calam JK, Roth JI, et al. Family studies of hypergastrinemic, hyperpepsinogenemic I duodenal ulcer. Ann Intern Med 1981;95:421.
90. Hangen D, Maltz GS, Anderson CM. Marked hypergastrinemia in gastric outlet obstruction. J Clin Gastroenterol 1989;11:442.
91. Fuerle G, Ketterer H, Becker HD, Creutzfeldt W. Circadian serum gastrin concentrations in control persons and in patients with ulcer disease. Scand J Gastroenterol 1972;7:177.
92. Nakanishi T, Shinomura Y, Kanayama S, Matsuzawa Y. Eradication of Helicobacter pylori normalizes serum gastrin concentration and antral gastrin cell number in a patient with primary gastrin
cell hyperplasia. Am J Gastroenterol 1993;88:440.
93. Comi RJ, Gorden P, Doppman HL, Norton JA. Insulinoma. In: Go VLW, Gardner JD, Brooks FP, et al., eds. The exocrine pancreas: biology, pathology, and diseases. New York: Raven Press,
1986:745.
94. Moller DE, Flier JS. Insulin resistancemechanisms, syndromes, and implications. N Engl J Med 1991;325:938.
95. Grunberger G, Weiner JL, Silverman R, et al. Factitious hypoglycemia due to surreptitious administration of insulin: diagnosis, treatment, and long-term follow-up. Ann Intern Med
1988;108:252.
96. Thompson GB, van Heerden JA, Grant CS, Carney JA, Ilstrup DM. Islet cell carcinomas of the pancreas: a twenty-year experience. Surgery 1988;104:1011.
97. Vinik AI, Strodel WE, Eckhauser FE, et al. Somatostatinomas, PPomas, neurotensinomas. Semin Oncol 1987;14:263.
98. Heitz PU, Kasper M, Polak JM, Kloppel G. Pancreatic endocrine tumors. Hum Pathol 1982;13:263.
99. Vinik AI, Moattari AR. Treatment of endocrine tumors. Endocrinol Clin North Am 1989;18:483.
100. Peracchi M, Tagliabue R, Quatrini M, Reschini E. Plasma pancreatic polypeptide response to secretin. Eur J Endocrinol 1999;141:47.
101. Kent RB, van Heerden JA, Weiland LH. Nonfunctioning islet cell tumors. Ann Surg 1981;193:185.
102. Verner JV, Morrison AB. Islet cell tumor and a syndrome of refractory watery diarrhea and hypokalemia. Am J Med 1958;29:529.
103. Matuchansky C, Rambaud JC. VIPomas and endocrine cholera: clinical presentation, diagnosis, and advances in management. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the
pancreas: recent advances in research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:166.
104. Mekhjian HS, O'Dorisio TM. VIPoma syndrome. Semin Oncol 1987;14:282.
105. Long RG, Bryant MG, Mitchell SJ, et al. Clinicopathological study of pancreatic and ganglioneuroblastoma tumors secreting vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIPomas). Br Med J
1981;282:1767.
106. Koppel G, Heitz PU. Pancreatic endocrine tumors. Pathol Res Pract 1988;183:155.
107. Capella C, Polak JM, Butta R, et al. Morphologic patterns and diagnostic criteria of VIP-producing endocrine tumors. A histologic, histochemical, ultrastructural, and biochemical study of 32
cases. Cancer 1983;52:1860.
108. Kane MG, O'Dorisio TM, Krejs GJ. Production of secretory diarrhea by intravenous infusion of vasoactive intestinal peptide. N Engl J Med 1983;309:1482.
109. Krejs GJ. VIPomas syndrome. Am J Med 1987;82:37.
110. Nagorney DM, Que FG. Cytoreductive hepatic surgery for metastatic gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas: recent advances
in research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:416.
111. Morris AI, Turnberg LA. Surreptitious laxative abuse. Gastroenterology 1979;77:780.
112. Read NW, Read MG, Krejs GJ, et al. A report of five patients with large volume secretory diarrhea but no evidence of endocrine tumor or laxative abuse. Dig Dis Sci 1982;27:193.
113. Becker SW, Kahn D, Rothman S. Cutaneous manifestations of internal malignant tumors. Arch Dermatol Syph 1942;45:1069.
114. McGavran MH, Unger RH, Recant L, et al. A glucagon-secreting alpha-cell carcinoma of the pancreas. N Engl J Med 1966;274:1408.
115. Wilkinson DS. Necrolytic migratory erythema with carcinoma of the pancreas. Trans St John's Hosp Dermatol Soc 1973;59:244.
116. Mallinson CN, Bloom SR, Warin AP, et al. A glucagonoma syndrome. Lancet 1974;2:1.
117. Stacpoole PW. The glucagonoma syndrome: clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment. Endocr Rev 1981;2:347.
118. Guillausseas PJ, Guillausseau-Scholer C. Glucagonomas: clinical presentation, diagnosis, and advances in management. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas:
recent advances in research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:183.
119. Holst JJ. Glucagon-producing tumors. In: Cohen S, Soloway D, eds. Hormone producing tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1985:57.
120. Abravia C, De Bartolo M, Katzen R, Lawrence AM. Disappearance of glucagonoma rash after surgical resection but not during dietary normalization of serum amino acids. Am J Clin Nutr
1984;39:351.
121. Ganda PO, Weir GC, Soeldner JS, et al. Somatostatinoma: a somatostatin-containing tumor of the endocrine pancreas. N Engl J Med 1977;296:963.
122. Larsson LI, Hirsch MA, Holst J, et al. Pancreatic somatostatinoma clinical features and physiologic implications. Lancet 1977;1:666.
123. Sassolas G, Chayvialle JA. GRFomas, somatostatinomas: clinical presentation, diagnosis, and advances in management. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas:
recent advances in research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:194.
124. Lrejs GJ, Orci L, Conlon M, et al. Somatostatinoma syndrome (biochemical, morphological, and clinical features). N Engl J Med 1979;301:285.
125. Boden G, Shimoyama R. Somatostatinoma. In: Cohen S, Soloway RD, eds. Hormone-producing tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1985:85.

126. Rivier J, Spress J, Thorner M, Vale W. Characterization of a growth-hormone releasing factor from a human pancreatic islet cell tumor. Nature 1982;300:276.
127. Thorner MO, Perryman RL, Cronin MJ, et al. Somatotroph hyperplasia. J Clin Invest 1982;70:965.
128. Guillemin R, Brazeau P, Bohlen P, et al. Growth hormonereleasing factor from a human pancreatic tumor that caused acromegaly. Science 1982;27:774.
129. Sano T, Asa SL, Kovacs K. Growth hormone releasingproducing tumors: clinical, biochemical, and morphological manifestations. Endocr Rev 1988;9:357.
130. Losa M, Schopohl J, von Werder K. Ectopic secretion of growth hormonereleasing hormone in man. J Endocrinol Invest 1993;16:69.
131. Berger C, Trouillas J, Bloch B, et al. Multihormonal carcinoid tumors of the pancreas: secreting growth hormonereleasing factor as a cause of acromegaly. Cancer 1984;54:2097.
132. Moller DE, Moses AC, Jones K, Thorner MO, Vance ML. Octreotide suppresses both growth hormone (GH) and GH-releasing hormone (GHRH) in acromegaly due to ectopic GHRH secretion. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1989;68:499.
133. von Werder K, Losa M, Stalla FK, et al. Long-term treatment of a metastasizing GRFoma with a somatostatin analogue (SMS 201-995) in a girl with gigantism. Scand J Gastroenterol
1986;21:238.
134. Christofides ND, Stephanou A, Suzuki H, Yianigou Y, Bloom SR. Distribution of immunoreactive growth hormonereleasing hormone in the human brain and intestine and its production by
tumors. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1984;59:747.
135. Barkan AL. Acromegaly: diagnosis and therapy. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1989;18:277.
136. Orbuch M, Doppman JL, Strader DB, et al. Imaging for pancreatic endocrine tumor localization: recent advances. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas: recent
advances in research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:268.
137. Norton JA, Sugarbaker PH, Doppman JL, et al. Aggressive resection of metastatic disease in select patients with malignant gastrinoma. Ann Surg 1986;203:352.
138. van Heerden JA, Grant CS, Czako PF, Service FJ, Charboneau JW. Occult functioning insulinomas: which localizing studies are indicated? Surgery 1992;112:1010.
139. Hashimoto LA, Walsh RM. Preoperative localization of insulinomas is not necessary. J Am Coll Surg 1999;189:368.
140. Pasieka JL, McLeod MK, Thompson NW, Burney RE. Surgical approach to insulinomas. Assessing the need for preoperative localization. Arch Surg 1992;127:442.
141. Brown CK, Bartlett DL, Doppman JL, et al. Intraarterial calcium stimulation and intraoperative ultrasonography in the localization and resection of insulinomas. Surgery 1997;122:1189.
142. Norton JA, Shawker TH, Doppman JL, et al. Localization and surgical treatment of occult insulinomas. Ann Surg 1990;212:615.
143. Axelrod L. Insulinoma: cost-effective care in patients with a rare disease. Ann Intern Med 1995;123:311.
144. Doppman JL, Chang R, Fraker DL, et al. Localization of insulinomas to regions of the pancreas by intra-arterial stimulation with calcium. Ann Intern Med 1995;123:269.
145. London JB, Shawker TH, Doppman HL, et al. Prospective assessment of abdominal ultrasound in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Radiology 1991;178:763.
146. Alexander HR, Fraker DL, Norton JA, et al. Prospective study of somatostatin receptor scintigraphy and its effect on operative outcome in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Ann Surg
1998;228:228.
147. Maton PN, Miller DL, Doppman HL, et al. Role of selective angiography in the management of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Gastroenterology 1987;92:913.
148. Frucht H, Doppman JL, Norton JA, et al. MR imaging of gastrinomas: comparison with computed tomography, angiography, and ultrasound. Radiology 1989;171:713.
149. Pisegna JR, Doppman JL, Norton JA, Metz DC, Jensen RT. Prospective comparative study of ability of MR imaging and other imaging modalities to localize tumors in patients with
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Dig Dis Sci 1993;38:1318.
150. Lamberts SWJ, Bakker WH, Reubi JC, Krenning EP. Somatostatin receptor imaging in the localization of endocrine tumors. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1246.
151. Krenning EP, Kwekkeboom DJ, Oei HY, et al. Somatostatin-receptor scintigraphy in gastroenteropancreatic tumors. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1994;733:416.
152. de Kerviler E, Cadiot G, Lebtahi R, et al. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy in forty-eight patients with the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. J Nucl Med 1994;21:1191.
153. Gibril F, Reynolds JC, Doppman JL, et al. Does the use of octreoscanning alter management in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome? A prospective study. Gastroenterology
1995;108:A356(abst).
154. Kwekkeboom DJ, Krenning EP, Oei HY, van Eyck CHJ, Lamberts SWJ. Use of radiolabelled somatostatin to localize islet cell tumors. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the
pancreas: recent advances in research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:298.
155. Lebtahi R, Cadiot G, Sarda L, et al. Clinical impact of somatostatin receptor scintigraphy in the management of patients with neuroendocrine gastroenteropancreatic tumors. J Nucl Med
1997;38:853.
156. Cadiot G, Bonnaud G, Lebtahi R, et al. Usefulness of somatostatin receptor scintigraphy in the management of patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Gut 1997;41:107.
157. Cadiot G, Lebtahi R, Sarda L, et al. Preoperative detection of duodenal gastrinomas and peripancreatic lymph nodes by somatostatin receptor scintigraphy. Gastroenterology 1996;111:845.
158. Reuter E, Semler P, Baer U, Sigismund R. Detection of a small gastrinoma by combined radiologic and scintigraphic techniques. Clin Nucl Med 1997;22:714.
159. van Eijck CJH, Lamberts SWJ, Lemaire LCJM, et al. The use of somatostatin receptor scintigraphy in the differential diagnosis of pancreatic duct cancers and islet cell tumors. Ann Surg
1996;224:119.
160. Gibril F, Doppman JL, Reynolds JC, et al. Bone metastases in patients with gastrinomas: a prospective study of bone scanning, somatostatin receptor scanning, and magnetic resonance
imaging and their detection, frequency, location, and effect of their detection on management. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1040.
161. Ruszniewski P, Amouyal P, Amouyal G, et al. Endocrine tumors of the pancreatic area: localization by endoscopic ultrasonography. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the
pancreas: recent advances in research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:258.
162. Rosch T, Lightdale CJ, Botet JF, et al. Localization of pancreatic endocrine tumors by endoscopic ultrasonography. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1721.
163. Thompson NW, Czako PF, Fritts LL, et al. Role of endoscopic ultrasonography in the localization of insulinomas and gastrinomas. Surgery 1994;116:1131.
164. Doppman JL. Pancreatic endocrine tumorsthe search goes on [Editorial]. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1770.
165. Cherner JA, Doppman HL, Norton JA, et al. Selective venous sampling for gastrin to localize gastrinomas. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:841.
166. Miller DL, Doppman JL, Metz DC, et al. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome: technique, results, and complications of portal venous sampling. Radiology 1992;182:235.
167. Vinik A, Moattari R, Cho K, Thompson N. Transhepatic portal venous catheterization for localization for sporadic and MEN gastrinomas. Surgery 1990;107:246.
168. Strader DB, Doppman JL, Orbuch M, et al. Functional localization of pancreatic endocrine tumors. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Frontiers of gastrointestinal research. Basel: S Karger,
1995:282.
169. Doppman JL, Miller DL, Chang R, et al. Gastrinomas: localization by means of selective intraarterial injection of secretin. Radiology 1990;174:25.
170. Vinik AI, Delbridge L, Moattari R, Cho K, Thompson N. Transhepatic portal vein catheterization for localization of insulinomas: a ten-year experience. Surgery 1991;109:1.
171. Norton JA. Surgical treatment of islet cell tumors with special emphasis on operative ultrasound. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas: recent advances in research
and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:309.
172. Norton JA, Cromack DT, Shawker TH, et al. Intraoperative ultrasonographic localization of islet cell tumors. Ann Surg 1988;207:160.
173. Frucht H, Norton JA, London JF, et al. Detection of duodenal gastrinomas by operative endoscopic transillumination a prospective study. Gastroenterology 1990;99:1622.
174. Sugg SL, Norton JA, Fraker DL, et al. A prospective study of intraoperative methods to diagnose and resect duodenal gastrinomas. Ann Surg 1993;218:2.
175. Metz DC, Jensen RT. Advances in gastric antisecretory therapy in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas: recent advances in research
and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:240.
176. Friesen SR. Effect of total gastrectomy on the Zollinger-Ellison tumor: observation by second-look operations. Surgery 1967;62:609.
177. Fox PS, Hofmann JW, DeCosse JJ, Wilson SD. The influence of total gastrectomy on survival in malignant Zollinger-Ellison tumors. Ann Surg 1974;180:558.
178. Metz DC, Strader DB, Orbuch M, et al. Use of omeprazole in Zollinger-Ellison: a prospective nine-year study of efficacy and safety. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1993;7:597.
179. Jensen RT, Metz DC, Koviack PD, Feigenbaum KM. Prospective study of the long-term efficacy and safety of lansoprazole in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
1993;7:41.
180. Norton JA, Cornelius MJ, Doppman JL, et al. Effect of parathyroidectomy in patients with hyperparathyroidism and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1: a
prospective study. Surgery 1987;102:958.
181. McCarthy DM, Olinger EJ, May RJ, Long VW, Gardner JD. H 2-histamine receptor blocking agents in the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1977;87:668.
182. Jensen RT, Doppman JL, Gardner JD. Gastrinoma. In: Go VLW, Brooks FA, DiMagno EP, et al., eds. The exocrine pancreas: biology, pathobiology, and disease. New York: Raven Press,
1986:727.
183. Howard JM, Chremos AN, Collen MJ, et al. Famotidine, a new potent, long-acting histamine H 2-receptor antagonist: comparison with cimetidine and ranitidine in the treatment of
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Gastroenterology 1985;88:1026.
184. Koury SI, Stone CK, La Charité DD. Omeprazole and the development of acute hepatitis. Eur J Emerg Med 1998;5:467.
185. Ekman L, Hansson E, Havu N, et al. Toxicological studies on omeprazole. Scand J Gastroenterol 1985;20:53.
186. Penston J, Wormsley KG. Achlorhydria-hypergastrinaemia: carcinoidsa flawed hypothesis. Gut 1987;28:488.
187. Maton PN, Lack EE, Collen MJ, et al. The effect of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and omeprazole therapy on gastric endocrine cells. Gastroenterology 1990;99:943.
188. Solcia E, Capella C, Fiocca R, Cornaggia M, Bosi F. The gastroenteropancreatic endocrine system and related tumors. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1989;18:671.
189. D'Adda T, Corletto V, Pilato FD, et al. Quantitative ultrastructure of endocrine cells of oxyntic mucosa in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Gastroenterology 1990;99:17.
190. Jensen RT. Gastrinoma as a model for prolonged hypergastrinemia in man. In: Walsh JH, ed. Gastrin. New York: Raven Press, 1993:373.
191. Lehy T, Cadiot G, Mignon M, Ruszniewski P, Bonfils S. Influence of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 on gastric endocrine cells in patients with the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Gut
1992;33:1275.
192. Metz DC, Pisegna JR, Fishbeyn VA, et al. Currently used doses of omeprazole in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome are too high. Gastroenterology 1992;103:1498.
193. Pisegna JR, Martin P, McKeand W, et al. Inhibition of pentagastrin-induced gastric acid secretion by intravenous pantoprazole: a dose-response study. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;94:2874.
194. Zollinger RM, Ellison EC, O'Dorision T, Sparks J. Thirty years' experience with gastrinoma. World J Surg 1984;8:427.
195. Ellison EC, Carey LC, Sparks J, et al. Early surgical treatment of gastrinoma. Am J Med 1987;82:17.
196. Kisker O, Bastian D, Bartsch D, Nies C, Rothmund M. Localization, malignant potential, and surgical management of gastrinomas. World J Surg 1998;22:651.
197. Farley DR, van Heerden JA, Grant CS, Miller LJ, Ilstrup DM. The Zollinger- Ellison syndrome: a collective surgical experience. Ann Surg 1992;216:561.
198. Soga J, Yakuwa Y. The gastrinoma/Zollinger-Ellison syndrome: statistical evaluation of a Japanese series of 359 cases. J Hepatobil Pancreat Surg 1998;5:77.
199. Stadil F, Bardram L, Gustafsen J, Efsen F. Surgical treatment of the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. World J Surg 1993;17:463.
200. Alexander HR, Bartlett DL, Venzon DJ, et al. Analysis of factors associated with long-term (five or more years) cure in patients undergoing operation for Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Surgery
1998;124:1160.
201. Podevin P, Ruszniewski P, Mignon M, et al. Management of multiple endocrine neoplasia type I (MEN I) in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Gastroenterology 1990;98:A230.
202. Maton PN, Gardner JD, Jensen RT. The incidence and etiology of Cushing's syndrome in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. N Engl J Med 1986;315:1.
203. Jensen RT. Management of the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. J Intern Med 1998;243:477.
204. Thompson NW. The surgical management of hyperparathyroidism and endocrine disease of the pancreas in the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 patient. J Intern Med 1995;238:269.
205. Mignon M, Cadiot G. Diagnostic and therapeutic criteria in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. J Intern Med 1998;243:489.
206. Fraker DL, Norton JA, Alexander HR, Venzon DJ, Jensen RT. Surgery in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome alters the natural history of gastrinoma. Ann Surg 1994;220:320.
207. Vogel SB, Wolfe MM, McGuigan JE. Localization and resection of gastrinomas in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Ann Surg 1987;205:550.
208. Delcore R Jr, Cheung LY, Friesen SR. Outcome of lymph node involvement in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Ann Surg 1988;208:291.
209. Delcore R, Hermeck AS, Friesen SR. Selective surgical management of correctable hypergastrinemia. Surgery 1989;106:1094.
210. Howard TJ, Zinner MJ, Stabile BE, Passaro E Jr. Gastrinoma excision for cure. Ann Surg 1990;211:9.
211. Stadil F. Treatment of gastrinomas with pancreatoduodenectomy. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas: recent advances in research and management. Basel: S
Karger, 1995:333.
212. Norton JA, Jensen RT. Unresolved surgical issues in the management of patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. World J Surg 1991;15:151.
213. Fraker DL, Alexander HR. The surgical approach to endocrine tumors of the pancreas. Semin Gastrointest Dis 1995;6:102.

214. Udelsman R, Yeo CJ, Hruban RH, et al. Pancreaticoduodenectomy for selected pancreatic endocrine tumors. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1993;177:269.
215. Delcore R, Friesen SR. Role of pancreatoduodenectomy in the management of primary duodenal wall gastrinomas in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Surgery 1992;112:1016.
216. Charboneau WJ, James EM, van Heerden JA, et al. Intraoperative real-time ultrasonographic localization of pancreatic insulinomas. J Ultrasound Med 1983;2:251.
217. Cromack DT, Norton JA, Sigel B, et al. The use of high-resolution intraoperative ultrasound to localize gastrinomas: an initial report of a prospective study. World J Surg 1987;11:648.
218. von Schrenck T, Howard JM, Doppman JL, et al. Prospective study of chemotherapy in patients with metastatic gastrinoma. Gastroenterology 1988;94:1326.
219. Zeiger MA, Shawker TH, Norton JA. Use of intraoperative ultrasonography to localize islet cell tumors. World J Surg 1993;17:448.
220. Pipeleers-Marichal M, Somers G, Willems G, et al. Gastrinomas in the duodenums of patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. N Engl J Med
1990;322:723.
221. MacFarlane MP, Fraker DL, Alexander HR, Norton JA, Jensen RT. A prospective study of surgical resection of duodenal and pancreatic gastrinomas. Surgery 1995;118:973.
222. Cadiot G, Vuagnat A, Doukhan I, et al. Prognostic factors in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Gastroenterology 1999;116:286.
223. Jaskowiak NT, Fraker DL, Alexander HR, et al. Is reoperation for gastrinoma excision indicated in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome? Surgery 1996;120:1055.
224. Boden G. Insulinoma and glucagonoma. Semin Oncol 1987;14:253.
225. Blum I, Doron M, Laron Z, et al. Prevention of hypoglycemia attacks by propranolol in a patient suffering from insulinoma. Diabetes 1975;24:535.
226. Hofeldt FD, Dippe SE, Levin SR, et al. Effects of diphenylhydantoin upon glucose-induced insulin secretion in three patients with insulinoma. Diabetes 1974;23:192.
227. Maton PN, Gardner JD, Jensen RT. The use of the long acting somatostatin analogue 201-995 in patients with pancreatic endocrine tumors. Dig Dis Sci 1989;34:29.
228. Maton PN. The use of the long-acting somatostatin analogue octreotide in patients with islet cell tumors. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1989;18:897.
229. Danforth DN, Gorden P, Brennan MF. Metastatic insulin secreting carcinoma of the pancreas: clinical course and the role of surgery. Surgery 1984;96:1027.
230. Verner JV, Morrison AB. Endocrine pancreatic islet disease with diarrhea: report of a case due to diffuse hyperplasia of nonbeta islet tissue with a review of 54 additional cases. Arch Intern Med
1974;133:492.
231. Mao C, Shah A, Hanson DJ, Howard JM. Von Recklinghausen's disease associated with duodenal somatostatinoma: contrast of duodenal versus pancreatic somatostatinomas. J Surg Oncol
1995;59:67.
232. Konomi K, Chijiiwa K, Katsuta T, Yamaguchi K. Pancreatic somatostatinoma: a case report and review of the literature. J Surg Oncol 1990;43:259.
233. Soldati TK, Delnoce G, Garino M, et al. Pancreatic somatostatinoma. Pan Minerva Med 1990;32:141.
234. Sano T, Yamasaki R, Saito H, et al. Growth hormonereleasing hormone (GHRH) secreting pancreatic tumor in a patient with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Surg Pathol 1987;11:810.
235. Barkan AL, Shenker Y, Grekin RJ, et al. Acromegaly from ectopic GHRH secretion by a malignant carcinoid tumor: successful treatment with long-acting somatostatin analogue SMS. Cancer
1986;61:221.
236. Melmed S, Ziel FH, Braustein GD, et al. Medical management of acromegaly due to ectopic production of GHRH by a carcinoid tumor. J Clin EndocrinolMet 1988;67:395.
237. Wilson DM, Hoffman AR. Reduction of pituitary size by the somatostatin analogue SMS 201-995 in a patient with an islet cell tumour secreting growth hormone releasing factor. Acta Endocrinol
1986;113:23.
238. Arps H, Dietel M, Schulz A, Janzarik H, Kloppel G. Pancreatic endocrine carcinoma with ectopic PTH-production and paraneoplastic hypercalcaemia. Virchows Arch 1986;408:497.
239. Bresler L, Boissel P, Conroy T, Grosdidier J. Pancreatic islet cell carcinoma with hypercalcemia: complete remission 5 years after surgical excision and chemotherapy. Am J Gastroenterol
1991;86:635.
240. Mao C, Carter P, Schaefer P, et al. Malignant islet cell tumor associated with hypercalcemia. Surgery 1995;117:37.
241. Miller CA, Ellison EC. Therapeutic alternatives in metastatic neuroendocrine tumors. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1998;7:863.
242. Gibril F, Doppman JL, Jensen RT. Recent advances in the treatment of metastatic pancreatic endocrine tumors. Semin Gastrointest Dis 1995;6:114.
243. Moertel CG, Hanley JA, Johnson LA. Streptozotocin alone compared with streptozotocin plus fluorouracil in the treatment of advanced islet-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1980;303:1189.
244. Buchanan KD, O'Hare MMT, Russel CJF, Kennedy TL, Hadden DR. Factors involved in the responsiveness of gastrointestinal apudomas to streptozotocin. Dig Dis Sci 1986;31:511S.
245. Moertel CG, Lefkopoulo M, Lipsitz S, et al. Streptozotocin-doxorubicin, streptozotocin-fluorouracil, or chlorozotocin in the treatment of advanced islet cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med
1992;326:519.
246. Eriksson B, Arnberg H, Lindgren PG, et al. Neuroendocrine pancreatic tumours: clinical presentation, biochemical and histopathological findings in 84 patients. J Intern Med 1990;228:103.
247. Moertel CG, Johnson CM, McKusick MA, et al. The management of patients with advanced carcinoid tumors and islet cell carcinomas. Ann Intern Med 1994;120:302.
248. Kvols LK, Buck M. Chemotherapy of the metastatic carcinoid and islet cell tumors: a review. Am J Med 1987;82:77.
249. Eriksson B, Oberg K. An update of the medical treatment of malignant endocrine pancreatic tumors. Acta Oncol 1993;32:203.
250. Bukowski RM, McCracken JD, Balcerzek SP, et al. Phase II study of chlorozotocin in islet cell carcinoma. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1983;11:48.
251. Moertel CG, Lavin PT, Hahn RG. Phase II trial of doxorubicin for advanced islet cell carcinoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:1567.
252. Kelsen DP, Buckner J, Einzig A, et al. Phase II trial of cisplatin and etoposide in adenocarcinomas of the upper gastrointestinal trac. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:329.
253. Saltz L, Lauwers G, Wiseberg J, Kelsen D. A phase II trial of carboplatin in patients with advanced APUD tumors. Cancer 1993;72:619.
254. Ohshio G, Hosotani R, Imamura M, et al. Gastrinoma with multiple liver metastases: effectiveness of dacarbazine (DTIC) therapy. J Hepatobil Pancreat Surg 1998;5:339.
255. Moertel CG. An odyssey in the land of small tumors. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1502.
256. Herr RR, Jahnke HK, Argoudelis AD. The structure of streptozotocin. J Am Chem Soc 1967;98:4808.
257. Weiss RB. Streptozotocin: a review of its pharmacology, efficacy, and toxicity. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:427.
258. Rakieten N, Rakieten ML, Nadkani MV. Studies of the diabetogenic action of streptozotocin (NSC-37917). Cancer Chemother Rep 1969;29:91.
259. Hofman JW, Fox PS, Wilson SD. Duodenal wall tumors and the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Arch Surg 1973;107:334.
260. Kelsen DG, Cheng E, Kemeny N, Magill GB, Yagoda A. Streptozotocin and Adriamycin in the treatment of APUD tumors (carcinoid islet cell and medullary thyroid). Proc Am AssocCancer Res
1982;23:433.
261. Frame J, Kelsen D, Kemeney N, et al. A phase II trial of streptozotocin and Adriamycin in advanced APUD tumors. Am J Clin Oncol 1988;11:490.
262. Bonfils S, Ruszniewski P, Haffar S, Laucournet H. Chemotherapy of hepatic metastases (HM) in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES). Report of a multicenter analysis. Dig Dis Sci 1986;31:51.
263. Ruszniewski PH, Rougier P, Andre-David F, et al. Prospective multicentric study: chemotherapy with streptozotocin (STZ) and 5-fluorouracil (5FU) for liver metastases (LM) in Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome (ZES). Gastroenterology 1989;96:A431.
264. Arnold R, Frank M. Systemic chemotherapy for endocrine tumors of the pancreas: recent advances. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas: recent advances in
research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:431.
265. Ruszniewski P, Hochlaf S, Rougier P, Mignon M. Chimiotherapie intraveineuse par streptozotocine et 5 fluoro-uracile des metastases hepatiques du syndrome de Zollinger-Ellison.
Gastroenterol Clin Biol 1991;15:393.
266. Sutliff VE, Doppman JL, Gibril F, et al. Growth of newly diagnosed, untreated metastatic gastrinomas and predictors of growth patterns. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2420.
267. Bonfils S, Landor SH, Mignon M, et al. Results of surgical management in 92 consecutive patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Ann Surg 1981;194:692.
268. Ajani JA, Levin B, Wallace S. Systemic and regional therapy of advanced islet cell tumors. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1989;18:923.
269. Oberg K. The use of chemotherapy in the management of neuroendocrine tumors. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1993;22:941.
270. Bukowski RM, Tangen C, Lee R, et al. Phase II trial of chlorozotocin and fluorouracil in islet cell carcinoma: a Southwest Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1914.
271. Moertel CG, Kvols LK, O'Connell MJ, Rubin J. Treatment of neuroendocrine carcinomas with combined etoposide and cisplatin. Cancer 1991;68:22.
272. Eriksson B, Oberg K. Interferon therapy of malignant endocrine pancreatic tumors. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas: recent advances in research and
management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:451.
273. Kvols LK, Buck M. Chemotherapy of endocrine malignancies: a review. Semin Oncol 1987;14:343.
274. Marynick SP, Fagadau WR, Duncan LA. Malignant glucagonoma syndrome. Response to chemotherapy. Ann Intern Med 1980;93:453.
275. Awrich AE, Peetz M, Fletcher WS. Dimethyltriazenomidazole carboxamide therapy of islet cell carcinomas of the pancreas. J Surg Oncol 1981;17:321.
276. Kurose T, Seino Y, Ishida LT, et al. Successful treatment of metastatic glucagonoma with dacarbazine. Lancet 1984;1:621.
277. Scarpignato C. Somatostatin analogues in the management of endocrine tumors of the pancreas. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas: recent advances in research
and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:385.
278. Angeletti S, Corleto VD, Schillaci O, et al. Single dose of octreotide stabilizes metastatic gastro-entero-pancreatic endocrine tumours. Ital J GastroenterolHepatol 1999;31:23.
279. Arnold R, Frank M, Kajdan U. Management of gastroenteropancreatic endocrine tumors: the place of somatostatin analogues. Digestion 1994;55:107.
280. Arnold R, Neuhaus C, Benning R, et al. Somatostatin analog sandostatin and inhibition of tumor growth in patients with metastatic endocrine gastroenteropancreatic tumors. World J Surg
1993;17:511.
281. Vinik AI, Tsai ST, Moattari AR, et al. Somatostatin analogue (SMS-201-995) in the management of gastroentero-pancreatic tumors and diarrhea syndromes. Am J Med 1986;81:23.
282. Saltz L, Trochanowski B, Buckley M, et al. Octreotide as an antineoplastic agent in the treatment of functional and nonfunctional neuroendocrine tumors. Cancer 1993;72:244.
283. Redding TW, Schally AV. Inhibition of growth of pancreatic carcinomas in animal models by analogs of hypothalamic hormones. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1984;84:248.
284. Reubi JC. Somatostatin analogue inhibits chondrosarcoma and insulinoma tumor growth. Acta Endocrinol 1985;109:108.
285. Kvols LK, Buck M, Moertel CG, et al. Treatment of metastatic islet cell tumors with a somatostatin analogue. Ann Intern Med 1987;107:162.
286. Arnold R, Trautmann ME, Creutzfeldt W, et al. Somatostatin analogue octreotide and inhibition of tumour growth in metastatic endocrine gastroenteropancreatic tumours. Gut 1996;38:430.
287. Erickson B, Oberg K, Alm G, et al. Treatment of malignant endocrine pancreatic tumors with human leukocyte interferon. Lancet 1986;2:1307.
288. Pisegna JR, Slimak GG, Doppman JL, et al. An evaluation of human recombinant alpha interferon in patients with metastatic gastrinoma. Gastroenterology 1993;105:1179.
289. Saltz L, Kemeny N, Schwartz G, Kelsen D. A phase II trial of alpha-interferon and 5-fluorouracil in patients with advanced carcinoid and islet cell tumors. Cancer 1994;74:958.
290. Valette PJ, Souquet JC. Pancreatic islet cell tumors metastatic to the liver: treatment by hepatic artery chemo-embolization. Horm Res 1989;32:77.
291. Arcenas AG, Ajani JA, Carrasco CH, Levin B, Wallace S. Vascular occlusive therapy of pancreatic endocrine tumors metastatic to the liver. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of
the pancreas: recent advances in research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:439.
292. Perry LJ, Stuart K, Stokes KR, Clouse ME. Hepatic arterial chemoembolization for metastatic neuroendocrine tumors. Surgery 1994;116:1111.
293. Venook AP. Embolization and chemoembolization therapy for neuroendocrine tumors. Curr Opin Oncol 1999;11:38.
294. Stokes KR, Stuart K, Clouse ME. Hepatic arterial chemoembolization for metastatic endocrine tumors. J Vasc Intervent Radiol 1993;4:341.
295. Carrasco CH, Chuang VP, Wallace S. Apudoma metastatic to the liver: treatment by hepatic artery embolization. Radiology 1983;149:79.
296. Carty SE, Jensen RT, Norton JA. Prospective study of aggressive resection of metastatic pancreatic endocrine tumors. Surgery 1992;112:1024.
297. Que FG, Nagorney DM, Batts KP, Linz LJ, Kvols LK. Hepatic resection for metastatic neuroendocrine carcinomas. Am J Surg 1995;169:36.
298. Harrison LE, Brennan MF, Newman E, et al. Hepatic resection for noncolorectal nonneuroendocrine metastases: a fifteen-year experience with ninety-six patients. Surgery 1997;121:625.
299. Chen H, Hardacre JM, Uzra A, Cameron JL, Choti MA. Isolated liver metastases from neuroendocrine tumors: Does resection prolong survival? J Am Coll Surg 1998;187:88.
300. Frilling A, Rogiers X, Malagó M, et al. Treatment of liver metastases in patients with neuroendocrine tumors. Langenbecks Arch Surg 1998;383:62.
301. O'Dorisio TM, Mekhjian H, Gaginella TS. Medical therapy of VIPomas. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1989;18:545.
302. McFadden D, Jaffe BN. Surgical approaches to endocrine-producing tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. In: Cohen S, Soloway RD, eds. Hormone producing tumors of the gastrointestinal tract.
New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1985:139.
303. McEntee GP, Nagorney DM, Kvols LK, et al. Cytoreductive hepatic surgery for neuroendocrine tumors. Surgery 1990;108:1091.
304. Dousset B, Houssin D, Soubrane O, et al. Metastatic endocrine tumors: Is there a place for liver transplantation? Liver Transplant Surg 1995;1:111.
305. Curtiss SI, Mor E, Schwartz ME, et al. A rational approach to the use of hepatic transplantation in the treatment of metastatic neuroendocrine tumors. J Am Coll Surg 1995;180:184.
306. Routley D, Ramage JK, McPeake J, Tan KC, Williams R. Orthotopic liver transplantation in the treatment of metastatic neuroendocrine tumors of the liver. Liver Transplant Surg 1995;1:118.
307. Azoulay D, Bismuth H. Role of liver surgery and transplantation in patients with hepatic metastases from pancreatic endocrine tumors In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the

pancreas: recent advances in research and management. Basel: S Karger, 1995:461.
308. Le Treut YP, Delpero JR, Dousset B, et al. Results of liver transplantation in the treatment of metastatic neuroendocrine tumors. Ann Surg 1997;225:355.
309. Görög D, Toth A, Weltner J. Prognosis of untreated liver metastasis from rectal cancer. Acta Chir Hung 1997;36:106.

SECTION 38.6 Carcinoid Tumors and the Carcinoid Syndrome
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 38.6
Carcinoid Tumors and the Carcinoid Syndrome
ROBERT T. JENSEN
GERARD M. DOHERTY
Pathology and Tumor Histology
Molecular Pathogenesis
Clinical Features
General Characteristics
Carcinoid Tumors without Systemic Features
Carcinoid Tumors with Systemic Features
Carcinoid Syndrome
Clinical Features
Pathobiology
Diagnosis
Localization
Prognosis
Treatment
Treatment of the Carcinoid Tumor
Chemotherapy
Biotherapy
Embolization and Chemoembolization
Liver Transplantation
Chapter References

PATHOLOGY AND TUMOR HISTOLOGY
Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are derived from the diffuse neuroendocrine system, which is made up of peptide- and amine-producing cells with different hormonal
profiles depending on their site of origin. 1 Carcinoids are classified as NETs and share cytochemical features with melanomas, pheochromocytomas, medullary
carcinoma of the thyroid, and pancreatic endocrine tumors (PETs). 1,2,3,4 and 5 Carcinoids are composed of monotonous sheets of small round cells with uniform nuclei
and cytoplasm. 4 Mitotic figures are rare. 1,2,4 Oberndorfer6 introduced the term carcinoid in 1907 to describe tumors that behaved more indolently than
adenocarcinomas.6 Pathologists cannot differentiate benign from malignant carcinoids based on histology, nor histologically can they differentiate PETs from
carcinoids. 3 Malignancy can only be determined if invasion or distant metastases are found. Ultrastructurally, carcinoids possess electron-dense neurosecretory
granules, and they contain small clear vesicles that correspond to the synaptic vesicles of neurons. 1,4,7 Carcinoids synthesize bioactive amines and peptides, including
neuron-specific enolase; 5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-hydroxytryptophan; synaptophysin; chromogranin A and C; and other peptides, such as insulin, growth hormone,
neurotensin, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), melanocyte-stimulating hormone-b, gastrin, pancreatic polypeptide, calcitonin, substance P, other various
tachykinins (e.g., neuropeptide K), growth hormone–releasing hormone, bombesin, and various growth factors such as transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b),
platelet-derived growth factor, and basic fibroblast growth factor. 1,3,8
Most carcinoids are tentatively identified on routine histology. 4,8 However, these tumors are characterized by their histologic staining patterns due to their shared
secreted products and certain cytoplasmic proteins. 1,4 Historically, one of the most important was their staining with silver. 1,3,4 Characteristically, carcinoids either take
up and reduce silver (argentaffin reaction) or take it up but do not reduce it (argyrophilic). 2,3 Currently, the identification of chromogranin, synaptophysin, or
neuron-specific enolase (NSE) is generally used. 1,3,8 The chromogranins (A, B, C) are acidic polypeptides that are the major component of the secretory granules of
many neuroendocrine cells. 8,9 Generally, chromogranin A immunoreactivity is more specific than the argyrophil reaction because the latter also identifies other
intracellular proteins such as melanin. 8 NSE, the gamma-gamma dimer of the glycolytic enzyme enolase, occurs in the cytoplasm of most neuroendocrine cells and is
positive in most carcinoids as well as other APUD (amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation) tumors. 1,8 The advantage of NSE as a marker is that its reactivity is
unrelated to secretory granule content. However, NSE can be occasionally misleading because some tumors not considered neuroendocrine, such as fibroadenomas
of breast carcinoma and certain lymphomas, may contain a considerable amount of NSE activity. 1 Synaptophysin is a calcium-binding vesicle membrane glycoprotein
that is expressed independently of other neuroendocrine proteins. 1
In addition to the general histologic NET markers, specific markers for carcinoids may identify the tumor as a carcinoid. 1 Serotonin can be identified by various
methods, including the use of the argentaffin reaction of Masson or using antibodies to serotonin. 8,10 In general, the argentaffin reaction of Masson is usually positive,
and the serotonin antibody localization is frequently weak or negative in midgut carcinoids, whereas in foregut and hindgut carcinoids, serotonin immunoreactivity is
detected more often than is the argentaffin reaction. 8,10
Williams and Sanders 11 proposed classifying carcinoids according to their site of origin because carcinoids with similar sites of origin frequently share functional
manifestations, histochemistry, and secretory products ( Table 38.6-1). Foregut carcinoids generally have a low serotonin [5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)] content, are
argentaffin-negative but argyrophilic, occasionally secrete 5- hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) or ACTH, can be associated with an atypical carcinoid syndrome, are often
multihormonal, and may metastasize to bone. Although many foregut carcinoids synthesize peptides, clinical syndromes are rarely produced and elevated plasma
hormone levels are generally not detected. Midgut carcinoids are argentaffin-positive, have a high serotonin content, have smaller numbers of endocrine cells than
foregut tumors, most frequently cause the classic carcinoid syndrome when they metastasize, release serotonin and tachykinins (substance P, neuropeptide K,
substance K), rarely secrete 5-HTP or ACTH, and uncommonly metastasize to bone. 12 Hindgut carcinoid tumors are argentaffin-negative, often argyrophilic, rarely
contain serotonin, rarely cause carcinoid syndrome, contain numerous gastrointestinal (GI) hormones, rarely secrete 5-HTP or ACTH, and may metastasize to bone. 12

TABLE 38.6-1. Classification of Carcinoid Tumors

Carcinoids within the same site of origin, such as lung, thymus, and pancreas, can differ significantly in characteristics and behavior. Therefore, it has been proposed
that the term carcinoid be replaced by the designation neuroendocrine tumor, and a new classification system has been drawn up. 1,4 In this proposed classification,
tumors are divided according to tissue of origin and subdivided by growth behavior. It is proposed that this new classification system better reflects the biology of

these tumors and provides better guidelines for tumors with similar behaviors in different tissues.
Carcinoids can be ubiquitous, but most take origin in four sites: bronchus, appendix, rectum, and jejunoileum. 13,14 In the past, carcinoids were most frequently reported
in the appendix (approximately 40%); however, more recently the bronchus and lung are the most common site (32%) ( Table 38.6-2). The distribution reported from
analyses of two large National Cancer Institute databases from 1950 to 1971 and from 1973 to 1991 are contrasted in Table 38.6-2. A number of trends are apparent
from comparison of the data from these two periods. The percentages of gastric carcinoids almost doubled, whereas the percentage of appendiceal carcinoids
decreased more than fourfold from 38% to 7.6%. Small intestinal carcinoids remained a large group comprising approximately 20% of all carcinoids. Overall, GI
carcinoids remain the most frequent, comprising 74% of all carcinoids in the 1973 to 1991 Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) data, 14 with the
respiratory tract being a distant second with 25%. 14

TABLE 38.6-2. Carcinoid Tumor Location, Frequency of Metastases, and Association with Carcinoid Syndrome

The exact clinical incidence of carcinoids varies in different studies. An incidence of 7.1 per million for males is reported, 15 with 8.7 per million reported for females 15
in England and Scotland, and 13 cases per million population reported in Ireland. Carcinoids thus occur 11 times more frequently than insulinomas and 26 times more
frequently than gastrinomas. 16 In other series, the incidence of clinically significant tumors was 7 per million population per year in Scandinavia, which was two times
more frequent than all PETs, seven times more than gastrinomas, and eight times more than insulinomas. 3,17,18 The clinical presentation of carcinoids far
underestimates their occurrence, because many are asymptomatic. This fact is demonstrated by SEER data, which report an annual incidence rate of 2.8 per million
population for small intestinal carcinoids, 19 whereas in an autopsy study at the Mayo Clinic, 6500 cases per million were reported. 20 In another study, the annual
incidence of malignant carcinoids at autopsy was 21 per million population per year, 21 whereas in a Swedish study calculated on autopsy and surgical results, the
incidence was 84 cases per million population. 21 The distribution of carcinoid tumors found in various surgical or clinical series differs markedly from that found at
autopsy.22 As many as 76% of all carcinoids are found in the jejunoileum at autopsy, whereas they make up approximately one-fourth of cases in clinical and surgical
series.
Approximately 1 in every 200 to 300 appendectomies result in discovery of a carcinoid. 20 Most occur in the tip of the appendix. The majority (i.e., 90%) are less than 1
cm in diameter and are without metastases.20,23,24 In the SEER data of 1570 appendiceal carcinoids, 25 62% were localized, 27% had regional lesions, and 8% had
distant metastatic disease. Approximately 50% of the carcinoids between 1 and 2 cm in size metastasize to lymph nodes. 26
Small intestinal carcinoids may be multiple; 70% to 87% are present within the ileum and 40% to 70% within 2 feet of the ileocecal valve. 20,27,28 Forty percent are less
than 1 cm in diameter, 32% are 1 to 2 cm, and 29% are more than 2 cm.28 In an analysis of 12 series, 47% (range, 0% to 100%) were associated with metastases, 28
whereas 35% to 70% were associated with metastases in the National Cancer Institute studies 13,14 (see Table 38.6-2). With the carcinoid, a marked fibrotic reaction
can occur that can distort the gut or mesentery and can present clinically with small bowel obstruction or venous mesenteric infarction. Distant metastases occur to
the liver (36% to 60%), 27,28 to bone (3%)28 and, occasionally, to lung (4%). 28 Approximately 20% to 30% of patients with ileal carcinoid have one or more additional
ileal primary carcinoids. 27,29 The incidence of metastases from small intestinal carcinoids is dependent on tumor size. 27,29 If the tumor is smaller than 1 cm, metastases
occur in fewer than 15% to 25%.20,27,28 If the tumor is between 1 and 2 cm in size, metastases occur in 58% to 80%. 20,27,28 If the tumor is larger than 2 cm, metastases
occur in more than 70%.20,27,28 In contrast to jejunoileal carcinoids, duodenal carcinoids are often discovered by endoscopy. 30 In two series13,30 (see Table 38.6-2),
20% to 21% of duodenal carcinoids had metastases. Invasion into the muscularis propria, tumor size, and mitotic activity all correlated with metastatic spread, with
invasion being the strongest predictor. No duodenal carcinoid smaller than 1 cm metastasized, whereas 33% of the tumors larger than 2 cm and 35% of tumors
invading the muscularis mucosa metastasized. 30
In approximately 1 in every 2500 proctoscopies, a small nodule is seen that is diagnosed as a carcinoid. 20 Nearly all rectal carcinoids occur submucosally on the
anterior or lateral walls between 4 and 13 cm above the dentate line. 20,31 Sixty-six percent to 80% are less than 1 cm in diameter and rarely metastasize (5%). 31
Tumors 1 to 2 cm can metastasize (5% to 30%),31,32 and 33 and tumors larger than 2 cm, which are uncommon, metastasize in more than 70%. 20,26,31,32 Colorectal
carcinoids are almost entirely limited to the sigmoid colon and rectum, with the vast majority in the rectum. Metastases occurs in approximately 10% to 22%, 31 and in
most cases, the tumor is larger than 2 cm in diameter and has invaded the muscularis propria. Invasiveness correlates with the presence of increased mitoses or
atypical histology. 33 Colonic carcinoids uncommonly occur in the remainder of the colon, with almost 60% occurring in the cecum or ileocecal area. These tumors tend
to be large (90% are larger than 2 cm; 50% are 5 cm or larger) 34 and are associated with metastases (61%).
Bronchial carcinoids resemble intestinal carcinoids and are not related to smoking. 7 Poor prognostic pathologic features include increased mitotic count, nuclear
pleomorphism, vascular invasion, undifferentiated growth pattern, and lymphatic invasion. 3 The bronchus is the site of a primary carcinoid in approximately 2% of
cases.35 The classification of bronchial carcinoids has been a subject of debate. 36 Lung NETs have been classified into four categories: the typical carcinoid [also
called bronchial carcinoid and Kulchitsky cell carcinoma-I (KCC-I)], atypical carcinoid (also called well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma and KCC-II),
intermediate small cell neuroendocrine carcinomas, and small cell neuroendocrine carcinomas (also called KCC-III).36,37 and 38 Another proposed classification 4
includes these tumors under three general categories of lung NETs: benign or low-grade malignant (typical carcinoid); low-grade malignant (atypical carcinoid); and
high-grade malignant (poorly differentiated carcinoma of the large cell or small cell type). The different categories of lung NETs have different prognosis, varying from
excellent for typical carcinoids to poor for small cell neuroendocrine carcinomas. 36,37,38 and 39
Gastric carcinoids account for three of every 1000 gastric neoplasms. Three subtypes of gastric carcinoids are proposed to occur, 40 and they originate from gastric
enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells. 40 Two subtypes are associated with hypergastrinemic states, either chronic atrophic gastritis (80%) (type I) or Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome (6%) (type II), which is almost always as part of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1). 40,41 Gastric carcinoids types I and II generally pursue a benign
course, with 9% to 30% developing metastases. They are usually multiple and small, with infiltration restricted to the mucosa and submucosa. 40 The third type of
gastric carcinoids (type III) (sporadic ECL tumors) occur without hypergastrinemia, and they pursue a more aggressive course, with 54% to 66% developing
metastases.40,41 They are often large, single tumors; 50% have atypical histology, and some patients develop carcinoid syndrome. 3,40
Carcinoids can be classified on their histologic growth patterns as insular, trabecular, glandular, undifferentiated, or mixed. 3,8,42 The midgut carcinoids frequently
possess the most typical morphology, 8 with insular-like formation of regular tumor cells surrounded by fibrotic stroma. Most foregut carcinoids show a more mixed
growth pattern, with a solid, ribbon-like, trabecular, or acinar pattern. Hindgut carcinoids are frequently solid or trabecular. 8,42 It has been demonstrated that the
histologic types have prognostic significance. 42,43 and 44 In one classification of decreasing order of median survival time in years, the growth pattern ranked as
follows42: mixed insular plus glandular (4.4 years), insular (2.9 years), trabecular (2.5 years), mixed insular plus trabecular (2.3 years), glandular (0.9 years), and
undifferentiated (0.5 years). In other studies, carcinoids are divided histologically into typical (well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors) and atypical (nuclear atypia,
necrosis, increased mitotic activity), 4 and categorization has been shown to have prognostic significance. 4,33,44

MOLECULAR PATHOGENESIS
Little is known about the induction of malignant growth or the factors promoting the growth of carcinoids. 3,45,46,47 and 48 For some gastric carcinoids, studies show that
gastrin is an important growth factor. 3,40 An increased occurrence of gastric carcinoids occurs in disease states (pernicious anemia, atrophic gastritis, Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome) that result in hypergastrinemia. 3,40 The hyperplastic effect of hypergastrinemia is restricted to gastric ECL cells. 49,50 It has been proposed that, with
prolonged hypergastrinemia, ECL hyperplasia (simple, linear, micronodular, adenomatoid), dysplasia, and carcinoid formation are increased. 49,50 In pernicious anemia
and atrophic gastritis, up to 4% to 11% of patients develop gastric carcinoids. 49,51 Patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome also develop gastric carcinoids, although
they are much more frequent in the subgroup with MEN 1. 52,53 In patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome with MEN 1 with gastric carcinoids, allelic loss occurs at the
MEN 1 locus on chromosome 11q13, and thus fundic gastric carcinoids are now included in the spectrum of MEN 1 tumors. Studies suggest that other important
growth factors in some carcinoid tumors are TGF-a 50 and TGF-b,54,55 insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), 47,50,55 trefoid peptides (TFF1, TFF2, TFF3), 50 platelet-derived
growth factor,47,54 vascular endothelial growth factor, 56 acidic and basic fibroblast growth factor, 47,54,55 and epidermal growth factor. 54,55
Limited studies have been performed on carcinoids examining the possible role of mutations of protooncogenes and alterations of tumor-suppressor genes in their
pathogenesis. 45,47,48 Mutations in common oncogenes, such as K-ras, are uncommon in GI carcinoids.45,48 Overamplification of HER2/NEU, c-myc, and c-jun have
been described in some cell lines derived from GI endocrine tumors and some carcinoids. 48,57 In bronchial carcinoids, a high expression of c-fos, c-jun, and c-met
occurs early, and a high expression of c-myc and L-myc occurs late. Alterations in the common tumor suppressor gene p53 3,48,58,59 are also uncommon in
carcinoids, 3,45,48,58,59 as are alterations in the retinoblastoma gene in typical carcinoids, although they may occur in atypical carcinoids. 24,45,60,61 MEN 1 has been shown
to be due to defects in a 10-exon gene on chromosome 11q13 that encodes for a 610–amino acid nuclear protein, MENIN. 62,63 Loss of heterozygosity at this locus has
been reported in 26% to 78% of carcinoids, 64,65 and 66 and mutations in the MENIN gene were reported to be 18% in one study. 64 Microsatellite instability is rare in
carcinoids 67; however, by comparative genomic hybridization, both frequent gains (of chromosome 5, 14, 17q, 7) and losses (especially of chromosome 9p) are
reported.68

CLINICAL FEATURES
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS
The age of onset ranges from 10 to 93 years, with a mean onset of 36 years of age for tumors of the cervix, 63 years for tumors of the small intestine and respiratory
tract, and 66 years for tumors of the rectum. 14,22
CARCINOID TUMORS WITHOUT SYSTEMIC FEATURES
The presentation of carcinoids that do not cause carcinoid syndrome is diverse and related to the site of origin of the tumor as well as the malignant spread of the
tumor. In the appendix (see Table 38.6-2), carcinoids are usually found incidentally during surgery for suspected appendicitis. 23 Small intestinal carcinoids in the
jejunoileum are the most common location for carcinoids of clinical significance. 20,22,29 Most small intestinal carcinoids found in autopsy studies do not cause
symptoms, but these tumors can cause fibrosis of the mesentery, which results in kinking of the bowel, intestinal obstruction, and gut infarction or intussusception.
The most common presenting symptoms due to the small intestinal carcinoids per se are periodic abdominal pain (51%), 20,22,28,29 intestinal obstruction with ileus and
invagination (31%), 28 an abdominal tumor (17%),28 or GI bleeding (11%). 28 Because of the vagueness of the symptoms, the diagnosis is frequently delayed, with a
median time of onset from symptoms to diagnosis of approximately 2 years20,29 and a range up to 20 years. Duodenal and gastric carcinoids are usually found
incidentally during endoscopy. 22,30,51 Rectal carcinoids are frequently found incidentally during endoscopy but can be symptomatic. 31,69 The most common symptoms
include melena and bleeding (39%), constipation (17%), and diarrhea (12%). 31 Bronchial carcinoids are frequently discovered on chest radiograph. In one large
series, 36 31% of patients were asymptomatic, and the carcinoid was incidentally discovered. The most common symptoms are pneumonia, hemoptysis, and cough. 36
Thymic carcinoids present as anterior mediastinal masses, usually on chest radiograph. Ovarian and testicular carcinoids may present as masses detected by
physical examination or ultrasound. Most carcinoids present as an isolated disease, but associations exist between foregut carcinoids and MEN 1, 40,52,53,70 gastric
carcinoids and diseases causing hypergastrinemia 40,52,70 ampullary somatostatin-rich carcinoids and von Recklinghausen's disease, 45,71,72 an intestinal carcinoid with
myotonic dystrophy,73 a gastric carcinoid in a patient with primary biliary cirrhosis, 74 and duodenal carcinoid tumors causing Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. 75 Metastatic
carcinoids in the liver, presenting as hepatomegaly, may be the initial presentation in a patient who is fully active and productive with minimal symptoms and normal or
near-normal liver function tests. 20
CARCINOID TUMORS WITH SYSTEMIC FEATURES
The most common systemic syndrome caused by carcinoids is the malignant carcinoid syndrome. As already mentioned, carcinoids may contain and secrete a
number of biologically active substances. Immunocytochemical or radioimmunoassay studies show that carcinoids can contain ACTH, gastrin, somatostatin, insulin,
motilin, growth hormone, gastrin-releasing peptide, serotonin, calcitonin, neurotensin, melanocyte-stimulating hormone-b, tachykinins (substance P, substance K,
neuropeptide K), glucagon, pancreatic polypeptide (PP), vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), and prostaglandins. 3,27,28,31,44,76,77 These substances may not be released
in sufficient amounts to cause symptoms. In various studies of patients with carcinoids, elevated serum concentrations of PP occur in 43%, 17,76 motilin in 14%, 76 and
subunits of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) in 12%; 17 a slightly elevated level of gastrin was reported in 15%, 17 and none were reported with an elevated VIP 76
or plasma gastrin-releasing peptide level. 76 Even though these GI peptides were present in the serum, it is not apparent that any of these peptides contributed to any
clinical symptoms.
Foregut carcinoids are more likely to produce various GI peptides than midgut carcinoids. 78 Ectopic ACTH production with Cushing's syndrome is increasingly seen
with foregut carcinoids, 22,78,79 and in some studies, these tumors were the most common cause of the ectopic ACTH syndrome, accounting for 64% of all patients. 79
Acromegaly due to release of growth hormone–releasing factors can occur with a number of carcinoids. 71 The somatostatinoma syndrome due to somatostatin release
can occur with duodenal carcinoids. 71,72

CARCINOID SYNDROME
CLINICAL FEATURES
Flushing attacks occur in 23% to 65% of carcinoid syndrome patients initially and in 63% to 78% at some time during the disease course ( Table 38.6-3). The typical
flush is the sudden appearance of a deep red erythema of the upper part of the body, primarily the face and neck. Flushes are often associated with an unpleasant
feeling of warmth, occasionally with lacrimation, itching, palpitations, facial or conjunctival edema, and diarrhea. Flushes may be spontaneous or precipitated by
stress; alcohol; certain foods, such as cheese; exercise; or pharmacologically by injections of agents such as catecholamines, calcium, or pentagastrin. 22,80,81 and 82
Flushes may be brief, lasting 2 to 5 minutes, especially initially, or may be prolonged for hours, especially later in the course. They are usually seen with carcinoids of
midgut origin but can also occur in some patients with foregut tumors. 22 With bronchial carcinoids, the flushes can be frequently prolonged, lasting for hours to days,
reddish in color, associated with salivation, lacrimation, diaphoresis, facial swelling, palpitations, deep furrowing of the forehead, diarrhea, and hypotension. 22,81 The
flushing with bronchial carcinoids has a greater tendency to cause diffuse body involvement, and after repeated flushing of this type, patients may develop a constant
red or cyanotic coloration. 20 The flush associated with gastric carcinoids is also reddish in color but patchy in distribution over the neck and face. It is frequently
provoked by food intake or pentagastrin, with erythema associated with blotches and wheals with central clearing, frequently occurring around the root of the neck and
on the arms, and the lesions are frequently associated with pruritus. 20,22,81

TABLE 38.6-3. Clinical Characteristics in Patients with Malignant Carcinoid Syndrome

Diarrhea is commonly present in 32% to 73% of patients initially and in 67% to 84% at some time during the disease course (see Table 38.6-3). Diarrhea usually
occurs with flushing (85% of cases), but it may occur alone (15% of cases). 3,22,83 The diarrhea is described as watery and, less commonly, as frothy or the pale bulky
stool of steatorrhea, with the stool number ranging from 2 to 30 per day, and 60% of patients have output of less than 1 L/d. 22,80,81,84 Steatorrhea is present in 67% and
in 46% is more than 15 g/d. 84 Abdominal pain may be present with the diarrhea or independently, and the frequency varies from 10% to 34% (see Table 38.6-3).
Cardiac manifestations occur in 11% to 66% of patients 85,86 and 87 (see Table 38.6-3). The cardiac disease is due to fibrosis involving the endocardium, primarily of the
right side of the heart, although left side lesions can also occur. 3,81,85,86,88 The fibrous deposits are diffuse and are found most commonly on the ventricular aspect of
the tricuspid valve and the associated chordae and less commonly on the pulmonary valve cusps. These fibrous deposits tend to cause constriction of both the
tricuspid and pulmonic valves. At the pulmonic valve, stenosis is usually predominant, whereas at the tricuspid valve, the constriction results in the valve being fixed
open, and tricuspid regurgitation is usually predominant. 81,85,88 In two series, 80% of the patients with cardiac lesions had evidence of heart failure. 39,80 Lesions on the
left side occur in 30% of autopsy studies, are less extensive, and most frequently occur on the mitral valve. 3
Other clinical manifestations of carcinoid syndrome are wheezing or asthma-like symptoms in 8% to 25% of patients and pellagra-like skin lesions with hyperkeratosis
and pigmentation in 2% to 5% of cases (see Table 38.6-3 39 arthralgias, 39 changes in mental state or confusion, and ophthalmic changes during flushing leading to
vessel occlusion. 3,39 A variety of noncardiac problems secondary to increased fibrous tissue have been reported, including retroperitoneal fibrosis leading to ureteral
obstruction, or Peyronie's disease of the penis; intraabdominal fibrosis; and occlusion of mesenteric arteries or veins. 22,81 Sexual dysfunction is a common complaint
of men with carcinoid syndrome.22 This may relate to the vascular effect of serotonin on pelvic blood vessels. 22
PATHOBIOLOGY
Carcinoid syndrome developed in 8% of 8876 patients with carcinoids, 12 with an incidence of 1.7% to 18.4% in six different series. 12,80 Carcinoid syndrome occurs
only when sufficient concentrations of the hormonal products released by the tumor reach the systemic circulation. Its occurrence and severity are directly related to
tumor size in an area that drains into the systemic circulation. 20 In 91% of cases, this only occurs after distant metastases (especially to the liver) develop. 12,80,81
Rarely, however, primary GI tumors with nodal metastases with extensive invasion retroperitoneally or drainage into the ovarian veins; pancreatic carcinoids with
retroperitoneal lymph nodes; or carcinoids, such as those in the lung or ovary, with direct access to the systemic circulation can produce the carcinoid syndrome
without hepatic metastases.12,80,89,90 Rarely, medullary thyroid carcinoma, a duodenal adenoma, or small cell lung cancer also have been reported to cause carcinoid
syndrome.81,91 All carcinoids do not have the same propensity to metastasize and to produce the carcinoid syndrome (see Table 38.6-2). Because midgut tumors are
the most common and frequently metastasize, midgut tumors account for 60% to 87% of the carcinoid syndrome, foregut tumors for 2% to 33%, hindgut for 1% to 8%,
and an unknown primary location for 2% to 15% (see Table 38.6-3).
Symptoms of carcinoid syndrome were originally attributed to secretion of 5-HT (serotonin) by the tumor. 92 In one study 22 of 380 patients with carcinoid tumors, 56%
had evidence of serotonin overproduction; 18% of 500 patients in a second study 80 and 88% of 103 patients with carcinoid tumors in a third study 17 had elevated
urinary 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid (5-HIAA), the major metabolite of serotonin ( Fig. 38.6-1). When 44 consecutive cases were studied before any resection, 84% of the
patients had serotonin overproduction. 22 In various studies, 12% to 26% of patients with evidence of serotonin overproduction did not have symptoms of carcinoid
syndrome. In one study93 of 44 consecutive patients with carcinoids, platelet and urinary serotonin, 5-HIAA, and seven catecholamine metabolites were measured.
Platelet serotonin was elevated in 96%, 43%, and 0% of patients with midgut, foregut, and hindgut carcinoids, respectively. Urinary dopamine and catecholamine
metabolites were elevated in 38% and 33% of midgut, 20% and 20% of foregut, and 7% and 14% of hindgut carcinoids, respectively. In a large review 12 of 748 cases
of carcinoid syndrome, 92% had increased serotonin activity.

FIGURE 38.6-1. Synthesis, secretion, and metabolism of serotonin [5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)] and 5-hydroxytryptophan in patients with typical and atypical
carcinoid syndrome, and site of drug action. (1) Tryptophan hydroxylase. (2) Aromatic 1-amino acid decarboxylase (dopa decarboxylase). (3) Monoamine oxidase. (4)
Aldehyde dehydrogenase. Arrows indicate the sites of action of therapeutic agents used in the treatment of carcinoid syndrome. Somatostatin analogues include
octreotide and lanreotide. Serotonin receptor subtype 3 antagonists (5-HT 3) include ondansetron, tropisetron, and alosetron.

Patients may develop either a typical or atypical type of carcinoid syndrome (see Fig. 38.6-1). In patients with the typical carcinoid syndrome, the conversion of
tryptophan to 5-HTP is the rate-limiting step. Once formed, the 5-HTP is rapidly converted to 5-HT in the tumor by dopa decarboxylase, either stored in the
neurosecretory tumor granules or released into vascular compartments, and most is taken up and stored in the granules of platelets. A small amount remains in the
plasma. The majority in the circulation is converted by monamine oxidase and aldehyde dehydrogenase to 5-HIAA, which appears in large amounts in the urine. 3,83
Characteristically, patients with carcinoid syndrome have expansion of the serotonin pool size, increase in blood and platelet concentrations of serotonin, and
elevations of 5-HIAA in the urine. 3,93,94 This is the typical pattern in argentaffin- and argyrophil-positive tumors such as midgut carcinoids, which characteristically
secrete large amounts of serotonin and which make up to 60% to 87% of all cases of carcinoid syndrome (see Table 38.6-3). Some carcinoids cause an atypical
carcinoid syndrome22,95 and are thought to be deficient in the enzyme dopa decarboxylase; thus, they cannot convert 5-HTP to 5-HT (serotonin), and 5-HTP is
secreted into the bloodstream (see Fig. 38.6-1). Plasma serotonin levels are normal in these patients, but urinary levels are usually elevated because some of the
5-HTP is decarboxylated in the kidney and excreted as serotonin (5-HT). Patients with this type of carcinoid tumor may have a marked increase in urinary 5-HT and
5-HTP levels but normal or only slightly elevated 5-HIAA levels. 22,83 Foregut carcinoids are more likely to excrete high levels of 5-HT and 5-HTP in the urine and give
the atypical carcinoid syndrome. 22

The exact cause of flushing in carcinoid syndrome remains unclear. 94,96 Flushing is not thought to be due to serotonin overproduction, because serotonin antagonists
generally have no effect on the flushing. 94,97,98,99,100 and 101 Using a specific radioenzymatic assay during spontaneous flushing in patients with midgut carcinoids,
increased plasma serotonin and norepinephrine levels were found with higher levels in the external jugular than the antecubital veins. 94 This result suggests a
possible role for these bioamines in the pathogenesis of flushing with midgut carcinoids. The exact etiology of the flushing in patients with carcinoid syndrome may
differ depending on the different tumor types. In patients with gastric carcinoids, the red, patchy, pruritic flush is thought to be caused by histamine, 82 because this
type of flushing can be prevented by the use of H 1- and H2-receptor antagonists. 3,82 In addition to serotonin, other candidates for mediators of flushing include the
tachykinins (substance P, neuropeptide K), various GI peptides, and prostaglandins. 83,98,99 However, other studies generally have concluded that prostaglandins are
unlikely to be major mediators of the flushing or diarrhea. 83,102
Studies demonstrate that numerous tachykinins are stored in carcinoids and are released during flushing. 17,76,99,103,104,105 and 106 In some studies, changes in plasma
substance P or neuropeptide K levels did not correlate with the occurrence of flushing, leading the authors to conclude that circulating tachykinins have only a minor
role, if any, in causing the flushing. 83,98,107 One study99 demonstrated that all eight patients with midgut carcinoids had elevated plasma substance P levels; however,
88% of patients with PETs and 71% of patients with idiopathic flushing also had elevated levels. In one study, 99 octreotide relieved pentagastrin-induced flushing in all
patients without necessarily altering the substance P response. Furthermore, pentagastrin caused flushing in some patients without rises in plasma substance P,
suggesting that mediators other than substance P must be important in inducing the flushing. 99 Even though various GI peptides have been proposed to be involved in
the flush, no changes in plasma levels of VIP, GIP, neurotensin, PP, motilin, insulin, glucagon, or enteroglucagon have been detected with provocation of the flush. 108
Patients with carcinoid syndrome have been shown to have increased colonic motility with a shortened transit time and, possibly, a secretory or absorptive
alteration.84,96,109,110 Serotonin is thought to be predominantly responsible for the diarrhea in some patients by its effects on gut motility and intestinal electrolyte and
fluid secretion. 83,84 Serotonin receptor antagonists (especially 5-HT 3-receptor antagonists such as ondansetron 101) relieve the diarrhea. 97,98,100,101 In one study,100
diarrhea was improved by ondansetron in six of six patients with carcinoid syndrome (100%) and nausea in three of four patients (75%), whereas flushing was
improved in none of five patients (0%). This finding suggests that 5-HT 3 receptors are mediating the diarrhea and nausea. This conclusion is further supported by the
demonstration that alosetron, another 5-HT 3-receptor antagonist, decreased proximal colonic emptying in patients with carcinoid syndrome. 111 One study110 provides
evidence that prostaglandin E 2 and tachykinins may also be important mediators of carcinoid diarrhea. Patients with carcinoid syndrome had decreased absorption of
sodium, potassium, chloride, and water in the jejunum and increased intraluminal nonsubstance P tachykinin and prostaglandin E 2 concentrations compared with
normal controls. 96 In combination with histamine, serotonin may be responsible for producing asthma 112 and may be involved in the fibrotic reactions causing heart
disease, Peyronie's disease, and ureteral obstruction. 81,98 The pathogenetic link between the carcinoid and heart disease remains a subject of controversy. 22 No
relationship between the severity of the heart disease and other common manifestations, such as flushing, diarrhea, or duration of disease, has been established. 22,113
It was reported85,113 that patients with heart disease have higher urinary 5-HIAA excretion and higher plasma levels of neurokinin A 113 and substance P113,113 than
those without heart disease. A study 114 examining cardiac tissue specimens obtained at operation demonstrated, using immunocytochemistry, increased amounts of
TGF-b1 and TGF-b3 but not TGF-b2. It was proposed 114 that TGF-bs may play an important role in proliferation in carcinoid heart disease.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis of carcinoid syndrome relies on the measurement of urinary or plasma serotonin or its metabolites (5-HIAA) in the urine, with the measurement of 5-HIAA in
a 24-hour urine sample the most commonly used test (see Fig. 38.6-1). False-positives may occur if the patient is eating serotonin-rich foods, such as bananas,
plantains, pineapple, kiwi fruit, walnuts, hickory nuts, pecans, and avocados, which falsely elevate urinary levels. 115,116 Medications, including cough medicine
containing guaifenesin, acetaminophen, salicylates, and L-dopa, should also be avoided because they may affect urinary 5-HIAA levels. 116,117 If one properly controls
dietary and medicinal intake, the normal range for urinary 5-HIAA excretion is between 2 and 8 mg per 24 hours, 22 although other researchers suggest that using a
level of 15 mg/d may reduce false-positive results. 116 Many patients with serotonin-secreting carcinoids have urinary 5-HIAA excretion in the range of 8 to 30 mg per
24 hours.118 The measurement of urinary 5-HIAA levels is the current method of choice to diagnose carcinoid syndrome. 118 In one study,83 5-HIAA determinations
alone had a 73% sensitivity and a 100% specificity for carcinoid syndrome. 83
Most physicians rely totally on the measurement of urinary 5-HIAA for diagnosis. However, urinary and platelet measurement of serotonin itself may give additional
information; thus, it has been recommended that these should also be measured. 22,83,93 In two studies,119 platelet serotonin levels not only were more sensitive than
urinary 5-HIAA and urinary serotonin levels, they were not affected by the patient's diet, as are the 5-HIAA levels. In one comparative study of 44 consecutive
carcinoid patients, the platelet serotonin levels, 93 urine 5-HIAA, and urinary serotonin levels were measured. In 14 foregut carcinoids, the sensitivities were 50%, 29%,
and 55%, respectively; for 25 midgut carcinoids, the sensitivities were 100%, 92%, and 82%, respectively; and for hindgut carcinoids, the sensitivities were 20%, 0%,
and 60%, respectively. The data demonstrate the increased sensitivity of measuring platelet serotonin levels. Elevations of 5-HIAA can occur in malabsorption states
and a number of other conditions. 81,116 It is important to remember that foregut carcinoids tend to produce an atypical carcinoid syndrome with increased plasma
5-HTP but not serotonin, because they lack the appropriate decarboxylase (see Fig. 38.6-1), with the result that urinary 5-HIAA may not be markedly increased. 22 In
such patients with a normal or minimally elevated 5-HIAA and for whom there is a strong suspicion of carcinoid syndrome, they should be screened for other urinary
metabolites of tryptophan, 118 and platelet serotonin levels should be measured. However, this screening is usually not necessary because some of the 5-HTP is
decarboxylated in the intestine and other tissues, and many of these patients have elevated urinary 5-HT or 5-HIAA levels. 118
Diagnostic difficulties may arise in patients who flush for reasons other than carcinoid syndrome, 22,120 in patients with carcinoid syndrome in whom flushing is not
apparent, in patients with certain carcinoids (especially foregut tumors in whom 5-HIAA may be normal or minimally elevated), 118 or in the rare patient without
metastatic disease who presents with flushing. 89 The differential diagnosis of flushing includes menopausal flushing; reactions to alcohol and glutamate; side effects
due to drugs such as chlorpropamide, calcium channel blockers, and nicotinic acid; and other neoplastic disorders, such as chronic myelogenous leukemia and
systemic mastocytosis.120,121 None of these conditions causes increased urinary 5-HIAA, and these disorders can be distinguished pathologically.
The diagnosis of a carcinoid may be suspected by clinical symptoms suggestive of carcinoid syndrome or by the presence of the other clinical symptoms, such as
abdominal pain or diarrhea, or it can be made in relatively asymptomatic patients from the pathology report at surgery or after liver biopsy for hepatomegaly. Ileal
carcinoids, which make up more than 25% of all clinically detected carcinoids, should be suspected if a patient presents with bowel obstruction, abdominal pain,
flushing, or diarrhea. 22 In one study 26 involving 154 consecutive patients with GI carcinoids, 60% found at surgery were asymptomatic. In patients with symptomatic
tumors, the time from onset of symptoms until diagnosis is frequently delayed, varying from 1 to 2 years. 17,20 Attempts are being made to identify more specific and
sensitive serum markers for carcinoids, which may allow earlier diagnosis. 17,22,76,83 In one study,76 urinary 5-HIAA had a sensitivity of 73% and a specificity of 100%;
plasma substance P a sensitivity of 32% and a specificity of 85%; and plasma neurotensin a sensitivity of 41% and a specificity of 60%. In another study, 17 88% of
patients with carcinoid tumors (93% with hepatic metastases) had an elevated 5-HIAA; 66% an elevated plasma neuropeptide K; and 43% an elevated plasma PP
concentration. A number of studies 122,123 and 124 demonstrate that serum chromogranin A levels are elevated in 56% to 100% of patients with carcinoids, and the level
correlates with tumor bulk. Serum chromogranin A elevations are not specific for carcinoids because increased levels occur with high frequency in patients with
PETs9,122,123,125 and certain other NETs. 123,125 The a (a-HCG) or b (b-HCG) subunits of HCG are detected frequently by immunocytochemistry in carcinoids, and
elevated plasma levels of HCG are reported in 28% of carcinoids 126 and 13% of patients with carcinoid syndrome. 127 NSE also is used as a plasma marker of
carcinoid tumors, 126 but it is less sensitive than chromogranin A, being positive in only 17% to 47% of patients. 122,123
LOCALIZATION
A number of techniques, including GI endoscopy, barium radiographs, chest radiographs, imaging studies [ultrasound, computed tomographic (CT) scan, magnetic
resonance imaging, angiography], endoscopic ultrasound, selective venous sampling for various hormones, positron emission tomography scanning, and various
forms of radionuclide scanning [radiolabeled somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS), iodinated metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG)], all have been used to determine
the location of the primary tumor as well as tumor extent. 3,22,128,129,130 and 131
Bronchial carcinoids are usually detected by chest radiography, CT or, occasionally, by bronchoscopy. 22,36,38 They appear frequently (37%) as opacities with sharp or
often notched margins.132 They are slow growing and often induce airway compression with resultant atelectasis. Enlarged hilar lymph nodes from metastasis are

rare.132 Rectal, duodenal, colonic, and gastric carcinoids are almost always detected by GI endoscopy, with barium radiographs being generally negative. 26,69 When
positive, barium radiographs show dilated loops of small bowel or extrinsic filling defects but rarely detect a mucosal lesion, 26 whereas ileal, cecal, and right colon
tumors are often diagnosed on radiographic studies. 133
The main problem is localizing small bowel carcinoids, which may be very small and frequently missed by barium studies, and small carcinoids in other GI tissues. 3
Some of these tumors can be localized by angiography, SRS, or CT, 3 but many are not seen with these modalities. Liver metastases usually are detected by CT or,
more recently, SRS. Angiography is more sensitive than CT for detecting liver metastases. 3,22 At present, CT and SRS are the primary diagnostic modality for tumor
staging. CT frequently misses the primary tumor, especially if it is small (less than 1.5 cm). 134 However, CT is generally helpful in evaluating the presence of liver
metastases and retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy. 3,134
Carcinoids possess high-affinity receptors for somatostatin in 88% to 100% of cases. 55,128,135 The somatostatin receptors are present in both the primary tumor and
metastases. Five subtypes (numbered sst1 to sst5) of somatostatin receptors have been described. 135 Octreotide binds with high affinity to sst 2 and with a lower affinity
to sst3 and sst5 and has a very low affinity for sst 1 and sst4.135 Studies show almost all carcinoids (90% to 100%) possess sst 2; 50% to 60% sst5; 10% to 100% sst3;
70% to 100% sst1; and 20% to 100% sst4.55 [111In-DTPA-DPhe] octreotide has been approved for localizing carcinoids using radionuclide scanning. 135 SRS images
tumor in 73% to 89% of patients with carcinoids. 128,134,135 In one comparative study of 40 patients, 129 SRS localized tumors in 78% and CT in 82%. SRS detected
primary tumors in two patients missed on CT, and in 16% of cases it detected lesions not previously seen. 129 Numerous other studies 134,135 have demonstrated that
SRS has greater sensitivity for localizing carcinoids, especially the extent of metastatic spread, than conventional imaging studies ( Fig. 38.6-2). More recent studies
demonstrate that it has a higher specificity than bone scanning and equal or greater sensitivity. 136,137 In general, SRS has excellent specificity, but it is important to
remember that high densities of somatostatin receptors exist on a number of other normal and abnormal cells that can lead to increased uptake and a false-positive
response.138 These include granulomas (e.g., sarcoid, tuberculosis), activated lymphocytes (wound infections, lymphomas), thyroid diseases (goiter, thyroiditis),
PETs, and other endocrine tumors. In one study, 138 12% of SRS localizations were false-positives; however, by considering the clinical context the number of
false-positives was reduced to less than 4%. Because of its sensitivity and ability to image all body areas, SRS should be the initial imaging procedure to localize and
establish the extent of carcinoids.

FIGURE 38.6-2. Comparison of the ability of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) to localize hepatic metastases in a
patient with carcinoid syndrome and metastatic gastric carcinoid to the liver. MRI was negative for tumor, whereas SRS demonstrated liver metastases (labeled tumor)
in the left and right hepatic lobes. The imaging results in this patient demonstrate the greater sensitivity of SRS for localizing hepatic metastases from a carcinoid
tumor over conventional imaging studies.

Bone metastases are increasingly being recognized in patients with metastatic carcinoid and other PETs. 3,136 In one study 137 of 30 patients with carcinoid tumors,
bone metastases were found in four (13%) using SRS and bone scanning. In general, technetium 99m bone scanning and SRS have been found to be more sensitive
than conventional radiographs for detecting bone metastases. 3,22,139
Positron emission tomography scanning with 5-hydroxytryptophan [ 111C-labeled 5-HTP] has been compared with CT in 16 patients with carcinoids. 131 Positron
emission tomography was more sensitive in ten of the patients than CT and was equally sensitive to CT in the others. 131 During treatment, a close correlation ( r =
0.91) was found between changes in the positron emission tomography scan transport rate constant and changes in urinary 5-HIAA, suggesting that positron emission
tomography scanning may be useful for monitoring the results of therapy. 131
PROGNOSIS
Clinically, carcinoid syndrome is generally a manifestation of advanced disease. 3,12,20,80 Two in every three patients with carcinoid syndrome have physical signs of
cancer, such as an abdominal mass or hepatomegaly. 20 A clear positive correlation exists between tumor mass and urinary 5-HIAA levels therefore, the laboratory test
measuring 5-HIAA levels is a good marker for extent of disease. 20,43,80;
Carcinoids from different locations not only differ in the percentage that are malignant and the percentage that develop carcinoid syndrome (see Table 38.6-2), but
also in their aggressiveness. The percentage of carcinoids in different locations having localized disease, regional metastases, or distant metastases varies widely.
The highest percentage of nonlocalized disease is with pancreatic (91%), colonic (77%), and small intestinal carcinoids (75%), whereas the highest percentage with
localized disease is the larynx (100%), followed by the ovary, appendix, and rectum (62% to 95%). Overall metastases are present at the time of diagnosis in 45% of
patients in the SEER group data. 14 In one study,140 no difference was found in the overall 5-year survival rate of patients with foregut (60%) or midgut carcinoids
(63%) (Fig. 38.6-3A).

FIGURE 38.6-3. Effect of carcinoid tumor type, extent of metastases, histologic pattern, or localization of primary tumor on survival. A: No significant difference was
noted in 5-year survival rates for patients with foregut or midgut carcinoid tumors (60% vs. 63%). 140 B: The 5-year survival rate of patients with no liver metastases
was not significantly different from patients with a few hepatic metastases (fewer than 5) (73% vs. 79%), but was significantly ( P <.001) greater than those patients
with extensive hepatic metastases (more than 5) (47%). 140 C: Effect of the histologic pattern of the carcinoid tumor in 833 patients, with the 5-year survival rates for
both patterns, is shown. 44 D: The number of patients at risk at different times are shown. Patients with an appendiceal primary tumor had a significantly ( P <.01) better
prognosis than those with pancreatic or colorectal carcinoids.

Survival rates with different carcinoids depend on both the site and the extent of tumor 13,14,141 (Table 38.6-4 and Table 38.6-5; see Fig. 38.6-3D). For all 8305 patients
in the SEER data14 with local disease only, the 5-year survival rate was 80%, varying from 0% for liver and 65% for small intestine and ileum to 94% for appendix. In
patients with regional involvement, the 5-year survival rate was 51% overall, varying from 0% for the pancreas and gallbladder to 85% for the appendix. For patients
with distant metastases, the overall 5-year survival rate was 22%, varying from 0% for the liver to 36% for the small intestine. In different studies for the common
carcinoids, the 5-year survival rate was the highest for carcinoids of the appendix (86% to 100%), 13,20,25,142,143 followed by lung (77% to 87%), 13,14 rectum (62% to
72%),13,14,26,31,143 small intestine (42% to 73%),3,13,14,20,27,28 and 29,142,143 and colon and stomach (42% to 75%).13,14,34,142,143

TABLE 38.6-4. Five-Year Survival Rates of Carcinoid Tumors by Site and Stage

TABLE 38.6-5. Prognostic Factors in Carcinoid Tumors

One of the main determinants of survival is the presence of liver metastases (see Table 38.6-4 and Table 38.6-5 and Fig. 38.6-3).3,14,28,31,141,143 In a multivariant
analysis of 188 cases of patients with carcinoids, 142 the one factor independently predictive of death was the presence of metastases. Additional prognostic factors
are summarized in Table 38.6-5. The extent of hepatic metastases is also an important prognostic factor (see Fig. 38.6-3B; Table 38.6-5). In one study, 140 the survival
rate was similar in patients with limited hepatic metastases (fewer than five) or no metastases, and it was significantly greater ( P <.001) than for patients with
extensive metastases. Female gender is associated with a better prognosis, 142,143 as is younger age. 140,143,144 and 145 The level of tissue invasion is an important
predictor of the probability of developing liver metastases. 28,31,142 The likelihood of finding regional invasion, metastatic disease, and decreasing survival rates is
directly proportional to the size of the primary tumor. 3,20,27,32,33,142 With carcinoids of less than 1 cm in diameter, fewer than 15% to 30% in the small bowel have
metastatic disease; in the rectum, fewer than 0% to 20%; and in the appendix, fewer than 0% to 2%. 17,20,23,31,32 In contrast, for those tumors more than 2 cm in
diameter, 33% to 95% in the small bowel have metastases; in the rectum, more than 70% have metastatic disease; and in the appendix, 33% have metastatic
disease. 20,27,28,29,31,32 For all patients with carcinoids the 5-year survival rate varies from 11% to 86% in different studies 13,14,17 (see Table 38.6-4).
The histologic features as well as the stage of the carcinoid have been shown to correlate with disease-specific survival and the risk of metastases 26,28,30,33,34,44,142 (see
Table 38.6-5 and Fig. 38.6-3C). In one study, 142 for patients with bowel tumors invading only the submucosa (T1), the 5-year survival rate was 100%; with tumors
invading the muscularis propria (T2), it was 81%; with tumors invading to the subserosa (T3), it was 70%; and with tumors involving the visceral peritoneum or directly
invading other structures (T4), it was 52%. These results are consistent with numerous studies that have demonstrated that, for carcinoids, the probability of
developing liver metastases is closely related to the level of tissue invasion. 3,27,28,31,32,34,44 With bronchial carcinoids, 38 the most important variables affecting prognosis
are increasing age, tumor diameter larger than 3 cm, T stage, N stage, lymph node involvement, and number of lymph nodes involved. For all pulmonary NETs, which
include typical and atypical carcinoids, and for large cell and small cell neuroendocrine carcinomas, 146 the histologic features, number of mitoses, degree of necrosis,
vascular invasion, and extent of nuclear pleomorphism all had a significant effect on survival. 146 Histologic features such as necrosis, increased mitotic count, nuclear
pleomorphism, vascular or lymphatic invasion, and undifferentiated growth pattern are used to classify carcinoids histologically as typical or atypical, 4,38 and this
variable can have a marked effect on survival (see Fig. 38.6-3C and Table 38.6-5).27,33,34,38,44,146 Measures of proliferation, such as Ki-67 activity or proliferative cell
nuclear antigen expression, correlate with tumor aggressiveness or survival in some studies, 147,148 and 149 but not in others.150 Flow cytometry has been used to attempt
to define the malignant potential for both GI and bronchial carcinoids. 38,149,151,152,153,154,155 and 156 In two studies3,151 of GI carcinoids, the presence of metastases or
decreased survival correlated with the presence of aneuploidy, 152,153 whereas in other studies,149,154,157 no correlation was found. In bronchial carcinoids, aneuploidy
was reported to occur in 50% to 79%, 3 and in some studies, 156,158,159 but not others,157,160 the flow cytometric result was predictive of the presence of metastases or
decreased survival. In one study, 158 aneuploidy was seen significantly more frequently in atypical (74% of cases) than in typical (18%) bronchial carcinoids.
In various studies in the before-octreotide era, 17,80 the median survival of patients with carcinoid syndrome from the time of onset of symptoms varied from 3.5 to 8.5
years, and the presence of carcinoid syndrome was associated with decreased survival. The mean survival after recognition of abnormal excretion of 5-HIAA was 23
months,80 and the 5- year survival rates after onset of symptoms in two studies were 30% and 67%. 17,80 In a number of studies, 140,161 the level of 5-HIAA excretion has
been correlated with survival (see Table 38.6-5). In one study, patients excreting 10 to 49 mg/d had a median survival of 29 months; those with 50 to 149 mg/d had a
survival rate of 24 months, and those with more than 150 mg/d had a mean survival rate of 13 months. 80 Octreotide treatment has been proposed to extend survival.
Studies show the level of plasma chromogranin A elevation is predictive of survival, 140 as is the plasma level of the tachykinin neuropeptide K. 140,161 In one study,140
patients with a plasma chromogranin A level of less than 5000 µg/L had significantly ( P <.001) longer survival than those with higher values (56 months vs. 33
months, respectively). A number of studies 28,31 have provided evidence that patients with carcinoids are at increased risk of developing a synchronous
adenocarcinoma (7% to 10%), with the most common site being the large intestine. The development of a second malignancy is associated with a worse prognosis. 144
The most immediate life-threatening complication of carcinoid syndrome, the carcinoid crisis, is observed more frequently in patients who have intense symptoms from
foregut carcinoids or who have greatly elevated urinary 5-HIAA levels (more than 200 mg per 24 hours). 162 The carcinoid crisis may occur spontaneously, or it may be
associated with stress, anesthesia, chemotherapy, or even biopsy of hepatic metastases. 3,20,135,163,164 Patients usually develop flushing, diarrhea, and abdominal pain.
Mentation is altered, ranging from light-headedness to coma. Cardiac abnormalities also occur, including tachycardia, hypertension, or profound hypotension. 3 The
carcinoid crisis may be successfully treated, but in some patients it may also be a terminal event. 20,162 In one study 165 of 21 patients with abdominal carcinoids, of
whom 90% had an elevated urinary 5-HIAA level, 80% had evidence of cardiovascular instability during surgery, primarily hypotension. In five cases pretreated with
octreotide, the changes in blood pressure were less and responded easily to additional octreotide. 165 Other investigators also have described the value of octreotide
in the treatment and prevention of carcinoid crises. 3,135,163,164,165 and 166

TREATMENT
Many patients with hepatic metastases from carcinoid tumors remain active and well except for occasional episodes of flushing or diarrhea. Treatment of these
patients includes avoiding stress and conditions or substances that precipitate flushing, and dietary supplementation with nicotinamide ( Fig. 38.6-4). Heart failure may
require diuretics; wheezing may require oral bronchodilators such as salbutamol, a bronchodilator that interacts with b-adrenergic receptors and does not induce
flushing, or aminophylline; and mild diarrhea may respond to antidiarrheal agents such as loperamide or diphenoxylate. If patients still have carcinoid syndrome
symptoms, serotonin receptor antagonists or somatostatin analogues are the drugs of choice, although a number of other drugs also have been shown to be effective
in small numbers of patients 3,77 (see Fig. 38.6-1 and Fig. 38.6-4).

FIGURE 38.6-4. Algorithm for the treatment of malignant carcinoid tumors. Somatostatin analogues refers to the use of octreotide, lanreotide, or their long-acting
depot formulations (long-acting–release octreotide or sustained-release lanreotide). 5-HT 3, 5-hydroxytryptamine subtype 3.

These various agents act in a variety of ways, including by inhibiting the synthesis of serotonin (parachlorophenylalanine, a-methyldopa), by functioning as serotonin
receptor antagonists and blocking the action of 5-HT on target tissues, or by inhibiting the release of various vasoactive substances (octreotide, interferon-a) (see Fig.
38.6-1 and Fig. 38.6-4). Parachlorophenylalanine, which blocks the hydroxylase enzyme that converts tryptophan to 5-HTP, relieves diarrhea and improves flushing in
some patients and reduces urinary 5-HIAA. 162,167 However, its side effects include hypersensitivity reactions and psychiatric disturbances, making it intolerable for
long-term clinical use. 162,167 a-Methyldopa blocks the conversion of 5-HTP to serotonin; however, its effect is partial. It occasionally relieves flushing, which may be
secondary to inhibiting catecholamine-stimulated release of vasoactive substances, and has little effect on GI symptoms. 78,81 Phenoxybenzamine, an a-adrenergic
antagonist, as well as phenothiazines, possibly acting as a-adrenergic receptor antagonists, may block flushing provoked by alcohol or other agents, although
patients frequently become refractory. 78,81,97 Fourteen subclasses of serotonin (5-HT) receptors have been described. 168 The 5-HT1 and 5-HT 2 receptor antagonists
methylsergide,93,97,169 cyproheptadine,169,170 and ketanserin 169,171,172 frequently decrease the GI symptoms but usually do not decrease the flushing. In one study, 20
cyproheptadine used at a dose of 3 to 8 mg three times per day reduced diarrhea in 50% of patients, with minimal, if any, effect on flushing or excretion of 5-HIAA.
Cyproheptadine also is reported to have antitumor activity. 3,173 The use of methysergide is limited because it can cause or enhance retroperitoneal fibrosis. In various
studies, 166,171,172,174 ketanserin diminished frequency and severity of flushing in 6% to 100% and diarrhea in 30% to 100% of patients. 5-HT 3-receptor antagonists
(ondansetron, tropisetron, alosetron) usually control diarrhea and nausea and, occasionally, flushing. 93,100,101,111,169 A combination of histamine H 1- and H2-receptor
antagonists are effective in carcinoid syndrome that is caused by gastric carcinoids. 82 Prednisone in doses of 20 mg/d gives occasional relief in some cases with
severe flushing; however, it is ineffective in controlling the GI symptoms. 78,81 Tamoxifen was reported to cause symptomatic improvement in two patients with carcinoid
syndrome3; however, in a study involving 16 patients with malignant carcinoids, no improvement or sustained reduction in 5-HIAA occurred with tamoxifen
administration. 175
Native somatostatin reduces symptoms in patients with carcinoid syndrome. 176 However, its use is limited by its short half-life (2.5 to 3.0 minutes). With the availability
of synthetic, long-acting somatostatin analogues, octreotide (half-life, 90 minutes), 177 and lanreotide, treatment can be given subcutaneously every 6 to 12 hours. 178
These drugs are now the drugs of choice to control the symptoms of patients with carcinoid syndrome. 110,135,164,179,180,181,182,183,184,185,186,187,188,189 and 190 These
somatostatin analogues are effective at relieving symptoms and decreasing hormone levels when self-administered every 6 to 12 hours subcutaneously in patients
with carcinoid syndrome. 20,110,135,164,179,180,181,182,183,184,185,186,187,188 and 189,189,190 and 191 Octreotide192 decreases 5-HT and neuropeptide K release and synthesis from midgut
carcinoids by a direct action on tumor cells. In an analysis of 62 published studies, 164 octreotide controlled symptoms in more than 80% of patients. When doses in
excess of 375 µg/day were used, diarrhea improved in more than 80%. 135,164,179 If more than 400 µg/d of octreotide were used, flushing was controlled in more than
80%.135,164,179 At least 70% of patients had a higher than 50% decrease in 5-HIAA. 164,179 It was recommended164 that, in patients with carcinoid syndrome with mild to
moderate symptoms, treatment should be initiated with 100 µg subcutaneously every 8 hours. Individual responses vary and some patients require higher doses, with
doses increased as high as 3000 µg/d. 164 Forty percent of patients escaped from control after a median time of 4 months, with the remaining patients having sustained
control for up to 2.5 years; all responded for more than 1 year, and one-third responded for more than 2 years. 20
Results similar to octreotide have been described with lanreotide. 181,183,185 In patients with life-threatening features of carcinoid syndrome or the carcinoid crises,
somatostatin analogues are effective at both treating these as well as preventing their possible development during known precipitating events, such as surgery,
anesthesia, chemotherapy, or stress. 135,163,165,193 It has been recommended179 that patients with carcinoids scheduled for surgery should be given 150 to 250 µg of
octreotide subcutaneously every 6 to 8 hours beginning 24 to 48 hours before anesthesia. In patients receiving chemotherapy, 250 to 300 µg subcutaneously 1 to 2
hours before chemotherapy is recommended.179
Sustained-release preparations of somatostatin have been developed that facilitate treatment. These include monthly octreotide-LAR (long-acting release) or biweekly
lanreotide-SR (sustained release) formulations. 84,181,182,194 With octreotide-LAR (30 mg/month) a plasma level of 1 ng/mL or more is maintained for 25 days, whereas
this requires three to six injections per day of the non–sustained-release form. 84,195 Similar to the nondepot forms, the sustained-release preparations are highly
effective at controlling symptoms of carcinoid syndrome. 181,182 and 183,194
Short-term side effects of somatostatin analogues have been minimal, occurring in 40% to 50% of patients. 3,135,181,196 Pain at the injection site and effects related to the
GI tract (discomfort in 59% and nausea/diarrhea in 15%) are most common. Most are short-lived and therapy is not interrupted. 135 Important long-term side effects
include gallstone formation, steatorrhea, and deterioration in glucose tolerance. 3,135,181,197,198 In various studies, 135 the incidence of gallstones in patients treated long
term with octreotide has varied from 5% to 80%, and in a review 135,199 of 13 studies involving 213 acromegalic patients, 29% developed gallstones. 135,199 In a study197
of 45 patients with metastatic carcinoid or PETs treated long term with octreotide, the overall incidence of gallstones, biliary sludge, or both was 52%, with 7% having
symptomatic disease requiring surgical treatment.
Interferon-a is effective in carcinoid syndrome, either alone 200,201,202,203 and 204 or combined with hepatic artery embolization. 203,205 In more than 300 patients with
carcinoids and carcinoid syndrome treated with interferon, 204 the overall biochemical response rate was 42%. In 111 patients 201,204 from one center given interferon-a
(1.5 to 7.0 mU three to seven times per week), 42% had a biochemical response (a more than 50% decrease in tumor marker) with a median duration of 32 months. In
70% of patients, an improvement in flushing or diarrhea was seen. In another study, 206 high doses of interferon-a were used (24 mU/m 2/d); 39% of patients had a
decrease in 5-HIAA secretion, flushing improved in 65%, and diarrhea improved in 33%. However, these responses were transient, lasting a median of only 7 weeks.
Interferon-a has been combined with hepatic embolization 205 in seven patients and compared with interferon given alone in 12 patients (5 mU/d) for the treatment of
carcinoid syndrome. Evaluation after 1 year of treatment showed that, with interferon alone, 50% of patients had decreased urinary levels of 5-HIAA, and when
combined with embolization, 71% of patients had a decrease. With interferon alone, 205 58% had decreased flushing and 67% had decreased diarrhea, whereas with
the addition of embolization, 86% had decreased flushing and 43% had decreased diarrhea.
Patients with carcinoid syndrome who have no response to octreotide or interferon-a alone have been treated with a combination of both agents. 184,204 In one study 204

involving 24 patients, all demonstrating increased urinary 5-HIAA levels and 19 having classic carcinoid syndrome, complete biochemical remission occurred in 18%
and partial biochemical remission occurred in 59%. For a patient with severe carcinoid syndrome not responsive to other measures, hepatic artery embolization or
ligation either alone or combined with interferon or chemotherapy may be effective 20,203,205,207,208,209,210,211,212 and 213 (see Fig. 38.6-4). In two studies214,215 involving 32
patients with metastatic liver disease with carcinoid syndrome, embolization or ligation resulted in at least a 50% decrease in urinary 5-HIAA levels in 63% of patients.
In the largest study,215 100% of patients had disappearance of diarrhea and flushing immediately after the procedure, and at 1 year postprocedure, 61% were free of
symptoms. Chemoembolization,20,207,208,210,211 and 212 which is embolization with Gelfoam and simultaneous chemotherapy (doxorubicin, mitomycin C, cisplatin,
5-fluorouracil) or interferon, 213 was reported to result in symptomatic improvement in a significant number of patients with carcinoid syndrome. In one large study 212
involving 42 patients with carcinoid tumors, 83% had a decrease in 5-HIAA with chemoembolization followed by treatment with doxorubicin plus dacarbazine
[(dimethyltriazeno)imidazole carboxamide; DTIC] and streptozotocin plus 5-fluorouracil, and the mean decrease was 87%. Among patients responding, 98% had
improvement in flushing and 88% had improvement in diarrhea. 212 In another study 207 of 15 patients who were unsuccessfully treated with chemotherapy and
somatostatin analogue, hepatic artery chemoembolization with 5-fluorouracil, adriamycin, cisplatin, and mitomycin C controlled diarrhea in 75%, flushing in 58%, and
pain in 75%. Hepatic artery occlusion or embolization can have significant side effects, with nausea, vomiting, liver pain, and fever. 208,209,212 Major complications
occurred in 12% to 17% of patients, 208,212 including hepatorenal syndrome, sepsis, gallbladder perforation or necrosis, upper GI bleeding, and abscess formation. In
two studies,209,216 5% to 7% of patients died of a complication of hepatic artery occlusion. In the literature, the mortality rate is reported as less than 3%, pain occurs in
100%, and pyrexia and leukocytosis are reported in 50%, as well as occasional acute gangrenous cholecystitis from obstruction of the cystic artery, hepatic abscess,
paralytic ileus, and renal failure. 214
The approach to treatment of carcinoid syndrome at present is summarized in Figure 38.6-4. After symptomatic treatment, patients should avoid precipitating food and
alcohol and use oral antidiarrheal agents for mild diarrhea and oral selective bronchodilators for wheezing. Serotonin receptor antagonists, particularly the new 5-HT 3
antagonists (ondansetron, tropisetron), may be effective, particularly for diarrhea and nausea. Octreotide or lanreotide are the drugs of choice, self-administered by
the patient. If tachyphylaxis develops, the dose can be increased. If symptoms recur, are severe, and do not respond to an increased octreotide dose, other serotonin
receptor antagonists, such as cyproheptadine or ketanserin, should be considered. If this strategy is ineffective, then interferon alone or subsequently combined with
somatostatin analogues should be considered (see Fig. 38.6-4).

TREATMENT OF THE CARCINOID TUMOR
Resection of local or regional nodal metastatic disease can result in cure in some patients. 217,218 and 219 Because in the case of most carcinoids the possibility of
metastatic disease is directly related to primary size, the extent of surgical resection for possible cure should be determined accordingly. In the case of appendiceal
tumors smaller than 1 cm without gross metastases, which pertains to the majority,20,25,217,219 a simple appendectomy is sufficient. 20,217,219 Of 103 such patients treated
with a simple appendectomy, of whom 103 were followed for 5 years and 83 for 10 to 35 years, no patient developed a local recurrence or metastatic disease. 20,23
With rectal carcinoids smaller than 1 cm, local resection usually is adequate and results in cure. 3,20,32,69,220,221 The depth of invasion is also an important prognostic
factor32 and should also be assessed in all tumors. 32 If no invasion of the muscularis propria is present for rectal carcinoids smaller than 2 cm, local resection is
adequate. 32 With small intestinal carcinoids smaller than 1 cm, complete agreement about treatment has not been reached. In most series, 15% to 20% of tumors
smaller than 1 cm have metastases. In another series, however, 69% of tumors smaller than 0.5 cm were associated with metastases, 222 and in another series, 28 32%
of tumors 0.6 to 1.0 cm in size had metastases, leading one group 222 to conclude that, with midgut carcinoids, malignancy is independent of size. This has led some to
recommend a wide en bloc resection of the adjacent lymph node–bearing mesentery for all small intestinal carcinoids. 26 If the carcinoid is 2 cm or larger, which is
uncommon in the case of carcinoids of the rectum or appendix and occurs in 40% of small bowel carcinoids, 20 a full-scale cancer operation should be done. 20 In the
case of carcinoids of the appendix that are 2 cm or larger, a right hemicolectomy is the operation of choice. 20,23,26,217,219 In a tumor larger than 2 cm in the rectum or a
smaller tumor with invasion through the muscularis propria, an abdominoperineal resection or a low anterior resection with primary anastomosis is recommended by
some3,26,32,223 but not by others.33 In two studies33,221 in patients with rectal carcinoids larger than 2 cm, all patients died from or developed metastatic disease to the
liver despite abdominoperineal or low anterior resection, and the authors concluded that radical surgery is inappropriate if anorectal carcinoids can be removed by
local excision. In the case of a small intestinal carcinoid of 2 cm or more, a wide resection is recommended with en bloc resection of the adjacent lymph node–bearing
mesentery.26 For carcinoids of the appendix 1 to 2 cm in size, simple appendectomy is recommended by some, 20,23,217 whereas others favor more aggressive surgery,
such as a partial cecectomy or formal right hemicolectomy for those lesions located at the base of the appendix to ensure clear margins 26 or in patients with invasion
of the mesoappendix or vascular invasion. 217 For carcinoids of the rectum 1 to 2 cm in size, it is estimated that 11% to 47% have metastases, 31,32 and 33 and thus it is
recommended by some that these tumors be locally resected with a wide, local, full-thickness excision 221 and that those tumors found to invade the muscularis propria
undergo abdominoperineal or low anterior resection. 20,26,217,223 In another study,33 however, 47% of these patients had metastases and 50% without metastatic disease
developed metastases on follow-up, leading the authors to conclude that extensive surgery is not routinely warranted in these patients. With gastric carcinoids,
treatment is generally stratified by whether hypergastrinemia is present (type I or II) or not (type III). 40,224,225,226,227 and 228 Most recommend that, in patients with type I or
II with small lesions of less than 1 cm, the carcinoids should be removed endoscopically. 226,228,229 In patients with type I or II gastric carcinoids, if the tumor is larger
than 2 cm or if there is local invasion, some recommend total gastrectomy, 26,230 whereas others recommend it be removed surgically with resection, with antrectomy
performed for type 1 (pernicious anemia) lesions. 40,228 For type I or II lesions of 1 to 2 cm, no general agreement has been reached on treatment; some recommend
that these lesions should be treated surgically, 224 whereas others recommend endoscopic treatment.228
In type III gastric carcinoids not associated with hypergastrinemia, which tend to be larger and more aggressive, if they are larger than 2 cm, excision and regional
lymph node clearance is recommended.224,225 and 226,228 Some recommend a similar approach for any carcinoid larger than 1 cm, whereas others recommend it be
reserved for tumors in this size range showing histologic invasion. Most tumors smaller than 1 cm are treated endoscopically. 224,225 and 226
Resection of isolated hepatic metastases may also be beneficial or curative in select patients. 162,217,218 and 219,231,232 In one study,232 22% of patients had unilobar
disease and could have all tumor resected, whereas in other studies, fewer than 10% of patients were surgical candidates because of more disseminated
disease. 231,233 In the 20% with all metastatic disease resected, 232 5-HIAA levels were normal and 10-year survival was 100%. The role of cytoreductive or debulking
surgery in patients in whom all tumor cannot be removed is unclear. No prospective randomized trials have addressed this question. A number of retrospective
analyses suggest that such an approach should be considered in selected cases. 20,162,217,218 and 219,231,232,234,235 and 236 A number of studies218,219,222,231,236,237 recommend
debulking mesenteric metastases and removal of compromised intestinal segments, even in the presence of liver metastases. In one study 222 of 138 patients with
midgut carcinoids of whom 51 patients were subjected to surgery with the principal aim of removing the primary tumor and debulking mesenteric metastases, the
authors concluded that this surgery provided considerable symptomatic relief. A similar study 237 of 75 patients with advanced abdominal carcinoids, all of whom
underwent exploratory laparotomy [33% had debulking procedures (excluding liver)], demonstrated a significantly longer survival in those patients who underwent
debulking procedures (excluding liver), whether or not liver metastases were present.
The role of cytoreductive hepatic resection or of cryotherapy for patients with multiple hepatic metastases from carcinoids is also unclear. 218,231,235,236,238 In a review of
47 cases of patients with metastatic carcinoids who underwent partial hepatectomy, the mortality rate was 4.3% and the mean survival rate was 6.2 years. 231 In 60% of
the patients, the symptoms of carcinoid syndrome resolved after resection. The authors of this review concluded that resection of hepatic metastases may relieve
clinical endocrinopathies and that the symptomatic response may last several months. 231 It was recommended that if more than 90% of the imaged tumor could be
safely removed, resection should be considered. In a study 238 of 13 patients with metastatic NETs to the liver (including seven patients with carcinoids), complete
ablation of all visible tumor was achieved at surgery by cryotherapy in all but one patient. With a mean follow-up of 13.5 months, 92% of the patients were alive and
only 17% of the patients with complete ablation had recurrent tumor. 238
In one study, 239 radiation therapy was used in 44 patients with symptomatic metastatic unresectable carcinoid tumors. Survival was not prolonged; however,
substantial palliation was achieved in most cases, with an overall response rate of 80%, including 76% (16 of 21) for abdominal tumors, 92% (12 of 13) for spinal
metastases, 63% (five of eight) for brain metastases, and 89% (eight of nine) for bone metastases. Of eight patients with intracranial lesions, 239 none demonstrated
progression during follow-up (median dose, 3300 cGy). At present, radiotherapy is primarily used for symptomatic bone metastases, especially to the spine.
Because MIBG is frequently taken up by carcinoids and concentrated, the possibility of using radiolabeled MIBG therapeutically has been evaluated in a small
number of patients. 3,240,241,242 and 243 Iodine 125 MIBG or iodine 131 MIBG has been reported to decrease 5-HIAA urine concentrations and control symptomatic
metastases in a small number of cases.

CHEMOTHERAPY
No general agreement on has been reached about when, or even if, chemotherapy should be started in patients with malignant carcinoids. One group with
considerable experience 20 suggests that only patients with significant symptoms or disability from malignant disease or syndromes or who have a poor prognosis
should undergo chemotherapy. Chemotherapy for metastatic carcinoids has, in general, been disappointing 3,244,245 (Table 38.6-6). Single-agent therapy with
doxorubicin,162,246 5-fluorouracil, 162 DTIC,166,247,248 and 249 actinomycin D,247 cisplatin, 250 alkylating agents, 78 etoposide,251 streptozotocin, 78 and carboplatin, 252 has
provided low tumor response rates of 0% to 30%. In general, the duration of responses is short, usually less than 1 year. Combination chemotherapy for metastatic
carcinoid has not been shown to have any clear advantage compared with single-agent chemotherapy. Two-dose combinations have been used of streptozotocin and
5-fluorouracil 43,166,201,246,253,254; streptozotocin and cyclophosphamide 43; streptozotocin and doxorubicin 253; etoposide and cisplatin 255; DTIC and 5-fluorouracil 256; and
lomustine and 5-fluorouracil 257 with low response rates of 0% to 40% and no apparent significant improvement over the use of single agents alone. Three-drug
combinations with 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cisplatin 258; DTIC, 5-fluorouracil, and epirubicin 259,260; and streptozotocin, cyclophosphamide, and 5-fluorouracil 261;
or four-drug combinations of streptozotocin, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and 5-fluorouracil 261 also gave low response rates of 10% to 31% and showed no
additional therapeutic advantage over a single agent. Remissions were short-lived, with an average duration of 4 to 7 months. 20,162,166,244 It can be concluded that no
combination therapy has clearly had a beneficial effect in the treatment of malignant carcinoids. Given the indolent nature of the tumor, poor efficacy, and undisputed
toxicity of chemotherapy and the availability of excellent symptomatic therapy (octreotide and interferon), chemotherapy usually is reserved for advanced tumors with
evidence of progression late in the disease course. Selective hepatic artery infusion of 5-fluorouracil had a similar response rate as that reported for systemic
5-fluorouracil. 78

TABLE 38.6-6. Antitumor Drug Therapy of Carcinoids

BIOTHERAPY
Analogues such as octreotide or lanreotide, in addition to controlling symptoms and reducing secretion of 5-HIAA or various peptides, also have been assessed for
their antitumor effects 181,183,185,189,191,201,262,263,264 and 265 (see Table 38.6-6). In general, these analogues have a poor tumoricidal effect, decreasing tumor size in only 0%
to 17% of patients. However, both somatostatin analogues (lanreotide, octreotide) have a tumoristatic effect, stabilizing the growth of metastatic disease and, in some
studies, prolonging survival. 135,181,185,265 The mean survival in the 66 patients treated with octreotide in the Mayo Clinic studies 191,264 was 3 years, which was
significantly longer than the 9 to 12 months in the 92 patients treated with chemotherapy in the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group studies. Similarly, in a phase II
study265,266 examining the effect of octreotide, 150 to 250 mg three times per day, on survival and tumor growth in 20 patients with metastatic carcinoids, 50% of
patients had a CT-documented stabilization of metastatic disease that was maintained a minimum of 2 months (median, 5 months). The median survival was not
reached at 29 months. Similar results were reported in prospective studies with octreotide or lanreotide in Germany, 267 in Sweden, 185 and in two studies in Italy 183,268 in
which 45%, 70%, 80%, and 100% of the patients did not demonstrate tumor progression during treatment, respectively. No prospective study has proven that this
tumor stabilization results in increased survival.
Studies200,201 and 202,206,262,266,269,270,271,272,273,274 and 275 show that human leukocyte interferon or interferon-a causes a decrease in tumor size in a small number (0% to
20%) of patients with metastatic tumors (see Table 38.6-6). However, similar to octreotide, interferon appears to have a tumoristatic effect, stopping further tumor
growth and stabilizing the extent of metastatic disease, which may lead to prolonged survival. 201,204,276 In a large prospective study 201 of interferon-a in 111 patients
with metastatic disease, 16 patients (14%) demonstrated a greater than 50% reduction in tumor size, whereas 66% demonstrated a stabilization of disease and 19%
progressed. In this study, the survival of patients treated with interferon was prolonged compared with the survival of those treated with streptozotocin and
5-fluorouracil. Interferon treatment (3 million to 9 million units three times per week) was associated with tolerable but significant side effects, including flu-like
symptoms in 89%, fatigue in 70%, weight loss in 57%, reduction of blood counts in 31% (anemia in 31%, leukopenia in 3%, thrombocytopenia in 14%), increased
serum levels of triglycerides in 32%, and increased liver enzymes in 31%. 201 Clinical thyroid disease developed in 76% of patients with thyroid antibodies. 3 In 22
patients, 277 it was found that the induction of the enzyme 2R,5R-oligoadenylate synthetase with interferon treatment correlated with the development of a clinical
response; however, it is unknown if this response is predictive of changes in tumor size with interferon treatment. The optimal dose for long-term treatment seems to
be 5 to 10 mU three to five times per week; subsequently, however, it is important to titrate the dose individually for each patient. 204 It is recommended that the
leukocyte count be used as an indication of the antiproliferative effect of interferon-a, with the goal of reducing the leukocytes to less than 3 × 10 9 per liter.204
Because of their separate tumoristatic effects and ability to control symptoms, the combination of octreotide and interferon-a were assessed in small numbers of
patients with malignant carcinoid syndrome, either alone or in combination with other agents (see Table 38.6-6). With octreotide and interferon, 184,266,278 interferon-a
plus 5-fluorouracil, 279 interferon-a and -b, 280 and streptozotocin with doxorubicin and interferon-a, 274 only low rates (0% to 10%) of decrease in tumor size occurred,
which was similar to interferon-a alone. Although some of these combinations, such as octreotide and interferon-a, were more effective than either agent alone at
controlling symptoms of the carcinoid syndrome or decreasing 5-HIAA excretion, 204 no clearly increased tumoricidal effect was apparent. In one study 184 involving 21
patients with metastatic NETs (including nine with carcinoids) who were unresponsive to monotherapy with octreotide, an interferon-a plus octreotide combination
caused inhibition of tumor growth in 67%. In one patient (6%), a decrease in tumor was noted, whereas in the other 61%, the response was a stabilization of tumor
size without further growth over a median period of 12 months (range, 3 to 52 months). 184
Studies281 demonstrate that somatostatin analogues (lanreotide, octreotide), but not interferon, can induce apoptosis in carcinoid. In contrast, treatment with
interferon-a 276 induced increased expression of bcl-2 in the carcinoids, whereas treatment with somatostatin analogues did not. It was proposed that this induced bcl-2
expression may contribute to keeping the malignant carcinoid cells at G 0 and therefore be one of the mechanisms of the antiproliferative effects of interferon. 276
EMBOLIZATION AND CHEMOEMBOLIZATION
Surgical hepatic artery ligation or embolization via interventional radiology has been reported to reduce hepatic tumor bulk alone 20,209,212,214,215,232; combined with
interferon 213; or as chemoembolization combined with chemotherapy with DTIC, cisplatin, doxorubicin, 5-fluorouracil, or streptozotocin 208,210,211,212 and 213,282,283,284 and 285
(see Table 38.6-6). In one study209 of 29 patients with metastatic carcinoids, 38% had a decrease in tumor size after embolization; 38% had a greater than 50%
decrease in hormone levels and 52% had either. Overall growth stabilization 209 was achieved in 38% for a median duration of 7 months. In two other studies involving
31 patients, 214,215 19 patients had temporary liver dearterialization and 12 were treated with chemoembolization. After temporary liver dearterialization, 41% had a
decrease in metastatic hepatic tumor size, whereas with embolization 50% showed a decrease, and in almost all cases the reduction was present for more than 12
months. Hepatic artery occlusion with chemotherapy or chemoembolization may be more effective than embolization or hepatic artery occlusion alone. 212 In one large
study,212 the percentage of patients who had tumor regression after hepatic artery ligation alone was similar to that for patients receiving chemoembolization
(treatment with DTIC and doxorubicin alternating with streptozotocin and 5-fluorouracil) (67% vs. 69%, respectively) (see Table 38.6-6). However, the duration of the
response was decreased (4 months vs. 18 months for the combination).

In nine recent studies involving chemoembolization (embolization combined with doxorubicin in ethiodized oil or with 5-fluorouracil, DTIC, doxorubicin, cisplatin,
mitomycin C, or streptozotocin), 3,207,208,210,211,282,283,284 and 285 a decrease in tumor size was seen in 33% to 100% of the patients (see Table 38.6-6). The average
decrease in size in one study was 84%. 283 In one study,283 47% of patients survived 2 years (median survival, 17 months), and in another study the median survival
time was 15 months.208 Interferon has been compared with and without hepatic artery embolization in 42 patients with metastatic carcinoid tumors. 213 Seventeen
patients were embolized and received interferon for 1 year, and the remaining 25 patients received only interferon. At 1 year, 82% with embolization had stable
disease or decrease in metastases, whereas 64% of those treated with interferon had stable decrease. 213 Also at 1 year, all patients responding to interferon and
those with stable disease were randomized to no interferon or continued interferon (3 mU 3 days per week). One year later, all patients receiving interferon had stable
disease as compared with only 40% of those taking no interferon. Survival was significantly longer in patients remaining on interferon. Embolization combined with
interferon caused a significantly higher rate of tumor shrinkage than embolization alone in this study but did not prolong survival. 213
LIVER TRANSPLANTATION
In contrast to other metastatic tumors to the liver in which liver transplantation has generally given poor results and has been largely abandoned, interest in liver
transplantation is increasing for patients with metastatic carcinoids and PETs. 71,286,287,288 and 289 In a review of 103 patients 287 with malignant NETs who underwent liver
transplantation (43 carcinoids, 48 PETs), the 2-year and 5-year survival rates were 60% and 47%, respectively. However, recurrence-free survival was less than
24%.287 Univariate analysis defined favorable prognostic factors as age younger than 50 years, primary tumor in lung or bowel, and pretransplantation somatostatin
therapy. Multivariate analysis identified the adverse prognostic factors as begin age older than 50 years and transplantation combined with upper abdominal
exenteration or Whipple's resection ( P <.01). It was concluded287 that liver transplantation may be justified, particularly in young patients with only hepatic disease.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Kloppel G, Heitz PU. Classification of normal and neoplastic neuroendocrine cells. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1994;733:18.
2. Langley K. The neuroendocrine concept today. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1994;733:1.
3. Jensen RT, Norton JA. Carcinoid tumors and the carcinoid syndrome. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology, 5th ed. Philadelphia:
LippincottRaven, 1997:1704.
4. Capella C, Heitz PU, Hofler H, Solcia E, Kloppel G. Revised classification of neuroendocrine tumours of the lung, pancreas and gut. Virchows Arch 1995;425:547.
5. Kulke MH, Mayer RJ. Carcinoid tumors. N Engl J Med 1999;340:858.
6. Oberndorfer S. Karzinoide tumoren des dunndarms. Frankf Z Pathol 1907;1:426.
7. Caplin ME, Buscombe JR, Hilson AJ, et al. Carcinoid tumour. Lancet 1998;352:799.
8. Wilander E. Diagnostic pathology of gastrointestinal and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours. Acta Oncol 1989;28:363.
9. Eriksson B. Tumor markers for pancreatic endocrine tumors, including chromogranins, HCG-alpha and HCG-beta. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas: recent
advances in research and management. Frontiers of Gastrointestinal Research Series. Basel: S Karger, 1995:121.
10. Wilander E, Lundqvist M, el-Salhy M. Serotonin in fore-gut carcinoids. A survey of 60 cases with regard to silver stains, formalin-induced fluorescence and serotonin immunocytochemistry. J
Pathol 1985;145:251.
11. Williams ED, Sandler M. The classification of carcinoid tumours. Lancet 1963;1:238.
12. Soga J, Yakuwa Y, Osaka M. Carcinoid syndrome: a statistical evaluation of 748 reported cases. J Exp Clin Cancer Res 1999;18:133.
13. Godwin JD II. Carcinoid tumors. An analysis of 2,837 cases. Cancer 1975;36:560.
14. Modlin IM, Sandor A. An analysis of 8305 cases of carcinoid tumors. Cancer 1997;79:813.
15. Newton JN, Swerdlow AJ, dos Santos Silva IM, et al. The epidemiology of carcinoid tumours in England and Scotland. Br J Cancer 1994;70:939.
16. Watson RG, Johnston CF, O'Hare MM, et al. The frequency of gastrointestinal endocrine tumours in a well-defined populationNorthern Ireland 19701985. QJM 1989;72:647.
17. Norheim I, Oberg K, Theodorsson-Norheim E, et al. Malignant carcinoid tumors. An analysis of 103 patients with regard to tumor localization, hormone production, and survival. Ann Surg
1987;206:115.
18. Eriksson B, Oberg K, Skogseid B. Neuroendocrine pancreatic endocrine tumors. Clinical findings in a prospective study of 84 patients. Acta Oncologia 1989;28:373.
19. Weiss NS, Yang CP. Incidence of histologic types of cancer of the small intestine. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;78:653.
20. Moertel CG. Karnofsky memorial lecture. An odyssey in the land of small tumors. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1502.
21. Berge T, Linell F. Carcinoid tumours. Frequency in a defined population during a 12-year period. Acta Pathol Microbiol Scand 1976;84:322.
22. Feldman JM. Carcinoid tumors and the carcinoid syndrome. Curr Probl Surg 1989;26:835.
23. Moertel CG, Dockerty MB, Judd ES. Carcinoid tumors of the vermiform appendix. Cancer 1968;21:270.
24. Pearce SH, Trump D, Wooding C, et al. Loss of heterozygosity studies at the retinoblastoma and breast cancer susceptibility (BRCA2) loci in pituitary, parathyroid, pancreatic and carcinoid
tumours. Clin Endocrinol 1996;45:195.
25. Sandor A, Modlin IM. A retrospective analysis of 1570 appendiceal carcinoids. Am J Gastroenterol 1998;93:422.
26. Thompson GB, Van Heerden JA, Martin JK Jr, et al. Carcinoid tumors of the gastrointestinal tract: presentation, management, and prognosis. Surgery 1985;98:1054.
27. Burke AP, Thomas RM, Elsayed AM, Sobin LH. Carcinoids of the jejunum and ileum. Cancer 1997;79:1086.
28. Soga J. Carcinoids of the small intestine: a statistical evaluation of 1102 cases collected from the literature. J Exp Clin Cancer Res 1997;16:353.
29. Moertel CG, Sauer WG, Dockerty MB, Baggenstoss AH. Life history of the carcinoid tumor of the small intestine. Cancer 1961;14:901.
30. Burke AP, Sobin LH, Federspiel BH, Shekitka KM, Helwig EB. Carcinoid tumors of the duodenum. A clinicopathologic study of 99 cases. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1990;114:700.
31. Soga J. Carcinoids of the rectum: an evaluation of 1271 reported cases. Surg Today 1997;27:112.
32. Naunheim KS, Zeitels J, Kaplan EL, et al. Rectal carcinoid tumorstreatment and prognosis. Surgery 1983;94:670.
33. Koura AN, Giacco GG, Curley SA, et al. Carcinoid tumors of the rectum. Cancer 1997;79:1294.
34. Soga J. Carcinoids of the colon and ileocecal region: a statistical evaluation of 363 cases collected from the literature. J Exp Clin Cancer Res 1998;17:139.
35. Hasleton PS, Gomm S, Blair V, Thatcher N. Pulmonary carcinoid tumours: a clinico-pathological study of 35 cases. Br J Cancer 1986;54:963.
36. Dusmet M, McKneally MF. Bronchial and thymic carcinoid tumors: a review. Digestion 1994;55:70.
37. Bonato M, Cerati M, Pagani A, et al. Differential diagnostic patterns of lung neuroendocrine tumours. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol 1992;420:201.
38. Hasleton PS. Histopathology and prognostic factors in bronchial carcinoid tumours. Thorax 1994;49:S56.
39. Thorson AH. Studies on carcinoid disease. Acta Med Scand 1958;334[Suppl]:1.
40. Rindi G, Bordi C, Rappel S, et al. Gastric carcinoids and neuroendocrine carcinomas: pathogenesis, pathology, and behavior. World J Surg 1996;20:168.
41. Granberg D, Wilander E, Stridsberg M, et al. Clinical symptoms, hormone profiles, treatment, and prognosis in patients with gastric carcinoids. Gut 1998;43:223.
42. Johnson LA, Lavin PT, Moertel CG, et al. Carcinoids: the prognostic effect of primary site histologic type variations. J Surg Oncol 1986;33:81.
43. Moertel CG, Hanley JA. Combination chemotherapy trials in metastatic carcinoid tumor and the malignant carcinoid syndrome. Cancer Clin Trials 1979;2:327.
44. Soga J. Statistical evaluation of 2001 carcinoid cases with metastases, collected from literature: a comparative study between ordinary carcinoids and atypical varieties. J Exp Clin Cancer Res
1998;17:3.
45. Weber HC, Jensen RT. Pancreatic endocrine tumors and carcinoid tumors: recent insights from genetic and molecular biologic studies. In: Dervenis CG, ed. Advances in pancreatic disease.
Molecular biology, diagnosis and treatment. Stuttgart, Germany: Georg Thieme Verlag, 1996:55.
46. Oberg K. Biology, diagnosis, and treatment of neuroendocrine tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. Curr Opin Oncol 1994;6:441.
47. Rindi G, Capella C, Solcia E. Pathobiology and classification of gut endocrine tumors. In: Mignon M, Colombel JF, eds. Recent advances in the pathophysiology and management of
inflammatory bowel diseases and digestive endocrine tumors. Paris: John Libbey Eurotext, 1999:177.
48. Calender A. New insights in genetics of digestive neuroendocrine tumors. In: Mignon M, Colombel JF, eds. Recent advances in the pathophysiology and management of inflammatory bowel
diseases and digestive endocrine tumors. Paris: John Libbey Eurotext, 1999:155.
49. Helander HF, Bordi C. Morphology of gastric mucosa during prolonged hypergastrinemia. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas: Recent advances in research and
management. Frontiers in Gastrointestinal Research Series. Basel, Switzerland: S Karger, 1995:372.
50. Modlin IM, Tang LH. Cell and tumour biology of the gastric enterochromaffin-like cell. Ital J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1999;31:S117.
51. Kokkola A, Sjoblom SM, Haapiainen R, et al. The risk of gastric carcinoma and carcinoid tumours in patients with pernicious anaemia. Scand J Gastroenterol 1998;33:88.
52. Jensen RT. Gastrinoma as a model for prolonged hypergastrinemia in man. In: Walsh JH, ed. Gastrin. New York: Raven Press, 1993:373.
53. Lehy T, Cadiot G, Mignon M, Ruszniewski P, Bonfils S. Influence of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 on gastric endocrine cells in patients with the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Gut
1992;33:1275.
54. Oberg K. Expression of growth factors and their receptors in neuroendocrine gut and pancreatic tumors, and prognostic factors for survival. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1994;733:46.
55. Wulbrand U, Wied M, Zofel P, et al. Growth factor receptor expression in human gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumours. Eur J Clin Invest 1998;28:1038.
56. Terris B, Scoazeck JY, Rubbia L, et al. Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor in digestive neuroendocrine tumours. Histopathology 1998;32:133.
57. Evers BM, Rady PL, Tyring SK, et al. Amplification of the HER-2/ neu protooncogene in human endocrine tumors. Surgery 1992;112:211.
58. Gibril F, Reynolds JC, Doppman JL, et al. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy: its sensitivity compared with that of other imaging methods in detecting primary and metastatic gastrinomas: a
prospective study. Ann Intern Med 1996;125:26.
59. O'Dowd G, Gosney JR. Absence of overexpression of p53 protein by intestinal carcinoid tumours. J Pathol 1995;175:403.
60. Barbareschi M, Girlando S, Mauri FA, et al. Tumour suppressor gene products, proliferation, and differentiation markers in lung neuroendocrine neoplasms. J Pathol 1992;166:343.
61. Cagle PT, el-Naggar AK, Xu HJ, Hu SX, Benedict WF. Differential retinoblastoma protein expression in neuroendocrine tumors of the lung. Am J Pathol 1997;150:393.
62. Guru SC, Goldsmith PK, Burns AL, et al. Menin, the product of the MEN1 gene, is a nuclear protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:1630.
63. Chandrasekharappa SC, Guru SC, Manickam P, et al. Positional cloning of the gene for multiple endocrine neoplasia-type 1. Science 1997;276:404.
64. Gortz B, Roth J, Krahenmann A, et al. Mutations and allelic deletions of the MEN1 gene are associated with a subset of sporadic endocrine pancreatic and neuroendocrine tumors and not
restricted to foregut neoplasms. Am J Pathol 1999;154:429.
65. Jakobovitz O, Nass D, DeMarco L, et al. Carcinoid tumors frequently display genetic abnormalities involving chromosome 11. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1996;81:3164.
66. D'Adda T, Keller G, Bordi C, Hofler H. Loss of heterozygosity in 11q13-14 regions in gastric neuroendocrine tumors not associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 syndrome. Lab
Invest 1999;79:671.
67. Ghimenti C, Lonobile A, Campani D, Bevilacqua G, Caligo MA. Microsatellite instability and allelic losses in neuroendocrine tumors of the gastro-entero-pancreatic system. Int J Oncol
1999;15:361.

68. Terris B, Meddeb M, Marchio A, et al. Comparative genomic hybridization analysis of sporadic neuroendocrine tumors of the digestive system. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1998;22:50.
69. Jetmore AB, Ray NE, Gathright JB Jr, et al. Rectal carcinoids: the most frequent carcinoid tumor. Dis Colon Rectum 1992;35:717.
70. Metz DC, Jensen RT, Bale AE, et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1: clinical features and management. In: Bilezekian JP, Levine MA, Marcus R, eds. The parathyroids. New York: Raven
Press, 1994:591.
71. Jensen RT, Norton JA. Endocrine neoplasms of the pancreas. In: Yamada T, Alpers DH, Owyang C, Powell DW, Silverstein FE, eds. Textbook of gastroenterology. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott,
1998:2193.
72. Mao C, Shah A, Hanson DJ, Howard JM. Von Recklinghausen's disease associated with duodenal somatostatinoma: contrast of duodenal versus pancreatic somatostatinomas. J Surg Oncol
1995;59:67.
73. Reimund JM, Duclos B, Chamouard P, et al. Intestinal carcinoid tumor and myotonic dystrophy. A new association. Dig Dis Sci 1992;37:1922.
74. Mork H, Jakob F, Al-Taie O, Gassel AM, Scheurlen M. Primary biliary cirrhosis and gastric carcinoid: a rare association? J Clin Gastroenterol 1997;24:270.
75. Jensen RT, Gardner JD. Gastrinoma. In: Go VLW, DiMagno EP, Gardner JD, et al., eds. The pancreas: biology, pathobiology and disease. New York: Raven Press, 1993:931.
76. Feldman JM, O'Dorisio TM. Role of neuropeptides and serotonin in the diagnosis of carcinoid tumors. Am J Med 1986;81:41.
77. Norton JA, Levin B, Jensen RT. Cancer of the endocrine system. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott,
1993:1333.
78. Bouchier IAD. Carcinoid tumours and the carcinoid syndrome. London: Bailliere Tindall, 1984.
79. Becker M, Aron DC. Ectopic ACTH syndrome and CRH-mediated Cushing's syndrome. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1994;23:585.
80. Davis Z, Moertel CG, McIlrath DC. The malignant carcinoid syndrome. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1973;137:637.
81. Grahame-Smith DG. The carcinoid syndrome. Am J Cardiol 1968;21:376.
82. Roberts LJ II, Marney SR Jr, Oates JA. Blockade of the flush associated with metastatic gastric carcinoid by combined histamine H 1 and H2 receptor antagonists. N Engl J Med 1979;300:236.
83. Feldman JM. Carcinoid tumors and syndrome. Semin Oncol 1987;14:237.
84. Jensen RT. Overview of chronic diarrhea caused by functional neuroendocrine neoplasms. Semin Gastrointest Dis 1999;10:156.
85. Jacobsen MB, Nitter-Hauge S, Bryde PE, Hanssen LE. Cardiac manifestations in mid-gut carcinoid disease. Eur Heart J 1995;16:263.
86. Anderson AS, Krauss D, Lang R. Cardiovascular complications of malignant carcinoid disease. Am Heart J 1997;134:693.
87. Lundin L, Landelius J. Echocardiography for carcinoid heart disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1994;733:437.
88. Roberts WC, Sjoerdsma A. The cardiac disease associated with the carcinoid syndrome (carcinoid heart disease). Am J Med 1964;36:5.
89. Feldman JM, Jones RS. Carcinoid syndrome from gastrointestinal carcinoids without liver metastasis. Ann Surg 1982;196:33.
90. Ricci C, Patrassi N, Massa R, Mineo C, Benedetti-Valentini FJ. Carcinoid syndrome in bronchial adenoma. Am J Surg 1973;126:671.
91. Betchen SA, Cirigliano M, Furth EE, et al. Tubulovillous adenoma of the duodenum. A new etiology for flushing and urinary 5-HIAA elevation. Dig Dis Sci 1998;43:1474.
92. Pernow B, Waldenstrom J. Paroxysmal flushing and other symptoms caused by 5-hydroxytryptamine and histamine in patients with malignant tumours [Preliminary communication]. Lancet
1954;2:951.
93. Kema IP, deVries GE, Sloof MJH, Biesma B, Muskiet FAJ. Serotonin, catecholamines, histamine, and their metabolites in urine, platelets, and tumor tissue of patients with carcinoid tumors.
Clin Chem 1994;40:86.
94. Matuchansky C, Luanay JM. Serotonin, catecholamines, and spontaneous midgut carcinoid flush: plasma studies from flushing and nonflushing sites. Gastroenterology 1995;108:743.
95. Feldman JM. Serotonin metabolism in patients with carcinoid tumors: incidence of 5-hydroxytryptophan-secreting tumors. Gastroenterology 1978;75:1109.
96. Makridis C, Theodorsson E, Akerstrom G, Oberg K, Knutson L. Increased intestinal non-substance P tachykinin concentrations in malignant midgut carcinoid disease. J Gastroenterol Hepatol
1999;14:500.
97. Grahame-Smith DG. The carcinoid syndrome. London: William Heinemann Medical Books, 1972.
98. Creutzfeldt W, Stockmann F. Carcinoids and carcinoid syndrome. Am J Med 1987;82:4.
99. Vinik AI, Gonin J, England BG, et al. Plasma substance-P in neuroendocrine tumors and idiopathic flushing: the value of pentagastrin stimulation tests and the effects of somatostatin analog. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1990;70:1702.
100. Wymenga AN, de Vries EG, Leijsma MK, Kema IP, Kleibeuker JH. Effects of ondansetron on gastrointestinal symptoms in carcinoid syndrome. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:1293.
101. Wilde MI, Markham A. Ondansetron: a review of its pharmacology and preliminary clinical findings in novel applications. Drugs 1996;52:773.
102. Metz SA, McRae JR, Robertson RP. Prostaglandins as mediators of paraneoplastic syndromes: review and up-date. Metabolism 1981;30:299.
103. Theodorsson-Norheim E, Norheim I, Oberg K, et al. Neuropeptide K: a major tachykinin in plasma and tumor tissues from carcinoid patients. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1985;131:77.
104. Emson PC, Gilbert RF, Martensson H, Nobin A. Elevated concentrations of substance P and 5-HT in plasma in patients with carcinoid tumors. Cancer 1984;54:715.
105. Norheim I, Theodorsson-Norheim E, Brodin E, Oberg K. Tachykinins in carcinoid tumors: their use as a tumor marker and possible role in the carcinoid flush. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1986;63:605.
106. Schaffalitzky de Muckadell OB, Aggestrup S, Stentoft P. Flushing and plasma substance P concentration during infusion of synthetic substance P in normal man. Scand J Gastroenterol
1986;21:498.
107. Oates JA. The carcinoid syndrome [Editorial]. N Engl J Med 1986;315:702.
108. Lucas KJ, Feldman JM. Flushing in the carcinoid syndrome and plasma kallikrein. Cancer 1986;58:2290.
109. von der Ohe MR, Camilleri M, Kvols LK, Thomforde GM. Motor dysfunction of the small bowel and colon in patients with the carcinoid syndrome and diarrhea. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1073.
110. Saslow SB, O'Brien MD, Camilleri M, et al. Octreotide inhibition of flushing and colonic motor dysfunction in carcinoid syndrome. Am J Gastroenterol 1997;92:2250.
111. Saslow SB, Scolapio JS, Camilleri M, et al. Medium term effects of a new 5HT 3 antagonist, alosetron, in patients with carcinoid diarrhoea. Gut 1998;42:628.
112. Herxheimer H. Further observations on the influence of 5-hydroxytryptamine on bronchial function. J Physiol 1953;122:49.
113. Lundin L, Norheim I, Landelius J, Oberg K, Theodorsson-Norheim E. Carcinoid heart disease: relationship of circulating vasoactive substances to ultrasound-detectable cardiac abnormalities.
Circulation 1988;77:264.
114. Waltenberger J, Lundin L, Oberg K, et al. Involvement of transforming growth factor-b in the formation of fibrotic lesions in carcinoid heart disease. Am J Pathol 1993;142:71.
115. Feldman JM, Lee EM. Serotonin content of foods: effect on urinary excretion of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid. Am J Clin Nutr 1985;42:639.
116. Nuttall KL, Pingree SS. The incidence of elevations in urine 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid. Ann Clin Lab Sci 1998;28:167.
117. Feldman JM, Butler SS, Chapman BA. Interference with measurement of 3-methoxy-4-hydroxymadelic acid and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid by reducing metabolites. Clin Chem 1974;20:607.
118. Feldman JM. Urinary serotonin in the diagnosis of carcinoid tumors. Clin Chem 1986;32:840.
119. DeVrie EGE, Kema IP, Slooff MJH, et al. Recent developments in diagnosis and treatment of metastatic carcinoid tumours. J Gastroenterol 1993;28:87.
120. Wilkin JK. Flushing reactions: consequences and mechanisms. Ann Intern Med 1981; 95:468.
121. Jensen RT. Gastrointestinal abnormalities and involvement in systemic mastocytosis. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 2000;14:579.
122. Baudin E, Gigliotti A, Ducreux M, et al. Neuron-specific enolase and chromogranin A as markers of neuroendocrine tumours. Br J Cancer 1998;78:1102.
123. Nobels FR, Kwekkeboom DJ, Coopmans W, et al. Chromogranin A as serum marker for neuroendocrine neoplasia: comparison with neuron-specific enolase and the alpha-subunit of
glycoprotein hormones. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1997;82:2622.
124. Stridsberg M, Oberg K, Li Q, Engstrom U, Lundqvist G. Measurements of chromogranin A, chromogranin B (secretogranin I), chromogranin C (secretogranin II) and pancreastatin in plasma and
urine from patients with carcinoid tumours and endocrine pancreatic tumours. J Endocrinol 1995;144:49.
125. Goebel SU, Serrano J, Yu F, et al. Prospective study of the value of serum chromogranin A or serum gastrin levels in assessment of the presence, extent, or growth of gastrinomas. Cancer
1999;85:1470.
126. Oberg K, Wide L. hCG and hCG subunits as tumour markers in patients with endocrine pancreatic tumours and carcinomas. Acta Endocrinol (Copenh) 1981;98:256.
127. Grossmann M, Trautmann ME, Poertl S, et al. Alpha-subunit and human chorionic gonadotropin-b immunoreactivity in patients with malignant endocrine gastroenteropancreatic tumours. Eur J
Clin Invest 1994;24:131.
128. Krenning EP, Kwekkeboom DJ, Oei HY, et al. Somatostatin-receptor scintigraphy in gastroenteropancreatic tumors. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1994;733:416.
129. Westlin JE, Janson ET, Arnberg H, et al. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy of carcinoid tumours using the [ 111In-DTPA-D-Phe1]-octreotide. Acta Oncol 1993;32:783.
130. Gibril F, Doppman JD, Jensen RT. Comparative analysis of tumor localization techniques for neuroendocrine tumors. Yale J Biol Med 1997;70:481.
131. Orlefors H, Sundin A, Ahlstrom H, et al. Positron emission tomography with 5-hydroxytryptophan in neuroendocrine tumors. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2534.
132. Nessi R, Basso Ricci P, Basso Ricci S, et al. Bronchial carcinoid tumors: radiologic observations in 49 cases. J Thorac Imaging 1991;6:47.
133. Jeffree MA, Barter SJ, Hemingway AP, Nolan DJ. Primary carcinoid tumours of the ileum: the radiological appearances. Clin Radiol 1984;35:451.
134. Schillaci O, Scopinaro F, Danieli R, et al. Single photon emission computerized tomography increases the sensitivity of indium-111-pentetreotide scintigraphy in detecting abdominal carcinoids.
Anticancer Res 1997;17(3B):1753.
135. Jensen RT. Peptide therapy. Recent advances in the use of somatostatin and other peptide receptor agonists and antagonists. In: Lewis JH, Dubois A, eds. Current clinical topics in
gastrointestinal pharmacology. Malden, MA: Blackwell Science, 1997:144.
136. Gibril F, Doppman JL, Reynolds JC, et al. Bone metastases in patients with gastrinomas: a prospective study of bone scanning, somatostatin receptor scanning, and MRI in their detection, their
frequency, location and effect of their detection on management. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1040.
137. Lebtahi R, Cadiot G, Delahaye N, et al. Detection of bone metastases in patients with endocrine gastroenteropancreatic tumors: bone scintigraphy compared with somatostatin receptor
scintigraphy. J Nucl Med 1999;40:1602.
138. Gibril F, Reynolds JC, Chen CC, et al. Specificity of somatostatin receptor scintigraphy: a prospective study and the effects of false positive localizations on management in patients with
gastrinomas. J Nucl Med 1999;40:539.
139. Kisker O, Weinel RJ, Geks J, et al. V alue of somatostatin receptor scintigraphy for preoperative localization of carcinoids. World J Surg 1996;20:162.
140. Janson ET, Holmberg L, Stridsberg M, et al. Carcinoid tumors: analysis of prognostic factors and survival in 301 patients from a referral center. Ann Oncol 1997;8:685.
141. Jensen RT. Natural history of digestive endocrine tumors. In: Mignon M, Colombel JF, eds. Recent advances in pathophysiology and management of inflammatory bowel diseases and digestive
endocrine tumors. Paris: John Libbey Eurotext, 1999:192.
142. McDermott EWM, Guduric B, Brennan MF. Prognostic variables in patients with gastrointestinal carcinoid tumours. Br J Surg 1994;81:1007.
143. Shebani KO, Souba WW, Finkelstein DM, et al. Prognosis and survival in patients with gastrointestinal tract carcinoid tumors. Ann Surg 1999;229:815.
144. Greenberg RS, Baumgarten DA, Clark WS, Isacson P, McKeen K. Prognostic factors for gastrointestinal and bronchopulmonary carcinoid tumors. Cancer 1987;60:2476.
145. Makridis C, Ekbom A, Bring J, et al. Survival and daily physical activity in patients treated for advanced midgut carcinoid tumors. Surgery 1997;122:1075.
146. Travis WD, Rush W, Flieder DB, et al. Survival analysis of 200 pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors with clarification of criteria for atypical carcinoid and its separation from typical carcinoid. Am
J Surg Pathol 1998;22:934.
147. Bordi C, Viale G. Analysis of cell proliferation and tumor antigens of prognostic significance in pancreatic endocrine tumors. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas:
recent advances in research and management. Frontiers of Gastrointestinal Research Series. Basel, Switzerland: S Karger, 1995:45.
148. Chaudhry A, Oberg K, Wilander E. A study of biological behavior based on the expression of a proliferating antigen in neuroendocrine tumors of the digestive system. Tumour Biol 1992;13:27.
149. von Herbay A, Sieg B, Schurmann G, et al. Proliferative activity of neuroendocrine tumours of the gastroenteropancreatic endocrine system: DNA flow cytometric and immunohistological
investigations. Gut 1991;32:949.
150. Tomita T. p53 and proliferating cell nuclear antigen in endocrine tumors of pancreas and intestinal carcinoids. Pathology 1997;29:147.
151. Santinelli A, Ranaldi R, Baccarini M, Mannello B, Bearzi I. Ploidy, proliferative activity, p53 and bcl-2 expression in bronchopulmonary carcinoids: relationship with prognosis. Pathol Res Pract
1999;195:467.
152. Tsushima K, Nagorney DM, Weiland LH, Lieber MM. The relationship of flow cytometric DNA analysis and clinicopathology in small-intestinal carcinoids. Surgery 1989;105:366.

153. Tsioulias G, Muto T, Kubota Y, et al. DNA ploidy pattern in rectal carcinoid tumors. Dis Colon Rectum 1991;34:31.
154. Kujari H, Joensuu H, Klemi P, Asola R, Nordman E. A flow cytometric analysis of 23 carcinoid tumors. Cancer 1988;61:2517.
155. Wilander E, Bjelkenkrantz K, Risberg B. Nuclear DNA recordings in gastric carcinoids. A cytofluorometric study on single tumour cells. Pathol Res Pract 1987;182:331.
156. Jones DJ, Hasleton PS, Moore M. DNA ploidy in bronchopulmonary carcinoid tumours. Thorax 1988;43:195.
157. Fitzgerald SD, Meagher AP, Moniz-Pereira P, et al. Carcinoid tumor of the rectum. DNA ploidy is not a prognostic factor. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:643.
158. el-Naggar AK, Ballance W, Karim FW, et al. Typical and atypical bronchopulmonary carcinoids. A clinicopathologic and flow cytometric study. Am J Clin Pathol 1991;95:828.
159. Thunnissen FB, Van Eijk J, Baak JP, et al. Bronchopulmonary carcinoids and regional lymph node metastases. A quantitative pathologic investigation. Am J Pathol 1988;132:119.
160. Travis WD, Linnoila RI, Tsokos MG, et al. Neuroendocrine tumors of the lung with proposed criteria for large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma. An ultrastructural, immunohistochemical, and flow
cytometric study of 35 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1991;15:529.
161. Janson EMT, Oberg KE. Carcinoid tumours. Clin Gastroenterol 1996;10:589.
162. Moertel CG. Treatment of the carcinoid tumor and the malignant carcinoid syndrome. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:727.
163. Vaughan DJ, Brunner MD. Anesthesia for patients with carcinoid syndrome. Int Anesthesiol Clin 1997;35:129.
164. Harris AG, Redfern JS. Octreotide treatment of carcinoid syndrome: analysis of published dose-titration data. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1995;9:387.
165. Veall GRQ, Peacock JE, Bax NDS, Reilly CS. Review of the anaesthetic management of 21 patients undergoing laparotomy for carcinoid syndrome. Br J Anaesth 1994;72:335.
166. Kvols LK. Therapy of the malignant carcinoid syndrome. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1989;18:557.
167. Sjoerdsma A, Lovenberg W, Engelman K, et al. Serotonin now: clinical implications of inhibiting its synthesis with para-chlorophenylalanine. Ann Intern Med 1970;73:607.
168. Alexander SPH, Peters JA. 1997 receptor and ion channel nomenclature supplement, 8th ed. Cambridge: Elsevier Trends Journals, 1997.
169. Gregor M. Therapeutic principles in the management of metastasising carcinoid tumors: drugs for symptomatic treatment. Digestion 1994;55[Suppl 3]:60.
170. Berry EM, Maunder C, Wilson M. Carcinoid myopathy and treatment with cyproheptadine (Periactin). Gut 1974;15:34.
171. Robertson JI. Carcinoid syndrome and serotonin: therapeutic effects of ketanserin. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 1990;1:53.
172. Gustafsen J, Lendorf A, Raskov H, Boesby S. Ketanserin versus placebo in carcinoid syndrome. A clinical controlled trial. Scand J Gastroenterol 1986;21:816.
173. Moertel CG, Kvols LK, Rubin J. A study of cyproheptadine in the treatment of metastatic carcinoid tumor and the malignant carcinoid syndrome. Cancer 1991;67:33.
174. Sullivan PA, O'Donovan M. Ketanserin, a 5-HT antagonist, in symptomatic treatment of carcinoid syndrome. Ir J Med Sci 1986;155:436.
175. Moertel CG, Engstrom PF, Schutt AJ. Tamoxifen therapy for metastatic carcinoid tumor: a negative study. Ann Intern Med 1984;100:531.
176. Frolich JC, Bloomgarden ZT, Oates JA, McGuigan JE, Rabinowitz D. The carcinoid flush. Provocation by pentagastrin and inhibition by somatostatin. N Engl J Med 1978;299:1055.
177. Pless J, Bauer W, Briner U, et al. Chemistry and pharmacology of SMS 201-995, a long-acting octapeptide analogue of somatostatin. Scand J Gastroenterol Suppl 1986;119:54.
178. Kutz K, Nuesch E, Rosenthaler J. Pharmacokinetics of SMS 201-995 in healthy subjects. Scand J Gastroenterol Suppl 1986;119:65.
179. Harris AG, O'Dorisio TM, Woltering EA, et al. Consensus statement: octreotide dose titration in secretory diarrhea. Diarrhea management consensus development panel. Dig Dis Sci
1995;40:1464.
180. Oberg K. Advances in chemotherapy and biotherapy of endocrine tumors. Curr Opin Oncol 1998;10:58.
181. Ruszniewski P, Ducreux M, Chayvialle JA, et al. Treatment of the carcinoid syndrome with the long-acting somatostatin analogue lanreotide: a prospective study in 39 patients. Gut
1996;39:279.
182. Rubin J, Ajani J, Schirmer W, et al. Octreotide acetate long-acting formulation versus open-label subcutaneous octreotide acetate in malignant carcinoid syndrome. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:600.
183. Tomassetti P, Migliori M, Gullo L. Slow-release lanreotide treatment in endocrine gastrointestinal tumors. Am J Gastroenterol 1998;93:1468.
184. Frank M, Klose KJ, Wied M, et al. Combination therapy with octreotide and a-interferon: effect on tumor growth in metastatic endocrine gastroenteropancreatic tumors. Am J Gastroenterol
1999;94:1381.
185. Eriksson B, Renstrup J, Imam H, Oberg K. High-dose treatment with lanreotide of patients with advanced neuroendocrine gastrointestinal tumors: clinical and biological effects. Ann Oncol
1997;8:1041.
186. Schonfeld WH, Elkin EP, Woltering EA, et al. The cost-effectiveness of octreotide acetate in the treatment of carcinoid syndrome and VIPoma. Int J Tech Assess Health Care 1996;14:514.
187. Bajetta E, Carnaghi C, Ferrari L, et al. The role of somatostatin analogues in the treatment of gastro-enteropancreatic endocrine tumours. Digestion 1996;57:72.
188. Stewart PM, Stewart SE, Clark PMS, Sheppard MC. Clinical and biochemical response following withdrawal of a long-acting, depot injection form of octreotide (Sandostatin-LAR). Clin
Endocrinol 1999;50:295.
189. Oberg K, Norheim I, Theodorsson E. Treatment of malignant midgut carcinoid tumours with a long-acting somatostatin analogue octreotide. Acta Oncol 1991;30:503.
190. Arnold R, Frank M. Gastrointestinal endocrine tumours: medical management. Clin Gastroenterol 1996;10:737.
191. Kvols LK, Moertel CG, O'Connell MJ, et al. Treatment of the malignant carcinoid syndrome: evaluation of a long-acting somatostatin analogue. N Engl J Med 1986;315:663.
192. Wangberg B, Nilsson O, Theodorsson E, Dahlstrom A, Ahlman H. The effect of a somatostatin analogue on the release of hormones from human midgut carcinoid tumour cells. Br J Cancer
1991;64:23.
193. Ahlman H, Ahlund L, Dahlstrom A, et al. SMS 201-995 and provocation tests in preparation of patients with carcinoids for surgery or hepatic arterial embolization. Anesth Analg 1988;67:1142.
194. Gillis JC, Noble S, Goa KL. Octreotide long-acting release (LAR). A review of its pharmacological properties and therapeutic use in the management of acromegaly. Drugs 1997;53:681.
195. Lancranjan I, Bruns C, Grass P, et al. Sandostatin LAR: pharmacodynamics, efficacy, and tolerability in acromegalic patients. Metabolism 1995;44[Suppl 1]:18.
196. Dunne MJ, Elton R, Fletcher T, Hofker P, Shui I. Therapeutic considerations in Sandostatin in the treatment of GEP endocrine tumors. In: O'Dorisio TM, ed. Sandostatin and
gastroenteropancreatic endocrine tumors. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1989:93.
197. Trendle MC, Moertel CG, Kvols LK. Incidence and morbidity of cholelithiasis in patients receiving chronic octreotide for metastatic carcinoid and malignant islet cell tumors. Cancer
1997;79:830.
198. Avila NA, Shawker TH, Roach P, et al. Sonography of gallbladder abnormalities in acromegaly patients following octreotide and ursodiol therapy: incidence and time course. J Clin Ultrasound
1998;26:289.
199. Newman CB, Melmed S, Snyder PJ, et al. Safety and efficacy of long-term octreotide therapy of acromegaly: results of a multicenter trial in 103 patientsa clinical research center study. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 1995;80:2768.
200. Oberg K, Norheim I, Lind E, et al. Treatment of malignant carcinoid tumors with human leukocyte interferon: long-term results. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:1297.
201. Oberg K, Eriksson B. The role of interferons in the management of carcinoid tumors. Acta Oncol 1991;30:519.
202. Nobin A, Lindblom A, Mansson B, Sundberg M. Interferon treatment in patients with malignant carcinoids. Acta Oncol 1989;28:445.
203. Hanssen LE, Schrumpf E, Jacobsen MB, et al. Extended experience with recombinant alpha-2b interferon with or without hepatic artery embolization in the treatment of midgut carcinoid
tumors. Acta Oncol 1991;30:523.
204. Oberg K, Eriksson B, Janson ET. The clinical use of interferons in the management of neuroendocrine gastroenteropancreatic tumors. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1994;733:471.
205. Hanssen LE, Schrumpf E, Kolbenstvedt AN, Tausjo J, Dolva LO. Treatment of malignant metastatic midgut carcinoid tumors with recombinant human a2b interferon with or without prior hepatic
artery embolization. Scand J Gastroenterol 1989;24:787.
206. Moertel CS, Rubin J, Kvols LK. Therapy of metastatic carcinoid tumor and the malignant carcinoid syndrome with recombinant leukocyte A interferon. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:865.
207. Drougas JG, Anthony LB, Blair TK, et al. Hepatic artery chemoembolization for management of patients with advanced metastatic carcinoid tumors. Am J Surg 1998;175:408.
208. Kim YH, Ajani JA, Carrasco CH, et al. Selective hepatic arterial chemoembolization for liver metastases in patients with carcinoid tumor or islet cell carcinoma. Cancer Invest 1999;17:474.
209. Eriksson BK, Larsson EG, Skogseid BM, et al. Liver embolizations of patients with malignant neuroendocrine gastrointestinal tumors. Cancer 1998;83:2293.
210. Diaco DS, Hajarizadeh H, Mueller CR, et al. Treatment of metastatic carcinoid tumors using multimodality therapy of octreotide acetate, intra-arterial chemotherapy, and hepatic arterial
chemoembolization. Am J Surg 1995;169:523.
211. Diamandidou E, Ajani JA, Yang DJ, et al. Two-phase study of hepatic artery vascular occlusion with microencapsulated cisplatin in patients with liver metastases from neuroendocrine tumors.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 1998;170:339.
212. Moertel CG, Johnson CM, McKusick MA, et al. The management of patients with advanced carcinoid tumors and islet cell carcinomas. Ann Intern Med 1994;120:302.
213. Jacobsen MB, Hanssen LE, Kolmannskog F, et al. Interferon-a2b, with or without prior hepatic artery embolization: clinical response and survival in mid-gut carcinoid patients. Scand J
Gastroenterol 1995;30:789.
214. Marlink RG, Lokich JJ, Robins JR, Clouse ME. Hepatic arterial embolization for metastatic hormone-secreting tumors. Technique, effectiveness, and complications. Cancer 1990;65:2227.
215. Nobin A, Mansson B, Lunderquist A. Evaluation of temporary liver dearterialization and embolization in patients with metastatic carcinoid tumour. Acta Oncol 1989;28:419.
216. Moertel CG, May GR, Martin JK. Sequential hepatic artery occlusion and chemotherapy for metastatic islet carcinoid tumor and islet cell carcinoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1985;4:80.
217. Loftus JP, Van Heerden JA. Surgical management of gastrointestinal carcinoid tumors. Adv Surg 1995;28:317.
218. Norton JA. Surgical management of carcinoid tumors: role of debulking and surgery for patients with advanced disease. Digestion 1994;55[Suppl 3]:98.
219. Rothmund M, Kisker O. Surgical treatment of carcinoid tumors of the small bowel, appendix, colon and rectum. Digestion 1994;55[Suppl 3]:86.
220. Andaker L, Lamke LO, Smeds S. Follow-up of 102 patients operated on for gastrointestinal carcinoid. Acta Chir Scand 1985;151:469.
221. Sauven P, Ridge JA, Quan SH, Sigurdson ER. Anorectal carcinoid tumors. Is progressive surgery warranted? Ann Surg 1990;211:67.
222. Makridis C, Oberg K, Juhlin C, et al. Surgical treatment of midgut carcinoid tumors. World J Surg 1990;14:377.
223. Mani S, Modlin IM, Ballantyne G, Ahlman H, West B. Collective reviews: carcinoids of the rectum. J Am Coll Phys 1994;179:231.
224. Ahlman H, Kolby L, Lundell L, et al. Clinical management of gastric carcinoid tumors. Digestion 1994;55:77.
225. Gilligan CJ, Phil M, Lawton GP, et al. Gastric carcinoid tumors: the biology and therapy of an enigmatic and controversial lesion. Am J Gastroenterol 1995;90:338.
226. Akerstrom G. Management of carcinoid tumors of the stomach, duodenum, and pancreas. World J Surg 1996;20:173.
227. Bordi C, Falchetti A, Azzoni C, et al. Aggressive forms of gastric neuroendocrine tumors in multiple endocrine neoplasia type I. Am J Surg Pathol 1997;21:1075.
228. Ahlman H. Surgical treatment of carcinoid tumours of the stomach and small intestine. Ital J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1999;31:S198.
229. Stuart RC. Primary gastric carcinoids. Br J Surg 1991;78:1013.
230. Shi W, Buchanan KD, Johnston CF, et al. The octreotide suppression test and [ 111In-DTPA-D-Phe1]-octreotide scintigraphy in neuroendocrine tumours correlate with responsiveness to
somatostatin analogue treatment. Clin Endocrinol 1998;48:303.
231. Nagorney DM, Que FG. Cytoreductive hepatic surgery for metastatic gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors. In: Mignon M, Jensen RT, eds. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas: recent advances
in research and management. Frontiers of Gastrointestinal Research Series. Basel, Switzerland: S Karger, 1995:416.
232. Wangberg B, Westberg G, Tylen U, et al. Survival of patients with disseminated midgut carcinoid tumors after aggressive tumor reduction. World J Surg 1996;20:892.
233. Galland RB, Blumgart LH. Carcinoid syndrome. Surgical management. Br J Hosp Med 1986;35:166,168.
234. Thompson NW. Surgical treatment of the endocrine pancreas and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome in the MEN 1 syndrome. Henry Ford Hosp Med J 1992;40:195.
235. Que FG, Nagorney DM, Batts KP, Linz LJ, Kvols LK. Hepatic resection for metastatic neuroendocrine carcinomas. Am J Surg 1995;169:36.
236. Ahlman H, Westberg G, Wangberg B, et al. Treatment of liver metastases of carcinoid tumors. World J Surg 1996;20:196.
237. Soreide O, Berstad T, Bakka A, et al. Surgical treatment as a principle in patients with advanced abdominal carcinoid tumors. Surgery 1992;111:48.
238. Seifert JK, Cozzi PJ, Morris DL. Cryotherapy for neuroendocrine liver metastases. Semin Surg Oncol 1998;14:175.
239. Schupak KD, Wallner KE. The role of radiation therapy in the treatment of locally unresectable or metastatic carcinoid tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:489.
240. Kimmig BN. Radiotherapy for gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1994;733:488.
241. Britton KE, Ur E, Hawkins L, Grossman AB, Besser GM. Treatment of malignant phaeochromocytoma, paraganglioma and carcinoid tumours with 131I-metaiodobenzylguanidine. Nucl Med
Commun 1993;14:856.
242. Bauer R, van de Flierdt E, Stettmeier H, Langhammer HR, Pabst HW. I-131 MIBG therapy of carcinoid tumor of intestinal origin. Eur J Nucl Med 1988;14:234.
243. Hoefnagel CA, den Hartog Jager FC, Taal BG, Abeling NG, Engelsman EE. The role of I-131- MIBG in the diagnosis and therapy of carcinoids. Eur J Nucl Med 1987;13:187.

244. Oberg K. The use of chemotherapy in the management of neuroendocrine tumors. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1993;22:941.
245. Rougier P, Ducreux M. Systemic chemotherapy of advanced digestive neuroendocrine tumours. Ital J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1999;31:S202.
246. Engstrom PF, Lavin PT, Moertel CG, Folsch E, Douglass HO Jr. Streptozocin plus fluorouracil versus doxorubicin therapy for metastatic carcinoid tumor. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:1255.
247. van Hazel GA, Rubin J, Moertel CG. Treatment of metastatic carcinoid tumor with dactinomycin or dacarbazine. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:583.
248. Ritzel U, Leonhardt U, Stockmann F, Ramadori G. Treatment of metastasized midgut carcinoids with decarbazine. Am J Gastroenterol 1995;90:627.
249. Bukowski RM, Tangen CM, Peterson RF, et al. Phase II trial of dimethyltriazenoimidazole carboxamide in patients with metastatic carcinoid. Cancer 1994;73:1505.
250. Moertel CG, Rubin J, O'Connell MJ. Phase II study of cisplatin therapy in patients with metastatic carcinoid tumor and the malignant carcinoid syndrome. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:1459.
251. Kelsen D, Fiore J, Heelan R, Cheng E, Magill G. Phase II trial of etoposide in APUD tumors. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:305.
252. Saltz L, Lauwers G, Wiseberg J, Kelsen D. A phase II trial of carboplatin in patients with advanced APUD tumors. Cancer 1993;72:619.
253. Kelsen DG, Cheng E, Kemeny N, Magill GB, Yagoda A. Streptozotocin and Adriamycin in the treatment of APUD tumors (carcinoid, islet cell and medullary thyroid). Proc Am Assoc Cancer
Res 1982;23:433.
254. Oberg K, Norheim I, Lundqvist G, Wide L. Cytotoxic treatment in patients with malignant carcinoid tumors. Response to streptozocinalone or in combination with 5-FU. Acta Oncol 1987;26:429.
255. Moertel CG, Kvols LK, O'Connell MJ, Rubin J. Treatment of neuroendocrine carcinomas with combined etoposide and cisplatin. Evidence of major therapeutic activity in the anaplastic variants
of these neoplasms. Cancer 1991;68:227.
256. Ollivier S, Fonck M, Becouarn Y, Brunet R. Dacarbazine, fluorouracil, and leucovorin in patients with advanced neuroendocrine tumors. Am J Clin Oncol 1998;21:237.
257. Kaltsas G, Papamichael D, Plowman PN, et al. 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) and lomustine (CCNU) combination for the treatment of advanced neuroendocrine tumours (NET). J Clin Oncol
1998;17:245a.
258. Rougier P, Oliveira J, Ducreux M, et al. Metastatic carcinoid and islet cell tumours of the pancreas: a phase II trial of the efficacy of combination chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin
and cisplatin. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:1380.
259. Di Bartolomeo M, Bajetta E, Bochicchio AM, et al. A phase II trial of dacarbazine, fluorouracil and epirubicin in patients with neuroendocrine tumours. A study by the Italian Trials in Medical
Oncology (ITMO) Group. Ann Oncol 1995;6:77.
260. Bajetta E, Rimassa L, Carnaghi C, et al. 5-Fluorouracil, dacarbazine, and epirubicin in the treatment of patients with neuroendocrine tumors. Cancer 1998;83:372.
261. Bukowski RM, Johnson KG, Peterson RF, et al. A phase II trial of combination chemotherapy in patients with metastatic carcinoid tumors. Cancer 1987;60:2891.
262. Creutzfeldt W, Bartsch HH, Jacubaschke U, Stockmann F. Treatment of gastrointestinal endocrine tumor with interferon-a and octreotide. Acta Oncologia 1991;30:529.
263. Vinik A, Moattari AR. Use of somatostatin analog in management of carcinoid syndrome. Dig Dis Sci 1989;34:14S.
264. Kvols L, Moertel C, Schutt A, Rubin J. Treatment of the malignant carcinoid syndrome (MCS) with a long acting somatostatin analogue (SMS 201-995): preliminary evidence that more is not
better. Proc ASCO 1987;6:370.
265. Saltz L, Trochanowski B, Buckley M, et al. Octreotide as an antineoplastic agent in the treatment of functional and nonfunctional neuroendocrine tumors. Cancer 1993;72:244.
266. Janson ET, Oberg K. Long-term management of the carcinoid syndrome. Treatment with octreotide alone and in combination with alpha-interferon. Acta Oncol 1993;32:225.
267. Arnold R, Neuhaus C, Benning R, et al. Somatostatin analog Sandostatin and inhibition of tumor growth in patients with metastatic endocrine gastroenteropancreatic tumors. World J Surg
1993;17:511.
268. Angeletti S, Corleto VD, Schillaci O, et al. Single dose of octreotide stabilize metastatic gastro-entero-pancreatic endocrine tumours. Ital J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1999;31:23.
269. Valimaki M, Jarvinen H, Salmela P, et al. Is the treatment of metastatic carcinoid tumor with interferon not as successful as suggested? Cancer 1991;67:547.
270. Bajetta E, Zilembo N, di Bartolomeo M, et al. Treatment of metastatic carcinoids and other neuroendocrine tumors with recombinant interferon-alpha-2a. Cancer 1993;72:3099.
271. di Bartolomeo MD, Bajetta E, Zilembo N, et al. Treatment of carcinoid syndrome with recombinant interferon alpha-2a. Acta Oncologia 1993;32:235.
272. Biesma B, Willemse PHB, Mulder NH, et al. Recombinant interferon alpha-2b in patients with metastatic APUDomas: effect on tumours and tumour markers. Br J Cancer 1992;66:850.
273. Schober C, Schmoll E, Schmoll HJ, et al. Antitumour effect and symptomatic control with interferon a 2b in patients with endocrine active tumours. Eur J Cancer 1992;28A:1664.
274. Janson ET, Ronnblom L, Ahlstrom H, et al. Treatment with alpha-interferon versus alpha-interferon in combination with streptozocin and doxorubicin in patients with malignant carcinoid tumors:
a randomized trial. Ann Oncol 1992;3:635.
275. Doberauer C, Niederle N, Kloke O, Kurschel E, Schmidt CG. [Treatment of metastasized carcinoid tumor of the ileum and cecum with recombinant alpha-2b interferon]. Onkologie 1987;10:340.
276. Imam H, Gobl A, Eriksson B, Oberg K. Interferon-alpha induces bcl-2 proto-oncogene in patients with neuroendocrine gut tumor responding to its antitumor action. Anticancer Res
1997;17:4659.
277. Grander D, Oberg K, Lundqvist ML, et al. Interferon-induced enhancement of 2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase in mid-gut carcinoid tumours. Lancet 1990;336:337.
278. Tiensuu-Janson EM, Ahlstrom H, Andersson T, Oberg KE. Octreotide and interferon alfa: a new combination for the treatment of malignant carcinoid tumours. Eur J Cancer 1992;28A:1647.
279. Saltz L, Kemeny N, Schwartz G, Kelsen D. A phase II trial of alpha-interferon and 5-fluorouracil in patients with advanced carcinoid and islet cell tumors. Cancer 1994;74:958.
280. Janson ET, Kauppinen HL, Oberg K. Combined alpha- and gamma-interferon therapy for malignant midgut carcinoid tumors. Acta Oncologia 1993;32:231.
281. Imam H, Eriksson B, Lukinius A, et al. Induction of apoptosis in neuroendocrine tumors of the digestive system during treatment with somatostatin analogs. Acta Oncol 1997;36:607.
282. Ruszniewski P, Rougier P, Roche A, et al. Hepatic arterial chemoembolization in patients with liver metastases of endocrine tumors. A prospective phase II study in 24 patients. Cancer
1993;71:2624.
283. Stokes KR, Stuart K, Clouse ME. Hepatic arterial chemoembolization for metastatic endocrine tumors. J Vasc Intervent Radiol 1993;4:341.
284. Therasse E, Breittmayer F, Roche A, et al. Transcatheter chemoembolization of progressive carcinoid liver metastasis. Radiology 1993;189:541.
285. Perry LJ, Stuart K, Stokes KR, Clouse ME. Hepatic arterial chemoembolization for metastatic neuroendocrine tumors. Surgery 1994;116:1111.
286. Le Treut YP, Delpero JR, Dousset B, et al. Results of liver transplantation in the treatment of metastatic neuroendocrine tumors. A 31-case French multicentric report. Ann Surg 1997;225:355.
287. Lehnert T. Liver transplantation for metastatic neuroendocrine carcinoma. Transplantation 1998;66:1307.
288. Anthuber M, Jauch KW, Briegel J, Groh J, Schildberg FW. Results of liver transplantation for gastroenteropancreatic tumor metastases. World J Surg 1996;20:73.
289. Dousset B, Saint-Marc O, Pitre J, et al. Metastatic endocrine tumors: medical treatment, surgical resection, or liver transplantation. World J Surg 1996;20:908.
290. Wang DG, Johnston CF, Buchanan KD. Oncogene expression in gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors: implications for pathogenesis. Cancer 1997;80:668.

SECTION 38.7 Multiple Endocrine Neoplasias
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 38.7
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasias
GERARD M. DOHERTY
ROBERT T. JENSEN
Introduction
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 1
Clinical Presentation
Parathyroid Gland Involvement
Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors
Pituitary Tumors
Adrenal and Thyroid Tumors and Lipomas
Carcinoid Tumors
Familial Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma and Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Types 2a and 2b
History and Pathology
Clinical Presentation
Preoperative Evaluation and Screening
Surgical Management
Postoperative Follow-up
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes are a group of syndromes characterized by tumors of endocrine organs ( Table 38.7-1). MEN 1 affects the
parathyroid glands, endocrine pancreas, and pituitary gland, among other organs, whereas MEN 2 affects the thyroid gland, parathyroid glands, and adrenal glands.
A great deal has been learned over the last 10 years about the genetics and genotype-phenotype relationships characteristic of these syndromes. Syndromes that
were earlier thought to be completely separate [MEN 2B and familial medullary thyroid cancer, (FMTC)] are now known to be closely related to MEN 2A.

TABLE 38.7-1. Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Syndromes and Familial Medullary Thyroid Cancer

MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA TYPE 1
Wermer first described the familial occurrence of tumors involving the pituitary gland, parathyroid glands, and pancreatic islets. 1 The syndrome was initially called
Wermer's syndrome, subsequently called multiple endocrine adenomatosis type 1, and now MEN 1. It is now clear that the parathyroid disease is always hyperplasia
and that the pancreatic endocrine tumors may be malignant.
MEN 1 is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. 2 Chromosomal linkage studies localized the genetic defect to the long arm of chromosome 11 (q-13 locus). 3 The
gene has subsequently been identified and codes a protein called menin.4 This follows the two-hit theory of neoplasia of Knudson 5 in which an inherited mutation in
one chromosome is unmasked by a somatic deletion or mutation in the other normal chromosome, thereby removing the suppressor effect of the normal gene. These
results are in contrast to patients without MEN 1 who develop pancreatic endocrine tumors, in whom the pancreatic neoplasms develop homozygous inactivation of
the MEN 1 gene in 27% to 39% of cases.6,7 and 8
Studies concerning the etiology of primary hyperparathyroidism in patients with MEN 1 suggest that there is a circulating factor in the plasma that stimulates bovine
parathyroid cells to proliferate. 9,10 Subsequently, analysis 10,11,12 and 13 of plasma mitogenic activity in MEN 1 patients demonstrated that basic fibroblast growth factor or
a closely related factor was present, and circulating antibodies to it have been identified. 11 However, other studies have demonstrated that there is a monoclonal
abnormality in the hyperplastic parathyroid glands of patients with MEN 1, suggesting that the hyperplastic process in these glands may not be totally dependent on a
circulating factor but rather through inactivation of the MEN 1 gene in a precursor cell. 14
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
The peak incidence of symptoms in women with MEN 1 is during the third decade of life, whereas the peak incidence in men is during the fourth decade. In individuals
from kindreds, its presence can usually be detected with screening by the age of 18. 15 More than one-half of patients with MEN 1 have adenomas of more than one
organ, and approximately 20% have three affected endocrine glands. The frequency of glandular involvement, in descending order, is parathyroid, pancreas, pituitary,
adrenal cortex, and thyroid. Both the adrenal cortex and the thyroid typically have benign, nonfunctioning adenomas. Other clinically important tumors these patients
develop include gastric carcinoids, 16 bronchial carcinoids (primarily women), 17 and carcinoid tumors of the thymus (primarily men).18 The frequency of clinical signs
and symptoms, in descending order, is hypercalcemia, nephrolithiasis, peptic ulcer disease, hypoglycemia, headache, visual field loss, hypopituitarism, acromegaly,
galactorrhea-amenorrhea, and rarely Cushing's syndrome. 19,20 and 21 Patients with MEN 1 have a decreased life expectancy, with a 50% probability of death by age 50.
One-half of the deaths are due to a malignant tumoral process or a sequela of the disease. 22,23
PARATHYROID GLAND INVOLVEMENT
Primary hyperparathyroidism is the most common abnormality in patients with MEN 1, occurring in 88% to 97% of affected patients. 19,24,25 and 26 The diagnosis is
dependent on the detection of elevated serum levels of calcium and parathyroid hormone. Primary hyperparathyroidism is usually the initially recognized clinical
manifestation of patients with MEN 1, although in prospectively screened patients, other manifestations may be biochemically detected earlier. 15,27 Occasional
patients have clinical manifestations of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES) before primary hyperparathyroidism. 28 Further, pituitary adenomas or hyperinsulinism may
be identified before hypercalcemia. 29 The pathology associated with primary hyperparathyroidism is always hyperplasia or multiple gland disease, although some
glands may appear grossly normal.25,26 Basic fibroblast growth factor has been expressed in the hyperplastic parathyroid glands of patients with MEN 1. 30 The
surgical management requires removal of three and a half or four parathyroid glands to control the hypercalcemia. If four glands are removed, immediate autograft of
some of the parathyroid tissue into the musculature of the nondominant forearm is recommended. 31 The results of surgery have not been ideal. The incidence of

recurrent or persistent hyperparathyroidism is 16% to 54%, and the incidence of hypoparathyroidism is between 10% and 25%. 32,33 Primary hyperparathyroidism has
been shown to adversely affect the medical management of the gastric acid hypersecretion in MEN 1 patients with ZES. Many clinicians recommend initial parathyroid
surgery to control hypercalcemia because it facilitates the management of the gastric acid hypersecretion. 34
PANCREATIC ENDOCRINE TUMORS
Malignant pancreatic endocrine tumors are the most common MEN 1–related cause of death in MEN 1 kindreds ( Table 38.7-2).23 Pathologic examination of the
duodenum and pancreas in patients with MEN 1 demonstrates multiple neuroendocrine tumors. 35,36 and 37 Tumors producing pancreatic peptide are the most common
pancreatic endocrine tumor in MEN 1 patients, occurring in 80% to 100%. 38 These tumors cause symptoms only due to the tumor mass itself and thus often present
when tumor growth is advanced. Many patients develop functional pancreatic endocrine tumors, sometimes coincident with pancreatic peptide–producing tumors, of
whom most have gastrinoma, approximately 20% insulinoma, 3% glucagonoma, and 1% vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIPoma) 19,25 (see Table 38.7-1).

TABLE 38.7-2. Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 1–Related Causes of Death in the Washington University Series

A number of studies have suggested that most gastrinomas in patients with ZES and MEN 1 are in the duodenum 37,39 and not in the pancreas. The ideal treatment of
the ZES is surgical excision of the gastrinoma; however, in patients with MEN 1, excision of gastrinoma rarely results in normal serum gastrin levels. 40,41 and 42 Because
of the low probability of cure and the suggestion that the gastrinoma is less malignant in MEN 1, some have recommended that patients with MEN 1 do not undergo
surgery. 43,44 However, familial gastrinoma may still have a malignant course. 23,45 Others recommend surgery if a localized gastrinoma is identified by a gastrin gradient
on portal venous sampling or secretin angiogram, 45 if the serum pancreatic peptide concentration is elevated, 46 or if a tumor mass is identified by imaging studies. 45,47
Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy can be used to rule out distant metastases and to evaluate for other primary sites ( Fig. 38.7-1).48 At present, the best approach is
still unclear.

FIGURE 38.7-1. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy can be helpful to identify sites of distant metastasis or otherwise undetected second primary tumors in the lungs
or mediastinum. In this patient with a malignant nonfunctional neuroendocrine tumor in the body of the pancreas ( black arrow), the scintigram revealed a solitary
metastasis in the left lateral segment of the liver ( white arrow) that was not demonstrated on computed tomographic scan or magnetic resonance imaging.

To date, no studies have demonstrated that surgical resection of gastrinomas in MEN 1 is beneficial. One study suggests that surgical resection of primary
gastrinomas in patients with and without MEN 1 decreases the probability of the development of liver metastases, 49 which is the most important negative predictor of
survival. Further, when followed for long periods of time, patients with gastrinoma and MEN 1 develop liver metastases at a rate similar to patients with sporadic
disease. 50 Therefore, we currently recommend that all patients with ZES and MEN 1 have extensive localization studies including somatostatin receptor scintigraphy.
Only patients with unequivocally positive imaging studies and no metastases should undergo surgical exploration with intraoperative ultrasound. Tumors larger than 1
cm identified in the pancreatic head are enucleated, the duodenum is carefully explored by duodenotomy, and solitary or multiple tumors identified are resected; large
tumors in the pancreatic body or tail are removed by distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy. 51 Some studies suggest that nearly 50% of large tumors treated in this
manner may have lymph node metastases.47 Other studies have shown that the primary tumor size is not necessarily correlated with the presence of lymph node
metastases in particular. 52 Resection of liver metastases from patients with MEN 1 may also be beneficial. 53 Using this approach, while cure of ZES is unusual,
resection should reduce the risk of subsequent metastatic disease. 49 No data conclusively demonstrate that this approach increases survival.
MEN 1 is present in 20% of all patients with ZES and 4% of patients with insulinoma. 38,54,55 The exact percentage of patients with VIPoma, glucagonoma, or
somatostatinoma with MEN 1 is not known, but is estimated to be low (less than 5%) 38 (see Table 38.7-1). The surgical management of insulinoma and VIPoma in
MEN 1 patients has had more frequent biochemical cures than resection for gastrinoma. 56 Medical management of the watery diarrhea in VIPoma is effective using
either short-acting or depot somatostatin analogues. Hypoglycemia management in insulinoma is not reliable. Diazoxide and octreotide are available and may be
useful for short-term treatment. In patients with MEN 1, insulinoma and VIPoma are frequently solitary large tumors. Resection may result in cure. 45,47,57,58 and 59 Some
recommend the use of endoscopic ultrasound to identify the insulinoma in patients with MEN 1. 60 Portal venous sampling for insulin or calcium angiography may also
be useful.45,47,61
PITUITARY TUMORS
Pituitary tumors occur in 54% to 80% of patients with MEN 1. 19,21,25 Symptoms may be due to local encroachment including headache and visual field defects. In a
review of series, the most common tumor was a prolactinoma (41% to 76%), followed by growth hormone–secreting tumor, nonfunctional tumor, and rarely
adrenocorticotropic hormone– or thyroid-stimulating hormone–secreting tumors. 62 Men with prolactinoma may be unable to achieve a penile erection, whereas women
may have galactorrhea. Growth hormone–secreting tumors (25%) result in acromegaly. 21 In one study 20% of patients with MEN 1 and gastrinoma had Cushing's
syndrome.63 In all cases in this series, the Cushing's syndrome was of pituitary origin and was mild. Cushing's syndrome may also result from release of
adrenocorticotropic hormone–like material from a pancreatic islet cell tumor 38,63,64 or a foregut carcinoid tumor (ectopic adrenocorticotropic hormone). Prolactinomas
are generally treated by dopamine receptor agonists (bromocriptine, pergolide, cabergoline). Transsphenoidal pituitary surgery may be indicated to control any
detectable pituitary mass lesion in patients with MEN 1. Incompletely resected patients may also be treated with bromocriptine.
ADRENAL AND THYROID TUMORS AND LIPOMAS

Adrenal abnormalities may occur in 27% to 36% of patients with MEN 1. 19,25,65 The most common abnormality is a benign, nonfunctional cortical adenoma, although
adrenal cortical carcinomas and hyperplasia may also occur. 19,25,66 Adrenal cortical hyperfunction may rarely be found secondary to an adrenal tumor. Adrenal cortical
neoplasms are usually nonfunctional in patients with MEN 1. Thyroid adenomas also occur in approximately 5% to 30% of patients with MEN 1 and have little clinical
significance. 25 Lipomas are seen with greater frequency in patients with MEN 1, as are cutaneous angiofibromas and collagenomas. 67
CARCINOID TUMORS
Gastric carcinoid tumors develop in 7% to 30% of patients with MEN 1 with ZES. 16,62 They arise from gastric enterochromaffin-like cells and thus are also called
ECLomas. Approximately 18% have metastases, they are usually multiple, and they generally pursue an indolent course.
Thymic carcinoids occur in 0% to 8% of patients with MEN 1, are almost exclusively in men, are usually asymptomatic, and are not associated with Cushing's or
carcinoid syndrome. 18 They pursue an aggressive course with distant metastases and are an increasing cause of death in older men with MEN 1.
Bronchial carcinoid tumors occur in 0% to 8% of patients with MEN 1. Eighty percent are in women and 74% are benign; however, they are an occasional cause of
death. 17

FAMILIAL MEDULLARY THYROID CARCINOMA AND MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA TYPES 2A AND 2B
HISTORY AND PATHOLOGY
In 1959, Hazard and coworkers68 first described medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and its striking histologic characteristics of cellular argentaffin staining and
amyloid production. MTC is associated with three distinct familial syndromes: MEN 2A, MEN 2B, and familial non-MEN MTC, a disease characterized by hereditary
MTC without associated endocrinopathies (see Table 38.7-1).69
In 1961, Sipple reported the unusually high incidence of bilateral pheochromocytomas in patients with thyroid malignancy. 70 These patients were later found to have
MTC, and the familial disease was inherited as a mendelian autosomal dominant trait with high gene penetrance 71,72 (see Table 38.7-1). Subsequently, primary
hyperparathyroidism was also noted to be part of the syndrome. 73 In 1968, this syndrome of medullary carcinoma of the thyroid gland, pheochromocytomas, and
hyperparathyroidism was termed MEN 2; now it is called MEN 2A. In 1966 Williams and Pollock called attention to the finding that some patients had multiple mucosal
neuromas, with or without marfanoid habitus, puffy lips, prominent jaw, pes cavus, and medullated corneal nerves with MTC and pheochromocytomas. 74 For this group
of patients the terms MEN 2B and MEN 3 were subsequently suggested. 75 Patients with MEN 2B do not have parathyroid disease. The gene defect in patients with
MEN 2A, MEN 2B, and familial MTC is a germline mutation in the RET protooncogene. 76,77
MTC is a malignant neuroendocrine tumor of the parafollicular thyroid cells or the calcitonin-secreting cells (C cells). Histologically, the MTC in patients with familial
MTC, MEN 2A, and MEN 2B appears identical to the MTC occurring sporadically. However, in the familial form of MTC there is bilateral, multifocal involvement, and
the cancer usually occupies a position in the superior lateral part of the thyroid lobe at the junction of the upper and middle third. In the sporadic setting, the MTC is
usually unilateral. MTC is most malignant in MEN 2B, malignant in MEN 2A, and least virulent in FMTC (see Table 38.7-1). MTC accounts for 5% to 12% of all thyroid
cancers, and only 10% of all MTC is familial. 78 In MEN 2A, approximately 42% to 60% of patients develop pheochromocytoma.79
The pheochromocytomas in patients with MEN 2A or MEN 2B usually present in the second or third decade of life and are often bilateral. 78,80,81 and 82 The size of the
tumor or tumors in patients with MEN 2A is usually less than 2 to 3 cm, while it is usually larger in patients with MEN 2B. Even in MEN 2A patients with apparent
unilateral pheochromocytomas, the contralateral adrenal gland almost always demonstrates medullary hyperplasia on pathologic analysis. 81 Patients with medullary
hyperplasia rarely have symptoms of pheochromocytoma. 131I-metaiodobenzyl guanidine scans in patients with MEN 2A may be useful to predict the presence of a
clinically significant pheochromocytoma and can be obtained preoperatively. Pheochromocytomas in patients with MEN 2A or MEN 2B are seldom malignant and are
usually within the adrenal gland. Histologically, these tumors are indistinguishable from those occurring sporadically in a nonfamilial setting.
The parathyroid lesions in MEN 2A consist of generalized hyperplasia 26 and should be managed like the parathyroid disease in MEN 1 31,83,84 (see Table 38.7-1).
Approximately 35% of patients with MEN 2A develop primary hyperparathyroidism. 82 The primary hyperparathyroidism in MEN 2A is usually less clinically significant
and causes fewer symptoms than the primary hyperparathyroidism in MEN 1. 82
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Any of the neoplasms that make up the syndromes of MEN 2A or MEN 2B may be the presenting problem; however, MTC is a hallmark feature that occurs in nearly
100% of affected individuals. Of 164 patients with MEN 2A, each had MTC, 35 (21%) had pheochromocytomas, and 28 (17%) had primary hyperparathyroidism. 78 In
another study of patients with MEN 2A, each had MTC, 40% had pheochromocytomas, and 60% had parathyroid hyperplasia. 85 In patients with MEN 2B, all have
MTC and approximately 60% develop pheochromocytomas.86
In patients with MEN 2B the MTC presents at an early age and appears more aggressive, since few patients live beyond 30 years of age. 87 In some kindreds, the
MTC in MEN 2B may be less malignant and individuals may live longer. 88 The characteristic appearance of MEN 2B patients is often the first sign of disease (see Fig.
38.7-1) and may suggest the diagnosis before other clinical abnormalities. However, with investigation by measuring calcitonin, the MTC is always present at the time
of clinical recognition (see Table 38.7-1).
Patients may initially seek medical advice because of episodic spells with headache, dizziness, or symptoms of irritability and nervousness. It is unusual for patients
with MEN 2A to present with symptoms related to parathyroid disease. 69
PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION AND SCREENING
When a suspicion of FMTC, MEN 2A, or MEN 2B exists, precise diagnosis depends on detection of missense mutations in the RET protooncogene in peripheral
leukocytes. Several studies in individuals from families with MEN 2A have been able to predict the inheritance of MEN 2A by detection of missense mutations in
RET.89,90,91,92 and 93 Screening of new patients or family members for mutations in RET involves polymerase chain reaction amplification and DNA sequence analysis for
detection of known point mutations in exons 10 and 11 (codons 609, 611, 618, 620, and 634) for MEN 2A and FMTC and exon 16 (codon 918) for MEN 2B. If a RET
mutation is detected, each individual (100%) develops MTC. Further, if a RET mutation is absent, the individual does not need any additional testing. Virtually all
patients with MTC have either elevated basal or stimulated plasma levels of calcitonin (CT). Patients who present with clinically apparent disease usually have basal
plasma CT levels exceeding 1 ng/mL. 94 Generally, there is a direct correlation between the tumor mass of MTC and plasma calcitonin levels. 95
Minimal plasma elevations of plasma CT are indicative of MTC in patients who have no other clinical evidence of the neoplasm. 95 Some patients with normal basal
plasma CT levels have an increase to abnormal levels following calcium infusion (15 mg/kg over 4 hours) or pentagastrin injection (0.5-mg/kg bolus). Short bolus
calcium injection (2 mg of calcium gluconate per kilogram over 1 minute) also provokes elevated plasma CT levels in MTC patients. The peak plasma CT levels in
patients with MTC are highest with the combination test of calcium and pentagastrin injection. 96
The presence of inherited MTC can be currently diagnosed in individuals from kindreds before detectable elevations in plasma calcitonin levels. Surgery performed
based solely on detection of RET mutations always demonstrates MTC or C-cell hyperplasia. 92,97,98 It is necessary in patients with MEN 2A or MEN 2B to exclude a
pheochromocytoma before undertaking surgery for MTC. Pheochromocytomas can be excluded by measuring normal urinary levels of epinephrine, norepinephrine,
vanillylmandelic acid, and metanephrines. If an elevated level is detected, pheochromocytoma localization studies should be done. Abdominal computed tomography
and magnetic resonance imaging are frequently helpful in localizing the pheochromocytoma, but additional more sensitive studies may be needed. 99,100
Metaiodobenzylguanidine is concentrated into pheochromocytoma cells and provides a means to functionally localize these tumors using scintigraphy. 100 The

sensitivity of this method varies from 79% to 91%, with a specificity of 94% to 99%. 100
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT
The ability to diagnose MTC in patients at risk for FMTC allows the physician to diagnose and treat this malignancy in an early preclinical stage. Should one diagnose
MTC in a patient from a MEN 2A kindred, it is absolutely essential that the remainder of the family members at risk be screened. It is in this situation that RET testing
has the greatest utility. Patients diagnosed by genetic testing have surgically curable C-cell hyperplasia or carcinoma confined to the thyroid gland. 92
MEN 2A or MEN 2B patients with pheochromocytoma merit evaluation of both adrenal glands. Pheochromocytomas in MEN 2 syndromes have not been extraadrenal,
nor have they been malignant. 80 Before surgical exploration, all patients need effective a-adrenergic receptor blockade. 86,100 Phenoxybenzamine should be
administered 1 to 2 weeks before surgery, starting with a dose of 10 mg twice daily and increased to a usual dose of 10 to 20 mg three times daily. 100 The end point is
normotension with mild to moderate asymptomatic postural hypotension (15 mm Hg) accompanied by symptoms of a blockade including nasal stuffiness. b-Adrenergic
blockade is usually not required 101 except in patients with persistent sinus tachycardia. 86,100 The b blocker should never be administered before the institution of
a-adrenergic blockage, because this may result in unopposed a agonism with hypertensive crisis. 100
At operation, if a solitary pheochromocytoma is present, it should be resected. Some advocate only resecting abnormal adrenal glands confirmed by palpation, 102
while others recommend routinely resecting both adrenal glands. 81 Some patients have had unilateral adrenalectomy and remained asymptomatic with normal urinary
catecholamines for a mean follow-up of 8 to 12 years. 80,102 We use preoperative radioiodinated metaiodobenzyl guanidine scan or magnetic resonance scan to
determine unilateral versus bilateral adrenal involvement in these patients. With imaging studies to localize the adrenal tumor, laparoscopic methods are now used to
remove it.103 Patients with MEN 2A undergoing unilateral adrenalectomy should be followed carefully at 6-month or yearly intervals, since a second adrenal tumor may
be diagnosed biochemically before it is clinically apparent.
The surgical management of familial MTC is total thyroidectomy with a central lymph node dissection. It is essential that a total thyroidectomy be performed, because
the MTC is always bilateral.
POSTOPERATIVE FOLLOW-UP
In patients with MEN 2A and MEN 2B, MTC is the disease that is most frequently lethal. The MTC in patients with MEN 2B seems to be more virulent than in patients
with MEN 2A87 (see Table 38.7-1), although a group of children with MTC in the setting of MEN 2B have been reported, some of whom appear to be cured of MTC.
Survival of patients with MEN 2A is dependent on the extent of MTC at initial surgical resection. 94 Data suggest that the survival rate of patients with MTC in the
presence of MEN 2A is excellent.104
With the widespread availability of reliable radioimmunoassays for CT, an individual patient can be easily followed postoperatively. Detection of an elevated basal
plasma CT level or the finding of an abnormal response to calcium and pentagastrin indicates recurrent or persistent disease. In patients with metastatic MTC, it is
unclear what is the best strategy. Radioactive iodine ablation, thyroid suppression, and radiation therapy have not been helpful. MTC is relatively insensitive to
chemotherapy. Because of the indolent nature of the tumor, most have chosen not to aggressively treat metastatic disease.
The 10-year survival of MTC is approximately 80% to 90%. Aggressive surgical resection has been used to locally control recurrent MTC, and one-third of individuals
can be rendered biochemically disease free. 105 However, it must be remembered that in patients with MEN 2A, the MTC may be well tolerated. The average life
expectancy of patients with MTC and MEN 2A is over 50 years. 106 The current best therapy for familial MTC is early diagnosis and complete resection of intrathyroidal
disease at initial surgery. Ablation of extrathyroidal disease when detected as persistent or recurrent elevations of plasma CT levels following total thyroidectomy
requires the development of effective systemic adjuvant treatment.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Wermer P. Endocrine adenomatosis: peptic ulcer in a large kindred. Am J Med 1963;35:205.
2. Oberg K, Skogseid B, Ericksson N. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type I. Acta Oncol 1989;28:383.
3. Larsson C, Skogseid B, Öberg K, Nakamura Y, Nordenskjôld M. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 gene maps to chromosome 11 and is lost in insulinoma. Nature 1988;332:85.
4. Chandrasekharappa SC, Guru SC, Manickam P, et al. Positional cloning of the gene for multiple endocrine neoplasia-type 1. Science 1997;276:404.
5. Knudson AG. Mutation and cancer: statistical study of retinoblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1971;68:820.
6. Toliat MR, Berger W, Ropers HH, Neuhaus P, Wiedenmann B. Mutations in the MEN1 gene in sporadic neuroendocrine tumours of gastroenteropancreatic system. Lancet 1997;350:1223.
7. Zhuang Z, Vortmeyer AO, Pack S, et al. Somatic mutations of the MEN1 tumor suppressor gene in sporadic gastrinomas and insulinomas. Cancer Res 1997;57:4682.
8. Goebel SU, Heppner C, Burns AL, et al. Genotype/phenotype correlation of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 gene mutations in sporadic gastrinomas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2000;85:113.
9. Brandi ML, Aurbach GD, Fitzpatrick LA, et al. Parathyroid mitogenic activity in plasma from patients with familial multiple endocrine neoplasia type I. N Engl J Med 1986;314:1287.
10. Brandi ML. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type I: general features and new insights into etiology. J Endocrinol Invest 1991;14:61.
11. Zimmering MB, Brandi ML, de Grange DA, et al. Circulating fibroblast growth factor-like substance in familial multiple endocrine neoplasia-type I. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1990;70:149.
12. Zimering MB, Riley DJ, Tjaller-Varia S. Circulating fibroblast growth factor like antibodies in two patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and prolactinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1994;79:1546.
13. Zimering MB, Katsumata N, Soto Y. Increased basic fibroblast growth factor in plasma from multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1: relation to pituitary tumor. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1993;76:1182.
14. Thakker RV, Bouloux P, Wooding C, et al. Association of parathyroid tumors in multiple endocrine neoplasia type I with loss of alleles on chromosome 11. N Engl J Med 1989;218:224.
15. Skogseid B, Eriksson B, Lundquist G, et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1: a 10-year prospective screening study in four kindreds. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1991;73:281.
16. Rindi G, Bordi C, Rappel S, et al. Gastric carcinoids and neuroendocrine carcinomas: pathogenesis, pathology and behavior. World J Surg 1996;20:168.
17. Duh Q-Y, Hybarger CP, Geist R, et al. Carcinoid associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes. Am J Surg 1987;154:142.
18. Teh BT, Zedenius J, Kytola S, et al. Thymic carcinoids in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Ann Surg 1998;228:99.
19. Ballard HS, Frame B, Hartsock RT. Familial multiple endocrine adenomapeptic ulcer complex. Medicine 1964;43:481.
20. Loeb JN. Polyglandular disorders. In: Wyngaarden JB, Smith LH, eds. Cecil textbook of medicine. Philadelphia: W.B. Sanders, 1982:1304.
21. Bone HG. Diagnosis of multiglandular endocrine neoplasias. Clin Chem 1990;36:711.
22. Wilkinson S, Teh BT, Davey KR, et al. Cause of death in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Arch Surg 1993;128:683.
23. Doherty GM, Olson JA, Frisella MM, et al. Lethality of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. World J Surg 1998;22:581.
24. Radford DM, Ashley SW, Wells SA Jr, Gerhard DS. Loss of heterozygosity of markers on chromosome 11 in tumors with patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome I. Cancer Res
1991;50:1154.
25. Eberle F, Grun R. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type I. Adv Int Med Pediatr 1981;5:76.
26. Leight GS, Hensley MI. Management of familial hyperparathyroidism. Prog Surg 1987;184:106.
27. Skogseid B, Oberg K. Experience with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 screening. J Intern Med 1995;238:255.
28. Benya RV, Metz DC, Venzon DJ, et al. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome can be initial endocrine manifestation in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Am J Med 1994;97:436.
29. Shepherd JJ. The natural history of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Arch Surg 1991;126:935.
30. Mutsuyama I. Expression of basic fibroblast growth factor in hyperplastic parathyroid glands from patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. World J Surg 1994;18:921.
31. Wells SA Jr, Farndon JR, Dale JK, et al. Long-term evaluation of patients with primary parathyroid hyperplasia managed by total parathyroidectomy and heterotopic autotransplantation. Ann
Surg 1980;192:451.
32. Hellman P, Skogseid B, Oberg K, et al. Primary and reoperative parathyroid operations in hyperparathyroidism of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Surgery 1998;124:993.
33. Rizzoli R, Green J III, Marx SJ. Primary hyperparathyroidism in familial multiple endocrine neoplasia type I: long-term follow-up of serum calcium levels after parathyroidectomy. Am J Med
1985;78:467.
34. Norton JA, Cornelius MJ, Doppman JL, et al. Effect of parathyroidectomy in patients with hyperparathyroidism, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1: a
prospective study. Surgery 1987;102:958.
35. Thompson NW, Lloyd RV, Nishiyama RH, et al. MEN I pancreas: a histological and immunohistochemical study. World J Surg 1984;8:561.
36. Kloppel G, Willemar S, Stamm B, et al. Pancreatic lesions and hormonal profile in pancreatic tumors in multiple endocrine neoplasia type I. Cancer 1986;57:1820.
37. Pipeleers-Marichal M, Somers G, Willems G, et al. Gastrinomas in the duodenums of patients with multiple endocrine neoplasic type 1 and the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. N Engl J Med
1990;322:723.
38. Jensen RT, Norton JA. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas in gastrointestinal disease. In: Sleisenger MH, Fordtran JS, eds. Gastrointestinal disease, 1993:1695.
39. Norton JA, Jensen RT. Unresolved surgical issues in the management of patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. World J Surg 1991;15:151.
40. Jensen RT, Gardner JD. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome: clinical presentation, pathology, diagnosis and treatment. In: Dannenberg A, Zakim D, eds. Peptic ulcer and other acid-related diseases.
New York: Academic Research Association, 1991:117.
41. Jensen RT, Gardner JD, Raufman JP. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. NIH combined clinical staff conference. Ann Intern Med 1983;98:59.
42. Norton JA. Invited commentary. World J Surg 1984;8:572.
43. Fox PS, Hofmann JW, Wilson SD, DeCosse JJ. Surgical management of the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Surg Clin North Am 1974;54:395.
44. Malagelada JR, Edis AJ, Adson MA, van Heerden JA, Go VLW. Medical and surgical options in the management of patients with gastrinoma. Gastroenterology 1983;84:1524.
45. Thompson NW. Surgical considerations in the MEA I syndrome. In: Johnston IDA, Thompson NW, eds. Endocrine surgery. Butterworths International Medical Reviews. London: Butterworths,
1983:144.

46. Mutch MG, Frisella MM, DeBenedetti MK, et al. Pancreatic polypeptide is a useful plasma marker for radiographically evident pancreatic islet cell tumors in patients with multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 1. Surgery 1997;122:1012.
47. Sheppard BC, Norton JA, Doppman JL, et al. Management of islet cell tumors in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia: a prospective study. Surgery 1989;106:1108.
48. Yim JH, Siegel BA, DeBenedetti MK, et al. Prospective study of the utility of somatastatin receptor scintigraphy in the evaluation of patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type I. Surgery
1998;124:1037.
49. Fraker DL, Norton JA, Alexander HR, Venzon DJ, Jensen RT. Surgery in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome alters the natural history of gastrinoma. Ann Surg 1994;220:320.
50. Weber HC, Venzon DJ, Lin JT. Determinants of metastatic rate and survival in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome: a prospective long-term study. Gastroenterology 1995;108:1637.
51. Lairmore TC, Chen VY, DeBenedetti MK, et al. Duodenopancreatic resections in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1). Ann Surg 2000;231:909.
52. Lowney JK, Frisella MM, Lairmore TC, Doherty GM. Islet cell tumor metastasis in multiple endocrine neoplasia type I: correlation with primary tumor size. Surgery 1998;124:1043.
53. Cherner JA, Sawyers JL. Benefit of resection of metastatic gastrinoma in multiple endocrine neoplasia type I. Gastroenterology 1992;102:1049.
54. Jensen RT, Maton PN. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. In: Gustavsson S, Kumar D, Graham DY, eds. The stomach. London: Churchill Livingstone, 1991:341.
55. Norton JA, Fraker DL, Alexander HR, et al. Surgery to cure the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. N Engl J Med 1999;341:635.
56. Jensen RT, Norton JA. Pancreatic endocrine tumors. In: Yamada T, Alpers DH, Owyang C, Powell DW, Silvenstein FE, eds. Textbook of gastroenterology. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1991:1912.
57. Thompson NW, Lloyd RV, Nishiyama RH, et al. MEN-1 pancreas: a histological and immunohistochemical study. World J Surg 1984;8:561.
58. Rasbach DA, van Heerden JA, Telandar RL, et al. Surgical management of hyperinsulinism in the multiple endocrine neoplasia, type I syndrome. Arch Surg 1985;120:584.
59. O'Riordain DS, O'Brien T, van Heerden JA. Surgical management of insulinoma associated with MEN-1. World J Surg 1994;18:488.
60. Thompson NW, Czako PF, Fritts LL. Role of endoscopic ultrasonography in the localization of insulinomas and gastrinomas. Surgery 1994;116:1131.
61. Cohen MS, Picus D, Lairmore TC, et al. Prospective study of provocative angiograms to localize functional islet cell tumors of the pancreas. Surgery 1997;122:1091.
62. Metz DC, Jensen RT, Bale AE, et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1: clinical features and management. In: Bilezekian JP, Levine MA, Marcus R, eds. The parathyroids. New York: Raven
Press, 1994:591.
63. Maton PN, Gardner JD, Jensen RT. The incidence and etiology of Cushing's syndrome in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. N Engl J Med 1986;315:1.
64. Lamers CB, Stadil F, Tongren, JMV. Prevalence of endocrine abnormalities in patients with the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and their families. Am J Med 1981;64:687.
65. Skogseid B, Rastad J, Gobl A, et al. Adrenal lesion in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Surgery 1995;118:1077.
66. Skogseid B, Larsson C, Lindgren PG. Clinical and genetic features of adrenocortical lesions in MEN-1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1992;75:76.
67. Marx S, Spiegel AM, Skarulis MC, et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1: clinical and genetic topics. Ann Intern Med 1998;129:484.
68. Hazard JB, Hawk WH, Creile GJ. Medullary (solid) carcinoma of the thyroid-clinicopathologic entity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1959;19:704.
69. Norton JA, Wells SA Jr. Medullary thyroid carcinoma and multiple endocrine neoplasia type-II syndromes. Surg Endocrinol 1990;5:359.
70. Sipple JH. The association of pheochromocytoma with carcinoma of the thyroid gland. Am J Med 1961;31:163.
71. Williams ED. A review of 17 cases of carcinoma of the thyroid and pheochromocytoma. J Clin Pathol 1965;18:288.
72. Schimke RN, Hartmann WH. Familial amyloid-producing medullary thyroid carcinoma and pheochromocytoma. A distinct genetic entity. Ann Intern Med 1965;63:1027.
73. Manning PC, Molnar GD, Black BM, Priestly JT, Wollner LB. Pheochromocytoma, hyperparathyroidism and thyroid carcinoma occurring coincidentally. N Engl J Med 1963;268:68.
74. Williams ED, Pollock DJ. Multiple mucosal neuromata with endocrine tumors: a syndrome alluded to von Rechlinghausen's disease. J Pathol Bacteriol 1989;91:71.
75. Chong GC, Beahrs OH, Sizemore GW, Woolner LH. Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid gland. Cancer 1975;35:695.
76. Mulligan LM, Kwok JBJ, Healey CS, et al. Germ-line mutation of the RET proto-oncogene in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. Nature 1993;363:458.
77. Donis-Keller H, Dou S, Chi D, et al. Mutations in the RET proto-oncogene are associated with MEN 2A and FMTC. Hum Mol Genet 1993;2:851.
78. Grun R, Eberle F. Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type II (MEN II). Ergeb Inn Med Kinderheildk 1981;46:151.
79. Howe JR, Norton JA, Wells SA Jr. Prevalence of pheochromocytomas and hyperparathyroidism in MEN2A: results of a long-term follow-up. Surgery 1993;114:1070.
80. Lairmore TC, Ball DW, Baylin SB, Wells J, Samuel A. Management of pheochromocytomas in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 syndromes. Ann Surg 1993;217:595.
81. Carney JA, Sizemore GW, Sheps SG. Adrenal medullary disease in multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2. Am J Clin Pathol 1976;66:279.
82. O'Riordain DS, O'Brien T, Grant CS, et al. Surgical management of primary hyperparathyroidism in multiple endocrine neoplasia types 1 and 2. Surgery 1993;114:1031.
83. Kraimps J, Duh Q-Y, Demeure M, Clark O. Hyperparathyroidism in multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome. Surgery 1992;112:1080.
84. Herfarth K, Bartsch D, Doherty GM, Wells S, Lairmore T. Surgical management of hyperparathyroidism in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. Surgery 1996;120:966.
85. Keiser HR, Beaven MA, Doppman J, et al. Sipple's syndrome: medullary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocytoma and parathyroid disease. Ann Intern Med 1973;78:561.
86. Wells SA Jr. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type II: recent results. Cancer Res 1990;18:71.
87. Norton JA, Fromme LC, Farrell RE, Wells SA Jr. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2b: the most aggressive form of medullary thyroid carcinoma. Surg Clin North Am 1979;59:109.
88. Vasen HF, vanderFeltz M, Raue F. The natural course of MENIIb-18 cases. Arch Intern Med 1992;152:1250.
89. Ledger GA, Khosla S, Lindor NM, Thibodeau SM, Gharib H. Genetic testing in the diagnosis and management of multiple endocrine neoplasia type II. Ann Intern Med 1995;122:118.
90. Frilling A, Roher HD, Ponder BA. Presymptomatic screening for medullary thyroid carcionoma in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. World J Surg 1994;18:577.
91. Lips CJ, Landsvater RM, Hoppener JW. Clinical screening as compared with DNA analysis in families with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. N Engl J Med 1994;331:828.
92. Wells SA Jr, Chi DD, Toshima K, et al. Predictive DNA testing and prophylactive thyroidectomy in patients at risk for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. Ann Surg 1994;220:237.
93. Tsai MS, Ledger GA, Khosla S, Gharib H, Thibodeau SM. Identification of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 gene carriers using linkage analysis and analysis of the RET proto-oncogene. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;78:1261.
94. Wells SA Jr, Baylin SG, Leight GS, et al. The importance of early diagnosis in patients with hereditary medullary thyroid carcinoma. Ann Surg 1982;195:505.
95. Wells SA Jr, Baylin SB, Gann DW, et al. Medullary thyroid carcinoma: relationship of method of diagnosis to pathological staging. Ann Surg 1978;188:377.
96. Melvin KEW, Miller HH, Tashjian AH Jr. Early diagnosis of medullary carcinoma of the thyroid by means of calcitonin assay. N Engl J Med 1971;285:1115.
97. Dralle H, Gimm O, Simon D, et al. Prophylactic thyroidectomy in 75 children and adolescents with hereditary medullary thyroid carcinoma: German and Austrian experience. World J Surg
1998;22:744.
98. Learoyd D, Marsh D, Richardson A, et al. G enetic testing for familial cancer: consequences of RET proto-oncogene mutation analysis in multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2. Arch Surg
1997;132:1022.
99. Valk TW, Frager MW, Gross MD, et al. Spectrum of pheochromocytoma in multiple endocrine neoplasia: a scintigraphic portrayal using 131-I-metaiodobenzylguanidine. Ann Intern Med
1981;94:762.
100. Shapiro B, Fig LM. Management of pheochromocytomas. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1989;18:443.
101. Hull CJ. Pheochromocytoma: diagnosis, preoperative preparation and anesthetic management. Br J Anaesth 1986;58:1453.
102. Farndon JR, Fagraeus L, Wells SA Jr. Recent developments in the management of phaechromocytoma. In: Johnston IDA, Thompson NW, eds. Endocrine surgery. London: Butterworths,
1983:189.
103. Brunt LM, Doherty GM, Norton JA, et al. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy compared to open adrenalectomy for benign adrenal neoplasms. J Am Coll Surg 1996;183:1.
104. Wells SA Jr, Baylin SG, Johnsrude IS, et al. Thyroid venous catheterization in the early diagnosis of familial medullary thyroid carcinoma. Ann Surg 1982;196:505.
105. Moley JF, Dilley WG, DeBenedetti MK. Improved results of cervical reoperation for medullary thyroid carcinoma. Ann Surg 1997;225:734.
106. Jackson CE, Talpos GB, Kanbouris A, et al. The clinical course after definitive operation for medullary thyroid carcinoma. Surgery 1983;94:995.

SECTION 39.1 Soft Tissue Sarcoma
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 39.1
Soft Tissue Sarcoma
MURRAY F. BRENNAN
KALED M. ALEKTIAR
ROBERT G. MAKI
Incidence
Etiology and Genetics
Cytogenetic Abnormalities
Distribution
Pathologic Classification
Grading of Sarcoma
Differential Diagnosis
Clinicopathologic Features of Specific Types of Benign and Malignant Soft Tissue Tumors
Tumors of Fibrous Origin
Fibrohistiocytic Tumors
Tumors of Adipose Tissue
Tumors of Smooth Muscle
Tumors of Skeletal Muscle
Vascular Tumors
Perivascular Tumors
Tumors of Synovial Tissue
Tumors of the Peripheral Nerves
Extraskeletal Cartilaginous and Osseous Tumors
Tumors of Uncertain Histogenesis
Clinical Presentation
Differential Diagnosis
Imaging Studies
Sites of Metastatic Disease
Biopsy
Value of Tru-Cut Biopsy
Fine Needle Aspiration Cytology
Frozen Section
Staging
Management of Extremity and Superficial Truncal Soft Tissue Sarcoma
Extent of Surgical Resection
Size
Radiation Therapy
Adjuvant Radiation
Postoperative External-Beam Radiotherapy
Adjuvant Brachytherapy
Preoperative External-Beam Radiotherapy
Special Considerations
Positive Margins of Resection
Small Soft Tissue Sarcomas
Soft Tissue Sarcomas of the Hands and Feet
Definitive Radiation
Adjuvant Chemotherapy
Randomized Adjuvant Studies of Doxorubicin Alone
Randomized Adjuvant Studies of Combination Chemotherapy
Conclusions from Individual Adjuvant Chemotherapy Studies
Metaanalyses of Randomized Trials of Adjuvant Chemotherapy for Sarcoma
Conclusions: Adjuvant Chemotherapy for Soft Tissue Sarcomas
Preoperative Chemotherapy
Intraarterial Chemotherapy
Hyperthermia and Limb Perfusion
Special Features of the Management of Sarcomas of Nonextremity Sites
Management of Visceral/Retroperitoneal Sarcoma
Management of Head and Neck Sarcoma
Management of Breast Sarcoma
Serious Complications of Primary Treatment
Wound Complications
Other Complications
Prognostic Factors for Outcome
Quality of Life and Functional Outcome
Treatment of Local Recurrence
Management of Advanced Disease
Resection of Metastatic Disease
Systemic Therapy for Advanced Disease
Combination Chemotherapy for Advanced Soft Tissue Sarcoma
Dose Intensity
Response by Histologic Subtype and Site
Leiomyosarcoma
Synovial Sarcoma
Pediatric Sarcomas in Adult Populations
Uterine Sarcomas
Desmoids (Aggressive Fibromatoses)
Recommendations for Patients with Advanced Disease
Future Directions
Chapter References

INCIDENCE
In the United States the incidence of soft tissue sarcoma is approximately 7800 new cases per year. A little more than 50% of these new patients go on to die of the
disease. 1 The relatively small number of cases seen and the great diversity in histopathologic presentation, anatomic site, and biologic behavior have made a
comprehensive understanding of these disease entities extremely difficult. They are, however, ideal prototypes to demonstrate the important role of multidisciplinary
management. It is clear that soft tissue sarcoma, diagnosed at an early stage, is eminently curable. When diagnosed at the time of extensive local or metastatic
disease, soft tissue sarcoma is rarely curable.
Analysis of population based data from Connecticut 2 suggests an increase in incidence in both men and women, greater for women.

ETIOLOGY AND GENETICS
Most soft tissue sarcomas have no clearly defined etiology, although multiple associated or predisposing factors have been identified ( Table 39.1-1). Data suggest
that genetic mutations in pluripotent mesenchymal stem cells give rise to malignant clones that differentiate along pathways that resemble normal histogenesis.
Alterations in the RB-1 and p53 genes are detected in a substantial proportion of sarcomas. 3,4 The importance of these cell regulatory genes in the pathogenesis of
sarcoma is highlighted by the high incidence of germline mutations in patients with hereditary retinoblastoma, and by identification of germline mutations in p53 in the

Li-Fraumeni syndrome. 5,6 A genetic predisposition to soft tissue sarcoma has also been associated with neurofibromatosis, 7,8 and familial adenomatous polyposis. 9

TABLE 39.1-1. Genetic Predisposition to Soft Tissue Sarcoma

The most common tumors in patients with neurofibromatosis are in the central nervous system. In a 42-year follow-up study, 47% of all malignancies were nervous
system tumors.10 This review confirms the high incidence of malignant tumors in patients with neurofibromatosis: approximately 46% of all patients with this disease
develop either a malignant tumor or a benign central nervous system tumor. 10 This prevalence is slightly higher in those with a family history of neurofibromatosis than
in those with sporadic cases, but is common in both. Relatives of such patients, whether with a family history or not, are also at risk of developing malignant tumors.
The development of pheochromocytoma also is a complication of neurofibromatosis. 11 Approximately 5% of patients with neurofibromatosis develop malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs). 10
Genetic predisposition to malignancy is well established in the form of an autosomal dominant gene in 8% to 9% of children with soft tissue sarcomas. 12 Survivors of
retinoblastoma with the associated Rb gene abnormality often develop tumors later in life with a high incidence of sarcomas; the best documented is osteosarcoma. 13
A follow-up study of members of Li-Fraumeni families with childhood rhabdomyosarcoma found additional cancers including carcinoma of the breast, soft tissue
sarcomas, lung cancer, skin cancer, leukemia, pancreatic cancer, and brain tumors. 14
It is important to emphasize that in patients who have retinoblastoma, the increased risk of a second primary is enhanced by radiotherapy, 15 which is dose dependent.
Familial adenomatous polyposis, a subset of which is Gardner's syndrome, is commonly associated with the development of intraabdominal desmoids. 16 These tumors
behave as low-grade fibrosarcomas, although constant debate exists as to the histopathologic classification and distinction between the desmoid tumor and
aggressive fibromatosis (see below, in Pathologic Classification). However, their natural history of slow growth with accompanying invasion of contiguous structures
increases the risk of subsequent mortality when managed inappropriately.
The development of soft tissue and bone sarcoma as a result of exposure to radiation has been known since 1922. 17 Although uncommon, these sarcomas usually
have a poor prognosis. In a review of 160 patients, 18 the antecedent diseases for which the radiation was given were predominantly breast and cervical cancer and
lymphoma (Fig. 39.1-1). External radiation therapy was given to 99% of the patients, 14% of whom received additional treatment with temporary or permanent
radioisotope implantation. One patient inadvertently ingested radium. The subsequent tumor that developed was most commonly an osteogenic sarcoma, followed by
soft tissue tumors, particularly malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH) and angiosarcoma or lymphangiosarcoma (see Fig. 39.1-1). No significant difference in survival
was found between patients with bone tumors and those with soft tissue sarcomas. Survival was not affected by site, latency period, and the amount of radiation
received initially, nor were there any differences for patients receiving chemotherapy for their sarcomas. The three factors in the Cox multivariate analysis that had a
significant unfavorable association were presentation with metastatic disease ( P = .017), incomplete or no operative resection ( P = .004), and tumor size of at least 5
cm (P = .007). Tumor grade was not significant in any analyses, but only 6% of the patients had low-grade tumors. 18

FIGURE 39.1-1. Radiation-associated soft tissue sarcoma: antecedent disease for which radiation was given and histopathology of sarcomas that developed in 160
patients at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. AS, angiosarcoma; LA, lymphangiosarcoma; MFH, malignant fibrous histiocytoma; OS, osteogenic sarcoma.
(From ref. 18, with permission.)

Given the increased use of radiation therapy as a primary treatment modality for breast cancer, concern has been expressed that an increased incidence of sarcoma
might be expected. In one study19 all 122,991 women with breast cancer in Sweden from 1958 to 1992 were followed, and 116 soft tissue sarcomas were found. There
were 40 angiosarcomas and 76 other sarcomas. As expected, angiosarcoma correlated with lymphedema [relative risk = 9.5 (3.2 to 28.0)] but not radiation therapy.
For other sarcomas, there was a dose-response relationship with exposure to radiation therapy.
Lymphedema has long been established as a factor in the development of lymphangiosarcoma. The most well-recognized association is with the postmastectomy,
postirradiated lymphedematous arm, described by Stewart and Treves. 20 This is not a radiation-induced sarcoma because the lymphangiosarcoma develops in sites
both inside and outside of the irradiated field, in the edematous extremity. Similar advanced sarcomas have been seen following filarial infection and chronic
lymphedema. Lymphangiosarcoma can arise in filarial lymphedema and remain localized for relatively long periods of time. 21
The issue of trauma as a possible predisposing factor is more controversial. Often a minor episode of injury is the factor that draws attention to the presence of a
mass, implying a causative association that is not real. Abdominal desmoid tumors commonly follow parturition. 22 However, they can occur in the extremity and may
be associated with antecedent vigorous physical activity. They may be multifocal. 23
Chemical agents have been implicated in the etiology of soft tissue sarcoma. Through the years there have been conflicting reports about the relationship between
occupational exposure to phenoxyacetic acids found in some herbicides and chlorophenols (found in some wood preservatives) ( Table 39.1-2).20,24,25,26,27,28,29 and 30
Other authors have pointed to the inherent problems in occupational epidemiology in relationship to the source material for soft tissue sarcoma, among them, (1)
possible recall bias in self-reported exposure data; (2) soft tissue sarcomas not consistently classified in the International Classification of Diseases, which is organ
based; (3) variation in the operational definition of soft tissue sarcomas; and (4) because of their rarity, difficulty recruiting sufficient patients for a case-control study,
and cohorts would have to be extremely large to identify an increase in risk. 31,32 Nevertheless, some studies have suggested a link between phenoxy herbicide
exposure in forestry workers, farmers, and railroad workers and subsequent development of sarcoma, 33 whereas other studies from the United States, New Zealand,

and Finland have not confirmed this relationship. 26,30,34

TABLE 39.1-2. Case-Control Studies of Relationship between Exposure to Phenoxy Herbicides and Incidence of Soft Tissue Sarcoma

Interestingly, it has been suggested 35 that such exposure may be tissue type specific (i.e., MFH and leiomyosarcoma having a herbicide association, but none being
found for liposarcoma).
An increased incidence of soft tissue sarcomas was seen in a cohort of 1520 industrial workers exposed for more than 1 year to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, 36
but other studies did not substantiate these findings. 37,38
The issue of dioxin as a risk factor remains controversial. A population-based case-control study assessed the risk of soft tissue sarcomas in Vietnam veterans,
including those potentially exposed to Agent Orange, which contains dioxin, and found no increased risk among any subset of veterans compared with control
groups.39 Another study found no increased risk for Vietnam veterans compared with men who had never been in Vietnam. 40 The risk for subgroups of veterans who
were more likely to be exposed to Agent Orange, compared with their unexposed counterparts in Vietnam, was not statistically significant.
Several chemical carcinogens have an established role in the development of hepatic angiosarcomas: thorotrast, vinyl chloride, and arsenic (including Fowler's 1%
arsenic solution. 34,41,42 and 43 A review of pesticides and cancer 44 has again linked the phenoxy herbicides to soft tissue sarcoma and lymphoma, but again questions
the causal relationship of these agents.
Chemotherapy for pediatric malignancies has been associated with the subsequent development of osteogenic sarcomas 45; a relationship with the development of
soft tissue sarcomas has not been demonstrated.
CYTOGENETIC ABNORMALITIES
It is important to emphasize that extensive cytogenetic abnormalities occur in soft tissue sarcoma ( Table 39.1-3). These are usually associated with high-grade
tumors, but are not consistent between tumors. For example, an analysis of 36 tumors, 46 pleomorphic soft tissue sarcomas were examined. Multiple complex
karyotypes were identified and at least 24 recurrent abnormalities (defined by their presence in at least five cases) were detected. However, none of the selected
rearrangements was specific for any one of a particular subgroup. It seems unlikely at the present time, therefore, that cytogenetic analysis can help differentiate the
pleomorphic sarcomas. Conversely, specific changes have been identified in selected sarcomas. The best examples are the classical translocation in Ewing's
sarcoma (primitive neuroectodermal tumor), t(11;22)(q24;q11.2-12), and the translocation seen in synovial sarcoma t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2). In these situations, these
genetic abnormalities can be used as a diagnostic tool.

TABLE 39.1-3. Chromosomal Changes in Soft Tissue Sarcoma

Multiple other studies of genetic abnormalities have been published. Abnormalities of INK4A (coding for p16 and p19ARF on 9p21) and INK4B have been correlated
with poor survival. 47 These chromosomal alterations occur in 15% of patients with high-grade sarcomas. In myxoid liposarcoma, the presence of the TLS-CHOP fusion
protein has now been firmly established 48 and is considered a definitive diagnostic tool for these tumors.

DISTRIBUTION
Soft tissue sarcomas can occur in any site throughout the body. Almost 50% of all soft tissue sarcomas appear in the extremities ( Fig. 39.1-2), with two-thirds of
extremity lesions occurring in the lower limb, and 30% intraabdominally divided equally between visceral and retroperitoneal lesions.

FIGURE 39.1-2. Distribution by site of soft tissue sarcomas in 3968 patients aged 16 or older admitted to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center between July 1982
and July 1999.

PATHOLOGIC CLASSIFICATION
Soft tissue tumors generally are categorized according to the normal tissues they mimic. 49,50 Many soft tissue neoplasms have been described, reflecting the diversity
of soft tissues in the body ( Table 39.1-4).50 Although most soft tissues arise from embryonic mesoderm, tumors of the peripheral nervous system (ectoderm), and
some tumors of uncertain histogenesis are included as soft tissue neoplasms.

TABLE 39.1-4. Histologic Classification of Soft Tissue Sarcoma

Soft tissue tumors may be benign or malignant, and a variety of borderline lesions are also recognized. The ratio of benign to malignant tumors is certainly more than
100:1. The soft tissue sarcomas are the malignant tumors that arise in soft tissues. The precise pathogenesis of the vast majority of the sarcomas is uncertain. Unlike
carcinomas, sarcomas do not demonstrate in situ changes, nor does it appear that sarcomas originate from benign soft tissue tumors. An exception would appear to
be the development of MPNST in patients with neurofibromatosis.
Although each of the sarcomas has distinguishing histologic characteristics, the different types of sarcoma have many common clinical and pathologic features.
Sarcomas are characterized by local invasiveness. The pattern of metastasis of most sarcomas is hematogenous. Lymph node metastases are uncommon, with the
exception of selected cell types usually associated with childhood sarcoma ( Table 39.1-5).51,52 and 53 Grossly, most sarcomas are similar, with a pale tan fish flesh
appearance (although liposarcomas may be soft and yellow). The clinical behavior of most types of sarcoma also is similar, determined more by anatomic location,
grade, and size, than by specific histologic pattern. 54

TABLE 39.1-5. Soft Tissue Sarcomas: Histologic Type and Lymph Node Metastasis

GRADING OF SARCOMA
After establishing the diagnosis of sarcoma, the most critical piece of information the pathologist can provide to the clinician is histologic grade. The pathologic
features that define grade include cellularity, differentiation, pleomorphism, necrosis, and number of mitoses. Unfortunately, the criteria for grading are neither specific
nor standardized. Furthermore, several grading scales are used: a four-grade system (Broders), 55 a three-grade system (low, intermediate, high) as recognized by the
American Joint Commission on Cancer (AJCC), 56 and a binary system (high vs. low) as used at Memorial Hospital. 50 Even when there is agreement about the number
of grades to be used, expert pathologists disagree about specific criteria for defining grade. 57,58,59 and 60
The possible clinical implications are obvious. In adjuvant chemotherapy trials high grade was defined differently at different centers, making comparison of results
between trials, and combining results of multiple trials, extremely hazardous. For example, tumors of 240 patients who participated in the Scandinavian Sarcoma
Group adjuvant trial for high-grade extremity sarcoma were reviewed by a panel of reference pathologists. A four-grade system was used in this trial; only patients
with grade III or IV sarcomas were eligible. On review, 5% of the patients were considered ineligible because their tumors actually were low grade. 61,62 Furthermore,
although it did not influence eligibility, there was considerable discordance between the original pathologists and the reference pathologists with regard to whether a
lesion was grade III or IV. Although the adjuvant regimen did not affect survival (see below, in Adjuvant Chemotherapy), a difference in survival was noted between
patients with tumors of these two grades as assigned by the reference pathologists.
Many pathologists consider mitotic activity and degree of necrosis to be the most important pathologic features. 63 To define a practical grading system, the European
Organization for Research on the Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) studied the histologic features of tumors from 282 patients who participated in their adjuvant
chemotherapy trial, and correlated the pathologic findings with outcome. 64 In multivariate analysis, only mitotic count (less than 3, 3 to 20, and greater than 20 mitoses
per 10 consecutive high power fields), the presence or absence of necrosis, and tumor size predicted survival.
Mutation of p53, nuclear overexpression of p53, and a high Ki-67 proliferation index are associated with high grade and poor survival. 65 As yet, however, these
biologic markers have not been shown to be independent indicators of prognosis and cannot be used to grade sarcomas.
Several tumors that are considered sarcomas have no recognizable normal tissue counterpart (e.g., alveolar soft part tumor, Ewing's sarcoma, epithelioid sarcoma).
These tumors often have unique clinical features and usually are not graded. However, note that Ewing sarcomas are considered high-grade, undifferentiated
sarcomas.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
In addition to sarcoma, the differential diagnosis of a soft tissue mass includes a variety of benign lesions, as well as primary or metastatic carcinoma, melanoma, and
lymphoma. Accurate diagnosis requires an adequate and representative biopsy of the tumor, and the tissue must be well fixed and well stained. Antibodies for
immunohistochemical staining are available commercially, and this technique is readily applicable to paraffin-embedded tissues. The most useful
immunohistochemical markers are the intermediate filaments (e.g., vimentin, keratin, desmin, leukocyte common antigen, S-100). In addition, the pathologist should
be prepared to process tissue from selected cases for electron microscopy, cytogenetic studies, or molecular analysis. This implies that certain diagnoses are
considered by the clinician, that the diagnostic biopsy is obtained appropriately, and that the clinician and pathologist communicate before the biopsy is performed to

ensure that the necessary steps are taken in handling the tissue.
Cytogenetic analyses reveal clonal chromosome alterations in the majority of sarcomas. 66 Consistent chromosomal abnormalities have been identified in several soft
tissue tumors, 61,62,67,68,69,70,71,72,73,74,75,76,77,78,79,80,81,82,83 and 84 but cytogenetic analysis is labor intensive and requires short-term culture of the sarcoma cells. Fusion
genes resulting from chromosomal rearrangements may be detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. This technique has been quite effective in
diagnosing and distinguishing among the small cell sarcomas. Table 39.1-3 describes some of the genetic changes identified in soft tissue sarcoma. Fluorescent in
situ hybridization using probes to locate specific chromosomal abnormalities may become clinically useful, but is unavailable for routine diagnostic use at this time.
Supernumerary ring chromosomes, seen in mesenchymal neoplasms of low or borderline malignancy, such as dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, may be identified
with this technique.
As might be expected from a group of rare, diverse, but related tumors, there may be considerable disagreement among pathologists regarding the specific histologic
diagnosis in individual cases. When pathologic material from 424 patients who entered into Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) sarcoma trials was
reviewed by a panel of expert pathologists, 10% of cases were rejected as not being sarcoma, and for 14% of the remaining cases there was disagreement with
respect to the histologic subtype. 85 Similarly, in the Southeastern Cancer Group experience with 216 patients, 6% were determined not to have sarcoma, and in 27%
the type of sarcoma was deemed incorrect by the reviewers. 86 In the Scandinavian Sarcoma Group experience, the specific histologic diagnosis was disputed in
20%.61
Overall, the three most common histopathologic subtypes are MFH, liposarcoma, and leiomyosarcoma. Some types of sarcoma occur with greater frequency in certain
age groups or in specific locations, forming clinicopathologic syndromes that permit standardized treatment strategies. The distribution of common histologic types
among different age groups is demonstrated in Figure 39.1-3. The most common extremity sarcomas are liposarcoma, MFH, tendosynovial sarcoma, and
fibrosarcoma, although a variety of other histologic types are seen. Most retroperitoneal sarcomas are liposarcomas or leiomyosarcomas. The distribution of histologic
type by site is shown in Figure 39.1-4.87

FIGURE 39.1-3. Age distribution of common histologic types of soft tissue sarcomas.

FIGURE 39.1-4. Predominant histology by site of soft tissue sarcomas in 3968 patients aged 16 or older admitted to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center between
July 1982 and July 1999. MFH, malignant fibrous histiocytoma; MPNT, malignant peripheral nerve tumor.

The most frequently encountered chest wall sarcomas are desmoids, liposarcomas, and myogenic sarcomas. 88
Virtually all gastrointestinal sarcomas were previously classified as leiomyosarcomas or leiomyoblastomas. 89 It is now recognized that many gastrointestinal sarcomas
do not express markers of myogenic differentiation and are better classified as gastrointestinal stromal tumors, or, if they exhibit neural differentiation, gastrointestinal
autonomic nerve tumors (GANT).90 The pattern of recurrence is intraabdominal, including liver metastasis. 89
Overall, leiomyosarcoma is the most common type of genitourinary sarcoma in the adult 91 and arises in the bladder, kidney, or prostate, usually in older individuals.
Rhabdomyosarcoma arising in paratesticular tissues is a disease of young men. Three major types of uterine sarcoma are recognized: (1) leiomyosarcomas, tumors
of the myometrium; (2) mesodermal mixed tumors (malignant mixed Müllerian tumors), composed of elements of carcinoma and sarcoma; and (3) endometrial stromal
sarcoma, the least common, which arises from endometrial stroma and usually has an aggressive behavior.
Approximately 10% to 15% of all sarcomas occur in children. The majority of pediatric patients have small cell sarcomas, including embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma and
the Ewing's sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor spectrum (see Chapter 44.2).

CLINICOPATHOLOGIC FEATURES OF SPECIFIC TYPES OF BENIGN AND MALIGNANT SOFT TISSUE TUMORS
TUMORS OF FIBROUS ORIGIN
There are a variety of benign tumors and tumor-like lesions of fibrous tissue that must be distinguished from true fibrosarcoma. These lesions may also be confused
with reactive or reparative processes. A variety of names have been used to designate identical or overlapping entities. In addition, there are a variety of fibrous
proliferations of infancy and childhood that resemble lesions in the adult, but are associated with a better prognosis. Features of lesions that may be mistaken for
sarcoma are summarized in the following sections.
Nodular Fasciitis
Nodular fasciitis, also called pseudosarcomatous fasciitis, is a benign lesion usually seen in adults aged 20 to 40, although it has been reported in both older and
younger patients. 92,93 The typical lesion grows rapidly over several weeks reaching a size of 1 to 2 cm. Growth is usually self-limited, and lesions rarely are larger than
5 cm. Tenderness or soreness is a common complaint. The upper extremity is the most common site, especially the volar aspect of the forearm. Nodular fasciitis
generally arises in the subcutaneous fascia or the superficial portions of the deep fascia. Histologically, the lesions are nodular, nonencapsulated masses, consisting
of plump, immature fibroblasts arranged in short, irregular bundles or fascicles. Because of their cellularity, rapid growth, and high mitotic activity these lesions may be
mistaken for fibrosarcoma. Recurrence is uncommon after simple excision.

Fibroma
Fibroma is a general term that has been applied to a group of poorly defined benign lesions that arise in the skin or soft tissues. Most are effectively treated by simple
excision. Fibroma of tendon sheath is a slowly growing dense fibrous nodule that is attached to the tendon sheath, found most frequently in the hands or feet. 94
Recurrence may occur after local excision.
Elastofibroma
Elastofibroma is a rare, slow-growing benign tumor that characteristically arises between the lower portion of the scapula and the chest wall of older individuals. 95,96
These lesions, which typically occur in workers who have done repetitive manual tasks for years, are thought to be reactive. Elastofibromas grow as ill-defined
masses, often measuring 5 to 10 cm in diameter. They may occur bilaterally and rarely have a familial association. Histologically, these lesions consist of swollen
eosinophilic collagen and elastic fibers, and stain intensely for elastins. Complete excision is curative.
Superficial Fibromatoses
Superficial fibromatoses arise from the fascia or aponeurosis and generally are small and slow growing. Palmar fibromatosis is associated with flexion contractures
(Dupuytren's contracture), and is by far the most common form, afflicting as many as one in five persons aged 65 and older. This condition is more common in men
than in women and tends to be familial. Although benign, these lesions have a tendency to recur after simple excision. Plantar fibromatosis (Ledderhose's disease)
tends to occur in a somewhat younger age group, but may occur with greater frequency in patients with palmar fibromatosis. Penile fibromatosis (Peyronie's disease),
which causes pain and curvature of the penis on erection, is much less common. The fibrous mass in Peyronie's disease primarily involves fascial structures, the
corpus cavernosum, and rarely, the corpus spongiosum. Peyronie's disease is more common in men with palmar and plantar fibromatosis than in the general
population.
Desmoid Tumor
The desmoid was originally described as a tumor of the abdominal wall in women who had recently been pregnant, but these rare, slow-growing fibrous tumors may
arise at any site in the body. The desmoids have been classified by location as abdominal, extraabdominal, intraabdominal, and mesenteric. As is the case for other
sarcomas, site affects management, but it is unclear whether the distinction by site is biologically significant. The term aggressive fibromatosis, often applied to these
lesions, especially when they occur in the retroperitoneum, belies their potential for invasion and progressive growth. Although desmoids do not metastasize, for
clinical management these tumors are best considered low-grade fibrosarcomas. 16 Retroperitoneal desmoids, along with fibromas, osteomas, and epidermoid cysts,
are among the extracolonic manifestations in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis coli that characterize Gardner's syndrome. 97,98 Multifocal desmoids of the
extremity have been recognized, 23,99 usually in young women.
In a clinicopathologic study based on Finnish hospital records, the incidence of desmoid was estimated at 2 to 4 cases per 100,000. Of the 89 cases, 49% involved
the abdomen. Only one patient had Gardner's syndrome, although familial bone abnormalities were noted in some patients. Four populations were defined: juvenile
(age 4.5 ± 3.5 years), fertile (27.2 ± 4.4 years), middle age (43.9 ± 6.9 years), and old (68.1 ± 4.4 years). The juvenile desmoid was primarily an extraabdominal tumor
of girls, whereas abdominal wall tumors of women were dominant in the fertile age group. Among middle-aged patients, abdominal wall tumors predominated, but the
proportion of men and women was equal. In the oldest age group, both abdominal and extraabdominal tumors occurred without a gender difference. These
investigators reported that the growth rate in premenopausal women was statistically greater than the rate of growth observed in male patients. 100
Among 131 patients with desmoid tumors treated at Memorial Hospital, of whom 39% presented with recurrent disease, the female to male ratio was 1:6.
Approximately one-half of these tumors arose in the extremity; 15% were retroperitoneal, 12% arose in the abdominal wall, and 10% were chest wall tumors. Four
patients had Gardner's syndrome. In univariate analysis, local failure was more common among patients aged 18 to 30 years, those with marginal or inadequate
excision, those who presented with recurrent disease, and those who did not receive radiation for gross residual disease. In multivariate analysis, only presentation
with recurrent disease and inadequate margins of resection were independent prognostic features. Gender had no influence on recurrence. The probability of local
failure following excision was estimated at 37%. Eleven deaths were attributable to recurrent disease, including one patient who developed pulmonary metastases;
none of the 11 patients had an extremity primary. 16 Management of patients with desmoid tumors is discussed later in this chapter in the section Desmoids
(Aggressive Fibromatoses).
Fibrosarcoma
Fibrosarcoma may occur in patients of any age, but most commonly are seen persons aged 30 to 55 years. These tumors have no characteristic clinical findings.
Pathologically, they consist of elongated fibroblast-like cells arranged in a uniform, vesiculated growth pattern. Intersection or interlacing of the fascicles often yields a
herringbone pattern on light microscopy. Well-differentiated fibrosarcomas are rich in mature collagen.
FIBROHISTIOCYTIC TUMORS
These tumors, originally thought to arise from histiocytes that had fibroblastic potential, almost certainly are fibroblastic in origin. Thus, the term fibrohistiocytic is
merely descriptive of their appearance.
Fibrous Histiocytoma
These benign tumors usually present as solitary, slowly growing nodules, although up to one-third are multiple. Histologically, they consist of fibroblastic and
histiocytic cells often arranged in a cartwheel or storiform pattern. When such lesions occur in the skin, they are often called dermatofibromas or sclerosing
hemangiomas. Superficially located lesions usually are cured by simple excision. 101 Deeper lesions should be resected with a wider margin of normal tissue to prevent
local recurrence. 102
Xanthoma
Xanthoma refers to a collection of lipid-laden histiocytes and is seen in diseases associated with hyperlipidemia. These lesions generally occur in cutaneous or
subcutaneous locations, but may involve deep soft tissues. Presumably, xanthomas are reactive lesions.
Dermatofibrosarcoma Protuberans
Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans103,104 is probably best considered a low-grade sarcoma. This lesion may occur anywhere in the body, but more than 40% occur on
the trunk, 20% in the head and neck, and 40% on the extremities. This lesion typically presents in early or midadult life, beginning as a nodular cutaneous mass. The
pattern of growth is usually slow and persistent, and as the lesion enlarges over many years, it becomes protuberant. Large lesions often are associated with satellite
nodules. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans is histologically similar to benign fibrous histiocytoma, but grows in a more infiltrative pattern, spreading along connective
tissue septa in deep areas. The central portion of the tumor consists of a uniform population of plump fibroblasts arranged in a distinct ordered pattern. Unlike fibrous
histiocytoma, dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans stains positive for CD34, suggesting a neural origin. 105 More than 75% of these tumors have a ring chromosome,
probably of chromosome 17 origin, superimposed on a normal karyotype 106 (see Table 39.1-3).
Up to 50% recur after simple excision. 104,107 Occasionally, areas of increased pleomorphism and mitotic activity occur, especially in recurrent lesions. Metastases
occur rarely to lung or to lymph nodes. 107 Because of their locally aggressive nature, these lesions may ultimately lead to amputation or even death because of
extensive invasion. A variant with melanin pigmentation (Bednar's tumor) also is recognized. 108
Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma

The term MFH was first introduced in 1963 to describe a group of malignant soft tissue tumors with a fibrohistiocytic appearance. 109 Since then, this entity has become
the most commonly diagnosed extremity sarcoma. A number of subtypes have been described, including myxoid, giant cell, inflammatory, angiomatoid, and
pleomorphic types. With advances in pathologic techniques, it has been claimed that a specific line of differentiation can be identified in the overwhelming majority of
patients with pleomorphic MFH. 110 Nonetheless, this designation has been useful clinically.
MFH characteristically is a tumor of later adult life with a peak incidence in the seventh decade, although it may occur in younger adults. MFH usually presents as a
painless mass; the most common site is the lower extremity, followed by the upper extremity and the retroperitoneum. 111,112
TUMORS OF ADIPOSE TISSUE
Lipomas
Lipomas are the most common of all benign neoplasm and may arise in any location where fat is normally present. Lipomas may be deep seated in the mediastinum
or retroperitoneum where they may attain massive size. Multiple lipomas are occasionally seen in a familial pattern. Lipomatosis is a term applied to a poorly
circumscribed overgrowth of mature adipose tissue that grows in an infiltrating pattern.
Well-differentiated lipomas are composed of fat cells, but are demarcated from surrounding fat by a thin fibrous capsule. These tumors usually are found within
subcutaneous fat, but may occur anywhere in the body. In spindle cell lipoma, mature fat is replaced by collagen-forming spindle cells; this lesion typically arises in
the posterior neck and shoulder in men between the ages of 45 and 65. Pleomorphic lipoma is a closely related lesion. Local excision of lipoma and these variants is
generally curative. The term atypical lipoma is used by some to describe these benign lesions; others use atypical lipoma to describe a well-differentiated liposarcoma
that arises in a subcutaneous or intramuscular location. 113,114
Angiolipomas present as subcutaneous nodules, usually in young adults. The most common site is the upper extremity. Angiolipomas rarely reach more than 2 cm,
but they often are painful, especially during their initial growth period. Microscopically, these tumors consist of adipocytes with interspersed vascular structures.
Myxoid and fibroblastic angiolipomas are recognized.
Angiomyolipoma
The term angiomyolipoma is used for a nonmetastasizing renal tumor that is composed of fat, smooth muscle, and blood vessels. Angiomyolipoma is more common in
women than in men and is seen in association with tuberous sclerosis. Although angiomyolipoma is usually well demarcated from normal kidney, it may extend into
the surrounding retroperitoneum. Angiomyolipomas may be solitary or multicentric and may produce abdominal pain or hematuria. Wide excision is curative.
Angiomyolipomas of the liver have also been described. 115
Hibernoma
Hibernoma is a rare, slowly growing benign neoplasm that resembles the glandular, brown fat that is found in hibernating animals. The literature consists primarily of
case reports, and in most of these the tumor arises within the thorax. 116 Lesions of the trunk, retroperitoneum, or extremities also are reported. Excision is generally
curative.
Lipoblastoma and Lipoblastomatosis
Lipoblastoma and lipoblastomatosis are peculiar variants of lipoma that occur almost exclusively in infancy and early childhood. 117 They differ from lipoma by their
cellular immaturity and their close resemblance to the myxoid form of liposarcoma.
Liposarcoma
Liposarcoma is primarily a tumor of adults with a peak incidence between age 50 and 65. Next to MFH, it is the most commonly diagnosed soft tissue sarcoma in
adults. Liposarcoma may occur anywhere in the body, although the most common sites are the thigh and the retroperitoneum. As with other adult sarcomas, there are
no characteristic clinical findings. Several types of liposarcoma are recognized and have different clinical outcomes. 118 Well-differentiated liposarcoma is a
nonmetastasizing lesion. It is often difficult to distinguish well-differentiated liposarcoma from atypical lipoma, and the distinction may be irrelevant to the clinician.
Sclerosing liposarcoma, also a low-grade lesion, typically occurs in the retroperitoneum.
Myxoid liposarcoma accounts for 40% to 50% of all liposarcomas. The tumor consists of proliferating lipoblasts within a delicate capillary network and has a myxoid
matrix. The amount and distribution of the mucoid material may vary widely. Although previously considered a low-grade lesion, it is now clear that a myxoid matrix
can be seen in many high-grade liposarcomas. As with other sarcomas, pathologic nomenclature can vary widely between pathologists. Myxoid liposarcoma typically
has a t(12;16)(q13-14;p11) translocation. 69 Round cell (or lipoblastic) liposarcoma is characterized by excessive proliferation of small rounded cells. Round cell
liposarcoma has the same translocation seen in myxoid liposarcoma, 72 suggesting that these liposarcomas are variants of the same pathogenetic process.
Fibroblastic liposarcoma is composed of slender, fibroblast-like cells, and, like round cell liposarcoma, is of higher grade than myxoid liposarcoma. Pleomorphic
liposarcoma, as the name implies, is a highly malignant lesion. Mitotic activity is high, and hemorrhage or necrosis is common.
It is not unusual for large liposarcomas to consist of multiple nodules, some of which contain only low-grade elements and others containing intermediate- or
high-grade elements. The term dedifferentiated liposarcoma119 has been used to refer to lesions that appear to begin as low-grade lesions, but progress to higher
grade tumors and show evidence of nonlipogenic differentiation. 120 This lesion is seen most frequently in the retroperitoneum.
TUMORS OF SMOOTH MUSCLE
Leiomyoma
Benign smooth muscle tumors are quite common in the uterus and in the gastrointestinal tract. Rare cutaneous leiomyomas arise from the piloerector muscles of the
skin. Some occur on a familial basis. These lesions are often multiple and may be quite painful. 121,122 Typically, these cutaneous leiomyomas develop in adolescence
or early adult life as small discreet papules that eventually form nodules. The extensor surfaces of the extremities are most often affected, and the nodules may follow
a dermatomal distribution. Although these tumors are histologically benign, recurrences after surgical incision are seen frequently, and often the lesions are so
numerous that surgical incision is not possible. Leiomyoma may also occur deep within the extremities, abdominal cavity, or retroperitoneum.
Angiomyoma is a solitary form of leiomyoma. This lesion tends to occur on the extremity in people between the fourth and sixth decades of life. Women are more
commonly afflicted than men.
Intravenous leiomyomatosis is a rare condition in which nodules of benign smooth muscle tissue grow within the veins of the myometrium and may extend into the
uterine and hypogastric veins. 123 Rarely, these tumors extend up the inferior vena cava into the heart. 124 Diffuse peritoneal leiomyomatosis is also recognized, often
occurring in association with pregnancy. 125 Leiomyomas in children have been associated with human immunodeficiency virus infection.
Leiomyosarcoma
Leiomyosarcoma may arise in any location, but more than half are located in retroperitoneal or intraabdominal sites. These masses often reach quite large
proportions, but present insidiously with nonspecific symptoms. In addition, most visceral sarcomas are leiomyosarcoma. Cutaneous leiomyosarcomas usually appear
as small solitary extremity nodules. 126 Deep extremity leiomyosarcoma most frequently arises in the thigh and may arise in association with medium or large veins. 127
Although rare, leiomyosarcoma may arise in large vascular structures and present with symptoms of obstruction to the normal flow of blood. The most common arterial
site is the pulmonary artery; patients present with symptoms of decreased pulmonary outflow. Leiomyosarcoma of the inferior vena cava, which may present with the

Budd-Chiari syndrome, is also described.
The typical cell of the leiomyosarcoma is elongated and has an abundant cytoplasm. Multinucleated giant cells are common. Epithelioid changes, in which the cells
become rounded, with concomitant clear cell changes in the neoplasm, may occur in otherwise typical leiomyosarcomas. When the tumor is predominantly or
exclusively epithelioid, the term leiomyoblastoma has been used. The term leiomyoblastoma, however, fails to convey any information with regard to clinical behavior.
Localization of muscle antigens by means of immunohistochemistry proves the diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma. Desmin and smooth muscle actin are the most common
immunohistochemical stains. Grading of leiomyosarcoma, however, can be quite difficult, although mitotic activity appears to be the best indicator of prognosis.
TUMORS OF SKELETAL MUSCLE
Benign tumors of striated muscle are rare. Several types of rhabdomyosarcoma are recognized. Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma is a small cell tumor that usually
arises in the orbit or genitourinary tract in children. The botryoid type of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, which frequently originates in mucosa-lined visceral organs
such as the vagina and the urinary bladder, generally grows as a polypoid tumor. These tumors may disseminate widely, but are responsive to chemotherapy and
radiation. Embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas occasionally arise in adults. Although regression of tumor in response to pediatric chemotherapy regimens usually occurs,
age is an important prognostic factor for survival, with worse outcomes in older patients. 128 Extremity rhabdomyosarcoma in adolescents and young adults often has
an alveolar histology. Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma is composed of ill-defined aggregates of poorly differentiated round or oval cells that frequently show central loss
of cellular cohesion and formation of irregular alveolar spaces. These tumors appear to have a worse prognosis than embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma in younger
children, but not in adults. A specific translocation, t(2,13)(q37;q14) involving the PAX3 gene on chromosome 2 and the FKHR gene on chromosome 13, is seen in the
majority of alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas. 72 In other patients, the translocated chromosome 2 locus is different. 73 Many pediatric studies include all types of
rhabdomyosarcoma seen in the pediatric population.
In adults, pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common form of rhabdomyosarcoma. This high-grade lesion is not clinically distinguishable from other
high-grade adult sarcomas.
VASCULAR TUMORS
Hemangioma
Hemangiomas are among the most common soft tissue tumors. Most hemangiomas are present at birth and regress spontaneously. Rapid growth with impingement
on vital structures may occur, however, and treatment with intralesional injection of interferon has been life-saving. 129 Pulmonary hemangiomatosis, a rare disorder of
diffuse microvascular proliferation in the lung, has been treated effectively with systemic interferon. Cavernous hemangioma refers to a benign lesion consisting of
large dilated blood vessels with a flattened endothelium.
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
Pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis is a disease of women of childbearing age. Patients present with cough, hemoptysis, and dyspnea. Grossly, the lungs
demonstrate multiple small cystic lesions. On microscopic examination, there is proliferation of normal smooth muscle around the airways and the blood and lymphatic
vessels. Tamoxifen does not appear to be useful, but responses to progestational agents have been seen. 130
Epithelioid Hemangioendothelioma
As its name implies, epithelioid hemangioendothelioma is a vascular tumor that has an epithelial appearance. 131 It has several forms. These lesions may appear as a
solitary, slightly painful mass in either superficial or deep soft tissue. Metastases to lung, regional lymph nodes, liver, and bone are reported. Another pattern is that of
a diffuse bronchoalveolar infiltrate or multiple small pulmonary nodules. This entity has also been called IBVAT (intravascular, bronchiolar, and alveolar tumor of the
lung).132 Patients may present with cough and hemoptysis. Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma can also arise in the liver, often presenting as an incidental finding, or
as part of a workup for mild elevation of liver enzymes or vague abdominal pain. Multiple liver nodules are the rule. Although these lesions can metastasize, they
usually run an indolent course. Liver transplantation has been performed, even in patients with metastatic disease. 133
Kaposi's Sarcoma
Classic Kaposi's sarcoma is an unusual vascular sarcoma that occurs in the skin of the lower extremities of elderly men of Mediterranean or Jewish extraction. 134 The
disease is usually indolent, although it can spread to the lungs and the gastrointestinal tract. Cutaneous lesions can be palliated with radiation therapy when
necessary. Another form of Kaposi's sarcoma occurs in Bantu men in Africa; it may also occur in African children in whom it runs a more aggressive course. Kaposi's
sarcoma has arisen in renal allograft recipients who are receiving immunosuppressant therapy. 135 Epidemic Kaposi's sarcoma is a complication of human
immunodeficiency virus infection (see Chapter 50.1).
Angiosarcoma
Angiosarcomas may arise in either blood or lymphatic vessels. Cutaneous lymphangiosarcoma may develop in chronically lymphedematous extremities. 136 The classic
presentation is the Stewart-Treves syndrome, lymphangiosarcoma in the chronically lymphedematous arms of women who have been treated for breast cancer with
radical mastectomy, and, often, axillary irradiation. 20 Hemangiosarcomas are usually located in the skin or superficial soft tissue. Multicentric angiosarcomas occur on
the scalp and face of elderly men, where unrelenting progression can cause severe ulceration and infection. 137 Angiosarcoma of the breast is usually an aggressive
lesion that recurs locally and may metastasize, primarily to lung; histologic grade has been of prognostic value. 138 Angiosarcomas are known to occur in sites of prior
irradiation without chronic lymphedema, in particular the pelvis of women who have received radiation therapy for gynecologic cancers. 139 Soft tissue angiosarcoma,
often with epithelioid features, may arise on the extremities or within the abdomen. 140
PERIVASCULAR TUMORS
Glomus Tumor
Glomus tumors mimic the modified smooth muscle cells of the glomus body, a special form of arteriovenous anastomosis that is located in the skin and participates in
thermal regulation. The glomus tumor generally presents as small, blue-red nodule in subcutaneous tissue or in the subungual region of the finger. 141 These tumors
are often associated with paroxysmal pain irradiating away from the tumor. Complete excision is the appropriate management.
Hemangiopericytoma
The cells of these tumors resemble pericytes, cells that normally are arranged along capillaries and venules. These rare tumors usually arise in adults, although an
infantile hemangiopericytoma is recognized. The adult form is most common in the lower extremity, but also occurs in the pelvis or retroperitoneum or other sites. The
tumors tend to be well circumscribed and consist of tightly packed cells around thin-walled vascular channels of varying calibers. The cells of hemangiopericytoma
stain immunohistochemically with factor XIIIa and HLA-DR antigen, but not with factor VIII-related antigen. 142 Many hemangiopericytomas have an indolent behavior,
although some behave like other high-grade sarcomas. 143
TUMORS OF SYNOVIAL TISSUE
Nodular Tenosynovitis
A variety of benign tumors and tumor-like lesions arise from the synovium. Nodular tenosynovitis (tenosynovial giant cell tumor) is a giant cell tumor that may occur at
any age but is most commonly seen between the ages of 30 to 50. These tumors are somewhat more common in women. They occur with greatest frequency in the

hand, but are also seen in the ankles and knees, among other sites. These slow-growing tumors grow as circumscribed lobulated masses and are usually diagnosed
when they are less than 5 cm in diameter. Because of their location, excision is often done with close margins and local recurrence is seen in 10% to 20% of patients.
A diffuse form occurs in and around joints, most commonly around the knee or ankle. In contrast to most giant cell tumors, this neoplasm grows in expansive sheets
without a mature capsule. Malignant giant cell tumors of the tendon sheath are also recognized.
Synovial Sarcoma
Synovial sarcoma usually occurs in young adults. 144 The most common site is around the knee. As opposed to most other soft tissue sarcomas, these lesions
occasionally are painful. This tumor is composed of two morphologically distinct types of cells that form a characteristic biphasic pattern. The biphasic synovial
sarcoma includes epithelial cells with a surrounding spindle or fibrous component. Calcification, with or without ossification, is seen in up to 30% of tumors. The
spindle cells stain positive for keratin and epithelial membrane antigen. Vimentin is demonstrable in spindle cells but absent in epithelial cells. S-100 may be positive
as well. Monophasic synovial sarcoma of both fibrous and epithelial types are recognized, although monophasic epithelial synovial sarcoma is extremely rare.
Synovial sarcomas contain a characteristic chromosomal translocation, t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2); a hybrid transcript has been identified. 68
TUMORS OF THE PERIPHERAL NERVES
Neurofibroma
Solitary neurofibromas are small, slow-growing cutaneous or subcutaneous nodules that usually arise during the third decade of life. By definition, these lesions are
not associated with neurofibromatosis. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1, peripheral neurofibromatosis, von Recklinghausen's disease) is one of the most common
genetic disorders, affecting approximately 1 in 3000 live births. 145 An autosomal dominant mutation at the 17q11.2 locus has been identified. 146 The clinical features of
NF1 include café au lait spots, Lisch nodules (pigmented hamartomas) of the iris, and neurofibromas of several types. Cutaneous neurofibromas, soft, fleshy growths,
arise in the skin in all patients with NF1. These lesions may range in size from a few millimeters to 50 to 60 cm. Although some patients have only a few such lesions,
others may have hundreds. Subcutaneous neurofibromas are firm and nodular and may be painful. Plexiform neurofibromas are large lesions that affect large
segments of a nerve, thickening and distorting the nerve into a tortuous mass. They may cause severe dysesthetic pain.
Benign Schwannoma
Also called neurilemoma, this benign lesion occurs most commonly in people aged 20 to 50 years. Common sites include the head and neck and the flexor surfaces of
the extremities. It grows slowly and is usually smaller than 5 cm when the diagnosis is made. This encapsulated nerve sheath tumor is distinguished from
neurofibroma in that schwannoma consists of two components: a highly ordered cellular region (Antoni A area), and a loose, myxoid component (Antoni B area).
Cellular Schwannoma
This tumor is more cellular than classical schwannoma. It usually presents in patients during the seventh decade of life as a painless paravertebral mass. 147 Complete
excision is curative in most patients.
Granular Cell Tumor
The granular cell tumor (also called granular cell myoblastoma) is a rare tumor that probably is of neural origin. This tumor usually presents in adults as a small,
poorly circumscribed subcutaneous nodule, although there are patients who have multiple lesions. This entity has a distinct histologic appearance and stains positive
for S-100. Granular cell tumor usually runs a benign course, but metastases have been reported.
Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors
MPNSTs have also been called malignant schwannoma, neurofibrosarcoma, or neurogenic sarcoma. The majority of MPNSTs are high grade and characteristically
stain for the S-100 protein. The lower extremity and the retroperitoneum are the most common sites, but MPNSTs may arise anywhere in the body. 148 These tumors
originate from the nerve sheath, rather than from the nerve itself. Although higher estimates appear in the literature, approximately 5% of patients with NF1 develop
MPNSTs,10,11 usually arising from a plexiform neurofibroma. The majority of patients with MPNST do not have neurofibromatosis, however. After accounting for size
and grade, the prognosis of patients with MPSNT in the setting of NF1 is not different from that of other patients. The malignant peripheral nerve tumor that develops
in the patient with neurofibromatosis historically has been considered to have a poor prognosis compared with other extremity malignant sarcomas. However, when
other factors of known risk for outcome such as grade and size are accounted for, malignant peripheral nerve tumors arising both sporadically and in the presence of
neurofibromatosis tend to have a similar outcome to other poor prognosis peripheral sarcomas. 149 MPNSTs tend to present with a greater preponderance of large size
and high grade than other soft tissue sarcomas, hence their reputation for aggressivity. The Triton tumor is a malignant peripheral nerve tumor with
rhabdomyosarcomatous elements.149
Because of evolving concepts and nomenclature, the literature is confusing with regard to MPNST and primitive neuroectodermal tumor. The latter, a small cell tumor
of children and young adults, is a variant of Ewing's sarcoma.
Gastrointestinal Autonomic Nerve Tumor
GANT, also called plexosarcoma, presumably arises from the enteric plexus of the gastrointestinal tract. Clinically and microscopically, GANT resembles
gastrointestinal leiomyosarcoma, but immunostaining is negative for markers of myogenic differentiation. Neurofilaments are seen by electron microscopy. 90 GANT is
usually considered a subset of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) and characteristically demonstrates expression of the oncogene c-kit (CD117).
EXTRASKELETAL CARTILAGINOUS AND OSSEOUS TUMORS
Myositis Ossificans
This benign lesion is a self-limiting process that usually is associated with trauma. Despite its name, myositis ossificans is not necessarily confined to the muscle nor
is inflammation a prominent feature. The condition usually presents in athletic young adults as a tender, soft tissue mass. Over a period of weeks, the mass usually
becomes firm or rock hard. Radiographs show calcification several weeks after the lesion appears. Histologically, the mass consists of fibroblastic tissue, often with
prominent mitotic activity. Nonetheless, this process is benign and may be managed conservatively. Obviously, it is important to distinguish between myositis
ossificans and sarcoma, especially extraosseous osteogenic sarcoma.
Extraskeletal Chondrosarcoma
Myxoid chondrosarcoma (also called chordoid sarcoma) occurs most commonly in patients over the age of 35. More than two-thirds occur in the extremity. 150 This
tumor usually grows slowly, but late recurrence and metastasis is common. A nonrandom reciprocal translocation has been shown in these tumors. 83,84
Extraosseous Osteogenic Sarcoma
Extraosseous osteogenic sarcoma are rare, high-grade sarcomas defined by their production of malignant osteoid and bone. 151,152 By definition, they are not attached
to the skeleton. Unlike typical osteogenic sarcoma of bone, these tumors rarely occur in patients under the age of 20, and most patients are over 50 years of
age.153,154 These high-grade tumors present like other soft tissue sarcomas. Most arise in the extremities, although osteosarcoma of other sites, including breast,
retroperitoneum, urinary bladder, or other visceral organs have been reported. There is considerable heterogeneity in the histologic appearance. Spindle cell varieties
may resemble MFH, MPNST, or fibrosarcoma, whereas others have a more epithelioid appearance. Giant cells are a common feature. Some lesions that may contain
bone or cartilage are hard to distinguish from MFH, but bone in MFH is well differentiated. Nonetheless, extraosseous osteogenic sarcoma resembles MFH in terms of

age, sites of distribution, and clinical behavior.
TUMORS OF UNCERTAIN HISTOGENESIS
Myxoma
Intramuscular myxoma is a rare tumor that occurs in adults, usually in the large muscles of the extremities. Myxomas consist of abundant mucoid material but few
cells. Although these lesions often measure 5 to 10 cm, their clinical behavior is generally benign. 155 Multiple intramuscular myxomas occur in association with fibrous
dysplasia.
Aggressive angiomyxoma156 is a tumor that usually occurs in women, although male patients have been reported. The lesion generally presents as a mass in the
perineal or pelvic area. Local recurrence can result in considerable morbidity given the location of these tumors, but distant metastases do not occur.
Mesenchymoma
Malignant mesenchymoma is defined as a malignant tumor showing at least two types of malignant mesenchymal differentiation in addition to a poorly differentiated
fibrosarcomatous element. 157 These rare tumors are generally thought to behave clinically in accordance with the predominant component, although one report
suggests that their behavior is not as aggressive as might be expected. 158
Alveolar Soft Part Tumor
This rare tumor occurs most frequently in patients between 15 and 35 years of age. Women outnumber men, especially in patients less than 20 years of age. 159
Prognosis is better in those patients who present at a younger age. These tumors often present in the lower extremities as slow-growing painless masses. Grossly,
alveolar soft part tumors are poorly circumscribed. They typically grow in an organoid or nest-like arrangement. The alveolar spaces actually are necrotic areas.
Considerable controversy regarding histogenesis persists. Neural derivation has been suggested, but other data suggest a myogenic origin. 160 Lung, brain, and bone
are the most common sites of metastasis. Although this tumor tends to grow slowly, the ultimate prognosis is quite poor. Patients may remain asymptomatic over
years, however, even with metastatic disease.
Epithelioid Sarcoma
Epithelioid sarcoma is another tumor of adolescents and young adults. This tumor usually presents as a small, firm nodule in the subcutaneous tissue of the distal
extremities.161,162 Multiple recurrences, which grow along tendons and fascial planes, are a characteristic feature. Unlike most other sarcomas, lymph node metastases
are common, and the tumor may appear in the extremity in transit to the regional nodes. 51,161 Lung is the most common site of distant metastasis.
Clear Cell Sarcoma (Malignant Melanoma of Soft Parts)
This tumor, also called clear cell sarcoma of tendons and aponeuroses, presents as a soft tissue mass. Because of the presence of intracellular melanin and the
tendency for regional nodal metastasis, it has been suggested that this entity is better considered a melanoma than a soft tissue sarcoma. Despite these clinical
features, clear cell sarcoma has a distinct chromosomal translocation, t(12;22)(q13;q13). Size is the most important prognostic factor. Treatment of the primary is
similar to that of other sarcomas. There are few reported responses to chemotherapy.
Desmoplastic Small Cell Tumor
This newly appreciated entity is a tumor of adolescents and young adults. 163 It usually presents in the abdomen, often with diffuse peritoneal implants. Because of its
multifocal nature, complete resection is usually impossible. Chemotherapy regimens used in the treatment of Ewing's sarcoma have induced responses in patients
with this disease, but are rarely curative. A specific translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 that is different from the translocation of Ewing's sarcoma has
been identified. 164,165
Follicular Dendritic Cell Sarcoma
This unusual lesion is thought to arise from lymphatic tissue 166 and commonly occur in the neck, but has been described in other sites. 167

CLINICAL PRESENTATION
The presence of soft tissue sarcoma almost invariably is suggested by the development of a mass. This mass is usually large, often painless, and may be associated
by the patient with an episode of injury. The majority present at a size greater than 5 cm. The size distribution for 3541 cases admitted to Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center (MSKCC) is illustrated in Figure 39.1-5. The focus of the clinical evaluation is to determine the likelihood of a benign or malignant soft tissue tumor, the
involvement of muscular or neurovascular structures, and the ease with which biopsy or subsequent excision can be obtained. Size becomes an important feature
(see Prognostic Factors for Outcome, later in this chapter) and definitive diagnosis is dependent on biopsy and histologic confirmation.

FIGURE 39.1-5. Distribution by size of soft tissue sarcomas in 3541 patients aged 16 years or older admitted to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center between
July 1982 and July 1999.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The major concern, when confronted with a soft tissue mass, is whether or not the lesion is benign or malignant. In most patients with small lesions, or even on
occasion large lesions, the differentiation is from the most common soft tissue tumor, lipoma. This may be simple but becomes more difficult as the more aggressive
and underappreciated inherently benign lesions are considered. Particularly difficult is myositis ossificans. The patient often has an antecedent history of trauma, and
often presents with a large, firm to hard lesion that, on plain film, may have a telltale sign of intrinsic calcification. This does not preclude a malignant lesion. Tru-Cut
(Travenol Laboratories, Deerfield, IL) needle biopsy or open biopsy is often accompanied by aggressive hemorrhage, suggesting a vascular neoplasm. In most cases,
diagnosis can be made fairly accurately by either plain film ( Fig. 39.1-6) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Fig. 39.1-7). Certainly, the diagnosis should be
suspected when there is a significant history of trauma, the lesion is particularly hard, and there is inherent calcification.

FIGURE 39.1-6. Myositis ossificans suggested by calcification on a plain film.

FIGURE 39.1-7. Characteristic findings of myositis ossificans on magnetic resonance imaging, including diffuse tissue expansion.

Other difficult lesions are the angiomyolipoma and the rare angiomyxoma ( Fig. 39.1-8A and Fig. 39.1-8B), which can also be vascular lesions, and the atypical
schwannoma, which can be quite large and often is invasive ( Fig. 39.1-9). They can often be quite destructive, causing ureteric obstruction and bone invasion. The
management is as difficult as for any sarcoma. Conversely, unless absolutely imperative, multiple radical operations in inherently indolent lesions should be avoided.

FIGURE 39.1-8. Other similarly difficult lesions are angiomyxoma, here seen growing as a mass in the perineum (A) and pelvis (B) in a young woman.

FIGURE 39.1-9. Atypical schwannoma can be quite large and often invasive, as shown here in a man with a 20-year history of having undergone multiple resections
for large invasive lesions.

IMAGING STUDIES
Imaging studies for soft tissue sarcoma vary, depending to some extent on the site. They involve evaluation both of the primary lesion and the potential site of
metastasis. Evaluation of the primary lesion in the extremity, and head and neck, predominantly is either by computed tomography (CT) scan, or magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), which provides some increased definition. In the hands of a knowledgeable radiologist, MRI can provide information over and above that provided by
CT.168 Nevertheless, a Radiology Diagnostic Oncology Group study comparing these modalities has shown no benefit of MRI over CT. 169 What is clear in this era of
cost containment is that multiple modalities, all focusing on the same entity, are not required.
An important issue for the primary clinician is identification of the relationship of the sarcoma to neurovascular structures. Angiography is rarely of value. For the
primary intraabdominal lesion we prefer CT scan ( Fig. 39.1-10 ), which can identify both primary and potential metastasis, although in lesions known to involve the
intestinal tract, MRI may add information.

FIGURE 39.1-10. Computed tomography of a massive intraabdominal liposarcoma.

Positron Emission Tomographic Scan
While positron emission tomographic (PET) scan has been used as an investigational agent for several years, it has yet to gain universal acceptance. It does appear
in some studies that grade can be distinguished by this modality. At present, it would appear that the role of PET is primarily in the identification of unsuspected sites
of metastasis in patients with recurrent high-grade tumors.
SITES OF METASTATIC DISEASE
As important as imaging studies of the primary lesion is evaluation of possible sites of metastasis. This knowledge is essential. An analysis of patients at MSKCC
reveals the common sites of metastasis that can guide investigation ( Fig. 39.1-11). Metastatic disease from soft tissue sarcoma is also site-specific. For patients with
extremity lesions, most metastases (70%) go primarily to the lung. 170 For patients with retroperitoneal or visceral lesions, a much more common site for metastases
would be the liver parenchyma, with lung only a secondary site. Nevertheless, no site is immune from soft tissue sarcoma metastasis, and other unique patterns can
be identified (e.g., the unusual presentation of intraabdominal metastasis following an extremity liposarcoma). 171

FIGURE 39.1-11. Common sites of metastasis that can guide investigation (from 1171 patients admitted to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center between July
1982 and July 1999). The primary site of metastasis for extremity lesions is the lung.

Clearly, for small, superficial extremity lesions, either high or low grade, evaluation for sites of metastasis is less important and simple chest roentgenogram suffices.
Conversely, with large high-grade lesions, where the risk of metastatic disease is significant, more extensive evaluation is required. For extremity lesions, the primary
modality is a chest roentgenogram followed by a CT scan of the chest. For retroperitoneal, visceral, and intraabdominal lesions, then the site of metastasis that is
most common (i.e., the liver) is evaluated with the modality that is used for evaluation of the primary lesion.
BIOPSY
The primary thrust of biopsy is to obtain adequate tissue for definitive histopathologic confirmation, to evaluate grade, and to identify prognostic factors that would
alter the approach to definitive treatment. In the main, for lesions that are less than 5 cm, particularly those that are superficial, excisional biopsy is the preferred
approach.
VALUE OF TRU-CUT BIOPSY
Several studies have examined this issue, 172,173 and a summary of the accuracy of Tru-Cut, incisional and frozen section biopsies is included in Table 39.1-6. In the
main, the important issue is the adequacy of the sample. Sufficient viable tissue is required that is both representative of the lesion and available for all
histopathologic evaluation, immunohistochemistry, and where necessary, electron microscopy. As molecular markers become a factor in prognosis, meticulous
attention to the adequacy of biopsy, tissue preservation, and evaluation is paramount. Histopathologic interpretation varies from center to center and may be a major
variable in decision making. As with other relatively rare lesions, it is essential that review of the histopathology be made by an experienced group. In a paper from a
major center,174 members of the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society were surveyed and the diagnostic accuracy of biopsies and the consequences of errors made in
diagnosis were tabulated. More recent studies, however, show improved diagnostic accuracy and confluence of opinion at least for malignancy and grade. 175

TABLE 39.1-6. Accuracy of Tru-Cut Biopsy a

FINE NEEDLE ASPIRATION CYTOLOGY
Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNA) has been examined by a number of authors 175,176 but is usually confined to the confirmation of recurrence, rather than for the
primary diagnosis. In the hands of some, however, it has been a consistent tool. Kindblom 176 performed a study of 18 soft tissue tumors, 5 bone tumors, and 3

metastatic carcinomas thought to be primary soft tissue tumors to examine the relative advantages of a technique using both light and electron microscopy rather than
conventional light microscopic aspiration cytology. In their hands FNA was a valuable adjunct used in this manner, but is rarely employed in most centers, other than
to identify expected recurrent lesions.
Some authors have argued that biopsy itself is not justified if FNA is available. Rydholm 177 has suggested that no open biopsy is ever really indicated, the argument
against its use suggesting the possibility of risking local tumor spread. The author is concerned that antecedent open biopsy increases both the magnitude of the
subsequent operation and the need for adjuvant radiation therapy. The author argues that without biopsy, radiation therapy is not needed in the majority of cases and
limits the need for more extensive resections. Using FNA, the surgeon proceeds directly to open operation. The author points out, however, that this requires referral
before antecedent biopsy, a relatively uncontrollable event in the United States. In addition, other authors suggest that this results in ten patients with benign lesions
referred for every sarcoma patient, 178 certainly an untenable situation under our present system.
In addition, this approach presupposes that all that is required is a malignant sarcoma diagnosis and the type or grade of sarcoma does not determine therapy. At
MSKCC for extremity lesions we use brachytherapy (BRT) for high-grade lesions and external-beam radiation therapy for low-grade lesions, particularly of large size,
that would preclude such an approach. The authors themselves conclude the difficulty if patients should be candidates for pretreatment neoadjuvant therapy to
improve survival. However, they argue that immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, DNA cytology, and chromosomal analysis, all of which can be performed on
FNA, ensure the appropriateness of this approach. 179 We still favor adequate tissue from Tru-Cut, excisional, or incisional biopsy to begin such a procedure.
FROZEN SECTION
In some institutions, frozen section is relied on as the diagnostic tool of choice. For many institutions, however, this is unavailable. Our results for frozen section are
described in Table 39.1-6. For diagnosis of malignancy, frozen section is accurate but for histopathologic subtypes and grade it is inferior to permanent sections of
either Tru-Cut or incisional biopsy.
STAGING
There have been significant changes in the staging of soft tissue sarcoma. The original 1992 staging system was based on a review published in 1977. 180 That
staging system has since been considerably modified. The major difference was the inclusion in the original staging system of a subcategory grade [i.e., patients with
small (less than 5 cm) lesions that were high grade, were considered as stage IIIA]. Several reviews, however, have suggested that such lesions (small, high grade)
have a much more favorable prognosis than outlined in the original 1977 proposal. Reports from two separate institutions 181,182 suggest that survival of these patients
is certainly better than 80% and in many patients, 90%. Consequently, size, which had been historically considered a subcategory of grade, was redefined. Clearly,
however, size is a continuous variable and the decision to divide tumors into less than 5 cm or greater than 5 cm is clearly arbitrary. 183 An analysis of greater than
1000 patients with localized extremity sarcoma seen at MSKCC between 1982 and 1997 has been published. 184 The new staging system, however, now includes both
size and depth. Our analysis of the present modified 1997 staging system makes it more clear that stages IB (low-grade, large superficial tumors) are uncommon as
are stage IIC (high-grade, large, superficial tumors). They are in such a minority that the ability to use them meaningfully in a staging system must be questioned
(Table 39.1-7). In addition, this would suggest that depth, although significant in multiple, overall analyses, is of less value when incorporated with other prognostic
factors such as size. In addition, it is clear that size itself is a continuous variable as mentioned previously, and for the high-risk tumors (i.e., the large, less than 5-cm,
deep tumors), they can be meaningfully divided into tumors of greater than 5 cm or greater than 10 cm. Using this approach then, distant metastasis-free survival can
be quite clearly distinguished into four discriminating groups ( Table 39.1-8A ,Table 39.1-8 B, and Table 39.1-8C and Fig. 39.1-12).

TABLE 39.1-7. Primary Extremity Soft Tissue Sarcoma: Distant Metastases by Stage, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, July 1, 1982 through December 31,
1997 (n = 1059)

TABLE 39.1-8A. Newer Approaches to Staging System of Soft Tissue Sarcoma: Stage Groupings

TABLE 39.1-8B. Local Recurrence, Disease-Free Survival and Overall Survival in Patients with Modified Staging

TABLE 39.1-8C. Statistical Test on Three Stages

FIGURE 39.1-12. Distant metastasis-free survival for patients with primary extremity soft tissue sarcoma (n = 1059 patients admitted to Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center between July 1982 and January 1998) by stages, incorporating 1A/1B/2A versus 2B/2C versus 3A versus 3B. Significance describes the overall
difference between the curves. (From ref. 183, with permission.)

Stage IV disease from lymph node metastasis, which as previously alluded to, is rare in the majority of adult soft tissue sarcomas, is equivalent to any other
metastasis. For example, if one takes patients with lymph node metastasis only or lymph nodes plus other metastasis and contrasts those to other systemic
metastasis, then the disease-specific survival is essentially the same ( Fig. 39.1-13). Finally, it is important to emphasize that prognostic factors can vary with time. For
early recurrence, it would appear that grade is predominant, whereas for late recurrence, size assumes a progressively more important role. 54,185

FIGURE 39.1-13. Disease-specific survival for patients with soft tissue sarcoma with metastases (n = 711 patients admitted to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center between July 1982 and July 1997); lymph node metastases alone versus lymph node metastases with other metastases versus all other metastases. (From
ref. 183, with permission.)

Whether or not age should be a determinant in a staging system is as yet unclear. Certainly, when age is examined as an outcome for overall survival, the older
patient has a shorter survival than the younger patient. This has usually been arbitrarily divided into less than 50 or greater than 50 years, with a patient over 50
having a worse prognosis. Conversely, a distinction into three groups can show some separation, which we thought were, in the main, disease-dependent rather than
age-dependent (Fig. 39.1-14). It certainly seems clear that patients under the age of 16 (i.e., the pediatric age group) have a far different prognosis and a far different
response to treatment with sarcoma than do the adults, and this should not be included in the current adults' staging system. An analysis of the most common
histopathologic type in children, rhabdomyosarcoma, suggested that the soft tissue sarcomas in children behave in a somewhat different manner than those in adults.
It does appear that the early stage of disease and the late stage of disease are similar in both children and adults, but the intermediate stage lesions have a better
prognosis in children, which does not appear solely due to their ability to tolerate extent of treatment. 128 Site is also a clear determinant of outcome. Patients with
retroperitoneal and visceral sarcomas certainly do worse than patients with extremity lesions ( Fig. 39.1-15).

FIGURE 39.1-14. Overall survival for extremity soft tissue sarcoma by age group in 1813 patients aged 16 years or older admitted to Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center between July 1982 and July 1999 ( P <.001). Significance describes the overall difference between the curves.

FIGURE 39.1-15. Disease-specific survival by site of soft tissue sarcoma in 3968 patients aged 16 years or older admitted to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center
between July 1982 and July 1999 (P <.001). Patients with retroperitoneal or visceral sarcomas did worse than patients with extremity lesions. Significance describes
the overall difference between the curves.

Conversely, there are factors that affect our ability to treat specific sites such as difficulty of radical resections for head and neck tumors and the limitations of
radiation therapy in intraabdominal sites.
It does appear that site is a significant factor in survival. However, it is difficult to separate site from adequacy of treatment. It is clear that patients with retroperitoneal
sarcoma can and do die of local recurrence, an uncommon event in extremity lesions. The intraabdominal visceral leiomyosarcomas still maintain a high metastatic
rate as the primary cause of death.
Bone invasion by soft tissue sarcoma with neurovascular invasion has historically been considered a bad prognostic feature. However, as bone invasion is relatively
uncommon in soft tissue sarcoma, it has not been uniformly included in any staging system, but should certainly be considered as a poor prognostic factor.
As of the present time, the innumerable molecular markers that have been included and defined for soft tissue sarcoma, some with prognostic implications, have not
been included in staging systems, but one that we would expect to become an increasingly important variable.

MANAGEMENT OF EXTREMITY AND SUPERFICIAL TRUNCAL SOFT TISSUE SARCOMA
Surgical Treatment
A suggested algorithm is shown in Figure 39.1-16. Where appropriate, alternative approaches are discussed in the text (e.g., for patients with lesions less than 5 cm
and positive microscopic margins not able to be reresected without major morbidity, radiation therapy can be selectively used). The mainstay of treatment for all soft
tissue sarcomas of the extremity and trunk is surgical excision. The issues of debate concern how extensive that surgical excision should be and whether it should be
preceded or followed by adjuvant therapy.

FIGURE 39.1-16. Management algorithm for extremity and superficial truncal soft tissue sarcoma. BRT, brachytherapy; ERT, external-beam radiation therapy.

Wide en bloc resection is used most often. Historical attempts to resect all muscle bundles from origin to exertion have now been supplanted by an encompassing
resection, aiming to obtain 2 cm of all uninvolved tissue in all directions. This is often unrealistic, however, because the limiting factor is usually neurovascular
juxtaposition or, occasionally, bony juxtaposition. Because most soft tissue sarcomas tend not to invade bone directly, only rarely does bone need to be resected. Soft
tissue sarcomas only uncommonly involve the skin, so major skin resection should be limited. In situations of primary or recurrent tumors where skin is involved, or the
tumor is so extensive that skin is involved, then consideration of free flap or rotational flap closure becomes important, particularly in those patients who are
candidates for subsequent adjuvant radiation therapy.
EXTENT OF SURGICAL RESECTION
The most extensive resection is clearly amputation. This should be only rarely indicated in soft tissue sarcoma at the present time because limb-sparing operations
are possible in at least 95% of patients. Experience over the last 25 years at MSKCC indicates that the 50% amputation rate in the late 1960s is now less than 5%
(Fig. 39.1-17). Amputation should be reserved, in the main, for tumors not able to be resected by any other means, without evidence of metastatic disease and the
propensity for good long-term functional rehabilitation. Often these are patients with large, low-grade tumors with considerable cosmetic and functional deformity, who
can be rendered free of symptoms by a major amputation.

FIGURE 39.1-17. Limb-sparing surgery (LSS) versus amputation for all patients, primary and recurrent. Trends in management over time based on the experience at
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center from 1968 to 1998.

Major amputation has been contrasted to limb-sparing surgery combined with adjuvant radiation. 186 Local recurrence can occur after the limb-sparing operation, and
follow-up data on this study confirm that this is almost invariably salvaged, but there is no effect on long-term survival. 187 The issue of amputation versus limb-sparing
surgery for extremity lesions has been addressed by a prospective randomized trial at the National Cancer Institute (NCI). In patients entered into this trial, follow–up
is now available for more than 10 years. Although local recurrence is greater in those undergoing limb-sparing operation plus irradiation compared with amputation
(Fig. 39.1-18), survival overall is not different ( Fig. 39.1-19).

FIGURE 39.1-18. Soft tissue sarcoma, local recurrence according to treatment. Limb-sparing surgery (LSS) plus irradiation (RT) compared with amputation (AMP) at
the National Cancer Institute. (Courtesy of J. C. Yang and S. A. Rosenberg.)

FIGURE 39.1-19. Soft tissue sarcoma, disease-free survival according to treatment. Limb-sparing surgery (LSS) plus irradiation (RT) compared with amputation
(AMP) at the National Cancer Institute. (Courtesy of J. C. Yang and S. A. Rosenberg.)

SIZE
Because size is a prognostic factor for outcome both in terms of local recurrence and subsequent metastatic disease, the approach to these lesions can be varied. In
patients with small approach to these lesions can be varied. In patients with small lesions less than 5 cm, complete surgical excision is usually sufficient, adjuvant
therapy being reserved for only those with recurrent lesions. Given the high risk of recurrence and of systemic disease for lesions larger than 10 cm that are high
grade, these patients are candidates for investigational approaches, especially neoadjuvant chemotherapy (see below, in Adjuvant Chemotherapy). All patients with
lesions larger than 5 cm should be considered for adjuvant radiation therapy as a proven method of limiting local recurrence. 181

RADIATION THERAPY
Before discussing the role of radiation therapy in the management of soft tissue sarcoma, it is important to differentiate between radiosensitivity and
radioresponsiveness. Radiosensitivity refers to the inherent response of cancer cells to radiation, and radioresponsiveness refers to how quickly a tumor regresses
after radiation. These two parameters do not always correlate.
Unfortunately, the slow rate of regression of soft tissue sarcomas even after high doses of radiation, an example of poorly radioresponsive tumors, is often mistaken
for radioresistance. This in turn has lead to an extensive debate about the effectiveness of radiation therapy in soft tissue sarcomas. This debate was not settled until
the recent past, even though the use of x-rays for the treatment of sarcoma was first proposed in 1902. 188 The fact that soft tissue sarcomas are radiosensitive tumors
has not only been proven clinically, but it has also been shown in radiobiologic experiments. Radiation sensitivity of cell lines derived from sarcomas, measured in
vitro, is not less than that of epithelial cancer cell lines. 189,190 and 191
The discussion in this section is focused primarily on the role of radiation in the management of soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity and superficial trunk. The role of
radiation in other sites is discussed separately in other sections of this chapter. Radiation therapy is mainly used as an adjuvant treatment to surgery in the form of
BRT or external-beam radiation and rarely used alone for patients with unresectable disease.
ADJUVANT RADIATION
The effectiveness of adjuvant radiation has been clearly shown not only through retrospective data but also through three prospective randomized trials that have
compared surgery alone with surgery and radiation. 187,192,193 Therefore, the question that we should be asking is not whether radiation is useful, but rather which form
of radiation is the most effective in terms of tumor control and function preservation.
POSTOPERATIVE EXTERNAL-BEAM RADIOTHERAPY
The use of postoperative external-beam radiotherapy in soft tissue sarcoma of the extremities has served as an early model for function preserving approach in
oncology.
Historically, amputation was considered the standard surgical treatment for soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity, but data that evaluated more conservative surgery
followed by postoperative external-beam radiotherapy emerged as a reasonable alternative. 194,195 These encouraging results lead the NCI to perform a randomized
prospective trial that compared amputation with wide local excision and postoperative radiation in patients with high-grade soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity.
Twenty-seven patients were randomized to conservative surgery and radiotherapy, and 16 received amputation (2:1 randomization). There were four local
recurrences in the limb-sparing group and none in the amputation group ( P = .06). However, there were no differences in disease-free survival rates (71% and 78% at
5 years; P = .75) or overall survival rates (83% and 88% at 5 years; P = .99) between the limb-sparing group and the amputation treatment groups. 187 In a subsequent
trial, investigators at the NCI wanted to determine if adjuvant radiation was needed after wide local excision. Ninety-one patients with high-grade lesions were
randomized; 47 to receive radiotherapy and 44 to not receive radiotherapy. With a median follow-up of 9.6 years, a highly significant decrease ( P = .0028) in the
probability of local recurrence was seen with radiation, but no difference in overall survival was shown. Of 50 patients with low-grade lesions (24 randomized to
resection alone and 26 to resection and postoperative radiotherapy), there was also lower probability of local recurrences ( P = .016) in patients receiving
radiotherapy, again, without a difference in overall survival. 193
The importance of technical aspects of postoperative radiation in soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity has been clearly emphasized in the literature. The volume at risk

has generally varied from including the whole compartment from origin to insertion, to giving a generous margin around the tumor bed, scar, and drainage sites. 196,197
and 198
However, whether such generous margins are always needed has been challenged. In particular, the results of adjuvant BRT suggest that radiation treatment
directed to the tumor bed plus a 2-cm margin might be adequate. 199 In addition, some retrospective data showed no added benefit in terms of local control between
field margins of 5.0 to 9.9 cm versus margins of greater than 10 cm or inclusion of the entire compartment. 200,201 During the design of the radiation field and
irrespective of length of field, it is important to spare as much circumference of the limb as possible in order to avoid chronic edema. 195,196 The use of all preoperative
images and CT-based treatment planning to ensure adequate coverage of the target volume with sparing of surrounding normal structures is important.
The optimal dose of radiation in the postoperative setting is also undergoing some debate. The traditional dose of postoperative external-beam radiotherapy is usually
60 to 66 Gy. A dose less than 63 Gy has been advocated by some authors, 200,201 but this remains controversial.
In summary, the effect of postoperative external-beam radiation on local control for soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity, whether it is high or low grade, has been
shown in two prospective randomized trials. Most authors recommend that the tumor bed, including scar and drainage site plus at least 5 to 7 cm margins be included
in the initial field of treatment. Then, one or two further reductions in the treatment volume should be done to allow maximum sparing of normal tissues. The total dose
is usually 60 to 70 Gy depending on tumor grade, size, margin status, and location.
ADJUVANT BRACHYTHERAPY
Although most of the initial experience with adjuvant radiation has revolved around external-beam radiation, BRT is becoming an attractive alternative. With BRT,
patients usually leave the hospital having completed all their treatment in approximately 2 weeks compared with a 6- to 7-week course of external-beam radiation. The
evaluation of the tumor bed at the time of the operation by both the surgeon and the radiation oncologist can far exceed any imaging modality in its accuracy, and the
rapid dose fall off with BRT spares more normal tissue than external radiation. In addition, Janjan et al. reported savings of $1000 per patient treated with BRT as
compared with external irradiation. 202
The initial experience with adjuvant BRT at MSKCC was reported by Hilaris et al. in 1982 203 and based on these encouraging results a prospective randomized trial
was initiated at that time. The aim of this trial was to determine whether adjuvant BRT was needed after complete gross resection. One hundred sixty-four patients
were enrolled in that trial; 78 patients were randomized to adjuvant BRT and 86 patients to no further therapy. With a median follow-up time of 76 months, the 5-year
actuarial local control rates were 82% and 69% in the BRT and no BRT groups ( P = .04), respectively ( Fig. 39.1-20 ). This improvement in local control, however, was
limited to patients with high-grade histology ( Fig. 39.1-21). For this group, local control for the BRT arm was 89% versus 66% for surgery alone ( P = .0025). There
was no improvement in local control for patients with low-grade tumors. The 5-year freedom from distant recurrence rates were 83% and 76% in the BRT and no BRT
groups (P = .6), respectively. Analysis by histologic grade did not demonstrate an effect of BRT on the development of distant metastasis or survival. 192 Even though
adjuvant BRT did not show an improvement in local control in patients with low-grade tumors, the local recurrence rates were 22% (no BRT) and 27% (BRT),
indicating the need for adjuvant external radiation in those patients. 204

FIGURE 39.1-20. Results of a prospective randomized trial at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center of adjuvant brachytherapy (BRT) in patients undergoing
limb-sparing surgery (n = 3968 patients admitted to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center between July 1982 and July 1992, follow-up to July 1999; P = .4).
Patients who received adjuvant BRT had a statistically significant improvement in local control. (Updated from ref. 192, with permission.)

FIGURE 39.1-21. Results of a prospective randomized trial at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center of adjuvant brachytherapy (BRT) in patients undergoing
limb-sparing surgery (n = 119, from July 1982 to July 1992, follow-up to July 1999; P = .002). This local control advantage was limited to patients with high-grade
lesions. (Updated from ref. 192, with permission.)

Other institutions have also reported encouraging results in their experience with BRT in soft tissue sarcoma. 205,206 In most of those cases, BRT was used as a boost
in combination with external-beam irradiation, but whether this combination is needed in all patients is unclear. Alekhteyar et al. reported on 105 patients with primary
or locally recurrent high-grade soft tissue sarcomas who were treated with wide local excision and BRT (87 patients) or BRT and external-beam irradiation (18
patients). With a median follow-up of 22 months, there was no statistically significant difference in the 2-year actuarial local control rates between the two groups;
86% in the BRT group compared with 90% in BRT plus external-beam irradiation group ( P = .32).207 At MSKCC, external-beam irradiation is added to BRT only when
the geometry of the implant is suboptimal or there is a positive surgical margin.
One of the most attractive aspects of BRT is the ability to deliver further radiation in previously irradiated patients who may otherwise need amputation in order to
obtain good local control. Nori et al. and Pearlstone et al. reported a local control rate of 82.5% (33 of 40) and 65% (17 of 26), respectively, when using conservative
surgery and reirradiation with BRT. 208,209 Catton et al., on the other hand, reported a local control of only 36% (4 of 11) for patients treated with conservative surgery
and no further irradiation. 210
The technical aspects of BRT are different from external-beam radiotherapy. At the time of the operation, the radiation oncologist and the surgeon jointly evaluate the
tumor bed, and the radiation target area is determined by adding 2 cm margin longitudinally and 1.0 to 1.5 cm circumferentially. The radiation oncologist then implants
this target area with an array of afterloading catheters, placed percutaneously and spaced 1 cm apart. The loading of the catheters takes place no sooner than the
fifth postoperative day to allow enough time for wound healing. 211 Unlike with postoperative irradiation, no attempts are usually made to treat large margins or to
include the scar and the drainage site. In patients treated with BRT alone, the dose is usually 45 Gy given over 4 to 6 days, and when given as boost the dose is
usually 15 to 20 Gy plus 45 to 50 Gy with external-beam irradiation. The most common isotope used is the low-dose-rate iridium 192; however, high activity iodine 125
is occasionally used in young patients or to protect the gonads. More recently, high-dose-rate iridium 192 has been advocated by some authors to take advantage of
its radiation safety aspects as well as its dose-optimization capabilities. 212 Further follow-up, however, is still needed to determine its long-term morbidity and overall

efficacy.
PREOPERATIVE EXTERNAL-BEAM RADIOTHERAPY
Of the three types of adjuvant radiation, preoperative external-beam irradiation is the only modality that has not been tested against surgery in a randomized trial.
There is, however, a great deal of interest and enthusiasm for this approach. Some of the potential advantages of preoperative external-beam radiation therapy
include decreased intraoperative seeding of tumor cells, a smaller radiation target volume compared with postoperative irradiation, and tumor shrinkage that might
facilitate later surgery. Suit et al. evaluated the relationship between tumor size and the sequencing of radiation and showed that preoperative radiation was superior
to postoperative radiation in terms of local control for patients with tumors greater than 15 cm. 213 However, others have shown no difference. 214 Pollack et al. from M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center compared the sequencing effect, not only according to size, but also according to presentation. For patients who presented to their
institution with gross disease, the 10-year local control rate was 88% for preoperative radiation compared with 67% with postoperative radiation ( P = .01). In contrast,
for those presenting after an excision elsewhere, the 10-year local control was better with postoperative radiation (88% versus 73%, P = .07). It is important to note,
however, that on multivariate analysis for predictors of local control for the entire population, the type of radiation was not a determinant of local control. 215 It is evident
from this discussion that there are no conclusive data on which adjuvant radiation produces the best results in terms of local control; indeed the results are similar.
Therefore, the only way to adequately answer this question would be through a randomized prospective trial. Such a trial was just concluded at the Princess Margaret
Hospital in Toronto, Canada, where patients with extremity soft tissue sarcoma were randomized to preoperative versus postoperative radiation. With 1.9 years
median follow-up, six cases manifested local relapse and metastatic outcome and survival were similar. 216 Outcome analysis must await longer follow-up.
The technical aspects of preoperative radiation for the large part are similar to postoperative irradiation. The typical margin around the target volume is 5 to 7 cm in
the longitudinal axis and 1.5 to 2.0 cm circumferentially. The definition of the target volume is different in the preoperative setting since it only includes the gross tumor
volume identified on imaging, preferably MRI. This volume usually receives 50 Gy in 5.0 to 5.5 weeks. Surgery is usually performed 2.5 weeks later. Most institutions
that use the preoperative approach do not add a boost except in patients with positive margins, where an additional 15 Gy is given. 198

SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
POSITIVE MARGINS OF RESECTION
Positive microscopic margin was found to be an independent adverse prognostic factor for local relapse in 1041 patients with localized soft tissue sarcoma of the
extremity (P = .0001).184 Although adjuvant radiation has been shown to improve local control in soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity, its effect on patients with positive
microscopic margin has not been clearly defined. Data from the Princess Margaret Hospital and Massachusetts General Hospital on patients treated with adjuvant
radiation have shown a 10% to 16% increase in the 5-year local recurrence rates in patients with positive margins compared with those with negative margins despite
the use of adjuvant irradiation. 217,218 In our trial of adjuvant BRT a total of 29 patients with positive margins were randomized: 15 to the BRT arm and 14 to the no BRT
arm.192 Five local failures were noted in each group ( P = .99). These findings then beg the following question, when compared with surgery alone; does adjuvant
irradiation improve local control in patients with positive margins of resection? Alektiar et al. evaluated 110 patients with primary high-grade soft tissue sarcoma of the
extremity who were treated at MSKCC with surgery alone (19 patients) or with surgery and radiation (91 patients). The 5-year actuarial local control for the whole
group was 71%. In the group that received adjuvant radiation the 5-year local control rate was 75% compared with 56% in those treated with surgery alone ( P = .01).
Adjuvant radiation also retained its significance as an independent prognostic factor for local control when multivariate analysis was performed ( P = .01). 219 Whether
any radiation modality is better than another in those patients is debatable possibly due to the paucity of data. Alekhteyar et al. 207 demonstrated a trend toward
improvement in local control if BRT was supplemented with external-beam radiotherapy in patients with positive margins (90% vs. 59%, P = .08).However, others
showed no difference in local control between external-beam irradiation and BRT boost. 218
SMALL SOFT TISSUE SARCOMAS
Despite the fact that two randomized trials that compared surgery alone with adjuvant radiation have shown an improvement in local control in all patients, there is still
considerable debate in the literature on whether all patients need adjuvant irradiation. Two large-scale studies that have looked at prognostic factors in soft tissue
sarcomas of the extremity have failed to show a correlation between local control and tumor size in multivariate analysis. 184,220
Geer et al., on the other hand, reported on 174 patients with primary soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity measuring less than or equal to 5 cm. When only patients
with negative margins of resection were analyzed (159 patients), the 5-year local control rate was 77% in those who received adjuvant radiation compared with 92%
with surgery alone (P = .08). 181 Therefore, the treatment policy at MSKCC has been to omit adjuvant irradiation in patients primarily treated at our institution with small
tumors and adequate margins.
It is important, however, to consider other factors when deciding on whether to omit radiation. One such factor is the status of the surgical margin of resection. In the
Geer study,181 the effect of adjuvant radiation was only analyzed in the subset of patients with negative margins. In fact, patients with positive margins in that study
had a 5-year local control rate of only 56% versus 88% in those with negative margins ( P = .01). Similar finding were reported by Fleming et al. from M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center. 182 Therefore, it is also our policy to treat patients with positive margins even if the tumors were less than or equal to 5 cm. The other factor that should
be considered is whether the patient has had a prior unplanned excision. Noria et al. found a significantly higher rate of local recurrence in patients who were treated
after unplanned excision on the outside compared with patients who receive their treatment at their institution (22% vs. 7%, P = .03).221 It is important to remember
that the previously mentioned scenario is common in the community settings when small soft tissue lesions are excised under the presumption that they are benign.
Therefore, its is our policy to attempt a reexcision if at all feasible, otherwise patients are strongly considered for postoperative irradiation.
SOFT TISSUE SARCOMAS OF THE HANDS AND FEET
Soft tissue sarcomas of the distal extremity deserve special consideration since they pose a formidable challenge to the treating oncologist. For a start, a true wide
local excision is the exception rather than the rule in these sites due to the lack of muscular bulk and the proximity to neurovascular structures and bone. In addition,
the overall prognosis has been shown to be inferior to other sites in the extremity. Brien et al. showed that even in patients with hand tumors that are less than or
equal to 5 cm, the survival rate was significantly lower than other extremity sites ( P = .0008).222
In the past, the use of adjuvant irradiation was fraught with debate about the functional outcome in regions that have traditionally been considered poorly tolerant of
radiation. However, more recently data to the contrary have been demonstrated. Talbert et al. treated 78 patients with nonmetastatic soft tissue sarcoma of the distal
extremity with conservative surgery and radiation therapy. The 10-year local control rate was 74% and the salvage rate was 80% in patients who failed locally using
this approach. The rate of amputation from complications was 8%. 223 Bray et al. also reported on 25 patients with soft tissue sarcoma of the hand and forearm. Twenty
received adjuvant radiation and with a mean follow-up of 37 months, the local control rate was 88%. In addition, 88% of those who survived and did not require
amputation were able to return to occupational and activities of daily living with minimal or no functional limitation. 224
Therefore, conservative surgery and adjuvant radiation should be considered as an acceptable treatment modality for distal soft tissue sarcomas. Special attention,
however, needs to be paid to radiation treatment technique in order to minimize complications and preserve function.

DEFINITIVE RADIATION
Surgery remains the main treatment for patients with sarcoma of the extremity, and every effort should be made to attempt resection. However, in some patients with
unresectable disease definitive radiation could be considered due to medical reasons or to achieve some palliation. Since sarcoma may be radiocurable in terms of
cell killing but not radioresponsive in terms of shrinkage of the mass, this can be perplexing, as such masses could give the false impression that little has been
accomplished, whereas in reality the mass is mainly made up of sterilized tumor cells and debris. Tepper and Suit reported on 51 patients treated with definitive
photon beam irradiation to a total dose of 64 to 66 Gy. The 5-year local control and survival rate were 33% and 25%, respectively. Local control was better for tumors
less than 5 cm (87.5%) than in tumors 5 to 10 cm (53%) or greater than 10 cm (30%). 225 Slater et al. showed similar findings in 57 patients treated with definitive
photon irradiation to 44 to 88 Gy. The 5-year local control was 28%. 226
More recently, hyperfractionated photon radiation was combined with intravenous iododeoxyuridine as a radiosensitizer. Goffman et al. reported on 36 patients

treated in this fashion, and with a median follow-up of 4 years the local control rate was 60%. 227
Other investigators have looked at using neutron radiotherapy either alone or in combination with photon beam radiation. Schwarz et al. reviewed the European
experience with such an approach and reported a local control rate of 50%, but the rate of severe complications ranged from 6.6% when neutron therapy was used as
a boost to 50% when used alone. 228

ADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY
Surgery remains the mainstay of therapy for soft tissue sarcoma in the control of local disease. As discussed previously, radiation therapy also plays a role in the local
control of soft tissue sarcomas. Nonetheless, as many as one-half of all patients with adequate local control of disease develop distant metastasis, usually to the
lungs (extremity sarcomas) or liver (abdominal primary). 229 As has been demonstrated in other cancers such as breast and colorectal cancer and osteosarcoma, it was
hoped that adjuvant chemotherapy would help decrease the frequency of distant metastases, thus increasing overall survival. At least 15 studies of adjuvant therapy
for soft tissue sarcoma have been performed. Since anthracyclines are the most active agents in sarcoma therapy in the metastatic setting, they have been used in
nearly all of the adjuvant trials, alone or in combination. Most of these studies are small, and therefore lack the statistical power to detect small changes in overall
survival. Accordingly, metaanalyses have been performed on the randomized trials for adjuvant chemotherapy in soft tissue sarcoma. In the following section the data
from the individual studies and metaanalyses are examined ( Table 39.1-9). Single-agent chemotherapy trials are considered first, followed by studies with
combination chemotherapy.

TABLE 39.1-9. Adjuvant Studies in Soft Tissue Sarcoma

RANDOMIZED ADJUVANT STUDIES OF DOXORUBICIN ALONE
One of the earliest studies to accrue patients in a randomized trial of adjuvant chemotherapy was performed by the Gynecologic Oncology Group for patients with
uterine sarcomas. 230 Two hundred twenty-five patients with stage I or II uterine sarcomas of any histopathologic subtype were treated surgically for local control.
Radiation was added at the discretion of the physician for local control, then patients were randomized to doxorubicin, 60 mg/m 2 every 3 weeks for eight cycles, or to
observation alone. Of 156 evaluable patients, disease-free survival was not different between the two groups, nor was there a statistically significant difference in
overall survival (73.7 months in the treated arm versus 55.0 months in the control arm). The addition of radiation therapy did not affect survival, although there was a
lower rate of vaginal relapse in the group treated with radiation.
Between 1978 and 1982, the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and Massachusetts General Hospital enrolled AJCC stage IIB to IVA
patients in a study in which local therapy consisted of radical surgery, or wide en bloc excision followed by radiation. 231 Forty-two patients were randomized to receive
five doses of doxorubicin, 90 mg /m2, every 3 weeks, versus observation. The timing of chemotherapy varied between Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Brigham and
Women's Hospital and Massachusetts General Hospital, with former patients receiving both radiation and chemotherapy postoperatively, and the latter patients
receiving radiation and two of the five cycles of chemotherapy before surgery. There was no significant difference in local control, relapse-free survival, or overall
survival in this study, although there was a trend (not statistically significant) toward better overall survival of patients with extremity sarcomas who received
chemotherapy compared with the patients who did not receive chemotherapy.
Similarly, the ECOG enrolled 47 AJCC stage IIB to IVA patients in a study in which local therapy consisted of radical surgery or wide en bloc excision followed by
radiation. 232 Patients with local recurrence were permitted on the study as well. Thereafter, patients received doxorubicin, 70 mg/m 2 every 3 weeks for seven cycles.
Thirty-two were eligible for analysis. There was no difference in local control, relapse-free survival, or overall survival in the treatment and control arms.
The Intergroup Sarcoma Study Group also examined AJCC stage IIB to IVA patients treated with surgery for local control. Seventy-eight eligible patients were
randomized to observation or to doxorubicin at 35 mg/m 2 given as daily bolus doses on two consecutive days. 233,234 Six cycles of doxorubicin were given at 3-week
intervals in the chemotherapy arm. There was no significant difference in local recurrence, disease-free survival, or overall survival in the chemotherapy arm
compared with the control arm. A trend was noted toward improved disease-free survival for extremity lesions that was of borderline statistical significance ( P = .06).
However, pooling the data from the Boston, ECOG, and Intergroup studies demonstrated no survival benefit for adjuvant doxorubicin. 234
The Scandinavian Sarcoma Group performed the largest study of doxorubicin as an adjuvant to local therapy for soft tissue sarcomas. 62 Two hundred forty patients
were treated with surgery with the option of adjuvant radiation for local control. Patients were then randomized to receive either doxorubicin, 60 mg/m 2, every 4 weeks
for nine cycles, or to no chemotherapy. Chemotherapy was started within 6 weeks of surgery when radiation was not used for local control, or within 10 weeks when
radiation was used. One hundred eighty-one patients were evaluable; at a median follow-up of 40 months, there was no difference in local control, disease-free
survival, or overall survival for the evaluable patients. Survival data was also assessed for the entire 240 patient cohort; again, there was no difference in disease-free
survival or overall survival.
The Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli examined a heterogeneous group of 77 patients with high-grade extremity sarcomas. 235 For local control some patients had radical
surgery alone, surgery and preoperative radiation, or radiation and chemotherapy before surgical resection (the conservative surgery group). Thereafter patients were
randomized to receive or not receive doxorubicin, 25 mg/m 2 given daily as boluses on 3 consecutive days in a 21-day cycle, for a total of six cycles. Relapse-free
survival was improved in the chemotherapy arm (79% vs. 45%) at a median 28 months follow-up. In updated data from this study, 236 disease-free and overall survival
were improved in the patients receiving chemotherapy. However, in a more recent update, 237 disease-free and overall survival benefit were not seen in the group
treated with conservative surgery and chemotherapy versus conservative surgery alone. These data are difficult to analyze owing to the complex randomization
scheme of the study as well as contamination of the control arm with patients receiving at least some chemotherapy (those receiving conservative surgery).
Investigators at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) School of Medicine examined patients with high-grade extremity sarcoma, treating 119 patients with
intraarterial doxorubicin for 3 days before radiation of the anatomic region and wide excision of the tumor. 238 Thereafter patients were randomized to observation
alone versus five cycles of doxorubicin, 45 mg/m 2 daily as a bolus on 2 consecutive days, once a month. At a median follow-up time of 28 months, there was no
improvement in either disease-free or overall survival in the chemotherapy arm. There was a statistically insignificant improvement in local control rates in the
chemotherapy arm (3 of 21 patients vs. 9 of 27 patients in the control arm relapsed). The use of intraarterial preoperative doxorubicin in the control arm complicates
comparison with the other doxorubicin adjuvant studies.
At Roswell Park Memorial Institute, 19 patients with stage I uterine sarcoma were randomized to surgery alone versus surgery plus adjuvant doxorubicin, 60 to 75
mg/m2 every 4 weeks for six cycles. 239 No statistically significant difference in survival was noted. Six of the patients randomized to the chemotherapy arm refused
randomization and were assessed as part of the control group, instead of using an intention-to-treat analysis.

RANDOMIZED ADJUVANT STUDIES OF COMBINATION CHEMOTHERAPY
In 1983 the NCI published the first in a series of publications on adjuvant chemotherapy for soft tissue sarcoma of different anatomic sites. A pilot study examined 26
patients with extremity sarcoma grades II and III, treated for local control with amputation or limb-sparing surgery with radiation. 240 These patients were treated
postoperatively with escalating doses of cyclophosphamide (500 to 700 mg/m 2) and doxorubicin (50 to 70 mg/m2) every 28 days, with a maximum cumulative dose of
550 mg/m2 of doxorubicin. This combination was followed by six cycles of intermediate dose methotrexate (50 to 250 mg/kg with dose escalation). Patients were
randomized to receive chemotherapy with or without C. parvum adjuvant immunotherapy, and were compared with historic controls. There was no effect of the
immunologic adjuvant, but the overall survival at 5 years was 73%, better than the 45% seen in the historic controls.
These initial data led to examination of adjuvant chemotherapy alone in a second cohort of patients with extremity sarcomas. Sixty-five patients underwent similar
local control as described previously, then were randomized to observation or to the same cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and methotrexate regimen of the pilot
study.240,241 Initial data indicated that disease-free survival and overall survival were improved in the chemotherapy arm. With longer follow-up (median, 7.1 years),
5-year disease-free survival was still improved (75% vs. 54% in the control arm), but the difference in overall survival (83% vs. 60% in the control arm) was not
statistically significant. 242 Local control was improved in the chemotherapy arm. In long-term follow-up there has been non–tumor-related mortality; there continues to
be no survival advantage in either treatment arm (J. Yang, S. Rosenberg, unpublished results).
Fourteen of the 101 patients treated with the NCI regimen developed clinical congestive heart failure. Other patients had radioventriculograms performed confirming a
subclinical decrease in cardiac ejection fraction at rest or with exercise. In all, there was an overall event rate of 46% clinical or subclinical cardiomyopathy in the 75
evaluated patients. 243 The high rate of cardiomyopathy led to a third trial examining the same cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and methotrexate combination versus a
regimen without methotrexate and a doxorubicin ceiling cumulative dose of 350 mg/m 2.242 No difference in 5-year overall survival was observed (69% for low dose,
75% for high dose), nor was there a difference in 5-year disease-free survival. There was no clinical congestive heart failure documented in the low-dose arm, and the
decrease in cardiac ejection fraction by nuclear medicine study was less pronounced than with the high-dose arm.
The NCI has also examined adjuvant chemotherapy for other sites in two other trials, using the same cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and methotrexate combination
regimen.244,245 In one study, some of the 37 patients with retroperitoneal sarcoma (15 of whom were prospectively randomized) were given adjuvant chemotherapy. 245
Patients given chemotherapy had a trend to poorer overall survival compared with the control group ( P = .06). Analysis of this study is difficult because of the small
number of patients and lack of prospective randomization for all patients. A separate NCI study using the same chemotherapy regimen examined 31 patients with soft
tissue sarcoma of the head and neck, breast, and trunk. 244 All patients had resection and postoperative radiation, then were randomized to receive chemotherapy or
no further therapy. Six patients received C. parvum adjuvant immunotherapy. A trend toward improved disease-free survival was seen in the chemotherapy patients,
but there was no statistically significant difference in overall survival.
The M. D. Anderson Cancer Center started one of the earliest adjuvant trials for soft tissue sarcoma. 246,247 Because of their high local relapse rate, patients with head
and neck or abdominal sarcomas all received surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy in this study. Forty-three eligible patients with trunk and extremity sarcomas were
treated with local therapy (surgery and radiation) with or without chemotherapy. The chemotherapy regimen consisted of vincristine, oral cyclophosphamide, and
doxorubicin every 4 weeks. After seven cycles of doxorubicin-based therapy, actinomycin D was substituted for doxorubicin in a maintenance phase to complete 2
years of chemotherapy. The initial results demonstrated poorer disease-free survival in the chemotherapy arm (76% vs. 83% for the control arm, P value not
significant) and double the rate of metastasis in the chemotherapy arm (but P >.3), and the study was stopped. However, the original study stratified patients by
histology, not by tumor grade. In a reanalysis of this data of the patients with truncal or extremity sarcomas, disease-free survival was improved in the chemotherapy
arm (55% vs. 35% at 10 years, P = .05), although there was no difference in overall survival in the two groups. 247
Another early study of combination chemotherapy was reported by the Mayo Clinic. 248 Sixty-one patients with sarcomas of the trunk or extremities were treated with
surgery alone for local control, then randomized to no further therapy or to chemotherapy. The chemotherapy alternated between cycles of vincristine, actinomycin D,
and cyclophosphamide and cycles of vincristine, doxorubicin, and dacarbazine, given at 6-week intervals for eight courses. Thirteen patients (randomly selected from
either group) were given bacilles Calmette-Guérin methanol extraction residue as nonspecific immunotherapy, but this was discontinued owing to ulceration at the
injection site. There was no benefit in overall survival in the chemotherapy arm, and there was a high local recurrence rate, likely due to the omission of radiation in
the local control phase of therapy. The chemotherapy regimen used in this study had low dose intensity by today's standards.
The largest single study of adjuvant combination chemotherapy in soft tissue sarcoma was performed by the EORTC. 249 Four hundred sixty-eight patients (excluding
only very low grade sarcomas) were treated with surgery for their primary sarcoma, and with adjuvant radiation used for margins less than 1 cm. Patients were
randomized to receive or not receive combination chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and dacarbazine (CyVADIC; Table 39.1-10), given
every 28 days for eight cycles. Disease-free survival and local control were both better in the chemotherapy arm, but overall survival was not significantly different
between the two arms. Improvement in local recurrence rates was limited to patients with head, neck, and trunk sarcomas and was not observed for patients with
extremity sarcomas. Some criticism has been raised as to the long accrual time of the study (11 years), inability of nearly half of patients to complete all eight cycles of
chemotherapy, and the relatively large number of patients ineligible for analysis, which most commonly was due to inappropriate radiation therapy.

TABLE 39.1-10. Combination Chemotherapy for Sarcoma: A Comparison of Formulations

A smaller study from the Fondation Bergonié also examined the CyVADIC regimen as adjuvant therapy. 250 Following local therapy with surgery and radiation, 59
eligible patients with AJCC stage IIB to IVA tumors were randomized to receive no chemotherapy or CyVADIC chemotherapy, in doses similar to the EORTC study. In
comparison with the EORTC trial, patients were treated with chemotherapy sooner after surgery, and on 21-day cycles, as opposed to 28-day cycles in the EORTC
study. More patients with extremity sarcomas were in the chemotherapy group, and the histology of the treated groups was different (e.g., more MFH and no
undifferentiated sarcoma in the chemotherapy arm). In contrast to the EORTC trial, local control, distant metastasis-free survival ( P = .003), and overall survival ( P =
.002) were better in the chemotherapy arm than the control arm. However, in comparison with the EORTC study, the chemotherapy arm fared better (5-year survival
85% vs. 68% for the EORTC study), and the control group performed more poorly (5-year survival under 37%, compared with 63% in the EORTC trial).
The Italian Sarcoma Study Group reported in abstract form the only trial to date to examine an anthracycline plus ifosfamide as adjuvant therapy for extremity
sarcoma.251 After surgery with or without local radiation, 104 patients were randomized to receive no chemotherapy or to receive ifosfamide (1.8 g/m 2 on 5 consecutive
days) with epirubicin (60 mg/m 2 on 2 consecutive days), with filgrastim support. Interim analysis in 1996 led to early conclusion of the trial. At a median follow-up of 36
months, overall survival in the chemotherapy arm was 72% compared with 55% for the control arm ( P = .002). This investigation is promising for its use of the two
most active agents against sarcoma in an appropriate cohort of patients. Review of the final data will be necessary to assess patient selection and follow-up before
conclusions can be drawn concerning this data.
CONCLUSIONS FROM INDIVIDUAL ADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY STUDIES

Clearly, the small size of these trials makes interpretation on an individual basis difficult, since such studies have no statistical power to detect small (e.g., 10% to
20%) changes in overall survival. In many of the studies, a significant proportion of patients was ineligible for analysis, raising the question of selection bias. A second
example of selection bias arises from the fact that patients who are enrolled on clinical trials are healthier overall than nonrandomized patients, and survive longer, as
demonstrated in the Mayo study. 248 Historic controls are inadequate for comparison as there continue to be advances in diagnosis, specific therapy, and supportive
care that could affect outcome. 240
Beyond general problems with randomized studies, staging and dose intensity also affect our ability to draw conclusions about individual studies. A number of
patients with low-grade or small tumors are included in the trials described previously. Patients with high-grade sarcomas do well as long as the primary disease is
small (less than 5 cm). The improved outcome with small, high-grade tumors has been incorporated into the most recent staging system for sarcoma. 252 Future studies
must focus on patients with large tumors at high risk of relapse. Furthermore, dose intensity of doxorubicin is low to moderate in many studies of adjuvant
chemotherapy to date, and largely did not have growth factors such as filgrastim available. It is reasonably clear that doxorubicin and ifosfamide show
dose-dependent responses, 253,254,255,256,257 and 258 and with better supportive care more intensive therapy may lead to improved survival. It is hoped that the first studies
evaluating the use of adjuvant chemotherapy using an anthracycline combined with ifosfamide with growth factors 251 will give further direction to future studies in the
adjuvant therapy of sarcomas.
METAANALYSES OF RANDOMIZED TRIALS OF ADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY FOR SARCOMA
Given the lack of statistical power of the existing randomized trials, it was hoped that combining the data from individual studies of adjuvant chemotherapy for sarcoma
would reveal improvement in overall survival that could not be detected in smaller studies. For example, to detect a 10% difference between control group and
treatment group with a power of 0.90 would require approximately 1000 patients to be enrolled in a randomized study.
Antman and colleagues 234 pooled the data for three randomized studies (ECOG, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Massachusetts General Hospital, and the Intergroup
studies). The 168 eligible patients examined in this study make up a smaller group than the EORTC adjuvant trial, but were followed for up to 11 years in some cases.
Patients with extremity lesions fared better than those with other sites of disease ( P = .02), but there was no difference in overall survival in those receiving
chemotherapy versus control patients.
Zalupski et al. 259 examined overall and disease-free survival in patients with extremity sarcoma obtained from ten of the adjuvant studies mentioned previously. Data
was extracted from the text and tables of each study. The combined data indicated a 10% absolute improvement in overall survival (from 71% to 81%, P = .0005) and
15% improvement in disease-free survival (53% vs. 68%, P <.00001). Criticism of this metaanalysis includes the fact that potentially inappropriate patients were
included (e.g., those from the Rizzoli and UCLA studies who received preoperative chemotherapy). In addition, some of the data were relatively immature as well,
such as the EORTC and Bergonié studies.
Tierney and colleagues assessed 15 published studies 2 years later and converted the survival data into the odds of recurrence based on the latest available
publication from each trial. 260 Standardization was performed to account for different lengths of follow-up. In all, 1546 patients were included in the study, which
showed improved survival at 2 years and at 5 years in the 13 and 11 studies eligible for analysis at each time point, respectively. In contrast to the previous
metaanalysis from Zalupski et al., 259 the Rizzoli data were included in this study, but not the data from UCLA.
The most rigorous metaanalysis was published in 1997. 261 In this study, 23 potential studies were considered, and 14 ultimately included; only 31 potential patients
were omitted due to unavailability of data, giving a cohort of 1568 patients to examine. Patient accrual had to be complete by the end of 1992, which excluded one
trial. Histology for each patient was recorded, but pathology review was not centralized. Median follow-up was 9.4 years. Analyses were stratified by trial, and hazard
ratios were calculated for each trial and combined, allowing for an assessment of the risk of death or recurrence in comparison with control patients. Disease-free
survival at 10 years was found to be improved from 45% to 55% and was statistically significant ( P = .0001). Local disease-free survival at 10 years also favored the
chemotherapy arm, improving from 75% to 81% (P = .016). However, overall survival, while improving at 10 years from 50% to 54%, was not statistically significant ( P
= .12). The largest difference in overall survival was found in subgroup analysis of the 886 patients with extremity sarcomas, in which absolute overall survival was
shown to increase 7% in the group receiving chemotherapy ( P = .029).
CONCLUSIONS: ADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY FOR SOFT TISSUE SARCOMAS
The data from the metaanalyses described previously must be examined with caution. Although the most recent metaanalysis is a useful tool, it still combines studies
with different designs, diverse criteria for enrollment, variations in pathologic assessment such as grading, different chemotherapeutic regimens, and different end
points. In particular, only one-fourth of the specimens from the 1997 metaanalysis underwent review of tumor grade; approximately 60% were reviewed for histologic
subtype. Of 15 published adjuvant studies, only two, the Rizzoli and Bergonié studies, show improved overall survival in the chemotherapy arm. Only one small study
included in the 1997 metaanalysis used ifosfamide, another active agent in sarcoma.
If there is a benefit for the adjuvant use of chemotherapy, it appears modest, based on the previously mentioned data. Given no statistically significant benefit in a
population of patients typically healthier than patients not enrolled on protocols, the data do not support the routine use of adjuvant chemotherapy for soft tissue
sarcoma outside of the setting of a clinical trial. However, moderate to large extremity lesions represent one situation in which adjuvant chemotherapy may be
considered on a case-by-case basis. The subset analysis of extremity data from the 1997 metaanalysis indicates this is one situation in which adjuvant chemotherapy
can be considered. However, subset analyses are used to generate hypotheses and do not necessarily give definitive results. Publication of the more recent Italian
study of epirubicin and ifosfamide as adjuvant therapy for extremity sarcomas may clarify this situation further. With clear definition of a population at high risk for
metastatic disease, identification of relatively sensitive histologic subtypes of sarcoma, and use of combinations of active agents, it is hoped that future studies will
delineate which clinical situations merit use of adjuvant chemotherapy.

PREOPERATIVE CHEMOTHERAPY
Preoperative chemotherapy has been successful in the management of predominantly pediatric sarcomas such as Ewing's sarcoma and osteosarcoma. With this
success, the concept was extended to use in adult soft tissue sarcomas. Preoperative neoadjuvant chemotherapy can make subsequent surgery easier and
potentially treats micrometastatic disease earlier before acquisition of resistance. Treating with chemotherapy before surgery also leaves primary vasculature intact
for drug delivery. In addition, preoperative chemotherapy can guide postoperative treatment based on pathologic review of the tissue after chemotherapy. In
experimental models, preoperative chemotherapy eliminates a postoperative surge in growth of metastases noted after resection of primary tumors. 262,263
There is relatively little evidence concerning the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas. Rouesse et al. retrospectively examined a
group of 34 patients with locally advanced sarcomas for whom only amputation or mutilating surgery was feasible. 264 Patients received doxorubicin-based
chemotherapy for two to seven cycles before resection. Postoperative radiation was offered to some patients. Partial or complete responses were noted in over
one-third of patients; not surprisingly, those patients who had a complete response by any means had a better overall survival than those who did not respond
completely. Local recurrence was common in the responding group, as well.
A retrospective trial of 46 patients from M. D. Anderson Cancer Center examined preoperative chemotherapy using cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and
dacarbazine. 265 Forty percent of patients demonstrated complete, partial, or minor responses to chemotherapy and had better rates of survival than the patients who
did not have an objective clinical response to chemotherapy.
A prospective trial was performed at MSKCC in which 29 patients with large, high-grade, primary or recurrent metastases were given two cycles of combination
chemotherapy before definitive therapy with surgery and radiation. 266 Clinical and radiologic studies were performed before chemotherapy, and the specimen was
assessed for response after surgical resection. Only 1 of 29 patients demonstrated a clinical partial response, although liquefaction, cystic necrosis, and hemorrhage
into the tumor were noted regularly in the resected specimen, with three tumors showing greater than 90% necrosis. Most patients did not elect to receive
postoperative chemotherapy after surgery, and survival results from this study did not differ significantly from studies of adjuvant doxorubicin or of no chemotherapy.
Assessing the response to preoperative chemotherapy in primary soft tissue sarcomas is difficult. Some softening or liquefaction can be noted clinically without
significant change in tumor size, but in the trial from MSKCC neither CT nor MRI provided information that predicted long-term outcome. It appears that there are

significantly fewer cases of complete response compared with preoperative adjuvant chemotherapy for sarcoma of bone (osteosarcoma or Ewing's sarcoma), and it is
difficult to objectively evaluate responses grossly or microscopically after chemotherapy. Other imaging modalities may demonstrate changes consistent with
chemotherapy effect (MRI spectroscopy, PET, gallium scan, thallium scan), 267,268,269,270 and 271 but these modalities remain investigational.
In sum, preoperative chemotherapy is given to some patients with potentially sensitive sarcoma subtypes such as synovial sarcoma or other high-grade lesions. It is
clear from the present AJCC staging system that larger, deep, high-grade lesions have a high risk of metastasis. 252 Thus, it is conceivable that local control could
improve with adjuvant chemotherapy, without significantly changing overall survival. Nonetheless, preoperative chemotherapy may be considered during an attempt to
maintain function of an extremity, with the possibility that more aggressive surgery could be performed later if needed. Selected patients have had responses that
allow for a more conservative resection, avoid an amputation, or both.

INTRAARTERIAL CHEMOTHERAPY
There have been many studies examining the role of intraarterial chemotherapy, with doxorubicin, cisplatinum, or both; in some situations other drugs have been used
as well. This infusional approach is to be differentiated from local limb perfusion, discussed later in the section Hyperthermia and Limb Perfusion. Intraarterial
chemotherapy has the potential benefit of providing higher doses of chemotherapy to the limb in a first-pass effect. However, pharmacokinetic data have not shown an
advantage over intravenous chemotherapy. 272
Intraarterial chemotherapy has been used in conjunction with radiation as well. Mention has already been made of the UCLA adjuvant study in which patients received
3 days of intraarterial doxorubicin before administration of 35 Gy of external-beam radiation over 10 days, or 17.5 Gy administered over 5 days. 273 Patients were then
randomized to receive postoperative doxorubicin intravenously or no further chemotherapy. No difference in survival or local control was noted in this study.
Thereafter, a randomized trial by the same group examined preoperative intravenous versus intraarterial chemotherapy before radiation (28 Gy given over 8 days)
followed by wide excision. There was no difference in local recurrence or survival between the 45 patients receiving intraarterial doxorubicin and the 54 patients
receiving intravenous doxorubicin. 274
A number of studies have examined intraarterial chemotherapy before radiation and surgery, 275,276 doxorubicin alone,273,277 or in combination with other drugs such as
cisplatin,275,278,279 single agent intraarterial cisplatin, 280 or intraarterial doxorubicin in combination with intravenous doxorubicin or other agents. 281 Doxorubicin with
simultaneous radiation has also been examined. 282,283 In these studies, some patients have been able to avoid amputation. Infusional chemotherapy has its attendant
complications as well, including arterial thromboembolism, infection, gangrene, and problems with wound healing, itself requiring amputation. Pathologic fractures
have been reported in patients receiving chemotherapy and relatively large doses of radiation. One study 283 reported ten major complications in 13 patients treated
intraarterial chemotherapy with simultaneous radiation, emphasizing the investigational nature of this approach. Although there are situations in which such therapy
should be considered, intraarterial chemotherapy at present has a limited role in the treatment of extremity sarcomas.

HYPERTHERMIA AND LIMB PERFUSION
In contrast to systemic intraarterial chemotherapy infusion, perfusion of limbs requires isolation of the arterial and venous system of the limb by means of a tourniquet
and obtaining access to arteries and veins supplying the limb. The arterial and venous supply of the limb is connected to an extracorporeal circulation system to
isolate the limb from the rest of the body. Recirculation of the blood from the limb is performed by a heart-lung machine to reoxygenate the blood. Care is taken after
isolation of the limb to ensure no leakage of the circuit into the systemic circulation; technetium-labeled albumin is injected into the circuit and a probe is used over the
heart to ensure isolation of the bypass circuit. Since mild hyperthermia may make chemotherapy more effective in some clinical settings (as mentioned in this section),
the blood of the circuit is often warmed to 39° to 40°C.
A number of chemotherapeutic agents have been used for limb perfusion, such as melphalan, nitrogen mustard, actinomycin D, and doxorubicin. The most effective
agents to date have been melphalan when given with tumor necrosis factor (TNF). The greatest experience with this technique comes from Eggermont et al. 284,285 Two
hundred forty-six patients with primary or recurrent sarcomas that would otherwise require amputation or marked loss of function were treated with one and
occasionally two isolated limb perfusion sessions. After isolation of the extremity, melphalan (10 to 13 mg/L limb volume) was perfused into the limb with a dose of
TNF ten times the lethal dose for humans, under mild hyperthermic conditions. In early studies interferon-a was included in the regimen, but was later dropped, as it
did not appear to improve results over melphalan and TNF alone. Both components of the regimen appeared important; the omission of TNF led to a decrease in
tissue dose of melphalan, probably from its effects on the tumor vasculature. Surgery to remove residual tumor was performed 2 to 4 months after limb perfusion. With
a median follow-up of 3 years, 71% of patients had successful limb salvage.
It is difficult to compare this approach with standard chemotherapy, given the heterogeneity of patients between the two types of studies. In aggregate, the response
rate does appear higher in the perfusion studies than in the infusion studies. However, isolated limb perfusion requires substantial expertise and specialized
dedicated equipment. Complications of this technique include shock (from systemic leak of TNF); infection; chronic damage to skin, muscles, and nerve; persistent
edema; and arterial or venous thrombosis. Experience has led to a decrease in the incidence and severity of complications. Isolated limb perfusion does appear to
hold promise for at least a subset of patients who would otherwise require amputation for local control and has been approved for such patients in Europe. Studies are
underway to examine the utility of regional limb infusion, which would not require bypass machines, as a simplified means of treating otherwise unresectable extremity
sarcomas.
Hyperthermia has been used in other ways to enhance the effects of chemotherapy in patients with locally advanced disease. Whole body hyperthermia using
extracorporeal heating of blood has been combined with ifosfamide and carboplatin intravenous chemotherapy, and responses have been seen in patients with
otherwise refractory small cell sarcomas. 286 Regional hyperthermia provided through an external magnetic field (phased array) has been examined in combination with
ifosfamide and etoposide. 287 Similarly, hyperthermia achieved with an external electromagnetic field has been combined with ifosfamide, etoposide, and
doxorubicin.288 In both studies, partial and complete responses in patients with locally advanced sarcoma have been observed. The hyperthermia used in these
protocols is more aggressive than that used with limb perfusion; higher temperatures have led to a higher rate of local complications. Isolated limb perfusion has not
been compared directly with simultaneous hyperthermia and chemotherapy. In sum, isolated limb perfusion and hyperthermia-enhanced chemotherapy represent
novel ways of attempting to preserve function of limbs in what otherwise would be situations in which amputation would be necessary. In the United States, such
procedures remain investigational at present.

SPECIAL FEATURES OF THE MANAGEMENT OF SARCOMAS OF NONEXTREMITY SITES
MANAGEMENT OF VISCERAL/RETROPERITONEAL SARCOMA
Clinical Presentation
Most patients present with an asymptomatic abdominal mass (Fig. 39.1-22). On occasion pain is present and, less commonly, gastrointestinal bleeding, incomplete
obstruction, or neurologic symptoms relating to retroperitoneal invasion or pressure on neurovascular structures are present. Weight loss is uncommon and incidental
diagnosis is often the norm. In one report, 289 neurologic symptoms related primarily to an expanding retroperitoneal mass were identified in 27% of patients.

FIGURE 39.1-22. Algorithm for the management of retroperitoneal or visceral sarcoma. BRT, brachytherapy; CR, complete resection; CT, computed tomography;
CXR, chest radiography; ERT, external-beam radiation therapy; ICR, incomplete resection; IORT, intraoperative radiation therapy; x-ray therapy.

On physical examination, a large abdominal mass is often present. Important issues of differential diagnosis, particularly in the young, are the presence of a germ cell
tumor or a primary retroperitoneal tumor arising from the adrenal. Most of such lesions, however, are tumors of mesenchymal origin, either benign or malignant.
USE OF IMAGING STUDIES. In the main, CT remains the primary modality for evaluation of retroperitoneal and visceral sarcomas. Because the most likely site of visceral

metastasis is the liver, a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis usually encompasses description not only of the primary lesion, but also of the most likely source of
metastasis. For retroperitoneal lesions, the incidence of metastatic disease to the liver is possible but still low.
Of the histopathologic types, leiomyosarcoma and liposarcoma predominate (see Fig. 39.1-4), whereas other types seen in the extremity, such as MFH, are very
uncommon. Most retroperitoneal tumors are high-grade lesions because of the predominance of leiomyosarcoma in the visceral lesions. The retroperitoneal
liposarcoma is often predominantly low grade and overall the more common tumor. Nevertheless, with increasing frequency we note the mixed cellularity and grade of
some retroperitoneal sarcomas.
Primary surgical resection is the dominant therapeutic modality. Preoperative bowel preparation is important, not because of tumor invasion, but often because of the
technical difficulty of resection without encompassing the intestine. Because many tumors involve the retroperitoneum, evaluation of renal function, particularly the
establishment of contralateral adequate renal function, is important, to allow nephrectomy where appropriate.
Although resection of adjacent organs is common289 proof that a more extensive resection of adjacent organs has an effect on long-term survival seems limited. It is
clear that complete surgical resection is the primary factor in outcome ( Fig. 39.1-23). Once complete resection is accounted for, the predominant factor in outcome is
the grade of the lesion.

FIGURE 39.1-23. Survival following resection of primary retroperitoneal sarcoma according to resection status in 155 patients aged 16 years or older admitted to
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center between July 1982 and July 1999 ( P <.001).

TECHNICAL ISSUES. The major issue in resection of such lesions is adequate exposure. Thoracoabdominal incisions, rectus-dividing incisions, incisions extending

through the inguinal ligament into the thigh, the availability of venovenous bypass, adequate and appropriate anesthetic, and blood replacement therapy are all
important issues for many of these large lesions. Resectability rates vary widely, but seem independent of histologic type, grade, or size. 289
These factors should not preclude attempts at reresection. Complete resection is usually possible in 60% to 70% of patients presenting with a second or subsequent
recurrence. In our reviews, 289,290 although nephrectomy was commonly performed (in 46% of cases), the kidney itself was rarely involved. In the report by Jaques and
coworkers289 only 2 of 30 nephrectomies showed true parenchymal invasion. Nevertheless, the encompassment of the kidney and the involvement of the hilar renal
vasculature all make the resection of the kidney on occasions technically necessary.
The overriding principle is not to be reticent about resection of adjacent organs should they be involved by tumor. Conversely, one should not resect uninvolved
organs if they are not the limiting factor in the margins. For example, the resection of a kidney, when the vena cava is the closest margin, makes little oncologic sense.
Overall, the use of debulking for recurrent lesions is rarely of significant value in terms of long-term survival. More extended resections do not seem to improve local
recurrence or survival. It is often difficult to decide how much can be palliated by incomplete removal of tumor. The concept, however, should be that unless palliation
can be achieved, operation should be reserved for those patients for whom complete resection is at least possible, if not probable. The basis for unresectability is
usually the presence of peritoneal implants or extensive vascular involvement.
Retroperitoneal sarcomas remain a major clinical challenge. Most of these tumors are large, making it difficult to obtain adequate margins of resection. Compounding
the problem, the presence of normal organ such as small bowel, large bowel, kidney, and liver make delivery of therapeutic doses of radiation therapy either difficult
or impossible.
Jaques and coworkers289 reported the experience at MSKCC from 1982 to 1987. One-half of the patients presented with liposarcoma, whereas 29% had
leiomyosarcoma. Sixty-five percent of primary sarcomas underwent a complete resection, whereas approximately one-half the patients with recurrent retroperitoneal
sarcomas could have a complete resection. Despite complete resection, local recurrence developed in approximately 40% to 50% of cases. There is a clear need for
adjuvant local therapy. Importantly, local recurrence is a problem for both high-grade and low-grade lesions: The local recurrence rate is similar, but the time to
recurrence differs significantly. The median time for recurrence was 15 months for high-grade and 42 months for low-grade sarcomas. Fifty-three percent of patients
required adjacent organ resection, and 40% of patients required more than one adjacent organ resection, in order to accomplish complete removal of disease.
Adjuvant external-beam irradiation is limited because of the low tolerance of surrounding normal organs. However, there are data to suggest some improvement in
local control with moderate doses of external-beam irradiation. 291,292 Tepper and associates 293 reviewed a cohort of 23 patients with retroperitoneal sarcomas treated
with surgery and radiation therapy. For patients who underwent a complete resection, local control was 71%. Radiation dose appeared to influence tumor control, with
only 30% of patients locally controlled at doses less than 5000 cGy and 83% of patients controlled with doses greater than 6000 cGy. Obviously, the total dose of
radiation that is possible varies with the size and location of that lesion.
With the need to deliver higher doses of radiation to the tumor and lower doses to surrounding tissue, there has been an interest in using intraoperative radiation
therapy (IORT). 294,295 Petersen et al. from the Mayo Clinic reported on 87 patients who were treated with IORT that was supplemented by external-beam radiation in
80/87. With a median follow-up of 3 years, the 5-year local control and survival rates were 58% and 50%, respectively. 296 Sindelar and coworkers297 reported a
prospective, randomized clinical trial utilizing intraoperative radiation therapy at the NCI. Thirty-five patients with surgically resected sarcomas of the retroperitoneum
were randomized to receive IORT (20 Gy) followed by low-dose external-beam irradiation (35 to 40 Gy) versus external-beam radiation therapy alone (50 to 55 Gy).
The study revealed a significant improvement in local control for those who received IORT. There was no effect on survival. Patients who received IORT also received
misonidazole, and they had a higher incidence of peripheral neuropathy than those who received external-beam radiation alone. On the other hand, those who
received higher dose external-beam radiation alone, without IORT, had a higher incidence of radiation enteritis.
To build on the NCI data, we have begun to examine IORT at MSKCC. Instead of using electron beam IORT, we have used a technique that involves high-dose-rate
remote afterloading. All patients had a maximal tumor resection. At the time of surgery, a dose of 12 to 15 Gy was delivered with IORT. Postoperative external
irradiation of 45 Gy was added. No misonidazole was given. The concept is that this dose of IORT without misonidazole should result in a significantly lower incidence

of neuropathy than the experience of the NCI, and this dose of external-beam irradiation should result in lower risk of radiation enteritis. Alektiar et al. reported on 32
patients treated with such an approach. 298 With a median follow-up of 33 months, the 5-year actuarial local control and overall survival rates were 62% and 45%,
receptively. The rate of peripheral neuropathy was 6% and the rate of gastrointestinal toxicity was 19%.

MANAGEMENT OF HEAD AND NECK SARCOMA
Soft tissue sarcomas of the head and neck in adults are rare. They represent approximately 1% of all head and neck malignancies and 10% of all soft tissue
sarcomas. Most of these tumors present as a painless subcutaneous or submucosal mass. Any histologic type of soft tissue sarcoma could originate in the head and
neck area, but there is preponderance of angiosarcoma in this site. Multimodality approach is the cornerstone for most soft tissue sarcomas of the head and neck.
Surgery is the main treatment for these tumors, and every attempt should be made to obtain at least gross total resection, otherwise the results are usually poor.
However, unlike extremity sarcomas, head and neck sarcomas are not amenable to wide local excision with generous margin of normal tissue due to anatomic
constraints. Therefore, the use of adjuvant radiation is more liberal in this site because local recurrence could be the cause of death in a substantial proportion of
patients.
Eeles et al. reported on 103 patients with soft tissue sarcoma of the head and neck area treated by surgery with or without radiation. The 5-year survival rate was 50%
and the local control rate was 47%. The only independent prognostic factor for survival was surgery other than biopsy ( P = .003). For local control the combined use
of surgery and radiation as opposed to single modality was also an independent prognostic factor ( P = .002). In addition, local tumor was the cause of death in 63% of
cases.299 Willers et al. reported on 46 patients with soft tissue sarcoma excluding angiosarcoma who were treated by radiation with or without surgery. The 5-year
survival and local control rates were 74% and 69%, respectively. On multivariate analysis survival correlated with low grade, recurrent presentation, and lack of direct
extension (P = .001, .01, .03, respectively). For local control the only independent prognostic factor was the T stage ( P = .05). There was also a 15-fold increased risk
of dying for patients whose tumor had recurred locoregionally, compared with controlled sarcomas ( P = .004).300
Le et al. reported on 65 patients treated by surgery with or without radiation and found the 5-year survival and local control rates to be 56% and 66%, respectively. On
multivariate analysis the independent predictors of improved survival were age less than 55 ( P = .009), low grade (P = .0002), extent of resection ( P = .008), and
negative margin ( P = .0009). For local control smaller tumor size ( P = .004) and grade 1 to 2 (P = .01) were independent predictors. 301
Angiosarcoma of the head and neck deserve special consideration due to their poor prognosis compared with other sarcomas in that region. 300,302 Some of the
difficulties in managing this disease have to do with its notorious propensity to infiltrate throughout the dermis beyond what is clinically apparent, making wide local
excision with negative margins difficult to achieve. In addition, they display a higher incidence of regional lymph node metastasis than other sarcomas with a reported
rate of 10% to 15%. 303
Morrison et al. reported on 14 patients with angiosarcoma of the head and neck treated by radiation with or without surgery. The 5-year overall and distant
metastasis-free survival rates were 29% and 37%, respectively. The 5-year above clavicle local control rates were 24% for definitive radiation compared with 40%
with adjuvant radiation ( P = .03). 304 Similar findings were reported by Willers et al. on 11 patients with 5-year overall, distant metastasis-free, and local recurrence-free
survival rates of 31%, 42%, and 24%, respectively. 300

MANAGEMENT OF BREAST SARCOMA
Primary soft tissue sarcomas of the breast are rare, representing approximately 1% of all breast malignancies. They usually present as a painless mass with no
distinctive findings on mammography. The main treatment is surgery and the extent of resection is debatable, but most authors believe that wide excision with
generous negative margin is adequate. 305 North et al. reported on 25 patients treated by surgery with or without radiation. The 5-year overall survival rate was 61%,
which did not vary significantly between those treated with wide excision compared with those who underwent mastectomy ( P = .9). Five patients received adjuvant
radiation and none of them developed local recurrence. 306
Gutman et al. showed similar findings in 60 cases of breast sarcoma treated by surgery with or without radiation. 307 Johnstone et al. reported on 10 patients treated
with mastectomy and adjuvant radiation. The 5-year survival rate was 66% with no local or regional failures. 308

SERIOUS COMPLICATIONS OF PRIMARY TREATMENT
WOUND COMPLICATIONS
It is well established that radiation and chemotherapy inhibit wound healing. Early studies defined the effects of doxorubicin and x-ray treatment on wound healing in
animal models. 309 The authors demonstrated that the timing and the combination of multiple antineoplastic agents were critical to inhibiting wound healing. They
suggested that radiation or antineoplastic drugs delivered more than 7 days on either side of the wound were accompanied by minimal inhibition of wound healing.
Conversely, the application of radiation or chemotherapy just before, or in close juxtaposition to, the time of wounding, resulted in significant impairment of wound
healing as demonstrated by wound-breaking strength. This appeared to be due to inhibition of newly synthesized collagen as determined by hydroxyproline assays.
A comprehensive review of the effect of chemotherapeutic agents on wound healing 310 emphasized the importance of the agents used and the timing of delivery.
In our studies of adjuvant BRT and wound complications, we also demonstrated that when particular attention is paid to the timing of delivery of radiation via
afterloading catheters to beyond the fifth postoperative day, the major wound complication rate approaches that with surgery alone. 211
More recently, wound complications (wound infection or the need for further operative intervention) were analyzed in the randomized BRT trial at MSKCC. 310a The
overall rate was 24% in the BRT arm compared with 14% in the control arm ( P = .13). However, the rate of reoperation was higher in the BRT group, 10% versus 0%
(P = .006). The other covariable that contributed to wound reoperation was the width of the excised skin. If the width was greater than 4 cm the rate was 10%, but if
the width was less than or equal to 4 cm the rate was 1% (P = .02). These types of complications are not unique to BRT but have been shown with external-beam
irradiation as well. 311,312 and 313 In a randomized trial from Princess Margaret Hospital comparing preoperative and postoperative irradiation, wound complication was a
primary end point of the study. Wound complications were defined as secondary wound surgery, hospital admission for wound care, and deep packing or prolonged
dressings within 120 days following tumor resection. The investigators found that preoperative radiation had a significantly higher rate of wound complications (35%
vs. 17%, P = .01).314
In situations in which wound complications may be anticipated because of the magnitude of the wound, extent of the resection, prior radiation, and so forth, serious
consideration should be given to bringing fresh vascularized tissue in the form of either transpositional or free grafts into the area to cover the defect before the
placement or delivery of radiation therapy. With this approach, postoperative morbidity can be markedly diminished.
OTHER COMPLICATIONS
The effect of adjuvant radiation and chemotherapy on the development of bony fracture has been reported in the literature but the data are scant. Stinson et al.
reported on 145 patients with soft tissue sarcoma who underwent limb-sparing surgery and postoperative radiation with or without chemotherapy and found a 6%
fracture rate. 315 For patients treated with adjuvant BRT in the MSKCC randomized trial, the rate of fracture was 4% compared with 0% in the control arm. This
difference, however, was not statistically significant ( P = .2).310a Brant et al. reported a 7.6% rate of pathologic fracture in patients treated with preoperative
radiation. 316
Lin et al. evaluated 205 patients with soft tissue sarcomas of the thigh to determine the contributing factors to pathologic fracture of the femur in patients treated with
adjuvant radiation. The 5-year actuarial risk was 8.6%, which on univariate analysis correlated with periosteal stripping ( P = .0001), location in the anterior
compartment (P = .008), female sex (P = .01), the use of chemotherapy (P = .02), age greater than or equal to 50 ( P = .03), and the use of external-beam radiation
instead of BRT (P = .04). On multivariate analysis only periosteal stripping retained significance ( P = .01). 317

The other type of complication encountered with adjuvant radiation is peripheral nerve damage. In the control arm of the MSKCC randomized trial the rate was 7%
compared with 9% in the BRT arm (P = .8).310a LePechoux et al. reported a rate of 1.6% of peripheral nerve damage in 62 patients treated with postoperative
radiation. 318 Brant et al. reported a 3.4% rate for patients treated with preoperative radiation. 316

PROGNOSTIC FACTORS FOR OUTCOME
As more sophisticated approaches to the analysis of outcome become more widely employed, it becomes clear that the variables being investigated provide different
information. Prognostic factors for local recurrence, metastasis, disease-specific survival, and overall survival may all be fine gradations of differing factors, all of
which provide considerably different information.
An analysis of long-term follow-up for over 1000 patients with localized soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity has been provided from our group. 184 From prospective
data collected from 1041 patients over the age of 16, we have determined the clinical pathologic factors that influence local recurrence, distant recurrence, and
disease-specific and overall survival. The 5-year survival rate was 76%, with a median follow-up of 4 years. Factors that increased the risk of local recurrence were
age greater than 50 years, recurrent disease at the time of presentation, positive histologic primary margins, histologic subtypes of fibrosarcoma (including desmoid),
and malignant peripheral nerve tumors ( Table 39.1-11).

TABLE 39.1-11. Relative Risk Influence on Recurrence of Localized Extremity Soft Tissue Sarcoma a

Factors that increased distant recurrence rates were tumor size greater than 5 cm, high histologic grade, deep location, recurrent disease at the time of presentation,
and histologic subtype leiomyosarcoma. Histology of liposarcoma was favorable for decreased distant recurrence rate when compared with other histologies.
For disease-specific mortality, large tumor size, high histologic grade, deep location, recurrent disease at presentation, positive histologic margins at the time of
resection of the primary, lower extremity site, and the histologic types of leiomyosarcoma and malignant peripheral nerve tumor were all factors.
Postmetastasis survival for most patients is independent of factors involved in the primary presentation, although large tumor size has been associated. The
determination of recurrence rates and survival rates can depend on which factor is examined. For example, high-grade lesions have a much greater cumulative
hazard rate of developing a distant metastasis in the first 30 months. Low-grade lesions, however, have a continued slow but inexorable progression to a continuing
long-term rate of metastasis. This raises the interesting biologic question of whether lack of recognition of the metastatic potential of low-grade sarcomas is caused by
inherent sampling error in low-grade lesions, where small foci of potentially metastatic cells are not appreciated. Alternatively, all soft tissue sarcomas may be
inherently imbued with metastatic potential. One thing is clear: 5-year survival does not guarantee cure. An analysis of patients who were disease-free 5 years after
the diagnosis and treatment of extremity lesions showed 9% would go on to have a further recurrence in the next 5 years ( Fig. 39.1-24).185

FIGURE 39.1-24. Survival in patients with extremity soft tissue sarcoma who were metastasis-free at 5 years. (From ref. 527, with permission.)

QUALITY OF LIFE AND FUNCTIONAL OUTCOME
Quality of life assessment has gained so much importance in recent years that many randomized trials in the field of oncology are evaluating that issue either as the
primary end point or secondary to outcome. This issue is obviously of great significance in patients with soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity who are being treated
with conservative surgery and adjuvant therapy in order to preserve function and potentially improve the overall quality of life.
However, in order to determine the effect of adjuvant therapy it is important to look at other potential contributing factors as well. One such factor is the extent of
surgical resection. Sugarbaker et al. found no evidence of improved quality of life in patients treated with conservative surgery and adjuvant radiation compared with
amputation, 319 but more recently Davis et al. showed a significantly higher levels of handicap in amputated patients compared with those treated with conservative
surgery. 320 In patients treated with conservative surgery, the effect of the extent of surgery on functional outcome is not clearly defined. Robinson et al. reported on 54
patients who were disease-free 2 or more years after limb-conserving treatment for soft tissue sarcoma of the leg or pelvic girdle. 324 The extent of surgery was not an
independent prognostic factor for limb function, although univariate analysis suggested an association with range of movement ( P <.025).81 On the other hand, Bell et
al. showed that neural sacrifice performed at the time of wide local excision was associated with poorer outcome on univariate ( P = .002) and multivariate analysis (P
= .019).321 Conventional chemotherapy has not been shown to affect the functional outcome of patients with extremity sarcomas.
The effect of adjuvant radiation and some of its parameters on functional outcome have been studied more extensively. Yang et al. reported that adjuvant
postoperative external-beam radiation compared with surgery alone resulted in significantly worse limb strength and edema and range of motion, but these deficits
were often transient and had few measurable effects on activities of daily life or global quality of life. 193 Schupak et al. reported on a group of patients who underwent
rigorous psychofunctional testing and were part of the BRT randomized trial at MSKCC. There were no significant differences in the functional outcome between the
BRT group and the no BRT group. The psychofunctional scores, however, revealed a higher level of anxiety, depression, and appreciation of illness in patients who
received adjuvant BRT.322 Karasek et al. evaluated 41 patients who were treated with surgery and radiation and showed that 83% of them had good or excellent
functional outcome. But there was a correlation between volume irradiated to greater than or equal to 55 Gy and poorer functional score, strength, fibrosis, and skin
changes.323 Robinson et al. also found that doses in excess of 60 Gy resulted in increased fibrosis and a worse functional outcome. 324

TREATMENT OF LOCAL RECURRENCE
The treatment of locally recurrent soft tissue sarcoma in almost any site that is amenable to low morbidity surgical resection is reresection. Local recurrence, however,
remains a significant factor in long-term morbidity and mortality. In cases in which surgical resection can be achieved, then adjuvant radiation therapy should be
considered in the vast majority of patients with recurrent disease. In patients undergoing systemic recurrence, again surgical resection should be considered.
Analyses of patients undergoing local resection of intraabdominal lesions have been extensively reviewed. 289,290 It is clear that when complete gross resection can be
achieved, operation for local recurrence should be attempted along with investigational approaches such as IORT (see Technical Issues, earlier in this chapter).
Intraperitoneal chemotherapy following debulking of peritoneal metastases has been advocated, 325 but remains an investigational approach.

MANAGEMENT OF ADVANCED DISEASE
Control of the primary site can be achieved in the vast majority of patients with soft tissue sarcoma, but ultimately close to one-half of patients succumb to metastatic
or locally advanced disease. Unfortunately, the most active chemotherapeutic options are of limited value and are associated with serious and potentially
life-threatening toxicity. Median survival from the time metastases are recognized is 8 to 12 months, although 20% to 25% of patients with metastatic sarcoma are
alive 2 years after diagnosis. Patients with metastatic sarcoma often feel well at the time that a radiograph or CT reveals metastases and may remain free of
symptoms for months, or even years. Thus, alleviation of symptoms is not an immediate concern in many patients, although progressive sarcoma is inevitable.
Surgical resection can provide selected patients with prolonged periods of freedom from disease, and radiation therapy provides palliation for individual patients who
have localized symptomatic metastases. Optimal treatment of patients with unresectable or metastatic soft tissue sarcoma requires an appreciation for the natural
history of the disease, close attention to the individual patient, and an understanding of the benefits and limitations of the therapeutic options.
RESECTION OF METASTATIC DISEASE
Approximately 20% of patients with a soft tissue sarcoma of an extremity or the trunk develop pulmonary metastases, and in the majority, the lung remains the only
clinically evident site of metastasis. In retrospective series, 20% to 30% of patients who undergo metastasectomy are alive 5 years later. 326,327,328,329,330 and 331
Of 716 patients with primary extremity sarcoma who were treated at Memorial over a period of 6 years, pulmonary-only metastases occurred in 19%, or 135. Of these
135 patients, 58% underwent thoracotomy and 83% of those had a complete resection of their tumor. In the 65 patients who had a complete resection of their tumor,
69% recurred with pulmonary metastases as their only site of disease. Median survival from complete resection was 19 months, and 3-year survival was only 23% of
those resected and 11% of those presenting with lung metastasis only. Patients who did not undergo thoracotomy all died within 3 years. 170 Chemotherapy had no
obvious effect on survival in either the resected or unresected patients. Incomplete resection was no better than no operation ( Fig. 39.1-25). At M. D. Anderson, in
contrast to the experience with primary sarcoma, response to chemotherapy administered before pulmonary resection did not predict for improved outcome. 332 Again,
there is a glaring need for effective approaches to reducing systemic recurrence in patients rendered free of disease by surgical resection.

FIGURE 39.1-25. Pulmonary resection of soft tissue sarcoma metastases from the extremity. Comparison of no resection, versus incomplete resection versus
complete gross resection of all known metastases. (From ref. 528, with permission.)

In patients who have pulmonary only metastatic disease that is not amenable to resection, an innovative approach under study is isolated lung perfusion. 333 This
technique or direct lung infusion can be used to administer chemotherapeutic drugs or biologic agents in a way that results in a high concentration of the agent in the
lung, with no systemic exposure.

SYSTEMIC THERAPY FOR ADVANCED DISEASE
The activity of individual commercially available chemotherapeutic agents in patients with soft tissue sarcoma is summarized in Table 39.1-12. Doxorubicin has been
the mainstay of chemotherapy for advanced sarcoma. Whereas early studies suggested overall response rates of 30%, 254,334 in more recent trials the response rate
was closer to 20%.335,336 Subset analysis of patients with soft tissue sarcoma from a large randomized phase II trial of different doses of doxorubicin demonstrated a
dose-response relationship in patients with sarcoma. 254 These data have been confirmed in other trials of single-agent doxorubicin and trials with
doxorubicin-containing combination therapy. 255,256,257 and 258 Some studies have begun to examine liposomal forms of doxorubicin, which may have fewer side effects
than doxorubicin itself; response rates have been low, however.

TABLE 39.1-12. Selected Studies of Single-Agent Chemotherapy for Advanced Disease a

Ifosfamide has approximately the same efficacy as doxorubicin. In the past, ifosfamide dosing was limited by severe urothelial toxicity (hemorrhagic cystitis). The
uroprotective agent mesna has markedly changed the ability to give both ifosfamide and cyclophosphamide, and ifosfamide doses as large as 14 to 18 g/m 2 over
several days are given in some studies. There has been a debate as to the relative efficacy of cyclophosphamide versus ifosfamide, in particular whether ifosfamide is
truly a different drug or whether differences in dosing of the two drugs accounts for the difference in response. The best study addressing this question came from the
EORTC, which performed a randomized phase II trial examining the response rates of ifosfamide, 5 g/m 2, to cyclophosphamide, 1.5 g/m2. There was greater
myelosuppression with cyclophosphamide, but response rates were 7.5% for cyclophosphamide and 18% with ifosfamide; although suggestive, this difference did not

achieve statistical significance. Additionally, there is some evidence to suggest a dose-response relationship for ifosfamide. 253 This is also borne out by the large
number of phase II trials examining high-dose ifosfamide in metastatic soft tissue sarcoma (see Table 39.1-12); responses to higher doses of ifosfamide are
occasionally seen in patients failing lower doses of alkylating agents. The similar response rates of ifosfamide and doxorubicin, even in doxorubicin-resistant patients,
suggested a lack of cross-resistance in combination chemotherapy. It should be noted that synovial sarcoma appears relatively responsive to ifosfamide. 337,338
The third drug with modest activity in sarcoma is dacarbazine. Its activity was recognized over 20 years ago, 339 and later confirmed. 340 Dacarbazine has frequently
been used in combination chemotherapy with doxorubicin (see Combination Chemotherapy for Advanced Soft Tissue Sarcoma, later in this chapter). Dacarbazine is
given in a variety of schedules, from intravenous continuous infusion as part of the mesna, doxorubicin, ifosfamide, and dacarbazine (MAID) protocol 341 (see Table
39.1-10), to one large bolus. The major side effect of dacarbazine is nausea and vomiting, which is abrogated to some extent by dividing the dose over 2 to 4 days. In
general, nausea and vomiting from dacarbazine have been substantially reduced with the use of serotonin antagonist antiemetics.
As for other single agents, cisplatin and carboplatin have given occasional responses in phase II trials. However, in contrast to pediatric sarcomas such as Ewing's
sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma, other agents such as single-agent vincristine, etoposide, and actinomycin D appear to be inactive. The taxanes also show little
activity; however, there are data that vinorelbine 342 and gemcitabine 343,344 have modest activity in at least some subtypes of soft tissue sarcoma.
The response rates of other largely investigational agents in soft tissue sarcomas are shown in Table 39.1-13. Few of these drugs have demonstrated meaningful
activity in soft tissue sarcoma.

TABLE 39.1-13. Selected Studies of Investigational Agents in Sarcoma Therapy a

Used in some of the earliest studies in sarcoma adjuvant chemotherapy, immunotherapy for sarcoma treatment is seeing renewed interest, without significant success
to date. Cytokines alone appear to be ineffective in sarcoma ( Table 39.1-14), as does nonspecific immunotherapy with bacterial cell wall components. A study
underway at the NCI is examining vaccination of patients with peptides representing the fusion proteins observed in specific subtypes of sarcoma. Lymphocyte
activated killer cell and other T-cell immunotherapy with cytokines was investigated in a small number of patients at the NCI without any observed responses.
Dendritic cell vaccines as well as other forms of tumor-specific immunotherapy are undergoing investigation and may be of relevance to patients with soft tissue
sarcoma.

TABLE 39.1-14. Biologic Agents in Sarcoma Therapy

Angiogenesis inhibition has emerged as a potential new therapy for solid tumors of all types, including sarcoma. To date, weak angiogenesis inhibitors such as the
interferons have shown no efficacy in sarcoma (see Table 39.1-14). Stronger angiogenesis inhibitors such as TNP-470 (AGM-1470), or vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF)-pathway inhibitor SU5416 have been examined in phase I trials, 345 but there have been only a handful of sarcoma patients treated with these more
potent antiangiogenic agents.
Newer biologic agents are beginning to be assessed, based on the biology of specific sarcoma subsets, in particular liposarcoma. The antidiabetic drug troglitazone
binds to the receptor PPAR-g (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-g). This receptor is present on the cell surface of some liposarcomas. When PPAR-g binds a
ligand, it can induce differentiation of the liposarcoma toward an adipocyte, with abundant fat droplet accumulation and decreased S-phase fraction. This laboratory
finding led to an ongoing trial of troglitazone in patients with advanced liposarcoma. 346 A subset of patients with liposarcoma demonstrates similar lipid accumulation
in vivo to that noted in vitro. To date, there are no data on relapse-free or overall survival of these patients.
COMBINATION CHEMOTHERAPY FOR ADVANCED SOFT TISSUE SARCOMA
A variety of combinations of chemotherapy have been developed and examined in phase II trials. The typical backbone of a combination regimen is doxorubicin (or its
analogue epirubicin) with an alkylating agent, with or without other agents (see Table 39.1-10). One of the earliest combinations used was doxorubicin and
dacarbazine, which has been well studied by the Southwest Oncology Group. Although initial responses noted a 41% major response rate, 347 subsequent study of
either a bolus or continuous infusion of the same regimen yielded a 17% response rate. 348
CyVADIC has been widely used for sarcoma therapy in the United States and Europe. Although single arm studies showed response rates as high as 71%, 256,257,349 a
randomized trial showed no significant difference in overall survival between CyVADIC and doxorubicin as a single agent. 335 The two drug combinations of
doxorubicin and ifosfamide 335 or epirubicin and ifosfamide 350,351 and 352 have consistently given response rates above 25%. Current studies are investigating higher
doses of ifosfamide with fixed doxorubicin dose and growth factor support.
MAID was proven effective in metastatic soft tissue sarcoma in a large phase II trial from the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. 341 This randomized trial took place before
the routine use of growth factors for aggressive chemotherapeutic regimens and examined doxorubicin and dacarbazine versus MAID. The study showed an
increased response rate in the MAID arm (32% vs. 17%, P <.002).353 Underscoring the increased toxicity of aggressive chemotherapy regimens, there were eight toxic
deaths on the study, seven in the 170 patients treated with the 7.5 g/m 2 total dose of ifosfamide per cycle. This dose was decreased to 6 g/m 2 during the course of the
study. All treatment deaths occurred in patients older than 50 years of age. In a univariate analysis, there was a survival advantage for the two-drug arm (13 months
vs. 12 months for MAID); however, this difference was not significant in a multivariate analysis. As noted in the later section on Dose Intensity, with the introduction of

growth factors, the dose intensity of this regimen has become better tolerated.
The response rates of metastatic sarcoma to cisplatin are low, and response rate to mitomycin C is zero in one small study. 354 However, the combination of the two
drugs with doxorubicin (called MAP) yielded a 43% response rate in a study from the Mayo Clinic. The activity of the MAP regimen has been confirmed in an
independent ECOG trial. 336,355
A recent metaanalysis of all of the data from seven large EORTC provided a useful resource to assess response rates to combination chemotherapy in a
multiinstitutional setting. 356 The 2185 patients with follow-up in this study were subjected to a univariate and multivariate analysis of survival based on a number of
factors, including age, sex, performance status before chemotherapy, presence and site of metastatic disease, histologic subtype, histologic grade, and disease-free
interval (time since initial diagnosis of sarcoma). The overall median survival time was 51 weeks. The predictors of overall survival included good performance status,
lack of liver involvement, low histopathologic grade, long disease-free interval, and young age ( P <.005 for all these factors in a multivariate analysis). Although
absence of liver involvement, young age, and high histopathologic grade also predicted for response to chemotherapy, so did liposarcoma histology ( P <.01 for all
these factors in a multivariate analysis); leiomyosarcoma histology did not qualify as a factor for response to chemotherapy independent of liver metastasis. Although
not stratified by site, these data provide some of the best evidence that response rate does not necessarily correlate with overall survival.
Is combination chemotherapy better than single-agent doxorubicin for overall survival? Again, the concept arises of response rates differing from rates of overall
survival. There have been several phase III trials examining the issue of combination chemotherapy versus single agents for patients with metastatic disease ( Table
39.1-15); two such trials examined this question in uterine sarcoma. There were improved response rates in several of the trials with combination chemotherapy, but
there was no survival advantage over single-agent doxorubicin. Complete responses were rare during these studies and were not durable. These data argue that
single agents are as effective as combination chemotherapy for patients with metastatic disease, in terms of overall survival. However, some patients may be eligible
for palliative resection of metastatic disease. In these situations in which such aggressive therapy is contemplated, combination chemotherapy, which gives better
response rates than single agents, can be considered.

TABLE 39.1-15. Selected Randomized Trials in Advanced Disease

DOSE INTENSITY
It is a central tenet of oncology that response to chemotherapy is a function of dose and dose intensity. 357 A dose-response effect for doxorubicin and ifosfamide has
been suggested in a variety of studies. 253,358 However, toxicity limits the amount of chemotherapy that can be given in any one cycle, as illustrated by the phase III trial
of the MAID combination chemotherapy noted previously. 353 It is argued that if dose could be increased, better responses might be seen. Better supportive care can
help increase dose intensity as outlined in this section.
The use of hematopoietic growth factors has allowed for the study of higher doses of chemotherapy in sarcoma. Some of the aggressive regimens for therapy of
metastatic sarcoma satisfy the American Society of Clinical Oncology guidelines for use of growth factors given their high rate of febrile neutropenia. 359
Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (sargramostim), the first granulocyte growth factor used, decreased the myelosuppression seen with CyADIC 360
and MAID361 chemotherapy, and allowed for increased dose intensity of high-dose ifosfamide. 362 Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor allowed for
escalation of the dose of doxorubicin when given in combination with 5 g/m 2 of ifosfamide, with improvement in response rate.363,364 Granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor has also been shown to allow increased dose intensity of the MAP combination of chemotherapy, allowing addition of ifosfamide. 365
Similarly, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (filgrastim) has been widely used to increase dose intensity and decrease myelotoxicity of aggressive
chemotherapeutic regimens such as MAID366 or dose-escalated doxorubicin and ifosfamide. 367 However, with escalated doses (25% increase) in the MAID regimen,
there appears to be no significant increased response rate despite use of growth factors. 368 There may be other ways to achieve dose intensity. A study of low-dose,
long-term (approximately 2-week) ifosfamide showed responses in patients who failed other forms of chemotherapy for their sarcomas. 369 As was seen with previous
studies, it may well be that responsiveness to a particular regimen may not translate into increased survival.
Unfortunately, the cardiac toxicity of doxorubicin and nephrotoxicity and central nervous system toxicity of ifosfamide prevent much greater dose escalation than
performed in some studies today. The next logical step is to proceed to high-dose therapy with stem cell support, which is currently under study with pediatric
sarcomas.370,371 Such studies show long-term disease-free survival for a handful of patients with Ewing's sarcoma, osteosarcoma, or rhabdomyosarcoma. Even in
these relatively chemotherapy-sensitive sarcomas, the majority of patients have relapsed rapidly. Given that complete responses (and therefore chemotherapy
sensitivity) are rare in the metastatic setting of adult soft tissue sarcoma, it is not surprising that the few patients with soft tissue sarcoma who undergo high-dose
therapy with stem cell rescue relapse quickly. High-dose therapy with stem cell rescue should not be considered for patients with metastatic sarcoma outside the
setting of a clinical trial. 372,373 With poor results from high-dose therapy, the pursuit of agents with better activity against soft tissue sarcoma will remain a primary
focus for therapy of relapsed disease.

RESPONSE BY HISTOLOGIC SUBTYPE AND SITE
A major focus in critical reading of the literature concerning responses of soft tissue sarcoma to chemotherapy is the variety of patient sarcoma histology. Pediatric
sarcomas are known for their relative sensitivity to chemotherapy (Ewing's sarcoma, osteosarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma). As for adult sarcomas, synovial
sarcomas and fibrosarcomas are generally sensitive to chemotherapy. GISTs, alveolar sarcoma of soft parts, and low- to intermediate-grade chondrosarcomas are
notorious for their resistance to chemotherapy. An imbalance in the subtypes of sarcomas in various groups of patients can markedly affect overall outcome for the
study in question.
Site of disease is another important factor in determination of outcome for patients with soft tissue sarcoma. For example, patients with large low-grade liposarcoma of
the extremity show lower relapse rates than patients with low-grade liposarcomas of the retroperitoneum; the latter are more difficult to control locally. Similarly,
formerly called leimyosarcomas of the gastrointestinal tract, both true leiomyosarcomas and gastrointestinal stomal tumors (GISTs), are less responsive to
chemotherapy than leiomyosarcoma of other sites (see Leiomyosarcoma, later in this chapter). Anatomy of metastatic disease can also affect overall response rates.
For example, metastases to liver are less likely to respond to chemotherapy than metastases to another site 356; however, this may represent the tendency of GISTs to
metastasize to the liver. Variations in the site of disease or metastasis pattern may at least in part account for the different responses noted in randomized trials of
chemotherapy for soft tissue sarcoma.
It is clear that specific subtypes of soft tissue sarcomas demonstrate unique biologic behavior. As diagnosis and classification of sarcomas improve, these unique
features may become more evident. Examples of specific sites or subtypes of sarcoma and their characteristics are presented here.

LEIOMYOSARCOMA
Leiomyosarcomas are one of the most common forms of soft tissue sarcoma. They are also relatively uniform in histologic appearance, and thus there is greater
concordance of pathologists in the diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma than other forms of soft tissue sarcoma. Given their relative frequency and the consistency of
diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma, it is useful to examine the sensitivity of this subset of sarcomas to standard chemotherapy.
The response rate of leiomyosarcoma in subset analysis of randomized trials is shown in Table 39.1-16. Subset analyses cannot substitute for primary trials of
chemotherapy, but still can be useful in generating hypotheses for further studies. Doxorubicin appears to be active in leiomyosarcomas, but ifosfamide appears to
add little to the response rate of this subset of tumors. In one small study of uterine leiomyosarcomas, a modest response to ifosfamide was observed. 374 Ifosfamide,
in contrast, appears to be effective in other subtypes of sarcoma.

TABLE 39.1-16. Response of Leiomyosarcoma to Various Chemotherapy Regimens

The primary site of leiomyosarcoma can have an equally important effect on survival. The difference in response rates for different sites of leiomyosarcoma is
highlighted in the trials from ECOG and Southwest Oncology Group. 336,353 Although only 20% to 25% of uterine leiomyosarcomas responded to chemotherapy, uterine
leiomyosarcoma was approximately twice as responsive to chemotherapy compared with leiomyosarcomas arising from the gastrointestinal tract (GISTs). These data
are at odds with the cumulative EORTC metaanalysis of therapy for metastatic sarcomas 356; however, in the EORTC study, leiomyosarcomas were not stratified with
respect to site; poorly responding gastrointestinal stromal tumors were grouped together with better responding leiomyosarcomas of other sites. Given the poor
response of gastrointestinal stromal tumors to any chemotherapy, patients with recurrent unresectable disease carrying this diagnosis should be considered
candidates for phase I or phase II studies, even before routine chemotherapy with doxorubicin or ifosfamide. Attention to improved histopathologic diagnosis will play
a part in the design of future studies of chemotherapy in the adjuvant or metastatic setting.
SYNOVIAL SARCOMA
Synovial sarcoma demonstrates two histologies, a monophasic form and a biphasic form. Specific translocations in this subset of sarcoma between the SSX and SYT
genes on chromosomes X and 18 may be prognostic factors for this subtype of sarcoma. Patients with biphasic histology demonstrated SYT-SSX1 gene fusions.
These patients fared more poorly than patients with SYT-SSX2 positive tumors that were associated with the monophasic phenotype 375; such molecular phenotyping
represents an attractive method of predicting outcome to therapy and need for more or less intensive therapy.
Patients with synovial sarcoma tend to be younger than patients with other subtypes of soft tissue sarcoma. Patients with synovial sarcoma are therefore likely to have
a better performance status than patients with other subtypes of sarcoma, a positive predictor for response to chemotherapy in the EORTC database. 356 The higher
response rates in such patients may therefore be in part due to patient selection factors, not just histologic diagnosis.
In patients with advanced synovial sarcoma, ifosfamide (at a high dose of 14 to 18 g/m 2) appears to be an active agent with a 100% response rate in one study of 13
patients. 338 The EORTC metaanalysis of 2185 sarcoma patients included 115 synovial sarcomas evaluable for response to chemotherapy 356; the response rate was
31%, not significantly different than the overall response rate of 26%. The conflict between these results may be due to dose intensity, as well as the use of an
inappropriate group for comparison; the EORTC data examined the response of metastatic sarcoma to anthracyclines and only a portion of patients received
ifosfamide (at a maximum dose of 5 g/m2, a low dose by today's standards).
PEDIATRIC SARCOMAS IN ADULT POPULATIONS
A number of pediatric sarcomas occur in the adults, including Ewing's sarcoma (in soft tissue or bone), rhabdomyosarcoma (usually embryonal), and osteosarcoma.
These diseases differ from typical adult sarcomas in that they are considered systemic diseases despite their initial presentation. Ewing's sarcoma and
rhabdomyosarcoma are typically much more sensitive to chemotherapy than adult soft tissue sarcomas. 376 In osteosarcoma, long-term survival has been achieved in
pediatric patients with the use of adjuvant chemotherapy. Unfortunately, adults with osteosarcoma are generally more resistant to chemotherapy than children.
Adjuvant (or neoadjuvant) chemotherapy is the standard of care for adults with a diagnosis of rhabdomyosarcoma or Ewing's sarcoma. In addition, adults with a typical
osteosarcoma of bone should receive neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy in addition to therapy for local control of their tumor. However, in extraskeletal
osteosarcoma, the use of chemotherapy as an adjuvant to surgical control of the primary disease remains controversial, largely due to the low response rates to
chemotherapy seen in patients with metastatic soft tissue osteosarcoma. 153,377
Typical regimens for small cell pediatric sarcomas, specifically rhabdomyosarcoma and Ewing's sarcoma, include the combination of vincristine, doxorubicin, and
cyclophosphamide (occasionally with actinomycin D), and the combination of ifosfamide and etoposide. 376,378,379 The MAID regimen also shows activity in pediatric
sarcomas.380 There is debate as to whether adults do worse than pediatric patients with the same stage of disease. Adults are less likely than children to tolerate the
aggressive regimens of chemotherapy used in these diseases. In addition, adults may present with advanced stage disease relative to children or adolescents. One
retrospective study showed older patients with rhabdomyosarcoma tolerated chemotherapy as well as the pediatric population, but fared worse overall 381; tumor size,
site, and response to chemotherapy predicted outcome in another series. 382 In Ewing's sarcoma, the role of age in predicting outcome is controversial. 383,384 A high
percentage of patients with pediatric sarcomas are enrolled on protocols examining new therapy in the setting of randomized trials. Adults with diagnosis of sarcoma
usually seen in pediatric populations should be included on pediatric protocols whenever feasible to help determine appropriate care for patients with these rare
diagnoses.
UTERINE SARCOMAS
Uterine sarcomas are rare, accounting for 3% to 7% of all uterine malignancies. The uterus is a unique site in that at least three different sarcomatous entities may
arise from this organ, including leiomyosarcoma, endometrial stromal sarcoma, and carcinosarcoma (also known as malignant mixed Müllerian tumor). The most
common histopathologic type is Müllerian tumor.
For localized disease surgery is the main treatment. Whether adjuvant radiation is needed remains a controversial topic. Most studies showed some improvement in
local control but not survival. 385,386 More recently, however, Ferrer et al. reviewed the experience of the Grup Oncologic Catala-Occita and found that the addition of
radiation to surgery improved local control as well as survival in 103 patients with stage I to IVa. 387 It is hoped that the ongoing EORTC-55874 randomized trial will
determine the exact effect of adjuvant radiation in this malignancy.
The Gynecologic Oncology Group performed a prospective randomized trial comparing adjuvant chemotherapy with no further therapy in patients with stage I to II

uterine sarcoma. No significant improvement was noted in progression-free interval or overall survival. 230
In advanced disease, the Gynecologic Oncology Group also compared doxorubicin alone with doxorubicin and dacarbazine in a randomized trial. 388 Response rates
and overall survival did not differ between the two arms; the response rate to doxorubicin of 28 women with leiomyosarcoma was 25%. Thereafter, doxorubicin was
compared with doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide; response rates in both arms were 19%, with a 13% response rate to doxorubicin for patients with
leiomyosarcoma. 389 Uterine sarcoma overall showed a 22% to 25% response rate to chemotherapy as noted previously. 336,348
A number of phase II studies have examined responses to various agents for various subtypes of uterine sarcoma. Patients with carcinosarcoma (one form of mixed
Müllerian tumor) have been treated with cisplatin, 390,391 or with doxorubicin 391; there were no responses in the small cohort of patients given doxorubicin. 391 When
patients develop metastatic disease from carcinosarcoma, it is usually of the carcinomatous elements, indicating this is the more important characteristic of the tumor
to treat. This may explain the responses of this sarcoma to therapy effective for epithelial tumors. Leiomyosarcoma is responsive to doxorubicin as noted previously,
less sensitive to ifosfamide (see Leiomyosarcoma, earlier in this chapter), and also relatively unresponsive to cisplatin. 390
Endometrial stromal sarcomas express estrogen and progesterone receptors, 392 and anecdotal responses to progestins have been noted. 393 However, it is clear that
frequency of positive estrogen or progesterone receptor staining is substantially greater than the response rate to hormonal therapy such as tamoxifen. In a
prospective trial of tamoxifen in uterine sarcomas, only one patient (with a mixed Müllerian tumor) responded, out of a total 29 patients treated (19 with
leiomyosarcoma).394
DESMOIDS (AGGRESSIVE FIBROMATOSES)
Desmoid tumors belong to a family of myofibroblastic fibromatoses that are unusual in their bland histology and slow progression. Surgery remains the treatment of
choice for these lesions, which cannot truly be called sarcomas because of their lack of metastatic potential.
The role of adjuvant radiation for completely resected primary desmoid tumor is controversial. Most authors agree that for patients with negative resection margins,
postoperative radiation is not recommended. 395,396 However, for patients with positive microscopic margins the role of adjuvant radiation is more debatable. Spear et
al. from Massachusetts General Hospital reported a local control rate of 61% for patients with primary tumors with positive microscopic margins treated with surgery
alone. 395 Others, however, have reported lower local control rates. 397 The conclusion from these studies is that failure does not invariably occur if residual microscopic
tumor from a primary lesion is left in situ as long as local progression would not cause significant morbidity. When adjuvant radiation is indicated for some primary
lesion or in most recurrent tumors, the usual dose is approximately 50 Gy.
In advanced cases desmoids can still cause significant morbidity in proximal extremity lesions and can be fatal if they arise in the retroperitoneum, since such sites
are difficult to resect completely.
Although the use of adjuvant radiation is becoming more restricted, the role of definitive radiation is emerging as a reasonable alternative to radical surgery. Ballo et
al. reported a 5-year local control rate of 69% for patients treated with radiation for gross disease. 396 Others have shown similar findings. 395,398 The recommended
dose for definitive radiation is usually 56 Gy in 2 Gy per fraction to 60 Gy given at 1.8 Gy per fraction.
Desmoids classically arise in pregnancy as an abdominal mass independent of the uterus. Desmoids have been examined for hormone receptors and have binding
sites for estrogens and antiestrogens in some cases. 399,400 There are anecdotes of responses to hormonal manipulation such as tamoxifen, 401,402 and 403 testolactone, 404
toremifene,405 goserelin, 406 and progestins. 406,407 There are well-documented responses of desmoids to sulindac 404 and other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, and
reports of responses to vitamin K, vitamin C, and warfarin. 404,408 Responses can take months and continue for years.
Responses have been reported to single-agent doxorubicin chemotherapy 409 as well as to combination chemotherapy at either standard or relatively low doses. 410,411
and 412 As noted previously, responses can be slow, and therapy should not be abandoned for stable disease.
In summary, for easily resectable disease, surgery alone would appear to be the optimal approach especially in patients with negative microscopic margin. In
advanced cases, a trial of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs or hormonal therapy can be considered in most patients. A period of close observation is also
reasonable, because some patients demonstrate regression without any therapy. However, if a patient is symptomatic and not a candidate for surgery, consideration
should be given to radiation or chemotherapy to increase the chance of a response.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PATIENTS WITH ADVANCED DISEASE
Low-grade tumors grow slowly and may be less responsive to chemotherapy than higher grade lesions. Accordingly, an asymptomatic patient with stable or only
slowly progressive disease can be observed only. Resection of metastatic disease, in particular lung metastases, provides some patients with long-term survival and
can be considered if the lungs are the only site of remaining disease. 413
Randomized studies have shown that combination chemotherapy can provide a better probability of a response than single-agent doxorubicin. However, overall
survival for any combination chemotherapy has not been proven superior to doxorubicin alone as a single agent. When a clinical response is needed, e.g., before
potential surgery for metastases, combinations of agents such as doxorubicin and ifosfamide should be considered, especially for patients with good performance
status. For patients with poor performance status, single-agent doxorubicin remains the standard of care, since no other therapy or combination of treatments has
proven superior to it for overall survival. Single-agent ifosfamide or dacarbazine can be used as a second-line agent. Dacarbazine demonstrates modest activity in
soft tissue sarcoma, and with doxorubicin is a well-studied and well-tolerated combination in metastatic disease. Patients with advanced disease are candidates for
phase I and phase II studies of new therapy for sarcoma, since we have but few tools with which to treat such patients presently.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Metastatic sarcoma, whether at time of disease presentation, or after local control of primary disease, remains an extremely difficult problem. The search for effective
chemotherapeutic and biologic agents will be the focus of continuing research for patients with advanced disease. In the near future, results should be forthcoming of
the study of the differentiation agent troglitazone for patients with metastatic or recurrent liposarcoma. Even more potent agonists of the PPAR-g receptor such as
rosiglitazone and pioglitazone will be examined in the metastatic and adjuvant setting for patients with liposarcoma. The study of angiogenesis inhibition is just
beginning. The examination of antagonists of the VEGF and other pathways of angiogenesis, may show promise in this class of tumors, using agents such as
SU5416, angiostatin, and endostatin. In terms of novel chemotherapeutic agents, ecteinascidin 743 has demonstrated some promise in phase I studies and may
provide the first new effective antisarcoma agent since ifosfamide.
In the longer term, it is hoped that new biologic agents for sarcoma therapy can be found that are as potent as TNF in murine models of sarcoma. TNF, interleukin-2,
and cytokines appear to be toxic and largely inactive as sarcoma therapy when given systemically. Nonetheless, other biologic interventions may show promise, such
as immunotherapy with targeted production of cytokines, or interference with cell-signaling pathways. Characteristic fusion proteins of sarcomas (or peptides thereof)
will be tested in the near future for their effectiveness in the appropriate subtypes of sarcomas, such as many pediatric sarcomas. Vaccines incorporating dendritic
cells appear to be effective immunogens in preclinical studies. Preparations of heat shock proteins or of immunogenic glycolipids found in sarcoma cell membranes
may also provide interesting agents for therapy. Potent agents inhibiting cellular signaling pathways through ras, tyrosine kinases, and other regulators of cell division
are just now entering clinical trials. The first tentative steps into the realm of gene therapy for cancer are just now being taken. It is hoped that the continued strides
made in understanding molecular and cell biology, such as the mechanisms of sarcoma induction by fusion proteins encoded by specific chromosomal translocations
seen in sarcomas, will lead to new therapies that will affect the therapy of this diverse family of tumors.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Landis S, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo P. Cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;9:8.
2. Zahm S, Fraumeni J Jr. The epidemiology of soft tissue sarcoma. Semin Oncol 1997;24:504.
3. Latres E, Drobnjak M, Pollack D, et al. Chromosome 17 abnormalities and TP53 mutations in adult soft tissue sarcomas. Am J Pathol 1994;145:345.

4. Cance W, Brennan M, Dudas M, et al. Altered expression of the retinoblastoma gene product in human sarcomas. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1457.
5. Malkin D. The Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Vol. 7. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1995.
6. Li F, Fraumeni J Jr. Soft tissue sarcomas, breast cancer and other neoplasms. A familial syndrome? Ann Intern Med 1969;71:747.
7. D'Agostino A, Soule E, Miller R. Sarcomas of the peripheral nerves and somatic soft tissues associated with multiple neurofibromatosis (von Recklinghausen's disease). Cancer 1963;16:1015.
8. Heard G. Malignant disease in von Recklinghausen's neurofibromatosis. Proc R Soc Med 1963;56:502.
9. Fraumeni J Jr, Vogel C, Easton J. Sarcomas and multiple polyposis in a kindred. A genetic variety of hereditary polyposis? Arch Intern Med 1968;121:57.
10. Sorensen S, Mulvihill J, Nielsen A. Long-term follow-up of von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis. N Engl J Med 1986;314:1010.
11. Riccardi V. Von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis. N Engl J Med 1981;305:1617.
12. Williams W, Strong L. Genetic epidemiology of soft tissue sarcomas in children. In: Muller W, ed. First International ResearchConference. Familial cancer. Basel, Switzerland: Karger, 1985:151.
13. Draper G, Sanders B, Kingston J. Second primary neoplasms in patients with retinoblastoma. Br J Cancer 1986;53:661.
14. Li F, Fraumeni J. Prospective study of a family cancer syndrome. JAMA 1982;247:2692.
15. Wong F, Boice J Jr, Abramson D, et al. Cancer incidence after retinoblastoma. Radiation dose and sarcoma risk. JAMA 1997;278:1261.
16. Posner M, Shiu M, Newsome J, et al. The desmoid tumor: not a benign disease. Arch Surg 1989;124:191.
17. Beck A. Zur frage des Rontgensarkoms, zugleich ein Beitrag zur pathogenese des Sarkoms. Muench Med Wochenschr 1922;69:623.
18. Brady M, Gaynor J, Brennan M. Radiation-associated sarcoma of bone and soft tissue. Arch Surg 1992;127:1379.
19. Karlsson P, Holmberg E, Samuelsson A, et al. Soft tissue sarcoma after treatment for breast cancer a Swedish population-based study. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:2068.
20. Stewart F, Treves N. Lymphangiosarcoma in post-mastectomy lymphedema. Cancer 1943;1:64.
21. Muller R, Hajdu S, Brennan M. Lymphangiosarcoma associated with chronic filarial lymphedema. Cancer 1987;59:179.
22. Pack G, Ehrlich H. Neoplasms of the anterior abdominal wall with special consideration of desmoid tumors: experience with 391 cases and collective review of literature. Int Abst Surg
1944;79:177.
23. Fong Y, Rosen P, Brennan M. Multifocal desmoids. Surgery 1993;114:902.
24. Hardell L, Sandstrom A. A case-control study: Soft tissue sarcoma and exposure to chemical substances: a case referent study. Br J Cancer 1979;39:711.
25. Eriksson M, Hardell L, Ber N, et al. Soft tissue sarcomas and exposure to chemical substances: a case referent study. Br J Ind Med 1981;38:27.
26. Smith A, Pearce N, Fisher D, et al. Soft tissue sarcoma and exposure to phenoxyherbicides and chlorophenols in New Zealand. J Natl Cancer Inst 1984;73:1111.
27. Balarajan R, Acheson E. Soft tissue sarcomas in agriculture and forestry workers. J Epidemiol Commun Health 1984;38:113.
28. Greenwald P, Kovasznay B, Collins D, Therriault G. Sarcomas of soft tissue after Vietnam service. J Natl Cancer Inst 1984;73:1107.
29. Kang H, Weatherbee L, Breslin P, et al. Soft tissue sarcoma and military service in Vietnam: a case comparison group analysis of hospital patients. J Occup Med 1986;28:1215.
30. Hoar S, Blair A, Holmes F, et al. Agricultural herbicide use and risk of lymphoma and soft tissue sarcoma. JAMA 1986;256:1141.
31. Kelly S, Guidotti T. Phenoxyacetic acid herbicides and chlorophenols and the etiology of lymphoma and soft tissue neoplasms. Public Health Rev 1989/90;17:1.
32. Lynge E, Storn H, Jensen O. The evaluation of trends in soft tissue sarcoma according to diagnostic criteria and consumption of phenoxy herbicides. Cancer 1987;60:1896.
33. Hoppin J, Tolbert P, Herrick R, et al. Occupational chlorophenal exposure and soft tissue sarcoma risk among men aged 3060 years. Am J Epidemiol 1998;148:693.
34. Riihimake V, Asp S, Hernberg S. Mortality of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid and 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid herbicide applicators in Finland: first report of an ongoing prospective cohort
study. Scand J Work Environ Health 1982;8:37.
35. Hoppin J, Tolbert P, Flanders W, et al. Occupational risk factors for sarcoma subtypes. Epidemiology 1999;10:300.
36. Fingerhut M, Halperin W, Marlow D, et al. Cancer mortality in workers exposed to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. N Engl J Med 1991;324:212.
37. Wiklund K, Holm L. Soft tissue sarcoma risk in Swedish agricultural and forestry workers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1986;76:229.
38. Wiklund K, Dich J, Holm L. Soft tissue sarcoma risk in Swedish licensed pesticide applicators. J Occup Med 1988;30:801.
39. Brann E. The association of selected cancers with service in the US military in Vietnam: II. Soft tissue and other sarcomas. Arch Intern Med 1990;150:2485.
40. Kang H, Enziger F, Breslin P, et al. Soft tissue sarcoma and military service in Vietnam: a case-control study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;79:693.
41. DaSilva H, Abbatt J, DaMotta L. Malignancy and other effects following the administration of thorotrast. Lancet 1965;2:201.
42. Creech J, Makk L. Liver disease among polyvinyl chloride production workers. Ann NY Acad Sci 1973;246:88.
43. Lander J, Stanley R, Summer H. Angiosarcoma of the liver associated with Fowler's solution. Gastroenterology 1975;68:1562.
44. Dick J, Zahm S, Hanberg A, Adami H. Pesticides and cancer. Cancer Causes Control 1997;8:420.
45. Tucker M, D'Angio G, Bioce J Jr, et al. Bone sarcomas linked to radiotherapy and chemotherapy in children. N Engl J Med 1987;317:588.
46. Mertens F, Fletcher C, Dal Cin P, et al. Cytogenetic analysis of 46 pleomorphic soft tissue sarcomas and correlation with morphologic and clinical features: a report of the CHAMP Study Group.
Chromosomes and morphology. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1998;22:16.
47. Orlow I, Drobnjak M, Zhang Z, et al. Alteration of INK4A and INK4B genes in adult soft tissue sarcomas: effect on survival. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:73.
48. Sreekantaiah C, Karakousis C, Leong S, Sandberg A. Cytogenetic findings in liposarcoma correlate with histopathologic subtypes. Cancer 1992;69:2484.
49. Enzinger F, Weiss S. Soft tissue tumors. 3rd ed. St. Louis: Year Book Medical, 1995.
50. Hajdu S. Pathology of soft tissue tumors. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1979.
51. Fong Y, Coit D, Woodruff J, Brennan M. Lymph node metastasis from soft tissue sarcoma in adults: analysis of data from a prospective database of 1772 sarcoma patients. Ann Surg
1993;218:72.
52. Weingrad D, Rosenberg S. Early lymphatic spread of osteogenic and soft tissue sarcomas. Surgery 1978;84:231.
53. Mazeron J, Suit H. Lymph nodes as sites of metastases from sarcomas of soft tissue. Cancer 1987;60:1800.
54. Gaynor J, Tan C, Casper E, et al. Refinement of clinicopathological staging for localized soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity: a study of 423 adults. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1317.
55. Broders A, Hargrave R, Meyerding H. Pathological features of soft tissue fibrosarcoma with special reference to the grading of its malignancy. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1939;69:267.
56. Beahrs O, Henson D, Hutter R, Kennedy B. Manual for staging cancer. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1992.
57. Costa J, Wesley R, Glatstein E. The grading of soft tissue sarcoma. Results of a clinicohistopathologic correlation in a series of 163 cases. Cancer 1984;53:530.
58. Trojani M, Contesso G, Coindre J. Soft tissue sarcoma of adults. Study of pathological prognostic variables and definition of a histopathological grading system. Int J Cancer 1984;33:37.
59. Myhre-Jensen O, Kaae S, Madsen E. Histopathological grading of soft tissue sarcomas: relation to survival in 261 surgically treated patients. Acta Pathol Microbiol Immunol Scand
1983;91A:145.
60. Markhede G, Angervall L, Stener B. A multivariate analysis of the prognosis after surgical treatment of malignant soft tissue tumors. Cancer 1982;49:1721.
61. Alvegard T, Berg N. Histopathology peer review of high-grade soft tissue sarcoma: the Scandinavian Sarcoma Group experience. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1845.
62. Alvegard TA, Sigurdsson H, Mouridsen H, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy with doxorubicin in high-grade soft tissue sarcoma: a randomized trial of the Scandinavian Sarcoma Group. J Clin
Oncol 1989;7:1504.
63. Enzinger F. Recent developments in the classification of soft tissue sarcomas. Chicago: Year Book Medical, 1977.
64. van Unnik J, Coindre J, Contesso G. Grading of soft tissue sarcomas: experience of the EORTC soft tissue and bone sarcoma group. Dev Oncol 1988;55:7.
65. Drobnjak M, Latres E, Pollack D, et al. Prognostic implications of p53 nuclear overexpression and high proliferation index of Ki-67 in adult soft tissue sarcomas. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:549.
66. Fletcher J, Kozakewich H, Hoffer F, et al. Diagnostic relevance of clonal chromosome aberrations in malignant soft tissue tumors. N Engl J Med 1991;324:436.
67. Limon J, Mrozek K, Mandahl N, et al. Cytogenics of synovial sarcoma: presentation of 10 new cases and review of the literature. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1991;3:338.
68. Clark J, Rocques P, Crew A, et al. Identification of novel genes, SYT and SSX, involved in the t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2) translocation found in human synovial sarcoma. Nature Genet 1994;7:502.
69. Turc-Carel C, Limon J, Dal Cin P, et al. Cytogenetic studies of adipose tissue tumors. II. recurrent reciprocal translocation t(12;16)(q13;p11) in myxoid liposarcomas. Cancer Genet Cytogenet
1986;23:291.
70. Crozat A, Aman P, Mandahl N, Ron D. Fusion of CHOP to a novel RNA-binding protein in human myxoid liposarcoma. Nature 1993;363:640.
71. Knight J, Renwick P, Cin P, et al. Translocation t(12;16)(q13;p11) in myxoid liposarcoma and round cell liposarcoma: molecular and cytogenetic analysis. Cancer Res 1995;55:24.
72. Wang-Wuu S, Soukup S, Ballard E, et al. Chromosomal analysis of sixteen human rhabdomyosarcomas. Cancer Res 1988;48:983.
73. Davis R, D'Cruz C, Lovell M, et al. Fusion of PAX7 to FKHR by the variant t(1;13)(p36;q14) translocation in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer Res 1994;54:2869.
74. Delattre O, Zucman J, Melot T, et al. The Ewing family of tumorsa subgroup of small round cell tumors defined by specific chimeric transcripts. N Engl J Med 1994;331:294.
75. Sorensen P, Lessnick S, Lopez-Terrada D, et al. A second Ewing's sarcoma translocation t(21;22), fuses the EWS gene to another ETS-family transcription factor, ERG. Nature Genet
1994;6:146.
76. Giovanni M, Beigel J, Serra M, et al. EWS-erg and EWS-Fli 1 fusion transcripts in Ewing's sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumors with variant translocations. J Clin Invest 1994;94:489.
77. Ladanyi M, Gerald W. Fusion of the EWS and WT1 genes in the desmoplastic small round cell tumor. Cancer Res 1994;54:2837.
78. Bridge J, Borek D, Neff J, Huntrakoon M. Chromosomal abnormalities in clear cell sarcoma. Implications for histogenesis. Am J Clin Pathol 1990;93:26.
79. Fletcher J. Translocation (12;22)(q13-14;q12) is a non-random aberration in soft tissue clear-cell sarcoma. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1992;5:184.
80. Reeves B, Fletcher C, Gusterson B. Translocation t(12;22)(q13;q13) is a nonrandom rearrangement in clear cell sarcoma. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1992;64:101.
81. Rodriguez E, Sreekantaiah C, Reuter V, et al. t(12;22)(q13;q13) and trisomy 8 are nonrandom aberrations in clear cell sarcoma. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1992;64:107.
82. Stenman G, Kindblom L, Angervall L. Reciprocal translocation t(12:22)(q13;q13) in clear cell sarcoma of tendons and aponeuroses. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1992;4:122.
83. Orndal C, Carlen B, Akerman M, et al. Chromosomal abnormality t(9;22)(q22;q12) in an extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma characterized by fine needle aspiration cytology, electron
microscopy, immunohistochemistry, and DNA flow cytometry. Cytopathology 1991;2:261.
84. Turc-Carel C, Dal Cin P, Rao U. Recurrent breakpoints at 9q31 and 22q12.2 in extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1988;30:145.
85. Shiraki M, Enterline H, Brooks J, et al. Pathologic analysis of advanced adult soft tissue sarcomas, bone sarcomas, and mesothelioma. Cancer 1989;64:484.
86. Presant C, Russell W, Alexander R, Fu Y. Soft tissue and bone sarcoma histopathology peer review: the frequency of disagreement in diagnosis and the need for second pathology opinions.
The Southeastern Cancer Study Group experience. J Clin Oncol 1986; 4:1658.
87. Vezeridis M, Moore R, Karakousis C. Metastic patterns in soft tissue sarcomas. Arch Surg 1983;118:915.
88. Gordon M, Hajdu S, Bains M, Burt M. Soft tissue sarcomas of the chest wall. Results of surgical resection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1991;101:843.
89. Conlon K, Casper E, Brennan M. Primary gastrointestinal sarcomas: analysis of prognostic variables. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:26.
90. Lauwers G, Erlandson R, Casper E, et al. Gastrointestinal autonomic nerve tumors. A clinicopathological, immunohistochemical, and ultrstructural study of 12 cases. Am J Surg Pathol
1993;17:887.
91. Russo P, Brady M, Conlon K, et al. Adult urological sarcoma. J Urol 1992;147:1032.
92. Bernstein K, Lattes R. Nodular (pseudosarcomatous) fasciitis, a nonrecurrent lesion: clinicopathologic study of 134 cases. Cancer 1982;49:1668.
93. Hutter R, Stewart F, Foote F. Fasciitis: a report of 70 cases with follow-up proving the benignity of the lesion. Cancer 1962;15:992.
94. Chung E, Enzinger F. Fibroma of tendon sheath. Cancer 1979;44:1945.
95. Stemmermann G, Stout A. Elastofibroma dorsi. Am J Clin Pathol 1962;38:499.
96. Brown R, Clearkin K, Nakachi K, Burdick C. Elastofibroma dorsi. N Engl J Med 1966;275:154.
97. Gardner E, Richards R. Multiple cutaneous and subcutaneous lesions occuring simultaneously with hereditary polyposis and osteomatosis. Am J Hum Genet 1953;5:139.
98. Gardner E. Follow up study of a family group exhibiting dominant inheritance for a syndrome including intestinal polyps, osteomas, fibromas, and epidermal cysts. Am J Hum Genet
1962;14:376.
99. Antal I, Szendroi M, Kovacs G, et al. Multicentric extraabdominal desmoid tumour: a case report. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1994;120:490.
100. Reitamo J, Scheinin T, Hayry P. The desmoid syndrome. New aspects in the cause, pathogenesis and treatment of the desmoid tumour. Am J Surg 1986;151:230.
101. Franquemont D, Cooper P, Shmookler B, Wick M. Benign fibrous histiocytoma of the skin with potential for local recurrence: a tumor to be distinguished from dermatofibroma. Mod Pathol

1990;3:158.
102. Fletcher C. Benign fibrous histiocytoma of subcutaneous and deep soft tissue: a clinicopathologic analysis of 21 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1990;14:801.
103. Burkhardt B, Soule E, Winkelman R, Ivins J. Dermatofibrosarcoma protruberans: study of 56 cases. Am J Surg 1966;111:638.
104. Taylor H, Helwig E. Dermatofibrosarcoma protruberans: a study of 115 cases. Cancer 1962;15:717.
105. Weiss S, Nickoloff B. CD34 is expressed by a distinctive cell population in peripheral nerve, nerve sheath tumors, and related lesions. Am J Surg Pathol 1993;17:1039.
106. Bridge J, Neff J, Sandberg A. Cytogenetic analysis of dermatofibrosarcoma protruberans. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1990;49:199.
107. McPeak C, Druz T, Nicastri A. Dermatofibrosarcoma protruberans: an analysis of 86 casesfive with metastasis. Am Surg 1967;166(Suppl 2):803.
108. Bednar B. Storiform neurofibromas of the skin, pigmented and non-pigmented. Cancer 1957;10:368.
109. Ozzello L, Stout A, Murray M. Cultural characteristics of malignant histiocytomas and fibrous zanthomas. Cancer 1963;16:331.
110. Fletcher C. Pleomorphic malignant fibrous histiocytoma: fact or fiction? Am J Surg Pathol 1992;16:213.
111. Pezzi C, Rawlings M, Esgro J, et al. Prognostic factors in 227 patients with malignant fibrous histiocytoma. Cancer 1992;69:2098.
112. Rooser B, Willen H, Gustafson P, et al. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma of soft tissue. Cancer 1991;67:499.
113. Evans H, Soule E, Winkelman R. Atypical lipoma, atypical intramuscular lipoma, and well differentiated retroperitoneal liposarcoma. Cancer 1979;43:574.
114. Azumi N, Curtis J, Kempson R, Hendrickson M. Atypical and malignant neoplasms showing lipomatous differentiation: a study of 111 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1987;11:161.
115. Nonomura A, Mizukami Y, Kadoya M. Angiomyolipoma of the liver: a collective review. J Gastroenterol 1994;29:95.
116. Ahn C, Harvey J. Mediastinal hibernoma, a rare tumor. Ann Thorac Surg 1990;50:828.
117. Mentzel T, Calonje E, Fletcher C. Lipoblastoma and lipoblastomatosis: a clinicopathological study of 14 cases. Histopathology 1993;23:527.
118. Chang H, Hajdu S, Collin C, Brennan M. The prognostic value of histologic subtypes in primary extremity liposarcoma. Cancer 1989;64:1514.
119. McCormick D, Mentzel T, Beham A, Fletcher C. Dedifferentiated liposarcoma. Clinicopatholiogic analysis of 32 cases suggesting a better prognostic subgroup among pleomorphic sarcomas.
Am J Surg Pathol 1994;18:1213.
120. Tallini G, Erlandson R, Brennan M, Woodruff J. Divergent myosarcomatous differentiation in retroperitoneal liposarcoma. Am J Surg Pathol 1993;17:546.
121. Fisher W, Helwig E. Leiomyomas of the skin. Arch Dermatol 1963;88:510.
122. Fox S. Leiomyomatosis cutis. N Engl J Med 1960;263:1248.
123. Norris H, Parmley T. Mesenchymal tumors of the uterus. V. Intravenous leiomyomatosis: a clinical and pathologic study of 14 cases. Cancer 1975;36:2164.
124. Suginami H, Kaura R, Ochi H, Matsuura S. Intravenous leiomyomatosis with cardiac extension. Obstet Gynecol 1990;76:527.
125. Tavassoli F, Norris H. Peritoneal leiomyomatosis (leiomyomatosis peritonealis disseminata). Int J Gynecol Pathol 1982;1:59.
126. Stout A, Hill W. Leiomyosarcoma of the superficial soft tissues. Cancer 1958;11:844.
127. Gustafson P, Willen H, Baldetorp B, et al. Soft tissue leiomyosarcoma. Cancer 1992;70:114.
128. LaQuaglia M, Heller G, Ghavimi F, et al. The effect of age at diagnosis on outcome in rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer 1994;73:109.
129. White C. Treatment of hemangiomatosis with recombinant interferon alfa [Review]. Semin Hematology 1990;27:15.
130. Taylor J, Ryu J, Colby T, Raffin T. Lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Clinical course in 32 patients. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1254.
131. Weiss S, Ishak K, Dail D, et al. Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma and related lesions. Semin Diagn Pathol 1986;3:259.
132. Dail D, Liebow A, Gmelich J, et al. Intravascular, bronchiolar, and alveolar tumor of the lung (IBVAT). Cancer 1983;51:452.
133. Kelleher M, Iwatsuki S, Sheahan D. Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma of liver. Clinicopathological correlation of 10 cases treated hby orthotopic liver transplantation. Am J Surg Pathol
1989;13:999.
134. Reynolds W, Winkelman R, Soule E. Kaposi's sarcoma: a clinicopathologic study with particular reference to its relationship to the reticuloendothelial system. Medicine (Baltimore) 1965;44:419.
135. Stribling J, Wertzner S, Smith G. Kaposi's sarcoma in renal allograft recipients. Cancer 1978;42:442.
136. Woodard A, Ivins J, Soule E. Lymphangiosarcoma arising in chronic lymphedematous extremities. Cancer 1972;30:562.
137. Holden C, Spittle M, Jones E. Angiosarcoma of the face and scalp, prognosis and treatment. Cancer 1987;59:1046.
138. Rosen P, Kimmel M, Ernsberger D. Mammary angiosarcoma: the prognostic significance of tumor differentiation. Cancer 1988;62:2145.
139. Nanus D, Kelsen D, Clark D. Radiation-induced angiosarcoma. Cancer 1987;60:777.
140. Fletcher C, Beham A, Bekir S, et al. Epithelioid angiosarcoma of deep soft tissue: a distinctive tumor readily mistaken for an epithelial neoplasm. Am J Surg Pathol 1991;15:915.
141. Shugart R, Soule E, Johnson E. Glomus tumor. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1963;117:334.
142. Nemes Z. Differentiation markers in hemangiopericytoma. Cancer 1992;69:133.
143. Enzinger F, Smith B. Hemangiopericytoma. An analysis of 106 cases. Hum Pathol 1976;7:61.
144. Brodsky J, Burt M, Hajdu S, et al. Tendosynovial sarcoma. Clinicopathologic features, treatment and prognosis. Cancer 1992;70:484.
145. Riccardi V. Neurofibromatosis: phenotype, natural history and pathogenesis. 2nd ed. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992.
146. Wallace M, Marchuk D, Andersen L, et al. Type I neurofibromatosis gene: identification of a large transcript disrupted in three NF1 patients. Science 1990;249:181.
147. White W, Shiu M, Rosenblum M, et al. Cellular schwannoma. Cancer 1990;66:1260.
148. Woodruff J, Chernick N, Smith M, et al. Peripheral nerve tumors with rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation (malignent “Triton” tumors). Cancer 1973;32:426.
149. Vauthey J, Woodruff J, Brennan M. Extremity malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (neurogenic sarcomas): a 10-year experience. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:126.
150. Enzinger F, Shiraki M. Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma: an analysis of 34 cases. Hum Pathol 1972;3:421.
151. Sordillo P, Hajdu S, Magill G, Golbey R. Extraosseous osteogenic sarcoma. Cancer 1983;51:727.
152. Chung E, Enzinger F. Extraskeletal osteosarcoma. Cancer 1987;60:1132.
153. Bane B, Evans H, Ro J, et al. Extraskeletal osteosarcoma. A clinicopathologic review of 26 cases. Cancer 1990;76:2762.
154. Lee J, Fetsch J, Wasdhal D, et al. A review of 40 patients with estraskeletal osteosarcoma. Cancer 1995;76:2253.
155. Enzinger F. Intramuscular myxoma. Am J Clin Pathol 1965;43:104.
156. Steeper T, Rosai J. Aggressive angiomyxoma of the female pelvis and perineum. Report of nine cases of a distinctive type of gynecologic soft tissue neoplasm. Am J Clin Pathol 1983;7:463.
157. Stout A, Lattes R.Malignant mesenchymoma. Tumors of soft tissue. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology Atlas of Tumor Pathology, 1967:172.
158. Newman P, Fletcher C. Malignant mesenchymoma. Clinicopathologic analysis of a series with evidence of low-grade behaviour. Am J Surg Pathol 1991;15:607.
159. Lieberman P, Brennan M, Kimmel M, et al. Alveolar soft-part sarcoma. A clinico-pathologic study of half a century. Cancer 1989;63:1.
160. Tallini G, Parham D, Dias P, et al. Myogenic regulatory protein expression in adult soft tissue sarcomas. A sensitive and specific marker of skeletal muscle differentiation. Am J Pathol
1994;144:693.
161. Prat J, Woodruff J, Marcove R. Epithelioid sarcoma. Cancer 1978;41:1472.
162. Chase D, Enzinger F. Epithelioid sarcoma. Am J Surg Pathol 1985;9:241.
163. Gerald W, Miller H, Battifora H, et al. Intraabdominal desmoplastic small round-cell tumor: report of 19 cases of a distinctive type of high-grade polyphenotypic malignancy affecting young
individuals. Am J Surg Pathol 1991;15:499.
164. Rodriguez E, Sreekantaiah C, Gerald W, et al. A recurring translocation, t(11;22(p13;q11.2), characterizes intraabdominal desmoplastic small round-cell tumors. Cancer Genet Cytogenet
1993;69:17.
165. Sawyer J, Tryka A, Lewis J. A novel reciprocal chromosome translocation t(11;22)(p13;q12) in an intraabdominal desmoplastic small round-cell tumor. Am J Surg Pathol 1992;16(4):411.
166. Fonesca R, Yamakawa M, Nakamura S, et al. Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma and interdigitating reticulum cell sarcoma: a review. Am J Hematol 1998;59:161.
167. Schwarz R, Chugo P, Arber D. Extranodal follicular dendritic cell tumor of the abdominal wall. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2290.
168. Demas B, Heelan R, Lane J, et al. Soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities: prospective comparison of MRI and CT in determination of anatomic extent of disease. Am J Radiol 1988;150:615.
169. Panicek D, Gatsonis C, Rosenthal D, et al. CT and MR imaging in local staging of primary malignant musculoskeletal neoplasms; report of the Radiology Diagnostic Oncology Group. Radiology
1997;202:237.
170. Gadd M, Casper E, Woodruff J, et al. Development and treatment of pulmonary metastases in adult patients with extremity soft tissue sarcoma. Ann Surg 1993;218:705.
171. Cheng E, Dempsey S, Springfield S, Mankin H. Frequent incidence of extrapulmonary sites of initial metastases in patients with liposarcoma. Cancer 1995;75:1120.
172. Ball A, Fisher C, Pittam M, et al. Diagnosis of soft tissue tumors by tru-cut biopsy. Br J Surg 1990;77:756.
173. Kissin M, Fisher C, Carter R, et al. Value of tru-cut biopsy in the diagnosis of soft tissue tumours. Br J Surg 1986;73:742.
174. Mankin H, Lange T, Spanier S. The hazards of biopsy in patients with malignant primary bone and soft tissue tumors. J Bone Joint Surg 1982;64:1121.
175. Kissin M, Fisher C, Webb A, Westbury G. Value of fine needle aspiration cytology in the diagnosis of soft tissue tumours: a preliminary study on the excised specimen. Br J Surg 1987;74:479.
176. Kindblom L. Light and electron microscopic examination of embedded fine-needle aspiration biopsy specimens in the preoperative diagnosis of soft tissue and bone tumors. Cancer
1983;51:2264.
177. Rydhom A. Soft tissue lesions in adults: biopsyyes or no? Ann Oncol 1992;3(Suppl 2):S57.
178. Rooser B, Rydhom A, Alvegard T. Centralization of soft tissue sarcoma. Status in Sweden, 1982. Acta Orthop Scand 1987;58:641.
179. Akerman M, Killander D, Rydholm A, Rooser B. Aspiration of musculoskeletal tumors for cytodiagnosis and DNA analysis. Acta Orthop Scand 1987;58:525.
180. Russell W, Cohen J, Enzinger F, et al. A clinical and pathological staging system for soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer 1977;40:1562.
181. Geer R, Woodruff J, Casper E, Brennan M. Management of small soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity in adults. Arch Surg 1992;127:1285.
182. Fleming J, Berman R, Cheng S, et al. Long-term outcome of patients with American Joint Committee on Cancer stage IIB extremity soft tissue sarcomas. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2772.
183. Brennan MF. Staging of soft tissue sarcomas. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:8.
184. Pisters P, Leung D, Woodruff J, et al. Analysis of prognostic factors in 1,041 patients with localized soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1679.
185. Lewis J, Leung D, Casper E, et al. Multifactorial analysis of long-term follow-up (more than 5 years) of primary extremity sarcoma. Arch Surg 1999;134:190.
186. Rosenberg S, Kent H, Costa J, et al. Prospective randomized evaluation of the role of limb-sparing surgery, radiation therapy, and adjuvant chemoimmunotherapy in the treatment of soft tissue
sarcoma. Surgery 1978;84:62.
187. Rosenberg S, Tepper J, Galtstein E, et al. The treatment of soft tissue sarcoma of the extremities: prospective randomized evaluations of (1) limb-sparing surgery plus radiation therapy
compared with amputation and (2) the role of adjuvant chemotherapy. Ann Surg 1982;196:305.
188. Pusey W. Cases of sarcoma and of Hodgkin's disease treated by exposure to X-rays: a preliminary report. JAMA 1902;38:166.
189. Weichselbaum R, Beckett M, Vijayakumar S, et al. Radiobiological characterization of head and neck and sarcoma cells derived from patient prior to radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1990;19:313.
190. Kelland L, Bingle L, Edwards S, Steel G. High intrinsic radiosensitivity of a newly established and characterised human embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma cell line. Br J Cancer 1989;59:160.
191. Ruka W, Taghian A, Gioioso D, et al. Comparison between the in vitro intrinsic radiation sensitivity of human soft tissue sarcoma and breast cancer cell lines. J Surg Oncol 1996;61:290.
192. Pisters P, Harrison L, Leung D, et al. Long term results of a prospective randomized trial of adjuvant brachytherapy in soft tissue sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:859.
193. Yang J, Chang A, Baker A, et al. Randomized prospective study of the benefit of adjuvant radiation therapy in the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas of the extremity. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:197.
194. Lindberg R, Martin R, Romsdahl M. Surgery and postoperative radiotherapy in the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas in adults. Am J Roentgenol Radium Ther Nucl Med 1975;123:123.
195. Suit H, Russell W, Martin R. Sarcoma of soft tissue: clinical and histopathologic parameters and response to treatment. Cancer 1975;35:1478
196. Suit H, Russell W, Martin R. Management of patients with sarcoma of soft tissue in an extremity. Cancer 1973;31:1237.
197. Lindberg R, Martin R, Romsdahl M, Barkley H. Conservative surgery and postoperative radiotherapy in 300 adults with soft tissue sarcomas. Cancer 1981;47:2391.
198. Suit H, Sprio I. Role of radiation in the management of adult patients with sarcoma of soft tissue. Semin Surg Oncol 1994;10:347.
199. Harrison L, Franzese F, Gaynor J, Brennan M. Long-term results of a prospective randomized trial of adjuvant brachytherapy in the management of completely resected soft tissue sarcomas of
the extremity and superficial trunt. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:259.

200. Mundt A, Awan A, Sibley G, et al. Conservative surgery and adjuvant radiation therapy in the management of adult soft tissue sarcoma of the extremities: clinical and radiobiological results. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:977.
201. Pao W, Pilepich M. Postoperative radiotherapy in the treatment of extremity soft tissue sarcomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:907.
202. Janjan N, Yasko A, Reece G, et al. Comparision of charges related to radiotherapy for soft tissue sarcomas treated with preoperative external beam radiation versus interstitial implantation.
Ann Surg Oncol 1994;1:415.
203. Hilaris B, Shiu M, Nori D. Limb-sparing therapy for locally advanced soft tissue sarcomas. Endocur Hypertherm Oncol 1985;1:17.
204. Pisters P, Harrison L, Woodruff J, et al. A prospective randomized trial of adjuvant brachytherapy in the management of low-grade soft tissue sarcomas of the extremity and superficial trunk. J
Clin Oncol 1994;12:1150.
205. Schray M, Gunderson L, Sim F, et al. Soft tissue sarcoma: integration of brachytherapy, resection, and external irradiation. Cancer 1990;66:451.
206. Thomas L, Delannes M, Stockle E, et al. Intraoperative interstitial iridium brachytherapy in the management of soft tissue sarcomas: preliminary results of a feasibility phase II study. Radiother
Oncol 1994;33:99.
207. Alekhteyar K, Leung D, Brennan M, Harrison L. The effect of combined external beam radiotherapy and brachytherapy on local control and wound complications in patients with high-grade soft
tissue sarcomas of the extremity with positive microscopic margin. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:321.
208. Nori D, Shupak K, Shiu M, Brennan M. Role of brachytherapy in recurrent extremity sarcoma in patients treated with prior surgery and irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:1229.
209. Pearlstone D, Janjan N, Feig B, et al. Re-resection with brachytherapy for locally recurrent soft tissue sarcoma arising in a previously radiated field. Cancer J Sci Am 1999;5:26.
210. Catton C, Davis A, Bell R, et al. Soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity. Limb salvage after failure of combined conservative therapy. Radiother Oncol 1996;41:209.
211. Ormsby M, Hilaris B, Nori D, Brennan M. Wound complicatons of adjuvant radiation therapy in patients with soft tissue sarcomas. Ann Surg 1989;210:93.
212. Alekhteyar K, Porter A, Herskovic A, et al. Preliminary results of hyperfracitonated high dose rate brachytherapy in soft tissue sarcomas. Endocurietherapy/Hyperthermia Oncology 1994;10:179.
213. Suit H, Mankin H, Wood W, et al. Treatment of the patient with stage M o soft tissue sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:854.
214. Cheng E, Dusenbery K, Winters M, Thompson R. Soft tissue sarcomas: preoperative versus postoperative radiotherapy. J Surg Oncol 1996;61:90.
215. Pollack A, Zagars G, Goswitz M, et al. Preoperative vs. postoperative radiotherapy in the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas: a matter of presentation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:563.
216. O'Sullivan B, Davis A, Group CS, et al. Effect on radiotherapy field sizes in a recently completed Canadian Sarcoma Group and NCI Canada Clinical Trials Group randomized trial comparing
pre-operative and post-operative radiotherapy in extremity soft tissue sarcoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys (abstract) 1999;45:238.
217. LeVay J, O'Sullivan B, Catton C, et al. Outcome and prognostic factors in soft tissue sarcoma in the adult. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:1091.
218. Sadoski C, Suit H, Rosenberg A, et al. Preoperative radiation, surgical margins, and local control of extremity sarcomas of soft tissues. J Surg Oncol 1993;52:223.
219. Alektiar K, Velasco J, Zelefsky M, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy for margin positive high-grade soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys (in press).
220. Coindre J, Terrier P, Bui N, et al. Prognostic factors in adult patients with locally controlled soft tissue sarcoma: a study of 546 patients from the French Federation of Cancer Centers Sarcoma
Group. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:869.
221. Noria S, Davis A, Kandel R, et al. Residual disease following unplanned excision of a soft tissue sarcoma of an extremity. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1996;78:650.
222. Brien E, Terek R, Geer R, et al. Treatment of soft tissue sarcomas of the hand. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1995;77:564.
223. Talbert M, Zagars G, Sherman N, Romsdahl M. Conservative surgery and radiation therapy for soft tissue sarcoma of the wrist, hand, ankle, and foot. Cancer 1990;66:2482.
224. Bray P, Bell R, Bowen C, et al. Limb salvage surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy for soft tissue sarcomas of the forearm and hand. J Hand Surg 1997;22A:495.
225. Tepper J, Suit H. Radiation therapy alone for sarcoma of soft tissue. Cancer 1985;56:475.
226. Slater J, McNeese M, Peters L. Radiation therapy for unresectable soft tissue sarcomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1729.
227. Goffman T, Tochner Z, Glatstein E. Primary treatment of large and massive adult sarcomas with Iododeoxyuridine and aggressive hyperfractionated irradiation. Cancer 1991;67:572.
228. Schwarz R, Krull A, Lessel A, et al. European results of neutron therapy in soft tissue sarcomas. Recent Results Cancer Res 1998;150:100.
229. American Joint Committee on Cancer. Soft tissue sarcoma. In: Fleming ID, Cooper JS, Henson DE, et al., eds. AJCC cancer staging handbook. 5th ed. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven,
1998:139.
230. Omura GA, Blessing JA, Major F, et al. A randomized clinical trial of adjuvant adriamycin in uterine sarcomas: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1240.
231. Antman K, Suit H, Amato D, et al. Preliminary results of a randomized trial of adjuvant doxorubicin for sarcomas: lack of apparent difference between treatment groups. J Clin Oncol
1984;2:601.
232. Lerner HJ, Amato DA, Savlov ED, et al. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group: a comparison of adjuvant doxorubicin and observation for patients with localized soft tissue sarcoma. J Clin
Oncol 1987;5:613.
233. Baker LH. Adjuvant treatment for soft tissue sarcomas. In: Ryan JR, Baker LH, eds. Recent concepts in sarcoma treatment. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer, 1988:130.
234. Antman K, Ryan L, Borden E, et al. Pooled results from three randomized adjuvant studies of doxorubicin versus observation in soft tissue sarcomas: 10 year results and review of the
literature. In: Salmon SE, ed. Adjuvant therapy of cancer, VI. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1990:529.
235. Gherlinzoni F, Bacci G, Picci P, et al. A randomized trial for the treatment of high-grade soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities: preliminary observations. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:552.
236. Picci P, Bacci G, Gherlinzoni F, et al. Results of a randomized trial for the treatment of localized soft tissue tumors (STS) of the extremities in adult patients. In: Ryan JR, Baker LH, eds. Recent
concepts in sarcoma treatment. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer, 1988:144.
237. Gherlinzoni F, Picci P, Bacci G, Cazzola A. Late results of a randomized trial for the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas (STS) of the extremities in adult patients. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1993;12:A1633.
238. Eilber FR, Giuliano AE, Huth JF, Morton DL. Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy (adriamycin) in high grade extremity soft tissue sarcoma: a randomized prospective trial. In: Salmon SE, ed.
Adjuvant therapy of cancer, V. Orlando: Grune & Stratton, 1987:719.
239. Piver MS, Lele SB, Marchetti DL, Emrich LJ. Effect of adjuvant chemotherapy on time to recurrence and survival of stage I uterine sarcomas. J Surg Oncol 1988;38:233.
240. Rosenberg SA, Tepper J, Glatstein E, et al. Prospective randomized evaluation of adjuvant chemotherapy in adults with soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities. Cancer 1983;52:424.
241. Rosenberg SA, Chang AE, Glatstein E. Adjuvant chemotherapy for treatment of extremity soft tissue sarcomas: review of the National Cancer Institute experience. Cancer Treat Symp
1985;3:83.
242. Chang AE, Kinsella T, Glatstein E, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy for patients with high-grade soft tissue sarcomas of the extremity. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1491.
243. Dresdale A, Bonow RO, Wesley R, et al. Prospective evaluation of doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy resulting from postsurgical adjuvant treatment of patients with soft tissue sarcomas.
Cancer 1983;52:51.
244. Glenn J, Kinsella T, Glatstein E, et al. A randomized, prospective trial of adjuvant chemotherapy in adults with soft tissue sarcomas of the head and neck, breast, and trunk. Cancer
1985;55:1206.
245. Glenn J, Sindelar WF, Kinsella T, et al. Results of multimodality therapy of resectable soft tissue sarcomas of the retroperitoneum. Surgery 1985;97:316.
246. Lindberg RD, Murphy WK, Benjamin RS, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy in the treatment of primary soft tissue sarcomas: a preliminary report. In: Institute MAAT, ed. Management of primary
bone and soft tissue tumors. Chicago: Year Book Medical, 1977:343.
247. Benjamin RS, Terjanian TO, Fenoglio CJ, et al. The importance of combination chemotherapy for adjuvant treatment of high-risk patients with soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities. In:
Salmon SE, ed. Adjuvant therapy of cancer, V. Orlando: Grune & Stratton, 1987:735.
248. Edmonson JH, Fleming TR, Ivins JC, et al. Randomized study of systemic chemotherapy following complete excision of nonosseous sarcomas. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:1390.
249. Bramwell V, Rouesse J, Steward W, et al. Adjuvant CyVADIC chemotherapy for adult soft tissue sarcomareduced local recurrence but no improvement in survival: a study of the European
Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1137.
250. Ravaud A, Bui NB, Coindre J-M, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy with CyVADIC in high risk soft tissue sarcoma: a randomized prospective trial. In Salmon SE, ed. Adjuvant therapy of cancer, VI.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1990:556.
251. Frustaci S, Gherlinzoni F, De Paoli A, et al. Maintenance of efficacy of adjuvant chemotherapy (CT) in soft tissue sarcoma (STS) of the extremities. Update of a randomized trial. Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1999;18:A2108(abst).
252. Fleming ID, Cooper JS, Henson DE, et al. AJCC cancer staging manual, 5th ed. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven, 1997:131.
253. Benjamin RS, Legha SS, Patel SR, Nicaise C. Single-agent ifosfamide studies in sarcomas of soft tissue and bone: the M.D. Anderson experience. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1993;31(Suppl 2):S174.
254. O'Bryan RM, Luce JK, Talley RW, et al. Phase II evaluation of adriamycin in human neoplasia. Cancer 1973;32:1.
255. Schoenfeld DA, Rosenbaum C, Horton J, et al. A comparison of adriamycin versus vincristine and adriamycin, and cyclophosphamide versus vincristine, actinomycin-D, and cyclophosphamide
for advanced sarcoma. Cancer 1982;50:2757.
256. Bodey GP, Rodriguez V, Murphy WK, et al. Protected environment prophylactic antibiotic program for malignant sarcomas: randomized trial during remission induction chemotherapy. Cancer
1981;47:2422.
257. Pinedo HM, Bramwell VH, Mouridsen HT, et al. CyVADIC in advanced soft tissue sarcoma: a randomized study comparing two schedules. A study of the EORTC Soft Tissue and Bone
Sarcoma Group. Cancer 1984;53:1825.
258. Steward WP, Verweij J, Somers R, et al. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor allows safe escalation of dose-intensity of chemotherapy in metastatic adult soft tissue sarcomas: a
study of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:15.
259. Zalupski MM, Ryan JR, Hussein ME, Baker LH. Defining the role of adjuvant chemotherapy for patients with soft tissue sarcoma of the extremities. In Salmon SE, ed. Adjuvant chemotherapy of
cancer, VII. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1993:385.
260. Tierney JF, Mosseri V, Stewart LA, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy for soft tissue sarcoma: review and meta-analysis of the published results of randomised clinical trials. Br J Cancer
1995;72:469.
261. Sarcoma Meta-analysis Collaboration. Adjuvant chemotherapy for localised resectable soft tissue sarcoma of adults: meta-analysis of individual data. Lancet 1997;350:1647.
262. Fisher B, Gunduz N, Saffer EA. Influence of the interval between primary tumor removal and chemotherapy on kinetics and growth of metastases. Cancer Res 1983;43:1488.
263. Simpson-Herren L, Sanford AH, Holmquist JP. Effects of surgery on the cell kinetics of residual tumor. Cancer Treat Rep 1976;60:1749.
264. Rouesse JG, Friedman S, Sevin DM, et al. Preoperative induction chemotherapy in the treatment of locally advanced soft tissue sarcomas. Cancer 1987;60:296.
265. Pezzi CM, Pollock RE, Evans HL, et al. Preoperative chemotherapy for soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities. Ann Surg 1990;211:476.
266. Casper ES, Gaynor JJ, Harrison LB, et al. Preoperative and postoperative adjuvant combination chemotherapy for adults with high grade soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer 1994;73:1644.
267. Southee AE, Kaplan WD, Jochelson MS, et al. Gallium imaging in metastatic and recurrent soft tissue sarcoma. J Nucl Med 1992;33:1594.
268. Menendez LR, Fideler BM, Mirra J. Thallium-201 scanning for the evaluation of osteosarcoma and soft- tissue sarcoma. A study of the evaluation and predictability of the histological response
to chemotherapy. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1993;75:526.
269. Koutcher JA, Ballon D, Graham M, et al. 31P NMR spectra of extremity sarcomas: diversity of metabolic profiles and changes in response to chemotherapy. Magn Reson Med 1990;16:19.
270. Kern KA, Brunetti A, Norton JA, et al. Metabolic imaging of human extremity musculoskeletal tumors by PET. J Nucl Med 1988;29:181.
271. Nieweg OE, Pruim J, Hoekstra HJ, et al. Positron emission tomography with fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose for the evaluation of therapeutic isolated regional limb perfusion in a patient with soft
tissue sarcoma. J Nucl Med 1994;35:90.
272. Didolkar MS, Kanter PM, Baffi RR, et al. Comparison of regional versus systemic chemotherapy with adriamycin. Ann Surg 1978;187:332.
273. Eilber FR, Giuliano AE, Huth JF, Morton DL. A randomized prospective trial using postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy (adriamycin) in high-grade extremity soft tissue sarcoma. Am J Clin
Oncol 1988;11:39.
274. Eilber F, Giuliano A, Huth J, Mirra J. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy, radiation, and limited surgery for high grade soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity. In: Ryan JR, Baker LH, eds. Recent
concepts in sarcoma treatment. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer, 1988:115.
275. Soulen MC, Weissmann JR, Sullivan KL, et al. Intraarterial chemotherapy with limb-sparing resection of large soft- tissue sarcomas of the extremities. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1992;3:659.
276. Wanebo HJ, Temple WJ, Popp MB, et al. Preoperative regional therapy for extremity sarcoma. A tricenter update. Cancer 1995;75:2299.
277. Hoekstra HJ, Schraffordt Koops H, Molenaar WM, et al. A combination of intraarterial chemotherapy, preoperative and postoperative radiotherapy, and surgery as limb-saving treatment of

primarily unresectable high-grade soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities. Cancer 1989;63:59.
278. Rahoty P, Konya A. Results of preoperative neoadjuvant chemotherapy and surgery in the management of patients with soft tissue sarcoma. Eur J Surg Oncol 1993;19:641.
279. Chawla SP, Rosen G, Eilber F, et al. Cisplatin and adriamycin as neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy in the management of soft tissue sarcoma. In Salmon SE, ed. Adjuvant therapy of
cancer, VI. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1990:567.
280. Kempf RA, Irwin LE, Menendez L, et al. Limb salvage surgery for bone and soft tissue sarcoma. A phase II pathologic study of preoperative intraarterial cisplatin. Cancer 1991;68:738.
281. Azzarelli A, Quagliuolo V, Casali P, et al. Preoperative doxorubicin plus ifosfamide in primary soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1993;31(Suppl 2):S210.
282. Levine EA, Trippon M, Das Gupta TK. Preoperative multimodality treatment for soft tissue sarcomas. Cancer 1993;71:3685.
283. Mason M, Robinson M, Harmer C, Westbury G. Intra-arterial adriamycin, conventionally fractionated radiotherapy and conservative surgery for soft tissue sarcomas. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol)
1992;4:32.
284. Eggermont AM, Schraffordt Koops H, Lienard D, et al. Isolated limb perfusion with high-dose tumor necrosis factor-alpha in combination with interferon-gamma and melphalan for nonresectable
extremity soft tissue sarcomas: a multicenter trial. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2653.
285. Eggermont AMM, Schraffordt Koops H, Klausner JM, et al. Limb salvage by isolated limb perfusion (ILP) with TNF and melphalan in patients with locally advanced soft tissue sarcomas:
outcome of 270 ILPs in 246 patients. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:A2067(abst).
286. Wiedemann GJ, d'Oleire F, Knop E, et al. Ifosfamide and carboplatin combined with 41.8 degrees C whole-body hyperthermia in patients with refractory sarcoma and malignant teratoma.
Cancer Res 1994;54:5346.
287. Issels RD, Prenninger SW, Nagele A, et al. Ifosfamide plus etoposide combined with regional hyperthermia in patients with locally advanced sarcomas: a phase II study. J Clin Oncol
1990;8:1818.
288. Issels RD, Bosse D, Abdel-Rahman S, et al. Preoperative systemic etoposide/ifosfamide/doxorubicin chemotherapy combined with regional hyperthermia in high-risk sarcoma: a pilot study.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1993;31(Suppl 2):S233.
289. Jaques D, Coit D, Hajdu S, Brennan M. Management of primary and recurrent soft tissue sarcoma of the retroperitoneum. Ann Surg 1990;212:51.
290. Bevilacqua R, Rogatko A, Hajdu S, Brennan M. Prognostic factors in primary retroperitoneal soft tissue sarcoma. Arch Surg 1991;126:328.
291. Catton C, O'Sullivan B, Kotwall C. Outcome and prognosis in retroperitoneal soft tissue sarcoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:1005.
292. Fein D, Corn B, Lanciano R. Management of retroperitoneal sarcomas: does dose escalation impact on locoregional control? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:129.
293. Tepper JE, Suit HD, Wood WC, et al. Radiation therapy of retroperitoneal soft tissue sarcomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:825.
294. Willet C, Suit H, Tepper J. Intraoperative electron beam radiation therapy for retroperitoneal soft tissue sarcomas. Cancer 1991;68:278.
295. Gunderson L, Najorney D, McIlrath D. External beam and intraoperative electron irradiation for locally advanced soft tissue sarcomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:647.
296. Petersen I, Haddock M, Donohue J. Use of intraoperative electron beam radiation therapy in the management of soft tissue sarcomas. Int J Radiat Biol Phys(in press).
297. Sindelar W, Kinsella T, Chen P. Intraoperative radiotherapy in retroperitoneal sarcomas. Arch Surg 1993;128:402.
298. Alektiar K, Hu K, Anderson L, et al. High dose rate intraoperative radiation therapy (HDR-IORT) for retroperitoneal sarcomas. Int J Radiat Biol Phys 2000;47:157.
299. Eeles R, Fisher C, A'Hern R, et al. Head and neck sarcomas: prognostic factors and implications for treatment. Br J Cancer 1993;68:201.
300. Willers H, Hug E, Spiro I, et al. Adult soft tissue sarcomas of the head and neck treated by radiation and surgery or radiation alone: patterns of failure and prognostic factors. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1995;33:585.
301. Le Q, Fu K, Kroll S, et al. Prognostic factors in adult soft tissue sarcomas of the head and neck. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:975.
302. Lydiatt W, Shaha A, Shah J. Angiosarcoma of the head and neck. Am J Surg 1994;168:451.
303. Tran L, Mark R, Meier R, et al. Sarcomas of the head and neck. Prognostic factors and treatment strategies. Cancer 1992;70:169.
304. Morrison W, Byers R, Garden A, et al. Cutaneous angiosarcoma of the head and neck: a therapeutic dilemma. Cancer 1995;76:319.
305. Moore M, Kinne D. Breast sarcoma. Surg Clin North Am 1996;76:383.
306. North J, McPhee M, Arredondo M, Edge S. Sarcoma of the breast: implications of the extent of local therapy. Am Surg 1998;64:1059.
307. Gutman H, Pollock R, Ross M, et al. Sarcoma of the breast: implications for extent of therapy. The MD Anderson experience. Surgery 1994;116:505.
308. Johnstone P, Pierce L, Merino M, et al. Primary soft tissue sarcomas of the breast: local-regional control with post-operative radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:671.
309. Devereux D, Kent H, Brennan M. Time dependent effects of Adriamycin and x-ray therapy on wound healing in the rat. Cancer 1980;45:2805.
310. Shamberger R, Devereux D, Brennan M. The effect of chemotherapeutic agents on wound healing. In: Murphy G, ed. International advances in surgical oncology. New York: Alan R. Liss,
1981:15.
310a. Alektiar K, Zelefsky M, Brennan M. Morbidity and long term results of adjuvant brachyotherapy in soft tissue sarcoma: a prospective randomized trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
2000;47:1237.
311. Bell R, Mahoney J, O'Sullivan B, et al. Wound healing complications in soft tissue sarcoma management: comparision of three treatment protocols. J Surg Oncol 1991;46:190.
312. Bujko K, Suit H, Springfield D, Convery K. Wound healing after preoperative radiation for sarcoma of soft tissues. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1993;176:124.
313. Peat B, Bell R, Davis A, et al. Wound-healing complications after soft tissue sarcoma surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg 1994;93:980.
314. O'Sullivan B, Davis A, Bell R, et al. Phase III randomized trial of pre-operative versus post-operative radiotherapy in the curative management of extremity soft tissue sarcoma. A Canadian
Sarcoma Group and NCI Canada Clinical Trials Group study. Proc ASCO 1999;18:535a.
315. Stinson S, DeLaney T, Greenberg J, et al. Acute and long-term effects on limb function of combined modality limb sparing therapy for extremity soft tissue sarcoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1991;21:1493.
316. Brant T, Parsons J, Marcus R Jr, et al. Preoperative irradiation for soft tissue sarcomas of the trunk and extremities in adults. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:899.
317. Lin P, Schupak K, Boland P, et al. Pathologic femoral fracture after periosteal excision and radiation for the treatment of soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer 1998;82:2356.
318. LePechoux C, LeDeley M, Delaloge S, et al. Postoperative radiotherapy in the management of adult soft tissue sarcoma of the extremities: results with two different total dose, fractionation,
and overall treatment time schedules. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:879.
319. Sugarbaker P, Barofsky I, Rosenberg S, Gianola F. Quality of life assessment of patients in extremity sarcoma clinical trials. Surgery 1982;91:17.
320. Davis A, Devlin M, Griffin A, et al. Functional outcome in amputation versus limb sparing of patients with lower extremity sarcoma: a matched case-control study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil
1999;80:615.
321. Bell R, O'Sullivan B, Davis A, et al. Functional outcome in patients treated with surgery and irradiation for soft tissue tumours. J Surg Oncol 1991;48:224.
322. Schupak K, Lane J, Weilepp A, et al. The psychofunctional handicap associated with the use of brachytherapy in the treatment of lower extremity high grade soft tissue sarcomas. Proceedings
of the 35th Annual ASTRO Meeting. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:293.
323. Karasek K, Constine L, Rosier R. Sarcoma therapy: functional outcome and relationship to treatment parameters. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:651.
324. Robinson M, Spruce L, Eeles R, et al. Limb function following conservation treatment of adult soft tissue sarcoma. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:1567.
325. Sugerbaker P. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy for treatment and prevention of peritoneal carcinomatosis and sarcomatosis. Dis Colon Rect 1994;37:S115.
326. Creagan E, Fleming T, Edmonston J, Pairolero P. Pulmonary resection for metastatic nonosteogenic sarcoma. Cancer 1979;44:1908.
327. Putnam J, Roth J, Wesley M, et al. Analysis of prognostic factors in patients undergoing resection of pulmonary metastases from soft tissue sarcomas. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1984;87:260.
328. Roth J, Putnam J, Wesley M, Rosenberg S. Differing determinants of prognosis following resection of pulmonary metastases from osteogenic and soft tissue sarcoma patients. Cancer
1985;55:1361.
329. Casson A, Putnam J, Natarajan G, et al. Five-year survival after pulmonary metastasectomy for adult soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer 1992;69:662.
330. Jablons D, Steinberg S, Roth J, et al. Metastasectomy for soft tissue sarcoma. Further evidence for efficacy and prognostic indicators. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1989;97:695.
331. Verazin G, Warneke J, Driscoll D, et al. Resection of lung meastases from soft tissue sarcomas. A multivariate analysis. Arch Surg 1992;127:1407.
332. Lanza L, Putnam J Jr, Benajmin R, Roth J. Response to chemotherapy does not predict survival after resection of sarcomatous pulmonary meastases. Ann Thorac Surg 1991;51:219.
333. Weksler B, Lenert J, Ng B, Burt M. Isolated single lung perfusion with doxorubicin is effective in eradicating soft tissue sarcoma lung metastases in a rat model. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
1994;107:50.
334. Benjamin RS, Wiernik PH, Bachur NR. Adriamycin chemotherapyefficacy, safety, and pharmacologic basis of an intermittent single high-dosage schedule. Cancer 1974;33:19.
335. Santoro A, Tursz T, Mouridsen H, et al. Doxorubicin versus CyVADIC versus doxorubicin plus ifosfamide in first- line treatment of advanced soft tissue sarcomas: a randomized study of the
European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1537.
336. Edmonson JH, Ryan LM, Blum RH, et al. Randomized comparison of doxorubicin alone versus ifosfamide plus doxorubicin or mitomycin, doxorubicin, and cisplatin against advanced soft tissue
sarcomas. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1269.
337. Antman KH, Ryan L, Elias A, et al. Response to ifosfamide and mesna: 124 previously treated patients with metastatic or unresectable sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:126.
338. Rosen G, Forscher C, Lowenbraun S, et al. Synovial sarcoma. Uniform response of metastases to high dose ifosfamide. Cancer 1994;73:2506.
339. Gottlieb JA, Benjamin RS, Baker LH, et al. Role of DTIC (NSC-45388) in the chemotherapy of sarcomas. Cancer Treat Rep 1976;60:199.
340. Buesa JM, Mouridsen HT, van Oosterom AT, et al. High-dose DTIC in advanced soft tissue sarcomas in the adult. A phase II study of the E.O.R.T.C. Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group.
Ann Oncol 1991;2:307.
341. Elias A, Ryan L, Sulkes A, et al. Response to mesna, doxorubicin, ifosfamide, and dacarbazine in 108 patients with metastatic or unresectable sarcoma and no prior chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol
1989;7:1208.
342. Fidias P, Demetri GD, Harmon DC. Navelbine shows activity in previously treated sarcoma patients: phase II results from MGH/Dana-Farber/Partners CancerCare Study. Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1998;17:A1977(abst).
343. Amodio A, Carpano S, Manfredi C, et al. Gemcitabine in advanced stage soft tissue sarcoma: a phase II study. Clin Ter 1999;150:17.
344. Merimsky O, Meller I, Kollender Y, et al. Gemcitabine in patients with sarcoma of soft tissue or bone resistant to standard chemotherapy. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:A2098(abst).
345. Rosen L, Mulay M, Mayers A, et al. Phase I dose-escalating trial of SU5416, a novel angiogenesis inhibitor in patients with advanced malignancies. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;
18:A618(abst).
346. Demetri GD, Fletcher CD, Mueller E, et al. Induction of solid tumor differentiation by the peroxisome proliferator- activated receptor-gamma ligand troglitazone in patients with liposarcoma.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:3951.
347. Gottlieb JA, Baker LH, Quagliana JM, et al. Chemotherapy of sarcomas with a combination of adriamycin and dimethyl triazeno imidazole carboxamide. Cancer 1972;30:1632.
348. Zalupski M, Metch B, Balcerzak S, et al. Phase III comparison of doxorubicin and dacarbazine given by bolus versus infusion in patients with soft tissue sarcomas: a Southwest Oncology Group
study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:926.
349. Pfeffer MR, Sulkes A, Biran S. Treatment of advanced soft tissue sarcomas with a modified CyVADIC protocol. Oncology 1984;41:308.
350. Frustaci S, Foladore S, Buonadonna A, et al. Epirubicin and ifosfamide in advanced soft tissue sarcomas. Ann Oncol 1993;4:669.
351. Toma S, Palumbo R, Canavese G, et al. Ifosfamide plus epirubicin at escalating doses in the treatment of locally advanced and/or metastatic sarcomas. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1993;31(Suppl 2):S222.
352. Toma S, Coialbu T, Biassoni L, et al. Epidoxorubicin plus ifosfamide in advanced and/or metastatic soft- tissue sarcomas. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1990;26:453.
353. Antman K, Crowley J, Balcerzak SP, et al. An intergroup phase III randomized study of doxorubicin and dacarbazine with or without ifosfamide and mesna in advanced soft tissue and bone
sarcomas. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1276.
354. van Oosterom AT, Santoro A, Bramwell V, et al. Mitomycin C (MCC) in advanced soft tissue sarcoma: a phase II study of the EORTC Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group. Eur J Cancer Clin
Oncol 1985;21:459.
355. Edmonson JH, Long HJ, Richardson RL, et al. Phase II study of a combination of mitomycin, doxorubicin and cisplatin in advanced sarcomas. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1985;15:181.

356. Van Glabbeke M, van Oosterom AT, Oosterhuis JW, et al. Prognostic factors for the outcome of chemotherapy in advanced soft tissue sarcomas: an analysis of 2,185 patients treated with
anthracycline containing first-line regimensan European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:150.
357. Frei E III, Elias A, Wheeler C, et al. The relationship between high-dose treatment and combination chemotherapy: the concept of summation dose intensity. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:2027.
358. O'Bryan RM, Baker LH, Gottlieb JE, et al. Dose response evaluation of adriamycin in human neoplasia. Cancer 1977;39:1940.
359. Ozer H. American Society of Clinical Oncology guidelines for the use of hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors. Curr Opin Hematol 1996;3:3.
360. Vadhan-Raj S, Broxmeyer HE, Hittelman WN, et al. Abrogating chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression by recombinant granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in patients with
sarcoma: protection at the progenitor cell level. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1266.
361. Antman KS, Griffin JD, Elias A, et al. Effect of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor on chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression. N Engl J Med
1988;319:593.
362. Christman KL, Casper ES, Schwartz GK. High-intensity scheduling of ifosfamide in adult patients with soft tissue sarcoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1993;12:A1642(abst).
363. Schutte J, Mouridsen HT, Steward W, et al. Ifosfamide plus doxorubicin in previously untreated patients with advanced soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1993;31(Suppl
2):S204.
364. Steward WP, Verweij J, Somers R, et al. Doxorubicin plus ifosfamide with rhGM-CSF in the treatment of advanced adult soft tissue sarcomas: preliminary results of a phase II study from the
EORTC Soft tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1991;117(Suppl 4):S193.
365. Edmonson JH, Petersen IA, Shives TC, et al. Chemotherapy, irradiation, and surgery for function-preserving curative therapy of primary extremity soft tissue sarcomas: intital treatment with
I-MAP + GM-CSF--preliminary report. Sarcoma 1999;3:60(abst).
366. Bui BN, Chevallier B, Chevreau C, et al. Efficacy of lenograstim on hematologic tolerance to MAID chemotherapy in patients with advanced soft tissue sarcoma and consequences on treatment
dose-intensity. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2629.
367. Bitran JD, Samuels BL, Marsik S, et al. A phase I study of ifosfamide and doxorubicin with recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in stage IV breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res
1995;1:185.
368. Bui NB, Demaille MC, Chevreau C, et al. qMAID VS MAID + 25% with G-CSF in adults with advanced soft tissue sarcoma (STS). First results of a randomized study of the FNCLCC sarcoma
group. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:A1991.
369. Frustaci S, Comandone A, Bearz A, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of an ifosfamide continuous infusion (IFO-C.I.) in soft tissue sarcoma (STS) patients (pts). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1998;17:A1993(abst).
370. Walterhouse DO, Hoover ML, Marymont MA, Kletzel M. High-dose chemotherapy followed by peripheral blood stem cell rescue for metastatic rhabdomyosarcoma: the experience at Chicago
Children's Memorial Hospital. Med Pediatr Oncol 1999;32:88.
371. Lucidarme N, Valteau-Couanet D, Oberlin O, et al. Phase II study of high-dose thiotepa and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in children with solid tumors. Bone Marrow Transplant
1998;22:535.
372. Elias AD. High-dose therapy for adult soft tissue sarcoma: dose response and survival. Semin Oncol 1998;25(Suppl 4):19.
373. Seynaeve C, Verweij J. High-dose chemotherapy in adult sarcomas: no standard yet. Semin Oncol 1999;26:119.
374. Sutton GP, Blessing JA, Barrett RJ, McGehee R. Phase II trial of ifosfamide and mesna in leiomyosarcoma of the uterus: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1992;166:556.
375. Kawai A, Woodruff J, Healey JH, et al. SYT-SSX gene fusion as a determinant of morphology and prognosis in synovial sarcoma [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1998;338:153.
376. Grier HE. The Ewing family of tumors. Ewing's sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumors. Pediatr Clin North Am 1997;44:991.
377. Patel S, Hays C, Papdopoulos N. Pilot study of high-dose ifosfamide (HDI) + G-CSF in patients (pts) with bone and soft tissue sarcomas (STS). Proc ASCO 1995;14:516(abst).
378. Craft A, Cotterill S, Malcolm A, et al. Ifosfamide-containing chemotherapy in Ewing's sarcoma: The Second United Kingdom Children's Cancer Study Group and the Medical Research Council
Ewing's Tumor Study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3628.
379. Kushner B, Meyers P, Gerald W, et al. Very high-dose short-term chemotherapy for poor-risk peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors, including Ewing's sarcoma, in children and young
adults. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2796.
380. Antman K, Crowley J, Balcerzak SP, et al. A Southwest Oncology Group and Cancer and Leukemia Group B phase II study of doxorubicin, dacarbazine, ifosfamide, and mesna in adults with
advanced osteosarcoma, Ewing's sarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer 1998;82:1288.
381. La Quaglia MP, Heller G, Ghavimi F, et al. T he effect of age at diagnosis on outcome in rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer 1994;73:109.
382. Singer S, Rubin B, Fletcher CDM, et al. Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) in adults: size, location, and response to chemotherapy predicts survival. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:A2106(abst).
383. Baldini EH, Demetri GD, Fletcher CD, et al. Adults with Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor: adverse effect of older age and primary extraosseous disease on outcome. Ann Surg
1999;230:79.
384. Ahrens S, Hoffmann C, Jabar S, et al. Evaluation of prognostic factors in a tumor volume-adapted treatment strategy for localized Ewing sarcoma of bone: the CESS 86 experience.
Cooperative Ewing Sarcoma Study. Med Pediatr Oncol 1999;32:186.
385. Hornback N, Omura G, Major F. Observations on the use of adjuvant radiation therapy in patients with stage I and II uterine sarcoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986; 12:2127.
386. Chi D, Mychalczak B, Saigo P, et al. The role of whole-pelvic irradiation in the treatment of early-stage uterine carcinosarcoma. Gynecol Oncol 1997;65:493.
387. Ferrer F, Sabater S, Farrus B, et al. Impact of radiotherapy on local control and survival in uterine sarcomas: a retrospective study from the Group Oncologic Catala-Occita. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1999;44:47.
388. Omura GA, Major FJ, Blessing JA, et al. A randomized study of adriamycin with and without dimethyl triazenoimidazole carboxamide in advanced uterine sarcomas. Cancer 1983;52:626.
389. Muss HB, Bundy B, DiSaia PJ, et al. Treatment of recurrent or advanced uterine sarcoma. A randomized trial of doxorubicin versus doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide (a phase III trial of the
Gynecologic Oncology Group). Cancer 1985;55:1648.
390. Thigpen JT, Blessing JA, Beecham J, et al. Phase II trial of cisplatin as first-line chemotherapy in patients with advanced or recurrent uterine sarcomas: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J
Clin Oncol 1991;9:1962.
391. Gershenson DM, Kavanagh JJ, Copeland LJ, et al. Cisplatin therapy for disseminated mixed mesodermal sarcoma of the uterus. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:618.
392. Lantta M, Kahanpaa K, Karkkainen J, et al. Estradiol and progesterone receptors in two cases of endometrial stromal sarcoma. Gynecol Oncol 1984;18:233.
393. Keen CE, Philip G. Progestogen-induced regression in low-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma. Case report and literature review. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1989;96:1435.
394. Wade K, Quinn MA, Hammond I, et al. Uterine sarcoma: steroid receptors and response to hormonal therapy. Gynecol Oncol 1990;39:364.
395. Spear M, Jennings L, Mankin H, et al. Individualizing management of aggressive fibromatoses. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:637.
396. Ballo M, Zagars G, Pollack A. Radiation therapy in the management of desmoid tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:1007.
397. Goy B, Lee S, Eilber F, et al. The role of adjuvant radiotherapy in the treatment of resectable desmoid tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:659.
398. Kamath S, Parsons J, Marcus R Jr, et al. Radiotherapy for local control of aggressive fibromatosis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:325.
399. Reitamo JJ, Scheinin TM, Hayry P. The desmoid syndrome. New aspects in the cause, pathogenesis and treatment of the desmoid tumor. Am J Surg 1986;151:230.
400. Lim CL, Walker MJ, Mehta RR, Das Gupta TK. Estrogen and antiestrogen binding sites in desmoid tumors. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1986;22:583.
401. Waddell WR, Gerner RE, Reich MP. Nonsteroid antiinflammatory drugs and tamoxifen for desmoid tumors and carcinoma of the stomach. J Surg Oncol 1983;22:197.
402. Kinzbrunner B, Ritter S, Domingo J, Rosenthal CJ. Remission of rapidly growing desmoid tumors after tamoxifen therapy. Cancer 1983;52:2201.
403. Sportiello DJ, Hoogerland DL. A recurrent pelvic desmoid tumor successfully treated with tamoxifen. Cancer 1991;67:1443.
404. Waddell WR, Kirsch WM. Testolactone, sulindac, warfarin, and vitamin K1 for unresectable desmoid tumors. Am J Surg 1991;161:416.
405. Brooks MD, Ebbs SR, Colletta AA, Baum M. Desmoid tumours treated with triphenylethylenes. Eur J Cancer 1992:28a;1014.
406. Wilcken N, Tattersall MH. Endocrine therapy for desmoid tumors. Cancer 1991;68:1384.
407. Lanari A. Effect of progesterone on desmoid tumors (aggressive fibromatosis). N Engl J Med 1983;309:1523.
408. Klein WA, Miller HH, Anderson M, DeCosse JJ. The use of indomethacin, sulindac, and tamoxifen for the treatment of desmoid tumors associated with familial polyposis. Cancer 1987;60:2863.
409. Seiter K, Kemeny N. Successful treatment of a desmoid tumor with doxorubicin. Cancer 1993;71:2242.
410. Patel SR, Evans HL, Benjamin RS. Combination chemotherapy in adult desmoid tumors. Cancer 1993;72:3244.
411. Weiss AJ, Lackman RD. Low-dose chemotherapy of desmoid tumors. Cancer 1989;64:1192.
412. Weiss AJ, Horowitz S, Lackman RD. Therapy of desmoid tumors and fibromatosis using vinorelbine. Am J Clin Oncol 1999;22:193.
413. Gadd MA, Casper ES, Woodruff JM, et al. Development and treatment of pulmonary metastases in adult patients with extremity soft tissue sarcoma. Ann Surg 1993;218:705.
414. Jhanwar S, Chen Q, Li F, et al. Cytogenetic analysis of soft tissue sarcomas. Recurrent chromosome abnormalities in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST). Cytogenet
1994;78:138.
415. Hovig E, Lothe R, Farrants G, et al. Chromosome 13 alterations in osteosarcoma cell lines derived from a patient with previous retinoblastoma. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1991; 57:31.
416. Scholz R, Kabisch H, Delling G, Winkler K. Homozygous deletion within the retinoblastoma gene in a native osteosarcoma specimen of a patient cured of a retinoblastoma of both eyes. Pediatr
Hematol Oncol 1990;7:265.
417. Malkin D, Li F, Strong L, et al. Germ line p53 mutations in a familial syndrome of breast cancer, sarcomas, and other neoplasms. Science 1990;250:1233.
418. Okamoto M, Sato C, Kohno Y, et al. Molecular nature of chromosome 5q loss in colorectal tumors and desmoids from patients with familial adenomatous ployposis. Hum Genet 1990;85:595.
419. Foulkes W. A tale of four syndromes: familial adenomatous polyposis, Gardner syndrome, attenuated APC and Turcot syndrome. QJM 1995;88:853.
420. Goto M, Miller R, Ishikawa Y, Sugano H. Excess of rare cancers in Werner syndrome (adult progeria). Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1996;5:239.
421. Carney J. Gastric stromal sarcoma, pulmonary chondroma, and extra-adrenal paraganglioma (Carney triad): natural history, adrenocortical component, and possible familial occurrence. Mayo
Clin Proc 1999;74:543.
422. Carney J, Sheps S, Go V, Gordon H. The triad of gastric leiomyosarcoma, functioning extra-adrenal paraganglioma and pulmonary chondroma. N Engl J Med 1977;296:1517.
423. van Slegtenhorst M, de Hoogt R, Hermans C, et al. Identification of the tuberous sclerosis gene TSC1 on chromosome 9q34. Science 1997;277:805.
424. Povey S, Burley M, Attwood J, et al. Two loci for tuberous sclerosis: one on 9q34 and one on 16p13. Ann Hum Genet 1994;58:107.
425. Sallee D, Spector M, van Heeckeren D, Patel C. Primary pediatric cardiac tumors: a 17 year experience. Cardiol Young 1999;9:155.
426. [No authors listed.] Chromosomal translocations in Ewing's sarcoma. N Engl J Med 1983;309:496.
427. Zoubek A, Dockhorn-Dworniczak B, Delattre O, et al. Does expression of different EWS chimeric transcripts define clinically distinct risk groups of Ewing tumor patients? J Clin Oncol
1996;14:1245.
428. Kaneko Y, Kobayashi H, Handa M, et al. EWS-ERG fusion transcript produced by chromosomal insertion in a Ewing sarcoma. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1997;18:228.
429. Jeon I, David J, Braun B, et al. A variant Ewing's sarcoma translocation (7;22) fuses the EWS gene to the ETS gene ETV1. Oncogene 1995;10:1229.
430. Kaneko Y, Yoshida K, Handa M, et al. Fusion of an ETS-family gene, EIAF, to EWS by t(17;22)(q12;q12) chromosome translocation in an undifferentiated sarcoma of infancy. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 1996;15:115.
431. Mugneret F, Lizard S, Aurias A, Turn-Carel C. Chromosomes in Ewing's sarcoma. II. Nonrandom adiditional changes, trisomy 8 and der(16)t(1;16). Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1988; 32:239.
432. Douglass E, Rowe S, Valentine M, et al. A second nonrandom translocation, der(16)t(1;16)(q21;q13), in Ewing sarcoma and peripheral neuroectodermal tumor. Cytogenet Cell Genet
1990;53:87.
433. Maurici D, Perez-Atayde A, Grier H, et al. Frequency and implications of chromosome 8 and 12 gains in Ewing sarcoma. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1998;100:106.
434. Panagopoulos I, Mandahl N, Ron D, et al. Characterization of the CHOP breakpoints and fusiontranscripts in myxoid liposarcomas with the 12;16 translocation. Cancer Res 1994;54:6500.
435. Aoki T, Hisaoka M, Kouho H, et al. Interphase cytogenetic analysis of myxoid soft tissue tumors by fluorescence in situ hybridization and DNA flow cytometry using paraffin-embedded tissue.
Cancer 1997;79:284.
436. Panagopoulos I, Hoglund M, Mertens F, et al. Fusion of the EWS and CHOP genes in myxoid liposarcoma. Oncogene 1996;12:489.
437. Heim S, Mandahl N, Dristoffersson U, et al. Marker ring chromosomea new cytogenetic abnormality characterizing lipogenic tumors? Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1987;24:319.
438. Rosai J, Akerman M, Dal Cin P, et al. Combined morphologic and karyotypic study of 59 atypical lipomatous tumors. Evaluation of their relationship and differential diagnosis with other adipose

tissue tumors (a report of the CHAMP Study Group). Am J Surg Pathol 1996;20:1182.
439. Kelly K, Womer R, Sorensen P, et al. Common and variant gene fusions predict distinct clinicalphenotypes in rhabdomyosarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1831.
440. Fletcher J. Translocation (12;22)(q13-14;q12) is a nonrandom aberration in soft tissue clear-cell sarcoma [letter]. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1992;5:184.
441. Peulve P, Michot C, Vannier J, et al. Clear cell sarcoma with t(12;22)(q13-14;q12). Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1991;3:400.
442. Rauscher Fd, Benjamin L, Fredericks W, Morris J. Novel oncogenic mutations in the WT1 Wilms' tumor suppressor gene: a t(11;22) fuses the Ewing's sarcoma gene, EWS1, to WT1 in
desmoplastic small round cell tumor. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 1994;59:137.
443. Gerald W, Ladanyi M, de Alava E, et al. Clinical, pathologic, and molecular spectrum of tumors associated with t(11;22)(p13;q12): desmoplastic small round-cell tumor and its variants. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:3028.
444. Turc-Carel C, Dal Cin P, Limon J, et al. Translocation X;18 in synovial sarcoma. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1986;23:93.
445. Clark J, Rocques P, Crew A, et al. Identification of novel genes, SYT anbd SSX, involved in the t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2) translocation found in human synovial sarcoma. Nat Genet 1994;7:502.
446. Shipley J, Clark J, Crew A, et al. The (X;18)(p11.2;q11.2) translocation found in human synovial sarcomas involves two distinct loci on the X chromosome. Oncogene 1994;9:1447.
447. Sciot R, Dal Cin P, Fletcher C, et al. t(9;22)(q22-31;q11-12) is a consistent marker of extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma: evaluation of three cases. Mod Pathol 1995;8:765.
448. Brody R, Ueda T, Hamelin A, et al. Molecular analysis of the fusion of EWS to an orphan nuclear receptor gene in extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. Am J Pathol 1997;150:1049.
449. Pedeutour F, Simon M, Minoletti F, et al. Transolocation, t(17;22)(q22;q13), in dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans: a new tumor-associated chromosome rearrangement. Cytogenet Cell Genet
1996;72:171.
450. Simon M, Pedeutour F, Sirvent N, et al. Deregulation of the platelet-derived growth factor B-chain gene via fusion with collagen gene COL1A1 in dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans and
giant-cell fibroblastoma. Nat Genet 1997;15:95.
451. Knezevich S, McFadden D, Tao W, et al. A novel ETV2-NTRK3 gene fusion in congenital fibrosarcoma. Nat Genet 1998;18:184.
452. Versteege I, Sevenet N, Lange J, et al. Truncating mutations of hSNF5/INI1 in aggressive paediatric cancer. Nature 1998;394:203.
453. Rousseau-Merck M, Versteege I, Legrand I, et al. hSNF5/INI1 inactivation is mainly associated with homozygous deletions and mitotic recombinations in rhabdoid tumors. Cancer Res
1999;59:3152.
454. Nibert M, Heim S. Uterine leiomyoma cytogenetics Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1990;2:3.
455. Rodriguez E, Reuter V, Mies C, et al. Abnormalities of 2q: a common genetic link between rhabdomyosarcoma and hepatoblastoma? Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1991;3:122.
456. Dietrich C, Jacobsen B, Starklint H, Heim S. Clonal karyotypic evolution in an embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma with trsiomy 8 as the primary chromosomal abnormality. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 1993;7:240.
457. Quezado M, Middleton L, Bryant B, et al. Allelic loss on chromosome 22q in epithelioid sarcomas. Hum Pathol 1998;29:604.
458. Cordoba J, Parham D, Meyer W, Douglass E. A new cytogenetic finding in an epithelioid sarcoma, t(8;22)(q22;q11). Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1994;72:151.
459. Wilson RE, Wood WC, Lerner HL, et al. Doxorubicin chemotherapy in the treatment of soft tissue sarcoma. Combined results of two randomized trials. Arch Surg 1986;121:1354.
460. Borden EC, Amato DA, Rosenbaum C, et al. Randomized comparison of three adriamycin regimens for metastatic soft tissue sarcomas. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:840.
461. Borden EC, Amato DA, Edmonson JH, et al. Randomized comparison of doxorubicin and vindesine to doxorubicin for patients with metastatic soft tissue sarcomas. Cancer 1990;66:862.
462. Mouridsen HT, Bastholt L, Somers R, et al. Adriamycin versus epirubicin in advanced soft tissue sarcomas. A randomized phase II/phase III study of the EORTC Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma
Group. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1987;23:1477.
463. Casper ES, Schwartz GK, Sugarman A, et al. Phase I trial of dose-intense liposome-encapsulated doxorubicin in patients with advanced sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2111.
464. Skubitz KM. A phase II trial of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (DOXIL) demonstrates activity in refractory sarcoma, mesothelioma, and head and neck cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:A2090(abst).
465. Lopez M, Vici P, Di Lauro K, et al. Randomized prospective clinical trial of high-dose epirubicin and dexrazoxane in patients with advanced breast cancer and soft tissue sarcomas. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:86.
466. Amato DA, Borden EC, Shiraki M, et al. Evaluation of bleomycin, chlorozotocin, MGBG, and bruceantin in patients with advanced soft tissue sarcoma, bone sarcoma, or mesothelioma. Invest
New Drugs 1985;3:397.
467. Golbey R, Li MC, Kaufman RF. Actinomycin in the treatment of soft part sarcomas (abst). James Ewing Society Scientific Program, 1968.
468. Bramwell VH, Mouridsen HT, Santoro A, et al. Cyclophosphamide versus ifosfamide: a randomized phase II trial in adult soft tissue sarcomas. The European Organization for Research and
Treatment of Cancer [EORTC], Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1993;31(Suppl 2):S180.
469. Borden EC, Larson P, Ansfield FJ, et al. Hexamethylmelamine treatment of sarcomas and lymphomas. Med Pediatr Oncol 1977;3:401.
470. Patel SR, Vadhan-Raj S, Papadopolous N, et al. High-dose ifosfamide in bone and soft tissue sarcomas: results of phase II and pilot studiesdose-response and schedule dependence. J Clin
Oncol 1997;15:2378.
471. Samson MK, Baker LH, Benjamin RS, et al. Cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum(II) in advanced soft tissue and bony sarcomas: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. Cancer Treat Rep
1979;63:2027.
472. Budd GT, Metch B, Balcerzak SP, et al. High-dose cisplatin for metastatic soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer 1990;65:866.
473. Goldstein D, Cheuvart B, Trump DL, et al. Phase II trial of carboplatin in soft tissue sarcoma. Am J Clin Oncol 1990;13:420.
474. Patel SR, Jenkins J, Papadopoulos NE, et al. Preliminary results of a two-arm phase 2 trial of gemcitabine in patients with gastroinstestinal leiomyosarcomas and other soft tissue sarcomas
(STS). Sarcoma 1999;3:56(abst).
475. Subramanian S, Wiltshaw E. Chemotherapy of sarcoma. A comparison of three regimens. Lancet 1978;1:683.
476. Vaughn CB, McKelvey E, Balcerzak SP, et al. High-dose methotrexate with leucovorin rescue plus vincristine in advanced sarcoma: a Southwest Oncology Group study. Cancer Treat Rep
1984;68:409.
477. Gold G, Hall T, Shnider B, et al. A clinical study of 5-fluorouracil. Cancer 1959;19:935.
478. van Hoesel QG, Verweij J, Catimel G, et al. Phase II study with docetaxel (Taxotere) in advanced soft tissue sarcomas of the adult. EORTC Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group. Ann Oncol
1994;5:539.
479. Balcerzak SP, Benedetti J, Weiss GR, Natale RB. A phase II trial of paclitaxel in patients with advanced soft tissue sarcomas. A Southwest Oncology Group study. Cancer 1995;76:2248.
480. Yap BS, Benjamin RS, Plager C, et al. A randomized study of continuous infusion vindesine versus vinblastine in adults with refractory metastatic sarcomas. Am J Clin Oncol 1983;6:235.
481. Thigpen T, Blessing JA, Yordan E, et al. Phase II trial of etoposide in leiomyosarcoma of the uterus: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 1996;63:120.
482. Rose PG, Blessing JA, Soper JT, Barter JF. Prolonged oral etoposide in recurrent or advanced leiomyosarcoma of the uterus: a gynecologic oncology group study. Gynecol Oncol 1998;70:267.
483. Bramwell VH, Eisenhauer EA, Blackstein M, et al. Phase II study of topotecan (NSC 609 699) in patients with recurrent or metastatic soft tissue sarcoma. Ann Oncol 1995;6:847.
484. Saiki J, Stephens R, Fabian C, et al. Phase II evaluation of gallium nitrate (NSC-15200) in soft tissue and bone sarcomas. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1981;22:525(abst).
485. Presant CA, Gams R, Bartolucci AA. Treatment of metastatic sarcomas with mitoxantrone. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:813.
486. Bull FE, Von Hoff DD, Balcerzak SP, et al. Phase II trial of mitoxantrone in advanced sarcoma: a Southwest Oncology Group study. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:321.
487. Earhart RH, Amato DJ, Chang AY, et al. Phase II trial of 6-diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine versus aclacinomycin-A in advanced sarcomas and mesotheliomas. Invest New Drugs 1990;8:113.
488. Yap BS, Plager C, Benjamin RS, et al. Phase II evaluation of AMSA in adult sarcomas. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:341.
489. Weiss AJ, Ramirez G, Grage T, et al. Phase II study of azotomycin (NSC-56654). Cancer Chemother Rep 1968;52:611.
490. Perevodchikova NI, Lichinitser MR, Gorbunova VA. Phase I clinical study of carminomycin: its activity against soft tissue sarcomas. Cancer Treat Rep 1977;61:1705.
491. Taylor SA, Metch B, Balcerzak SP, Hanson KH. Phase II trial of echinomycin in advanced soft tissue sarcomas. A Southwest Oncology Group study. Invest New Drugs 1990;8:381.
492. Giaccone G, Donadio M, Calciati A. Phase II study of esorubicin in the treatment of patients with advanced sarcoma. Oncology 1989;46:285.
493. Somers R, Santoro A, Verweij J, et al. Phase II study of mitozolomide in advanced soft tissue sarcoma of adults: the EORTC Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group. Eur J Cancer
1992;28A:855.
494. Buckner JC, Edmonson JH, Ingle JN, Schaid DJ. Evaluation of menogaril in patients with metastatic sarcomas and no prior chemotherapy exposure. Am J Clin Oncol 1989;12:384.
495. Taub RN, Paciucci AP, Behrens B, et al. Phase II study of methoxymorpholinodoxorubicin in advanced sarcomas [PNU/S2243 (FCE23762)]. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:A1831.
496. Casper ES, Baselga J, Smart TB, et al. A phase II trial of PALA + dipyridamole in patients with advanced soft- tissue sarcoma. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1991;28:51.
497. Schiesel JD, Carabasi M, Magill G, et al. Oral piritrexima phase II study in patients with advanced soft tissue sarcoma. Invest New Drugs 1992;10:97.
498. Cormier WJ, Hahn RG, Edmonson JH, Eagan RT. Phase II study in advanced sarcoma: randomized trial of pyrazofurin versus combination cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and cisdichlorodiammineplatinum(II) (CAP). Cancer Treat Rep 1980;64:655.
499. Blay J-Y, Judson I, Rodenhuis S, et al. A phase II study of raltitrexed (“Tomudex”) as second or third line treatment for patients (pts) with advanced soft tissue sarcomas (ASTS) refractory to
doxorubicin-containing regimens. Sarcoma 1999;3:56.
500. Thigpen JT, O'Bryan RM, Benjamin RS, Coltman CA Jr. Phase II trial of Baker's antifol in metastatic sarcoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1977;61:1485.
501. Eisenhauer EA, Wierzbicki R, Knowling M, et al. Phase II trials of trimetrexate in advanced adult soft tissue sarcoma. Studies of the Canadian Sarcoma Group and the National Cancer Institute
of Canada Clinical Trials Group. Ann Oncol 1991;2:689.
502. Patel SR, Burgess MA, Papadopolous NE, et al. Phase II study of CI-980 (NSC 635370) in patients with previously treated advanced soft tissue sarcomas. Invest New Drugs 1998;16:87.
503. Cure H, Krakowski I, Adenis A, et al. Results of a phase II trial with second-line cystemustine at 60 mg/m 2 in advanced soft tissue sarcoma: a trial of the EORTC Early Clinical Studies Group.
Eur J Cancer 1998;34:422.
504. Borden EC, Ash A, Enterline HT, et al. Phase II evaluation of dibromodulcitol, ICRF-159, and maytansine for sarcomas. Am J Clin Oncol 1982;5:417.
505. Thigpen JT, Samson MK. Phase II trial of dianhydrogalactitol in advanced soft tissue and bony sarcomas: a Southwest Oncology Group study. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:553.
506. Blomqvist C, Wiklund T, Pajunen M, et al. Oral trofosfamide: an active drug in the treatment of soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1995;36:263.
507. Asbury R, Blessing JA, Buller R, et al. Amonafide in patients with leiomyosarcoma of the uterus: a phase II Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Am J Clin Oncol 1998;21:145.
508. Chan C, Bartolucci A, Brenner D, et al. Phase II trial of diaziquone in anthracycline-resistant adult soft tissue and bone sarcoma patients: a Southeastern Cancer Study Group Trial. Cancer
Treat Rep 1986;70:427.
509. Vosika GJ, Briscoe K, Carey RW, et al. Phase II study of diglycoaldehyde in malignant melanomas and soft tissue sarcomas. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:823.
510. Bramwell V, Morris D, Ernst S, et al. Phase I/II study with the MDR inhibitor INCELTM (biricodar, VX-710)+doxorubicin in anthracycline resistant advanced soft tissue sarcoma (STS). Proc Am
Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:A2094(abst).
511. Somers R, Rouesse J, van Oosterom A, Thomas D. Phase II study of elliptinium in metastatic soft tissue sarcoma. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1985;21:591.
512. Ajani JA, Dimery I, Chawla SP, et al. Phase II studies of homoharringtonine in patients with advanced malignant melanoma; sarcoma; and head and neck, breast, and colorectal carcinomas.
Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:375.
513. Kraut EH, Bendetti J, Balcerzak SP, Doroshow JH. Phase II trial of merbarone in soft tissue sarcoma. A Southwest Oncology Group study. Invest New Drugs 1992;10:347.
514. Rouesse JG, van Oosterom AT, Capellaere P, et al. Phase II study of 1,2,4-triglycidyl urasol (TGU) in advanced soft tissue sarcoma. A trial of the EORTC Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma
Cooperative Group. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1987;23:1413.
515. Sordillo PP, Magill GB, Gralla RJ. Phase II evaluation of vindesine sulfate in patients with advanced sarcomas. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:515.
516. Schuff-Werner P, Bartsch H, Schremi W, Nagel GA. Treatment of soft tissue sarcoma with recombinant alpha-interferon. Antiviral Res 1984;3:93(abst).
517. Borden EC, Kim K, Ryan L, et al. Phase II trials of interferons-alpha and -beta in advanced sarcomas. J Interferon Res 1992;12:455.
518. Jazieh AR, McIntyre W, Husain M, et al. Phase I clinical trial of tamoxifen and interferon alpha in the treatment of solid tumors. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999; 18: A829(abst).
519. Harris J, Das Gupta T, Vogelzang N, et al. Treatment of soft tissue sarcoma with fibroblast interferon (beta- interferon): an American Cancer Society/Illinois Cancer Council study. Cancer Treat
Rep 1986;70:293.
520. Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT, Muul LM, et al. A progress report on the treatment of 157 patients with advanced cancer using lymphokine-activated killer cells and interleukin-2 or high-dose
interleukin-2 alone. N Engl J Med 1987;316:889.
521. Gravis G, Viens P, Delva R, et al. rIL-2 in metastatic soft tissue sarcomas refractory to chemotherapy: response and enhancement of further chemosensitivity. Anticancer Res 1998;18:3699.

522. Verweij J, Judson I, Steward W, et al. Phase II study of liposomal muramyl tripeptide phosphatidylethanolamine (MTP/PE) in advanced soft tissue sarcomas of the adult. An EORTC Soft Tissue
and Bone Sarcoma Group study. Eur J Cancer 1994;6:842.
523. Rinehart J, Balcerzak SP, Hersh E. Phase II trial of tumor necrosis factor in human sarcomas: a Southwest Oncology Group study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1990;9:1229(abst).
524. Cruz AB Jr, Thames EA Jr, Aust JB, et al. Combination chemotherapy for soft tissue sarcomas: a phase III study. J Surg Oncol 1979;11:313.
525. Nielsen OS, Dombernowsky P, Mouridsen H, et al. High-dose epirubicin is not an alternative to standard-dose doxorubicin in the treatment of advanced soft tissue sarcomas. A study of the
EORTC soft tissue and bone sarcoma group. Br J Cancer 1998;78:1634.
526. Loehrer PJ Sr, Sledge GW Jr, Nicaise C, et al. Ifosfamide plus doxorubicin in metastatic adult sarcomas: a multi-institutional phase II trial. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1655.
527. Brennan MF. The surgeon as a leader in cancer care: lessons learned from the study of soft tissue sarcoma. J Am Coll Surg 1996;182:520.
528. Billingsley K, Burt M, Jara E, et al. Pulmonary metastases from soft tissue sarcoma: analysis of patterns of disease and postmetastasis survival. Ann Surg 1999;229:602.

SECTION 39.2 Sarcomas of Bone
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 39.2
Sarcomas of Bone
MARTIN M. MALAWER
MICHAEL P. LINK
SARAH S. DONALDSON
Introduction
Classification and Types of Bone Tumors
Radiographic Evaluation and Diagnosis
Natural History
Biology and Growth
Metastasis
Skip Metastasis
Local Recurrence
Staging Bone Tumors
Musculoskeletal Tumor Society Classification
American Joint Committee on Cancer Bone Tumor Classification
Preoperative Evaluation
Bone Scans
Computed Tomography
Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Staging
Angiography
Thallium Scans
Choosing a Method of Radiographic Evaluation
Biopsy Technique and Timing
Restaging after Preoperative Chemotherapy
Clinical Evaluation
Plain Radiography
Angiography
Computed Tomography
Bone Scintigraphy
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Thallium Scintigraphy
Positron Emission Tomography
Surgical Management of Skeletal Tumors
Principles and Techniques of Limb-Sparing Surgery
Phases of Operation
Guidelines for Limb-Sparing Resection
Types of Skeletal Reconstruction
Contraindications to Limb-Sparing Surgery
Relationship of Various Aspects of Surgical Management to Prognosis
Quality-of-Life Considerations: Limb-Sparing Surgery versus Amputation
Amputations
Cryosurgery
Chemotherapy for Bone Sarcomas
Adjuvant Chemotherapy
Presurgical Chemotherapy
Assessment of Tumor Response
Tailoring Therapy
Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy
Intraarterial Chemotherapy
Radiotherapy for Bone Tumors
Treatment Planning
Dose and Volume Considerations
Complications of Radiation
Benign Bone Tumors
Solitary and Multiple Osteochondromas (Exostosis)
Solitary and Multiple Enchondromas
Chondroblastoma, Osteoblastoma, and Osteoid Osteoma
Aneurysmal Bone Cysts
Desmoplastic Fibroma
Langerhans' Cell Histiocytosis
Malignant Bone Tumors
Classic Osteosarcoma
Osteosarcoma of the Pelvis and Proximal Femur
Clinical Presentations of Osteosarcoma and Treatment Considerations
Variants of Classic Osteosarcoma
Chondrosarcoma
Giant Cell Tumor of Bone
Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma
Fibrosarcoma of Bone
Malignant Hemangioendothelioma of Bone
Chordoma
Small Round Cell Sarcomas of Bone
Lymphomas of Bone (Diffuse Large Cell Lymphoma)
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Malignant tumors arising from the skeletal system are rare, representing only 0.2% of all new cancers. Approximately 2600 new cases occur in the United States each
year. 1 Osteosarcoma and Ewing's sarcoma, the two most common bone tumors, occur mainly during childhood and adolescence. 2,3 and 4 Other mesenchymal (spindle
cell) neoplasms that characteristically arise after skeletal maturity—fibrosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, and malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH)—are less
common.5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17 and 18 The vast majority of experience reported in the management of bone neoplasms has been obtained in patients with
osteosarcoma. As a result, the surgical, chemotherapeutic, and radiotherapeutic principles developed for treatment of osteosarcomas form the basis of the
management strategy for most of the spindle cell neoplasms.
Since the late 1970s, an explosion of clinical knowledge and experience in the management of bone neoplasms has been seen. 18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28 and 29 The
development of centers of specific interest in these tumors has played an important role in the advancement of biologic understanding and surgical management of
these lesions and the development of multimodality treatment regimens. 24,25,26,27 and 28 A surgical staging system that permits standardized preoperative evaluation,
analysis, and end-result reporting has been developed. 29
Amputation has been the standard method of treatment for most bone sarcomas, but the 1990s was witness to the development of limb-sparing surgery for most

malignant bone tumors. 30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39 and 40 Advances in orthopedics, bioengineering, radiographic imaging, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy have contributed to
safer, more reliable surgical procedures. 41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65,66,67,68,69,70,71,72,73,74,75,76,77,78,79,80 and 81 Computed tomography (CT),
developed during the early 1980s, and, more recently, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), permit extremely accurate evaluation of the local anatomy and enhance
the possibility of safe resection. 82,83,84,85,86,87,88 and 89 Today, limb-sparing surgery is considered safe and routine for approximately 90% of patients with extremity
osteosarcomas. An evaluation system has been developed to determine a patient's functional status. 29 This system, for the first time, permits evaluation and
comparison of the various limb-sparing procedures and types of surgical reconstructions.
Paralleling these advances has been the demonstrated effectiveness of adjuvant chemotherapy in dramatically increasing overall survival; specifically, the bleak 15%
to 20% survival rate associated with surgery alone before the 1970s rose to 55% to 80% with various adjuvant treatment regimens by the 1980s. 50,51,52 and 53,90,91 and 92
Multiple-drug regimens are now considered essential treatment. The timing, mode of delivery, and different combinations of these agents are being investigated at
many centers. Preoperative chemotherapy regimens (termed neoadjuvant or induction chemotherapy) and postoperative regimens are being evaluated to determine
their effect on the tumor and their impact on the choice of operative procedure and on overall survival. 93,94,95,96,97,98,99 and 100
This chapter focuses only on malignant spindle cell tumors. Ewing's sarcoma is presented in detail in Chapter 39.1. Benign tumors are described briefly, and their
significance for the oncologist is described. 2,3 Emphasis is placed on natural history, surgical staging, tumor imaging, criteria of patient selection for amputation versus
limb-sparing surgery, and technique of limb-sparing procedures. The development, role, timing, and mode of delivery of adjuvant chemotherapy and its relationship to
stage of disease are discussed. The role of radiotherapy in specific clinical situations is presented.

CLASSIFICATION AND TYPES OF BONE TUMORS
Bone consists of cartilaginous, osteoid, and fibrous tissue and bone marrow elements. Each tissue can give rise to benign or malignant spindle cell tumors. 2,3 and 4
Bone tumors are classified on the basis of cell type and recognized products of proliferating cells. The classification system, described by Lichtenstein 3,56 and
modified by Dahlin, 2 is presented in Table 39.2-1. Jaffe 4 recommends that each tumor be considered a separate clinicopathologic entity. Radiographic, histologic, and
clinical data are necessary to form an accurate diagnosis and to determine the degree of activity and malignancy of each lesion.

TABLE 39.2-1. General Classification of Bone Tumors

Cartilage tumors are lesions in which cartilage is produced. They are the most common bone tumors. Osteochondroma is the most common benign cartilage tumor;
some 1% to 2% of solitary osteochondromas become malignant. 57 and 58 Enchondroma is a benign cartilage tumor that occurs centrally; in adults, malignant
transformation may occur. Chondrosarcoma, the most common malignant cartilage tumor, is either intramedullary or peripheral. Ten percent are secondary, arising
from an underlying benign lesion. 2 Most chondrosarcomas are low grade, although 10% dedifferentiate into high-grade spindle cell sarcomas or, rarely, a
mesenchymal chondrosarcoma.2,57
Osteoid tumors are lesions in which the stroma produce osteoid. The benign forms are osteoid osteoma and osteoblastoma. Osteoid osteomas are never malignant.
Osteoblastomas rarely metastasize; when they do, it is only after multiple local recurrences. 59 Osteosarcomas are the most common primary malignant tumors of the
bone. Histologically, they are composed of malignant spindle cells and osteoblasts that produce osteoid or immature bone. Several variants are now recognized. 60
Parosteal, periosteal, and low-grade intraosseous osteosarcoma are histologically and radiographically distinct from the “classic” central medullary osteosarcomas
and have a more favorable prognosis. 61,63
Fibrous tumors of bone are rare. Desmoplastic fibroma is a locally aggressive, nonmetastasizing tumor, analogous to fibromatosis of soft tissue. 5,6 Fibrosarcoma of
bone appears histologically as its soft tissue counterpart. Multiple sections must be obtained to demonstrate the lack of osteoid production. If osteoid is present, the
lesion is classified as an osteosarcoma. MFH, a rare lesion and the counterpart of soft tissue MFH, has been described in bone. 7,8 and 9 The pathophysiologic behavior
of bone and soft tissue MFH is similar, consisting of a storiform pattern with a histiocytic component. Giant cell tumors of unknown origin were originally called benign
but are now considered low-grade sarcomas. They have high rates of local recurrence and malignant transformation. 64,65
Tumors presumably arising from bone marrow elements are the round cell sarcomas. The two most common are Ewing's sarcoma and the rarer non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Radiographic evaluation combined with the clinical history and histologic examination is necessary for accurate diagnosis. Bone scans, angiography, CT, and MRI are
generally not helpful in determining a diagnosis but are important in delineating the extent of local involvement. A systematic approach to the radiographic evaluation
of skeletal lesions has been described by Madewell and colleagues, 66 who studied and correlated several hundred radiographic and pathologic specimens. They
considered the radiograph as the gross specimen from which a detailed histologic interpretation could be made and biologic activity accurately diagnosed. According
to their system, a bone tumor is evaluated by five radiographic parameters:
1. Anatomic site. Specific anatomic sites of the bone give rise to specific groups of lesions. Johnson 67 explained this by a “field” theory, which hypothesizes that the
most active cells of a certain area of bone give rise to tumors that are characteristic of that area. In general, spindle cell sarcomas are metaphyseal, whereas
round cell sarcomas tend to be diaphyseal.
2. Borders. The border reflects the growth rate and the response of the adjacent normal bone to the tumor. Most tumors have a characteristic border. Benign
lesions (e.g., nonossifying fibromas and unicameral bone cysts) have well-defined borders and a narrow transition area that is often associated with a reactive
sclerosis. Aggressive or benign tumors [e.g., chondroblastoma and giant cell tumors (GCTs)] tend to have faint borders and wide zones of transition with very
little sclerosis, reflecting a faster-growing lesion. Poorly delineated or absent margins indicate an aggressive or malignant lesion.
3. Bone destruction. Bone destruction is the hallmark of a bone tumor. Three patterns of bone destruction are described 68: geographic, moth-eaten, and
permeative. In general, these patterns are found in the tubular bone rather than in the flat bone and represent a combination of cortical and cancellous
destruction. These patterns reflect a progressively increasing growth rate of the underlying tumor.
4. Matrix formation. Calcification of the matrix, or new bone formation, may produce an area of increased density within the lesion. Calcification typically appears
as flocculent or stippled rings or clusters. The appearance of the new bone varies from dense sclerosis that obliterates all evidence of normal trabeculae, to
small, irregular, circumscribed masses described as “wool” or “clouds.” Calcification and ossification may appear in the same lesion. Neither type of matrix
formation per se is diagnostic of malignancy.
5. Periosteal reaction. Periosteal reaction is indicative of malignancy but not pathognomonic of a particular tumor. A combination of periosteal changes is often
noted. In malignant tumors, periosteal reaction is noncontinuous and thin, with multiple laminations. A parallel or a perpendicular pattern may be present.

The radiographic parameters of benign and malignant tumors are quite different. Benign tumors have round, smooth, well-circumscribed borders. No cortical
destruction and, generally, no periosteal reaction are found. Malignant lesions have irregular, poorly defined margins. Evidence of bone destruction and a wide area
of transition with periosteal reaction are noted. Soft tissue extension is common.

NATURAL HISTORY
Tumors arising in bone have characteristic patterns of behavior and growth that distinguish them from other malignant lesions. 69,89 These patterns form the basis of a
staging system and current treatment strategies. These principles and their relationship to management, as formulated by Enneking and colleagues, 69,89 are described
here.
BIOLOGY AND GROWTH
Spindle cell sarcomas form a solid lesion that grows centrifugally. The periphery is the least mature part of this lesion. In contradistinction to a true capsule, which
surrounds a benign lesion and is composed of compressed normal cells, a malignant tumor is generally enclosed by a pseudocapsule and consists of compressed
tumor cells and a fibrovascular zone of reactive tissue with an inflammatory component that interdigitates with the normal tissue adjacent to and beyond the lesion.
The thickness of the reactive zone varies with the degree of malignancy and histiogenic type. The histologic hallmark of sarcomas is their potential to break through
the pseudocapsule to form satellite lesions of tumor cells. This characteristic distinguishes a nonmalignant mesenchymal tumor from a malignant one.
High-grade sarcomas have a poorly defined reactive zone that may be invaded and destroyed by the tumor. In addition, tumor nodules in tissue may appear to be
normal and not continuous with the main tumor. These are termed skip metastases. Although low-grade sarcomas regularly demonstrate tumor interdigitation into the
reactive zone, they rarely form tumor nodules beyond this area.
The three mechanisms of growth and extension of bone tumors are: (1) compression of normal tissue, (2) resorption of bone by reactive osteoclasts, and (3) direct
destruction of normal tissue. Benign tumors grow and expand by the first two mechanisms, whereas direct tissue destruction is characteristic of malignant bone
tumors. Sarcomas respect anatomic borders and remain within one compartment. Local anatomy influences tumor growth by setting the natural barriers to extension.
In general, bone sarcomas take the path of least resistance. Most benign bone tumors are unicompartmental; they remain confined and may expand the bone in which
they arose. Malignant bone tumors are bicompartmental; they destroy the overlying cortex and go directly into the adjacent soft tissue. The determination of anatomic
compartment involvement has become more important with the advent of limb-preservation surgery.
On the basis of biologic considerations and natural history, Enneking and colleagues 69,101 classified bone tumors into five categories, each of which shares certain
clinical characteristics and radiographic patterns and requires similar surgical procedures.
1. Benign/latent: lesions whose natural history is to grow slowly during normal growth of the individual and then to stop, with a tendency to heal spontaneously.
They never become malignant and, if treated by simple curettage, heal rapidly. Surgery is not indicated unless they become symptomatic.
2. Benign/active: lesions whose natural history is one of progressive growth. Simple curettage leaves a reactive rim with some tumor. Curettage is associated with
a high recurrence rate. Wide excision through normal bone results in local control in approximately 95% of all cases.
3. Benign/aggressive: lesions that are locally aggressive but do not metastasize. The tumor extends through the capsule into the reactive zone. Local control can
be obtained only by removing the lesion with a margin of normal bone beyond the reactive zone.
4. Malignant/low grade: lesions that have a low potential to metastasize. Histologically, a pseudocapsule rather than a true capsule is found. Tumor nodules exist
within the reactive zone but rarely beyond. Local control can be accomplished only by removal of all tumor and reactive tissue with a margin of normal bone.
These lesions can be treated successfully by surgery alone.
5. Malignant/high grade: lesions whose natural history is to grow rapidly and metastasize early. Tumor nodules are often found within and beyond the reactive
zone and at some distance in the normal tissue. Surgery is necessary for local control, and systemic therapy is warranted to prevent metastasis.
METASTASIS
Bone tumors, unlike carcinomas, disseminate almost exclusively through the blood; bones lack a lymphatic system. Early lymphatic spread to regional nodes has only
rarely been reported. 18,102 Lymphatic involvement, which has been noted in 10% of cases at autopsy, is a poor prognostic sign. 70 McKenna and associates 71 noted
that 6 of 194 patients (3%) with osteosarcoma who underwent amputation demonstrated lymph node involvement. None of these patients survived 5 years.
Hematogenous spread is manifested by pulmonary involvement in its early stage and secondarily by bone involvement. 71,72,73,74,75 and 76 Bone metastasis is
occasionally the first sign of dissemination. With the use of adjuvant chemotherapy, the skeletal system has become a more common site of initial relapse. 46,103,104
SKIP METASTASIS
A skip metastasis, as previously defined, is a tumor nodule that is located within the same bone as the main tumor but not in continuity with it. Transarticular skip
metastases are located in the joint adjacent to the main tumor. 77 Skip metastases are most often seen with high-grade sarcomas. A skip lesion develops by the
embolization of tumor cells within the marrow sinusoids; in effect, they are local micrometastases that have not passed through the circulation. Transarticular skips are
believed to occur via the periarticular venous anastomosis. The clinical incidence of skip metastases is less than 1%. 78 These lesions are a prognosticator of poor
survival. 77,78
LOCAL RECURRENCE
Local recurrence of a benign or malignant lesion is due to inadequate removal. The aggressiveness of the tumor determines which surgical procedure is required for
local control. Ninety-five percent of all local recurrences, regardless of histology, develop within 24 months of attempted removal. 69,79,80 Local recurrence of a
high-grade sarcoma decreases overall survival prospects substantially. Local recurrence in patients who have undergone therapy is associated with an even poorer
prognosis (Fig. 39.2-1).75

FIGURE 39.2-1. Survival rates over a 5-year period of patients with bone sarcoma according to stage of disease. (From ref. 19, with permission.)

STAGING BONE TUMORS
MUSCULOSKELETAL TUMOR SOCIETY CLASSIFICATION

In 1980, the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society (MSTS) adopted a surgical staging system for bone sarcomas ( Table 39.2-2).100 The system is based on the fact that
mesenchymal sarcomas of bone behave similarly, regardless of histiogenic type. The surgical staging system, as described by Enneking and colleagues, 101 is based
on the GTM classification: grade (G), location (T), and lymph node involvement and metastases (M).

TABLE 39.2-2. Surgical Staging of Bone Sarcomas

G represents the histologic grade of a lesion and other clinical data. Grade is further divided into two categories: G1 is low grade, and G2 is high grade.
T represents the site of the lesion, which may be intracompartmental (T1) or extracompartmental (T2). Compartment is defined as “an anatomic structure or space
bounded by natural barriers or tumor extension.” The significance of T1 lesions is easier to define clinically, surgically, and radiographically than that of T2 lesions,
and the chance is better for adequate removal of the former without amputation. In general, low-grade bone sarcomas are intracompartmental (T1), whereas
high-grade ones are extracompartmental (T2).
Lymphatic spread is a sign of widespread dissemination. Regional lymphatic involvement is equated with distal metastases (M1). Absence of any metastasis is
designated as M0.
The surgical staging system developed by Enneking and colleagues 101 for surgical planning and assessment of bone sarcomas is summarized thus:
Stage IA (G1,T1,M0): low-grade intracompartmental lesion, without metastasis
Stage IB (G1,T2,M0): low-grade extracompartmental lesion, without metastasis
Stage IIA (G2,T1,M0): high-grade intracompartmental lesion, without metastasis
Stage IIB (G2,T2,M0): high-grade extracompartmental lesion, without metastasis
Stage IIIA (G1 or G2,T1,M1): intracompartmental lesion, any grade, with metastasis
Stage IIIB (G1 or G2,T2,M1): extracompartmental lesion, any grade, with metastasis
AMERICAN JOINT COMMITTEE ON CANCER BONE TUMOR CLASSIFICATION
In 1983, the American Joint Committee on Cancer Bone Tumor Classification (AJCC) recommended a staging system for the malignant tumors of bone. This system
has undergone minimal changes and remains unchanged in the fifth edition of the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. This system is based on two indications: TNM
designation [extent of the tumor (T), nodal status (N), and distant metastases (M)] and grade (G). This system is similar to the MSTS classification; however, the AJCC
uses four stages instead of three. The four stages are designated I to IV and may be further modified with A or B. Stages I and II are defined by the histologic grade
(grade I and II) and modified by tumor extent (i.e., cortical involvement; designated E1 to E6) ( Table 39.2-3). T(I) indicates that the tumor is confined within the cortex
(similar to the MSTS classification A), and T(II) indicates that the tumor extends beyond the cortex (similar to the MSTS classification B). In the AJCC, stage III has
remained undefined and stage IV is defined as the presence of metastases. Stage IV tumors are modified by A, which is equivalent to III M1 in the MSTS system (i.e.,
indicates a nodal metastasis), and B, which is equivalent to III M1 in the MSTS system (i.e., indicates distant metastases). 105

TABLE 39.2-3. Definitions of Anatomic Extent for Stage IIB Tumors

PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION
If the plain radiographs suggest an aggressive or malignant tumor, staging studies should be performed before biopsy. All radiographic studies are influenced by
surgical manipulation of the lesion, making interpretation more difficult. 40,69 More important, the biopsy site may be in a location that is not optimal for subsequent en
bloc removal or radiotherapy. 24,110,111 Bone scintigraphy, MRI, CT, angiography, or a combination of these is required to delineate local tumor extent, vascular
displacement, and compartmental localization. 43,44,45,46 and 47,69,79,83,84,85,86,87,88 and 89
BONE SCANS
Bone scintigraphy helps determine polyostotic involvement, metastatic disease, and intraosseous extension of tumor. 43,44,46 Malignant bone tumors, although solitary,
may in rare cases present with skeletal metastasis. 47 Skip metastases are rarely detected by bone scan, because they are small and localized to the fatty marrow and
do not excite cortical response. 77,78
Appreciation of the intraosseous extension of a bone tumor is important in surgical planning. Removal of bone 3 to 4 cm beyond the area of scintigraphic abnormality

has been accepted as a safe margin for limb-sparing procedures after induction chemotherapy. 33
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
CT allows accurate determination of intra- and extraosseous extension of skeletal neoplasms. 41,42,43,44 and 45 It accurately depicts the transverse relationship of a tumor.
By varying window settings, one can study cortical bone, intramedullary space, adjacent muscles, and extraosseous soft tissue extension. CT should include the
entire bone and the adjacent joint. Infusion of intravenous contrast material permits identification of the adjacent large vascular structures. CT evaluation must be
individualized. To obtain the maximum benefits from image reconstruction, the surgeon should discuss with the radiologist what information is desired.
Three-dimensional reconstruction may be useful. Today, CT and MRI are considered complementary studies for bone sarcomas. Both studies are recommended for
most patients.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING AND STAGING
MRI has several advantages in the diagnoses of bone sarcomas. 82,83,84,85,86,87,88 and 89 It has better contrast discrimination than any other modality; furthermore, imaging
can be performed in any plane. MRI is ideal for imaging the medullary marrow and thus for detection of tumor as well as the extraosseous component. It has proved
especially helpful in several heretofore difficult clinical situations, such as detecting small lesions, evaluating a positive bone scan when the corresponding plain
radiograph is negative, determining the extent of infiltrative tumors, and detecting skip metastases. 87,88 and 89
Dynamic MRI is currently being evaluated as a more accurate method of determining intraosseous extension of tumor than conventional MRI. Iwasawa et al. 106
performed a microscopic evaluation of six macrospecimens after tumor resection and chemotherapy. They concluded that the calculation of the slope value of
dynamic MRI discriminated regions of microscopic invasion from tumor-free marrow in patients with osteosarcoma after chemotherapy. The slope value of dynamic
MRI was greater in the region of microscopic invasion than in the tumor-free marrow and less than in the area showing macroscopic tumor invasion. This technique
may provide more accurate determination of intraosseous bony extent than traditional MRI.
ANGIOGRAPHY
The technique of arteriography for bone lesions differs from that used for arterial disease. At least two views (biplane) are necessary to determine the relation of the
major vessels to the tumor.107 Because experience with limb-sparing procedures has increased, it has become essential to determine individual vascular patterns
before resection. This is especially crucial for tumors of the proximal tibia, where vascular anomalies are common. 108 Angiography is the most reliable means of
determining vascular anatomy and displacement, whereas MRI and CT better demonstrate extraosseous extension. Presently, magnetic resonance angiography is
being evaluated in the treatment of bone sarcomas.
THALLIUM SCANS
Thallium 201 scintigraphy has been shown to accumulate in musculoskeletal neoplasms 109,110; however, it cannot distinguish benign from malignant tumors. Thallium
scintigraphy is helpful in following the response to neoadjuvant treatment and detecting local recurrence when MRI cannot be used. 109,110,111 and 112
CHOOSING A METHOD OF RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
All of the above studies are required in the preoperative evaluation of a bone sarcoma. Each study has unique benefits. Bloem et al. 113 performed a prospective study
comparing results of CT, MRI, scintigraphy, and angiography with 56 resected specimens to determine the appropriate choice of procedures. MRI, the single best
study, was most accurate for determining intraosseous extent of tumor; scintigraphy and CT were often misleading. Angiography was performed only if the primary
tumor was in the vicinity of the major vascular structures. They also reported that CT and MRI were equally accurate in evaluating cortical changes. MRI was superior
to CT for detecting muscle involvement in the knee, pelvis, and shoulder.
MRI and CT (transverse data), combined with bone scans and angiography, allow the physician to develop a three-dimensional construct of the local tumor area
before surgery and thereby formulate a detailed surgical approach.

BIOPSY TECHNIQUE AND TIMING
The biopsy of a suspected bone tumor must be performed with great care and skill. 114,115 This principle cannot be overemphasized. The consequences of a poorly
executed biopsy are often the deciding factor in the choice between a limb-salvage procedure and amputation. Murray and coworkers 114a from the M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center judged that only 19% of patients referred to that institution for treatment of primary bone sarcomas had properly placed biopsies. All of these patients
had open (incisional) biopsies, whereas 92% of such procedures performed at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center over the same period were needle biopsies.
Similarly, Mankin et al. 115 compared the results of biopsies performed at the referring institution with those performed at the treatment center. In this study, which
involved 329 patients, a major error in diagnosis occurred in 60% of patients from referring hospitals. Importantly, 18.2% of the referred patients had to have less than
optimal treatment owing to problems related to the biopsy, and for 8.5% of the total, the prognosis and outcome were thought to have been adversely affected by the
biopsy. It is recommended that the biopsy be performed by the surgeon who will make the ultimate decision about the operative procedure. This entails referring some
patients who are strongly suspected of having primary bone malignancies to a regional cancer center for biopsy.
Trephine or core biopsy is recommended and often obtains an adequate specimen for diagnosis. 116,117 and 118 Multiple samples can be obtained from the same puncture
site by slightly changing the angle of approach. Radiographs should be obtained to document the position of the trocar. Core biopsy is preferred if a limb-sparing
option exists, because it entails less local contamination than does open biopsy. Core biopsy is especially helpful in difficult areas, such as the spine, pelvis, and hips.
If a core biopsy proves to be inadequate, a small incisional biopsy is performed.
Every precaution should be taken to avoid contamination when performing an open biopsy. A tourniquet is used if feasible. If a soft tissue component is present, there
is no need to biopsy the underlying bone. To decrease subsequent hemorrhage, polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) is used to plug a cortical window. Gelfoam is used
for hemostasis in the soft tissue. The overlying pseudocapsule is carefully closed to ensure maximum hemostasis. If it is necessary to biopsy the underlying bone, it is
essential to use a small, rounded cortical window, especially if the tumor requires primary radiotherapy. Large segments will not reossify, and they often fracture and
require late amputations. Regardless of the technique used, tumor cells contaminate all tissue planes and compartments transversed. All biopsy sites must therefore
be removed en bloc when the tumor is resected or irradiated.

RESTAGING AFTER PREOPERATIVE CHEMOTHERAPY
With the advent of preoperative chemotherapy for osteosarcoma, a need has developed for serial evaluation of the clinical and radiographic response of the tumor
before surgery. The staging and preoperative clinical studies previously described are used to evaluate tumor response. These studies have been
summarized.119,120,121,122,123,124 and 125 Complete restaging studies should be obtained after the completion of induction chemotherapy. MRI, CT, thallium scans, and
angiography should be evaluated before making a final surgical decision.
CLINICAL EVALUATION
Pain often decreases after induction chemotherapy. Alkaline phosphatase (AP) levels likewise decrease. The tumor shrinks, especially if significant matrix is not
present. Conversely, increase of pain, elevated AP values, and increasing tumor size are signs of tumor progression.
PLAIN RADIOGRAPHY
There is a good correlation between radiographic response and the amount of necrosis. 121,124 Smith and colleagues 124 described the radiographic responses seen on
serial radiographs: increased ossification of tumor osteoid, marked thickening and new bone formation of the periosteum and tumor border (giving the tumor a more

“benign” appearance), and decreased soft tissue mass. The healing ossification is usually solid, homogeneous, and regular and is easily differentiated from tumor
osteoid.121 Less significant changes take place within the intramedullary component, which may include both increased sclerosis and lysis, presumably caused by
necrosis and hemorrhage.
ANGIOGRAPHY
After chemotherapy, vascularity decreases markedly. 120,121 Chuang et al. 121 evaluated 53 patients and reported that those with a complete angiographic response had
more than 90% necrosis; among those with a partial response, necrosis ranged from 40% to 78%. They concluded that angiographic evaluation was as reliable as
pathologic evaluation and that the angiographic features were the best clinical criteria for the evaluation of tumor response.
Carrasco and coworkers122 from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center reported on their extensive experience with intraarterial chemotherapy for osteosarcoma (81
patients) and evaluated the angiographic appearance and changes after two and four cycles of preoperative chemotherapy. They developed a simple radiographic
system for angiographic changes. They evaluated the midarterial (tumor vascularity) and parenchymal (capillary) phases. They described three types of responses:
1. Angiographic response: complete disappearance of tumor vascularity and stain.
2. Total disappearance of tumor vascularity, with slight persistence of tumor stain (capillary phase).
3. No response: persistence of tumor vascularity and capillary stain.
They reported that 40% of the histologic responders (more than 90% tumor necrosis) and 91% of nonresponders were identified after two cycles. The number of
courses was no different between the responders and nonresponders. They concluded that the disappearance of tumor vascularity after two courses of chemotherapy
was highly suggestive of a good histologic response and was unlikely to occur in the histologic nonresponders.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
The most consistent finding in patients who respond to therapy is a decrease in soft tissue mass and the development of a rim-like calcification similar to that seen on
plain radiographs. 119 Changes in marrow are not helpful in evaluating response.
BONE SCINTIGRAPHY
Bone scan changes are difficult to evaluate. A decrease in activity generally indicates a favorable response; however, reparative bone formation, signaled by
increased activity, may be misleading. Dynamic (quantitative) bone scans, which are based on tumor blood flow and regional plasma clearance by bone and soft
tissue, may allow more valid evaluations. 125 Regions that show a greater than 20% decrease in technetium 99m methylene diphosphonate plasma clearance are
reported to be associated with necrotic tumor. To quantify bone scans, a tumor to nontumor ratio is obtained after bone scintigraphy. This ratio is then determined
preoperatively and after induction chemotherapy on serial scans. A decrease in this ratio is an indication of a good response to chemotherapy.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
Monitoring of neoadjuvant chemotherapy by MRI has become the focus of many studies. 126,127 and 128 Holscher and colleagues 126 evaluated 57 patients at the University
Hospital of Leiden. T1- and T2-weighted images were obtained in longitudinal, coronal or sagittal, and axial planes. Factors evaluated were margins, homogeneity,
hematoma, fibrosis, calcification liquefaction, edema, joint effusion, and fracture. The authors concluded that increased tumor volume or increased or unchanged
peritumoral edema and inflammation indicated a poor response. Subjective criteria, such as improved tumor demarcation or an increase in size of area of low signal
intensity (presumably necrotic tumor), were independent of tumor response. They concluded that subjective criteria could not predict the good responders.
Conventional MRI is not specific enough to distinguish viable tumor from chemotherapy-related inflammation. On routine T2-weighted images, the signals for tumor,
hemorrhage, necrosis, and edema are similar. Tumor cannot be differentiated from inflammation on T1-weighted gadolinium-enhanced images.
THALLIUM SCINTIGRAPHY
Several studies have demonstrated that serial thallium 201 scintigraphy is an accurate way to follow the response of osteosarcoma during the course of neoadjuvant
treatment and to predict tumor responses.109,110,111 and 112 Rosen and associates 110 used this technique to evaluate tumor necrosis after preoperative chemotherapy in
27 patients. They concluded that serial thallium scans can accurately predict a good histologic response and good prognosis. Furthermore, thallium scintigraphy can
identify poor responders within the first 2 weeks after the initiation of treatment. They described a simple classification of response: type I, no response; type II,
discernible lesion still present; type III, no detectable lesion. All patients with a type III classification and 67% of those with a type II classification were rated as good
responders (types II and III constituted a total of nine patients). 110
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY
Positron emission tomographic scans are nuclear medicine scintigraphy techniques that use 2[ 18F]-fluoro-2-deoxy- D-glucose as the radiopharmaceutical. This
technique is under investigation. It is hoped that it will be able to dynamically evaluate the tumor and the percentage of tumor necrosis after chemotherapy. 129

SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF SKELETAL TUMORS
Surgical removal, including curettage, resection, and amputation, is the traditional method of managing skeletal neoplasms. Limb-sparing techniques were developed
during the early 1970s. 20,21 and 22,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39 and 40 Marcove and associates 130,131 and 132 have described cryosurgery for some bony tumors. Enneking and
colleagues 101 have formulated means of classifying surgical procedures based on the surgical plane of dissection in relationship to the tumor ( Table 39.2-4) and the
method of accomplishing the removal (Table 39.2-5). The scheme summarized below affords meaningful comparisons of various operative procedures and gives
surgeons a common language.69,79,101

TABLE 39.2-4. Classification of Surgical Procedures for Bone Tumors

TABLE 39.2-5. Surgical Procedure, Plane of Dissection, and Residual Disease for Musculoskeletal Tumors

Intralesional: An intralesional procedure passes through the pseudocapsule of the neoplasm directly into the lesion. Macroscopic tumor remains, and the entire
operative field is potentially contaminated. Curettage is an intralesional procedure.
Marginal: A marginal procedure is one in which the entire lesion is removed in a single piece. The plane of dissection passes through the pseudocapsule or
reactive zone around the lesion. When performed for a sarcoma, it leaves macroscopic disease.
Wide (intracompartmental): A wide excision, commonly termed en bloc resection, includes the entire tumor, the reactive zone, and a cuff of normal tissue. The
entire structure of origin of the tumor is not removed. In patients with high-grade sarcomas, this procedure may leave skip nodules.
Radical (extracompartmental): A radical procedure involves removal of the entire tumor and the structure of origin of the lesion. The plane of dissection is beyond the
limiting fascial or bony borders.
It is important to note that any of these procedures may be accomplished either by a local (i.e., limb-sparing) procedure or by amputation. Thus, amputation may entail
a marginal, wide, or radical excision, depending on the plane through which it passes. Amputation does not necessarily remove all cancer, but it can achieve a
specific margin. The local anatomy determines how such a margin can be obtained. Therefore, the aim of preoperative staging is to assess local tumor extent and
important local anatomy to enable the surgeon to decide how to achieve a desired margin (i.e., to evaluate the feasibility of one surgical procedure over another). This
system allows meaningful comparisons of surgical procedures, end-result reporting, and analysis of combined data. In general, benign bone tumors may be treated
adequately by an intralesional procedure (curettage) or a marginal excision. Malignant tumors require either a wide (intracompartmental) or radical
(extracompartmental) removal, by an amputation or an en bloc procedure. Today, wide excision combined with adjuvant chemotherapy is the treatment for most
high-grade bone sarcomas. Radical resections are rare.

PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES OF LIMB-SPARING SURGERY
Limb-salvage surgery is a safe operation for selected cases ( Fig. 39.2-2).23,24,25,26 and 27,133,134 and 135 This technique may be used for all spindle cell sarcomas,
regardless of histogenesis. Approximately 90% of osteosarcomas can be treated successfully with this technique. 24,26,29,33,40,101 Successful management of localized
osteosarcomas and other sarcomas requires careful coordination and timing of staging studies, biopsy, surgery, and preoperative and postoperative chemotherapy or
radiation therapy.

FIGURE 39.2-2. Patient survival after three different types of surgical procedures for osteosarcoma of the distal femur.

PHASES OF OPERATION
Successful limb-sparing procedures consist of three surgical phases 134:
1. Resection of tumor: Tumor resection follows strictly the principles of oncologic surgery. Avoiding local recurrence is the criterion of success and the main
determinant of how much bone and soft tissue are to be removed.
2. Skeletal reconstruction: The average skeletal defect following adequate bone tumor resection measures 15 to 20 cm. Techniques of reconstruction vary and are
independent of the resection, although the degree of resection may favor one technique over another.
3. Soft tissue and muscle transfers: Muscle transfers are performed to cover and close the resection site and to restore motor power. Adequate skin and muscle
coverage is mandatory. Distal tissue transfers are not used because of the possibility of contamination.
GUIDELINES FOR LIMB-SPARING RESECTION
The surgical guidelines and technique of limb-sparing surgery used by the senior author (MM) are as follows 134:
1. No major neurovascular tumor involvement
2. Wide resection of the affected bone, with a normal muscle cuff in all directions
3. En bloc removal of all previous biopsy sites and potentially contaminated tissue
4. Resection of bone 3 to 4 cm beyond abnormal uptake, as determined by CT or MRI and bone scan
5. Resection of the adjacent joint and capsule
6. Adequate motor reconstruction, accomplished by regional muscle transfers
7. Adequate soft tissue coverage
TYPES OF SKELETAL RECONSTRUCTION
Large skeletal defects are reconstructed after tumor resection by several different modalities. Osteoarticular defects are most often reconstructed by segmental,
custom prostheses that are fixed to the remaining intramedullary bone by PMMA ( Fig. 39.2-3). The newer knee prostheses allow some rotation as well as flexion and
extension, this mobility decreases the forces on the bone-cement interface and thus reduces the risk of loosening.

FIGURE 39.2-3. Prostheses used in selected patients for skeletal reconstruction: distal femoral prosthesis (A), proximal tibial prosthesis (B), proximal humeral
prosthesis (C), proximal femoral prosthesis (D).

There has been increasing interest in applying a porous coating to the prosthesis in the hope of obtaining long-term, perhaps even permanent, fixation. 38,136,137 and 138
In addition, titanium, a new alloy with superior metallurgical properties, has been introduced. Modular endoprosthetic replacement systems that can be assembled in
the operating room are now available and avoid the problem of long delays for custom manufacturing. 38,136 Alternative methods of segmental replacement include
large autografts or allografts, used to obtain an arthrodesis, or osteoarticular allografts that may replace the affected joint. 34,136,138,139 Composite allograft (i.e., allograft
placed over a prosthesis) has been used. In general, allografts have been used successfully for low-grade sarcomas and for GCTs of bone that do not require
chemotherapy or radiotherapy.
Today, most surgeons prefer endoprosthetic replacements. The modular replacement systems can replace the most commonly affected bones: the proximal femur,
proximal humerus, distal femur, and proximal tibia.
CONTRAINDICATIONS TO LIMB-SPARING SURGERY
Major Neurovascular Involvement
Although vascular grafts may be used, the adjacent nerves are usually at risk, making successful resection less likely. In addition, the magnitude of resection in
combination with vascular reconstruction is often prohibitive.
Pathologic Fractures
A fracture through a bone affected by a tumor spreads tumor cells via the hematoma beyond accurately determined limits. The risk of local recurrence increases
under such circumstances. If a pathologic fracture heals after neoadjuvant chemotherapy, a limb-salvage procedure may be performed successfully. 140
Inappropriate Biopsy Sites
An inappropriate or poorly planned biopsy jeopardizes local tumor control by contaminating normal tissue planes and compartments.
Infection
The risk of infection after implantation of a metallic device or an allograft in an infected area is prohibitive. Sepsis jeopardizes the effectiveness of adjuvant
chemotherapy.
Skeletal Immaturity
The predicted leg-length discrepancy should not be greater than 6 to 8 cm, although expandable prostheses have been used with success in this situation. Upper
extremity reconstruction is independent of skeletal maturity.
Extensive Muscle Involvement
Enough muscle must remain to reconstruct a functional extremity.
RELATIONSHIP OF VARIOUS ASPECTS OF SURGICAL MANAGEMENT TO PROGNOSIS
Makley and coworkers 141 from the Children's Cancer Study Group reported a randomized study of 166 patients that examined the relationship of various aspects of
surgical management to prognosis for disease-free survival. They found no advantage to the various aspects of surgical management, specifically, interval from first
symptom to definitive surgery, interval from biopsy to definitive surgery, surgical sequence, type of surgery, or site of primary tumor.
QUALITY-OF-LIFE CONSIDERATIONS: LIMB-SPARING SURGERY VERSUS AMPUTATION
During the 1990s, as the techniques of limb-sparing surgery were being developed, it had been assumed that such surgery was superior to amputation. Nonetheless,
when complications occurred, many surgeons thought that an amputation might have been preferable. Despite the extensive literature on the various chemotherapy
regimens, surgical techniques, and limb-sparing surgery, few studies have focused on the patients' evaluation of their overall quality of life. 142,143 and 144 Two studies
that have been published are described here.
Greenberg 143 from Massachusetts General Hospital and the Children's Hospital/Dana Farber Cancer Center evaluated 62 osteosarcoma survivors at a mean of 12
years from diagnosis. Of 89 survivors contacted, 62 patients (42 women and 20 men) agreed to be interviewed. These patients responded to a comprehensive battery
of psychological questions. In general, most survivors were in good mental and physical health. The results are summarized as follows:
1. The reported rates of psychopathology among amputees and those undergoing limb-sparing surgery did not differ significantly.
2. Fertility was not a problem. Twenty-three normal progeny were born after chemotherapy to eight women and the wives of five men. Only two women were
considered infertile; both had undergone radiation therapy associated with other childhood cancers.
3. All responders who had undergone limb-sparing surgery believed the effort to save their limb was worthwhile. Twenty patients rated the effort of limb-salvage
very worthwhile, (mean 4.5 out of 5). Those whom the attempt at limb-salvage failed rated the effort as 4.0 (not significantly different than the successful group).
Those patients who were less satisfied with surgery had secondary amputations.
4. Pain was usually minimal, but when present, was associated only with lower extremity amputation. The pain pattern suggested deafferentation syndromes. No
patients undergoing upper extremity limb-sparing procedures had pain as a sequela.
5. Among patients who did not do well, multiple symptoms, family problems, and socioeconomic problems were more common than among patients who fared well.
The authors concluded that attention to the management of depression, treatment of substance abuse, and help with financial difficulties could contribute to the
quality of life of patients who underwent limb-sparing surgery or amputation. Pain management, physical and vocational rehabilitation, and sexual counseling may
also be of benefit, as may psychotherapeutic counseling when required.

Christ and coworkers144 evaluated the long-term psychosocial effects of limb-sparing surgery and primary amputation for coping capacity and the degree of
psychopathology. The overall incidence of emotional disturbance in the entire osteosarcoma group was no different than the general population. Unlike patients in
other studies, those in the group with initial amputations had substantial difficulty maintaining an optimal functioning level. Their difficulty was even greater than that of
limb-salvage patients with a compromised outcome, including those with late amputation. Specifically:
1. An amputee was significantly less likely to have married than a limb-spared patient.
2. Coping mechanisms of those with primary amputations were less effective than those patients in the limb-salvage group. This deficit was still evident several
years after surgery.
3. Patients who had limb-salvage without later complications were very pleased with their outcome.
4. Good work experience was an important compensation for physical loss.
5. Male dependency needs were often underestimated. Some men were left to manage their own adaptation tasks, whereas for females the opposite was true.
Female patients tended to become excessively dependent.
6. Patients reported no difficulty in enjoying sexual activity. The first postsurgical sexual experience was described as no more traumatic than the first experience
that required showing the leg (e.g., swimming).
Despite good social support scores, the amputees had higher psychopathology scores than patients who had undergone limb-sparing procedures. The authors
concluded that patients undergoing primary amputation need more intensive support than those whose limbs are spared. They recommend an overall approach
similar to that for posttraumatic stress disorder.

AMPUTATIONS
An amputation provides definitive surgical treatment in patients in whom a limb-sparing resection is not a prudent option. A significant number of patients still require
amputation, despite the advent of limb-sparing surgery. In contrast to amputations performed for noncancer causes, those for cancer tend to be at a more proximal
anatomic level, to occur in younger people (reflecting the incidence of bone sarcomas 145), and to be technically more difficult. 145 The resultant psychological and
cosmetic losses are also more substantial. The amputation experience of the National Cancer Institute since the 1960s has been reviewed; 89% of these procedures
were done for sarcomas.145 Fifty-five percent of the lower extremity amputations were either hip disarticulations or hemipelvectomies. One-half of the upper extremity
amputations were interscapulothoracic (forequarter) resections. Osteosarcoma accounted for one-third of all amputations. Large lesions around the pelvis or proximal
femur still generally require an amputation, whereas most sarcomas of the shoulder girdle and knee can now be resected. Amputation techniques are well described
in the literature.

CRYOSURGERY
Cryosurgery is the use of liquid nitrogen (temperature, –196°C) after curettage of a tumor cavity to kill the remaining tumor cells. 130,131 and 132 Necrosis has been shown
to occur between –20° and –40°C. 145 In general, a double freeze-thaw cycle is required. The aim of this technique is to enhance local tumor control after a careful
curettage and thus avoid resection of the involved bone. Cryosurgery was initially developed by Marcove and colleagues 130,132 at Memorial Hospital for treatment of
metastatic bone tumors. They have applied this technique to the treatment of aggressive benign tumors, specifically GCTs, and more recently to low-grade sarcomas
as well as chordomas. The local recurrence rate after cryosurgery for these aggressive benign tumors has decreased from more than 30% to 40% to between 5% and
10%.130,131 and 132 This technique is not used for high-grade sarcomas.

CHEMOTHERAPY FOR BONE SARCOMAS
Before the advent of effective adjuvant chemotherapy, the outlook for patients with osteosarcoma was dismal. The overwhelming majority of patients who presented
without evidence of metastases and were treated only with surgery ultimately developed metastases and died. 72,146,147,148 and 149 A review of the literature published in
1972 summarized experience with 1337 patients in 11 studies conducted between 1946 and 1971. 149 Approximately one-half of these patients developed metastatic
disease—virtually always in the lung—within 6 months after surgery of the primary tumor, and more than 80% developed recurrent disease. Fewer than 20% of the
patients survived 5 years. The inescapable conclusion from these studies is that 80% of patients presenting without overt metastases had microscopic subclinical
metastases at the time of diagnosis. Thus, the expectation that fewer than 20% of patients would survive beyond 5 years appeared to be reasonable; this expectation
served as the background for trials of adjuvant chemotherapy conducted in the 1970s and 1980s. By the late 1970s, the prognosis for patients with osteosarcoma was
improving, largely due to the beneficial effects of adjuvant chemotherapy. However, investigators from the Mayo Clinic and elsewhere challenged the apparent
contribution of adjuvant chemotherapy, reporting that the patients' prognoses, with or without adjuvant therapy, had apparently improved over time. 150,151,152,153,154,155 and
156

Two randomized, controlled trials were conducted in the mid-1980s by investigators of the Multi-Institutional Osteosarcoma Study and from the University of
California, Los Angeles to resolve the controversy over the role of adjuvant chemotherapy in osteosarcoma. Both studies included a control group treated only with
surgery of the primary tumor and no postsurgical adjuvant chemotherapy. Preliminary and mature results of these studies 157,158,159 and 160 confirm the favorable impact of
adjuvant chemotherapy in the treatment of osteosarcoma. Furthermore, life tables of event-free survival for patients in the control groups of these studies
recapitulated the historical experience before 1970. Results of these trials confirm that the natural history of osteosarcoma has not changed since the 1970s; fewer
than 20% of patients treated only with surgery of the primary tumor can be expected to survive relapse-free. The bleak historical experience that served as the
background for many uncontrolled adjuvant trials in the 1970s appears to be equally valid as a control for studies in the 1980s, 1990s, and beyond. Microscopic,
subclinical metastatic disease can be presumed to exist in virtually all patients at the time of diagnosis. Although the more favorable results from the Mayo Clinic for
patients treated without adjuvant chemotherapy remain unexplained, it is apparent from the Multi-Institutional Osteosarcoma Study and University of California, Los
Angeles studies that adjuvant chemotherapy has a significant favorable influence on outcome and should, therefore, be recommended for all patients with
osteosarcoma.
ADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY
The rationale for adjuvant chemotherapy of osteosarcoma is derived from experimental evidence that microscopic metastatic disease can be eradicated if the
treatment is initiated when the total body burden of metastatic tumor is sufficiently low. 161,162 and 163 The strategy of adjuvant chemotherapy after surgical removal of the
primary tumor has been applied successfully in the management of other childhood tumors. However, osteosarcoma is a relatively drug-resistant neoplasm, and
results of studies of the activity of single agents and drugs in combination against macroscopic osteosarcoma have been disappointing. Few drugs have produced
responses in more than 15% of patients, and most responses are partial. Notable exceptions are the responses observed in trials of doxyrubicin, 164 cisplatin, 165,166,167
and 168
high-dose methotrexate (HDMTX) with leucovorin rescue 169,170 and 171 and, more recently, ifosfamide. 172 Logic dictates that the application of agents with only
modest activity against macroscopic osteosarcoma should not influence the natural history of this disease. Experimental evidence, however, suggests that eradication
of microscopic metastases is possible, even with drugs that are marginally effective or even ineffective against gross macroscopic tumors. 161,162 and 163,173
The hopeless prognosis for patients with osteosarcoma led to the enthusiastic application of the available agents, singly or in combination, as adjuvant therapy for
patients with nonmetastatic osteosarcoma. An apparent improvement in outcome compared with the historical experience without chemotherapy was demonstrated in
a number of these trials. Results of some of the important adjuvant chemotherapy trials of the 1970s and early 1980s are summarized in Table 39.2-6. Concerns have
been raised that adjuvant chemotherapy for osteosarcoma may delay, but not prevent, relapse. However, the results of many of the adjuvant studies reported in Table
39.2-6, and more recent trials that include presurgical chemotherapy ( Table 39.2-7), some with follow-up beyond 10 years, suggest that life tables of event-free
survival have stable plateaus beyond 4 years and that relapses after 3 years are infrequent. The majority of patients surviving 3 years without evidence of recurrence
are probably cured.

TABLE 39.2-6. Reported Results of Representative Trials of Adjuvant Therapy for Osteosarcoma

TABLE 39.2-7. Reported Results of Representative Trials Incorporating Presurgical Chemotherapy for Osteosarcoma

Examination of the results of chemotherapy trials (see Table 39.2-6 and Table 39.9.2-7) reveals a trend in the direction of improved outcomes for patients treated on
more recent, more intensive chemotherapy regimens. Considering that so few drugs have demonstrable activity against macroscopic osteosarcoma, the results
reported in adjuvant trials are remarkable. Approximately 60% to 70% of patients with osteosarcoma treated with modern intensive adjuvant chemotherapy regimens
survive without recurrence. The development of adjuvant regimens has been largely empirical, and newer, more intensive regimens have resulted in further
improvements in outcome. The majority of regimens currently in use incorporate doxorubicin, cisplatin, and HDMTX. The effectiveness of HDMTX in the adjuvant
treatment of osteosarcoma has not been universally accepted; 174 reported response rates against macroscopic disease have varied widely, ranging from no response
to 80%.169,170 and 171,174,175
Furthermore, a randomized study conducted by the Children's Cancer Group (CCG) 176 comparing HDMTX and intermediate-dose methotrexate in combination with
doxorubicin adjuvant therapy did not show any benefit for patients receiving HDMTX. The overall outcome was not better than that achieved in studies using
doxorubicin alone. In contrast, a more recent study from the Instituto Orthopedico Rizzoli 177 demonstrated superior responses in the primary tumor as well as a
superior outcome for patients receiving HDMTX as compared with intermediate-dose methotrexate in the context of a multiagent chemotherapy regimen. A trial
conducted by the European Osteosarcoma Intergroup compared the combination of doxorubicin and cisplatin alone, or doxorubicin and cisplatin alternating with
HDMTX as pre- and postsurgical chemotherapy for patients with osteosarcoma. 178 The disease-free survival for patients receiving the two-drug regimen (without
HDMTX) was significantly superior to that of patients treated with all three drugs. However, the intensity of administration of HDMTX was compromised by the design
of the study, and the overall outcome of patients in this report is inferior to that observed in other studies.
The role of HDMTX in chemotherapy of osteosarcoma requires further investigation. The effectiveness of this drug may be dose-dependent, 179 because dose
escalation has produced responses in patients found previously to be unresponsive to treatment. 180 A steep dose-response relationship may also pertain to
Adriamycin. 49,163,181 The BCD combination (bleomycin, cyclophosphamide, and dactinomycin) also is used in some regimens, 182 although its effectiveness has been
disputed 183 and few modern regimens incorporate it. Carboplatin is an attractive agent to use in place of cisplatin because of possible reduced renal and ototoxicity.
However, this analogue may be considerably less active against osteosarcoma than cisplatin, 184 and it cannot yet be recommended.
The optimal chemotherapy regimen for treatment of osteosarcoma continues to be the subject of investigation and heated debate. Although most investigators use
intensive, multiagent regimens, the superiority of such regimens as compared to simpler, shorter, less intensive multiagent regimens has been questioned. A large,
randomized study conducted by the European Osteosarcoma Intergroup 185 compared the efficacy of six cycles of doxorubicin and cisplatin with the more complicated,
more toxic multiagent T-10 regimen pioneered at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center ( Fig. 39.2-4). No differences in progression-free (47% at 3 years and
44% at 5 years) and overall survival (65% at 3 years and 55% at 5 years) were detected between the treatment groups, although these results are unsatisfactory
when compared with the outcomes achieved on other studies conducted in North America and Europe. Thus, whether any regimen is superior to six cycles of
doxorubicin and cisplatin remains an open question.

FIGURE 39.2-4. The T-10 regimen from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. A: All patients receive the initial 16-week regimen. The presurgical chemotherapy
regimen features four weekly courses of high-dose methotrexate (HDMTX) and leucovorin rescue followed by resection or amputation. Patients undergoing
endoprosthetic replacement receive 16 weeks of presurgical chemotherapy. B: Postoperative chemotherapy is determined by the histologic grade of response of the
primary tumor to presurgical chemotherapy. Patients who achieve an unfavorable response in the primary tumor (grades I and II) receive a T-10A regimen
postoperatively, featuring doxorubicin, cisplatin (CDDP), and the BCD combination. Patients achieving a favorable response (grades III and IV) receive the T-10B
regimen postoperatively and continue to receive HDMTX with doxorubicin and the BCD combination. VCR, vincristine. (From ref. 98, with permission.)

Further improvements in outcomes for patients with osteosarcoma will likely result from the development of new active agents. The activity of ifosfamide against
macroscopic disease has been demonstrated, and this drug has been incorporated into newer regimens under study with promising results. 186,187 The role of
ifosfamide in the presurgical and adjuvant settings was addressed specifically in a randomized trial conducted by the American Pediatric Cooperative Oncology
Groups. Overall, the projected event-free survival at 3 years is 66% (P. Meyers, personal communication, 1999), but the data are immature, and results pertaining to

the contribution of ifosfamide have not yet been analyzed.
PRESURGICAL CHEMOTHERAPY
Presurgical chemotherapy has been used with increasing frequency in the management of osteosarcoma. This strategy evolved concurrently with limb-sparing
procedures. Initial attempts at limb salvage at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in 1973 involved the fabrication of customized endoprostheses for select
patients undergoing en bloc resection. While the prosthesis was being made (a process requiring up to 3 months), chemotherapy was administered to prevent tumor
progression. 54 Retrospectively, it appeared that patients treated with presurgical chemotherapy fared better than did patients treated during the same period with
immediate surgery and postoperative adjuvant therapy. 50
In studies from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, responsiveness of the primary tumor to preoperative chemotherapy, assessed by histologic evaluation,
was found to be a powerful prognostic factor; unfavorable responders were likely to develop distant metastases despite continued use of chemotherapy with the same
agents after surgery. 188 The prognostic significance of tumor response to preoperative chemotherapy has been confirmed in multiple studies, 177,189,190,191,192 and 193 and
tumor responsiveness has emerged as one of the most powerful prognostic factors in patients with nonmetastatic extremity osteosarcoma. 194
Although the initial impetus for presurgical chemotherapy was limb salvage, several theoretical advantages of presurgical chemotherapy apply to all patients with
osteosarcoma50 (Table 39.2-8). Because chemotherapy is administered very soon after biopsy and diagnosis, treatment of the micrometastases known to be present
in the majority of patients can be instituted early. This offers a substantial advantage over the traditional adjuvant approach, in which the administration of systemic
chemotherapy is delayed by 1 month or more for surgery and wound healing. Earlier administration of systemic treatment may reduce the emergence of drug-resistant
cells in the micrometastases. 195,196 For the surgeon, presurgical chemotherapy offers some advantages, because it allows time for fabrication of prostheses and may
effect a reduction of bulky tumors, thereby increasing the feasibility of limb-salvage surgery in selected patients.

TABLE 39.2-8. Considerations for Presurgical and Postsurgical Chemotherapy

ASSESSMENT OF TUMOR RESPONSE
Assessment of the response of primary tumors has been based on clinical and radiographic data (see Restaging after Preoperative Chemotherapy , earlier in this
chapter); however, the histologic appearance of the resected tumor specimen after presurgical chemotherapy has emerged as the standard for measuring
response.98,188,192,197,198 Several systems for grading the effect of preoperative chemotherapy have been proposed, all of which are based on the degree of cellularity
and necrosis in the resected specimen. Grading systems are necessarily imprecise and subject to sampling errors; however, with scrupulous attention to adequate
sectioning from many sites of the surgical specimen, the degree of response can be reliably and reproducibly assessed. The grading system designed at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center by Huvos and colleagues 98,188 has been used widely (Table 39.2-9). Grade III and IV responses, indicating extensive to complete
response in the primary tumor, are considered favorable. Grade I and II responses, indicating minimal destruction of the tumor, are unfavorable. In studies using the
Huvos grading system, patients with favorable response (grade III or IV) fare extremely well, whereas those with an unfavorable histologic response to preoperative
chemotherapy (grade I or II) are likely to develop distant metastases. Thus, patients at high risk for recurrent disease can apparently be identified early in treatment
on the basis of poor response to presurgical chemotherapy. The Huvos grading system has served as a model for other systems for grading tumor response.

TABLE 39.2-9. Histologic Grading of the Effect of Preoperative Chemotherapy on Primary Osteosarcoma

Although the predictive value of tumor response to presurgical chemotherapy is now indisputable, a number of problems have surfaced in the application of such
response grading to patient management. Different criteria for the definition of favorable and unfavorable response are used in different grading systems, making
comparisons among studies difficult. The grading system formerly used by the German Society of Pediatric Oncology (GPO) identifies six categories of response. 197 In
the Germany-Austria-Swiss Coooperative Osteosarcoma Study (COSS 80) study conducted by the GPO, favorable response was defined as more than 50% tumor
destruction after presurgical chemotherapy; however, in more recent GPO studies, 90% destruction is required. The grading system favored by investigators at the M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center divides response into three categories: (1) no effect or doubtful effect with less than 40% tumor destruction; (2) partial effect with 40% to
60% tumor destruction; and (3) definite effect, in which more than 60% of the tumor is destroyed and fibrovascular regeneration is present. 198
Of particular concern is that an update of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering experience with presurgical chemotherapy suggests that a modification of the Huvos system is
in order because the implications of “favorable” and “unfavorable” response to presurgical chemotherapy have changed somewhat. It is apparent that grade IV
response is predictive of favorable outcome; however, the outcome of patients with grade III response is not significantly superior to that of patients with grade II
response.199 Thus, only patients who experience a grade IV response to presurgical chemotherapy might be considered as being in the most favorable prognostic
group.
Perhaps most problematic are the differences among studies conducted to date in the timing of surgery relative to the initiation of chemotherapy, and especially the
variable duration of exposure to chemotherapy before definitive surgery and histologic evaluation of the response of the primary tumor. It appears that presurgical
chemotherapy regimens of longer duration are associated with a higher proportion of “favorable” responders. 199,200 However, as the duration of presurgical
chemotherapy increases, the predictive value of response for outcome may be lost; longer, more intensive presurgical regimens may achieve a greater proportion of
favorable responders, but the favorable responses achieved with such regimens may not translate into more favorable outcomes. An analysis from the Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center suggests that this is indeed the case. 199

TAILORING THERAPY
One of the most compelling rationales for presurgical chemotherapy is its use as an in vivo drug trial to determine the sensitivity of an individual tumor and to
customize postoperative chemotherapy. As noted above, results of studies from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and elsewhere suggest that patients
whose tumors are responsive to presurgical therapy are destined to do well when the same therapy is continued postoperatively. Patients whose tumors are
unresponsive to the presurgical regimen have a much less favorable outlook and might benefit from a change in chemotherapeutic agents. This strategy was
pioneered at Memorial Sloan-Kettering in the T-10 protocol 51,98 (see Fig. 39.2-4A). Patients were treated preoperatively with HDMTX, the BCD combination, and
doxorubicin. Those with favorable (grades III and IV) histologic responses continued to receive the same agents postoperatively (T-10B regimen). Patients
demonstrating unfavorable (grades I and II) histologic responses were treated on regimen T-10A, consisting of doxorubicin and cisplatin along with the BCD
combination (without HDMTX) postoperatively (see Fig. 39.2-4B). Although only 39% of patients achieved a favorable histologic response to presurgical
chemotherapy (51% if only patients younger than 21 years were analyzed), virtually all of the favorable responders were projected to survive free of recurrence. 51,98
The patients whose primary tumors demonstrated an unfavorable histologic response were switched to the cisplatin-containing regimen, and almost 85% were initially
projected to remain relapse-free at 3 years. Overall, in preliminary reports, 90% of patients treated on the T-10 regimen with tailored therapy were projected to remain
disease-free at 3 years. Moreover, a significant difference in outcome could no longer be detected between those who did and did not respond to presurgical
chemotherapy, supporting the contention that poor responders were “salvaged” by the administration of alternative chemotherapy postoperatively. Because of these
very favorable preliminary results, the T-10 protocol served as a model for many of the osteosarcoma treatment studies launched in the 1980s and 1990s, virtually all
of which featured presurgical chemotherapy and tailoring of treatment on the basis of responsiveness of the primary tumor.
NEOADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY
Results reported from representative trials using presurgical chemotherapy are summarized in Table 39.2-7. Responses in the primary tumor have been variable, with
favorable responses observed in 30% to 85% of patients. The overall results are excellent but are comparable to adjuvant studies that used regimens of equal
intensity without any preoperative chemotherapy (see Table 39.2-6). Furthermore, the importance of custom tailoring of therapy in this strategy remains to be defined.
Several trials are pertinent in this regard. The CCG attempted to duplicate the T-10 regimen in a multiinstitutional setting (CCG 782). 192 Results were not as favorable
as those initially reported from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center; only 28% of the patients demonstrated favorable responses in the primary tumor. These
patients fared extremely well (projected 5-year event-free survival, 87%). The remaining poor-responding patients did not benefit from a change in therapy
postoperatively and had a less favorable outcome (projected 5-year event-free survival, 49%). Overall, only 56% of patients in the CCG study were projected to
remain free of recurrent disease at 5 years—a disappointing result when compared with the initial results reported from Memorial Sloan-Kettering. The COSS 82 trial
of the GPO191 also tested the strategy of tailoring treatment. As in the CCG trial, results suggest that patients demonstrating poor response of the primary tumor are
destined to do poorly and that treatment of poor responders with “salvage regimens” (as in the T-10 protocol) does not improve their prognosis. Investigators of the
GPO concluded that active agents should not be withheld from the initial therapy of newly diagnosed patients. At the Rizzoli Institute, 177,201 overall results have
improved over time, concurrent with the adoption of the strategy of presurgical chemotherapy. However, the Rizzoli investigators conclude that the improvement in
prognosis more likely reflects increased effectiveness of the agents used rather than the use of presurgical chemotherapy per se, because a group of patients treated
concurrently at the same institution without the benefits of presurgical chemotherapy fared just as well as patients treated with presurgical chemotherapy. 201 As in
most trials of presurgical chemotherapy, an early trial of presurgical chemotherapy reported from the Rizzoli Institute demonstrated that favorable responders had a
better overall outcome; change in the postoperative chemotherapy for poor responders did not alter their unfavorable prognosis. However, in a more recent Rizzoli
trial 202 conducted between 1986 and 1990, patients were treated initially with HDMTX, doxorubicin, and intraarterial cisplatin preoperatively. Favorable responders
(more than 90% necrosis in their primary tumors) were treated postoperatively with 21 additional weeks of the same agents, whereas unfavorable responders
received 30 weeks of chemotherapy, including ifosfamide and etoposide in addition to doxorubicin, cisplatin, and HDMTX. Seventy-one percent of patients in this
study achieved a favorable response to presurgical chemotherapy, and 71% of these patients were projected to be disease-free survivors at 5 years. Of note, the
poorly responding patients had a projected disease-free survival equal to that of good responders if only patients receiving adequate therapy were considered. This is
one of the few studies in which the strategy of salvage chemotherapy for poorly responding patients has been shown to be of benefit.
Perhaps of greatest significance, an update of results of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center studies 199,203 indicates that the very promising preliminary
results have eroded with further follow-up. Moreover, no difference in overall disease-free survival is apparent, regardless of whether patients received presurgical
chemotherapy. Although histologic response to preoperative chemotherapy strongly predicted subsequent disease-free survival and overall survival, with longer
follow-up the Memorial Sloan-Kettering investigators were unable to demonstrate an improvement in disease-free survival for poor responders who received a
modification of their postoperative chemotherapy compared with a similar group of patients treated without such tailoring of treatment. 199 In support of these findings,
members of the Pediatric Oncology Group reported preliminary results of a randomized trial designed to test the impact of presurgical chemotherapy on outcome of
patients with extremity osteosarcoma.204 The overall event-free survival was identical whether patients were treated with chemotherapy before definitive surgery of the
primary tumor. Moreover, the overall results of this study were identical to those achieved in a predecessor study (Multi-Institutional Osteosarcoma Study) in which all
patients were treated with immediate surgery followed by conventional adjuvant chemotherapy. Thus, it does not appear that the administration of presurgical
chemotherapy (with or without individualizing of therapy based on tumor response) per se has led to an improvement in the outcome of children with osteosarcoma, at
least in terms of rate of cure. Rather, improvements in outcome probably reflect the increasing intensity of the chemotherapy regimens used.
Although responsiveness of the primary tumor to presurgical chemotherapy is a powerful predictor of outcome, the likelihood that an individual patient will respond
favorably cannot be predicted at the time of diagnosis. Because a majority of poor responders relapse and modifications of postsurgical chemotherapy do not have an
impact on this unfavorable outcome, strategies are needed to predict favorably and poorly responding patients before the initiation of therapy, and markers that
predict poor overall prognosis independent of response to chemotherapy, so that more aggressive approaches can be used for poor-prognosis patients earlier in
treatment. Analysis of tumor DNA content,205 tumor expression of P glycoprotein [product of the multidrug-resistant (MDR) gene 206], and other resistance-related
proteins207; expression of mutant p53 208; and loss of heterozygosity of the retinoblastoma gene 209 in primary tumors before therapy have been examined as prognostic
factors, but results have been inconclusive. Tumor expression of high levels of HER2/erbB-2 has been associated with unfavorable histologic response to
chemotherapy and inferior event-free survival. 208,210 If confirmed, these findings suggest a possible intervention with anti-HER2 monoclonal antibodies (Herceptin) for
patients whose tumors express high levels of this unfavorable molecular marker.
INTRAARTERIAL CHEMOTHERAPY
Presurgical chemotherapy may be administered directly into the arterial supply of the tumor to maximize drug delivery to the tumor vasculature ( Fig.
39.2-5).120,177,193,198,211 Doxorubicin and cisplatin, in particular, have been delivered by prolonged intraarterial infusion to the extremities, and high local drug
concentrations have been achieved. 120 However, the rationale for the use of intraarterial therapy is not self-evident for several reasons. Even in the prechemotherapy
era, control of the primary tumor in patients with extremity primaries was rarely a problem. Rather, micrometascopic disease present in the lung ultimately killed the
patient. Improvements in the outcome of patients with osteosarcoma have resulted directly from improvements of systemic chemotherapy for micrometastatic disease
rather than from better local control measures. Thus, strategies that improve drug delivery to the primary tumor at the expense of drug delivery to micrometastatic
disease are counterintuitive. Little evidence suggests that responses to intraarterial administration of chemotherapy are superior to those seen with systemic
intravenous administration of the same agents, nor has intraarterial chemotherapy improved the proportion of patients suitable for limb-sparing surgery. Finally, the
administration of intraarterial chemotherapy in resectable osteosarcoma has waned, and the strategy cannot be recommended for most patients.

FIGURE 39.2-5. The impact of neoadjuvant chemotherapy on the choice of surgical procedure: surgical decisions made before receiving chemotherapy (PRE CT)
compared with actual surgical procedure [amputation (AMP) vs. limb-sparing surgery (L-S)] performed after induction with intraarterial chemotherapy (POST CT).
Initially, 17 of 31 patients (55%) would have required amputation, compared with only 4 of 31 amputations (13%) actually performed (limb salvage rate of 87%). Notice
that 14 of 17 patients (82%) were converted from an amputative decision to a limb-sparing procedure. (From Malawer MM, Buch R, Reaman G, et al. Impact of two
cycles of preoperative chemotherapy with intraarterial cisplatin and intravenous doxorubicin on the choice of surgical procedure for high-grade bone sarcomas of the
extremities. Clin Orthop 1991:270:214, with permission.)

RADIOTHERAPY FOR BONE TUMORS
In keeping with the multidisciplinary, multimodality approach to the treatment of bone tumors, all patients should be evaluated by a radiation oncologist and by an
orthopedic and medical (or pediatric) oncologist before decisions are made concerning therapy. Close communication between members of the care team is crucial.
Tumors of the axial skeleton and facial bones are treated by a combination of limited surgery and radiotherapy. Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumors of bone may be managed by definitive radiation treatment, complete surgical excision, or combined surgical and radiotherapy approaches
and are discussed in Chapter 39.1. In general, radiation therapy is not used in the primary treatment of osteosarcoma. Radiation therapy is used for patients who
have refused definitive surgery, require palliation, or have lesions in axial locations.
TREATMENT PLANNING
Optimal radiotherapy of bone tumors requires careful planning ( Table 39.2-10). Such planning begins with tumor localization and accurate definition of the clinical and
radiographic extent of tumor as well as of all tissue at risk for microscopic involvement. Precise, three-dimensional definition is required. This evaluation is identical to
that done for surgical evaluation (see Preoperative Evaluation, earlier in this chapter). Using these composite studies, the maximal tumor dimensions are established.

TABLE 39.2-10. Guidelines for Optimal Radiation Therapy in the Treatment of Bone Sarcomas

With the clinical physicist, decisions are then made concerning the optimal choice of radiation beam (e.g., photon, electron), technique (external beam,
brachytherapy, intraoperative therapy), beam modifiers (compensators, wedge filters), and immobilization system. All patients should undergo simulation and be
treated with megavoltage therapy units. No role for orthovoltage (low-kilovoltage x-ray) exists in the management of primary tumors of bone.
Patient immobilization is essential to optimal radiotherapy. The patient should be placed in a comfortable position on the treatment table. The precise patient set-up
should be planned using three points for reproducibility. 212 Immobilization devices, such as casts, shells, vacuum pillows, and sandbags, are frequently necessary. 213
Molding techniques that require a cast of the anatomic site to be treated are generally preferred when treatment fields are complex and the radiation course is lengthy.
DOSE AND VOLUME CONSIDERATIONS
Large treatment volumes that include the entire clinical and radiographic extent of tumor plus a generous margin for microscopic or subclinical extension of disease
are needed. For tumors that tend to spread along the medullary canal (lymphoma, Ewing's sarcoma), the standard radiation field in the past included the entire bone,
with a boost of radiation to the area of bulky disease. However, current practice suggests that radiation confined to the involved area may be sufficient for small round
cell bone tumors that have responded to induction chemotherapy. If large fields are needed, it is desirable to use an extended source-to-skin distance to enable the
entire radiation field to fit into one portal. If extended distances are not possible and two radiation fields must abut, the abutment must pass through areas of
microscopic, rather than gross, disease. Match lines should be routinely moved every 10 Gy.
The irradiated field should encompass at least the volume of tissue that would be resected, plus an allowance of approximately 2 cm for patient movement and dose
fall-off at the margin of the field. Extremity fields should be planned with a strip of tissue deliberately out of the beam to allow for lymphatic and venous return and to
decrease morbidity. This nonirradiated strip should overlie the lymphatic drainage, which is located medially in the extremity.
Because large doses often are necessary for treatment of malignant bone tumors, a shrinking field technique is recommended, which allows treatment to a large
volume of tissue involved by subclinical disease with a moderate radiation dosage, whereas the area of gross tumor is treated with a larger, sterilizing dose.
Additional principles involve using multiple beam-shaping devices so that shaped fields can be designed to conform to individual tumor volume and anatomy. Multiple
fields should be used to optimize the radiation dosage, and all fields must be treated every day. Beam modifiers, including compensating filters and wedge filters,
should be used to account for individual variations in patient thickness. Three-dimensional conformal radiation techniques using multiple fields, multileaf collimation,
and intensity-modulated beams are useful aids to optimize the homogeneity of the dose within the target volume while sparing adjacent, critical normal structures.
When chemotherapy, such as Adriamycin and dactinomycin, and radiotherapy are used, it is important to avoid concomitant administration of drugs that may act as
radiation sensitizers to normal tissue.
COMPLICATIONS OF RADIATION
The complications of radiation are related directly to treatment dose and volume. Reactions that occur during the early stages of treatment usually are reversible and
not of major significance. These include erythema, dry desquamation of the skin, and epilation. More serious late reactions may include fibrosis, contracture, atrophy,
impaired growth, secondary fracture, and radiation-induced neoplasm. When pelvic treatment is necessary in young women, it is important to consider ovarian
transposition whenever possible. Techniques to move the small bowel out of the pelvis are useful, as is avoiding treatment of the entire bladder if cyclophosphamide
or ifosfamide is also being used. Fibrosis and contracture can be minimized—or possibly avoided—by embarking on an active physical therapy program during
radiation therapy; such a program should be continued in the postradiation therapy follow-up period. Whenever possible, treating across a joint space and treating an
open epiphysis should be avoided. For tumors of weight-bearing bones, partial weight bearing and protective bracing are important until reossification occurs.

BENIGN BONE TUMORS
SOLITARY AND MULTIPLE OSTEOCHONDROMAS (EXOSTOSIS)
Osteochondroma is the most common benign bone tumor. The tumors characteristically are sessile or pedunculated, arising from the cortex of a long tubular bone
adjacent to the epiphyseal plate. Osteochondromas are usually solitary, except in multiple hereditary exostosis. Plain radiographs are usually diagnostic, and no

further tests are required. Sessile osteochondromas are difficult to diagnose, especially when they occur in unusual sites, such as the distal posterior femur, where
they must be differentiated from a parosteal osteosarcoma. Bone scintigraphy and CT are helpful in distinguishing between the two.
Osteochondromas grow with the individual until skeletal maturity is reached. Growth of an osteochondroma during adolescence does not, therefore, signify
malignancy. Pain is not a sign of malignancy in childhood or adolescence, although in adulthood it is a significant warning sign. Pain in a child may be due to local
bursitis, mechanical irritation of adjacent muscles, or pathologic fracture.
Between 1% and 2% of solitary osteochondromas undergo malignant transformation; patients with multiple hereditary exostosis are at higher risk. 2,4,57,58 Malignant
tumors arising from a benign osteochondroma are usually low-grade chondrosarcomas. Proximal osteochondromas are more likely than distal ones to undergo
malignant transformation. In general, surgical removal is recommended only for symptomatic osteochondromas and for those arising along the axial skeleton or pelvic
or shoulder girdle.
SOLITARY AND MULTIPLE ENCHONDROMAS
Enchondromas are composed of mature hyaline cartilage that arises within a bone. They may be solitary or multiple (Ollier's disease) and have been reported in most
bones.3,4 Their biologic potential is often over- or underestimated. In general, pathologic interpretation of cartilage tumors is more difficult than that of other bone
tumors; it is particularly difficult to differentiate a benign enchondroma from a grade I chondrosarcoma. 10,11,214 Malignant transformations do occur, but the rate is
difficult to determine. 215 Lesions of the pelvis, femur, and ribs are generally at higher risk for malignant transformation than are lesions at more distal sites.
Pain is a sign of local aggressiveness and possible malignancy. Enchondromas of the hands and feet are benign, irrespective of pathology, 3 whereas cartilage tumors
of the pelvic or shoulder girdle are often malignant, even though the histology appearance is benign. Plain radiographs may be helpful in making this distinction.
Radiographic scalloping is a sign of local aggressiveness. Bone scintigraphy is not helpful in differentiating a low-grade chondrosarcoma from an active
enchondroma. Patient age is an important indicator of possible malignancy; enchondromas rarely undergo malignant transformation before skeletal maturity. Painful,
histologically benign-looking proximal enchondromas in adults are often malignant, despite their histology. Thus, correlation of symptoms, plain radiographic findings,
and histology is crucial.
CHONDROBLASTOMA, OSTEOBLASTOMA, AND OSTEOID OSTEOMA
Chondroblastoma and osteoblastoma are characterized by immature but benign chondroid or osteoid production, respectively. Both may undergo malignant
transformation in rare cases. 59,216 Osteoid osteomas are smaller than 1 cm, painful, bone-forming tumors that are always benign. It is essential that the oncologist be
aware of these entities and be able to differentiate them from their malignant counterparts, chondrosarcoma and osteosarcoma. Chondroblastomas appear
radiographically in the epiphysis of a child; conversely, primary chondrosarcomas are rarely epiphyseal and occur in adults. Although osteoblastomas may be found in
any bone, one-half of them are in the spine and skull. Osteoblastomas must be differentiated from osteosarcomas and osteoid osteoma.
Both chondroblastomas and osteoblastomas are considered aggressive, benign lesions with a high recurrence rate after simple curettage. 2,3 and 4,216 Local control can
be achieved by primary resection; however, routine resection cannot be recommended for tumors adjacent to a joint. Marcove et al. 131 report a 5% to 10% local
recurrence rate when curettage is combined with cryosurgery. This method has obviated resection and extensive reconstruction in select patients. Osteoid osteoma is
treated by simple excision. In a few cases, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs have proven curative when continued for a minimum of 1 year. Because surgical
removal is the treatment of choice for these benign bone lesions, the role of radiotherapy is limited. For nonresectable tumors, radiotherapy has been associated with
long-term control (Table 39.2-11), but most radiation oncologists do not believe that radiation plays a role in the management of these conditions. 214,217

TABLE 39.2-11. Radiation Guidelines for Benign Bone Lesions

ANEURYSMAL BONE CYSTS
Aneurysmal bone cysts (ABCs) are benign tumors of childhood, occurring typically before skeletal maturity. 2,3 and 4 They never become malignant. They often involve
the metaphyseal regions of the long bones or the vertebrae. Radiographically, ABCs are eccentric, lytic, and expansile, characterized by cortical destruction and
periosteal elevation. They can grow rapidly and appear extremely aggressive, and distinguishing them from a primary malignancy may be difficult. Differential
diagnosis includes GCT and telangiectatic osteosarcoma. ABCs contain some osteoid; however, careful examination reveals this to be reactive and not neoplastic.
Approximately one-third arise in conjunction with another bony neoplasm. 216,218 The classic treatment is simple curettage and bone graft, which has a recurrence rate
of 20% to 35%.4 Wide curettage may decrease the recurrence rate to approximately 10%. Marcove and colleagues 130,131 and 132 recommend curettage and cryosurgery
as the primary treatment. Primary resection of tumors involving weight-bearing bones is not warranted. Expandable bones, especially the ribs and fibula, may be
treated by primary resection. The Mayo Clinic reviewed its experience of 238 patients with ABCs. 219 Eighty percent of those lesions involved long bones. The
investigators noted that CT and MRI may show characteristic septations or fluid-fluid levels. Of 153 patients treated, 19% had recurrence after curettage. The
high-risk period for local recurrence was the first 2 years. The most significant clinical problem is deciding whether a lesion is an ABC or a telangiectatic
osteosarcoma.
Radiation therapy is recommended in surgically inaccessible sites. 3,217,218 Megavoltage doses (25 to 30 Gy in 18 to 24 days) have been associated with a decrease in
local recurrence from 32% to 8% and are generally recommended. 98,214,218,220,221 and 222
DESMOPLASTIC FIBROMA
Desmoplastic fibroma is an extremely rare bone tumor; only 80 cases have been reported. 216 It is characterized by abundant collagen formation and a fibrous stroma
without evidence of mitosis or pleomorphism. It presents radiographically as an osteolytic lesion with well-defined margins. Most important in differential diagnosis is
primary fibrosarcoma of bone. Treatment is en bloc resection; curettage has a significant rate of local recurrence. Radiation therapy has been suggested when
surgery is not a reasonable option, but dose-response data are not available. 223
LANGERHANS' CELL HISTIOCYTOSIS
Langerhans' cell histiocytosis is a more descriptive and recently accepted term to describe the disease commonly referred to as histiocytosis X. The solitary or
multifocal osseous lesions (Greenberger stage IA and B) were formerly referred to as eosinophilic granuloma.224 This condition can be difficult to diagnose and may
mimic radiographically a primary bone malignancy.
Almost any bone can be involved. Radiographically, the lesions appear as lytic, destructive defects, with ill-defined margins. Periosteal elevation occurs in one-half of

all cases. This combination of characteristics strongly resembles that of Ewing's sarcoma or osteomyelitis. When the disease arises in a flat bone, specifically the
pelvis, there may be a large soft tissue component. Solitary lesions are treated by surgical curettage.

MALIGNANT BONE TUMORS
CLASSIC OSTEOSARCOMA
Osteosarcoma is a high-grade, malignant spindle cell tumor that arises within a bone. Its distinguishing characteristic is the production of “tumor” osteoid or immature
bone directly from a malignant spindle cell stroma. 2,3,60,225
Clinical Characteristics
Osteosarcoma typically occurs during childhood and adolescence. An epidemiologic study from the Swedish Cancer Institute documented that the mean and median
age of patients with osteosarcoma has increased since 1971. 226 Investigators evaluated 227 patients from 1971 to 1984 and reported the peak incidence to be
between 10 and 19 years of age but noted the mean and median values to be 29 and 20 years, respectively. The overall incidence—2.1 cases per million people per
year—has not changed. When osteosarcoma occurs in patients older than 40 years, it is usually associated with a preexisting condition, such as Paget's disease,
irradiated bones, multiple hereditary exostosis, or polyostotic fibrous dysplasia. 2,225,226,227,228,229 and 230 Bones of knee joint and the proximal humerus are the most
common sites, accounting for 50% and 25%, respectively, of all osteosarcomas. 216 In general, 80% to 90% of osteosarcomas occur in the long tubular
bones 2,4,57,227,231,232 and 233; the axial skeleton is rarely affected. Fewer than 1% are found in the hands and feet. 2
With the exception of serum AP levels, which are elevated in 45% to 50% of patients, laboratory findings are usually not helpful. 231 Furthermore, elevated AP per se is
not diagnostic, because it is also found in association with other skeletal disease. Pain is the most common complaint. Physical examination demonstrates a firm, soft
tissue mass fixed to the underlying bone with slight tenderness. No effusion is noted in the adjacent joint, and motion is normal. Incidence of pathologic fracture is less
than 1%. Systemic symptoms are rare.
Radiographic Characteristics
Typical findings are increased intramedullary radiodensity (due to tumor bone or calcified cartilage), an area of radiolucency (due to nonossified tumor), a pattern of
permeative destruction with poorly defined borders, cortical destruction, periosteal elevation, and extraosseous extension with soft tissue ossification. 231,232 and 233 This
combination of characteristics is not seen in any other lesion. Wilner classified 600 radiographs of osteosarcoma seen at the Memorial-Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
into three broad categories 233: sclerotic (32%), osteolytic (22%), and mixed (46%). Although no statistically significant difference was found in overall survival rates
among these types, the patterns are important to recognize. The sclerotic and mixed types offer few diagnostic problems. Errors of diagnosis most often occur with
pure osteolytic tumors. The differential diagnosis of osteolytic osteosarcoma includes GCT, ABC, fibrosarcoma, and MFH. 234 In a series of 305 osteosarcoma cases,
DeSantos and Edeiken234 reported that 42 (13.5%) were purely lytic. Most commonly, they presented as ill-defined lesions with a moderate to large soft tissue
component. Nine of the lesions had benign radiographic features.
Clinical and Prognostic Considerations
Before the era of adjuvant chemotherapy, treatment consisted of amputation. Metastasis to lungs and other bones generally occurred within 24 months. A large
number of series shows an overall survival of 5% to 20% at 2 years 72,73,74 and 75 (Fig. 39.2-6). This pattern has been altered by adjuvant chemotherapy and aggressive
thoracotomy for pulmonary disease. 46,103,235 Metastases may now appear at less common sites, and disease-free intervals are longer. 235 In 1968, Lockshin and
Higgins236 reviewed the experience of 100 authors over 50 years and concluded that there was no significant difference between survival rates of patients with the
three histiogenic subtypes (osteoblastic, chondroblastic, and fibroblastic) or between patients whose lesions had a different radiographic appearance (sclerotic,
osteolytic, or mixed).236 Likewise, tumor size, patient age, and degree of malignancy did not correlate with survival. The most significant variable was anatomic site.
Patients with pelvic and axial lesions had a lower survival rate than those with tumors of the extremities, probably due to surgical inaccessibility and incomplete
removal. Patients with tumors of the tibia had a significantly higher survival rate than those with tumors of the distal femur (35% vs. 16%). Larsson and colleagues, 237
using a multifactorial analysis of all patients from the Swedish Cancer Registry between 1958 and 1968, similarly concluded that patients with tibial lesions had a
better survival rate than those with femoral lesions (38.1% vs. 15.1%), due to the fact that the former were less advanced at the time of treatment.

FIGURE 39.2-6. The historical survival curve for 145 patients with osteosarcoma treated by surgery alone at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center as reported by
Marcove and associates. (From Marcove RC, Mike V, Hajek JV, et al. Osteogenic sarcoma under the age of 21. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1966;48:1, with permission.)

Marcove et al.,72 reviewing 145 patients younger than 21 years of age who underwent surgery without adjuvant chemotherapy at Memorial Sloan-Kettering, noted no
statistically significant differences with regard to race, gender, or duration of symptoms (see Fig. 39.2-6). Younger patients developed metastases sooner, but this
made no difference in overall survival. Location had no impact on the 5-year survival rate. Brostrom and coworkers 238 evaluated 52 patients treated by surgery alone.
They studied tumor size and site and reported that patients with distal lesions measuring smaller than 10 cm had a significantly higher survival ( P <.01) than those
with proximal lesions larger than 10 cm (43% vs. 12%, respectively). More recently, Hudson and associates 239 reported on 98 patients treated at the M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center with three different protocols. Tumor size ( P = .04) and the percentage of tumor necrosis induced by induction therapy ( P = .01) were the most
important prognostic factors.
Baldini et al. 240 from the Rizzoli Institute have reviewed the prognostic factors of osteosarcoma patients treated with preoperative chemotherapy. This is one of the
more recent studies that attempts to determine prognostic factors when chemotherapy is administered, in contrast to older studies, which evaluated prognostic factors
before chemotherapy. Baldini et al. evaluated 160 patients with stage II high-grade osteosarcomas at a single institution. One hundred forty-two patients were treated
by a limb-sparing procedure, and 18 underwent amputation. Tumor size was not found to be associated with a histologic response to chemotherapy. One-hundred
fifteen patients had a good response (more than 90% necrosis), and 40 had a poor response. Larger tumors were not found to be associated with a lower likelihood of
response to chemotherapy. No association was found between the size of the tumor and the event-free survival of the patients, as determined by univariate and
multivariate analysis.
Changing Pattern of Metastasis
The classic pattern and time frame of metastatic dissemination of osteosarcoma has been somewhat modified by the use of adjuvant chemotherapy and thoracotomy.
Bacci and coworkers241 evaluated the pattern of metastatic spread of osteosarcoma in 193 patients at the Rizzoli Institute. Thirty patients who were treated with
surgery alone were compared to 163 patients who underwent adjuvant chemotherapy. No difference was found in sites of first relapse; approximately 90% of cases in
both groups occurred in the lungs. After chemotherapy, extrapulmonary spread occurred in 10% of cases, usually to bony sites. Simultaneous bone and lung

metastases occurred in approximately 2%. The time to metastases differed (surgery alone was 13 months vs. adjuvant chemotherapy at 8 months), and the number of
metastatic nodules were reduced. In general, lung metastases appeared later and were fewer in number after adjuvant chemotherapy but with variable difference on
extrapulmonary or bony spread. The authors of this study concluded that the alteration of metastatic spread permitted surgical resection of pulmonary metastases in a
larger number of patients (51% vs. 29%).
Alkaline Phosphatase
Serum AP level is an important biologic marker of tumor activity in patients with osteosarcoma. 242,243 The early studies of the relationship of AP activity and survival
were evaluated in several studies before the introduction of adjuvant chemotherapy (i.e., in patients treated with surgery alone).
The prognostic significance of AP has more recently been evaluated in conjunction with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Bacci and coworkers evaluated patients treated
for osteosarcoma between 1972 and 1989. 244 The study demonstrated that for patients with osteosarcoma of the extremities, presurgical serum AP levels are useful
prognostic markers in patients treated with adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Specifically, the study demonstrated that patients presenting with nonmetastatic
osteosarcoma and an elevated serum AP level had a worse prognosis than those with normal values (55% of relapses versus 26%). Among those patients determined
to have elevated pretreatment serum AP levels, there was a correlation showing that the higher the serum levels of AP, the greater the risk was for relapse. Patients
with elevated pretreatment serum AP who experienced relapse or recurrence had a poorer disease-free survival when compared with individuals who relapsed and
had normal pretreatment serum AP levels.
Surgical Resection of Localized Extremity Osteosarcoma
Before the early 1980s, treatment for localized osteosarcoma was amputation one joint above the tumor-containing bone or, occasionally, transmedullary
amputation. 2,3,72,73 and 74 Since the early 1980s, parallel developments in radiology, orthopedics, and oncology have made limb-sparing procedures an option in 50% to
80% of patients. 20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33 and 34 A significant impetus for these developments was the introduction of effective chemotherapeutic agents in the early
1970s.48,49,50,51,52 and 53
Springfield and coworkers 245 from the University of Florida compared limb-sparing surgery with amputation in 53 patients with stage IIB osteosarcoma. For ethical
reasons, the patients were not randomized. No difference in survival was found between amputation and resection or between radical resection and a wide surgical
margin. Three local recurrences were reported. The investigators concluded that a wide surgical resection was adequate for local control. In general, they
recommended amputation if the major neurovascular bundle was involved. They concluded that local recurrence was due to an extremely aggressive tumor or to skip
metastases.
Rougraff and colleagues 142 updated a combined study from the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society of 227 patients from 26 institutions treated for osteosarcoma of the
distal femur. One hundred nine patients (48%) were alive at an average of 11 years after surgery. No differences in local recurrence, overall survival, or duration of
disease-free survival were noted between amputation and limb-sparing groups. The local recurrence rate (10%) was identical for above-knee amputation and
limb-sparing surgery. The most common causes of failed limb-sparing procedures were infection and local recurrence. Rougraff et al. concluded that the type of
surgery did not affect outcomes. No difference was noted among patients treated with endoprostheses, allografts, composites, rotationplasties, and arthrodesis;
however, the numbers of patients in those categories were small.
Local Recurrence, Tumor Necrosis, and Surgical Margins
During the 1990s, many surgeons intuitively believed that a patient with a good response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy was more likely to undergo a limb-sparing
procedure safely than a patient with a poor response. A relationship appears to exist between the safety of limb-sparing resection and the surgical margins achieved
with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Patients whose lesions respond well to chemotherapy are less likely to develop local recurrence than those whose lesions respond
poorly.246 Picci and coworkers246 from the Rizzoli Institute analyzed the relationship between local recurrence after neoadjuvant chemotherapy, surgical margin
obtained, and tumor response as demonstrated by percentage of tumor necrosis. Of 355 patients, 7% developed local recurrences. The mean time to local recurrence
was 13 months from diagnosis (range, 2 to 56 months). Eighty-nine percent of the local recurrences developed within 18 months of the diagnosis. Of 237 patients in
the group who had undergone a limb-sparing procedure, 23 (10%) developed a local recurrence. The types of surgical margins obtained and their respective local
recurrence rates were as follows: wide margin, 3%; marginal margin, 29%; intralesional margin, 36%; contaminated margin, 15%.
When the type of surgical margin and the response to chemotherapy were analyzed together, differences in outcome were dramatic. The patients with poor necrosis
(<60%) and wide margins had ten times the risk of local recurrence. The worst combination was poor necrosis and less than wide margins.
Treatment by Anatomic Site
The unique features of evaluation, management, and resection of tumors of the most common anatomic areas, the shoulder and knee, are described and illustrated in
this section.
247,248
This classification is

SHOULDER GIRDLE. A surgical classification for shoulder girdle resections has been described and is shown schematically in Figure 39.2-7.

useful for all limb-sparing procedures of the shoulder girdle. It is recommended that osteosarcomas arising from the proximal humerus be treated by a type VB
resection (see Fig. 39.2-7). Figure 39.2-8 illustrates the various means by which a sarcoma may involve the shoulder joint.

FIGURE 39.2-7. Schematic of proposed surgical classification of shoulder girdle resections. In general, types I to III are for benign or low-grade tumors, and types IV
to VI are for high-grade tumors. A and B denote the status of the abductor mechanism: A is intact, and B is partially or completely excised. Types I to III and types IV
to VI are intraarticular and extraarticular resections, respectively.

FIGURE 39.2-8. Mechanisms of local tumor spread for sarcomas of the shoulder. (From Malawer MM, Buch R, Reaman G, et al. Impact of two cycles of preoperative
chemotherapy with intraarterial cisplatin and intravenous doxorubicin on the choice of surgical procedure for high-grade bone sarcomas of the extremities. Clin Orthop
1991;270:214, with permission.)

PROXIMAL HUMERUS. Adequate resection of the proximal humerus requires removal of 15 to 20 cm of the humerus and shoulder joint with the deltoid, rotator cuff, and

portions of the biceps and triceps muscles 249 (Fig. 39.2-9). The procedure involves suspension of the arm, motor reconstruction, and provision of adequate soft tissue
coverage.

FIGURE 39.2-9. Osteosarcoma of the proximal humerus. This patient was placed in a shoulder splint and given three cycles of chemotherapy in the hope of avoiding
a forequarter amputation. Due to the good clinical and radiographic response, this patient underwent a limb-sparing resection (type V).

Proximal humeral lesions should not be biopsied through the deltopectoral interval. Biopsy under fluoroscopy through the anterior one-third of the deltoid by a trocar
is preferred. Angiography is the most useful preoperative study. If the neurovascular bundle is clear, resection is feasible.
Extraarticular resection of the glenohumeral joint by medial scapulosteotomy is safer than intraarticular resection. A custom prosthesis is used for reconstruction. Soft
tissue reconstruction and suspension are essential to avoid postoperative pain, instability, and fatiguability. 249 Suspension by Dacron tape and muscle transfer is
effective. Hand and wrist function is normal after resection. Shoulder motion is minimal, but stable, and scapulothoracic motion provides some internal and external
rotation. Cosmesis is acceptable and can be enhanced with use of a shoulder pad.
Alternatively, resection of the proximal humerus for osteosarcomas can be performed by an intraarticular resection that preserves the glenoid and the adjacent deltoid
muscle. The problems associated with this procedure include significant local recurrence rates and instability of the reconstructed prosthesis or allograft. When the
glenoid and deltoid are preserved in this procedure, minimum margins are obtained along the shoulder joint, the deltoid muscle, and the axillary nerve. Because of
this serious inherent drawback, this technique is not recommended by the senior author (M. M.).
DISTAL FEMUR. Adequate en bloc resection includes 15 to 20 cm of the distal femur and proximal tibia and portions of the adjacent quadriceps.

134

Biplane angiography
is crucial to determine popliteal vessel involvement. Biopsy must avoid the sartorial canal and the knee joint. Contraindications to resection are popliteal vessel
involvement, massive soft tissue contamination from previous biopsy, and fracture. Large tumors requiring removal of the entire quadriceps or hamstrings can be
adequately reconstructed by an arthrodesis.
PROXIMAL TIBIA.

Today, limb-sparing procedures often are feasible for tumors of the proximal tibia after induction chemotherapy. 250 It is more difficult to obtain an adequate margin of
resection and a good functional result with lesions of the proximal tibia, which tend to have a higher incidence of local complications than do distal femoral tumors.
These problems are directly related to the anatomic constraints: minimal adjacent soft tissue and the normal subcutaneous location of the medial tibial border. It is
extremely important that the biopsy be small and that it avoid the knee joint. A core biopsy of medial flare is preferred to avoid contamination of the anterior
musculature and peroneal nerve.
The popliteus muscle adjacent to the posterior aspect of the tibia prevents direct tumor involvement of the neurovascular bundle. 250,251 Lateral angiography is
essential to demonstrate this interval. Tumor extension often involves the tibiofibular capsule. 250 Extraarticular resection of the proximal tibiofibular joint en bloc with
the tibia is required to obtain a safe margin. The average resection length is 15 to 18 cm. Reconstruction is achieved by prosthetic replacement, arthrodesis, or
allograft. The medial gastrocnemius is routinely transferred to provide soft tissue coverage of the reconstructed area. 252 Postoperative management consists of a long
leg cast for 2 to 4 weeks to allow the extensor muscles to heal. Rehabilitation emphasizes knee extension, but not flexion, for a maximum of 2 to 3 months. 250
PROXIMAL FIBULA.

Tumors of the proximal fibula require the same evaluation as do proximal tibial lesions. 253 Unique considerations are early soft tissue extension, proximity to the lateral
tibial condyle, necessity of ligation of the anterior and peroneal arteries, sacrifice of the peroneal nerve, and tumor infiltration of the tibiofibular joint capsule.
Contraindications to resection are direct tibial involvement, an anomalously absent posterior tibial artery, and intraarticular knee joint extension. Adequate resection
includes the fibula, the tibiofibular joint, the anterior and lateral muscle compartments, and a portion of the lateral gastrocnemius muscle. After surgery, the only
functional deficit is footdrop, which is treated by an orthosis. Knee function is normal. 253
OSTEOSARCOMA OF THE PELVIS AND PROXIMAL FEMUR
Osteosarcomas of the pelvis and proximal femur are less common than those occurring at other anatomic areas. They account for 10% and 5%, respectively, of all
osteosarcomas. 216 Tumors arising from these structures are often large, involve important structures, and are difficult to resect. Hemipelvectomy often is required for
pelvic tumors, whereas modified hemipelvectomy is used for tumors of the proximal femur. 145 The limb-sparing options, when feasible, are all functionally superior to
amputation at this level. 254,255 A poorly planned biopsy often contaminates the extrapelvic structures, typically making a hemipelvectomy the only safe option. Detailed
anatomic and surgical considerations are discussed in the section on chondrosarcomas (see Chondrosarcoma, later in this chapter), which often arise in these sites.
Fahey and Spanier 256 reviewed 25 patients with osteosarcoma of the pelvis treated at the University of Florida between 1967 and 1990 and described their biologic
behavior, growth, and histologic and vascular findings. Common problems included delay in diagnosis, widespread invasion into major pelvic veins, microscopic foci
of tumor in otherwise normal tissue, and extension into adjacent (and other) pelvic structures. They noted marked differences in obtaining tumor-free margins with
surgery. Eighteen patients underwent surgery (ten hemipelvectomies and eight limb-sparing resections). Only two of ten hemipelvectomy patients obtained wide
margins, and only two of the eight limb-sparing patients obtained negative margins. Major intraoperative complications occurred in 11 patients. Intraoperative blood
loss exceeded 10 L in six patients. An unexpected intraoperative finding was obvious tumor invasion into the large veins in nine patients: the iliac veins in two
patients, the inferior vena cava in three patients, and unnamed veins in four patients.
The high incidence of venous invasion requires that the iliac vessels be evaluated preoperatively and intraoperatively. Radiographic staging studies should include a
thorough evaluation of the iliac vessels. This can best be performed by CT, MRI with contrast, and pelvic venography. Survival for patients with pelvic osteosarcoma
is dismal. Only 1 of 25 patients remained disease-free. The five patients that lived the longest were all treated with chemotherapy. Innovative treatment strategies are

needed for pelvic osteosarcomas.
Clinical Analysis of Limb-Sparing Surgery
The most recent comparison of the results of limb-sparing surgery and amputation were reported by Sluga and colleagues 257 from the University of Vienna. They
evaluated 130 consecutive patients younger than 21 years of age treated for osteosarcoma of the extremity. Ninety percent (116 patients) were treated by a
limb-sparing procedure. Fourteen amputations, 32 rotationplasties, and 84 resections with subsequent reconstruction were performed. The 5-year metastasis-free
survival rate was 60% for patients treated by amputation or rotationplasty and 71% for patients treated by limb-sparing surgery. The surgical margins were classified
as wide in 109 cases and radical in ten cases. The overall local recurrence rate was 2.3%: 4.3% for amputation and/or rotationplasty and 1.2% for limb-sparing
surgery. The overall survival rate was significantly influenced by tumor volume ( P = .0018), response to chemotherapy (P = .039), and presence of metastases at the
time of diagnosis (P = .0001). The authors emphasize that there was no selection bias by tumor volume for the type of surgical procedure performed. The authors
warn that limb-sparing is not suitable for every patient; patients with large tumors and close margins may require amputation. They emphasize the importance of wide
margins to a successful limb-sparing procedure. This study, as well as previous studies, showed no difference in patient survival or local recurrence in patients
treated by a limb-sparing procedure and those undergoing an amputation.
Rougraff and colleagues 142 evaluated 227 patients with nonmetastatic osteosarcoma of the distal femur treated at 26 institutions. They reported eight (11%) local
recurrences in 73 patients with a limb salvage procedure, and nine (8%) local recurrences in 115 patients who had an above-knee amputation. No local recurrences
were reported in the 39 patients who had a hip disarticulation.
Bacci et al.258 retrospectively evaluated 540 patients treated over 10 years in three multicenter studies with 63 participating institutions. The rate of local recurrence
was 8% for patients with a poor histologic response and 3% for those with a good histologic response. A limb-sparing procedure was performed on 84% of the 540
cases evaluated, with a local recurrence rate of 6%. The most important determinant of local recurrence was the type of surgical margin and the response to
chemotherapy. Of the 540 patients, 31 had a local recurrence. The overall outcome of this group was extremely poor. All local recurrences were accompanied by
metastases, and despite treatment, only one patient remains alive (3%). Local recurrence did not correlate with patient age, gender, histologic type, site and volume,
pathologic fracture incidence, chemotherapy, or type of surgical procedure.
It appears, in summary, that the safety and efficacy of limb-sparing procedures for high-grade bone sarcomas have been well answered during the 1990s. 259 The
senior author (M. M.) would like to emphasize that these procedures are demanding and must be performed by surgeons experienced in limb-sparing procedures.
Allograft Replacement
Allograft (cadaver bone) replacement was popular in the 1970s and mid-1980s, which were the early days of limb-sparing surgery. Allograft was used for replacement
of large bony segments after limb-sparing surgery. When used in patients in conjunction with chemotherapy, allografts have a significant complication rate, including
infection, fracture, nonunion, and local recurrence, which may lead to secondary amputation. 260
The most recent authors to evaluate the use of allografts for reconstruction of the distal femur (the most common site for osteosarcoma) were Powell et al. 261 They
evaluated their experience over a 13-year period. A total of 37 osteoarticular allografts were used to reconstruct the distal femur of 34 patients who underwent tumor
resection. Twenty-one patients with sarcoma received chemotherapy. Average follow-up was 86 months. Eighty-five percent of patients had postoperative
complications, and 21 of 33 patients (73%) required further surgery. The most common complications were joint instability (55%), degenerative joint disease (44%),
nonunion (36%), allograft fracture (28%), and infection (17%). Only 13 of the 36 of the allografts (36%) remained intact. A steady decline in actuarial survivorship of
the reconstruction was noted over time: 83.2% at 2 years, 42.3% at 5 years, and 14.3% at 10 years.
Allograft replacement remains popular at some institutions but is reserved for low-grade tumors that do not require chemotherapy. The use of allografts has become
less common with the development of reliable prosthetic replacements, especially the modular replacement systems.
Prosthesis Survival and Complications
Prosthetic replacement is commonly used for reconstruction after resection of the proximal humerus, proximal femur, distal femur ( Fig. 39.2-10), and proximal tibia.
Several studies have evaluated the long-term results, prosthetic survivorship, and complications associated with prosthetic replacement. 262,263,264 and 265 Ruggieri and
associates 264 reported on 133 cases of nonmetastatic osteosarcoma of the extremities treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy and limb-sparing surgery. Sixty-three
percent of the patients had one or more complications. Twenty-eight complications were considered minor (i.e., no surgery was required), and 77 complications were
major. The infection rate was 6.2%. Mechanical problems occurred in seven patients (5%). The average number of complications per patient was 1.3. The authors
thought that the most serious problems resulting from a complication were those that required the delay of chemotherapy or deviation from the recommended dose,
either of which could jeopardize survival. Such consequences were not, however, demonstrable statistically.

FIGURE 39.2-10. Osteosarcoma of the distal femur treated by limb-sparing resection. A: Plain radiograph of a distal femoral osteosarcoma. B: Intraoperative
photograph shows a modular distal femoral prosthesis.

Campanna and colleagues265 from the Rizzoli Institute reported on 95 distal femoral resections performed between 1983 and 1989 (average follow-up, 51 months).
The overall complication and infection rates were 55% and 5%, respectively. The most common complication was failure of the polyethylene bushings used with the
knee component, which occurred at an average of 5.3 years after the procedure. They reported an overall local recurrence rate of 5% (average, 15 months).
Mechanical stem breakage was rare (6%) and was associated with two factors—the use of a narrow stem and extensive quadriceps excision. The results were not
related to patient age or length of resection. The tibia component caused no problems. All revisions done for infections were unsatisfactory. The incidence of infection
correlated with the extent of soft tissue resection of the quadriceps. No revisions were needed because of loosening.
Malawer and Chou262 evaluated the prosthetic survivorship of large-segment prostheses in 89 patients with high-grade bone sarcomas. The overall limb survival and
infection rates were 90% and 7%, respectively. The infection rate resulting in amputation was 7%. The 5- and 10-year prosthetic survival rates (no need for revision or
amputation) were 83% and 67%, respectively. Age, gender, and diagnosis were not related to prosthetic survival. The authors of this study suggested that infection
was related to periods of bacteremia and neutropenia associated with postoperative chemotherapy and to episodes of line sepsis.
In 1999, Henshaw et al. 266 reported the long-term prosthetic survival analysis of the 100 patients treated with the American-designed modular replacement system
(Howmedica and Osteonics, Inc., Allendale, NJ). The minimum follow-up period was 2 years. Prosthetic failure was defined as removal of the implant for any reason.
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was performed for all implants and for each site of reconstruction. The authors reported no mechanical failures of the stem, body, or
taper components. No clinically significant prosthetic loosening was reported. The infection rate was 8% (four in distal femurs, three in proximal tibias, and one in
proximal humerus), leading to six amputations and one prosthetic removal. The amputation rate was 7% (six infections and one local recurrence). The Kaplan-Meier

survival analysis ( Fig. 39.2-11) for all sites was 88% at 10 years, with a median follow-up of 64.4 months. The estimates of 10-year survival for the distal femur,
proximal humerus, proximal femur, and proximal tibia were 90%, 98%, 100%, and 78%, respectively. Today, modular prostheses are forged by several manufacturers
and are the standard prostheses used for most limb-sparing procedures. 266

FIGURE 39.2-11. Kaplan-Meier curve showing the survival of prosthetic replacements according to anatomic site in 100 patients treated by limb-sparing surgery for
high-grade bone sarcomas. The anatomic site was the most significant predictor of survival of the prosthesis. Distal Femur, distal or mid-part of the femur; Prox
Humerus, proximal part of the humerus; Prox Femur, proximal portion of the femur; Prox Tibia, proximal portion of the tibia. (From ref. 266, with permission.)

Revision of Limb-Sparing Surgery (Prosthesis)
The growing popularity of limb-sparing surgery has led to a need for revision of a limb-sparing endoprosthesis. The early causes of prosthetic failure were
postoperative infection, secondary infection due to transient bacteremia during postoperative chemotherapy, and local recurrence. These events usually occur within
the first 2 years after surgery. Long-term survival of the prosthesis depends on the mechanical properties of theprosthesis and on the host response to the
polyethylene, methylmethacrylate, and metallic components. The most common causes of late failure of a prosthesis necessitating revision (i.e., removal and
replacement of the prosthesis) are aseptic loosening of the prosthesis, mechanical breakage, or polyethylene component failure.
Renard et al. 267 evaluated 26 revision procedures. The most common reasons for a revision were polyethylene wear (nine cases) and aseptic loosening (eight cases).
The follow-up after the last revision ranged from 6 months to 12 years, with a median of 3 years. All patients retained their extremity, and approximately 75% incurred
no functional loss after prosthetic revision.
Cost of Limb-Sparing Surgery versus Amputation
The question of the cost effectiveness of limb-salvage surgery for bone tumors has arisen in the face of managed care, especially within the United States. The only
published report on this subject is by Grimer et al., 268 who compared the cost of a limb-sparing procedure in lieu of an amputation. They developed a formula for the
cost of the limb-salvage procedure versus an above-knee amputation with subsequent prosthetic replacement over the predicted life of the patient. This was
calculated for tumors around the knee. They excluded tumors of the proximal humerus and of the proximal femur, because, whatever difference in cost there might be,
there was a tremendous advantage of replacing the proximal femur rather than performing a hemipelvectomy or hip disarticulation. Similarly, there is a tremendous
advantage in preserving the upper extremity and a functioning hand in lieu of a forequarter amputation for a proximal humeral sarcoma. Their study is based on large
experience of amputations and limb-sparing procedures at the Royal Orthopedic Hospital in Birmingham, England. The formula is E + 2Fy + sSy + rRy + 3R(rRy),
where E is the cost of the original procedure, y is the number of years since the original operation, F is the cost of follow-up attendance, s is the risk of a service
procedure in any year, S is the cost of a servicing procedure in any year, r is the risk of a revision procedure being needed, and R is the cost of revision procedure.
They concluded the savings for an average patient undergoing a limb-sparing surgery over a 20-year period to be approximately 70,000 British pounds (at 1977
prices), which is approximately six times the cost of the original limb-sparing procedure. They concluded that the equation can be used for any method of limb-salvage
procedure. This study was performed with distal femoral resections that used a simple hinge prosthesis, which is now out of date. The modern rotating hinged-knee
prosthesis, with an improved surface and a collar coated with porous beads, provides a much longer rate of survival. These features should provide a significantly
lower rate of wear and failure, thus increasing cost-effectiveness.
The surprising feature of these findings is the considerable cost of amputation. Most active young people would demand and use a sophisticated artificial limb. These
individuals frequently have stump problems and require multiple replacements of the socket and prosthesis. They often require a spare prosthesis as well. Many
request and use a sports limb and a limb designed for swimming. A new prosthesis is required at regular intervals. With the increasing complexity of artificial limbs, it
is likely that the maintenance cost of the amputated extremity will increase. 268
Limb-Sparing Surgery and Pathologic Fracture
Traditionally, a fracture through an osteosarcoma was treated by amputation. As experience with induction chemotherapy and limb-sparing surgery has increased,
however, several centers have attempted limb-sparing surgery in this high-risk patient population. The assumption has been that if the fracture can be immobilized
during the induction period and the tumor shows clear signs of necrosis and secondary fracture healing, an amputation may be avoided. The earlier strategy,
immediate amputation, was based on the presumed high risk of local recurrence after a limb-sparing procedure. A limb-sparing procedure may now be safely
performed if the response to induction chemotherapy is good, as evidenced by fracture healing.
Steadman et al.269 evaluated their experience with patients with osteosarcoma-induced pathologic fractures between 1970 and 1995. Nine primary instances of limb
salvage in patients with preoperative chemotherapy and eight primary cases of amputation with postoperative chemotherapy were studied. No significant difference in
survival was found. One local recurrence occurred in the limb-salvage group, and none in the amputation group. This retrospective analysis, combined with other
reported results, makes a convincing case that a pathologic fracture does not indicate the need for an immediate amputation. The strategy today is to immobilize the
extremity and proceed with induction chemotherapy. If the fracture heals and the tumor appears to respond to chemotherapy, a limb-sparing operation is warranted.
Repeat staging studies after induction chemotherapy and close serial observation during the induction period are essential.
CLINICAL PRESENTATIONS OF OSTEOSARCOMA AND TREATMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Treatment Considerations
LOCALIZED EXTREMITY DISEASE. Management of osteosarcoma requires the expertise of a multidisciplinary team familiar with the various management options.

Patients with a suspected diagnosis of osteosarcoma (based on radiographic findings) should be referred to centers with treatment programs before biopsy. The
biopsy should be performed by an orthopedic surgeon familiar with the management of malignant bone tumors and experienced in the required techniques. 270
Whenever possible, this individual should be the surgeon who will ultimately perform the definitive surgical procedure, because the biopsy must be planned carefully
with a consideration of subsequent definitive surgery. A poorly conceived and poorly placed biopsy may jeopardize the subsequent treatment, especially a
subsequent limb-salvage procedure.
The patient with a primary tumor of the extremity without evidence of metastases requires surgery to control the primary tumor and chemotherapy to control
micrometastatic disease. The choice between amputation and limb-sparing resection must be made by an experienced orthopedic oncologist, taking into account
tumor location, size, or extramedullary extent; the presence or absence of distant metastatic disease; and patient factors such as age, skeletal development, and
lifestyle preference. Routine amputations are no longer performed; all patients should be evaluated for limb-sparing options. Intensive, multiagent chemotherapeutic
regimens have provided the best results to date (see Table 39.2-6 and Table 39.2-7). Patients who are judged unsuitable for limb-sparing options may be candidates
for presurgical chemotherapy; those with a good response may then become suitable candidates for limb-sparing operations. The management of these patients

mandates close cooperation between the medical oncologist and surgeon.
PELVIC TUMORS AND UNRESECTABLE DISEASE. In some pelvic and most vertebral primary tumors, complete resection often is not possible. Most pelvic osteosarcomas

can be treated by hemipelvectomy; more centrally located pelvic tumors, especially those involving the sacrum, are unresectable. Only a few pelvic osteosarcomas
can be treated by limb-sparing resection (internal hemipelvectomy). Contraindications to resection are unusually large extraosseous extensions with sacral plexus or
major vascular involvement. On rare occasions, vertebral and sacral resections have been attempted. 271,272 and 273 In general, these tumors cannot be resected with
negative margins and are best treated by radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Some success has been achieved with systemic or intraarterial chemotherapy, which is
administered to convert apparently inoperable tumors into lesions that can be ablated surgically. 89,90 Patients with primary tumors of the axial skeleton have had a
poor outcome, because local control was rare. The prognosis for these patients may improve with a more aggressive surgical approach and more effective
chemotherapy.274 Patients whose tumors can be completely resected should be approached with curative intent; radiotherapy provides significant palliation in patients
with unresectable primary tumors.
METASTATIC PULMONARY DISEASE AT DIAGNOSIS. Metastatic disease detected at initial diagnosis does not preclude a curative treatment strategy, although the

presence of extrathoracic metastases makes cure extremely unlikely. In general, the surgical principles outlined for the treatment of relapsing patients apply equally to
the patient presenting with macroscopic metastases. Newly diagnosed patients have not been exposed to chemotherapy and are, thus, less likely to have
drug-resistant tumors. Therefore, several options are available to them.
For the patient presenting with resectable disease (i.e., usually fewer than 15 pulmonary nodules and a primary tumor of the extremity), the traditional approach has
been resection of all evidence of macroscopic disease by median sternotomy and limb amputation or resection, followed by intensive adjuvant chemotherapy. The
tumor burden is thereby reduced to a minimum before the application of adjuvant therapy. Some investigators have favored treatment with chemotherapy, followed
weeks or months later by definitive surgery for residual macroscopic disease in primary and metastatic sites. 92,93 Arguments advanced to justify this approach are
similar to those used to support preoperative chemotherapy in general, and the theoretical advantages and disadvantages of this strategy as discussed for patients
with nonmetastatic osteosarcoma apply here as well. The risk for the patient with metastases is that growth of tumor nodules in the face of chemotherapy may render
small, operable metastases unresectable and prevent cure. Although the timing of the surgery of the primary tumor and metastatic sites has been variable, most
modern approaches entail alternating chemotherapy and surgery. The initial treatment is usually a course of chemotherapy, followed by surgical resection of the
primary tumor, followed by a second course of chemotherapy and surgical ablation of metastatic sites, followed by the remaining courses of chemotherapy. Patients
with tumors that respond to presurgical chemotherapy are more likely to be cured. In patients with inoperable metastases, primary treatment with chemotherapy is
probably appropriate; metastases may respond sufficiently to allow complete resection. Because these patients usually require surgery for the primary tumor as a
palliative procedure, early surgery may be recommended, despite unresectable pulmonary disease. Although improving, the outlook for patients presenting with
metastatic disease remains poor. 275,276
RECURRENT DISEASE AFTER CURATIVE ATTEMPT. Historically, patients developing recurrent disease had a poor prognosis and were treated palliatively; most died

within 1 year of the development of metastatic disease. Because more than 85% of metastases occur in the lung, surgical resection of tumor nodules can be readily
accomplished. With the advent of thoracic CT scanning, metastatic nodules can be detected when quite small and more easily resectable, although in most cases the
surgeon discovers more lesions at thoracotomy than anticipated on the basis of the CT scan. 277,278 and 279 In many patients, the lungs are likely to be the only site of
metastasis, especially in cases in which recurrences appear more than 1 year after diagnosis and in which the metastatic lesion is solitary. In such cases, the
recurrent tumors are likely to behave more indolently and may not further metastasize. These patients have been cured by thoracotomy alone.
Surgical resection of all overt metastatic disease is a prerequisite for long-term salvage after relapse. 278,279,280 and 281 Patients not treated by thoracotomy have little
hope for cure, because complete responses of macroscopic metastases to chemotherapy are rare. 279,280 and 281 The completeness of surgical resection is an important
determinant of outcome, because patients left with measurable or microscopic disease at the resection margins are unlikely to be cured. 279
Many investigators have recommended adjuvant chemotherapy after thoracotomy for the management of metastatic osteosarcoma to destroy residual microscopic
tumor deposits.92,102,103 For patients who develop recurrent disease within 1 year of initial surgery, the possibility of additional microscopic metastatic disease is quite
high, and further chemotherapy is indicated. Long-term survival has been reported for some patients with recurrent osteosarcoma who were treated only with
surgery. 98,99 and 100 These survivors were more likely to be patients experiencing late relapses with solitary pulmonary nodules.
If overt metastatic disease is discovered, a thorough search for all metastatic lesions is essential. The discovery of unresectable extrathoracic metastases or
unresectable pulmonary disease is a contraindication to aggressive thoracotomy, and the patient should be treated palliatively. Radiotherapy may be particularly
useful in this context. In some patients with unresectable disease, an aggressive approach with curative intent may still be indicated. Chemotherapy, with or without
radiotherapy, rarely eradicates all metastatic disease; nonetheless, some patients with inoperable metastases may respond sufficiently to allow for complete resection
of disease at a later date. Occasionally, patients with unresectable pulmonary metastases are cured with chemotherapy or high-dose radiotherapy alone.
Patients with resectable lung disease should undergo thoracotomy to remove all evidence of disease. Bilateral disease may be approached by staged bilateral
thoracotomies or a median sternotomy. The role of adjuvant chemotherapy after thoracotomy should be studied; it is probably indicated for patients with more than
three lesions appearing 6 months to 1 year after initial surgery, for patients whose metastatic disease has not been completely resected, or for those with evidence of
pleural disruption by tumor. Repeat thoracotomies may be required for subsequent recurrence and should be performed if all disease can be resected.
Survival after relapse has undeniably been enhanced by approaches designed with curative intent that incorporate repeated aggressive surgery to remove overt
disease. With such treatment, 30% to 40% of patients have been reported to survive beyond 5 years after relapse, 92,98,100,101,282,283,284 and 285 although not all of these
patients are ultimately cured. Such considerations emphasize the value of close follow-up, with frequent chest radiographs and thoracic CT scans, to detect recurrent
disease when it is still resectable. Thus, for the patient with osteosarcoma, the development of metastases is not a hopeless situation; aggressive systematic
treatment offers prolonged survival for many patients and the possibility of cure for a significant fraction. Ironically, as adjuvant regimens used in front-line therapy of
patients are intensified and the number of patients surviving without ever developing recurrence increases, the proportion who are likely to be salvageable after
relapse may decrease, because relapsing patients are more likely to have drug-resistant recurrences.
Radiation Therapy in the Treatment of Osteosarcoma
BACKGROUND. Significant experience with primary radiotherapy for osteosarcomas was obtained in the 1950s and early 1960s. Primary radiotherapy with delayed

amputation gained acceptance in 1955, when Cade 286 advocated initial therapy with radiation and delayed amputation for patients in whom there was no evidence of
metastasis 4 to 6 months after radiotherapy. This approach was designed to circumvent amputation in the majority of patients who were destined to develop an early
relapse. Radiation doses were 7000 to 8000 cGy administered over 7 to 9 weeks at 1000 cGy/week. A few patients in Cade's series who were not subjected to
delayed amputation were controlled with irradiation alone, and amputation was eventually performed. The 5-year survival rate was 21.8%. Other investigators
followed a similar regime, using various radiation doses and schemes ( Table 39.2-12). Subsequent surgical specimens of many of the patients managed in this
fashion were found to have no histologic evidence of tumor. The ability of high radiation doses to sterilize some tumors, however, was associated with significant
necrosis of normal tissue. 287,288,289,290,291 and 292

TABLE 39.2-12. Series of Primary Radiation Followed by Delayed Surgery for Osteosarcoma

Results of preoperative radiation were subsequently evaluated. Overall success with preoperative radiation followed by ablative surgery was, in general, suboptimal;
most patients relapsed shortly after treatment. This led Jenkin et al. 260 at Princess Margaret Hospital to recommend limiting radiation to patients who had unresectable
tumors or who were being treated for palliation only. Beck et al. 293 observed no survival advantage for preoperative radiation followed by surgery over surgery alone;
furthermore, only 43% of their patients obtained any palliative benefit from radiotherapy.
Radiotherapy has, however, been shown to be successful in several distinct clinical situations—facial lesions, palliation and, possibly, as a postoperative adjuvant.
High-dose combination photon and proton radiation using three-dimensional treatment planning may improve long-term local control. Guidelines for the use of
radiotherapy for osteosarcoma and other malignant bone tumors are shown in Table 39.2-12 and Table 39.2-13.

TABLE 39.2-13. Radiation Guidelines for Malignant Bone Lesions

PALLIATION. Radiation therapy is extremely beneficial in patients requiring palliation of metastatic bony sarcomas; tumors at axial sites, which are unresectable; and

advanced, inoperable lesions of the pelvis or extremities. A novel approach using high-dose-per-fraction radiation and intraarterial 5'-bromodeoxyuridine (BUdR) as a
radiosensitizer was undertaken by the Stanford Group. 294 Pulsed 48-hour BUdR infusions were performed before each 600-cGy radiation fraction, with a total
radiation dose to the primary site of 4200 to 4800 cGy in 5 weeks (seven to eight fractions). Infusions of methotrexate-leucovorin were administered simultaneously.
Local control was achieved in seven of the nine patients (78%) treated. 295 However, local tissue toxicity was excessive and included subcutaneous fibrosis,
nonhealing traumatic fractures, peroneal neuropathy, and atrophy. Because the patients were treated with an unusual fractionation scheme using large fractions as
well as intravenous chemotherapy, the specific role of the BUdR in both the local control and the excessive toxicity was not established.
Kinsella and Glatstein 296 have used intravenous radiosensitizers of BUdR, iododeoxyuridine, or misonidazole with high-dose radiotherapy, with various fractionation
schemes and usually with chemotherapy, in patients with large, unresectable primary or metastatic sarcomas. Twenty-one of 29 patients (75%) achieved local control,
which was defined as freedom from symptoms and absence of growth.
These studies demonstrated the efficacy of radiation therapy in obtaining long-term local control and palliation. They lend support to further clinical investigations
using radiation sensitizers with high-dose radiotherapy.
VARIANTS OF CLASSIC OSTEOSARCOMA
Dahlin and Unni 60 have identified 11 variants of the classic osteosarcoma. These accounted for 268 of 1021 (28%) cases reviewed at the Mayo Clinic. Osteosarcoma
arising in the jawbone, the most common variant, is characterized by well-differentiated cells with a low metastatic potential. 60 Excluding tumors arising secondary to
Paget's disease, irradiation, or dedifferentiation of a chondrosarcoma, parosteal and periosteal osteosarcomas are the most common variants of classic osteosarcoma
arising in the extremities. In contrast to classic osteosarcoma, which arises within a bone, both parosteal and periosteal osteosarcomas arise on the surface of the
bone (juxtacortical).
The three types of surface osteosarcomas are parosteal osteosarcoma, periosteal osteosarcoma, and high-grade surface osteosarcoma. The Mayo Clinic reported
518 surface osteosarcomas seen between 1926 and 1996. The incidence was 335 parosteal osteosarcomas (64.7%), 137 periosteal osteosarcomas (26.4%), and 46
high-grade surface osteosarcomas (8.9%). These 518 surface osteosarcomas were from a pool of 4365 osteosarcoma tumors (i.e., a ratio of 1:8.4 cases). 297
Parosteal Osteosarcoma
Parosteal osteosarcoma is a distinct variant of conventional osteosarcoma that accounts for 4% of all osteosarcoma. 60 It arises from the cortex of a bone and
generally occurs in older individuals. It has a better prognosis than classical osteosarcoma.
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS. There is a slight predominance of parosteal osteosarcoma in women. The distal posterior femur is involved in 72% of all cases; the

proximal humerus and proximal tibia are the next most frequent sites. Parosteal osteosarcoma metastasizes slowly and has an overall survival rate of 75% to
85%.60,298 Unni and colleagues 62 noted that all patients who died of tumor lived longer than 5 years. The natural history of parosteal osteosarcoma is progressive
enlargement and late metastasis. Parosteal osteosarcoma presents a mass and occasionally is associated with pain. In contrast to conventional osteosarcoma,
duration of symptoms varies from months to years. Unni et al. 298 reported that 50 of 79 patients had complaints of longer than 1 year, and one-third of this group had
pain for more than 5 years. Tumor size, location, and duration of symptoms did not correlate with survival. 60
RADIOGRAPHIC FINDINGS. Roentgenograms characteristically show a large, dense, lobulated mass broadly attached to the underlying bone without involvement of the

medullary canal. If old enough, the tumor may encircle the entire bone. The periphery of the lesion is characteristically less mature than the base. Ahuja and
coworkers61 emphasized that intramedullary extension is difficult to determine from plain radiographs. Unni et al. 298 emphasized that high-grade foci did not usually
alter the roentgenographic appearance of these tumors.
PATHOLOGY AND GRADING. Parosteal osteosarcoma is characterized by well-formed lamellar or woven bone with a mature spindle cell stroma with few signs of

malignancy. The cellularity of the spindle cell components varies; generally, it is not anaplastic, with few mitoses. 2,3,4,59,60 The differential diagnosis is osteochondroma,
myositis ossificans, and conventional osteosarcoma. Cortical tumors of the posterior femur should always be suspected of malignancy; this is a rare location for a
benign osteochondroma. In contrast to sarcoma, myositis ossificans is rarely attached to the underlying bone. In addition, the periphery is more mature, both
radiographically and histologically. Ahuja and colleagues 60 reviewed all cases of parosteal osteosarcoma at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center from 1934 to
1975 and described three grades: grade I (low grade), grade II (intermediate), and grade III (high grade). They emphasized the importance of evaluating the
fibroblastic, cartilaginous, and osseous components independently. Of 24 patients, eight were grade I, ten grade II, and six grade III. Unni et al. 298 reviewed 79
patients and reported that 18 were grade II (23%), and seven had high-grade foci (9%). Neither group of researchers could distinguish the three grades on plain
radiographs. The survival rate of patients with grade III tumors is similar to that of patients with conventional osteosarcoma.
Jelinek et al. 299 reviewed the records of the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology and evaluated 60 patients with parosteal osteosarcomas for tumor size, location, and
presence of cleavage plane; intramedullary extension; soft tissue mass; and the presence and pattern of ossification. Tumors were classified as low grade or high
grade. The average maximal length for low- and high-grade tumors was 7.7 and 15.0 cm, respectively. A cleavage plane was present in 20 low-grade (62%) and 19

high-grade (68%) lesions. On cross-sectional imaging, intramedullary extension was present in 13 low-grade (41%) and 14 high-grade (50%) lesions. They concluded
that a poorly defined soft tissue component distinct from the ossified matrix is the most distinctive feature of high-grade parosteal osteosarcoma and may be the
optimal site to perform a biopsy.
Intramedullary involvement does not necessarily imply a worse prognosis, although this may be the case in patients with high-grade lesions. 60 Eleven of 24 patients
(46%) reviewed by Ahuja 61 had medullary involvement; moreover, the patients with medullary involvement who had a local resection all had a local recurrence.
Okada and associates297 has updated the experience of the Mayo Clinic. They reviewed the records of 226 patients. Dedifferentiation was more common (16% of
patients) than previously reported. They emphasized the usefulness of cross-sectional imaging in planning surgical resection. The tumor often had extensive
intramedullary, extraosseous, and adjacent soft tissue components. Medullary involvement was present in 22% of the patients, and extraosseous, unmineralized soft
tissue peripheral to the mineralized cortical mass was noted in 51% of the patients. Adjacent soft tissue extension occurred in 46% of patients. In contrast to their
previous studies, intramedullary involvement was not a poor prognostic factor. The authors stressed the need for long-term follow-up. Eleven of the 67 patients
managed at their institution died at an average of 14 years (range, 2 to 41 years). Ten of the 11 patients died from a dedifferentiated tumor.
treatment. Wide excision of the tumor is the treatment of choice. This may be accomplished either by an amputation or a limb-sparing procedure. No experience with

preoperative chemotherapy or radiotherapy has been reported. Parosteal osteosarcomas are often amenable to limb preservation due to their distal location, low
grade, and lack of local invasiveness. If the adjacent neurovascular bundle is free of tumor, resection is feasible. Vascular displacement is not a contraindication for
resection. The major surgical decision usually is whether to remove the entire end of the bone and the adjacent joint or to preserve the joint. Small lesions can be
resected with joint preservation. If the medullary canal is involved, the joint usually cannot be preserved. A second factor mitigating against joint preservation is
extensive cortical involvement. Techniques of resection and reconstruction are similar to those described for conventional osteosarcoma. The major difference is that
only a small amount of soft tissue usually must be resected; consequently, a good functional result is obtained. Grade III parosteal lesions warrant systemic therapy
because of the risk of metastasis.
Periosteal Osteosarcoma
Periosteal osteosarcoma is a rare cortical variant of osteosarcoma that arises superficially on the cortex, most often on the tibia shaft. 61 Radiographically, it is a small,
radiolucent lesion with some evidence of bone spiculation. The cortex is characteristically intact, with a scooped-out appearance and a Codman's triangle ( Fig.
39.2-12). Histologically, periosteal osteosarcomas are relatively high-grade chondroblastic osteosarcoma composed of a malignant cartilage with areas of anaplastic
spindle cells and osteoid production. Unni and colleagues, 60 in a report of 23 cases, found periosteal osteosarcomas to be one-third as frequent as the parosteal
variant. The largest tumor measured 2.5 × 3.5 cm. Four of the 23 patients died of metastatic disease.

FIGURE 39.2-12. Periosteal osteosarcoma. A: Typical radiograph of a periosteal osteosarcoma of the humerus. Notice the cortical location with a scooped-out defect
of the lateral aspect of the shaft and the diaphyseal location. B: Longitudinal section of the gross specimen after a limb-sparing resection. The tumor seems to arise
on the outer cortex without any evidence of cortical involvement. C: Postoperative radiograph. A custom prosthesis was used to reconstruct the defect. (From Hall RB,
Robinson LH, Malawar MM, Dunham WK. Periosteal osteosarcoma. Cancer 1985;55:165, with permission.)

One of the largest reported series was by Okada et al. 297 from the Mayo Clinic. They evaluated 46 patients and described their radiographic, clinical, and pathologic
evaluation. All the tumors were broad based and attached to the underlying cortex. Nineteen of the 46 tumors (41%) showed infiltration into the cortex of the
underlying bone. Medullary involvement was documented on gross or radiologic examination in 13 tumors and by microscopic examination only in six tumors. They
attempted to evaluate the effectiveness of chemotherapy in this very rare subtype of osteosarcoma. Fifteen of the 21 patients receiving systemic treatment showed no
response to chemotherapy. Among those 15 patients, only one patient remains alive. All six patients who showed a good response to chemotherapy are alive.
Medullary involvement did not affect prognosis. The survival rate was 57.5% at 3 years and 46.1% at 5 years.
Treatment is similar to that of other high-grade lesions. En bloc resection should be performed when feasible; amputation is rarely indicated. Table 39.2-12 compares
the significant characteristics of periosteal tumors with those of conventional osteosarcoma.
Paget's Sarcoma
Approximately 1% of patients with Paget's disease will develop a primary bone sarcoma. 229,230 Greditzer and colleagues 230 reported 41 sarcomas among 4415 patients
with Paget's disease followed at the Mayo Clinic; 35 were osteosarcomas and six were fibrosarcomas. The average patient age was 64 years old, and the most
common sites were the pelvis, femur, and humerus. One-half of these lesions were osteolytic; the remainder had a mixed pattern. Cortical destruction and a soft
tissue component were the most common signs noted; periosteal elevation was rare. Most patients with this condition present with pain; thus, a patient with known
Paget's disease who complains of increasing pain, especially when it is well localized, should be evaluated radiographically. The diagnosis is usually made by plain
radiography and confirmed by biopsy. Traditionally, fewer than 8% of patients survive, and most deaths occur within 2 years. 230 Treatment is similar to that
recommended for adolescent patients with osteosarcoma without metastatic disease.
High-Grade Surface Osteosarcoma
High-grade surface osteosarcoma (peripheral conventional osteosarcoma) is the rarest variant of surface osteosarcoma. 300 The parosteal and periosteal
osteosarcomas have a better prognosis, whereas the high-grade surface variant has the same prognosis as the conventional, intramedullary lesion. This variant was
previously called type III parosteal osteosarcoma. Schajowicz and coworkers300 studied the different surface osteosarcomas. They reported that only 7 of 80 surface
osteosarcomas (9%) were considered to be the high-grade variant. Clinically, the median age was 13.5 years (younger than that of patients with other surface
lesions), and almost all were located in the diaphyseal region of the bone. The femur was the most common site. These tumors may show extensive intramedullary
involvement. Radiographically, it appears as a small or moderate-size lesion with slight to heavy calcification. The broad base of the lesion abuts the cortex. The
radiographic features often are misleading and may suggest the periosteal variant; thus, the preoperative diagnosis may be difficult. But the young age, diaphyseal
location and, most important, the highly malignant histologic features indicate the correct diagnosis. Wide excision with limb preservation has been reported. Adjuvant
chemotherapy is warranted due to the high rate of metastases.
Small Cell Osteosarcoma
The small cell osteosarcoma, a rare variant of osteosarcomas, resembles a Ewing's sarcoma and is often classified as an “atypical” Ewing's sarcoma. 301,302
Characteristically, areas of osteoid and, on occasion, chondroid formation are present. The differential diagnosis includes Ewing's sarcoma, atypical Ewing's sarcoma,
primitive neuroectodermal tumor, mesenchymal chondrosarcoma, lymphoma, and Askin's tumor. Differentiation from Ewing's sarcoma and the typical osteosarcoma is
important, because the response of small cell osteosarcoma to treatment is poorly defined.

Devaney and colleagues 303 from the Bone Branch of the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology evaluated 79 round cell tumors of bone with immunohistochemistry in an
attempt to distinguish small cell osteosarcoma from the other round cell tumors of bone. They noted that none reacted with cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen,
factor VIII–related antigen, synaptophysins, or Leu-M1-positive. Thus, a strong positivity of any of these studies should rule out small cell osteosarcoma. Vimentin was
seen in the majority of the various tumor types. They concluded that immunohistochemical stains alone could not make the diagnosis.
Sim et al.301 recommend surgery, whereas at the Pediatric Branch of the National Cancer Institute, these tumors, like other pediatric round cell tumors, are treated by
a combination of radiation therapy and chemotherapy.
Radiation-Induced Osteosarcoma
Radiation-induced osteosarcomas arise in a previously irradiated field and meet the general criteria of a radiation-induced sarcoma [i.e., they appear after a latent
period of 5 to 20 years, are documented to be secondary (different from the original one), and occur in a documented irradiated field]. Amendola and coworkers 304
from the University of Michigan reviewed 22,306 patients treated with radiation between 1934 and 1983 and reported 23 patients with radiation-associated sarcoma
(prevalence, 0.1%). The median latent period was 13 years (range, 3 to 34 years). The radiation doses ranged from 25 to 72 Gy. The data suggest that intensive
chemotherapy may have shortened the latency period.
In two nested case-control studies of 3-year cancer survivors from France and the United Kingdom, the risk of osteosarcoma was found to be a linear function of
radiation dose and alkylating agent chemotherapy. 305,306 The 20-year risk of osteosarcoma among survivors of retinoblastoma (7.2%), Ewing's sarcoma (5.4%), and
other bone tumors (2.2%) suggests a genetic influence in the induction of secondary osteosarcoma. However, the risk of developing bone sarcoma within 20 years for
the majority of survivors of childhood cancer is less than 0.9%.
The treatment of radiation-associated osteosarcoma is wide resection, when possible, combined with adjuvant chemotherapy. 307 A previously irradiated field presents
a unique challenge for the surgeon—choosing the best local option. The likelihood of local complications is greater in such cases.
CHONDROSARCOMA
Chondrosarcoma is the second most common primary malignant spindle cell tumor of bone. 2 Chondrosarcomas form a heterogeneous group of tumors whose basic
neoplastic tissue is cartilaginous without evidence of direct osteoid formation. 329 Occasionally, bone formation occurs from differentiation of cartilage. If evidence is
found of direct osteoid or bone production, the lesion is classified as an osteosarcoma. The five types of chondrosarcomas are central, peripheral, mesenchymal,
differentiated, and clear cell. 2,3 and 4,10 The classic chondrosarcomas are central (arising within a bone) or peripheral (arising from the surface of a bone). The other
three are variants and have distinct histologic and clinical characteristics.
Both central and peripheral chondrosarcomas can arise as primary tumors or secondary to underlying neoplasm. Seventy-six percent of primary chondrosarcomas
arise centrally. 2,10,11 and 12,308 Secondary chondrosarcomas most often arise from benign cartilage tumors. The multiple forms of benign osteochondromas or
enchondromas have a higher rate of malignant transformation than the corresponding solitary lesions. 11,12,58,215
Central and Peripheral Chondrosarcomas
2

2

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS. One-half of all chondrosarcomas occur in persons older than 40 years of age. ,216 Only 3.8% occur in those younger than 20 years. The

most common sites are the pelvis (31%), femur (21%), and shoulder girdle (13%). 11,12,215,216 Chondrosarcomas are the most common malignant tumors of the sternum
and scapula. The clinical presentation varies. Peripheral chondrosarcomas may become large without causing pain, and local symptoms develop only because of
mechanical irritation. Pelvic chondrosarcomas are often large and present with referred pain to the back or thigh, sciatica secondary to sacral plexus irritation, urinary
symptoms from bladder neck involvement, unilateral edema due to iliac vein obstruction, or as a painless abdominal mass. Conversely, central chondrosarcomas
present with dull pain; a mass is rare. Pain, which indicates active growth, is an ominous sign of a central cartilage lesion. This cannot be overemphasized. An adult
with a plain radiograph suggestive of a “benign” cartilage tumor but associated with pain most likely has a chondrosarcoma.
HISTOLOGY AND GRADING. Chondrosarcomas are categorized as grade I, II, or III. The majority of chondrosarcomas are either grade I or II.

1,10,11 and 12,215,216,308
The

metastatic rate of moderate-grade lesions is 15% to 40%; in high-grade lesions, it is 75%. 1,10,11,12,86,215 Grade III lesions have the same metastatic potential as
osteosarcomas. 11,308
Because cartilage tumors are difficult to grade histologically, 10,215,216 some investigators have attempted to apply cytologic, histochemical, and biochemical analysis to
evaluate these lesions. 215,309,310 Sanerkin 215 described a combination of cytologic and histologic criteria. He emphasized that cytologic analysis evaluates nuclear
abnormalities better than conventional histologic sections, whereas histologic evaluation of bone-tumor interface is the best predictor of local aggressiveness.
Krocberg and colleagues 311 performed a retrospective study of DNA content of 45 chondrosarcomas as an indicator of malignancy by evaluating diploid (normal DNA
content) and hyperploid (abnormal increase in DNA) cells and correlating the findings to 10-year survival. Regardless of tumor grade, size, and location, patients with
diploid cells had a better prognosis than those with hyperploid cells. A preliminary report assessing the malignancy of cartilage tumor by flow cytometry to determine
the percentage of diploid, tetraploid, and aneuploid cells indicates that it may be a promising method of grading chondrosarcomas. 311
RADIOGRAPHIC DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION. Central chondrosarcomas have two distinct radiologic patterns.

312

One is a small, well-defined lytic lesion with a narrow
zone of transition and surrounding sclerosis with faint calcification. This is the most common malignant bone tumor that may appear radiographically benign. The
second type has no sclerotic border and is difficult to localize. The key sign of malignancy is endosteal scalloping. It is difficult to diagnose on plain radiographs and
may go undetected for a long period. In contrast, peripheral chondrosarcoma is recognized easily as a large, calcified mass protruding from a bone. Its differential
diagnosis includes large benign osteochondroma, parosteal osteosarcoma, and juxtacortical myositis ossificans. Correlation of clinical, radiographic, and histologic
data is essential for accurate diagnosis and evaluation of the aggressiveness of cartilage tumor. Proximal or axial location, skeletal maturity, and pain point toward
malignancy, even though the cartilage may appear benign.
prognosis. Metastatic potential tends to correlate with the histologic grade of the lesions.

10,11,12,308
Marcove et al. 308 reported on long-term follow up of 113

chondrosarcomas of the proximal femur and the pelvis. The survival rates in patients with grade I, II, or III lesions were 47%, 38%, and 15%, respectively; the overall
survival rate was 52%. No significant difference was noted between grades I and II; however, the mortality rate for grade III was significantly higher ( P <.02) than for
the other two. Eleven of 59 deaths occurred after 5 years. The authors emphasized that the meaningful survival interval should be considered 10 or 15 years. No
relationship between grade, age, gender, or location was found, and there was no statistical difference between primary and secondary chondrosarcomas. Adequacy
of surgical removal was the main determinant of recurrence. In general, chondrosarcomas occurring during childhood have a worse prognosis than those of adult
onset. 313
In a review of 125 chondrosarcomas at the Rizzoli Institute, Gitellis and colleagues 13 reported that adequacy of treatment was the main determinant of local
recurrence, length of survival, and length of disease-free interval. Patients adequately treated had a 6% local recurrence rate, whereas the recurrence rate among
those inadequately treated was 69%. The 10-year survival rates were 78% (adequately treated) versus 61% (inadequately treated). No relation between local
recurrence and grade was determined.
In the largest reported series of chondrosarcomas from one institution, Bjornsson et al. 314 from the Mayo Clinic reported the experience and the clinical pathologic
profiles of 344 patients with chondrosarcomas over 80 years. They analyzed the anatomic site, clinical history, and overall survival. Survival analysis was limited to
233 patients whose primary tumors were treated at the Mayo Clinic. The minimum follow-up was 5 years. The overall 5-year survival rate was 77%. Local recurrence
developed in 19.7% of patients, and metastatic lesions in 13.7%. The recurrence rate was higher for tumors of the shoulder and pelvis than for tumors of long bones.
Histologic tumor grade was an important predictor of local recurrence and metastases.
In general, peripheral chondrosarcomas have a lower grade than central lesions. Gitellis et al. 13 reported that 43% of peripheral lesions, compared with 13% of central
lesions, were grade I. The 10-year survival rate among those with peripheral lesions was 77%, and among those with central lesions was 32%. Secondary

chondrosarcomas arising from osteochondromas also have a low malignant potential. Eighty-five percent are grade I. Garrison and associates 58 reported that only 3%
of 75 patients with secondary chondrosarcomas from an osteochondroma developed metastases, although 12% died of local recurrence.
TREATMENT. The treatment of chondrosarcomas is surgical removal.

10,12,308,313,315
No reports of effective adjuvant chemotherapy have been published. Resection

guidelines for high-grade chondrosarcomas are similar to those for osteosarcoma. The shoulder and pelvic girdle are the most common sites for chondrosarcomas.
This, combined with the fact that chondrosarcomas tend to be low grade, make them amenable to limb-sparing procedures. Lesions of the ribs and sternum are
treated by wide excision. Cryosurgery, a technique using liquid nitrogen after thorough curettage of the lesion, has been used for central, low-grade
chondrosarcomas.131,132 There have been a few reports of effective radiation therapy for axial chondrosarcomas and, more recently, encouraging reports using
fractionated proton radiation therapy for the low-grade chondrosarcomas arising at the base of the skull. 316 The Massachusetts General Hospital group report a 5-year
local control rate of 82% and a 10-year local control rate of 58% among 28 patients with low-grade base-of-skull chondrosarcomas treated to approximately 69 CGE
(cobalt Gy equivalent) using the proton beam. 317 High-grade chondrosarcomas warrant consideration of adjuvant chemotherapy.
Limb-Sparing Procedures: Specific Anatomic Sites
The four most common sites of chondrosarcomas are the pelvis, proximal femur, shoulder girdle, and diaphyseal portions of long bones. The unique characteristics of
each are described in the following sections.
PELVIS. The pelvis consists of three areas: ilium, periacetabulum, and pubic rami ( Fig. 39.2-13). Each site may be resected independent of the others.

30,316
Resections

are classified as type I (iliac wing), type II (acetabulum), or type III (public rami, pelvic floor). Bone scan most accurately determines specific bony involvement,
whereas CT and MRI delineate the extraosseous component. Contraindications to resection are vascular (iliac artery and vein), peritoneal, and sacroiliac joint and/or
sarcoplexus involvement.

FIGURE 39.2-13. Segmental resection for pelvic tumors.

The retroperitoneal space is explored first to determine resectability. Type I resection is performed by a supraacetabular osteotomy and disarticulation of the
sacroiliac joint. Type II resection may require removal of the femoral head; intraarticular involvement of the hip joint by tumor is evaluated by arthrotomy before
finalizing the surgical plan. Type II and III resections require mobilization of the iliac vessels and femoral nerve. Care must be taken to protect these structures. Type
III procedure requires mobilization of the bladder and urethra before resection. Bilateral pelvic floor resection may be used for chondrosarcomas arising from the
midline of the symphysis pubis, in which case urethral resection and reconstruction may be required. Partial cystectomy may be necessary.
Long-term results of these procedures have been published by Enneking and Dunham, 30 who reported that local recurrence was only 4% if adequate margins were
obtained. Function was nearly normal if the hip joint was preserved. If the hip joint was removed and fusion was obtained, results were good. A saddle prosthesis ( Fig.
39.2-14) has been developed, permitting reconstruction after periacetabular resections with minimal morbidity. 318

FIGURE 39.2-14. Limb-sparing resection for a large periacetabular chondrosarcoma involving the pelvic floor. A: Computed tomography shows acetabular destruction
by a large tumor mass (arrows) with involvement of the pubic rami. B: The patient was treated by an internal hemipelvectomy (type II and III resection). C: A
custom-made saddle prosthesis was used for the reconstruction. This is a new type of pelvic prosthesis that has made pelvic reconstruction more reliable with less
morbidity than other techniques.

Treatment of malignant tumors of the pelvis is one of the greatest challenges in musculoskeletal oncology. Kawai and coworkers 319 reviewed 102 patients with
localized pelvic sarcomas who underwent surgical excision at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. Chondrosarcoma was the most common diagnosis. They
evaluated the prognostic factors for local recurrence, metastasis, and survival. The 5-year survival rate for sarcomas of pelvic chondrosarcomas was 65%. An
inadequate surgical margin was the only independent prognostic factor for local recurrence. For distant metastases, surgical stage (i.e., histologic grade and site) is
an independent prognostic factor.
PROXIMAL FEMUR. Chondrosarcoma of the proximal femur can often be treated successfully by resection and prosthetic replacement. A lateral trephine biopsy is

recommended. Care must be taken to avoid intraarticular contamination. A posterior approach should be avoided because of potential contamination of the posterior
flap in the event a hemipelvectomy is required.
SHOULDER. The technique of resection of chondrosarcomas of the proximal humerus and scapula is similar to that described for osteosarcomas. In low-grade,

intracompartmental (stage IA) tumors, preservation of the deltoid, rotator cuff musculature, and glenoid is possible, and alternatives for reconstruction are more
variable. Endoprostheses, fibula autografts, and allografts all have a high rate of success. 35,36,37,38,39 and 40,139,140 and 141,254,255
DIAPHYSEAL SEGMENTS OF THE TIBIA, FEMUR, AND HUMERUS. Central diaphyseal chondrosarcomas can be adequately treated by segmental resection without

sacrificing the adjacent joint. Because the ends of the bones are not involved, function is excellent. Reconstruction is performed by allografts or autografts combined
with internal fixation.
CRYOSURGERY. Marcove et al.

130,131 and 132
pioneered the technique of cryosurgery for bone tumors. This method involves thorough curettage and cryotherapy of the

cavity with liquid nitrogen. With increasing experience, the indications were expanded to low-grade intramedullary cartilage tumors as well as to some high-grade
lesions. With these indications, they have treated 30 chondrosarcomas with only one local recurrence. The major advantages of cryosurgery are preservation of bone

stock and the avoidance of resection.
Schreuder et al. 320 reported the experience of 26 benign and low-grade intramedullary chondrosarcomas treated with curettage and cryosurgery. Fourteen
enchondromas and nine grade I chondrosarcomas were treated with curettage, cryosurgery, and bone grafting. After a follow-up of 26 months, no recurrences were
observed. The most common complication was postoperative fracture (two cases). All bone grafts had incorporated, resulting in full weight-bearing capacity and
excellent functional results. These authors emphasized that the preoperative assessment of these lesions is essential and that only low-grade cartilage tumors should
be treated with a cryosurgical technique.
Variants of Chondrosarcoma
CLEAR CELL CHONDROSARCOMA. Clear cell chondrosarcoma, the rarest form of chondrosarcoma, is a slow-growing, locally recurrent tumor resembling a

chondroblastoma but with some malignant potential. 321 It generally occurs in adults. The most difficult clinical problem of this entity is early recognition. It is often
confused with chondroblastoma. Metastases occur only after multiple local recurrences. Primary treatment is wide excision. Systemic therapy is not required.
MESENCHYMAL CHONDROSARCOMA. Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma is a rare, aggressive variant of chondrosarcoma characterized by a biphasic histologic pattern

(i.e., small, compact cells intermixed with islands of cartilaginous matrix). 322,323 and 324 It has a predilection for flat bones; long, tubular bones are rarely affected. 216 It
tends to occur in younger individuals and has high rates of metastatic potential. Harwood and colleagues 322 reported that 8 of 17 patients died within 1 year of
diagnosis. The 10-year survival rate is 28%. 322 This entity responds favorably to radiotherapy. It is hypothesized that the round cell component, similar to other round
cell sarcomas, is relatively radiosensitive. Treatment is surgical removal combined with adjuvant chemotherapy. Radiotherapy is recommended if the tumor cannot be
completely removed.324
Approximately 10% of chondrosarcomas may be dedifferentiated into a fibrosarcoma or osteosarcoma. 2,10,11,57 This occurs in older individuals and is highly fatal.
Surgical treatment is similar to that described for other high-grade sarcomas. Adjuvant therapy is warranted.
Radiation Therapy in the Treatment of Chondrosarcoma
Unresectable or inoperable chondrosarcomas arising within the axial skeleton and pelvic and/or shoulder girdle can be controlled, and in some cases cured, by
radiation therapy. A unique situation is chondrosarcomas of the facial bones and skull, in which a combination of radiotherapy and surgery has been shown to be
successful.
Although chondrosarcomas have generally been considered radioresistant, data exist to show that some are radiocurable. 324 Among 38 patients undergoing radical
irradiation, with or without concurrent chemotherapy, at the Princess Margaret Hospital, 5- and 10-year actuarial survival rates of 41% and 36%, respectively, were
achieved. Median survival was 46 months. 324 The best results, a 48% 5-year actuarial survival rate, were obtained in the group with favorable (well and moderately
differentiated) histology. Conversely, for those with unfavorable (mesenchymal and poorly differentiated) histology, the 5-year survival rate was only 22%. Radical
radiotherapy was defined as a minimum of 40 Gy in 4 or more weeks of megavoltage therapy. Of the 38 patients treated, 17 developed local recurrence. The authors
recommend 50 Gy in 4 weeks with treatment to the whole bone if possible and, if not, at least a 5-cm margin of normal bone. These authors noted tumor regression
continued slowly for 2 to 3 years after therapy.
McNaney et al., 325 from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, reported 20 patients with chondrosarcoma treated with photons and/or neutrons, with or without
chemotherapy. The doses of radiation administered ranged from 4000 to 7000 cGy. Thirteen of 20 (65%) were surviving at 30 months' median follow-up. Among the
11 patients treated with radiotherapy alone, six survived (54%). Six patients, all of whom had received photon therapy alone, developed local failure. No local failures
were reported among the four patients treated with a mixed beam of photons and neutrons. Similarly, Hug et al. 326 reported 100% local control and disease-free status
for six patients with axial skeleton chondrosarcoma treated with a mean target dose of 73.9 CGE delivered using a 160 MeV proton beam and 23 MV megavoltage
beam.
After radical irradiation, clinical regression of tumor is slow and may take months to complete. Radiographically, the affected bone never returns to normal. The
combination of extremely slow regression of tumor with a persistent radiologic defect makes follow-up and assessment of response difficult. No rebiopsy data are
available to document long-term sterilization of these tumors. Radiotherapy for chondrosarcoma can provide palliation. In such cases, high doses (in the range of
5000 cGy in 4 to 5 weeks, or its equivalent) are necessary; low doses for symptomatic relief are ineffective. 327
Ryall et al. 328 used radiation and the radiosensitizer razoxane (ICRF 159) in eight patients with 12 chondrosarcomas. Seven tumors in five patients achieved complete
or partial remission after 4500 to 6000 cGy. Two or the responders were disease-free 2.5 years after treatment.
GIANT CELL TUMOR OF BONE
GCT is an aggressive, locally recurrent tumor with a low metastatic potential. 14,15 and 16,64 and 65,216,336 It consists of spindle-shaped and ovoid cells uniformly interspersed
with multinucleated giant cells. Giant cell sarcoma of bone is a term that refers to the de novo, malignant GCT, not the tumor that arises from the transformation of a
GCT previously thought to be benign. These two lesions are separate clinical entities.
Clinical Characteristics
GCTs occur slightly more often in females than in males. Pain, mass, local tenderness, and decreased motion in the adjacent joint are the most common clinical
symptoms. Eighty percent of GCTs in the long bones occur after skeletal maturity, and 75% of these develop around the knee joint. 3,63 An effusion or pathologic
fracture, uncommon with other sarcomas, is common with GCTs. GCTs occasionally occur in the vertebrae (2% to 5%) and the sacrum (10%). 2,3 and 4
Grading and Pathologic Characteristics
Jaffe4 attempted to grade GCTs as grade I (completely benign), grade II (borderline), and grade III (frankly sarcomatous). In general, grades I and II do not correlate
well with biologic behavior. There is also a poor correlation between the histologic pattern and the tendency for recurrence or malignant transformation. 14,15,64,216
Nineteen percent to 25% of GCTs have some osteoid production. 216 When osteoid formation is noted, care must be exercised in differentiating a GCT from an
osteosarcoma. Conversely, an osteosarcoma with giant cells may be misinterpreted as a benign GCT. No correlation has been found between osteoid formation and
increased risk of recurrence or metastasis. Necrosis or hemorrhage is often noted. Neither has a relationship to malignant potential or local recurrence rate. 64
Natural History
Although GCTs are rarely malignant de novo (2% to 8%),14,330 they may undergo transformation and demonstrate malignant potential histologically and clinically after
multiple local recurrences. 14,15 and 16 Between 8.6% and 22% of known GCTs become malignant after local recurrence. 14,15 and 16,216,330 This rate decreases to less than
10% if patients who have undergone radiotherapy are excluded from the series. Hutter noted that 40% of malignant GCTs were malignant at the first recurrence 15; the
remainder had become malignant by the second or third recurrence. Thus, each recurrence increases the risk of malignant transformation of typical GCT, especially if
the transformation occurs after radiation therapy. Local recurrence of a GCT is determined by the adequacy of surgical removal rather than histologic grade.
Radiographic and Clinical Evaluation
Giant cell tumors are eccentric lytic lesions without matrix production. They have poorly defined borders with a wide area of transition. They are juxtaepiphyseal with a
metaphyseal component. Although the cortex is expanded and appears destroyed at surgery, it is usually found to be attenuated but intact. Periosteal elevation is
rare; soft tissue extension is common.

Treatment
Treatment of GCT of bone is surgical removal. Resection is curative in 90% of these tumors, 14,15 whereas curettage, with or without bone grafts, has a recurrence rate
of 40% to 75%.14,15 and 16,64,331 Johnson and Dahlin 16 reported a recurrence rate of 29% within 1 year of curettage and of 54.1% within 5 years. O'Donnell and
colleagues 332 reviewed the literature from 1970 to 1990 and reported an overall recurrence rate of approximately 40%.
Although en bloc excision offers a reliable cure, routine resection is not recommended. 331,332 and 333 Primary resection of a joint has a significant morbidity. It is
recommended for GCT of the proximal radius and fibula, distal ulna, tubular bones of the hand and foot, coccyx, sacrum, and pelvic bones. Under certain situations, a
curettage is reasonable. If the lesion heals, resection is avoided. In general, curettage does not rule out a later curative resection. Today, the technique of curettage is
more extensive than previously performed. Curettage is accomplished through a large cortical window, equal to the length of the bony defect, using both mechanical
curettage and a mechanical burr. This extensive technique has been termed curettage/resection and has decreased the rate of local recurrence to approximately 15%
to 25%. Bone graft and PMMA are used to reconstruct the surgical defect.
O'Donnell et al. 332 reviewed the experience at the Massachusetts General Hospital of 60 patients with GCTs treated by curettage and packing with PMMA. The overall
rate of local recurrence was 25% (15 of 60 patients) occurring at an average of 4 years. Risk factors for local recurrence were pathologic fracture, stage III disease,
anatomic site, and the use of adjuvant treatment. The distal radius and the proximal tibia had the highest rate of local recurrence: 50% (five of ten patients) and 28%
(7 of 25 patients), respectively. These authors emphasized that adjuvant treatment with a high-speed burr or PMMA, or both, after curettage decreased the local
recurrence rate from 42% (8 of 19 patients) to 17% (7 of 41 patients). They concluded that PMMA alone did not reduce the rate of local recurrence, but that the use of
a wide curettage combined with additional curettage with a high-speed burr is necessary.
Malawer et al.,334 in a multicenter study of 100 cases of GCTs of the extremities (treated with wide curettage, high-speed burr, and either a single or double cycle of
cryosurgery with liquid nitrogen), reported a local recurrence rate of 9% (9 of 100 patients). They used the direct-pour technique as described by Marcove. 131,132
Reconstruction of the surgical defect was performed with PMMA (combined with internal fixation in most cases). The secondary fracture rate was 5%. Only two
patients required a secondary resection and prosthetic replacement. These authors recommend liquid nitrogen adjuvant after curettage in the treatment of GCTs.
Amputation is reserved for massive recurrence, malignant transformation, or infection. Because of the biologic propensity for malignant transformation, radiation is
reserved for specific lesions, usually lesions of the spine, that cause bone destruction in a confined area and can lead to spinal cord compression and severe
deformity.335 Thus, treatment of GCT of the vertebrae and sacrum must be individualized. A combination of surgical excision and cryosurgery or radiotherapy is
required to eradicate the tumor and prevent neurologic impairment. 117
Cryosurgery
Cryosurgery has been used more successfully for GCTs than for any other type of bone tumor. 130,131 and 132,334 Marcove131,132 developed the technique of cryosurgery
because of the high recurrence rates after curettage and the significant risk of sarcomatous degeneration in GCTs treated by irradiation. He found cryosurgery
effective in eradicating the tumor while preserving joint motion and avoiding resection or amputation. He reported a 17-year experience of 100 GCTs treated by
thorough curettage and cryosurgery. 131 He noted a recurrence rate of 16% in the first 50 cases and 2% in the following 50 cases. The major complications of
cryosurgery are necrosis of the adjacent bones, which are liable to develop a late pathologic fracture, and delayed union. The rate of secondary pathologic fracture
has been decreased by a combination of PMMA, augmentation, bone graft, internal fixation of the cavity, and postoperative use of a long-leg brace with a
quadrilateral socket. 336,337 Persson and Wouters 338 have reported curettage with PMMA augmentation of the bony defect with bony necrosis due to the heat of
polymerization. This technique may provide better local control than curettage alone.
Bickels and colleagues 333 reported 102 patients treated by curettage and cryosurgery at two institutions between 1983 and 1993. The surgical stage was I in 15
cases, II in 47 cases, and III in 40 cases. Sixteen percent of the patients had presented with local recurrences. The local recurrence rate among 86 patients treated
primarily with cryosurgery was 2.3%. There were six local recurrences among 16 patients who were referred with recurrent disease. The overall recurrence rate was
7.9%. The most common complication was pathologic fracture (5.9%). No pathologic fractures occurred when internal fixation was used along with PMMA. This study
emphasized that the overall function was good to excellent in 92% of the patients. All 102 patients were free of disease at final follow-up.
Cryosurgery is a powerful physical adjunct to curettage in the treatment of GCTs of bone. Bickels and colleagues 333 recommend routine use of cryosurgery for all
GCTs of long bones.
Giant Cell Tumors of the Sacrum
Giant cell tumors of the sacrum are difficult to treat. Patients often present with back pain, neurologic deficits, and rectal symptoms. The diagnosis is often delayed.
CT, MRI, and bone scintigraphy are required for accurate local anatomic staging. Turcotte et al. 339 reviewed the treatment of 26 patients treated at the Mayo Clinic
between 1960 and 1986 with an average follow-up of 7.8 years. Neurologic deficit was present in 88%. The local recurrence rate for patients treated by curettage was
33%. Twenty-one patients had radiation therapy; malignant transformation occurred in three. They suggested initial treatment is complete curettage. Radiation
therapy is recommended for incomplete resection and local recurrence. Resection of the sacrum should be reserved for extensive recurrences. The technique of
surgical resection of the sacrum is similar to the combined anterior and posterior approach described for chordomas.
RADIATION THERAPY. The specific indications for radiation include inoperable and incompletely resected lesions, and lesions that occur locally despite definitive

surgery. These situations are most likely to occur in the spine. 335 Doses of 35 to 50 Gy in 4 to 5.5 weeks using megavoltage equipment is recommended.
Although concern has been raised about malignant transformation after radiotherapy. 340,341,342,343,344,345,346,347,348 and 349 transformation also occurs independent of
radiation, most often after multiple local recurrences, suggesting that this observation is best explained by the natural history of the disease. 350
Giant cell tumor is not radioresistant, as was once believed. Local control rates range from 75% to 85% in more recent series. 339,342,343 and 344 The Princess Margaret
Hospital group has reported that local control was achieved in 13 of 14 patients with GCT treated with one course of megavoltage radiation. The disease in 12
patients was controlled for longer than 5 years. 342 The researchers observed no instance of malignant transformation. Larsson and colleagues 335 reported three
patients with GCT of the spine and sacrum treated by moderate doses of radiotherapy; all have done well. Similarly, the Gainesville group reports 12 of 16 tumors
(75%) controlled locally with 35 to 54 Gy, with no untoward complications or secondary sarcomas. 343 Several authors now suggest curettage, followed by planned
megavoltage radiation, as a good alternative to complex and difficult surgery.
MALIGNANT FIBROUS HISTIOCYTOMA
Clinical Characteristics
MFH is a high-grade bone tumor histologically similar to its soft tissue counterpart. 7,8 and 9 It is a disease of adulthood. The most common sites are the metaphyseal
ends of long bones, especially around the knee. AP values are normal. Pathologic fracture is common. Huvos 9 emphasized that a lytic metaphyseal lesion with a
pathologic fracture in an adult with a normal serum AP level suggests a primary MFH rather than an osteosarcoma or fibrosarcoma. MFH disseminates rapidly.
Spanier and colleagues 7 reported that 9 of 11 patients died of the tumor. The average disease-free survival was 6 months. One-third of patients (three of nine) with
pulmonary metastasis had lymph node dissemination. The author hypothesized that lymphatic spread was due to the histiocytic component of the tumor.
Radiographic Characteristics
MFH is an osteolytic lesion associated with marked cortical disruption, minimal cortical or periosteal reaction, and no evidence of matrix formation. 9 The extent of the
tumor routinely exceeds plain radiographic signs. McCarthy et al., 8 reporting on 35 patients with MFH, noted that four tumors were multicentric and four were

associated with bone infarcts.
Treatment
Today, MFH and osteosarcoma of bone are treated in much the same way. Data demonstrate that results of limb-sparing surgery for MFH of bone, as well as
responses to chemotherapy among MFH patients, are very similar to those of patients with primary osteosarcoma. Picci et al., 351 in the largest review to date,
evaluated the effects of neoadjuvant chemotherapy of MFH of bone and extremity osteosarcomas. They reported 51 patients treated with high-grade MFH of bone and
390 patients with high-grade osteosarcoma treated with identical regimens of neoadjuvant chemotherapy at the Rizzoli Institute between 1982 and 1994. All tumors
were located in the limbs. Preoperative chemotherapy was performed according to three successively activated regimens consisting of methotrexate and
cis-diamminedichlorplatinum II (CDP): MTX/CDP intraarterially, MTX/CDP plus Adriamycin, and MTX/CDP plus Adriamycin and ifosfamide). Rates of limb salvage
were approximately the same for MFH (92%) and osteosarcoma (85%). Although MFH showed a statistically significantly lower rate of good histologic response, the
rate of tumor necrosis for MFH was 90% or more [27% vs. 67% for osteosarcoma (P <.001)] for all three regimens. Despite this low chemosensitivity, the disease-free
survival rates for the two neoplasms were similar (67% vs. 65%). Nevertheless, the two tumors had similar prognoses when treated with chemotherapy regimens
based on methotrexate, cisplatinum, Adriamycin, and ifosfamide. The surgical procedures were both similar limb-sparing procedures. This study emphasized that
induction chemotherapy, followed by limb-sparing surgery and subsequent postoperative chemotherapy, was just as effective for MFH of bone as for the
osteosarcomas. 339
Bacci et al., 352,353 also from the Rizzoli Institute, reported on 65 patients treated with MFH of bone in the extremities with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The limb-salvage
rate was 89% (58 patients) and amputation rate was 11% in seven patients. The histiologic response to preoperative chemotherapy was good (90% or more tumor
necrosis) in 16 patients (25%) and poor in 49 patients (75%). At a median follow-up of 7 years, 40 patients (69%) remained free of disease and 20 patients
experienced relapse (18 metastases and two local recurrences followed by metastases). The rate of disease-free survival wassignificantly higher for patients who had
a good response than for those who had a poor response (94% vs. 61%). Similarly, these authors concluded that a high percentage of patients with MFH of the
extremities can be cured with neoadjuvant chemotherapy and that it is usually possible to avoid amputation. Similarly, Nishida and colleagues 354 from the Mayo Clinic
reviewed their experience with MFH of the extremities and reported that the overall prognosis for patients with MFH was not significantly different from that of patients
with osteosarcoma. The primary approach to the treatment of MFH of bone is similar to that of osteosarcoma—wide surgical resection (usually limb-sparing surgery)
combined with pre- and postoperative chemotherapy. Similar chemotherapeutic regimens are recommended.
FIBROSARCOMA OF BONE
Clinical Characteristics
Fibrosarcoma of bone is a rare entity characterized by interlacing bundles of collagen fibers (herringbone pattern) without any evidence of tumor bone or osteoid
formation.5 Fibrosarcoma occurs in middle age. The long bones are most affected. Fifteen percent of tumors are found in the bones of the head and neck. 216
Fibrosarcomas occasionally arise in conjunction with an underlying disease, such as fibrous dysplasia, Paget's disease, bone infarcts, osteomyelitis, and
postirradiation bone and GCT. 5 Fibrosarcoma may be either central or cortical (periosteal). The histologic grade is a good prognosticator of metastatic potential.
Huvos and Higinbotham5 reported overall survival rates of 27% and 52% for central and peripheral lesions, respectively. Late metastases do occur, and 10- and
15-year survival rates vary. In general, periosteal tumors have a better prognosis than central lesions.
Radiographic Features
Fibrosarcoma is a radiolucent lesion that shows minimal periosteal and cortical reaction. The radiographic appearance closely correlates with the histologic grade of
the tumor.5 Low-grade tumors are well-defined, whereas high-grade lesions demonstrate indistinct margins and bone destruction similar to that of osteolytic
osteosarcoma. In general, plain radiographs underestimate the extent of the lesion. Pathologic fracture is common (30%) owing to the lack of matrix formation.
Differential diagnosis includes GCT, ABC, MFH, and osteolytic osteosarcoma. 5,6
Fibrosarcoma of bone is primarily managed surgically. Irradiation is recommended for inoperable tumors, for patients with postsurgical residual disease, and for
palliation.
MALIGNANT HEMANGIOENDOTHELIOMA OF BONE
Malignant hemangioendothelioma of bone (also referred to as epithelioid hemangioepitheliod sarcoma or histiocytoid hemangioma) comprises only 0.5% to 1.0% of
primary malignant bone tumors. 355,356,357 and 358 More than one-third of these lesions arise in the long, tubular bones, especially those of the lower extremity. 356,358
Incidence peaks in the third decade of life, but the tumor can present at any age. Multicentric lesions are common. The treatment of choice has been surgery, often in
combination with radiotherapy. 358 In rare cases, radiotherapy has been the sole modality of treatment. 355,357,358 Radiation doses in the range of 50 to 60 Gy are
associated with long-term local control. Chemotherapy plays no significant role in treatment.
CHORDOMA
Chordoma is a rare neoplasm arising from notochordal remnants in the midline of the neural axis and involving the adjacent bone. The ends of the spine are the most
common sites. The sacrococcus and the base of the skull (35%) near the spheno-occipital area are most commonly involved, accounting for 50% and 35%,
respectively, of all chordomas. 216 Histologically, the physaliferous cell is pathognomonic. Large areas of syncytial strands of cells lying in a mass of mucus are
typically present. Myxoid chondrosarcoma and metastatic carcinoma must be differentiated. This tumor is highly fatal because of the high rate of local recurrence and
local complications. 359,360,361 and 362 Death is most commonly due to local disease. 359 Gray and colleagues 362 reviewed 222 cases from the literature and noted that only
two patients were disease-free at 10 years. Average survival was 5.7 years. Mindell 359 emphasized that the main malignant potential of chordomas resides in their
critical locations adjacent to important structures, their locally aggressive nature, and their extremely high rate of recurrence. Chordomas at the base of the skull are
often described as chondroid chordomas. Patients with these lesions at this site tend to survive longer than those with the sacrococcygeal tumors.
The most common complaint of patients with sacrococcygeal tumors is dull pain; constipation is an occasional symptom. Bladder and sensory loss are late
complaints. Clinical suspicion is the key to early diagnosis. Rectal examination characteristically reveals a large presacral mass. Spheno-occipital tumors present with
signs of cranial nerve or pituitary dysfunction, or both. CT and MRI are essential for accurate evaluation. Myelography is used to determine intraspinal extension. A
transrectal biopsy should not be performed because of potential contamination. A small midline posterior incision or trocar biopsy is recommended.
Treatment
The first surgical procedure has the best chance of cure. 361,362 Inadequate surgery results in local recurrence, with little chance of subsequent surgical removal.
Sacrococcygeal tumors are best removed by a combined abdominosacral approach, as described by Localio and colleagues. 360,361 They emphasized wide excision of
the sacrum one level higher than the lesion. A lateral position is used. The rectum can be mobilized and the iliac vessels controlled anteriorly. The rectum may be
removed with the sacrum if necessary. Guterberg et al. 364 reported that if only one-half of the first sacral vertebra remains bilaterally, the pelvic girdle is still stable
enough to allow immediate mobilization. DeVries and associates 363 reported two long-term survivors (7 years and 10 years) after cryosurgery of sacral chordomas.
Radiation Therapy
Because local recurrence is common with chordomas, radiation therapy is an integral treatment modality, particularly for tumors of the base of skull and
spheno-occipital region. Results of conventional radiation therapy have been disappointing. Heffelfinger et al. 365 reported on 36 patients with nonchondroid varieties
of chordomas of the base of skull, none of whom were rendered free of disease by surgery, radiation, or a combination thereof. However, the chondroid variant is
more sensitive; of 19 patients with chondroid chordomas, seven were alive and six were disease-free.
Amendola et al.,366 reported on 21 patients with a 5-year survival rate of 50% but a disappointing 10-year survival rate of only 20%. This is not surprising, because
chordomas are relatively slow-growing. In fact, long-term survival free of tumor regrowth over 10 years is relatively rare. Amendola et al. emphasized the importance

of using CT in planning the radiation field, administration of high radiation doses (i.e., 5500 to 7000 cGy with megavoltage equipment), and use of irradiation
immediately after surgery to prolong local control, rather than reserving it until recurrence. The Massachusetts General Hospital experience of 48 patients is similar to
that reported by others; 50% of the patients survived years or more. 367 Radiation doses varied from 4500 to 8040 cGy, but even with high doses, a 45% incidence of
local recurrence was reported. The Princess Margaret Hospital group investigated various fraction schedules in an effort to impact local control. They used
conventionally fractionated radiation at a median dose of 50 Gy in 25 fractions over 5 weeks, and a hyperfractionated course of 1 Gy over 4 hours four times per day,
with a median dose of 40 Gy in 44 fractions over 14 days. No difference was found between the conventional or hyperfractionated regimen with respect to
symptomatic response or progression-free interval. With a median survival of 65 months, the authors concluded that external-beam radiation provided useful palliation
but was rarely curative. 368,369
Investigators now advocate using precision heavy-charged particle irradiation, particularly for chordoma of the basisphenoid region and cervical spine. The
Massachusetts General Hospital experience now includes 68 patients, 40 with chordomas and 28 with low-grade chondrosarcomas of the basosphenoid region and
cervical spine, who have been treated with proton-beam radiation therapy at a median tumor dose of 69 CGE. The actuarial 5-year disease-free survival rate is 76%,
whereas the local control rate is 82%. 370,371 No difference was found in local control between those patients with low-grade chondrosarcoma and those with either
chondroid or nonchondroid chordoma. 370 Hug and the Massachusetts General Hospital investigators 326 have reported axial skeleton chordoma treated with a myxoid
proton and photon beam (mean dose of 73.9 CGE). Five of 14 patients (36%) had local recurrence, and two of the five developed distant metastases. The 5-year
actuarial local control and overall survival rates were 53% and 50%, respectively, for the chordoma patients. Other groups also report local control and reversal of
neurologic symptoms and signs using 75.5 Gy proton therapy for chordoma of the clivus. 372 Proton therapy should be considered after initial surgical removal for
inoperable clivus chordoma.
Stereotactic radiosurgery has been tried for skull-based tumors and is a potential means to provide symptomatic relief for small-volume (4 cm or smaller) tumors. 373,374
SMALL ROUND CELL SARCOMAS OF BONE
Round cell sarcomas of bone behave differently than spindle cell sarcomas and require different therapeutic management. 375,376 These tumors consist of poorly
differentiated small cells without matrix production. They present radiographically as osteolytic lesions. These lesions are best treated with radiation and
chemotherapy; surgery is reserved for special situations. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and Ewing's sarcoma are the two most common small cell sarcomas. The
differential diagnosis of all round cell sarcomas includes metastatic neuroblastoma, metastatic undifferentiated carcinoma, histiocytosis, small cell osteosarcoma,
osteomyelitis, and multiple myeloma.
LYMPHOMAS OF BONE (DIFFUSE LARGE CELL LYMPHOMA)
Lymphoma of bone (previously called reticulum cell sarcoma of bone) accounts for only 5% of the primary bone tumors. In general, lymphoma presenting in bone is a
sign of disseminated (stage IV) disease; occasionally, it may be a true solitary lesion defined as “involvement of single extralymphatic organ or site” (stage IE). 375,376
Reimer and coworkers375 at the National Cancer Institute reported that only 1 of 12 patients presenting with bone lymphomas had a true solitary lesion. Sweet and
colleagues 376 from the University of Chicago reported that 50% of so-called “solitary” lesions were associated with disease elsewhere. Sweet et al. presented a useful
algorithm for the evaluation and treatment of bone lymphomas. They emphasized that all patients with a presumed solitary lymphoma of bone should undergo a
thorough evaluation for other involvement. 376
Treatment is based on extent of disease. Stage IE lesions have traditionally been treated with radiotherapy, with a reported 90% cure rate. 375 The role of surgery is
limited to obtaining adequate tissue for diagnosis and treatment of pathologic fracture. The technique of biopsy is important to avoid secondary fracture through
potentially irradiated bone. Biopsy for a suspected round cell tumor should always include a frozen section and additional material for electron microscopy, tissue
culture, and immunophenotyping. Patients presenting with pathologic fractures require fixation. To prevent late fractures, all patients treated with radiotherapy should
be protected with a brace until reossification occurs.
Radiation Therapy
Local control of the primary tumor with retention of good function of the affected part is commonly achieved after radiation therapy. Radiation therapy is administered
to the entire bone and soft tissue extent with a dose of 4000 cGy and a boost to the original tumor area of 500 cGy. Regional lymph nodes should be included in the
radiation port if they are adjacent to the area treated or if clinically involved. Mendenhall et al. 377 from the University of Florida achieved local and regional control in
all irradiated sites among 21 patients with primary bone lymphomas. Two patients relapsed in apparently uninvolved regional lymph node sites that had not been
included in the primary treatment portal.
Patients with lymphoma of the bone should be considered to have systemic disease; accordingly, they require chemotherapy. Patients treated with radiation and
Adriamycin-based chemotherapy have long-term survival in the 90% to 100% range. The Dana Farber Cancer Center reported 90% lymphoma-free survival at 8
years, with radiation and the Adriamycin, prednisone, and Oncovin combination regimen. 378 Similarly, the Bone Tumor Center in Bologna, Italy, reports 88%
disease-free survival at 7.5 years with radiation and Adriamycin, vincristine, and cyclophosphamide. 379 Patients presenting with monostotic disease have a better
outcome than those with polystoic disease. 380,381 Although a randomized controlled clinical trial testing radiation therapy and chemotherapy versus radiation therapy
alone has not been performed, combined modality is commonly used in adults with primary and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the bone. 383,384 The international index
parameters of age 60 years or younger, normal lactate dehydrogenase, and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0 are prognostic factors for
good outcome.382 The Dana Farber investigators reported second bone tumors 5 and 7.5 years after combined modality therapy. Because of this concern and the
success of intensive combination chemotherapy, investigators have begun to question the need for primary radiation therapy among children responding to multiagent
chemotherapy.385,386 The Pediatric Oncology Study Group 387 studied the impact of localized bone radiotherapy in children with early-stage primary non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma, all of whom received multiagent chemotherapy. Thirty of 31 were disease-free and all survived, thus leading these investigators to recommend a 9-week
chemotherapy regimen of modest intensity without radiation therapy as definitive treatment of children with localized primary lymphoma of the bone.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, et al. Cancer statistics, 1999. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:8.
2. Dahlin DC. Bone tumors: general aspects and data on 6221 cases, 3rd ed. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas Publisher, 1978.
3. Lichtenstein L. Bone tumors, 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby, 1977.
4. Jaffe HL. Tumors and tumorous conditions of the bone and joints. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1958.
5. Huvos AG, Higinbotham NL. Primary fibrosarcoma of bone. A clinicopathologic study of 130 patients. Cancer 1975;35:837.
6. Wilner D. Fibrosarcoma. In: Wilner D, ed. Radiology of bone tumors and allied disorders. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1982:2291.
7. Spanier SS, Enneking WF, Enriquez P. Primary malignant fibrous histiocytoma of bone. Cancer 1975;36:2084.
8. McCarthy EF, Matsuno T, Dorfman HD. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma of bone: a study of 35 cases. Hum Pathol 1979;10:57.
9. Huvos AG. Primary malignant fibrous histiocytoma of bone: clinicopathologic study of 18 patients. N Y State J Med 1976;76:552.
10. Shives TS, Wold LE, Dahlin DC, Beaubout JW. Chondrosarcoma and its variants. In: Sim FH, ed. Diagnosis and treatment of bone tumors: a team approach. Mayo Clinic Monograph.
Thorofare, NJ: Slack Inc., 1983:211.
11. Marcove RC. Chondrosarcoma: diagnosis and treatment. Orthop Clin North Am 1977;8:811.
12. Pritchard DJ, Lunke RJ, Taylor WF, et al. Chondrosarcoma: a clinicopathologic statistical analysis. Cancer 1980;45:149.
13. Gitellis S, Bertoni F, Chieti PP, et al. Chondrosarcoma of bone. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1981;63:1248.
14. Dahlin DC, Cupps RE, Johnson EW Jr. Giant cell tumor: a study of 195 cases. Cancer 1970;25:1061.
15. Hutter VP, Worcester JN Jr, Francis KC, et al. Benign and malignant giant cell tumor of bone. A clinicopathological analysis of the natural history of the disease. Cancer 1962;15:653.
16. Johnson EW Jr, Dahlin DC. Treatment of giant cell tumor of bone. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1959;41:895.
17. Nascimento AG, Huvos AC, Marcove RC. Primary malignant giant cell tumor of bone: a study of eight cases and review of the literature. Cancer 1979;44:1393.
18. Weingard DN, Rosenberg SA. Early lymphatic spread of osteogenic and soft tissue sarcomas. Surgery 1978;84:231.
19. Enneking WF, Spanier SS, Goodman MA. A system for the surgical staging of musculoskeletal sarcoma. Clin Orthop 1980;153:106.
20. Marcove RC, Rosen G. En bloc resection for osteogenic sarcoma. Cancer 1980;45:3040.
21. Malawer MM. Distal femoral osteogenic sarcoma, principles of soft tissue resection and reconstruction in conjunction with prosthetic replacement (adjuvant surgery). In: Chao EYS, ed. Design
and application of tumor prosthesis for bone and joint reconstruction. New York: Thieme-Stratton, 1983:297.
22. Morton DL, Eilber FR, Townsend CM Jr, et al. Limb salvage from a multidisciplinary treatment approach for skeletal and soft tissue sarcomas of the extremity. Ann Surg 1976;184:268.
23. Enneking WF, Dunham WK. Resection and reconstruction for primary neoplasms involving the innominate bone. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1978;60:731.
24. Marcove RC, Lewis MM, Rosen G, et al. Total femur and total knee replacement: a preliminary report. Clin Orthop 1977;126:147.
25. Eilber FR, Morton DL, Eckardt J, Grant T, Weisenburger T. Limb salvage for skeletal and soft tissue sarcomas. Multidisciplinary preoperative therapy. Cancer 1984;53:2579.

26. Eilber FR, Eckhardt J, Morton DL. Advances in the treatment of sarcomas of the extremities. Current status of limb salvage. Cancer 1984;54:2695.
27. Weisenberg TH, Eilber FR, Grant TT, et al. Multidisciplinary “limb salvage” treatment of soft tissue and skeletal sarcomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:1495.
28. Simon MA, Aschliman MA, Thomas N, et al. Limb salvage treatment versus amputation for osteosarcoma of the distal end of the femur. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1986;68:1331.
29. Enneking WF. Modification of the system for functional evaluation of surgical management of musculoskeletal tumors. In: Enneking WF, ed. Limb-sparing surgery for musculoskeletal tumors.
New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1987:626.
30. Enneking WF, Dunham WK. Resection and reconstruction for primary neoplasms involving the innominate bone. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1978;60:731.
31. Marcove RC, Lewis MM, Rosen G, et al. Total femur and total knee replacement. A preliminary report. Clin Orthop 1977;126:147.
32. Mankin HJ, Fogelson FS, Thrasher AZ, et al. Massive resection and allograft transplantation in the treatment of malignant bone tumors. N Engl J Med 1976;294:1247.
33. Watts HG. Introduction to resection of musculoskeletal sarcomas. Clin Orthop 1980; 153:31.
34. Enneking WF, Shirley PD. Resection-arthrodesis for malignant and potentially malignant lesions about the knee using an intramedullary rod and local bone graft. J Bone Joint Surg Am
1977;59:223.
35. Janeck CJ, Nelson CL. En bloc resection of shoulder girdle: technique and indications. Report of a case. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1972;54:1754.
36. Francis KC, Worcester JN Jr. Radical resection for tumors of the shoulder with preservation of a functional extremity. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1962;44:1423.
37. Marcove RC, Lewis MM, Huvos AG. En bloc upper humeralinterscapular resection, the Tikhoff-Linberg procedure. Clin Orthop 1977;124:219.
38. Chaos EYS, Ivins JC. Design and application of tumor prosthesis for bone and joint reconstruction. The design and application. New York: Theime-Stratton, 1983.
39. Malawer MM, Sugarbaker PH, Lambert M, et al. Limb salvage surgery for tumors of the proximal humerus and shoulder girdle. The Tikhoff-Linberg procedure and its modifications. Surgery
1955;97:518.
40. Sim FH, Bowman WE, Chao EYS. Limb salvage surgery and reconstructive techniques. In: Sim FH, ed. Diagnosis and treatment of bone tumors: a team approach. Mayo Clinic Monograph
75-105. Thorofare, NJ: Slack, Inc., 1983.
41. DeSantos LA, Bernardino ME, Murry JA. Computed tomography in the evaluation of osteosarcoma: experience with 25 cases. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1979;132:535.
42. Destouet JM, Gilula LA, Murphy W. Computed tomography of long bone osteosarcoma. Radiology 1979;131:439.
43. McKillop JH, Etcubanas E, Goris ML. The indications for and limitations of bone scintigraphy in osteogenic sarcoma: a review of 55 patients. Cancer 1981;48:1133.
44. Levine E. Computed tomography of musculoskeletal tumors. Crit Rev Diagn Imaging 1981;16:279.
45. Rosenthal DI. Computed tomography in bone and soft tissue neoplasm: application and pathologic correlation. Crit Rev Diagn Imaging 1982;18:243.
46. Goldstein H, McNeil BJ, Zufall E, et al. Changing indications for bone scintigraphy in patients with osteosarcoma. Radiology 1980;135:177.
47. Bacci G, Picci P, Calderoni P, et al. Full lung tomograms and bone scanning in the initial workup of patients with osteogenic sarcoma. A review of 126 cases. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol
1982;18:1967.
48. Jaffe N, Link MP, Cohen D, et al. High-dose methotrexate in osteogenic sarcoma. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1981;56:201.
49. Cortes EP, Holland JF, Wang JJ, et al. Amputation and Adriamycin in primary osteosarcoma. N Engl J Med 1974;291:998.
50. Rosen G, Marcove RC, Caparros B, et al. Primary osteogenic sarcoma. The rationale for preoperative chemotherapy and delayed survey. Cancer 1979;43:2163.
51. Rosen G, Caparros B, Huvos AC, et al. Preoperative chemotherapy for osteogenic sarcoma: selection of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy based upon the response of the primary tumor to
preoperative chemotherapy. Cancer 1982;49:1221.
52. Muggia F, Catani R, Lee YJ, et al. Factors responsible for therapeutic success in osteosarcoma. In: Jones S, Salmon S, eds. Adjuvant therapy for cancer, 2nd ed. New York: Grune & Stratton,
1979.
53. Cortes EP, Holland JP. Adjuvant chemotherapy for primary osteogenic sarcoma. Surg Clin North Am 1981;61:1391.
54. Rosen G, Murphy ML, Huvos AG, et al. Chemotherapy, en bloc resection and prosthetic replacement in the treatment of osteogenic sarcoma. Cancer 1976;37:1.
55. Goorin AM, Frei E II, Abelson HT. Adjuvant chemotherapy for osteosarcoma: a decade of experience. Surg Clin North Am 1981;61:1379.
56. Lichenstein L. Classification of primary tumors of bone. Cancer 1951;4:335.
57. Spjut HJ, Dorfman HD, Fechner DE, Ackerman LV. Tumors of bone and cartilage. Atlas of Tumor Pathology Fasc. 5, 2nd series. Washington, DC: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 1971.
58. Garrison RC, Unni KK, McLeod RA, Pritchard DJ, Dahlin DC. Chondrosarcoma arising in osteochondroma. Cancer 1982;49:1890.
59. Merryweather R, Middlemiss JH, Sanerkin NG. Malignant transformation of osteoblastoma. J Bone Joint Surg (Br) 1980;62:381.
60. Dahlin DC, Unni KK. Osteosarcoma of bone and its important recognizable varieties. Am J Surg Path 1977;1(1):61.
61. Ahuja SC, Villacin AB, Smith J, et al. Juxtacortical (parosteal) osteogenic sarcoma. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1977;59:632.
62. Unni KK, Dahlin DC, Beaubout SW. Periosteal osteogenic sarcoma. Cancer 1976;37:2476.
63. Unni KK, Dahlin DC, McLeod RA, Pritchard DJ. Interosseous well-differentiated osteosarcoma. Cancer 1977;40:1337.
64. Goldenberg RR, Campbell CJ, Bongfiglio M. Giant cell tumor of bone. An analysis of two hundred and eighteen cases. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1970;52:619.
65. Johnson EW, Dahlin DC. Treatment of giant cell tumor of bone: an evaluation of 24 cases treated at the Johns Hopkins hospital between 19251955. Clin Ortho 1969;62:187.
66. Madewell JE, Ragsdale BD, Sweet DE. Radiographic and pathologic analysis of solitary bone lesions. Radiol Clin North Am 1981;19:715.
67. Johnson LC. A general theory of bone tumors. Bull N Y Acad Med 1953;19:164.
68. Lodwick GS. The bone and joints. In: Atlas of tumor radiology. Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers, 1971.
69. Enneking WF. Musculoskeletal tumor surgery, Vol I. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1983:1.
70. Jeffree GM, Price CHG, Sissins HA. The metastatic spread of osteosarcoma. Br J Cancer 1975;32:87.
71. McKenna RJ, Schwinn CP, Soong KY, Higinbotham NL. Sarcoma of the osteogenic series (osteosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, parosteal osteosarcoma and sarcomata) arising in
abnormal bone: an analysis of 552 cases. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1966;48:1.
72. Marcove RC, Mike V, Hajack JV, et al. Osteogenic sarcoma under the age of 21. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1970;52:411.
73. Sweetnam R. Surgical management of primary osteosarcoma. Clin Orthop 1975;111:57.
74. Campanacci M, Bacci G, Bertoni F, et al. The treatment of osteosarcoma of the extremities: twenty years' experience at the Instituto Ortopedico Rizzoli. Cancer 1981;48:1569.
75. Campanacci M, Bacci G, Bertoni F, et al. The treatment of osteosarcoma of the extremity: twenty years' experience at the Instituto Orthopedico Rizzoli. Cancer 1981;48:1569.
76. Brostrom LA. On the natural history of osteosarcoma. Aspects of diagnosis, prognosis and endocrinology. Acta Orthop Scand (Suppl) 1980;183:1.
77. Enneking WF, Kagan A. Intramarrow spread of osteosarcoma. In: Management of primary bone and soft tissue tumors. Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers, 1976:171.
78. Malawer MM, Dunham WF. Skip metastases in osteosarcoma: recent experience. J Surg Oncol 1983;22:236.
79. Enneking WF, Spanier SS, Malawer MM. The effect of the anatomic setting on the results of surgical procedure for soft parts sarcoma of the thigh. Cancer 1981;47:1005.
80. Simon MA, Spanier SS, Enneking WF. The management of soft tissue tumors of the extremities. J Bone Surg (Am) 1976;60:317.
81. Simon MA. Intraarticular extension of adult primary bone sarcomas: implications for limb-sparing surgical procedures. In: Chao EYS, Ivins JS, eds. Design and application of tumor prosthesis
for bone and joint reconstruction. New York: Thieme-Stratton, 1983.
82. Bohndorf K, Reiaer M, Lochner B, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging of primary tumours and tumourlike lesions of bone. Skeletal Radiol 1986;15:511.
83. Cohen MD, Weetman RM, Provisor AJ, et al. Efficacy of magnetic resonance imaging in 139 children with tumors. Arch Surg 1986;121:522.
84. Turner DA. Nuclear magnetic resonance in oncology. Semin Nucl Med 1985;15:210.
85. Zimmer WD, Berquist TH, McLeod RA, et al. Bone tumors: magnetic resonance imaging versus computed tomography. Radiology 1985;155:709.
86. Powers JA. Magnetic resonance imaging in marrow diseases. Clin Orthop 1985;206:79.
87. Sundaram M, McGuire MH, Herbold DR. Magnetic resonance imaging of osteosarcoma. Skeletal Radiol 1987;16:23.
88. Easton EJ, Powers JA. Musculoskeletal magnetic resonance imaging. Thorofare, NJ: Slack, Inc., 1986.
89. Pettersson H, Springfield DS, Enneking WF. Radiologic management of musculoskeletal tumors. Philadelphia, Springer, 1999.
90. Link MP. Adjuvant therapy in the treatment of osteosarcoma. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Important advances in oncology. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1986:193.
91. Link MP, Goorin AM, Miser AW, et al. The effect of adjuvant chemotherapy on relapse-free survival in patients with osteosarcoma of the extremity. N Engl J Med 1986;314:1600.
92. Eilber F, Guiliano A, Eckardt J, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy for osteosarcoma: a randomized prospective trial. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:21.
93. Edmonson J, Creagan E, Gilchrist G. Phase II study of high dose methotrexate in patients with unresectable metastatic osteosarcoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:5438.
94. Rosen G, Nirenberg A. Chemotherapy for osteogenic sarcoma: an investigative method, not a recipe. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:1687.
95. Dahlin DC. The problems in assessment of new treatment regimens of osteosarcoma. Clin Orthop 1980;153:81.
96. Goorin A, Perez-Atayde A, Gebhardt M, et al. Weekly high-dose methotrexate and doxorubicin for osteosarcoma: the Dana Farber Cancer Institute/the Children's Hospitalstudy III. J Clin Oncol
1987;5:1178.
97. Ettinger LJ, Douglas HO, Mindell ER, et al. Adjuvant Adriamycin and cisplatin in newly diagnosed, nonmetastatic osteosarcoma of the extremity. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:353.
98. Rosen G, Marcove RC, Huvos AG, et al. Primary osteogenic sarcoma: 8-year experience with adjuvant chemotherapy. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1983;106[Suppl]:55.
99. Winkler K, Beron G, Kotz R, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for osteogenic sarcoma. Results of a cooperative German/Austrian study. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:617.
100. Winkler K, Beron G, Delling G, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy of osteosarcoma: results of a randomized cooperative trial (COSS82) with salvage chemotherapy based on histological tumor
response. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:329.
101. Enneking WF, Spanier SS, Goodman MA. A system for the surgical staging of musculoskeletal sarcoma. Clin Orthop 1980;153:106.
102. Tobias JD, Pratt CB, Parham DM, et al. The significance of calcified regional lymph nodes at the time of diagnosis of osteosarcoma. Orthopedics 1985;8:49.
103. Giuliano AE, Feig S, Eilber F. Changing metastatic patterns of osteosarcoma. Cancer 1984;54:2160.
104. Jaffe N, Smith E, Abelson H, Frei E. Osteogenic sarcoma. Alterations in the pattern of pulmonary metastases with adjuvant chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:251.
105. Fleming ID, Cooper JS, Henson DE, et al. (eds). American Joint Committee on Cancer Staging Manual, 5th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1997.
106. Iwasawa T, Tanaka Y, Aida N, et al. Microscopic intraosseous extension of osteosarcoma: assessment on dynamic contrast enhanced MRI. Skeletal Radiol 1997;26:214.
107. Hudson TM, Hass G, Enneking WF, Hawkins EF. Angiography in the management of musculoskeletal tumors. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1975;141:21.
108. Malawer MM, McHale KA. Limb-sparing surgery for high-grade malignant tumors of the proximal tibia: surgical technique and a new method of extensor mechanism reconstruction. Fourth
International Symposium on Limb-Salvage Surgery in Musculoskeletal Oncology, Kyoto, Japan, 1987.
109. Menendez LR, Fideler BM, Mirra J. Thallium-201 scanning for the evaluation of osteosarcoma and soft-tissue sarcoma. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1993;75:526.
110. Rosen G, Loren GJ, Brien EW, et al. Serial thallium-201 scintigraphy in osteosarcoma. Correlation with tumor necrosis after preoperative chemotherapy. Clin Orthop 1993;293:302.
111. Springfield D. Thallium-201 scanning for the evaluation of osteosarcoma and soft-tissue sarcoma. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1999;75:1880.
112. Tokuumi Y, Tsuchiya H, Sunayama C, et al. Thallium-201 scintigraphy for diagnosis, evaluation of chemotherapy effects and detection of local recurrence in musculoskeletal neoplasms.
Abstract Book 1995:175.
113. Bloem JL, Taminiau AHM, Eulderink F, Hermans J, Pauwels EKJ. Radiologic staging of primary bone sarcoma: MR imaging, scintigraphy, angiography and CT correlated with pathologic
examination. Radiology 1988;169:805.
114. Enneking WF. The issue of the biopsy. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1982;64:1119.
114a. Ayala AG, Raymond AK, Ro JY, et al. Needle biopsy of primary bone lesions. M. D. Anderson experience. Pathol Annu 1989;24(1):219.
115. Mankin HJ, Lange TA, Spanier S. The hazards of biopsy in patients with malignant primary bone and soft-tissue tumors. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1982;64:1121.
116. Moore TM, Meyers MH, Patzakis MJ, et al. Closed biopsy of musculoskeletal lesions. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1999;61:375.
117. Savino R, Gherlinzoni F, Morandi M, et al. Surgical treatment of giant cell tumor of the spine. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1983;65:1283.

118. Schajowicz F, Derqui JC. Puncture biopsy in lesions of the locomotor system. Review and results in 4050 cases, including 941 vertebral punctures. Cancer 1968;21:5331.
119. Mail JT, Cohen MD, Mirkin LD, Provisor AJ. Response of osteosarcoma to preoperative intravenous high-dose methotrexate chemotherapy: CT evaluation. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1985;144:89.
120. Jaffe N, Knapp J, Chuang VP, et al. Osteosarcoma: intraarterial treatment of the primary tumor with cis-diamminedichlorplatinum II (CDP): angiographic, pathologic, and pharmacologic studies.
Cancer 1983;51:402.
121. Chuang VP, Benjamin R, Jaffe N, et al. Radiographic and angiographic changes in osteosarcoma after intraarterial chemotherapy. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1982;139:1065.
122. Carrasco CH, Charnsangavel C, Raymond AK, et al. Osteosarcoma: angiographic assessment of response to preoperative chemotherapy. Radiology 1989;170:839.
123. Hogeboom WR, Hhoekstra HJ, Mooyaart EL, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in evaluating in vivo response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy for osteosarcomas of the extremities. Eur J
Surg Oncol 1989;15:424.
124. Smith J, Heelan RT, Huvos AG, et al. Radiographic changes in primary osteogenic sarcoma following intensive chemotherapy. Radiology 1982;143:355.
125. Sommer HJ, Knop J, Heise U, Winkler K, Delling G. Histomorphometric changes of osteosarcoma after chemotherapy. Correlation with 99Tc methylene diphosphonate functional imaging.
Cancer 1987;59:252.
126. Holscher HC, van der Woude HJ, Hermans J, et al. Magnetic resonance relaxation times of normal tissue in the course of chemotherapy: a study in patients with bone sarcoma. Skeletal Radiol
1994;23:181.
127. de Beare T, Vanel D, Shapeero LG, et al. Osteosarcoma after chemotherapy: evaluation with contrast material enhanced subtraction MR imaging. Radiology 1992;185:587.
128. Conrad EU, Bruckner JD III, Miser J, et al. Surgical imaging and staging of osteosarcoma. Eighth annual meeting of the International Society of Limb Salvage, Florence, Italy, 1995.
129. Lampreave JL, Benard F, Alavi A, Jimenez-Hoyuela J, Fraker D. PET evaluation of therapeutic limb perfusion in Merkel's cell carcinoma. J Nucl Med 1998;39:2087.
130. Marcove RC, Lyden JP, Huvos AC, Bullough PB. Giant cell tumor treated by cryosurgery. Report of 25 cases. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1973;55:1633.
131. Marcove RC, Stovell P, Huvos AC, Bullough P. The use of cryosurgery in the treatment of low and medium grade chondrosarcoma: a preliminary report. Clin Orthop 1977;122:147.
132. Marcove RC. A 17-year review of cryosurgery in the treatment of bone tumors. Clin Orthop 1982;163:231.
133. Marcove RC, Rosen G. En bloc resection for osteogenic sarcoma. Cancer 1980;45:3040.
134. Malawer MM. Distal femoral osteogenic sarcoma, principles of soft tissue resection and reconstruction in conjunction with prosthetic replacement (adjuvant surgery). In: Chao EYS, ed. Design
and application of tumor prothesis for bone and joint reconstruction. New York: Thieme-Stratton, 1983:297.
135. Morton DL, Eilber FR, Townsend CM Jr, et al. Limb salvage from a multidisciplinary treatment approach for skeletal and soft tissue sarcomas of the extremity. Ann Surg 1976;184:268.
136. Enneking WF. Section 8: concluding material. In: Enneking WF, ed. Limb-sparing surgery for musculoskeletal tumors. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1987:624.
137. Malawer MM, Meller I. Porous coated segmental prosthesis for large tumor defects. A prosthesis based upon immediate fixation (PMA) and extracortical bone fixation: analysis of 20
consecutive patients. Annual meeting of the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society, Toronto, 1987.
138. Heck DA, Chao EY, Sim FH, et al. Titanium fibermetal segmental replacement prostheses and radiographic analysis and review of current status. Clin Orthop 1987;204:266.
139. Mankin HJ, Fogelson FS, Thrasher AZ, et al. Massive resection and allograft transplantation in the treatment of malignant bone tumors. N Engl J Med 1976;294:1247.
140. Malawer MM. Personal experience.
141. Makley JT, Krailo M, Ertel IJ, et al. The relationship of various aspects of surgical management to outcome in childhood nonmetastatic osteosarcoma: a report from the Children's Cancer Study
Group. J Pediatr Surg 1988;23:146.
142. Rougraff BT, Simon MA, Kneisl JS, Greenberg DB, Mankin HJ. Limb salvage compared with amputation for osteosarcoma of the distal end of the femur. A long term oncological, functional,
and quality of life study. J Bone Joint Surgery Am 1994;76:649.
143. Greenberg DB. Quality of life in osteosarcoma survivors. Oncology (Huntingt) 1994;8:19.
144. Christ GH, Lane JP, Christ AE, Marcove R, Glasser D. Long term psychosocial adaptation of osteosarcoma survivors. Oncology 1993;335:1.
145. Malawer MM, Baker A. Amputations for tumor. In: Evarts CM, ed. Surgery of the musculoskeletal system, 2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1990.
146. Marcove RC, Mike V, Hajek JV, Levin AG, Hutter RVP. Osteogenic sarcoma under the age of twenty-one. A review of one hundred and forty-five operative cases. J Bone Joint Surg Am
1970;52:411.
147. Gehan EA, Sutow WW, Uribe-Botero G, Romsdahl M, Smith TL. Osteosarcoma: the M. D. Anderson experience, 19501974. In: Terry WD, Windhorst D, eds. Immunotherapy of cancer: present
status of trials in man. Prog Cancer Res Ther 1978;6:271.
148. Uribe-Botero G, Russell W, Sutow W, Martin R. Primary osteosarcoma of bone: a clinicopathologic investigation of 243 cases, with necropsy studies in 54. Am J Clin Pathol 1977;67:427.
149. Friedman MA, Carter SK. The therapy of osteogenic sarcoma: current status and thoughts for the future. J Surg Oncol 1972;4:482.
150. Taylor WF, Ivins JC, Dahlin DC, Edmonson JH, Pritchard DJ. Trends and variability in survival from osteosarcoma. Mayo Clinic Proc 1978;53:695.
151. Taylor WF, Ivins JC, Dahlin DC, Pritchard DJ. Osteogenic sarcoma experience at the Mayo Clinic, 19631974. In: Terry WD, Windhorts D, eds. Immunotherapy of cancer: present status of trials
in man. Prog Cancer Res Ther 1978;6:257.
152. Taylor WF, Ivins J, Pritchard D, et al. Trends and variability in survival among patients with osteosarcoma: a 7-year update. Mayo Clin Proc 1985;60:91.
153. Strander H, Adamson U, Aparisi T, et al. Adjuvant interferon treatment of human osteosarcoma. Recent results. Cancer Res 1979;68:40.
154. Rab GT, Ivins JC, Childs DS, Cupps RE, Pritchard DJ. Elective whole lung irradiation in the treatment of osteogenic sarcoma. Cancer 1976;38:939.
155. Breur K, Cohen P, Schweisguth O, Hart A. Irradiation of the lungs as an adjuvant therapy in the treatment of osteosarcoma of the limbs: an EORTC randomized study. Eur J Cancer
1978;14:461.
156. Edmonson JH, Green SJ, Ivins JC, et al. A controlled pilot study of high-dose methotrexate as post surgical adjuvant treatment for primary osteosarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:152.
157. Link MP, Goordin AM, Miser AW, et al. The effect of adjuvant chemotherapy on relapse-free survival in patients with osteosarcoma of the extremity. N Engl J Med 1986;314:1600.
158. Link MP, Shuster JJ, Goorin AM, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy in the treatment of osteosarcoma: results of the Multi-Institutional Osteosarcoma Study. In: Ryan J, Baker LO, eds. Recent
concepts in sarcoma treatment. Proceedings of the International Symposium on Sarcomas, Tarpon Springs, Florida, October 810, 1987. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1988:283.
159. Link MP, Goorin AM, Horowitz M, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy of high grade osteosarcoma of the extremity: updated results of the Multi-Institutional Osteosarcoma Study. Clin Orthop
1991;270:8.
160. Eilber F, Giuliano A, Eckardt J, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy for osteosarcoma: a randomized prospective trial. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:21.
161. Laster WR Jr, Mayo JG, Simpson-Herren L, et al. Success and failure in the treatment of solid tumors. II. Kinetic parameters and “cell cure” of moderately advanced carcinoma. Cancer
Chemother Rep 1969;53:169.
162. Schabel FM Jr. Rationale for adjuvant chemotherapy. Cancer 1977;39:2875.
163. Schabel FM Jr. The use of tumor growth kinetics in planning “curative” chemotherapy of advanced solid tumors. Cancer Res 1969;29:2384.
164. Cortes EP, Holland JF, Wang JJ, Sinks LF. Doxorubicin in disseminated osteosarcoma. JAMA 1972;221:1132.
165. Nitschke R, Starling KA, Vats T, Bryan H. Cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (NSC119875) in childhood malignancies: a Southwest Oncology Group study. Med Pediatr Oncol 1978;4:127.
166. Ochs JJ, Freeman AL, Douglass HO, et al. Cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum (II) in advanced osteogenic sarcoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:239.
167. Baum ES, Gaynon P, Greenberg L, Krivitt W, Hammond D. Phase II study of cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum (II) in childhood osteosarcoma: Children's Cancer Study Group Report. Cancer
Treat Rep 1979;63:1621.
168. Gasparini M, Rouesse J, van Oosterom A, et al. Phase II study of cisplatin in advanced osteogenic sarcoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:211.
169. Jaffe N, Farber S, Traggis D, et al. Favorable response of metastatic osteogenic sarcoma to pulse high dose methotrexate with citrovorum rescue and radiation therapy. Cancer 1973;31:1367.
170. Pratt C, Howarth C, Ransom J, et al. High dose methotrexate used alone and in combination for measurable primary and metastatic osteosarcoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1980;64:11.
171. Jaffe N, Frei E, Traggis D, Watts H. Weekly high-dose methotrexate-citrovorum factor in osteogenic sarcoma. Presurgical treatment of primary tumor and overt pulmonary metastases. Cancer
1977;39:45.
172. Marti C, Kroner T, Remagen W, et al. High-dose ifosfamide in advanced osteosarcoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:115.
173. Frei E, Jaffe N, Skipper HE, Gero MG. Adjuvant chemotherapy of osteogenic sarcoma: progress and perspectives. In: Salmon SE, Jones SE, eds. Adjuvant therapy of cancer. Amsterdam:
Elsevier/North Holland Biomedical Press, 1977:49.
174. Grem J, King S, Wittes R, Leyland Jones B. The role of methotrexate in osteosarcoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:626.
175. Edmonson J, Creagan E, Gilchrist G. Phase II study of high dose methotrexate in patients with unresectable metastatic osteosarcoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:538.
176. Krailo M, Ertel I, Makley J, et al. A randomized study comparing high-dose methotrexate with moderate dose methotrexate as components of adjuvant chemotherapy in childhood nonmetastatic
osteosarcoma: a report from the Children's Cancer Study Group. Med Pediatr Oncol 1987;15:69.
177. Bacci G, Picci P, Ruggieri P, et al. Primary chemotherapy and delayed surgery (neoadjuvant chemotherapy) for osteosarcoma of the extremities. The Instituto Rizzoli experience in 127 patients
treated preoperatively with intravenous methotrexate (high versus moderate doses) and intraarterial cisplatin. Cancer 1990;65:2539.
178. Bramwell VHC, Burgers M, Sneath R, et al. A comparison of two short intensive adjuvant chemotherapy regimens in operable osteosarcoma of limbs in children and young adults: the first study
of the European Osteosarcoma Intergroup. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1579.
179. Winkler K, Beron G, Kotz R, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for osteogenic sarcoma: results of a cooperative German/Austrian study. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:617.
180. Rosen G, Nirenberg A. Chemotherapy for osteogenic sarcoma: an investigative method, not a recipe. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:1687.
181. Smith MA, Ungerleider RS, Horowitz ME, Simon R. Influence of doxorubicin dose intensity on response and outcome for patients with osteogenic sarcoma and Ewing's sarcoma. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1991;83:1460.
182. Mosende C, Gutierrez M, Caparros B, Rosen G. Combination chemotherapy with bleomycin, cyclophosphamide and dactinomycin for the treatment of osteogenic sarcoma. Cancer
1977;40:2779.
183. Pratt CB, Epelman S, Jaffe N. Bleomycin, cyclophosphamide, and dactinomycin in metastatic osteosarcoma: lack of tumor regression in previously treated patients. Cancer Treat Rep
1987;71:421.
184. Harris MB, Gieser P, Goorin AM, et al. Treatment of metastatic osteosarcoma at diagnosis: a Pediatric Oncology Group Study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3641.
185. Souhami RL, Craft AW, Van der Eijken JW, et al. Randomised trial of two regimens of chemotherapy in operable osteosarcoma: a study of the European Osteosarcoma Intergroup. Lancet
1997;350:911.
186. Miser J, Arndt C, Smithson W, et al. Treatment of high grade osteosarcoma (OGS) with ifosamide (Ifos), MESNA, Adriamycin (ADR), and high dose methotrexate (HDMTX). Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1991;10:310.
187. Harris M, Gieser P, Goorin A, et al. Treatment of metastatic osteosarcoma at diagnosis: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3641.
188. Huvos A, Rosen G, Marcove RC. Primary osteogenic sarcoma. Pathologic aspects in 20 patients after treatment with chemotherapy, en bloc resection and prosthetic bone replacement. Arch
Pathol Lab Med 1977;101:14.
189. Winkler K, Beron G, Kotz R, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for osteosarcoma: results of a cooperative German/Austrian study. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:617.
190. Winkler K, Beron G, Kotz R, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy in osteosarcoma effects of cisplatinum, BCD, and fibroblast interferon in sequential combination with HDMTX and Adriamycin.
Preliminary results of the COSS 80 study. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1983;106[Suppl]:1.
191. Winkler K, Beron G, Delling G, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy of osteosarcoma: results of a randomized cooperative trial (COSS82) with salvage chemotherapy based on histological tumor
response. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:329.
192. Provisor AJ, Ettinger LJ, Nachman JB, et al. Treatment of nonmetastatic osteosarcoma of the extremity with preoperative and postoperative chemotherapy: a report from the Children's Cancer
Group. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:76.
193. Hudson M, Jaffe MR, Jaffe N, et al. Pediatric osteosarcoma: therapeutic strategies, results and prognostic factors derived from a 10-year experience. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1988.
194. Davis AM, Bell RS, Goodwin PJ. Prognostic factors in osteosarcoma: a critical review. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:423.
195. Goldie JH, Coldman AJ. A mathematical model for relating the drug sensitivity of tumors to their spontaneous mutation rate. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:1727.
196. DeVita VT. The relationship between tumor mass and resistance to chemotherapy. Cancer 1983;51:1209.
197. Salzer-Kuntschik M, Delling G, Beron G, Sigmund R. Morphological grades of regression in osteosarcoma after polychemotherapy. Study COSS 80. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol

1983;106[Suppl]:21.
198. Jaffe N, Prudich J, Knapp J, et al. Treatment of primary osteosarcoma with intra-arterial and intravenous high-dose methotrexate. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:428.
199. Meyers PA, Heller G, Healey J, et al. Chemotherapy for non-metastatic osteogenic sarcoma: the Memorial Sloan Kettering experience. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:5.
200. Jaffe N, Raymond AK, Ayala A, et al. Effect of cumulative courses of intraarterial cis-diamminedichloroplatin-II on the primary tumor in osteosarcoma. Cancer 1989;63:63.
201. Avella M, Bacci G, McDonald DJ, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy with six drugs (Adriamycin, methotrexate, cisplatinum, bleomycin, cyclophosphamide, and dactinomycin) for nonmetastatic
high-grade osteosarcoma of the extremities. Results of 32 patients and comparison to 127 patients concomitantly treated with the same drugs in a neoadjuvant form. Chemioterapia 1988;7:133.
202. Gherlinzoni F, Mercuri M, Monti C. Primary chemotherapy and delayed surgery for nonmetastatic osteosarcoma of the extremities. Results in 164 patients preoperatively treated with high doses
of methotrexate followed by cisplatin and doxorubicin. Cancer 1993;72:3227.
203. Glasser DB, Lane JM, Huvos AG, Marcove RC, Rosen G. Survival, prognosis, and therapeutic response in osteogenic sarcoma. The Memorial Hospital experience. Cancer 1992;69:698.
204. Goorin A, Baker A, Gieser P, et al. No evidence for improved event-free survival [EFS] with presurgical chemotherapy [PRE] for non-metastatic extremity osteogenic sarcoma [OGS]:
preliminary results of randomized Pediatric Oncology Group [POG] trial 8651. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:444.
205. Baldini N, Scotlandi K, Barbanti-Brodano G, et al. Expression of P-glycoprotein in high-grade osteosarcomas in relation to clinical outcome. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1380.
206. Chan HSL, Grogan TM, Haddad G, et al. P-glycoprotein expression: critical determinant in the response to osteosarcoma chemotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1706.
207. Uozaki H, Horiuchi H, Ishida T, et al. Overexpression of resistance-related proteins (metallothioneins, glutathione-S-transferase O, heat shock protein 27, and lung resistancerelated protein) in
osteosarcoma: relationship with poor prognosis. Cancer 1997;79:2336.
208. Gorlick R, Huvos AG, Heller G, et al. Expression of HER2/erbB-2 correlates with survival in osteosarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2781.
209. Feugeas O, Guriec N, Babin-Boilletot A, et al. Loss of heterozygosity of the RB gene is a poor prognostic factor in patients with osteosarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:467.
210. Onda M, Matsuda S, Higaki S, et al. ErbB-2 expression is correlated with poor prognosis for patients with osteosarcoma. Cancer 1996;77:71.
211. Jaffe N, Robertson R, Ayala A, et al. Comparison of intraarterial cis-diamminedichloroplatinum II with high dose methotrexate and citrovorum factor rescue in the treatment of primary
osteosarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1101.
212. Martinez A, Donaldson SS, Bagshaw MA. Special set up and treatment techniques for the radiotherapy of pediatric malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1977;2:1007.
213. Watkins DMB. Radiation therapy mold technology. Toronto: Pergamon Press, 1981.
214. Order SE, Donaldson SS. Radiation therapy for benign disease, 2nd ed. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1997.
215. Sanerkin NG. The diagnosis and grading of chondrosarcoma of bone. A combined cytologic and histologic approach. Cancer 1980;45:582.
216. Huvos AG. Bone tumors. Diagnosis, treatment and prognosis. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1979.
217. Singer JM, Deutsch GP. The successful use of radiotherapy for osteoblastoma. Clin Oncol 1993;5:124.
218. Nobler MP, Higinbotham NL, Phillips RF. The cure of aneurysmal bone cyst: irradiation superior to surgery in an analysis of 33 cases. Radiology 1968;90:1185.
219. Vergel DD, Bond JR, Shives TC, McLeod RA, Unni KK. Aneurysmal bone cyst. A clinicopathologic study of 238 cases. Cancer 1992;69:2921.
220. Cassady JR. Radiation therapy in less common primary bone tumors. In: Jaffe N, ed. Solid tumors in childhood. Littleton, MA: PSG Publishing, 1979:205.
221. Kamikonya N, Hishikawa Y, Kurisu K, et al. Aneurysmal bone cyst treated by high-energy, low-dose radiation therapy: a case report. Radiat Med 1991;9:54.
222. Madea N, Tateishi H, Takaiwa H, et al. High-energy, low-dose therapy for aneurysmal bone cyst. Report of a case. Clin Orthop 1989;243:200.
223. Sanfilippo NJ, Wang GJ, Larner JM. Desmoplastic fibroma: a role for radiotherapy? South Med J 1995;88:1267.
224. Greenberger JS, Crocker AC, Vawter G, et al. Results of treatment of 127 patients with systemic histiocytosis (Letterer-Siwe syndrome, Schuller-Christian syndrome and multifocal eosinophilic
granuloma). Medicine (Baltimore) 1981;60:311.
225. Dahlin DC, Coventry MB. Osteosarcoma, a study of 600 cases. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1967;49:101.
226. Stark A, Kricbergs S, Nilsonne U, Silfversward C. The age of osteosarcoma patients is increasing. An epidemiological study of osteosarcoma in Sweden 1971 to 1984. J Bone Joint Surg Am
1990;72B:89.
227. Richter MP, D'Angio GJ. The role of radiation therapy in the management of children with histiocytosis X. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1981;3:161.
228. Selch MT, Parker RG. Radiation therapy in the management of Langerhans cell histocytosis. Med Pediatr Oncol 1990;8:151.
229. Wick MR, Siegal GP, Unni KK, et al. Sarcomas of bone complicating osteitis deformas (Paget's disease), 50 years' experience. Am J Surg Pathol 1981;5:47.
230. Greditzer HG, McLeod RA, Unni KK, et al. Bone sarcomas in Paget's disease. Radiology 1983;146:337.
231. Francis KC, Kohn H, Malawer MM. Osteogenic sarcoma. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1976;55:754.
232. Scranton PE Jr, DeCicco FA, Totten RS, Yunis EJ. Prognostic factors in osteosarcoma. A review of 20 years experience at the University of Pittsburgh Health Center Hospitals. Cancer
1975;36:2179.
233. Wilner D. Osteogenic sarcoma (osteosarcoma). In: Radiology of bone tumors and allied disorders. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1982:1897.
234. DeSantos LA, Edeiken B. Purely lytic osteosarcoma. Skeletal Radiol 1982;9:1.
235. Jaffe N, Smith E, Abelson HT, et al. Osteogenic sarcoma: alterations in the pattern of pulmonary metastases with adjuvant chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:251.
236. Lockshin MD, Higgins TT. Prognosis in osteogenic sarcoma. Int Orthop 1981;5:305.
237. Larsson SE, Lorentzon R, Wedren H, Boquist L. The prognosis in osteosarcoma. Int Orthop 1981;5:305.
238. Brostrom L, Strander H, Nisonne U. Survival in osteosarcoma in relation to tumor size and location. Clin Orthop 1982;167:250.
239. Hudson M, Jaffe MR, Jaffe N, et al. Pediatric osteosarcoma: therapeutic strategies results and prognostic factors derived from a 10-year experience. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1988.
240. Baldini N, Scotlandi K, Barbanti-Brodano G, et al. Expression of P-glycoprotein in high-grade osteosarcomas in relation to clinical outcome. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1380.
241. Bacci G, Avella M, Picci P, et al. Metastatic patterns in osteosarcoma. Tumori 1988;74:421.
242. Levine AM, Rosenberg SA. Alkaline phosphatase levels in osteosarcoma tissue are related to prognosis. Cancer 1979;44:2291.
243. Levine AM, Trich T, Rosenberg SA. Osteosarcoma cells in tissue culture. II. Characterization and location of alkaline phosphatase activity. Clin Orthop 1975;3:33.
244. Bacci G, Picci P, Ferrari S, et al. Prognostic significance of serum alkaline phosphatase measurements in patients with osteosarcoma treated with adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Cancer 1993;71(4):1224.
245. Springfield DS, Schmidt R, Grahm-Pole J, et al. Surgical treatment for osteosarcoma. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1988;70:1124.
246. Picci P, Ferrari S, Bacci G, Gherlinzoni F. Treatment recommendations for osteosarcoma and adult soft tissue sarcomas. Drugs 1994;47:82.
247. Malawer MM, Meller I, Dunham WK. A new surgical classification system for shoulder-girdle resections. Analysis of 38 patients. Clin Orthop 1991;267:33.
248. Malawer MM, Meller I, Dunham WK. Proposed surgical classification of shoulder girdle resections for bone and soft tissue tumors: description of a new system and analysis of 38 patients. New
Orleans: American Society of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery, 1987.
249. Malawer MM, Sugarbaker PH, Lambert M, et al. The Tikhoff-Linberg procedure and its modifications. In: Sugarbaker PH, ed. Atlas of sarcoma surgery. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1984.
250. Malawer MM, McHale KA. Limb-sparing surgery for high grade tumors of the proximal tibia and a new method of extensor mechanism reconstruction. Fourth International Symposium on
Limb-Salvage in Musculoskeletal Oncology, Kyoto, Japan, 1987.
251. Hudson TM, Springfield DS, Schiebler M. Popliteus muscle as a barrier to tumor spread: computer tomography and angiography. J Comput Assisted Tomogr 1984;8:498.
252. Malawer MM, Price WM. Gastrocnemius transposition flaps in conjunction with limb-sparing surgery for primary sarcomas around the knee. Plast Reconstr Surg 1984;73:741.
253. Malawer MM. Surgical management of aggressive malignant tumors of the proximal tibia and fibula. Clin Orthop 1984;186:172.
254. Enneking WF. A system for the functional evaluation of the surgical management of musculoskeletal tumors. In: Enneking WF, ed. Limb-sparing surgery for musculoskeletal tumors. New York:
Churchill Livingstone, 1987:5.
255. Miller G. Opening remarks. In: Enneking WF, ed. Limb-sparing surgery for musculoskeletal tumors. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1987:5.
256. Fahey M, Spanier SS. Osteosarcoma of the pelvis. A clinical and histopathological study of twenty-five patients. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1992;74:321.
257. Sluga M, Windhager R, Lang S, et al. Local and systemic control after ablative and limb-sparing surgery in patients with osteosarcoma. Clin Orthop Rel Res 1999;358:120.
258. Bacci G, Ferrari S, Mercuri M, et al. Predictive factors for local recurrence in osteosarcoma: 540 patients with extremity tumors followed for a minimum 2.5 years after neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. Acta Orthop Scand 1998;69:230.
259. Malawer MM. Personal experience.
260. Jenkin RDT, Allt WEC, Fitzpatrick PJ. Osteosarcoma. An assessment of management with particular reference to primary irradiation and selective delayed amputation. Cancer 1972;30:393.
261. Powell GJ, Scarborough MT, Enneking WF. Osteoarticular allografts for reconstruction of the distal femur following tumor resection. Tenth International Symposium on Limb Salvage, Cairns,
Australia, 1999.
262. Malawer MM, Chou L. Prosthetic survival and clinical results with the use of large segment replacements in the treatment of high-grade bone sarcomas. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1995;77:1154.
263. Unwin PS, Walker PS, Briggs TW. Aseptic loosening in 1001 cases of cemented custom-made bone tumor replacements: tumor replacements of the lower limb. Eighth annual meeting of the
International Society of Limb Salvage, Florence, Italy, May 1995.
264. Ruggieri P, De Cristofaro R, Picci P, et al. Complications and surgical indications in 144 cases of nonmetastatic osteosarcoma of the extremities treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Clin
Orthop 1993;295:226.
265. Campanna R, Manfrini M, Ceruso M, Bertoni F, Nomtanari N. Intraepiphyseal resection in high grade bone sarcomas. Eighth annual meeting of the International Society of Limb Salvage,
Florence, Italy, May 1995.
266. Henshaw R, Jones V, Malawer MM. Endoprosthetic reconstruction with the modular replacement system. Survival analysis of the first 100 implants with a minimum 2 year follow-up. Fourth
combined meeting of the American and European Musculoskeletal Tumor Societies, Washington, DC, May 1998.
267. Renard AJ, Veth RP, Schreuder HW, et al. Revisions of endoprosthetic reconstructions after limb salvage in musculoskeletal oncology. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg 1998;117(3):125.
268. Grimer RJ, Carter SR, Pynsent PB. The cost-effectiveness of limb salvage for bone tumours. J Bone Joint Surg (Br) 1997;79:558.
269. Steadman PB, Pritchard DJ, Larson D. Pathological fractures in osteosarcomaa descriptive study 19701985. Tenth International Symposium on Limb Salvage, Cairns, Australia, 1999.
270. Mankin HJ, Lange TA, Spanier S. The hazards of biopsy in patients with malignant primary bone and soft-tissue tumors. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1982;64:1121.
271. Martin NS, Williamson J. The role of surgery in the treatment of malignant tumors of the spine. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1970;52B:227.
272. Sterner B. Total spondylectomy in chondrosarcoma arising in the seventh thoracic vertebra. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1971;53B:288.
273. Sterner BL, Johnson OE. Complete removal of three vertebra for giant cell tumor. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1971;53B:278.
274. Estrada-Aguilar J, Greenberg H, Walling A, et al. Primary treatment of pelvic osteosarcoma. Report of five cases. Cancer 1992;69:1137.
275. Marina NM, Pratt CB, Rao BN, et al. Improved prognosis of children with osteosarcoma metastatic to the lung(s) at the time of diagnosis. Cancer 1992;70:2722.
276. Meyers PA, Heller G, Healy JH. Osteogenic sarcoma with clinically detectable metastasis at initial presentation. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:449.
277. Cregan E, Frytak S, Pairolero P, et al. Surgically proven pulmonary metastases not demonstrated by computed chest tomography. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:1404.
278. Telander R, Pairolero P, Pritchard D, et al. Resection of pulmonary metastatic osteogenic sarcoma in children. Surgery 1978;84:335.
279. Putnam JB, Roth J, Wesley M, et al. Survival following aggressive resection of pulmonary metastases from osteogenic sarcoma: analysis of prognostic factors. Ann Thorac Surg 1983;36:516.
280. Goorin A, Delorey M, Lack E, et al. Prognostic significance of complete surgical resection of pulmonary metastases in patients with osteogenic sarcoma: analysis of 32 patients. Clin Oncol
1984;2:425.
281. Meyer WH, Schell MJ, Kumar APM, et al. Thoracotomy for pulmonary metastatic carcinoma. Cancer 1987;59:374.
282. Han MT, Telander R, Pairolero P, et al. Aggressive thoracotomy for pulmonary metastatic osteogenic sarcoma in children and young adolescents. J Pediatr Surg 1981;16:928.
283. Saeter G, Hoie J, Stenwig AE, et al. Systemic relapse of patients with osteogenic sarcoma. Prognostic factors for long-term survival. Cancer 1995;75:1084.
284. Tabone MD, Kalifa C, Rodary C, et al. Osteosarcoma recurrences in pediatric patients previously treated with intensive chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2614.
285. Ward WG, Mikaelian K, Dorey F, et al. Pulmonary metastases of stage IIB extremity osteosarcoma and subsequent pulmonary metastases. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1849.
286. Cade S. Osteogenic sarcoma. A study based on 133 patients. J Royal Coll Surg (Edinb) 1955;1:79.
287. Lee ES, Mackenzie DH. Osteosarcoma: a study of the value of preoperative megavoltage radiotherapy. Br J Surg 1964;51:252.
288. Farrell C, Reventos A. Experience in treating osteosarcoma at the University of Pennsylvania. Radiology 1964;83:1080.

289. Sweetnan R, Knowelden J, Seedon H. Bone sarcoma treatment by irradiation, amputation, or a combination of the two. BMJ 1971;2:363.
290. Phillips TL, Sheline GE. Radiation therapy of malignant bone tumors. Radiology 1969;92:1537.
291. Allen CV, Stevens KR. Preoperative irradiation for osteogenic sarcoma. Cancer 1973;31:1365.
292. Gaitan-Yanguas M. A study of the response of osteogenic sarcoma and adjacent normal tissues to radiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:593.
293. Beck JC, Wara WM, Bovill EG, et al. The role of radiation therapy in the treatment of osteosarcoma. Radiology 1976;120:163.
294. Goffinet DR, Kaplan HS, Donaldson SS, et al. Combined radiosensitizer infusion and irradiation of osteogenic sarcoma. Radiology 1975;117:211.
295. Martinez A, Goffinet DR, Donaldson SS, et al. Intra-arterial infusion of the radiosensitizer (BudR) combined with hypofractionated irradiation and chemotherapy for primary treatment of
osteogenic sarcoma. Radiology 1975;117:211.
296. Kinsella TJ, Glatstein E. Clinical experience with intravenous radiosensitizers in unresectable sarcomas. Cancer 1987;59:908.
297. Okada K, Frassica FJ, Sim FH, et al. Parosteal osteosarcoma. A clinicopathic study. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1994;76:366.
298. Unni KK, Dahlin CC, Beaubout SW. Parosteal osteogenic sarcoma. Cancer 1976;37:2466.
299. Jelinek JS, Murphey MD, Kransdorf MJ, et al. Parosteal osteosarcoma, value of MR imaging and CT in the prediction of histologic grade. Radiology 1996;201:837.
300. Schajowicz F, McGuire MH, Araujo S, Muscolo DL, Gitelis S. Osteosarcoma arising on the surfaces of long bones. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1988;70:555.
301. Sim FH, Unni KK, Beaubout JW, et al. Osteosarcoma with small cells simulating Ewing's tumor. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1979;61:207.
302. Martin SE, Dwyer A, Kissane JM, et al. Small-cell osteosarcoma. Cancer 1982;50:990.
303. Devaney K, Vinh TN, Sweet DE. Small cell osteosarcoma of bone: an immunohistochemical study with differential diagnosis considerations. Hum Pathol 1993;24:1211.
304. Amendola BE, Amendola MA, McClatchey KD, et al. Radiation-associated sarcoma: a review of 23 patients over a 50-year period. Am J Clin Oncol 1989;12:411.
305. Le Vu B, de Vathaire F, Shamsaldin A, et al. Radiation dose, chemotherapy, and risk of osteosarcoma after solid tumors during childhood. Int J Cancer 1998;77:370.
306. Hawkins MM, Wilson LM, Burton HS, et al. Radiotherapy, alkylating agents, and risk of bone cancer after childhood cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:270.
307. Huvos AG, Wooard HQ, Cahan WG, et al. Postradiation osteogenic sarcoma of bone and soft-tissues, a clinicopathologic study of 66 patients. Cancer 1982;55:1244.
308. Marcove RC, Mike V, Hutter RVP, et al. Chondrosarcoma of the pelvis and upper end of femur. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1972;54:561.
309. Mankin HJ, Cantley KD, Lipielo L, et al. The biology of human chondrosarcoma. I. Description of the cases, grading, and biochemical analyses. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1980;62:160.
310. Mankin HJ, Cantley KD, Schiller AL, et al. The biology of human chondrosarcoma. II. Variations in chemical composite among types and subtypes of benign and malignant cartilage tumors. J
Bone Joint Surg Am 1980;62:176.
311. Krocberg A, Zelterberg A, Soderberg G. A comparative study of cellular DNA content and clinicopathologic features. Cancer 1982;50:577.
312. Edeiken J. Bone tumors and tumor-like conditions. In: Edeiken J, ed. Roentgen diagnosis and disease of bone, 3rd ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1981:30.
313. Aprin H, Riserborough EJ, Hall JE. Chondrosarcoma in children and adolescents. Clin Orthop 1982;166:226.
314. Bjornsson J, McCleod RA, Unni K, et al. Primary chondrosarcoma of long bones and limb girdles. Cancer 1998;83:2105.
315. Steel HH. Partial or complete resection of the hemipelvis: an alternative to hindquarter amputation for periacetabular chondrosarcoma of the pelvis. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1978;60:719.
316. Austin-Seymour M. Fractionated proton radiation therapy of chordoma and low grade chondrosarcoma of the base of the skull. J Neurosurg 1999;30:13.
317. Scanlon PW. Split dose radiotherapy for radioresistant bone and soft tissue sarcoma: ten years' experience. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1972;114:544.
318. Aboulafia AJ, Faulks C, Li W, et al. Reconstruction using the saddle prosthesis following excision of malignant periacetabular tumors. In: Brown KLB, ed. Complications of limb salvage,
prevention, management and outcome. Montreal: International Society of Limb Salvage, 1991.
319. Kawai A, Healey JH, Boland PJ, et al. Prognostic factors for patients with sarcomas of the pelvic bones. Cancer 1998;82:851.
320. Schreuder HW, Pruszczynski M, Veth RP, Lemmens JA. Treatment of benign and low-grade malignant intramedullary chondroid tumours with curettage and cryosurgery. Eur J Surg Oncol
1998;24:120.
321. Unni KK, Dahlin DC, Beaubout JW, Sim FH. Chondrosarcoma: clear cell variant. A report of 16 cases. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1976;57:676.
322. Harwood AR, Krajbich JI, Fornasier VL. Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma: a report of 17 cases. Clin Orthop 1981;158:144.
323. Huvos AG, Rosen G, Dabska M, Marcove RC. Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma: a clinicopathologic analysis of 35 patients with emphasis on treatment. Cancer 1983;51:1230.
324. Krochak R, Harwood AR, Cummings BJ, et al. Results of radical radiation for chondrosarcoma of bone. Radiat Oncol 1983;1:109.
325. McNaney D, Lindberg RD, Ayala AG, et al. Fifteen year radiotherapy experience with chondrosarcoma of bone. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8:187.
326. Hug EB, Fitzek MM, Liebsch NJ, Munzenrider JE. Locally challenging osteo- and chondrogenic tumors of the axial skeleton: results of combined proton and photon radiation therapy using
three-dimensional treatment planning. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:467.
327. Harwood AR, Krajbich JI, Fornasier VL. Radiotherapy of chondrosarcoma of bone. Cancer 1980;45:2769.
328. Ryall RDH, Bates T, Newton KA, et al. Combination of radiotherapy and razoxane ICRF 159 for chondrosarcoma. Cancer 1979;44:891.
329. Marcove RC. The surgery of tumors of bone and cartilage, 2nd ed. New York: Grune and Stratton, 1984.
330. Nascimento AG, Huvos AC, Marcove RC. Primary malignant giant cell tumor of bone study of eight cases and review of the literature. Cancer 1979;44:1393.
331. Campanacci M, Giunti A, Olmi R. Giant-cell tumors of bone: a study of 209 cases with long-term follow-up in 130. Ital J Orthop Traumatol 1977;1:249.
332. O'Donnell RJ, Springfield DS, Motwani HK. Recurrence of giant cell tumors of the long bones after curettage and packing with cement. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1994;76:1827.
333. Bickels J, Malawer MM, Meller I, et al. Cryosurgery in the treatment of giant cell tumor of bone: a multi-institutional study of 102 cases with a follow-up period of 415 years. Combined Meeting
of the American and European Musculoskeletal Tumor Societies, Washington, DC, 1998.
334. Malawer M, Bickels J, Meller I, et al. Cryosurgery in the treatment of giant cell tumor: a long-term followup study. Clin Orthop 1999;359:176.
335. Larsson SE, Lorenzton R, Boquist L. Giant cell tumors of the spine and sacrum causing neurological problems. Clin Orthop 1975;111:201.
336. Marcove RS, Weiss L, Vaghaiwall M. Cryosurgery in the treatment of giant cell tumor of bone: a report of 52 consecutive cases. Clin Orthop 1978;143:275.
337. Malawer MM, Dunham WK, Zaleski T, Zielinski CJ. The management of aggressive and low grade malignant bone tumors by cryosurgery: analysis of 40 consecutive cases. In: Enneking WF,
ed. Limb-sparing surgery for musculoskeletal tumors. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1987:498.
338. Persson BM, Wouters HW. Curettage and acrylic cementation in surgery of giant cell tumor of bone. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1976;120:125.
339. Turcotte RE, Sim FH, Unni KK. Giant cell tumor of the sacrum. Clin Orthop 1993;291:215.
340. Cassady JR. Radiation therapy in less common primary bone tumors. In: Jaffe N, ed. Solid tumors in childhood. Littleton, MA: PSG Publishing, 1979:205.
341. Amendola BE, Amendola MA, McClatchey KD, Miller CH Jr. Radiation associated sarcoma: a review of 23 patients with postradiation sarcoma over a 50 year period. Am J Clin Oncol
1989;12:411.
342. Bell RS, Harwood AR, Goodman SB, et al. Supervoltage radiotherapy in the treatment of difficult giant cell tumors of bone. Clin Orthop 1983;174:208.
343. Bennett CJ, Marcus RB, Million RR, et al. Radiation therapy for giant cell tumor of bone. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;26:299.
344. De Groof E, Verdonk R, Vercauteren M, et al. Giant-cell tumor involving a lumbar vertebra. Long-term follow-up after radiotherapy. Spine 1990;15:835.
345. Harwood AR, Fornasier VL, Rider WD. Supervoltage irradiation in the management of giant-cell tumor of bone. Radiology 1977;125:223.
346. Nair MK, Jyothami R. Radiation therapy in the treatment of giant cell tumor of bone. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:59.
347. Malone S, O'Sullivan B, Catton C, et al. Long-term follow-up of efficacy and safety of megavoltage in high-risk giant cell tumors of bone. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995: 33;689.
348. Schwartz LH, Okunieff PG, Rosenberg A, et al. Radiation therapy in the treatment of difficult giant cell tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:1085.
349. Singhal RM, Mukopadhyaya S, Tanwar RK, et al. Case report: giant cell tumour of metacarpals: report of three cases. Br J Radiol 1994;67:408.
350. Brien EW, Mirra JM, Kessler S, et al. Benign giant cell tumors of bone with osteosarcomatous transformation (dedifferentiated primary malignant GCT): report of two cases. Skeletal Radiol
1996;41:246.
351. Picci P, Bacci G, Ferrari S, Mercuri M. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy in malignant fibrous histiocytoma of bone and in osteosarcoma located in the extremities: analogies and differences between
the two tumors. Ann Oncol 1997;8:1107.
352. Bacci G, Springfield D, Picci P, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy for malignant fibrous histiocytoma in the femur and tibia. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1985;67:620.
353. Bacci G, Mercuri M, Ruggieri P, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for malignant fibrous histiocytoma of bone and for osteosarcoma of the limbs: a comparison between the results obtained for
21 and 144 patients, respectively, treated during the same period with the same chemotherapy protocol. Chir Organi Mov 1996;81:139.
354. Nishida J, Sim FH, Wenger DE, Unni KK. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma of bone. A clinicopathologic study of 81 patients. Cancer 1997;79:482.
355. Larsson S, Lorentzon R, Boquist L. Malignant hemangioendothelioma of bone. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1975;57:84.
356. Campanacci M, Boriani S, Giunti A. Hemangioendothelioma of bone: a study of 29 cases. Cancer 1980;46:804.
357. Welles L, Dorfman H, Valentine ES, et al. Low grade malignant hemangioendothelioma of bone: a disease potentially curable with radiotherapy. Med Pediatr Oncol 1994;23:144.
358. Wold LE, Ivins JC, Dahlin DC, et al. Hemangioendothelial sarcoma of bone. Am J Surg Pathol 1982;6:59.
359. Mindell ER. Current concept review. Chordoma. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1981;63:501.
360. Localio AS, Eng K, Ranson JHC. Abdominosacral approach for retrorectal tumors. Am Surg 1980;179:555.
361. Localio AS, Francis KC, Rossano PC. Abdominosacral resection of sacrococcygeal chordoma. Ann Surg 1980;166:394.
362. Gray SW, Singhabhandhu B, Smith RA, Skandalakis JE. Sacrococcygeal chordoma: report of a case and review of the literature. Surgery 1975;78:573.
363. DeVries J, Oldhoff J, Hadders HN. Cryosurgery treatment for sacrococcygeal chordoma: report of 4 cases. Cancer 1986;58:2348.
364. Guterberg B, Romanus B, Sterner BL. Pelvic strength after major amputation of the sacrum. An experimental study. Acta Orthop Scand 1976;47:635.
365. Heffelfinger MJ, Dahlin DC, MacCarthy CS, et al. Chordomas and cartilaginous tumors of the skull base. Cancer 1973;32:410.
366. Amendola BE, Amendola MA, Oliver E, et al. Chordoma: role of radiation therapy. Radiology 1986;158:839.
367. Rich TA, Schiller A, Suit HD, et al. Clinical and pathologic review of 48 cases of chordoma. Cancer 1985;56:182.
368. Cummings BJ, Hodson ID, Bush RS. Chordoma: the results of megavoltage radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;9:633.
369. Catton C, O'Sullivan B, Bell R, et al. Chordoma: long-term follow-up after radical proton irradiation. Radiother Oncol 1996;41:67.
370. Austin-Seymour M, Munzenrider J, Goitein M, et al. Proton radiation therapy of chordoma and low-grade sarcoma of the base of the skull and cervical spine. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1986;12[Suppl 1]:98.
371. Raffel C, Wright DC, Gutin PH, et al. Cranial chordomas: clinical presentation and results of operative and radiation therapy in twenty-six patients. Neurosurgery 1985;17:703.
372. Yoshii Y, Tsunoda T, Hyodo A, et al. Proton radiation therapy for clivus chordomacase report. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo) 1993;33:173.
373. Muthukumar N, Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, Flickinger JC. Stereotactic radiosurgery for chondroma and chondrosarcoma: further experiences. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;39:387.
374. Miller RC, Foote RL, Coffey RJ, et al. The role of stereotactic radiosurgery in the treatment of malignant skull base tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:977.
375. Reimer RR, Chabner BAC, Young RC, et al. Lymphoma presenting in bone. Results of histopathology, staging, and therapy. Ann Intern Med 1977;87:50.
376. Sweet DL, Moss DP, Simon MA, et al. Histiocytic lymphoma (reticulum-cell sarcoma) of bone. Current strategy for orthopedic surgeons. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1987;63:79.
377. Mendenhall NP, Jones JJ, Kramer BS, et al. The management of primary lymphoma of bone. Radiother Oncol 1987;9:137.
378. Loeffler JS, Tarbell NJ, Kozakewich H, et al. Primary lymphoma of bone in children: analysis of treatment results with Adriamycin, prednisone, Oncovin (APO), and local radiation therapy. J
Clin Oncol 1986;4:496.
379. Bacci G, Jaffe N, Emiliani E, et al. Therapy for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of bone and a comparison of results with Ewing's sarcoma. Cancer 1986;57:1468.
380. Ferreri AJ, Reni M, Ceresoli JL, Villa E. Therapeutic management with Adriamycin-containing chemotherapy and radiotherapy of monostoic and polystoic non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of bone in
adults. Cancer Invest 1998;16:554.
381. Rapoport AP, Constine LS, Packman CH, et al. Treatment of multifocal lymphoma of bone and intensified ProMACE-CytaBOM chemotherapy and involved field radiotherapy. Am J Hematol
1998;58:1.
382. Dubey P, Ha CS, Besa PC, et al. Localized primary lymphoma of bone. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:1087.
383. Baar J, Burkes RL, Gospodarowicz M. Primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of bone. Semin Oncol 1999;26:270.

384. Christie DR, Barton MB, Bryant G, et al. Osteolymphoma (primary bone lymphoma): an Australian review of 70 cases. Australasian Radiation Oncology Lymphoma Group (ARLOG). Aust N Z J
Med 1999;29:214.
385. Coppes MJ, Patte C, Couanet D, et al. Childhood malignant lymphoma of bone. Med Pediatr Oncol 1991;19:22.
386. Furman WL, Fitch S, Hutsu HO, et al. Primary lymphoma of bone in children. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1275.
387. Suryanarayan K, Shuster JJ, Donaldson SS, et al. Treatment of localized primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of bone in children: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:456.
388. Jaffe N, Frei E, Traggis D, Watts H. Adjuvant methotrexate and citrovorum factor treatment of osteogenic sarcoma. N Engl J Med 1974;291:994.
389. Rosenberg SA, Chabner BA, Young RC, et al. Treatment of osteogenic sarcoma. I. Effect of adjuvant high dose methotrexate after amputation. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:739.
390. Cortes E, Necheles TF, Holland JF, et al. Adjuvant therapy of operable primary osteosarcoma: a Cancer and Leukemia Group B experience. In: Salmon S, Jones S, eds. Adjuvant therapy of
cancer, vol 3. New York: Grune & Stratton, 1981:201.
391. Sutow WW, Sullivan WP, Fernbach DJ, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy in primary treatments of osteogenic sarcoma. A Southwest Oncology Group study. Cancer 1975;36:1598.
392. Sutow WW, Gehan EA, Dyment PG, et al. Multidrug adjuvant chemotherapy for osteosarcomas of the extremity: interim report of a Southwest Oncology Group study. Cancer Treat Rep
1978;62:265.
393. Herson J, Sutow WW, Elder K, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy in nonmetastatic osteosarcoma: a Southwest Oncology Group study. Med Pediatr Oncol 1980;8:343.
394. Van der Scheuren E, Breur K. Role of lung irradiation in the adjuvant treatment of osteosarcoma. Recent Results Cancer Res 1982;80:98.
395. Pratt CB, Champion JE, Fleming ID, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy for osteosarcoma of the extremity. Long-term results of two consecutive prospective protocol studies. Cancer 1990;65:439.
396. Ettinger LJ, Douglass HO, Higby DJ, et al. Adjuvant Adriamycin and cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (cisplatinum) in primary osteosarcoma. Cancer 1981;47:248.
397. Weiner M, Harris M, Lewis M, et al. Neoadjuvant high dose methotrexate, cisplatin, and doxorubicin for the management of patients with nonmetastatic osteosarcoma. Cancer Treat Rep
1986;70:1431.
398. Bacci G, Picci P, Ferrari S, et al. Primary chemotherapy and delayed surgery for nonmetastatic osteosarcoma of the extremities. Results in 164 patients preoperatively treated with high doses
of methotrexate followed by cisplatin and doxorubicin. Cancer 1993;72:3227.

SECTION 40.1 Molecular Biology of Mesothelioma
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 40.1
Molecular Biology of Mesothelioma
JOSEPH R. TESTA
HARVEY I. PASS
MICHELE CARBONE
Introduction
Mechanism of Asbestos-Induced Oncogenesis
Cytogenetic Assessment of Malignant Mesotheliomas
Deletion Mapping
Chromosome 1p22
Chromosome 3p21
Chromosome 6q
Chromosome 9p21
Chromosome 15q11.1-15
Alterations of Tumor Suppressor Genes in Mesothelioma
Simian Virus 40
Conclusions
Summary
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Malignant mesotheliomas (MMs) are highly aggressive neoplasms that arise primarily from the surface serosal cells of the pleural, peritoneal, and pericardial cavities.
Epidemiologic studies have established that exposure to asbestos fibers is the primary cause of MM, 1 and more recent investigations have implicated simian virus 40
(SV40) in the etiology of some MMs. 2,3 and 4 MM is characterized by a long latency from the time of exposure to asbestos to the onset of disease, suggesting that
multiple somatic genetic events are required for tumorigenic conversion of a normal mesothelial cell. Early evidence in support of this notion was provided by
karyotypic analyses, which revealed multiple clonal cytogenetic alterations in most human MMs. 5 Although a specific chromosomal change is not shared by all MMs,
several prominent sites of chromosome loss have been identified in this malignancy. Tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) residing in these deleted chromosome regions
may be responsible for the tumorigenic conversion of mesothelial cells, and studies have begun to identify the specific TSGs that contribute to the development and
progression of MM. In this chapter, we provide an overview of recurrent chromosome deletions and molecular genetic alterations characteristic of MM. We also review
the mechanistic role of asbestos and SV40 in this malignancy.

MECHANISM OF ASBESTOS-INDUCED ONCOGENESIS
Presently, it is not known whether asbestos fibers act directly on mesothelial cells or if they act indirectly via formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and growth
factors. 6,7 In tissue culture, asbestos can physically interact with the mitotic spindle apparatus, which can result in aneuploidy and other forms of chromosome
damage.8 In vivo, iron-rich crocidolite asbestos fibers may lead to the release of ROS when hydrogen peroxide and superoxide react to form hydroxyl radicals.
Asbestos has been shown to induce the expression and enzymatic activity of the mammalian DNA repair enzyme, apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) endonuclease,
suggesting that ROS generated by asbestos may induce DNA damage. 9 Furthermore, the inflammatory response to asbestos leads to the generation of several
cytokines that are responsible for the well-known local and systemic immunosuppressive activity of asbestos. 10 Asbestos can also induce autophosphorylation of the
epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor, leading to increased expression of the protooncogenes c- fos and c-jun, which encode transcription factors that activate
various genes critical in the initiation of DNA synthesis. 6 Persistent induction of these transcription activators by asbestos may enhance cellular proliferation and could
render cells more susceptible to subsequent mutations in TSGs. Such enhanced expression of protooncogenes and inactivation of TSGs may cooperate in a multistep
process that leads to MM.

CYTOGENETIC ASSESSMENT OF MALIGNANT MESOTHELIOMAS
Chromosome banding analyses have revealed that most MMs have complex karyotypes. 5 Among 20 MMs karyotyped by one of us (J. R. T.), all but one displayed
more than ten clonal chromosome alterations. 11 Deletions of specific regions in the short (p) arms of chromosomes 1, 3, and 9 and long (q) arm of 6 were repeatedly
observed in these tumors. Loss of a copy of chromosome 22 is the single most consistent numerical change seen in MMs. In the series by Taguchi et al., 11 deletions
and unbalanced rearrangements accounted for overlapping losses from the chromosome region 1p21-22 in 17 of 20 cases (85%). Thirteen of 20 MMs (65%) had
interstitial deletions or other rearrangements that resulted in losses from 3p21. Ten cases (50%) showed losses from 6q, with a shortest region of overlap (SRO) at
6q15-21. Losses involving 9p were observed in 16 cases (80%), with the SRO being 9p21-p22. Monosomy 22 was documented in 13 cases (65%). These recurrent
losses of 1p, 3p, 6q, 9p, and 22q frequently occurred in combination in a given tumor. All five of these aberrations were found in 5 of our 20 MMs. Losses of 1p, 3p,
9p, and 22q coexisted in another three cases, and various combinations of three of these four abnormalities were seen in seven other cases. It is not known if this
multistep cascade evolves slowly during the course of tumor formation or in rapid succession at some critical stage of the disease. In any case, the accumulated loss
of DNA sequences from chromosomes 1p, 3p, 6q, 9p, and 22q appears to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of MM.
More recent molecular cytogenetic studies, using comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), also have documented recurrent genomic imbalances in MM. CGH is a
fluorescence in situ hybridization technique that permits the identification of chromosome gains and losses in the entire tumor genome in a single experiment. Balsara
et al.12 performed CGH analyses on 24 MM cell lines derived from patients seen in the United States; each of these cell lines exhibited multiple (6 to 25) genomic
imbalances. Losses involving 22q, documented in 14 of 24 cell lines (58%), was the most prominent alteration. Also in agreement with earlier karyologic findings,
losses of 1p, 3p, 6q, and 9p were common, with each being observed in approximately 30% to 40% of cell lines. In addition, CGH analysis uncovered other recurrent
chromosome losses not highlighted in previous karyotypic studies. In particular, 13 of 24 MMs (54%) showed losses of part or all of 15q, with the SRO being
15q11.1-21. In addition, losses involving 14q24.2-qter and 13q12-14 were each observed in 42% of the cell lines. The most frequently overrepresented chromosomal
arm was 5p (54% of cases), suggesting the involvement of a putative oncogene(s) at this location.
Many of the recurrent genomic imbalances identified in U.S. cases were also detected in MM specimens examined by Finnish investigators. 13 However, three
prominent imbalances in the series from the United States (i.e., losses of 15q11.1-21.1, 8p21-pter, and 3p21) were each observed in only 1 of 42 cases from Finland.
Discrepancies between the data from Finland and the United States could reflect dissimilarities in the type of asbestos exposure or genetic differences in the study
populations. Alternatively, they may be related to the presence of SV40 in MMs from the United States and the absence of SV40 in MMs from Finland. 14

DELETION MAPPING
The recurrent genomic losses just described are consistent with a recessive mechanism of oncogenesis and can be viewed as indicators of the locations of putative
TSGs important in the development and progression of MM. As a prelude to the isolation of these genes, the critically deleted regions in 1p, 3p, 6q, 9p, and 15q
defined by cytogenetic studies of MM have been mapped at the molecular genetic level by loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis using polymorphic DNA markers.
Results of these investigations have been reviewed in detail elsewhere, 5 but are briefly summarized here.
CHROMOSOME 1p22
To map the critically deleted region of 1p, Lee et al. 15 performed LOH analyses of 50 MMs using a large panel of DNA markers located throughout the entire short arm
of chromosome 1. Allelic losses at 1p21-22 were observed in 36 cases (72%), and we were able to localize the SRO of deletions to a 4-centimorgan segment within
1p22. Currently, candidate TSGs mapped to this region are being assayed for possible mutations and altered expression in MMs.

CHROMOSOME 3p21
Research groups led by two of us (J. R. T., H. I. P.) have independently demonstrated that 3p is a common site of allelic loss in MM. In one of these investigations, for
example, 15 of 24 cases (62.5%) exhibited losses from 3p, with the highest frequency being at 3p21.3. Losses from this region also have been reported in many other
malignancies, particularly lung cancers, suggesting that perturbation of a TSG(s) located in this region may play a role in the development of multiple tumor types.
CHROMOSOME 6q
LOH analysis of 6q has revealed a complex pattern of allelic loss. LOH at 6q occurs in approximately 60% of MMs, and deletions fall into several discrete regions
involving markers mapped within 6q14-21, 6q16.6-21, 6q21-23.2, and 6q25. Multiple nonoverlapping regions of 6q loss also have been described in other types of
malignancy, such as non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
CHROMOSOME 9p21
To map the minimal region of 9p deletion in MMs, one of us (J. R. T.) initially performed gene dosage studies on a series of MM cell lines, 83% of which showed
homozygous or hemizygous deletions involving an approximately 1-megabase segment located between the interferon gene cluster and the marker D9S171 in 9p21.
The CDKN2A locus, which encodes the alternative TSG products p16 and p14 ARF is located within this region. The cellular function of p16 and p14 ARF and their
potential role in MM are discussed in the following section, Alterations of Tumor Suppressor Genes in Mesothelioma.
CHROMOSOME 15q11.1-15
CGH analyses performed by Balsara et al. 12 revealed losses from 15q in 13 of 24 MM cell lines (54%) examined, and subsequent LOH analyses showed allelic losses
from one or more 15q loci in 10 of these 13 lines. The extent of overlap of 15q deletions was used to define a minimal region of chromosome loss within 15q11.1-15.
Losses overlapping this region also have been observed in several other types of malignancy, such as metastatic tumors of the breast, lung, and colon, suggesting
that this region harbors a TSG that may contribute to the progression of diverse cancer types.

ALTERATIONS OF TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENES IN MESOTHELIOMA
One of the protein products of the CDKN2A locus, p16, is capable of binding to the cyclin-dependent kinase CDK4, thereby inhibiting the catalytic activity of the
CDK4/cyclin D enzymes. Several months after its initial cloning, the p16 gene was identified as the 9p21 putative TSG by using a positional cloning approach, and
homozygous deletions of p16 were detected at high frequencies in cell lines derived from many different kinds of cancer. 16
Because of its location within the region we previously determined as the SRO of 9p deletions in MMs and because of its involvement in many other cancer types, p16
emerged as the prime candidate for the 9p TSG in MM. Among 40 MM cell lines studied by Cheng et al., 17 34 (85%) had homozygous deletions of one or more p16
exons and another had a point mutation in p16. Down-regulation of p16 was observed in four of the remaining cell lines. Homozygous deletions of p16 were identified
in 5 of 23 MM specimens (22%). The finding of a much higher incidence of p16 alterations in MM cell lines than in tumor tissues may be associated with a selective
growth advantage provided by p16 deletion during the culturing process. On the other hand, MM samples often contain a significant amount of contaminating normal
stroma, which can mask the existence of a homozygous deletion in the malignant cell population. Down-regulation of p16 in MM cells may result from 5' CpG island
hypermethylation, as has been demonstrated in other types of cancer. 18 At the protein level, Kratzke et al. 19 reported abnormal expression of p16 in 12 of 12 MM
specimens and 15 of 15 MM-derived cell lines examined by immunohistochemistry. Moreover, in xenograft experiments, reexpression of p16 in MM cells resulted in
cell-cycle arrest and cell death, as well as inhibition of tumor formation or diminished tumor size. 20
It is important to note that homozygous deletions of the CDKN2A locus would in many cases also lead to the inactivation of another putative TSG, p14ARF (the mouse
homologue is p19ARF), because p16 and p14ARF share exons 2 and 3, although their reading frames differ. p14 ARF is essential for the activation of p53 in response to
the action of oncogenes such as Ras. 21 On the other hand, p16 induces a G 1 cell-cycle arrest by inhibiting the phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein, pRb.
Thus, homozygous loss of p14ARF and p16 would collectively affect both p53- and pRb-dependent growth regulatory pathways. However, there is evidence that
retention of exon 1b, which encodes the active domain of p14 ARF, may produce a peptide containing a functional, or partly functional, protein. 21 Moreover, unlike the
response to oncogenic Ras, p14 ARF is not required for activation of p53 in response to DNA damage by agents such as asbestos, suggesting that p16 could be the
critical TSG targeted by 9p21 deletions in MM.
Extensive LOH analysis of chromosome 22 losses in MM has not been performed because an entire copy of chromosome 22 is lost in most cases. Although the
neurofibromatosis type 2 TSG, NF2, predisposes affected individuals primarily to tumors of neuroectodermal origin, somatic mutations of NF2 have occasionally been
identified in seemingly unrelated malignancies. 22 Thus, two groups independently embarked on mutational studies of NF2 in MM. Bianchi et al. 22 identified nucleotide
mutations in 8 of 15 MM cell lines (53%). The mutations, which included deletions and insertions and one nonsense mutation, predicted truncated forms of the NF2
protein, known as merlin or schwannomin. Similar results were also reported by Sekido et al., 23 who detected somatic mutations in one MM specimen and in 7 of 17
MM cell lines (41%). In the study by Bianchi et al., 22 the mutations observed in complementary DNAs from MM cell lines were confirmed in genomic DNA from six
matched primary tumor specimens. It is intriguing that the two complementary DNA alterations that could not be confirmed by genomic analysis were both
splicing-related—that is, deletion of exon 10 in one cell line and a 43-base-pair insertion between exons 13 and 14 in the other. This finding suggests that aberrant
splicing, either by mutations of cis elements or by changes in the splicing machinery regulating the processing of NF2 transcripts, may constitute an additional
mechanism for NF2 inactivation in MM.
In a subsequent report, mutations in the NF2 coding region were detected in 12 of 23 new MM cell lines. 24 Western blot analyses revealed high levels of NF2 in 11
MM cell lines lacking NF2 mutations, whereas NF2 protein was not detectable in the 12 cell lines that exhibited alterations of the NF2 gene. In addition, two cell lines
with NF2 mutations reported in an earlier study were also examined, and both of these cell lines showed no NF2 expression. LOH analyses were performed on the
entire 25 MM cell lines using two polymorphic DNA markers residing at or near the NF2 locus in chromosome 22q12. Eighteen of the 25 cell lines (72%) showed
losses at one or both of these loci. All cases exhibiting mutation or aberrant expression of NF2 showed allelic losses, implying that inactivation of NF2 in MM occurs
via a two-hit mechanism.

SIMIAN VIRUS 40
SV40 is a DNA tumor virus that has been associated with MM. Although SV40 is endogenous to the rhesus monkey, the virus infected the human population through
contaminated polio- and adenovaccines, both attenuated and killed, between 1955 and 1963. 2,3 and 14 Poliovaccines were prepared in cell cultures grown as
monolayers of infected rhesus monkey kidney cells. Because the virus produces no cytopathic effects in these cells, their infection went unrecognized until 1960,
when high titers of the virus were found in some lots of the vaccine. As a result of this contamination, it is estimated that up to 96 million adults and children in the
United States alone may have been injected with poliovaccines containing SV40. After 1963, slow-replicating strains of SV40, which are difficult to detect using
cytopathic tests, may have infected humans exposed to products produced with monkey cells. 25 This hypothesis is supported by the observation that individuals born
after 1962 with minimal risk of exposure to contaminated vaccines had an approximately 10% positive rate for SV40-neutralizing antibodies. 3 In addition, horizontal
transmission is also possible because SV40 sequences have been detected in sperm, in circulating mononuclear phagocytes, and in cells obtained from the milk of a
healthy woman.2,3 and 4 Regardless of its method of introduction into humans, SV40 appears to be presently transmitted among humans similarly to other
papovaviruses.
A link between SV40 and tumor development was first recognized in hamsters, when, in 1960, Bernice Eddy found that subcutaneous injection of rhesus monkey
kidney cells into newborn hamsters led to the formation of sarcomas at the injection site. In 1991, it was found that 60% of hamsters injected intracardially with SV40
developed pleural MMs. 4 When SV40 was injected into the pleural spaces of these animals, 100% developed pleural MMs in 3 to 6 months. 4 Interestingly, in
hamsters, SV40 is a much more potent carcinogen in the induction of MMs than asbestos. For example, in a study by Smith and Hubert, 26 hamsters were injected
intrapleurally with varying doses of chrysotile, amosite, and tremolite. Of 50 hamsters, 13 developed MMs on injection with chrysotile. In a separate group of 50
animals, four developed MMs when injected with amosite. No tumors were observed in those injected with tremolite. Among all tumors that developed, the earliest was
observed after 151 days in a hamster injected intrapleurally with 25 mg of chrysotile. In contrast, MMs developed in 100% of hamsters injected intrapleurally with

SV40 in only 3 to 6 months.4
The discovery that SV40 produced MMs in hamsters subsequently led to the polymerase chain reaction analysis of human MM specimens for the presence of the
virus.27 It was found that 29 of 48 human MMs (60%) contained and expressed SV40 DNA. Sequence analysis revealed that these DNA sequences were homologous
to SV40. These results were confirmed by many laboratories 3,4 and by an independent multilaboratory study organized by the International Mesothelioma Interest
Group.28 This study found that 83% of the MMs tested contained SV40 DNA sequences. 28 More recently, using a microdissection technique, Schivapurkar et al.
demonstrated that SV40 is specifically present in neoplastic MM cells and not in the surrounding reactive stromal cells or in lung cancer cells. 29 It should be noted,
however, that Finnish MM specimens consistently tested negative for SV40. 14 This finding, together with the observation of a different incidence of SV40 in bone
tumors from different regions of the world, suggest geographic differences for SV40 in human tumors. 2,3 and 4 It has been hypothesized that these differences may be
related either to the use of contaminated poliovaccines (because Finnish poliovaccines were not contaminated by SV40) or to other factors presently unknown. 14
The ability of SV40 to transform human cells in vitro is well established. The SV40 genome is a double-stranded circular DNA molecule containing 5243 base pairs,
which can be divided into two regions, early and late, according to the order in which they are transcribed. 2,3 and 4 The early region encodes three proteins—large T
antigen (Tag), small t antigen (tag), and 17kT—and is responsible for the transforming ability of the virus. The late region encodes viral coat proteins. Only the early
region is necessary for transformation to occur, so immortalization experiments have been done with both the whole viral genome and the early-region DNA alone. 2,3
and 4
Tag binds to viral and cellular DNA, inducing their replication, and has mutagenic and clastogenic function, as it can cause chromosome rearrangements, point
mutations, and aneuploidy. Tag is also capable of binding and inactivating the products of several TSGs, including p53, pRb, pRb2/p130, p107, p400, and p300,
which are necessary to prevent cells with DNA damage from cycling. 2,3 and 4 In addition, through inhibition of p53, Tag inactivates an essential cell checkpoint at which
DNA alterations are repaired before the cell is allowed to continue into the S phase of the cell cycle. If the cell does not repair the mutations, normally apoptosis
occurs. Tag inhibition of p53 allows the cell to undergo mitosis even in the presence of mutations. Whether continuous expression of Tag is necessary to maintain the
transformed phenotype is currently unclear. 2,3 and 4 Experiments in hamsters indicate that continuous expression of Tag is necessary to induce and maintain
transformation. In contrast, more recent experiments in SV40 transgenic mice and human cells in vitro2,4 and in rats 30 suggest that continuous expression of Tag is not
always needed for maintenance of the transformed phenotype.
A 19-kD protein, tag is found predominantly in the cytoplasm of infected or transformed cells and performs several functions to increase the transforming potential of
Tag.2,3 and 4 It increases production of Tag, causes mitosis in quiescent cells through stimulation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase and AP-1, and contributes
to the complete inactivation of p53 by stimulating cellular phosphatase 2A (PP2A) to indirectly alter the phosphorylation state of p53.
After infection with SV40, some human cells die and others are transformed. Many of the transformed cells eventually reach crisis and die, but a few become
immortal.31 Although human cells immortalized by SV40 do not produce tumors in nude mice, these same cells may become oncogenic if they are transfected with an
oncogene, mutated by carcinogens, or if they are passed enough times to allow a significant number of mutations to accrue. 2,3 and 4,31
Through the actions of Tag and tag, human mesothelial cells, fibroblasts, bronchial epithelium, and breast epithelium have been transformed in vitro.31 Human cells
transformed by SV40 in tissue culture, when injected into human volunteers, have induced subcutaneous tumors. 4 Analysis of p53 and retinoblastoma family members
demonstrated that Tag complexes and inactivates these gene products in human MM. 32,33 p53, pRb, p107, and pRb2/p130 are present in detectable quantities in
human mesothelial cells, and their expression is also significantly associated with Tag expression. 32,33 Their absence of mutations, their unusually high level of
expression in tumor cells, and the ability of Tag to co-precipitate with each of these tumor suppressors supports the assertion that SV40 Tag binds, stabilizes, and
inactivates p53 and retinoblastoma proteins, which may allow for MM development. 32,33 This hypothesis has been supported by experiments in which transfection of
antisense SV40 inhibited Tag expression, restored the p53-p21 pathway, and caused growth arrest and apoptosis of SV40-positive human MM cell lines. 34 These
findings suggest that antisense SV40 strategies may be useful in the treatment of SV40-positive MM patients. 34

CONCLUSIONS
Multiple genetic alterations are involved in the development of most malignancies. Many MM patients who expressed SV40-Tag contained asbestos in their lungs. 8,35
Both SV40 and asbestos cause genetic damage. Thus, SV40 may act with asbestos to cause MM. Cells of patients with preexisting genetic alterations have been
found to be more susceptible to SV40 transformation than normal control cells. 2,3 and 4 For instance, the transformation frequency by SV40 of fibroblasts from a lung
cancer patient with Klinefelter's syndrome was three to ten times higher than that of fibroblasts from normal individuals with no history of cancer. Furthermore,
fibroblasts from individuals with Down syndrome and Fanconi's anemia also have increased susceptibility to transformation by SV40 in vitro. Thus, it is possible that
because cells with preexisting genetic alterations are more easily transformed by SV40, cells harboring DNA alterations caused by asbestos would also be more
prone to SV40 transformation.
In a normal cell, mitosis is controlled through a delicate balance of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events. Increased levels of AP-1 are ultimately responsible
for cell division, and the activity of AP-1 is normally regulated through phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events ( Fig. 40.1-1). Autophosphorylation of the EGF
receptor, or activation of ras and others, leads to phosphorylation of MEK1 kinase, which in turn phosphorylates the MAP kinases, also known as
extracellular-regulated kinases (ERK). The activation of these kinases causes activation of other intermediaries, such as elk-1, and this in turn stimulates c-fos and
c-jun and other members of the AP-1 family, inducing cell division. 6 Down-regulation of AP-1 activity is achieved through PP2A, which dephosphorylates MAP kinases.
Asbestos and SV40 Tag, working through this mechanism, may actually induce tumor formation. Asbestos is capable of inducing both DNA damage and
autophosphorylation of the EGF-receptor, which eventually leads to increased c-fos and c-jun expression, AP-1 expression, and cell division. 36 When Tag is
concurrently expressed, it binds and inhibits p53 and pRb and causes DNA alterations. In addition, tag can bind and inactivate PP2A, allowing increased activity of
MAP kinases, AP-1 and, ultimately, cell division. Tag inactivation of p53 does not allow repair of the mutations caused by asbestos and/or Tag at the G 1/S checkpoint
mediated by p53 through p21. Thus, these two carcinogens would allow the cell to divide unchecked and accumulate further somatic genetic changes. 2,3 and 4 Whereas
DNA alterations are either of no significance or lead to cell death in the majority of the cases, a few cells could potentially develop perturbations of key cell-cycle
regulatory genes 5 and become immortalized, transformed, and tumorigenic. Therefore, we propose that the combined effects of asbestos and SV40 overwhelm
cell-cycle regulatory mechanisms, result in unchecked cell division, and occasionally allow transformation and MM development. Evidence in support of this assertion
comes from experiments with p53-deficient mice.37 These studies demonstrate that p53-deficient animals are more susceptible to the induction of MM on exposure to
asbestos. Similarly, human mesothelial cells positive for SV40 have Tag-mediated inhibition of p53 33 and may be more susceptible to asbestos carcinogenicity. The
finding that, in MM cells, restoration of the p53 pathway with antisense Tag causes growth arrest and apoptosis supports this scenario. 34 It should be noted that SV40
is a very strong immunogen and that cells expressing SV40 viral antigens are usually efficiently recognized and killed by the host immune system. 2,3 and 4 In other
words, SV40 is a very potent carcinogen, capable of fully transforming human cells in tissue culture. 2,3 and 4 At the same time, SV40 is a strong immunogen; therefore,
SV40-transformed cells should be killed by the immune system. It is possible that the local and systemic immunosuppressive activity of asbestos 10 may favor the
growth of cells expressing SV40 antigens and may partly explain the strong association of SV40 with MM.

FIGURE 40.1-1. Diagram illustrating mesothelioma pathogenesis. Increased levels of activator protein 1 (AP-1) stimulate cell division. 36 The activity of AP-1 is
regulated through a delicate balance between phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. Autophosphorylation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R), or
activation of ras and others, leads to phosphorylation of MEK1 kinase, which in turn phosphorylates the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases also known as
extracellular-regulated kinases (ERK). The activation of these kinases leads through other intermediaries, such as elk-1 (Elk1), to the activation of c- fos, c-jun, and

other members of the AP-1 family (not shown), which through their transcriptional activity stimulate cell division. 36 Phosphatase 2A (PP2A) down-regulates AP-1
activity by dephosphorylating the MAP kinases; therefore, PP2A plays an important role in preventing asbestos-mediated cancerogenesis. Crocidolite asbestos
induces both DNA mutations and autophosphorylation of the EGF-R, which leads to increased levels of c- fos and c-jun expression, AP-1 activation, and cell division. 36
When simian virus 40 (SV40) large T antigen (Tag) is expressed in this system, it binds and inhibits p53 and the retinoblastoma protein pRb, and it contributes to the
development of DNA alterations. 32,33 In addition, Tag is known to be directly and indirectly (through p53 inactivation) mutagenic. 2,4 When SV40 small t antigen (tag) is
also expressed in this system, it binds and inactivates PP2A and contributes to cellular transformation. This leads to increased activity of the MAP kinases, increased
activity of AP-1, and cell division. 36 In this scenario, crocidolite may increase the amount of c- fos and c-jun and, to some extent, their activity, whereas tag, by
removing PP2A, further increases their activity. If the dividing cells have developed DNA alterations (such as p16 and p14ARF) through the mutagenic effects of
asbestos—mediated through the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) created by alveolar macrophages during phagocytosis of asbestos fibers 5,36—and/or
Tag, these mutations may not be repaired because of the Tag inactivation of the G 1/S checkpoint mediated by p53 through p21. 32,33 and 34 In this scenario, the cell may
complete division and possibly continue to divide. 34 Cells with unrepaired DNA damage are prone to develop additional DNA alterations that usually result in cell
death but occasionally may result in immortalization, which may be followed by transformation and tumor development. Therefore, the combined effects of asbestos
and SV40 may overwhelm the cell-cycle regulatory mechanisms and result in cell division and occasionally in cellular transformation, which may lead to mesothelioma
development. Because asbestos depresses both the local and systemic immune responses, 10 asbestos may help mesothelial cells expressing SV40 antigens to
escape immune surveillance. Arrowheads indicate a stimulatory effect, and crossed bars indicate an inhibitory effect. The circle indicates nonintegrated SV40; in
some tumors, however, SV40 has been found integrated in the host cell DNA. NF2, neurofibromatosis type 2; TSG, tumor suppressor genes.

SUMMARY
A large body of experimental and epidemiologic data support the notion that asbestos, or at least amphibole asbestos, causes MM. The same data also support the
notion that exposure to asbestos is usually not sufficient for MM development and that other factors, including radiation, genetic predisposition, and SV40, may render
some individuals more susceptible to asbestos carcinogenicity. At this time, the involvement of radiation and genetic predisposition in MM development is speculative.
On the other hand, SV40 is present in most human MMs. In these neoplasms, SV40 interferes with key cell-cycle regulatory genes and may contribute with asbestos
or alone (in non–asbestos-associated tumors) to the development of molecular genetic alterations that ultimately lead to a malignant phenotype. The local and
systemic immunosuppressive activity of asbestos may also interfere with the ability of the immune system to eliminate cells expressing SV40 antigens and thus favor
tumor progression.
Acknowledgments
This paper was supported by National Institutes of Health grants CA 45745 and CA 06927, a gift from the Local 14 Mesothelioma Fund of the International
Association of Heat and Frost Insulators & Asbestos Workers in memory of Hank Vaughan and Alice Haas (J. R. T.); and by American Cancer Society grant 8632 and
National Institutes of Health grant CA 77220 (M. C.).
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Craighead JE, Mossman BT. The pathogenesis of asbestos-associated diseases. N Engl J Med 1982;306:1446.
2. Carbone M, Fisher S, Powers A, Pass HI, Rizzo P. New molecular and epidemiological issues in mesothelioma: role of SV40. J Cell Physiol 1999;180:167.
3. Butel J, Lednicky J. Cell and molecular biology of SV40: implications for human infections and disease. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:119.
4. Carbone M, Rizzo P, Pass HI. Simian virus 40, poliovaccines, and human tumors: a review of recent developments. Oncogene 1997;15:1877.
5. Murthy SS, Testa JR. Asbestos, chromosomal deletions, and tumor suppressor genes in human malignant mesothelioma. J Cell Physiol 1999;180:150.
6. Mossman BT, Kamp DW, Weitzman SA. Mechanisms of carcinogenesis and clinical features of asbestos-associated cancers. Cancer Invest 1996;14:466.
7. Pache JC, Janssen YM, Walsh ES, et al. Increased epidermal growth factor-receptor protein in a human mesothelial cell line in response to long asbestos fibers. Am J Pathol 1998;152:333.
8. Ault JG, Cole RW, Jensen CG, et al. Behavior of crocidolite asbestos during mitosis in living vertebrate lung epithelial cells. Cancer Res 1995;55:792.
9. Fung H, Kow YW, Van Houten B, et al. Asbestos increases mammalian AP-endonuclease gene expression, protein levels, and enzyme activity in mesothelial cells. Cancer Res 1998;58:189.
10. Rosenthal GJ, Simeonova P, Corsini E. Asbestos toxicity: an immunologic perspective. Rev Environ Health 1999;14:11.
11. Taguchi T, Jhanwar SC, Siegfried JM, Keller SM, Testa JR. Recurrent deletions of specific chromosomal sites in 1p, 3p, 6q, and 9p in human malignant mesothelioma. Cancer Res
1993;52:4349.
12. Balsara BR, Bell DW, Sonoda G, et al. Comparative genomic hybridization and loss of heterozygosity analyses identify a common region of deletion at 15q11.1-15 in human malignant
mesothelioma. Cancer Res 1999;59:450.
13. Bjorkqvist AM, Tammilehto L, Anttila S, Mattson K, Knuutila S. Recurrent DNA copy number changes in 1q, 4q, 6q, 9p, 13q, 14q, and 22q detected by comparative genomic hybridization in
malignant mesothelioma. Br J Cancer 1997;75:523.
14. Hirvonen A, Mattson K, Karjalainen A, et al. Simian virus 40 (SV40)-like DNA sequences not detectable in Finnish mesothelioma patients not exposed to SV40 contaminated polio vaccines. Mol
Carcinog 1999;26:93.
15. Lee WC, Balsara B, Liu Z, Jhanwar SC, Testa JR. Loss of heterozygosity analysis defines a critical region in chromosome 1p22 commonly deleted in human malignant mesothelioma. Cancer
Res 1996;56:4297.
16. Kamb A, Gruis NA, Weaver-Feldhaus J, et al. A cell cycle regulator potentially involved in the genesis of many tumor types. Science 1994;264:436.
17. Cheng JQ, Jhanwar SC, Klein WM, et al. p16 alterations and deletion mapping of 9p21-p22 in malignant mesothelioma. Cancer Res 1994;54:5547.
18. Merlo A, Herman JG, Mao L, et al. 5' CpG island methylation is associated with transcriptional silencing of the tumor suppressor p16/CDKN2/MTS1 in human cancers. Nature Med 1995;1:686.
19. Kratzke RA, Otterson GA, Lincoln CE, et al. Immunohistochemical analysis of the p16INK4 cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor in malignant mesothelioma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1870.
20. Frizelle SP, Grim J, Zhou J, et al. Re-expression of p16INK4a in mesothelioma cells results in cell cycle arrest, cell death, tumor suppression and tumor regression. Oncogene 1998;16:3087.
21. Palmero I, Pantoja C, Serrano M. p19ARF links the tumour suppressor p53 to Ras. Nature 1998;395:125.
22. Bianchi AB, Mitsunaga SI, Cheng JQ, et al. High frequency of inactivating mutations in the neurofibromatosis type 2 gene ( NF2) in primary malignant mesotheliomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1995;92:10854.
23. Sekido Y, Pass HI, Bader S, et al. Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) gene is somatically mutated in mesothelioma but not in lung cancer. Cancer Res 1995;55:1227.
24. Cheng JQ, Lee WC, Klein MA, et al. Frequent alterations of NF2 and allelic loss from chromosome band 22q12 in malignant mesothelioma: evidence for a two-hit mechanism of NF2
inactivation. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1999;24:238.
25. Rizzo P, Di Resta I, Powers A, Rattner H, Carbone M. Unique strains of SV40 in commercial poliovaccines from 1955 not readily identifiable with current testing for SV40 infection. Cancer Res
1999;59:6103.
26. Smith WE, Hubert DD. The intrapleural route as a means for estimating carcinogenicity. In: Karbe E, Park JF. Experimental lung cancer. Carcinogenesis and bioassays. New York:
Springer-Verlag New York, 1974:92.
27. Carbone M, Pass HI, Rizzo P, et al. Simian virus 40like DNA sequences in human pleural mesothelioma. Oncogene 1994;9:1781.
28. Testa JR, Carbone M, Hirvonen A, et al. A multi-institutional study confirms the presence and expression of simian virus 40 in human malignant mesotheliomas. Cancer Res 1998;58:4505.
29. Schivapurkar N, Wiethege T, Wistuba II, et al. Presence of simian virus 40 sequences in malignant mesotheliomas and mesothelial cell proliferations. J Cell Biochem 1999;76:181.
30. Salewski H, Bayer TA, Eidhoff U, et al. Increased oncogenicity of subclones of SV40 large T-induced neuroectodermal tumor cell lines after loss of large T antigen expression and concomitant
mutation of p53. Cancer Res 1999;59:1980.
31. Bryan TM, Reddel RR. SV40-induced immortalization of human cells. Crit Rev Oncog 1994;5:331.
32. Carbone M, Rizzo P, Grimely PM, et al. Simian virus 40 large T antigen binds p53 in human mesotheliomas. Nature Med 1997;8:908.
33. De Luca A, Baldi A, Esposito V, et al. The retinoblastoma gene family pRb/p105, p107, pRb2/p130, and simian virus 40 large T antigen in human mesotheliomas. Nature Med 1997;3:913.
34. Waheed I, Guo ZS, Chen GA, et al. Antisense to SV40 early gene region induces growth arrest and apoptosis in T-antigen positive human pleural mesothelioma cells. Cancer Res
1999;15:6068.
35. Mayall FG, Jacobson G, Wilkins R. Mutations of p53 gene and SV40 sequences in asbestos associated and non-asbestos-associated mesotheliomas. J Clin Pathol 1999;4:291.
36. Robledo R, Mossmann B. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of asbestos induced fibrosis. J Cell Physiol 1999;180:158.
37. Marsella JM, Liu BL, Vaslet CA, Kane AB. Susceptibility of p53 deficient mice to induction of mesothelioma by crocidolite asbestos fibers. Environ Health Perspect 1998;141:1069.

SECTION 40.2 Management of Mesothelioma
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 40.2
Management of Mesothelioma
KAREN H. ANTMAN
HARVEY I. PASS
PETER B. SCHIFF
Epidemiology
Asbestos-Associated Mesothelioma
Mesotheliomas without a History of Asbestos Exposure
Biology of Mesothelioma: Ploidy Studies
Diagnosis of Mesothelioma
Humoral Factors
Pathology
Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma
Presentation
Staging
Natural History
Surgical Treatment
Radiation Therapy
Chemotherapy
Multimodality Treatment
Combined Radiotherapy and Chemotherapy
Surgery with Postoperative Adjuvant Therapy
Pleurectomy, Intrapleural Chemotherapy, with or Without Postoperative Chemotherapy
Extrapleural Pneumonectomy, Intravenous Chemotherapy, and Postoperative Radiotherapy
Novel Multimodal Approaches
Malignant Peritoneal Mesothelioma
Presentation
Well-Differentiated Papillary Mesothelioma or Cystic Mesotheliomas of the Peritoneum
Therapy
Malignant Mesothelioma of the Tunica Vaginalis Testis
Malignant Mesothelioma of the Pericardium
Benign Mesothelioma
Benign Fibrous Tumors of the Pleura
Benign Fibrous Mesotheliomas of the Genital Tracts
Benign Mesothelioma of the Cardiac Atrioventricular Node
Chapter References

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Asbestos is the predominant cause of pleural, peritoneal, and probably epididymal mesothelioma in humans. The resistance of asbestos to heat and combustion was
recognized by ancient civilizations. Although Pliny had observed that asbestos miners were less healthy than other slaves, the health hazards of asbestos exposure
were generally not recognized until this century. 1
The Industrial Revolution greatly expanded demand for asbestos as insulating and packing material for machines and power generators. In 1898, pulmonary scarring
and eventual death from respiratory failure was noted in asbestos workers from French and English asbestos textile mills. 2 However, the cause of the pulmonary
fibrosis remained uncertain because tuberculosis and other respiratory infections were often epidemic among poor laborers. The two World Wars further increased
the use of asbestos in ships and other equipment of combat and transport. The availability, durability, and low cost of asbestos additionally expanded its range of
uses in industrial and consumer products. In 1930, the causal association between asbestos and asbestosis was firmly established by Merewether and Price at the
London Chest Hospital. 3 When limits were set on allowable industrial levels of asbestos exposure in England, many thought the asbestos problem had been solved. 1
However, case reports of lung cancer in patients with asbestosis appeared as early as 1935. 4,5
In 1955, Doll 6 reported a case-control study that established the association between asbestos and lung cancer. The attitudes and opinions of scientists between
1935 and 1965 reveal early agreement on the carcinogenesis of asbestos by 1943 in Germany, but rejection of German scientific thought during and after World War
II and the lack of epidemiologic and experimental evidence delayed a consensus elsewhere. 7
Up to 8 million living persons in the United States have been occupationally exposed to asbestos over the last five decades during mining and milling of asbestos and
in diverse manufacturing processes that use the material. Today, many public and private buildings contain asbestos, including 10% to 15% of schools in the United
States that were insulated or sprayed on interior surfaces with asbestos between 1946 and 1972. The public health significance of exposure in such buildings and the
cost-effectiveness of asbestos removal are controversial. 8 However, one study suggested risk from such incidental exposures. For 9 of 12 schoolteachers with
mesothelioma, the only potential asbestos exposure was that derived from asbestos-containing building materials in schools. 9
ASBESTOS-ASSOCIATED MESOTHELIOMA
The existence of mesothelioma as a distinct pathologic entity was debated by pathologists before 1960. 10 In the late 1940s, case reports of mesotheliomas in patients
with asbestosis began to appear. In 1960, Wagner et al. 11 in South Africa reported 33 cases of mesothelioma diagnosed between ages 31 and 68 years in a South
African crocidolite mining community. An additional 14 cases were added in an addendum to the paper. A substantial proportion of these patients were exposed in
childhood through living in the vicinity of asbestos mills and mines; a few had occupational contact. This study was followed by reports of mesotheliomas in asbestos
workers in other parts of the world.
Mechanisms of Asbestos Carcinogenicity
Two major forms of asbestos exist: curly pliable serpentine asbestos (chrysotile) and rod-like amphiboles (crocidolite, amosite, anthophyllite, tremolite, and actinolyte).
The first three of these are mined for their commercial utility; the latter three are usually contaminants. Asbestos fibers tend to separate readily and form numerous
individual strands, which often are less than 1 µm in diameter.
Carcinogenic effects of asbestos appear to result from its physical properties, rather than chemical structure. 12 In one animal experiment, other fiber types produced
mesothelioma more efficiently than amosite asbestos. 13 Long rod-like fibers of narrow diameter are more likely to induce tumors in laboratory animals. 14 Although
serpentine asbestos (chrysotile) is generally considered less carcinogenic than the rod-like amphiboles (crocidolite, amosite, anthophyllite, tremolite, and actinolyte),
debate continues over whether cases associated with chrysotile asbestos are actually caused by amphibole contamination 15 or are caused by chrysotile itself. 16 Long,
needle-like amphibole fibers lodge more readily in the distal respiratory area, where they persist longer and are transported to the pleura and peritoneum. 14
After inhalation most asbestos is expectorated or swallowed and subsequently excreted in the feces. The remainder can be cleared from the tracheal and bronchial
tree via multiple mechanisms, including ciliary action in the trachea, ingestion by macrophages, or penetration through the endothelial lining into interstitial tissues. 17
Short fibers are cleared more readily than long fibers. Fibers that remain preferentially accumulate in the lower third of the lungs adjacent to the visceral pleura. Fibers
can be counted visually or using electron microscopy and correlate with asbestos exposure, 18 although visual counting provides substantially lower estimates of fibers
per gram of lung. 19

Asbestos results in an inflammatory and fibrotic process, mediated in part by cytokines released by activated alveolar macrophages. 20 At a molecular level,
protooncogenes such as c-sis (platelet-derived growth factor-b chain) are up-regulated in alveolar macrophages from fibrotic lungs, a factor that enhances mesothelial
cell proliferation. In addition, asbestos can transfect DNA into cells. 20 Epidermal growth factor–positive cells have been found in 68% of mesotheliomas examined and
correlate with improved survival. 21 Chrysotile fiber has been shown to be a strong mutagen in mammalian cells. 22 Asbestos fibers can cause persistent expression of
early response genes, such as c-fos and c-jun in tissue culture. 23 The oxidative stress response gene product, heme oxygenase, can be induced by asbestos fibers. 24
These findings suggest that reactive oxygen species produced by asbestos fibers are responsible for the expression of cytotoxicity, DNA damage, mutation, gene
expression, or carcinogenesis. Asbestos fibers have also been shown to enhance gamma ray–induced oncogenicity in mammalian cells. 22
Risk Rates
The annual incidence of mesothelioma is not known with certainty. 25 The neoplasm can be difficult to diagnose, even by expert pathologists. Data from death
certificates are unreliable for estimating disease frequency despite the usually rapidly fatal outcome of malignant mesothelioma. Cancer deaths are not coded by
morphology (mesothelioma). Rather, the cause of mortality is assigned by primary site of the neoplasm (primary neoplasms of pleura and peritoneum). In a study of
the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program of the National Cancer Institute, only 274 of 1130 white decedents with mesothelioma (approximately 95%
diagnosed by microscopy) were recorded as having died of a primary neoplasm of pleura or peritoneum. 26 The majority of these mesothelioma cases were coded as
having malignant neoplasm of the lung or unknown site.
A reasonable estimate is that 2200 new cases of mesothelioma occur annually in the United States (range, 1000 to more than 3000 cases) 26,27 or approximately 12.1
per million white men. In the United States, mesothelioma is approximately threefold more common in men than in women. 25,26 Incidence rises steadily with age and is
approximately tenfold higher in men aged 60 to 64 years as compared with those aged 30 to 34.
Because of local asbestos industries, some locations in the United States have incidences as high as 636 male cases and 96 female cases per year per million
population.28 Whether risk in such communities extends to the population at large who are not employed in the asbestos industry remains controversial. The
standardized incidence of mesothelioma in Wittenoom, Australia, was 260 per million for both men and women once residents employed in the crocidolite industry
were excluded. 29 Purely residential exposure accounted for only 3% of incident cases in Yorkshire, England, 30 but at least 18% of the cases in South Africa. 31
The incidence of mesothelioma appears to be increasing perhaps by as much as 50% in the last decade. 25,26 Projections of future incidence for the United States
suggest that the numbers of cases will peak at the turn of the twentieth century 32 or rise moderately in the twenty-first century, 27 and then decline as a result of
legislation to reduce asbestos exposure in the workplace and the ambient environment. In the Netherlands, the peak in annual male mesothelioma deaths is expected
later, in approximately the year 2018. Pleural mesothelioma may account for 0.87% of all deaths in the 1943 to 1947 birth cohort of Dutch men. 33 Peto et al. project
that the risk of dying of mesothelioma in Western Europe will double over the next 20 years, with the highest risk of approximately 1 in 150 men in the 1945 to 1950
birth cohort. 34
High-Risk Individuals
Persons at high risk of mesothelioma can be identified by tracing the processing and commercial uses of asbestos. The mineral is mined, milled, and incorporated into
a wide range of industrial and commercial products, including insulation, textiles, heat protectors, filters, and construction materials (spackling, roofing, siding, and
floor and ceiling tiles). 1,25 Workers with high levels of asbestos exposure, therefore, are miners, millers, producers of asbestos products, and laborers who install
plumbing, boilers, and heating equipment in ships, factories, and homes. The risk extends to workers who may not handle asbestos directly but are in proximity to the
material, such as carpenters, electricians, and welders in shipyards.
The risk of mesothelioma associated with occupational exposure to asbestos has been examined in case-control studies and cohort studies. In case-control studies,
up to 75% of cases had asbestos exposure, as compared with a small fraction of controls. 25 In cohort studies, up to 10% of asbestos workers have died of
mesothelioma.35 However, mesothelioma risk is difficult to quantitate for several reasons. First, ambient levels of asbestos in most workplaces have not been
measured. A high level in one study might be called moderate or low in another. Duration of employment has been used as another surrogate measure of exposure.
Second, the time from exposure to the development of mesothelioma is long, usually three to four decades in most reported studies. Mathematical modeling suggests
that risk of mesothelioma increases exponentially by the third to fourth power of time from first exposure, but few cohorts have been followed to the end of life. Third,
the composition of the inspired asbestos differed among exposed workers.
Despite the obstacles to quantifying risk of mesothelioma, several consistent observations have emerged from studies worldwide. Crocidolite is associated with high
risk of mesothelioma in miners, manufacturers, and workers who install asbestos products. 36 Another amphibole, amosite, appears to carry an intermediate risk.
Chrysotile, currently the major form of asbestos in production, shows the weakest association with mesothelioma. 14 Occupations with highest risk appear to be
insulators, asbestos producers and manufacturers, and heating and construction tradespeople. The projected lifetime risk among these workers exposed from early
adulthood ranges up to 20%. Working in proximity to these occupational groups in construction sites confers a relatively lower risk. In addition, some patients with
mesothelioma have reported only isolated or brief occupational exposures to asbestos.
In a cohort study of 248 insulation workers in Sweden where exposure to asbestos had almost ended in the mid-1970s, 84 deaths occurred between 1970 and 1994
compared with 46 expected mainly due to an increased cancer mortality (approximately 50%). The morbidity was increased for lung cancer (11.0 cases vs. 2.5
expected), peritoneal mesothelioma (7 vs. 0), cancer in pancreas (5.0 vs. 0.7). No pleural mesotheliomas were found. The risk of lung cancer did not reach normal
levels despite decreased asbestos exposure. Mesothelioma in insulation workers seems to be peritoneal more often than pleural. 37
Malignant mesothelioma is rarely curable at present, so screening of asbestos workers for mesothelioma is inappropriate. However, smoking greatly increases the risk
of lung cancer (but not mesothelioma) in asbestos workers and smoking cessation efforts are needed in this high-risk group. 38 Clinicians considering the diagnosis of
malignant mesothelioma should take a detailed exposure history emphasizing the period 20 to 50 years before diagnosis and including possible household contact
exposure. Brief exposures may be long forgotten. 39
Exposure in the Home
Mesothelioma in wives and children of asbestos workers has prompted studies that show increased asbestos levels in their homes. 40,41 Presumably, asbestos was
brought into the home on hair and on clothing to be washed in the family laundry. Asbestos workers have been required to shower and change clothing before leaving
the workplace only since 1972. Asbestos-related neoplasms have been reported in multiple members of some families, but genetic predisposition to the neoplasm
remains to be shown. The risk of mesothelioma in household contacts of asbestos workers has been estimated to be as high as 0.4 to 1.0%, 38 but clearly varies with
the level of household contamination, and may be overestimated in the reported data. More than one-half of women with mesothelioma in one series were household
contacts of asbestos workers.42
A high incidence of mesothelioma (22 per 10,000 persons of age greater than 25) observed in the Anatoli region of Turkey has been attributed to zeolite, a silicate
ubiquitous in the soil and to tremolite 43 and sometimes sprayed onto homes. Erionite found in Karain, Turkey, is also associated with a high incidence of
mesothelioma.44 In a cohort of 162 Karain immigrants to Sweden, 18 cases of mesothelioma had occurred, accounting for 14 of the 18 deaths (78%). 45 Although
human herpes virus (HHV) is associated with body cavity lymphomas, HHV-8 amplification products were absent by polymerase chain reaction in 13 diffuse malignant
mesotheliomas.46
MESOTHELIOMAS WITHOUT A HISTORY OF ASBESTOS EXPOSURE
No asbestos exposure can be documented in approximately 30% to 50% of cases of mesothelioma. Quantitation of asbestos fibers in some of these patients has
documented background pulmonary fiber levels consistent with the absence of a substantial asbestos exposure. 47 Two cases of peritoneal mesothelioma were
associated with familial Mediterranean fever. 48

Approximately 25 published cases of pleural and peritoneal mesothelioma have developed following therapeutic radiation 49,50 or in two patients, arising adjacent to
deposits of thorium dioxide (thorotrast) still visible on chest radiographs after extravasation during diagnostic procedures years earlier. Patients with a history of
Hodgkin's disease may have an increased risk of developing mesothelioma. All five of the mesotheliomas in one series occurred in the field of prior radiation therapy
with an average interval between radiation treatment and diagnosis of mesothelioma of 15 years. 51 Three of the five patients also received chemotherapy. No patients
recalled exposure to asbestos or had evidence of asbestosis on chest radiography. In reported cases a median of 16 years (range, 7 to 36 years) had elapsed
between radiation and detection of mesothelioma.

BIOLOGY OF MESOTHELIOMA: PLOIDY STUDIES
Ploidy status and the percentage of cells actively synthesizing DNA have been analyzed by flow cytometry in almost 200 malignant mesotheliomas. 52,53 and 54 Ploidy
and S-phase fraction seem to be consistent in different sections from the same tumor and were not associated with histologic subtype. 53 In the various studies, 60% to
78% were diploid and 27% were near diploid. In contrast, 85% to 88% of lung cancer are aneuploid. 52 Significantly shorter survival is associated with a high
percentage of S-phase cells (but not aneuploidy). 53,54

DIAGNOSIS OF MESOTHELIOMA
Initial misdiagnosis is common. Pathologic opinion appears particularly diverse when litigation is involved. Because a substantial percentage of mesotheliomas
develops in patients with no known asbestos exposure and other malignancies are common in asbestos workers, asbestos exposure should not influence the
diagnosis of mesothelioma. Because of the poor current prognosis of pleural mesothelioma, a major role of establishing the diagnosis is to exclude the possibility of a
more treatable illness. Accurate diagnosis is also important in the event of subsequent litigation and for epidemiologic and therapeutic studies.
HUMORAL FACTORS
Hyaluronic acid has been reported to be useful in diagnosis or for following response but is relatively nonspecific. 55 The level of hyaluronic acid was studied in the
pleural fluid of 19 patients with malignant mesothelioma, 27 with lung cancer, 1 with breast cancer, 1 with mediastinal tumor, and 51 with benign diseases. The pleural
fluid concentration of hyaluronic acid was greater than 100 µg/mL in 37% of (7 of 19) mesotheliomas and 1.3% of (1 of 80) lung cancers and other malignant and
benign diseases. 56 A markedly elevated serum or pleural fluid carcinoembryonic antigen, however, suggests a diagnosis other than mesothelioma.
Hematopoietic growth factors 57,58 and 59 and blood group antigens 60,61 have been produced by normal and malignant mesothelial cell lines. Serum levels of interleukin-6
(IL-6), C-reactive protein, a 1-acid glycoprotein, and fibrinogen were significantly higher in 25 mesothelioma patients than in patients with lung adenocarcinoma with
cytology-positive pleural effusions. Serum IL-6 levels correlated with the levels of the acute-phase proteins and significantly with platelet counts. The level of IL-6 in
the pleural fluid of patients with mesothelioma was approximately 60 to 1400 times higher than in the serum. Even higher levels of IL-6 in the pleural fluid and of
thrombocytosis were found in patients with tuberculous pleurisy. High cytokine levels were not specific to mesothelioma (similar profiles were found in patients with
tuberculous pleurisy). However, the detection of a markedly increased level of IL-6 in pleural fluid argues against a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma. 62
PATHOLOGY
Benign inflammatory and reactive processes producing mesothelial hyperplasia or other malignant tumors may mimic mesothelioma 63 but do not invade normal
tissues and lack cytologic atypia and hyperchromatism. Repeated cytologic examination or biopsy results may be negative despite active tumor. When tumor tissue is
obtained, light microscopy often provides documentation of malignancy, but usually does not distinguish adenocarcinoma from mesothelioma. Electron microscopy of
either needle biopsy or cytocentrifuge specimens from pleural fluid may establish the mesothelial origin of the malignant tumor. Sputum cytology and bronchoscopy
may be helpful in documenting an occult bronchogenic adenocarcinoma. The Cancer Committee of the College of American Pathologists has established a checklist
protocol for the examination of specimens from patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma. 64
Adenocarcinomas from primary lung, breast, ovary, stomach, kidney, or prostate cancer frequently metastasize to the pleura and can be extremely difficult to
distinguish from epithelial mesothelioma cytologically or histologically. Metastatic adenocarcinoma with extensive pleural involvement may grossly resemble
mesothelioma and has been called pseudomesothelioma.65
Sarcomatous mesotheliomas must be distinguished from fibrosarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma, malignant schwannoma, and hemangiopericytoma. Synovial
sarcoma and carcinosarcomas, which may also have mixed sarcomatous and epithelial components, usually present as a localized mass in the lung.
Autopsy requires skilled performance and experienced interpretation to reliably exclude other occult primary carcinomas. Advanced malignant mesothelioma tends to
form peripheral visceral masses mimicking primary carcinomas. 66 Asbestos counts and postmortem examinations may have legal as well as epidemiologic value.
Cytology
In one study of 21 cases of epithelial malignant mesothelioma (15 pleural, 6 peritoneal) diagnosed by effusion cytology, 13 were of the cohesive cell type and 8 were
of the noncohesive cell type. Because of its resemblance to florid reactive mesothelial hyperplasia and the general lack of awareness of the existence of the
single-cell pattern of mesothelioma, the noncohesive cell type can often be missed. 67
For 29 patients with at least one cytologic pleural fluid examination, cytology was positive for mesothelioma in 32%. The median time from initial symptoms to the
diagnosis of mesothelioma was 8 weeks (4 weeks for patients with positive or suspicious cytology results, and 12 weeks for those with negative cytology results).
Cytogenetic analysis of pleural fluid had a sensitivity of 56% and was positive in one case in which results of cytologic examination were negative. Patients in whom
the time from presentation to diagnosis was greater than 1 year all had negative cytologic results followed by long periods without further workup, despite a history of
exposure to asbestos. Because the sensitivity of cytologic examination for mesothelioma is so low, patients in whom mesothelioma is suspected should undergo
immediate pleural biopsy if the pleural fluid cytology result is negative. 68
Fine-Needle Aspirations
Cytomorphologic features (amount of cytoplasm and the degree of nuclear pleomorphism and cellular cohesion) on fine-needle aspiration of primary mesothelioma
and of metastatic lesions varies greatly among individual cases. However, numerous distinct, uniformly small intracytoplasmic vacuoles, believed to represent
intracellular fat and glycogen, were consistently present in metastatic lesions. 69
GROSS DESCRIPTION. Discrete nodules and plaques of firm, grayish tumor coalesce, eventually obliterating the parietal and visceral surfaces. A rind of up to 5 cm
in thickness may encase and constrict the lung with only superficial invasion. The chest wall, pericardium, and diaphragm as well as the interlobar fissures are
involved relatively early. 66 At autopsy, tumor invades thoracic lymph nodes in up to 70% of patients with occasional extension to cervical nodes. 63 Small
hematogenous metastases are documented to liver and lung and less commonly to kidney, adrenal, and bone in 33% to 67% of cases. 63,70 Without careful
postmortem examination, hematogenous metastases may be missed.
MICROSCOPIC DESCRIPTION. Extensive sampling of biopsy, laparotomy, pleurectomy, or pneumonectomy specimens is required. A small piece should be fixed in
glutaraldehyde for electron microscopy and the remainder promptly fixed in neutral buffered formalin. There are three histologic variants: epithelial, sarcomatoid, and
mixed.66,71 Fifty percent to 60% are epithelial, characterized by tubular, papillary, solid, or vacuolated patterns. The sarcomatoid variant is composed of ovoid to
spindle-shaped cells with cellularity and hyperchromatism similar to that of a fibrosarcoma. A biphasic pattern with mixed epithelial and sarcomatoid elements is
virtually pathognomonic of malignant mesothelioma although extensive sampling may be required to demonstrate the minor component.
Histochemical Methods

Three methods are in common use to distinguish metastatic adenocarcinomas from epithelial mesotheliomas. The periodic acid–Schiff stain used before and after
diastase digestion, is the single most reliable histochemical method generally available. 66 Neutral mucopolysaccharides that are strongly positive for periodic
acid–Schiff diastase are found in intracellular secretory vacuoles and in intraacinar vacuoles in most adenocarcinomas, but are rarely found in mesotheliomas. Their
presence is strong but not unequivocal evidence for a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma. Appropriate controls for diastase activity and to distinguish staining of vacuoles
from stroma and other structures are essential. Alcian blue at pH 2.5 and colloidal iron stain acid mucopolysaccharides are present in mesothelioma and many
adenocarcinomas.63 Disappearance after digestion with hyaluronidase, which removes hyaluronic acid in intracellular and secretory vacuoles and intercellular lumens,
is characteristic of mesothelioma. Stromal hyaluronic acid is a nonspecific finding in many tumors, however. Under most staining conditions, Mayer's mucicarmine
method (which stains neutral and weakly acidic mucopolysaccharides in intracellular and intercellular secretory vacuoles pink or red) is strongly positive in many
adenocarcinomas. Mesotheliomas are usually negative but occasionally may stain strongly in some laboratories possibly due to fixation or technical conditions. Thus,
the method is not completely reliable.
Immunohistochemistry
Immunoperoxidase stains using various antibodies may be effectively applied to paraffin-embedded tumor tissue. Monoclonal antibodies against keratin proteins are
strongly reactive in mesothelioma with diffuse cytoplasmic staining, 72 and perinuclear accentuation with ring formation. Both epithelial and spindle-shaped tumor cells
of mixed and sarcomatoid variants are often stained, reflecting transitional patterns of differentiation also observed on electron microscopy. 73 This reactivity is helpful
in distinguishing mesothelioma from fibrosarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH), and schwannoma; however, carcinosarcomas and synovial sarcomas, which
also have biphasic histology, also express keratin proteins. Adenocarcinomas also stain positively, usually with localization to the periphery of the tumor cell.
Immunoperoxidase staining for Leu M1 is usually absent in mesotheliomas but positive in most adenocarcinomas. Staining for carcinoembryonic antigen is moderate
to strong in most adenocarcinomas, but often weak or absent in renal, prostate, and some ovarian and endometrial carcinomas as well as mesotheliomas. 74,75 and 76
Unfortunately, there is marked variability among available monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies. 77
Electron Microscopy
The epithelial variant is composed of polygonal cells with numerous long, slender branching surface microvilli, desmosomes, abundant tonofilaments, and intracellular
lumen formation.73,78 Primary lung, breast, and upper gastrointestinal tract adenocarcinomas have short stubby surface microvilli, fewer tonofilaments, and
microvillous rootlets or lamellar bodies. 79,80 Ovarian and endometrial carcinomas lack intracytoplasmic lumens, but have few tonofilaments and may express features
of intestinal metaplasia (abundant mucin droplets, numerous cilia, and dense core granules). 79,80 Elongated nuclei, and abundant rough endoplasmic reticulin are
found in the sarcomatoid variant. Stromal cells separated by matrix containing collagen fibers appear spindle or ovoid with both sarcomatoid and epithelial features,
characteristic of the biphasic nature of mesothelioma. 73,78
Prognostic Correlations
Serum concentrations of two cytokeratin markers, CYFRA 21-1 and tissue polypeptide antigen, were elevated in 26 (50%) and 30 (58%) of 52 patients, respectively,
and were highly correlated (r = .98). Univariate analysis of data from 51 patients showed a relation with survival for performance status ( P = .010), thoracic pain (P =
.014), platelet count ( P = .027), CYFRA 21-1 (P = .002), and tissue polypeptide antigen ( P = .003). Multivariate analysis identified independent prognostic significance
for performance status, platelet count, and CYFRA 21-1. In addition to performance status, the cytokeratin markers identified patients with good prognosis in a log
rank test. 81
Microvascular quantification by staining for the antigens CD34 and CD31 in 25 mesotheliomas counted manually or on a computerized image analysis system
significantly correlated with each other and with shorter survival independent of patient age and histologic type or grade of mesothelioma. No association was noted
with p53 immunoexpression.82

MALIGNANT PLEURAL MESOTHELIOMA
PRESENTATION
Malignant pleural mesothelioma most commonly develops in the fifth to seventh decade (median age, 60 years), typically 20 to 50 or more years since first
documented asbestos exposure. The risk has been estimated to be linearly proportional to the intensity and duration of exposure, and to the time since first exposure
to a power of between 3 and 4. Latency periods between first exposure to asbestos and a diagnosis of mesothelioma may vary by occupation, with shorter latencies
for insulators and dock workers and longer intervals for shipyard and maritime workers, as well as domestic exposures. 83 A significant proportion of patients with
mesothelioma diagnosed between the ages of 20 and 40 report household or neighborhood exposure during childhood. 11,84 Children who present with the disease
generally have no apparent asbestos exposure. 85,86,87 and 88
A ratio of five men to one woman is affected. Dyspnea, nonpleuritic chest wall pain, or both bring 90% of patients to medical attention. Examination is generally
remarkable for dullness at one base, and chest radiography reveals a large freely movable unilateral pleural effusion. Occasional patients are asymptomatic, an
effusion found incidentally on chest radiography. Five patients in one series presented with spontaneous pneumothorax with the unsuspected diagnosis of
mesothelioma made at pleurectomy.89 Sixty percent have right-sided lesions, and less than 5% have bilateral involvement at the time of diagnosis.
Pulmonary function test results may document restrictive lung disease resulting from encasement of the lung and assess the potential tolerance for pneumonectomy.
Obstructive spirometric changes are unrelated to mesothelioma or asbestosis. Laboratory evaluation is otherwise generally unremarkable except for an elevated
platelet count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
STAGING
As described by Rusch and Venkatraman, the five staging systems before the International Mesothelioma Interest Group (IMIG) Staging System have been “to some
extent imprecise and incompletely validated.” 90 The Butchart classification (Table 40.2-1) suffers from an absence of tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) descriptors and
vague statements regarding lymph node involvement and degrees of chest wall invasion. 95 Mattson's classification recognizes contralateral involvement as stage II
rather than stage III and has largely been abandoned. Chahinian was the first to devise a TNM-based mesothelioma staging system, with an attempt to qualify the
influence of such parameters as locoregional lymph node involvement as well as specific sites and extent of invasion.

TABLE 40.2-1. Two of the Five Published Staging Systems for Pleural Malignant Mesothelioma

The Union International Contra le Cancrum proposed a TNM staging system that evolved into the presently described International Mesothelioma Interest Group
Staging System. The IMIG staging system has only been available for a short time, but it has been validated in two large surgical series of mesothelioma. 91,92
Sugarbaker et al. have proposed the alternative but complementary Brigham Staging System based on tumor, resectability, and nodal status. 93 In any evaluation for
the patient with mesothelioma, careful attention must be paid to the diaphragmatic extent of the tumor with suspicious scans confirmed by laparoscopic evaluation for
transdiaphragmatic extension. 94
The most important preoperative prognostic indicator may be tumor status of the patients. Tumor volumes associated with malignant pleural mesothelioma patients
who have no spread to lymph nodes are significantly smaller than in those patients with positive nodes. Moreover, progressively higher IMIG stage is associated with
higher median preoperative solid volume of tumor. 92 Further studies verifying that preresection tumor volume is representative of tumor status in malignant pleural
mesothelioma and can predict overall and progression-free survival, as well as postoperative IMIG stage, are needed to complement metabolic imaging studies.
Noninvasive Studies to Determine Stage
The major role of noninvasive procedures is to determine isolated hemithorax disease. Despite a history of asbestos contact in 50% to 70% of patients, pleural
plaques or interstitial fibrosis are apparent on chest radiography in only approximately 20%, but pleural calcifications are evident on almost one-half of computed
tomographic (CT) scans96 and in up to 87% at autopsy. Scoliosis with contracture of the ipsilateral hemithorax is visible even on chest radiography with advanced
disease.
A CT scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the primary tumor to assess the extent of disease is indicated if treatment is contemplated. Characteristic CT
findings in almost 100 patients are pleural thickening in 92% (and of the intralobar fissures in 86%), effusions in 74%, and pleural calcifications in 20% to 50%. 96,97 CT
scan is helpful in differentiating benign from malignant pleural thickening, but does not reliably distinguish primary from metastatic malignancy.
Coronal MRI is particularly helpful to evaluate the diaphragm. In a study of 26 mesothelioma patients evaluated with sequential paired CT and MRI scans, MRI
showed tumor spread into the interlobar fissures, tumor invasion of and through the diaphragm, and invasion of bony structures better than CT. Invasion of the chest
wall and mediastinal soft tissue and tumor growth into the lung parenchyma were equally well seen on both imaging methods. CT was better for detecting pleural
calcifications. 98
Twenty-eight consecutive patients referred for the evaluation of suspected malignant mesothelioma were evaluated by positron emission tomography (PET) with
2-fluoro-2-deoxy- D-glucose (FDG) imaging. Video-assisted thoracoscopy or surgical biopsies provided a malignant diagnosis in 24 patients (22 with mesothelioma)
and benign processes in the remaining four. The uptake of FDG was significantly higher in malignant than in benign lesions ( P = .0001). FDG-PET images identified
active tumor sites. Hypermetabolic lymph nodes were noted on FDG-PET images in 12 patients, 9 of which appeared normal on CT scans. Histologic examination in
six patients confirmed malignant nodal disease in five cases and granulomatous lymphadenitis in one. Standardized uptake values were inversely correlated with
duration of survival after the PET study ( P = .05). 99 These important data require verification in larger numbers of patients but could be useful in deciding which
patient may be a candidate for an aggressive approach since a high FDG uptake in these tumors may indicate a shorter patient survival.
Mesotheliomas are reported to take up gallium 67. 100 Gallium 67 scans in seven cases obtained before resection were compared with pathology. When the involved
pleural thickness was over 6 mm, gallium 67 uptake correlated with the macroscopic thickness of mesothelioma in resected specimens. Thickness of the pleura on CT
images was only reliable for thick involvement. No definite correlation was found between gallium 67 uptake and the histologic type, extent of tumor parenchyma,
interstitial volume, and tumor vascularity. 101
Planar 201Tl scintigraphy in a single mesothelioma patient revealed diffuse pleural tumor accumulation. Single photon emission CT demonstrated exact tumor
location. 102
Brain, bone, and liver metastases or extension into other serosal surfaces, although present in more than one-half of patients at autopsy, are sufficiently uncommon at
presentation to obviate the need for extensive baseline studies in the absence of symptoms or laboratory abnormalities. However, such studies may identify an occult
adenocarcinoma of the lung, a pattern of widespread metastases, or a markedly elevated serum or pleural fluid carcinoembryonic antigen suggesting a diagnosis
other than mesothelioma. 63,103
Although there are no definitive biomarkers for mesothelioma, future studies investigating serial serum levels of tissue polypeptide antigen 104 or thrombomodulin105
may be of interest.
Diagnostic Surgery
Although obtaining an accurate histologic confirmation of mesothelioma from pleural fluid cytology or needle biopsy specimens is often difficult, the diagnosis of
mesothelioma has such a poor prognosis that an unequivocal tissue diagnosis is mandatory. Surgical intervention is usually required, either a thoracoscopy or
thoracotomy, despite the risk of seeding the biopsy site or surgical scar with tumor. For patients who are not candidates for radical surgery, thoracoscopy usually
obtains sufficient tissue for histochemical analysis. 106 The later development of chest wall masses from seeding of the biopsy site or surgical scar is an uncommon
complication (approximately 10%) of any diagnostic procedure, but can usually be avoided by radiotherapy to the scar if appropriate (see Surgery, later in this
chapter). Tumor nodules seeded from fluids rich in tumor cells may develop in the subcutaneous tissue surrounding Denver shunts and intrapleural ports. 107
If preoperative studies suggest stage I mesothelioma in good-risk patients with asbestos exposure, most surgeons combine the diagnostic and therapeutic surgical
interventions in one stage. 108 Generous biopsies can be performed at the inception of the exploration, using frozen sections to differentiate mesothelioma from
adenocarcinoma. A sample of uninvaded lung should be obtained for counting asbestos fibers. 39
Bronchoscopy should be performed in all patients suspected of mesothelioma to rule out endobronchial disease, rare in mesothelioma. 109 The role of mediastinoscopy
in patients with suspected mesothelioma is undefined. Some surgeons believe it is unnecessary because nodes can be removed with the lung. Other surgeons
believe that, because positive nodes indicate stage III disease, surgery would be contraindicated. Nevertheless, if radical extrapleural pneumonectomy (EPP) is
contemplated, mediastinoscopy is recommended, because 20% of patients with mesothelioma have mediastinal lymph node involvement. 109
NATURAL HISTORY
Shortness of breath and chest pain can be controlled initially by repeated thoracenteses and minor narcotics. Although chest tube drainage and sclerosis is generally
unsuccessful, pleural fluid eventually becomes loculated as the tumor obliterates the pleural space. 70 With advanced disease, fatigue and dyspnea increase out of
proportion to radiographic findings or pulmonary function values. Because hypoxia results from shunting of desaturated blood through a poorly aerated lung,
therapeutic oxygen provides little symptomatic relief.
Mesothelioma tends to be locally invasive. Chest wall masses develop in approximately 10% of patients, generally over thoracentesis, chest tube drainage, or
thoracotomy tracts.70,110 Direct involvement of esophagus, ribs, vertebrae, nerves, and the superior vena cava cause dysphagia, pain, cord compression, brachial
plexopathy, Horner's syndrome, or superior vena cava syndromes, respectively. 111 Fevers and sweats with no documented source of infection are common and often
accompanied by significant weight loss, poor performance status, and an early death. Thrombocytosis and other clotting abnormalities occur in 10% to 20% (more
frequently in peritoneal mesothelioma). 112,113 Disseminated intravascular coagulation, thrombophlebitis, pulmonary emboli, and Coombs' positive hemolytic anemia
have been reported, 114 as well as hypercalcemia associated with elevated levels of a parathyroid hormone–like peptide. 115
The median survival is 4 to 18 months in various series (range, weeks to 16 years). Patients generally die of respiratory failure or pneumonia. Small bowel obstruction
from direct extension through the diaphragm develops in approximately one-third, and 10% die of pericardial or myocardial involvement. 84,111
Prognostic variables at presentation are shown in Table 40.2-2. Poor prognostic variables in 180 patients in one single institution series included chest pain, older

age, pleural site, and sarcomatous or mixed histology. 116

TABLE 40.2-2. Poor Prognostic Variables at Presentation

In the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer experience in 204 adults with malignant pleural mesothelioma on five consecutive phase II
clinical trials, the median survival was 13 months from diagnosis and 8 months from trial entry. In the multivariate analysis, poor prognosis was associated with a poor
performance status, a high white blood cell count, male gender, and the sarcomatous histologic subtype. 117
Factors predictive of poorer survival among 337 patients with mesothelioma on Cancer and Leukemia Group B studies included poor performance status, chest pain,
dyspnea, platelet count greater than 400,000/µL, weight loss, serum lactate dehydrogenase level greater than 500 IU/L, pleural involvement, low hemoglobin level,
high white blood cell count, and increasing age over 75 years.
With decreasing risk ratio, a multivariate Cox analysis showed that pleural involvement, lactate dehydrogenase greater than 500 IU/L, poor performance, chest pain,
platelets greater than 400,000/µL, nonepithelial histology, and increasing age older than 75 years jointly predict poor survival. Performance was the most important
prognostic split in the regression tree. 118
Localized malignant fibrous tumors of the pleura that may resemble sarcomatous mesotheliomas histologically have also been described. Of 82 malignant localized
tumors, 45% were cured by simple excision.120 If the nature of the lesion is ambiguous, involvement of the pleura on random biopsy would establish a diagnosis of
diffuse (malignant) disease.
SURGICAL TREATMENT
The role of surgery in managing diffuse pleural mesothelioma remains controversial, but there are an increasing number of thoracic oncologic surgeons who are
operating for this disease. Nevertheless, overwhelming pessimism for curative surgical options continues in most centers that do not routinely deal with the disease
since the combination of effusive disease and bulky tumor renders surgical eradication virtually impossible. The disappointing long-term overall survival results, the
historically high morbidity and mortality, as well as the propensity for local recurrences have forced many centers to abandon radical operations except for the rare
localized situation. The arguments regarding appropriate management of mesothelioma can have geographic differences. In a United Kingdom poll of chest
physicians, only 46% of the physicians surveyed would consider referral to a thoracic surgeon for radical resection (E. G. Butchart, personal communication). The
French approach to the disease has been a concentration on detection of early stage I disease that is treated with intrapleural therapy, including interferon-g with or
without cisplatin. 121 Surgery is performed after this therapy only to improve local control, either by pleurectomy or EPP. In patients with stage II or III mesothelioma,
Boutin et al. recommend surgery and postoperative radiation therapy. In the United States a cohort of specialized cancer centers have evolved that have maintained
an interest in the surgical management of the disease. As a new cohort of aggressively trained, specialized thoracic oncologists enters practice, the necessity for such
referrals may be diminished. At the present time, however, the evolution of the use of surgery with or without intraoperative, postoperative innovative adjuvant
therapies is being defined by these centers. In general, innovative, multimodality protocols that incorporate surgery as part of the package are being explored in larger
numbers of patients.
History of Surgical Management
Eiselberg 122 is credited with the earliest resection of mesothelioma in a 46-year-old man in whom he removed chest wall and a portion of lung. Much of the original
interest in en bloc resection for diffuse malignant mesothelioma originated in Germany between 1920 and 1960. With advances both in surgery and anesthetic
management, a more extensive resection that included lung, pleura, and diaphragm became technically feasible.
Rationale
Diffuse pleural mesotheliomas are rarely amenable to en bloc removal. A small proportion of tumors called mesotheliomas may present as an encapsulated mass, not
associated with pleural effusion, and these may be amenable to surgical extirpation with negative margins of resection. The majority of diffuse malignant
mesotheliomas, however, cannot be surgically removed en bloc with truly negative histologic margins because many of the patients have had a previous biopsy and
there is invasion of the endothoracic fascia and intercostal muscles at that site, or pleural effusion, which, although cytologically negative, may be breached, or both
leading to local permeation of tumor cells either into the residual cavity or into the abdomen. Nevertheless, in the largest series of EPP performed for mesothelioma
from the Boston group, 66 of 183 patients were defined as having negative resection margins after EPP. Patients with this finding who had epithelial mesothelioma
were found to have 2- and 5-year survival rates of 68% and 46%, if the node dissection did not reveal tumor. 93
The operation of choice, especially for early pleural mesothelioma, has yet to be defined. There is no doubt that EPP is a more extensive dissection and may serve to
remove more bulk disease than a pleurectomy, chiefly in the diaphragmatic and visceral pleural surfaces. Some surgeons, however, include diaphragmatic resection
and pericardial resection with their pleurectomies to accomplish removal of “all gross disease.” For EPP, it is almost a necessity to include pericardiotomy with or
without resection, for the maneuver aids in the exposure of the vessels and allows intrapericardial control to prevent a surgical catastrophe. There are no real
guidelines preoperatively that one can use to assure the patient which operation will accomplish tumor removal. The presence of irregular, bulky disease that on the
CT infiltrates into the fissures probably dictates the necessity for EPP; a large effusion with minimal bulk disease may call for pleurectomy decortication. Moreover, the
philosophy of the surgeon regarding the operation may affect his or her choice, because some surgeons reserve EPP for those patients with bulk disease that
presents simple pleurectomy, whereas others believe that the greatest chance for complete gross excision is via EPP performed in the patient with minimal disease.
This important factor, preoperative quantitative bulk of disease, may not only influence the choice of resection, but may be an important preoperative prognostic factor
in any patient with malignant pleural mesothelioma. 92
Indications for Surgical Management
Surgery is involved in the management of pleural mesothelioma either for diagnosis, palliative therapy, or as part of a multimodal therapeutic plan. The operations
involved in this management include thoracoscopy, pleurectomy and decortication, or EPP. The indications for each of these operations depend on the extent of
disease, performance and functional status of the patient, and the philosophy of the treating institution. Basically, operative intervention in mesothelioma is for primary
effusion control, cytoreduction before multimodal therapy, or to deliver and monitor innovative intrapleural therapies.
Functional Evaluation of the Patient Being Considered for Surgical Intervention
The majority of patients seeking treatment for mesothelioma are middle-aged to older individuals with a long latency period between asbestos exposure and tumor
development. If surgical intervention is to be considered, a detailed physiologic and functional workup directed chiefly at the cardiopulmonary axis must be performed.

PULMONARY EVALUATION. Poor underlying pulmonary function in patients with malignant mesothelioma usually reflects the burden of asbestos exposure,
concomitant smoking history (up to 70% of the patients have had a heavy tobacco intake), degree of lung trapped by tumor or fluid, and patient age. Decreases in the
forced vital capacity correlate with the degree of costophrenic angle involvement, width, and length of pleural fibrosis, and the presence of either circumscribed plaque
or diffuse pleural thickening. The extent of fibrosis correlates with the amount of dyspnea on exertion, and the diffusion capacity of carbon dioxide is reduced in these
patients. There is restriction of chest wall motion resulting in reduced lung volumes. Such changes may be bilateral and thus the extent of surgical therapy is
influenced by the patient's respiratory functional reserve. Generally accepted criteria for tolerance of an EPP can be assessed by pulmonary function testing including
the patients' response to bronchodilators. Patients with a forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV 1) of greater than 2 L/second usually are able to withstand a
pneumonectomy. In general, an FEV 1 of less than 1 L/second, a PO 2 less than 55, or a pCO 2 greater than 45 are relative contraindications to performance of EPP. 93 If
the patient presents with an FEV 1 of less than 2 L/second, or if the predicted FEV 1 is less than 1.2 L/minute after pneumonectomy, quantitative ventilation-perfusion
scanning should be performed.
CARDIAC EVALUATION Operations for malignant pleural mesothelioma are associated with profound blood loss and potentially significant cardiac demands. The
patient should be carefully screened for a history of hypertension, angina, and previous myocardial infarction, and routine electrocardiography should reveal no signs
of previous injury. Any patient sustaining a myocardial infarction within the past 3 months or having an arrhythmia requiring medication should not be considered for
EPP. Patients without objective evidence of cardiac injury who have a history of chest pain compatible with angina or remote myocardial infarction should have
dobutamine thallium screening to investigate reversible perfusion defects indicative of myocardium at risk. In general, patients with an ejection fraction of less than
45% are not considered to be candidates for EPP. 93 This may also affect their enrollment in innovative multimodality programs using potentially cardiotoxic drugs.
These patients may then be considered for angioplasty before operative intervention for their disease, and indeed, may be better candidates if a multimodality
approach is being contemplated.
Other Preoperative Evaluation
Preoperative medications must be carefully scrutinized, specifically any nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs that could affect platelet function. Patients should have
complete extrathoracic staging evaluation including bone scan, abdominal CT, and head CT to rule out systemic involvement. If patients are to participate in
multimodality programs that use drugs with potential renal toxicity (i.e., cisplatin), a preoperative creatinine clearance should be performed.
Effusion Control
In general, the indications for palliative surgery include the control or prevention of effusion that results in disabling dyspnea. The most efficacious and least invasive
of the surgical procedures to accomplish effusion control is thoracoscopy with talc pleurodesis. Two to 5 g of asbestos-free, sterile talc can be insufflated over the
lung and the parietal surfaces. Success rates in effusion control with talc, used either via thoracoscopy or via slurry, approach 90%. Failure of these techniques are
usually associated with mesothelioma with entrapped lung, a large solid tumor mass, a long history of effusion with multiple thoracenteses leading to loculations, or
age older than 70 years. This technique is widely used once the diagnosis of mesothelioma is made. Primary care physicians, however, should carefully deliberate
before using sclerosants and consider the extent of visceral and parietal pleural disease. The use of talc or other sclerosants could affect the suitability for patients to
enter innovative trials that incorporate either pleurectomy or EPP and could jeopardize the ability of the surgeon to spare a lung that may not have visceral pleural
implants. Table 40.2-3 reviews the results of videothoracoscopic talc pleurodesis specifically for mesothelioma. Patients who were able to have a successful
pleurodesis had a significantly longer survival than those who did not, and success depended on presence of trapped lung or degree of invasion of the pleura.

TABLE 40.2-3. Videothoracoscopic Talc Pleurodesis for Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma

Effusion control via palliative surgery is occasionally attempted after lesser procedures (including sclerotherapy) have failed because of the inability of the lung to
expand. Generally, the procedure of choice for such palliation is a pleurectomy with or without decortication of the underlying lung. The use of EPP for palliative intent
is only rarely described in the literature and because of its morbidity and mortality some surgeons state that EPP should never be used for palliative purposes. 1
Pleurectomy
MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY. When performed routinely pleurectomy for mesothelioma can be associated with few major complications ( Fig. 40.2-1). In the series
that specify postoperative morbidity, the most common complication was prolonged air leak (i.e., greater than 7 days), occurring in 10% of the patients. On average
the chest tubes can be removed in approximately 5.5 days with greater than 50% of the patients having the chest tube removed within 4 days. Pneumonia and
respiratory insufficiency may occur and are usually related to the burden of disease and preoperative functional status. Empyema is a rare occurrence (2%) and is
managed by prolonged chest tube drainage and antibiotics. Hemorrhage requiring reexploration is rare (i.e., less than 1%).

FIGURE 40.2-1. Pleurectomy for diffuse pleural mesothelioma. Preoperative tomograms demonstrate thickened pleura and fluid. The operative photograph and
specimen are depicted.

Earlier studies in patients requiring pleurectomy (but not having mesothelioma) had an inhospital or operative mortality of 10% to 18% in the 1960s. 126,127 The
modern-day mortality from pleurectomy has decreased and is generally considered to be 1.5% to 2.0%, with death either from respiratory insufficiency or hemorrhage.
Most recently, total pleurectomy in 50 patients performed for mesothelioma had a 30-day mortality of 2%. 6 In a series of 39 pleurectomies, the hospital mortality was

0%. 128
SHORT- AND LONG-TERM RESULTS Pleurectomy and decortication are effective in controlling malignant pleural effusion. Law et al. report effusion control in 88%
of patients having decortication for mesothelioma. 129 In 63 patients having partial decortication and pleurectomy Ruffie et al. 119 reported 86% control of effusion, and
Brancatisano et al. reported a 98% control of effusion after pleurectomy in 50 cases of pleural mesothelioma. 130
Many of the published series using pleurectomy for palliative management have added therapies postoperatively in an uncontrolled, institution-related fashion ( Table
40.2-4). The majority have no sampling of the mediastinal nodes, little less a mediastinal dissection. Nevertheless, the overall median survival for patients having
pleurectomy alone is approximately 13 months. The patients who receive pleurectomy and decortication alone usually have early effusive disease with minimal bulk
tumor. If these patients have epithelial mesothelioma and are not found to have nodal involvement, survival rates can be significantly longer than that quoted
previously.

TABLE 40.2-4. Results of Pleurectomy Alone for Mesothelioma

Radical Curative Surgery: Extrapleural Pneumonectomy
INDICATIONS. Radical EPP classically has been described for pure epithelial tumor, stage I that is technically resectable and encapsulated by the parietal pleura
(Fig. 40.2-2). Due to sampling error it is impossible to clarify with 100% certainty whether the tumor is a pure epithelial type or mixed tumor based on the preoperative
or intraoperative biopsy.

FIGURE 40.2-2. Left-sided diffuse mesothelioma. Two computed tomographic cuts show chest wall, fissure involvement, and aortic arch abutment. The surgical
photograph demonstrates the skeletonized aorta, partial pericardiectomy, and partial diaphragmatic removal via a counterincision. The surgical specimen is
demonstrated in the lower right.

The centers that are able to attract large numbers of mesothelioma patients due to ongoing prospective trials may be relaxing the so-called classic indications based
on stage, age, and histology. Surgeons at these institutions are chiefly concerned with the patients' functional ability to tolerate the operation, and the ability to
accomplish maximal tumor debulking. If, indeed, higher stage patients can undergo the operation with risks equal to pleurectomy and decortication, enthusiasm for its
general incorporation in more aggressive adjunctive trials would be justified.
There are few patients who actually qualify for exploration outside the research setting. In Butchart's review, 29 of 46 or 63% of patients were eligible for EPP. 95 The
only other series that reveals this percentage is DaValle's in which 33 of 56 patients over a 27-year period had EPP (59%). 136 Sugarbaker reported 50% of the
patients seen at his institution are not eligible for EPP and adjuvant therapy. Unfortunately, these series really do not define why one patient may have a pleurectomy
while another would have EPP, and it is obvious, however, that some institutions have simply never adopted the operation as feasible for treatment of the disease.
Probably the most enlightening study on eligibility was the Lung Cancer Study Group malignant mesothelioma pilot study from 1985 through 1988. 135 To be eligible for
entry into the study the patient was required to have disease limited to the hemithorax by roentgenographic evaluation, a residual FEV 1 after resection of at least 1
L/second, and no significant cardiovascular illness, clearly more lenient criteria than those that limited eligibility due to age, histologic type, or presumed stage. Even
with these relaxed criteria only 20 of the 83 evaluated patients were resected with an EPP. The reasons that EPP could not be performed were chiefly extent of
disease not allowing complete gross resection (54%), inadequate respiratory reserve (33%), stage IV disease (11%), and concurrent medical illness (10%) ( Table
40.2-5).

TABLE 40.2-5. Extrapleural Pneumonectomy: Results

COMPLICATIONS. Due to its magnitude, EPP has significantly greater morbidity than pleurectomy. The major complication rate ranges from 20% to 40%, and
arrhythmia requiring medical management is the most common complication. In the most recent report of Sugarbaker et al., major morbidity occurred in 24% of the

patients having EPP and minor morbidity in 41%. 93 The rate for bronchopleural fistula is greater with right-sided EPPs with an overall fistula rate of 3% to 20%. The
bronchopleural fistula can be handled for the most part with open thoracostomy drainage with or without muscle flap interposition.
MORTALITY. The mortality following EPP was unacceptably high in the 1970s, with 31% reported by Butchart et al. 95 Since then, however, there has been a steady
decline in the operative mortality for the operation to consistent rates less than 10% in series of 20 or more patients. Mortality occurs chiefly in older patients from
respiratory failure, myocardial infarction, or pulmonary embolus. Rusch and Venkatraman 91 reported a perioperative mortality of 6% (3 of 50) after EPP and
Sugarbaker et al. reported a perioperative mortality of 3.8% from myocardial infarction and presumed pulmonary emboli. 93
Recurrence after Extrapleural Pneumonectomy
Rusch et al. 135 described sites of recurrence after EPP to be distant areas compared with biopsy only or pleurectomy and decortication, and the local control was
superior to that of the other modalities. Pass et al. also found a higher proportion of first sites of local recurrence seen in the pleurectomy population compared with
the patients having EPP. 128 In the series of patients reported by Sugarbaker et al., Baldini et al. have reported that the sites of first recurrence were local in 35% of
patients, abdominal in 26%, the contralateral thorax in 17%, and other distant sites in 8%. 140
survival. Long-term survival rates after EPP remain disappointing, with the median survivals ranging from 9.3 to 17.0 months for the majority series. Rusch and
Venkatraman reported a median survival of 10 months in their series of 50 EPP, 91 and the median survival of malignant pleural mesothelioma patients having EPP (all
histologies) in the National Cancer Institute series is 9.4 months. The majority of patients were pathologic stage II or III in these two series. Most recently, Sugarbaker
et al.93 reported a 17-month median survival in a series heavily weighted with stage I, epithelial patients (52 of 183), using a multimodality approach (see Combined
Modality Approaches, later in this chapter) whose 2- and 5-year survivals were 68% and 46%. In the series by Rusch and Venkatraman, the 2- and 5-year survivals of
stage I patients (16 of 131) were 65% and 30%, respectively.
RADIATION THERAPY
The efficacy of irradiation, like that of other treatment modalities, remains uncertain in the definitive treatment of patients with pleural mesothelioma. While there are
no prospective randomized clinical trials that define a role for radiation therapy, several studies suggest benefit. However, the variable clinical course of the disease
and the frequent use of radiation in conjunction with either surgery or chemotherapy make assessment of its contribution to an overall treatment program difficult. One
report suggests prolonged patient survival among patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma receiving combined modality treatment versus supportive care alone
or single modality therapy. 141
Mesothelioma cell lines seem to be more sensitive to radiation (as assessed by the surviving fraction after 2 Gy) than non–small cell lung cancer cell lines, but less
sensitive than small cell lung cancer cells. 142 The results of a more recent study suggest that mesothelioma cell lines from different patients exhibit remarkable
differences in radiosensitivity. 143 The use of radiation for mesothelioma, however, differs considerably from its use in lung cancer because of the extensive pleural
involvement seen in mesothelioma. If radiation is to be used for definitive treatment of malignant mesothelioma, treatment of the entire ipsilateral pleura is indicated.
This target volume is extremely difficult to radiate to tumoricidal doses without exposing patients to a risk of normal tissue injury to adjacent lung, heart, spinal cord,
and liver.144
Most reports from the literature document occasional regressions of gross disease with modest doses of radiation, but do not indicate that survival is significantly
altered by irradiation compared with supportive care ( Table 40.2-6). Between 1971 and 1980, 116 patients with good performance status and without evidence of
extrathoracic disease were evaluated at the Brompton and Royal Marsden Hospitals in London. 129,146 Fifty-two patients underwent active treatment, whereas the other
64 received supportive care. No difference in survival was seen between the two groups at 2 (33%) and 4 years (0% to 11%). Active treatment consisted of nonradical
parietal pleurectomy and decortication of the lung in 28 patients, radiation therapy in 12 patients (following surgery in 8), and chemotherapy in the remaining 12
patients (8 of whom also underwent operation). Radiation therapy consisted of 50 to 55 Gy using rotating arc fields designed to treat the pleura and spare underlying
lung. One patient showed a dramatic response to radiotherapy, with resolution of effusion, pain, and dyspnea. She was doing well 4 years after completion of
treatment. Two other patients experienced sustained regression of recurrent pleural effusions after radiation therapy. Thus, although the treatment volume and
adjuvant normal tissue limit radiation dose, radiation therapy to bulky tumors occasionally produces significant regression and palliation.

TABLE 40.2-6. Radiation Series

Because of the variable course of the disease, different radiation treatment techniques used (anteroposterior and posteroanterior, rotational arc, combined photon
electron), and normal tissue constraints on radiation dose, the relationship between treatment response and radiation dose is not well established. The series from the
Joint Center for Radiation Therapy in Boston included 29 treatment courses for palliation between 1968 and 1980. 110 Relief of dyspnea, pain, and other symptoms
was seen in four of six patients treated with doses of greater than or equal to 40 Gy, whereas only 1 of 23 treatment courses at lower doses of radiation achieved
palliation of symptoms. Doses of 15 to 20 Gy (the normal tissue tolerance dose of whole lung irradiation) did not control disease in patients with diffuse involvement of
the visceral pleura with 1- to 2-mm nodules.
A series from the Peter MacCallum Cancer Institute in Australia described good palliation in 17 of 26 (65%) evaluable palliative radiation courses. 152 Short-course
treatment for palliation with 20 Gy in five fractions appeared to give similar results with more protracted courses (30 to 40 Gy in 10 to 15 fractions). Fifteen patients
were given high-dose radiotherapy with radical intent. Twelve completed treatment to 50 Gy. The median survival of the 12 patients completing treatment was 17
months, with an estimated 2-year survival of 17%. 152 A more recent study from the Peter MacCallum Cancer Institute on 111 patients showed that 60% of the patients
obtained successful palliation, with a median survival of 5 months. No dose-response curve for palliation could be identified.
In a series from Thomas Jefferson Medical School in Philadelphia, two of nine patients had local control at 20 and 40 months after 60 Gy to the entire ipsilateral
pleura, mediastinum, and involved areas of lung. 148 Radiation was delivered in three courses of 20 Gy over a total of 10 weeks by a split-course technique.
While the volume of disease can influence radiotherapeutic outcome in many other tumors, its effect on the radiation response of pleural mesothelioma is not well
characterized. The combination of radiation therapy with debulking surgery can be rationalized if only microscopic disease on the majority of the pleural surfaces
remains after surgery. Radiation is more effective at a given dose level when treating microscopic compared with gross disease. Higher doses of boost irradiation with
either a shrinking-field technique or brachytherapy can be used on sites of residual gross disease. Such a strategy likely maximizes local control while minimizing the
normal tissue complications from irradiation.
Radiation therapy can be used to prevent seeding of biopsy tracts and surgical wounds. In a series from Marseilles, France, radiation treatment of 21 Gy in three
fractions prevented wound seeding after thoracoscopy or thoracotomy in 24 patients. 153 Before initiation of an adjuvant irradiation policy in this setting, wound seeding
occurred in 17 of 33 (61%) patients. None of the patients who developed growth of nodules in an incision site responded to subsequent irradiation.

When considering the use of radical radiation therapy in this disease, the potential complications of high-dose irradiation to a large volume should also be weighed in
the treatment decision. The frequency, type, and severity of radiation complications depends on volume, dose, fractionation, technique, and normal tissue in the field,
as well as type and timing of any other treatment, such as chemotherapy. Remarkably, some earlier series reported no acute or chronic complications from the use of
radiotherapy alone. 110,147 This may have been the result of limited volume treatment or short survival. One series noted few complications with radiotherapy when 50
to 55 Gy were delivered with an off-axis rotational technique. Among 12 patients, complications included nausea and malaise in six, transient radiation hepatitis in
one, and mild esophagitis in another. 129,146 No case of radiation pneumonitis was noted. However, in cases in which no attempt has been made to shield lung or when
the organ tolerance of other tissues such as the liver has been exceeded, significant complications have been seen. Ball and Cruickshank reported a case of fatal
radiation hepatitis in a patient treated for a right pleural mesothelioma and one case of radiation myelitis (after 40 Gy) in their series of 12 patients treated with radical
irradiation. 152 Maasilta et al. reported deterioration in lung function after high-dose irradiation (55 to 71 Gy) given with chemotherapy. 154,155 Indeed, forced vital
capacity and diffusing capacity showed a significant decline at 1.5 to 2.0 months following radiotherapy and continued to decline over the year following the end of
radiation. By radiologic assessment, treatment essentially obliterated lung function on the affected side. Of note, hypoxemia and pathologic and physiologic shunting
increased in two of six patients monitored. Hence, lung function should be evaluated to assess potential tolerance before undertaking hemithorax irradiation. Liver
position and volume should be determined, and adequate hepatic shielding should be used. Maasilta and Hallman et al. have reported the association of
bronchoalveolar lavage plasmin and surfactant in mesothelioma patients with radiation pulmonary injury. 155,156
The use of radioactive colloids such as 198Au or chromic phosphate- 32P instilled into the pleural space has also been studied. Pleural effusions have been reported to
disappear for up to 3.5 years. 157 The exact response rate and duration to this approach is not known. In a series from Hahnemann Medical College, all six patients
were alive at 12 months or longer after instillation of isotopes. 158 The extent of other treatment and exact length of survival, however, was not reported. Because of the
physical characteristics of these isotopes, their effect on gross disease is limited. 32P is a pure beta (electron) emitter with maximum tissue penetration of 8 mm, and
the bulk of energy deposited in the first 2 mm. 198Au emits 90% of its energy as beta particles (electrons) with an energy of 0.96 MeV. These have tissue penetration
of less than 5 mm, although the emitted photons have energies of 0.412 to 1.099 MeV and would penetrate several centimeters. An equally important limitation on the
use of radiocolloids is the problem of obtaining optimal distribution of isotope throughout the pleural space. Gordon and colleagues reported an attempt at
radioisotope instillation in three patients, but fluoroscopy or gamma camera measurements indicated that the distribution was suboptimal. 110 Hence, both agents may
have a limited role in patients with low-volume disease or in conjunction with surgery in patients with an adequate pleural distribution. The distribution of a radiotracer
or contrast material should be tested before a therapeutic administration of these agents is considered.
Radiation Therapy Techniques
Different radiotherapy techniques have been used to irradiate the pleura to high doses. Because of the extensive pleural involvement, the target volume is large and
includes the pleural surface, diaphragm, and mediastinum. Attempts at radical radiation should be limited to those patients with disease confined to one hemithorax.
Field borders must extend above the first rib superiorly, below the diaphragmatic reflection of the pleura inferiorly, which is usually at about the lower border of the
twelfth thoracic vertebra, laterally to clear the bony rib cage, and include the full width of the mediastinum. The field size can be increased to include masses
extending into the chest wall or diaphragm, or to include the whole heart when the pericardium is involved. The identification of sites of residual gross disease with
surgical clips at thoracotomy greatly facilitates radiation planning by allowing accurate, well-defined high-dose boost volumes and lessens the likelihood of normal
tissue injury. CT scanning can also help delineate sites of gross disease, but may miss invasion of tumor into the mediastinum or through the diaphragm, as well as
areas of miliary seeding of the pleura. 96,159 MRI has been reported to delineate mediastinal invasion by mesothelioma 160 and may have a role in radiologic assessment
and treatment planning.
Radical irradiation commonly delivers 40 to 55 Gy to the entire pleural surface (with the exception of the reflections extending into the fissures in the lung) and the
mediastinum. Other structures, such as the heart, are included as clinically indicated. This has been followed by boosts to focal areas of gross disease through
reduced portals to doses of 55 to 71 Gy. While some have chosen to irradiate the entire hemithorax with opposed anterior and posterior photon fields to doses of 40
to 50 Gy without lung shielding followed by a cone-down to smaller fields, 144,152 such techniques are associated with irreversible pulmonary injury. 144 Hence,
techniques have been developed to spare the lung. One involves the use of an off-axis beam rotational technique to irradiate the pleural space to high dose while
shielding underlying lung. 129,146 Several others involve matching photon and electron beams. 148,161 These involve the use of large, opposed anterior and posterior
external-beam portals with central lung blocking. The pleural areas underneath the blocks are treated with electron beams of appropriate energy (generally 10 to 15
MeV). CT scans are used to define the thickness of the chest wall, delineate patient contour, and plan treatment. Tissue compensators may improve dose distribution.
None of these techniques are ideal. Even careful photon and electron techniques deliver substantial doses to the lung because of the penetrating ability of the
electron beams in the lung and contribution from side-scattered electrons set in motion during photon irradiation. 161
Advances in sophisticated conformal radiotherapy may improve the available dose distribution. 162 A single report using fast neutrons describes a complete regression
of bulk disease without evidence of recurrence 78 months after treatment. 163 However, a portion of the disease was treated with cobalt 60 irradiation with similar
response. Because of the poor depth dose characteristics of the available neutron beams, only thin patients could be treated with a pure neutron technique. However,
these or other particles may have a role in selected patients in delivering boost treatment to sites of gross disease. Other particles, such as protons, may have a role
in selected patients in delivering boost treatment to sites of gross disease.
Intensity modulated radiation therapy techniques permit higher doses of radiation to be delivered to target tissue while limiting radiation dose to the lung and other
normal tissues (Fig. 40.2-3).

FIGURE 40.2-3. Coronal (top), sagittal (middle), and axial (bottom) views of an intensity-modulated radiation therapy treatment plan for a patient with malignant
pleural mesothelioma. In this patient the target tissue surrounds the lung. In this plan the target tissue receives 54 Gy while limiting the dose to the majority of the lung
to less than 20 Gy. The spinal cord, heart, and contralateral lung also receive acceptable low doses of radiation. (Courtesy of the Department of Radiation Oncology,
Columbia University, New York.)

When conventional fractions of 1.8 to 2.0 Gy are given daily five times per week, reasonable treatment precautions would limit the spinal cord dose to 40 Gy, the
esophagus to 45 to 50 Gy, the whole lung to 20 Gy, a functional portion of the liver to 30 Gy, and 50% of the heart to 40 Gy. Radiation tolerances may be lowered
when radiation is given in conjunction with chemotherapy, especially doxorubicin, despite temporal separation of the two modalities by weeks or even months.
CHEMOTHERAPY
Single-Agent Studies
Before the wide availability of CT scans, most mesotheliomas were not strictly measurable. Measurable masses on chest radiography were frequently obscured by
effusions that are totally unreliable in determining response to therapy. Response rates to standard agents remain difficult to define. Relatively small positive studies
are reported promptly, whereas larger series with lower response rates may never be published. Nevertheless, data from single-agent studies are shown in Table

40.2-7. Response rates are included in the table when the number of evaluable patients exceeds ten.

TABLE 40.2-7. Single-Agent Response Rates in Malignant Mesothelioma from Series with More Than Five Patients

Doxorubicin appears to have some activity against mesothelioma although response rates vary considerably. Methotrexate with rescue, 5-azacitidine, and
5-fluorouracil may also have single-agent activity. Neither cisplatin nor paclitaxel as single agents appear to be significantly active.
Intrapleural Cytokine Therapy
Interferon-g has had intriguing results by the intrapleural route as documented by Boutin et al. 230 Interferon was administered at a dose of 40 million U twice a week
for 8 weeks intrapleurally via a catheter or an implantable port for 89 patients over 46 months. Thoracoscopic or surgical biopsy was performed if CT scan 2 weeks
after the end of treatment demonstrated a reduction in tumor size. Eight histologically confirmed complete responses and nine partial responses with at least a 50%
reduction in tumor size were obtained. The overall response rate was 20%. The response rate for patients with stage I disease was 45, with the main side effects
being hyperthermia, liver toxicity, neutropenia, and catheter-related infection.
IL-2–based regimens have also been exploited in mesothelioma. The largest experience to date with intrapleural IL-2–based therapy has been reported by Astoul et
al.233 Of 22 patients with mesothelioma (19 epithelial, 2 mixed, 1 sarcomatous) treated with intrapleural IL-2 (21 × 10 6 IU/m2/day for 5 days) 11 responded partially and
1 completely. The median survival was 18 months. The 24- and 36-month survival rates for responders were 58% and 41%, respectively. 233
Combination Chemotherapy
Response rates for combination regimens range from 0% to 48% (Table 40.2-8). The highest response rate reported is for cisplatin and gemcitabine (48% in 21
patients). Nine of ten responders and three of nine with stable disease has symptomatic improvement, and three responders had improved vital capacity on functional
testing. 234

TABLE 40.2-8. Reported Combinations in Series with More Than 15 Patients

Randomized Trials in Mesothelioma
Doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide with or without dacarbazine yielded response rates of 7% in both arms of a large randomized trial that accrued advanced patients
concurrently with a second study for stage I and II mesothelioma. 235 Thus, the response rates may be artificially low in this study because better prognosis patients
were treated on a competing study.
The Cancer and Leukemia Group B randomized 79 patients with measurable mesothelioma to cisplatin and doxorubicin versus cisplatin and mitomycin C. The
objective response rates in patients with measurable disease (24%) were similar but time to treatment failure (4.8 vs. 3.6 months) and survival (8.8 vs. 7.7 months)
were slightly longer for the doxorubicin and cisplatin combination compared with mitomycin and cisplatin. 236
Intrapleural Chemotherapy
Based on the activity of intraperitoneal cisplatin (see Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy , below), the Lung Cancer Study Group completed a trial of 47 patients treated with
intrapleural cisplatin and cytarabine. Of the 37 patients evaluated, 49% had at least 75% decrease in the size of their effusion. 135
Pharmacokinetic data in 12 patients treated with intrapleural cisplatin and mitomycin showed three- to fivefold higher pleural to plasma levels of both drugs. 237 In an
Italian pharmacokinetic study of four patients treated with 90 mg/m 2 intrapleurally compared with seven patients treated with the same dose intravenously, the mean
area under the concentration versus time curve was 50 times greater than that detected in plasma. Intrapleural cisplatin resulted in significantly lower plasma mean
area under the concentration versus time curve and prolonged plasma levels of filterable platinum compared with intravenous administration. 238
The use of an implantable port facilitates repetitive intrapleural administration and probably decreases the risk of infection. 239

MULTIMODALITY TREATMENT
COMBINED RADIOTHERAPY AND CHEMOTHERAPY
Theoretically, cisplatin or doxorubicin could be used as a radiosensitizer and may be more effective than radiotherapy or chemotherapy alone. A small group of South
African patients treated with doxorubicin and radiation of 10 Gy every 6 weeks for four courses survived a median of 23 months. 269 Paclitaxel has been described as a
radiation sensitizer. 270 A phase I report from the National Cancer Institute combining a 120-hour (5-day) continuous infusion of paclitaxel every 3 weeks during
thoracic radiation therapy (57.6 to 63.0 Gy) has been shown to be safe in 27 patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma. 271 Many patients achieved local control;
however, only four patients were alive with a median follow-up of 15 months. One of these patients is without evidence of disease at 14 months.

A nonrandomized phase II study from University Hospital in Lund, Sweden, compared the effect of hemithorax radiation (40 Gy) alone or combined with doxorubicin
and cyclophosphamide in 47 patients with biopsy only. 272 No significant difference was detected between the two groups of patients with regard to tumor response,
survival, or palliation of tumor-related pain.
SURGERY WITH POSTOPERATIVE ADJUVANT THERAPY
The majority of patients with mesothelioma, independent of staging, cannot be rendered free of disease with surgical therapy alone. In a Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center report of 41 patients who underwent parietal pleurectomy between 1976 and 1982, disease at the completion of surgery remained on the diaphragm
(49%), visceral pleura (51%), mediastinum (49%), chest wall (27%), and lung (5%). 273 Seventy-eight percent had residual gross disease after surgery. Radical
pleuropneumonectomy can remove more disease in selected patients, but many still have residual microscopic or gross tumor after even the most aggressive surgical
resection.
Alberts et al., 269 in a series of 26 selected patients (10% of a total of 262 patients), reported an 11-month median survival after maximal pleural cytoreduction, 4500
cGy postoperative radiation therapy, and doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and procarbazine. The results, however, may reflect a generally poor risk group as the
duration of symptoms was usually less than 6 months.
A nonrandomized prospective study from Helsinki University Central Hospital 274 reported on 100 patients treated between 1977 and 1989 with debulking surgery,
chemotherapy, and hemithorax irradiation. The median survival time was increased from 8 to 12 months for those patients who completed one of five protocols. The
first protocol (1977 to 1981, 16 patients) was 20-Gy hemithorax irradiation in ten fractions over 2 weeks and a variable number of courses of cyclophosphamide,
vincristine, doxorubicin, and dacarbazine. The second study (1982 to 1984, 26 patients) was a split-course radiation therapy program consisting of 55 Gy in 25
fractions over 7 weeks with a midway 2-week rest. Major tumor areas were boosted with 15 Gy in six fractions. Chemotherapy was as described for the first protocol.
The third protocol (1985 to 1986, 15 patients) was hemithorax irradiation using a hyperfractionation schedule to 70 Gy (1.25 Gy twice daily) over 7 weeks with a
10-day rest halfway through. Radiation was preceded by single-agent chemotherapy with mitoxantrone for a maximum of six cycles. The fourth protocol (1986 to 1988,
24 patients) included 35-Gy hyperfractionated into 28 fractions over 3 weeks and hypofractionation of 36 Gy into nine fractions every other day over 3 weeks. This
schedule was preceded with 4-epirubicin for a maximum of six cycles. The fifth and final protocol (1988 to 1989, 19 patients) included hemithorax irradiation using
38.5 Gy in 11 fractions over 15 days. A maximum of six cycles of etoposide preceded the radiation therapy. None of the protocols prevented progression of local
disease or spread of tumor outside the hemithorax. Significant lung injury (radiation pneumonitis and fibrosis) occurred in regimens 2, 3, 4, and 5.
Pleurectomy, Intraoperative Brachytherapy, and Postoperative Radiation
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center has been the leading proponent of this technique, which includes as complete a parietal pleurectomy as possible to remove
the bulk of the tumor followed by permanent ( 125I) or temporary (192Ir) implantation to deliver 3000 rads in 3 days to a 1-cm distance from the implant plane. 273
Radioactive 32P is selectively instilled intrapleurally 5 to 7 days after thoracotomy, followed by external-beam radiation therapy commencing 4 to 6 weeks
postoperatively using electrons and photons to deliver 4500 rads in 4.5 weeks. They report minimum morbidity in the 41 patients discussed, and the median survival
was 21 months at the time of their report. The majority of patients had recurrences at distant sites (54%) with or without local recurrence. Unfortunately, there has
been little follow-up information with regard to the ongoing status of these patients, as the median follow-up in 40% of the patients was 12 months or less at the time of
the first report in 1984.
PLEURECTOMY, INTRAPLEURAL CHEMOTHERAPY, WITH OR WITHOUT POSTOPERATIVE CHEMOTHERAPY
Few studies of combining debulking surgery with intracavitary treatment of pleural mesothelioma have appeared since the first reports of intrapleural chemotherapy
alone for malignant mesothelioma. In a report describing intrapleural chemotherapy without surgery for malignant pleural mesothelioma in 1987, 21 patients received
20 to 30 mg of doxorubicin weekly for 4 weeks and then monthly. 275 The average survival was 21 months, but the indications for the therapy and the monitoring of
responses and recurrence data were difficult to extract from the report. Kirmani et al. 276 treated 17 patients with intrapleural cisplatin (90 to 100 mg/m 2) weekly for 3
weeks followed by a 3-week rest. Only 2 of 12 evaluable patients with pleural mesothelioma responded, with a median survival of 4 months. The 2 responders
survived 9 months.
Rusch et al. 277 combined the elements of intrapleural chemotherapy with cisplatin and cytarabine after surgical debulking followed by systemic chemotherapy in ten
patients. One patient died postoperatively, but the chemotherapy complications were reversible, making such an approach feasible. They followed this regimen with
an even more aggressive regimen of pleurectomy, immediate intracavitary cisplatin and mitomycin C, followed by two cycles of cisplatin and mitomycin C
systemically.278 Toxicity was acceptable. The overall survival rate of the 27 patients was 68% at 1 year and 44% at 2 years, with a median survival of 17 months.
Recurrences, however, were chiefly locoregional.
A similar regimen combining cisplatin and mitomycin C has been attempted at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation of 14 patients. 279 The projected 18-month survival was
31%, yet patients' tolerance permitted delivery of only 50% of the chemotherapy treatments adjuvantly.
In an Italian study, pleurectomy and diaphragmatic or pericardial resection was combined with intrapleural cisplatin and cytarabine for 4 hours immediately after
pleurectomy and systemic epirubicin and mitomycin C. The median time to disease progression was 7.4 months, and median survival was 11.5 months in 20
patients. 280
Pleurectomy with intrapleural chemotherapy with or without radiation therapy remains an intriguing strategy, but its efficacy is not established. Further investigation
should include standard debulking with definition of the extent of residual disease, a tolerable but effective intrapleural regimen, and compulsive follow-up to
document recurrence patterns.
EXTRAPLEURAL PNEUMONECTOMY, INTRAVENOUS CHEMOTHERAPY, AND POSTOPERATIVE RADIOTHERAPY
An ongoing interest in a multimodal approach to malignant mesothelioma was developed at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute beginning in 1980. 111 The program has
evolved with regard to the chemotherapy, and presently consists of EPP, followed by two cycles of paclitaxel and carboplatin. Concurrent radiation to a dose of 40.5
Gy is given with weekly paclitaxel. Over a 19-year period, 183 patients were treated, with a perioperative mortality of 3.8%. The median survival in this group of
patients is approximately 17 months, which is a significant improvement over other trials. Favorable subgroups include those with no mediastinal nodal involvement
and epithelial histology. 93,281
A series of 93 patients from Hamburg who chose either multimodal treatment or best supportive care has also shown some prolongation of life expectancy with
multimodal treatment.282 The treated patients, however, were younger, had a better performance status at presentation, and had no medical contraindications to
surgery. Surgery consisted of pleurectomy decortication or EPP followed by systemic chemotherapy with doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and vindesine. Patients in
remission at the end of the chemotherapy (16 of the 57 accrued) received 45 to 60 Gy of radiation therapy to the hemithorax. Median survival was 13 months
compared with 7 months for those receiving best supportive care.
NOVEL MULTIMODAL APPROACHES
Intrapleural Photodynamic Therapy
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) involves the light-activated sensitization of malignant cells. 283 Photofrin II, the sensitizer, is retained by malignant tissue in vivo in
comparison with normal tissue. The sensitizer is activated by 630-nm light and then interacts with molecular oxygen to produce an excited reactive oxygen species.
Singlet oxygen forms the basis of PDT cytotoxicity. The potential for minimal normal tissue toxicity due to the selective retention of the sensitizer within tumors has
prompted an interest in studying PDT for the treatment of a variety of tumors including skin, bladder, lung, head and neck, brain, and esophagus. From July 1993 to
June 1996, 63 patients at the National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, with localized malignant pleural mesothelioma were randomized to surgery, with
or without intraoperative PDT. All patients received postoperative immunochemotherapy with cisplatin, tamoxifen, and interferon. Median survival (14.4 vs. 14.1

months), median progression-free time (8.5 vs. 7.7 months), and sites of first recurrence were similar. Thus, aggressive multimodal therapy incorporating PDT can be
delivered for patients with higher stage malignant pleural mesothelioma, but first-generation PDT does not prolong survival or increase local control for malignant
pleural mesothelioma.
Pleural Perfusion
There has been a resurgence of interest in the delivery of intrapleural cytotoxic chemotherapy at the time of operation for pleural mesothelioma. Using hyperthermic
pleural space perfusion, Ratto et al. delivered cisplatin to the pleural space after pleurectomy or EPP in 10 patients. 284 This study has recorded the pharmacokinetics,
but has no data as of yet on survival or recurrences.
Gene Therapy
A tumor cell infected with an adenovirus construct TK gene (AdHSVtk) containing the herpes simplex thymidine kinase (TK) gene can be killed with ganciclovir. The
goals of phase I trial at the University of Pennsylvania were to assess the safety, toxicity, and maximally tolerated dose of intrapleural AdHSVtk, to examine patient
inflammatory response to the viral vector, and to evaluate the efficiency of intratumoral gene transfer. Twenty-one previously untreated patients were enrolled in this
viral titer dose-escalation study. A replication-incompetent recombinant adenoviral vector containing the HSVtk gene under control of the Rous sarcoma virus
promoter-enhancer was introduced into the pleural cavity of patients with malignant mesothelioma followed by 2 weeks of systemic therapy with 5 mg/kg twice a day of
ganciclovir. The initial 15 patients underwent thoracoscopic pleural biopsy before and 3 days after vector delivery. The last six patients underwent only the postvector
instillation biopsy. Dose-limiting toxicity was not reached. Side effects were minimal and included fever, anemia, transient liver enzyme elevations, and bullous skin
eruptions, as well as a temporary systemic inflammatory response in those receiving the highest dose. Strong intrapleural and intratumoral immune responses were
generated. Using RNA polymerase chain reaction, in situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry, and immunoblotting, HSVtk gene transfer was documented in 11 of 20
evaluable patients in a dose-related fashion. 285,286
A similar approach is under investigation by the group at Louisiana State University. 287,288 In in vitro mixing experiments, gene-modified tumor ovarian tumor cells
killed both mouse and human mesothelioma cells in a dose-dependent manner. Use of the ovarian HSVtk ovarian cells also prolonged survival of mice with
mesothelioma in a dose-dependent fashion. These data have served as the basis for an ongoing phase I clinical gene therapy trial to determine the maximal tolerated
dose of an HSVtk-transduced ovarian cancer cells infused into the pleural cavities of mesothelioma patients followed by systemic administration of ganciclovir.

MALIGNANT PERITONEAL MESOTHELIOMA
PRESENTATION
Patients usually present with symptoms and signs of advanced disease including pain, ascites, weight loss, or an abdominal mass. 289,290 and 291 A cake of tumor in the
omentum may be palpable as an epigastric mass. No satisfactory staging system has been proposed for peritoneal mesotheliomas, which are usually confined to the
abdomen at diagnosis. Chest radiography reveals pleural plaques in approximately 50% of patients with peritoneal primaries, compared with 20% in patients with
pleural mesothelioma, reflecting the higher level of asbestos exposure in patients with peritoneal disease. Classic findings on CT scan include mesenteric thickening,
peritoneal studding, hemorrhage within the tumor mass, and ascites; however, patients may have advanced disease with relatively normal CTs. 292,293 MRI offers the
possibility of improved resolution. Given the low incidence of bone, brain, or liver metastasis at presentation, extensive evaluation for metastatic disease is
inappropriate in the absence of laboratory abnormalities. Adrenal, intrapulmonary, or bony metastasis should raise the possibility of an alternative diagnosis.
Peritoneal fluid from malignant ascites may be a watery transudate or a viscous fluid rich in mucopolysaccharides. No diagnostic significance has been attached to
the character of the fluid, although a viscous ascites (with high fluid hyaluronidase levels) may suggest the diagnosis. Massive ascites may result in confusion of
mesothelioma with severe cirrhosis. Cytology establishes the diagnosis in only 5% to 10% of cases. 291 Ultimately, definitive diagnosis requires adequate tissue
sampling, preferably from peritoneoscopy or an open directed biopsy. A generous biopsy specimen is required to perform immunohistochemical stains, as well as
electron microscopy. Open biopsy also permits inspection of the abdominal cavity for extent of disease with particular attention to the bowel and ovaries to distinguish
mesothelioma from other more common causes of peritoneal carcinomatosis. Peritoneal mesotheliomas can be confused with adenocarcinomas arising from any
abdominal organ, but the pattern of spread and tendency to accumulate in the pelvis readily leads to confusion with adenocarcinoma of the ovary or carcinoma arising
from Müllerian duct remnants in the peritoneum.
The tumor generally remains confined to the abdomen until late in the course and even then is more likely to spread to one or both pleural cavities than to
disseminate hematogenously. Thrombocytosis is common and associated with high levels of IL-6 and a poor prognosis. Other common clotting abnormalities include
phlebitis, emboli, hemolytic anemia, and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Most patients die without metastases or involvement of the chest. 291 Esophageal
achalasia, secondary amyloidosis, and dermatomyositis have been reported. 294,295 and 296 The median survival of untreated patients in most series is short, 4 to 12
months.114,289,290,297
WELL-DIFFERENTIATED PAPILLARY MESOTHELIOMA OR CYSTIC MESOTHELIOMAS OF THE PERITONEUM
Rare, well-differentiated papillary variants and a syndrome of recurrent peritoneal mesothelial cysts have both been found predominantly in younger women
associated with a prolonged survival despite bulky disease. 298 Rarely, the disease progresses over time to a typical malignant mesothelioma. 299 Approximately 130
cases of multiloculated peritoneal inclusion cysts (also called benign cystic peritoneal mesotheliomas) have been described, mainly in the pathologic and surgical
literature. 300 Some authors have advocated classifying this lesion as reactive proliferation rather than as malignant. 301 The radiologic differential diagnosis has been
reviewed.300
Frequently associated with prior surgery, endometriosis, or pelvic inflammatory disease, 301 they occur predominantly in women, 302 but can occur in men.300,303
Treatment should be provided for palliation of symptoms or for clearly documented progression. 299,304 Despite initial surgical resection, approximately one-half recur
locally. Neither lesion size nor proliferation correlates with outcome. 301 Tamoxifen resulted in a prolonged response in a 19-year-old woman. 305 Permanent
transvaginal catheter drainage in a patient with recurrent cysts resulted in infection and obliteration of the cyst. 306 The potassium titanyl phosphate laser has also
been used in treatment of benign multicystic peritoneal mesothelioma. 307
THERAPY
Surgery
Surgical and autopsy series have shown that peritoneal mesothelioma involves all peritoneal surfaces, often with masses of 5 cm or more. Sites of local invasion
included the liver, abdominal wall, diaphragm, retroperitoneum, gastrointestinal tract, and bladder. Seeding of laparotomy scars and biopsy tracts has also been
observed. The tumor is most often confined to the peritoneal cavity at the time of initial diagnosis and remains there for much or all of the subsequent clinical
course. 114 Hence, effective local therapy may have a substantial effect on the survival of patients with this disease. Complete surgical resection is rarely, if ever,
feasible, and has not been shown to afford survival benefit in the absence of additional therapy. Nevertheless, surgical intervention can provide palliation for small
bowel obstruction and relief of massive ascites by peritovenous shunting or paracentesis via Tenckhoff's catheter. 308
Radiation
Despite its use in the few reported survivors in this disease, the role of radiation therapy remains unclear. Megavoltage external radiotherapy can deliver a
homogeneous dose to the entire abdominal cavity and its contents, although critical organ tolerance limits dose in several areas. Several techniques have been
described and used predominantly for the therapy of ovarian carcinoma. 309 The first report was the moving strip technique, which was necessary because of limited
field size and dose rate with cobalt 60 units but that was shown to have a higher morbidity than the open field techniques.310 The technique reported from the Joint
Center for Radiation Therapy uses open fields with a 67% transmission block to attenuate the dose given to the abdomen superior to the L-5 to S-1 interspace. 311 The

superior border of the field is placed above the maximum excursion of the diaphragm by 1 to 2 cm as observed by fluoroscopy. The inferior border is placed at the
ischial tuberosities. Laterally, the field extends 1 to 2 cm beyond the properitoneal fat stripe. Daily fractions of 1.2 Gy in the upper abdomen and 1.8 Gy in the pelvis
are given five times weekly to opposed anterior and posterior fields, with both fields treated daily. Doses are prescribed to midplane on the central axis. Total doses of
30 Gy in the upper abdomen and 45 Gy in the pelvis are given in 5 weeks. Full-thickness kidney blocks are added to both anterior and posterior fields at 18 Gy. When
intraperitoneal chemotherapy is used, the transmission block is omitted and a uniform daily dose of 1.2 Gy is given to a total dose of 30 Gy. Blocks are also placed
over a portion of the heart and the inferior pelvis lateral to the abdominal cavity to protect the femoral heads and soft tissue. Treatment breaks are given when the
total leukocyte count drops to 1500 to 2000/µL or the platelet count drops below 75 to 100,000/µL.
Intraperitoneal instillation of radioactive colloidal gold ( 198Au) was first reported to improve the symptoms of peritoneal mesothelioma in 1955. 312 Nine other patients
treated by the administration of colloidal 198Au have been reported. 183 Two of nine were free of disease for 3.5 and 5.0 years, respectively. Four other patients were
reported to have clinical improvement of symptoms. The concentration of radiocolloid is generally greatest in the pelvis and lateral gutters, but adhesions from prior
surgery and tumor can cause adherence of loops of bowel that may result in inhomogeneous spread of the radiocolloid. 182,313 Neither 198Au nor 32P give substantial
dose to tumor cells within gross tumor masses. The estimated dose from 20 mCi of 32P is 180 Gy at 0.04 mm, but only 43 Gy at 1 mm and 17 Gy at 2 mm.314 The
distribution of a radiotracer or contrast material should be tested before the therapeutic administration of these agents. The major complication associated with
intraperitoneal instillation of radiocolloids is small bowel obstruction, which occurs in 2% to 10% of patients 315,316 When external-beam irradiation is also given to the
pelvis, as many as 33% of patients may develop bowel complications. 311,317
Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy
Because the results of intravenous chemotherapy in patients with malignant mesothelioma have been disappointing, and given the tendency of the disease to remain
confined to the peritoneum, interest has focused on the use of intraperitoneal chemotherapy. The primary theoretical obstacle to this form of treatment is the shallow
depth of drug penetration into tumor nodules. Advantages include greatly enhanced drug concentrations in the peritoneal cavity and decreased systemic toxicity. In
addition, substantial intravenous drug concentrations are obtained from peritoneal absorption of some drugs such as cisplatin. Thus, the combination of free surface
diffusion and intracapillary drug flow may be potentially more efficacious than intravenous treatment alone.
Intraperitoneal cisplatin and intravenous thiosulfate protection have resulted in a 59% complete response rate. However, many patients in this study have relapsed
quickly after treatment, implying incomplete eradication of tumor using cisplatin alone. 318 Mitomycin C, doxorubicin, and epidoxorubicin have also been used
intraperitoneally. 290,319,320
Intraperitoneal cisplatin in 19 patients (with mitomycin in as well in 18) resulted in 2 (10%) disease free more than 5 years from therapy. 321 Cisplatin and etoposide
resulted in one complete response in five patients with measurable disease. 322
Of four patients receiving cisplatin-based intraperitoneal therapy in a Dutch study, two responded, one completely. At 2 years he developed intestinal obstruction.
Laparotomy revealed only adhesions. 323 A case report noted continuing complete response at 53 months in a patient treated with intraperitoneal cisplatin and
cytarabine.324
Combined Modality Approaches
Because surgery or radiotherapy alone has resulted in only a few anecdotal long-term mesothelioma survivors, intensive combined modality approaches are being
studied at several institutions. One of four patients treated at Seattle with surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy had no tumor by follow-up CT scan at the time of
publication. 325
In a retrospective review of 15 women with peritoneal mesothelioma, clinical features included abdominal or pelvic masses in 93%, abdominal distention in 73%,
ascites in 60%, abdominal pain in 40%, thrombocytosis in 27%, thromboembolic manifestations in 20%, and elevated CA-125 in four of four. The response rate to
first-line chemotherapy regimens was 30% overall, but 67% to paclitaxel and cisplatin. The median survival of all patients was 12 months. The median survival was
longer for patients who underwent cytoreductive surgery versus biopsy only (14 vs. 6 months, P = .24), and chemotherapy versus none (29 vs. 1 month, P = .03).326
In three sequential studies by Antman and colleagues of patients with peritoneal mesothelioma treated with surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy, one of three
patients treated in the first trial with surgery, whole abdominal radiotherapy, and cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and dacarbazine remains alive more than 15 years
from diagnosis. 290 Of seven patients treated on a second phase I trial between 1982 and 1985 with debulking of all lesions greater than 1 cm, and intraperitoneal
doxorubicin (20 to 50 mg) alternating every 2 weeks with intraperitoneal cisplatin (20 to 100 mg/m 2) for a total of 8 to 12 treatments. At the time of second laparotomy
for removal of the access device, all six patients had at least an objective 50% decrease in the size of the tumor. Chemotherapy was followed by whole abdominal
irradiation in four patients. (One patient refused and a second had had prior irradiation for Hodgkin's disease.) Four of the six patients (including three of the four who
received irradiation) remain disease free more than 14 years after diagnosis. 290,297 One patient requires chronic intravenous hyperalimentation due to malabsorption;
the remaining three patients have normal performance status. In the third (phase II) trial begun in 1986, 297 20 patients have completed debulking, intraperitoneal
doxorubicin, and cisplatin and radiation as above. The median survival for the entire treated group is 16.4 months. Thus, intensive multimodality therapy produces a
high response rate and may ultimately prolong survival for this otherwise rapidly fatal disease.
Of 18 patients with primary peritoneal mesothelioma who underwent tumor debulking followed by a 90-minute continuous hyperthermic peritoneal profusion with
cisplatin as part of three consecutive phase I trials conducted at the National Cancer Institute, 13 had associated ascites. One patient had a symptomatic, multiply
recurrent, benign, cystic peritoneal mesothelioma. Three patients who had a recurrence after a progression-free interval of more than 6 months after continuous
hyperthermic peritoneal profusion underwent reperfusion. Two patients had superficial wound infections, and one patient each had atrial fibrillation, pancreatitis,
fascial dehiscence, ileus, line sepsis, and Clostridium difficile colitis, but no toxic deaths occurred. Renal toxicity occurred at cisplatin doses above the recommended
phase II dose. Nine of ten patients had resolution of their ascites postoperatively. Three patients with recurrent ascites at 10, 22, and 27 months after initial treatment
had resolution of their ascites with ongoing responses at 4, 6, and 24 months after the second perfusion. The median progression-free survival is 26 months, and the
overall 2-year survival is 80%. 327

MALIGNANT MESOTHELIOMA OF THE TUNICA VAGINALIS TESTIS
Approximately 75 cases have been reported in the literature, 328 most often in patients between ages 55 and 75 years, although approximately 10% of the patients
were younger than 25 years and occasional children are affected. 329
Asbestos exposure was documented in approximately one-half of the more recently reported cases. 330
Patients generally present with a hydrocele or hernia. An accurate preoperative diagnosis was reported in only two cases. 331 Diffuse peritoneal or abdominal lymph
node involvement may be present at the time of diagnosis.
Mesotheliomas arising in the tunica vaginalis testes appear to have a more indolent disease course. 330,332 The overall recurrence rate (local and disseminated) was
52%, and 38% died of disease progression. 328 Local recurrence occurred in 36% of patients who underwent local resection of the hydrocele wall, 10% after scrotal
orchiectomy, and 12% after inguinal orchiectomy. 328 More than 60% of recurrences developed within the first 2 years of the follow-up. The median survival of the
patients was 23 months, but was 14 months after recurrence.
In some cases of disseminated mesothelioma, adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy was given. Survival correlated significantly with younger patient's age ( P = .01),
and with localized as opposed to disseminated disease ( P = .05) in univariate analysis. A multivariate Cox regression model of prognostic parameters concerning
survival did not yield statistically significant results. 328

MALIGNANT MESOTHELIOMA OF THE PERICARDIUM

There are approximately just over 100 cases reported in the literature in adults 333 and children. 334 Asbestos exposure has not been documented in most reported
cases. Patients generally present with a pericardial effusion, 333,334 congestive heart failure, 335 an anterior mediastinal mass, 336 or tamponade.337 Diffuse pericardial
involvement is found at surgery. The diagnosis is often unsuspected before surgery or autopsy.

BENIGN MESOTHELIOMA
Benign tumors involving mesothelium arise with some frequency in the pleura and peritoneum, the tunica vaginalis testis, 338 the atrioventricular node of the heart, 339
and rarely in the mediastinum, 340 liver,341 and adrenal.342 Those of peritoneum, including tunica vaginalis testis and adrenal, are mesothelial derived, but the others
are of disputed histogenesis (atrioventricular node) or appear to arise from submesothelial mesenchymal cells that do not exhibit mesothelial differentiation.
BENIGN FIBROUS TUMORS OF THE PLEURA
Benign fibrous tumors of the pleura are approximately one-third as common as diffuse malignant mesotheliomas 343 and are most common from age 40 to 70 years.
Because they appear to arise from subsurface fibrous tissue, rather than from the mesothelial lining, they have also been called submesothelial fibromas, localized
fibrous mesothelioma, or solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura. 343,344 and 345 Few patients have been exposed to asbestos, approximating the incidence of exposure in the
general population. CT scan and MRI are useful but nonspecific. The differential diagnosis between benign and malignant lesions is based on histologic study. 346
Lesions have ranged in size from 1 to 36 cm. Associated effusions can be serosanguineous. Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy has occurred in approximately
one-third of patients, particularly associated with lesions more than 10 cm in size. Hypoglycemia has also been associated with large lesions, associated in some
cases with tumor production of insulin-like growth factor. 347,348
Mesotheliomas are often pedunculated and 80% arise from but usually do not invade the visceral pleura. 120 Thus, benign pleural mesotheliomas usually have a sharp
separation between tumor and compressed lung, and resection can be performed without pulmonary resection. Others may require a limited chest wall resection.
While generally cured if completely resected, recurrences have occurred after several decades 349 and 12% of patients eventually die of extensive local tumor. 343
Localized malignant fibrous tumors of the pleura have also been described. Of 82 malignant localized tumors, 45% were cured by simple excision. 120 If the nature of
the lesion is ambiguous, involvement of the pleura on random biopsy would establish a diagnosis of diffuse (i.e., malignant) disease.
BENIGN FIBROUS MESOTHELIOMAS OF THE GENITAL TRACTS
Called benign mesotheliomas in the past, these neoplasms are probably more accurately designated adenomatoid tumors.350,351 They generally arise in the scrotum
and epididymis. Similar tumors histologically also are occasionally described in women. Talc granulomas have been described in proximity to the tumor in one
case.352
BENIGN MESOTHELIOMA OF THE CARDIAC ATRIOVENTRICULAR NODE
The histologic origin of benign mesotheliomas of the atrioventricular node is disputed. 353 Patients with benign mesotheliomas of the atrioventricular node have ranged
in age from newborn 354 to elderly, and present most frequently with heart block. 355 The diagnosis is often made at autopsy, 356 although clinical excision has been
reported.357 Sudden death has sometimes occurred despite the implantation of a pacemaker.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Lee DHK, Selikoff IJ. Historical background to the asbestos problem. Environ Res 1979;18:300.
2. Women Inspectors of Factories. Annual report for 1898. Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London, 1899.
3. Merewether ERA, Price CV. Report on effects of asbestos dust in the lungs and dust suppression in the asbestos industry. Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London, 1930.
4. Lynch KM, Smith WA. Pulmonary asbestosis III: carcinoma of lung in asbestosilicosis. Am J Cancer 1935;14:56.
5. Gloyne SR. Two cases of squamous carcinoma of the lung occurring in asbestosis. Tubercle 1935;17:5.
6. Doll R. Morality from lung cancer in asbestos workers. BJM 1955;12:81.
7. Enterline PE. Changing attitudes and opinions regarding asbestos and cancer 19341965 [see comments]. Ind Med 1992;22:2591; comment in Am J Ind Med 1991;20:685.
8. Mossman BT, Bignon J, Corn M, et al. Asbestos: scientific developments and implications for public policy. Science 1990;247:294.
9. Anderson HA, Hanrahan LP, Schirmer J, et al. Mesothelioma among employees with likely contact with in-place asbestos-containing building materials. Ann NY Acad Sci 1991;643:550.
10. Robertson HE. Endothelioma of the pleura. Cancer Res 1924;8:317.
11. Wagner JC, Sleggs EA, Marchand P. Diffuse pleural mesothelioma and asbestos in the North Western Cape Province. Br J Ind Med 1960;17:260.
12. Timbrell V. Physical factors as etiological mechanisms, in biological effects of asbestos. Int Agency Res Cancer (Lyon) 1973.
13. Miller BG, Searl A, Davis JM, et al. Influence of fibre length, dissolution and biopersistence on the production of mesothelioma in the rat peritoneal cavity. Ann Occup Hyg 1999;43:155.
14. Stanton MF, Layard M, Tegeris A, et al. Carcinogenicity of fibrous glass: pleural response in relation to fiber dimension. J Natl Cancer Inst 1977;58:589.
15. Gibbs AR, Griffiths DM, Pooley FD, Jones JS. Comparison of fibre types and size distributions in lung tissues of paraoccupational and occupational cases of malignant mesothelioma. Br J Ind
Med 1990;47:621.
16. Rogers AJ, Leigh J, Berry G, et al. Relationship between lung asbestos fiber type and concentration and relative risk of mesothelioma. A case-control study. Cancer 1991;67:1912.
17. Lee KP, Barras CE, Griffith FD, Waritz RD. Pulmonary response and transmigration of inorganic fibers by inhalation exposure. Am J Pathol 1981;102:314.
18. Kayser K, Becker C, Seeberg N, Gabius HJ. Quantitation of asbestos and asbestos-like fibers in human lung tissue by hot and wet ashing, and the significance of their presence for survival of
lung carcinoma and mesothelioma patients. Lung Cancer 1999;24:89.
19. Dodson RF, O'Sullivan M, Corn CJ, et al. Analysis of asbestos fiber burden in lung tissue from mesothelioma patients. Ultrastruct Pathol 1997;21:321.
20. Rom WN, Travis WD, Brody AR. Cellular and molecular basis of the asbestos-related diseases. Am Rev Respir Dis 1991;143:408.
21. Dazzi H, Hasleton PS, Thatcher N, et al. Malignant pleural mesothelioma and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R). Relationship of EGF-R with histology and survival using fixed paraffin
embedded tissue and the F4, monoclonal antibody. Br J Cancer 1990;61:924.
22. Hei TK, Piao CQ, He ZY, et al. Chrysotile fiber is a strong mutagen in mammalian cells. Cancer Res 1992;52:6305.
23. Heintz NH, Janssen YM, Mossman BT. Persistent induction of c-fox and c-jun expression by asbestos. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:3299.
24. Suzuki K, Hei TK. Induction of heme oxygenase (HO) in mammalian cells by mineral fibers: distinctive effect of reactive oxygen species. Carcinogenesis 1996;17:661.
25. McDonald AD, McDonald JC. Epidemiology of malignant mesothelioma. In: K Antman, Aisner J, ed. Asbestos-related malignancy. Orlando, FL: Grune & Stratton, 1987:31.
26. Connelly RR, Spirtas R, Myers MH, et al. Demographic patterns for mesothelioma in the United States. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;78:1053.
27. Walker AM, Loughlin JE, Freidlander ER, et al. Projections of asbestos-related disease 19802009. J Occup Med 1983;25:409.
28. Berry M. Mesothelioma incidence and community asbestos exposure. Environ Res 1997;75:34.
29. Hansen J, de Klerk NH, Musk AW, Hobbs MS. Environmental exposure to crocidolite and mesothelioma: exposure-response relationships. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:69.
30. Howel D, Arblaster L, Swinburne L, et al. Routes of asbestos exposure and the development of mesothelioma in an English region. Occup Environ Med 1997;54:403.
31. Rees D, Goodman K, Fourie E, et al. Asbestos exposure and mesothelioma in South Africa. S Afr Med J 1999;89:627.
32. Price B. Analysis of current trends in United States mesothelioma incidence. Am J Epidemiol 1997;145:211.
33. Burdorf A, Barendregt JJ, Swuste PH, Heederik D . [Future increase of the incidence of mesothelioma due to occupational exposure to asbestos in the past (see comments)]. Ned Tijdschr
Geneeskd 1997;141:1093.
34. Peto J, Decarli A, La Vecchia C, et al. The European mesothelioma epidemic. Br J Cancer 1999;79:666.
35. Selikoff IJ, Hammond EC, Seidman H. Latency of asbestos disease among insulation workers in the United States and Canada. Cancer 1980;46:2736.
36. Wagner JC, Berry G, Polley FD. Mesotheliomas and asbestos type in asbestos textile workers: a study of lung contents. BMJ 1982;285:603.
37. Jarvholm B, Sanden A. Lung cancer and mesothelioma in the pleura and peritoneum among Swedish insulation workers. Occup Environ Med 1998;55:766.
38. Selikoff IJ, Churg J, Hammond EC. Asbestos exposure and neoplasia. JAMA 1964;188:22.
39. Churg A. Fiber counting and analysis in the diagnosis of asbestos-related disease. Hum Pathol 1982;13:381.
40. Risberg B, Nickels J, Wagermark J. Familial clustering of malignant mesothelioma. Cancer 1980;45:2422.
41. Vianna NJ, Polan AK. Non-occupational exposure to asbestos and malignant mesothelioma in females. Lancet 1978;i:1061.
42. Roggli VL, Oury TD, Moffatt EJ. Malignant mesothelioma in women. Anat Pathol 1997;2:147.
43. Metintas M, Ozdemir N, Hillerdal G, et al. Environmental asbestos exposure and malignant pleural mesothelioma. Respir Med 1999;93:349.
44. Gardner MJ, Saracci R. Effects on health of non-occupational exposure to airborne mineral fibres. IARC Sci Publ 1989;90:375.
45. Metintas M, Hillerdal G, Metintas S. Malignant mesothelioma due to environmental exposure to erionite: follow-up of a Turkish emigrant cohort. Eur Respir J 1999;13:523.
46. Ascoli V, Nardi F, Carnovale Scalzo C, et al. Absence of HHV-8 DNA sequences in malignant mesothelioma. Mol Pathol 1998;51:113.
47. Gibbs AR, Jones JS, Pooley FD, et al. Non-occupational malignant mesotheliomas. IARC Sci Publ 1989;90:219.
48. Gentiloni N, Febbraro S, Barone C, et al. Peritoneal mesothelioma in recurrent familial peritonitis. J Clin Gastroenterol 1997;24:276.
49. Antman KH, Corson JM, Li FP, et al. Malignant mesothelioma following radiation exposure. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:695.
50. Hofmann J, Mintzer D, Warhol MJ. Malignant mesothelioma following radiation therapy. Am J Med 1994;97:379.
51. Weissman LB, Corson JM, Neugut AI, Antman KH. Malignant mesothelioma following treatment for Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2098.
52. Burmer GC, Rabinovitch PS, Kulander BG, et al. Flow cytometric analysis of malignant pleural mesotheliomas. Hum Pathol 1989;20:777.
53. Dazzi H, Thatcher N, Hasleton PS, et al. DNA analysis by flow cytometry in malignant pleural mesothelioma: relationship to histology and survival. J Pathol 1990;162:51.
54. Pyrhonen S, Laasonen A, Tammilehto L, et al. Diploid predominance and prognostic significance of S-phase cells in malignant mesothelioma. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:197.

55. Hillerdal G, Lindqvist U, Engstrom AL. Hyaluronan in pleural effusions and in serum. Cancer 1991;67:2410.
56. Atagi S, Ogawara M, Kawahara M, et al. Utility of hyaluronic acid in pleural fluid for differential diagnosis of pleural effusions: likelihood ratios for malignant mesothelioma. Jpn J Clin Oncol
1997;27:293.
57. Demetri GD, Zenzie BW, Rheinwald JG, Griffin JD. Expression of colony-stimulating factor genes by normal human mesothelial cells and human malignant mesothelioma cell lines in vitro.
Blood 1989;74:940.
58. Nakamura Y, Ozaki T, Yanagawa H, et al. Eosinophil colony-stimulating factor induced by administration of interleukin-2 into the pleural cavity of patients with malignant pleurisy. Am J Respir
Cell Mol Biol 1990;3:291.
59. Okazaki H, Kano S, Hatake K, et al. [A case of malignant pleural mesothelioma producing colony-stimulating factor (CSF)]. Nippon Naika Gakkai Zasshi 1989;78:506.
60. Jordon D, Jagirdar J, Kaneko M. Blood group antigens, Lewisx and Lewisy in the diagnostic discrimination of malignant mesothelioma versus adenocarcinoma. Am J Pathol 1989;135:931.
61. Kawai T, Suzuki M, Torikata C, Suzuki Y. Expression of blood group-related antigens and Helix pomatia agglutinin in malignant pleural mesothelioma and pulmonary adenocarcinoma. Hum
Pathol 1991;22:118.
62. Nakano T, Chahinian AP, Shinjo M, et al. Interleukin 6 and its relationship to clinical parameters in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma. Br J Cancer 1998;77:907.
63. Kannerstein M, Churg J. A critique of the criteria for the diagnosis of diffuse malignant mesothelioma. Mt Sinai J Med 1977;44:485.
64. Nash G, Otis CN. Protocol for the examination of specimens from patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma: a basis for checklists. Cancer Committee, College of American Pathologists.
Arch Pathol Lab Med 1999;123:39.
65. Harwood TR, Grecey DR, Yokoo H. Pseudomesotheliomatous carcinoma of the lung. A variant of peripheral lung carcinoma. Am J Clin Pathol 1976; 65:159.
66. Kannerstein M, Churg C, McCaughery WTE. Asbestos and mesothelioma: a review. Pathol Annu 1978;13:81.
67. Kho-Duffin J, Tao LC, Cramer H, et al. Cytologic diagnosis of malignant mesothelioma, with particular emphasis on the epithelial noncohesive cell type. Diagn Cytopathol 1999;20:57.
68. Renshaw AA, Dean BR, Antman KH, et al. The role of cytologic evaluation of pleural fluid in the diagnosis of malignant mesothelioma. Chest 1997;111:106.
69. Yu GH, Baloch ZW, Gupta PK. Cytomorphology of metastatic mesothelioma in fine-needle aspiration specimens. Diagn Cytopathol 1999;20:328.
70. Elmes PC, Simpson M. The clinical aspects of mesothelioma. Q J Med 1976;45:427.
71. Winslow DJ, Taylor HB. Malignant peritoneal mesotheliomas. Cancer 1960;13:127.
72. Corson J, Pinkus G. Cellular localization patterns of keratin proteins in pleural mesothelioma and metastatic adenocarcinomas: a diagnostic discriminant. Lab Invest 1991;64:114A.
73. Suzuki Y, Churg C, Kannerstein M. Ultrastructure of human malignant diffuse mesothelioma. Am J Pathol 1976; 85:241.
74. Corson JM, Pinkus GSS. Mesothelioma: profile of keratin proteins and carcinoembryonic antigen; an immunoperoxidase study of 20 cases and comparison with pulmonary adenocarcinomas.
Am J Pathol 1982;108:80.
75. Said J, Nash G, Lee M. Immunoperoxidase localization of keratin, proteins, carcinoembryonic antigen, and factor VIII in adenomatoid tumors: evidence for a mesothelial derivation. Hum Pathol
1982;13:1106.
76. Dejmek A, Hjerpe A. Immunohistochemical reactivity in mesothelioma and adenocarcinoma: a stepwise logistic regression analysis. APMIS 1994;102:255.
77. Dejmek A, Hjerpe A. Carcinoembryonic antigen-like reactivity in malignant mesothelioma. A comparison between different commercially available antibodies. Cancer 1994;73:464.
78. Bolen JW, Thorning D. Mesotheliomas: a light and electron microscopical study concerning the histogenic relationships between the epithelial and the mesenchymal variants. Am J Surg Pathol
1980;4:451.
79. Warhol WJ, Hickey WF, Corson J. Malignant mesothelioma: ultrastructural distinction from adenocarcinoma. Am J Surg Pathol 1982;6:307.
80. Warhol MJ, Hunter NJ, Corson JM. An ultrastructural comparison of mesotheliomas and adenocarcinomas of the ovary and endometrium. Int J Gynecol Pathol 1982;1:125.
81. Schouwink H, Korse CM, Bonfrer JM, et al. Prognostic value of the serum tumour markers Cyfra 21-1 and tissue polypeptide antigen in malignant mesothelioma. Lung Cancer 1999;25:25.
82. Kumar-Singh S, Vermeulen PB, Weyler J, et al. Evaluation of tumour angiogenesis as a prognostic marker in malignant mesothelioma. J Pathol 1997;182:211.
83. Bianchi C, Giarelli L, Grandi G, et al. Latency periods in asbestos-related mesothelioma of the pleura. Eur J Cancer Prev 1997;6:162.
84. Antman K, Blum R, Greenberger J, et al. Multimodality therapy for mesothelioma based on a study of natural history. Am J Med 1980;68:356.
85. Cooper SP, Fraire AE, Buffler PA, et al. Epidemiologic aspects of childhood mesothelioma. Pathol Immunopathol Res 1989;8:276.
86. Geary WA, Mills SE, Frierson HJ, Pope TL. Malignant peritoneal mesothelioma in childhood with long-term survival. Am J Clin Pathol 1991;95:493.
87. Lin CM, Lee Y, Ho MY. Malignant mesothelioma in infancy. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1989;113:409.
88. Tewari SC, Kurian G, Jayaswal R, et al. Malignant mesothelioma in the young (with prosthetic aortic valve an unusual association). J Assoc Physicians India 1989;37:187.
89. Sheard JD, Taylor W, Soorae A, Pearson MG. Pneumothorax and malignant mesothelioma in patients over the age of 40. Thorax 1991;46:584.
90. Rusch VW. A proposed new international TNM staging system for malignant pleural mesothelioma. Chest 1995;108:1122.
91. Rusch VW, Venkatraman E. The importance of surgical staging in the treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1996;111:815; discussion, 825.
92. Pass HI, Temeck BK, Kranda K, et al. Preoperative tumor volume is associated with outcome in malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1998;115:310; discussion, 317.
93. Sugarbaker DJ, Flores RM, Jaklitsch MT, et al. Resection margins, extrapleural nodal status, and cell type determine postoperative long-term survival in trimodality therapy of malignant pleural
mesothelioma: results in 183 patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1999;117:54; discussion, 63.
94. Conlon KC, Rusch VW, Gillern S. Laparoscopy: an important tool in the staging of malignant pleural mesothelioma. Ann Surg Oncol 1996;3:489.
95. Butchart EG, Ashcroft T, Barnsley WC, et al. Pleuropneumonectomy in the management of diffuse malignant mesothelioma of the pleura: experience with 29 patients. Thorax 1976;31:15.
96. Grant DC, Seltzer SE, Antman KH, et al. Computer tomography of malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1983;7:626.
97. Leung AN, Muller NL, Miller RR. CT in differential diagnosis of diffuse pleural disease. Am J Roentgenol 1990;154:487.
98. Knuuttila A, Halme M, Kivisaari L, et al. The clinical importance of magnetic resonance imaging versus computed tomography in malignant pleural mesothelioma. Lung Cancer 1998;22:215.
99. Benard F, Sterman D, Smith RJ, et al. Prognostic value of FDG PET imaging in malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Nucl Med 1999;40:1241.
100. Nakano T, Maeda J, Iwahashi N, et al. Gallium-67 scanning in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma. Jpn J Med 1990;29:255.
101. Yoshida S, Fukumoto M, Motohara T, et al. Ga-67 tumor scan in malignant diffuse mesotheliomacomparison with CT and pathological findings. Ann Nucl Med 1999;13:49.
102. Watanabe N, Shimizu M, Kameda K, et al. Thallium-201 scintigraphy in malignant mesothelioma. Br J Radiol 1999;72:308.
103. McDonald AD, Magner D, Eyssen G. Primary malignant mesothelial tumors in Canada, 19601968. Cancer 1973;31:869.
104. Pluygers E, Badewyns P, Minette P, et al. Biomarker assessments in asbestos-exposed workers as indicators for selective prevention of mesothelioma or bronchogenic carcinoma: rationale
and practical implications. Eur J Cancer Prev 1992;1:129.
105. Collins CL, Ordonez NG, Schaefer R, et al. Thrombomodulin expression in malignant pleural mesothelioma and pulmonary adenocarcinoma. Am J Pathol 1991;141:827.
106. Boutin C, Rey F. Thoracoscopy in pleural malignant mesothelioma: a prospective study of 188 consecutive patients. Cancer 1993;72:389.
107. van Ooijen B, Eggermont AM, Wiggers T. Subcutaneous tumor growth complicating the positioning of Denver shunt and intrapleural port-a-cath in mesothelioma patients. Eur J Surg Oncol
1992;18:638.
108. DaValle MJ, Faber LP, Kittle CF. Extrapleural pneumonectomy for diffuse, malignant mesothelioma. Ann Thorac Surg 1986;42:612.
109. Martini N, McCormach PM, Baines MS, et al. Pleural mesothelioma. Ann Thorac Surg 1987;43:113.
110. Gordon W, Antman K, Breenberger J, et al. Radiation therapy in the management of patients with mesothelioma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8:19.
111. Antman KH. Malignant mesothelioma. N Engl J Med 1980;303:200.
112. Wojtukiewicz MZ, Zacharski RL, Memoli VA, et al. Absence of components of coagulation and fibrinolysis pathways in situ in mesothelioma. Thromb Res 1989;55:279.
113. De Pangher, Manzini V, Brollo A, Bianchi C. Thrombocytosis in malignant pleural mesothelioma. Tumori 1990;76:576.
114. Antman K, Pomfret E, Aisner J, et al. Peritoneal mesothelioma: natural history and response to chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:386.
115. McAuley P, Asa SL, Chiu B, et al. Parathyroid hormone-like peptide in normal and neoplastic mesothelial cells. Cancer 1990;66:1975.
116. Antman K, Shemin R, Ryan L, et al. Malignant mesothelioma: prognostic variables in a registry of 180 patients, the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Brigham and Women's Hospital
experience over two decades:19651985. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:147.
117. Curran D, Sahmoud T, Therasse P, et al. Prognostic factors in patients with pleural mesothelioma: the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer experience. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:145.
118. Herndon JE, Green MR, Chahinian AP, et al. Factors predictive of survival among 337 patients with mesothelioma treated between 1984 and 1994 by the Cancer and Leukemia Group B. Chest
1998;113:723.
119. Ruffie P, Feld R, Minkin S, et al. Diffuse malignant mesothelioma of the pleura in Ontario and Quebec: a retrospective study of 332 patients. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1157.
120. England DM, Hochholzer L, McCarthy MJ. Localized benign and malignant fibrous tumors of the pleura. A clinicopathologic review of 223 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1989;13:640.
121. Boutin C, Schlesser M, Frenay C, Astoul P. Malignant pleural mesothelioma. Eur Respir J 1998;12:972.
122. Eiselberg AV. Im protokoll der Gesellschaft der Artze in Wein. Wein Klin Wochenschr 1922;1922:509.
123. Viallat JR, Boutin C. [Malignant pleural effusions: recourse to early use of talc]. Rev Med Interne 1998;19:811.
124. Canto A, Guijarro R, Arnau A, et al. Videothoracoscopy in the diagnosis and treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma with associated pleural effusions. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1997;45:16.
125. Charvat JC, Brutsche M, Frey JG, Tschopp M. [Value of thoracoscopy and talc pleurodesis in diagnosis and palliative treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma]. Schweiz Rundsch Med
Prax 1998;87:336.
126. Beattie JE. The treatment of malignant pleural effusions by partial pleurectomy. Surg Clin North Am 1963;43:99.
127. Jensik R, Cagle JE, Milloy F, et al. Pleurectomy in the treatment of pleural effusion due to metastatic malignancy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1963;46:322.
128. Pass HI, Kranda K, Temeck BK, et al. Surgically debulked malignant pleural mesothelioma: results and prognostic factors. Ann Surg Oncol 1997;4:215.
129. Law MR, Gregor A, Hodson ME, et al. Malignant mesothelioma of the pleura: a study of 52 treated and 64 untreated patients. Thorax 1984;39:255.
130. Brancatisano RR, Joseph MG, McCaughan BC. Pleurectomy for mesothelioma. Med J Aust 1991;154:455.
131. Brenner J, Sordillo PP, Magill GB, Golbey RB. Malignant mesothelioma of the pleura. Cancer 1982;49:2431.
132. Chahinian AP, Pajak T, Holland J, et al. Diffuse malignant mesothelioma: prospective evaluation of 69 patients. Ann Intern Med 1982;96:746.
133. Chailleux E, Dabouis G, Pioche D, et al. Prognostic factors in diffuse malignant pleural mesothelioma. Chest 1988;93:159.
134. Harvey JC, Fleischman EH, Kagan R, Streeter OE. Malignant pleural mesothelioma: a survival study. J Surg Oncol 1990;45:40.
135. Rusch VW, Piantadose S, Holmes EC. The role of extrapleural pneumonectomy in malignant pleural mesothelioma. A Lung CancerStudy Group trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1991;102:1.
136. Faber LP. 1986: Extrapleural pneumonectomy for diffuse, malignant mesothelioma. Updated in 1994. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;58:1782.
137. Wörn HW. Moglichkeiten und Ergebnisse der chirurgischen Behandlung des malignen Pleuramesotheliomas. Thoraxchirurgie 1974;22:339.
138. Bamler KJ, Maassen W. Malignant pleura mesotheliomas. Thoraxchirurgie 1974;22:386.
139. Probst G, Buelzebruck H, Bauer H, et al. The role of pleuropneumonectomy in the treatment of diffuse malignant mesothelioma of the pleura. In: Deslauriers J, Lacquet LK, ed. Thoracic
surgery: surgical management of pleural diseases. St. Louis: Mosby, 1990:344.
140. Baldini EH, Recht A, Strauss GM, et al. Patterns of failure after trimodality therapy for malignant pleural mesothelioma. Ann Thorac Surg 1997;63:334.
141. Huncharek M, Kelsey K, Mark EJ, et al. Treatment and survival in diffuse malignant pleural mesothelioma; a study of 83 cases from the Massachusetts General Hospital. Anticancer Res
1996;16:1265.
142. Carmichael J, Degraff WG, Gamson J, et al. Radiation sensitivity of human lung cancer cell lines. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1989;25:527.
143. Hakkinen AM, Laasonen A, Linnainmaa K, et al. Radiosensitivity of mesothelioma cell lines. Acta Oncol 1996;35:451.
144. Maasilta P. Deterioration in lung function following hemithorax irradiation for pleural mesothelioma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:433.
145. Ehrenhaft JL, Sensenig DM, Lawrence MS. Mesotheliomas of the pleura. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1960;40:393.
146. Law MR, Hodson ME, Turner-Warurch M. Malignant mesothelioma of the pleura: clinical aspects and symptomatic treatment. Eur J Respir Dis 1984;65:162.
147. Eschwege F, Schlienger M. La Radiotherapie des mesotheliomes pleuraux malins: a propos de 14 cas irradies a dose elevees. J Radiol Electrol 1973;54:255.

148. Dobelbower RR, Strubler KA, Vaisman I. Clinical applications of high energy electron beams: the pancreas, pleura, and spine. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1980:91.
149. Bissett D, Macbeth FR, Cram I. The role of palliative radiotherapy in malignant mesothelioma. Clin Oncol 1991;3:315.
150. Davis SR, Tan L, Ball DL. Radiotherapy in the treatment of malignant mesothelioma of the pleura, with special reference to its use in palliation. Aust Radiol 1994;38:212.
151. de Graaf-Strukowska L, van der Zee J, van Putten W, Senan S. Factors influencing the outcome of radiotherapy in malignant mesothelioma of the pleuraa single-institution experience with 189
patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:511.
152. Ball DL, Cruickshank DG. The treatment of malignant mesothelioma of the pleura: review of a 5-year experience, with special reference to radiotherapy. Am J Clin Oncol 1990;13:4.
153. Boutin C, Irrisson M, Rathelot P, Petite JM. L'extension parietale des mesotheliomas pleu raux malins diffus apres biopsies: prevention par radiotherapie locale. Presse Med 1983;12:1823.
154. Maasilta P, Kivisaari L, Holsti LR, et al. Radiographic chest assessment of lung injury following hemithorax irradiation for pleural mesothelioma. Eur Respir J 1991;4:76.
155. Maasilta P, Salonen EM, Vaheri A, et al. Procollagen-III in serum, plasminogen activation and fibronectin in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid during and following irradiation of human lung. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:973.
156. Hallman M, Maasilta P, Kivisaari L, Mattson K. Changes in surfactant in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid after hemithorax irradiation in patients with mesothelioma. Am Rev Respir Dis
1990;141:998.
157. Richart R, Sherman CD. Prolonged survival in diffuse pleural mesothelioma treated with Au198. Cancer 1959;12:799.
158. Brady LW. Mesothelioma the role for radiation therapy. Semin Oncol 1981;8:329.
159. Rusch VW, Godwin JD, Shuman WP. The role of computed tomography scanning in the initial assessment and the follow-up of the malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
1988;96:171.
160. Shimojo M, Tsuda N, Kamihata H, et al. [Magnetic resonance imaging for cardiovascular masses]. J Cardiol 1989;19:583.
161. Soubra M, Dunscombe PB, Hodson DI, et al. Physical aspects of external beam radiotherapy for the treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;18:1521.
162. Takahashi K, Purdy J, Liu YY. Work in progress: treatment planning system for conformation radiotherapy. Radiology 1983;147:567.
163. Blake PR, Catterall M, Emerson PA. Pleural mesothelioma treated by fast neutron therapy. Thorax 1985;40:72.
164. Bonadonna G, Beretta G, Tancini G, et al. Adriamycin studies at the Instituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan. Cancer Chemother Rep III 1975;6:231.
165. Gerner RE, Moore GE. Chemotherapy of malignant mesothelioma. Oncology 1974;30:152.
166. Harvey VJ, Slevin ML, Ponder BA, et al. Chemotherapy of diffuse malignant mesothelioma: phase II trials of single-agent 5-fluorouracil and adriamycin. Cancer 1984;54:961.
167. Antman KH, Pass HI, Schiff P. Benign and malignant mesothelioma. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott,
1997:1853.
168. Kaukel E, Koschel G, Gatzemeyer U, Salewski E. A phase II study of pirarubicin in malignant pleural mesothelioma. Cancer 1990;66:651.
169. Sridhar KS, Hussein AM, Feun LG, Zubrod CG. Activity of pirarubicin (4'-0-tetrahydropyranyladriamycin) in malignant mesothelioma. Cancer 1989;63:1084.
170. Koschel G, Calavrezos A, Kaukel E, et al. Phase III randomized comparison of pirarubicin vs. pirarubicin and cisplatin for treatment of pleural mesotheliomas. Proc Eur Congress Contra Oncol
1991;6:
171. Magri MD, Veronesi A, Foladore S, et al. Epirubicin in the treatment of malignant mesothelioma: a phase II cooperative study. The North-Eastern Italian Oncology GroupMesothelioma
Committee. Tumori 1991;77:49.
172. Mattson K, Giaccone G, Kirkpatrick A, et al. Epirubicin in malignant mesothelioma: a phase II study of the E.O.R.T.C. Lung Cancer Cooperative Group. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:824.
173. Colbert N, Izrael V, Vannetzel JM, et al. A prospective study of detorubicin in malignant mesothelioma. Cancer 1985;56:2170.
174. van Breukelen FJ, Mattson K, Giaccone G, et al. Mitoxantrone in malignant pleural mesothelioma: a study by the EORTC Lung CancerCooperative Group. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:1627.
175. Butt WO. Mesothelioma of the pleura. J Can Assoc Radiol 1962;13:40.
176. Yap BS, Benjamin RS, Burgess MA, et al. The value of Adriamycin in the treatment of diffuse malignant pleural mesothelioma. Cancer 1978;42:1692.
177. Zidar BL, Metch B, Balcerzak SP, et al. A phase II evaluation of ifosfamide and mesna in unresectable diffuse malignant mesothelioma: a South West Oncology Group study. Cancer
1992;70:2547.
178. Alberts AS, Falkson G, Van ZL. Ifosfamide and mesna with doxorubicin have activity in malignant mesothelioma [letter; comment]. Eur J Cancer 1990;26:1002.
179. Falkson G, Hunt M, Borden EC, et al. An extended phase II trial of ifosfamide plus mesna in malignant mesothelioma. Invest New Drugs 1992;10:337.
180. Andersen MK, Krarup-Hansen A, Martensson G, et al. Ifosfamide in malignant mesothelioma: a phase II study. Lung Cancer 1999;24:39.
181. Jara F, Takita H, Rao UN. Malignant mesothelioma: clinicopathologic observation. NY State J Med 1977;77:1885.
182. Kaplan WD, Zimmerman RE, Bloomer WD, Knapp RC. Therapeutic intraperitoneal 32P: a clinical assessment of the dynamics of distribution. Radiology 1981;138:683.
183. Legha SS, Muggia FM. Pleural mesothelioma: clinical features and therapeutic implications. Ann Intern Med 1977;87:613.
184. McGowan L, Bunnag B, Arias LF. Mesothelioma of the abdomen in women; monitoring of therapy by peritoneal fluid study. Gynecol Oncol 1975;3:10.
185. Falkson G, DeVilliers PC, Falkson HC. (N-isopropyl-L-2-methylhydrazino)-p-toluamide hydrochloride (NSC 77213) for the treatment of cancer patients. Cancer Chemother Rep 1965;46:7.
186. Kelsen D, Bajorin D, Mintzer D. Phase II trial of mitomycin C in malignant mesothelioma. Am Soc Clin Oncol 1985; 4:146(abst).
187. Dabouis G, LeMevel B, Corroller J. Treatment of diffuse pleural malignant mesothelioma by cis dichloro diammine platinum in nine patients. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1981;5:209.
188. Daboys G, Delajartre MB, LeMevel BP. Treatment of diffuse pleural malignant mesothelioma by cis-diaminedichloroplatinum: preliminary results in eleven patients. Med Oncol Soc 1979;52:98.
189. Glatstein E, Fuks Z, Bagshaw M. Diaphragmatic treatment in ovarian carcinoma: a new radiotherapeutic technique. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1977;2:357.
190. Hayes DM, Cvitkovic E, Golbey RB, et al. High dose cisplatinum diaminedichloride. Cancer 1977;39:1372.
191. Mintzer D, Kelson D, Frimmer D, et al. Phase II trial of high dose cisplatin in patients with malignant mesothelioma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1984;3:258.
192. Rossoff AH, Slayton RE, Perlia CP. Preliminary clinical experience with cisdiamine dichloroplatinum (II) (NSC 119875 CACO). Cancer 1972;30:1451.
193. Samson MK, Baker LH, Benjamin RS, et al. Cis dichlorodiammineplatinum (III in advanced soft tissue and bony sarcomas: a South West Oncology Group study. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:11.
194. Planting AS, Schellens JH, Goey SH, et al. Weekly high-dose cisplatin in malignant pleural mesothelioma. Ann Oncol 1994;5:373.
195. Raghavan D, Gianoutsos P, Bishop J, et al. Phase II trial of carboplatin in the management of malignant mesothelioma. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:151.
196. Vogelzang NJ, Goutsou M, Corson JM, et al. Carboplatin in malignant mesothelioma: a phase II study of the Cancer and Leukemia Group B. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1990;27:239.
197. Mbidde EK, Harland SJ, Calvert AH, Smith IE. Phase II trial of carboplatin (JM8) in treatment of patients with malignant mesothelioma. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1986;18:284.
198. Cantwell BMJ, Harris AL, Ghani S. Phase II studies of a novel antifolate CB3717, and the platinum analogues JM8 and JM9, in mesothelioma of pleura and peritoneum. Cancer Treat Rep
1986;70:1335.
199. Cantwell BMJ, Franks CR, Harris AL. A phase II study of the platinum analogues JM8 and JM9. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1986;18:286.
200. Rebattu P, Riou R, Pacheco Y, et al. Phase II study of very high dose cisplatin in the treatment of malignant mesothelioma. Proc. 1st International Mesothelioma Conference, Paris: 1991:36.
201. Martensson G, Sorenson S. A phase II study of vincristine in malignant mesotheliomaa negative report. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1989;24:133.
202. Falkson G, Falkson H. Clinical trial of the oral form 4'-dimethylepipodophyllotoxin-p-D ethylidene glucoside and VP-16. Am Assoc Cancer Res 1978;1:160.
203. Nissen NI, Larsen V, Pederson H, et al. Phase I clinical trial of a new antitumor agent, 4'dimethylepipodophyllotoxin-9-(4,6-O-ethylidene-beta-D-glucopyranoside) (NSC 141540). Cancer
Chemother Rep 1972;56:769.
204. Nissen NI, Dombernowsky P, Hansen HH, et al. Phase I clinical trial of an oral solution of VP16-213. Cancer Treat Rep 1976;60:943.
205. Smit EF, Berendsen HH, Postmus PE. Etoposide and mesothelioma [letter]. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1281.
206. Sahmoud T, Postmus PE, van Pottelsberghe C, et al. Etoposide in malignant pleural mesothelioma: two phase II trials of the EORTC Lung CancerCooperative Group. Eur J Cancer
1997;33:2211.
207. Boutin C, Irisson M, Guerin J, et al. Phase II trial of vindesin on malignant pleural mesothelioma. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:205.
208. Kelsen D, Gralla R, Chang E. Vindesine in the treatment of malignant mesothelioma: a phase II study. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:821.
209. van Meerbeeck J, Debruyne C, van Zandwijk N, et al. Paclitaxel for malignant pleural mesothelioma: a phase II study of the EORTC Lung CancerCooperative Group. Br J Cancer 1996;74:961.
210. Vogelzang NJ, Herndon JE, 2nd, Miller A, et al. High-dose paclitaxel plus G-CSF for malignant mesothelioma: CALGB phase II study 9234. Ann Oncol 1999;10:597.
211. Solheim OP, Saeter G, Finnanger AM, Stenwig AE. High-dose methotrexate in the treatment of malignant mesothelioma of the pleura. A phase II study. Br J Cancer 1992;65:956.
212. Vogler WR, Arkun S, Velez-Garcia E. Phase I study of twice-weekly azacytidine. Cancer Chemother Rep 1974;58:895.
213. Vogler WR, Miller DS, Keller JW. 5-Azacytidine: a new drug for the treatment of myeloblastic leukemia. Blood 1976;48:331.
214. Dhingra HM, Murphy WK, Winn RJ, et al. Phase II trial of 5, 6-dihydro-5-azacytidine in pleural malignant mesothelioma. Invest New Drugs 1991;9:69.
215. Vogelzang NJ, Herndon JE, 2nd, Cirrincione C, et al. Dihydro-5-azacytidine in malignant mesothelioma. A phase II trial demonstrating activity accompanied by cardiac toxicity. Cancer and
Leukemia Group B. Cancer 1997;79:2237.
216. van Meerbeeck JP, Baas P, Debruyne C, et al. A phase II study of gemcitabine in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma. European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
Lung Cancer Cooperative Group. Cancer 1999;85:2577.
217. Lerner H, Schoenfeld D, Martin A, et al. Malignant mesothelioma: the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group experience. Cancer 1983; 52:1981.
218. Vogelzang NJ, Weissman LB, Herndon JN, et al. Trimetrexate in malignant mesothelioma: a Cancer and Leukemia Group B Phase II study. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1436.
219. Falkson G, Vorobiof DA, Lerner JH. A phase II study of M-AMSA in patients with malignant mesothelioma with cyclophosphamide, adriamycin and vincristin. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1983;11:94.
220. Maksymiuk AW, Marschke RF Jr, Tazelaar HD, et al. Phase II trial of topotecan for the treatment of mesothelioma. Am J Clin Oncol 1998;21:610.
221. Webster I, Cochrane JWC, Burkhardt KR. Immunotherapy with BCG vaccine in 30 cases of mesothelioma. SA Med J 1982;81:277.
222. Davidson JA, Musk AW, Wood BR, et al. Intralesional cytokine therapy in cancer: a pilot study of GM-CSF infusion in mesothelioma. J Immunother 1998;21:389.
223. Esposito S. RNA therapy for pleural mesothelioma. Lancet 1969;ii:1203.
224. Christmas TI, Manning LS, Garlepp MJ, et al. Effect of interferon-alpha 2a on malignant mesothelioma. J Interferon Res 1993;13:9.
225. Ardizzoni A, Pennucci MC, Castagneto B, et al. Recombinant interferon alpha-2b in the treatment of diffuse malignant pleural mesothelioma. Am J Clin Oncol 1994;17:80.
226. Von Hoff DD, Metch B, Lucas JG, et al. Phase II evaluation of recombinant interferon-beta (IFN-beta ser) in patients with diffuse mesothelioma: a Southwest Oncology Group study. J Interferon
Res 1990;10:531.
227. Boutin C, Viallat JR, Astoul P. Treatment of mesothelioma with interferon gamma and interleukin 2. Rev Pneumol Clin 1990;46:211.
228. Boutin C. Treatment of malignant mesothelioma using intrapleural gamma interferon. Bull Acad Natl Med 1990;174:421; discussion, 427.
229. Boutin C, Viallat JR, Zandwijk NV, et al. Activity of intrapleural recombinant gamma-interferon in malignant meosthelioma. Cancer 1991;67:2033.
230. Boutin C, Nussbaum E, Monnet I, et al. Intrapleural treatment with recombinant gamma-interferon in early stage malignant pleural mesothelioma. Cancer 1994;74:2460.
231. Stoter G, Goey SH, Slingerland R, et al. Intrapleural interleukin-2 in malignant pleural mesothelioma: a phase I-II study. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1990;31:275(abst 1630).
232. Robinson BWS, Bowman RV, Christmas TI, et al. Clinical experience using immunotherapy (IL-2/LAK cells or interferon alpha 2a) in malignant mesothelioma. Proc. 1st International
Mesothelioma Conference, Paris: 1991:38.
233. Astoul P, Picat-Joossen D, Viallat JR, Boutin C. Intrapleural administration of interleukin-2 for the treatment of patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma: a phase II study [see comments].
Cancer 1998;83:2099.
234. Byrne MJ, Davidson JA, Musk AW, et al. Cisplatin and gemcitabine treatment for malignant mesothelioma: a phase II study. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:25.
235. Samson MK, Wasser LP, Borden EC, et al. Randomized comparison of cyclophosphamide, imidazole carboxamide, and adriamycin versus cyclophosphamide and adriamycin in patients with
advanced stage malignant mesothelioma: a Sarcoma Intergroup Study. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:86.
236. Chahinian AP, Antman K, Goutsou M, et al. Randomized phase II trial of cisplatin with mitomycin or doxorubicin for malignant mesothelioma by the Cancer and Leukemia Group B. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:1559.
237. Rusch VW, Niedzwiecki D, Tao Y, et al. Intrapleural cisplatin and mitomycin for malignant mesothelioma following pleurectomy: pharmacokinetic studies. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1001.
238. Bogliolo GV, Lerza R, Bottino GB, et al. Regional pharmacokinetic selectivity of intrapleural cisplatin. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:839.

239. Driesen P, Boutin C, Viallat JR, et al. Implantable access system for prolonged intrapleural immunotherapy. Eur Respir J 1994;7:1889.
240. Chahinian AP, Holland JF. Treatment of diffuse malignant mesothelioma: a review. Mt Sinai J Med 1978;45:54.
241. Carmichael J, Cantwell BM, Harris AL. A phase II trial of ifosfamide/mesna with doxorubicin for malignant mesothelioma. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1989;25:911.
242. Dirix LY, van Meerbeeck J, Schrijvers D, et al. A phase II trial of dose-escalated doxorubicin and ifosfamide/mesna in patients with malignant mesothelioma. Ann Oncol 1994;5:653.
243. Zidar B, Pugh R, Schiffer L, et al. Treatment of six cases of mesothelioma with doxorubicin and cis-platinum. Cancer 1983;52:1788.
244. Ardizzoni A, Rosso R, Salvati F, et al. Activity of doxorubicin and cisplatin combination chemotherapy in patients with diffuse malignant pleural mesothelioma. An Italian Lung Cancer Task
Force phase II study. Cancer 1991;67:2984.
245. Niki Y, Nakayama S, Soga T, et al. [A case of remission induced in diffuse pleural malignant mesothelioma by the treatment with cisplatin and doxorubicin]. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho
1989;16:3635.
246. Stewart DJ, Gertler SZ, Tomiak A, et al. High dose doxorubicin plus cisplatin in the treatment of unresectable mesotheliomas: report of four cases. Lung Cancer 1994;11:251.
247. Pennucci MC, Ardizzoni A, Pronzato P, et al. Combined cisplatin, doxorubicin, and mitomycin for the treatment of advanced pleural mesothelioma: a phase II FONICAP trial. Italian Lung
Cancer Task Force. Cancer 1997;79:1897.
248. Breau JL, Boaziz C, Morere JJF, et al. Combination chemotherapy with cisplatinum, adriamycin, bleomycin and mitomycin C, plus systemic and intrapleural hyaluronidase in 25 consecutive
cases of stages II, III pleural mesothelioma. Proc. 1st International Mesothelioma Conference, Paris: 1991:5.
249. Dhingra H, Valdivieso M, Tannir N, et al. Combined modality treatment for mesothelioma with cytoxan, adriamycin, and DTIC (CYADIC) and adjuvant surgery. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1983;2:205(abst C-800).
250. Spremulli E, Wampler G, Regelson E, et al. Chemotherapy of malignant mesothelioma. Cancer 1977;40:2038.
251. Gottlieb JA, Bodney GP, Sinkovics JG, et al. An effective new four-drug combination regimen (CY-VA-DIC) for metastatic sarcomas. AACR/ASCO 1974;15:162.
252. Upham JW, Musk AW, van Hazel G, et al. Interferon alpha and doxorubicin in malignant mesothelioma: a phase II study. Aust N Z J Med 1993;23:683.
253. Eisenhauer EA, Evans WK, Murray N, et al. A phase II study of VP-16 and cisplatin in patients with unresectable malignant mesothelioma. An NCI Canada clinical trials group study. Invest New
Drugs 1988;6:327.
254. Niki Y, Soga T, Nishimura A, et al. [A diffuse, pleural, malignant mesothelioma kept in long remission by chemotherapy combining pirarubicin and cisplatin]. Gan No Rinsho 1990;36:2463.
255. Nakano T, Chahinian AP, Shinjo M, et al. Cisplatin in combination with irinotecan in the treatment of patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma: a pilot phase II clinical trial and
pharmacokinetic profile. Cancer 1999;85:2375.
256. Tsavaris N, Mylonakis N, Karvounis N, et al. Combination chemotherapy with cisplatin-vinblastine in malignant mesothelioma [see comments]. Lung Cancer 1994;11:299.
257. Samuels BL, Herndon JE, 2nd, Harmon DC, et al. Dihydro-5-azacytidine and cisplatin in the treatment of malignant mesothelioma: a phase II study by the Cancer and Leukemia Group B.
Cancer 1998;82:1578.
258. Purohit A, Moreau L, Dietemann A, et al. Weekly systemic combination of cisplatin and interferon alpha 2a in diffuse malignant pleural mesothelioma. Lung Cancer 1998;22:119.
259. Trandafir L, Ruffie P, Borel C, et al. Higher doses of alpha-interferon do not increase the activity of the weekly cisplatin-interferon combination in advanced malignant mesothelioma Eur J
Cancer 1997;33:1900.
260. Chahinian AP, Norton L, Szrajer L, et al. Mitomycin C and cisplatin in human malignant mesothelioma xenografts in nude mice: clinical correlation. Proc AACR 1983;24:151(abst 597).
261. Middleton GW, Smith IE, O'Brien ME, et al. Good symptom relief with palliative MVP (mitomycin-C, vinblastine and cisplatin) chemotherapy in malignant mesothelioma. Ann Oncol 1998;9:269.
262. Kasseyet S, Astoul P, Boutin C. Results of a phase II trial of combined chemotherapy for patients with diffuse malignant mesothelioma of the pleura. Cancer 1999;85:1740.
263. Metintas M, Ozdemir N, Ucgun I, et al. Cisplatin, mitomycin, and interferon-alpha2a combination chemoimmunotherapy in the treatment of diffuse malignant pleural mesothelioma. Chest
1999;116:391.
264. Tansan S, Emri S, Selcuk T, et al. Treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma with cisplatin, mitomycin C and alpha interferon. Oncology 1994;51:348.
265. Magri MD, Foladore S, Veronesi A, et al. Treatment of malignant mesothelioma with epirubicin and ifosfamide: a phase II cooperative study. Ann Oncol 1992;3:237.
266. Bretti S, Berruti A, Dogliotti L, et al. Combined epirubicin and interleukin-2 regimen in the treatment of malignant mesothelioma: a multicenter phase II study of the Italian Group on Rare
Tumors. Tumori 1998;84:558.
267. O'Reilly EM, Ilson DH, Saltz LB, et al. A phase II trial of interferon alpha-2a and carboplatin in patients with advanced malignant mesothelioma. Cancer Invest 1999;17:195.
268. Halme M, Knuuttila A, Vehmas T, et al. High-dose methotrexate in combination with interferons in the treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma. Br J Cancer 1999;80:1781.
269. Alberts AS, Falkson G, Goedhals L, et al. Malignant pleural mesothelioma: a disease unaffected by current therapeutic maneuvers. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:527.
270. Tishler RB, Geard CR, Hall EJ, Schiff PB. Taxol sensitizes human astrocytoma cells to radiation. Cancer Res 1992;52:3495.
271. Herscher LL, Hahn SM, Kroog G, et al. Phase I study of paclitaxel as a radiation sensitizer in the treatment of mesothelioma and non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:635.
272. Linden CJ, Mercke C, Albrechtsson U, et al. Effect of hemithorax irradiation alone or combined with doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide in 47 pleural mesotheliomas: a nonrandomized phase II
study. Eur Respir J 1996;9:2565.
273. Hilaris BS, Dattatreyudu NK, Wong E, et al. Pleurectomy and intraoperative brachytherapy and postoperative radiation in the management of malignant pleural mesothelioma. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:325.
274. Mattson K, Holsti LR, Tammilehto L, et al. Multimodality treatment programs for malignant pleural mesothelioma using high-dose hemithorax irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1992;24:643.
275. Markman M, Cleary S, Pfeifle C, Howell SB. Cisplatin administered by the intracavitary route as treatment for malignant mesothelioma. Cancer 1986;58:18.
276. Kirmani S, Cleary SM, Mowry J, Howell SB. Intracavitary cisplatin for malignant mesothelioma; an update. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1988;5:273.
277. Rusch V, Saltz L, Venkatraman E, et al. A phase II trial of plurectomy, docortication followed by intrapleural and systemic chemotherapy for malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:1156.
278. Figlin R, Mendoza E, Piantadosi S, Rusch V. Intrapleural chemotherapy without pleurodesis for malignant pleural effusions. LCSG Trial 861. Chest 1994;106:363S.
279. Rice TW, Adelstein DJ, Kirby TJ, et al. Aggressive multimodality therapy for malignant pleural mesothelioma. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;58:24.
280. Colleoni M, Sartori F, Calabro F, et al. Surgery followed by intracavitary plus systemic chemotherapy in malignant pleural mesothelioma. Tumori 1996;82:53.
281. Sugarbaker D, Harpole D, Healey E, et al. Multimodality treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:356(abst 1083).
282. Calavrezos A, Koschel G, Husselmann H, et al. Malignant mesothelioma of the pleura. Klin Wochenschr 1988;66:607.
283. Pass HI, Donington JS. Use of photodynamic therapy for the management of pleural malignancies. Semin Surg Oncol 1995;11:360.
284. Ratto GB, Civalleri D, Esposito M, et al. Pleural space perfusion with cisplatin in the multimodality treatment of malignant mesothelioma: a feasibility and pharmacokinetic study. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 1999;117:759.
285. Sterman DH, Treat J, Litzky LA, et al. Adenovirus-mediated herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase/ganciclovir gene therapy in patients with localized malignancy: results of a phase I clinical
trial in malignant mesothelioma. Hum Gene Ther 1998;9:1083.
286. Molnar-Kimber KL, Sterman DH, Chang M, et al. Impact of preexisting and induced humoral and cellular immune responses in an adenovirus-based gene therapy phase I clinical trial for
localized mesothelioma. Hum Gene Ther 1998;9:2121.
287. Schwarzenberger P, Harrison L, Weinacker A, et al. The treatment of malignant mesothelioma with a gene modified cancer cell line: a phase I study. Hum Gene Ther 1998;9:2641.
288. Schwarzenberger P, Lei D, Freeman SM, et al. Antitumor activity with the HSV-tk-gene-modified cell line PA-1-STK in malignant mesothelioma. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 1998;19:333.
289. Moertel C. Peritoneal mesothelioma. Gastroenterology 1972;63:346.
290. Antman K, Osteen R, Klegar K, et al. Early peritoneal mesothelioma: a treatable malignancy. Lancet 1985;ii:977.
291. van Gelder T, Hoogsteden HC, Versnel MA, et al. Malignant peritoneal mesothelioma: a series of 19 cases. Digestion 1989;43:222.
292. Whitley NO, Brenner DE, Antman KH, et al. Computed tomographic evaluation of peritoneal mesotheliomas: an analysis of eight cases. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1982;138:531.
293. Fukuda T, Hayashi K, Mori M, et al. [Radiologic manifestations of peritoneal mesothelioma]. Nippon Igaku Hoshasen Gakkai Zasshi 1991;51:643.
294. Nensey YM, Ibrahim MA, Zonca MA, Ma CK. Peritoneal mesothelioma: an unusual cause of esophageal achalasia. Am J Gastroenterol 1990;85:1617.
295. Rashchupkina ZP, Karmilov VA, Iudina LI, Burtsev VI. [Malignant mesothelioma of the peritoneum with secondary amyloidosis of the internal organs]. Klin Med (Mosk) 1990;68:99.
296. von Hirschhausen R, Clemens M. [Paraneoplastic dermatomyositis in peritoneal mesothelioma]. Med Klin 1990;1:113.
297. Weissman L, Osteen R, Corson J, et al. Combined modality therapy for intraperitoneal mesothelioma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1988;7:274(abst 1063).
298. Katsube Y, Mukai K, Silverberg SG. Cystic mesothelioma of the peritoneum: a report of five cases and review of the literature. Cancer 1982;50:1615.
299. Burrig KF, Pfitzer P, Hort W. Well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma of the peritoneum: a borderline mesothelioma. Report of two cases and review of literature. Virchows Arch
1990;417:443.
300. Ozgen A, Akata D, Akhan O, et al. Giant benign cystic peritoneal mesothelioma: US, CT, and MRI findings. Abdom Imaging 1998;23:502.
301. Ross MJ, Welch WR, Scully RE. Multilocular peritoneal inclusion cysts (so-called cystic mesotheliomas). Cancer 1989;64:1336.
302. Villaschi S, Autelitano F, Santeusanio G, Balistreri P. Cystic mesothelioma of the peritoneum. A report of three cases. Am J Clin Pathol 1990;94:758.
303. Datta RV, Paty PB. Cystic mesothelioma of the peritoneum. Eur J Surg Oncol 1997;23:461.
304. Daya D, McCaughey WT. Well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma of the peritoneum. A clinicopathologic study of 22 cases. Cancer 1990;65:292.
305. Letterie GS, Yon JL. The antiestrogen tamoxifen in the treatment of recurrent benign cystic mesothelioma. Gynecol Oncol 1998;70:131.
306. van der Klooster JM, Lambers MD, van Bommel EF, Scholten PC. Successful catheter drainage of recurrent benign multicystic mesothelioma of the peritoneum. Neth J Med 1997;50:246.
307. Rosen DM, Sutton CJ. Use of the potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP) laser in the treatment of benign multicystic peritoneal mesothelioma. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1999;106:505.
308. Lomas DA, Wallis PJ, Stockley RA. Palliation of malignant ascites with a Tenckhoff catheter. Thorax 1989;44:828.
309. Einhorn N, Hamos KV, Hindmarsh T, et al. Radiation therapy of ovarian carcinoma: presentation of a six-field technique. Radiother Oncol 1986;7:125.
310. Fazekas J, Maier JG. Irradiation of ovarian carcinomas: a prospective comparison of the open-field and moving strip techniques. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1974;120:118.
311. Lederman GS, Recht A, Herman T, et al. Long-term survival in peritoneal mesothelioma. The role of radiotherapy and combined modality treatment. Cancer 1987;59:1882.
312. Rose RG, Palmer JD, Lougheed MN. Treatment of peritoneal mesothelioma with radioactive colloidal gold. Cancer 1955;8:478.
313. Leichner PK, Rosenshein N, Leibel SA, Order SE. Distribution and tissue dose of intraperitoneal administered radioactive chromic phosphate (32P) in New Zealand white rabbits. Radiology
1980;134:729.
314. Cross WG. Table of beta-ray dose distributions in water. Chalk River, Ontario; Chalk River Laboratories, 1967.
315. Piver SM. Radioactive colloids in the treatment of stage IA ovarian cancer. Obstet Gynecol 1972;40:42.
316. Pezner RD, Stevens KR, Tong D, Allen CV. Limited epithelial carcinoma of the ovary treated with curative intent by the intraperitoneal installation of radiocolloids. Cancer 1978;42:2563.
317. Klaassen D, Starreveld A, Shelly W, et al. External beam pelvic radiotherapy plus intraperitoneal radioactive chromic phosphate in early stage ovarian cancer: a toxic combination. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:1801.
318. Howell SB, Pfeifle CL, Wung WE, et al. Intraperitoneal cisplatin with systemic thiosulfate protection. Ann Intern Med 1982;97: 845.
319. Hayashi T, Nasu Y, Aramaki K, et al. [A case of peritoneal malignant mesothelioma with disappearance of ascites result of intraperitoneal instillation of mitomycin C and oral administration of
UFT]. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho 1989;16:2449.
320. Sugarbaker PH, Cunliffe WJ, Graves T, et al. Phase I and pharmacologic studies with early postoperative intraperitoneal epiadriamycin. Fourth International Conference on Advances in
Regional Cancer Therapy. Berchtesgaden, Germany, 1989.
321. Markman M, Kelsen D. Efficacy of cisplatin-based intraperitoneal chemotherapy as treatment of malignant peritoneal mesothelioma. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1992;118:547.
322. Langer CJ, Rosenblum N, Hogan M, et al. Intraperitoneal cisplatin and etoposide in peritoneal mesothelioma: favorable outcome with a multimodality approach. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1993;32:204.
323. Vlasveld LT, Taal BG, Kroon BB, et al. Intestinal obstruction due to diffuse peritoneal fibrosis at 2 years after the successful treatment of malignant peritoneal mesothelioma with intraperitoneal
mitoxantrone [published erratum appears in Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1992;30:249]. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1992;29:405.
324. Garcia Moore ML, Savaraj N, Feun LG, Donnelly E. Successful therapy of peritoneal mesothelioma with intraperitoneal chemotherapy alone. A case report. Am J Clin Oncol 1992;15:528.

325. Taylor RA, Johnson LP. Mesothelioma: current perspectives. West J Med 1981;134:379.
326. Eltabbakh GH, Piver MS, Hempling RE, et al. Clinical picture, response to therapy, and survival of women with diffuse malignant peritoneal mesothelioma. J Surg Oncol 1999;70:6.
327. Park BJ, Alexander HR, Libutti SK, et al. Treatment of primary peritoneal mesothelioma by continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion (CHPP) [In Process Citation]. Ann Surg Oncol
1999;6:582.
328. Plas E, Riedl CR, Pfluger H. Malignant mesothelioma of the tunica vaginalis testis: review of the literature and assessment of prognostic parameters. Cancer 1998;83:2437.
329. Khan MA, Puri P, Devaney D. Mesothelioma of tunica vaginalis testis in a child. J Urol 1997;158:198.
330. Antman K, Cohn S, Green M. Malignant mesothelioma of the tunica vaginalis testis. J Clin Oncol 1984; 2:447.
331. Gupta SC, Gupta AK, Misra V, Singh PA. Pre-operative diagnosis of malignant mesothelioma of tunica vaginalis testis by hydrocele fluid cytology. Eur J Surg Oncol 1998;24:153.
332. Kamiya M, Eimoto T. Malignant mesothelioma of the tunica vaginalis. Pathol Res Pract 1990;186:680.
333. Asoh Y, Nakamura M, Maeda T, et al. [Brain metastasis from primary pericardial mesothelioma. Case report]. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo) 1990;30:884.
334. Eker R, Cantez T, Dogan O, et al. Pericardial mesothelioma. A pediatric case report. Turk J Pediatr 1989;31:305.
335. Taguchi T, Fujiwara Y, Ichiki H, et al. [A case of malignant pericardial mesothelioma detected by gallium-67 scintigraphy]. Kaku Igaku 1991;28:281.
336. Aggarwal P, Wali JP, Agarwal J. Pericardial mesothelioma presenting as a mediastinal mass. Singapore Med J 1991;32:185.
337. Pascual MA, Povar J, Munoz J, et al. [Pericardial mesothelioma: apropos of a case]. Rev Esp Cardiol 1989;42:559.
338. DeKlerk DP, Nime F. Adenomatoid tumors (mesothelioma) of testicular and paratesticular tissue. Urology 1975; 6:635.
339. Scully R, Mark EJ, McNeeley BU. Case record of the Massachusetts General Hospital. N Engl J Med 1982;306:32.
340. Balassiano M, Reichert N, Rosenman Y, et al. Localized fibrous mesothelioma of the mediastinum devoid of pleural connections. Postgrad Med J 1989;65:788.
341. Kottke MK, Hart WR, Broughan T. Localized fibrous tumor (localized fibrous mesothelioma) of the liver. Cancer 1989;64:1096.
342. Simpson PR. Adenomatoid tumor of the adrenal gland. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1990;114:725.
343. Briselli M, Mark EJ, Dickersin GR. Solitary fibrous tumors of the pleura: eight new cases and review of 360 cases in the literature. Cancer 1981;47:2678.
344. Scharifker D, Kaneko M. Localized fibrous “mesothelioma” of pleura (sub-mesothelial fibroma). A clinicopathologic study of 18 cases. Cancer 1979;43:627.
345. Dalton WT, Zolliker AS, McCaughey WTE, et al. Localized primary tumors of the pleura. An analysis of 40 cases. Cancer 1979;44:1465.
346. Majoulet JF, Millant P, Bouillet P, et al. [Radiologic aspect of benign pleural fibrous mesothelioma. Reports of 4 cases]. Ann Radiol (Paris) 1990;33:229.
347. Strom EH, Skjorten F, Aarseth LB, Haug E. Solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura. An immunohistochemical, electron microscopic and tissue culture study of a tumor producing insulin-like growth
factor I in a patient with hypoglycemia. Pathol Res Pract 1991;187:109.
348. Scotte M, Bessou JP, Andro JF, et al. [Hypoglycemic pleural mesothelioma. A case report]. Ann Chir 1990;44:688.
349. DeLaria G, Jensik R, Faber LP, Kittle CF. Surgical management of malignant mesothelioma. Ann Thorac Surg 1978;26:375.
350. Davies JH, Notley RG. Adenomatoid tumours of the male genital tract. Review of 5 men presenting with an intrascrotal swelling subsequently diagnosed as an adenomatoid tumour. Eur Urol
1989;16:393.
351. Lopez JI, Aranda FI. Absence of estrogen immunoreactivity in adenomatoid tumors of male reproductive system. Pathol Res Pract 1990;186:395.
352. Kupryjanczyk J. Adenomatoid tumour of the ovary and uterus in the same patient. Zentralbl Allg Pathol 1989;135:437.
353. Monma N, Satodate R, Tashiro A, Segawa I. Origin of so-called mesothelioma of the atrioventricular node. An immunohistochemical study. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1991;115:1026.
354. Fontaliran F, Guillois B, Colin A, et al. Congenital atrioventricular block and maternal lupus erythematosus. Histologic discovery of tumor of the atrioventricular node. Arch Mal Coeur
1989;82:609.
355. Corbi P, Jebara V, Fabiani JN, et al. [Benign tumors of the heart (excluding myxoma). Experience with 9 surgically treated cases]. Ann Cardiol Angeiol (Paris) 1990;39:433.
356. Subramanian R, Flygenring B. Mesothelioma of the atrioventricular node and congenital complete heart block. Clin Cardiol 1989;12:469.
357. Balasundaram S, Halees SA, Duran C. Mesothelioma of the atrioventricular node: first successful follow-up after excision. Eur Heart J 1992;13:718.

SECTION 41.1 Molecular Biology of Skin Cancer
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 41.1
Molecular Biology of Skin Cancer
DOUGLAS E. BRASH
ALLAN E. BALE
Introduction
Skin Carcinogens
Genetic Events
Ptch
Cellular Events
Therapeutics
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
In skin cancer, the interaction between genes and the environment figures prominently. At the molecular level, skin tumors appear to result from a succession of
genetic alterations; many of these changes are caused by carcinogens, such as sunlight. At the cellular level, one of the mutant genes, p53, causes a deficiency in
the programmed cell death of damaged keratinocytes. Without such apoptosis, large numbers of precancerous cells accumulate in the sun-exposed skin of normal
individuals. A second gene, PTCH, affects skin development and is mutated in basal cell carcinomas (BCC). Various aspects of these advances have been
reviewed.1,2,3,4 and 5

SKIN CARCINOGENS
Nonmelanoma skin cancer is associated with exposure to chimney soot in chimney sweeps, burn scars, arsenic ingestion, and exposure to sunlight. 6 Sunlight is the
principal skin carcinogen in humans and the human carcinogen whose mechanism is clearest. Basal and squamous cell carcinomas are most frequent at low
latitudes, in outdoor workers, on exposed regions of the body, and in light-skinned individuals with blonde or red hair who have a tendency to burn rather than tan. 7
Many BCCs that occur on body sites not chronically exposed to sunlight, such as the trunk and legs, seem related to intermittent sun exposure. 8 In experimental
animals, the most effective wavelengths are the ultraviolet B (UVB) region of the solar spectrum; the UVA used in tanning parlors can cause skin tumors as well. 5
UVB's effectiveness is due to its ability to partially penetrate the ozone layer and stratum corneum and then be absorbed by DNA. 9 Nonmelanoma skin cancers
exceed the incidence of all other cancers combined in the southern United States, Hawaii, and Australia. 10,11
The first molecular step in sunlight-induced carcinogenesis is the induction of DNA photoproducts by UVB photons. The most frequent photoproducts involve adjacent
pyrimidines.1 UV photons tend to be absorbed at the 5-6 double bond of pyrimidines, allowing the bond to open. The result is either the cyclobutane dimer or a
pyrimidine-pyrimidone (6-4) photoproduct ( Fig. 41.1-1).2 Both lead to abnormal DNA structures. When DNA is copied during subsequent DNA replication, the DNA
polymerase often incorrectly inserts an adenine opposite a damaged cytosine. At the next round of replication, the adenine correctly codes for thymine opposite. After
UV, these C®T mutations occur only where a cytosine lies next to a thymine or another cytosine, reflecting the specificity of the sites at which UV photoproducts
occur. If two adjacent cytosines mutate, the result is CC®TT. These distinctive patterns of mutation are pathognomonic for UV radiation. 12

FIGURE 41.1-1. Ultraviolet light photoproducts. TT cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (left) and TC pyrimidine-pyrimidone (6-4) photoproduct (right).

Mutations are prevented by DNA repair systems that excise UV photoproducts from DNA. 13,14 A transcription-coupled repair system rapidly removes lesions from the
transcribed strand of active genes, whereas a slower global excision system removes lesions from inactive genes and from the nontranscribed strand of active ones.
Individuals with xeroderma pigmentosum group A (XPA) are defective in both pathways, resulting in acute sun sensitivity and a 2000-fold elevated incidence of skin
cancer. 15 The XPC subtype is defective in only the global system, yet has similar clinical features. Cockayne's syndrome is defective in only the transcription-coupled
pathway and, though sun-sensitive, does not have an increased skin cancer incidence. Most genes corresponding to the XP and Cockayne's syndrome subtypes have
been cloned, and their protein products successively recognize and excise not only UV photoproducts but other forms of DNA damage as well.

GENETIC EVENTS
PTCH
Two genes normally prevent cancers but are inactivated in skin tumors. PTCH, a component of a cellular signaling pathway, is mutated in perhaps 90% of BCCs. p53,
which encodes a regulator of the cell cycle and cell death, is mutated in half of BCCs and more than 90% of squamous cell carcinomas (SCC).
PTCH was discovered as the gene mutated in nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by multiple BCCs, jaw cysts, and
pits of the palms and soles. It is a human homologue of the Drosophila gene patched.16,17 Most sporadic BCCs have inactivating PTCH mutations,18 and almost all
tumors without PTCH mutations have activating mutations in its partner, smoothened. 19
Patched is important in establishing anterior-posterior relationships of the segments of developing Drosophila embryos. It encodes a large transmembrane protein
that, in a complex with smoothened, another transmembrane molecule, is believed to serve as the receptor for the secreted molecule hedgehog. 20 In hedgehog's
absence, smoothened and patched form an inactive complex. On hedgehog binding, smoothened is released from inhibitory effects of patched and transduces a
signal (Fig. 41.1-2). Mutations that inactivate patched switch on the hedgehog pathway without hedgehog. 18 Smoothened functions as an oncogene when switched on
in mouse skin, and some BCCs result from activating mutations of smoothened instead of inactivating mutations of patched. 19 GLI1, a downstream transcription factor
in the hedgehog pathway, is an oncogene in brain tumors, and its overexpression causes epidermal proliferation in frogs. 21 Activating GLI turns on transcription of
WNT, which is known to act as an oncogene in mammary tumors in mice, as well as members of the tumor growth factor-b family. The latter genes have complex roles
in regulating differentiation and cell growth.

FIGURE 41.1-2. Interactions among patched (PTCH), smoothened (SMO), and hedgehog (HH) proteins. Patched represses transcription of hedgehog target genes by
inactivating smoothened. Hedgehog binds to patched, thereby activating smoothened and causing increased transcription of GLI, itself a transcription factor, and its
downstream targets, such as WNT and transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b). In the absence of patched, smoothened may be constitutively activated, resulting in the
overexpression of these genes.

Mutating the hedgehog pathway is an early step in tumor development because minute BCCs are as likely as large tumors to have patched mutations, and all
histologic subtypes have a high frequency of loss of patched. A congenital lesion that can progress to BCC, the sebaceous nevus, has allelic loss in the PTCH region
in 40% of cases.22 No tumors have loss on other chromosomes without involvement of the PTCH locus,23 so PTCH appears to function as a “gatekeeper gene” in
basal cell carcinogenesis. Inactivating this function seems to be necessary before clonal expansion and accumulation of other genetic hits can lead to BCC
formation.24
Nearly all hereditary BCCs have allelic loss as their second, somatic hit. This allelic loss is usually related to sunlight, since nevoid BCC syndrome tumors are most
frequent on sun-exposed skin and are rare in African Americans. 25 However, UVB causes this type of gross rearrangement of genetic material only rarely, so other
wavelengths, such as UVA, may be important. Sporadic BCCs from XP group A patients contain PTCH mutations that are UVB-like, with CC®TT mutations
predominating. 26 However, in typical patients, approximately one-third of BCCs have mutations that are clearly not UVB-induced. 18 These may reflect factors such as
UVA, oxidative damage, or arsenicals. Sunscreens may need to block both UVB and UVA to be completely protective against BCC.
p53
The distinctive mutations caused by UVB radiation identify a tumor suppressor gene critical for both BCC and SCC: p53. More than 90% of SCC of the skin in U.S.
patients contain mutations in p53.4,27 These are predominantly C®T and CC®TT base substitutions at sites of adjacent pyrimidines, directly implicating
cytosine-containing cyclobutane dimers or (6-4) photoproducts and sunlight UVB as the mutagen. Each p53 mutation changes the amino acid, indicating that the
mutation was selected for and contributed to tumor development, rather than being solely an indicator of sun exposure. p53 is a transcription factor that turns on or off
the expression of other genes involved in the cell cycle, programmed cell death, and DNA repair. 28,29 Most mutations inactivate p53's transcriptional activator function.
The gene is mutated in approximately one-half of all human cancers and is considered a tumor suppressor gene because these mutations inactivate the gene's ability
to suppress growth of tumor cells in culture. 30
BCCs, though usually diploid and nonmetastasizing, also contain UV-induced p53 mutations.4 Approximately one-third of BCCs occur on body sites that are relatively
sun-shielded; p53 mutations from these tumors resemble those seen with UVA, ionizing radiation, or oxidative damage, rather than UVB. 31 UVB-induced p53
mutations are frequent in skin cancers from XP patients, with CC®TT mutations being prominent, and in carcinoma in situ.32,33 and 34 Aggressive tumors from patients
with exposure to both sun and tobacco or agricultural chemicals contain multiple unrelated p53 mutations, as if multiple tumors arising in an abnormal field had
merged.35 In Taiwanese arsenic-induced BCC and SCC, p53 mutations are not UV-like. 36 Non-UV p53 mutations are common in keloids, results of dysregulated
wound healing.37
The p53 mutations in skin cancers tend to cluster at nine mutation hot spots. 38 DNA photoproducts are not particularly frequent at these sites, 38 but excision of UV
photoproducts is slower than at surrounding nucleotides. 39 Excision repair of UV photoproducts is reduced in T lymphocytes from patients with BCC or a family history
of skin cancer. 40
Sunlight mutates p53 quite early. UVB-induced mutations are found in actinic keratoses, which occasionally progress to SCC; each lesion has a different p53
mutation.41,42 Strikingly, some 60,000 tiny clones of p53-mutant cells are found in sun-exposed skin from normal individuals ( Fig. 41.1-3).43,44 Thus, precancerous cells
are not only made early in life but begin to proliferate early. The molecular evidence supports migration studies indicating that sunlight exposure critical for skin
cancer occurs before age 15 to 20. 45,46

FIGURE 41.1-3. p53-mutant clone in whole-mount preparations of human epidermis. Sun-exposed skin from normal individuals contains 60,000 such clones. (From
ref. 43, with permission.)

CELLULAR EVENTS
The contribution of a p53 mutation to tumorigenesis is partially understood. The p53 protein is not required for normal development but is elevated in cells treated with
DNA-damaging agents and in cells with cell-cycle abnormalities. 28,29 The signal for UV induction of p53 originates from active genes whose transcription has been
blocked. 47 Elevated p53 protein has two effects on cells. In the “guardian of the genome” pathway, DNA damage induces the p53 protein. p53 then leads to cell-cycle
arrest at a G1-phase checkpoint by inducing p21, an inhibitor of cell-cycle–dependent protein kinases. In keratinocytes, however, UV induces p21 without p53. 48 p53
facilitates DNA repair by transcriptionally activating the p48 protein, which is required for global excision repair and is defective in XPE. 49 In the “cellular proofreading”
pathway,4 inducing p53 in an aberrant cell leads to apoptosis, a form of programmed cell death. 41,50,51
In the epidermis, cellular proofreading is operative after DNA damage. UVB and UVA induce p53 by reducing its degradation rate. 52,53 and 54 p53 then causes irradiated
keratinocytes to become the apoptotic “sunburn cells” familiar to dermatologists. 55 Inactivating the p53 gene prevents sunburn cell formation. 41 Some point mutations
in p53 do not block apoptosis, 56 so different p53 mutations may have different effects on tumor development. Mice inactivated for the p53 gene develop more and
earlier skin cancers after UV. 57,58 Cells defective in p53, or mice defective in UV-induced apoptosis due to a defect in the fas ligand, accumulate mutations at a rapid

rate.59,60 Skin evidently uses the strategy that killing a damaged cell prevents it from becoming cancerous. Thus, if the p53 gene itself is mutated by a previous
sunlight exposure, the cell will be apoptosis-resistant. This cancer-prone cell will survive even if badly UV-damaged.
The situation can grow worse, due to a second consequence of death-resistance. Because the cancer-prone cell's normal neighbors undergo apoptosis when
damaged, their death provides an opportunity for the p53-mutated cell to clonally expand. Sunlight exposure can thus act as a selection pressure favoring the clonal
expansion of p53-mutated cells (Fig. 41.1-4). Indeed, transgenic mice carrying a p53 point mutation that does not affect apoptosis have more tumors after UVB but no
shortening of tumor latency. 61 Sunlight can thus act several times in skin carcinogenesis: first to mutate the p53 or PTCH gene and then afterward to select for clonal
expansion of a p53-mutated cell. These two actions correspond to tumor initiation and tumor promotion. UVB is known to have tumor-promoting activity in mouse
skin.62,63

FIGURE 41.1-4. A model for genetic and cellular events in the onset of human skin cancer. Mutation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene and selection for
apoptosis-resistant p53-mutant cells by repeated sunlight exposure are described in the text. SBC, sunburn cells; UV, ultraviolet; UVB, ultraviolet B. (From ref. 41,
with permission.)

Progression of a single mutant cell to a clone of precancerous or cancerous cells can be traced long after the fact. Taking advantage of p53 mutations as lineage
markers, it has been found that when an SCC is adjacent to carcinoma in situ, the two lesions carry the identical mutation. 44 Similarly, microdissecting BCCs into
regions of 50 to 100 cells reveals that a BCC contains a dominant cell clone accompanied by subclones containing a second or even a third mutation. 64

THERAPEUTICS
The foregoing molecular findings are beginning to impact the clinic, first in the realm of diagnostics. Sunscreens of SPF 15 reduce cyclobutane dimers, p53 protein
induction, sunburn cells, and p53 gene mutations nearly tenfold. 65,66,67,68 and 69 Tumors in mice are reduced up to 50-fold, 70,71 consistent with simultaneous protection of
several genes. This is reassuring, since some common sunscreen ingredients are mutagenic, 72 and protection against actinic keratoses in humans is only twofold. 73,74
Molecular therapeutics is in its infancy. A gene therapy strategy is to restore p53 to render cells more sensitive to radiotherapy- or chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. 75
Obtaining a useful therapeutic index depends on apoptosis being greater in the tumor cells than in normal tissue. In fact, many treatments leading to apoptosis in
transformed fibroblasts only growth-arrest their untransformed counterparts. 76,77 Since p53 is also sensitive to cell-cycle aberrations or other aberrations of tumor
cells, 28,29 an alternative therapeutic strategy introduces p53 without adjunct treatment to induce apoptosis in transformed but not normal cells. 78In vivo intraperitoneal
delivery of a retroviral p53 vector leads to a 75% reduction in peritoneal metastatic cells from murine pancreatic cancer. 79 Pharmacologic approaches include
activation of latent normal p53 protein with small peptides 80 and destabilizing mutant p53 using modifiers of its interaction with heat-shock protein. 81 Several
chemoprevention regimens increase apoptosis of premalignant cells, including dietary antioxidants 77,82,83 and caloric restriction. 84,85

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Brash DE. UV mutagenic photoproducts in E coli and human cells: a molecular genetics perspective on human skin cancer. Photochem Photobiol 1988;48:59.
2. Mitchell DL, Nairn RS. The biology of the (6-4) photoproduct. Photochem Photobiol 1989;49:805.
3. Ananthaswamy HN, Pierceall WE. Molecular mechanisms of ultraviolet radiation carcinogenesis. Photochem Photobiol 1990;52:1119.
4. Brash DE, Ziegler A, Jonason A, et al. Sunlight and sunburn in human skin cancer: p53, apoptosis, and tumor promotion. J Invest Dermatol Symp Proc 1996;1:136.
5. Black HS, deGruijl FR, Forbes D, et al. Photocarcinogenesis: an overview. J Photochem Photobiol B 1997;40:29.
6. Fitzpatrick TB, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, Freedberg IM, Austen KF, eds. Dermatology in general medicine, 4th ed, vol 1. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993:1812.
7. Urbach F. Ultraviolet radiation and skin cancer. In: Smith KC, ed. Topics in photomedicine. New York: Plenum Publishing, 1984:67.
8. Bastiaens MT, Hoefnagel JJ, Bruijn JA, et al. Differences in age, site distribution, and sex between nodular and superficial basal cell carcinoma indicate different types of tumors. J Invest
Dermatol 1998;110:880.
9. Freeman SE, Hacham H, Gange RW, Maytum DJ, Sutherland JC. Wavelength dependence of pyrimidine dimer formation in DNA of human skin irradiated in situ with ultraviolet light. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:5605.
10. Glass AG, Hoover RN. The emerging epidemic of melanoma and squamous cell skin cancer. JAMA 1989;262:2097.
11. Parker SL, Tong T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics, 1997. CA Cancer J Clin 1997; 47:5.
12. Hutchinson F. Induction of tandem base change mutations. Mutat Res 1994;309:11.
13. Wood RD. Nucleotide excision repair in mammalian cells. J Biol Chem 1997;272:23465.
14. de Laat WL, Jaspers NG, Hoeijmakers JH. Molecular mechanism of nucleotide excision repair. Genes Dev 1999;13:768.
15. Cleaver JE, Kraemer KH. Xeroderma pigmentosum and Cockayne syndrome. In: Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, Sly WS, Valle D, eds. The metabolic and molecular bases of inherited disease, 7th
ed, vol 3. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995:4393.
16. Hahn H, Wicking C, Zaphiropoulos PG, et al. Mutations in the human homologue of Drosophila patched in the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Cell 1996;85:841.
17. Johnson RL, Rothman AL, Xie J, et al.Human homolog of patched, a candidate gene for the basal cell nevus syndrome. Science 1996;272:1668.
18. Gailani MR, Stahle-Backdahl M, Leffell DJ, et al. The role of the human homologue of Drosophila patched in sporadic basal cell carcinomas. Nat Genet 1996;14:78.
19. Xie J, Murone M, Luoh SM, et al. Activating smoothened mutations in sporadic basal-cell carcinoma. Nature 1998;391:90.
20. Gailani MR, Bale AE. Developmental genes and cancer: role of patched in basal cell carcinoma of the skin. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1103.
21. Dahmane N, Lee J, Robins P, Heller P, Ruiz i Altaba A. Activation of the transcription factor Gli1 and the sonic hedgehog signaling pathway in skin tumors. Nature 1997;389:876.
22. Xin H, Matt D, Qin JZ, Burg G, Boni R. The sebaceous nevus: a nevus with deletions of the PTCH gene. Cancer Res 1999;59:1834.
23. Gailani MR, Bale SJ, Leffell DJ, et al. Developmental defects in Gorlin syndrome related to a putative tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 9. Cell 1992;69:111.
24. Sidransky D. Is human patched the gatekeeper of common skin cancers? Nat Genet 1996;14:7.
25. Howell JB. Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. J Am Acad Dermatol 1984;11:98.
26. Bodak N, Queille S, Avril MF, et al. High levels of patched gene mutations in basal-cell carcinomas from patients with xeroderma pigmentosum. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:5117.
27. Brash DE, Rudolph JA, Simon JA, et al. A role for sunlight in skin cancer: UV-induced p53 mutations in squamous cell carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:10124.
28. Ko LJ, Prives C. p53: puzzle and paradigm. Genes Dev 1996;10:1054.
29. Levine AJ. p53, the cellular gatekeeper for growth and division. Cell 1997;88:323.
30. Greenblatt MS, Bennett WP, Hollstein M, Harris CC. Mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene: clues to cancer etiology and molecular pathogenesis. Cancer Res 1994;54:4855.
31. Matsumura Y, Nishigori C, Yagi T, Imamura S, Takebe H. Characterization of p53 gene mutations in basal-cell carcinomas: comparison between sun-exposed and less-exposed skin areas. Int J
Cancer 1996;65:778.
32. Dumaz N, Drougard C, Sarasin A, Daya-Grosjean L. Specific UV-induced mutation spectrum in the p53 gene of skin tumors from DNA repair deficient xeroderma pigmentosum patients. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:10529.
33. Sato M, Nishigori C, Zghal M, Yagi T, Takebe H. Ultraviolet-specific mutations in p53 gene in skin tumors in xeroderma pigmentosum patients. Cancer Res 1993;53:2944.
34. Campbell C, Quinn AG, Ro Y-S, Angus B, Rees JL. p53 Mutations are common and early events that precede tumor invasion in squamous cell neoplasia of the skin. J Invest Dermatol
1993;100:746.
35. Kanjilal S, Strom SS, Clayman GL, et al. p53 Mutations in nonmelanoma skin cancer of the head and neck: molecular evidence for field cancerization. Cancer Res 1995;55:3604.
36. Hsu CH, Yang SA, Wang JY, Yu HS, Lin SR. Mutational spectrum of p53 gene in arsenic-related skin cancers from the blackfoot disease endemic area of Taiwan. Br J Cancer 1999;80:1080.
37. Saed GM, Ladin D, Olson J, et al. Analysis of p53 gene mutations in keloids using polymerase chain reaction-based single-strand conformational polymorphism and DNA sequencing. Arch
Dermatol 1998;1324:963.
38. Ziegler A, Leffell DJ, Kunala S, et al. Mutation hotspots due to sunlight in the p53 gene of non-melanoma skin cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:4216.
39. Tornaletti S, Pfeifer GP. Slow repair of pyrimidine dimers at p53 mutation hotspots in skin cancer. Science 1994;263:1436.
40. Grossman L. Epidemiology of ultraviolet-DNA repair capacity and human cancer. Environ Health Perspect 1997;105:927.
41. Ziegler A, Jonason AS, Leffell DJ, et al. Sunburn and p53 in the onset of skin cancer. Nature 1994;372:773.

42. Taguchi M, Watanabe S, Yashima K, et al. Aberrations of the tumor suppressor p53 gene and p53 protein in solar keratosis in human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1994;103:500.
43. Jonason AS, Kunala S, Price GJ, et al. Frequent clones of p53-mutated keratinocytes in normal human skin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:14025.
44. Ren ZP, Hedrum A, Ponten F, et al. Human epidermal cancer and accompanying precursors have identical p53 mutations different from p53 mutations in adjacent areas of clonally expanded
non-neoplastic keratinocytes. Oncogene 1996;12:765.
45. Kricker A, Armstrong BK, English DR, Heenan PJ. Pigmentary and cutaneous risk factors for non-melanocytic skin cancera case-control study. Int J Cancer 1991;48:650.
46. Marks R, Jolley D, Lectsas S, Foley P. The role of childhood exposure to sunlight in the development of solar keratoses and non-melanocytic skin cancer. Med J Aust 1990;152:62.
47. Ljungman M, Zhang F. Blockage of RNA polymerase as a possible trigger for UV light-induced apoptosis. Oncogene 1996;13:823.
48. Liu M, Wikonkal NM, Brash DE. UV induces p21WAF1/CIP1 protein in keratinocytes without p53. J Invest Dermatol 1999;113:283.
49. Hwang BJ, Ford JM, Hanawalt PC, Chu G. Expression of the p48 xeroderma pigmentosum gene is p53-dependent and is involved in global genomic repair. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1999;96:424.
50. Evan G, Littlewood T. A matter of life and cell death. Science 1998;281:1317.
51. Green DR, Reed JC. Mitochondria and apoptosis. Science 1998;281:1309.
52. Hall PA, McKee PH, Menage H, Dover R, Lane DP. High levels of p53 protein in UV-irradiated normal human skin. Oncogene 1993;8:203.
53. Campbell C, Quinn AG, Angus B, Farr PM, Rees JL. Wavelength specific patterns of p53 induction in human skin following exposure to UV radiation. Cancer Res 1993;53:2697.
54. Liu M, Dhanwada KR, Birt DF, Hecht S, Pelling JC. I ncrease in p53 protein half-life in mouse keratinocytes following UV-B irradiation. Carcinogenesis 1994;15:1089.
55. Danno K, Horio T. Sunburn cell: factors involved in its formation. Photochem Photobiol 1987;45:683.
56. Li G, Mitchell DL, Ho VC, Reed JC, Tron VA. Decreased DNA repair but normal apoptosis in ultraviolet-irradiated skin of p53-transgenic mice. Am J Pathol 1996;148:1113.
57. Li G, Tron V, Ho V. Induction of squamous cell carcinoma in p53-deficient mice after ultraviolet irradiation. J Invest Dermatol 1998;110:72.
58. Jiang W, Ananthaswamy HN, Muller HK, Kripke ML. p53 protects against skin cancer induction by UV-B radiation. Oncogene 1999;18:4247.
59. Griffiths SD, Clarke AR, Healy LE, et al. Absence of p53 permits propagation of mutant cells following genotoxic damage. Oncogene 1997;14:523.
60. Hill LL, Ouhtit A, Loughlin SM, et al. Fas ligand: a sensor for DNA damage critical in skin cancer etiology. Science 1999;285:898.
61. Li G, Ho VC, Berean K, Tron VA. Ultraviolet radiation induction of squamous cell carcinomas in p53 transgenic mice. Cancer Res 1995;55:2070.
62. Epstein JH, Epstein WL. Cocarcinogenic effect of ultraviolet light on DMBA tumor initiation in albino mice. J Invest Dermatol 1962;39:455.
63. Blum HF. Quantitative aspects of cancer induction by ultraviolet light: including a revised model. In: Urbach F, ed. The biologic effects of ultraviolet radiation. Oxford: Pergamon, 1969:543.
64. Pontén F, Berg C, Ahmadian A, et al. Molecular pathology in basal cell cancer with p53 as a genetic marker. Oncogene 1997;15:1059.
65. Pontén F, Berne B, Ren ZP, Nister M, Pontén J. Ultraviolet light induces expression of p53 and p21 in human skin: effect of sunscreen and constitutive p21 expression in skin appendages. J
Invest Dermatol 1995;105:402.
66. Wolf P, Cox P, Yarosh DB, Kripke ML. Sunscreens and T4N5 liposomes differ in their ability to protect against ultraviolet-induced sunburn cell formation, alterations of dendritic epidermal cells,
and local suppression of contact hypersensitivity. J Invest Dermatol 1995;104:287.
67. Ley RD, Fourtanier A. Sunscreen protection against ultraviolet radiationinduced pyrimidine dimers in mouse epidermal DNA. Photochem Photobiol 1997;65:1007.
68. Ananthaswamy HN, Loughlin SM, Cox P, et al. Sunlight and skin cancer: inhibition of p53 mutations in UV-irradiated mouse skin by sunscreens. Nature Med 1997;3:510.
69. Freeman SE, Ley RD, Ley KD. Sunscreen protection against UV-induced pyrimidine dimers in DNA of human skin in situ. Photodermatology 1998;5:243.
70. Bestak R, Halliday GM. Sunscreens protect from UV-promoted squamous cell carcinoma in mice chronically irradiated with doses of UV radiation insufficient to cause edema. Photochem
Photobiol 1996;64:188.
71. Ananthaswamy HN, Ullrich SE, Mascotto RE, et al. Inhibition of solar simulator-induced p53 mutations and protection against skin cancer development in mice by sunscreens. J Invest Dermatol
1999;112:763.
72. Gasparro FP, Mitchnick M, Nash JF. A review of sunscreen safety and efficacy. Photochem Photobiol 1998;68:243.
73. Thompson SC, Jolley D, Marks R. Reduction of solar keratoses by regular sunscreen use. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1147.
74. Naylor MF, Boyd A, Smith DW, et al. High sun protection factor sunscreen in the suppression of actinic neoplasia. Arch Dermatol 1995;131:170.
75. Fujiwara T, Grimm EA, Mukhopadhyay T, et al. Induction of chemosensitivity in human lung cancer cells in vivo by adenovirus-mediated transfer of the wild-type p53 gene. Cancer Res
1994;54:2287.
76. Lowe SW, Ruley HE, Jacks T, Houseman DE. p53-dependent apoptosis modulates the cytotoxicity of anticancer agents. Cell 1993;74:957.
77. Liu M, Pelling JC, Ju J, Chu E, Brash DE. Antioxidant action via p53-mediated apoptosis. Cancer Res 1998;58:1723.
78. Fujiwara T, Grimm EA, Mukhopadhyay T, et al. A retroviral wild-type p53 expression vector penetrates human lung cancer spheroids and inhibits growth by inducing apoptosis. Cancer Res
1993;53:4129.
79. Hwang RF, Gordon EM, Anderson WF, Parekh D. Gene therapy for primary and metastatic pancreatic cancer with intraperitoneal retroviral vector bearing the wild-type p53 gene. Surgery
1998;124:143.
80. Hupp TR, Sparks A, Lane DP. Small peptides activate the latent sequence-specific DNA binding function of p53. Cell 1995;83:237.
81. Blagosklonny MV, Toretsky J, Neckers L. Geldanamycin selectively destabilizes and conformationally alters mutated p53. Oncogene 1995;11:933.
82. Yano H, Mizoguchi A, Fukuda K, et al. The herbal medicine sho-saiko-to inhibits proliferation of cancer cell lines by inducing apoptosis and arrest at the G 0/G 1 phase. Cancer Res 1994;54:448.
83. Chiao C, Crothers AM, Grunberger D, et al. Apoptosis and altered redox state induced by caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE) in transformed rat fibroblast cells. Cancer Res 1995;55:3576.
84. James SJ, Muskhelishvili L. Rates of apoptosis and proliferation vary with caloric intake and may influence incidence of spontaneous hepatoma in C57BL/6 x C3H F 1 mice. Cancer Res
1994;54:5508.
85. Grasl-Kraupp B, Bursch W, Ruttkay-Nedecky B, et al. Food restriction eliminates preneoplastic cells through apoptosis and antagonizes carcinogenesis in rat liver. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1994;91:9995.

SECTION 41.2 Management of Skin Cancer
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 41.2
Management of Skin Cancer
DAVID J. LEFFELL
JOHN A. CARUCCI
Introduction
Diagnosis
Shave Biopsy
Punch Biopsy
Excisional Biopsy
General Approach to Management of Skin Cancer
Excision
Mohs Micrographic Surgery
Curettage and Electrodessication
Cryosurgery
Radiation Therapy
Nonmelanoma Skin Cancer and Precancerous Lesions
Actinic Keratosis
Basal Cell Carcinoma
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Merkel Cell Carcinoma
Microcystic Adnexal Carcinoma
Sebaceous Carcinoma
Atypical Fibroxanthoma
Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma
Dermatofibrosarcoma Protuberans
Angiosarcoma
Kaposis Sarcoma
Carcinoma Metastatic to Skin
Conclusion
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
In 1999, approximately 1 million nonmelanoma skin cancers (NMSCs) were diagnosed in the United States. 1,2 One in five Americans will develop skin cancer during
life, and more than 97% of these will be NMSCs. 3 Some studies suggest that development of NMSC, including basal cell (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC),
may indicate increased risk for internal malignancy. 3 However, the precise relationship between skin cancer and the risk of internal malignancy is not yet completely
defined. The approach to diagnosis and management of common skin cancers, including BCC and SCC and other, less common tumors of follicular, neuroendocrine,
and fibrohistiocytic origin, is discussed in this chapter.

DIAGNOSIS
Although many NMSCs present with classic clinical findings such as nodularity and erythema, definitive diagnosis can be made only by biopsy. Adequate tissue
obtained in a nontraumatic fashion is critical to histopathologic diagnosis.
Skin biopsies may be performed by shave, punch, or fusiform excision. The type of biopsy performed should be based on the morphology of the primary lesion. 4 A
shave biopsy usually is adequate for raised lesions such as nodular BCC, SCC, or tumors of follicular origin. Punch biopsy is effective for sampling flat, broad lesions
for which shave or fusiform excision would be technically inappropriate. An excisional biopsy may be used to sample deep dermal and subcutaneous tissue. Excision
is appropriate when it is necessary to distinguish between a benign lesion such as a dermatofibroma and a malignant tumor such as a dermatofibrosarcoma
protuberans.
SHAVE BIOPSY
The basic techniques involved in performing skin biopsies are demonstrated in Figure 41.2-1. A shave biopsy is performed under clean conditions. Local anesthetic
(lidocaine 1% with epinephrine 1:100,000, unless contraindicated) is injected with a 30-gauge needle. The use of a sterilized razor blade, which can be precisely
manipulated by the operator to adjust the depth of the biopsy, often is superior to the use of a No. 15 scalpel. After the procedure, adequate hemostasis is achieved
with topical application of aqueous aluminum chloride (20%) or electrocautery.

FIGURE 41.2-1. Biopsy techniques. A: Shave biopsy. A scalpel blade is precisely manipulated by the operator to adjust the depth of the biopsy, and hemostasis is
achieved with topical application of aqueous aluminum chloride (20%), ferric chloride (25%), or electrocautery. B: Punch biopsy. The operator makes a circular
incision to the level of the superficial fat using a rotating motion of the trephine. Traction applied perpendicularly to the relaxed skin tension lines minimizes
redundancy at closure. Hemostasis is achieved by placement of sutures.

PUNCH BIOPSY
A punch biopsy is performed under local anesthesia, using a trephine or biopsy punch. The operator makes a circular incision to the level of the superficial fat, using a
rotating motion of the trephine. Traction applied perpendicularly to the relaxed skin tension lines minimizes redundancy at closure. Hemostasis is achieved by
placement of simple, nonabsorbable sutures that can be removed in 7 to 14 days depending on anatomic site. If the punch biopsy is small and not in a cosmetically
important area, the wound will likely heal very well by second intention.
EXCISIONAL BIOPSY

After local anesthesia has been achieved under sterile conditions, a scalpel is used to incise a fusiform ellipse to the level of deep fat. Hemostasis is obtained with
cautery as needed, and the wound is closed in a layered fashion using absorbable and nonabsorbable sutures. In most cases, postoperative care involves daily
cleansing with mild soap and water followed by application of antibiotic ointment and a nonstick dressing. Though popular in the past, it is now known that hydrogen
peroxide may not have a favorable effect on wound healing. The toxicity of hydrogen peroxide to keratinocytes has been well described, 5,6 and its use as an adjuvant
to wound care is, in our opinion, contraindicated.

GENERAL APPROACH TO MANAGEMENT OF SKIN CANCER
The management of skin cancer depends on the histologic nature of the tumor, the anatomic site, the underlying medical status of the patient, and whether the tumor
is primary or recurrent. Because specific management varies with histologic diagnosis, an accurate interpretation of biopsy specimens is essential. Though the
majority of BCCs and SCCs are straightforward, identification of the histologic subtypes is important because it can guide proper treatment. Depending on the
aggressiveness of the tumor, cancers of the skin may be excised or, in some cases of superficial tumors or precancerous lesions, destroyed in a nonexcisional
fashion. Electrodesiccation and curettage is the most common nonexcisional approach. If a cancer requires excision, the two options are conventional excisional
surgery or extirpation by Mohs micrographic surgery (MMS).
EXCISION
Excisional surgery involves removal of the cancer and a margin of clinically uninvolved tissue, followed by layered closure or second-intention healing, as indicated.
Frozen or permanent sections interpreted by the pathologist determine adequacy of margins. Margins are assessed from representative sections of the specimen in
“breadloaf” fashion, allowing for examination of approximately 3% of the excisional margin of the specimen. This degree of examination may occasionally result in a
false-negative assessment of clear margins in cases of infiltrating or aggressive-growth cancers. Similar misdiagnosis may result when one relies on vertically cut
frozen specimens for intraoperative margin control. Excision, especially that performed in a physician's office rather than a hospital operating room, is effective and
cost-efficient when the cancer is small (<1 cm), nonrecurrent, or noninfiltrative.
MOHS MICROGRAPHIC SURGERY
MMS facilitates optimal margin control and conservation of normal tissue in the management of NMSC. 7,8 and 9 Individuals specially trained in the technique perform
MMS in an office setting under local anesthesia. Briefly, after gentle curettage, a tangential specimen of tumor with a minimal margin of clinically normal-appearing
tissue is obtained, precisely mapped, and processed immediately by frozen section for microscopical examination ( Fig. 41.2-2). Optimal margin control is obtained by
examination of the entire perimeter of the specimen and contiguous deep margin. Meticulous mapping allows for directed extirpation of any remaining tumor. A key
defining feature of MMS is that the surgeon excises, maps, and reviews the specimen personally, minimizing the chance of error in tissue interpretation and
orientation. MMS has gained acceptance as the treatment of choice for recurrent skin cancers as well as for primary skin cancers located on anatomic sites that
require maximal tissue conservation for preservation of function and cosmesis. 10,11,12 and 13

FIGURE 41.2-2. Mohs micrographic surgery. A–D: After gentle curettage, a tangential specimen of tumor with a minimal margin of clinically normal-appearing tissue is
obtained, precisely mapped, and processed immediately by frozen section for microscopical examination. Superior margin control is obtained through examination of
the entire perimeter of the specimen. Precise mapping allows for directed extirpation of any remaining tumor. (Courtesy of Neil A. Swanson, M.D.) E–G: Conservation
of cartilage allowed for retention of normal contour after healing in this case of basal cell carcinoma involving the ear, which was treated by Mohs micrographic
surgery. H–J: In tumors involving the eyelid, conservation of normal tissue and superior margin control are essential. Note second intention healing.

CURETTAGE AND ELECTRODESSICATION
Common methods of skin cancer destruction include curettage and electrodesiccation (C&D) and cryotherapy using liquid nitrogen. 14,15,16,17,18 and 19 C&D is performed
under clean conditions with local anesthesia. Visible tumor is first removed by curettage. Curettage is extended for a margin of 2 to 4 mm beyond the clinical borders
of the cancer. Electrodesiccation then is performed to destroy another 1 mm of tissue at the lateral and deep margins. Salasche 20 recommended that C&D be
performed for three cycles. Others report satisfactory results after a single cycle of C&D for tumors smaller than 1 cm. Although this leads to decreased scarring, it
may lead to higher rates of recurrence, as suggested by Robins and Albom, 21 who attributed to insufficiently aggressive treatment the higher rates of recurrence
observed in young women with BCC. Tangential shave excision followed by gentle curettage and cauterization is an effective treatment approach for destruction of
superficial BCCs.
CRYOSURGERY
Cryosurgery exposes skin cancers to subzero temperatures, which causes tissue destruction ( Fig. 41.2-3). Heat transfer occurs from the skin, which acts as a heat
sink. Tissue damage is caused by direct effects initially and, subsequently, by vascular stasis, ice crystal formation, cell membrane disruption, pH changes, and
thermal shock. Successful cryosurgery requires that temperatures reach –50° to –60°C, including deep and lateral margins. The subsequent thaw leads to vascular
stasis and failure of local microcirculation. The open-spray technique is used most often and requires liquid nitrogen spray delivery from a distance of 1 to 3 cm. With
the confined-spray technique, liquid nitrogen is delivered through a cone that is open at both ends. With the closed-cone technique, one end of the cone is closed and
a shorter delivery time is required. With the cryoprobe technique, a prechilled metal probe is applied to the tumor. Delivery time is determined via a depth-dose
estimation, which takes into account freeze time, lateral spread, and halo thaw time. Immediately after cryosurgery, local erythema and edema are apparent. An
exudative phase ensues in 24 to 72 hours, which is followed by sloughing at approximately day 7. Complete healing usually is seen with facial lesions at 4 to 6 weeks
and in nearly 12 to 14 weeks in lesions on the trunk and extremities.

FIGURE 41.2-3. Cryosurgery involves direct exposure of skin cancers to subzero temperatures to cause destruction.

Temporary complications may include extensive drainage, edema, bulla formation, and hypertrophic scarring. Rarely, delayed hemorrhage can occur suddenly
approximately 2 weeks after the procedure, most commonly after treatment on the nose, temple, and forehead. Paresthesia may occur if superficial nerves are frozen.
Other less common side effects may include headache, syncope, febrile reaction, cold urticaria, pyogenic granuloma, milia formation, or hyperpigmentation.
Permanent complications may include tissue contraction, hypopigmentation, and scarring. Other less frequently reported complications are neuropathy, ulceration,
tendon rupture, alopecia, and ectropion. Cryosurgery is not considered the standard of care for recurrent NMSC or any tumor other than very small, superficial BCC or
SCC.
Cryosurgery and C&D both are limited by the inability to evaluate thoroughness of tumor eradication. The absence of margin control and the development of dense
scar, which might obscure recurrence, make these methods valuable primarily in the care of histologically superficial NMSC. Close follow-up of the patient is
necessary.
RADIATION THERAPY
Radiation therapy (RT) is a treatment option for NMSC but is also limited by the inability to confirm the tumor margins definitively. In addition, treatment of an
excessively large area around the tumor carries risk. RT, in properly fractionated doses, generally is indicated when the patient's health or size or extent of the tumor
precludes surgical extirpation. Consideration of the permanent tissue effects of RT must include anticipation and management of recurrence.
After treatment for BCC or SCC, patients should be evaluated on an annual basis for the presence of skin cancers. In the case of a more aggressive tumor, evaluation
should be more frequent and, in the case of squamous cell cancer, should include examination of draining lymph nodes. Laboratory evaluation, generally not
indicated in uncomplicated cases of BCC and SCC, may be necessary for other types of particularly aggressive tumors. Imaging studies may be necessary in the case
of aggressive tumors or in cases of long-neglected tumors impinging on vital structures. Magnetic resonance imaging allows visualization of the soft tissues, while
computed tomography (CT) scan may be used to evaluate involvement of bone. In general, imaging studies have not proven helpful in definitively evaluating the
presence of perineural invasion by NMSC.

NONMELANOMA SKIN CANCER AND PRECANCEROUS LESIONS
ACTINIC KERATOSIS
Actinic keratoses (AKs) are very common lesions that tend to occur on sun-exposed areas in blond or red-haired, fair-skinned, individuals with green or blue eyes. 22
Although not invasive, AKs are considered by some dermatopathologists to be SCC in situ.
AKs are caused by exposure to ultraviolet B light (UVB), and the possibility for progression to invasive SCC exists. 22 The risk for transformation of a single AK has
been estimated to be as low as 1 per 1000 per year. 23 However, the long-term risk of the development of invasive SCC in patients with multiple AKs has been
estimated to be as high as 10%. In one study, AK was histologically present or adjacent to invasive SCC in 82% of cases. 24 Molecular characterization of the role of
the p53 tumor suppressor gene in AK, and its similar finding in SCC and BCC, suggests that the AKs represent an early stage in the molecular carcinogenesis of
NMSC.25,26 It has recently been suggested that the term actinic keratosis be replaced by another term, such as solar keratotic intraepidermal SCC.26
Clinical Features
AKs are red, pink, or brown papules with a scaly to hyperkeratotic surface ( Fig. 41.2-4). They occur on sun-exposed areas and are especially common on the balding
scalp, forehead, face, and dorsal hands. A hypertrophic, indurated variant [hyperplastic AK (HAK)] exists and may be difficult to distinguish from SCC.

FIGURE 41.2-4. Actinic keratoses are characterized by erythema and rough surface.

The microscopical spectrum of AK includes hyperplastic, atrophic, bowenoid, acantholytic, and pigmented subtypes. 27 In each subtype, disordered, atypical
keratinocytes with nuclear atypia are seen. In the hyperplastic variant, pronounced hyperkeratosis is intermingled with parakeratosis. Epidermal hyperplasia and
downward displacement without dermal invasion are present. A thin epidermis devoid of rete ridges characterizes the atrophic variant. Atypical cells predominate in
the basal layer. The bowenoid AK is indistinguishable from Bowen's disease, also known as SCC in situ. In this variant, considerable epidermal cell disorder and
clumping of nuclei exist, giving a windblown appearance. The presence of suprabasal lacunae is characteristic of acantholytic AK. The acantholysis occurs
secondarily to cellular changes. Excessive melanin is present within the basal layer in the pigmented variant of AK.
Treatment
Due to their potential to develop into invasive SCC, AKs usually should be treated. Numerous destructive options are available for the treatment of AKs, including
cryosurgery, C&D, topical 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), chemical cauterization using trichloroacetic acid, or excision ( Fig. 41.2-5). Treatment of solitary lesions is
straightforward. However, management of patients with hundreds of lesions can become complicated. In this situation, we initially treat the largest lesions by
tangential excision followed by C&D. Raised lesions of smaller size are treated by destructive methods, especially the open-spray cryosurgery technique. When flat
lesions are extensive, topical application of 5-FU with or without topical retinoids can be effective. The clinical effects of erythema, crusting, or discomfort associated
with 5-FU therapy may limit compliance with its use (Fig. 41.2-6). Alternative specialized deepithelializing techniques, such as laser and chemical exfoliation, may be
helpful in the patient with severe solar damage and extensive AKs. Regardless of the treatment used, because AK is a clonal disease that results from exposure to
UVB, the chance for developing new lesions over time is clinically significant.

FIGURE 41.2-5. Management of a solitary actinic keratosis does not present a therapeutic challenge, whereas management of multiple actinic keratoses is likely to
require combination therapy. 5-FU, 5-fluorouracil.

FIGURE 41.2-6. Erythema, crusting, and discomfort secondary to the use of topical 5-fluorouracil limit compliance with its use.

BASAL CELL CARCINOMA
BCC is a neoplasm of nonkeratinizing cells originating in the basal cell layer of the epidermis. 28 BCC is the most common human cancer, accounting for approximately
75% of all NMSCs and almost one-fourth of all cancers diagnosed in the United States. 29,30 Characteristically, BCC develops on sun-exposed areas of lighter-skinned
individuals, with 30% of lesions occurring on the nose. Men are affected only slightly more often than are women and, although once rare before the age of 50, BCCs
are becoming more common in younger individuals. 1,31
The pathogenesis of BCC most commonly involves exposure to ultraviolet light (UVL), 32 particularly rays in the UVB spectrum (290 to 320 nm), which triggers
mutations in tumor suppressor genes.25,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39 and 40 Other factors that appear to be involved in the pathogenesis include mutations in regulatory genes,
exposure to ionizing radiation, and alterations in immune surveillance. 41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49 and 50
BCC is a feature of inherited conditions. Included among these are the nevoid basal call carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS), Bazex syndrome, Rombo syndrome, and
unilateral basal cell nevus syndrome. 42,47,51 Patients with NBCCS may exhibit a broad nasal root, borderline intelligence, jaw cysts, palmar pits, and multiple skeletal
abnormalities in addition to hundreds of BCCs ( Fig. 41.2-7).52 In one case, bilateral cystic adrenal lymphangiomas have been reported in association with NBCCS. 53
Recently, studies have indicated an association with mutations in the PTCH regulatory gene. 42,54,55 and 56 In addition, mutations in the PTCH gene have been identified
in sporadic nonfamilial BCC. 55

FIGURE 41.2-7. Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Patients with this syndrome can present with hundreds of superficial basal cell carcinomas.

Bazex syndrome is transmitted in an X-linked dominant fashion. Patients present with multiple BCCs, follicular atrophoderma, dilated follicular ostia with ice-pick
scars, hypotrichosis, and hypohidrosis.
In contrast, Rombo syndrome is transmitted in an autosomal dominant fashion. Patients present with vermiculate atrophoderma, milia, hypertrichosis,
trichoepitheliomas, BCCs, and peripheral vasodilation. Hypohidrosis is not a feature of Rombo syndrome. Patients with unilateral basal cell nevus syndrome present
with a congenital, unilateral lesion of comedones and epidermoid cysts, with basal cell proliferations that are thought to be basaloid follicular hamartomas.
The role of the immune system in the pathogenesis of skin cancer that is not completely understood. 46,57 Immunosuppressed patients with lymphoma or leukemia 58,59
and patients who have undergone transplants 60,61,62,63 and 64 experience a marked increase in the incidence of SCC but only a slight increase in BCC development. A
potential link between UVL and immune surveillance has been suggested by Gutierrez-Steil et al., who demonstrated that UVL-induced BCC tumor cells express Fas
ligand (CD95L) and further showed that these cells were associated with CD95-bearing T cells undergoing apoptosis. 63 This represents a potential mechanism by
which UVL might mediate the tumor cells' avoidance of cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Patients with depressed cellular immunity secondary to human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) infection show a higher frequency of infiltrative BCC. 64,65
Clinical Behavior of Basal Cell Cancer
BCC is associated with extremely low metastatic potential, but it does invade locally. This biologic behavior depends upon angiogenic factors, stromal conditions, and
the propensity for the cancer to follow anatomic paths of least resistance. 66 BCCs can elicit angiogenic factors that account for the telangiectatic vessels
characteristically seen on the tumor's surface. 68 Necrosis occurs in tumors that have outgrown their blood supply. Recently, tumor microcirculation was examined in
vivo in 12 BCCs from the head and neck by Bedlow et al. 67 Mean blood vessel size, density, and length per unit area were increased in BCC in comparison to normal
tissue. An earlier study showed that mean vessel counts were increased in SCCs versus BCCs, 68 suggesting that angiogenesis may be linked to biologic

aggressiveness and that antiangiogenic factors may play a potential therapeutic role in the treatment of aggressive BCCs.
Tumor stroma is critical for both initiating and maintaining the development of BCC. 66 Transplants of neoplasms devoid of stroma usually are unsuccessful. In one
study, Hernandez et al. 69 demonstrated that cultured BCC tumor cells stimulated collagenase production by fibroblasts. The concept of stromal dependence is
supported by the low incidence of metastatic BCC.
BCC has a tendency to grow along the path of least resistance. Invasive BCC can migrate along the perichondrium, periosteum, fascia, or tarsal plate. 66 This type of
spread accounts for higher recurrence rates noted in tumors involving the eyelid, nose, and scalp not treated by MMS. Embryonic fusion planes offer little resistance
and can lead to deep invasion and tumor spread, with very high rates of recurrence, if complete tumor extirpation is not achieved ( Fig. 41.2-8). The most susceptible
areas include the inner canthus, philtrum, middle to lower chin, nasolabial groove, preauricular area, and the retroauricular sulcus. 66

FIGURE 41.2-8. Recurrent nodular basal cell carcinoma. Embryonic fusion planes offer little resistance to tumor spread.

Perineural spread is uncommon and occurs most often in recurrent, aggressive lesions. 70,71,72,73 and 74 In one series, Niazi and Lamberty 74 noted perineural invasion in
0.178% of BCC. In all cases, perineural extension was associated with recurrent tumors that were most often located in the periauricular and malar areas. Perineural
invasion may present with paresthesia, pain, and weakness or, in some cases, paralysis. 74,76,77 Involvement of the cranial nerves and, in one case, thoracic spine has
been reported. 71,75,76 and 77 Metastatic BCC is rare, with incidence rates varying from 0.0028% to 0.1%. 78,79 and 80 Metastases, when reported, have involved lung, lymph
nodes, esophagus, oral cavity, and skin. 80,81,82,83,84,85 and 86 Although long-term survival has been reported, the prognosis for metastatic BCC is generally poor, survival
of 8 to 10 months after diagnosis being the norm. 86 Platinum-based chemotherapy appears to have some effect in the treatment of metastatic BCC. 87,88
Basal Cell Carcinoma Subtypes
Clinical variants of BCC include nodular, superficial, morpheaform (also termed aggressive-growth BCC or infiltrative BCC), pigmented, and cystic BCC, and
fibroepithelioma of Pinkus (FEP) ( Fig. 41.2-9,Fig. 41.2-10,Fig. 41.2-11,Fig. 41.2-12,Fig. 41.2-13,Fig. 41.2-14 and 41.2-15).28,29 and 30,89,90 Nodular BCC presents as a
raised, translucent papule or nodule, with telangiectasia, and has a propensity for involving sun-exposed areas of the face. Superficial BCC commonly presents as an
erythematous scaly or eroded macule on the trunk and may be difficult to differentiate clinically from AK, SCC in situ, or a benign inflammatory lesion. Not
uncommonly, superficial BCC may be mistakenly treated without response as eczema or even psoriasis. Biopsy in such cases is definitive. Morpheaform BCC
presents as a flat, slightly firm lesion, without well-demarcated borders, and may be difficult to differentiate from a scar. The aggressive growth pattern of this subtype
is highlighted by the fact that the actual size of the cancer is usually much greater than the clinical extent of the tumor. Pigmented BCC is a variant of nodular BCC
and may be difficult to differentiate from nodular melanoma. The presence of pigment may be of value in determining adequate margins for excision. FEP usually
presents as a pink papule on the lower back. 91 It may be difficult to distinguish clinically from amelanotic melanoma.

FIGURE 41.2-9. Superficial basal cell carcinoma presents as an erythematous patch and may be difficult to distinguish from dermatitis.

FIGURE 41.2-10. Nodular basal cell carcinoma. A: A red, translucent nodule with rolled border, as seen here, is a classic presentation of nodular basal cell
carcinoma. B: Nodular basal cell carcinoma demonstrating ulceration.

FIGURE 41.2-11. Morpheaform or aggressive-growth basal cell carcinoma (BCC). A: Morpheaform BCC may be difficult to differentiate from scar. B: Microscopical
examination reveals strands of basaloid cells aggressively infiltrating dense collagen. C: BCC may recur without an obvious clinical lesion. D: Recurrent BCC after
extirpation by Mohs micrographic surgery in the patient depicted in C.

FIGURE 41.2-12. If neglected, basal cell carcinoma invades locally with devastating results. (Courtesy Neil A. Swanson, M.D.)

FIGURE 41.2-13. Pigmented basal cell carcinoma may be difficult to differentiate clinically from melanoma.

FIGURE 41.2-14. Nodular basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Microscopical examination of nodular BCC reveals islands of basophilic cells exhibiting typical BCC
morphology.

FIGURE 41.2-15. Cystic basal cell carcinoma. This variant may resemble an epidermal inclusion cyst.

Histologic subtypes of BCC include superficial, nodular, and infiltrative BCC. 89,92 All BCC subtypes tend to share certain histologic characteristics. These include
peripheral palisading of large, basophilic cells, nuclear atypia, and retraction from surrounding stroma. Nodular BCC accounts for approximately 50% of BCCs and is
characterized by the presence of tumor cells in rounded masses within the dermis (see Fig. 41.2-14). Peripheral palisading of nuclei is prominent, and surrounding
retraction artifact may be present. Groups of cells may be solid, or there may be dermal necrosis or degradation, with formation of cysts or microcysts. The stroma is
characteristically coarse and myxoid. If nodules measure less than 15 µm, the tumor may be called micronodular. Infiltrative histology is seen in 15% to 20% of BCCs
and represents that subclass of BCCs referred to as aggressive-growth tumors. Tumor cells manifest irregular outlines with a spiky appearance. Palisading is
characteristically absent. The stroma is less myxoid than in the nodular form. In the morpheaform variant, which accounts for approximately 5% of BCCs, small groups
or cords of tumor cells infiltrate a dense, collagenous stroma parallel to the skin surface (see Fig. 41.2-11B). Superficial multifocal BCC accounts for approximately

15% of BCCs and is characterized by basophilic buds extending from the epidermis. Retraction artifact is present, as is peripheral palisading within the buds. FEP,
which accounts for 1% of BCCs, is characterized by a polypoid lesion in which basaloid cells grow downward from the surface in a network of anastomoses of cords of
cells in loose connective tissue. Mixed histology is apparent in approximately 15% of BCCs.
The significance of histologic subtype lies in the correlation with biologic aggressiveness. The infiltrative and micronodular types are the most likely to be incompletely
removed by conventional excision. Rates of incomplete excision vary from 5% to 17%. Incompletely excised infiltrative and micronodular BCCs may recur at rates of
33% to 39%. Recurrences after RT show a tendency toward infiltrative histology and evidence of squamous transformation, and even recurrent BCC after excision or
C&D may become metatypical. In general, recurrences are more frequent in BCCs with infiltrative and micronodular histology, when clear margins are less than 0.38
mm, and in the presence of squamous differentiation. Although historical reports in the literature 66 suggested that 60% of incompletely excised BCCs will not recur,
none of these studies provided an appraisal of recurrence rates as a function of histologic subtype. In general, incompletely excised BCCs should be removed
completely, preferably by MMS, especially if they occur in anatomically critical areas such as the central zone of the face, retroauricular sulcus, or periocular area.
Adequate treatment of BCC requires appreciation of the histopathologic pattern of the neoplasm. Though some BCCs are small and superficial and behave in
essentially a “biologically benign” manner as long as they are conservatively removed, others behave more aggressively and thus require more aggressive treatment.
Examples of the latter include clinical BCCs that ulcerate and those located in the central face or on the ear. Furthermore, BCCs that show an aggressive growth
pattern histologically require definitive treatment with confirmation of histologically negative margins.
Occasionally, it may appear that a BCC has been adequately removed by biopsy alone, leading to the question of whether to render further treatment. In one study,
41 consecutive patients with 42 BCCs apparently removed by biopsy were treated by MMS, and blocks of tissue, sectioned consecutively until exhausted, were
examined for the presence of residual tumor. 93 In 28 of 42 cases (66%), residual cancer was identified. The presence of residual cancer was not related to age, site,
histologic subtype, or extent of surrounding inflammation. The results indicate that patients with small BCCs that appear to be completely removed by initial biopsy
may be at risk for recurrence if not treated further.
Characteristics Related to Anatomic Site
BCCs may demonstrate unique characteristics based on anatomic site. The nose is the most common site for cutaneous malignancies (30%), and BCCs involving the
nose may be aggressive. A study of 193 cases of infiltrative BCC involving the nose confirmed that the majority of infiltrating and recurrent BCCs affect the ala. 94
Analysis of the recurrences' aggressive local behavior indicated that recurrent lesions were subjected to inadequate therapy initially. In one study, 26 recurrences
were identified in 71 nasal skin cancers at an average of 36 months after non-MMS excision. 95 This suggests that MMS may be the treatment of choice for all BCCs
involving the nose, especially those exhibiting aggressive growth characteristics.
Periocular BCC represents a significant therapeutic challenge. In one study, periocular BCC accounted for 7.3% of 3192 BCCs treated over a 10-year period. 10 Of
these, 48.5% involved the medial canthus, 22.35% involved the lower eyelid, 10.7% involved the upper eyelid, and 5.6% involved the lateral canthus. BCC is the most
common tumor affecting the eyelid. In a series of 97 cases of BCC involving the eyelid, 69% were nodular, 13% were infiltrative, 1% were ulcerated, and 12% were
mixed (defined as having a significant nodular or ulcerative component in addition to an infiltrative component). Follow-up of 8 of 12 patients with mixed tumors
revealed three recurrences. In one patient, orbital exenteration was required. This suggests that mixed tumors of the eyelid with aggressive growth histology warrant
thorough treatment with complete margin control.
In a review of 24 eyelid tumors treated by MMS, high clearance rates were shown (100%), although follow-up was short (14.6 months). 11 In addition, 50% of patients
were left with intact posterior lamellae, highlighting conservation of normal tissue. The results suggest that MMS followed by oculoplastic reconstruction, if necessary,
is the preferred strategy in the management of periocular BCC.
Approximately 6% of BCCs involve the ear, a site notable for high rates of recurrence. In a recent study, nine patients with BCC involving the conchal bowl were
treated by an interdisciplinary approach. 96 In each case, tumor extirpation was accomplished by MMS, and an otolaryngologist was available in the event of temporal
bone involvement. There were no cases of recurrence at mean follow-up of 1 year.
It must be stressed that BCC can occur anywhere, even in non–sun-exposed areas, and has been reported to occur on the vulva, penis, scrotum, and perianal
area. 97,98,99,100 and 101 In one series of vulvar BCC, mean age at presentation was 74 years. Patients have been seen with a history of local irritation that had been
present for a few months to several years.
Treatment
Excisional surgery, C&D, and cryosurgery have been used to treat circumscribed, noninfiltrating BCCs ( Fig. 41.2-16).102 MMS is the treatment method of choice for all
recurrent and infiltrative BCCs, particularly if a tumor is located on the face. 103 RT is best suited for older patients, particularly those with extensive lesions on the ear,
lower limbs, or eyelids. 104 RT is not indicated for recurrent or morpheaform lesions.

FIGURE 41.2-16. Primary basal cell carcinomas may be managed by electrodessication curettage (ED&C), excision or Mohs micrographic surgery, depending on
histology, size, and anatomic location. Recurrent basal cell carcinomas should be treated by Mohs micrographic surgery.

Surgical excision offers the advantage of histologic evaluation of the excised specimen. Although appropriate for management of most BCCs, cure rates for traditional
excisional surgery are inferior to those for tumors treated by MMS in cases of recurrent BCC, infiltrative BCC, and BCC in high-risk anatomic sites. 16 It has been
demonstrated that 4-mm margins are adequate for removal of BCC in 98% of cases of nonmorpheaform BCC of less than 2 cm in diameter. 105 Extending the excision
into fat generally is adequate for a small primary BCC. It should be noted that the majority of BCCs are well treated with conventional excision or C&D. However, in
the circumstances just outlined, MMS is especially helpful.
MMS permits superior histologic verification of complete removal, allows maximum conservation of tissue, and remains cost-effective as compared to traditional
excisional surgery for NMSCs. 7,12,102,106 In a large study of treatment of primary BCC by Rowe et al., 107 MMS demonstrated a recurrence rate of 1% over 5 years. This
was superior to all other modalities including excision (10%), C&D (7.7%), RT (8.7%), and cryotherapy (7.5%). In a similar study of treatment of recurrent BCC,
treatment with MMS demonstrated a long-term recurrence rate of 5.6%. 108 Once again, this was superior to all other modalities including excision (17.4%), RT (9.8%),
and C&D (40%). MMS is the preferred treatment for morpheaform, recurrent, poorly delineated, high-risk, and incompletely removed BCC, and for those sites in which
tissue conservation is imperative. 7,8,31,109,110
C&D is the method most frequently used by dermatologists in the treatment of BCC. Knox et al. 111 noted cure rates as high as 98.3%, whereas Kopf et al., 112 in an
earlier study, cited a significant difference in the cure rates obtained between patients treated by private practitioners (94.3%) and those treated by trainees in the

New York University Skin and Cancer Unit (81.2%). This supports the premise that though C&D is simple and cost-effective, it is dependent on operator skill. In a
series of 233 patients treated by Spiller et al., 113 an overall cure rate of 97% was reported. The highest cure rate was obtained in lesions that measured less than 1 cm
(98.8%), with recurrences observed in 2 of 165 patients treated. Recurrences were noted in 2 of 45 patients with lesions that measured between 1 and 2 cm, for an
overall cure rate of 95.5%. Recurrences were significantly higher in patients with lesions larger than 2 cm, for whom the overall cure rate was 84%. In this series, as in
others, recurrences were most commonly noted on the forehead, temple, ears, nose, and shoulders. Some practitioners advocate that the procedure be repeated for
three cycles, 16,19,114 but we believe that the histology, location, and behavior of the tumor should dictate the number of cycles.
When surgery is contraindicated, RT is an option for treating primary BCC. 104 RT may be indicated postoperatively if margins are ambiguous. Advantages of RT
include minimal to no discomfort for the patient and avoidance of an invasive procedure in a patient who may not be able to tolerate or is unwilling to undergo surgery.
Disadvantages include lack of margin control, poor cosmesis over time, a drawn-out course of therapy, and possible increased risk of future skin cancers. In one
series, control rates of 95% were achieved in BCC involving the eyelid treated with RT. The recurrence rate for primary BCC treated by RT approaches 5% to 10%
over 5 years. In one study by Wilder et al. 115 local control rates among 85 patients with 115 biopsy-proven BCCs were compared. The local control rates varied
significantly, a 95% control rate being achieved in primary BCC and a 56% control rate in recurrent BCC at 5 years. From the standpoint of cosmesis, scars from RT
tend to worsen over time (Fig. 41.2-17), as contrasted to surgical scars, which improve over time.

FIGURE 41.2-17. After radiation therapy, scar and hypopigmentation can result.

Cryosurgery has been used to treat BCC. 14,16,17,114,116,117 Two freeze-thaw cycles with a tissue temperature of –50°C are required to destroy the tumor sufficiently. A
margin of normal skin also should be frozen to ensure eradication of subclinical disease. Complications include hypertrophic scarring and postinflammatory
pigmentary changes. Fractional cryotherapy has been used with success in treating eyelid lesions. 116,118 The method has been described as quick and cost-effective.
A serious potential adverse outcome is recurrent BCC that can become extensive because of concealment by the fibrous scar created when aggressive cryosurgery is
used.
Ablation by the CO2 laser has been used in the treatment of BCC. In a recent study, Humphreys et al. 119 reported ablation of primary superficial BCC with the
high-energy, pulsed CO 2 laser. Because of the absence of margin control and lack of large series studies, physicians familiar with laser and tumor biology should use
this method only in unique circumstances.
Management of BCC must be directed by the histologic nature of the tumor and the clinical context in which it presents. We recommend MMS for BCCs showing
aggressive growth patterns and for BCCs occurring in high-risk anatomic sites or sites that require maximum conservation of normal tissue. For
non-aggressive-growth BCCs on the trunk and extremities, fusiform excision with margins of 4 mm or C&D are appropriate. For patients with numerous BCCs,
including patients with NBCCS, tangential excision followed by gentle curettage and cauterization for smaller, superficial lesions is effective. Cryosurgery can be
helpful in the management of multiple, small BCCs of NBCCS.
It is imperative that patients with a history of BCC receive annual full-body skin examinations. Although most recurrences appear within 1 to 5 years, they can develop
later. 30 Rowe et al.106 found that 30% of recurrences developed within the first year after therapy, 50% within 2 years, and 66% within 3 years. Subsequent new
primary BCC can present at rates of approximately 40%, with 20% to 30% of these developing within 1 year of treatment of the original lesion. 30
SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA
SCC is a neoplasm of keratinizing cells that shows malignant characteristics, including anaplasia, rapid growth, local invasion, and metastatic potential. 16,120
Approximately 100,000 cases of SCC are diagnosed in the United States each year, making it the second most common human cancer after BCC. As with BCC,
affected men tend to outnumber affected women.121,122 People of Celtic descent, individuals with fair complexions, and those with poor tanning ability and a
predisposition to sunburn are at increased risk for developing SCC ( Fig. 41.2-18).123 Patients taking immunosuppressive medications after organ transplantation are
also at increased risk. 48,124 Another high-risk group includes patients treated with psoralens and ultraviolet A light (PUVA) for psoriasis. 125,126,127,128 and 129 Patients
exposed to arsenic are at increased risk for SCC, particularly Bowen's disease. 130,131,132 and 133

FIGURE 41.2-18. Extensive solar damage. Patients with this degree of solar damage are at increased risk for squamous cell carcinoma.

Pathogenesis
Factors involved in the pathogenesis of SCC are similar to those for BCC and include exposure to UVL, genetic mutations, immunosuppression, and viral infection.
The evidence for an association with UVL is even stronger for SCC than for BCC. 25,33,134 UVL may mediate development of SCC through several mechanisms.25,36
Exposure to UVB appears to interfere with the density and antigen-processing capability of Langerhans' cells and may suppress production of the T helper 1 (Th1)
cytokines interleukin-2 and interferon-g. 135,136,137 and 138 Recent studies have demonstrated that UVL may introduce mutations into the tumor suppressor gene
p53.25,36,39,139,140 This allows UVL to act as both tumor initiator and promoter. Development of SCC has been associated with radiation exposure, burn scars, chronic
inflammatory dermatoses, ulcers, osteomyelitis, and arsenic ingestion. 48,50,141,142,143,144 and 145 Heritable conditions associated with SCC include xeroderma pigmentosum
and oculocutaneous albinism. Immunosuppression also may play a role in pathogenesis. Skin cancers in immunosuppressed patients appear primarily on
sun-exposed sites.60,62 This correlation suggests that immunosuppression and UVL act as cofactors in the development of SCC. HIV patients tend to have a higher
incidence of SCC than the general population. 66,67 However, the exact nature of the relationship between HIV and SCC has not yet been determined. The role of

human papillomavirus (HPV) in the development of SCC has been studied. Eliezri et al. 146 found a direct correlation between the venereal spread of HPV-16 and the
initiation of SCC, and others have demonstrated an association of HPV-16 with periungual SCC. 147
Biologic Behavior
The biologic behavior of SCC is determined by a number of variables. 148,149 and 150 The overall invasiveness and depth of the neoplasm is significant when determining
the risk of recurrence. SCCs that invade the reticular dermis and subcutis tend to recur if not properly treated. Immerman et al. 151 observed a 20% incidence of
recurrence in 86 patients with invasive SCC. Degree of cellular differentiation is an important factor in recurrence also, with poorly differentiated neoplasms showing
increased rates of recurrence.
SCC in situ tends to arise in association with preexisting AK. Arsenical keratoses are rarely seen nowadays but are associated with SCC. These lesions are
considered to be at low risk for metastasis. While SCC in situ carries no risk of metastasis, invasive SCC can metastasize 148,149 and 150 and can originate in neglected
SCC in situ (Fig. 41.2-19). The most common type arises on sun-damaged skin. The incidence of metastasis of such lesions is 3% to 5%. A higher incidence (10% to
30%) is associated with SCC arising on a mucosal surfaces (lip, genitalia) and in sites of prior injury (scars, chronic ulcers).

FIGURE 41.2-19. Metastatic squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). A: In this patient, primary cutaneous SCC metastasized to the parotid gland and draining lymph nodes.
B: Metastatic SCC after multiple excisions.

The tendency for regional lymph node metastasis is variable. Tumors arising in areas of chronic inflammation have a 10% to 30% rate of metastasis, whereas the
incidence of metastasis from SCC that is not due to preexisting inflammatory or degenerative conditions varies from 0.05% to 16%. 148,149 and 150 Although tumors that
arise on sun-damaged skin may behave less aggressively than de novo SCC, all lesions have the potential to become invasive locally and to metastasize to draining
lymph nodes. The large number of sun-mediated SCCs makes this clinical potential a concern. Friedman et al. 152 demonstrated that all trunk and extremity primary
SCCs that later developed local or nodal recurrence were at least 4 mm deep and penetrated into the reticular dermis or subcutis. The extent of cellular differentiation
also influences the metastatic potential in that tumors that invade regional lymph nodes tend to be more anaplastic than those that have not metastasized. Tumors are
more likely to disseminate to regional lymph nodes than to distant sites, although intravascular metastases to viscera have appeared in as many as 5% to 10% of
SCCs metastatic from skin.
Invasive SCC has the potential to involve nerves. 72,148 Regional lymph node and distant metastases may increase with perineural involvement. SCCs on the skin of
the head and neck may metastasize to cervical lymph nodes and distantly to the central nervous system, the latter either hematogenously or via the perineural space,
which directly connects to the subarachnoid space. SCCs on the midface and lip are prone to neural involvement. These patients show a lower 10-year survival (23%
vs. 88%) and a higher local recurrence rate (47% vs 7.3%) than do those without neural involvement.
Clinical Features
On the skin, SCC appears as a slightly raised, red, hyperkeratotic macule or papule on sun-exposed sites but may occur anywhere ( Fig. 41.2-20, Fig. 41.2-21, Fig.
41.2-22, Fig. 41.2-23, Fig. 41.2-24 . It can be difficult to clinically distinguish an invasive SCC from a HAK, a benign seborrheic keratosis, or a benign inflammatory
lesion. Appropriate biopsy should be performed on any lesion suspicious for SCC, considering the potential for invasive disease. Shave biopsy is sufficient and will
not lead to spread of the cancer. Verrucous carcinoma, a variant of SCC, includes oral florid papillomatosis, giant condyloma of Buschke-Löwenstein, and epithelioma
cuniculatum. 153,154 and 155 A biopsy should be performed on an atypical wart or one that is unresponsive to therapy to rule out the presence of verrucous carcinoma.

FIGURE 41.2-20. Recurrent squamous cell carcinoma, keratoacanthoma type, successfully treated by Mohs micrographic surgery.

FIGURE 41.2-21. Squamous cell carcinoma can arise within a cutaneous horn.

FIGURE 41.2-22. Periungual squamous cell carcinoma treated by Mohs micrographic surgery can result in sparing of a digit that otherwise may have been
amputated.

FIGURE 41.2-23. Squamous cell carcinoma, keratoacanthoma type. This variant of squamous cell carcinoma presents as a rapidly growing nodule.

FIGURE 41.2-24. A: Bowen's disease presents as an erythematous macule or patch and can be difficult to differentiate from a benign inflammatory process. B:
Bowen's disease is characterized by proliferation of atypical cells arranged in such a way as to suggest a windblown appearance.

Bowen's disease represents SCC in situ with a distinctive microscopical appearance (see Fig. 41.2-24).156 Erythroplasia of Queyrat is simply Bowen's disease
occurring on the penis. 157 Bowenoid papulosis classically presents as a reddish brown verrucous papule and is associated with HPV-16. 158 Bowenoid papulosis
usually involves the genitals but may present elsewhere. 159
SCC is characterized histologically by relatively large cellular size, lack of maturation, nuclear atypia, and the presence of mitotic figures (see Fig. 41.2-24; Fig.
41.2-25).148 Lack of dermal invasion separates SCC in situ from histologically invasive SCC. Verrucous carcinoma is characterized microscopically by an endophytic
epidermal proliferation with atypia sufficient to distinguish it from verruca vulgaris, or common wart. 160 Variants of Bowen's disease are characterized by proliferation
of atypical cells arranged in such a way as to suggest a windblown appearance. 157 A grading system was devised to classify SCC with respect to percentage of
differentiated cells. Grade 1 tumors are described as having more than 75% well-differentiated cells, whereas in grade 2 SCC, 50% to 75% of cells are described as
well-differentiated and, in grade 3 SCC, 25% to 50% of cells are described this way. Primary cutaneous SCC with fewer than 25% well-differentiated cells is termed
grade 4 SCC. Prognosis worsens with decreased degree of differentiation. 148,161

FIGURE 41.2-25. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), microscopical view. A: Infiltrative SCC. Note large cellular size and nuclear atypia. B: SCC demonstrating
perineural invasion on microscopical examination.

Recurrence and Metastatic Risk
In a review of studies of SCCs from 1940 to 1992, Rowe et al. 148 correlated risk for local recurrence and metastasis with treatment modality, prior treatment, location,
size, depth, histologic differentiation, evidence of perineural involvement, precipitating factors other than UVL, and immunosuppression. They found that with tumors
greater than 2 cm in diameter, recurrence rates double from 7.4% to 15.2%. In addition, they demonstrated that tumors less than 4 mm deep were at low risk for
metastasis (6.7%) as compared with tumors deeper than 4 mm (45.7%). Locally recurrent SCCs showed an overall metastatic rate of 30%, with high rates of
metastasis in the context of local recurrence in skin (25%), lip (31.5%), and ear (45%). Immunosuppressed patients showed a 5- to 20-fold increase in the incidence of
SCCs, with a reversal of the SCC/BCC ratio from 0.25:1 to 3:1. The number of SCCs per patient was increased, and the age at initial presentation was decreased. In
immunosuppressed patients, SCCs metastasized at a rate of 12.9%. Poorly differentiated SCC metastasized more frequently (32.9%) than did well-differentiated SCC
(9.2%). SCC arising on sun-exposed skin recurred at a rate of 7.9% and metastasized at a rate of 5.2%. Recurrence rates were increased in SCC on the lip (10.5%)
and ear (18.7%), as were metastatic rates from the lip (13.7%) and ear (11%). SCCs with perineural invasion recurred in almost one-half of cases (47.2%) and

showed a similar rate of metastasis (47.3%).
Treatment
Many of the treatments for BCC are appropriate for SCC (Fig. 41.2-26 ). The type of therapy should be selected on the basis of size of the lesion, anatomic location,
depth of invasion, degree of cellular differentiation, and history of previous treatment. 162 There are three general approaches to treatment of SCC: (1) destruction by
C&D or cryosurgery, (2) removal by traditional excisional surgery or MMS, and (3) RT.

FIGURE 41.2-26. Primary squamous cell carcinoma may be managed by electrodessication and curettage (ED&C), excision, or Mohs micrographic surgery,
depending on histology, tumor size, and anatomic location. Recurrent squamous cell carcinomas should be treated by Mohs micrographic surgery.

C&D can be used for small lesions arising on sun-damaged skin. Well-differentiated, primary SCCs measuring less than 1 cm in diameter are amenable to this form of
therapy. Honeycutt and Jansen 163 reported a 99% cure rate for 281 SCCs after a 4-year follow-up. In this study, two recurrences were noted in lesions less than 2 cm
in diameter.
SCC in situ may be treated by cryotherapy. As with BCC, two freeze-thaw cycles with a tissue temperature of –50°C are required to destroy the tumor sufficiently. A
margin of normal skin also should be frozen to ensure eradication of subclinical disease. Complications include hypertrophic scarring and postinflammatory
pigmentary changes. Concealment of recurrence within dense scar tissue presents a danger.
Surgical excision is another well-accepted treatment modality for SCC. Brodland et al. 164 demonstrated that lesions of less than 2 cm in diameter are best treated by
excision, with margins of 4 mm, whereas high-risk SCC requires 6-mm margins. These investigators found that certain characteristics were associated with a greater
risk of subclinical tumor extension, thus qualifying such tumors as high-risk. These included size of 2 cm or larger, histologic grade higher than 2, invasion of the
subcutaneous tissue, and location in high-risk areas. Carcinomas of the penis, vulva, and anus usually are treated by excision because of the poor tolerance of these
areas to irradiation. 100,165,166 Surgical excision is the treatment of choice for verrucous carcinoma. 153
MMS is indicated in cases of large primary or recurrent SCC, as this modality allows conservation of normal tissue with preservation of function and enhanced
cosmesis. MMS is also superior to other forms of treatment with regard to local recurrence. 103,162 Recurrence rates with Mohs surgery are superior to those obtained
with traditional excisional surgery in primary SCC of the ear (3.1% vs. 10.9%), primary SCC of the lip (5.8% vs. 18.7%), recurrent SCC (10% vs. 23.3%), SCC with
perineural invasion (0% vs. 47%), SCC larger than 2 cm (25.2 vs. 41.7%), and poorly differentiated SCC (32.6% vs. 53.6%). 148 MMS has proven useful in SCC
involving the nail unit 110 and has been used as a limb-sparing procedure in cases of SCC arising in osteomyelitis. 144
RT may be used for head and neck cutaneous SCC in which there is no spread to bone or cartilage and there is no evidence of metastasis. 167 As with BCC, RT may
be indicated for elderly patients with SCC who are unwilling or unable to undergo surgery. 104 In one series, 108 patients with SCC of the lower vermilion lip were
stratified into stage T1 (82.4%), T2 (15.7%), or T3 (1.9%) disease and were treated with RT. Recurrences occurred in 12.4% of patients with T1 disease and 6.7% of
patients with T2 disease. 168 Radiation therapy often is used as an adjuvant modality after treatment of SCC in which perineural involvement is identified, although no
controlled studies have proven its usefulness.
MMS is indicated for invasive lesions, poorly differentiated lesions, and lesions occurring in high-risk anatomic sites or sites in which conservation of normal tissue is
essential for preservation of function or cosmesis.
Invasive SCC can be a potentially lethal neoplasm and warrants close follow-up. In one study, approximately 30% of patients with SCC developed a subsequent SCC,
with more than one-half of these occurring within the first year of follow-up. 169 In another study, the median time to recurrence was 15 months.142 Thus, it is
recommended that patients with SCC be examined every 3 months during the first year following treatment, every 6 months during the second year after treatment,
and annually thereafter. Evaluation should include total body cutaneous examination and palpation of draining lymph nodes. Currently, roentgenography, magnetic
resonance imaging, and CT play no role in the routine workup of uncomplicated cutaneous SCC.
MERKEL CELL CARCINOMA
Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a potentially aggressive tumor of neuroendocrine cell origin. Though it primarily affects the head and neck, other areas may be
involved. 170 MCC affects more men than women and most often occurs between the seventh and ninth decades of life. 171,172
The pathogenesis of MCC is incompletely characterized. UVL has been indirectly implicated in its development, as 36% of such cancers arise on the face. 173 More
than 50% of tumors occur on the head and neck, while 35% develop on the extremities. Mixed MCC/SCC 174 and, recently, MCC/BCC175 have been reported, thus
supporting the role of UVL exposure as a risk factor. Immunosuppression may play a role in the development of MCC, as rapid progression has been reported in the
setting of immunosuppressive therapy after organ transplantation. 176,177 An association with arsenic-induced Bowen's disease has been reported, implicating arsenic
exposure as a risk factor for development of MCC. 132
Lymph node metastases have been identified in up to 20% of cases of MCC at initial presentation. Approximately 50% of patients experience nodal disease at some
point in the disease course. Distant metastases have been reported in up to 30% of patients at presentation. Metastases have been noted in skin, lymph nodes, lung,
liver, brain, intestine, bladder, and abdominal wall. 178,179,180,181,182 and 183 Although MCC is a highly aggressive and potentially lethal cancer, spontaneous regression has
been reported. 184 The significance of this phenomenon is unknown.
MCC usually appears as a red, violaceous, dome-shaped papule or plaque on sun-exposed skin ( Fig. 41.2-27).170 It may develop on the extremities and can involve
the trunk. Clinical differential diagnosis includes leukemia cutis, amelanotic melanoma, metastatic carcinoma, pyogenic granuloma, and SCC.

FIGURE 41.2-27. Merkel cell carcinoma presenting as a red to violaceous, dome-shaped papule or plaque on the sun-exposed skin of an elderly person.

Microscopical examination reveals sheets and cords of atypical cells in the dermis, extending to the subcutaneous layer, that sometimes form an interlacing trabecular
or pseudoglandular pattern. 170,185 A grenz zone often is present, separating tumor from epidermis. Cell membranes often are indistinct, giving a syncytial appearance.
Cells are round to oval and generally noncohesive. Cytoplasm tends to be scant, with round to oval nuclei containing two to three nucleoli. Foci of squamous
differentiation resembling SCC have occasionally been noted. Special stains may prove useful in the histologic diagnosis of MCC. Cytokeratin-20 (CK-20) staining
gives a characteristic paranuclear dot pattern. 185 Histologic differential diagnosis includes lymphoma, BCC, metastatic oat cell carcinoma, or noncutaneous
neuroendocrine tumors. Lymphoma cells are differentiated in that they are CD45-positive and CK-20-negative. Melanoma can be differentiated in that melanocytes
are strongly S-100-positive. In addition to CK-20, MCC stains positively for chromogranin neuron-specific enolase and may be weakly positive for S-100 protein.
MCC warrants aggressive therapy (Fig. 41.2-28). Evaluation of a patient with histologically confirmed MCC must include full-body skin examination and lymph node
evaluation. A complete blood cell count and liver function tests should be performed as well. CT scanning of the chest, pelvis, and abdomen may be indicated to rule
out the presence of small cell carcinoma of the lung. CT scanning of the head and neck may prove valuable in detection of nodal disease. MCC tends to spread in a
cascade pattern, first affecting local, then regional lymph nodes and finally progressing to fatal distant metastatic disease. 186

FIGURE 41.2-28. Merkel cell carcinoma should be treated by wide local excision followed by sentinel or complete lymph node dissection (SLND, CLND), radiation
therapy (XRT), or chemotherapy, depending on stage.

Management of MCC follows staging of patients according to local, regional, or metastatic disease. Current recommendations support wide local excision (WLE) with
lymph node dissection and adjuvant RT, if indicated. 187 In cases of local disease, sentinel lymph node dissection may be advisable, if available. In a recent study, 18
patients with stage I MCC underwent sentinel lymph node dissection. In two patients, involvement of the sentinel node was identified, resulting in complete lymph
node dissection. Sentinel node–negative patients received no therapy other than wide and deep excision. 188 All patients remained free of recurrence at 7 months.
Patients with negative sentinel nodes may be treated by WLE with margins of up to 3 cm and, possibly, adjunctive RT. Patients with positive sentinel nodes should be
treated as patients with regional disease. The combination of WLE, therapeutic lymph node dissection, and RT has been suggested for treatment of regional
disease. 189,190 Metastatic disease is treated with chemotherapy. The most common regimens used in the treatment of metastatic MCC include cytoxan, doxorubicin,
and vincristine, and cisplatin and etoposide. However, brief responses were reported recently in a small series of patients treated with carboplatin and etoposide. 191 In
a review by Voog et al.,192 overall response to first-line chemotherapy for MCC was 61%, with a 57% response in metastatic disease and a 69% response in locally
advanced disease. The 3-year survival rate was 17% in metastatic disease and 35% in locally advanced disease. In a recent series of nine patients with
neuroendocrine tumors, complete response in a patient with inoperable MCC was reported using 5-FU, dacarbazine, and epirubicin. Patients with MCC must be
followed up aggressively for potential local recurrence and development of metastatic disease.
MICROCYSTIC ADNEXAL CARCINOMA
Microcystic adnexal carcinoma (MAC) was first described as a distinct entity in 1982 by Goldstein et al. 193 In this study, six cases of MAC were described. In each
case, the tumor was originally misdiagnosed on initial biopsy as benign. MAC originates from pluripotent adnexal cells capable of eccrine and follicular differentiation.
Synonyms for MAC include sclerosing sweat duct carcinoma, sweat duct carcinoma with syringomatous features, and combined adnexal tumor of the skin.
MAC is a tumor that primarily affects middle-aged individuals, 194 though it has been reported in an 11-year-old boy. 195 Unlike the other primary cutaneous
malignancies considered thus far, affected women outnumber affected men. 194 The pathogenesis of MAC is not completely understood but may involve exposure to
ionizing radiation. In many cases, patients with MAC have received RT. In general, these patients were treated with RT for conditions ranging from tinea capitis to
thyroid carcinoma.196,197 Treatment may precede development of MAC by as long as 40 years.
MAC is a locally aggressive tumor with low metastatic potential. It has been demonstrated that the increased stromal collagen observed in MAC is not due to soluble
factors excreted by MAC cells. 198 Perineural invasion is common with MAC, as are involvement of muscle, perichondrium, and vascular adventitia. 199,200 Birkby et
al.200a reported MAC on the face of a 51-year-old man that invaded the bone marrow of the mandible and spread along the inferior alveolar and mental nerves.
Recently, the first case of MAC metastatic to lymph node was reported. 201
MAC classically presents as a sclerotic or indurated plaque with intact epidermis and yellow hue ( Fig. 41.2-29A).193 The tumor usually involves the central face and lip
but is not limited to those anatomic sites. 193,202,203 MAC involvement of the eyelid, 204 scalp,205 tongue,206 and eyebrow207 have been reported.

FIGURE 41.2-29. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma. A: Classic presentation is as an indurated plaque with intact epidermis and yellow hue. B: On microscopical
examination, the dermis shows numerous basaloid cells forming cords, nests, small ducts, and horn microcysts.

On microscopical examination, MAC may be misdiagnosed as a benign adnexal process. 208 The epidermis is normal, although mild hyperkeratosis may be present.
The dermis contains numerous basaloid cells forming cords, nests, small ducts, and horn microcysts (see Fig. 41.2-29B). Horn microcysts usually are present
superficially, containing laminated keratin and, occasionally, small vellus hairs. Cysts may be calcified. Small ducts, either empty or filled with eosinophilic material
composed of sialomucin, commonly are present. Ducts may be well-differentiated, with two rows of cuboidal cells, or less differentiated, with single strands without
lumina. A dense sclerotic stroma is present. Immunohistochemical analysis may be useful in differentiating MAC from desmoplastic trichoepithelioma (DTE). Wick et
al. reported that MACs were reactive to hard keratin subclasses AE13 and AE14, epithelial membrane antigen, carcinoembryonic antigen, and LeuM1. 209 DTEs were
positive for AE14, epithelial membrane antigen, and LeuM1 only focally and were, in contrast, negative for carcinoembryonic antigen. Correct diagnosis of MAC is
imperative, as the tumor can be highly invasive and may involve adipose, muscle, perichondrium, or bone.
MAC has been treated by WLE as well as MMS. 194 In a recent series, 11 cases of MAC treated by MMS remained free of tumor for a median of 5 years. 210 This
suggests that extirpation by Mohs technique may prove beneficial in the management of MAC. However, these findings must be interpreted cautiously, as recurrences
have been reported up to 30 years after surgical excision. 208 Non-Mohs surgical excision is associated with recurrence rates of 47% to 59%. 201 It appears that the
tumor is resistant to RT, thus presenting difficulties in the management of MAC with perineural invasion.
After surgery for MAC, patients must be evaluated regularly for recurrence and for development of other skin cancers. Evaluation should include examination of skin
and lymph nodes and, due to the potential for recurrence long after treatment, continue indefinitely.
SEBACEOUS CARCINOMA
Sebaceous carcinoma (SC) is a malignant adnexal tumor with variable sites of origin, histologic growth patterns, and clinical presentations. 211,212 Ocular SC is more
common and may arise from meibomian glands and, less frequently, from the glands of Zeis. The upper eyelids are most frequently involved. Approximately 50% of
SCs are initially incorrectly diagnosed histologically and, in some series, all have been initially misdiagnosed clinically. 211,212 SC is the second most common eyelid
malignancy after BCC213 and is the second most lethal after melanoma. 214
In SC, women are affected more commonly than men, at a ratio of approximately 2:1.211,212 and 213,215 SC classically presents in the seventh to ninth decade. 211,212 SC is
associated with sebaceous adenomas, radiation exposure, Bowen's disease, and Muir-Torre syndrome. In Muir-Torre syndrome, an autosomal dominant heritable
condition, SC and (more commonly) sebaceous adenoma (or sebaceous epithelioma) are associated with a second internal malignancy, usually a carcinoma of the
colon or urogenital tract. SC may be associated with a history of RT. SC has been reported after RT for retinoblastoma, 216 eczema,217 and cosmetic epilation. 218 In one
study, SC was associated with thiazide diuretic use. 213 In addition, recent studies have identified HPV DNA 219 and overexpression of p53 protein in some SCs. 220
Commonly, SC presents as a slowly growing, deeply seated nodule of the eyelid and may present as chronic diffuse blepharoconjunctivitis or
keratoconjunctivitis.211,212,213 and 214 Upper eyelid involvement is more common. Approximately 25% of cases of SC involve extraocular sites, which may include head
and neck, trunk, 221,222 and 223 and external genitalia. 219 A case of SC has occurred within a benign dermoid cyst of the ovary. 224
SC can spread by lymphatic or hematogenous routes or by direct extension. 211,212 Distant metastases are reported in up to 20% of cases and may involve the lungs,
liver, brain, bones, and lymph nodes. 211,212 The parotid gland may be involved secondarily. 225 Ocular SC may spread via the lacrimal secretory and excretory
systems.213
On microscopical examination, SC shows nonencapsulated tumors within the dermis. 211 Sebaceous cells exhibiting varying degrees of differentiation, nuclear
pleomorphism, hyperchromatism, and locally infiltrating surrounding tissues and neurovascular spaces are observed. Poor prognostic indicators in SC have been
reviewed.226 These include multicentric origin, poor differentiation, infiltrative pattern, pagetoid changes, vascular invasion, lymphatic channel involvement, and orbital
spread.
Treatment options for SC include traditional excisional surgery and extirpation by MMS. In one study of 14 cases of SC excised with frozen-section margin control, 5
recurrences were observed in cases with surgical margins of 1 to 3 mm, whereas no recurrences were seen with margins of 5 mm. 227 Potential difficulties arise
because tumors are often multicentric, and pagetoid spread is difficult to determine even on high-quality, paraffin-embedded sections. Extirpation of SC by Mohs has
thus far yielded varying results. Folberg et al. 228 reported recurrences in two of three patients treated by the Mohs technique, with tumor noted at reconstruction in one
of the three patients. Dzubow 229 reported two patients with recurrent SC who underwent MMS. One patient who underwent MMS followed by oculoplastic repair was
tumor-free at 6 months. In the other patient, tumor distal to the Mohs defect was noted at reconstruction. A case of poorly differentiated SC successfully treated with
RT has been reported. 230
Patients with SC should be evaluated by an internist, and routine screening for internal malignancy (stool for occult blood, analysis of urine, colonoscopy) should be
current. A family history for internal malignancy should be sought and family members screened, if indicated, to rule out Muir-Torre syndrome. 231 After treatment for
SC, patients should be followed up for recurrence or progression through regular examination of skin and lymph nodes.
ATYPICAL FIBROXANTHOMA
Atypical fibroxanthoma (AFX) is a spindle cell tumor that occurs on the head and neck of sun-exposed individuals and on the trunk and extremities of younger
patients. 232,233 and 234 Tumors of the head and neck characteristically present during the eighth decade, whereas tumors involving the extremities often present during
the fourth decade. 231 The ratio of affected men to affected women appears to be equal. 232
The pathogenesis of AFX may involve exposure to UVL, ionizing radiation, or aberrant host response. In one study of ten cases of AFX, seven cases showed
mutation in p53. Of the seven, all showed abnormal single-strand conformation polymorphism, with four of those showing C®T mutations characteristically induced by
UVL. 235 Exposure to ionizing radiation may play a role in the development of the tumor, as AFX after RT has been demonstrated. 236 An increased incidence of AFX
was shown in a study of 642 renal transplant patients, 237 and invasive AFX has been reported in a heart transplant patient. 238 Finally, metastatic AFX has been
reported in a patient with null cell variant chronic lymphocytic leukemia. 239
AFX usually presents as an asymptomatic papule or nodule. There may be hyperpigmentation or ulceration. 240 The clinical appearance is not distinctive, and the
lesion may be confused with pyogenic granuloma, SCC, or BCC. 241,242 The tumor characteristically presents on the head and neck of the elderly or the trunk or
extremities of younger individuals but is not limited to these sites. Occurrences on the eyelid 243 and within the ethmoid sinus 244 and oral cavity 236 have been reported.
Although AFX rarely metastasizes, it is a locally aggressive tumor with metastatic potential. 245 Metastases to parotid gland, 246 lymph nodes, 247 and lung 248 have been
reported. In a series of eight cases of metastatic AFX, poor prognostic indicators included vascular invasion, recurrence, deep tissue penetration, necrosis, and
impaired host resistance. 246
On microscopical examination, there is a dermal nodule with a dense infiltrate of bizarre spindle cells arranged in haphazard fashion ( Fig. 41.2-30).240 Often, bizarre
giant cells are present, and there is no connection to the epidermis. 240 Special stains for vimentin are positive and for CD68 are weakly positive, while stains for
HMB-45 and S-100 are negative, distinguishing this lesion from spindle cell melanoma. 249,250 Differentiation from malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH) may be aided
by special stains, as AFX stains negatively for LN-2, a marker present on B cells, Reed-Sternberg cells, and macrophages, and MFH cells are positive for LN-2 in

90% of cases.251

FIGURE 41.2-30. Atypical fibroxanthoma. On microscopical examination, there is a dermal nodule with a dense infiltrate of atypical spindle cells arranged in
haphazard fashion and associated with bizarre giant cells.

Treatment options for AFX include WLE and MMS. In one large series comparing WLE with MMS, 232 recurrences were observed during a mean follow-up period of
73.6 months in 12% of 25 cases treated by WLE. Metastatic involvement of the parotid gland occurred in one of these patients, for an overall regional metastatic rate
of 4%. In contrast, no recurrences or metastases were observed over a mean follow-up period of 29.6 months in any patient treated by MMS. Others have reported
similarly favorable outcomes after treatment of AFX by MMS, albeit with smaller numbers of cases. 252,253 The authors favor the use of MMS for AFX because of the
superior margin control and conservation of normal tissue.
MALIGNANT FIBROUS HISTIOCYTOMA
MFH is an aggressive spindle cell cancer and is the most common soft tissue tumor in the elderly, primarily affecting the extremities. 254,255 Peak incidence is during the
seventh decade.253
Though the pathogenesis of MFH is incompletely understood, there appears to be a predilection for development in scar tissue. Inoshita et al. 256 report development
of MFH in an amputation site in one patient and in a hernioplasty scar in another. In both patients, the initial clinical diagnosis was subcutaneous abscess. MFH in a
burn scar has also been reported. 257 A case of MFH associated with discoid lupus erythematosis has also been described. 258 Decreased immune surveillance may
play a role in the development of MFH. A significant increase in the incidence of MFH (158 per 100,000) has been reported in a large series of renal transplant
patients. 237
MFH is aggressive, with high metastatic potential. In one series, a higher percentage of histologically infiltrative tumors (83% vs. 24%) were observed in
subcutaneous MFH as opposed to intramuscular MFH. 259 An increased percentage of local recurrences (17% vs. 0%) were observed in the subcutaneous variant.
However, infiltrative growth pattern was not predictive of metastatic potential. In one large series, the local recurrence rate was 44%, and the rate of metastasis was
42%.254 Metastasis, in this series, occurred most commonly in lung (82%) and lymph nodes (32%). Factors that appeared to influence metastasis included depth and
size of tumor and inflammatory response. Small, superficially located tumors and tumors with a prominent inflammatory component metastasized less frequently.
Clinically, MFH may present as a subcutaneous mass 256 or ulcerative nodule. 255 In one large series, MFH occurred principally as a mass on an extremity (lower
extremity, 49%; upper extremity, 19%) or in the abdominal cavity or retroperitoneum (16%) of adults. 254 Deep fascial involvement was typical (19%), as was
involvement of skeletal muscle (59%). Fascial involvement was absent in only a small percentage of cases (7%).
On microscopical examination, morphologic features vary, and MFH may show transitions from areas with a highly ordered, storiform pattern to less differentiated
areas with a pleomorphic appearance. Differentiation from AFX may be aided by staining with LN-2, a marker present in 90% of MFHs in one series but absent or only
weakly present in AFX.251
Treatment options for MFH include WLE, although recurrence rates of up to 40% have been reported with this approach. 254 Some authors have reported successful
treatment of subcutaneous MFH with MMS.251,259 Brown and Swanson260,261 reported no recurrences over a 3-year follow-up period among 17 patients with 20 tumors
treated by MMS. Hafner et al. 252 reported successful treatment of MFH by MMS with margin control achieved using paraffin-embedded tissue sections. After treatment
for MFH, patients should be followed up aggressively for development of recurrent and metastatic disease.
DERMATOFIBROSARCOMA PROTUBERANS
Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP) is a low-grade cutaneous sarcoma with well-characterized clinical and histopathologic features. The lesion frequently
appears as a plaque on the trunk and, less commonly, on the extremities of middle-aged adults. 262,263 Gender distribution of DFSP tends to vary in published series. 262
The pathogenesis of DFSP is incompletely understood but may involve factors as diverse as aberrant tumor suppressor genes or history of local trauma. In one study,
increased p53 protein immunoreactivity was found in DFSP but not in dermatofibrosarcoma, suggesting that expression of the protein may be important in the
pathogenesis of DFSP. 264 In addition, DFSP has been reported to occur at previously traumatized sites. 265
DFSP has a tendency to recur locally, with an overall rate of 50%. However, metastases are rare. In one series of 19 cases of DFSP, there were 20 local recurrences
in 8 patients. 266 Recurrences in this series followed narrow excision. No recurrences were noted during a mean follow-up period of 13.2 years after WLE with margins
greater than 2 cm. Lymph node metastases occur in approximately 1% of cases and distant metastases, principally to lung, occur in approximately 4% of DFSP
cases.266 A fibrosarcomatous variant, FS-DFSP, represents an uncommon form of DFSP.267 In a series of 41 patients with FS-DFSP, follow-up in 34 patients for a
mean period of 90 months revealed a local recurrence rate of 58%. Metastases were observed at a rate of 14.7%. Thus, fibrosarcomatous change in DFSP is
indicative of a more aggressive clinical course. 267 A case of acral DFSP with fibrosarcomatous change and pulmonary parenchymal metastases was reported
recently. 268
DFSP classically presents as a plaque on the trunk and, less frequently, on the extremities but may occur anywhere. 262 The tumor may be difficult to differentiate
clinically from a dermatofibroma or a keloid. 270 The tumor most commonly presents during early or middle adulthood, though it can occur during childhood. 271,272 The
Bednar tumor is a rare pigmented variant of DFSP. 273
Microscopically, the tumor is composed of monomorphous spindle cells arranged in a storiform pattern and embedded in a sparse to moderately dense fibrous
stroma.262 The distinction between deep penetrating dermatofibroma (DPDF), which involves the subcutis, and DFSP may be challenging. In most instances, attention
to the cytologic constituency of the lesions and the overall architecture is sufficient for differentiation. DPDF is typified by cellular heterogeneity. DPDF includes giant
cells and lipidized histiocytes and extends deeply, using the interlobular subcuticular fibrous septa as scaffolds, or in the form of broad fronts. In contrast, DFSP tends
to be monomorphous, surrounding adipocytes diffusely or extending in stratified horizontal plates. Immunostaining for factor XIIIa and CD34 may be helpful in
distinguishing DPDF from DFSP. Characteristically, DPDF is diffusely factor XIIIa–positive and CD34-negative, whereas DFSP is factor XIIIa–negative and
CD34-positive.274,275
Treatment options for DFSP include WLE and MMS. Some authors advocate surgical excision with a minimal margin of 2 to 3 cm of surrounding skin, including the
underlying fascia, without elective lymph node dissection. 266 Although WLE has been the standard treatment of DFSP, recurrence rates approach 50%. In one series,
58 patients with DFSP treated by MMS at three institutions showed a local recurrence rate of 2%. 277 There were no cases of regional or distant metastases. Other

studies support MMS as the treatment of choice for DFSP, based on low recurrence rate and maximal conservation of normal tissue. 269,276,277 Caution is advised in
attempting to interpret immunostains on frozen sections of DFSP since, in one study, microscopical examination of paraffin-embedded sections showed
CD34-negative DFSP tumor cells with positive staining of endothelial cells. 278 The authors favor extirpation of tumor by MMS, using frozen sections with confirmation
by examination of paraffin-embedded sections. Patients with DFSP should be followed up closely for evidence of local or regional recurrence or metastatic disease.
ANGIOSARCOMA
Angiosarcoma (AS) is an aggressive, usually fatal neoplasm of vascular cells. 279 Four variants of cutaneous AS currently are recognized, including AS of the scalp
and face, AS in the context of lymphedema (Stewart-Treves syndrome), radiation-induced AS, and epithelioid AS. Although these variants differ in presentation, they
share key features, including clinical appearance of primary lesions, a biologically aggressive nature and, ultimately, poor outcome.
Cutaneous AS of the head and scalp usually affects the elderly, with men being affected more often than women. 280 Although no predisposing factors have been
identified, exposure to UVL has been suggested as a risk factor due to the propensity for the tumor to affect sun-exposed sites of the scalp and face. Other
researchers have questioned this connection because, in several series, AS has presented on scalps protected by hair as frequently as on bald scalps. Others have
demonstrated that patients with AS show no significant increase in numbers of BCCs and SCCs, thus arguing against increased UVL exposure.
AS presents as a violaceous to red ill-defined plaque, often initially resembling a bruise ( Fig. 41.2-31). The differential diagnosis may include benign vascular tumors,
hematoma secondary to trauma, or an inflammatory dermatosis. Unexplained facial edema may be a presenting sign as well. As AS progresses, lesions increase in
size, become indurated, and may eventually ulcerate. Satellite lesions are common.

FIGURE 41.2-31. Angiosarcoma may present as a violaceous, ill-defined plaque on the scalp.

On microscopical examination, it becomes evident that AS extends far beyond clinical margins. In well-differentiated lesions, histology shows irregularly dilated
vascular channels lined by flattened endothelial cells. 278 Less differentiated tumors show proliferation of polygonal or spindle-shaped, pleomorphic endothelial cells
and anastomosing vascular channels. The state of cellular differentiation has not been shown to correlate with prognosis. Special stains may be of value in histologic
diagnosis of AS, as cells stain positively for Ulex europeaus I lectin and factor VIII–related antigen. Ulex I is considered to be more sensitive for AS. In addition, AS
cells express stem cell antigen CD34 and endothelial cell surface antigen CD31.
AS is a biologically aggressive tumor with high metastatic potential. Metastases to lymph nodes, lung, and brain are common. Prognosis for metastatic disease is
poor. Although prognosis does not correlate with degree of cellular differentiation, there appears to a correlation with lesion size at presentation: Increased survival
has been demonstrated in lesions smaller than 5 cm at time of presentation.
Owing to the aggressiveness and poor prognosis of AS, treatment options are limited. Radical excision is currently the treatment of choice and may be difficult to
accomplish in tumors involving the face. Amputation with shoulder disarticulation or hemipelvectomy are recommended for tumors involving the extremities. As stated,
AS tends to extend far beyond clinically appreciated margins, thus complicating excision. Several cases of AS have been treated by MMS in an attempt to control
margins; however, the difference between AS and normal vasculature may be difficult to interpret on frozen sections, even with the use of immunohistochemical
stains. Prognosis of AS is poor, with a mortality rate of 50% at 15 months after diagnosis. The 5-year survival rate is approximately 12%.
Lymphedema-associated AS (LAS) was first reported by Stewart and Treves 281,282 and 283 in 6 patients with postmastectomy lymphedema. In each case, AS developed
in the ipsilateral arm and occurred several years after mastectomy. Subsequently, LAS was reported after axillary node dissection for melanoma and in the context of
congenital lymphedema, filarial lymphedema, and chronic idiopathic lymphedema. The risk for developing LAS 5 years after mastectomy is approximately 5%. The
most common site is the medial aspect of the upper arm.
LAS presents as a violaceous plaque or nodule superimposed on brawny, nonpitting edema. Ulceration may develop rapidly. The pathogenesis of LAS is incompletely
understood and may be related to imbalances in local immune regulation or angiogenesis, leading to proliferation of neoplastic cells. The prognosis is poor, and
survival rates are comparable to AS involving the scalp and face. Long-term survival has been reported after amputation of the affected limb.
Radiation-induced AS has been reported to occur after RT for benign or malignant conditions. 279,284,285 and 286 AS may occur from 4 to 40 years after RT for benign
conditions, including acne and eczema, or from 4 to 25 years after RT for malignancies. Lesions appear at sites treated with radiation and are clinically and
histologically similar to AS involving the scalp and face. Prognosis is poor and comparable to that observed in other forms of AS.
Epithelioid AS (EAS) is a rare, recently described variant of AS. It tends to involve the lower extremities. 278 On microscopical examination, the tumor may mimic an
epithelial neoplasm, with sheets of rounded, epithelioid cells intermingled with irregularly lined vascular channels. Epithelioid AS results in widespread metastases
within 1 year of presentation. Prognosis, as in other forms of AS, is poor.
KAPOSI'S SARCOMA
Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) is an indolent vascular tumor that has been subdivided into epidemiologic variants including classic KS, African endemic KS, iatrogenic KS,
and epidemic, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome–associated (AIDS-associated) KS. 62,279,287,288 and 289 Classic KS affects elderly men, with increased incidence in
Ashkenazi Jews and in persons of Mediterranean descent. Classic KS typically presents with violaceous macules on the lower extremities. Slow progression with
coalescence to plaques is observed. Eventually, the disease enters a nodular phase and may ultimately progress to a hyperkeratotic or even ulcerative phase.
African endemic KS can be further subdivided into a generally benign nodular disease, predominantly affecting young adults, and a fulminant lymphadenopathic
disease, predominantly affecting children. 289 Nodular African endemic KS also presents with violaceous macules that eventually progress to form plaques and
nodules. Cutaneous and mucous membrane involvement are rare in lymphadenopathic endemic KS.
Iatrogenic KS occurs in the context of immunosuppressive drug therapy. 62 Iatrogenic KS is usually chronic but may be somewhat more aggressive than classic KS.
Iatrogenic KS presents with lesions similar to those observed in classic KS. The lesions may regress on withdrawal of the immunosuppressive agent.
Epidemic KS appears in approximately 21% of homosexual men with AIDS.287 It is considered to be a sexually transmitted disease, and the etiologic agent appears to
be human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8). Epidemic KS presents with violaceous macules involving the face, chest, and oral mucosa. The hard palate and ocular conjunctiva
are frequently involved.
KS, for the most part, behaves in an indolent fashion, with some variance according to epidemiologic subtype. Patients with long-standing classic KS may show

visceral involvement, but this is usually asymptomatic. The adult variant of endemic KS tends to follow an indolent course as well. In contrast, lymphadenopathic
endemic KS progresses to fulminant, fatal disease. Iatrogenic KS is somewhat more aggressive than classic KS; however, lesions usually regress on discontinuation
of immunosuppressive therapy. In epidemic KS, extracutaneous involvement is commonly encountered in lymph nodes, gastrointestinal tract, and lungs. Disseminated
disease accounts for death in 10% to 20% of patients with epidemic KS.
On microscopical examination, KS varies according to patch, plaque, and nodular subtypes. The histologic changes in early patch-stage KS are inconspicuous,
leading to misdiagnosis of a benign inflammatory process. A superficial and deep perivascular infiltrate with increased numbers of jagged vascular spaces is observed
in the dermis. The thin-walled vessels surround normal vessels and adnexal structures, resulting in the so-called promontory sign. Plasma cells may be seen
surrounding the newly formed vessels. In plaque-stage KS, the entire dermis and superficial fat may be involved, with an increase in the number of spindle cells
arranged in small fascicles between collagen bundles centered around proliferating vascular channels. The spindle cells outline irregular slit-like vascular spaces that
contain erythrocytes. In nodular KS, the number of spindle cells increases. They are arranged in interwoven fascicles with erythrocytes scattered in the interstices.
Although nuclear atypia, mitotic figures, and pleomorphism may be observed, these are not prominent. Cells that stain positively for factor VIII–related antigen and
spindle cells that stain positively for Ulex europeaus I lectin line well-formed vessels within KS lesions.
Both local and systemic therapies have been used in the management of KS, depending on epidemiologic context, extent of disease, and concomitant
disease. 279,290,291,292,293 and 294 KS has been treated successfully using cryosurgery, RT, laser ablation, and intralesional injection of cytotoxic agents. Local infiltration
with vincristine has been particularly effective in the treatment of oral lesions in epidemic AIDS-associated KS. Other, more aggressive approaches have included
systemic therapy with interferon or with single- or multiagent chemotherapy. Tur and Brenner 293 treated 11 classic KS patients with low-dose subcutaneous
interferon-a for 6 months. Initial response, defined as reduction of lesion size and fading of color, was noted in 9 of the 11 patients after 3 to 13 weeks of treatment.
Maximum response was noted in 4 to 6 months, with remission lasting from 4 to 72 months. Experimental therapies including antiangiogenesis agents TNP-470 and
thalidomide, 9-cis retinoic acid, and human chorionic gonadotropin may prove useful in management of KS in the future. 295

CARCINOMA METASTATIC TO SKIN
The relative frequencies of cutaneous metastases are similar to those observed with primary cancers. 296 The most frequently observed cutaneous metastatic cancers
are breast, colon, and melanoma in women and lung, colon, and melanoma in men. Cutaneous metastases may represent an opportunity to detect a potentially
treatable cancer before other evidence of it is present, to modify therapy as appropriate to the tumor stage or, possibly, to use the cutaneous lesion as a source of
easily accessible tumor cells for specific therapy. Cutaneous metastatic disease as the first sign of internal cancer is most commonly seen with cancer of the lung,
kidney, and ovary. Cutaneous involvement is also seen in the leukemias, with a wide variation in morphology of lesions. 296 The scalp is a common site for cutaneous
metastatic disease (Fig. 41-32). Perhaps the most widely known cutaneous manifestation of an internal carcinoma is the Sister Mary Joseph nodule. 297 Dr. William
Mayo's surgical assistant, Sister Mary Joseph, noted the association of the presence of an indurated umbilical nodule in the setting of gastric cancer with poor
prognosis. The discovery of cutaneous metastatic disease should result in prompt consultation with an oncologist for staging and management ( Fig. 41.2-33).

FIGURE 41.2-32. The scalp is a common site for cutaneous metastatic disease.

FIGURE 41.2-33. The appropriate management of less common skin cancers may include wide local excision (WLE), Mohs micrographic surgery (MMS), cryosurgery,
or intralesional or systemic chemotherapy. AFX, atypical fibroxanthoma; DFSP, dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans; MAC, microcystic adnexal carcinoma; MFH,
malignant fibrous histiocytoma.

CONCLUSION
The discovery of an atypical skin lesion should result in consultation with a dermatologist for evaluation. It is necessary that skin biopsy specimens be sent to a
dermatopathologist for interpretation to minimize misdiagnosis and delayed treatment of skin cancers. Management of skin cancer is based on histopathologic
analysis of a given lesion; hence, accurate interpretation of skin biopsy specimens is essential. After treatment for skin cancer, patients should be followed up
regularly, through full-body skin examinations performed by a dermatologist, for the development of recurrences as well as new primary skin cancers.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Strom SS, Yamamura Y. Epidemiology of nonmelanoma skin cancer. Clin Plast Surg 1997;24(4):627.
2. Karagas MR, et al. Increase in incidence rates of basal cell and squamous cell skin cancer in New Hampshire, USA. New Hampshire Skin Cancer Study Group. Int J Cancer 1999;81(4):555.
3. Spratt JS Jr. Cancer mortality after nonmelanoma skin cancer. JAMA 1999;281(4):325.
4. Arpey CJ. Biopsy of the skin: thoughtful selection of technique improves yield. Postgrad Med 1998;103(3):179.
5. O'Toole EA, Goel M, Woodley DT. Hydrogen peroxide inhibits human keratinocyte migration. Dermatol Surg 1996;22(6):525.
6. Vessey DA, Lee KH, Blacker KL. Characterization of the oxidative stress initiated in cultured human keratinocytes by treatment with peroxides. J Invest Dermatol 1992;99(6):859.
7. Lawrence CM. Mohs micrographic surgery for basal cell carcinoma. Clin Exp Dermatol 1999;24(2):130.
8. Bernstein PE. Mohs '98: single-procedure Mohs surgery with immediate reconstruction. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1999;120(2):184.
9. Shriner DL, et al. Mohs micrographic surgery. J Am Acad Dermatol 1998;39(1):79.
10. Arlette JP, et al. Basal cell carcinoma of the periocular region. J Cutan Med Surg 1998;2(4):205.
11. Kumar B, et al. A review of 24 cases of Mohs surgery and ophthalmic plastic reconstruction. Aust NZ J Ophthalmol 1997;25(4):289.
12. Nelson BR, Railan D, Cohen S. Mohs micrographic surgery for nonmelanoma skin cancers. Clin Plast Surg 1997;24(4):705.
13. Skouge JW. Mohs micrographic surgery for the treatment of difficult skin cancers. Md Med J 1997;46(5):231.
14. Nordin P. Curettage-cryosurgery for non-melanoma skin cancer of the external ear: excellent 5-year results. Br J Dermatol 1999;140(2):291.
15. Nordin P, Larko O, Stenquist B. Five-year results of curettage-cryosurgery of selected large primary basal cell carcinomas on the nose: an alternative treatment in a geographical area
underserved by Mohs surgery. Br J Dermatol 1997;136(2):180.

16. Kibarian MA, Hruza GJ. Nonmelanoma skin cancer. Risks, treatment options, and tips on prevention. Postgrad Med 1995;98(6):39.
17. Sinclair RD, Dawber RP. Cryosurgery of malignant and premalignant diseases of the skin: a simple approach. Australas J Dermatol 1995;36(3):133.
18. Motley RJ, et al. Treatment of basal cell carcinoma by dermatologists in the United Kingdom. British Association of Dermatologists Audit Subcommittee and the British Society for
Dermatological Surgery. Br J Dermatol 1995;132(3):437.
19. Crouch E. Curettage and cautery of skin conditions [Letter]. Br J Gen Pract 1992;42(362):398.
20. Salasche SJ. Status of curettage and desiccation in the treatment of primary basal cell carcinoma [Editorial]. J Am Acad Dermatol 1984;10(2):285.
21. Robins P, Albom MJ. Recurrent basal cell carcinomas in young women. J Dermatol Surg 1975;1(1):49.
22. Schwartz RA. The actinic keratosis: a perspective and update. Dermatol Surg 1997;23(11):1009.
23. Kuflik AS, Schwartz RA. Actinic keratosis and squamous cell carcinoma. Am Fam Physician 1994;49(4):817.
24. Mittelbronn MA, et al. Frequency of pre-existing actinic keratosis in cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. Int J Dermatol 1998;37(9):677.
25. Brash DE, et al. Sunlight and sunburn in human skin cancer: p53 apoptosis and tumor promotion. J Invest Dermatol Symp Proc 1996;1(2):136.
26. Cockerell CJ. Histopathology of incipient intraepidermal squamous cell carcinoma (“actinic keratosis”). J Am Acad Dermatol 2000;42(1):11.
27. Picascia DD, Robinson JK. Actinic cheilitis: a review of the etiology, differential diagnosis, and treatment. J Am Acad Dermatol 1987;17(2):255.
28. Burns T. Basal cell carcinoma. Practitioner 1998; 242(1591):718.
29. Lear JT, et al. Basal cell carcinoma [see comments]. J R Soc Med 1998;91(11):585.
30. Lear JT, Smith AG. Basal cell carcinoma. Postgrad MedJ 1997;73(863):538.
31. Leffell DJ, et al. Aggressive-growth basal cell carcinoma in young adults. Arch Dermatol 1991;127(11):1663.
32. Leffell DJ, Brash DE. Sunlight and skin cancer. Sci Am 1996;275(1):52.
33. English DR, et al. Sunlight and cancer. Cancer Causes Control 1997;8(3):271.
34. Quinn AG. Ultraviolet radiation and skin carcinogenesis. Br J Hosp Med 1997;58(6):261.
35. Brash DE. Sunlight and the onset of skin cancer. Trends Genet 1997;13(10):410.
36. Grossman D, Leffell DJ. The molecular basis of nonmelanoma skin cancer: new understanding. Arch Dermatol 1997;133(10):1263.
37. Ziegler A, et al. Tumor suppressor gene mutations and photocarcinogenesis. Photochem Photobiol 1996;63(4):432.
38. Ziegler A, et al. Sunburn and p53 in the onset of skin cancer [see comments]. Nature 1994;372(6508):773.
39. Walsh DS. Molecular genetics of skin cancer. Adv Dermatol 1997;13:167.
40. Ingham PW. The patched gene in development and cancer. [Published erratum appears in Curr Opin Genet Dev 1998;8(3):371.] Curr Opin Genet Dev 1998;8(1):88.
41. Cohen MM Jr. Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome: molecular biology and new hypotheses. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1999;28(3):216.
42. Bale SJ, Falk RT, Rogers GR. Patching together the genetics of Gorlin syndrome. J Cutan Med Surg 1998;3(1):31.
43. Wong ST, Chan HL, Teo SK. The spectrum of cutaneous and internal malignancies in chronic arsenic toxicity. Singapore Med J 1998;39(4):171.
44. Strickland FM, Kripke ML. Immune response associated with nonmelanoma skin cancer. Clin Plast Surg 1997;24(4):637.
45. Wicking C, Bale AE. Molecular basis of the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Curr Opin Pediatr 1997;9(6):630.
46. Ron E, et al. Skin tumor risk among atomic-bomb survivors in Japan. Cancer Causes Control 1998;9(4):393.
47. Davis MM, et al. Skin cancer in patients with chronic radiation dermatitis [see comments]. J Am Acad Dermatol 1989;20(4):608.
48. Karagas MR, et al. Risk of basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers after ionizing radiation therapy. For the Skin Cancer Prevention Study Group. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88(24):1848.
49. Hahn H, et al. The patched signaling pathway in tumorigenesis and development: lessons from animal models. J Mol Med 1999;77(6):459.
50. Moles JP. [The gene of Gorlin's syndrome (basocellular nevomatosis) and the revival of the developmental genes in human carcinogenesis.] Bull Cancer 1998;85(3):207.
51. Mortele KJ, et al. Bilateral adrenal cystic lymphangiomas in nevoid basal cell carcinoma (Gorlin-Goltz) syndrome: US CT and MR findings. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1999;23(4):562.
52. Hahn H, et al. Mutations of the human homolog of Drosophila patched in the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Cell 1996;85(6):841.
53. Gailani MR, et al. The role of the human homologue of Drosophila patched in sporadic basal cell carcinomas [see comments]. Nat Genet 1996;14(1):78.
54. Bale AE, Gailani MR, Leffell DJ. The Gorlin syndrome gene: a tumor suppressor active in basal cell carcinogenesis and embryonic development. Proc Assoc Am Physicians 1995;107(2):253.
55. Meunier L, Raison-Peyron N, Meynadier J. [UV-induced immunosuppression and skin cancers.] Rev Med Interne 1998;19(4):247.
56. Ramsay HM, et al. Multiple basal cell carcinomas in a patient with acute myeloid leukaemia and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Clin Exp Dermatol 1999;24(4):281.
57. Levi F, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, chronic lymphocytic leukaemias, and skin cancers. Br J Cancer 1996;74(11):1847.
58. Ong CS, et al. Skin cancer in Australian heart transplant recipients. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999;40(1):27.
59. van Zuuren EJ, de Visscher JG, Bouwes Bavinck JN. Carcinoma of the lip in kidney transplant recipients. J Am Acad Dermatol 1998;38(3):497.
60. Montagnino G, et al. Cancer incidence in 854 kidney transplant recipients from a single institution: comparison with normal population and with patients under dialytic treatment. Clin Transplant
1996;10(5):461.
61. Leigh IM, Glover MT. Skin cancer and warts in immunosuppressed renal transplant recipients. Recent Results Cancer Res 1995;139:69.
62. Bouwes Bavinck JN, et al. Relation between skin cancer and HLA antigens in renal-transplant recipients [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1991;325(12):843.
63. Gutierrez-Steil C, et al. Sunlight-induced basal cell carcinoma tumor cells and ultraviolet-B-irradiated psoriatic plaques express Fas ligand (CD95L). J Clin Invest 1998;101(1):33.
64. Smith KJ, et al. Cutaneous neoplasms in a military population of HIV-1-positive patients. Military Medical Consortium for the Advancement of Retroviral Research. J Am Acad Dermatol
1993;29(3):400.
65. Lobo DV, et al. Nonmelanoma skin cancers and infection with the human immunodeficiency virus. Arch Dermatol 1992;128(5):623.
66. Miller SJ. Biology of basal cell carcinoma (part I). J Am Acad Dermatol 1991;24(1):1.
67. Bedlow AJ, et al. Basal cell carcinomaan in-vivo model of human tumour microcirculation? Exp Dermatol 1999;8(3):222.
68. Weninger W, et al. Differences in tumor microvessel density between squamous cell carcinomas and basal cell carcinomas may relate to their different biologic behavior. J Cutan Pathol
1997;24(6):364.
69. Hernandez AD, Hibbs MS, Postlewaite AE, et al. Establishment of basal cell carcinoma in culture: evidence for a basal cell carcinoma-derived factor(s) which stimulates fibroblasts to proliferate
and release collagenase. J Invest Dermatol 1985;85:470.
70. McCord MW, et al. Skin cancer of the head and neck with incidental microscopic perineural invasion. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43(3):591.
71. Di Gregorio C, et al. Mental nerve invasion by basal cell carcinoma of the chin: a case report. Anticancer Res 1998;18(6B):4723.
72. Terashi H, et al. Perineural and neural involvement in skin cancers. Dermatol Surg 1997;23(4):259.
73. Carlson KC, Roenigk RK. Know your anatomy: perineural involvement of basal and squamous cell carcinoma on the face. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 1990;16(9):827.
74. Niazi ZB, Lamberty BG. Perineural infiltration in basal cell carcinomas. Br J Plast Surg 1993;46(2):156.
75. Silbert PL, et al. Enigmatic trigeminal sensory neuropathy diagnosed by facial skin biopsy. Clin Exp Neurol 1992;29:234.
76. ten Hove MW, Glaser JS, Schatz NJ. Occult perineural tumor infiltration of the trigeminal nerve. Diagnostic considerations. J Neuroophthalmol 1997;17(3):170.
77. Morselli P, et al. Recurrent basal cell carcinoma of the back infiltrating the spine. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 1993;19(10):917.
78. Berti JJ, Sharata HH. Metastatic basal cell carcinoma to the lung. Cutis 1999;63(3):165.
79. Christian MM, Murphy CM, Wagner RF Jr. Metastatic basal cell carcinoma presenting as unilateral lymphedema. Dermatol Surg 1998;24(10):1151.
80. Berardi RS, et al. Pulmonary metastasis in nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Int Surg 1991;76(1):64.
81. Lo JS, et al. Metastatic basal cell carcinoma: report of twelve cases with a review of the literature [see comments]. J Am Acad Dermatol 1991;24(5):715.
82. Degner RA, et al. Metastatic basal cell carcinoma: report of a case presenting with respiratory failure. Am J Med Sci 1991;301(6):395.
83. Blinder D, Taicher S. Metastatic basal cell carcinoma presenting in the oral cavity and auditory meatus. A case report and review of literature. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1992;21(1):31.
84. Cruse CW, O'Neill W, Rayhack J. Metastatic basal cell carcinoma of the upper extremity. J Hand Surg [Am] 1992;17(6):1093.
85. Mizushima J, Ohara K. Basal cell carcinoma of the vulva with lymph node and skin metastasisreport of a case and review of 20 Japanese cases. J Dermatol 1995;22(1):36.
86. Raszewski RL, Guyuron B. Long-term survival following nodal metastases from basal cell carcinoma. Ann Plast Surg 1990;24(2):170.
87. Pfeiffer P, Hansen O, Rose C. Systemic cytotoxic therapy of basal cell carcinoma A review of the literature. Eur J Cancer 1990;26(1):73.
88. Moeholt K, et al. Platinum-based cytotoxic therapy in basal cell carcinomaa review of the literature. Acta Oncol 1996;35(6):677.
89. Rippey JJ. Why classify basal cell carcinomas? Histopathology 1998;32(5):393.
90. Bastiaens MT, et al. Differences in age, site distribution, and sex between nodular and superficial basal cell carcinoma indicate different types of tumors. J Invest Dermatol 1998;110(6):880.
91. Scherbenske JM, et al. A solitary nodule on the chest: fibroepithelioma of Pinkus. Arch Dermatol 1990;126(7):955.
92. Skidmore RA Jr, Flowers FP. Nonmelanoma skin cancer. Med Clin North Am 1998;82(6):1309.
93. Holmkvist KA, Rogers GS, Dahl PR. Incidence of residual basal cell carcinoma in patients who appear tumor free after biopsy. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999;41(4):600.
94. Salgarello M, Seccia A, Vricella M, Farallo E. Analysis of infiltrating epitheliomas of the nose examined from 1986 to 1995. J Otolaryngol 1998;27:288.
95. Evans GR, Williams JZ, Ainslie NB. Cutaneous nasal malignancies: Is primary reconstruction safe? Head Neck 1997;3:182.
96. Glied M, Berg D, Witterick I. Basal cell carcinoma of the conchal bowl: interdisciplinary approach to treatment. J Otolaryngol 1998;27(6):322.
97. Esquivias Gomez JI, et al. Basal cell carcinoma of the scrotum. Australas J Dermatol 1999;40(3):141.
98. Nehal KS, Levine VJ, Ashinoff R. Basal cell carcinoma of the genitalia. Dermatol Surg 1998;24(12):1361.
99. Ladocsi LT, et al. Basal cell carcinoma of the penis [see comments]. Cutis 1998;61(1):25.
100. Grossman HB. Premalignant and early carcinomas of the penis and scrotum. Urol Clin North Am 1992;19(2):221.
101. Paterson CA, Young-Fadok TM, Dozois RR. Basal cell carcinoma of the perianal region: 20-year experience. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42(9):1200.
102. Goldberg DP. Assessment and surgical treatment of basal cell skin cancer. Clin Plast Surg 1997;24(4):673.
103. Leslie DF, Greenway HT. Mohs micrographic surgery for skin cancer. Australas J Dermatol 1991;32(3):159.
104. Halpern JN. Radiation therapy in skin cancer: a historical perspective and current applications. Dermatol Surg 1997;23(11):1089.
105. Wolf DJ, Zitelli JA. Surgical margins for basal cell carcinoma. Arch Dermatol 1987;123(3):340.
106. Cook J, Zitelli JA. Mohs micrographic surgery: a cost analysis [see comments]. J Am Acad Dermatol 1998;39(5):698.
107. Rowe DE, Carroll RJ, Day CL Jr. Long-term recurrence rates in previously untreated (primary) basal cell carcinoma: implications for patient follow-up. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 1989;15(3):315.
108. Rowe DE, Carroll RJ, Day CL Jr. Mohs surgery is the treatment of choice for recurrent (previously treated) basal cell carcinoma. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 1989;15(4):424.
109. Aliseda D, Vazquez J, Munuera JM. Medial canthus tumor surgery: a prospective study of microscopically controlled excision. Eur J Ophthalmol 1997;7(3):216.
110. Goldminz D, Bennett RG. Mohs micrographic surgery of the nail unit. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 1992;18(8):721.
111. Knox JM. Treatment of skin cancer. J Am Acad Dermatol 1985;12(3):589.
112. Kopf AW, et al. Curettage-electrodesiccation treatment of basal cell carcinomas. Arch Dermatol 1977;113(4):439.
113. Spiller WF, et al. Treatment of basal cell epithelioma by curettage and electrodesiccation. J Am Acad Dermatol 1984;11(5):808.
114. Morganroth GS, Leffell DJ. Nonexcisional treatment of benign and premalignant cutaneous lesions. Clin Plast Surg 1993;20(1):91.
115. Wilder RB, Kittelson JM, Shimm DS. Basal cell carcinoma treated with radiation therapy. Cancer 1991;68(10):2134.
116. Kuflik EG. Cryosurgery for cutaneous malignancy. An update. Dermatol Surg 1997;23(11):1081.
117. Zitelli JA. Cryosurgery for skin cancer [Letter]. J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;26(2):283.
118. Goncalves JC. Fractional cryosurgery. A new technique for basal cell carcinoma of the eyelids and periorbital area. Dermatol Surg 1997;23(6):475.
119. Humphreys TR, et al. Treatment of superficial basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma in situ with a high-energy pulsed carbon dioxide laser. Arch Dermatol 1998;134(10):1247.
120. Katz MH. Nonmelanoma skin cancer. Md Med J 1997;46(5):239.

121. Gloster HM Jr, Brodland DG. The epidemiology of skin cancer. Dermatol Surg 1996;22(3):217.
122. Marks R. The epidemiology of non-melanoma skin cancer: who, why, and what can we do about it? J Dermatol 1995;22(11):853.
123. Healy E, Collins P, Barnes L. Nonmelanoma skin cancer in an Irish population: an appraisal of risk factors [see comments]. Ir Med J 1995;88(2):58.
124. Espana A, et al. Skin cancer in heart transplant recipients. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995;32(3):458.
125. Kirby B, Chalmers RJ. Multiple squamous cell carcinomas following photochemotherapy for atopic eczema [Letter]. Clin Exp Dermatol 1999;24(4):337.
126. Stern RS, Lunder EJ. Risk of squamous cell carcinoma and methoxsalen (psoralen) and UV-A radiation (PUVA). A meta-analysis. Arch Dermatol 1998;134(12):1582.
127. Lindel B, et al. PUVA and cancer risk: the Swedish follow-up study. Br J Dermatol 1999;141(1):108.
128. Stern RS, Liebman EJ, Vakeva L. Oral psoralen and ultraviolet-A light (PUVA) treatment of psoriasis and persistent risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer. PUVA Follow-up Study. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90(17):1278.
129. Takeda H, Mitsuhashi Y, Kondo S. Multiple squamous cell carcinomas in situ in vitiligo lesions after long-term PUVA therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol 1998;38(2):268.
130. Col M, et al. Arsenic-related Bowen's disease, palmar keratosis, and skin cancer. Environ Health Perspect 1999;107(8):687.
131. Yu HS, et al. Defective IL-2 receptor expression in lymphocytes of patients with arsenic-induced Bowen's disease. Arch DermatolRes 1998;290(12):681.
132. Tsuruta D, et al. Merkel cell carcinoma Bowen's disease and chronic occupational arsenic poisoning. Br J Dermatol 1998;139(2):291.
133. Karagas MR, et al. Design of an epidemiologic study of drinking water arsenic exposure and skin and bladder cancer risk in a US population. Environ Health Perspect 1998;106[Suppl 4]:1047.
134. Brash DE, Ponten J. Skin precancer. Cancer Surv 1998;32:69.
135. Streilein JW, Alard P, Niizeki H. A new concept of skin-associated lymphoid tissue (SALT): UVB light impaired cutaneous immunity reveals a prominent role for cutaneous nerves. Keio J Med
1999;48(1):22.
136. Dandie GW, et al. Effects of UV on the migration and function of epidermal antigen presenting cells. Mutat Res 1998;422(1):147.
137. Goettsch W, et al. Comparative immunotoxicology of ultraviolet B exposure: I. Effects of in vitro and in situ ultraviolet B exposure on the functional activity and morphology of Langerhans cells
in the skin of different species. Br J Dermatol 1998;139(2):230.
138. Denfeld RW, et al. Further characterization of UVB radiation effects on Langerhans cells: altered expression of the costimulatory molecules B7-1 and B7-2. Photochem Photobiol
1998;67(5):554.
139. Ziegler A, et al. Mutation hot-spots due to sunlight in the p53 gene of nonmelanoma skin cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993;90(9):4216.
140. Wang XM, et al. An unexpected spectrum of p53 mutations from squamous cell carcinomas in psoriasis patients treated with PUVA. Photochem Photobiol 1997;66(2):294.
141. Wong SS, Tan KC, Goh CL. Cutaneous manifestations of chronic arsenicism: review of seventeen cases. J Am Acad Dermatol 1998;38(2):179.
142. Eroglu A, Camlibel S. Risk factors for locoregional recurrence of scar carcinoma. Br J Surg 1997;84(12):1744.
143. Harland DL, Robinson WA, Franklin WA. Deletion of the p53 gene in a patient with aggressive burn scar carcinoma. J Trauma 1997;42(1):104.
144. Kirsner RS, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma arising in osteomyelitis and chronic wounds. Treatment with Mohs micrographic surgery vs amputation. Dermatol Surg 1996;22(12):1015.
145. Edwards MJ, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma arising in previously burned or irradiated skin. Arch Surg 1989;124(1):115.
146. Eliezri YD, Silverstein SJ, Nuovo GJ. Occurrence of human papillomavirus type 16 DNA in cutaneous squamous and basal cell neoplasms. J Am Acad Dermatol 1990;23(5):836.
147. Moy RL, et al. Human papillomavirus type 16 DNA in periungual squamous cell carcinomas [see comments]. JAMA 1989;261(18):2669.
148. Rowe DE, Carroll RJ, Day CL Jr. Prognostic factors for local recurrence metastasis and survival rates in squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, ear, and lip. Implications for treatment modality
selection. J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;26(6):976.
149. Barksdale SK, O'Connor N, Barnhill R. Prognostic factors for cutaneous squamous cell and basal cell carcinoma. Determinants of risk of recurrence, metastasis, and development of
subsequent skin cancers. Surg Oncol Clin North Am 1997;6(3):625.
150. Brodland DG, Zitelli JA. Mechanisms of metastasis. J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;27(1):1.
151. Immerman SC, et al. Recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Cancer 1983;51(8):1537.
152. Friedman HI, Cooper PH, Wanebo HJ. Prognostic and therapeutic use of microstaging of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the trunk and extremities. Cancer 1985;56(5):1099.
153. Spiro RH. Verrucous carcinoma then and now. Am J Surg 1998;176(5):393.
154. Bouquot JE. Oral verrucous carcinoma. Incidence in two US populations. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 1998;86(3):318.
155. Casanova D, et al. Plantar verrucous carcinoma: a case report and literature review. Ann Chir Plast Esthet 1997;42(1):56.
156. Bell HK, Rhodes LE. Bowen's diseasea retrospective review of clinical management [Letter]. Clin Exp Dermatol 1999;24(4):338.
157. Fitzgerald DA. Cancer precursors. Semin Cutan Med Surg 1998;17(2):108.
158. Liu Y, et al. [Detecting HPV DNA in tissue of epidermal neoplasms.] Chung Kuo I Hsueh Ko Hsueh Yuan Hsueh Pao 1997;19(1):64.
159. Olhoffer IH, et al. Facial bowenoid papulosis secondary to human papillomavirus type 16. Br J Dermatol 1999;140(4):761.
160. Dogan G, et al. Three cases of verrucous carcinoma. Australas J Dermatol 1998;39(4):251.
161. Johnson TM, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin (excluding lip and oral mucosa). J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;26(3):467.
162. Goldman GD. Squamous cell cancer: a practical approach. Semin Cutan Med Surg 1998;17(2):80.
163. Honeycutt WM, Jansen GT. Treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Arch Dermatol 1973;108(5):670.
164. Brodland DG, Zitelli JA. Surgical margins for excision of primary cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;27(2):241.
165. Wilson SM, Beahrs OH, Manson R. Squamous cell carcinoma of the anus. Surg Annu 1976;8:297.
166. Haberthur F, Almendral AC, Ritter B. Therapy of vulvar carcinoma. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol 1993;14(3):218.
167. Geisse JK. Comparison of treatment modalities for squamous cell carcinoma. Clin Dermatol 1995;13(6):621.
168. de Visscher JG, et al. Surgical treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the lower lip: evaluation of long-term results and prognostic factorsa retrospective analysis of 184 patients. J Oral
Maxillofac Surg 1998;56(7):814.
169. Frankel DH, Hanusa BH, Zitelli JA. New primary nonmelanoma skin cancer in patients with a history of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Implications and recommendations for follow-up. J
Am Acad Dermatol 1992;26(5):720.
170. Haag ML, Glass LF, Fenske NA. Merkel cell carcinoma. Diagnosis and treatment. Dermatol Surg 1995;21(8):669.
171. Cook TF, Fosko SW. Unusual cutaneous malignancies. Semin Cutan Med Surg 1998;17(2):114.
172. Bose A. Nine cases of Merkel cell tumour. J R Soc Med 1997;90(8):439.
173. Miller RW, Rabkin CS. Merkel cell carcinoma and melanoma: etiological similarities and differences. [Published erratum appears in Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1999;8(5):485.] Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1999;8(2):153.
174. Iacocca MV, et al. Mixed Merkel cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1998;39(5):882.
175. Simstein NL, Sduggs NK. Merkel cell tumor: two cases. Int Surg 1998;83(1):60.
176. Williams RH, et al. Merkel cell carcinoma in a renal transplant patient: increased incidence? Transplantation 1998;65(10):1396.
177. Veness MJ. Aggressive skin cancers in a cardiac transplant recipient. Australas Radiol 1997;41(4):363.
178. Marks S, Radin DR, Chandrasoma P. Merkel cell carcinoma. J Comput Tomogr 1987;11(3):291.
179. Olivero G, et al. [A rare case of Merkel's tumor with intestinal metastases.] Ann Ital Chir 1990;61(3):277.
180. Woo HH, Kencian JD. Metastatic Merkel cell tumour to the bladder. Int Urol Nephrol 1995;27(3):301.
181. Helm KF, et al. Localized limb cutaneous metastases. J Surg Oncol 1998;67(4):261.
182. Ikawa F, et al. Brain metastasis of Merkel cell carcinoma. Case report and review of the literature. Neurosurg Rev 1999;22(1):54.
183. Dunlop P, et al. Merkel cell carcinoma of the abdominal wall. Skeletal Radiol 1998;27(7):396.
184. Yanguas I, et al. Spontaneous regression of Merkel cell carcinoma of the skin. Br J Dermatol 1997;137(2):296.
185. Skelton HG, et al. Merkel cell carcinoma: analysis of clinical histologic and immunohistologic features of 132 cases with relation to survival. J Am Acad Dermatol 1997;37(5):734.
186. Yiengpruksawan A, et al. Merkel cell carcinoma. Prognosis and management. Arch Surg 1991;126(12):1514.
187. Kokoska ER, et al. Early aggressive treatment for Merkel cell carcinoma improves outcome. Am J Surg 1997;174(6):688.
188. Hill AD, Brady MS, Coit DG. Intraoperative lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymph node biopsy for Merkel cell carcinoma. Br J Surg 1999;86(4):518.
189. Allen PJ, Zhang ZF, Coit DG. Surgical management of Merkel cell carcinoma. Ann Surg 1999;229(1):97.
190. Gray LN. Aggressive surgical management for Merkel cell carcinoma [Letter; comment]. Plast Reconstr Surg 1995;96(1):237.
191. Pectasides D, et al. Chemotherapy for Merkel cell carcinoma with carboplatin and etoposide. Am J Clin Oncol 1995;18(5):418.
192. Voog E, et al. Chemotherapy for patients with locally advanced or metastatic Merkel cell carcinoma. Cancer 1999;85(12):2589.
193. Goldstein DJ, Barr RJ, Santa Cruz DJ. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma: a distinct clinicopathologic entity. Cancer 1982;50(3):566.
194. Sebastien TS, et al. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1993;29(5):840.
195. McAlvany JP, et al. Sclerosing sweat duct carcinoma in an 11-year-old boy. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 1994;20(11):767.
196. Borenstein A, et al. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma following radiotherapy in childhood. Am J Med Sci 1991;301(4):259.
197. Lober CW, Larbig GG. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma (sclerosing sweat duct carcinoma). South Med J 1994;87(2):259.
198. Moy RL, Tahery DP, Howe K. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma: in vitro growth characteristics and effect on stromal collagen production. Int J Dermatol 1993;32(5):341.
199. Billingsley EM, Fedok F, Maloney ME. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma. Case report and review of the literature. ArchOtolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1996;122(2):179.
200. Yuh WT, et al. Bone marrow invasion of microcystic adnexal carcinoma. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1991;100(7):601.
200a. Birkby, CS, Argenvi, ZB, Whitaker, DC. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma with mandibular invasion and bone marrow replacement. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 1989;15:308.
201. Bier-Lansing CM, et al. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma: management options based on long-term follow-up. Laryngoscope 1995;105(11):1197.
202. Newman L. Microcystic adnexal carcinomaa case report and review of the literature. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1986;24(6):448.
203. Rongioletti F, Grosshans E, Rebora A. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma. Br J Dermatol 1986;115(1):101.
204. Brookes JL, et al. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma masquerading as a chalazion [Letter]. Br J Ophthalmol 1998;82(2):196.
205. Chow WC, Cockerell CJ, Geronemus RG. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma of the scalp. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 1989;15(7):768.
206. Schipper JH, Holecek BU, Sievers KW. A tumour derived from Ebner's glands: microcystic adnexal carcinoma of the tongue. J Laryngol Otol 1995;109(12):1211.
207. Kumar K, McGregor JC, Watson JD. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma: a report of three cases. J R Coll Surg Edinb 1998;43(6):412.
208. Lupton GP, McMarlin SL. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma. Report of a case with 30-year follow-up. Arch Dermatol 1986;122(3):286.
209. Wick MR, Cooper PH, Swanson PE, et al. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma: an immunohistochemical comparison with other cutaneous appendage tumors. Arch Dermatol 1990;162:189.
210. Friedman PM, et al. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma: collaborative series review and update. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999;41(2):225.
211. Wolfe JT, et al. Sebaceous carcinoma of the eyelid. Errors in clinical and pathologic diagnosis. Am J Surg Pathol 1984;8(8):597.
212. Khan JA, Doane JF, Grove AS Jr. Sebaceous and meibomian carcinomas of the eyelid. Recognition diagnosis and management. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg 1991;7(1):61.
213. Khan JA, et al. Sebaceous carcinoma. Diuretic use, lacrimal system spread, and surgical margins. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg 1989;5(4):227.
214. Tan KC, Lee ST, Cheah ST. Surgical treatment of sebaceous carcinoma of eyelids with clinico-pathological correlation. Br J Plast Surg 1991;44(2):117.
215. Zurcher M, et al. Sebaceous carcinoma of the eyelid: a clinicopathological study. Br J Ophthalmol 1998;82(9):1049.
216. Rundle P, et al. Sebaceous gland carcinoma of the eyelid seventeen years after irradiation for bilateral retinoblastoma [Letter]. Eye 1999;13:109.
217. Rumelt S, et al. Four-eyelid sebaceous cell carcinoma following irradiation. Arch Ophthalmol 1998;116(12):1670.

218. Hood IC, et al. Sebaceous carcinoma of the face following irradiation. Am J Dermatopathol 1986;8(6):505.
219. Carlson JW, et al. Sebaceous carcinoma of the vulva: a case report and review of the literature. Gynecol Oncol 1996;60(3):489.
220. Gonzalez-Fernandez F, et al. Sebaceous carcinoma. Tumor progression through mutational inactivation of p53. Ophthalmology 1998;105(3):497.
221. Antuna SA, et al. Metastatic lesion of the cervical spine secondary to an extraocular sebaceous carcinoma. Acta Orthop Belg 1996;62(4):229.
222. Bailet JW, et al. Sebaceous carcinoma of the head and neck. Case report and literature review. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1992;118(11):1245.
223. Jensen ML. Extraocular sebaceous carcinoma of the skin with visceral metastases: case report. J Cutan Pathol 1990;17(2):117.
224. Changchien CC, Chen L, Eng HL. Sebaceous carcinoma arising in a benign dermoid cyst of the ovary. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1994;73(4):355.
225. Mandreker S, Pinto RW, Usgaonkar U. Sebaceous carcinoma of the eyelid with metastasis to the parotid region: diagnosis by fine needle aspiration cytology [Letter]. Acta Cytol
1997;41(5):1636.
226. Nelson BR, et al. Sebaceous carcinoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995;33(1):1.
227. Dogru M, et al. Management of eyelid sebaceous carcinomas. Ophthalmologica 1997;211(1):40.
228. Folberg R, et al. Recurrent and residual sebaceous carcinoma after Mohs excision of the primary lesion. Am J Ophthalmol 1987;103(6):817.
229. Dzubow LM. Sebaceous carcinoma of the eyelid: treatment with Mohs surgery. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 1985;11(1):40.
230. Matsumoto CS, et al. Sebaceous carcinoma responds to radiation therapy. Ophthalmologica 1995;209(5):280.
231. Schwartz RA, Torre DP. The Muir-Torre syndrome: a 25-year retrospect [see comments]. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995;33(1):90.
232. Dahl I. Atypical fibroxanthoma of the skin A clinico-pathological study of 57 cases. Acta Pathol Microbiol Scand [A] 1976;84(2):183.
233. Davis JL, et al. A comparison of Mohs micrographic surgery and wide excision for the treatment of atypical fibroxanthoma. Dermatol Surg 1997;23(2):105.
234. Fish FS. Soft tissue sarcomas in dermatology. Dermatol Surg 1996;22(3):268.
235. Dei Tos AP, et al. Ultraviolet-induced p53 mutations in atypical fibroxanthoma. Am J Pathol 1994;145(1):11.
236. High AS, Hume WJ, Dyson D. Atypical fibroxanthoma of oral mucosa: a variant of malignant fibrous histiocytoma. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1990;28(4):268.
237. Hafner J, Kirzi W, Weinreich T. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma and atypical fibroxanthoma in renal transplant recipients. Dermatology 1999;198(1):29.
238. Paquet P, Pierard GE. Invasive atypical fibroxanthoma and eruptive actinic keratoses in a heart transplant patient. Dermatology 1996;192(4):411.
239. Kemp JD, et al. Metastasizing atypical fibroxanthoma. Coexistence with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Arch Dermatol 1978;114(10):1533.
240. Heintz PW, White CR Jr. Diagnosis: atypical fibroxanthoma or not? Evaluating spindle cell malignancies on sun damaged skin: a practical approach. Semin Cutan Med Surg 1999;18(1):78.
241. Fretzin DF, Helwig EB. Atypical fibroxanthoma of the skin. A clinicopathologic study of 140 cases. Cancer 1973;31(6):1541.
242. Goette DK, Odom RB. Atypical fibroxanthoma masquerading as pyogenic granuloma. Arch Dermatol 1976;112(8):1155.
243. Boynton JR, Markowitch W Jr, Searl SS. Atypical fibroxanthoma of the eyelid. Ophthalmology 1989;96(10):1480.
244. Lesica A, Harwood TR, Yokoo H. Atypical fibroxanthoma of ethmoid sinus. Arch Otolaryngol 1975;101(8):506.
245. Dzubow LM. Mohs surgery report: spindle cell fibrohistiocytic tumors: classification and pathophysiology. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 1988;14(5):490.
246. Helwig EB, May D. Atypical fibroxanthoma of the skin with metastasis. Cancer 1986;57(2):368.
247. Grosso M, et al. Metastatic atypical fibroxanthoma of skin. Pathol Res Pract 1987;182(3):443.
248. Glavin FL, Cornwell ML. Atypical fibroxanthoma of the skin metastatic to a lung. Report of case features by conventional and electron microscopy and a review of relevant literature. Am J
Dermatopathol 1985;7(1):57.
249. Diaz-Cascajo C, Borghi S, Bonczkowitz M. Pigmented atypical fibroxanthoma. Histopathology 1998;33(6):537.
250. Ma CK, Zarbo RJ, Gown AM. Immunohistochemical characterization of atypical fibroxanthoma and dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Am J Clin Pathol 1992;97(4):478.
251. Lazova R, et al. LN-2 (CD74): a marker to distinguish atypical fibroxanthoma from malignant fibrous histiocytoma. Cancer 1997;79(11):2115.
252. Hafner J, et al. Micrographic surgery (‘slow Mohs) in cutaneous sarcomas. Dermatology 1999;198(1):37.
253. Limmer BL, Clark DP. Cutaneous micrographic surgery for atypical fibroxanthoma. Dermatol Surg 1997;23(7):553.
254. Weiss SW, Enzinger FM. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma: an analysis of 200 cases. Cancer 1978;41(6):2250.
255. Fletcher CD, McKee PH. Sarcomasa clinicopathological guide with particular reference to cutaneous manifestation. I: Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, malignant fibrous histiocytoma, and the
epithelioid sarcoma of Enzinger. Clin Exp Dermatol 1984;9(5):451.
256. Inoshita T, Youngberg GA. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma arising in previous surgical sites. Report of two cases. Cancer 1984;53(1):176.
257. Yamamura T, et al. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma developing in a burn scar. Br J Dermatol 1984;110(6):725.
258. Farber JN, Koh HK. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma arising from discoid lupus erythematosus. Arch Dermatol 1988;124(1):114.
259. Fanburg-Smith JC, et al. Infiltrative subcutaneous malignant fibrous histiocytoma: a comparative study with deep malignant fibrous histiocytoma and an observation of biologic behavior. Ann
Diagn Pathol 1999;3(1):1.
260. Stadler FJ, Scott GA, Brown MD. Malignant fibrous tumors. Semin Cutan Med Surg 1998;17(2):141.
261. Brown MD, Swanson NA. Treatment of malignant fibrous histiocytoma and atypical fibrous xanthomas with micrographic surgery. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 1989;15(12):1287.
262. Diaz-Cascajo C, Weyers W, Borghi S. Sclerosing dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. J Cutan Pathol 1998;25(8):440.
263. Garcia C, Clark RE, Buchanan M. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Int J Dermatol 1996;35(12):867.
264. Lee CS, Chou ST. p53 protein immunoreactivity in fibrohistiocytic tumors of the skin. Pathology 1998;30(3):272.
265. Bashara ME, Jules KT, Potter GK. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans: 4 years after local trauma. J Foot Surg 1992;31(2):160.
266. Rutgers EJ, et al. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans: treatment and prognosis. Eur J Surg Oncol 1992;18(3):241.
267. Mentzel T, et al. Fibrosarcomatous (“high-grade”) dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans: clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical study of a series of 41 cases with emphasis on prognostic
significance. Am J Surg Pathol 1998;22(5):576.
268. Skoll PJ, Hudson DA, Taylor DA. Acral dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans with metastases. Ann Plast Surg 1999;42(2):217.
269. Parker TL, Zitelli JA. Surgical margins for excision of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995;32(2):233.
270. Mbonde MP, Amir H, Kitinya JN. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans: a clinicopathological study in an African population. East Afr Med J 1996;73(6):410.
271. Bouyssou-Gauthier ML, et al. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans in childhood. Pediatr Dermatol 1997;14(6):463.
272. Pappo AS, et al. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans: the pediatric experience at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital. Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1997;14(6):563.
273. Elgart GW, et al. Bednar tumor (pigmented dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans) occurring in a site of prior immunization: immunochemical findings and therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol
1999;40(2):315.
274. Wick MR, et al. The pathological distinction between “deep penetrating” dermatofibroma and dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Semin Cutan Med Surg 1999;18(1):91.
275. Abenoza P, Lillemoe T. CD34 and factor XIIIa in the differential diagnosis of dermatofibroma and dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans [see comments]. Am J Dermatopathol 1993;15(5):429.
276. Ratner D, et al. Mohs micrographic surgery for the treatment of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Results of a multiinstitutional series with an analysis of the extent of microscopic spread. J
Am Acad Dermatol 1997;37(4):600.
277. Gloster HM Jr, Harris KR, Roenigk RK. A comparison between Mohs micrographic surgery and wide surgical excision for the treatment of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. J Am Acad
Dermatol 1996;35(1):82.
278. Garcia C, et al. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans treated with Mohs surgery. A case with CD34 immunostaining variability. Dermatol Surg 1996;22(2):177.
279. Requena L, Sangueza OP. Cutaneous vascular proliferations: III. Malignant neoplasms, other cutaneous neoplasms with significant vascular component, and disorders erroneously considered
as vascular neoplasms. J Am Acad Dermatol 1998;38(2):143.
280. el-Sharkawi S. Angiosarcoma of the head and neck. J Laryngol Otol 1997;111(2):175.
281. Kirova YM, et al. [Radiation-induced sarcoma after breast cancer. Apropos of 8 cases and review of the literature.] Cancer Radiother 1998;2(4):381.
282. Bisceglia M, et al. [Early stage Stewart-Treves syndrome: report of 2 cases and review of the literature.] Pathologica 1996;88(6):483.
283. Stewart NJ, et al. Lymphangiosarcoma following mastectomy. Clin Orthop 1995;320:135.
284. Kim MK, et al. Secondary angiosarcoma following irradiationcase report and review of the literature. Radiat Med 1998;16(1):55.
285. Cafiero F, et al. Radiation-associated angiosarcoma: diagnostic and therapeutic implicationstwo case reports and a review of the literature. Cancer 1996;77(12):2496.
286. Perin T, et al. Radiation-associated angiosarcoma: diagnostic and therapeutic implicationstwo case reports and a review of the literature. Cancer 1997;80(3):519.
287. Cianfrocca M, Roenn JH. Epidemic Kaposi's sarcoma. Oncology (Huntingt) 1998;12(9): 1375.
288. Fenig E, et al. Classic Kaposi sarcoma: experience at Rabin Medical Center in Israel. Am J Clin Oncol 1998;21(5):498.
289. Matondo P, Zumla A. The spectrum of African Kaposi's sarcoma: Is it consequential upon diverse immunological responses? Scand J Infect Dis 1996;28(3):225.
290. McGarvey ME, et al. Emerging treatments for epidemic (AIDS-related) Kaposi's sarcoma. Curr Opin Oncol 1998;10(5):413.
291. Shepherd FA, et al. Treatment of Kaposi's sarcoma after solid organ transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1997;15(6):2371.
292. Stein ME, et al. Radiation therapy for non-AIDS associated (classic and endemic African) and epidemic Kaposi's sarcoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;28(3):613.
293. Tur E, Brenner S. Classic Kaposi's sarcoma: low-dose interferon alfa treatment. Dermatology 1998;97(1):37.
294. Jie C, et al. Treatment of epidemic (AIDS-related) Kaposi's sarcoma. Curr Opin Oncol 1997;9(5):433.
295. Yarchoan R. Therapy for Kaposi's sarcoma: recent advances and experimental approaches. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol 1999;21[Suppl 1]:S66.
296. Schwartz RA. Cutaneous metastatic disease [see comments]. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995;33(2):161.
297. Quaglino D, et al. Cutaneous involvement in leukaemic patients. A review of the literature and personal experience. Recent Prog Med 1997;88(9):415.

SECTION 41.3 Skin Cancer Atlas
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 41.3
Skin Cancer Atlas
DAVID J. LEFFELL
Basal Cell Cancer
Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Nonsurgical Management of Nonmelanoma Skin Cancer
Mohs Micrographic Surgery
Wound Management and Reconstruction after Mohs Micrographic Surgery
Recurrent Skin Cancer
Rare Skin Tumors
Pigmented Lesions

BASAL CELL CANCER
Basal cell cancer, the most common cancer among humans, can present with a variety of clinical lesions. Familiarity with the spectrum of basal cell cancer permits
early diagnosis, when treatment is most easily accomplished.

FIGURE 41.3-1. Nodular basal cell carcinoma on nasal tip. Note pearly, translucent appearance with telangiectasias.

FIGURE 41.3-2. Nodular basal cell carcinoma on right cheek. Note confluence of multiple nodular lesions with telangiectasias.

FIGURE 41.3-3. Nodular basal cell carcinoma of the left glabella with central depression. Note classic rolled borders and pearly appearance. There is also a large
violaceous nodule in the left medial canthus. This long-standing lesion is an eccrine acrospiroma.

FIGURE 41.3-4. Large nodular basal cell carcinoma of the forehead with classic rolled border.

FIGURE 41.3-5. A: Nodular basal cell carcinoma of the forehead at the site of a previous automobile injury. The patient states that she had multiple fragments of glass
removed over a long period of time. Basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma are known to develop at the site of chronic scar. B: Microscopical example of
nodular basal cell carcinoma demonstrating peripheral palisading of basal cells, retraction of tumor masses from dermis, and hyperchromatic cells. C: Defect following
Mohs micrographic excision, demonstrating extension of cancer to the periosteum. The patient subsequently underwent skin flap repair.

FIGURE 41.3-6. Superficial basal cell cancer on the left upper lip of a 27-year-old woman. The patient, an aspiring actress, did not want treatment with surgery or
radiation therapy. A course of intralesional interferon was successful at eliminating the cancer. It should be noted that this approach should only be used in
superficial, easy to monitor basal cell cancer and has a recurrence rate of 20%.

FIGURE 41.3-7. Superficial basal cell cancer on an extremity. This lesion had been treated for many years as eczema and psoriasis. Topical corticosteroids provided
no benefit. Any persistent rash that does not respond to topical treatment or is not otherwise diagnosed should be promptly biopsied.

FIGURE 41.3-8. Superficial basal cell carcinoma on trunk.

FIGURE 41.3-9. Pigmented basal cell carcinoma with nodular morphology.

FIGURE 41.3-10. Large pigmented basal cell carcinoma. The differential diagnosis includes melanoma.

FIGURE 41.3-11. Ulcerating basal cell carcinoma of the angle of the jaw.

FIGURE 41.3-12. Extensive basal cell carcinoma of the medial eyebrow and nasal root. Proximity to the supraorbital nerve raises the possibility of perineural
extension of cancer in this long-standing carcinoma.

FIGURE 41.3-13. A: Large nodular basal cell carcinoma in the medial canthus. Deep extension of the cancer in this area can involve the lacrimal duct. B: Defect
following Mohs micrographic surgery indicates complete elimination of cancer. The lacrimal duct was not involved.

FIGURE 41.3-14. Extensive basal cell carcinoma of the right medial canthus, nasal sidewall, and distal nose. Basal cell cancer is typically a slow-growing tumor, but
neglect can result in extensive destruction sometimes requiring removal of the orbital contents.

FIGURE 41.3-15. Cystic basal cell carcinoma of the glabella. This tumor was misdiagnosed as a cyst until a biopsy confirmed that it was a basal cell carcinoma, cystic
type.

FIGURE 41.3-16. Morpheaform basal cell carcinoma of the left chin. Note light coloration and smooth texture. Although it appears to be well demarcated, the
infiltrative histologic nature of this cancer can be expected to result in a larger defect upon complete extirpation.

FIGURE 41.3-17. Long-standing morpheaform basal cell carcinoma of the left cheek. Note smooth, white appearance, slightly elevated from the surrounding tissue.
Crust in the center is an indication of tumor necrosis. Patients who have this type of cancer diagnosed histologically must be prepared for the large extent of the
defect.

FIGURE 41.3-18. Morpheaform basal cell carcinoma, a form of aggressive growth basal cell cancer, is noted on the right cheek of a 30-year-old woman. It had been
long-standing and was noted to grow very slowly. Especially in young patients, the true extent of the cancer must be discussed in advance and proper preparation
must be made so that optimal reconstruction results in the best aesthetic outcome. This cancer, located in the embryonic fusion plain, must be removed with Mohs
micrographic surgery to minimize the chance of recurrence. Recurrent basal cell cancer, especially in this region, is at high risk for extension deep in the facial planes.

FIGURE 41.3-19. Poorly defined morpheaform basal cell carcinoma of the right upper eyebrow in a 55-year-old woman. The patient had this lesion for some time
before noting that it had changed. The extent of the cancer is larger than it appears clinically. It is best treated with the Mohs micrographic surgery method.

FIGURE 41.3-20. Morpheaform basal cell carcinoma of the right upper eyebrow. The patient believed that she had a scar at the site for many years but could not
identify an episode of related trauma. This is the classic appearance of a morpheaform basal cell cancer, the true extent of which is significantly greater than appears
clinically.

FIGURE 41.3-21. Large basal cell cancer of the left upper outer arm. The cancer had been present for approximately three years before the patient sought treatment.

FIGURE 41.3-22. Extensive basal cell carcinoma of the left face. Although this is an extreme example, it highlights the potentially aggressive nature of basal cell
carcinoma. Despite the very low risk of metastasis, the cancer can be extremely locally destructive and, if present near vital organs, lethal.

FIGURE 41.3-23. Young patient with a nevus sebaceous on the left cheek. This is a benign tumor of sebaceous glands but is associated with basal cell carcinoma.
Current recommendations are that a nevus sebaceous be removed in young adulthood to minimize the risk of basal cell cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-24. A: Multiple small papules in the periorbital region. Patients may present concerned that these represent cancer. In fact, they are syringomas, or
benign tumors of the sweat glands. No treatment is necessary. B: This patient was referred because of concern that the red patch on the cheek, of long-standing
duration, represented basal cell cancer. This is the classic appearance of rosacea, an adult form of acne. The condition responds promptly to topical therapy.

FIGURE 41.3-25. Severe solar damage of left face. This is the classic setting for the development of non-melanoma skin cancer. Note fair skin, mottled pigmentation,
and telangiectasias.

FIGURE 41.3-26. Close-up of patient in Fig. 41.3-25 . This patient has skin type I. When exposed to ultraviolet radiation from the sun, he always burns and never tans.
The absence of the tanning response probably increases the risk for epidermal mutations from solar radiation. Actinic keratoses, hypopigmentation from previous
cryotherapy, and telangiectasias are noted.

FIGURE 41.3-27. This patient has had lifelong problems with basal cell carcinoma. Some patients who received radiation therapy for acne later developed multiple
basal cell cancers. Despite multiple surgeries, topical chemotherapy, and cryotherapy, the patient continues to develop new basal cell carcinomas.

FIGURE 41.3-28. A: This patient worked for many years in his youth as a lifeguard. Evidence of basal cell cancer and solar damage, as well as scar related to
previous surgery, are noted. B: The same patient 10 years later with progressive basal cell cancer and areas of scar associated with basal cell cancer recurrence.
Although we refer to these lesions as recurrences, histologic evaluation of the patient's facial skin indicates widespread basaloid budding in the epidermis, consistent
with a field defect.

FIGURE 41.3-29. Elderly patient with multiple basal cell cancers. This patient has a history of arsenic exposure, which is associated with the development of basal
cell carcinomas.

FIGURE 41.3-30. Nodular basal cell carcinoma on the nasal sidewall of a 40-year-old woman. Although most likely to be basal cell carcinoma, all such lesions must
be biopsied. Melanoma and other forms of non-melanoma skin cancer are in the differential diagnosis, although they are less likely.

FIGURE 41.3-31. Ulcerated nodular basal cell carcinoma of the nose.

FIGURE 41.3-32. Nodular basal cell carcinoma of the left upper lip and alar groove. Basal cell cancer is thought to double in size over approximately 1 year. The size
of this lesion suggests it has been present for many years. It is at risk for deep infiltration into the nasolabial groove.

FIGURE 41.3-33. Basal cell carcinoma of the tip of the nose. Because of the ill-defined margins of this cancer and its technically challenging location, Mohs
micrographic surgery is indicated.

FIGURE 41.3-34. Basal cell carcinoma of the right nose. Patients must be advised of the likely size of the cancer, which is often larger than appears clinically. The
final wound and reconstruction may be unsettling to the patient if he or she has not been properly prepared.

FIGURE 41.3-35. Small basal cell carcinoma of the left upper lip.

FIGURE 41.3-36. Basal cell carcinoma of the nose. Note the extensive nodularity under the surface of the skin. This cancer is likely to be at least 50% larger than it
appears on the surface.

FIGURE 41.3-37. Nodular basal cell carcinoma of the left ala. This lesion is easily treated by Mohs micrographic surgery. Because of its presence in the alar groove,

healing by second intention is often an acceptable alternative plastic reconstruction.

FIGURE 41.3-38. A: Recurrent basal cell carcinoma on the left nose of an individual who works outdoors. Although very little scar tissue is noted on clinical exam, the
cancer proved to be approximately twice the clinical size because of the extension of cancer cells within and under scar tissue. B: The defect following Mohs
micrographic surgery. C: Immediately after Mohs micrographic surgery, the defect was repaired in a linear fashion, which will result in a fine-line scar. Patients must
be advised that the complete healing process takes approximately 12 months. Maturation and fading of the scar continues during this whole period.

FIGURE 41.3-39. Ulcerating nodular basal cell carcinoma of the left alar rim. Because of its proximity to the alar rim as well as to the embryonic fusion plain, Mohs
micrographic excision is indicated. A shallow defect in this area can be allowed to heal by second intention with excellent results. Alternatively, plastic reconstruction
may be required to preserve normal anatomic and functional relationships.

FIGURE 41.3-40. Linear erosions on the right alar rim of a patient with a history of squamous cell cancer of the cheek. The patient also has a history of prurigo. The
area was biopsied and failed to reveal any cancer. The patient admits to scratching. If topical treatment with corticosteroids fails to resolve the problem, a deeper
biopsy may be indicated.

FIGURE 41.3-41. Nodular basal cell carcinoma on the left ala, similar to Fig. 41.3-39.

FIGURE 41.3-42. Extensive basal cell carcinoma of the left nose. Mohs micrographic treatment surgery is the treatment of choice. The reconstruction technique
depends on the final defect.

FIGURE 41.3-43. Large eroding basal cell carcinoma of the nasal bridge. This patient, of northern European ancestry, had worked outdoors his whole life. Several
other basal cell carcinomas are noted on the cheek and lip.

FIGURE 41.3-44. A: Large basal cell carcinoma of the left ala. Note elevation and retraction of the alar rim. This is an indication of extensive deep infiltration by basal
cell carcinoma. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery. The patient was referred for complex flap reconstruction.

FIGURE 41.3-45. A: Large nodular basal cell carcinoma of the left upper lip and left nostril. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery. It is essential to minimize
the recurrence of cancer in this location, as recurrent tumor is likely to invade deeply. The patient was referred for plastic reconstruction. Recurrence of cancer under
complex flaps may be concealed, so careful examination including bimanual palpation of the region is necessary.

FIGURE 41.3-46. A: Extensive basal cell carcinoma of the left upper lip. Excision with conventional margins would not have adequately removed the cancer. Mohs
micrographic surgery was performed. B: Following Mohs micrographic excision with preservation of the orbicularis oris. C: After reconstruction using an Abbe flap.
(Fig. 41.3-46C courtesy of Dr. Stephan Ariyan.)

FIGURE 41.3-47. Nodular basal cell carcinoma of the right upper lip.

FIGURE 41.3-48. A: Morpheaform basal cell carcinoma of the left cheek with indistinct margins. Excision by the Mohs micrographic surgery technique resulted in a
5-cm defect. The wound was repaired under local anesthesia at the time of Mohs surgery. B: Three months following reconstruction with cheek advancement flap.

FIGURE 41.3-49. A: Long-standing basal cell carcinoma of the left cheek. Note areas of nodularity, hypopigmentation, and crusting resulting from bleeding from the
surface of the cancer. B: Extensive defect following Mohs micrographic excision demonstrates histologic extent of cancer. Incomplete excision of cancer is an
important cause of recurrence. Proper preparation of the patient for the extent of this defect was essential. Repair was performed without complication.

FIGURE 41.3-50. Ill-defined extensive basal cell carcinoma of the left temporal region.

FIGURE 41.3-51. A: Neglected basal cell carcinoma of the right temporal region and ear. Cancer in this area, especially when long-standing, has the potential for
deep invasion. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery reveals temporalis muscle. C: Despite the very high cure rates associated with Mohs micrographic
surgery, risk of recurrence is proportional to the size of the cancer. Because of concern about concealing any recurrence, the wound was allowed to heal by second
intention. The wound is pictured here at approximately 4 weeks status post excision. D: Completely healed wound at 3 months. The patient did not wish to have
reconstructive surgery done on the helix of the ear.

FIGURE 41.3-52. Basal cell cancer within the triangular fossa of the ear. Basal cell cancer on the antihelix is not uncommon, and the recommended treatment is Mohs
micrographic excision.

FIGURE 41.3-53. Ill-defined nodular basal cell carcinoma of the forehead.

FIGURE 41.3-54. Large basal cell carcinoma of the right lower eyelid. Retraction of surrounding tissue indicates deeply infiltrative nature of the cancer. The patient
was treated with Mohs micrographic surgery and referred for reconstruction to minimize the risk of ectropion.

FIGURE 41.3-55. Very large ulcerated basal cell carcinoma of the glabella.

FIGURE 41.3-56. Basal cell carcinoma of right lower eyelid in an African American. Although basal cell carcinoma is most common in light-skinned people, it can
occur in more darkly pigmented individuals.

FIGURE 41.3-57. Ulcerated basal cell carcinoma on the root of the nose. The majority of facial basal cell carcinomas occur on the nose.

FIGURE 41.3-58. Extensive basal cell carcinoma of the left nose extending into the medial canthus and along the lower eyelid. Treatment of this cancer requires an
interdisciplinary approach. Following Mohs micrographic surgery, the patient was referred for plastic reconstruction. Because of the large size of the lesion, the patient
must be monitored for recurrence.

FIGURE 41.3-59. A: Extensive basal cell carcinoma in a young man. The location in the medial canthus, the long-standing nature of the cancer, and its size create a

high risk that if the lesion recurs it will extend into the orbit. The patient was treated with Mohs micrographic surgery. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery
demonstrating the canthal ligament.

FIGURE 41.3-60. Basal cell cancer of the nasal root extending into the medial canthus.

FIGURE 41.3-61. Large nodular basal cell cancer of the lower eyelid. Mohs micrographic excision was performed followed by plastic reconstruction. Based on its size,
this lesion had been present for many years.

FIGURE 41.3-62. Extensive basal cell carcinoma with retraction of the medial canthus. This clinical appearance suggests that the cancer likely extends deeply and
may be at risk for involving the infraorbital nerve.

FIGURE 41.3-63. Recurrent nodular basal cell carcinoma of the post-auricular sulcus. Basal cell cancer in this region can extend widely along the cartilage and
posterior scalp before it is diagnosed. Mohs micrographic excision is indicated.

FIGURE 41.3-64. Nodular basal cell carcinoma within an area of previous excision consistent with recurrent cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-65. Extensive basal cell carcinoma of the ear and temple. Because of the extensive nature of this cancer, radiation therapy was used with a good result.
The therapeutic plan was to use Mohs micrographic surgery if the cancer recurred.

FIGURE 41.3-66. Multiple nodular and papular lesions on the scalp in an individual with severe solar damage. Although the clinical diagnosis of the large lesion on
the right is basal cell cancer, the red nodular lesions are concerning and require biopsy as well to obtain a definitive diagnosis.

FIGURE 41.3-67. Large superficial basal cell carcinoma on the right breast. This was successfully treated with radiation therapy, although Mohs micrographic surgery
and reconstruction would have been an equally acceptable alternative.

FIGURE 41.3-68. Large nodular basal cell carcinoma on the chest. The differential diagnosis includes squamous cell carcinoma.

FIGURE 41.3-69. Basal cell carcinoma on the shin of a 60-year-old woman. Basal cell carcinoma on the lower extremity is more common in women than in men. This
highlights the likely association between solar exposure, secondary to clothing styles, and basal cell cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-70. Additional basal cell cancer on the lower extremity in the same patient as in Fig. 41.3-69 .

FIGURE 41.3-71. Multiple basal cell carcinomas of the lower extremity with evidence of venous stasis changes. Treatment of cancer in this area is extremely difficult
because of the dependent location and the resultant slow healing in older patients. Treatment by Mohs micrographic excision with healing by second intention
provides excellent results. While skin grafting creates secondary wounds in the patient that require additional healing, new biologic dressings and allograft permit
excellent healing while minimizing limitations on activity.

FIGURE 41.3-72. Large nodular basal cell carcinoma on the upper extremity.

FIGURE 41.3-73. Nodular basal cell carcinoma on the upper extremity, side view, indicating the exophytic nature. The differential diagnosis includes squamous cell
cancer and melanoma.

FIGURE 41.3-74. Superficial basal cell carcinoma on the shoulder of a 45-year-old male. This lesion can be treated easily with electrodesiccation and curettage.

FIGURE 41.3-75. Basal cell carcinoma on the instep of an elderly woman.

FIGURE 41.3-76. A: Basal cell carcinoma with ill-defined clinical margins on the nasal tip of a 50-year-old man. The lesion had been treated for several years as
rosacea. Biopsy confirmed the presence of rosacea but also revealed a few foci of superficial basal cell carcinoma. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery.

FIGURE 41.3-77. Basal cell carcinoma on the philtrum complicated by an outbreak of herpes labialis. Surgery was deferred until the lesion resolved. Prophylactic
antiviral medication was used. This case highlights the occasional misdiagnosis of basal cell carcinoma for herpes labialis. The chronic, recurring nature of both, in
certain circumstances, may be responsible for the confusion. Basal cell cancer is not associated with a prodrome.

FIGURE 41.3-78. A: Basal cell carcinoma of the right medial canthus. This red, scaling lesion had been treated for many years as a form of eczema. Biopsy was
eventually performed when the patient was seen by his dermatologist, and it revealed basal cell cancer. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery. C: Two
weeks after placement of a full-thickness skin graft. D: After complete healing of skin graft. E: Recurrent basal cell carcinoma at upper edge of graft 10 years after
original surgery.

FIGURE 41.3-79. Multiple basal cell carcinomas in a severely sun-damaged patient. Compare this clinical presentation with that in Fig. 41.3-25, Fig. 41.3-26, Fig.
41.3-27, Fig. 41.3-28, and Fig. 41.3-29. Surgery and radiation therapy are generally the only treatments currently available. Photodynamic therapy, incorporating the
use of topical aminolevulinic acid, which avoids systemic adverse effects, holds promise for treatment of large numbers of lesions. The long-term benefit of this
approach remains to be determined.

FIGURE 41.3-80. Multiple basal cell carcinomas in a patient who received radiation therapy for acne 50 years earlier. Any new therapeutic modality that is practiced
on the skin today may yield unanticipated complications decades later. In most cases, it is difficult to anticipate what those effects might be, and the need for effective
current management typically outweighs unknown delayed risks.

NEVOID BASAL CELL CARCINOMA SYNDROME
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome is relatively rare and accounts for less than 0.5% of basal cell cancer cases. It is extremely important, however, because
patients with this condition represent a management challenge. It is also important because the basal cell cancer gene was first identified in this group of patients.

The PTC gene has since been shown to be mutated in sporadic cases of basal cell cancer as well.

FIGURE 41.3-81. Multiple 2- to 4-mm, slightly pigmented papules are noted on the cheek of this individual with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (Gorlin's
syndrome). It is now known that this syndrome, associated with a range of developmental defects, is caused by mutations in the PTC gene. Management of these
tumors is often a challenge. Because of the multiple lesions, patients become frustrated with ongoing surgery. A comprehensive approach using a combination of
electrodesiccation and curettage, cryosurgery, Mohs surgery in critical locations, and, in the future, photodynamic therapy permits control of the lesions. Intralesional
interferon was also used in this patient with some success but has not proven routinely successful. Suppression of new cancers may be achieved with oral isotretinoin
or related compounds, but side effects limit its use, and the cancer incidence returns to pre-treatment levels when medication is discontinued.

FIGURE 41.3-82. This patient has nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome and presented with multiple extensive basal cell cancers of the scalp, face, and trunk. She
received radiation therapy as a child for medulloblastoma, and this may have increased the incidence of basal cell cancers of the scalp. After a persistent effort at
removing individual lesions, it was determined that the continued growth rate necessitated complete removal of the scalp tissue. Whole-scalp skin grafting was
performed.

FIGURE 41.3-83. Multiple basal cell carcinomas of the trunk are noted in the patient depicted in Fig. 41.3-82. These can be treated with electrodesiccation and
curettage or with cryosurgery. Excision is sometimes needed. On the back, the risk of recurrence must be considered, because the thickness of the dermis invites
deep penetration of recurrent basal cell cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-84. A small basal cell carcinoma of the tip of the nose in a 14-year-old boy with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. When these lesions are small,
simple electrodesiccation and curettage or excision with Mohs micrographic surgery followed by second intention healing often provides excellent results.
Nonetheless, the tendency in this syndrome is to develop numerous skin cancers that eventually can make surgery impractical. The search for nonsurgical treatment
options continues.

FIGURE 41.3-85. Nevus sebaceous on the left cheek of a 14-year-old girl. This benign congenital lesion has a well-documented tendency to transform into basal cell
cancer. It is currently recommended that the lesion be considered for excision at or around puberty.

FIGURE 41.3-86. Nevus sebaceous of the scalp demonstrating area of alopecia and tumor nodularity. Because the location of this lesion makes it difficult to monitor
for the development of basal cell cancer, excision is indicated. The additional benefit is the elimination of the area of alopecia.

SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA
Squamous cell cancer of the skin is most commonly caused by ultraviolet radiation from the sun. Its clinical distribution is the same as that of basal cell cancer, but
this cancer does have the potential for metastasis. Identification of precursor lesions, known as actinic keratoses, is important, as is close management of patients
who are immunosuppressed. The incidence of squamous cell cancer in these patients is increased compared with the general population. Approximately 2000 people
per year die from metastatic cutaneous squamous cell cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-87. Dorsal hand demonstrating moderate to severe solar damage. Irregular pigmentation, skin laxity due to solar elastosis, and actinic keratoses are
hallmarks of excessive sun exposure. Studies of such sun-damaged skin have demonstrated ultraviolet radiation-induced mutations in the tumor suppressor gene,
p53.

FIGURE 41.3-88. A: Squamous cell carcinoma in the popliteal fossa of a middle-aged woman with extensive solar damage of the lower extremity. This lesion must be
distinguished from a hypertrophic actinic keratosis by biopsy, and excision is indicated if squamous cell carcinoma is identified. B: Infiltrative squamous cell
carcinoma at the base of the fourth toe in the same patient. This lesion was causing severe pain. Excision by the Mohs micrographic technique is indicated to
minimize damage to adjacent anatomic structures and optimize the cure rate.

FIGURE 41.3-89. Multiple actinic keratoses, hypertrophic actinic keratoses, and early squamous cell carcinoma on the lower extremity of a patient similar to the one
depicted in Fig. 41.3-88. Squamous cell carcinoma of the lower extremity in women is a major challenge because of the frequent extensive nature of the lesions.
Photodynamic therapy is currently being explored as an option for treatment of widespread disease. Surgical excision remains the standard treatment, but
management of precancerous lesions by cryosurgery and topical medications such as 5-fluorouracil and imiquimod (experimental) may minimize the number of
lesions that evolve into squamous cell cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-90. A: Severe solar damage on the dorsal hand of a 70-year-old man. This individual had fair skin and a history of extensive sun exposure. The lesions

noted on the dorsal hand include hypertrophic actinic keratoses, squamous cell carcinoma, and actinic keratoses. Squamous cell carcinoma in this area, as in other
skin sites such as the temple and lip, can metastasize. Aggressive management of these lesions with monthly visits may help minimize the development of infiltrative
squamous cell cancer. B: Multiple actinic keratoses on the lower extremity of a 60-year-old woman. Close monitoring is necessary to treat any squamous cell
carcinoma that develops. Because of healing problems related to the lower extremities, extensive excision is often problematic. The tissue-preserving benefits of
Mohs micrographic surgery as well as conservative tangential excision with cautery of the wound base contribute to successful management of the cancers in these
patients.

FIGURE 41.3-91. Hypertrophic actinic keratosis in the digital web space. This lesion may be treated by cryosurgery, excision, or electrodesiccation and curettage.

FIGURE 41.3-92. Squamous cell carcinoma. This 4-mm lesion appeared clinically similar to an actinic keratosis. Because it persisted, a shave biopsy was performed,
which confirmed the presence of squamous cell carcinoma.

FIGURE 41.3-93. A: Cutaneous horn on the helix of the right ear. This horn consists of keratin produced by well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma and is best
treated by Mohs micrographic surgery. Note previous scar superior to the site where a skin cancer was previously treated. Proximity of the horn to scar raises the
possibility that it is a recurrent lesion. B: Cutaneous horn of the left helix. Note extension of squamous cell carcinoma beyond the immediate area of the protruding
horn. One treatment option for this lesion is Mohs micrographic surgery. In this situation, the tissue-sparing method will likely permit preservation of underlying
cartilage and optimum healing.

FIGURE 41.3-94. Extensive actinic keratosis of the right infraorbital area. This lesion is marked by a broad plaque of erythema and hyperkeratosis. Biopsy of the most
atypical area is indicated. It would not be surprising for the biopsy to reveal squamous cell carcinoma in association with hypertrophic actinic keratosis. Excision is
indicated because of the proximity to the eye and the likelihood of progression to invasion. Recurrence can be minimized by Mohs micrographic surgery.

FIGURE 41.3-95. Concretion of keratin and debris on the scalp of an individual with skin type I (which always burns and never tans in response to exposure to
sunlight). The lesion had been present for many years. Removal of the debris, which was accomplished by pre-moistening with water, revealed the underlying

squamous cell carcinoma.

FIGURE 41.3-96. Similar to the patient depicted in Fig. 41.3-95, hyperkeratosis in multiple areas is associated with severe solar damage and squamous cell
carcinoma. Neglected squamous cell carcinoma in the temple and scalp may metastasize.

FIGURE 41.3-97. A: Similar to the patient in Fig. 41.3-94, this patient has multiple areas of actinic keratoses and possible squamous cell carcinoma. The area was
previously treated by cryosurgery. Note hypopigmented atrophic scarring. Treatment by electrodesiccation and curettage was performed in this case. B: Hypertrophic
actinic keratosis of the nose in a 50-year-old woman. This lesion requires biopsy to rule out squamous cell carcinoma.

FIGURE 41.3-98. A: Extensive squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen's disease) of the neck and jaw area. This region was previously treated by topical
5-fluorouracil but recurred. Mohs micrographic excision is an option, but the surgical defect would be extensive. A trial of imiquimod, an immunomodulator shown to
have some effect on superficial skin cancer, was attempted. Alternatively, treatment by ultrapulse carbon dioxide laser may be palliative. Extension of Bowen's
disease down the hair follicles, which may not be destroyed by laser or topical treatments, raises the possibility of recurrence and even the development of invasive
squamous cell carcinoma. B: Microscopical example of squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen's disease). Note thickened epidermis and large atypical squamous
epithelial cells with a wind-blown appearance.

FIGURE 41.3-99. Multiple actinic keratoses associated with areas of Bowen's disease. The spectrum of sun-induced atypical epithelial lesions extends from actinic
keratosis to Bowen's disease to invasive squamous cell carcinoma.

FIGURE 41.3-100. Small eroded nodule on the anti-helix of an elderly man. The differential diagnosis includes chondrodermatitis nodularis helicis, which is usually
painful, and squamous cell cancer, which may bleed but is usually not tender.

FIGURE 41.3-101. Ulcerated painful lesion on right ear. Biopsy is necessary to rule out squamous cell carcinoma. If chondrodermatitis is suspected because of pain
on pressure, a trial of intralesional corticosteroid is a reasonable first approach.

FIGURE 41.3-102. Bowen's disease of the lower extremity demonstrating that squamous cell carcinoma in situ can develop in individuals with a range of cutaneous
pigmentation.

FIGURE 41.3-103. Hypertrophic Bowen's disease of the lower extremity. Note hyperkeratosis, erythematous background, and extensive size of lesion. Bowen's
disease may rarely be associated with arsenic exposure, but the most common cause is solar radiation.

FIGURE 41.3-104. Same patient as depicted in Fig. 41.3-103 after treatment with emollients to remove hyperkeratosis. This was done in preparation for surgery.

FIGURE 41.3-105. Mohs micrographic surgery. After the cancerous area was prepared with local anesthesia, it was scored in accordance with the Mohs micrographic
technique in preparation for removal and mapping of all margins. Because of healing issues related to the lower extremity, the tissue preserving method of the Mohs
technique is the treatment of choice for this large lesion.

FIGURE 41.3-106. Squamous cell carcinoma in situ of the left ear in an immunocompromised patient. During complete extirpation by Mohs surgery, invasive
squamous cell carcinoma was detected and removed. This highlights the fact that invasive squamous cell cancer can develop in long-standing lesions of Bowen's
disease.

FIGURE 41.3-107. Recurrence of squamous cell carcinoma in situ within a scar line of a previous Mohs micrographic surgery excision. The small area recurred
approximately one year after the initial treatment.

FIGURE 41.3-108. A 1.3-cm hypertrophic nodule in the center forehead on a patient with skin type I. The differential diagnosis includes squamous cell carcinoma,
hypertrophic actinic keratosis, and inflamed seborrheic keratosis. Biopsy is indicated.

FIGURE 41.3-109. Infiltrating squamous cell carcinoma of the right cheek. The location of this lesion over the infraorbital nerve is a special concern. Careful
questioning regarding symptoms referable to the infraorbital nerve is important prior to treatment. Imaging studies have not proved especially helpful, but new
magnetic resonance imaging methods may help determine whether perineural invasion is present.

FIGURE 41.3-110. Squamous cell carcinoma in situ of the upper eyelid in a 70-year-old woman. This lesion had been present for approximately 20 years. The
patient's physician advised her that it was eczema and treated it with a variety of topical medications. Despite the persistence of the lesion, a biopsy was not done
until the patient consulted a dermatologist. Removal of the eyelid and orbital contents was recommended. The patient was referred for Mohs surgery, and the
squamous cell carcinoma was removed in its entirety, preserving the upper eyelid for reconstruction. Upon removal of the cancer, invasive squamous cell carcinoma
and perineural invasion was noted. The use of adjuvant radiation therapy in the management of perineural involvement by squamous cell cancer should be
considered if the draining lymph node group is known. Six months after removal of the cancer, the patient developed metastases to the parotid gland and neck nodes.

FIGURE 41.3-111. A: Hyperkeratotic lesion of the chest present for several years in an elderly woman. B: Hyperkeratotic debris was removed with a moist gauze
revealing friable, nodular squamous cell carcinoma.

FIGURE 41.3-112. Squamous cell carcinoma on the lower extremity. This patient had received ultraviolet A therapy with psoralens [psoralen plus ultraviolet A
(PUVA)] for treatment of psoriasis. Note the extensive freckling and solar damage. Development of multiple squamous cell carcinomas is a known complication of
long-term PUVA therapy.

FIGURE 41.3-113. A: Deeply infiltrative squamous cell carcinoma of the left jaw. B: Defect following Mohs excision demonstrating depth of cancer and thus risk of
injury to facial artery and marginal mandibular nerve. C: Repair of defect under local anesthesia at time of Mohs surgery. Minimal undermining is performed to prevent
the risk of extension of cancer in tissue planes should it recur.

FIGURE 41.3-114. Extensive squamous cell carcinoma of the chin in a middle-aged woman. This lesion had been present for some time. It demonstrates multiple
keratin cysts resulting from the atypical epithelial cells of the well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Despite the well-differentiated nature of the cancer, it was
deeply infiltrative and involved the underlying muscle. After excision by Mohs micrographic surgery, adjuvant radiation therapy was performed.

FIGURE 41.3-115. Large squamous cell carcinoma of left forehead present for approximately 1 year. The lesion was removed by Mohs micrographic surgery and
revealed presence of basal cell carcinoma as well.

FIGURE 41.3-116. Large cutaneous horn of the right jaw. This squamous cell carcinoma developed in a patient who previously underwent orbital exenteration for
multiply recurrent basal cell carcinoma of the forehead and eye region.

FIGURE 41.3-117. Squamous cell carcinoma of the dorsal nose in a 75-year-old woman. Note the nodularity of this lesion.

FIGURE 41.3-118. Squamous cell carcinoma, keratoacanthoma type, at the oral commissure of a 55-year-old woman. This small lesion may be excised with margins
or removed using Mohs micrographic surgery technique. Although keratoacanthoma has been considered a relatively benign self-regressing lesion, on the central
face it can behave aggressively. It must be treated as a squamous cell cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-119. A: Squamous cell carcinoma, keratoacanthoma type, of the left temple. This lesion developed rapidly over a short period, which is the classic
history for a lesion of this sort. Excision by Mohs micrographic surgery, conventional excision, radiation therapy, and intralesional methotrexate are options. The
preferred treatment in this location is excision by Mohs micrographic surgery followed by immediate reconstruction if indicated. B: Recurrent squamous cell
carcinoma, keratoacanthoma type, of the right lateral canthus. Note scar from previous surgery and retraction of lower eyelid indicating depth of penetration of this
lesion. Although keratoacanthoma has previously been considered to behave in a benign fashion, it is now recognized as a form of squamous cell cancer and must be
managed accordingly. Recurrent behavior highlights the potentially aggressive nature of this cancer. Mohs micrographic surgery was indicated to ensure complete
removal. No recurrence has developed.

FIGURE 41.3-120. A: Large squamous cell carcinoma, keratoacanthoma type, of the left upper lip. Squamous cell carcinoma of this size and in this region is at risk for
metastasis. B: Microscopical example of keratoacanthoma revealing squamous cell carcinoma in an eruptive cup-like formation.

FIGURE 41.3-121. A: Hyperkeratotic lesion on the right nose consistent with keratoacanthoma. Note that this does not have the typical appearance of the lesions
depicted in Fig. 41.3-118, Fig. 41.3-119, and Fig. 41.3-120. This patient elected not to undergo treatment. B: Same patient after lesion regressed on its own.
Observation is not recommended as keratoacanthoma is a squamous cell carcinoma. Certain forms of intralesional chemotherapy may be considered depending on
the clinical circumstances.

FIGURE 41.3-122. Large squamous cell carcinoma on the upper extremity of a 76-year-old woman. Excision is indicated, although this cancer would also likely
respond to radiation therapy.

FIGURE 41.3-123. A: Eroded lesion in the nasolabial fold of a 50-year-old woman. This lesion was previously diagnosed as keratoacanthoma and treated with a
variety of topical medications and cryosurgery. It failed to respond to treatment. The patient declined surgery and elected radiation therapy instead. B: The final
cosmetic result after a course of radiation therapy. No recurrence has been reported.

FIGURE 41.3-124. Large infiltrative squamous cell carcinoma of the forehead. This lesion is at risk for perineural extension to the supraorbital and supratrochlear
nerves. Sensory changes in the forehead may be an indication of nerve involvement by the cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-125. Microscopical example of perineural invasion by squamous cell carcinoma. The skip-like nature of perineural invasion makes it difficult to be
certain that negative margins indeed reflect complete eradication of the cancer. Many recommend adjuvant radiation therapy as an additional means of preventing
recurrence and extension. Use of radiation therapy in these situations must be determined by the overall clinical circumstances.

FIGURE 41.3-126. Recurrent squamous cell carcinoma in a previous surgical scar. The rapidly recurrent nature of the squamous cell carcinoma in this case suggests
an aggressive behavior. Mohs surgery is indicated. Follow-up radiation therapy may be indicated as well.

FIGURE 41.3-127. Subcutaneous nodule above right eyebrow contiguous with an old scar. The clinical presentation was that of an epidermoid cyst. Despite the
mobile nature of the lesion, because of the patient's history of previous squamous cell carcinoma and immune suppression, the lesion was excised and proved to be a
squamous cell carcinoma. A high index of suspicion is necessary in any patient who is immunocompromised, as this group of patients is at high risk for the
development of nonmelanoma skin cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-128. Multiple scalp nodules consistent with internal malignancy metastatic to the scalp. Absence of histologic connection with the epidermis confirms
noncutaneous origin of cancer. Lung, breast, and colon cancer are among the most common internal malignancies that metastasize to the skin.

FIGURE 41.3-129. A: Recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the central upper lip and right oral commissure in a patient with a long history of squamous cell
carcinoma. The upper lip had been previously treated with radiation therapy for squamous cell carcinoma. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery. C:
Immediate appearance after reconstruction under local anesthesia at time of Mohs surgery. D: Final cosmetic result. In the interim the patient underwent Mohs
surgery for excision of squamous cell carcinoma of the nose.

FIGURE 41.3-130. A: Squamous cell carcinoma adjacent to left lower lip. This large lesion is at risk for metastasis. Treatment by Mohs micrographic surgery may be
followed by radiation therapy if indicated. B: Microscopical example of squamous cell carcinoma. Note large eosinophilic epithelial cells with enlarged hyperchromatic
nuclei.

FIGURE 41.3-131. Small hyperkeratotic lesion on sun-damaged lower lip. The biopsy revealed squamous cell carcinoma. The lesion had been present for some time,
and its early stage was clinically consistent with actinic cheilitis. Actinic cheilitis is equivalent to the precancerous condition noted elsewhere on sun-damaged skin
referred to as actinic keratosis. Treatment of actinic cheilitis depends on the severity of the lesion, whether it is symptomatic, and whether the patient is considered at
special risk for developing squamous cell carcinoma.

FIGURE 41.3-132. Squamous cell carcinoma on the lower lip of a man in his 30s. This individual works in a marina and has extensive sun damage. In addition,
severe actinic cheilitis is present on the lower lip, which is more exposed to solar radiation than is the upper lip. The squamous cell carcinoma was treated by Mohs

micrographic surgery and proved extensive.

FIGURE 41.3-133. A: Squamous cell carcinoma of the left lower lip in an elderly gentleman. B: Defect following Mohs surgery indicating true extent of cancer.
Because the cancer was not especially deep, it was allowed to heal by second intention with an excellent result. In addition, absence of flap reconstruction permitted
monitoring for evidence of recurrence.

FIGURE 41.3-134. Long-standing extensive squamous cell carcinoma on the lower lip of a 65-year-old woman. This lesion was treated by Mohs micrographic surgery
on three occasions. Each time the lesion recurred the cancer appeared more poorly differentiated. Eventually the cancer metastasized to the jaw. This highlights the
potentially aggressive nature of squamous cell carcinoma of the lip and its risk for metastasis.

FIGURE 41.3-135. Large squamous cell carcinoma of the lower lip. This large, aggressive lesion was treated by Mohs micrographic surgery. Following excision,
radiation therapy to the surgical site and draining lymph nodes must be considered and pursued based on the clinical circumstances.

FIGURE 41.3-136. Periungual wart. Long-standing periungual wart may be associated with carcinogenic subtypes of human papilloma virus. Biopsy is indicated to
rule out squamous cell carcinoma in situ.

FIGURE 41.3-137. Squamous cell carcinoma in situ of the thumb. Mohs micrographic surgery is indicated to preserve tissue and obtain the highest cure rate. Even
with the Mohs technique, because of the viral origin of this cancer and the presence of carcinogenic virus in normal-appearing adjacent skin, there is a risk of
recurrence.

FIGURE 41.3-138. Squamous cell carcinoma of the distal finger. The patient was advised to have an amputation but elected to undergo Mohs micrographic surgery
instead. The defect was allowed to heal by second intention, and the distal phalanx was preserved.

FIGURE 41.3-139. A: Squamous cell carcinoma in situ of the glans penis, also referred to as Erythroplasia of Querat. The patient did not want to undergo a
recommended penectomy, so Mohs micrographic surgery was performed. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery. This was allowed to heal by second
intention without any compromise of function.

FIGURE 41.3-140. Erythema and scale of the glans penis consistent with ill-defined squamous cell carcinoma in situ.

FIGURE 41.3-141. A: Multiple scars of the left temple indicating previous surgery in an elderly Mediterranean man. Small nodules are noted as well, representing
recurrent squamous cell carcinoma and metastatic in transit squamous cell carcinoma. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery. Surgery in this region is at risk
for injury to the temporal branch of the facial nerve, which can result in brow and eyelid ptosis. This patient developed metastases to regional lymph nodes and died
from his skin cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-142. A: A preauricular nodule present for several years. Biopsy revealed squamous cell carcinoma, and the lesion was removed by Mohs micrographic
surgery. The cancer was deep-seated but did not extend to the parotid gland. B: Large nodule of the preauricular region. Clinically this was consistent with a basal
cell carcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma. Biopsy is indicated to confirm the precise nature of the cancer prior to treatment. Because of its location, extension of the
cancer into the retroauricular sulcus and metastasis to the parotid gland is a distinct possibility.

FIGURE 41.3-143. A: A 70-year-old man with extensive squamous cell carcinoma of the forehead. Note hypopigmentation from previous treatments with cryosurgery.
B: Defect in the same patient following Mohs micrographic surgery. At the time of Mohs micrographic surgery, squamous cell carcinoma was found in a perineural
distribution and infiltrating muscle. The decision was made to discontinue surgery and consider radiation therapy. Because of his age and the likely slow progression
of this disease, the patient elected not to pursue further therapy. Management of complicated skin cancer must be based on the clinical setting and knowledge of the
biologic behavior of the cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-144. Erythema, hyperkeratosis, previous skin graft, and irregular pigmentation are all consistent with severe solar damage of the scalp in this
69-year-old man. He previously underwent excision of squamous cell carcinoma of the scalp with grafting but continued to develop new squamous cell cancers. In an
attempt to minimize the development of the cancers, the patient underwent carbon dioxide laser resurfacing to destroy the abnormal clones of epidermal cells thought
to give rise to the actinic keratoses that can evolve into squamous cell cancer. He did relatively well after treatment with a decreased number of new lesions. This
approach must be considered only in special circumstances in which close follow-up is possible. There is a theoretical possibility that the laser-treated site may
conceal the development of invasive squamous cell carcinoma beneath the surface of otherwise well-healed skin.

FIGURE 41.3-145. A: Metastatic squamous cell carcinoma on the scalp of a 90-year-old man. The patient underwent multiple excisions of squamous cell carcinoma of
the scalp but continued to develop new lesions within several months following each excision. B: The patient was referred for Mohs micrographic surgery. The
post-surgical defect demonstrates the depth of the cancer invasion. This treatment was unsuccessful, as the patient continued to develop new in transit metastases.

FIGURE 41.3-146. Extensive squamous cell carcinoma of the scalp of a kidney transplant patient. Squamous cell carcinoma in renal transplant patients is very
common and can behave aggressively. Close monitoring of these patients is essential to diagnose and treat cutaneous cancers at the earliest possible stage.

FIGURE 41.3-147. Extensive squamous cell carcinoma of the scalp in an elderly man. This lesion started as a small tumor, similar to the lesion noted in Fig. 41.3-98.
Despite aggressive treatment by Mohs micrographic surgery and radiation, the lesion continued to recur. The patient died from extension of the cancer through the
calvarium and into the dura.

FIGURE 41.3-148. Extensive squamous cell carcinoma of the forehead with associated satellite lesions representing in transit metastasis.

FIGURE 41.3-149. A: Recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the nose following radiation therapy. When seen at the time of his initial consultation, the patient
complained of severe chronic pain in the nose. No clearly defined lesion was noted on palpation, but the bridge of the nose was distinctly firm and tender throughout.
B: Biopsy on the left lateral nose revealed highly infiltrative squamous cell carcinoma. C: Complete rhinectomy resulted from Mohs micrographic surgery. Although
margins were negative, the infiltrative nature of this cancer represented a high risk of recurrence. Following healing by second intention the patient continued to
complain of pain in the upper maxilla. D: In order to monitor for recurrence, reconstruction was not performed. Instead a prosthesis was developed with which the
patient was satisfied. Identification of cancer within the maxilla explained his ongoing pain and was treated by maxillectomy.

FIGURE 41.3-150. Extensive squamous cell carcinoma in situ of the left parietal scalp and ear. Because of the extensive nature of this lesion and the patient's desire
to avoid surgery, radiation therapy was performed in multiple fractionated doses. He obtained an excellent result.

NONSURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF NONMELANOMA SKIN CANCER
There is a variety of nonsurgical treatments that can be used in the management of skin cancer. Most are beneficial in the control of premalignant lesions such as
actinic keratoses. Side effects of these treatments must be understood because they can limit compliance with the treatment regimen. In addition to the therapeutic
approaches demonstrated here, photodynamic therapy may become a more realistic treatment possibility for a range of cutaneous cancers. Recent refinement of
target compounds and the potential for topical administration, which minimizes side effects, have renewed interest in photodynamic treatment of skin cancer and
pre–skin cancers.

FIGURE 41.3-151. An actinic keratosis on the forehead consisting of erythema and scale. This lesion is at risk for development into squamous cell carcinoma.
Although the precise rate of malignant transformation is difficult to calculate, the molecular hallmarks of malignancy, such as mutation in the p53 tumor suppressor
gene, occur in actinic keratoses as well as squamous cell cancers. Treatment of actinic keratoses must be based on the clinical circumstances. Single lesions may be
treated by cryosurgery. Multiple lesions require management by topical chemotherapy.

FIGURE 41.3-152. The most effective way of treating an isolated actinic keratosis is cryosurgery. Here, a cotton-tipped applicator soaked in liquid nitrogen is applied
to the actinic keratosis. The frosting of the actinic keratosis is the clinical end point of treatment. Overtreatment can result in hypopigmentation and scarring. If the

lesion recurs multiple times, biopsy is needed to rule out squamous cell cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-153. Erythema, crusting, and swelling secondary to treatment with 5-fluorouracil. This therapy, which has been in use for at least 30 years, can cause
significant side effects that may limit patient compliance. The proper treatment course requires application for 4 weeks, although dermatologists customize treatment
to patient needs. Combination regimens that include topical tretinoin and other compounds have been shown to provide some additional benefit.

FIGURE 41.3-154. This patient self-treated with 5-fluorouracil and developed culture-proven impetigo. The 5-fluorouracil was discontinued and the infection resolved
with antibiotic therapy. No scarring is noted. Rare cases of cribriform scarring have developed with the extensive use of 5-fluorouracil. Patients who are initiated on
this therapy should be seen after the initiation of therapy to evaluate the progress and determine the extent of reaction. Topical corticosteroids may be used to control
the aggressiveness of the reaction.

FIGURE 41.3-155. This patient has a squamous cell carcinoma in situ of the glabella and declined surgery. 5-Fluorouracil was applied twice a day for 4 weeks. The
patient developed this crust, as expected. After discontinuation of the treatment, complete resolution of the crust occurred. Close monitoring and rebiopsy to confirm
the absence of any deeper tumor may be indicated based on the clinical exam.

FIGURE 41.3-156. This patient with extensive solar damage treated his scalp with 5-fluorouracil. He had a history of multiple hypertrophic actinic keratoses and
squamous cell cancers. However, he was also anticoagulated with coumadin and developed hemorrhagic bleeding at the sites of erosion caused by the 5-fluorouracil.

FIGURE 41.3-157. Slightly pink, smooth skin appearance immediately after complete resolution of 5-fluorouracil treatment course. Although many patients obtain a
sustained benefit from this treatment, it is not unusual to see the redevelopment of actinic keratoses in 6 to 8 months. In addition, 5-fluorouracil may eliminate
superficial actinic keratoses but conceal the development of basal cell cancer or squamous cell cancer under the skin surface. Although this is not a very common
occurrence, one must be alert to the possibility.

FIGURE 41.3-158. This patient had a large squamous cell carcinoma of the left cheek. After complete removal by Mohs micrographic surgery, it was decided to
perform adjuvant radiation therapy. The erythema and swelling is typical at this stage in the radiation therapy course. Discomfort can be controlled with emollients and
topical corticosteroids.

FIGURE 41.3-159. Large scar on the back of a 70-year-old woman. Previously this patient underwent radiation therapy for a basal cell carcinoma. Note the
hypopigmentation, atrophy, scarring, and telangiectasias. This is a common result after radiation therapy. An erosion at ten o'clock required multiple biopsies because
of the suspicion that recurrent basal cell carcinoma was present within and under the scar. Biopsies were negative indicating that the erosion was secondary to
radiation tissue effects.

FIGURE 41.3-160. This patient underwent radiation therapy for a basal cell carcinoma of the left infraorbital cheek. He presented because of a small erosion and
retraction five years after treatment. The nodule was present on palpation, but aggressive biopsy failed to reveal the presence of cancer. The scarring, retraction, and
pigmentation change are not uncommonly seen after radiation therapy and can complicate the diagnosis of recurrent cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-161. This patient underwent Mohs micrographic surgery excision of a large basal cell carcinoma of the nose with subsequent reconstruction using a
full-thickness skin graft. The erythema consisting of multiple telangiectasias secondary to new vascular growth is very common and makes the graft more prominent
than it otherwise should be.

FIGURE 41.3-162. The patient underwent treatment with the pulsed dye laser, a technique used to treat telangiectasias, port wine stains, and other vascular tumors.
This simple procedure effectively eliminated the blood vessels and improved the cosmetic result.

MOHS MICROGRAPHIC SURGERY

FIGURE 41.3-163. A: Mohs micrographic surgery is a technique designed to provide maximal cure rate and optimal tissue preservation. In the first stage of Mohs
surgery the tumor is debulked with a curette. A thin layer of tissue surrounding the curetted area is then excised in a horizontal fashion. The tumor is then divided into
sections and mapped, denoting margins with different colored ink. B: The tumor specimen is then prepared for frozen section in the adjacent laboratory specifically
designed for this procedure. Using a cryotome, the tumor is then sectioned across the inferior margin including the complete peripheral epidermal margin. Sectioning
of the epidermal edge and dermis is made possible by the unique way in which the Mohs specimen is obtained, using a 45-degree beveled incision. C: Specimens are
then evaluated microscopically and areas of residual tumor are noted on a map by the Mohs surgeon. Residual cancer is then excised according to denoted areas of
cancer positivity. D: The specimens are then studied again and additional Mohs micrographic surgery stages are excised until the complete tumor has been
extirpated. The final defect is then reconstructed or permitted to heal by second intention. (Figs. 41.3-163 A–D courtesy of Neil A. Swanson, M.D.)

FIGURE 41.3-164. A: 4-mm nodular basal cell carcinoma on the right lower eyelid margin. Basal cell cancer in this area is at risk for spread along the tarsal plate,
resulting in a cancer that is larger than appears on clinical exam. To preserve important structures and obtain the highest cure rate, Mohs micrographic surgery was
performed. B: Lower eyelid site after excision by the Mohs technique. C: The wound was allowed to heal by second intention, yielding an excellent cosmetic and
functional result. Note that reconstruction is often not necessary with defects of this size because of the tissue preservation feature of Mohs micrographic surgery.

FIGURE 41.3-165. A: An infiltrative basal cell carcinoma of the right ala in a young woman. The area is curetted and then a Mohs micrographic stage is taken under
local anesthesia. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery indicating the true extent of the basal cell carcinoma. In this region the tissue preservation technique
permits minimal destruction of tissue in an area that is challenging to reconstruct. C: A full-thickness skin graft is placed to yield the best cosmetic result. D: Final
result after complete healing of the skin graft.

FIGURE 41.3-166. A: A large superficial multifocal basal cell carcinoma of the right upper ear. The patient was concerned that he might lose the upper half of his ear.
He pursued Mohs micrographic surgery as an alternative. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery indicating preservation of cartilage and ear anatomy. C: A
full-thickness skin graft is placed at the time of Mohs surgery. D: A full-thickness skin graft 4 weeks after surgery indicating complete graft take with preservation of
the ear anatomy.

FIGURE 41.3-167. A: An infiltrative basal cell carcinoma of the right nose in a 30-year-old woman. B: Defect following Mohs surgery resulting in preservation of
normal anatomic and functional relationships. C: Linear repair of Mohs defect. Complex reconstruction is often not required in smaller lesions excised with Mohs
micrographic surgery. D: Final result after plastic reconstruction provides a minimally noticeable scar with preservation of anatomic relationships.

FIGURE 41.3-168. A: Clinically ill-defined skin cancer on the dorsal nose. Mohs surgery is indicated because of the need to achieve the highest cure rate while
preserving normal tissue in this cosmetically important area. B: Defect following Mohs surgery. C: Dorsonasal flap is used to repair the defect with adjacent tissue to
provide the best cosmetic result.

FIGURE 41.3-169. A: Ill-defined infiltrative basal cell carcinoma on the nasal tip of a 33-year-old woman. B: Defect following excision indicating true histologic extent
of cancer, which is greater than could be appreciated clinically. The tendency of basal cell carcinoma of this type to extend beyond the clinical margins highlights the
value of the Mohs technique. C: The patient was referred to a plastic surgeon for forehead flap reconstruction of defect. Repair shown is 2 months status post
reconstruction. The repair will continue to mature over time, and patients must be reassured of the fact that with time the cosmetic result will improve. The patient
underwent several scar revisions. D: Several years status post final scar revision demonstrates excellent result. There was no evidence of recurrence.

FIGURE 41.3-170. A: An ill-defined morpheaform basal cell carcinoma of the left nasal tip and ala. Because of the inability to be certain of the extent of the basal cell
cancer, Mohs surgery is indicated. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery. The resulting shallow depth of the wound permits a variety of reconstructive
options, including healing by second intention, skin graft, and flap. Because of the potential for elevation of the nasal tip, a full-thickness skin graft is performed. C:
The full-thickness skin graft in place. D: Final result after healing of full-thickness skin graft. Note preservation of normal anatomic relationships of the aesthetically
complex nasal tip unit.

FIGURE 41.3-171. A: Morpheaform basal cell carcinoma of the right infraorbital cheek. Repair of defects in this area has the potential for resulting in ectropion. B:
Defect following excision. Note extent of defect is larger than would have been anticipated from the clinical appearance of the cancer but smaller than would have
resulted with standard excisional margins. C: Linear repair oriented to minimize inferior traction on lower eyelid.

FIGURE 41.3-172. A: Recurrent basal cell carcinoma of the right cheek, below the eye. Note contracture resulting from residual scar tissue from previous treatment.
In this situation one should anticipate a relatively large extent of cancer unpredictable from clinical exam. B: Defect following Mohs excision revealing extension of
cancer into subcutis. C: Linear repair of defect is designed to conceal the final scar within natural skin tension lines and minimize ectropion. D: The final result at 3
months indicating well-healed scar with no ectropion.

FIGURE 41.3-173. A: Infiltrative basal cell carcinoma of the right ala. Careful clinical examination of the site failed to reveal significant clinical extension. B: Histologic
specimen. Infiltrative basal cell carcinoma noted during Mohs excision. C: Defect following Mohs micrographic excision of infiltrative basal cell carcinoma of the right
nose. Note that cancer extended onto the cheek. The patient was referred for plastic reconstruction.

FIGURE 41.3-174. A: Classic morpheaform basal cell carcinoma featuring a scar-like, smooth white appearance. Morpheaform basal cell carcinoma typically extends
significantly beyond the clinical margins of the cancer. Its histologic behavior is characterized as aggressive growth. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic excision.
This defect can be repaired in a simple fashion similar to the procedure used on the patient depicted in Fig. 41.3-167.

FIGURE 41.3-175. A: Basal cell carcinoma previously untreated noted in the right nasolabial groove extending under the right ala. Basal cell cancer in this embryonic
fusion plane can be expected to be significantly larger than the clinical appearance of the cancer suggests. In addition, extension through the plane, which represents
the course of least resistance is thought by some cutaneous oncologists to result in the potential for deeply invasive cancer. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic
surgery revealing extent of cancer to the vermillion border, and extending superiorly into and under the ala. The patient was referred for plastic reconstruction, and
after several scar revisions, underwent laser resurfacing to optimize the appearance of the reconstructed site.

FIGURE 41.3-176. A: A long-standing basal cell carcinoma at the angle of the nasolabial fold and the left ala in a woman in her 30s. Palpation of the tumor indicated
nodular extension beneath the surface. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery revealing extension into the orbicularis oris and into the subcutis of the cheek.
C: Infiltrative nests of basal cell cancer are noted adjacent to salivary tissue. The patient underwent plastic reconstruction but requires close observation for
recurrence of cancer in this region.

FIGURE 41.3-177. A: Patient with surgical excision ulcer on right cheek. This patient was referred for Mohs micrographic surgery after intraoperative conventional
excision with frozen sections revealed extensive positive margins. B: Infiltrating basal cell cancer noted on Mohs micrographic tissue section. C: Extensive defect is
noted following complete extirpation of cancer by Mohs micrographic surgery.

FIGURE 41.3-178. A: Recurrent basal cell carcinoma of right temple. Recurrent cancer often involves extension of cancer cells throughout pre-existing scar tissue. It
appears that the scar tissue planes permit broader extension of cancer than would otherwise occur. B: Defect following excision revealing the extent of cancer. Injury
to the temporal branch of the facial nerve is a significant risk in this region but is unavoidable if cancer involves the nerve.

FIGURE 41.3-179. A: This patient had a lesion on the nose and cheek for at least 15 years. Because of the long-standing nature of the lesion and the likelihood of
extensive disease, Mohs micrographic surgery was indicated. Complete cancer extirpation, as well as tissue preservation, is especially important when cancer is
present in the central facial area. In addition, proximity to the embryonic fusion plane is another indication for controlled microscopic excision. B: Extensive defect
following Mohs micrographic surgery. Although repair with complex flaps and other forms of tissue rearrangement may result in a good cosmetic result, despite the
very high cure rate associated with the Mohs technique, there is a risk of recurrence. Minimizing complex repairs can permit recognition of recurrence at the earliest
stages. The patient developed recurrent skin cancer under a forehead flap several years after the original surgery.

FIGURE 41.3-180. A: Long-standing basal cell carcinoma of the nasal tip. Following Mohs micrographic surgery, the complete nasal tip, including cartilage, was
removed. Basal cell cancer infiltrated between the nasal cartilages. B: Forehead flap repair 2 months after reconstruction. The patient was referred to plastic surgery
for reconstruction. The forehead flap option permitted repair of cosmetic unit with full-thickness tissue to compensate for extent of nasal loss due to cancer. Further
revision of the flap under local anesthesia will achieve an improved cosmetic result.

WOUND MANAGEMENT AND RECONSTRUCTION AFTER MOHS MICROGRAPHIC SURGERY
Following excision of skin cancer, whether using the Mohs micrographic surgery technique or conventional frozen section methods, reconstruction of the defect must
be addressed. Options usually include plastic reconstruction ranging from simple linear closure to skin grafts and skin flaps. This series demonstrates a range of
procedures that represent reconstructive options for defects resulting from relatively large skin cancer excisions. In most cases reconstruction can be performed in the
office setting under local anesthesia. Key guidelines to follow include reconstruction within cosmetic units, minimization of repair, and an understanding of the
long-term management implications of a particular solution with respect to the possibility of recurrent cancer. In general, the simplest approach that yields the best
aesthetic results is preferred. Healing by second intention may often result in a cosmetic result superior to that of plastic reconstruction depending on the location,
depth, and breadth of the defect. In cases in which the cancer has been removed using Mohs micrographic surgery, reconstruction is usually performed at the same
time as a separate and distinct procedure. Alternatively the wound may be allowed to heal by second intention. In another strategy, the team approach is employed.
Mohs micrographic surgery can be performed on one day, and reconstruction can be performed by a reconstructive surgeon at any point thereafter, including the
same day. If adjuvant radiation therapy is anticipated, it is usually not initiated until the wound or plastic reconstruction has healed completely, most commonly at 6
weeks.

FIGURE 41.3-181. A: This nasal tip defect resulting from excision of a basal cell carcinoma is especially difficult to reconstruct, because it involves the soft triangle of
the nose. Of the many available options, reconstruction using a bilobed transposition flap is chosen. B: Immediately after transposition of the flap into the wound,
there is evidence of excellent blood flow ensuring the likelihood of flap viability. This procedure takes approximately 30 minutes under local anesthesia. Patients who
smoke, diabetics, and others with compromised blood supply are at a greater risk of flap failure. C: Side view of the original defect site at 4 weeks, demonstrating
healing flap and preservation of alar rim. D: Frontal view of repair indicating matching texture of flap tissue with that of adjacent skin. Patients must be advised that
the healing process takes approximately 12 months, and fullness and bulkiness of any flap will resolve with time. Early scar revision is usually not indicated. The alar
rim is contiguous, and there has been successful reconstitution of the soft triangle of the nose.

FIGURE 41.3-182. A: Large defect involving part of the nasal ala, upper lip, nasolabial fold, and cheek. This defect can be repaired in a variety of ways, but there
must be special attention paid to the fact that it traverses several cosmetic units. In general the simplest approach that yields the best cosmetic result is preferable. B:
An island pedicle advancement flap was incised inferior to the defect and advanced superiorly. It survives on a vascular pedicle including muscle and subcutis. Once
advanced into the defect, the flap is sutured in place. C: Reconstruction as it appears at 3 months postoperatively. Note preservation of natural facial skin lines. This
will continue to improve over time and, because of the simplicity of the repair, permit identification of any recurrence of skin cancer in this critical embryonic fusion
plane.

FIGURE 41.3-183. A: Large nasal defect on the side of the nose. This would heal well by second intention. The process would take approximately 4 weeks until the
wound filled with granulation tissue and closed with epidermal resurfacing. Further wound contraction would result in a final scar approximately one-third of the
original defect. Because of the desire to obtain the best cosmetic result, reconstruction was selected. B: A transposition flap was created borrowing skin from the
nasolabial fold and transposing it into the defect. Lateral cheek skin was advanced into the nasolabial fold to close the secondary defect. Sutures will be removed in
approximately 1 week, and continued improvement can be expected.

FIGURE 41.3-184. A: A very large defect of the nasal bridge involving the nasal cartilages. The reconstructive options include a delayed pedicle forehead flap, skin
graft, and healing by second intention. The patient did not want to undergo the extensive surgery involved in a forehead flap. A skin graft would have resulted in an
unsatisfactory cosmetic appearance. Healing by second intention would have been similarly unsatisfactory. A further option was explored. B: A bilateral transposition
flap was performed borrowing skin from the cheek on each side of the nose. This procedure, performed under local anesthesia, permitted positioning of adjacent
tissue, which closely matched nasal skin in color and texture. C: The appearance of the repair 4 months following surgery. Note minimal appearance of scar lines and
preservation of natural contours of the nose. It should be noted that patients with fair skin and good facial blood supply tend to heal extremely well. This simple repair
is an excellent alternative to more complicated reconstructive procedures when the patient prefers a simple approach.

FIGURE 41.3-185. A: This large defect involved removal of much of the left nasal ala and extended into the cheek and nasolabial fold. The patient had a history of
cardiac disease and was not considered a candidate for surgery under general anesthesia. Allowing the wound to heal by second intention might have resulted in
deformity and possible closure of the nostril with limited airflow. The decision was made to reconstruct the defect with local tissue. B: A combined repair involving a
nasolabial transposition flap and island pedicle flap to re-create the lining and floor of the nose was performed. C: Final result at 6 months. Although the ala does not
match that of the other side, it is functional and cosmetically acceptable to the patient. No evidence of recurrence is noted.

FIGURE 41.3-186. A: Large defect of right temple following excision of a large basal cell cancer by Mohs micrographic surgery. Reconstructive options included
full-thickness skin graft, split-thickness skin graft, and healing by second intention. Because of the relative extent of the cancer and the patient's lack of desire to

undergo further surgery, the wound was allowed to heal by second intention. B: Granulation tissue has completely filled the wound by 4 weeks. In another 2 weeks,
the wound will heal over with epidermis. In the subsequent 6 to 12 months, contraction of the wound will result in a final scar that will be approximately 30% of the
original wound diameter. Wound contraction is an impressive feature of healing by second intention and must be anticipated when considering allowing a wound to
heal in this fashion. For example, certain defects surrounding the eye can result in ectropion if allowed to heal by second intention.

FIGURE 41.3-187. A: A large defect of the scalp extending into the periosteum. This patient had multiple medical problems and elected not to undergo flap
reconstruction. Moreover, flap reconstruction may be problematic if recurrence develops and cancer spreads under the galea. Healing by second intention was not an
option because of exposure of the outer table. Human skin allograft was placed as illustrated here. B: The same patient at 10 to 14 days postoperatively
demonstrating vascularization of human skin allograft. This approach minimizes wound care and stimulates normal healing. In the vast majority of circumstances, the
human skin allograft will be rejected at 2 to 4 weeks, revealing well-granulated base that subsequently heals by second intention. C: Final wound result after
sloughing of human skin allograft and complete healing by second intention. This scar will continue to improve in texture and color over many months. In addition any
recurrence of cancer should be easily noted.

RECURRENT SKIN CANCER
While most nonmelanoma skin cancers are easily managed with a range of approaches, if recurrence develops the tumor can behave in an aggressive fashion. This
series depicts the clinical behavior of recurrent nonmelanoma skin cancer and highlights the advantages of achieving the highest cure rate when the cancer presents
as a primary lesion. Recurrence of skin cancer relates not only to the thoroughness of the original treatment but also to the intrinsic biologic behavior of the cancer.
Often, second cancers will develop near the site of previous treatment and in fact do not represent recurrent tumor. A patient who has had one basal cell cancer has a
40% chance of developing a second new skin cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-188. A: Recurrent basal cell carcinoma on the tip of the nose. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery reveals extension onto columella and into
the soft triangle of the nose. A wound such as this can heal by second intention or with a skin graft. Extension of the cancer beyond the clinical margins is typical for
recurrent basal cell cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-189. Recurrent basal cell carcinoma developing within the scar line of a previous skin cancer excision. The presence of basal cell cancer within the scar
line is an indication of recurrent cancer probably resulting from incomplete removal at the time of the original excision. Although the literature suggests that incomplete
basal cell carcinoma will frequently not recur, these studies do not take into account the histologic subtype of the basal cell cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-190. A: Multiply recurrent basal cell carcinoma of the left forehead. Of note are a depressed skin graft and an area that appears shiny and white. The
patient was referred for Mohs micrographic surgery because of the recurrent nature of the cancer. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic excision with extension of
the wound down to periosteum. C: Following reconstruction with a full-thickness skin graft. Although not cosmetically optimal, this repair permits monitoring for
recurrence in this large infiltrative basal cell carcinoma.

FIGURE 41.3-191. A: Recurrent basal cell carcinoma of the forehead. This patient underwent multiple previous procedures for removal of the basal cell carcinoma. B:
Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery demonstrating extension of cancer into the upper eyelids. In many cases, recurrent basal cell cancer may develop
squamoid features and demonstrate more aggressive behavior with recurrence. C: Full-thickness skin graft in place. This cancer is at a very high risk for recurrence
despite the Mohs technique. Recurrence will result in extension of cancer along the medial canthus. D: Wound is healing well with complete take of graft at 6 weeks.
Central crust will resolve with normal grafted skin underneath. Close monitoring, including palpation in the periorbital area, is essential.

FIGURE 41.3-192. A: Multiple scars indicating previous adjacent tissue transfers. The patient had undergone multiple excisions for basal cell carcinoma in the past,
and each time residual cancer was noted. The patient was advised by his physician that basal cell carcinoma is not serious and there is no need to re-excise. The
patient presented for evaluation because of the crust located in the scalp area. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery performed under local anesthesia in
the office setting. C: Infiltrating basal cell carcinoma noted tracking along the galea. D: Full-thickness skin graft in place at 1 year. E: The patient continued to
traumatize the scalp and developed erosions on a regular basis. Clinically, the distinction had to be made whether this represents a recurrent basal cell cancer or
simply poor healing due to trauma in a full-thickness skin graft.

FIGURE 41.3-193. A: Eighty-year-old woman with multiple basal cell carcinomas of the forehead. Previously, the patient had superficial basal cell carcinomas, which
were treated with dermabrasion. Because of our current knowledge of the biology of basal cell cancer, this approach would not be considered optimum. B:
Microscopical example of superficial basal cell carcinoma demonstrating extension into dermis. Elimination of this cancer by dermabrasion is not feasible and can
result in the creation of multiple bands of scar in which recurrent skin cancer can develop. C: Defect following Mohs excision of recurrent basal cell carcinoma. Note
extension of cancer down to periosteum. The patient was referred for reconstruction.

FIGURE 41.3-194. Recurrent basal cell carcinoma of the left upper lip. This cancer developed at the site of previous cryotherapy. The scar created by previous
treatment provided sanctuary for cancer cells to extend. The defect can be expected to be larger than the clinical lesion.

FIGURE 41.3-195. A: Recurrent basal cell carcinoma on the right cheek surrounding previous site of electrodesiccation and curettage. Electrodesiccation and
curettage are appropriate for small superficial skin cancers but are not as effective as excision at removing basal cell carcinoma that is infiltrative, nodular, or large. B:
Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery reveals extensive nature of cancer that spread through scar tissue bands. In this region, extension into the parotid gland
and injury to CVII are risks.

FIGURE 41.3-196. A: Recurrent basal cell cancer in right preauricular region. B: Extensive defect similar to that in Figure 41.3-195 but extending onto the ear and
towards the ear canal.

FIGURE 41.3-197. Marginal recurrence of basal cell carcinoma at site of previous excision of basal cell cancer. The patient underwent multiple previous conventional
excisions of the skin cancer, each time developing marginal recurrence. It is conceivable that the Mohs micrographic surgery may have limited the number of
recurrences in this situation. Alternatively it appears that certain basal cell carcinomas have an aggressive behavior and may recur independent of the surgical
technique used.

FIGURE 41.3-198. Recurrent basal cell carcinoma on the chest. Note the white scar indicating the previous site of electrodesiccation and curettage.

FIGURE 41.3-199. Recurrent basal cell carcinoma on the neck. This widespread multifocal superficial basal cell carcinoma on the neck surrounds a site of previous
electrodesiccation and curettage. Excision by Mohs micrographic surgery is indicated.

FIGURE 41.3-200. Multiple recurrent areas of basal cell carcinoma surrounding a cryosurgery scar. Excision is indicated because of the tendency of the cancer cells
to extend beneath the scar tissue and the clinical difficulty in determining the true extent of the cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-201. Recurrent basal cell carcinoma on the upper extremity of a young woman. Note the previous electrodesiccation and curettage scar and the
recurrence of basal cell carcinoma at the margin. Recurrence of basal cell carcinoma at the margin in this as in Fig. 41.3-198, Fig. 41.3-199, and Fig. 41.3-200
suggests the incomplete nature of electrodesiccation and curettage at the peripheral edges.

FIGURE 41.3-202. Recurrent basal cell carcinoma at the right lateral canthus. Note retraction of the lower eyelid and the large nodule. This cancer is very large and
requires Mohs micrographic surgery for adequate excision.

FIGURE 41.3-203. Recurrence of basal cell carcinoma in the right nasolabial fold had been treated multiple times by conventional excision and recurred each time
despite the report of negative margins.

FIGURE 41.3-204. Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery indicates deep extension into the nasolabial fold. It is believed that this embryonic fusion plane
provides low resistance to deep tracking of the tumor.

FIGURE 41.3-205. Histologic features of infiltrative basal cell carcinoma as noted in the patient of Fig. 41.3-204.

FIGURE 41.3-206. A: Multiply recurrent basal cell carcinoma on the nose and medial canthus of a 68-year-old man. B: Following Mohs micrographic surgery, the
defect extends into the medial canthus, onto the cheek, and over the midline of the nose. Over the subsequent 8 years, the patient underwent repeat excisions
because of recurrence, despite the use of Mohs micrographic surgery. The tumor had an infiltrative histology. Eventually cancer tracked under the floor of the orbit
and an orbital exenteration was performed. C: The patient 1-year status post exenteration of the orbital contents and contiguous facial soft tissue. D: The orbital
prosthesis is in place. E: Orbital prosthesis. The technology is available now to create very acceptable prostheses. Reconstruction in this patient would have been
unacceptable because of the high risk of recurrence and the need to monitor for the development of new cancer, which, in this case, could be life threatening because
of extension into the brain.

FIGURE 41.3-207. A: This patient underwent multiple excisions of basal cell carcinoma in the left nasolabial fold over the course of 10 years. Repair with a forehead
flap had been done most recently. B: She presented with recurrence of skin cancer on the left upper lip. Mohs micrographic surgery combined with intraoperative
conventional excision resulted in complete removal of the nose and medial canthus. The cancer extended into the glabella and tracked under the base of the flap and
its origin on the forehead. This highlights the tendency of recurrent cancer to track under flap reconstruction without evidence of recurrence until there has been
widespread cancer growth. C: Same patient with nasal prosthesis in place.

FIGURE 41.3-208. A: Recurrent basal cell carcinoma of the left upper lateral eyebrow. Previously, the patient underwent radiation therapy to this site and developed
recurrence at multiple foci. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery with removal of cancer in its entirety.

FIGURE 41.3-209. A: Basal cell carcinoma of the nasal tip. Previously this patient underwent radiation therapy for a basal cell carcinoma in this area and received
treatment to the whole nose. Note cutaneous changes of telangiectasias, hypopigmentation, and atrophy. B: Defect following Mohs micrographic surgery. Extensive
cancer invaded the cartilage and extended onto the cheeks. The patient underwent reconstruction.

FIGURE 41.3-210. Basal cell carcinoma at the site of a previous scar. The patient was unaware of any previous trauma or skin cancer treatment at this site. Basal cell
carcinoma is known to develop at the site of long-standing scar.

FIGURE 41.3-211. A: This patient had multiple recurrences of basal cell carcinoma of the back starting many years earlier with treatment by electrodesiccation and
curettage. Each time the cancer recurred, it appeared to invade more deeply and become more aggressive. He underwent Mohs micrographic surgery. B: Defect

following Mohs micrographic surgery indicating extension deep into muscle of the back. C: Histologic specimen indicating deep infiltration of basal cell carcinoma. D:
Despite successful healing by second intention, the patient developed recurrent basal cell carcinoma, and the decision was made to perform radiation therapy. This
treatment failed as well. Long-standing, aggressive, large basal cell carcinomas that undergo squamous differentiation have the potential to metastasize, but this is
extremely rare. When it does occur, treatment options are limited.

RARE SKIN TUMORS
While the vast majority of skin cancers are basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, other nonmelanoma skin cancers do occur and, because they present
on the skin, can be diagnosed by biopsy at presentation.

FIGURE 41.3-212. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP) noted on the dorsum of the left hand of a 35-year-old woman. The patient first noted the lesion around
the time that she received an intravenous infusion at that site. It grew slowly over time. DFSP is a slow-growing sarcoma of skin that may initially be confused with a
benign dermatofibroma. Complete excision is indicated, and Mohs micrographic surgery is now considered the treatment choice. Because of the irregular growth
pattern, conventional excision with standard wide margins may not completely remove the tumor. Metastasis is rare and usually occurs in circumstances where the
cancer has recurred multiple times.

FIGURE 41.3-213. Recurrent DFSP in a skin graft adjacent to the clavicle in a 30-year-old man. This cancer had been present for some time prior to initial excision. At
that time the cancer extended into the region of the brachial plexus and further surgery was deferred because of the risk. Margins remained positive at the time of the
completion of the initial surgery. A skin graft was placed, and this small nodule was noted several years later. Mohs micrographic surgery was performed, and the
cancer was removed in its entirety. Close monitoring is essential, because the lesion, with a history of deep positive margins, is at risk for recurrence.

FIGURE 41.3-214. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans on the nose of a young child. This lesion had been excised with the clinical diagnosis of a cyst. The pathology
revealed dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, and further excision was indicated. This cancer does occur in children, although it is not as common as in older patients.

FIGURE 41.3-215. Two lesions are noted. On the left there is a linear scar from the excision of a lesion that was considered to be a dermatofibroma. There are forms
of dermatofibroma that may be hard to distinguish histologically from dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. In this case evaluation by a skilled pathologist is necessary.
The use of special stains such as CD-34 is usually helpful. Inferior and to the right of this lesion is a classic dermatofibroma which is represented by an 8-mm,
dome-shaped tan nodule. A complete biopsy was performed of this lesion because of the patient's history, but there is nothing about the clinical appearance of this
lesion that is concerning, nor is biopsy normally indicated for dermatofibroma.

FIGURE 41.3-216. Leiomyosarcoma is noted on the right outer arm of a 50-year-old man. This patient presented because of continued growth of the lesion, which he
had been told was scar tissue. Several years earlier a similar lesion was excised, and the patient was advised that it was not malignant. Review of the original's lines
confirmed that it was not possible to make a diagnosis of malignant tumor at that time. However, excision of this lesion down to fascia and careful examination of the
pathology revealed that it was a leiomyosarcoma.

FIGURE 41.3-217. Merkel cell carcinoma on the leg of an elderly man. This large cancer can behave much like a melanoma, with potential for metastatic spread.
Wide local excision and radiation therapy are indicated. Mohs surgery is advocated by some.

FIGURE 41.3-218. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma of the cheek on a 45-year-old man. The lesion had been present for many years prior to seeking treatment. A
microcystic adnexal carcinoma is believed to originate from the sweat gland apparatus. Although it tends not to metastasize, it can behave aggressively and
demonstrate perineural invasion. If this occurs, cure rate is diminished.

FIGURE 41.3-219. Microscopical example of microcystic adnexal carcinoma indicating structures similar to sweat glands and the infiltrative nature of the cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-220. A: A microcystic adnexal carcinoma of the nose demonstrating infiltration of the nasal bridge, distortion the soft triangle of the nose, and erosion in
that region as well. This had been a long-standing lesion. B: Following Mohs micrographic surgery, which is the treatment choice for this condition, partial rhinectomy
resulted. Cancer infiltrated between the nasal cartilages. Reconstruction was performed using a forehead flap.

FIGURE 41.3-221. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma of the chin highlighted by a small area of white papules on the right lateral inferior chin area. Surrounding erythema
is identifiable and approximates the true extent of the cancer, which involved most of the lower chin area.

FIGURE 41.3-222. Angiosarcoma of the scalp. The cancer appears as a hemorrhagic patch that does not blanch on compression. This patient progressed to develop
nodules and erosions requiring extensive surgery. Angiosarcoma is extremely difficult to treat with chemotherapy, and radiation therapy does not provide consistent
results. In addition, the histologic nature of the cancer is such that there are often skip lesions, and negative histologic margins are no indication of complete
eradication of the cancer.

FIGURE 41.3-223. A: This patient has multiple small papules, noted for several years. A biopsy was done to rule out basal cell carcinoma. Histology revealed
angiosarcoma. The patient underwent Mohs micrographic surgery and reconstruction. Subsequently, and not surprisingly, the cancer recurred in noncontiguous
areas. The patient received radiation and several cycles of chemotherapy. B: Same patient after multiple excisions and reconstruction. In addition the patient received
radiation therapy to the central facial area, which resulted in breathing complications. Because of the metastatic potential of this cancer, routine monitoring with CT
scan and full physical examination is necessary. C: Patient developed a new nodule of angiosarcoma in the glabellar area. He had already completed multiple
courses of chemotherapy, and the decision was made to treat this lesion symptomatically. It was excised with margins down to the periosteum, which was involved by
angiosarcoma. Overall this patient has done well during the 7-year course of his disease without any evidence of metastatic disease.

FIGURE 41.3-224. Purplish nodule on the nose of a 30-year-old woman. This lesion was an angiosarcoma. Wide excision was successful in eliminating the lesion.

FIGURE 41.3-225. The violaceous plaque with erosion on the scalp of a woman in her 60s. This patient had this lesion for several years before it became darker and
thicker. Physicians had treated it with laser, assuming it was a benign vascular tumor. When biopsy was performed, angiosarcoma was identified. In this case the
changes of angiosarcoma were very subtle and required consultation with multiple dermatopathologists. Excision was performed initially with Mohs micrographic
surgery, but eventually multiple areas of recurrence required complete removal of the scalp tissue with full-thickness skin grafting. The patient did well for
approximately 5 years until she presented with a lytic lesion of the posterior parietal scalp. Imaging studies revealed a large infiltrating mass compressing the dura
and infiltration of the calvarium by angiosarcoma.

FIGURE 41.3-226. Atypical fibroxanthoma of the arm. This sun-induced tumor is normally seen in elderly men. It has a low potential for metastasis but can behave
aggressively and requires excision. Mohs micrographic surgery is the treatment choice.

FIGURE 41.3-227. A: A young patient demonstrating a tumor of the right lower eyelid. B: The same patient many years later demonstrating the effect of neglecting
basal cell carcinoma. This cancer must be considered incurable. (Photograph courtesy of Israel Dvoretzky, M.D.)

FIGURE 41.3-228. Long-standing infiltrative basal cell carcinoma of the right cheek in a 95-year-old man. The patient was unable to undergo surgery, and the family
declined radiation therapy. A course of intralesional interferon was unsuccessful. This cancer is at high risk for extension into the parotid gland and involvement of the
facial nerve.

PIGMENTED LESIONS
Pigmented lesions include benign moles or nevi, atypical nevi, melanoma, and a range of benign epithelial tumors. This series depicts a range of pigmented lesions,
highlighting those that should arouse a high index of suspicion for malignancy. Melanoma is most curable when it is diagnosed in its earliest stages. A melanoma that
is up to 1 mm in depth has a 96% cure rate with simple local excision. Any lesion that is suspicious for melanoma or an atypical nevus should be promptly biopsied.
The clinical photographs represent the spectrum of pigmented lesions with which patients present to their dermatologist.

FIGURE 41.3-229. A: Seborrheic keratosis of right cheek. This very common pigmented lesion has a rough, greasy surface and may often be confused with a
melanoma by the patient because of the pigmentation. The visit to the doctor provides an opportunity to perform a full body skin examination. B: Multiple seborrheic
keratoses of the trunk. These lesions are very common and accumulate with age. They are benign proliferations of epidermis and do not transform into malignancy.

FIGURE 41.3-230. Compound nevus. This normal mole is slightly darker than the surrounding skin color. The papillated surface is not uncommon. Note the regular
border.

FIGURE 41.3-231. Several nevi are noted in this picture. The central lesion is slightly irregular with darker pigmentation in the center surrounded by a rim of tan
coloration. These features suggest that this mole may be atypical, especially in comparison to the surrounding nevi. Biopsy of the central lesion is indicated.

FIGURE 41.3-232. A: Two nevi are noted. The one on the right is approximately 2 mm in diameter and is regular in coloration. There is no indication of atypicality.
The larger lesion is approximately 5 mm in its longest diameter and has irregular pigmentation. These atypical features are concerning, and biopsy is indicated. A
tangential biopsy is sufficient to determine whether further excision is needed due to the degree of atypicality of the nevus. B: This large nevus has irregular
pigmentation, a notched border, and a relative lack of symmetry. It is difficult to identify from the photograph, but one must be concerned about the possibility of an
atypical nevus at the least and melanoma at the worst. Biopsy is required.

FIGURE 41.3-233. Congenital nevus of the right neck. This lesion has been present since birth. It has slightly irregular pigmentation that has been unchanged during
the life of the patient. Close monitoring is indicated, but biopsy at the earliest sign of any change is necessary.

FIGURE 41.3-234. Slightly irregular dark nevus. Note how the dark pigmentation is different from surrounding pigmented lesions in this fair-skinned individual. Biopsy
is indicated to rule out melanoma.

FIGURE 41.3-235. Nevus of the left lateral dorsal foot. Nevi on the extremities can occur. If there is any suspicion of melanoma or atypical nevus, biopsy is required.

FIGURE 41.3-236. Multiple nevi on a patient who is being followed for a history of atypical moles. Note the central irregular mole that has a notched border and
irregular pigmentation. Careful monitoring of patients with multiple moles may be accomplished with serial photography. Biopsy should be performed on any lesion
that demonstrates a change when compared to photographs, or in the opinion of the patient or physician.

FIGURE 41.3-237. A congenital mole characterized by large size, brown pigmentation, regular border, and normal skin surface markings. Opinion varies about
whether congenital nevi smaller than 1 cm need to be removed. In general any congenital mole smaller than 1 cm may be monitored.

FIGURE 41.3-238. A: Large congenital nevus on the anterior shin of a patient with a history of melanoma. Because of this history it is judicious to ensure that the
congenital nevus is removed in its entirety. Therapeutic options include excision with skin grafting or staged excision. The author prefers the latter in this situation, as
it causes minimal discomfort and provides a superior cosmetic result. In the first excision the majority of the lesion is excised in an elliptical fashion to permit linear
approximation of wound edges. B: Healed nevus after first stage of excision. C: Final result after second excision of residual nevus. This was performed
approximately 3 months after the first excision. Note well-healed scar with no evidence of residual nevus.

FIGURE 41.3-239. Large congenital nevus of the trunk with areas of irregular pigmentation. The risk of transformation to melanoma over time increases with the size
of the congenital nevus. Excision in this situation would help minimize the need to monitor for malignant transformation.

FIGURE 41.3-240. Labial lentigo in an 18-year-old with a history of sun exposure. This lentigo has regular pigmentation and a well-circumscribed border. The risk that
this represents a malignant lesion is very low, but biopsy may be performed without complication. When multiple lesions of this sort are noted, Peutz-Jeghers
syndrome must be considered.

FIGURE 41.3-241. Blue nevus is noted on the cheek of a middle-aged woman. The blue nevus represents pigment cells located within the dermis. The blue coloration
is due to the Tyndall effect, light reflecting off pigment deep within the dermis. The differential diagnosis must include melanoma. Common blue nevi are benign,
although cellular blue nevi have the potential for malignant transformation.

FIGURE 41.3-242. Lentigo maligna, also called melanoma in situ, noted on the right cheek of a man with severe solar damage. Lentigo maligna can transform over
many years into invasive melanoma. Treatment is often complicated by its large size. Atypical melanocytes are confined to the epidermis, and there is no risk of
metastasis as long as the lesion has not transformed into invasive lentigo maligna melanoma. Lentigo maligna was historically referred to as Hutchinson's melanotic
freckle. The treatment of choice is excision with 5-mm margins. This approach can be complicated by the fact that at the periphery of the lesion, it is sometimes
difficult to distinguish sun-damaged melanocytes from truly malignant cells. In addition, the occurrence of these lesions on the face sometimes limits the margin of
tissue that may be taken.

FIGURE 41.3-243. Recurrent lentigo maligna on the nose of a 75-year-old woman. This patient underwent excision of extensive lentigo maligna on the nose with skin
graft placement. Note recurrent lentigo maligna resulting from migration of malignant cells from marginal skin.

FIGURE 41.3-244. A: Lentigo maligna, which is most commonly seen in elderly patients, can be extensive. Often, the broad extent of the malignancy precludes
surgical excision. This patient was not a surgical candidate but had extensive long-standing lentigo maligna. On an experimental basis, the Q-switched ruby laser was
used to treat the lesion with the concern that although the pigment may be removed, amelanotic malignant cells may persist. This presents a theoretical risk of
developing invasive melanoma that might not be identified because of the absence of pigmentation. This approach is considered experimental and necessitated by
the unique clinical challenge presented by this case. B: The patient underwent several treatments with the Q-switched ruby laser, and clinical elimination of lesion
was achieved. Most notable was the complete elimination of labial lentigo maligna. Follow-up biopsy failed to reveal any malignant cells. Further rigorous studies are
needed to determine the role of laser in the management of inoperable lentigo maligna.

FIGURE 41.3-245. Lentigo maligna of the left jaw. This patient presented for laser treatment of this liver spot because of cosmetic concerns. Because of the size of
the lesion, biopsy was performed, which confirmed the presence of lentigo maligna. In this case surgical excision is feasible, and laser was not indicated.

FIGURE 41.3-246. Tan, slightly irregular pigmented lesion of the shin in a patient with extensive solar damage. Although this lesion has the appearance of a
melanoma in situ, the scale that is noted confirms that clinically this is most likely a seborrheic keratosis.

FIGURE 41.3-247. A: Long-standing irregularly pigmented patch on the cheek of a 65-year-old woman. The patient presented for cosmetic treatment of this lesion.
Biopsy revealed lentigo maligna. B: The extent of the lesion was identified using ultraviolet light, which highlights areas of epidermal pigmentation. Those margins
were marked as shown, and excision was performed with 3 to 5 mm beyond the identified area. Rush permanent histologic sections permit identification of residual
areas of lentigo maligna that require further excision. Once all of the lentigo maligna is removed, the patient may undergo reconstruction. Careful monitoring is
required because of the tendency of this type of lesion to recur in sun-damaged skin.

FIGURE 41.3-248. Irregularly pigmented nodular lesion. Note asymmetry, irregular border, variegated color, and diameter greater than 5 mm. This is a melanoma
until proven otherwise by biopsy.

FIGURE 41.3-249. A regularly pigmented dark nodule. The differential diagnosis includes melanoma and seborrheic keratosis.

FIGURE 41.3-250. Superficial spreading melanoma in the radial growth phase. Neglect of this lesion or aggressive behavior will result in transformation into the
vertical growth phase, thus increasing the risk of metastasis. Early diagnosis of melanoma is the single best approach to obtaining the highest cure rate. The role of
sentinel node biopsy is currently under study but is increasingly recommended for intermediate- and some early-stage melanomas.

FIGURE 41.3-251. Nodular malignant melanoma. The dark coloration, size, and nodularity make the diagnoses obvious.

FIGURE 41.3-252. Microscopical example of nodular melanoma with atypical melanocytes extending into the dermis.

FIGURE 41.3-253. Irregular pigmentation under the nail. The differential diagnosis includes hemorrhage and melanoma. Often a clear history of trauma is helpful in
clarifying the diagnosis. If the lesion is not obvious hemorrhage, biopsy is necessary to rule out melanoma.

FIGURE 41.3-254. Pigmented band in the thumbnail of a 70-year-old man. The lesion had been present for many months. The diagnosis in this fair-skinned individual
is melanoma until proven otherwise. A biopsy was performed following avulsion of the nail under local anesthesia, and the histology revealed a simple lentigo.

FIGURE 41.3-255. Lightly pigmented band extending from the proximal nail fold to the distal toe at the medial edge of the nail plate. This long-standing lesion had
begun to change in color. After the nail was avulsed, a biopsy was performed of the nail matrix, and melanoma in situ was identified. Further excision with margins
was performed and the wound was allowed to heal by second intention.

FIGURE 41.3-256. A: Irregular growth of the nail plate associated with a nodule under the medial aspect of the great toenail raised the suspicion of an amelanotic
melanoma. B: After avulsion of the nail, a digital fibroma was identified and removed. Biopsy confirmed the benign nature of this growth.

FIGURE 41.3-257. Irregular black pigmented lesion on the sole of an African American. This represents an acral lentiginous melanoma. The development of
melanoma on the sole is the reason why full body skin examination must include a careful examination of that area, including the interdigital web spaces.

SECTION 42.1 Molecular Biology of Cutaneous Melanoma
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 42.1
Molecular Biology of Cutaneous Melanoma
MEENHARD HERLYN
KAPAETTU SATYAMOORTHY
Introduction
Etiology of Melanoma
Genetics of Melanoma
Functional Significance of Specific Gene Mutations in Melanoma
Cell-Cycle–Regulating Genes in Melanoma
b-Catenin Pathway
Phosphatase and Tensin Homologue Deleted on Chromosome 10 Pathway
Biology of Melanoma Development and Progression
Progression Model
Biologic Basis of Melanoma Progression
Adhesion Receptors
Growth Factors
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The normal human melanocyte adheres singly to the basement membrane of the epidermis with five to six keratinocytes between each cell. Despite normally resting,
melanocytes maintain a lifelong proliferation potential. With their dendrites, they reach to keratinocytes in the upper layers of the epidermis to distribute the pigment
melanin. Melanin is packaged in melanosomes and provides protective coloration against the damaging effects of ultraviolet (UV) irradiation. Developmentally,
melanocytes arise from pluripotent cells of the neural crest. Their survival, migration to the skin, and differentiation is related to spatial and temporal expression of
molecules, not only on the migrating cells, but also on juxtaposed other cell types and the extracellular matrix. Defects during development in genes associated with
melanocyte migration lead to complete or partial loss of pigment-producing cells in the skin, whereas defects in genes of the pigmentation pathways lead to presence
of melanocytes but absence of pigmentation. 1 Genes specific for either melanocyte development or pigmentation are potentially important determinants for melanoma,
but a causal relationship has not yet been established. Growth factor receptor genes such as c-kit or endothelin receptor-B (ENDRB) could have a potential role in the
pathogenesis of melanoma. Stem cell factor, the ligand for c-kit, is a strong mitogen for normal melanocytes, but has little effect on melanoma cells because
expression of c-kit is down-regulated through as yet unknown mechanisms.
The type of pigment, eumelanin versus pheomelanin, present in the melanosomes appears to be related to susceptibility for development of melanoma. 2,3 Those
individuals who produce pheomelanin instead of eumelanin are at higher risk for developing melanoma. Preliminary investigations have revealed mutations in the
gene for the receptor for melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MC1R). Apparently specific point mutations in the MC1R gene correlate with high susceptibility for
melanoma,4 but not all studies came to the same conclusions. 5,6
The incidence of melanoma has increased in the United States from 3 cases per 100,000 in 1950 to 13 cases in 2000 with annual increases of 2.5%. This yearly
increase is among the highest of all human cancers. In 1999, 44,000 new cases are expected in the United States, with approximately 9000 deaths from the disease.
There are no indications that the rate of increase will be slowing in the near future. Fortunately, diagnosis of melanoma in more recent years occurs at an earlier
stage, resulting in higher cure rates than two decades ago. Thus, mortality has not increased as steeply as incidence rates.

ETIOLOGY OF MELANOMA
Knowledge of the etiology of melanoma comes predominantly from epidemiologic, less from genetic, studies. UV exposure at the ultraviolet B (UVB) (290 to 320 nm)
and ultraviolet A (UVA) (320 to 400 nm) range is the most important, if not the only, causative agent for sporadic melanoma development. Predisposition for poor
tanning in combination with high sun exposure provides the largest accumulative risk factor for melanoma development. Risk factors for melanoma development over
a lifetime are, in decreasing order from less than tenfold to less than twofold: presence of over ten dysplastic nevi, presence of over 100 common acquired nevi, fair
skin (types I and II), red hair, and high intermittent sun exposure (i.e., blistering sunburns as a child). 7,8,9 and 10 Excessive intermittent sun exposure is more prevalent in
individuals from higher socioeconomic classes.
The melanoma-inducing effects of UV light have been demonstrated in experimental animal systems. Irradiation with UV light sources in the B range induced
melanomas in Xiphophorus fish and Monodelphus domestica.11,12 and 13 UVA could also transform melanocytes in the highly susceptible Xiphophorus fish. 14 Preliminary
experimental evidence of melanoma induction by UVB comes also from a human skin/mouse chimera model, in which the human skin was grafted to severe combined
immunodeficient (SCID) or recombinase activating gene (RAG) knockout mice and then treated with the carcinogen 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene followed by
chronic UVB irradiation over 9 months. 15,16In this model, which comes closest to the conditions in humans, melanocytic hyperplasia is seen after 4 to 5 months,
followed 2 to 3 months later by atypia in lentiginous lesions. Human melanomas have developed but rarely.

GENETICS OF MELANOMA
Cytogenetic analyses over the last two decades have identified in melanoma cells at least six different chromosomes with loci showing nonrandom deletions,
translocations (rarely), or amplifications (rarely). Extensive research efforts in the late 1980s and early 1990s focused on chromosomes 1, 6, 7, 9, 10, and 11 ( Figure
42.1-1). The severe aneuploidy of melanoma cells has made it difficult to identify specific regions because each chromosome showed several affected regions.
Whereas few laboratories have continued their efforts on the cytogenetic analysis of melanoma cells, most are currently concentrating on screening specific loci or on
genome-wide scans. Cytogenetic studies have helped to identify the 9p21 locus, which is frequently affected in melanoma. Intensive research efforts have identified
mutations in the p16 INK4a gene, which localizes in this region. The p16 INK4a is affected through germline mutations or deletions in patients with familial melanoma, 9
which represent 8% to 10% of all melanoma cases. Approximately 50% of familial melanoma patients have germline abnormalities at chromosome 9p21, 17 making this
the most frequently abnormal locus. Of these, approximately 50% have mutations or deletions in the p16 INK4a gene. Thus, p16 INK4a abnormalities represent
approximately 5% of all melanomas. They are also significant in sporadic melanomas, in which 25% to 40% of all lesions have mutations or deletions or in which the
gene is functionally silenced ( Table 42.1-1). Besides p16INK4a,9 only the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK4) gene has been found mutated in familial melanoma, but only
two families have been identified to date. 18

FIGURE 42.1-1. Identification of regions in human chromosomes with melanoma-specific abnormalities.

TABLE 42.1-1. Gene Abnormalities in Lesions of Patients with Sporadic Melanomas

Among sporadic melanomas, mutations have been found in ras genes with the frequency ranging between 5% and 25%. The wide range is due to differences in the
site of the lesions among the studied patients' cohorts. Melanomas in the sun-exposed face have relatively higher proportions of ras mutation than those in
sun-protected areas. 19 p53, phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) and b-catenin mutations are each around 5% of melanoma
cases.2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23 and 24 Further studies are needed to determine for each lesion the relative frequency of each of the six major genes listed
in Table 42.1-1. Some lesions may accumulate several abnormalities to account for a lower overall percentage of melanomas with defined genetic aberrations. Little is
also known about the sequence of gene defect accumulations in melanomas. With the exception of ras mutations, all abnormalities appear to occur in late stages of
progression. Nevertheless, the aberrations have important biologic implications for melanoma progression.

FUNCTIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF SPECIFIC GENE MUTATIONS IN MELANOMA
CELL-CYCLE–REGULATING GENES IN MELANOMA
Proliferation in melanocytes is tightly controlled in the late G 1 phase of the cell cycle through a number of checkpoint-modulating proteins. These include cyclins
(cyclins A, B, D, and E), 25 CDKs such as CDK2, CDK4, CDK6, CDC2, CDK8,26 CDK inhibitors such as p16 INK4a, p15INK4b, p21 WAF1/CIP1, p27KIP1,27,28 and 29 pocket proteins
of the retinoblastoma (Rb) family (p107, p130, p105), 30 E2F transcription factors (E2F 1 through 6), 31 and other regulatory proteins ( Figure 42.1-2). A clear definition
of the restriction point in the cell cycle has enabled further characterization of each protein in relation to its effects on the cell cycle. Separation of pre–S phase G 1
cells from postmitotic G1 phase by the restriction point relays the mitogenic signals from growth factors to cell-cycle regulatory proteins. In melanoma, growth factors
such as basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) can stimulate the cells to progress from the restriction point interface to the
pre–S phase. Combined with their ability to act as survival and maintenance factors, growth factors can stimulate the expression of positive regulators such as cyclins
and CDKs or suppress CDK inhibitors and pocket proteins.

FIGURE 42.1-2. Cell cycle regulatory proteins in melanoma. Regulation by p53, Rb, cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), and CDK inhibitors during the
melanoma cell cycle. MDM2, murine double minute 2.

D-type cyclins (D1, D2, and D3) are induced in response to the presence of growth factors and, unlike other cyclins, do not oscillate during cell-cycle. 32 This growth
factor–sensing ability allows the cells to synthesize D-type cyclins and interact with their CDK partners such as CDK4 and CDK6, and initiates autonomous cell-cycle
entry. The main function of cyclin D–dependent kinases is phosphorylation of Rb in mid G 1 phase and at least cyclin D is required for the import of CDK4 into the
nucleus. Subsequently, cyclin E-CDK2 becomes active and phosphorylates Rb on other sites. The main role of cyclins A and B–dependent cdc2 kinase appears to be
the maintenance of Rb in its hyperphosphorylated form during the cell division before its hypophosphorylation during the next G 1 cycle. Hyperphosphorylated Rb in
late G1 phase does not associate with the various E2F family members, thereby allowing efficient transcription of a number of target genes, especially those involved
in DNA synthesis during S phase of the cell cycle. 28,33
The CDK inhibitors belong to two classes: the Cip/Kip and INK4 families. The most prominent protein among Cip/Kip family proteins is p21 WAF1/CIP1; others include
p57kip2 and p27kip1. p21 WAF1/CIP1 is able to associate primarily with CDK2, in addition to other CDKs, and can interact with proteins involved in DNA repair and
replication. It also has been identified as a protein induced by the p53 tumor suppressor protein. On DNA damage, p53 is stabilized and acts as a transcription factor,
which, in turn, stimulates expression of p21 WAF1/CIP1. This induction of p21 WAF1/CIP1 inhibits cell-cycle progression by inhibiting cyclin-CDK complexes and by inhibiting
DNA synthesis through proliferating cell nuclear antigen. 34,35 The INK4 family members consist of p16INK4a, p15INK4b, p18INK4c, and p19INK4d. The hallmark of this group
of proteins is that they are able to inhibit specifically the assembled cyclin D/CDK4/6 activity, and expression directly correlates with the Rb phosphorylation status.
Another protein is encoded from the same p16 gene but from a different reading frame, p19 ARF, which acts as a tumor suppressor for the p53 pathway by inhibiting the
effect of MDM2 (murine double minute 2) on p53. At this time, there are no known abnormalities in the p19 ARF gene in melanoma or other cancers. 36
b-CATENIN PATHWAY
b-Catenin is a multifunctional protein that is involved in cell-cell adhesion during tissue morphogenesis and tumor growth. 37,38 Its expression levels and subcellular
localization are tightly regulated. 39 In the absence of a Wnt signal or when not associated with adherens junctions, b-catenin is present as a large multiprotein
complex that consists of glycogen synthase kinase 3b (GSK3b), adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), and axin ( Figure 42.1-3). Phosphorylation in this complex targets
b-catenin for proteolytic degradation by the ubiquitin-protesome system. 40,41 When the Wnt signaling pathway is activated via ligand binding to frizzled receptors,
GSK3b function is inhibited. b-Catenin then accumulates, interacts with TCF/LEF-1 (T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor-1) transcription factors, and activates
transcription of promoters of genes containing TCF/LEF-1 binding sites. 42 Posttranscriptionally, b-catenin's fate is regulated by at least two proteins that control
GSK3b. Akt/protein kinase B (PKB), which is activated by growth factor receptors and integrins through phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3), phosphorylates GSK3b,
thereby inhibiting its ability to phosphorylate b-catenin, leading to its degradation. 40,41,43Dishevelled, which is a predominantly cytoplasmic protein, is regulated by
frizzled.44Dishevelled contains an axin-like domain, a PDZ (three proteins) domain (involved in protein interactions), and the DEP domain (implicated in G protein
regulation) 45,46 and it interacts with axin to regulate GSK3b, thereby influencing b-catenin. In addition, overexpression of axin can suppress the effect of b-catenin in

cells. Mutations in the b-catenin gene in melanoma would lead to an endogenous activation without degradation.

FIGURE 42.1-3. b-Catenin pathways in melanoma. Differences between normal and transformed melanocytes for cadherin signaling. APC, adenomatous polyposis
coli; mut.b-cat., b-catentin mutation.

PHOSPHATASE AND TENSIN HOMOLOGUE DELETED ON CHROMOSOME 10 PATHWAY
PTEN has emerged as a major component in regulating survival of tumor cells through its involvement in intricate cascading pathways for growth and adhesion
signaling. Both the growth factor and the adhesion receptor (integrin) signaling pathways work in tandem, and signaling is initiated from PI3 kinase, which acts as a
relay station (Fig. 42.1-4).47 PI3 kinase activity is associated with the transformation ability of oncoproteins and stimulation by growth factors. Akt/PKB, an oncogene
initially discovered in retroviruses, binds to phosphatidylinositol 3,4-diphosphate (PtdIns-3,4-P 2), and phosphatidylinositol 3,4-triphosphate (PtdIns-3,4,5-P 3), and is
then transported to the membrane where it activates PI3 kinase. Activation of Akt/PKB in melanoma cells by IGF-1 provides survival signal by phosphorylating Bad
and caspase 9. PTEN dephosphorylates PtdIns phosphates, thereby depriving the PI3 kinase of its substrate. Thus, a mutated PTEN can constitutively activate
Akt/PKB to influence downstream genes. Cells accumulate in the G 1 phase of the cell cycle through up-regulation of p27. However, it is unknown whether the
phosphatase activity is involved in this process and whether it is necessary for dephosphorylation of FAK leading to inhibition of integrin-mediated signaling of cell
spreading.

FIGURE 42.1-4. PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome 10) pathways in melanoma. Schematic representation of PTEN as a central
molecule influencing PI3 kinase-dependent Ras and Akt signaling.

It is not yet clear how the PTEN may signal to regulate the ras pathway. 48,49 One evidence is the involvement of Shc phosphorylation, which affects its association with
Grb2. Shc and Grb2 interactions are necessary for subsequent activation of the ras/raf/MEK1/MAPK pathways, providing a central role for PTEN in controlling cellular
responses to growth factor– and integrin-mediated signaling.

BIOLOGY OF MELANOMA DEVELOPMENT AND PROGRESSION
PROGRESSION MODEL
Clinical and histologic studies have resulted in defining distinct steps of melanoma development and progression ( Fig. 42.1-5): step 0, melanocytes; step 1, common
acquired and congenital nevi with structurally normal melanocytes; step 2, dysplastic nevi with structural and architectural atypia; step 3, radial growth phase (RGP),
nontumorigenic primary melanomas without metastatic competence; step 4, vertical growth phase (VGP), tumorigenic primary melanomas with competence for
metastasis; and step 5, metastatic melanoma.50,51 and 52 A refinement by Elder et al. of this classification of nevi and primary melanomas 51 divides lesions into three
classes: class I represents precursor nevi; class II lesions are intermediates, confined to the epidermis or with microinvasion into the dermis and represented by in situ
and microinvasive RGP melanomas; class III are VGP tumorigenic melanomas. As in any neoplastic system, individual melanomas can skip steps in their
development, appearing without identifiable intermediate lesions. It remains to be experimentally verified that melanoma cells can develop from a melanocyte
precursor cell, which appears to be present not only in murine but also in human skin.

FIGURE 42.1-5. Melanoma development and progression. The model implies that melanomas develop and progress in a sequence of steps. However, malignancy
can also develop de novo. RGP, radial growth phase; VGP, vertical growth phase.

The progression from each stage to the next is associated with specific biologic changes, which are based on experimental models and clinical and histopathologic
observations (Fig. 42.1-6). The transition from the mature melanocyte to the formation of a nevus is characterized by a disruption of cell-cell cross-talk between
melanocytes and keratinocytes, which leads to an escape of the melanocyte from the regulatory control of keratinocytes. Nevus cells show limited proliferation
because common acquired nevi have no apparent chromosomal aberrations. Thus, nevi can develop not just through a stimulatory event, but also through loss of

control of keratinocytes over melanocytes.

FIGURE 42.1-6. Biologic events during melanoma progression. Each transition is marked by characteristic changes in the cells. RGP, radial growth phase; VGP,
vertical growth phase.

Progression from the melanocyte or common acquired nevus cell to a dysplastic nevus or RGP melanoma most likely involves the beginning of genetic aberrations.
The cells show cytologic atypia, they can separate from the basement membrane without undergoing apoptosis, and the entire lesion shows architectural atypia. Cells
from RGP lesions have biologic properties in vitro that are intermediate between benign and malignant. They require several growth factors for proliferation, do not
grow anchorage independently in soft agar and are nontumorigenic in mice. At this time, a local immune response is observed, which could be critical for long-term
disease outcome. Specificity and nature of infiltrating lymphocytes in dysplastic nevi or RGP melanoma have not yet been determined. Surgical excision of dysplastic
nevi and RGP melanomas leads to a cure from the disease. The histologic diagnosis of both dysplastic nevi and RGP primary melanomas is still controversial
because of a lack of molecular markers. For example, in the diagnosis of 37 lesions by eight pathologists, disagreements in diagnosis were noted in 40% of the
cases.53
VGP primary melanomas are characterized as expanding nodules that invade deep into the dermis. Lesions show increased blood vessel infiltration and a decreased
host response. Approximately 35% of VGP lesions have already disseminated at the time of surgical excision of the primary lesion. Besides the classical criteria of
Clark's level of invasion and Breslow's measure of tumor thickness, several additional attributes have been defined that determine disease outcome: (1) mitotic
activity (i.e., the higher the number of mitoses, the lower the survival rate); (2) lymphocyte infiltration (i.e., the higher the better for survival); and (3) minor attributes
such as sex (i.e., male worse than female subjects), site (i.e., trunk worse than extremity), and regression (i.e., presence worse than absence). 54
Cultured VGP melanoma cells grow independently of exogenous growth factors with the exception of IGF-1. They readily grow anchorage independently in soft agar
and all form tumors when injected into immunodeficient mice. VGP primary melanomas are highly aneuploid, which has hampered their cytogenetic and molecular
genetic characterization. Biologically, the cells are relatively plastic, and selective pressure over a few weeks can render cells independent of all exogenous growth
factors55 or they become highly invasive. 56,57,58 and 59 Some also acquire metastatic competence.
The metastatic phenotype of melanoma cells isolated from metastatic lesions of patients is unstable. Injection of these cells into an immunodeficient host rarely
produces metastases. Metastatic cells also show a high level of phenotypic plasticity, depending on the environment and any selective pressure placed on the cells.

BIOLOGIC BASIS OF MELANOMA PROGRESSION
Monoclonal antibodies have been used for the last 20 years to characterize molecules expressed by melanoma cells ( Fig. 42.1-7). They have particularly aided in
biologic and biochemical analyses of melanoma-associated antigens. Each group of molecules is represented by 5 to 20 members. Thus, melanoma cells are among
the best studied of all human tumors. Most intensely studied are adhesion receptors and their ligands, and growth factors with their receptors. 60 In the following
discussion, we focus on the biologic significance of adhesion receptors and growth factors for melanoma survival, growth, motility, and invasion.

FIGURE 42.1-7. Expression of defined molecules on melanoma cells. Each group, which was defined with monoclonal antibodies, represents 5 to 20 different
molecules.

ADHESION RECEPTORS
Melanoma cells express all major groups of adhesion receptors: integrins, cadherins, and cellular adhesion molecules of the immunoglobulin supergene family.
Expression of most adhesion receptors increases with progression ( Fig 42.1-8). There is a dynamic shift as others decrease. Only few remain unchanged. This shift in
adhesion receptor expression between normal and malignant cells is most obvious among the cadherins. Melanocytes express E-cadherin, whereas melanoma cells
express N-cadherin. The expression of E-cadherin by melanocytes allows them to adhere to keratinocytes and develop gap junctions through connexin 43 ( Fig.
42.1-9). Melanoma cells cannot establish gap junctions with keratinocytes. Instead, melanoma cells, which all express N-cadherin, adhere to either fibroblasts or
endothelial cells, which both express N-cadherin. Neither fibroblasts nor endothelial cells can establish gap junctions to keratinocytes. The biologic consequences of
gap junction formation are not clear.

FIGURE 42.1-8. Dynamic shifts in the expression of adhesion receptors and their matrix proteins by melanoma cells. The increase or decrease in expression may
already start in nevi or only in vertical growth phase melanomas.

FIGURE 42.1-9. Melanocyte and melanoma cell interactions with juxtaposed cells in their environment. Adhesions occur through either E-cadherin (E-cad) or
N-cadherin (N-cad) and gap junctional communication is mediated through connexin 43 hexamers.

Keratinocytes can control the phenotype of normal melanocytes but not melanoma cells. They can regulate melanocyte growth and the expression of cell surface
adhesion receptors. Figure 42.1-10 illustrates that melanocytes in culture in the absence of any other cell (monoculture) express melanoma-associated antigens.
However, the expression of these molecules disappears within 3 to 4 days when the cells are cocultured with normal keratinocytes to allow cell-cell contact.
Melanoma cells are refractory to keratinocytes. However, if the melanoma cells are transduced with E-cadherin, they can adhere to keratinocytes and establish gap
junctions. At this time, cell surface molecules are down-regulated, gap junctions are established with keratinocytes, and growth of cells is controlled by keratinocytes.
Highly metastatic melanoma cells are no longer invasive. 56,61,62 Little is currently known about the signaling mechanisms between keratinocytes and
E-cadherin–expressing melanoma cells.
Besides N-cadherin–mediated interactions, melanoma cells can adhere through other adhesion receptor systems (see Fig. 42.1-10). Most notable is adhesion
through Mel–cellular adhesion molecules and a yet unidentified ligand, also found on melanoma cells. Melanoma cells and activated endothelial cells share a number
of adhesion molecules that allow heterophilic adhesion between these two cell types in a similar manner as homophilic adhesion between the malignant cells. The
similarities in adhesion receptor expression could have functional consequences ( Fig. 42.1-11). Maniotis and coworkers demonstrated that melanoma cells could
establish tubule-like structures for blood flow, which can connect to bona fide blood vessels. 63

FIGURE 42.1-10. Expression of tumor-associated antigens on melanocytes and melanoma cells is dependent on the presence of E-cadherin (E-cad.) and adhesion to
keratinocytes. Keratinocytes can regulate antigen expression on melanoma cells only when E-cadherin is expressed by melanoma cells.

FIGURE 42.1-11. Melanoma-melanoma and melanoma-endothelial cell adhesion. Both cell types use similar molecules for cell-cell adhesion.

b3 is present on almost all VGP primary and metastatic melanomas, but not on cells of earlier stages of progression. One of the most specific markers that
characterizes VGP and metastatic cells is the b 3 subunit of the vitronectin receptor a vb3 (Fig. 42.1-12). When the b 3 gene was transduced to RGP melanoma cells,
there were no changes in growth properties in vitro.64 On the other hand, the cells became highly invasive in a skin reconstruction model and were now tumorigenic in
mice, two attributes of VGP melanoma cells. Apparently, b 3 integrin expression triggers the up-regulation of a variety of genes associated with invasion and tumor
growth. The b 3 integrin subunit is also up-regulated by tumor-infiltrating endothelial cells, and several clinical studies have been initiated to target b 3 on endothelial
cells, melanoma cells, or both for therapy.

FIGURE 42.1-12. Expression of the integrin subunit b 3 of the a vb3 vitronectin receptor in melanocytic cells from different stages of tumor progression. Expression was
tested with monoclonal antibodies on both frozen and fixed tissue sections. RGP, radial growth phase; VGP, vertical growth phase.

GROWTH FACTORS
With progression, melanoma cells show an increase in production of growth factors and cytokines ( Fig. 42.1-13). Normal melanocytes are relatively inactive in growth
factor production, even after stimulation. Nevus cells may produce bFGF and chemoattractive cytokines such as interleukin-8 or MCP-1 (monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1). The strongest increase in growth factor expression, most notably a further increase in production of bFGF, and of expression of platelet-derived growth
factor (PDGF) and transforming growth factor-b, can be found in VGP melanomas. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) can be triggered in VGP and metastatic
cells by hypoxic growth conditions or by chemokines and growth factors. bFGF, PDGF, and VEGF act in concert with each other (see Fig. 42.1-13). bFGF is the most
significant autocrine growth factor in melanoma. Blocking of bFGF production with antisense oligonucleotides stops melanoma cell proliferation. 65 Despite its lack of a
signal sequence, it can be released from cells through yet unknown mechanisms. When released from cells, bFGF binds to matrix proteins such as heparan sulfate
proteoglycan, and it can then stimulate both fibroblasts and endothelial cells. bFGF is not only a survival factor and a growth stimulator for melanoma cells but also a
motility factor. Its role in invasion comes from up-regulation of serine proteinases (urokinase and plasminogen activator), and metalloproteinases (gelatinase A and B).
Potentially, a variety of other genes are activated as well, which still need to be identified.

FIGURE 42.1-13. Dynamic up-regulation of expression of growth factors and cytokines during melanoma progression. Whereas initial increases occur after the
transition from normal melanocyte to nevus cells, most changes occur between the radial growth phase (RGP) and vertical growth phase (VGP) of primary
melanomas. Metastatic cells generally show the highest production levels. bFGF, basic fibroblast growth factor; IL-8, interleukin-8; PDGFA + B, platelet-derived
growth factor-a and-b; TGF-b, transforming growth factor-b; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.

The biologically most significant stimulating growth factor for tumor-infiltrating fibroblasts is PDGF ( Fig 42.1-14). Melanoma cells produce both A and B isoforms.
PDGF is not only mitogenic for fibroblasts, but it also induces the production of matrix proteins such as fibronectin and collagen, which provide the melanoma cells a
scaffolding to which to adhere. Activated fibroblasts produce IGF-1, one of the most significant exogenous growth factors for melanoma cells because they do not
produce it on their own. IGF-1 is highly mitogenic for melanoma cells but is also a motility factor and stimulates survival by stabilization of b-catenin. Melanoma cells
are strong producers of chemoattractive proteins such as interleukin-8 (neutrophil attractant) or MCP-1 (monocyte attractant). In early malignant lesions, infiltrating
neutrophils and monocytes may have a stimulatory role for tumors by producing angiogenic cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-a or by inducing stroma formation.
High production of these chemokines can lead to a strong infiltration of the inflammatory cells, which then kills the malignant cells. Thus, tumor cells must maintain a
fine balance of chemokine production for biggest growth advantage. Inflammatory cell infiltrates diminish with metastasis apparently due to a breakdown of the
gradient when the chemokine levels are increased to be elevated in serum.

FIGURE 42.1-14. Melanoma to stroma cross-talk. Production of growth factors and cytokines by melanoma cells that affect normal host cells in the environment. A
positive feedback may also occur, when the stromal cells produce stimulants for the malignant cells. bFGF, basic fibroblast growth factor; IGF-I, insulin-like growth
factor 1; IL-8, interleukin-8; MCP-1, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; SF, scatter factor;TGF-b, transforming growth factor-b;
TNF-a, tumor necrosis factor-a; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Spritz RA. Multi-organellar disorders of pigmentation: tied up in traffic. Clin Genet 1999;55:309.
2. Valverde P, Healy E, Jackson I, et al. Variants of the melanocyte-stimulating hormone receptor gene are associated with red hair and fair skin in humans [see comments]. Nat Genet
1995;11:328.
3. Rees JL, Healy E. Melanocortin receptors, red hair, and skin cancer. J Invest DermatolSymp Proc 1997;2:94.
4. Valverde P, Healy E, Sikkink S, et al. The Asp84Glu variant of the melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) is associated with melanoma. Hum Mol Genet 1996;5:1663.
5. Sturm RA, Box NF, Ramsay M. Human pigmentation genetics: the difference is only skin deep. Bioessays 1998;20:712.
6. Ichii-Jones F, Lear JT, Heagerty AH, et al. Susceptibility to melanoma: influence of skin type and polymorphism in the melanocyte stimulating hormone receptor gene [see comments]. J Invest
Dermatol 1998;111:218.
7. Dubin N, Pasternack BS, Moseson M. Simultaneous assessment of risk factors for malignant melanoma and non-melanoma skin lesions, with emphasis on sun exposure and related variables.
Int J Epidemiol 1990;19:811.
8. Carli P, Biggeri A, Nardini P, et al. Epidemiology of atypical melanocytic naevi: an analytical study in a Mediterranean population [see comments]. Eur J Cancer Prev 1997;6:506.
9. Carli P, Biggeri A, Nardini P, et al. Sun exposure and large numbers of common and atypical melanocytic naevi: an analytical study in a southern European population. Br J Dermatol
1998;138:422.
10. Goldstein AM, Tucker MA. Etiology, epidemiology, risk factors, and public health issues of melanoma. Curr Opin Oncol 1993;5:358.
11. Ley RD, Applegate LA, Padilla RS, et al. Ultraviolet radiation-induced malignant melanoma in Monodelphis domestica. Photochem Photobiol 1989;50:1.
12. Moan J, Dahlback A, Setlow RB. Epidemiological support for an hypothesis for melanoma induction indicating a role for UVA radiation. Photochem Photobiol 1999;70:243.
13. Setlow RB. Relevance of in vivo models in melanoma skin cancer. Photochem Photobiol 1996;63:410.
14. Setlow RB, Woodhead AD, Grist E. Animal model for ultraviolet radiation-induced melanoma: platyfish-swordtail hybrid. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:8922.
15. Soballe PW, Montone KT, Satyamoorthy K, et al. Carcinogenesis in human skin grafted to SCID mice. Cancer Res 1996;56:757.
16. Atillasoy ES, Seykora JT, Soballe PW, et al. UVB induces atypical melanocytic lesions and melanoma in human skin. Am J Pathol 1998;152:1179.
17. Chin L, Merlino G, DePinho RA. Malignant melanoma: modern black plague and genetic black box. Genes Dev 1998;12:3467.
18. Platz A, Hansson J, Ringborg U. Screening of germline mutations in the CDK4, CDKN2C and TP53 genes in familial melanoma: a clinic-based population study. Int J Cancer 1998;78:13.
19. Herlyn M, Satyamoorthy K. Activated ras. Yet another player in melanoma? [comment]. Am J Pathol 1996;149:739.

20. Rimm DL, Caca K, Hu G, et al. Frequent nuclear/cytoplasmic localization of beta-catenin without exon 3 mutations in malignant melanoma. Am J Pathol 1999;154:325.
21. Robbins PF, El-Gamil M, Li YF, et al. A mutated beta-catenin gene encodes a melanoma-specific antigen recognized by tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1996;183:1185.
22. Albino AP, Vidal MJ, McNutt NS, et al. Mutation and expression of the p53 gene in human malignant melanoma. Melanoma Res 1994;4:35.
23. Weiss J, Schwechheimer K, Cavenee WK, et al. Mutation and expression of the p53 gene in malignant melanoma cell lines. Int J Cancer 1993;54:693.
24. Tsao H, Zhang X, Benoit E, et al. Identification of PTEN/MMAC1 alterations in uncultured melanomas and melanoma cell lines. Oncogene 1998;16:3397.
25. Johnson DG, Walker CL. Cyclins and cell cycle checkpoints. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1999;39:295.
26. Morgan DO. Cyclin-dependent kinases: engines, clocks, and microprocessors. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1997;13:261.
27. Elledge SJ, Harper JW. Cdk inhibitors: on the threshold of checkpoints and development. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1994;6:847.
28. Serrano M. The tumor suppressor protein p16INK4a. Exp Cell Res 1997;237:7.
29. Sherr CJ, Roberts JM. CDK inhibitors: positive and negative regulators of G1-phase progression. Genes Dev 1999;13:1501.
30. Bartek J, Bartkova J, Lukas J. The retinoblastoma protein pathway in cell cycle control and cancer. Exp Cell Res 1997;237:1.
31. Black AR, Azizkhan-Clifford J. Regulation of E2F: a family of transcription factors involved in proliferation control. Gene 1999;237:281.
32. Elledge SJ. Cell cycle checkpoints: preventing an identity crisis. Science 1996;274:1664.
33. Nasmyth K. Viewpoint: putting the cell cycle in order. Science 1996;274:1643.
34. el-Deiry WS. p21/p53, cellular growth control and genomic integrity. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1998;227:121.
35. Ko LJ, Prives C. p53: puzzle and paradigm. Genes Dev 1996;10:1054.
36. Sherr CJ. Tumor surveillance via the ARF-p53 pathway. Genes Dev 1998;12:2984.
37. Willert K, Nusse R. Beta-catenin: a key mediator of Wnt signaling. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1998;8:95.
38. Polakis P. The oncogenic activation of beta-catenin. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1999;9:15.
39. Arias AM, Brown AM, Brennan K. Wnt signalling: pathway or network? Curr Opin Genet Dev 1999;9:447.
40. Dierick H, Bejsovec A. Cellular mechanisms of wingless/Wnt signal transduction. Curr Top Dev Biol 1999;43:153.
41. Eastman Q, Grosschedl R. Regulation of LEF-1/TCF transcription factors by Wnt and other signals. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1999;11:233.
42. Shulman JM, Perrimon N, Axelrod JD. Frizzled signaling and the developmental control of cell polarity. Trends Genet 1998;14:452.
43. Cox RT, Peifer M. Wingless signaling: the inconvenient complexities of life. Curr Biol 1998;8:R140.
44. Axelrod JD, Miller JR, Shulman JM, et al. Differential recruitment of Dishevelled provides signaling specificity in the planar cell polarity and Wingless signaling pathways. Genes Dev
1998;12:2610.
45. Li L, Yuan H, Xie W, et al. Dishevelled proteins lead to two signaling pathways. Regulation of LEF- 1 and c-Jun N-terminal kinase in mammalian cells. J Biol Chem 1999;274:129.
46. Lee JS, Ishimoto A, Yanagawa S. Characterization of mouse dishevelled (Dvl) proteins in Wnt/Wingless signaling pathway. J Biol Chem 1999;274:21464.
47. Besson A, Robbins SM, Yong VW. PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 in signal transduction and tumorigenesis. Eur J Biochem 1999;263:605.
48. Cantley LC, Neel BG. New insights into tumor suppression: PTEN suppresses tumor formation by restraining the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT pathway. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1999;96:4240.
49. Maehama T, Dixon JE. PTEN: a tumour suppressor that functions as a phospholipid phosphatase. Trends Cell Biol 1999;9:125.
50. Clark WH Jr, Elder DE, Guerry DT, et al. A study of tumor progression: the precursor lesions of superficial spreading and nodular melanoma. Hum Pathol 1984;15:1147.
51. Elder DE, Clark WH Jr, Elenitsas R, et al. The early and intermediate precursor lesions of tumor progression in the melanocytic system: common acquired nevi and atypical (dysplastic) nevi.
Semin Diagn Pathol 1993;10:18.
52. Valyi-Nagy I, Rodeck U, Kath R, et al. The human melanocyte system as a model for studies on tumor progression. Basic Life Sci 1991;57:315.
53. Farmer ER, Gonin R, Hanna MP. Discordance in the histopathologic diagnosis of melanoma and melanocytic nevi between expert pathologists [see comments]. Hum Pathol 1996;27:528.
54. Clemente CG, Mihm MC Jr, Bufalino R, et al. Prognostic value of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes in the vertical growth phase of primary cutaneous melanoma. Cancer 1996;77:1303.
55. Kath R, Jambrosic JA, Holland L, et al. Development of invasive and growth factor-independent cell variants from primary human melanomas. Cancer Res 1991;51:2205.
56. Meier F, Satyamoorthy K, Nesbit M, et al. Molecular events in melanoma development and progression. Front Biosci 1998;3:D1005.
57. Valyi-Nagy IT, Herlyn M. Regulation of growth and phenotype of normal human melanocytes in culture. Cancer Treat Res 1991;54:85.
58. Valyi-Nagy I, Shih IM, Gyorfi T, et al. Spontaneous and induced differentiation of human melanoma cells. Int J Cancer 1993;54:159.
59. Satyamoorthy K, DeJesus E, Linnenbach AJ, et al. Melanoma cell lines from different stages of progression and their biological and molecular analyses. Melanoma Res 1997;7(Suppl 2):S35.
60. Herlyn M. Molecular and cellular biology of melanoma. Austin: R.G. Landes, 1993.
61. Valyi-Nagy IT, Murphy GF, Mancianti ML, et al. Phenotypes and interactions of human melanocytes and keratinocytes in an epidermal reconstruction model. Lab Invest 1990;62:314.
62. Valyi-Nagy IT, Hirka G, Jensen PJ, et al. Undifferentiated keratinocytes control growth, morphology, and antigen expression of normal melanocytes through cell-cell contact [see comments].
Lab Invest 1993;69:152.
63. Maniotis AJ, Folberg R, Hess A, et al. Vascular channel formation by human melanoma cells in vivo and in vitro: vasculogenic mimicry [see comments]. Am J Pathol 1999;155:739.
64. Hsu MY, Shih DT, Meier FE, et al. Adenoviral gene transfer of beta3 integrin subunit induces conversion from radial to vertical growth phase in primary human melanoma [see comments]. Am
J Pathol 1998;153:1435.
65. Becker D, Lee PL, Rodeck U, et al. Inhibition of the fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR-1) gene in human melanocytes and malignant melanomas leads to inhibition of proliferation and
signs indicative of differentiation. Oncogene 1992;7:2303.

SECTION 42.2 Cutaneous Melanoma
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 42.2
Cutaneous Melanoma
MICHAEL T. LOTZE
RAMSEY M. DALLAL
JOHN M. KIRKWOOD
JOHN C. FLICKINGER
Introduction
Epidemiology
Risk Factors, Prevention, and Screening
Risk Factors for the Development of Melanoma in Populations at Highest Risk for Developing Melanoma
Diagnosis: Characteristics of Melanoma
Prevention
Screening
Staging of Melanoma
Stage I Melanoma
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IV: M1
Imaging of Malignant Melanoma
Radiobiology of Melanoma
Stage I and II Disease: Management of Primary Melanoma
Preoperative Workup
Excisional Biopsy
Incisional Biopsy
Surgical Margins of Resection
Special Sites
Mohs Micrographic Surgery
Radiotherapy of Primary Skin Tumors
Stage I and II Disease: Examination of the Lymph Node Basin
Elective Lymph Node Dissection
Sentinel Node Biopsy
Sentinel Lymph Node Results in Thin and Thick Melanomas
Stage III Disease: Management of the Clinically Positive Nodal Basin
Therapeutic Node Dissection
Melanoma of Unknown Primary Site
Management of Locoregional Disease by Radiotherapy
Stage III Disease: Management of in-Transit Disease
Surgical Excision
Isolated Limb Perfusion
Isolated Limb Infusion
Intraarterial Therapy
Local Ablation
Local Immunotherapy
Radiotherapy
Systemic Therapy
Adjuvant Medical Therapy
Immunostimulants
Interferons
Treatment of Stage IV Disease
Radiographic Role in the Diagnosis of Stage IV Disease
Metastasectomy and Radiotherapy
Cytotoxic Chemotherapy
Immunotherapy of Metastatic Disease
Management of Melanoma in the Pregnant Patient
Future Prospects for the Biologic Therapy of Patients with Melanoma
Antigens of Melanoma
Clinical Applications
Cellular Adjuvants
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Cutaneous melanoma is a readily curable neoplasm, with 85% of diagnosed patients enjoying long-term survival following simple surgical excision. In its disseminated
state, however, it is a devastating illness with limited effective treatment options prompting the evolution of efforts designed to identify metastatic disease early and to
develop novel biologic therapies. 1 The application of immunotherapy has so far provided benefit to only a small percentage of patients. In the majority of patients with
metastatic disease, many in their youth, treatment with chemotherapy or biologic therapy is unsuccessful, and they ultimately succumb to their disease. In the United
States, melanoma is diagnosed in at least 47,000 people a year, more than double the reported incidence in 1970. There has been a steady increase in melanoma
incidence over the last century. In 1935, for example, the incidence of melanoma in the United States was approximately 1 in 100,000. Now, the incidence approaches
15 in 100,000. Although the basis for this increase is incompletely understood, the localized degradation of the ozone layer, the increase in solar exposure as a
recreational activity, and the immigration of fair-skinned populations into equatorial latitudes each appears to play some causative role. Because of the effectiveness
of early surgical treatment, the international community has focused extensively on preventive measures and screening efforts with some success. The diagnosis of
the majority of melanoma occurs at thin and easily cured depths of invasion.
Large prospective, randomized, multicenter trials have answered some basic management questions, improved the care of melanoma patients, and expanded our
understanding of the disease. However, many aspects of the treatment of melanoma, such as the therapeutic role of sentinel node dissection, isolated limb perfusion
(ILP), and cytotoxic, biologic, or both therapies remain controversial and inconclusive. The field of melanoma is rapidly evolving with new techniques and therapeutics
becoming standard care, even before substantial evidence of benefit exists. Not surprisingly, many physicians still find the enormous amount of conflicting data
confusing. The changing framework of surgical, radiologic, and even pathologic assessment demands additional randomized, prospective, controlled trials to arrive at
meaningful conclusions to serve as the foundation for future progress. Many of these are currently ongoing without results available at the time of preparation of this
chapter.
Melanoma has been one of the most successful targets for immunotherapy, especially as biologic therapies. Interleukin-2 (IL-2) and interferon (IFN) therapy have now
become routine and new peptide or protein vaccines as well as cellular and genetic therapies are being aggressively developed. Melanoma has attracted the attention
of immunotherapists for many reasons. Spontaneous regression of melanoma associated with evidence supporting a specific cellular immune response occurs more
frequently in patients with melanoma than with other solid tumors. The lack of effective alternatives has allowed the implementation and evolution of new treatments
since, as yet, no systemic therapy has been shown to prolong survival significantly for treated cohorts in properly randomized studies. The identification of tumor
rejection antigens recognized by CD4 and CD8 T cells as well as prognostically significant roles of antibody response to melanoma antigens has spawned a
renaissance of immunotherapy. Occasional patients with advanced disease have been apparently cured by immunotherapy, surviving as long as 15 years without
disease, something essentially unheard of for systemic therapy of metastases of any other major solid tumor.
The advances made in melanoma treatment have moved into other areas of oncology. Sentinel node biopsies are increasingly applied in the treatment of breast and

colon cancer. The rapid advances in understanding melanocyte biology and the immunologic community's interest in studying the disease has propelled the
development of novel biologic therapies for other tumors. Melanoma trials have demonstrated the importance of multidisciplinary approaches in confronting the
difficult problems faced in the treatment of cancer patients.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
In 1956, Lancaster observed an association between sun exposure and the development of melanoma. He described the relationship between disease incidence and
latitude among people of European background. The closer to the equator, the greater the rate of melanoma mortality and incidence of melanoma in whites. 2
Since 1973, the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program has sampled hospital-based cancer registries in 11 different regions accounting for a
total of 10% of the U.S. population. Even with this surveillance system, underreporting is common as numerous thin melanomas are treated in an office setting and not
reported in this hospital-based system. For example up to 19% of melanomas were not reported in the Massachusetts Cancer Registry. Using national surveys of
community practices, some believe the incidence of melanoma in the United States to be 2.5 times SEER estimates. 3,4
In 2000, an estimated 7700 Americans will die of malignant melanoma. 5 The incidence of melanoma in the white U.S. population has increased alarmingly from 1 per
100,000 in 1935 to 15 per 100,000 in 1996 ( Fig. 42.2-1).6 In 2000, at least 47,000 cases are expected. However, the overall melanoma mortality has not increased
nearly as dramatically over the last several decades ( Fig. 42.2-2). Since 1973 the mortality only increased from 1.6 to 2.3 per 100,000 individuals in the 1996 survey
(Fig. 42.2-3).7 During the same time period, overall 5-year survival in patients with melanoma has increased significantly, possibly due to the thinner depth at
diagnosis of lesions and the adoption of improved surgical techniques ( Fig. 42.2-4). The increase in melanoma mortality over the last 50 years has only recently
shown signs of slowing. 8 Some argue that the increased incidence of melanoma may be secondary to the detection of neoplasms that never would have acquired
metastatic potential and were destined for regression. Others question whether a lead-time bias may account for the relative differences in rates of mortality and
incidence changes. However, one analysis demonstrates rather clearly that the increase in incidence is only partly associated with earlier detection. 9

FIGURE 42.2-1. Age-adjusted incidence of melanoma in the United States from 1973 to 1996. The incidence has increased for the white population substantially and
is rising faster in male than female subjects. This increase in melanoma incidence has not discernibly affected the black population. (Data from the Surveillance,
Epidemiology and End Results program, 2000.)

FIGURE 42.2-2. The incidence of melanoma has increased disproportionately faster than mortality. This is at least in part due to the increase in superficial lesions
diagnosed relative to thicker ones. (Data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results program, 2000.)

FIGURE 42.2-3. Age-adjusted U.S. mortality from melanoma from 1973 to 1996. Note the increasing mortality among white male subjects. (Data from the Surveillance,
Epidemiology and End Results program, 2000.)

FIGURE 42.2-4. Five-year survival rates after the diagnosis of melanoma in the United States. These have improved from 1960, the earliest time period for which
reliable data are available. The difference between the earliest and latest time periods are statistically significant. This increase in survival may be due to the increase
in thinner melanomas compared with thicker ones. (Data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results program, 2000.)

Currently, melanoma is the sixth and seventh most common cancer in American men and women, respectively. The lifetime risk for developing melanoma among
white Americans is 1 in 85. The risk of melanoma increases with age and the median age at diagnosis ranges between 45 and 55 years, but people of all ages are at
risk.10,11 Melanoma commonly afflicts young, productive members of society. One-fourth of melanoma cases identified in the United States occurs in individuals before
the age of 40. In women 20 to 35 years old, it is the second most common tumor after cervical cancer 12 and in women aged 25 to 30 it is the leading source of cancer
death. The years of productive life lost to melanoma exceed those of all other solid tumors. In the United States, melanoma is more common among higher
socioeconomic classes, but the case fatality is highest among lower socioeconomic groups. 13 The highest mortality from melanoma occurs in the state of Vermont and
the lowest in Washington, DC. Although there is some increased distribution of melanoma mortality by latitude, other factors such as race are additionally important
(Fig. 42.2-5).

FIGURE 42.2-5. Substantial geographic variation in the incidence of melanoma. Interestingly, the U.S. mortality for melanoma is highest in Vermont (3.2 per 100,000)
and lowest in Washington, DC (0.8 per 100,000) and Hawaii (1.2 per 100,000). Factors other than latitude, such as ethnic background, significantly influence the
geographic risk of overall melanoma mortality. (Data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results program, 2000.)

Racial differences in susceptibility are apparent, and melanoma is most prevalent among white, European populations. For example, the incidence of cutaneous
melanoma among African Americans is approximately1/20 that of the U.S. white population and behaves differently at presentation. Among African Americans,
melanoma occurs predominantly in acral sites rather than in areas of pigmented integument. 14 The worldwide incidence of melanoma varies considerably as well ( Fig.
42.2-6). Rates of 0.2 per 100,000 in parts of Japan to nearly 40 per 100,000 in Queensland have been reported. Despite these wide variations, the increase in overall
melanoma incidence has increased globally. 15 Worldwide, race is the predominant risk factor for the development of melanoma, with white populations having the
highest risk and Asian the lowest risk.

FIGURE 42.2-6. Worldwide incidence of melanoma. Note the wide variation in incidence depending on race, sex, and latitude. (Data from refs. 549 and 550.)

In the United Kingdom, trends have been similar to those in the United States. The incidence and mortality of melanoma has increased 50% during the last decade. 12
In Australia, where the incidence rates are the highest in the world, the increase in mortality is only now showing signs of slowing. However, mortality is increasing in
many countries that had not previously reported increases such as France, Italy, Spain, and Hungary. 16

RISK FACTORS, PREVENTION, AND SCREENING
With the increase in melanoma incidence over the last 40 years, effective screening strategies have become increasingly important. 17 The biologic and clinical
behavior of melanoma supports the broad pursuit of screening programs. Effective screening for melanoma can be accomplished using noninvasive skin examinations
since 93% of all primary melanomas are grossly visible. The remaining balance arises in mucosal, ocular, and unknown primary sites. 18 Many primary cutaneous
lesions have a distinct radial growth phase that may persist for months to years, giving physicians, family, and patients ample opportunity for early recognition and
appropriate excision before progressive vertical tumor invasion. 19 As melanomas less than 0.76 mm deep have a 10-year survival rate of more than 95%, the goal of
screening is to identify lesions before the development of the so-called vertical growth phase associated with a worsened prognosis. 20 Furthermore, screening for
melanoma can be accomplished in just minutes by trained physicians, and diagnostic biopsies are relatively inexpensive and simple to perform in the office setting.
RISK FACTORS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF MELANOMA IN POPULATIONS AT HIGHEST RISK FOR DEVELOPING MELANOMA
Education and screening programs should especially focus on populations that are at high risk for the development of melanoma. Many known risk factors can be
used by physicians to improve the efficiency of screening programs ( Table 42.2-1). Typical risk factors associated with carcinogenesis such as use of tobacco,
alcohol, and estrogens do not affect the risk of melanoma. Instead, factors such as patient phenotype (hair, skin, and eye color), sun exposure, family history, and
genetics play key roles.

TABLE 42.2-1. Known Risk Factors for the Development of Melanomaa

Common Nevi
The role of moles or melanocytic nevi in the genesis of melanoma has been suspected since Norris' first description of melanoma in the English language in 1857.
Small, common nevi are pigmented lesions that are often raised, symmetric in outline, and delimited with discrete regular borders. Clearly, the number of moles is an
important predictor of melanoma risk and is surprisingly genetically determined, with monozygous twins having almost identical mole counts in contrast with dizygotic
twins.21 A threefold increase in melanoma risk is associated with the presence of five nevi more than 5 mm in diameter, or for those patients with more than 50 nevi
greater than 2 mm in diameter.22
Atypical Nevi
Atypical melanocytic nevi that exhibit histopathologic features of dysplasia were initially described by Reimer et al. in the setting of familial melanoma. 23 These lesions
when clinically defined but not pathologically examined are classified as atypical nevi,24 and lesions defined histologically with specific architectural and cytologic
features are called dysplastic nevi.25 An atypical nevus is defined clinically as a flat macule greater than 5 mm. At least two of the following features are also
necessary to distinguish atypical nevi from banal nevi: variable pigmentation; irregular, asymmetric outline; and indistinct borders. 26 Atypical lesions in patients without
familial syndromes are more commonly found on sun-exposed areas.
The majority of melanoma is sporadic, and in this setting, the role of atypical nevi has become more clearly apparent. Atypical nevi among patients with sporadic
melanoma are clinically indistinguishable from those of patients with familial melanoma. Atypical nevi occur in 2% to 7% of the white population and can be identified
in 25% to 40% of patients with melanoma. 22,25,27,28 and 29 Atypical nevi are a significant risk factor for the development of melanoma. Their presence may indicate a
general instability in melanocyte growth. Estimating the risk incurred by the presence of atypical nevi has been difficult and ranges widely in the literature. The risk of
new primary melanoma among individuals with atypical nevi was calculated according to the presence of a family or personal history of prior melanoma by Kraemer et
al.27 This risk relates both to the presence of atypical nevi, melanoma, or both in the balance of the family of a given individual. In cases in which atypical nevi are
isolated in an individual, the risk is lowest (27 times population risk). When atypical nevi are found in multiple members of a family or there is a history of melanoma in
additional members of the family, the risk rises. Those patients with multiple family members exhibiting atypical nevi and a having a history of melanoma have the
highest risk (148 times population risk). 27,30,31 Unfortunately, the history of atypical nevi and of melanoma itself is often difficult to elicit. Crijns et al. reported that more
than one-half of patients without an elicited history of melanoma or atypical nevi on initial family history are later found to have familial patterns of atypical nevi,
melanoma, or both.32 Still the identification of atypical nevi even among skilled clinicians and pathologists is problematic, and some find the distinction from
conventional nevi unconvincing. 33
The risk incurred by the presence of atypical nevi has been difficult to accurately establish. In one series, 716 patients with melanoma were compared with a group of
matched controls. In the absence of atypical nevi, increased numbers of small nevi were associated with an approximately twofold elevated risk of melanoma, and
increased numbers of both small and large nonatypical nevi were associated with a fourfold greater risk. The presence of a single clinically atypical nevus was
associated with a twofold greater risk, while ten or more conferred a 12-fold greater risk of developing primary melanoma. 26 Another smaller series suggested the risk
of developing melanoma might be as high as 37 times greater in those individuals who have atypical nevi. 34
Congenital Nevi
Childhood melanomas are rare, but even infants have been reported with the disease, especially in association with giant congenital nevi. 35 Patients with large
congenital melanocytic nevi, those that appear at birth or during early childhood, are at high risk for developing melanomas ( Fig. 42.2-7). The lesions are elevated,
with discrete borders and stippled pigmentation. 26 Large congenital nevi occur in 1 in 1000 to 1 in 20,000 newborns, and giant nevi involving large body surfaces (i.e.,
the entire trunk) occur in 1 in 500,000 newborns. 36 One-half of all cases of melanoma within large congenital nevi occur in the first decade of life so screening,
surgical excision, or both should be planned early. 37 In a series of 265 patients with congenital nevi, patients with congenital nevi that covered more than 5% of their
total body surface area had a risk of developing melanoma 1000-fold higher than the general population. No patients with congenital nevi that involved less than 4%
of their total body surface area developed melanomas, but the study size could not exclude a small increase in risk. 38 In another series of 46 patients with large
congenital nevi, two individuals developed three melanomas arising from nevi after a mean of 7.3 years of routine screening. Although the study was small, it confirms
that these patients are a high-risk population. 39 Furthermore, detecting early melanoma in these lesions is difficult since malignant transformation usually evolves in
the deeper layers of the nevus, and visible surface alterations are late manifestations.

FIGURE 42.2-7. Giant congenital nevus with malignant degeneration. This melanoma developed on the shoulder of a patient with a giant congenital nevus. Patients
with large congenital nevi have a 1000-fold increased risk for developing melanoma. Frequent surveillance is necessary to diagnose these lesions early. For nevi that
encompass more than 5% of total body surface area, resection may prevent the development of melanoma.

Spitz Nevi
Spitz nevi are benign lesions that occur in children, and their importance stems from the difficulty in distinguishing them from melanoma. Whereas Spitz nevi are
usually under 1 cm in diameter and may resemble verrucae or small hemangiomas, melanomas in children tend to be larger and quite striking clinically. 40 All children
diagnosed with melanoma or Spitz nevi should have the lesions reviewed by experienced pathologists. Parameters suggesting malignancy are age of diagnosis
greater than 10 years, presence of ulceration, diameter greater than 1 cm, involvement of subcutaneous fat, and a mitotic activity of at least 6/mm 2.41
Familial Atypical Nevus Syndromes
Melanoma is divisible into familial and sporadic patterns. Our understanding of the role of melanocytic precursor lesions in the genesis of melanoma has been
clarified over the past 30 years based on pioneering studies involving familial clusters of patients with melanoma, many of whom are observed to have nevi exhibiting
atypical features. 42,43 and 44
Patients with the dysplastic nevus syndrome, a disease of autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance, are at increased risk for developing
melanoma.22 In familial syndromes, the atypical moles of patients with the familial atypical mole-melanoma syndrome were named according to the initials of the
probands (B-K nevus syndrome).23,43 These atypical nevi were also notable for their location on the skin of the trunk that was not necessarily sun-exposed. The
presence of atypical nevi identifies patients with a high risk of melanoma among family members with this syndrome. 44 The risk conferred by the presence of multiple
atypical nevi in such individuals approaches 100% by age 70. 30,44,45 and 46 This risk is more complex than that of a discrete precursor lesion that progresses stepwise
into malignancy. Although many melanomas have been identified to arise within atypical nevi, most occur in areas of skin that show neither gross nor histologic

evidence of an antecedent atypical nevic lesion. This observation suggests that removal of atypical lesions is not akin to the reduction in carcinoma risk after
resection of adenomatous polyps of the colon as most melanomas arise de novo. In patients with familial melanomas, it is clear that atypical nevi may serve as
nonobligate precursors and markers of melanocyte dyscrasia.
Careful molecular, genetic, and pathologic studies in patients with familial atypical mole-melanoma syndrome may define the molecular basis of progression and
identify markers for adequate surveillance and ultimate disease prevention. A few apparently important genetic mutations have already been identified in the
cyclin-dependent kinase genes, some of which serve as inhibitors of cell-cycle progression. An enhanced incidence of melanoma is associated with a single mutation
in CDK4 (12q14) as well as mutations in the CDKN2A (9p21) and CDKN2B genes. 47 There is a correlation between CDKN2A mutations in family members with
atypical nevus syndromes. Clinical findings associated with this germline mutation involve nevi in abnormal locations and abnormal numbers. These include nevi on
the buttocks, nevi on the feet, total nevi greater than 100, and two or more atypical nevi. 48 Germline mutations of CDKN2A have been identified in approximately 20%
of melanoma-prone families, and CDK4 has been described in three families. 49 Polymorphisms occurring in the melanocyte-stimulating hormone receptor predict skin
coloration, risk of developing nevi, and independently and synergistically with p16 mutations, ultimately the development of melanoma. Although familial melanoma
provides important insights into the disease, the number of cases of familial melanoma are limited. They represent an estimated 10% of patients with melanoma.
History of Previous Melanoma
A significant number of patients with a past history of melanoma develop a second, metachronous lesion. 22 A study of 3310 patients from a prospective database with
stage I and II melanoma showed that 3.4% developed a second primary melanoma. The 5- and 10-year risk of developing a second primary melanoma was 2.8% and
3.6%, respectively.50 Patients with a past history of melanoma should undergo frequent cutaneous examinations to screen for such metachronous lesions. Patients
who are at especially high risk for metachronous lesion are those with atypical nevi or family history. 51
Transplant and Other Immunosuppressed Patients
Patients who have had a solid organ transplant are at increased risk for developing melanoma, and the risk is directly related to the degree of immunosuppression.
Although the risk for nonmelanomatous cutaneous tumors is estimated at approximately 65-fold that of the general population, the risk for developing melanoma is
increased by a more modest threefold.52 Children who have had a renal transplantation demonstrate higher benign nevus counts than controls, and the duration and
degree of immunosuppression correlates positively with these counts. Such nevi are found most commonly on the back and acral sites. 53 Interestingly, in normal
adults, nevus counts increase in number, peaking in the early 20s and then progressively decreasing with time. 54 Children with genetically determined
immunodeficiencies have a three- to sixfold risk of developing melanoma. 55 Of the few patients reported to have melanoma and human immunodeficiency virus in the
literature, approximately one-third had metastatic disease at the time of initial examination, and systemic symptoms correlate with decreased CD4+ cell counts.
Melanomas among patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection are often atypical in appearance, multiple, and metastatic. 56 The number of nevi less than 5
mm in diameter was found be greater in patients with human immunodeficiency virus than in the general population. Immunodeficiency may promote or permit the
development of nevi and raises the question of whether sun-induced immunosuppression plays a role in the development of nevi. 57 The development of melanoma
may relate directly to the suppression of cellular immunity. Melanoma in immunosuppressed patients may evolve from precursor nevi that are unable to elicit cellular
immune recognition. The detection of dysplastic nevi offers an opportunity to identify those immunosuppressed patients who are at greatest risk of melanoma. 58,59 and 60
Phenotypic, Solar, and Other Risk Factors
Risk factors for melanoma apart from the presence of acquired and congenital melanocytic nevi include easily identifiable phenotypic characteristics of pigmentation
such as pale skin, poor tanning ability, light hair and eyes, and the presence of freckles. Compared with individuals with brown and black hair, the relative risk for
developing melanoma for those with blonde and red hair is 1.8 and 2.4, respectively. Individuals with blue eyes have a risk 1.2 times that of individuals with brown
eyes.22,61 Episodic exposure to intense sunlight and a history of blistering sunburns, especially in childhood (ages 10 to 19), is strongly associated with the
development of melanoma. 51,62 Childhood sunburn with blistering is also associated with increased numbers of atypical nevi. 22,63 Unlike other nonmelanoma skin
cancers, recreational intermittent exposure to sunlight is more strongly associated with risk of melanoma than lifetime continuous exposure. 64
One might expect a much higher incidence of melanoma in patients with albinism since they have minimal natural solar protection and the development of melanoma
is dependent on the presence of melanocytes, not on melanin. However, only 23 cases of melanoma have been documented in the literature in patients with
oculocutaneous albinism. They were all, of course, amelanotic. 65,66 Patients with xeroderma pigmentosum are another group that have little natural solar protection;
however, 5% of patients develop melanoma at a median age of 19 years. They are a rare high-risk subgroup that needs close screening for cutaneous
malignancies. 67
Ultraviolet (UV) exposure is the most easily modified risk factor for the development of melanoma, but a causative role of UV exposure only partially explains
observational data. Exposure to UV radiation is not obligatory for the development of melanoma. Melanomas are commonly found on the soles of the feet and in
mucosal areas that never are exposed to daylight, and geographic susceptibility to melanoma does not consistently increase with the amount of UV exposure.
Melanoma occurs in children and young adults who frequently have had relatively little sun exposure. UV radiation frequently initiates the development of melanoma
either directly or indirectly, but patient susceptibility is a much more important risk factor.
Role of Pregnancy and Estrogens in Melanoma
As pregnancy is associated with an increase in melanocyte-stimulating hormone levels and an increase in pigmentation in some patients, the theoretical concern for
stimulation of melanoma has prompted concern. Although various case reports initially suggested an adverse outcome in pregnant patients with melanoma, six
well-controlled studies have evaluated the effect pregnancy has on survival. No difference in survival between patients diagnosed during pregnancy and controls has
been substantiated.68,69,70,71 and 72 Interestingly, one study implied that prior pregnancy was in fact protective by demonstrating improved survival in women under 50
who had more than five children before the diagnosis of melanoma. 73 Neither is there evidence that pregnancy occurring after the diagnosis of melanoma worsens
prognosis. 70,74 In women with a history of melanoma, it may be reasonable to suggest waiting 2 years after initial diagnosis before becoming pregnant since two-thirds
of recurrences occur within this time period. However, the stage and depth at diagnosis and the age and desires of the mother factor heavily into these decisions.
There is no evidence that estrogen use increases the risk of melanoma. Much of the confusion concerning estrogens results from the expression of estrogen
receptors on some melanomas. The presence or absence of these receptors neither predicts prognosis nor hormone responsiveness. Tamoxifen has been suggested
to have effects on melanoma; however, its actions may be indirect, through the potentiation of the cytotoxic chemotherapy or enhancing natural killer (NK) function,
rather than directly affecting melanoma. 74,75 More recent randomized controlled trials failed to corroborate a significant benefit of tamoxifen with dacarbazine or
multidrug therapy. Well-designed epidemiologic studies have not shown an increased rate of melanoma in patients who have used exogenous estrogens. 76,77 No
studies have specifically examined the risks of hormonal replacement therapy in postmenopausal women with melanoma, but no data exist to suggest that hormonal
replacement therapy is harmful. 74 The well-characterized beneficial effects of hormonal replacement therapy likely outweigh any theoretical, unsubstantiated risks of
estrogens.
DIAGNOSIS: CHARACTERISTICS OF MELANOMA
Identification of features that may mark lesions suspicious for melanoma can be simply recalled using the mnemonic ABCDE. A stands for asymmetry, B for borders
that are irregular or diffuse, C for color variegation, D for diameter more than 5 mm, and E signifies enlargement or evolution. 78 Bleeding and ulceration occurs in 10%
of localized melanomas and 54% of late melanomas and is a poor prognostic finding. 79
Morphotypes
Although specific morphotypes of melanoma have been used for prognostic information, the Breslow depth of the lesion and presence or absence of ulceration are
the most significant predictors of biologic behavior of the primary lesion. Morphology does not predict prognosis independently of these well-defined risk factors. The
classic morphotypes now serve as descriptive tools that aid in the recognition of these lesions and as historic references ( Fig. 42.2-8, Fig. 42.2-9,Fig. 42.2-10,Fig.
42.2-11, and Fig. 42.2-12). Physicians should recognize that many less dangerous (and more common) skin lesions may exhibit features similar to melanoma such as

seborrheic keratosis, pigmented basal cell cancer, solar lentigines, and atypical nevi. 80

FIGURE 42.2-8. Lentigo maligna melanoma. These lesions commonly occur on the face in older patients. These lesions may require considerable planning for
reconstruction.

FIGURE 42.2-9. Nodular melanoma. The second most common melanoma morphotype. It is associated with the so-called vertical growth phase, manifesting a more
aggressive biologic phenotype and worsened prognosis.

FIGURE 42.2-10. Superficial spreading melanoma. This typical example exemplifies the most common melanoma morphotype. Note the irregular borders, large size,
color variegation, and asymmetry. Radial growth at the dermal-epidermal junction for prolonged periods is associated with a better prognosis.

FIGURE 42.2-11. Subungual melanoma. All nail bed lesions that have grown or remained unchanged over 4 to 6 weeks should undergo an incisional biopsy and
removal of the nail.

FIGURE 42.2-12. Acral lentiginous melanoma. These lesions, located in the extremity, are more common in Asians and African Americans.

Superficial spreading melanoma presents as an asymptomatic, flat macule or barely raised plaque with color variations that may include shades of black and brown.
Areas of regression (depigmentation) are common. It is the most common growth pattern and accounts for 60% to 70% of all melanomas. 81,82 These lesions may exist
for years before a rapid growth phase is identified. 22 Notching and scalloping are common, with enlargement during the radial growth phase of melanoma. They can

occur at any site, although they most commonly can be seen on the lower extremities of women and on the trunk of men. 79
Nodular melanoma typically presents as a uniform lesion that is dark black-blue or bluish-red, although 5% are amelanotic. 22,79 This is the second most common
morphotype, occurring in 15% to 30% of patients, and usually exhibits a more rapid onset. 82 Nodular melanomas are associated with deeper Breslow depths because
they quickly establish a vertical growth phase. Most commonly, nodular melanomas are located on the trunk or head and neck and are observed in men more
frequently than women.
Lentigo maligna melanomas (LMM) are typically located on the face and are generally large, flat lesions that are tan colored, with differing shades of brown. Rarely,
LMM can be amelanotic. Up to one-half of lentigo maligna (LM), a precursor lesion that is characterized by atypical melanocytic proliferation, degenerate into
melanoma over a period of many years. The diagnosis requires the presence of sun-related changes in both the epidermis and dermis. They are found in
approximately 5% of patients with melanoma. 82
Acral lentiginous melanomas are uncommon and typically occur on the palms, soles, or beneath the nail (subungual). However, not all lesions in these locations are
acral lentiginous melanomas. Melanoma in the hands or feet account for less than 5% of all melanomas, but they are much more common in dark-complexioned
individuals. 83,84 These lesions tend to present late and thus are associated with a poorer prognosis. They represent up to 70% of melanomas in African Americans and
up to 46% in Asians. 79 They are usually tan, brown to black macular lesions with variegation in color and an irregular border. 22 In a Japanese series of 62 plantar
melanomas, 82% were acral lentiginous, 3% were superficial spreading, and 14% were nodular. The lesions most commonly affected the heel. Acral melanomas are
strongly associated with high total body nevus counts [relative risk (RR) = 6.3] and with nevi on the soles. There is also an association with penetrating injuries to the
feet or hands (RR = 5.0) and heavy exposure to agricultural chemicals (RR = 3.6). 85 Subungual melanomas account for only 1% to 3% of all melanomas. They
commonly are diagnosed late because of their close resemblance to many benign lesions of the nail. If a nail bed lesion has not changed significantly in 4 to 6 weeks,
a biopsy should be performed, accompanied by removal of the nail. Some clinical parameters that should arouse suspicion of subungual melanoma are lesions
occurring in patients greater than 50 years old, a width greater than 3 mm with variegated borders, extension of pigment into the lateral or proximal nail fold, and
lesions occurring in individuals of African American, Asian, or Native American ancestry. 86 Seventy percent occur on the great toe or thumb. These tumors are
associated with a 5-, 10-, and 20-year median survival of 59%, 44%, and 29%, respectively. One-half have associated nail destruction and 70% ulcerate. Twenty-five
percent present with metastases and 74% are greater than 1.5 mm thick. 87
Desmoplastic melanoma is a rare and locally aggressive variant of malignant melanoma that is difficult to diagnose clinically and microscopically. It represents
approximately 1.7% of melanomas. The majority of these tumors occur on the head and neck of elderly patients and one-half are amelanotic. 88 Desmoplastic tumors
are aggressive locally and behave more like mesenchymal neoplasms. These tumors stain intensely with S-100. The most reliable and characteristic histologic
features of an early lesion of desmoplastic melanoma are aggregates of lymphocytes, tumor cell cytologic atypia, stromal myxoid change, and poor circumscription of
the dermal infiltrate. 89 The risk of local recurrence increases when neurotropism is present. 90
PREVENTION
With the assumption that the prime modifiable risk factor in the development of melanoma is UV radiation, prevention strategies focus on reducing the public's
excessive exposure to sunlight. The American Cancer Society and the Skin Cancer Foundation recommend that the general population employ “sun-smart” practices.
This includes the avoidance of direct midday sun exposure between the hours of 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. and the use of sunscreens, protective clothing, and appropriate
shade (e.g., sun umbrellas). The increased risk of melanoma incurred through sun exposure is strongly associated with blistering sunburns between the ages of 10
and 19; thus, special attention should focused on teaching children these sun-smart practices. While the use of sunscreens of sun protection factor (SPF) of at least
15 is recommended, sunscreens have been largely shown to reduce the nonmelanoma skin cancer incidence. There is much controversy regarding the effectiveness
of sunscreen for prevention of melanoma, with the epidemiologic data inconclusive at present. 91
Sunscreens and Sunlight
Claims of a reduction in melanoma risk from the use of sunscreens have been controversial and difficult to substantiate. In fact, most studies show an increased risk
for the development of melanoma with the use of sunscreens, probably because of their ability to delay or avoid sunburn episodes, which may allow prolonged
exposure to unfiltered UV radiation ( Table 42.2-2). Many criticize these epidemiologic studies, for many confounding factors may contribute to these negative results.
Individuals who sunbathe frequently are more likely to use sunscreens. In addition, many studies had focused on older preparations that were either less effective at
blocking UVB light (low SPF) or contained psoralens, potent tanning activators. People with a poor tanning ability who have used psoralen sunscreen in the past have
a risk of developing melanoma 4.5 times that of regular sunscreen users. 15 The risk reduction from newer, high SPF sunscreens is difficult to assess due to the long
latency from sun exposure to the development of melanoma.92,93 However, increases in benign nevus counts are clearly associated with the use of sunscreens. In a
large, randomized, placebo-controlled study of more than 600 European children, the number of nevi increased in those who used sunscreens even when controlling
for factors such as skin type and eye color. 91 A theoretical basis exists for the lack of efficacy of sunscreens. Most sunscreens offer greater protection from UVB (290
nm) than UVA (375 nm) radiation, thereby reducing the risk of sunburn while not blocking UVA radiation, which efficiently induces tanning. However, UVA penetrates
more deeply and causes more DNA damage than UVB. Although the ozone layer filters UVA more effectively than UVB light, approximately 1000 times more UVA
than UVB bathes the earth's surface. 94 Thus, the depletion of the ozone layer may significantly affect the incidence of melanoma. An estimated 1% increase in
melanoma incidence occurs with each percentage decrease in the ozone layer. 15

TABLE 42.2-2. Relationship between Melanoma and Sunscreen Use: Case-Controlled Studies a

Several studies show that the excessive use of tanning salons is associated with an increased risk of developing melanoma. No study demonstrates that tanning is
protective against subsequent sunburns or melanoma. 95,96 Long-term use of tanning salons is associated with premature skin aging, cataract development, and
nonmelanoma skin cancers. Prevention strategies should discourage the use of tanning salons.
Self-Examination
Patients at increased risk of melanoma should be informed how to perform regular self-examinations of their skin. Most patients who develop melanoma would have
alerted their physicians much earlier if they had used a simple checklist that helps identify high-risk lesions. 97 Self-examination is currently underused even in
high-risk populations. Only one in five patients with melanoma practices self-screening and only 6% of patients follow recommendations for self-examination, sun
protection, and yearly professional examinations. 98,99 Screening by trained physicians currently cannot be replaced by self-screening until national efforts at public
education are more broadly undertaken.
Excision of Nevi

Evidence supports the removal of atypical nevi in patients with a prior history of melanoma as a preventative strategy. The excision of atypical lesions decreases the
expected incidence of melanomas in high-risk cohorts, but it is unclear whether a broader population-based strategy supporting the excision of these nevi can be
extrapolated. 100 Wholesale removal of unsuspicious nevi should be condemned as a surgical practice. Indiscriminant excisions are associated with unnecessary
scarring and little effect on the development of melanoma. Most melanomas, even in patients with familial atypical mole-melanoma syndrome, arise de novo; thus, the
excision of all atypical lesions may not eliminate the risk of developing melanoma. Large congenital nevi should be excised if feasible, and frequent screening should
be preformed in these patients until excision is performed. If the lesion is too large for excision, surgery may be limited to biopsies of the most worrisome sites in
combination with observation and photographic documentation. Dermabrasion and other superficial excisions may not decrease the risk of developing melanoma and
are not recommended.
SCREENING
Prevention and screening for melanoma are reasonable objectives to restrain the rising incidence of this silent epidemic. Cancer screening for melanoma fulfills many
of the requirements necessary for effectiveness. First, early detection appears to result in improved outcomes. Second, the screening process is easy to perform by
primary care physicians, and third, the screening is cost effective.
Efficacy
Randomized trials to determine efficacy and cost effectiveness of screening programs would require thousands of people and prolonged (greater than 10-year)
follow-up; however, there is sufficient evidence to assume the validity and efficacy of current screening programs, especially in high-risk populations. Although the
true effectiveness of screening programs can only be determined by noting an increased survival in screened populations, many reports demonstrate that thinner
lesions are found in screened compared with unscreened cohorts. Since the thickness of the melanoma correlates linearly with survival in stage I and II patients,
screening programs can measure their effectiveness through this intermediate end-point instead of waiting 10 years (or more) for survival data. 101 Numerous studies
have been published from Australia, Europe, and the United States demonstrating the effectiveness of screening programs. Many have focused on high-risk
populations in order to attain a high number of events with much fewer patients.
Many of the published screening trials studied high-risk populations with either a strong family history of melanoma, a previous personal history of melanoma, or a
diagnosis of the dysplastic nevus syndrome. In one series of 555 high-risk patients, screening reduced the average thickness of diagnosed melanomas to 0.52 mm
compared with an average tumor thickness of 1.44 mm before the screening program was instituted. None of the 138 patients diagnosed with melanoma on screening
developed metastatic disease. 102 In another series from the Netherlands, in which high-risk patients were screened, the thickness of primary lesions decreased from
1.75 mm before the screening process to 0.8 mm at the start of the screening process and then to 0.54 mm during routine follow-up. 103
In Australia, the incidence of melanoma is the highest in the world due to an equatorial climate, a fair-skinned immigrant population, and localized depletion of the
ozone layer. The decrease in average tumor Breslow depth in Australia has been attributed to extensive screening. In 1960 the average thickness of melanoma
lesions was greater than 2.5 mm. By 1986, after the establishment of a comprehensive screening program in the 1960s, the mean tumor thickness dropped to 0.80. 104
In France, a unique situation exists as occupational medicine specialists examine the entire working population yearly. In a study involving 65,000 people, 273
patients examined by occupational medicine specialists were thought to have suspicious lesions. Of these patients only 172 followed up with their primary care
physicians and five melanomas were found. This translates to in an incidence of 7.7 per 100,000, close to the 9 per 100,000 found in the general French
population.105
The American Academy of Dermatology has provided more than 1 million free skin cancer screenings from 1985 to 1997. Of all the biopsies performed for suspicious
lesions, 17% were found to be melanomas on histology. More than 90% of histologically confirmed melanomas were less than 1.5 mm thick, and the median thickness
of all melanomas was 0.30 mm. The 8.3% of cases with advanced melanoma is a lower proportion than that reported by the 1990 SEER registry. The rate of thickest
lesions (greater than 4 mm) and late-stage melanomas among all participants was 2.83 per 100,000 population. Thirty-nine percent of screened patients who had
melanoma claimed they would not have sought examination otherwise and more than 30% of these melanomas were located on areas not readily visible on
self-examination. 106
Examination
Although dermatologists have superior accuracy compared with nondermatologists in the diagnosis of melanoma and dysplastic nevi, there are too few dermatologists
for all routine screening. 107 Dermatologists are generally more qualified in identifying these lesions. Screening for melanoma by a dermatologist has a sensitivity and
positive predictive value of 89% to 97% and 17% to 75%, respectively. 108 The use of epiluminescence microscopy by an experienced dermatologist can greatly
increase the sensitivity and specificity of the examination. 109 Further, only 12% of nondermatologists were able to correctly identify five out of six melanomas, whereas
69% of dermatologists did. 101,110 A viable health strategy for reducing the mortality of melanoma involves educating primary care providers to incorporate skin
examinations as part of their routine physical examinations. With education, primary care physicians should successfully incorporate skin screenings in their physical
examinations as they have with breast examinations, digital examinations, and fecal occult blood testing.
Screening examinations are quick, painless, inexpensive and readily accepted by patients. Complete examination of the skin should be performed systematically, with
the patient fully undressed. Care should be taken not to ignore the scalp, nails, palms, soles, ears, and beneath the breasts. Since most melanomas occur on the
trunk and lower extremities in women and on the trunk and proximal upper extremities in men, these areas should be carefully examined. Lesions of the perineum are
uncommon and may be excluded unless the patient has a specific lesion in question. Problems do exist with screening protocols as some melanomas may have an
uncharacteristically benign appearance and a radial growth phase shorter than the screening interval.
Cost-Effectiveness
The cost of screening includes practitioner time spent with patients and the cost of biopsy and pathology. Since the ratio of positive to negative biopsy results ranges
from 1:70 to 1:250, the number of biopsies subsequent to mass screenings may be considerable. 105,106 In a cost-effectiveness model of screening high-risk patients,
$29,000 would be spent per year of life saved. This is less than what is currently spent on prostate-specific antigen testing, Pap smears, or annual mammography. 111

STAGING OF MELANOMA
The staging of cutaneous melanoma involves segregation by local, regional, or distant disease and strongly correlates with survival ( Fig. 42.2-13). The vast majority
of patients who present with primary melanoma have localized tumors, and for this reason stage I and II have been used to designate early (low-risk) and later
(intermediate-risk) tumors, even though both represent localized disease. The features of melanoma that influence the risk of relapse are encapsulated in current and
proposed staging systems of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) (Table 42.2-3 and Table 42.2-4). The last formal edition of this system (1992) is
currently in revision, so the features of the prior system will be contrasted to those of the proposed new system of 2000. 112 In both systems, distant metastases (M1)
define stage IV disease, whereas regional lymph node metastases (N1 to N3) define stage III disease and are cardinal prognostic variables for patients with
melanoma of the skin. Most patients present with neither distant nor regional disease apparent, so the features of local prognostic significance assume a predominant
role in defining the prospect for relapse-free survival and overall survival in patients with melanoma.

FIGURE 42.2-13. Melanoma survival correlates strongly with stage. Fifteen-year survival results are shown for over 4000 melanoma patients. (From Ketcham AS,
Balch CM. Classification and staging systems. In: Balch CM, Milton GW, eds. Cutaneous melanoma: clinical management and treatment results worldwide.
Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1985:55, with permission.)

TABLE 42.2-3. American Joint Committee on Cancer Tumor (T), Node (N), Metastasis (M) Classification System for Melanoma a

TABLE 42.2-4. American Joint Committee on Cancer Tumor (T), Node (N), Metastasis (M) Stage Grouping for Cutaneous Melanoma a

STAGE I MELANOMA
The microstage or Breslow depth and presence or absence of ulceration are the most important variables in those without regional or distant metastases. 113 Patients
with localized disease apparent only at the primary site make up by far the largest category of those presenting with melanoma. The division between stages I and II
has been arbitrary, in part reflecting an effort to separate low-risk from intermediate-risk disease. 114,115,116 and 117 The staging system adopted by the AJCC in 1992
moved from a dependence on prognostic assessment based on the levels of skin through which a tumor had penetrated, to a duality of thickness measured in
millimeters according to Breslow, and levels according to Clark. 118,119 The role of the Breslow thickness has been recognized as more predictive of prognosis. A
secondary importance of the Clark level, especially in thinner tumors, has been identified. The Breslow depth is the primary predictor of prognosis, even when it
predicts a more favorable prognosis than the level of invasion. Although the AJCC 1992 system allowed for either thickness or level (whichever was worse) to be
taken as the basis for risk assessment, thickness appears to be considerably more reproducible in predicting prognosis than the Clark level. 112,118,120,121 Thus, in the
proposed new classification system 112 stage I and II melanoma prognostic assessment will be based on Breslow thickness and ulceration. The Clark level of the
primary lesion enters multivariate analyses only as a secondary feature when the Breslow depth is less than 1 mm. Patients with T1 lesions and a Clark stage of IV or
more have a 10% chance of nodal disease compared with only a 2% risk in those with T1 lesions and Clark stages less than IV. Because of the importance of Clark
stage in thin tumors, lesions less than 1 mm in Breslow depth that are level IV or V are designated as T1b lesions.
Breslow Depth
The Breslow depth of a primary melanoma is the cardinal prognostic factor for clinically localized disease (stages I and II). 119 The risk of relapse and death due to
melanoma rises incrementally with each millimeter of depth (Breslow thickness) for primary melanoma, and the relationship between primary tumor thickness and the
relapse rate is linear between 1 and 6 mm ( Fig. 42.2-14). Beyond 6 mm of depth, the incremental risk of relapse and death for each millimeter of invasion is less than
for lesions below that thickness.

FIGURE 42.2-14. The relationship between primary melanoma thickness and survival is nearly a linear function. The American Joint Committee on Cancer
breakpoints between T stages is not based on defined biologic mortality differences, but for convenience and general prognostic grouping.

Melanoma thickness is therefore a continuous variable, for which there are no natural breakpoints, so the choice of dichotomization between stages I and II (and
within stage I between substage A and substage B, or in stage II between substages A and B) is somewhat arbitrary. The designation of T1/stage IA (less than 0.76
mm), T2/stage IB (from 0.77 to 1.50 mm), T3/stage IIA (1.51 to 4.00 mm), and T4/stage IIB (greater than 4.0 mm) has been based in part on data from early series in
which it appeared there might be biologically determined breakpoints at these depths. The risk for patients in these categories rises in direct relation to the Breslow
depth, without any evident breakpoints, to justify the previous divisions at 0.76 and 1.50 mm. The staging system proposed for adoption by AJCC in 2000 therefore
adopts integer breakpoints at 1, 2, and 4 mm in place of the previous 0.76, 1.50, and 4 mm. 112,116,118,122,123
Ulceration
Ulceration is found in 21% to 60% of localized primary melanomas. 115,117 The presence of ulceration reduces the 5- to 10-year relapse-free survival by more than
one-third and is important in both univariate and multivariate analyses. Ulceration is more common with deeper tumors, although melanomas of any depth can
ulcerate. The median thickness of nonulcerated melanomas is 0.8 mm whereas that of ulcerated melanomas is 2.6 mm. Ulceration independently predicts local
recurrence, regional disease, and worse overall survival. 122 In tumors with associated ulceration, the risk of regional lymph node dissemination is increased by 10%
compared with nonulcerated tumors.112,116,118,123 Adding back the depth of an ulcer crater does not correct for the decrease in survival associated with ulceration, and
the width of ulceration is more significant than the depth in predicting prognosis. 124 The AJCC revision of melanoma staging for 2000 proposes the incorporation of
ulceration as the major independent factor for prognostic assessment of stage I and II melanomas after the Breslow depth. The suffix a will indicate nonulcerated and
b ulcerated primary melanoma.
Morphotype
The morphotype of the primary melanoma historically was used to predict prognosis. Nodular melanomas have a higher risk and shorter latency than superficial
spreading melanomas because of their tendency toward a vertical growth pattern. The less frequent acral lentiginous melanoma similarly has been associated with
increased risk when compared with that of LMM. The latter morphotype is distinctive in its occurrence at a median age of more than decade later than that of the more
common superficial spreading and nodular, as well as acral lentiginous, morphotypes. The site of origin is also distinctive for LMM, which is typically found on the
chronically sun-exposed areas of the head and neck, and for acral lentiginous melanoma. These descriptive terms, although helpful in pattern recognition for
clinicians, are less frequently used based on more modern staging systems.
Lymphoid and Dendritic Cell Host Response
Infiltration of the primary melanoma site by lymphocytes has been correlated with an improved outcome in studies performed over the past several decades. The
Boston Collaborative Melanoma Study has demonstrated a more favorable prognosis of melanomas infiltrated densely with lymphocytes. 125 The immunologic target of
the lymphoid response frequently observed in primary melanomas, and less often in metastatic sites of disease, has led to intense efforts with each of the emerging
therapeutic tools of immunology. There has also been a correlation with the infiltration of other immune mediators and prognosis. Dendritic cells (DC), potent
antigen-presenting cells, are also found in melanoma specimens, and DC infiltrate is inversely related to tumor thickness in melanoma. DCs mediate several biologic
roles including regulation of angiogenesis and the active uptake of apoptotic tumor, processing of nominal antigens and migration to local nodal basins where a
specific T-cell response is capable of being stimulated. 126,127
Regression
Historically, lesional regression characterized by the histologic presence of fibrosis and centralized depigmentation has been suggested as an ominous sign. Many
interpret regression as an invalidation of the Breslow depth because the tumor may have once extended deeper than measured at the time of excision. Thus, actual
prognosis would be worse than predicted since the patient would be understaged. The studies of the University of Alabama and Sydney Melanoma Unit have not
borne this out; in fact, complete regression of primary as well as metastatic lesions has been well documented, and rarely, spontaneous cures occur. 128,129 Melanomas
with undetermined primary sites presumably originate from regressed lesions. These patients have the same if not a slightly better prognosis than equally matched
patients whose primary is known. Other evidence suggests that melanoma regression is not a negative prognostic factor. Gershenwald et al. reported that no patient
with melanomas less than 1 mm thick with evidence of regression had a positive sentinel node. 130 Tumor regression indicates an active specific tumor response may
have beneficial systemic effects. Tumor immunologists have tried to augment this immune response through various vaccine strategies to treat melanoma.
Site of Origin
Patients with melanoma of acral, subungual, and head and neck sites have a worse prognosis than those with melanoma arising on the extremities. Multivariate
analysis from one mature series from the University of Pennsylvania (n = 488) and a multicenter German database (n = 5246) have shown that the site of tumor origin
is an independent and significant prognostic variable. 131,132 and 133 In general, patients with primary lesions of the extremities have a significantly better prognosis than
those with primary lesions of the trunk and head. Lesions of the upper and lower extremities do not differ in prognosis, but those found distally on the hands and feet
fare worse than those with more proximal lesions. 10,131,134 The use of a model that incorporated four variables (i.e., site of origin, gender, age, and Breslow thickness)
has been reported; the prognostic variables increased prediction of survival by up to 50%. 131 In patients with positive regional lymph nodes, the site of origin, gender
of the patient, and age become unimportant in predicting prognosis.
STAGE II
A large and relatively heterogeneous population is the group previously designated as stage II, composed of stage IIA (T3) melanomas between 1.5 and 4.0 mm in
depth, and stage IIB (T4) melanomas of more than 4 mm in depth. Relapse risk for this group lies between 10% and 40% and is directly related to the primary Breslow
depth. Beyond the Breslow depth in this category, the most consistent and powerful prognostic factor identified over the past 20 years has been the presence or
absence of ulceration. The presence of ulceration is significantly associated with an increase in the likelihood of nodal metastasis and reduces the prognosis for
relapse-free survival by nearly 10% for any given Breslow depth.
Elective lymph node dissection (ELND) has previously been the only available means to demonstrate the presence of regional lymph node involvement and proved to
be positive in 20% of these patients with lesions greater than 1 mm in depth. The development of more precise techniques of lymph node mapping has significantly
affected the ability to predict prognoses for this group of patients. Many large adjuvant trials have been conducted in patients for whom the pathologic status of the
regional draining lymph nodes has either not been assessed at all, or in whom this has only been assessed using anatomically guided elective regional
lymphadenectomy, not isotopically or dye-guided sentinel lymph node (SLN) mapping. Thus, the surgical and pathologic assessment of melanoma at the primary site
has now been coupled with techniques that have demonstrated improved precision at the regional lymph node basin(s). Consequently, the assessment of relapse and
mortality risk for primary melanoma patients with intermediate risk is in substantial flux. In patients for whom SLN mapping is not feasible, the previously defined risk
algorithms and factors are still of use. For those in whom SLN mapping is appropriately performed and whose results are negative, the prognosis appears to be
substantially improved. 135 The series of patients that have been assessed by SLN mapping have to date less than 5 years of median follow-up. The limited follow-up
in these series qualifies interpretation of the data at this time, since it is possible that the identification of nodal disease using refined pathologic,
immunohistochemical, and in some cases, molecular [reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)] assays for melanosomal antigens such as
tyrosinase may simply have improved lead time for the diagnosis of metastatic disease.
STAGE III
In patients with nodal disease, only three variables independently affect overall prognosis: the number of lymph nodes, the presence of ulceration of the primary
tumor, and whether the nodal disease is macroscopic or microscopic. In patients with macroscopic disease, more than one positive lymph node, and an ulcerated
primary lesion, the 5-year survival is only 16%. In patients with only one microscopically positive node and without ulceration in the primary tumor, the overall 5-year
survival is 71%. This large difference in survival demonstrates the inadequacies of previous staging systems and the heterogeneity of supposedly matched patients in
previous clinical trials. 136

Sentinel Lymph Node Mapping
The detection of lymph node metastases previously relied on crude clinical or regional ELND, which has not improved survival in several large randomized controlled
trials. Currently, SLN mapping and selective lymphadenectomy directed by isotopic lymphoscintigraphy or blue dye lymphography has been shown to identify lymph
node metastases more precisely and with less surgical morbidity, hospitalization time, and cost than elective dissection. 135,137,138 All of the observations reported from
series attempting to refine the prognostic assessment of patients based on Breslow depth and Clark's level, with or without ulceration, has been in many ways
supplanted by the availability of pathologic assessment of SLNs mapped using isotopic and dye techniques. A study of 580 patients whose sentinel draining lymph
nodes localized using dye and scintigraphic techniques (e.g., SLN) and found to be pathologically negative has demonstrated that the status of the SLN is the single
most powerful prognostic factor after Breslow depth ( P <.00001 for each). 135,137,139 Sentinel node status remains a significant prognostic factor in multivariate analyses
of disease-specific survival in this model after adjustment for other previously identified prognostic factors. Once SLN status is accounted for, a number of factors that
have previously been considered as independent prognostic factors lose their significance. The primary site of origin, age of the patient, and sex of the patient are all
nonsignificant after incorporation of SLN status in a prognostic model for outcome of stage I and II patients. 135,139 The multidisciplinary procedure of SLN evaluation
requires attentive radiology and meticulous pathology as well as expert surgery for optimal outcome. 140,141 Whether the information attained from SLN biopsy allows
treatment decisions that alter outcome remains a question currently being addressed in a number of prospective trials. Even though it has been widely adopted by
most centers in the United States, it is less widely applied elsewhere and the results of seminal prospective studies should be available within the next few years to
assess its utility in improving patient outcome. It is conceivable that strategies to quantitatively identify tumor in the peripheral blood using molecular analysis or
serologic assays may supplant this surgical staging procedure.
Number of Nodes
Regional lymph node involvement defined stage III in the AJCC system in 1992 as it does currently. The size of involved lymph nodes had previously served as the
basis for characterization of patients within stage III (TNM N1, N2, N3). Multiple studies have been performed using Cox regression analysis to identify the most
important predictors of outcome for patients with stage III disease. 116 In all of these studies, the number of lymph nodes found to be involved with tumor (whether
macroscopic or microscopic) has been the cardinal factor identified ( Fig. 42.2-15). The advent of sentinel node mapping has increased the precision with which
regional lymph node dissemination can be identified, but even in studies that have patients evaluated by SLN mapping, the number of involved lymph nodes has been
a significant prognostic factor. 135,142 The prognosis for patients with one involved regional lymph node is significantly better than for patients with two or more involved
regional lymph nodes. 112,116,143,144 and 145 The recommended AJCC 2000 staging system will adopt the number of nodes involved with tumor as the principal basis for
prognostic assessment of patients with regional disease. N1 will signify one node involved, N2 will signify two to three nodes involved, and N3 will signify four or more
nodes involved with tumor. N3 includes matted nodes and ulcerated melanoma with any number of metastatic lymph nodes. A secondary criterion for classification of
patients with nodal metastatic disease is that of nodal bulk of disease (microscopic versus macroscopic). The former is invisible to the gross surgical or pathologic
evaluation, nonpalpable, and designated (a). The N1(a)/N2(a) category of microscopic involvement represent a significant and increasing fraction of patients identified
through sentinel node mapping procedures, for whom the prognosis appears to be improved. Previous data suggested a more favorable prognosis of patients with
microscopic disease identified at ELND as compared with those with clinically manifest recurrence subjected to therapeutic node dissection. 146,147 Although the
sentinel node is meticulously examined using immunohistochemistry and fine sections, for practical reasons, nodes from the completion lymphadenectomy specimen
are not. The prognostic importance of rigorously characterizing the number of sub-micrometastatic positive nodes after completion lymphadenectomy using thin
sections and immunohistochemical staining is unclear.

FIGURE 42.2-15. Survival for stage III patients according to the number of nodal metastases. Survival correlates strongly with increasing numbers of positive lymph
nodes. (From ref. 222, with permission.)

Satellitosis and In-Transit Disease
The stage III category has also been designated for patients with forms of regional extranodal disease. Satellite involvement, satellitosis, is a form of tumor extension
that may be manifested by deep or aggressive primary melanomas, often with intervening areas of apparently tumor-free skin. Satellite involvement signifies a poor
prognosis for patient outcomes; prognosis has been shown to resemble that of patients with regional lymph node involvement. A second category of metastatic
melanoma that has long been recognized to have a more ominous prognostic significance than localized primary disease is known as in-transit disease. In-transit
melanoma does not differ from more typical nodal metastatic disease. The more indolent course of in-transit melanoma, particularly when associated with
paraneoplastic hypopigmentation, has led to substantial immunologic interest in this form of melanoma, and its location has lent itself to regional isolated perfusion
chemotherapy and biologic therapy. 148,149 For these reasons, both satellite involvement in the region of the primary, and in-transit melanoma between the primary and
regional nodal basin have been assigned to a category N2C. Patients with both manifestations of satellite involvement or in-transit involvement with regional lymph
node metastases have been assigned to the N3 category, due to their more ominous prognosis, regardless of the number of involved regional lymph
nodes.112,116,118,147,150
STAGE IV: M1
Distant disease that has spread beyond the regional draining lymph nodes is generally denoted as M1 in the TNM system and stage IV in the AJCC and Union
International Contra le Cancrum systems. The prognosis of patients with stage IV M1 disease is poor, with median survivals of less than 1 year. 151 The AJCC
Subcommittee on Melanoma has reviewed criteria for this disease category, which represents the smallest fraction of patients of any stage at presentation, but a
significant fraction of the patients with melanoma who will die each year. For these patients, the identification of important prognostic factors may guide treatment
selection or decisions whether to pursue therapy. An analysis of the clinical factors associated with a favorable prognosis in patients with stage IV disease entering
therapeutic trials of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) has demonstrated that patient factors including a normal appetite, absence of nausea and
vomiting or fever, unimpaired performance status, and female gender are significant. Disease-related factors of prognostic importance included limited numbers of
sites of disease, disease limited to soft tissues and lymph nodes, a time interval more than 1 year to therapy for metastasis, and the occurrence of a clinical response
to treatment.152 A current reassessment of important factors in 1325 patients with stage IV melanoma treated in eight clinical trials over 25 years in ECOG has
identified many of the same factors to be significant, including the number of metastatic sites, unimpaired performance status, and female gender. A number of
multivariate analyses of factors that bear on survival in stage III or IV have been reported. 153,154,155,156 and 157 The median survival in all studies has been 6 to 8 months,
except for one case record analysis of the European Organization for Cancer Research and Treatment Group of Cancer (EORTC). 158 In a large metaanalysis of
patients with disseminated melanoma that included 83 studies and 6322 patients, the median survival for patients diagnosed after 1985 was 8.9 months. The 2-, 3-,
and 5-year survival rates were 13.6%, 9.7%, and 2.3%. Survival for patients before 1985 was 5.9 months. The study provides important information that will allow
survival results from current and future trials to be compared with expected survival. 158 The number of sites or organs involved with metastatic disease appears to be
of significance in most models and is unquestionably important in determining prognosis. However, the AJCC has presently chosen not to incorporate a measure of
the number or volume of tumor metastases, due to the variability of imaging techniques employed to assess the presence of metastatic disease, and the state of flux
of radiologic assessment for melanoma at present. The 1992 formulation of stage IV disease dichotomized metastatic disease according to its location in nonvisceral
(M1a) or visceral (M1b) locations. A review of data from JWCI (John Wayne Cancer Institute), 157 the ECOG,159,160 and other series has shown that metastatic disease

involving the lung but no other viscera has a prognosis that is intermediate between that of nonvisceral distant metastasis and other visceral sites of metastasis. The
proposed reformulation of the AJCC for 2000 112,118 proposes classification of nonvisceral metastatic disease limited to skin, soft tissue, and nodes be designated as
M1a, and that involvement of lung sites be considered as M1b, with the M1c category left to designate all other visceral sites of disease.
Biochemical and Serologic Markers
Many studies have evaluated biochemical, immunologic, or other quantitative blood assays that might reflect the prognosis of patients with melanoma. One of the
earliest was the level of the enzyme lactic dehydrogenase (LDH), assessed as a marker of metastatic disease, particularly within the liver. 161 Several multivariable
proportional hazards models have evaluated the importance of an elevated LDH level (either elevated above the mean value for a laboratory or above the upper limit
of normal for the laboratory). In each case in which LDH was assessed, it proved to be a significant prognostic factor. Additional factors included melanoma inhibitory
activity (MIA) 162 and the level of the polypeptide S-100b. 163 The AJCC Subcommittee for Melanoma has taken a significant step in a new direction in the proposed
2000 revision of the melanoma staging system 112,118 by including LDH measurement as a factor to be employed to define a more ominous prognosis and to downstage
patients with known metastatic disease who have an elevated LDH value, assigning these patients with stage IV disease to stage IV M1c.
A number of studies have proposed the prognostic utility of S-100b measured by radioimmunoassay or a more recent luminometric immunoassay. 164 A prospective,
observational study evaluated the clinical and prognostic value of S-100 protein in patients with metastasis-free disease versus patients with newly occurring lymph
node, visceral, brain metastases, or all three. In this series that included 570 patients and 52 normal controls, the sensitivity and specificity of S-100 measured by an
immunoluminometric assay was 64% and 91%. False-negative results occurred in those with amelanotic melanoma. The negative predictive value was 99%, but the
positive predictive value was only 65%.
S-100b was examined prospectively in the peripheral blood of patients undergoing surgical procedures for resection of high-risk primaries or lymph node metastases.
Of the patients who were S-100b positive by luminometric immunoassay, 47% developed metastatic disease after at least 2 years of follow-up. Kaplan Meier analysis
showed that patients who were S-100b positive had approximately 2.7 times shorter disease-free survival than patients negative for S-100b. This difference was
statistically significant, and multivariate analysis showed that S-100b was an independent prognostic determinant of disease-free survival. 164
RT-PCR has also been used to gain prognostic information by attempting to detect small numbers of blood-borne melanoma cells. The technique is generally limited
by its extreme sensitivity. The use of tyrosinase has been somewhat problematic because tyrosinase is also present in nonmalignant cells including melanocytes in
the dermis picked up by phlebotomy. Up to 10% of healthy people may have blood tyrosinase-positive cells in this assay. 165 However, tyrosinase has been used to
detect circulating melanoma cells in patients with melanoma with intriguing results. Positive tyrosinase results are seen in stage I, II, III, and IV melanoma patients at a
frequency of 11%, 18%, 31%, and 67%, respectively. In stage IV patients, median overall survival was 8 months compared with 12 months in those patients with a
negative test result. 166 Tyrosinase is present in a proportion of long-term clinically disease-free melanoma patients, and the late presence of circulating melanoma
cells predicts a subsequent high risk of relapse and death. Some studies have correlated tyrosinase positivity with increasing stage, survival, presence of visceral
metastases, and higher LDH levels. 167,168 Actuarial 2-year survival is 97% for the tyrosinase-negative patients versus 72% for the tyrosinase-positive patients. 169 The
use of true real-time quantitative PCR (Taqman) may improve on the prognostic utility of these melanoma assays.
MIA, a novel molecular marker, has been examined as a potential prognostic marker. One hundred sixty-six patients with melanoma were examined for expression of
MIA. A correlation between positive blood sample results and tumor burden in stage III and IV patients was detected and 73% of stage I and II patients were negative
for the MIA RNA. Five of 24 patients who were RT-PCR positive progressed to systemic disease within the follow-up period of 6 months. The predictive values were
low and the study was too small to deduce prognostic significance. 165 MIA, as currently examined, is limited in its utility as a prognostic marker.
Immunosorting of melanoma cells using magnetic cell separation has been used to isolate, in a specific fashion, viable melanocytes from patient's blood. This
technique does not have suitable sensitivity for early detection of metastasis, but may prove a valuable tool in the isolation and identification of circulating autologous
melanoma cells. No patients with stage I primary melanoma were found to have circulating melanoma cells, whereas 13.6% and 15.2% of patients with stage III and IV
disease were found to have them. The prognostic significance of these circulating cells is unknown. 170

IMAGING OF MALIGNANT MELANOMA
Conventional evaluation of the patient with primary melanoma involves chest radiography for all patients with primary lesions deeper than 1 mm. In the setting of
established stage II or III disease, radiologic evaluation may be indicated with the use of magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and computed tomography (CT) of
the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. In the setting of known metastatic disease, thorough evaluation may be required to allow the participation in clinical trials and in
planning therapy. Advances in imaging techniques have improved the ability to identify and localize primary and metastatic melanoma. The most notable advances
have been positron emission tomography (PET), radionuclide agents with affinity for melanoma, and the resurgence of lymphoscintigraphy. Lymphoscintigraphy can
provide valuable assistance in localizing SLNs for biopsy. 171 It is particularly helpful for tumor locations with variable lymphatic drainage and has identified previously
unsuspected drainage patterns for some regions. 171
Improvements in PET have made it a valuable staging study for melanoma. Rinne et al. prospectively compared whole body 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose PET with
conventional imaging (CT, magnetic resonance imaging, and so forth) in 100 consecutive patients (52 at diagnosis, 48 at follow-up). 172 At initial staging, PET was
100% sensitive and 94% specific, whereas conventional imaging did not identify any of the nine lymph node metastases and was 84% specific. In the 48 follow-up
patients, the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of PET per metastasis was 92%, 94%, and 92%, respectively, compared with 58%, 45%, and 56% with conventional
imaging. While PET was better at detecting cervical lymph node metastases (100% vs. 67%) and abdominal metastases (100% vs. 27%), CT was better for small lung
metastases (87% vs. 70%). With the exception of brain imaging, where magnetic resonance imaging is superior, these authors suggested that a single whole body
PET scan could replace all other imaging performed in melanoma patients. This will need to be evaluated in other series.
Other imaging techniques that show promise in melanoma are technetium 99m ( 99mTc)-sestamibi (MIBI), 99mTc-tetrofosmin, and iodine 123 iodobenzamide (for
melanotic tumors). 173,174 and 175 Of these, 99mTc-MIBI has undergone the most thorough evaluation and appears to be a reasonably inexpensive substitute for whole
body PET scans in staging melanoma patients.

RADIOBIOLOGY OF MELANOMA
Early experiences with conventional radiotherapy of melanoma led some clinicians to believe that this tumor was so radioresistant that radiotherapy was of little use.
This erroneous deduction was based on experience with treating melanomas with conventional low-dose fractions (approximately 2 Gy per fraction) and moderate
total overall doses. Radiobiologic studies of melanoma have subsequently altered the clinical approach to treating melanoma. Some investigators identified wide
shoulders for in vivo cell survival curves for melanoma, suggesting a large capacity for repair of sublethal damage that prompted a number of investigators to treat
patients with malignant melanoma with large-dose fractions. 176,177,178,179,180,181 and 182 There is some intrinsic variability within various melanoma cell cultures, and these
models differ in many respects from tumors found in patients. Analyses of clinical experiences with various radiotherapy treatment schedules provided important data.
Melanoma can be responsive to radiotherapy when large-dose fractions are used.
An important study of the clinical radiobiology of melanoma is the analysis by Bentzen et al. of tumor control in 121 patients with 239 histologically proven recurrent or
metastatic malignant melanomas. 179 They identified an alpha to beta ratio of 0.57 (95% confidence interval, –1.07 to 2.5 Gy). The rationale for standard fractionation
is that small-dose fractions preferentially spare late reacting normal tissues with lower alpha to beta ratios (1.8 for subcutaneous) than malignant tumors, which
usually have alpha to beta ratios closer to 10. 183,184 With melanoma, these clinical data indicate the reverse situation. In cases in which the larger individual dose
fraction is used, more normal tissue is spared the effects of radiation compared with tumor. There is little treatment time effect (negligible repopulation during a
treatment schedule) indicating that treatment may be administered with large-dose fractions twice a week rather than conventional application five times per week
schedule. The subsequent protraction of the overall treatment time allows normal cell populations that determine acute radiation reactions (such as moist skin
erythema and mucositis) to repopulate to a greater degree between fractions to minimize acute side effects. The dose response is markedly influenced by tumor size
in radiotherapy of melanoma. Figure 42.2-16 shows the estimated total doses necessary for 80% control probability in tumors of different sizes with different dose
fractions derived from their data. In contrast with these findings, the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group trial 83-05 found largely identical responses in 137 patients
with measurable melanoma lesions randomized between 32 Gy in four weekly 8-Gy fractions (24% complete response, 35% partial response) compared with 40 Gy

with daily 2.5-Gy fractions (23% complete response, 34% partial response). 185

FIGURE 42.2-16. Radiosensitivity of melanoma. Total dose (Gy) necessary to control 80% of malignant melanoma tumors as a function of tumor size and dose per
fraction as estimated from 239 tumors in 121 patients. (Redrawn by permission from ref. 179.)

Several factors have been postulated to contribute to the relative radioresistance of melanoma including tumor hypoxia, loss or dysfunction of the p16 DNA locus, and
decreased cell membrane gangliosides. 186,187,188 and 189 A number of different innovative techniques are being investigated to improve radiotherapy of malignant
melanoma. Hypoxic cell sensitizers such as tirapazamine and gadolinium texaphyrin show promise in preferentially killing radioresistant hypoxic cells within
melanoma tumors.190 Hyperthermia combined with radiotherapy is another approach to optimize killing of hypoxic tumor cells. 191,192 Approaches that combine
radiotherapy with radiosensitizing chemotherapy such as topoisomerase I targeting drugs (topotecan, camptothecin) or taxanes, which arrest cells in the most
radiosensitive phase (G 2/S), also could improve radioresponsiveness. 188,193 Boron neutron capture therapy, which depends on selective drug uptake in tumor (as does
gadolinium texaphyrin), also holds potential in treatment of melanoma. 194 Gene therapy including application of N-Ras or Myc transfection is another promising
approach to increase radiosensitivity. 194a The specific use of radiotherapy on primary tumors, in-transit disease, recurrences, and metastatic disease are discussed in
the following sections.

STAGE I AND II DISEASE: MANAGEMENT OF PRIMARY MELANOMA
All lesions with characteristics suggestive of melanoma should be biopsied. Suspicious lesions may have irregular raised surfaces; ulceration, bleeding, or both;
variegations; or recent changes in color or size. As sampling error may occur with incisional biopsies, a full-thickness excisional biopsy is the preferred diagnostic
technique since the depth of the lesion determines the extent of resection. Shave biopsies are contraindicated since they may not encompass the full depth of the
lesion and make pathologic interpretation of Breslow depth impossible.
PREOPERATIVE WORKUP
The most important staging information obtained from patients with melanoma is the Breslow depth, presence of ulceration, and nodal status. The 1992 National
Institutes of Health Consensus conference indicated that asymptomatic patients with T1 lesions do not appear to benefit from any diagnostic staging including
computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, or nuclear scans. A chest radiograph is performed in patients with stage IB disease or greater. 195 Liver function
tests, especially LDH, and other radiologic tests are indicted in stage III and IV disease or otherwise symptomatic patients.
EXCISIONAL BIOPSY
Performing an excisional biopsy is preferable over an incisional biopsy. Sampling error may limit the reliability of assessing the Breslow depth of incisional biopsies. In
most instances, a biopsy can be done in an office setting under local anesthesia with minimal morbidity. An excisional biopsy removes the lesion en toto. No effort is
made to obtain a wide margin, but a small margin (1 to 2 mm) of normal skin is taken with the elliptical specimen and primary closure performed on most lesions. The
specimen is sent to pathology for permanent section. Some surgeons suggest that a single-stage procedure is possible using frozen sections to characterize tumor
depth, but this has not been validated. 196
INCISIONAL BIOPSY
Wide excision after incisional biopsy was initially thought to be associated with a higher recurrence rate. Those studies were poorly designed and retrospective, and
no evidence in the recent literature suggests a worse outcome from incisional biopsy. However, incisional biopsy has a higher rate of inaccurate microstaging 197 and
should be reserved for large or subungual lesions to confirm diagnosis. Incisional biopsies may be used in areas such as the face where cosmesis and skin coverage
are an issue. The biopsy should be a wedge of tissue including normal skin, the center of the lesion, and subcutaneous fat.
SURGICAL MARGINS OF RESECTION
The depth of melanoma resection does not require inclusion of the underlying muscular fascia, although this was initially suggested. Biopsies should go down to, but
not include the fascia. 198 For years, no clear standard existed that guided the amount of margin to resect around the primary tumor. The margin is defined as the radial
distance from the visible edge of the lesion or scar. Only relatively recently have randomized trials examined the width of surgical margin in relation to local
recurrence and overall survival. Pathologists have long observed malignant cells separated by some distance from the primary lesion. Wide excisions minimize the
risk of leaving behind these cells that may locally recur or metastasize. Rests of malignant cells can be found distances of 1 cm from the visible edge of the tumor, and
their presence outside 1 cm is directly proportional to the depth of the primary lesion. 199,200 Some histopathologic data show morphologically bizarre melanocytes in
normal skin upward of 5 cm from the primary site. 201 The extent of excision necessary should depend of the thickness of the primary tumor. Since large resections risk
functional deficits, disfigurements, and increased cost, determining the minimal excision margin has been extensively studied.
Appropriate initial resection remains crucial in the management of primary melanoma since almost all patients with a local recurrence die of metastatic disease.
Locally recurrent disease may be just a surrogate for more aggressive biologic behavior, but an adequate surgical resection should never be compromised. 202 Local
recurrence, defined as tumor relapse within 3 to 5 cm of the primary closure or skin graft, is a relatively rare event, making the design of trials difficult. In a
retrospective series of 3569 patients, local recurrences were found in only 3.2% of patients. 203 Some factors have been identified that are associated with the
probability of local recurrence. One large study found that the probability of local recurrence depends on only ulceration of the primary tumor (1.5% without ulceration
vs. 10.6% with ulceration) and tumor thickness (2.3%, 4.2%, 11.7% for 1 to 2 mm, 2 to 3 mm, 3 to 4 mm lesions, respectively). 204 Another large prospective series
found that the site of primary tumor also predicted recurrence. In the 10-year reassessment of the Intergroup trial, multivariate analysis showed that the only variables
that predicted local recurrence were ulceration and a head and neck primary site. The proximal extremity was least likely to have a local recurrence, followed by the
trunk, distal extremity, and head and neck. When ulceration was present, the relative risk of local recurrence was 6.3 compared with nonulcerated melanomas. In
patients with head and neck primaries, the relative risk for local recurrence was 9.4 compared with all sites. Both of these risks were highly significant. 136
Although the risk of recurrence increases with more narrow margins, wide incisions can be quite morbid. A more radical excision is associated with the morbidity of
cosmetic defects, functional losses, and the need for skin grafting. Wide excisions for melanoma were first popularized by Handley in 1907 who described a 1-inch
skin margin with further undermining of 2 more inches laterally. 205 In 1947 Urteaga and Pack compared radiation therapy to surgical excision with an 8-cm margin and
found resection to have a superior 5-year survival. 206 Others proposed routine amputations or huge 15-cm margins with en bloc lymphadenectomy. Until more recent
randomized trials, a 3- to 5-cm excision, which frequently required skin grafting, was the standard treatment. Even as late as the 1980s, there were no national
guidelines for the extent of excision necessary and much variation between surgeons existed. Although the rate of recurrence was known to depend on tumor depth,
there was no correlation between the extent of operation and tumor thickness. 207 Three well-designed, randomized prospective trials and various retrospective trials

supports the use of a 1-cm margin for melanomas less than 1 mm thick and a 2-cm margin for deeper lesions deeper ( Table 42.2-5).

TABLE 42.2-5. Current U.S. Recommendations for Excision of Primary Melanoma

Thin and Intermediate Thickness Lesions
Breslow and Macht first questioned the need for excessively wide (3 to 5 cm) resection margins for thin melanomas in 1970. 119 The World Health Organization (WHO)
designed a trial to answer the question of resection margins in thin lesions (less than 2.0 mm). In the WHO trial, 612 patients with melanomas less than 2 mm thick
were randomly assigned to either receive wide excision (3 cm) or narrow excision (1 cm). The results, reported in 1988, showed that the 12-year survival rates were
not significantly different at 87.2% and 85.1%, respectively. There was a 1.8% recurrence rate in the 612 patients. There were four local recurrences in patients with
lesions 1.1 to 2.0 mm deep who received a narrow excision and none of the patient who had had the 3-cm excision. Although this difference was not statistically
significant and there was no difference in survival between the two groups, the WHO reserved judgment on the safety of narrow excisions for intermediate-thickness
lesions. They concluded that in melanomas less than 1.0 mm in depth, a 1-cm margin is to be recommended. 208
The Melanoma Intergroup trial was designed to examine intermediate-thickness lesions and reported its initial data in 1993. The Intergroup trial entered 468 patients
with lesions 1 to 4 mm in thickness and randomized patients to undergo either a 2-cm or a 4-cm wide local excision. After a median follow-up time of 8 years, the
overall survival rates were 79.5% and 83.7%, respectively (no significant difference). The local recurrence rates were not significantly different at 0.8% and 1.7% in
patients with 2- and 4-cm margins, respectively. With a narrow margin, the rate of skin grafting decreased from 46% to 11%, with a resultant decrease in hospital stay
and cost.209 In 1996, the Swedish Melanoma Study group subsequently reported their series of 769 randomized patients with thin and intermediate-thickness
melanoma to a 2- versus a 5-cm margin. Again, there was no difference in local or regional recurrence or survival. 210 The current standard of care for lesions between
1 and 4 mm is a margin of 2 cm.
In Situ and Thick Melanomas
For treatment of patients with melanoma in situ, retrospective data supports the use of 0.5-cm margins. There have not been any reported local recurrences using this
as a guideline. 195 For thick primaries, no randomized trial exists comparing different resection margins; however, a retrospective review of 278 patients compared
excisions greater than 2 cm with excisions less than 2 cm in thick lesions. With a median tumor thickness of 6 mm, no correlation between the width of marginal
resection and local recurrence or overall survival was found. The local recurrence rates were 11% and 13% in the less than 2-cm and greater than 2-cm excision
groups, respectively. 211 Thick tumors do not require a margin greater than 2 cm since patient outcome is dictated more by the presence of regional and systemic
disease. Currently, a prospective trial is accruing patients with melanomas greater than 2 mm thick and randomizing them to 1-cm versus a 2-cm margin. Outside of
this trial, resection margins of 2 cm are recommended for all lesions greater than 1 mm deep.
Technique
The surgeon should mark the appropriate resection margin from the visible edge of the tumor or scar. If primary closure is desired, an elliptical incision should be
performed. The minor axis of the ellipse should encompass the resection margins and the major axis should be approximately three times the minor axis. The long
axis of the ellipse should be parallel to the axis of the extremity, or, if on the trunk, along Langers' lines. Care must be taken not to bevel the dissection inward, and
the excision should not include the fascia. Generous undermining of the lateral flaps allows for a tension-free closure. Rotational flaps may be required for large
lesions or lesions on the face.
SPECIAL SITES
Subungual Tumors
If a nail bed lesion has not changed significantly in 4 to 6 weeks, a biopsy should be performed accompanied by removal of the nail. An incisional biopsy, taking a
representative wedge that includes the middle of the lesion, is recommended to establish a diagnosis and prevent needless amputation. The biopsy should include
the nail plate and should be oriented longitudinally. 84 The level of amputation does not seem to affect the incidence of recurrence or patient survival, so especially in
lesions of the thumb, maintenance of function is important. For disease confined to the nail bed, amputation through the distal interphalangeal joint is recommended,
and for bulky disease, a more proximal amputation through the base of the phalanx may be required. 212,213 Toe amputations should be performed more proximally as
the loss of a toe at the metatarsal-phalangeal joint does not result in decreased function. Some surgeons advocate ILP, sentinel node biopsy, or both in patients with
these high-risk lesions. There are few data showing a survival benefit in any patient with melanoma using adjuvant ILP.
Acral and Lentiginous Melanoma
Due to functional concerns, there is a tendency to use smaller margins, perhaps accounting for the two- to fivefold higher incidence of local recurrence in this area. 214
Excisions often require split-thickness skin grafting for closure or tissue transfer, especially in wounds involving weight-bearing areas such as the heel of the foot that
may require flap transfer. 215 In most instances, skin grafts may be applied successfully to weight-bearing areas. 216
Head and Neck
Melanoma of the face and scalp represent sites where local recurrence, nodal, and in-transit disease occur more frequently perhaps due to the extensive lymphatic
drainage. Melanoma of the head and neck usually occurs in an age group 10 years older than truncal and extremity melanoma. The lesions most commonly involve
the face (Table 42.2-6). LMM, a common morphotype of head and neck melanomas, is historically associated with an improved prognosis. However, appropriate
excision margins for Breslow depth should not be compromised solely on cosmetic bases. 217 LM, a benign precursor lesion, can be treated through a number of
techniques that do not require a wide margin of resection. Since up to one-half degenerate into malignancy, the treatment of these lesions is warranted. Multiple
techniques have successfully been used to treat these lesions including excision, micrographic Moh's surgery, cryosurgery, radiotherapy, electrodesiccation and
curettage, 5-fluorouracil, azelaic acid, and retinoic acid. 218 A Wood's lamp examination often helps to define the extent of pigmentation better than room light. 219
Full-thickness wedge resections are indicated for melanomas arising on helix of the ear ( Fig. 42.2-17).

TABLE 42.2-6. Mean Age at Diagnosis for 496 Patients with Melanoma of the Head and Neck a

FIGURE 42.2-17. Melanoma of the external ear. These patients should be treated by a full-thickness wedge excision of the helix. Primary, three-layer closure can
easily be performed with good cosmetic results. (Courtesy of H. Edington, M.D., University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute.)

MOHS MICROGRAPHIC SURGERY
Mohs micrographic surgery (MMS) has been used for some time by dermatologists for nonmelanomatous lesions. The technique reduces scarring and may spare
normal tissues by shaving involved tissues until a histologically negative margin. MMS employs repeated shallow (3-mm) resections, each examined histologically by
frozen section. Some specialized centers have proposed the use of Mohs surgery in melanoma to minimize loss of normal tissue, especially in area such as the face,
hands, and feet. Margins are generally taken somewhat less than the WHO and Intergroup trials found appropriate, which has generated much criticism from most
melanoma experts. There have been no randomized trials comparing the standard surgical excision with MMS, but in some uncontrolled centers, rates of local
recurrence and overall survival have not been found to be inferior to matched historic controls. Interesting differences exist between traditional surgical resection and
micrographic surgery. For instance, the diameter and location of the primary tumor are prime determinants of the expected extent of excision in the MMS literature.
Proponents of Mohs surgery claim that repeated frozen sectioning is accurate and saves normal tissues. Opponents cite the fact that satellite lesions may be missed
using the Mohs technique and that pathologists do not generally examine the specimens. Critics also claim that frozen section is notoriously inaccurate for
identification of melanoma. 220 Appropriate controlled multicenter trials are essential before this technique can be accepted by the surgical community for the treatment
of melanoma.
RADIOTHERAPY OF PRIMARY SKIN TUMORS
Radiotherapy is rarely indicated in the management of primary invasive melanoma except in patients who refuse surgical excision or who are poor medical
candidates. Treatment is usually administered with 6- to 9-MeV electron beams or 100- to 280-kilovolt (peak) x-rays using wide margins. Seegenschmiedt et al.
reported tumor control in all 11 patients with residual (n = 6) or recurrent (n = 4) stage IIB melanoma (one patient with primary disease refused surgical excision). 180
They found better tumor control in these patients compared with control achieved through radiotherapy in patients with skin and lymph node metastases.
Radiotherapy is a noninvasive alternative to surgical resection in the management of LM. This therapy may be appropriate for patients who cannot undergo or refuse
surgery. Harwood reported 40 cases of LM and LMM managed with radiotherapy alone at Princess Margaret Hospital. 175 Radiotherapy doses were 45 to 50 Gy in 10
to 15 fractions with orthovoltage beams. Fourteen of 17 patients with LM and 34 of 37 with LMM were alive without tumor progression after 1 month to 7 years. Four
patients with local recurrent or persistent tumor (two LM and two LMM) were salvaged by surgery (one LM, two LMM) or further radiotherapy (one LM). One LM patient
died of intercurrent illness. Lesions can take up to 2 years to disappear after radiotherapy and the follow-up of available series remains short. 175

STAGE I AND II DISEASE: EXAMINATION OF THE LYMPH NODE BASIN
Although prophylactic nodal dissection has never clearly been demonstrated to be of survival value in any other tumor, the Halstedian belief of radical
lymphadenectomy has, and still dominates the treatment of melanoma. Physicians have believed that a survival benefit exists after the early removal of nodes that are
subclinically involved with tumor compared with removal once obvious nodal disease develops because the longer melanoma grows in the lymphatics, the more likely
it is to metastasize systemically. This concept was tested in numerous trials by comparing ELND, a complete lymphadenectomy (LND) in those at risk for nodal
disease but without clinical evidence, with therapeutic lymph node dissection (TLND), LND in those with clinically positive nodes. Although no clear survival benefits
have yet been demonstrated by ELND, many confounding factors may have contributed to the generally negative results. After years of controversy surrounding the
potential benefit of elective nodal dissection and numerous trials, it is ironic that, regardless of the conclusions reached, the new technique of sentinel node mapping,
has cast a shadow on all the answers recently obtained. The complexity of nodal drainage, the relatively low frequency of nodal disease, inadequate staging, and
slight, if any, therapeutic benefit are clear obstacles in attempting to demonstrate any benefit of elective nodal dissection for melanoma. In previous texts, a detailed
discussion of ELND was mandatory. Now the wholesale removal of entire nodal basins that may harbor metastatic disease based on inadequate descriptions of
drainage patterns, and insensitive pathologic techniques should no longer be performed. With the advent of sentinel node mapping, ELND is only discussed as an
historic reference. Regardless of possible therapeutic benefit, sentinel node biopsies efficiently predict prognosis with low morbidity. Current trials are assessing
therapeutic benefit of selective nodal dissection. Unlike in breast cancer, there is no clearly beneficial adjuvant therapy available for high-risk patients, but as various
new melanoma therapies are being developed, risk stratification by nodal status will become increasingly important. In the future sophisticated assays such as
quantitative PCR (Taqman), which can measure melanoma antigens in the peripheral blood, may prove more important than nodal status for predicting prognosis and
obviate the need for invasive procedures.
ELECTIVE LYMPH NODE DISSECTION
ELND has been an extremely controversial subject and its theoretical value hinges on the biology of melanoma metastasis. Does melanoma spread stepwise through
the draining lymph nodes before reaching other more distant sites, or, as in breast cancer, does a Fisherian theory of nodal disease exist in which positive nodes are
only a marker for systemic disease? Selecting patients who may be candidates for ELND has been based on the depth of the primary tumor. Patients with tumor less
than 1 mm deep have a 98% cure rate and would not benefit from a relatively morbid operation. Patients with thick lesions (greater than 4 mm) at the time of diagnosis
did not undergo ELND. Initial studies of ELND in this group of patients could not show any benefit and data erroneously suggested that this was due to a high percent
(70%) of patients with occult metastatic disease. 221 Numerous trials have tried to understand the role of nodal dissection for intermediate-thickness lesions, but,
unfortunately, many of the data are conflicting. Although sentinel node mapping has not yet proven therapeutic, the knowledge gained has helped elucidate the
reasons for failure in multiple ELND trials and given much insight to the biology of nodal disease in melanoma.
Proponents of ELND advocate the use of ELND for its prognostic information since, in patients with regional disease, the actual number of nodes involved is the most
important predictor of overall survival. 222 Advocates also cite retrospective studies that demonstrate a 5-year survival rate increase of up to 10% to 27% when patients

with clinically occult disease have their nodal basins resected compared with delayed resection of gross disease. 223 As well, regional node disease may determine
candidacy for adjuvant treatment such as IFN-a.
Opponents point out the morbidity of the operation, the lack of clear therapeutic benefit of ELND, and a controversial advantage to IFN-a treatment. One of the most
important criticisms was that up to 80% of patients had negative nodes on pathology. This large percentage of patients received no benefit from the procedure. Many
believe that lymph node metastases are a manifestation rather than a predecessor of distant spread. In a retrospective review of 4682 patients, only 16% of patients
had positive nodes at ELND. Ten percent of metastases were positive in the contralateral node, and 6% were positive in nodal basins not classically predicted. At
Breslow depths of less than 0.76 mm, 0.76 to 1.5 mm, 1.5 to 2.5 mm, 2.5 to 4.0 mm, and greater than 4 mm, the regional nodal basin was positive in 0%, 5%, 16%,
24%, and 36% of cases, respectively. 224 LND has substantial potential morbidity that includes chronic lymphedema, pain, paresthesias, cosmetic deformity, and,
especially in the groin, wound complications. Lesions of the head and neck are especially problematic. As is true for squamous cell cancers of the head and neck,
evidence arising from randomized prospective trials is not available to confirm the value of prophylactic nodal dissection for melanoma arising in the head and
neck.225,226
The usefulness of ELND has been debated for decades because of conflicting trials of various quality ( Table 42.2-7). Multiple trials suggest that TLND does not
jeopardize the probability of cure and prevents the need for difficult toilet operations. Most trials are retrospective and mixed in conclusions. In one from Duke
University and another from the Sydney Melanoma Unit, initial analysis showed a survival advantage in patients with intermediate-thickness lesions, but both, after 10
years of further data accrual, showed no advantage to ELND. This demonstrated the lack of reliability of retrospective trials and the length of time needed for
adequate data accrual.

TABLE 42.2-7. Results of Elective Lymph Node Dissection Trials a

Two prospective trials from the WHO in 1977 and Mayo Clinic in 1986 showed no benefit of ELND. 227,228 Both these trials included what we now recognize as many
low-risk patients and their negative results have been criticized. Both the Intergroup and WHO trunk trials are contemporary prospective randomized trials that were
developed to address much of the conflicting information. Although long-term data are still accruing, results have been published.
In 1998, the WHO published a series of 252 patients randomized to immediate or delayed node dissection. All patients had truncal melanoma of at least 1.5 mm
thickness. The 5-year survival observed in patients who had delayed node dissection was 51.3% compared with 61.7% in patients who had had immediate resection
(P = .09). Multivariate analysis showed that routine use of immediate node dissection had no effect on survival. 229 The WHO study, in contrast to the Intergroup
Melanoma trial, was much smaller in patient accrual, assessed patients who generally had thicker melanomas, and did not use lymphoscintigraphy to determine the
appropriate drainage basins to resect.
In 1996, initial results of the Intergroup Melanoma trial were reported. The trial randomized 740 patients with intermediate-thickness lesions to ELND, and, although
there was no difference in survival for the entire group, an apparent survival benefit was seen in a post hoc analysis of a subgroup of patients. Male patients younger
than the age of 60, with tumors 1.1 to 2.0 mm thick, and without ulceration had a significant improvement in 5-year survival of 96% versus 84% ( P = .007) which was
confirmed in multivariate analysis. The subgroup of patients with tumor thickness 1.1 to 2.0 mm of any age who underwent an ELND also had a significantly better
5-year survival compared with the observation group (92 vs. 84%, P = .05).230
Cascinelli et al. suggest a role of prophylactic dissection in a randomized study of patients with trunk melanoma comparing elective versus delayed dissection, noting
that only patients with positive lymph nodes benefited from lymphadenectomy. 229 These data become important with the advent of sentinel node biopsy and
subsequent selective nodal dissection. Now a large percentage (80%) of patients who may not benefit from LND may be spared the procedure while identifying
patients who may most benefit. SLN biopsy followed by dissection in patients with positive nodes eliminates the indications for prophylactic dissection, and future
studies can focus on a homogenous group of patients in order to establish the true therapeutic role of lymphadenectomy.
SENTINEL NODE BIOPSY
Even before the results of the WHO and Intergroup Melanoma trials, the use of sentinel node biopsy was widely adopted as a means to minimize procedural morbidity
of LND. The sentinel node is the most likely lymph node to contain metastatic disease. The concept of sentinel node biopsy is based on the presumption of an orderly
progression of disease through the lymphatic system. A negative SLN would suggest more upstream metastatic disease has not occurred, whereas a positive SLN
would indicate potential involvement of other nodes in the same basin. 231 A lymphadenectomy after intraoperative lymphatic mapping and sentinel node biopsy has
been termed a completion lymph node dissection.232 The importance of a positive sentinel node is underscored by multivariate analyses, which show that the SLN
status is the most important prognostic factor influencing disease-free and distant disease-free survival in patients with stage I and II melanoma. 233
SLN biopsies have clarified the natural progression of melanoma metastasis. 234 The data from initial trials using sentinel node mapping demonstrate an apparent
orderly progression of disease with failure to observe lymph node metastases in nodes adjacent to a negative sentinel node. 235 Cabanas was the first to describe the
technique of sentinel node biopsy for penile cancer as a means to prevent the morbidity of bilateral inguinal LND. 236 This concept is that discrete areas of skin drain
initially to specific node(s) within lymph node basin(s) that may or may not be proximate anatomic basins. The identification of such initially draining nodes allows for
pathologic assessment in far greater detail than is possible otherwise.
Although many surgeons believe SLN biopsy is the current standard of care, the true role and benefit of sentinel node mapping is still to be determined. Undoubtedly,
sentinel node status is extremely valuable in staging. Clinical trials of melanoma have been hampered by the heterogeneity of patient populations due to suboptimal
staging. Accurate knowledge of the lymph node status (macroscopic, microscopic, immunohistochemical, and molecular) enables appropriate comparisons to be
made between treatment groups. There is still debate whether a positive sentinel node biopsy with subsequent lymphadenectomy of clinically negative basins and
adjuvant therapy is efficacious. Data suggest that the early removal of positive lymph nodes may improve survival. The Intergroup trial suggests that the benefit of
elective LND may be meaningful in patients whose tumors are nonulcerated, extremity primaries, of thickness between 1 and 2 mm, and whose age is less than 60
years. Current trials are attempting to determine the efficacy of early LND guided by sentinel node mapping. Although the efficacy of adjuvant treatment for melanoma
is less than desired, the ongoing studies of IFNs, chemotherapy, vaccines, and combinations will be improved by a greater precision in prognostic assessment.
Lymphoscintigraphy
In 1977 Robinson et al. described the use of cutaneous lymphoscintigraphy in the nodal basin for truncal melanomas using colloidal gold scanning. 237 In 1985, Morton
began the first clinical trials using both lymphoscintigraphy and vital dye injection for the identification of sentinel nodes in melanoma patients. In 1993, Alex
introduced the use of technetium 99m sulfur colloid, a radioactive tracer, injected intradermally around a primary melanoma site, followed by imaging and subsequent
intraoperative use of a gamma probe to localize the sentinel node. 238
The day before the operation, lymphoscintigraphy is performed using 99mTc (0.5 to 0.8 mCi), which is injected around the tumor site ( Fig. 42.2-18 and Fig. 42.2-19).

The colloidal isotopes are phagocytosed by macrophages within the lymph node. This keeps tracer in the draining node and prevents further passage through the
nodal basin.239 Immediately afterward, dynamic images are obtained, and after 2 hours static scintigrams are taken. Dynamic imaging helps differentiate between
multiple sentinel nodes and spillover to nonsentinel node. The choice of tracer is also important. The 99mTc sulfur colloid has a particle size in the micrometer range,
and transport may be too slow to be suitable for dynamic imaging. 99mTc colloidal albumin and technetium 99m human serum albumin appear to be the most favorable
as the sentinel node becomes positive within 20 minutes in 97% of patients and is retained for up to 24 hours without an increase in the number of sentinel
nodes.24099mTc human serum albumin demonstrated faster washout rates from injection sites and better definition of lymph channels than either particulate agent,
whereas particulate agents were retained longer in nodes and demonstrated more nodes in delayed images than in early images. Early dynamic imaging is important,
as sentinel nodes cannot be distinguished reliably from nonsentinel nodes in delayed images alone. 241 The radiologist should mark the position of the sentinel node
on the skin, although the surgeon must be wary that relaxation during surgery and positioning may change the position of the lymph node relative to the skin marker.

FIGURE 42.2-18. Lymphoscintigram. This patient had a biopsy-proven melanoma on the right hand (note the high area of radioactive tracer around the injection site)
and was noted to have an epitrochlear sentinel node. Five percent of patients with distal extremity lesions have popliteal or epitrochlear nodes. Using classical
guidelines for lymphadenectomy, a potential positive lymph node may be overlooked, which may result in incorrect staging.

FIGURE 42.2-19. Lymphoscintigram. This patient had a primary tumor on the nose. Sentinel node mapping in the head and neck can be difficult secondary to the
increased number of nodes (3.8 vs. 1.3), the overshadowing of pertinent lymph nodes by the primary injection site, the difficult dissections, and cosmetic concerns.
Note, the multiple sentinel nodes suggested during early imaging. In this patient, no sentinel nodes in the parotid gland were identified. (Courtesy of H. Edington,
M.D., University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute.)

The surgeon should reexamine the SLN in the operating room with the hand-held gamma counter and make the skin incision directly over the most radioactive point.
As only 1% of the injected dose of radioactive colloid reaches the SLN, a primary site close to the nodal basin may preclude effective use of the gamma probe, even if
the primary site is excised initially. 242 This shadowing becomes especially important in head and neck melanomas where nodes and the primary site overlap. After the
sentinel node is removed, the wound is explored with the gamma probe for additional hot, blue nodes.
Sappey had originally injected mercury into the skin of cadavers and showed that a line drawn just above the umbilicus would differentiate inguinal versus axillary
drainage. Lesions within 2 cm of this line had bidirectional drainage. With the use of these techniques, lymphatic drainage not predicted by Sappey's original
description of the cutaneous watershed of lymph drainage has been frequently observed. 243 Only more recently, with the use of lymphoscintigraphy, has Sappey's
guide to lymphatic flow been modifies by modern means of assessment.
Discordance from classical drainage patterns is especially common in the head, neck, and truck. Sixty percent of head and neck and 32% of the trunk tumors drain in
unpredicted sites. Operative intervention is changed in almost one-half of patients when lymphoscintigraphy is used. 244,245 Lymphoscintigraphy may also identify
patients with lymphatic drainage in two separate basins. Patients who have positive nodes in two basins have a worse prognosis when compared with patients with
nodal disease in one basin, even when controlling for the total number of positive nodes. 246 Even in distal extremity lesions in which lymphatic drainage is seemingly
obvious, lymphoscintigraphy may identify popliteal or epitrochlear nodes. 247
The unpredictability of lymphatic drainage based on anatomic guidelines basins, especially in the head, neck, and trunk, make the use of routine ELND based on
classic anatomy inappropriate without preoperative lymphoscintigraphy. The examination of incorrect lymphatic basins, the lack of appropriate immunohistochemical
techniques, and the inclusion of patients with a relatively low likelihood of nodal involvement accounts for the difficulty in interpreting the various results of prior trials
studying the role of ELND.
Vital Dye
After induction of anesthesia, vital blue dye (1.0 mL of isosulfan blue or patent blue V) is injected intradermally around the primary tumor or scar ( Fig. 42.2-20). The
gamma counter is more accurate than vital dyes in locating sentinel nodes, especially in the axilla or in deep fatty tissue. Techniques using dye alone require a longer
learning curve to achieve success rates of only 80%. The blue dye is still helpful in visual confirmation of a hot node ( Fig. 42.2-21 and Fig. 42.2-22), but up to 15% of
radiolabeled sentinel nodes lack any blue dye. Conversely, 8% of blue nodes are not hot, and some of these nodes will be the only site of metastasis. 248
Complications of the technique are infrequent and minor including dye-stained urine and prolonged tattooing of the skin lasting several months.

FIGURE 42.2-20. Vital blue dye injected around a primary melanoma. The patient had undergone lymphoscintigraphy before injection of the vital blue dye. (Courtesy

of H. Edington, M.D., University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute.)

FIGURE 42.2-21. Vital blue dye leading to superficial inguinal sentinel lymph node. Arrow points to blue lymphatic channel. (Courtesy of H. Edington, M.D., University
of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute.)

FIGURE 42.2-22. Vital blue dye staining the sentinel lymph node after removal. (Courtesy of H. Edington, M.D., University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute.)

Results of Sentinel Lymph Node Biopsy
After nodal mapping, regional recurrence rates are acceptably low and the sensitivity and specificity are quite high. Reintgen, in 1997, reported that after 600
mappings and 5 years of follow-up, no patient developed a recurrence in any basins not predicted at risk by lymphoscintigraphy. 242 In another series, the sensitivity of
lymphatic mapping and SLN biopsy for extremity melanoma was 100% and the specificity was 97%. Only 3% of patients with histologically negative SLNs developed
inguinal nodal metastases during a mean 2-year follow-up. 249 Lenisa et al. described their series of 580 sentinel node biopsies, 15% of which had nodes involved with
tumor. Positive cases were distributed according to thickness as shown in Table 42.2-8. In 77% of the patients, only a single positive node was identified after
completion LND. Only eight patients (1%) had a local relapse after a negative sentinel node biopsy. 250 Using multivariate analysis, the probability of a positive sentinel
node depends only on tumor thickness, ulceration, and truncal location. Although tumor thickness and ulceration influenced survival in SLN-negative patients, they
provided no additional prognostic information in SLN-positive patients. Sentinel nodes are positive in 15% to 26% of patients in various series. 234,248,251 Of patients
with positive sentinel nodes, 24% to 33% demonstrate lymph nodes to be involved at completion lymphadenectomy. A single SLN is found in 59% of patients, two
SLNs in 37%, and three SLN in 3%. 240 The median number of sentinel nodes found in several series ranges from 1.3 to 1.8.

TABLE 42.2-8. Thickness of Melanoma and Sentinel Lymph Node Positivity a

Essner et al. were the first to show that sentinel node biopsy followed by completion lymphadenectomy did not decrease survival compared with patients undergoing
ELND. They described a series of 534 matched patients with clinical stage I melanoma; one-half of the patients were treated with lymphatic mapping and sentinel
lymphadenectomy and the other half were treated with ELND. The overall incidences of nodal metastases and survival were no different between the sentinel node
and ELND groups, but the incidence of occult nodal disease was significantly higher among patients with intermediate-thickness primary tumors who underwent
sentinel node mapping instead of ELND. 240a Essner et al. showed that sentinel node mapping is therapeutically equivalent but prognostically more accurate than
ELND.252
Whether previous wide excision affects the ability to map the sentinel node by changing local lymphatic drainage has been debated. The likelihood of appropriate dye
uptake is decreased by one-half if a wide excision has been previously done. 234,253 Most surgeons strongly recommend the use of lymphoscintigraphy before wide
local excision to avoid disruption, artifactual drainage of the lymphatic drainage, or both. 254 Morton et al. retrospectively examined 47 patients who had SLN mapping
after wide local excision and concluded that SLN biopsy can be cautiously performed in patients who have undergone previous wide local excision if the primary
resection margin was no greater than 2.0 cm and the primary was not in a region of ambiguous drainage. Another retrospective review of 142 patients concluded that
previous wide excision does not affect the reliability of sentinel node biopsy unless a rotational flap has been used. 255 Further study is needed before firm conclusions
can be made on the timing of SLN biopsy.
SLNs of the head and neck behave somewhat differently. Sentinel node biopsy has been less consistently successful in the head and neck due to the frequent
alterations in lymphatic draining; likewise, prophylactic nodal dissection has not proven useful. Series reports between a 90% and a 95% success rate in identifying
the sentinel node, somewhat less than the success rate for sentinel nodes at other sites. 226,250,256,257,258 and 259 Many differences in head and neck lesions make sentinel
node biopsy more difficult. Whereas most patients with extremity melanomas have a median of 1.3 to 1.8 SLNs, a median of 3.8 sentinel nodes is found in patients
with intermediate-thickness head and neck lesions. Difficulties in mapping strategies are seen in nonclassical and especially parotid nodes, which may be shadowed
by the radioisotope injected in the primary site. Furthermore, only 67% of lesions stain with vital dyes. One-half of sentinel nodes are located in nonadjacent nodal
basins. One-fourth are in nonclassical sites and one-half in the parotid gland. Often, a functional node dissection with ex vivo dissection using the gamma probe is

necessary to find small sentinel nodes. 260 Furthermore, the patients must be warned that prolonged tattooing may occur from injected dyes in cosmetically sensitive
areas of the face.
In 1994, the Multicenter Selective Lymphadenectomy Trial was begun to evaluate the therapeutic role of lymphatic mapping and SLN biopsy with and without wide
excision in patients with localized melanoma. This trial has just closed with 1800 patients accrued, and long-term results are awaited. The Multicenter Selective
Lymphadenectomy Trial has a 99.1% success rate in obtaining sentinel node(s) using both dye and radiolabeling. 232 In centers participating in the Multicenter
Selective Lymphadenectomy Trial, a minimum of 30 procedures must be performed before patients can be entered. After performing 30 cases, there was no difference
in success of sentinel node biopsies between any of the centers. 261
Pathologic Interpretation
Frozen sections do not have a place in sentinel node mapping because micrometastatic disease cannot be determined, and thus permanent pathologic interpretation
is crucial to success of sentinel node staging. Hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) staining is performed with negative samples undergoing immunohistochemical staining with
the antibodies reactive with melanoma including S-100 and HMB-45. Ninety percent of melanomas are positive for S-100. HMB-45 is more specific but less sensitive
than S-100, which also stains neurons, melanocytes, and DCs. 22 The importance of immunostaining is exemplified in a study by Gershenwald. Of 243 patients with a
histologically negative SLN on routine H&E staining, 27 (11%) developed local, in-transit, regional nodal, distant, or both nodal and distant metastases after a median
follow-up of 35 months. Ten patients (4.1%) developed a nodal recurrence in the previously mapped basin. Reexamination of the original cassettes using S-100 and
HMB-45 demonstrated that 80% of these patients had evidence of occult metastases by serial sectioning or immunohistochemical staining. 141 In another large series
of 357 patients and 838 sentinel nodes, 45% of positive nodes were only positive by S-100 staining, again confirming the importance of immunostaining for
H&E-negative nodes. 262 At a minimum, all negative SLNs should undergo immunohistochemical staining for melanoma markers.
The Multicenter Selective Lymphadenectomy Trial uses strict guidelines in handling nodal tissue. The Trial recommends cutting the lymph node in two halves through
its longest diameter and fixing the specimen. Ten serial 8- to 10-µm sections are then made. Sections 1, 3, 5, and 10 are used for H&E staining, section 2 for S-100,
section 4 for HMB-45, and sections 6 and 7 are negative controls for immunoperoxidase studies. Sections 8 and 9 are used to repeat any needed studies. 248
The use of RT-PCR, or potentially in the future, Taqman analysis to examine nodes for mRNA of melanosomal proteins may be valuable as this could reduce
sampling error and increase sensitivity. Its extreme sensitivity, however, may result in the inappropriate upstaging of patients and overtreatment of patients falsely
termed positive. In one study of RT-PCR of 124 patients, 58% of patients with histologically negative nodes were upstaged. This group of patients had a worse overall
prognosis than patients who were RT-PCR negative and histologically negative. Twenty percent of these patients developed either locoregional or systemic disease,
whereas only 5% of the PCR-negative patients developed signs of disease. One melanoma cell in 1 million background cells can be detected. 263 Since approximately
80% of sentinel nodes will be negative, a quick screening of H&E-negative nodes using PCR may identify patients in whom the more labor-intensive immunostaining
may be performed.264 One aim of the current Sunbelt trial is to examine the importance of PCR-positive lymph nodes and the effect of adjuvant therapy in patients with
histologically negative nodes. The introduction of Taqman analysis may allow more accurate antigen quantitation and further insight. 265
SENTINEL LYMPH NODE RESULTS IN THIN AND THICK MELANOMAS
Only rarely are sentinel nodes found positive in patients with thin melanomas (T1). The use of sentinel node biopsy is controversial in this group of patients, and many
have looked for risk factors that may predict a higher incidence of nodal metastases. Less than 2% of patients with nonulcerated primary lesions less than 1 mm (T1)
and less than Clark level IV have positive sentinel nodes. No lymph node involvement has been reported in lesions less than 0.73 mm. Thus, there is no role for
sentinel mapping in these patients. The two most significant risk factors for positive sentinel nodes in thin primary lesions are ulceration and Clark level greater or
equal to IV. Even in patients with T1b lesions, the risk for nodal disease is less than 10%. Patients with T1b tumors have the same risk for nodal disease as T2a
patients. In a series of 254 patients reported by Gershenwald, no patient with T1 lesions and a positive sentinel node had positive nodes on completion
lymphadenectomy. Regression by itself was not found a risk factor for nodal disease in thin lesions. 130 Careful selection and patient education is necessary before the
employment of SLN biopsies in these patients with thin lesions.
No trial has shown benefit for elective nodal dissection in patients with tumors greater than 4 mm, and, in fact, ELNDs were not performed in this group of patients.
However, many centers perform sentinel node mapping in this group of patients. Perhaps the subgroup of patients that has deep lesions and negative sentinel nodes
may have improved survival compared with stage III patients and would be spared adjuvant therapy.

STAGE III DISEASE: MANAGEMENT OF THE CLINICALLY POSITIVE NODAL BASIN
THERAPEUTIC NODE DISSECTION
The development of clinically palpable nodes in the draining basins of a primary melanoma requires TLND to control local disease. Although there are no randomized
trials clearly demonstrating a survival difference after TLND, a significant number of patients attain 5-year survival. Furthermore, the palliative benefits of TLND are
considerable. Untreated nodal metastasis can be expected to ulcerate, impinge on neural structures, and cause pain in patients whose life expectancy is more than 1
year. Even in some patients with metastasis to distant nodal regions, TLND has a role in palliation. In addition, prognostic information is obtained after TLND since the
number of positive nodes correlates with survival and may guide adjuvant therapy. 143
In patients with a prior history of melanoma but without evidence of infection, 90% of lymphadenopathy is associated with tumor. 266 Tumor-involved nodes tend to be
firm and spherical. Five-year survival rates following TLND range from 19% to 38% in retrospective series. 222,266,267,268,269,270 and 271 In one series of 133 patients
undergoing iliac and inguinal nodal dissection, those with one, two, three, or more than four lymph nodes positive for tumor had median survivals of 90, 78, 49, and 15
months, respectively. The median survival was significantly worse for those with deep nodes positive with survival of 53, 42, 14, and 9 months, respectively. 272
Inguinal Dissection
The extent of surgical management in patients with clinically palpable inguinal nodes is a controversial topic in the treatment of melanoma. An inguinal groin
dissection can be either superficial, including all nodes below the inguinal ligament, or complete, including the deep iliac and obturator nodes accessed through
retroperitoneal exposure. The superficial dissection is carried out through a longitudinal incision with the removal of subcutaneous tissues, lymphatics, and the
anterior portion of the femoral sheath. A sartorius muscle flap is used in closure to protect the femoral vessels and decrease wound complications. 273
Of patients with palpable inguinal nodes, up to 37% have histologically positive deep iliac nodes. Some believe that the routine removal of all deep nodes in patients
with palpable inguinal disease is indicted, whereas others believe patients with radiologically positive pelvic nodes should not undergo TLND given the likelihood of
distant disease. There are currently no randomized data comparing complete and superficial LND. Case series suggest that performing a deep inguinal dissection
increases the morbidity of the operation and does not to offer an obvious survival advantage in a radiologically negative pelvis. In comparing patients who undergo
deep TLND for known positive iliac disease with those who have no apparent pelvic disease and only positive inguinal disease, overall survival is equivalent. For
some, this is evidence that pelvic dissections are beneficial. They argue that those with grossly positive pelvic nodes should have a predictably worse prognosis since
those patients had significantly more positive lymph nodes of generally larger size. 274 There is some suggestion that the probability of a groin recurrence decreased
with the inclusion of a deep iliac dissection. 272 In a retrospective review of 362 therapeutic groin dissections, 20% had positive deep inguinal nodes. The 5- and
10-year survival for those patients was 24% and 20%, respectively, with the number of positive iliac nodes an independent prognostic factor. The authors suggest that
deep lymph node dissection may be of benefit as up to 20% of patients are long-term survivors who would otherwise would have had residual disease if treated only
by a superficial dissection. 275 A prospective trial is currently testing the value of deep iliac dissection in patients who will all have superficial dissection.
Axillary Dissections
Therapeutic axillary nodal dissection for melanoma involves the complete removal of levels I and II nodes, and some advocate the removal of level III nodes including
skeletonizing the axillary vein and brachial plexus. Rarely, in patients without evidence of distant disease and with positive supraclavicular nodes, a lower cervical
node dissection may be performed by resection of the middle third of the clavicle. 273 As with inguinal dissections, survival after axillary dissection correlates with the
number of positive nodes. The 5-year survival rate is 80% in patients with histologically negative nodes. With one, two, three, or more than four nodes, the 5-year

survival was 62%, 51%, 28%, and 5%, respectively. Patients with recurrent lymph nodes or nodes that are fixed have a 5-year survival of 13%. 276
Neck Dissections
A functional neck dissection is indicated with the preservation of the jugular vein, sternocleidomastoid, and spinal accessory nerve unless directly involved with tumor.
Modification of the extent of dissection is appropriate relative to the site of the primary tumor. 273 Patients treated with node positivity in head and neck cancer have a
substantially lower survival than in patients with truncal or extremity melanoma. Superficial, nerve-sparing parotidectomy is indicated for palpable metastatic lesions
for local tumor control. 277 These parotid nodes should be removed by superficial parotidectomy. Although controversial, some advocate the use of adjuvant
radiotherapy for high-risk lesions because of the higher rate of recurrence in head and neck lesions. 260 This is the topic of an ongoing randomized controlled trial,
E3697, by ECOG.
Popliteal and Antecubital Nodal Dissection
Infrequently, the popliteal nodes become involved with metastatic disease and cause palpable enlargement. The popliteal nodes only drain a small area of skin of the
posterior calf. In the absence of distant unresectable disease, popliteal nodal dissection should be performed through an S-shaped incision. There are no data
demonstrating survival benefit of this operation as there are only small case series in the literature. 273,278 Epitrochlear node involvement occurred in 18% of patients
with forearm or hand lesions, and only when the primary melanoma was within 5 cm of the elbow or in the ulnar distribution. 279
Complications of Nodal Dissection
In inguinal dissections, necrosis of the skin flap occurs to some degree in 7% of patients. Wound infection occurs in 10% of patients. 280 The most devastating
long-term complication is lymphedema. This occurs in up to 24% of patients and may be upward of 40% with prolonged follow-up. A strict regimen of daily leg
elevation and routine use of elastic stockings decreases the severity of symptoms. The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve is commonly sacrificed with resultant
numbness of the lateral thigh. The Intergroup Melanoma Trial reports a 50% wound complication rate in inguinal lymphadenectomies. In 112 patients there were 23
wound breakdowns, 24 cases of lymphedema, one deep vein thrombosis, and one pulmonary embolism. 230
Necrosis is rare in axillary dissection. Neuropraxia secondary to brachial plexopathy is also a rare event that is usually resolved within 3 to 6 months. Proper
positioning, careful placement of retractors and careful dissection minimize this event. Lymphocele rates are 7%, and the incidence of arm edema is much lower than
nodal dissection for breast cancer. 281 Mobilization after axillary dissection should be limited until after surgical drains are removed. 282
MELANOMA OF UNKNOWN PRIMARY SITE
Melanomas presenting as regional or distant disease without an obvious primary site occur uncommonly and may represent a completely regressed primary tumor. A
vigorous search for suspicious lesions is mandatory in these patients with a low threshold for biopsy. In a large series of more than 84,000 patients with melanoma,
2.2% of all melanoma presented without signs of a primary lesion. In patients with unknown primary melanomas, the distribution of metastases as localized to a region
or multiple sites at presentation was 43% and 57%, respectively. 283 These patients are younger than other melanoma patients and tend to be male. The most common
presenting nodal site is the axilla. 284 In patients with lymph node metastasis without a known primary site, survival is equal or better than for patients with known
primaries. The clinical disease course of patients with metastatic melanoma of unknown primary origin is similar to that of patients with primary cutaneous melanoma
when the same clinical stages of the disease are compared, and they should be treated accordingly. 285
MANAGEMENT OF LOCOREGIONAL DISEASE BY RADIOTHERAPY
Radiotherapy may be useful in the management of unresectable lymph node metastases from melanoma and possibly as adjuvant therapy after repeat resection in
patients with recurrent lymph node metastases. The role of adjuvant radiotherapy to regional lymphatics is presently being investigated in an ECOG protocol that
randomizes patients with high-risk disease between IFN-a 2b with or without regional radiotherapy to 30 Gy in five biweekly 6-Gy fractions. This study was undertaken
because of the favorable experience with adjuvant radiotherapy reported by Ang et al. 176,182 For 118 previously untreated patients with melanomas greater than 1.5
mm in thickness or Clark's level IV and V, with no palpable nodes managed with wide local excision and adjuvant radiotherapy to 30 Gy in five fractions, 5-year local
regional control was 86% and survival was 63%. In 39 patients with clinically positive nodes and 67 patients with recurrent local regional tumor who received
postoperative local regional radiotherapy, 5-year local regional control rates were 92% and 88%, respectively, while survival rates were 41% and 45%, respectively.
Arm or leg edema and brachial neuropathy associated with radiation fibrosis are concerns with high-dose fraction radiotherapy of lymph node regions. Ang et al.
reported mild to moderate late radiation sequelae in only 3 of 224 patients. 181,182 Arm or leg edema is managed with limb compression therapy. Radiation fibrosis with
or without extremity edema appears to improve with treatment following therapy with pentoxifylline (400 mg twice a day) and vitamin E (500 IU twice a day) for 6
months.286

STAGE III DISEASE: MANAGEMENT OF IN-TRANSIT DISEASE
In-transit disease is defined as dermal or subcutaneous recurrent melanoma located in the skin or subcutaneous tissue of the lymphatic drainage of the primary tumor
and found greater than 5 cm from the origin of the primary tumor ( Fig. 42.2-23). If observed surrounding the site of the primary tumor, the term satellitosis is
sometimes used. In-transit disease occurs in an estimated 2% to 10% of all melanoma patients. The probability of developing locoregional cutaneous relapse is highly
associated with histologic evidence of lymphatic invasion seen in the initial primary lesion. 287 Seventy percent of in-transit disease occurs in the lower extremity, the
majority originating from thick primaries. 288 The lower extremity has the highest incidence of in-transit disease perhaps due to the higher density of lymphatics.
Regional nodal metastases are common and seen in up to two-thirds of patients with in-transit disease. 289 Patients with in-transit disease without regional lymph node
involvement have similar disease progression as patients with two to four positive nodes, thus the proposed stage designation of N2C. Patients with nodal
involvement and in-transit disease will be designated N3. The 5-year survival rate following locoregional recurrence of melanoma of the extremities is approximately
20%. Treatment options are not standardized, and until more effective systemic therapy is developed, aggressive local treatment is indicated for this group of patients.

FIGURE 42.2-23. In-transit disease most often is found between the primary lesion and the draining lymph nodes but in advanced instances is able to track beyond
these sites, presumably through lymphatic connections.

SURGICAL EXCISION
Resection is indicated for small, easily excised recurrent tumors and patients with a limited number of in-transit lesions. Simple resection may delay or even eliminate
the need for ILP. Wide excisions are unnecessary and excessively morbid in patients whose lymphatics are already contaminated. Amputation should only be
considered if the limb is nonfunctional or hygiene cannot be maintained. When amputations are necessary, they should be performed as either a hip disarticulation or

hemipelvectomy as distal amputations usually fail locally. The 5-year disease-free survival after amputation in older series is approximately 20% to 35%. 290
ISOLATED LIMB PERFUSION
ILP for the introduction of chemotherapeutic agents to control regional malignant disease was first described in 1958 by Winblad. Approximately 50% of primary
melanomas occur in the extremities, and approximately 10% of those patients have a recurrence as in-transit disease. 291 As only rare patients respond to systemic
therapy, ILP was developed as a means of limb salvage that would enable the delivery of cytotoxic drugs locoregionally at doses many-fold higher than would be
tolerable systemically. No clear agreement exists on which patients benefit most from ILP and which regimens are most active. Prospective randomized trials that
examine regimen, toxicity, dosage, and response are in development. Currently, melphalan is the gold standard reagent for use in ILP. Melphalan can be safely
delivered locally at doses ten times higher than systemically tolerated. 292 One-half of patients exhibit a complete response and 75% at least have a partial response to
melphalan.293 Melphalan delivered at maximal systemic doses has negligible activity against melanoma. The use of hyperthermia has also become standard during
ILP since Stehlin, in 1969, described improved response rates using perfusate at temperatures of 38.8 to 40°C. 294 Current randomized studies seek to demonstrate
that combination therapy using melphalan and TNF is superior to melphalan alone in treatment of patients with in-transit disease and the combination has been
reported to have a 100% response rate. 295
Indications
ILP is useful in two groups of patients. Those with locoregionally advanced melanoma such as satellitosis and in-transit metastasis and those in need of palliation who
have bulky regional disease and limited systemic metastasis. Prophylactic ILP for use as an adjunct to wide local excision in patients with a high-risk primary or
recurrent melanoma cannot be recommended since no improvement in survival can be shown in prospective trials.
Prophylactic (Adjuvant) Isolated Limb Perfusion
A well-designed multiinstitutional prospective trial of ILP with melphalan was conducted by the consortium of the EORTC, the WHO, and the North American
Perfusion Group. In 1998, the results of this multicenter randomized phase III trial of ILP in patients with primary cutaneous melanoma greater than 1.5 mm in
thickness were published. A total of 832 patients were randomized to have wide local excision or wide local excision plus ILP with melphalan and hyperthermia.
Median follow-up was 6.4 years. There was no difference in survival. Patients who had not undergone ELND had a nonsignificant trend for a longer disease-free
interval. In a subset of patients with melanoma of 1.5 to 2.99 mm thickness, in-transit metastasis was reduced from 6.6% to 3.3% and regional lymph node metastasis
was reduced from 16.7% to 12.6%. In thicker lesions, patients succumbed to distant disease. 296
Other retrospective series demonstrate the lack of benefit for prophylactic ILP. A series of 111 patients compared with 111 historical controls with subungual
melanoma demonstrated no difference in survival after ILP with melphalan alone. 297 Prophylactic ILP with melphalan cannot be recommended as an adjunct to
standard surgical therapy in high-risk melanoma patients.
Therapeutic Isolated Limb Perfusion
The role of ILP in prolonging overall survival has some support in the literature. Multiple randomized studies suggest improved survival in a subgroup of patients that
undergoes ILP. ILP also is quite effective at ameliorating symptoms from bulky disease such as pain, edema, decreased mobility, and skin breakdown. 298 Numerous
nonrandomized series claim survival advantages with melphalan-based ILP, but only two prospective randomized trials, with unfortunately conflicting and criticized
results, exist in the literature ( Table 42.2-9, Table 42.2-10, and Table 42.2-11).

TABLE 42.2-9. Five-Year Survival after Isolated Limb Perfusion Compared with Historic Controls a

TABLE 42.2-10. Prospective Therapeutic Trials of Isolated Limb Perfusion a

TABLE 42.2-11. Tumor Response after Isolated Limb Perfusion with Melphalan Alone

Ghussen et al. reported results in 107 patients in which wide excision and regional lymph nodes dissection were compared with hyperthermic (42°C) perfusion with
melphalan at a mean follow-up period of 554 days. The recurrence rate in the control group was 27.8% in stage I, 31.6% in stage II, and 58.8% in stage III compared
with 5.6% in stage I, 5.5% in stage II, and 12.5% in stage III, suggesting improved survival for stage II and III patients. However, there has been wide skepticism
regarding the results of this small study. 299 Hafstrom et al. reported a prospective randomized trial in 69 patients testing application of regional hyperthermic perfusion
with melphalan after surgery to one-half of patients following excision. Median disease-free survival was 17 months in the perfusion group and 10 months in the
control group. There were 15 locoregional recurrences in the perfusion group and 24 in the control group. The disease-free survival was better for the perfusion group
than for the control group, but no significant difference in overall survival was noted. 300 Of note, Hafstrom et al. used a lower dose of melphalan than currently
standard. Patients developing recurrence after ILP may undergo repeat ILP, but there is a high limb recurrence rate and diminished response and disease control
interval with increased toxicity. 301
Patient factors that have been associated with therapeutic benefits include minimal total tumor surface area, absence of regional node involvement, number of
lesions, and lack of previous recurrence. 301a
Technique and Dosing
ILP of the lower extremity is performed via cannulation of the external iliac artery and vein through a suprainguinal retroperitoneal dissection. All venous and arterial
branches including the hypogastric artery are ligated to prevent systemic leak syndrome. 302 Cannulation of the upper extremity is similarly performed through the
axillary vessels. A proximal tourniquet aids in limiting systemic exposure to the perfusate. The extracorporeal perfusion circuit is primed with 700 mL saline, 1 U of
packed red blood cells, and 1500 U of heparin, and flow is maintained in the range of 50 mL/L limb volume per minute ( Fig. 42.2-24). The amount of systemic leak is
measured using 131I radiolabeled albumin or 99mTc-labeled red blood cells with the gamma counter over the precordium. 303,304

FIGURE 42.2-24. Operating room setup of isolated limb perfusion. Note the cumbersome apparatus. If clinical trials are performed demonstrating similar efficacy
using isolated limb infusion, the simplification of the treatment of regional disease may enable a more widespread treatment.

Melphalan is an alkylating agent that is the mustard derived from phenylalanine, an essential precursor used in melanin synthesis by melanocytes. Weiberdink
developed a regional toxicity scoring system to grade the reaction based on actual measurement of limb volume ( Table 42.2-12). Based on this dosing regimen, a
dose of 10 mg/L for the lower extremity and a dose of 13 mg/L for the upper extremities were developed to limit severe toxicities and optimize response. 305

TABLE 42.2-12. Wieberdink Grading System for Regional Tissue Toxicity after Isolated Limb Perfusion

The use of hyperthermia has become standard with the use of ILP, as it seems to augment tissue concentrations of melphalan. 306 True hyperthermia is defined as
greater than 41.5°C, mild hyperthermia as 38.5° to 41.5°C and controlled normothermia as 36° to 38°C. Temperatures above 42°C are directly cytotoxic to tumor but
result in excessive adverse effects. 307 Stehlin suggested an improvement in the 5-year survival rate from 22% to 76% after introduction of hyperthermia to ILP, but
others have demonstrated conflicting data. In one series of 136 patients with recurrent extremity melanoma, a minimum temperature of 41.5°C was an independent
factor predictive of complete response. 308 By contrast, hyperthermia was not a significant factor related to complete response in an equally large series (n = 120). 309
The optimal duration of therapy, which has ranged from 45 minutes to 2 hours, is unknown.
Other Agents
A number of other agents in addition to melphalan have been administered by ILP including cisplatin, etoposide, actinomycin D, dacarbazine, thiotepa, mitoxantrone,
IL-2, IFN-g, TNF-a, and lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells alone or in various combinations. 309a,309b Although dacarbazine requires systemic hepatic conversion to
its active metabolite, it has been shown, when administered by ILP, to generate an overall response rate of 76%. 310 Cisplatin has an overall response rate of over
50%, but the median response duration is only 5 months. 311 ILP using drugs other than melphalan and TNF is less effective and often associated with increased
toxicity.312
In murine systems, TNF is capable of significant antitumor effects with a single intravenous injection, but effective doses cannot be achieved systemically in patients
because of hemodynamic collapse. Immunohistochemical analysis of biopsies from patients treated with ILP with TNF demonstrates intravascular platelet
aggregation, endothelial activation, and neutrophil invasion. Specific tumoral vasculature destruction with sparing of the normal vessels is also seen. 313
The initial study of regional administration of high-dose TNF in conjunction with melphalan and low doses of IFN-g was reported in 1992, demonstrating a complete
response rate of 90%. 295 Many other case series corroborate the apparently enhanced activity of combination therapy ( Table 42.2-13). IFN-g induces the
up-regulation of TNF receptors on tumor cells and has in vitro synergism with TNF in antitumor activity. 314,315 A randomized trial comparing TNF and melphalan alone
or in combination with IFN-g has shown no benefit with the addition of IFN-g. 316

TABLE 42.2-13. Tumor Response after Isolated Limb Perfusion with Tumor Necrosis Factor and Melphalan a

A dose of 4 mg of TNF, more than ten times the maximal tolerable systemic dosage, is well tolerated during perfusion, and adverse effects are reportedly no greater
than with melphalan alone. Subsequent clinical trials demonstrate no benefit for doses above 4 mg. 317 The melphalan and TNF regimen has been successfully
applied in patients who historically do not respond to melphalan ILP treatment alone. Patients with bulky disease, who historically are less likely to respond to
melphalan alone, may have an improved outcome with the addition of TNF. 317 In addition, those who have failed treatment or had recurrences after prior ILP with
melphalan or other chemotherapeutics are candidates for TNF therapy. 318 Phase III randomized studies evaluating ILP and melphalan with or without TNF in patients
with localized, advanced, extremity involvement are currently underway.
Toxicity
Perioperative toxicity is common but generally tolerable and reversible. Acute regional toxicity after ILP includes pain within the first 48 hours and edema that usually
resolves within 14 days. Erythema associated with the procedure fades over a period of 3 to 6 months. Melanomatous lesions soften and flatten, and biopsies show
melanin pigment within macrophages without evidence of melanoma cells. Patient age is not an absolute contraindication for perfusion as adverse effects do not
appear to be significantly greater in patients greater than 70 years of age. 319 Vrouenraets et al. evaluated 425 patients for treatment-related toxicities after ILP, finding
grade I and II toxicities in 85%, grade III and IV toxicities in 15%, and grade V toxicities in 0.5% ( Table 42.2-14). The degree of limb toxicity, since it has no correlation
with tumor response, should be avoided. 320 Creatinine kinase levels greater than 1000 U after the first postoperative day and temperatures higher than 40°C are both
strongly associated with development of severe toxicities. 321 Although some centers recommend prophylactic fasciotomies during ILP, many surgeons simply monitor
compartment pressures postoperatively. Renal failure secondary to myoglobinuria can be prevented by maintaining adequate urine output (greater than 4 L/d) and
alkalization (pH greater than 7.5) during the first 2 to 3 postoperative days. 322 Serious long-term sequelae of ILP are uncommon. Mild neuropathies are noted in up to
20% to 40% of patients (possibly from the tourniquet) after perfusion ( Table 42.2-15).323,324 Some advocate the use of drugs other than melphalan to prevent wound
complications and edema. The use of dacarbazine, cisplatin, or carboplatin may have less adverse effects but no trial has directly compared the therapeutic and toxic
effects of these various regimens. 325 Some evidence suggests that nonmelphalan regimens have more rapid recurrence rates. The incidence of wound complications
increases significantly in patients who undergo concurrent lymphadenectomy. 326 Some surgeons opt to perform a lymphadenectomy as a staged procedure after 6 to
8 weeks, whereas others routinely perform them in order to avoid a difficult operation in a previously explored site.

TABLE 42.2-14. Regional Toxicity of Isolated Limb Perfusion a

TABLE 42.2-15. Late Morbidity of Isolated Limb Perfusion a

Almost all patients develop hypotension and tachycardia during ILP with TNF. Furthermore, patients undergoing ILP with a TNF with measured leaks of greater than
1% develop mild and transient postoperative hypotension. Prevention of systemic leak and fluid loading before tourniquet release may help prevent the need for
vasopressors. The use of a perioperative Swan-Ganz catheter is strongly recommended. 327 Disturbances in pulmonary function are common with TNF but resolve to
baseline in 8 weeks. 328 Fever, nausea, and reversible hepatic toxicity are also common with TNF protocols. 329 Acute vascular complications are rare (2.1%) and
consist mainly of arterial thrombosis for which urgent embolectomy is required. 330
ISOLATED LIMB INFUSION
Thompson et al. have reported an alternative approach called isolated limb infusion with the percutaneous insertion of venous and arterial catheters in the axial
vessels followed by proximal tourniquet limb vessel occlusion. The procedure is preformed under normothermic and hypoxic conditions for 30 minutes without an
oxygenator, thus avoiding much of the cost and complexity of ILP. Long-term survival results are still pending, but complete response rates comparable with ILP are
reported.331 More investigation of this technique is necessary before wide acceptance.
INTRAARTERIAL THERAPY
Intraarterial cisplatin combined with systemic therapy has been used with only modest success. Fifteen patients treated with systemic vinblastine and dacarbazine and
intraarterial cisplatin were observed to have a 67% response rate. Only 45% were complete responses and one was pathologically positive at subsequent biopsy.

Given the significant toxicities of this regimen, it is necessary to have more experience before any recommendations can be made. 332
LOCAL ABLATION
Hill and Thomas reported the use of the ablation of multiple melanoma nodules using a CO 2 laser. Their initial series had a surprising recurrence rate of only 2%. 333
Another small series treated 19 patients with CO 2 laser ablation. After a mean follow-up of 15 months, five patients died from the disease. Among the 14 survivors, 8
have had no limb recurrence and the remaining required further treatments to control disease. 334 In larger European trials, higher recurrence rates with this technique
are reported. The use of electrical pulses directly applied to cutaneous metastases after administration of local or systemic bleomycin may have activity against
melanoma. In one series, a 91% response rate was noted without any significant reported side effects. 335 The use of photodynamic therapy may have some use in the
treatment of patients with in-transit disease. Photodynamic therapy can specifically ablate malignant cells at depths up to 1 cm. There are yet no series of melanoma
patients using this technique. 336 These treatments may offer reasonable local control using a minimally invasive approach of nonbulky regional disease.
LOCAL IMMUNOTHERAPY
Local injection of bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG), 337 IFN-a, and other agents has been occasionally locally effective, but has not shown systemic effect on noninjected
metastases and has been occasionally associated with significant toxicity (e.g., Pott's disease with systemic BCG infection). 338,339 For those reasons, BCG is little
used at present for local therapy.
RADIOTHERAPY
Radiotherapy can be useful in managing in-transit metastases that are too extensive for surgical resection and as an adjuvant therapy after reresection of recurrent
in-transient disease. Treatment techniques and outcome are similar to those for management of lymph node metastases and remote subcutaneous metastases and
are discussed in the sections Stage III Disease: Management of the Clinically Positive Nodal Basin and Stage I and II Disease: Management of Primary
Melanoma.180,181 and 182,340
SYSTEMIC THERAPY
The use of dacarbazine and other systemic chemotherapy, biologic agents, or both benefits patients with in-transit disease at rates equivalent to patients with
systemic disease. Immunotherapies including IFN and IL-2 have shown benefit in a small number of patients. Patients with in-transit disease may be ideal candidates
for immunobiologic intervention because of their low tumor burden. The use of IL-2 and other novel immunotherapies such as IL-12, IL-18, peptide, or DC-based
vaccines may prove effective in the future to control in-transit disease. Morton from the John Wayne Cancer Institute has used the CancerVax vaccine for patients
with in-transit disease, and in nonrandomized patients suggests an approximate 50% 5-year survival.

ADJUVANT MEDICAL THERAPY
The prognosis of melanoma predicted from staging information allows the designation of low-, intermediate-, high-, and very high-risk groups that serve as guideposts
for the potential consideration of adjuvant therapy. Patients previously enrolled in trials of adjuvant therapy have been those at high risk, in whom relapse and
mortality risk exceed 50% at 5 years. The entry criteria for patients in high-risk trials has previously included both locally advanced, surgically curable (AJCC stage
IIB), and regionally metastatic node-positive melanoma.
The adjuvant therapy of melanoma using IFN and other related agents is here considered separately under the previously defined categories of high-risk for
recurrence melanoma (AJCC stage IIB and III), and with intermediate-risk melanoma (AJCC stage IIA). Patients with AJCC stage I disease have a low relapse risk
and an excellent overall and relapse-free survival. For this reason, stage I patients are unlikely to benefit from such therapy and have not been the focus of any
adjuvant therapy trials.
IMMUNOSTIMULANTS
A number of approaches for postsurgical adjuvant therapy have been tested since 1970. These have included systemic chemotherapy, immunostimulation with crude
microbial agents such as BCG,341Corynebacterium parvum,342,343 and picibanil, derived from Streptococcus pyogenes.344,345 The antihelminthic chemical
immunomodulator levamisole has undergone intensive evaluation. 346,347,348,349 and 350 Unfortunately, randomized controlled trials have not demonstrated reproducible
increases in relapse-free or overall-survival with any of these modalities.
INTERFERONS
More recently, the use of individual cytokines obtained and partially purified from human cells or synthesized by recombinant DNA technology have demonstrated an
effect on the natural history of this disease. The IFNs have been the most intensely studied agents for the adjuvant therapy of intermediate- and high-risk melanoma.
Results of randomized controlled clinical trials in the United States National Cooperative Groups have now yielded both positive and negative results using high- and
low-dose IFN-a 2b. A summary of IFN trials for the adjuvant treatment of melanomas is shown in Table 42.2-16.

TABLE 42.2-16. Summary of Interferon Trials for Adjuvant Therapy of Melanoma

The IFNs are a complex family of proteins with diverse functions that are divided into type I (IFN-a, IFN-b, IFN-t, IFN-w), type II (IFN-g) and type III (IL-10, IL-19, IL-20,
and IL-21). The IFNs have shown potent immunomodulatory effects in vivo and in vitro including induction of major histocompatibility antigen expression of both class I
(ABC) and class II (DR, DP, and DQ) molecules. Modulation of the number and function of effector cells (NK cell, T cells, monocytes, and DCs) have been well
defined, and their function in responding to nominal tumor antigens is now under intense study. 351 The type I IFNs are structurally related species derived from genes
on chromosome 9 that are classically induced by exposure of cells to virus or nucleic acids. Type II IFN is produced mainly by T lymphocytes and NK cells, bears little
homology to type I IFN, and is coded for by genes located on chromosome 12. The type III members of this family are produced by several lymphoid and myeloid cell
types and appear to modify immunity by promoting a humoral immune response, enhancing cytolytic activity, and in some instances, having direct antitumor effects.
The types of IFN differ in terms of the receptors with which they interact. IFN-a and INF-b share a common receptor distinct from the receptor that binds IFN-g and
induce a unique intracellular signal transduction cascade. Mixed results of trials examining IFN-a may be due to frequent down-regulation of IFN receptors and
responsiveness to IFN after prolonged IFN-a administration. Recombinant DNA technology has allowed the production of virtually unlimited quantities of recombinant
IFN, which has facilitated their testing both in the laboratory and in the clinic. In melanoma, IFN-a 2 has been the most extensively evaluated agent, of which three
subspecies are commercially available: IFN-a 2a (Hoffman LaRoche), INF-a2b (Schering Plough), and IFN-a 2c (Boehringer Ingelheim) that differ minimally in amino acid

sequence and apparent biologic effects.
Adjuvant Therapy for High-Risk (American Joint Committee on Cancer Stage IIB and III) Melanoma
IFN-a has been widely tested for the adjuvant therapy of melanoma, and the most extensively evaluated IFN-a subspecies has been IFN-a 2. Other agents currently
undergoing evaluation in randomized trials include the chemically defined ganglioside vaccines: GM2, keyhole limpet hemocyanin, plus QS 21 (Progenics) and
allogeneic whole tumor cell–derived vaccines for which trials are incomplete or inconclusive [Melacine (Corixa) and CancerVax (John Wayne Cancer Institute)].
Regimens using IFN-a 2 for high-risk melanoma can be divided into high-dose regimens given for 1 year, high-dose regimens given for periods of shorter duration (3
months), and low-dose regimens given for longer intervals (of 2 to 3 years). Results of adjuvant IFN trials are shown in Table 42.2-17.

TABLE 42.2-17. Trials for Adjuvant Interferon-a 2 for Melanoma

High-Dose Interferon-a 2 for 1 Year: Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Trial E1684
The ECOG initiated a trial in 1984 (1684) for patients with melanoma at high risk for relapse following surgical resection of primary tumor, regional lymph node
metastasis, or both. Twenty-nine centers contributed 287 (280 evaluable) patients who were randomized to treatment with IFN-a 2b or observation. Eligibility criteria
included the presence of a T4 primary lesion with or without regional lymph node involvement or primary lesions of any depth with pathologically proven regional
lymph node involvement. Patients with cutaneous melanoma of any thickness, but with the regional lymph nodes as the site of initial and only relapse were also
eligible. All patients underwent regional lymph node dissection and were stratified with respect to clinical and pathologic stage of disease. Maximally tolerable doses
of IFN-a 2b were used: an initial induction phase of 20 MU/m 2 intravenously daily for 5 to 7 days for 4 weeks was followed by a maintenance phase at 10 MU/m 2
subcutaneously, three times a week for 48 weeks (total treatment duration of 52 weeks). The rationale for the initial high-dose intravenous treatment phase was to
provide maximal dose intensity and minimize the induction of anti-IFN antibodies. At a median follow-up of 7 years, a significant improvement in both median
relapse-free survival (1.72 vs. 0.98 years) and overall survival (OS) (3.82 vs. 2.78 years) was noted in an intent-to-treat analysis. Patients with established lymph
node involvement, de novo or recurrent, appeared to derive the greatest benefit from treatment. Only a limited number of patients (31) who were clinically and
pathologically node-negative (T4 pN0) entered the study, and an imbalance in the distribution of the important prognostic variable, ulceration, made it difficult to draw
firm conclusions for this subset. At five years the 40% improvement in relapse-free survival (26% vs. 37%) and 25% improvement in overall survival (37% vs. 45%) led
the Food and Drug Administration to approve the use of IFN-a 2b given for 1 year by this intravenous and subcutaneous schedule for patients with stage IIB/T4-N0 and
stage III node-positive disease in 1995.
As expected, this regimen was associated with substantial toxicity, and grade 3 and 4 (ECOG toxicity scale) events were noted in the majority of recipients.
Dose-modification or delays were required at least once in 50% of patients during the intravenous induction phase and in 48% of patients during the subcutaneous
maintenance phase. Most treatment delays occurred in the first 4 months of the regimen. A retrospective quality-of-life (Q-TWiST) analysis revealed a mean gain of
8.9 months without relapse (P = .03) and 7 months of overall survival time ( P = .02) for the IFN-treated patients after 84 months of follow-up as compared with the
observation group. 352,353 The treated group experienced severe treatment-related toxicity for an average of 5.8 months. The net result was that the IFN-treated group
had more quality-of-life-adjusted survival time than the observation group, regardless of the relative valuations placed on time with toxicity and time with relapse. An
economic analysis of the E1684 regimen was also published. 354 The incremental cost of IFN per life-year gained ranged from $13,700 after a projected 35 years to
$32,600 at 7 years (the median follow-up of E1684). The benefits of IFN projected over a lifetime yielded incremental cost per life-year or quality-adjusted life-year
that are less than $16,000. This compares favorably with the rigorous Canadian benchmark of $20,000 per quality-of-life-year gained and is comparable with other
accepted adjuvant therapies of breast and colorectal cancer.
To evaluate the observations regarding the results of trial E1684 and to evaluate concurrently the high-dose regimen and a low-dose IFN-a 2b regimen against
observation, Intergroup trial E1690 was initiated in 1991. This trial was designed and implemented before the availability of mature data from the E1684 trial. Eligibility
criteria for E1690 were similar to those for E1684 but dropped the requirement for regional lymphadenectomy for patients with deep (T4, greater than 4 mm) primary
lesions. Six hundred forty-two (95% eligible) patients were randomized to either high-dose IFN-a 2b as in E1684, low-dose IFN-a2b for 2 years (IFN-a 2b 3 MU
subcutaneously, TIW), or observation. At a median follow-up of 52 months, the 5-year estimated relapse-free survival for high-dose IFN-a 2b, low-dose IFN-a2b, and
observation were 44%, 40%, and 35%, respectively. High-dose IFN-a 2b showed a significant effect on relapse-free survival as compared with observation in a Cox
analysis (P2 = .03), prolonging median time to relapse by 10 months. There was no significant effect of low-dose IFN-a 2b on relapse-free survival, and neither
high-dose IFN-a 2b nor low-dose IFN-a 2b demonstrated a benefit in overall survival.
Of note, the median overall survival for patients assigned to observation in E1690 was 6 years as compared with only 2.8 years for observed patients on E1684. The
question has arisen whether the use of systemic IFN-a 2b among one-third of patients who relapsed (n = 38), who were originally assigned to observation, may have
been in part responsible for the large gain in postrelapse survival seen in E1690. The postrelapse survival for patients originally assigned to observation who
subsequent to relapse received IFN, versus those who never received IFN, was significantly prolonged (median 2.2 years vs. 0.8 years; P = .0024). Other factors that
could potentially account for the improved outcome for patients on this trial randomized to observation include the use of more accurate staging techniques or more
modern surgical intervention at initial treatment, subsequent relapse, or both.
High-Dose Regimens of IFN-a of Intermediate Duration
The North Central Cancer Treatment Group (NCCTG) performed a randomized trial of high-dose IFN-a 2a given for 3 months (intramuscular, TIW) versus observation
in 262 patients with primary melanomas of thickness greater than 1.69 mm deep or with presenting or recurrent regional lymph node involvement. The dose of IFN-a 2a
used was 20 MU/m2 given intramuscularly TIW for 12 weeks and reached a total dose approximately one-half that of the E1684 high-dose regimen. At a median
follow-up of 6.1 years, the median relapse-free and overall survival were not significantly different for the two arms of the study. For patients with regional lymph node
involvement, the improvement in median recurrence-free survival was significant by Cox analysis ( P2 = .03) for the IFN-a 2a–treated patients (17 months vs. 10
months), without a significant difference in overall survival. The limited number of patients in this subset does not permit a firm conclusion regarding the benefit of this
regimen on either relapse-free or overall survival or the treated population as a whole.
Low-Dose Interferon-a 2a for 2 to 3 Years
The use of lower, nontoxic doses of IFN-a 2a for high-risk melanoma has been studied both in the United States and in Europe. Between 1990 and 1993, the WHO
Melanoma Program entered 444 patients to a randomized trial comparing 3 years of treatment with IFN-a 2a (3 MU subcutaneously, TIW) or observation. This trial
differed from the ECOG and NCCTG trials in regard to eligibility: Only patients with regional lymph node metastases were eligible for randomization after
lymphadenectomy. One-half of the patients studied had extracapsular extension with lymph node involvement, a feature that was excluded from ECOG studies 1684,
1690, and the NCCTG 837052 trials. A preliminary report at 22 months median follow-up suggested prolongation of recurrence-free survival among women younger

than 50 years and men older than 50 years, while a somewhat more mature interim report at 39 months median follow-up revealed no durable benefit in terms of
either relapse-free interval or overall survival; a final publication is pending. 355,356 The negative results of the low-dose arm of the Intergroup trial E1690 discussed
previously 357 confirm the results of WHO 16, both in terms of recurrence rates and overall survival for patients with high-risk melanoma.
The EORTC Trial 18952 is currently testing two intermediate doses of IFN-a 2b in high-risk melanoma patients. The study design incorporates two treatment arms and
an observation arm. Treatment comprises a modified induction phase of IFN-a2b, 10 MU subcutaneously injected, five times per week, followed either by 10 MU
subcutaneously injected three times per week, for 1 year or 5 MU subcutaneously injected, TIW for 2 years. This study will accrue 1200 patients with high-risk
resected melanoma, including patients with nodal disease with or without extracapsular extension, of whom 200 will be randomized to observation and 400 to each of
the IFN arms (1:2:2 unbalanced assignment) to evaluate the role of dose intensity. The Nordic Melanoma Trial group are investigating the efficacy of two intermediate
dosages of IFN-a2b administered for 2 years, using a similar subcutaneous daily induction treatment. While the induction phase and the maintenance phase are
modeled on the pivotal E1684 trial, it is important to note that the peak levels of IFN-a 2 attained by the intravenous administration of 20 MU/m 2/d are orders of
magnitude higher than the levels that can be detected following the administration of 10 MU/d, especially when given by the subcutaneous route (10,000 µ/mL vs. less
than 100 µ/mL peak).
Vaccines in the Adjuvant Therapy of Stage IIB and III Melanoma
A number of vaccine approaches are being evaluated in the adjuvant treatment of patients with melanoma. Biochemical analysis has shown the presence of
gangliosides of several series in melanoma, including GD3, GD3, GM1, GM2, and GM3, among others. In general, the purified gangliosides have not been shown to
be immunogenic, and it has been difficult to induce antibody responses to these molecules with the exception of the ganglioside GM2, to which antibody responses
have been detected spontaneously in up to 5% of patients with melanoma. Two studies have demonstrated that the presence of anti-GM2 antibodies confers a
relapse-free survival advantage for patients with melanoma. 358,359 This led to the conduct of a randomized controlled trial of GM2 plus BCG versus BCG alone (both
with cyclophosphamide pretreatment) in 122 patients with AJCC stage III melanoma, at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York. GM2 antibody was
detected in 50 of 58 patients treated with GM2/BCG and in only 7 of 64 patients treated with BCG alone. Patients with anti-GM2 antibodies, either preexisting or
induced by treatment, had a significantly longer relapse-free survival than antibody-negative patients. A nonsignificant increase in disease-free interval (18%) and
overall survival (11%) was found for the GM2/BCG-treated group as a whole. However, exclusion of patients with preexisting anti-GM2 antibodies from the analysis
suggested a benefit in terms of disease-free interval for those who developed an antibody response to GM2.
A range of efforts to improve the immunogenicity of the GM2 molecule were tested, including conjugation to immunogenic carrier molecules, and admixture with potent
new immunologic adjuvant agents. These have subsequently been found to induce more frequent and higher titer antibody responses to the GM2 molecule. The most
potent combination tested uses the GM2 molecule coupled with a carrier protein derived from the keyhole limpet hemocyanin with an immunoadjuvant, QS21, a potent
immunologic adjuvant of the saponin class. This vaccine induces qualitatively improved antibody responses of the IgG as well as IgM isotype, of higher titer than
obtained by GM2 plus BCG. The GM2, keyhole limpet hemocyanin, plus QS21 vaccine has been developed for clinical evaluation (Progenics, New York, NY; Bristol
Myers Squibb) and is currently being compared with high-dose IFN-a 2b in the Intergroup U.S. Trial E1694 for patients with AJCC stage IIB and III melanoma. This trial
initiated in 1996 completed accrual of 880 patients in 1999, and its results have recently been unblinded due to the significant relapse-free interval and overall
survival advantage of HDI, substantially confirming both RFS ( P = .007) and OS (P = .009) benefits of HDI observed in E1684.
The John Wayne Cancer Institute has performed a series of phase II trials employing cultured tumor cell–derived vaccines (CancerVax) administered with the
immunostimulant BCG for patients with metastatic disease as well as intermediate- and high-risk resected melanoma. 138,360 Encouraging phase II results have led to
the initiation of two ongoing phase III randomized trials of adjuvant therapy for high-risk melanoma and resected metastatic disease patients believed to be at very
high risk of recurrence. The first of these is comparing CancerVax plus BCG to BCG alone for the postsurgical treatment of AJCC stage III melanoma. The second is a
randomized trial of CancerVax versus placebo for patients with stage IV melanoma rendered clinically disease free with surgery. Firm conclusions will only be
possible regarding the therapeutic benefit of these vaccines as these first randomized controlled trials are completed and mature.
On the basis of evidence that cellular immune responses to melanosomal antigens may be of therapeutic value, peptide antigens that represent the immunodominant
and subdominant melanosomal antigens have been brought into multicenter adjuvant trial for patients with resectable stage IV (M1) or advanced stage III melanoma
in an ECOG study E4697. E4697 will investigate treatment with a multiepitope three-peptide vaccine composed of Melan-A/MART-1, gp100, and tyrosinase antigens
that have been studied previously in the National Cancer Institute Surgery Branch and the University of Pittsburgh Melanoma Center/Biologics Program. 361,362
Adjuvant Therapy for Intermediate-Risk Melanoma
Patients with T3, Breslow depth 1.5 to 4.0 mm (S1992 AJCC stage IIA) melanoma account for a substantial fraction of patients at presentation and represent a
heterogeneous group with 5-year survival greater than 72%. This category is historically twice as frequent as the stage III category, representing 31% of new
melanomas. With 47,000 new cases of melanoma in the United States, approximately 19,000 represent stage II melanoma and from this group 5400 deaths are
anticipated. This group of patients has been the focus of several completed European and newly initiated North American cooperative group studies.
Low-Dose Interferon-a for 18 Months
Adjuvant therapy trials for high-risk melanoma have generally excluded patients with stage IIA melanoma, although a subset of patients in the NCCTG trial 83-7052
(100 patients) had stage II disease. Austrian, French, and Scottish trial groups have evaluated the low-dosage regimen tested in E1690 and WHO 16 in regimens of
IFN-a administered for shorter periods of 12 to 18 months for patients with stage II melanoma (defined by clinical examination alone). The results of these trials are
therefore difficult to apply to patients for whom more precise staging, by means of sentinel node mapping, is available.
The French Cooperative Group on Melanoma randomized 499 patients with AJCC stage II melanoma to IFN-a 2a, 3 MU subcutaneous TIW injections for 18 months, or
observation. After a median follow-up of 5 years, a significant improvement in relapse-free survival ( P = .038) but not in overall survival ( P = .059) was noted.363 The
Austrian Malignant Melanoma Cooperative Group has reported a smaller trial that is somewhat less mature, at a mean follow-up of only 41 months. 364 Three hundred
eleven patients were randomized to observation or treatment with IFN-a 2a, 3 MU subcutaneous daily injections for 3 weeks, followed by 3 MU subcutaneous TIW
injections for 1 year. The prolongation of relapse-free survival noted in this trial ( P = .02) must be qualified given the short follow-up period; and the absence as yet of
any overall survival data for this trial. 365,366
Patients entering these trials included those with stage IIA and stage IIB, but neither elective lymph node staging (as in E1684) nor sentinel node mapping were
pursued in any participants. This stage grouping therefore represents a heterogeneous population for which multicenter sentinel lymphadenectomy trials suggest that
SLNs would be positive in 20% to 28% of patients with T3, T4 melanomas, respectively. The sentinel node mapping technique has had its greatest effect in refining
the prognosis for these nominal stage II patients. Sentinel node mapping is an established method for staging these patients, which defines node-negative subgroups
at lower risk. These results of the reported studies of low-dose IFN-a 2a show prolonged relapse-free interval for patients with intermediate-risk melanoma during
treatment, with loss of this benefit over time following discontinuation of therapy. These results differ from the results of the high-dose regimens described previously
in showing no durable effect on continuous relapse-free survival. Indeed, one of the conclusions that may be drawn from the Austrian and French experience, is that
indefinite therapy may be required to achieve durable relapse-free benefit with low dosage IFN-a 2.
High-Dose Interferon-a for 4 Weeks
The high-dose IFN regimens used in E1684 and E1690 were unique in their incorporation of an induction phase of intravenous therapy for the initial 4 weeks, at
maximal tolerable dosages. The rationale for the induction phase was to provide peak levels of IFN-a 2b sufficient to inhibit tumor growth directly, as well as
antivascular, and immunomodulatory effects on antigen-presenting and T-cell responses against melanoma antigens while avoiding the potential for induction of
anti-IFN antibodies. The relative importance of the induction phase is suggested by the early effect of E1684 and E1690 regimens, in which hazard functions for
relapse-free survival demonstrate early suppression of relapse risk with high-dose IFN-a 2b that is sustained for years after discontinuation of treatment. This has led to
the hypothesis that peak dose exposure during induction may represent the critical component of the E1684/1690 regimens. Patient acceptance and tolerance for the
intravenous induction phase is excellent. Dose modifications were required in one-half of patients during this phase (a fraction equivalent to the portion requiring dose
modification during the subsequent maintenance phase). Removal from treatment was rarely necessary during this interval.

To help clarify the role of high-dose induction intravenous therapy, the ECOG and National Cancer Institute of Canada are currently conducting a randomized trial of
intravenous therapy for 4 weeks alone, for patients with intermediate-risk stage IIA and IIB or microscopic nodal stage III N1A disease. Pathologic staging with SLN
mapping and biopsy (or ELND) is encouraged but not mandatory, and patients are stratified according to the method of staging. Patients are randomized to receive
either the intravenous induction therapy administered as in the first month of E1684 (IFN-a 2b 20 MU/m2 5/week) or observation. To demonstrate a 7.5% improvement
in relapse-free survival for the treated population with 80% power will require 1420 patients in this trial.
Sunbelt Trial
A multicenter adjuvant trial that has been designated the Sunbelt Trial tests the role of high-dose IFN-a 2a in patients who are staged by SLN mapping procedures and
in which both routine (H&E and immunohistochemical) and molecular assays (RT-PCR for multiple markers including tyrosinase, MAGE, and gp100) are conducted.
One goal is to assess the significance of molecular markers in contrast to immunohistochemistry and standard H&E. This study will require 3000 patients to have a
power to assess its multiple goals.
Vaccine Trial for Intermediate-Risk Melanoma
A commercial vaccine preparation from cultured tumor cell lines (Melacine, Corixa) given together with the proprietary adjuvant agent Detox (monophosphoryl lipid A)
has also been shown to induce antitumor responses in patients with metastatic melanoma. 367,368 and 369 A pilot experience suggests improved responses in recipients
who have been administered IFN-a2b. The Melacine-cultured melanoma tumor cell vaccine administered with the monophosphoryl lipid A adjuvant Detox has been
tested by the Southwest Oncology Group for the adjuvant therapy of patients with T3 melanoma (SWOG 9035). This trial was conducted between 1990 and 1996, with
700 patients having received either the vaccine with Detox, or observation, after primary melanoma resection. Results of this trial have been preliminarily reported,
showing no significant prolongation of relapse-free and overall survival in a primary efficacy analysis, but a significant effect in an intention-to-treat analysis that has
yet to be clarified. 370

TREATMENT OF STAGE IV DISEASE
Metastatic melanoma has a median survival of only 6 to 9 months and current systemic therapy has been shown to induce complete durable responses in only a small
minority of patients. 371 Most common sites of initial presentation with metastatic disease are the skin, lungs, liver, brain, and bone. Chemotherapy agents, biologic
agents individually and in various combinations, and surgery have been used in the treatment of these patients.
RADIOGRAPHIC ROLE IN THE DIAGNOSIS OF STAGE IV DISEASE
Weiss et al. performed a retrospective study on 261 malignant melanoma patients with resected local (greater than or equal to 1.69 mm) and regional nodal disease.
Follow-up consisted of physical examination, complete blood cell count, blood chemistry panel, and chest radiography and was performed every 2 and 4 months for
the first 1 and 2 years, respectively, followed by every 6 months for the subsequent 3 years. Out of 145 evaluable patients with recurrent disease, 32% were
asymptomatic. Physical examination detected 37 of 45 (82%) of the asymptomatic recurrences. Chest radiography detected the other 9 of 45 (22%) recurrences, while
no recurrences were detected by blood tests alone. 372 Bassares et al. studied 115 relapses in follow-up of 528 stage I melanoma patients. History and physical
examination detected 90% of relapses, with chest radiography and abdominal ultrasound detecting the rest. Only two recurrences were resectable. 373 Roth et al.
evaluated bone, brain, and liver scans in the follow-up of 58 patients with node-positive melanoma. Only one patient with a true positive bone scan was found, thus
calling into question its utility in patients with melanoma. 374
METASTASECTOMY AND RADIOTHERAPY
Surgical treatment of asymptomatic, distant metastatic lesions remains controversial because of the likelihood of widespread disease at other sites. However, a
subgroup of patients exists that may benefit from surgical resection of metastatic lesions, and some surgeons have advocated the more widespread application of
surgery in stage IV disease. Unfortunately, no randomized trials exist to support the use of metastasectomy. Retrospective reviews, largely from single institutions,
have reported a survival difference in selected operated melanoma patients compared with historic controls. Although, metastatic melanoma has a worse prognosis
(by a factor of two) after resection than other carcinomas, prolonged 5-year survival in some patients has been reported following complete resection of melanoma
metastases of the lung, soft tissue, and even gastrointestinal tract. 375,376,377,378,379 and 380 Metastasectomy in melanoma has also been advocated because of the
absence of a demonstrable survival effect with currently available systemic therapies in more rigorous randomized controlled trials. However, the rigor with which
systemic therapy has been tested is far greater than that with which surgical approaches have been evaluated to date. Although numerous series show survival
benefits for metastasectomy compared with historic controls, selection bias may account for these differences. Unfortunately, randomized trials to determine the
efficacy of surgery in this setting are not likely.
Metastasectomy should be considered in the absence of locoregional disease and when metastatic disease is confined to a single site that is amenable to complete
resection. Before the application of metastasectomy with therapeutic intent, patients must be able to tolerate the operation and have appropriate staging studies
demonstrating limited disease. The paradigm for optimal staging includes the use of brain magnetic resonance imaging, whole body CT, and PET scanning. The use
of immunotherapy following metastasectomy may afford a more suitable setting for demonstration of the potential benefits of vaccine immunotherapy, as researchers
at the John Wayne Cancer Institute are attempting to demonstrate. 381
Nonvisceral Metastasis
More than one-half of patients who have recurrent melanoma manifest disease initially at nonvisceral sites, and one-half of these lesions may be solitary. 382,383
Adequate data predicting prognosis in patients with nonvisceral metastasis range wildly, making the assessment of metastectomy's efficacy difficult. Following
complete resection, median survivals of 8 to 50 months have been reported with 5-year survival between 10% and 61% of patients. 382,384,385,386,387 and 388 Radiotherapy
is an alternative to surgery for managing symptomatic skin metastases not responding to systemic therapy. Impending skin breakdown and pain at the tumor site are
relative indications for local ablative therapy. Lesions may respond to radiotherapy using high-dose fractions and high total doses. Commonly used fractionation
schemes are 20 Gy/5 fractions and 30 Gy/10 fractions given in conventional daily fractions, or by means of hypofractionated schedules such as 21 Gy/3 fractions and
30 to 36 Gy/5 to 6 fractions.
Pulmonary Metastasis
The lung is the sole site of initial recurrence in 7% to 21% of melanoma patients and is the most common initial visceral site of metastatic disease. Lung metastases
are usually detected as asymptomatic lesions on screening chest radiographs. 376,389 Up to one-third of these are benign or represent a new primary neoplasm,
suggesting the importance of biopsy and pathologic confirmation. 390,391 There is conflicting information concerning prognostic factors such as rapidity of tumor growth,
the disease-free interval, the number of lesions, and survival after metastasectomy. One factor that clearly correlates with median survival after resection is the ability
to completely remove all metastatic disease.
The rapidity of tumor growth may affect survival after metastasectomy. The average melanoma has a tumor-doubling time of 30 days. Patients with a tumor-doubling
time of greater than 60 days have a median survival of 23 months with a 5-year survival rate of 16%. Patients with a tumor doubling time less than 60 days had a
median survival of 16 months and no 5-year survivors were reported. In a multivariate analysis, the number of pulmonary lesions, bilateral location, disease-free
interval before diagnosis of pulmonary metastases, and size of the nodules did not significantly affect survival. 390,392
Five-year survival after pulmonary metastasectomy is 20% to 27%. 375,376 Historic data suggest a median survival of 10 months in patients with disease confined to the
lungs alone who were treated with dacarbazine, and the 1-year survival rate for patients receiving nonsurgical treatment was reported to be 36%. 382,393 In a
retrospective study, improved survival was found when a second resection was performed after localized recurrence from a previous metastasectomy. Twenty percent
of patients who had a second complete metastasectomy for melanoma were alive at 5 years. 394

Although no randomized trials exist, the resection of pulmonary metastases has been suggested in patients with melanoma whose preoperative radiographic workup
showed no evidence of extrapulmonary disease. Almost all of these resections can be done using minimally invasive techniques, and even bilateral procedures can
be undertaken with low morbidity. Following patients' chest radiographs serially for a sufficient period may be a reasonable option in order to measure tumor-doubling
time and reassess tumor burden when such therapy is considered. The rationale for such heroic surgical approaches may increase if adjuvant trials with IFNs,
vaccines, or combinations are found to have a benefit in operable stage IV disease. These resected patients are ideal candidates for adjuvant immunotherapy trials as
patients with limited tumor burden may respond better.
Gastrointestinal Metastasis
Only 5% of all patients who die of melanoma develop symptoms from gastrointestinal disease. 389 Most have multiple lesions and the goal of surgery has been
palliation of obstruction, perforation, or bleeding. Median survival after palliative surgery is only 10 months. 395 The diagnosis of a solitary gastrointestinal lesion is
quite uncommon; nonetheless, after resection of solitary gastrointestinal lesions, 5-year survival rates have been reported to be as high as 28% to 41% from some
centers.377,378
There is no evidence that invasive procedures for the treatment of hepatic metastasis benefits patients. There are occasional case reports of long-term survival after
resections of isolated hepatic melanoma metastasis, but no substantial series exists in the literature. Hepatic metastasectomy cannot be recommended outside an
investigational protocol setting. 396 A series examining the use of isolated hepatic perfusion for hepatic melanoma metastasis has also only reported limited response
rates in a small number of patients. 397 At the University of Pittsburgh, hepatic metastasis from ocular melanoma demonstrates no advantage for cisplatin via hepatic
artery administration and embolic occlusion of the hepatic artery over systemic administration, even with doses beyond the limits of systemic tolerance.
Adrenal Metastasis
Isolated adrenal metastases are uncommon; however, a large retrospective series of 83 patients suggested a benefit for surgical excision. Twenty-seven patients
underwent surgical exploration and 18 were rendered clinically free of disease at surgery. There was a median survival of 25.7 months for patients rendered disease
free compared with only 9.2 months after a palliative resection. Removal of resectable lesions is a reasonable option if other approaches are unavailable, although
there is a substantial likelihood of selection bias rather than surgery per se accounting for the suggested benefits. 398
Bone Metastasis
Melanoma metastasizes to the bone relatively late in the disease course. Median survival is just 4 months after diagnosis. Truncal melanomas have a higher
percentage of bony metastases compared with melanomas found at other sites. 399 Of those with bone metastases, 67% responded to palliative radiotherapy or
decompression with good pain relief. 400 Bone metastases from melanoma respond in a similar fashion to bone metastases from other tumors, with doses of 8 Gy/1
fraction, 20 Gy/5 fractions, or 30 Gy/10 fractions.
Brain Metastasis
Brain metastases are detected clinically in 8% to 46% of patients and at autopsy in 55% to 75% of melanoma patients. 401,402 and 403 Brain metastases usually require
treatment to relieve symptoms, and available options depend on the number and location of lesions. Corticosteroid treatment often reduces symptoms by ameliorating
swelling in many patients and may provide palliation. Melanoma metastatic to the brain is reasonably treated by gamma knife irradiation or surgically, if the lesion is
solitary, symptomatic, and can be treated without major neurologic injury.
A series of patients with symptomatic, solitary, intracranial lesions showed a median survival after craniotomy of only 10 months. 404 Patients who responded to
previous immunotherapy and subsequently relapsed with intracranial disease seem to enjoy more significant benefit after craniotomy. Forty patients with melanoma or
renal cell cancer metastasis involving the brain were reported in a study by the NCI. Thirty-six were rendered free of disease after resection of a single metastasis.
The median survival after craniotomy for patients exhibiting complete response, partial response, and no response to previous immunotherapy was 23, 17, and 7
months, respectively. Of the ten patients who had achieved a prior complete response, eight remained disease free in the brain at last follow-up and some have had
long-term survival. Twenty-five patients experienced neurologic symptoms before craniotomy, and all had complete resolution of their symptoms after surgical
excision. The benefits of resection include palliation of symptoms and the potential for a prolonged disease-free interval in the brain. 405
The role of conventional radiation for multiple lesions or unresectable disease is controversial. 406 Possibly, because of the sensitivity of the brain to large-dose
fractions, studies of whole brain radiotherapy with high-dose fractions have shown little survival improvement. 407 Whole brain radiotherapy (30 Gy/10 fractions) is
standard therapy for multiple brain metastases with initial radiosurgery beneficial for cases with two to four metastases. 408 Radiosurgery alone is recommended for
patients with solitary brain metastases less than 3 cm in diameter ( Fig. 42.2-25 and Fig. 42.2-26). Resection followed by whole brain irradiation is recommended for
larger lesions with significant mass effect unrelieved by corticosteroids. The local control rates with stereotactic radiosurgery employing single-fraction minimum tumor
doses of 16 to 20 Gy are excellent. Mori reported the University of Pittsburgh experience with gamma knife radiosurgery (median marginal dose, 16 Gy; range, 10 to
20 Gy) in 118 brain melanoma brain metastases (median volume, 2.95 mL; range, 0.1 to 25.5 mL) in 60 patients. 409 Median survival was 7 months after radiosurgery
and 10 months after the initial diagnosis of brain metastasis, with a 90% local control rate. Local tumor progression developed in seven patients and subsequent
remote brain metastases developed in 14 patients. Multivariate analysis demonstrated improved survival was associated with solitary brain metastases and for
patients with no other active systemic disease.

FIGURE 42.2-25. Actuarial survival curves for 60 patients with malignant melanoma treated by gamma knife radiosurgery. Survival is compared for patients with
solitary brain metastasis and no active systemic disease (solitary/no systemic) at radiosurgery (n = 11), multiple brain metastases and active systemic disease
(multiple/systemic) at radiosurgery (n = 11), and the remaining patients with either solitary brain metastasis and active systemic disease (single/systemic) or multiple
brain metastases without active systemic disease (multiple/no systemic) at radiosurgery (n = 38). Some patients with limited brain disease and no systemic disease
are able to enjoy prolonged survival. (From ref. 409, with permission.)

FIGURE 42.2-26. Radiosurgery of melanoma. Solitary right temporal metastasis from malignant melanoma treated by radiosurgery alone to a dose of 20 Gy at the
50% isodose volume (left) and at follow-up 17 months later (right).

CYTOTOXIC CHEMOTHERAPY
Chemotherapeutic agents that have been most widely applied in metastatic disease are dacarbazine, the platinum analogs, nitrosoureas, and microtubular toxins
(Table 42.2-18). Dacarbazine is considered the reference agent for melanoma, with a response rate of 14% to 20% in multiple series and a median response
durations of 4 to 6 months. 410 Long-term follow-up of patients treated with dacarbazine alone indicates that less than 2% of patients survive 6 years. Although early
limited phase II and III trials suggested a benefit of tamoxifen, IFN-a 2b, or cisplatin when added to dacarbazine for patients with metastatic disease, these benefits
have not been confirmed in large-scale multicenter phase III trials. More recently completed phase III trials using dacarbazine-based combinations are summarized in
Table 42.2-19.

TABLE 42.2-18. Single Agents with Activity against Melanoma

TABLE 42.2-19. Pivotal Phase III Trials of Chemotherapy Combinations for Stage IV Melanoma

The role of dacarbazine combinations involving either tamoxifen or IFN-a 2b has been carefully evaluated. In 1992, a prospective randomized trial of dacarbazine and
tamoxifen versus dacarbazine alone indicated that the combination therapy might be more effective. 75,411 A 28% response rate and 41-week median survival was
reported for patients receiving dacarbazine plus tamoxifen versus only a 12% response rate and 23-week median survival for patients treated with dacarbazine alone.
The benefit of tamoxifen in this setting was attributed to the potentiation of the cytotoxic chemotherapy rather than to direct antitumor hormonal (antiestrogenic)
effects. In a small, randomized trial that compared dacarbazine with dacarbazine and high-dose IFN-a 2, the combination therapy produced 12 complete and four
partial responses in 30 patients compared with only two complete and four partial responses among 30 patients treated with dacarbazine alone. 412,413 Median
response duration and survival were significantly prolonged when dacarbazine was combined with IFN-a 2. Unfortunately, a large-scale four-arm two-by-two factorial
phase III ECOG trial has reexamined the benefit of both tamoxifen and IFN-a 2b using the same protocol and failed to confirm the initial encouraging observations. 154,414
The overall response rate in this trial (ECOG 3690) was 18% (range, 12% to 21% for the four arms), and median time to treatment failure was 2.6 months. Median
survival was identical for all four arms tested at 9.1 months. There was no advantage in terms of response or survival attributable to the addition of IFN-a 2b, tamoxifen,
or both agents, to dacarbazine. There is no evidence, based on this trial and the cumulative observations from prior studies to support the use of IFN-a or tamoxifen in
combination with dacarbazine in metastatic melanoma. Unfortunately, we also have no clear indication that dacarbazine itself provides any substantial survival
benefit, although it represents conventional therapy at this time.
Many chemotherapy combinations have produced response rates ranging from 30% to 50% in single-institution phase II trials for metastatic melanoma. Two of the
most active combinations reported are the three-drug combination of cisplatin/vinblastine/dacarbazine (CVD) developed by Legha and the group at M. D. Anderson
and the four-drug combination of cisplatin/dacarbazine/carmustine and tamoxifen (CDBT) developed by Del Prete at Dartmouth and known commonly as the
Dartmouth combination. 415,416 and 417 The CVD regimen produced responses in 40% of 50 patients with 4% complete response and a median response duration of 9
months.418 In a randomized multicenter trial comparing CVD with dacarbazine alone encompassing approximately 150 patients, the CVD arm produced a 19%
response rate compared with 14% for dacarbazine alone with no differences in either response duration or survival. 419
The four-drug CDBT or Dartmouth regimen produced responses in 46% of 141 patients (16 complete response and 49 partial responses). 420 Median response
duration for this large population was more than 7 months. The inclusion of tamoxifen was suggested to be essential with response rates of 10% when tamoxifen was
omitted.420 However, a randomized phase III NCI Canada Melanoma Trial comparing CDBT with CDB alone showed a response rate of 30% for the CDBT arm and no
added value resulting from tamoxifen. 421 In 1999, a randomized phase III trial performed by a consortium including ECOG and Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center showed no benefit for the CDBT combination relative to dacarbazine alone. This trial involved 240 patients, and the response rate with dacarbazine was
10.2% compared with 18.5% for the CDBT regimen (P = .09). The median survival time from randomization was 7 months, with no difference between the two
treatment arms. Toxicity was substantially greater, with bone marrow suppression, nausea, vomiting, and fatigue significantly more frequent with the CDBT treatment
regimen than with dacarbazine. Taken together, current controlled trials to date have shown no compelling evidence to support the value of combination
chemotherapy.

Temozolomide is a nonclassical prodrug of MTIC (5-(3-N-methyltriazen-l-yl)-imidazole-4-carboxamide), the alkylating agent that is the active metabolite of
dacarbazine. Temozolomide spontaneously converts into its active metabolite and in several trials has shown antitumor activity against melanoma that is at least
equivalent to that of dacarbazine. A randomized phase III study of temozolomide versus dacarbazine was published in which patients with advanced melanoma were
randomly assigned to receive either oral temozolomide at a starting dose of 200 mg/m 2/d for 5 days every 28 days or intravenous dacarbazine at a starting dose of
250 mg/m2/d for 5 days every 21 days. Median survival was 7.7 months for patients treated with temozolomide and 6.4 months for those treated with dacarbazine. No
major differences in toxicity were seen. Systemic levels of the active metabolite MTIC were higher than with the intravenous dosing of dacarbazine, and overall quality
of life was improved with temozolomide.422 Temozolomide also has been examined in phase I trials for use in conjunction with cisplatin and has been shown to be safe
at the studied dosages. 423 The most attractive advantage of temozolomide is the well-documented penetration of third spaces such as the central nervous system
(CNS) and ascites fluid. Approximately one-half of the circulating levels in the blood has been documented in the CNS, and temozolomide has been shown to be an
active agent against CNS melanoma, as well as glioblastoma multiforme. Failure to demonstrate improvements in survival has led to denial of licensure for melanoma,
although this agent has been licensed by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for glioblastoma multiforme.

IMMUNOTHERAPY OF METASTATIC DISEASE
Although immunotherapy currently is effective in only a small percentage of patients, the results can be quite dramatic. Six percent of patients have a complete
response to IL-2, but two-thirds of patients with complete responses are disease-free survivors at a median follow-up of more than 5 years ( Fig. 42.2-27 and Fig.
42.2-28).424 These infrequent responses suggest that with a better understanding of the immune mechanisms of IL-2, a greater proportion of patients might be
benefited and perhaps serve as a more effective model for developing therapies for patients with other neoplasms.

FIGURE 42.2-27. Complete response in a patient with disseminated melanoma using high-dose interleukin-2. Chest radiograph (A) and abdominal computed
tomographic scan (B) showing complete regression of disease.

FIGURE 42.2-28. Partial response in a patient with multiple cutaneous metastatic lesions after interleukin-2 (before, left; after, right). In general, partial responses are
limited in their duration to 6 to 18 months, but some can be sustained for prolonged periods (greater than 10 years).

One fascinating aspect of melanoma is the evidence of tumor regression at the primary tumor site, and less commonly, at regional or distant metastatic sites. One of
the hallmarks of primary melanoma is the appearance of subjacent lymphocytic infiltrate and pigment phagocytosis in monocytes associated with lesional
depigmentation. Some patients develop patches of cutaneous depigmentation, remote from the primary lesion: This is known as leukoderma or paraneoplastic vitiligo,
presumably secondary to a specific immune response directed toward melanocyte antigens. 425,426 Some patients who develop responses after immunotherapy, and in
particular after IL-2, IFN-a 2b, or vaccines composed of melanosomal proteins or peptide therapy, develop marked paraneoplastic vitiligo. The presence of vitiligo
predicts response to immunotherapy.
IL-2, originally termed T-cell growth factor, was first identified in 1976 and the first human trials of its antitumor effects were published in 1985. 427,428 and 429 IL-2 has no
apparent direct cytotoxic or cytostatic effect on melanoma. IL-2 promotes T-cell proliferation and, in high doses, like IL-4, IL-7, IL-10, IL-12, and IL-18, induces LAK
cells from NK precursors. These LAK cells can nonspecifically lyse tumor in vitro, and in particular, those failing to express class I molecules. In some instances, IL-2
can promote apoptotic death of T cells and its targeted deletion (or that of its alpha and beta chain receptors) is associated with inflammatory bowel disease. Typical
high-dose IL-2 protocols involve the administration of 600,000 to 720,000 IU/kg IL-2 every 8 hours up to a maximum of 15 doses. This is administered in two cycles of
up to 5 days separated by a 10-day rest period. Numerous single-institutional case series have been published on the efficacy of IL-2 ( Table 42.2-20). The NCI
published the largest series of 283 consecutive patients with melanoma and renal cell carcinoma treated with high doses of IL-2 (720,000 IU/kg). A 7% complete
response rate and 10% partial response rate was observed. Complete responses tended to be prolonged with many free of disease 15 years following therapy. An
update of these patients published in 2000 demonstrated response durations ranging from 1.5 to greater than 122 months and a median response duration of at least
59 months. Disease progression was not observed in any patient responding for longer than 30 months. 430

TABLE 42.2-20. Clinical Trials Using Interleukin-2 as Monotherapy for Melanoma a

Relapse after IL-2 usually occurs within 1 to 2 years (97%) in partial responders but much less frequently (41%) in complete responders. In patients who relapse,
repeat administration of IL-2 is rarely effective following IL-2 treatment. 431 Surgical resection following recurrence following IL-2 therapy is associated with a rapid
relapse with a median time of 5 months before progression, and resection in such patients should be used only as palliative therapy. 432
Considerable toxicity from IL-2 administration is observed since IL-2 is given in each patient to maximally tolerated doses on the basis of evidence that efficacy is
directly related to dose intensity. Capillary leak syndrome resulting in pulmonary edema as well as renal and cardiac dysfunction, hypotension, fever, and malaise are
all common side effects of administration. In these early studies, a 1% mortality was reported, although more recent reports, with careful selection of patients,
suggests mortality of less than 0.1%. There has been considerable debate concerning the dosage and regimen of IL-2 necessary to optimize response and minimize
toxicity. A large experience supports the application of three daily IL-2 doses of 720,000 IU/kg or as more commonly applied outside of the NCI, 600,000 IU/kg of
IL-2.433 Low-dose IL-2 appears to be markedly less effective. 434,435 Identification of patients most likely to respond to IL-2 therapy has generally not been effective,
although good performance status, low pretreatment serum IL-6 levels, postinfusion thrombocytopenia, and expression of certain HLA antigens have been suggested
to be helpful. 436,437
IL-2 has been used in numerous trials alone, in combination with other cytokines, with the infusion of autologous immune effector cells, with other chemotherapeutic
agents, and with radiation therapy ( Table 42.2-21 and Table 42.2-22).438,439 and 440 None of these combinations has been associated with enhanced survival. The
enhanced toxicity and absence of long-term survival advantage compared with IL-2 alone has led to their discontinuation. 441,442 The Extratumoral IL-2 Working Group
also failed to demonstrate improved response rates of high-dose IL-2 and IFN-a over IL-2 alone in patients with melanoma in which the response rates were 10% and
5%, respectively. 443 The EORTC evaluated IFN-a and IL-2 with or without cisplatin in 138 patients with advanced metastatic melanoma. The overall response rate was
18% for patients receiving IFN-a and IL-2 and increased to 35% with the addition of cisplatin. In a subset analysis considering patients with normal pretherapy LDH
levels, the response rate was 23%, and with cisplatin improved to 38%. Overall survival was 9 months without any significant differences between the various groups.
Although results are still early to determine the true effect IL-2 has on survival, a 5-year survival rate of 13% has been shown in patients receiving IL-2 and IFN-a
regardless of the inclusion of chemotherapy. 444 Efforts to reduce toxicity associated with IL-2 administration, including the use of corticosteroids and anti-TNF
antibodies, have generally been ineffective or limited the antitumor effects of IL-2. 445

TABLE 42.2-21. Phase II Results for Chemotherapy with Interleukin-2 Infusion and Interferon-a and Interferon-a 2 Subcutaneously

TABLE 42.2-22. Phase III Trials of Biochemotherapy for Stage IV Melanoma

A prospective randomized trial in patients with metastatic melanoma, comparing treatment with chemobiotherapy in relation to chemotherapy was carried out at the
NCI. One hundred two patients with metastatic melanoma were prospectively randomized to receive chemotherapy consisting of tamoxifen, cisplatin, and dacarbazine
or this same chemotherapy followed by IFN-a 2b and IL-2 using a schedule that has not been explored by others. No increase in survival was seen with the addition of
immunotherapy and toxicity was increased. From previous patients treated with immunotherapy alone it was suggested that the chemotherapy might have negatively
affected the efficacy of the immunotherapy component of the regimen. 446
The addition of immune effectors such as LAK cells, tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), or activated T cells combined with IL-2 has not improved response or
survival rates substantially over IL-2 alone and greatly increases cost and complexity. TILs can be demonstrated to contain some cells that are specific for known
melanosomal lineage antigens of melanoma, as well as the patient's own autologous tumor. It has been suggested that the major targets of T cells in melanoma
patients may be unique to each individual. Concomitant infusion of IL-2 may act as a survival factor for the infused TILs, may enhance the recruitment of T cells into
the tumor site, and augment the specific cytotoxic T-cell response. In one study, 86 consecutive patients were treated with a combination of TILs and IL-2. An
objective response was observed in 34% of patients, including some patients who had previously failed treatment with high-dose IL-2 alone. These T cells were also
demonstrated to localize to the site following radiolabeling. 447,448 From both TILs as well as T cells derived from the peripheral blood and sensitized in vitro, genes
encoding target antigens as well as the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-specific peptide epitopes derived from them have been identified. These peptides are
being used as vaccine antigens to enhance T-cell response and function against melanoma. Numerous clinical protocols have been initiated based on these new
findings. 449 Other therapies applying cytokines that have been tested in this disease including IL-1, IL-4, IL-12, TNF, IFN-g, and FLT3L have not been successful. In
the future, they may play a role in combination with IL-2 or IFN-a. 450,451,452,453,454 and 455

MANAGEMENT OF MELANOMA IN THE PREGNANT PATIENT
Appropriate surgical management should not be delayed in a pregnant patient with melanoma. The cornerstone of fetal viability is maternal health, and a delay in
surgery only jeopardizes the lives of both the mother and the child. Adjuvant treatment such as high-dose IFN-a, an abortifactant, should be delayed until after
delivery. Patients who have been treated with IFNs while pregnant also have had babies of low birth weight. Only rarely do situations arise in which a woman with
melanoma should be advised to terminate pregnancy. In patients with stage IV disease, fetal termination should only be considered for the use of chemotherapeutic or
biologic agents with the understanding that only a few percent may experience a survival benefit. Managing a pregnant patient with disseminated melanoma can be
difficult, but because the prognosis is so poor in these patients and treatment options are lacking, the patient may reasonably decide to attempt a full-term gestation
without therapy. Cases of women receiving chemotherapy and focused spinal radiation without subsequent harm to the fetus have been reported. Uncommonly,
melanoma can pass through the placenta, but usually in only far-advanced disease. Melanomas account for only 8% of the cancers that affect pregnant women but for
46% of fetal tumors acquired transplacentally. 456 In a gestational patient with melanoma, the placenta should be specifically examined histologically for occult
melanoma metastasis.457

FUTURE PROSPECTS FOR THE BIOLOGIC THERAPY OF PATIENTS WITH MELANOMA
Some of the goals of the tumor immunologist are (1) the development of a specific T cell response to tumor, (2) delivery of T cells across the endothelial barrier to the
tumor, (3) maintenance of the T-cell survival within the tumor microenvironment, (4) the induction of long-lasting immune memory to an individual's tumor, and (5)
regulation of the local angiogenic response mediated by development of a T-cell response in concert with tumor resident DCs. Future directions in immunotherapy
promise more directed stimulation of a specific immune response using vaccines derived from autologous tumor, DCs, and application of known tumor antigens.
ANTIGENS OF MELANOMA
Specific cellular immune responses to melanoma antigens classically occur through the recognition of a foreign peptide on a self-MHC molecule by the T-cell
receptor. 458 These peptides, generated through the processing of either exogenous (extracellular) or endogenous (intracellular) antigens, are presented by DCs to
specific T cells in regional lymph nodes. Proteins are cleaved to short amino acid sequences of 8 to 10 aa for MHC class I molecules and 13 to 18 aa for MHC class II
molecules. MHC class I molecules interact with CD8 cells to stimulate a cytotoxic T-cell response to melanoma, whereas MHC class II molecules activate appropriate
helper CD4 cells to induce a humoral immune response. 459 Single amino acid differences in these small peptides have enormous effects on this interaction as
alterations in the anchoring of the peptide in the MHC grove may occur and recognition by the T-cell receptor of the MHC/peptide complex may no longer occur with
minute changes in spatial conformation and charge. 460 Escape from immune recognition can occur in a variety of ways, but evidence for defects in the peptide
transporter into the endoplasmic reticulum, loss of expression of individual melanoma antigens, and loss of class I molecules (limited to single alleles or globally, often
due to loss of b 2 microglobulin expression) has been associated with progression of this tumor. 461
DCs are uniquely required for priming naive T and B cells and probably play a major role in driving the effector phase of the immune response. DCs, which express
high levels of costimulatory molecules and efficiently secrete Th1 cytokines, select, activate, and expand specific T cells. Through positive and negative selection of T
cells during maturation, autoreactivity should be minimized. Proteins produced from tumor cells that induce a specific T-cell response are called tumor-associated
antigens. Those that are sufficiently potent at stimulating reactivity, demonstrated by a clinical rejection of tumor, are called tumor-rejection antigens. As cancer is a
genetic disease, the production of mutated proteins occurs, and these proteins were thought to be prime candidates for the development of peptide vaccines. Of
course, this concept is much more complicated as T cells are, in fact, quite capable of recognizing self, and, conversely, are able to develop tolerance or anergy to
foreign peptides. In fact, although some mutated self-proteins have been identified in patients that can stimulate an antitumor T-cell response, most peptides thus far
identified derive from normal proteins either overexpressed in melanoma or restricted to cells of melanocytic lineage. 462 Understanding the mechanisms of tolerance
and the means to stimulate enhanced self-reactivity has been a goal of the tumor immunologist. By identifying antigens present in tumors (the processed epitopes
express in concert with MHC class I and II molecules, which can bind with sufficient affinity to the T-cell receptor), therapeutic vaccines may be developed that induce
a long-lived antitumor response.
Unique Tumor Antigens
Unique antigens, those expressed usually as a result of mutation, only occur in a single patient's melanoma and not in other patients; those may be the most
important target. Techniques to sample the antigenic repertoire of autologous tumors and to express them on autologous DCs have been developed. Several sources
of antigen have been applied to DCs, including the use of synthetic peptides, peptides stripped from the surface of the tumor cell by means of acid elution, and cDNA
or cRNA preparations encoding genes expressed by the tumor. The creation of antigen-presenting cells by fusing autologous DCs with tumor, incubating with tumor
lysates or apoptotic bodies, also has been shown to elicit an antitumor response in murine and some human studies. 463
Shared Tumor Antigens
A number of proteins providing a source of peptide epitopes, some of them synthetically altered to improve MHC binding, have been identified and used in clinical
trials. These epitopes bind either to class I ( Table 42.2-23) or class II (Table 42.2-24) MHC molecules. One technique that enabled the rapid detection and
identification of antigens of cancer was the technique known as serologic expression cloning. 464 This has been now shown to detect both antibody-recognized and
T-cell–recognized antigens of melanoma.

TABLE 42.2-23. Major Histocompatibility Class I–Restricted Human Melanoma Peptide Antigens Used in Clinical Trials

TABLE 42.2-24. Major Histocompatibility Class II Human Melanoma Peptides Used in Clinical Trials

Differentiation Antigens
A broad group of antigens is known as the cancer testis group was initially identified in melanoma as MAGE 1, 2, and 3. 465 These antigens are now known to be
expressed in cancers of different histologic types, but also in only normal testis and occasionally ovary of adults. The cells in the testis expressing these antigens are
immunologically privileged by their anatomic localization and their frequent lack of HLA class I molecules. Thus, cancer testis antigens are restricted to malignant cells
in the adult. The identification in melanoma and melanocytes of the cancer testes MAGE genes, 466 which occur naturally in several human cancers, were the first
identifiable tumor antigen in human solid tumors. Many more such antigens have been subsequently described.
Melanocyte and Melanoma Tumor Antigens

The predominant melanocytic antigens include Melan-A/MART-1, tyrosinase, and gp100. These gene products are expressed in both normal and malignant
melanocytes, and immune responses against these targets have been associated with the development of autoimmune reactions against normal melanocytes. 467
However, these genes are not expressed in tumors derived from other cell types. Therefore, vaccination against these targets should allow a relatively tissue-specific
response to be elicited.
CLINICAL APPLICATIONS
Active Immunotherapy
CELLULAR ADJUVANTS. DCs are specialized APC that have the unique ability to stimulate naive T cells.

468,469
They are also capable of presenting exogenous antigens

either by the MHC class I or II pathways. 470,471,472,473,474,475,476,477 and 478 DCs can per se mediate antitumor effects479; however, current trials use DCs that have been
manipulated through various techniques to express tumor antigen on self-restricted MHC molecules ( Table 42.2-25). For example, animal studies using synthetic 480 or
stripped481 peptides pulsed onto DCs have shown potent inhibition of tumor growth. DCs can be generated easily from peripheral blood monocytes, 482 CD34+
progenitors, 483,484 or by direct purification from blood 485 and have entered clinical trials in a variety of malignant diseases including melanoma. 486,487,488 and 489

TABLE 42.2-25. Uses of Dendritic Cells in Immunotherapy a

Nestle et al. performed a clinical trial involving 30 patients with melanoma in which DCs were used to mediate vaccination. 487,490 Patients of HLA serotype HLA-A1
were treated with appropriate peptides derived from the MAGE-1 and MAGE-3 antigens; those who were HLA-A2+ were treated with peptides from Melan-A/MART-1,
gp100, and tyrosinase; and those who expressed HLA-B44 received treatment with peptides derived from MAGE-3 and tyrosinase. Clinical responses were noted in
27% (8 of 30) of patients, including three complete remissions and five partial remissions. This study is the most mature of current DC and peptide studies in
melanoma and has indicated the feasibility, safety, as well as the tolerance of such therapy. The meaningful clinical responses induced in a group of patients with
poor prognosis disease is encouraging but needs further evaluation.
A University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute trial initiated in 1996 has also shown encouraging evidence of activity in 23 patients. 491 The first patient treated exhibited a
relapsing and remitting course of her melanoma over several years and multiple trials. After DC vaccination, this patient developed a complete remission and has
remained free of disease for more than 20 months. Another patient on this study attained a complete remission sustained for over 3 years, and a third has had a
partial remission.
New adjuvants are also becoming available. Cytokines of great potential interest are FLT3L and CD40L, which preferentially expands or activates DC in the
peripheral blood and many tissues. 492,493 and 494 A major difficulty in conducting trials of cancer immunotherapy is the selection of appropriate end points. Most patients
on such studies are heavily pretreated and immunosuppressed. It is logical to apply these treatments to patients with a much lower burden of disease such as in the
adjuvant setting, where all obvious disease is removed, but there is a high chance of relapse due to microscopic residual or metastatic disease. Performing such
studies using the clinical end points of time to tumor progression or survival involves studying large numbers of patients over a long period. This is justifiable if phase
II studies in patients with advanced disease indicate that there is significant clinical activity, but for most strategies, this has not yet been shown to be the case.
CYTOKINE ADJUVANTS. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) is an important cytokine promoting survival and expansion of DCs.

482,483,495
In

gene transfer models, GM-CSF gene transfer into poorly immunogenic tumors leads to rejection of those tumors in animal models 496 or to clinical and immunologic
responses in humans. 497,498 Direct injection of GM-CSF into subcutaneous melanoma metastases may also lead to regression of injected and noninjected tumor
deposits.499 A study using GM-CSF together with peptides derived from Melan-A/MART-1, tyrosinase, and gp100 in HLA-A2 melanoma patients was reported in
1996.500 Immunologic responses were observed, consisting of development of skin reactions to intradermal injections of peptide, infiltration of injection site by CD4
and CD8 lymphocytes, and detectable cytotoxic T lymphocytes in peripheral blood without apparent toxicity. Three patients were reported in whom tumor regressions
were seen despite having progressive melanoma at the time of entry into the study: One patient showed complete regression of tumor and the others displayed partial
regressions. In a study using modified gp100 HLA-A2 peptides, 13 of 31 patients receiving the peptide plus systemic IL-2 showed regression of metastatic melanoma,
with an additional four patients showing minor or mixed responses. Immunologic responses could be generated in 91% of patients using blood lymphocytes stimulated
in vitro before assay.501
Another approach to the enhancement of immune response to tumor cells consists of introducing genes encoding costimulatory molecules or alloantigens. In human
clinical trials, tumor cells (autologous or allogeneic) or normal cells such as fibroblasts, have been transfected with individual cytokine gene(s) and have been used to
induce tumor immunity. So far, only early toxicity results from phase I trials have been reported using this approach in advanced disease patients. Current efforts are
underway involving the evaluation of IL-4 or IL-12 gene therapy in patients with melanomas. A human clinical trial using this approach was reported using IFN-g gene
modified and irradiated autologous melanoma cells. The preparation was given every 2 weeks for a total of six doses. Twenty stage III and IV melanoma patients were
treated. Two complete responses were observed and two patients had a decrease in the size and number of their subcutaneous nodules. The vaccinated population
showed an increased IgG response dominated by IgG-2, suggesting the development of an effective T-helper cell response. 502 Palmer et al. reported on 12 patients
who were treated with autologous irradiated tumor engineered to secrete IL-2 by infection with recombinant retrovirus. No clinical responses were seen, but three
patients had stable disease for 7 to 15 months. 503
Arienti et al. reported the vaccination of 12 patients with metastatic melanoma with an allogeneic human melanoma line genetically modified to release IL-4. Only two
mixed responses were recorded, without objective clinical responses by conventional criteria. However, induction of a specific immune response was demonstrated by
in vitro studies. Antibodies to alloantigens could be detected in 2 of 11 patients tested. A significant increase in IFN-g release was detected in 7 of 11 cases when
postvaccination lymphocytes were stimulated by the untransduced allomelanoma cells. However, induction of a specific recognition of autologous melanoma cells by
peripheral blood lymphocytes was obtained after vaccination in only one of six cases studied. This response involved the melanoma peptide
Melan-A/MART-1 501,504,505,506,507,508,509,510 and 511 that was recognized in an HLA-A2–restricted fashion. These results, although modest, show that the induction of a
specific immune response is possible in a few patients through novel vaccination strategies. 451
The feasibility of using melanosomal proteins for the immunotherapy of patients with melanoma is now being addressed. Immunization using peptides or recombinant
viruses containing genes encoding the melanosomal antigens MART-1 or gp100, with or without coadministration of cytokines such as IL-2, IL-12, or GM-CSF, are
ongoing at the National Institutes of Health, as well as in the ECOG. 512
PEPTIDES ALONE. Initial studies using melanoma peptides were performed using peptides alone. One of the first involved the use of a MAGE-3 HLA-A1–restricted

peptide without of any immunologic adjuvant. 355 In this study, 6 of 19 patients with melanoma displayed tumor regression, and toxicity was minimal. In one patient,
tumor regression occurred several months after completing peptide vaccination, although the tumor had progressed while on treatment, leading to the initiation of
vaccination. Eventually four of five lung metastases in this patient disappeared entirely. 513 This initial study demonstrated that synthetic peptides derived from

self-tumor antigens were safe and that clinical responses could be obtained in some individuals in the absence of any other adjuvant. Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
responses against melanoma differentiation antigens correlate inversely with expression of the antigen in melanoma tissues: Patients with progressing disease have
been shown in several experiences to displayed antigen-loss variants, implying in vivo immunoselection under the pressure of peptide vaccination. 513a,513b
A series of studies was performed at the NCI involving peptides derived from the melanoma differentiation antigen gp100. 501,506,507 Initially, HLA-A2+ patients were
treated with the native peptide, and subsequent patients were treated with a version of this peptide containing a single modified amino acid. 507 This substituted
peptide has a higher binding affinity for HLA-A*0201 than the native peptide and has been pursued in the hopes that there will be correspondingly greater induction of
in vivo, as well as in vitro cytotoxic T lymphocytes.507 Patients treated with the substituted peptide developed cytotoxic T lymphocytes recognizing both native and
modified peptide-pulsed target cells, as well as HLA-A2+ tumor cell lines expressing gp100 in almost all cases. Following administration of IL-2 many of these T cells
were not found in the peripheral blood, but a substantial number of patients were observed to respond. Presumably, reactive T cells migrated to the site of antigen.
Considerable work has been done in relation to several HLA class I subtypes to map binding pockets and to determine preferential anchor residues for binding
peptides.509 To improve the stability of the class I complex, some investigators have produced modified class I peptides with amino acid variations designed to
introduce residues that improve the binding to individual class I molecules. This has enhanced the generation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes with specificity not only for
the modified peptide-pulsed target cells, but also for unmodified peptide and for naturally processed peptide. 507,510 Vaccination using modified peptides has now
entered evaluation in clinical trials, and cytotoxic T lymphocytes have clearly been demonstrated in patients vaccinated in these studies. 501
Allogeneic tumor vaccines are based on the presumption that same cell type tumors from different individuals share several common antigens that are capable of
inducing an immunologic response. One vaccine based on this approach, CancerVax, has been developed at John Wayne Cancer Institute. CancerVax is a whole cell
irradiated vaccine developed from three allogeneic melanoma cell lines that were subsequently demonstrated to express several known immunogenic
tumor-associated antigens. Phase II nonrandomized trials have shown impressive results in a select group of patients. Stage IV patients received CancerVax after
resection of all evident metastatic disease and were compared with a matched set of controls. The 5-year overall survival and median survival for patients who
received the vaccine appears to be improved, but it is well recognized that historic controls have great liabilities. Forty-two percent of patients who received the
vaccine were alive at 5 years and the median survival was 42 months. The historic reference had a 19% 5-year survival and an 18-month median survival. After
multivariate analysis, CancerVax therapy was suggested to be a significant predictor of survival. 360 It is believed that prior surgery enabled success of the vaccine by
reducing tumor load and identifying a better group of patients. Prospective randomized studies are now needed, and underway, to appropriately evaluate this therapy
in patients with resected stage III and stage IV melanoma. 514 Use of peptides fused to heat-shock protein hsp70 has been shown to be rapidly taken up by DCs and to
bypass the need for T-cell help in murine models. 515In vivo immunization with these hybrid peptides caused rejection of tumors expressing antigen and may represent
important strategies to be taken into clinical trials.
Lysate vaccines are produced by mechanical disruption of whole tumor cells. Vaccine preparations have been evaluated in which nonpathogenic viruses such as
vaccinia virus and Newcastle disease virus, are used to lyse cells to enhance their immunogenicity (viral melanoma oncolysate). They contain multiple
tumor-associated antigens and are capable of stimulating a polyvalent immune response. Wallack et al. compared a vaccinia melanoma oncolysate with vaccinia virus
alone in AJCC stage III melanoma patients. This phase III, randomized, multicenter trial demonstrated no significant difference in either disease-free or overall
survival at a median follow-up of 46 months. 516 Similar studies by Hersey from Australia have also failed to show either relapse-free survival or overall survival
benefit. 517
CELLULAR ADJUVANTS
Passive Immunotherapy
Passive immunotherapy is a term generally applied to agents that are thought to have direct antitumor activity themselves. Most specifically, this would include the
adoptive transfer of cells or antibodies. Application of the adoptive transfer of T cells and LAK cells has been discussed previously (see Immunotherapy of Metastatic
Disease, earlier in this chapter). Although responses have been observed in conjunction with delivery of IL-2, the general sense is that these responses are inferior in
quality and duration to those of IL-2 alone and provide no long-term benefit. With an improved understanding of the so-called central (CCR7+ vs. CCR7–) memory T
cells that could provide long-term benefit, it would be worthwhile to reevaluate these approaches with these cells as opposed to the effector memory T cells (CCR7+),
which are most likely to provide only short-term responses. 518,519 Application of gene therapies using gene-marked TILs, IL-4, or IL-12 may also enhance induction of
a melanoma-specific immune response.520,521 and 522
The application of antibodies in melanoma was first evaluated with the notion that such antibodies could confer complement or antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity on tumor cells. 523,524 The subsequent genetic engineering of monoclonal antibodies (MAB), resulting in human molecules, and successes with antibodies
targeting breast cancer and lymphoma in clinical trials has led to a reevaluation of these reagents alone or in combination with molecularly defined cytokines and
growth factors for the immunotherapy of melanoma. The development of a human IgG anti-mouse antibody (HAMA) has been observed in virtually every patient and
limited the effectiveness of these early approaches in treated patients. However, first-generation murine MABs have been developed that have been used to
effectively map melanosomal, melanocyte, and melanoma antigens.525 One of these antibodies, R24, an IgG3 murine monoclonal antibody that recognizes GD3, a
ganglioside present on melanoma cells and a subset of T cells, was reported initially to mediate 3 of 12 responses in patients with melanoma. 526 Evidence of immune
reactivity with inflammatory reactions (urticaria, pruritus, erythema, subcutaneous ecchymoses) were observed at tumor sites in some patients treated at doses
greater than or equal to 80 mg/m2. Tumor biopsies during and after treatment showed lymphocyte and mast cell infiltration, mast cell degranulation, and complement
deposition. Subsequent studies with this antibody have failed to confirm this level of response. 527 As a single agent, R24 induced responses in 10 of 103 patients two
of which were complete. Combining R24 with cytotoxic drugs or cytokines did not increase the response rate. An alternative approach was to develop strategies to
immunize with the antiidiotype (so-called Ab2) to induce a host immune response to the original antigen (Ab3). 528,529 BEC2, an antiidiotypic MAB mimics GD3 has
been tested with two immunologic adjuvants, BCG and QS21, administered with BEC2 in melanoma patients free of disease after surgical resection. All patients
developed high-titer IgG antibodies against BEC2. Anti-GD3 antibodies were induced in 3 of 14 patients immunized with BEC2/BCG; no patient immunized with
BEC2/QS21 developed such antibodies. Conjugation of BEC2 to keyhole limpet hemocyanin did not increase the immunogenicity of BEC2 when administered with
BCG. Prolonged disease-free intervals were noted in a majority of treated patients in these adjuvant studies. Two clinical trials with the mouse antiidiotypic MAB
MF11-30, which is an Ab2 of human high-molecular-weight melanoma-associated antigen was administered subcutaneously to patients with advanced
melanoma.530,531 In the first phase I trial in 16 patients, minor responses were observed in three patients. In a second clinical trial MAB MF11-30 was administered to
21; 17 of 19 evaluable patients had increased levels of anti-mouse Ig antibodies and 16 developed antibodies that inhibit the binding of antiidiotypic MAB MF11-30 to
the immunizing anti–high-molecular-weight melanoma-associated antigen MAB 225.28. One patient had increased levels of anti–high-molecular-weight
melanoma-associated antigen antibodies. One patient achieved a complete remission with disappearance of multiple abdominal lymph nodes for a duration of 95
weeks. Minor responses were observed in three patients. These collective results suggest that such antiidiotype antibodies may be useful in patients with melanoma.
Additional antibodies including those directed against the cell surface high-molecular-weight antigen or a transferrin-like molecule have been used in experimental
studies of imaging or therapy with cytokines including IL-2. 527,532,533,534 and 535 MABs with tumor specificity are able to enhance the immunologic specificity of
IL-2–activated LAK cells. MAB 3F8 and 14.G2a, which are specific for neuroblastoma and melanoma and recognize ganglioside GD2, were able to mediate
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity with fresh effector cells and antibody-binding targets. Use of cross-linked antibodies or humanized antibodies has yet to
be clinically explored in this disease but may represent promising approaches. 536
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Lotze MT. Keystone symposium. Melanoma and biology of the neural crest. Melanoma Res 1992;2:131.
2. Lancaster HO. Some geographical aspects of the mortality from melanoma in Europeans. Med J Aust 1956;1:1082.
3. Kopf AW, Salopek TJ, Slade J, et al. Management of cutaneous malignant melanoma by dermatologists in the USA. The Sixth World Congress on Cancers of the Skin, Buenos Aires,
Argentina, 2000.
4. Koh HK, Clapp RW, Barnett JM, et al. Systematic underreporting of cutaneous malignant melanoma in Massachusetts. Possible implications for national incidence figures. J Am Acad Dermatol
1991;24:545.
5. Greenlee RT, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo P. Cancer statistics 2000. CA Cancer J Clin 2000;50:7.
6. Polednak AP, Flannery JT. Cancer Incidence in Connecticut, 19351991. Hartford, Connecticut, Department of Public Health, 1996.
7. National Cancer Institute DoCPaC. Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program Public Use CD-ROM (19731994). National Canncer Institute, Surveillance Program, Statistics Branch,
1997.
8. Roush GC, McKay L, Holford TR. A reversal in the long-term increase in deaths attributable to malignant melanoma. Cancer 1992;69:1714.
9. Dennis LK. Analysis of the melanoma epidemic, both apparent and real: data from the 1973 through 1994 Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program registry. Arch Dermatol
1999;135:275.

10. Balch CM, Soong SJ, Shaw HS, Urist MM, McCarthy WH. An analysis of prognostic factors in 8500 patients with cutaneous melanoma. In: Cutaneous melanoma. Philadelphia: Lippincott,
1992:165.
11. Koh HK. Cutaneous melanoma. N Engl J Med 1991;325:171.
12. Jackson A, Wilkinson C, Ranger M, Pill R, August P. Can primary prevention or selective screening for melanoma be more precisely targeted through general practice? A prospective study to
validate a self administered risk score. BMJ 1998;316:34.
13. Geller AC, Miller DR, Lew RA, et al. Cutaneous melanoma mortality among the socioeconomically disadvantaged in Massachusetts. Am J Pub Health 1996;86:538.
14. American Cancer Society. American Cancer Society facts and figures1998. American Cancer Society, Atlanta, 1998.
15. Liu T, Soong SJ. Epidemiology of malignant melanoma. Surg Clin North Am 1996;76:1205.
16. Berwick M, Halpern A. Melanoma epidemiology. Curr Opin Oncol 1997;9:178.
17. Glass AG, Hoover RN. The emerging epidemic of melanoma and squamous cell skin cancer. JAMA 1989;262:2097.
18. Reintgen DS, McCarty KS, Woodard B, Cox E, Seigler HF. Metastatic malignant melanoma with an unknown primary. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1983;156:335.
19. Mihm MC Jr, Fitzpatrick TB. Early detection of malignant melanoma. Cancer 1976;37:597.
20. Balch CM, Soong SJ, Shaw HM, et al. An analysis of prognostic factors in 4000 patients with cutaneous melanoma. In: Balch CM, Milton GW, eds. Cutaneous melanoma: clinical management
and treatment results worldwide. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1985:321.
21. Lotze MT, Heyward N. Personal communication, 2000.
22. Mansfield PF, Lee JE, Balch CM. Cutaneous melanoma: current practice and surgical controversies. Curr Probl Surg 1994;31:253.
23. Reimer RR, Clark WH Jr, Greene MH, Ainsworth AM, Fraumeni JF Jr. Precursor lesions in familial melanoma. A new genetic preneoplastic syndrome. JAMA 1978;239:744.
24. Nordlund JJ, Kirkwood J, Forget BM, et al. Demographic study of clinically atypical (dysplastic) nevi in patients with melanoma and comparison subjects. Cancer Res 1985;45:1855.
25. Elder DE, Goldman LI, Goldman SC, Greene MH, Clark WH Jr. Dysplastic nevus syndrome: a phenotypic association of sporadic cutaneous melanoma. Cancer 1980;46:1787.
26. Tucker MA, Halpern A, Holly EA, et al. Clinically recognized dysplastic nevi. A central risk factor for cutaneous melanoma. JAMA 1997;277:1439.
27. Kraemer KH, Greene MH, Tarone R, et al. Dysplastic naevi and cutaneous melanoma risk. Lancet 1983;2:1076.
28. Elder DE, Goldman LI, Goldman SC, Greene MH, Clark WH Jr. Dysplastic nevus syndrome: a phenotypic association of sporadic cutaneous melanoma. Cancer 1980;46:1787.
29. Bondi EE, Clark WH Jr, Elder D, Guerry D, Greene MH. Topical chemotherapy of dysplastic melanocytic nevi with 5% fluorouracil. Arch Dermatol 1981;117:89.
30. Kraemer K. Dysplastic nevi as precursors to hereditary melanoma. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 1983;9:619.
31. Kraemer KH, Greene MH. Dysplastic nevus syndrome. Familial and sporadic precursors of cutaneous melanoma. Dermatol Clin 1985;3:225.
32. Crijns MB, Vink J, van Hees CL, Bergman W, Vermeer RJ. Dysplastic nevi. Occurrence in first- and second-degree relatives of patients with “sporadic” dysplastic nevus syndrome. Arch
Dermatol 1991;127:1346.
33. Ackerman AB. What naevus is dysplastic, a syndrome and the commonest precursor of malignant melanoma? A riddle and an answer. Histopathology 1988;13:241.
34. Snels DG, Hille ET, Gruis NA, Bergman W. Risk of cutaneous malignant melanoma in patients with nonfamilial atypical nevi from a pigmented lesions clinic. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999;40:686.
35. Mehregan AH, Mehregan DA. Malignant melanoma in childhood. Cancer 1993;71:4096.
36. Kopf AW, Bart RS, Hennessey P. Congenital nevocytic nevi and malignant melanomas. J Am Acad Dermatol 1979;1:123.
37. Ruiz-Maldonado R, Tamayo L, Laterza AM, Duran C. Giant pigmented nevi: clinical, histopathologic, and therapeutic considerations. J Pediatr 1992;120:906.
38. Swerdlow AJ, English JS, Qiao Z. The risk of melanoma in patients with congenital nevi: a cohort study. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995;32:595.
39. Egan CL, Oliveria SA, Elenitsas R, Hanson J, Halpern AC. Cutaneous melanoma risk and phenotypic changes in large congenital nevi: a follow-up study of 46 patients. J Am Acad Dermatol
1998;39:923.
40. Ceballos PI, Ruiz-Maldonado R, Mihm CM Jr. Melanoma in children. N Engl J Med 1995;332:656.
41. Spatz A, Calonje E, Handfield-Jones SE, Barnhill RL. Spitz tumors in children: a grading system for risk stratification. Arch Dermatol 1999;135:282.
42. Lynch HT, Fusaro RM, Pester J, Lynch JF. Familial atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM) syndrome: genetic heterogeneity and malignant melanoma. Br J Cancer 1980;42:58.
43. Clark WH, Reimer RR, Greene M. Origin of familiar malignant melanomas from heritable melanocytic lesions. Arch Dermatol 1978;114:732.
44. Greene MH, Clark WH Jr, Tucker MA, et al. High risk of malignant melanoma in melanoma-prone families with dysplastic nevi. Ann Intern Med 1985;102:458.
45. Perera MIR, Um K, Greene MH, et al. Hereditary dysplastic nevus syndrome: lymphoid cell ultraviolet hypermutability in association with increased melanoma susceptibility. Cancer Res
1986;46:1005.
46. Barnhill RL, Mihm MC Jr. Hstopathology of malignant melanoma and its precursor lesions. In: Balch CM, Houghton AN, Milton GW, eds. Cutaneous melanoma. Philadelphia: Lippincott,
1992:234.
47. Flores JF, Pollock PM, Walker GJ, et al. Analysis of the CDKN2A, CDKN2B and CDK4 genes in 48 Australian melanoma kindreds. Oncogene 1997;15:2999.
48. Aitken J, Welch J, Duffy D, et al. CDKN2A variants in a population-based sample of Queensland families with melanoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:446.
49. Greene MH. The genetics of hereditary melanoma and nevi: 1998 update. Cancer 1999;86:1644.
50. DiFronzo LA, Wanek LA, Elashoff R, Morton DL. Increased incidence of second primary melanoma in patients with a previous cutaneous melanoma. Ann Surg Oncol 1999; 6:705.
51. Titus-Ernstoff L, Mansson-Brahme E, Thorn M, et al. Factors associated with atypical nevi: a population-based study. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1998;7:207.
52. Jensen P, Hansen S, Moller B, et al. Skin cancer in kidney and heart transplant reciepients and different long-term immunosuppresive therapy regimens. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999;40:177.
53. Smith CH, McGregor JM, Barker JN, et al. Excess melanocytic nevi in children with renal allografts. J Am Acad Dermatol 1993;28:51.
54. Szepietowski J, Wasik F, Szepietowski T, et al. Excess benign melanocytic naevi in renal transplant recipients. Dermatology 1997;194:17.
55. Greene MH. Dysplastic nevus syndrome. Hosp Pract 1984;19:91.
56. Aboulafia DM. Malignant melanoma in an HIV-infected man: a case report and literature review. Cancer Invest 1998;16:217.
57. Grob JJ, Bastuji-Garin S, Vaillant L, et al. Excess of nevi related to immunodeficiency: a study in HIV-infected patients and renal transplant recipients. J Invest Dermatol 1996;107:694.
58. Greene MH, Young TI. Malignant melanoma in renal transplant recipients. Lancet 1981;318:1196.
59. Stern RS, Nichols KT, Vakeva LH. Malignant melanoma in patients treated for psoriasis with methoxsalen (psoralen) and ultraviolet A radiation (PUVA). The PUVA Follow-Up Study. N Engl J
Med 1997;336:1041.
60. Veness MJ, Quinn DI, Ong CS, et al. Aggressive cutaneous malignancies following cardiothoracic transplantation: the Australian experience. Cancer 1999;85:1758.
61. Bliss JM, Ford D, Swerdlow AJ, et al. Risk of cutaneous melanoma associated with pigmentation characteristics and freckling: systemic overview of 10 case-control studies. Int J Cancer
1995;62:367.
62. Evans RD, Kopf AW, Lew RA, et al. Risk factors for the development of malignant melanomaI: Review of case-control studies. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 1988;14:393.
63. Titus-Ernstoff L, Ernstoff MS, Duray PH, et al. A relation between childhood sun exposure and dysplastic nevus syndrome among patients with nonfamilial melanoma. Epidemiology 1991;2:210.
64. Elwood JM, Jopson J. Melanoma and sun exposure: an overview of published studies. Int J Cancer 1997;73:198.
65. Levine EA, Ronan SG, Shirali SS, Das Gupta TK. Malignant melanoma in a child with oculocutaneous albinism. J Surg Oncol 1992;51:138.
66. Ihn H, Nakamura K, Abe M, et al. Amelanotic metastatic melanoma in a patient with oculocutaneous albinism. J Am Acad Dermatol 1993;28:895.
67. Kraemer KH, Lee MM, Scotto J. Xeroderma pigmentosum: cutaneous, ocular, and neurologic abnormalities in 830 published cases. Arch Dermatol 1987;123:241.
68. Smith MA, Fine JA, Barnhill RL, Berwick M. Hormonal and reproductive influences and risk of melanoma in women. Int J Epidemiol 1998;27:751.
69. McManamny DS, Moss AL, Pocock PV, Briggs JC. Melanoma and pregnancy: a long-term follow-up. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1989;96:1419.
70. MacKie RM, Bufalino R, Morabito A, Sutherland C, Cascinelli N. Lack of effect of pregnancy on outcome of melanoma. For The World Health Organisation Melanoma Programme. Lancet
1991;337:653.
71. Reintgen DS, McCarty KS Jr, Vollmer R, Cox E, Seigler HF. Malignant melanoma and pregnancy. Cancer 1985;55:1340.
72. Slingluff CL Jr, Reintgen DS, Vollmer RT, Seigler HF. Malignant melanoma arising during pregnancy. A study of 100 patients. Ann Surg 1990;211:552.
73. Bork K, Brauninger W. Prior pregnancy and melanoma survival. Arch Dermatol 1986;122:1097.
74. MacKie RM. Pregnancy and exogenous hormones in patients with cutaneous malignant melanoma. Curr Opin Oncol 1999;11:129.
75. Cocconi G, Bella M, Calabresi F, et al. Treatment of metastatic malignant melanoma with dacarbazine plus tamoxifen. N Engl J Med 1992;327:516.
76. Grin CM, Driscoll MS, Grant-Kels JM. The relationship of pregnancy, hormones, and melanoma. Semin Cutan Med Surg 1998;17:167.
77. Gefeller O, Hassan K, Wille L. Cutaneous malignant melanoma in women and the role of oral contraceptives. Br J Dermatol 1998;138:122.
78. Friedman RJ, Rigel DS, Kopf AW. Early detection of malignant melanoma: the role of physician examination and self-examination of the skin. CA Cancer J Clin 1985;35:130.
79. Langley R, Sober AJ. Clinical recognition of melanoma and its precursors. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 2000;12:699.
80. Muglia JJ, Pesce K, McDonald CJ. Skin cancer screening: a growing need. Surg Oncol Clin North Am 1999;8:735.
81. Clark WH Jr, Ainsworth AM, Bernardino EA, et al. The developmental biology of primary human malignant melanomas. Semin Oncol 1975;2:83.
82. Averbook BJ, Russo LJ, Mansour EG. A long-term analysis of 620 patients with malignant melanoma at a major referral center. Surgery 1998;124:746.
83. Crombie IK. Racial differences in melanoma incidence. Br J Cancer 1979;40:185.
84. Tseng JF, Tanabe KK, Gadd MA, et al. Surgical management of primary cutaneous melanomas of the hands and feet. Ann Surg 1997;225:544.
85. Green A, McCredie M, MacKie R, et al. A case-control study of melanomas of the soles and palms (Australia and Scotland). Cancer Cause Control 1999;10:21.
86. Levit EK, Kagen MH, Scher RK, Grossman M, Altman E. The ABC rule for clinical detection of subungual melanoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 2000;42:269.
87. Heaton KM, el Naggar A, Ensign LG, Ross MI, Balch CM. Surgical management and prognostic factors in patients with subungual melanoma. Ann Surg 1994;219:197.
88. Eng W, Tschen JA. Comparison of S-100 versus hematoxylin and eosin staining for evaluating dermal invasion and peripheral margins by desmoplastic malignant melanoma. Am J
Dermatopathol 2000;22:26.
89. Wharton JM, Carlson JA, Mihm MC Jr. Desmoplastic malignant melanoma: diagnosis of early clinical lesions. Hum Pathol 1999;30:537.
90. Quinn MJ, Crotty KA, Thompson JF, et al. Desmoplastic and desmoplastic neurotropic melanoma: experience with 280 patients. Cancer 1998;83:1128.
91. Autier P, Dor JF, Grier N, et al. Sunscreen use and duration of sun exposure: a double-blind, randomized trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1304.
92. Urbach F. Ultraviolet radiation and skin cancer of humans. J Photochem Photobiol B 1997;40:3.
93. Graham S, Marshall J, Haughey B, et al. An inquiry into the epidemiology of melanoma. Am J Epidemiol 1985;122:606.
94. Hill L, Ferrini RL. Skin cancer prevention and screening: summary of the American College of Preventive Medicine's practice policy statements. CA Cancer J Clin 1998;48:232.
95. Autier P, Dore JF, Lejeune F, et al. Cutaneous malignant melanoma and exposure to sunlamps or sunbeds: an EORTC multicenter case-control study in Belgium, France and Germany.
EORTC Melanoma Cooperative Group. Int J Cancer 1994;58:809.
96. Rossi CR, Foletto M, Vecchiato A, et al. Management of cutaneous melanoma M0: state of the art and trends. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:2302.
97. Healsmith MF, Bourke JF, Osborne JE, Graham-Brown RA. An evaluation of the revised seven-point checklist for the early diagnosis of cutaneous malignant melanoma. Br J Dermatol
1994;130:48.
98. Koh HK, Miller DR, Geller AC, et al. Who discovers melanoma? Patterns from a population-based survey. J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;26:914.
99. Lee G, Massa MC, Welykyj S, Choo J, Greaney V. Yield from total skin examination and effectiveness of skin cancer awareness program. Findings in 874 new dermatology patients. Cancer
1991;67:202.
100. Cohen MH, Cohen BJ, Shotkin JD, Morrison PT. Surgical prophylaxis of malignant melanoma. Ann Surg 1991;213:308.
101. Reintgen D, Ross M, Bland K, Seigler HF, Balch C. Prevention and early detection of melanoma: a surgeon's perspective. Semin Surg Oncol 1993;9:174.
102. Masri GD, Clark WH Jr, Guerry D, et al. Screening and surveillance of patients at high risk for malignant melanoma result in detection of earlier disease. J Am Acad Dermatol 1990;22:1042.
103. Vasen HFA, Bergman W, Van Haeringen A, Scheffer E, Van Slooten EA. The familial dysplastic nevus syndrome. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1989;25:337.
104. Roush GC, Berwick M, Koh HK, MacKie RM. Screening for melanoma. In: CM Balch. Cutaneous melanoma. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1992:70.
105. Guibert P, Mollat F, Ligen M, Dreno B. Melanoma screening: report of a survey in occupational medicine. Arch Dermatol 2000;136:199.

106. Koh HK, Norton LA, Geller AC, et al. Evaluation of the American Academy of Dermatology's National Skin Cancer Early Detection and Screening Program. J Am Acad Dermatol 1996;34:971.
107. Whited JD, Hall RP, Simel DL, Horner RD. Primary care clinicians' performance for detecting actinic keratoses and skin cancer. Arch Intern Med 1997;157:985.
108. Koh HK, Caruso A, Gage I, et al. Evaluation of melanoma/skin cancer screening in Massachusetts. Preliminary results. Cancer 1990;65:375.
109. Rajadhyaksha M, Grossman M, Esterowitz D, et al. In vivo confocal scanning laser microscopy of human skin: melanin provides strong contrast. J Invest Dermatol 1995;104:946.
110. Ramsay DL, Fox AB. The ability of primary care physicians to recognize the common dermatoses. Arch Dermatol 1981;117:620.
111. Freedberg KA, Geller AC, Miller DR, Lew RA, Koh HK. Screening for malignant melanoma: a cost-effectiveness analysis. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999;41:738.
112. Balch CM. A new AJCC staging system for cutaneous melanoma. Cancer 2000;88:1484.
113. Stephenson EM, Stephenson NG. Invasive locomotory behaviour between malignant human melanoma cells and normal fibroblasts filmed in vitro. J Cell Sci 1978;32:389.
114. Melanoma of the skin. In: Beahrs OH, Myers MH, eds. Manual for staging of cancer, American Joint Committee on Cancer. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1983:117.
115. Stadelmann WK, Rapaport DP, Soong SJ, et al. Prognostic clinical and pathologic features. In: Balch CA, Houghton AN, Sober AJ, Soong SJ, eds. Cutaneous melanoma. St. Louis: Quality
Medical Publishing, 1998:11.
116. Buzaid AC, Ross MI, Balch CM, et al. Critical analysis of the current American Joint Committee on Cancer staging system for cutaneous melanoma and proposal of a new staging system. J
Clin Oncol 1997;15:1039.
117. Stadelman WK, Rapaport DP, Soong SJ, et al. Prognostic clinical and pathologic features. In: Balch CM, Houghton AN, Sober AJ, Soong SJ, eds. Cutaneous melanoma. St. Louis: Quality
Medical Publishing, 1998:11.
118. Balch CM, Buzaid AC, Atkins MB, et al. A new American Joint Committee on Cancer staging system for cutaneous melanoma. Cancer 2000;88:1484.
119. Breslow A. Thickness, cross-sectional areas and depth of invasion in the prognosis of cutaneous melanoma. Ann Surg 1970;172:902.
120. Corona R, Mele A, Amini M, et al. Interobserver variability on the histopathologic diagnosis of cutaneous melanoma and other pigmented skin lesions. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1218.
121. Lock-Andersen J, Hou-Jensen K, Hansen JP, et al. Observer variation in histological classification of cutaneous malignant melanoma. Scand J Plast Reconstruc Surg Hand Surg 1995; 29:141.
122. Balch CM, Murad TM, Soong SJ, et al. A multifactorial analysis of melanoma: prognostic histopathological features comparing Clark's and Breslow's staging methods. Ann Surg 1978;188:732.
123. Buttner P, Garbe C, Bertz J, et al. Primary cutaneous melanoma. Optimized cutoff points of tumor thickness and importance of Clark's level for prognostic classification. Cancer 1995;75:2499.
124. Balch CM, Wilkerson JA, Murad TM, et al. The prognostic significance of ulceration of cutaneous melanoma. Cancer 1980;45:3012.
125. Day CL, Sober AJ, Kopf AW. A prognostic model for clinical stage I melanoma of the lower extremity: location on foot as independent risk factor for recurrent disease. Surgery 1981;89:599.
126. Toriyama K, Wen DR, Paul E, Cochran AJ. Variations in the distribution, frequency, and phenotype of Langerhans cells during the evolution of malignant melanoma of the skin. J Invest
Dermatol 1993;100:269S.
127. Lotze MT. Dendritic cells: biology and clinical applications. San Diego: Academic, 1999.
128. Kang S, Barnhill RL, Mihm MC Jr, Sober AJ. Histologic regression in malignant melanoma: an interobserver concordance study. J Cutan Pathol 1993;20:126.
129. Blessing K, McLaren KM. Histological regression in primary cutaneous melanoma: recognition, prevalence and significance. Histopathology 1992;20:315.
130. Gershenwald J, Berman R, Mansfield P, Lee J, Ross M. Role of sentinel lymph node biopsy in patient with thin (<1 mm) cutaneous melnoma. Presented at the Society of Surgical Oncology
Annual Meeting, New Orleans, LA, March 2000.
131. Schuchter L, Schultz DJ, Synnestvedt M, et al. A prognostic model for predicting 10-year survival in patients with primary melanoma. The Pigmented Lesion Group. Ann Intern Med
1996;125:369.
132. Garbe C, Buttner P, Bertz J, et al. Primary cutaneous melanoma. Prognostic classification of anatomic location. Cancer 1995;75:2492.
133. Garbe C, Büttner P, Bertz J, et al. Primary cutaneous melanoma. Cancer 1995;75:2484.
134. Balch CM, Houghton AN, Milton GW, eds. Cutaneous melanoma. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1992.
135. Gershenwald JE, Thompson W, Mansfield PF, et al. Multi-institutional melanoma lymphatic mapping experience: the prognostic value of sentinel lymph node status in 612 stage I or II
melanoma patients. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:976.
136. Balch CM, Soong S. Long-term results of a prospective surgical trial comparing 2 vs 4 cm excision margins for patients with 14 mm melanomas. Presented at the Society of Surgical Oncology
Annual Meeting, New Orleans, LA, March 2000.
137. Reintgen D, Rapaport D, Tanabe KK, Ross M. Lymphatic mapping and sentinel node biopsy in patients with malignant melanoma. J FL Med Assoc 1997;84:188.
138. Morton DL, Foshag LJ, Hoon DS, et al. Prolongation of survival in metastatic melanoma after active specific immunotherapy with a new polyvalent melanoma vaccine. Ann Surg 1992;216:463.
139. Nocks BN, Olsson CA, Prout GR Jr, et al. Abdominal mass in 43-year-old man. J Urol 1981;125:80.
140. Strickland D, Lee JA. Melanomas of eye: stability of rates. Am J Epidemiol 1981;113:700.
141. Gershenwald JE, Colome MI, Lee JE, et al. Patterns of recurrence following a negative sentinel lymph node biopsy in 243 patients with stage I or II melanoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2253.
142. Bonfrer JM, Korse CM, Nieweg OE, Rankin EM. The luminescence immunoassay S-100: a sensitive test to measure circulating S-100B: its prognostic value in malignant melanoma. Br J
Cancer 1998;77:2210.
143. Balch CM, Soong SJ, Shaw HS, Urist MM, McCarthy WH. An analysis of prognostic factors in 8500 patients with cutaneous melanoma. In: Balch CM, Houghton AN, Milton GW, eds. Cutaneous
melanoma. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1992:165.
144. Morton DL, Wanek L, Nizze JA, Elashoff RM, Wong JH. Improved long-term survival after lymphadenectomy of melanoma metastatic to regional nodes. Analysis of prognostic factors in 1134
patients from the John Wayne Cancer Clinic. Ann Surg 1991;214:491.
145. Drepper H, Biess B, Hofherr B, et al. The prognosis of patients with stage III melanoma. Prospective long-term study of 286 patients of the Fachklinik Hornheide. Cancer 1993;71:1239.
146. Cascinelli N, Morabito A, Santinami M, MacKie R, Belli F. Immediate or delayed dissection of regional nodes in patients with melanoma of the trunk: a randomized trial. Lancet 1998;351:793.
147. Coit DG, Rogatko A, Brennan MF. Prognostic factors in patients with melanoma metastatic to axillary or inguinal lymph nodes. A multivariate analysis. Ann Surg 1991;214:627.
148. Nordlund JJ, Kirkwood JM, Forget BM, et al. Vitiligo in patients with metastatic melanoma: a good prognostic sign. J Am Acad Dermatol 1983;9:689.
149. Keilholz U, Goey SH, Punt CJA, et al. Interferon alfa-2a and interleukin-2 with or without cisplatin in metastatic melanoma: a randomized trial of the European organization for research and
treatment of cancer melanoma cooperative group. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2579.
150. Bevilacqua RG, Coit DG, Rogatko A, Younes RN, Brennan MF. Axillary dissection in melanoma. Prognostic variables in node-positive patients. Ann Surg 1990;212:125.
151. Lee ML, Tomsu K, Von Eschen KB. Duration of survival for disseminated malignant melanoma: results of a meta-analysis. Melanoma Res 2000;10:81.
152. Ryan L, Kramar A, Borden E. Prognostic factors in metastatic melanoma. Cancer 1993;71:2995.
153. Ilson DH, Sirott M, Saltz L, Kelsen DP. A Phase II trial of interferon alpha-2A, 5-fluorouracil, and cisplatin in patients with advanced esophageal carcinoma. Cancer 1995;75:2197.
154. Falkson CI, Ibrahim J, Kirkwood J, Blum R. A randomized phase III trial of dacarbazine (DTIC) versus DTIC + interferon alfa-2b (IFN) versus DTIC + tamoxifen (TMX) versus DTIC + IFN +
TMX in metatastic malignant melanoma: an ECOG trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1996;15:435.
155. Sirott MN, Bajorin DF, Wong GY, et al. Prognostic factors in patients with metastatic malignant melanoma. A multivariate analysis. Cancer 1993;72:3091.
156. Falkson CI, Falkson HC. Prognostic factors in metastatic malignant melanoma. An analysis of 236 patients treated on clinical research studies at the Department of Medical Oncology,
University of Pretoria, South Africa from 19721992. Oncology 1998;55:59.
157. Brand CU, Ellwanger U, Stroebel W, et al. Prolonged survival of 2 years or longer for patients with disseminated melanoma. An analysis of related prognostic factors. Cancer 1997;79:2345.
158. Keilholz U, Conradt C, Legha SS, et al. Results of interleukin-2-based treatment in advanced melanoma: a case record-based analysis of 631 patients. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2921.
159. Kirkwood JM, Nordlund JJ, Lerner AB, et al. Favorable prognosis of melanoma associated with hypopigmentation (HYP) in a randomized adjuvant trial comparing DTIC-BCG (DB) vs
monobenzyl ether of hydroquininone (HQ) vs null (NL) treatment. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1985;4:149.
160. Harris JE, Ryan L, Hoover HC Jr, et al. Adjuvant active specific immunotherapy for stage II and III colon cancer with an autologous tumor cell vaccine: Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
Study E5283. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:148.
161. Finck SJ, Giuliano AE, Morton DL. LDH and melanoma. Cancer 1983;51:840.
162. Bosserhoff AK, Kaufmann M, Kaluza B, et al. Melanoma-inhibiting activity, a novel serum marker for progression of malignant melanoma. Cancer Res 1997;57:3149.
163. Berd D, Maguire HC Jr, McCue P, Mastrangelo MJ. Treatment of metastatic melanoma with an autologous tumor-cell vaccine: clinical and immunologic results in 64 patients. J Clin Oncol
1990;8:1858.
164. Curry BJ, Farrelly M, Hersey P. Evaluation of S-100 beta assays for the prediction of recurrence and prognosis in patients with AJCC stage I-III melanoma. Melanoma Res 1999;9:557.
165. Muhlbauer M, Langenbach N, Stolz W, et al. Detection of melanoma cells in the blood of melanoma patients by melanoma-inhibitory activity (MIA) reverse transcription-PCR. Clin Cancer Res
1999;5:1099.
166. Proebstle TM, Jiang W, Hogel J, et al. Correlation of positive RT-PCR for tyrosinase in peripheral blood of malignant melanoma patients with clinical stage, survival and other risk factors. Br J
Cancer 2000;82:118.
167. Battayani Z, Grob JJ, Xerri L, et al. Polymerase chain reaction detection of circulating melanocytes as a prognostic marker in patients with melanoma. Arch Dermatol 1995;131:443.
168. Curry BJ, Myers K, Hersey P. Polymerase chain reaction detection of melanoma cells in the circulation: relation to clinical stage, surgical treatment, and recurrence from melanoma. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:1760.
169. Mellado B, Gutierrez L, Castel T, et al. Prognostic significance of the detection of circulating malignant cells by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction in long-term clinically
disease-free melanoma patients. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:1843.
170. Benez A, Geiselhart A, Handgretinger R, Schiebel U, Fierlbeck G. Detection of circulating melanoma cells by immunomagnetic cell sorting. J Clin Lab Anal 1999;13:229.
171. Thompson JF, Uren RF, Shaw HM, et al. Location of sentinel lymph nodes in patients with cutaneous melanoma: new insights into lymphatic anatomy. J Am Coll Surg 1999;189:195.
172. Rinne D, Baum RP, Hor G, Kaufmann R. Primary staging and follow-up of high risk melanoma patients with whole-body 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography: results of a
prospective study of 100 patients. Cancer 1998;82:1664.
173. Alonso O, Martinez M, Mut F, et al. Detection of recurrent malignant melanoma with 99m Tc-MIBI scintigraphy. Melanoma Res 1998;8:355.
174. Alonso O, Martinez M, Mut F, et al. Scintigraphic evaluation of malignant melanoma lesions with Tc-99m tetrofosmin. Clin Nucl Med 1998;23:683.
175. Harwood AR. Conventional radiotherapy in the treatment of lentigo maligna and lentigo maligna and lentigo maligna melanoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1982;6:310.
176. Ang KK, Peters LJ, Weber RS, et al. Postoperative radiotherapy for cutaneous melanoma of the head and neck region. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:795.
177. Hornsey S. The relationship between total dose, number of fractions and fractions size in the response of malignant melanoma in patients. Br J Radiol 1978;51:905.
178. Overgaard J. Radiation treatment of malignant melanoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:41.
179. Bentzen SM, Overgaard J, Thames HD, et al. Clinical radiobiology of malignant melanoma. Radiother Oncol 1989;16:169.
180. Seegenschmiedt MH, Keilholz L, Altendorf-Hofmann A, et al. Palliative radiotherapy for recurrent and metastatic malignant melanoma: prognostic factors for tumor response and long-term
outcome: a 20-year experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:607.
181. Geara FB, Ang KK. Radiation therapy for malignant melanoma. Surg Clin North Am 1996;76:1383.
182. Balch CM, Reintgen DS, Kirkwood JM, et al., eds. Cutaneous melanoma. In: Cancer principles & practices of oncology. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven, 1997:1947.
183. Bentzen SM, Juul Christensen J, Overgaard J, Overgaard M. Some methodological problems in estimating radiobiological parameters from clinical data. Alpha/beta ratios and electron RBE for
cutaneous reactions in patients treated with postmastectomy radiotherapy. Acta Oncol 1988;27:105.
184. Williams MV, Denekamp J, Fowler JF. Review of alpha/beta ratios for experimental tumors: implications for clinical studies of altered fractionation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:87.
185. Sause WT, Cooper JS, Rush S, et al. Fraction size in external beam radiation therapy in the treatment of melanoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:429.
186. Matsumura Y, Yamagishi N, Miyakoshi J, Imamura S, Takebe H. Increase in radiation sensitivity of human malignant melanoma cells by expression of wild-type p16 gene. Cancer Lett
1997;115:91.
187. Thomas CP, Buronfosse A, Combaret V, et al. Gangliosides protect human melanoma cells from ionizing radiation-induced clonogenic cell death. Glycoconjugate Journal 1996;13:377.
188. Ng CE, Cybulski SE, Bussey AM, Aubin RA, Raaphorst GP. DNA topoisomerase I content of a pair of human melanoma cell lines with very different radiosensitivities correlates with their in
vitro sensitivities to camptothecin. Anticancer Res 1998;18:3119.
189. Rofstad EK, Maseide K. Fraction of radiobiologically hypoxic cells in human melanoma xenografts measured by using single-cell survival, tumour growth delay and local tumour control as end
points. Br J Cancer 1998;78:893.

190. Zhang M, Stevens G. Effect of radiation and tirapazamine (SR-4233) on three melanoma cell lines. Melanoma Res 1998;8:510.
191. Emami B, Perez CA, Konefal J, et al. Thermoradiotherapy of malignant melanoma. Int J Hypertherm 1988;4:373.
192. Engin K, Tupchong L, Waterman FM, et al. Hyperthermia and radiation in advanced malignant melanoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:87.
193. Lamond JP, Wang M, Kinsella TJ, Boothman DA. Concentration and timing dependence of lethality enhancement between topotecan, a topoisomerase I inhibitor, and ionizing radiation. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:361.
194. Utsumi H, Tano K, Mizuma N, Kobayashi T, Ichihashi M. Cellular effect of thermal neutron capture treatment using 10B1-para-boronophenylalanine: lethal effect on melanoma cells with
different degrees of X-ray sensitivity. J Radiat Res 1996;37:193.
194a. Pomp J, Ouwerkerk IJ, Hermans J, et al. The influence of the oncogenes NRAS and MYC on the radiation sensitivity of cells of a human melanoma cell line. J Radiat Res 1996;146(4):374.
195. NIH Consensus conference. Diagnosis and treatment of early melanoma. JAMA 1992;268:1314.
196. Kiehl P, Matthies B, Ehrich K, Volker B, Kapp A. Accuracy of frozen section measurements for the determination of Breslow tumour thickness in primary malignant melanoma. Histopathology
1999;34:257.
197. Griffiths RW, Briggs JC. Biopsy procedures, primary wide excisional surgery and long-term prognosis in primary clinical stage I invasive cutaneous malignant melanoma. Ann R Coll Surg
1985;67:75.
198. Da Costa ML, Redmond P, Bouchier-Hayes DJ. The effect of laparotomy and laparoscopy on the establishment of spontaneous tumor metastases. Surgery 1998;124:516.
199. Breuninger H, Schlagenhauff B, Stroebel W, et al. Patterns of local horizontal spread of melanomas: consequences for surgery and histopathologic investigation. Am J Surg Pathol
1999;23:1493.
200. Kelly JW, Sagebiel RW, Calderon W, et al. The frequency of local recurrence and microsatellites as a guide to reexcision margins for cutaneous malignant melanoma. Ann Surg 1984;200:759.
201. Wong CK. A study of melanocytes in the normal skin surrounding malignant melanomata. Dermatologica 1970;141:215.
202. Dong XD, Tyler D, Johnson JL, DeMatos P, Seigler HF. Analysis of prognosis and disease progression after local recurrence of melanoma. Cancer 2000;88:1063.
203. Urist MM, Balch CM, Soong S, et al. The influence of surgical margins and prognostic factors predicting the risk of local recurrence in 3445 patients with primary cutaneous melanoma. Cancer
1985;55:1398.
204. Karakousis CP, Balch CM, Urist MM, et al. Local recurrence in malignant melanoma: long-term results of the multiinstitutional randomized surgical trial. Ann Surg Oncol 1996;3:446.
205. Handley S. The Hunterian lectures: the pathology of melanotic growths in relation to their operative treatment. Lancet 1907;1:927.
206. Urteaga O, Pack GT. On the antiquity of melanoma. Cancer 1966;19:607.
207. Balch CM, Karakousis C, Mettlin C, et al. Management of cutaneous melanoma in the United States. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1984;158:311.
208. Veronesi U, Cascinelli N, Adamus J, et al. Thin stage I primary cutaneous malignant melanoma. Comparison of excision with margins of 1 or 3 cm. N Engl J Med 1988;318:1159.
209. Balch CM, Urist MM, Karakousis CP, et al. Efficacy of 2-cm surgical margins for intermediate-thickness melanomas (1 to 4 mm). Results of a multi-institutional randomized surgical trial. Ann
Surg 1993;218:262.
210. Ringborg U, Andersson R, Eldh J, et al. Resection margins of 2 versus 5 cm for cutaneous malignant melanoma with a tumor thickness of 0.8 to 2.0 mm: randomized study by the Swedish
Melanoma Study Group. Cancer 1996;77:1809.
211. Heaton KM, Sussman JJ, Gershenwald JE, et al. Surgical margins and prognostic factors in patients with thick (>4mm) primary melanoma. Ann Surg Oncol 1998;5:322.
212. Park KG, Blessing K, Kernohan NM. Surgical aspects of subungual malignant melanomas. The Scottish Melanoma Group. Ann Surg 1992;216:692.
213. Krementz ET, Feed RJ, Coleman WP III, et al. Acral lentiginous melanoma. A clinicopathologic entity. Ann Surg 1982;195:632.
214. Balch CM, Houghton AN, Milton GW, eds. Cutaneous melanoma. Clinical management and treatment results worldwide. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1998.
215. Fortin PT, Freiberg AA, Rees R, Sondak VK, Johnson TM. Malignant melanoma of the foot and ankle. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1995;77:1396.
216. Schnur PL. Volar foot skin grafts do work! Ann Plastic Surg 1994;33:572.
217. Geraghty PJ, Johnson TM, Sondak VK, Chang AE. Surgical therapy of primary cutaneous melanoma. Semin Surg Oncol 1996;12:386.
218. Gaspar ZS, Dawber RP. Treatment of lentigo maligna. Aust J Dermatol 1997;38:1.
219. Cohen LM. Lentigo maligna and lentigo maligna melanoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995;33:923.
220. Zitelli JA, Brown C, Hanusa BH. Mohs micrographic surgery for the treatment of primary cutaneous melanoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1997;37:236.
221. Balch CM, Murad TM, Soong SJ, et al. Tumor thickness as a guide to surgical management of clinical stage I melanoma patients. Cancer 1979;43:883.
222. Balch CM, Soong SJ, Murad TM, Ingalls AL, Maddox WA. A multifactorial analysis of melanoma: III. Prognostic factors in melanoma patients with lymph node metastases (stage II). Ann Surg
1981;193:377.
223. Link EM, Michalowski AS, Rosch F. 211At-methylene blue for targeted radiotherapy of disseminated melanoma: microscopic analysis of tumour versus normal tissue damage. Eur J Cancer
1996;32A:1986.
224. Slingluff CL Jr, Stidham KR, Ricci WM, Stanley WE, Seigler HF. Surgical management of regional lymph nodes in patients with melanoma. Experience with 4682 patients. Ann Surg
1994;219:120.
225. Van d V, Eggermont AM, Van Putten WL, Wiggers T. Therapeutic lymphadenectomy in melanomas of the head and neck. Head Neck 1993;15:377.
226. Peralta EA, Yarington CT, Glenn MG. Malignant melanoma of the head and neck: effect of treatment on survival. Laryngoscope 1998;108:220.
227. Veronesi U. Regional lymph node dissection in melanoma of the limbs. Stage I. A cooperative international trial (WHO Collaborating Centers for diagnosis and treatment of melanoma). Rec
ResCancer Res 1977;80:8.
228. Sim FH, Taylor WF, Pritchard DJ, Soule EH. Lymphadenectomy in the management of stage I malignant melanoma: a prospective randomized study. Mayo Clin Proc 1986; 61:697.
229. Cascinelli N, Morabito A, Santinami M, MacKie RM, Belli F. Immediate or delayed dissection of regional nodes in patients with melanoma of the trunk: a randomised trial. WHO Melanoma
Programme. Lancet 1998;351:793.
230. Balch CM, Soong SJ, Bartolucci AA, et al. Efficacy of an elective regional lymph node dissection of 1 to 4 mm thick melanomas for patients 60 years of age and younger. Ann Surg
1996;224:255.
231. Reintgen D, Cruse CW, Wells K, et al. The orderly progression of melanoma nodal metastases. Ann Surg 1994;220:759.
232. Morton DL, Thompson JF, Essner R, et al. Validation of the accuracy of intraoperative lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymphadenectomy for early-stage melanoma. Ann Surg 1999;230:453.
233. Gershenwald J, Thompson W, Mansfield P, et al. Patterns of failure in melanoma patients after successful lymphatic mapping and negative sentinel node biopsy. Soc Surg Oncol 1996;20.
234. Morton DL, Wen DR, Wong JH, et al. Technical details of intraoperative lymphatic mapping for early stage melanoma. Arch Surg 1992;127:392.
235. Veronesi U. Delayed node dissection in stage one malignant melanoma: justification and advantages. Cancer Invest 1987;5:47.
236. Cabanas RM. An approach for the treatment of penile carcinoma. Cancer 1977;39:456.
237. Robinson DS, Sample WF, Fee HJ, Holmes C, Morton DL. Regional lymphatic drainage in primary malignant melanoma of the trunk determined by colloidal gold scanning. Surg Forum
1977;28:147.
238. Alex JC, Weaver DL, Fairbank JT, Rankin BS, Krag DN. Gamma-probe-guided lymph node localization in malignant melanoma. Surg Oncol 1993;2:303.
239. Hung JC, Wiseman GA, Wahner HW, et al. Filtered technetium-99m-sulfur celloid evaluated for lymphoscintigraphy. J Nucl Med 1995;36:1895.
240. Pijpers R, Borgstein PJ, Meijer S, et al. Sentinel node biopsy in melanoma patients: dynamic lymphoscintigraphy followed by intraoperative gamma probe and vital dye guidance. World J Surg
1997;21:788.
240a. Essner R, Conforti A, Kelley MC, et al. Efficacy of lymphatic mapping, sentinel lymphadenectomy, and selective complete lymph node dissection as a therapeutic procedure for early-stage
melanoma. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6(5):442.
241. Glass EC, Essner R, Morton DL. Kinetics of three lymphoscintigraphic agents in patients with cutaneous melanoma. J Nucl Med 1998;39:1185.
242. Reintgen D. Lymphatic mapping and sentinel node harvest for malignant melanoma. J Surg Oncol 1997;66:277.
243. Sappey MP. Injection, preparation, et conservation des vaisseaux lymphatique. These pour le doctorat en medecine. No 24. Paris: Rignoux, Imprimeur de la Faculte de Medecine, 1843.
244. Norman J, Wells K, Kearney R, et al. Identification of lymphatic drainage basins in patients with cutaneous melanoma. Semin Surg Oncol 1993;9:224.
245. McCarthy WH, Shaw HM, Milton GW. Efficacy of elective lymph node dissection in 2,347 patients with clinical stage I malignant melanoma. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1985;161:575.
246. Dale PS, Foshag LJ, Wanek LA, Morton DL. Metastasis of primary melanoma to two separate lymph node basins: prognostic significance. Ann Surg Oncol 1997;4:13.
247. Uren RF, Howman-Giles R, Thompson JF, et al. Lymphoscintigraphy to identify sentinel lymph nodes in patients with melanoma. Melanoma Res 1994;4:395.
248. Bostick P, Essner R, Glass E, et al. Comparison of blue dye and probe-assisted intraoperative lymphatic mapping in melanoma to identify sentinel nodes in 100 lymphatic basins. Arch Surg
1999;134:43.
249. Pu LL, Cruse CW, Wells KE, et al. Lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymph node biopsy in patients with melanoma of th elower extremity. Plast Reconstruct Surg 1999; 104:964.
250. Lenisa L, Santinami M, Belli F, et al. Sentinel node biopsy and selective lymph node dissection in cutaneous melanoma patients. J Exp Clin Cancer Res 1999;18:69.
251. Krag DN, Meijer SJ, Weaver DL, et al. Minimal-access surgery for staging of malignant melanoma. Arch Surg 1995;130:654.
252. Essner R, Conforti A, Kelley MC, et al. Efficacy of lymphatic mapping, sentinel lymphadenectomy, and selective complete lymph node dissection as a therapeutic procedure for early-stage
melanoma. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:442.
253. Morton DL, Wen DR, Foshag LJ, Essner R, Cochran A. Intraoperative lymphatic mapping and selective cervical lymphadenectomy for early-stage melanomas of the head and neck. J Clin
Oncol 1993;11:1751.
254. Glass FL, Cottam JA, Reintgen DS, Fenske NA. Lymphatic mapping and sentinel node biopsy in the management of high-risk melanoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1998;39:603.
255. Karakousis CP, Grigoropoulos P. Sentinal node biopsy before and after wide excision of the primary melanoma. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:785.
256. Jansen L, Koops HS, Nieweg OE, et al. Sentinel node biopsy for melanoma in the head and neck region. Head Neck 2000;22:27.
257. Uren RF, Howman-Giles RB, Thompson JF, Roberts J, Bernard E. Variability of cutaneous lymphatic flow rates in melanoma patients. Melanoma Res 1998;8:279.
258. Pitman KT, Johnson JT, Edington H, et al. Lymphatic mapping with isosulfan blue dye in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Head Neck Surg 1998;124:790.
259. Wells KE, Rapaport DP, Cruse CW, et al. Sentinel lymph node biopsy in melanoma of the head and neck. Plast Reconstruct Surg 1997;100:591.
260. Clayman G. Sentinel node mapping for the head and neck. Presented at the Society of Surgical Oncology Annual Meeting, New Orleans, LA, March 2000.
261. Morton DL, Thompson JF, Essner R, et al. Validation of the accuracy of intraoperative lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymphadenectomy for early-stage melanoma: a multicenter trial.
Multicenter Selective Lymphadenectomy Trial Group. Ann Surg 1999; 230:453.
262. Messina JL, Glass LF, Cruse CW, et al. Pathologic examination of the sentinel lymph node in malignant melanoma. Am J Surg Pathol 1999;23:686.
263. Reintgen DS, et al. Accurate nodal staging of malignant melanoma: cancer control. Journal of the Moffitt Cancer Center 1995;1995:405.
264. van der Velde-Zimmermann D, Schipper ME, De Weger RA, Hennipman A, Borel Rinkes IH. Sentinel node biopsies in melanoma patients: a protocol for accurate, efficient, and cost-effective
analysis by preselection for immunohistochemistry on the basis of Tyr-PCR. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:51.
265. Wang T, Brown MJ. mRNA quantification by real time TaqMan polymerase chain reaction: validation and comparison with RNase protection. Ann Biochem 1999;269:198.
266. Karakousis CP, Emrich LJ, Driscoll DL, Rao U. Survival after groin dissection for malignant melanoma. Surgery 1991;109:119.
267. McNeer G, Das Gupta T. Prognosis in malignant melanoma. Surgery 1964;56:512.
268. Das Gupta TK. Results of treatment of 269 patients with primary cutaneous melanoma: a five-year prospective study. Ann Surg 1977;186:201.
269. Roses DF, Provet JA, Harris MN, Gumport SL, Dubin N. Prognosis of patients with pathologic stage II cutaneous malignant melanoma. Ann Surg 1985;201:103.
270. Callery C, Cochran AJ, Roe DJ, et al. Factors prognostic for survival in patients with malignant melanoma spread to the regional lymph nodes. Ann Surg 1982;196:69.

271. Cohen MH, Ketcham AS, Felix EL, et al. Prognostic factors in patients undergoing lymphadenectomy for malignant melanoma. Ann Surg 1977;186:635.
272. Kissin MW, Simpson DA, Easton D, White H, Westbury G. Prognostic factors related to survival and groin recurrence following therapeutic lymph node dissection for lower limb malignant
melanoma. Br J Surg 1987;74:1023.
273. Karakousis CP. Therapeutic node dissections in malignant melanoma. Semin Surg Oncol 1998;14:291.
274. Mann GB, Coit DG. Does the extent of operation influence the prognosis in patients with melanoma metastatic to inguinal nodes? Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:263.
275. Strobbe LJ, Jonk A, Hart AA, Nieweg OE, Kroon BB. Positive iliac and obturator nodes in melanoma: survival and prognostic factors. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:255.
276. Karakousis CP, Hena MA, Emrich LJ, Driscoll DL. Axillary node dissection in malignant melanoma: results and complications. Surgery 1990;108:10.
277. Wells KE, Stadelmann WK, Rapaport DP, et al. Parotid selective lymphadenectomy in malignant melanoma. Ann Plast Surg 1999;43:1.
278. Karakousis CP. The technique of popliteal lymph node dissection. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1980;151:420.
279. Smith TJ, Sloan GM, Baker AR. Epitrochlear node involvement in melanoma of the upper extremity. Cancer 1983;51:756.
280. Karakousis CP, Goumas W, Rao U, Driscoll DL. Axillary node dissection in malignant melanoma. Am J Surg 1991;162:202.
281. Karakousis CP, Hena MA, Emrich LJ, Driscoll DL. Axillary node dissection in malignant melanoma: results and complications. Surgery 1990;108:10.
282. Lotze MT, Duncan MA, Gerber LH, Woltering EA, Rosenberg, SA. Early versus delayed shoulder motion following axillary dissection: a randomized prospective study. Ann Surg 1981;193:288.
283. Chang AE, Karnell LH, Menck HR. The National Cancer Data Base report on cutaneous and noncutaneous melanoma: a summary of 84,836 cases from the past decade. The American College
of Surgeons Commission on Cancer and the American Cancer Society. Cancer 1998;83:1664.
284. Sutherland CM, Chmiel JS, Bieligk S, Henson DE, Winchester DP. Patient characteristics, treatment, and outcome of unknown primary melanoma in the United States for the years 1981 and
1987. Am Surg 1996;62:400.
285. Schlagenhauff B, Stroebel W, Ellwanger U, et al. Metastatic melanoma of unknown primary origin shows prognostic similarities to regional metastatic melanoma: recommendations for initial
staging examinations. Cancer 1997;80:60.
286. Delanian S, Balla-Mekias S, Lefaix J-L. Striking regression of chronic radiotherapy damage in a clinical trial of combined pentoxifylline and tocopherol. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3283.
287. Borgstein PJ, Meijer S, van Diest PJ. Are locoregional cutaneous metastases in melanoma predictable? Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:315.
288. Wong JH, Cagle LA, Kopald KH, Swisher SG, Morton DL. Natural history and selective management of in transit melanoma. J Surg Oncol 1990;44:146.
289. Stehlin JS Jr, Smith JL Jr, Jing BS, Sherrin D. Melanomas of the extremities complicated by in-transit metastases. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1966;122:3.
290. Jaques DP, Coit DG, Brennan MF. Major amputation for advanced malignant melanoma. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1989;169:1.
291. Coit DG. Hyperthermic isolation limb perfusion for malignant melanoma: a review. CancerInvest 1992;10:277.
292. Briele HA, Walker MJ, Das Gupta TK. Melanoma of the head and neck. Clin Plastic Surg 1985;12:495.
293. Lejeune FJ, Deloof T, Ewalenko P, et al. Objective regression of unexcised melanoma in-transit metastases after hyperthermic isolation perfusion of the limbs with melphalan. Rec Res Cancer
Res 1983;86:268.
294. Stehlin JS Jr. Hyperthermic perfusion with chemotherapy for cancers of the extremities. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1969;129:305.
295. Lienard D, Lejeune FJ, Ewalenko P. In transit metastases of malignant melanoma treated by high dose rTNF alpha in combination with interferon-gamma and melphalan in isolation perfusion.
World J Surg 1992;16:234.
296. Koops HS, Vaglini M, Suciu S, et al. Prophylactic isolated limb perfusion for localized, high-risk limb melanoma: results of a multicenter randomized phase III trial. European Organization for
Research and Treatment of Cancer Malignant Melanoma Cooperative Group Protocol 18832, the World Health Organization Melanoma Program Trial 15, and the North American Perfusion
Group Southwest Oncology Group-8593. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2906.
297. Lingam MK, McKay AJ, MacKie RM, Aitchison T. Single-centre prospective study of isolated limb perfusion with melphalan in the treatment of subungual malignant melanoma. Br J Surg
1995;82:1343.
298. Fraker DL, Alexander HR, Andrich M, Rosenberg SA. Palliation of regional symptoms of advanced extremity melanoma by isolated limb perfusion with melphalan and high-dose tumor necrosis
factor. Cancer Journal from Scientific American 1995;1:122.
299. Ghussen F, Kruger I, Groth W, Stutzer H. Randomized melanoma study of perfusion of the extremities. Results of treament 2 1/2 years after premature discontinuation. Chirurg 1986;57:619.
300. Hafstrom L, Rudenstam CM, Blomquist E, et al. Regional hyperthermic perfusion with melphalan after surgery for recurrent malignant melanoma of the extremities. Swedish Melanoma Study
Group. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:2091.
301. Klop WM, Vrouenraets BC, van Geel BN, et al. Repeat isolated limb perfusion with melphalan for recurrent melanoma of the limbs. J Am Coll Surg 1996;182:467.
301a. Klaase JM, Kroon BB, van Geel AN, et al. Limb recurrence-free interval and survival in patients with recurrent melanoma of the extremities treated with normothermic isolated perfusion.
Am Coll Surg 1994;178(6):564.

J

302. Klaase JM, Kroon BB, van Geel AN, Eggermont AM, Franklin HR. Systemic leakage during isolated limb perfusion for melanoma. Br J Surg 1993;80:1124.
303. Barker WC, Andrich MP, Alexander HR, Fraker DL. Continuous intraoperative external monitoring of perfusate leak using iodine-131 human serum albumin during isolated perfusion of the liver
and limbs. Eur J Nucl Med 1995;22:1242.
304. Hoekstra HJ, Naujocks T, Schraffordt KH, et al. Continuous leaking monitoring during hyperthermic isolated regional perfusion of the lower limb: techniques and results. Reg Cancer Treat
1992;4:301.
305. Wieberdink J. Dosimetry in isolated perfusion of the limbs by assessment of perfused tissue volume and grading of toxic tissue reactions. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1982;18:905.
306. Scott RN, Blackie R, Kerr DJ, et al. Melphalan concentration and distribution in the tissues of tumour-bearing limbs treated by isolated limb perfusion. Eur J Cancer 1992;28A:1811.
307. Cavaliere R, Ciocatto EC, Giovanella BC, et al. Selective heat sensitivity of cancer cells: biochemical and clinical studies. Cancer 1967;20:1351.
308. Di Filippo F, Calabro A, Giannarelli D, et al. Prognostic variables in recurrent limb melanoma treated with hyperthermic antiblastic perfusion. Cancer 1989;63:2551.
309. Klaase JM, Kroon BB, van Geel AN, et al. Limb recurrence-free interval and survival in patients with recurrent melanoma of the extremities treated with normothermic isolated perfusion. J Am
Coll Surg 1994;178:564.
309a. Lienard D, Lejeune FJ, Ewalenko P. In transit metastases of malignant melanoma treated by high dose rTNF alpha in combination with interferon-gamma and melphalan in isolation
perfusion. World J Surg 1992;16(2):234.
309b. Belli F, Arienti F, Rivoltini L, et al. Treatment of recurrent in transit metastases from cutaneous melanoma by isolation perfusion in extracorporeal circulation with interleukin-2 and lymphokine
activated killer cells. A pilot study. Melanoma Res 1992;2(4):263.
310. Cavaliere R, Cavaliere F, Deraco M, et al. Hyperthermic antiblastic perfusion in the treatment of stage IIIA-IIIAB melanoma patients. Comparison of two experiences. Melanoma Res
1994;4(Suppl 1):5.
311. Hoekstra HJ, Schraffordt KH, de Vries LG, van Weerden TW, Oldhoff J. Toxicity of hyperthermic isolated limb perfusion with cisplatin for recurrent melanoma of the lower extremity after
previous perfusion treatment. Cancer 1993;72:1224.
312. Vrouenraets BC, Klaase JM, Nieweg OE, Kroon BB. Toxicity and morbidity of isolated limb perfusion. Semin Surg Oncol 1998;14:224.
313. Renard N, Lienard D, Lespagnard L, et al. Early endothelium activation and polymorphonuclear cell invasion precede specific necrosis of human melanoma and sarcoma treated by
intravascular high-dose tumour necrosis factor alpha (rTNF alpha). Int J Cancer 1994;57:656.
314. Lejeune FJ. High dose recombinant tumour necrosis factor (rTNF alpha) administered by isolation perfusion for advanced tumours of the limbs: a model for biochemotherapy of cancer. Eur J
Cancer 1995;31A:1009.
315. Sugarman BJ, Palladino MA Jr, Figari IS, Palladino MA, Shepard HM. Recombinant human tumor necrosis factor-alpha: effects on proliferation of normal and transformed cells in vitro. Science
1985;230:943.
316. Lienard D, Eggermont AM, Schraffordt KH, et al. Isolated perfusion of the limb with high-dose tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and melphalan for
melanoma stage III. Results of a multi-centre pilot study. Melanoma Res 1994;4(Suppl)1:21.
317. Alexander HR Jr, Fraker DL, Bartlett DL. Isolated limb perfusion for malignant melanoma. Semin Surg Oncol 1996;12:416.
318. Bartlett DL, Ma G, Alexander HR, Libutti SK, Fraker DL. Isolated limb reperfusion with tumor necrosis factor and melphalan in patients with extremity melanoma after failure of isolated limb
perfusion with chemotherapeutics. Cancer 1997;80:2084.
319. Ariyan S, Poo WJ. Safety and efficacy of isolated perfusion of extremities for recurrent tumor in elderly patients. Surgery 1998;123:335.
320. Vrouenraets BC, Hart GA, Eggermont AM, et al. Relation between limb toxicity and treatment outcomes after isolated limb perfusion for recurrent melanoma. J Am Coll Surg 1999;188:522.
321. Vrouenraets BC, Kroon BB, Klaase JM, et al. Value of laboratory tests in monitoring acute regional toxicity after isolated limb perfusion. Ann Surg Oncol 1997;4:88.
322. Hohenberger P, Kettelhack C. Clinical management and current research in isolated limb perfusion for sarcoma and melanoma. Oncology 1998;55:89.
323. Vrouenraets BC, Eggermont AM, Klaase JM, et al. Long-term neuropathy after regional isolated perfusion with melphalan for melanoma of the limbs. Eur J Surg Oncol 1994;20:681.
324. Drory VE, Lev D, Groozman GB, Gutmann M, Klausner JM. Neurotoxicity of isolated limb perfusion with tumor necrosis factor. J Neurol Sci 1998;158:1.
325. Ariyan S, Poo WJ, Bolognia J. Regional isolated perfusion of extremities for melanoma: a 20-year experience with drugs other than L-phenylalanine mustard. Plast Reconstruct Surg
1997;99:1023.
326. Klaase JM, Kroon BB, van Geel BN, et al. Patient- and treatment-related factors associated with acute regional toxicity after isolated perfusion for melanoma of the extremities. Am J Surg
1994;167:618.
327. Sigurdsson GH, Nachbur B, Lejeune FJ. Anesthesiologists' management of isolated limb perfusion with “high-dose” tumor necrosis factor alpha. Anesthesiology 1993;79:1433.
328. Sleijfer S, van Ginkel RJ, van der Mark TW, et al. Effects of hyperthermic isolated limb perfusion with tumor necrosis factor-alpha and melphalan on pulmonary function assessments. J
Immunother 1997;20:202.
329. Vrouenraets BC, Kroon BB, Ogilvie AC, et al. Absence of severe systemic toxicity after leakage-controlled isolated limb perfusion with tumor necrosis factor-alpha and melphalan. Ann Surg
Oncol 1999;6:405.
330. Klicks RJ, Vrouenraets BC, Nieweg OE, Kroon BB. Vascular complications of isolated limb perfusion. Eur J Surg Oncol 1998;24:288.
331. Thompson JF, Kam PC, Waugh RC, Harman CR. Isolated limb infusion with cytotoxic agents: a simple alternative to isolated limb perfusion. Semin Surg Oncol 1998;14:238.
332. Eton O, East M, Legha SS, et al. Pilot study of intra-arterial cisplatin and intravenous vinblastine and dacarbazine in patients with melanoma in-transit metastases. Melanoma Res 1999;9:483.
333. Hill S, Thomas JM. Use of the carbon dioxide laser to manage cutaneous metastases from malignant melanoma. Br J Surg 1996;83:509.
334. Lingam MK, McKay AJ. Carbon dioxide laser ablation as an alternative treatment for cutaneous metastases from malignant melanoma. Br J Surg 1995;82:1346.
335. Heller R, Jaroszeski MJ, Reintgen DS, et al. Treatment of cutaneous and subcutaneous tumors with electrochemotherapy using intralesional bleomycin. Cancer 1998;83:148.
336. Keller SM. Photodynamic therapy. Biology and clinical application. Chest Surg Clin North Am 1995;5:121.
337. Morton DL, Malmgren RA, Holmes EC, Ketcham AS. Demonstration of antibodies against human malignant melanoma by immunofluorescence. Surgery 1968;64:233.
338. von Wussow P, Block B, Hartmann F, Deicher H. Intralesional interferon-alpha therapy in advanced malignant melanoma. Cancer 1988;61:1071.
339. Morton DL, Eilber FR, Holmes EC, et al. BCG immunotherapy of malignant melanoma: summary of a seven-year experience. Ann Surg 1974;180:635.
340. Overgaard J, von der MH, Overgaard M. A randomized study comparing two high-dose per fraction radiation schedules in recurrent or metastatic malignant melanoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1985;11:1837.
341. Cascinelli N, Rumke P, MacKie R, Morabito A, Bufalino R. The significance of conversion of skin reactivity to efficacy of bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccinations given immediately after
radical surgery in stage II melanoma patients. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1989;28:282.
342. Wallack MK, McNally K, Michaelides M, et al. A phase I/II SECSG (Southeastern Cancer Study Group) pilot study of surgical adjuvant immunotherapy with vaccinia melanoma oncolysates

(VMO). Am Surg 1986;52:148.
343. Balch CM, Smalley RV, Bartolucci AA, et al. A randomized prospective clinical trial of adjuvant C. parvum immunotherapy in 260 patients with clinically localized melanoma (stage I):
prognostic factors analysis and preliminary results of immunotherapy. Cancer 1982;49:1079.
344. Kirkwood JM, Wilson J, Whiteside TL, Donnelly S, Herberman RB. Phase IB trial of picibanil (OK-432) as an immunomodulator in patients with resected high-risk melanoma. Cancer Immunol
Immunother 1997;44:137.
345. Kirkwood J. Interferon alpha to be as adjuvant therapy for high risk melanoma. Melanoma Res 1997;7:S23.
346. Yeilding NM, Gerstner C, Kirkwood JM. Analysis of two human monoclonal antibodies against melanoma. Int J Cancer 1992;52:967.
347. Heredia A, Villena J, Romaris M, Molist A, Bassols A. Transforming growth factor beta 1 increases the synthesis and shedding of the melanoma-specific proteoglycan in human melanoma cells.
Arch Biochem Biophys 1996;333:198.
348. Spitler LE, Sagebiel R. A randomized trial of levamisole versus placebo as adjuvant therapy in malignant melanoma. N Engl J Med 1980;303:1143.
349. Spitler LE. A randomized trial of levamisole versus placebo as adjuvant therapy in malignant melanoma. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:736.
350. Quirt IC, Shelley WE, Pater JL, et al. Improved survival in patients with poor-prognosis malignant melanoma treated with adjuvant levamisole: a phase III study by the National Cancer Institute
of Canada Clinical Trials Group. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:729.
351. Abramowitz J, Chavin W. In vitro effects of hormonal stimuli upon tyrosinase and peroxidase activities in murine melanomas. Biochem Biophys Res Comm 1978;85:1067.
352. Cole BF, Gelber RD, Kirkwood JM, et al. Quality-of-life-adjusted survival analysis of interferon alfa-2b adjuvant treatment of high-risk resected cutaneous melanoma: an Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2666.
353. Cole BF, Gelber RD, Kirkwood JM, et al. A quality-of-life adjusted survival analysis of interferon alfa-2b (IFNa2b) adjuvant treatment for high-risk resected cutaneous melanoma: an Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1996;15:437.
354. Hillner BE, Kirkwood JM, Atkins MB, Johnson ER, Smith TJ. Economic analysis of adjuvant interferon alfa-2b in high-risk melanoma based on projections from Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group 1684. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2351.
355. Marchand M, Weynants P, Rankin E, et al. Tumor regression responses in melanoma patients treated with a peptide encoded by gene MAGE-3. Int J Cancer 1995;63:883.
356. Cascinelli N. Evaluation of efficacy of adjuvant rIFNa 2A in melanoma patients with regional node metastases. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:A1296.
357. Kirkwood JM, Ibrahim J, Sondak VK, et al. High- and low-dose interferon alfa-2b in high-risk melanoma: first analysis of Intergroup Trial E1690/S9111/C9190. J Clin Oncol 2000; 18(12):2444.
358. Livingston PO, Wong GY, Adluri S, et al. Improved survival in stage III melanoma patients with GM2 antibodies: a randomized trial of adjuvant vaccination with GM2 ganglioside. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:1036.
359. Livingston PO, Adluri S, Helling F, et al. Phase 1 trial of immunological adjuvant QS-21 with a GM2 ganglioside-keyhole limpet haemocyanin conjugate vaccine in patients with malignant
melanoma. Vaccine 1994;12:1275.
360. Hsueh EC, Famatiga E, Gupta RK, Qi K, Morton DL. Enhancement of complement-dependent cytotoxicity by polyvalent melanoma cell vaccine (CancerVax): correlation with survival. Ann Surg
Oncol 1998;5:595.
361. Restifo NP, Rosenberg SA. Developing recombinant and synthetic vaccines for the treatment of melanoma. Curr Opin Oncol 1999;11:50.
362. Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, Schwartzentruber DJ, et al. Prospective randomized trial of the treatment of patients with metastatic melanoma using chemotherapy with cisplatin,dacarbazine, and
tamoxifen alone or in a combination with interleukin-2 and interferon alfa-2b. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:968.
363. Grob JJ, Dreno B, de la SP, et al. Randomised trial of interferon alpha-2a as adjuvant therapy in resected primary melanoma thicker than 1.5 mm without clinically detectable node metastases.
French Cooperative Group on Melanoma. Lancet 1998;351:1905.
364. Pehamberger H, Soyer HP, Steiner A, et al. Adjuvant interferon alfa-2a treatment in resected primary stage II cutaneous melanoma. Austrian Malignant Melanoma Cooperative Group. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:1425.
365. Kirkwood JM. Adjuvant IFNa2 therapy of melanoma. Lancet 1998;351:1901.
366. Kirkwood JM. Adjuvant IFN alpha2 therapy of melanoma. Lancet 1998;351:1901.
367. Quan WD Jr, Dean GE, Spears L, et al. Active specific immunotherapy of metastatic melanoma with an antiidiotype vaccine: a phase I/II trial of I-Mel-2 plus SAF-m. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2103.
368. Eton O, Kharkevitch DD, Gianan MA, et al. Active immunotherapy with ultraviolet B-irradiated autologous whole melanoma cells plus DETOX in patients with metastatic melanoma. Clin Cancer
Res 1998;4:619.
369. Mitchell MS. Perspective on allogeneic melanoma lysates in active specific immunotherapy. Semin Oncol 1998;25:623.
370. Sondak VK, Liu PY, Flaherty LE, et al. A phase II evaluation of all- trans-retionic acid plus interferon alfa-2a in stage IV melanoma: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. Cancer J from Scientific
American 1999;5:41.
371. Atkins MB. The treatment of metastatic melanoma with chemotherapy and biologics. Curr Opin Oncol 1997;9:205.
372. Weiss M, Loprinzi CL, Creagan ET, et al. Utility of follow-up tests for detecting recurrent disease in patients with malignant melanomas. JAMA 1995;274:1703.
373. Basseres N, Grob JJ, Richard MA, et al. Cost-effectiveness of surveillance of stage I melanoma. A retrospective appraisal based on a 10-year experience in a dermatology department in
France. Dermatology 1995;191:199.
374. Roth JA, Eilber FR, Bennett LR, Morton DL. Radionuclide photoscanning. Usefulness in preoperative evaluation of melanoma patients. Arch Surg 1975;110:1211.
375. Tafra L, Dale PS, Wanek LA, Ramming KP, Morton DL. Resection and adjuvant immunotherapy for melanoma metastatic to the lung and thorax. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1995;110:119.
376. Harpole DH Jr, Johnson CM, Wolfe WG, George SL, Seigler HF. Analysis of 945 cases of pulmonary metastatic melanoma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1992;103:743.
377. Ricaniadis N, Konstadoulakis MM, Walsh D, Karakousis CP. Gastrointestinal metastases from malignant melanoma. Surg Oncol 1995;4:105.
378. Ollila DW, Essner R, Wanek LA, Morton DL. Surgical resection for melanoma metastatic to the gastrointestinal tract. Arch Surg 1996;131:975.
379. Karakousis CP, Velez A, Driscoll DL, Takita H. Metastasectomy in malignant melanoma. Surgery 1994;115:295.
380. Pastorino U, Buyse M, Friedel G, et al. Long-term results of lung metastasectomy: prognostic analysis based on 5206 cases. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1999;113:137.
381. Hsueh EC, Gupta RK, Qi K, Morton DL. Correlation of specific immune responses with survival in melanoma patients with distant metastases receiving polyvalent melanoma cell vaccine. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:2913.
382. Balch CM, Soong SJ, Murad TM, et al. A multifactorial analysis of melanoma. IV. Prognostic factors in 200 melanoma patients with distant metastases (stage III). J Clin Oncol 1983;1:126.
383. Feun LG, Gutterman J, Burgess MA, et al. The natural history of resectable metastatic melanoma (stage IVA melanoma). Cancer 1982;50:1656.
384. Amer MH, Al Sarraf M, Vaitkevicius VK. Clinical presentation, natural history and prognostic factors in advanced malignant melanoma. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1979;149:687.
385. Markowitz JS, Cosimi LA, Carey RW, et al. Prognosis after initial recurrence of cutaneous melanoma. Arch Surg 1991;126:703.
386. Overett TK, Shiu MH. Surgical treatment of distant metastatic melanoma. Indications and results. Cancer 1985;56:1222.
387. Hena MA, Emrich LJ, Nambisan RN, Karakousis CP. Effect of surgical treatment on stage IV melanoma. Am J Surg 1987;153:270.
388. Wornom IL III, Smith JW, Soong SJ, et al. Surgery as palliative treatment for distant metastases of melanoma. Ann Surg 1986;204:181.
389. Calabro A, Singletary SE, Balch CM. Patterns of relapse in 1001 consecutive patients with melanoma nodal metastases. Arch Surg 1989;124:1051.
390. Pogrebniak HW, Stovroff M, Roth JA, Pass HI. Resection of pulmonary metastases from malignant melanoma: results of a 16-year experience. Ann Thorac Surg 1988;46:20.
391. Mathisen DJ, Flye MW, Peabody J. The role of thoracotomy in the management of pulmonary metastases from malignant melanoma. Ann Thorac Surg 1979;27:295.
392. Ollila DW, Stern SL, Morton DL. Tumor doubling time: a selection factor for pulmonary resection of metastatic melanoma. J Surg Oncol 1998;69:206.
393. Einhorn LH, Burgess MA, Vallejos C, et al. Prognostic correlations and response to treatment in advanced metastatic malignant melanoma. Cancer Res 1974;34:1995.
394. Ollila DW, Hsueh EC, Stern SL, Morton DL. Metastasectomy for recurrent stage IV melanoma. J Surg Oncol 1999;71:209.
395. Caputy GG, Donohue JH, Goellner JR, Weaver AL. Metastatic melanoma of the gastrointestinal tract. Results of surgical management. Arch Surg 1991;126:1353.
396. Mondragon-Sanchez R, Barrera-Franco JL, Cordoba-Gutierrez H, Meneses-Garcia A. Repeat hepatic resection for recurrent metastatic melanoma. Hepato-Gastroenterology 1999;46:459.
397. Lindner P, Fjalling M, Hafstrom L, et al. Isolated hepatic perfusion with extracorporeal oxygenation using hyperthermia, tumor necrosis factor alpha and melphalan. Eur J Surg Oncol
1999;25:179.
398. Haigh PI, Essner R, Wardlaw JC, Stern SL, Morton DL. Long-term survival after complete resection of melanoma metastatic to the adrenal gland. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:633.
399. Gokaslan ZL, Aladag MA, Ellerhosrt JA. Melanoma metastatic to the spine: a review of 133 cases. Melanoma Res 2000;10:78.
400. Kirova YM, Chen J, Rabarijaona LI, Piedbois Y, Le Bourgeois JP. Radiotherapy as palliative treatment for metastatic melanoma. Melanoma Res 1999;9:11.
401. Bullard DE, Cox EB, Seigler HF. Central nervous system metastases in malignant melanoma. Neurosurgery 1981;8:26.
402. Amer MH, Al Sarraf M, Baker LH, Vaitkevicius VK. Malignant melanoma and central nervous system metastases: incidence, diagnosis, treatment and survival. Cancer 1978;42:660.
403. Patel JK, Didolkar MS, Pickren JW, Moore RH. Metastatic pattern of malignant melanoma. A study of 216 autopsy cases. Am J Surg 1978;135:807.
404. Brega K, Robinson WA, Winston K, Wittenberg W. Surgical treatment of brain metastases in malignant melanoma. Cancer 1990;66:2105.
405. Hurst R, White DE, Heiss J, et al. Brain metastasis after immunotherapy in patients with metastatic melanoma or renal cell cancer: is craniotomy indicated? J Immunother 1999;22:356.
406. Hagen NA, Cirrincione C, Thaler HT, DeAngelis LM. The role of radiation therapy following resection of single brain metastasis from melanoma. Neurology 1990;40:158.
407. Vlock DR, Kirkwood JM, Leutzinger C, Kapp DS, Fischer JJ. High-dose fraction radiation therapy for intracranial metastases of malignant melanoma: a comparison with low-dose fraction
therapy. Cancer 1982;49:2289.
408. Kondziolka D, Patel A, Lunsford LD, Kassam A, Flickinger JC. Stereotactic radiosurgery plus whole brain radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone for patients with multiple brain metastases. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:427.
409. Mori Y, Kondziolka D, Flickinger JC, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery for cerebral metastatic melanoma: factors affecting local disease control and survival. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;42(3):581.
410. Kirkwood JM, Agarwala S. Systemic cytotoxic and biologic therapy melanoma. PPO Updates 1993;7:1.
411. Cocconi G, Bella M, Calabresi F, et al. Treatment of metastatic malignant melanoma with dacarbazine plus tamoxifen. N Engl J Med 1992;327:516.
412. Falkson CI, Falkson G, Falkson HC. Improved results with the addition of interferon alfa-2b to dacarbazine in the treatment of patients with metastatic malignant melanoma. J Clin Oncol
1991;9:1403.
413. Falkson CI, Falkson G, Falkson HC. Improved results with the addition of interferon alfa-2b to dacarbazine in the treatment of patients with metastatic malignant melanoma. J Clin Oncol
1991;9:1403.
414. Falkson CI, Ibrahim J, Kirkwood JM, et al. Phase III trial of dacarbazine versus dacarbazine with interferon a-2b versus dacarbazine with tamoxifen versus dacarbazine with interferon a-2b and
tamoxifen in patients with metastatic malignant melanoma: an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group study (E3690). J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1743.
415. Legha SS, Ring S, Eton O, et al. Development of a biochemotherapy regimen with concurrent administration of cisplatin, vinblastine, dacarbazine, interferon alfa, and interleukin-2 for patients
with metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1752.
416. Lattanzi SC, Tosteson T, Chertoff J, et al. Dacarbazine, cisplatin and carmustine, with or without tamoxifen, for metastatic melanoma: 5-year follow-up. Melanoma Res 1995;5:365.
417. Chapman PB, Einhorn LH, Meyers ML, et al. Phase III multicenter randomized trial of the Dartmouth regimen versus dacarbazine in patients with metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:2745.
418. Heinemann D, Smith PJB, Symes MO. Expression of histocompatibility antigens and characterization of mononuclear cell infiltrates in human renal cell carcinomas. Br J Cancer 1987;56:433.
419. Agarwala SS, Atkins MB, Kirkwood JM. Current approaches to advanced and high-risk melanoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2000 (in press).
420. Oster W, Lindemann A, Horn S, Mertelsmann R, Herrmann F. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha but not TNF-beta induces secretion of colony stimulating factor for macrophages (CSF-1) by
human monocytes. Blood 1987;70:1700.
421. Klostergaard J. Role of tumor necrosis factor in monocyte/macrophage tumor cytotoxicity in vitro. Nat Immun Cell Growth Reg 1987;6:161.
422. Middleton MR, Grob JJ, Aaronson N, et al. Randomized phase III study of temozolomide versus dacarbazine in the treatment of patients with advanced metastatic malignant melanoma. J Clin
Oncol 2000;18:158.
423. Britten CD, Rowinsky EK, Baker SD, et al. A phase I and pharmacokinetic study of temozolomide and cisplatin in patients with advanced solid malignancies. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:1629.
424. Atkins MB, Lotze M, Wiernick P, et al. High-dose IL-2 therapy alone results in long-term durable complete responses in patients with metastatic melanoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol

1997;16:494a.
425. Nathanson L. Spontaneous regression of malignant melanoma: a review of the literature on incidence, clinical features, and possible mechanisms. Conference on spontaneous regression of
cancer. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1976;44:67.
426. Rosenberg SA, White DE. Vitiligo in patients with melanoma: normal tissue antigens can be targets for cancer immunotherapy. Journal of Immunotherapy with Emphasis on Tumor Immunology
1996;19:81.
427. Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT, Muul LM. Observations on the systemic administration of autologous lymphokine-activated killer cells and recombinant interleukin-2 in patients with metastatic
melanoma. N Engl J Med 1985;313:1485.
428. Mier JW, Gallo RC. Purification and some characteristics of human T-cell growth factor from phytohemagglutinin-stimulated lymphocyte-conditioned media. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1980;77:6134.
429. Donohue JH, Rosenstein M, Change AE, et al. The systemic administration of purified interleukin 2 enhances the ability of sensitized murine lymphocytes to cure a disseminated syngeneic
lymphoma. J Immunol 1984;132:2123.
430. Atkins MB, Kunkel L, Sznol M, Rosenberg SA. High-dose recombinant interleukin-2 therapy in patients with metastatic melanoma: long-term survival update. Cancer J from Scientific American
2000;6:S11.
431. Lee DS, White DE, Hurst R, Rosenberg SA, Yang JC. Patterns of relapse and response to retreatment in patients with metastatic melanoma or renal cell carcinoma who responded to
interleukin-2-based immunotherapy. Cancer J from Scientific American 1998;4:86.
432. Sherry RM, Pass HI, Rosenberg SA, Yang JC. Surgical resection of metastatic renal cell carcinoma and melanoma after response to interleukin-2-based immunotherapy. Cancer 1992;69:1850.
433. Ettinghausen SE, Rosenberg SA. Immunotherapy of murine sarcomas using lymphokine activated killer cells: optimization of the schedule and routine of administration of recombinant
interleukin-2. Cancer Res 1986;46:2784.
434. Legha SS, Gianan MA, Plager C, Eton OE, Papadopoulos NE. Evaluation of interleukin-2 administered by continuous infusion in patients with metastatic melanoma. Cancer 1996;77:89.
435. Tagliaferri P, Barile C, Caraglia M, et al. Daily low-dose subcutaneous recombinant interleukin-2 by alternate weekly administration: antitumor activity and immunomodulatory effects. Am J Clin
Oncol 1998;21:48.
436. Rubin JT, Day R, Duquesnoy R, et al. HLA-DQ1 is associated with clinical response and survival of patients with melanoma who are treated with interleukin-2. Ther Immunol 1995;2:1.
437. Marincola FM, Venzon D, White D, et al. HLA association with response and toxicity in melanoma patients treated with interleukin 2-based immunotherapy. Cancer Res 1992;52:6561.
438. Lange JR, Raubitschek AA, Pockaj BA, et al. A pilot study of the combination of interleukin-2-based immunotherapy and radiation therapy. J Immunother 1992;12:265.
439. Rosenberg SA. Adoptive cellular therapy: clinical applications. In: De Vita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Biological therapy of cancer. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1991:214.
440. Kirkwood JM, Agarwala SS. Systemic cytotoxic and biologic therapy of melanoma. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. PPO Updates. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1993:1.
441. Lotze MT. The future role of interleukin-2 in cancer therapy. Cancer J from Scientific American 2000;6:S58.
442. Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT, Yang JC, et al. Combination therapy with interleukin-2 and alpha-interferon for the treatment of patients with advanced cancer. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1863.
443. Sparano JA, Fisher RI, Sunderland M. Randomized phase III trial of treatment with high-dose interleukin-2 either alone or in combination with interferon-alfa-2a in patients with advanced
melanoma. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1969.
444. Keilholz U, Eggermont AM. The role of interleukin-2 in the management of stage IV melanoma: the EORTC melanoma cooperative group program. Cancer J from Scientific American
2000;6:S99.
445. Margolin K, Atkins M, Sparano J, et al S. Prospective randomized trial of lisofylline for the prevention of toxicities of high-dose interleukin 2 therapy in advanced renal cancer and malignant
melanoma. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:565.
446. Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, Schwartzentruber DJ, et al. Prospective randomized trial of the treatment of patients with metastatic melanoma using chemotherapy with cisplatin, dacarbazine, and
tamoxifen alone or in combination with interleukin-2 and interferon alfa-2b. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:968.
447. Rosenberg SA, Yannelli JR, Yang JC, et al. Treatment of patients with metastatic melanoma with autologous tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and interleukin-2. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1159.
448. Fisher B, Packard BS, Read EJ, et al. Tumor localization of adoptively transferred indium-111 labeled tumor infiltrating lymphocytes in patients with metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol
1989;7:250.
449. Rosenberg SA. Keynote address: perspectives on the use of interleukin-2 in cancer treatment. Cancer J from Scientific American 1997;3(Suppl 1):S2.
450. Veltri S, Smith JW. Interleukin 1 trials in cancer patients: a review of the toxicity, antitumor and hematopoietic effects. Oncologist 1996;1:190.
451. Arienti F, Belli F, Napolitano F, et al. Vaccination of melanoma patients with interleukin 4 gene-transduced allogeneic melanoma cells. Hum Gene Ther 1999;10:2907.
452. Janik JE, Miller LL, Kopp WC, et al. Treatment with tumor necrosis factor-alpha and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor increases epidermal Langerhans' cell numbers in cancer
patients. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 1999;93:209.
453. Fernandez N, Duffour MT, Perricaudet M, et al. Active specific T-cell-based immunotherapy for cancer: nucleic acids, peptides, whole native proteins, recombinant viruses, with dendritic cell
adjuvants or whole tumor cell-based vaccines. Principles and future prospects. Cytokines, Cellular & Molecular Therapy 1998;4:53.
454. Nemunaitis J, Fong T, Robbins JM, et al. Phase I trial of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) retroviral vector administered intratumorally to patients with metastatic melanoma. Cancer Gene Ther
1999;6:322.
455. Atkins MB, Robertson MJ, Gordon M, et al. Phase I evaluation of intravenous recombinant human interleukin 12 in patients with advanced malignancies. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:409.
456. Freedman WL, McMahon FJ. Placental metatasis: review of the literature and report of a case of metastatic melanoma. Obstet Gynecol 1960;16:550.
457. Sober AJ, Day CL Jr, Fitzpatrick TB, et al. Factors associated with death from melanoma from 2 to 5 years following diagnosis in clinical stage I patients. J Invest Dermatol 1983;80(Suppl
6):53s.
458. Maeurer MJ, Hurd S, Martin D, Storkus WJ, Lotze MT. Cytolytic T-cell clones define HLA-A2 restricted human cutaneous melanoma peptide epitopescorrelation with T-cell receptor usage.
Cancer J 1995;2:162.
459. Maeurer MJ, Lotze MT. Immune responses to melanoma antigens. In: Balch CM, Houghton AN, Sober AJ, Soong SJ, eds. Cutaneous melanoma. St Louis: Quality Medical Publishing,
1998:517.
460. Maeurer MJ, Martin DM, Storkus WJ, Lotze MT. Evidence for shared T-cell receptor usage in cytolytic T-cells recognizing HLA-A2 presented antigens shared by melanoma and melanocytes.
Immunol Today 1995;16:603.
461. Maeurer MJ, Martin DM, Gollin SM, et al. Recurrent melanoma exhibiting downregulation of the peptide transporter protein, TAP-1 and antigen-loss of the immunodominant antigen
MART-1/Melan-A recognized by CD8+ cytotoxic T-lymphocytes. J Clin Invest 1996;98:1633.
462. Maeurer MJ, Storkus WJ, Kirkwood JM, Lotze MT. Immunization with melanoma derived peptide T-cell epitopes represents a new treatment option for patients with melanoma. Melanoma Res
1996;6:11.
463. Kugler A, Stuhler G, Walden P, et al. Regression of human metastatic renal cell carcinoma after vaccination with tumor cell-dendritic cell hybrids. Nat Med 2000;6:332.
464. Chen YT, Scanlan MJ, Sahin U, et al. A testicular antigen aberrantly expressed in human cancers detected by autologous antibody screening. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:1914.
465. Gure AO, Tureci O, Sahin U, et al. SSX: a multigene family with several members transcribed in normal testis and human cancer. Int J Cancer 1997;14:173.
466. Knuth A, Wolfel T, Klehmann E, Boon T, Meyer zum Buschenfelde KH. Cytolytic T-cell clones against an autologous human melanoma: specificity study and definition of three antigens by
immunoselection. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:2804.
467. Kawakami Y, Rosenberg SA. Immunobiology of human melanoma antigens MART-1 and gp100 and their use for immuno-gene therapy. Int Rev Immunol 1997;14:173.
468. Inaba K, Metlay JP, Crowley MT, Witmer-Pack M, Steinman RM. Dendritic cells as antigen presenting cells in vivo. Int Rev Immunol 1990;6:197.
469. Takamizawa M, Rivas A, Fagnoni F, et al. Dendritic cells that process and present nominal antigens to naive T lymphocytes are derived from CD2+ precursors. J Immunol 1997;158:2134.
470. Reimann J, Kaufmann SH. Alternative antigen processing pathways in anti-infective immunity. Curr Opin Immunol 1997;9:462.
471. Brossart P, Bevan MJ. Presentation of exogenous protein antigens on major histocompatibility complex class I molecules by dendritic cells: pathway of presentation and regulation by cytokines.
Blood 1997;90:462.
472. Shen Z, Reznikoff G, Dranoff G, Rock KL. Cloned dendritic cells can present exogenous antigens on both MHC class I and class II molecules. J Immunol 1997;158:2723.
473. Norbury CC, Chambers BJ, Prescott AR, Ljunggren HG, Watts C. Constitutive macropinocytosis allows TAP-dependent major histocompatibility complex class I presentation of exogenous
soluble antigen by bone marrow-derived dendritic cells. Eur J Immunol 1997;27:280.
474. Harding CV. Class I MHC presentation of exogenous antigens. J Clin Immunol 1996;16:90.
475. Bohm W, Schirmbeck R, Elbe A, et al. Exogenous hepatitis B surface antigen particles processed by dendritic cells or macrophages prime murine MHC class I-restricted cytotoxic T
lymphocytes in vivo. J Immunol 1995;155:3313.
476. Rock KL, Rothstein L, Gamble S, Fleischacker C. Characterization of antigen-presenting cells that present exogenous antigens in association with class I MHC molecules. J Immunol
1993;150:438.
477. Albert ML, Sauter B, Bhardwaj N. Dendritic cells acquire antigen from apoptotic cells and induce class I-restricted CTLs. Nature 1998;392:86.
478. Ingulli E, Mondino A, Khoruts A, Jenkins MK. In vivo detection of dendritic cell antigen presentation to CD4+ T cells. J Exp Med 1997;185:2133.
479. Knight SC, Hunt R, Dore C, Medawar PB. Influence of dendritic cells on tumor growth. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1985;82:4495.
480. Mayordomo JI, Zorina T, Storkus WJ, et al. Bone marrow-derived dendritic cells pulsed with synthetic tumor peptides elecit protective and therapeutic antitumor immunity. Nat Med
1995;1:1297.
481. Zitvogel L, Mayordomo JI, Tjandrawan T, et al. Therapy of murine tumors with tumor peptide-pulsed dendritic cells: dependence on T cells, B7 costimulation, and T helper cell 1-associated
cytokines. J Exp Med 1996;183:87.
482. Sallusto F, Lanzavecchia A. Efficient presentation of soluble antigen by cultured human dendritic cells is maintained by granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor plus interleukin 4 and
down-regulated by tumor necrosis factor a. J Exp Med 1994;179:1109.
483. Luft T, Pang KC, Thomas E, et al. A serum-free culture model for studying the differentiation of human dendritic cells from adult CD34+ progenitor cells. Exp Hematol 1998;26:489.
484. Luft T, Pang KC, Thomas E, et al. Type I IFNs enhance the terminal differentiation of dendritic cells. J Immunol 1998;161:1947.
485. McLellan AD, Sorg RV, Williams LA, Hart DNJ. Human dendritic cells activate T lymphocytes via a CD40:CD40 ligand-dependent pathway. Eur J Immunol 1996;26:1204.
486. Mukherji B, Chakraborty NG, Yamasaki S, et al. Induction of antigen-specific cytolytic T cells in situ in human melanoma by immunization with synthetic peptide-pulsed autologous antigen
presenting cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:8078.
487. Nestle FO, Alijagic S, Gilliet M, et al. Vaccination of melanoma patients with peptide- or tumor lysate-pulsed dendritic cells. Nat Med 1998;4:328.
488. Lotze MT, Shurin M, Davis I, Amoscato A, Storkus WJ. Dendritic cell based therapy of cancer. Adv Exp Med Biol 1997;417:551.
489. Lotze MT, Hellerstedt B, Stolinski L, et al. The role of interleukin-2, interleukin-12, and dendritic cells in cancer therapy. Cancer J from Scientific American 1997;3(Suppl 1):S109.
490. Nestle FO. DC vaccination: clinical trial in melanoma. In: Lotze MT, Steinman R, Banchereau J, eds. 5th International symposium on dendritic cells in fundamental and clinical immunology.
Pittsburgh, PA: Society for Leukocyte Biology, 1998.
491. Lotze MT, Elder E, Whiteside TL. Dendritic cell therapy of cancernot just an antigen presenting cell. In: Lotze MT, Steinman R, Banchereau J, eds. 5th International symposium on dendritic cells
in fundamental and clinical immunology. Pittsburgh, PA: Society for Leukocyte Biology, 1998.
492. Chen K, Braun S, Lyman S, et al. Antitumor activity and immunotherapeutic properties of Ftl3-ligand in a murine breast cancer model. Cancer Res 1997;57:3511.
493. Fields RC, Osterholzer JJ, Fuller JA, et al. Comparative analysis of murine dendritic cells derived from spleen and bone marrow. J Immunother 1998;21:323.
494. Rosenzwajg M, Camus S, Guigon M, Gluckman JC. The influence of interleukin (OL)-4, IL-13, and Flt3 ligand on human dendritic cell differentiation from cord blood CD34+ progenitor cells.
Exp Hematol 1998;26:63.
495. Caux C, Dezutter-Dambuyant C, Schmitt D, Banchereau J. GM-CSF and TNF-alpha cooperate in the generation of dendritic Langerhans cells. Nature 1992;360:258.
496. Dranoff G, Jaffee E, Lazenby A, et al. Vaccination with irradiated tumor cells engineered to secrete murine granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor stimulates potent, specific, and
long-lasting anti-tumor immunity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:3539.
497. Ellem KA, O'Rourke MG, Johnson GR, et al. A case report: immune responses and clinical course of the first human use of granulocyte/macrophage-colony-stimulating-factor-transduced
autologous melanoma cells for immunotherapy. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1997;44:10.
498. Simons JW, Jaffee EM, Weber CE, et al. Bioactivity of autologous irradiated renal cell carcinoma vaccines generated by ex vivo granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor gene

transfer. Cancer Res 1997;57:1537.
499. Si Z, Hersey P, Coates AS. Clinical responses and lymphoid infiltrates in metastatic melanoma following treatment with intralesional GM-CSF. Melanoma Res 1996;6:247.
500. Jager E, Ringhoffer M, Dienes HP, et al. Granulocyte-macrophage-colony-stimulating factor enhances immune responses to melanoma-associated peptides in vivo. Int J Cancer 1996;67:54.
501. Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, Schwartzentruber DJ, et al. Immunologic and therapeutic evaluation of a synthetic peptide vaccine for the treatment of patients with metastatic melanoma. Nat Med
1998;4:321.
502. Abdel-Wahab Z, Weltz C, Hester D, et al. A phase I clinical trial of immunotherapy with interferon-gamma gene-modified autologous melanoma cells: monitoring the humoral immune response.
Cancer 1997;80:401.
503. Palmer K, Moore J, Everard M, et al. Gene therapy with autologous, interleukin 2-secreting tumor cells in patients with malignant melanoma. Hum Gene Ther 1999;10:1261.
504. Jager E, Ringhoffer M, Altmannsberger M, et al. Immunoselection in vivo: independent loss of MHC class I and melanocyte differentiation antigen expression in metastatic melanoma. Int J
Cancer 1997;71:142.
505. Jager E, Bernhard H, Romero P, et al. Generation of cytotoxic T cell responses with synthetic melanoma associated peptides in vivo: implications for tumor vaccines with melanoma associated
antigens. Int J Cancer 1996;66:162.
506. Kawakami Y, Eliyahu S, Jennings C, et al. Recognition of multiple epitopes in the human melanoma antigen gp100 by tumor-infiltrating T lymphocytes associated with in vivo tumor regression.
J Immunol 1995;154:3961.
507. Parkhurst MR, Salgaller ML, Southwood S, et al. Improved induction of melanoma-reactive CTL with peptides from the melanoma antigen gp100 modified at HLA-A*0201-binding residues. J
Immunol 1996;157:2539.
508. Sette A, Vitiello A, Reherman B, et al. The relationship between class I binding affinity and immunogenicity of potential cytotoxic T cell epitopes. J Immunol 1994;153:5586.
509. Ruppert J, Sidney J, Celis E, et al. Prominent role of secondary anchor residues in peptide binding to HLA-A2.1 molecules. Cell 1993;74:929.
510. Valmori D, Fonteneau JF, Lizana CM, et al. Enhanced generation of specific tumor-reactive CTL in vitro by selected Melan-A/MART-1 immunodominant peptide analogues. J Immunol
1998;160:1750.
511. Gervois N, Guilloux Y, Diez E, Jotereau F. Suboptimal activation of melanoma infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) due to low avidity of TCR/MHC-tumor peptide interactions. J Exp Med
1996;183:2403.
512. Kawakami Y, Robbins PF, Wang RF, et al. The use of melanosomal proteins in the immunotherapy of melanoma. J Immunother 1998;21:237.
513. Davis ID. Cytokine therapy in meatstatic renal cancer [letter]. N Engl J Med 1998;339:199.
513a. Jager E, Ringhoffer M, Karbach J, et al. Inverse relationship of melanocyte differentiation antigen expression in melanoma tissues and CD8+ cytotoxic-T-cell responses: evidence for
immunoselection of antigen-loss variants in vivo. Int J Cancer 1996;66(4):470.
513b. Jager E, Ringhoffer M, Altmannsberger M, et al. Immunoselection in vivo: independent loss of MCH class I and melanocyte differentiation antigen expression in metastatic melanoma.
Cancer 1997;71(2):142.

Int J

514. Hsueh EC, Foshag L, Essner R, Stern S, Morton D. A new paradigm for the management of metastatic melanoma. Presented at Society of Surgical Oncology Annual Meeting, New Orleans, LA,
March 2000.
515. Moroi Y, Mayhew M, Trcka J, et al. An induction of cellular immunity by immunization with novel hybrid peptides complexed to heat shock protein 70. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;97:3485.
516. Wallack MK, Sivanandham M, Balch CM, et al. Surgical adjuvant active specific immunotherapy for patients with stage III melanoma: the final analysis of data from a phase III, randomized,
double-blind, multicenter vaccinia melanoma oncolysate trial. J Am Coll Surg 1998;187:69.
517. Hersey P. Evaluation of vaccinia viral lysates as therapeutic vaccines in the treatment of melanoma. Ann NY Acad Sci 1993;690:167.
518. Sallusto F, Lenig D, Forster R, Lipp M, Lanzavecchia A. Two subsets of memory T lymphocytes with distinct homing potentials and effector functions. Nature 1999;401:708.
519. Reisfeld RA. Monoclonal antibodies in cancer immunotherapy. Clin Lab Med 2000;12:201.
520. Rosenberg SA, Aebersold P, Cornetta K, et al. Gene transfer into humansimmunotherapy of patients with advanced melanoma, using tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes modified by retroviral gene
transduction. N Engl J Med 1990;323:570.
521. Lotze MT. Clinical protocol: the treatment of patients with melanoma using IL-2, IL-4, and tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. Hum Gene Ther 1992;3:167.
522. Tahara H, Zeh HJ III, Storkus WJ, et al. Fibroblasts genetically engineered to secrete interleukin 12 can suppress tumor growth and induce antitumor immunity to a murine melanoma in vivo.
Cancer Res 1994;54:182.
523. Houghton AN, Scheinberg DA. Monoclonal antibody therapies a “constant” threat to cancer. Nat Med 2000;6:373.
524. Steffens TA, Bajorin DF, Houghton AN. Immunotherapy with monoclonal antibodies in metastatic melanoma. World J Surg 1992;16:261.
525. Herlyn M, Koprowski H. Melanoma antigens: immunological and biological characterization and clinical significance. Ann Rev Immunol 1988;6:283.
526. Houghton AN, Mintzer D, Cordon-Cardo C, et al. Mouse monoclonal IgG3 antibody detecting GD3 ganglioside: a phase I trial in patients with malignant melanoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1985;82:1242.
527. Kirkwood JM, Mascavi RA, Edington HD. Analysis of therapeutic and immunologic effects of R(24) anti-GD3 monoclonal antibody in 37 patients with metastatic melanoma. Cancer
2000;88:2693.
528. Yao TJ, Meyers M, Livingston PO, Houghton AN, Chapman PB. Immunization of melanoma patients with BEC2-keyhole limpet hemocyanin plus BCG intradermally followed by intravenous
booster immunizations with BEC2 to induce anti-GD3 ganglioside antibodies. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:77.
529. McCaffery M, Yao TJ, Williams L, et al. Immunization of melanoma patients with BEC2 anti-idiotypic monoclonal antibody that mimics GD3 ganglioside: enhanced immunogenicity when
combined with adjuvant. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:679.
530. Mittelman A, Chen ZJ, Kageshita T, et al. Active specific immunotherapy in patients with melanoma. A clinical trial with mouse antiidiotypic monoclonal antibodies elicited with syngeneic
anti-high-molecular-weight-melanoma-associated antigen monoclonal antibodies. J Clin Invest 1990;86:2136.
531. Mittelman A, Wang X, Matsumoto K, Ferrone S. Antiantiidiotypic response and clinical course of the disease in patients with malignant melanoma immunized with mouse antiidiotypic
monoclonal antibody MK2-23. Hybridoma 1995;14:175.
532. Lotze MT, Carrasquillo JA, Weinstein JN, et al. Monoclonal antibody imaging of human melanoma. Radioimmunodetection by subcutaneous or systemic injection. Ann Surg 1986;204:223.
533. Del Vecchio S, Reynolds JC, Carrasquillo JA, et al. Local distribution and concentration of intravenously injected 131I-9.2.27 monoclonal antibody in human malignant melanoma. Cancer Res
1989;49:2783.
534. Lotze MT. Interleukin-2 based immunotherapy of malignant melanoma. In: Rumke P, Karger S, eds. Therapy of advanced melanoma. Basel: Kager, 1990:163.
535. Hank JA, Robinson RR, Surfus J, et al. Augmentation of antibody dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity following in vivo therapy with recombinant interleukin 2. Cancer Res 1990;50:5234.
536. Lotze MT, Roberts K, Custer MC, Segal DA, Rosenberg SA. Specific binding and lysis of human melanoma by IL-2-activated cells coated with anti-T3 or anti-Fc receptor cross-linked to
antimelanoma antibody: a possible approach to the immunotherapy of human tumors. J Surg Res 1987;42:580.
537. Gillgren P, Mansson-Brahme E, Frisell J, et al. Epidemiological characteristics of cutaneous malignant melanoma of the head and neck. Acta Oncol 1999;38:1069.
538. Wieberdink J, Benckhuysen C, Braat RP, Van Slooten EA, Olthuis GA. Dosimetry in isolation perfusion of the limbs by assessment of perfused tissue volume and grading of toxic tissue
reactions. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1982;18:905.
539. van Geel AN, van Wijk J, Wieberdink J. Functional morbidity after regional isolated perfusion of the limb for melanoma. Cancer 1989;63:1092.
540. Vrouenraets BC, Klaase JM, Kroon BB, et al. Long-term morbidity after regional isolated perfusion with melphalan for melanoma of the limbs. The influence of acute regional toxic reactions.
Arch Surg 1995;130:43.
541. Zavour HM, Storlans WJ, Brusic V, et al. NY-ESO-1 encodes DRB*0401restricted epitopes recognized by melanoma-reactive CD4 T cells. Cancer Res 2000;60:1.
542. Zarour HM, Kirkwood JM, Kierstead LS, et al. Melan-A/MART-1 51-73 represents an immunogenic HLA-DR4-restricted epitope recognized by melanoma-reactive CD4+ T cells. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2000;97:400.
543. Reintgen D, Rapaport D, Tanabe KK, Ross M. Lymphatic mapping and sentinel node biopsy in patients with malignant melanoma. J Fl Med Assoc 1997;84:188.
544. Jager E, Jager D, Karbach J, et al. Identification of NY-ESO-1 epitopes presented by human histocompatibility antigen (HLA)-DRB4*0101-0103 and recognized by CD4+ T lymphocytes of
patients with NY-ESO-1-expressing melanoma. J Exp Med 2000;191:625.
545. Topalian SL, Gonzales MI, Parkhurst M, et al. Melanoma-specific CD4+ T cells recognize nonmutated HLA-DR-restricted tyrosinase epitopes. J Exp Med 1996;183:1965.
546. Kobayashi H, Kokubo T, Sato K, et al. CD4+ T cells from peripheral blood of a melanoma patient recognize peptides derived from nonmutated tyrosinase. Cancer Res 1998;58:296.
547. Chaux P, Vantomme V, Stroobant V, et al. Identification of MAGE-3 epitopes presented by HLA-DR molecules to CD4(+) T lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1999;189:767.
548. Mancini S, Sturniolo T, Imro MA, et al. Melanoma cells present a MAGE-3 epitope to CD4+ cytotoxic T cells in association with histocompatibility leukocyte antigen DR11. J Exp Med
1999;189:871.
549. Whelan SL, Parkin DM, Masoyer E. Patterns of cancer in five continents. International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1990.
550. Liu T, Soong, S-J. Epidemiology of malignant melanoma. Surg Clin North Am 1996;76:1205.
551. Lejeune FJ, Lienard D, el Douaihy M, Seyedi JV, Ewalenko P. Results of 206 isolated limb perfusions for malignant melanoma. Eur J Surg Oncol 1989;15:510.
552. Klaase JM, Kroon BB, van Geel AN, et al. Is there an indication for a double perfusion schedule with melphalan for patients with recurrent melanoma of the limbs? Melanoma Res 1994;4(Suppl
1):13.
553. Kettelhack C, Kraus T, Hupp T, Manner M, Schlag P. Hyperthermic limb perfusion for malignant melanoma and soft tissue sarcoma. Eur J Surg Oncol 1990;16:370.
554. Lienard D, Ewalenko P, Delmotte JJ, Renard N, Lejeune FJ. High-dose recombinant tumor necrosis factor alpha in combination with interferon gamma and melphalan in isolation perfusion of
the limbs for melanoma and sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:52.
555. Vaglini M, Santinami M, Manzi R, et al. Treatment of in-transit metastases from cutaneous melanoma by isolation perfusion with tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), melphalan and
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). Dose-finding experience at the National Cancer Institute of Milan. Melanoma Res 1994;4(Suppl 1):35.
556. Fraker DL, Alexander HR, Andrich M, Rosenberg SA. Treatment of patients with melanoma of the extremity using hyperthermic isolated limb perfusion with melphalan, tumor necrosis factor,
and interferon gamma: results of a tumor necrosis factor dose-escalation study. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:479.
557. Kettelhack C, Hohenberger P, Schlag PM. Die isolierte extremitatenperfusion min tumornekrsefaktor alpha und melphalan beim malignen melanom. Dtsch Med Wochenschr 1997;122:177.
558. Lienard D, Eggermont AM, Koops HS, et al. Isolated limb perfusion with tumor necrosis factor-alpha and melphalan with or without interferon-gamma for the treatment of in-transit melanoma
metastases: a multicenter randomized phase II study. Melanoma Res 1999;9:491.
559. Storm FK, Morton DL. Value of therapeutic hyperthermic limb perfusion in advanced recurrent melanoma of the lower extremity. Am J Surg 1985;150:32.
560. Santinami M, Belli F, Cascinelli N, Rovini D, Vaglini M. Seven years experience with hyperthermic perfusions in extracorporeal circulation for melanoma of the extremities. J Surg Oncol
1989;42:201.
561. Klaase JM, Kroon BB, van Geel AN, et al. Prognostic factors for tumor response and limb recurrence-free interval in patients with advanced melanoma of the limbs treated with regional isolated
perfusion with melphalan. Surgery 1994;115:39.
562. Sugarbaker EV, McBride CM. Survival and regional disease control after isolation-perfusion for invasive stage I melanoma of the extremities. Cancer 1976;37:188.
563. Janoff KA, Moseson D, Nohlgren J, et al. The treatment of state I melanoma of the extremities with regional hyperthermic isolation perfusion. Ann Surg 1982;196:316.
564. Rege VB, Leone LA, Soderberg CH Jr, et al. Hyperthermic adjuvant perfusion chemotherapy for stage I malignant melanoma of the extremity with literature review. Cancer 1983;52:2033.
565. Martijn H, Schraffordt KH, Milton GW, et al. Comparison of two methods of treating primary malignant melanomas Clark IV and V, thickness 1.5 mm and greater, localized on the extremities.
Wide surgical excision with and without adjuvant regional perfusion. Cancer 1986;57:1923.
566. Franklin HR, Schraffordt KH, Oldhoff J, et al. To perfuse or not to perfuse? A retrospective comparative study to evaluate the effect of adjuvant isolated regional perfusion in patients with stage
I extremity melanoma with a thickness of 1.5 mm or greater. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:701.
567. Reintgen DS, Cruse CW, Wells KE, Saba HI, Slingluff CL Jr. Isolated limb perfusion for recurrent melanoma of the extremity. Ann Plast Surg 1992;28:50.

568. Ghussen F, Nagel K, Groth W, Muller JM, Stutzer H. A prospective randomized study of regional extremity perfusion in patients with malignant melanoma. Ann Surg 1984;200:764.
569. Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT, Yang JC, et al. Experience with the use of high-dose interleukin-2 in the treatment of 652 cancer patients. Ann Surg 1989;210:474.
570. Thatcher N, Dazzi H, Johnson RJ, et al. Recombinant interleukin-2 (rIL-2) given intrasplenically and intravenously for advanced malignant melanoma. A phase I and II study. Br J Cancer
1989;60:770.
571. Parkinson DR, Abrams JS, Wiernik PH, et al. Interleukin-2 therapy in patients with metastatic malignant melanoma: a phase II study. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1650.
572. Whitehead RP, Kopecky KJ, Samson MK, et al. Phase II study of intravenous bolus recombinant interleukin-2 in advanced malignant melanoma: Southwest Oncology Group study. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1991;83:1250.
573. Dorval T, Mathiot C, Brandely M. Lack of effect of tumour infiltrating lymphocytes in patients with metastastic melanoma who failed to respond to interleukin 2 [letter]. Eur J Cancer
1991;27:599.
574. Sparano JA, Fisher RI, Sunderland M, et al. Randomized phase III trial of treatment with high-dose interleukin-2 either alone or in combination with interferon alfa-2a in patients with advanced
melanoma. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1969.
575. Legha SS, Gianan MA, Plager C, Eton OE, Papadopoulous NE. Evaluation of interleukin-2 administered by continuous infusion in patients with metastatic melanoma. Cancer 1996;77:89.
576. Atkins MB, Lotze MT, Dutcher JP, et al. High-dose recombinant interleukin 2 therapy for patients with metastatic melanoma: analysis of 270 patients treated between 1985 and 1993. J Clin
Oncol 1999;17:2105.
577. Wolf P, Quehenberger F, Mullegger R, Stranz B, Kerl H. Phenotypic markers, sunlight-related factors and sunscreen use in patients with cutaneous melanoma: an Austrian case-control study.
Melanoma Res 1998;8:370.
578. Klepp O, Magnus K. Some environmental and bodily characteristics of melanoma patients. A case-control study. Int J Cancer 1979;23:482.
579. Herzfeld PM, Fitzgerald EF, Hwang SA, Stark A. A case-control study of malignant melanoma of the trunk among white males in upstate New York. Cancer Detect Prev 1993;17:601.
580. Westerdahl J, Olsson H, Masback A, Ingvar C, Jonsson N. Is the use of sunscreens a risk factor for malignant melanoma? Melanoma Res 1995;5:59.
581. Autier P, Dore JF, Schifflers E, et al. Melanoma and use of sunscreens: an Eortc case-control study in Germany, Belgium and France. The EORTC Melanoma Cooperative Group. Int J Cancer
1995;61:749.
582. Beitner H, Norell SE, Ringborg U, Wennersten G, Mattson B. Malignant melanoma: aetiological importance of individual pigmentation and sun exposure. Br J Dermatol 1990;122:43.
583. Holman CD, Armstrong BK, Heenan PJ. Relationship of cutaneous malignant melanoma to individual sunlight-exposure habits. J Natl Cancer Inst 1986;76:403.
584. Osterlind A, Tucker MA, Stone BJ, Jensen OM. The Danish case-control study of cutaneous malignant melanoma. II. Importance of UV-light exposure. Int J Cancer 1988;42:319.
585. Holly EA, Aston DA, Cress RD, Ahn DK, Kristiansen JJ. Cutaneous melanoma in women. Am J Epidemiol 1995;141:923.
586. Rodenas JM, Delgado-Rodriguez M, Herranz MT, Tercedor J, Serrano S. Sun exposure, pigmentary traits, and risk of cutaneous malignant melanoma: a case-control study in a Mediterranean
population. Cancer Cause Control 1996;7:275.
587. Kirkwood JM, Strawderman MH, Ernstoff MS, et al. Interferon alfa-2b adjuvant therapy of high-risk resected cutaneous melanoma: the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Trial EST 1684. J
Clin Oncol 1996;14:7.
588. Creagan ET, Dalton RJ, Ahmann DL, et al. Randomized, surgical adjuvant clinical trial of recombinant interferon alfa-2a in selected patients with malignant melanoma. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:2776.
589. Cascinelli N, Bufalino R, Morabito A, MacKie R. Results of adjuvant interferon study in WHO melanoma programme. Lancet 1994;343:913.
590. Kirkwood JM, Sosman J, Ernstoff M, et al. E2690: A study of the mechanism of IFN alfa-2b in high risk melanoma in the ECOG/intergroup trial E1690. Proc Am AssocCancer Res 1995;36:641.
591. Keilholz U, Goey SH, Punt CJ, et al. Interferon alfa-2a and interleukin-2 with or without cisplatin in metastatic melanoma: a randomized trial of the European Organization for Research and
Treatment of Cancer Melanoma Cooperative Group. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2579.
592. Keilholz U, Goey SH, Punt CJA, et al. A randomized trial if IFNa/IL-2 with or without CDDP in advanced melanoma: an eortic melanoma cooperatie group trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1996;15.
593. Legha S, Ring S, Bedikian A. Treatment of metastatic melanoma with combined chemotherapy containing cisplatin, vinblastin and dacarbazine (CVD) and biotherapy using interleukin-2 and
interferon-a. Ann Oncol 1996;7:827.
594. Flaherty LE, Atkins M, Sosman J, et al. Randomized phase II trial of chemotherapy and outpatient biotherapy with inteleukin-2 (IL-2) and interferon alpha (IFN) in metastatic malignant
melanoma (MMM). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:536a.
595. Cocconi G, Bella M, Calabresi F, et al. DTIC versus DTIC plus tamoxifen in metastatic malignant melanoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1990;9:278.
596. Rusthoven J, Quirt I, Iscoe N, et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial comparing BCNU (B), decarbazine, and cisplatin (P) versus BDP and high-dose tamoxifen in the treatment of
metastic melanoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:413.
597. Buzaid AC, Legha S, Winn R, et al. Cisplatin(C), vinblastine(V), and dacarbazine(D) (CVD) versus dacarbazine alone in metastatic melanoma: preliminary results of a phase III cancer
community oncology program (CCOP) trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1993;12:389.
598. Falkson CI, Ibrahim J, Kirkwood JM, et al. Phase III trial of dacarbazine versus dacarbazine with interferon alpha-2b versus dacarbazine with tamoxifen versus dacarbazine with interferon
alpha-2b and tamoxifen in patients with metastatic malignant melanoma: an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1743.
599. McDermott DF, Mier JW, Lawrence DP, et al. A phase II pilot trial of concurrent biochemotherapy with cisplatin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine (CVD), interleukin-2 (IL-2) and interferon alpha-2b
(IFN) in patients with metastatic melanoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:490a.
600. O'Day SJ, Gammon G, Boasberg PD, et al. Advantages of concurrent biochemotherapy modified by decrescendo interleukin-2, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, and tamoxifen for patients
with metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2752.
601. Thompson JA, Gold PJ, Fefer A. Outpatient chemoimmunotherapy for the treatment of metastatic melanoma. Semin Oncol 1997;24:S44.

SECTION 42.3 Intraocular Melanoma
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 42.3
Intraocular Melanoma
JOSÉ A. SAHEL
ARTHUR S. POLANS
MINESH P. MEHTA
RICHARD M. AUCHTER
DANIEL M. ALBERT
Introduction
Epidemiology
Race
Gender
Mortality
Etiology and Histogenesis of Ocular Melanomas
Genetics and Immunohistochemistry
Predisposing Conditions
Oncogenic Stimuli
Histopathology, Prognostic Parameters, and Natural History
Cytologic and Histologic Classification
Tissue Culture and Animal Models of Uveal Melanomas
Histopathologic Effects of Radiation
Natural History
Diagnosis of Uveal Melanomas: Choroidal and Ciliary Body Melanomas
Management
Prognostic Assessment of Choroidal and Ciliary Body Melanomas
Pretreatment Clinical Staging
Treatment of Choroidal and Ciliary Body Melanomas
Future Directions for Research
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Melanomas are the most common primary intraocular malignancy in whites. They arise from uveal melanocytes (i.e., mature melanin-producing and
melanin-containing cells) residing in the uveal stroma and originating from the neural crest. Whereas reactive or neoplastic proliferations of pigmented cells can occur
in the epithelia of the iris, ciliary body, and retina, forming adenomas or adenocarcinomas, this chapter deals exclusively with uveal melanomas. A particular emphasis
is given to the current therapeutic concerns and issues since (1) the appropriate treatment of the primary tumor remains in many instances controversial and (2)
management of metastatic disease is essentially palliative.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
The annual age-adjusted incidence of nonskin melanomas as reported in the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program during 1973 to 1977 was 0.7 per
100,000 population in the United States. Similar figures were reported from epidemiologic studies conducted in New England (0.65 per 100,000 residents from 1984
to 1985), the Swedish west coast (0.72 per 100,000 over the period 1956 to 1975), and Iceland (0.7 per 100,000 in male patients and 0.5 per 100,000 in female
patients over the period 1955 to 1979). In the Third National Cancer Survey, conducted from 1969 to 1971, the annual age-adjusted incidence in the United States
was estimated at 0.6 per 100,000. The precise anatomic origin of ocular melanomas was unspecified in approximately 25% of cases. Seventy-three percent of the
tumors arose within the globe (mainly from the choroid), and 2% developed from the conjunctiva. Melanoma accounted for 70% of all primary ocular malignancies,
followed in frequency by the childhood tumor retinoblastoma (13%). In persons older than 20, melanoma was the reported diagnosis for 80% of all primary ocular
cancers. Data from the Missouri Department of Health; China; the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program; New England; Iceland; Finland; and the
Ocular Melanoma Task Force are similar to those reported by the Third National Cancer Survey. 1 A French study in 1992 provided accurate data on the incidence of
this condition in the French population: 0.73 per 100,000. 2 The annual age-adjusted incidence of ocular melanomas is approximately one-eighth that of skin
melanomas in the United States. The recently observed increase in the incidence of cutaneous melanomas has not been observed for uveal melanomas. 3
Although the incidence increases steadily by decade, with a peak in the seventh decade, uveal melanoma cases occur before the age of 20, as illustrated by 101 of
the 6359 cases on file at the Registry of Ophthalmic Pathology at the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology (AFIP), 40 of 3706 consecutive patients seen at Wills Eye
Hospital, and by several other reports. Most studies show a median age at diagnosis of approximately 55, with rates dropping after age 70. 3,13
RACE
The lower incidence of uveal melanoma in African Americans has been noticed in several large series. Only 10 African American patients were identified among more
than 3586 patients with uveal melanoma (0.39%) from the oncology service at Wills Eye Hospital between 1974 and 1989. 3 Findings from the Florida Cancer Data
System showed a 32-fold greater risk of uveal melanoma in whites than in African Americans. 4 White men had 72 times the risk of developing uveal melanoma as
compared with that of African American men. For white women, this risk was 22 times that of African American women. 4 According to the Florida Cancer Data System,
the risk of uveal melanoma in Hispanics is 62% less than that of white non-Hispanics. These findings may support at least in part the hypothesis that the sunlight
effect on the causation of melanoma is primarily a direct one, since this is not found for visceral melanomas. 5 A study of the initial clinical manifestations and
pathologic characteristics in Hispanic patients enucleated for choroidal melanomas showed an earlier onset, a larger tumor diameter, and a heavier pigmentation in
this population than in other groups. 6 An epidemiologic study of posterior uveal melanoma in Israel over the period 1961 to 1989 shows that the incidence rates have
been stable over this 30-year period. The incidence rate is lowest in Jews from Asia and Africa (2.2) and in non-Jews (1.5) and is highest in Jews born in Israel (6.8),
Europe, and the Americas (7.5). The significance of these figures with regard to the role of constitutional factors and timing of sunlight irradiation remains conjectural. 7
GENDER
Although Scotto et al. found that the overall risk of ocular melanomas did not vary by gender, Jensen, Gislason et al., and othersnoted a predominance of male
patients. 8,9 and 10 Ocular and skin melanoma show similar age patterns, with more women affected at younger ages and more men later in life. The Third National
Cancer Survey indicated a left-sided excess of 18% for ocular melanomas in men and a right-sided excess in women. 1
MORTALITY
As emphasized by Markowitz et al. 11 in a review of mortality from choroidal melanoma, very few reports are complete enough to be informative. Diener-West et al., 12
using selected data published during the period from 1966 to 1988, performed a pooled analysis (metaanalysis) of 5-year mortality rates among enucleated patients,
providing weighed estimates of 5-year mortality after enucleation: 16% for small tumors [95% confidence interval (CI), 14% to 18%], 32% for medium-size tumors
(95% CI, 29% to 34%), and 53% for large tumors (95% CI, 50% to 56%). The most complete long-term survival studies after enucleation were performed in Denmark
by Jensen9 et al. and in Finland by Raivio. 13 In the Finnish study, the 5-, 10-, and 15-year survival rates were 65%, 52%, and 46%, 13 respectively. In the Danish study,
survival rates were similar; at the end of the 25-year period, 51% patients had died from metastasis. 9 A French study of survival of patients with uveal melanomas
treated by enucleation with a long-term follow-up reported similar figures. 14 Rates of survival after radiation therapy appear comparable in the short term and mean
term. Yet, as the following discussion shows, both the validity of these data and the long-term predictability of prognosis after conservative treatment remain a matter
of controversy. The median survival of patients with metastatic disease is reportedly very short: 2 to 5 months. 11,12

ETIOLOGY AND HISTOGENESIS OF OCULAR MELANOMAS
As is the case for most human cancers, the specific causes of ocular melanomas are unknown. However, epidemiologic, electron-microscopical, and experimental
data allow characterization of risk factors, predisposing conditions, and hypothetical genetic or oncogenic causes.
GENETICS AND IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY
There is now considerable evidence that, like many cancers, a subset of uveal melanomas is caused by an inherited predisposition. The familial occurrence of uveal
melanomas was first mentioned by Silcock15 in 1892 and reported since several times. 16,17 and 18 Despite the rare occurrence of uveal melanoma in a family and the
presence of many skips in these pedigrees, the occurrence of familial uveal melanoma is not caused by fortuitous familial aggregation of sporadic cases. 18 Because
of an insufficient number of families with more than two affected individuals, it is impossible to distinguish between polygenic inheritance, single-gene inheritance with
reduced penetrance, and the role of environmental factors as causes of this familial aggregation. A few cytogenetic studies argue for the putative role of a recessive
oncogene on chromosome 2, 3, or 6q 19,20 and showed abnormalities again on chromosomes 6 and 8q. 19,21,22 and 23 Other studies emphasize the possible relationship of
monosomy 3 and multiplication of chromosome 8q to uveal melanoma, 24,25 suggesting monosomy 3 as an early, if not primary, event and supporting a role for
chromosome 8q multiplication in the proliferation of cloned tumor cells in vitro. A role for the c-myc oncogene, located in the region 8q2.1-qter, in uveal melanoma
formation and progression, probably linked to the regulation of cell proliferation, has been hypothesized. This is partly supported by cytogenetic 21 as well as
immunohistochemical studies.26 Abnormalities of the p53 gene have also been demonstrated. 27,28 The coexistence of ocular and cutaneous melanoma in some
patients suggests a predisposition to both types and may imply mutations in the CDKN2A gene on chromosome 9 in a proportion of these cases. 29 An association
between ocular melanoma and breast or ovarian cancer (or both) has also been reported, and BRCA2 on chromosome 13 may also be involved. 29
Additional molecular genetic studies are necessary to understand the pathogenesis of familial uveal melanoma. In several studies, 30,31,32 and 33 investigators have
demonstrated a close link between oncogenesis and the cell-cycle machinery. Progression through the cell cycle is orchestrated by sequential activation of a series of
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). The CDKs' activity is primarily dependent on the association with their activating cyclin subunits (Ds, E, G 1). CDK activity is
counterbalanced by a variety of CDK-inhibitory proteins (CKIs), such as p21, p27, p16, and the like. Deregulated expression of G 1 cyclins p21, p27, p16 CKIs, and
alteration in the interaction of CKIs with CDKs may be implicated in the neoplastic transformation of human ocular melanocytes to malignant melanoma cells. 30,31,33
MDR1 gene and its gene product, P glycoprotein, which are known to cause drug resistance in cancer cells, are expressed in ocular melanoma. 32 Dunne et al.32
reported a statistically significant association between MDR1 expression by tumor cells and shorter survival times, which was most striking at grade III. 32 Whether P
glycoprotein is a marker for tumor aggressiveness, for clinical chemotherapy resistance, or perhaps for both remains to be clarified.
PREDISPOSING CONDITIONS
Ocular and oculodermal melanocytosis (i.e., nevus of Ota) predispose to the development of uveal melanomas. In 4.6% of reported cases of nevus of Ota, malignant
transformation was reported 34 and, except for a single anecdotal case, the melanoma occurred in the pigmented eye. In the vast majority (90%) of patients with
oculodermal melanosis and uveal melanoma, the uveal melanoma was diagnosed between the ages of 31 years and 80 years. 34 Rare cases of uveal melanomas
have been reported in patients with type 1 neurofibromatosis, 35 a neurocristopathy. The tumor cells in neurofibromatosis have their origin in the neural crest, in
common with melanocytes.35
Evidence that nevi are the origin of most choroidal melanomas has been provided by Yanoff and Zimmerman. 36 Yet a nevus-like configuration associated with
choroidal melanoma may, in some cases, be explained by other mechanisms, such as (1) flattening of normal uveal melanocytes or of tumor cells, (2) a secondary
proliferative effect of the malignancy, or (3) common oncogenic stimuli. The last two mechanisms have been postulated in a few cases of bilateral diffuse melanocytic
tumors of the uvea in patients with systemic carcinoma. 36
In some instances (as discussed), a familial increased occurrence of uveal melanoma has been recorded. 16,17,18 Data on the occurrence of uveal melanocytic tumors
in patients with the dysplastic nevus syndrome are controversial 36 but generally support the value of periodic ophthalmoscopic examination of patients with atypical
nevi. 37 A recent case-control study by Bataille et al. 38 demonstrated that (1) numerous common nevi (i.e., 100) were present in 10% of cases versus 3% of controls;
(2) four or more atypical nevi were present in 7% of cases versus 0.4% controls; (3) pigmented iris nevi were significantly more common in cases than in controls
(odds ratio, 3.1); and (4) the atypical mole syndrome was a strong risk factor (odds ratio, 7.3).
The association between uveal melanomas and other cancers is still a matter of controversy. Turner et al. 39 showed that the overall prevalence of non–basal cell
cancers in uveal melanoma patients was twice the expected prevalence based on an age- and gender-matched population. 39 Anecdotal cases of uveal melanomas
associated with various cancers exist, including breast cancer 28 and lymphomas.40 A link between cutaneous and uveal melanoma was suspected on the basis of the
association, in three cases (among 333 patients), of primary uveal and cutaneous melanomas. A family history of cutaneous or uveal melanoma was present in 14 of
the primary uveal melanoma patients and 2 of the cutaneous melanoma patients. 41 Bataille et al. 41 reported five cases of primary ocular and cutaneous melanoma
occurring in the same individual. Lischko et al. conducted a case-control study among 197 New England cases with 385 matched controls and 337 cases (from the
United States) with 800 controls. They concluded that the association of prior malignancies with uveal melanomas is weak. 42 Holly et al., in a similar study of 407
uveal melanoma patients from the western United States with 870 control subjects, found no excess prior cancer. 43
ONCOGENIC STIMULI
Certain electron-microscopical and biomolecular studies of ocular melanomas suggest an etiologic role of viruses. Viruses such as the feline sarcoma have been used
successfully in the induction of animal ocular melanoma models. 53,54
In a study of a single population of chemical workers, a statistically significant and higher-than-expected incidence of ocular melanomas was found. Nicotine has been
incriminated in the unusual incidence of uveal melanomas in male patients but does not appear to increase the risk for metastasis. 44 Various chemicals, including
nickel bisulfamide, platinum, methylcholanthrene, ethionine, N-2-fluorenylacetamide, radium, and N-methyl-N-nitrosourea have been reported to induce ocular
melanocytic tumors in animals.55 An exploratory study of various occupational associations provided elevated odds ratios for agriculture and farming work, several
industrial operations, and exposure to inks, insecticides, gases, radioactive substances, polybromated phenyls, and chemical solvents. 33,45 A possible connection
between Parkinson's disease, levodopa therapy, and malignant melanoma has been mentioned. The role of hormonal factors and pregnancy has been suggested in
some reports. Hartge et al. 46a reported a case-control study comparing 238 women with uveal melanoma with 223 matched control women. They showed that women
with a history of pregnancy or hormonal substitutive treatment with estrogens had an increased risk, whereas a history of oophorectomy had a decreasing influence
on relative risk (risk ratio, 0.6), and oral contraceptives had no influence on relative risk. 46 Seddon et al. and Shields et al. 44a,45a have documented the role of
pregnancy in the growth of uveal melanomas. Whether the growth observed clinically is secondary to cellular growth or other factors (e.g., fluid retention or vascular
engorgement) is unclear. 55,57,58 Foss et al.46 failed to detect any estrogen or progesterone receptors in 27 choroidal melanomas and questioned the role of these
hormones in the development or progression of these tumors.
A case-control study lends support to the etiologic role of sunlight exposure. 49 A study of host factors (Northern ancestry, light skin color, 10 or more cutaneous nevi),
ultraviolet radiation, and risk of uveal melanoma indicated that personal attributes are strong independent risk factors. 48 Holly et al. 43 showed that light skin color and
easily sunburned skin increase by twofold the risk of uveal melanoma, while ultraviolet exposure increases this risk by fourfold, and sevenfold if intensive. 49 These
data, contradicting previous studies, confirm the high association between light iris color and the presence of melanocytic lesions. 50 More recent evidence of an
association between light iris color and melanocytic lesions has come from cases of melanomas associated with xeroderma pigmentosum 47,48,56 as well as a
case-control study of patients with uveal melanoma. It has been suggested that cutaneous freckles (25 or more) or iris freckles and nevi may be risk factors for uveal
melanomas.49 Also, a relationship has been suggested between cutaneous or iris nevi and ocular melanomas. 38 Paraneoplastic uveal melanocytic proliferations have
been observed in association with various systemic malignancies, such as ovary and lung. 50,51 These appear as diffuse multinodular infiltration of the uveal tract by
predominantly diploid nevoid cells as well as more anaplastic cells; in addition, an association between bilateral uveal melanoma and a proliferation associated
antigen (Ki-67) has been described. 52 The pathogenesis of paraneoplastic uveal melanocytic proliferation remains speculative. Hamartomatous paraneoplastic

proliferation or stimulation of a preexisting tumor are possible underlying factors. 50

HISTOPATHOLOGY, PROGNOSTIC PARAMETERS, AND NATURAL HISTORY
CYTOLOGIC AND HISTOLOGIC CLASSIFICATION
Experienced pathologists generally make the accurate microscopical diagnosis of uveal melanoma easily, but it is still occasionally difficult to differentiate between
primary and metastatic choroidal melanomas. 71,72 In rare cases, differentiation from metastatic carcinoma may be facilitated by immunohistochemical labeling with
monoclonal antibodies to S-100 protein. 72 This technique is not helpful in differentiating other neural crest–derived tumors (schwannomas, neurofibromas, and
leiomyomas).73 The S-100 immunophenotypes of uveal melanomas differ considerably from cutaneous melanomas. 74,75,76 and 77 S-100b is not helpful for distinguishing
between primary and metastatic choroidal melanoma. HMB-45 immunostaining appears to be a useful adjunct in the differentiation between nonmelanocytic and
melanocytic tumors but serves as a marker of melanocytic activation rather than a tool to differentiate uveal melanomas from nevi. 72,75,76 Studies of the
immunocytochemistry of uveal melanomas using antibodies against cutaneous melanomas or anti-HLA antibodies have not yet provided a clinically useful
characterization of the ocular tumors. 77,78 Cytometry can phenotype cells in suspension from ocular melanoma tissue. 73 Lawry et al.73 described antibody binding for
MHC antigens, the adhesion molecule ICAM-1, and the oncoproteins c-erb B-2, c-myc, and bcl-2. Further studies should be undertaken to question whether there are
any relationships between traditional clinical and pathologic parameters (tumor cell type, volume, location, the tissue origin) and the flow cytometric measurement of
cell surface protein or cytoplasmic-nuclear oncoprotein expression in cells taken from samples of primary uveal melanomas.
In 1931, Callender recognized major cell types in the spectrum of cells composing uveal melanomas, and this provided a cytologic classification clearly correlated with
prognosis after enucleation. The different cell types are based on cell size and shape, cytoplasmic features, nuclear and nucleolar characteristics, evidence of loss of
cohesion, and relative number of various cell types as outlined in Table 42.3-1.

TABLE 42.3-1. Designation of the Cell Type Based on the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology Modification of the Callender Classification

According to Callender's cytologic characterization, uveal melanomas are divided into three categories:
Spindle cell melanomas type A, B, or both, accounting for 30% of intraocular tumors, composed of spindle cells
Mixed cell melanomas, when fewer than one-half of the tumor sections examined are composed of epithelioid cells
Epithelioid cell melanomas (accounting for 5% of intraocular tumors), when greater than one-half is composed of epithelioid cells
Based on Callender classification, spindle cell tumors carry the best prognosis and epithelioid cell tumors the worst. In the Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study
(COMS) series,74 large tumors contain more epithelioid cells than small tumors do; small tumors contain a higher percentage of spindle cell types. In their series, a
more malignant cell type was observed more commonly in tumors with large size and anterior location.
Paul et al. reviewed 2652 cases accessioned at the AFIP by 1959 and found that 95% of patients with spindle A tumors, 85% of those with spindle B tumors, 60% of
those with mixed tumors, and 83% of those with epithelioid tumors were alive 5 years after enucleation. 43a At 15 years after enucleation, the survival rates were 85%
for spindle A, 80% for spindle B, 46% for mixed, and 34% for epithelioid. 74 McLean et al., 79a in a review of 3432 cases from the AFIP, found that the overall mortality
from metastasis 15 years after enucleation was 46%. The mortality of patients with mixed cell melanomas was three times that of patients with pure spindle cell
lesions.74
In Jensen's series of 302 cases reported from Denmark that had been observed for 25 years, 150 patients (50%) died of metastatic melanoma. Fewer than 1% of
patients with spindle A tumors died of metastatic disease; 63% with mixed tumors died of this cause; and the cause of death in 71% with epithelioid tumors was
metastatic melanoma.9
Works by Sorenson et al. and Gamel et al. 80,81 and others have corroborated the well-documented prognostic value of Callender's classification, especially as to the
pejorative significance of a high epithelioid cell content. 82 Yet, the major cell types described by Callender are part of a continuous spectrum, and the pathologist's
identification of a particular cell type involves subjective judgment.
In the COMS report number 6, 74 balloon cells were associated with epithelioid tumors but not with tumor size. Metastases containing balloon cells have been
reported. These lipid-laden cells are thought to be metabolically less active than spindle or epithelioid cells. 74
This issue was addressed by Sorenson et al. and Gamel et al., 80,81 who described a more objective method of assessing uveal melanomas histopathologically. This
technique uses computed cytomorphometry and entails evaluating the inverse of the standard deviation of the nucleolar area with measurements made of the mean of
the 10 largest nucleoli and stereologic estimates produced of the volume-weighted mean nucleolar volume. 79,80 This, in conjunction with tumor size as estimated by
largest tumor diameter, is among the best objective cytologic measures of a tumor's malignant potential ( P >.001).81 Marcus et al., 84 counting nucleolar organizing
regions, reached similar figures.
Folberg et al., 82,83 Pe'er et al., 85 and Rummelt et al.,86 using sections stained with periodic acid–Schiff, described nine vascular patterns that they observed in ×10
objective fields of uveal malignant melanomas:
Normal vessels
Silent-avascular zones
Straight with randomly distributed vessels
Parallel-oriented straight vessels without cross-linking
Parallel with cross-linking between vessels
Arcs that are incomplete loops
Arcs with branching
Loops that represent fibrovascular septa that completely surround lobules of tumor
Networks that are composed of at least three back-to-back loops
The detection of these patterns in histologic sections is highly reproducible between observers, 87 and more than one pattern can exist in a tumor. 88 Foss et al.88
showed that the avascular zones contain large numbers of small blood vessels as demonstrated by factor VIII staining.
Two of these microvascularization patterns (networks, parallel with cross-linking) showed a very strong correlation with metastatic disease; two other

microvascularization patterns (silent, parallel without cross-linking) were correlated with a more favorable outcome for the patient. 82,83,85,86,89,90 and 91 The survival rate
was 80% at 20 years in the absence of loops, networks, or parallel with cross-linking vascular patterns and only 40% when these patterns were present. 82,83,85,86 The
presence of epithelioid cells is associated with the presence of networks, and the absence of epithelioid cells is associated with avascular zones. 87 These
microcirculatory patterns of primary uveal melanomas appear also in foci of metastasis, regardless of the site of dissemination. 92
The Callender classification cell typing is highly subjective because it is based on multiple cytoplasmic, nuclear, and nucleolar features. Loops and mean of the
largest nucleoli (MLN) should be less subjective than cell type, because these variables are based on only one feature and MLN is measured objectively. 93
Several attempts to evaluate the growth and malignant potential of uveal melanomas have been made recently using DNA cell-cycle studies (e.g., bromodeoxyuridine
uptake or Ki-67 antibody as a marker of cycling cells, 96 proliferating cell nuclear antigen, 94,95 DNA or RNA content by flow cytometry).96 Several reports of DNA ploidy
analysis in uveal melanomas showed a progressive predominance of diploid over aneuploid tumors moving from spindle to epithelioid cell type and worsening
prognosis. 96,97 and 98 The value of this technique as a diagnostic and prognostic tool in combination with fine-needle aspiration biopsy needs further confirmation. 97,99
After the works of Rosenberg et al. on the prognostic and therapeutic value of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL), a reappraisal of the lymphocytic infiltration of some
uveal melanomas has been undertaken. 100 Whelchel et al. 101 and other authors 102 unexpectedly showed that T-lymphocytic infiltration is associated with death from
metastasis. T cells appear predominant among TIL. Attempts to generate TIL cytotoxic for ocular melanoma cells showed that after interleukin-2 addition, cells
expressing natural killer (NK) cells, lymphokine-activated killer cells, and tumor-specific cytotoxic properties were obtained. 100 Moreover, allogeneic melanomas could
substitute for autologous tumors in active specific immunotherapy with CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes. 103 A few studies suggest a link between host-immune
responses to the tumor and gangliosides profile (e.g., GM3 vs. GD2 and 3). 104,105 The role of infiltrating lymphocytes in the regression of animal models of tumors was
shown in nude mice for NK cell-mediated lysis 106,107 and for CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes in the rejection of tumors from transgenic mice. 106,107
TISSUE CULTURE AND ANIMAL MODELS OF UVEAL MELANOMAS
Several cell lines of human ocular melanomas have been established and characterized. 53,54,55,56,57 and 58 These vary greatly regarding doubling times or morphology
and are mostly used for genetic studies and the development of animal models.
The most commonly used model of uveal melanoma is the Greene melanoma, which represents a transplantable hamster amelanotic melanoma. When injected into a
rabbit eye, this tumor grows rapidly with marked spontaneous necrosis and is, therefore, not reflective of the clinical situation. 59,60 Other models of either induced or
spontaneous pigmented intraocular tumors are available arising from the retinal pigment epithelium or representing atypical nevi. 61,62,63 and 64 Yet, to date, the most
clinically relevant model to the human situation appears to be the heterotransplantation of human uveal melanomas into the choroid of rabbits, 65,66,67,68 and 69 and the
newer transgenic mouse models.70 These transgenic models are based on using the promoter region of the tyrosinase gene to target the expression of oncogenes to
pigment-producing cells of different origins. Most of the models have been successful in producing intraocular pigmented tumors, including retinal pigment epithelium
tumors, carcinomas, and ocular melanosis. 70 These models might provide better understanding of uveal malignant melanoma pathobiology.
HISTOPATHOLOGIC EFFECTS OF RADIATION
The histopathology of radiation-treated globes is of value in understanding the therapeutic mode of action. 108,109,110,111,112 and 113 The aim of treatment is to kill all tumor
cells or to render them incapable of sustained proliferation. It is postulated that this result can be achieved through indirect tumor necrosis and hypoxia secondary to
blood supply damage. 108 Most studies are biased by the small size of the sample and by the complicated nature of cases examined in the pathology laboratory.
Changes in eyes enucleated for radiation-induced complications or poor tumor control may not reflect the radiation response of most treated cases. Using
conventional light-microscopy methods, it was difficult in most studies to characterize histopathologically the radiation response aside from radiation-induced damage
(radiation retinopathy, rubeosis iridis, cataract, vitreous hemorrhage). In the COMS, 74 preenucleation radiation significantly reduced, but did not eliminate, mitotic
activity. Not surprisingly, tumor regrowth is correlated with significant mitotic activity, 112 whereas good tumor response is linked with fewer mitotic figures and tumor
and blood vessel damage. 113 It seems likely that loss of replicative capacity through DNA damage is a major mode of action of this method. Other significant features
of irradiated tumors include necrosis, fibrosis, and balloon cell formation. 109,111,113
Further studies of the sequence of changes after proton beam treatment of uveal melanomas indicates progressive changes with decreased inflammation and
increased fibrosis. In successfully treated tumors, mitotic figures persist only for the first 30 months after treatment. 114,115
NATURAL HISTORY
Doubling Time
Little is known about the natural history of uveal melanomas. Until recent decades, all patients underwent enucleation immediately after the diagnosis. 113 Data on the
growth pattern of small melanomas from series of patients observed by Gass and others have contributed to our knowledge of the rate of intraocular tumor growth
prior to treatment.50 These findings and other selected reports suggest a gompertzian (exponential) growth curve, as postulated by Manschot et al. 129 The doubling
time of uveal tumors may vary from 2 months or less to several years. In rapidly growing tumors, a high mitotic activity and the presence of epithelioid cells have been
documented. Spontaneous regression of a choroidal melanoma has been described. 116
Intraocular Spread
Small melanomas grow from a discoid to a hemispheric shape. They progressively obliterate the choriocapillaris and displace Bruch's membrane and the retina
inward. When Bruch's membrane is disrupted, the tumor usually grows in the subretinal space in a mushroom configuration. 118,119 and 120 The retinal pigment epithelium
overlying the tumors undergoes early changes called tumor-associated retinal pigment epitheliopathy, which includes drusen formation and orange pigment
(lipofuscin) accumulation. 120 The neurosensory retina is frequently detached and, in some instances, infiltrated by tumor cells, which can seed into the vitreous. Most
often, but not exclusively, this is a late finding.
Anterior tumors are more likely to affect the lens and to involve the posterior chamber. The zonules, lens, iris, anterior chamber, and angle may be affected by the
tumor. A secondary glaucoma may result from obstruction of the outflow pathways by tumor cells, cell debris, and phagocytic cells swollen with ingested cell debris
(melanomalytic glaucoma). The tumor may infiltrate through the scleral spur into the anterior chamber.
Although the sclera is thought to be an effective barrier against extraocular extension, scleral infiltration by tumor cells along ciliary vessels and nerves and along the
vortex veins is frequent (32.3% of large melanomas in a series reported by Shammas and Blodi). 122 Approximately 5% of melanomas grow diffusely in the plane of the
uvea or circumferentially along the root of the iris. They induce a slight thickening of the uvea (approximately 3 to 5 mm) and are often unsuspected or diagnosed late
when secondary glaucoma or extraocular spread occurs. Extraocular spread may occur adjacent to or within the optic nerve or can occur anteriorly about the
limbus.124
Extraocular Extension
Although extrascleral extension may be observed with small tumors, it is more likely to occur when the tumor has reached a larger size. 125 In a study by Shammas and
Blodi,122 extrascleral extension was observed in 18% of tumors exceeding 10 mm in diameter. The overall incidence of transscleral extension was determined to be
approximately 13% among 1842 malignant melanomas studied by Starr and Zimmerman.125 Other series arrive at similar data. Starr and Zimmerman noted a tenfold
increase in the incidence of postoperative recurrence if the tumor extended to the surgical margin. The depth of scleral extension may have a prognostic significance.
Other less common paths of extraocular spread include the optic nerve and the lumen of the vortex veins. 124
Metastases

Lymphatic spread has not been demonstrated, as would be expected from the absence of lymphatics in the eye. This is in contrast to cutaneous melanomas.
Hematogenous dissemination to the liver is a frequent form of metastatic spread. The respective roles of nonspecific trapping and of cell surface antigens in the
invasiveness and dissemination of uveal melanomas are not yet fully established. 117 Plasminogen activator function 118 and the epidermal growth factor receptor 119
may play a role in the occurrence and progression of metastases. Metastases to other sites (lung, heart, gastrointestinal tract, lymph nodes, pancreas, skin, central
nervous system, bones, spleen, adrenal, kidneys, ovaries, thyroid) generally occur in association with liver metastases. 120 In a survey of metastases from proton
beam–treated melanomas, liver involvement was documented in almost all patients (136 of 145); the overall 1-year survival was 13%. 120
In a series of studies, McLean et al. found that most deaths from metastatic disease occurred in the first 5 years after enucleation, with a peak mortality in the second
and third years (approximately 8% per year). They compared these data with the natural course of untreated melanomas 126 and reached a conclusion that remains
controversial: McLean et al. incriminated enucleation as a risk factor and suggested two principal mechanisms: (1) dissemination of tumor cells during traumatic
operations, as demonstrated experimentally by Fraunfelder et al., 126127 and (2) decreased host resistance to disseminated tumor cells. This latter mechanism has been
called by Niederkorn et al. 61 the “loss of intraocular induced concomitant immunity” mediated by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Zimmerman and McLean's assumptions
have been challenged by several investigators. Seigel et al. 128 concluded that the statistical data can be interpreted differently and that no evidence suggested that
the existing pattern of treatment be altered. 128 Manschot and Van Peperzeel, 129 Kersten and Blodi, 130 and Davidorf 131 pointed out that most melanomas are diagnosed
only when they have reached a relatively large size and concomitantly given rise to metastases, and only then are enucleated. The clinical consequences of these
controversies are the use of less traumatic techniques for enucleation and new impetus to the search for alternative treatments. 132
Multiple Choroidal Malignant Melanoma
It has been estimated that only one person will develop bilateral choroidal melanomas in a population of 50 million. 121 There is no clinical evidence of an inherited
genetic predisposition for bilateral primary uveal melanoma, and it may be associated with ocular melanocytosis. 123 Unilateral multifocal intraocular malignant
melanoma appears to be even rarer than bilateral intraocular melanoma. 121 To eliminate the possibility of a multinodular tumor, serial sections of the enucleated eye
are useful to exclude continuity between the two tumors. Intraocular multifocal melanoma has been associated with ocular melanocytosis, iris melanoma with invasion
of the ciliary body, iris or choroidal nevus (or both), and with systemic malignant neoplasm. 121,124 However, other cases of double melanoma do not show any such
associations. It is also unknown whether the prognosis for life differs in patients with multiple versus unifocal primary uveal melanoma.

DIAGNOSIS OF UVEAL MELANOMAS: CHOROIDAL AND CILIARY BODY MELANOMAS
The diagnosis of choroidal and ciliary body melanomas has reached a high degree of accuracy at eye centers where experienced clinicians and modern ancillary
testing facilities are available. 134 This is well illustrated by a comparison of the misdiagnosis rates among the eyes on file at the AFIP: 19% (of 529 eyes) until 1962;
20% (of 208 eyes) between 1963 and 1970; and 6.4% (of 744 eyes) between 1970 and 1980. During the 11-year period of the last study, the rate of misdiagnosis
declined from 12.5% to 1.4%. Between 1954 and 1977, the misdiagnosis rate was 2.6% (of 224 eyes) at the Mayo Clinic. In the Mayo series, in addition, six clinically
unsuspected melanomas were found.132
This high rate of correct clinical diagnosis is particularly impressive because only outpatient procedures (including clinical examination, ultrasonography, and
fluorescein angiography) were used. No biopsies were performed, as is used for many other tumors. A review of 395 eyes enucleated during a 50-year period, drawn
from the pathology files of Ohio State University, revealed a misdiagnosis rate of 10.9% in the period 1931 to 1959 that decreased to 1.7% in the period 1960 to 1981.
Nine percent of choroidal melanomas were unsuspected preoperatively; all were in eyes with opaque media. In a series of 400 consecutive patients referred to the
oncology unit of the Wills Eye Hospital with an incorrect diagnosis of melanoma (i.e., patients who proved to have a so-called pseudomelanoma), the correct
diagnosis was reached through clinical evaluation in 397 cases (99%). In that series, the most commonly encountered conditions mimicking a melanoma included
suspicious choroidal nevi (26.5%), peripheral disciform degeneration (11%), congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (9.5%), and choroidal
hemangioma (8%). Most metastatic carcinomas had been correctly diagnosed by the referring ophthalmologists. The diagnostic accuracy of 99.7% in the COMS
exceeds previously documented rates.132 It reflects the value of rigorous and standardized ophthalmic and systemic evaluations.
The cornerstone of diagnosis of posterior uveal melanoma remains clinical examination and, in particular, indirect ophthalmoscopy through a dilated pupil. Fundus
contact lens examination and the use of a three-mirror lens can be extremely helpful. 142 Scleral transillumination as advocated by Reese is also a useful aid. 182a
Pigmented conjunctival lesions, such as conjunctival melanoma, staphylomas, scleral ectasia, hematoma, cellular blue nevi, and ocular melanocytosis, may mimic
extraocular extension of uveal melanomas. Visual field studies are of little help, especially in distinguishing melanomas from choroidal nevi. Although clinical
examination by an experienced observer remains the most important test in establishing the presence of an ocular melanoma, ancillary diagnostic testing can be
extremely valuable. 142,143,144 and 145
Fluorescein angiography and monochromatic photography have proved useful in differentiating subretinal or choroidal hemorrhage and hemangioma from melanoma
(Fig. 42.3-1). Although no angiographic pattern is pathognomonic, features of value include early mottling fluorescence, orange pigment over the margin of the tumor,
progressive fluorescence of the lesion with late staining, and multiple pinpoint leaks that increase in size. Breaks in Bruch's membrane and retinal invasion can be
detected from abnormalities, such as a double or tumor circulation pattern (simultaneous visualization of retinal and choroidal circulation). 134,135,136 and 137 However, this
double circulation pattern is often difficult to recognize, particularly when the overlying retinal pigment epithelium is completely intact. An in vitro study of endogenous
fluorescence 133 emphasized the differences between low tumor autofluorescence and bright retinal pigment epithelium autofluorescence due to lipofuscin deposits.

FIGURE 42.3-1. Fluorescein angiogram showing characteristic pattern of choroidal melanoma.

Indocyanine green angiography was formerly used as a tool to differentiate melanomas from nevi, but early photographs had a rather poor resolution. 134 Since the
introduction of videoangiography and high-resolution fundus digital imaging systems, this technique has proven useful in documenting retinal vascular and choroidal
diseases. 135,136 It can also be useful to further differentiate amelanotic choroidal tumors, such as some nevi or melanomas from hemangiomas or metastases, the latter
appearing almost invariably hyperfluorescent on early or late frames (or both). This imaging system might also better delineate tumor borders. Indocyanine green
angiography using a confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscope is superior to fluorescein angiography in imaging microvascularization patterns. 89,90,137 The
angiographically seen microvascularization patterns appear to be identical to patterns identified histologically that have prognostic significance in choroidal
melanomas.89,90,138In vivo imaging of these microvascularization patterns may offer the possibility of improving the prognostic assessment of choroidal melanomas.
The combined use of A- and B-mode ultrasonographic techniques is of great value in confirming the clinical diagnosis of choroidal melanoma, especially in the
presence of opaque media. 139,140 The B-mode ultrasonographic characteristics useful in differentiating melanomas from metastases or hemangiomas are acoustic
hollowness, choroidal excavation, 141 and orbital shadowing (Fig. 42.3-2). Small tumors elevated less than 2 mm to 3 mm cannot be evaluated accurately. In large
tumors, ultrasonography provides valuable size data for serial measurements. 146 However, a difference between ultrasonographic and histopathologic measurements
of tumor thickness was demonstrated, probably consecutive to tumor shrinkage after laboratory preparation. Extrascleral extension can be detected by contact

B-mode ultrasonography. Ultrasonic tissue characterization and tumor volume determination might bear prognostic information. 141,142,143,144,145,146 and 147
Ultrasonography is also a very important follow-up tool after conservative treatment of uveal melanoma. 145

FIGURE 42.3-2. A: Ultrasonographic appearance of choroidal tumor. B: Tumor dimensions correspond to schematic drawing showing dimensions.

Three-dimensional ultrasonography is a promising imaging technique for evaluating the accurate position of radioactive plaques secured beneath intraocular
tumors.148 It can also be used to observe extrascleral extension of a choroidal melanoma, 149 to quantify the tumor volume, and for posttreatment follow-up.
Direct observation by indirect ophthalmoscopy or the use of a three-mirror lens is useful to display the anterior border of these tumors. Clinical transillumination is
helpful but is dependent on tumor characteristics and can be more difficult in those patients with amelanotic tumors, 74,150 with ocular melanocytosis, and with dark
pigmentation, or tumors complicated with paratumoral hemorrhage. Transillumination may provide an inaccurate assessment of the anterior tumor margins of the
peripheral choroid. Anatomic features evident on ultrasonographic biomicroscopy before enucleation were correlated with pathologic examination: supraciliary
choroidal effusions, ciliary body rotation, anterior tumor margin position, and angle involvement. 150
The clinical need to define the anterior borders of peripheral choroidal melanomas clearly is related mainly to decisions regarding treatment options. Secondarily, the
pattern of ciliary body involvement can help differentiate tumors of ciliary origin from those of choroidal origin.
Recent reports on the usefulness of color-coded Doppler imaging in the characterization and follow-up of melanomas are promising, particularly for detection of
pulsatile ocular blood flow (POBF) at the tumor base. 151,152,153,154,155 and 156 The tumor blood flow can also be quantified indirectly by ocular blood flow tonography. The
higher POBF values observed in eyes with choroidal melanoma indicate that the pulsatile component of choroidal blood flow is increased. 151 At present, these
techniques must be interpreted with caution. Fundamental studies to validate the theoretically derived POBF values and clinical studies to determine reference ranges
are required before any meaningful interpretation of these parameters can be made.
The usefulness of radioactive phosphorus ( 32P) in determining malignancy remains controversial, and this is little used at present. It has limited indications for use in
routine cases in which adequate support for a diagnosis of ocular melanoma can be obtained with less complicated procedures. 157
Radiologic examination, including computed tomography (CT), is useful in evaluating the presence and size of extraocular extension of tumor. It does not, however,
add significant information to ultrasonography and implies low doses of radiation. 145
Images of uveal melanoma have been obtained by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). This imaging modality has become more useful with employment of
thin-section imaging, surface coils, and contrast material (gadolinium). Typically, due to the postulated paramagnetic properties of melanin, pigmented melanomas are
hyperintense on T1-weighted images with enhancement by gadolinium and hypointense on T2-weighted images when compared to the brightness of the
vitreous. 158,159 This method is, therefore, promising in the detection and characterization of tumors in difficult cases as well as in the differentiation of associated
serous retinal detachments. 15931P magnetic resonance spectroscopy may be helpful in this respect in the near future. 158 Nevertheless, to this date, ultrasonography is
by far the main diagnostic modality in intraocular melanomas. Ocular ultrasonography is also more sensitive than MRI or CT for the detection of extraocular extension
of choroidal malignant melanomas. 160 Ultrasonography and fluorescein angiography are together very useful in patients' follow-up ( Fig. 42.3-3).

FIGURE 42.3-3. Angiographic appearance of choroidal melanoma during follow-up.

Immunologic testing does not yet offer reliable results. 161,162 Using the indirect immunoperoxidase method, Folberg et al. 162a found that 78% of patients with uveal
malignancy had tumor-associated antibodies (TAA), whereas 24% of controls tested positive for TAA. However, TAA assays could not be used to separate primary
from secondary uveal tumors. Studies with monoclonal antibodies (discussed earlier in Cytologic and Histologic Classification ) are still in the experimental phase.
Radioimmunoscintigraphy using technetium 99m–labeled monoclonal antibodies are still too preliminary to be considered as reliable diagnostic tools, even after
pretargeting techniques. 161 However, surveillance of melanoma-associated antigens and carcinoembryonic antigens may be useful for monitoring recurrence or
metastatic disease. 162
In a review of 51 consecutive patients who had undergone enucleation for a choroidal melanoma and 50 patients with simulating lesions, Char et al. found that the
ophthalmoscopic examination was the most accurate diagnostic modality, allowing correct diagnosis of choroidal melanomas in all patients with clear media. 163
Subretinal fluid, orange pigmentation, and collar-button configuration occurred more often with melanomas than with other lesions. In 63% of melanoma patients,
fluorescein angiography was diagnostic; in 82%, A- and B-mode ultrasonography was diagnostic. 163
In some problematic cases, fine-needle aspiration biopsy has been proposed. However, the interpretation of aspirates may be difficult even in the hands of an
experienced pathologist, and subsequent tumor cell seeding in the needle track has been reported. Nonetheless, in selected cases, this technique has proven useful
in differentiating benign lesions or lymphoid infiltrates from melanoma. Such biopsies obtained through a transocular approach with a 22-gauge needle provided
informative specimens in almost 90% of cases, with an accuracy of approximately 98%. 164 It should be emphasized that the lack of histologic data prior to
conservative treatment of most uveal melanomas represents a major limitation to our understanding of tumor response to radiation, accurate adaptation of
conservative approaches, and establishment of prognosis.
Despite ancillary examinations, the differential diagnosis of small tumors may be difficult. Careful follow-up of such patients at short intervals with photography,

fluorescein angiography, and ultrasonography is advocated to demonstrate tumor growth. 165,166 Buttler et al. 165 showed that the presence of symptoms, tumor
thickness, orange pigment, acoustic hollowness, and hot spots on fluorescein angiography was a significant predictor of growth.
Patients with suspected intraocular melanoma should undergo a physical examination and metastatic workup. Clinical laboratory studies should include routine blood
work, chest radiography, and liver enzyme measurements. CT should be performed if other tests suggest liver involvement. 165,166,167 and 168 Detection of circulating
melanocytes using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction amplification of the tyrosinase gene is a promising approach. 67,167,168 Nevertheless, even though it
is known that the detection of melanoma cells in blood cannot automatically be taken as a definitive sign for the presence of metastatic disease, polymerase chain
reaction might help in interpreting the result of conventional markers for metastasis in the near feature. Haynie et al. 169 noted significant differences in the peripheral
blood lymphocytes in two subgroups of patients with clincially less favorable choroidal melanoma; ciliary body involvement was related to reduction in NK cells and, in
patients with extrascleral extension, an increased number of activated T cells was noted. Liver ultrasonography, liver-spleen scans, CT of the head, and MRI appear
useful in the initial workup and follow-up. 158

MANAGEMENT
PROGNOSTIC ASSESSMENT OF CHOROIDAL AND CILIARY BODY MELANOMAS
The number of epithelioid cells in conjunction with the largest tumor dimension 74,90,91,93 and the microvascularization patterns 14,82,83,84,85 and 86 are the most important
histologic prognostic parameters. Despite an early study by Flocks et al., 170 a larger study of small melanomas by Char et al. 163 showed that the largest tumor
diameter was the best prognostic parameter for such tumors. The location of the anterior margin of the tumor, invasion of the line of transsection, and the degree of
pigmentation follow this, according to Seddon et al. 215 Other features that have been associated with prognosis include tumor size, location of the anterior margin of
the tumor, and degree of ciliary body involvement. 74 Shammas and Blodi,122 in a study of 253 choroidal and ciliary body melanomas for which a follow-up of 5 years or
more was available, identified nine factors that significantly influenced prognosis: age of the patient enucleation; location of the tumor; location of its anterior border;
largest tumor diameter in contact with the sclera, or largest tumor dimension; height of the tumor; integrity of Bruch's membrane; cell type; pigmentation; and scleral
infiltration by tumor cells. 171,173
Char et al.,163 using a multivariate analysis, reached similar conclusions for small melanomas. Parameters that significantly influenced prognosis were cell type,
largest dimension, scleral extension, and mitotic activity. A single-factor analysis identified three additional factors of significance: degree of scleral invasion, optic
nerve invasion, and pigmentation. In most studies, increased pigmentation has been associated with increased mortality. 174 However, in a multivariate analysis, these
last three parameters appear statistically related to cell type and tumor size. 171 Regan et al.172 described iris color as a prognostic factor in ocular melanoma and
concluded that patients with blue or gray irises show light to moderate tumor pigmentation and appear to be at increased risk of metastatic death from choroidal
melanoma, independent of other risk factors. Maximum tumor size is believed to be an important predictor of outcome. 74 In the COMS report number 6,74 anterior
location was observed more commonly with large tumor size and more malignant cell type. In many studies, tumors involving the ciliary body have a worse prognosis
than those located entirely in the choroid. 74,87 Microvascular networks tend to develop more commonly in the ciliary body relative to the choroid. 87 This observation is
important, because deletion of chromosome 3 may be characteristic of ciliary body melanomas and has been associated with their aggressive behavior. 87
A matter of concern in the present classification of posterior uveal melanomas is the lack of an accurate, consistent, and clinically pertinent size classification. 173 This
question is not purely theoretic, since size classification is most often the only available prognostic parameter; a clinically relevant size classification should assign
tumors to currently accepted elective treatment modality, or at least to groups of significantly different life prognosis; and a comparison of results using various
therapeutic approaches is required. The current TNM staging by the American Joint Committee on Cancer 174 draws boundary lines for small, medium, and large
tumors. According to this classification, many tumors considered medium in the current conservative management would belong to the large-tumor category. Whereas
a classification according to the largest tumor dimension would appear best suited to predict patient survival, a size classification taking into account tumor thickness
and basal diameter is currently in use in most centers and in the COM study ( Table 42.3-2).74 Data from retrospective evaluations, 173 as well as recommendations
from the COM Study group,174 tend to classify tumors as in Table 42.3-2. In COMS report number 6,74 larger tumor size was related more commonly with anterior
location and more malignant cell type. Large tumors invaded the retina, the vitreous, and vortex veins and ruptured Bruch's membrane more often than medium
tumors.74

TABLE 42.3-2. Classification of Tumor Size According to Boundary Lines

It has been shown that certain histologically identified microvascularization patterns are an independent risk factor for the growth and metastatic behavior of choroidal
melanomas. The microvascularization patterns that are networked and parallel with cross-linking indicate a high probability for metastatic disease, whereas the
presence of microvascular patterns that are silent and parallel without cross-linking indicates a better prognosis. 14,82,83,84,85 and 86,90,91 A Cox proportional hazards model
was generated with the conventional prognostic factors (including the largest tumor dimension in contact with the sclera, cell type, tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes,
mitotic figures, gender, and location of the tumor within the eye) and the presence or absence of each of the nine microcirculatory patterns. The most important
variable was the network pattern (back-to-back loops). Other significant factors in the model include (in decreasing order of importance) largest tumor dimension,
mitoses, parallel with cross-linking vascular patterns, age, the presence of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, and male gender. 87,175 However, in the Foss et al. series, 88
the parallel with cross-linking pattern did not carry a poor prognosis; in this series, a poor prognosis was associated with absence of the normal pattern and the
presence of arcs, arcs with branches, loops, and networks. Foss et al. 88 suggested that the periodic acid–Schiff patterns are based on three underlying factors that
have been identified as (1) presence of disordered growth, (2) presence of rapidly growing subclones, and (3) sectioning orientation. The first two of these factors
carried prognostic significance in a multivariate Cox model that included tumor size and microvessel density. 88
Mehaffey et al.91 observed that larger areas of these microcirculatory patterns (tumors with >2% occupied) imply a worse prognosis than small isolated foci (tumors
with <0.5% occupied). This study also showed that it is possible to separate choroidal melanomas into three prognostic groups by cross-sectional area measured from
histologic sections: small (tumor area <16.0 mm 2); medium (tumor area >16.0 mm2 but <61.4 mm2); and large (>61.4 mm 2).
The estimation of tumor volume was related to outcome, but the relation between estimated volume and outcome did not hold for relatively small tumors (measuring
<1.344 mm3).175 In a series of 217 small tumors (measuring <1.400 mm3), the largest tumor dimension in contact with the sclera was more strongly associated with
outcome than estimated volume, possibly because diffuse melanomas may have a relatively small volume but follow an aggressive clinical course. 169
Technologic advances have implemented the assessment of nucleolar area, nucleolar organized regions, tumor vascular patterns, and tumor vascular density as
potential prognostic factors. Cell type, however, remains the most potent single predictor of outcome. 74,93
Seregard et al. have shown that the MLN and PC10 immunostaining counts retain a prognostic value in uveal melanoma when adjusting for the effect of the mean of
the diverse vascular patterns. 176 In recent studies,177,178 high expression of HLA-A (and, to a lesser extent, of HLA-B) antigens on the primary uveal melanoma was

strongly correlated with poor patient survival. High HLA-B expression was significantly correlated with the presence of epithelioid cells in the tumor. 172 The primary
uveal melanomas showed a high expression of monomorphic and polymorphic HLA-A antigens, while metastases showed a high expression of monomorphic and a
lower expression of polymorphic antigens. 173
In summary, all studies show that the prognosis of a patient with a choroidal or ciliary body melanoma is adversely affected by the following factors:
Tumor containing loops, networks, or parallel with cross–linking vascular patterns 91,93,172
Largest tumor dimension exceeding 10 mm
Presence of numerous mitotic figures (mean count per 40 high-power field)
Patient age older than 56 81
Presence of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes 87
Male gender 87
Tumor containing epithelioid cells (or related cytologic features, such as nucleolar parameters and vascular architecture, as discussed earlier in Cytologic and
Histologic Classification )
Anterior tumor border anterior to equator 174
Tumor extending to the scleral surface
In the COMS report number 4, 174 older patients with a history of diabetes and patients with more anteriorly located tumors were at increased risk for death. Yet a close
interval-by-interval analysis of the prognostic value of size and cell type in a series of 3680 patients shows a decline over time after tumor excision. 175 Gamel et al.,179
applying the log-normal survival model 175,179 to 2892 patients treated by enucleation, demonstrated that the probability that the patient is cured by tumor resection is
not modulated by the same biologic factors as those determining survival time among patients. Their analysis showed that mixed cell type and advanced patient age
are associated only with a short median survival time. In contrast, pleomorphic nucleoli and large tumor size were independently associated with both a low probability
of curative resection and short median survival time. Many of these prognostic parameters are lacking in patients treated conservatively. Furthermore, due to a shorter
follow-up, bias in patient selection and size of samples, and the use of different survival analysis models, comparison of survival rates between conservative
approaches or between conservative approaches and enucleation remains a subject of intense controversy. 163,179,180 and 181 To date, the survival rates in large series
after 5 years do not differ significantly. The reported tumor-related mortality 5 years after radiation therapy ranges from 11% to 25%, 181,183 whereas preliminary
assumptions based on a log-normal model may indicate a poorer life prognosis after 10 years for patients treated conservatively. The COMS, a prospective
multicenter study, should provide answers to this most crucial and controversial issue. 209
Several studies have established a correlation between rapid tumor regression after radiation therapy and a poorer life prognosis. 175 Rapid regression of tumor height
after radiation therapy appears as a risk factor for metastasis. Rapid regression can possibly be correlated with a less differentiated cell type of fast-regressing
tumors. However, such a hypothesis is difficult to ascertain for several reasons: (1) Cytologic study of melanomas is rarely performed before radiation therapy; (2)
when needle biopsy is obtained, it often does not provide a reliable characterization of the cell type; and (3) study of enucleated eyes after radiation therapy for any
reason may not accurately reflect features of the tumor prior to radiation therapy, particularly in mixed or epithelioid tumors.
PRETREATMENT CLINICAL STAGING
In light of current knowledge, it is useful to discuss the treatment of choroidal and ciliary body melanomas in terms of tumor size, following the size classification
discussed previously in Management. In contrast with the Reese-Ellsworth classification 182a of retinoblastoma, the current classifications are of marginal help in
predicting the visual outcome of conservative approaches, since such factors as the distance to the optic nerve and macula are important in estimating final visual
acuity.
Another problem is related to the rarity of detectable metastases, particularly lymphatic, at the time of diagnosis. Attempts to detect and treat subclinical metastases
should develop in the near future to address appropriately this major clinical problem. Moreover, the lack of histopathologic data in most cases managed
conservatively has given emphasis to clinical patterns of tumor growth prior to treatment and histologic analysis of tumor regression after radiation therapy based on
enucleated eyes. The results of comparisons of data from retrospective studies have been a source of confusion and controversy.
TREATMENT OF CHOROIDAL AND CILIARY BODY MELANOMAS
In the late nineteenth century, enucleation became the standard and almost universally accepted treatment for all choroidal or ciliary body melanomas. Even today,
early enucleation continues to have its ardent advocates. 181 However, in the last two decades, enucleation has been reassessed as the standard means of treating
malignant melanomas of the choroid and ciliary body. This reassessment has resulted from (1) the development of newer and more precise diagnostic tests for
recognizing malignant melanomas and the serial documentation of their size; (2) more information about clinical and pathologic features that determine survival; (3)
additional observations about the natural course of untreated ciliary body and choroidal melanomas; (4) therapeutic developments other than enucleation to treat
these tumors without destroying the eye; and (5) disagreements as to the value and risks of enucleation. 183
Most authors today agree that the goals of an ophthalmologist treating a uveal melanoma should be to destroy or inactivate the neoplasm, to maintain useful vision in
the involved eye, to employ a treatment with as few side effects as possible but, most important, to provide the patient with the best prognosis for life possible. 175,176
Regarding which treatment can best achieve these goals, controversies will continue until results from prospective randomized treatment trials are collected. 183 In the
absence of these data, the selection of treatment is based on the specific findings in each case with regard to tumor size, location, and growth rate; the preferences of
the ophthalmologist; and the desires of the patient. Recently, Cruickshanks et al. showed that treatment choice does not seem to be associated with large differences
in quality of life (as assessed by the Medical Outcome Study Short Form 36 and the National Eye Institute Visual Function Questionnaire). 184
Small Melanomas
The choices open to the physician treating a small choroidal or ciliary body melanoma include (1) observation; (2) some method of local treatment, such as radiation
therapy, photoradiation, cryotherapy, ultrasonic hyperthermia, or local resection; and (3) enucleation.
OBSERVATION. An accumulating body of evidence indicates that the risks in observing most melanomas are generally low.

184

Serial examination every 3 months
without intervention seems appropriate if the tumor is asymptomatic and appears dormant, the diagnosis is equivocal, and no growth is seen on serial
ophthalmoscopic, photographic, and ultrasonographic examinations. Observation is also indicated for elderly or seriously ill patients or for tumors in the patient's only
useful eye, particularly where the tumor is growing slowly. If the tumor shows progression, especially rapid growth or an increase in size beyond 10 mm in diameter
and 3 mm in elevation, or if the lesion results in significant impairment of vision, treatment is indicated.
PHOTOCOAGULATION. In the photocoagulation method, the xenon arc, the argon laser, photoradiation with red light after photosensitization with hematoporphyrin

derivatives, or dye laser after phthalocyanine photosensitization can be used. 185 Some success with photocoagulation has been documented histologically in small
series. 186,187,188 and 189 The following criteria 188,189 for selecting patients with melanoma for photocoagulation treatment were suggested by Meyer-Schwickerath 188 and
Vogel189 and adapted by Shields 186:
1. The diagnosis of melanoma and evidence of growth should be documented thoroughly.
2. The tumor should not be greater than 5 diopters in elevation and 6 disc diameters at its greatest diameter.
3. The tumor must be surrounded completely without damaging the fovea or the optic disc.
4. The patient must have clear ocular media and a sufficient mydriasis to enable photocoagulation to be performed.
5. The tumor surface should not have large retinal vessels.
Photocoagulation requires several outpatient treatment sessions and is carried out after mydriasis and, in the case of xenon photocoagulation, use of retrobulbar
anesthesia. A double confluent row of heavy coagulation is repeated three times at monthly intervals to encircle the tumor and to obliterate the choroidal vasculature
supplying the lesion. The tumor subsequently becomes necrotic, with gray discoloration and a surrounding chorioatrophic scar.

Long-term complications of photocoagulation include retinal vascular obstruction, visual field defect, macular pucker, cystoid macular edema, choroid
neovascularization, vitreous hemorrhage, and retinal detachment. 186 Recurrences may appear, usually within 2 years of treatment. In a 20-year follow-up of 54
patients with uveal melanoma, Vogel 189 reported that 63% were alive, although only 46% were considered cured by photocoagulation. Twenty percent of patients
subsequently underwent enucleation. Of the 20 patients (37%) who died, 8 did so as a result of metastatic disease, 3 died of other causes and, in 9 patients, the
cause of death was undetermined. 166 Shields186 reported that among 35 patients treated between 1976 and 1979, 25 retained useful vision, 5 had poor vision, and 5
subsequently underwent enucleation. There were no tumor-related deaths. Effects of laser phototherapy are strongly correlated with tumor pigmentation. 185
Comparison of xenon arc and argon laser photocoagulation in 38 consecutive patients with a minimal follow-up of 58 months showed that recurrences were less
frequent and appeared later after xenon radiation therapy. 190a Moreover, primary photocoagulation of small posterior choroidal melanoma with argon laser is not
recommended in view of a risk of immediate visual loss. 189
Photocoagulation seems best suited for small posterior melanomas located within 3 mm of the optic disc or fovea. In such lesions, radiation-induced retinopathy may
cause visual loss. 186,187 The patient's wish to avoid radiation therapy or enucleation may be the deciding factor. Phototherapy could also be used as an adjunct to
brachytherapy. 190,191 and 192 Photocoagulation can be helpful in the treatment of secondary serous macular detachments. Reports on hematoporphyrin, benzoporphyrin
derivative monoacid and phthalocyanine, and indocyanine green–enhanced phototherapy are still preliminary. 191,192 and 193
Transpupillary thermotherapy is a technique that employs infrared light (diode laser, 810 mm) delivered as heat to induce necrosis in tumor tissues. Transpupillary
thermotherapy offers very promising results in the management of retinoblastoma. It also may be an effective treatment for small choroidal melanomas, theoretically
reducing radiation-induced complications. 194,195 In a 14-month follow-up of 100 patients with posterior choroidal melanomas, Shields et al. 195 reported tumor control in
94% of the cases but worsening of visual acuity in 42%. A longer follow-up is necessary to assess the actual rate of local recurrence, survival, and visual outcome.
OTHER LOCAL NONSURGICAL TECHNIQUES. Lincoff et al. obtained discouraging results with cryotherapy of ocular melanomas in four patients. Anecdotal reports of

successful treatments for small peripheral melanomas exist. 196 Even more than with radiation therapy, the efficacy of these alternative approaches lacks unequivocal
evidence.
LOCAL RESECTION. Peyman et al. developed a technique of local sclerochorioretinal resection for choroidal melanomas.

197,198,199,200 and 201
After a series of

photocoagulation treatments around the tumor to create a firm chorioretinal adhesion or an area of bare sclera, the tumor is surgically removed, along with the
adjacent sclera and retina. The defect is replaced by a scleral graft. Peyman has suggested that surgical candidates should exhibit the following criteria: (1) no
evidence of metastatic disease; (2) the ability to tolerate general anesthesia; (3) a tumor base no larger than 12 mm and tumor location at least 3 disc diameters from
the optic disc; (4) exudative retinal detachment no larger than one-third of the fundus; and (5) clear media.
After local resection, one-third of the eyes required enucleation because of complications, including vitreous hemorrhage and retinal detachment. Shields et al. 195
advocate, in selected cases, the use of partial lamellar sclerouvectomy. 200,201 Damato et al.,202 reporting the large experience of a skilled team, concluded that with a
technique combining lamellar scleral flap for eye closure, hypotensive anesthesia for homeostasis 202,203 and, more recently, ocular decompression by pars plana
vitrectomy, good visual results can be obtained in nasal tumors and for tumors located more than 1 disc diameter from the optic nerve and fovea. Yet, most authors
note that patients treated by local resection are also amenable to radiation therapy and that early visual loss is far more frequent after surgical resection than with
radiation. 204 The risk of leaving some viable tumor cells after treatment is also a matter of major concern. Local resection has not been widely adopted. Recently
Damato et al.202 recommended to adjunct systematically 106Ru brachytherapy to prevent tumor recurrence after local resection. 204
Iridocyclectomy has proven useful in the treatment of ciliary body melanomas in several series. 205 In the report by Forrest et al. 206 of 107 iridocyclectomies for ciliary
body melanoma, 6% of the patients had subsequent enucleation. The majority of problems related to surgical management occurred within 4 years of surgery. 206
Damato et al. have promoted and employed this method for many years with good results. 202 A surprising feature is the low incidence of recurrence even when tumor
extends to the margins of the resection. In contrast to resection of choroidal melanomas, iridocyclectomy is widely accepted for the treatment of ciliary body
melanomas.204 Endoresection of choroidal melanoma is technically challenging but may bear some interest for the conservation of central vision after removal of
juxtapapillary tumors. Preliminary results are encouraging in terms of visual outcome despite a high rate of complication, including retinal detachment (40%), and
cataract (65%). 205,207 The risk of tumor cell release during surgery warrants long-term assessment of this procedure.
ENUCLEATION. In the case of patients with a healthy second eye, enucleation is advised if the tumor shows evidence of rapid progression and invasion of the optic

nerve or extraocular extension is suspected. 208,209 Other considerations, including loss of central vision, failure of previous conservative treatment, and the patient's
desire for complete surgical removal of the tumor, may make enucleation a reasonable choice.
Large Melanomas
There is at present general agreement that it would be inadvisable to treat cases of large melanoma by methods other than enucleation. 208 Possible exceptions
include patients with only one sighted eye, rare patients in whom vision can be salvaged, and patients who refuse enucleation. Abramson et al. 182 recommended local
radiation therapy in these latter difficult cases. Some authors recommend external radiation therapy prior to enucleation. Only experimental evidence in animal models
exists for the usefulness of this therapy. This method is currently being evaluated in the COMS. 174 This randomized trial reported initial mortality findings that showed
no survival difference in the preenucleation irradiated group. 208,209
Zimmerman et al. have suggested that when enucleation is carried out, the “no-touch” technique of Fraunfelder should be considered. 210 This method was designed to
minimize the possibility of seeding of tumor cells into the blood vessels during enucleation. The authors claim that this technique avoids intraocular pressure
elevations above 15 mm before complete freezing occurs around the tumor. Cryotherapy is used to minimize the flow of fluid and blood to or from the tumor during the
manipulation necessary for enucleation. Although most surgeons do not use the no-touch technique, it is increasingly recognized that enucleation should be carried
out by a person skilled and experienced in the procedure and that surgery should be done with a minimum of manipulation. 210
Medium-Sized Melanomas
Treatment of medium-sized tumors is the subject of current controversy. Although general agreement exists that the observation of small melanomas carries little risk
and that large melanomas should be treated by enucleation, there is less consensus regarding the treatment of medium-sized melanomas.
Nonsurgical Techniques
RADIATION THERAPY FOR OCULAR MELANOMA. Ocular melanomas have been successfully treated by a variety of radiotherapeutic modalities, including external-beam

techniques using photons or charged particles (protons and helium ions); stereotactic radiosurgery with modified linear accelerators and multisource cobalt units;
brachytherapy (plaque) techniques using a wide variety of isotopes; hyperthermia in combination with brachytherapy; and, at least experimentally, boron neutron
capture therapy (BNCT). Techniques with the most widely reported clinical experience to date include charged-particle beam therapy and plaque therapy.
CHARGED-PARTICLE BEAM THERAPY. Charged-particle beams (protons or helium ions) have specific dosimetric advantages in the delivery of high radiation dose to very

precisely localized targets. Treatment of ocular melanoma requires pinpoint accuracy to limit dose to the adjacent retina, optic nerve, lens, and brain. Charged-particle
beams are produced by a cyclotron or synchrotron available at only a few sites around the world. High-energy charged particles travel a fixed distance in tissue that
varies with the energy of the particle and the nature of the tissue. Near the end of their path, they deposit the bulk of their energy within a well-defined volume,
referred to as the Bragg peak. A high and relatively uniform dose can be achieved within a small volume, thereby sparing adjacent normal tissues. 211
Proton beam therapy is available at only 16 facilities in nine countries and helium and other ion beams at even fewer sites. 212 Charged-particle beam therapy is
generally delivered in four or five treatment sessions over 1 to 2 weeks. The treatment requires sophisticated planning techniques, precise tumor mapping,
immobilization of the head, and fixation of the eye at a reproducible and verifiable gaze angle. Surgical placement of inert radiopaque rings on the sclera assists in
identifying the target volume. Patients are treated in a seated position, with a face mask and bite block to immobilize the head. The correct gaze angle, chosen so that
the beam enters the sclera and minimizes radiation therapy of the anterior chamber, is verified by an infrared camera with the patient's vision focused on a fixation

light. The treatment portal (beam diameter) ranges from 1 to 4 cm. Daily setup of the patient is accomplished in 10 minutes, and the duration of radiation therapy is
only 1 to 2 minutes.213 Long-term data on the experience with helium ion therapy for ocular melanoma have recently been updated. 214 Three hundred forty-seven
patients were reported, with local tumor control achieved in 96%. Although rare cases of tumor regrowth were identified as late as 5 years after treatment, 85% of
local regrowth was detected within 3 years. The total enucleation rate was 19% (3% for local regrowth and 16% for complications of radiation therapy, including
neovascular glaucoma). The 10-year overall survival is 76%, with 24% of patients manifesting distant metastasis. Risk of metastasis was related to previously known
negative prognostic factors, such as large tumor size or unfavorable location.
Proton beam treatment centers report similar local control rate of 90% to 95%. 213 Risk of distant metastasis also appears comparable to the helium ion–treated
patients, approximately 20% at 5 years. Randomized studies comparing proton beam therapy and enucleation have not been reported, and retrospective comparisons
are difficult because of the need to balance the known prognostic factors (tumor size, tumor location and ocular structures involved, patient age) between the
treatment groups. A large and statistically well-balanced comparison of proton-treated patients with enucleated patients from the same institution has shown no
apparent difference in long-term survival. 216
Visual preservation is one of the goals of eye-conserving therapies for ocular melanoma. Radiation maculopathy and papillopathy are major causes of visual loss after
successful treatment of melanoma with charged-particle beams. Although preservation of peripheral vision and ambulatory vision has been satisfactory, visual acuity
of 20/100 or better was observed in only 32% of patients treated at one major center for proton radiation therapy 218 and was 20/200 or better in only 36% of patients
treated with helium ion therapy. 214 These studies concur in the finding that posttreatment visual acuity is greatly effected by tumor location (in relation to optic disc and
fovea), tumor size, pretreatment visual acuity, and treatment parameters. In proton beam–treated patients with tumor edge more than 3 mm from the optic disc and
fovea, 67% retained useful vision (20/200 or better); with tumors located within 3 mm of these structures, only 39% maintained useful vision. 213
EPISCLERAL PLAQUE RADIATION THERAPY. Episcleral plaque therapy, a highly specialized multidisciplinary treatment approach, is more widely available than

charged-particle beam therapy for ocular melanoma. A concave plaque is constructed to house several small radioactive sources based on preoperative tumor
measurements. This requires integration of data from clinical examination, ultrasonography, CT, or MRI scan. The specially designed plaque containing multiple
radioactive sources is temporarily sutured to the sclera overlying the tumor under general or retrobulbar anesthesia. Operative localization of the plaque placement is
guided by transillumination, ophthalmoscopic observation, or ultrasonography. The plaque remains in place for 2 to 5 days, depending on the type and activity of the
radioactive source, and is then removed under similar operative conditions.
Iodine 125 is the most commonly used radioisotope in the United States and is the only isotope permitted in the COMS trial. Ruthenium 106 is frequently used in
Europe; other isotopes include cobalt 60 and palladium 103. Isotopes with lower photon and electron radiation ( 125I, 106Ru, 103Pd) are more easily shielded to reduce
the exposure to adjacent normal tissues in the patient and the potential exposure to medical personnel. The choice of radioisotope has been based historically on
availability and experience. Newer isotopes have been used after detailed dosimetric study and computer modeling. 103Pd has dosimetric advantages based on its
lower photon energy as compared to 125I.217 Phase I trials of 103Pd have been favorable. 218 A nonrandomized comparison of 125I and 106Ru plaques showed better
tumor control with the 125I. 219
The COMS group recently completed accrual to a randomized trial comparing standardized 125I plaque therapy to enucleation for medium-sized melanomas. A review
of factors considered in selecting 125I plaque therapy for this trial has been published. 220 In comparison to 60Co plaque, 125I results in a significantly reduced exposure
of normal tissue to high radiation dose. Each plaque consists of a flexible inner plastic plaque and a rigid outer gold plaque that is sutured in place. Six different
plaque sizes are available, and the size selected covers a 2- to 3-mm margin around the base of the tumor. 125I seeds are sandwiched between the gold and plastic
plaques. The activity and number of seeds are selected to achieve an apical dose rate between 42 and 105 cGy/h. Treatment duration for the plaque therapy is
calculated to deliver a total dose of 85 Gy to the prescription point.
Study end points include survival, freedom from melanoma metastasis, as well as useful vision retained. The accrual objective was reached in July 1998, when 43
clinical centers enrolled a total of 1317 patients. Published data will be available when reliable 5-year survival estimates are known. The COMS data will have a major
influence on the choice of treatments. No other randomized trial has been published comparing enucleation with any radiotherapeutic approach. As with proton beam
therapy, retrospective comparisons between plaque therapy and enucleation require careful analysis and balancing of prognostic factors. A large retrospective series
comparing 60Co plaque therapy to enucleation identified no significant difference in long-term survival. 221
Table 42.3-3 summarizes some of the retrospective data available for a variety of plaque therapies. Survival rates at 5 years range from 80% to 88%. The rate of
metastatic disease is approximately 10% at 5 years but appears to increase to close to 20% for studies reporting 10-year data. Enucleation has been required for
either tumor progression or severe radiation complication (neovascular glaucoma, vitreous hemorrhage) in 10% to 17% of patients. In Table 42.3-4, clinical outcomes
for charged-particle beam treatments and plaque therapy are compared, with no apparent significant differences between any of the modalities.

TABLE 42.3-3. Retrospective Data on Radioactive Episcleral Plaque Therapy

TABLE 42.3-4. Clinical Outcomes from Three Different Radiation Therapy Techniques

Preservation of useful vision is one of the anticipated benefits of plaque therapy. However, the documentation and analysis of visual outcomes after eye-conserving
therapies have been limited by a number of factors. Acuity may decrease with time after radiation therapy, and follow-up data may be incomplete for patients referred
to distant tertiary eye care centers. Data from the various retrospective series are not always directly comparable. Visual acuity has been expressed as useful vision,
reading vision, ambulatory vision, Snellen chart line decrement, and other measures. As noted with particle beam treatment, loss of acuity is a complex interaction of
tumor size, location, and treatment effects. In the recently updated report by Gunduz et al., 222 final visual acuity was better than 20/200 for 44% of patients, but visual

decrement of 3 or more Snellen lines was seen in 82% of patients at 10 years. 224 The initial report of patients treated with 103Pd shows more favorable visual
preservation with 77% of patients at 20/200 or better, but follow-up has been only 3 years. 218 For tumors with favorable size and location, the rate of useful vision
preservation is encouraging.
PREENUCLEATION ORBITAL RADIATION THERAPY. For the treatment of larger melanomas, where enucleation is the accepted standard treatment, COMS has reported

initial results of a randomized comparison of preoperative orbital radiation therapy (20 Gy in 5 fractions) followed immediately by enucleation versus enucleation
alone. The hypothesis tested was that preoperative orbital radiation might reduce the risk of seeding of viable tumor cells during surgery and thereby improve survival
through the reduction in the incidence of distant metastasis.
With the sponsorship of the National Eye Institute of the National Institutes of Health, the COMS Group enrolled 1003 patients from 1986 through closure in
December 1994. Five-year outcome data on the first 800 patients have been published. 209,226
As shown in Table 42.3-5, no advantage in overall survival or prevention of melanoma metastasis was seen with the use of preenucleation orbital radiation therapy at
the dose and fractionation studied. The trial had the statistical power of 90% to detect a 20% relative difference in survival between the two arms. Acute complications
(occurring 1 to 6 weeks after enucleation) were slightly more common in irradiated patients, but all complications were minor. For late complications (>6 months after
enucleation), no increase in cosmetic or functional complications was seen after radiation therapy. In fact, severe ptosis was observed less frequently in patients
receiving radiation therapy (5% vs. 10%).

TABLE 42.3-5. Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study Randomized Trial of Preenucleation Radiation Therapy for Large Choroidal Melanomas

Preoperative radiation did appear to lower the risk of orbital recurrence, although this was a rarely noted event (<1% of the total study population developed local
relapse). No recurrences were noted in the preenucleation radiation therapy arm, and five biopsy-proven recurrences were documented in the enucleation-only arm.
The five patients with orbital recurrence had metastatic melanoma diagnosed prior to diagnosis of the orbital recurrence and died less than 1 year after presentation
of the local recurrence.
With no survival benefit noted from the COMS trial, routine preoperative orbital radiation therapy, as administered in this trial, would not be considered standard
therapy. The COMS patients will continue to have follow-up assessments, but any late difference in survival is unlikely, as 46% of patients on study have died at time
of this analysis. Preoperative or postoperative orbital radiation therapy may still be considered for selected patients who are at high risk for incomplete tumor excision
or perioperative tumor seeding.
INVESTIGATIONAL RADIOTHERAPEUTIC TECHNIQUES.

Radiosurgery and Fractionated Stereotactic Radiation Therapy. High-dose, highly focused radiation therapy for small target lesions (<2 cm) can be accomplished by
either gamma knife radiosurgery (multiple fixed, precisely aimed cobalt teletherapy beams) or stereotactic radiation therapy (multiple rotational arcs of photon beams
from a linear accelerator). Both techniques are similar in their use of standard energy proton beams for treatment and rely on meticulous patient immobilization to
deliver treatment to a precisely localized target within a coordinate mapping system. These techniques have been widely used and well described for the treatment of
intracranial neoplasms (meningiomas, acoustic neuromas, and metastatic tumors) and for the ablation of arteriovenous malformations. Several recent retrospective
series have examined the application of these techniques for the treatment of ocular melanomas.
The use of high-dose single-fraction Leksell gamma knife radiosurgery has been reported in a few small retrospective series. 227,228 This technique has been marked
by significant adverse radiation reactions, including retinopathy, optic neuropathy, and glaucoma after treatment with 50 to 70 Gy in a single fraction. Optimal dose
and technique have not yet been defined for this approach.
Linear accelerator (photon) fractionated stereotactic radiosurgery has been studied to use the radiobiologic advantage of multiple- rather than single-fraction
treatment.229,230 Reproducible immobilization of the head and eye is required, and active optical fixation systems, similar to proton beam techniques, have been
described. 231 In these studies, 35 to 70 Gy has been delivered in 2 to 8 fractions. Outcome data and toxicity reports will require additional follow-up time, and further
refinement of treatment technique will be necessary. 232 The preliminary data indicate a risk of significant adverse treatment effects with the techniques and radiation
doses reported to date. The use of these techniques outside of the investigational setting is not recommended, except for patients who cannot be treated with proton
beam or plaque therapy.
Hyperthermia and Episcleral Plaque Radiation Therapy. Hyperthermia has been investigated in conjunction with radiation therapy to treat a variety of tumors.
Preclinical experiments have demonstrated that neoplastic cell lethality is proportional to temperature increase in the target tissue and that the combination of
hyperthermia and radiation produces enhanced antitumor effects. 233,234 Ocular tumor heating has been achieved by a variety of techniques, including microwave
applicators, 235 ultrasonic applicators, or ferromagnetic seeds. 236
One of the primary objectives for combining hyperthermia and radiation is to reduce the radiation dose, which is expected to result in fewer visual complications with a
comparable rate of tumor control. An initial report of combined hyperthermia and episcleral plaque therapy employed a 30% reduction in radiation dose (72 Gy, as
compared to the prior standard dose of 100 Gy). 237 In this phase I study of 25 patients, 22 showed decrease in tumor height, and ambulatory vision (>5/200) was
maintained in 20 patients. Two patients had severe complications (hemorrhagic retinal detachment and vitreous hemorrhage). Evaluation of long-term efficacy and
late effects will require additional follow-up.
Boron Neutron Capture Radiation Therapy. BNCT is a specialized form of radiation therapy in which a neutron beam is targeted against a tumor that has been
pretreated with a boron-containing compound. The boron nucleus is 10,000 times more likely than a hydrogen atom to capture a thermal neutron; therefore,
preferential localization of boron in the tumor would result in precise and focal radiation delivery. The capture of the slow neutron by the boron nucleus leads to an
energetic fission reaction with the formation of a lithium ion and an alpha particle (helium ion), accompanied by 2.4 MV of energy. The lithium and helium ions travel a
distance of only 10 mm, limiting the lethal effect of the radiation to a radius approximately the diameter of one cell. 238
The administration of boron-containing compounds and neutron radiation therapy has shown efficacy in the Greene melanoma-rabbit model. 239 Boronated compounds
have been administered experimentally to human subjects with ocular melanoma prior to enucleation. Increased uptake of boron within the melanoma cells, compared
to vitreous body, retina, and sclera was observed. 240 The use of BNCT in humans with melanoma, for the treatment of skin nodules, has been reported. 241,242 This
approach for the treatment of ocular melanoma is at an early experimental stage, and further technical refinement will be required before clinical trials can be
considered.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS FOR RESEARCH

Uveal melanoma, like retinitis pigmentosa, may not constitute a single disease; it may instead consist of an assortment of maladies with multiple genetic origins that
simply culminate in a limited phenotype. In the case of retinitis pigmentosa, varying proportions of rod and cone photoreceptor cells degenerate owing to a variety of
genetic mutations within the same or different genes. 243 In contrast to a phenotype associated with cell death, uveal melanoma is characterized by uncontrolled
proliferation. Fundamentally different mechanisms can lead to unwarranted cell growth, supported in the case of uveal melanoma by cytogenetic 19,25,244,245,246,247,248,249
and 250
and biochemical33,234,251 findings that disparate genetic events likely initiate the transformation of normal uveal melanocytes.
Cancer, as a multistage process, has an impact on a large number of genes and their related cellular pathways. Recent advances in both biochemical and molecular
methods render it possible to study the cellular pathways that comprise this multistage process, endowing tumor cells with properties related to their malignant and
metastatic capabilities. Such studies can provide significant information about the course of the disease and about effective treatments, independent of knowing the
genetic mutations that cause the disease. It may, in fact, be more prudent to study the common cellular pathways that define the properties of these cells and to
develop treatments based on these findings rather than attempting to “fix” a diverse array of genetic mutations.
Many features of ocular melanoma can be studied initially using established cell lines derived from biopsies of human tissues. 53,100,252 Normal uveal melanocytes also
can be passaged in culture. 253 They are nonmalignant, neither growing in soft agar or athymic nude mice and, therefore, differ from uveal melanomas that can grow in
either circumstance as well as alter the structure of the uvea and metastasize to other sites. Comparisons between uveal melanocytes and uveal melanomas can
reveal the biochemical pathways that promote malignancy and metastatic disease. It is important to note, however, that the results obtained from in vitro studies need
to be confirmed using primary tumor tissue.
In addition, although several properties associated with transformation can be studied in vitro, animal models are essential, since the most general and accepted
definition of malignancy requires demonstrating the formation of invasive or metastasizing tumors in vivo. Cells derived from human uveal melanomas, for example,
have been shown to grow in athymic nude mice after intraocular or subcutaneous inoculation; migration to the liver ensues, resulting in metastatic lesions and
death. 254,255 An animal model, therefore, can be used to grade the malignant and metastatic properties of different cell lines; these cell lines then can be modified to
alter the expression of a gene suspected of being involved in tumor progression, and the consequences for growth and dissemination of the tumor then can be
measured in the animal.
As a first step, how can in vitro comparisons be made between uveal melanocytes and uveal melanomas? Genes and their products (proteins) that are uniquely
expressed in one cell type can be identified by one of several new approaches, including differential display, 256,257 suppression subtractive hybridization, 258
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis–mass spectrometry 259,260 and, most recently, by using cDNA chip arrays. 261 As an example, subtractive cDNA hybridization
recently was used to identify differences in mRNA species obtained from normal uveal melanocytes and an epithelioid melanoma cell line. Tissue Factor was among
the genes identified and suspected of elevated expression in the melanoma cell line. Tissue Factor has angiogenic properties, contributing to the formation of new
vessels associated with solid tumors, 257,258,262,263 and 264) perhaps including uveal melanoma. The expression of angiogenic factors is an example of one of the cellular
events contributing to the cancer phenotype but which has little to do with the initial genetic mutation underlying transformation. Also, treatments based on
antiangiogenic strategies are a prime example of how studying cellular pathways can be beneficial. 265
The differential expression of Tissue Factor was confirmed by Western blot analysis (detecting levels of protein) and by RNase protection assay (measuring levels of
mRNA), as illustrated in Figure 42.3-4A and Figure 42.3-4B. Thus, multiple techniques support in vitro findings that Tissue Factor is expressed at elevated levels in a
uveal melanoma cell line compared to normal uveal melanocytes.

FIGURE 42.3-4. A: Tissue Factor (open arrowhead) was compared by Western blot analysis using protein from cultured uveal melanocytes (UM) and a uveal
melanoma cell line (Mel). GAPDH immunostaining (filled arrowhead) served as a control for loading artifact. B: Tissue Factor mRNA was detected by RNase
protection assay (symbols are the same as in A). C: Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction detection of Tissue Factor using specific primers and RNA
isolated from a paraffin-embedded section of human uveal melanoma.

To avoid in vitro artifacts stemming from culture conditions, however, differential expression must be confirmed in primary ocular tissues. Biopsies from primary uveal
melanomas and normal tissues derived from human donor eyes can be compared by Western blot analysis and by immunohistochemistry using specific antibodies.
The expression of the corresponding genes also can be compared by Northern blot hybridization using the same ocular tissues. In addition, archival specimens can
be used for case-corroborative purposes by employing such techniques as in situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry, and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction. As illustrated in Figure 42.3-4c, RNA isolated from a 6-mm paraffin section of an enucleated eye with a uveal melanoma was used for reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction with primers specific for Tissue Factor. Tissue Factor was detected in the primary tumor tissue, thus corroborating in vitro
studies. In the near future, it will be especially informative to compare these sorts of detailed molecular findings with outcome data for patients made available through
the collection of archival specimens.
Further correlations can be established between specific biochemical events and the malignant properties of an ocular tumor by genetic manipulation using
established cell lines. Transfection experiments can be conducted to alter the level of expression of interesting genes (e.g., Tissue Factor); the consequences of
altered expression on division, growth, and progression of the transfected cells then can be determined both in vitro and in vivo. In some cases, the biochemical
function of the protein can be ascertained, and this provides further clues about additional portions of a cellular pathway that might be useful for targeted intervention.
The promoters for melanocyte-specific genes also may be useful for targeting oncogenic expression in a transgenic animal, thereby creating an important model of
uveal melanoma.
Oncogenes, such as the SV40 transgene producing the large T and small t antigens, can be used to generate pigmented tumors of the eye. To obtain models more
representative of uveal melanoma, however, the transgene apparently needs to be driven by a promoter specific for uveal melanocytes rather than one common to
multiple cell types. 266,267 Again, this can be accomplished by comparing normal uveal melanocytes with related ocular tissues and skin. Once the identification has
been successful and an appropriate model of uveal melanoma available, the efficacy of different treatments can be evaluated more fully.
However, there is a general misconception that ocular melanoma and cutaneous melanoma are essentially the same disease and that research of the more prevalent
skin disorder will satisfy needs within the ophthalmology community. This is not the case. The two diseases differ in their systemic symptoms, metastatic patterns, and
susceptibility to treatments. 268 Clearly, the study of ocular melanoma remains within the purview of the vision scientist. Further, the advent of new molecular and
biochemical techniques coupled with the availability of tissue specimens and established cell lines now renders it possible to advance our understanding and
treatment of ocular tumors. Additionally, as has often been the case, studies of ocular tissues have enhanced our understanding of other tissue types and associated
pathologies; delineating the cellular pathways contributing to cancer phenotypes in the eye should be no exception.
Acknowledgments

Drs. Laurent Meyez, Jean-Louis Uzel, and Fernande Porto. Ghislaine Hirth.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Cutler SJ, Young JL, eds. Third National Cancer Survey: incidence data. NCI Monogr 1975;41:1.
2. Vidal JL, Bacin F, Albuisson E, et al. “Mélanome 1992.” Etude épidémiologique des mélanomes uvéaux en France. J Fr Ophtalmol 1995;18:520.
3. Phillpotts BA, Sanders RJ, Shields JS, et al. Uveal melanomas in black patients: a case series and comparative review. J Natl Med Assoc 1995;87:709.
4. Margo CE, Mulla Z, Billiris K. Incidence of surgically treated uveal melanoma by race and ethnicity. Ophthalmology 1998;105:1087.
5. Neugut AI, Kizelnik-Freilich S, Ackerman C. Black-white differences in risk for cutaneous, ocular, and visceral melanomas. Am J Public Health 1994;84:1828.
6. Hudson HL, Valluri S, Rao NA. Choroidal melanomas in Hispanic patients. Am JOphthalmol 1994;18:57.
7. Iscovich J, Ackerman C, Andreev H, Peter J, Steinitz R. An epidemiological study of posterior uveal melanoma in Israel, 19611989. J Cancer 1995;61:291.
8. Scotto J, Fraumeni JF, Lee JAH. Melanoma of the eye and other noncutaneous sites. JNCI 1976;56:489.
9. Jensen QA, Prause JU. Malignant melanomas of the human uvea in Denmark: incidence and a 25-year follow-up of cases diagnosed between 1943 and 1952. In: Lommatzsch PK, Blodi FC,
eds. Intraocular tumors. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1983:85.
10. Gialason I, Magnussen G, Tulinius H. Malignant melanoma of the uvea in Iceland, 19551979. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1985;63, 385, 394.
11. Markowitz JA, Hawkins BS, Diener-West M, Schachat AP. A review of mortality from choroidal melanoma: I. Quality of published reports, 1966 through 1988. Arch Ophthalmol 1992;110:239.
12. Diener-West M, Hawkins BS, Markowitz JA, Schachat AP. A review of mortality from choroidal melanoma: II. A meta-analysis of 5-year mortality rates following enucleation, 1966 through
1988. Arch Ophthalmol 1992;110:245.
13. Raivio I. Uveal melanoma in Finland: an epidemiological, clinical, histological and prognostic study. Acta Ophthalmol 1977;133(Suppl):3.
14. Panigel K, Speeg-Schatz C, Schaffer P, Brini A, Sahel J. Facteurs pronostiques des mélanomes choroïdiens. J Fr Ophtalmol 1992;15:410.
15. Silcock A. Hereditary sarcoma of the eyeball in three generations. Br Med J 1892;1:1079.
16. Singh AD, Donoso LA. Genetic aspects of uveal melanoma. Int Ophthalmol Clin 1993;33:47.
17. Young LH, Egan KM, Walsh SM, Gragoudas ES. Familial uveal melanoma. Am JOphthalmol 1994;117:516.
18. Singh AD, Wang MX, Donoso LA, et al. Familial uveal melanoma: III. Arch Ophthalmol 1996;114:1101.
19. Singh AD, Boghosian-Sell L, Wary KK, et al. Cytogenetic findings in primary uveal melanoma. Cancer GenetCytogenet 1994;72:109.
20. Copeman MC. The putative melanoma tumor-suppressor gene on human choromosome 6q. Pathology 1992;24:307.
21. Prescher G, Bornfeld N, Becher R. Nonrandom chromosomal abnormalities in primary uveal melanoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:1765.
22. Dahlenfors R, Tornqvist G, Wettrell K, Mark J. Cytogenetical observations in nine ocular malignant melanomas. Anticancer Res 1993;13:1415.
23. Sisley K, Cottam DW, Rennie IG, et al. Non-random abnormalities of chromosomes 3, 6 and 8 associated with posterior uveal melanoma. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1992;5:197.
24. Gordon KB, Thompson CT, Char DH, et al. Comparative genomic hybridization in the detection of DNA copy number abnormalities in uveal melanoma. Cancer Res 1994;54:4764.
25. Prescher G, Bornfeld N, Becher R. Two subclones in a case of uveal melanoma. Relevance of monosomy 3 and multiplication of chromosome 8q. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1994;77:144.
26. Royds JA, Sharrard RM, Parsons MA, et al. C-myc oncogene expression in ocular melanomas. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1992;230:366.
27. Tobal K, Warren W, Cooper CS, McCartney A, Hungerford J, Lightman S. Increased expression and mutation of p53 in choroidal melanoma. Br J Cancer 1992;66:900.
28. Jay M, McCartney AC. Familial malignant melanoma of the uvea and p53: a Victorian detective story. Surv Ophthalmol 1993;37:457.
29. Houlston RS, Damato BE. Genetic predisposition to ocular melanoma. Eye 1999;13:43.
30. Mouriaux F, Maurage CA, Labalette P, Casagrande F, Malecaze F, Darbon JM. Les inhibiteurs des CDK cyclines dans les mélanocytes choroidiens normaux et transformés. J Fr Ophtalmol
1999;22:339.
31. Mouriaux F, Casagrande F, Pillaire MJ, Manenti S, Malecaze F, Darbon JM. Differential expression of G 1 cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors in normal and transformated
melanocytes. Invest Ophthalmol VisSci 1998;39:876.
32. Dunne BM, McNamara M, Clynes M, et al. MDR1 expression is associated with adverse survival in melanoma of the uveal tract. Hum Pathol 1998;27(6):594.
33. Coupland SE, Bechrakis N, Schüler A, et al. Expression patterns of cyclin D1 and related proteins regulating G 1-S phase transition in uveal melanoma and retinoblastoma. Br J Ophthalmol
1998;82:961.
34. Singh AD, De Potter P, Fijal BA, Shields CL, Shields JA, Elston RC. Lifetime prevalence of uveal melanoma in white patients with oculo (dermal) melanocytosis. Ophthalmology 1998;105:195.
35. Rehany U, Rumelt S. Iridocorneal melanoma associated with type 1 neurofibromatosisa clinicopathologic study. Ophthalmology 1999;106:614.
36. Yanoff M, Zimmerman LE. Histogenesis of malignant melanomas of the uvea III. The relationship of congenital ocular melanocytosis and neurofibromatosis to uveal melanomas. Arch
Ophthalmol 1967;77:331.
37. Van Hees CL, De Boer A, Jager MJ, et al. Are atypical nevi a risk factor for uveal melanoma? A case-control study. J Invest Dermatol 1994;103:202.
38. Bataille V, Sasieni P, Cuzick J, Hungerford JL, Swerdlow A, Newton Bishop JA. Risk of ocular melanoma in relation to cutaneous and iris naevi. Int J Cancer 1995;60:622.
39. Turner BJ, Statkowski RM, Ausberger JJ, et al. Other cancers in uveal melanoma patients and their families. Am J Ophthalmol 1989;107:601.
40. Kuchle M, Tiemann M, Holbach L, Naumann GO. Necrotic malignant melanoma of the choroid and concurrent intraocular manifestation of malignant non-Hodgkin's B cell lymphoma.
Ophthalmologica 1994;208:65.
41. Bataille V, Pinney E, Hungerford JL, Cuzick J, Bishop DT, Newton JA. Five cases of coexistent primary ocular and cutaneous melanoma. Arch Dermatol 1993;129:198.
42. Lischko AM, Seddon JM, Gragoudas ES, et al. Evaluation of prior primary malignancy as a determinant of uveal melanoma: a case-control study. Ophthalmology 1989;96:1716.
43. Holly EA, Ashton DA, Ahn DK, et al. No excess prior cancer in patients with uveal melanoma. Ophthalmology 1991;98:608.
43a. Paul EV, Parnell BL, Fraker M. Prognosis of malignant melanomas of the choroid and ciliary body. Int Ophthalmol Clin 1968;5:387.
44. Egan KM, Gragoudas ES, Seddon JM, Walsh SM. Smoking and the risk of early metastases from uveal melanoma. Ophthalmology 1992;99:537.
44a. Seddon JM, MacLaughlin DT, Albert DM, et al. Uveal melanomas presenting during pregnancy and the investigation of estrogen receptors in melanomas. Br J Ophthalmol 1982;66:695.
45. Ajani UA, Seddon JM, Hsieh CC, Egan KM, Albert DM, Gragoudas ES. Occupation and risk of uveal melanoma. An exploratory study. Cancer 1992;70:2891.
45a. Shields CL, Shields JA, Eagle RC Jr. et al. Uveal melanoma and pregnancy. Ophthalmology 1991;98:1667.
46. Foss AJE, Alexander RA, Phil M, et al. Estrogen and progesterone receptor analysis in ocular melanomas. Ophthalmology 1995;102:431.
46a. Hartge P, Tucker MA, Shields JA, et al. Case-control study of female hormones and eye melanoma. Cancer Res 1989;49:4622.
47. Kraemer KH, Lee MM, Scotto J. Xeroderma pigmentosum: cutaneous, ocular, and neurologic abnormalities in 830 published cases. Arch Dermatol 1987;123:241.
48. Kraemer KH, Lee MM, Andrews AD, Lambert WC. The role of sunlight and DNA repair in melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer. The xeroderma pigmentosum paradigm. ArchDermatol
1994;130:1018.
49. Horn EP, Hartge P, Shields JA, Tucker MA. Sunlight and risk of uveal melanoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1476.
50. Gass JDM, Gieser RG, Wilkinson CP, Beahm DE, Pautler SE. Bilateral diffuse uveal melanocytic proliferation in patients with occult carcinoma. Arch Ophthalmol 1990;108:527.
51. Leys AM, Dierick HG, Sciot RM. Early lesions of bilateral diffuse melanocytic proliferation. Arch Ophthalmol 1991;109:1590.
52. Mooy CM, De Jong PTVM, Strous C. Proliferative activity in bilateral paraneoplastic melanocytic proliferation and bilateral uveal melanoma. Br J Ophthalmol 1994;78:483.
53. Albert DM, Ruzzo MA, McLaughlin MA, Robinson NL, Craft JL, Epstein J. Establishment of cell lines of uveal melanoma. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1984;25:1284.
54. Belkhou R, Abbé JCh, Pham P, et al. Uptake and metabolism of boronophenylalanine in human uveal melanoma cells in culture. Relevance to boron neutron capture therapy of cancer cells.
Amino Acids 1995;8:217.
55. Belkhou R, Mykita S, Meyer L, et al. Effet létal de la réaction de capture neutronique du bore sur des cellules de mélanome uvéal humain en culture incubées avec la boro-phénylalanine. C R
Acad Sci Paris 1992;315(3):485.
56. Benathan M, Alvero-Jackson H, Mooy AM, Scaletta C, Frenk E. Relationship between melanogenesis, glutathione levels and melphalan toxicity in human melanoma cells. Melanoma Res
1992;2:305.
57. Aubert C, Rouge F, Reillaudou M, Metge P. Establishment and characterization of human ocular melanoma cell lines. Int J Cancer 1993;54:784.
58. Goodal T, Buffey JA, Rennie IG, et al. Effect of melanocyte stimulating hormone on human cultured choroidal melanocytes, uveal melanoma cells, and retinal epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 1994;35:826.
59. Olsen KR, Blumkranz M, Hernandez E, Hajek A, Hartzer M. Fluorouracil therapy in intraocular Greene melanoma in the rabbit. Arch Ophthalmol 1988;106:812.
60. Waard-Siebinga, van Delft JL, Wolff-Rouendaal D, Jager M. Hamster Greene melanoma in the rabbit eye: immunosuppressive treatment to improve this tumor model. Graefes Arch Clin Exp
Ophthalmol 1994;232: 683.
61. Niederkorn J, Sanborn GE, Scarbrough EE. Mouse model of brachytherapy in consort with enucleation for treatment of malignant intraocular melanoma. Arch Ophthalmol 1990;108:865.
62. Pe'er J, Folberg R, Massicotte SJ, et al. Clinicopathologic spectrum of primary uveal melanocytic lesions in an animal model. Ophthalmology 1992;99:977.
63. Mintz B, Klein-Szanto AJ. Malignancy of eye melanomas originating in the retinal pigment epithelium of transgenic mice after genetic ablation of choroidal melanocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 1992;89:11421.
64. Anand R, Ma D, Alizadeh H, et al. Characterization of intraocular tumors arising in transgenic mice. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1994;35:3533.
65. Liggett PE, Lo G, Pince KJ, Rao NA, Pascal SG, Kan-Mitchel J. Heterotransplantation of human uveal melanoma. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1994;232(31):15.
66. Pignol JP, Abbé JC, Lefebvre O, Stampfler A, Methlin G, Sahel J. Thérapie par capture de neutrons des mélanomes oculaires : approches dosimétrique et microdosimétrique. C R Acad Sci
1994;317:543.
67. Kan-Mitchell J, Mitchell MS, Rao N, Liggett PE. Characterization of uveal melanoma cell lines that grow as xenografts in rabbit eyes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1989;30:829.
68. Hu LK, Huh K, Gragoudas ES, Young LH. Establishment of pigmented choroidal melanomas in a rabbit model. Retina 1994;14:264.
69. Mueller AJ, Folberg R, Freeman WR, et al. Evaluation of human choroidal melanoma rabbit model for studying microcirculation patterns with confocal ICG and histology. Exp Eye Res
1999;68:671.
70. Kramer TR, Powell MB, Wilson MM, Salvatore J, Grossniklaus HE. Pigment uveal tumors in a transgenic mouse. Br J Ophthalmol 1998;82:953.
71. Scull JJ, Alcocer CE, Deschênes J, Burnier MN Jr. Primary choroidal melanoma in a patient with previous cutaneous melanoma. Arch Ophthalmol 1997;115:796.
72. Grossniklaus HE, Albert DM, Green R, Conway BP, Hovland KR, for the Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study Group. Clear cell differentiation in choroidal melanoma: COMS Report No. 8.

Arch Ophthalmol 1997;115:894.
73. Lawry J, Smith MO, Parsons AJ, Rennie IG. Simultaneous cell cycle and phenotypic analysis of primary uveal melanoma by flow cytometry. Eye 1998;12:431.
74. Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study Group. Histopathologic characteristic of uveal melanomas in eyes enucleated: COMS Report No. 6. Am J Ophthalmol 1998;125:745.
75. Beckenkamp G, Schäfer HJ, Von Domarus D. Immunocytochemical parameters in ocular malignant melanomas. EurJCancerClinOncol 1988;24 [suppl2]:542.
76. Steuhl KP, Rohrbach JM, Knorr M, Thiel HJ. Significance, specificity, and ultrastructural localization of HMB-45 antigen in pigmented ocular tumors. Ophthalmology 1993;100:208.
77. Berge PJ, Danen EH, Van Muijen GN, Jager MJ, Ruiter DJ. Integrin expression in uveal melanoma differs from cutaneous melanoma. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1993;34:3635.
78. Wang MX, Earley JJ Jr, Shields JA, Donoso LA. An ocular melanoma-associated antigen. Molecular characterization. ArchOphthalmol 1992;110:399.
79. McCurdy J, Gamel JW, McLean I. A simple, efficient, and reproducible method for estimating the malignant potential of uveal melanoma from routine H and E slides. PatholRes Pract
1991;187:1025.
79a. McLean IW, Foster WD, Zimmerman LE. Prognostic factors in small malignant melanomas of the choroid and ciliary body. Arch Ophthamol 1977;95:48.
80. Sorensen FB, Gamel JW, McCurdy J. Stereologic estimation of nucleolar volume in ocular melanoma: a comparative study of size estimators with prognostic impact. HumPathol 1993;24:513.
81. Gamel JW, McCurdy JB, McLean IW. A comparison of prognostic covariates for uveal melanomas. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1992;33:1919.
82. Folberg R, Pe'er J, Gruman LM, et al. The morphologic characteristics of tumor blood vessels as a marker of tumor progression in primary human uveal melanoma. Hum Pathol 1992;23:1298.
83. Folberg R, Rummelt V, Parys-Van Ginderdeuren R, et al. The prognostic value of tumor blood vessel morphology in primary uveal melanoma. Ophthalmology 1993;100:1389.
84. Marcus DM, Minokovitz JB, Wardwell SD, et al. The value of nucleolar organizer regions in uveal melanoma. Am J Ophthalmol 1990;100:527.
85. Pe'er J, Rummelt V, Mawn L, Hwang T, Woolson RF, Folberg R. Mean of the ten largest nucleoli, microcirculation architecture, and prognosis of ciliochoroidal melanomas. Ophthalmology
1994;101:1227.
86. Rummelt V, Folberg R, Rummelt C, et al. Microcirculation architecture of melanocytic nevi and malignant melanomas of the ciliary body and choroid. A comparative histopathologic and
ultrastructural study. Ophthalmology 1994;101:718.
87. Folberg R, Mehaffey MG, Gardner LM, Meyer M, Rummelt V, Pe'er J. The microcirculation of choroidal and ciliary body melanomas. Eye 1997;11:227.
88. Foss AJE, Alexander RA, Hungerford JL, Harris AL, Cree IA, Lightman S. Reassessment of the PAS patterns in uveal melanoma. Br J Ophthalmol 1997;81:240.
89. Mueller AJ, Freeman WR, Folberg R, et al. Evaluation of microvascularization pattern visibility in human choroidal melanomas: comparison of confocal fluorescein with indocyanine green
angiography. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1999;237:448.
90. Mueller AJ, Bartsch DU, Folberg R, et al. Imaging the microvasculature of choroidal melanoma with confocal indocyanine green scanning laser ophthalmoscopy. Arch Ophthalmol 1998;116:31.
91. Mehaffey MG, Folberg R, Meyer M, et al. Relative importance of quantifying area and vascular patterns in uveal melanomas. Am J Ophthalmol 1997;123:798.
92. Rummelt V, Mehaffey MG, Campbell J, et al. Microcirculation architecture of metastases from primary ciliary body and choroidal melanoma. Am J Ophthalmol 1998;126:303.
93. McLean IW, Keefe KS, Burnier MN. Uveal melanoma. Comparison of the prognostic value of fibrovascular loops, mean of the ten largest nucleoli, cell type, and tumor size. Ophthalmology
1997;104:777.
94. Ward TP, McLean IW, Raberts AO. Expression of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) in primary uveal melanoma. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1994;35[Suppl]:1926(abst).
95. Pe'er J, Gnessin H, Shargal Y, Livni N. PC-10 immunostaining of proliferating cell nuclear antigen in posterior uveal melanoma. Enucleation versus enucleation postirradiation groups.
Ophthalmology 1994;101:56.
96. Karlsson M, Boeryd B, Carstensen J, Kagedal B, Wingren S. DNA ploidy and S-phase fraction as prognostic factors in patients with uveal melanomas. Br J Cancer 1995;71:177.
97. Coleman K, Baak JP, van Diest PJ, et al. DNA ploidy status in 84 ocular melanomas: a study of DNA quantitation in ocular melanomas by flow cytometry and automatic and interactive static
image analysis. Hum Pathol 1995;26:99.
98. Mooy C, Vissers K, Luyten G, et al. DNA flow cytometry in uveal melanoma: the effect of pre-enucleation irradiation. Br J Ophthalmol 1995;79:174.
99. Char DH, Kroll SM, Stoloff A, et al. Cytomorphometry of uveal melanoma. Comparison of fine needle aspiration biopsy samples with histologic sections. Anal Quant Histol 1991;13:293.
100. Ksander BR, Rubsamen PE, Olsen KR, Cousins SW, Streilein JW. Studies of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes from a human choroidal melanoma. InvestOphthalmol Vis Sci 1991;32:3198.
101. Whelchel JC, Farah SE, McLean IW, Burnier MN. Immunohistochemistry of infiltrating lymphocytes in uveal malignant melanoma. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1993;34:2603.
102. de la Cruz PO, Specht CS, McLean IW. Lymphocytic infiltration in uveal malignant melanoma. Cancer 1990;65:112.
103. Huang XQ, Mitchell MS, Liggett PE, Murphree AL, Kan-Mitchell J. Non-fastidious, melanoma specific CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes from choroidal melanoma patients. Cancer Immunol
Immunother 1994;38:399.
104. Kanda S, Cochran AJ, Lee WR, Morton DL, Irie RF. Variations in the ganglioside profile of uveal melanoma correlate with cytologic heterogeneity. Int J Cancer 1992;52:682.
105. Tardif M, Coulombe J, Soulieres D, Rousseau A, Pelletier G. Gangliosides in human uveal melanoma process. Int JCancer 1996;68:97.
106. Ma D, Luyten GP, Luider TM, Niederkorn JY. Relationship between natural killer cell susceptibility and metastasis of human uveal melanoma cells in a murine model. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
1995;36:435.
107. Ma D, Alizadeh H, Comerford SA, et al. Rejection of intraocular tumors from transgenic mice by tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. CurrEye Res 1994;13:361.
108. MacFaul PA, Morgan G. Histopathological changes in malignant melanomas of the choroid after cobalt plaque therapy. Br J Ophthalmol 1977;61:221.
109. Klaus H, Lommatzsch PK, Fuchs U. Histopathology studies in human malignant melanomas of the choroid after unsuccessful treatment with 106Ru/106Rh ophthalmic applicators. Graefes Arch
Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1991;229:480.
110. Fuchs U, Kivela T, Tarkkainen A, Laatikanen L. Histopathology of enucleated intraocular melanomas irradiated with cobalt and ruthenium plaques. Acta Ophthalmol 1988;66:255.
111. Crawford JB, Char DH. Histopathology of uveal melanomas treated with charged particle radiation. Ophthalmology 1987;94:639.
112. Shields CL, Shields JA, Karlsson U, Menduke H, Brady LW. Enucleation after plaque radiotherapy for posterior uveal melanoma. Histopathologic findings. Ophthalmology 1990;97:1665.
113. Saornil MA, Egan KM, Gragoudas ES, Seddon JM, Walsh S, Albert DM. Histopathology of proton beam irradiated versus enucleated uveal melanomas. ArchOphthalmol 1992;110:1112.
114. Gragoudas ES, Egan KM, Saornil MA, Walsh SM, Albert DM, Seddon JM. The time course of irradiation changes in proton beam-treated uveal melanomas. Ophthalmology 1993;100:1555.
115. Schilling H, Bornfeld N, Friedrichs W, Pauleikhoff D, Sauerwein W, Wessing A. Histopathologic findings in large uveal melanomas after brachytherapy with iodine 125 ophthalmic plaques.
Germ J Ophthalmol 1994;3:232.
116. Hardman Lea SJ, Levesey SJ, Lowe J, Rothwell I, Haworth SM. Disappearance of ocular malignant melanoma on computerized scan after spontaneous necrosis: clinical, radiological and
pathological features. Eye 1991;5:748.
117. Rennie I. Melanomas, metastases, and survival. Br J Ophthalmol 1993;77:685.
118. Ma D, Gerard RD, Li XY, Alizadeh H, Niederkorn JY. Inhibition of metastasis of intraocular melanomas by adenovirus-mediated gene transfer of plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) in
an athymic mouse model. Blood 1997;90:2738.
119. Ma D, Niederkorn JY. Role of epidermal growth factor receptor in the metastasis of intraocular melanomas. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1998;39:1067.
120. Gragoudas ES, Egan KM, Seddon JM, et al. Survival of patients with metastases from uveal melanoma. Ophthalmology 1991;98:383.
121. Dithmar S, Völcker HE, Grossniklaus HE. Multifocal intraocular malignant melanoma: report of two cases and review of the literature. Ophthalmology 1999;106:1345.
122. Shammas HF, Blodi FC. Prognostic factors in choroidal and ciliary body melanomas. Arch Ophthalmol 1977;95:63.
123. Singh AD, Shields CL, Shields JA, De Potter P. Bilateral primary uveal melanoma: bad luck or bad genes? Ophthalmology 1996;103:256.
124. Blumenthal EZ, Pe'er J. Multifocal choroidal malignant melanoma: at least 3 melanomas in one eye. Arch Ophthalmol 1999;117:255.
125. Starr HJ, Zimmerman LE. Extrascleral extension and orbital recurrence of a malignant melanoma of the choroid and ciliary body. Int Ophthalmol Clin 1962;2:369.
126. McLean IW, Foster MD, Zimmerman LE. Uveal melanoma: location, size, cell type and enucleation as risk factors in metastasis. Hum Pathol 1981;13:123.
127. Fraunfelder FT, Boozman FW, Wilson RS, et al. No-touch technique for intraocular malignant melanomas. Arch Ophthalmol 1977;95:1616.
128. Seigel D, Myers M, Ferris F III, et al. Survival rates after enucleation of eyes with malignant melanomas. Am J Ophthalmol 1979;87:761.
129. Manschot WA, van Peperzeel HA. Choroidal melanoma: enucleation or observation? A new approach. Arch Ophthalmol 1980;98:71.
130. Kersten RC, Blodi FC. Prognosis of choroidal melanomas. Ophthal Forum 1983;1:21.
131. Davidorf FH. The melanoma controversy: a comparison of choroidal, cutaneous, and iris melanomas. Surv Ophthalmol 1981;25:373.
132. Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study Group. Accuracy of diagnosis of choroidal melanoma in the collaborative ocular melanoma study. COMS report. Arch Ophthalmol 1990;108:1268.
133. Lohmann W, Wiegand W, Stolwijk TR, van Delft JL, Best JA. Endogenous fluorescence of ocular malignant melanomas. Ophthalmologica 1995;209:7.
134. Bischoff PM, Flower RW. Ten years' experience with choroidal angiography using indocyanin green dye: a new routine examination or an epilogue? Doc Ophthalmol 1985;60:235.
135. Harino S, Miyamoto K, Ogawa K, et al. Indocyanine green videoangiographic findings in choroidal metastatic tumor. Graefes Arch ExpOphthalmol 1995;233:339.
136. Shields CL, Shields JA, De Potter P. Patterns of indocyanine green videoangiography of choroidal tumours. Br J Ophthalmol 1995;79:237.
137. Meyer K, Augsburger JJ. Independent diagnostic value of fluorescein angiography in the evaluation of intraocular tumors. Graefes Arch ExpOphthalmol 1999;237:489.
138. Rummelt V, Naumann GO. Reassessment of the PAS patterns in uveal melanoma. Br J Ophthalmol 1998;82:101.
139. Gosbell AD, Barry WR, Favilla I, Burgess F. Volume measurement of intraocular tumours by cross-sectional ultrasonographic scans. Aust NZJ Ophthalmol 1991;19:327.
140. Berger RW, Guthoff R, Helmke K, Winkler P. Doppler ultrasonography in the follow-up of malignant melanoma of the choroid. Doc Ophthalmol ProcSer 1990;53:327.
141. Van Gool CA, Thijssen JM, Verbeek AM. B-mode echography of choroidal melanoma; echographic and histological aspects of choroidal excavation. Int Ophthalmol 1991;15:327.
142. Coleman DJ, Lizzi FL, Silvermann RH, Woods SM, Rondeau MJ. Three-dimensional acoustic tissue staining of uveal melanoma for monitoring of treatment. Invest OphthalmolVis Sci Suppl
1992;33:1440.
143. Damms T, Schäfer HJ, Guthoff R, et al. Histological determination of tumor-vascularization and their correlation with Doppler sonography in patients with malignant melanoma of the choroid.
Invest OphthalmolVis Sci Suppl 1992;33:2750.
144. Jensen PK, Hansen MK. Ultrasonographic, three-dimensional scanning for determination of intraocular tumor volume. Acta Ophthalmol 1991;69:178.
145. Jensen PK. Ultrasonographic three-dimensional scanning for determination of intraocular tumour volume. Acta Ophthalmol 1992;[Suppl 204]:23.
146. Thijssen JM, Verbeek AM, Romijn RL, de Wolf-Rouendaal D, Oosterhuis JA. Echographic differentiation of intraocular melanomas by computer analysis. Acta Ophthalmol 1992;[Suppl 204]:26.
147. Coleman DJ, Silverman RH, Rondeau MJ, et al. Ultrasonic tissue characterization of uveal melanoma and prediction of patient survival after enucleation and brachytherapy. Am J Ophthalmol
1991;112:682.
148. Finger PT, Romero JM, Rosen RB, et al. Three-dimensional ultrasonography of choroidal melanoma: localization of radioactive eye plaques. Arch Ophthalmol 1998;116:305.
149. Romero JM, Finger PT, Iezzi R, Rosen RB, Cocker RS. Tri-dimensional ultrasonography of choroidal melanoma: extrascleral extension. Am J Ophthalmol 1998;126:842.
150. Maberly DAL, Pavlin CJ, McGowan HD, Foster FS, Simpson ER. Ultrasound biomicroscopic imaging of the anterior aspect of peripheral choroidal melanomas. Am J Ophthalmol 1997;123:506.
151. Yang YC, Kent D, Fenerty CH, Kosmin AS, Damato BE. Pulsatile ocular blood flow in eyes with untreated choroidal melanoma. Eye 1997;11:331.
152. Guthoff RF, Berger RW, Winkler P, Helmke K, Chumbleu LC. Doppler ultrasonography of malignant melanomas of the uvea. Arch Ophthalmol 1992;109:537.
153. Guthoff R, Winkler P, Helmke K, Berger R. Diagnosis and treatment control of choroidal melanomasthe role of B-scan and Doppler-technique Acta Ophthalmol 1992;[Suppl 59]:204.
154. Wolff-Kormann PG, Kormann BA, Hasenfratz GC, Spengel FA. Duplex and color Doppler ultrasound in the differential diagnosis of choroidal tumors. Acta Ophthalmol 1992;[Suppl 204]:66.
155. Wolff-Kormann PG, Kormann BA, Riedel KG, Hasenfratz GC, Spengel FA. Quantitative duplex and color Doppler ultrasound in the follow-up of beta-irradiated (106Ru/106Rh) choroidal
melanomas. A prospective study. Germ J Ophthalmol 1992;1:151.
156. Gulani AC, Morparia H, Bhatti SS, Jehangir RP. Colour Doppler sonography: a new investigative modality for intraocular space-occupying lesions. Eye 1994;8:307.
157. Schaling DF, Oosterhuis JA, Jager MJ, Kakebeeke-Kemme H, Pauwels EK. Possibilities and limitations of radioimmunoscintigraphy and conventional diagnostic modalities in choroidal
melanoma. Br J Ophthalmol 1994;78:244.
158. Lashkari K, Garrido L, Hughes MS, et al. Magnetic resonance microscopy of eyes with uveal melanoma and retinoblastoma. Invest Ophthalmol Vis SciSuppl 1992;33:925.
159. Ferris JD, Bloom PA, Goddard PR, Collins C. Quantification of melanin and iron content in uveal malignant melanomas and correlation with magnetic resonance image. Br JOphthalmol

1993;77:297.
160. Scott IU, Murray TG, Randall Hughes J. Evaluation of imaging technics for detection of extraocular extension of choroidal melanoma. Arch Ophthalmol 1998;116:897.
161. Modorati G, Brancato R, Paganelli G, et al. Immunoscintigraphy with three step monoclonal pretargeting technique in diagnosis of uveal melanoma: preliminary results. Br J Ophthalmol
1994;78:19.
162. Modorati G, Paganelli G, Magnani P, et al. Radioimmunoscintigraphy with three-step monoclonal pretargeting technique in diagnosis of uveal melanoma: preliminary results. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci Suppl 1992;33:2749.
162a. Folberg R, Rummelt V, Parys-Van Ginderdeuren R, et al. The prognostic value of tumor blood vessel morphology in uveal melanoma. Ophthalmology 1993;100:1389.
163. Char DH, Stone RD, Irvine AR, et al. Diagnosis modalities in choroidal melanoma. Am J Ophthalmol 1980;89:223.
164. Shields JA, Shields CL, Ehya H, Eagle RC Jr, De Potter P. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of suspected intraocular tumors. The 1992 Urwick Lecture. Ophthalmology 1993;100:1677.
165. Buttler P, Char DH, Zarbin M, Kroll S. Natural history of indeterminate pigmented choroidal tumors. Ophthalmology 1994;101:710.
166. Augsburger JJ, Vrabec TR. Impact of delayed treatment in growing posterior uveal melanomas [published erratum appears in Arch Ophthalmol 1994;112(3):335]. Arch Ophthalmol
1993;111:1382.
167. Tobal K, Sherman LS, Foss AJ, Lightman SL. Detection of melanocytes from uveal melanoma in peripheral blood using the polymerase chain reaction. Invest Ophthalmol VisSci 1993;34:2622.
168. Wang MX, Shields JA, Donoso LA. Subclinical metastasis of uveal melanoma. Int Ophthalmol Clin 1993;33:119.
169. Haynie GD, Shen TT, Gragoudas ES, Young LUH. Flow cytometric analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes in patients with choroidal melanoma. Am J Ophthalmol 1997;124:357.
170. Flocks M, Gerende JH, Zimmerman LH. The size and shape of malignant melanomas of the choroid and ciliary body in relation to prognosis and histologic characteristics. A statistical study of
210 tumors. Trans Am Acad Ophthalmol Otolaryngol 1955;59:740.
171. Coleman K, Baak JPA, van Diest P, Mullaney J, Farrel M, Fenton M. Prognostic factors following enucleation of 111 uveal melanomas. Br J Ophthalmol 1993;77:688.
172. Regan S, Judge HE, Gragoudas ES, Egan KM. Iris color as a prognostic factor in ocular melanoma. ArchOphthalmol 1999;117:811.
173. Augsburger JJ. Size classification of posterior uveal malignant melanomas. Year Book Ophthalmol St. Louis: Mosby, 1993;155.
174. Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study Group. Mortality in patients with small choroidal melanoma: COMS report no. 4. ArchOphthalmol 1997;115:886.
175. McLean IW. Prognostic features of uveal malignant melanoma. OphthalmolClin North Am 1995;8:143.
176. Seregard S, Spangberg B, Juul C, Oskarsson M. Prognostic accuracy of the mean of the largest nucleoli, vascular patterns and PC-10 in posterior uveal melanoma. Ophthalmology
1998;105:485.
177. Blom DJR, Luyten GPM, Mooy C, et al. Human leucocyte antigen class I expression: marker of poor prognosis in uveal melanoma. Invest Ophthalmol VisSci 1997;38:1865.
178. Blom DJR, Schurmans LRHM, De Waard-Siebinga I, et al. HLA expression ina primary uveal melanoma, its cell line, and four of its metastases. Br J Ophthalmol 1997;81:989.
179. Gamel JW, McLean IW, McCurdy JB. Biologic distinctions between cure and time to death in 2892 patients with intraocular melanoma. Cancer 1993;71:2299.
180. Potter P, Shields CL, Shields JA, Cater JR, Tardio DJ. Impact of enucleation versus plaque radiotherapy in the management of juxtapapillary choroidal melanoma on patient survival. Br J
Ophthalmol 1994;78:109.
181. Manschot WA, Van Strik R. Choroidal melanoma: analysis of published therapeutic results. Fortschr Ophthalmol 1987;84:183.
182. Adams KS, Abramson DH, Ellsworth RM, et al. Cobalt plaque versus enucleation for uveal melanoma: comparison of survival rates. Br J Ophthalmol 1988;72:494.
182a. Reese AB. Tumors of the eye. 3rd ed. Hagerstown, MD: Harper & Row, 1976:174.
183. Apple D, Blodi FC. Pathologic observations and clinical approach to uveal melanomas. In: Nicholson D, ed. Ocular pathology update. New York: Masson, 1980:213.
184. Cruickshanks KJ, Fryback DG, Nondahl DM, et al. Treatment choice and quality of life in patients with choroidal melanoma. Arch Ophthalmol 1999;117:461.
185. Favilla I, Barry WR, Gosbell A, Ellims P, Burgess F. Phototherapy of posterior uveal melanomas. Br J Ophthalmol 1991;75:718.
186. Shields JA. The expanding role of laser photocoagulation for intraocular tumors. The 1993 H. Christian Zweng Memorial Lecture. Retina 1994;14:310.
187. Eide N. Primary laser photocoagulation of small choroidal melanomas. Acta Ophthalmol Scand 1999;77:351.
188. Meyer-Schwickerath G. The preservation of vision by treatment of the intraocular tumors with light coagulation. Arch Ophthalmol 1961;66:458.
189. Vogel MH. The application of photocoagulation in the treatment of the choroid. Ophthalmic Forum 1983;1:46.
190. Augsburger JJ, Kleineidam M, Mullen D. Combined iodine-125 plaque irradiation and indirect ophthalmoscope laser therapy of choroidal malignant melanomas: comparison with iodine-125 and
cobalt-60 plaque radiotherapy alone. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1993;231:500.
190a. Shields JA, Glazer LC, Mieler WF, Shields CL, Gottlieb MS. Comparison of xenon ard and argon laser photocoagulation in the treatment of choroidal melanomas. Am J Ophthalmol
1990;109:647.
191. Gonzalez VH, Hu LK, Theodossiadis PG, et al. Photodynamic therapy of pigmented choroidal melanomas. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1995;36:871.
192. Chong LP, Ozler SA, de Queiroz JM Jr, Liggett PE. Indocyanine greenenhanced diode laser treatment of melanoma in a rabbit model. Retina 1993;13:251.
193. Schmidt-Erfurth U, Bauman W, Gragoudas E, et al. Photodynamic therapy of experimental choroidal melanoma using lipoprotein-delivered benzoporphyrin. Ophthalmology 1994;101:89.
194. Oosterhuis JA, Journée-de Korver HG, Keunen JEE. Transpupillary thermotherapy: results in 50 patients with choroidal melanoma. Arch Ophthalmol 1998;116:157.
195. Shields CL, Shields JA, Cater J, et al. Transpupillary thermotherapy for choroidal melanoma: tumor control and visual results in 100 consecutive cases. Ophthalmology 1998;105:581.
196. Lincolff H, McLean T, Long R. The cryosurgical treatment of intraocular tumors. Am J Ophthalmol 1977;63:389.
197. Peyman GA, Ericson ES, Axelrod AJ, et al. Full-thickness eyewall resection in primates: an experimental approach to the treatment of choroidal melanoma. Arch Ophthalmol 1973;89:410.
198. Peyman GA, Apple DJ. Local excision of a choroidal malignant melanoma: full-thickness eyewall resection. Arch Ophthalmol 1974;92:216.
199. Peyman GA. Eyewall resection. Ophthalmic Forum 1983;4:38.
200. Peyman GA, Juarez CL, Diamond FG, et al. Ten-year experience with eyewall resection for uveal malignant melanomas. Ophthalmology 1984;91:1720.
201. Peyman GA, Gremillon CM. Eyewall resection in the management of uveal neoplasms. Jpn J Ophthalmol 1989;33:458.
202. Damato BE, Paul J, Foulds WS. Predictive factors of visual outcome after local resection of choroidal melanoma. Br J Ophthalmol 1993;77:616.
203. Chaudhri S, Colvin JR, Todd JG, Kenny GN. Evaluation of closed loop control of arterial pressure during hypotensive anaesthesia for local resection of intraocular melanoma. Br J Anaesth
1992;69:607.
204. Rennie IG. From the outside in, or the inside out. Resecting uveal melanomas. Br J Ophthalmol 1998;82:209.
205. Reese AB, Jones IS, Cooper WC. Surgery for tumors of the iris and ciliary body. Am JOphthalmol 1968;60:173.
206. Forrest AW, Keyser RB, Spencer WH. Iridocyclectomy for melanomas of the ciliary body: a follow-up study of pathology and surgical mortality. Trans Am Acad Ophthalmol 1978;85:1237.
207. Damato B, Groenewald C, McGalliard J, Wong D. Endoresection of choroidal melanoma. Br J Ophthalmol 1998;82:213.
208. The Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study (COMS) randomized trial of pre-enucleation radiation of large choroidal melanoma: I. Characteristics of patients enrolled and not enrolled. COMS
report no. 9. Am J Ophthalmol 1998;125:767.
209. The Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study Group (COMS) randomized trial of pre-enucleation radiation of large choroidal melanoma: II. Initial mortality findings, COMS report no. 10. Am J
Ophthalmol 1998;125:779.
210. Fraunfelder FT, Boozman FW, Wilson RS, et al. No-touch technique for intraocular malignant melanomas. Arch Ophthalmol 1977;95:1616.
211. Lamond JP, Auchter RM, Harari PM. Radiation therapy of ocular and orbital disease. In: Albert DM (ed), Ophthalmic surgery principles and techniques. Malden, MA: Blackwell Science,
1999:1653.
212. Phillips MH, Griffin TW. Physics of high LET particles and protons. In: Perez CA, Brady LW, eds. Principles and practice of radiation oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers,
1998:593.
213. Munzenrider JE. Proton therapy for uveal melanomas and other eye lesions. Strahlenther Onkol 1999;175:68.
214. Castro JR, Char DH, Petti PL, et al. 15 years experience with helium ion radiotherapy for uveal melanoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:989.
215. Seddon JM, Gragoudas ES, Egan KM, et al. Relative survival rates after alternative therapies for uveal melanoma. Ophthalmology 1990;97:769.
216. Gragoudas ES, Wenjun L, Lane AM, Munzenrider J, Egan KM. Risk factors for radiation maculopathy and papillopathy after intraocular irradiation. Ophthalmology 1999;106:1571.
217. Finger PT, Lu D, Buffa A, DeBlasio DS, Bosworth JL. Palladium-103 versus iodine-125 for ophthalmic plaque radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:849.
218. Finger PT, Berson A, Szechter A. Palladium-103 plaque radiotherapy for choroidal melanoma. Ophthalmology 1999;106:606.
219. Wilson MW, Hungerford JL. Comparison of episcleral plaque and proton beam radiation therapy for the treatment of choroidal melanoma. Ophthalmology 1999;106:1579.
220. Earle J, Kline RW, Robertson DM. Selection of iodine 125 for the Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study. Arch Ophthalmol 1987;105:763.
221. Augsburger JJ, Correa ZM, Freire J, Brady LW. Long-term survival in choroidal and ciliary body melanoma after enucleation versus plaque radiation therapy. Ophthalmology 1998;105:1670.
222. Gunduz K, Shields CL, Shields JA, et al. Radiation complications and tumor control after plaque radiotherapy of choroidal melanoma with macular involvement. Am J Ophthalmol 1999;127:579.
223. Petrovich Z, Luxton G, Langholz B, Astrahan MA, Liggett PE. Episcleral plaque radiotherapy in the treatment of uveal melanomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:247.
224. Seregard S, Trampe E, Lax I, Kock E, Lundell G. Results following episcleral ruthenium plaque radiotherapy for posterior uveal melanoma. The Swedish experience. Acta Ophthalmol Scand
1997;75:11.
225. Beitler JJ, McCormick B, Ellsworth RM, et al. Ocular melanoma: total dose and dose rate effects with Co-60 plaque therapy. Radiology 1990;176:275.
226. Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study Group. The Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study Group (COMS) randomized trial of pre-enucleation radiation of large choroidal melanoma III: local
complications and observations following enucleation. COMS report no. 11. Am J Ophthalmol 1998:126:362.
227. Rennie I, Forster D, Kemeny A, Walton L, Kunkler I. The use of single fraction Leksell stereotactic radiosurgery in the treatment of uveal melanoma. Acta Ophthalmol Scand 1996;74:558.
228. Marchini G, Gerosa M, Piovan E, et al. Gamma knife stereotactic radiosurgery for uveal melanoma: clinical results after 2 years. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg 1996;66:208.
229. Tokuuye K, Akine Y, Sumi M, et al. Fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy for choroidal melanoma. Radiother Oncol 1997;43:87.
230. Zehetmayer M, Dieckmann K, Kren G, et al. Fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy with linear accelerator for uveal melanomapreliminary Vienna results. Strahlenther Onkol 1999;175:74.
231. Dieckmann K, Zehetmayer M, Poetter R. Fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy for choroidal melanoma [Comment]. Radiother Oncol 1998;49:197.
232. Buatti JM, Parsons JT, Mendenhall WM, Meeks SL. Fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy for choroidal melanoma [Comment]. Radiother Oncol 1997;45:99.
233. Mieler WF. Concurrent versus sequential application of ferromagnetic hyperthermia and 125I brachytherapy of melanoma in an animal model. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc 1997;95:611.
234. Burgess SE, Chang S, Svitra P, et al. Effect of hyperthermia on experimental choroidal melanoma. Br J Ophthalmol 1985;69:854.
235. Finger PT. Microwave thermoradiotherapy for uveal melanoma: results of a 10-year study. Ophthalmology 1997;104:1794.
236. Steeves RA, Murray TG, Moros EG, et al. Concurrent ferromagnetic hyperthermia and 125I brachytherapy in a rabbit choroidal melanoma model. Int J Hyperthermia 1992;8:443.
237. Petrovich Z, Pike M, Astrahan MA, et al. Episcleral plaque thermoradiotherapy of posterior uveal melanomas. Am J Clin Oncol 1996;19:207.
238. Hawthorne MF. New horizons for therapy based on the boron neutron capture reaction. Mol Med Today 1998;4:174.
239. Packer S, Coderre J, Saraf S, et al. Boron neutron capture therapy of anterior chamber melanoma with p-boronophenylalanine. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1992;33:395.
240. Wadabayashi N, Honda C, Mishima Y, Ichihashi M. Selective boron accumulation in human ocular melanoma vs surrounding eye components after 10B1-p-boronophenylalanine administration.
Melanoma Res 1994;4:185.

241. Laramore GE, Risler R, Griffin TW, Wootton P, Wilbur DS. Fast neutron radiotherapy and boron neutron capture therapy: application to a human melanoma test system. Bull Cancer Radiother
1996;83[Suppl]:191s.
242. Mishima Y, Ichihashi M, Tsuji M, et al. Treatment of malignant melanoma by selective thermal neutron capture therapy using melanoma-seeking compound. J Invest Dermatol 1989;92:321s.
243. Farber DB, Danciger M. Identification of genes causing photoreceptor degenerations leading to blindness. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1997;7:666.
244. Speicher MR, Prescher G, Du Manoir S, et al. Chromosomal gains and losses in uveal melanomas detected by comparative genomic hybridization. Cancer Res 1994;54:3817.
245. Prescher G, Bornfeld N, Friedrichs W, Seeber S, Becher R. Cytogenetics of twelve cases of uveal melanoma and patterns of nonrandom anomalies and isochromosome formation. Cancer
Genet Cytogenet 1995;80:40.
246. Luyten GPM, Mooy CM, Post J, et al. Metastatic uveal melanomaa morphologic and immunohistochemical analysis. Cancer 1996;78:1967.
247. McNamara M, Kennedy SM. Successful establishment of uveal and conjunctival melanoma in vitro. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim 1997;33:236.
248. McNamara M, Felix C, Davison EV, Fenton M, Kennedy SM. Assessment of chromosome 3 copy number in ocular melanoma using fluorescence in situ hybridization. Cancer Genet Cytogenet
1997;98:4.
249. Mitelman F, Mertens F, Johansson B. A breakpoint map of recurrent chromosomal rearrangements in human neoplasia. Nature Genet 1997;15:417(abst).
250. White VA, Chambers JD, Courtright PD, Chang WY, Horsman DE. Correlation of cytogenetic abnormalities with the outcome of patients with uveal melanoma. Cancer 1998;83:354.
251. Mourizux F, Casagrande F, Pillaire M, et al. Differential expression of G 1 cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors in normal and transformed melanocytes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
1998;39:876.
252. De Waard-Siebinga I, Blom D-JR, Griffioen M, et al. Establishment and characterization of an uveal-melanoma cell line. Int J Cancer 1995;62:155.
253. Hu D, McCormick SA, Ritch R, Pelton-Henrion K. Studies of human uveal melanocytes in vitro: isolation, purification and cultivation of human uveal melanocytes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
1993;34:2210.
254. Niederkorn JY, Mellon J, Pidherney M, Mayhew E, Anand R. Effect of anti-ganglioside antibodies on the metastatic spread of intraocular melanomas in a nude mouse model of human uveal
melanoma. Curr Eye Res 1993;12:3423.
255. Ma D, Luyten GP, Luider TM, Jager MJ, Niederkorn JY. Association between nm23-H1 gene expression and metastasis of human uveal melanoma in an animal model. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 1996;37:2293(abst).
256. Liang P, Zhu W, Zhang X, et al. Differential display using one-base anchored oligo-dT primers. Nucleic Acids Res 1994;22:5763(abst).
257. Liang P, Pardee AB. Differential display of eukaryotic messenger RNA by means of the polymerase chain reaction. Science 1992;257:967(abst).
258. Diatchenko L, Lau YC, Campbell AP, et al. Suppression subtractive hybridization: a method for generating differentially regulated or tissue-specific cDNA probes and libraries. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1996;93:6025(abst).
259. Clauser KR, Hall SR, Smith DM, et al. Rapid mass spectrometric peptide sequencing and mass matching for characterization of human melanoma proteins isolated by two-dimensional PAGE.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:5072(abst).
260. Matsui NM, Smith DM, Clauser KR, et al. Immobilized pH gradient two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometric identification of cytokine-regulated proteins in ME-180 cervical
carcinoma cells. Electrophoresis 1997;18:409.
261. Brown PO, Botstein D. Exploring the new world of the genome with DNA microarrays. Nature Genet 1999;21:33.
262. Zhang Y, Deng Y, Luther T, et al. Tissue factor controls the balance of angiogenic and antiangiogenic properties of tumor cells in mice. J Clin Invest 1994;94:1320.
263. Carmeliet P, Collen D. Molecules in focus: Tissue Factor. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 1998;30:661.
264. Nakagawa K, Zhang Y, Tsuji H, et al. The angiogenic effect of tissue factor on tumors and wounds. Semin Thromb Hemost 1998;24:207.
265. Molema G, Meijer DKF, deLeij LFMH. Tumor vasculature targeted therapies. Biochem Pharmacol 1998;55:1939.
266. Zetter BR. Angiogenesis and tumor metastasis. Annu Rev Med 1998;49:407.
267. Syed NA, Windle JJ, Darjatmoko SR, et al. Characterization of transgenic mice with pigmented intraocular tumors: tissue of origin and treatment. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1998;39:2800.
268. Albert DM, Ryan LM, Borden EC. Metastatic ocular and cutaneous melanoma: a comparison of patient characteristics and prognosis. Arch Ophthalmol 1996;114:107.

SECTION 43.1 Molecular Biology of Central Nervous System Neoplasms
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 43.1
Molecular Biology of Central Nervous System Neoplasms
DAVID N. LOUIS
WEBSTER K. CAVENEE
Introduction
Diffuse Fibrillary Astrocytomas
Formation of Low-Grade Astrocytoma
Progression to Anaplastic Astrocytoma
Progression to Glioblastoma Multiforme
Subsets of Glioblastoma Multiforme
Other Gliomas
Other Astrocytomas
Oligodendrogliomas and Oligoastrocytomas
Ependymomas and Choroid Plexus Tumors
Medulloblastomas
Meningiomas
Peripheral Nerve Tumors
Miscellaneous Tumors
Hemangioblastomas
Hemangiopericytomas
Neurologic Tumor Syndromes
Summary
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Neoplastic transformation appears to be a multistep process in which the normal controls of cell proliferation and cell-cell interaction are lost, thus transforming a
normal cell into a tumor cell. This tumorigenic process involves an interplay between different classes of genes, including oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, DNA
repair genes, and cell death genes. Alterations of these types of genes in turn underlie human brain tumor formation. In addition, such molecular genetic information
has begun to have clinical significance, in both the classification and management of brain tumors. The following chapter reviews the molecular basis of brain
tumorigenesis, covering primary tumors of the brain as well as other primary intracranial neoplasms that commonly affect the central nervous system.

DIFFUSE, FIBRILLARY ASTROCYTOMAS
FORMATION OF LOW-GRADE ASTROCYTOMA
Diffuse, fibrillary astrocytomas are the most common type of primary brain tumor in adults. These tumors are divided histopathologically into three grades of
malignancy: World Health Organization (WHO) grade II astrocytoma, WHO grade III anaplastic astrocytoma, and WHO grade IV glioblastoma multiforme (GBM).
WHO grade II astrocytomas are the most indolent of the diffuse astrocytoma spectrum. Nonetheless, these low-grade tumors are infiltrative and have a marked
potential for malignant progression, and any biologic model for astrocytomas must account for these cardinal features of malignant progression and invasion. 1
p53, a tumor suppressor encoded by the TP53 gene on chromosome 17p, has an integral role in a number of cellular processes, including cell-cycle arrest, response
to DNA damage, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and differentiation. The TP53 gene is involved in the early stages of astrocytoma tumorigenesis. 2 TP53 mutations and
allelic loss of chromosome 17p are observed in at least one-third of all three grades of adult astrocytomas, suggesting that inactivation of p53 is important in the
formation of the grade II tumors. Moreover, high-grade astrocytomas with homogeneous TP53 mutations evolve clonally from subpopulations of similarly mutated cells
present in initially low-grade tumors. 3 Such mutation studies are complemented by functional studies that have recapitulated the role of the p53 inactivation in the
early stages of astrocytoma formation. For instance, cortical astrocytes from mice without functional p53 appear immortalized when grown in vitro and rapidly acquire
a transformed phenotype. Cortical astrocytes from mice with one functional copy of TP53 behave more like wild-type astrocytes and only show signs of
immortalization and transformation after they have lost the one functional TP53 copy. 4,5 Interestingly, those cells without functional p53 become markedly aneuploid, 4
confirming prior work showing that p53 loss results in genomic instability and that astrocytomas with mutant TP53 are often aneuploid. 6 Thus, the abrogation of
astrocytic p53 function appears to facilitate some events integral to neoplastic transformation, setting the stage for further malignant progression.
Many growth factors and their receptors are overexpressed in astrocytomas, including platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), fibroblast growth factors, and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF). PDGF ligands and receptors are expressed approximately equally in all grades of astrocytoma, suggesting that such
overexpression is also important in the initial stages of astrocytoma formation. Tumors often overexpress cognate PDGF ligands and receptors in an autocrine
stimulatory fashion. 7 The mechanisms for PDGF overexpression in most cases have not been elucidated, although rare astrocytomas display amplification of the
PDGF-a receptor gene. Significantly, loss of chromosome 17p in the region of the TP53 gene is closely correlated with PDGF-a receptor overexpression, in that 17p
loss is most often seen in those astrocytomas that have PDGF-a receptor overexpression. 8 These observations may imply that TP53 mutations have an oncogenic
effect only in the presence of PDGF-a receptor overexpression. This interdependence is highlighted by observations that mouse astrocytes without functional p53
become transformed only in the presence of specific growth factors. 5
Astrocytomas display a remarkable tendency to infiltrate the surrounding brain, confounding therapeutic attempts at local control. These invasive abilities are often
apparent in low-grade as well as high-grade tumors, implying that the invasive phenotype is acquired early in tumorigenesis. Investigations into astrocytoma invasion
have highlighted the complex nature of cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix interactions. 9,10 A variety of cell surface and extracellular matrix molecules such as CD44
glycoproteins, gangliosides, and integrins are differentially expressed in astrocytomas. Many of the growth factors expressed in astrocytomas, such as fibroblast
growth factor, epidermal growth factor (EGF), and VEGF, also stimulate migration. 9 Such growth factors, cell surface receptors, and extracellular molecules most likely
reflect a dynamic interplay between cell-cell adhesion, remodeling of the extracellular matrix, and cell motility. 10
Less common molecular changes also occur in grade II astrocytomas. Loss of chromosome 22q, for instance, suggests the presence of a chromosome 22q glioma
tumor suppressor gene. 11 Comparative genomic hybridization studies have also demonstrated common gains of chromosome 7q in low-grade astrocytomas. 12 Finally,
methylation of critical growth regulatory genes has been noted in some astrocytomas and may be another mechanism for gene alteration (W. Cavenee, unpublished
data).
PROGRESSION TO ANAPLASTIC ASTROCYTOMA
The transition from WHO grade II astrocytoma to WHO grade III anaplastic astrocytoma is accompanied by a marked increase in malignant behavior. Although many
patients with grade II astrocytomas survive for 5 or more years, patients with anaplastic astrocytomas often die within 2 or 3 years and frequently show transformation
to GBM. Histologically, the major differences between grade II and grade III tumors are increased cellularity and the presence of mitotic activity, implying that higher
proliferative activity is the hallmark of the progression to anaplastic astrocytoma.
A number of molecular abnormalities have been associated with anaplastic astrocytoma, and some studies have suggested that most of these abnormalities converge
on one critical cell-cycle regulatory complex that includes the p16, cyclin-dependent kinase-4 (cdk4), cdk6, cyclin D1, and retinoblastoma (RB) proteins. The simplest
schema suggests that p16 inhibits the cdk6/cyclin D1 or cdk4/cyclin D1 complex, preventing these complexes from phosphorylating pRB, and so ensuring that pRB
maintains its brake on the cell cycle. Individual components in this pathway are altered in up to 50% of anaplastic astrocytomas and in the majority of GBM.
Chromosome 9p loss occurs in approximately 50% of anaplastic astrocytomas and GBMs, with 9p deletions primarily affecting the region of the CDKN2A gene, 13

which encodes the p16 protein and the p14ARF protein. The CDKN2A gene is inactivated either by homozygous deletion or, less commonly, by point mutations or
hypermethylation, thereby affecting p16 and p14ARF expression. 14,15 and 16 Moreover, replacement of CDKN2A/p16 into GBM cell lines lacking the gene results in
growth suppression. 17
Loss of chromosome 13q occurs in one-third to one-half of high-grade astrocytomas, with the RB gene preferentially targeted by losses and inactivating mutations. 18
Overall, analysis of chromosome 13q loss, RB gene mutations and RB protein expression suggests that the RB gene is inactivated in approximately 20% of anaplastic
astrocytomas and 35% of GBM.14,18 Interestingly, RB and CDKN2A/p16 alterations in primary gliomas are inversely correlated, rarely occurring together in the same
tumor.13
Amplification of the CDK4 gene provides an alternative to subvert cell-cycle control and facilitate progression to GBM. 19 CDK4, located on chromosome 12q13-14, is
amplified in 15% of malignant gliomas, 20 although this frequency may be higher among cases without CDKN2A/p16 loss, perhaps reaching 50% of GBMs without
CDKN2A/p16 loss.19 CDK4 amplification and CDKN2A/p16 deletions do not occur together in GBM cell lines and some GBM cell lines overexpress cyclin D1. 21 On the
other hand, in some GBMs and GBM cell lines, CDK4 amplification and cyclin D1 overexpression appear to represent alternative events to CDKN2A/p16 deletions,
because these genetic changes only rarely occur in the same tumors. 19,21 CDK6 amplification also occurs, although not as commonly as CDK4 amplification. 22
Allelic losses on 19q have been observed in up to 40% of anaplastic astrocytomas and GBMs, indicating a progression-associated glial tumor suppressor gene on
chromosome 19q.23 This tumor suppressor gene may be unique to glial tumors 24 and is involved in all three major types of diffuse cerebral gliomas (astrocytomas,
oligodendrogliomas, and oligoastrocytomas). This gene maps to a region of chromosome 19q13.3, telomeric to the marker D19S412 and centromeric to the STD locus
gene,25,26 but is yet to be identified.
PROGRESSION TO GLIOBLASTOMA MULTIFORME
GBM is the most malignant stage of astrocytoma, with survival times of less than 2 years for most patients. Histologically, these tumors are characterized by dense
cellularity, high proliferation indices, microvascular proliferation, and focal necrosis. The highly proliferative nature of these lesions is no doubt the result of multiple
mitogenic effects. As mentioned previously, at least one such effect is deregulation of the p16-cdk4-cyclin D1-pRB pathway of cell-cycle control. The vast majority, if
not all, GBMs have alterations of this system, whether it be inactivation of p16 or pRB or overexpression of cdk4. 13,19
Chromosome 10 loss is a frequent finding in GBM, occurring in 60% to 95% of GBMs but far less commonly in anaplastic astrocytomas. 27,28 At least two tumor
suppressor loci are present on the long arm of chromosome 10, and there may be a third locus on the short arm. The PTEN/MMAC1/TEP-1 gene at 10q23.3 has been
implicated as one of these genes, with PTEN mutations identified in approximately 20% of GBM. 29,30 and 31 PTEN functions as a protein tyrosine phosphatase and has
3' phosphoinositol phosphatase activity; in addition, PTEN has an amino-terminal domain with homologies to tensin and auxilin. 10 Thus, PTEN may regulate cell
migration via affecting focal adhesion kinase and may regulate cell proliferation via control of the AKT serine/threonine kinase. Indeed, introduction of wild-type PTEN
into glioma cells with mutant PTEN leads to growth suppression. 32 Nonetheless, given the remarkably high frequency of chromosome 10 loss in GBM, it is likely that
other glioma tumor suppressors reside on this chromosome; one candidate is the DBMT1 gene. 33
EGFR is a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase, whose ligands include EGF and transforming growth factor-a. The EGFR gene is the most frequently amplified
oncogene in astrocytic tumors, 34 being amplified in approximately 40% of all GBM 27 but in few anaplastic astrocytomas. 35 Those GBMs that exhibit EGFR gene
amplification have almost always lost genetic material on chromosome 10 27 and often have CDKN2A deletions. 36 GBMs with EGFR gene amplification display
overexpression of EGFR at both the mRNA and protein levels, suggesting that activation of this growth signal pathway is integral to malignant progression to
GBM.35,37 Approximately one-third of those GBM with EGFR gene amplification also have specific EGFR gene rearrangements, which produce truncated molecules
similar to the v-erbB oncogene. 10 These truncated receptors are capable of conferring dramatically enhanced tumorigenicity to GBM cells. 38 The downstream targets
of EGFR activation in GBMs include the Shc-Grb2-ras pathway, involving EGFR in a cascade that facilitates mitogenesis and decreases apoptosis in tumor cells. 39
Less commonly amplified oncogenes include N-myc, gli, PDGF-a receptor, c-myc, myb, K-ras, CDK4, and MDM2.
As mentioned previously, one of the hallmarks of GBM is microvascular proliferation. A host of angiogenic growth factors and their receptors are found in GBMs. 10 For
example, VEGF and PDGF are expressed by tumor cells while their tyrosine kinase receptors, VEGF receptors 1 and 2 for VEGF and the PDGF-b receptor for PDGF,
are expressed on endothelial cells. VEGF and its receptors, in particular, appear to play a major role in GBM angiogenesis. 40,41 and 42 A paracrine mechanism has been
suggested in which VEGF is secreted by tumor cells and bound by the VEGF receptors on endothelial cells. Interestingly, VEGF is preferentially up-regulated by
tumor cells surrounding regions of necrosis, perhaps as a result of necrosis-induced hypoxia, since hypoxia can up-regulate VEGF. In addition, PDGF may
up-regulate VEGF expression by endothelial cells, thereby providing an early stimulus for angiogenesis. 43 A link between p53 and tumor angiogenesis has been
suggested by the observations that some mutant p53 molecules can enhance VEGF expression 40 and that wild-type p53 regulates the secretion of a glioma-derived
angiogenesis inhibitory factor. 44 Related mechanisms may also be responsible for tumoral edema in GBM, because some of these angiogenic molecules, such as
VEGF, may also cause vascular permeability and hence tumoral edema.
SUBSETS OF GLIOBLASTOMA MULTIFORME
The assumption that all astrocytomas progress through distinct genetic stages in a linear fashion is most likely an oversimplification. Indeed, it appears as if there are
biologic subsets of astrocytomas that may reflect the clinical heterogeneity observed in these tumors 45 (Fig. 43.1-1). For instance, approximately one-third of GBM
have TP53/chromosome 17p alterations, one-third have EGFR gene amplification, and one-third have neither change 46 (i.e., TP53 mutations and EGFR amplification
are mutually exclusive). Experimental data also support this distinction by showing that p53-deficient cells are not transformed when cultured in the presence of EGF,
whereas they are transformed in the presence of other growth factors. 5 Primary GBMs with TP53 mutations may therefore not be expected to acquire EGFR gene
amplification, if activation of the EGF-EGFR system does not produce a growth advantage in such cells.

FIGURE 43.1-1. Molecular alterations characteristic of different stages of astrocytoma progression. EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; PDGFa(R),
platelet-derived growth factor-a (receptor).

The genetic pathway involving TP53 mutations often involves progression from a lower grade astrocytic lesion, so-called secondary GBM. 46, 47 and 48 On the other hand,
those GBM with EGFR amplification may arise either de novo or rapidly from a preexisting tumor, without a clinically evident, preceding lower-grade astrocytoma. 46,47
Interestingly, younger age at initial diagnosis has been an important prognostic parameter among patients with GBM, with younger patients faring better than older
patients. In turn, those GBMs with loss of chromosome 17p occur in patients younger than those characterized by EGFR gene amplification. 49,50 The predominance of
tumors with 17p loss in a younger population of astrocytoma patients may therefore reflect the age-based difference in prognosis. The data suggest that genetic
analysis may begin to explain the clinical observations concerning age differences in astrocytic tumors. However, convincing differences in prognosis have not been
found in a variety of retrospective studies of either TP53 or EGFR alterations in GBM. Nonetheless, because effective therapies do not exist for GBM, possible clinical

differences may be obscured by the universally grim prognosis of these tumors (see Oligodendrogliomas and Oligoastrocytomas , later in this chapter).

OTHER GLIOMAS
OTHER ASTROCYTOMAS
Pilocytic astrocytoma is the most common astrocytic tumor of childhood and differs clinically and histopathologically from the diffuse, fibrillary astrocytoma that affects
adults. Pilocytic astrocytomas do not have the same genomic alterations as diffuse, fibrillary astrocytomas. Because pilocytic astrocytomas frequently affect patients
with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), it would not be surprising if the NF1 gene on chromosome 17q were altered in pilocytic astrocytomas; in fact, allelic loss occurs
on chromosome 17q in one-fourth of cases. 51 Unfortunately, detailed mutational analysis of the NF1 gene in pilocytic tumors has not yet been performed, because of
the large size of the gene.
Other pediatric astrocytic tumors are histologically similar to the astrocytomas, anaplastic astrocytomas, and GBMs that occur in adults. Some of these are associated
with similar genetic alterations, such as TP53 mutations. For instance, brain stem gliomas have frequent TP53 gene and chromosome 17p alterations without EGFR
gene amplification, 52 as do those diffuse cerebral astrocytic tumors that occur in children older than 4 years of age. 53 Desmoplastic cerebral astrocytoma of infancy
and desmoplastic infantile ganglioglioma are large, superficial, usually cystic, benign astrocytomas that affect children in the first year or two of life. Allelic loss of
chromosomes 10 or 17 have not been detected in these lesions. 54 In adult gangliogliomas, another benign form of astrocytic glioma, EGFR gene amplification or
allelic loss on chromosomes 10, 13q, 17p, 19q, and 22q has not been detected (A. von Deimling and D. N. Louis, unpublished data).
Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (PXA) is a superficial, low-grade astrocytic tumor that predominantly affects young adults. While these tumors have a bizarre
histologic appearance, they are typically slow-growing tumors that may be amenable to surgical cure. Some PXAs, however, may recur as GBM. Nonetheless, the
genetic events that underlie PXA formation and progression differ from those involved in diffuse astrocytoma tumorigenesis. 55 PXAs may have TP53 mutations, but
the few documented mutations have been somewhat different from those usually found in diffuse, fibrillary astrocytomas. 55 EGFR gene amplification does not occur in
PXAs, but GBMs that arise from PXAs may display EGFR gene amplification. On the other hand, allelic losses of chromosomes 9, 10, and 19q are not observed in
PXA.
Subependymal giant cell astrocytomas (SEGA) are periventricular, low-grade astrocytic tumors that are usually associated with tuberous sclerosis (TS) and are
histologically identical to the so-called candle-gutterings that line the ventricles of TS patients. Similar to the other tumorous lesions in TS, these are slowly growing
and may be more akin to hamartomas than true neoplasms. The association of SEGA with TS leads to the prediction that the TS genes, TSC1 on chromosome 9q and
TSC2 on chromosome 16p (see Neurologic Tumor Syndromes, later in this chapter), are involved in SEGA formation. Loss of heterozygosity studies have shown
allelic loss of chromosome 9q and 16p loci in some SEGAs, particularly of the TSC2 locus on 16p, suggesting that the TS genes act as tumor suppressors. 56,57 and 58
OLIGODENDROGLIOMAS AND OLIGOASTROCYTOMAS
Oligodendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas (mixed gliomas) are diffuse, usually cerebral, tumors that are clinically and biologically most closely related to the diffuse,
fibrillary astrocytomas. The tumors, however, are less common than astrocytomas and have generally better prognoses than the diffuse astrocytomas; patients with
WHO grade II oligodendrogliomas, for instance, may have mean survival times of 10 years. In addition, oligodendroglial tumors appear to be differentially
chemosensitive,59 when compared with the diffuse astrocytomas.
Allelic losses in oligodendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas occur preferentially on chromosomes 1p and 19q, affecting 40% to 80% of these tumor types. 23,60,61
Because of the frequent loss of these loci in low-grade as well as anaplastic oligodendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas, the 1p and 19q tumor suppressors are
probably important early in oligodendroglial tumorigenesis. Mapping of the chromosome 19q locus has demonstrated that the gene resides in the same vicinity as the
astrocytoma gene and is likely the same gene. 25,62 Similar mapping of chromosome 1p has implicated the telomeric region of 1p. 61,62 Interestingly, chromosome 1p
and 19q losses are closely associated; oligodendroglial tumors with 1p loss typically also have loss of 19q, suggesting that these two putative tumor suppressor
genes may be involved in biologically distinct pathways. 60,61 In fact, microdissection of the oligodendroglial and astrocytic components in oligoastrocytomas has shown
that, despite the histologic differences, the molecular changes are identical in these two components. 61 Oligoastrocytomas may also suffer allelic losses of
chromosome 17p,60 although these losses are not often associated with TP53 mutations, 60,63 perhaps implying a second chromosome 17p glioma gene. Oncogene
amplification has only rarely been noted in oligodendroglial tumors. 34,60
Oligodendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas may progress, either to WHO grade III anaplastic oligodendroglioma or anaplastic oligoastrocytoma, and sometimes to
higher-grade tumors with histologic features similar to GBM ( Fig. 43.1-2). Anaplastic oligodendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas may display allelic losses of
chromosomes 9p involving the CDKN2A gene and chromosome 10.60,64 Thus, allelic loss of chromosome 10 may be a common finding in high-grade malignant
gliomas, whether they are astrocytic or oligodendroglial in original lineage. 28

FIGURE 43.1-2. Molecular genetic subsets of glioblastoma multiforme (see text for details). PCV, procarbazine, CCNU, and vincristine.

Anaplastic oligodendrogliomas have proven to be the first brain tumor for which molecular genetic analysis has had practical clinical ramifications: Anaplastic
oligodendrogliomas that have allelic losses of chromosomes 1p and 19q follow different clinical courses from those tumors that do not have these genetic changes.
Anaplastic oligodendrogliomas that have 1p and 19q loss are essentially always sensitive to procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine chemotherapy, with nearly 50%
of such tumors demonstrating complete neuroradiologic responses; correspondingly, patients whose tumors have 1p and 19q loss have median survivals of
approximately 10 years. 64 On the other hand, anaplastic oligodendrogliomas that lack 1p and 19q loss are only chemosensitive approximately 25% of the time and
only rarely have complete neuroradiologic responses; as a result, patients whose anaplastic oligodendrogliomas lack 1p and 19q loss have median survivals of
approximately 2 years. 64 Thus, molecular genetic analysis of 1p/19q allelic status has already become a clinically useful test in neurooncology and is most likely an
indication of the utility of molecular diagnostic approaches in neurooncology.
EPENDYMOMAS AND CHOROID PLEXUS TUMORS
Ependymomas are a clinically diverse group of gliomas that vary from aggressive intraventricular tumors of children to benign spinal cord tumors in adults.
Chromosome 22q loss is common in ependymomas.65,66 A candidate glioma tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 22q is the NF2 gene, because NF2 patients have
a higher incidence of gliomas, particularly spinal ependymomas, in addition to schwannomas and meningiomas. Analysis of the NF2 gene in spinal ependymomas has
revealed mutations and deletions, confirming the role of the NF2 gene alterations in the genesis of spinal ependymomas. 67,68 For cerebral ependymomas, the paucity
of NF2 mutations suggests that another, as yet unidentified, chromosome 22q gene will probably be a more integral ependymoma locus. The TP53 gene is not
mutated in ependymomas63 or in the malignant transformation of ependymomas to anaplastic ependymoma (S. Cortez and D. N. Louis, unpublished data).

Choroid plexus tumors are also a varied group of tumors that preferentially occur in the ventricular system, ranging from aggressive supratentorial intraventricular
tumors of children to benign cerebellopontine angle tumors of adults. Choroid plexus tumors have been reported occasionally in patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
and von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease (as well as in Aicardi's syndrome, which does not predispose to cancer), raising the possibility that the TP53 gene on
chromosome 17p, responsible for Li-Fraumeni syndrome, or the VHL gene on chromosome 3p is involved in choroid plexus neoplasia. Studies of human choroid
plexus tumors have not shown TP53 mutations, but choroid plexus neoplasms may be induced in transgenic mice by disrupting p53 and pRB function. 69 VHL
mutations have also not been documented in choroid plexus tumors, but some reported choroid plexus tumors in VHL patients may instead reflect papillary tumors of
the middle ear (endolymphatic sac tumors), which occur in higher frequency in VHL patients and which histologically resemble choroid plexus neoplasms.
Oncogenic viruses may cause human cancer, particularly those viruses whose products interfere with tumor suppressor gene functions, such as the human
papillomaviruses implicated in cervical carcinoma. One study has identified sequences similar to SV40 virus, an oncogenic virus that has the ability to inactivate both
the RB and p53 proteins in human ependymomas and choroid plexus papillomas. 70 This observation raised considerable excitement since SV40 has been implicated
as an oncogenic factor in transgenic models of choroid plexus neoplasia. 69 However, SV40-like sequences have not been found in other choroid plexus papillomas or
ependymomas and the role of oncogenic viruses in these tumors remains undefined.

MEDULLOBLASTOMAS
Medulloblastomas are highly malignant, primitive tumors that arise in the posterior fossa, primarily in children. One-third to one-half of all medulloblastomas have an
isochromosome 17q on cytogenetic analysis, 71 and corresponding allelic loss of chromosome 17p has been noted on molecular genetic analysis. 72,73 TP53 mutations,
however, are rare in medulloblastomas. 63,74 Allelic losses occur preferentially at regions of chromosome 17p that are telomeric to the TP53 locus, 73,75 implying the
presence of a second, more distal chromosome 17p tumor suppressor gene. Allelic losses of chromosome 6q, 11, and 16q have also been noted frequently in these
tumors,72 as have genomic losses on chromosomes 10q, 11, 16q, 17p, and 8p, 76 but deletions of the CDKN2A gene, which are common in many tumors, do not occur
in medulloblastomas.77 Oncogene amplification has not been found frequently in medulloblastomas; only c-myc is amplified in significant numbers of cases and this
change appears more common in medulloblastoma cell lines than in primary tumors. 71 Comparative genomic hybridization studies have demonstrated amplification of
chromosome bands 5p15.3 and 11q22.3 and gains of chromosomes 17q and 7. 76
The discovery of genes underlying two hereditary tumor syndromes has directed attention to two pathways involved in medulloblastoma tumorigenesis. Gorlin
syndrome, a condition characterized by multiple basal cell carcinomas (also termed basal cell nevoid syndrome), bone cysts, dysmorphic features, and
medulloblastomas arises from defects in the PTCH gene on the long arm of chromosome 9, a homologue of the Drosophila patched gene. Medulloblastomas,
particularly the nodular desmoplastic variants that are characteristic of Gorlin syndrome, can show allelic loss of chromosome 9q and PTCH mutations. 78,79 and 80 The
protein encoded by PTCH functions in the pathway regulated by the Sonic hedgehog protein; other molecules in this pathway include smoothened, and rare
smoothened mutations have been documented in sporadic medulloblastomas. 81 Turcot syndrome, a condition characterized by colonic tumors and brain tumors, is
also linked to medulloblastoma; patients with the adenomatous polyposis phenotype may develop medulloblastomas, and these patients often have mutations of the
APC gene on chromosome 5q.82 Curiously, APC gene mutations and loss of chromosome 5q are rare in sporadic medulloblastomas. 83 The APC protein operates in a
molecular pathway that includes the b-catenin protein, and rare mutations of b-catenin have now been noted in sporadic medulloblastomas. 84 It is likely that other
components of these two pathways will also be implicated in medulloblastoma tumorigenesis.
The question of whether molecular analyses can provide ancillary information for the management of medulloblastoma patients remains open. Some papers have
suggested that patients whose tumors have loss of chromosome 17p may follow a more aggressive course, 85 but this has not been a universal finding. Others have
provided intriguing evidence that the level of expression of the trkC receptor may relate to prognosis, with those tumors showing high trkC expression following a more
favorable course. 86

MENINGIOMAS
Meningiomas are common intracranial tumors that arise in the meninges and compress the underlying brain. Meningiomas are usually benign, but some atypical
meningiomas may recur locally, and some meningiomas are frankly malignant. Monosomy 22 is common in meningiomas, with the NF2 gene on chromosome 22q
frequently mutated in meningiomas, clearly implicating it in meningothelial tumorigenesis. 87,88 and 89 In sporadic meningiomas, both chromosome 22q allelic loss and
NF2 gene mutations are more common in fibroblastic and transitional subtypes than in meningothelial forms. 88 As in schwannomas (see Peripheral Nerve Tumors,
later in this chapter), NF2 gene alterations result predominantly in immediate truncation, splicing abnormalities, or altered reading frames, producing grossly truncated
proteins.
Approximately 40% of meningiomas have neither NF2 gene mutations nor allelic loss of chromosome 22q. For these tumors, it is likely that a second meningioma
tumor suppressor gene is involved. This putative second gene is probably not on chromosome 22q, since NF2 gene mutations in meningiomas correlate fairly closely
with chromosome 22q loss. Nonetheless, a few meningiomas have been described with loss of portions of chromosome 22q that do not include the NF2 gene,
suggesting the possibility of a second meningioma locus on chromosome 22. 90 Furthermore, a family with multiple meningiomas but without vestibular schwannomas
does not show linkage to the NF2 locus on chromosome 22q, suggesting yet another meningioma predisposition gene. 91 One study has suggested that alternative
meningioma genes may reside on chromosomes 1p and 3p.92 Allelic losses in meningiomas have been noted on a variety of other chromosomes, including 1p, 3p, 5p,
5q, 11, 13, and 17p.93,94
Atypical and malignant meningiomas are not as common as benign meningiomas. Atypical meningiomas often show allelic losses of chromosomal arms 1p, 6q, 9q,
10q, 14q, 17p, and 18q, suggesting that progression-associated genes may lie at these loci. 94,95 and 96 More frequent losses of chromosomes 6q, 9p, 10, and 14q also
occur in anaplastic meningiomas. 94 Chromosomal gains have also been noted in higher-grade meningiomas, with gains of chromosomes 20q, 12q, 15q, 1q, 9q, and
17q most commonly observed.94 Chromosome 10 loss, in particular, has been associated with those meningiomas with morphologic features of malignancy, rather
than those meningiomas that are designated as malignant on the basis of brain invasion alone. 96 Interestingly, brain invasion used to be considered a histologic
indicator of malignancy in meningiomas; molecular genetic inquires have, however, shown that histologically benign meningiomas that invade the brain do not have
the molecular hallmarks of higher-grade meningiomas. 94,96 These observations provide another example of how molecular genetic investigations have clarified
grading issues in neurooncology.
PERIPHERAL NERVE TUMORS
Schwannomas are benign tumors that arise on peripheral nerves. Schwannomas may arise on cranial nerves, particularly the vestibular portion of the eighth cranial
nerve (vestibular schwannomas, acoustic neuromas) where they present as cerebellopontine angle masses. NF2 patients are defined by the presence of bilateral
vestibular schwannomas,97 although unilateral vestibular schwannomas are common in the general population as well. Therefore, like meningiomas, schwannomas
occur frequently in NF2 patients, have frequent loss of chromosome 22q, and harbor NF2 gene mutations in at least 50% of cases, in vestibular tumors as well as
schwannomas from other sites.97 The majority of the somatic changes are small deletions or insertions that create either frameshifts and premature stop codons or
altered splicing. Inactivating mutations are relatively evenly distributed across the first 15 exons with no outstanding hot spots. Furthermore, loss of the NF2
gene–encoded merlin protein occurs in all schwannomas, consistent with an integral and universal role for NF2 gene inactivation in schwannoma formation. 98 Thus,
inactivation of NF2 is a common feature underlying both inherited and sporadic forms of schwannoma.
Neurofibromas are also benign tumors of peripheral nerve that most often arise on distal, superficial nerves. Multiple neurofibromas are associated with NF1,
suggesting that the NF1 gene on chromosome 17q is involved in the genesis of these benign nerve sheath lesions. Unfortunately, the large size of the NF1 gene has
precluded extensive mutation analysis in these lesions. Neurofibromas, particularly the plexiform variants associated with NF1, have the potential for malignant
progression to malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, a transition that is associated with inactivation of the NF1, TP53, and CDKN2A genes. 99, 100 and 101

MISCELLANEOUS TUMORS
HEMANGIOBLASTOMAS

Hemangioblastomas are tumors of uncertain origin that are composed of endothelial cells, pericytes, and so-called stromal cells. These benign tumors most frequently
occur in the cerebellum and spinal cord of young adults. Multiple hemangioblastomas are characteristic of VHL, an inherited tumor syndrome in which patients have a
tendency to develop tumors, particularly hemangioblastomas, retinal angiomas, renal cell carcinomas, and pheochromocytomas. 102 Allelic loss occurs in
hemangioblastomas in the region of the VHL gene on chromosome 3p 103 and the VHL gene is mutated in sporadic hemangioblastomas. 104 These observations
suggest that the VHL gene acts as a classical tumor suppressor and is involved in both sporadic hemangioblastomas and familial tumors. The mechanism of action of
the VHL protein appears complex, with evidence suggesting that it may stabilize mRNA of angiogenic compounds such as VEGF, 105 as well as extracellular matrix
components such as fibronectin. 106 These actions at least begin to explain the highly vascular nature of hemangioblastomas.
HEMANGIOPERICYTOMAS
Hemangiopericytomas (HPCs) are dural tumors that may display locally aggressive behavior and may metastasize. The histogenesis of dural-based HPC has long
been debated, with some authors classifying it as a distinct entity and others classifying it as a subtype of meningioma. Molecular genetic studies have greatly
clarified this issue. Meningiomas contain frequent mutations of the NF2 gene, whereas HPCs do not, suggesting that HPC is genetically distinct from meningioma. 107
In addition, homozygous deletions of the CDKN2A gene are common in HPCs but not in meningiomas and suggest that alterations of the p16-mediated cell-cycle
regulatory pathway may underlie the malignant potential of some HPCs. 108 Rearrangements of chromosome 12q13 are common in peripherally located, soft tissue
HPCs and have been reported in meningeal HPCs, implying that an oncogene or tumor suppressor gene at this locus is important in HPC formation. A number of
oncogenes reside in this region, including MDM2, CDK4, and CHOP/GADD153.

NEUROLOGIC TUMOR SYNDROMES
Hereditary neurologic tumor syndromes, in which patients are at risk for developing multiple nervous system tumors, have provided important clues to the genetic
basis of brain tumors. These tumor syndromes provide unique insights into tumor suppressor genes. For instance, the hereditary RB syndrome, which provided much
of the impetus for current tumor suppressor gene research, results from a mutation in both RB tumor suppressor alleles. 109 In the case of familial RB, the patient
inherits one mutant, inactive copy of the RB gene and thus carries a germline mutation in every cell, 110 which is unveiled when the second copy of the gene is
inactivated, either by mutation or by loss of a portion of chromosome 13q. A patient with sporadic RBs does not carry the germline mutation and must acquire both
inactivating hits in the same cell during his or her life. Therefore, a familial RB patient, in which every cell contains a mutation, is much more likely to develop a
second RB than a sporadic RB patient. This same paradigm appears to hold true for most, but not all, 111 of the hereditary brain tumor syndromes.
Neurologic tumor syndromes include the so-called neurocutaneous syndromes, such as NF1, NF2, TS, and VHL, and other tumor conditions such as Li-Fraumeni,
Turcot, Gorlin, and Cowden syndromes. 97,102,111,112 and 113 Each syndrome is accompanied by a characteristic panoply of tumors, both neurologic and nonneurologic. A
catalogue of only the gliomas would feature optic nerve gliomas and other astrocytomas in NF1; ependymomas and astrocytomas in NF2; SEGAs in TS; and various
malignant gliomas in Li-Fraumeni syndrome, Turcot syndrome, and the hereditary glioma pedigrees. Linkage studies have provided powerful means for tracking down
the genes associated with these tumor syndromes and have assigned the NF1 gene to chromosome 17q; the NF2 gene to chromosome 22q; the TS genes to
chromosome 9q and 16p; and Turcot syndrome genes to chromosome 5q (APC gene) and to the DNA mismatch repair genes on various chromosomes. The NF1
gene codes for a guanosine triphosphatase–activating protein termed neurofibromin. Neurofibromin interacts with the p21 product of the ras oncogene and is most
likely important in growth factor-mediated signal transduction. The NF2 gene codes for a protein, termed merlin, which most likely functions by facilitating signal
transduction from the cell surface via the cytoskeleton. One of the TS genes, TSC2 on chromosome 16p, TSC2 encodes a guanosine triphosphatase activating
protein–related protein, tuberin; whereas the TSC1 gene on 9q encodes a protein known as hamartin that has no known homology to other proteins. Nonetheless,
tuberin and hamartin appear to bind one another and function in a single cellular pathway, consistent with a similar phenotype for patients with either TSC1 or TSC2
gene mutations. For the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, mutational analyses have implicated the TP53 gene on 17p.

SUMMARY
Human brain tumors have molecular alterations that are characteristic of each type of tumor and of most stages of progression. For instance, the formation of
low-grade astrocytoma and the subsequent progression to anaplastic astrocytoma and GBM involve alterations of distinct tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes.
Furthermore, molecular genetic analysis has been used to distinguish subsets of astrocytomas. For instance, one type of GBM, characterized by TP53 gene
mutations, is more common in younger patients and may be associated with slower progression from lower-grade astrocytoma; another type of GBM, characterized by
EGFR gene amplification, is more common in older patients and may be associated with more rapid progression or de novo growth. In the case of anaplastic
oligodendrogliomas, molecular genetic subtyping has already provided practical information for the management of patients, since tumors with chromosome 1p and
19q loss are differentially chemosensitive and more indolent.
For the less common gliomas and for other primary tumors such as medulloblastomas, molecular genetic studies have defined sets of genetic alterations. For
meningiomas and schwannomas, the NF2 gene has been clearly implicated, although other genetic alterations must underlie the formation of some meningiomas as
well. For some tumors, such as HPC and brain-invasive meningiomas, molecular investigations have clarified classification and grading issues. For those tumors
associated with hereditary tumor syndromes, such as the SEGAs in TS and the hemangioblastomas in VHL, the same genes appear responsible for the syndromes
when mutated in the germline, and for sporadic tumors when mutated on a somatic basis. At present, however, these molecular data are incomplete. Once the
molecular pathways are completely understood, such knowledge will no doubt contribute to the development of more effective therapies for many of these tumors.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Louis DN. A molecular genetic model of astrocytoma histopathology. Brain Pathol 1997;7:755.
2. Louis DN. The p53 gene and protein in human brain tumors. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1994;53:11.
3. Sidransky D, Mikkelsen T, Schwechheimer K, et al. Clonal expansion of p53 mutant cells is associated with brain tumor progression. Nature 1992;355:846.
4. Yahanda AM, Bruner JM, Donehower LA, et al. Astrocytes derived from p53-deficient mice provide a multistep in vitro model for development of malignant gliomas. Mol Cell Biol 1995;15:4249.
5. Bogler O, Huang H-JS, Cavenee WK. Loss of wild-type p53 bestows a growth advantage on primary cortical astrocytes and facilitates their in vitro transformation. Cancer Res 1995;55:2746.
6. van Meyel DJ, Ramsay DA, Casson AG, et al. p53 mutation, expression, and DNA ploidy in evolving gliomas: evidence for two pathways of progression. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1011.
7. Hermanson M, Funa K, Hartman M, et al. Platelet-derived growth factor and its receptors in human glioma tissue: expression of messenger RNA and protein suggests the presence of autocrine
and paracrine loops. Cancer Res 1992;52:3213.
8. Hermanson M, Funa K, Westermark B, et al. Association of loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 17p with high platelet-derived growth factor a receptor expression in human malignant
gliomas. Cancer Res 1996;56:164.
9. Pilkington GJ. Tumour cell migration in the central nervous system. Brain Pathol 1994;4:157.
10. Cavenee WK, Furnari FB, Nagane M, et al. Diffuse astrocytomas. In: Kleihues P, Cavenee PK, eds. Pathology and genetics of tumours of the nervous system. Lyon: International Agency for
Research on Cancer, 2000.
11. Ino Y, Silver JS, Blazejewski L, et al. Common regions of deletion on chromosome 22q12.3-13.1 and 22q13.2 in human astrocytomas appear related to malignancy grade. J Neuropathol Exp
Neurol 1999;58:881.
12. Schrock E, Blume C, Meffert MC, et al. Recurrent gain of chromosome arm 7q in low-grade astrocytic tumors studied by comparative genomic hybridization. Genes Chromosomes Cancer
1996;15:199.
13. Ueki K, Ono Y, Henson JW, et al. CDKN2/p16 or RB alterations occur in the majority of glioblastomas and are inversely correlated. Cancer Res 1996;56:150.
14. Burns KL, Ueki K, Jhung SL, et al. Molecular genetic correlates of p16, cdk4 and pRb immunohistochemistry in glioblastomas. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1998;57:122.
15. Nishikawa R, Furnari F, Lin H, et al. Loss of p16 INK4 expression is frequent in high grade gliomas. Cancer Res 1995;55:1941.
16. Merlo A, Herman JG, Mao L, et al. 5'CpG island methylation is associated with transcriptional silencing of the tumor suppressor p16/CDKN2/MTS1. Nature Med 1995;1:686.
17. Arap W, Nishikawa R, Furnari FB, et al. Replacement of the p16/CDKN2 gene suppresses human glioma cell growth. Cancer Res 1995;55:1351.
18. Henson JW, Schnitker BL, Correa KM, et al. The retinoblastoma gene is involved in malignant progression of astrocytomas. Ann Neurol 1994;36:714.
19. Schmidt EE, Ichimura K, Reifenberger G, et al. CDKN2 (p16/MTS1) gene deletion or CDK4 amplification occurs in the majority of glioblastomas. Cancer Res 1994;54:6321.
20. Reifenberger G, Reifenberger J, Ichimura K, et al. Amplification of multiple genes from chromosomal region 12q13-14 in human malignant gliomas: preliminary mapping of the amplicons
shows preferential involvement of CDK4, SAS, and MDM2. Cancer Res 1994;54:4299.
21. He J, Allen JR, Collins VP, et al. CDK4 amplification is an alternative mechanism to p16 gene homozygous deletion in glioma cell lines. Cancer Res 1994;54:5804.
22. Costello JF, Plass C, Arap W, et al. Cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (CDK6) amplification in human gliomas identified using two-dimensional separation of genomic DNA. Cancer Res 1997;57:1250.
23. von Deimling A, Louis DN, von Ammon K, et al. Evidence for a tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 19q associated with human astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas and mixed gliomas.
Cancer Res 1992;52:4277.
24. Seizinger BR, Klinger HP, Junien C, et al. Report of the committee on chromosome and gene loss in human neoplasia. Cytogenet Cell Genet 1991;58:1080.
25. Rubio M-P, Correa KM, Ueki K, et al. The putative glioma tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 19q maps between APOC2 and HRC. Cancer Res 1994;54:4760.
26. Rosenberg JE, Lisle DK, Burwick JA, et al. Refined deletion mapping of the chromosome 19q glioma tumor suppressor gene to the D19S412-STD interval. Oncogene 1996;13:2483.
27. von Deimling A, Louis DN, von Ammon K, et al. Association of epidermal growth factor receptor gene amplification with loss of chromosome 10 in human glioblastoma multiforme. J Neurosurg
1992;77:295.

28. James CD, Carlblom E, Dumanski JP, et al. Clonal genomic alterations in glioma malignancy stages. Cancer Res 1988;48:5546.
29. Dürr E-M, Rollbrocker B, Hayashi Y, et al. PTEN mutations in gliomas and glioneuronal gliomas. Oncogene 1998;16:2259.
30. Li J, Yen C, Liaw D, et al. PTEN, a putative protein tyrosine phosphatase gene mutated in human brain, breast and prostate cancer. Science 1997;275:1943.
31. Steck PA, Pershouse MA, Jasser SA, et al. Identification of a candidate tumour suppressor gene, MMAC1, at chromosome 10q23.3 that is mutated in multiple advanced cancers. Nature Genet
1997;15:356.
32. Furnari FB, Lin H, Huang HS, et al. Growth suppression of glioma cells by PTEN requires a functional phosphatase catalytic domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:12479.
33. Mollenhauer J, Wiemann S, Scheurlen W, et al. DMBT1, a new member of the SRCR superfamily, on chromosome 10q25.3-26.1 is deleted in malignant brain tumours. Nature Genet
1997;17:32.
34. Fuller GN, Bigner SH. Amplified cellular oncogenes in neoplasms of the human central nervous system. Mutat Res 1992;276:299.
35. Ekstrand AJ, James CD, Cavenee WK, et al. Genes for epidermal growth factor receptor, transforming growth factor a, and epidermal growth factor and their expression in human gliomas in
vivo. Cancer Res 1991;51:2164.
36. Hayashi Y, Ueki K, Waha A, et al. Association of EGFR gene amplification and CDKN2 (p16/MTS1) gene deletion in glioblastoma multiforme. Brain Pathol 1997;7:871.
37. Wong AJ, Bigner SH, Bigner DD, et al. Increased expression of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene in malignant gliomas is invariably associated with gene amplification. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1987;84:6899.
38. Nishikawa R, Ji XD, Harmon RC, et al. A mutant epidermal growth factor receptor common in human glioma confers enhanced tumorigenicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:7727.
39. Nagane M, Coufal F, Lin H, et al. A common mutant epidermal growth factor receptor confers enhanced tumorigenicity on human glioblastoma cells by increasing proliferation and reducing
apoptosis. Cancer Res 1996;56:5079.
40. Plate KH, Breier G, Risau W. Molecular mechanisms of developmental and tumor angiogenesis. Brain Pathol 1994;4:207.
41. Plate KH, Breier G, Weich HA, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor is a potential tumour angiogenesis factor in human gliomas in vivo. Nature 1992;359:845.
42. Cheng SY, Huang HJ, Nagane M, et al. Suppression of glioblastoma angiogenicity and tumorigenicity by inhibition of endogenous expression of vascular endothelial growth factor. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:8502.
43. Wang D, Huang HJ, Kazlauskas A, et al. Induction of vascular endothelial growth factor expression in endothelial cells by platelet-derived growth factor through the activation of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Cancer Res 1999;59:1464.
44. Van Meir EG, Polverini PJ, Chazin VR, et al. Release of an inhibitor of angiogenesis upon induction of wild type p53 expression in glioblastoma cells. Nature Genet 1994;8:171.
45. Louis DN, Gusella JF. A tiger behind many doors: multiple genetic pathways to malignant glioma. Trends Genet 1995;11:412.
46. von Deimling A, von Ammon K, Schoenfeld D, et al. Subsets of glioblastoma multiforme defined by molecular genetic analysis. Brain Pathol 1993;3:19.
47. Watanabe K, Tachibana O, Sato K, et al. Overexpression of the EGF receptor and p53 mutations are mutually exclusive in the evolution of primary and secondary glioblastomas. Brain Pathol
1996;6:217.
48. Reifenberger J, Ring GU, Gies U, et al. Analysis of p53 mutation and epidermal growth factor receptor amplification in recurrent gliomas with malignant progression. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
1996;55:822.
49. Louis DN, von Deimling A, Chung RY, et al. Comparative study of p53 gene and protein alterations in human astrocytomas. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1993;52:31.
50. Rasheed BKA, McLendon RE, Herndon JE, et al. Alterations of the TP53 gene in human gliomas. Cancer Res 1994;54:1324.
51. von Deimling A, Louis DN, Menon AG, et al. Deletions on the long arm of chromosome 17 in pilocytic astrocytoma. Acta Neuropathol 1993;86:81.
52. Louis DN, Rubio M-P, Correa K, et al. Molecular genetics of pediatric brain stem gliomas. Application of PCR techniques to small and archival brain tumor specimens. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
1993;52:507.
53. Pollack IF, Hamilton RL, Finkelstein SD, et al. The relationship between TP53 mutations and overexpression of p53 and prognosis in malignant gliomas of childhood. Cancer Res 1997;57:304.
54. Louis DN, von Deimling A, Dickersin G, et al. Desmoplastic cerebral astrocytoma of infancy: a histopathological, immunohistochemical, ultrastructural and molecular genetic study. Hum Pathol
1992;23:1402.
55. Paulus W, Lisle DK, Tonn JC, et al. Molecular genetic alterations in pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma. Acta Neuropathol 1996;91:293.
56. Green AJ, Smith M, Yates JRW. Loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 16p13.3 in hamartomas from tuberous sclerosis patients. Nature Genet 1994;6:193.
57. Green AJ, Johnson PH, Yates JR. The tuberous sclerosis gene on chromosome 9q34 acts as a growth suppressor. Hum Mol Genet 1994;3:1833.
58. Henske EP, Scheithauer BW, Short MP, et al. Allelic loss is frequent in tuberous sclerosis kidney lesions but rare in brain lesions. Am J Hum Genet 1996;59:400.
59. Cairncross JG, Macdonald DR, Ramsay DA. Aggressive oligodendroglioma: a chemosensitive tumor. Neurosurgery 1992;31:78.
60. Reifenberger J, Reifenberger G, Liu L, et al. Molecular genetic analysis of oligodendroglial tumors shows preferential allelic deletions on 19q and 1p. Am J Pathol 1994;145:1175.
61. Kraus JA, Koopman J, Kaskel P, et al. Shared allelic losses on chromosomes 1p and 19q suggest a common origin of oligodendroglioma and oligoastrocytoma. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
1995;54:91.
62. Smith JS, Alderete B, Minn Y, et al. Localization of common deletion regions on 1p and 19q in human gliomas and their association with histological subtype. Oncogene 1999;18:4144.
63. Ohgaki H, Eibl RH, Wiestler OD, et al. p53 mutations in nonastrocytic human brain tumors. Cancer Res 1991;51:6202.
64. Cairncross JG, Ueki K, Zlatescu MC, et al. Specific chromosomal losses predict chemotherapeutic response and survival in patients with anaplastic oligodendrogliomas. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90:1473.
65. Ransom DT, Ritland SR, Kimmel PJ, et al. Cytogenetic and loss of heterozygosity studies in ependymomas, pilocytic astrocytomas, and oligodendrogliomas. Genes Chromosomes Cancer
1992;5:348.
66. James CD, He J, Carlbom E, et al. Loss of genetic information in central nervous system tumors common to children and young adults. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1990;2:94.
67. Rubio M-P, Correa KM, Ramesh V, et al. Analysis of the neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) gene in human ependymomas and astrocytomas. Cancer Res 1994;54:45.
68. Birch BD, Johnson JP, Parsa A, et al. Frequent type 2 neurofibromatosis gene transcript mutations in sporadic intramedullary spinal cord ependymomas. Neurosurgery 1996;39:135.
69. Van Dyke TA. Tumors of the choroid plexus. In: Levine AJ, Schmidek HH, eds. Molecular genetics of nervous system tumors. New York: Wiley-Liss, 1993:287.
70. Bergsagel DJ, Finegold MJ, Butel JS, et al. DNA sequences similar to those of simian virus 40 in ependymomas and choroid plexus tumors of childhood. N Engl J Med 1992;326:988.
71. Bigner SH, Vogelstein B. Cytogenetics and molecular genetics of malignant gliomas and medulloblastoma. Brain Pathol 1990;1:12.
72. Thomas GA, Raffel C. Loss of heterozygosity on 6q, 16q, and 17p in human central nervous system primitive neuroectodermal tumors. Cancer Res 1991;51:639.
73. Cogen PH, Daneshvar L, Metzger AK, et al. Deletion mapping of the medulloblastoma locus on chromosome 17p. Genomics 1990;8:279.
74. Saylors RL, Sidransky D, Friedman HS, et al. Infrequent p53 gene mutations in medulloblastomas. Cancer Res 1991;51:4721.
75. Biegel JA, Burk CD, Barr FG, et al. Evidence for a 17p tumor related locus distinct from p53 in pediatric primitive neuroectodermal tumors. Cancer Res 1992;52:3391.
76. Reardon DA, Michalkiewicz E, Boyett JM, et al. Extensive genomic abnormalities in childhood medulloblastoma by comparative genomic hybridization. Cancer Res 1997;57:4042.
77. Raffel C, Ueki K, Harsh GR, et al. The multiple tumor suppressor 1/cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 2 gene (MTS1/CDKN2) in human central nervous system primitive neuroectodermal tumor.
Neurosurgery 1995;36:971.
78. Schofield D, West DC, Anthony DC, et al. Correlation of loss of heterozygosity at chromosome 9q with histologic subtype in medulloblastomas. Am J Pathol 1995;146:472.
79. Raffel C, Jenkins RB, Frederick L, et al. Sporadic medulloblastomas contain PTCH mutations. Cancer Res 1997;57:842.
80. Pietsch T, Waha A, Koch A, et al. Medulloblastomas of the desmoplastic variant carry mutations of the human homologue of Drosophila patched. Cancer Res 1997;57:2085.
81. Reifenberger J, Wolter M, Weber RG, et al. Missense mutations in SMOH in sporadic basal cell carcinomas of the skin and primitive neuroectodermal tumors of the central nervous system.
Cancer Res 1998;58:1798.
82. Hamilton SR, Liu B, Parsons RE, et al. The molecular basis of Turcot's syndrome. N Engl J Med 1995;332:839.
83. Yong WH, Raffel C, von Deimling A, et al. Lack of allelic loss at APC in sporadic medulloblastomas [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1995;333:524.
84. Zurawel RH, Chiappa SA, Allen C, et al. Sporadic medulloblastomas contain oncogenic b-catenin mutations. Cancer Res 1998;58:896.
85. Scheurlen WG, Schwabe GC, Joos S, et al. Molecular analysis of childhood primitive neuroectodermal tumors defines markers associated with poor outcome. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2478.
86. Segal RA, Goumnerova LC, Kwon YK, et al. Co-expression of neurotrophin-3 and trkC linked to a more favorable prognosis in medulloblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:12867.
87. Ruttledge MH, Sarrazin J, Rangaratnam S, et al. Evidence for the complete inactivation of the NF2 gene in the majority of sporadic meningiomas. Nature Genet 1994;6:180.
88. Wellenreuther R, Kraus JA, Lenartz D, et al. Analysis of the neurofibromatosis 2 gene reveals molecular variants of meningioma. Am J Pathol 1995;146:827.
89. Lekanne Deprez RH, Bianchi AB, Groen NA, et al. Frequent NF2 gene transcript mutations in sporadic meningiomas and vestibular schwannomas. Am J Hum Genet 1994;54:1022.
90. Ruttledge MH, Xie YG, Han FY, et al. Deletions on chromosome 22 in sporadic meningioma. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1994;10:122.
91. Pulst S-M, Rouleau GA, Marineau C, et al. Familial meningioma is not allelic to neurofibromatosis 2. Neurology 1993;43:2096.
92. Carlson KM, Bruder C, Nordenskjold M, et al. 1p and 3p deletions in meningiomas without detectable aberrations of chromosome 22 identified by comparative genomic hybridization. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 1997;20:419.
93. Schneider G, Lutz S, Henn W, et al. Search for the putative suppressor genes in meningiomas: significance of chromosome 22. Hum Genet 1992;53:579.
94. Weber RG, Bostrom J, Wolter M, et al. Analysis of genomic alterations in benign, atypical, and anaplastic meningiomas: toward a genetic model of meningioma progression. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 1997;94:14719.
95. Lindblom A, Ruttledge M, Collins VP, et al. Chromosomal deletions in anaplastic meningiomas suggest multiple regions outside chromosome 22 as important in tumor progression. Int J Cancer
1994;56:354.
96. Rempel SA, Schwechheimer K, Davis RL, et al. Loss of heterozygosity for loci on chromosome 10 is associated with morphologically malignant meningioma progression. Cancer Res
1993;53:2387.
97. Louis DN, Ramesh V, Gusella JF. Neuropathology and molecular genetics of neurofibromatosis 2 and related tumors. Brain Pathol 1995;5:163.
98. Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Xu L, Gonzalez-Agosti C, et al. Universal absence of merlin, but not other ERM family members, in schwannomas. Am J Pathol 1997;152:1649.
99. Legius E, Marchuk DA, Collins FS, et al. Somatic deletion of the neurofibromatosis type 1 gene in a neurofibrosarcoma supports a tumor suppressor gene hypothesis. Nature Genet 1993;3:122.
100. Menon AG, Anderson KM, Riccardi VM, et al. Chromosome 17p deletions and p53 gene mutations associated with the formation of malignant neurofibrosarcomas in Recklinghausen
neurofibromatosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:5435.
101. Nielsen GP, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Ino Y, et al. Malignant transformation of neurofibromas in neurofibromatosis 1 is associated with CDKN2A/p16 inactivation. Am J Pathol
1999;155:1879.
102. Neumann HPH, Lips CJM, Hsia YE, et al. Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. Brain Pathol 1995;5:181.
103. Crossey PA, Foster K, Richards FM, et al. Molecular genetic investigations of the mechanism of tumourigenesis in von Hippel-Lindau disease: analysis of allele loss in VHL tumours. Hum
Genet 1994;93:53.
104. Kanno H, Kondo K, Ito S, et al. Somatic mutations of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene in sporadic central nervous system hemangioblastomas. Cancer Res 1994;54:4845.
105. Gnarra JR, Zhou S, Merrill MJ, et al. Post-transcriptional regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor mRNA by the product of the VHL tumor suppressor gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1996;93:10589.
106. Ohh M, Yauch RL, Lonergan KM, et al. The von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein is required for proper assembly of extracellular fibronectin matrix. Mol Cell 1998;1:959.
107. Joseph JT, Lisle DK, Jacoby LB, et al. NF2 gene analysis distinguishes hemangiopericytoma from meningioma. Am J Pathol 1995;147:1450.
108. Ono Y, Ueki K, Joseph JT, et al. Homozygous deletions of the CDKN2/p16 gene in dural hemangiopericytomas. Acta Neuropathol 1996;91:221.
109. Cavenee WK, Dryja TP, Phillips RA, et al. Expression of recessive alleles by chromosomal mechanisms in retinoblastoma. Nature 1983;305:779.
110. Cavenee WK, Murphree AL, Shull MM, et al. Prediction of familial predisposition to retinoblastoma. N Engl J Med 1986;314:1201.
111. Louis DN, von Deimling A. Hereditary tumor syndromes of the nervous system: overview and rare syndromes. Brain Pathol 1995;5:145.
112. Short MP, Richardson EP, Haines JL, et al. Clinical, neuropathological, and genetic aspects of the tuberous sclerosis complex. Brain Pathol 1995;5:173.
113. von Deimling A, Krone W, Menon AG. Neurofibromatosis type 1: pathology, clinical features, and molecular genetics. Brain Pathol 1995;5:153.

SECTION 43.2 Neoplasms of the Central Nervous System
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 43.2
Neoplasms of the Central Nervous System
VICTOR A. LEVIN
STEVEN A. LEIBEL
PHILIP H. GUTIN
Incidence and Classification
Genetic, Molecular, Environmental, Viral, and Other Factors Associated with Central Nervous System Neoplasia
Anatomic and Clinical Considerations
Intracranial Tumors
Spinal Axis
Neurodiagnostic Tests
Neuroimaging
Tangent Screen, Perimetry, Audiometry, and Electroencephalography
Tumor and Cerebrospinal Fluid Markers
Indications for and Interpretation of Cerebrospinal Fluid Examination
Factors That May Produce Clinical Deterioration
Glucocorticoid Use
Surgery
General Considerations
Surgical Planning
Preoperative and Anesthetic Management
Craniotomy for Supratentorial Tumors
Craniotomy for Posterior Fossa Tumors
Stereotactic Tumor Biopsy
Radiation Therapy
General Considerations
Tolerance of the Brain
Tolerance of the Spinal Cord
Central Nervous System Radiotherapy Toxicity Scoring Systems
Tumor Target Volume and Treatment Techniques
Chemotherapy
General Pharmacologic Considerations
Regional Drug Delivery Considerations
Cerebral Astrocytomas
Pathology Classification
Rationale for Surgery
Surgical Principles for Cerebral Astrocytomas
Reoperation for Cerebral Astrocytomas
Radiation Therapy
Chemotherapy
Brain Stem Gliomas
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Chemotherapy
Cerebellar Astrocytomas
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Chemotherapy
Optic, Chiasmal, and Hypothalamic Gliomas
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Chemotherapy
Oligodendrogliomas
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Chemotherapy
Ependymoma
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Chemotherapy
Meningiomas
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Chemotherapy
Primitive Neuroepithelial Tumors
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Chemotherapy
Medulloblastoma
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Chemotherapy
Pineal Region Tumors
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Chemotherapy
Pituitary Adenomas
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Craniopharyngiomas
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Cerebellopontine Vestibular Schwannomas
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations

Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Glomus Jugulare Tumors
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Chordomas
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Hemangioblastomas and Hemangiomas
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Choroid Plexus Papilloma and Carcinoma
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Chemotherapy
Spinal Axis Tumors
Clinical and Pathologic Considerations
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Chemotherapy
Chapter References

INCIDENCE AND CLASSIFICATION
Available registry data from Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results for 1973 to 1990 indicate that the combined incidence of all recorded primary intracranial
and spinal axis tumors is between 2 and 19 in 100,000 per year, depending on age. 1 There is an early peak (3.1 in 100,000) between 0 and 4 years, a trough (1.8 in
100,000) between 15 and 24 years, and then a steady rise in incidence that reaches a plateau (17.9 to 18.7 in 100,000) between 65 and 79 years of age. In general,
the incidence of primary brain tumors is more common in whites than blacks and the mortality is higher in male than female subjects.
The diversity in primary intracranial and spinal axis tumors partly results from the diversity of phenotypically distinct cells capable of transformation into tumors. Table
43.2-1 shows the hypothetical 15 cell types that can give rise to these tumors. Because of changes in classification and reporting of these tumors, the tumor registry
data are not completely accurate. The relative frequency of 15 families of intracranial tumors is given in Table 43.2-2, and the distribution of spinal tumors is shown in
Table 43.2-3.2,3 The most common tumors are those that are derived from glial precursors (astrocytes, ependymocytes, and oligodendrocytes). The existence of
histologically mixed astrocytoma-oligodendroglioma and the extremely uncommon astrocytoma-ependymoma implies that astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, and
ependymomas may arise from common stem or progenitor cells. The facts that these tumors arise in different locales within the cranium and the spinal axis and that
various types predominate at different ages suggest that differing molecular and genetic mechanisms may underlie tumorigenesis at different times in the life span.

TABLE 43.2-1. Classification of Primary Intracranial Tumors by Cell of Origin

TABLE 43.2-2. Frequency of Primary Intracranial Central Nervous System (CNS) Tumors

TABLE 43.2-3. Distribution of Primary Spinal Tumors a

Central nervous system (CNS) tumors are the most prevalent solid neoplasms of childhood, the second leading cancer-related cause of death in children younger
than 15 years of age, and the third leading cancer-related cause of death in adolescents and adults between the ages of 15 and 34 years. However, most intracranial
tumors occur in people older than 45 years. Glioblastoma rarely occurs in people younger than 15 years, but dramatically increases after the age of 45. The incidence

of most glial tumors, other than glioblastoma multiforme, actually decreases with increasing age. There is some concern that the incidence of glioblastoma multiforme
is increasing in the elderly population, 4 although incorrect ascertainment preceding the widespread availability of computed tomography (CT) scans in the late 1970s
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the 1980s may account for some of the presumed increase in incidence. 5,6 A similar age-related increase in prevalence
occurs with differentiated or benign meningiomas that increase from 0.2% of all primary intracranial tumors in patients younger than 24 years of age to 39% of tumors
in patients older than 65 years.
The overall incidence of primary spinal cord tumors is approximately 15% of that of brain tumors. For gliomas, the age-adjusted incidence is 0.11% to 0.14%; for
meningiomas, 0.08% to 0.28%, depending on sex (female higher than male subjects); and for nerve sheath tumors, 0.07% to 0.13%. 3 As shown in Table 43.2-3, the
frequency of specific spinal cord tumors is strikingly different from that of the brain tumors. Gliomas constitute 46% of primary intracranial tumors while only 23% of
spinal tumors. Unlike brain gliomas, most spinal cord gliomas are ependymomas with a predilection for the cauda equina. Schwannomas and meningiomas account
for approximately 60% of spinal tumors, with schwannomas being slightly more frequent; both types occur most often in adult life. Other less common spinal tumors
are the lipomas, dermoids, and hemangioblastomas.

GENETIC, MOLECULAR, ENVIRONMENTAL, VIRAL, AND OTHER FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
NEOPLASIA
In Chapter 43.1, the contribution of genetics and molecular biology to the understanding of CNS tumorigenesis is covered in detail. Less important associations of
CNS neoplasia are those associated with viruses, chemicals, and physical forces.
The epidemiology of primary CNS tumors has provided hints but few definitive observations with respect to environmental or occupational causes. Although brain
tumors can be experimentally induced in a high proportion of rodents by the use of certain chemicals, the association of chemical exposure and brain tumors is limited
to a few occupations. A higher than expected increase in the incidence of brain tumors has been observed as a result of purported exposure to pesticides, herbicides,
and fertilizers, 7 various petrochemical industries, 8 and health professions. 9 Whether these statistical observations are credible is difficult to determine. Aside from a
known association between vinyl chloride and gliomas, there are no common chemical or environmental threads among these observations. 8 There has also been
concern that electromagnetic fields could account for some glial tumors, although the majority of studies do not support such a conjecture. 10,11 and 12
Viruses have been implicated directly in the development of gliomas only in rats, dogs, and monkeys. In all cases, direct CNS injection of the virus is required. In rats,
the avian sarcoma virus produces glial tumors 13; in dogs, Rous sarcoma virus leads to gliosarcomas 14; in owl monkeys, a human polyoma virus (JC virus) produces
glial neoplasms15; and in hamsters, JC virus produces medulloblastomas. 16 Although a direct association between virus exposure and CNS tumors has not been
established in humans, patients with primary CNS lymphoma have been observed to have a high incidence of infection with Epstein-Barr virus and evidence of
Epstein-Barr virus in their tumor tissue. 17 Common viral exposure could explain the occasional glioma cluster observed in schools and communities. However, it is
extremely difficult to pinpoint mutations due to a virus to validate this hypothesis.
CNS neoplasia, like most cancers, appears to be unassociated with prior trauma. It has been suggested that the incidence of meningiomas is higher in patients with a
prior history of head trauma, but this hypothesis was not supported by a prospective study. 18 Trauma could be a progression event; however, this theory would be
difficult to prove.
The incidence of CNS tumors after treatment for a prior malignancy is small. The literature contains examples of astrocytomas occurring 3 to 7 years after craniospinal
axis irradiation and chemotherapy for acute lymphocytic leukemia and craniopharyngioma 19,20 and 21 unfortunately, none of the reports contains sufficient information to
determine risk assessment. In non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, 2% of 44 second malignancies were an astrocytoma. 22 As in the cases discussed previously, no measure of
risk assessment is possible, although such infrequent reporting would suggest that these are uncommon or rare events. Meningiomas have been reported in
association with scalp irradiation for tinea capitis, the risk for meningiomas being as high as 21% in one study. 23,24
For unknown reasons, transplant recipients and patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome have substantially increased risks for primary CNS lymphoma but
not gliomas.

ANATOMIC AND CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS
The clinical presentation of the various tumors is best appreciated by considering the relation of signs and symptoms to anatomy. 25
INTRACRANIAL TUMORS
Intracranial tumors produce symptoms primarily by two mechanisms: mass effect (and increased intracranial pressure), due entirely to the tumor or to the tumor and
surrounding edema, or infiltration and destruction of normal tissue.
General Signs and Symptoms
Typical infiltrative intracerebral tumors, such as the various grades of astrocytoma and oligodendroglioma and some of the more primitive neuroectodermal tumors,
can produce headache, gastrointestinal upset such as nausea and vomiting, personality changes, and slowing of psychomotor function. These may be the only
clinical indications of tumor.
Because headache is a common presenting symptom in patients with intracranial tumor, clinical patterns and their localizing value must be appreciated. Brain
parenchyma does not have pain-sensitive structures, and tumor pain (headache) has been attributed to local swelling and distortion of pain-sensitive nerve endings
associated with blood vessels, primarily in the meninges. Tumors grow at different rates and, therefore, achieve variable size before signs and symptoms occur. But
once a tumor has achieved a critical volume causing compression and displacement of brain, the onset and demise of headache seem to correlate with changes in
intracranial pressure.
Headaches can vary in severity and quality; they often occur in the early morning hours or on first awakening. Patients sometimes complain of an uncomfortable
feeling in the head rather than headache. Although there is not an exact relation between the location of tumor headache and the location of the tumor, some rules
are worth remembering. More often than not, frontal and temporal tumors produce headache in frontal, retroorbital, or temporal regions, whereas infratentorial tumors
tend to produce occipital and retroauricular headache. Occasionally, however, retroorbital headaches are observed with infratentorial tumors.
Gastrointestinal symptoms are common. Patients complain of loss of appetite, queasiness, nausea, and, occasionally, vomiting. Vomiting appears more commonly in
children and in patients harboring infratentorial rather than supratentorial tumors. Although textbooks discuss projectile vomiting as an infrequent generalized
symptom of brain tumors, in these authors' experience, it is common in children but rare in adults. From reports in the literature and discussions with experienced
neurosurgeons, it seems as though there is a lower incidence of vomiting currently compared with past years; this may reflect the fact that patients are diagnosed
earlier than in previous years and receive glucocorticoids that can modify dramatically many of the generalized signs and symptoms of brain tumors.
Sometimes the only presenting symptoms are changes in personality, mood, mental capacity, and concentration. Occasionally, merely a slowing of psychomotor
activity is the antecedent symptom of intracranial tumor. Patients with brain tumors tend to sleep longer at night and nap during the day. These changes in function
and activity often are apparent to the family and the examiner but not to the patient; in other instances, only the patient recognizes the changes in mental function.
None of these symptoms are unique to brain tumors; they could easily be confused with depression, neurasthenia, or other psychological problems.
Focal Cerebral Syndromes
Although fewer than 10% of patients presenting with seizures have a brain tumor as the cause of the seizure, seizures are a presenting symptom in approximately
20% of patients with supratentorial brain tumors. With rapidly growing infiltrative malignant gliomas, they are likely to take the form of focal motor or sensory seizures,
although generalized seizures are also common. In patients with slowly growing astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, or meningiomas, generalized seizures may
antedate the clinical diagnosis by months to years. The value of the focal seizure as a means of tumor localization is high, sufficiently so that tumor should be

considered causative until proven otherwise.
The distribution of infiltrative parenchymal tumors in the brain is directly related to the mass of the lobe or region. Frontal tumors occur more commonly than parietal
tumors, which, in turn, occur more often than temporal lobe tumors, and so forth. Anatomic or regional involvement by tumors, although not completely stereotypic as
it is with CNS vascular disease, nonetheless has certain features that distinguish them and help the clinician localize the tumor or, at least, to consider the diagnosis.
The frontal lobe syndrome varies markedly from patient to patient. It can range from personality change to headache and mild slowing of contralateral hand
movements and to contralateral spastic hemiplegia, marked elevation in mood, or loss of initiative and dysphasia (if it is the dominant lobe). Assuming the normal
pattern of left hemisphere dominance, unilateral tumors affecting the right frontal lobe can cause left hemiplegia, slight elevation in mood, difficulty in adapting to new
situations, loss of initiative, and even occasional primitive grasp and sucking reflexes. Left frontal lobe tumors can cause right hemiplegia and nonfluent dysphasia
with or without some apraxia of lip, tongue, or hand movements.
Bifrontal disease, a condition usually associated with infiltrative gliomas and primary CNS lymphomas, can cause varying degrees of bilateral hemiplegia, spastic
bulbar palsy, severe impairment of intellect, lability of mood, dementia, and prominent primitive grasp, suck, and snout reflexes.
Temporal lobe syndromes, like frontal lobe syndromes, can range from symptoms that are detectable only on careful testing of perception and spatial judgment to
severe impairment of recent memory. Homonymous quadrantanopsia, auditory hallucinations, and even aggressive behavior can occur as a result of tumors of either
temporal lobe. Involvement of the nondominant temporal lobe can also result in minor perceptual problems and spatial disorientation. Dominant temporal lobe
involvement can lead to dysnomia, impaired perception of verbal commands, and even a full-blown, fluent Wernicke-like aphasia. Bilateral disease, involving both
temporal lobes, is rare in comparison with the bilaterality of frontal lobe tumors that readily cross through the corpus callosum. This is fortunate, because bitemporal
tumor involvement is devastating. It produces impairment of memory, especially recent memory, and can lead to dementia.
Parietal lobe syndromes affect sensory and perceptual functions more than motor modalities, although mild hemiparesis is sometimes seen with extensive parietal
lobe tumors. Tumors impinging on either parietal lobe can produce a decrease in the perception of cortical sensory stimuli that may vary from mild sensory extinction,
observable only by testing, to a more severe sensory loss with deep tumors that leads to hemianesthesia or other hemisensory abnormalities. Homonymous
hemianopsia or visual inattention also may occur. In addition, involvement of the nondominant parietal lobe can lead to perceptual abnormalities and, in severe cases,
to anosognosia and apraxia for self-dressing. Unilateral dominant parietal lobe tumors lead to alexia, dysgraphia, and certain types of apraxia.
Occipital lobe tumors can produce contralateral homonymous hemianopsia or visual aberrations that take the form of imperception of color, object size, or object
location. Bilateral occipital disease can produce cortical blindness.
The classic disconnection syndromes associated with corpus callosum lesions are seen rarely in patients with brain tumors. Even though infiltrative gliomas often
cross the corpus callosum in the region of the genu or the splenium, the involvement of additional structures complicates neurologic interpretation, obscuring classic
disconnection syndromes. With respect to partial lesions, interruption of association fibers in the anterior part of the corpus callosum usually causes a failure of the
left hand to carry out spoken commands. Lesions in the splenium of the corpus callosum interrupt visual fibers connecting the right occipital lobe and left angular
gyrus, resulting in an inability of patients to read or name colors.
Symptoms related to thalamic tumors vary as a function of tumor size and whether the tumor produces secondary blockage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow and
hydrocephalus. Occasionally, tumors in the thalamus and, less commonly, in the basal ganglia, can reach 3 to 4 cm in diameter before the patient has symptoms
severe enough to seek medical attention. Patients typically present with headaches resulting from hydrocephalus and increased intracranial pressure secondary to
trapping of the lateral horn of one of the ventricles. In addition or independently, patients can present with a mild sensory abnormality on the contralateral side, which
is detected only by testing of sensory extinction or, rarely, severe neuropathic pain syndrome. Patients may complain of intermittent paresthesias on the contralateral
side; because they are episodic and seizure-like, anticonvulsant drugs are used sometimes and actually may be beneficial. With more involvement of the basal
ganglia, contralateral intention tremor and hemiballistic-like movement disorders can be observed. Thalamic tumors usually do not present in a manner typical of
thalamic strokes, unless bleeding into the tumor has occurred.
Focal Infratentorial Syndromes
The brain stem, composed of the medulla oblongata and the pons, has both nuclear groups and traversing axons. Tumors invading or compressing the brain stem can
produce dire consequences; even a small increase in size (e.g., 1 to 2 mm) may lead to death or devastating signs and symptoms. Tumors can be primarily intrinsic or
intrinsic with exophytic components in the fourth ventricle, peripontine cisterns, or in both locations. Cranial nerve involvement, therefore, can be at the nuclear level
or of the cranial nerve as it leaves the brain stem.
The most common tumor of the brain stem is an astrocytoma (glioma), the initial clinical manifestations of which are palsies involving cranial nerves VI and VII on one
side in 90% of patients. These usually are followed by involvement of long tracts resulting in hemiplegia, unilateral limb ataxia, ataxia of gait, paraplegia, hemisensory
syndromes, gaze disorders, and, occasionally, hiccups. Less commonly, long tract signs precede the cranial nerve abnormalities; this is more likely with confined
intrinsic brain stem lesions.
The midbrain, juxtaposed between the pons and the cerebral hemispheres, encompasses the tectum, the cerebral peduncles, and the cerebral aqueduct. If the
midbrain is involved, obstructive hydrocephalus can occur, producing vomiting, drowsiness, and cerebellar signs. Patients with medullary tumors have a more rapidly
progressive course and are more likely to have deficits in cranial nerves VI (usually late), VII, IX, and X, and dysarthria, personality change, and head tilt. Unlike the
expansive posterior fossa tumors, headache, vomiting, and papilledema occur late. Fourth ventricular tumors, because of their location, tend to produce obstructive
hydrocephalus early in their development. This produces profound headache and vomiting and associated disturbances of gait and balance. With rapidly progressing
lesions, cerebellar herniation may develop.
Tumors of the cerebellum have valuable localizing signs and symptoms. In slowly growing tumors, the initial symptoms may be headache and nausea, which are
caused by increased intracranial pressure, and mild imbalance in gait or ataxia of a limb. In more rapidly growing cerebellar tumors, there may be prominent morning
headache; vomiting; a stumbling gait with frequent falling, nystagmus, and dizziness; and visual symptoms caused by papilledema. Abnormal posturing of the head is
seen often in children but not in adults. In children, the head is tilted back and away from the side of the tumor. Posturing of the head is curious in that it indicates
unilateral cerebellum-foramen magnum herniation. Bilateral sixth cranial nerve palsies are uncommon. Midline lesions in and around the cerebellar vermis lead to
truncal and gait ataxia, whereas lesions in a cerebellar hemisphere lead to unilateral appendicular ataxia, most readily observed in upper extremity movements.
Tumors of the base of the skull, although not particularly common, nevertheless are important because many are curable by surgery. Table 43.2-4 26 summarizes the
salient clinical features of seven of the more common clinical syndromes.

TABLE 43.2-4. Differential Diagnosis of Tumors at the Base of the Skull

A classic base of skull tumor presentation is that associated with vestibular schwannomas, the most frequent cause of the cerebellopontine angle syndrome. Almost
all such patients have involvement of the auditory or vestibular portions of cranial nerve VIII; fortunately, most patients have little morbidity from surgery. Potential
postoperative complications depend on size of tumor and surgical approach used. The morbidity of surgery can be facial weakness, hypoesthesia of cornea,
disturbance of taste, sensory loss of the face, ataxia of gait, and unilateral appendicular ataxia. Deafness and vestibular dysfunction due to damage to the auditory
and vestibular nerve branches are characteristic of these tumors. Finally, these tumors can attain an extremely large size before they are discovered.
Another group of tumors that present with distinct signs and symptoms is that which occurs in or near the sella turcica. Table 43.2-5 summarizes the location, tumors,
and some of the salient features of sellar and parasellar tumors. 27

TABLE 43.2-5. Clinical Syndromes Associated with Tumors of Sellar Region

Many patients present with defects of the visual field, less commonly with blindness and optic atrophy. The visual field abnormality is usually a partial or complete
bitemporal hemianopsia associated with intrasellar tumors such as pituitary adenomas. With lesions that expand from below the optic chiasm, the upper temporal
quadrants are affected first. Patients can also present with scotomata in either eye. With long-standing, slowly progressive disease, unilateral or bilateral optic atrophy
can be observed. Expansion of tumor may involve the hypothalamus and compression of the third ventricle, leading to obstructive hydrocephalus and signs of
increased intracranial pressure, such as headache and nausea and vomiting.
Some of the pituitary tumors produce secondary signs and symptoms, because they elaborate hormones that create various syndromes of endocrine hyperactivity
(Table 43.2-6). A few pituitary tumors produce no detectable hormones or produce hormones in quantities that assume no clinical significance. Currently, it is
uncommon for patients with endocrine-active tumors to present with large tumors; it is more common for patients with endocrine-inactive tumors to seek medical
attention because of optic chiasmal compression hypopituitarism as a consequence of a large mass. Compression leads to detectable hyposecretion of specific cells,
with production of growth hormone being the most sensitive, followed closely by gonadotropins. Cells producing thyroid-stimulating hormone and corticotrophin are
much more resistant, and their function is impaired only at a later stage of growth.

TABLE 43.2-6. Clinical Syndromes Produced by Endocrine-Activity Pituitary Adenomas

Table 43.2-7 summarizes the differential diagnosis of tumors by location in children and adults. 28

TABLE 43.2-7. Differential Diagnosis of Tumors by Location and Age at Onset of Symptoms

Acute and Life-Threatening Syndromes Caused by Intracranial Tumors
Because the brain and the spinal cord are surrounded by a rigid skull and dural membranes, expanding lesions within or abutting the brain or spinal cord can cause
displacement of vital structures. This can lead, in the brain, to respiratory arrest and death and, in the spinal cord, to paraplegia or quadriplegia.
To understand the sequence of events leading to temporal lobe-tentorial (uncal) herniation and cerebellar-foramen magnum herniation, a visual image of intracranial
anatomy is needed. The tentorium cerebelli forms a rigid tissue partition between the cerebral hemispheres above and the cerebellum and brain stem below. Through
this opening passes the midbrain centrally and cranial nerve III anterolaterally. Immediately lateral to cranial nerve III lies the medial portion of the temporal lobe
called the uncus. An expanding mass lesion situated above the tentorium may displace the uncus medially and inferiorly beneath the tentorium. Table 43.2-8
summarizes the neurologic findings and pathologic causes for the events that constitute the temporal lobe-tentorial herniation syndrome. 29

TABLE 43.2-8. Temporal Lobe-Tentorial (Uncal) Herniation

A rapid increase in the volume of the supratentorial compartment leading to herniation can be caused by many different factors. A rapidly growing glioblastoma can
present in this manner, although it is more usual for it to occur as a terminal or near terminal event after ineffective therapy for the tumor. It can also occur when there
is a dramatic increase in the amount of edema associated with metastasis to the brain or with hyponatremia and hypoosmolar syndromes. The injudicious use of
parenteral hypoosmolar 5% dextrose in water often is sufficient to produce an abrupt increase in brain edema and temporal lobe herniation. The authors of this
chapter also have seen temporal lobe herniation follow a group of shortly spaced seizures. Presumably, the seizures, which are associated with hypoventilation,
produce local hypoxia around the tumor with a resultant increase in brain edema.
Mass lesions in the infratentorial compartment can displace brain tissue upward through the tentorium, but more commonly force brain tissue downward through the
foramen magnum. In this situation, the cerebellar tonsils move caudally through the foramen magnum, and in doing so, wedge against the medulla, causing the
findings summarized in Table 43.2-9.29

TABLE 43.2-9. Cerebellar Foramen Magnum Herniation

Cerebellar-foramen magnum herniation frequently results from, or is contributed to by, obstructive hydrocephalus. In such instances, emergency removal of fluid from
the more cephalad ventricular system may relieve symptoms and be life saving. Surgical intervention is indicated only if the reason for the herniation is treatable. In
the instance of cerebellar-foramen magnum herniation aggravated by acute obstructive hydrocephalus, ventriculoperitoneal shunting is often necessary. Care must be
taken, however, because too rapid a change in the CSF dynamics can lead to a rapid and damaging movement of the brain, which can lead to occlusion of posterior
cerebral arteries and brain stem injury.
These two herniation syndromes lead to death, unless there is prompt intervention. The immediate intravenous administration of hyperosmotic agents, such as
mannitol or urea, and large doses of synthetic glucocorticoids, such as dexamethasone or methylprednisolone, should be given promptly to reduce intracranial
pressure and to avert impending death.
Hemorrhage into a tumor is not as common as might be expected, although the incidence of intratumor hemorrhage may increase because of iatrogenic
thrombocytopenia associated with the current use of chemotherapy in the treatment of brain tumors. Primary tumors that most commonly bleed de novo are
glioblastoma and oligodendrogliomas; of the metastatic tumors, those from the lung, melanoma, hypernephroma, and choriocarcinoma are most likely to be
associated with intratumoral hemorrhage. Signs and symptoms of intratumoral hemorrhage may be temporized by the use of osmotic agents and glucocorticoids, but if
extensive and life-threatening, operation and decompression are indicated. Under no circumstances should a lumbar puncture be performed in any of the acute
herniation syndromes. In fact, lumbar puncture should never be done indiscriminately. The indications for lumbar puncture are discussed in another section of this
chapter (see Neurodiagnostic Tests, later in this chapter).
SPINAL AXIS
To understand the clinical presentation of tumors of the spinal axis, the local anatomy ( Fig. 43.2-1) and how tumors might present with respect to anatomy must be
appreciated. The cranial dura is firmly adherent to the skull (with the exception of dural duplications of the falx and tentorium), and no extradural space normally exists
between dura and skull. An entirely different anatomic relation in the spinal canal accounts for a well-defined extradural space containing epidural fat and blood
vessels. By way of the intervertebral foramina, this extradural space communicates with adjacent extraspinal compartments (e.g., the mediastinum and the
retroperitoneal space). With rare exceptions, extradural tumors are metastatic, reaching the extradural space through intervertebral foramina.

FIGURE 43.2-1. Cross-section of thoracic spinal cord shows relation of spinal nerves to intraspinal tracts.

Tumors arising inside of the dural tube (intradural tumors) may originate within the spinal cord (intramedullary), or they may take origin outside the spinal cord
(extramedullary). The two common extramedullary intradural tumors, neurilemmoma (schwannoma) and meningioma, are attached, respectively, to sensory nerve
roots and to dura and involve the spinal cord by compression.

Neurology of Spinal Cord Tumors
A spinal tumor produces two effects: local (focal) and distal (remote). Local effects indicate the tumor's location along the spinal axis, and distal effects reflect
involvement of motor and sensory long tracts within the spinal cord. Table 43.2-10 summarizes the clinical findings useful in localizing a spinal cord tumor.

TABLE 43.2-10. Clinical Manifestations of Spinal Cord Tumors

Distal effects are common to all spinal tumors sooner or later, and symptoms and signs are confined to structures innervated below the spinal cord level of
involvement. Although neurologic manifestations commonly begin unilaterally, a full-blown Brown-Séquard syndrome of cord hemisection can occur but is rare. More
characteristic are motor changes: weakness and spasticity, if the tumor lies above the conus medullaris, or weakness and flaccidity, if at or below the conus. Typically,
sensory impairment begins distally in the feet. Impairment of bladder function occurs later in tumors above the conus, but may be an early manifestation of tumors in
or below the conus. The upper level of impaired long tract function usually is several segments below the actual site of tumor involvement.
Local manifestations may reflect involvement of bone, with pain constituting the cardinal symptom of metastatic tumors. Involvement of spinal roots produces pain,
sensory impairment, and weakness with atrophy in the appropriate radicular distribution. Less often, involvement of spinal gray matter produced by extensive pressure
from extramedullary tumors or direct damage by intramedullary tumors causes segmental sensory and motor changes.
Historically, tumors at or near the foramen magnum have been diagnosed incorrectly more often than have spinal tumors at any other site, because foramen magnum
tumors can mimic such diverse conditions as multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and cervical disk disease. The frequency of delayed diagnoses of these
tumors justifies the dictum that MRI is indicated as a diagnostic measure in any neurologic disease that can be accounted for by a lesion at or below the foramen
magnum.
Occasionally, a cervical intramedullary tumor mimics syringomyelia, with dissociated sensory loss, weakness, and wasting in the arms and hands and variable long
tract involvement. In most instances, the clinical presentation of a spinal tumor does not indicate if it is extradural or intradural.
The rate at which symptoms develop can be helpful in distinguishing extradural from intradural tumor, with a history of days to a few weeks characterizing metastatic
extradural tumors, and a longer course, often many months, reflecting the slower growth of intradural tumors. A history of previously diagnosed cancer or other system
involvement also is helpful.

NEURODIAGNOSTIC TESTS
NEUROIMAGING
The diagnosis of intracranial tumor requires radiographic confirmation. Fortunately, the great strides in radiology have yielded technologic advances best adapted for
the brain and the spinal cord. Today MRI and CT are the major neuroimaging techniques used to demonstrate intracranial and spinal lesions. Both MRI and CT
produce cross-sectional digital images. In both, the depicted anatomy and pathology are based on numeric computerized representations of certain physical
properties of the tissue. The CT image is composed of pixels based on the attenuation of x-rays that are, in turn, dependent on the electron density of the tissue being
studied. The MRI scan also produces an image based on pixels, but unlike CT scanning, MRI pixel intensity is based on proton density, T1 and T2 relaxation times,
and flow (blood flow). The MRI scan, therefore, represents a complex interrelation of four parameters. Data acquisition also can be manipulated by the operator to a
greater degree than can be done with CT scans. CT and MRI also differ in that MRI data can be acquired in any plane desired, including oblique planes, in a primary
fashion such that there is no compromise of spatial or contrast detail. CT scans can be acquired only in the axial or half-axial planes. Computer-generated
reformations are required to generate alternative views, such as orthogonal and off-axis images, all of which have degradation of both spatial and contrast detail.
Because MRI scanning can generate images in any plane and offers high resolution and contrast without associated bone artifact, it has been shown to be superior to
CT scan in detecting and localizing brain tumors and evaluating edema, hydrocephalus, or hemorrhage.
Intraaxial CNS tumors normally produce edema that is partially correlated with the rapidity of tumor growth. An exception is the benign cerebral meningioma, a
slow-growing tumor that can produce profound edema. The so-called vasogenic edema associated with brain tumors is fluid that has leaked through an incompetent
blood–brain barrier and is seen on the CT scan as relatively low attenuation compared with normal brain. On MRI, edema appears as an area of low-signal intensity
on T1-weighted images and high-signal intensity on T2-weighted images.
Mass lesions in the brain can obstruct the ventricular system, resulting in hydrocephalus. MRI is superior to CT in evaluating hydrocephalus and its causes, because
more planes of view are available to the radiologist. Dilation of one or both of the lateral ventricles and not the rest of the ventricular system suggests obstruction at
the foramen of Monro as is seen with colloid cysts or gliomas in this region. Dilatation of a temporal horn of the ventricular system suggests a tumor in the ventricular
atrium trapping the temporal horn. Dilation of only the lateral and third ventricles points to a lesion of the aqueduct; when all the ventricles are dilated, communicating
hydrocephalus caused by tumor seeding to the meninges or by the reaction to previous therapy should be considered.
Brain tumors occasionally bleed, and this bleeding can be insignificant or can cause dramatic clinical consequences. Metastatic brain tumors that tend to bleed are
melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, choriocarcinoma, and thyroid carcinoma. Of the primary CNS tumors, glioblastoma and oligodendrogliomas are more commonly
associated with hemorrhage than are other primary tumors. Acute hemorrhage appears as high attenuation on CT, but subacute hemorrhage may be harder to detect
by CT. On MRI, acute hemorrhage is of low-signal intensity on T1 and T2; the subacute hemorrhage poorly seen on CT produces a bright signal on both T1- and
T2-weighted MRI scans.
Assessment of the disruption of tumor endothelia and the passage of contrast material compared with the intact blood–brain barrier is an important step in radiologic
evaluation. The use of contrast agents in CT and MRI scanning provides, in some patients, improved tumor visualization and, in all patients, an improved ability to
discern tumors from other pathologic entities, to discern one tumor type from another, and even to discern higher from lower grade malignancies. There are few
situations when administration of contrast agents should not be included in the radiologic evaluation of the patient with a brain tumor.
Approximately 50% of patients with low-grade gliomas may present with tumors that do not exhibit contrast enhancement on CT scan. Some may not be detected on
CT because they are isodense with brain. It is in these patients that the differential sensitivity of MRI can be seen clearly, even in the absence of a paramagnetic
contrast agent. Figure 43.2-2 shows an example of a CT scan in a patient with a seizure disorder that was interpreted prospectively and retrospectively as normal
before and after contrast agent administration. The MRI scan is clearly abnormal. Stereotactic biopsy demonstrated a well-differentiated astrocytoma.

FIGURE 43.2-2. A young man presented with a single focal seizure that generalized into a major motor seizure. A: A postcontrast axial computed tomographic scan
demonstrates a poorly defined area of low density involving the most anterior portion of the corona radiate extending anteriorly to the gray matter on the right. No
contrast enhancement, sulcal effacement, or mass effect is present. B: After this computed tomographic scan, a T2-weighted (TR 2000, TE 20) axial magnetic
resonance imaging scan was performed that shows an area of decreased signal intensity at the gray-white junction at the most anterior medial aspect of the right
frontal lobe. C: On the second echo (TR 2000, TE 60), the lesion exhibits high signal intensity. On biopsy, the tumor was found to be a well-differentiated
astrocytoma.

The possibility of obtaining high-quality coronal images without artifact associated with beam hardening through bone makes MRI particularly attractive for evaluating
the base of the skull and the posterior fossa. Figure 43.2-3 is an example of a high-quality MRI scan in a patient with pituitary adenoma. Although this lesion would be
identified readily on CT, the relation to the optic chiasm and infundibulum would certainly not be identified as clearly.

FIGURE 43.2-3. A woman 30 years of age presented with hyperprolactinemia. Coronal T1-weighted (TR 600, TE 20) 3-mm-thick section scan of the pituitary gland
demonstrates (arrows) a low-intensity lesion 9 mm in diameter involving the right side of the pituitary fossa displacing the gland and the stalk to the left. Findings are
typical of a pituitary microadenoma.

In the posterior fossa, the lack of artifact and the availability of sagittal and coronal planes make MRI uniquely suited for detecting and characterizing neoplasms. Both
intraaxial and extraaxial masses are distinguished easily, and their relation to the ventricular cisternal systems is assessed easily.
In the evaluation of intracranial tumors, cerebral angiography is used much less frequently than in the past. For many cases MR angiography suffices. Angiography
may be used to confirm an impression gained by MRI or CT that the lesion in question is a vascular malformation or an aneurysm rather than a neoplasm. In certain
situations (e.g., with large meningiomas) angiography may be useful before surgery to determine the blood supply so that it can be embolized during the angiographic
procedure or obliterated during the surgical procedure, or both.
In the evaluation of intramedullary and extramedullary spinal cord lesions, high-quality MRI is the diagnostic study of choice. Indications for myelography currently are
extremely limited, because multiplanar MRI can provide superb delineation of the spinal cord contour, and the addition of gadolinium-diethylenetriaminepenta-acetic
acid provides enhancement and visualization of almost all intrinsic tumors (such as ependymomas, astrocytomas, meningiomas, and schwannomas) and facilitates
the diagnosis of leptomeningeal disease. Tumor cysts are readily identified on MRI, and currently spinal cord tumors can be distinguished much more reliably from
syringomyelia (Fig. 43.2-4).

FIGURE 43.2-4. A 39-year-old man with a known cerebral glioblastoma multiforme developed spinal cord symptoms. A: A T1-weighted (TR 600, TE 20) sagittal scan
of the thoracolumbar spine shows mild heterogeneity of signal near the conus, but is otherwise normal. B: A T2-weighted (TR 2000, SE 35, 70) sagittal scan provides
no additional information. C: A T1-weighted (TR 600, SE 20) image after gadolinium-diethylenetriaminepenta-acetic acid administration clearly shows high
signal-enhancing tumor (black arrows show some of lesions) immediately caudad to the conus resulting in a high-grade partial block and multiple additional drop
metastases. D: A water-soluble contrast myelogram demonstrates the drop metastases (white arrows show some of lesions) and incompletely delineates the mass
adjacent to the conus. (Courtesy of Gordon Sze, Department of Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.)

Another unique and particularly important application of MRI is the use of the sagittal image in radiation treatment planning. The MRI sagittal image can be
superimposed on radiographic simulator films so that the tumor can be localized accurately for appropriate port design. The use of the MRI scan is now routine in
treatment planning of brain and spinal cord tumors.
Newer MRI techniques such as MR spectroscopy, dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI, functional MRI, and diffusion-perfusion MRI can provide additional information.
MR spectroscopy can evaluate the regional distribution of chemicals associated with energy metabolism in the tumor. Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI, by
quantitating the uptake of gadolinium contrast agents into the lesion, can distinguish the slow rate of uptake of radiation injury from the rapid rate of uptake commonly
seen in highly malignant primary CNS tumors. Functional MRI reflects small localized changes in blood flow that occur in response to cortical localization of various
neurologic functions. Thus, for instance, dominance of cerebral function or importance of a supplementary motor area can be quickly determined before surgery to
enable the surgeon to better protect normal brain function during a surgical resection of a tumor. Diffusion-perfusion MRI can provide better information regarding free

and restricted water diffusion in the brain to help differentiate tumor malignancy and secondary effects of treatment on the tumor.
TANGENT SCREEN, PERIMETRY, AUDIOMETRY, AND ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY
Testing for abnormalities of the visual system is part of the neurologic examination. However, the results of confrontation visual field testing need quantitation to
provide greater accuracy and to follow the effects of treatment. Formal visual field testing is done using tangent screens, and scotomas and field defects are
diagnosed with perimetry. Schematic representation of the common visual field abnormalities and their anatomic localization can be readily found in any neurology
text.
Quantitation of deafness is performed by formal audiometric testing. This can be helpful in the diagnosis of acoustic neurinomas.
Electroencephalography once had a place in the diagnosis and follow-up study of intracranial neoplasms. Its major value is in the diagnosis of seizure disorders and
in following the rare patient whose neurologic deterioration may be related to subclinical seizures rather than tumor growth. Visual-evoked potentials measured over
the visual cortex after visual stimuli are less valuable in the evaluation or follow-up study of patients with brain tumors, but can help distinguish multiple sclerosis from
tumor.
TUMOR AND CEREBROSPINAL FLUID MARKERS
For patients with intracranial and spinal tumors, examination of peripheral blood and CSF has been found to be helpful for diagnosis and for therapy monitoring.
Pituitary tumors often produce endocrinologic abnormalities measurable by sensitive radioimmunoassays. Polycythemia associated with a tumor of the posterior fossa
(cerebellum) may be useful as presumptive evidence for the diagnosis of hemangioblastoma. Some parasellar and pineal region embryonal tumors secrete unique
hormones and proteins; human chorionic gonadotropin-b hormone (b-HCG) and a-fetoprotein (AFP) are examples of hormones associated with trophoblastic tissue
and yolk sac, respectively.
INDICATIONS FOR AND INTERPRETATION OF CEREBROSPINAL FLUID EXAMINATION
Lumbar puncture in a patient with headache, papilledema, and a presumed diagnosis of tumor is risky, because it increases the possibility of a fatal
cerebellum-foramen magnum or temporal lobe-tentorial herniation. Lumbar puncture should follow rather than precede neuroimaging studies, such as MRI and CT
scanning.
The examination of CSF is useful in following patients with intracranial tumors that have a propensity to seed the subarachnoid space and spread through the CSF
pathways. Typically, medulloblastoma, ependymoma, choroid plexus carcinoma, and some embryonal pineal and suprasellar region tumors have a high enough
likelihood of spread to justify CSF examinations. In these patients, it is important to obtain a lumbar puncture for CSF to examine for malignant cells (cytology),
protein, and glucose, and specific markers such as b-HCG and AFP. These tests determine if malignant cells are in the CSF and if tumor deposits have reached
sufficient size to begin to block CSF subarachnoid pathways. A high protein concentration with normal glucose levels and normal cytology is seen in tumors of the
base of the skull, such as acoustic neurinoma, and in spinal cord tumors. The appearance of xanthochromic CSF, due to high protein content, with an absence of
erythrocytes is characteristic of spinal cord tumors obstructing the subarachnoid space and producing stasis of the CSF in the caudal lumbar sac.
Evaluation of Patients with Intracranial Tumors during Therapy
Critical to the evaluation of the efficacy of any therapy for brain tumors is the reliability of the measurement of tumor growth (deterioration) or tumor regression
(response). Today, contrast-enhanced MRI and, to a lesser extent, CT are used as the primary measure of response to treatment. The extreme sensitivity of the MRI
to changes in brain water content and small enhancing lesions can be confusing in the evaluation of tumor regrowth and progression, especially following
radiotherapy. The use of MR spectroscopy, diffusion-perfusion algorithms, and dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI may improve the ability to assess tumor regrowth in
the postirradiation period.
To interpret the results of therapy correctly and to improve patient care, understanding factors other than cell division is important.
FACTORS THAT MAY PRODUCE CLINICAL DETERIORATION
The most common causes of neurologic deterioration in brain tumor patients undergoing radiation therapy or chemotherapy, or both, are growth of the tumor or
increased peritumoral edema. Both cause increased pressure in the cranial cavity that is transmitted primarily to the adjacent brain; in turn, hydrostatic pressure on
the brain can lead to impairment of cerebral blood flow. The clinical result can be progressive impairment of functioning brain with resultant neurologic deficits. These
manifestations may include signs and symptoms of increased intracranial pressure and temporal lobe or cerebellar herniation (see Table 43.2-9 and Table 43.2-10).
Neurologic deterioration, without neuroimaging evidence of tumor growth, can occur for any of the following reasons:
Obstructive hydrocephalus can occur secondary to tumor in the ventricular system at the aqueduct of Sylvius, fourth ventricle, or foramen of Monro or
communicating hydrocephalus due to infiltrative tumor (carcinomatosis, CNS leukemia, and arachnoiditis).
Hemorrhage into a tumor may occur.
Fluid imbalance, particularly hyponatremia caused by excessive administration of parenteral dextrose in water solutions, may develop.
Hypertension can accentuate intratumoral and peritumoral edema.
Reactive peritumoral edema (or demyelination) may develop early in the course of radiation therapy.
An early delayed syndrome, observed in approximately 15% to 40% of patients completing a course of cranial irradiation, can be distinguished from tumor
regrowth only by waiting and finding that the patient's condition improves without further treatment. 41 This encephalopathy responds to corticosteroids and
resolves within several weeks without specific sequelae. This syndrome is not unique to patients with brain tumors and is observed in leukemic children after
prophylactic cranial irradiation and in those with extracranial tumors who receive incidental radiation to the brain.
Radiation necrosis can occur within 3 months to 13 years or longer after radiation therapy and can produce neurologic impairment that may be indistinguishable
from tumor recurrence.
Seizures may suggest that the tumor is growing and may result in an increase in the neurologic deficit apart from any direct effect of the tumor. Recovery from
any increase in weakness and mental dullness may take several hours to a week in postictal patients who are already brain injured. Even subclinical seizures
can cause deterioration, persisting for hours to days, which resolves with control of the seizures. Electroencephalography is usually diagnostic in these patients,
and the treatment is better control of seizures. Patients receiving long-term chemotherapy often require higher doses of anticonvulsants or widely fluctuating
dosages caused by drug-induced hepatic changes.
Infection and fever often exacerbate neurologic signs and symptoms, regardless of the site of infection. The more common causes of infection include
pneumonia secondary to aspiration or atelectasis and urinary tract infections; meningitis and cerebral abscess are less common.
Metabolic disorders, anemia, fatigue, and emotional depression can cause clinical deterioration, including increase in focal deficit on testing, that is difficult to
distinguish from tumor progression. Such conditions generally produce no alteration of neuroimages.
In these authors' experience, at least 10% of patients who eventually respond to therapy become significantly worse at the end of a first course of chemotherapy, and
transient deterioration is observed occasionally even during the second year of continuous chemotherapy. Paradoxically, this clinical worsening early in therapy may
result from an increase in tumor bulk resulting from effective therapy. Several factors contribute: cell mass may increase when doomed cells form giant cells or
undergo one or more successful cell divisions before dying; the CNS also has an inefficient mechanism for disposing of dead cells produced by chemotherapy or
irradiation; and edema, probably caused by irritative products of cell lysis, may be present within the tumor mass and in adjacent brain.
GLUCOCORTICOID USE
Administration of glucocorticoids is usually begun before surgery for brain tumor. If an adequate surgical decompression is achieved, the corticosteroid dose can be
tapered off rapidly and discontinued within the first week or two after the operation. Some patients require corticosteroid maintenance because a large volume of
tumor remains, because tumor occupies the brain stem or spinal cord, or because of corticosteroid dependence resulting from long-term prior usage.

Patients who no longer require corticosteroids after surgery may need them during or after radiation therapy. Reactive edema may occur during irradiation, and there
may be a transient period of drowsiness and increased deficit for 6 to 16 weeks after treatment. In both instances, signs and symptoms usually resolve within a few
weeks; observation of the subsequent clinical course is often the only way to differentiate these reactions from tumor progression.
The lowest dosage of glucocorticoid that maintains patients at their maximum levels of comfort and function should be sought. Ordinarily, this is determined by
decreasing the dosage until symptoms increase or become apparent, then increasing the dosage until they subside. If deterioration is secondary to tumor growth or
treatment-induced effects, glucocorticoids may have to be increased to keep the patient comfortable. For example, 3 mg/d of dexamethasone may have the desired
effect for a patient with stabilized disease; however, a deteriorating patient may require dexamethasone doses of 64 mg/d or more.
The efficacy of chemotherapy and radiation therapy can be affected by glucocorticoid dosage. A decrease in corticosteroid requirement suggests improvement,
assuming that the previous dosage was actually required. An increase in dosage suggests deterioration. Because increased glucocorticoid dosage may improve
neurologic status and reduce the image size on CT scan, an attempt should be made to document tumor recurrence before increasing glucocorticoid dosage. The
ability of glucocorticoids to reduce the size of primary brain tumors as measured by MRI is well established.

SURGERY
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
No other modality can reduce tumor bulk as quickly as surgery, and advances in imaging, computerized navigation, pharmacologic agents for brain edema,
neuroanesthesia, and surgical magnification, illumination, and instrumentation such as ultrasonic aspirators have made operative approaches to tumors in even the
most remote corners of the CNS possible and reasonably safe. The goal of brain tumor surgery is to resect and cure the tumor completely. If surgical cure is not
possible, such as in most gliomas, tumor bulk reduction and consequent decompression of the brain is the next goal and, when possible, should be the first
therapeutic modality for the tumor.
An extremely important by-product of cytoreductive surgery is the acquisition of adequate tissue for histopathologic examination. Only rarely should brain tumors be
treated with radiation or chemotherapy without a definitive tissue diagnosis. In patients with tumors that are believed to be inaccessible by open craniotomy or in
patients for whom open craniotomy would not be helpful, a needle biopsy should be performed with guidance from CT, MRI, or ultrasound. CT-guided stereotaxy is
the easiest method for obtaining tissue with a needle.
SURGICAL PLANNING
The intrinsic characteristics of a tumor's appearance and its relative position in the brain as shown on a technically adequate MRI scan can most often narrow the
diagnostic possibilities to one or two choices, and a view of the tumor in several planes simplifies surgical planning.
For tumors that appear to be located in critical motor or language areas, functional MRI is becoming an important preoperative screening test to determine the
feasibility of the surgery. If the surgery is deemed possible, the functional MRI scans are used in conjunction with intraoperative electrophysiologic mapping (see
Craniotomy for Supratentorial Tumors , later in this chapter) to plan a safe approach to an intraaxial tumor. 30
Cerebral angiography is sometimes useful in surgical planning for tumors that may encircle critical cerebral blood vessels, such as basal meningiomas, or for tumors
that can be extremely vascular, such as hemangioblastomas, glomus tumors, and certain meningiomas. Angiography done in temporal proximity (24 to 96 hours) to
the planned surgical procedure can be combined with embolization of the tumor's blood supply, in many instances making the surgical procedure technically easier.
The final selection of a surgical approach is made after adequate imaging, after developing a differential diagnosis, and after assessing the patient's general
condition. In the era of modern neuroanesthesia, it is rare that a craniotomy must not be done because of poor general medical status. The design of an appropriate
scalp incision and bone flap is the final preoperative decision.
PREOPERATIVE AND ANESTHETIC MANAGEMENT
Patients undergoing surgery for supratentorial tumors should be placed on anticonvulsants except in the case of surgery for brain metastasis without prior history of
seizures. Corticosteroids (commonly dexamethasone) should be administered for a few days preoperatively, when possible, to reduce cerebral edema and thereby
facilitate cerebral retraction for perfect exposure. Blood levels of anticonvulsants should be monitored to ensure that the therapeutic range has been achieved.
Anticonvulsants should also be continued for at least 1 year. Corticosteroids should be continued into the postoperative period and then tapered, when possible. The
anesthetic agents are selected for their lack of effect on intracranial pressure. In general, the head is held rigidly with pin fixation to minimize movement as the
surgeon is looking through the operating microscope, where the slightest movement is dramatically amplified. As the procedure is about to commence, mannitol (1
g/kg body weight) is administered and hyperventilation to a p CO2 of 25 to 30 mm Hg is accomplished for definitive reduction of the intracranial pressure in preparation
for brain retraction.
CRANIOTOMY FOR SUPRATENTORIAL TUMORS
The bony opening is designed so that it is generous enough to facilitate surgery. The bone flap is centered over the tumor or positioned to provide access to the route
of approach. In all instances, the scalp flap is designed to accommodate the bone flap fully, and the vascular supply to the scalp is given careful consideration in the
design.
After the scalp incision is made and the scalp flap reflected, burr holes are drilled and connected with a power saw. The bone flap can be turned back, attached to the
temporal muscle (osteoplastic flap) or its blood supply, or removed completely (free flap). The dura is opened only after the brain has been softened completely by
mannitol diuresis and intraoperative hyperventilation. Sometimes a few minutes' wait is necessary to secure maximum decompression, and this brief pause can be
critical to the success of the subsequent surgical approach.
The dura is reflected back, and the approach to the tumor is made. The surgeon can be confronted by a field of normal appearing and, in some areas, potentially
critical functional cortical structures when seeking to resect a subcortical lesion. In this situation, mapping of cortical motor and speech function can be carried out
intraoperatively using electrical stimulation of the cortex. 31 The preoperative functional MRI scan can serve as a guide. Motor mapping can be done in the
anesthetized patient when muscle relaxants are not used during surgery, and an increasing number of glioma resections in the dominant hemisphere are being done
under local anesthesia for the purpose of speech mapping. 31 Localization of subcortical tumors can be accomplished using intraoperative ultrasonography, but more
recently, frameless image-guided interactive surgical systems have been developed. 32 With these systems, a preoperative MRI scan is done with markers on the
patient's scalp, which at the time of surgery allow computer digitization of the images onto the patient's head. Placement of the system's probe at the time of surgery
gives immediate feedback as to localization as visualized on the MRI. This sort of guidance is invaluable for the design of the craniotomy flap, the localization of the
subcortical tumor, and even determination of the extent of tumor resection.
Tumor removal is usually done with grasping instruments, bipolar coagulation, and suction, but removal of firm, adherent, or calcified tumor tissue can be difficult and
is simplified by use of the Cavitron ultrasonic aspirator (CUSA), which ultrasonically disrupts the tumor at its tip and sucks it away. Tumor in locations where access is
limited (e.g., the third ventricle) and space to use graspers and other equipment is not available sometimes can be dealt with best by use of the CO 2 laser, which can
vaporize tumor tissue with a hands-off technique. Tumor removal with a laser is slow, however, and is reserved for special circumstances.
In the rare situations in which brain swelling is worrisome at the time of closure, a catheter is left in the subdural space to measure the intracranial pressure. All
patients are monitored in the intensive care unit for at least 1 night after surgery, and an MRI scan is done within 48 hours to evaluate the success of the tumor
resection. Serum electrolyte levels and osmolality are measured frequently in the postoperative period to ensure that the patient is relatively dehydrated through the
first several days and to detect the possible onset of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone or diabetes insipidus.

CRANIOTOMY FOR POSTERIOR FOSSA TUMORS
The occiput and, commonly, the dorsal aspects of C-1 and C-2 are exposed. A generous craniotomy is done unilaterally or bilaterally to accommodate an approach
through the vermis or through, over, or around the cerebellar hemisphere. A laminectomy of C-1 and sometimes C-2 is done in certain midline approaches to improve
tumor exposure or extend the decompression. The cisterna magna is opened to drain CSF and decompress the cerebellum before initiating retraction.
STEREOTACTIC TUMOR BIOPSY
For intrinsic tumors of the deep midline (e.g., pontine or corpus callosum gliomas), for deep tumors of the dominant hemisphere, or for diffuse nonfocal tumors,
surgical resection is not practical. In these situations, needle biopsy for diagnosis is essential. There is no longer any reason to perform a full craniotomy for the
purpose of biopsy only. Tissue can be obtained through a needle directed by hand through a burr hole under CT or MRI scan guidance or a needle directed by many
devices that incorporate ultrasound images. However, in these authors' opinion, nothing is as simple or accurate as CT- or MRI-directed stereotactic biopsy.
A number of image-guided stereotactic systems are available. 33,34 Typically, the patient undergoes a CT or MRI scan with a rigid array of bars affixed tightly to the
skull to minimize movement. In adults, local anesthesia usually is used; children usually require general anesthesia. The CT scan image demonstrates the lesion in
which the biopsy will be performed and also the localizing rods, thereby relating the target to a volume encompassed by the rods. By digitizing the position of the
target and the position of the rods, this relation is formalized, and the coordinates for a trajectory to the target are created in a way specific to the individual
stereotactic system used.
The target is approached through a burr hole or a (smaller) twist drill hole. The biopsy instrument is guided to the target by use of an adjustable stereotactic arc that is
placed on the head in fixed relation to the former position of the localizing rods used for the CT scan. A fragment of tissue is aspirated or grasped for removal, and a
frozen section confirms the acquisition of diagnostic material and most often also suggests a working diagnosis. Experienced surgeons obtain diagnostic tissue in
more than 95% of patients, and these patients stay only 1 night in the hospital. 34 The principal risk of the surgery, hemorrhage at the biopsy site, occurs in few
patients. Occasionally, cerebral edema is exacerbated by the procedure.

RADIATION THERAPY
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Most primary CNS neoplasms are unifocal; however, the more common brain tumors, such as the low-grade and malignant astrocytomas, are infiltrative into
surrounding normal brain tissue for a distance of 1 to 3 cm or more. Radiotherapeutic approaches for these brain tumors generally consist of an initial dose to the
enhancing disease (which contains solid tumor tissue) plus surrounding edema (which is comprised of normal brain infiltrated by microscopic tumor) plus a 2-cm
margin of normal brain tissue followed by a boost dose to the enhancing tumor plus a 2-cm margin. Because of the penetrating nature of the high-energy radiation
beams used in current practice, and the presence of a large amount of normal brain tissue in the edema and margin, substantial amounts of normal tissue are often
irradiated in the typical patient receiving high-dose radiation with curative intent. The tolerance of the normal brain (and spinal cord in the case of cord tumors) may
then be a limiting factor to achieving local control and cure of a CNS neoplasm.
TOLERANCE OF THE BRAIN
Adverse reactions associated with cranial irradiation differ in their pathogenesis and can be temporally classified into (1) acute reactions that occur during or shortly
after radiation therapy; (2) early delayed reactions that appear within a few weeks to 4 months after irradiation; and (3) late delayed injuries that develop several
months to years after treatment.35
Acute reactions are thought to be caused by radiation-induced edema. Within a few hours after the first fraction of radiation, patients may develop headache, nausea,
vomiting, somnolence, fever, and worsening neurologic symptoms. Symptoms occur most commonly after large dose fractions (3.0 to 6.0 Gy) are delivered to a large
volume of the brain in patients with increased intracranial pressure from primary or metastatic brain tumors. Thus, if symptoms of increased intracranial pressure are
present, patients undergoing cranial irradiation should be protected with corticosteroids, administered for at least 48 to 72 hours before beginning treatment. 36 When
larger fractions (7.5 Gy or more) are used, this disorder may culminate in abrupt neurologic deterioration or death. 35 However, with conventional daily fractions of 1.8
to 2.0 Gy, the acute radiation reaction most commonly presents as mild headache and nausea, becoming progressively less severe with each succeeding fraction. 36
Treatment with hyperfractionated irradiation schedules of 0.9 to 1.2 Gy, two or three times daily and accelerated fractionation programs of 1.6 to 2.0 Gy given two or
three times daily delivered to a portion of the brain are also well tolerated. 35
The early delayed reaction is thought to result from temporary demyelination caused by the effects of radiation on oligodendroglial cells 37 or radiation-induced
changes in capillary permeability. 36 It is characterized by transient neurologic deterioration, somnolence, and an exacerbation of tumor-associated signs and
symptoms depending on the presence or absence of an underlying brain tumor, the volume of brain irradiation, and the dose delivered. 35 In patients with brain tumors,
perilesional vascular abnormalities and tumor necrosis may induce clinical and radiographic changes that are indistinguishable from tumor progression. Although
signs and symptoms are usually mild, corticosteroid therapy and intensive medical support may be required. The appearance of new findings during this early
posttreatment interval does not always indicate that the tumor has recurred or that a change in therapy is needed; observation is often the only way to distinguish this
situation from tumor progression.
Late delayed radiation injuries make up the most serious complications of therapeutic irradiation on the brain and vary in their appearance and severity from
asymptomatic white matter changes to potentially fatal necrosis. Late radiation injury has been attributed to vascular endothelial injury or to a direct effect on
oligodendroglial cells, and multiple mechanisms are probably involved. 35 The late delayed reaction presents as a focal or as a diffuse white matter injury that may
occur together in the same patient. The clinical presentation depends on the site and volume of the brain exposed. Patients with focal radiation necrosis present with
localizing neurologic signs, often accompanied by symptoms of increased intracranial pressure. Focal hypodensity or a contrast-enhancing mass with surrounding
vasogenic edema may be seen on CT scan. MRI shows a contrast-enhancing mass with focal and confluent white matter alterations on T2-weighted images. Diffuse
white matter injury typically occurs after large-volume or whole brain irradiation. Clinical features range from seizure disorders and varying degrees of
neuropsychological impairment to incapacitating dementia. Diffuse white matter hypodensity is seen on CT scan, often accompanied by a focal enhancing mass,
whereas T2-weighted MRI shows diffuse periventricular white matter hyperintensity. Cerebral cortical atrophy, probably a late finding related to diffuse white matter
injury, is observed in 17% to 39% of patients who receive whole brain irradiation with chemotherapy for malignant gliomas. Enlarged cerebral sulci and ventricles are
seen in neuroimaging studies. 36 The pathogenesis of this formal radiation damage is uncertain. 36 Rarely, therapeutic irradiation causes an intracranial vessel
occlusive vasculopathy or secondary neoplasia.
The tolerance of the brain depends on the size of the dose per fraction, total dose administered, overall treatment time, volume of brain irradiated, host factors, and
adjunctive therapies. The probability of injury increases with larger daily doses (2.2 Gy per fraction) and doses in excess of 60 Gy delivered in 30 fractions over
approximately 6 weeks. Table 43.2-11 defines the role of these factors in radiation tolerance and injury to the normal CNS tissues, as well as ways they might be
modified to increase tolerance (i.e., reduce injury). 35,38 Sheline and associates suggested that the threshold doses for brain injury are approximately 35 Gy for 10
fractions, 60 Gy for 35 fractions, and 76 Gy for 60 fractions. 39 They further demonstrated that the isoeffective dose (termed neuret) formula should have an exponent
of N = 0.41 and an exponent of T = 0.03 (where N is the number of fractions and T is the total time in days). This formula may not be applicable to extremely small or
large numbers of fractions or to extremely short or long overall treatment times. Based on models such as these, the TD 5/5 (a 5% complication rate in 5 years) for the
whole brain is between 40 and 60 Gy, for part of the brain is 50 to 10 Gy, and for a 10-cm segment of spinal cord is 45 to 50 Gy (see discussion of spinal cord
tolerance in this section), as shown in Table 43.2-12. Although the TD 50/5 (a 50% complication rate in 5 years) for spinal cord is reportedly lower than that of brain,
there are not good data to support this difference. Rather, the sequelae of spinal cord radiation injury are perceived as greater than those of brain injury, therefore
tolerance doses have been arbitrarily lowered. In clinical practice, TD 5/5's of 60 Gy for partial brain and 50 Gy for a limited segment of spinal cord are
commonlyused.

TABLE 43.2-11. Factors Associated with Radiation Tolerance of the Normal Central Nervous System (CNS) Tissues

TABLE 43.2-12. Tolerance Doses (TD) for Normal Central Nervous System Tissues at 2 Gy Per Fraction over 5 Days per Week

The TD 5/5's given for brain and spinal cord tolerance assume a standard fraction size of 180 to 200 cGy/d. For primary CNS tumor patients being treated with
curative intent, fraction size should rarely exceed 200 cGy daily, and in most situations, should be 150 to 200 cGy. Fraction sizes greater than 200 cGy daily (usually
250 to 300 cGy) are commonly used for palliation of brain metastases and spinal cord compression, but only because such patients are not expected to live long
enough to manifest normal tissue injury.
Table 43.2-13 shows the tolerance doses for other normal tissues of the CNS, including the brain stem, eye, ear, optic chiasm, optic nerve, and pituitary gland. The
clinical manifestations of severe injury to these structures is listed. 40,41,42 and 43

TABLE 43.2-13. Tolerance Doses (TD) for Miscellaneous Normal Tissues of the Cranium

Approximately 4% to 9% of patients treated to 50 to 60 Gy with conventional fractionated radiation for brain tumors develop clinically detectable focal radiation
necrosis, but this form of injury may be found in as many as 10% to 22% of patients at autopsy. A review by Marks and colleagues of 139 patients who received
irradiation for primary brain tumors with at least 45 Gy in daily dose fractions of 1.8 to 2.0 Gy disclosed 7 patients (5%) with brain necrosis. 44 A recalculation of their
data, assuming a daily dose of 1.8 Gy given five times per week, demonstrated that the incidence of necrosis was directly related to dose. Of 51 patients who received
total doses of 57.6 Gy or less, there were no cases of necrosis. Two of 60 patients (3%) who received between 57.6 and 64.8 Gy developed necrosis, and 5 of 28
patients (18%) who received 64.8 to 75.6 Gy developed necrosis. 45
Several additional factors may affect the radiation tolerance of the brain. Children younger than 2 to 3 years of age are thought to be more susceptible to injury than
are adults because of incomplete development of the CNS. 39 Vasculopathy associated with endocrine disorders, CNS infection, and cerebral edema also appear to
potentiate the effects of radiation.
The risk of injury may be amplified by some chemotherapeutic agents. The most dramatic illustration of the toxicity of combined modality therapy was observed in
children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia treated with prophylactic brain irradiation and methotrexate administered intravenously and intrathecally. Two delayed
syndromes, necrotizing leukoencephalopathy and mineralizing microangiopathy, have been recognized in children who received 24 Gy in 1.5 to 2.0 Gy daily
increments, which without chemotherapy are well below tolerance levels. Although necrotizing leukoencephalopathy has not been reported with a dose of 24 Gy in the
absence of chemotherapy and occurs in fewer than 1% to 2% of patients receiving intrathecal and high-dose intravenous methotrexate, the incidence with all three
therapies combined is as high as 45%. 46 It is currently recognized that methotrexate is most toxic when given during or after radiation therapy, and attention to this
detail has reduced the frequency of this complication significantly.
Radiation and chemotherapy-induced changes are often indistinguishable from tumor recurrence on CT. By MRI the changes are better defined and can be more
easily anticipated, nevertheless, at time the radiographic diagnosis of radiation necrosis may be difficult to confirm. Thallium 201 single-photon emission CT, 18F
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography, and dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI 47 studies may help separate patients with radiation and chemotherapy
necrosis from those with recurrent tumor. However, because most patients have a mixture of necrosis and tumor, a biopsy may be required to confirm the diagnosis,
especially when the injury occurs at or near the tumor site.
Corticosteroids may improve or stabilize the neurologic symptoms associated with the effects of radiation and radiation with chemotherapy injury. Surgical resection is
often beneficial to patients with favorably situated, focal radiation-induced lesions who deteriorate neurologically and become dependent on corticosteroids. 48 While
anticoagulation has been suggested as a therapeutic alternative when surgery is not feasible, a clinical trial that demonstrates real benefit to the patient is lacking at
present. In unpublished trials, we and others have tried vitamin E, pentoxifylline (Trental), aspirin, cis-retinoic acid, heparin, coumadin, and enoxaparin (Lovenox)
without conclusive evidence of reproducible benefit. As an anecdote, the occasional patient appears to benefit from anticoagulation, 49 cis-retinoic acid, or both.
Decreased levels of intellectual function have been observed after cranial irradiation in children and adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, small cell lung
carcinoma, and primary brain tumors. IQ decrements and perceptual and learning disabilities seen after CNS prophylaxis in children with acute lymphoblastic

leukemia have long been attributed to cranial irradiation. However, a study comparing the long-term cognitive outcome of children treated with 18 or 24 Gy and
intrathecal methotrexate or intrathecal and intravenous methotrexate without cranial irradiation failed to demonstrate an overall decline in verbal, performance, or
full-scale IQ in any of the three groups, although 22% to 30% of children in each group showed at least a 15-point decline in IQ during the study period. The authors
proposed that ecologic factors or continuation phase chemotherapy rather than radiation therapy might account for the IQ changes. 50
Neuropsychological deterioration has been recognized in long-term surviving patients with small cell lung carcinoma who receive prophylactic cranial irradiation.
These patients are treated with a variety of chemotherapeutic agents that may enhance the effects of radiation on the CNS. The risk and severity of impairment
appear to be related to radiation dose and fraction size and to the type, sequence, and dose intensity of the chemotherapeutic agents used.
Children irradiated for brain tumors have IQ decrements and behavioral disturbances. Most require formal psychological intervention and special education programs.
Young age at treatment, supratentorial tumor sites, the use of whole brain irradiation, poorly controlled seizure disorders, the presence of sensorimotor deficits, and
the addition of chemotherapy have a negative influence on IQ. 51 The risk and severity of neuropsychological dysfunction are also affected by psychological stress,
reduced school attendance, and the adequacy of rehabilitative efforts. 52
Cranial irradiation also leads to intellectual impairment in adults. Unlike in children, however, only a limited amount of quantitative information is available, especially
for patients treated with radiation therapy alone. Patients in whom a substantial portion of the brain is irradiated frequently develop recent memory loss and difficulty
with attending to tasks that may prevent their return to gainful employment. Impairment is most pronounced in those patients who have had chemotherapy and whole
brain irradiation. 52 We found that approximately 60% of long-term survivors irradiated for gliomas were able to be employed at occupations comparable with those
they held before treatment. 53 As expected, patients irradiated with partial brain fields had superior memory function and better employment histories than those treated
with whole brain fields. Decrements in tests of new learning ability, recent memory, abstraction, and problem solving have been observed in patients who fail to retain
their premorbid social or occupational level of function. 51 Early return to work after treatment may lead to improvement or recovery of neuropsychological function.
Radiation therapy may cause hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction, and the incidence and degree of hormone suppression appear to be dose related. 41 Growth hormone
deficiency, the most frequent endocrine dysfunction observed after radiation therapy, can occur after doses as low as 18 Gy. Deficiencies of gonadotrophins,
thyroid-stimulating hormone, and adrenocorticotrophins as well as hyperprolactinemia can be seen with doses in excess of 40 Gy. 41 Patients at risk for
neuroendocrinologic sequelae should be evaluated for pituitary function before, and periodically after, irradiation. Early detection of a deficiency permits appropriate
hormonal replacement therapy before irreversible damage has occurred.
TOLERANCE OF THE SPINAL CORD
Radiation myelopathy may present as a transient early delayed or as a more ominous late delayed reaction. Transient radiation myelopathy is clinically manifested by
momentary, electrical shock-like paresthesias or numbness radiating from the neck to the extremities, precipitated by neck flexion (Lhermitte's sign). The syndrome
develops after an average latent period of 3 to 4 months and gradually resolves over the ensuing 3 to 6 months without the need for specific therapy. These findings
have been attributed to transient demyelination caused by radiation-induced inhibition of myelin-producing oligodendroglial cells in the irradiated cord segment. An
alternative hypothesis suggests that radiation induces a transient disruption of the blood-spinal cord barrier, resulting in vasogenic edema, which in turn leads to
demyelination. 5
Radiation myelopathy is one of the most feared complications in clinical radiotherapy. In addition to its obvious neurologic sequelae, nearly 50% of patients die from
secondary complications.54 The latent period between the completion of radiation therapy and the onset of symptoms is bimodal in distribution, with the first peak
occurring at 12 to 14 months and the second occurring at 24 to 28 months. Demyelination and white matter necrosis due to a direct effect on oligodendroglial cells
and intramedullary microvascular injury each play a role in the pathogenesis of radiation myelopathy. In addition, microglia, astrocytes, and the release of cytokines
are also involved. 38 It is probable that multiple mechanisms exist and that the relative contribution of each depends on radiation dose and other factors. The signs and
symptoms that accompany radiation myelopathy are irreversible. They may be partial in some patients, whereas in others there is progressive functional loss that
becomes complete over several months. Less commonly, radiation myelopathy is manifested by the acute onset of paraplegia or quadriplegia that evolves over
several hours or a few days, resulting from infarction of the cord. Myelopathy may also be heralded by lower motor neuron dysfunction due to selective injury to
anterior horn cells.
The diagnosis of radiation myelopathy requires a history of radiation therapy in doses sufficient to result in injury. The portion of the cord irradiated must be slightly
above the dermatome level of expression of the lesion, and the latent period from the completion of treatment to the onset of injury must be consistent with that
observed in radiation myelopathy. There are no confirmatory laboratory tests or imaging studies that distinguish radiation myelopathy from other spinal cord lesions.
MRI findings include swelling of the cord with decreased intensity in T1-weighted and hyperintensity in T2-weighted images. 55 The diagnosis is often one of exclusion.
The medical and legal consequences of radiation myelopathy are such that treatment with radiation therapy is often compromised to keep the spinal cord dose within
a safe level. 56 A dose of 45 Gy in 22 fractions over 5 weeks usually is considered to be safe, the risk of myelopathy being less than 0.2%, 38,56 well below the steep
portion of the dose-response curve. 56 It is estimated that with conventionally fractionated irradiation (1.8 to 2.0 Gy per fraction, five fractions per week), the incidence
of myelopathy is 5% for doses in the range of 57 to 61 Gy and 50% for doses of 68 to 73 Gy. 38 There is no convincing evidence that the cervical and thoracic cord
differ in their radiosensitivity. The belief that the cervical cord is more tolerant than the thoracic cord probably arose from differences in biologic dose resulting from
the practice of treating with one field per day, which was common through the mid-1970s. 57 There appears to be little change in tolerance with variations in the length
of cord irradiated. 38
Various isoeffect formulas have been proposed for the spinal cord. Wara and coworkers, for example, derived a formula with an exponent of N = –0.377 and an
exponent of T = –0.058. 58 These formulas suggest that in addition to the total dose given, radiation myelopathy is related to the size of the individual daily dose and
predict that spinal cord tolerance will continue to increase with decreasing fraction size. However, data indicate that reducing the fraction size to lower than 2 Gy does
not alter the dose response significantly. Furthermore, because radiation damage is not completely repaired between multiple daily fractions, extrapolating from a
conventionally fractionated cord dose to an equivalent hyperfractionated cord dose using any biomathematical formula should be approached with caution. A dose of
45 Gy in twice daily fractions of 1.2 Gy with an interfraction interval of 6 hours appears safe. 38 Interestingly, experimental animal studies suggest that the majority of
occult lesions caused by a dose of 44 Gy in 20 fractions is revealed within 2 years. This may have implications on treatment recommendations for previously treated
patients. 38
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM RADIOTHERAPY TOXICITY SCORING SYSTEMS
The most commonly used system for scoring radiation-associated acute and chronic CNS toxicity is that of the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) and its
European counterpart, the European Organization for the Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC), and is shown in Table 43.2-14.59 Pavy et al. have proposed a
more sophisticated system for scoring radiation toxicity, called Late Effects on Normal Tissues (LENT), in which they describe four components for each toxicity,
including the subjective, objective, management, and analytical (SOMA) components. 60 The LENT/SOMA system is currently being validated by the RTOG and may
eventually replace the RTOG/EORTC system.

TABLE 43.2-14. Central Nervous System (CNS) Toxicity Levels of the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group and the European Organization for the Research and

Treatment of Cancera

TUMOR TARGET VOLUME AND TREATMENT TECHNIQUES
The appropriate volume to encompass within the radiation treatment portal varies according to the specific histopathologic tumor type and, with certain histologies, is
a topic of considerable controversy. Because their tendency to infiltrate beyond the lesional borders visualized by neuroimaging studies is limited, certain tumors,
such as benign meningiomas, pituitary adenomas, craniopharyngiomas, and acoustic neurilemmomas, may be treated with narrow margins of surrounding normal
tissue. In contrast, the astrocytic gliomas require larger margins for uncertainty because of their tendency to infiltrate beyond the identifiable tumor periphery.
Improved imaging techniques and a better understanding of recurrence patterns have fostered the use of limited radiation portals rather than whole brain irradiation
for malignant gliomas. Comparisons of CT and MRI studies with clinical and pathologic findings have shown that (1) malignant gliomas are localized, and microscopic
invasion of the perilesional brain is limited at the time of initial diagnosis 61; (2) only 1.1% of patients present with multiple lesions 62; (3) after initial treatment, most of
these lesions, when they recur, do so at their original location 63; and (4) isolated tumor cell infiltration may extend to the periphery of T2-weighted MRI abnormalities. 64
Clinical studies have failed to demonstrate that irradiating the whole brain is superior to treating more limited fields, 45 and patients surviving for extended periods
after whole brain irradiation, especially in combination with chemotherapy, may experience considerable treatment-related morbidity. 52 Until the primary tumor can be
controlled with greater frequency, and the patterns of failure in such patients suggest that local fields are unjustified, there is little rationale for treating the whole brain.
The radiation beam energy and field arrangements are selected after consideration of the location of the tumor within the brain and the geometry of the target volume.
The across target volume is defined as a three-dimensional reconstruction of the tumor contour based on operative findings and data from CT and MRI studies. The
planning target volume consists of the volume of tissue that must be irradiated to encompass the tumor volume with a margin of surrounding tissue considered to be at
risk for microscopic tumor spread and to account for patient movement and daily set-up uncertainties. Depending on tumor size and location, treatment portals may be
coaxially opposed or designed in a more complex fashion, using multiple or rotational fields with wedge filters. Three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy and the
advanced technique of intensity modulated radiation therapy (see Chapter 29.4) are new methods of treatment planning and delivery designed to enhance the
conformation of the dose to the target volume, while maximally restricting the dose delivered to the normal tissue outside the treatment volume. In the future, these
techniques may improve the outcome of patients with brain tumors by allowing higher than traditional radiation doses to be administered safely. Megavoltage
equipment with energies ranging from cobalt 60 to 15 MV photons is used to administer radiation therapy. Treatment is generally given in daily fractions of 1.8 to 2.0
Gy/d five times per week. In this chapter, the total doses referred to assume that a conventional fractionation scheme is used unless otherwise specified.
Certain neoplasms, such as medulloblastomas and other primitive neuroectodermal tumors as well as some ependymomas and germ cell tumors, require treatment to
the entire craniospinal axis. Patients are treated prone in an immobilization cast to ensure daily positional reproducibility. The intracranial contents, including the
upper one or two segments of the cervical cord, are treated through parallel opposed lateral fields. The spine is treated through one or two posterior fields, depending
on the size of the patient. The collimator for the lateral cranial fields is angled to match the divergence of the upper border of the adjacent spinal field, and the
treatment couch is angulated so that the inferior border of the cranial field is perpendicular to the superior edge of the spinal field. Individualized focused blocks
protect the normal extracranial head and neck tissues from the primary radiation beam. The cranial and posterior spine fields may be abutted, but a gap of 0.5 to 1.0
cm is often left between the fields. When two posterior spinal fields are used, as is usually the case, a gap is calculated so that the 50% isodose lines meet at the
level of the spinal cord. All junction lines are moved 0.5 to 1.0 cm daily or at least every 10 Gy to avoid overdosing or underdosing segments of the cord. This is
accomplished by expanding the lateral cranial fields and moving the posterior spine fields caudally without changing their dimensions. A fixed block is placed at the
inferior margin of the caudal spinal field to keep the lower margin of the irradiated volume at the same location. Several modifications of this approach are used in
clinical practice.
Radiosurgery is being used to treat a diverse group of intracranial lesions, including small arteriovenous malformations, pituitary adenomas, acoustic neurinomas,
meningiomas, gliomas, and brain metastases. Radiosurgery is a method of highly focal, closed skull external irradiation that uses an imaging-compatible stereotactic
device for precise target localization. The relationship between the stereotactic coordinate system and the radiation source(s) allows accurate delivery of radiation to
the target volume. Radiosurgery can be administered by gamma knife units, made up of multiple cobalt beams, and by modified linear accelerators. This technique is
designed to deliver a high radiation dose to an intracranial target in a single session without delivering significant radiation to adjacent normal tissues. The dose that
can be safely administered in a single fraction is limited by the volume irradiated, and to maintain a steep dose gradient at the edge of the field, the application of
radiosurgery is restricted to lesions measuring 4 cm or less in diameter.
Radiosurgery may be delivered in a fractionated dose schedule using stereotactic radiosurgery hardware and software and head frames that can be relocalized daily
in a reproducible fashion. This approach is referred to as stereotactic radiotherapy or fractionated radiosurgery. Because fractionating the radiation dose improves the
therapeutic ratio, larger tumors and those located within or adjacent to critical intracranial structures are suitable for this treatment technique. This approach is being
applied to the treatment of malignant gliomas, craniopharyngiomas, pituitary adenomas, small optic tract tumors, and as a boost for medulloblastomas.

CHEMOTHERAPY
GENERAL PHARMACOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
The use of anticancer agents in the treatment of intracranial and spinal tumors is established for many primary tumors. For parenchymal CNS tumors, however,
controversy surrounds the concept of limited antitumor efficacy for agents with restricted blood–brain barrier permeability, 65 supporting the concept is the fact that
many infiltrative primary CNS tumors (e.g., gliomas) have cellular regions within the brain with apparently intact normal-appearing brain capillaries. In addition, the
actual extent of capillary breakdown accounting for the leakage responsible for positive-contrast CT and MRI as well as radionuclide brain scans is small. 66 Although
drug delivery to portions of any primary tumor would be expected to occur to the same extent as with non-CNS tumors, delivery (by diffusion) to infiltrative regions
distant from leaky tumor capillaries would be expected to be compromised. Diffusion, being a slow process, cannot achieve significant drug concentrations, unless
plasma drug levels are sustainable for prolonged periods, and the diffusing drug is relatively stable in the tumor tissue as it diffuses.
A secondary supporting argument is that most agents with antitumor activity against CNS tumors readily cross the blood–brain barrier. 67 For example, all of the
non–sugar-containing chloroethylnitrosoureas such as bischloroethylnitrosourea (BCNU), lomustine (CCNU),
[1-(2-chloroethyl)-3-(2,5-dioxo-3-piperidyl)-1-nitrosourea] (PCNU), and nimustine (ACNU) have shown efficacy as single agents, whereas sugar-containing
chloroethylnitrosoureas are less effective. 25 Procarbazine and a new agent, temozolomide (Temodar), also cross the blood–brain barrier and are active. Agents such
as bleomycin, doxorubicin, cisplatin, vincristine (VCR), and mithramycin do not readily cross the blood–brain barrier and have shown limited activity against gliomas
and have limited activity against primitive childhood and embryonal tumors.
Whether ease of blood–brain barrier passage constitutes an absolute or relative advantage is somewhat academic, given the paucity of chemotypes with
demonstrable antitumor activity. Even a small pharmacokinetic disadvantage takes on disproportionate importance when the selective cytotoxicity of a drug is small.
This may well be the case with many of the drugs used, because they share narrow therapeutic indices because of dose-limiting systemic toxicity.
Finally, with respect to drugs for CNS tumors, many of the available anticancer drugs can be toxic to the CNS if given at extremely high doses or when given in a
manner to circumvent the blood–brain barrier. 68,69 The blood–brain barrier exists to protect the brain from many potentially toxic compounds. If the blood–brain barrier
did not exist, CNS toxicity rather than myelotoxicity or gastrointestinal toxicity would be dose limiting for most drugs.
Pharmacokinetic considerations for intracranial nonparenchymal tumors and extramedullary spinal tumors are less dependent on the ability to cross the blood–brain
barrier readily, because many of these tumors gain blood supply from meningeal blood vessels that are significantly more permeable than those of the brain.
REGIONAL DRUG DELIVERY CONSIDERATIONS
Under most circumstances regional drug delivery produces greater drug exposure than does systemic intravenous or oral administration. With respect to intracranial
and spinal tumors, the regional delivery takes the form of intra-CSF therapy, intraarterial infusion, and intratumoral therapy.

Therapy by the CSF route (usually by ventricular reservoir) is a form of regional drug delivery that is used to treat meningeal neoplasia resulting from primary or
secondary tumor invasion of the subarachnoid space and, less commonly, one of the ventricular cavities. It is often, but not always, associated with malignant cells
floating in the CSF.
The advantages of intra-CSF therapy are high local drug levels; low systemic toxicity; and the ability to increase the frequency of treatments. However, delivery of
drugs through the CSF can be dangerous and is associated with a high morbidity. The drugs commonly used are methotrexate, cytarabine, and thiotepa. All three
drugs have been reported to produce CNS damage ranging from fever and chills to leukoencephalopathy and myelitis. Efficacy is limited when gross lesions exist
(greater than or equal to 5 mm diameter) or when CSF pathways are blocked and CSF flows are diverted.
Of concern in the use of CSF therapy is that slow clearance of drug can lead to increased neurotoxicity. Normally, these authors find, after injection into a ventricular
reservoir and pumping the reservoir five times, the CSF distribution and flow of radionuclide-labeled albumin in the ventricle is well distributed and the half-time from
ventricle to cisterna magnum is approximately 60 minutes. In many instances, obvious hydrocephalus is not apparent by neuroimaging, but a physiologic slowing of
CSF flow (and presumably CSF absorption) is present. This slowing of CSF flow can lead to poor distribution in the subarachnoid CSF for drugs with high capillary
clearance, such as cytarabine, and a greater likelihood of serious CNS toxicity for a drug such as methotrexate.
Another form of regional therapy is the intraarterial administration of anticancer drugs through carotid or vertebral arteries. The advantage of this approach is an
increased uptake during the first passage of drug through tumor capillaries. Increased efficacy would be expected for patients whose tumors reside within the
perfusion territory of the infused artery. Contrary to what may be thought, systemic toxicity is not reduced unless the total administered dose is reduced, because the
actual amount of drug taken up into the tumor is a small fraction of the injected dose. On the other hand, focal brain and retinal morbidity are increased, as was
demonstrated by the clinical trials with BCNU 70 and cisplatin. 71 Controversial results of clinical trials do not commend this form of treatment, except under controlled
experimental conditions.
Intratumoral therapy is regional therapy that is applicable for cystic tumors or postsurgical cavities with a narrow rim of surrounding tumor. Pharmacokinetic
considerations implicate problems with maintenance of tumor cavity drug levels if the goal is to maintain a concentration in the cavity as a drug source for diffusion
into the surrounding tumor and brain. These problems relate to conservation of mass, diffusion distances from the cavity to the outer margin of tumor, nonspecific
biodegradation and binding of drug or drug products, and the need for repeat treatments. Modern clinical trials evaluating this form of regional therapy have not been
published.
Another intratumoral approach uses a biodegradable drug-containing polymer that allows zero order release of drug that can diffuse into the surrounding tumor and
brain. This approach, using BCNU (the Gliadel wafer system) has received approval by the Food and Drug Administration for use in patients with glioblastoma
multiforme at recurrence. Patient survival benefit is modest in published clinical trials. 72

CEREBRAL ASTROCYTOMAS
PATHOLOGY CLASSIFICATION
This section deals primarily with the classification of astrocytomas of varying degrees of aggressiveness, ranging from juvenile pilocytic astrocytoma to glioblastoma
multiforme. The slower growing or less aggressive lesions are often referred to as low grade or benign and the more rapidly progressive neoplasms are referred to as
high grade or malignant. With the exception of juvenile pilocytic astrocytomas, subependymomas, and the limited number of astrocytomas that can be completely
resected, even benign astrocytomas are highly lethal. For instance, median 5-year survival for low-grade infiltrating astrocytomas ranges between 21% and 55%
following surgery and the 10-year survival between 10% and 43%. For patients with residual tumor after surgery, irradiation increases survival from an average 30%
at 5 years to 49%. 73 Median survival for glioblastoma multiforme, on the other hand, ranges between 42 and 60 weeks ( Table 43.2-15 for later studies).

TABLE 43.2-15. Survival for Adult Glioblastoma Multiforme Patients with Karnofsky Performance Scores Greater Than or Equal to 60 Treated on Protocols Published
Since 1990

Many classification systems for astrocytomas have been advanced that have advocated the presumed cell of origin, the degree of malignancy, or both. Most common
classification schemas in use over the past two decades have been modifications of that developed by Ringertz. 74 A slightly different approach was proposed by
Daumas-Duport and colleagues. Their grading system assigned a point system to nuclear atypia, mitoses, endothelial proliferation, and necrosis. 75 Grade I tumors
had none of these features, grade II had one feature, grade III had two features, and grade IV had three or more features. While in their initial evaluation, this
grouping led to distinct and separate median survival curves, a subsequent review of 251 cases at the Massachusetts General Hospital found no statistical difference
in survival between grades II and III. 76 Necrosis was found to be a significant predictor of short survival, in agreement with previous studies. 77 The most recent grading
system is that proposed by the World Health Organization. 74 For practical purposes, a three-tier system is generally satisfactory for infiltrative adult astrocytomas:
Astocytoma (includes fibrillary, protoplasmic, gemistocytic)
Astic (malignant) astrocytoma
Glioblastoma multiforme (includes gliosarcoma and giant cell glioblastoma)
RATIONALE FOR SURGERY
Data from animal experiments suggest, and a large clinical experience with tumors at many sites would confirm, that maximal surgical resection improves the results
of subsequent radiation therapy and chemotherapy. This principle is transferable to the treatment of astrocytomas. Gross total surgical resection was among the
dominant factors favoring longer survival in patients with grade I or II astrocytomas treated at the Mayo Clinic 78 and in patients with the more malignant
astrocytomas. 79,80 If one takes a different perspective and looks at the amount of tumor present on the postoperative CT scan and compares it with survival it can be
shown that the two are inversely related even comparing for other variables. 81,82 and 83
A number of factors might be responsible for the improved clinical outcome when astrocytomas are aggressively resected. An assiduous resection can remove 90% of
a typical astrocytoma (1-log cell-kill) and thereby decompress the brain as well as substantially reducing the tumor cell burden. In addition, a large tumor mass left in
the brain can serve as a nidus for cerebral edema after radiation therapy because of the indolent removal of dead cells from the brain. 84,85
SURGICAL PRINCIPLES FOR CEREBRAL ASTROCYTOMAS
The goal of every craniotomy for a cerebral astrocytoma is gross total resection, and adequate exposure should be accomplished for this purpose, although
sometimes aggressive resection proves impossible at the time of the operation. Tumors are approached through an incision in the crest of an overlying gyrus or

through a sulcus. The selection of the entry site is aided by intraoperative ultrasound images and the frameless image-guided stereotactic system. Self-retaining
retractors are placed to retract gently both sides of the cortical incision (generally approximately 3 cm in length), and then the operating microscope is brought in for
the approach through the subcortical white matter to the tumor. The tumor is resected with suction, two-point coagulation forceps, grasping instruments, the CO 2 laser,
or the CUSA, the resection proceeding from the inside out, so that surrounding normal white matter is disturbed minimally. The glistening peritumoral white matter is
seen easily through the microscope as each of the tumor's margins are reached, and it is at this interface that the resection is stopped. Hemostasis is sometimes
difficult but must be perfect. Hemispheric tumor cysts can be drained and, when possible, fenestrated into an adjacent ventricle to prevent reaccumulation. Tumors not
amenable to resection because of their location or their diffuseness should be biopsied stereotactically. Again, there is no indication for a craniotomy when the
purpose is merely to biopsy (and not resect) a tumor.
The introduction of cortical mapping procedures into brain tumor surgery has made feasible the extensive resection of tumors in functionally critical areas. By use of
intraoperative cortical stimulation, motor- and speech-associated cortex can be mapped, and safe routes to deep-lying tumors and safe resection limits determined. 31
A principal disadvantage of surgery that incorporates mapping of speech is that the patient cannot be given general anesthesia, and the surgeon must, therefore,
anticipate unexpected patient movement and possibly inferior brain relaxation during the operation.
REOPERATION FOR CEREBRAL ASTROCYTOMAS
Evidence is accumulating that reoperation for resection of cerebral astrocytomas at the time of their recurrence can be efficacious. 80,86,87 The rationale cited earlier for
the aggressive initial resection of cerebral astrocytomas seems to fit equally well the prospect for reresection at recurrence. This is only true, however, if there is some
treatment modality (e.g., chemotherapy and brachytherapy) that the patient can receive after the reoperation, and most often there is.
Salcman proposes from experience with reoperation of all patients who were to receive further therapy for recurrence of malignant glioma that a relatively
nonselective approach might be rational, given that reoperation is safe and of potential benefit despite the patient's age, performance status, tumor grade, or interval
between initial surgery and recurrence. 80 Young and coworkers argue for more rigid selection criteria when choosing candidates for reoperation on recurrent
malignant gliomas.86 They found that patients with a Karnofsky performance score (KPS) higher than 60 and an interval between the initial surgery and recurrence of
at least 6 months had the longest survival times after reoperation. Harsh and associates looked at the effect of reoperation on the subsequent high-quality survival
(KPS of at least 70) of patients with recurrent malignant gliomas. 87 Age and preoperative KPS have effects on the duration of high-quality survival in this study, with
relative youth and high performance scores being advantageous. Because their data suggest that reoperation can significantly enhance the effects of chemotherapy
on recurrent brain tumors, Harsh and associates would not suggest confining reoperation to young patients in excellent condition, but would suggest instead simply
using these factors as guidelines in the broader therapeutic picture. Barker and his coworkers updated the experience from the same institution [University of
California, San Francisco (UCSF)] and found that while the number of patients with high quality survival after reoperation had increased, the overall survival remained
poor. 472 In this series the KPS was the single significant determinant for longer survival after reoperation.
RADIATION THERAPY
Astrocytoma
Differentiated or low-grade astrocytomas constitute a heterogenous group of tumors. Median survival times may vary from 1 to 12 years depending on the patient's
age, performance status, and the presence or absence of tumor enhancement on neuroimaging studies. 88 The variability in their behavior has led to uncertainties
regarding their therapy and prognosis. Fortunately, randomized trials are being performed to clarify many of the issues surrounding the treatment of these tumors.
Approximately 10% to 35% of astrocytomas are amenable to total surgical resection. 89 The local control rate for completely resected cystic cerebellar astrocytomas
approaches 100%, and postoperative irradiation is not recommended. 90 Similarly, the 5- and 10-year survival rates for patients with juvenile pilocytic astrocytomas are
almost 100% after complete or radical subtotal resection and radiation. 89,91 Wallner and coworkers reported 10- and 20-year progression-free survival rates of 74%
and 41%, respectively, for incompletely resected and irradiated juvenile pilocytic astrocytomas. 91 The authors had no data relative to incompletely resected and
nonirradiated lesions. Shaw and associates found that patients with supratentorial pilocytic astrocytomas who underwent subtotal resection or biopsy and irradiation
survived longer than nonirradiated patients. 89 However, the number of patients treated with surgery alone was small, and, therefore, the efficacy of radiotherapy for
this tumor is uncertain. Based on these data, postoperative irradiation is not indicated for pilocytic astrocytomas when a complete or near complete resection has
been performed. After subtotal resection, either immediate irradiation or close follow-up, reserving treatment for those patients with symptomatic, progressive,
nonresectable tumors may be recommended.92
The 5-year recurrence-free survival rates of patients with infiltrative (nonpilocytic) astrocytomas or mixed oligoastrocytomas who undergo total or radical subtotal
tumor resection range from 52% to 95%. 93 The variation in outcome may reflect prognostic differences related to age, the inclusion of patients with radical subtotal
resections, and the reliance on retrospective evaluations of operative reports to determine the completeness of resection in the era before CT and MRI studies.
Because recurrences are infrequent in children with completely resected astrocytomas, postoperative irradiation is generally not recommended. The outcome of adult
patients after total or radical subtotal resection, has been found in some series to be similar to that of patients undergoing less extensive surgery. 93 Thus, in adults,
postoperative irradiation has been recommended after complete resection by some authors, 93 whereas others advise that radiation therapy be withheld until there is
evidence of tumor recurrence. 94
Retrospective reviews published between 1956 and 1990 suggested that postoperative irradiation is beneficial for incompletely resected infiltrative low-grade
astrocytomas. For irradiated patients, 5-year survival rates varied from 36% and 55%, and 10-year rates ranged from 26% to 43%. In contrast, 5-year survival rates
for subtotally resected, nonirradiated tumors varied from 19% to 32% and 10-year rates were approximately 10%. 92,93 Many series that report the outcome of
irradiated patients do not include a comparable control group, whereas others have presented results for selected groups of irradiated and nonirradiated patients.
Further, marked changes in the quality of surgery, radiation therapy, and patient management occurred over the long time intervals spanned by these studies. Indeed,
survival rates in these reports increase directly as a function of the time period in which the patients were treated. 95 Most of these data precede the era of modern
neuroimaging techniques. The outcome of patients diagnosed and treated in the CT/MRI era is notably better than that reported in the older literature. Median survival
times in more recent series are in the range of 7.2 to 10.0 years, 95,96 raising concerns over the value of the older literature in making treatment decisions today. The
improved outcome appears to be related to the earlier diagnosis of tumors in neurologically intact patients who exhibit only seizures at the time of diagnosis. 96 In
addition, CT and MRI may assist in operative planning, allowing a greater percentage of patients to undergo complete resections. 94,97
The earlier diagnosis of patients with low-grade astrocytomas raised new questions regarding the timing of therapeutic intervention. Is it better to intervene early, or to
wait until there is disease progression? Recht and colleagues 96 reported 26 patients with suspected low-grade supratentorial gliomas (based on clinical and radiologic
features only) who were monitored without other treatment except anticonvulsants. Of these patients, 58% subsequently required intervention (surgery alone or with
radiotherapy) within a median of 29 months (range, 4 to 123 months) because of increased size of the radiographic abnormality, refractory seizures, new symptoms,
or malignant transformation. When compared with 20 patients who had similar characteristics but in whom the decision was made for immediate intervention, there
was no difference in the outcome of patients who received immediate or deferred treatment and no difference in the time to neoplastic transformation. Arguments for
performing an immediate biopsy are to confirm the diagnosis and to identify patients with nonenhancing anaplastic tumors. Further, complete surgical resection may
improve survival, obviate the need for irradiation, and decrease the risk of malignant transformation, the most common cause of death in low-grade astrocytoma
patients, 95,96 and 97 by reducing the tumor burden. 97
The timing of postoperative irradiation is another area of controversy. Although it is generally agreed that patients with unfavorable astrocytomas with radiographic
evidence of tumor growth, intractable seizures, progressive neurologic impairment, or malignant transformation of the tumor should undergo radiotherapy, this
treatment is commonly deferred in patients with well-controlled seizures who present with asymptomatic, indolent tumors. Proponents of this approach argue that with
CT and MRI, the disease is diagnosed much earlier in its natural history than in the past and that it is unclear whether early irradiation provides an outcome
advantage over delayed irradiation, can delay or prevent tumor dedifferentiation, or whether radiation therapy even alters the prognosis. 92
This issue was clarified in a randomized trial conducted by the EORTC and British Medical Research Council Brain Tumor Working Party. Patients with low-grade
astrocytomas (65%), oligodendrogliomas (25%), or mixed tumors (10%) were randomized to receive immediate postoperative irradiation to a dose of 54 Gy or no
further treatment until neurologic and CT scan evidence of disease progression. Among those in the control arm, 65% of patients received subsequent radiotherapy,
19% underwent surgery, chemotherapy, or both, and the remainder received only supportive care. A preliminary analysis of the study demonstrated that although

immediate irradiation improved the 5-year progression-free survival (44% vs. 37%, P = .02), there was no improvement in overall 5-year survival (63% vs. 66%). 98 The
outcome of patients with astrocytomas strongly correlates with the proliferative potential of the tumor as measured by bromodeoxyuridine (BUdR) and Ki67. The use of
immunohistochemical and molecular markers may provide an opportunity for earlier intervention and improvement in the outcome for the prognostically more
unfavorable subsets of patients.
Because radiotherapy is likely to lead to unacceptable sequelae in children younger than 3 to 5 years of age, treatment in this age group is postponed for as long as
possible, provided that no significant neurologic deficits and no neuroimaging changes indicative of rapid tumor progression are present. Management decisions are
also individualized in older children with incompletely resected astrocytomas who, compared with adults, have a better prognosis, a less pronounced survival
improvement with postoperative irradiation, and a greater risk of late radiation sequelae. 93
Limited radiation fields are used in the treatment of low-grade astrocytomas. The lesion defined by CT scan is encompassed with a 2-cm margin of normal tissue,
whereas the T2-weighted MRI abnormality, which tends to be larger than the CT-defined lesion is given a margin of 1 to 2 cm. Complex treatment planning should be
used whenever appropriate to minimize the risk of long-term sequelae. The standard dose is 54 Gy, administered using daily fractions of 1.8 to 2.0 Gy. The dose is
reduced to 50.4 Gy for children younger than 5 years of age.
Two studies indicate that higher radiation doses do not improve the outcome (at least at 5 years) and suggest that lower doses may be preferable. In a trial conducted
by the EORTC, patients were randomized to receive 45 Gy in 25 fractions or 59.4 Gy in 33 fractions. No difference in survival was observed between the two dose
levels. The 5-year survival rates were 58% for 45 Gy and 59% for 59.4 Gy. Progression-free rates were also similar (47% vs. 50%). Minimal surgery, poor neurologic
status, large tumors, advanced age, and unfavorable histologic features were adverse prognostic factors. 99 Similarly, a combined North Central Cancer Treatment
Group, RTOG, and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group trial randomized adult patients with supratentorial astrocytomas to receive 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions or 64.8
Gy in 36 fractions. As in the EORTC study, the 5-year survival rates were similar for the two dose levels studied, 73% for 50.4 Gy and 68% for 64.8 Gy ( P = .57). Age
40 or older and astrocytoma-dominant histology were poor prognostic features. 100 An increase in functional sequelae 101 and radiation necrosis 100 was observed in
patients treated in the high dose arms of these studies.
There have been few studies evaluating combined chemotherapy and radiation therapy for low-grade astrocytomas. In a Southwest Oncology Group trial, adult
patients with incompletely excised low-grade gliomas were randomized to receive radiation therapy alone or radiation therapy and CCNU. The median survival time
for all patients was 4.45 years with no difference between the two treatment arms. 102 A trial by the RTOG is studying whether the addition of PCV to radiotherapy
improves the outcome over radiotherapy alone.
Levin and coworkers103 treated 22 adult patients with contrast-enhancing astrocytomas with the halopyrimidine analogue BUdR and radiation therapy. BUdR was
given in weekly 96-hour infusions throughout the course of irradiation. This was followed by 1 year of PCV chemotherapy. The estimated 6-year progression-free and
overall survival rates were 63% and 79%, respectively, comparing favorably with survival rates for enhancing low-grade gliomas reported by others. 97 These results
require further confirmation.
Malignant Gliomas
Prospective clinical trials conducted by the Brain Tumor Cooperative Group provided seminal evidence supporting the efficacy of radiation therapy in the treatment of
malignant gliomas. The Brain Tumor Cooperative Group trial demonstrated a significant survival advantage for patients who received radiotherapy alone or with
BCNU, as compared with those treated with resection and supportive care or with BCNU alone. The median survival time for patients receiving supportive care alone
was 14 weeks, whereas those treated with radiation therapy had a median survival time of 36 weeks ( P = .001).104 Patients with anaplastic astrocytomas and
glioblastoma multiforme were treated to a dose of 60 Gy in single daily fractions of 1.8 to 2.0 Gy, five times per week. With this schedule, 25% of patients with
glioblastoma multiforme and 50% of those with anaplastic astrocytoma exhibit a significant radiographic response by the completion of radiation therapy. Only 5% of
patients have a complete tumor response, and a delayed response after irradiation is uncommon. 105
Partial brain fields (also called limited field), defined by the extent of tumor on neuroimaging studies, are used for the treatment of malignant gliomas. 106 The target
volume is defined as a 2- to 3-cm margin of tissue surrounding the perimeter of the CT- and MRI-defined contrast-enhancing lesion. RTOG protocols use a shrinking
field approach. Initially, the treatment volume includes the contrast-enhancing lesion and surrounding edema on the preoperative CT or MRI study with a 2-cm margin.
Subsequently (after 46 Gy of a 60-Gy course), the target volume is reduced to include the enhancing lesion only (without edema) with a 2.5-cm margin.
With conventional radiation therapy the median survival time for patients with anaplastic astrocytoma is 36 months, and the 3-year survival rate is approximately
55%.107 In contrast, the median survival time for patients with glioblastoma multiforme is 10 months, whereas the 3-year survival rate is only 6%. 106 The response of
malignant gliomas to standard radiation therapy techniques is limited by their striking inherent radioresistance and the radiosensitivity of the surrounding normal brain
tissue. Thus, research in the treatment of malignant gliomas has been directed at improving the efficacy of radiotherapy. In addition to pursuing more effective
chemotherapy programs (see Chemotherapy section), areas of investigation have included the use of chemical modifiers of the radiation response, altered
fractionation schemes, dose escalation with interstitial brachytherapy, radiosurgery and three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy, and the use of heavy particle
irradiation.
Two different classes of radiation-sensitizing agents have been investigated in malignant gliomas. The combination of the hypoxic cell radiation sensitizer,
misonidazole, and radiation was compared with radiation alone in ten randomized trials. No survival improvement was observed in any of the dose-fractionation or
drug schedules tested. 108 In addition, two halopyrimidine analogues, BUdR 103,109,110 and iododeoxyuridine, 111 have been tested. In a phase II study conducted by the
Northern California Oncology Group, patients with malignant gliomas received BUdR in six weekly 96-hour infusions during the course of radiation therapy. This was
followed by 1 year of PCV chemotherapy. The median survival times for patients with glioblastoma multiforme and anaplastic astrocytoma were 64 and 272 weeks,
respectively.103,109 Compared with historical controls, the survival of patients with anaplastic astrocytoma using this regimen was particularly encouraging. Based on
these results, a randomized trial comparing radiotherapy alone or with BUdR plus PCV chemotherapy in patients with anaplastic astrocytoma was conducted by the
RTOG, North Central Cancer Treatment Group, and Southwest Oncology Group. Enrollment into the study was discontinued before it reached its full accrual when it
was estimated that there would be no difference between the two treatment arms.110
Hyperfractionated irradiation is the use of two or more treatments per day with fraction sizes smaller than conventional dose fractions to deliver a higher dose in the
same overall treatment time as conventionally fractionated therapy. With hyperfractionation, tumor control probabilities should improve without increasing the risk of
late complications. Further, with a 6-hour interval between doses, there is greater probability that rapidly proliferating tumor cells will be irradiated during more
radiosensitive phases of the cell cycle and become self-sensitized by redistribution. Target cells for late sequelae proliferate slowly, and, therefore, for these tissues
little redistribution or self-sensitization occurs.
The RTOG conducted a randomized phase II dose-escalation study in which patients were given 64.8, 72.0, 76.8, or 81.6 Gy in 1.2-Gy twice-daily fractions. Patients
receiving 72 Gy had the longest median survival time, and no further improvement in outcome was observed at the higher dose levels. 112 A randomized trial
comparing 72-Gy hyperfractionated irradiation with conventionally fractionated 60-Gy radiotherapy (BCNU given in both arms) was subsequently conducted by the
RTOG. The median survival times for patients with glioblastoma multiforme were similar (10.2 months with hyperfractionation and 11.2 months with conventional
fractionation). Likewise, for patients with anaplastic astrocytoma, the median survival was 44 months with hyperfractionation and 50 months with conventional
fractionation ( P = .81).113
Another fractionation option, accelerated fractionation, attempts to reduce the overall treatment time by giving conventional sized dose fractions two or three times
daily. This treatment schedule may improve the therapeutic ratio by reducing the opportunity for tumor cell repopulation during treatment, thereby increasing the
probability of tumor control for a given dose level. Several trials using accelerated regimens have been conducted, but none has shown a survival benefit over
conventional irradiation. 114 These studies indicated that although rapid regeneration does not appear to explain the radioresistance of malignant gliomas, the overall
treatment time can be shortened. Altered fractionation schedules also provide an opportunity to integrate chemosensitizers and hypoxic cell sensitizers in a novel
fashion. Trials applying this approach, however, have yet to demonstrate a benefit. 115 On the other hand, the use of accelerated fractionation and other short-course
fractionation schemes may be especially appropriate in patients with relatively short survival expectancies.
Most gliomas are localized to a single area of the brain, 62,63 and they should be controllable if sufficiently high radiation doses can be delivered without damaging the
surrounding normal brain tissue. One approach to augmenting the radiation dose is with interstitial brachytherapy. Iodine 125 and iridium 192 sources have been

used in clinical practice, and stereotactic techniques have been devised for the placement of afterloading catheters that are removed after the prescribed dose has
been accrued. Well-circumscribed, peripheral, solitary supratentorial lesions measuring as large as 5 cm are best suited for implantation. Further, candidates must
have good neurologic function and a KPS of at least 70. Based on these criteria, approximately one-third of patients with newly diagnosed malignant gliomas are
candidates for this procedure. 116
Several phase II studies have demonstrated survival improvements in patients with glioblastoma multiforme when external irradiation is combined with brachytherapy.
Gutin and coworkers evaluated brachytherapy as an adjunct to external irradiation and chemotherapy in patients with newly diagnosed supratentorial malignant
gliomas. 117 Patients received involved field external irradiation to 60 Gy with concomitant hydroxyurea (300 mg/m 2 orally every other day) followed by an iodine 125
implant to deliver an additional minimum tumor dose of 50 to 60 Gy. Following removal of the implants, they were given PCV chemotherapy every 6 to 8 weeks for 1
year. Although the median survival time of patients with glioblastoma multiforme (22 months) compared favorably with that of historical controls, there was no
apparent gain observed in performing implantation at diagnosis in patients with anaplastic gliomas (median survival time, 39 months). Loeffler and associates reported
the outcome of 35 patients with glioblastoma multiforme who underwent partial brain external irradiation (59.4 Gy in 33 fractions) followed by an additional 50 Gy
given by interstitial implantation. 118 Survival rates at 1 and 2 years were 87% and 57%, respectively, for patients receiving brachytherapy compared with 40% and
12%, respectively, for a control group matched by radiographic and patient characteristics ( P >.001). Reoperation for brachytherapy-induced symptomatic radiation
injury is required in approximately 40% of patients. 117,118
The Brain Tumor Cooperative Group compared interstitial implantation (60 Gy at 10 Gy/d) preceding external irradiation (60.2 Gy at 1.72 Gy per fraction) and BCNU
with external irradiation and BCNU alone in a randomized trial. Implanted patients experienced improvement in median survival (16 months vs. 13 months) and
18-month survival (47% vs. 32%) compared with those who did not receive brachytherapy. 119 However, in another randomized trial, Laperriere and colleagues found
no difference in outcome in patients randomized to receive external beam irradiation alone to 50 Gy (median survival, 14 months) or external beam irradiation and an
iodine 125 implant delivering a minimum tumor dose of 60 Gy (13 months). 120 A randomized trial testing the addition of interstitial microwave hyperthermia to the
brachytherapy boost after external irradiation in newly diagnosed patients with glioblastoma multiforme was conducted at the UCSF. Median survival was 85 weeks
versus 76 weeks and the 2-year survival was 31% versus 15%, favoring patients receiving hyperthermia compared with those treated with external beam irradiation
and brachytherapy alone (P = .045 and P = .02, respectively). 121 Brachytherapy has also been shown to improve the survival and quality of life of patients with
recurrent malignant gliomas who meet the criteria of implantation. 122
Stereotactic radiosurgery has also been used to augment the dose of external beam irradiation in initial treatment of patients with malignant gliomas. Shrieve and
colleagues 123 used radiosurgery as a boost after standard external beam irradiation (59.4 Gy) in 78 patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme. Patients
with discrete, geometrically spherical lesions measuring 4 cm or less in diameter and a KPS of 70 or higher were selected for radiosurgery. The median minimum
tumor dose was 12 Gy. The median survival was 20 months, and the 1- and 2-year survival rates were 88% and 36%, respectively. Similar to brachytherapy, 50% of
the patients required reoperation for symptomatic radiation necrosis or recurrent tumor. Based on tumor size, geometry and functional status guidelines proposed for
radiosurgery, only 12% of patients with malignant gliomas met the criteria for radiosurgery. The median survival time for radiosurgery-eligible glioblastoma multiforme
patients was 12.5 months, compared with 10.5 months for ineligible patients ( P = .07).124 A comparison of these data with those cited previously suggests that for
glioblastoma multiforme a survival advantage of approximately 7 months is conferred when radiosurgery is actually given. Unfortunately, the benefit of radiosurgery
diminishes when broader selection criteria are used. 125
Radiosurgery may also be used to retreat patients with small previously irradiated tumors. In one series the median survival time of 86 patients with recurrent
glioblastoma multiforme was 10 months from the time of radiosurgery, similar to the published experience for brachytherapy at recurrence. 126,127
Three-dimensional conformal photon radiation therapy is a mode of treatment planning and delivery designed to enhance the conformation of the radiation dose to the
target volume, while maximally restricting the dose delivered to the normal tissue outside the treatment volume. Conformal treatment planning techniques when
applied to cerebral tumors have permitted a 30% to 50% reduction in the volume of normal brain tissue irradiated to high doses. 128 This new approach to treatment
planning may not only decrease the risk of normal tissue injury, but also allow higher than traditional radiation doses to be safely administered to patients with
malignant gliomas. In an ongoing study at the University of Michigan, doses as high as 80 Gy have been administered using three-dimensional techniques, and
escalation to higher dose levels is planned. 129 Fitzek and colleagues used conformal techniques to plan combined treatment with photons and proton beams using an
accelerated fractionation regimen to escalate the tumor dose to 90 cobalt gray equivalent (CGE). Twenty-three patients were treated with this approach. The median
survival time was 20 months (a 5- to 11-month improvement compared with patients with comparable risk factors treated with conventional radiotherapy) and the 2and 3-year actuarial survival rates were 34% and 18%, respectively. Tumor regrowth, demonstrated by histologic tissue examination, occurred most commonly in
areas that received 70 CGE or less, whereas tumor was found in the 90 CGE volume in only one case. 130
CHEMOTHERAPY
The era of controlled clinical trials for malignant astrocytomas began with the inception of the Brain Tumor Study Group in 1967. The European Organization for
Research on Treatment of Cancer then established a comparable group. In addition, other national and regional cooperative groups have conducted controlled
chemotherapy trials. Table 43.2-12 and Table 43.2-13 103,131,132 and 133 summarize selected data from some of these groups. Differences in reports are sometimes
confusing, for instance, some groups report survival or time to tumor progression (TTP) from initiation of therapy, whereas others use the original surgery date for
untreated patients. Some groups define histologic groups and separate glioblastoma multiforme from anaplastic astrocytoma, and others combine the two groups
under the heading of malignant glioma. For more detail, see a published review of chemotherapy for gliomas in the 1990s. 134
In addition to histology, other factors influence the likelihood and duration of response. Major known factors are age, performance status, and extent of surgical
resection at onset of therapy. For instance, younger patients are more likely to respond and for a longer period; better performance status patients do best; and
patients who have more extensive surgical resection do better than those who do not have surgery or who have biopsy only. 80,135
With consideration for these covariates, it is still clear that adjuvant chemotherapy after surgery and radiation therapy for glioblastoma and anaplastic astrocytomas
increases both TTP and survival, more so for the patients with anaplastic gliomas than for glioblastoma. There is less precise information with respect to response
because of differing criteria used by the various groups. However, most investigators agree on the definition of deterioration or tumor progression: TTP and survival
are more universal measures for controlled clinical trials. TTP is a more pure measure of efficacy, because at time of initial progression, many patients receive other
forms of therapy. Survival, however, is a better measure of the social usefulness of the life attained by the therapy.
Clinical trials have demonstrated the efficacy of a number of drugs when combined with irradiation as adjuvant therapy for patients with glioblastoma multiforme and
anaplastic astrocytoma. Table 43.2-15 summarizes some of the trials of adjuvant chemotherapy for glioblastoma. 126,128,131,136,137,138,139,140,141,142,143,144,145,146,147,148 and 149
The data are disappointing in that evidence-based survival gains for adjuvant chemotherapy have not occurred over the past 25 years. Chemotherapy appears to
benefit modestly those patients that are in the 25th percentile of survivors. This is reasonable, because in vitro tumor drug-sensitivity assays suggest that
approximately 60% of patients are resistant to the cytotoxic anticancer drugs used in those studies. 150,151 From Table 43.2-15 it would appear that nitrosourea-based
drug combinations may be modestly superior to monotherapy 131,132,149 in that the 25% survival for BCNU is 71 weeks, whereas it is 91 to 120 weeks for drug
combinations.
For anaplastic astrocytoma and other anaplastic gliomas, the benefits of combination chemotherapy appear to be greater and better accepted. The first study to open
this door was the randomized study of postradiation BCNU to the PCV combination. In that study the survival at the 50th percentile was 157 weeks for PCV compared
with only 82 weeks for BCNU-treated patients ( P = .009). Even better was the 25th percentile survival, which was greater than 7.7 years for PCV patients compared
with 4.1 years for BCNU patients. Jeremic and coauthors found similar results with their combination of CCNU, procarbazine, and vincristine. 132 The study with
bromodeoxyuridine together with irradiation and then followed by PCV appears similar for anaplastic astrocytoma patients in whom the median survival is actually
higher (4 years vs. 3 years), although it offers no advantage for glioblastoma patients. 103,109 Another nitrosourea combination, 6-thioguanine and BCNU, appears to be
at least as active against anaplastic astrocytoma (and other anaplastic gliomas) with an anticipated median survival of more than 5 years. 149
More approaches need to be considered to improve the results cited in Table 43.2-15 and Table 43.2-16. The status of phase II chemotherapy trials is summarized in
Table 43.2-17. These studies are disappointing and show that response rate (response plus stable disease) does not correlate with durability of response. Table
43.2-17 67,128,145,152,153,154,155,156,157,158,159,160,161,162,163,164,165,166,167,168,169,170,171,172,173,174,175,176,177,178,179 and 180 shows that even though the number of patients benefiting from
chemotherapy is high in some studies, nevertheless, among the response and stable tumor patients, the duration of benefit has shown only modest gains during the

last decade. This failure of chemotherapy is probably a function of de novo and emergent resistance of tumor cell subclones. It is disappointing that drugs designed
specifically for gliomas, such as diaziquone and spiromustine, were only mediocre agents in the clinic. 158,159 and 160,162

TABLE 43.2-16. Survival for Adult Anaplastic Glioma Patients with Karnofsky Performance Scores Greater Than or Equal to 60 Treated on Protocols Published Since
1990

TABLE 43.2-17. Chemotherapy of Recurrent and Progressive Supratentorial Astrocytomas

The use of the combination of polyamine inhibitors for anaplastic astrocytomas was somewhat encouraging, and one of the authors has spent many years in pursuit of
better drug combinations with little positive gain to date. Alpha-difluoromethyl ornithine (eflornithine; DFMO) has been studied alone, 181 with
methyl-bisguanylhydrazone, 175 with BCNU,174 and most recently with PCV (glioblastoma multiforme [GBM] study submitted). As a single agent, DFMO appears to have
similar activity to the DFMO–methyl-bisguanylhydrazone combination. In both instances, the median time to progression (MTP) for recurrent anaplastic gliomas
achieving response and stable disease was almost 1 year. The difference in response rates (72% vs. 46%) may reflect too lenient entry requirements for the DFMO
patients and a subsequent high number of patients who went off therapy before the first evaluation at 8 weeks. 182
It has long been known that some alkylating agents such as the nitrosoureas have their DNA damage repaired by an alkyltransferase. Tumors with high
alkyltransferase levels are able to repair nitrosourea-inflicted DNA damage and are thus considered resistant to the chemotherapy. This can reflect itself in decreased
survival. 183,184 We have conducted some uncontrolled phase II studies in an attempt to overcome tumor resistance to nitrosoureas. In one study, 6-thioguanine,
dibromodulcitol, and procarbazine were given before CCNU to enhance tumor cell kill by interfering with DNA repair. 176 The results were dramatic for the anaplastic
gliomas, when 95% of patients who had failed radiation therapy responded or stabilized for an MTP of 15 months, and 25% did not fail until 33 months; 61% of
glioblastoma patients with response or stable disease had an MTP of 9.3 months. Of those who failed earlier nitrosourea therapies, 38% of anaplastic glioma patients
and 58% of glioblastoma patients benefited, with MTPs of 10.6 and 5.1 months, respectively. Using a modification of this protocol, we combined 6-thioguanine,
procarbazine, CCNU, and hydroxyurea and found that in the anaplastic glioma group, 23% of patients had a partial response and 53% had stable disease. This
included 77% of 30 patients who had not received prior chemotherapy and 76% of 17 who had undergone previous chemotherapy. The median time to disease
progression was 50 weeks for patients responding who had not undergone previous chemotherapy and 25 weeks for those who had undergone previous
chemotherapy. More careful controlled studies with drugs that block alkyltransferase levels are indicated, but expectations should not be too high as these early data
remain discouraging.
Intravenous cisplatin and carboplatin have shown only modest activity with respect to TTP, although response and stable rates appear high. 163,185 This may reflect
poor tumor and adjacent brain penetration of these drugs and their inability to kill tumor cells at a distance from the main tumor mass. Compounding this
pharmacokinetic disadvantage is recent experimental data in rodent tumors that show that dexamethasone can reduce cisplatin penetration into the brain adjacent to
tumor where infiltrative tumor cells reside. 186
Paclitaxel studies have shown acceptable toxicity but only modest antitumor activity in the treatment of recurrent malignant gliomas. Against recurrent anaplastic
astrocytoma, Chamberlain and Kormanik found a remarkable 80% response and stabilization rate for a median of 7.5 months. 187 Experience with paclitaxel was
summarized in a review article where it was shown to have modest activity. 188 Evaluation of paclitaxel has been complicated by accelerated plasma clearance in
patients on anticonvulsants. 189
The newest alkylating agent to be approved by the European and American regulatory authorities is temozolomide. It has been approved for anaplastic astrocytoma in
the United States and also for glioblastoma multiforme in Europe. The drug has been shown to be modestly active in glioblastoma and moderately active against
anaplastic astrocytoma. 190,191 Temozolomide is oral, better tolerated than procarbazine by patients, and has a predictable and short nadir period. These features make
it a popular choice for drug combination regimens. Currently, trials have been completed or are underway to evaluate temozolomide with interferon-a, cis-retinoic acid,
BCNU, and Marimastat to name a few trials.
Betaseron, an interferon-b, attained 50% response and stable rates in a cooperative study; however, the duration of benefit is low, with MTPs of 16 to 18 weeks. 165
Tamoxifen, an antiestrogen with the ability to reduce protein kinase C levels and possibly interfere with angiogenesis, has taken on almost cult status as a brain tumor
agent. 192,193,194 and 195
Autologous bone marrow transplantation has had few practitioners, generally because of a low rate of observed complete responses to any form of chemotherapy.
Single-agent BCNU was used years ago with no definable gains over conventional dose nitrosourea therapy. 196 Other researchers have used thiotepa 236 and
etoposide. 197,198 Although neither thiotepa nor etoposide alone has shown remarkable activity against gliomas, various combinations of the three agents are being
evaluated. 199,200 It is currently unclear whether autologous bone marrow transplantation has a place in the management of cerebral gliomas.

BRAIN STEM GLIOMAS
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Tumor involvement of the brain stem is caused by, in order of decreasing frequency, astrocytoma, glioblastoma, and ependymoma. These tumors can be primarily
central, diffuse, and infiltrative or focally infiltrative with or without an exophytic; the latter carry a better prognosis. Cranial nerve involvement can be at the nuclear
level or of the cranial nerve as it leaves the brain stem. The initial manifestations of a brain stem glioma are unilateral palsies of cranial nerves VI and VII in

approximately 90% of patients. Cranial nerve involvement is usually followed by long tract signs, such as hemiplegia, unilateral limb ataxia, ataxia of gait, paraplegia,
hemisensory syndromes, gaze disorders, and, occasionally, hiccups. Less commonly, long tract signs precede the cranial nerve abnormalities; this is more likely with
confined central intrinsic lesions.
If the tumor is a well differentiated or an anaplastic astrocytoma, it is likely to involve the midbrain and produce hydrocephalus, vomiting, drowsiness, and cerebellar
signs; if the tumor is a glioblastoma, it more often involves the medulla. Children with glioblastoma characteristically have a rapidly progressive course and are likely
to have deficits in cranial nerves VI, VII, IX, and X, and dysarthria, personality change, and head tilt. Unlike expansive posterior fossa tumors, headache, vomiting,
and papilledema occur late.
As a group, the prognosis is poor, with 5-year survival rates varying between 0% and 38% and a median survival of less than 1 year in most series. 201,202 and 203 Certain
patients do better than others. For instance, patients with type II tumors do better than those with infiltrative type I tumors. Moderately anaplastic exophytic tumors do
better than higher grade anaplastic tumors. Landolfi and others reported a small series of 19 brain stem glioma patients between 17 and 70 years of age with a
median survival of 54 months. 204 In their group were 2 tectal, 4 cervicomedullary, and 13 pontine gliomas; three pontine tumors had an exophytic component.
Surprisingly, only 12 were treated initially with radiotherapy and 3 were treated at recurrence.
SURGERY
Modern imaging of the CNS with MRI has improved the capability for definitive diagnosis of brain stem tumors. Lesions previously difficult to distinguish from brain
stem glioma (e.g., clivus tumors, foramen magnum meningiomas, multiple sclerosis, occult arteriovenous malformations, and brain stem abscesses) usually can now
be excluded. Still, biopsy of brain stem gliomas for confirmation of the diagnosis and for definite tumor grading should be performed when possible. Biopsy of brain
stem gliomas accessible through the floor of the fourth ventricle or presenting on the lateral surface of the pons can be accomplished safely, and associated
symptomatic cysts can be drained. Attempt at complete resection of these tumors is contraindicated. Stereotactic needle biopsy of brain stem gliomas using CT and
MRI guidance seems to have a low complication rate, so this method is being used increasingly, with the consequence that fewer patients are being treated without a
tissue diagnosis. 205
RADIATION THERAPY
Radiation therapy, the primary treatment for brain stem tumors, improves survival and can stabilize or reverse neurologic dysfunction in 75% to 90% of patients. 203
Traditionally, brain stem gliomas have been treated with doses of 54 Gy, administered in daily fractions of 1.8 Gy, through parallel opposed portals with the tumor
dose calculated at the midline on the central axis of the beam. According to a multiinstitutional survey by Freeman and Suissa, 202 the 1-, 2-, and 5-year survival rates
of children treated with conventional radiation therapy techniques were 50%, 29%, and 23%, respectively.
Because of the relatively poor results obtained with conventional radiation dose-fractionation schedules and the observation that these tumors recur locally,
hyperfractionated irradiation, designed to deliver higher tumor doses, was evaluated by several investigators. 206,207,208 and 209 Early reports demonstrating consistent,
although modest, improvements in outcome have been observed when patients treated with hyperfractionation regimens of up to doses of 70.2 to 72.0 Gy (1.0 to 1.17
Gy twice daily) were compared with historical control patients treated with conventional or low-dose hyperfractionated irradiation. 250,253 There was no outcome
improvement when the dose was increased to 75.6 Gy and 78 Gy, 208 but considerable morbidity was observed at these higher dose levels. 210 The Pediatric Oncology
Group (POG) conducted a dose-escalation trial of 66.0, 70.2, and 75.6 Gy in twice-daily fractions of 1.1, 1.17, and 1.26 Gy, respectively, in children with diffuse brain
stem gliomas. No difference in the median time to progression (7 to 8 months) and median survival time (10 months) between the three dose schedules was found.
The highest dose was associated with steroid dependency in 62% of patients and a 45% incidence of intralesional necrosis. 209 Thus, the 70.2-Gy dose level was
considered to have the best therapeutic ratio, and was tested by POG in a randomized trial comparing hyperfractionated radiotherapy with 54 Gy given with
conventional fractionation. Children in both treatment arms received cisplatin during radiotherapy. 209 Hyperfractionation did not improve event-free survival ( P = .96)
or overall survival ( P = .65) over that of the conventional dose fractionation regimen. For patients receiving the conventional fractionation regimen, the median time to
progression was 6 months, the median survival time was 8.5 months, and the 1- and 2- year survival rates were 30.9% and 7.1%, respectively. For those receiving the
hyperfractionated irradiation regimen, the median time to progression was 5 months, the median survival time was 8 months, and the 1- and 2- year survival rates
were 27% and 6.7%, respectively.211
Based on the results of the POG trial, the current standard for the treatment of diffuse intrinsic brain stem gliomas consists of conventionally fractionated radiotherapy
given to a dose of 54.0 to 59.4 Gy. The availability of MRI and three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy treatment planning approaches offers improved target
definition and allows the high-dose radiation volume to be better tailored to the contour of the lesion. The irradiated volume includes a margin of normal tissue of
approximately 2 cm around the tumor. Smaller margins may be used for more focal lesions. 210 Dorsal exophytic and cervicomedullary tumors that are completely
resected do not require routine postoperative irradiation. 210
CHEMOTHERAPY
As with cerebral astrocytomas, chemotherapy is primarily nitrosourea based. 212 The use of chemotherapy, adjuvant to irradiation, has been infrequent. The Children's
Cancer Group (CCG) randomly compared radiation therapy with radiation therapy followed by CCNU, PCV, and prednisone. 170 The mean survival was 11 months, and
there was no difference between the two groups. In another trial, 5-fluorouracil and CCNU before radiation therapy and hydroxyurea and misonidazole during
radiation therapy were evaluated 258; in that study, TTP (32 weeks) and survival (44 weeks) were not better than the initial CCG study. A pilot study evaluating oral
etoposide during and after radiotherapy was closed to accrual by the CCG; analysis of the data has not yet been reported.
For recurrent or progressive brain stem gliomas, few therapies have been evaluated. 213 Some benefit has been demonstrated, but the extent of benefit has not been
well established. In one study, 5-fluorouracil, CCNU, hydroxyurea, and 6-mercaptopurine were used to treat children and adults with recurrent or progressive brain
stem gliomas.214 Sixty-nine percent of 13 patients had response or stabilization, with a relapse-free survival of 25 weeks; the overall survival was 27 weeks. This
finding is somewhat worse than would be expected for supratentorial gliomas. These authors conducted a phase II study of recurrent malignant gliomas with a
combination of BCNU and DFMO. In that study, three of five patients benefited, with the three continuing to benefit at 1 to 3 years. 174 Although not curative, some of
these chemotherapeutic leads should be exploited.

CEREBELLAR ASTROCYTOMAS
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Astrocytomas arising in the cerebellum are considered separately, because their prognosis is consistently better than astrocytomas arising in the cerebrum or brain
stem. These tumors, which occur most often during the first two decades of life, arise in the vermis or more laterally in a cerebellar hemisphere. Cerebellar
astrocytomas usually are well circumscribed; they can be cystic, solid, or an admixture of polycystic and solid.
Histologically, most astrocytomas are low grade and lack features commonly associated with anaplasia; many are pilocytic in appearance and, histologically, some
are juvenile pilocytic astrocytomas. In a series on 451 children reported from the Hospital for Sick Children of Toronto, cerebellar astrocytomas accounted for 25% of
all posterior fossa tumors; 99 of 111 (89%) of the cerebellar astrocytomas were low grade, with nearly all vermian in origin. 215 Approximately 75% of these tumors are
located only in the cerebellum, with the remainder involving the brain stem as well. 216
Because most of these tumors arise in the vermis, the clinical presentation is similar to medulloblastoma, with truncal ataxia, headache, nausea and vomiting, and in
the young, split cranial sutures and head enlargement from increased intracranial pressure.
SURGERY
Cystic cerebellar astrocytomas are exposed through a posterior fossa craniectomy. The cyst is located with ultrasound, cannulated, and then exposed by an incision
through the cerebellar folia. Self-retaining retractors are placed into the cyst and then, with the aid of the operating microscope, the cyst is examined and the vascular,

firm mural module identified, dissected, and removed. The nonneoplastic cyst wall is not excised.
Solid cerebellar astrocytomas are separated carefully from surrounding cerebellar white matter, again using the improved visualization offered by the operating
microscope. The texture and appearance of the tumor are usually distinct and the separation from white matter usually is not difficult, so the only barrier to complete
resection becomes deep penetration of the tumor into the dentate nucleus, cerebellar peduncles, or brain stem.
RADIATION THERAPY
See the discussion in the section on Cerebral Astrocytomas; the same principles apply. Completely resected cerebellar astrocytomas do not require postoperative
radiation therapy. The remainder receive total doses of 50 to 60 Gy, depending on the histologic features and the age of the patient.
CHEMOTHERAPY
Because surgery alone or surgery and irradiation is often curative, chemotherapy has been limited to cases of recurrence or if the tumor is histologically highly
anaplastic. For these tumors, the authors' approach has been to use nitrosourea-based therapies.
Chemotherapy adjuvant to surgery and radiation has not been commonly advocated for these tumors. The authors' experience is anecdotal ( Table 43.2-18), but
appears consistent with chemotherapy results for cerebral gliomas. 217 All patients received a nitrosourea; however, the chemotherapy combinations varied depending
on which program was being used at the time for supratentorial gliomas. For patients at recurrence, chemotherapy provided palliation, with a median TTP of 24 weeks
and 25% of patients surviving longer than 32 months. 217 As with the adjuvant chemotherapy patients, all were treated on a protocol being used at the time for cerebral
gliomas. Among these patients, 5 of 18 (28%) developed metastases to the leptomeninges (three of five) or intracranial extracerebellar parenchymal sites (two of
five). All leptomeningeal disseminations occurred in conjunction with locoregional recurrences. In many patients, therefore, combined systemic and intraventricular
therapy may be needed for tumor control.

TABLE 43.2-18. Chemotherapy for Recurrent Cerebellar Astrocytomas

Other chemotherapy agents have been used on an ad hoc basis to treat recurrent cerebellar gliomas primarily in children. One report cited the palliative potential of
oral etoposide in the treatment of juvenile pilocytic astrocytoma with 50% (6 of 12) of responding and stable patients achieving a median 7 months' progression-free
survival. 218 It is safe to assume that temozolomide will be used alone and in combination for recurrent cerebellar gliomas in the future.

OPTIC, CHIASMAL, AND HYPOTHALAMIC GLIOMAS
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Nearly all gliomas of the optic nerve and chiasm are discovered in patients before the age of 20 years, and most before the age of 10 years. 219 In some patients there
is a family kindred of neurofibromatosis. Lewis and colleagues prospectively evaluated 217 patients with neurofibromatosis and found that gliomas along the anterior
visual pathway occurred in 15% and were occasionally bilateral. 220 Sixty-seven percent of these tumors were not suspected clinically or obvious on ophthalmologic
examination.
With respect to tumor location, Housepian and associates reported that 25% involved one optic nerve, 73% the chiasm, and 3% the optic tracts. 221 In another series,
25% involved the chiasm alone, 33% the chiasm and hypothalamus, and 42% the chiasm and optic nerves or tracts. 265 Clinically, these tumors produce loss of visual
acuity (70%), strabismus and nystagmus (33%), visual field impairment (bitemporal hemianopsia, 8%), developmental delay, macrocephaly, ataxia, hemiparesis,
proptosis, and precocious puberty. Funduscopic evaluation demonstrates a range of findings from normal optic disks through venous engorgement to disk pallor due
to atrophy. Tumors involving the chiasm often grow to involve the hypothalamus, causing a diencephalic syndrome that is characterized by emaciation (especially in
children between 3 months and 2 years of age), motor overactivity, and euphoria.
Pathologically, these tumors range from primarily piloid and stellate astrocytes (most common), with or without oligodendroglia, through the gamut of malignant
astrocytomas to glioblastoma multiforme (rare). Typically, optic gliomas appear as fusiform expansions of any part of the nerve; they tend to bridge through the optic
foramen and expand as dumbbell-shaped tumors within the skull. The nerve can be infiltrated by tumor originating in the chiasm, the walls of the third ventricle, or the
hypothalamus. The tumors found in patients with neurofibromatosis often affect a single optic nerve and are grossly normal in appearance, although infiltrated by
tumor and surrounded by a fibrous stroma.
Diagnosis is best made by MRI scan and should use images in the sagittal plane. The CT scan is satisfactory for diagnosis but is not as sensitive or descriptive as the
MRI scan. The MRI also shows hypothalamic involvement more clearly.
SURGERY
Unilateral tumors of the optic nerve (as opposed to the chiasm) should be resected, particularly when there is profound vision loss or when proptosis is disfiguring. A
transcranial approach to the orbit is preferred, permitting complete resection of the tumor-infiltrated nerve from the chiasm to the globe and sparing the globe for an
optimal cosmetic effect. 222 The involved nerve is inspected through a unilateral craniotomy, and the nerve is sectioned at the chiasm. The orbit is then unroofed, and
the optic nerve's attachment to the globe is exposed and divided, allowing the tumor to be removed.
Biopsy of smaller tumors of the optic nerve, tumors involving the nerve and chiasm, and tumors of the chiasm alone must sometimes be done when radiographic
studies cannot exclude meningioma, craniopharyngioma, or other diagnoses definitively. Subtotal resection of such tumors, particularly if exophytic, can sometimes be
done for decompression before radiation or chemotherapy. 223 Resection of the chiasm with resultant blindness is never indicated.
RADIATION THERAPY
Treatment of optic nerve and chiasmal gliomas is controversial, because some patients with incomplete surgical resections have been followed for 10 to 20 years
without progression. 219 The literature suggests, however, that untreated optic gliomas, especially those involving the chiasm or extending into the hypothalamus or
optic tracts, progress locally or are fatal in 75% of patients. Tenny and coworkers found that only 21% of patients who were followed after biopsy or exploration
survived compared with 64% of those who received radiation therapy. 224 In general, optic nerve gliomas have a better prognosis than those involving the chiasm, and
tumors confined to the anterior chiasm have a better outcome than those that involve adjacent structures (posterior chiasmal tumors). 225,226 and 227

Routine postoperative irradiation is not indicated for most gliomas confined to the optic nerve. 227 In contrast, radiation therapy can prevent tumor progression, improve
disease-free survival, and stabilize or improve vision in patients with chiasmal lesions. Wong and colleagues reported that 6 of 27 (22%) chiasmal gliomas that did not
receive radiation therapy progressed locally, whereas 9 of 20 (45%) that received radiation therapy failed. 226 Three of these recurrences were seen in the adults with
extremely aggressive, nonresponsive tumors. Further, 87% of the irradiated patients who received a dose of 50 to 55 Gy were controlled compared with 55% of those
who received 46 Gy or less. Radiation therapy significantly improved the relapse-free survival but not the overall survival. Tao and colleagues concluded that
radiotherapy was effective in the majority of patients with progressive chiasmal gliomas. The 10-year progression-free and overall survival rates after radiotherapy
were 89% and 100%, respectively. Stabilization or improvement in vision was achieved in 81% of the evaluable treated patients. The authors drew attention to the fact
that the median time for a radiographic response of 50% or more was 62 months. Hypopituitarism was common after radiotherapy, underscoring the need for life-long
endocrine follow-up with appropriate replacement after treatment. 228 Jenkin and colleagues 227 found that for posterior optic gliomas irradiation was more effective in
preventing subsequent relapse than subtotal resection alone. The 10-year relapse-free survival rate was 70% for irradiated patients, compared with 41% for those
who did not receive primary radiotherapy ( P = .03). However, there was no difference in overall survival between these two patient groups due largely to the efficacy
of radiationtherapy in previously nonirradiated relapsed patients. Erkal and colleagues also reported a progression-free survival rate of 77% in children irradiated for
optic nerve and chiasmal hypothalamic gliomas. 229 The prognosis for patients with optic pathway tumors and chiasmatic hypothalamic lesions was similar. In a series
collected from the literature, local control was achieved in 154 of 189 (81%) irradiated anterior chiasmal tumors, whereas 92 of 142 (65%) posterior tumors were
controlled. Vision improved in 61 of 210 (29%) evaluable patients and remained stable in 118 of 210 (56%) patients. 225 For hypothalamic tumors, radiation therapy
produced radiographic improvement in 11 of 24 (46%) with a median progression-free survival of 70 months compared with 30 months for those patients who did not
receive radiation therapy. 230
Although some clinicians advocate deferring irradiation in asymptomatic patients or in those with lesser visual disturbance until there are signs of disease
progression, 227 others recommend that radiation therapy be given early in the course of the disease to minimize the risk of visual deterioration. 226 The radiation portals
are tailored to the tumor volume and designed to avoid irradiation of the lens of the eye. Three-dimensional conformal, intensity-modulated radiotherapy and
stereotactic radiotherapy techniques are used to minimize the dose to adjacent structures. A dose of 50 to 54 Gy in daily 1.8-Gy fractions is recommended.
CHEMOTHERAPY
The published chemotherapy trials for this group of patients represent small series. Chemotherapy has been used successfully to delay the initiation of radiation
therapy in young children. 231,232 Packer and associates treated 24 children (median age, 1.6 years) with a combination of dactinomycin and vincristine. 233 Six of the
cases involved the chiasm, eight involved the chiasm and hypothalamus, and ten involved the chiasm and visual pathways. At a median follow-up period of 4.3 years,
38% of patients had disease that progressed.
Petronio and coworkers reported on 19 infants or children with chiasmatic and hypothalamic gliomas treated with chemotherapy after diagnosis. 234 Of the 12 tumors in
which a biopsy was obtained, there were 7 juvenile pilocytic astrocytomas, 2 astrocytomas, 2 anaplastic astrocytomas, and 1 subependymal giant cell astrocytoma.
The children were between 3 months and 15 years of age when treated. The chemotherapy included one of three regimens: one with dactinomycin and vincristine;
one with the combination of BCNU, 5-fluorouracil, hydroxyurea, and 6-mercaptopurine; and 15 with the combination of 6-thioguanine, procarbazine, dibromodulcitol,
CCNU, and vincristine (BTRC 8422 protocol). Fifteen of 18 initially treated with chemotherapy responded or stabilized; the median follow-up period exceeded 1.5
years (range, 1.4 months to 5.8 years). Rodriguez and colleagues reported a series of 33 patients with hypothalamic gliomas, 230 some of whom were included in the
Petronio series. 234 Chemotherapy at presentation or recurrence was beneficial in 10 of 16 (62%) patients.
In another study, Prados and colleagues treated 42 children with low-grade gliomas who had either progressive neurologic symptoms or radiographic tumor
enlargement with a combination of 6-thioguanine, procarbazine, dibromodulcitol, CCNU, and vincristine (TPDCV). 235 In that group were 33 patients with hypothalamic
chiasmatic gliomas. Multivariate analysis demonstrated no difference between this group and those with low-grade gliomas elsewhere; for the entire group of 42
patients the median progression-free survival was 2.5 years and the 5-year median survival was 78%, reflecting the value of secondary chemotherapy regimens and
radiotherapy.

OLIGODENDROGLIOMAS
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Oligodendrogliomas have a relatively flat peak incidence between 25 and 49 years. Although they are most common (80%) in the cerebral hemispheres,
approximately 15% occur in the third or lateral ventricles or protrude into a ventricle from the thalamus. 236 Grossly, these tumors are often well demarcated, and in
20% they are cystic. They have a 10% likelihood of spreading through the CSF pathways. Like astrocytomas, they vary in malignancy. Attempts have been made to
grade oligodendrogliomas on an A through D scale 236; however, grades A through C vary little, and B and C are virtually identical with respect to survival such that
these subdivisions seem unnecessary; a designation of differentiated or highly anaplastic may be sufficient. These tumors often have both astrocytic or ependymal
elements seen at biopsy; such tumors are called mixed gliomas.
Clinically, these tumors present in the typical fashion of hemispheral astrocytomas. However, two features distinguish them from astrocytomas: the antecedent history,
averaging 7 to 8 years, tends to be longer, and seizures are more common, occurring in 70% to 90% of patients by the time of diagnosis. Provisional diagnosis may
be made by MRI or CT neuroimaging, but histologic confirmation is necessary and almost always possible. Approximately 50% of oligodendrogliomas have scattered
calcification, usually related to intrinsic blood vessels, which are evident by CT scan.
At recurrence or autopsy, approximately 60% of oligodendroglioma and most mixed oligoastrocytoma patients demonstrate histologically an anaplastic astrocytoma or
glioblastoma multiforme. This may belie a common origin of both types of tumors to the O2A progenitor cell.
SURGERY
The surgical resection of hemispheric oligodendrogliomas follows the same principles as discussed earlier for cerebral astrocytomas, with gross total removal being
the goal when this is consistent with good neurologic outcome. The margins of oligodendrogliomas can appear to be more distinct than those of astrocytomas, but
generally they are infiltrative. Because of this, surgical cure remains unlikely; but the indolent course of these tumors allows for a long progression-free interval after
an aggressive resection in some patients. Oligodendrogliomas often recur in the previous operative site. Under these circumstances, reoperation may be advisable,
particularly when followed by chemotherapy.
RADIATION THERAPY
The infrequency of oligodendrogliomas and their variable and often long prediagnosis and posttreatment natural history make it difficult to evaluate the effect of
radiation therapy in patients with differentiated oligodendrogliomas. Data from Mirk and colleagues 237 indicate that the behavior of these tumors may be more
unpredictable and their prognosis less favorable than previously believed. The problems in evaluating retrospective reports for oligodendrogliomas are similar to
those previously discussed for low-grade astrocytomas. Conclusions regarding the value of radiotherapy are contradictory, and the lack of randomized trials precludes
the statement of firm recommendations. Five-year survival rates for irradiated patients range from 36% and 83% and 10-year rates vary from 30% to 46%. In contrast,
5-year survival rates for subtotally resected, nonirradiated tumors range from 25% to 55% and 10-year rates vary from 13% to 25%. 92,93,238,239,240,241 and 241 Some
authors recommend immediate postoperative irradiation for patients with incompletely resected lesions, 238,239,240 and 241 whereas others have been unable to show that
postoperative irradiation is of benefit. 242 It has also been suggested that radiation therapy be deferred until there is evidence of tumor progression or recurrence or
that only patients with anaplastic tumors or mixed oligoastrocytomas should receive treatment. 92
Most retrospective studies comparing surgery alone with surgery and radiation therapy do not contain analyses to ensure that the distribution of patients in the two
treatment groups are comparable with respect to prognostic variables such as age, 242 completeness of resection, 237,243 neurologic signs and symptoms,239,242 and
histopathologic features. 236,239,242,243 Furthermore, treatment selection criteria are either not stated or unknown. 241 It is likely that many retrospective studies in which
the pathology material was not independently reviewed contain patients with both differentiated and anaplastic oligodendrogliomas. This has been considered to be
an important distinction because on average patients with low-grade oligodendroglioma tumors survive 9 years, as compared with 2.2 years for those with high-grade

tumors.93,236,244 Our own data compiled at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center and the University of California Brain Tumor Center (San Francisco)
found that median survival was comparable and greater than 7 years.
Although there is some controversy, most neurooncology specialists find that the outcome of patients with pure oligodendroglioma is significantly better than those
with mixed oligoastrocytomas. Shaw and colleagues found that the 5- and 10-year survival rates for patients with oligodendrogliomas were 72% and 46%,
respectively, whereas for mixed oligoastrocytomas the survival rates were 63% and 33%. 244
Taken together, the data suggest that there may be a benefit to radiation therapy for patients with incompletely resected tumors during the first 5 years after treatment,
but this effect appears to diminish over time. Gannett and colleagues found a significant improvement in survival with postoperative irradiation. Patients treated with
surgery alone had 5- and 10-year survival rates of 51% and 36%, respectively, compared to 83% and 46% for irradiated patients ( P = .032). Lindegaard and
colleagues found that radiation therapy prolonged the median survival time (38 months vs. 26.5 months, P = .039) but did not influence the overall cure rate when
given after subtotal resection, whereas it did not appear to be indicated after total resection. 241 Wallner and associates reviewed the outcome of 42 patients and
observed 5- and 10-year survival rates of 61% and 33%, respectively; relapse-free survival rates were only 33% and 25%. 240 The 10-year survival rate for patients
with pure oligodendrogliomas who received at least 45 Gy was 56% compared with 18% for nonirradiated patients ( P = .092). Wallner and coworkers concluded that
adjunctive radiation therapy increased the time to tumor recurrence and the number of long-term survivors. 240 Shaw and colleagues 244 also found a survival advantage
in irradiated patients with incompletely resected tumors who received at least 50 Gy. However, the survival differences between the irradiated and the nonirradiated
groups did not reach statistical significance. The 10-year survival rate for patients treated with subtotal resection alone was 25%, compared with 31% for those treated
with surgery and radiation therapy to at least 50 Gy. Shimizu and colleagues performed a metaanalysis on reports from the current literature and concluded that
postoperative irradiation conferred a 14% improvement in 5-year survival ( P <.01).238 The data presented in these studies suggest that more effective therapies are
needed to improve the long-term outcome of patients with oligodendrogliomas.
As in the case in low-grade astrocytomas, it is difficult to take a categorical position regarding the role of radiation therapy in the treatment of low-grade
oligodendrogliomas. 92 Some small asymptomatic (except for controlled seizures) tumors can be carefully observed, delaying surgical or radiotherapeutic intervention
until there is tumor progression or uncontrolled neurologic symptoms. If feasible, large, symptomatic or progressive tumors should be resected. Patients with
completely resected or small asymptomatic incompletely resected low-grade oligodendrogliomas can be observed, delaying radiotherapy until the time of
recurrence.92 Because of the poor long-term prognosis associated with some of these tumors and data that suggest that radiotherapy may improve survival, at least
up to 5 years, patients with large, symptomatic unresectable or incompletely resected tumors should receive radiation therapy. 92 As in the case of low-grade
astrocytomas, proliferation markers such as the MIB-1 labeling index may help to distinguish patients who require aggressive treatment from those who can be
observed.
Radiation therapy is given using fields that encompass the tumor volume with a 2-cm margin. A dose of 54 to 60 Gy is used in adults, and the dose is reduced to 50
Gy in children. PCV chemotherapy (see following Chemotherapy section) may be useful in some patients as initial treatment, as combined therapy or to reduce the
size of large tumors before beginning radiotherapy. 245,246 In the latter situation, reducing the volume of brain irradiated may decrease risk of treatment-related adverse
effects.
Patients with pure or mixed anaplastic oligodendrogliomas have a poorer outcome than those with low-grade tumors. Winger and colleagues reported median survival
times of 1.3 years and 5.3 years, respectively, for patients with mixed anaplastic oligoastrocytomas and pure anaplastic oligodendrogliomas treated with radiotherapy
and chemotherapy. 83 Shaw and coworkers found that patients with high-grade mixed oligoastrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas (based on the St. Anne-Mayo system
had similar outcomes with a median survival of 4.5 years, and 5- and 10-year survival rates of 45% and 25%, respectively. 247 Patients with pure and mixed anaplastic
oligodendrogliomas receive postoperative irradiation to a dose of 60 Gy in conventional daily fractions of 1.8 to 2.0 Gy using an approach similar to that used for
malignant gliomas. Clinical trials are currently testing whether the combination of PCV with radiotherapy improves the outcome of anaplastic lesions. 248 Others are
using high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell rescue to defer radiotherapy until there is evidence of tumor progression.
CHEMOTHERAPY
Prospective clinical chemotherapy trials of oligodendroglioma patients are underway; until they are completed and reported, we have two sources of information:
individual patients reported within trials for malignant astrocytomas and some PCV trials that led up to the randomized studies currently in progress. In those reports,
chemotherapy was limited to the treatment of recurrent, well-differentiated, and moderately anaplastic oligodendrogliomas and the primary treatment of the highly
anaplastic oligodendrogliomas with surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. Adjuvant chemotherapy following surgery and irradiation yields 58% 5-year survival
for oligodendroglioma patients, a 50% 3-year survival for anaplastic oligodendroglioma patients, and an 80% 2-year relapse-free survival for oligoastrocytoma
patients.
Table 43.2-19 summarizes the status of PCV chemotherapy for recurrent oligodendroglioma from three contemporary publications. The complete response rate was
19% for a MTP of 31 months, the partial response rate was 45% for a MTP of 14 months, and the stable disease rate was 22% for a MTP of 8 weeks. Thus, the
majority (86%) of patients treated with PCV at recurrence are expected to either respond or stabilize for a period in excess of 1 year.

TABLE 43.2-19. Status of Phase II Studies of Lomustine, Procarbazine, and Vincristine for Recurrent Oligodendroglioma and Oligoastrocytoma

For anaplastic oligodendrogliomas, Kyritsis and coworkers found a median 1.3 years relapse-free survival after chemotherapy (mostly PCV therapy). 249 For recurrent
oligoastrocytoma, the median relapse-free survival is 1.0 to 1.2 years. 249,250 To test the efficacy of this chemotherapy regimen in newly diagnosed patients, the RTOG
is coordinating an intergroup randomized trial that compares neoadjuvant intensive PCV chemotherapy followed by radiation therapy with radiation therapy alone.

EPENDYMOMA
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Ependymoma tumors arise from cells of ependymal lineage and, therefore, have a propensity for occurring in the obliterated central canal of the spinal cord, the filum
terminale, and white matter adjacent to a ventricular surface (usually a highly angulated surface). 28 Sixty percent of intracranial ependymomas are infratentorial, and
40% are supratentorial. 251 Of infratentorial sites, the fourth ventricle is the most common site. Extension into the subarachnoid space occurs in 50% of these cases,
and encasement of the medulla and upper cervical cord can occur. Of supratentorial ependymomas, 50% are primarily intraventricular, and the remainder are
parenchymal, arising from ependymal rests. Most of the intraventricular tumors arise in the lateral ventricles, and fewer (25%) occur in the third ventricle.
Ependymomas can be classified in various ways. Ependymomas are either differentiated (ependymoma or myxopapillary ependymoma) and, therefore, low-grade or,

less commonly, they are anaplastic and higher grade and more likely to disseminate through the CSF pathways.
Clinical presentations are dependent on the location of tumor. Intraventricular tumors often cause increased intracranial pressure and hydrocephalus. As a result,
headache, nausea and vomiting, papilledema, ataxia, and vertigo are found in most patients at presentation. Focal neurologic signs and symptoms are more often
seen with extraventricular supratentorial ependymomas.
Either MRI or CT scanning is sufficient to make the anatomic diagnosis before surgery. The presence of calcium in a fourth ventricular tumor is highly suggestive but
not diagnostic of an ependymoma. Surgical exploration and biopsy are essential for the selection of appropriate treatment. For anaplastic ependymomas, staging
myelography and examination of the CSF for cytologic evidence of malignancy are essential.
The inclusion of ependymoblastomas, which are known for their propensity to disseminate throughout the CNS, tends to overestimate the risk of seeding. 252,253 In a
literature review, Vanuytsel and Brada found that the overall incidence of spinal seeding was 6.9%. 254 It was 1.6% for supratentorial tumors, 9.7% for infratentorial
lesions, 8.4% for high-grade tumors, and 4.5% for low-grade lesions. No patient with high-grade supratentorial lesions developed spinal seeding, whereas 15.7% of
those with high-grade infratentorial tumors developed spinal dissemination. For low-grade tumors, 2.7% of patients with supratentorial lesions developed seeding
compared with 5.5% for those with infratentorial lesions. The incidence of spinal seeding was related directly to local tumor control, regardless of tumor grade. The
incidence of spinal dissemination was 3.3% in locally controlled patients and 9.5% in those with uncontrolled primary lesions ( P <.05).
SURGERY
Approximately one-half of hemispheric ependymomas arise from the wall of the lateral ventricle, and one-half appear to be intraparenchymal, arising perhaps from
remote fetal ependymal cell rests. 255 Hemispheric ependymomas tend to be cystic and, even when not, are often well circumscribed from surrounding brain, allowing
gross total resection. A wide craniotomy permits a transcortical exposure of the tumor through a cortical incision placed to avoid injury to vital brain tissue. The tumor
is removed using the operating microscope, and every effort is made to minimize bleeding into the ventricular cavity. At the end of the resection, the ventricular
system is gently irrigated free of blood and blood clots to prevent mechanical obstruction to CSF flow, to prevent the blockage of the CSF absorptive bed (arachnoid
granulations), and to reduce the irritation of bloody CSF to the brain.
Ependymomas arising from the floor of the fourth ventricle are approached through a wide bilateral suboccipital craniectomy and laminectomy of C-1. The tumor is
exposed by retracting the cerebellar tonsils laterally and splitting the inferior aspect of the vermis, although often a tongue of tumor is visible over the dorsal aspect of
the medulla and upper cervical spinal cord before the tonsils are retracted. The dorsal convexity of the tumor comes into view as the cerebellar vermis is divided, and
its attachment to the floor of the fourth ventricle can then be exposed progressively and evaluated. Firm attachment precludes a complete resection, as does
infiltration of the tumor into the cranial nerves of the cerebellopontine angle through the foramen of Luschka. Tumor is removed to the extent possible using
illumination and magnification afforded by the operating microscope.
There would appear to be a relation between residual ependymoma left by the surgeon and a poorer outcome after radiation therapy. 256 In ependymomas, as in most
of the gliomas, a maximal surgical resection should be carried out when possible.
RADIATION THERAPY
It is well established that postoperative irradiation improves the survival of patients with intracranial ependymomas, and 5-year survival rates with doses of 45 Gy or
more range from 40% to 87%.45 Tumor grade has been considered to be the most important determinant of tumor behavior and prognosis. The 5-year survival for
patients with low-grade tumors ranges from 60% to 80%, whereas for anaplastic ependymomas it is only 10% to 47%. 45 Most series fail to distinguish patients with
malignant ependymomas from those with ependymoblastomas that are classified as primitive neuroectodermal tumors and have an especially poor prognosis.
Analysis of these data when these lesions are excluded suggested that tumor grade may have less prognostic value. 252
The amount of normal CNS tissues to include in the treatment volume and the need for prophylactic irradiation to the entire craniospinal axis are major areas of
controversy. The differences of opinion are based on the potential for ependymomas to spread into the ventricular system and to disseminate into the spinal
subarachnoid space. In their literature review, Vanuystel and Brada found that risk of seeding was independent of whether prophylactic spinal irradiation was given. 254
For high-grade lesions, spinal dissemination occurred in 9.4% of patients receiving craniospinal irradiation and in 6.7% of those treated with local radiation therapy
only. Similarly, for low-grade tumors, spinal seeding occurred in 9.3% after craniospinal irradiation, whereas 2.2% developed seeding without prophylactic treatment.
The treatment volumes recommended for low-grade supratentorial ependymomas vary from generous local fields to fields encompassing the whole brain, whereas for
low-grade infratentorial tumors they include local fields, the whole brain with cervical spine extension, and the craniospinal axis. Wallner and coworkers reviewed the
outcome of 20 patients with supratentorial and infratentorial low-grade ependymomas treated with partial or whole brain irradiation after surgery; only 1 in 16 patients,
who was eventually found to have a local recurrence, developed spinal dissemination. 257 The 5- and 10-year survival rates for those who received more than 45 Gy
(approximately 50 Gy in most instances) were 67% and 57%, respectively. As nearly all recurrences were limited to the original primary tumor site, it was concluded
that treatment of the whole brain was unnecessary. Based on this series and data from others 253,254,258 and the greater precision in determining tumor extent currently
available through high-quality diagnostic imaging, low-grade supratentorial ependymomas are treated using partial brain fields with a dose of at least 54 Gy. Spinal
MRI and CSF evaluation are not obtained unless there is evidence of ventricular involvement or signs of subarachnoid metastases. Low-grade infratentorial
ependymomas are also treated with limited fields. The craniospinal axis is irradiated only if pretreatment CSF cytology studies reveal malignant cells or if radiographic
studies show evidence of tumor spread.
Many authors recommend inclusion of the entire craniospinal axis in the treatment of anaplastic ependymomas 257,259,260; the entire craniospinal axis should be treated,
although some recommend whole brain irradiation with an additional boost for high-grade supratentorial lesions located away from the CSF pathways, if there is no
evidence of leptomeningeal spread. 253 A dose of 54 Gy is given to the primary tumor site and 36 Gy to the remainder of the axis. If spread within the brain is
demonstrated, the entire brain receives 54 Gy. Spinal imaging studies are routinely performed, and any area of gross involvement is boosted to 50 Gy. However,
despite the apparent superiority of craniospinal irradiation in some series, 259 local recurrence is the primary pattern of failure with high-grade
ependymomas,253,257,258,261 and subarachnoid seeding is uncommon in the absence of local recurrence. 45 Furthermore, the patterns of failure are similar in patients
treated with local fields or with craniospinal axis irradiation, 253,258,260 and prophylactic treatment may not prevent spinal metastases. 253,254 Merchant and colleagues
reviewed the outcome of 28 patients with anaplastic ependymomas. 261 Twelve patients received craniospinal irradiation, 2 were treated to the whole brain, and 14
received treatment to limited fields. The actuarial 5- and 10-year survival rates were 56% and 38%, respectively. All 19 patients who failed radiotherapy had relapses
at the primary site, and one of these also developed subarachnoid dissemination. A benefit from craniospinal irradiation could not be demonstrated. Based on these
data and the findings in other reported series, craniospinal irradiation is generally not recommended for patients with anaplastic (high-grade) ependymomas unless
evidence of leptomeningeal spread is pathologically or radiographically documented. 253,258,261 Others, however, suggest that prophylactic craniospinal irradiation be
reserved for those with infratentorial high-grade lesions. 258
Because the inability to eradicate the primary tumor remains the single most important factor leading to treatment failure, 260 clinical trials are examining more
aggressive local therapies to improve local tumor control, both in low- and high-grade ependymomas. These include the use of boosts with stereotactic radiotherapy
or conformal radiotherapy techniques as well as hyperfractionated dose schedules. 258 There is no evidence thus far that the addition of chemotherapy to radiotherapy
improves the outcome.262
CHEMOTHERAPY
Because ependymomas are uncommon tumors and before MRI these tumors were difficult to assess, there are few chemotherapeutic trials. For instance, the only trial
for initial treatment of anaplastic ependymomas is one the authors started in 1984. It combined craniospinal axis irradiation with oral hydroxyurea followed by six
courses of polydrug chemotherapy TPDCV. 263 Since 1984 17 consecutive children and adults were treated. At publication 11 of 17 patients had failed with an MTP of
141 weeks; the median follow-up for the eight who had not died was 469 weeks, whereas nine patients who died had a median survival of 183 weeks.
Table 43.2-20 163,264,265,266 and 267 summarizes some published and unpublished series of chemotherapy for recurrent differentiated or anaplastic ependymomas. The
therapies range from single-agent therapies to the five-drug protocol, TPDCV. The best single agents were BCNU and dibromodulcitol, with combined response plus

stable disease rates of 75% to 78% and MTP of 13 to 16 months. 264 Results are somewhat better than those achieved for anaplastic astrocytomas. With a variety of
drug combinations the best response plus stable disease rate was 82% with an MTP of 21 months for TPDCV.

TABLE 43.2-20. Chemotherapy for Recurrent Ependymoma and Anaplastic Ependymomas

Goldwein and colleagues retrospectively analyzed 16 recurrent ependymoma patients treated with a variety of agents alone and in combination (VCR, cisplatin,
CCNU, procarbazine, VP-16, and ifosfamide). 267 Approximately 20% of patient trials led to a partial response or stable disease (more common 7:1), for an
approximate median of 6 to 10 months.
Gaynon and associates of the CCG used carboplatin every 4 weeks and found a response and stable disease rate of 28% (4 in 14) with a duration of 6+, 17+, 12, and
15 months.266 Those who did not receive prior cisplatin were more likely to respond to carboplatin. Bertolone and coworkers evaluated cisplatin and found 6 of 8
(75%) benefiting, with an MTP of 3.8 months. 163 Ettinger and colleagues, also of the CCG, used diaziquone on a 5-day schedule every 3 weeks in 12 children with
recurrent or metastatic disease. One response more than 35 months was reported. 265
If the 87 patients cited in the studies presented in Table 43.2-20 are weighted for the number of patients in each trial, the mean TTP was 16 months.

MENINGIOMAS
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Meningiomas arise from arachnoidal cells in the meninges, especially in areas of the arachnoid villi. In some series, meningiomas constitute 39% of primary CNS
tumors.24 The most frequent locations of these tumors are along the sagittal sinus and over the cerebral convexity. Table 43.2-21 summarizes the frequency of these
tumors according to location. 268 Meningiomas are extraaxial, intracranial (and sometimes spinal) tumors that produce symptoms and signs through compression of
adjacent brain tissue and cranial nerves. They often also produce hyperostosis. Table 43.2-22 summarizes the symptoms and signs associated with these tumors.

TABLE 43.2-21. Sites of Predilections of Meningiomas within the Intracranial Regions

TABLE 43.2-22. Neurologic Findings Associated with Meningiomas as a Function of Their Location

Histologically, most meningiomas are differentiated, with low proliferative capacity and limited invasiveness. Less commonly, meningiomas are more anaplastic with a
higher proliferative capacity and are invasive. Even though the difference in the 30-minute bromodeoxyuridine labeling index in situ for the differentiated meningiomas
may be less than 1% versus 3% to 4% for anaplastic meningiomas, 269 biologically, the anaplastic meningiomas behave considerably differently than the more
differentiated meningiomas. MIB-1, an antibody to the Ki-67 protein, has been used as a proliferative marker in meningioma patients and found to correlate closely
with the bromodeoxyuridine labeling index. 315
SURGERY
The perception that meningiomas are surgically resectable gives these tumors an undeserved reputation of benignity. Although meningiomas usually are well
circumscribed and do not invade adjacent brain, they can occur virtually anywhere in the CNS, and access is sometimes only by deep retraction. In addition, these
tumors may be extremely vascular and can surround important structures such as cranial nerves and major arteries at the skull base. Such characteristics can
preclude a smooth operation, and a total removal is commonly not possible. Simpson reported on a large series of surgically resected meningiomas and documented
that even when there was a perceived total resection, the recurrence rate was 9%. 270 A more modern series from Massachusetts General Hospital shows that a total
resection is followed by 7% recurrence rate at 5 years, 20% at 10 years, and 32% at 15 years. 271
Since many meningiomas are surgically resectable, the neurosurgeon is usually more favorably disposed toward operating on them than another glioma. The
neurosurgeon's zeal must be tempered, however, with an understanding of the risks of removing a meningioma in a particular location and an understanding of the

effect of this meningioma on the well-being of the patient, because these tumors are often exceedingly slow growing and the patients are often elderly. When surgery
is undertaken in an elderly patient, partial removal is sometimes adequate.
Preoperative Planning
The preoperative preparation of the patient, surgical planning, and intraoperative anesthetic management are as described in the earlier Surgery section. However,
the planning of surgery for meningiomas must be extremely assiduous, because a detailed knowledge of surgical anatomy is necessary in these tumors. A
preoperative angiogram to assess overall tumor vascularity and to identify arterial feeders is often important. In many instances, the angiography procedure is
combined with embolization of the tumor's blood supply. The angiogram is done within 24 to 96 hours of the operative procedure, so that alternative vascular routes to
the tumor do not have time to develop.
Surgical Principles
Those feeding arteries that could not be occluded by embolization are addressed first at the operation, if they are accessible. These arteries are meningeal and
cerebral in origin. The tumor is retracted from surrounding normal brain progressively as the tumor bulk is reduced by the use of the CUSA or, for extremely vascular
tumors, the cutting loop of the electrocoagulation unit or the CO 2 laser. Meningiomas at individual sites pose special surgical problems.
At the cerebral convexity, a large bone flap is made around the tumor, a dural incision circumscribes the tumor, and the dura attached to the tumor is used to retract
the tumor from the brain as microdissection frees the adhesions between the tumor and surrounding brain.
Parasagittal meningiomas abut the midline; difficulties in removal are related to critical draining veins, to involvement of the sagittal sinus with tumor, and to the
occasionally massive overlying bony erosion or hyperostosis or both. A patent sagittal sinus cannot be transected for a complete tumor removal except in its anterior
one-third, so a careful study of the preoperative arteriogram looking for the patency of the sinus and for the position of the draining veins in the region is critical. Some
clinicians advocate opening the sagittal sinus for removal of tumor that has grown through its wall, and others advocate resecting and grafting the involved sagittal
sinus wall. In the authors' opinion, these dangerous maneuvers are not usually indicated, because recurrence-free survivals after subtotal resection of these lesions
are extended, 271 and because the tumor may grow to occlude the sinus completely, thereby making complete resection possible later with a lesser risk to life.
Falx meningiomas do not involve the sagittal sinus but occupy the falx below the sinus, often becoming bilateral. Major complications of resection of falx meningiomas
relate to interruption of draining veins and consequent cerebral edema and venous infarction.
Olfactory groove meningiomas grow extremely large before their neurologic sequelae lead to their discovery. Surgery is carried out through a large frontal bone flap
based low on the forehead. The broad sessile base of the tumor is attacked first so that its blood supply can be interrupted. The tumor's bulk is then reduced by
internal coring and dissection, with attention to protection of the optic nerves, carotid artery, and anterior cerebral arteries on the tumor's posterior aspect.
Tuberculum sellae meningiomas are smaller at presentation because of their proximity to the optic apparatus. Attention to the safety of the optic apparatus and the
anterior cerebral and carotid arteries is equally critical.
The approach to sphenoid ridge meningiomas varies according to whether they occupy the outer, middle, or inner third of the sphenoid bone. Outer third tumors can
be a problem purely of tumor mass, purely of massive temporal hypertosis from en plaque tumor invading bone, or a combination of both. When it is present, the
tumor mass insinuates itself in the sylvian tissue, and its removal through a frontotemporal craniotomy is complicated by the tumor's adherence (on its medial aspect)
to sylvian veins. Surgical cure is not possible. Middle third tumors grow into both the frontal and temporal fossae in a globular fashion. The approach is through a
frontotemporal craniotomy, with the base of the tumor approached first to eliminate the blood supply. Surgical cure is likely. Inner third tumors arise from the anterior
clinoid process and compress the optic nerve and encase the carotid and middle cerebral arteries. In addition, medial sphenoid ridge meningiomas can grow diffusely
into the cavernous sinus and optic canal. Only in those situations in which the tumor presents early because of optic nerve compression is total removal feasible, with
the surgeon stopping when the risk of the surgery exceeds potential benefits.
Tentorial meningiomas arise from the broad surface or free edge of the tentorium and are approached under the temporal lobe or under the occipital lobe, depending
on their placement. In all instances, the principle of removal is incision of the tentorium around the tumor and gradual bulk reduction and separation of the tumor from
surrounding brain. Venous sinuses and critical draining veins, particularly the vein of Labbe, must be protected.
Cerebellopontine angle meningiomas arise from the petrous bone and if small and dorsolaterally situated are exposed through a posterior fossa craniectomy by
retracting the cerebellum medially. More ventrally situated tumors arising at the junction of the petrous bone and the clivus or from the clivus itself are exposed
through a combined approach above and below the tentorium, which allows a better angle to work medially and more generous exposure with less brain retraction. 272
Posterior fossa meningiomas may engulf critical blood vessels and cranial nerves and may be characterized by extreme adherence to the brain stem, so attempts at
complete removal must proceed cautiously. In younger patients, particularly, these tumors should be completely resected during the first attempt if possible as
subsequent operations are complicated by scarring, with obliteration of surgical planes and increased adherence to the brain stem.
Radiation Therapy
The need for adjunctive radiation therapy is determined by the extent of surgical resection and the histopathologic features of the tumor (benign vs. malignant). The
risk of recurrence for completely resected benign meningiomas is small, and postoperative irradiation is not usually recommended. In contrast, the risk of relapse after
subtotal resection ranges from 33% to 60% at 5 years to more than 90% at 15 years. 271,273,274 Several reports provide evidence that postoperative irradiation prolongs
the interval to recurrence, prevents tumor regrowth in some patients, and improves the survival of patients with incompletely resected meningiomas. Barbaro and
associates compared the outcome of 54 patients who were treated with subtotal resection and radiation therapy with a group of 30 patients who underwent subtotal
resection alone. 275 Sixty percent of the nonirradiated patients developed recurrence, whereas 32% of the irradiated patients recurred. The median time to recurrence
was 10.4 years for the irradiated patients compared with 5.5 years for the nonirradiated group ( P <.05). Irradiated patients had a more favorable outcome than
nonirradiated patients, despite the fact that they more frequently had tumors located in surgically unfavorable sites. This series was recently updated by Goldsmith
and colleagues who reported the results of 140 patients (117 benign and 23 malignant) treated at UCSF with subtotal resection and postoperative irradiation. The
median tumor dose was 54 Gy.276 For patients with benign meningiomas, the 5- and 10-year progression-free survival rates were 89% and 77%, respectively. Patients
who received at least 52 Gy had a 20-year progression-free survival of more than 90%. The 5-year progression-free survival of patients treated after 1980 was 98%,
compared with 77% of those treated before 1980. This improvement was attributed to the availability of CT scanning and MRI for tumor localization and treatment
planning.
A multivariate analysis identified that for benign meningiomas, improved progression-free survival was not related to tumor size but was associated with younger age
(P = .01) and treatment after 1980 with innovative technologies ( P = .002).277 Condra and coworkers found that at 15 years 70% of their patients relapsed after
subtotal excision alone, whereas only 13% of those treated with subtotal excision and postoperative irradiation recurred ( P = .0001). The 15-year cause-specific
survival rate was 86% for patients treated with combined therapy compared with 51% for nonirradiated patients ( P = .0003). For patients undergoing complete
resection, 24% relapsed after 15 years, and the 15-year cause-specific survival was 88%. 278 The actuarial 5-, 10-, and 15-year relapse-free survival rates for patients
undergoing subtotal resection and irradiation reported by Graholm and colleagues were 78%, 67%, and 56%, respectively. 279 These results and those of Goldsmith
and coworkers276 compare favorably with the relapse-free survival rates of 63%, 45%, and 9% reported by Mirimanoff and associates for incompletely resected,
nonirradiated patients. 271
The size of the residual meningioma affects the outcome of radiotherapy. Connell and colleagues showed that for tumors of 5 cm or larger, the 5-year
progression-free survival rate was 40%, significantly less than the 93% observed for smaller tumors. 280 Among patients irradiated for unresectable tumors and in those
with residual disease, the volume of visible tumor on imaging studies rarely decreases by more than 15% and often only after many years. 277
It is controversial whether patients should be treated with radiation therapy after their initial subtotal resection or when signs of disease progression appear. Some
clinicians have found that patients with benign meningiomas do equally well with either approach 281; others suggest that initial postoperative irradiation is
preferable, 277 because recurrence has an adverse influence on outcome, and many patients who recur after initial subtotal excision alone may not be salvaged by
subsequent treatment. 278 Postoperative irradiation often is deferred in elderly patients and in those in poor medical condition until there is evidence of symptomatic

progression. When a surgical resection is not feasible, radiation therapy may relieve symptoms and substantially decrease the rate of tumor progression. 279
Malignant meningiomas behave in a more aggressive manner than their benign counterparts. Chan and Thompson found that the median survival of six patients
treated with surgery alone was only 7.2 months, compared with 5.1 years for 12 patients treated with surgery and postoperative irradiation. 282 Six of the nine patients
with malignant histology reported by Graholm and coworkers died within 5 years. 279 Goldsmith and colleagues reported a 5-year progression-free survival of 48% for
23 patients treated by subtotal resection and irradiation. 277 The recurrence rate among 53 patients with malignant meningiomas collected from six series in the
literature was 49%. The recurrence rates were 33% for patients treated with complete resection alone, 12% for those undergoing complete resection and radiation
therapy, 55% for patients treated by subtotal resection and irradiation, and 100% for those treated by subtotal resection alone. 273 These data support the
recommendation that all patients with atypical and malignant meningiomas should be offered postoperative irradiation, regardless of the extent of resection. 277,283
For benign meningiomas, the planning target volume consists of the residual tumor with a 1 to 2 cm margin of normal tissue, defined by CT scan or MRI and modified
by the neurosurgeon's description of the site of residual disease. Extensive tumors of the base of the skull and malignant meningiomas require more generous
margins. The preoperative tumor volume is used for planning completely resected malignant lesions. A dose of 54 Gy in daily fractions of 1.8 to 2.0 Gy is
recommended for benign meningiomas, whereas the dose is increased to 60 Gy for atypical and malignant tumors. Complex three-dimensional conformal treatment
planning and delivery techniques and intensity modulated radiotherapy are used to restrict the dose to normal tissues.
Radiosurgery is another option for the treatment of meningiomas. Kondziolka and colleagues reported that 93% of their patients treated with radiosurgery and
followed for 5 to 10 years required no further therapy for their tumors. 284 Nearly 85% of patients treated by Hakim and coworkers were controlled with a median
follow-up time of 22.9 months.285 Complications, including cranial neuropathies, transient neurologic deficits, radiation necrosis, and malignant edema, have been
reported 6% to 42% of radiosurgically treated patients. 286,287 Complications have been observed most frequently in patients with large or deep-seated tumors and
those treated with high single doses. 288 These data suggest that treatment with radiosurgery should be limited to small lesions, whereas fractionated radiotherapy may
be preferable for other subsets of tumors. Although tumor control rates for small meningiomas appear promising, several more years of patient accrual and follow-up
will be required to fully evaluate the efficacy of radiosurgery in comparison with surgery and conventional radiotherapy.
CHEMOTHERAPY
There is currently no defined role for chemotherapy for newly diagnosed and nonirradiated meningiomas. Chemotherapy has been used for the most intransigent
recurrences. For patients with histologically malignant meningiomas or recurrent, surgically inaccessible, more differentiated meningiomas, the situation is only
slightly different. Because of the potentially lethal consequences of these two situations, the authors have been treating with aggressive surgery, focal irradiation, and
chemotherapy.
The authors have evaluated primarily sarcoma regimens such as the combinations of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine (VCR) (nine patients);
dacarbazine (DTIC) and doxorubicin (five patients); and high-dose ifosfamide with mesna (two patients). Little objective activity was noted for the first, one in five
responses in the second, and one in two in the third. Grunberg and colleagues reported on the use of mifepristone, an antiprogesterone, in 14 patients with recurrent
meningiomas; 5 in 14 showed objective response after 6 to 12 months of daily oral therapy. 289 A randomized trial for incompletely resected meningiomas is active
through Southwest Oncology Group to better determine the efficacy of mifepristone (RU-486).
Kaba and colleagues reported on six patients with either a recurrent malignant meningioma or an unresectable meningioma who were treated with interferon-a at a
dosage of 4 mU/m2/d, 5 days per week. 290 Five of six patients exhibited positive response to treatment with stabilization of the size of the tumor in four patients and
slight regression in one for 6 to 14 months. A larger study has been opened at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center.
Lastly, there are preliminary data suggesting that hydroxyurea may provide treatment in patients with unresectable and recurrent meningiomas. 291

PRIMITIVE NEUROEPITHELIAL TUMORS
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
The treatment of primitive neuroepithelial tumors is controversial and complex. Much of the controversy is based on the failure to understand that there are multiple
entities included within this pathologic diagnosis. Controversy surrounds the classification of these tumors. 292 Primitive cells that remain undifferentiated or exhibit
varying degrees of neuronal or glial differentiation, or both, are the hallmark of these tumors. Conceptually, these tumors can be viewed as developmentally aberrant
brain cells. Therefore, primitive neuroepithelial tumors can be divided into the following classification schema: medulloepithelioma, neuroblastoma, spongioblastoma,
ependymoblastoma, pineoblastoma, and medulloblastoma. With the exception of medulloblastoma, primitive neuroepithelial tumors are rare.
It has been proposed that all neoplasms showing primitive poorly differentiated neuroepithelial cells be called primitive neuroectodermal tumors, regardless of location
or cell type. Because of the infrequency of these tumors and the controversy surrounding an all-inclusive classification schema currently, it is best to refer to each
histiotype separately.
Clinically, however, these tumors share some common and disquieting features. Primarily, they are proliferative and malignant tumors that tend to spread throughout
the neuraxis like medulloblastoma. As a result, a complete evaluation of the CNS, including contrast-enhanced CT scans of the entire brain, CSF cytology, and
metrizamide myelography, must be performed before the initiation of treatment.
SURGERY
The initial therapy for primitive neuroectodermal tumors is surgical bulk reduction whenever feasible. Surgical principles are the same as those for cerebral
astrocytoma described earlier.
RADIATION THERAPY
There is general consensus that patients with primitive neuroectodermal tumors should receive postoperative irradiation. Although radiation therapy appears to
improve survival time, the outcome is generally poor, and most patients develop local or regional recurrences. Because of their propensity to spread throughout the
subarachnoid space, primitive neuroectodermal tumors are treated with craniospinal axis irradiation. The primary tumor is given 54 to 56 Gy and the remainder of the
axis receives 36 Gy. The dose is reduced in very young children. Chemotherapy is usually a part of the treatment program. Primitive neuroectodermal tumors are less
radiocurable than medulloblastomas. Whereas in some series 1-year survival rates are as low as 10%, 293 others report 5-year survival rates of 20% to 25%. 294 The
disparity in outcome data reflects the heterogeneity of malignancies that are classified under the term of primitive neuroectodermal tumors. 295 For example, in a series
of 14 patients reported by Gaffney and coworkers the 3-year survival rate was 29%. None of the patients with tumors containing more than 90% undifferentiated
elements were alive at 3 years, whereas 60% of those with less primitive tumors survived 3 years. 296 In another study, Mikaeloff and colleagues reported on 30
patients with CNS primitive neuroectodermal tumors other than medulloblastoma treated with gross tumor resection (16 of 30) who were considered good risk who
had a 37% 3-year survival. 297 In a more recent series, Paulino and Melian reported a 5-year survival rate of 47% in a small group of patients treated for supratentorial
primitive neuroectodermal tumors. 298
Cerebral neuroblastomas are biologically distinct from other primitive neuroectodermal tumors. They tend to be less malignant, have a better outcome, and are less
likely to disseminate throughout the craniospinal axis. 299 These tumors may present as a cystic lesion with a peripheral nodule or as a solid mass, and their
morphologic appearance is related to prognosis. Berger and colleagues found that 7 of the 11 patients treated with local irradiation to an average of 52 Gy were alive
with no evidence of tumor progression. 300 Of the six patients with cystic tumors, none had recurrent disease, whereas four of the five patients with solid tumors had
recurrences. The only patient with a solid lesion who did not have a recurrence received adjuvant chemotherapy. Although subarachnoid dissemination is found in
autopsied cases, 301 this pattern of spread does not represent a significant clinical problem. Thus, localized cerebral neuroblastomas are treated with involved field
irradiation to 54 Gy. The craniospinal axis is included only if there is evidence of tumor dissemination beyond the site of origin by imaging studies or CSF cytology.

CHEMOTHERAPY
Because primitive neuroectodermal tumors are an uncommon type of tumor, there are no controlled chemotherapy trials. Reports of isolated cases and small series
indicate that drugs active against medulloblastoma have activity in primitive neuroectodermal tumors (see Medulloblastoma Chemotherapy section, later in this
chapter).

MEDULLOBLASTOMA
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Medulloblastoma appears more similar to the primitive neuroectodermal tumors of childhood than to the gliomas. Although the cell of origin of these tumors is
controversial, it is probable that medulloblastoma takes its origin from germinative neuroepithelial cells in the roof of the fourth ventricle. 28 Consistent with its
embryonal nature is the fact that the peak incidence occurs in the first decade of life; 50% to 60% of medulloblastomas occur in the first decade, with a peak between
5 and 9 years. A second but lesser peak occurs between 20 and 30 years. The typical location for childhood medulloblastoma is in the cerebellum, mostly in the
midline and posterior vermis (Fig. 43.2-5); many encroach on the cisterna magna and the fourth ventricle. In adolescents and adults, there is an increasing tendency
for tumors to be laterally placed in the cerebellar hemispheres. Regardless of where in the cerebellum they occur, the tendency for metastatic spread (within
craniospinal intradural axis) of medulloblastoma is relatively high. At presentation, as many as 30% of patients have positive cytology or myelographic evidence of
spinal metastasis. 302,303 Extra-CNS metastasis is less common and occurs in fewer than 5% of patients; most metastases are to long bones. 302

FIGURE 43.2-5. This young girl presented with headache and gait ataxia. A T1-weighted sagittal magnetic resonance imaging scan (TR 600, TE 20) demonstrated a
large, low-intensity mass involving the inferior aspect of the cerebellum in the midline and extending to and filling the fourth ventricle. There is arcuate stretching and
displacement of the medulla and secondary hydrocephalus. The well-circumscribed nature and location of the tumor is fairly characteristic for medulloblastoma.

Based on bromodeoxyuridine 30-minute labeling indices, medulloblastoma would be considered a highly proliferative tumor because its labeling index is
approximately 14%, as opposed to gliomas, which range between less than 1% to 10%. 269
The overall disease-free 5-year survival for medulloblastoma is approximately 50%. 212,302,304,305,306, and 307 However, the extent of disease at initial diagnosis defines risk.
When risk factors are considered, survival is altered dramatically. Poor risk is defined as less than a 75% resection (probably greater than 1 cc residual); invasion of
the brain stem (less clearly established); metastasis to the spinal cord, cerebrum, and leptomeninges or seeding of the cerebellum; positive CSF cytology 2 weeks
after surgery; and age younger than 4 years. 212,304,305 Of the poor risk factors, two need explanation. Resection of less than 75% is an imprecise measure of remaining
tumor; CT and MRI measurement of residual tumor volume would be better. However, in most patients, if the surgeon can remove more than 75% of tumor, the
resection is usually a gross total resection. Poor risk associated with age 4 years and younger may relate more to the restricted irradiation to the developing CNS and
its negative effect on tumor control. Most radiation therapists do not treat with full doses of craniospinal irradiation at 4 years of age.
The disease-free survival of poor-risk patients with craniospinal irradiation with or without chemotherapy is approximately 25% to 30%. 306 Good-risk patients, on the
other hand, have 5-year disease-free survivals of 66% to 70%. 307,308
At relapse, the major site of first recurrence is the posterior fossa in more than 50% of patients, the frontal lobe in nearly 20%, bone in 10% to 15%, and other cerebral
and suprasellar regions in 10% to 15%. 302,308
The incidence of systemic metastasis varies between 10% and 30%, 305,306 although the 10% incidence is most similar to the authors' experience. Most extra-CNS
metastases are to long bones and ribs, with lymph nodes being a distant second site. In the series by Park and associates 305 and Lowery and colleagues, 306 the
median time to the development of extra-CNS metastasis was 10 to 12 months; in the authors' more recent study, it was 18 months. 309 In the Park study, 17% of
ventriculoperitoneal-shunted patients developed systemic metastases, whereas only 4% in unshunted patients did so. In Lowery's series, 30% of patients developed
systemic metastases, and none had been shunted previously. These authors' experience is that, except in patients with rampant disease, they did not find an
association between ventriculoatrial or ventriculoperitoneal shunting, with or without an in-line filter, and systemic metastases. Bone metastases can occur as the only
evidence of recurrence in unshunted patients years after their initial presentation with CNS disease.
SURGERY
Although hydrocephalus associated with medulloblastoma obstructing the fourth ventricle can be relieved with a preresection CSF shunt, it is more usual to defer
shunting and control increased intracranial pressure with corticosteroids. In as many as 60% of patients, aggressive resection of the tumor relieves hydrocephalus. An
occipital burr hole is commonly placed at surgery, before the posterior fossa exposure is done, to allow cannulation of the ventricles for drainage of CSF to lower the
increased intracranial pressure so that the dura can be opened safely.
Surgery for medulloblastoma is carried out in the prone or the sitting position. The prone position is preferred, especially in children. The incision and bony exposure
are usually in the midline, but a paramedian incision and unilateral bony removal are done when the tumor is limited to one hemisphere, particularly in adults. The
more commonly used midline craniectomy extends down through the foramen magnum, and a laminectomy of C-1 (and rarely, C-2) is performed to decompress
herniated cerebellar tonsils or to remove a caudally extending tongue of tumor over the dorsum of the spinal cord.
After the dura is opened, the cerebellar tonsils are retracted laterally, and it is in the foramen of Magendie that the purplish-gray tumor usually is first seen. The floor
of the fourth ventricle is separated from the tumor by a cottonoid pledget. The pledget is advanced to protect the floor of the fourth ventricle as the tumor is resected.
The thinned cerebellar vermis is progressively incised in the midline until the dorsum of the tumor is exposed. The tumor is usually soft and moderately vascular and
is readily removed with suction irrigation, the CUSA, or laser, using the operating microscope for magnification and illumination. Clinical studies of cooperative groups
show that an aggressive (gross total) removal is associated with an improved prognosis for the patient. 305 Dissection is continued laterally to remove tumor from the
cerebellar hemispheres and ventrally to remove tumor from the fourth ventricle. When the obstructive hydrocephalus has been relieved, the CSF can be seen flowing
from the aqueduct of Sylvius superiorly. It is rare for medulloblastoma to invade the floor of the fourth ventricle. Closure is carried out in multiple layers, with particular
attention to a tight dural closure to decrease the risk for pseudomeningocele (bulging wound) formation and the risk for aseptic meningitis and consequent
communicating hydrocephalus from spilled blood products. Postoperative CSF shunting for hydrocephalus remains necessary in approximately 30% to 40% of
patients.

RADIATION THERAPY
Medulloblastomas commonly infiltrate the subarachnoid space and have a striking propensity to spread throughout the CSF. As many as 25% to 30% of patients have
clinically unsuspected cytologic and radiographic evidence of CNS dissemination at the time of diagnosis, 303 and for this reason, radiation therapy is directed to the
entire craniospinal axis. Doses of 54 to 55 Gy to the primary tumor site and 35 to 36 Gy to the remainder of the craniospinal axis are generally recommended. These
doses usually are reduced by approximately 10 Gy for children younger than 2 or 3 years of age. Five-year survival rates in more recent series range from 50% to
65% or higher. 45 The prognosis is affected by local tumor extent, completeness of surgical resection, presence of CSF dissemination, and age at diagnosis. 307
Survival and patterns of relapse in adults with medulloblastoma are similar to those reported for children. 310 Although medulloblastoma is considered to be one of the
most radiosensitive tumors of the CNS, local recurrence remains the primary cause of failure. 311,312
Although modern radiation therapy techniques have greatly improved the prognosis for patients with medulloblastoma, the maximum benefit that can be achieved with
conventional radiation therapy has probably been reached. Adjunctive chemotherapy programs are being pursued actively to further improve the outcome.
Randomized trials have been conducted by the International Society of Pediatric Oncology 307 and the CCG. 308 Each study compared radiation therapy plus
chemotherapy with radiation therapy alone. The International Society of Pediatric Oncology study used a regimen of weekly VCR during radiation therapy followed by
eight courses of VCR and CCNU, cycled every 6 weeks. Patients in the CCG study received similar chemotherapy plus prednisone. Neither trial demonstrated an
overall improvement in outcome with the addition of chemotherapy. The 5-year disease-free survival rates in the CCG and International Society of Pediatric Oncology
studies were 59% and 55%, respectively, for radiation therapy plus chemotherapy, and 50% and 43%, respectively, for radiation therapy alone. Chemotherapy did,
however, appear to benefit certain patients with more advanced stages of disease, including those having only partial or subtotal tumor excision, those with brain stem
involvement, and those with advanced T (T3 and T4) and M (M1 to M3) stages. Based on these findings, patients with medulloblastoma have been separated into
low-stage or good-risk and high-stage or poor-risk subgroups, and different study questions are being examined in each group.
Clinical studies in good-risk patients have been directed at decreasing treatment-related morbidity, including neuropsychological dysfunction, impaired growth of the
spine, and hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction, by reducing the dose of prophylactic irradiation to areas remote from the primary tumor site. A randomized trial
conducted by CCG and POG, which compared 23.4 Gy with the standard 36 Gy craniospinal prophylactic dose in good-risk patients, demonstrated an excessive
number of overall treatment failures and isolated neuraxis recurrences in the low-dose arm. 313 In a pilot study conducted by the CCG, the survival rates of patients
treated with a combination of low-dose craniospinal axis irradiation and chemotherapy in the form of VCR, CCNU, and cisplatin were found to compare favorably with
those in studies of full-dose radiotherapy alone or conventional radiation therapy and chemotherapy. 314
Studies are also being directed at improving local tumor control. Wara and colleagues used a hyperfractionation schedule (1.0 Gy twice a day) to treat the
craniospinal axis to 30 Gy and to boost the posterior fossa to 72 Gy. 315 Poor-risk patients also received chemotherapy. An excess of failures occurred outside of the
primary site in good-risk patients, and there was no improvement in survival over that observed with conventional regimens in either risk group. 316 Investigators are
currently exploring the use of stereotactic radiosurgery and three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy techniques to deliver an incremental increase in dose to the
primary tumor site.312,315
CHEMOTHERAPY
Medulloblastomas are responsive to a variety of antineoplastic agents, including VCR, nitrosoureas, procarbazine, dibromodulcitol, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate,
platinum compounds, and various drug combinations. Table 43.2-23 128,152,160,167,201,264,266,299,317,318,319,320,321,322,323,324,325,326,327,328,329,330,331,332,333,334,335,336,337 and 338
summarizes some of the single agents and their observed response rates for CNS medulloblastoma when treated at recurrence or for progressive disease. For
extra-CNS disease, these same agents have activity, although drugs such as cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, doxorubicin, and VCR may be more active than the
nitrosoureas and procarbazine.

TABLE 43.2-23. Efficacy of Single-Agent Chemotherapy for Recurrent and Progressive Central Nervous System Medulloblastoma

Table 43.2-24 339,340,341,342,343,344,345,346 and 347,406 summarizes some of the drug combinations that have been used for recurrent or progressive CNS medulloblastoma. It is
not possible to compare the durability of these responses, because some reports pool the primitive neuroectodermal tumor patients with medulloblastoma, whereas
others do not provide individual lengths of response, an MTP, or Kaplan-Meier curves. This is unfortunate, because those studies suggest an MTP range of 10 to 19
months among the better single agent and combination chemotherapy programs. 346 It is clear, however, that better treatments are needed for recurrent and
progressive disease. Whether well-founded or not, current emphasis appears to be with drug combinations such as cyclophosphamide, teniposide, and cisplatin or
CCNU, VCR, and cisplatin. Whether these approaches provide long-standing benefit or short-term gain awaits more careful adjuvant studies. Problems with drug
delivery of these agents to the CNS and inherent drug resistance may compromise long-term benefits and ultimate cure.

TABLE 43.2-24. Efficacy of Combination Chemotherapy for Recurrent and Progressive Central Nervous System Medulloblastoma

As adjuvant therapy to surgery and irradiation, chemotherapy has shown inconsistent but sometimes dramatic benefit. Part of the problem resides with an agreement
for the definition of good and poor risk and the tendency of some investigators to pool data from medulloblastoma with other primitive neuroectodermal tumors.
Another constraint is that patients who receive craniospinal irradiation do not tolerate high-dose aggressive chemotherapy protocols well because of reduced bone
marrow reserves. In an attempt to improve the tolerance to cytotoxic agents, these authors and others conducted trials to evaluate reduced craniospinal radiation
therapy doses. Packer et al. 1994 348,473 reported a 10-year experience with medulloblastoma treated with craniospinal local-boost radiotherapy and adjuvant

chemotherapy with vincristine weekly during radiotherapy followed by eight 6-week cycles of cisplatin, lomustine, and vincristine. To be eligible, children had to have a
subtotal resection, evidence of metastatic disease, brain stem involvement, or all three. Of the 63 eligible patients, 42 had brain stem involvement, 15 had metastatic
disease at the time of diagnosis, and 19 had a subtotal resection. Progression-free survival for the entire group at 5 years was 85%. Progression-free survival was not
adversely affected by younger age at diagnosis, brain stem involvement, or subtotal resection. Patients with metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis had a 5-year
progression-free survival rate of 67%, as compared with 90% for those children with localized disease at the time of diagnosis ( P = .037).
The authors conducted a nonrandomized trial of preradiation procarbazine and hydroxyurea during reduced craniospinal irradiation. 304 In that study they found that
after 2 weeks of oral procarbazine and irradiation with hydroxyurea, reducing the craniospinal radiation dose to 25 Gy to the spinal axis and 25 to 35 Gy to the whole
brain was not detrimental with respect to disease-free survival or recurrence patterns in good- and poor-risk patients. When this group was compared with historical
controls treated with conventional doses, Halberg and associates 349 found no increase in tumor recurrence in the brain or spinal axis. The 5-year disease-free survival
rates for good- and poor-risk patients were 77% and 39%, respectively. In both groups, 70% of recurrences were in the posterior fossa only.
A randomized postoperative trial with postirradiation nitrogen mustard, PCV, procarbazine, and prednisone versus radiation therapy alone for newly diagnosed
medulloblastoma found that patients treated with irradiation plus nitrogen mustard, PCV, procarbazine, and prednisone had a statistically significant increase in
overall survival rate at 5 years compared with patients treated with radiation therapy alone (74% vs. 56%; P = .06).350
The authors presented preliminary results of a study that opened in 1984. 232 In that study, they gave combination chemotherapy with TPDCV before and for as many
as eight cycles every 6 weeks after radiation therapy in children and adults with high-risk (more than 25% residual tumor, brain stem invasion, positive CSF cytology,
positive myelogram) medulloblastoma. Radiation therapy consisted of 54 Gy to the posterior fossa and 24 Gy to the craniospinal axis. Of the 30 patients evaluable (25
children and 5 adults), there were 17 failures, a 5-year disease-free survival of 30%, and an MTP of 4.3 years. Seven pineoblastomas were also treated, with four
failures to date, an MTP of 1.6 years, and 38% 5-year disease-free survival.
Hyperfractionated radiation therapy regimens, although potentially less damaging to the CNS, may lead to more bone marrow damage and less tolerance to systemic
chemotherapy. One approach that is being evaluated consists of aggressive preradiation therapy chemotherapy. The advantage of this approach is that it
unequivocally defines response; the disadvantage is that some drugs may fail to achieve adequate levels in patients with poor risk due to CSF spread of tumor cells.
Eight-in-1-day therapy has also been evaluated before radiation therapy. 343 Of 21 eligible medulloblastoma patients who received at least two courses of
chemotherapy, 12 (57%) responded (including three complete responses and three partial responses). The MTP for the combined medulloblastoma primitive
neuroectodermal tumor group was 2 years.
In another study, Kovnar and associates treated 11 newly diagnosed children with measurable residual disease and characteristics indicative of poor prognosis with
preradiation therapy cisplatin and etoposide. 474 There were 2 of 11 complete responses, 8 partial responses, and 1 stable disease determined radiographically in the
series.
For extracranial metastases, the best results appear with aggressive combination chemotherapy. In this situation, issues of CNS drug delivery are not important, and
many drugs are active. Initially, these authors evaluated the combination of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and VCR; seven patients treated responded for a median
duration of 17 months, and two continue at 34 and 62 months without evidence of disease. 308 Other combinations with good activity are cyclophosphamide and
VCR351; VCR, dactinomycin, and cyclophosphamide 352; cisplatin, cyclophosphamide, and VP-16; and DTIC and doxorubicin. 181

PINEAL REGION TUMORS
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
The pineal gland is located in the posterior portion of the third ventricle. Tumors in this region are rare, accounting for fewer than 1% of intracranial tumors, although
in children they constitute 3% to 8% of intracranial tumors. 353 The peak incidence of germ cell tumors is the second decade, and few present after the third decade. 354
Table 43.2-25 summarizes the types of tumors found in the pineal region and their tumor markers. 355,356 In all series, germinomas are the most common histology,
accounting for 33% to 50% of pineal tumors (the higher frequencies are seen in Japan). Gliomas are the second most common, accounting for approximately 25% of
pineal tumors; astrocytomas are the most common of the glial neoplasms arising at this site.

TABLE 43.2-25. Classification of Pineal Region Tumors and Tumor Markers

Neurologic signs and symptoms are caused by obstructive hydrocephalus and involvement of ocular pathways. Major symptoms are headache, nausea and vomiting,
lethargy, and diplopia. Signs are primarily ocular but can include ataxia and hemiparesis. The major ocular manifestation is paralysis of conjugate upward gaze
(Parinaud's syndrome), although pupillary and convergence abnormalities are seen, as are skew deviation and papilledema.
Determination of tumor histology, tumor cell markers, and extent of disease is critical for optimal management of pineal region tumors. Figure 43.2-6 is a schema the
authors use to evaluate end-stage patients with pineal region tumors.

FIGURE 43.2-6. Treatment and evaluation schema for pineal region tumors. AFP, a-fetoprotein; CS, ; CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging;
RT, radiation therapy. (Modified from Edwards MSB, Hudgins RJ, Wilson CB, et al. Pineal region tumors in children. J Neurosurg 1988;68:689.)

The prognosis for these tumors varies depending on the histology and size of tumor and the extent of disease at presentation. Typically, patients with mature
teratomas do well with surgery alone; germinomas do best with radiation, although preradiation therapy chemotherapy may increase the cure rate and reduce the total
radiation dose; gliomas respond to therapy in a manner discussed in earlier sections; and the remaining tumors respond variably to chemotherapy and radiation
therapy, leading to survivals ranging from months to years before recurrence.
SURGERY
Because pineal tumors are near the center of the brain, they are among the most difficult brain tumors to remove, and it is this factor that has created some
controversy in their management. However, the application of modern surgical technology, with superb illumination, magnification, surgical guidance, and
neuroanesthesia to microsurgical approaches to the pineal region have made this region much more accessible. Surgeons choose from several accepted approaches
depending on personal preference and the tumor's position and extent. 357 The current recommendation is to obtain a tissue diagnosis when a diagnosis is not
forthcoming from CSF markers, cytology, or both. When possible a gross total resection of the tumor is performed. Resection is particularly important for pineal
masses that are relatively radioresistant or that do not require radiation therapy, such as teratomas, arachnoid cysts, and meningiomas.
Many surgical approaches to the pineal region have been described: (1) through the dilated lateral ventricle; (2) through the posterior corpus callosum; (3) under the
occipital lobe; and (4) through the posterior fossa over the cerebellum. 358 The most commonly used microsurgical approaches are currently the infratentorial
supracerebellar approach described first by Horsley, later by Krause, and resurrected and modernized by Stein, and the supratentorial approach under the occipital
lobe described by Poppen and popularized by Clark. 358 Both have been associated with low morbidity and mortality in experienced hands.
The place of image-guided (stereotactic) biopsy in the diagnosis of pineal region tumors is unclear. Although such biopsies have been described as relatively safe,
particularly in large tumors, there is a risk that tissue sampling of these heterogenous tumors may not depict accurately the correct histologic nature of the tumor. 359
Without an accurate histologic diagnosis, treatment planning may be erroneous or inadequate. In its favor is the advantage of rapid tissue diagnosis and shortened
hospital stay.
RADIATION THERAPY
With certain exceptions, such as benign teratomas, radiation therapy has an established role in the treatment of pineal and suprasellar tumors of pineal parenchymal
or germ cell origin. Because of their location and infiltrative nature, complete surgical extirpation often is not possible. In the past, high mortality and morbidity
associated with biopsy or attempted resection, especially with older surgical techniques, often led to the use of radiation therapy without histologic confirmation. In
such instances, response to low-dose radiation therapy, measurement of AFP and b-HCG, and CSF cytology were used to provide diagnostic information. There has
been a tendency to increase the use of biopsy and attempted resection. Although surgery theoretically might be expected to increase the incidence of CSF seeding,
there is no proof that this will occur. A review of older literature suggests that the incidence of spinal seeding increased from 3% for tumors in which biopsy was not
obtained to 23% when biopsy was obtained from the tumors. 45 However, Linstadt and associates found no instances of failure in the spinal axis in 13 patients with
biopsy-proved germinomas, only one of whom received prophylactic spinal irradiation. 360
Five-year survival rates with radiation therapy range from 44% to 78% and vary with histology and extent of disease, age, radiation volume, and dose to the primary
site.45 According to a multiinstitutional survey by Wara and coworkers, the survival of patients with pineal parenchymal cell tumors or malignant teratomas was 21% (3
of 14) compared with 72% (26 of 36) for those with germinomas. 361 More recently, Wolden and colleagues reported 5-year disease-free survival rates of 91% for
germinomas, 63% for unbiopsied tumors and 60% for nongerminoma germ cell tumors irradiated to doses of 50 to 54 Gy to the local tumor site with or without
additional treatment to the whole brain or ventricular system. 362 Patients younger than 25 to 30 years of age have survival rates of 65% to 80% compared with 35% to
40% for older patients. 361,363 This finding may reflect the increased incidence of true germinomas in younger patients.
Germinomas are infiltrative tumors that tend to spread along the ventricular walls or throughout the leptomeninges. The incidence of CSF seeding ranges from 7% to
12%. Because of these features, the use of fields encompassing the entire ventricular system, the whole brain, and even the entire craniospinal axis has been
recommended. In a literature review, Salazar and colleagues found a recurrence-free survival rate of 76% for patients with whole brain irradiation compared with 61%
for irradiation to the ventricular system and 51% for smaller volumes. 364 Further analysis of those data showed a 90% survival rate for patients treated with whole
brain irradiation and a tumor dose of at least 50 Gy. If smaller fields were used or the dose to the primary tumor site was less than 50 Gy, the survival was 33%. With
less than whole brain irradiation, recurrences at the margin of the irradiated volume were reported in the older literature. However, the frequency of such recurrences
has been reduced with the availability of CT and MRI for treatment planning. Linstadt and associates concluded that the risk for spinal metastases from germinomas
was too small to justify routine prophylactic spinal irradiation, but recommended its use when there is tumor spill at surgery or in those patients with malignant CSF
cytology or known subependymal or leptomeningeal metastases. 360
The paradigm described by Edwards and Levin for management of pineal region tumors differs somewhat from the approach just discussed and is outlined in Figure
43.2-6.365 If hydrocephalus is present, patients are placed on corticosteroids. A shunt is placed only if corticosteroids fail to relieve the symptoms of increased
intracranial pressure. An open operation with the goal to resect the tumor is preferred to a stereotactic biopsy. Occasionally, in a patient with widely disseminated
disease, a stereotactic biopsy may be indicated. The approach (supratentorial vs. infratentorial) is planned on the basis of the MRI scan. At the time of craniotomy, an
external ventricular drain with an intracranial pressure monitor is placed in the lateral ventricle and CSF is removed to lower intracranial pressure and measure CSF
tumor markers (b-HCG and AFP). A tumor biopsy is obtained, and, based on the findings at operation and the histologic diagnosis, a decision is reached regarding
the aggressiveness of tumor resection.
Additional therapy is planned based on the histology, CSF markers, staging CT and MRI, and myelography; localized germinomas are treated with 20 Gy to the
ventricular system and an additional 30 Gy to the tumor with a 1.5- to 2.0-cm margin for a total of 50 Gy. 362 Treatment with neoadjuvant chemotherapy and low-dose
(30 to 40 Gy) focal irradiation is being studied in some centers. 366,367 If the germinoma is disseminated or if multiple midline tumors are present, systemic
chemotherapy or craniospinal irradiation is administered. Doses of 20 to 35 Gy to the craniospinal axis have been recommended when tumor cells are detected in the
CSF.368 Patients given chemotherapy as their primary treatment but who have an incomplete response or subsequently recur can be successfully treated with
radiotherapy. 369
Nongerminomatous malignant germ cell tumors, whether localized or disseminated, are treated with systemic chemotherapy (for six courses), followed by restaging
studies. After restaging, localized tumors receive focal radiation therapy (20 to 24 Gy to the ventricular system with a tumor boost to 54 to 60 Gy), and disseminated
tumors receive craniospinal irradiation (54 to 60 Gy to the primary tumor, 45 Gy to the ventricular system, 35 Gy to the spinal cord, and 45 Gy to any localized spinal
cord lesions). 362
Biopsy-verified tumors with little or no tendency to metastasize to the spinal cord, such as teratomas, pineocytomas, and low-grade gliomas, are treated by resection
or with local field irradiation. 370 Craniospinal axis irradiation is reserved for tumors that have a strong tendency toward cord involvement (such as pineoblastoma), for
those with positive CSF cytology, or for those with radiographic evidence of spinal cord involvement.
CHEMOTHERAPY
Chemotherapy for glial neoplasms is similar to that covered in earlier sections. The chemotherapy for germ cell tumors is in flux but is encouraging. Adjuvant multidrug
therapy with agents such as cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin together with high-dose radiotherapy have produced encouraging disease-free and overall survival
rates.371 Finaly and coworkers have used high-dose chemotherapy alone (carboplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin) with deferral of radiotherapy. 372 These results also
appear promising.
For germinomas, complete responses before radiation therapy or at recurrence have been observed with cisplatin and bleomycin 373; carboplatin 374;
cyclophosphamide 375,376; the combination of cyclophosphamide, vinblastine, and bleomycin 375; the combination of cisplatin and etoposide 377; and dactinomycin,
methotrexate, vinblastine, and cisplatin. 354,365 This has led to attempts to reduce or defer radiotherapy. 378 Following surgical diagnosis of germinoma, two courses of
high-dose cyclophosphamide produced complete response in 91%. 375 Because of this, Allen and coworkers reduced the radiation dose and volume. Of the 10
complete response patients treated with reduced radiation, only 10% of patients have failed 5 years later. A comparable approach using carboplatin produced an 88%

response rate and a radiation dose-reduction in five of eight patients. 374 More recently, Bouffet and colleagues reported on a Societe Francaise d'Oncologie
Pediatrique study of four courses of alternating etoposide-carboplatin and etoposide-ifosfamide followed by 40 Gy localized radiation therapy for nonmetastatic cases
and craniospinal radiation therapy for metastatic cases. 366 Of the 57 patients registered, 47 had biopsy proof of germinoma. Median follow-up was 42 months. The
estimated 3-year event-free survival was 96%.
For nongerminoma malignant germ cell tumors (e.g., embryonal, endodermal sinus, and mixed tumors), the benefits of chemotherapy are far less impressive, with
partial rather than complete responses and recurrence within months to years being the norm. Chemotherapies with activity include combinations of
cyclophosphamide, vinblastine, and bleomycin 375; cisplatin, VCR, and bleomycin 379; cisplatin and etoposide 380; and cisplatin, bleomycin, and teniposide. 381 Occasional
patients with recurrent germ cell tumors who have failed the combination of cisplatin, bleomycin, and vinblastine therapies have responded to chemotherapy with
TPDCV.
The results with chemotherapy have appeared paradoxical, because patients with systemic seminoma treated with cisplatin, bleomycin, and vinblastine have
developed brain metastases while receiving chemotherapy. Using nonseminomatous testicular germ cell lines, Pera and colleagues found that temozolomide was
quite cytotoxic and they predict that temozolomide will be active against intracranial metastases from testicular seminomas as well as primary germ cell tumors in the
CNS.382
Given the rarity of CNS germ cell tumors and the similarity of small trials reported in the literature, it is obvious that cooperative group trials are necessary to
determine which of the existing chemotherapy combinations are most active. Second-generation studies could then address modifications based on a reasonable
database rather than the few anecdotal studies in the literature. Much study needs to be done to elucidate the best drug combinations and use of chemotherapy in
these patients.

PITUITARY ADENOMAS
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Pituitary gland tumors tend to produce neuroendocrine or neurologic symptoms and signs. Anatomically, tumors arising from the pituitary gland can compress the
pituitary, grow out of the sella to compress and invade the optic chiasm, and, if growth is unabated, extend into the temporal lobe, third ventricle, and the posterior
fossa. The chief finding in most patients is vision loss initially characterized by a bitemporal hemianopia. Headache occurs in approximately 20%. Less frequent are
ocular palsies due to compression or invasion of the cavernous sinus.
Neuroendocrine abnormalities can be associated with tumor compression of the pituitary gland or hypersecretion of hormones, or both. Table 43.2-6 summarizes
some of the more common syndromes and their endocrine abnormalities. Sexual impotence in men and amenorrhea and galactorrhea in women are commonly
associated with hyperprolactinemia. Growth hormone hypersecretion is associated with acromegaly or gigantism, depending on the age of the patient. Corticotropin
hypersecretion results in Cushing's disease. Elements of hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency, and growth hormone deficiency may follow compression of the
pituitary gland by growth of an adenoma.
The diagnosis of a pituitary tumor is based on sensitive radioimmunoassays, CT scans, and, most recently, MRI. Figure 43.2-3 shows an MRI scan of a pituitary
adenoma before surgery. Pituitary adenomas are classified as endocrine inactive or endocrine active. Most secrete one or, occasionally, two hormones. The reported
incidence of the various types of pituitary adenomas depends on the institution's referral patterns. Of 800 patients operated on at UCSF between 1970 and 1981, 630
of 800 (79%) were endocrine active; of these, 331 of 630 (52%) were prolactin secreting, 27% growth hormone secreting, 20% corticotropin secreting, and only 0.3%
were thyroid-stimulating hormone secreting. 383 Undifferentiated cell adenomas are considered to be nononcocytic (null) or oncocytic (oncocytoma) tumors.
Of prognostic importance are the functional status of the tumor and how large or invasive it is. Table 43.2-6 is the grading and staging system used at UCSF. 383
SURGERY
The goal of surgery for the larger (usually, but not always, endocrine inactive) pituitary tumors is to decompress the visual pathways and reduce tumor bulk, whereas
the goal for hypersecreting adenomas is normalization of the hypersecretion with preservation of remaining normal pituitary function. For larger nonsecreting pituitary
adenomas, surgical cure is often not possible or even necessary, because radiation therapy adjuvant to surgery is usually curative. However, radiation therapy is
often withheld until regrowth is suspected on postoperative surveillance scans. In contrast, the hypersecreting adenoma should be resected in its entirety, whenever
possible, because the effects of hypersecretion can be devastating, and response to radiation therapy is slow and less predictable.
The operative approach of choice for most pituitary tumors is transsphenoidal, because it is safer and better tolerated than the alternative transcranial (frontal
craniotomy) approach. 384 The transsphenoidal approach is possible for tumors occupying the sella turcica and even in those with generous suprasellar extension as
long as the tumor is soft (the usual case) and can drop into the sella with progressive resection. Tough, woody suprasellar tumors and those with extension laterally
into the middle fossa or anteriorly beneath the frontal lobes must be resected by craniotomy.
RADIATION THERAPY
Microadenomas of the pituitary, usually diagnosed because of endocrine hypersecretion, may be totally resected. There is no indication for radiation therapy, unless
there is persistent hormone elevation. Radiation therapy is also indicated for hormone-secreting adenomas that are refractory to pharmacologic management.
Macroadenomas, particularly the endocrine inactive lesions, may invade into adjacent structures, such as the cavernous sinus, the optic chiasm, or the third ventricle.
Subtotal resection and postoperative irradiation can relieve mass effect, shrink the remaining tumor, prevent regrowth, and lower hormone levels. Further, radiation
therapy alone or medical treatment for patients with hormone-secreting tumors are effective alternatives to resection for patients who are medically inoperable or who
refuse surgery.
Breen and colleagues found that for irradiated nonfunctioning adenomas the actuarial tumor control rate was 87.5% at 10 years, 77.6% at 20 years, and 64.7% at 30
years. The oncocytic variant of pituitary adenoma appears to be less sensitive to control by radiotherapy than the nononcocytic form of undifferentiated cell
adenoma.385 Sheline demonstrated that patients with large, nonfunctioning adenomas or prolactin-secreting adenomas associated with visual field deficits had a 60%
recurrence rate (using visual field changes as an end point) within 5 years after incomplete resection alone. 386 The recurrence rate was reduced to approximately 4%
by the addition of radiation therapy, whereas 7% treated with radiation therapy alone recurred. Approximately two-thirds of patients who presented with modest visual
field defects, involving not more than one quadrant, who were treated by surgery or radiation therapy alone had return of normal vision in the involved eyes. With
larger visual field defects, restoration of vision was better in patients who received preirradiation therapy and surgical decompression than in those treated by
radiation therapy alone. Normal vision was achieved by irradiation alone in approximately two-thirds of patients with acromegaly and visual field defects.
Radiation therapy is less effective in controlling endocrine hypersecretion than in controlling the growth of pituitary adenomas. Radiation therapy decreases serum
growth hormone concentrations to normal levels (defined as basal growth hormone levels of less than 5 ng/mL and glucose-suppressed growth hormone levels of less
than 2 ng/mL) in 80% to 85% of acromegalic patients. 387 Growth hormone levels decrease at a rate of 10% to 30% per year. Thus, several years may be required for
the levels to normalize. 387 The probability of normalization is related to the pretreatment growth hormone level. Radiation therapy is most effective in tumors with
relatively small preradiation therapy growth hormone elevations (30 to 50 ng/mL), whereas the response is less predictable with higher growth hormone levels. 386 In
contrast, serum insulin-like growth factor-1 levels remain elevated after radiotherapy, 388 and long-term treatment with somatostatin or its analogues may be
required. 389 Radiation therapy controls hypercortisolism in 50% to 75% of adults and 80% of children with Cushing's disease. Response occurs within 6 to 9 months of
treatment.390
Data on control of prolactin secretion by conventional radiation therapy are difficult to interpret. When radiation therapy is used as primary treatment or after
incomplete surgical resection, the rate of prolactin normalization varies from 30% to 70%. 391,392 The response occurs over several years, and the probability of cure
(defined as prolactin less than 25 ng/mL) is inversely related to the baseline prolactin level. In some cases persistent hyperprolactinemia after treatment may be
caused by damage to the hypothalamic prolactin inhibitory pathway. 393 Dopamine agonist therapy with agents such as cabergoline is often part of the initial

management of prolactinomas.394 Radiation therapy in such cases is reserved for patients who fail to respond to this treatment.
Pituitary adenomas may be treated using several different techniques. One approach is to use bilateral coronal arcs with moving wedge filters. The usual treatment
plan includes two 110-degree arcs with 30-degree wedge filters. The field size is chosen to include the target volume in the 95% isodose line. The neck is placed in
the flexed position so that the plane of rotation is behind the eyes. During simulation, markers are placed on the eyelids. Three tattoo marks are placed on the skin
and used for alignment with laser beams to ensure daily positional reproducibility. For large tumors, a three-field technique with lateral opposed wedged portals and a
superior or vertex field may be used. Three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy approaches as well as stereotactic radiosurgery and radiotherapy and charged
particle beams have also been advocated. 395,396 With conventional radiotherapy techniques, the total dose is carried to 45 Gy in 25 fractions of 1.8 Gy, calculated at
the 95% isodose line. This combination of fraction size and total dose controls tumor growth in 90% of cases at 10 years, and, therefore, a larger dose is not
indicated. 397,398 and 399 Further, radiation-induced injury to optic apparatus or adjacent brain with this dose-fractionation scheme is rare, whereas larger fractions or
greater total doses lead to a higher incidence of injury. The optic chiasm appears especially sensitive to radiation injury in patients with acromegaly. 39 Hypopituitarism,
however, may develop as a late complication years after completion of radiation therapy. 397 It is more likely to occur in patients who have had surgery and
postoperative radiation therapy than in those who have been treated by radiation therapy or surgery alone. 397 Because hypopituitarism is largely correctable by
hormone replacement therapy, patients treated for pituitary adenomas should be observed by an endocrinologist for the remainder of their lives. The risk of
developing a radiation-induced brain tumor after treatment is 1.3% to 2.7% at 10 years and 2.7% at 30 years. 385,400
Reirradiation can be considered for patients with recurrent pituitary adenomas when there has been a long interval after the first course of radiotherapy and when
other therapeutic methods have been unsuccessful. Schoenthaler and colleagues reported the outcome of 15 patients who were retreated (median dose, 42 Gy) after
a median of 9 years from their initial course of radiation therapy (median dose, 40.8 Gy). With a median follow-up time of 10 years, 80% of patients were locally
controlled. Although no visual complications were observed, all patients developed hypopituitarism and two sustained temporal lobe injury. 401

CRANIOPHARYNGIOMAS
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Craniopharyngiomas occur primarily in children. These tumors arise from cell rests that are remnants of Rathke's pouch at the juncture of the infundibular stalk and
the pituitary gland. Most of these tumors become symptomatic only after they have attained a diameter of approximately 3 cm. They are usually cystic at the time of
presentation. They may compress the optic chiasm or pituitary gland and extend up into the third ventricle. The cyst is high in proteinaceous material and calcium and
is seen easily by CT scan or MRI.
Clinically, craniopharyngiomas produce increased intracranial pressure and hypopituitary-hypothalamic-chiasmal dysfunction. Symptoms vary and, in children, may
include obesity, delayed development, decreased vision and optic atrophy, field defects, and papilledema.
SURGERY
Craniopharyngiomas usually are approached by a microsurgical procedure done through a frontal or frontotemporal craniotomy. Large craniopharyngioma cysts that
enter and enlarge the sella turcica can be drained and resected through a transsphenoidal procedure.
The goal of most surgeons in the surgery of craniopharyngioma is total removal, but some do a more conservative operation and depend on the excellent results with
radiation therapy. Aggressive removal nearly guarantees some injury to the pituitary stalk, with subsequent temporary or permanent diabetes insipidus and elements
of hypopituitarism. Patients injured in this manner must take replacement hormones and use inhaled desmopressin acetate spray for the control of diabetes insipidus
for life. However, patients whose vision was affected by the craniopharyngioma can expect improvement after surgery. The mortality of craniopharyngioma resection
should be extremely low.
In Europe, a few centers are treating craniopharyngioma cysts with stereotactic puncture and the instillation of colloidal therapeutic radioisotopes, particularly yttrium
90.402 Such treatments are being tried in this country also with colloidal phosphorus 32. 403 Intracystic therapy may be a good treatment for craniopharyngioma cysts
recurring after conventional external beam irradiation.
RADIATION THERAPY
Although debate exists regarding the extent to which total excision should be attempted, numerous reports demonstrate that local tumor control and survival after
subtotal removal, consisting of extensive resection or of limited biopsy and cyst aspiration and irradiation, is comparable with that achieved by radical excision. 404,405
and 406 The local control rates after complete resection, subtotal resection alone, and incomplete resection and postoperative irradiation are 70%, 26%, and 75%,
respectively.406 Ten-year survival rates range from 24% to 100% for complete resection, 31% to 52% for subtotal resection, 62% to 86% for incomplete resection and
irradiation, 404,405,407 and 100% after radiotherapy alone. 407 The latter group are comprised of patients with small tumors at presentation. Patients undergoing
conservative treatment including biopsy and cyst drainage and irradiation appear to enjoy a better quality of life and demonstrate less psychosocial impairment than
those initially treated with more extensive resections. 405 Further, conservative therapy is associated with less hypothalamic and pituitary dysfunction and a lower
incidence of persistent diabetes insipidus than when a total or near total excision is attempted. 408 More extensive resections using a subfrontal approach may be
associated with frontal lobe and visual perceptual dysfunction. 409
The radiation therapy target volume is based largely on CT and MRI scanning using relatively small margins around demonstrated tumor. The technique varies
according to size and location of residual tumor, but most patients are treated by bicoronal arcs with moving wedge filters, similar to the method used for pituitary
adenomas. More sophisticated three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy and intensity-modulated radiotherapy approaches and stereotactic radiotherapy techniques
using relocatable immobilization devices may further spare surrounding normal tissues. 407 The use of radiosurgery is limited because of the proximity of most lesions
to the optic chiasm and brain stem. The total dose is 50 to 55 Gy, given in daily 1.8-Gy increments. In children younger than 3 years of age, it is recommended that, if
possible, irradiation be delayed until the child is older.

CEREBELLOPONTINE VESTIBULAR SCHWANNOMAS
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
The major tumors occurring in this region are the acoustic nerve tumors and meningiomas. Meningiomas have been discussed previously (see Meningiomas, earlier
in this chapter); therefore, the discussion that follows is limited to vestibular schwannomas (acoustic neuromas). These tumors originate on cranial nerve VIII, almost
always on the vestibular division, at the point where the nerve acquires its reticulin and Schwann cell investment. Within the skull, this transition zone occurs in the
internal auditory foramen and causes local erosion of the internal auditory meatus. Slow growth characterizes these tumors; therefore, they can grow to substantial
size before clinical symptoms lead to diagnosis. They often occupy the posterior fossa at the angle between the cerebellum and the pons. By compression, they can
affect cranial nerves VII, V, and, less often, IX and X, alone or in various combinations. When large enough, they can compress the medulla and obstruct the CSF,
leading to hydrocephalus.
Vestibular schwannomas are most common in the fifth decade and can be associated with familial neurofibromatosis. In the latter instance they occur earlier, in late
childhood and adolescence, and may be bilateral.
In a series from the Massachusetts General Hospital, auditory and vestibular branch involvement was found to occur in 98% of patients, facial weakness with
disturbances of taste in 56%, sensory loss over the face in 56%, gait abnormality in 41%, and appendicular ataxia in 20%. 29 Diagnosis by skull radiographic
examination is suggestive, but definitive diagnosis is most effectively made with MRI or CT scan done in conjunction with the CSF administration of metrizamide
contrast.
SURGERY

The aim of surgery for vestibular schwannomas is complete resection, with the surgical approach chosen after consideration of the patient's age, residual hearing,
and the size and location of the tumor. 410 When useful hearing is present, the suboccipital approach is taken because of the possibility of hearing preservation
postoperatively, particularly in smaller tumors. In patients with poor hearing, the translabyrinthine approach, which produces deafness in the ear operated on, is used
for its lower overall morbidity. Occasionally, tumors that reside purely within lateral portions of the internal acoustic canal are approached through the middle cranial
fossa.410
The translabyrinthine route requires only a small incision behind the ear through which the petrous bone is gradually removed with a high-speed drill until the facial
nerve is identified and exposed to the point where it can be separated from the tumor and protected. The dura of the posterior fossa is seen easily and can be opened
to gain access to the intradural component of the tumor.
The transoccipital approach requires a unilateral posterior fossa craniectomy, after which the dura is opened and the cerebellum is retracted medially to expose the
cerebellopontine angle. The lower cranial nerves are protected while tumor is removed, and the porus acousticus is unroofed in an effort to identify the facial nerve,
and in smaller tumors, the acoustic nerve as well. Once the facial nerve is identified, the remainder of the tumor is removed in a usually lengthy and involved
operation that fully exploits the surgeon's microsurgical skill.
Complete removal of vestibular schwannomas through the posterior fossa can be predicted in almost every instance, and life-threatening complications are rare
except in patients with extremely large tumors. While preservation of the acoustic nerve is uncommon in even small tumors, the facial nerve is in continuity at the end
of most acoustic tumor resections. Therefore, any postoperative paresis or paralysis tends to be temporary. When the facial nerve is divided during surgery, it is
sutured together when possible, or a nerve graft is placed between the stumps. Facial paralysis with no evidence of recovery within a few months is treated by
surgical reinnervation, wherein another cranial nerve, usually the hypoglossal nerve, is joined to the facial nerve peripherally. Bilateral acoustic tumors are seen with
neurofibromatosis type 2 and present difficult problems in surgical decision making. 411 In general, a conservative approach is taken, treating the largest tumor when
symptoms absolutely require it. Bilateral aggressive tumor resections lead to complete deafness and confer the possibility of bilateral facial nerve paralysis, a
cosmetic and functional problem.
RADIATION THERAPY
There have been few reports on the role of conventional radiation therapy for treatment of acoustic neurilemmomas. A review by Wallner and colleagues disclosed 62
patients who were thought to have had a total resection and did not receive irradiation. 412 The recurrence rate in this group was only 3% (2 of 62). The 15-year
actuarial survival and relapse-free survival rates were 98% and 94%, respectively. Thirty patients underwent subtotal resection, defined as removal of less than 90%
of the tumor. Six of the 13 (46%) patients with subtotally resected lesions recurred, whereas only 1 of 17 (6%) of those treated with subtotal resection and
postoperative irradiation to a dose higher than 45 Gy relapsed. The 15-year relapse-free survival rate for patients treated with subtotal resection and radiation therapy
(greater than 45 Gy) was 94% compared with 41% for nonirradiated patients ( P = .01); the corresponding 15-year survival rates were 100% and 67%, respectively ( P
= .016). There were no recurrences among three patients in whom biopsy was obtained at the time of surgery that was followed by irradiation. On the other hand, four
of seven patients who were irradiated for disease progression after having had resection alone subsequently developed a second recurrence. Based on these data, it
was concluded that postoperative irradiation should be given after subtotal resection to reduce the risk of local tumor progression. The target volume includes a
narrow margin around the residual tumor. Maire and colleagues reported a local control rate of 88% among 24 patients with large tumors, the majority of whom were
irradiated without initial surgical resection. Hearing was maintained in three of five patients with bilateral neurilemmomas after contralateral tumor resection. No
patient developed facial or trigeminal neuropathy. 413 Treatment is given using a homolateral pair of angled beams with wedge filters in daily increments of 1.8 to 2.0
Gy to a total of 50 to 55 Gy.
Stereotactic radiosurgery and stereotactic radiotherapy have been used as an alternative to surgery in selected patients with small acoustic neurilemmomas. In a
long-term follow-up study Kondziolka and colleagues reported that 98% of 162 patients treated to a median dose of 16 Gy were controlled. 414 Only four patients
required subsequent surgical treatment. Normal facial function was preserved in 79% of patients after 5 years, and normal trigeminal function was preserved in 73%.
Patients may develop new incomplete trigeminal and facial cranial neuropathies within a median of 6 to 7 months after radiosurgery. These tend to be mild and
usually improve within 8 to 13 months of onset. Approximately, 45% to 50% of patients with useful hearing before radiosurgery maintain their pretreatment hearing
level, whereas patients with hearing deficits before treatment generally do not improve after radiosurgery. 393,414,415 The risk of treatment-induced cranial neuropathy is
directly related to the volume of the lesion, the dose administered, and the length of nerve irradiated. 416 Efforts are being directed at decreasing the complication rates
while maintaining the high control rates with more sophisticated planning and treatment techniques and reducing dose levels. 417

GLOMUS JUGULARE TUMORS
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Glomus jugulare tumors arise from glomus tissue in the adventitia of the jugular bulb (glomus jugulare) or along Jacobson's nerve in the temporal bone, sometimes
multifocally. The tumor invades temporal bone diffusely, but growth is characteristically slow. Sometimes they are endocrine active, with a carcinoid or
pheochromocytoma-like syndrome. 418 Because glomus jugulare tumors occur in the jugular foramen, they commonly cause lower cranial nerve palsies and early
symptoms of hoarseness and difficulty swallowing. Later, facial weakness, hearing loss, and atrophy of the tongue become prominent. Pulsating tinnitus also may be
a presenting symptom, and a pulsating mass can sometimes be seen behind the eardrum. A presumptive radiologic diagnosis of glomus tumor can be made by CT or
MRI scanning, with jugular neurilemmoma being the main differential diagnosis. Because glomus tumors incite a tremendous blood supply, particularly by way of the
ascending pharyngeal artery, cerebral angiography provides the definitive diagnosis. Because preoperative tumor embolization is essential to surgical removal of
glomus tumors, the diagnostic angiogram should be performed just before surgery when possible.
Histopathologically, numerous vascular channels are distinctive. The background is composed of clear cells clumped in a fibrous matrix. A small percentage of glomus
tumors are malignant.
SURGERY
The treatment of glomus jugulare tumors is controversial, with advocates for radiation, 419 surgery, and the combination. 420 Most clinicians would agree that a resection
should be attempted and that in most instances gross surgical resection, if not a cure, is a realistic goal. Surgery on glomus tumors is most often performed by a
neurosurgeon and a head and neck surgeon together after preoperative embolization. The base of the skull in the region of the jugular foramen is first exposed, and
neurovascular structures are identified and mobilized through a high transverse cervical incision. When the incision is extended behind the pinna and a
mastoidectomy is completed, the facial nerve can be protected, and the entire tumor bulb, jugular bulb, and internal jugular vein can be seen passing through the base
of the skull. Finally, after a suboccipital craniectomy, the sigmoid sinus above and the jugular vein below can be ligated, and the segment between them excised with
the attached tumor. Complications of this procedure include CSF leak and cranial nerve (particularly facial) palsy.
RADIATION THERAPY
Even though glomus tumors are histologically benign, radiation therapy is effective and has been recommended for symptomatic lesions that cannot be totally
resected or as primary treatment.421,422 These tumors regress slowly after irradiation, and the success of radiation therapy is measured by the amelioration of
symptoms and the absence of disease progression. In their review of the literature, Springate and Weichselbaum found a 94% local control rate for temporal bone
glomus tumors treated with radiotherapy alone and a 91% local control rate for glomus tympanicum and jugulare tumors treated with radiotherapy alone or with
preoperative or postoperative irradiation. 421 The dose required for control is relatively modest. Kim and associates reported a series of 40 patients with such lesions
and added a literature survey. 423 The control rate with subtotal resection and postoperative irradiation was 85%. When radiation therapy only was used for inoperable
or recurrent tumors, control was achieved in 88%. Their composite data, including cases from the literature, showed a 25% recurrence rate for doses lower than 40
Gy, whereas only 1.4% recurred with doses of 40 Gy or higher.
Based on these data, a dose of 45 Gy in 5 weeks is recommended. Although a dose of 50 Gy has been advocated for more advanced tumors, there is no evidence
that such lesions require higher doses. 422 Treatment is usually delivered through a homolateral pair of angled, wedged portals, depending on the precise location of

the lesion. More sophisticated three-dimensional conformal techniques may be used to reduce the dose to surrounding normal tissue structures.

CHORDOMAS
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Chordomas occur along the pathway of the primitive notochord, which extends, in human embryos, from the tip of the dorsum sellae to the coccyx. Chordomas are
extradural, multilobulated tumors, varying in consistency from extremely soft to woody and cartilaginous. They are pseudoencapsulated and may invade through the
basal dura.
The typical chordoma is composed of cord-like rows of distended, vacuolated (physaliferous) cells. A variant, the chondroid chordoma, has distinctly chondroid
elements and may be less aggressive. 424 None of the histopathologic characteristics of tumor aggressiveness (cellularity, pleomorphism, and mitoses) seems to be
predictive in chordoma.
The diagnosis of clivus chordomas cannot be made without radiologic tests and often is delayed because symptoms are nonspecific and vague. At onset there is
usually headache and intermittent diplopia. These vague symptoms often are not reported, allowing the tumor to grow to an enormous size before the diagnosis is
made. Gradually, headache (upper clivus tumors) and neck pain (lower clivus tumors) worsen. Superiorly placed tumors proceed to cause diplopia and facial
numbness as the cavernous sinus and Meckel's cave are invaded. Lower clivus tumors compress the lower cranial nerves and later the brain stem.
The differential diagnosis of cranial chordoma includes basal meningioma, neurilemmoma (schwannoma), nasopharyngeal carcinoma, pituitary adenoma, and
craniopharyngioma. MRI scanning usually results in a working diagnosis of chordoma, but surgical biopsy (and resection) is mandatory.
SURGERY
Surgery for cranial chordomas is obligatory to obtain diagnostic tissue, to enhance the effectiveness of subsequent radiation therapy, and to improve the patient's
clinical condition. With an aggressive surgical resection, a favorable effect on the severe headaches and neurologic deficits associated with chordomas can be
anticipated.
Intracranial chordomas occur at the base of the skull, a region relatively remote from surgical access. Consequently, a variety of innovative approaches have been
developed by neurosurgeons and head and neck surgeons, and these procedures are commonly done with both types of specialist in attendance.
For midline lesions of the upper clivus that extend into the sella or sphenoid sinus, or both, a transseptal, transsphenoidal approach (as for pituitary tumors) is best.
Large, compressive, transdural extensions of these upper clivus tumors into the interpeduncular cistern must be removed through a transcranial, subtemporal,
intradural approach. For the more lateralized upper clival tumor and some lateralized midclival tumors, an approach through a sphenoethmoidectomy (to which may
be added a maxillectomy) is useful. For midline tumors of the midclivus and lower clivus, a transoral resection is commonly used. A combination of exposures
sometimes is necessary for extremely large tumors.
A potentially serious complication of the transsphenoidal, transsphenoethmoid, and transoral approaches is CSF leakage and consequent meningitis. Therefore,
every attempt must be made to keep the dura intact during these procedures. Because dural invasion by cranial chordomas may occur 50% of the time, inadvertent
entry of the dura during tumor resection is sometimes unavoidable. Careful intraoperative patching of the leak with fat and muscle grafts followed by postoperative
spinal CSF drainage is essential.
Cranial chordomas often recur after surgery and radiation therapy. In this situation, reoperation directed toward symptomatic improvement is the only treatment option.
Reoperations are complicated by surgical scarring and tissue compromise from irradiation.
RADIATION THERAPY
Chordomas and low-grade chondrosarcomas of the base of skull, clivus, and axial skeleton are not amenable to complete surgical resection. With conventional
megavoltage irradiation (median dose of 50 Gy), the local control rate for these lesions is only 27%. 425 Although higher doses appear to improve the local control rate,
the proximity of dose-limiting critical structures, such as the optic nerves, chiasm, other cranial nerves, brain stem, temporal lobes, and spinal cord, limit the dose that
can be delivered safely to these lesions. Charged particle beams such as protons and helium ions, which feature sharp lateral beam edges and a finite range in
tissue, may be used to deliver higher doses than are possible with conventional photon irradiation while keeping the dose to neighboring critical structures at a safe
level. The depth of penetration can be tailored to the clinical situation by varying the energy of the beam or by interposing bolus material in the beam path. Charged
particle beams can be made to stop in front of a critical structure, such as the spinal cord, and in combination with other lateral or oblique beams, a target volume may
be wrapped around a critical structure. Precise tumor and normal tissue identification and beam delivery techniques, highly reproducible patient positioning, and
accurate compensation for tissue inhomogeneities in the beam path are required.
Available data suggest that the higher doses that are achievable with charged particle irradiation result in higher local control rates than have been observed with
conventional radiation therapy techniques. Munzenrider and coworkers reported the outcome of 132 patients with nonchondroid and chondroid skull base chordomas
treated postoperatively at the Harvard Cyclotron Laboratory at Massachusetts General Hospital with a 160-MeV proton beam. Patients received a median dose of 69
cobalt Gy equivalent (CGE; the dose in proton Gy multiplied by 1.1, the relative biologic effectiveness for protons compared with cobalt 60), with a range of 36 to 79
CGE, and 95% received 67 CGE (70% to 100% of dose given with proton beam). Follow-up ranged from 2 to 158 months (median, 46 months). Local control was
achieved in 70% of patients (93 of 132). Local control was more common in men than women (77% vs. 40%) and more frequent in those with chondroid chordomas
than in nonchondroid tumors (83% vs. 66%). The 5-year actuarial local control and disease-specific survival rates were 59% and 80%, respectively. 426 Treatment was
complicated by functional and anatomic abnormalities in the brain and brain stem, visual and auditory deficits, and pituitary insufficiency requiring hormone
replacement. Skull base chondrosarcomas treated with proton therapy have a better prognosis than chordomas. Rosenberg and colleagues reported a 5- and 10-year
local control rate of 99% and 98%, respectively, whereas the disease-specific survival rates at 5 and 10 years were both 99%. 427
Berson and colleagues reviewed the results of 45 patients with chordomas and chondrosarcomas of the base of skull and cervical spine treated at the University of
California Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory with helium ion or neon beams. 428 Total doses ranged from 59.4 to 80.0 Gy equivalent (the physical dose multiplied by the
relative biologic effectiveness; 1.2 to 1.3 for helium and 2.0 to 3.3 for neon). After initial subtotal resection, 23 patients were treated with charged particles alone, and
13 were treated with photons and particles combined. Nine patients were treated for recurrent disease. Similar to the findings of Munzenrider and coworkers, 426 the
5-year actuarial local control and survival rates were 59% and 62%, respectively. The 2-year actuarial local control rate for patients treated at initial diagnosis was
78% compared with 33% for those with recurrent tumors (P <.01). The 2-year local control rate for tumor volumes of less than 20 mL was 80%, whereas it was 33%
for larger lesions (P <.05). Complications included unilateral or bilateral blindness in five patients, and four patients developed brain stem injury.

HEMANGIOBLASTOMAS AND HEMANGIOMAS
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Hemangioblastoma accounts for approximately 2% of intracranial tumors, arising most often in the cerebellar hemispheres and vermis. Usually solitary, these tumors
can be multiple and may also occur in the brain stem, spinal cord, and supratentorial compartment. Cerebellar hemangioblastoma can be sporadic or occur as a
familial disorder as part of the von Hippel-Lindau complex that is transmitted as an autosomal dominant disorder with varying degrees of penetrance. Other entities
associated with familial hemangioblastoma are hypernephroma, polycystic kidneys, pancreatic cysts, pheochromocytoma, and erythrocytosis.
Cerebellar hemangioblastomas usually are recognized in the third decade, causing symptoms of increased intracranial pressure and symptoms and signs of
cerebellar dysfunction. Gait disturbance and imbalance are particularly common. Clinical progression is slow because these tumors enlarge extremely slowly.
The hemangioblastoma probably arises during embryonic life from primitive endothelial cells around the fourth ventricle. The tumor is composed of numerous capillary
and sinusoidal channels lined with endothelial cells. Interspersed are nests of lipid-laden pseudoxanthoma cells. The tumor is usually cystic and contains

proteinaceous, xanthochromic fluid. The cyst contains a red (vascular) firm mural nodule, the apparent source of the fluid. The cyst wall is a glial nonneoplastic
reaction to the secreted fluid. Occasional hemangioblastomas (brain stem and spinal cord, particularly) are without cysts.
SURGERY
In most instances, the diagnosis can be made by CT scan or MRI. Angiography, to confirm the diagnosis and map the tumor's blood supply, is usually done before
surgery. Cerebellar hemangioblastoma tumors are readily approached and excised, with the cyst drained and the entire solid portion carefully dissected and removed.
Solid hemangioblastomas of the brain stem are exceedingly vascular, and their removal is associated with high mortality. Such tumors are sometimes irradiated with
or without a confirmatory biopsy.
RADIATION THERAPY
Radiation therapy is recommended for patients with unresectable, incompletely excised, and recurrent hemangioblastomas and for those patients who are medically
inoperable. Smalley and associates reported the outcome of 25 patients treated with radiation therapy for hemangioblastoma. 429 Nineteen patients had gross residual
disease after initial surgery or recurrent tumors, whereas six had only microscopic disease. The overall 5-, 10-, and 15-year survival rates were 85%, 58%, and 58%,
respectively, and the recurrence-free survival rates were 76%, 52%, and 42%, respectively. Eight of the 19 patients with gross disease were locally controlled. In-field
disease control rates were significantly higher in patients who received at least 50 Gy ( P = .06) than in those who received lower doses. Five of the six patients
treated for microscopic disease had the disease controlled. Based on these data, doses of at least 50 to 55 Gy in 5.5 to 6.0 weeks appear to be warranted.
Radiosurgery has also been applied to the treatment of hemangioblastomas. Patrice and colleagues summarized the outcome of 38 lesions in 22 patients (eight
patients with multifocal tumors) who received radiosurgery as definitive treatment or in relapsed patients after surgery or surgery and conventional radiotherapy. The
median tumor volume was 0.97 cc (range, 0.05 to 12.0 cc), and the median dose was 15.4 Gy (range, 12 to 20 Gy). With a median follow-up time of 24.5 months
(range, 6 to 77 months), 31 of 36 evaluable tumors (86%), including all tumors treated definitively with radiosurgery, remained locally controlled. All five lesions that
relapsed after radiosurgery were among the tumors that were treated for recurrence after initial surgery. Better control rates were associated with higher doses and
smaller tumor volumes. The 3-year actuarial progression-free survival rate was 86%, and the 2-year actuarial survival rate was 88%. 430 Among 29 hemangioblastomas
treated by Chang and coworkers, only one (3%) progressed. Five tumors (17%) regressed completely, 16 (55%) partially regressed, and 7 (24%) remained
unchanged in size. 431 Radiosurgery should be considered for surgically unresectable hemangioblastomas, as adjuvant treatment for incompletely excised tumors, as
definitive treatment of multifocal disease, and for salvage therapy for discrete recurrences after surgical relapse. 430,431

CHOROID PLEXUS PAPILLOMA AND CARCINOMA
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Choroid plexus papilloma and carcinoma are rare tumors that occur most often in children younger than 12 years of age, although they can occur at any age. Nearly
one-half of these tumors are found in patients younger than 20 years of age. The tumor is an irregularly lobulated reddish mass, which on histopathologic examination
is apparently normal choroid plexus. Rarely, these tumors show malignant features and are then classified as choroid plexus carcinoma.
In children, choroid plexus papillomas most often occur in the lateral ventricles. In adults, the fourth ventricular papilloma is most common. Third ventricle tumors are
exceedingly rare. Because papillomas tend to grow slowly within ventricles, they expand to fill the ventricle and block CSF flow. In addition, papillomas are thought to
secrete CSF. Choroid plexus papillomas (and carcinomas) can produce hydrocephalus secondary to obstruction of the CSF; by CSF overproduction by the tumor; or
by damage to the CSF resorptive bed from recurrent hemorrhages. As a result, increased intracranial pressure without focal findings is the most common
presentation; fourth ventricular tumors can also be associated with focal findings of ataxia and nystagmus.
Although choroid plexus papillomas and carcinomas extensively seed throughout the ventricular and subarachnoid spaces, seeding from papillomas is usually
subclinical, whereas that from carcinomas is frequent and dramatically symptomatic. These tumors are seen easily by CT scan and MRI. For patients with anaplastic
changes, the authors advocate staging by myelography and examination of the CSF.
Therapy for anaplastic tumors should be approached in a manner similar to medulloblastoma and malignant ependymomas. Because of the aggressive nature of the
more anaplastic tumors, therapy must be equally aggressive, requiring radiation therapy and, in some instances, intraventricular chemotherapy.
SURGERY
The treatment of choroid plexus papillomas is total surgical excision. Choroid plexus tumors of the lateral ventricle are approached through a high parietal cortical
incision and transcortical approach to the ventricular trigone. The predilection of these tumors for the left (often dominant) side makes this approach worrisome.
Hydrocephalus is the rule and simplifies the exposure when retraction into the ventricle is established. Tumor arteries and veins are identified by use of the operating
microscope and then coagulated, after which smaller tumors are removed intact and larger tumors are removed piecemeal. In one-half of the patients, hydrocephalus
is relieved by tumor resection, but persistent hydrocephalus requires shunting.
Choroid plexus papillomas of the third ventricle are exceedingly rare but can be approached through various surgical exposures of the third ventricle. The problems of
removal of fourth ventricular choroid plexus tumors are similar to those associated with suboccipital removal of medulloblastomas or ependymomas, as discussed in
surgery sections for those tumors.
RADIATION THERAPY
Because choroid plexus papillomas are often cured by complete surgical resection, there is little information regarding their response to radiation. 299 The studies that
are available do not provide sufficient detail to allow an assessment of the value of radiotherapy for these tumors. Pathology specimens from patients who received
low-dose preoperative radiation therapy (approximately 30 Gy) demonstrated a marked reduction in tumor size, obliteration of the capillary bed, and necrosis,
although at this dose level there was little change in the neoplastic choroidal cells. Naguib and coworkers reported a case of an inoperable choroid plexus papilloma
with extensive involvement of the mastoid bone. 432 This patient received 49.5 Gy in 32 treatments during a 33-day period. Serial CT scans showed that 16 months
after completion of the radiation therapy, the mass was markedly reduced in size. Such anecdotal reports suggest that it is reasonable to offer local radiation therapy
to patients with inoperable or recurrent choroid plexus papillomas. 299
Radiation therapy may be beneficial in patients with choroid plexus carcinomas even after gross total resection. 433,434 Because ventricular and subarachnoid tumor
seeding may occur in up to 44% of cases, 435 consideration must be given to treating the entire craniospinal axis. However, data to support this approach are
unavailable. Chow and colleagues recommend that patients with completely excised localized choroid plexus carcinomas be treated with either chemotherapy or
limited field irradiation if their spinal MRI and CSF cytology study results are negative. They advise both chemotherapy and craniospinal axis irradiation for those with
incompletely excised tumors or evidence of leptomeningeal spread. 434 Infants and young children may be successfully treated initially with postoperative
chemotherapy and delayed radiation. 436
CHEMOTHERAPY
Usually, chemotherapy is not used for choroid plexus papillomas. For the more anaplastic tumors, however, the authors have increasingly used chemotherapy
adjuvant to surgery and irradiation to prevent the inevitable recurrence and CSF dissemination common to the choroid plexus carcinomas. As with many of the less
common tumors discussed, there are no chemotherapeutic guidelines and few reports to guide the therapist.
Initially, the authors used chemotherapy only for recurrent disease. They have used combinations of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and VCR and nitrosourea-based
combinations. They have seen transient responses and disease control with both. They have also used intraventricular chemotherapy with low-dose methotrexate (2
to 3 mg/d for 5 days) or cytosine arabinoside (30 mg/d for 3 days), or both, to stave subarachnoid spread. As a result of this experience, the authors currently
advocate the use of adjuvant chemotherapy with a nitrosourea-based combination after irradiation and the use of concomitant intraventricular chemotherapy. During

irradiation, they have used intraventricular cytosine arabinoside and methotrexate after irradiation. Further study and additional approaches should be considered.

SPINAL AXIS TUMORS
CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Some of the clinical features of spinal axis tumor localization and diagnosis have been discussed previously. Most primary spinal axis tumors produce symptoms and
signs as a result of spinal cord and nerve root compression rather than because of parenchymal invasion.
The reported frequency of primary spinal cord tumors is between 10% and 19% of all primary CNS tumors. 437 Although most spinal axis tumors are extradural, most
primary spinal axis tumors are intradural. Of intradural tumors, the intradural extramedullary neurilemmomas and meningiomas are the most common (see Table
43.2-3). Neurilemmomas and meningiomas are normally intradural, but occasionally they may present as extradural tumors. Other intradural extramedullary tumors
are vascular tumors, chordomas, and epidermoids.
Intramedullary tumors have the same cellular origins as the other CNS tumors discussed previously. In terms of frequency, ependymomas occur in approximately 40%
of patients with intramedullary tumors; next most common are the astrocytomas of low- and mid-anaplasia. These are followed in frequency by less common
histologies such as oligodendroglioma, ganglioglioma, medulloblastoma, and various hemangiomas and hemangioblastomas.
Table 43.2-26 classifies spinal axis tumors by location. Although different tumor types exhibit a predilection for certain spinal regions, taken altogether, spinal tumors
are distributed almost evenly along the spinal axis. Approximately 50% of spinal tumors involve the thoracic spinal canal, 30% involve the lumbosacral spine, and the
remainder involve the cervical spine, including the foramen magnum. Some tumors, such as the neurilemmomas, occur with greatest frequency in the thoracic region,
although they can be found throughout the spine and often extend through an intervertebral foramen to acquire a dumbbell configuration.

TABLE 43.2-26. Classification of Spinal Tumors by Their Location in Relation to the Spinal Cord and Dura Mater

Meningiomas are dural based and arise preferentially at the foramen magnum and in the thoracic spine. Astrocytomas are distributed throughout the spinal cord, and
most ependymomas involve the conus medullaris and the cauda equina. Spinal chordomas are characteristically sacral.
Clinically, patients with spinal axis tumors present with a sensorimotor spinal tract syndrome, a painful radicular spinal cord syndrome, or a central syringomyelic
syndrome. In the sensorimotor presentation, symptoms and signs are in response to compression of the spinal cord. The onset is gradual over weeks to months, initial
presentation is asymmetric, and motor weakness predominates. The level of impairment determines the muscle groups involved. Because of external compression,
dorsal column involvement occurs with paresthesia and abnormalities of pain and temperature on the side contralateral to the motor weakness.
Radicular spinal cord syndromes occur because of external compression and infiltration of spinal cord roots. The main symptom is sharp, knife-like pain in the
distribution of a sensory nerve root. The intense pain is often of short duration, with pain that is more aching in nature persisting for longer periods. The pain typically
is exacerbated by coughing and sneezing or other maneuvers that increase intracranial pressure. Local paresthesia and impairment of sensations of pain and touch
are common, as are weakness and muscle wasting. These findings commonly antedate cord compression by months.
Spinal tumors, particularly intramedullary tumors, can produce syringomyelic dysfunction by destruction and cavitation within the central gray matter of the cord. This
produces lower motor neuron destruction and attendant segmental muscle weakness, wasting, and loss of reflexes. There is also a dissociated sensory loss of pain
and temperature sensation with preservation of touch. With extension of the lesion, however, touch, vibration, and position sense are affected.
Finally, many patients with spinal axis tumors or supratentorial tumors that show a tendency toward drop metastases tend to lead to leptomeningeal neoplasia.
Choucair and colleagues found that 1.2% of glioblastomas and 1.5% of anaplastic gliomas had metastatic spread of their supratentorial tumors to the spinal cord at
some time during the course of their disease. 62
SURGERY
General Considerations
The use of the operating microscope is as essential for spinal cord tumor surgery as it is for brain tumor surgery. In addition, other surgical adjuncts, such as
intraoperative ultrasound, the CO 2 laser, and the CUSA, are equally valuable for the resection of spinal cord tumors. The ultrasound is particularly useful for
examining the spinal cord through an intact or open dura to assess the level of maximum tumor involvement or to differentiate tumor cysts from solid tumor masses.
Surgical Planning
MRI scanning is invaluable for the diagnosis, localization, and characterization of spinal tumors (see Fig. 43.2-4). In all but vascular tumors (e.g., hemangioblastoma),
in which angiography is needed, or tumors that cause extensive bony destruction (e.g., metastasis), where CT scanning might be helpful, a technically excellent MRI
scan is most often sufficient for preoperative planning for spinal tumors. Determination of the spinal level of the tumor and its exact relation to the spinal cord is
important in localization. Corticosteroids are given before, during, and after spinal cord tumor surgery to help control spinal cord edema.
Removal of Intradural Extramedullary Tumors
Meningiomas and neurilemmomas (schwannomas) occur in the intradural extramedullary spinal compartment. Most of these tumors can be completely resected
(cured), because through a laminectomy exposure they can be easily separated and rotated away from the spinal cord, which is already displaced, but not invaded, by
tumor.
Neurilemmomas arise from spinal rootlets (most often dorsal rootlets), and their removal includes sections of those rootlets involved. Neurilemmomas can grow along
the nerve root in a dumbbell fashion through a neural foramen; and although some of these extraspinal tumor extensions can be removed by extending the initial
laminectomy exposure laterally, some must be resected at a separate operation through a thoracotomy, a costotransversectomy, or a retroperitoneal approach.
Meningiomas in most patients can be removed through a posterior (laminectomy) approach, because they are commonly lateral or anterolateral, and even the more
anteriorly placed tumors cause enough lateral displacement of the spinal cord to allow access for resection without traction on the spinal cord. The uncommon tumor
directly anterior to the spinal cord must sometimes be approached anteriorly, anterolaterally, or posterolaterally. Anteriorly situated meningiomas at the foramen

magnum are sometimes unresectable because of their encasement of the vertebral artery.
Removal of Intramedullary Tumors
The most common intramedullary tumors are ependymoma and astrocytoma. Hemangioblastoma is another (infrequent) tumor occurring in the spinal intramedullary
compartment. Surgery is the principal treatment for all these tumors, with the exception of anaplastic astrocytomas.
Intramedullary tumors are approached through a laminectomy exposure, and after the dura is opened, a longitudinal myelotomy is made over the widened region of
spinal cord and the incision deepened several millimeters to the tumor surface. Dissection planes around the tumor are sought microsurgically and, in the case of
ependymomas, usually found and extended gradually around the tumor's surface, because removal of the central tumor bulk (by CO 2 laser or CUSA) causes the
tumor to collapse. Usually, such tumors are completely removed. Tumors with indefinite dissection planes (usually low-grade astrocytomas) cannot be removed
completely, but bulk reduction can cause long-term palliation. If frozen section shows a tumor to be malignant, surgery is aborted, and radiation therapy is the
treatment.
Hemangioblastomas are extremely vascular tumors, so the tumor margins are addressed first where feeding arteries are coagulated, and the tumor is dissected and
removed en bloc. The dorsal location of most of these tumors and the commonly associated cyst simplifies the removal to some extent.
RADIATION THERAPY
Radiation therapy is recommended for unresectable and incompletely resected neoplasms of the spinal axis. As a rule, doses of 50 to 54 Gy are used so that the risk
of radiation injury to the cord is less than that from the neoplasm itself. Low-grade tumors and meningiomas are treated at the lower dose level and malignant tumors
to the higher level. 438 For lesions involving only the cauda equina and in situations in which irreversible and complete transverse myelopathy already has occurred,
higher doses are permissible. The tumor usually is treated with a margin of 2 to 3 cm or two vertebral bodies above and below the lesion. Extension of the portals to
include the thecal sac has been suggested for ependymomas that are removed piecemeal 439 and for those arising in the distal spinal canal. 440 Ependymomas of the
cord have a longer natural history than astrocytomas. Although most astrocytomas that recur do so within 3 years of treatment, recurrence of ependymomas may be
delayed for as long as 12 years. 440,441
Adjunctive radiation therapy is not necessary when ependymomas are removed completely in an en bloc fashion. However, 75% of patients (three of four) reported by
Wen and associates recurred locally or with spread to the thecal sac after complete resection alone when the tumor was excised piecemeal. 439 All seven nonirradiated
patients with incompletely excised lesions reported by Barone and Elvidge 442 and Schuman and coworkers443 recurred. In contrast, postoperative radiation therapy
appears to improve tumor control and disease-free survival in patients with incompletely resected ependymomas. Sloof and colleagues found their irradiated patients
survived nearly twice as long as those who were not irradiated. 2 Five- and 10-year survival rates in irradiated patients with localized ependymomas range from 60% to
100% and 68% to 95%, respectively, whereas 10-year relapse-free survival rates vary from 43% to 61%. 440,444 Tumor grade has a significant effect on outcome.
Waldron and colleagues found that for well-differentiated tumors the 5-year cause-specific survival was 97% as compared with 71% for intermediate or poorly
differentiated tumors (P = .005).440 Myxopapillary ependymomas that arise exclusively in the conus medullaris have a better prognosis than the cellular ependymomas
that arise in the cord. 439 Local recurrence is the predominate pattern of treatment failure, occurring in 25% of irradiated patients. 440
The 5- and 10-year survival rates for irradiated patients with low-grade astrocytomas of the spinal cord vary from 60% to 90% and 40% to 90%, respectively; 5- and
10-year relapse-free survival rates range from 66% to 83% and 53% to 83%, respectively. 438,441 Approximately 50% to 65% of astrocytomas are controlled locally.
Patients with malignant gliomas have a much poorer prognosis; none of the patients with anaplastic astrocytoma or glioblastoma multiforme reported by Linstadt and
colleagues survived longer than 8 months. 441
CHEMOTHERAPY
There have been no reports of controlled clinical trials of chemotherapy for primary spinal axis tumors. Drugs active against intracranial astrocytomas,
oligodendrogliomas, ependymomas, medulloblastoma, and germ cell tumors logically may be assumed to be equally efficacious against these same histologies in the
spinal cord. Along with reports of chemotherapy activity against intracranial tumors, anecdotal patient reports have been included.
The authors' experience suggests that palliation is possible for astrocytomas using nitrosourea-based chemotherapy regimens. No therapy is clearly superior. For
drop metastases from ependymomas, they have used BCNU and dibromodulcitol as single agents and various combinations with some benefit. 181,445 For drop
metastases from medulloblastoma, various drugs have been found to be beneficial. Specifically, cyclophosphamide, carboplatin, methotrexate, procarbazine,
teniposide, and VCR have been used alone or in various combinations. These drugs would be expected to produce palliation for weeks to many months.
Although leptomeningeal spread is a common complication of primary spinal axis tumors, the use of intraventricular and intrathecal chemotherapy is limited to the
treatment of microscopic deposits. Biodistribution in the subarachnoid CSF can be limited in the face of intradural extramedullary tumors. In addition, deposits of 5 mm
in diameter or larger are not likely to benefit because of limitations in diffusion coupled with transcapillary loss of drug in the tumor. 446
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Davis FG, Preston-Martin S. Epidemiology. Incidence and survival. In: Bigner DD, McLendon RE, Bruner JM, eds. Russell and Rubinstein's pathology of tumors of the nervous system. London:
Arnold, 1999:7.
2. Sloof JL, Kernohan JW, MacCarty CS. Primary intramedullary tumors of the spinal cord and filum terminale. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1964.
3. Preston-Martin S. Descriptive epidemiology of primary tumors of the spinal cord and spinal meninges. Neuroepidemiology 1990;9:106.
4. Davis DL, Hoel D, Percy C, et al. Is brain cancer mortality increasing in industrial countries? Ann NY Acad Sci 1990;609:791.
5. Boyle P, Maisonneuve P, Saracci R, et al. Is the increased incidence of primary malignant brain tumors in the elderly real? JNCI 1990;82:1594.
6. Greig NH, Ries LG, Yancik R, et al. Increasing annual incidence of primary malignant brain tumors in the elderly. JNCI 1990;82:1621.
7. Musicco M, Filippini G, Bordo BM, et al. Gliomas and (occupational) exposure to carcinogens: case-control study. Am J Epidemiol 1982;116:782.
8. Moss AR. Occupational exposure and brain tumors. J Toxicol Environ Health 1985;16:703.
9. McLaughlin JK, Malker HS, Blot WJ, et al. Occupational risks for intracranial gliomas in Sweden. JNCI 1987;78:253.
10. Wrensch M, Yost M, Miike R, et al. Adult glioma in relation to residential power frequency electromagnetic field exposures in the San Francisco Bay area. Epidemiology 1999;10:523.
11. Kheifets LI, Sussman SS, Preston-Martin S. Childhood brain tumors and residential electromagnetic fields (EMF). Rev Environ Contam Toxicol 1999;159:111.
12. Higashikubo R, Culbreth VO, Spitz DR, et al. Radiofrequency electromagnetic fields have no effect on the in vivo proliferation of the 9L brain tumor. Radiat Res 1999;152:665.
13. Copeland DD, Bigner DD. Glial-mesenchymal tropism of in vivo avian sarcoma virus neuro-oncogenis in rats. Acta Neuropathol 1978;41:23.
14. Wodinski I, Kensler CJ, Rall DP. The induction and transplantation of brain tumors in neonate beagles. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1969;99.
15. Beutler AS, Banck MS, Wedekind D, et al. Tumor gene therapy made easy: allogeneic major histocompatibility complex in the C6 rat glioma model. Hum Gene Ther 1999;10:95.
16. Toki S, Tanaka T, Uosaki Y, et al. RP-1551s, a family of azaphilones produced by Penicillium sp., inhibit the binding of PDGF to the extracellular domain of its receptor. J Antibiot (Tokyo)
1999;52:235.
17. Hochberg FH, Miller G, Scholley RT, et al. Central nervous system lymphoma ralated to Epstein-Barr virus. N Engl J Med 1983;309:745.
18. Annegers JF, Laws ER Jr, Kurland LT, et al. Head trauma and subsequent brain tumors. Neurosurgery 1979;4:203.
19. Relling MV, Rubnitz JE, Rivera GK, et al. High incidence of secondary brain tumors after radiotherapy and antimetabolites. Lancet 1999;354:34.
20. Malone M, Lumley H, Erdohazi M. Astrocytoma as a second malignancy in patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Cancer 1986;57:979.
21. Sogg RL, Donaldson SS, Yorke CH. Malignant astrocytoma following radiotherapy of a craniopharyngioma. J Neurosurg 1978;48:622.
22. Poster DS, Bruno S. The occurrence of second primary neoplasms in patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. IRCS Med Sci Cancer 1980;8:554.
23. Rubinstein AB, Shalit MN, Cohen M, et al. Radiation-induced cerebral meningioma: a recognizable entity. J Neurosurg 1984;61:966.
24. Spallone A, Gagliardi FM, Vagnozzi R, et al. Intracranial meningiomas related to external cranial irradiation. Surg Neurol 1979;12:153.
25. Levin VA, Wilson CB. Clinical characteristics of cancer in the brain and spinal cord. In: Crook ST, Prestaydo A, eds. Cancer and chemotherapy: introduction to neoplasia and antineoplastic
chemotherapy. New York: Academic Press, 1981:167.
26. Bingas B. Tumors of the base of the skull. In: Vinken PJ, Bruyn GW, eds. Handbook of clinical neurology: tumors of the brain and skull. Amsterdam: North Holland, 1974:136.
27. Fahlbusch R, Marguth F. Endocrine disorders associated with intracranial tumors. In: Vinken PJ, Bruyn GW, eds. Handbook of clinical neurology: tumors of the brain and skull. Amsterdam:
North Holland, 1974:345.
28. Russell DJ. Pathology of tumors of the nervous system. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1977.
29. Adams R, Victor M. Principles of neurology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1977.
30. Fandino J, Kollias SS, Wieser HG, et al. Intraoperative validation of functional magnetic resonance imaging and cortical reorganization patterns in patients with brain tumors involving the
primary motor cortex. J Neurosurg 1999;91:238.
31. Berger MS, Kincaid J, Ojemann GA, et al. Brain mapping techniques to maximize resection, safety and seizure control in children with brain tumors. Neurosurgery 1999;25:786.
32. McDermott MW, Gutin PH. Image-guided surgery for skull base neoplasms using the ISG viewing wand. Anatomic and technical considerations. Neurosurg Clin North Am 1996;7:285.

33. Heilbrun MP. Computed tomography-guided stereotactic systems. Clin Neurosurg 1984; 31:564.
34. Apuzzo ML, Chandrasoma PT, Cohen D, et al. Computed imaging stereotaxy: experience and perspective related to 500 procedures applied to brain masses. Neurosurgery 1987;20:930.
35. Leibel SA, Sheline GE. Tolerance of the brain and spinal cord to conventional irradiation. In: Gutin PH, Leibel SA, Sheline GE, eds. Radiation injury to the nervous system. New York: Raven
Press, 1991:211.
36. Posner JB. Side effects of radiotherapy. In: Neurologic complications of cancer. Philadelphia, PA: FA Davis, 1995:311.
37. Hoffman WF, Levin VA, Wilson CB. Evaluation of malignant glioma patients during the postirradiation period. J Neurosurg 1979;50:624.
38. Schultheiss TE, Kun LE, Ang KK, et al. Radiation response of the central nervous system. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:1093.
39. Sheline GE, Wara WM, Smith V. Therapeutic irradiation and brain injury. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:1215.
40. Rubin P. Radiation biology and radiation pathology syllabus. 1975.
41. Sklar CA, Constine LS. Chronic neuroendocrinological sequelae of radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:1113.
42. Gordon KB, Char DH, Sagerman RH. Late effects of radiation on the eye and ocular adnexa. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:1123.
43. Cooper JS, Fu K, Marks J, et al. Late effects of radiation therapy in the head and neck region. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:1141.
44. Marks JE, Baglan RJ, Prassad SC, et al. Cerebral radio-necrosis: incidence and risk in relation to dose, time, fractionation and volume. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:243.
45. Leibel SA, Sheline GE. Radiation therapy for neoplasms of the brain. J Neurosurg 1987;66:1.
46. Bleyer WA, Griffin TW. White matter necrosis, mineralizing microangiopathy, and intellectual abilities in surviovors of childhood leukemia. In: Gilbert HA, Kagan AR, eds. Radiation damage to
the nervous system. New York: Raven Press, 1980:155.
47. Hazle JD, Jackson EF, Schomer DF, et al. Dynamic imaging of intracranial lesions using fast spin-echo imaging: differentiation of brain tumors and treatment effects. J Magn Reson Imaging
1997;7:1084.
48. Gutin PH. Treatment of radiation necrosis of the brain. In: Gutin PH, Leibel SA, Sheline GE, eds. Radiation injury to the nervous system. New York: Raven Press, 1991:271.
49. Glantz MJ, Burger PC, Friedman AH, et al. Treatment of radiation-induced nervous system injury with heparin and warfarin. Neurology 1994;44:2020.
50. Mulhern RK, Fairclough D, Ochs J. A prospective comparison of neuropsychologic performance of children surviving leukemia who received 18- Gy, or no cranial irradiation. J Clin Oncol
1991;9:1348.
51. Mulhern RK, Ochs J, Kun LE. Changes in intellect associated with cranial radiation therapy. In: Gutin PH, Leibel SA, Sheline GE, eds. Radiation injury to the nervous system. New York: Raven
Press, 1991:325.
52. Eiser C. Intellectual abilities among survivors of childhood leukemia as a function of CNS irradiation. Arch Dis Child 1978;53:391.
53. Kleinberg L, Wallner K, Malkin MG. Good performance status of long-term disease-free survivors of intracranial gliomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;26:129.
54. Schultheiss TE, Stephens LC, Peters LJ. Survival in radiation myelopathy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1765.
55. Wang PY, Shen WC, Jan JS. Magnetic resonance imaging in radiation myelopathy. Am J Neuroradiol 1992;13:1049.
56. Marcus RB Jr, Million RR. The incidence of myelitis after irradiatin of cervical spinal cord. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:3.
57. Schultheiss TE. Spinal cord radiation “tolerence” doctrine versus data. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:219.
58. Wara WM, Phillips TL, Sheline GE, et al. Radiation tolerance of the spinal cord. Cancer 1975;35:1558.
59. Cox JD, Stetz J, Pajak TF. Toxicity criteria of the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) and the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC). Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:1341.
60. Pavy JJ, Denekamp J, Letschert J, et al. EORTC Late Effects Working Group. Late effects toxicity scoring: the SOMA scale. Radiother Oncol 1995;35:11.
61. Burger PC, Dubis PJ, Schold SC Jr, et al. Computerized tomographic and pathologic studies in untreated, quiescent, and recurrent glioblastoma multiforme. J Neurosurg 1983;58:159.
62. Choucair AK, Levin VA, Gutin PH, et al. Development of multiple lesions during radiation therapy and chemotherapy in patients with gliomas. J Neurosurg 1986;65:654.
63. Hochberg FH, Pruitt A. Assumptions in the radiotherapy of glioblastoma. Neurology 1980;30:907.
64. Kelly PJ, Daumas-Duport C, Kispert DB, et al. Imaging-based stereotaxic serial biopsies in untreated intracranial glial neoplasms. J Neurosurg 1987;66:865.
65. Levin VA. Pharmacokinetics and CNS chemotherapy. In: Hellmann K, Carter SK, eds. Fundamentals of cancer chemotherapy. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1986:28.
66. Levin VA, Patlak CS, Landahl HD. Heuristic modeling of drug delivery to malignant brain tumors. J Pharmacokinet Biopharm 1980;8:257.
67. Levin VA. Chemotherapy of primary brain tumors. Neurol Clin North Am 1985;3:855.
68. Weiss HD, Walker MD, Wiernik PH. Neurotoxicity of commonly used antineoplastic agents. N Engl J Med 1974;291:75.
69. Shapiro WR, Young DF. Neurological complications of antineoplastic therapy. Acta Neurol Scand 1984;100:125.
70. Feun LG, Wallace S, Yung WK, et al. Phase I trial of intrcarotid BCNU and cisplatin in patients with malignant intracerebral tumors. Cancer Drug Deliv 1984;1:239.
71. Stewart DJ, Grahovac Z, Benoit B et al. Intracarotid chemotherapy with a combination of 1,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea (BCNU), cis-diaminedichloroplatinum (cisplatin), and
4'-o-demethyl-1-o-(4,6-o-2-thenylidene-beta-d-glucopyranosyl) epipodophyllotoxin (vm-26) in the treatment of primary and metastatic brain tumors. Neurosurgery 1984;15:828.
72. Brem H, Piantadosi S, Burger PC, et al. Placebo-controlled trial of safety and efficacy of intraoperative controlled delivery by biodegradable polymers of chemotherapy for recurrent gliomas.
The Polymer-brain Tumor Treatment Group. Lancet 1995;345:1008.
73. Levin VA. Management of gliomas, medulloblastoma and CNS germ cell tumors. In: Cavalli F, Hansen HH, Kaye SB, eds. Textbook of medical oncology. London: Martin Dunitz, 1997:309.
74. Kleihues P, Burger PC, Scheithauer BW. Histological typing of tumors of the central nervous system. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1993.
75. Daumas-Duport C, Scheithauer B, O'Fallon J, et al. Grading of astrocytomas, a simple and reproducible method. Cancer 1988;62:2152.
76. Kim TS, Halliday AL, Hedley-Whyte ET, et al. Correlates of survival and the Daumas-Duport grading system of astrocytomas. J Neurosurg 1991;74:27.
77. Nelson JS, Tsukada Y, Schoenfeld D, et al. Necrosis as a prognostic criterion in malignant supratentorial, astrocytic gliomas. Cancer 1983;52:550.
78. Laws ER Jr, Taylor WF, Clifton MB, et al. Neurosurgical management of low-grade astrocytoma of the cerebral hemispheres. J Neurosurg 1984;61:665.
79. Waller MD, Alexander E Jr, Hunt WE, et al. Evaluation of BCNU and/or radiotherapy in the treatment of anaplastic gliomas: a cooperative clinical trial. J Neurosurg 1978;49:333.
80. Salcman M. Malignant glioma management. Neurosurg Clin North Am 1990;1:49.
81. Levin VA, Hoffman WF, Heilbron DC, et al. Prognostic significance of the pretreatment CT scan on time to progression for patients with malignant gliomas. J Neurosurg 1980;52:642.
82. Wood JR, Green SB, Shapiro WR. The prognostic importance of tumor size in malignant gliomas: a computed tomographic scan study by the Brain Tumor Cooperative Group. J Clin Oncol
1988;6:338.
83. Winger MJ, Macdonald DR, Cairncross JG. Supratentorial anaplastic gliomas in adults: the prognostic importance of extent of resection and prior low-grade glioma. J Neurosurg 1989;71:487.
84. Kumar ARV, Hoshino T, Wheeler KT, et al. Comparative rates of dead tumor cell removal from brain, muscle, subcutaneous tissue, and peritonal cavity. JNCI 1974;52:1751.
85. Gutin PH, Leibel SA, Wara WM, et al. Recurrent malignant gliomas: improved survival following interstitial brachytherapy with high-activity iodine-125 sources. J Neurosurg 1987;67:864.
86. Young B, Oldfield EH, Markesbery WR, et al. Reoperation for glioblastoma. Neurosurgery 1981;55:917.
87. Harsh GR IV, Levin VA, Gutin PH, et al. Reoperation for recurrent glioblastoma and anaplastic astrocytoma. Neurosurgery 1987;21:615.
88. Bauman G, Lote K, Larson D, et al. Pretreatment factors predict overall survival for patients with low- grade glioma: A recursive partitioning analysis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:923.
89. Shaw EG, Daumas-Duport C, Scheithauer B, et al. Radiation therapy in the management of low-grade supratentorial astrocytomas. J Neurosurg 1989;70:853.
90. Leibel SA, Sheline GE, Wara WM, et al. The role of radiation therapy in the treatment of astrocytomas. Cancer 1975;35:1551.
91. Wallner KE, Gonzales MF, Edwards MS, et al. Treatment results of juvenile pilocytic astrocytoma. J Neurosurg 1988;69:171.
92. MacDonald DR. Low-grade gliomas, mixed gliomas, and oligodendrogliomas. Semin Oncol 1994;21:236.
93. Berger MS, Leibel SA, Bruner JM, et al. Primary central nervous system tumors of the supratentorial compartment. In: Levin VA, ed. Cancer in the nervous system. New York: Churchill
Livingstone, 1995:57.
94. Berger MS, Deliganis AV, Dobbins J, et al. The effect of extent of resection on recurrence in patients with low grade cerebral hemisphere gliomas. Cancer 1994;74:1784.
95. Vertosick FT, Selker RG, Arena VC. Survival of patients with well-differentiated astrocytomas diagnosed in the era of computer tomography. Neurosurgery 1991;28:496.
96. Recht LD, Lew R, Smith TW. Suspected low-grade glioma: Is deferring treatment safe? Ann Neurol 1992;31:431.
97. McCormack BM, Miller DC, Budzilovich GN, et al. Treatment and survival of low-grade astrocytoma in adults 19771988. Neurosurgery 1992;31:636.
98. Karim ABMF, Cornu P, Bleehan N, et al. Immediate postoperative radiotherapy in low grade glioma improves progression free survival but not overall survival: preliminary results of an
EORTC/MRC randomized phase III trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:400a.
99. Karim AB, Maat B, Hatlevoll R, et al. Randomized trial on dose-response in radiation therapy of low-grade cerebral glioma: European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
(EORTC) Study 22844. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:549.
100. Shaw E, Arusell R, Scheithauer B, et al. A prospective randomized trial of low versus high-dose radiation therapy in adults with supratentorial low-grade glioma: initial report of a
NCCG-RTOG-ECOG study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:401a.
101. Kiebert GM, Curran D, Aaronson NK, et al. Quality of life after radiation therapy of cerebral low-grade gliomas of the adult: results of a randomised phase III trial on dose response (EORTC trial
22844). EORTC Radiotherapy Co-operative Group. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:1902.
102. Eyre HJ, Crowley JJ, Townsend JJ, et al. A randomized trial of radiotherapy versus radiotherapy plus CCNU for incompletely resected low-grade gliomas: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. J
Neurosurg 1993;78:909.
103. Levin VA, Prados MD, Wara WM, et al. Radiation therapy and bromodeoxyuridine chemotherapy followed by procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine for the treatment of anaplastic gliomas. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:75.
104. Walker MD, Alexander E, Hunt WE, et al. Evaluation of BCNU and /or radiotherapy in the treatment of anaplastic gliomas. J Neurosurg 1978;49:333.
105. Gaspar LE, Fisher BJ, MacDonald DR, et al. Malignant glioma-timing of response to radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:877.
106. Leibel SA, Scott CB, Loeffler JS. Contemporary approaches to the treatment of malignant gliomas with radiation therapy. Semin Oncol 1994;21:198.
107. Prados MD, Scott C, Curran WJ, et al. Procarbazine, CCNU, and vincristine (PCV) chemotherapy for anaplastic astrocytoma: a retrospective review of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group
protocols comparing survival with carmustine or PCV adjuvant chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3389.
108. Leibel SA, Scott CB, Loeffler J. Contemporary approaches to the treatment of malignant gliomas with radiation therapy. Semin Oncol 1994;21:198.
109. Phillips TL, Levin VA, Ahn DK, et al. Evaluation of bromodeoxyuridine in glioblastoma multiforme: a Northern California Cancer Center Phase II study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:709.
110. Prados MD, Scott C, Sandler H, et al. A phase 3 randomized study of radiotherapy plus procarbazine, CCNU, and vincristine (PCV) with or without BUdR for the treatment of anaplastic
astrocytoma: a preliminary report of RTOG 9404. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:1109.
111. Sullivan FJ, Herscher LL, Cook JA, et al. National Cancer Institute (phase II) study of high-grade glioma treated with accelerated hyperfractionated radiation and iododeoxyuridine: results in
anaplastic astrocytoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:583.
112. Nelson DF, Curran WJ, Nelson JS, et al. Hyperfractionation in malignant glioma, report on a dose-searching phase I/II protocol of the radiation therapy oncology group (RTOG). Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1990;9:A350.
113. Scott CB, Curran W, Yung WKA, et al. Long term results of RTOG 9006: randomized trial of hyperfractionated radiotherapy (RT) to 72 Gy & carmustine vs. standard RT & carmustine for
malignant glioma patients with emphasis on anaplastic astrocytoma patients. Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:40a.
114. Keim H, Potthoff PC, Schmidt K, et al. Survival and quality of life after continuous accelerated radiotherapy of glioblastomas. Radiother Oncol 1987;9:21.
115. Groves MD, Maor MH, Meyers C, et al. A phase II trial of high-dose bromodeoxyuridine with accelerated fractionation radiotherapy followed by procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine for
glioblastoma multiforme. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:127.
116. Florell RC, Macdonald DR, Irish WD, et al. Selection bias, survival, and brachytherapy for glioma. J Neurosurg 1992;76:179.
117. Gutin PH, Prados MD, Phillips TL, et al. External irradiation followed by an interstitial high activity iodine-125 implant “boost” in the initial treatment of malignant gliomas: NCOG study 6G-82-2.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:601.
118. Loeffler JS, Alexander E, Wen PY, et al. Results of stereotactic brachytherapy used in the initial management of patients with glioblastoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:1918.
119. Green SB, Shapiro WR, Burger PC, et al. A randomized trial of interstitial radiotherapy (RT) boost for newly diagnosed malignant glioma: Brain Tumor Cooperative Group (BTCG) trial 8701.
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1994;13:A486.

120. Laperriere NJ, Leung PM, McKenzie S, et al. Radomized study of brachytherapy in the initial management of patients with malignant astrocytoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:1005.
121. Sneed PK, Stauffer PR, McDermott MW, et al. Survival benefit of hyperthermia in a prospective randomized trial of brachytherapy boost +/- hyperthermia for glioblastoma multiforme. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:287.
122. Leibel SA, Gutin PH, Wara WM, et al. Survival and quality of life after interstitial implantation of removable high-activity iodine-125 sources for the treatment of patients with recurrent
malignant gliomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:1129.
123. Shrieve DC, Alexander E III, Black PM, et al. Treatment of patients with primary glioblastoma multiforme with standard postoperative radiotherapy and radiosurgical boost: prognostic factors
and long-term outcome. J Neurosurg 1999;90:72.
124. Tang XM, Beesley JS, Grinspan JB, et al. Cell cycle arrest induced by ectopic expression of p27 is not sufficient to promote oligodendrocyte differentiation. J Cell Biochem 2000;76:270.
125. Mehta MP, Masciopinto J, Rozental J, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery for glioblastoma multiforme: report of a prospective study evaluating prognostic factors and analyzing long-term survival
advantage. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:541.
126. Scharfen CO, Sneed PK, Wara WM, et al. High activity iodine-125 interstitial implant for gliomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:583.
127. Shrieve DC, Alexander E, Wen PY, et al. Comparison of stereotactic radiosurgery and brachytherapy in the treatment of recurrent glioblastoma multiforme. Neurosurgery 1995;36:275.
128. Thornton AF. Three-dimensional treatment planning of astrocytomas, a dosimetric study of cerebral irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:1309.
129. Lee SW, Fraass BA, Marsh LH, et al. Patterns of failure following high-dose 3-D conformal radiotherapy for high-grade astrocytomas: a quantitative dosimetric study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1999;43:79.
130. Fitzek MM, Thornton AF, Rabinov JD, et al. Accelerated fractionated proton/photon irradiation to 90 cobalt gray equivalent for glioblastoma multiforme: results of a phase II prospective trial. J
Neurosurg 1999;91:251.
131. Levin VA, Silver P, Hannigan J, et al. Superiority of post-radiotherapy adjuvant chemotherapy with CCNU, procarbazine, and vincristine (PCV) over BCNU for anaplastic gliomas: NCOG 6G61
Final Report. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;18:321.
132. Jeremic B, Jovanovic D, Djuric LJ, et al. Advantage of post-radiotherapy chemotherapy with CCNU, procarbazine, and vincristine (mPCV) over chemotherapy with VM-26 and CCNU for
malignant gliomas. J Chemother 1992;4:123.
133. Dinapoli RP, Brown LD, Arusell RM, et al. Phase III comparative evaluation of PCNU and carmustine combined with radiation therapy for highy2Dgrade glioma. J Clin Oncol 1993; 11:1316.
134. Levin VA. Chemotherapy for brain tumors of astrocytic and oligodendroglial lineage: the past decade and where we are heading. Neuro-Oncology 1999;1:69.
135. Byar DP, Green SB, Strike TA. Prognostic factors for malignant glioma. In: Walker MD, ed. Oncology of the nervous system. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff, 1983:379.
136. Walker MD, Green SB, Byar DP, et al. Randomized comparison of radiotherapy and nitrosoureas for the treatment of malignant glioma after surgery. N Engl J Med 1980;303:1323.
137. Green SB, Byar DP, Walker MD, et al. Comparison of carmustine, procarbazine, and high-dose methylprednisolone as additions to surgery and radiotherapy for the treatment of malignant
glioma. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:1.
138. Paoletti P, Cuna GRD, Knerich R, et al. Multidisciplinary treatment for central nervous system tumors with nitrosourea compounds. Acta Neurochir 1978;41:287.
139. Eyre HJ, Quagliana JM, Eltringham JR, et al. Randomized comparisons of radiotherapy and CCNU versus radiotherapy, CCNU plus procarbazine for the treatment of malignant gliomas
following surgery. J Neurooncol 1983;1:171.
140. Adinolfi DBP, Casotto A, et al. Multidiscriplinary treatment for brain tumors. J Neurosurg 1978;22:111.
141. EORTC Brain Tumor Group. Effect of CCNU on survival rate of objective remission and duration of free interval in patients with malignant brain gliomafinal evaluation. Eur J Cancer
1978;14:851.
142. Deutsch MGS, Strike TA, et al. Results of a randomized trial comparing BCNU plus radiotherapy, streptozotocin plus radiotherapy, BCNU plus hyperfractionated radiotherapy, and BCNU
following misonidazole plus radiotherapy in the postoperative treatment of malignant glioma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;16:1389.
143. Feun LG, Steward DJ, Maor M, et al. A pilot study of MD+UL, cis MD-UL-diaminedichloroplatinum and radiation therapy in patients with high-grade astrocytomas. J Neurooncol 1983;1:109.
144. Shapiro WR, Green SB, Burger PC, et al. Randomized trial of three chemotherapy regimens and two radiotherapy regimens in postoperative treatment of malignant glioma: Brain Tumor
Cooperative Group Trial 8001. J Neurosurg 1989;71:1.
145. Yung WK, Janus TJ, Maor M, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy with carmustine and cisplatin for patients with malignant gliomas. J Neurooncol 1992;12:131.
146. Grossman SA, Wharam M, Sheidler V, et al. BCNU/cisplatin (B/C) followed by radiation in poor-prognosis patients with high-grade astrocytomas (HGA). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11:A418.
147. Rozental JM, Robins HI, Finlay J, et al. Eight-in-one-day chemotherapy administered before and after radiotherapy to adult patients with malignant gliomas. Cancer 1989;63:2475.
148. Levin VA, Wara WM, Davis RL, et al. NCOG Protocol 6G91: seven drug chemotherapy and irradiation for patients with glioblastoma multiforme. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:739.
149. Prados MD, Larson DA, Lamborn K, et al. Radiation therapy and hydroxyurea followed by the combination of 6-thioguanine and BCNU for the treatment of primary malignant brain tumors. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:57.
150. Rosenblum ML, Gerosa MA, Wilson CB, et al. Stem cell studies of human brain tumors. J Neurosurg 1983;58:170.
151. Thomas DGT, Darling JL, Paul EA, et al. Assay of anti-cancer drugs in tissue culture: relationship of relapse free interval (RFI) and in vitro chemosensitivity in patients with malignant cerebral
glioma. Br J Cancer 1985;51:525.
152. Kumar ARV, Renaudin J, Wilson CB, et al. Procarbazine hyudrochloride in the treatment of brain tumors. J Neurosurg 1974;40:365.
153. Wilson CB, Gutin P, Boldrey EB, et al. Single-agent chemotherapy of brain tumors. A five-year review. Arch Neurol 1976;33:739.
154. Rosenblum ML, Reynolds AF, Smith KA, et al. Chloroethyl-cyclohexyl-nitrosourea (CCNU) in the treatment of malignant brain tumors. J Neurosurg 1973;39:306.
155. Levin VA, Resser K, McGrath L, et al. PCNU treatment for recurrent malignant gliomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;68:969.
156. Nelson DF, Schoenfeld D, Weinstein AS, et al. A randomized comparison of misonidazole sensitized radiotherapy plus BCNU and radiotherapy plus BCNU for treatment of malignant glioma
after surgery: preliminary results of an RTOG study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:1143.
157. Levin VA, Crafts DC, Wilson CB, et al. Imidazole carboxamides: relationship of lipophilicity to activity against intracerebral murine glioma 26 and preliminary phase II clinical trial of 5-(3,3-bis
chlorethyl)-1-troazeno)-imidazole-4-carboxamide (NSC-82196) in primary and secondary brain tumors. Cancer Chemother Rep 1975;59:107.
158. Chamberlain MC, Prados MD, Silver P, et al. A phase I/II study of 24 hour intravenous AZQ in recurrent primary brain tumors. J Neurooncol 1988;6:319.
159. Decker DA, Al Sarraf M, Kresge C, et al. Phase II study of Aziridinylbenzoquinone (AZQ: NSC-182986) in the treatment of malignant gliomas recurrent after radiation. J Neurooncol 1985;3:19.
160. Schold SC Jr, Friedman HS, Bjornsson TD, et al. Treatment of patients with recurrent primary brain tumors with AZQ. Neurosurgery 1984;34:615.
161. Chamberlain MC, Prados MD, Silver P, et al. A phase II trial of oral melphalan in recurrent primary brain tumors. Am J Clin Oncol 1988;11:52.
162. Prados M, Rodriguez L, Seager M, et al. Phase II study of spirohydantoin mustard for the treatment of recurrent malignant gliomas. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:1105.
163. Bertolone SJ, Baum ES, Krivit W, et al. A phase II study of cisplatin therapy in recurrent childhood brain tumors. J Neurooncol 1989;7:5.
164. Yung WK, Mechtler L, Gleason MJ. Intravenous carboplatin for recurrent malignant glioma: a phase II study. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:860.
165. Yung WK, Prados M, Levin VA, et al. Intravenous recombinant interferon beta in patients with recurrent malignant gliomas: a phase I/II study. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1945.
166. Kaba SE, Kyritsis AP, Conrad C, et al. The treatment of recurrent cerebral gliomas with all-trans-retinoic acid (tretinoin). J Neurooncol 1997;34:145.
167. Fewer D, Wilson CB, Boldrey EB, et al. Chemotherapy of brain tumors: clinical experience with carmustine and vincristine. JAMA 1972;222:549.
168. Levin VA, Crafts DC, Wilson CB, et al. BCNU and procarbazine treatment for malignant brain tumors. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;60:243.
169. Gutin PH, Wilson CB, Kumar AR, et al. Phase II study of procarbazine, CCNU, and vincristine combination chemotherapy in the treatment of malignant brain tumors. Cancer 1975;35:1398.
170. Levin VA, Edwards MS, Wright DC, et al. Modified procarbazine, CCNU, and vincristine (PCV 3) combination chemotherapy in the treatment of malignant brain tumors. Cancer Treat Rep
1980;64:237.
171. Levin VA, Hoffman WF, Pischer TL, et al. BCNU 5 fluorouracil combination in the treatment of recurrent malignant brain tumors. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:2071.
172. Levin VA, Phuphanich S, Liu H-C, et al. Phase II study of combined BCNU, 5-fluorouracil, hydroxyurea, and 6-mercaptopurine (BFHM) for the treatment of malignant gliomas. Cancer Treat
Rep 1986;70:1271.
173. Buckner JC, Brown LD, Kugler JW, et al. Phase II evaluation of recombinant interferon alpha and BCNU in recurrent glioma. J Neurosurg 1995;82:430.
174. Prados MD, Rodriguez L, Chamberlain MC, et al. Treatment of recurrent gliomas with 1,3 (2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea and difluoromethylornithine. Neurosurgery 1989;24:806.
175. Levin VA, Chamberlain MC, Prados MD, et al. Phase I - II study of eflornithine and mitoguazone combined in the treatment of recurrent primary brain tumors. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:459.
176. Levin VA, Prados MD, Davis RL, et al. Treatment of recurrent gliomas with a polydrug protocol designed to combat nitrosourea resistance. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:766.
177. Schold SC Jr, Mahaley MS Jr, Vick NA, et al. Phase II diaziquone-based chemotherapy trials in patients with anaplastic supratentorial astrocytic neoplasms. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:464.
178. Yung WK, Harris MI, Bruner JM, et al. Intravenous BCNU and AZQ in patients with recurrent malignant gliomas. J Neurooncol 1989;7:237.
179. Longee DC, Friedman HS, Albright RE, et al. Treatment of patients with recurrent gliomas with cyclophosphamide and vincristine. J Neurosurg 1990;72:583.
180. Flowers A, Gleason MJ, Levin VA, et al. Combination chemotherapy with carboplatin, 5-fluorouricil, and procarbazine for recurrent malignant gliomas. Am Assoc Cancer Res 1993; 12:180.
181. Levin VA, et al. Unpublished observations. 1987 and 1991.
182. Levin VA, Prados MD, Yung WK, et al. Treatment of recurrent gliomas with eflornithine. JNCI 1992;84:1432.
183. Mason W, Louis DN, Cairncross JG. Chemosensitive gliomas in adultswhich ones and why. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:3423.
184. Jaeckle KA, Eyre HJ, Townsend JJ, et al. Correlation of tumor O6 methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase levels with survival of malignant astrocytoma patients treated with
bis-chloroethylnitrosourea: a Southwest Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3310.
185. Yung WK, Mechtler L, Gleason MJ. Intravenous carboplatin for recurrent malignant gliomas: a phase II study. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:860.
186. Straathof CS, van den Bent MJ, Ma J, et al. The effect of dexamethasone on the uptake of cisplatin in 9L glioma and the area of brain around tumor. J Neurooncol 1998;37:1.
187. Chamberlain MC, Kormanik P. Salvage chemotherapy with taxol for recurrent anaplastic astrocytomas. J Neurooncol 1999;43:71.
188. Glantz MJ, Chamberlain MC, Chang S, et al. The role of paclitaxel in the treatment of primary and metastatic brain tumors. Semin Radiat Oncol 1999;9:27.
189. Fetell MR, Grossman SA, Fisher JD, et al. Preirradiation paclitaxel in glioblastoma multiforme: efficacy, pharmacology, and drug interactions. New Approaches to Brain Tumor Therapy Central
Nervous System Consortium. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:3121.
190. Yung WKA, Prados MD, Yaya-Tur R, et al. Multicenter phase II trial of temozolomide in patients with anaplastic astrocytoma or anaplastic oligoastrocytoma at first relapse. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:2762.
191. Yung WKA, Albright RE, Olson J, et al. Randomized, multicenter, open-label, phase II, comparative study of temozolomide and procarbazine in the treatment of patients with glioblastoma
multiforme at first relapse. Br J Cancer(in press).
192. Ben Arush MW, Postovsky S, Goldsher D, et al. Clinical and radiographic response in three children with recurrent malignant cerebral tumors with high-dose tamoxifen. Pediatr Hematol Oncol
1999;16:245.
193. Couldwell WT, Weiss MH, DeGiorgio CM, et al. Clinical and radiographic response in a minority of patients with recurrent malignant gliomas treated with high-dose tamoxifen. Neurosurgery
1993;32:485.
194. Couldwell WT, Hinton DR, Surnock AA, et al. Treatment of recurrent malignant gliomas with chronic oral high-dose tamoxifen. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:619.
195. Chamberlain MC, Kormanik PA. Salvage chemotherapy with tamoxifen for recurrent anaplastic astrocytomas. Arch Neurol 1999;56:703.
196. Goodwin W, Crowley J. A retrospective comparison of high-dose BCNU with antologous marrow rescue plus radiotherapy vs IV BCNU plus radiation therapy in high grade gliomas: a Southwest
Oncology Group review. Am Soc Clin Oncol 1989;8:A352.
197. Long J, Leff R, Daly M, et al. Phase II trial of high-dose etoposide (E) and autologous bone marrow transplantation for treatment of progressive glioma. Am Soc Clin Oncol 1989;8:A360.
198. Glannone L, Wolff SN. Phase II treatment of central nervous system gliomas with high-dose etoposide and autologous bone marrow transplantation. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:759.
199. Finlay JL, August C, Packer R, et al. High-dose multi-agent chemotherapy followed by bone marrow ‘rescue' for malignant astrocytomas of childhood and adolescence. J Neurooncol
1990;9:239.
200. Finlay JL. The role of high-dose chemotherapy and stem cell rescue in the treatment of malignant brain tumors. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;18(Suppl 3):S1.
201. Allen JC, Bloom J, Ertel I, et al. Brain tumors in children: current cooperative and institutional chemotherapy trials in newly diagnosed and recurrent disease. Semin Oncol 1986;13:110.
202. Freeman CR, Suissa S. Brain stem tumors in children: results of a survey of 62 patients treated with radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1823.
203. Eifel PJ, Cassady JR, Belli JA. Radiation therapy of tumors of the brainstem and midbrain in children: experience of the Joint Center For Radiation Therapy and Children's Hospital Medical

Center (19711981). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:847.
204. Landolfi JC, Thaler HT, DeAngelis LM. Adult brainstem gliomas. Neurology 1998;51:1136.
205. Coffey RJ, Lunsford LD. Stereotactic surgery for mass lesions of the midbrain and pons. Neurosurgery 1985;17:12.
206. Edwards MS, Wara WM, Urtasun RC, et al. Hyperfractionated radiation therapy for brain-stem glioma: a phase I-II trial. J Neurosurg 1989;70:691.
207. Packer RJ, Boyett JM, Zimmerman RA, et al. Hyperfractionated radiation therapy (72 Gy) for children with brain stem gliomas. A Childrens Cancer Group Phase I/II Trial. Cancer 1993;72:1414.
208. Prados MD, Wara WM, Edwards MS, et al. The treatment of brain stem and thalamic gliomas with 78 Gy of hyperfractionated radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995; 32:85.
209. Freeman CR, Krischer JP SR, et al. Final results of a study of escalating doses of hyperfractionated radiotherapy in brain stem tumors in children: a Pediatric Oncology Study. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:197.
210. Freeman CR, Farmer JP. Pediatric brain stem gliomas: a review. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:265.
211. Mandell LR, Kadota R, Freeman C, et al. There is no role for hyperfractionated radiotherapy in the management of children with newly diagnosed diffuse intrinsic brainstem tumors: results of a
pediatric oncology group phase III trial comparing conventional vs. hyperfractionated radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 199;43:959.
212. Jenkin D. Posterior fossa tumors in childhood: radiation treatment. Clin Neurosurg 1983;30:203.
213. Fulton DS, Levin VA, Wara WM, et al. Chemotherapy of pediatric brain-stem tumors. J Neurosurg 1981;54:721.
214. Rodriguez LA, Prados M, Fulton D, et al. Treatment of recurrent brain stem gliomas and other central nervous system tumors with 5-fluorouracil, CCNU, hydroxyurea, and 6-mercaptopurine.
Neurosurgery 1988;22:691.
215. Humphreys RP. Posterior cranial fossa brain tumors in children. In: Appuzzo M, ed. Third ventricular tumors. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1987:838.
216. Pencalet P, Maixner W, Sainte-Rose C, et al. Benign cerebellar astrocytomas in children. J Neurosurg 1999;90:265.
217. Chamberlain MC, Silver P, Levin VA. Poorly differentiated gliomas of the cerebellum. A study of 18 patients. Cancer 1990;65:337.
218. Chamberlain MC. Recurrent cerebellar gliomas: salvage therapy with oral etoposide. J Child Neurol 1997;12:200.
219. Walsh FB, Hoyt WF. Clinical neuro-opthalmology. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1969:2076.
220. Lewis RA, Gerson LP, Axelson KA, et al. von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis: II Incidence of optic gliomata. Ophthalmology 1984;91:929.
221. Housepian EM, Trokel SL, Jakobiec FO, et al. Tumors of the orbit. In: Youman JR, ed. Neurological surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1982:3024.
222. Housepian EM. Surgical treatment of unilateral optic nerve glimas. J Neurosurg 1969;31:604.
223. Sutton LN, Molloy PT, Sernyak H, et al. Long-term outcome of hypothalamic/chiasmatic astrocytomas in children treated with conservative surgery. J Neurosurg 1995;83:583.
224. Tenny RT, Laws ER, Young BR, et al. The neurosurgical management of optic gliomas: results in 104 patients. J Neurosurg 1982;57:452.
225. Bataini JP, Delanian S, Ponvert D. Chiasmal gliomas: results of irradiation management and review of literature. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:615.
226. Wong JYC, Uhl V, Wara WM, et al. Optic gliomas: a re-analysis of the University of California, San Francisco experience. Cancer 1987;60:1847.
227. Jenkin D, Angyalfi S, Beckler L, et al. Optic glioma in children: surveillance, resection, or irradiation? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:215.
228. Tao ML, Barnes PD, Billett AL, et al. Childhood optic chiasm gliomas: radiographic response following radiotherapy and long-term clinical outcome. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:579.
229. Erkal HS, Serin M, Cakmak A. Management of optic pathway and chiasmatic-hypothalamic gliomas in children with radiation therapy. Radiother Oncol 1997;45:11.
230. Rodriguez LA, Edwards MS, Levin VA. Management of hypothalamic gliomas in children: an analysis of 33 cases. Neurosurgery 1990;26:242.
231. Rosenstock JG, Packer RJ, Bilaniuk LT. Chiasmatic optic glioma treated with chemotherapy. J Neurosurg 1985;63:862.
232. Prados MD, Levin VA, Edwards MS, et al. Combined chemotherapy/radiotherapy for pediatric brain tumors: the UCSF experience. International symposium on Pediatric Neuro-Oncology,
Seattle, WA, 1989.
233. Packer RJ, Sutton LN, Bilaniuk LT, et al. Treatment of chiasmatic/hypothalamic gliomas of childhood with chemotherapy: an update. Ann Neurol 1988;23:79.
234. Petronio J, Edwards MS, Prados MD, et al. Management of chiasmal and hypothalamic gliomas of infancy and childhood with chemotherapy. J Neurosurg 1990;74:701.
235. Prados MD, Edwards MS, Rabbitt J, et al. Treatment of pediatric low-grade gliomas with a nitrosourea-based multiagent chemotherapy regimen. J Neurooncol 1997;32:235.
236. Ludwig CL, Smith MT, Godfrey AD, et al. A clinicopathologic study of 323 patients with oligodendrogliomas. Ann Neurol 1986;19:15.
237. Mirk SJ, Lindegaard K-F, Halvorsen TB, et al. Oligodendroglioma: incidence and biological behavior in a defined population. J Neurosurg 1985;63:881.
238. Shimizu KY, Tran LM, Mark RJ, et al. Management of oligodendrogliomas. Radiology 1993;186:569.
239. Gannett DE, Wisbeck WM, Silbergeld DL, et al. The role of postoperative irradiation in the treatment of oligodendroglioma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:567.
240. Wallner KE, Gonzales M, Sheline GE. Treatment of oligodendrogliomas with or without postoperative irradiation. J Neurosurg 1988;68:684.
241. Lindegaard K-F, Mork SJ, Eide GE, et al. Statistical analysis of clinicopathological features, radiotherapy, and survival in 170 cases of oligodendroglioma. J Neurosurg 1987;67:224.
242. Buckner JC, Brown LD, Kugler JW, et al. Oligodendroglioma: an analysis of the value of radiation therapy. Cancer 1987;60:2179.
243. Mirk SJ, Halvorsen TB, Lindegaard K-F, et al. Oligodendroglioma: histologic evaluation and prognosis. J Neuropath Exp Neurol 1986;45:65.
244. Shaw EG, Scheithauer BW, O'Fallon JR, et al. Oligodendrogliomas: the Mayo Clinic Experience. J Neurosurg 1992;76:428.
245. Allison RR, Schulsinger A, Vongtama V, et al. Radiation and chemotherapy improve outcome in oligodendroglioma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:399.
246. Mason WP, Krol GS, DeAngelis LM. Low-grade oligodendroglioma responds to chemotherapy. Neurology 1996;46:203.
247. Shaw EG, Scheithauer B, O'Fallon JR. Astrocytomas (A), oligo-astrocytomas (OA), and oligodendrogliomas (O): a comparative survival study. Neurology 1992;42:342.
248. Jeremic B, Shibamoto Y, Grujicic D, et al. Combined treatment modality for anaplastic oligodendroglioma: a phase II study. J Neurooncol 1999;43:179.
249. Kyritsis AP, Yung WK, Bruner J, et al. The treatment of anaplastic oligodendrogliomas and mixed gliomas. Neurosurgery 1993;32:365.
250. Cairncross JG, Macdonald DR. Chemotherapy for oligodendroglioma: progress report. Arch Neurol 1991;48:225.
251. Kernohan JW, Sayre GP. Tumors of the central nervous system. Atlas of tumor pathology . Washington, DC: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 1952.
252. Ross GW, Rubinstein LJ. Lack of histopathological correlation of malignant ependymomas with postoperative survival. J Neurosurg 1989;70:31.
253. Goldwein JW, Corn BW, Finlay JL, et al. Is craniospinal irradiation required to cure children with malignant (anaplastic) intracranial ependymomas? Cancer 1991;67:2766.
254. Vanuytsel L, Brada M. The role of prophylactic spinal irradiation in localized intracranial ependymoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:825.
255. Svien HJ, Mabon RF, Kernohan JW, et al. Ependymoma of the brain: pathologic aspects. Neurology 1953;3:1.
256. Healey EA, Barnes PD, Kupsky WJ, et al. The prognostic significance of postoperative residual tumor in ependymoma. Neurosurgery 1991;28:666.
257. Wallner KE, Wara WM, Sheline GE, et al. Intracranial ependymomas: results of treatment with partial or whole brain irradiation without spinal irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1986;12:1937.
258. McLaughlin MP, Marcus RB Jr, Buatti JM, et al. Ependymoma: results, prognostic factors and treatment recommendations. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:845.
259. Salazar OM, Castro-Vita H, Van Houtte P, et al. Improved survival in cases of intracranial ependymoma after radiation therapy: late report and recommendations. J Neurosurg 1983;59:652.
260. Vanuytsel LJ, Bessell EM, Ashley SE, et al. Long-term results of a policy of surgery and radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;23:313.
261. Merchant TE, Haida T, Wang MH, et al. Anaplastic ependymoma: treatment of pediatric patients with or without craniospinal radiation therapy. J Neurosurg 1997;86:943.
262. Robertson PL, Zeltzer PM, Boyett JM, et al. Survival and prognostic factors following radiation therapy and chemotherapy for ependymomas in children: a report of the Children's Cancer
Group. J Neurosurg 1998;88:695.
263. Levin VA, Lamborn K, Wara W, et al. Phase II study of 6-thioguanine, procarbazine, lomustine, dibromodulcitol, and vincristine chemotherapy (TPDCV) with radiotherapy for the treatment of
malignant gliomas in children. Neuro-Oncology 1999;2:22.
264. Levin VA, Edwards MS, Gutin PH, et al. Phase II evaluation of dibromodulcitol in the treatment of recurrent medulloblastoma, ependymoma, and malignant astrocytoma. J Neurosurg
1984;61:1063.
265. Ettinger LJ, Ru N, Krailo MD, et al. A phase II study of diaziquone in children with recurrent or progressive primary brain tumors; a report from the Children's Cancer Study Group. J Neurooncol
1990;9:69.
266. Gaynon PS, Ettinger LJ, Baum ES, et al. Carboplatin in childhood brain tumors. A Children's Cancer Study Group phase II trial. Cancer 1990;66:2465.
267. Goldwein JW, Leahy JM, Packer RJ, et al. Intracranial ependymomas in children. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:1497.
268. Cushing H, Eisehardt L. Meningiomas: their classification, regional behavior, life history and surgical end results. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1938:73.
269. Hoshino T, Nagashima T, Murovic J, et al. Cell kinetic studies of in situ human brain tumors with bromodeoxyuridine. Cytometry 1985;6:627.
270. Simpson D. The recurrence of intracranial meningiomas after surgical treatment. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1957;20:22.
271. Mirimanoff RO, Dosoretz DE, Linggood RM, et al. Meningioma: analysis of recurrence and progression following neurosurgical resection. J Neurosurg 1985;62:18.
272. Jackler RK, Sim DW, Gutin PH, et al. Systematic approach to intradural tumors ventral to the brainstem. Am J Otol 1995;16:39.
273. Karlsson UL, Leibel SA, Wallner K, et al. Brain tumors. In: Perez CA, Brady LW, eds. Principles and practice of radiation oncology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1992:515.
274. Stafford SL, Perry A, Suman VJ, et al. Primarily resected meningiomas: outcome and prognostic factors in 581 Mayo Clinic patients, 19781988. Mayo Clin Proc 1998;73:936.
275. Barbaro NM, Gutin PH, Wilson CB, et al. Radiation therapy in the treatment of partially resected meningiomas. Neurosurgery 1987;20:525.
276. Goldsmith BJ, Wara WM, Wilson CB, et al. Postoperative irradiation for subtotally resected meningiomas. A retrospective analysis of 140 patients treated from 1967 to 1990. J Neurosurg
1994;80:195.
277. Wilson C. Meningiomas: genetics, malignancy, and the role of radiation in induction and treatment. J Neurosurg 1994;81:666.
278. Condra KS, Buatti JM, Mendenhall WM, et al. Benign meningiomas: treatment selection affects survival. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:427.
279. Graholm J, Bloom HJG, Crow JH. The role of radiotherapy in the management of intracranial meningiomas: the Royal Marsden Hospital experience with 186 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1990;18:755.
280. Connell PP, Macdonald RL, Mansur DB, et al. Tumor size predicts control of benign meningiomas treated with radiotherapy. Neurosurgery 1999;44:1194.
281. Solan MJ, Kramer S. The role of radiation therapy in the management of intracranial meningiomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:675.
282. Chan RC, Thompson GB. Morbidity, mortality, and quality of life following surgery for intracranial meningiomas. J Neurosurg 1984;60:52.
283. Milosevic MF, Frost PJ, Laperriere NJ, et al. Radiotherapy for atypical or malignant meningioma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;34:817.
284. Kondziolka D, Levy EI, Niranjan A, et al. Long-term outcomes after meningioma radiosurgery: Physician and patient perspectives. J Neurosurg 1999;91:44.
285. Hakim R, Alexander E, Loeffler JS, et al. Results of linear accelerator-based radiosurgery for intracranial meningiomas. Neurosurgery 1998;42:446.
286. Engenhart R, Kimming BN, Hover KH, et al. Stereotactic single high dose radiation therapy of benign intracranial meningiomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:1021.
287. Kondiziolka D, Lunsford LD, Coffey RJ, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery for meningiomas. J Neurosurg 1991;74:552.
288. Morita A, Coffey RJ, Foote RL, et al. Risk of injury to cranial nerves after gamma knife radiosurgery for skull base meningiomas: experience in 88 patients. J Neurosurg 1999;90:42.
289. Grunberg SM, Weiss MH, Spitz IM, et al. Treatment of unresectable meningiomas with the antiprogesterone agent mifepristone. J Neurosurg 1991;74:861.
290. Kaba SE, DeMonte F, Bruner JM, et al. The treatment of recurrent unresectable and malignant meningiomas with interferon alpha-2B. Neurosurgery 1997;40:271.
291. Schrell UM, Rittig MG, Anders M, et al. Hydroxyurea for treatment of unresectable and recurrent meningiomas. II. Decrease in the size of meningiomas in patients treated with hydroxyurea. J
Neurosurg 1997;86:840.
292. McComb RD, Burger PC. Pathologic analysis of primary brain tumors. Neurol Clin North Am 1985;3:711.
293. Kosnik EJ, Boesel CP, Bay J, et al. Primitive neuroectodermal tumors of the central nervous system in children. J Neurosurg 1978;48:741.
294. Humphrey GB, Dehner LP, Kaplan RJ, et al. Overview on the management of primitive neuroectodermal tumors. In: Humphrey GB, Dehner LP, eds. Pediatric oncology I. The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff, 1981:289.
295. Rubinstein LJ. Embryonal central neuroepithelial tumors and their differentiation potential. J Neurosurg 1985;62:795.
296. Gaffney CC, Sloane JP, Bradley NJ, et al. Primitive neuroectodermal tumors of the cerebrum: pathology and treatment. J Neurooncol 1985;4:63.
297. Mikaeloff Y, Raquin MA, Lellouch-Tubiana A, et al. Primitive cerebral neuroectodermal tumors excluding medulloblastomas: a retrospective study of 30 cases. Pediatr Neurosurg 1998;29:170.
298. Paulino AC, Melian E. Medulloblastoma and supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumors: an institutional experience. Cancer 1999;86:142.
299. Cohen ME. Primitive neuroectodermal tumors, oligodendrogliomas, choroid plexus papillomas. In: Brain tumors of childhood: principles of diagnosis and treatment. New York: Raven Press,

1984:273.
300. Berger MS, Edwards MS, Wara WM, et al. Primary cerebral neuroblastoma. Long-term follow-up review and therapeutic guidelines. J Neurosurg 1983;59:418.
301. Horten BC, Rubinstein LJ. Primary cerebral neuroblastoma: a clinicopathological study of 35 cases. Brain 1976;99:735.
302. Bloom HJG. Medulloblastoma in children: increasing survival rates and further prospects. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8:2023.
303. Deutsch M. The impact of myelography on the treatment results for medulloblastoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:999.
304. Levin VA, Rodriguez LA, Edwards MS, et al. Treatment of medulloblastoma with procarbazine hydroxyurea, and reduced radiation doses to whole brain and spine. J Neurosurg 1988;68:383.
305. Park TS, Hoffman HJ, Hendrick EB, et al. Medulloblastoma: clinical presentation and management experience at the hospital for sick children Toronto, 19501980. J Neurosurg 1983;58:543.
306. Lowery GS, Kimball JC, Patterson RB, et al. Extraneural metastases from cerebellar medulloblastoma. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1982;4:259.
307. Tait DM, Thornton-Jones H, Bloom HJG, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy for medulloblastoma: the first multi-centre control trial of the International Society of Pediatric Oncology (SIOP I). Eur J
Cancer 1990;26:464.
308. Evans AE, Jenkin RD, Sposto R, et al. The treatment of medulloblastoma: results of a prospective randomized trial of radiation therapy with and without CCNU, vincristine and prednisone. J
Neurosurg 1990;72:572.
309. Chamberlain MC, Silver P, Edwards MS, et al. Treatment of extraneural metastatic medulloblastoma with a combination of cyclophosphamide, adriamycin, and vincristine. Neurosurgery
1988;23:476.
310. Prados MD, Warnick RE, Wara WM, et al. Medulloblastoma in adults. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:1145.
311. Leibel SA, Sheline GE. Radiation therapy for neoplasms of the brain. J Neurosurg 1987;66:1.
312. Merchant TE, Wang MH, Haida T, et al. Medulloblastoma: long-term results for patients treated with definitive radiation therapy during the computed tomography era. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1996;36:29.
313. Deutsch M, Thomas P, Boyett J, et al. Low-stage medulloblastoma: a Children's Cancer Study Group (CCSG) and Pediatric Oncology Group (POG) randomized study of standard vs reduced
neuraxis irradiation. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1991;10:124.
314. Packer RJ, Goldwein J, Nicholson HS, et al. Treatment of children with medulloblastomas with reduced-dose craniospinal radiation therapy and adjuvant chemotherapy: a Children's Cancer
Group study. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2127.
315. Wara WM, Le Q-Tx, Sneed PK, et al. Pattern of recurrence of medulloblastoma after low-dose craniospinal radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:551.
316. Prados MD, Edwards MS, Chang SM, et al. Hyperfractionated craniospinal radiation therapy for primitive neuroectodermal tumors: results of a phase II study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1999;43:279.
317. Benjamin RS, Wiernik PH, Bachur NR. Adriamycin chemotherapy: efficacy, safety, and pharmacologic basis of an intermittent single high-dose schedule. Cancer 1974;74:1784.
318. Hancock C, Allen J, Tan CTC. Phase II trial of PCNU in children with recurrent brain tumors and Hodgkin's disease. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:441.
319. Bleyer WA, Krivit W, Chard RL. Phase II study of VM26 in leukemia, neuroblastoma, and other refractory childhood malignancies: a report from the Children's Cancer Study Group. Cancer
Treat Rep 1979;63:977.
320. Shapiro WR. Chemotherapy of primary malignant brain tumors. Cancer Child 1975;35:965.
321. Allen JC, Walker R, Luks E, et al. Carboplatin and recurrent childhood brain tumors. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:459.
322. Rosen G, Ghavimi F, Nirenberg A, et al. High-dose methotrexate with citrovorum factor rescue for the treatment of central nervous system tumors in children. Cancer Treat Rep 1977;61:681.
323. Djerassi I, Kim JS, Shulman K. High-dose methotrexate-citrovorum factor rescue in the management of brain tumors. Cancer Treat Rep 1977;61:691.
324. Mooney C, Souhami R, Pritchard J. Recurrent medulloblastoma: lack of response to high-dose methotrexate. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1983;10:135.
325. Walker RW, Allen JC. Treatment of recurrent primary intracranial childhood tumors with cis-diamine-dichloroplatinum. Ann Neurol 1983;14:371.
326. Bertolone SJ, Baum E, Krivit W, et al. Phase II trial of cisplatinum diaminodichloride (CPDD) in recurrent childhood brain tumors: a CCSG trial. Proc Annu Meet Am Assoc Cancer Res
1983;2:72.
327. Sexauer CL, Kahn A, Burger PC, et al. MD+UL-platinum in recurrent pediatric brain tumors: a POG phase II study. Cancer 1985;56:1497.
328. Friedman HS, Schold SC Jr, Mahaley MS Jr, et al. Phase II treatment of medulloblastoma and pineoblastoma with melphalan: clinical therapy based on experimental models of human
medulloblastoma. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:904.
329. Haddy TB, Ferbach DJ, Watkins WL, et al. Vincristine in uncommon malignant disease in children. Cancer Chemother Rep 1964;41:41.
330. Lassman LP, Pearce GW, Gang J. Effect of vincristine sulfate on the intracranial gliomata of childhood. Br J Surg 1966;53:774.
331. Lampkin BC, Maurer AM, McBride BH. Response of medulloblastoma to vincristine sulfate: a case report. Pediatrics 1967;39:761.
332. Smart CR, Ottoman RE, Rochlin DB, et al. Clinical experience with vincristine in tumors of the central nervous system and other malignant diseases. Cancer Chemother Rep 1968;52:733.
333. Afra D. Vincristine therapy in malignant glioma recurrencies. Neurochirurgia 1973;16:189.
334. Rosenstock JG, Evans AE, Schut L. Response to vincristine of recurrent brain tumors in children. J Neurosurg 1976;45:135.
335. Ward HWC. Central nervous system tumors of childhood treated with CCNU, vincristine and radiation. Med Pediatr Oncol 1978;4:315.
336. Garrett MJ, Hughs HJ, Ryall RDH. CCNU in brain tumors. Clin Radiol 1974;25:183.
337. Ward HWC. CCNU in the treatment of recurrent medulloblastoma. BMJ 1974;1:642.
338. Allen JC, Helson L. High-dose cyclophosphamide chemotherapy for recurrent CNS tumors in children. J Neurosurg 1981;55:749.
339. Cangir A, Ragab AH, Steubner P, et al. Combination chemotherapy with vincristine, procarbazine, prednisone with or without nitrogen mustard (MOOP vs OPP) in children with recurrent brain
tumors. Med Pediatr Oncol 1984;12:1.
340. Friedman HS, Mahaley MS, Schold SC Jr, et al. The efficacy of vincristine and cyclophosphamide in the therapy of recurrent medulloblastoma. Neurosurgery 1986;18:335.
341. Crafts DC, Levin VA, Edwards MS, et al. Chemotherapy of recurrent medulloblastoma with combined procarbazine, CCNU, and vincristine. J Neurosurg 1978;49:589.
342. Seiler RW. Combination chemotherapy with VM26 and CCNU in primary malignant brain tumors of children. Helv Peadiatr Acta 1980;35:51.
343. Pendergrass TW, Milstein JM, Geyer JR, et al. Eight drugs in 1 day chemotherapy for brain tumors: experience in 107 children and rationale for preirradiation chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol
1987;5:1221.
344. van Eys J, Baram TZ, Cangir A, et al. Salvage chemotherapy for recurrent primary brain tumors in children. J Pediatr 1988;113:601.
345. Thomas P, Duffner PK, Cohen ME, et al. Multimodality therapy for medulloblastoma. Cancer 1980;45:666.
346. Lefkowitz IB, Packer RJ, Siegel KR, et al. Results of treatment of children with recurrent medulloblastoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors with lomustine, cisplatin, and vincristine. Cancer
1990;65:412.
347. Gentet JC, Doz F, Bouffet E, et al. Carboplatin and VP 16 in medulloblastoma: a phase II Study of the French Society of Pediatric Oncology (SFOP). Med Pediatr Oncol 1994;23:422.
348. Packer RJ, Sutton, L, Goldwein JW, et al. Improved survival with the use of adjuvant chemotherapy in the treatment of medulloblastoma. J Neurosurg 1991;74:433.
349. Halberg FE, Wara WM, Fippin LF, et al. Low-dose craniospinal radiation therapy for medulloblastoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:651.
350. Krischer J, Ragab AH, Kun LE, et al. Nitrogen mustard, vincristine, procarbazine, and prednisone as adjuvant chemotherapy in the treatment of medulloblastoma: a Pediatric Oncology Group
Study. J Neurosurg 1991;74:905.
351. Christ WM, Ragab AH, Vietti TJ, et al. Chemotherapy of childhood medulloblastoma. Am J Dis Child 1976;13:639.
352. Nathanson L, Kovacs SG. Chemotherapeutic response in metastatic: report of two cases and review of the literature. Med Pediatr Oncol 1978;4:105.
353. Hoffman HJ. Pineal region tumors. Prog Exp Tumor Res 1987;30:281.
354. Matsutani M, Takakura K, Sano K. Primary intracranial germ cell tumors: pathology and treatment. Prog Exp Tumor Res 1987;30:307.
355. Herrick MK. Pathology of pineal tumors. In: Neuwelt EA, ed. Diagnosis and treatment of pineal region tumors. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1984:31.
356. Allen JC, Bruce J, Kun LE, et al. Pineal region tumors. In: Edwards MS, Levin V, eds. Cancer in nervous system. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1995:421.
357. Rhoton AL Jr, Yamamoto I, Peace DA. Microsurgery of the third ventricle: part 2. Operative approaches. Neurosurgery 1981;8:357.
358. Schmidek HH, Waters A. Pineal masses: clinical features and management. In: Wilkins RH, Rengachary SS, eds. Neurosurgery. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1985:688.
359. Pecker J, Scarabin JM, Vallee B, et al. Treatment in tumor of the pineal region: value of stereotaxic biopsy. Surg Neurol 1979;12:341.
360. Linstadt D, Wara WM, Edwards MS, et al. Radiotherapy of primary intracranial germinomas: the case against routine craniospinal irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:291.
361. Wara WM, Evans A, et al. Tumors of the pineal and supreasellar region: Children's Cancer Study Group. Cancer 1979;43:698.
362. Wolden SL, Wara WM, Larson DA, et al. Radiation therapy for primary intracranial germ-cell tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:943.
363. Jenkin RDT, Simpson WJK, Keen CW, et al. Pineal and suprasellar germinomas: results of radiation treatment. J Neurosurg 1978;48:99.
364. Salazar OM, Castro-Vita H, Bakos RS, et al. Radiation therapy for tumors of the pineal region. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1979;5:491.
365. Edwards MSB LV. Chemotherapy of third ventricle tumors. In: Appuzzo M, ed. Third ventricular tumors. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1987:838.
366. Bouffet E, Baranzelli MC, Patte C, et al. Combined treatment modality for intracranial germinomas: results of a multicentre SFOP experience. Br J Cancer 1999;79:1199.
367. Buckner JC, Peethambaram PP, Smithson WA, et al. Phase II trial of primary chemotherapy followed by reduced-dose radiation for CNS germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:933.
368. Shibamoto Y, Oda Y, Yamashita J, et al. The role of cerebrospinal fluid cytology in radiotherapy planning for intracranial germinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:1089.
369. Merchant TE, Davis BJ, Sheldon JM, et al. Radiation therapy for relapsed CNS germinoma after primary chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:204.
370. Fuller BG, Kapp DS, Cox R. Radiation therapy of pineal region tumors: 25 new cases and a review of 208 previously reported cases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;28:229.
371. Patel SR, Buckner JC, Smithson WA, et al. Cisplatin-based chemotherapy in primary central nervous system germ cell tumors. J Neurooncol 1992;12:47.
372. Finlay J, Walker R, Balmaceda, et al. Chemotherapy without irradiation (XRT) for primary central nervous system (CNS) germ cell tumors (GCT): a report of international study. Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1992;11:A420.
373. Matsukado Y, Abe H, Tanaka R, et al. Cisplatin, vinblastine and bleomycin (PVB) combination chemotherapy in the treatment of intracranial malignant germ cell tumors; a preliminary report of
a phase II study. The Japanese Intracranial Germ Cell Tumor Study Group. Gan No Rinsho 1986;32:1387.
374. Allen JC, DaRosso RC, Donahue B, et al. A phase II trial of preirradiation carboplatin in newly diagnosed germinoma of the central nervous system. Cancer 1994;74:940.
375. Allen JC, Kim JH, Packer RJ. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for newly diagnosed germ-cell tumors of the central nervous system. J Neurosurg 1987;67:65.
376. Jereb B, Zupancic N, Petric J. Report of seven cases. Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1990;7:183.
377. Mizuno M, Yoshida J, Noda S. Combined chemotherapy of CDDP and etoposide in intracranial germinomas. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho 1989;16:3457.
378. Balmaceda C, Heller G, Rosenblum M et al. Chemotherapy without irradiationa novel approach for newly diagnosed CNS germ cell tumors: results of an international cooperative trial. The First
International Central Nervous System Germ Cell Tumor Study. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2908.
379. Miyamachi K, Aida T, Abe H. Five cases of primary intracranial germ cell tumors treated by combination chemotherapy with cisplatin. No Shinkei Geka 1989;16:1053.
380. Kobayashi T, Yoshida J, Sugita K, et al. Combination chemotherapy with cisplatin and etoposide for intracranial germ cell tumors. International Symposium on Pediatric Neuro-Oncology.
Seattle, WA, 1989 (abst A5).
381. Ablin A, Isaacs H Jr. Pediatric oncology: germ cell tumors. In: Pizzo PA, Poplack DG, eds. Principles and practice of pediatric oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1989:713.
382. Pera MF, Koberle B, Masters JR. Exceptional sensitivity of testicular germ cell tumour cell lines to the new anti-cancer agent, temozolomide. Br J Cancer 1995;71:904.
383. Wilson CB. Surgical management of endocrine-active pituitary adenomas. In: Walker MD, ed. Oncology of the nervous system. Boston: Martinus-Nijhoff, 1983:117.
384. Eastman RC, Gorden P, Roth J. Conventional supervoltage irradiation is an effective treatment for acromegaly. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1979;48:931.
385. Breen P, Flickenger JC, Kondziolka D, et al. Radiotherapy for nonfuctional pituitary adenomas: analysis of long-term tumor control. J Neurosurg 1998;89:933.
386. Sheline GE TJ. Pituitary tumors. In: Perez CA BL, ed. Principles and practice of radiation oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1987:1108.
387. Malmed S. Acromegaly. N Engl J Med 1990;322:966.
388. Barkan AL, Halasz I, Dornfeld KJ, et al. Pituitary irradiation is ineffective in normalizing plasma insulin-like growth factor I in patients with acromegaly. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1997;82:3187.
389. Suliman M, Jenkins R, Ross R, et al. Long-term treatment of acromegaly with somatostatin analogue SR-lanreotide. J Endocrinol Invest 1999;22:409.
390. Jennings AS, Liddle GW, Orth DN. Results of treating childhood Cushing's disease with pituitary irradiation. N Engl J Med 1977;297:957.

391. Sheline GE, Grossman A, Jones AH, et al. Radiation therapy of prolactinomas. In: Black PM, Zervas NT, Ridgeway ED, Martin JB, eds. Secretory tumors of the pituitary gland. New York:
Raven Press, 1984:1.
392. Littley MD, Shalet SM, Reid H, et al. The effect of extenal pituitary irradiation on elevated serum prolactin levels in patients with pituitary microadenomas. Q J Med 1991;81:985.
393. Tsao MN, Wara WM, Larson DA. Radiation therapy for benign central nervous system disease. Semin Oncol 1999;9:120.
394. Cannavo S, Curto L, Squadrito S, et al. Cabergoline: a first choice treatment in patients with previously untreated prolactin-secreting pituitary adenoma. J Endocrinol Invest 1999;22:354.
395. Mitsumori M, Schrieve DC, Alexander E 3rd, et al. Initial clinical results of LINAC-based sterotactic radiosurgery and sterotactic radiotherapy for pituitary adenomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;42:573.
396. Levy RP, Schulte PWM, Slater JD, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery-the role of charged particles. Acta Oncol 1999;38:165.
397. Zierhut D, Flentje M, Adolph J, et al. External radiotherapy of pituitary adenomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;33:307.
398. McCord MW, Buatti JM, Fennell EM, et al. Radiotherapy for pituitary adenoma: long term outcome and sequelae. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:437.
399. Tsang RW, Brierley JD, Panzarella T, et al. Role of radiation therapy in clinical hormonally-active pituitary adenomas. Radiother Oncol 1996;41:45.
400. Bradra M, Ford, Ashely S, et al. Risk of second brain tumor after conservative surgery and radiotherapy for pituitary adenoma. BMJ 1992;304:1343.
401. Schoenthalar R, Albright NW, Wara WM, et al. Reirradiation of pituitary adenoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:307.
402. Coffey RJ, Lunsford LD. The role of stereotactic techniques in the management of craniopharyngiomas. In: Rosanblum ML, ed. The role of surgery in brain tumor management. Philadelphia:
Saunders, 1991:161.
403. Pollock BE, Lunsford LD, Kondziolka D, et al. Phosphorus-32 intracavitary irradiation of cystic craniopharyngiomas: current technique and long-term results. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1995;33:437.
404. Richmond IL, Wara WM, Wilson CB. Role of radiation therapy in the management of craniopharyngiomas in children. Neurosurgery 1980;6:513.
405. Fischer EG, Welch K, Belli JA, et al. Treatment of craniopharyngiomas in children, 19721981. J Neurosurg 1985;62:496.
406. Wen B-C, Hussey DH, Staples J, et al. A comparison of the roles of surgery and radiation therapy in the management of craniopharyngiomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;16:17.
407. Hetelekidis S, Barnes PD, Tao ML, et al. 20 year experience in childhood carniopharyngioma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:189.
408. Thomsett MJ, Conte FA, Kaplan SL, et al. Endocrine and neurologic outcome in childhood craniopharyngioma: review of effect of treatment in 42 patients. J Pediatr 1980;97:728.
409. Cavazzuti V, Fischer EC, Welch K, et al. Neurological and psychophysiological sequelae following different treatments of craniopharyngiomas in children. J Neurosurg 1983;59:409.
410. Jackler RK, Pitts LH. Acoustic neuroma. Neurosurg Clin North Am 1990;1:199.
411. Martuza RL, Ojemann RG. Bilateral acoustic neuromas: clinical aspects, pathogenesis, and treatment. Neurosurgery 1982;10:1.
412. Wallner KE, Sheline GE, Pitts LH, et al. Efficacy of irradiation for incompletely excised acoustic neurilemomas. J Neurosurg 1987;67:858.
413. Maire JP, Caudry M, Darrouzet V, et al. Fractionated radiation therapy in the treatment of stage III and IV cerebello-pontine angle neruinomas: long-term results in 24 cases. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1995;32:1137.
414. Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, McLaughlin MR, et al. Long-term outcomes after radiosurgery for acoustic neuromas. N Engl J Med 1998;339:1426.
415. Flickinger JC, Lunsford LD, Linskey ME, et al. Gamma knife radiosurgery for acoustic tumors: multivariate analysis of 4-year results. Radiother Oncol 1993;27:91.
416. Linskey ME, Flickinger JC, Lunsford LD. Cranial nerve length predicts the risk of delayed facial and trigeminal neuropathies after acoustiv tumor stereotactic radiosurgery. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1993;25:227.
417. Miranjan A, Lunsford LD, Flickenger JC, et al. Dose reduction improves hearing preservation rates after intercanalicular acoustic tumor radiosurgery. Neurosurgery 1999;45:762.
418. Farriro JB III, Hymas VL, Benke RH, et al. Carcinoid apudoma arising in glomus jugulare tumors. Laryngoscope 1980;90:110.
419. Simko TG, Griffin TW, Gerdes AJ, et al. The role of radiation therapy in the treatment of glomus jugulare tumors. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1957;20:22.
420. Gardner G, Cocke EW Jr, Robertson JT, et al. Glomus jugulare tumors: combined treatment. J Laryngol Otol 1981;95:437.
421. Springate SC, Weichselbaum RR. Radiation or surgery for chemodectoma of the temporal bone: a review of local control and complications. Head Neck 1990;12:303.
422. Million RR, Cassisi NJ, Mancuso AA, et al. Chemodectomas (glomus body tumors). In: Million RR, Cassisi NJ, eds. Management of head and neck cancer. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1994:765.
423. Kim JA, Elkon D, Lim ML, et al. Optimum dose of radiotherapy for chemodectomas of the middle ear. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:815.
424. Heffelfinger MJ, Dahlin DC, MacCarty CS, et al. Chordomas and cartilaginous tumors at the skull base. Cancer 1973;32:410.
425. Phillips T, Newman H. Chordomas. In: Deeley T, ed. Modern radiotherapy and oncology: central nervous system tumors. Boston: Butterworths, 1974:184.
426. Munzenrider JE, Hug E, McManus P, et al. Skull base chordomas: treatment outcome and prognostic factors in adult patients following conformal treatment with 3D planning and high dose
fractionated combined proton and photon radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:209.
427. Rosenberg AE, Nielsen GP, Keel SB, et al. Chondrosarcoma of the base of the skull: a clinicopathologic study of 200 cases with emphasis on its distinction from chordoma. Am J Surg Pathol
1999;23:1370.
428. Berson AM, Castro JR, Petti P, et al. Charged particle irradiation of chordoma and chondrosarcoma of the base of the skull and cervical spine: the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory Experience.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:559.
429. Smalley SR, Schomberg PJ, Earle JD, et al. Radiotherapeutic considerations in the treatment of hemangioblastomas of the central nervous system. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;18:1165.
430. Patrice SJ, Sneed PK, Flickinger JC, et al. Radiosurgery for hemangioblastoma: results of a multiinstitutional experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;35:493.
431. Chang SD, Meisel JA, Hancock SL, et al. Treatment of hemangioblastomas in von Hippel-Lindau disease with linear accelerator-based radiosurgery. Neurosurgery 1998;43:28.
432. Naguib MG, Chou SH, Mastri A. Radiation therapy of a choroid plexus papilloma of the cerebellopontine angle with bone involvement. J Neurosurg 1981;54:245.
433. Wolff JE, Sajedi M, Coppes MJ, et al. Radiation therapy and survival in choroid plexus carcinoma. Lancet 1999;353:2126.
434. Chow E, Reardon DA, Shah AB, et al. Pediatric choroid plexus neoplasms. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:249.
435. Ausman JI, Schrontz C, Chason J, et al. Aggressive choroid plexus papilloma. Surg Neurol 1984;22:472.
436. Duffner PK, Kun LE, Burger PC, et al. Postoperative chemotherapy and delayed radiation in infants and very young children with choroid plexus carcinomas. The Pediatric Oncology Group.
Pediatr Neurosurg 1995;22:189.
437. Connolly ES. Spinal cord tumors in adults. In: Youman JR, ed. Youmans' neurological surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1982:3196.
438. Linstadt DE. Spinal cord. In: Leibel SA, Phillips TL, eds. Textbook of radiation oncology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1998:401.
439. Wen B-C, Hussey DH, Hitchon PW, et al. The role of radiation therapy in the management of ependymomas of the spinal cord. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:781.
440. Waldron JN, Laperriere NJ, Jaakkimainen L, et al. Spinal cord ependymomas: a retrospective analysis of 59 cases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:223.
441. Linstadt D, Wara WM, Leibel SA, et al. Postoperative radiotherapy of primary spinal cord tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;16:1397.
442. Barone B, Elvidge A. Ependymomas: a clinical survey. J Neurosurg 1970;33:428.
443. Schuman R, Alvord E, Leech R. The biology of childhood ependymomas. Arch Neurol 1975;32:731.
444. Whitaker SJ, Bessell EM, Ashley SE, et al. Postoperative radiotherapy in the management of spinal cord ependymoma. J Neurosurg 1991;74:720.
445. Cairncross JG, Laperriere N. Low-grade glioma: to treat or not to treat? Arch Neurol 1989;46:1238.
446. Forman AD, Levin VA. Intraventricular therapy. In: Perry MC, ed. The chemotherapy source book. Baltimore: William & Wilkins, 1991:213.
447. Emami B, Lyman J, Brown A, et al. Tolerance of normal tissue to therapeutic irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:109.
448. Levin VA, Silver P, Hannigan J, et al. Superiority of post-radiotherapy adjuvant chemotherapy with CCNU, procarbazine, and vincristine (PCV) over BCNU for anaplastic gliomas: NCOG 6G61
final report. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;18:321.
449. Levin VA, Wara WM, Davis RL, et al. Northern California Oncology Group protocol 6G91: response to treatment with radiation therapy and seven-drug chemotherapy in patients with
glioblastoma multiforme. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:739.
450. Levin VA, Maor MH, Thall PF, et al. Phase II study of accelerated fractionation radiation therapy with carboplatin followed by vincristine chemotherapy for the treatment of glioblastoma
multiforme. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;33:357.
451. Levin VA, Uhm JH, Jaeckle KA, et al. Phase III randomized study of post-radiotherapy chemotherapy with DFMO-PCV versus PCV for glioblastoma multiforme. Clin Cancer Res 2000 (in
press).
452. Levin VA, Prados MD, Wara WM, et al. Radiation therapy and bromodeoxuruidine chemotherapy followed by procarbazine, lomustine,and vincristine for the treatment of anaplastic gliomas. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:75.
453. Rodriguez L, Prados M, Silver P, et al. Re-evaluation of procarbazine for the treatment of recurrent malignant CNS tumors. Cancer 1989;64:2420.
454. Levin VA, Crafts D, Wilson CB, et al. Imidazole carboxamides: relationship of lipophilicity to activity against intracerebral murine glioma 26 and preliminary phase II clinical trial of 5-[3,3-bis
(2-chloroethyl)-1-triazeno]imidazole-4-carboxamide (NSC-82196) in primary and secondary brain tumors. Cancer Chemother Rep 1975;59:327.
455. Levin VA, Prados MD, Yung WK, et al. Treatment of recurrent gliomas with eflornithine. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1432.
456. Yung WK, Kyritsis AP, Gleason MJ, et al. Treatment of recurrent malignant gliomas with high-dose 13-cis-retinoic acid. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:1931.
457. Groves MD, Jaeckle KA, Kyritsis AP, et al. Cis-retinoic acid for the treatment of recurrent glioblastoma multiforme. Neuro-Oncology 1999;1:314.
458. Friedman HS, Petros WP, Friedman AH, et al. Irinotecan therapy in adults with recurrent or progressive malignant glioma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1516.
459. Levin VA, Edwards MS, Wright DC, et al. Modified procarbazine, CCNU, and vincristine (PCV 3) combination chemotherapy in the treatment of malignant brain tumors. Cancer Treat Rep
1980;64:237.
460. Levin VA, Hoffman WF, Pischer TL, et al. BCNU-5-fluorouracil combination therapy for recurrent malignant brain tumors. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:2071.
461. Levin VA, Chamberlain MC, Prados MD, et al. Phase I-II study of eflornithine and mitoguazone combined in the treatment of recurrent primary brain tumors. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:459.
462. Levin VA, Prados MD. Treatment of recurrent gliomas and metastatic brain tumors with a polydrug protocol designed to combat nitrosourea resistance. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:766.
463. Kyritsis AP, Yung WK, Jaeckle KA, et al. Combination of 6-thioguanine, procarbazine, lomustine, and hydroxyurea for patients with recurrent malignant gliomas. Neurosurgery 1996;39:921.
464. Galanis E, Buckner JC, Burch PA, et al. Phase II trial of nitrogen mustard, vincristine, and procarbazine in patients with recurrent glioma: North Central Cancer Treatment Group results. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:2953.
465. Kunschner LJ, Yung WKA, Levin VA, et al. Carboplatin and 13- cis-retinoic acid for recurrent glioblastoma multiforme. Neuro-Oncology 1999;1:320.
466. van den Bent MJ, Kros JM, Heimans JJ, et al. Response rate and prognostic factors of recurrent oligodendroglioma treated with procarbazine, CCNU, and vincristine chemotherapy. Dutch
Neuro-Oncology Group. Neurology 1998;51:1140.
467. Soffietti R, Ruda R, Bradac GB, et al. PCV chemotherapy for recurrent oligodendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas. Neurosurgery 1998;43:1066.
468. Cairncross G, Macdonald D, Ludwin S et al. Chemotherapy for anaplastic oligodendroglioma. National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2013.
469. Levin VA, Edwards MS, Gutin PH et al. Phase II evaluation of dibromodulcitol in the treatment of recurrent medulloblastoma, ependymoma, and malignant astrocytoma. J Neurosurg
1984;61:1063.
470. Fewer D, Wilson CB, Boldrey EB, et al. Phase II study of 1-(2-choloroethyl)-3-cyclohexyl-1-nitrosourea (CCNU) in the treatment of brain tumors. Cancer Chemother Rep 1972;56:421.
471. Lefkowitz IB, Packer RJ, Siegel KR, et al. Results of treatment of children with recurrent medulloblastoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors with lomustine, cisplatin, and vincristine. Cancer
1990;65:412.
472. Barker FG, Chang SM, Gutin PH, et al. Survival and functional status after resection of recurrent glioblastoma multiforme. Neurosurgery 1998;42:709.
473. Packer RJ, Sutton LN, Elterman R, et al. Outcome for children with medulloblastoma treated with radiation and cisplatin, CCNU, and vincristine chemotherapy. J Neurosurg 1994;81:690.
474. Kovnar EH, Kellie SJ, Horowitz ME, et al. Preirradiation cisplatin and etoposide in the treatment of high-risk medulloblastoma and other malignant embryonal tumors of the central nervous
system: a phase II study. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:330.

SECTION 44.1 Molecular Biology of Childhood Cancers
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 44.1
Molecular Biology of Childhood Cancers
LEE J. HELMAN
DAVID MALKIN
Introduction
Tumor Suppressor Genes
Retinoblastoma: the Paradigm
Wilms' Tumor: Three Distinct Loci
Neurofibromatoses
Neuroblastoma
Ewing's Sarcoma Family of Tumors
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Hereditary Syndromes Associated with Tumors of Childhood
Li-Fraumeni Syndrome
Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome
Gorlin Syndrome
Malignant Rhabdoid Tumors
Predictive Testing for Germline Mutations and Childhood Cancers
Molecular Therapeutics
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The biologic nature of tumors of childhood is clinically, histopathologically, and biologically distinct from that of adult-onset malignancies. Childhood cancers tend to
have short latency periods, are often rapidly growing and aggressively invasive, are rarely associated with exposure to carcinogens implicated in adult-onset cancers,
and are generally more responsive to standard modalities of treatment, in particular chemotherapy. Most childhood tumors occur sporadically in families with at most a
weak history of cancer. In approximately 10% to 15% of cases, 1,2 however, a strong familial association is recognized, or the child has a congenital or genetic disorder
that imparts a higher likelihood of specific cancer types. Examples of genetic disorders that render a child at increased risk of tumor development include xeroderma
pigmentosa, Bloom's syndrome, or ataxia-telangiectasia, which predispose to skin cancers, leukemias, or lymphoid malignancies, respectively. In all three cases,
constitutional gene alterations that disrupt normal mechanisms of genomic DNA repair are blamed for the propensity to cell transformation. Other hereditary disorders
including Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) and the multiple endocrine neoplasias types 1 and 2 are thought to be associated with their respective tumor
spectra through constitutional activation of molecular pathways of deregulated cellular growth and proliferation. The cancers that occur in these syndromes are
generally secondary phenotypic manifestations of disorders that have distinctive recognizable physical stigmata. On the other hand, some cancer predisposition
syndromes are recognized only by their malignant manifestations, with nonmalignant characteristics being virtually absent. These include hereditary retinoblastoma,
the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), familial Wilms' tumor (WT), and familial adenomatous polyposis coli. Each of these presents with distinct cancer phenotypes, and
for each the identified molecular defect is unique ( Table 44.1-l).

TABLE 44.1-1. Hereditary Syndromes Associated with Childhood Cancers

The study of pediatric cancer and rare hereditary cancer syndromes and associations has led to the identification of numerous cancer genes including dominant
oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. These have proved to be important not only in hereditary predisposition, but also as major players in the normal growth,
differentiation, and proliferation pathways of all cells. Alterations of these genes have been consistently found in numerous sporadic tumors of childhood and led to
studies of their functional role in carcinogenesis. The numerous properties of transformed malignant cells in culture or in vivo can be explained by the complex
abnormal interaction of numerous positive and negative growth regulatory genes. Pediatric cancers offer unique models in which to study these pathways in that they
are less likely to be disrupted by nongenetic factors. The embryonic ontogeny of many childhood cancers suggests that better understanding of the nature of the
genetic events leading to these cancers will also augment the understanding of normal embryologic growth and development. This chapter begins with an outline of
tumor suppressor genes, the most frequently implicated class of cancer genes in childhood malignancy. This leads into discussion of molecular features of
retinoblastoma, the paradigm of cancer genetics, followed by analysis of the molecular understanding of other common pediatric cancers. Evaluation of the
importance of molecular alterations in familial cancers, as well as new approaches in molecular therapeutics, are also addressed.

TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENES
Faulty regulation of cellular growth and differentiation leads to neoplastic transformation and tumor initiation. Many inappropriately activated growth-potentiating
genes, or oncogenes, have been identified through the study of RNA tumor viruses and the transforming effects of DNA isolated from malignant cells. However,
activated dominant oncogenes themselves do not readily explain a variety of phenomena related to transformation and tumor formation. Among these is the
suppression of tumorigenicity by fusion of malignant cells with their normal counterparts. If these malignant cells carried an activated dominant oncogene, it would be
expected that such a gene would initiate transformation of the normal cells, likely leading to either embryonic or fetal death. The observation is more readily explained
by postulating the existence of a factor in the normal cell that acts to suppress growth of the fused malignant cells. Malignant cells commonly exhibit specific
chromosomal deletions (Table 44.1-2). The best example of this occurs in retinoblastoma, a rare pediatric eye tumor in which a small region of the long arm of
chromosome 13 is frequently missing. 3,4 The presumed loss of genes in specific chromosomal regions argues strongly against the concept of a dominantly acting
gene being implicated in the development of the tumor. Hereditary forms of cancer are also not readily explained by altered growth-potentiating genes. Comparisons
between the frequencies of familial tumors and their sporadic counterparts led Knudson to suggest that the familial forms of some tumors could be explained by
constitutional mutations in growth-limiting genes. 5 The resulting inactivation of these genes would facilitate cellular transformation. 6 Such growth-limiting genes were
termed tumor suppressor genes.

TABLE 44.1-2. Common Cytogenetic Rearrangements in Solid Tumors of Childhood

Unlike dominant oncogenes, mutant tumor suppressor genes may be found either in germ cells or somatic cells. In the former, they may arise de novo or be
transmitted from generation to generation within a family. Despite many similarities among the various cloned tumor suppressors, it has become evident that this
family of genes is heterogeneous in many respects. The diversity of functions, cellular locations, and tissue-specific expression of the tumor suppressor genes
suggests the existence of a complex, yet coordinated, cellular pathway that limits cell growth by linking nuclear processes with the intracytoplasmic and
extracytoplasmic environment. This discussion is limited to those genes for which pediatric tumors are frequently associated.

RETINOBLASTOMA: THE PARADIGM
Retinoblastoma is the prototype cancer caused by mutations of a tumor suppressor gene. It is a malignant tumor of the retina that occurs in infants and young
children, with an incidence of approximately 1 in 20,000. 7 Approximately 40% of retinoblastoma cases are of the heritable form 8 in which the child inherits one mutant
allele at the retinoblastoma susceptibility locus (RB1) through the germline. A somatic mutation in a single retinal cell causes loss of function of the remaining normal
allele, leading to tumor formation. Tumors are often bilateral and multifocal. The disease is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, with a penetrance approaching
100%.9 The remaining 60% of retinoblastoma cases are sporadic (nonheritable). 10 Both RB1 alleles in a single retinal cell have been inactivated by somatic mutations.
As one can imagine, such an event is rare, and these patients usually have only one tumor that presents later than in infants with the heritable form. Fifteen percent of
unilateral retinoblastoma is heritable, 9 but by chance develops in only one eye. Survivors of heritable retinoblastoma have a several-hundred-fold increased risk of
developing mesenchymal tumors such as osteogenic sarcoma, fibrosarcomas, and melanomas later in life. 10,11 It is thought that several genetic mechanisms may be
involved in elimination of the second wild-type RB1 allele in an evolving tumor. These include chromosomal duplication or nondisjunction, mitotic recombination, or
gene conversion. 12
The RB1 gene was eventually mapped to chromosome 13q14. 13 Using Southern blot analysis, it was then possible to demonstrate that the second target gene that
led to disease was actually the second copy of the RB1 locus. Reduction to homozygosity of the mutant allele [or loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the wild-type allele]
would lead to the loss of functional RB1 and account for tumor development.
Using classic cloning techniques, a 4.7-kb cDNA fragment was isolated from retinal cells. 14 This gene, RB1, consisted of 27 exons and encoded a 105-kD nuclear
phosphoprotein. As well as being altered in retinoblastoma, this gene and its protein product have also been found to be altered in osteosarcomas, small cell lung
carcinomas, and bladder, breast, and prostate carcinomas. 14,15
Although it is clear that RB1 and its protein product play some role in growth regulation, the precise nature of this role remains obscure. In the developing retina,
inactivation of the RB1 gene is both necessary and sufficient for tumor formation. 16 Although the RB1 gene is expressed in virtually all mammalian tissues, only in the
retina is its inactivation sufficient for tumor initiation. Outside the retina, RB1 inactivation is often a rate-limiting step in tumorigenesis generated by multiple genetic
events. The molecular characteristics and potential functional activities of RB1 are outlined in detail elsewhere in this volume.
The patterns of inheritance and presentation of retinoblastoma have been well described, and the responsible gene identified. Although the basic mechanisms by
which the gene is inactivated are understood, much still remains to be determined about the biologic function of the gene and its protein product.

WILMS' TUMOR: THREE DISTINCT LOCI
WT, or nephroblastoma, is an embryonal malignancy of the kidney that arises from remnants of immature kidney. It affects approximately 1 in 10,000 children, usually
before the age of 6 years (median age at diagnosis, 3.5 years). Some 5% to 10% of children present with either synchronous or metachronous bilateral tumors. 17 A
peculiar feature of WT is its association with nephrogenic rests, foci of primitive but nonmalignant cells whose persistence suggests a defect in kidney development.
These precursor lesions are found within the normal kidney tissue of 30% to 40% of children with WT. Nephrogenic rests may persist, regress spontaneously, or grow
into a large mass that simulates a true WT and presents a difficult diagnostic challenge. 18 Another interesting feature of this neoplasm is its association with specific
congenital abnormalities, including genitourinary anomalies, sporadic aniridia, mental retardation, and hemihypertrophy. The WT1 tumor suppressor gene is
homozygously deleted, at least in part, in a small but highly informative set of sporadic WTs. In addition, both sporadic and hereditary WTs have been described in
which WT1 is specifically altered.
A genetic predisposition to WT is observed in two distinct disease syndromes with urogenital system malformations (the WAGR syndrome and the Denys-Drash
syndrome) 19 as well as in an overgrowth syndrome characterized by visceromegaly, macroglossia, and hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia (BWS). 20 These congenital
disorders have now been linked to abnormalities at specific genetic loci implicated in Wilms' tumorigenesis.
The WAGR syndrome, the association of WT (W) with congenital aniridia (A), genitourinary malformations (G), and mental retardation (R), has been correlated with
constitutional deletions of band ql3 of chromosome 11. 21 Whereas it is now known that the WAGR deletion encompasses a number of contiguous genes, including the
aniridia gene Pax6,22 the cytogenetic observation in patients with WAGR was also important in the cloning of WT1 at chromosome 11p13. 23,24 and 25 Characterization of
WT1 demonstrated that this gene spans approximately 50 kb of DNA and contains 10 exons. The WT1 protein is a transcription factor. 26 However, the identity of the
gene(s) targeted by WT1 during normal kidney development is not known.
The second syndrome closely associated with this locus was initially described by Denys in 1967 and recognized as a syndrome by Drash 3 years later. 27,28
Denys-Drash syndrome is a rare association of WT, intersex disorders, and progressive renal failure. 28 It has been demonstrated that virtually all patients with
Denys-Drash syndrome carry WT1 point mutations in the germline. 29
WT1 is altered in only 10% of WTs. This observation implies the existence of alternative loci in the etiology of this childhood renal malignancy. One such locus also
resides on the short arm of chromosome 11, telomeric of WT1, at 11p15. This gene, designated WT2, is associated with BWS. Patients with BWS are at increased
risk of developing WT, as well as other embryonic malignancies including rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), neuroblastoma, and hepatoblastoma. The putative BWS gene
maps to chromosome 11p1530,31 and is tightly linked to the Ha-ras oncogene homologue HRAS-I and the insulin growth factor-2 gene ( IGF-2). Whether the BWS
gene and WT2 are one and the same or two distinct yet closely linked genes remains to be determined.
Although linkage studies have indicated that the gene for familial WT must be distinct from WT1 and WT2, and from the gene that predisposes to BWS, to date, this
gene has been neither cytogenetically localized nor isolated. Whether, of course, the gene for familial WT interacts with the gene product of either of the two WT
suppressor genes has yet to be determined.
Finally, loss of the long arm of chromosome 16 has been observed in approximately 20% of WT specimens. 32 This observation implicates yet another genetic locus in
WT. Since linkage studies have also excluded this locus as the familial WT gene, 33 a total of four loci have thus far been associated with this pediatric malignancy.

However, it is not known whether alterations at 16q can initiate tumorigenesis or simply reflect subsequent steps in the progression of malignancy.
It is apparent that the influence of the genetic alterations in WT is quite different from those of the retinoblastoma gene. In the latter, there is strong evidence that a
single gene is involved, whereas a series of genetic alterations, or at least distinct genetic events, is required for Wilms' tumorigenesis.

NEUROFIBROMATOSES
The neurofibromatoses (NF) comprise two similar entities. NF1 is one of the most common autosomal dominantly inherited disorders, affecting approximately 1 in
3500 people, 34 one-half of which arise from new spontaneous mutations. Carriers of mutant NF1 are predisposed to a variety of tumors including optic nerve glioma,
neurofibroma and neurofibrosarcoma, malignant schwannoma, astrocytoma, and pheochromocytoma.35,36 Occurring with less frequency are leukemias, osteosarcoma,
RMS, and WT.
Using standard linkage analysis, the NF1 gene was mapped to chromosomal band 17q11 and subsequently cloned. 37,38 The NF1 gene is unusual in that it contains
three embedded genes, OMGP, EV12A, and EV12B, in a single intron. 39 This gene encodes a 2818 amino acid protein, termed neurofibromin, that is ubiquitously
expressed. One region of the gene shows extensive structural homology to the GTPase activating domain of mammalian guanosine triphosphatase-activating
proteins: Loss of the protein's activity results in failure of hydrolysis of guanosine triphosphate to guanosine diphosphate by the ras oncoprotein. Loss of
neurofibromin function usually results from mutations in one allele of the gene leading to premature truncation of the protein, followed by absence or mutations of the
second allele in tumors. This loss of function is thought to lead to elevated levels of the guanosine triphosphate–bound RAS protein that transduces signals for cell
division. There appears to be more than one mechanism whereby malignant tumors develop in NF patients. In addition to structural alterations of both alleles of the
NF1 gene, alternative splicing leading to dysregulation at the level of transcription has also been demonstrated. It appears that the two types of resulting protein may
modify the modulation of RAS-regulated signal transduction.
NF2 is much less frequent than NF1, occurring in only 1 in 1 million persons. Although it is also inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder with high penetrance, the
new mutation rate in NF2 is low.40 It is clinically characterized by bilateral acoustic neuromas, spinal nerve root tumors, and meningiomas.
The NF2 locus was mapped to chromosome 22, band q12,41 and its 69-kD encoded protein, termed merlin, has been shown to be expressed in various tissues,
including brain, although not as ubiquitously as NF1. 42,43 The mechanism of tumor formation in NF2 appears to be in concordance with the Knudson two-hit model,
although the mechanism of action of the NF2 protein has not yet been elucidated. It is, however, postulated that a defect in such a molecule may dysregulate normal
cell growth by disrupting a signal transduction pathway, anchorage dependence, or cell-cycle regulation. 43

NEUROBLASTOMA
Nonrandom chromosomal abnormalities are observed in more than 75% of neuroblastomas, 44 and many of these are also found in neuroblastoma-derived cell lines.
The most common of these is deletion or rearrangement of the short arm of chromosome 1, although loss, gain, and rearrangements of chromosomes 10, 14, 17, and
19 have also been reported. The allelic losses indicate loss of function of as yet unknown tumor suppressor genes in these regions. It is believed that a tumor
suppressor gene that lies on band p36 of chromosome 1 is critically important in the pathogenesis and aggressive nature of neuroblastoma. It has been shown that
the loss of chromosome 1p is a strong prognostic factor in patients with neuroblastoma, independent of age and stage. 45,46 Two other unique cytogenetic
rearrangements are highly characteristic of neuroblastoma. 47,48 These structures, homogeneous staining regions and double-minute chromosomes, contain regions of
gene amplification. The N-myc gene, an oncogene with considerable homology to the cellular protooncogene c-myc, is amplified within homogeneous staining regions
and double-minute chromosomes. Virtually all neuroblastoma tumor cell lines demonstrate amplified and highly expressed N-myc, 49 and N-myc amplification is
thought to be associated with rapid tumor progression. Expression of N-myc is increased in undifferentiated tumor cells compared with much lower (or single copy)
levels in more differentiated cells (ganglioneuroblastoma and ganglioneuroma). N-myc expression is diminished in association with the in vitro differentiation of
neuroblastoma cell lines. 50 This observation formed the basis for current therapeutic trials demonstrating a survival advantage to patients treated with cis-retinoic
acid. 51 Furthermore, a close correlation exists between N-myc amplification and advanced clinical stage. 52
Although it is clear that altered expression of N-myc contributes to the development of malignancy, it is not yet apparent which cellular functions are altered. The
molecular mechanisms underlying regulation of neuroblastoma differentiation may be explained in part through the contribution of other genes and proteins.
Neuroblastoma cells that express the high-affinity nerve growth factor receptor trkA 53 can be terminally differentiated by nerve growth factor and may demonstrate
morphologic changes typical of ganglionic differentiation. Tumors showing ganglionic differentiation and trk gene activation have a favorable prognosis. 53 As noted
previously, resistance to multidrug chemotherapeutic regimens (multidrug resistance) is characteristic of aggressive, poorly responsive N-myc amplified
neuroblastomas. It is interesting to note that expression of the multidrug-resistance-associated protein, found to confer multidrug resistance in vitro, is increased in
neuroblastomas with N-myc amplification and decreased after differentiation of tumor cells in vitro.54 It has been demonstrated in fact that high levels of
multidrug-resistance-associated protein expression are significantly associated with poor outcome, independent of N-myc amplification. 54 Gain of chromosome
segment 17q21-qter has been shown to be the most powerful prognostic factor yet. 55 However, no gene has yet been implicated at this site.
Finally, insulin growth factor-2 (IGF-2) is a developmentally regulated gene that may play a role in the pathogenesis of neuroblastoma. IGF-2 is expressed in
embryonic adrenal cortex, as well as adult adrenal medulla. It is a stimulatory ligand for neuroblastoma cell growth. IGF-2 is highly expressed in tumor cell lines that
express a pattern of developmentally regulated genes found late in the chromaffin lineage and functions in an autocrine growth pathway. 56 Cell lines that express
markers corresponding to more immature cells are responsive to IGF-2, but do not produce the mitogen itself. This paracrine growth-mediating effect is consistent with
observations of IGF-2 expression in infiltrating tumor specimens and adjacent normal tissues. 57

EWING'S SARCOMA FAMILY OF TUMORS
Ewing's sarcoma is one of the first examples in which the application of molecular diagnostics led to improved tumor classification. Ewing's sarcoma was first
described by James Ewing as a bone tumor characterized by small blue round cells and minimal mitotic activity. 58 Turc-Carel identified a recurring reciprocal t(11;22)
chromosomal translocation in these tumors in 1983. 59 Investigators subsequently demonstrated a cytogenetically identical t(11;22) in adult neuroblastoma or
peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor, so named because of its histologic similarity to neuroblastoma. 60 Based on the presence of the identical translocation, it
was hypothesized that peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor was related to Ewing's sarcoma. This translocation breakpoint has been molecularly characterized
as an in-frame fusion between a new Ewing's sarcoma gene, EWS, on chromosome 22 and an ETS transcription family member, FLI-1, on chromosome 22. 61,62 and 63
In addition to this fusion transcript being identified in peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor, other variants, notably the chest wall Askin's tumor and soft tissue
Ewing's sarcoma, previously treated as a RMS because of its location in soft tissue, were also shown to bear the identical fusion transcript. Several variant
translocations have also been identified, invariably fusing the EWS gene to an ETS family member. 64,65 Greater than 90% of Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors carry
the EWS-ETS fusion gene, and a search for EWS-ETS by either reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction or fluorescence in situ hybridization should be
considered standard practice in the diagnostic evaluation of suspected Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors. The nature of the novel fusion transcription factor and its
downstream targets are currently under intense investigation. Interestingly, it has been suggested that the specific fusion protein expressed in the Ewing's sarcoma
family of tumors has prognostic significance. 66,67

RHABDOMYOSARCOMA
The two major histologic subtypes of RMS, embryonal and alveolar, have both unique histologic appearance as well as distinctive molecular genetic abnormalities,
while sharing a common myogenic lineage. Embryonal tumors make up two-thirds of all RMS and are histologically characterized by a stroma-rich, spindle-cell
appearance. Alveolar tumors make up approximately one-third of RMS and are histologically characterized by densely packed small round cells often lining a
septation reminiscent of a pulmonary alveolus, giving rise to its name. Both histologic subtypes express muscle-specific proteins including a-actin, myosin, desmin,
and MyoD,68,69 and 70 and they virtually always express high levels of IGF-2. 71,72
At the molecular level, embryonal tumors are characterized by LOH at the 11p15 locus, which is of particular interest since this region harbors the IGF-2 gene. 73,74

The loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at 11p15 occurs by loss of maternal and duplication of paternal chromosomal material. 75 While LOH is normally associated with loss
of tumor suppressor gene activity, in this instance LOH with paternal duplication may result in activation of IGF-2. This occurs because IGF-2 is now known to be
normally imprinted (i.e., this gene is normally transcriptionally silent at the maternal allele, with only the paternal allele being transcriptionally active). 76,77 Thus, LOH
with paternal duplication potentially leads to a twofold gene-dosage effect of the IGF-2 locus. Furthermore, in alveolar tumors where LOH does not occur, the normally
imprinted maternal allele has been shown to be reexpressed. 78,79 Thus, LOH and loss of imprinting may in this case lead to the same functional result, namely,
biallelic expression of the normally monoallelically expressed IGF-2. However, loss of an as yet unidentified tumor suppressor gene due to LOH also remains a
possibility.
Alveolar RMS is characterized by a t(2;13)(q35;q14) chromosomal translocation. 80,81 Molecular cloning of this translocation has identified the generation of a fusion
transcription factor, fusing the 5' DNA-binding region of PAX-3 on chromosome 2 to the 3' transactivation domain region of FKHR gene on chromosome 13. 82,83 A
variant t(1;13)(q36;q14) has been identified in a small number of alveolar RMS tumors that fuses the 5' DNA-binding region of the PAX 7 gene on chromosome 1 with
the identical 3' transactivation domain of the FKHR gene. 84 Fluorescence in situ hybridization or reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction can be used to
identify these PAX-FKHR fusions in approximately 90% of tumors and are diagnostic of alveolar RMS. As noted previously, the fusion protein generated by the
translocation leads to a novel transcription factor. The nature of this transcription factor and its downstream targets are the subject of active investigation. Of particular
interest is the association of the PAX3-FKHR fusion with increased expression of c-met. 85,86 Met is the receptor tyrosine kinase for hepatocyte growth factor/scatter
factor and is overexpressed in both embryonal and alveolar RMS. 87 It has also been suggested that, like the Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors, where the specific
expressed fusion transcript has prognostic significance, the PAX3-FKHR and the PAX7-FKHR fusions lead to distinct clinicopathologic entities. 88
Other frequently reported genetic alterations that may be common to both embryonal and alveolar RMS include activated forms of N-RAS and K-RAS, 89,90 inactivating
p53 mutations,91 as well as amplification and overexpression of MDM2, CDK4, and N-MTC. 92

HEREDITARY SYNDROMES ASSOCIATED WITH TUMORS OF CHILDHOOD
LI-FRAUMENI SYNDROME
A few hereditary cancer syndromes are associated with the occurrence of both childhood and adult-onset neoplasms. The paradigm Li-Fraumeni familial cancer
syndrome was originally described in 1969 from an epidemiologic evaluation of more than 600 medical and family history records of childhood sarcoma patients. 93,94
The original description of kindred with a spectrum of tumors that includes soft tissue sarcomas, osteosarcomas, breast cancer, brain tumors, leukemia, and
adrenocortical carcinoma has been overwhelmingly substantiated by numerous subsequent studies, 95 although other cancers are also observed. Germline alterations
of the p53 tumor suppressor gene are associated with LFS. 96,97 and 98 These are primarily missense mutations that yield a stabilized mutant protein. The spectrum of
mutations of p53 in the germline are indistinct from somatic mutations found in a wide variety of tumors. Carriers are heterozygous for the mutation, and in tumors
derived from these individuals, the second (wild-type) allele is frequently deleted or mutated, leading to functional inactivation. 99,100 and 101 Only 60% to 80% of classic
LFS families have detectable alterations of the gene. It is not yet determined whether the remainder are associated with the presence of modifier genes, promoter
defects yielding abnormalities of p53 expression, or simply the result of weak genotype-phenotype correlations. Other candidate predisposition genes, such as p16,
p15, p21, BRCA1, BRCA2, and PTEN, associated with multisite cancer associations have generally been ruled out as potential targets.
Germline p53 alterations have also been reported in some patients with cancer phenotypes that resemble the classic LFS phenotype. Between 3% and 10% of
children with apparently sporadic RMS or osteosarcoma have been shown to carry germline p53 mutations. 102,103 These patients tend to be younger than those who
harbor wild-type p53. It appears as well that more than 75% of children with apparently sporadic adrenocortical carcinoma carry germline p53 mutations, although in
some of these cases, a family history develops that is not substantially distinct from LFS. 104,105 These observations suggest that germline p53 alterations may be
associated with early-onset development of the childhood component tumors of the syndrome. It is not clear what clinical significance these findings have in that no
studies of prognostic significance or potential impact on anticancer treatment modalities are reported. Nevertheless, in light of the critical role played by p53 in the
initiation and potentiation of gamma irradiation or chemotherapy-induced DNA damage repair, studies into the effect of such germline mutations on the potentiation of
tumor development related to therapeutic interventions would be important.
BECKWITH-WIEDEMANN SYNDROME
BWS occurs with a frequency of 1 in 13,700 births. More than 450 cases have been documented since the original reported associations of exomphalos,
macroglossia, gigantism, and other congenital anomalies. With increasing age, phenotypic features of BWS become less pronounced. Laboratory findings may
include, at birth, hypoglycemia (extremely common), polycythemia, hypocalcemia, hypertriglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia, and high serum a-fetoprotein levels.
Early diagnosis of the condition is crucial to avoid deleterious neurologic effects of neonatal hypoglycemia and to initiate an appropriate screening protocol for tumor
development. The increased risk for tumor formation in BWS patients is estimated at 7.5% and is further increased to 10% if hemihyperplasia is present. Tumors
occurring with the highest frequency include WT, hepatoblastoma, neuroblastoma, and adrenocortical carcinoma. 20,106
The genetic basis of BWS is complex. Various 11p15 chromosomal or molecular alterations have been associated with the BWS phenotype and its tumors. 107 It is
unlikely that a single gene is responsible for the BWS phenotype. Because it appears that abnormalities in the region affect imprinted domain, it is more likely that
normal gene regulation in this part of chromosome 11p15 occurs in a regional manner and may depend on various interdependent factors or genes. Chromosomal
abnormalities associated with BWS are extremely rare, with only 20 cases having been associated with 11p15 translocations or inversions. The chromosomal
breakpoint in each of these cases is always found on the maternally derived chromosome 11. 108 This parent-of-origin dependence in BWS suggests that the
chromosome translocations disrupt imprinting of a gene in the 11p15 region. On the other hand, BWS-associated 11p15 duplications (approximately 30 reported
cases) are always paternally derived, and the duplication breakpoints are heterogeneous. 109 Paternal uniparental disomy, in which there are two alleles inherited from
one parent (the father), has been reported in approximately 15% of sporadic BWS patients. 110 It is interesting that the insulin/IGF-2 region is always represented in
the uniparental disomy, although the extent of chromosomal involvement is highly variable. Alterations in allele-specific DNA methylation of IGF-2 and H19 reflect this
paternal imprinting phenomenon. 111 Although there are associated cytogenetic and molecular findings for some patients, no single diagnostic test exists for BWS. This
observation is not unlike that described for LFS, or perhaps for other multisite cancer phenotypes, in which the clarity of the phenotype is often weak, making the
genetic link cloudy and the likelihood of multiple pathways to tumor formation strong.
GORLIN SYNDROME
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome, or Gorlin syndrome, is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by multiple basal cell carcinomas, developmental
defects including bifid ribs and other spine and rib abnormalities, palmar and plantar pits, odontogenic keratocysts, as well as generalized overgrowth. 112 This
syndrome appears to be caused by germline mutations of the tumor suppressor gene PTCH, a receptor for sonic hedgehog. 113,114 Approximately 5% of patients with
Gorlin syndrome develop medulloblastoma. Furthermore, approximately 10% of patients diagnosed with medulloblastoma by the age of 2 years are found to have
other phenotypic features consistent with Gorlin syndrome and also harbor germline PTCH mutations. 115 Of further note, mice with heterozygous PTC deletions
develop RMS.116 Although RMS is not associated with Gorlin syndrome, the mouse studies suggest a possible link between PTC signaling and RMS. 117
MALIGNANT RHABDOID TUMORS
These unusual pediatric tumors occur as primary renal tumors, but have also been described in lung, liver, soft tissues, and the CNS, where it is often termed atypical
and teratoid rhabdoid tumor.118,119 Recurrent chromosomal translocations of chromosome 22 involving a breakpoint at 22q11.2, as well as complete or partial
monosomy 22, have been observed, strongly suggesting the presence of a tumor suppressor gene in this area. The hSNF5/INI1 gene has been isolated and shown to
be the target for biallelic, recurrent, inactivating mutations. 120 The encoded gene product is thought to be involved in chromatin remodeling. Studies have not only
demonstrated the presence of inactivating mutations in the majority of malignant rhabdoid tumors (renal or extrarenal), but also in chronic myeloid leukemia, 121 as well
as in a wide variety of other childhood and adult-onset malignancies. 122,123 An intriguing feature in some individuals with malignant rhabdoid tumors is the observation
of germline mutations, suggesting that this family of tumors may occur as a result of a primary inherited defect in one allele of the INI1 gene. 124 Further studies of the
function of this gene will be important in determining its role in tumorigenesis of this wide spectrum of neoplasms.

PREDICTIVE TESTING FOR GERMLINE MUTATIONS AND CHILDHOOD CANCERS
Several important issues have arisen as a result of the identification of germline mutations of tumor suppressor genes in cancer-prone individuals and families. These
include ethical questions of predictive testing in such families and in unaffected relatives, and selection of patients to be tested, as well as the development of
practical and accurate laboratory techniques, development of pilot testing programs, and the role of clinical intervention based on test results. This chapter was not
meant to discuss these problems in detail, but one would be remiss to ignore their significance.
For several reasons, testing cannot as yet be offered to the general pediatric population, particularly in light of the demonstrably low carrier rate of the abnormal tumor
suppressor genes and the general lack of standardized methods of preclinical screening of carriers. Exceptions to these limitations include screening of gene carriers
in RB, BWS, multiple endocrine neoplasia, and multiple melanoma families. Whether predictive testing studies are initiated in high-risk families or surveys are carried
out in cancer populations likely to harbor germline mutations in tumor suppressor genes, the investigations should be undertaken in a research setting involving
expertise in oncology, psychiatry, psychology, genetics and genetic counseling, medical ethics, and molecular genetics. The development of screening programs
should address aspects of cost, informed consent (particularly where it affects children), socioeconomic impact on the individual tested, consistency in providing
results, and counseling. 125,126
MOLECULAR THERAPEUTICS
With the identification of alterations in a variety of molecular signaling pathways, including activated growth factor signaling pathways (e.g., IGF-2) and altered tumor
suppressor pathways (e.g., RB), it has become increasingly apparent that these alterations may potentially represent the Achilles heel for these tumors. New agents
targeting the tyrosine kinase enzymes that transduce growth factor signals are at various stages of development in early clinical studies. Agents blocking the growth
hormone IGF-1 pathway are currently being tested in clinical trials in osteosarcoma and breast cancer. Farnesyl transferase inhibitors, blockers of the RAS pathway,
have been developed and are also currently in clinical testing. Of note, the activity of farnesyl transferase inhibitors against NF is under investigation, since activation
of RAS signaling has been observed in NF-associated tumors (see previous discussion). As targets of mutant transcription factors generated are identified, it is hoped
that they may represent additional targets for therapeutic intervention.
Finally, fusion proteins derived from tumor-specific translocations may themselves represent potential neoantigens that could be targeted by cytotoxic T cells. It is
likely that the molecular characterization of pediatric tumors will lead to novel and perhaps more effective treatment approaches in the near future. It is likely that
some of these innovative approaches will at least initially be integrated into standard therapeutic protocols.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Knudson AG. Hereditary cancers disclose a class of cancer genes. Cancer 1988;63:1888.
2. Li FP. Cancer families: human models of susceptibility to neoplasia. Cancer Res 1988;48:5381.
3. Balaban G, Gilbert F, Nichols W, et al. Abnormalities of chromosome #13 in retinoblastoma from individuals with normal constitutional karyotypes. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1982;6:213.
4. Benedict WF, Banerjee A, Mark C, et al. Nonrandom chromosomal changes in untreated retinoblastoma. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1983;10:311.
5. Knudson AG. Mutation and cancer: statistical study of retinoblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1971;68:820.
6. Comings DE. A general theory of carcinogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1973:70:3324.
7. Devesa SS. The incidence of retinoblastoma. Am J Opthalmol 1975;80:263.
8. Francois J, Matton M-Th, De Bie S, et al. Genesis and genetics of retinoblastoma. Ophthalmologica 1975;170:405.
9. Knudson AG, Hethcote HW, Brown BW. Mutation and childhood cancer: a probabilistic model for the incidence of retinoblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1975;72:5116.
10. Abramson DH, Ellsworth RM, Kitchin FD, et al. Second nonocular tumors in retinoblastoma survivors: are they radiation induced? Ophthalmology 1984;91:1351.
11. Smith LM, Donaldson SS, Egbert PR, et al. Aggressive management of second primary tumors in survivors of hereditary retinoblastoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:499.
12. Cavenee WK, Dryga TP, Phillips RA, et al. Expression of recessive alleles by chromosomal mechanisms in retinoblastoma. Nature 1983;305:779.
13. Squire J, Dryja TP, Dunn J, et al. Cloning of the esterase D gene: a polymorphic gene probe closely linked to the retinoblastoma locus on chromosome 13. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1986;83:6573.
14. Friend SH, Bernards R, Rogelj S, et al. A human DNA segment with properties of the gene that predisposes to retinoblastoma and osteosarcoma. Nature 1986;323:643.
15. Bookstein R, Shew J-Y, Chen P-L, et al. Suppression of tumorigenicity of human prostate carcinoma cells by replacing a mutated RB gene. Science 1990;247:643.
16. Gonzalez FF, Lopes MB, Garcia FJM, et al. Expression of developmentally defined retinal phenotypes in the histogenesis of retinoblastoma. Am J Pathol 1992;141:363.
17. Montgomery BT, Ketalis PP, Blute ML, et al. Extended follow-up of bilateral Wilms' tumor: results of the National Wilms Tumor Study. J Urol 1991;146:514.
18. Beckwith JB, Kiviat NB, Bonadio JF. Nephrogenic rests, nephroblastomatosis, and the pathogenesis of Wilms tumor. Pediatr Pathol 1990;10:1.
19. Mueller RF. The Denys-Drash syndrome. J Med Genet 1994;31:471.
20. Wiedemann HR. Tumors and hemihypertrophy associated with Wiedemann-Beckwith syndrome. Eur J Pediatr 1983;141:129.
21. Riccardi VM, Sujansky E, Smith AC, et al. Chromosomal imbalance in the aniridia-Wilms' tumor association: 11p interstitial deletion. Pediatrics 1978;61:604.
22. Ton CC, Hirvonen H, Miwa H, et al. Positional cloning and characterization of a paired box and homeobox-containing gene from the aniridia region. Cell 1991;67:1059.
23. Call KM, Glaser T, Ito CY, et al. Isolation and characterization of a zinc finger polypeptide gene at the human chromosome 11 Wilms' tumor locus. Cell 1990;60:509.
24. Gesler M, Poustka A, Cavenee W, et al. Homozygous deletion in Wilms tumors of a zinc-finger gene identified by chromosome jumping. Nature 1990;343:774.
25. Bonetta L, Kuehn S, Huang A, et al. Wilms tumor locus on 11p13 defined by multiple CpG island-associated transcripts. Science 1990;250:994.
26. Rauscher FJ III. The WT1 Wilms tumor gene product: a developmentally regulated transcription factor in the kidney functions as a tumor suppressor. FASEB J 1993;7:896.
27. Drash A, Sherman F, Hartmann WH, et al. A syndrome of pseudohermaphroditism, Wilms tumor, hypertension and degenerative renal disease. J Pediatr 1970;76:585.
28. Jadresic L, Leake J, Gordon I, et al. Clinicopathologic review of twelve children with nephropathy, Wilms tumor, and genital abnormalities (Drash syndrome). J Pediatr 1990;117:717.
29. Coppes M, Liefers GJ, Higuchi M, et al. Inherited WT1 mutations in Denys-Drash syndrome. Cancer Res 1992;52:6125.
30. Koufos A, Grundy P, Morgan K, et al. Familial Wiedemann-Beckwith syndrome and a second Wilms tumor locus both map to 11p15.5. Am J Hum Genet 1989;44:711.
31. Ping AJ, Reeve AE, Law DJ, et al. Genetic linkage of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome to 11p15. Am J Hum Genet 1989;44:720.
32. Maw MA, Grundy PE, Millow LJ, et al. A third Wilms tumor locus on chromosome 16q. Cancer Res 1992;52:3094.
33. Huff V, Reeve AE, Leppert M, et al. Nonlinkage of 16q markers to familial predisposition to Wilms tumor. Cancer Res 1992;52:6117.
34. Stumpf GR, Alkane JF, Annegers JF, et al. Neurofibromatosis. Arch Neurol 1987;45:575.
35. Riccardi VM, Eichner JE. Neurofibromatosis: phenotype, natural history, and pathogenesis. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins, 1986.
36. Halliday AL, Sobel RA, Martuza RL. Benign spinal nerve sheath tumors: their occurrence sporadically and in neurofibromatosis types 1 and 2. J Neurosurg 1991;74:248.
37. Marchuk DA, Saulino AM, Tavakkol R, et al. cDNA cloning of the type 1 neurofibromatosis gene: complete sequence of the NF1 gene product. Genomics 1991;11:931.
38. DeClure JE, Cohen BD, Lowy DR. Identification and characterization of the neurofibromatosis type 1 protein product. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:9914.
39. Viskochil D, Buchberg AM, Xu G, et al. Deletions and a translocation interrupt a cloned gene at the neurofibromatosis type 1 locus. Cell 1990;62:187.
40. Martuza RL, Eldridge R. Neurofibromatosis 2 (bilateral acoustic neurofibromatosis). N Engl J Med 1988;318:684.
41. Trofatter JA, MacCollin MM, Rutter JL, et al. A novel moesin-, ezrin-, radixin-like gene is a candidate for the neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor. Cell 1993;73:791.
42. Rouleau GA, Merel P, Lutchman M, et al. Alteration in a new gene encoding a putative membrane-organizing protein causes neurofibromatosis type 2. Nature 1993;363:515.
43. Hara T, Bianchi AB, Seizinger BR, et al. Molecular cloning and characterization of alternatively spliced transcripts of the mouse neurofibromatosis 2 gene. Cancer Res 1994;54:330.
44. Brodeur G, Sekhon G, Goldstein M. Chromosomal aberrations in human neuroblastoma. Cancer 1977;40:2256.
45. Maris JM, White PS, Beltinger CP, et al. Significance of chromosome 1p loss of heterozygosity in neuroblastoma. Cancer Res 1995;55:4664.
46. Caron H, van Sluis P, de Kraker J, et al. Allelic loss of chromosome 1p is a predictor of unfavorable outcome in patients with neuroblastoma. N Engl J Med 1996;334:225.
47. Biedler J, Ross R, Sharske S, et al. Human neuroblasotma cytogenetics: search for significance of homogeneously staining regions in double minute chromosomes. In: Evans A, ed. Advances
in neuroblastoma research. New York: Raven Press, 1980:81.
48. Biedler JL, Spengler BA. A novel chromosome abnormality on human neuroblastoma and anti-folate resistant Chinese hamster cell lines in culture. J Natl Cancer Inst 1976;57:683.
49. Schwab M, Alitalo K, Lempnauer K, et al. Amplified DNA with limited homology to myc cellular oncogene is shared by human neuroblasotoma cell lines and a neuroblastoma tumor. Nature
1983;305:245.
50. Thiele CJ, Reynolds PC, Israel MA. Decreased expression of N-myc precedes retinoic acid induced phenotypic differentiation of human neuroblastoma. Nature 1985;313:404.
51. Matthay KK, Villablanca JG, Seeger RC, et al. Treatment of high-risk neuroblastoma with intensive chemotherapy, radiotherapy, autologous bone marrow transplantation, and 13-cis-retinoic
acid. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1165.
52. Schwab M, Ellison J, Busch M, et al. Enhanced expression of the human N-myc gene consequent to amplification of DNA may contribute to malignant progression of neuroblastoma. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1984;81:4940.
53. Nakagawara A, Arima-Nakagawara M, Scavarda NJ, et al. Association between high levels of expression of the TRK gene and favorable outcome in human neuroblastoma. N Engl J Med
1993;328:847.
54. Norris MD, Bordow SB, Marshall GM, et al. Expression of the gene for multidrug-resistance-associated protein and outcome in patients with neuroblastoma. N Engl J Med 1996;334:231.
55. Bown N, Cotterill S, Lastowska M, et al. Gain of chromosome arm 17q and adverse outcome in patients with neuroblastoma. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1954.
56. El-Badry OM, Romanous JA, Helman LJ, et al. Autonomous growth of a human neuroblastoma cell line is mediated by insulin-like growth factor II. J Clin Invest 1989;84:829.
57. El-Badry OM, Israel MA. Growth regulation of human neuroblastoma. Cancer Treat Res 1992;63:105.
58. Ewing J. Diffuse endothelioma of bone. Proc NY Pathol Soc 1921;21:17.
59. Turc-Carel C, Philip I, Berger M, et al. [Chromosomal translocation (11;22) in cell lines of Ewing's sarcoma]. C R Seances Acad Sci III 1983;296:1101 [French].
60. Whang-Pheng J, Triche T, Knutesen T, et al. Chromosome translocation in peripheral neuroepithelioma. N Engl J Med 1984;311:584.
61. Delattre O, Zucman J, Ploustagel B, et al. Gene fusion with an ETS DNA-binding domain caused by chromosome translocation in human tumours. Nature 1992;359:162.
62. Zucman J, Delattre O, Desmaze C, et al. Cloning and characterization of the Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral neuroepithelioma t(11;22) translocation breakpoints. Genes Chromosome Cancer
1992;5:271.
63. May WA, Gishizky ML, Lessnick SL, et al. Ewing sarcoma 11;22 translocation produces a chimeric transcription factor that requires the DNA-binding domain encoded by FLI1 for
transformation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:5752.

64. Desmaze C, Brizard F, Turc-Carel C, et al. Multiple chromosomal mechanisms generate an EWS/FLI1 or an EWS/ERG fusion gene in Ewing tumors. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1997;97:12.
65. Jeon IS, Davis JN, Braun BS, et al. A variant Ewing's sarcoma translocation (7;22) fuses the EWS gene to the ETS gene ETV1. Oncogene 1995;10:1229.
66. Zoubek A, Dockhorn-Dworniczak B, Delattre O, et al. Does expression of different EWS chimeric transcripts define clinically distinct risk groups of Ewing tumor patients? J Clin Oncol
1996;14:1245.
67. de Alava E, Kawai A, Healey JH, et al. EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript structure is an independent determinant of prognosis in Ewing's sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1248.
68. Parham DM, Webber B, Holt H, et al. Immunohistochemical study of childhood rhabdomyosarcomas and related neoplasms. Results of an Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma study project. Cancer
1991;67:3072.
69. Dodd S, Malone M, McCulloch W. Rhabdomyosarcoma in children: a histological and immunohistochemical study of 59 cases. J Pathol 1989;158:13.
70. Dias P, Parham DM, Shapiro DN, et al. Myogenic regulatory protein (MyoD1) expression in childhood solid tumors: diagnostic utility in rhabdomyosarcoma. Am J Pathol 1990;137:1283.
71. El-Badry OM, Minniti C, Kohn EC, et al. Insulin-like growth factor II acts as an autocrine growth and motility factor in human rhabdomyosarcoma tumors. Cell Growth Diff 1990;1:325.
72. Minniti CP, Tsokos M, Newton WA, et al. Specific expression of insulin-like growth factor-II in rhabdomyosarcoma tumor cells. Am J Pathol 1994;101:198.
73. Scrable H, Witte D, Lampkin B, et al. Chromosomal localization of the human rhabdomyosarcoma locus by mitotic recombination mapping. Nature 1987;329:645.
74. Scrable H, Witte D, Shimada H, et al. Molecular differential pathology of rhabdomyosarcoma. Genes Chromosome Cancer 1989;1:23.
75. Scrable H, Cavenee W, Ghavimi F, et al. A model for embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma tumorigenesis that involves genome imprinting. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:7480.
76. Rainier S, Johnson LA, Dobry CJ, et al. Relaxation of imprinted genes in human cancer. Nature 1993;362:747.
77. Ogawa O, Eccles MR, Szeto J, et al. Relaxation of insulin-like growth factor II gene imprinting implicated in Wilms' tumour. Nature 1993;362:749.
78. Zhan S, Shapiro DN, Helman LJ. Activation of an imprinted allele of the insulin-like growth factor II gene implicated in rhabdomyosarcoma. J Clin Invest 1994;94:445.
79. Zhan S, Shapiro D, Zhang L, et al. Concordant loss of imprinting of the human insulin-like growth factor II gene promoters in cancer. J Biol Chem 1995;270:27983.
80. Turc-Carel C, Lizard-Nacol S, Justrabo E, et al. Consistent chromosomal translocation in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1986;19:361.
81. Douglass EC, Valentine M, Ectubanas E, et al. A specific chromosomal abnormality in rhabdomyosarcoma. Cytogenet Cell Genet 1987;45:148.
82. Barr FG, Galili N, Holick J, et al. Rearrangement of the PAX3 paired box gene in the paediatric solid tumour alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. Nat Genet 1993;3:113.
83. Shapiro DN, Sublett JE, Li B, et al. Fusion of PAX3 to a member of the forkhead family of transcription factors in human alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer Res 1993;53:5108.
84. Davis RJ, D'Cruz CM, Lovell MA, et al. Fusion of PAX7 to FKHR by the variant t(1;13)(p36;q14) translocation in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer Res 1994;54:2869.
85. Epstein J, Shapiro D, Cheng J, et al. Pax3 modulates expression of the c-Met receptor during limb muscle development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:4213.
86. Ginsberg JP, Davis RJ, Bennicelli JL, et al. Up-regulation of MET but not neural cell adhesion molecule expression by the PAX3-FKHR fusion protein in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer
Res 1998;58:3542.
87. Ferracini R, Olivero M, Di Renzo MF, et al. Retrogenic expression of the MET proto-oncogene correlates with the invasive phenotype of human rhabdomyosarcomas. Oncogene 1996;12:1697.
88. Kelly KM, Womer RB, Sorensen PH, et al. Common and variant gene fusions predict distinct clinical phenotypes in rhabdomyosarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1831.
89. Chardin P, Yeramian P, Madaule P, et al. N-ras gene activation in the RD human rhabdomyosarcoma cell line. Int J Cancer 1985;35:647.
90. Stratton MR, Fisher C, Gusterson BA, et al. Detection of point mutations in N-ras and K-ras genes of human embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas using oligonucleotide probes and the polymerase
chain reaction. Cancer Res 1989;49:6324.
91. Felix CA, Kappel CC, Mitsudomi T, et al. Frequency and diversity of p53 mutations in childhood rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer Res 1992;52:2243.
92. Merlino G, Helman LJ. Rhabdomyosarcomaworking out the pathways. Oncogene 1999;18:5340.
93. Li FP, Fraumeni JF. Rhabdomyosarcoma in children: epidemiologic study and identification of a familial cancer syndrome. J Natl Cancer Inst 1969;43:1365.
94. Li FP, Fraumeni JF. Prospective study of a family cancer syndrome. JAMA 1982;247:2692.
95. Li FP, Fraumeni JF, Mulvihill JJ, et al. A cancer family syndrome in 24 kindreds. Cancer Res 1988;48:5358.
96. Malkin D, Li FP, Strong LC, et al. Germline p53 mutations in a familial syndrome of breast cancer, sarcomas, and other neoplasms. Science 1990;250:1233.
97. Srivastava S, Zou Z, Pirollo K, et al. Germline transmission of a mutated p53 gene in a cancer-prone family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome Nature 1990;348:747.
98. Malkin D. Li-Fraumeni syndrome. In: Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW, eds. The genetic basis of human cancer. 1st ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998:393.
99. Sedlacek Z, Kodet R, Seemanova E, et al. Two Li-Fraumeni syndrome families with novel germline p53 mutations: loss of the wild-type allele in only 50% of tumors. Br J Cancer 1998;77:1034.
100. Varley JM, Thorncroft M, McGown G, et al. A detailed study of loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 17 in tumours from Li-Fraumeni patients carrying a mutation of the TP53 gene. Oncogene
1997;14:65.
101. Frebourg T, Kassel J, Lam KT, et al. Germline mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in patients with high risk for cancer inactivate the protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:6413.
102. Diller L, Sexsmith E, Gottlieb A, et al. Germline p53 mutations are frequently detected in young children with rhabdomyosarcoma. J Clin Invest 1994;95:1606.
103. McIntyre JF, Smith-Sorensen B, Friend SH, et al. Germline mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in children with osteosarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:925.
104. Wagner J, Portwine C, Rabin K, et al. High frequency of germline p53 mutations in childhood adrenocortical cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1707.
105. Varley JM, McGown G, Thorncroft M, et al. Are there low-penetrance TP53 alleles? Evidence from childhood adrenocortical tumors. Am J Hum Genet 1999;65:995.
106. Clericuzio CL, Johnson C. Screening for Wilms tumor in high-risk individuals. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1995;9:1255.
107. Weksberg R, Teshima I, Williams B, et al. Molecular characterization of cytogenetic alterations associated with the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome phenotype refines the localization and
suggests the gene for BWS is imprinted. Hum Mol Genet 1993;2:549.
108. Mannens M, Hoovers JMN, Redeker E, et al. Parental imprinting of human chromosome region 11p15.2-pter involved in the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and various human neoplasia. Eur
J Hum Genet 1994;2:3.
109. Henry I, Jeanpierre M, Barichard F, et al. Duplication of HRAS1, INS and IGF2 is not a common event in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Annal Genetique 1988;31:216.
110. Henry I, Bonaiti-Pellie C, Chehensse V, et al. Uniparental paternal disomy in a genetics cancer-predisposing syndrome. Nature 1991;351:665.
111. Reik W, Brown KW, Schneid H, et al. Imprinting mutations in the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome suggested by an altered imprinting pattern in the IGF2-H19 domain. Hum Mol Genet
1995;265:464.
112. Gorlin RJ. Nevoid basal-cell carcinoma syndrome. Medicine (Baltimore) 1987;66:98.
113. Gailani MR, Stahle-Backdahl M, Leffell DJ, et al. The role of the human homologue of Drosophila patched in sporadic basal cell carcinomas. Nat Genet 1996;14:78.
114. Hahn H, Wicking C, Zaphiropoulous PG, et al. Mutations of the human homolog of Drosophila patched in the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Cell 1996;85:841.
115. Cowan R, Hoban P, Kelsey A, et al. The gene for the naevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome acts as a tumour-suppressor gene in medulloblastoma. Br J Cancer 1997;76:141.
116. Hahn H, Wojnowski L, Zimmer AM, et al. Rhabdomyosarcomas and radiation hypersensitivity in a mouse model of Gorlin syndrome. Nat Med 1998;4:619.
117. Zhan S, Helman LJ. Glimpsing the cause of rhabdomyosarcoma. Nat Med 1998;4:559.
118. Parham DM, Weeks DA, Beckwith JB. The clinicopathologic spectrum of putative extrarenal rhabdoid tumors. Am J Surg Pathol 1994;18:1010.
119. Rorke LB, Packer R, Biegel J. Central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors of infancy and childhood: definition of an entity. J Neurosurg 1996;85:56.
120. Versteege I, Sevenet N, Lange J, et al. Truncating mutations of hSNF5/INI1 in aggressive pediatric cancer. Nature 1998;394:203.
121. Grand F, Kulkarni S, Chase A, et al. Frequent deletion of hSNF5/INI1, a component of the SWI/SNF complex, in chronic myeloid leukemia. Cancer Res 1999;59:3870.
122. Sevenet N, Sheridan E, Amram D, et al. Constitutional mutations of the hSNF5/INI1 gene predispose to a variety of cancers. Am J Hum Genet 1999;65:1342.
123. Sevenet N, Lellouch-Tubiana A, Schofield D, et al. Spectrum of hSNF5/INI1 somatic mutations in human cancer and genotype-phenotype correlations. Hum Mol Genet 1999;8:2359.
124. Biegel JA, Zhou JY, Rorke LB, et al. Germ-line and acquired mutations in INI1 in atypical teratoid and rhabdoid tumors. Cancer Res 1999;59:74.
125. Knoppers BM, Chadwick R. The Human Genome Project: under and international ethical microscope. Science 1995;265:464.
126. Malkin D, Knoppers BM. Genetic predisposition to cancer: issues to consider. Semin Cancer Biol 1996;7:49.

SECTION 44.2 Solid Tumors of Childhood
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 44.2
Solid Tumors of Childhood
DAVID H. EBB
DANIEL M. GREEN
ROBERT C. SHAMBERGER
NANCY J. TARBELL
Introduction
Epidemiology
Management of Childhood Cancer
Wilms' Tumor
Epidemiology and Genetics
Pathology
Clinical Presentation and Natural History
Staging
Evaluation
Diagnostic Imaging
Treatment
Favorable Histology Wilms' Tumor
National Wilms' Tumor Study-3
National Wilms' Tumor Study-4
Treatment
Neuroblastoma
Epidemiology and Genetics
Pathology
Clinical Presentation and Natural History
Staging
Clinical Evaluation
Treatment
Prognostic Factors
Retinoblastoma
Epidemiology and Genetics
Pathology
Clinical Presentation
Evaluation
Staging
Treatment
Surgical Considerations
Advanced Unilateral Disease
Limited Unilateral or Limited Bilateral Disease
Bilateral Disease
Chemotherapy
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Epidemiology and Genetics
Pathology
Clinical Presentation and Evaluation
Staging
Treatment
Specific Primary Tumor Sites
Prognostic Factors
Ewing's Sarcoma and Peripheral Primitive Neuroectodermal Tumor
Epidemiology and Genetics
Pathology
Clinical Presentation and Natural History
Staging
Treatment
Prognostic Factors
Primary Hepatic Tumors
Epidemiology and Genetics
Pathology
Clinical Presentation
Evaluation and Staging
Treatment
Prognosis
Germ Cell Tumors
Embryology
Pathology
Teratoma
Yolk Sac Tumor (Endodermal Sinus Tumor)
Embryonal Carcinoma
Seminoma
Choriocarcinoma
Teratocarcinoma
Laboratory Markers
Clinical Presentation and Treatment by Anatomic Site
Sacrococcygeal Tumors
Testicular Tumors
Ovary
Mediastinum
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Malignant solid tumors account for 30% of all cases of childhood cancer. Collaborative, multimodality treatment efforts undertaken in the context of pediatric
cooperative group clinical trials have produced a remarkable improvement in survival since the 1970s. In addition to improvements in survival and functional outcome,
the cooperative group studies have also facilitated a rapid growth in our understanding of cancer genetics and tumor biology. Prospective studies are currently
underway to validate new risk group stratification schemes that integrate classical tumor staging information with prognostically significant features of tumor biology
detectable with molecular diagnostics. We review the epidemiology, pathology, clinical presentation, evaluation, treatment, and prognosis of the common malignant
solid tumors of children and adolescents.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Approximately 12,400 children and adolescents younger than 20 years of age were diagnosed with cancer in 1998. 1 Malignant neoplasms are a major cause of

mortality in children between 1 and 14 years of age. In 1998, the most recent year for which statistics are available, accidents, congenital anomalies, and homicide
were responsible for more deaths in the age group 1 to 4 years, whereas only accidents were a more frequent cause of death in the age group 5 to 14 years. 2
The most common malignant neoplasms diagnosed in pediatric patients are acute leukemia, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, Hodgkin's disease, and primary tumors of the
central nervous system. The most common malignant solid tumors are neuroblastoma, Wilms' tumor, rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), and retinoblastoma ( Table 44.2-1).1

TABLE 44.2-1. Annual Incidence Rates and Percentage Distribution of Malignant Diseases in U.S. Children

Insights into the etiology of malignant solid tumors of childhood have been suggested by well-designed case-control studies ( Table 44.2-2).3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12 and 13

TABLE 44.2-2. Risk of Solid Tumors Following Parental Preconception Exposures

Some childhood solid tumors occur in association with well-recognized single gene defects. Examples of these include the association of Wilms' tumor with
Denys-Drash syndrome [Wilms' tumor suppressor gene (WT1) mutation], 13 bilateral retinoblastoma [retinoblastoma tumor suppressor gene (RB1) mutation], 14
hepatoblastoma and adenomatous polyposis coli (APC gene mutation), 15 RMS or malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1 gene
mutation),16 RMS and Li-Fraumeni syndrome (p53 gene mutation).17,18
The etiology of most childhood tumors is unknown. Knudson proposed the two-event model to explain the pattern of retinoblastoma, in which approximately 10% of
patients with sporadic unilateral tumors and all patients with bilateral tumors carry a germline mutation of RB1. 19 This mutation could be either a new germinal
mutation transmitted from the father20 or a mutation transmitted from a carrier or affected parent. 21 The interstitial deletion occurs preferentially in the paternally
derived allele of RB1, 22 as is the case for new germinal mutations of WT1, 23 resulting in the loss of function of one of the alleles of the RB1 or WT1 gene. A tumor
arises only if a second event occurs, resulting in the loss of function of the remaining normal allele. This loss occurs via one of several mechanisms ( Fig. 44.2-1),
recognized by loss of heterozygosity for markers of specific chromosomal regions, all of which result in complete absence of the normal gene product. 21 This
mechanism has been demonstrated in tumor tissue derived from embryonal RMS, hepatoblastoma, retinoblastoma, and Wilms' tumor. 24

FIGURE 44.2-1. Loss of heterozygosity may occur by a variety of mechanisms. (From Cavenee WK, Dryja TP, Phillips RA, et al. Expression of recessive alleles by
chromosomal mechanisms in retinoblastoma. Nature 1983;305:779, with permission.)

The genetics of some childhood solid tumors may be more complex. Analysis of the epidemiologic and clinicopathologic features suggest, for example, some cases of
bilateral and multicentric Wilms' tumor may arise from somatic mosaicism rather than germline mutation. 25,26

MANAGEMENT OF CHILDHOOD CANCER
Childhood malignant solid tumors are unique due to their responsiveness to many chemotherapeutic agents. Effective combination chemotherapy regimens have
been identified and evaluated through cooperative group multiinstitutional trials. The cooperative groups' membership includes multidisciplinary treatment teams
consisting of pediatric oncologists, radiologists, surgeons, and surgical subspecialists, as well as pediatric pathologists, pediatric radiation oncologists, and allied
pediatric health professionals. The dramatic improvements in survival of pediatric patients with cancer are the result of treatment by such teams with experience in the
evaluation, staging, surgical management, radiation treatment, and administration of intensive chemotherapy regimens to these children.
Surgery plays two roles in the management of solid tumors. The first role is establishing a histologic diagnosis and staging the tumor; the second is resection of the
primary site of disease. It is increasingly important that the surgeon work in a collaborative fashion with the pediatric oncologist and radiation oncologist, since
resection may be best accomplished after initial chemotherapy and radiotherapy. These initial treatments may decrease both the potential risks of resection and the
long-term morbidity. Similarly, it is critical that the surgeon be involved from the outset in the care of a child presenting with a solid tumor since an inappropriately
performed biopsy of the tumor may complicate later resection efforts. Questions regarding timing and feasibility of resection should only be considered by surgeons
who are facile in reconciling the sometimes competing demands of durable local control and optimal functional outcome in a growing child. In light of the exquisite

radiosensitivity of most pediatric solid tumors, all deliberations concerning timing and extent of resection efforts must recognize the importance of radiotherapy as an
effective adjunct in efforts to secure local control.
Advances in anesthetic management of infants and children have contributed greatly to the surgical resection of solid tumors. Procedures that were performed in the
past with a significant mortality, such as hepatectomy and extensive retroperitoneal resections, are now accomplished on a routine basis with limited risk. The
duration of a procedure with modern anesthetic techniques is also rarely a consideration. Although the length of anesthesia was once a major determinant of
operative morbidity and mortality, duration of a procedure is now rarely an issue.
Significant advances have also been achieved in postoperative pain management. Epidural catheters and continuous intravenous infusions of narcotics by
mechanical pumps have greatly limited the severity of pain following extensive resections. Improvements in pain management have permitted more rapid mobilization
of postoperative patients, with a corresponding decrease in the risk of pneumonia.
These advances in surgical management have been complemented by substantial improvements in radiation planning and delivery. Conformal radiotherapy using
three-dimensional treatment planning to spare normal tissues has had a salutary effect on functional outcome. Advances in our knowledge of radiation dosing and
planning techniques are discussed separately under each specific tumor type.

WILMS' TUMOR
Wilms' tumor is the most common primary malignant renal tumor of childhood. The striking success of national cooperative studies in improving survival and
decreasing treatment-related morbidity mark this disease as the paradigm for multimodal treatment of a pediatric malignant solid tumor.
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND GENETICS
The incidence rate of Wilms' tumor is 7.9 cases per 1 million in white children younger than 15 years of age. 1 The incidence rate is approximately three times higher
for African Americans in the United States and blacks in Africa than for East Asians, with rates for white populations in Europe and North America between these
extremes.27
Wilms' tumor in the United States is slightly less frequent in boys than in girls. The tumor presents at an earlier age among boys, with the mean age at diagnosis for
those with unilateral tumors being 41.5 months compared with 46.9 months among girls. The mean age at diagnosis for those who present with bilateral tumors is 29.5
months for boys and 32.6 months for girls. 28
Children with Wilms' tumor may have associated anomalies, including aniridia, hemihypertrophy (as an isolated abnormality, or as a component of the
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome), cryptorchidism, and hypospadias. 29,30 and 31 Children with pseudohermaphroditism and renal disease (glomerulonephritis or
nephrotic syndrome) who develop Wilms' tumor may have the Denys-Drash syndrome, 32,33 which is associated with mutations within the same gene implicated in the
Wilms' tumor, aniridia, genitourinary malformations, mental retardation (WAGR) syndrome. 34
Wilms' tumor has become an important model for the study of fundamental mechanisms of tumorigenesis. The etiology of Wilms' tumor was thought to follow the
two-event model proposed by Knudson to explain the pattern of retinoblastoma. Case reports of the familial occurrence of Wilms' tumor, however, remain uncommon.
Approximately 1.5% of National Wilms' Tumor Study Group (NWTSG) cases have one or more family members with the disease. 26,35 In the absence of a history of
parental consanguinity in such families, the mode of inheritance is generally thought to be autosomal dominant, with variable penetrance and expressivity. The rate of
synchronous and metachronous bilaterality among NWTSG familial cases is significantly higher than for the NWTSG population as a whole. In addition, the mean age
at diagnosis for familial unilateral or familial bilateral cases is significantly lower than the corresponding group of sporadic cases. 35
Predicting the outcome in multicentric disease is likely to be more complex than previously imagined because of the emerging evidence for genetic heterogeneity.
Mechanisms other than an inherited mutation may account for at least some of the bilateral and multicentric cases. Analysis of the epidemiologic and clinicopathologic
features of Wilms' tumor patients led NWTSG investigators to suggest that some bilateral and multicentric tumors may arise from somatic mosaicism rather than
germline mutation.25,26 They also suggested that the disease comprises at least two pathogenetic entities that are identifiable on the basis of distinct precursor
lesions.36
PATHOLOGY
Wilms' tumor is characterized by tremendous histologic diversity and is thought to be composed of, or derived from, primitive metanephric blastema. Most Wilms'
tumors are unicentric lesions, although a substantial number arise multifocally in the kidney. Among 1905 NWTSG cases, approximately 5% involved both kidneys
either at initial presentation or subsequent to diagnosis. An additional 7% of reported cases were multicentric unilateral tumors. 26 There is no predilection or either
side. The tumor may arise anywhere within the kidney, which is usually markedly distorted by the neoplasm.
The most distinctive microscopic feature of Wilms' tumor is its structural diversity. The classic nephroblastoma is made up of varying proportions of three cell types
(i.e., blastemal, stromal, and epithelial), but they are not all present in every case. 37 Anaplasia is marked by the presence of gigantic polyploid nuclei within the tumor
sample. The new definition of focal anaplasia emphasizes distribution, requiring that cells with anaplastic nuclear changes be confined to sharply restricted foci within
the primary tumor. By definition, focally anaplastic disease must not be identifiable in any site outside the renal parenchyma. 38
Clear cell sarcoma of the kidney is an important primary renal tumor associated with a significantly higher rate of relapse and death than favorable histology Wilms'
tumor.39,40 Clear cell sarcoma of the kidney has a wider distribution of metastases than favorable histology Wilms' tumor. Most clear cell sarcomas of the kidney
specimens have a distinct histologic appearance, although a number of variant patterns, such as epithelioid, spindling, myxoid, and cystic patterns, invite confusion
with Wilms' tumor or other tumor types. 41,42
Rhabdoid tumor of the kidney was identified for the first time in 1978 by NWTSG pathologists. 39 The neoplasm, previously confused with Wilms' tumor, is a
monomorphous tumor like clear cell sarcoma of the kidney. The cell of origin for this distinctive tumor remains unknown. 43 Rhabdoid tumor of the kidney tends to
metastasize to the lung and brain. Several studies have reported that separate primary neuroectodermal tumors of the brain have apparently developed in children
with this neoplasm.44 Primary rhabdoid tumors of the kidney and brain (atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors) share deletions of chromosome band 22q11.2. 45 This
deleted locus appears to be the site of INI1, a putative tumor suppressor gene. 46,47
The existence of precursor lesions to Wilms' tumor has been recognized for many years. 48,49 They take the form of small, usually microscopic clusters of blastemal
cells, tubules, or stromal cells that are generally situated at the periphery of the renal lobe. The lesion that occurs within the deeper cortex of medulla has been
termed an intralobar nephrogenic rest in contrast with the more commonly encountered perilobar nephrogenic rest. One or both of these variants are encountered in
the renal parenchyma of approximately 30% of Wilms' tumor cases. 36 These nephrogenic rests are present in approximately 1% of random perinatal postmortem
examinations.49
Congenital mesoblastic nephroma is important to recognize since it is usually curable by nephrectomy alone. 50 These tumors are typically identified in the first months
of life, with a median age at diagnosis of 2 months.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND NATURAL HISTORY
Most children with Wilms' tumor come to medical attention because of abdominal swelling or the presence of an abdominal mass. This feature is usually noticed by a
parent while bathing or dressing the child. Abdominal pain, gross hematuria, and fever may be present at diagnosis. Hypertension, present in approximately 25% of
cases, has been attributed to an increase in renin activity. 51
During the physical examination, it is important to note the location and size of the abdominal mass and its movement with respiration. A varicocele secondary to

obstruction of the spermatic vein may be associated with the presence of a tumor thrombus in the renal vein or inferior vena cava. It is also important to note
specifically any signs of the Wilms' tumor-associated syndromes marked by the presence of aniridia, partial or complete hemihypertrophy, and genitourinary
abnormalities, such as hypospadias and cryptorchidism.
STAGING
The staging system currently employed by the NWTSG is shown in Table 44.2-3.

TABLE 44.2-3. National Wilms' Tumor Study Group Staging System for Renal Tumors

EVALUATION
Laboratory evaluation should include a complete blood cell count, differential white blood cell count, platelet count, liver function tests, renal function tests, serum
calcium, and urinalysis. Elevation of the serum calcium may occur in children with rhabdoid tumor of the kidney or congenital mesoblastic nephroma. 52
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
Imaging studies initially should be restricted to those necessary to establish the presence of an intrarenal space-occupying lesion. These studies should also be
directed at identifying the presence of a contralateral kidney, which must be assessed for possible tumor involvement. In addition, imaging of the affected kidney must
look for evidence of tumor thrombus in the renal vein and measure its proximal extent.
The initial radiographic study often selected is an abdominal ultrasound examination. This demonstrates whether the abdominal mass is solid or cystic and may allow
identification of the mass's organ of origin and measurement of the maximum diameter of the mass. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen,
performed to further evaluate the nature and extent of the mass, may suggest apparent extension of the tumor into adjacent structures such as the liver, spleen, and
colon (Fig. 44.2-2). However, most children believed to have invasion of the liver on CT are found to have hepatic compression at the time of surgery, rather than
hepatic invasion. 53 The examination also may demonstrate small lesions that may be nephrogenic rests or Wilms' tumor in the opposite kidney. Small superficial or
intrarenal lesions are frequently not identified even when CT is employed. 54

FIGURE 44.2-2. Computed tomography scan of abdomen demonstrating bilateral renal tumors ( arrows).

The patency of the inferior vena cava may be demonstrated relatively inexpensively using real-time ultrasonography. When tumor is identified within that vessel, the
proximal extent of the thrombus must be established before operation. Extension of the thrombus to the right atrium may produce few, if any, clinical signs and may
not be suspected preoperatively. 55,56
The results of the radiographic studies and real-time ultrasonography provide sufficient information to support proceeding with a laparotomy in most children, although
no imaging study unequivocally establishes the histologic diagnosis of Wilms' tumor.
Plain chest radiographs should be obtained to determine if pulmonary metastases are present. Insufficient data are currently available to firmly establish the need for
CT of the chest in the initial evaluation of children with Wilms' tumor. Substantial interobserver variation exists in the interpretation of chest CT scans of children with
Wilms tumor.57 The available data suggest that, in many cases, nodules identified are not metastatic tumor. Thus, at least one nodule should be biopsied to confirm
the stage.
A radionuclide bone scan and skeletal survey should be obtained postoperatively on all children with clear cell sarcoma of the kidney and all children, regardless of
histologic type, with pulmonary or hepatic metastases who have suggestive symptomatology. Both studies are necessary due to the potential of clear cell sarcoma of
the kidney to cause lytic bony lesions, which may be evident on plain radiographs but undetectable on bone scan. 58,59
In light of the association of intracranial metastases with both clear cell sarcoma and rhabdoid tumor of the kidney, children with either of these histologies should
undergo brain imaging. 43,60
TREATMENT
Surgery
Resection is the primary means of achieving local control in Wilms' tumor, with radiotherapy reserved for locally advanced or metastatic disease. Accurate surgical
staging is critical as it determines subsequent requirements for chemotherapy and radiotherapy based on penetration of renal capsule by tumor, regional lymph node
involvement, and residual tumor. These factors cannot be determined radiographically with sufficient sensitivity for treatment planning. A review of children treated in
NWTS-4 demonstrated an increased incidence of local recurrence in those cases in which lymph node biopsies were not obtained. 61 Presumably, these children were
understaged and thus, undertreated. The increased incidence of local recurrence in these cases highlights the need for complete surgical staging.

Initial resection of the tumor has been the policy supported by the NWTSG through all of its protocols. Despite the presentation of most Wilms' tumors as a large
mass, resection is generally feasible. In contrast to neuroblastoma, attempted resections of Wilms' tumors are less likely to be complicated by tumor invasion of
surrounding organs. Close surveillance of children undergoing initial nephrectomy in the NWTS-3 cohort demonstrated an operative complication rate of 19.8% in a
group closely followed and evaluated. 62 The most frequent complication was intestinal obstruction, occurring in 6.9%, followed by extensive intraoperative
hemorrhage in 5.8% of cases. 63 Injuries to other visceral organs (1%) and extensive vascular injuries (1.4%) were much less frequent. Factors that correlated with
increased risk of surgical complications included advanced local stage, intravascular extension of the tumor, and resection of other organs. Resected adjacent organs
were often found to be merely compressed or distorted by the tumor rather than directly infiltrated. Extensive resection involving removal of other organs or
procedures that may carry a high risk of morbidity or mortality should be avoided. In such cases of extensive disease, initial surgery should be limited to a biopsy,
followed by administration of chemotherapy. Resection can be more readily performed after the tumor has regressed.
The International Society of Pediatric Oncology (SIOP) has promoted the use of preoperative treatment of children with Wilms' tumor with radiotherapy or
chemotherapy, without histologic confirmation of the diagnosis before therapy is initiated. They report a lower surgical complication rate of 8% by following this
policy.64 This approach has several risks, including (1) the potential for administration of chemotherapy for benign disease; (2) modification of the tumor histology; (3)
loss of staging information; and (4) delivering treatment that is inappropriate for a particular histology (e.g., rhabdoid tumor of the kidney). Treatment without an initial
diagnosis is difficult to support when NWTSG and SIOP studies have both demonstrated a 7.6% to 9.9% rate of benign or other malignant diagnosis in children with a
prenephrectomy diagnosis of Wilms' tumor. 65,66
A major driving factor for the use by SIOP of preoperative therapy was the high rate of operative tumor rupture in their early series. This rate decreased from 33% to
4% in the SIOP series when prenephrectomy abdominal radiation was given. However, 33% is an extremely high frequency of this complication. 66 Operative rupture
occurred in NWTS-1 and NWTS-2 in 22% and 12% of children, respectively. In NWTS-4, operative rupture occurred in 14% of cases. 65,67,68 A subsequent randomized
SIOP study reported that the rate of rupture was essentially the same for children receiving abdominal radiation and dactinomycin (8%) and those receiving vincristine
and dactinomycin (6%). 69,70 In two consecutive nonrandomized studies, the proportion of stage II lymph node–negative children versus stage II lymph node–positive
and stage III changed from 45% to 32% and 33% to 19%, suggesting that the preoperative treatments significantly decreased the apparent stage of the children's
disease. 71 Evaluation of NWTS-4 clearly demonstrates that operative rupture, whether localized to the renal fossa or diffuse in the peritoneal cavity, is associated with
an increased incidence of local recurrence. 68 This supports the need to avoid rupture by use of an adequate abdominal or thoracoabdominal incision to safely remove
the tumor.
Adequate biopsy of lymph nodes in the renal hilum and along the vena cava or aorta is critical for staging. The surgeon must always consider the possibility of stage
III disease, and obtain adequate tissue for its diagnosis. While grossly involved lymph nodes are generally resected, this approach should not be extrapolated into a
recommendation for an extensive retroperitoneal lymph node dissection since this has not been shown to improve local control. 72
The histologic diagnosis following preoperative treatment in a group of children followed by the NWTSG did not appear to have been distorted by treatment. It is less
certain, however, that the pathologic findings that would determine staging were not altered by preoperative therapy. 73 A SIOP study randomized the use of local
radiotherapy (20 Gy) in children treated preoperatively with chemotherapy who had stage II node-negative disease at resection. The study was terminated after
randomization of 123 children because of an increased incidence of abdominal recurrence during the first year of follow-up in the children not receiving radiation (six
vs. zero). 70 This difference in outcome suggested that prenephrectomy treatment altered the pathologic findings that would otherwise have led to a diagnosis of stage
III disease (i.e., lymph node involvement or capsular penetration) and inclusion of local radiation.
Preoperative treatment of Wilms' tumor is generally accepted in certain circumstances. These include the occurrence of Wilms' tumor in children with a solitary
kidney, bilateral renal tumors, tumor in a horseshoe kidney, and respiratory distress from extensive pulmonary metastases. In most instances, pretreatment biopsy
should be obtained. In children with bilateral disease or involvement of a solitary kidney, preoperative chemotherapy is intended to permit maximal conservation of
uninvolved renal parenchyma. Studies on pretreatment of children with unilateral tumors have demonstrated that in most instances a complete nephrectomy is still
required due to extensive involvement with the kidney at presentation. 74
In the bilateral cases, preservation of normal renal tissue is a more critical issue. In these children the contralateral tumor often is smaller and more amenable to a
partial nephrectomy after treatment with chemotherapy. Concerns about long-term renal impairment following removal of more than one-half of the renal parenchyma
have resulted in a less radical surgical approach to the treatment of these children. 75
The goal of therapy in bilateral cases is first, to eradicate all tumor, and second, to preserve as much renal tissue as possible to minimize the frequency of chronic
renal failure. 76,77 The management presently recommended is initial bilateral renal biopsy and staging. Children then receive combination chemotherapy based on the
stage and histology. A reevaluation is performed after 5 weeks to determine if there has been sufficient response of the tumors to allow tumor resection, with
preservation of a substantial amount of normal renal tissue. Additional chemotherapeutic agents, such as doxorubicin, with or without radiation therapy, may be
necessary for the management of children whose tumors respond poorly to the combination of vincristine and dactinomycin.
The absence of radiographic response or evidence of radiographic progression does not always imply lack of histologic response. Fetal rhabdomyomatous
nephroblastoma is being recognized with increasing frequency as an entity with a favorable prognosis that may be misinterpreted as chemotherapy-resistant tumor in
the absence of histologic confirmation. 78,79 This potential lack of concordance between radiographic and histologic response mandates that changes in chemotherapy,
the addition of radiation therapy, or both in the management of children with bilateral or inoperable tumors should only be made after evaluation of a posttreatment
biopsy.
In the most recent NWTSG series (NWTS-4), 98 children with bilateral Wilms' tumors underwent a partial nephrectomy. 80 One hundred thirty-four kidneys were
managed with renal salvage procedures (120 partial nephrectomies and 14 enucleations). Definitive surgical resection was performed at initial operation in 58 kidneys
(34 were salvage procedures). Complete resection of gross disease was accomplished in 118 (88%) of the 134 kidneys. The higher incidence of positive surgical
margins (21%) and local tumor recurrence (8.2%) seen in this group of children compared with children with unilateral tumors was justified by the attempts to
maximize renal preservation. Local recurrence occurred in only one of the children with gross residual disease or positive margins. Overall, 72% of the kidneys were
preserved, and the 4-year survival rate was 81.7%. In a similar effort, the United Kingdom Children's Cancer Study Group reported on 70 children with bilateral Wilms'
tumor.81 The majority (57) had initial biopsy and chemotherapy with delayed resection, whereas the rest had initial surgical resection. Overall survival of 69% was
similar in both groups (initial vs. delayed resection), as was the 80% incidence of normal renal function. Only the estimated mean preserved renal mass differed
between the two groups, with 45% preservation when surgery was delayed versus 35% in patients with surgery at initial diagnosis.
Intracaval or intraatrial extension of a tumor thrombus is an uncommon event, occurring in 4% of children with Wilms' tumor. Identification of vascular extension by
preoperative radiographic studies or by palpation early in the surgical exploration is critical to avoid embolization during mobilization of the kidney. Traditionally,
vascular extension has been managed by resection during nephrectomy. Cardiopulmonary bypass is used for atrial extension. This approach has been associated
with a significant risk of complications. In one NWTSG report, 23 children with vascular extension were treated initially with chemotherapy after biopsy of the renal
mass. Complete resolution of the tumor thrombus occurred in seven children, and all lesions except one decreased in size. 56 Of the 14 children with tumor initially
extending into the atrium, only 4 had residual atrial involvement at resection requiring sternotomy and bypass. Tumor embolism did not occur during chemotherapy.
This study suggests that children with atrial or caval involvement generally require less extensive resection after preliminary treatment with combination
chemotherapy.
Gross hematuria in children with Wilms' tumor is infrequent, but should lead to suspicion of extensive involvement of the renal pelvis with possible extension into the
ureter. Cystoscopy should be considered in these children to identify extension of the tumor into the bladder and avoid transection of the tumor with division of the
ureter. Ureteral extension that is recognized and entirely resected does not increase the stage of the tumor.
Exploration of the contralateral kidney has been recommended by the NWTSG based on the 5% occurrence of synchronous lesions. Exploration of the renal fossa by
opening Gerota's fascia to directly examine the anterior and posterior aspects of the kidney is suggested. A review of children with bilateral tumors treated on
NWTS-4 identified 9 of 122 children in whom the diagnosis of bilateral disease was missed by the preoperative imaging studies [CT, ultrasonography, or magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)]. 54 All but one of these lesions were small, with five being less than 1 cm and three being 1 to 3 cm in diameter. CT was found to be more
sensitive for diagnosing contralateral disease than ultrasonography. Thus, 7% of the 5% of children presenting with bilateral disease would have been missed if
exploration had not been performed, or an incidence of 0.35% among children with Wilms' tumor. This low frequency explains why more recent studies with smaller

numbers of children have reached other conclusions.
The role of surgery in the treatment of pulmonary relapse has been evaluated by the NWTSG in 211 patients. While diagnostic confirmation of relapse may be
required, there was no therapeutic benefit identified to resection of a solitary pulmonary metastasis in addition to pulmonary radiotherapy and chemotherapy alone. 82
Four-year survival rates were identical in the two groups.
Radiation Therapy
Pioneering radiation oncologists noted that Wilms' tumors were responsive to radiation therapy. This modality then became routine postoperative treatment at
Children's Hospital, Boston, where many of the initial observations concerning the management of these children were made. 83 First, the treatment volume was
extended across the midline to include the entire circumference of the implicated vertebral bodies. 84 This was done to equalize the growth suppression; irradiation of
only one side of a vertebra had been shown to lead to an obligatory scoliosis convex away from the irradiated side.
The original radiation therapy concepts have been modified as the result of the clinical trials conducted by the NWTSG. For example, the age-adjusted dosages were
shown to be unnecessary in tumors of favorable histology. The advent of effective drugs had a profound effect, not only on the general management of these children,
but also on the indications for the administration of postnephrectomy abdominal irradiation. Presumed microscopic residual disease in the tumor bed of children with
stage I favorable histology Wilms' tumor can be successfully treated with combination chemotherapy rather than flank irradiation. This was demonstrated in the first
two NWTSG randomized clinical trials that indicated the overall relapse-free survival rate in all patients, regardless of age, was similar to that of irradiated patients in
NWTS-1 who had received chemotherapy with only dactinomycin. Retrospective analyses of the data accumulated in NWTS-1 and NWTS-2 were conducted to
determine the patterns of relapse and to evaluate the relationship between abdominal radiation therapy dose and intraabdominal tumor recurrence. 85,86 and 87 In
NWTS-3, the unirradiated and the irradiated (20 Gy) stage II, favorable histology patients had similar relapse-free survival percentages, as did those with stage III,
favorable histology, who received nominal doses of 10 versus 20 Gy. Meanwhile, excellent results continued to be recorded for stage I, favorable histology patients,
none of whom received radiation therapy. 88 In summary, NWTS-1, NWTS-2, and NWTS-3 demonstrated that stage I and II patients with favorable histology tumors
who receive vincristine and dactinomycin do not require postoperative irradiation. A dose of 1000 cGy is sufficient for local control in stage III, favorable histology
patients if they also received chemotherapy with vincristine, dactinomycin, and doxorubicin. 89
Whole lung irradiation (12 Gy) is recommended for patients who present with pulmonary metastases visible on plain chest radiography. Chemotherapy doses given
immediately after the completion of whole lung irradiation are decreased by 50%.
A pilot study conducted by investigators from SIOP produced results similar to those of the NWTSG in stage IV, favorable histology patients following treatment with
nephrectomy and chemotherapy only.90 Patients with persistent or recurrent lung nodules received whole lung radiation therapy or surgical removal of the metastatic
lesions or both. Using a similar approach, the United Kingdom Children's Cancer Study Group reported results inferior to those of the NWTSG in this group of
patients. 91
The potential adverse effects of whole lung irradiation and chemotherapy (which includes vincristine, dactinomycin, and doxorubicin as employed in the NWTSG
treatment regimens) include radiation pneumonitis or Pneumocystis carinii pneumonitis, or both. These complications are an important cause of morbidity and
mortality in patients with stage IV Wilms' tumor. 92
Patients with pulmonary lesions identified only on CT of the chest should undergo biopsy of one or more lesions to confirm that they are due to metastatic Wilms'
tumor if treatment with whole lung irradiation and doxorubicin is planned. A report from St. Jude Children's Research Hospital suggested that such patients have an
increased risk of pulmonary recurrence following treatment with chemotherapy only. 93 A review of the experience with such patients treated on NWTS-3 and NWTS-4
did not demonstrate a clear benefit of whole lung irradiation for such patients. The 4-year relapse-free survival rate was 89% among 53 irradiated patients and 80%
among 37 unirradiated patients. 94,95 This improvement in relapse-free survival must be balanced against the increase in potential side effects of therapy, leaving the
use of whole lung irradiation as a continued source of debate.
Chemotherapy
Wilms' tumor was the first pediatric malignant solid tumor found to be responsive to the systemic chemotherapeutic agent dactinomycin. 96 Other active agents were
subsequently identified, including vincristine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide. 51

FAVORABLE HISTOLOGY WILMS' TUMOR
NATIONAL WILMS' TUMOR STUDY-3
Patients with stage I Wilms' tumor were successfully treated using an 11-week regimen composed of vincristine and dactinomycin without abdominal irradiation. The
4-year relapse-free percentage and overall survival percentage with this regimen were 89.0% and 95.6%, respectively. 88
Patients with stage II Wilms' tumor were randomized to receive vincristine and dactinomycin or these two drugs and doxorubicin. They were also randomized to
receive tumor bed irradiation (20 Gy) or no radiation therapy. The 4-year relapse-free percentage and overall survival percentage for patients who were treated with
vincristine and dactinomycin and no abdominal irradiation were 87.4% and 91.1%, respectively. There was no statistically significant difference between these results
and those for the remaining three treatment regimens for patients with stage II, favorable histology tumors. 88
Patients with stage III Wilms' tumor were randomized to treatment with vincristine and dactinomycin or these two drugs and doxorubicin. They were also randomized
to receive 10 or 20 Gy of abdominal irradiation. This study demonstrated that these patients benefited from the addition of doxorubicin to the two-drug combination of
vincristine and dactinomycin. There was no statistically significant difference in the frequency of intraabdominal relapse among those treated with 10 Gy compared
with 20 Gy. Although there was no statistically significant difference in the frequency of intraabdominal relapse in any of the subgroups, there appeared to be a higher
frequency among those treated with vincristine and dactinomycin with 10 Gy (7 of 61), compared with those receiving vincristine and dactinomycin with 20 Gy (3 of 68)
or vincristine, dactinomycin, and doxorubicin with 10 Gy (3 of 70). 89 The 4-year relapse-free percentage and overall survival percentage of those children treated with
vincristine, dactinomycin, doxorubicin, and 10 Gy of abdominal irradiation were 82.0% and 90.9%, respectively. 88
Patients with stage IV Wilms' tumor were randomized to receive vincristine, dactinomycin, and doxorubicin or these three drugs and cyclophosphamide. All underwent
immediate nephrectomy, and all received abdominal irradiation (20 Gy) and whole lung irradiation (12 Gy). The 4-year relapse-free percentage and overall survival
percentage for the patients treated with vincristine, dactinomycin, and doxorubicin were 79.0% and 80.9%, respectively. There was no statistically significant
improvement in the 4-year relapse-free percentage or overall survival percentage from the addition of cyclophosphamide to the three-drug regimen. 88
NATIONAL WILMS' TUMOR STUDY-4
Previous success in treatment strategies allowed the design of a unique study, NWTS-4, with the primary aims of continuing to improve treatment results while
decreasing the cost of therapy through modification of the schedule of drug administration. This study was based on experimental and clinical data 97,98 demonstrating
the safety and efficacy of dactinomycin when administered in a single, moderately high dose.
The design of NWTS-4 ( Fig. 44.2-3) allowed the results of pulse-intensive chemotherapy regimens employing single doses of dactinomycin and doxorubicin to be
compared with treatment regimens using divided dose regimens of each drug. In addition, treatment durations of 6 and 15 months were compared in patients with
stages II to IV, favorable histology tumors.

FIGURE 44.2-3. Treatment randomization for patients entered on National Wilms' Tumor Study-4. Doxorubicin and radiation therapy (RT) are included in the
treatment regimen only for patients with stage III or IV Wilms' tumor. EE, K, and DD are regimen designations; RT, radiotherapy; S, surgery.

Toxicity analyses confirmed that the pulse-intensive regimens produce less hematologic toxicity than the standard regimens, and the administered drug dose intensity
is greater on the pulse-intensive regimens. 99 Also, an analysis of the cost of chemotherapy treatment suggested that at least $728,000 per year could be saved if all
U.S. children with stages I to IV, favorable histology Wilms' tumor were treated using the pulse-intensive regimens. 100 In addition, there were no statistically significant
differences in the 2-year or 4-year relapse-free percentages or overall survival percentage of patients treated with pulse-intensive, compared with standard, modes of
chemotherapy administration. 101
TREATMENT
These recommendations are based on the results of the NWTSG, which advocates early surgery without preoperative therapy and modulates therapy according to
stage and histology. For stage I, favorable or anaplastic histology, stage II, favorable histology, combination chemotherapy with vincristine and dactinomycin is
recommended; no abdominal radiation therapy is necessary. For stage III, favorable histology, combination chemotherapy with vincristine, dactinomycin, and
doxorubicin and postnephrectomy abdominal radiation therapy are recommended. For stage IV, favorable histology, combination chemotherapy with vincristine,
dactinomycin, and doxorubicin and postnephrectomy abdominal radiation therapy if renal tumor is stage III are recommended; all patients with pulmonary metastases
receive whole lung radiation therapy. For stages II through IV, anaplastic histology, combination chemotherapy with dactinomycin, vincristine, doxorubicin, and
cyclophosphamide is recommended; all patients receive abdominal radiation therapy; and all patients with pulmonary metastases receive whole lung radiation
therapy. For stages I through IV, clear cell sarcoma of the kidney, combination chemotherapy with vincristine, dactinomycin, and doxorubicin is recommended; all
patients receive abdominal radiation therapy; and all patients with pulmonary metastases receive whole lung radiation therapy.
Prognostic Factors
Tumor size, age of the patient, histology, lymph node metastases, and local features of the tumor, such as capsular or vascular invasion, have been predictive of
outcome. Modern treatments have been so successful that some of these factors no longer pertain.
The results of the first three NWTS were evaluated using logistic regression analysis. Children entered on NWTS-1 who were younger than 24 months of age had a
significantly better prognosis than those who were older. The relapse rate was 14.8% for those younger than 2 years of age, compared with 34.7% for those between
2 and 4 years old, and 27.6% for those older than 4 years. 102
The histology of Wilms' tumor was identified as the most important determinant of prognosis. More recent analyses have confirmed the importance of histopathology
and lymph node involvement, whereas the prognostic significance of other factors, such as age and tumor size, changes as treatment efficacy improves. 102,103 and 104

NEUROBLASTOMA
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND GENETICS
Neuroblastoma is the most common malignant intraabdominal tumor in children. Based on the most recent epidemiologic survey compiled in 1995, neuroblastoma
(including ganglioneuroblastoma) occurs at an annual rate of 9.1 cases per 1 million U.S. children younger than 15 years of age. 1 Neuroblastoma occurs more
frequently in boys than in girls. The median age at diagnosis was 2 years for both boys and girls. 51
Neuroblastoma has been pathologically documented in additional members of immediate and extended families, including parents, siblings, twins, and cousins. 51
Mediastinal or cervical neuroblastoma is associated with heterochromia and Horner's syndrome. 105 Patients with neuroblastoma have been diagnosed with several
other conditions, including neurofibromatosis, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, and Hirschsprung's disease. 51
Neuroblastoma in situ was identified in 0.37% to 2.58% of infants younger than 3 months of age who died of other causes and underwent autopsy examination. 51 This
finding suggests that the frequency of neuroblastoma may be higher than indicated by figures derived from death certificate diagnoses or clinical (pathologic)
diagnoses. Many in situ neuroblastomas may undergo involution or maturation or both.
PATHOLOGY
The microscopic features of a typical neuroblastoma include the presence of nests of tumor cells, separated by fibrovascular septa, with additional areas of
hemorrhage, calcification, and necrosis. The tumor cells are uniform round cells with a round hyperchromatic or densely speckled nucleus. Mitoses are not frequent.
Homer-Wright rosettes, with a central fibrillar core, may be present. 106 Lymphocytic infiltration may be observed. Neuroblastoma may contain mature elements,
including ganglion cells.
Histochemical stains may aid in the differentiation of neuroblastoma from other common pediatric solid tumors. The periodic acid–Schiff stain result is generally
negative, and neuron-specific enolase is generally positive. 107
Shimada and colleagues developed a histologic classification of neuroblastomas based on the separation of tumors into two large groups: stroma-rich and
stroma-poor tumors based on the presence or absence of schwannian spindle cell stroma. Stroma-poor tumors were further subdivided into those that were
differentiated and those that were undifferentiated. Stroma-rich tumors were subdivided into those that were nodular, well-differentiated, or mixed. These
histopathologic features were evaluated along with other characteristics, including patient age and the mitotic-karyorrhexis index for their importance in predicting
prognosis. Patients with nodular, stroma-rich histology and undifferentiated, stroma-poor histology had a poor prognosis. This histologic classification was based on
an examination of 295 pathologic specimens from a population of patients, of whom only 25% had stage IV (Evans') disease. 108 This stage distribution is not
representative of unselected series of neuroblastoma patients. Several subsequent reports have evaluated the Shimada classification in case series that included
patients with advanced disease. 109,110 There may be a high degree of overlap between classification as a ganglioneuroblastoma and stroma-rich tumors. 111 The
International Neuroblastoma Pathology Committee has developed a modification of the Shimada system 112 that was validated in a case-cohort sample of 227
neuroblastic tumors. 113 The International Neuroblastoma Pathology Classification (the Shimada system) is proposed for international use in assessing neuroblastic
tumors. Further statistical evaluation of this histopathologic classification and its correlation with other prognostic variables, such as age at diagnosis, stage, primary
tumor site, and biologic variables (i.e., N-myc copy number and DNA ploidy), is necessary to establish the importance of histopathologic grading for the management
of children with neuroblastoma.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND NATURAL HISTORY

Neuroblastoma may originate from any sympathetic nervous system tissue in the body ( Fig. 44.2-4). The most common site of origin of neuroblastoma is within the
abdomen. The adrenal gland is the primary tumor site in 38% of cases. Other intraabdominal sites include the paravertebral sympathetic ganglia, celiac ganglion,
superior mesenteric ganglion, and inferior mesenteric ganglion. The remaining patients with neuroblastoma have tumors that originate in the thorax or neck. 51

FIGURE 44.2-4. Neuroblastoma may originate from the adrenal gland or any sympathetic nervous system plexus. (From House EL, Pansky B. General visceral
efferent system. In: A functional approach to neuroanatomy, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967:281, with permission.)

Infants and children with neuroblastoma come to medical attention with a variety of signs and symptoms, most commonly the presence of abdominal swelling or an
abdominal mass. Abdominal or thoracic paravertebral tumors frequently cause symptoms referable to the central nervous system. Children with hematogenous
metastases may complain of pain in one or more bones or present with periorbital swelling or ecchymoses. Fever is present in 23% of patients at diagnosis.
Uncommon clinical presentations include hydrops fetalis, 51 chronic diarrhea due to secretion of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide by the tumor, 51,114 and
myoclonus-opsoclonus. 51 Jones and coworkers reported that 50% (8 of 16) of patients evaluated for acute cerebellar encephalopathy were found to have
neuroblastoma.115 Although the prognosis for complete recovery from the movement disorder is poor, 116,117 and 118 treatment with intravenous gamma globulin 119 has
been effective in some patients, supporting an autoimmune etiology for this disorder. 120 Hypertension is an uncommon presenting sign in children with
neuroblastoma.121
Infants and children with neuroblastoma frequently present with hematogenous metastases. These were identified in 62% of patients. The most frequently involved
sites were bones, liver, bone marrow, lung, and skin. 51
Normal sympathetic tissues secrete the catecholamines epinephrine and norepinephrine. Most patients with neuroblastoma have increased urinary excretion of
vanillylmandelic acid, homovanillic acid, dihydroxyphenylalanine, dopamine, and norepinephrine at the time of diagnosis. 51
Mass screening of infants at 4 months of age has been employed in Kyoto, Japan, since 1974, and throughout Japan since 1985. Data from both Kyoto and Sapporo
suggest that mass screening has resulted in a decrease in the incidence of neuroblastoma among older children and a decrease in the percentage of patients who
have metastatic disease at diagnosis. 122,123 However, the absence of adequate data have precluded the demonstration that screening in Japan has altered the
mortality due to neuroblastoma. Population-based screening of 3-week-old infants has been conducted in Quebec province, Canada. 124 Because excellent
population-based data on incidence, survival, and mortality are available, 125 these studies address the questions raised by the studies from Japan. Unfortunately, the
Canadian experience has paralleled the outcome of the Japanese efforts. Mass screening in both countries has led to the preclinical identification of increased
numbers of infants with favorable tumor biology. Most of these infants would have had an excellent prognosis with little, if any, therapy. Neither screening effort has
had any effect on the number of children identified with clinically advanced disease and unfavorable tumor biology. To date, newborn screening has had a negligible
effect on survival and may have led to overtreatment of children with good prognostic features. 126,127
STAGING
Local features of neuroblastoma that can be related to treatment success include the extent of the primary tumor and the presence or absence of lymph node
metastases. Dissemination of tumor to the liver, subcutaneous tissue, bone marrow, and bones can also influence prognosis.
Evans and colleagues developed a staging system, first reported in 1971, that considered the extent of the primary tumor, the presence or absence of regional lymph
node tumor metastases, and the presence or absence of hematogenous metastases in determining the tumor stage. This system recognized the existence of a unique
group of infants with small primary tumors and liver, skin, and bone marrow metastases, but without positive findings in the skeletal survey (stage IVS). This system
demonstrated the favorable prognosis of patients with localized primary tumors, but did not consider the possible independent effects of lymph node involvement or
surgical excision on prognosis. 128
A new staging system, the International Neuroblastoma Staging System, was proposed in 1988. 129 Because of ambiguity regarding the classification of tumors
originating near the midline and having a favorable prognosis, 130 the staging system was revised in 1993. 131 This staging system, recommended for adoption by the
Children's Cancer Group (CCG) and the Pediatric Oncology Group (POG), is shown in Table 44.2-4.

TABLE 44.2-4. International Neuroblastoma Staging System

CLINICAL EVALUATION
The evaluation of a child suspected to have neuroblastoma begins with a careful history. The maternal history should be examined for the use of tranquilizers,
anticonvulsant medications, and the abuse of alcohol. The review of systems should include careful questioning regarding symptoms such as diarrhea and ataxia. The
physical examination should include a careful examination of the skin. Subcutaneous metastases from neuroblastoma are reddish-purple, raised lesions that may be
solitary. Periorbital ecchymoses are a frequent finding in children with disseminated tumor. The color of the irises and the location and consistency of the abdominal
mass should be noted. A careful neurologic examination should be performed. Occasionally, the tumor mass in a child with paraplegia can be detected only on rectal
examination.

The laboratory examination of a child suspected to have a neuroblastoma should include a complete blood cell count, urinalysis, liver and renal function tests,
sedimentation rate, serum ferritin, and a urine sample for quantitation of the excretion of vanillylmandelic acid and total catecholamines.
The radiographic evaluation of a child with an abdominal mass suspected to be a neuroblastoma begins with a plain supine examination of the abdomen that may
demonstrate the presence of a soft tissue mass frequently having calcification. Abdominal ultrasonography demonstrates the presence of a solid mass that may
contain cystic areas. 132 CT provides information regarding the extent of intraabdominal disease that is not obtained with the plain radiography or abdominal
ultrasound. However, there is a substantial difference between findings using CT and surgical findings. 133,134 Patients with thoracic neuroblastomas typically have a
posterior mediastinal mass demonstrated on plain chest radiography. Calcification is present within this mass less frequently than within primary intraabdominal
neuroblastomas. Detailed films of the ribs and vertebral bodies may demonstrate erosion of the adjacent ribs, transverse processes, and widening of the intervertebral
foramina.
Patients with paraspinal primary tumors may have asymptomatic extension of the tumor through the spinal foramina. Armstrong and coworkers reported symptoms
suggestive of spinal cord or nerve root compression by tumor were present in only 55% of patients with paraspinal neuroblastoma subsequently shown to have such
compression at myelography. 135 Due to the increased risk of neurologic compromise with paraspinal tumors, patients with tumors in this location should undergo
careful evaluation of the spinal canal using MRI with gadolinium.
All patients should have a conventional skeletal survey, including the long bones, spine, ribs, and skull, and a technetium 99m methylene diphosphonate bone scan.
Although most bone metastases are identified using the radionuclide bone scan, occasional lesions, especially in the metaphyses of long bones, are identified only on
the conventional skeletal survey. 136
Bilateral trephine bone marrow biopsies and bone marrow aspirates should be performed. The biopsy is positive in 11% to 30% of children with negative bone marrow
aspirate results. 137,138 Bone marrow replacement by tumor is occasionally so extensive that the microscopic picture resembles acute leukemia. 51
TREATMENT
Surgery
Surgery plays a major role in the treatment of low-stage neuroblastoma. The surgical approach varies depending on the stage and site of the primary. It is increasingly
recognized that the biologic characteristics of the tumor should also contribute to therapeutic decision making. Most thoracic, pelvic, and cervical primaries and limited
abdominal lesions that do not extend across the midline to involve the great vessels are resectable at presentation. Surgery alone is curative in many children with
low-stage disease. The need for postresection chemotherapy is now frequently determined by the biologic markers of the resected tumor. Reports suggest that even
subtotal resection in infants and children with neuroblastoma with favorable biologic features results in a correspondingly favorable outcome and constitutes adequate
therapy. 139,140
Improved survival has been identified in children with more extensive primary tumors (stage III disease) whose tumors were completely resected at initial exploration
or during subsequent surgeries following administration of chemotherapy. 141 This improvement in outcome may be more a reflection of favorable biology than a
product of skillful surgery. Children previously treated on CCG protocols were reclassified using the International Neuroblastoma Staging System. This study
demonstrated a strong correlation between survival and the extent of residual tumor after resection. 142 Histologically, viable neuroblastoma is found in most tumors
resected following preliminary chemotherapy, supporting the important role of resection in achieving local control. 143 No difference in survival was found between
those children undergoing resection at presentation versus those receiving preliminary chemotherapy.
Neuroblastoma arising in the posterior mediastinum appears to have a favorable prognosis when compared with other primary sites. 144 This has been correlated with
a higher incidence of favorable biologic markers in mediastinal tumors. 145 Large tumors are also more readily resected in the chest than in the abdomen where they
may surround the aorta, vena cava, renal vessels, celiac axis, and the superior mesenteric artery. 146
Regrettably, the majority of infants and children present with metastatic disease. In these cases, the initial role of surgery is obtaining diagnostic tissue. Traditionally,
surgical diagnosis has employed either a laparotomy or thoracotomy. Improved methods have been developed for percutaneous biopsy with radiographic imaging or
biopsy via laparoscopic or thoracoscopic techniques. If these latter methods are used, it is critical that adequate tissue be obtained for evaluation of biologic markers.
Most children with widely disseminated disease have large primaries. Abdominal primaries arising from adrenal or paravertebral sites often encircle the celiac axis
and the superior mesenteric vessels. Several studies have demonstrated that resection of these extensive lesions can be best accomplished after initial treatment with
chemotherapy. In addition to reducing tumor volume, preoperative chemotherapy decreases the vascularity and friability of the tumor. This neoadjuvant approach has
also contributed to decreased operative morbidity, 143 including a lower complication ratio with nephrectomy. 147
Postoperative diarrhea may complicate resections of extensive tumors surrounding the superior mesenteric or celiac arteries. 148 This increased stool output is
presumably produced by disruption of the autonomic nerve supply to the gut and not related to the timing of surgery. Several studies have demonstrated an apparent
decrease in the frequency of local recurrences following resection of the primary in stage IV tumors. 149,150 and 151 Improved survival, however, has not been achieved
since the majority of these advanced stage patients ultimately succumb to relapse at distant sites. 152 As systemic therapy improves, local control will become more
critical. Use of radiolabeled metaiodobenzylguanidine 153 and a hand-held gamma detector to identify sites of neuroblastoma in extensive or recurrent cases has been
described. Whether use of these techniques will result in better outcomes has yet to be established.
Attempts should be made to preserve the ipsilateral kidney during resection of the primary tumor in children with stage IV neuroblastoma. 154 Many of these children
receive either a bone marrow transplant or nephrotoxic agents, making maximal preservation of maximum renal function an important goal. Children with adrenal or
paravertebral primaries generally have metastatic tumor in lymph nodes that wraps around the renal vessels. These must be dissected free to preserve the kidney.
The risk of nephrectomy is greatest in children undergoing resection before the administration of chemotherapy. 143
Infants with stage IVS disease require exploration or a percutaneous biopsy for diagnosis. In most cases resection is not necessary unless the most readily obtained
tissue for diagnosis is a small, easily resected primary. 155 There is no convincing evidence that resection of the primary will accelerate or ensure resolution of
metastatic disease. 156,157 In fact, one review of 110 infants with stage IVS disease treated by members of the POG showed that there was no statistical difference in
survival rate for patients with complete resection of their primary tumor compared with those who underwent partial resection or biopsy only. 158 Decreased survival
was associated with age less than 2 months, diploid ploidy, amplification of the N-myc protooncogene, or tumors with unfavorable histology. If a mass remains at the
primary site after resolution of the distant disease, resection is often performed and frequently demonstrates a ganglioneuroma or neuroblastoma with extensive
maturation. Surgical techniques have been developed for abdominal expansion for infants presenting with extensive hepatomegaly that impairs respiratory function.
The abdominal fascia is divided and prosthetic material is inserted to increase the volume of the abdominal cavity. 159,160
Antenatal diagnosis of neuroblastoma appears to identify a particularly good risk population of infants. The biologic markers on these tumors are favorable. In keeping
with their less aggressive biology, infants have done well following resection of the primary tumor. 161 It is not known whether spontaneous regression would occur if
these infants were observed, but a report of four infants with antenatal diagnosis of adrenal masses (two solid and two cystic) demonstrated resolution of the
abnormalities by 2.5 to 8.0 weeks of age. 162
Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy has been used in the treatment of patients with neuroblastoma both to decrease the frequency of local tumor recurrence and to eradicate
microscopic or macroscopic distant metastases.49 Wyatt and Farber systematically treated patients with neuroblastoma with local irradiation. They suggested radiation
therapy should be instituted in every case once the diagnosis is established. 163
Rosen and colleagues reported local control in 100% (14 of 14) of patients with stage I to stage III (Evans') neuroblastoma treated with 10 to 20 Gy, and in 87.5% (21

of 24) of patients treated with 20 to 40 Gy. One patient had recurrence in the treatment volume, whereas two others were considered marginal misses, occurring
outside of high-dose boost volumes. 164
Reports have demonstrated patients with stage I (International Neuroblastoma Staging System) neuroblastoma have a 4-year relapse-free survival percentage of 89%
when treated with surgery only. 165 Children with stage II (Evans') neuroblastoma with microscopic residual disease may benefit from local irradiation. 166 The POG
randomized patients with stage C neuroblastoma to treatment with postoperative chemotherapy or postoperative chemotherapy and local irradiation (24 to 30 Gy).
The 3-year event-free survival percentage was 32% for patients with stage III (Evans') randomized to treatment with combination chemotherapy, compared with 59%
for those randomized to the same chemotherapy and local radiation therapy ( P = .009).167 Thus, in patients with residual disease or positive lymph nodes, the addition
of radiation therapy appears to improve the prognosis. Refinements of these recommendations may be necessary in the future as newer studies that use biologic
markers for treatment stratification identify subsets that do or do not benefit from local radiation therapy.
Chemotherapy
Although two published studies offer a glimmer of hope for metastatic patients treated with dose-intensive regimens incorporating stem cell support, 169,173 prospects
for long-term survival in advanced stage disease remain poor despite increasingly toxic therapies. At the other end of the spectrum, trials conducted in patients
without evidence of gross residual disease have not demonstrated a survival advantage for adjuvant chemotherapy. A retrospective analysis of patients with locally
unresected disease, however, demonstrated a clear survival advantage for children treated with teniposide and cisplatin (93%) versus those whose treatment did not
include these two drugs (42%; P = .02). 170 The role of chemotherapy in these patients must be addressed in future randomized trials.
The poor response of patients with metastatic neuroblastoma to aggressive combination chemotherapy programs stimulated clinical trials that incorporated
autologous bone marrow transplantation (ABMT) or peripheral blood stem cell rescue. Event-free survival 2 years after ABMT was reported to be 6% to 64% 171,172 and
173 among progression-free patients with advanced neuroblastoma who received a bone marrow transplant. The spectrum of results may reflect patient selection. A
retrospective analysis by the POG showed no significant prognostic benefit of changing, in remission, from conventional therapy to bone marrow transplant. 174 The
CCG reported the results of a randomized trial comparing the outcome following intensive chemotherapy without bone marrow transplant to that following ABMT. The
3-year event-free survival was 34% ± 4% for those randomized to ABMT, compared with 22% ± 4% for those randomized to continuation chemotherapy ( P = .034).
However, 32% of patients randomized to ABMT did not receive the randomized therapy, whereas 21% of those randomized to continuation chemotherapy did not
receive the randomized treatment. ABMT did not improve overall survival compared with continuation chemotherapy. A secondary randomization involving a 6-month
course of 13-cis retinoic acid following completion of treatment produced a 3-year relapse-free survival rate of 46% ± 6% for those who received the drug. This
outcome compared favorably with the 29% ± 5% relapse-free survival for patients who were not randomized to treatment with cis-retinoic acid (P = .027).168 Current
treatment protocols employed by the POG and the CCG stratify patients by stage, age, N-myc status, Shimada histology, and DNA ploidy ( Table 44.2-5).

TABLE 44.2-5. Risk Group and Protocol Assignment Schema: Pediatric Oncology Group and Children's Cancer Group

Low-Risk Patients
Children with stage I neuroblastoma have an excellent prognosis following excision of the primary tumor without adjuvant therapy. Children with stage II disease with a
single copy of N-myc, regardless of histology, have an excellent prognosis following tumor excision alone. Stage II patients with greater than ten copies of N-myc and
favorable Shimada histology also have a good prognosis following tumor resection. Despite the amplification of N-myc in this subset of children with localized disease,
the favorable Shimada histology has sufficient predictive power that radiation and chemotherapy are not recommended unless recurrence is documented. Perhaps the
most unique cohort of low-risk patients consists of asymptomatic infants with disseminated stage IVS neuroblastoma and hyperdiploidy (DNA index greater than 1.0).
Since many of these infants spontaneously improve, they should be observed without treatment.
Intermediate-Risk Patients
Among children without N-myc amplification, those with stage III neuroblastoma who are younger than 12 months of age, stage III patients with favorable Shimada
histology who are more than 12 months of age, and those with stage IV neuroblastoma who are less than 12 months of age all have a moderate risk of disease
recurrence. Their treatment may include local radiation therapy and combination chemotherapy. As noted previously, infants with stage IVS neuroblastoma require
supportive care only. Those younger than 6 weeks of age at diagnosis may have feeding intolerance or respiratory insufficiency due to massive hepatomegaly,
mandating a brief course of chemotherapy.
High-Risk Patients
All children with N-myc amplification, regardless of stage, and all children older than 1 year of age with stage IV neuroblastoma have a substantial risk of disease
progression. These children should be treated using study regimens being evaluated by the national or international pediatric clinical trials groups. The role of ABMT
is being evaluated in the subgroup of patients who have a favorable response to combination chemotherapy.
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
Breslow and McCann evaluated the interaction between age at diagnosis, stage (Evans'), and probability of survival. These investigators confirmed the adverse effect
of both increasing age at diagnosis and advanced stage on the probability of survival. 175
Other clinical investigators have reported lower survival percentages in stage IV (Evans') patients with a vanillylmandelic acid to homovanillic acid ratio of less than
1.5.176 A poorer prognosis has also been ascribed to stage III and IV (Evans') patients with a neuron-specific enolase level greater than 100 ng, 177 and for stage IV
patients (Evans') with serum lactate dehydrogenase greater than 1000 IU. 178
Look and coworkers reported that patients with hyperdiploid tumor cells had a more favorable response to combination chemotherapy than did patients with diploid
tumor cells. 179 Brodeur and colleagues demonstrated the relationship between advanced tumor stage and increased copy number of N-myc, 180 and Nakagawara and
associates reported that increased expression of TRK-A was associated with a favorable prognosis. 181 Although several reports have documented the prognostic
effect of several of these markers,181,182 and 183 the retrospective design of the published analyses and the small number of patients with all markers evaluated has
prevented an adequate multivariate analysis from being performed. A prospective study in which treatment was not a variable would facilitate this important analysis.

RETINOBLASTOMA

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND GENETICS
Retinoblastoma is the most frequent malignant ocular tumor in pediatric patients. The incidence rate per year is 3.8 cases per 1 million U.S. children younger than 15
years of age. 1 Approximately 70% to 75% of all cases are unilateral. Among children with unilateral disease, 10% to 15% have hereditary germline deletions of
chromosome 13, band q14, which contains the RB1 tumor suppressor gene locus. Germline mutations of 13q14 uniformly affect the 25% to 30% of children with
bilateral disease. 19 Retinoblastoma occurs slightly more frequently in boys than girls, especially among those who have bilateral retinoblastoma. The median age at
diagnosis was 2 years for boys and 1 year for girls with unilateral retinoblastoma. In cases of bilateral disease, the median age at diagnosis is less than 12 months for
both boys and girls. 51
Retinoblastoma may occur in children with other anomalies, including congenital cardiovascular defects, cleft palate, Bloch-Sulzberger syndrome, infantile cortical
hyperostosis, dentinogenesis imperfecta, incontinentia pigmenti, and familial congenital cataracts. 51
Although most children with retinoblastoma have normal intellectual function, some patients have been reported who had mental retardation in addition to a
constellation of features associated with the deletion of the more distal portion of 13q. 184,185 These features include a broad nasal bridge, hypertelorism,
microphthalmos, micrognathia, and variable foot and toe anomalies. 51
While the majority of new cases of retinoblastoma arise spontaneously from new somatic mutations, a significant, and possibly increasing, fraction of retinoblastoma
cases are hereditary. The familial pattern may demonstrate direct transmission of retinoblastoma from parent to child, or the presence of two or more affected
offspring from unaffected parents who have affected first-degree relatives. Retinoblastoma is transmitted in each of these situations as a highly penetrant, autosomal
dominant trait.186 An analysis of the offspring of patients with sporadic, bilateral retinoblastoma demonstrated that 49.2% of the offspring developed the disease. This
suggests that essentially all patients with sporadic, bilateral retinoblastoma had a germinal mutation that was transmitted in an identical manner as in families with a
positive history of retinoblastoma. Approximately 5.5% of the offspring of patients with sporadic, unilateral retinoblastoma developed the disease, suggesting that
9.9% to 12.3% of patients with sporadic, unilateral retinoblastoma actually have a germinal mutation that may be transmitted to their offspring. 187
A more complex problem in genetic counseling arises when one is asked to estimate the risk of an unaffected member of a sibship with a positive family history for
retinoblastoma who carries the retinoblastoma gene. It is also difficult to estimate the risk for recurrence of retinoblastoma in a sibship from unaffected parents with
one affected sibling. Nussbaum and Puck have analyzed these situations and developed equations for estimating these various probabilities. 188
The parents and siblings of all patients with retinoblastoma should have a thorough ophthalmoscopic examination. Retinoblastomas may undergo spontaneous
regression, leaving characteristic retinal changes. 189 Margo and associates suggested such lesions were benign at their outset. These lesions indicated the presence
of the same mutation found in patients with retinoblastoma, although they occurred in a more mature retinal cell. 190
PATHOLOGY
The gross appearance of retinoblastoma is that of a chalky white, friable tumor with dense foci of calcification. Those arising from cells in the internal nuclear layer,
nerve fiber layer, ganglion cell layer, or external, nuclear layer grow toward the subretinal space, pushing the retina inward and frequently causing retinal detachment.
Such tumors are called the exophytum type. Those tumors arising from the inner layers of the retina grow toward the vitreous and are called the endophytum type.
Multiple foci of tumor are usually present. 191
Retinoblastoma is composed of uniform small, round, or polygonal cells, which have scanty, poorly staining cytoplasm. The sparse cytoplasm is located at one side of
the cell, suggesting the appearance of an embryonal retinal cell. The nucleus is large and deeply staining. Three types of cellular arrangements may be identified: the
Homer-Wright rosette (a radial arrangement of cells surrounding a tangle of fibrils), the Flexner-Wintersteiner rosette (a radial arrangement of cuboidal to short
columnar cells about a lumen, with the nuclei displaced basally, away from the lumen), and the fleurette (areas composed of pale-appearing cells, with abundant, pale
eosinophilic cytoplasm and small, hyperchromatic nuclei; the cells are arranged in a fleur-de-lis pattern). Calcification and necrosis are often observed in
retinoblastomas.192
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Patients with retinoblastoma come to medical attention most frequently because of the presence of leukokoria. Strabismus, conjunctival erythema, or decreased visual
acuity are other common presenting complaints. The tumor may be diagnosed during a routine examination performed because of a family history of retinoblastoma or
during an examination for an unrelated complaint in patients without a family history of retinoblastoma. 51
The history obtained during the evaluation of a child with leukokoria should include questions regarding the administration of oxygen following birth, the eating of dirt,
or the close association of the patient with a dog. Prolonged administration of oxygen is associated with the occurrence of retrolental fibroplasia. Domestic animals,
particularly young puppies, may be infested with Toxocara canis, a parasite that may cause an ocular lesion resembling retinoblastoma in some of its clinical features.
The family history should be examined for other cases of eye and bone tumors.
The physical examination reveals the presence of a white pupillary reflex. Tumors located near the macula may be readily apparent with direct ophthalmoscopy,
whereas those located at the periphery of the retina may not be detected unless the patient looks in a particular direction. Esotropia or exotropia may be identified.
The eye may be red and painful due to uveitis following spontaneous necrosis of a retinal tumor or due to glaucoma. Decreased visual acuity may be due to
involvement of the macula by the tumor or the presence of cells and debris in the vitreous. 191
EVALUATION
The laboratory evaluation of a child suspected of having retinoblastoma should include a complete blood cell count with white blood cell differential, tests of renal and
hepatic function, and a urinalysis. An enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay for the detection of Toxocara antibody is available. An antibody was detected in the
serum of 65% of patients with ocular toxocariasis, indicating this determination may be helpful in differential diagnosis when an antibody is present. 193
Radiographic evaluation of a child with suspected retinoblastoma may include CT of the orbit or orbital ultrasonography. 194 CT may be used both to define the extent
of the intraocular tumor and to determine the presence and extent of extraocular disease. Calcification was identified in orbital CT scans of 48% of patients with
retinoblastoma confined to the globe, compared with 13% of patients with tumor extension beyond the globe. 195 Head CT or MRI may identify intracranial extension in
patients who have normal plain radiographs of the bones adjacent to the orbit. Retinoblastoma may metastasize to the central nervous system, bones, or bone
marrow.196 The risk of such dissemination is related to the extent of the ocular tumor. A diagnostic lumbar puncture with examination of the cerebrospinal fluid
following cytocentrifugation should be performed on all patients with involvement of the choroid, ora serrata, ciliary body, or anterior chamber. It should also be
performed on patients with involvement of other extraocular structures, including the orbit or optic nerve, or when symptoms, signs, or diagnostic imaging studies
suggest involvement of bones, soft tissues, or the central nervous system. 197
Radionuclide bone scans should be obtained only for patients with extensive ocular involvement, symptoms suggesting the presence of a bone metastasis, and bone
marrow involvement by retinoblastoma. 198
STAGING
Martin and Reese proposed the first staging system for patients with retinoblastoma in 1942. The classification segregated patients into large treatment groups and
established four categories: (1) unilateral tumors not extending outside of globe; (2) bilateral tumors; (3) residual tumors in the optic nerve or orbit at the time of
enucleation or recurrent tumors following enucleation; and (4) widely disseminated retinoblastoma. 199 These investigators recognized the more favorable prognosis of
patients with a small flat tumor and the ominous nature of tumors that extended toward the vitreous or into the choroid. 200 Subsequently, those patients with anteriorly
located tumors were shown to have an unfavorable prognosis. 201 These factors were considered in developing a more detailed staging system ( Table 44.2-6).

TABLE 44.2-6. Staging System for Retinoblastoma (Reese and Ellsworth)

A useful staging system for patients with retinoblastoma must incorporate those features known to influence prognosis, therapy, or both. Simplicity would allow easy
adoption of the system by investigators at many treatment centers. The system adopted by the St. Jude Children's Research Hospital incorporates many of these
features (Table 44.2-7).202,203

TABLE 44.2-7. Staging System for Retinoblastoma (St. Jude Children's Research Hospital)

TREATMENT
The diagnosis of retinoblastoma is based on the clinical history of the patient (including the family history) and the results of an examination of both eyes under
general anesthesia. Ellsworth suggested the pupils must be maximally dilated and the examination be performed with the binocular indirect ophthalmoscope. 191
Scleral indentation must be performed around the entire circumference of the ora serrata to ensure detection of all anteriorly located tumors. Using scleral indentation,
retinoblastoma may be identified in the periphery of the fundus in approximately 65% of patients. These tumors either originated posterior to the equator of the globe
(82%) or were of small to moderate size and located anterior to the equator, where they could only be seen with indentation of the sclera. 204 The examination of the
retinal surface is not completed when the first tumor is identified. The entire retinal surface of both eyes must be evaluated and the locations of tumors noted on a
diagram.
SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
The indications for enucleation include (1) unilateral retinoblastoma that completely fills the globe or that has damaged and disrupted the retina so extensively that
restoration of useful vision is not possible; (2) bilateral retinoblastoma in which the previously mentioned conditions exist in only one eye; (3) a tumor present in the
anterior chamber; (4) painful glaucoma with loss of vision following rubeosis iridis; (5) extensive bilateral retinoblastoma in which there is no potential for restoration of
useful vision; (6) retinoblastoma unresponsive to other forms of local therapy; and (7) cases with permanent visual loss in which intraocular tumor is suspected. 205

ADVANCED UNILATERAL DISEASE
Patients with suspected retinoblastoma should be referred to a pediatric ophthalmologist experienced with the treatment of retinoblastoma. The standard surgical
technique is modified to allow excision of the longest possible segment of optic nerve in continuity with the globe. The surgeon must be careful not to perforate the
globe when the extraocular muscles are divided. The globe and optic nerve are inspected for evidence of extraocular extension of the tumor. Orbital biopsies should
be obtained when extraocular extension is suspected to be present. After the globe is enucleated, a plastic implant is placed in the muscle funnel. Although the
presence of the ocular prosthesis may prevent early detection of an orbital recurrence of tumor, the cosmetic result and promotion of normal development of the bony
orbit are considerably improved with the use of a prosthesis. 204
The importance of including a sufficient (10 to 15 mm) length of optic nerve in the surgical specimen is emphasized by reports of inferior survival rates among patients
with extension of retinoblastoma to the margin of the excised optic nerve. 206,207
The survival rate reported for patients with retinoblastoma confined to one or both globes, treated only with enucleation, was 86% for those with unilateral disease and
97% for those with bilateral disease. 51

LIMITED UNILATERAL OR LIMITED BILATERAL DISEASE
Patients with limited unilateral or bilateral residual or recurrent disease after radiation therapy may benefit from photocoagulation or cryotherapy. Photocoagulation
was reported to have successfully eradicated retinoblastomas in 80% of the patients treated. Hopping and Meyer-Schwickerath stated that suitable cases for this
technique included solitary or multiple tumors, less than 4 to 5 disc diameters in size, situated at or posterior to the equator. Tumors located near the macula or
papillary area and those with a mushroom shape should not be treated with photocoagulation. 208
Cryotherapy was first employed for the treatment of a patient with retinoblastoma in 1963. 209,210 Subsequent reports that included some patients treated sequentially
with local irradiation and cryotherapy suggested long-term control of retinoblastoma was possible using this technique. 211 Abramson and colleagues reported
long-term control of retinoblastoma with one cryotherapy session in 80% of patients with previously untreated tumors, 59% of new postirradiation tumors, and 56% of
recurrent tumors following irradiation. Tumors arising from the vitreous base were not responsive to cryotherapy. These investigators stated that previously untreated
patients with tumors located anterior to the equator and those with recurrent or new tumors following irradiation were candidates for cryotherapy. 212 Cryotherapy is
generally effective for tumors up to 2.5 mm in diameter and 1.0 mm thick that are confined to the sensory retina. 213

BILATERAL DISEASE
Historically, external-beam irradiation was used for the treatment of the less involved eye, following enucleation of the more involved eye of a patient with bilateral
retinoblastoma. The decision to irradiate or enucleate the remaining eye was based on consideration of the location of the tumor, the presence of multiple foci of

tumor or vitreous seeding with tumor, and the size of the tumor.
The development of megavoltage radiation allowed the design of treatment plans that could irradiate the retinal surface to a uniform dose, while relatively sparing the
posterior surface of the lens. All current techniques require meticulous attention to daily field placement. Treatment can be administered reproducibly with the use of
general anesthesia. 214 Many radiation oncologists prefer to use a single, temporal field, moving the edge of the field anteriorly in patients who are at high risk of
anterior recurrence of tumor. 215
Many new techniques have been proposed for a more conformal dose distribution in retinoblastoma. 216 Proton beam therapy or stereotactic techniques offer
significant advantages in sparing normal tissues. For example, even with the conventional small fields used, the posterior field edge frequently encompasses the
hypothalamic and pituitary area. This may lead to the late occurrence of endocrine dysfunction. Proton beam techniques avoid such an exit dose to normal
structures.217
Several patterns of tumor regression following irradiation have been described, including the following patterns. In type I ( cottage cheese calcium) the tumor shrinks in
size and assumes an irregular, glistening white appearance similar to cottage cheese. In type II, the tumor shrinks in size to one-half to three-fourths of the initial
volume and loses the pink color of capillary injection. The surface is gray and homogeneous, and some areas may be markedly translucent. An annulus of pigment
disturbance may be exposed at the border of the tumor. In type III, a glistening white nidus of calcium, or DNA, is present in the center of an amorphous, translucent
gray mass. The lesion loses its pink, solid appearance. It may be possible to see through the translucent tumor and identify normal choroidal markings. A pigment
disturbance is frequently noted at the periphery of this lesion. 191
Increased awareness of the risk of retinoblastoma among the siblings and offspring of retinoblastoma patients resulted in the diagnosis of tumors when they were
small. Abramson and coworkers reported on the treatment of patients with early, bilateral retinoblastoma using bilateral irradiation. The radiation dose used for the
treatment of the majority of the patients was 35 Gy. Residual tumors were present in 37% of the eyes when treatment was completed, and additional tumors
developed in 16% of the eyes treated. All patients had group I, II, or III tumors. The risk of developing a second, nonocular malignancy in this group of irradiated
patients is significant. 218
Patients presenting with group IV and V bilateral retinoblastoma have been treated with radiation doses of 35 to 60 Gy. Enucleation was subsequently required for
persistent or recurrent tumors in 67% of the treated eyes. The survival rate of the combined series of patients treated with bilateral irradiation was 82% compared with
a survival rate of 71% among a group of patients treated only with bilateral enucleation. 219 Although the risk of a radiation-related second malignant tumor developing
in a patient with bilateral retinoblastoma is considerable, the data available suggest the long-term survival of patients treated with bilateral irradiation is not worse than
that of patients treated with bilateral enucleation only. The preservation of some useful vision in these patients is an obvious advantage of such a treatment approach,
but prolonged follow-up of patients so treated will be necessary to thoroughly evaluate the effect of radiation-related second malignant tumors on long-term
survival. 220
Local irradiation, after enucleation, is recommended for all patients with extension of retinoblastoma into the orbit. Presentation with exophthalmos or a palpable mass
through the eyelids suggests the presence of orbital extension of the tumor. The identification of an encapsulated or unencapsulated extraocular mass, enlargement
of the cut end of the optic nerve at the time of enucleation, or rupture of the globe during removal are associated with orbital contamination with the tumor. These
findings are confirmed histologically by the identification of an episcleral mass of tumor tissue or tumor at the margin of the cut end of the optic nerve. 221 The presence
of tumor cells in the choroid and scleral emissaria, in the tissue between the choroid and optic nerve, or the presence of significant scleral necrosis, are highly
suggestive of orbital contamination with the tumor. Patients with orbital retinoblastoma should receive irradiation to a volume, including the entire orbit and the optic
nerve to the optic chiasm, as indicated. The recommended dose is 44 Gy in 4 weeks to 50 Gy in 4.5 to 5.0 weeks. 222

CHEMOTHERAPY
The role of adjuvant single-agent or combination chemotherapy in the management of patients with retinoblastoma is not well defined. Wolff and associates reported
the results of a randomized study of adjuvant chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide (40 mg/kg) and vincristine (0.05 mg/kg) administered every 3 weeks for 57 weeks
to patients with unilateral group V retinoblastoma following enucleation. The control patients received no adjuvant chemotherapy. The relapse rates of 7.4% among
those randomized to receive adjuvant chemotherapy and 11.1% among those randomized to receive no adjuvant chemotherapy did not differ statistically. 223
Subsequently, Pratt and his colleagues 224,225 and others226,227 reported successful treatment of some patients with advanced or recurrent retinoblastoma using various
combinations of etoposide, cisplatinum, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide.
The combination of etoposide and carboplatin was evaluated in patients with extraocular retinoblastoma, 85% of whom had partial or complete responses following
treatment.228 These two drugs, in combination with vincristine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide, have been recommended for treatment of children with orbital
involvement from retinoblastoma.229
The demonstration that combination chemotherapy can produce responses in children with advanced or recurrent tumors has led to pilot studies of combination
chemotherapy for reduction of tumor bulk in previously untreated patients. The goal of these trials has been preservation of vision, primarily in children with bilateral
disease. Tumor shrinkage may decrease the need for enucleation or external-beam radiation therapy for local control. Unfortunately, the use of different end points,
particularly for the definition of treatment failure, has complicated interpretation of the outcomes of these studies. Responses to chemotherapy have been sufficiently
provocative, however, that a multiinstitution, randomized trial of chemotherapy has been undertaken. This trial is intended to assess the therapeutic value of
chemotherapy combined with cyclosporin for multidrug resistance reversal in managing advanced stage retinoblastoma. 230,231,232,233,234,235 and 236

RHABDOMYOSARCOMA
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND GENETICS
RMS is the most common malignant tumor of the soft tissues in infants and children. The incidence rate per year is 4.6 cases per 1 million U.S. children younger than
15 years of age. 1 The annual incidence is lower for Asian children than for whites or African American children. 27 RMS occurs slightly more frequently in boys. 51 The
median age at diagnosis of children with RMS is approximately 4 years, with girls presenting at slightly older ages than boys. 51
RMS has been pathologically documented in siblings and cousins of patients 51 and is a frequent tumor in families affected by the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. 17 This
syndrome is defined by familial clustering of cancers that include RMS and adrenocortical carcinoma in children and breast cancer in young adults. Affected relatives
share germline mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene, which maps to chromosome 17p13. 237 In addition to p53 mutations, which have been associated with
nearly 50% of RMS cases, mutations in the NF1 gene occurring in children with neurofibromatosis confer an increased risk for developing RMS. 238,139 and 240
RMS may arise anywhere in the body, although the head and neck region is most frequently involved, accounting for 35% of all cases 241 (Fig. 44.2-5). The most
common primary site for RMS is the orbit, accounting for 29% of the RMS in the head and neck, and 13% of all RMS in children. 51

FIGURE 44.2-5. Overall distribution of patients in major Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study clinical trials according to clinical group and primary site. (From ref.
241, with permission.)

The remaining primary tumor sites in the head and neck are divided into parameningeal and nonparameningeal locations. The parameningeal sites, including the
nasopharynx, paranasal sinuses, middle ear, mastoid, pterygopalatine fossa, and infratemporal fossa, account for 40% of the RMS that originate in the head and
neck. Additional primary tumor sites in the head and neck include the scalp, oral cavity, oropharynx, larynx, parotid gland, and neck. 51
The second most frequently involved regions include the abdomen and genitourinary tract, which account for the location of 29% of primary tumor sites in children
with RMS. These tumors originate most frequently from the paratesticular tissues. Other primary tumor sites include the bladder, prostate, vagina, uterus, cervix, and
bile ducts. 51 RMS arising in the genitourinary tract tends to affect young children, particularly the vaginal botryoid variant, which commonly presents in infancy.
The third group of tumor sites for RMS originates within the thorax or from the soft tissues of the trunk or extremities. The most common sites involve the lower
extremities, with 22% originating in the thigh or groin. 51 In contrast to the predilection for genitourinary tumors to develop in young children, RMS arising in the
extremities is more likely to be identified in the second decade of life. Almost one-half of these extremity primaries contain alveolar elements that are associated with a
more aggressive tumor biology (see Pathology, later in this chapter).
Overall, nearly 25% of all newly diagnosed cases of RMS are metastatic at initial presentation. The most common sites of dissemination include lung, bone marrow,
bone, and lymph nodes, in approximate order of frequency. 242
PATHOLOGY
RMS has been traditionally classified into three histologies, consisting of embryonal (including botryoid), alveolar, and pleomorphic subtypes. As noted previously,
tumor histology is strongly correlated with the primary tumor site. Alveolar histology is uncommon except in primary tumors of the trunk and extremity, whereas
embryonal histology is most common in RMS of the head and neck and those of the genitourinary system. 51 Slightly over one-half of all cases are characterized by
favorable embryonal histology, with an additional 6% demonstrating the uniquely favorable botryoid architecture. The prognostically unfavorable alveolar histology
constitutes only 21% of all cases of RMS. 242
Various histologic classification schemes have been proposed since Horn and Enterline first categorized RMS as either embryonal or alveolar in 1958. 243,244,245 and 247 A
revised classification of childhood RMS was proposed in 1995, based on the results of an international collaborative study. This system recognizes six subtypes:
botryoid RMS, spindle cell RMS, embryonal RMS, alveolar RMS, undifferentiated sarcoma, and RMS with rhabdoid features. Application of this system has been
shown to have greater reproducibility than prior classification schemes, separating patients into prognostically significant groups. 248 Histologic classification of
childhood RMS can be difficult, however, since individual tumors may have areas consistent with two or more histologic subtypes. Although immunohistochemical
staining for desmin may be useful for the identification of RMS, some tumors lack distinguishing microscopic characteristics and cannot be further categorized.
In light of the limitations of immunohistochemical assessment, molecular diagnostics may prove to be important in identifying biologically less favorable subsets of
patients for stratification to more intensive treatment regimens. Embryonal RMS is characterized by loss of heterozygosity at the chromosome 11p15 locus. Although
chromosomal translocations are rarely associated with embryonal histology, alveolar tumors are characterized by rearrangement of the PAX3 gene on the long arm of
chromosome 2 with the FKHR gene on the long arm of chromosome 13. Rearrangement of these genes produces the characteristic translocation t(2;13)(q35;q14). 249
The fusion transcript of this chimeric gene is thought to contribute to dysregulated transcriptional activation, culminating in transformation. 241 Employing reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction methodology, this signature translocation can now be identified with great sensitivity.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND EVALUATION
Because RMS may originate from so many sites, the radiographic examination of the primary tumor must be individualized. Evaluation of children with RMS requires
expert radiographic interpretation, competent pathologic examination of surgical specimens, and knowledge of distant sites to which RMS may spread.
The lungs should be evaluated with plain chest radiography and CT of the chest. Pulmonary nodules identified in children with RMS are frequently benign, 250
suggesting that solitary nodules identified on a chest radiograph of a child with RMS should be examined pathologically.
The skeleton may be evaluated using conventional radiography and radionuclide scanning. 251,252
The bone marrow may be involved by RMS in the absence of bone or pulmonary metastases. Potential bone marrow involvement that may produce
hypercalcemia 253,254 is assessed by bilateral bone marrow aspiration and biopsy. The bone marrow aspirate was positive at the time of diagnosis in approximately
10% of patients and may be the only definite site of identifiable disease. 255
In addition to the aforementioned sites of hematogenous dissemination, lymph node involvement has been documented in 10% to 20% of cases of RMS. 256 These
nodal sites may be evaluated radiographically or pathologically.
STAGING
Staging and risk-group stratification of children with RMS is complicated by the many potential sites from which the tumor may originate and the correspondingly
different prognoses for affected children depending on site, resectability, and histology. Recognizing these difficulties, an international panel of experts evaluated two
staging systems and concluded that the TNM system (Table 44.2-8) best defined the pretreatment extent of the disease, facilitating patient management based on the
extent of the disease and comparisons of treatment outcome between studies. 257 Treatment decisions for patients treated using the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma
Study Group protocols are based on both TNM stage and clinical group, as shown in Table 44.2-9.

TABLE 44.2-8. Tumor (T), Node (N), Metastasis (M) Pretreatment Staging for Rhabdomyosarcoma

TABLE 44.2-9. Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group Grouping System for Rhabdomyosarcoma

TREATMENT
Surgery
Surgical considerations for RMS are site specific. Although biopsy is required of tumors in all locations, progressive improvements in the response to chemotherapy
and radiotherapy have obviated the need for immediate surgical resection, particularly of orbital primaries. Surgery is more frequently employed at other sites where
resection does not produce major functional impairment (e.g., paratesticular and extremity lesions).
In most cases an initial incisional biopsy should be performed. The biopsy site and direction of the incision should always be planned with future excision in mind.
Unsuccessful attempts at initial resection of an extremity lesion, leaving positive margins, can greatly complicate future resection.
Lymph node biopsy should be considered based on the primary site. Children presenting without distant metastases have an overall 10% incidence of lymphatic
spread. Lymph node involvement is most frequent for tumors arising in the prostate (41%), paratesticular (26%), and genitourinary sites (24%). Extremity lesions had
an intermediate frequency of 12%, whereas orbit (0%), nonorbital head and neck sites (7%), and truncal sites (3%) had the lowest frequency of lymphatic
dissemination.256 In the extremity and genitourinary sites, assessment of lymph node involvement is essential to ensure that radiation fields are appropriately
designed and sufficiently inclusive.
Radiation Therapy
Cassady and colleagues demonstrated in 1968 that embryonal RMS of the orbit could be controlled locally with irradiation. 258 In fact, orbital irradiation was proven to
be superior to exenteration for the treatment of orbital RMS. 259
Local irradiation is necessary for patients with known microscopic or gross residual disease. The role of local irradiation in the treatment of patients with group I
disease was examined in the first Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study (IRS). 260 All patients had gross and microscopic complete tumor excisions, and all received
adjuvant chemotherapy with vincristine, dactinomycin, and cyclophosphamide (VAC). One-half of these patients were randomized to receive tumor bed irradiation.
Relapse-free survival was 86% for those who did not receive local irradiation compared with 80% for stage I patients who were irradiated. The incidence of local
failure was 6.3% (3 of 47) for those who did not receive local irradiation versus 7.6% (2 of 26) for those patients randomized to receive irradiation. 261,262 These findings
indicated that radiation did not confer a survival advantage to clinical group I patients (i.e., patients who had undergone complete resections with negative margins).
In light of these findings, radiation was not included in the treatment of group I patients enrolled on IRS-II.
IRS-III accrued 1062 patients from 1984 through 1991. All patients received postoperative radiation therapy except those with group I, favorable histology tumors and
selected special pelvic sites, who had pathologic confirmation of complete remission after primary chemotherapy. The dose for microscopic residual disease was 41.4
Gy and 50.4 Gy for gross residual disease. The overall survival in IRS-III improved to 73%, a significant improvement from the results of IRS-I and -II 263 (Fig. 44.2-6).

FIGURE 44.2-6. Survival (S) by primary site for all patients treated in Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study-III. BP, bladder/prostate; Ext, extremities; GU,
genitourinary tract; HN, head and neck; PM, parameningeal sites. (From ref. 263, with permission.)

IRS-IV opened in 1991, completing accrual in 1997. This study used the TNM staging system to determine the chemotherapy regimen, and the IRS clinical group
system to determine radiation therapy. Group III patients were randomized between hyperfractionated radiation therapy (110 cGy twice a day to a total dose of 59.4
Gy) and conventional radiation therapy (180 cGy once a day to a total dose of 50.4 Gy). 264
Chemotherapy
The development of combination chemotherapy programs for children with RMS paralleled the identification of new chemotherapeutic agents with significant activity.
The first combination reported to be active included VAC. 51
IRS-I was initiated in 1972 to answer questions suggested by the results of the prior pilot studies in children with RMS. 261,262 Three additional studies have been
completed (IRS-II, IRS-III, and IRS-IV). The results of these studies suggest the following points: (1) The addition of cyclophosphamide to the combination of
vincristine and dactinomycin does not improve the relapse-free survival percentage of children with group I RMS (excluding alveolar RMS of the extremity). 263,265 (2)
The addition of cyclophosphamide to the combination of vincristine and dactinomycin did not improve the relapse-free survival percentage of children with group II
RMS (excluding alveolar RMS of the extremity).265 The addition of doxorubicin to the combination of vincristine and dactinomycin improved the relapse-free survival of
children with group II RMS (excluding alveolar histology and excluding primary tumors of the orbit, head, and paratesticular tissues) from 63% to 77%. 263 Analysis of
histiotypes among group II patients on IRS-II and IRS-III revealed a disproportionate number of patients with favorable histologies on IRS-III. Thus, the better outcome
on IRS-III with the addition doxorubicin may have reflected a more favorable patient cohort, rather than more effective therapy. In light of the uncertainty around the
therapeutic value of doxorubicin in this setting, the current recommendations for nonalveolar group II disease remains vincristine plus dactinomycin, without
doxorubicin.241 (3) The addition of doxorubicin to the combination of VAC did not improve the relapse-free survival percentage of children with group III RMS
(excluding primary tumors of the bladder, prostate, vagina, and uterus). 265 The addition of cisplatin with or without etoposide to the combination of VAC did not
improve the relapse-free survival of children with group III RMS (excluding primary tumors of the bladder, prostate, vagina, uterus, orbit, scalp, parotid gland, oral

cavity, larynx, oropharynx, and cheek). 263 (4) The addition of doxorubicin to the combination of VAC did not improve the relapse-free survival of children with group IV
RMS.265 The addition of doxorubicin and cisplatin, with or without etoposide, to the combination of VAC did not improve the relapse-free survival of children with group
IV RMS.263
From 1991 to 1997, 894 patients were enrolled on IRS-IV. This study randomized patients between VAC, VAI (vincristine, actinomycin-D, ifosfamide), and VIE
(vincristine, ifosfamide, etoposide). The 3-year failure-free survival for all three groups was approximately 75% for nonmetastatic disease. There were no statistically
significant differences in outcome between the randomized treatment groups. In light of the therapeutic parity of the three regimens, VAC remains the gold standard
due to the lesser risk of renal damage compared with the two regimens containing ifosfamide. 266
The current IRS-V study, which was first started in 1995, focuses on improving survival in the intermediate- and high-risk subsets of patients. An attempt at
dose-escalating cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan) in one of these pilots was proven to be prohibitively toxic. Since all three agents in the VAC regimen are currently
delivered at maximal dose intensity, improvements in survival will require identification of new active agents. Based on encouraging pilot data from treatment of
metastatic patients with VAC plus topotecan, a phase III study is now being conducted in intermediate-risk patients. Eligible patients are being randomized to VAC
alone versus VAC alternating with vincristine, topotecan, and Cytoxan.
Survival for metastatic (stage IV) patients has only marginally improved from 20% to 32% since the inception of the IRS in 1972. In an effort to improve survival in this
very high-risk subset of children, a series of phase II window studies have been undertaken. Patients with metastatic RMS are now being treated with an induction
regimen that combines vincristine with irinotecan. Like topotecan, irinotecan is a camptothecin analogue that exerts its cytotoxic effect by inhibition of topoisomerase I.
Irinotecan has demonstrated impressive antitumor activity in preclinical studies with murine xenografts. Subsequent pilot studies for metastatic patients may revisit the
therapeutic potential of anthracyclines in the form of Doxil, a liposomally encapsulated analogue of doxorubicin, currently in phase I studies. It is hoped that the
liposomal delivery system will minimize cardiotoxicity, permitting more dose-intensive application of anthracyclines to sarcoma therapy.
SPECIFIC PRIMARY TUMOR SITES
Head and Neck
ORBIT. Children with orbital RMS present with proptosis, due to a retrobulbar tumor, or swelling of the eyelid. The radiographic evaluation must demonstrate whether

the tumor is confined to the orbit or has extended inferiorly into the maxillary sinus or posteriorly into the ethmoid sinus and cranial cavity. CT provides excellent
definition of the soft tissue mass and can demonstrate the presence of bone destruction. 267
Surgery. Biopsy is required before beginning treatment of orbital tumors. Due to the excellent response to radiation and chemotherapy, orbital exenteration is not
indicated except for the unusual cases of recurrent disease in this site.
Radiation Therapy. The technique of local irradiation should include treatment of a volume that includes the entire soft tissue mass, demonstrated radiographically,
with a margin of normal tissue. The dose given to the macroscopic tumor should be 45 to 55 Gy, administered over 5 to 6 weeks. Historically, a wedged lateral and
anterior or three-field treatment plan was used. Three-dimensional treatment planning yields a superior dose distribution and can potentially avoid irradiation of the
pituitary gland. Children with RMS of the orbit are at a small risk of developing disease recurrence in the meninges. 258,268,269
Chemotherapy. Children with group II or III RMS of the orbit have a 5-year progression-free survival of approximately 90% when treated with local radiation therapy
and chemotherapy that includes vincristine and dactinomycin. 263,265 These patients do not benefit from the addition of either doxorubicin or cyclophosphamide to the
chemotherapy regimen.
PARAMENINGEAL SITES. The parameningeal sites include the middle ear, nasopharynx, and adjacent areas. Children with a primary tumor in the middle ear present

with a peripheral facial nerve palsy or a mass in the external auditory canal and may have been misdiagnosed as having chronic otitis media or Bell's palsy. 270 Those
with a RMS of the nasopharynx present with signs of upper airway obstruction, which is frequently associated with cranial nerve palsies. On examination, they are
found to have a soft tissue mass that is depressing the palate and extending into the retropharyngeal space.
The radiographic evaluation of a patient with a parameningeal RMS must document the presence and extent of bone destruction and identify local or intracranial
extension of the tumor. The temporal bone, petrous bone, mastoid, and infratemporal fossa can be adequately evaluated using CT. Coronal sections obtained either
by rescanning the patient or reprocessing the data obtained from the axial scan of the head allow identification of tumor extension into the floor of the middle and
posterior cranial fossae. 51
Surgery. Surgical resection is infrequently required at this site because of the excellent response to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. In children who have persistent
disease after completion of radiotherapy or who have tumor recurrence, surgery should be considered. 271 Modern methods of resection and reconstruction of these
sites make surgery much less mutilating than in the past, with improved long-term functional outcomes. Before the initiation of therapy, a lumbar puncture should be
performed. A cytocentrifuge preparation of the cerebrospinal fluid should be examined for tumor cells.
Radiation Therapy. Parameningeal RMS progresses locally by destruction of the adjacent bones and by growth along nerves. 272,273 To achieve local control of this
tumor, a generous margin of these tissues must be included within the volume of irradiation. 274,275 The tumor mass must receive a radiation dose of at least 50 Gy.
Meticulous treatment planning is necessary to deliver adequate therapy to the tumor without causing excessive or unnecessary damage to adjacent normal tissues
including the brain and eye. 275
RMS of the middle ear may recur as diffuse meningeal disease. This occurred in 17.5% of patients with a parameningeal primary tumor entered on IRS-I. 276 The high
rate of primary meningeal relapse in this study may have been related to inadequate radiation technique. Although these investigators recommended the
administration of craniospinal irradiation to prevent meningeal recurrence, others reported isolated meningeal relapse in 5.4% to 7.4% 274,277,278 of patients with
parameningeal RMS.
This suggests that the rate of meningeal recurrence is related to the adequacy of the volume and dose of irradiation to the primary tumor. Current guidelines in IRS-V
for parameningeal disease do not recommend craniospinal irradiation. Treatment is confined to the tumor volume plus a 2-cm margin for parameningeal tumors
without intracranial extension. In cases of documented intracranial extension, the skull is included in the radiated target volume.
Chemotherapy. Approximately one-half of children with parameningeal primary tumors have group III tumors. These children require treatment with the combination of
vincristine, dactinomycin, and doxorubicin. The 5-year progression-free survival percentage for all children with parameningeal primary tumors on IRS-III was 70%, 263
a result similar to that reported for IRS-II. 265 Patients who present with bone erosion of the cranial base, with or without a cranial nerve palsy, have a 3-year
disease-free survival percentage of 43%, compared with 65% for those with intracranial extension and 81% for those without any evidence of meningeal
involvement. 279 VAC remains the therapy of choice for parameningeal disease.
Other Head And Neck Sites.
RMS may originate in several nonorbital and nonparameningeal sites, including the parotid region, larynx, soft and hard palate, tonsil, tongue, cheek, nose, scalp, and
neck. Children with a parotid RMS present with unilateral swelling at the angle of the mandible and local pain. Those with RMS of the larynx present with hoarseness
or signs of airway obstruction.
Although radical excision of tumor in these sites has been reported in a few cases, local infiltration of the tumor usually precludes gross total excision. Despite the
prohibitions of surgical morbidity, local tumor control can be achieved with irradiation. The volume of irradiation should include a margin of normal tissue. Direct tumor
extension along the extracranial portions of the adjacent cranial nerves may occur. These areas should be included within the treatment volume. The dose to gross
residual disease should be 45 to 50 Gy. These patients should receive combination chemotherapy with VAC. The 5-year progression-free survival percentage for
these children was 78% on IRS-III, similar to the result of IRS-II. 263,265

TRUNK.
RMS of the thorax may arise from the soft tissues of the chest wall or within the thoracic cavity. Primary tumors of the chest wall present as a localized swelling.
The radiographic evaluation of a patient with a primary tumor of the chest wall should include plain chest radiography and CT.
SURGERY. Lesions in the trunk, arising in the chest or abdominal wall and paraspinal or retroperitoneal sites, are best resected if possible because of their less

favorable response to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Complete surgical removal is limited by the frequently large size of these lesions at diagnosis as well as their
involvement of vital structures within the abdomen or chest. Resections of the chest or abdominal wall often require prosthetic mesh reconstruction. Primary reexcision
should be considered if pathologic examination of the initial specimen demonstrates microscopic residual disease. 280 In a review of IRS studies II and III, there were
84 patients with thoracic sarcomas. 281 Although 71% (60 patients) achieved an initial complete response, 39 suffered a local relapse, whereas an additional 22
patients developed distant relapse. Fifty-eight percent (49 patients) have died, with an average survival of 1.1 years. Survival was significantly associated with clinical
group, size, and local or distant recurrence.
RMS arising in the abdominal wall is rare, accounting for only 1% of all cases of this disease. A review of patients with abdominal wall primaries treated on IRS I
through IV demonstrated a substantial advantage to complete versus partial resection of localized tumors (100% vs. 62%). 282
Biliary tract primaries appear to be more responsive to chemotherapy than other truncal sites. Affected children typically present with symptoms of biliary tract
obstruction. Diagnostic biopsy followed by chemotherapy is appropriate, with resection reserved for those children with persistent disease.
Initial biopsy followed by chemotherapy and radiation has also been standard therapy for bulky tumors of the retroperitoneum and nongenitourinary pelvic sites.
These tumors make up approximately 10% of all RMS. The treatment outcome for these tumors on IRS-III and -IV has been reviewed. All of the 138 eligible patients
with tumors in these locations were either group III (gross residual) or group IV (metastatic). Nearly one-half of these patients were metastatic at diagnosis. Children
with embryonal histology had a 4-year failure-free survival of 56% versus only 33% for children with alveolar or undifferentiated histology. Nearly all of the patients
with alveolar tumors underwent biopsy only, followed by chemotherapy and radiation. In contrast, 40% of patients with embryonal tumors underwent extensive
debulking at initial surgery. Among the embryonal patients, the failure-free survival at 4 years was 72% for those who underwent debulking versus only 48% for those
embryonal patients who underwent biopsy followed by chemotherapy and radiation. The apparent advantage to debulking will be prospectively analyzed in IRS-V. 284
RADIATION THERAPY. When complete tumor excision is not possible, local control is established with the use of radiation therapy. The volume must include the grossly

apparent tumor with a margin of normal tissue. A radiation dose of 40 Gy is adequate for microscopic residual disease, while 50 Gy is required for gross residual
disease. The pleural space is considered contaminated if there is a malignant pleural effusion, or if the tumor is cut across and the pleural space is opened at the time
of surgery. The entire pleural surface must be irradiated when pleural contamination with tumor cells has occurred. Failure to do so may result in disease recurrence
on the pleural surface not included within the volume of irradiation.
CHEMOTHERAPY. Embryonal RMS of the trunk should be treated using the chemotherapy regimens appropriate for the clinical group. Group I tumors are treated with

the combination of vincristine and dactinomycin, 263,265 whereas groups II, III, and IV are managed with the combination of VAC. 263,265 Primary tumors of the trunk
frequently consist of alveolar elements. 285 As in other sites, alveolar tumors in the trunk do not respond to chemotherapy as favorably as embryonal disease. Children
with intermediate- or high-risk disease arising in these sites are currently being evaluated for response to VAC plus one of the camptothecin analogues.
Extremity
Patients with RMS of an extremity usually present with localized swelling. Occasionally, a child with RMS of an extremity comes to medical attention due to symptoms
caused by metastases, such as spinal cord compression secondary to vertebral body metastases, or pain due to other bone metastases. Nearly 25% of extremity
primaries are metastatic at the time of diagnosis.
Radiographic evaluation of a patient with an RMS of the extremity should include plain radiographs of the primary tumor site and a bone scan. The presence of
increased radionuclide uptake in the adjacent bone, although generally not associated with frank invasion of the bone by tumor, is correlated with the presence of
inflammatory adhesions between the tumor and adjacent bone. Local recurrence of the tumor is likely if the tumor is not removed en bloc with the adjacent bone.286 CT
and MRI are useful for defining the extent of the soft tissue mass and the presence of bone destruction. Arteriography may be necessary to evaluate the relationship
between the tumor, contiguous muscle compartments, and their vascular supply.
SURGERY. Complete resection of the tumor with negative microscopic margins is the goal in extremity sarcomas.

287

There is no advantage to amputation or muscle
group excision compared with local excision with an adequate surrounding rim of normal tissue, provided the resection results in negative microscopic margins. The
extent of the resection is often tempered by attempts to minimize functional impairment. In extremity tumors, consideration of the initial biopsy site and the direction of
the incision are particularly important, because an inappropriate biopsy can greatly complicate later resection. Extremity lesions should rarely be resected without an
initial biopsy because the surgical approach when resecting a malignant lesion will be quite different from the approach for a benign lesion.
Extensive local lesions with invasion of vital structures are often treated first with chemotherapy and subjected to delayed surgical resection. The goal of delayed
resection is to render the child free of gross residual disease and accept microscopic residual disease that can be controlled with a lower dose of radiotherapy than
the dose required for gross residual disease (40 vs. 55 Gy). This multidisciplinary approach results in good local control, while minimizing the potential morbidity of a
more extensive initial resection or amputation.
Lymph node sampling is important in extremity RMS due to the significant risk of lymphatic involvement. Nearly 25% of all extremity tumors demonstrated regional
nodal infiltration. 242 A representative sample of lymph nodes from the draining nodal group should be biopsied. A lymph node resection should not be performed
because of the risks of producing lymphedema, which complicate radiotherapy and subsequent surgical resection of the primary lesion.
Analysis of data from IRS-III has shown that estimated 5-year survival was directly related to the clinical group, with a 95% survival in group I, versus 67% in group II,
58% in group III, and 33% in group IV. Survival was independent of histology or site. Multivariate analysis of pretreatment factors showed that lymph node metastasis,
age over 10 years, and distant metastasis predicted worse survival. The difference between the survival percentage of 51 group II and III patients with lymph
node–negative distal extremity lesions who could have been made group I with extensive resection and that of patients with group I distal extremity tumors
approached statistical significance in univariate analysis ( P <.06).288 All four group II patients who had reexcision of margins survived, whereas only 18 of 31 without
reexcision survived. In IRS-IV, the failure-free survival rate was 55%, with an overall survival rate of 70%. Again, the 3-year failure-free survival was closely related to
group (group I, 91%; II, 72%; III, 50%; IV, 23%). In this cohort, clinical group and stage were both highly predictive of outcome. None of the other variables were
predictors of failure-free survival by multivariate analysis. 289
RADIATION THERAPY. Postoperative irradiation must be to a volume that includes a generous margin around the tumor. The radiation dose should be 50 Gy to areas of

gross residual disease. Patients with histologic confirmation of regional lymph node involvement should receive similar treatment to a volume that includes the
involved lymph nodes.
CHEMOTHERAPY. Embryonal RMS of the extremity should be treated using the chemotherapy regimens described earlier for RMS of the trunk. Approximately one-half

of extremity RMS have alveolar histology and require chemotherapy appropriate for this histologic subtype with a poorer prognosis. 285
Genitourinary
Patients with RMS of the paratesticular tissue present with painless enlargement of the testis. The age distribution is bimodal, with peaks at 5 and 16 years of age. 51
Children with RMS of the prostate present most frequently with acute urinary retention or with difficulty in voiding. Hematuria, dysuria, and abdominal swelling are also
observed. Those with RMS of the bladder usually present because of hematuria, urinary frequency, or dysuria. 51 The physical examination of children with a prostate
tumor is unremarkable except for the presence of a mass between the bladder and rectum that is palpable on rectal examination. Radiographic evaluation should
include a voiding cystourethrogram or CT of the abdomen and pelvis. These studies demonstrate displacement of the bladder, in the case of a prostatic primary

tumor, or the presence of multiple polypoid masses within the bladder, with thickening of the bladder wall in the case of a bladder primary tumor. 290
Children with sarcoma botryoids of the vagina frequently present with a polypoid mass protruding from the vaginal orifice or with vaginal bleeding. These children
should have an a-fetoprotein (AFP) level obtained before tumor biopsy or excision, since yolk sac tumor may also present as a vaginal mass.
SURGERY. Anterior pelvic exenteration is rarely required today. Bladder, prostate, and vaginal primaries are first biopsied, and lymph node extension is defined.

Chemotherapy and radiotherapy are then used to eradicate residual disease. In the IRS-I and -II studies there were 28 vaginal and 10 uterine lesions. 291 Vaginal
lesions generally arise from the anterior vaginal wall in the area of the embryonic vesicovaginal septum. The mean age of children with vaginal tumors was under 2
years. Over the course of the first four IRS studies spanning 25 years, the percentage of children undergoing resections of vaginal tumors has steadily decreased
from 90% to 13%. Despite the limitation of surgical intervention to biopsy, survival in this group remains excellent, exceeding 90% with minimal surgical morbidity. 292
In contrast to vaginal lesions, uterine primary tumors arise in older children demonstrate a greater propensity for local recurrence. As with vaginal lesions, initial
surgical intervention is limited to biopsy in most cases. Hysterectomy is reserved for those patients who fail to achieve a complete response to chemotherapy and
radiation. Survival in children with uterine disease approaches 90%. 293
Preservation of the bladder and prostate was one of the primary goals of the IRS-II study in which surgical therapy was shifted from initial resection to primary biopsy
with subsequent radiotherapy or surgery. 294 The 3-year survival rate of patients on IRS-II (70%) was similar to that of IRS-I (78%), but the 3-year disease-free survival
rate was lower (52% vs. 70%). The percentages of 95 children with bladder and prostate tumors in IRS-II who retained their bladder and were alive at 2 and 3 years of
age were 33% and 22%, respectively, compared with 26% and 23% in the 66 children with bladder or prostate tumors in IRS-I. Sequential treatment on this protocol
failed to improve bladder salvage. The rate of retention of a functional bladder at 4 years from diagnosis was 60%. Excluding children who presented with
disseminated disease, mortality was only 10% among children treated on IRS-III for bladder or prostate tumors. 295
Successful treatment of paratesticular RMS first requires a transinguinal radical orchiectomy. Testicular masses should never be approached through the scrotum due
to the risk of inducing spread into the pelvis via the inguinal lymphatics. In addition, the desired high inguinal ligation of the spermatic cord cannot be accomplished by
the scrotal approach. A total of 121 boys with paratesticular RMS treated on IRS-III had retroperitoneal lymph node dissection to evaluate nodal status. 296 Lymph
nodes were radiographically negative based on CT in 81% of the boys, 14% of whom had positive nodes when biopsy or retroperitoneal lymph node dissection was
performed. Among the boys with abnormal nodes by radiographic criterion, 94% had pathologic confirmation of lymph node involvement. Retroperitoneal relapse
occurred in only 2 of the 121 boys, one of whom had pathologically negative lymph nodes and did not receive radiotherapy. While CT was accurate if lymph node
abnormalities were identified, it was not extremely sensitive in identifying nodal involvement.
RADIATION THERAPY. The IRS reported that there was no obvious benefit from prophylactic retroperitoneal lymph node irradiation among patients with paratesticular

RMS, who had negative pathologic staging of retroperitoneal nodes. 297
Tumors of the bladder and prostate were initially managed with radical resections including cystectomy. 298 Although excellent survival was achieved with this
approach, the extensive surgical morbidity of this strategy prompted subsequent efforts at tissue-sparing treatment designs. Current IRS guidelines now recommend
early introduction of radiation in combination with chemotherapy following a minimally invasive biopsy. 299 Employing this multimodal approach on IRS-III produced
improved progression-free survival of approximately 75%, while maintaining partial or complete bladder function. 263
CHEMOTHERAPY. Patients with group II paratesticular primary tumors of embryonal histology have an excellent prognosis when treated with the combination of

vincristine and dactinomycin, with a 5-year progression-free survival percentage of 81%. 263 All patients with group III (biopsy only) genitourinary tumors are treated
with VAC.
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
As noted previously, the favorable prognostic factors for children and adolescents with RMS include tumor status (T1, tumor localized in the organ or tissue of origin)
and primary tumor site (orbit, genitourinary nonbladder, or prostate). 300 Although alveolar histology predicts a poorer outcome with standard therapy, the difference in
survival between alveolar and embryonal cases resolves when more intensive therapy is applied to alveolar tumors. Despite improvements in therapy, however,
children with metastatic disease still fare poorly, with a 5-year survival between 20% and 30%. Most of these metastatic patients have alveolar tumors. In a noteworthy
departure from the dismal prognosis for children with disseminated RMS, there is a subset of younger children with embryonal histology with a 50% rate of failure-free
survival. Identification of this relatively favorable subset of metastatic patients reinforces the importance of histology in predicting the behavior of this disease.
Unfortunately, efforts at maximal dose intensification of chemotherapy with stem cell support have failed to improve the prognosis for children with metastatic
disease. 301 Improved survival will require identification of new active cytotoxic agents in conjunction with efforts to target the unique genetic perturbations that are
ubiquitous features of alveolar disease.

EWING'S SARCOMA AND PERIPHERAL PRIMITIVE NEUROECTODERMAL TUMOR
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND GENETICS
Ewing's sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor are closely related, if not identical, malignancies that may occur as osseous or soft tissue tumors. 302,303 Ewing's
sarcoma is the second most common primary bone tumor in pediatric patients. The incidence rate per year is 3.4 cases per 1 million U.S. white children less than 15
years of age. The corresponding figure for African American children is only 0.6 per 1 million. 1 The rarity of Ewing's sarcoma in African American and Asian
populations has been confirmed by several investigators. 27 Ewing's sarcoma occurs more frequently in boys than girls and has been reported in three pairs of female
siblings. 51
The femur is the most frequent primary site for Ewing's sarcoma, accounting for approximately 20% to 25% of all cases. Lower extremity tumors may also arise in the
tibia, fibula, or the bones of the feet. Combining all potential sites of lower extremity disease, these tumors account for 45% of newly diagnosed Ewing's sarcomas. 304
The pelvis is the second most common primary site for Ewing's sarcoma, accounting for an additional 20% of new cases. Pelvic tumors may arise in the ilium, ischium,
pubic bone, or sacrum. Upper extremity sites comprise another 12% to 16% of new diagnoses, with the humerus accounting for the majority of these cases. The
remainder of Ewing's sarcomas originate from the vertebrae, ribs, clavicle, mandible, and skull. 51 These axial lesions account for nearly 13% of all newly diagnosed
cases.304
PATHOLOGY
Ewing's sarcoma and primary neuroectodermal tumors are counted among the small blue round cell tumors of childhood. Based on readily apparent features noted on
light microscopy, this grouping includes neuroblastoma, RMS, and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Tumors of the Ewing's sarcoma family are characterized by the presence
of highly cellular aggregates of tumor cells compartmentalized by widely separated strands of fibrous tissue. The tumor cells are regular in shape, with round to oval
nuclei. The slightly granular cytoplasm is often framed by indistinct cellular outlines. The nuclei contain finely dispersed chromatin, giving the nucleus a ground glass
appearance. Inconspicuous nucleoli may be present with occasional mitotic figures. 305
Within the Ewing's family of tumors, primary neuroectodermal tumors are characterized by significant neuroectodermal differentiation. These tumors typically
demonstrate Homer-Wright pseudorosettes on light microscopy and positive immunohistochemical staining for synaptophysin and neuron-specific enolase. In contrast
to primary neuroectodermal tumors, Ewing's sarcomas are poorly differentiated tumors that do not form pseudorosettes and do not stain positively for neural
markers.306,307 Regardless of the extent of neural differentiation, nearly all tumors within the Ewing's sarcoma family express the MIC2 gene product (CD99) on their
cell membranes.308 Approximately 95% of all Ewing's family tumors contain translocations consisting of either t(11;22) or t(21;22). These gene rearrangements
combine the N-terminal region of the EWS gene on chromosome 22 with the C-terminal region of one of two closely related genes on chromosome 11 (FLI1) or
chromosome 21 (ERG). Both FLI1 and ERG are members of the Ets gene family of transcriptional activators. The majority of these translocations involve EWS and
FLI1, t(11;22), producing a fusion transcript that is presumed to contribute to dysregulated cell growth and transformation. 309 Although the mechanism of
tumorigenesis mediated by EWS-FLI1 remains uncertain, one study implicates the transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b) type II receptor as a target. TGF-b is a
putative tumor suppressor gene. Levels of TGF-BR2 are reduced when EWS-FLI1 is introduced into embryonic stem cells. Antisense oligonucleotides to EWS-FLI1

restore TGF-b sensitivity and block tumorigenicity in cell lines containing the fusion gene. 310
Studies of EWS-FLI1 have demonstrated a variety of genomic breakpoints within the rearranged genes. Differences in the resulting fusion transcripts are thought to
contribute to the clinical heterogeneity of Ewing's sarcoma. The most common rearrangement, designated type 1, consists of the first seven exons of EWS fused to
exons 6 to 9 of FLI1. This fusion gene accounts for nearly two-thirds of all cases. The type 2 rearrangement, constituting an additional 25% of cases, fuses EWS to
exon 5 of FLI1. Type 2 appears to be a more potent transactivator, which may account for the poorer prognosis associated with this fusion product. 311,312 and 313
Rapid identification of EWS gene rearrangement using fluorescent in situ hybridization on frozen section specimens has been described. 314 Application of this
diagnostic tool may facilitate prompt discrimination between the Ewing's family tumors and other morphologically similar small round cell tumors, expediting the
initiation of appropriate therapy.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND NATURAL HISTORY
Localized pain is typically the first symptom reported by pediatric patients with bone tumors. The pain progresses from intermittent to more constant, often awakening
the patient from sleep. Depending on the location of the tumor, the patient may develop a limp, complain of pain that increases with respiration, or experience pain
that is radicular in character. Local swelling is often noticed by the patient. This finding is more readily identified when the tumor is located in an extremity. Paraplegia
secondary to vertebral disease is present at the time of diagnosis in approximately 3% of patients.
The clinical presentation of patients with Ewing's sarcoma is similar to that of patients with osteomyelitis. 315 Fever is present in 28% of patients with Ewing's sarcoma
at the time of diagnosis. 51
Metastases are present in approximately 26% of patients at initial diagnosis. The most frequent sites of metastases are the lungs and other bones. Patients may seek
medical attention because of symptoms related to metastatic disease, rather than the primary tumor. Multiple pulmonary metastases may produce respiratory
insufficiency, or paraplegia may develop secondary to a vertebral body metastasis.
Evaluation of a patient suspected of having Ewing's sarcoma includes radiographic examinations of the primary tumor site, documentation of the presence or absence
of hematogenous metastases, and additional laboratory studies that correlate with prognosis or exclude the presence of other possible diagnoses.
Lesions that originate in the long bones characteristically involve the diaphysis, with extension toward the metaphases. A lytic or mixed lytic-sclerotic lesion is
identified in the bone. Parallel, lamellated periosteal new bone formation (onion skin) or, less frequently, radiating bone spicules may be present. A soft tissue mass is
frequently identified on CT or gadolinium-enhanced MRI.
Plain radiographs of tumors that originate in the pelvic bones frequently demonstrate a mixed lytic and blastic lesion. CT and MRI of the pelvis are required to
adequately delineate the presence and extent of any associated soft tissue mass.
Radionuclide bone scans should be obtained, both to define more precisely the extent of disease at the primary site and to determine whether bone metastases are
present.
The sedimentation rate and serum lactate dehydrogenase level are frequently elevated in patients with Ewing's sarcoma. 316,317
STAGING
Ewing's sarcoma can metastasize to the lungs, other bones, and bone marrow. As with other sarcomas, nodules identified on plain chest radiography or CT of the
chest in patients with Ewing's sarcoma are not always malignant. Cohen and colleagues reported that 60% (three of five) of nodules identified in such radiographs
were benign. 250 A solitary nodule identified only on the CT scan of one patient was shown pathologically to be secondary to histoplasmosis. 318
Radionuclide bone scans demonstrated disease in additional bones in approximately 10% of patients with Ewing's sarcoma. 319,320
Patients with Ewing's sarcoma may have disseminated bone marrow disease in the absence of radiographically detectable bone metastases. 321 Bilateral bone marrow
sampling is required to complete the staging of all patients regardless of primary site or tumor size.
TREATMENT
Surgery
Local control must be achieved by either high-dose radiotherapy or resection. Larger tumor size (more than 8 cm) or volume (more than 100 cm 3) has correlated with
decreased success in achieving durable local control. 322,323 and 324 No randomized study has been performed to define whether local control is better accomplished with
surgical resection or radiotherapy. In nonrandomized trials, the improved survival in the surgical resection group has been attributed to the allocation of larger tumors
with correspondingly poorer prognosis to the radiation group. 325,326 and 327 Not all series have reported better survival among patients treated surgically than among
those treated with radiation therapy. 328 In the German Cooperative Ewing's Sarcoma Study, survival with resection was better, although this relative advantage of
surgery lost statistical significance when tumor size was considered. 329 The 3-year relapse-free survival was 78% for patients whose tumor volume was less than 100
mL, compared with 17% for patients with tumor volumes greater than 100 mL. Extraosseous extension has also been associated with an increased risk of distant
relapse.330
The long-term morbidity produced by radiotherapy versus surgery is often the deciding factor when selecting the most appropriate modality for local control. In
addition to analyses of resectability and functional outcome, deliberations about local control must also consider the risk of late-onset second malignancies in tissues
treated with intensive radiotherapy. Central pelvic or spinal lesions are frequently treated with radiation alone. Extremity lesions amenable to limb-sparing resections
are treated predominantly with resection after an initial 12- to 15-week phase of induction chemotherapy. It is critical for the surgeon performing the diagnostic biopsy
to place the incision appropriately to avoid complicating future resection.
Chest wall lesions make up 6.5% of primary Ewing's sarcomas, representing the most frequent chest wall tumor in children. They frequently present with large lesions
extending into the thoracic cavity. Traditionally, these have been biopsied by open techniques that can be difficult because of the extremely vascular nature of this
tumor and the limited surgical exposure. Percutaneous biopsy, which can provide adequate material for histologic and cytogenetic testing, may be a preferable
approach in many cases. 331
Preoperative chemotherapy can greatly reduce the size, vascularity, and friability of the tumor, facilitating resection and decreasing the risk of intraoperative tumor
rupture. 332 Analysis of the 53 patients with nonmetastatic chest wall primaries treated on the first intergroup Ewing's Sarcoma Study (POG/CCG) demonstrated a
decreased incidence of residual tumor in those patients resected after induction chemotherapy, in contrast to those who underwent resections before treatment with
chemotherapy.333 Current practice mandates the addition of radiotherapy for all patients with microscopic or gross residual disease after resection. Since surgical
outcome was improved in patients receiving preoperative chemotherapy, they were less likely to require postoperative chest wall radiotherapy with its well-established
risks of cardiac and pulmonary damage. As noted previously, the inclusion of 12 to 15 weeks of systemic chemotherapy before introduction of local control measures
has become standard practice, regardless of tumor size, location, or stage.
Radiation Therapy
Radiation responsiveness was one of the cardinal diagnostic features of the bone tumor first described by Ewing in 1921. 304 Unfortunately, the long-term survival rate
of patients with Ewing's sarcoma following treatment with local radiation alone was only 9%. The vast majority of these patients ultimately succumbed to metastatic
disease, suggesting the presence of occult metastatic tumor foci in most affected children. 51 These findings presaged the routine inclusion of systemic chemotherapy

in the treatment of this disease, leading to a marked improvement in survival over the past three decades.
Local control of Ewing's sarcoma with radiation is dependent on the delivery of a sufficient dose of irradiation to an adequate volume of tissue. Both the requisite
minimum dose and the optimal treatment volume continue to be debated. Although dose-response information is limited for modern studies that employ adjuvant
chemotherapy, local control rates have been fairly similar, ranging from 75% to 90% at radiation doses varying from 45 to 65 Gy. 334
Local control rates have improved with the introduction of adjuvant chemotherapy. Chan and colleagues 505 reported local tumor recurrence in only 2.8% of patients
treated with 60 Gy and adjuvant chemotherapy. Local disease recurrence was identified in 33.3% of patients who received identical local irradiation, but no adjuvant
chemotherapy.
The Intergroup Ewing's Sarcoma Study (IESS) examined the relation of primary tumor site, radiation therapy dose, treatment volume, and adjuvant chemotherapy
regimen to local tumor control. Local tumor recurrence occurred in 22.6% of patients with primary tumors in the humerus, 15.3% of those with tumors originating in the
pelvis, 10.3% of patients with tibial primaries, and 6.7% of those whose tumor originated in the femur. A dose-response relationship was not apparent when local
control was evaluated in patients who had received treatment to an adequate volume. 335
Minor or major violations of radiation therapy technique, resulting in treatment of an insufficient volume, yielded inferior local control rates among patients who did not
receive doxorubicin as part of the adjuvant chemotherapy program. 335 Local recurrence occurred in 21.4% of patients who had a margin of less than 5 cm of normal
tissue included within the treatment volume. This compared with 7.9% of patients who had a margin of 5 or more centimeters of normal tissue within the treatment
volume.336 There was no improvement of the local control rate in patients with a pelvic primary tumor from the addition of doxorubicin when an adequate volume of
tissue was irradiated. 337
Local control percentages that are derived from series in which the majority of patients who died of disease did not have an autopsy may overestimate the frequency
of local control. 338
Studies from the National Cancer Institute confirmed the importance of autopsy examination for the identification of locally recurrent Ewing's sarcoma. Telles and
colleagues identified recurrent or persistent tumor at the primary site in 13 of 20 patients at autopsy. 339 Tepper and coworkers reported that local tumor recurrence
was clinically apparent in 5 of 20 autopsied patients, but was identified histologically in an additional 6 of 20 patients. 340 Since many of these patients had widespread
metastatic disease, the possibility that the primary tumor site was reseeded with tumor cells derived from metastatic disease cannot be excluded. These results
suggest that local failure rates in irradiated patients may be higher than suggested by the clinical determination of locally recurrent tumor.
Improved local control of tumor with irradiation followed the identification of a target volume encompassing the entire medullary cavity to moderately high-dose
levels.341,342 Suit summarized the experience of the 1950s and 1960s in recommending irradiation to the entire involved bone with a higher dose boost to the primary
tumor site, noting few instances of marginal or distant intramedullary recurrence with such treatment. 343
Assessment of the primary target volume requires detailed attention to both intraosseous and adjacent soft tissue tumor extent. Prior treatment recommendations
included a 3- to 5-cm margin beyond the known soft tissue extension and inclusion of the entire intramedullary cavity. The radiation therapy results of IESS-I
demonstrated an overall increase in local recurrence with fields that had not included the opposite epiphysis. 337 Although local failure increased from 7% to 20% with
marginal or inadequate treatment fields, the differences were not statistically significant. Subsequent studies have reported comparable irradiation results using
treatment techniques that have not included the opposite epiphysis. 326,344
The results of the German Cooperative Ewing Sarcoma Study indicated an excessive rate of local recurrence attributed to poor quality control for radiation therapy.
Protocol modifications, which included central planning for radiation therapy, diminished the frequency of local treatment failure. 344,345
Local or tailored fields encompassing the primary tumor with a 3- to 5-cm margin, rather than treatment of the entire bone, have been evaluated. 346,347 Marcus et al.
reported excellent local control using tailored fields, noting the ability to spare a component of the long bones in tumors less than 8 cm in diameter, while frequently
requiring whole bone irradiation to achieve a 4-cm margin around larger tumors. 347
The POG prospectively evaluated whole bone (conventional) irradiation compared with tailored treatment fields, ultimately collapsing a planned randomized study to a
single arm trial using only tailored fields. A published analysis of this trial supports the efficacy of more limited treatment volume as defined by prechemotherapy tumor
extent.291 There was no difference in local control rates between patients receiving whole bone versus involved field radiation. This more tailored field has become the
standard strategy used in the most recent CCG and POG Ewing's sarcoma trials.
The data available in the literature, and those accumulated by the IESS, have not demonstrated a strong relationship between the radiation dose and the local control
rate when doses greater than 40 Gy were employed. Radiation doses greater than 60 Gy did not appear to significantly increase the local control rate and were
associated with considerable long-term morbidity. Although the available data did not suggest that doses exceeding 40 Gy were essential for adequate local control
rates in patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy, comparisons between this dose and higher doses should be conducted in controlled trials. The current standard
for the open POG and CCG trial is 55.8 Gy for gross and 45 Gy for microscopic residual disease.
The comparable outcome achieved with smaller, tailored fields is most provocative when considered in the context of the late sequelae of radiation therapy. The risk
of secondary sarcomas arising in irradiated bone is variously reported as ranging from 5% to 10% at 20 years from diagnosis. Although no clear therapeutic
advantage can be attributed to radiation doses in excess of 60 Gy, analysis of the long-term outcome in patients treated with doses greater than or equal to 60 Gy
demonstrated an unacceptable excess risk of secondary bone sarcomas. In marked contrast to the late complications seen in patients receiving very high-dose
radiation, the risk of developing a secondary bone tumor in the irradiated field was negligible at doses below 48 Gy. 348
Chemotherapy
The availability of chemotherapeutic agents active against macroscopic deposits of Ewing's sarcoma suggested that improved relapse-free survival rates might be
achieved with the use of these agents in patients with microscopic residual disease.
In 1973, the IESS initiated a trial (IESS-I) to evaluate the potential additional benefit of adding doxorubicin and prophylactic whole lung irradiation to standard
treatment of patients with nonmetastatic Ewing's sarcoma with vincristine, dactinomycin, and cyclophosphamide. The patients treated with the four-drug regimen that
included doxorubicin had superior relapse-free survival. 349,350 In a subsequent study (IESS-II), the efficacy of administration of high-dose (1400 mg/mn)
cyclophosphamide every 6 weeks was compared with administration of cyclophosphamide (500 mg/m 2) weekly for 6 weeks. The regimen that included high-dose
cyclophosphamide also included a higher dose of doxorubicin (75 mg/m 2) than did the weekly cyclophosphamide schema. The 5-year relapse-free survival was 73%
for the high-dose cyclophosphamide, high-dose doxorubicin regimen, compared with 56% for the weekly cyclophosphamide regimen ( P = .03),351 a finding supported
by the analysis by Smith and colleagues. 352
The POG and CCG completed an intergroup study comparing the combination of vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and dactinomycin to the combination of
these four drugs plus ifosfamide and etoposide. The 5-year event-free survival was 68% for those who received the six-drug regimen, compared with 52% for those
who received the four-drug regimen ( P = .0005).353 Similar improvements in survival with the addition of ifosfamide have been reported in studies by the National
Cancer Institute and multiple European cooperative groups. 354,355 and 356
Standard chemotherapy for nonmetastatic disease currently consists of a five-drug regimen including the three-drug combination of vincristine, doxorubicin, and
cyclophosphamide, alternating with the two-drug combination of ifosfamide and etoposide for a total of 48 weeks. The intergroup POG/CCG study for nonmetastatic
Ewing's sarcoma compared this 48-week five-drug combination with a dose-intensified 30-week schedule employing the same agents at identical cumulative doses.
The experimental arm in this study increased the dose intensity of alkylating agents by 25%. Preliminary statistical analysis of this study reveals no evidence of
improved event-free survival with the dose-intensified regimen. 357 Although the Kaplan-Meier plots for event-free survival may yet diverge, current data from this

randomized study suggest that new treatment strategies will be required if further improvements in survival are to be achieved.
In contrast to the improvement in survival for nonmetastatic patients treated with the addition of ifosfamide and etoposide, no comparable benefit could be
demonstrated for metastatic patients. Previous studies, however, had shown improved survival with the addition of radiation to metastatic sites of disease. Patients
with hematogenous metastases entered on IESS-II were treated with irradiation to the primary tumor, in addition to whole lung radiation (18 Gy) for patients with
pulmonary metastases and local bone irradiation for bone metastases. This strategy yielded a progression-free survival of 39%, demonstrating that some patients with
hematogenous metastases can be successfully treated. 358
Several groups have explored the feasibility and efficacy of maximally dose intensive chemotherapy regimens in combination with total body irradiation and peripheral
blood stem cell rescue in an effort to improve the prognosis for high-risk patients. 359,360,361,362,363 and 364 Analysis of these studies is complicated by the nonstandardized
inclusion of both metastatic and nonmetastatic patients in some of the high-risk cohorts. One study reported a 3-year relapse-free survival of 43% following
megatherapy with chemotherapy, total body irradiation and stem cell rescue. 365 Unfortunately, longer follow-up of this cohort revealed a disappointing decline in
event-free survival to 27%. 366 Another study reported a 6-year event-free survival of 34% with similar high-dose chemoradiotherapy. 367 None of these results is clearly
superior to the outcome reported for similar patients treated on IESS-II without intensive chemotherapy or total body irradiation. While the early response data from
several of these dose-intensive regimens appears promising, their small size and short follow-up mandate a guarded approach to their therapeutic potential. Further
substantial improvements in survival for both metastatic and nonmetastatic patients will require identification of new non–cross-resistant cytotoxic agents and
translation of our growing understanding of the unique molecular derangements of this disease into targeted biologic therapies. 368
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
Historically, the prognosis for children and young adults with Ewing's family tumors has been assessed based on tumor size, location, and extent. Aside from the poor
prognosis associated with metastatic disease, large tumor size (greater than 8 cm in diameter) and volume (greater than 100 mL) have correlated with adverse
outcome. Children with nonmetastatic pelvic primary sites also have a poorer prognosis than children with extremity primaries, although this difference may be related
to the larger size and more difficult resectability of pelvic tumors. High serum lactate dehydrogenase levels at diagnosis have been shown to predict a poorer
prognosis in several studies.
Although not true prognostic factors assessable at the time of diagnosis, radiographic and histologic response to initial chemotherapy appear to be strong predictors
of treatment outcome. Poor histologic response correlates with a poor prognosis, while complete or near complete tumor necrosis strongly correlates with good
outcome, with a 5-year event-free survival of 84% to 95%. 369,370 Researchers in Vienna and New York have independently identified the type of EWS-FLI1 fusion
transcript as a strong predictor of outcome in nonmetastatic patients. Both studies reported remarkably congruent results, with a predicted 5-year event-free survival
of approximately 70% for type 1 transcripts versus 20% for all other types of fusion transcripts. 311,312 Nearly two-thirds of all patients in both studies were found to have
type 1 fusion transcripts. Although the prognostic significance of this finding appears to be substantial, these findings must be prospectively validated before they are
used to stratify patients for therapeutic purposes. All upcoming north American pediatric cooperative group studies conducted by the Children's Oncology Group
(POG/CCG) will require submission of diagnostic tissue for molecular analyses that will include determination of EWS-FLI1 gene rearrangement status.

PRIMARY HEPATIC TUMORS
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND GENETICS
Approximately 60% to 70% of all primary liver tumors in children are malignant, with hepatoblastoma and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) representing the vast
majority of malignancies arising in this location. Hemangiomas and hamartomas constitute the majority of nonmalignant liver tumors in the pediatric population. 371
Hepatoblastoma accounts for slightly more than one-half of hepatic malignancies, occurring at an annual rate of 1.3 cases per 1 million children less than 15 years of
age. In contrast, HCC occurs less frequently in children, accounting for one-third of all malignant hepatic tumors, with an annual incidence of 0.4 cases per 1 million. 27
In addition to the significant difference in incidence, hepatoblastoma and HCC are distinguished by age at diagnosis. Hepatoblastoma tends to affect young children,
with a median age at diagnosis of 1 year. HCC is typically identified in older children, with a median age of 12 years. Both tumors demonstrate a male
predominance. 372
Children diagnosed with hepatoblastoma have had additional anomalies, including hemihypertrophy, Meckel's diverticulum, congenital absence of the kidney,
congenital absence of the adrenal gland, and umbilical hernia. 371 Infants and children with incomplete or complete forms of the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome have
an increased risk of developing hepatoblastoma, suggesting a linkage between loss of heterozygosity at chromosome 11p15.5 and the pathogenesis of both
diseases. 373 Familial adenomatous polyposis has been identified in the mothers and maternal relatives of several patients with hepatoblastoma. 374 The risk of
hepatoblastoma arising in children from kindreds with the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene on the long arm of chromosome 5 is 1000 to 2000 times higher
than the risk in sporadic cases with no family history of familial adenomatous polyposis. 375 Other karyotypic abnormalities associated with the pathogenesis of
hepatoblastoma include trisomy 1 or 1q, 376 trisomy 2 or 2q, and trisomy of chromosome 20.377 In addition to these chromosomal derangements, children with a history
of prematurity and very low birth weight appear to be at increased risk for hepatoblastoma. 378,379 In a study based on the Japanese Children's Cancer Registry,
hepatoblastoma accounted for 58% of the cancer diagnoses in children with a history of extremely low birth weight (less than 1000 g). 378 The authors suggest that this
association points to a combination of aberrant genetic endowments and prenatal events or exposures that contribute to disruptions in normal organogenesis,
culminating in transformation of hepatocytes.
HCC is strongly associated with infection with hepatitis B virus, both in the presence and absence of pathologic evidence of cirrhosis in nontumorous hepatic tissue.
Hepatitis B virus can be acquired via vertical transmission from seropositive mothers or through exposure to contaminated blood products. 380,381 Several studies have
documented a near 100% rate of seropositivity for HBsAg in children who develop HCC. 382 Efforts to reduce the incidence of hepatitis B infection with universal
hepatitis B vaccination in Taiwan have produced a corresponding decrease in the risk of developing HCC. 380,381 and 382
In addition to the association with hepatitis B, HCC has been diagnosed in pediatric patients with several other underlying diseases, including tyrosinemia,
galactosemia, biliary atresia, progressive familial cholestatic cirrhosis, giant cell hepatitis of infancy, Fanconi's anemia, type I glycogen storage disease, hepatic
glycogenosis with Fanconi's syndrome, a 1-antitrypsin deficiency (MZ phenotype), Soto's syndrome, and neurofibromatosis. 51,383 Hemochromatosis has not been
associated with HCC in pediatric patients, although it is frequently associated with this disease in adult populations. Determinations of iron reserves, as estimated by
serum iron, unsaturated iron-binding capacity, and serum ferritin, might clarify the relationship between hemochromatosis and HCC in children. 384,385
PATHOLOGY
Hepatoblastoma may be divided into two broad histologic subsets of uncertain prognostic significance. The pure epithelial type consists of either fetal or embryonal
elements or a combination of both cell types. Alternatively, the tumor may consist of a mixture of epithelial cells with mesenchymal elements. 386 Pure fetal histology is
prognostically favorable in patients with completely resected hepatoblastoma. 387 Hepatoblastoma tends to occupy a single site within the liver, most commonly arising
in the right lobe.
Two types of HCC are frequently recognized in pediatric patients: microtrabecular and fibrolamellar. 388,389 The fibrolamellar histology is most commonly seen in older
children and young adults. In contrast to hepatoblastoma, HCC is often multicentric at diagnosis, substantially limiting the feasibility of complete resection. 372
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Infants and children with hepatoblastoma are most frequently identified by the discovery of an abdominal mass or abdominal distention. Symptoms such as weight
loss, anorexia, or fever may also be present, although jaundice is infrequent. A rare but interesting presentation of patients with hepatoblastoma occurs in young boys
with isosexual precocious puberty due to production of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) by the tumor cells. 390
The presenting physical findings in children with HCC are quite similar to the characteristic features of hepatoblastoma. Children with HCC typically present with an

abdominal mass or abdominal distention. Abdominal pain, anorexia, and weight loss are less frequent complaints. Jaundice is infrequently present at the time of
diagnosis, although it is a more common finding in HCC than hepatoblastoma. Occasionally, a patient with HCC presents with acute abdominal pain due to tumor
rupture, with intraabdominal hemorrhage. 51
EVALUATION AND STAGING
The history of pediatric patients suspected of having a malignant hepatic tumor should be reviewed for any history of jaundice or hepatitis. Laboratory data obtained in
the perinatal period for the evaluation of hyperbilirubinemia should be reviewed. The maternal prenatal history should be evaluated for the use of steroidal hormones.
Previous exposures to hepatotoxic agents should be recorded. The family history should be reviewed for prior cases of hepatic or biliary disease in siblings or
parents.
The physical examination may reveal a solitary or multiple hepatic nodules. The presence of dilated collateral vessels on the anterior thorax and abdomen should be
noted. Hemihypertrophy or stigmata of the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, such as macroglossia or omphalocele, may be present.
Laboratory evaluation should include a complete blood count, white blood cell differential, tests of renal and hepatic function, and a urinalysis. The serum levels of
total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and glutamic-oxaloacetic acid transaminase are not generally useful for the differential diagnosis of malignant hepatic tumors in
children.
The serum level of AFP is increased in approximately 90% of patients with hepatoblastoma 391,392 and 78% of adult patients with HCC. The increase of AFP in 51% of
white and 81% of African American patients with HCC suggests the presence of ethnic variability in the production of this protein by malignant hepatocytes. 393 Once
the diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma is established, additional studies should include hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B antibody, serum iron, total
iron-binding capacity, serum ferritin, and a 1-antitrypsin phenotyping. The serum level of HCG should be determined if the clinical presentation included precocious
puberty. Several authors reported the excretion of increased amounts of cystathionine in the urine of patients with hepatoblastoma. 394 This finding has also been
reported in patients with neuroblastoma, decreasing the utility of this determination for the differential diagnosis of hepatomegaly.
Abdominal radiographic examination may demonstrate the presence of a homogeneous density in the upper abdomen. Malignant hepatic tumors are rarely
calcified.395
Abdominal ultrasonography demonstrates the presence and extent of a solid mass. Sonography assesses both kidneys and the inferior vena cava, providing
information useful for differential diagnosis and surgical management. The proximal extent of tumor thrombus within the inferior vena cava may be determined by
echocardiography or cardiac angiography.
A radionuclide liver and spleen scan may demonstrate solitary or multiple defects in the liver. Transient, early perfusion of the defect is frequently observed in hepatic
adenomas, hepatoblastomas, and HCCs. Persistent perfusion is found in hepatic hemangiomas and hepatic adenomas. 396
Pulmonary metastases are identified on plain chest radiography in approximately 10% of patients with hepatoblastoma 391 and HCC.389 The additional yield of CT in
pediatric patients with hepatoblastoma or HCC has not been evaluated.
The grouping system employed in the therapeutic studies of children with malignant hepatic tumors conducted by the CCG and POG segregates patients according to
the resectability of the primary tumor, a criterion that may vary among treatment centers. This staging system also accounts for the presence of lymph node or
hematogenous metastases (Table 44.2-10).397

TABLE 44.2-10. Clinical Staging System for Childhood Hepatic Tumors

TREATMENT
Surgery
Resection is the cornerstone of treatment for hepatoblastoma and HCC. Long-term survival is rare for patients who have not undergone a successful resection. 397
Hepatoblastoma is generally unifocal, arising at one site within the liver parenchyma, whereas HCC is frequently multifocal. HCC has an invasive pattern of spread
across anatomic planes and is generally unresponsive to current forms of chemotherapy. 398 Complete resection of HCC is frequently difficult due to its multifocality
and invasiveness. Approximately one-half of all hepatoblastomas are resectable at initial presentation, whereas only 30% of HCCs can be fully resected at
diagnosis. 371
The resectability of a primary liver tumor is determined by its anatomic location within the liver and by its size. Surgical considerations are complex and best
addressed by surgeons intimately familiar with hepatic anatomy and resection. For successful resection, perfusion and drainage for an anatomic segment of the liver
must be preserved. The liver lobes are perfused by the two divisions of the hepatic artery and the portal vein, with one branch to each lobe. The left and right lobes
are divided along a plane between the bed of the gallbladder and the anterior aspect of the vena cava. The liver is drained by three veins into the vena cava at the
most superior aspect of the liver. The right hepatic vein drains the major portion of the right lobe (the posterior segment and a portion of the anterior segment of the
lobe).399 The middle hepatic vein, which courses along the plane anterior to the vena cava between the right and left lobes, drains one-third of the liver (a large portion
of the anterior segment of the right lobe and all of the medial segment of the left lobe). The left hepatic vein, arising from a short common trunk with the middle vein in
50% of cases, travels along the umbilical fissure of the liver and primarily drains the lateral segment of the left lobe. In a right or left lobectomy, the left or right
branches of the hepatic artery and portal vein are preserved, along with the left and middle or right and middle hepatic veins. In an extended right or left hepatectomy
(also referred to as a trisegmentectomy), the same inflow vessels are removed, along with the middle and left or right hepatic veins. A much greater portion of the
hepatic parenchyma is removed in this type of resection ( Fig. 44.2-7).

FIGURE 44.2-7. Relation between hepatic anatomy and nomenclature for various types of hepatic resection. (From Iwatsuki S, Starzl TE. Hepatectomy in children. Int
Adv Surg Oncol 1982;5:163, with permission.)

Radiographic imaging before surgical exploration is critical to the surgeon. It defines the critical relationship between the tumor and associated vasculature.
Historically, most children underwent angiography to facilitate surgical planning before hepatic resection. In view of the remarkable anatomic detail afforded by current
radiographic techniques including MRI and spiral CT, angiography is less frequently required. 400 Ultimately, the feasibility of resection can only be determined by
direct surgical exploration. When angiography is not performed, the surgeon must be aware of the frequent anomalies of the hepatic artery. The right hepatic artery
may arise from the superior mesenteric artery, while the left hepatic artery may arise from the celiac axis. These variations, if present, must be identified before
division of any vessels in the hepatic porta. Factors that render a liver tumor unresectable include involvement of both lobes of the liver and lymph node involvement
in the porta hepatis or mediastinum. Additional features that preclude resection include direct extension into the inferior vena cava, a central lesion that involves both
the left and right hepatic arteries or the portal vein, or lesions that involve all branches of the hepatic vein.
A large hepatoblastoma grossly distorts the normal anatomy and relationships of the vessels. Hepatoblastoma, in contrast with HCC, does not invade surrounding
liver segments as much as it distorts them. It is as if a balloon is placed within the liver parenchyma and is progressively inflated. The vessels to the uninvolved
segments may be tightly drawn over a massively enlarged segment, making safe dissection and preservation difficult. As the tumor responds to chemotherapy, it does
not regress from areas of involvement, although its decreased volume permits identification of the normal uninvolved segments. Treatment with chemotherapy before
definitive surgery has permitted complete resections in children whose hepatoblastomas were initially deemed unresectable. 401,402 Regrettably, HCC has been much
less responsive to chemotherapy, limiting the effectiveness of preoperative pharmacologic intervention. When feasible, aggressive attempts at initial resection of HCC
should be pursued.
Although complications from hepatectomy persist, perioperative mortality has significantly decreased. Bile leaks, strictures, subphrenic or subhepatic abscesses, and
intraoperative hemorrhage are the most frequent complications. Major postoperative complications have occurred more frequently in children undergoing resection
after chemotherapy (25%) than in children resected at presentation (8%). 403 In a series published by King et al. in 1991, the increased frequency of complications in
the group resected following chemotherapy did not appear to be explained by disproportionate numbers of more extensive resections being performed in that subset.
The distribution between lobectomies and trisegmentectomies was similar for children undergoing primary resections and resections following several course of
induction chemotherapy.403
Hepatic transplantation has been used by several centers for children with unresectable liver tumors, with a survival rate of 50.0% to 87.5% reported for children with
hepatoblastoma.404,405 Success with this treatment approach for patients with hepatocellular carcinoma has been extremely limited and is difficult to justify. Disease
must be limited to the liver for efforts to be successful. Lymph node involvement is a contraindication for efforts at resection and transplantation.
Cryoablation or radiofrequency ablation of hepatic malignancies has been increasingly used in adults, particularly for metastatic lesions in the liver. 406 While these
techniques have been employed in treatment of recurrent disease, their overall role in treatment of pediatric neoplasms remains to be defined.
Long-term evaluation of infants and children following hepatic resection has demonstrated normal synthetic and degradative function of the liver. Liver volumes
assessed by MRI are near normal, despite prior anatomic lobectomies or trisegmentectomies. Sequential studies have shown that hepatic volumes continue to
increase as the children grow following completion of their treatment. 407
Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy has a limited role in the treatment of hepatoblastoma or HCC. Generally, combination chemotherapy is given preoperatively to patients with large,
unresectable tumors. Postoperative radiation therapy may be valuable in the treatment of children with residual disease following resection. 408 Generally, doses of 25
to 40 Gy are recommended for treatment of limited volumes.
Chemotherapy
Following initial biopsy, combination chemotherapy has been administered to children with malignant hepatic tumors to facilitate subsequent surgical excision. In
addition to its role in reducing the size of tumors before attempted resections, chemotherapy has been employed as a postoperative adjuvant following complete
excision of the primary tumor. Initially reported by single institutions, 409,410,411,412 and 413 these results led to the design of much larger cooperative group trials of
combination chemotherapy in children with hepatoblastoma and HCC.
Evans and coworkers reported the results of sequential studies conducted by two pediatric cooperative groups in patients with malignant hepatic tumors. Patients with
hepatoblastoma and HCC were evaluated together. Those patients with completely resected disease (group 1) entered on the first study received no therapy following
surgery. Those entered on the second study received adjuvant chemotherapy consisting of doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and 5-fluorouracil.
Comparison of these sequential studies demonstrated a significant survival advantage for those patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy compared with patients
treated only with surgery. 397
Based on pilot data that demonstrated the activity of the combination of doxorubicin and cisplatin 408 and of the combination of cisplatin, vincristine, and
5-fluorouracil 414 in patients with malignant liver tumors, the CCG and POG conducted a randomized comparison of these two combinations. The results of this trial
demonstrated that the two combinations produced similar relapse-free and overall survival percentages within stages. The combination of cisplatin, vincristine, and
5-fluorouracil produced substantially less severe myelosuppression, less need for prolonged hyperalimentation, and fewer toxic deaths. Event-free survival rates for
patients treated with the three-drug regimen were 85% for stage I, 100% for stage II, 62% for stage III, and 23% for stage IV. 415 Similar results have been reported by
investigators in Toronto, 416 Japan,417 and Germany.418 These studies have consistently demonstrated that a substantial number of initially unresectable tumors can be
surgically removed at second exploration following treatment with variations on either of the two drug combinations. 403,419 Despite the remarkable similarity in
outcomes between these various studies, there was a significant difference in survival for children who underwent initial complete resection, corresponding to
postoperative management. The Toronto group reported a 100% event-free survival for children with complete resections treated with postoperative chemotherapy,
versus 72% survival for a similar group of children on the POG/CCG study who received no chemotherapy following definitive surgery. 416 Although the numbers in the
comparison groups are small, the more favorable outcome with inclusion of chemotherapy suggests that this approach should be prospectively examined.
Japanese investigators have reported successful application of transarterial chemoembolization using cisplatinum and doxorubicin in combination with iodized oil in
treatment of a small number of children with inoperable hepatoblastoma. 420 Although the results of this limited series are provocative, the role of this more invasive
technique is uncertain given the efficacy of systemic, intravenous administration of the same chemotherapeutic agents.
PROGNOSIS

For both hepatoblastoma and HCC, resectability of the primary tumor and disease extent at diagnosis remain the strongest predictors of survival. Prospects for
long-term survival are extremely poor for both histologies in cases of widely metastatic disease. Despite aggressive efforts at surgical management of HCC, long-term
survival remains dismal even for patients with fully resected tumors. A North American Pediatric Cooperative Group study demonstrated only 13% survival for children
with totally resected HCC. 421 This outcome sharply contrasts with the good survival documented for children with localized, completely resected hepatoblastoma, as
described previously (see Surgery, earlier in this chapter).
Although correlation of survival with histology in hepatoblastoma and HCC remains controversial, there appear to be favorable histologic subsets within both types of
hepatic malignancy. Multiple studies have demonstrated that pure fetal histology is prognostically favorable in patients with completely resected
hepatoblastoma.387,422,423 Several studies have shown a better outcome for children with the fibrolamellar variant of HCC, 424 although this advantage was not apparent
in the cooperative studies conducted by the POG and CCG. 423 Multivariate analysis of prognostic factors in children with hepatoblastoma by the German Pediatric
Liver Tumor Study group has identified AFP level at diagnosis and vascular invasion as important prognostic factors. Children with either very low AFP (less than 100
ng/mL) or very high AFP (greater than 1 million ng/mL) had a poorer prognosis than children with intermediate levels (100 to 1 million ng/mL). Children with venous
tumor invasion also fared poorly. 422

GERM CELL TUMORS
Germ cell tumors arising in gonadal or extragonadal sites constitute a remarkably heterogeneous group of tumors that account for approximately 3% of all pediatric
malignancies. Although extragonadal germ cell tumors are relatively infrequent in adults, accounting for only 5% to 10% of all cases, extragonadal tumors make up
nearly two-thirds of all germ cell tumors in children. 425 The sacrococcygeal region represents the most common site for germ cell tumors in children, constituting 40%
of all childhood germ cell tumors, 426 and 78% of all extragonadal disease. 427 Less commonly, extragonadal disease arises in the mediastinum, retroperitoneum,
vagina, and pineal region. Biologic behavior among this diverse grouping of tumors varies from the benign mature teratoma to the highly malignant embryonal
carcinoma and choriocarcinoma. Fortunately, the introduction of platinum-based chemotherapy by Einhorn and Donahue in the 1970s has greatly improved survival
for most children affected by these highly chemosensitive tumors 428 (Table 44.2-11).

TABLE 44.2-11. Relative Incidence According to Age and Pathology

EMBRYOLOGY
Primordial germ cells arise in the embryonic yolk sac endoderm. These cells migrate through the wall of the midgut to the genital ridge at 4 to 5 weeks' gestation.
Migration along this paravertebral gonadal ridge proceeds in a caudal to cranial direction. Arrested migration of these germ cells along this pathway has been
proposed as an explanation for the near midline location of most extragonadal germ cell tumors, including the sacrococcygeal region, retroperitoneum, mediastinum,
and intracranial sites, which primarily consist of the pineal and suprasellar regions. 425,427,429
PATHOLOGY
Pediatric germ cell tumors include an enormously diverse array of histologies. The majority of extragonadal tumors arising in infancy are benign teratomas. Similarly,
most ovarian germ cell tumors are benign lesions. In contrast, the vast majority of germ cell tumors developing in the testis contain malignant yolk sac elements. While
many of these tumors contain a mixture of benign and malignant elements, their clinical behavior and therapeutic management are determined by the most malignant
component identified on extensive sectioning. 427 This section reviews the various histopathologic subtypes of germ cell tumors most frequently seen in children.
TERATOMA
Teratomas contain elements derived from more than one of the three primary germ layers (ectoderm, mesoderm, entoderm), frequently arranged in a haphazard
manner. The tissues are immature to well differentiated and foreign to the anatomic site. Mature teratomas are either cystic or solid, although the cystic presentation
predominates in gonadal sites. Immature teratomas are graded according to the amount of immature tissue present on light microscopic assessment of sampled
tissue. Grade 1 immature teratomas have neuroepithelium or other immature elements limited to only one low-power field per slide. Grade 3 immature teratomas
contain abundant immature tissue that is identifiable on greater than or equal to four low-power fields per slide. 430 Nearly all mature teratomas are diploid with normal
karyotypes. In contrast, chromosomal derangements are frequently identified in immature teratomas. Ploidy may correlate with clinical behavior in immature ovarian
teratomas. Grade 1 and 2 immature teratomas are typically diploid, whereas grade 3 tumors are often aneuploid. 431
YOLK SAC TUMOR (ENDODERMAL SINUS TUMOR)
Intracellular and intercellular hyaline droplets are present in typical yolk sac tumors. This material is periodic acid–Schiff-positive and resists digestion with diastase.
Several groups of investigators have shown that these droplets contain AFP as well as other proteins. 51,432 Teilum and colleagues suggested that the presence of AFP
in these tumors supported the theory that such tumors contained or originated from the yolk sac endoderm. 433
The polyvesicular vitelline tumor is a variant of the yolk sac tumor that is composed predominantly of cystic structures. 434,435 Such evidence of differentiation has been
associated with a more favorable prognosis for patients with this histologic subtype of yolk sac tumor.
A cytogenetic study of childhood endodermal sinus tumors employing fluorescent in situ hybridization demonstrated deletions of the distal portion of the short arm of
chromosome 1 (1p36) in eight of ten cases. This deletion maps to the same locus identified in neuroblastoma, another embryonal malignancy that typically affects
young children. 436 The prognostic importance of this finding remains uncertain. Several putative tumor suppressor genes have been mapped within or adjacent to this
locus, however, suggesting a role of this deletion in the pathogenesis of these tumors.
EMBRYONAL CARCINOMA
Embryonal carcinoma is composed of cells that resemble epithelial cells. There is considerable variation in their size, shape, and arrangement. They may be large
and pleomorphic without distinct cell borders. The cytoplasm may be homogeneously amphophilic or vacuolated. The nuclei are irregular, oval, or round, with an
irregular and coarse nuclear membrane, and one or more large nucleoli. The cells may occur as solid sheets. Frequently, small or large acinar, tubular, and papillary
structures are formed. Hemorrhage and necrosis are frequent. 437
SEMINOMA

Seminomas arising outside the testis are referred to as germinomas or dysgerminomas (ovarian). Typical seminoma is composed of uniform cells supported by a
delicate connective tissue stroma. Characteristically, the seminoma cell is large, polyhedral, or round, with a distinct cell border. It has clear or granular cytoplasm and
a large, centrally located, spherical hyperchromatic nucleus, an irregular nuclear membrane, distinct and granular chromatin distribution, and one or two basophilic
nucleoli. Tumor giant cells may be seen. Lymphocytic infiltration is present in most seminomas, with a granulomatous reaction identifiable in approximately one-half of
cases.437 As is commonly found in adult testicular tumors, isochrome 12p (two copies of the short arm of chromosome 12) is frequently identified in adolescent
testicular germinomas. 438,439 This chromosomal abnormality is rarely seen in malignant testicular tumors of infancy in which yolk sac tumor is the predominant
histology.
CHORIOCARCINOMA
Choriocarcinoma consists of two distinct cell types: syncytiotrophoblast and cytotrophoblast. The syncytiotrophoblast is a large, multinucleated cell with many
hyperchromatic, irregular nuclei and cytoplasm usually eosinophilic or amphophilic. Cytotrophoblast cells are medium sized and closely packed with clear cytoplasm,
distinct cell borders, and a single, uniform, moderate-sized vesicular nucleus. 437
TERATOCARCINOMA
Teratocarcinomas contain derivatives of more than one of the three primary germ cell layers (entoderm, mesoderm, ectoderm) consistent with the diagnosis of
teratoma, and areas of embryonal carcinoma. In addition, areas of seminoma, endodermal sinus tumor, and choriocarcinoma may be identified within the tumor. 437
LABORATORY MARKERS
AFP and the b subunit of HCG (b-HCG) are oncofetoproteins that are found at elevated serum levels in association with a variety of germ cell tumors. These proteins
are clinically useful both as diagnostic tools and in surveillance of children on or off treatment for tumors that secrete these markers. AFP is a glycoprotein that is
produced in the liver, gastrointestinal tract, and yolk sac of the human fetus. The serum concentration of AFP reaches a maximum at 13 weeks of gestation. 440 It is
readily detectable at birth, when high physiologic levels confound its diagnostic utility in infants with suspected germ cell tumors. Due to its long serum half-life of 7
days, the level of AFP may remain elevated in normal infants as old as 6 months of age. 441,442 Abelev and colleagues reported in 1967 that patients with testicular
tumors that contained elements of embryonal carcinoma had elevated levels of AFP in their serum. 443 Other investigators have reported that children with embryonal
carcinomas and malignant teratomas have elevated serum levels of AFP. Most commonly, high serum levels of AFP are identified in pediatric patients with testicular,
ovarian, presacral, and vaginal primary yolk sac tumors. 51,444
HCG is a glycoprotein that is secreted by the placenta. Patients with a pure yolk sac tumor do not have detectable serum levels of HCG. Patients with malignant germ
cell tumors of the ovary or embryonal carcinoma of the ovary or testis may have elevated serum HCG levels. 445 HCG has a much shorter serum half-life than AFP,
lasting only 24 to 36 hours. Thus, a decline in the serum level of this marker occurs much more rapidly with successful therapeutic intervention than is seen in
management of tumors that secrete AFP.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND TREATMENT BY ANATOMIC SITE
SACROCOCCYGEAL TUMORS
Presacral and sacrococcygeal teratomas are usually diagnosed at birth or during the first month of life. Four types have been defined on the basis of the extent of
pelvic and abdominal extension of the teratoma, and the presence or absence of external extension of the teratoma ( Fig. 44.2-8).446

FIGURE 44.2-8. The types of presacral teratomas. Malignancy rates are as follows: type 1, 8%; type II, 21%; type III, 34%; type IV, 38%. (From ref. 446, with
permission.)

Only 2% of presacral and sacrococcygeal teratomas diagnosed before 6 months of age were malignant, compared with 65% of those diagnosed after 6 months of
age. Both benign and malignant teratomas are more frequent in girls. 426 Children with presacral or sacrococcygeal teratomas frequently have congenital anomalies of
the vertebrae, genitourinary system, or anorectum. 446,447
Malignant presacral or sacrococcygeal teratomas may arise de novo or at the site of a previously excised benign teratoma. 448,449 The frequency of malignancy
depends on the type of teratoma, varying from 8% for patients with type I, to 21% for those with type II, 34% for those with type III, and 38% for those with type IV
lesions.446 The much higher rate of malignancy in type IV tumors may reflect inadequate or delayed treatment of infants with foci of endodermal sinus tumor within a
mature or immature sacrococcygeal teratoma. 450
Clinical Presentation and Evaluation of Sacrococcygeal Teratomas
Children with malignant pelvic teratomas present with an abdominal or buttock mass or signs of urinary and fecal obstruction. Rectal examination reveals the
presence of a mass between the rectum and the sacrum. The mass may extend through the sciatic notch deep into the gluteal muscles.
Staging of the patient with a sacrococcygeal teratoma requires a radionuclide bone scan, plain radiographs of any positive area on the scan and any symptomatic
bone, plain chest radiography and CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis ( Table 44.2-12).

TABLE 44.2-12. Pediatric Oncology Group/Children's Cancer Group Staging for Malignant Extragonadal Germ Cell Tumors

Yolk sac tumor accounts for the vast majority of malignant presacral and sacrococcygeal teratomas. 451 In marked contrast to the predominance of benign teratomas in
neonates with type I tumors, nearly 90% of children with type IV anatomy have tumors consisting of malignant elements. 451 Before the inclusion of cisplatinum in
chemotherapy regimens for pelvic yolk sac tumors, survival was poor, barely exceeding 10%. 452 Since the advent of modern, platinum-based chemotherapy in the late
1970s, however, more than 80% of patients with malignant sacrococcygeal teratomas are survivors. 425
Surgery
Before surgical resection, the upper limit of the tumor should be assessed by both rectal examination and either ultrasonography or MRI. In the vast majority of cases,
the tumor can be resected by a perineal approach in which an incision is placed around the periphery of the protruding teratoma, preserving the maximum amount of
skin. In approximately 10% of infants, a combined perineal and abdominal approach is required. 446 The plane between a benign teratoma and the normal anatomic
structures can be readily defined. All normal structures should be preserved, accepting a narrow margin of resection. In light of a much higher recurrence rate when
the adjacent coccyx is spared, the coccyx should routinely be removed with the tumor. The sacrum, however, can be preserved. Caution must be taken when
resecting the anterior aspect of the teratoma to preserve the anal musculature, which may be directly adherent, and to avoid injury to the rectum that is draped over
the anterior aspect of the tumor. If the tumor is identified in an older child or there is suspicion of malignancy, a preliminary biopsy should be performed. Preoperative
chemotherapy should be administered if malignancy is confirmed. A complete resection of malignant teratomas can rarely be achieved without prior treatment with
combination chemotherapy. This approach allows maximum preservation of normal structures including the rectum, anus, and the sacral plexus, which is critical for
bladder and bowel function. If significant abdominal extension of the tumor is present, initial abdominal exploration allows control of the vascular supply to the tumor
before the perineal dissection. 453
Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy is not necessary for those children who undergo a complete excision or who have a complete response to combination chemotherapy. 454 In patients
who have residual disease after treatment with chemotherapy and second-look surgery, local control with irradiation is poor. 455 If irradiation is indicated, the dose
required for extragonadal germ cell tumors is 45 to 50 Gy.
Chemotherapy
As noted previously, malignant pelvic yolk sac tumors are highly responsive to chemotherapy regimens that include cisplatinum. 456,457 and 458 Children with pelvic yolk
sac tumors should be treated aggressively, with the expectation that such an approach will result in long-term tumor control. Table 44.2-13 contains an algorithm for
the inclusion of chemotherapy in the treatment of germ cell tumors based on the risk-group stratification currently employed by North American pediatric cooperative
groups (POG/CCG).425

TABLE 44.2-13. Management Schema for Pediatric Germ Cell Tumors

TESTICULAR TUMORS
Testicular tumors make up approximately 10% of all pediatric germ cell tumors. The vast majority of these tumors are malignant (80%), characteristically containing
yolk sac elements. In contrast to adult testicular tumors, which are frequently metastatic at initial diagnosis, 90% of pediatric testicular germ cell tumors are
localized. 427 Malignant germ cell tumors of the testis occur at an annual incidence of 1.1 cases per 1 million U.S. white children younger than 15 years of age. The
corresponding figure for African American children is only slightly lower at 0.9 cases per 1 million. 459 Testicular germ cell tumors follow a bimodal age distribution,
occurring in very young children and adolescent boys. Yolk sac tumor, or endodermal sinus tumor, is the most common malignant germ cell tumor of the testis in
prepubertal boys, with a median age at diagnosis of 24 months. Testicular tumors in adolescent boys have histologic features similar to those of adults. 429
Children with yolk sac tumors of the testis have been diagnosed with additional anomalies including inguinal hernia, double ureter, ectopic kidney, hypospadias, and
renal agenesis. 460
Clinical Presentation and Evaluation
Most children with primary testicular tumors present with painless testicular enlargement. In the relatively infrequent cases of metastatic disease, patients present with
abdominal swelling due to malignant ascites, inguinal lymphadenopathy, or acute abdominal pain.
Physical examination reveals testicular enlargement. Transillumination is usually negative, but the presence of a hydrocele should not decrease the index of suspicion
that a testicular tumor is present. Yolk sac tumor occurs with equal frequency in the right and left testis. Less than 1% of cases had bilateral testicular involvement at
the time of initial presentation. 51
The preoperative evaluation of a child suspected to have a malignant tumor of the testis should include a plain chest radiograph and serum AFP and HCG levels.
Additional studies, including CT of the abdomen, pelvis, and chest, are not necessary before orchiectomy, although they are ultimately required for complete staging
of testicular tumors containing malignant elements.
Management of the Undescended Testis
Patients with an undescended testis have an increased risk of developing testicular cancer, although most associated tumors are diagnosed well beyond 15 years of
age, often arising in the fourth decade. 461,462 and 463 The undescended testis occupies an intraabdominal location in 14.2% of patients. Cryptorchid testes in
intraabdominal sites account for 51.5% of the cases of cancer diagnosed in patients with undescended testes, suggesting these patients are at the greatest risk of
malignancy.462,464
Orchiopexy has been recommended both to preserve testicular function and to facilitate the identification of malignancy in the abnormally located testis. Several
authors have reported the occurrence of testicular cancer in maldescended testes following orchiopexy. 465 Most patients were more than 6 years of age when

orchiopexy was performed.466 While orchiopexy permits identification of tumors, it does not uniformly prevent their occurrence. Normal testicular function is unlikely in
boys who undergo orchiopexy after 2 years of age. 467,468 Children with an undescended testis and a normal contralateral testis should undergo orchiectomy if the
undescended testis is not recognized until puberty. Orchiopexy is the treatment of choice for younger patients with cryptorchidism. Preservation of normal testicular
function is most likely if surgical repair is performed before 2 years of age. 469
Staging
Once the histologic diagnosis is established, the patient must be staged. Although the majority of pediatric testicular germ cell tumors are nonmetastatic, the tumors
may spread to retroperitoneal lymph nodes, liver, lungs, and rarely to bones or brain.
As noted previously, staging must include CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, in addition to a radionuclide bone scan.
The retroperitoneal lymph nodes may be evaluated by CT or MRI. Absence of significant retroperitoneal fat in these young children and the inability of CT to identify
normal sized lymph nodes that contain tumor may limit the sensitivity of CT for staging these patients. Since 90% of malignant testicular germ cell tumors in young
children elaborate AFP, adjuvant chemotherapy is reserved for advanced stage disease and the small percentage of children with occult metastatic disease whose
AFP fails to decline following orchiectomy ( Table 44.2-14).

TABLE 44.2-14. Pediatric Oncology Group/Children's Cancer Group Staging System for Testicular Germ Cell Tumors

Treatment Planning
SURGERY. Preoperative diagnostic studies of a scrotal mass may include ultrasonography that can define the solid or cystic nature of the mass and its relationship to

the testicle. All scrotal masses should be explored through an inguinal incision. A transcrotal biopsy contaminates the scrotum and its lymphatic drainage to the
inguinal lymph nodes and prevents high ligation of the spermatic cord. If the tumor is clearly malignant, high ligation of the spermatic cord should be performed at the
internal ring.
Increasingly, effective cisplatin-based chemotherapy for nonseminomatous germ cell tumors has decreased the role of surgical resection of the retroperitoneal lymph
nodes as a therapeutic modality. Infants have a predominance of early-stage lesions that are primarily endodermal sinus tumors (yolk sac tumors), in contrast with
teenage boys in whom the embryonal carcinoma or mixed germ cell tumors predominate. Teenagers frequently delay seeking medical attention, resulting in a higher
proportion of advanced stage disease at initial presentation. 470 In most series, infants with clinical stage I (Table 44.2-15) endodermal sinus tumors are treated by
radical orchiectomy and then close follow-up. In the United Kingdom Children's Cancer Group Study of malignant germ cell tumors, 87% of the boys presented with
stage I testicular tumors that were treated by orchiectomy alone. 471 The pathology of these lesions was predominantly yolk sac tumors (57 of 61). In seven boys, a
rising serum AFP was the only evidence for incomplete resection. All responded well to chemotherapy. Survival using this protocol was 100%. A smaller series from
the Institute Gustave-Roussy reported recurrence in 2 of 12 boys followed without adjuvant chemotherapy or retroperitoneal lymph node dissection. Both were cured
by surgery and chemotherapy. 472

TABLE 44.2-15. Staging System for Yolk Sac Tumor of the Testis

The clinical behavior of testicular embryonal carcinomas is similar in teenagers and adults. Studies have demonstrated that adults with clinical stage I embryonal
carcinoma of the testes have positive retroperitoneal lymph nodes in approximately 30% of cases. 473 This earlier finding is supported by reports of a 28% relapse rate
in adults with stage I disease who were initially observed after radical orchiectomy. 474 A similar approach to localized disease in children was employed at the St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital where relapse with a pulmonary metastasis was seen in one of eight boys. 475 In many current protocols, children with clinical stage I
disease (i.e., no radiographically identifiable retroperitoneal tumor and falling serum markers) are followed after radical orchiectomy. Children with identifiable
retroperitoneal tumor frequently receive initial chemotherapy, with surgery reserved for residual masses or persistently elevated markers. Resection of
postchemotherapy residual masses in adults demonstrated that 45.0% had necrosis, 42.5% had teratoma, and 12.5% had viable germ cell tumor. 476 Both the North
American and European pediatric cooperative groups currently employ this strategy of surgery alone followed by close surveillance in children with stage I germ cell
tumors, regardless of site or histology.
Children with yolk sac tumors of the testis rarely require bilateral retroperitoneal lymph node dissection for adequate staging. The procedure results are usually
negative, but the procedure carries a substantial risk of producing impotence and retrograde ejaculation. In one series, only 2 of 49 bilateral retroperitoneal lymph
node dissections and 4 of 29 unilateral retroperitoneal lymph node dissections performed in children with yolk sac tumor of the testis were positive. 51 The percentage
of positive retroperitoneal lymph node dissections was not influenced by the age of the patient. Since this diagnostic procedure carries substantial potential morbidity
and infrequently provides information that will change the stage or influence therapy, retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy should be avoided.
CHEMOTHERAPY. Current therapeutic practice reserves chemotherapy for children with either advanced stage disease, recurrent localized tumors, or children with

stage I disease whose tumor markers fail to decline following orchiectomy. Inclusion of chemotherapy in the treatment of children with stage I disease has not
provided a statistically significant advantage in relapse-free survival.
The application of combination chemotherapy to the treatment of children with advanced stage or recurrent yolk sac tumor has proceeded from the use of similar
programs for the management of adults with nonseminomatous germ cell tumors of the testis. The first effective combinations included dactinomycin, chlorambucil,

and methotrexate or dactinomycin, vincristine, and cyclophosphamide. 51 Unfortunately, neither of these regimens significantly increased the number of patients with
advanced abdominal or pulmonary metastatic disease who achieved long-term, disease-free survival.
Subsequent identification of bleomycin and cisplatinum as active agents against testicular germ cell tumors, however, has substantially improved survival for patients
with disseminated disease. The Einhorn regimen, consisting of cisplatin, vinblastine, and bleomycin (PVB), was developed at the Indiana University Medical Center in
1974. It has been active against embryonal carcinoma, teratocarcinoma, choriocarcinoma, and yolk sac tumor of the testis. 428 The addition of doxorubicin did not
increase the complete response rate. The activity of this three-drug combination has been confirmed by several groups of investigators. Increasing the dose intensity
of cisplatin does not improve the response rate or survival rate, but does increase the toxicity of the PVB regimen. 477 Substitution of etoposide for vinblastine in the
PVB regimen did not change the response rate and substantially decreased the toxicity of the chemotherapy regimen. 478,479 In light of the pulmonary toxicity of
bleomycin, multiple studies have been conducted to assess the value of continued inclusion of this agent in platinum-based regimens. Although several randomized
adult studies suggest that bleomycin may be deleted from the cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin combination based on comparable response rates with and without
this agent, there were sufficient differences in overall and relapse-free survival to recommend its continued use. 480,481 and 482 In view of impressive responses to
alternative regimens using ifosfamide and etoposide and a United Kingdom study that effectively substituted carboplatinum for cisplatinum, there are now several
potentially less toxic chemotherapy options that need to be prospectively tested. 483,484,485 and 486
The same guidelines for management of young children with yolk sac tumors of the testis should be applied to adolescents with malignant germ cell tumors.
Teenagers with stage I nonseminomatous germ cell tumors may be managed with close surveillance. 487 Those with more advanced stage disease should receive
platinum-based combination chemotherapy.
OVARY
Ovarian tumors account for approximately 25% of all pediatric germ cell tumors. The majority of these tumors arise later in childhood, with a peak incidence at 10
years of age. Most of these tumors are benign mature cystic teratomas, although nearly one-third contain malignant elements. In contrast to adult ovarian tumors,
malignancies of epithelial or stromal cell origin are uncommon in children. The most common pediatric ovarian neoplasias are dysgerminomas and yolk sac tumors.
Immature teratomas account for approximately 10% of ovarian masses. 426,429,488,489
Clinical Presentation
Patients with ovarian tumors present with abdominal pain or an abdominal mass. The pain may be severe due to torsion of the ovarian pedicle by the ovary and
tumor.490 Fever is present in 24% of patients at the time of diagnosis.
Preoperative radiographic evaluation should include studies that localize the mass to the ovary. A plain abdominal radiograph should be obtained and examined for
the presence of calcification. Abdominal ultrasonography demonstrates whether the mass is cystic in nature. CT provides more detailed information about the site of
origin of the tumor. In patients with suspected ovarian germ cell tumors, serum levels of AFP and HCG should be assayed before diagnostic or therapeutic surgical
intervention. Once the tissue diagnosis is established, the potential sites of metastatic disease should be examined. Possible sites of dissemination include peritoneal
implants, retroperitoneal lymph nodes, lung, liver, and bone. There has been considerable controversy regarding the proper risk group stratification and treatment of
patients with immature teratomas and gliomatosis peritonei (peritoneal seeding with mature glial tissue). In general, immature teratomas are treated with surgery
alone. The controversy resides in questions about the appropriateness of surgery alone for immature teratomas that have extensively seeded the omentum and
peritoneal surfaces. In a report by POG/CCG documenting 135 cases of childhood immature teratomas, 22 of 86 cases of ovarian immature teratoma were
characterized by gliomatosis peritonei. Investigators on this study found that this feature had no adverse effect on outcome in patients treated with surgery alone. 491
Only the finding of microscopic foci of malignant yolk sac tumor in immature teratomas correlated with poor prognosis, mandating inclusion of adjuvant chemotherapy
for this small subset of children. These same authors note that while modest elevations of AFP (less than 60) may be recorded in children with immature teratomas
without malignant elements, nearly all patients with AFP greater than 100 have occult foci of malignant yolk sac tumor. 491
Staging
Staging evaluation should include CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, in addition to bone scintigraphy with technetium 99m pertechnetate. Ovarian tumors are
staged using the POG/CCG staging system, which represents a simplified derivation of the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging
system425,492 (Table 44.2-16).

TABLE 44.2-16. Pediatric Oncology Group/Children's Cancer Group Staging System for Pediatric Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors

Treatment Planning
SURGERY. Surgical exploration of an ovarian mass must accomplish two goals: resection of the primary tumor and adequate staging. Peritoneal fluid should be

aspirated for cytology. If no fluid is present, peritoneal washings should be obtained. Any peritoneal seeding should be biopsied and a partial or complete
omentectomy performed. Ipsilateral lymph nodes should be examined and biopsies taken from the iliac, low periaortic, or pericaval nodes and the periaortic or
pericaval nodes at the level of the renal vessels. The contralateral ovary should be examined closely, and if nodules are present, particularly in dysgerminomas or
teratomas, a biopsy should be obtained. With current techniques available for in utero fertilization, increasing efforts are taken to preserve the fallopian tube and
uterus in cases in which both ovaries must be resected. 493
CHEMOTHERAPY. Combination chemotherapy with VAC was employed in the 1970s in two small series of pediatric patients with ovarian yolk sac tumor. These early

studies demonstrated that improved survival could be achieved with inclusion of chemotherapy in treatment of patients with stage I and II disease. 494,495 Results of
these pediatric trials were consistent with the outcomes of studies in adults with ovarian yolk sac tumor that documented similar improvements in survival with
adjuvant VAC chemotherapy.496,497 Neither study reported the response rate of women with advanced ovarian yolk sac tumor to VAC.
Closely paralleling the chronology and evolution of chemotherapy for testicular germ cell tumors, subsequent clinical trials for ovarian germ cell tumors employed the
combination of PVB in the treatment of women with advanced ovarian germ cell tumors. In one series, the response rate was 91%, with six women achieving a
complete response.498 Several other investigators have reported activity of the PVB combination against a variety of ovarian germ cell tumor histologies. 499,500 Current
pediatric practice uses the cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin regimen for treatment of primary nonlocalized or recurrent ovarian germ cell tumors. This regimen has
produced survival rates exceeding 90% for localized and advanced stage ovarian germ cell tumors in children. 425
RADIATION THERAPY. With the advent of such effective chemotherapy for ovarian germ cell tumors, the current role of radiation therapy is uncertain. No radiation

therapy is given for histologies other than dysgerminoma if surgery and chemotherapy render the child free of disease. 434 In the unusual situation in which there is

persistent disease after initial surgery, chemotherapy, and a second-look operation, 40 Gy is recommended.
Treatment options for ovarian dysgerminoma are more complex. Dysgerminomas are curable with irradiation, with one small pediatric study documenting a 5-year
overall survival of 94%. Unfortunately, this same study described extensive late sequelae to radiation therapy, including infertility, dysmenorrhea, hypogonadism, and
pelvic fibrosis. 501 Given the morbidity of pelvic irradiation and the exquisite chemosensitivity of this tumor, radiation should be reserved for second-line therapy in
patients who have relapsed following surgery and chemotherapy. In those rare cases in which radiation therapy is indicated, doses required for dysgerminoma are 20
to 25 Gy, with a boost to gross residual disease to a total dose of 35 to 40 Gy. 493
MEDIASTINUM
Germ cell tumors of the thoracic cavity typically arise in the anterior mediastinum of adolescent boys. While the majority of these tumors are benign teratomas,
malignant yolk sac tumor and choriocarcinoma have been identified in this location. 502,503 Several patients with Klinefelter's syndrome have developed yolk sac
tumors.504 The clinical presentation is characterized by a brief history of cough, dyspnea, and chest pain due to tracheobronchial compression.
Routine chest radiographs may demonstrate an incidental anterior mediastinal mass. The diagnosis is established by biopsy of the primary tumor at thoracotomy or
mediastinoscopy, or by biopsy of an involved supraclavicular lymph node. Staging studies, including a bone scan, skeletal survey, bone marrow aspirate, and biopsy,
should be performed immediately after tissue diagnosis is established.
The results of therapy have improved with the use of cisplatin-containing chemotherapy regimens, with approximately 40% of patients being relapse-free
survivors. 454,498,502
There are insufficient data available to evaluate the relative importance of surgical excision, local irradiation, and combination chemotherapy in the management of
patients with yolk sac tumor of the mediastinum. Frequently, therapeutic failure is due to local progression of the tumor. Since achieving complete surgical excision in
this site may be difficult, therapeutic morbidity may be minimized by treating malignant tumors with neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by delayed resection.
Treatment outcomes have improved with the application of cisplatinum-based chemotherapy regimens. 454,499,503
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Ries LAG, Smith MA, Gurney JG, et al., eds. Cancer incidence and survival among children and adolescents: United States SEER Program 19751995. National Cancer Institute, SEER
Program. NIH Publication No. 99-4649, Bethesda, MD, 1999.
2. Guyer B, Hoyert DL, Martin JA, et al. Annual summary of vital statistics1998. Pediatrics 1999;104:1229.
3. Buckley JD, Sather H, Ruccione K, et al. A case-control study of risk factors for hepatoblastoma. A report from the Children's Cancer Study Group. Cancer 1989;64:1169.
4. Grufferman S, Schwartz AG, Ruymann FB, Maurer HM. Parents' use of cocaine and marijuana and increased risk of rhabdomyosarcoma in their children. Cancer Causes Control 1993;4:217.
5. Grufferman S, Wang HH, DeLong ER, et al. Environmental factors in the etiology of rhabdomyosarcoma in childhood. J Natl Cancer Inst 1982;68:107.
6. Bunin GR, Kramer S, Marrero O, Meadows AT. Gestational risk factors for Wilms' tumor: results of a case-control study. Cancer Res 1987;47:2972.
7. Olshan AF, Breslow NE, Falletta JM, et al. Risk factors for Wilms' tumor. Report from the National Wilms' Tumor Study. Cancer 1993;72:938.
8. Olshan AF, Breslow NE, Daling JR, et al. Wilms' tumor and paternal occupation. CancerRes 1990;50:3212.
9. Bunin GR, Petrakova A, Meadows AT, et al. Occupation of parents of children with retinoblastoma. A report from the Children's Cancer Study Group. Cancer Res 1990;50:7129.
10. Bunin GR, Meadows AT, Emanuel BS, et al. Pre- and postconception factors associated with sporadic heritable and nonheritable retinoblastoma. Cancer Res 1989;49:5730.
11. Schwartzman JA. Influence of the mother's prenatal drug consumption on risk of neuroblastoma in the child. Am J Epidemiol 1992;135:1358.
12. Kramer S, Ward E, Meadows AT, Malone KE. Medical and drug risk factors associated with neuroblastoma: a case-control study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;78:797.
13. Coppes MJ, Higuchi M, Liefers GJ, et al. Inherited WT1 mutation in Denys-Drash syndrome. Cancer Res 1992;52:1.
14. Yandell DW, Campbell TA, Dayton SH, et al. Oncogenic point mutations in the human retinoblastoma gene: their application to genetic counseling. N Engl J Med 1989;321:1689.
15. Kurahashi H, Takami K, Oue T, et al. Biallelic inactivation of the APC gene in hepatoblastoma. Cancer Res 1995;55:5007.
16. Cawthon RM, Weiss R, Xu G, et al. A major segment of the neurofibromatosis type 1 gene: cDNA sequence, genomic structure, and point mutations. Cell 1990;62:193.
17. Li FP, Fraumeni JF Jr, Mulvihill JJ, et al. A cancer family syndrome in twenty-four kindreds. Cancer Res 1988;48:5358.
18. Santibanez-Koref MF, Birch JM, Hartley AL, et al. p53 germline mutations in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Lancet 1991;338:1490.
19. Knudson AG. Mutation and cancer: statistical study of retinoblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1971;68:820.
20. Ejima Y, Sasaki MS, Kaneko A, Tanooka H. Types, rates, origin and expressivity of chromosome mutations involving 13q14 in retinoblastoma patients. Hum Genet 1988;79:118.
21. Cavenee WK, Dryja TP, Phillips RA, et al. Expression of recessive alleles by chromosomal mechanisms in retinoblastoma. Nature 1983;305:779.
22. Dryja TP, Mukai S, Petersen R, et al. Parental origin of mutations of the retinoblastoma gene. Nature 1989;339:556.
23. Huff V, Meadows A, Riccardi VM, Strong LC, Saunders GF. Parental origin of de novo constitutional deletions of chromosomal band 11p13. Am J Hum Genet 1990;47:155.
24. Koufos A, Hansen MF, Copeland NG, et al. Loss of heterozygosity in three embryonal tumors suggests a common pathogenetic mechanism. Nature 1985;316:330.
25. Breslow NE, Beckwith JB. Epidemiological features of Wilms tumor: results of the National Wilms Tumor Study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1982;68:429.
26. Breslow NE, Beckwith JB, Ciol M, Sharples K. Age distribution of Wilms tumor: report from the National Wilms Tumor Study. Cancer Res 1988;48:1653.
27. Parkin DM, Stiller CA, Draper GJ, et al., eds. International incidence of childhood cancer. Lyon: International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1988.
28. Breslow N, Olshan A, Beckwith JB, Green DM. Epidemiology of Wilms tumor. Med Pediatr Oncol 1993;21:172.
29. Miller RW, Fraumeni JF Jr, Manning MD. Association of Wilms' tumor with aniridia, hemihypertrophy and other congenital malformations. N Engl J Med 1964;270:922.
30. Franco EL, de Camargo B, Saba L, Marques LA. Epidemiological and clinical correlations with genetic characteristics of Wilms' tumor: results of the Brazilian Wilms' Tumor Study Group. Int J
Cancer 1991;48:641.
31. Bonaiti-Pellie C, Chompret A, Tournade MF, et al. Genetics and epidemiology of Wilms' tumor: the French Wilms' Tumor Study. Med Pediatr Oncol 1992;20:284.
32. Drash A, Sherman F, Hartmann WH, Blizzard RM. A syndrome of pseudohermaphroditism, Wilms tumor, hypertension and degenerative renal disease. J Pediatr 1970;76:585.
33. Denys P, Malvaux P, Van Den Berghe H, Tanghe W, Proesmans W. Association d'un syndrome anatomo-pathologique de pseudohermaphroditism masculin, d'une tumeur de Wilms, d'une
nephropathie parenchymateuse et d'un mosaicism XX hXY. Arch Fr Pediatr 1967;24:729.
34. Coppes MJ, Huff V, Pelletier J. Denys-Drash syndrome: relating a clinical disorder to genetic alterations in the tumor suppressor gene WT1. J Pediatr 1993;123:673.
35. Breslow N, Olson J, Moksness J, Beckwith JB, Grundy P. Familial Wilms tumor: a descriptive study. Med Pediatr Oncol 1996;27:398.
36. Beckwith JB, Kiviat NB, Bonadio J. Nephrogenic rests, nephroblastomatosis and the pathogenesis of Wilms tumor. Pediatr Pathol 1990;10:1.
37. Murphy WM, Beckwith JB, Farrow GM. Atlas of tumor pathology. 3rd Series. Fascicle 11. Tumors of the kidney, bladder, and related urinary structures. Washington, DC: Armed Forces Institute
of Pathology, 1994.
38. Faria P, Beckwith JB, Kishra K, et al. Focal versus diffuse anaplasia in Wilms tumor: new definitions with prognostic significance. A report from the National Wilms Tumor Study Group. Am J
Surg Pathol 1996;20:909.
39. Beckwith JB, Palmer NF. Histopathology and prognosis of Wilms tumor. Results of the National Wilms Tumor Study. Cancer 1978;41:1937.
40. Marsden HB, Lawler W, Kumar PM. Bone metastasizing renal tumor of childhood. Cancer 1978;42:1922.
41. Haase HE, Bonadio JF, Beckwith BJ. Clear cell sarcoma of the kidney with emphasis on ultrastructural studies. Cancer 1984;54:2978.
42. Schmidt D, Harms D, Evers KG, Bliesener JA, Beckwith JB. Bone metastasizing renal tumor (clear cell sarcoma) of childhood with epithelioid elements. Cancer 1985;56:609.
43. Weeks DA, Beckwith JB, Mierau GW, Luckey DW. Rhabdoid tumor of kidney. Am J Surg Pathol 1989;13:439.
44. Bonnin JM, Rubinstein LJ, Palmer NF, Beckwith JB. The association of embryonal tumors originating in the kidney and in the brain. Cancer 1984;54:2137.
45. White FV, Dehner LP, Belchis DA, et al. Congenital disseminated malignant rhabdoid tumor: a distinct clinicopathologic entity demonstrating abnormalities of chromosome 22q11. Am J Surg
Pathol 1999;23:249.
46. Rousseau-Merck MF, Versteege I, Couturier J, et al. hSNFS/INI1 inactivation is mainly associated with homozygous deletions and mitotic recombinations in rhabdoid tumors. Cancer Res
1999;59:3152.
47. Biege JA, Zhou JY, Rourke LB, et al. Germline and acquired mutations of INI1 in atypical teratoid and rhabdoid tumors. Cancer Res 1999;59:74.
48. Bove KE, McAdams AJ. The nephroblastomatosis complex and its relationship to Wilms' tumor: a clinicopathological treatise. Perspect Pediatr Pathol 1976;3:185.
49. Shanklin DR, Sotelo-Avila C. In situ tumors in fetuses, newborns and young infants. Biol Neonate 1969;14:286.
50. Bolande RP, Brough AJ, Izant RJ Jr. Congenital mesoblastic nephroma of infancy. Pediatrics 1967;40:272.
51. Green DM. Diagnosis and management solid tumors in infants and children. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff, 1985.
52. Jayabose S, Iqbal K, Newman L, et al. Hypercalcemia in childhood renal tumors. Cancer 1988;61:788.
53. Ng YY, Hall-Graggs MA, Dicks-Mireaux C, Pritchard J. Wilms' tumor: pre- and post-chemotherapy CT appearances. Clin Radiol 1991;43:255.
54. Ritchey ML, Green DM, Breslow N, Moksness J, Norkool P. Accuracy of current imaging modalities in the diagnosis of synchronous bilateral Wilms tumor: a report from the National Wilms
Tumor Study Group. Cancer 1995;75:600.
55. Nakayama DK, deLorimier AA, O'Neill JA, Norkool P, D'Angio GJ. Intracardiac extension of Wilms' tumor. A report of the National Wilms' Tumor Study. Ann Surg 1986;204:693.
56. Ritchey ML, Kelalis PP, Haase GM, et al. Preoperative therapy for intracaval and atrial extension of Wilms tumor. Cancer 1993;71:4104.
57. Wilimas JA, Kaste SC, Kauffman WM, et al. Use of chest computed tomography in the staging of pediatric Wilms' tumor: interobserver variability and prognostic significance. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:2631.
58. Feusner JH, Beckwith JB, D'Angio GJ. Clear cell sarcoma of the kidney: accuracy of imaging methods for detecting bone metastases. Report from the National Wilms' Tumor Study. Med
Pediatr Oncol 1990;18:225.
59. Gururangan S, Wilimas JA, Fletcher BD. Bone metastases in Wilms' tumorreport of three cases and review of literature. Pediatr Radiol 1994;24:85.
60. Green DM, Breslow NE, Beckwith JB, et al. The treatment of children with clear cell sarcoma of the kidney. A report from the National Wilms Tumor Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2132.
61. Shamberger RC, Guthrie KA, Ritchey ML, et al. Surgery-related factors and local recurrence of Wilms' tumor in National Wilms' Tumor Study 4. Ann Surg 1999;229:292.
62. Ritchey ML, Etzioni R, Breslow N, et al. Surgical complications following nephrectomy for Wilms' tumor. A report of NWTS-3. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1992;175:507.
63. Ritchey ML, Kelalis PP, Etzioni R, et al. Small bowel obstruction following nephrectomy for Wilms tumor: a report of NWTS-3. Ann Surg 1993;218:654.
64. Godzinski J, Tournade MF, deKraker J, et al. Rarity of surgical complications after postchemotherapy nephrectomy for nephroblastoma. Experience of the International Society of Paediatric
Oncologytrial and study “SIOP-9.” Eur J Pediatr Surg 1998;8:83.

65. D'Angio GJ, Evans AE, Breslow N, et al. The treatment of Wilms' tumor. Cancer 1976;38:633.
66. Lemerle J, Voute PA, Tournade MF, et al. Preoperative versus post-operative radiotherapy, single versus multiple courses of actinomycin D in the treatment of Wilms' tumor. Cancer
1976;38:647.
67. D'Angio GJ, Evans AE, Breslow N, et al. The treatment of Wilms' tumor: results of the second national Wilms' tumor study. Cancer 1981;47:2302.
68. Shamberger RC, Guthrie KA, Ritchey ML, et al. Surgery related factors and local recurrence of Wilms' tumor in National Wilms' Tumor Study 4.6. Ann Surg 1999;229:292.
69. Lemerle J, Voute PA, Tournade MF, et al. Effectiveness of preoperative chemotherapy in Wilms' tumor: results of an International Society of Paediatric Oncology (SIOP) clinical trial. J Clin
Oncol 1983;1:604.
70. Tournade MF, Com-Hougue C, Voute PA, et al. Results of the sixth International Society of Pediatric Oncology Wilms tumor trial and study: a risk-adapted therapeutic approach in Wilms
tumor. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1014.
71. Godzinski J, Tournade MF, deKraker J, et al. The role of preoperative chemo in the treatment of nephroblastoma: the SIOP experience. Semin Urol Oncol 1998;17:28.
72. Othersen HB Jr, DeLorimier A, Hrabovsky E, et al. Surgical evaluation of lymph node metastases in Wilms' tumor. J Pediatr Surg 1990;25:330.
73. Zuppan CW, Beckwith JB, Weeks DA, Luckey DW, Pringle KC. Effect of preoperative therapy on the histologic features of Wilms' tumor. An analysis of cases from the Third National Wilms'
Tumor Study. Cancer 1991;68:385.
74. Moorman-Voestermans CGM, Staalman CR, Delamarre JFM. Partial nephrectomy in unilateral Wilms tumor is feasible without local recurrence. Med Pediatr Oncol 1994;23:218(abst).
75. Novick AC, Gephardt G, Guz B, Steinmuller D, Tubbs RR. Long-term follow-up after partial removal of a solitary kidney. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1058.
76. Montgomery BT, Kelalis P, Blute ML, et al. Extended follow-up of bilateral Wilms' tumor: results of the National Wilms' Tumor Study. J Urol 1991;146:514.
77. Ritchey ML, Green DM, Thomas PRM, et al. Renal failure in Wilms tumor patients: a report from the National Wilms Tumor Study Group. Med Pediatr Oncol 1996;26:75.
78. Maes P, Delamarre J, deKraker J, Ninane J. Fetal rhabdomyomatous nephroblastoma: a tumor of good prognosis but resistant to chemotherapy. Eur J Cancer 1999;35:1356.
79. Saba LMB, deCamargo B, Gabriel-Arana M. Experience with six children with fetal rhabdomyomatous nephroblastoma: review of the clinical, biologic, and pathologic features. Med Pediatr
Oncol 1998;30:152.
80. Horwitz J, Ritchey M, Moksness J, et al. Renal salvage procedures in patients with synchronous bilateral Wilms' tumors: a report from the National Wilms' Tumor Study Group. J Pediatr Surg
1996;8:1020.
81. Kumar R, Fitzgerald R, Breatnach F. Conservative surgical management of bilateral Wilms' tumor: results of the United Kingdom Children's Cancer Study Group. J Urol 1998;160:1450.
82. Green DM, Breslow N, Ii Y, et al. The role of surgical excision in the management of relapsed Wilms' tumor patients with pulmonary metastases. J Pediatr Surg 1991;26:728.
83. Gross RE, Neuhauser EBD. Treatment of mixed tumors of the kidney in childhood. Pediatrics 1950;6:843.
84. Neuhauser EBD, Wittenborg MH, Berman CZ, Cohen J.Irradiation effects of roentgen therapy on the growing spine. Radiology 1952;59:637.
85. Tefft M, D'Angio GJ, Grant W III.Postoperative radiation therapy for residual Wilms' tumor. Cancer 1976;37:2768.
86. D'Angio GJ, Tefft M, Breslow N, Meyer JA. Radiation therapy of Wilms' tumor: results according to dose, field, post-operative timing and histology. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1978;4:769.
87. Thomas PRM, Tefft M, Farewell VT, et al. Abdominal relapses in irradiated second national Wilms' tumor study patients. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:1098.
88. D'Angio GJ, Breslow N, Beckwith JB, et al. The treatment of Wilms' tumor. Results of the Third National Wilms' Tumor Study. Cancer 1989;64:349.
89. Thomas PRM, Tefft M, Compaan PJ, et al. Results of two radiation therapy randomizations in the third National Wilms' Tumor Study. Cancer 1991;68:1703.
90. de Kraker J, Lemerle J, Voute PA, et al. Wilms' tumor with pulmonary metastases at diagnosis. The significance of primary chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1187.
91. Pritchard J, Imeson J, Barnes J, et al. Results of the United Kingdom Children's Cancer Study Group (UKCCSG) first Wilms' tumor study (UKW-1). J Clin Oncol 1995;13:124.
92. Green DM, Finkelstein JZ, Tefft M, Norkool P. Diffuse interstitial pneumonitis after pulmonary irradiation for metastatic Wilms' tumor. A report from the National Wilms' Tumor Study. Cancer
1989;63:450.
93. Wilimas JA, Douglass EC, Magil HL, Fitch S, Hustu HO. Significance of pulmonary computed tomography at diagnosis in Wilms' tumor. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1144.
94. Green DM, Fernbach DJ, Norkool P, Kollia G, D'Angio GJ. Treatment of Wilms' tumor patients with pulmonary metastases detected only with computerized tomography. J Clin Oncol
1991;9:1776.
95. Meisel JA, Guthrie KA, Breslow NE, Donaldson SS, Green DM. Significance and management of computed tomography detected pulmonary nodules: a report from the National Wilms' Tumor
Study Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:579.
96. Farber S. Chemotherapy in the treatment of leukemia and Wilms' tumor. JAMA 1966;198:826.
97. Green DM, Sallan SE, Krishan A. Actinomycin D in childhood acute lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:829.
98. Green DM. Evaluation of single-dose vincristine, actinomycin D and cyclophosphamide in childhood solid tumors. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:1517.
99. Green DM, Breslow NE, Evans I, et al. The effect of chemotherapy dose intensity on the hematological toxicity of the treatment for Wilms tumor. A report from the National Wilms' Tumor
Study. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1994;16:207.
100. Green DM, Breslow NE, Beckwith JB, et al. Effect of duration of treatment outcome and cost of treatment for Wilms' tumor: a report from the National Wilms' Tumor Study Group. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:3744.
101. Green D, Breslow N, Beckwith J, et al. Comparison between single-dose and divided-dose administration of dactinomycin and doxorubicin for patients with Wilms' tumor: a report from the
National Wilms' Tumor Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:237.
102. Breslow NE, Palmer NF, Hill LR, Buring J, D'Angio GJ. Wilms' tumor: prognostic factors for patients without metastases at diagnosis. Cancer 1978;41:1577.
103. Breslow N, Churchill G, Beckwith JB, et al. Prognosis for Wilms' tumor patients with nonmetastatic disease at diagnosisresults of the Second National Wilms' Tumor Study. J Clin Oncol
1985;3:521.
104. Breslow N, Sharples K, Beckwith JB, et al. Prognosis in nonmetastatic, favorable histology Wilms' tumor: results of the Third National Wilms' Tumor Study. Cancer 1991;68:2345.
105. Jaffe N, Cassady JR, Filler RM, Petersen R, Traggis D. Heterochromia and Horner syndrome associated with cervical and mediastinal neuroblastoma. J Pediatr 1975;87:75.
106. Triche TJ, Askin FB. Neuroblastoma and the differential diagnosis of small-, round-, blue cell tumors. Hum Pathol 1983;14:569.
107. Tsokos M, Linnoila RL, Chandra RS, Triche TJ. Neuron-specific enolase in the diagnosis of neuroblastoma and other small, round-cell tumors in children. Hum Pathol 1984;15:575.
108. Shimada H, Chatten J, Newton WA Jr, et al. Histopathologic prognostic factors in neuroblastic tumors. Definition of subtypes of ganglioneuroblastoma and an age-linked classification of
neuroblastomas. J Natl Cancer Inst 1984;73:405.
109. Joshi VV, Chatten J, Sather HN, Shimada H. Evaluation of the Shimada classification in advanced neuroblastoma with a special reference to the mitosis-karyorrhexis index. A report from the
Children's Cancer Study Group. Mod Pathol 1991;4:139.
110. Chatten J, Shimada H, Sather HN, et al. Prognostic value of histopathology in advanced neuroblastoma. A report from the Children's Cancer Study Group. Hum Pathol 1988;19:1187.
111. Joshi VV, Cantor AB, Altshuler G, et al. Recommendations for modification of terminology of neuroblastic tumors and prognostic significance of Shimada classification. A clinicopathologic study
of 213 cases for the Pediatric Oncology Group. Cancer 1992;69:2183.
112. Shimada H, Ambros IM, Dehner LP, et al. Terminology and morphologic criteria of neuroblastic tumors. Recommendations by the International Neuroblastoma Pathology Committee. Cancer
1999;86:349.
113. Shimada H, Abros IM, Dehner LP, et al. The International Neuroblastoma Pathology Classification (the Shimada system). Cancer 1999;86:364.
114. Schiebel E, Rechnitzer C, Fahrenkrug J, Hertz H. Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) in children with neutral crest tumours. Acta Paediatr Scand 1982;71:721.
115. Jones A, Groover R, Smithson W. Acute cerebellar encephalopathy (ACE): its natural history and relationship to neuroblastoma (NB). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1984;3:86(abst).
116. Telander RL, Smithson WA, Groover RV. Clinical outcome in children with acute cerebellar encephalopathy and neuroblastoma. J Pediatr Surg 1989;24:11.
117. Koh PS, Raffensperger JG, Berry S, et al. Long-term outcome in children with opsoclonus-myoclonus and ataxia and coincident neuroblastoma. J Pediatr 1994;125:712.
118. Hiyama E, Yokoyama T, Ichikawa T, et al. Poor outcome in patients with advanced stage neuroblastoma and coincident opsomyoclonus syndrome. Cancer 1994;74:1821.
119. Petruzzi MJ, de Alarcon PA. Neuroblastoma-associated opsoclonus-myoclonus treated with intravenously administered immune globulin G. J Pediatr 1995;127:328.
120. Fisher PG, Wechsler DS, Singer HS. Anti-Hu antibody in a neuroblastoma-associated paraneoplastic syndrome. Pediatr Neurol 1994;10:309.
121. Weinblatt ME, Heisel MA, Siegel SE. Hypertension in children with neurogenic tumors. Pediatrics 1983;71:947.
122. Nishi M, Miyake H, Takeda T, et al. Mass screening of neuroblastoma in Sapporo City, Japan. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1992;14:327.
123. Sawada T, Matsumura T, Kawakatsu H, et al. Long-term effects of mass screening for neuroblastoma in infancy. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1991;13:3.
124. Woods WG, Tuchman M, Bernstein ML, et al. Screening for neuroblastoma in North America. 2-year results from the Quebec project. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1992;14:312.
125. Bernstein ML, Leclerc JM, Bunin G, et al. A population-based study of neuroblastoma incidence, survival and mortality in North America. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:323.
126. Brossard J, Bernstein M, Lemieux B. Neuroblastoma: an enigmatic disease. Br Med Bull 1996;52:787.
127. Besho F. Is there a future for neuroblastoma mass screening? Med Pediatr Oncol 1998;31:106.
128. Evans AE, D'Angio GJ, Randolph J. A proposed staging for children with neuroblastoma. Cancer 1971;27:374.
129. Brodeur GM, Seeger RC, Barrett A, et al. International criteria for diagnosis, staging, and response to treatment in patients with neuroblastoma. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1874.
130. Evans AE, D'Angio GJ, Sather HN, et al. A comparison of four staging systems for localized and regional neuroblastoma: a report from the Children's Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol
1990;8:678.
131. Brodeur GM, Pritchard J, Berthold F, et al. Revisions of the international criteria for neuroblastoma diagnosis, staging, and response to treatment. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1466.
132. White SJ, Stuck KJ, Blane CE, Silver TM. Sonography of neuroblastoma. Am J Roentgenol 1983;141:465.
133. Ng YY, Kingston JE. The role of radiology in the staging of neuroblastoma. Clin Radiol 1993;47:226.
134. Foglia RP, Fonkalsrud EW, Feig SA, et al. Accuracy of diagnostic imaging as determined by delayed operative intervention in advanced neuroblastoma. J Pediatr Surg 1989;24:708.
135. Armstrong EA, Harwood-Nash DCF, Ritz CR, et al. CT of neuroblastomas and ganglioneuromas in children. Am J Roentgenol 1982;139:571.
136. Kaufman RA, Thrall JH, Keyes JW Jr, Brown ML, Zakem JF. False negative bone scans in neuroblastoma metastatic to the ends of long bones. Am J Roentgenol 1978;130:131.
137. Cozzutto C, De Bernardi B, Comelli A, Guarino M. Bone marrow biopsy in children: a study of 111 patients. Med Pediatr Oncol 1979;6:57.
138. Franklin IM, Pritchard J. Detection of bone marrow invasion by neuroblastoma is improved by sampling at two sites with both aspirates and trephine biopsies. J Clin Pathol 1983;36:1215.
139. Kushner BH, Cheung NKV, LaQuaglia MP, et al. Survival from locally invasive or widespread neuroblastoma without cytotoxic therapy. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:373.
140. Kaneko M, Iwakawa M, Ikebukuro K, et al. Complete resection is not required in patients with neuroblastoma under 1 year of age. J Pediatr Surg 1998;33:1690.
141. Haase GM, Wong KY, deLorimier AA, Sather HN, Hammond GD. Improvement in survival after excision of primary tumor in stage III neuroblastoma. J Pediatr Surg 1989;24:194.
142. Haase GM, Atkinson JB, Stram DO, Lukens JN, Matthay KK. Surgical management and outcome of locoregional neuroblastoma: comparison of the Children's Cancer Group and the
International staging systems. J Pediatr Surg 1995;30:289.
143. Shamberger RC, Allarde-Segundo A, Kozakewich HPW, Grier HE. Surgical management of stage III and IV neuroblastoma: resection before or after chemotherapy? J Pediatr Surg
1991;26:1113.
144. Adams GA, Shochat SJ, Smith EI, et al. Thoracic neuroblastoma: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Pediatr Surg 1993;28:372.
145. Morris JA, Shochat SJ, Smith EI, et al. Biological variables in thoracic neuroblastoma: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Pediatr Surg 1995;30:296.
146. Azizkhan RG, Shaw A, Chandler JG. Surgical complications of neuroblastoma resection. Surgery 1985;97:514.
147. Shamberger RC, Smith EI, Joshi VV, et al. The risk of nephrectomy during local control in abdominal neuroblastoma. J Pediatr Surg 1998;33:161.
148. Rees H, Markley MA, Kiely EM, et al. Diarrhea after resection of advanced abdominal neuroblastoma: a common management problem. Surgery 1998;123:568.
149. Ikeda H, August CS, Goldwein JW, et al. Sites of relapse in patients with neuroblastoma following bone marrow transplantation in relation to preparatory “debulking'' treatments. J Pediatr Surg
1992;27:1438.
150. Tsuchida Y, Yokoyama J, Kaneko M, et al. Therapeutic significance of surgery in advanced neuroblastoma: a report from the Study Group of Japan. J Pediatr Surg 1992;27:616.
151. Haase GM, O'Leary MC, Ramsay NKC, et al. Aggressive surgery combined with intensive chemotherapy improves survival in poor-risk neuroblastoma. J Pediatr Surg 1991;26:1119.
152. Kiely EM. The surgical challenge of neuroblastoma. J Pediatr Surg 1994;29:128.
153. Heij HA, Rutgers EJTH, Kraker J, Vos A. Intraoperative search for neuroblastoma by MIBG and radioguided surgery with the gamma detector. Med Pediatr Oncol 1997;28:171.
154. Hata Y, Uchino J, Sasaki F, et al. Kidney-preserving radical tumor resection in advanced neuroblastoma. J Pediatr Surg 1989;24:382.

155. Evans AE, Chatten J, D'Angio GJ, et al. A review of 17 IV-S neuroblastoma patients at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. Cancer 1980;45:833.
156. Martinez DA, King DR, Ginn-Pease ME, Haase GM, Wiener ES. Resection of the primary tumor is appropriate for children with stage IV-S neuroblastoma: an analysis of 37 patients. J Pediatr
Surg 1992;27:1016.
157. Gugielmi M, DeBernardi B, Rizzo A, et al. Resection of primary tumor at diagnosis in stage IV-S neuroblastoma: does it affect the clinical course? J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1537.
158. Katzenstein HM, Bowman LC, Brodeur GM, et al. Prognostic significance of age, MYCN oncogene amplification, tumor cell ploidy, and histology in 110 infants with stage D(S) neuroblastoma:
the Pediatric Oncology Group experiencea Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2007.
159. Lee EW, Applebaum H. Abdominal expansion as a bridging technique in stage IV-S neuroblastoma with massive hepatomegaly. J Pediatr Surg 1994;29:1470.
160. McGahren Ed, Rodgers BM, Waldron PE. Successful management of stage 4S neuroblastoma and severe hepatomegaly using absorbable mesh in an infant. J Pediatr Surg 1998;33:1554.
161. Ho PTC, Estroff JA, Kozakewich H, et al. Prenatal detection of neuroblastoma: a ten year experience from the Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Children's Hospital. Pediatrics 1993;92:358.
162. Holgersen LO, Subramaniam S, Kirpekar M, Mootabar H, Marcus JR. Spontaneous resolution of antenatally diagnosed adrenal masses. J Pediatr Surg 1996;31:153.
163. Wyatt GM, Farber S. Neuroblastoma sympatheticum. Am J Roentgenol 1941;46:485.
164. Rosen EM, Cassady JR, Frantz CN, et al. Neuroblastoma: the Joint Center for Radiation Therapy Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Children's Hospital experience. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:719.
165. Nitschke R, Smith EI, Shochat S, et al. Localized neuroblastoma treated by surgery: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1271.
166. Matthay KK, Sather HN, Seeger RC, Haase GM, Hammond GD. Excellent outcome of stage II neuroblastoma is independent of residual disease and radiation therapy. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:236.
167. Castleberry RP, Kun LE, Shuster JJ, et al. Radiotherapy improves the outlook for patients older than 1 year with Pediatric Oncology Group stage C neuroblastoma. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:789.
168. Matthay KK, Villablanca JG, Seeger RC, et al. Treatment of high-risk neuroblastoma with intensive chemotherapy, radiotherapy, autologous bone marrow transplantation, and 13-cis-retinoic
acid. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1165.
169. Frappaz D, Michou J, Coze C, et al. LMCE3 treatment strategy: results in 99 consecutively diagnosed stage 4 neuroblastomas in children older than 1 year at diagnosis. J Clin Oncol
2000;18:468.
170. Bowman LC, Hancock ML, Santana VM, et al. Impact of intensified therapy on clinical outcome in infants and children with neuroblastoma: the St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Experience, 1962 to 1988. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1599.
171. Sawaguchi S, Kaneko M, Uchino J-I, et al. Treatment of advanced neuroblastoma with emphasis on intensive induction chemotherapy. A report from the Study Group of Japan. Cancer
1990;66:1879.
172. Kushner BH, Gulati SC, Kwon J-H, et al. High-dose melphalan with 6-hydroxydopamine-purged autologous bone marrow transplantation for poor-risk neuroblastoma. Cancer 1991;68:242.
173. Matthay KK, Seeger RC, Reynolds CP, et al. Allogeneic versus autologous purged bone marrow transplantation for neuroblastoma: a report from the Children's Cancer Group. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:2382.
174. Shuster JJ, Cantor AB, McWilliams N, et al. The prognostic significance of autologous bone marrow transplant in advanced neuroblastoma. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1045.
175. Breslow N, McCann B. Statistical estimation of prognosis for children with neuroblastoma. Cancer Res 1971;31:2098.
176. Laug WE, Siegel SE, Shaw KNF, et al. Initial urinary catecholamine metabolite concentrations and prognosis in neuroblastoma. Pediatrics 1978;62:77.
177. Zeltzer PM, Marangos PJ, Parma AM, et al. Raised neuron-specific enolase in serum of children with metastatic neuroblastoma. Lancet 1983;2:361.
178. Shuster JJ, McWilliams NB, Castleberry R, et al. Serum lactate dehydrogenase in childhood neuroblastoma. A Pediatric Oncology Group recursive partitioning study. Am J Clin Oncol
1992;15:295.
179. Look AT, Hayes FA, Nitschke R, McWilliams NB, Green AA. Cellular DNA content as a predictor of response to chemotherapy in infants with unresectable neuroblastoma. N Engl J Med
1984;311:231.
180. Brodeur GM, Seeger RC, Schwab M, Varmus HE, Bishop JM. Amplification of N-myc in untreated human neuroblastomas correlates with advanced disease stage. Science 1984;224:1121.
181. Nakagawara A, Arima-Nakagawara M, Scavarda NJ, et al. Association between high levels of expression of the TRK gene and favorable outcome in human neuroblastoma. N Engl J Med
1993;328:847.
182. Look AT, Hayes FA, Shuster JJ, et al. Clinical relevance of tumor cell ploidy and N-myc gene amplification in childhood neuroblastoma: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol
1991;9:581.
183. Joshi VV, Cantor AB, Brodeur GM, et al. Correlations between morphologic and other prognostic markers of neuroblastoma. A study of histologic grade, DNA index, N-myc gene copy number,
and lactic dehydrogenase in patients in the Pediatric Oncology Group. Cancer 1993;71:3173.
184. Allderdice PW, Davis JG, Miller OJ, et al. The 13qdeletion syndrome. Am J Hum Genet 1969;21:499.
185. Noel B, Quack B, Rethore MO. Partial deletions and trisomies of chromosome 13. Mapping of bands associated with particular malformations. Clin Genet 1976;9:593.
186. Matsunaga E. Hereditary retinoblastoma. Penetrance, expressivity and age at onset. Hum Genet 1976;33:1.
187. Vogel F. Genetics of retinoblastoma. Hum Genet 1979;51:1.
188. Nussbaum R, Puck J. Recurrence risks for retinoblastoma: a model for autosomal dominant disorders with complex inheritance. J Pediatr Ophthalmol 1976;13:89.
189. Sanborn GE, Augsburger JJ, Shields JA. Spontaneous regression of bilateral retinoblastoma. Br J Ophthalmol 1982;66:685.
190. Margo C, Hidayat A, Kopelman J, Zimmerman LE. Retinocytoma. A benign variant of retinoblastoma. Arch Ophthalmol 1983;101:1519.
191. Ellsworth RM. The practical management of retinoblastoma. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc 1969;67:462.
192. Sang DN, Albert DM. Retinoblastoma: clinical and histopathologic features. Hum Pathol 1982;13:133.
193. Schantz PM, Meyer D, Glickman LT. Clinical, serologic and epidemiologic characteristics of ocular toxocariasis. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1979;28:24.
194. Shields JA, Leonard BC, Michelson JB, Sarin LK. B-scan ultrasonography in the diagnosis of atypical retinoblastomas. Can J Ophthalmol 1976;11:42.
195. Danziger A, Price HI. CT findings in retinoblastoma. Am J Roentgenol 1979;133:783.
196. Freeman CR, Esseltine D-L, Whitehead VM, Chevalier L, Little JM. Retinoblastoma: the case for radiotherapy and for adjuvant chemotherapy. Cancer 1980;46:1913.
197. Pratt CB, Meyer D, Chenaille P, Crom DB. The use of bone marrow aspirations and lumbar punctures at the time of diagnosis of retinoblastoma. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:140.
198. Pratt CB, Crom DB, Magill L, Chenaille P, Meyer D. Skeletal scintigraphy in patients with bilateral retinoblastoma. Cancer 1990;65:26.
199. Martin H, Reese AB. Treatment of retinoblastoma (retinal glioma) surgically and by irradiation. Arch Ophthalmol 1942;27:40.
200. Martin H, Reese AB. Treatment of bilateral retinoblastoma (retinal glioma) surgically and by irradiation. Arch Ophthalmol 1945;33:429.
201. Reese AB, Ellsworth RM. The evaluation and current concept of retinoblastoma therapy. Trans Am Acad Ophthalmol Otolaryngol 1963;67:164.
202. Howarth C, Meyer D, Hustu HO, et al. Stage-related combined modality treatment of retinoblastoma. Cancer 1980;45:851.
203. Pratt CB, Fontanesi J, Lu X, et al. Proposal for a new staging scheme for introcular and extrocular retinoblastoma based on an analysis of 103 globes. Oncologist 1997;2:1.
204. Howard RD, Ellsworth RM. Findings in the peripheral fundi of patients with retinoblastoma. Am J Ophthalmol 1966;62:243.
205. Cassady JR. Retinoblastoma: questions in management. In: Carter SK, Glatstein E, Livingston RB, eds. Principles of cancer treatment. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1982:891.
206. Brown DH. The clinicopathology of retinoblastoma. Am J Ophthalmol 1966;61:508.
207. Stannard C, Lipper S, Sealy R, Sevel D. Retinoblastoma: correlation of invasion of the optic nerve and choroid with prognosis and metastasis. Br J Ophthalmol 1979;63:560.
208. Hopping W, Meyer-Schwickerath G. Light coagulation treatment in retinoblastoma. In: Boniuk M, ed. Ocular and adnexal tumors. St Louis: Mosby, 1964:192.
209. Lincoff H. A report on the freezing of intraocular tumors. Mod Probl Ophthalmol 1968;7:348.
210. Lincoff H, McLean J, Long R. The cryosurgical treatment of intraocular tumors. Am J Ophthalmol 1967;63:389.
211. Faris BM, Tarakji MS, Baghdassarian SA, To'mey KF. The role of cryotherapy in the management of early lesions of retinoblastoma. Ann Ophthalmol 1978;10:1005.
212. Abramson DH, Ellsworth RM, Rozakis GW. Cryotherapy for retinoblastoma. Arch Ophthalmol 1982;100:1253.
213. Shields JA, Parsons H, Shields CL, Giblin ME. The role of cryotherapy in the management of retinoblastoma. Am J Ophthalmol 1989;108:260.
214. Weiss DR, Cassady JR, Petersen R. Retinoblastoma: a modification in radiation therapy technique. Radiology 1975;114:705.
215. Donaldson SS. Retinoblastoma. In: Levine AS, ed. Cancer in the young. New York: Masson, 1982:683.
216. McCormick B, Ellsworth R, Abramson D, et al. Radiation therapy for retinoblastoma: comparison of results with lens-sparing versus lateral beam techniques. Int J Rad Oncol Biol Phys
1988;15:567.
217. Kooy HM, Dunbar SF, Tarbell NJ, et al. Adaptation and verification of the relocatable Gill-Thomas-Cosman frame in stereotactic radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:685.
218. Abramson DH, Ellsworth RM, Tretter P, Javitt J, Kitchin FD. Treatment of bilateral groups I through IV retinoblastoma with bilateral radiation. Arch Ophthalmol 1981;99:1761.
219. Abramson DH, Ronner HJ, Ellsworth RM. Second tumors in nonirradiated bilateral retinoblastoma. Am J Ophthalmol 1979;87:624.
220. Wong FL, Boice JD, Abramson D, et al. Cancer incidence after retinoblastoma. Radiation dose and sarcoma risk. JAMA 1997;278:1262.
221. Rootman J, Ellsworth RM, Hofbauer J, Kitchin D. Orbital extension of retinoblastoma: a clinicopathologic study. Can J Ophthalmol 1978;13:72.
222. Halperin EC, Constine LS, Tarbell NJ, Kun LE. Pediatric radiation oncology, 2nd ed. New York: Raven Press, 1994:140.
223. Wolff JA, Boesel CP, Dyment PG, et al. Treatment of retinoblastoma. A preliminary report. In: Raybaud C, Clement R, Lebreuil G, Bernard JL, eds. Pediatric oncology. Amsterdam: Excerpta
Medica, 1982:364.
224. Pratt CB, Crom DB, Howarth C. The use of chemotherapy for extraocular retinoblastoma. Med Pediatr Oncol 1985;13:330.
225. Pratt CB, Fontanesi J, Chenaille P, et al. Chemotherapy for extraocular retinoblastoma. Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1994;11:301.
226. Advani SH, Rao SR, Iyer RS, et al. Pilot study of sequential combination chemotherapy in advanced and recurrent retinoblastoma. Med Pediatr Oncol 1994;22:125.
227. Schvartzman E, Chantada G, Fandino A, et al. Results of a stage-based protocol for the treatment of retinoblastoma. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1532.
228. Doz F, Neuenschwander S, Plantaz D, et al. Etoposide and carboplatin in extraocular retinoblastoma: a study by the Société Franscaise d'Oncologie Pediatrique. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:902.
229. Doz F, Khelfaoui F, Mosseri V, et al. The role of chemotherapy in orbital involvement of retinoblastoma. The experience of a single institution with 33 patients. Cancer 1994;74:722.
230. Shields CL, DePotter P, Himelstein BP, et al. Chemoreduction in the initial management of intraocular retinoblastoma. Arch Ophthalmol 1996;114:1330.
231. Gallie BL, Budning A, DeBoer G, et al. Chemotherapy with focal therapy can cure introcular retinoblastoma. Arch Ophthalmol 1996;114:1321.
232. Kingston JE, Hungerford JL, Madreperla SA, Plowman PN. Results of combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy for advanced intraocular retinoblastoma. Arch Ophthalmol 1996;114:1339.
233. Murphree AL, Villablanca JG, Deegan WF III, et al. Chemotherapy plus local treatment in the management of intraocular retinoblastoma. Arch Ophthalmol 1996;114:1348.
234. Friedman DL, Himelstein B, Shields CL, et al. Chemoreduction and local ophthalmic therapy for intraocular retinoblastoma. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:12.
235. Chan HSL, DeBoer G, Thiessen JJ, et al. Combining cyclosporin with chemotherapy controls intraocular retinoblastoma without requiring radiation. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:1499.
236. Greenwald MJ, Strauss LC, Correspondence RE, et al. Combining cyclosporin with chemotherapy controls intraocular retinoblastoma without requiring radiation. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:491.
237. Rubnitz JE, Crist WM. Molecular genetics of childhood cancer: implications for pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment. Pediatrics 1997;100:101.
238. Felix CA, Kappel CC, Mitsudo I. Frequency and diversity of p53 mutations in childhood rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer Res 1992;52:2247.
239. Matsui I, Tanimura M, Kobayashi N, et al. Neurofibromatosis type 1 and childhood cancer. Cancer 1993;72:2746.
240. Shearer P, Parham DI, Kovnar E, et al. Neurofibromatosis type 1 and malignancy: review of 32 pediatric cases treated at a single institution. Med Pediatr Oncol 1994;22:78.
241. Pappo AS, Shapiro DN, Crist WM, et al. Biology and therapy of pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2123.
242. Wexler LH, Helman LJ. Rhabdomyosarcoma and the undifferentiated sarcomas. In: Pizzo PA, Poplack DG, eds. Principles and practice of pediatric oncology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott,
1987:799.
243. Horn RC Jr, Enterline HT. Rhabdomyosarcoma: a clinicopathological study and classification of 39 cases. Cancer 1958;11:181.
244. Tsokos M, Webber BL, Parham DM, et al. Rhabdomyosarcoma. A new classification scheme related to prognosis. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1992;116:847.
245. Palmer NG, Sachs N, Foulkes M. Histopathology and prognosis in rhabdomyosarcomas (IRS-1). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1982;1:170(abst).
246. Caillaud JM, Gerard-Marchant R, Marsden HB, et al. Histopathological classification of childhood rhabdomyosarcoma: a report from the International Society of Pediatric Oncology Pathology
Panel. Med Pediatr Oncol 1989;17:391.
247. Asmar L, Gehan EA, Newton WA, et al. Agreement among and within groups of pathologists in the classification of rhabdomyosarcomas and related childhood sarcomas. Cancer 1994;74:2579.
248. Newton WA Jr, Gehan EA, Webber BL, et al. Classification of rhabdomyosarcomas and related sarcomas. Pathologic aspects and proposal for a new classificationan Intergroup

Rhabdomyosarcoma Study. Cancer 1995;76:1073.
249. Arndt CA, Crist WM. Medical progress: common musculoskeletal tumors of childhood and adolescence. N Engl J Med 1999;341:342.
250. Cohen M, Smith WL, Weetman R, Provisor A. Pulmonary pseudometastases in children with malignant tumors. Radiology 1981;141:371.
251. Quddus FF, Espinola D, Kramer SS, Leventhal BG. Comparison between x-ray and bone scan detection of bone metastases in patients with rhabdomyosarcoma. Med Pediatr Oncol
1983;11:125.
252. Weinblatt ME, Miller JH. Radionuclide scanning in children with rhabdomyosarcoma. Med Pediatr Oncol 1981;9:293.
253. Hutchinson RJ, Shapiro SA, Raney RB Jr. Elevated parathyroid hormone levels in association with rhabdomyosarcoma. J Pediatr 1978;92:780.
254. Ruymann FB, Newton WA Jr, Ragab AH, Donaldson MH, Foulkes M. Bone marrow metastases at diagnosis in children and adolescents with rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer 1984;53:368.
255. Kuttesch JF Jr, Parham DM, Kaste SC, et al. Embryonal malignancies of unknown primary origin in children. Cancer 1995;75:115.
256. Lawrence W Jr, Hays DM, Moon TE. Lymphatic metastases with childhood rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer 1977;39:556.
257. Rodary C, Flamant F, Donaldson SS. An attempt to use a common staging system in rhabdomyosarcoma: a report from an international workshop initiated by the International Society of
Pediatric Oncology (SIOP). Med Pediatr Oncol 1989;17:210.
258. Cassady JR, Sagerman RH, Tretter P, Ellsworth RM. Radiation therapy for rhabdomyosarcoma. Radiology 1968;91:116.
259. Loeffler JS, Leslie NT, Cassady JR. Case 10-1984: orbital rhabdomyosarcoma [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1984;311:262.
260. Tefft M, Lindberg RD, Gehan EA. Radiation therapy combined with systemic chemotherapy of rhabdomyosarcoma in children: local control in patients enrolled in the Intergroup
Rhabdomyosarcoma Study. Monogr Natl Cancer Inst 1981;56:75.
261. Maurer HM. The Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study: update, November 1978. Monogr Natl Cancer Inst 1981;56:61.
262. Maurer HM, Moon T, Donaldson M, et al. The Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study. Cancer 1977;40:2015.
263. Crist W, Gehan EA, Ragab AH, et al. The third Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:610.
264. Donaldson S, Asmar L, Breneman J, et al. Hyperfractionated radiation in children with rhabdomyosarcomaresults of the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma pilot study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1995;32:903.
265. Maurer HM, Gehan EA, Beltangady M, et al. The Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study-I. Cancer 1993;71:1904.
266. Crist WM, Anderson J, Maurer H, et al. Preliminary results for patients with local/regional tumors treated on the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study-IV (19911997). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:555(abst).
267. Forbes GS, Ernest F IV, Waller RR. Computed tomography of orbital tumors, including late-generation scanning techniques. Radiology 1982;142:387.
268. Weichselbaum RR, Cassady JR, Albert DM, Gonder JR. Multimodality management of orbital rhabdomyosarcoma. Int Ophthalmol Clin 1980;20:247.
269. Fuesner JE, Pizzo PA, Poplack DG, Freeman C. Meningeal relapse of orbital rhabdomyosarcoma. Med Pediatr Oncol 1978;4:247.
270. Pratt CB, Smith JW, Woerner S, et al. Factors leading to delay in diagnosis and affecting survival of children with head and neck rhabdomyosarcoma. Pediatrics 1978;61:30.
271. Weiner ES. Head and neck rhabdomyosarcoma. Semin Pediatr Surg 1994;3:203.
272. Dodd GD, Dolan PA, Ballantyne AJ, Ibanez ML, Chau P. The dissemination of tumors of the head and neck via the cranial nerves. Radiol Clin North Am 1970;8:445.
273. Gerson JM, Jaffe N, Donaldson MH, Tefft M. Meningeal seeding from rhabdomyosarcoma of the head and neck with base of skull invasion: recognition of the clinical evolution and suggestions
for management. Med Pediatr Oncol 1978;5:137.
274. Berry MP, Jenkin RDT. Parameningeal rhabdomyosarcoma in the young. Cancer 1981;48:281.
275. Martinez A, Donaldson SS, Bagshaw MA. Special set-up and treatment techniques for the radiotherapy of pediatric malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1977;2:1007.
276. Tefft M, Fernandez C, Donaldson M, Newton W, Moon TE. Incidence of meningeal involvement by rhabdomyosarcoma of the head and neck in children. Cancer 1978;42:253.
277. Chan RC, Sutow WW, Lindberg RD. Parameningeal rhabdomyosarcoma. Radiology 1979;131:211.
278. Tarbell NJ, Schwenn M, Delorey M, et al. Extent of bone erosion predicts survival in non-orbital rhabdomyosarcoma of the head and neck in children. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1987;6:222(abst).
279. Raney RB Jr, Tefft M, Newton WA, et al. Improved prognosis with intensive treatment of children with cranial soft tissue sarcomas arising in nonorbital parameningeal sites. A report from the
Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study. Cancer 1987;59:147.
280. Hays DM, Lawrence W Jr, Wharam M, et al. Primary reexcision for patients with “microscopic residual'' tumor following initial excision of sarcomas of the trunk and extremity sites. J Pediatr
Surg 1989;24:5.
281. Andrassy RJ, Wiener ES, Raney RB, et al. Thoracic sarcomas in children. Ann Surg 1998;227:170.
282. Beech TR, Moss RL, Anderson JA, et al. What constitutes appropriate therapy for children/adolescents with rhabdomyosarcoma in the abdominal wall? A report from the IRS. J Pediatr Surg
1999;34:668.
283. Blakely ML, Lobe TE, Anderson JR, et al. Does debulking improve survival rate in advanced-stage retroperitoneal embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma? J Pediatr Surg 1999; 34:736.
284. Newton WA Jr, Soule EH, Hamoudi AB, et al. Histopathology of childhood sarcomas, Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Studies I and II: clinicopathologic correlation. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:67.
285. Simon MA, Enneking WF. The management of soft-tissue sarcomas of the extremities. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1976;58A:317.
286. LaQuaglia MP. Extremity rhabdomyosarcoma. Biological principles, staging, and treatment. Semin Surg Oncol 1993;9:510.
287. Andrassy RJ, Corpron CA, Hays D, et al. Extremity sarcomas: an analysis of prognostic factors from the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study (IRS) III. J Pediatr Surg 1996;31:191.
288. Neville HL, Andrassy RJ, Lobe TE, et al. Preoperative staging, prognostic factors and outcome in extremity rhabdomyosarcoma: a preliminary report from the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma
study IV (199197). J Pediatr Surg 2000;35:317.
289. Lee FA. Rhabdomyosarcoma. In: Parker BR, Castellino RA, eds. Pediatric oncologic radiology. St Louis: Mosby, 1977:417.
290. Hays DM, Shimada H, Raney RB, et al. Clinical staging and treatment results in rhabdomyosarcoma of the female genital tract among children and adolescents. Cancer 1988;61:1893.
291. Andrassy RJ, Wiener ES, Raney RB, et al. Progress in surgical management of vaginal rhabdomyosarcoma: a 25 year review from the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group. J Pediatr
Surg 1999;34:731.
292. Corpron CA, Andrassy RJ, Hays DM, et al. Conservative management of uterine pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma: a report of the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study III and IV pilot. J Pediatr
Surg 1995;30:942.
293. Raney RB Jr, Gehan EA, Hays DM, et al. Primary chemotherapy with or without radiation therapy and/or surgery for children with localized sarcoma of the bladder, prostate, vagina, uterus, and
cervix. Cancer 1990;66:2072.
294. Hays DM. Bladder/prostate rhabdomyosarcoma: results of the multi-institutional trials of the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study. Semin Surg Oncol 1993;9:520.
295. Wiener ES, Lawrence W, Hays D, et al. Retroperitoneal node biopsy in paratesticular rhabdomyosarcoma. J Pediatr Surg 1994;29:171.
296. Tefft M, Hays D, Raney RB Jr, et al. Radiation to regional nodes for rhabdomyosarcoma of the genitourinary tract in children: is it necessary? Cancer 1980;45:3065.
297. Hays DM, Raney RB Jr, Lawrence W, et al. Bladder and prostatic tumors in the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study (IRS-I). Cancer 1982;50:1472.
298. Hays DM, Raney RB Jr, Lawrence W, et al. Primary chemotherapy in the treatment of children with bladder-prostate tumors in the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study (IRS-II). J Pediatr Surg
1982;17:812.
299. Rodary C, Gehan EA, Flamant F, et al. Prognostic factors in 951 nonmetastatic rhabdomyosarcoma in children: a report from the International Rhabdomyosarcoma Workshop. Med Pediatr
Oncol 1991;19:89.
300. Walterhouse DO, Hoover ML, Marymount MA, Kletzel M. High-dose chemotherapy followed by peripheral blood stem cell rescue for metastatic rhabdomyosarcoma: the experience at Chicago
Children's Memorial Hospital. Med Pediatr Oncol 1999;32:88.
301. Dehner LP. Primitive neuroectodermal tumor and Ewing's sarcoma. Am J Surg Pathol 1993;17:1.
302. Tsokos M. Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors. Diagnosis, classification, and prognosis. In: Garvin AJ, O'Leary TJ, Bernstein J, Rosenberg HS, eds. Pediatric molecular pathology:
quantitation and applications. Perspectives in pediatric pathology. Basel: Karger, 1992:27.
303. Grier HE. The Ewing family of tumors . Pediatr Clin North Am 1997;44:991.
304. Dahlin DC. Bone tumors, 3rd ed. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1978:274.
305. Kissane JM, Askin FB, Foulkes M, Stratton LB, Shirley SF. Ewing's sarcoma of bone: clinicopathologic aspects of 303 cases from the Intergroup Ewing's Sarcoma Study. Hum Pathol
1983;14:773.
306. Dekner LP. Primitive neuroectodermal tumor and Ewing's sarcoma. Am J Surg Pathol 1993;17:1.
307. Ambros IM, Ambros PF, Strehl S, et al. MIC2 is a specific marker for Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors. Evidence for a common histogenesis of Ewing's
sarcoma and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors from MIC2 expression and specific chromosome aberration. Cancer 1991;67:1886.
308. Delattre O, Zucman J, Melot T, et al. The Ewing family of tumorsa subgroup of small-round-cell tumors defined by specific chimeric transcripts. N Engl J Med 1994;331:294.
309. Hahm KB, Cho K, Lee C, et al. Repression of the gene encoding the TGF-beta type II receptor is a major target of the EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein. Nature Genet 1999;23:222.
310. Zoubek A, Dockhorn-Dwarniak B, Delattre O, et al. Does expression of different EWS chimeric transcripts define clinically distinct risk groups of Ewing tumor patients? J Clin Oncol
1996;14:1245.
311. deAlva E, Kawai A, Healey JH, et al. EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript structure is an independent determinant of prognosis in Ewing's sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1248.
312. Lin PP, Brody RI, Hamelin AC, et al. Differential transactivation by alternative EWS-FLI1 fusion proteins correlates with clinical heterogeneity in Ewing's sarcoma. Cancer Res 1999;59:1428.
313. Monforte-Munoz H, Lopez-Terrada D, Affendie H, et al. Documentation of EWS gene rearrangements by fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) in frozen sections of Ewing's
sarcomaperipheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor. Am J Surg Pathol 1999;23:309.
314. Durbin M, Randall RL, James M, et al. Ewing's sarcoma masquerading as osteomyelitis. Clin Orthop 1998;357:176.
315. Glaubiger DL, Makuch R, Schwarz J, Levine AS, Johnson RE. Determination of prognostic factors and their influence on therapeutic results in patients with Ewing's sarcoma. Cancer
1980;45:2213.
316. Rosen G, Caparros B, Nirenberg A, et al. Ewing's sarcoma: ten-year experience with adjuvant chemotherapy. Cancer 1981;47:2204.
317. Cohen M, Grosfeld J, Baehner R, Weetman R. Lung CT for detection of metastases: solid tumor neoplasms in children. Am J Roentgenol 1982;139:895.
318. Reiman RE, Rosen G, Gelbard AS, Benua RS, Laughlin JS. Imaging of primary Ewing's sarcoma with (13) N-glutamate. Radiology 1982;142:495.
319. Goldstein H, McNeil BJ, Zufall E, Treves S. Is there still a place for bone scanning in Ewing's sarcoma? J Nucl Med 1980;21:10.
320. Delta BG, Pinkel D. Bone marrow aspiration in children with malignant tumors. J Pediatr 1964;64:542.
321. Evans R, Nesbit M, Askin F, et al. Local recurrence, rate and sites of metastases, and time to relapse as a function of treatment regimen, size of primary and surgical history in 62 patients
presenting with non-metastatic Ewing's sarcoma of the pelvic bones. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:129.
322. Hayes FA, Thompson EI, Meyer WH, et al. Therapy for localized Ewing's sarcoma of bone. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:208.
323. Arai Y, Kun LE, Brooks MT, et al. Ewing's sarcoma: local tumor control and patterns of failure following limited volume radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:1501.
324. Pritchard DJ, Dahlin DC, Dauphine RT, Taylor WF, Beabout JW. Ewing's sarcoma: a clinicopathological and statistical analysis of patients surviving five years or longer. J Bone Joint Surg Am
1975;57A:10.
325. Brown AP, Fixsen JA, Plowman PN. Local control of Ewing's sarcoma: an analysis of 67 patients. Br J Radiol 1987;60:261.
326. Thomas PRM, Foulkes MA, Gilula LA, et al. Primary Ewing's sarcoma of the ribs. Cancer 1983;51:1021.
327. Scully SP, Temple HT, O'Keefe RJ, et al. Role of surgical resection in pelvic Ewing's sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2336.
328. Göbel V, Jürgens H, Etspuler G, et al. Prognostic significance of tumor volume in localized Ewing's sarcoma of bone in children and adolescents. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1987;113:187.
329. Mendenhall CM, Marcus RB Jr, Enneking WF, et al. The prognostic significance of soft tissue extension in Ewing's sarcoma. Cancer 1983;51:913.
330. Hoffer FA, Kozakewich H, Shamberger RC. Percutaneous biopsy of thoracic lesions in children. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 1990;13:32.
331. Shamberger RC, Tarbell NJ, Perez-Atayde AR, Grier HE. Malignant small round cell tumor (Ewing's-PNET) of the chest wall in children. J Pediatr Surg 1994;29:179.
332. Shamberger RC, LaQuaglia MP, Krailo MD, et al. Ewing's sarcoma of the rib: results of an intergroup study with analysis of outcome by timing of resection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
2000;119:1154.
333. Horowitz ME, Malawer MM, Woo SY, et al. Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors: Ewing's sarcoma of bone. In: Pizzo PA, Poplack DG, eds. Principles and practice of pediatric oncology, 3rd ed.

Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997:831.
334. Perez CA, Tefft M, Nesbit M, et al. The role of radiation therapy in the management of non-metastatic Ewing's sarcoma of bone. Report of the intergroup Ewing's sarcoma study. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:141.
335. Razek A, Perez CA, Tefft M, et al. Intergroup Ewing's sarcoma study. Cancer 1980;46:516.
336. Tefft M, Razek A, Perez CA, et al. Local control and survival related to radiation dose and volume and to chemotherapy in non-metastatic Ewing's sarcoma of pelvic bones. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1978;4:367.
337. Fernandez CH, Lindberg RD, Sutow WW, Samuels ML. Localized Ewing's sarcomatreatment and results. Cancer 1974;34:143.
338. Telles NC, Rabson AS, Pomeroy TC. Ewing's sarcoma: an autopsy study. Cancer 1978; 41:2321.
339. Tepper J, Glaubiger D, Lichter A, Wackenhut J, Glatstein E. Local control of Ewing's sarcoma of bone with radiotherapy and combination chemotherapy. Cancer 1980;46:1969.
340. Phillips TL, Sheline GE. Radiation therapy of malignant bone tumors. Radiology 1969;92:1537.
341. Vietti TJ, Gehan EA, Nesbit ME Jr, et al. Multimodal therapy in metastatic Ewing's sarcoma: an intergroup study. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1981;56:279.
342. Suit HD. Role of therapeutic radiology in cancer of bone. Cancer 1975;35:930.
343. Prindull G, Jurgens H, Jentsch F, Sauer R, Lasson U. Radiotherapy of non-metastatic Ewing's sarcoma. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1985;110:127.
344. Sauer R, Jurgens H, Burgers JMV, et al. Prognostic factors in the treatment of Ewing's sarcoma. Radiother Oncol 1987;10:101.
345. Donaldson S, Shuster J, Andreozzi C. The Pediatric Oncology Group (POG) experience in Ewing's sarcoma of bone. Med Pediatr Oncol 1989;17:283(abst).
346. Marcus RB Jr, Graham-Pole JR, Springfield DS, et al. High-risk Ewing's sarcoma: end-intensification using autologous bone marrow transplantation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:53.
347. Kuttesch JF, Wexler LH, Marcus RB, et al. Second malignancies after Ewing's sarcoma: radiation dose-dependency of secondary sarcomas. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2818.
348. Nesbit ME Jr, Perez CA, Tefft M, et al. Multimodal therapy for the management of primary, non-metastatic Ewing's sarcoma of bone: an intergroup study. Monogr Natl Cancer Inst 1981;56:255.
349. Nesbit ME Jr, Gehan EA, Burgert EO, et al. Multimodal therapy for the management of primary, nonmetastatic Ewing's sarcoma of bone: a long-term follow-up of the first intergroup study. J
Clin Oncol 1990;8:1664.
350. Burgert EO Jr, Nesbit ME, Garnsey LA, et al. Multimodal therapy for the management of nonpelvic, localized Ewing's sarcoma of bone: Intergroup Study IESS-II. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1514.
351. Smith MA, Ungerleider RS, Horowitz ME, Simon R. Influence of doxorubicin dose intensity on response and outcome for patients with osteogenic sarcoma and Ewing's sarcoma. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1991;83:1460.
352. Grier H, Krailo M, Tarbell N, et al. Adding ifosfamide and etoposide to vincristine, cyclophosphamide, adriamycin and actinomycin improves outcome in non-metastatic Ewing's and PNET:
update of CCG/POG study. Med Pediatr Oncol 1996;27:259.
353. Wexler LH, Delaney TF, Tsokos M, et al. Ifosfamide and etoposide plus vincristine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide for newly diagnosed Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors. Cancer
1996;78:901.
354. Craft A, Cotterill S, Malcolm A, et al. Ifosfamide-containing chemotherapy in Ewing's sarcoma: the second United Kingdom Children's Cancer Study Group and the Medical Research Council
Ewing's tumor study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3628.
355. Rosito P, Mancini AF, Rondell R, et al. Italian cooperative study for the treatment of children and young adults with localized Ewing sarcoma of bone. Cancer 1999;86:421.
356. Granowetter L. Personal communication, April 2000.
357. Cangir A, Vietti TJ, Gehan EA, et al. Ewing's sarcoma metastatic at diagnosis. Results and comparisons of two Intergroup Ewing's Sarcoma Studies. Cancer 1990;66:887.
358. Madero L, Munoz A, Sanchez deToledo J, et al. Megatherapy in children with high risk Ewing's sarcoma in first complete remission. Bone Marrow Transplant 1998;21:795.
359. Ozkaynek MF, Matthay K, Cairo M, et al. Double alkylator non-total-body irradiation regimen with autologous hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation in pediatric solid tumors. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:937.
360. Boulad F, Kernan NA, LaQuaglia MP, et al. High-dose induction chemoradiotherapy followed by autologous bone marrow transplantation as consolidation therapy in rhabdomyosarcoma,
extrosseous Ewing's sarcoma, and undifferentiated sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1697.
361. Thomson B, Hawkins D, Felgenhauer J, Radick JP. RT-PCR evaluation of peripheral blood, bone marrow and peripheral blood stem cells in children and adolescents undergoing VACIME
chemotherapy for Ewing's sarcoma and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;24:527.
362. Marina NM, Pappo AS, Parham DM, et al. Chemotherapy dose-intensification for pediatric patients with Ewing's family of tumors and desmoplastic small round-cell tumors: a feasibility study at
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:180.
363. Perentesis J, Katsanis E, DeFor T, et al. Autologous stem cell transplantation for high-risk pediatric solid tumors. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;24:609.
364. Burdach S, Jurgens H, Peters C, et al. Myeloablative radiochemotherapy and hematopoietic stem-cell rescue in poor-prognosis Ewing's sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1482.
365. Paulusseu M, Ahrens S, Burdach S, et al. Primary metastatic (stage IV) Ewing tumor: survival analysis of 171 patients from the EICESS studies. Ann Oncol 1998;9:275.
366. Horowitz ME, Kinsella TJ, Wexler LH, et al. Total-body irradiation and autologous bone marrow transplant in the treatment of high-risk Ewing's sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:1911.
367. Tanaka K, Iwakuma T, Harimaya K, et al. EWS-FLI1 antisense oligodeoxynucleotide inhibits proliferation of human Ewing's sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor cells. J Clin Invest
1997;99:239.
368. Picci P, Bohling T, Bacci G, et al. Chemotherapy-induced tumor necrosis as a prognostic factor in localized Ewing's sarcoma of the extremities. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1553.
369. Wunder JS, Paulian G, Huvos AG, et al. The histological response to chemotherapy as a predictor of the oncological outcome of operative treatment of Ewing sarcoma. J Bone Surg Am
1998;80:1020.
370. Reynolds M. Pediatric liver tumors. Semin Surg Oncol 1999;16:159.
371. Greenberg H, Filler RM. Hepatic tumors. In: Pizzo PA, Poplack DG, eds. Principles and practice of pediatric oncology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997.
372. Sotelo-Avila C, Gonzalez-Crussi F, Fowler JW. Complete and incomplete forms of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome: their oncogenic potential. J Pediatr 1980;96:47.
373. Kingston JE, Herbert A, Draper GJ, Mann JR. Association between hepatoblastoma and polyposis coli. Arch Dis Child 1983;58:959.
374. Oda H, Imai Y, Nakatsura Y, et al. Somatic mutations of the APC gene in sporadic hepatoblastomas. Cancer Res 1996;56:3320.
375. Kraus JA, Albrecht S, Wiestler OD, et al. Loss of heterozygosity of chromosome 1 in human hepatoblastoma. Int J Cancer 1996:67:467.
376. Nagata T, Mugiskima H, Shickino H, et al. Karyotypic analyses of hepatoblastoma. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1999;114:42.
377. Ideda H, Matsuyama S, Tauimura M. Association between hepatoblastoma and very low birth weight: a trend or a chance? J Pediatr 1997;130:557.
378. Ross JA. Hepatoblastoma and birth weights: too little, too big or just right? J Pediatr 1997;130:516.
379. Ohaki Y, Misugi K, Sasaki Y, Tsunoda A. Hepatitis B surface antigen positive hepatocellular carcinoma in children. Cancer 1983;51:822.
380. Leuschner I, Harms D, Schmidt D. The association of hepatocellular carcinoma in childhood with hepatitis B virus infection. Cancer 1988;62:2363.
381. Chang M-H, Chen C-J, Lai M-S, et al. Universal hepatitis B vaccination in Taiwan and the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in children. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1855.
382. Eriksson S, Carlson J, Velez R. Risk of cirrhosis and primary liver cancer in alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency. N Engl J Med 1986;314:736.
383. Beaumont C, Simon M, Fauchet R, et al. Serum ferritin as a possible marker of the hemochromatosis allele. N Engl J Med 1979;301:169.
384. Cartwright GE, Edwards CQ, Kravitz K, et al. Hereditary hemochromatosis. N Engl J Med 1979;301:175.
385. Weinberg AC, Finegold MJ. Primary hepatic tumors in childhood. In: Finegold M, ed. Pathology of neoplasia in children and adolescents. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1986.
386. Haas JE, Muczynski KA, Krailo M, et al. Histopathology and prognosis in childhood hepatoblastoma and hepatocarcinoma. Cancer 1989;64:1082.
387. Farhi DC, Shikes RH, Murari PJ, Silverberg SG. Hepatocellular carcinoma in young people. Cancer 1983;52:1516.
388. Lack EE, Neve C, Vawter GF. Hepatocellular carcinoma. Review of 32 cases in childhood and adolescence. Cancer 1983;52:1510.
389. McArthur JW, Toll GD, Russfield AB, et al. Sexual precocity attributable to ectopic gonadotropin secretion by hepatoblastoma. Am J Med 1973;54:390.
390. Lack EE, Neave C, Vawter GF. Hepatoblastoma. A clinical and pathologic study of 54 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1982;6:693.
391. Pritchard J, da Cunha A, Cornbleet MA, Carter CJ. Alpha feto (AFP) monitoring of response to adriamycin in hepatoblastoma. J Pediatr Surg 1982;17:429.
392. Alpert E, Hershberg R, Schur P II, Isselbacher KJ. Alpha-fetoprotein in human hepatoma: improved detection in serum, and quantitative studies using a new sensitive technique.
Gastroenterology 1971;61:137.
393. Geiser CF, Shih VE. Cystathionuria and its origin in children with hepatoblastoma. J Pediatr 1980;96:72.
394. Miller JH, Gates GH, Stanley P. The radiographic investigation of hepatic tumors in childhood. Radiology 1977;124:451.
395. Gates GF, Miller JH, Stanley P. Scintiangiography of hepatic masses in childhood. JAMA 1978;239:2667.
396. Evans AE, Land VJ, Newton WA, et al. Combination chemotherapy (vincristine, adriamycin, cyclophosphamide and 5-fluorouracil) in the treatment of children with malignant hepatoma. Cancer
1982;50:821.
397. Ni Y-H, Chang M-H, Hsu H-Y, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma in childhood. Cancer 1991;68:1737.
398. Goldsmith NA, Woodburne RT. The surgical anatomy pertaining to liver resection. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1957;105:310.
399. Boechat MI, Kangarloo H, Ortega J, et al. Primary liver tumors in children: comparison of CT and MR imaging. Radiology 1988;169:727.
400. Stringer MD, Hennayake S, Howard ER, et al. Improved outcome for children with hepatoblastoma. Br J Surg 1995;82:386.
401. Takahiko S, Ando H, Watanabe Y, et al. Treatment of hepatoblastoma: less extensive hepatectomy after effective preoperative chemotherapy with cisplatin and adriamycin. Surgery
1998;123:407.
402. King DR, Ortega J, Campbell J, et al. The surgical management of children with incompletely resected hepatic cancer is facilitated by intensive chemotherapy. J Pediatr Surg 1991;26:1074.
403. Koneru B, Flye MW, Busuttil RW, et al. Liver transplantation for hepatoblastoma: the American experience. Ann Surg 1991;213:118.
404. Bilik R, Superina R. Transplantation for unresectable liver tumors in children. Transplant Proc 1997;29:2834.
405. Curley SA, Izzo F, Delrio P, et al. Radiofrequency ablation of unresectable primary and metastatic hepatic malignancies. Ann Surg 1999;230:1.
406. Shamberger RC, Leichtner AM, Jonas MM, LaQuaglia MP. Long-term hepatic regeneration and function in infants and children following liver resection. J Am Coll Surg 1996;182:515.
407. Ortega JA, Krailo MD, Haas JE, et al. Effective treatment of unresectable or metastatic hepatoblastoma with cisplatin and continuous infusion doxorubicin chemotherapy: a report from the
Children's Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:2167.
408. Quinn JJ, Altman AJ, Robinson HT, et al. Adriamycin and cisplatin for hepatoblastoma. Cancer 1985;56:1926.
409. Heifetz SA, French M, Correa M, Grossfeld JL. Hepatoblastoma: the Indiana experience with preoperative chemotherapy for inoperable tumors. Pediatr Pathol Lab Med 1997;17:857.
410. Weinblatt ME, Siegel SE, Siegel MM, Stanley P, Weitzman JJ. Preoperative chemotherapy for unresectable primary hepatic malignancies in children. Cancer 1982;50:1061.
411. Filler RM, Ehrlich PF, Greenberg ML, Babyn PS. Preoperative chemotherapy in hepatoblastoma. Surgery 1991;110:591.
412. Ninane J, Perilongo G, Stalens J-P, et al. Effectiveness and toxicity of cisplatin and doxorubicin (PLADO) in childhood hepatoblastoma and hepatocellular carcinoma: a SIOP pilot study. Med
Pediatr Oncol 1991;19:199.
413. Douglass EC, Reynolds M, Finegold M, Cantor AB, Glicksman A. Cisplatin, vincristine, and fluorouracil therapy for hepatoblastoma: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:96.
414. Ortega JA, Douglass E, Feusner J, et al. A randomized trial of cisplatin (DDP)/vincristine (VCR) h5-fluorouracil (5FU) versus DDP /doxorubicin (DOX) I.V. continuous infusion (CI) for the
treatment of hepatoblastoma (HB). Results from the Pediatric Intergroup Hepatoma Study (CCG-8881 hPOG-8945). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1994;13:416(abst).
415. Ehrlich PF, Greenberg ML, Filler RM. Improved long-term survival with preoperative chemotherapy for hepatoblastoma. J Pediatr Surg 1997;32:999.
416. Uchiyama M, Iwafuchi M, Naito M, et al. A study of therapy for pediatric hepatoblastoma: prevention and treatment of pulmonary metastasis. Eur J Pediatr Surg 1999;9:142.
417. von Schweinitz D, Byrd DJ, Hecker H, et al. Efficiency and toxicity of ifosfamide, cisplatin and doxorubicin in the treatment of childhood hepatoblastoma. Eur J Cancer 1997; 33:1243.
418. Reynolds M, Douglass EC, Finegold M, Cantor A, Glicksman A. Chemotherapy can convert unresectable hepatoblastoma. J Pediatr Surg 1992;27:1080.
419. Han Y-M, Park H-H, Lee J-M, et al. Effectiveness of preoperative transarterial chemoembolization in presumed inoperable hepatoblastoma. J Vasc Intervent Radiol 1999;10:1275.
420. Douglas E, Ortega J, Feusner J, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma in children and adolescents. Results from the Pediatric Intergroup Study (CCG 8881/POG 8945). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1994;13:420(abst 1439).
421. von Schweinitz D, Hecker H, Schmidt-von-Arndt G, et al. Prognostic factors and staging systems in childhood hepatoblastoma. Int J Cancer 1997;74:593.
422. Haas JE, Muczynski KA, Krailo M, et al. Histopathology and prognosis in childhood hepatoblastoma and hepatocarcinoma. Cancer 1989;64:1082.

423. Giacomantonio M, Ein SH, Mancer K, Stephens CA. Thirty years of experience with pediatric primary malignant liver tumors. J Pediatr Surg 1984;19:523.
424. Rescorla FJ. Pediatric germ cell tumors. Semin Surg Oncol 1999;16:144.
425. Göbel V, Calaminus G, Engert J, et al. Teratomas of infancy and childhood. Med Pediatr Oncol 1998;31:8.
426. Castleberry RP, Cushing B, Perlman E, Hawkins EP. Germ cell tumors. In: Pizzo PA, Poplack DG, eds. Principles and practice of pediatric oncology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1997:921.
427. Einhorn LH, Donohue J. Cis-diamminedichloroplatinum, vinblastine and bleomycin combination chemotherapy in disseminated testicular cancer. Ann Intern Med 1977; 87:293.
428. Pinkerton CR. Malignant germ cell tumors in childhood. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:895.
429. Dehner LP. Gonadal and extragonadal germ cell neoplasms: teratomas in childhood. In: Finegold MJ, Bennington J, eds. Pathology of neoplasia in children and adolescents. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, 1986:282.
430. Silver SA, Wiley JM, Perlman EJ. DNA ploidy analysis of pediatric germ cell tumors. Mod Pathol 1994;7:951.
431. Shirai T, Itoh T, Yoshiki T, et al. Immunofluorescent demonstration of alpha-fetoprotein and other plasma proteins in yolk sac tumors. Cancer 1976;38:1661.
432. Teilum G, Albrechtsen R, Norgaard-Pedersen B. The histogenetic-embryologic basis for reappearance of alpha-fetoprotein in endodermal sinus tumors (yolk sac tumors) and teratomas. Acta
Pathol Microbiol Scand 1975;83:80.
433. Kurman RJ, Norris HJ. Malignant germ cell tumors of the ovary. Hum Pathol 1977;8:551.
434. Teilum G. The concept of endodermal sinus (yolk sac) tumour. Scand J Immunol 1978;8(Suppl):75.
435. Perlman EJ, Valentine MB, Griffin CA, Look AT. Deletion of 1p36 in childhood endodermal sinus tumors by two-color fluorescence in situ hybridization: a Pediatric Oncology Group study.
Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1996;16:15.
436. Mostofi FK, Price EB Jr. Atlas of tumor pathology. Second Series. Fascicle 8. Tumors of the male genital system. Washington, DC: American Registry of Pathology, 1973.
437. Bosl GJ, Dmitrovsky E, Reuter VE, et al. Isochrome of chromosome 12: clinically useful marker for male germ cell tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:1874.
438. Hoffner L, Deka R, Chakravarti A, Surti V. Cytogenetics and origins of pediatric germ cell tumors. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1994;74:54.
439. Gitlin D, Boesman M. Serum alpha feto-protein, albumin and gamma G-globulin in the human conceptus. J Clin Invest 1966;45:1826.
440. Tsuchida Y, Endo Y, Saito S, et al. Evaluation of alpha-fetoprotein in early infancy. J Pediatr Surg 1978;13:155.
441. Wu JT, Book L, Sudar K. Serum alpha fetoprotein (AFP) levels in normal infants. Pediatr Res 1981;15:50.
442. Abelev GI, Assecritova IV, Kraevsky NA, Perova SD, Perevodchikova NI. Embryonal serum alpha-globulin in cancer patients: diagnostic value. Int J Cancer 1967;2:551.
443. Mann JR, Lakin GE, Leonard JC, et al. Clinical applications of serum carcinoembryonic antigen and alpha-fetoprotein levels in children with solid tumors. Arch Dis Child 1978;53:366.
444. Morinaga S. Ojima M, Sasano M. Human chorionic gonadotropin and alpha-fetoprotein in testicular germ cell tumors: an immunohistochemical study in comparison with tissue concentrations.
Cancer 1983;52:1281.
445. Altman RP, Randolph JG, Lilly JR. Sacrococcygeal teratoma: American Academy of Pediatrics Surgical Section survey1973. J Pediatr Surg 1974;9:389.
446. Fraumeni JF Jr, Li FP, Dalager N. Teratomas in children: epidemiologic features. J Natl Cancer Inst 1973;51:1425.
447. Ein SH, Adeyeimi SD, Mancer K. Benign sacrococcygeal teratomas in infants and children. A 25 year review. Ann Surg 1980;191:382.
448. Gross RE, Clatworthy HW Jr, Meeker IA. Sacrococcygeal teratomas in infants and children. A report of 40 cases. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1951;92:341.
449. Hawkins E, Isaacs H, Cushing B, Rogers P. Occult malignancy in neonatal sacrococcygeal teratomas. A report from a combined Pediatric Oncology Group and Children's Cancer Group study.
Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1993;15:406.
450. Ein SH, Mancer K, Adeyemi SD. Malignant sacrococcygeal teratomaendodermal sinus, yolk sac tumorin infants and children. A 32 year review. J Pediatr Surg 1985;20:473.
451. Schropp KP, Lobe TE, Rao B, et al. Sacrococcygeal teratoma: the experience of four decades. J Pediatr Surg 1992;27:1075.
452. Teitelbaum D, Teich S, Cassidy S, et al. Highly vascularized sacrococcygeal teratoma: description of this atypical variant and its operative management. J Pediatr Surg 1994;29:98.
453. Ablin AR, Krailo MD, Ramsay NKC, et al. Results of treatment of malignant germ cell tumors in 93 children. A report from the Children's Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1782.
454. Kersh CR, Constable WC, Hahn SS, et al. Primary malignant extragonadal germ cell tumors. An analysis of the effect of radiotherapy. Cancer 1990;65:2681.
455. Green DM, Brecher ML, Grossi M, et al. The use of different induction and maintenance chemotherapy regimens for the treatment of advanced yolk sac tumors. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:111.
456. Pinkerton CR, Pritchard J, Spitz L. High complete response rate in children with advanced germ cell tumors using cisplatin-containing combination chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:194.
457. Hawkins EP, Finegold MJ, Hawkins HK, et al. Nongerminomatous malignant germ cell tumors in children. A review of 89 cases from the Pediatric Oncology Group, 19711984. Cancer
1986;58:2579.
458. Young JL Jr, Ries LG, Silverberg E, Horm JW, Miller JW. Cancer incidence, survival, and mortality for children younger than age 15 years. Cancer 1986;58:598.
459. Birch JM, Marsden HB, Swindell R. Pre-natal factors in the origin of germ cell tumours of childhood. Carcinogenesis 1982;3:75.
460. Gilbert JB, Hamilton JB. Studies in malignant testis tumors. III. Incidence and nature of tumors in ectopic testes. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1940;71:731.
461. Campbell HE. Incidence of malignant growth of the undescended testicle. Arch Surg 1942;44:353.
462. Giwercman A, Grindsted J, Hansen B, Jensen OM, Skakkebaek NE. Testicular cancer risk in boys with maldescended testis: a cohort study. J Urol 1987;138:1214.
463. Batata MA, Chu FCH, Hilaris BS, Whitmore WF, Golbey RB.Testicular cancer in cryptorchids. Cancer 1982;49:1023.
464. Pike MC, Chilvers C, Peckham MJ. Effect of age at orchiopexy on risk of testicular cancer. Lancet 1986;i:1246.
465. Martin DC. Malignancy in the cryptorchid testis. Urol Clin North Am 1982;9:371.
466. Lipschultz LI, Caminos-Torres R, Greenspan CS, Snyder PJ. Testicular function after orchiopexy for unilaterally undescended testis. N Engl J Med 1976;295:15.
467. Werder EA, Illig R, Torresani T, et al. Gonadal function in young adults after surgical treatment for cryptorchidism. BMJ 1976;2:1357.
468. Johnson DE, Woodhead DM, Pohl DR, Robison JR. Cryptorchidism and testicular tumorigenesis. Surgery 1968;63:919.
469. Fernandes ET, Etcubanas E, Rao BN, et al. Two decades of experience with testicular tumors in children at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital. J Pediatr Surg 1989;24,677.
470. Mann JR, Pearson D, Barrett A, et al. Results of the United Kingdom Children's Cancer Study Group's malignant germ cell tumor studies. Cancer 1989;63:1657.
471. Flamant F, Nihoul-Fekete C, Patte C, Lemerle J. Optimal treatment of stage I yolk sac tumor of the testis in children. J Pediatr Surg 1986;21:108.
472. Staubitz WJ. Surgical treatment of nonseminomatous germinal testis tumors. In: Johnson DE, Samuels ML, eds. Cancer of the genitourinary tract. New York: Raven Press, 1979:135.
473. Hoskin P, Dilly S, Easton D, et al. Prognostic factors in stage I non-seminomatous germ-cell testicular tumors managed by orchiectomy and surveillance: implications for adjuvant
chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1031.
474. Marina N, Fontanesi J, Kun L, et al. Treatment of childhood germ cell tumors: review of the St. Jude experience from 1979 to 1988. Cancer 1992;70:2568.
475. Aprikian AG, Herr HW, Bajorin DF, Bosl GJ. Resection of postchemotherapy residual masses and limited retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy in patients with metastatic testicular
nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. Cancer 1994;74:1329.
476. Nichols CR, Williams SD, Loehrer PJ, et al. Randomized study of cisplatin dose intensity in poor-risk germ cell tumors. A Southwestern Cancer Study Group and Southwest Oncology Group
protocol. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1163.
477. Wozniak AJ, Samson MK, Shah NT, et al. A randomized trial of cisplatin, vinblastine, and bleomycin versus vinblastine, cisplatin, and etoposide in the treatment of advanced germ cell tumors
of the testis: a Southwest Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:70.
478. Williams SD, Birch R, Einhorn LH, et al. Treatment of disseminated germ-cell tumors with cisplatin, bleomycin, and either vinblastine or etoposide. N Engl J Med 1987;316:1435.
479. Levi JA, Raghavan D, Harvey V, et al. The importance of bleomycin in combination chemotherapy for good-prognosis germ cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1300.
480. Loehrer PJ Sr, Johnson D, Elson P, Einhorn LH, Trump D. Importance of bleomycin in favorable-prognosis disseminated germ cell tumors: an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group trial. J Clin
Oncol 1995;13:470.
481. Stoter G, Kaye S, Jones W, et al. Cisplatin (P) and VP16 (E) +/- bleomycin (B), (BEP) versus (EP) in good risk patients with disseminated non-seminomatous testicular cancer; a randomized
EORTC GU Group study. Onkologie 1991;14(Suppl 4):17(abst).
482. Wheeler BM, Loehrer PJ, Williams SD, Einhorn LH. Ifosfamide in refractory male germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:28.
483. Bokemeyer C, Kohrman O, Tischler J, et al. A randomized trial of cisplatin, etoposide and bleomycin (PEB) versus carboplatin, etoposide and bleomycin (CEB) for patients with “good risk”
metastatic non-seminomatous germ cell tumors. Ann Oncol 1996;7:1015.
484. Mann JR, Raafat F, Robinson K, et al. The UKCCSG's germ cell tumor (GCT) studies: carboplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin are as effective as and less toxic than previous regimens for
malignant extracranial non-gonadal tumors. Med Pediatr Oncol 1996, SIOP XXVIII (abst).
485. Frazier AL, Grier HE, Green DM. Treatment of endodermal sinus tumor in children using a regimen that lacks bleomycin. Med Pediatr Oncol 1996;27:69.
486. Fung CY, Garnick MB. Clinical stage I carcinoma of the testis. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:734.
487. Scully RE. Atlas of tumor pathology. Second Series. Fascicle 16. Tumors of the ovary and maldeveloped gonads. Washington, DC: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 1978.
488. Norris HJ, Zirkin HJ, Benson WL. Immature (malignant) teratoma of the ovary. A clinical and pathologic study of 58 cases. Cancer 1976;37:2359.
489. Breen JL, Maxson WS. Ovarian tumors in children and adolescents. Clin Obstet Gynecol 1977;20:607.
490. Heifetz SA, Cushing B, Giller R, et al. Pathologic considerations: a report from the combined Pediatric Oncology Group/Children's Cancer Group. Am J Surg Pathol 1998;22:1115.
491. Kottmeier HL. Classification and staging of malignant tumors in the female pelvis. Int J Obstet Gynecol 1971;9:172.
492. Buskirk SJ, Schray MF, Podratz KC, et al. Ovarian dysgerminoma: a retrospective analysis of results of treatment, sites of treatment failure and radiosensitivity. Mayo Clin Proc 1987;62:1149.
493. Cangir A, Smith J, van Eys J. Improved prognosis in children with ovarian cancers following modified VAC (vincristine sulfate, dactinomycin and cyclophosphamide) chemotherapy. Cancer
1978;42:1234.
494. Ungerleider RS, Donaldson SS, Warnke RA, Wilbur JR. Endodermal sinus tumor. The Stanford experience and the first reported case arising in the vulva. Cancer 1978;41:1627.
495. Gershenson DM, del Junco G, Herson J, Rutledge FN. Endodermal sinus tumor of the ovary: the MD Anderson experience. Obstet Gynecol 1983;61:194.
496. Slayton RE, Hreshchyshyn MM, Silberberg SG, et al. Treatment of malignant ovarian germ cell tumors. Cancer 1978;42:390.
497. Williams S, Clayton R, Silberberg S, et al. Response of malignant ovarian germ cell tumors to cis-platinum, vinblastine and bleomycin (PVB). Proc Am AssocCancer Res 1981;22:463(abst).
498. Gershenson DM, Kavanagh JJ, Copeland LJ, et al. Treatment of malignant nondysgerminomatous germ cell tumors of the ovary with vinblastine, bleomycin, and cisplatin. Cancer
1986;57:1731.
499. Taylor MH, Depetrillo AD, Turner AR. Vinblastine, bleomycin, and cisplatin in malignant germ cell tumors of the ovary. Cancer 1985;56:1341.
500. Teinturier C, Gelez J, Flamant F, et al. Pure dysgerminoma of the ovary in childhood: treatment results and sequelae. Med Pediatr Oncol 1994;23:1.
501. Norohna PA, Noronha R, Rao DS. Primary anterior mediastinal endodermal sinus tumors in childhood. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1985;7:312.
502. Kuzur ME, Vobleigh MA, Greco FA, Einhorn LH, Oldham RK. Endodermal sinus tumor of the mediastinum. Cancer 1982;50:766.
503. Flamant F, Schwartz L, Delons E, et al. Nonseminomatous malignant germ cell tumors in children. Multidrug therapy in stages III and IV. Cancer 1984;54:1687.
504. Chan RC, Sutow WW, Lindberg RD, et al. Management and results of localized Ewing's sarcoma. Cancer 1979;43:1001.

SECTION 45.1 Molecular Biology of Lymphomas
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 45.1
Molecular Biology of Lymphomas
RICCARDO DALLA-FAVERA
GIANLUCA GAIDANO
Introduction
Histogenetic Pathways of Lymphoma
General Mechanisms of Genetic Lesions in Lymphoma
Chromosomal Translocations
Other Mechanisms of Protooncogene Alteration
Inactivation of Tumor Suppressor Genes
Oncogenic Viruses
Molecular Pathogenesis of B-Cell Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma
B-Cell Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia/Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma
Lymphoplasmacytoid Lymphoma
Mantle Cell Lymphoma
Follicular Lymphoma
Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid Tissue Lymphomas
Diffuse Large Cell Lymphoma
Burkitt's Lymphoma
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome–Related Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma
Molecular Pathogenesis of T-Cell Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma
T-Cell Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma
Adult T-Cell Leukemia/Lymphoma
T-Cell Prolymphocytic Leukemia
Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphoma
Molecular Pathogenesis of Hodgkin's Lymphoma
Genetic Lesions as Clinical Tools in the Management of Lymphoma
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The term lymphoma identifies two distinct groups of neoplasms: non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) and Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL). 1,2 Since the late 1970s, significant
progress has been made in the elucidation of the pathogenesis of NHL as a clonal malignant expansion of B or T cells. The molecular characterization of the most
frequent cytogenetic abnormalities associated with NHL has led to the identification of a number of genes that are altered in B-cell or T-cell NHL. The pathogenicity of
most of these alterations has been confirmed by their ability to cause tumors in transgenic animal models. In addition, it has been established that most of these
genetic lesions selectively associate with specific NHL types, thus representing specific markers of possible diagnostic significance for various NHL subtypes. 1,2 In
contrast to NHL, the molecular pathogenesis of HL is less well understood, and until the advent of single-cell molecular analysis, genetic studies of HL had been
hampered by the paucity of the neoplastic population within HL biopsies.
This chapter outlines the main types of genetic lesions in lymphomas and their distribution among the various clinicopathologic subtypes of these disorders, with
major emphasis on NHL. The last section of the chapter briefly discusses the present and future applications of molecular genetic analysis in the clinical management
of lymphomas.

HISTOGENETIC PATHWAYS OF LYMPHOMA
The histogenesis of lymphoma can be assessed by identifying the precise cellular subset from which a given lymphoma category derives ( Fig. 45.1-1). This is
achieved by defining the lineage and the precise differentiation stage of the various types of lymphoma and by comparing them with the features proper of the
different maturation stages of normal lymphocytes. To date, the histogenesis of lymphoma has been clarified to a sizable extent in the case of lymphomas derived
from B cells, whereas it is still poorly understood in the case of lymphomas originating from T cells.

FIGURE 45.1-1. Model of B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) histogenesis and pathogenesis. A lymphoid follicle, constituted by the germinal center (GC) and the
mantle zone (MZ), is represented together with the surrounding marginal zone (MargZ). On entering the GC, B cells activate into centroblasts, proliferate, and mature
into centrocytes. These events are coupled to somatic hypermutation of immunoglobulin (Ig) genes and isotype switch of the Ig produced. Only GC B cells that are
positively selected by antigen survive and exit the GC successfully. Cells that have exited the GC (post-GC B cells) have two fates: differentiation into plasma cells or
memory B cells. Based on the absence or presence of somatic Ig hypermutation, B-cell NHL may be distinguished into two broad histogenetic categories: (1) B-cell
NHL derived from pre-GC B cells and devoid of Ig mutations, represented in the figure by mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) and a fraction of chronic lymphocytic
leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL); and (2) B-cell NHL derived from B cells that have transited through the GC and harbor Ig mutations, represented in
the figure by follicular lymphoma (FL), lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma (LPL), mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma (MALT), diffuse large cell lymphoma
(DLCL), and Burkitt's lymphoma (BL). For each lymphoma category, the arrow indicating the histogenetic origin is flanked by the genetic lesion associated with the
lymphoma. In the case of CLL/SLL, as well as in a subset of DLCL, the relevant cancer related gene has not been identified.

B lymphocytes are generated in the bone marrow as a result of a multistep differentiation process. 3,4 and 5 Precursor B cells usually begin immunoglobulin (Ig) gene
rearrangements of the heavy-chain locus followed by rearrangements of the light-chain locus. 3,4 and 5 If precursor B cells express a functional surface antibody acting as
antigen receptor, they are positively selected into the peripheral B-cell pool comprising naive B cells. 3,4 and 5 Cells failing to express a functional antigen receptor are
eliminated within the bone marrow. 3,4 and 5 For many B cells, the subsequent maturation steps are linked to the histologic structure of the germinal center. 3,4 and 5 The
germinal center is constituted by a dark zone, characterized by a dominant growth of rapidly proliferating B cells, and by a light zone, in which nonproliferating B cells
are selected and induced to differentiate through interactions with follicular dendritic cells and T helper cells. Within the germinal center, antigen-activated B cells
accumulate somatic point mutations within their rearranged heavy- and light-chain genes (a phenomenon known as somatic hypermutation), which modify the affinity
of their surface antibody to the antigen. 3,4,5,6,7 and 8 Only B cells that have acquired mutations leading to high-affinity binding are positively selected and differentiate into
memory B cells or plasmablasts, whereas the majority of B cells are eliminated by apoptosis within the germinal center. 3,4,5,6,7 and 8

The use of somatic hypermutation as a specific marker of B-cell transition through the germinal center allows for the definition of two broad histogenetic categories of
B-cell lymphoma9,10:
1. Lymphomas devoid of somatic Ig hypermutation, which may derive from either pre–germinal center B cells or from B cells that have achieved maturation without
transiting through the germinal center. Lymphomas generally devoid of somatic Ig hypermutation include mantle cell lymphoma and a substantial percentage of
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma. 9,10
2. Lymphomas associated with somatic Ig hypermutation and thus putatively derived from germinal center or post–germinal center B cells. Among the NHLs,
lymphomas generally associated with somatic Ig hypermutation include follicular lymphoma, lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
(MALT) lymphoma, diffuse large cell lymphoma (DLCL), Burkitt's lymphoma, and primary effusion lymphoma. 9,10,11,12,13,14,15 and 16 In addition, a fraction of B-cell
chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma, approximating 50% of cases, is thought to originate from germinal center–related B cells. 17,18 Most, if
not all, HL cases also are thought to derive from germinal center or post–germinal center B cells. 10,19,20,21,22 and 23 Extranodal lymphomas associated with somatic
Ig hypermutation are postulated to originate from B cells that have transited through the germinal center and subsequently migrated to the involved extranodal
site.

GENERAL MECHANISMS OF GENETIC LESIONS IN LYMPHOMA
Analogous to most cancer types, the pathogenesis of lymphoma represents a multistep process involving the progressive and clonal accumulation of multiple genetic
lesions affecting protooncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. However, several important features distinguish the mechanism and type of genetic alterations
associated with lymphoma from those associated with solid tumors. Extensive cytogenetic studies have shown that, during most stages of the disease, the genome of
lymphoma cells is relatively stable and is not affected by the generalized random instability typical of many solid tumors, particularly those of epithelial origin. 24
Lymphoma also appears devoid of microsatellite instability, the hallmark of molecular defects in DNA mismatch repair genes observed in some hereditary cancer
predisposition syndromes as well as in most sporadic tumor types. 25,26 and 27 Conversely, the genome of lymphoma cells is characterized by few, sometimes single,
nonrandom chromosomal abnormalities, commonly represented by chromosomal translocations. 28
At the molecular level, the genetic lesions identified so far in lymphomas include activation of oncogenes by chromosomal translocations, as well as inactivation of
tumor suppressor loci by chromosomal deletion and mutation. In addition, the genome of certain lymphoma subtypes can be altered by the introduction of exogenous
genes by various oncogenic viruses.
CHROMOSOMAL TRANSLOCATIONS
Chromosomal translocations represent the genetic hallmark of lymphoid malignancies, including NHL. As in other types of malignancies, NHL-associated
translocations represent reciprocal and balanced recombinations between two specific chromosomes that are recurrently associated with a given tumor type and
clonally represented in each tumor case.
The precise mechanisms leading to chromosomal translocations in hematopoietic neoplasms are not clearly understood. However, data suggest that the translocation
process most likely occurs during Ig gene and T-cell receptor gene rearrangements in B and T cells, respectively, as a consequence of errors of the VDJ
recombination machinery or the class switch machinery. This evidence is supported by the following observations:
1. A significant number of translocations involve chromosomal breakpoints within the Ig or T-cell receptor loci. 24
2. In B-cell NHL, breakpoints within the Ig loci are often located precisely within sequences that normally mediate Ig gene rearrangement in B cells, such as the J
and switch sequences. 29 Moreover, N-nucleotides, which are template-independent nucleotide additions generated at the site of VDJ recombination by terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase, can be detected at certain breakpoint junctions, suggesting the action of the recombinase. 30
3. Similarity has been shown between the sequences surrounding the breakpoints and recombination targeting motifs, such as the heptamer/nonamers and the
bp45 nuclease binding sequence. 31
Not all the chromosomal translocations are due to errors of the recombination machinery of the immune system. A defect in the DNA damage repair mechanism may
be responsible in at least some translocations. 32 For example, based on sequence analysis of reciprocal chromosomal breakpoints, the chromosomal translocation
t(4;11) seen in acute leukemias of B lineage appears to be initiated by several DNA strand breaks on both participating chromosomes and by subsequent DNA repair
by an “error-prone” DNA repair mechanism. Similarly, analysis of the breakpoint junction sequence at TEL in t(12;21)(p13;q22) supports the occurrence of staggered
DNA double-strand breaks followed by DNA repair. 33 Therefore, the generation of DNA double-strand breaks by exogenous and endogenous sources (e.g., chemicals
and oxygen-free radicals) and faulty DNA repair can lead to chromosomal rearrangements. 34,35 These models have been validated by mouse models but have yet to
be proven in humans. 36
The suggestion also has been made that some translocations, namely those occurring in lymphoid malignancies derived from germinal center B cells, such as
Burkitt's lymphoma and DLCL, may be a result of somatic hypermutation that takes place in the germinal center B cells. 37 It has been shown that deletions and
duplications can be introduced into the rearranged variable (V) H genes in a substantial portion of germinal center cells during somatic hypermutation. Because the
formation of these deletions and duplications is intrinsically associated with DNA double-strand breaks, they may provide a potential source for chromosomal
translocations in germinal center B cells. Somatic hypermutation may be the underlying mechanism of the chromosomal translocations between the Ig H locus and
c-MYC in the endemic form of Burkitt's lymphoma, and these translocations are generally believed to be a result of errors of the VDJ recombination machinery. This
theory is supported by the observation that the breakpoints at the Ig H loci in endemic Burkitt's lymphoma are not usually directly adjacent to the recombination signal
sequence that mediates VDJ recombination, but are located in the J intron or within rearranged VJ genes (i.e., the target region for hypermutation). 38 It remains to be
seen if somatic hypermutation also plays a role in the generation of chromosomal translocations at the BCL-6 locus, which also is a target for somatic hypermutation,
in B-cell DLCL (see Diffuse Large Cell Lymphoma, later in this chapter).
The common feature of all chromosomal translocations associated with NHL is the presence of protooncogenes in proximity to the chromosomal recombination sites.
In most cases, the structure of the protooncogene and, in particular, its coding domain is not affected by the translocation, but the pattern of expression of the gene is
altered as a consequence of the juxtaposition of heterologous regulatory sequences derived from the partner chromosome (protooncogene deregulation) ( Fig. 45.1-2).
Two distinct types of protooncogene deregulation may occur, including homotopic and heterotopic deregulation. Homotopic deregulation occurs when the
protooncogene is expressed constitutively in the lymphoma, whereas its expression is tightly regulated in normal lymphoid cells. Conversely, heterotopic deregulation
occurs when the protooncogene, which is normally not expressed in lymphoid cells, undergoes ectopic expression in the lymphoma. In most types of NHL-associated
translocations, the heterologous regulatory regions responsible for protooncogene deregulation are derived from antigen receptor loci, which are expressed at high
levels in the target tissue.

FIGURE 45.1-2. Models of chromosomal translocations in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). The two genes involved in the translocation event are represented by their
coding sequences (CS), which are represented by the rectangles, and by their regulatory sequences (RS), which are represented by the circles. The two genes are
identified by different colors (black or white). Top: Germline configuration of the two genes involved in the translocation. The coding sequence of each of the two

genes is proximal to its physiologic regulatory sequences, which coordinate the normal expression of the gene. Bottom: Chromosomal translocations may lead to two
different consequences. In the case of transcriptional deregulation, the normal regulatory sequences of the protooncogene are removed and substituted with
regulatory sequences derived from the partner chromosome. The protooncogene coding sequence ( black rectangle) is thus juxtaposed to heterologous regulatory
sequences (white circle). In NHL, most commonly the novel regulatory regions are derived from the immunoglobulin gene loci, which are consistently expressed at
high levels in mature B cells. In the case of fusion transcript formation, part of the coding sequence of the two genes involved is fused together, generating a novel
fusion protein with biochemical properties distinct from the native proteins.

An alternative mechanism of oncogene activation by chromosomal translocation is the juxtaposition of two genes to form a chimeric gene coding for a novel chimeric
protein. This mechanism, which is common in chromosomal translocations associated with acute leukemias, is rarely associated with NHL. Examples are the t(11;18)
of MALT lymphoma and the t(2;5) of T-cell anaplastic lymphoma.
The molecular cloning of the genetic loci involved in the translocations most frequently associated with NHL has led to the identification of a number of
protooncogenes involved in lymphomagenesis ( Table 45.1-1). The majority of these protooncogenes code for nuclear molecules belonging to major families of
transcription factors, although regulators of programmed cell death and signal transducers may also be involved. The structural and functional consequences of each
chromosomal translocation associated with NHL are described in each section of this chapter dedicated to the molecular pathogenesis of the various NHL subtypes.

TABLE 45.1-1. Chromosomal Translocations of Non-Hodgkin's Lymphomas

OTHER MECHANISMS OF PROTOONCOGENE ALTERATION
In addition to chromosomal translocations, other mechanisms of protooncogene activation can also occur in NHL. Protooncogene amplification is substantially less
common than in epithelial cancers, yet it occurs in some cases of high-grade NHL, as exemplified by the instance of REL amplifications in DLCL. 39 Amplification may
involve many other unknown chromosomal sites, which are likely to be revealed by the extensive use of advanced cytogenetic techniques, such as comparative
genomic hybridization. Point mutations can alter the coding sequence of the protooncogene, as in the case of c- MYC and BCL-2, and thus alter the biologic properties
of the protooncogene product. 40,41 Alternatively, mutations may affect the protooncogene regulatory sequences, as in the case of c- MYC and BCL-6, thus altering their
sensitivity to factors normally regulating the expression of the protooncogene through binding to its regulatory sequences. 42,43,44 and 45 Mutations of the RAS genes,
which represent a frequent protooncogene alteration in human neoplasia, are virtually always absent in NHL. 46 Mutations activating unknown oncogenes may be a
frequent event in NHL, and the search for these oncogenes is the focus of current investigations.
INACTIVATION OF TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENES
Deletions and mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene, which are thought to represent the most common genetic alteration in human cancer, 47 are restricted to
specific subsets of NHL, including late stages of follicular lymphoma and Burkitt's lymphoma. 48,49 and 50 The mechanisms of p53 inactivation in NHL is similar to that
detected in human neoplasia in general and occurs through point mutation of one allele, chromosomal deletion of the second allele, or both. 47
In addition, NHLs are associated with specific chromosomal deletions, suggesting the loss of presently unknown tumor suppressor genes. The most frequent of these
deletions involves the long arm of chromosome 6 (6q). 24,51 The observations that 6q deletions may occur as the sole cytogenetic abnormality in some NHL cases 24
and are associated with poor prognosis 28 strongly support a pathogenetic role for these alterations. Deletions of chromosome 13q14 represent the most frequent
lesion in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma, occurring in more than 50% of cases. 24 Mapping studies have ruled out the involvement of
the RB1 tumor suppressor gene, which is also located on chromosome 13q14, and have suggested the presence of a distinct tumor suppressor gene in the same
region.52,53,54,55,56,57 and 58
ONCOGENIC VIRUSES
The infection of tumor cells by oncogenic viruses must be considered as a mechanism of genetic lesion because viruses introduce foreign genes into their target cells.
Three distinct viruses are associated with the pathogenesis of specific NHL subtypes: Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8), and human T-cell
leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I).
EBV was initially identified in cases of endemic Burkitt's lymphoma from Africa; subsequently, EBV also was detected in a fraction of sporadic forms of Burkitt's
lymphomas, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)–associated lymphomas, and primary effusion lymphomas. 49,59,60,61,62,63,64,65,66,67 and 68 With infection of a B
lymphocyte, the EBV genome is transported into the nucleus, where it exists predominantly as an extrachromosomal circular molecule (episome). 59 The formation of
circular episomes is mediated by the cohesive terminal repeats, which are represented by a variable number of tandem repeats sequence. 59,69 Because of this termini
heterogeneity, the number of variable number of tandem repeats sequences enclosed in newly formed episomes may differ considerably, thus representing a constant
clonal marker of the episome and, consequently, of a single infected cell. 69 Evidence for a pathogenetic role of the virus in NHL infected by EBV is at least twofold. On
one side, it is well recognized that EBV is able to significantly alter the growth of B cells. 59 On the other side, EBV-infected lymphomas usually display a single form of
fused EBV termini, suggesting that the lymphoma cell population represents the clonally expanded progeny of a single infected cell. 49,61
HHV-8 is a gamma herpesvirus initially identified in tissues of patients with AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma, and it subsequently was found to infect a peculiar type of
lymphoma known as primary effusion lymphoma70,71,72,73,74 and 75 as well as a substantial fraction of multicentric Castleman's disease. 76 Phylogenetic analysis has
shown that the closest relative of HHV-8 is herpesvirus saimiri, a gamma-2 herpesvirus of primates associated with T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders. 77,78 Like the
other gamma herpesviruses, HHV-8 is lymphotropic, because it can be found in lymphocytes both in vitro and in vivo.67,70,71,72,73,74,75 and 76,79,80 Lymphoma cells naturally
infected by HHV-8 harbor the viral genome in its episomal configuration and display a marked restriction of viral gene expression, suggesting a pattern of latent
infection. 78 HHV-8 carries several genes that may behave as oncogenes, including a gene homologous to the cellular D-type cyclins, a G protein–coupled receptor
displaying constitutive activation, and several genes encoding for molecules displaying high homology with cellular cytokines [viral interleukin (IL)-6] and chemokines
[viral macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1a, MIP-2]. 81,82 and 83 However, because primary effusion lymphoma cells carry latent HHV-8 infection, only a restricted
subset of viral genes are expressed in vivo, including viral cyclin D and viral IL-6. 81,84
HTLV-I is a member of the lentivirus group, which can immortalize normal T cells in vitro and can cause adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma. 85,86 and 87 Unlike acutely
transforming retroviruses, the HTLV-I genome does not encode a viral oncogene. 85,86 and 87 Furthermore, this retrovirus does not transform T cells by cis-activation of
an adjacent cellular protooncogene, because the provirus appears to integrate randomly within the host genome. 85,86 and 87 Rather, the pathogenetic effect of HTLV-I

seems to be due to viral production of a transregulatory protein (HTLV-I tax) that markedly increases expression of all viral gene products and transcriptionally
activates the expression of certain host genes, including IL-2, the a chain of the IL-2 receptor (CD25), c-sis, c-fos, and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor. 88,89,90,91 and 92 The central role of these genes in normal T-cell activation and growth, coupled to direct experimental evidence, support the notion that
tax-mediated activation of these host genes represents an important mechanism by which HTLV-I initiates T-cell transformation. 93 In addition, it has been suggested
that tax may mediate DNA damage as a consequence of either inactivation of the p53 checkpoint or a repression of DNA repair functions. 94,95 It has been shown that
tax may abrogate a mitotic checkpoint by targeting the TXBP181 cellular gene, a homologue of the yeast mitotic checkpoint MAD1 protein. 96 These features of tax are
consistent with the fact that adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma cells are karyotypically abnormal and frequently present as pleomorphic multinucleated giant cells. 97,98

MOLECULAR PATHOGENESIS OF B-CELL NON-HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA
The following section describes the detailed genetic lesions and the molecular pathways presently identified in association with distinct B-cell NHL categories
classified according to the World Health Organization (WHO) system of lymphoid neoplasia. 2 B-cell NHL categories known to associate with specific genetic lesions
include B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma, lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma, mantle cell lymphoma, follicular lymphoma, MALT
lymphoma, DLCL, and Burkitt's lymphoma among B-cell NHL. The molecular pathogenesis of AIDS-related NHL also is addressed. The precise molecular
pathogenesis of all other B-cell NHL types has not yet been elucidated.
B-CELL CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA/SMALL LYMPHOCYTIC LYMPHOMA
The molecular pathogenesis of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma is still largely unknown (see Fig. 45.1-1). Mutations of the p53 gene
and loss of heterozygosity at 17p, the p53 site, are found in a small number (10% to 15%) of cases. 48,99 A higher frequency of p53 alterations is observed after
transformation of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma to Richter's syndrome, a highly aggressive lymphoma with a poor clinical
outcome,48 suggesting that p53 may be involved in the genetic mechanisms underlying B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma progression.
Despite initial suggestions, it is now well established that “true” cases of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma (i.e., CD5+, CD23+,
according to the WHO and the Revised European-American Lymphoma classification 1,2) are consistently devoid of BCL-1 and BCL-2 rearrangements99 (Table 45.1-2).
Because high levels of bcl-2 expression are consistently seen in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma, 100 it is conceivable that they result
from mechanisms other than chromosomal translocation. A small fraction of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma harbor mutations of the
ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene. 101,102 and 103 Because these mutations may occur in the patient germline, ATM mutations may account, at least in part, for the
familial cases of the disease.
Despite the paucity of information regarding the molecular lesions associated with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma, cytogenetic
studies have revealed several recurrent chromosomal abnormalities. 24,104 Trisomy 12 is found in approximately 35% of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small
lymphocytic lymphoma cases evaluated by interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization and correlates with a poor survival. 105,106 and 107 Based on karyotypic and
deletion mapping studies, it is likely that the 13q14 chromosomal region harbors a novel tumor suppressor gene that is involved at high frequency in B-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma. 52,53,54,55,56,57 and 58 In fact, deletions of 13q14 occur in approximately 60% of cases when analyzed by sensitive
molecular tools, but the relevant gene has not been identified. 52,53,54,55,56,57 and 58 Deletions of 6q define a subset of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small
lymphocytic lymphoma cases displaying prolymphocytic features. 108
Studies of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma have revealed novel insights into the disease histogenesis. It is now apparent that the
clinical heterogeneity of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma might be related to heterogeneity in the disease histogenesis. Although
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma has been traditionally viewed as a tumor of naive, pre–germinal center B cells, more recent data
have suggested that a fraction of cases derives from germinal center–related B cells. In fact, the malignant cells of approximately 50% of B-cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma harbor mutations of Ig genes, with or without BCL-6 mutations,17,18,45,109 which are well-established markers of germinal center
transit. The molecular spectrum of Ig and BCL-6 mutations in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma is superimposable to that of germinal
center–derived lymphomas. 17,18,45,109 Intriguingly, the histogenetic heterogeneity of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma appears to carry
prognostic relevance, because cases with mutations of Ig genes are associated with a significantly longer survival. 110,111
LYMPHOPLASMACYTOID LYMPHOMA
Lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma is typically CD5-negative and associates in a large fraction of cases with a monoclonal serum IgM-type paraprotein, causing the
clinical syndrome known as Waldenström's macroglobulinemia.1,2 Approximately 50% of these lymphomas associate with the t(9;14)(p13;q32) translocation, a
recurrent chromosomal abnormality in B-cell NHL 112 (see Table 45.1-1 and Fig. 45.1-1). The chromosomal breakpoints of t(9;14)(p13;q32) involve the Ig H locus on
chromosome 14q32 and, on chromosome 9p13, a genomic region containing the paired homeobox-5 ( PAX-5) gene.113PAX-5 encodes a B-cell–specific transcription
factor involved in the control of B-cell proliferation and differentiation. 114 Presumably, the juxtaposition of PAX-5 to the Ig H locus in NHL carrying t(9;14)(p13;q32)
causes the deregulated expression of the gene, thus contributing to tumor development. 113 Apart from t(9;14)(p13;q32), no other genetic lesion has been detected at
significant frequencies in lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma (see Table 45.1-2).
MANTLE CELL LYMPHOMA
Mantle cell lymphoma constitutes 25% of nonfollicular small B-cell lymphomas and is typically associated with t(11;14) (q13;q32) 1,2,115,116 and 117 (see Fig. 45.1-1). The
t(11;14)(q13;q32) translocation juxtaposes the BCL-1 locus at 11q13 with Ig H118,119 and 120 (see Table 45.1-1). Although early characterization of the BCL-1 locus did not
identify a putative oncogene implicated in the translocation, it is now evident that t(11;14) consistently leads to homotopic deregulation of BCL-1 (also known as
CCND1 or PRAD1), a gene located in proximity to the breakpoint region and encoding for cyclin D1, a member of the D-type G 1 cyclins that regulate the early phases
of the cell cycle. 121,122,123,124 and 125 The consistent and selective clustering of BCL-1 overexpression with NHLs carrying t(11;14) strongly suggests that this gene is
indeed the critical component of t(11;14)(q13;q32). 121,122,123,124 and 125
The precise contribution of cyclin D1 to cell-cycle regulation is still under investigation. As for other D-type cyclins, cyclin D1 is thought to act primarily as a growth
factor sensor, integrating extracellular signals with the cell-cycle clock. 126 The pathogenetic role of BCL-1 activation in human neoplasia is suggested by the ability of
cyclin D1 overexpression to transform cells in vitro and contribute to B-cell lymphomagenesis in transgenic mice. 127,128 and 129
The application of strict phenotypic criteria to the classification of B-cell lymphoproliferations has defined that the distribution of BCL-1 rearrangements and activation
are restricted to mantle cell lymphoma (see Table 45.1-2).130,131 and 132 The frequency and specificity of this genetic lesion provide an excellent marker for diagnosis of
mantle cell lymphoma.117 The precise identification of mantle cell lymphoma among nonfollicular small B-cell lymphomas is clinically relevant because mantle cell
lymphoma is a far more aggressive disease and displays a significantly shorter survival than other histologically related forms. 115,116
Other genetic alterations may be also involved in mantle cell lymphoma. Inactivation of p53 occurs in approximately 20% of cases and is a marker of poor
prognosis. 133 Inactivation of p16 by deletion, mutation, or hypermethylation is detectable in approximately one-half of cases belonging to the aggressive mantle cell
lymphoma variant characterized by a blastoid cell morphology. 134
FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA
The genetic hallmark of follicular lymphoma is represented by chromosomal breaks at 18q21 and rearrangements of BCL-2, which are detected in 80% to 90% of the
cases independent of cytologic subtype 135,136,137,138 and 139 (see Table 45.1-2 and Fig. 45.1-1). Other genetic lesions may also occur, especially in follicular lymphoma
cases that have undergone histologic progression to a high-grade NHL. 50,134,140

TABLE 45.1-2. Frequency of Genetic Lesions in B-Cell Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma a

Chromosomal Translocations Involving the BCL-2 Gene
The t(14;18)(q32;q21) translocation is the most common translocation in human lymphoid malignancies 135,136,137,138 and 139 (see Table 45.1-1). The rare variant
translocations t(2;18)(p11;q21) and t(18;22)(q21;q21) represent biologic equivalents. Virtually all follicular lymphomas and a fraction of DLCLs carry breaks at
18q21 135,136,137,138 and 139,141 (see Table 45.1-2). In t(14;18), the rearrangement joins the BCL-2 gene at its 3' untranslated region to an Ig H J segment (Fig. 45.1-3),
resulting in homotopic deregulation of BCL-2 expression. 135,136,137,138 and 139 The consequence of the translocation is the presence within the cells of constitutively high
levels of BCL-2 protein resulting from both enhanced transcription and, possibly, more efficient RNA processing. 142,143 Approximately 70% of the chromosome 18
breakpoints cluster within the major breakpoint region, and the remaining cases usually break in the more distant minor cluster region. 135,136,137,138 and 139

FIGURE 45.1-3. Schematic representation of BCL-2 translocations. The germline configuration of the BCL-2 gene, mapping to 18q21, is shown in the upper panel of
the figure. In its germline configuration, BCL-2 is composed of three exons with a large intron between exon 2 and exon 3. The coding region of the BCL-2 gene is
indicated by black boxes, whereas noncoding exons (or portions of exons) are indicated by white boxes. The BCL-2 promoters within exon 1 are shown by arrows.
The location of the major breakpoint region (MBR) and minor cluster region (mcr), where most BCL-2 breakpoints fall, is indicated by an arrow. The germline
configuration of Ig H on chromosome 14q32 is also shown in the upper panel of the figure. Boxes indicate the joining (J), switch (S), and constant (C) regions of Ig H.
The 14q32 breakpoint (indicated by an arrow) falls within J H. The bottom panels of the figure depict the molecular consequences of t(14;18)(q32;q21), which causes
the juxtaposition of BCL-2 to the Ig H locus. Both the MBR and mcr type of translocations are shown. Within the Ig H locus, the breakpoint involves J H sequences.
Notably, the BCL-2 coding sequence of the translocated BCL-2 allele is intact. Because the BCL-2 coding region is preserved, the hybrid BCL-2/Ig H transcript gives
rise to a wild-type and normal-size BCL-2 protein. The reader is referred to the text for a description of the functional consequences of BCL-2 translocations on the
transcriptional regulation of BCL-2.

The BCL-2 gene encodes a 26-kD integral membrane protein that has been localized to mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, and perinuclear membrane. 144 In
contrast to most protooncogenes of lymphoid neoplasia, BCL-2 has little or no ability to promote cell-cycle progression or cell proliferation, but rather controls the
cellular apoptotic threshold by preventing programmed cell death. 144,145,146,147 and 148 In normal cells, the topographic restriction of BCL-2 expression to germinal center
zones of surviving B cells suggests that BCL-2 drives the emergence of long-surviving memory B cells. 149 Indeed, BCL-2–trangenic animals show markedly protracted
secondary immune responses and an extended lifetime for memory B cells in the absence of antigen. 150
The precise molecular mechanisms by which BCL-2 regulates cell death stem from the observation that BCL-2 is only one member of a family of apoptotic regulators,
which also includes BAX and BCL-X.151,152 and 153 It is now clear that BCL-2 exists as part of a high-molecular-weight complex generated through heterodimerization
with BAX.152,153 The inherent ratio of BCL-2 to BAX determines the functional activity of BCL-2.152,153 When BAX is in excess, BAX homodimers dominate and cell
death is accelerated; conversely, when BCL-2 is in excess, as in NHL carrying BCL-2 rearrangements, BCL-2/BAX heterodimers are the prevalent species and cell
death is repressed. The biochemistry of the BCL-2 antiapoptotic function has been elucidated to a certain extent and relies on activation of an antioxidant pathway at
sites of free radical generation or regulation of endoplasmic reticulum–associated Ca 2+ fluxes.154,155
The precise role of BCL-2 activation in follicular lymphoma pathogenesis is complex. Despite the fact that follicular lymphoma is comprised of mature B cells, the
translocation appears to occur earlier in ontogeny at a pre-B cell stage. 156 In contrast to other genetic lesions occurring in pre-B cells and leading to B-cell lineage
acute lymphoblastic leukemia through a differentiative block of the target cells, BCL-2 rearrangements are permissive of B-cell maturation to the stage of surface
sIgM+/sIgD+ B cells.156 The pathogenetic contribution of BCL-2 lesions to follicular lymphoma development is documented by the observation that the growth of human
B-cell NHL bearing BCL-2 translocations is specifically and efficiently inhibited in vitro by antisense oligonucleotides targeted against the BCL-2 gene.157 Furthermore,
BCL-2 transgenic mice develop a pattern of polyclonal hyperplasia of mature, long-lived B cells resting in G 0, which, despite morphologic similarities, contrasts with
the consistent monoclonality of human follicular lymphoma. 158 Hence the view that BCL-2 activation is not sufficient for follicular lymphoma development and that other
genetic lesions or host factors are required. A strong candidate is represented by chronic antigen stimulation and selection that would synergize with BCL-2 in driving
follicular lymphoma expansion. 156,159 With time, and analogous to the human disease, a fraction of BCL-2 transgenic mice progresses to develop aggressive, clonal
large cell lymphomas that have acquired additional genetic lesions 160 (see the following section, Other Genetic Lesions).
Other Genetic Lesions
Other cancer-related genes involved in lymphomagenesis, such as c- MYC and p53, do not appear to be involved in follicular lymphoma. Deletions of chromosome 6
are present in 20% of cases. 51 Over time, follicular lymphomas tend to convert into an aggressive lymphoma with a diffuse large cell architecture 1,2 (see Fig. 45.1-1).
This histologic shift is generally accompanied by the accumulation of p53 mutations and, in approximately 40% of cases, by mutations of BCL-6 or inactivation of p16
(or both).45,50,134 Rearrangements of c-MYC may also accompany the histologic transformation of follicular lymphoma in rare cases. 140
MUCOSA-ASSOCIATED LYMPHOID TISSUE LYMPHOMAS
The majority of gastric MALT lymphomas are associated with Helicobacter pylori infection. 161 It has been suggested that gastric MALT lymphomas may be dependent
on antigen stimulation by H pylori because malignant lymphoid cells respond to H pylori antigens and because the lymphoma may regress, at least partially, when the
infection is eradicated. 162 The potential role of antigen in MALT lymphoma pathogenesis is further supported by the observation that MALT lymphoma cells harbor the
genotypic clue of antigen-experienced B cells (i.e., somatic hypermutation of Ig genes). 9,10,13 Whether the development of MALT lymphoma arising in body sites other

than the stomach is also dependent on antigen stimulation and selection remains an open question. In this respect, it is remarkable that thyroid MALT lymphoma is
generally a sequela of Hashimoto thyroiditis, an autoimmune process causing the exposure of B cells to thyroid-derived autoantigens.
Cytogenetic studies have pointed to several abnormalities selectively and recurrently involved in these tumors. The most common of these abnormalities is
t(11;18)(q21;q21). 24 The t(11;18)(2;33) translocation occurs in approximately 50% of cytogenetically abnormal MALT lymphomas, independent of the site of
origin. 163,164 The genes involved by t(11;18) are API2 on 11q21 and MLT (for MALT lymphoma translocation) on 18q21. API2 belongs to the family of inhibitor of
apoptosis proteins that plays an evolutionary conserved role in regulating programmed cell death in diverse species. Although the function of MLT is currently
unknown, it has been hypothesized that the API2/MLT fusion protein resulting from t(11;18)(q21;q21) may lead to increased inhibition of apoptosis and, therefore,
confer a survival advantage to MALT lymphomas. 163,164
Other recurrent chromosomal abnormalities of MALT lymphomas are trisomy 3 and t(1;14). The genes involved by trisomy 3 are not presently known. 165 Recurrent
abnormalities of chromosomal band 1p22, generally represented by t(1;14)(p22;q32), occur in a small percentage of MALT lymphomas and cause alterations of the
BCL-10 gene. 166,167BCL-10 is a cellular homologue of the equine herpesvirus-2 E10 gene and encodes an amino-terminal caspase recruitment domain homologous to
that found in several apoptotic molecules. 166,167 The wild-type BCL-10 gene activates the NF-kB signaling cascade and is able to induce apoptosis in different cell
types. Two distinct types of BCL-10 aberrations are observed in MALT lymphomas carrying t(1;14)(p22;q32). 166,167 First, BCL-10 is overexpressed. Second, BCL-10
genes from t(1;14)-positive MALT lymphomas harbor truncations either in, or carboxy-terminal to, the caspase recruitment domain. BCL-10 mutants lose the
proapoptotic ability of wild-type BCL-10 and, in some cases, also fail to activate NF-kB. 166,167 Therefore, it is conceivable that overexpression of BCL-10–translocated
alleles might have a twofold effect on lymphomagenesis: Loss of BCL-10 proapoptosis may confer a survival advantage to MALT B cells, and constitutive NF-kB
activation may provide both antiapoptotic and proliferative signals mediated via its transcriptional targets.
Other genetic alterations commonly involved in other lymphoma types also have been observed in MALT lymphomas, including BCL-6 alterations and p53
mutations.45,168,169 and 170
DIFFUSE LARGE CELL LYMPHOMA
B-lineage DLCL is a potentially curable disease that accounts for approximately 40% of NHLs of adulthood. 1,2 The molecular pathogenesis of DLCL is complex and
includes both genetic lesions specific for this disease (i.e., rearrangements of BCL-6) and molecular alterations common to other NHL categories (see Fig. 45.1-1).
Chromosomal Translocations Involving the BCL-6 Gene
Cytogenetic studies of NHL have demonstrated that chromosomal alterations affecting band 3q27 are a frequent recurrent abnormality in B-lineage DLCL. 171,172 These
alterations are predominantly represented by reciprocal translocations between the 3q27 region and several alternative partner chromosomes, including, though not
restricted to, the sites of the Ig genes at 14q32 (Ig H), 2p11 (Ig k), and 22q11 (Ig l)171,172 (Fig. 45.1-4). The variability of the partner chromosomes juxtaposed to 3q27 in
B-lineage DLCL translocations suggests that these abnormalities belong to the group of “promiscuous” translocations, which involve a fixed chromosomal breakpoint
on one side and, on the other side, have different chromosomal partners in different cases.

FIGURE 45.1-4. Chromosomal sites implicated in der(3)(q27) and leading to rearrangement of BCL-6. The variability of the partner chromosome juxtaposed to 3q27 in
B-lineage diffuse large cell lymphoma suggests that these chromosomal abnormalities belong to the group of “promiscuous” translocations. The thick arrows point to
some sites that are involved more frequently than others. In many cases, indicated by ?der(3) in the figure, the partner chromosomal site cannot be identified with
precision by conventional cytogenetics.

The cloning of the 3q27 chromosomal breakpoints revealed the BCL-6 gene, which is involved in the overwhelming majority of B-lineage DLCL cases harboring 3q27
breaks, irrespective of the partner chromosome participating in the translocation 173,174,175,176 and 177 (see Table 45.1-1). The BCL-6 gene is a transcriptional repressor
belonging to the family of transcription factors containing zinc fingers, a protein sequence motif able to mediate the protein binding to specific DNA
sites.173,174,175,176,177,178 and 179 The amino-terminal region of the BCL-6 protein contains a domain, termed POZ, which is homologous to domains found in several other
zinc-finger transcription factors. 180 Apparently, the POZ domain acts as a protein-protein interface implicated in homo- and heterodimerization processes. 180 These
structural features of the BCL-6 protein are consistent with functional studies indicating that BCL-6 can indeed function as a transcriptional repressor that inhibits the
expression of genes carrying its specific DNA-binding motif. 181
The pattern of BCL-6 protein expression in human tissues is highly specific, and high levels are specifically found in B cells. 182 In particular, BCL-6 expression is
topographically restricted to the germinal center, where BCL-6 is expressed by both centroblasts and centrocytes, whereas expression of BCL-6 is absent in
pre–germinal center B cells (virgin B cells) and post–germinal center B cells (memory B cells and plasma cells). 182 The observation that BCL-6 is expressed within the
germinal center, but not before entrance into or after exit from the germinal center, led to the postulation that BCL-6 may be needed for germinal center development
and sustainment, whereas its down-regulation may be necessary for further differentiation of B cells. 182,183,184 and 185
The precise role of BCL-6 in physiologic immune processes has been further clarified by knockout animal models carrying biallelically disrupted BCL-6 genes.186,187
Mice carrying the BCL-6–/– phenotype consistently fail to form germinal centers. Consistent with lack of germinal center formation, BCL-6–/– mice also display
impairments in the T-cell–dependent antigen-specific IgG response. Overall, these animal models unequivocally demonstrate that BCL-6 is a key regulator of
germinal center formation and B-cell immune response.
Chromosomal translocations involving band 3q27 truncate the BCL-6 gene within its 5' flanking region or within the first exon or intron ( Fig. 45.1-5), making these
alterations readily detectable as rearrangements by Southern blot hybridization analysis of tumor DNA. 173,174,175,176 and 177 By conventional molecular assays, BCL-6
rearrangements are detectable in 35% of B-lineage DLCL cases and in a small fraction of follicular lymphomas. 188,189 Conversely, BCL-6 rearrangements are virtually
absent in all other types of lymphoid neoplasms. 188,189 The coding domain of the BCL-6 gene is left intact in all cases displaying BCL-6 rearrangements, whereas the
5' regulatory sequences, which contain the BCL-6 promoter, are either truncated or, alternatively, completely removed. 173,174,175,176 and 177 In all BCL-6 rearrangements,
the entire coding sequence of BCL-6 is juxtaposed downstream to heterologous sequences that, based on cytogenetic data, may originate from different chromosomal
sites in different patients (see Fig. 45.1-4 and Fig. 45.1-5). The common functional consequence of BCL-6 translocations is the juxtaposition of heterologous
promoters to the BCL-6 coding domain, a mechanism called promoter substitution190,191 (see Fig. 45.1-5). The substitution of the BCL-6 promoter by heterologous
regulatory sequences causes deregulated BCL-6 expression in B-lineage DLCL carrying BCL-6 rearrangements. One feature shared by the heterologous promoters
linked to rearranged BCL-6 alleles is that they are physiologically active in normal B cells and are not down-regulated during the late stages of B-cell
differentiation. 190,191 Thus, BCL-6 rearrangements may prevent down-regulation of BCL-6 and, in turn, block the differentiation of germinal center B cells toward the

stage of plasma cells. According to this model, B-lineage DLCL cells carrying BCL-6 rearrangements would thus be “frozen” at the stage of germinal center cells.

FIGURE 45.1-5. Schematic representation of BCL-6 translocations. The germline configuration of the BCL-6 gene, mapping to 3q27, is shown in the upper right panel
of the figure. In its germline configuration, BCL-6 is composed of ten exons. The coding region of the BCL-6 gene is indicated by black boxes, whereas the noncoding
exons (or portions of exons) are indicated by white boxes. The physiologic BCL-6 promoter within exon 1 is shown by an arrow. The frequency of BCL-6 breakpoint
locations is also shown. The germline configuration of several BCL-6 translocation partners (TTF, BOB1, Ig H, and other hypothetical genes designated as X) is shown
in the upper left panel of the figure. The bottom panel of the figure depicts the molecular configuration of representative translocated BCL-6 alleles. Independent of
the partner chromosome involved, all translocated BCL-6 alleles are deprived of their exon 1 and, consequently, of their physiologic promoter. The novel sequences
derived from the partner chromosomes are thus juxtaposed 5' to the intron 1 of BCL-6. These novel sequences provide a heterologous promoter to BCL-6, such as the
IgH germline transcript promoter Ig (or, alternatively, Im) in the case of t(3;14); the TTF promoter in the case of t(3;4); and the BOB1 promoter in the case of t(3;11).
The genomic configuration of the BCL-6 gene downstream to the breakpoint site is preserved, thus leaving intact the BCL-6 coding sequence. The transcripts
resulting from representative BCL-6 translocations are also shown in the lower part of the bottom panel of the figure. In all cases, the translocation gives rise to a
fusion transcript, exemplified by TTF/BCL-6, BOB1/BCL-6, Ig/BCL-6, and X/BCL-6. These transcripts initiate from the heterologous promoter provided by the
chromosomal site juxtaposed to BCL-6, and they retain the entire normal BCL-6 coding domain, which translates into a normal-size BCL-6 protein.

Beside promoter substitution, the BCL-6 gene can also be altered by somatic hypermutation at its 5' noncoding region. Hypermutation of BCL-6 can be found in
normal germinal center cells. 44,192 It is also found in B-cell NHLs that are also characterized by somatic IgV hypermutation, 43,44 and 45,193,194 suggesting a common
mechanism of mutation. Functional analysis of BCL-6 mutated alleles indicates that some mutations derived from DLCL but not from normal germinal center cells may
deregulate the basal level of BCL-6 transcription (unpublished results). This finding indicates that BCL-6 can also be deregulated by somatic hypermutation of its
promoter, which further supports the role of BCL-6 deregulation in the pathogenesis of DLCL.
Molecular Heterogeneity of Diffuse Large Cell Lymphoma
The WHO classification has established that, with current knowledge and methods, it is impractical to histologically subclassify DLCL into its morphologic variants
(i.e., diffuse centroblastic lymphoma and diffuse immunoblastic lymphoma). 1,2 However, both clinicians and pathologists reach consensus in suggesting that DLCL is
in fact a heterogeneous disease. 1 Most likely, diversity does not depend on cytologic features, but rather on the tumor genotype. The biologic diversity of DLCL has
been validated by the identification of at least three distinct genetic types of the disease 50,141,195,196 (Fig. 45.1-6). The first type, accounting for approximately 40% of
cases, associates with rearrangements of BCL-6 in the absence of other known genetic lesions. DLCLs harboring BCL-6 rearrangements are de novo lymphomas,
presenting without a previous history of follicular lymphoma. The second genetic type of DLCL involves activation of BCL-2 in combination with p53 mutations. DLCLs
harboring BCL-2 rearrangements and p53 mutations derive from the histologic transformation of a previous follicular lymphoma. Finally, the third genetic group of
DLCL displays germline BCL-2 and BCL-6 genes. The genotypic configuration of DLCL is thought to be of prognostic relevance. For example, some studies
suggested that DLCLs associated with BCL-6 rearrangements display the most favorable prognosis, whereas cases carrying BCL-2 translocations have the poorest
outcome.195,197,198 The exact prognostic relevance of BCL-6 rearrangements, however, still remains a controversial issue. 188,199,200

FIGURE 45.1-6. Model of molecular pathways in B-lineage diffuse large cell lymphoma (B-DLCL) development. Three main pathogenetic pathways may be
recognized in B-DLCL. The first two molecular pathways are designated de novo pathways, because in these instances B-DLCL develops without a preexistent
follicular lymphoma. One de novo pathway implicates the BCL-6 gene and occurs in approximately 35% of B-DLCL. The second de novo pathway involves presently
unknown genetic lesions (indicated by the question mark), although some cases may harbor alterations of REL. The third pathway, designated as the transformation
pathway, implicates the transformation of a preexisting follicular lymphoma to a B-DLCL histology. Cases of B-DLCL belonging to this pathway harbor rearrangements
of BCL-2 and mutations of p53. Whereas the BCL-2 rearrangement is already present in the follicular lymphoma phase, p53 mutations are gained during histologic
transformation. Other genetic lesions, including p16 inactivation, also associate with transformed B-DLCL.

The application of novel DNA technologies to DLCL is likely to refine the biologic heterogeneity of this disease. One study using DNA microarrays demonstrated
diversity in gene expression among DLCL cases, allowing for the distinction between a germinal center–like variant of the disease and a variant resembling peripheral
blood B cells activated in vitro.201 This distinction has been proposed to be of prognostic value, because patients with the germinal center–like variant of the disease
display a better overall survival. 201
BURKITT'S LYMPHOMA
Burkitt's lymphoma includes two clinical variants: sporadic Burkitt's lymphoma and endemic Burkitt's lymphoma. 1,2 Some cases may present as acute leukemias with
Burkitt's tumor cells and are termed L3 acute lymphoblastic leukemias.1,2 All Burkitt's lymphoma cases, including the leukemic variants, share one common genetic lesion
(chromosomal translocations involving region 8q24 and one of the Ig loci) and, at variable frequency, other genetic lesions, including inactivation of p53 and p16,
deletions of 6q, and infection by EBV 48,51,59,60,61,62 and 63,134,202 (see Fig. 45.1-1).
Chromosomal Translocations Involving the c-MYC Gene
Translocations of region 8q24 involve the c- MYC locus and have provided the first example of the involvement of protooncogenes in tumor-associated chromosomal
abnormalities. 202 The c-MYC locus can be involved in three distinct translocations with one of the Ig loci, including Ig H, Igk, or Igl 202,203,204,205,206 and 207 (see Table
45.1-1). IgH is involved in 80% of the cases leading to t(8;14)(q24;q32). The remaining 20% is composed of t(2;8)(p11;q24), which involves Ig k (15%), and

t(8;22)(q24;q11), which involves Ig l (5%).
Although fairly homogeneous at the microscopic level, these translocations display a high degree of molecular heterogeneity. The t(8;14) breakpoints are located 5'
and centromeric to c-MYC, whereas they map 3' to c-MYC in t(2;8) and t(8;22). 202,203,204,205,206 and 207 Further molecular heterogeneity derives from the exact breakpoint
sites of chromosomes 8 and 14 of t(8;14) (Fig. 45.1-7). Translocations of endemic Burkitt's lymphoma tend to involve sequences on chromosome 8 at an undefined
distance (more than 1000 kilobases) 5' to c- MYC, and sequences on chromosome 14 within or in proximity to the Ig J H region.38,208 In sporadic Burkitt's lymphoma,
t(8;14) preferentially involves sequences within or immediately 5' (fewer than 3 kilobases) to c- MYC on chromosome 8, and sequences on chromosome 14 within the
Ig switch regions. 38,208
The common effect of t(8;14), t(2;8), and t(8;22) is that c- MYC–translocated alleles are expressed constitutively in tumor cells, as opposed to the tight regulation of
c-MYC levels in normal B cells. 209,210 and 211 At least two distinct mechanisms may be responsible for c- MYC deregulation. These include (1) juxtaposition of c- MYC to
heterologous enhancers derived from Ig loci; and (2) structural alterations in the 5' regulatory regions of c- MYC, putatively altering their responsiveness to cellular
factors regulating c-MYC expression. In fact, the c-MYC exon 1–intron 1 border, where c-MYC regulatory sequences are located, is either decapitated by the
translocation or undergoes selective and consistent mutations in translocated alleles 42,203,204,205,206 and 207 (see Fig. 45.1-7). In addition to homotopic deregulation,
oncogenic conversion of c- MYC is also thought to be due to amino acid substitutions in c- MYC exon 2 corresponding to the transactivation domain of the c- MYC
protein.41,212 These mutations would abolish the physiologic ability of p107, a nuclear protein related to RB1, to suppress the transactivation domain of c- MYC.213

FIGURE 45.1-7. Schematic representation of c-MYC translocations. The germline configuration of the c-MYC gene, mapping to 8q24, is shown in the upper panel of
the figure. In its germline configuration, c-MYC is composed of three exons. The coding region of the c-MYC gene is indicated by black boxes, whereas noncoding
exons (or portions of exons) are indicated by white boxes. The c-MYC promoters within exon 1 are indicated by arrows. The 8q24 breakpoint regions of sporadic
Burkitt's lymphoma (sBL) and endemic Burkitt's lymphoma (eBL) also are indicated. The germline configuration of Ig H on chromosome 14q32 also is shown in the
upper panel of the figure. Boxes indicate the joining (J), switch (S), and constant (C) regions of Ig H. The 14q32 breakpoint regions of sBL and eBL also are indicated.
The bottom panels of the figure depict the molecular consequences of t(8;14)(q24;q32), which causes the juxtaposition of c-MYC to the Ig H locus. Two molecularly
distinct types of translocations are recognized, which preferentially associate with either sBL or eBL. In the case of t(8;14) of sBL, the c-MYC breakpoint involves
sequences within c-MYC, which is thus decapitated of its exon 1. Because the physiologically active promoters of c-MYC are removed by t(8;14) of sBL, a novel
transcriptional initiation site (P3), located within c-MYC intron 1 and otherwise silent in physiologic conditions, is activated in c-MYC alleles involved by t(8;14) of sBL.
Within the Ig H locus, the breakpoint falls in the proximity of the switch µ (Sµ) region. Notably, the gross configuration of the coding sequence of the translocated
c-MYC allele is left intact. At the nucleotide level, however, translocated c-MYC alleles frequently harbor point mutations within the exon 2 coding sequence, leading
to alteration in the amino acid sequence of the c-MYC protein. The complementary DNA (cDNA) resulting from t(8;14) of sBL includes c-MYC exons 2 and 3, which,
on their 5' side, are preceded by an abnormally transcribed sequence of intron 1, starting from the novel transcriptional initiation site within c-MYC intron 1. Because
the c-MYC coding region is intact, a normal-size c-MYC protein is translated by t(8;14) of sBL. The reader is referred to the text for a description of the functional
consequences of t(8;14) of sBL in terms of deregulation of translocated c-MYC. In the case of t(8;14) of eBL, the c-MYC breakpoint involves sequences on
chromosome 8 at an undefined distance (more than 100 kilobases) 5' to c-MYC and sequences on chromosome 14 within or in proximity to the immunoglobulin J H
region. The internal genomic configuration of the translocated c-MYC allele is thus apparently preserved. However, c-MYC alleles involved by t(8;14) of eBL
consistently harbor small mutations clustered around the exon 1–intron 1 border, where c-MYC regulatory regions are located. In addition, and in common with t(8;14)
of sBL, point mutations within the exon 2 coding sequence, leading to alteration in the amino acid sequence of the c-MYC protein, also are frequently detected in
c-MYC alleles affected by t(8;14) of eBL. The cDNA transcribed by t(8;14) of eBL includes c-MYC exons 1 through 3 and gives rise to a normal-size c-MYC protein.
The reader is referred to the text for a description of the functional consequences of t(8;14) of eBL on the transcriptional regulation of c-MYC.

The product of c-MYC is a ubiquitously expressed nuclear phosphoprotein that functions as a transcriptional regulator controlling cell proliferation, differentiation, and
apoptosis.202In vivo, c-MYC is found mainly in heterodimeric complexes with the related protein MAX, and such interaction is required for c- MYC–induced stimulation
of transcription and cell proliferation. 214,215,216,217,218 and 219 Conversely, MAX can form heterodimers with MAD and MXI1, two novel basic helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper
proteins that act as negative regulators of transcription. 220,221 In NHL carrying c-MYC translocations, it is conceivable that constitutive expression of c- MYC leads to
the prevalence of MYC/MAX complexes over MAD/MAX and MXI1/MAX heterodimers, thus inducing positive growth regulation. In fact, expression of c- MYC regulates
transcription of a subset of target genes that have diverse roles in regulating cell growth by affecting DNA metabolism and dynamics, energy metabolism, and protein
synthesis. 222 One of these genes is represented by TERT (for telomerase reverse transcriptase), a specialized type of transcriptase modulating the activity of
telomerase. 223 The fact that TERT is directly induced by c-MYC explains the association between c- MYC overexpression and telomerase activity observed in human
cells. 223 Because telomerase preserves chromosome integrity by maintaining telomere length, and because telomere length is a limiting factor in determining the
replicative lifespan of a cell, the maintenance of chromosomal integrity via stimulation of telomerase activity may be an important component of the role of c- MYC in
facilitating cell proliferation. 223,224
Substantial experimental evidence documents that the constitutive expression of c- MYC can influence the growth of B cells in vitro and in vivo, consistent with a role
in B-cell lymphomagenesis. In vitro, the expression of c-MYC oncogenes transfected into EBV immortalized human B cells, a potential natural target for c- MYC
activation in EBV-positive Burkitt's lymphoma, leads to their malignant transformation. 225 In addition, antisense oligonucleotides directed against translocated c- MYC
alleles are able to revert tumorigenicity of Burkitt's lymphoma cell lines. 226In vivo, the targeted expression of c- MYC oncogenes in the B-cell lineage of transgenic mice
leads to the development of B-cell malignancy at relatively high frequency. 227
Other Genetic Lesions
In addition to c-MYC activation in 100% of Burkitt's lymphoma cases, disruption of p53 occurs in 30% of sporadic and endemic Burkitt's lymphoma 48 (see Table
45.1-2). Deletions of 6q are detected in approximately 30% of the Burkitt's lymphoma cases independent of the clinical variant. 51 Inactivation of p16 also has been
reported in a fraction of cases. 228 Another lesion that contributes to the development of this malignancy is monoclonal EBV infection, present in virtually all cases of
endemic Burkitt's lymphoma and in approximately 30% of sporadic Burkitt's lymphoma 60,61,62,63 and 64 (see Table 45.1-2). Because EBV infection in Burkitt's lymphoma
displays a peculiar latent infection phenotype characterized by negativity of both EBV-transforming antigens, LMP-1 and EBNA-2, the precise pathogenetic role of the
virus has remained elusive. However, it has been proposed that a class of small RNA molecules, termed EBER and consistently expressed by all Burkitt's lymphomas,
may mediate the transforming potential of EBV in Burkitt's lymphoma. 229
ACQUIRED IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROME–RELATED NON-HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA
The association between an immunodeficiency state and the development of lymphoma has been long since recognized in several clinical conditions, including
congenital (e.g., Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome), iatrogenic (e.g., treatment with immunosuppressor agents), and viral-induced (e.g., AIDS) immunodeficiencies. The
increasing frequency of human immunodeficiency virus infection has emerged as a major risk factor for lymphomagenesis and has prompted detailed investigations of

the molecular pathophysiology of AIDS-related NHL. 230,231,232,233 and 234
AIDS-related NHLs invariably derive from B cells and are primarily classified into three main clinicopathologic categories: AIDS-related Burkitt's lymphoma,
AIDS-related DLCL, and AIDS-related primary effusion lymphoma. 2,74,75,230,231,232,233 and 234 Based on the presence or absence of immunoblastic features, AIDS-related
DLCL may be further distinguished into large noncleaved cell lymphoma and immunoblastic lymphoma plasmacytoid. 64,230,231,232,233 and 234 Based on the site of origin,
AIDS-related NHLs are generally grouped into systemic AIDS-related NHL and AIDS-related primary central nervous system lymphoma. 230,231,232,233 and 234 Systemic
AIDS-related NHLs may be either AIDS-related DLCL or AIDS-related Burkitt's lymphoma. Conversely, AIDS-related primary central nervous system lymphomas
display a uniform morphology consistent with a diffuse architecture of large cells.
The different categories of AIDS-related NHL associate with distinctive molecular pathways. 230,231,232,233 and 234 Cases of AIDS-related Burkitt's lymphoma consistently
display activation of c-MYC by chromosomal translocations that show structural similarities to those found in sporadic Burkitt's lymphoma. 49,62,230,231,232,233,234 and 235
Rearrangements of BCL-6 are consistently absent in this type of AIDS-related NHL. 235,236 AIDS-related Burkitt's lymphoma also frequently harbors mutations of p53
(60%), mutations of BCL-6 5' noncoding regions (60%) and, in 30% of cases, infection of the tumor clone by EBV. 49,64,68,193,235,236 The EBV-encoded antigens LMP-1
and EBNA-2 are not expressed by AIDS-related Burkitt's lymphoma. 64,238,239 In addition to genetic lesions and EBV infection, stimulation and selection by antigens,
frequently represented by autoantigens, appear to be a prominent feature of AIDS-related Burkitt's lymphoma. 240,241
AIDS-related DLCL displays several genotypic differences when compared with AIDS-related Burkitt's lymphoma. 230,231,232,233 and 234 First, the most frequent genetic
alteration detected in AIDS-related DLCL is infection by EBV, which occurs in approximately 60% to 70% of cases and associates frequently, although not always,
with expression of LMP-1.49,64,68 Second, AIDS-related DLCL displays rearrangements of BCL-6 in 20% of cases.236 Mutations of BCL-6 5' noncoding regions occur in
70% of AIDS-related DLCL cases. 193 AIDS-related DLCL can be segregated into two distinct histogenetic categories based on the expression pattern of the BCL-6
protein: the EBV-encoded LMP-1; and the CD138/syndecan-1 antigen, a proteoglycan associated with the terminal phases of B-cell differentiation. 64,239 AIDS-related
DLCL associated with the BCL-6 +/syndecan-1 –/LMP-1– phenotype tend to display a large noncleaved cell morphology and closely reflect the phenotype of germinal
center B cells. 64,239 Conversely, BCL-6–/syndecan-1 +/LMP-1 + AIDS-related DLCLs are morphologically consistent with immunoblastic lymphoma plasmacytoid and
reflect a post–germinal center stage of B-cell differentiation. 64,239
All AIDS-related primary central nervous system lymphomas harbor EBV infection. 66,242 However, only a fraction of AIDS-related primary central nervous system
lymphomas, namely those with immunoblastic plasmacytoid morphology, express the LMP-1–transforming protein of EBV. 66 As for systemic AIDS-related DLCL,
AIDS-related primary central nervous system lymphomas may be distinguished into two phenotypic categories based on the expression pattern of BCL-6:
CD138/syndecan-1 and LMP-1. 66 AIDS-related primary central nervous system lymphomas also carry mutations of BCL-6 in 60% of cases. 66 The association of
AIDS-related primary central nervous system lymphoma with mutations of BCL-6 as well as Ig genes indicates their origin from germinal center–related B cells. 66,243
Although some reports have suggested that HHV-8 may be related to primary central nervous system lymphoma pathogenesis in immunocompromised patients,
extensive analysis of AIDS-related primary central nervous system lymphoma has unequivocally ruled out this hypothesis. 244,245
The last type of AIDS-related NHL that has been characterized at the molecular level is represented by primary effusion lymphoma, also known as body cavity–based
lymphoma.71,74,75 This entity is a novel lymphoma characterized by HHV-8 infection and clinically presenting as effusions in the serosal cavities of the body (pleura,
pericardium, peritoneum) in the absence of solid tumor masses. 71,74,75 Primary effusion lymphoma consistently derives from B cells that reflect a preterminal stage of
B-cell differentiation. 71,74,75,237,246 Infection of the tumor clone by HHV-8 occurs in 100% of cases and is a sine qua non for the diagnosis of the disease. 71,74,75 In
addition to HHV-8, cases of primary effusion lymphoma frequently carry coinfection of the tumor clone by EBV. 65,67,71,74,75

MOLECULAR PATHOGENESIS OF T-CELL NON-HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA
Malignancies of mature T cells are a highly heterogeneous group of diseases. 1,2 These malignancies greatly differ in clinical behavior, immunophenotypic features,
and genetic lesions involved in their pathogenesis. 1,2 In Western countries, mature T-cell malignancies overall represent only 15% to 20% of tumors derived from
mature lymphocytes and are relatively uncommon when compared to mature B-cell malignancies. 247 A higher frequency of mature T-cell malignancies is reported in
other parts of the world, namely Japan and the Caribbean. 247
Only a few categories of mature T-cell malignancies have been investigated in detail at the molecular level. These include Ki-1 + (CD30+) anaplastic large cell
lymphoma, adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma, T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia and, to a lesser extent, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. CD30 + anaplastic large cell
lymphoma tends to occur in childhood and young adults. 1,2 The term adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma encompasses a spectrum of lymphoproliferative diseases
associated with the human retrovirus HTLV-1 and characteristically expressing large amounts of IL-2 receptors (CD25). The geographic distribution of adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma is mainly restricted to Southwestern Japan and the Caribbean basin, although cases also have been reported in the United States and Europe in
long-term immigrants from the affected geographic areas. 1,2 T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia represents a rare T-cell malignancy that presents predominantly as a
leukemic disease. 1,2 An intrinsic tropism for the skin is displayed by cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, which includes mycosis fungoides and its leukemic manifestation,
known as Sézary syndrome.1,2
T-CELL ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMA
Anaplastic large cell lymphoma is a specific category of T-cell NHL composed of large pleomorphic cells that usually express the CD30 antigen. 1,2 Anaplastic large
cell lymphoma is characterized by frequent cutaneous and extranodal involvement. 1,2 Conventional karyotyping analysis of anaplastic large cell lymphoma cases has
shown a unique translocation involving bands 2p23 and 5q35 in a substantial fraction of cases. 24 The cloning of the t(2;5)(p23;q35) translocation has demonstrated
that it involves the fusion of the nuclephosmin/B23 ( NPM) gene on 5q35 to a novel anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) on 2p23 (see Table 45.1-1).248 As a
consequence of this translocation, the NPM and ALK genes are fused to form a chimeric transcript that encodes a hybrid protein (p80) in which the amino-terminus of
NPM is linked to the catalytic domain of ALK.248 Two distinct oncogenic effects are thought to be caused by the t(2;5) translocation. First, the ALK gene, which is not
physiologically expressed in normal T lymphocytes, undergoes heterologous expression in lymphoma cells, conceivably because of its juxtaposition to the promoter
sequences of NPM, which are physiologically expressed in T cells. Second, based on the activation model of other tyrosine kinase oncogenes, one would predict that
the truncated ALK constitutively phosphorylates intracellular targets to trigger malignant transformation.
The pathogenetic role of NPM/ALK rearrangements is supported by studies in vitro and in vivo. First, overexpression of the p80 hybrid protein induces neoplastic
transformation of target cells in in vitro models, substantiating the notion that the p80 kinase is in fact aberrantly activated. 249 Second, retroviral-mediated gene
transfer of NPM/ALKin vivo causes T-cell lymphoid malignancies in mice. 250 In such animal models, NPM/ALK selectively transforms lymphoid cells of T-cell lineage,
whereas the growth properties of other hematopoietic cells remain unaffected. 250
The distribution of NPM/ALK rearrangements throughout the spectrum of NHL is highly selective, being virtually restricted to T-cell lineage anaplastic large cell
lymphoma.251,252 and 253 Within this category, NPM/ALK rearrangements seem to preferentially associate with cases of childhood (more than 85% positivity), although
they are also detected in a large fraction of cases of adulthood (60%). 251,252 and 253
ADULT T-CELL LEUKEMIA/LYMPHOMA
The molecular pathogenesis of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma has been elucidated to a wider extent in comparison with other mature T-cell tumors. Adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma is associated with HTLV-I infection of the tumor cells in 100% of cases, although the rate of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma development among
seropositive individuals is relatively low (less than 5% lifetime risk). 85,86 and 87,254,255,256,257,258,259 and 260 The period between infection and onset of clinical disease is
typically quite long, varying between 10 and 30 years. 260 Unlike acutely transforming animal retroviruses, the HTLV-I genome does not encode a known oncogene. 85,86
and 87,254,255,256,257,258,259 and 260
Furthermore, this retrovirus does not transform T cells by cis-activation of an adjacent protooncogene, because this provirus appears to
integrate randomly within the host genome. 85,86 and 87,254,255,256,257,258,259 and 260 Rather, the pathogenetic effect of HTLV-I in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma seems to be
due to the viral production of a transregulatory protein (HTLV-I tax) that markedly increases expression of all viral gene products and transcriptionally activates the

expression of certain host genes, including IL-2, the a chain of the IL-2 receptor (CD25), c-sis, c-fos, and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. 88,89,90,91
and 92
Indeed, a property of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma cells is the constitutive high level expression of IL-2 receptors. The central role of these genes in normal
T-cell activation and growth, together with the results of in vitro studies, support the notion that tax-mediated activation of these host genes represents an important
mechanism by which HTLV-I initiates T-cell transformation. 89 In addition, tax interferes at multiple sites with DNA damage repair functions and with mitotic
checkpoints, consistent with the fact that adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma cells harbor a high frequency of karyotypic abnormalities. 94,95 and 96
The long period of clinical latency that precedes the development of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma, the small percentage of infected patients that develop this
malignancy, and the observation that leukemic cells from adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma are monoclonal suggest that HTLV-I is not sufficient to cause the full
malignant phenotype. 85,86 and 87 An attractive model for adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma would therefore include an early period of tax-induced polyclonal T-cell
proliferation that, in turn, would facilitate the occurrence of additional genetic events leading to the monoclonal outgrowth of a fully transformed cell. In this respect, a
recurrent genetic lesion in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma is represented by mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene, which is inactivated in 40% of cases. 261,262
T-CELL PROLYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia frequently carries cytogenetic abnormalities of chromosome 11, the most common abnormalities being monosomy 11, partial or
terminal deletions of 11q, and unbalanced translocations involving the 11q arm. 24 The gene relevant to these abnormalities has been identified and has been shown
to correspond to ATM, a gene that is also responsible for the hereditary disorder ataxia-telangiectasia. 263,264 Whereas ATM is mutated in the germline of
ataxia-telangiectasia patients, it is altered somatically in cases of T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia. 263,264 Mutations of ATM in T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia associate
with the deletion of the other allele and lead to the absence, premature truncation, or alteration of the ATM gene product, consistent with the inactivation model of
tumor suppressor genes.x 263,264 Circumstantial evidence suggests that ATM might be involved in cell-cycle regulation and DNA repair, which in fact have been shown
to be defective in cells with biallelic ATM inactivation.265
CUTANEOUS T-CELL LYMPHOMA
Rearrangements of the lyt-10/NFKB-2 gene at 10q24 have been demonstrated in a sizable fraction of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma tumors. The lyt-10 gene (also called
NFKB-2) is a novel member of the NF-kB rel family of transcription factors. 266,267 The normal products of these genes have structural homologies within the
DNA-binding rel domain and share the ability to bind to specific (kB) target sequences found in various inducible enhancer and promoter elements. In addition to the
DNA-binding domain, the lyt-10/NFKB-2 gene harbors an ankyrin motif, which is thought to regulate the physiologic nuclear/cytoplasm distribution of the
lyt-10/NFKB-2 protein. 266,267 The translocation breaks observed in NHL consistently disrupt the ankyrin domain, separating it from the DNA-binding domain. It is
therefore conceivable that an intact DNA-binding domain, once separated from the regulatory ankyrin portion of the gene, might be constitutively activated and act as
an oncogene to T cells.

MOLECULAR PATHOGENESIS OF HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA
HL, also known as Hodgkin's disease, is characterized by scattered large atypical cells residing in a complex admixture of inflammatory cells. 1,2 Two different biologic
entities have been recognized within HL: nodular lymphocyte predominance HL (NLPHL) and classic HL comprising the nodular sclerosis, mixed cellularity, and
lymphocyte depletion variants. Historically, biologic studies of HL have been hampered by the paucity of HL diagnostic cells [i.e., Reed-Sternberg (RS) or Hodgkin's
cells] in HL biopsies. More recently, however, the availability of sophisticated laboratory techniques that enable the isolation and enrichment of HL neoplastic cells
has been instrumental in the understanding of HL histogenesis.
The neoplastic cells of both classic HL and NLPHL typically represent clonal populations of B-lineage cells, as documented by the presence of clonal rearrangements
of Ig genes. 268,269,270,271,272,273 and 274 The consistent occurrence of somatic mutations and their pattern within (V) region genes amplified from neoplastic cells of both
classic HL and NLPHL indicate that both types of HL are derived from B cells that reside in, or have transited through, the germinal center. 268,269,270,271,272,273 and 274
Neoplastic cells of NLPHL display ongoing mutation of IgV genes, suggesting derivation from centroblasts residing in the germinal center. Also, neoplastic cells of
NLPHL show the typical clues of antigen selection, indicating a putative pathogenetic role of stimulation by antigen molecules. Conversely, no ongoing mutation of IgV
genes is observed in RS cells of classic HL, consistent with derivation from centrocytes or post–germinal center B cells. In some cases, RS cells of classic HL harbor
stop codons in in-frame V H gene rearrangements (crippling mutations). Because IgV crippling mutations prevent antigen selection, it is likely that RS cells of classic
HL have escaped apoptosis through a mechanism not linked to antigen stimulation, possibly represented by a transforming event, such as that mediated by the EBV
LMP-1. The differences in the histogenesis of NLPHL and classic HL revealed by molecular studies also have been confirmed at the phenotypic level. In fact, the
neoplastic cells of NLPHL consistently display the BCL-6 +/syndecan-1 – profile typical of germinal center B cells, whereas RS cells of classic HL frequently, although
not always, display the BCL-6 –/syndecan-1+ phenotype of post–germinal center B cells. Although the overwhelming majority of HL cases derive from the B lineage,
occasional cases have been formally proved to be of T-cell origin. 278
The truly neoplastic nature of RS cells has been debated since the description of HL. The detection of heterogeneous clonal karyotypic changes in HL lymph nodes
and in cells identifiable as RS cells suggested that HL may indeed represent a clonal malignancy. 279,280,281 and 282 Many chromosomal breaks detected in HL are also
shared by other lymphoid malignancies, whereas a cytogenetic abnormality specifically associated with HL has yet to be found.
The p53 pathway is thought to be altered in HL. RS cells express abnormal levels of the MDM2 protein, 283 which, in turn, conceals functional domains of the wild-type
p53, thus blocking the physiologic activity of the tumor suppressor gene. 284 Despite initial observations, 285,286 it appears that the p53 gene itself is not affected by
mutations in HL. 287
A number of epidemiologic features of HL suggest that the disease might result also from infectious cofactors. HL lesions express EBV antigens, carry EBV DNA
demonstrable by conventional Southern blot or in situ hybridization techniques, and contain EBV-encoded RNA. 288,289,290,291,292,293,294,295,296,297,298,299,300,301 and 302 EBV
infection of RS cells is virtually always absent in NLPHL, whereas it occurs in approximately 50% of classic HL and in 100% of AIDS-related
HL.1,277,288,289,290,291,292,293,294,295,296,297,298,299,300,301 and 302 Notably, the EBV infection of RS cells is monoclonal, suggesting that infection precedes clonal expansion and
further confirming the monoclonal nature of RS cells. Of the two B-cell transforming antigens encoded by the EBV genome, infected RS cells most commonly express
LMP-1 but not EBNA-2.288,289,290,291,292,293,294,295,296,297,298,299,300,301 and 302 The latent infection protein phenotype of RS cells (LMP-1–positive, EBNA-2–negative) is distinct
from that of Burkitt's lymphoma (LMP-1–negative, EBNA-2–negative) or B-lymphoblastoid cell lines (LMP-1–positive, EBNA-2–positive) and is similar to the EBV
expression pattern detected in nasopharyngeal carcinoma and a fraction of AIDS-related DLCL. The reason for these alternative EBV expression patterns is not
known with precision, but it is likely influenced by the developmental stage of the infected cells as well as by the host's immune function.

GENETIC LESIONS AS CLINICAL TOOLS IN THE MANAGEMENT OF LYMPHOMA
From a clinical standpoint, NHL genetic lesions represent molecular markers of disease serving four purposes: (1) They assist morphologic diagnosis, (2) they provide
a prognostic indicator in some cases, (3) they allow evaluation of minimal residual disease by highly specific and highly sensitive technologies, and (4) they provide
targets for molecular therapy.
With respect to diagnosis, the use of genetic lesions as markers for NHL diagnosis is justified by the selective association between a given genetic alteration and a
specific NHL category1,2 (see Fig. 45.1-1 and Table 45.1-1). For example, the detection of BCL-1 activation in nonfollicular small cell NHL is considered the most
specific clue to the diagnosis of mantle cell lymphoma. 1,2 The growing knowledge of the molecular pathogenesis of lymphoma will progressively refine the way we
classify these disorders. Ideally, genetically distinct groups of lymphomas should be considered as distinct diseases requiring distinct therapeutic options.
The prognostic relevance of genetic lesions of lymphoma is a growing field of investigation that may provide significant improvement in the therapeutic stratification of
lymphoma. Although several genetic alterations have been proposed to influence the prognosis of specific lymphoma categories, the application of novel DNA
technologies, namely DNA microarrays, is likely to rapidly expand the molecular markers available for prognostic studies. On these grounds, the application of DNA
microarrays to DLCL has allowed the recognition of distinct disease variants with different response to therapy and survival. 201

Genetic lesions of lymphoma also represent the most specific and the most sensitive marker for evaluation of minimal residual disease by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR). Examples are the PCR assay for BCL-2 in follicular lymphoma and for BCL-1 in mantle cell lymphoma. Overall, the sensitivity of PCR analysis is several-fold
higher than that of standard diagnostic techniques and allows the detection of one tumor cell among 10 6 normal cells. To date, most studies of minimal residual
disease in lymphoma have centered on follicular lymphoma and have demonstrated a survival advantage in cases achieving PCR negativity compared to cases that
remained positive for minimal residual disease. 303
Finally, the study of the molecular pathogenesis of lymphoma may provide molecular targets for therapeutic strategies aimed at reversing the very genetic lesions that
are responsible for tumor development. Such therapy should, by definition, be largely specific for the lymphoma cells and, hence, devoid of the major side effects
presently encountered with antineoplastic therapy.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Stein H, et al. A revised European-American classification of lymphoid neoplasms: a proposal from the International Lymphoma Study Group. Blood 1994;84:1361.
2. Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Diebold J, et al. World Health Organization classification of neoplastic diseases of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues: report of the Clinical Advisory Committee
meeting, Airlie House, Virginia, November 1997. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3835.
3. Burrows PD, Cooper MD. B cell development and differentiation. Curr Opin Immunol 1997;9:239.
4. Liu YJ, Arpin C. Germinal center development. Immunol Rev 1997;156:1115.
5. Gordon J, Gregory CD, Grafton G, Pound JD. Signals for survival and apoptosis in normal and neoplastic B lymphocytes. Adv Exp Med Biol 1996;406:139.
6. Kosko-Vilbois MH, Zentgraf H, Gerdes J, Bonnefoy JY. To “B” or not to “B” a germinal center? Immunol Today 1997;18:2257.
7. Liu YJ, de Bouteiller O, Fugier-Vivier I. Mechanisms of selection and differentiation in germinal centers. Curr Opin Immunol 1997;9:256
8. Berek C. Somatic mutation and memory. Curr Opin Immunol 1993;5:218.
9. Muller-Hermelink HK, Greiner A. Molecular analysis of human immunoglobulin heavy chain variable genes (IgV H) in normal and malignant B cells. Am J Pathol 1998;153:1341.
10. Kuppers R, Klein U, Hansmann ML, Rajewsky K. Cellular origin of human B-cell lymphomas. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1520.
11. Bahler DW, Levy R. Clonal evolution of a follicular lymphoma: evidence for antigen selection. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:6770.
12. Tamaru J, Hummel M, Marafioti T, et al. Burkitt's lymphomas express V H genes with a moderate number of antigen-selected somatic mutations. Am J Pathol 1995;147:1398.
13. Bertoni F, Cazzaniga G, Bosshard G, et al. Immunoglobulin heavy chain diversity genes rearrangement pattern indicates that MALT-type gastric lymphoma B cells have undergone an antigen
selection process. Br J Haematol 1997;97:830.
14. Kuppers R, Rajewsky K, Hansmann ML. Diffuse large cell lymphomas are derived from mature B cells carrying V region genes with a high load of somatic mutation and evidence of selection
for antibody expression. Eur J Immunol 1997;27:1398.
15. Sahota SS, Garand R, Bataille R, Smith AJ, Stevenson FK. V H gene analysis of clonally related IgM and IgG from human lymphoplasmacytoid B-cell tumors with chronic lymphocytic leukemia
features and high serum monoclonal IgG. Blood 1998;91:238.
16. Fais F, Gaidano G, Capello D, et al. Immunoglobulin V region gene use and structure suggest antigen selection in AIDS-related primary effusion lymphomas. Leukemia 1999;13:1093.
17. Fais F, Ghiotto F, Hashimoto S, et al. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells express restricted sets of mutated and unmutated antigen receptors. J Clin Invest 1998;102:1515.
18. Capello D, Fais F, Vivenza D, et al. Identification of three subgroups of B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia based upon mutations of BCL-6 and IgV genes. Leukemia 2000;14:811.
19. Kuppers R, Rajewsky K. The origin of Hodgkin and Reed/Sternberg cells in Hodgkin's disease. Annu Rev Immunol 1998;16:471.
20. Kuppers R, Kanzler H, Hansmann ML, Rajewsky K. Immunoglobulin V genes in Reed-Sternberg-cells. N Engl J Med 1996;334:405.
21. Kuppers R, Kanzler H, Hansmann ML, Rajewsky K. Single cell analysis of Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg cells. Ann Oncol 1996;7[Suppl 4]:27.
22. Kuppers R, Rajewsky K, Zhao M, et al. Hodgkin's disease: clonal Ig gene rearrangements in Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells picked from histological sections. Ann N Y Acad Sci
1995;764:523.
23. Marafioti T, Hummel M, Foss HD, et al. Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells represent an expansion of a single clone originating from a germinal center B-cell with functional immunoglobulin
gene rearrangements but defective immunoglobulin transcription. Blood 2000;95:1443.
24. Mitelman F, Mertens F, Johansson B. A breakpoint map of recurrent chromosomal rearrangements in human neoplasia. Nat Genet 1997;[Special issue]:417.
25. Bedi GC, Westra WH, Farzadegan H, Pitha PM, Sidransky D. Microsatellite instability in primary neoplasms from HIV+ patients. Nat Med 1995;1:65.
26. Gamberi B, Gaidano G, Parsa N, et al. Lack of microsatellite instability is rare in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1997;89:975.
27. Eshleman JR, Markowitz SD. Microsatellite instability in inherited and sporadic neoplasms. Curr Opin Oncol 1995;7:83.
28. Offit K, Wong G, Filippa DA, Tao Y, Chaganti RSK. Cytogenetic analysis of 434 consecutively ascertained specimens of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: clinical correlations. Blood 1991;77:1508.
29. Tycko B, Sklar J. Chromosomal translocations in lymphoid neoplasia: a reappraisal of the recombinase model. Cancer Cells 1990;2:1.
30. Tycko B, Reynolds TC, Smith SD, Sklar J. Consistent breakage between consensus recombinase heptamers of chromosome 9 DNA in a recurrent chromosomal translocation of human T cell
leukemia. J Exp Med 1989;169:369.
31. Jaeger U, Karth GD, Knapp S, et al. Molecular mechanism of the t(14;18)a model for lymphoid-specific chromosomal translocations. Leuk Lymphoma 1994;14:197.
32. Gillert E, Leis T, Repp R, et al. A DNA damage repair mechanism is involved in the origin of chromosomal translocations t(4;11) in primary leukemic cells. Oncogene 1999;18:4663.
33. Romana S, Poirel H, Della Valle V, et al. Molecular analysis of chromosomal breakpoints in three examples of chromosomal translocation involving the TEL gene. Leukemia 1999;13:1754.
34. Richardson C, Moynahan ME, Jasin M. Homologous recombination between heterologs during repair of a double-strand break. Suppression of translocations in normal cells. Ann N Y Acad Sci
1999;886:183.
35. Morgan WF, Corcoran J, Hartmann A, et al. DNA double-strand breaks, chromosomal rearrangements, and genomic instability. Mutat Res 1998;404:125.
36. Difilippantonio MJ, Zhu J, Chen HT, et al. DNA repair protein Ku80 suppresses chromosomal aberrations and malignant transformation. Nature 2000;404:510.
37. Goossens T, Klein U, Kuppers R. Frequent occurrence of deletions and duplications during somatic hypermutation: implications for oncogene translocations and heavy chain disease. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:2463.
38. Neri A, Barriga F, Knowles DM, Magrath IT, Dalla-Favera R. Different regions of the immunoglobulin heavy-chain locus are involved in chromosomal translocations in distinct pathogenetic
forms of Burkitt lymphoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:2748.
39. Houldsworth J, Mathew S, Rao PH, et al. REL proto-oncogene is frequently amplified in extranodal diffuse large cell lymphoma. Blood 1996;87:25.
40. Tanaka S, Louie DC, Kant JA, Reed JC. Frequent incidence of somatic mutations in translocated bcl2 oncogenes of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Blood 1992;79:229.
41. Bhatia K, Huppi K, Spangler G, et al. Point mutations in the c-MYC transactivation domain are common in Burkitt's lymphoma and mouse plasmacytoma. Nat Genet 1993;5:56.
42. Cesarman E, Dalla-Favera R, Bentley D, Groudine M. Mutations in the first exon are associated with altered transcription of c-myc in Burkitt lymphoma. Science 1987;238:1272.
43. Migliazza A, Martinotti S, Chen W, et al. Frequent somatic hypermutation of the 5' noncoding region of the BCL-6 gene in B-cell lymphoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:12520.
44. Pasqualucci L, Migliazza A, Fracchiolla N, et al. BCL-6 mutations in normal germinal center B cells: evidence of somatic hypermutation acting outside Ig loci. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1998;95:11816.
45. Capello D, Vitolo U, Pasqualucci L, et al. Distribution and pattern of BCL-6 mutations throughout the spectrum of B-cell neoplasia. Blood 2000;95:651.
46. Neri A, Knowles DM, Greco A, McCormick F, Dalla-Favera R. Analysis of RAS oncogene mutations in human lymphoid malignancies. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:9268.
47. Hollstein M, Sidransky D, Vogelstein B, Harris CC. p53 mutations in human cancers. Science 1991;253:49.
48. Gaidano G, Ballerini P, Gong JZ, et al. p53 mutations in human lymphoid malignancies: association with Burkitt lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1991;88:5413.
49. Ballerini P, Gaidano G, Gong JZ, et al. Multiple genetic lesions in acquired immunodeficiency syndromerelated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1993;81:166.
50. Lo Coco F, Gaidano G, Louie DC, et al. p53 mutations are associated with histologic transformation of follicular lymphoma. Blood 1993;82:2289.
51. Gaidano G, Hauptschein RS, Parsa NZ, et al. Deletions involving two distinct regions of 6q in B-cell non Hodgkin lymphoma. Blood 1992;80:1781.
52. Brown AG, Ross FM, Dunne EM, Steel CM, Weir-Thompson EM. Evidence for a new tumor suppressor locus (DBM) in human B-cell neoplasia telomeric to the retinoblastoma gene. Nat Genet
1993;3:67.
53. Devilder MC, François S, Bosic C, et al. Deletion cartography around the D13S25 locus in B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia and accurate mapping of the involved tumor suppressor gene.
Cancer Res 1995;55:1355.
54. Liu Y, Hermanson M, Grandér D, et al. 13q deletions in lymphoid malignancies. Blood 1995;86:1911.
55. Garcia-Marco JA, Caldas C, Price CM, et al. Frequent somatic deletion of the 13q12.3 locus encompassing BRCA2 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1996;88:1568.
56. Kalachikov S, Migliazza A, Cayanis E, et al. Cloning and gene mapping of the chromosome 13q14 region deleted in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Genomics 1997;42:369.
57. Migliazza A, Cayanis E, Bosch-Albareda F, et al. Molecular pathogenesis of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia: analysis of 13q14 chromosomal deletions. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2000 (in
press).
58. Cuneo A, Bigoni R, Rigolin GM, et al. 13q14 deletion in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: correlation with clinicopathologic features. Haematologica 1999;84:589.
59. Kieff E, Leibowitz D. Oncogenesis by herpesvirus. In: Weinberg RA, ed. Oncogenes and the molecular origin of cancer. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press,
1989:259.
60. zur Hausen H, Schulte-Holthausen H, Klein G, et al. EBV DNA in biopsies of Burkitt tumors and anaplastic carcinomas of the nasopharynx. Nature 1970;228:1056.
61. Neri A, Barriga F, Inghirami G, et al. Epstein-Barr virus infection precedes clonal expansion in Burkitt's and acquired immunodeficiencyassociated lymphoma. Blood 1991;77:1092.
62. Pelicci PG, Knowles DM II, Arlin ZA, et al. Multiple monoclonal B cell expansions and c-myc oncogene rearrangements in acquired immunodeficiency syndromerelated lymphoproliferative
disorders. Implications for lymphomagenesis. J Exp Med 1986;164:2049.
63. Hamilton-Dutoit SJ, Pallesen G. A survey of Epstein-Barr virus gene expression in sporadic non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Am J Pathol 1992;140:1315.
64. Carbone A, Gaidano G, Gloghini A, et al. Differential expression of BCL-6, CD138/syndecan-1 and EBV-encoded latent membrane protein-1 identifies distinct histogenetic pathways of
AIDS-related non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Blood 1998;91:747.
65. Horenstein MG, Nador RG, Chadburn A, et al. Epstein-Barr virus latent gene expression in primary effusion lymphomas containing Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus/human
herpesvirus-8. Blood 1997;90:1186.
66. La Rocca LM, Capello D, Rinelli A, et al. The molecular and phenotypic profile of primary central nervous system lymphoma identifies distinct categories of the disease and is consistent with
histogenetic derivation from germinal centerrelated B-cells. Blood 1998;92:1011.
67. Fassone L, Bhatia K, Gutierrez M, et al. Molecular profile of Epstein-Barr virus infection in HHV-8 positive primary effusion lymphoma. Leukemia 2000;14:271.
68. Cingolani A, Gastaldi R, Fassone L, et al. Epstein-Barr virus infection is predictive of central nervous system involvement in systemic AIDS-related non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. J Clin Oncol
2000 (in press).
69. Raab-Traub N, Flynn K. The structure of the termini of the Epstein-Barr virus as a marker of clonal cellular proliferation. Cell 1986;47:883.
70. Chang Y, Cesarman E, Pessin MS, et al. Identification of herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. Science 1994;266:1865.
71. Cesarman E, Chang Y, Moore PS, Said JW, Knowles DM. Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in AIDS-related body-cavity-based lymphomas. N Engl J Med
1995;332:1186.
72. Carbone A, Gloghini A, Vaccher E, et al. Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus DNA sequences in AIDS-related and AIDS-unrelated lymphomatous effusions. Br J Haematol 1996;94:533.
73. Gaidano G, Pastore C, Gloghini A, et al. Distribution of human herpesvirus-8 sequences throughout the spectrum of AIDS-related neoplasia. AIDS 1996;10:941.

74. Carbone A, Gaidano G. HHV-8 positive body cavity based lymphoma: a novel lymphoma entity. Br J Haematol 1997;97:515.
75. Gaidano G, Carbone A. Primary effusion lymphoma. A liquid phase lymphoma of fluid-filled body cavities. Adv Cancer Res 2000 (in press).
76. Soulier J, Grollet L, Oksenhendler E, et al. Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in multicentric Castleman's disease. Blood 1995;86:1276.
77. Roizman B, Desrosiers RC, Fleckenstein B, et al. The family herpesviridae: an update. Arch Virol 1992;123:425.
78. Moore PS, Gao SJ, Dominguez G, et al. Primary characterization of a herpesvirus agent associated with Kaposi's sarcoma. J Virol 1996;70:549.
79. Gaidano G, Cechova K, Chang Y, et al. Establishment of AIDS-related lymphoma cell lines from lymphomatous effusions. Leukemia 1996;10:1237.
80. Mesri EA, Cesarman E, Arvanitakis L, et al. Human herpesvirus-8/Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus is a new transmissible virus that infects B cells. J Exp Med 1996;183:2385.
81. Chang Y, Moore PS, Talbot SJ, et al. Cyclin encoded by KS herpesvirus. Nature 1996;382:410.
82. Moore PS, Boshoff C, Weiss RA, Chang Y. Molecular mimicry of human cytokine and cytokine response pathway genes by KSHV. Science 1996;274:1739.
83. Arvanitakis L, Geras-Raaka E, Varma A, Gershengorn MC, Cesarman E. Human herpesvirus KSHV encodes a constitutively active G-protein-coupled receptor linked to cell proliferation. Nature
1997;385:347.
84. Carbone A, Gloghini A, Bontempo D, et al. Proliferation in HHV-8-positive primary effusion lymphomas is associated with expression of HHV-8 cyclin but independent of p27(kip1). Am J Pathol
2000;156:1209.
85. Ferreira OC Jr, Planelles V, Rosenblatt JD. Human T-cell leukemia viruses: epidemiology, biology, and pathogenesis. Blood Rev 1997;11:91.
86. Uchiyama T. Human T cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) and human diseases. Annu Rev Immunol 1997;15:15.
87. Yoshida M. Howard Temin memorial lectureship. Molecular biology of HTLV-1: deregulation of host cell gene expression and cell cycle. Leukemia 1997;11:14.
88. Inoue J, Seiki M, Taniguchi T, Tsuru S, Yoshida M. Induction of interleukin-2 receptor gene expression by p40 encoded by human T-cell leukemia virus type I. EMBO J 1987;5:2883.
89. Cross SL, Feinberg MB, Wolf JB, et al. Regulation of the human interleukin-2 a chain promoter: activation of a non-functional promoter by the transactivator gene of HTLV-I. Cell 1987;49:47.
90. Fujii M, Sassone-Corsi P, Verma IM. c-fos promoter transactivation by the tax1 protein of human T-cell leukemia virus type I. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:8526.
91. Wano Y, Feinberg M, Hosking JB, Bogerd H, Greene WC. Stable expression of the tax gene of type I human T-cell leukemia virus in human T-cell activates specific cellular genes involved in
growth. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:9733.
92. Nimer SD, Gasson JC, Hu K, et al. Activation of the GM-CSF promoter by HTLV-I and -II tax proteins. Oncogene 1989;4:671.
93. Arima N. Autonomous and interleukin-2-responsive growth of leukemic cells in adult T-cell leukemia (ATL): a review of the clinical significance and molecular basis of ATL cell growth. Leuk
Lymphoma 1997;26:479.
94. Uittenbogaard MN, Giebler HA, Reisman D, Nyborg JK. Transcriptional repression of p53 by human T-cell leukemia virus type I Tax protein. J Biol Chem 1995;270:28503.
95. Jeang KT, Widen SG, Semmes OJ IV, Wilson SH. HTLV-I trans-activator protein, tax, is a trans-repressor of the human beta-polymerase gene. Science 1990;247:1082.
96. Jin DY, Spencer F, Jeang KT. Human T cell leukemia virus type 1 oncoprotein Tax targets the human mitotic checkpoint protein MAD1. Cell 1998;93:81.
97. Poiesz BJ, Ruscetti FW, Gazdar AF, et al. Detection and isolation of type C retrovirus particles from fresh and cultured lymphocytes of a patient with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1980;77:7415.
98. Kikuchi M, Mitsui T, Takeshita M, et al. Virus associated adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) in Japan: clinical, histological and immunological studies. Hematol Oncol 1986;4:67.
99. Gaidano G, Newcomb EW, Gong JZ, et al. Analysis of alterations of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Am J Pathol 1994;144:1312.
100. Schena M, Larsson LG, Gottardi D, et al. Growth- and differentiation-associated expression of BCL-2 in B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells. Blood 1992;79:2981.
101. Starostik P, Manshouri T, O'Brien S, et al. Deficiency of the ATM protein expression defines an aggressive subgroup of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer Res 1998;58:4552.
102. Bullrich F, Rasio D, Kitada S, et al. ATM mutations in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer Res 1999;59:24.
103. Stankovic T, Weber P, Stewart G, et al. Inactivation of ataxia telangiectasia mutated gene in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Lancet 1999;353:26.
104. Autio K, Aalto Y, Franssila K, et al. Low number of DNA copy number changes in small lymphocytic lymphoma. Haematologica 1998;83:690.
105. Juliusson G, Oscier DG, Fitchett M, et al. Prognostic subgroups in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia defined by specific chromosomal abnormalities. N Engl J Med 1990;323:720.
106. Anastasi J, Le Beau MM, Vardiman JW, et al. Detection of trisomy 12 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia by fluorescence in situ hybridization to interphase cells: a simple and sensitive method.
Blood 1992;79:1796.
107. Hjalmar V, Kimby E, Matutes E, et al. Trisomy 12 and lymphoplasmacytoid lymphocytes in chronic leukemic B-cell disorders. Haematologica 1998;83:602.
108. Offit K, Louie DC, Parsa NZ, et al. Clinical and morphologic features of B-cell small lymphocytic lymphoma with del(6) (q21q23). Blood 1994;83:2611.
109. Sahota SS, Davis Z, Hamblin TJ, Stevenson FK. Somatic mutation of bcl-6 genes can occur in the absence of V(H) mutations in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 2000;95:3534.
110. Damle RN, Wasil T, Fais F, et al. Ig V gene mutation status and CD138 expression as novel prognostic indicators in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1999;94:1840.
111. Hamblin TJ, Davis Z, Gardiner A, Oscier DG, Stevenson FK. Unmutated Ig V(H) genes are associated with a more aggressive form of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1999;94:1848.
112. Offit K, Parsa NZ, Filippa D, Jhanwar SC, Chaganti RSK. t(9;14)(p13;q32) denotes a subset of low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with plasmacytoid differentiation. Blood 1992;80:2594.
113. Iida S, Rao PH, Nallasivam P, et al. The t(9;14)(p13;q32) chromosomal translocation associated with lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma involves the PAX-5 gene. Blood 1996;88:4110.
114. Neurath MF, Stuber ER, Strober W. BSAP: a key regulator of B-cell development and differentiation. Immunol Today 1995;16:564.
115. Berger F, Felman P, Sonet A, et al. Nonfollicular small B-cell lymphomas: a heterogeneous group of patients with distinct clinical features and outcome. Blood 1994;83:2829.
116. Fisher RI, Dahlberg S, Nathwani BN, et al. A clinical analysis of two indolent lymphoma entities: mantle cell lymphoma and marginal zone lymphoma (including the mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissue and monocytoid B subcategories): a Southwest Oncology Study Group. Blood 1995;85:1075.
117. Raffeld M, Jaffe ES. bcl-1, t(11;14), and mantle zone lymphomas. Blood 1991;78:259.
118. Tsujimoto Y, Yunis J, Onorato-Showe L, et al. Molecular cloning of the chromosomal breakpoint on chromosome 11 in human B-cell neoplasms with the t(11;14) chromosome translocation.
Science 1984;224:1403.
119. Tsujimoto Y, Jaffe ES, Cosman J, Gorham J, Croce CM. Clustering of breakpoints on chromosome 11 in human B-cell neoplasms with the t(11;14) chromosome translocation. Nature
1985;315:340.
120. Erikson J, Finan J, Tsujimoto Y, Nowell PC, Croce CM. The chromosome 14 breakpoint in neoplastic B cells with the t(11;14) translocation involves the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1984;81:4144.
121. Motokura T, Bloom T, Goo KH, et al. A novel cyclin encoded by a bcl-1 linked candidate oncogene. Nature 1991;350:512.
122. Withers DA, Harvey RC, Faust JB, et al. Characterization of a candidate bcl-1 gene. Mol Cell Biol 1991;11:4846.
123. Rosenberg CL, Wong E, Petty EM, et al. PRAD1, a candidate BCL1 oncogene: mapping and expression in centrocytic lymphoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:9638.
124. Seto M, Yamamoto K, Iida S, et al. Gene rearrangement and overexpression of PRAD-1 in lymphoid malignancy with t(11;14)(q13;q32) translocation. Oncogene 1992;7:1401.
125. Rimokh R, Berger F, Delsol G, et al. Rearrangement and overexpression of the BCL-1/PRAD-1 gene in intermediate lymphocytic lymphomas and in t(11q13)-bearing leukemias. Blood
1993;81:3063.
126. Murakami MS, Strobel MJ, Vande Woude JF. Cell cycle regulation, oncogenes, and antineoplastic drugs. In: Mendelsohn J, Howley PM, Israel MA, Liotta LA, eds. The molecular basis of
cancer. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1995:3.
127. Jiang W, Kahn SM, Zhou P, et al. Overexpression of cyclin D1 in rat fibroblasts causes abnormalities in growth control, cell cycle progression and gene expression. Oncogene 1993;8:3447.
128. Bodrug S, Warner B, Bath M, et al. Cyclin D1 transgene impedes lymphocyte maturation and collaborates with the myc gene. EMBO J 1994;13:2124.
129. Lovec H, Grzeschiczek A, Möröy T. Cyclin D1/bcl-1 cooperates with myc genes in the generation of B-cell lymphomas in transgenic mice. EMBO J 1994;13:3487.
130. Williams ME, Meeker TC, Swerdlow SH. Rearrangement of the chromosome 11 bcl-1 locus in centrocytic lymphoma: analysis with multiple breakpoint probes. Blood 1991;78:493.
131. Williams ME, Swerdlow SH. Cyclin D1 overexpression in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with chromosome 11 bcl-1 rearrangement. Ann Oncol 1994;5:S71.
132. Rimokh R, Berger F, Delsol G, et al. Detection of the chromosomal translocation t(11;14) by polymerase chain reaction in mantle cell lymphomas. Blood 1994;83:1871.
133. Louie DC, Offit K, Jaslow R, et al. p53 overexpression as a marker of poor prognosis in mantle cell lymphomas with t(11;14)(q13;q32). Blood 1995;86:2892.
134. Pinyol M, Cobo F, Bea S, et al. p16(INK4a) gene inactivation by deletions, mutations, and hypermethylation is associated with transformed and aggressive variants of non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas. Blood 1998;91:2977.
135. Bakshi A, Jensen JP, Goldman P, et al. Cloning the chromosomal breakpoint of t(14;18) of human lymphomas: clustering around J H on chromosome 14 and near a transcriptional unit on 18.
Cell 1985;41:889.
136. Tsujimoto Y, Finger LR, Yunis J, Nowell PC, Croce CM. Cloning of the chromosome breakpoints of neoplastic B cells with the t(14;18) chromosomal translocation. Science 1984;226:1097.
137. Cleary ML, Sklar J. Nucleotide sequence of a t(14;18) chromosomal breakpoint in follicular lymphoma and demonstration of a breakpoint cluster region near a transcriptionally active locus on
chromosome 18. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1985;82:7439.
138. Cleary ML, Smith SD, Sklar J. Cloning and structural analysis of cDNAs for bcl-2 and a hybrid bcl-2/immunoglobulin transcript resulting from the t(14;18) translocation. Cell 1986;47:19.
139. Cleary ML, Galili N, Sklar J. Detection of a second t(14;18) breakpoint cluster region in human follicular lymphomas. J Exp Med 1986;164:315.
140. Yano T, Jaffe ES, Longo DL, Raffeld M. MYC rearrangements in histologically progressed follicular lymphomas. Blood 1992;80:758.
141. Volpe G, Vitolo U, Carbone A, et al. Molecular heterogeneity of B-lineage diffuse large cell lymphoma. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1996;16:21.
142. Graninger WB, Seto M, Boutain B, Goldman P, Korsmeyer SJ. Expression of BCL-2 and BCL-2-Ig fusion transcripts in normal and neoplastic cells. J Clin Invest 1987;80:1512.
143. Ngan BY, Chen-Levy Z, Weiss LM, Warnke RA, Cleary ML. Expression in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the bcl-2 protein associated with the t(14;18) chromosomal translocation. N Engl J Med
1988;318:1638.
144. Korsmeyer SJ. Bcl-2 initiates a new category of oncogenes: regulators of cell death. Blood 1992;80:879.
145. Chao DT, Korsmeyer SJ. BCL-2 family: regulators of cell death. Annu Rev Immunol 1998;16:395.
146. Hockenberry D, Nunez G, Milliman C, Schreiber RD, Korsmeyer SJ. Bcl-2 is an inner mitochondrial membrane protein that blocks programmed cell death. Nature 1990;348:334.
147. Nuñez G, Seto M, Seremetis S, et al. Growth- and tumor-promoting effects of deregulated BCL2 in human B-lymphoblastoid cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:4589.
148. Vaux DL, Cory S, Adams JM. Bcl-2 gene promotes hematopoietic cell survival and cooperates with c-MYC to immortalize pre-B cells. Nature 1988;335:440.
149. Hockenbery DM, Zutter M, Hickey W, Nahm M, Korsmeyer SJ. Bcl-2 protein is topographically restricted in tissues characterized by apoptotic cell death. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1991;88:6961.
150. Nuñez G, Hockenbery D, McDonnel TM, Sorensen CM, Korsmeyer SJ. Bcl-2 maintains B cell memory. Nature 1991;353:71.
151. Boise LH, González-García M, Postema CE, et al. bcl-x, a bcl-2-related gene that functions as a dominant regulator of apoptotic cell death. Cell 1993;74:597.
152. Oltvai ZN, Milliman CL, Korsmeyer SJ. Bcl-2 heterodimerizes in vivo with a conserved homolog, Bax, that accelerates programmed cell death. Cell 1993;74:609.
153. Yin XM, Oltvai ZN, Korsmeyer SJ. BH1 and BH2 domains of Bcl-2 are required for inhibition of apoptosis and heterodimerization with Bax. Nature 1994;369:321.
154. Hockenbery DM, Oltvai ZN, Yin XM, Milliman CL, Korsmeyer SJ. Bcl-2 functions in an antioxidant pathway to prevent apoptosis. Cell 1993;75:241.
155. Lam M, Dubyak G, Chen L, et al. Evidence that BCL-2 represses apoptosis by regulating endoplasmic reticulumassociated Ca 2+ fluxes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:6569.
156. Zelenetz AD, Chen TT, Levy R. Clonal expansion in follicular lymphoma occurs subsequent to antigenic selection. J Exp Med 1992;176:1137.
157. Reed JC, Stein C, Subasinghe C, et al. Antisense-mediated inhibition of bcl-2 protooncogene expression and leukaemic cell growth and survival: comparisons of phosphodiester and
phosphorothioate oligodeoxynucleotides. Cancer Res 1990;50:6565.
158. McDonnel TJ, Deane N, Platt FM, et al. bcl-2-immunoglobulin transgenic mice demonstrate extended B cell survival and follicular lymphoproliferation. Cell 1989;57:79.
159. Bahler DW, Levy R. Clonal evolution of a follicular lymphoma: evidence for antigen selection. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:6770.
160. McDonnel TJ, Korsmeyer SJ. Progression from lymphoid hyperplasia to high-grade malignant lymphoma in mice transgenic for the t(14;18). Nature 1991;349:254.
161. Parsonnet J, Hansen S, Rodriguez L, et al. Helicobacter pylori infection and gastric lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1994;330:1267.
162. Wotherspoon AC, Doglioni C, Diss TC, et al. Regression of primary low-grade B-cell gastric lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue after eradication of Helicobacter pylori. Lancet
1993;342:575.
163. Dierlamm J, Baens M, Wlodarska I, et al. The apoptosis inhibitor gene API2 and a novel 18q gene, MLT, are recurrently rearranged in the t(11;18)(q21;q21) associated with mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue lymphoma. Blood 1999;93:3601.

164. Akagi T, Motegi M, Tamura A, et al. A novel gene, MALT1 at 18q21, is involved in t(11;18)(q21;q21) found in low-grade B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue. Oncogene
1999;18:5785.
165. Ott G, Kalla J, Steinhoff A, et al. Trisomy 3 is not a common feature in malignant lymphomas of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue type. Am J Pathol 1998;153:689.
166. Willis TG, Jadayel DM, Du MQ, et al. Bcl10 is involved in t(1;14)(p22;q32) of MALT B cell lymphoma and mutated in multiple tumor types. Cell 1999;96:35.
167. Zhang Q, Siebert R, Yan M, et al. Inactivating mutations and overexpression of BCL-10, a caspase recruitment domain-containing gene, in MALT lymphoma with t(1;14)(p22;q32). Nat Genet
1999;22:63.
168. Du M, Peng H, Singh N, Isaacson PG, Pan L. The accumulation of p53 abnormalities is associated with progression of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. Blood 1995;86:4587.
169. Gaidano G, Volpe G, Pastore C, et al. Detection of BCL-6 rearrangements and p53 mutations in Malt-lymphomas. Am J Hematol 1997;56:206.
170. Gaidano G, Capello D, Gloghini A, et al. Frequent mutation of BCL-6 proto-oncogene in high grade, but not low grade, MALT lymphomas of the gastrointestinal tract. Haematologica
1999;84:582.
171. Offit K, Jhanwar S, Ebrahim SAD, et al. t(3;22)(q27;q11), a novel translocation associated with diffuse non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1989;74:1876.
172. Bastard C, Tilly H, Lenormand B, et al. Translocations involving band 3q27 and Ig gene regions in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1992;79:2527.
173. Baron BW, Nucifora G, McNabe N, et al. Identification of the gene associated with the recurring chromosomal translocations t(3;14)(q27;q32) and t(3;22)(q27;q11) in B-cell lymphomas. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:5262.
174. Kerckaert JP, Deweindt C, Tilly H, et al. LAZ3, a novel zinc-finger encoding gene, is disrupted by recurring chromosome 3q27 translocations in human lymphoma. Nat Genet 1993;5:66.
175. Ye BH, Lista F, Lo Coco F, et al. Alterations of BCL-6, a novel zinc-finger gene, in diffuse large cell lymphoma. Science 1993;262:747.
176. Ye BH, Rao PH, Chaganti RSK, et al. Cloning of BCL-6, the locus involved in chromosome translocations affecting band 3q27 in B-cell lymphoma. Cancer Res 1993;53:2732.
177. Miki T, Kawamata N, Arai A, et al. Molecular cloning of the breakpoint for 3q27 translocation in B-cell lymphomas and leukemias. Blood 1994;83:217.
178. Nelson HC. Structure and function of DNA-binding proteins. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1995;5:180.
179. Mackay JP, Crossley M. Zinc fingers are sticking together. Trends Biochem Sci 1998;23:1.
180. Bardwell VJ, Treisman R. The POZ domain: a conserved protein-protein interaction motif. Genes Dev 1994;8:1664.
181. Chang CC, Ye BH, Chaganti RSK, et al. BCL-6, a POZ/Zinc-finger protein, is a sequence specific transcriptional repressor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:6947.
182. Cattoretti G, Chang C, Cechova K, et al. BCL-6 protein is expressed in germinal-center B cells. Blood 1995;86:45.
183. Dalla-Favera R, Ye BH, Cattoretti G, et al. BCL-6 in diffuse large-cell lymphomas. Important Adv Oncol 1996;139.
184. Allman D, Jain A, Dent A, et al. BCL-6 expression during B-cell activation. Blood 1996;87:5257.
185. Niu H, Ye BH, Dalla-Favera R. Antigen receptor signaling induces MAP kinasemediated phosphorylation and degradation of the BCL-6 transcription factor. Genes Dev 1998;12:1953.
186. Dent AL, Shaffer AL, Yu X, et al. Control of inflammation, cytokine expression, and germinal center formation by BCL-6. Science 1997;276:589.
187. Ye BH, Cattoretti G, Shen Q, et al. The BCL-6 proto-oncogene controls germinal-centre formation and Th2-type inflammation. Nat Genet 1997;16:161.
188. Bastard C, Deweindt C, Kerckaert JP, et al. LAZ3 rearrangements in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: correlation with histology, immunophenotype, karyotype, and clinical outcome in 217 patients.
Blood 1994;83:2423.
189. Lo Coco F, Ye BH, Lista F, et al. Rearrangements of the BCL-6 gene in diffuse large cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1994;83:1757.
190. Ye BH, Chaganti S, Chang CC, et al. Chromosomal translocations cause deregulated BCL6 expression by promoter substitution in B cell lymphoma. EMBO J 1995;14:6209.
191. Dallery E, Galiegue-Zouitina S, Collyn-d'Hoohge M, et al. TTF, a gene encoding a novel small G protein, fuses to the lymphoma-associated LAZ3 gene by t(3;4) chromosome translocation.
Oncogene 1995;10:2171.
192. Shen HM, Peters A, Baron B, Zhu X, Storb U. Mutation of BCL-6 gene in normal B cells by the process of somatic hypermutation of Ig genes. Science 1998;280:1750.
193. Gaidano G, Carbone A, Pastore C, et al. Frequent mutation of the 5' noncoding region of the BCL-6 gene in acquired immunodeficiency syndromerelated non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Blood
1997;89:3755.
194. Capello D, Carbone A, Pastore C, et al. Point mutations of the BCL-6 gene in Burkitt's lymphoma. Br J Haematol 1997;99:168.
195. Offit K, Lo Coco F, Louie DC, et al. Rearrangements of the bcl-6 gene as a prognostic marker in diffuse large-cell lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1994;331:74.
196. Dalla-Favera R, Ye BH, Lo Coco F, et al. Identification of genetic lesions associated with diffuse large-cell lymphoma. Ann Oncol 1994;5:S55.
197. Yunis JJ, Mayer MG, Arnesen MA, et al. Bcl-2 and other genomic alterations in the prognosis of large-cell lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1989;320:1947.
198. Tang SC, Visser L, Hepperle B, Hanson J, Poppema S. Clinical significance of bcl-2 MBR gene rearrangement and protein expression in diffuse large-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma: an analysis
of 83 cases. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:149.
199. Vitolo U, Gaidano G, Botto B, et al. Rearrangements of BCL-6, BCL-2, c-MYC and 6q deletion in B-diffuse large cell lymphoma: clinical relevance in 71 patients. Ann Oncol 1998;9:55.
200. Pescarmona E, Lo Coco F, Pacchiarotti A, et al. Analysis of the BCL-6 gene configuration in diffuse B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas and Hodgkin's disease. J Pathol 1995;177:21.
201. Alizadeh AA, Eisen MB, Davis RE, et al. Distinct types of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma identified by gene expression profiling. Nature 2000;403:503.
202. Dalla-Favera R. Chromosomal translocations involving the c-myc oncogene in lymphoid neoplasia. In: Kirsch IR, ed. The causes and consequences of chromosomal aberrations. Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press, 1993:312.
203. Dalla-Favera R, Bregni M, Erickson J, et al. Human c-myc oncogene is located on the region of chromosome 8 that is translocated in Burkitt lymphoma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1982;79:7824.
204. Dalla-Favera R, Martinotti S, Gallo RC, Erikson J, Croce CM. Translocation and rearrangements of the c-myc oncogene in human undifferentiated B-cell lymphomas. Science 1983;219:963.
205. Taub R, Kirsch I, Morton C. Translocation of c-myc gene into the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus in human Burkitt lymphoma and murine plasmacytoma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1982;79:7837.
206. Davis M, Malcolm S, Rabbits TH. Chromosome translocations can occur on either side of the c-myc oncogene in Burkitt lymphoma cells. Nature 1984;30:286.
207. Hollis GF, Mitchell KF, Battey J, et al. A variant translocation places the lambda immunoglobulin genes 3' to the c-myc oncogene in Burkitt's lymphoma. Nature 1984;307:752.
208. Pelicci PG, Knowles DK, Magrath I, Dalla-Favera R. Chromosomal breakpoints and structural alterations of the c-myc locus differ in endemic and sporadic forms of Burkitt lymphoma. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1986;83:2984.
209. Hayday AC, Gillies SD, Saito H, et al. Activation of a translocated human c-myc gene by an enhancer in the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus. Nature 1984;307:334.
210. Rabbits TH, Forster A, Baer R, Hamlin PH. Transcriptional enhancer identified where the human C m immunoglobulin heavy chain gene is unavailable to the translocated c-myc gene in a
Burkitt's lymphoma. Nature 1983;306:806.
211. ar-Rushdi A, Nishikura K, Erikson J, et al. Differential expression of the translocated and untranslocated c-myc oncogene in Burkitt's lymphoma. Science 1983;222:390.
212. Bhatia K, Spangler G, Gaidano G, et al. Mutations in the coding region of c-myc occur frequently in acquired immunodeficiency syndromeassociated lymphomas. Blood 1994;84:883.
213. Gu W, Bhatia K, Magrath IT, Dang CV, Dalla-Favera R. Binding and suppression of the c-Myc transcriptional activation domain by p107. Science 1994;264:251.
214. Blackwood EM, Eisenman RN. Max: a helix-loop-helix zipper protein that forms a sequence-specific DNA-binding complex with Myc. Science 1991;251:1211.
215. Blackwood EM, Lüscher B, Eisenman RN. Myc and Max associate in vivo. Genes Dev 1992;6:71.
216. Kretzner L, Blackwood EM, Eisenman RN. Myc and Max proteins possess distinct transcriptional activities. Nature 1992;359:426.
217. Amati B, Dalton S, Brooks MW, et al. Transcriptional activation by the human c-Myc oncoprotein in yeast requires interaction with Max. Nature 1992;359:423.
218. Gu W, Cechova K, Tassi V, Dalla-Favera R. Differential regulation of target gene expression by Myc/Max ratio. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:2935.
219. Amati B, Brooks MW, Levy N, et al. Oncogenic activity of the c-Myc protein requires dimerization with Max. Cell 1993;72:233.
220. Ayer DE, Kretzner L, Eisenman RN. Mad: a heterodimeric partner for Max that antagonizes Myc transcriptional activity. Cell 1993;72:211.
221. Zervos AS, Gyuris J, Brent R. Mxi1, a protein that specifically interacts with Max to bind Myc-Max recognition sites. Cell 1993;72:223.
222. Dang CV. c-Myc target genes involved in cell growth, apoptosis, and metabolism. Mol Cell Biol 1999;19:1.
223. Wu KJ, Grandori C, Amacker M, et al. Direct activation of TERT transcription by c-MYC. Nat Genet 1999;21:220.
224. Cerni C. Telomeres, telomerase, and myc. An update. Mutat Res 2000;462:31.
225. Lombardi L, Newcomb EW, Dalla-Favera R. Pathogenesis of Burkitt lymphoma: expression of an activated c-myc oncogene causes the tumorigenic conversion of EBV-infected human B
lymphoblasts. Cell 1987;49:161.
226. McManaway ME, Neckers LM, Loke SL, et al. Tumor-specific inhibition of lymphoma growth by an antisense oligodeoxy-nucleotide. Lancet 1990;335:808.
227. Adams JM, Harris AW, Pinkert CA, et al. The c-myc oncogene driven by immunoglobulin enhancers induces lymphoid malignancy in transgenic mice. Nature 1985;318:533.
228. Klangby U, Okan I, Magnusson KP, et al. p16/INK4a and p15/INK4b gene methylation and absence of p16/INK4a mRNA and protein expression in Burkitt's lymphoma. Blood 1998;91:1680.
229. Komano J, Maruo S, Kurozumi K, Oda T, Takada K. Oncogenic role of Epstein-Barr virusencoded RNAs in Burkitt's lymphoma cell line Akata. J Virol 1999;73:9827.
230. Gaidano G, Carbone A. AIDS-related lymphomas: from pathogenesis to pathology. Br J Haematol 1995;90:235.
231. Knowles DM. Molecular pathology of acquired immunodeficiency syndromerelated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Semin Diagn Pathol 1997;14:67.
232. Gaidano G, Carbone A, Dalla-Favera R. Pathogenesis of AIDS-related lymphomas: molecular and histogenetic heterogeneity. Am J Pathol 1998;152:623.
233. Gaidano G, Carbone A, Dalla-Favera R. Genetic basis of acquired immunodeficiency syndromerelated lymphomagenesis. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1998;23:95.
234. Gaidano G, Capello D, Carbone A. The molecular basis of AIDS-related lymphomagenesis. Semin Oncol 2000;24(4):431.
235. Gaidano G, Pastore C, Gloghini A, et al. Genetic heterogeneity of AIDS-related small noncleaved cell lymphoma. Br J Haematol 1997;98:726.
236. Gaidano G, Lo Coco F, Ye BH, et al. Rearrangements of the BCL-6 gene in acquired immunodeficiency syndromeassociated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: association with diffuse large-cell
subtype. Blood 1994;84:397.
237. Gaidano G, Capello D, Cilia AM, et al. Genetic characterization of HHV-8/KSHV positive primary effusion lymphoma reveals frequent mutations of BCL-6: implications for disease pathogenesis
and histogenesis. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1999;24:16.
238. Carbone A, Gloghini A, Gaidano G, et al. AIDS-related Burkitt's lymphoma. Morphologic and immunophenotypic study of biopsy specimens. Am J Clin Pathol 1995;103:561.
239. Carbone A, Gaidano G, Gloghini A, et al. BCL-6 protein expression in AIDS-related non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Inverse relationship with Epstein-Barr virusencoded latent membrane protein-1
expression. Am J Pathol 1997;150:155.
240. Riboldi P, Gaidano G, Schettino EW, et al. Two acquired immunodeficiency syndromeassociated Burkitt's lymphomas produce specific anti-i IgM cold agglutinins using somatically mutated
VH4-21 segments. Blood 1994;83:2952.
241. Jain R, Roncella S, Hashimoto S, et al. A potential role for antigen selection in the clonal evolution of Burkitt's lymphoma. J Immunol 1994;153:45.
242. MacMahon EME, Glass JD, Hayward SD, et al. Epstein-Barr virus in AIDS-related primary central nervous system lymphoma. Lancet 1991;338:969.
243. Julien S, Radosavljevic M, Labouret N, et al. AIDS primary central nervous system lymphoma: molecular analysis of the expressed V H genes and possible implications for lymphomagenesis. J
Immunol 1999;162:1551.
244. Gaidano G, Capello D, Pastore C, et al. Analysis of human herpesvirus type 8 infection in AIDS-related and AIDS-unrelated primary central nervous system lymphoma. J Infect Dis
1997;175:1193.
245. Antinori A, Larocca LM, Fassone L, et al. HHV-8/KSHV is not associated with AIDS-related primary central nervous system lymphoma. Brain Pathol 1999;9:199.
246. Gaidano G, Gloghini A, Gattei V, et al. Association of Kaposi's sarcomaassociated herpesvirus-positive primary effusion lymphoma with expression of the CD138/syndecan-1 antigen. Blood
1997;90:4894.
247. Lin AY, Tucker MA. Epidemiology of Hodgkin's disease and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. In: Canellos GP, Lister TA, Sklar JL, eds. The lymphomas. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1998:43.
248. Morris SW, Kirstein MN, Valentine MB, et al. Fusion of a kinase gene, ALK, to a molecular protein gene, NPM, in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Science 1994;263:1281.
249. Fujimoto J, Shiota M, Iwahara T, et al. Characterization of the transforming activity of p80, a hyperphosphorylated protein in a Ki-1 lymphoma cell line with chromosomal translocation t(2;5).
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:4181.
250. Kuefer MU, Look AT, Pulford K. Retrovirus-mediated gene transfer of NPM/ALK causes lymphoid malignancy in mice. Blood 1997;90:2901.
251. Lamant L, Meggetto F, al Saati T, et al. High incidence of the t(2;5)(p23;q35) translocation in anaplastic large cell lymphoma and its lack of detection in Hodgkin's disease: comparison of

cytogenetic analysis, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, and p-80 immunostaining. Blood 1996;87:284.
252. Sarris AH, Luthra L, Papadimitracopoulou V, et al. Amplification of genomic DNA demonstrates the presence of the t(2;5)(p23;q35) in anaplastic large cell lymphoma, but not in other
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, Hodgkin's disease, or lymphomatoid papulosis. Blood 1996;88:1771.
253. Yee HT, Ponzoni M, Merson A, et al. Molecular characterization of the t(2;5)(p23;q35) translocation in anaplastic large cell lymphoma (Ki-1) and Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1996;87:1081.
254. Poiesz BF, Ruscetti FW, Gazdar AF, et al. Detection and isolation of type C retrovirus particles from fresh cultured lymphocytes of a patient with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1980;77:7415.
255. Catovsky D, Rose M, Goolden AWG, et al. Adult T-cell lymphoma-leukaemia in blacks from the West Indies. Lancet 1982;1:639.
256. Yoshida M, Miyoshi I, Hinuma Y. Isolation and characterization of retrovirus from cell lines of adult T-cell leukemia and its implication in the disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1982;79:2031.
257. Gallo RC, Kalyanaraman VS, Sarngadharan MG, et al. Association of the human type of C retrovirus with a subset of adult T-cell cancers. Cancer Res 1983;43:3892.
258. Wong-Staal F, Hahn B, Manzari V, et al. A survey of human leukemias for sequences of a human retrovirus. Nature 1983;302:626.
259. Yoshida M, Seiki M, Yamaguchi K, et al. Monoclonal integration of human T-cell leukemia provirus in all primary tumors of adult T-cell leukemia suggests causative role of human T-cell
leukemia virus in the disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1984;81:2534.
260. Smith MR, Green W. Molecular biology of the type I human T-cell leukemia virus (HTLV-I) and adult T-cell leukemia. J Clin Invest 1991;87:761.
261. Sakashita A, Hattori T, Miller CW, et al. Mutations of the p53 gene in adult T-cell leukemia. Blood 1992;79:477.
262. Cesarman E, Chadburn A, Inghirami G, et al. Structural and functional analysis of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma shows frequent p53 mutations.
Blood 1992;80:3205.
263. Stilgenbauer S, Schaffner C, Litterst A, et al. Biallelic mutations in the ATM gene in T-prolymphocytic leukemia. Nature Med 1997;3:1155.
264. Vorechovsky I, Luo L, Dyer MJ, et al. Clustering of missense mutations in the ataxia-telangiectasia gene in a sporadic T-cell leukemia. Nat Genet 1997;17:96.
265. Westphal CH. Cell-cycle signaling: Atm displays its many talents. Curr Biol 1997;7:R789.
266. Neri A, Chang CC, Lombardi L, et al. B cell lymphomaassociated chromosomal translocation involves candidate oncogene lyt-10, homologous to NF- kB p50. Cell 1991;67:1075.
267. Lenardo MJ, Baltimore D. NF- kB: a pleiotropic mediator of inducible and tissue-specific gene control. Cell 1989;58:227.
268. Kanzler H, Kuppers R, Hansmann ML, Rajewsky K. Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells in Hodgkin's disease represent the outgrowth of a dominant tumor clone derived from (crippled) germinal
center B cells. J Exp Med 1996;184:1495.
269. Braeuninger A, Kuppers R, Strickler JG, et al. Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells in lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin disease represent clonal populations of germinal center derived tumor B
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:9337.
270. Hummel M, Marafioti T, Stein H. Immunoglobulin V genes in Reed-Sternberg cells. N Engl J Med 1996;334:405.
271. Ohno T, Stribley JA, Wu G, et al. Clonality in nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1997;337:459.
272. Marafioti T, Hummel M, Anagnastopoulos I, et al. Origin of nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's disease from a clonal expansion of highly mutated germinal-center B cells. N Engl J Med
1997;337:453.
273. Kuppers R, Rajewsky K, Zhao M, et al. Hodgkin disease: Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells picked from histological sections show clonal immunoglobulin gene rearrangements and appear to
be derived from B cells at various stages of development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:10962.
274. Brauninger A, Hansmann ML, Strickler JG, et al. Identification of common germinal-center B-cell precursors in two patients with both Hodgkin's disease and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. N Engl J
Med 1999;340:1239.
275. Carbone A, Gloghini A, Gattei V, et al. Reed-Sternberg cells of classical Hodgkin's disease react with the plasma cell specific monoclonal antibody B-B4 and express human syndecan-1. Blood
1997;89:3787.
276. Carbone A, Gloghini A, Gaidano G, et al. Expression status of BCL-6 and syndecan-1 identifies distinct histogenetic subsets of Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1998;92:2220.
277. Carbone A, Gloghini A, Larocca LM, et al. HIV-associated Hodgkin's disease derives from post-germinal center B-cells. Blood 1999;93:2319.
278. Seitz V, Hummel M, Marafioti T, et al. Detection of clonal T-cell receptor gamma-chain gene rearrangements in Reed-Sternberg cells of classic Hodgkin disease. Blood 2000;95:3020.
279. Rowley J. Chromosomes in Hodgkin's disease. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:639.
280. Teerenhovi L, Lindholm C, Pakkala A, et al. Unique display of a pathologic karyotype in Hodgkin's disease by Reed-Sternberg cells. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1988;34:305.
281. Schouten H, Sanger W, Duggan M, et al. Chromosomal abnormalities in Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1989;73:2149.
282. Tilly H, Bastard C, Delastre T, et al. Cytogenetic studies in untreated Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1991;77:1298.
283. Chilosi M, Doglioni C, Menestrina F, et al. Abnormal expression of the p53-binding protein MDM2 in Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1994;84:4295.
284. Momand J, Zambetti GP, Olson DC, George D, Levine AJ. The MDM2 oncogene product forms a complex with the p53 protein and inhibits p53-mediated transactivation. Cell 1992;691:1237.
285. Gupta RK, Patel K, Bodmer WF, Bodmer JG. Mutation of p53 in primary biopsy material and cell lines from Hodgkin's disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:2817.
286. Trumper LH, Brady G, Bagg A, et al. Single-cell analysis of Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells: molecular heterogeneity of gene expression and p53 mutations. Blood 1993;81:3097.
287. Montesinos-Rongen M, Roers A, Kuppers R, et al. Mutation of the p53 gene is not a typical feature of Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells in Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1999;94:1755.
288. Pallesen G, Hamilton-Dutoit SJ, Rowe M, Young LS. Expression of Epstein-Barr virus latent gene products in tumour cells of Hodgkin's disease. Lancet 1991;337:320.
289. Weiss L, Strickler J, Warnke R, Purtillo D, Sklar J. Epstein-Barr viral DNA in tissues of Hodgkin's disease. Am J Pathol 1987;129:86.
290. Weiss L, Mohaved L, Warnke R, Sklar J. Detection of Epstein-Barr viral genomes in Reed-Sternberg cells of Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1989;320:502.
291. Herbst H, Dallenbach F, Hummel M, et al. Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein expression in Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991; 88:4766.
292. Boiocchi M, De Re V, Gloghini A, et al. High incidence of monoclonal EBV episomes in Hodgkin's disease and anaplastic large-cell Ki-1-positive lymphomas in HIV-1-positive patients. Int J
Cancer 1993;54:895.
293. Vasef MA, Kamel OW, Chen YY, Medeiros LJ, Weiss LM. Detection of Epstein-Barr virus in multiple sites involved by Hodgkin's disease. Am J Pathol 1995;147:1408.
294. Carbone A, Dolcetti R, Gloghini A, et al. Immunophenotypic and molecular analyses of acquired immune deficiency syndromerelated and Epstein-Barr virusassociated lymphomas: a
comparative study. Hum Pathol 1996;27:133.
295. Alkan S, Ross CW, Hanson CA, Schnitzer B. Epstein-Barr virus and bcl-2 protein overexpression are not detected in the neoplastic cells of nodular lymphocyte predominance Hodgkin's
disease. Mod Pathol 1995;8:544.
296. Stein H, Hummel M, Marafioti T, Anagnostopoulos I, Foss HD. Molecular biology of Hodgkin's disease. Cancer Surv 1997;30:107.
297. Oudejans JJ, Jiwa NM, Meijer CJ. Epstein-Barr virus in Hodgkin's disease: more than just an innocent bystander. J Pathol 1997;181:353.
298. Dolcetti R, Zancai P, De Re V, et al. Epstein-Barr virus strains with latent membrane protein-1 deletions: prevalence in the Italian population and high association with human immunodeficiency
virusrelated Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1997;89:1723.
299. Chapman AL, Rickinson AB. Epstein-Barr virus in Hodgkin's disease. Ann Oncol 1998;9[Suppl 5]:S5.
300. Enblad G, Sandvej K, Sundstrom C, Pallesen G, Glimelius B. Epstein-Barr virus distribution in Hodgkin's disease in an unselected Swedish population. Acta Oncol 1999;38:425.
301. Jarret RF, MacKenzie J. Epstein-Barr virus and other candidate viruses in the pathogenesis of Hodgkin's disease. Semin Hematol 1999;36:260.
302. Harris NL. Hodgkin's disease: classification and differential diagnosis. Mod Pathol 1999;12:159.
303. Corradini P, Ladetto M, Pileri A, Tarella C. Clinical relevance of minimal residual disease monitoring in non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: a critical reappraisal of molecular strategies. Leukemia
1999;13:1691.

SECTION 45.2 Leukemias and Lymphomas of Childhood
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 45.2
Leukemias and Lymphomas of Childhood
HOWARD J. WEINSTEIN
NANCY J. TARBELL
Leukemias
Epidemiology
Clonality and Cell of Origin
Classification
Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations and Diagnosis
Treatment
Future Directions
Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma
Risk Factors
Classification
Staging
Lymphoblastic Lymphoma
Treatment
Small Noncleaved Cell (Burkitt's) Lymphoma
Large Cell Lymphoma
Hodgkin's Disease
Epidemiology
Clinical Presentation, Staging, and Workup
Selection of Therapy
Complications
Chapter References

LEUKEMIAS
The development of successful therapy for most children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) can be attributed to a series of prospective clinical studies that
clarified the pathophysiology of ALL and showed the importance of combination chemotherapy, sanctuary-specific treatment, and supportive care measures. 1 On the
other hand, the relative resistance of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) to chemotherapy led to the development of treatment strategies that include dose-intensified
chemotherapy and bone marrow transplantation (BMT). 2 During the 1990s, we have also greatly advanced our knowledge of leukemia cell biology, most notably in the
area of molecular pathogenesis. Molecular biologists have developed powerful diagnostic tools, sensitive methods for detecting minimal residual leukemia, and
potential new therapeutic targets. 3 The improvement in long-term survival for children with acute leukemia has been gratifying but also has been associated with
significant late effects that underscore the need for vigilant follow-up and for designing risk-adapted therapies.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Leukemia is the most common form of cancer in children. Approximately 2500 new cases of childhood leukemia are diagnosed each year in the United States. 4 ALL
and AML are diagnosed in 75% and 20% of the cases, respectively, and chronic myeloid leukemia in fewer than 5%. The well-established peak incidence of childhood
leukemia at age 4 years is due to ALL. ALL affects males and whites more often than females and African Americans. Nearly a threefold higher incidence of ALL at 2
to 3 years of age occurs for white children compared to black children. The incidence of AML is constant during childhood, except for a slight peak in infancy and late
adolescence.4
It is likely that the majority of acute leukemias in children are initiated by acquired mutations within the hematopoietic tissues. 5 Intriguing results of molecular genetic
studies using stored neonatal blood spots from children who eventually developed ALL suggest a prenatal origin in some patients. 6 In studies of monozygotic twins
who both developed acute leukemia (approximately 5% concordance rate), it appears that the initial chromosome translocation occurred in utero with subsequent
transfer of the leukemia clone from one twin to the other via the shared blood supply. Because the concordance rate for leukemia is low in identical twins, it follows
that an additional event or environmental exposure is required postnatally.
A small number of children are at increased risk to develop leukemia because of an inherited predisposition. 5 For example, children with Down syndrome have a 10to 20-fold increased risk of leukemia during the first 10 years of life. 7 The types of leukemia in children with Down syndrome follow the usual distribution of childhood
leukemia, except at younger than 3 years of age when AML (mostly FAB M7) is more likely to occur than ALL. Neonates with Down syndrome or trisomy 21 mosaicism
may also develop a “transient myeloproliferative disorder” (TMD) that is indistinguishable from congenital AML. This disorder is usually diagnosed within the first 2
weeks of life, and the incidence is unknown. Peripheral blood or bone marrow blasts from infants with TMD have features of the megakaryocytic and erythroid
lineages and, in some cases, have been shown to be clonal in origin. In more than 90% of these infants, however, the blasts spontaneously disappear and normal
blood counts recover within the first several weeks to months after diagnosis of TMD. One retrospective study reported that up to 30% of infants with TMD eventually
developed either a myelodysplastic syndrome or AML before the age of 3 years. 8 Because the majority of these infants appear never to develop leukemia, neonates
with Down syndrome and a hematologic picture consistent with AML should be observed for 4 to 10 weeks before cytotoxic therapy is initiated. If therapy is eventually
needed, the outcome for these children has been surprisingly favorable. 9
Children with neurofibromatosis are predisposed to develop myeloid malignancies, especially myelodysplastic and myeloproliferative syndromes. 10 In patients with
neurofibromatosis who develop leukemia, evidence indicates loss of both neurofibromatosis (NF-1) alleles in bone marrow cells. These data provide evidence that
NF-1 may function as a tumor-suppressor gene in children with NF-1.
Some epidemiologic studies suggest that maternal reproductive history of previous fetal loss and maternal alcohol consumption during pregnancy is associated with
an increased risk of AML in infants. 11 In general, most studies have not found a consistent association between common infectious or environmental exposures and
an increased risk of childhood leukemia. 5,12 On the other hand, AML has been observed as a secondary leukemia in both children and adults who were treated with
alkylating agents or topoisomerase II inhibitors (e.g., epipodophyllotoxins). 13,14
CLONALITY AND CELL OF ORIGIN
Normal blood cell production is polyclonal, whereas leukemia is a clonal disorder. The return of polyclonal hematopoiesis in remission and the reappearance of the
original clone at relapse suggests that the leukemic clone was suppressed but not eradicated by chemotherapy. This also implies that normal bone marrow stem cells
repopulate the marrow during remission. In rare situations, patients with AML in remission have had persistent clonal hematopoiesis. 15 The significance of this
observation remains unknown.
Within the hierarchy of hematopoietic development, there are many potential targets for leukemic transformation. Characterization of the leukemic blast population by
morphology, genetics, and immunologic methods has helped to establish a revised classification system that may or may not reflect the nature of the leukemic “stem
cell.” The detection of lymphoid lineage–associated determinants on the surface of lymphoblasts plus an analysis of immunoglobulin (Ig) and T-cell receptor gene
rearrangements suggest that ALL derives from either a precursor T or precursor B cell. 16 The cell of origin for AML has been postulated to be either a multipotent or
committed myeloid progenitor (e.g., CFU-GEMM or granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming unit), but more recent data indicate that the AML stem cell may be more

primitive than previously postulated. 17,18
CLASSIFICATION
Morphology
In the 1970s, a morphologic classification system was developed for the acute leukemias by a French-American-British (FAB) Cooperative Working Group and has
since gained wide acceptance. 19 The FAB system divides ALL into three morphologic subtypes (L1, L2, and L3). L1 lymphoblasts, the most common FAB type in
children, have scanty cytoplasm and inconspicuous nucleoli. Blasts in the L2 category account for 10% of cases; they are larger and more pleomorphic in size, with
abundant cytoplasm and prominent nucleoli, and they may be difficult to distinguish by morphology alone from FAB subtype M0 AML.
L3 is the rarest subtype (1% to 2%) of ALL, and these blasts have very basophilic vacuolated cytoplasm. These L3 blasts have the same immunophenotype as well as
karyotype and molecular genetic abnormalities as the tumor cells in small noncleaved or Burkitt lymphomas 3 (see Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma, later in this chapter).
The FAB classification recognizes eight subtypes of AML (M0 to M7). Table 45.2-1 presents a distribution of FAB subtypes for 180 cases of AML in children younger
than 18 years of age studied at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital from 1984 to 1992. Most children younger than 2 years of age with AML have either the M4 or
M5 subtypes.2 Although the M7 subtype may have several characteristic morphologic features, the diagnosis of M7 AML requires confirmation either by ultrastructural
histochemistry (platelet peroxidase granules on electron microscopy) or monoclonal antibody positivity for specific megakaryocyte or platelet glycoproteins (e.g.,
IIB\IIIA or IB).20 The FAB M7 subtype most often is seen in children younger than 3 years of age with Down syndrome. 7

TABLE 45.2-1. French-American-British Classification of Acute Myelogenous Leukemia in Children

Immunophenotype
By using a panel of lineage-associated monoclonal antibodies, most cases of ALL can be broadly divided into precursor B- and precursor T-cell subgroups. 16
Precursor B-cell ALL is further subdivided into early pre-B and pre-B, and the T-cell cases are subtyped according to level of thymocyte differentiation (e.g. early,
mid-, or late thymocyte).21 The expression of several antigens, such as CD10 (CALLA) and CD34, are not lineage-specific and, in some studies, were of prognostic
importance. The CALLA antigen is expressed in most cases of precursor B ALL, hence the derivation of the term common ALL previously used to define this large
subgroup of childhood ALL. Most infants with ALL have a CALLA-negative, early pre-B immunophenotype. 22 The proportion of children with specific
immunophenotypes of ALL is shown in Table 45.2-2 according to age group.

TABLE 45.2-2. Percentage Distribution of Immunophenotypes of Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia by Age Group

Compared to early pre-B-cell ALL, the pre-B (cytoplasmic Ig) immunophenotype develops more often in African Americans, is associated with a higher initial leukocyte
count and hemoglobin level, and is more likely to have a DNA index lower than 1.16 and a pseudodiploid karyotype. 23 The previously known adverse outcome
associated with pre-B ALL was due to the subgroup with the t(1:19)(q23;p13). The clinical features of T-cell ALL have long been recognized and include an
adolescent male with a high leukocyte count, bulky lymphadenopathy (especially mediastinal), and extramedullary leukemia [central nervous system (CNS), skin,
testes]. 24,25 In the past, these children had a poor prognosis. However the prognostic distinctions among ALL immunophenotypes have been lost by improvements in
therapy with risk-directed protocols. 1
B-cell (surface Ig) ALL is associated with L3 morphology, male predominance, and bulky extramedullary disease (e.g., intraabdominal masses). 1 Many children with
B-cell ALL come to medical attention because of a “primary tumor mass,” which on biopsy is a small noncleaved or Burkitt lymphoma and on further staging is found to
have extensive replacement of the bone marrow with L3 blasts. If more than 25% marrow blasts are present, these children are considered to have mature B-cell ALL
rather than advanced-stage Burkitt's lymphoma, but they are treated on identical protocols and now enjoy a favorable prognosis. 26
There has been limited clinical use for a classification of AML based on immunophenotype. 27 The primary value of cell surface antigen analysis in most cases of AML
is distinguishing between AML and ALL (L2 versus M0) and diagnosing FAB M7 AML.
Hybrid or Acute Mixed-Lineage Leukemias
Blasts from approximately 5% to 20% of children with acute leukemia have either morphologic, cytochemical, immunophenotypic, or genetic markers suggesting
derivation from both myeloid and lymphoid lineages. 28 In these biphenotypic, hybrid, or acute mixed lineage leukemias, individual blasts usually co-express markers of
more than one lineage, but in rare instances, two distinct populations of blasts are present. Whether these cases represent aberrant gene expression or
transformation of a multipotent stem cell is unknown. Hybrid leukemias appear to be more common in patients with prior myelodysplastic syndromes, secondary
leukemias, leukemias associated with 11q23 [especially t(4;11)] translocations and the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome.
Myeloid-antigen expression (blasts reactive with two or more myeloid-specific monoclonal antibodies) is detected in fewer than 10% of cases of childhood ALL, and
lymphoid-antigen expression is noted in approximately 15% of AML. 28 Mixed-lineage expression in AML lacks prognostic significance, and patients should be treated
on AML protocols. 27,29 Myeloid-antigen–positive ALL is not associated with a poor prognosis if patients are treated on intensive, risk-adapted ALL protocols. 30,31

Leukemias with two distinct leukemic clones (one lymphoid and the other myeloid) are rare. No specific treatment recommendations have been established for these
patients, but most oncologists favor a hybrid ALL/AML protocol in this situation.
CYTOGENETICS AND MOLECULAR GENETICS
The combination of cytogenetics, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and molecular methods identify chromosomal abnormalities in approximately 80% of cases of
childhood acute leukemia. 3,32 Identification of numerous chromosomal abnormalities in leukemia blasts, including translocations, deletions, and inversions, have
enabled molecular geneticists to clone the genes that ultimately have been shown to be important in the malignant transformation of hematopoietic cells. The genetic
abnormalities also have been proved valuable as diagnostic and prognostic tools. For example, TEL-AML1, or ETV6-CBFA2, is a newly identified fusion gene that is
detected in approximately 25% of children with precursor B ALL. The fusion gene results from a cryptic t(12;21) translocation and identifies a group of patients with a
favorable prognosis 33,34 (Fig. 45.2-1).

FIGURE 45.2-1. Kaplan-Meier analysis of event-free survival according to genetic features of blast cells in 369 children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia treated at
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital from 1984 to 1997. The relatively good survival of patients with BCR-ABL fusion reflects successful treatment of a subgroup
with low leukocyte counts at diagnosis. The E2A-PBX1 abnormality, once associated with poor survival, now is associated with the same favorable prognosis as the
ETV6-CBFA2 (TEL-AML1) abnormality. (From ref. 1, with permission.)

Many of the chromosomal translocations in ALL involve Ig or T-cell receptor genes and transcription factors. The prototype translocation is the t(8;14) in L3 ALL and
Burkitt's lymphoma [see Small Noncleaved Cell (Burkitt's) Lymphoma, later in this chapter]. 1,3 The t(1;19) is seen in approximately one-fourth of patients with pre-B-cell
ALL and fuses the E2A gene on chromosome 19 with the PBX1 gene on chromosome 1.35 Approximately 2% to 5% of children with ALL have the t(9;22)(9q34;q11) or
Ph chromosome.1,3 In Ph-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia, the translocation results in a bcr-abl fusion gene product of 210-kD, whereas in most cases of
Ph-positive ALL, the breakpoint within the bcr region is more centromeric, yielding a smaller fusion protein (185 kD). The presence of the Ph chromosome in ALL
usually indicates high-risk leukemia warranting a stem cell transplantation in first remission, except for those children presenting with a low leukocyte count or good
early response to prednisone. 36,37 The genetic abnormalities associated with T-cell ALL are discussed in the section Lymphoblastic Lymphoma, later in this chapter. 25
Genes involved in cell-cycle control (e.g., p53, p16) also have been implicated in the pathogenesis of ALL. 38,39 and 40
Childhood ALL can also be classified by the number of chromosomes (or DNA content) per leukemic cell. 41 Hyperdiploidy with a DNA index greater than 1.16 (greater
than 50 chromosomes) is associated with the precursor B-cell phenotype and a highly favorable prognosis, especially if there are trisomies of chromosomes 4 and
10.42 It is not known why patients with a DNA index greater than 1.16 respond well to chemotherapy, but it may be related either to a favorable intracellular
metabolism of methotrexate or the marked propensity for hyperdiploid blasts to undergo apoptosis. 43,44 On the other hand, hypodiploidy (less than 45 chromosomes)
is associated with a poor prognosis. 45
Many of the chromosomal abnormalities in AML are associated with specific FAB subtypes. 46,47 These include t(8:21)(q22:q22) and FAB M2; t(15;17)(q22;q11-21) and
acute promyelocytic leukemia (FAB M3); translocations involving chromosome band 11q23 and various partner chromosomes [e.g., t(9;11) and FAB M4 and M5]; and
inv(16)(p13;q22) and FAB M4eo. The t(8;21) and t(15;17) translocations are extremely rare in patients younger than 2 years of age, whereas translocations involving
11q23 are quite common in this age group. 48 Translocations of 11q23 almost always involve the MLL gene and are also the most frequent karyotypic change in infants
with ALL. Infants with t(4;11)(q21;q23) or molecular rearrangements of MLL have an almost fivefold higher risk of relapse compared with other infants. 49 The MLL
gene is also rearranged in most cases of secondary AML induced by topoisomerase II inhibitors. 14 The t(1;22)(p13,q13), a unique but rare chromosomal translocation,
has been detected in infants with FAB M7 AML. 50 Monosomies or partial deletions of chromosomes 5 or 7 are commonly observed in adults with AML and patients
with secondary AML (postalkylating agent therapy or myelodysplastic syndromes) but are unusual in de novo childhood AML.46 The critical genes involved in leukemic
transformation on chromosomes 5 and 7 have not yet been identified.
CLINICAL AND LABORATORY MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS
The most common presenting signs and symptoms in children with acute leukemia are fever or infection, fatigue, pallor, and bleeding. These symptoms result from
decreased normal hematopoiesis secondary to bone marrow infiltration by leukemic blasts, leading to neutropenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. Bone or joint pain
(or both) are initial complaints in approximately 25% of children with acute leukemia and are more commonly observed in ALL than AML. 51 Bone pain is usually due to
periosteal elevation but may be secondary to microfractures or bone necrosis. The classic radiologic findings in acute leukemia include metaphyseal lucent bands
(growth arrest lines), periosteal elevation, and lytic lesions. These changes are best seen in the long bones near the knees, ankles, or wrists.
Moderate to massive lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly are associated with T-cell ALL and infant acute leukemias. 21,52 Nonspecific abdominal pain is
relatively common and may be secondary to organomegaly, gastrointestinal bleeding or, rarely, leukemic infiltration of the bowel wall. Most of the gastrointestinal
lesions encountered in patients with leukemia are secondary to complications of treatment and include oral mucositis, esophagitis, gastritis, typhlitis or neutropenic
enterocolitis, lactose malabsorption, and hepatitis or cholestasis.
Extramedullary Leukemia
Extramedullary spread of leukemia at either the time of diagnosis or relapse is important because it can cause local problems, represent a sanctuary site of disease,
or herald bone marrow relapse. At diagnosis, clinically detectable extramedullary leukemia of the central nervous system (CNS), skin, and testes is rare, except in
infants. Therefore, the major treatment strategies are aimed at eradication of subclinical disease. 1 In the past, the most common sites of extramedullary relapse
included the CNS and testes. 53
Symptomatic CNS leukemia (e.g., increased intracranial pressure or cranial nerve palsies) is extremely rare, but between 4% and 10% of children with acute leukemia
have blasts present in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) at diagnosis. 54,55 The diagnosis of CNS leukemia is made by examining a cytocentrifuged preparation of CSF.
Traditionally, CNS leukemia was defined by the presence of at least five leukocytes per microliter of CSF with blasts. However, more recent data indicates that the
presence of blasts in CSF samples with fewer than five leukocytes per microliter may be of prognostic significance. The most common signs of CNS leukemia include
headache, nausea and vomiting, lethargy, or cranial nerve palsies (sixth and seventh being most common). Neurologic symptoms in children with acute leukemia may
also be due to epidural masses causing cord compression or myeloblastomas of the cerebral cortex or cerebellum, hemorrhage, or leukostasis (plugging of vessels by
aggregates of leukemic blasts). Patients with AML and initial leukocyte counts greater than 200,000 cells per microliter are at highest risk for leukostasis. 56
Leukemia cutis is a rare finding seen most often in AML (FAB M4 and M5) and T-cell ALL. Infants with AML are at particularly high risk for leukemia cutis. 57 The
lesions of leukemia cutis are typically subcutaneous nodules that are blue-gray or salmon in color. The skin nodules in babies with AML have been observed to
spontaneously regress for short periods before progressive leukemia ensues.

Overt testicular leukemia is extremely unusual at diagnosis, and with current effective chemotherapy regimens, it is rarely encountered as a site of relapse. 1 Clinically
it presents as a firm, painless, unilateral or bilateral testicular swelling. The diagnosis should be confirmed by testicular biopsy. Enlarged kidneys from infiltration of
leukemia is not uncommon but is usually asymptomatic. The rare cases of renal failure in newly diagnosed children with acute leukemia are either secondary to uric
acid nephropathy or ureteral obstruction from retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy.
Leukemic infiltration of the pericardium/myocardium or lungs is also extremely rare at diagnosis or during treatment. Congestive heart failure during therapy is much
more likely due to sepsis or anthracycline cardiac toxicity rather than leukemic infiltration. Diffuse pulmonary infiltrates are most often secondary to an infection, but
leukemic infiltration, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, and pulmonary leukostasis should be considered in the differential diagnosis.
The most common ocular findings in patients with acute leukemia include retinal hemorrhages secondary to either thrombocytopenia or vessel infiltration, or
papilledema from CNS leukemia. Leukemic involvement of the anterior chamber (hypopyon) or retinal infiltration are both infrequent.
Myeloblastomas are also referred to as chloromas or granulocytic sarcomas and occur in fewer than 5% of children with AML. 2,57,58 These solid tumors of myeloid
leukemia cells can appear simultaneously with bone marrow infiltration or may be the initial clinical manifestation of leukemia, occurring weeks to months before an
increase in bone marrow blasts occurs. Myeloblastomas have a predilection for the CNS (brain or epidural) and the bones and soft tissues of the head and neck
(especially the orbits).
Laboratory Features and Differential Diagnosis
The peripheral blood findings in patients with acute leukemia often include a normocytic anemia with teardrop or nucleated red blood cells, thrombocytopenia with
platelet counts averaging between 20,000 and 50,000 cells per microliter, and leukocyte counts between 5000 and 50,000 cells per microliter ( Table 45.2-3).51
Approximately 20% of patients, however, have leukocyte counts greater than 100,000 cells per microliter. The white blood cell (WBC) differential usually reveals
neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count <1000 cells per microliter) and circulating blasts, especially if the leukocyte count is greater than 5000 cells per microliter.

TABLE 45.2-3. Initial Clinical and Laboratory Features in Children with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia According to Major Immunophenotypes

The bone marrow biopsy in most cases of acute leukemia is hypercellular, with blasts accounting for the majority of nucleated cells. The numbers of normal
granulocyte/monocyte, erythroid, and megakaryocytic precursors are markedly decreased. To establish the diagnosis of acute leukemia, the bone marrow aspirate or
biopsy must have more than 25% and 30% blasts, respectively, in ALL and AML. Most cases of childhood acute leukemia can be readily diagnosed and classified by
routine bone marrow morphology and histochemistry. Additional laboratory tests, such as genetics and immunophenotyping, are important for risk assignment and are
sometimes necessary for distinguishing ALL from AML.
Other significant laboratory findings at diagnosis may include metabolic derangements [see Small Noncleaved Cell (Burkitt's) Lymphoma, later in this chapter] and
disseminated intravascular coagulation or fibrinolysis. Disseminated intravascular coagulation usually is associated with acute promyelocytic leukemia (FAB M3) or
FAB M5 AML, but it may be seen in other children with newly diagnosed acute leukemia. 59,60
The differential diagnosis in a child suspected of having acute leukemia includes juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia, myelodysplastic syndromes, metastatic tumors
with marrow involvement (neuroblastoma and rhabdomyosarcoma), idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, aplastic anemia, sepsis and
other conditions that might result in neutropenia, infectious diseases associated with lymphocytosis, and the TMD in neonates with Down syndrome. 7
TREATMENT
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
Most children with acute leukemia are referred to tertiary care hospitals, where they are treated by pediatric oncologists according to institutional or cooperative group
protocols [e.g., Pediatric Oncology Group (POG), Children Cancer Group (CCG), Berlin-Frankfort-Munster (BFM), Medical Research Council]. 61 Therapy for childhood
ALL has been based on risk classification systems because it has become clear that outcome of treatment varies substantially among different subsets of children
with the disease. The philosophy behind this approach has been to use less toxic therapy for children with a lower risk of relapse and to treat high-risk patients with
experimental and potentially more aggressive regimens. Because no single best protocol has been established for either low- or high-risk patients with ALL,
enrollment in clinical trials is still encouraged.
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS. Numerous prognostic factors (Table 45.2-4) have been identified for children with ALL, and some of these have been incorporated into
risk classification systems used to assign treatment. These prognostic factors include combinations of presenting clinical and laboratory parameters, biologic features
of the leukemia blast, and early response to chemotherapy. Because prognostic factors are treatment-dependent, improvements in therapy may abrogate a previously
accepted prognostic variable. In an effort to compare the results of various clinical trials worldwide, a uniform risk classification for treatment assignment was
accepted at a National Cancer Institute workshop. 62 The agreed on standard risk category includes patients 1 to 9 years of age with precursor B ALL and a WBC
count at diagnosis of less than 50,000 cells per microliter. The remaining patients are classified as high risk. The event-free survival rate for children in the
standard-risk category is approximately 80% at 4 years and approximately 65% for the high-risk patients.

TABLE 45.2-4. Acute Leukemia: Adverse Prognostic Factors

Some investigators continue to classify T-cell ALL as an independent high-risk feature, and others assign risk to these children based on age and WBC criteria. 1,21,25
The prognosis for patients with T-cell ALL has significantly improved during the 1990s with the advent of multiagent dose-intensified ALL protocols. 25,63 Children with
mixed lineage or myeloid antigen-positive ALL are no longer considered high risk based on immunophenotype alone. 30,31
In addition to age and WBC count, other important prognostic variables established in the workshop include hyperdiploidy, cytogenetics, early response to treatment,
and CNS status. The prognosis for patients with blasts with additional copies of whole chromosomes (hyperdiploidy) has been very favorable, as reported by several
groups.41,42,44 Hyperdiploidy can be measured by DNA content (DNA index) of leukemic cells and by karyotyping. A DNA index of more than 1.16, especially if blasts
contain extra copies of chromosomes 4 and 10, is associated with an extremely favorable prognosis. The majority of children with hyperdiploid blasts have
standard-risk age and WBC features. In some studies, DNA index and trisomies of chromosomes 4 and 10 are used to change risk assignment independent of age
and WBC criteria. 42
Early response to chemotherapy as measured by bone marrow findings within 7 to 14 days of induction or peripheral blood blast response to corticosteroids on day 8
of treatment is associated with outcome. A more rapid clearing of blasts from either the blood or bone marrow confers a more favorable prognosis. 64,65 In one study,
an augmented postinduction therapy for children with high-risk ALL and a slow response to induction has improved their long-term outcome. 66
Patients with the Ph chromosome [t(9;22)] and a high initial WBC count or slow early response to prednisone, and infants with t(4;11), continue to be at high risk for
treatment failure. 37,67 Experimental therapies, such as allogeneic stem cell transplantation in first remission, are recommended for these very high-risk patients.
Studies have shown that the poorer response associated with t(1:19) can be overcome by more intensive therapy. 35
New genetic abnormalities are continuing to be identified in patients with ALL. For example, the TEL/AML1 fusion gene occurs in approximately 25% to 30% of cases
of pediatric precursor B ALL and defines a subgroup with a favorable prognosis. 33,34 Molecular studies also are identifying genetic changes (e.g., MLL, TAL,
TEL/AML1) in leukemic blasts that are undetectable at the routine cytogenetic level. 1,68
Other factors that have been shown to independently affect prognosis include race, gender, blast cell morphology, lymphomatous presentations, and serum lactic
dehydrogensase.69,70 and 71 African Americans have a poorer prognosis than whites for reasons that cannot be totally explained based on known prognostic factors. 71 In
several studies, males had a higher risk of bone marrow relapse compared to females. 70,72 Long-term follow-up data also indicate that females have an increased risk
for some late effects, especially CNS and cardiac effects. 73,74
REMISSION INDUCTION. The achievement of a complete remission is a prerequisite for the long-term survival of patients with acute leukemia. In 1948, Sidney
Farber demonstrated the first remissions in ALL using aminopterin, an analogue of methotrexate. 75 Vincristine and prednisone are effective in inducing remissions in
85% to 90% of children with ALL, without unduly suppressing normal bone marrow function. Daunorubicin and L-asparaginase were subsequently identified as active
drugs in the treatment of ALL. The addition of either one of these drugs to vincristine and prednisone increased the complete remission rate in childhood ALL to more
than 95%. The combination of vincristine, prednisone, and L-asparaginase is one of the standard remission induction regimens in childhood ALL. 1,76 The use of
additional drugs, such as the anthracyclines (daunorubicin or doxorubicin) or cyclophosphamide, are often reserved for children with high-risk ALL. 66,76
Data from both experimental models and human clinical trials indicate that maximum leukemia cell kill during induction decreases the likelihood for the emergence of
drug-resistant clones and results in higher cure rates. Therefore, maximum tolerated doses of all active agents are delivered as early as possible during treatment. As
previously discussed, a more rapid response to induction chemotherapy as measured by day 8 peripheral blast count or day 14 marrow aspirate is a favorable
prognostic sign. 64 New technologies, including polymerase chain reaction and multiparameter flow cytometry, are able to quantitate “minimal residual leukemia” at the
end of induction. 77,78 The results of this type of analysis may be predictive for risk of subsequent relapse, although the best assay and optimal timing for testing are
not known.
CONTINUATION THERAPY. It has been estimated that approximately two to three logs of leukemic blasts are killed during the induction phase of therapy, leaving a
residual leukemic burden of approximately 100 million cells. Therefore, additional treatment is necessary to prevent relapse. In the past, children with ALL relapsed
within a median of 4 to 6 months when treatment was not continued beyond the remission induction phase. In the late 1960s, investigators at St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital developed a “total therapy” approach for the treatment of children with ALL. 1 The model included remission induction, continuation chemotherapy
with or without intensification, and preventive CNS therapy. The choice of continuation therapy was empiric. The early St. Jude studies evaluated 6-mercaptopurine,
methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, and cytarabine in various doses and combinations. The best outcome was achieved in patients who received 2 to 3 years of daily
oral 6-mercaptopurine and weekly methotrexate. Long-term follow-up of patients treated with this latter combination show a 42% disease-free survival rate for children
with initial WBC counts of fewer than <25,000 cells per microliter, whereas it was only 16% for all other patients. 79
Before the observation that the intensity of treatment required for a successful outcome varied substantially among subsets of patients, investigators in the BFM
group, at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and the Dana Farber Cancer Institute treated all children with ALL with up-front intensive multiagent chemotherapy.
The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center protocols used a cell kinetic rationale that combined eight cell-cycle specific and nonspecific agents. 80 The Dana Farber
Cancer Institute protocols emphasized the intensive use of L-asparaginase and doxorubicin, and the BFM group used 4 months of intensive multidrug therapy
(induction, consolidation, and intensification). 63,76 CNS prophylaxis varied between the groups (see Central Nervous System Prophylaxis, later in this chapter).
Children with high-risk ALL benefited most from these protocols. The advantage of these regimens compared to antimetabolite-based protocols for children with lower
risk ALL was less obvious. However, more recent BFM and POG randomized trials have shown the importance of intensive reinduction therapy or dose intensified
antimetabolite therapy, even for patients with favorable risk features. 72,76
Other successful approaches for patients with high-risk ALL have included the use of alternating non–cross-resistant pairs of active agents. For example,
investigators at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital reported encouraging results with the combination of VM-26 and cytarabine in refractory ALL and subsequently
introduced those drugs into front-line protocols. 1,79 Most protocols for high-risk patients include the use of four or more drugs during remission induction, followed by
intensification therapy for a brief period, CNS prophylaxis, and continuation therapy. With this approach, the cure rates for these very high-risk patients have reached
levels of 65% to 75%. The use of bone marrow transplant (BMT) from a related or unrelated histocompatible donor for select groups of very high-risk patients in first
remission is being investigated. 81
Several groups treat infants with ALL and those with T-cell ALL on separately designed protocols. 21,80,82 The results of these studies have been comparable to
therapies used to treat a more inclusive group of patients with high-risk ALL. On the other hand, because children with B-cell ALL (Burkitt's or L3 type) had such a
dismal prognosis after treatment with classic ALL protocols, an entirely different treatment approach was developed. These children were treated according to
regimens that were designed for patients with advanced-stage Burkitt's lymphoma. The protocols for B-cell ALL and advanced-stage Burkitt's lymphoma included
short but dose-intensive chemotherapy cycles that include cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and cytarabine plus intensive intrathecal (IT) chemotherapy. The
long-term disease-free survival rates increased from less than 10% to more than 60% with this approach. 26,83 As more is learned about the biologic, pharmacologic,
and other factors that distinguish the various “genotypic species” or subtypes of ALL, we will hopefully be able to select our therapies accordingly.
The duration of continuation therapy for children with ALL has been empiric. Chemotherapy has not been given for indefinite periods because of its short- and
long-term toxicities. Because of our new techniques for quantifying minimal residual leukemia, we may soon be able to adjust the length of treatment based on more
objective measures.77,78 The duration of continuation chemotherapy has gradually been shortened from 5 to approximately 2 years without undue risk of relapse. 1,79
The risk of relapse after cessation of therapy is highest in the first year and tapers off to 2% to 3% in the second and third years. 79 Very late relapse, after 5 or more
years in remission, is rare but reported. There appears to be an increased risk of relapse off therapy for males compared to females.
PREVENTIVE OR PROPHYLACTIC CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM THERAPY. CNS relapse in children with ALL became clinically apparent as bone marrow
remissions became more durable. Before the use of preventive CNS therapy, CNS relapse heralded bone marrow relapse in almost 60% of patients. It was postulated
by investigators at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital that leukemia blasts were already present in the CNS by the time ALL was diagnosed and that the drugs
used to treat leukemia did not penetrate the meninges in therapeutic concentrations. The CNS was considered a “sanctuary site,” requiring site-specific therapy for
subclinical disease. This concept proved to be correct and led to major increments in cure rates for childhood ALL. Clinical trials at St. Jude Children's Research

Hospital established that the risk for CNS relapse could be reduced to less than 5% by the early use of 24 Gy of craniospinal irradiation (CSI) or 24 Gy of cranial
irradiation plus IT methotrexate. 84 Cranial irradiation plus IT methotrexate replaced craniospinal irradiation because of the toxicities of CSI. CSI was myelosuppressive
and also caused impaired growth of vertebral bodies.
The target volume for cranial irradiation includes the entire intracranial subarachnoid space. By convention, the caudal margin of the field extends to the bottom of the
second cervical vertebra. Standard guidelines for preventive cranial irradiation also include the posterior retina and orbital apex, encompassing the extension of the
subarachnoid space along the optic nerves. A subacute somnolence syndrome that follows cranial irradiation has been well described. 85 Approximately 50% of
children develop some degree of lethargy, irritability, or low-grade fever at a median onset of 4 to 8 weeks after cranial irradiation.
The neurologic and cognitive sequelae of 24-Gy cranial irradiation led to treatment modifications. 86,87 and 88 The CCG safely reduced the dose of cranial irradiation to
18 Gy.89 In an effort to further reduce toxicity, the Dana Farber ALL consortium compared 18 Gy given in a single daily fraction with a hyperfractionated schedule
(twice daily), and the BFM reduced the dose to 12 Gy. 90,91
An alternative strategy for preventing CNS relapse has been the use of IT chemotherapy alone, starting during induction and continuing for an extended period
throughout therapy. 92,93 Protocols using repetitive doses of IT chemotherapy also include multiple cycles of intravenous moderate- to high-dose methotrexate. This
approach has been successful in preventing CNS relapse in children with standard-risk ALL, as well as intermediate- and high-risk patients in some studies, but it is
also associated with neurotoxicity. 94
IT methotrexate has the same efficacy as triple IT therapy (methotrexate, hydrocortisone, and cytarabine) and may be less neurotoxic. The risk of a CNS event was
gender-dependent in the CCG trials. Boys were at greater risk for relapse, whereas girls were more vulnerable than boys to cognitive and growth dysfunction after
cranial irradiation and IT chemotherapy. 95 Similar findings have been observed by the Nordic and Dana Farber groups. 90
In some protocols, select subgroups of children with ALL at high risk of CNS relapse (e.g., WBC count higher than 50,000 cells per microliter, T-cell ALL, Ph-positive
ALL, and infants) continue to be treated with cranial irradiation (12 to 18 Gy) plus IT chemotherapy. 90,91 The percentage of children with ALL who currently receive
cranial irradiation as part of CNS prophylaxis ranges from 15% to 60% depending on the protocol.
OVERT CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM LEUKEMIA AT DIAGNOSIS. Fewer than 5% of children with ALL have leukemic blasts detected in the CSF at diagnosis.
The definition of CNS leukemia has been revised. 54 Three categories have been defined according to CSF findings: CNS-1 (no blasts), CNS-2 (fewer than 5 WBCs
per microliter with blasts), and CNS-3 (more than 5 WBCs per microliter with blasts or cranial nerve palsy). Patients with CNS-3 status have a higher frequency of
isolated CNS relapse and a lower long-term survival rate than patients with CNS-1 status, but the significance of CNS-2 status is not clear. Some investigators treat
patients with CNS-2 status with additional doses of IT chemotherapy but give a risk assignment based on age and WBC criteria.
The management of patients with overt CNS leukemia (CNS-3) is less controversial than is the choice of preventive or prophylactic CNS therapy. After inducing a
complete hematologic and CNS remission with IT and systemic chemotherapy, most investigators give CNS irradiation toward the latter part of the first year of
treatment. Doses of 24 to 30 Gy of radiation have been given to these children.
THERAPY AFTER RELAPSE. The two most important factors relating to prognosis after relapse are the length of the initial remission and the site of relapse. 96,97
Children with late relapse have a better prognosis than those with early relapse, but the definition of early and late relapse is variable. An initial remission duration of
less than 3 years is considered to represent an early relapse. Relapse in extramedullary sites compared to bone marrow is also more favorable in terms of survival. 97
The second complete remission rate is more than 80%. The question of whether to perform a BMT or to continue chemotherapy has been one of the most
controversial issues in second remission. 98,99 The likelihood of long-term survival after chemotherapy alone is less than 10% to 15% for patients with early relapse.
This finding is in contrast to a 40% to 50% leukemia-free survival rate for children whose first remission was longer than 3 years. 96 These children also require a
second course of CNS-directed therapy. BMTs from HLA-identical sibling donors compared with chemotherapy result in fewer relapses and better leukemia-free
survival rates for the early-relapse group and, in some studies, for all risk groups 98,99 (Fig. 45.2-2).

FIGURE 45.2-2. Actuarial probability of leukemia-free survival in matched cohorts of children receiving chemotherapy or undergoing transplantation, according to the
duration of the first remission. The numbers below the figure indicate the numbers of children at risk. (From ref. 98, with permission.)

Some investigators recommend autologous BMT for children with ALL in second remission who lack histocompatible family donors. 100,101 Various methodologies have
been developed to purge or remove contaminating leukemia cells present in the patient's harvested marrow, but the merits of this approach are unknown. The relapse
rates are higher after autologous BMT compared to allogeneic BMT because of the lack of a graft-versus-leukemia effect. It remains controversial as to whether
autologous BMT is superior to chemotherapy for children with ALL in second remission. The value of matched unrelated stem cell transplantation in the therapy of
children with recurrent ALL is under investigation. 102
Isolated CNS relapse occurs in 5% to 10% of children treated for ALL on current protocols despite CNS-directed therapy. In the past, CNS relapse was associated
with a very poor long-term prognosis, and the few survivors had serious long-term neurotoxicity. Salvage therapies included cranial or craniospinal irradiation plus IT
or intraventricular chemotherapy. In the early trials, hematologic relapse rather than a subsequent CNS event was the main obstacle to a long-term second remission.
Current approaches for these children include intensified reinduction and consolidation chemotherapy, IT chemotherapy, and delayed craniospinal irradiation to 6
months in remission.103 The delay in craniospinal irradiation allows for intensive chemotherapy to be administered during the early phases of therapy. The
5-year-disease-free survival estimates are approximately 70% with this strategy. However, a very high rate of relapse still occurs in children whose initial duration of
remission was less than 18 months. The neurologic toxicity with this type of therapy has been acceptable. BMT should be considered for the very high-risk patients
with an isolated CNS relapse.
Reports of ALL treatment in the 1970s indicated that 5% to 16% of boys had a testicular relapse during hematologic remission. 79,104 Males with T-cell ALL were at
highest risk for testicular leukemia. The time of testicular relapse was early for patients with T-cell ALL and usually was after cessation of therapy for most others.
These data led to trials of prophylactic testicular irradiation in T-cell ALL and testicular biopsies at completion of chemotherapy for patients with precursor B ALL.
Prophylactic testicular irradiation significantly reduced the incidence of testicular relapse but did not influence overall survival. As therapy for children with ALL has
improved, testicular relapse has become a rare event. As with other sites of relapse, patients who develop early testicular relapse have a worse prognosis than those
with a late relapse. Treatment includes both local radiation (24 Gy to both testes) and systemic chemotherapy. The target volume for radiation therapy includes the
entire scrotal region, encompassing both the testes and epididymis bilaterally. Patients with late isolated testicular relapse have a 75% long-term disease-free survival
rate.104 However, hormonal dysfunction usually is seen after these doses of gonadal irradiation.
COMPLICATIONS. The most concerning late complications of leukemia therapy include second cancers, adverse effects on growth and development, cardiotoxicity,

and neuropsychological dysfunction. 105,106 and 107 In a retrospective review of children treated for ALL, a sevenfold excess of all cancers and a 22-fold excess of CNS
tumors were found compared with the prevalence rate in the general population. 107 Children who received cranial irradiation before the age of 5 years had the highest
incidence of brain tumors. Patients treated intensively for ALL with the epipodophyllotoxins are at high risk for developing secondary AML. 108
Short stature and obesity are common in children who received cranial irradiation, especially girls who were treated at a very young age. 105 Many of these patients,
however, have had satisfactory growth after growth hormone replacement therapy. The chemotherapeutic agents used in the treatment of the acute leukemias have
been associated with many acute and chronic toxicities. The prolonged use of corticosteroids may induce osteoporosis and pathologic fractures. Avascular necrosis of
long bones and foot bones also has been observed in patients with ALL who have received steroid treatment. The antimetabolites (e.g., methotrexate,
6-mercaptopurine, and cytarabine) induce cholestatic and hepatotoxic changes in the liver but are associated with few documented long-term toxicities in this
population of patients. L-Asparaginase is associated with significant acute toxicity, including allergy, pancreatitis, and deep venous thrombosis, but has not been
associated with long-term complications. The anthracycline antibiotics, doxorubicin and daunorubicin, have been associated with cardiomyopathy, especially when the
cumulative doses administered are more than 300 mg per square meter of body surface area. Studies indicate that a very high percentage of long-term survivors of
childhood cancer who received doxorubicin have subclinical echocardiographic abnormalities, including impaired contractility and increased afterload. Risk factors for
doxorubicin cardiac toxicity include female gender, young age at treatment, cumulative dose, and dose intensity. 73 The clinical significance of these findings remains
to be determined, but late congestive heart failure and death have been reported. ALL regimens that do not include alkylating agents appear not to impair
reproductive function.
The neurologic and cognitive sequelae of CNS-directed therapy for children with acute leukemia have been a major concern and a highly controversial subject. 74,88,94
It was once thought that cranial irradiation produced a greater impairment in cognitive function (e.g., impairment of verbal memory and coding and IQ declines) than
did chemotherapy. Because of those concerns, many investigators eliminated cranial radiation from therapeutic protocols. However, studies indicate that prednisone
and high doses of intravenous or IT methotrexate are associated with neurotoxicity and that 18 Gy of cranial irradiation may not be an independent toxic agent for
cognitive outcome.90,94 High-dose intravenous methotrexate is particularly toxic if it follows cranial irradiation. 74
Acute Myelogenous Leukemia
In contrast to ALL, only a modest improvement has been made in the long-term survival of children with AML since the late 1970s. 2,109 The complete remission rate
has increased from less than 50% to approximately 85%, but only 30% to 50% of patients are long-term survivors. 110,111,112,113 and 114 The survival rate is somewhat
better for those children with HLA-matched family donors who receive an allogeneic BMT early in first remission. 111,112,114
INDUCTION. The most commonly used remission induction regimen for children with AML, excluding those with Down syndrome and FAB M3, includes a 5- to 7-day
course of cytosine arabinoside, plus 2 to 3 days of daunorubicin, with or without thioguanine or etoposide. 2,109 The high complete remission rate with all- trans-retinoic
acid (ATRA) in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (FAB M3) led to prospective randomized trials testing the value of ATRA in the overall treatment plan. 115,116
Results of these studies clearly show that the combined use of ATRA and chemotherapy is superior to chemotherapy alone for patients with acute promyelocytic
leukemia.115,116 Therefore, induction therapy for all patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia should include ATRA combined with an anthracycline (daunorubicin or
idarubicin) and cytarabine. Chemotherapy for children with Down syndrome and AML needs to be less intensive than standard AML therapy because of the increased
risk of toxicity in these patients. Despite dose modifications, the outcome of children with Down syndrome and AML is excellent. 9
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM PROPHYLAXIS. Isolated CNS relapse occurs in approximately 20% of children with AML. 2,109 IT chemotherapy in combination with
high-dose systemic cytosine arabinoside is effective in lowering the CNS relapse rate. Data from the BFM studies using historical comparisons suggests that cranial
irradiation plus IT chemotherapy in children with standard-risk AML improves outcome. 117
POSTREMISSION THERAPY. The intensity and duration of postremission chemotherapy and the role of allogeneic and autologous BMT in first remission have been
under active investigation. The improvement in overall survival rates to approximately 40% to 50% at 5 years is a result of more effective remission induction and
postremission chemotherapy. 2,113,118,119 There is no proven role for maintenance chemotherapy if it follows several courses of high-dose cytarabine–based
consolidation chemotherapy. 119 Most pediatric AML protocols include one to three cycles of high-dose cytarabine after remission is achieved.
BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTATION IN FIRST REMISSION. Allogeneic BMT was first applied to children and young adults with AML in first remission as an
alternative to continued chemotherapy in the mid-1970s. 112,120,121 The early results were favorable compared with chemotherapy, but the transplantations were done in
a selected group of patients. The CCG initiated the first cooperative group study comparing allogeneic BMT to chemotherapy in children with AML in first remission. 112
Long-term follow-up of that study, plus data from POG and Associazione Italiana Ematologia ed Ongologia Pediatrica, all show a survival advantage for allogeneic
BMT compared to chemotherapy.111,112,114 However, fewer than one-fourth of children have a fully histocompatible family donor. Because of improving results of
chemotherapy and the morbidity and mortality associated with BMT, the German BFM and Medical Research Council cooperative groups are not recommending
allogeneic BMT in first remission for patients with favorable prognostic factors. 110,113 BMTs are reserved for second remission in this group of patients.
For patients who lack histocompatible family donors, autologous BMT became an attractive option in first remission after it was reported to be efficacious (30% to 40%
survival) in second remission of AML. 122 The results of the early studies were controversial because they were not prospectively controlled. Beginning in the
mid-1980s, both the adult and pediatric AML cooperative groups initiated prospective randomized studies to compare autologous BMT and intensive postremission
chemotherapy.111,114,118 In the pediatric trials, no event-free or survival advantage was found for autologous BMT compared with chemotherapy. The majority of failures
after autologous BMT are due to recurrent leukemia.
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS. In contrast to childhood ALL, very few clinical or laboratory factors are consistently related to prognosis 2,46,47,110 (see Table 45.2-4). A
leukocyte count of more than 100,000 cells per microliter, karyotype with monosomy 7, and secondary AML are associated with lower remission rates. The lower
remission rates associated with hyperleukocytosis are only partially accounted for by early deaths secondary to leukostasis. In the German BFM AML studies, two risk
groups were identified. 110 Standard-risk patients included FAB subtypes M1 or M2 with Auer rods, M3 or M4eo, rapid response to initial induction chemotherapy, and
Down syndrome. The standard-risk group includes patients with “favorable chromosomal abnormalities” [t(8;21), t(15;17), and inv 16]. 47 All other patients are high risk
and include approximately 70% of the entire group. Event-free survival rates for standard-risk versus high-risk patients was 65% and 34%, respectively.
MANAGEMENT OF THE RELAPSED PATIENT. The prognosis for children with AML who do not enter complete remission or who relapse is poor. 2,123 BMT offers
these patients a chance for long-term survival. 102,123,124 A variety of chemotherapy regimens have been evaluated in children with refractory or relapsed AML. 2,109,123,125
The second remission rates range from approximately 30% to 50% and are highest for children whose first remission duration was longer than 1 year. However, the
length of chemotherapy-maintained second remissions are very brief. On the other hand, 5-year event-free survival ranges from 30% to 50% for those patients who
receive an allogeneic (related or unrelated marrow donor) marrow transplantation. 124 Autologous BMT in second remission for patients who lack suitable marrow
donors offers some hope for long-term survival, but it has become a less attractive option because of the expanding unrelated marrow and cord blood banks and the
opportunity to find a matched unrelated donor for an allogeneic transplantation. 102,126
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The major challenge for the future is to develop effective therapy for patients who have a poor prognosis and to minimize toxicity for those children who are
successfully treated. Strategies are being developed to target drug doses to achieve predetermined serum or intracellular concentrations to improve the therapeutic
index1. The use of recombinant human hematopoietic growth factors may reduce the myelosuppressive complications from chemotherapy and allow dose
intensification to proceed safely.
Mechanisms of drug resistance are beginning to be elucidated. 127 For example, increased expression of the multidrug resistance gene (mdr1) or its protein product (P
glycoprotein) has been demonstrated in blasts from 20% to 40% of newly diagnosed patients with AML, and it increases approximately twofold at the time of relapse.
High in vitro expression of mdr1 correlates with resistance to multiple drugs (e.g., etoposide, anthracyclines, vincristine) by promoting their cellular efflux. A number of
biologically active agents, including verapamil and cyclosporine, are capable of reversing the mdr1 phenotype in vitro. To date, only limited evidence indicates that
this strategy works in vivo, but controlled clinical trials are under way.

The wider availability of stem cell transplantations from unrelated marrow or cord blood donors has enabled many more patients to successfully undergo marrow
transplantation. 102,126 Studies are testing nonmyeloablative marrow transplantations in an effort to achieve mixed chimerism that will hopefully achieve a more
favorable balance of the graft-versus-host and graft-versus-leukemia reactions. 128 Biologic response modifiers, such as interleukin-2 and -12, are under study for their
potential to enhance the host response to tumor. It is now possible to target the genetic lesions of leukemia cells, as exemplified by the successful use of ATRA in
acute promyelocytic leukemia and a specific bcr-abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor in Ph-positive leukemias. 115,129

NON-HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA
The lymphomas are the third most common childhood malignancy and account for approximately 10% of cancers in children. 4,26 Approximately two-thirds of the
lymphomas diagnosed in children are non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) and the remainder are Hodgkin's disease. The spectrum of NHL seen in pediatric patients
differs significantly from that seen in adults. The three major histologic categories of NHL in children are lymphoblastic, small noncleaved cell (Burkitt's), and large cell
lymphoma (Table 45.2-5).26 In adults, Burkitt's and lymphoblastic lymphoma are rare, but follicular center cell lymphoma, a histologic type exceedingly rare in children,
predominates.130 No sharp age peak (median age, 11 years) occurs in children with NHL, and the male to female ratio approaches 3:1.

TABLE 45.2-5. Pediatric Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma: Correlation of Histology, Presenting Sites, and Immunophenotype

Therapy is best delivered by a team of pediatric oncologists, surgeons, and radiation oncologists at a major medical center with expertise in treating children. Before
the use of multiagent leukemia regimens for children with all stages and histologic subtypes of NHL, fewer than 20% of children were cured. 131 The survival of children
with NHL, especially those with advanced-stage disease, has markedly improved during the 1990s. The 5-year survival rate is approximately 90% for children with
early-stage NHL and 70% for those with advanced-stage disease. 26,132,133
RISK FACTORS
Numerous factors have been linked to an increased risk of NHL. Children with severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, common
variable immunodeficiency, ataxia-telangiectasia, and the X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome are at increased risk for developing a lymphoma. 26,134,135 Acquired
immunodeficiency secondary to human immunodeficiency virus infection or immunosuppressive therapy, especially after solid organ transplantation or BMT, also
places individuals at greater risk for developing a lymphoproliferative disorder or malignant lymphoma. 136,137 Most of the lymphomas that occur in these high-risk
groups are B-lineage large cell or small noncleaved (Burkitt's). Monoclonal Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA has been identified in tumor tissue from many of these
patients, indicating an important and early role for the virus in tumor development. 138 It has been postulated that the immunodeficient host does not generate an
adequate T-lymphocyte response (EBV-specific cytotoxic T cells) against B cells that are latently infected with EBV.
EBV has long been associated with endemic Burkitt's lymphoma, and more recently with hairy leukoplakia, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and leiomyosarcomas in
children with human immunodeficiency virus. 139 The role of EBV in the pathogenesis of Burkitt's lymphoma and other malignancies is unknown [see Small Noncleaved
Cell (Burkitt's) Lymphoma, later in this chapter].
CLASSIFICATION
In the Working Formulation, the major categories of childhood NHL are lymphoblastic, small noncleaved cell (Burkitt's and non-Burkitt's), diffuse large cell, and large
cell immunoblastic. 140 The pediatric NHLs in the Revised European-American Lymphoma classification include precursor B and precursor T lymphoblastic
lymphoma/leukemia, Burkitt's lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, and anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) (T- and null cell types). 141
STAGING
The Ann Arbor staging classification is not well suited for childhood NHL for several reasons. It does not adequately reflect prognosis, because there is early
widespread, noncontiguous dissemination of disease despite the limited initial sites of involvement (e.g., mediastinal lymphoblastic lymphoma). In addition, extranodal
involvement is common, whereas stage III nodal disease is rare. In view of these deficiencies, an alternative staging system (see Table 45.2-6) was developed at St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital. 131 The St. Jude system considers both primary site and extent of tumor in assigning a clinical stage, and it has been widely
accepted. Pathologic staging is not helpful in the overall management of children with NHL because the mainstay of treatment is systemic chemotherapy with a very
limited role for irradiation of involved sites of disease. 25,133

TABLE 45.2-6. St. Jude Children's Research Hospital Staging System for Pediatric Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma

LYMPHOBLASTIC LYMPHOMA
Lymphoblastic lymphomas account for 30% of childhood NHL and share many clinical and biologic features with ALL. 21,25,142 The distinction between lymphoblastic
lymphoma and ALL is arbitrary (see Table 45.2-2) and has not been based on clinical presentation. If the bone marrow has more than 25% lymphoblasts, the patient
is considered to have ALL rather than stage 4 lymphoblastic lymphoma.

The tumor cells of lymphoblastic lymphoma are morphologically indistinguishable from the lymphoblasts of precursor B and precursor T ALL. 141 They have round or
convoluted nuclei, finely dispersed chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm. 142 Lymphoblastic lymphomas in the anterior mediastinum have a
precursor T cell immunophenotype that most often correlates with the middle or late stage of thymocyte maturation. 21 The cells express various combinations of the
CD1, CD2, CD5, and CD7 antigens and, in many cases, express both CD4 and CD8. The CD3 antigen and associated T-cell receptor molecule are not commonly
expressed. The CD10 or CALLA antigen is variably present. Significant overlap of the immunophenotype is found in many cases of lymphoblastic lymphoma and
T-cell ALL, suggesting a common cell of origin. 142 The early-stage lymphoblastic lymphomas have the phenotype of an early B-cell precursor, identical to that seen in
most children with ALL.1,143
In more than one-half of the cases of T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma/leukemia, recurrent nonrandom chromosomal translocations involving the a, b, and g chains of
the T-cell receptor have been identified. Many of these translocations arise in error during the normal process of rearrangement of the T-cell receptor genes, a
situation that is analogous to the Ig rearrangements noted in Burkitt's lymphoma. 25,144 Several of the partner genes involved in these translocations include the
transcription factors TAL1 and HOX11, and the cysteine-rich (LIM) proteins RHOMB1 and RHOMB2. In the t(1;14)(p32;q11), detected in 3% of patients with T ALL,
the TAL1 gene is rearranged in its 5' regular sequence by its translocation into the T-cell receptor a/d chain locus. A submicroscopic deletion in the same region of
TAL1 is detected in up to 25% of patients with T-cell ALL/lymphoblastic lymphoma, making it the most common genetic change in this disease. 25,145
Clinical Presentation and Staging
Most children with lymphoblastic lymphoma present with rapidly enlarging neck and mediastinal lymphadenopathy, although subdiaphragmatic nodal presentations
are occasionally seen. 26 The classic presentation is that of an adolescent male with respiratory distress due to a large anterior mediastinal mass with or without
pleural effusions. Cough, wheezing, or shortness of breath and facial swelling (evidence of superior vena cava syndrome) are frequent complaints in these patients.
Other common presenting sites of disease include cervical nodes, Waldeyer's ring, cutaneous lesions, bone marrow, and single- or multiple-site bone disease. The
majority of children have advanced-stage disease (see Table 45.2-5).
Because the pace of the disease is usually rapid, diagnostic studies and institution of therapy should proceed quickly. The least invasive procedure should be used to
establish the diagnosis. Because bone marrow is frequently involved and patients with T-cell ALL often present with an anterior mediastinal mass, a close examination
of the peripheral blood and bone marrow should be undertaken before proceeding to a more invasive procedure. Pleural effusions should be tapped because they are
often positive for malignant cells. If the bone marrow and pleural fluid are nondiagnostic, a lymph node outside of the mediastinum should be biopsied, if possible.
Sufficient tissue should be obtained for histopathology, genetic studies, and immunophenotyping. Biopsy under general anesthesia should be avoided if at all
possible, especially if there is significant airway narrowing or symptoms of respiratory distress. 146,147 The prebiopsy use of mediastinal irradiation or steroids for
respiratory distress results in rapid disappearance of the mass and jeopardizes the likelihood of establishing a tissue diagnosis. The remainder of the workup should
include a lumbar puncture with a cytocentrifuged examination of cerebral spinal fluid, and a computed tomographic (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging of the
primary site. Bone and liver-spleen scans are not necessary. Routine blood chemistries and liver function tests should be obtained before starting therapy.
TREATMENT
Historically, children with lymphoblastic lymphoma had less than a 10% survival rate after careful pathologic staging followed by extended-field radiotherapy. 148,149
Within several months from the start of radiation therapy, disease progression to a leukemic phase that was indistinguishable from ALL was noted in most patients.
This finding suggested that widespread dissemination of lymphoma already existed at the time of diagnosis, especially to the bone marrow and meninges. Based on
these observations, investigators at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital added chemotherapy that was effective against childhood ALL to local irradiation. 149 This
systemic treatment approach dramatically improved the outcome for children with lymphoblastic lymphoma. Similar treatment strategies were adopted for the other
histologic types of childhood NHL.
The combined use of ALL therapy with local irradiation was very effective for children with early-stage lymphoblastic lymphoma (80% survival). 150,151 Despite the
favorable outcome, the toxicity of combined modality therapy led to attempts to reduce the intensity and duration of treatment without compromising survival. Several
single-institution and cooperative group protocols were successful in maintaining excellent survival rates (85% to 90%) while reducing the morbidity and mortality of
therapy. The CCG protocols demonstrated the equal efficacy of 6 and 18 months of the cyclophosphamide, Oncovin, methotrexate, and prednisone (COMP)
combination.151 However, all children also received radiotherapy to involved fields. A POG study demonstrated that the omission of radiotherapy from the treatment of
localized NHL in children did not jeopardize survival. 133 The POG chemotherapy regimen included three cycles of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, Oncovin, and
prednisone (CHOP) followed by 24 weeks of 6-mercaptopurine and methotrexate. The CCG and POG protocols included IT methotrexate for patients with primary
tumors in the head and neck region. Treatment with either CHOP or COMP results in 65% event-free survival for children with localized lymphoblastic lymphoma, but
survival is 90% because of the successful treatment of relapse with salvage chemotherapy.
Fewer than 40% of patients with advanced-stage (stages 3 and 4) lymphoblastic lymphoma were cured with standard-risk ALL regimens (e.g., vincristine, steroid,
131
L-asparaginase, methotrexate, and 6-mercaptopurine) or COMP therapy. ,150 The addition of drugs such as the anthracyclines, cyclophosphamide, cytosine
arabinoside, or the epipodophyllotoxins to ALL regimens substantially improved the prognosis for these children.
The vincristine, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and prednisone (APO) and LSA2L2 regimens were two of the early successful protocols for children with high-risk ALL or
advanced-stage lymphoblastic lymphoma. LSA2L2 included ten drugs, and the APO protocol featured intensification with doxorubicin and L-asparaginase (Table
45.2-7).150,152,153 Both protocols included preventive CNS therapy. Radiation therapy to the mediastinum was generally limited to emergency situations. These
regimens resulted in approximately 65% survival for children with advanced-stage lymphoblastic lymphoma. The use of more intensive ALL chemotherapy regimens
appears to further improve the outcome for these children. 25,132 Although radiotherapy has been omitted from most of the protocols, a small percentage of patients
have local tumor failure. 154

TABLE 45.2-7. Recommended Protocols by Histology and Stage for Pediatric Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma

Early preventive CNS therapy is critical in the treatment for children with advanced-stage lymphoblastic lymphoma. IT chemotherapy alone or combined with cranial
irradiation has been the mainstay of CNS preventive therapy. 154
Relapse at any site is a significant obstacle to cure in children with advanced-stage lymphoblastic lymphoma. Most of the relapses occur within 2 years from
diagnosis, but occasional late relapse is observed. In contrast to relapse for early-stage disease, the outcome after a second course of chemotherapy is poor.
However, these patients have a 30% to 50% survival rate after allogeneic BMT from a histocompatible sibling donor. 155

SMALL NONCLEAVED CELL (BURKITT'S) LYMPHOMA
The small noncleaved cell lymphomas (Burkitt's type) were initially described by Dennis Burkitt in equatorial Africa where the tumor is endemic. 156 These lymphomas
were subsequently recognized worldwide and account for approximately 40% of childhood NHL. The endemic form is common (100 per 1 million children) and is
nearly always associated with EBV (95%), whereas the sporadic form is rare (1 to 2 per 1 million children) and uncommonly associated with EBV (15%). In endemic
areas, involvement of the jaw and other facial bones is frequent, whereas extensive intraabdominal disease and bone marrow involvement are commonly seen in
sporadic cases. 157
Histologically, the small noncleaved cell lymphomas include the Burkitt's and non-Burkitt's types. The Burkitt's type was defined by the World Health Organization in
1969. It is characterized by homogeneous cells with round to oval nuclei with multiple nuclei and intensely basophilic vacuolated cytoplasm that contains neutral fat.
The non-Burkitt's type has a greater degree of nuclear pleomorphism compared to the Burkitt's type. The non-Burkitt's type may be difficult to distinguish on a
morphologic basis from some large B-cell lymphomas. In children, no obvious differences are found between the Burkitt's and non-Burkitt's lymphomas, and therefore
they are considered the same for treatment purposes. 158
Burkitt's lymphoma is a B-cell tumor based on expression of cell surface Ig heavy chains (usually IgM) and either k or l light chains. 11 Approximately 50% of cases are
also CD10 (CALLA)-positive. L3 lymphoblasts have a similar immunophenotype and are cytologically indistinguishable from Burkitt's cells. Because many patients
with L3 ALL also have primary tumor masses, it is likely that the essential difference in these diseases lies in their extent at presentation. Cure rates of 75% to 85%
have been achieved for children with B-cell ALL (FAB L3) using treatment programs developed for advanced-stage Burkitt's lymphoma. 83,159,160
Chromosomal translocations involving the c-myc locus on chromosome 8q24 and Ig receptor genes are characteristic of Burkitt's lymphoma. 3,26,161 These
translocations appear to result from errors in the normal process of recombination that drives Ig gene rearrangement during B-cell development. The majority of cases
have a t(8;14)(q24;q32) translocation in which c-myc is translocated into the Ig heavy-chain gene on chromosome 14q32. Two variant translocations, t(2;8)(p12;q24)
and t(8;22)(q24;q11), occur with less frequency. In these translocations, c-myc is fused with the k or l light-chain genes located on chromosome 2 and 22,
respectively. These translocations juxtapose Ig transcriptional regulatory sequences adjacent to the c-myc gene, leading to its dysregulated activity. In endemic and
sporadic cases, the breakpoints on chromosome 14 involve the Ig heavy-chain joining region and switch region, respectively, suggesting that the translocation in the
sporadic cases occurs at a later stage of B-cell development. 162 Up-regulation of c-myc influences the ratio between myc/max complexes in favor of transcriptional
activation and B-cell proliferation. 163 In transgenic mice, the translocation-induced dysregulation of c-myc has been shown to directly induce B-cell lymphomas. 164
The role of EBV in the pathogenesis of endemic Burkitt's lymphoma is unknown. 165 Studies of EBV gene expression in lymphoblastoid cell lines and in human tumor
biopsy specimens have identified three distinct forms of virus latency. EBV gene expression is more restricted in Burkitt's lymphoma (EBNA1 and EBERs) compared
with lymphoblastoid cell lines, posttransplantation lymphoproliferative processes, and some cases of EBV-positive Hodgkin's disease and nasopharyngeal cancer. 166
Tumor cells of endemic Burkitt's lymphoma are not susceptible to killing by EBV-specific cytotoxic T cells, which may be due to the lack of the EBNA3 family of
proteins. Furthermore, Burkitt's cells display down-regulated expression of adhesion molecules and HLA class I alleles, further impairing the action of cytotoxic T
cells. The role of malarial infection remains unknown but may also result in a relative T-cell immunodeficiency.
Clinical Presentation
The abdomen is the most common presenting site in sporadic cases of Burkitt's lymphoma (see Table 45.2-5).26 Approximately one-third of children with an abdominal
primary tumor present with a right lower quadrant mass or with signs and symptoms of either acute appendicitis or intestinal obstruction secondary to an ileocecal
intussusception. 157,167 This presentation is typically seen in boys between 5 and 10 years of age. An exploratory laparotomy is indicated for diagnostic purposes. If a
tumor is discovered, it is invariably a small noncleaved Burkitt's lymphoma that is limited in extent to the distal ileum or cecum. Complete surgical resection of the
involved segment of gut with its associated mesentery, followed by an end-to-end anastomosis, is the proper treatment. Children with completely resected Burkitt's
lymphoma (stage 2) of the intestinal tract have an excellent prognosis after treatment with a limited course of chemotherapy (discussed later, in the section
Treatment). The majority of patients with Burkitt's lymphoma of the abdomen, however, have unresectable disease that may involve the mesentery, retroperitoneum,
kidneys, ovaries, and peritoneal surfaces (often associated with malignant ascites). Surgical debulking is not feasible or appropriate for this latter group of patients. 167
The head and neck region is the second most common site of disease presentation. Patients in nonendemic areas present with tonsillar enlargement, cervical
lymphadenopathy and, occasionally, a soft tissue facial mass associated with involvement of the jaw or other facial bones. 133,157 Less common presenting sites include
an epidural mass, skin nodules, bone, and bone marrow.
The least invasive procedure should be used to establish the diagnosis, and the staging evaluation should be expedited because these patients usually have rapidly
growing tumors with significant electrolyte imbalance as well as impaired renal function. This is especially true for children with massive abdominal disease. Effusions
are usually malignant in these children and contain sufficient numbers of tumor cells for cytology and biology studies. Imaging should include a CT scan or magnetic
resonance imaging of the primary site and a bone scan. Patients with head and neck primary tumors may have clinically nondetectable disease in the abdomen
(especially of the kidneys) and therefore should also have abdominal imaging studies.
Particular attention to kidney function, and the serum levels of uric acid, potassium, calcium, and phosphorus, is critical in children with advanced-stage Burkitt's
lymphoma. These patients are at high risk for the “tumor lysis syndrome” and uric acid nephropathy. 168 Measures should be taken to reduce the likelihood of uric acid
nephropathy, including vigorous intravenous hydration, alkalinization of urine with either sodium bicarbonate or Diamox, administration of allopurinol, and careful
monitoring of serum electrolytes. Hemodialysis is required in a small percentage of cases. 160
Treatment
Complete remissions were induced in 80% of African children with Burkitt's lymphoma with cyclophosphamide administered as a single agent. 169 Patients with facial
tumors (early stage) had sustained remissions with single- or multiple-dose cyclophosphamide, whereas the majority of children with abdominal tumors relapsed with
systemic and CNS disease. Successor protocols used combination chemotherapy and IT methotrexate. The use of cyclophosphamide and vincristine with
methotrexate or cytarabine was associated with higher remission rates and more durable remissions compared to single-agent cyclophosphamide. 170 The most
important prognostic factor was the extent of tumor at diagnosis.
Clinical trials in the United States demonstrated that the complete response rate, relapse frequency, and survival in American patients were similar to results in
Africa.171 Approximately 85% of patients with early-stage Burkitt's lymphoma were cured using as little as 9 weeks of CHOP chemotherapy. 133 Similar results were
achieved after 6 months of COMP therapy. 151 A POG study demonstrated that the addition of involved-field radiation therapy did not influence outcome. 133 Treatment
for patients with head and neck primary sites of disease also included IT methotrexate.
COMP therapy, however, resulted in only a 40% survival rate for patients with advanced-stage disease, 150 which was similar to the African experience. 170 Relapses
occurred in systemic and CNS sites at a median of 3 months from the beginning of therapy. Protocols that were highly effective for children with ALL and
lymphoblastic lymphoma (e.g., LSA2L2 and APO) were less effective than COMP for advanced-stage Burkitt's lymphoma or L3 ALL. 150 These poor results were most
likely due to the omission or limited use of cyclophosphamide.
Several groups of investigators began to evaluate dose-intensified systemic and IT chemotherapy for these high-risk patients. 83,159,160 Cyclophosphamide,
methotrexate, and cytarabine were administered in high doses with or without anthracyclines and the epipodophyllotoxins. Treatment courses were repeated at early
signs of bone marrow recovery in an attempt to prevent regrowth of tumor between cycles of chemotherapy. Hematopoietic growth factors were used in some
protocols to enhance bone marrow recovery. CNS prophylaxis included systemic chemotherapy that penetrated the CNS (high-dose methotrexate and cytarabine) and
intensive IT chemotherapy. Radiation therapy was usually reserved for patients who presented with initial CNS involvement. The duration of treatment ranged from 2
months to 1 year. The results of these studies were impressive. Event-free survival increased from 50% to 80% for stage 3 and from less than 20% to more than 80%
for patients with stage 4 Burkitt's lymphoma and L3 ALL (see Table 45.2-7).
The management of patients with recurrent Burkitt's lymphoma is problematic. Relapse tends to occur early, while the patient is still on therapy. BMT offers the only

realistic hope of long-term survival for these children. 26,172 The outcome is more favorable for patients who achieve a second remission before proceeding to BMT.
However, second remissions are difficult to induce in these patients, especially for those with advanced-stage disease.
LARGE CELL LYMPHOMA
The large cell lymphomas constitute approximately 30% of childhood NHL. 26 Approximately 30% of pediatric large cell lymphomas are classified as ALCL in the
Revised European-American Lymphoma classification. 141 The remainder are diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma, and the rare
peripheral T-cell lymphoma. ALCL in children tends to involve lymph nodes and extranodal sites, including the skin, soft tissues, lung, and bone. 173 Lymphomatoid
papulosis and the primary cutaneous form of ALCL are rare in childhood. The majority of the cases of ALCL studied in children have had a T-cell phenotype. The
t(2;5)(p23;q35) translocation has been associated with Ki-1+ or CD30+ lymphomas in both children and adults. 174 The chromosomal breakpoints involved in the t(2;5)
have been cloned and involve the gene that encodes nucleophosmin (NPM), a nonribosomal nuclear phosphoprotein on chromosome 5, and a gene that encodes a
novel transmembrane tyrosine-specific protein kinase (ALK) located on chromosome 2. 175 The translocation results in the fusion of these genes, producing a chimeric
NPM-ALK gene and message. Reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction assays for this translocation have been positive in all cases with cytogenetic
evidence of the t(2;5) and in several cases of ALCL with a normal karyotype.
Clinical Presentation
The clinical presenting features of large cell lymphoma in children are more varied than those for lymphoblastic or Burkitt's lymphoma. Also, a relatively equal
distribution is seen between early- and advanced-stage disease. The most common primary sites of disease include the nasopharynx, cervical nodes, skin, soft
tissues, mediastinum, bone, and abdomen. The bone marrow and CNS are rarely infiltrated (see Table 45.2-5).
Evaluation and Treatment
The workup and staging of the child with large cell lymphoma are similar to that recommended for children with the other histologic subtypes of NHL. The treatment of
large cell lymphoma in children has evolved from local radiotherapy to primarily combination chemotherapy. 26,176 Because of the relative rarity of large cell lymphoma
in children, many of the treatment strategies and protocols derive from adult studies. 177
Children with localized large cell lymphoma have a very favorable prognosis. The COMP and CHOP regimens that are effective in early-stage lymphoblastic and
Burkitt's lymphoma also result in 85% survival for these children (see Table 45.2-7).133,150 The results of CHOP with or without involved-field irradiation were similar.
CHOP has not been systematically evaluated in children with advanced-stage large cell lymphoma. The results of COMP therapy for these children were
disappointing (approximately 50% event-free survival). 150 However, the use of the APO and Adriamycin, Cytoxan, Oncovin, and prednisone (ACOP+) regimens
resulted in approximately 70% event-free survival for children with stage 3 or 4 large cell lymphoma. 176,178 These latter protocols include up-front vincristine,
prednisone, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide (ACOP+ only). Because of the similar outcomes after APO and ACOP+ therapy and the concerns of secondary
malignancy and gonadal failure after cyclophosphamide, POG investigators prospectively compared APO to ACOP+ in children with advanced-stage large cell
lymphoma.179 The event-free survival rate is approximately 70% in both arms at 5 years, thereby questioning the value of the addition of an alkylating agent to an
Adriamycin-containing regimen. Conclusions about the safety of omitting cyclophosphamide await confirmatory studies and a detailed analysis of various subsets of
patients.
The most important prognostic factor in children with large cell lymphoma is stage. Children with ALCL do not have an adverse prognosis compared with other
subgroups of patients with large cell lymphoma. In a retrospective POG study, B-cell phenotype was associated with superior survival. 180
Most protocols for children with advanced-stage large cell lymphoma do not include involved-field radiotherapy, but no controlled trials have addressed this issue. 181
The risk of an isolated CNS relapse is rare, but nevertheless, pediatric protocols include IT chemotherapy for these patients.

HODGKIN'S DISEASE
Approximately 10% to 15% of all cases of Hodgkin's disease occur in patients younger than 16 years. 182,183 The natural history of Hodgkin's disease and outcome of
treatment is similar in children and young adults 20 to 45 years of age. 184,185,186 and 187 Fully grown adolescents generally are evaluated and managed in the same way
as adults. Treatment decisions are more complex in young children because of the adverse effects of irradiation on growth of bone and soft tissues and the risk of
secondary malignancies. 189,190 The preceding concerns led to the development in the 1970s of combined modality therapy with reduced doses and volumes of
irradiation for children with both early and advanced stages of Hodgkin's disease. 191,192 The following section focuses on the unique aspects of the treatment of
Hodgkin's disease in children.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
In industrialized countries, the age of Hodgkin's incidence is bimodal, with a first peak in adults 20 to 30 years of age and a second peak in late adulthood. Hodgkin's
is uncommon before age 5 years, and the majority of pediatric cases are in children older than 11 years. 4,182 Before age 10, the male to female ratio is approximately
3:1; this ratio approaches 1:1 by adolescence.
The etiology of Hodgkin's disease remains unknown. An increased risk of Hodgkin's disease is noted in children with inherited immunodeficiency syndromes. Genetic
susceptibility and environmental factors probably both play a role in the pathogenesis of Hodgkin's disease (discussed in detail in Chapter 45.1 and Chapter 45.6).
Although rare, Hodgkin's can be familial. Evidence is increasing for the role of EBV in some subgroups of patients with Hodgkin's disease, especially children with
mixed-cellularity histology. 193
CLINICAL PRESENTATION, STAGING, AND WORKUP
Hodgkin's disease usually presents in supradiaphragmatic lymph nodes, with cervical, anterior mediastinal, and axillary nodes occurring in decreasing frequency.
Mediastinal adenopathy may produce symptoms such as dyspnea, cough, or superior vena cava syndrome. Approximately 90% of children present with painless neck
adenopathy, and 60% have involvement of anterior mediastinal, paratracheal, or hilar lymph nodes. Isolated infradiaphragmatic Hodgkin's disease is rare.
Approximately one-third of children have B symptoms [unexplained fever (exceeding 100.4°F), drenching night sweats, more than 10% weight loss]. The Ann Arbor
staging system is used for all age groups of patients with Hodgkin's disease and is described in detail in Chapter 45.6.
Although not included in the staging system, a precise measurement of the size of the anterior mediastinal mass is important. If the ratio of the width of the mediastinal
mass over the maximum transthoracic diameter is greater than one-third, this is considered large mediastinal adenopathy and is an adverse prognostic variable. 194
The diagnosis of Hodgkin's disease must be established by lymph node or tissue biopsy. The lymphocyte-predominant subtype is closely associated with stage I and
II Hodgkin's disease, and lymphocyte depletion is extremely rare in children. 183 Despite the unique biology and natural history of lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's
disease, most pediatric oncologists recommend the same stage-appropriate treatment as given to other children with Hodgkin's disease. 195 The pathology and
immunobiology of Hodgkin's disease is reviewed in detail in Chapter 45.6.
Once the diagnosis is established, the pretherapy evaluation begins with “clinical” staging. 196,197 Clinical staging should include a history and physical examination
with particular emphasis on defining lymphadenopathy by palpating the major lymph node chains. The size of the nodes should be measured and recorded for staging
and follow-up. Laboratory studies include complete blood cell count with platelets, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and kidney and liver function studies. Patients with
B symptoms or stage III or IV disease should have bone marrow biopsies from two separate sites.
Imaging studies should include a chest radiograph with a posteroanterior and lateral view, and thoracic and abdominal CT scans. Lower extremity lymphangiography
is no longer routinely performed in most centers because it does not visualize the upper abdominal nodes and spleen and sometimes require general anesthesia in
children. High-dose gallium scanning in children with Hodgkin's disease, similar to the situation in adults, is most helpful for following response to therapy if the tumor

is gallium-avid. 198
The thoracic CT scan is useful for detecting minimal mediastinal disease, pulmonary parenchymal and hilar disease, pericardial involvement, paracardiac nodes, and
chest wall extension. No optimal method has been developed for detecting abdominal involvement of Hodgkin's disease. The false-positive and false-negative rates
for abdominal CT scans were 14% and 22%, respectively, in a pediatric series. 196 More than 90% of children who are upstaged by laparotomy have evidence of
splenic involvement that is not detected by CT scanning or lymphangiograms. 197 In a POG study, models based on clinical and radiographic findings were developed
to predict for splenic involvement and upstaging with laparotomy. Risk factors, such as B symptoms, an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of more than 70, histology
other than nodular sclerosis or lymphocyte predominant, more than four sites of involvement, and an enlarged spleen (based on spleen CT index), were predictive for
abdominal disease but still were associated with 25% to 30% false-negative and false-positive rates, respectively. 196
The merits of staging laparotomy remain a source of controversy. 185,196 Although information provided by a staging laparotomy and splenectomy may be unobtainable
by other means, surgical staging is recommended only if the information provided will influence treatment planning. If radiation therapy alone is used for stage I and II
disease, pathologic staging will more accurately define appropriate patients and, in certain cases, spare them paraaortic and splenic irradiation. However, staging
laparotomy is no longer routinely performed in children because of the increasing use of combined modality therapy for all stages of disease.
In the era of staging laparotomy in children, a concern existed for the risk of overwhelming postsplenectomy sepsis from encapsulated pathogens. 193,197 With the use
of pneumococcal, meningococcal, and Haemophilus influenzae vaccinations before surgery and prophylactic antibiotics, this risk appears to have decreased. 199
Among 2238 consecutive patients with Hodgkin's disease treated at Stanford University, 4% were 10 years old or younger and 11% were 11 to 16 years old. Stage I
and II disease was present in approximately 60% of children. Stage I disease was slightly more common in younger children (18%) than in adolescents (8%); stage II
disease occurred in 40% to 50% of all age groups; and stage IV disease was less common in younger children (3%) than in adolescents (15%). B symptoms occurred
in 19% of younger children and in 30% of adolescents. 200
As the treatment of Hodgkin's disease has improved, previously identified prognostic factors have diminished in importance. However, stage, tumor bulk, and
constitutional symptoms continue to influence the success and certainly the choice of therapy. 192,200,201 Because prognostic factors are similar for adults and children
with Hodgkin's disease, the reader is referred to Chapter 45.6 for an in-depth discussion of this topic.
SELECTION OF THERAPY
The cure rate for children with all stages of Hodgkin's disease is approximately 90%. As the cure rate has increased, an increasing focus has been placed on the late
complications of therapy. In the pediatric patient, especially the prepubescent child, treatment decisions must be weighed in view of the toxicities of radiation therapy
on growth and development. For example, the use of high-dose (40 Gy) extended-field radiotherapy alone in children and adults with pathologic stage I or II Hodgkin's
disease results in 85% to 90% 10-year survival. 185,202 However, this therapy has serious late effects on musculoskeletal growth in the prepubescent child. 185,188 In this
young age group, the effect on bone and soft tissue is manifest by intraclavicular narrowing, shortened sitting height, decreased mandibular growth, and decreased
muscle development in the treated volume (Fig. 45.2-3). Other well-known late complications of irradiation, including hypothyroidism and second neoplasms, are not
unique in patients treated for Hodgkin's disease in childhood (discussed later in the section Complications).189,203,204

FIGURE 45.2-3. Frontal view of patient several years after mantal irridation with 4-MeV linear accelerator for Hodgkin's disease. Note the intaclavicular narrowing and
hypodevelopment of neck musculature.

In an attempt to decrease the late effects of high-dose extended-field irradiation, alternative treatments have been developed. These have included chemotherapy
combined with both lower doses and less extensive fields of irradiation and chemotherapy alone ( Table 45.2-8).

TABLE 45.2-8. Representative Combined Modality Trials for Pediatric Hodgkin's Disease

A Stanford study was one of the first to demonstrate that combined modality therapy with Mustargen, Oncovin, procarbazine, and prednisone (MOPP) and low-dose
radiation to involved regions was highly effective and associated with fewer adverse effects on musculoskeletal growth and development than had been observed with
high-dose radiation alone. 191 In this study, patients were surgically staged and treated with six cycles of MOPP chemotherapy and an age-adjusted radiation dose of
15 to 25 Gy. Boost doses of 10 Gy were used in select patients. The projected 10-year survival rate was 89% for all patients. However, the long-term side effects
included a 10-year risk of 6.5% for the development of secondary leukemia, as well as azoospermia in all males tested. The Princess Margaret Hospital team in
Toronto used a similar combined modality approach, but avoided staging laparotomy. 192 In an effort to maintain efficacy while decreasing the occurrence of secondary
leukemia and male infertility, the Stanford successor study alternated MOPP with doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine (ABVD) for six cycles in
combination with a 15- to 25-Gy radiation dose to involved fields. 186 The projected 10-year survival rates are 96%, and growth and development have progressed
normally. At the time of the report, no patient had developed a second leukemia, but one solid tumor in a radiation field was noted. Approximately one-third of patients
had asymptomatic changes noted on pulmonary function tests. Azoospermia is documented in approximately one-third of patients treated with ABVD, but it appears
transitory in almost all patients. 205
Similar treatment strategies with the goal of decreasing the risk of secondary leukemia, solid tumors, and gonadal failure have been reported by other groups. The
French Society of Pediatric Oncology randomized patients with clinical stage I and IIA Hodgkin's disease to four cycles of ABVD, or two cycles of MOPP and two
cycles of ABVD, plus low-dose (20-Gy) involved-field radiation therapy. 206 Children with advanced disease (stages IB, IIIB, III, and IV) were given three cycles of

MOPP and three cycles of ABVD plus extended-field low-dose radiotherapy. Patients with a poor response to chemotherapy received full doses of irradiation. The
disease-free survival rate is 88%, and the actuarial survival for the entire group is 95% (see Table 45.2-8).
The German-Austrian multicenter studies also have developed successful combined modality treatment programs for children with all stages of Hodgkin's
disease. 205,207 The frequency of exploratory laparotomy and splenectomy has been greatly reduced. In DAL-HD-90 (German-Austrian Hodgkin's trials), chemotherapy
was limited to two cycles for stages I and IIA. Boys received vincristine, etoposide, prednisone, and Adriamycin (OEPA), and girls were given two cycles of vincristine,
procarbazine, prednisone, and Adriamycin (OPPA). Radiation was applied to involved sites (25 Gy). The 5-year event-free survival rate is 95%. Patients with more
advanced-stage disease received two cycles of OPPA or OEPA and an additional two cycles (stages IIB and IIIA) or four cycles (stages IIIB and IV) of
cyclophosphamide, Oncovin, procarbazine, and prednisone (COPP) plus involved-field irradiation. Five-year event-free survival rates were 90% to 95% for
intermediate stages and 84% to 89% for stages IIIB and IV. Testicular function was normal in the regimens without procarbazine. 207
In the past, there had been only limited experience using chemotherapy as the only treatment modality in children with Hodgkin's disease. The early experience was
reported by the investigators from the Royal Children's Hospital in Melbourne, Australia. 208 After clinical staging, they treated children with stage I to IV Hodgkin's
disease with either MOPP or chlorambucil, vinblastine, procarbazine, and prednisone (ChlVPP) therapy. The event-free survival rate was 92% at a median follow-up
of 45 months. Twenty-eight of 32 patients with stage I or II disease and 14 of 15 patients with stage III or IV were disease-free. Although the outcome was excellent,
these children were exposed to multiple cycles of alkylating agents with the high risk of secondary leukemia and infertility in males.
The POG investigators have completed two large randomized trials in early-stage and advanced-stage Hodgkin's disease. The first POG study compared six cycles of
MOPP alternating with ABVD to four cycles of the same chemotherapy followed by involved-field irradiation (25 Gy) in surgically staged children with stage I to IIIA
Hodgkin's disease. 209 The event-free survival rate was 90% at 6 years, with no difference noted in the two arms of the study (see Table 45.2-8). These children were
exposed to less alkylating agent than in the Australian study because of the alternating use of MOPP and ABVD.
In the second randomized study, POG showed that no benefit existed for low-dose total nodal or subtotal nodal radiation after eight cycles of MOPP alternating with
ABVD in children with advanced-stage Hodgkin's disease. 210 Results of CCG study 5942 indicate inferior results in patients with advanced-stage disease or B
symptoms who were randomized to receive chemotherapy only (J. Nachman, personal communication). Further investigations are needed before radiation therapy is
omitted in the treatment of children with Hodgkin's disease, especially for unfavorable subgroups.
The combined modality approach using limited doses of both radiation (15 to 30 Gy) and alkylating agents for children with all stages of Hodgkin's disease produces
an excellent outcome with significant reduction in the risk of serious late effects. As the doses of irradiation are safely lowered in combined modality treatments, future
studies will undoubtedly test whether chemotherapy alone can achieve these excellent results. In addition, less toxic and equally effective chemotherapy regimens are
being tested.
COMPLICATIONS
The risk of infertility, secondary cancers, and late cardiopulmonary complications of newer generation combined modality therapies in young children with Hodgkin's
disease remains to be determined. 207 Several reports provide evidence that the risk of a second neoplasm is increased approximately 18 times in long-term survivors
of childhood Hodgkin's disease. 190,204 Breast cancer and thyroid cancer were the most common solid tumors. The actuarial risk of a solid tumor at 20 years after the
diagnosis of Hodgkin's disease was significantly higher among women (12.6%) than men (3.9%). The actuarial risk of breast cancer among women approached 35%
at 40 years of age. An age of more than 10 years at the diagnosis of Hodgkin's disease and a higher dose of mantle radiation were independently associated with
increased risk. The relative risk for a dose between 20 Gy and 40 Gy was 5.9 and 23.7 for a dose exceeding 40 Gy.
The cumulative risk of leukemia was highest in patients receiving chemotherapy alone (7.9%) and rose with an increase in the alkylating agent score. Based on these
data, efforts to lower the doses and volumes of radiation and limit exposure to alkylating agents and anthracyclines are steps in the right direction.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Pui CH, Evans WE. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1998;339:605.
2. Ebb DH, Weinstein HJ. Diagnosis and treatment of childhood acute myelogenous leukemia. Pediatr Clin North Am 1997;44:847.
3. Rubnitz JE, Look AT. Molecular genetics of childhood leukemias J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1998;20:1.
4. Smith MA, Ries LAG, Gurney JG, Ross JA. Cancer incidence and survival among children and adolescents: United States SEER Program 19751995. In: Ries L, Smith M, Gurney J, et al. eds.
Leukemia (ICCC I). National Institutes of Health Pub. No. 99-4649. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute SEER Program, 1999:17.
5. Greaves M. A natural history for pediatric acute leukemia. Blood 1993;82:1043.
6. Wiemels JL, Daniotti M, Eden OB, et al. Prenatal origin of acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children. Lancet 1999;354:1499.
7. Zipursky A, Poon A, Doyle J. Leukemia in Down syndrome: a review Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1992;9:139.
8. Homans AC, Verissimo AM, Vlacha V. Transient abnormal myelopoiesis of infancy associated with trisomy 21. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1993;15:392.
9. Ravindranath Y, Abella E, Krischer J, et al. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in Down's syndrome is highly responsive to chemotherapy: experience of Pediatric Oncology Group AML Study 8498.
Blood 1992;80:2210.
10. Shannon K, O'Connell P, Martin G, et al. Loss of the normal NFI allele from the bone marrow of children with type 1 neurofibromatosis and malignant myeloid disorders. N Engl J Med
1994;330:597.
11. Shu XO, Ross J, Pendergrass T, et al. Parental alcohol consumption, cigarette smoking, and risk of infant leukemia: Children's Cancer Group study. J Natl CancerInst 1996;88:24.
12. Linet MS, Hatch EE, Kleinerman RA, et al. Residential exposure to magnetic fields and acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1.
13. Tucker MA, Meadows AT, Boice JD, et al. Leukemia after therapy with alkylating agents for childhood cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;78:459.
14. Pui CH, Ribeiro R, Hancock M, et al. Acute myeloid leukemia in children treated with epipodophyllotoxins for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1682.
15. Busque L, Gilliland DG. Clonal evolution in acute myeloid leukemia. Blood 1993;82:337.
16. Pui CH, Behm FG, Crist WM. Clinical and biologic relevance of immunologic marker studies in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1993;82:343.
17. Faikow PJ, Singer JW, Raskind W, et al. Clonal development, stem-cell differentiation, and clinical remissions in acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. N Engl JMed 1987;317:468.
18. Lapidot T, Sirard C, Vormoor J, et al. A cell initiating human acute myeloid leukemia after transplantation into SCID mice. Nature 1994;367:645.
19. Bennett JM, Catovsky D, Daniel MT, et al. Proposed revised criteria for the classification of acute myeloid leukemia. Ann Intern Med 1985;103:626.
20. Bennett JM, Catovsky D, Daniel M, et al. Criteria for the diagnosis of acute leukemia of megakaryocyte lineage (M7). Ann Intern Med 1985;103:450.
21. Uckun FM, Gaynon PS, Sensel MG, et al. Clinical features and treatment outcome of childhood T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia according to the apparent maturational stage of
T-lineage leukemic blasts: a Children's Cancer Group study. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2214.
22. Felix CA, Lange BJ. Leukemia in infants. Oncologist 1999;4:225.
23. Pui CH, Raimonde SC, Hancock ML, et al. Immunologic cytogenetic, and clinical characterization of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia with the t(1;19)(q23:p13) or its derivative. J Clin
Oncol 1994;12:2601.
24. Pui CH, Behm FG, Singh B, et al. Heterogeneity of presenting features and their relation to treatment outcome in 120 children with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1990;75:174.
25. Uckun FM, Sensel MG, Sun L, et al. Biology and treatment of childhood T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1998;91:735.
26. Sandlund JT, Downing JR, Crist WM. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in childhood. NEngl J Med 1996;334:1238.
27. Creutzig U, Harbott J, Sperling C, et al. Clinical significance of surface antigen expression in children with acute myeloid leukemia: results of study AML-BFM-87. Blood 1995;86:3097.
28. Pui CH, Raimondi SC, Head DR, et al. Characterization of childhood acute leukemia with multiple myeloid and lymphoid markers at diagnosis and at relapse. Blood 1991;78:1327.
29. Smith FO, Lampkin BC, Bersteeg C, et al. Expression of lymphoid-associated cell surface antigens by childhood acute myeloid leukemia cells lacks prognostic significance. Blood
1992;79:2415.
30. Putti MC, Rondelli R, Cocito MG, et al. Expression of myeloid markers lacks prognostic impact in children treated for acute lymphoblastic leukemia: Italian experience in AIEOP-ALL 88-91
studies. Blood 1998;92:795.
31. Pui CH, Rubnitz JE, Hancock ML, et al. Reappraisal of the clinical and biologic significance of myeloid-associated antigen expression in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:3768.
32. Rabbitts TH. Chromosomal translocations in human cancer. Nature 1994;372:143.
33. McLean TW, Ringold S, Neuberg D, et al. TEL/AML-1 dimerizes and is associated with a favorable outcome in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1996;88:4252.
34. Rubnitz JE, Shuster JJ, Land VJ, et al. Case-control study suggests a favorable impact of TEL rearrangement in patients with B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia treated with
antimetabolite-based therapy: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. Blood 1997;89:1143.
35. Uckun FM, Sensel MG, Sather HN, et al. Clinical significance of translocation t(1;19) in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia in the context of contemporary therapies: a report from the
Children's Cancer Group. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:527.
36. Schrappe M, Arico M, Harbott J, et al. Philadelphia chromosomepositive (Ph+) childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: good initial steroid response allows early prediction of a favorable
treatment outcome. Blood 1998;92:2730.
37. Ribeiro RC, Broniscer A, Rivera GK, et al. Philadelphia chromosomepositive acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children: durable responses to chemotherapy associated with low initial white
blood cell counts. Leukemia 1997;11:1493.
38. Rowley JD. The critical role of chromosome translocations in human leukemias. Annu Rev Genet 1998;32:495.
39. Hartwell LH, Kastan MB. Cell cycle control and cancer. Science 1994;266:1821.
40. Quesnel B, Preudhomme C, Philippe N, et al. p16 Gene homozygous deletions in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1995;85:657.
41. Trueworthy R, Shuster J, Look T, et al. Ploidy of lymphoblasts is the strongest predictor of treatment outcome in B-progenitor cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia of childhood: a Pediatric
Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:606.

42. Harris MB, Shuster JJ, Carroll A, et al. Trisomy of leukemic cell chromosomes 4 and 10 identifies children with B-progenitor cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia with a very low risk of treatment
failure: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. Blood 1992;79:3316.
43. Whitehead VM, Vuchich MJ, Laver SJ, et al. Accumulation of high levels of methotrexate polyglutamates in lymphoblasts from children with hyperdiploid (greater than 50 chromosomes)
B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a POG study. Blood 1992;80:1316.
44. Ito C, Kumagai M, Manabe A, et al. Hyperdiploid acute lymphoblastic leukemia with 51 to 65 chromosomes: a distinct biological entity with a marked propensity to undergo apoptosis. Blood
1999;93:315.
45. Heerema NA, Nachman JB, Sather HN, et al. Hypodiploidy with less than 45 chromosomes confers adverse risk in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a report from the Children's Cancer
Group. Blood 1999;94:4036.
46. Grimwade D, Walker H, Oliver F, et al. The importance of diagnostic cytogenetics on outcome in AML: analysis of 1,612 patients entered into the MRC AML 10 trial. Blood 1998;92:2322.
47. Raimondi SC, Chang MN, Ravindranath Y, et al. Chromosomal abnormalities in 478 children with acute myeloid leukemia: clinical characteristics and treatment outcome in a cooperative
Pediatric Oncology Group studyPOG 8821. Blood 1999;94:3707.
48. Sorensen P, Chen CS, Smith F, et al. Molecular rearrangements of the MLL gene are present in most cases of infant acute myeloid leukemia and are strongly correlated with monocytic or
myelomonocytic phenotypes. J Clin Invest 1994;93:429.
49. Johansson B, Moorman AV, Haas OA, et al. Hematologic malignancies with t(4;11)(q21;q23)a cytogenetic, morphologic, immunophenotypic and clinical study of 183 cases. European 11q23
Workshop participants. Leukemia 1998;12:779.
50. Carroll A, Civin C, Schneider N, et al. The t(1:22) (p13,q13) is nonrandom and restricted to infants with acute megakaryoblastic leukemia: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. Blood 1991;78:748.
51. Choi S, Simone JV. Acute nonlymphocytic leukemia in 171 children. Med PediatrOncol 1976;2:119.
52. Pui CH, Frankel LS, Carroll AJ, et al. Clinical characteristics and treatment outcome of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia with the t(4;11)(q21;q23): a collaborative study of 40 cases [See
comments]. Blood 1991;77:440.
53. Bleyer WA, Poplack DG. Prophylaxis and treatment of leukemia in the central nervous system and other sanctuaries. Semin Oncol 1985;12:131.
54. Mahmoud HH, Rivera GK, Hancock ML, et al. Low leukocyte counts with blast cells in cerebrospinal fluid of children with newly diagnosed acute lymphoblastic leukemia. N Engl J Med
1993;329:314.
55. Gelber R, Sallan SE, Cohen HJ, et al. Central nervous system treatment in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: long-term follow-up for patients diagnosed 19731985. Cancer 1993;72:261.
56. Bunin NJ, Pui CH. Differing complications of hyperleukocytosis in children with acute lymphoblastic or acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1590.
57. Pui CH, Kalwinsky D, Schell M, et al. Acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia in infants: clinical presentation and outcome. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1008.
58. Tallman MS, Hakimian D, Shaw JM, et al. Granulocytic sarcoma is associated with the 8;21 translocation in acute myeloid leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:690.
59. Creutzig U, Ritter J, Buddle M, et al. Early deaths due to hemorrhage and leukostasis in childhood acute myelogenous leukemia. Cancer 1987;60:3071.
60. Warrell RP Jr, de The H, Wang ZY, Degos L. Acute promyelocytic leukemia. NEngl J Med 1993;329:177.
61. Bleyer WA. The U.S. pediatric cancer clinical trials programmes: international implications and the way forward. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:1439.
62. Smith M, Arthur D, Camitta B, et al. Uniform approach to risk classification and treatment assignment for children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:18.
63. Clavell LA, Gelber RD, Cohen HJ, et al. Four agent induction and intensive asparaginase therapy for treatment of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. NEngl J Med 1986;315:657.
64. Gaynon PS, Desai AA, Bostrom BC, et al. Early response to therapy and outcome in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a review. Cancer 1997;80:1717.
65. Gajjar A, Ribeiro R, Hancock ML, et al. Persistence of circulating blasts after 1 week of multiagent chemotherapy confers a poor prognosis in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood
1995;86:1292.
66. Nachman JB, Sather HN, Sensel MG, et al. Augmented post-induction therapy for children with high-risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia and a slow response to initial therapy [See comments]. N
Engl J Med 1998;338:1663.
67. Reaman GH, Sposto R, Sensel MG, et al. Treatment outcome and prognostic factors for infants with acute lymphoblastic leukemia treated on two consecutive trials of the Children's Cancer
Group [See comments]. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:445.
68. Bash RO, Crist WM, Shuster JJ, et al. Clinical features and outcome of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia in childhood with respect to alterations at the TAL1 locus: a Pediatric Oncology
Group study. Blood 1993;81:2110.
69. Shuster JJ, Camitta BM, Pullen J, et al. Identification of newly diagnosed children with acute lymphocytic leukemia at high risk for relapse. Cancer Res TherControl 1999;9:101.
70. Chessells JM, Richards SM, Bailey CC, et al. Gender and treatment outcome in childhood lymphoblastic leukaemia: report from the MRC UKALL trials. Br JHaematol 1995;89:364.
71. Pui CH, Boyett JM, Hancock ML, et al. Outcome of treatment for childhood cancer in black as compared with white children. The St. Jude Children's Research Hospital experience, 1962
through 1992 [See comments] JAMA 1995;273:633.
72. Shuster JJ, Wacker P, Pullen J, et al. Prognostic significance of sex in childhood B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. J ClinOncol 1998;16:2854.
73. Lipshultz S, Lipsitz S, Mone S, et al. Female sex and higher drug dose as risk factors for late cardiotoxic effects of doxorubicin therapy for childhood cancer. N Engl J Med 1995;33:1738.
74. Waber D, Tarbell N, Fairclough D, et al. Cognitive sequelae of treatment in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: cranial radiation requires an accomplice. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2490.
75. Farber S, Diamond LK, Mercer RD, Sylvester RF, Wolff JA. Temporary remission in acute leukemia in children produced by folic acid antagonist, 4 amino pteroylglutamic acid (Aminopterin). N
Engl J Med 1948;238:787.
76. Reiter A, Schrappe M, Ludwig WD, et al. Chemotherapy in 998 unselected childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients: results and conclusions of the multicenter trial ALL-BFM 86. Blood
1994;84:3122.
77. Cave H, van der Werff ten Bosch J, Suciu S, et al. Clinical significance of minimal residual disease in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. European Organization for Research and
Treatment of CancerChildhood Leukemia Cooperative Group [See comments]. N Engl J Med 1998;339:591.
78. Dibenedetto SP, Lo NL, Mayer SP, et al. Detectable molecular residual disease at the beginning of maintenance therapy indicates poor outcome in children with T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Blood 1997;90:1226.
79. Pui C, Crist W. Biology and treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Pediatr 1994;124:491.
80. Gaynon PS, Steinherz PG, Bleyer WA, et al. Improved therapy for children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia and unfavorable presenting features: a follow-up report of the Children's Cancer
Group Study CCG-106. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2234.
81. Hongeng S, Krance R, Bowman L, et al. Outcomes of transplantation with matched-sibling and unrelated-donor bone marrow in children with leukemia. Lancet 1997;350:767.
82. Frankel LS, Ochs J, Shuster JJ, et al. Therapeutic trial for infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia: the Pediatric Oncology Group experience (POG 8493). JPediatr Hematol Oncol 1997;19:35.
83. Reiter A, Schrappe M, Tiemann M, et al. Improved treatment results in childhood B-cell neoplasms with tailored intensification of therapy: a report of the Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster Group Trial
NHL-BFM 90. Blood 1999;94:3294.
84. Aur RJA, Hustu HO, Verzosa MS, Wood A, Simone JV. Comparison of two methods of preventing central nervous system leukemia. Blood 1973;42:349.
85. Freeman AI, Johnston PG, Voke JM. Somnolence after prophylactic cranial irradiation in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. BMJ 1973;4:523.
86. Pinkel D, Woo S. Prevention and treatment of meningeal leukemia in children. Blood 1994;84:355.
87. Ochs JJ. Neurotoxicity due to central nervous system therapy for childhood leukemia. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1989;11:93.
88. Smibert E, Anderson V, Godber T, et al. Risk factors for intellectual and educational sequelae of cranial irradiation in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Br J Cancer 1996;73:825.
89. Nesbit ME Jr, Robison LL, Littman PS, et al. Presymptomatic central nervous system therapy in previously untreated childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: comparison of 1800 rad and 2400
rad: a report for Children's Cancer Study Group. Lancet 1981;28:461.
90. Waber DP, Tarbell NJ, Fairclough D, et al. Cognitive sequelae of treatment in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: cranial radiation requires an accomplice [See comments]. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:2490.
91. Schrappe M, Reiter A, Riehm H. Prophylaxis and treatment of neoplastic meningeosis in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Neurooncol 1998;38:159.
92. Tubergen DG, Gilchrist GS, O'Brien RT, et al. Prevention of CNS disease in intermediate-risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia: comparison of cranial radiation and intrathecal methotrexate and
the importance of systemic therapy: a Childrens Cancer Group report. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:520.
93. Pullen J, Boyett J, Shuster J, et al. Extended triple intrathecal chemotherapy trial for prevention of CNS relapse in good-risk and poor-risk patients with B-progenitor acute lymphoblastic
leukemia: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:839.
94. Mahoney DH Jr, Shuster JJ, Nitschke R, et al. Acute neurotoxicity in children with B-precursor acute lymphoid leukemia: an association with intermediate-dose intravenous methotrexate and
intrathecal triple therapya Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1712.
95. Bleyer A. CNS chemoradiotherapy of childhood leukemia: the plot thickens but the ending bodes well. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2480.
96. Chessells J, Leiper A, Richards S. A second course of treatment for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: long term follow-up is needed to assess results. Br JHematol 1994;86:48.
97. Gaynon PS, Qu RP, Chappell RJ, et al. Survival after relapse in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: impact of site and time to first relapsethe Children's Cancer Group Experience. Cancer
1998;82:1387.
98. Barrett AJ, Horowitz MM, Pollock BH, et al. Bone marrow transplants from HLA-identical siblings as compared with chemotherapy for children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia in a second
remission. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1253.
99. Wheeler K, Richards S, Bailey C, Chessells J. Comparison of bone marrow transplant and chemotherapy for relapsed childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: the MRC UKALL X experience.
Medical Research Council Working Party on Childhood Leukaemia. Br J Haematol 1998;101:94.
100. Billett A, Kornmehl E, Tarbell N, et al. Autologous bone marrow transplantation after a long first remission for children with recurrent acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1993;81:1651.
101. Weisdorf DJ, Billett AL, Hannan P, et al. Autologous versus unrelated donor allogeneic marrow transplantation for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1997;90:2962.
102. Casper J, Camitta B, Truitt R, et al. Unrelated bone marrow donor transplants for children with leukemia or myelodysplasia. Blood 1995;85:2354.
103. Kumar P, Kun LE, Hustu HO, et al. Survival outcome following isolated central nervous system relapsed treated with additional chemotherapy and craniospinal irradiation in childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia [See comments]. Int J RadiatOncol Biol Phys 1995;31:477.
104. Wofford MM, Smith SD, Shuster JJ, et al. Treatment of occult or late overt testicular relapse in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol
1992;10:624.
105. Katz JA, Pollock BH, Jacaruso D, Morad A. Final attained height in patients successfully treated for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Pediatr 1993;123:546.
106. Ochs J, Mulhern R, Fairclough D, et al. Comparison of neuropsychologic functioning and clinical indicators of neurotoxicity in long-term survivors of childhood leukemia given cranial radiation
or parenteral methotrexate: a prospective study. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:145.
107. Neglia JP, Meadows AT, Robinson LL, et al. Second neoplasms after acute lymphoblastic leukemia in childhood. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1330.
108. Pui CH, Relling MV, Rivera GK, et al. Epipodophyllotoxin-related acute myeloid leukemia: a study of 35 cases. Leukemia 1995;9:1990.
109. Hurwitz CA, Mounce KG, Grier HE. Treatment of patients with acute myelogenous leukemia: review of clinical trials of the past decade. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1995;17:185.
110. Creutzig U, Ritter J, Schellong G. Identification of two risk groups in childhood acute myelogenous leukemia after therapy intensification in study AML-BFM-83 as compared with study
AML-BFM-78. Blood 1990;75:1932.
111. Amadori S, Testi AM, Arico M, et al. Prospective comparative study of bone marrow transplantation and postremission chemotherapy for childhood acute myelogenous leukemia. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:1046.
112. Nesbit M, Buckley J, Feig S, et al. Chemotherapy for induction of remission of childhood acute myeloid leukemia followed by marrow transplantation or multiagent chemotherapy: a report from
the Children's Cancer Group. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:127.
113. Stevens RF, Hann IM, Wheatley K, et al. Marked improvements in outcome with chemotherapy alone in paediatric acute myeloid leukemia: results of the United Kingdom Medical Research
Council's 10th AML trial. MRC Childhood Leukemia Working Party. Br J Haematol 1998;101:130.
114. Ravindranath Y, Yeager AM, Chang MN, et al. Autologous bone marrow transplantation versus intensive consolidation chemotherapy for acute myeloid leukemia in childhood. N Engl J Med
1996;334:1428.
115. Tallman MS, Andersen JW, Schiffer CA, et al. ALL-trans-retinoic acid in acute promyelocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1021.
116. Castaigne S, Chomienne C, Daniel MT, et al. ALL-trans-retinoic acid as a differentiation therapy for acute promyelocytic leukemia. I. Clinical results. Blood 1990;76:1704.
117. Creutzis U, Ritter J, Zimmermann M, et al. Does cranial irradiation reduce the risk for bone marrow relapse in acute myelogenous leukemia? Unexpected results of the childhood acute

myelogenous leukemia study BFM-87. J ClinOncol 1993;11:279.
118. Woods WG, Kobrinsky N, Buckley JD, et al. Timed-sequential induction therapy improves postremission outcome in acute myeloid leukemia: a report from the Children's Cancer Group. Blood
1996;87:4979.
119. Woods WG, Ruyman FB, Lampkin B, et al. The role of timing of high-dose cytosine arabinoside intensification and of maintenance therapy in the treatment of children with acute
nonlymphocytic leukemia. Cancer 1990;66:1106.
120. Sanders JE, Thomas ED, Buckner CE, et al. Marrow transplantation of children in first remission of acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia: an update. Blood 1985;66:460.
121. Brochstein JA, Kornan NA, Groshen S, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation versus intensive consolidation chemotherapy for acute myeloid leukemia in childhood. N Engl J Med
1996;334:1428.
122. Yaeger AM, Kaizer H, Santos GW, et al. Autologous bone marrow transplantations in patients with acute nonlymphocytic leukemia, using ex vivo marrow treated with
4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide. N Engl J Med 1986;315:141.
123. Webb D, Wheatley K, Harrison G, et al. Outcome for children with relapsed acute myeloid leukemia following initial therapy in the Medical Research Council (MRC) AML 10 trial. Leukemia
1999;13:25.
124. Clift RA, Buckner CD, Thomas ED, et al. The treatment of acute non-lymphoblastic leukemia by allogeneic marrow transplantation. Bone MarrowTransplant 1987;2:243.
125. Steuber C, Krischer J, Holbrook T, et al. Therapy of refractory or recurrent acute myeloid leukemia using amsacrine and etoposide with or without azacytidene: a Pediatric Oncology Group
randomized phase II study. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1521.
126. Wagner JE, Rosenthal J, Sweetman R, et al. Successful transplantation of HLA-matched and HLA mismatched umbilical cord blood from unrelated donors: analysis of engraftment and acute
graft versus host disease. Blood 1996;88:795.
127. Arceci RJ. Clinical significance of P-glycoprotein in multidrug resistance malignancies. Blood 1993;81:2215.
128. Wekerle T, Sykes M. Mixed chimerism as an approach for the induction of transplantation tolerance. Transplantation 1999;68:459.
129. Druker B, Resta M, Peng B, et al. Clinical efficacy and safety of an abl specific tyrosine kinase inhibitor as targeted therapy for chronic myelogenous leukemia. Blood 1999;94[Suppl
1]:368a(abst 1639).
130. Murphy SB. Classification, staging and end results of treatment in childhood non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: dissimilarities from lymphomas in adults. Semin Oncol 1980;7:332.
131. Murphy S, Fairclough D, Hutchison R, et al. NHL of childhood. An analysis of the histology, staging and response to treatment of 338 cases at a single institution. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:186.
132. Reiter A, Schrappe M, Parwasesch R, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas of childhood and adolescence: results of a treatment stratified for biologic subtypes and stagea report of the
Berlin-Frankfort-Munster Group. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:359.
133. Link MP, Shuster JJ, Donaldson SS, et al. Treatment of children and young adults with early-stage non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1259.
134. Filipovich AH, Mathur A, Kamat D, Shapiro RS. Primary immunodeficiencies: genetic risk factors for lymphoma. Cancer Res 1992;52[Suppl]:5465S.
135. Taylor A, Metcalfe J, Thick J, Mak Y. Leukemia and lymphoma in ataxia telangiectasia. Blood 1996;87:423.
136. Fischer A, Blanche S, LeBidois J, et al. Anti-B cell monoclonal antibodies in the treatment of severe B-cell lymphoproliferative syndrome following bone marrow and organ transplantation. N
Engl J Med 1991;324:1451.
137. McClain KL, Joshi VV, Murphy SB. Cancers in children with HIV infection. HematolOncol Clin North Am 1996;10:1189.
138. Anagnostopoulos I, Herbst H, Niedobitek G, Stein H. Demonstration of monoclonal EBV genomes in Hodgkin's disease and Ki-1-positive anaplastic large cell lymphoma by combined Southern
blot and in situ hybridization. Blood 1989;74:810.
139. McClain K, Leach C, Jenson H, et al. Association of Epstein-Barr virus with leiomyosarcomas in young people with AIDS. N Engl J Med 1995;332:12.
140. The Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Pathologic Classification Project. National Cancer Institute sponsored study of classifications of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: summary and description of a
working formulation for clinical usage. Cancer 1982;49:2112.
141. Harris N, Jaffe E, Stein H, et al. A revised European-American classification of lymphoid neoplasms: a proposal from the International Lymphoma Study Group. Blood 1994;84:1361.
142. Nathwani B, Diamond L, Windberg C, et al. Lymphoblastic lymphoma: a clinical pathologic study of 95 patients. Cancer 1981;48:2347.
143. Link MP, Roper M, Dorfman RF, et al. Cutaneous lymphoblastic lymphoma with pre-B markers. Blood 1983;61:838.
144. Finger L, Harvey R, Moore R, et al. A common mechanism of chromosomal translocation in T and B cell neoplasia. Science 1986;234:982.
145. Brown L, Gheng JT, Chen Q, et al. Site-specific recombination of the tal-1 gene is a common occurrence in human T cell leukemia. EMBO J 1990;9:3343.
146. King DR, Patrick LE, Ginn-Pease ME, et al. Pulmonary function is compromised in children with mediastinal lymphoma. J Pediatr Surg 1997;32:294.
147. Shamberger RC, Holzman RS, Griscom NT, et al. Prospective evaluation by computed tomography and pulmonary function tests of children with mediastinal masses. Surgery 1995;118:468.
148. Glatstein E, Kim H, Donaldson S, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. VI. Results of treatment in childhood. Cancer 1974;34:204.
149. Aur R, Hustu H, Simone J, et al. Therapy of localized and regional lymphosarcoma of childhood. Cancer 1971;27:1328.
150. Anderson JR, Jenkin RD, Wilson JF, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients treated with COMP or LSA2L2 therapy for childhood non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a report of CCG-551 from the
Children's Cancer Group. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1024.
151. Meadows A, Sposto R, Jenkin R, et al. S imilar efficacy of 6 and 18 months of therapy with four drugs (COMP) for localized non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of children: a report from the Childrens
Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:92.
152. Wollner N, Burchenal J, Liebermann P, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in children: a comparative study of two modalities of therapy. Cancer 1976;37:123.
153. Weinstein HJ, Cassady JR, Levey R. Long-term results of the APO protocol (vincristine, doxorubicin (adriamycin), and prednisone) for treatment of mediastinal lymphoblastic lymphoma. J Clin
Oncol 1983;1:537.
154. Reiter A, Schrappe M, Ludwig WB, et al. Intensive ALL type therapy without local radiotherapy provides a 90% event free survival for children with T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma: a BFM
Group report. Blood 2000;95:416.
155. Chopra R, Goldstone A, Pearce R, et al. Autologous versus allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a case controlled analysis of the European Bone Marrow
Transplant Group registry data. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1690.
156. Burkitt D. The discovery of Burkitt's lymphoma. Cancer 1983;51:1777.
157. Ziegler JL. Burkitt's lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1981;30:735.
158. Hutchinson R, Murphy S, Fairclough D, et al. Diffuse small noncleaved cell lymphoma in children, Burkitt versus non-Burkitt's types. Cancer 1989;64:23.
159. Patte C, Phillip T, Rodary C, et al. High survival rate in advanced stage B-cell lymphomas and leukemias without CNS involvement with a short intensive polychemotherapy. Results from the
French Pediatric Oncology Society of a randomized trial of 216 children. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:123.
160. Bowman WP, Shuster JJ, Cook B, et al. Improved survival for children with B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and stage IV small noncleaved-cell lymphoma: a Pediatric Oncology Group
study. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1252.
161. Abshire TC, Buchanan GR, Jackson JF, et al. Morphologic, immunologic and cytogenetic studies in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia at diagnosis and relapse: a Pediatric Oncology
Group study. Leukemia 1992;6:357.
162. Shiramizu B, Barriga F, Neeguaye J, et al. Patterns of chromosomal breakpoint locations in Burkitt's lymphoma: relevance to geography and Epstein-Barr virus association. Blood
1991;77:1516.
163. Zervos AS, Gyuris J, Brent R. Mxi1, a protein that specifically interacts with Max to bind Myc-Max recognition sites. Cell 1993;72:223.
164. Adams JM, Harris AW, Pinkert CA, et al. The c-myc oncogene driven by immunoglobulin enhancers induces lymphoid malignancy in transgenic mice. Nature 1985;318:533.
165. Strauss S, Cohen J, Tosado G. et al. Epstein-Barr virus infections: biology, pathogenesis, and management. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:45.
166. Niedobitek G, Agathanggelou A, Rowe M, et al. Heterogeneous expression of Epstein-Barr virus latent proteins in endemic Burkitt's lymphoma. Blood 1995;86:659.
167. Shamberger R, Weinstein HJ. The role of surgery in abdominal Burkitt's lymphoma. J Pediatr Surg 1992;27:236.
168. Cohen LF, Balow JE, Magrath IT, Poplack DG, Ziegler JL. Acute tumor lysis syndrome. A review of 37 patients with Burkitt's lymphoma. Am J Med 1980;68:486.
169. Ziegler JL. Chemotherapy of Burkitt's lymphoma. Cancer 1972;30:1534.
170. Olweny C, Keatongole-Mbidde E, Kaddu-Mukasa A, et al. Treatment of Burkitt's lymphoma: randomized clinical trial of single agent versus combination chemotherapy. Int J Cancer
1976;17:436.
171. Ziegler JL. Treatment results of 54 American patients with Burkitt's lymphoma are similar to the African experience. N Engl J Med 1977;297:75.
172. Ladenstein R, Pearce R, Hartmann O, et al. High-dose chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow rescue in children with poor-risk Burkitt's lymphoma: a report from the European Lymphoma
Bone Marrow Transplantation Registry. Blood 1997;90:2921.
173. Sandlund J, Pui C, Santana V, et al. Clinical features and treatment outcome for children with CD30+ large cell NHL. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:895.
174. Sandlund J, Pui CH, Roberts M, et al. Clinicopathologic features and treatment outcome of children with large cell lymphoma and the t(2;5) (p23,q35). Blood 1994;84:2467.
175. Morris SW, Kirstein MN, Valentine MB, et al. Fusion of a kinase gene ALK, to a nucleolar protein gene, NPM, in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Science 1994;263:1281.
176. Weinstein HJ, Lack E, Cassady JR. APO therapy for malignant lymphoma or large cell “histiocytic” type of childhood: analysis of treatment results for 29 patients. Blood 1984;64:422.
177. Santana VM, Abromowitch M, Sandlund JT, et al. MACOP-B treatment in children and adolescents with advanced diffuse large-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Leukemia 1993;7:187.
178. Hvizdala EV, Berard C, Calihan T. Nonlymphoblastic lymphoma in childrenhistology and stage-related response to therapy: a pediatric oncology group study. JClin Oncol 1991;9:1189.
179. Pick T, Weinstein HJ, Schwenn M, et al. Treatment of advanced stage large cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in childhood. A Pediatric Oncology Group study (8615). Blood 1993;82:333a.
180. Hutchinson R, Berard C, Shuster J, et al. B-cell lineage confers a favorable outcome among children and adolescents with large cell lymphoma: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:2023.
181. Sandlund JT, Santana V, Abromowitch M, et al. Large cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma of childhood: clinical characteristics and outcome. Leukemia 1994;8:30.
182. Cleary S, Link M, Donaldson S. Hodgkin's disease in the very young. Int J RadiatOncol Biol Phys 1994;28:77.
183. Donaldson SS, Link MP. Hodgkin's disease: treatment of the young child. PediatrClin North Am 1991;38:457.
184. Mauch PM. Controversies in the management of early stage Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1994;83:318.
185. Mauch PM, Weinstein H, Botnick L, Belli J, Cassady JR. An evaluation of long-term survival and treatment complications in children with Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1988;51:925.
186. Hunger S, Link M, Donaldson S. Long-term results of ABVD/MOPP and low dose involved field radiotherapy (LDFRT) in pediatric Hodgkin's disease: the Stanford Experiences. J Clin Oncol
1993;12:386.
187. Horning SJ, Rosenberg SA, Hoppe RT. Brief chemotherapy (Stanford V) and adjuvant radiotherapy for bulky or advanced Hodgkin's disease: an update. Ann Oncol 1996;7[Suppl 4]:105.
188. William K, Cox R, Donaldson S. Radiation induced height impairment in pediatric Hodgkin's disease. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;28:85.
189. Tarbell NJ, Gelber RD, Weinstein HJ, Mauch P. Sex differences in risk of second malignant tumors after Hodgkin's disease in childhood. Lancet 1993;341:1428.
190. Bhatig S, Robison L, Oberlin O, et al. Breast cancer and other second neoplasms after childhood Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1996;334:745.
191. Donaldson SS, Link MP. Combined modality treatment with low-dose radiation and MOPP chemotherapy for children with Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:742.
192. Jenkin D, Doyle J, Berry M, et al. Hodgkin's disease in children: treatment with MOPP and low-dose, extended field irradiation without laparotomy. Late results and toxicity. Med Pediatr Oncol
1990;18:265.
193. Amblinder RF, Browning PJ, Lorenzana I, et al. Epstein-Barr virus and childhood Hodgkin's disease in Honduras and the United States. Blood 1993;81:462.
194. Mauch P, Tarbell NJ, Weinstein HJ, et al. Stage IAIIA supradiaphragmatic Hodgkin's disease: prognostic factors in surgically staged patients. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1576.
195. Karayalcin G, Behm FG, Gieser PW, et al. Lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin's disease: clinico-pathologic features and results of treatmentthe Pediatric Oncology Group experience. Med
Pediatr Oncol 1997;29:519.
196. Mendenhall N, Cantor A, Williams J, et al. With modern techniques, is staging laparotomy necessary in pediatric Hodgkin's disease? A Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:2218.
197. Breuer CK, Tarbell NJ, Mauch PM, et al. The importance of staging laparotomy in pediatric Hodgkin's disease. J Pediatr Surg 1994;29:1085.
198. Zinzani PL, Zompatori M, Bendandi M, et al. Monitoring bulky mediastinal disease with gallium-67, CT-scan and magnetic resonance imaging in Hodgkin's disease and high-grade
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Leuk Lymphoma 1996;22(12):131.

199. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP): use of vaccines and immune globulins for
persons with altered immunocompetence. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1993;42(RR-4):1.
200. Donaldson SS, Whitaker SJ, Plowman PN, et al. Stage III pediatric Hodgkin's disease: long-term follow-up demonstrates equivalent survival rates following different management schemes. J
Clin Oncol 1990;8:1128.
201. Shah AB, Hudson MM, Poquette CA, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients treated with primary radiotherapy for supradiaphragmatic Hodgkin's disease at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:867.
202. Maity A, Goldwein JW, Lange B, D'Angio JG. Comparison of high-dose and low-dose radiation with and without chemotherapy for children with Hodgkin's disease: an analysis of the experience
at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:929.
203. Constine LS, Donaldson SS, McDougall IR, et al. Thyroid dysfunction after radiotherapy in children with Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1984;53:878.
204. Sankila R, Garwicz S, Olsen JH, et al. Risk of subsequent malignant neoplasms among 1,641 Hodgkin's disease patients diagnosed in childhood and adolescence: a population-based cohort
study in the five Nordic countries. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1442.
205. Schellong G. The balance between cure and late effects in childhood Hodgkin's lymphoma: the experience of the German-Austrian Study Group since 1978. German-Austrian Pediatric
Hodgkin's Disease Study Group. Ann Oncol 1996;7[Suppl 4]:67.
206. Oberlin O, Leverger G, Pacquement H, et al. Low dose radiation therapy and reduced chemotherapy in childhood Hodgkin's disease: the experience of the French Society of Pediatric
Oncology. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1602.
207. Schellong G, Potter R, Bramswig J, et al. High cure rate and reduced long-term toxicity in pediatric Hodgkin's disease: the German-Austrian Multicenter Trial DAL-HD-90. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:3736.
208. Ekert H, Waters KD, Smith PF, Toogood I, Mauger D. Treatment with MOPP and CHIVPP chemotherapy only for all stages of childhood Hodgkin's disease. J ClinOncol 1988;6:1845.
209. Kung F, Behm F, Cantor A, et al. Abbreviated chemotherapy versus chemoradiotherapy in early stage Hodgkin's disease. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1993;12:414.
210. Weiner MA, Leventhal B, Brecher ML, et al. Randomized study of intensive MOPP-ABVD with or without low-dose total-nodal radiation therapy in the treatment of stages IIB, IIIA2, IIIB, and IV
Hodgkin's disease in pediatric patients: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2769.
211. Hudson MM, Greenwald C, Thompson E, et al. Efficacy and toxicity of multiagent treatment with chemotherapy and low-dose involved-field radiotherapy in children and adolescents with
Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:100.

SECTION 45.3 Non-Hodgkin's Lymphomas
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 45.3
Non-Hodgkin's Lymphomas
JAMES O. ARMITAGE
PETER M. MAUCH
NANCY LEE HARRIS
PHILIP BIERMAN
Introduction
Epidemiology
Etiology
Immunodeficiency
Infectious Agents
Environmental and Occupational Exposures
Diet and Other Exposures
Biologic Background for Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms
Immunophenotyping of Lymphoid Cells
Molecular Genetic Analysis of Lymphoid Cells
Use of Immunophenotyping and Genetic Studies in the Diagnosis of Lymphoid Neoplasms
Principles of Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasm
Differential Diagnosis of Indolent Disseminated Lymphoma
Differential Diagnosis of Indolent Extranodal and Nodal Lymphomas
Differential Diagnosis of Mature (Peripheral) T-Cell Lymphomas
Principles of Management of Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma
History and Physical Examination
Laboratory Evaluation
Imaging Studies
Staging Laparotomy
Polymerase Chain Reaction for Evaluating Minimal Residual Disease
Staging and Prognostic Systems
Restaging
Specific Disease Entities
B-Cell Neoplasms
T-Cell and Natural Killer–Cell Neoplasms
Special Clinical Situations
Children
Elderly Patients
Posttransplant Lymphoproliferative Disorders
Human Immunodeficiency Virus–Associated Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma
Extranodal Sites
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Neoplasms of lymphoid cells can present clinically as leukemia, lymphoma, and myeloma. Leukemia and myeloma are dealt with in separate chapters in this text (see
individual Chapter 46.1, Chapter 46.2, Chapter 46.3.1, Chapter 46.3.2, Chapter 46.4, and Chapter 46.5). Lymphomas (i.e., the solid tumors of lymphoid cells) are
typically subdivided into Hodgkin's disease (see Chapter 45.6) and non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHL), the topic of this chapter.
Our knowledge of the biology of NHLs has increased dramatically over the last decade. This is reflected in an improved system of classification that categorizes
patients in a more clinically relevant way. New insights into the immunology and genetics of lymphomas have offered new therapeutic opportunities. Some of these,
such as monoclonal antibodies directed against specific proteins on the surface of malignant lymphoma cells, have already become widely applied.
It has been known for more than 30 years that some patients with NHL can be cured using chemotherapy. Those clinical factors that predict curability are now well
known. The prognostic effect of clinical variables such as age, stage, performance status, serum lactic dehydrogenase level, and specific sites of involvement must be
mediated through expression of certain genes. The next improvement in lymphoma classification, improved prognostic categories, and new opportunities for therapy
will come as the patterns of gene expression that underlie clinical variables become increasingly apparent.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
In 2000 it is estimated that there will be 54,900 new cases of NHL diagnosed in the United States, and that 26,100 people will die with this diagnosis. 1 NHL accounts
for 5% of new cancers in men and 4% of new cancers in women each year in the United States and is responsible for 5% of deaths. In 1997, NHL was reported to be
the leading cause of death from cancer in men between the ages of 20 and 39.
According to the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program of the National Cancer Institute, the U.S. age-adjusted incidence rate for NHL was 15.5 per
100,000 in 1996. 2 International NHL incidence rates vary as much as fivefold. The highest reported incidence rates are in the United States, and also Europe and
Australia, while the lowest rates have generally been reported in Asia. 3,4 and 5
NHL is more common in male subjects, with a reported incidence of 19.2 per 100,000 as compared with 12.2 per 100,000 for women. 2 In some sites, such as the
thyroid, NHL incidence may be higher in women, however. 6 The incidence rate for whites is 15.9 per 100,000 as compared with 12.0 per 100,000 for African
Americans. The NHL incidence rate for white male subjects is approximately 54% higher than Japanese Americans and 27% higher than Chinese Americans. 3
Incidence rates are also lower among Native Americans and Hispanics. 2
The median age of NHL diagnosis was 65 years in the American College of Surgeons' National Cancer Data Base. 7 NHL incidence increases with age and peaks in
the 80 to 84 age group (Fig. 45.3-1). In the period between 1992 and 1996, the incidence rate for white men in this age group was 131.5 per 100,000. 2 Incidence rates
have tripled for patients older than 65 years of age. 8

FIGURE 45.3-1. The Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results incidence for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma by age from 1973 to 1975 versus 1994 to 1996 for all races
and male sex. (From ref. 2, with permission.)

There has been a striking increase in NHL incidence rates over the last four decades that has been referred to as an epidemic of NHL. The lifetime risk of being
diagnosed with NHL is 2.08%. 2 The incidence rate for white men and women increased 150% between the late 1940s to the late 1980s. 3 The incidence rate is
increasing approximately 3% per year and has increased more than 80% since 1973 ( Fig. 45.3-2). An increase in incidence has been observed in all geographic
areas of the United States, although the largest increase has been from the San Francisco area. 2,9 A registry analysis from seven European countries showed that the
incidence rate for NHL increased 4.8% each year between 1985 and 1992. 10 Similar increases in NHL incidence have been noted in international cancer registries in
addition to well-defined population-based registries. 5,8,11

FIGURE 45.3-2. Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results incidence and U.S. mortality for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma for male sex and by race. A: White. B: Black.
(From ref. 2, with permission.)

There has been an increase in all histologic types of NHL except for diffuse small cleaved histology. 2,6 The decreasing incidence of this histology probably reflects the
reclassification of most of these biopsies to a diagnosis of mantle cell histology. The largest increases have occurred in patients with high-grade lymphomas. 2,3 The
incidence of extranodal lymphomas has increased more rapidly than nodal disease in some reports, 3,6,8 whereas others have noted similar increases in the incidence
of nodal and extranodal disease. 4 The incidence of primary CNS lymphoma in the United States increased more than tenfold between 1973 and 1991 to 1992. 12 This
increase is undoubtedly related to the occurrence of primary CNS lymphomas in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), 13 although the increase in
incidence began before the AIDS epidemic, and incidence rates have increased in non-AIDS populations. 8,12 Furthermore, some studies have failed to show evidence
of an increasing incidence of primary CNS lymphoma in non-AIDS populations. 14,15
Geographic differences in histologic subtypes of NHL have been noted. Examples include the endemic form of Burkitt's lymphoma, which is seen most commonly in
children in equatorial Africa. 16 Higher rates of gastric lymphoma have been reported to occur in Northern Italy. 17 Other examples include nasal T-cell lymphomas,
which are most common in China, certain small intestinal lymphomas, which are most common in the Middle East, and adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL), which is
most common in southern Japan and the Caribbean. Several reports have shown a lower incidence of follicular lymphomas in Asia and in developing countries. 18,19 and
20
The incidence of follicular lymphomas is lower in Asian immigrants to the United States as compared with later generations, suggesting an environmental
influence. 21 Geographic differences in the distribution of mantle cell lymphoma, certain T-cell lymphomas, and in the incidence of primary extranodal lymphomas have
also been described. 4,20
The mortality for NHL has also increased steadily over the last four decades, although mortality increased more slowly than incidence (see Fig. 45.3-2). Increasing
mortality suggests that increased incidence rates cannot be entirely due to artifacts of improved detection. 8,22 Between 1973 and 1996 the U.S. mortality increased
from 4.7 per 100,000 to 6.9 per 100,000. 2 Mortality for NHL is approximately 20% higher in urban areas when compared with rural areas, and rates are higher in
counties with higher median education levels among residents. 3
Several hypotheses have been used to explain the increasing incidence of NHL. Some of the increase may be artifactual. For example, new NHL classification
systems and techniques such as gene rearrangement studies have led to a diagnosis of NHL in some patients who would have previously had other diagnoses such
as pseudolymphoma or atypical lymphoid hyperplasia. 3 This is especially true for entities such as lymphomas of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) as well
as certain T-cell lymphomas that might have previously been given diagnoses such as angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy. However, these changes in diagnosis
can only account for a small fraction of the increase in incidence. 8,23 In addition, improved imaging techniques have undoubtedly led to more NHL diagnoses,
particularly for primary CNS lymphoma, and less invasive biopsy techniques have led to more vigorous attempts at establishing a diagnosis than before. 3 Finally,
some increase in NHL incidence can be attributed to reclassification of cases that would have previously been called Hodgkin's disease. 3,5,8,23 It has been estimated
that this may account for 10% to 15% of cases, 23 although in some series more than 25% of Hodgkin's disease patients were reclassified as NHL. 5 However, such
large discrepancies apply mostly to cases diagnosed before the 1970s and are unlikely to be responsible for much of the later increase in incidence. 23,24 While these
artifacts have undoubtedly led to some increase in the reported incidence of NHL, they can only account for a small fraction of the increase. 25
The aging U.S. population can account for only a small increase in NHL incidence, although other factors, such as the AIDS epidemic, may be responsible to a
greater extent. In 1996 the incidence rate for NHL in men was 44.4 per 100,000 in the San Francisco city and county region as compared with 18.1 per 100,000 for
areas exclusive of the San Francisco metropolitan area. 2 The incidence rate was 62.4 per 100,000 men aged 20 to 54 in the San Francisco city and county area.
While AIDS can account for some of the increased NHL incidence, the rise in NHL incidence began before the AIDS epidemic, and it has been estimated that only 8%
to 27% of NHL cases can be attributable to AIDS, 26 although studies have demonstrated that in some areas such as San Francisco, as many as 66% of the increased
NHL incidence can be attributed to AIDS. 13
In summary, even when factors such as accuracy and completeness of diagnosis, the effect of human immunodeficiency virus, and occupational exposures are
considered, the reason for most of the increase in NHL incidence is unexplained. 24 Many investigators have postulated that a ubiquitous environmental or toxic
exposure is responsible. 22,25

ETIOLOGY
The cause of most cases of NHL is unknown, although several genetic diseases, environmental agents, and infectious agents have been associated with the
development of lymphoma. Although the existence of a familial NHL risk is debated, familial aggregations of NHL have been described, and some studies have shown
a higher risk of NHL in siblings or first-degree relatives of people with lymphoma or other hematologic malignancies. 27,28 and 29 Three categories of familial aggregates
have been described. 28 The first consists of male preadolescents and adolescent siblings who often have extranodal lymphoma. The second category consists of
adult siblings with NHL, and the third is represented by adults with NHL from two or more generations. Familial clustering may reflect a true genetic susceptibility or a
shared environmental exposure. 29,30 In some cases, affected individuals in familial clusters have had well-defined or subtle immune deficiencies. 28,29 In one study, no
evidence of germline p53 mutations was noted in unaffected members of lymphoma-prone kindreds. 31
IMMUNODEFICIENCY

Several rare inherited disorders are associated with as much as a 25% risk of developing lymphoma. 32,33 These disorders include severe combined immunodeficiency,
hypogammaglobulinemia, common variable immunodeficiency, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, and ataxia-telangiectasia. Lymphomas associated with these disorders are
often associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and vary in appearance from polyclonal B-cell hyperplasia at one end of the spectrum to monoclonal lymphomas at the
other end.32,34
Ataxia-telangiectasia is an autosomal recessive multisystem disorder associated with a risk of lymphoma that is increased more than 250-fold in affected individuals. 35
Both B-cell and T-cell NHL has been described. 36 A mutated ataxia-telangiectasia gene (ATM) has been cloned and localized to chromosome 11. Mutations are
thought to inactivate or eliminate a protein involved with control of cell-cycle checkpoints responding to DNA damage. 37 Mutations and deletions of ATM have also
been identified in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and mantle cell lymphoma. 38,39
The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is an X-linked recessive disorder. The relative risk of developing malignancy is more than 100 times that expected in the general
population.33,40 NHL accounts for most of the increased cancer risk, and the incidence of NHL increases with age. Patients frequently have extranodal and CNS
lymphomas. A 30-fold excess of lymphoma has been noted in individuals with common variable immunodeficiency, 41 and a similar increase in risk has been noted in
patients with severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome. 33
The X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome is characterized by a defective immune response to EBV. 42 After primary EBV infection, male subjects can develop fatal
infectious mononucleosis, aplastic anemia, dysgammaglobulinemia, or NHL. 43,44 Lymphomas are frequently of small noncleaved histology and often occur in the
ileocecal region. 33 The SH2D1A gene has been identified as the gene responsible for X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome, and mutations and deletions have been
identified in affected individuals. 44,45
In addition to these inherited immunodeficiency states, a number of acquired conditions are associated with an increased risk of NHL. The occurrence of NHL in
patients with AIDS and following solid organ transplantation are discussed later (see Human Immunodeficiency Virus–Associated Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma and
Posttransplant Lymphoproliferative Disorders , later in this chapter). Patients with a variety of autoimmune disorders also have an increased risk of developing NHL.
Several registry-based studies and case-control studies have shown that the risk of developing NHL is increased approximately twofold in patients with rheumatoid
arthritis.46,47 and 48 Other series have failed to find an increased risk, however. 49 EBV-related lymphoproliferative disorders have also been seen in patients receiving
methotrexate and other immunosuppressive drugs for rheumatoid arthritis and similar disorders. 50 These lymphomas may undergo regression on withdrawal of
immunosuppression.
The risk of developing NHL in association with Sjögren's syndrome is increased approximately 30- to 40-fold. 46,51,52 These lymphomas are usually marginal zone
lymphomas that most commonly occur in salivary glands and other extranodal sites such as the stomach and lung. 51,53 Another condition associated with NHL is
Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Most cases of thyroid lymphoma occur in association with thyroiditis. 54 NHL may also be more common in patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus.55 Celiac sprue is associated with poor-prognosis lymphomas that are now classified as enteropathy-type intestinal T-cell lymphomas. 56,57
INFECTIOUS AGENTS
EBV was discovered in cell lines from tumors of patients with African (endemic) Burkitt's lymphoma. EBV DNA is associated with 95% of endemic Burkitt's lymphomas,
and less commonly with sporadic Burkitt's lymphoma.58,59 Both type A and type B EBV strains are observed. 60 Since EBV is not seen in all cases of Burkitt's
lymphoma, the actual relationship and the mechanism by which EBV might contribute to the development of Burkitt's lymphoma is unknown. 59,61 Burkitt's lymphoma is
associated with c-myc deregulation, although different chromosome 8 breakpoints are observed in the endemic and sporadic forms, and the presence or absence of
EBV DNA is related to the breakpoint location. 62 It is hypothesized that early EBV infection and environmental factors may increase the numbers of EBV-infected
precursors and the risk of genetic error. 58
EBV is also linked to posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLDs), some AIDS-associated lymphomas, and some lymphomas associated with congenital
immunodeficiency. Virtually all AIDS-associated primary CNS lymphomas have EBV in the tumor clone, although EBV is associated with other AIDS-associated
lymphomas less frequently. 63 Following EBV infection, normal host immune responses mediated by T lymphocytes suppress EBV-induced proliferation. 64 In patients
with depressed T-cell immunity, clones of EBV-transformed B cells can proliferate, leading to the development of lymphoma. The pattern of EBV-associated nuclear
proteins in AIDS-associated Burkitt's lymphomas differs from large cell lymphomas. 63 C-myc activation in the absence of EBV infection can occur in AIDS-associated
lymphomas.65 The EBV latent membrane protein 1 is a viral analogue of the tumor necrosis factor receptor. The activity of this protein is similar to activated CD40 and
is essential for in vitro transformation of B cells by EBV.64,66 In EBV-positive AIDS-associated NHL and PTLD, it appears that latent membrane protein 1 binds to
members of the tumor necrosis factor receptor–associated factor family and activates the NF-kB transcription factor, leading to cellular proliferation. 66 EBV is also
seen in association with humanherpesvirus-8 (HHV-8) in primary effusion lymphomas.
The human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) was the first human retrovirus associated with a malignancy. HTLV-I is a type C RNA virus that is responsible for
ATL in addition to HTLV-I–associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis and other disorders. 67 HTLV-I is primarily transmitted by means of breast feeding,
sexual contact, and blood transfusion. The latent period between infection and development of ATL is several decades. 59,68 HTLV-I seropositivity and ATL are most
prevalent in southern Japan, South America, Africa, and the Caribbean, 69 although ATL is sometimes seen in the United States. 70 In endemic areas more than 50% of
all NHL cases are ATL, although the risk of developing disease is only approximately 5% in infected patients. 69 The HTLV-I genome contains the regulatory tax gene,
whose product is a potent transcriptional activator of several genes and is thought to be responsible for the transforming features of HTLV-I. 67,68,71 The risk of ATL
may be higher in patients with higher anti–HTLV-I titers and lower reactivity to tax.72
A third virus associated with NHL is HHV-8. This virus was originally discovered in Kaposi's sarcoma lesions from AIDS patients and was called Kaposi's
sarcoma–associated herpesvirus.73 The virus is also associated with multicentric Castleman's disease. 74 An analysis of 193 lymphoma specimens from patients with
and without AIDS identified the presence of virus in only eight specimens, all of which were from patients with primary effusion lymphomas. 75 The virus was
subsequently shown to be a member of the gamma herpesvirus subfamily and was named HHV-8.76 Subsequent studies have shown that primary effusion lymphomas
are EBV-associated, lack c-myc gene rearrangements, and have distinct clinical and phenotypic features. 77 The mechanism of HHV-8 growth stimulation is unknown,
although several potential mechanisms have been proposed. 64 It has been suggested that HHV-8 may be necessary for EBV-induced transformation in these
patients. 64,77
Evidence also links hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection with NHL. Infection with HCV is strongly associated with essential mixed cryoglobulinemia, which is itself
associated with low-grade NHL. Several analyses have demonstrated significantly higher rates of HCV infection when B-cell NHL patients were compared with
controls. 78,79 The association appears strongest for patients with monocytoid B-cell lymphoma and lymphoplasmacytoid lymphomas. HCV has been identified in NHL
cells from a patient with type II mixed cryoglobulinemia. 80,81 Although HCV is not thought to be oncogenic, chronic antigenic stimulation from circulating HCV RNA may
produce clonal expansion leading to development of NHL. 82 Some studies have failed to find an association between HCV infection and NHL. 83
Several lines of evidence link the bacteria Helicobacter pylori to gastric MALT lymphomas.84H pylori can be found in the gastric mucosa of patients with gastric MALT
lymphoma,85 and patients with gastric lymphoma are more likely than controls to have serologic evidence of past H pylori infection. 86 It is hypothesized that
development of gastric MALT lymphomas is a multistep process beginning with H pylori colonization. This leads to chronic antigenic stimulation and gastritis and the
subsequent development of malignant B-cell clones. 87,88 Stimulation by H pylori–associated antigens appears to be strain specific and T-cell mediated. 89
ENVIRONMENTAL AND OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURES
Studies of occupational and environmental NHL risk are frequently inconsistent and contradictory. Difficulties in estimating risk are often related to sample size and
other methodologic difficulties in addition to difficulties in quantifying exposure. The risk of NHL has been reported to be increased in several occupations. 90,91,92 and 93
Occupations frequently associated with a higher risk include farmers, forestry workers, and agricultural workers. Metaanalysis has shown a slightly increased risk of

NHL in farmers.94,95 Increased risk of NHL in farmers may be related to an infectious agent or chemical exposure.
Several studies have shown an increased risk of NHL in relation to herbicide exposure, especially phenoxy herbicides such as 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid. 93,96,97
Other analyses have found less evidence for an association between 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid exposure and NHL. 98,99 and 100 The development of NHL has also
been linked to hair dyes, especially darker and permanent colors, 101,102 and 103 although some studies have failed to find an association. 104,105 NHL has also been
associated with organic solvents. 90,91,106,107 High levels of nitrates in drinking water have been associated with NHL in some studies, 108 but not others.109
DIET AND OTHER EXPOSURES
Cohort and case-control studies suggest that the risk of NHL is increased approximately twofold in association with higher intake of meats and dietary fat. 110,111 and 112
Recreational drug use has been associated with increased NHL risk, 113 and tobacco use has been associated with a higher risk in some studies, but not others. 114,115
and 116
The risk of NHL may be increased more than 20-fold after treatment for Hodgkin's disease. 117,118 and 119 Studies examining the relative risk of combined modality
treatment have been inconsistent, although the risk of NHL in association with ionizing radiation is minimal. 120 Solar ultraviolet exposure has been associated with
NHL in some studies.121,122 Although some analyses have shown that the risk of NHL is increased after blood transfusion, other studies have failed to identify a
significantly increased risk. 123
BIOLOGIC BACKGROUND FOR CLASSIFICATION OF LYMPHOID NEOPLASMS
Although the normal counterpart of the neoplastic cell is not known for all types of lymphoid neoplasms, it can be postulated for many of them. Understanding the
normal counterpart of neoplastic cells can provide a useful framework for understanding the morphology, immunophenotype, and to some extent, the clinical behavior
of the neoplasms (Fig. 45.3-3A ,Fig. 45.3-3B and Fig. 45.3-3C).

FIGURE 45.3-3. A: Hypothetical scheme of lymphocyte differentiation, showing anatomic locations of different stages of T- and B-cell differentiation. T cells are shown
at top; B cells are at bottom. B: Differentiation scheme, showing nomenclature for various types of T cells ( top) and B cells (bottom). C: Differentiation scheme,
showing postulated normal counterpart of many of the T- and B-cell neoplasms that can currently be recognized. B-ALL, B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia; B-CLL,
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia; Ig, immunoglobulin; LBL, lymphoblastic lymphoma; MALT, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue; SLL, small lymphocytic
lymphoma; T-LGL, T-cell large granular lymphocyte; T-PLL, T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia.

Anatomy and Morphology of Normal Lymphoid Tissues
Lymphoid tissues can be divided into two major categories: (1) the central or primary lymphoid tissues, which harbor lymphoid precursor cells and provide for their
maturation to a stage at which they are capable of performing their function in response to antigen; and (2) the peripheral or secondary lymphoid tissue, in which
antigen-specific reactions occur.
Primary (Central) Lymphoid Tissues
BONE MARROW (BURSA EQUIVALENT). Many of the early experiments that elucidated the basic biology of the lymphoid system used chickens and other avian species

as experimental animals; in avians, an organ known as the bursa of Fabricius, located in the region of the cloaca, was proven to be the source of cells capable of
producing antibody. Thus, these cells were termed B cells, for bursa-derived cells. In mammals, the bursa does not exist, and experiments have shown that the
precursors of antibody-producing cells come from the bone marrow. The bone marrow is also the source of other hematopoietic cells, including T cells (so named
because their crucial maturation steps cannot occur in the absence of the thymus).
THYMUS. The thymus, located in the anterior mediastinum, is the site at which immature T-cell precursors (prethymocytes) that migrate from the bone marrow undergo

maturation and selection to become mature, naive T cells, which are capable of responding to antigen. The thymus is divided into a cortex and a medulla, each of
which is characterized by specialized epithelium and accessory cells, which provide the milieu for T-cell maturation.
Secondary (Peripheral) Lymphoid Tissues
LYMPH NODES. Lymph nodes are located at sites throughout the body, strategically placed to process antigens present in lymph drained from most organs via the

afferent lymphatics. Lymph nodes have a capsule, a cortex, a medulla, and sinuses (subcapsular, cortical, and medullary). The sinuses contain macrophages, which
take up and process antigen, which may then be presented to lymphocytes. The cortex is divided into follicular and diffuse (paracortical) regions, and the medulla into
medullary cords and sinuses. The paracortex contains high endothelial venules, through which both T and B lymphocytes enter the node, and specialized
antigen-presenting cells (APC), the interdigitating dendritic cells, which may be related to the cutaneous Langerhans' cell, and which present antigen to T cells. Both
T-cell and early B-cell reactions to antigen occur in the paracortex, while the germinal center reaction occurs in the follicular cortex. The follicular cortex also contains
a specific type of accessory cell, the follicular dendritic cell (FDC); adhesion to the FDC-antigen complex is important in the differentiation of B cells in response to
antigen. Plasma cells and effector T cells generated by immune reactions accumulate in the medullary cords and exit via the medullary sinuses.
SPLEEN. The spleen, located in the left upper abdomen, has two major compartments: the red pulp, which functions as a filter for particulate antigens and for the

formed elements of the blood, and the white pulp, which is virtually identical in its compartments to the lymphoid tissue of the lymph node. Follicles and germinal
centers are found in the Malpighian corpuscles, whereas T cells and interdigitating dendritic cells are found in the adjacent periarteriolar lymphoid sheath. Plasma
cells accumulate in the red pulp.
MUCOSA-ASSOCIATED LYMPHOID TISSUE. Specialized lymphoid tissue is found in association with certain epithelia, in particular the nasopharynx and oropharynx

(Waldeyer's ring: adenoids, tonsils), the gastrointestinal tract (gut-associated lymphoid tissue: Peyer's patches of the distal ileum, mucosal lymphoid aggregates in the
colon and rectum), and lung (bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue). Collectively, this is known as mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT). These tissues tend to
have prominent B-cell follicles, but also may have discrete T-cell zones, similar to the paracortex of lymph nodes. MALT is thought to function in response to
intraluminal antigens and the generation of mucosal immunity. Lymphoid cells that respond to antigen in the MALT acquire homing properties that enable them to
return to these tissues. 3
B- and T-Cell Differentiation
In both the T- and B-cell systems, there are two major phases of differentiation: antigen-independent and antigen-dependent (see Fig. 45.3-3A and Fig. 45.3-3B).
Antigen-independent differentiation occurs in the primary lymphoid organs [bursa equivalent (bone marrow possibly) and thymus] without exposure to antigen and
produces a pool of lymphocytes that are capable of responding to antigen (naive or virgin T and B cells). The early stages are stem cells and lymphoid blasts, which

are self-renewing, while the later stages are resting cells with a finite life span ranging from weeks to years. On exposure to antigen, the naive lymphocyte undergoes
blast transformation and becomes a large, proliferating cell, which gives rise to progeny that are capable of direct activity against the inciting antigen (antigen-specific
effector cells). The earlier stages of antigen-dependent differentiation are proliferating cells, while the fully differentiated effector cells are less mitotically active. Thus,
neoplasms that correspond to proliferating stages of either antigen-independent or antigen-dependent differentiation are likely to be aggressive, whereas those that
correspond to naive or mature effector stages are likely to be indolent.
B-Cell Differentiation
ANTIGEN-INDEPENDENT B-CELL DIFFERENTIATION.

Precursor B Cells. The earliest B cells have rearranged immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy-chain genes, but lack surface immunoglobulin (SIg); the B cells at this stage are
called precursor B cells or pre-pre-B cells. At the next stage, pre-B cells make cytoplasmic µ heavy-chain, but no light-chain, and do not express SIg. Both types of
cells are lymphoblasts, with dispersed chromatin and small nucleoli. They contain the intranuclear enzyme, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT), and express
CD34, a glycoprotein present on immature cells of both lymphoid and myeloid lineage, HLA-DR [class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens], and the
common acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) antigen (CD10). Expression of class II MHC antigens persists throughout the life of the B cell and is important in
interactions with T cells. Pan-B-cell antigens are sequentially expressed on precursor B cells: CD19 and cytoplasmic CD22, followed by surface CD20. The leukocyte
common antigen (CD45) does not appear until surface CD20; thus, staining for CD45 may not be useful in identifying early B-cell neoplasms. Precursor B cells also
express CD79a, a molecule that is associated with SIg and is involved in transduction of signal after engagement of the SIg with antigen, analogous to CD3 and the
T-cell receptor (TCR) molecule.
Fetal early B-cell development occurs in the liver, bone marrow, and spleen, whereas in adults it is restricted to the bone marrow. Cells with the morphologic and
immunologic features of precursor B cells can be found in normal and regenerating bone marrow, where they correspond to the lymphocyte-like cells known as
hematogones. Neoplasms of precursor B cells usually involve bone marrow and peripheral blood and are known as common or precursor B ALL; rarely, they present
as solid tumors (precursor B lymphoblastic lymphoma).
Naive B Cells. The end stage of antigen-independent B-cell differentiation is the mature, naive (virgin) B cell, which expresses both complete surface IgM and IgD,
lacks TdT and common ALL antigen, and is capable of responding to antigen. Naive B cells have rearranged but unmutated Ig genes. Each individual B cell is
committed to a single light-chain, either k or l, and all of its progeny express the same light-chain. In contrast to precursor B cells, naive B cells lack CD10 and CD34.
In addition to SIg, naive B cells express pan-B-cell antigens (CD19, CD20, CD22, CD40, and CD79a), HLA class II molecules, complement receptors (CD21 and
CD35), CD44, Leu-8 (L-selectin), CD23, and the pan-T-cell antigen, CD5. Many of the surface antigens expressed by mature B cells are involved in homing or
adhesion to vascular endothelium, interaction with APCs, and signal transduction. SIg, CD79a, CD19, and CD20, appear to be involved in signal transduction, CD22
is involved in signaling, and CD40 is involved in interaction with T cells and in further differentiation of B cells. Resting B cells also produce the bcl-2 protein, which
promotes survival in the resting state. CD5-positive B cells produce Ig that often has broad specificity (cross-reactive idiotypes) and reactivity with self-antigens
(autoantibodies).
Naive B cells are small resting lymphocytes. In fetal tissues, they are the predominant lymphoid cell in the spleen; in adults, they circulate in the blood and also make
up a minor fraction of the B cells in primary lymphoid follicles and follicle mantle zones (so-called recirculating B cells). Studies of single cells picked from the mantle
zones of reactive follicles show that they are clonally diverse and contain unmutated Ig genes, consistent with naive B cells. Tumors of these cells are usually
clinically indolent and histologically low grade. In addition, they are often widespread and leukemic, consistent with the recirculating behavior of the normal naive B
cell. Two neoplasms appear to correspond to CD5-positive B cells: B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) and mantle cell (centrocytic/intermediate) lymphoma.
ANTIGEN-DEPENDENT B-CELL DIFFERENTIATION.

Immunoblastic and Plasma Cell Reaction. On encountering antigen, the naive B cell transforms into a proliferating cell, which ultimately matures into an
antibody-secreting plasma cell. In T-cell–independent reactions, and in the early primary immune response, naive B cells transform into IgM-positive blast cells (B
blasts or immunoblasts) in the T-cell zones, proliferate, and differentiate into IgM-secreting plasma cells, producing the IgM antibody of the primary immune response.
These plasma cells have largely unmutated Ig genes. Surface IgD is lost during blast transformation, as are some other antigens, such as CD21 and CD22. Other
antigens associated with activation are up-regulated. With maturation to plasma cells, most surface antigens are lost, including pan-B-cell antigens HLA-DR and the
leukocyte common antigen CD45, and secretory cytoplasmic IgM accumulates. The corresponding neoplasm to the IgM-producing plasma cell may be
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (immunocytoma) or Waldenström's macroglobulinemia.
Germinal Center Reaction. Later in the primary response (within 3 to 7 days of antigen challenge in experimental animals) and in secondary responses, the
T-cell–dependent germinal center reaction occurs. Each germinal center is formed from between three and ten naive B cells and ultimately contains approximately
10,000 to 15,000 B cells; thus, more than ten generations are required to form a germinal center. Proliferating IgM-positive B blasts formed from naive B cells that
have encountered antigen in the T-cell zone (paracortex) migrate into the center of the primary follicle and fill the FDC mesh work by approximately 3 days after
antigen stimulation, forming a germinal center. These B blasts differentiate into Ig-negative centroblasts (large noncleaved follicular center cells), which appear at
approximately 4 days, and accumulate at one pole of the germinal center, forming the dark zone. Centroblasts are large proliferating cells with vesicular nuclei, one to
three prominent, peripheral nucleoli, and a narrow rim of basophilic cytoplasm. They lack SIg and also switch off the gene that encodes the bcl-2 protein; thus, they
and their progeny are susceptible to death through apoptosis. Germinal center cells express antigens associated with activation, most of which are involved with
interaction with T cells, including CD23, CD71, CD40, and CD86, as well as antigens associated with adhesion to FDCs, including CD11a/18 and CD29/49d, and
antigens that may promote apoptosis, such as CD95. An important event in germinal center development is expression of bcl-6 protein, a nuclear zinc finger
transcription factor that is expressed by both centroblasts and centrocytes, but not by naive or memory B cells, mantle cells, or plasma cells. Interestingly, normal
resting B cells express high levels of bcl-6 messenger RNA, while lacking the protein.
In centroblasts, a process of somatic mutation of the Ig gene variable (V) region begins, which alters the affinity for antigen of the antibody that will be produced by the
cell. In addition, the cell may also switch from IgM to IgG or IgA production; through these mechanisms, the germinal center reaction gives rise to the better fitting IgG
or IgA antibody of the late primary or secondary immune response. Studies on single centroblasts picked from the dark zone of germinal centers suggest that in the
early stages, a germinal center may contain approximately five to ten clones of centroblasts, which show only a moderate amount of Ig gene V region mutation; later,
the number of clones diminishes to as few as three, and the degree of somatic mutation increases.
Centroblasts mature to nonproliferating medium-sized cells with irregular nuclei, inconspicuous nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm, called centrocytes (small or large
cleaved follicular center cells), which accumulate in the opposite pole of the germinal center, known as the light zone, which also contains a high concentration of
FDCs. Centrocytes reexpress SIg, which has the same VDJ rearrangement as the parent naive B cell and the centroblast of the dark zone, but which may have
undergone heavy-chain class switch and which has an altered antibody-combining site, because of the somatic mutations in the Ig V region. This process of somatic
mutation thus results in marked intraclonal diversity of antibody-combining sites in a population of cells derived from only a few precursors. Also in the germinal
center, the bcl-6 gene undergoes somatic mutation of the 5' noncoding promoter region, at a lower frequency than is seen in the Ig genes. Thus, both Ig gene
mutation and bcl-6 mutation serve as markers of cells that have experienced the germinal center.
Centrocytes whose Ig gene mutations have resulted in decreased affinity for antigen rapidly die by apoptosis (programmed cell death); the prominent starry sky
pattern of phagocytic macrophages seen in germinal centers at this stage is a result of the apoptosis of centrocytes. In contrast, centrocytes whose Ig gene mutations
have resulted in increased affinity are able to bind to native, unprocessed antigen trapped in antigen-antibody complexes by the complement receptors on the
processes of FDCs. The centrocytes are able to process the antigen and present it to T cells in the light zone of the germinal center. It is thought that this activation of
T cells may induce them to express CD40 ligand (CD40L), which can engage CD40 on the B cell. Both ligation of the antigen receptor by antigen and ligation of CD40
on the surfaces of germinal center B cells can rescue them from apoptosis. Interaction with surface molecules expressed by FDCs, such as CD23, appears to be
important in directing differentiation of the centrocytes into plasma cells, while interaction with the numerous T cells present in the light zone, through the CD40
molecule and its ligand on T cells, appears to be important in the generation of memory B cells. In addition, both antigen receptor ligation and CD40 ligation switch off
bcl-6 messenger RNA production and bcl-6 protein expression.
Follicular lymphomas are tumors of germinal center B cells, in which centrocytes fail to undergo apoptosis because they have a chromosomal rearrangement,
t(14;18), that prevents the normal switching off of the antiapoptosis gene, bcl-2. Most large B-cell lymphomas are composed of cells that at least in part resemble
centroblasts and have mutated Ig V region genes and are therefore thought to derive from the germinal center stage of differentiation. Finally, it is possible that

Burkitt's lymphoma corresponds to the early SIgM-positive B blast found in the early germinal center reaction in experimental animals.
Marginal Zone and Monocytoid (Parafollicular) B Cells. When the germinal center polarizes into a dark and a light zone, the mantle zone becomes better defined and
eccentric, with the broader portion surrounding the light zone of the germinal center. Antigen-specific B cells generated in the germinal center reaction leave the
follicle and reappear in the outer mantle zone, to form a marginal zone; these are particularly prominent in mesenteric lymph nodes, Peyer's patches, and the spleen.
Marginal zone B cells have slightly irregular nuclei, resembling those of centrocytes, but with more abundant, pale cytoplasm. The term centrocyte-like has been
applied to similar neoplastic cells. On rechallenge with antigen, splenic marginal zone B cells migrate first into the germinal center and then quickly appear in the
T-cell zone as Ig-positive blast cells, which give rise to antigen-specific plasma cells; thus, they are thought to be memory B cells. Memory B cells are also detectable
in the peripheral blood, where they may be IgM-positive and even CD5-positive. Studies on single marginal zone B cells from spleen and Peyer's patches show that
they have mutated V region genes, may be oligoclonal, and are not clonally related to the adjacent germinal center. Cells that resemble marginal zone B cells, but
with even more nuclear indentation and abundant cytoplasm, known as monocytoid B lymphocytes, are seen in clusters adjacent to subcapsular and cortical sinuses
of some reactive lymph nodes, peripheral to and often continuous with the follicle marginal zone. In contrast to marginal zone B cells, the monocytoid B cells found in
reactive lymph nodes appear to have either unmutated Ig V region genes or to show only a small number of randomly distributed mutations that do not suggest
selection by antigen. Nodal and splenic tumors resembling normal marginal zone and monocytoid B cells have been described. Analysis of Ig V region genes
suggests that most of these have mutations consistent with germinal center exposure and antigen selection.
Bone Marrow Plasma Cells. IgG-producing plasma cells accumulate in the lymph node medulla, but it appears that the immediate precursor of the bone marrow
plasma cell leaves the node and migrates to the bone marrow. Plasma cells lose SIg, pan-B-cell antigens, HLA-DR, CD40, and CD45, and cytoplasmic IgG or IgA
accumulates. Plasma cells also express CD38. They have rearranged and mutated Ig genes, but do not have the ongoing mutations seen in follicle center cells.
Tumors of these marrow-homing plasma cells correspond to plasmacytoma and multiple myeloma.
Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid Tissue. A subset of B cells, including all the differentiation stages listed previously, are programmed for gut-associated rather than
nodal lymphoid tissue. In these tissues (Waldeyer's ring, Peyer's patches, and mesenteric nodes), similar responses occur to antigen, but both the intermediate and
end-stage B cells that originate in the gut or mesenteric lymph nodes preferentially return there, rather than to peripheral lymph nodes or bone marrow. Thus, the
plasma cells generated in gut-associated lymphoid tissue home preferentially to the lamina propria, rather than to the bone marrow. 3 Many extranodal low-grade B-cell
lymphomas are thought to arise from this MALT. Since most MALT lymphomas contain prominent marginal zone type B cells, in addition to small B lymphocytes and
plasma cells, and since similar lymphomas occur in non-MALT sites, the term extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of MALT type has been proposed for these
tumors.124 MALT-type lymphomas have somatically mutated V region genes, consistent with an antigen-selected post–germinal center B-cell stage.
T-Cell Differentiation
ANTIGEN-INDEPENDENT T-CELL DIFFERENTIATION.

Cortical Thymocytes. As in the B-cell system, the earliest stages of T-cell differentiation involve characteristic rearrangement of the DNA encoding the antigen
receptor molecule. The earliest antigen-independent stages of T-cell differentiation occur in the bone marrow; later stages occur in the thymic cortex. The exact site at
which precursor cells become committed to the T lineage is not known, since the thymus contains cells that can differentiate into either T cells or natural killer (NK)
cells, but not B cells. Cortical thymocytes are lymphoblasts, which contain the intranuclear enzyme TdT. The earliest committed T-cell precursors are CD34+ and
CD45RA+, express the CD13 and CD33 antigens usually associated with myeloid cells, and lack CD3, CD4, and CD8 ( triple negative cells); within the thymus they
sequentially acquire CD1, CD2, CD5, and cytoplasmic CD3, and first the CD4 helper and then the CD8 suppressor antigen ( double positive). In the thymus,
rearrangement of the TCR genes is initiated, beginning with the g and d chains, followed by the b and then the a chain genes; these proteins are then expressed on
the cell surface. Surface CD3 expression appears at the same time as expression of the T-cell antigen receptor b chain, with which it is closely associated and
participates in signal transduction. Cortical thymocytes express the CD45RO epitope of the leukocyte common antigen, instead of CD45RA, and lack the
antiapoptosis protein bcl-2.
In addition to providing a pool of mature T cells through proliferation of precursor cells, the thymus plays a major role in the selection of T cells, so that the resulting
pool of mature T cells do not react to self-antigens. Both positive and negative selection occur in the thymus at the double positive (CD4+, CD8+) stage. Thymocytes
that have anti–self-specificity bind strongly via their TCR ab complex to self-antigens presented by the MHC on thymic dendritic cells and die by apoptosis. Those that
lack anti–self-reactivity undergo positive selection on thymic epithelial cells; they then express increased levels of surface CD3, acquire CD27 and CD69, switch their
CD45 isotype from RO back to RA, lose CD1, express bcl-2, and lose either CD4 or CD8 to become mature, naive T cells. The tumor that corresponds to the stages of
T-cell differentiation in the thymic cortex is precursor T-lymphoblastic lymphoma and leukemia; the variety of immunophenotypes and antigen receptor gene
rearrangements found in precursor T-cell neoplasia corresponds to the variety of stages of intrathymic T-cell differentiation.
Naive T Cells. Mature, naive (virgin) T cells have the morphologic appearance of small lymphocytes, have a low proliferation fraction, lack TdT and CD1, and express
either (but not both) CD4 or CD8, as well as surface CD3 and CD5, CD45RA, and bcl-2. These cells leave the thymus and can be found in the circulation, in the
paracortex of lymph nodes, and in the thymic medulla. Some cases of T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia and peripheral T-cell lymphoma may correspond to naive T
cells.
ANTIGEN-DEPENDENT T-CELL DIFFERENTIATION. A complex interaction of T-cell surface molecules with molecules on the surface of APCs is required for T-cell

activation in response to antigen. On the T cell, the CD4 or CD8 molecules bind to MHC class II or class I molecules, respectively, on the APC. A complex of CD3 and
the T-cell antigen receptor (which may be of either gd or ab type and has a combining site that fits the specific peptide antigen) binds to the antigen-MHC complex on
the APC. The adhesion molecule lymphocyte function-associated–1 on the T cell binds to intercellular adhesion molecule-1 on the APC; the activation-associated
molecule CD40L on the T cell binds to CD40; and CD28 and CTLA4 on the T cell bind to B7-1 and B7-2 (CD86) on the APC. The binding of CD40-CD40L provides an
activation stimulus for both the T cell and the APC, and binding of CD28 or CTLA4 to B7 provides a crucial second stimulus for the T cell, without which anergy
develops. In addition, both the T cell and the APC release stimulatory molecules, such as interferon-g and interleukins, which provide further mutual activation stimuli.
T Immunoblasts. On encountering antigen, mature T cells transform into immunoblasts, which are large cells with prominent nucleoli and basophilic cytoplasm, that
may be indistinguishable from B immunoblasts. T immunoblasts, in contrast to T lymphoblasts (thymocytes), are TdT and CD1 negative, strongly express pan-T-cell
antigens, and continue to express either CD4 or CD8, not both. Activated or proliferating T cells express HLA-DR, as well as CD25 (interleukin-2 receptor), and both
CD71 and CD38. Antigen-dependent T-cell reactions occur in the paracortex of lymph nodes and the periarteriolar lymphoid sheath of the spleen, as well as at
extranodal sites of immunologic reactions.
Effector T Cells. From the T-immunoblastic reaction come antigen-specific effector T cells of either CD4 or CD8 type, as well as memory T cells. Antigen-stimulated T
cells switch their CD45 isotype from CD45RA to CD45RO. Effector T cells of the CD4 type typically act as helper cells, and those of the CD8 type as suppressor cells
in vitro; however, both types can be cytotoxic. CD4 cells are cytotoxic to cells that display antigen complexed with MHC class II antigen, whereas CD8 cells are
cytotoxic to cells that display it complexed with MHC class I antigen. In addition to cytotoxicity, effector T cells produce a variety of cytokines that affect the function of
B cells and APCs, which modulate the immune response. Fully differentiated T-effector cells are small lymphocytes, morphologically similar to other nonproliferating
lymphocytes of either T or B type. In addition to differences in subset antigen (CD4 vs. CD8 or double negative) expression, peripheral T cells may differ in their TCR
expression (gd vs. ab). The majority of T cells in the circulation and in most lymphoid tissues are gd+; ab T cells are more numerous in mucosae and in the spleen.
Most cases of peripheral T-cell lymphoma are thought to correspond to stages of antigen-dependent T-cell differentiation (e.g., mycosis fungoides corresponds to a
mature effector CD4+ cell; hepatosplenic gd T-cell lymphoma to a gd T cell; T-cell large granular lymphocyte leukemia to a mature effector CD8+ cell); however, the
relationship between neoplastic and normal T cells is not nearly as well understood as in the B-cell system. The systemic symptoms such as fever, skin rashes, and
hemophagocytic syndromes associated with some peripheral T-cell lymphomas may be a consequence of cytokine production by the neoplastic T cells.
Natural Killer Cells. A third line of lymphoid cells, called NK cells since they can kill certain targets without sensitization and without MHC restriction, appears to derive
from a common progenitor with T cells. NK cells recognize self class I MHC molecules on the surfaces of cells and kill cells that lack these antigens. Immature NK
cells have cytoplasmic CD3, but these cells do not rearrange their T-cell receptor genes or express T-cell receptors or surface CD3. They are characterized by certain
NK cell–associated antigens (CD16, CD56, and CD57), which can also be expressed on some T cells and also express some T-cell–associated antigens (CD2,
CD28, and CD8). NK cells appear in the peripheral blood as a small proportion of circulating lymphocytes; they are usually slightly larger than most normal T and B
cells, with abundant pale cytoplasm containing azurophilic granules (so-called large granular lymphocytes). Angiocentric and nasal T/NK cell lymphoma and some

types of large granular lymphocytes leukemia appear to correspond to immature and mature NK cells, respectively.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPING OF LYMPHOID CELLS
Individual B- and T-lymphoid cells as well as accessory cells of the mononuclear phagocyte system can be recognized in cell suspensions or tissue sections by the
presence of surface or cytoplasmic molecules (antigens) that can be detected using antibodies labeled with either fluorescence or enzymatic (immunohistochemical)
methods. Immunophenotyping with monoclonal antibodies can be done using viable cell suspensions, frozen tissue sections, or paraffin-embedded tissue sections.
Using monoclonal antibodies and acetone-fixed cryostat sections, it has been possible to characterize many types of normal and neoplastic lymphoid cells. A series of
international workshops has developed a standardized nomenclature for many of the antigens detected by more than one monoclonal antibody. For cells in body
fluids, particularly the peripheral blood, flow cytometry with fluorescent-labeled antibodies is the method of choice; this method can also be applied to fine-needle
aspiration biopsy specimens and to cell suspensions prepared from fresh tissue specimens, but sampling problems can occur due to selective loss of fragile
neoplastic cells. Acetone-fixed frozen sections are the most reliable method for the pathologist to assess the phenotype of lymphoid cells in tissue sections. However,
the technology for detecting lymphocyte-associated antigens in paraffin-embedded tissue has greatly improved, so that most clinically necessary immunophenotyping
can be accomplished using only routinely processed tissue. Nonetheless, it is still advisable to prepare fresh frozen tissue in all cases of suspected lymphoma, in
case a diagnosis cannot be made with certainty on paraffin tissue section analysis and also for possible molecular genetic analysis.
MOLECULAR GENETIC ANALYSIS OF LYMPHOID CELLS
Lymphocyte differentiation involves rearrangement of the genes involved in antigen recognition. This process is required for development of a functional antigen
receptor gene and serves to increase the diversity of these receptors beyond what can be hard-coded into the genome, so that lymphoid cells can develop a
repertoire large enough to respond to the majority of antigens they may encounter. Analysis of these rearrangements has provided insights into normal T- and B-cell
differentiation and can also be useful in the diagnosis and classification of lymphoid neoplasms. In addition to these normal rearrangements, chromosome
translocations frequently occur in lymphoid neoplasms, as they do in other tumors. In lymphomas, these translocations often involve hot spots in the antigen receptor
genes; these translocations can also be useful in the diagnosis and classification of lymphoid neoplasms.
Antigen Receptor Gene Rearrangement
IMMUNOGLOBULIN GENE REARRANGEMENT. B-cell differentiation involves rearrangements of the genes involved in Ig production. The genes that encode the constant

and variable regions of the Ig heavy and light-chain molecules are located far apart on the chromosomes in germline cells. To produce RNA for an Ig protein, many
thousands of base pairs of DNA must be deleted from the genome to bring the different portions of the Ig gene together. These rearrangements change the position
on the DNA of restriction sites (points at which restriction endonucleases cleave the DNA). Thus, fragments produced by digesting B-cell DNA with these enzymes are
of a different size than those produced by digesting non–B-cell (germline) DNA and migrate differently in an electrophoresis gel. When radiolabeled DNA probes
(cloned segments of DNA produced by bacteria) that are complementary to specific portions of the Ig gene are applied to such a gel, they specifically mark the
position of the Ig gene, which can be demonstrated on an autoradiograph. The exact size, and therefore position on the gel (Southern blot), of each Ig gene fragment
is unique to an individual B cell; thus, this technique provides not only a specific marker for B cells, but also a true marker for monoclonality.
T-CELL RECEPTOR GENE REARRANGEMENT. A process of gene rearrangement analogous to that seen in B cells also occurs during T-cell differentiation. This process

involves the DNA encoding a T-cell–specific surface molecule that serves as the T-cell receptor for antigen, analogous to surface Ig on B cells. As in the B-cell
system, the size of restriction fragments of the DNA encoding the T-cell receptor gene is specific for a single clone of T cells. Thus, T-cell receptor gene
rearrangement is a specific marker for T cells and also a true marker for monoclonality in T cells.
Oncogene Rearrangements
In addition to rearrangements of antigen receptor genes, hematologic malignancies frequently have specific chromosomal translocations. Cellular oncogenes (genes
that can cause malignant transformation when transfected in activated or altered form into cultured normal cells) have been identified in association with some of the
more common chromosome translocations that characterize lymphoid malignancies. These translocations can be detected using DNA probes that hybridize to the
breakpoint regions on the chromosome carrying the oncogene. Using a technique for amplifying unique DNA segments [polymerase chain reaction (PCR)], rare cells
carrying a given translocation can be detected, using probes that span the breakpoint, or using a reverse transcriptase technique to detect RNA produced by the
altered or fused gene (reverse transcriptase–PCR). Numeric abnormalities of chromosomes are also common in lymphoid malignancies; these can be detected by
fluorescence in situ hybridization, using probes to specific chromosomes.
To the extent to which specific histologic subtypes, prognostic groups, or both of lymphomas are associated with specific gene rearrangements, detection of these
rearrangements may prove useful in the characterization of lymphomas. In addition, this technique can potentially be used to detect disseminated or recurrent
lymphoma on small biopsy specimens or in the blood. Finally, study of the function of the translocated oncogene is providing clues to the mechanisms of oncogenesis.
USE OF IMMUNOPHENOTYPING AND GENETIC STUDIES IN THE DIAGNOSIS OF LYMPHOID NEOPLASMS
Each of the lymphoid neoplasms has a characteristic morphology, which may be sufficient in a given case to permit diagnosis and classification on morphologic
grounds alone, if well-prepared sections are available; thus, most cases of lymphoma can be diagnosed and classified with reasonable certainty on the basis of
routine histologic sections alone. However, there are many pitfalls in the histologic diagnosis of malignant lymphoma, and immunophenotyping or, less often, genetic
studies can be useful in resolving major differential diagnostic problems ( Table 45.3-1). Problems that can be resolved by these techniques include (1) reactive versus
neoplastic lymphoid infiltrates; (2) lymphoid versus nonlymphoid malignancies; and (3) subclassification of lymphoma. In a clinical study of the Revised
European-American Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms (REAL), the interobserver reproducibility of experts using the classification was tested, and the
contribution of immunophenotype to reproducibility was assessed ( Table 45.3-2). For most of the common entities (follicular lymphoma, MALT lymphoma, B-CLL),
immunophenotyping was not necessary; however, in some diseases (mantle cell lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma) it was helpful, and in all types of T-cell
lymphoma it was essential. In a given case, if the morphology is typical of a given entity but the immunophenotypic or genetic features are unusual, the histologic
sections should be reexamined; however, the case may still be accepted as an example of the entity suggested by morphologic features. If the morphology is atypical
but the immunophenotype and genetic features are classic for a given entity, these features may override morphology in classification. If both the morphology and the
immunophenotype are atypical, then the case is best regarded as unclassifiable or borderline.

TABLE 45.3-1. Cluster Designation (CD) of Leukocyte-Associated Molecules

TABLE 45.3-2. Immunohistologic and Genetic Features of Common B-Cell Neoplasms

PRINCIPLES OF CLASSIFICATION OF LYMPHOID NEOPLASM
Revised European-American Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms from the International Lymphoma Study Group
The International Lymphoma Study Group (ILSG), an informal group of 19 hematopathologists from the United States, Europe, and Asia, adopted a new approach to
lymphoma classification in 1993. In this approach, all available information (i.e., morphology, immunophenotype, genetic features, and clinical features) is used to
define a disease entity. The relative importance of each of these features varies among diseases, and there is no one gold standard. Morphology is always important,
and some diseases are primarily defined by morphology (e.g., follicular lymphoma, angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma, nodular sclerosis Hodgkin's disease), with
immunophenotype as backup in difficult cases. Some diseases have a virtually specific immunophenotype [e.g., mantle cell lymphoma, small lymphocytic lymphoma
(SLL), anaplastic large cell lymphoma] such that one would hesitate to make the diagnosis in the absence of the immunophenotype. In some lymphomas a specific
genetic abnormality is an important defining criterion [e.g., t(11;14) in mantle cell lymphoma, t(8;14) in Burkitt's lymphoma; t(14;18) in follicular lymphoma), whereas
others lack specific genetic abnormalities (e.g., MALT lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma). Still others require a knowledge of clinical features as well (e.g.,
nodal vs. extranodal presentation in marginal zone lymphoma and peripheral T-cell lymphomas, and mediastinal location in mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma). The
inclusion of clinical criteria was one of the most novel aspects of the ILSG approach. The emphasis on defining real disease entities, rather than focusing on subtleties
of morphology or immunophenotype or primarily on patient survival, represented a new paradigm in lymphoma classification.
The ILSG developed a consensus on a list of diseases that its members recognized in daily practice, using a combination of available morphologic, immunologic, and
genetic information, and that appeared to be distinct clinical entities. This consensus approach represented the second major departure from previous classifications,
most of which represented the work of one or a few individuals. The ILSG recognized that the complexity of the field in the 1990s made it impossible for a single
person or small group to be completely authoritative, and also that broad agreement is necessary if the result is to be used by multiple pathologists, even if it requires
compromise. The ILSG consensus list of well-defined, real diseases was published in 1994 ( Table 45.3-3).124 Since it represented a revision of current or prior
European and American lymphoma classifications ( Table 45.3-4), it was called the Revised European-American Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms. Although its
initial publication incited considerable controversy, experience over the intervening years has shown that it can be used by most pathologists, and that the entities it
describes have distinctive clinical features, making it a useful and practical classification, despite its apparent complexity. 125,126 and 127

TABLE 45.3-3. Revised European-American Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms (1994)

TABLE 45.3-4. Comparison of the Original Revised European-American Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms with the Kiel Classification and the Working
Formulation

World Health Organization Classification of Hematologic Malignancies
Since 1995, members of the European and American Hematopathology societies have been collaborating on a new World Health Organization (WHO) classification
of hematologic malignancies. It will use an updated version of the REAL classification for lymphomas ( Table 45.3-5) and will expand the principles of the REAL
classification to the classification of myeloid and histiocytic neoplasms. 128,129 The WHO project includes over 50 pathologists from around the world, as well as a
Clinical Advisory Committee of more than 30 international expert hematologists and oncologists. 130 Proponents of current classifications (e.g., Working Formulation,
Kiel, REAL and French-American-British) are in agreement that the final WHO consensus will replace existing classifications. Thus, it will represent the first true
international consensus on the classification of hematologic malignancies.

TABLE 45.3-5. Proposed Updated Revised European-American Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms/World Health Organization Classification of Lymphoid
Neoplasmsa

Principles of the Revised European-American Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms/World Health Organization Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms
The REAL/WHO classification is a list of distinct disease entities, which are defined by a combination of morphology, immunophenotype, and genetic features, and
which have distinct clinical features. It recognizes that all of these criteria are at best approximations, and that continued research and experience will be needed to
continue to improve the definition of these diseases. Morphology remains the first and most basic approach and is sufficient for both diagnosis and classification in
many typical cases of lymphoma. Immunophenotyping and, particularly, molecular genetic studies are not needed in all cases; however, they are useful in difficult
cases and improve interobserver reproducibility. It is the availability of these more objective methods that make a consensus on lymphoma classification possible now,
while it was impossible in the 1970s, when classification was based purely on subjective morphologic features.
The classification includes all lymphoid neoplasms (i.e., Hodgkin's disease, NHLs, lymphoid leukemias, and plasma cell neoplasms). Both lymphomas and lymphoid
leukemias are included, since both solid and circulating phases are present in many lymphoid neoplasms, and distinction between them is artificial. Thus, B-CLL and
B-SLL are simply different manifestations of the same neoplasm, as are lymphoblastic lymphomas and ALLs. In addition, Hodgkin's disease and plasma cell myeloma
are now recognized as lymphoid neoplasms of B lineage and therefore belong in a compilation of lymphoid neoplasms. Immunodeficiency-associated lymphomas are
classified according to the basic lymphoma classification; a separate classification of the posttransplant lymphoid proliferations that do not fulfill criteria for lymphoma
is also given (Table 45.3-6). Many of the neoplasms recognized in the classification have morphologic variants, clinical subtypes, or both.

TABLE 45.3-6. Categories of Posttransplant Lymphoproliferative Disorders

Clinical Test of the Revised European-American Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms
An initial criticism of the REAL was that it had not been tested in a clinical study, 131 although it only included diseases that had been previously published and for
which the clinical features were known. 132 To address this issue, an international group of oncologists and pathologists devised a clinical study of the classification, in
which five expert pathologists reviewed over 1300 cases of NHL at centers around the world. 126,127 The aims of the study were to (1) see whether the classification
could be used in practice; (2) test its interobserver reproducibility; (3) determine the need for immunophenotyping in diagnosis; (4) determine whether the categories
of disease identified in the classification were clinically distinctive either at presentation or in outcome; and (5) determine the relative frequency of these diseases in
the populations studied.
This study convincingly demonstrated that the classification could be used by expert hematopathologists: Over 95% of the cases with adequate material could be
classified into one or another of the categories. The interobserver reproducibility was substantially better than that for other classifications and was better than 85%
for most diseases (Table 45.3-7). Immunophenotyping was helpful in some diseases, such as mantle cell lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, in which it
improved accuracy by 10% to 15% and was essential for all types of T-cell lymphoma, improving reproducibility from approximately 50% to over 90%. It was not
required for many diseases, such as follicular lymphoma, B-SLL, and MALT lymphoma. 126

TABLE 45.3-7. Reproducibility of Lymphoma Diagnosis

The relative frequency of the different B-cell and T/NK-cell lymphomas in the study population was similar to previous patterns reported in the literature ( Table 45.3-8).
The most common lymphoma was diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, followed by follicular lymphoma; together, these accounted for 50% of the lymphomas in the study.
New entities not specifically recognized in the Working Formulation accounted for 27% of the cases: MALT lymphoma, 8%; mantle cell, 7%; peripheral T-cell, 6%;
nodal marginal zone, 2%; mediastinal large B-cell, 2%; and anaplastic large T/null-cell, 2%. These results are reassuring, confirming that the majority of the cases that
will be encountered by oncologists and pathologists will be only a few subtypes, with which they are already familiar. However, they also underscore the need for
recognizing the more recently described entities, which although less common, have important clinical differences. The study also found differences in geographic
distribution of the lymphoma types, with follicular lymphoma being more common in North America and western Europe, T-cell lymphomas more common in Hong

Kong, and both mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma and mantle cell lymphoma more common in Ticino (the Italian-speaking canton), Switzerland. 20

TABLE 45.3-8. Presenting Features of Common B- and T-Cell Neoplasms

The different entities recognized by the classification had significantly different clinical presentations and survivals. For example, diffuse aggressive lymphomas,
which would be lumped as intermediate or high grade in the Working Formulation, include diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma,
peripheral T-cell lymphoma, and anaplastic large T/null-cell lymphoma. The clinical features at presentation were strikingly different, with a younger age group for
mediastinal large T-cell lymphoma and anaplastic large T/null-cell lymphoma, and striking differences in male to female ratios, suggesting that these are distinctive
biologic entities (see Table 45.3-8). When overall survivals were analyzed, entities that would have been lumped together as low grade or intermediate/high grade in
the Working Formulation showed marked differences in survival, again confirming that they need to be recognized and treated as distinct entities.
A critical finding in this study was that classification is not the only predictor of clinical outcome. Patients with any of these diseases could be stratified into better and
worse prognostic groups according to the International Prognostic Index. 133 For example, although patients with follicular lymphoma typically have International
Prognostic Index scores of 1 to 3, those patients with scores of 4 or 5 had a predicted median overall survival of only 18 months. Thus, to plan treatment for an
individual patient, the oncologist must know not only the diagnosis, but the clinical prognostic factors that influence that patient's course.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF INDOLENT DISSEMINATED LYMPHOMA
For most of the indolent lymphoid neoplasms, both the clinical and pathologic differential diagnosis includes, first, a benign lymphoid proliferation, and second,
another type of indolent lymphoma or leukemia. In distinguishing B-CLL/SLL, immunocytoma, or splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL) with villous lymphocytes
from reactive lymphocytosis, cytologic criteria can be difficult, since cytologic atypia may be minimal; the only reliable technique is SIg analysis for clonality, usually by
flow cytometry. In lymph nodes or other tissues, the most important distinguishing features include effacement of the architecture and the presence or absence of
pseudofollicles. On frozen sections or flow cytometry, demonstration of monotypic SIg and CD5 expression are also useful. On paraffin sections, demonstration of a
predominance of interfollicular B cells, often with coexpression of CD43, can provide suggestive evidence of B-cell lymphoma.
B-SLL/CLL, immunocytoma, and SMZL must be distinguished from one another and from MALT type lymphoma (in extranodal sites) and mantle cell lymphoma (which
can involve blood, bone marrow, and spleen). The presence of pseudofollicles is diagnostic of CLL/SLL; expression of CD23 (frozen sections) and lack of cyclin D1
(paraffin sections) can exclude mantle cell lymphoma, whereas expression of CD5 argues against a diagnosis of MALT type lymphoma, lymphoplasmacytoid
lymphoma, or SMZL. By flow cytometry, SIg in CLL is usually weak, whereas it tends to be stronger in the other lymphomas; CD25 or CD103 are also uncommon in
B-CLL and more common in some of the other lymphoid leukemias.
Clinically and pathologically, the differential diagnosis of SMZL also includes hairy cell leukemia. Although the cells in the peripheral blood may resemble hairy cells,
the nuclei are usually smaller, with more condensed chromatin, and the villi are polar and less conspicuous than those of hairy cell leukemia. The marrow infiltrate is
usually sparse and nodular, in contrast to hairy cell leukemia. The cells may, however, express CD25, CD103, and even TRAP. In the past, many cases were
probably diagnosed as atypical hairy cell leukemia or B-CLL. Distinction from lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma is more problematic; both are CD5– and both may have
an M component and evidence of plasmacytoid differentiation. The relationship between SMZL/splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes and lymphoplasmacytoid
lymphoma needs further study.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF INDOLENT EXTRANODAL AND NODAL LYMPHOMAS
The most important clinical and pathologic differential diagnosis in indolent lymphomas in either lymph nodes or extranodal sites is with benign lymphoid hyperplasias.
In this situation, if morphologic criteria are insufficient, staining for Ig light-chains is the most useful test to determine clonality.
In the differential diagnosis of gastric MALT type lymphomas, clinical features favoring lymphoma include evidence of a mass, enlargement of gastric folds, or a
multinodular appearance to the mucosa. Histologically, the presence of a dense, diffuse infiltrate of marginal zone B cells, with destruction of glands and prominent
lymphoepithelial lesions is required for a confident diagnosis. In borderline cases, paraffin section immunoperoxidase stains for cIg may be helpful in approximately
50% of the cases; frozen section immunophenotyping for detection of monotypic SIg is definitive in the rest. If gastric MALT lymphoma is suspected in a patient with
Helicobacter infection, it is important not to treat with antibiotics until the diagnosis is ruled in or out by special studies, including rebiopsy if necessary. Antibiotic
therapy often causes the lymphoma to regress, but the long-term outcome of these patients is not known, and therefore it is important to know before treatment,
whether the patient has lymphoma or just gastritis.
The major differential diagnosis, both clinically and pathologically, for follicular lymphoma is with reactive follicular hyperplasia. The presence of persistent, nontender
lymph nodes in an older adult should raise the suspicion of follicular lymphoma, particularly if more than one site is involved. Histologic criteria for this differential
diagnosis are well established; in the minority of cases in which a confident diagnosis is not possible on routine sections, demonstration of monotypic SIg on flow
cytometry or frozen section, or of bcl-2 expression within the follicles, can confirm the diagnosis. Molecular genetic studies to confirm Ig gene or bcl-2 rearrangement
are rarely necessary but can be helpful.
Follicular lymphoma, mantle cell lymphoma, nodal monocytoid B-cell lymphoma, and extranodal MALT lymphoma must all be distinguished from one another.
Clinically, the first three usually involve generalized lymph nodes; however, when mantle cell lymphoma presents with extranodal involvement in the form of
lymphomatous polyposis of the gastrointestinal tract, it may be confused with MALT type lymphoma. The presence of widespread disease involving multiple
gastrointestinal sites strongly favors mantle cell lymphoma. In other extranodal sites such as the orbit 134 and breast, 135 follicular lymphoma may be more common than
MALToma and should be considered in the differential diagnosis.
Although most cases of indolent nodal lymphoma can be correctly classified by morphologic criteria if good histologic sections are available, immunophenotyping
studies can be helpful and are occasionally necessary for correct subclassification (see Table 45.3-2). Expression of CD5 and CD43 and lack of CD23 and (usually)
CD10 are useful in distinguishing mantle cell lymphoma from CLL and follicular center lymphoma, respectively. In extranodal sites, CD5 is useful in distinguishing
mantle cell lymphoma from MALToma. Staining for cyclin D1 is potentially the most specific marker for mantle cell lymphoma; Southern blot or PCR studies can also
be used to detect the t(11;14).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF MATURE (PERIPHERAL) T-CELL LYMPHOMAS
With most peripheral T-cell lymphomas, the clinical and pathologic differential diagnosis includes an atypical reactive process, such as a viral infection, and one of the
more common B-cell lymphomas. Because of the great variety of clinical presentations and morphologic features, establishing a diagnosis can be difficult and may
require multiple diagnostic procedures. Since there is no reliable immunophenotypic marker for clonality in T cells, molecular genetic analysis is often necessary when
the differential diagnosis includes a reactive process. These studies can often be performed on cells isolated from blood or body fluids or from needle-aspiration
biopsies, if the initial diagnostic biopsy has not been processed to obtain fresh tissue. An important caveat is excluding a B-cell lymphoma; many B-cell lymphomas of

both low and high grade contain numerous reactive T cells in biopsy specimens. Therefore, simply demonstrating a predominance of T cells does not establish the
diagnosis of a T-cell lymphoma; tissues should always be stained for B-cell–associated antigens and Ig.

PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT OF NON-HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA
The principles of the management of patients with NHL have steadily evolved. The phases of patient management include obtaining an adequate biopsy for an
accurate diagnosis, a careful history and physical examination, appropriate laboratory studies, imaging studies, and possibly, further biopsies to determine an
accurate stage and to plan therapy. Finally, taking into account factors related to the patient, type of lymphoma, and stage and pace of disease, a treatment
recommendation must be made. Treatment choices include no initial therapy, radiotherapy, cytotoxic chemotherapy, a variety of new biologic therapies, and
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A careful history and physical examination is the basis for subsequent studies to determine the extent of the disease and key factor in the therapeutic decision. The
duration of symptoms and the pace of progression of the illness should be documented. The physician should not discount the possibility that waxing and waning
lymphadenopathy could be related to the lymphoma. Especially in follicular lymphomas, spontaneous regressions are frequent. The presence of specific symptoms
known to have an adverse prognosis in patients with some types of lymphoma should be ascertained. These include fevers, night sweats, and unexplained weight
loss. Symptoms referable to a particular organ system such as pain in the chest, abdomen, or bones might lead to identification of specific sites of involvement.
History of a concurrent illness such as diabetes or congestive heart failure might modify therapeutic decisions.
A careful physical examination can lead to important observations that will direct subsequent care. Obviously, examination of all lymph node–bearing areas and a
search for hepatomegaly or splenomegaly are important. Pharyngeal involvement, a thyroid mass, evidence of pleural effusion, abdominal mass, testicular mass, or
cutaneous lesions are all examples of findings that might direct further investigations and subsequent therapy. Certain associations of involvement between two organ
sites are worth remembering. For example, patients with involvement of Waldeyer's ring often have gastrointestinal involvement, and the converse is also true. These
patients usually have mantle cell lymphoma. Patients with paranasal sinus, testicular involvement, and epidermal lymphoma are especially prone to meningeal spread
and deserve a diagnostic lumbar puncture and, probably, prophylactic therapy. Patients with one testicle involved are likely to relapse on the opposite side and
radiotherapy should be directed to the entire scrotum with this in mind. Patients with ocular lymphoma almost always have dissemination to other parts of the CNS in
the absence of prophylactic therapy.
LABORATORY EVALUATION
Laboratory studies should include complete blood count and screening chemistry studies to include renal and hepatic function studies, serum glucose, calcium,
albumin, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and b 2-microglobulin level. Serum protein electrophoresis is frequently appropriate. The purpose of these studies is to aid in
determining the prognosis (e.g., LDH, b2-microglobulin, albumin) and identifying abnormalities in other organ systems that might complicate therapy (e.g., renal or
hepatic dysfunction).
In addition to the diagnostic biopsy, almost all patients should have a bone marrow aspirate and biopsy performed. The chances of finding bone marrow involvement
varies considerably among different subtypes of lymphoma ( Table 45.3-9). It is present in approximately 70% of patients with SLL, lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma,
and mantle cell lymphoma. Patients with follicular lymphoma have bone marrow involvement approximately 50% of the time, while it is seen in approximately 15% of
patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (see Table 45.3-9).126 Bone marrow involvement in patients with follicular and SLL has little prognostic import except when
bone marrow is extensively involved and cytopenias or large numbers of circulating lymphoma cells are present. In patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, bone
marrow involvement can occur with the large cells or small B cells. Patients with large cell lymphoma in the marrow have a distinctly adverse prognosis, while marrow
involvement by small cells has a much less clear effect on prognosis. 136

TABLE 45.3-9. Frequency of Extranodal Involvement by Non-Hodgkin's Lymphomas

IMAGING STUDIES
Chest Radiography and Computed Tomographic Scans
Chest radiography and computed tomographic (CT) scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis should be performed at the initial evaluation in almost all patients with
NHL. Although the chest radiograph is abnormal in less than 50% of patients, identification of hilar or mediastinal adenopathy, parenchymal lesions, or pleural
effusions is important and provides an easy method for reevaluation. CT scanning can identify both nodal and extranodal sites of involvement and provides an
important approach to monitoring the response to therapy. This approach has largely replaced lymphangiography for the evaluation of retroperitoneal
lymphadenopathy. This is partly because of the difficulty of performing lymphangiography. The abdominal and pelvic CT scan can identify mesenteric and retrocrural
nodes and is more accurate than the lymphangiogram in determining the dimension of nodal disease. 137,138 Involvement of intraabdominal organs such as kidney,
ovary, spleen, and liver can be identified on CT scans.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
The value of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the staging of NHL is limited. This technique can be used in lieu of CT scanning in many patients, but its higher
cost makes this impractical. MRI is particularly useful in identifying bone and CNS involvement. MRI can suggest meningeal involvement when gadolinium has been
used. MRI can also identify bone marrow involvement 139 and might be more sensitive than bone marrow biopsy in this regard. However, it has not yet been accepted
as a substitute for bone marrow biopsy.
Nuclear Medicine Studies
The most common nuclear medicine studies used in staging patients with lymphoma are bone scans and gallium scans. Bone scans are rarely used as part of the
initial staging studies. They can sometimes be useful in patients who present with or develop back pain during the course of their lymphoma, looking for vertebral
involvement and potential spinal cord compression.
Gallium scans are more often used as part of the staging evaluation. This study, because it provides functional rather than purely anatomic information, has potential
value in resolving difficulties in determining the response to therapy. 140 To be maximally valuable, high doses of gallium need to be administered and single photon
emission CT needs to be used. Gallium scan results are more likely to be positive in patients with aggressive lymphoma such as diffuse large B-cell lymphomas than
in more indolent lymphoma such as follicular lymphoma, but can be positive in any subtype. Gallium scans are more accurate in evaluating supradiaphragmatic rather

than infradiaphragmatic sites because of colon uptake of the gallium. Unfortunately, this test is most often needed in determining intraabdominal sites of involvement.
On rare occasions, technetium liver spleen scans can be helpful in determining the cause of splenic involvement in the patient in whom lymphoma is suspected. One
of the differential diagnoses in such patients is occult liver disease. Technetium liver spleen scans that show more uptake in the spleen than liver suggest occult liver
disease, and a liver biopsy should be done before considering splenectomy.
Positron Emission Tomographic Scans
Positron emission tomographic (PET) scanning has been increasingly applied in staging patients with lymphoma. The specificity and sensitivity of PET scanning
seems to be at least that of gallium scanning. The procedure has been more widely adopted in some countries in Europe than in the United States. Despite
enthusiastic reports, more large comparative trials assessing the relative merits of PET scanning, gallium scanning, and CT scanning need to be completed before
PET replaces previous tests. Merely adding PET scanning to all the previous studies will only increase the cost of therapy.
STAGING LAPAROTOMY
Staging laparotomies became popular in the late 1960s and 1970s for evaluating patients with Hodgkin's disease. The same approach was used in patients with
NHLs. Studies showed that a large proportion of patients with apparently localized follicular lymphoma would be upstaged using staging laparotomy, but this was a
less common event in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Because of improvements in imaging studies, and the morbidity and potential mortality associated with staging
laparotomy, this procedure is rarely appropriate in the initial evaluation of a patient with NHL. However, some patients with NHL are diagnosed at laparotomy, and if
the diagnosis is known during the procedure, careful evaluation of other lymph nodes sites and organs by the surgeon can be valuable.
POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION FOR EVALUATING MINIMAL RESIDUAL DISEASE
The use of PCR to expand small numbers of cells with a particular genetic abnormality can allow identification of cells as frequent as 1 in 10 5.141 This has usually been
applied to studying blood and bone marrow, but could be applied in other sites. Studies to date have generally focused on the t(14;18) translocation and the
associated bcl-2 gene. Several observations have been made. PCR positivity for bcl-2 gene rearrangements can be found in healthy individuals. 142 However, patients
with lymphoma in remission who show positive results for bcl-2 gene rearrangement using PCR in the blood or bone marrow are more likely to relapse than patients
who do not have this abnormality discovered. 143 Unfortunately, some patients that are positive do not relapse and some patients that are negative do relapse. At
present, this approach is probably better considered a research tool. Planning further therapy based only on this abnormality appears risky, until the test is better
standardized and the implications of an abnormal finding are better quantified.
STAGING AND PROGNOSTIC SYSTEMS
The goal of the initial evaluation of a patient with lymphoma is to provide information that allows intelligent planning of therapy, imparting the prognosis to the patient,
and making possible comparisons between patients in clinical trials. The studies to accomplish these goals can be aimed at identifying sites of involvement,
characteristics of the patient (i.e., age, performance status, and so forth), or characteristic of the lymphoma (serum LDH, serum b 2-microglobulin, growth fraction, and
so forth) that predict treatment outcome.
The Ann Arbor Staging System was developed for patients with Hodgkin's disease. This system 144 (Table 45.3-10) identifies anatomic sites of involvement by
lymphoma and assigns patients into four categories based on the extent of disease dissemination. Patients are also subcategorized by the presence of unexplained
fevers, night sweats, or weight loss. This system has a significant effect on prognosis and is important in treatment planning.

TABLE 45.3-10. Ann Arbor Staging System

Other staging systems have been identified. 145,146 and 147 These have used anatomic stage as identified by the Ann Arbor System, symptoms, performance status,
serum LDH, serum b2-microglobulin, tumor size, number of sites of involvement, and bone marrow involvement. The bulk of lymphoma is an important prognostic
indicator whenever it has been studied. Unfortunately, there has been no consensus on how to best measure bulk. The diameter of the largest mass has been the
most common method used, but diameters of 5, 7, and 10 cm have been used by different investigators, making comparisons difficult. Even so, a greater than 10-cm
mass, regardless of anatomic stage, is a serious negative prognostic factor. These patients might benefit from adjuvant radiotherapy even if the disease is
disseminated.
At present, the most valuable and widely used system to stratify patients is the International Prognostic Index ( Table 45.3-11).148 It was developed by investigators
throughout the world for use in predicting outcome for patients with diffuse aggressive NHLs treated with an anthracycline-containing combination chemotherapy
regimen. Five features were found to have approximately an equal and independent effect on survival. These included age, serum LDH, performance status, anatomic
stage, and the number of extranodal sites. Because of the approximately equal effect on outcome, the number of abnormalities were simply summed to develop the
prognostic index. Thus, patients might have a score of 0 to 5. For patients under the age of 60, a simplified index can be applied that incorporates only anatomic
stage, serum LDH, and performance status. This system was initially developed only for patients with diffuse aggressive lymphoma. However, it is clear that it applies
to patients with almost all subtypes of NHL. 127

TABLE 45.3-11. International Prognostic Index for Diffuse Large Cell Lymphoma

RESTAGING
After patients have received three or four cycles of the planned treatment regimen or at the completion of the entire regimen, reevaluation should be done to
determine the response to therapy. For patients with diffuse aggressive lymphoma, reevaluation after three or four cycles of therapy can add prognostic information.
Patients who have a complete response are more likely to be cured than patients who have only achieved a partial response at this point. Achieving a complete
remission to therapy is the most important single prognostic factor in patients with NHL. 149 Documenting complete remission is important. It is particularly true since
salvage treatment such as high-dose therapy and autologous or allogeneic bone marrow transplantation can sometimes cure disease in patients who fail to respond
to initial therapy.
A restaging evaluation typically involves repeating all previous studies with abnormal results to document their current normal results. However, especially in sites of
bulky disease, masses do not always completely regress. This does not necessarily mean that patients will have persisting lymphoma. Rebiopsy under these
circumstances can be difficult and is not always accurate. If the patient was known to have a positive gallium scan or PET scan at the outset of treatment, a normal
result of that test despite a residual mass raises the possibility that only residual fibrous tissue is present. Gallium avidity midtreatment cycle or at the end of treatment
is associated with a much higher relapse rate than seen in patients who have negative results on gallium scanning. 140

SPECIFIC DISEASE ENTITIES
B-CELL NEOPLASMS
Precursor B-Lymphoblastic Leukemia and Lymphoma (Precursor B-Cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia/ Precursor B-Lymphoblastic Lymphoma)
DEFINITION. The definition is a neoplasm of lymphoblasts committed to the B-cell lineage, typically composed of small to medium-sized blast cells with scant

cytoplasm, moderately condensed to dispersed chromatin and indistinct nucleoli, involving bone marrow and blood (ALL), and occasionally presenting with primary
involvement of nodal or extranodal sites (lymphoblastic lymphoma).
MORPHOLOGY. On smears, lymphoblasts vary from small cells with scant cytoplasm, condensed nuclear chromatin, and indistinct nucleoli to larger cells with a

moderate amount of cytoplasm, dispersed chromatin, and multiple nucleoli. Azurophilic granules may be present. In tissue sections, the cells are small to medium
sized, with scant cytoplasm; round, oval, or convoluted nuclei; fine chromatin; and indistinct or small nucleoli. Occasional cases have larger cells. The pattern is
infiltrative rather than destructive, with partial preservation of the subcapsular sinus and germinal centers. A starry-sky pattern may be present, but this is usually less
prominent than in Burkitt's lymphoma.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. The lymphoblasts are typically positive for TdT and variably express CD19, CD22, CD20, and CD79a, as well as CD45 and CD10. The

constellation of antigens defines stages of differentiation, ranging from early precursor (membrane CD19 and CD79a and cytoplasmic CD22) to common ALL (CD10+)
to late pre-B ALL (CD20+, cytoplasmic µ heavy-chain). CD34 is expressed on 40%, and coexpression of myeloid antigens is seen in up to 30%, most commonly CD13
(14%), CD33(16%), or both.150,151 Expression of CD13 and CD33 is associated with rearrangement of ETV6 [t(12;21)(p12;q22),ETV6-CBFA2 or TEL-AML1], while
expression of CD68, CD15, and CD33 are seen in cases with 11q23/MLL abnormalities. 151
GENETIC FEATURES. Rearrangement of antigen receptor genes is variable in lymphoblastic neoplasms and may not be lineage specific; thus, precursor B-cell

neoplasms may have either or both Ig heavy-chain and TCR g or b chain gene rearrangements, or may show no rearrangements. 152,153 and 154
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is precursor B lymphoblast at varying stages of differentiation.
CLINICAL FEATURES AND THERAPY. Precursor B-ALL/lymphoblastic lymphoma occurs most frequently in childhood, with a second peak in the elderly. The outcome is

less favorable in infants less than 1 year of age and in adults. In addition to cytogenetic features, risk groups are based on age, leukocyte count, sex, and response to
therapy. In infants, many cases have translocations involving the MLL gene at 11q23, which is associated with a poor prognosis at any age 155; older children more
often have hyperdiploidy or t(12;21), which confers a better prognosis (85% to 90% long-term survival). 156 Adult precursor B-ALL is more often associated with the
poor-prognosis t(9;22) or t(v11q23), and the survival is much poorer than that for childhood cases. 150,157 Myeloid antigen expression does not seem to be an
independent prognostic factor in ALL. 151,158 Therapy is the same as described for T-lymphoblastic lymphoma.
B-Cell Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia/Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma
DEFINITION. The definition of B-CLL/SLL is a neoplasm of monomorphic, small round B lymphocytes in the peripheral blood and lymph nodes, admixed with

prolymphocytes and paraimmunoblasts in lymph nodes, usually expressing CD5 and CD23. B-SLL is defined as a tissue infiltrate with the morphology and
immunophenotype of B-CLL.
MORPHOLOGY. The lymph node infiltrate of B-CLL/SLL is composed predominantly of small lymphocytes with condensed chromatin, round nuclei, and occasionally a

small nucleolus. 159,160 Larger lymphoid cells (prolymphocytes and paraimmunoblasts) with more prominent nucleoli and dispersed chromatin are always present,
usually clustered in pseudofollicles. In some cases, the cells show moderate nuclear irregularity, which can lead to a differential diagnosis of mantle cell
lymphoma.161,162 Occasional cases show plasmacytoid differentiation.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. The tumor cells of B-CLL have faint SIgM, and most coexpress IgD. The antigen specificity of the SIg in many cases has been shown to be

against self-antigens, and these antibodies often have broad specificity, so-called cross-reactive idiotypes. 163 Cytoplasmic Ig is detectable in approximately 5% of the
cases. B-cell–associated antigens (CD19, CD20, CD79a) are positive, but particularly CD20 may be weak; tumor cells characteristically express both CD5 and
CD23.164 CD23 is particularly useful in distinguishing B-CLL/SLL from mantle cell lymphoma and should be evaluated in every case, if possible. 164
GENETIC FEATURES. Ig heavy and light-chain genes are rearranged. Most cases (75%) in early studies did not show somatic mutation of their V regions, suggesting

that they corresponded to a cell that has not yet undergone antigen selection in the germinal center. 165 However, more recent studies have found up to 40% of the
cases to have V region mutations, consistent with exposure to the germinal center. Cases with mutations are reported to express CD38 and to be associated with a
better prognosis than cases without mutations or that are CD38–. 166,167
Approximately 50% of cases have abnormal karyotypes.168 Trisomy 12 is reported in one-third of the cases with cytogenetic abnormalities 169 and correlates with
atypical histology and an aggressive clinical course. 162,170 Abnormalities of 13q are reported in up to 25% of the cases and are associated with long survival. t(11;14)
and bcl-1 gene rearrangement have been reported, 171,172 but many of these cases may be examples of leukemic mantle cell lymphoma; however, at least two clear-cut
cases of B-CLL have been reported with bcl-1 gene rearrangement, cyclin D1 overexpression, or both; in both it was associated with an unusually aggressive clinical
course. 173,174 Abnormalities of 11q23 are found in a small subset of cases and are associated with lymphadenopathy and an aggressive course. 175,176
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. Many cases of B-CLL are thought to correspond to the recirculating CD5+ CD23+ naive B cells,

177

which are found in the

peripheral blood, primary follicle, and follicle mantle zone. 178,179 It has been suggested that they are an anergic, self-reactive CD5+ B-cell subset. 180,181 Cases that
show V region mutations may correspond to a subset of peripheral blood CD5+ IgM+ B cells that appear to be memory B cells. 182
CLINICAL FEATURES. B-CLL accounts for 90% of chronic lymphoid leukemias in the United States and Europe; nonleukemic B-SLL accounts for less than 5% of NHLs.

In the International Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Classification Project, 6.7% of 1378 cases were diagnosed as B-CLL/SLL. The median age was 65 years, and 83% had
stage IV disease, 73% with bone marrow involvement. Generalized lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and extranodal infiltrates may occur. Sixty-four percent
had an International Prognostic Index score of 2/3. The 5-year overall actuarial survival was 51%, with a failure-free survival of 25%; for those patients with an
International Prognostic Index of 0/1, the overall actuarial survival was 76%, whereas for those with an International Prognostic Index of 4/5 it was only 38%. Thus, the
extent of the disease at the time of the diagnosis is the best predictor of survival; however, chromosomal abnormalities and immunophenotype may also have

prognostic importance. 183
Patients with SLL can present with hypogammaglobulinemia or develop it over the course of the illness. 184,185 The presence of hypogammaglobulinemia is associated
with an increased incidence of infections and can be managed in some patients with intermittent gamma globulin injections. Polyclonal or monoclonal
hypergammaglobulinemia can also be seen. 185,186 Autoimmune hemolytic anemias can be seen in patients with SLL 187 and are particularly likely to develop in patients
treated with fludarabine. 188 Autoimmune thrombocytopenia is not rare. 189 Autoimmune neutropenia and pure red cell aplasia are unusual. 185
THERAPY. Localized SLL is unusual and was seen in only 4% of patients in a large series. 127 The rare patient who presents in this manner could be treated with local

radiotherapy. Such patients should have their slides reviewed to make certain they do not have a MALT lymphoma.
Some patients with disseminated SLL/chronic lymphocytic leukemia have a slowly progressive or stable disorder that does not require therapy. The traditional
treatment for this lymphoma has been oral chlorambucil or oral cyclophosphamide. However, it is now clear that fludarabine is the most active single agent. Several
randomized trials have been completed. One study with 544 patients randomized received fludarabine, chlorambucil, or a combination of both drugs. Patients who
failed to respond to an individual drug were crossed over to the other arm. The overall response rate (70% vs. 43%) and complete response rate (27% vs. 3%)
favored fludarabine over chlorambucil. 190 Although progression-free survival also favored fludarabine, there was no difference in overall survival. Another randomized
trial 191,192 studied 695 patients and compared fludarabine with anthracycline-containing combinations. Fludarabine had a superior response rate. It appears that
combinations including fludarabine and cyclophosphamide are also active and might be more active than fludarabine alone. 193
Patients with SLL/chronic lymphocytic leukemia can respond to monoclonal antibody therapy using rituximab (anti-CD20) and Campath-1 (anti-CD52). However, the
response rate to rituximab appears to be on the order of 20%, perhaps because of the lower level of expression of CD20 than seen in follicular lymphoma. 194,195
Combination chemotherapy using CHOP or FND produces significant response rates in SLL, but the patients almost always relapse. High-dose therapy and
autologous transplantation 196 and allogeneic transplantation 197 have both been used in fairly small numbers of patients. It appears that allogeneic transplantation can
probably be curative. In general, principles of therapy of SLL apply to patients with lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma.
Lymphoplasmacytic Lymphoma (with or without Waldenström's Macroglobulinemia)
DEFINITION. Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma is defined as a neoplasm of small B lymphocytes, plasmacytoid lymphocytes, and plasma cells, involving bone marrow,

lymph nodes, and spleen, lacking CD5, usually with a serum monoclonal protein with hyperviscosity or cryoglobulinemia. Plasmacytoid variants of other neoplasms
are excluded. The name, lymphoplasmacytoid (REAL) has been changed to lymphoplasmacytic (WHO).
MORPHOLOGY. The tumor consists of a diffuse proliferation of small lymphocytes, plasmacytoid lymphocytes, and plasma cells, with variable numbers of

immunoblasts. In lymph nodes, sinuses are often open and may contain histiocytes reacting to secreted periodic acid–Schiff-positive Ig. In the spleen, both red and
white pulp may be infiltrated. The pattern is usually diffuse, without a distinct marginal zone or nodularity in the red pulp. The bone marrow infiltrate may be either
diffuse or nodular and is often interstitial and rather subtle. It is usually less massive than that of B-CLL and contains plasma cells and plasmacytoid cells in addition
to small lymphocytes. Peripheral blood involvement is usually less prominent than in CLL, and the cells often have a plasmacytoid appearance.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. The cells have surface and cytoplasmic (some cells) Ig, usually of IgM type, usually lack IgD, and strongly express B-cell–associated antigens

(CD19, CD20, CD22, and CD79a). The cells are CD5–, CD10–, CD23–, CD43+/–; CD25 or CD11c may be faintly positive in some cases. 164,198,199 and 200 Lack of CD5
and CD23, strong SIg and CD20, and the presence of cytoplasmic Ig are useful in distinguishing it from B-CLL.
GENETIC FEATURES. Ig heavy and light-chain genes are rearranged, and V region genes show somatic mutations, suggesting that, in contrast to B-CLL, these cells

arise from a population of B cells that have undergone antigen B–driven selection. 165,201,202 and 203 Translocation t(9;14)(p13;q32) and rearrangement of the PAX-5 gene
is reported in up to 50% of the cases. PAX-5 encodes a protein, B-cell–specific activator protein, which is important in early B-cell development. Expression of
B-cell–specific activator protein is restricted to B cells and appears to be independent of the translocation. 204
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is a peripheral B lymphocyte stimulated to differentiate to a plasma cell, possibly

corresponding to the primary immune response to antigen, or to a post–germinal center cell that has undergone somatic mutation but not heavy-chain class switch.
CLINICAL FEATURES AND THERAPY. Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma made up only 1.2% (16 of 1378) of the cases in the REAL clinical study.

126

Similar to B-CLL/SLL, the
median age was 63 years and 53% were men; most (73%) had bone marrow involvement. Sixty-nine percent had an International Prognostic Index of 2/3. Lymph
node and splenic involvement are common. A monoclonal serum paraprotein of IgM type, with or without hyperviscosity syndrome (Waldenström's
macroglobulinemia), is present in most patients 205; as with B-CLL, the paraprotein may have autoantibody or cryoglobulin activity.
Most cases of mixed cryoglobulinemia have been shown to be related to HCV infection, even in patients who have demonstrable B-cell lymphoma in the bone
marrow.206,207 Treatment of patients with HCV and cryoglobulinemia with interferon to reduce viral load has been associated with regression of the lymphoma. 208 HCV
infection has also been documented in patients with B-cell lymphoma without cryoglobulinemia, most commonly in MALT type/monocytoid B-cell lymphomas and in
lymphomas of the salivary gland and liver (two sites of chronic viral infection). 79,209,210 and 211 HCV is an RNA virus that cannot integrate into the host genome, but it
does infect lymphocytes, and viral proteins have been detected in lymphoid cells in these patients. 212 It is not clear at this point whether HCV has transforming
potential, or whether these neoplasms are antigen driven, similar to MALT type lymphomas.
The clinical course of LPL is indolent; in some European series it has been reported to be more aggressive than typical B-CLL, 213,214 but in the REAL clinical study,
5-year overall actuarial survival (58%) and failure-free survival (25%) were identical to that of CLL/SLL. 126 The traditional therapy for this disorder has been
chlorambucil with or without prednisone. 215 Anthracycline-based combination chemotherapy has not been shown to be more effective. However, fludarabine and
cladribine 216,217 are active as single agents. Combinations including fludarabine are now being studied.
Extranodal Marginal Zone B-Cell Lymphoma (Low-Grade B-Cell Lymphoma of Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid Tissue)
DEFINITION. Extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma is defined as an extranodal lymphoma consisting of heterogeneous small B cells, including marginal zone

(centrocyte-like) cells, monocytoid cells, and small lymphocytes in varying proportions, and scattered immunoblast- and centroblast-like cells, with plasma cell
differentiation in 40% of the cases. The infiltrate is in the marginal zone of reactive B-cell follicles and extends into the interfollicular region.
MORPHOLOGY. Extranodal marginal zone B-cell (MALT) lymphoma reproduces the morphologic features of normal MALT. It is characterized by a polymorphous

infiltrate of small lymphocytes, marginal zone (centrocyte-like) B cells, monocytoid B cells, and plasma cells, as well as rare large basophilic blast cells (centroblast- or
immunoblast-like). Reactive follicles are usually present, with the neoplastic marginal zone or monocytoid B cells occupying the marginal zone, the interfollicular
region, or both; occasional follicles may be colonized by marginal zone or monocytoid cells. In epithelial tissues, the marginal zone B cells typically infiltrate the
epithelium, forming so-called lymphoepithelial lesions. 218 While blast cells are typically present, they are by definition in the minority. Clusters or sheets of blasts
sufficiently large to warrant a diagnosis of large cell lymphoma are associated with a worse prognosis. In these cases, a separate diagnosis of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma should be made. The term high-grade MALT lymphoma should be avoided for large B-cell lymphomas in MALT sites, since it may lead to inappropriate
treatment with antibiotics instead of aggressive antilymphoma therapy. 130
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. The tumor cells express SIg (M greater than G greater than A), lack IgD, and 40% to 60% have monotypic cytoplasmic Ig, indicating plasmacytoid

differentiation. They express B-cell–associated antigens (CD19, CD20, CD22, CD79a) and are usually negative for CD5 and CD10. Immunophenotyping studies are
useful in confirming malignancy (light-chain restriction) and in excluding B-CLL (CD5+), mantle cell (CD5+), and follicle center (CD10+ CD43–, CD11c–, usually cIg–)
lymphomas.164,219
GENETIC FEATURES. Ig genes are rearranged, and the variable region has a high degree of somatic mutation, as well as intraclonal diversity consistent with a

post–germinal center stage of B-cell development. 220,221 and 222 Ig heavy-chain variable regions in the analyzed cases are those often found in autoantibodies,

consistent with prior studies showing that the antibodies produced by the tumor cells have specificity against self-antigens such as endothelial cells. 222 The bcl-1 and
bcl-2 genes are germline 223; trisomy 3 (60%) and t(11;18) (25% to 40%) are the most common reported cytogenetic abnormalities. 224,225 and 226 Interestingly, neither of
these abnormalities is common in primary large cell lymphomas of the gastrointestinal tract. 226,227 Analysis of the t(11;18) breakpoint has shown fusion of the
apoptosis-inhibitor gene AP12 to a novel gene at 18q21, named MLT, in two cases of MALT lymphoma.228 A gene involved in a breakpoint in MALT lymphomas with
t(1;14) has been cloned; named BCL-10, it is an apoptosis-promoting gene that in mutated form may cause cellular transformation. 229
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is a post–germinal center B memory cell with capacity to differentiate into marginal zone,

monocytoid, and plasma cells.
CLINICAL FEATURES. Extranodal marginal zone B-cell (MALT) lymphoma accounts for the majority of low-grade gastric lymphomas and almost 50% of all gastric

lymphomas230; in other sites, such as the ocular adnexa, they make up approximately 40% of the cases, 134 and they account for the majority of low-grade pulmonary
lymphomas.231 Patients are usually older adults, although they may be in their 20s and 30s. A slight female predominance has been reported in some series. 164 The
majority of patients present with localized stage I or II extranodal disease, involving glandular epithelial tissues of various sites. The stomach is the most frequent site,
but most low-grade lymphomas (and former pseudolymphomas) presenting in the lung, thyroid, salivary gland, and orbit are of this type; skin and soft tissues may also
be the presenting site. Many patients have a history of autoimmune disease, such as Sjögren's syndrome or Hashimoto's thyroiditis, or of Helicobacter gastritis in the
case of gastric MALT lymphoma. Acquired MALT secondary to autoimmune disease or infection in these sites is thought to be the substrate for lymphoma
development.232
Proliferation of the cells of marginal zone lymphoma at certain sites depends on the presence of activated, antigen-driven T cells; in gastric tumors, it has been shown
that the T cells are driven by Helicobacter pylori antigens.89 Therapy directed at the antigen ( Helicobacter pylori in gastric lymphoma) results in regression of most
early lesions. 233,234 The long-term prognosis of these patients is not known, however, and patients treated with antibiotic therapy require long and careful follow-up.
The disease known as Mediterranean abdominal lymphoma, a heavy-chain disease, and immunoproliferative small intestinal disease, which occurs in young adults in
eastern Mediterranean countries, is another example of a MALT type lymphoma that may respond to antibiotic therapy in its early stages. 235
THERAPY OF MUCOSA-ASSOCIATED LYMPHOID TISSUE LYMPHOMAS.

Nodal and Extranodal Marginal Zone B-Cell Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma (Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid Tissue). The indolent extranodal lymphomas associated with
MALT involve the gastrointestinal tract, salivary glands, breast, thyroid, orbit, conjunctiva, skin, lung, and less commonly other sites. As these diseases tend to remain
localized for long periods of time, local treatment (surgery or local or regional irradiation) is effective at long-term control of disease and provides the opportunity for
cure. In particular, low doses of radiation therapy (RT; 30 Gy) almost always control sites of disease. These doses are somewhat lower than used for patients with
localized follicular grade 1 and 2 disease. Data regarding irradiation of gastric MALT suggest that doses above 30 Gy are probably not needed. 236
The use of chemotherapy for MALT lymphomas has received limited attention as this indolent NHL does not routinely require the use of systemic treatment in patients
with early-stage disease. In one study of 24 patients with low-grade MALT treated with daily cyclophosphamide or chlorambucil for 12 to 24 months, the complete
response rate at 1 year was 75% and approximately 50% continued to be in remission at the time of the study. 237 Although these results are favorable, control of
limited disease is superior with RT, and the use of chemotherapy should be limited to patients with advanced-stage disease.
One-half or more of patients with gastric NHL have the indolent MALT type. The optimal treatment of gastric MALT lymphoma remains to be determined. Gastric
MALT lymphoma is frequently associated with chronic gastritis and H pylori infection. Based on clinical observations, it has been postulated that H pylori infection
leads to the accumulation of MALT in the stomach, and that gastric MALT lymphomas arise within this acquired MALT tissue. This has prompted speculation that
eradication of the H pylori infection might lead to tumor regression. Promising early results have been seen with the use of antibiotics for gastric MALT NHL. In one
study from the German MALT Lymphoma Group, 33 patients with low-grade MALT were treated with antibiotics. At 1-year median follow-up more than 70% of patients
remained in complete remission.238 However, in a follow-up study, 22 of 31 patients in continuous complete remission (median follow-up, 16 months) had a
monoclonal B-cell population on PCR analysis, leaving open the question of durability of complete response after antibiotics. 239 Nonetheless, the standard treatment
for patients with gastric MALT who are positive for H pylori is antibiotics and follow-up endoscopy 3 and 6 months later. Patients who have a complete response
should be followed without further treatment. Patients who have a partial response and remain H pylori positive should receive a second course of antibiotics before
proceeding to more definitive treatment.
Patients who are negative for H pylori may be less likely to respond to antibiotics than H pylori–positive patients; initial treatment of H pylori–negative patients with
antibiotics remains under study. 240 For patients who have persistent disease after antibiotics, local regional irradiation therapy is the treatment of choice. Good results
have been obtained with total or partial gastrectomy; however, this approach has been associated with long-term morbidity. Local and regional radiation through the
three-field approach (anterior and two lateral fields to minimize radiation to the left kidney) provides local control and relief of symptoms in greater than 90% of
patients. Although more information is needed, 30 Gy appears sufficient to control disease in most patients. 236
More than 80% of patients with pulmonary NHL have indolent histology; nearly 80% of these are MALT. 241 The 5-year survival of patients with pulmonary MALT is
greater than 90%. Often surgery is the initial treatment for patients with pulmonary MALT; however, development of recurrent disease is common and moderately
low-dose RT has the potential to provide durable remissions. Gastrointestinal MALT is less common than gastric MALT. Approximately 25% of patients with
gastrointestinal NHL have MALT. Few data exist on the success of treatment of these patients. The most common sites are the jejunum and the ileocecum.
Patients with MALT in the salivary glands may have a history of Sjögren's disease. Because these patients often have symptoms of mild xerostomia and low doses of
RT worsen the xerostomia, we recommend that the radiation fields be limited to the ipsilateral salivary gland region and draining nodes to spare as much of the
remaining salivary tissue as possible.
Lymphomatous involvement occurs in the orbit and in the conjunctiva with approximately equal frequency, accounting for between 5% and 14% of all extranodal
presentations. These locations should be considered individually as they are often histologically distinct and have different natural histories. Conjunctival lymphoma
tends to be localized, but may be associated with advanced disease. Due to its infiltrative nature, conjunctival lymphoma recurs with a high frequency following
surgical excision alone. Surgery is used for diagnosis, but local RT to the entire conjunctiva is the definitive treatment of choice. Treatment of conjunctival lymphoma
can be accomplished with either electrons or with photons. We generally use electrons as the lens can be protected with daily placement of a tungsten eyeshield.
Dunbar and colleagues from the Massachusetts General Hospital have recommended doses of 24 to 30 Gy for patients with conjunctival lymphoma. They saw no
local recurrences in a series of 12 patients treated with electron-beam RT. 242
CT scanning and MRI are useful for the evaluation of the extent of disease and important for radiation treatment planning when the orbit is involved. Various treatment
field arrangements can be employed depending on the location of the disease (i.e., disease limited to the anterior portion of the orbit, involving both eyes, or involving
the lacrimal glands). In treatment of orbital NHL in contrast to conjunctival NHL, it is not possible to block the lens and cataract development is more common. When
disease is unilateral, a single anterior photon field can be used to avoid dose to the contralateral eye; however, this field produces a higher anterior dose and more
dose than optimal to the lacrimal gland, resulting in a greater risk of some eye dryness. Alternatively, an anterior wedged pair can allow for better dose distribution
within the tumor and less dose to normal tissues. Doses restricted to 30 to 36 Gy controls nearly 100% of indolent NHL of the orbit while maintaining a low risk of
toxicity to the lacrimal glands and retina. With MALT lymphoma of the orbit, the dose can probably be reduced to 30 Gy.
MALT lymphomas can also be disseminated and present at an advanced stage in approximately one-third of cases. 243,244 and 245 Dissemination is usually to lymph
nodes but can involve other extranodal sites. Patients with widespread MALT lymphoma should probably be treated in a manner similar to that described for follicular
lymphoma.
Nodal Marginal Zone B-Cell Lymphoma
DEFINITION. Nodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma is defined as a primary nodal lymphoma with features identical to lymph nodes involved by MALT lymphoma, but

without evidence of extranodal disease. Monocytoid B cells may be prominent. This diagnosis should not be made in patients with MALT lymphoma at other sites,
Sjögren's syndrome, or when another low-grade B-cell lymphoma (follicular, mantle cell) is present in the same node.
MORPHOLOGY. Tumors with morphologic features identical to those described for extranodal marginal zone (MALT type) lymphoma have occasionally been reported

with isolated or disseminated nodal involvement, in the absence of extranodal disease. 246,247 Most reported cases of nodal monocytoid B-cell lymphoma have been in
patients with Sjögren's syndrome and thus represent nodal involvement by a MALT type lymphoma of the salivary gland. 248,249 Others have been reported as
composite lymphomas with other histologically low-grade lymphomas, chiefly follicular lymphoma. In these cases, however, this phenomenon represents focal
differentiation to marginal zone or monocytoid B cells and not a true composite lymphoma; these cases should be classified as follicular lymphoma (see Follicular
Lymphoma, later in this chapter). 250 Nonetheless, there are occasional cases that do not appear to be associated with other types of lymphoma. Two morphologic
types have been described: cases that resemble MALT lymphoma and cases that more closely resemble splenic marginal zone lymphoma. 251 Those that resemble
MALT lymphoma show aggregates of monocytoid B cells in a parafollicular, perivascular, and perisinusoidal distribution, with preserved germinal centers and mantle
zones. Those that resemble SMZL had infiltrates of marginal zone cells surrounding reactive follicles with germinal centers, but with attenuated mantle zones.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE AND GENETIC FEATURES. The cases that resembled splenic marginal zone lymphoma are reported to express IgD and to lack CD5, CD23, and

cyclin D1. Those that resemble MALT lymphoma are IgD– and have an immunophenotype identical to those of extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (MALT). 251
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is nodal monocytoid or marginal zone B cell.
CLINICAL FEATURES AND THERAPY. This is a rare disorder, accounting for 1% of the cases in the international study of the REAL.

126

The patients presented with

127,252
However, when peripheral and blood

isolated or generalized nodal disease; bone marrow was involved in 30%; rarely, peripheral blood may be involved.
involvement appears, it seems to have a poor prognosis. 253 The cases reported by Campo and associates were predominantly localized at the time of the diagnosis. 251
Although elderly women with vocalized disease have been reported much more frequently, the disease appears in both genders, and patients with advanced stage
are not infrequent. Transformation to large cell lymphoma occurs and has a poor prognosis. 254 Of those that resembled MALT lymphoma, 44% of those with follow-up
had an extranodal lymphoma, whereas those resembling SMZL did not. The overall and failure-free survivals appear to be similar to those of follicular or SLLs. 127 The
optimal therapy for patients with monocytoid B-cell lymphoma is not known. Patients are frequently treated with regimens that are used for follicular lymphoma.
Splenic Marginal Zone Lymphoma with or without Villous Lymphocytes
DEFINITION. Splenic marginal zone lymphoma is defined as a neoplasm of small B lymphocytes that surround and replace splenic white pulp germinal centers, merging

with an outer marginal zone of larger cells with pale cytoplasm admixed with large transformed blasts; both small and large cells infiltrate red pulp, often with villous
lymphocytes in the peripheral blood. 255
MORPHOLOGY. In the spleen, the neoplastic cells occupy both the mantle and marginal zone of the splenic white pulp, usually with a central residual germinal center,

which may be either atrophic or hyperplastic. 219,235,256 Both the mantle and marginal zones are expanded. The cells in the mantle zone are small, with slight nuclear
irregularity and scant cytoplasm, while those in the marginal zone have more dispersed chromatin and abundant pale cytoplasm, resembling marginal zone cells, and
are admixed with centroblasts and immunoblasts. The red pulp is also involved, with both a diffuse and micronodular pattern and sinus infiltration. Epithelioid
histiocytes may be present singly or in clusters and, particularly in the bone marrow, may give rise to the differential diagnosis of an infectious process. Splenic hilar
lymph nodes are often involved; the neoplastic cells form vague nodules, often without a central germinal center, and a marginal zone pattern may or may not be
present. 257 Sinuses are often open. The marrow usually contains discrete lymphoid aggregates, without a marginal zone pattern, with or without diffuse lymphoid
infiltration. When tumor cells are present in the peripheral blood they often have abundant cytoplasm with small surface villous projections or may appear
plasmacytoid.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. The tumor cells are IgM+, IgD+, CD5–, CD10–, CD43–, CD23–, express B-cell antigens (CD19, CD20, CD22) and bcl-2, and lack CD11c and

CD25.235,258 In the majority of cases, lack of CD5 serves to distinguish this disorder from B-CLL, and lack of CD103 and CD25 are useful in distinguishing it from hairy
cell leukemia. The cells are cyclin D1 negative by immunoperoxidase staining. 259
GENETIC FEATURES. Analysis of the Ig variable region genes indicates a high degree of somatic mutation, consistent with a post–germinal center stage of B-cell

development.260 More recently, ongoing mutations of V region genes, similar to germinal center cells, has been reported. 261 Bcl-2 is germline. Early reports that
t(11;14)(q13;132), bcl-1 rearrangement, and cyclin D1 overexpression were common are now thought to have reflected inclusion of cases of leukemic mantle cell
lymphoma.262,263 Trisomy 3, found in nodal and extranodal marginal zone lymphoma, is detected in only a small number of cases. 224,264
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is post–germinal center, memory B cell of splenic type.
CLINICAL FEATURES AND THERAPY. Splenic marginal zone lymphoma accounts for only 1% to 2% of chronic lymphoid leukemia found on bone marrow examination, but

up to 25% of low-grade B-cell neoplasms in splenectomy specimens. 235,256,265,266 It may make up the majority of chronic B-cell leukemia and low-grade splenic
lymphomas that do not fit the defining criteria of B-CLL, lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, mantle cell lymphoma, follicular lymphoma, or hairy cell leukemia. Patients
typically present with weakness, fatigue, or symptoms related to splenomegaly. 267 Physical examination revealed splenomegaly in almost all patients, hepatomegaly in
up to 40% of patients, but lymphadenopathy is rare. 267 Lymphocytosis is a uniform finding, but extreme lymphocytosis is unusual. Anemia and thrombocytopenia are
present in a minority of patients. In some series more than one-half of the patients have been shown to have a monoclonal Ig. 267 Although most commonly seen in
elderly men, the disease can be seen in both genders and in young patients. 267,268 and 269 Although the disease is usually confined to the spleen, bone marrow, and
blood, unusual sites of involvement such as leukemic meningitis 270 have been described.
Most patients have an indolent course and require no immediate therapy or respond to splenectomy. 267,269,271 However, transformation to a large cell lymphoma with
an aggressive course can be seen in some patients. 267,272 For patients in whom splenectomy is inappropriate, splenic radiation can be an alternative. 267,269 Oral
alkylating agents appear to be marginally effective. 269 One report described four patients who achieved a complete remission with fludarabine. 273
Follicular Lymphoma
DEFINITION. Follicular lymphoma is a lymphoma of follicle center B cells (centrocytes and centroblasts), which has at least a partially follicular pattern.
MORPHOLOGY. The tumor is composed of follicle center cells, usually a mixture of centrocytes (cleaved follicle center cells) and centroblasts (large noncleaved follicle

center cells). Centrocytes typically predominate; centroblasts are usually in the minority, but by definition are always present. Rare lymphomas with a follicular growth
pattern consist almost entirely of centroblasts. Occasional cases may show plasmacytoid differentiation or foci of marginal zone or monocytoid B cells. 254 The
proportion of centroblasts varies from case to case, and the clinical aggressiveness of the tumor increases with increasing numbers of centroblasts. Numerous criteria
have been proposed for grading follicular lymphoma. The WHO Classification is adopting the cell-counting method of Mann and Berard ( Table 45.3-12).130,274 In
addition to typical follicular lymphoma, two variants are recognized whose relationship to follicular lymphoma remains controversial: cutaneous follicle center
lymphoma and diffuse follicle center lymphoma.

TABLE 45.3-12. Follicular and Mantle Cell Lymphomas: Grading and Variants

IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. The tumor cells of follicle center lymphoma are usually SIg+; approximately 50% to 60% express IgM; approximately 40% express IgG; and rare

cases express IgA. The tumor cells express pan-B-cell–associated antigens, approximately 60% are CD10+, and they are CD5–, CD23–/+, CD43– (most cases), and
CD11c–. Tightly organized mesh works of FDCs are present in follicular areas. 198,275 Most cases are bcl-2+, and nuclear bcl-6 is expressed by at least some of the
neoplastic cells. 276,277 The Ki-67+ fraction is lower than that of reactive follicles.
GENETICS. Ig heavy and light-chain genes are rearranged, and analysis of the Ig variable region genes shows that most cases have extensive somatic mutations and

a high frequency of intraclonal diversity, indicating ongoing mutations, similar to normal germinal center cells. 278,279 t(14;18) and bcl-2 gene rearrangement are present
in the majority of the cases.
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is germinal center B cells, both centrocytes (small cleaved follicular center cells) and

centroblasts (large noncleaved follicular center cells).
CLINICAL FEATURES. Follicular lymphoma is the second most common lymphoma in the United States and western Europe, accounting for 20% of all NHLs and up to

70% of low-grade lymphomas reported in American and European clinical trials. 7,126 Thus, our understanding of the clinical features and response to treatment of
low-grade lymphoma is essentially that of follicular lymphoma. Follicular lymphoma affects predominantly older adults, with a slight female predominance. 126,280 Most
patients have widespread disease at diagnosis, usually predominantly lymph nodes, but also spleen, bone marrow, and occasionally peripheral blood or extranodal
sites. Despite the advanced stage, the clinical course is generally indolent, with median survivals in excess of 8 years; however, the disease is not usually curable
with available treatment. In the international study of the REAL, the few patients (7%) with International Prognostic Index scores of 4/5 have a much worse prognosis,
with a median survival of only 1 year. 126 In that study, cases with monocytoid B-cell differentiation had a worse prognosis than other cases. 250
THERAPY OF LOCALIZED FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA. There are a number of questions regarding RT and follicular grade 1 and 2 NHL. Is follicular grade 1 and 2 NHL

curative with RT alone? (Yes.) What is the frequency of recurrence after 10 years? (Only approximately 10%.) Are there prognostic factors for recurrence? (Yes, age
is the most influential.) What is the extent and dose of RT needed? What are the late effects of treatment? What is the role of CT in early-stage low-grade NHL? Many
published studies have demonstrated the efficacy of RT in the treatment of clinically staged patients with localized follicular small cleaved cell NHL. Patients with
early-stage disease are curable with local regional irradiation. The updated series from Stanford University details the results of RT in 177 patients treated from 1961
to 1994. 281 Out of 177 patients, 73 were stage I and 104 had stage II disease. Staging laparotomy was performed in 25% of patients and 20% of patients had
extranodal presentations. Total nodal irradiation (TLI) and subtotal nodal irradiation were given to 41 patients, and involved-field or extended-field irradiation was
delivered to 133 patients. Staging laparotomy and TLI were used in the early years of the study. Histology was follicular grade 1 in 57% of cases and follicular grade 2
to 3 in 43% of patients. The median follow-up was 7.7 years. The 10-year, 15-year, and 20-year survivals were 64%, 44%, and 35%, respectively. The 10-year,
15-year, and 20-year disease-free survivals were 44%, 40%, and 37%, respectively. Only 5 of 47 patients in remission for 10 years or longer have relapsed at longer
intervals. This study demonstrates that a substantial percentage of patients with early-stage follicular small cleaved cell NHL never have recurrence of disease
following local regional irradiation.
Several other series using local regional radiation demonstrate similar results and are shown in Table 45.3-13. All the series demonstrate greater than a 40% freedom
from treatment failure at 10 years. Median survival ranges from 13 to 16 years in the studies. Prognostic factors for relapse were analyzed. 281,282,283,284 and 285 Age in all
studies was a significant adverse factor for relapse. Although most studies use age under and over 60, the British National Lymphoma Investigation (BNLI) study
found no difference in relapse for patients in their 50s or 60s and only age 70 or greater was an adverse factor. 284 Other significant but less important prognostic
factors for increasing recurrence risk include extranodal disease, female gender, and stage II disease. There appears to be little difference in outcome between
follicular grade 1 and follicular grade 2 disease.

TABLE 45.3-13. Radiation Therapy Alone for Early-Stage, Low-Grade Follicular Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma

The techniques of RT (field arrangement and size and dose) in the treatment of NHL are guided by the histologic subtype, the stage of disease, and the patterns of
failure. Early-stage indolent lymphomas treated with RT alone have been shown to relapse in extranodal sites or in nodal sites distant from the radiation fields when
involved-field or extended-field RT has been used. This observation led some to recommend TLI for patients with follicular small cleaved cell NHL. Several factors,
however, argue against the use of such extensive RT for patients with early-stage indolent disease. On multivariant analysis, for patients with stage I to II disease,
there is no evidence that the use of extended-field or TLI provided for a survival advantage compared with involved-field or regional irradiation in the Stanford study.
There are concerns for increased toxicity with larger RT fields and the possibility that subsequent treatment, if needed, will be compromised as more than 50% of
stage I to II patients eventually develop a recurrence and require more aggressive treatment. In addition, there is a high conversion rate of follicular small cleaved cell
NHL to a more aggressive histology over time, requiring treatment with chemotherapy. 286,287 Prior treatment with TLI may compromise marrow reserve and limit
subsequent multiagent chemotherapy given either for recurrent indolent NHL or for NHL transformed to a more aggressive histology. Also, there appears to be an
increased risk of late complications including second cancers with large-field irradiation. 281
There are no large prospective or randomized studies evaluating the dose and field size of RT for patients with stage I to II follicular small cleaved cell NHL. However,
most centers use radiation doses between 30 and 40 Gy, and either involved-field irradiation or regional fields. Current recommendations include the use of regional
RT fields. This consists of irradiating the involved nodal region plus one additional uninvolved region on each side of the involved nodes. For example, the treatment
field for lymphoma of the inguinal nodes would include the ipsilateral femoral, inguinal, and external iliac nodes. The treatment of a stage I lymphoma of the right
supraclavicular nodes would include the ipsilateral axilla, supraclavicular, and cervical nodes. The cervical, supraclavicular, oropharyngeal, and nasopharyngeal
nodes would be irradiated in patients with involvement of Waldeyer's ring. The recommended dose for patients with follicular small cleaved cell NHL is 3000 to 3600
cGy, with a boost to areas of initial involvement to 36 to 40 Gy. When there is a possibility of significant morbidity from treatment, such as long-term xerostomia from
irradiation of the salivary glands, lower doses to the uninvolved nodal areas are recommended (i.e., 25 to 30 Gy).
The role of combination chemotherapy in the management of early-stage follicular lymphoma is unclear. At least three randomized studies conducted in the 1970s
failed to demonstrate that non–adriamycin-containing combination chemotherapy regimens plus RT were superior to RT alone. 288,289 and 290 A more recent BNLI study
randomized 148 patients to receive either RT alone or RT plus chlorambucil chemotherapy. 291 There were no differences in freedom from recurrence or survival
between the groups. A single-arm study of 91 stage I and II patients treated at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center with cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisone
(COP) or cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone-bleomycin (CHOP-Bleo) chemotherapy in addition to RT demonstrated an improved freedom
from recurrence compared with historic controls but no overall survival differences. 292,293 In part, the choice of therapy may lie in the careful assessment of prognostic
factors. Most patients with Ann Arbor clinical stage I or II follicular small cleaved cell and follicular mixed lymphomas should have a good prognosis following local
regional RT alone. For patients whose prognosis is less certain, such as patients with stage II disease with multiple sites of involvement or bulky nodes, or patients
with follicular large cell histology, chemotherapy followed by involved-field irradiation may provide more durable remissions.

THERAPY OF DISSEMINATED FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA. The optimal treatment strategy for patients with advanced-stage follicular lymphoma is controversial.

294

Treatment
has followed one of two divergent approaches: an aggressive approach that may include extensive RT, combination chemotherapy, or both; and a conservative
approach that consists of no initial treatment followed by a palliative single-agent chemotherapy or involved-field radiotherapy when treatment is needed. Although
many years of clinical investigation have failed to prove that immediate aggressive therapy improves survival compared with conservative therapy, 294 the median
survival of only 7 to 8 years from diagnosis in patients with stage III and IV disease has prompted the continuation of aggressive treatment approaches. 295,296 and 297
Despite the indolent nature of the follicular lymphomas, most patients ultimately die of their disease. Of 147 previously untreated patients enrolled at St.
Bartholomew's Hospital in various protocols, ranging from no initial therapy to conservative treatment with single alkylating agents, only 53 of 147 patients remain
alive; 94 patients have died, and only 18 patients died from causes unrelated to lymphoma. 296
RT in the treatment of patients with stage III and IV follicular lymphoma serves two roles, as palliative treatment and as part of a potentially curative approach in
clinical trials. RT has much to offer as a palliative approach. For patients with isolated disease that has returned after remission or has not responded as well as other
sites to chemotherapy, involved-field irradiation can allow for patients to go significant periods of time without the need for additional combination therapy. In addition,
follicular lymphoma can produce troubling symptoms through bone or spine involvement, through pressure on peripheral nerves, by disfigurement via large neck or
axillary nodes, by intraorbital involvement, and through many other mechanisms. Follicular lymphoma is sensitive to RT, and often nodes resistant to chemotherapy
begin to shrink after four to five radiation treatments. Sometimes even a large volume of lymph nodes can be encompassed because the low doses of radiation
needed results in minimal toxicity to normal tissues.
As a curative approach, TLI combined with chemotherapy has been used for the treatment of stage III patients in past studies. McLaughlin and colleagues reported on
the use of CHOP chemotherapy and TLI in 74 patients with follicular lymphomas. The relapse-free survival at 5 years was 52%. This study did not provide sufficient
evidence that patients were cured with this approach. 298 The National Cancer Institute initiated a prospective randomized study comparing conservative treatment (no
initial therapy) with aggressive combined modality therapy with ProMACE/MOPP chemotherapy followed by low-dose (24 Gy) total lymphoid RT. 299 Eighty-nine
patients were randomized. The disease-free survival was significantly higher in the combined modality therapy group at 4 years (51% vs. 12%); however, no
differences in overall survival were seen. As these studies have failed to show a survival advantage for an initial aggressive approach in the management of patients
with advanced-stage indolent lymphomas, new high-dose chemotherapy approaches are being developed that for the most part do not include the use of TLI.
When a decision is made to treat a patient with disseminated follicular lymphoma using cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents, a wide variety of choices is available.
These include single-agent chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide, or fludarabine, or popular combination chemotherapy regimens such as cyclophosphamide, vincristine,
and prednisone (CVP), CHOP, and fludarabine, mitoxantrone, and dexamethasone (FND). Each of these approaches produces objective responses in a high
proportion of patients with previously untreated follicular lymphoma. 300,301,302,303 and 304 In general, complete responses occur more rapidly with combination
chemotherapy regimens, but it is unclear that the ultimate treatment result is superior with combinations. Approximately 20% of complete responders remain in
remission for longer than 10 years. 294
Patients with follicular lymphoma who are followed without therapy sometimes have spontaneous regressions that can be complete. 305 Spontaneous regressions
appear most frequently in patients with predominantly follicular small cleaved cell lymphoma and least frequently in patients with follicular large cell lymphoma.
Interferon-a has long been known to be an active drug in the treatment of patients with follicular lymphoma and has an objective response rate of 30% to 55% when
used as a single agent with relapsed disease. 306,307 and 308 The value of adding interferon to standard combination chemotherapy regimens has been tested in a number
of clinical trials. 309,310,311,312,313,314,315 and 316 The dose and duration of administration of interferon-a varied among these studies. A significant increase in remission
duration was observed in several studies, 311,312 and 313,315,316 and a prolongation of survival was found in one setting. 312 A metaanalysis of eight of the randomized trials
incorporating 1756 patients has been initially reported. 317 This analysis found an improvement in overall survival in patients who received an anthracycline-containing
chemotherapy regimen and received a dose of interferon of at least 36 MU/month.
The activity of rituximab in patients with relapsed follicular lymphoma has led to its incorporation into the initial treatment and has produced encouraging results. 318
Use of the radiolabeled monoclonal antibody tositumomab in previously untreated patients has also been reported to produce a high complete response rate. Two
trials of autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation incorporated in the primary therapy of patients with follicular lymphoma have reported high complete
response rates, but the observation period is too short to know if a subset of these patients will be cured. 319,320
The importance of determining what has been called a molecular response in patients receiving primary therapy for follicular lymphoma has been studied. A molecular
response refers to disappearance of previously apparent bcl-2 gene rearrangements detected by the PCR in the blood or bone marrow. Most studies have found a
better disease-free survival in patients achieving a molecular remission. 321,322 and 323 At the present time, determining the molecular response is an important research
tool, but since prolonged remissions have been reported in patients who are persistently positive 321 the practical clinical utility of this measurement is uncertain.
The subdivision of patients with follicular lymphoma into those with predominantly small cells (follicular small cleaved cell), those with an intermediate number of small
and large cells (follicular mixed), and those with more large cells (follicular large cell) is difficult. 126 However, even considering the imprecision of the distinction,
patients classified as follicular large cell lymphoma have a shorter remission duration and overall survival than patients with the other subtypes. 126 The incorporation
of an anthracycline into the initial treatment regimen seems to be more important in patients with follicular large cell lymphoma. 302,324,325 A subset of patients with
follicular large cell lymphoma who receive an intensive chemotherapy regimen can achieve long-term disease-free survival. 326
SALVAGE THERAPY. Most patients with follicular lymphoma, despite complete response to initial chemotherapy, relapse and are candidates for salvage treatment.

However, unlike the situation with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma or other aggressive NHLs, patients with relapsed follicular lymphoma do not necessarily pursue an
aggressive course. In an asymptomatic patient, particularly if the patient is elderly, observation without treatment can be an acceptable option. In a patient with
follicular lymphoma who relapses with transformation to a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, however, treatment is almost always indicated. The majority of patients with
follicular lymphoma undergoes transformation to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. This transformation is clinically recognized in approximately 40% of patients, but
present in autopsy in almost 100% of patients. 327 The clinical manifestations of histologic transformation to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma typically include rapidly
progressive lymphadenopathy (i.e., often localized); the development of new symptoms such as fevers, night sweats, weight loss, and pain; or both. In general,
histologic transformation to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma has a poor prognosis and frequently a rapidly fatal outcome. However, some patients can have complete
responses to salvage chemotherapy regimens and achieve durable complete remissions. 328 These patients are typically left with persisting follicular lymphoma.
A wide variety of second-line chemotherapy regimens has been used in patients with follicular lymphoma. In addition to repeating standard front-line regimen, purine
analogues such as fludarabine 329 and cladribine 330 are often used. However, even when the initial therapy is repeated, patients with follicular lymphoma often
respond. In one series using chlorambucil, the response rate was 68% for the second course of therapy in contrast to 70% in the initial treatment. 331,332
A variety of other treatment approaches has been used in patients with relapsed follicular lymphoma. Interferon-a used as a single agent has a 30% to 55% response
rate.306,307 and 308 The monoclonal antibody rituximab produces objective responses in 35% to 50% of patients with relapsed follicular lymphoma. 333 Radiolabeled
antibodies also directed against CD20 have even higher response rates in patients with relapsed follicular lymphoma. 334,335 Other treatments such as use of antisense
molecules336 and tumor vaccines 337 have also been shown to produce objective responses.
Both autologous and allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantations have been used for patients with relapsed follicular lymphoma. Both purged 338,339 and
unpurged 340,341 autologous stem cell products have been used. The value of purging, particularly when blood stem cell products are used, remains uncertain.
Autologous transplantation in patients with relapsed follicular lymphoma produces remissions durable for 5 years in approximately 50% of patients who are
transplanted at the time of initial treatment failure. 339,340 and 341 Patients transplanted after multiple treatment failures have a poorer outcome. Use of allogeneic bone
marrow transplantation is associated with a much higher treatment-related mortality and a lower relapse rate. 342
Mantle Cell Lymphoma
DEFINITION. A mantle cell lymphoma is a neoplasm of monomorphous small to medium-sized B cells with irregular nuclei, which resemble the cleaved cells

(centrocytes) of germinal centers and overexpress cyclin D1; neoplastic transformed cells (centroblasts or immunoblasts) are absent. Tumor cells are typically CD5+

CD23–.
MORPHOLOGY. The pattern of mantle cell lymphoma may be either diffuse, nodular, or mantle zone, or a combination of the three. Some reports indicate a better

prognosis for cases with a mantle zone pattern. 343 Most cases are composed exclusively of small to medium-sized lymphoid cells, with slightly irregular or cleaved,
nuclei; however, the morphology in various cases can range from lymphocyte-like to large cleaved or lymphoblast-like. 160,164,344,345 and 346 Despite the small size and
bland appearance, there is often more mitotic activity than in other histologically low-grade lymphomas. Single epithelioid histiocytes may be present, but clusters and
granulomas are not seen. Transformed cells with basophilic cytoplasm (centroblast- or immunoblast-like cells) are extremely rare or absent.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. The tumor cells express strong SIgM and IgD, which is often of l light-chain type, strongly express B-cell–associated antigens, and coexpress

CD5, similar to B-CLL/SLL, but are CD23–. Rare cases may be CD5– or CD23+. 363,363a In contrast to follicle center lymphoma, mantle cell lymphoma are usually
CD10– and CD43+. A prominent, irregular mesh work of FDCs is found, even in diffuse cases. 164,198,275 The product of the cyclin D1 gene can be detected in the nuclei
of neoplastic mantle cells in paraffin-embedded tissue sections with the immunoperoxidase technique and is useful in distinguishing mantle cell lymphoma from other
low-grade B-cell lymphomas.173,347
GENETIC FEATURES. Ig heavy and light-chain genes are rearranged. The Ig V region genes lack somatic mutations, indicating a pre–germinal center stage of

differentiation, consistent with an origin from the follicle mantle. 348 A t(11;14) in the majority of the cases results in overexpression of a gene known as PRAD1 or
cyclin D1, which encodes a cell-cycle–associated protein that is not normally expressed in lymphoid cells. 173,349,350 The protein is overexpressed even in cases lacking
the t(11;14), suggesting that point mutations may also result in overexpression. 351,352 Overexpression of this protein may explain the often high mitotic index and
aggressive clinical course of this histologically low-grade lymphoma. Studies have shown abnormalities in expression of other genes associated with the cell cycle,
including mutations of the cdk inhibitors p16 and p17 in blastoid variants and decreased expression of p27, another cdk inhibitor, in the majority of the cases. 353 Cases
of the blastoid variant have been reported to have a high incidence of tetraploidy and p53 gene mutations. 354,355 and 356 Acquisition of a myc translocation has been
reported in some fatal cases. 357
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. Mantle cell lymphoma corresponds to a naive B cell of follicle mantle or germinal center origin that is distinct from both the

recirculating B cell of B-CLL/SLL and the later centrocyte of follicle center lymphomas. 179,198
Clinical Features. Mantle cell lymphoma accounts for approximately 7% of adult NHLs in the United States and Europe. 126,160 In a review of 376 cases of disseminated
low-grade lymphoma (Working Formulation categories A through E), mantle cell lymphoma made up 10% of the cases. 358 It is a tumor of older adults, with a marked
male predominance (75%).126 The majority (70%) of patients are in stage IV at diagnosis; sites involved include lymph nodes, spleen, Waldeyer's ring, bone marrow
(greater than 60%), blood (up to 50%), and extranodal sites, especially the gastrointestinal tract (lymphomatous polyposis). 359 The course is moderately aggressive.
The median overall survival in most series is 3 years, with no plateau in the curve, and failure-free survival is around 1 year. 127 The blastoid variant is reported in
some studies to be more aggressive. 126,358,360,361,362 and 363
THERAPY. Since mantle cell lymphoma was widely accepted as an entity in only the last decade, the number of therapeutic trials are not as extensive as for some

other types of NHL. Localized mantle cell lymphoma is quite rare, seen in only 13% of unselected patients in one large series. 127 The failure-free survival of patients
treated for localized mantle cell lymphoma is quite poor, suggesting that unrecognized dissemination was usually present. The optimal treatment for these patients is
not known.
Most patients present with disseminated disease. Single-agent chemotherapy has been used less commonly than in other small cell lymphomas, with chlorambucil,
fludarabine, and cladribine being the most commonly used agents. The most frequently used combination regimens have been CVP and CHOP. Overall response
rates have ranged between 60% and 80% and complete response rates between 30% and 60%. A randomized trial comparing CVP and CHOP showed no significant
difference in overall survival (84% vs. 88%) and failure-free survival (41% vs. 58%). 360 A new chemotherapy regimen that was originally used for patients with
leukemia called hyper-CVAD (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, dexamethasone, and doxorubicin) has been used in mantle cell lymphoma and has a high response
rate.364 In an historic control study from M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, hyper-CVAD had a superior 3-year event-free survival to CHOP (72% vs. 28%). 364
Because of the poor long-term outlook, patients with mantle cell lymphoma who are sufficiently young and healthy often undergo autologous or allogeneic bone
marrow transplantation at best response. 365,366,367 and 368 The long-term benefits of autologous and allogeneic transplantation are still uncertain, although long-term
survivors with both approaches are reported. Patients who relapse and are not candidates for transplantation or those who relapse can be treated with rituximab and
interferon.
Monoclonal antibody therapy for patients with mantle cell lymphoma has been attempted with rituximab. 369 The antibody yielded a response rate of 33% in relapsed
patients. Further trials will be necessary to define the place of rituximab in the management of patients with mantle cell lymphoma. Interferon-a has been used in the
treatment of mantle cell lymphoma. In one randomized trial including 47 patients with mantle cell lymphoma, 22 patients received interferon and 25 patients did not. 370
The disease-free survival was 47% for the patients receiving interferon and 27% for the patients observed without therapy. However, the number of patients and the
period of follow-up were not long enough to reach a firm conclusion.
Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma
DEFINITION. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is defined as a neoplasm of large, transformed B cells with prominent nucleoli and basophilic cytoplasm, with a diffuse

growth pattern and a high (greater than 40%) proliferation fraction. The cells may resemble centroblasts, immunoblasts, multilobated cells, or anaplastic large cells.
Rare cases contain only scattered large cells in a background of small T cells and epithelioid histiocytes (T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma).
MORPHOLOGY. Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas are probably a heterogeneous group of neoplasms. They are typically composed of large cells that resemble

centroblasts or immunoblasts, most often with a mixture of the two. Several morphologic variants can be recognized, but their clinical significance is debated ( Table
45.3-14).

TABLE 45.3-14. Morphologic Variants and Subtypes of Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma

Centroblastic Variant. The monomorphic centroblastic (large noncleaved cell) type is composed of medium to large lymphoid cells with oval to round vesicular nuclei
with fine chromatin and two to four membrane-bound nucleoli. The cytoplasm is generally scanty and amphophilic to basophilic. The multilobated centroblastic type
contains many large lymphoid cells with nuclei having more than three lobes. A polymorphic type shows a mixture of centroblasts and immunoblasts and may contain
up to 90% immunoblasts.

Immunoblastic Variant. Approximately 10% of the cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas have over 90% immunoblasts with a prominent central nucleolus and
abundant, basophilic cytoplasm. Plasmacytoid differentiation may be present. These cases are more common in immunosuppressed patients. In
nonimmunosuppressed patients, they have been reported to carry a worse prognosis. 371
Anaplastic Variant. In some cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, the cells are identical to those of T/null anaplastic large cell lymphoma and strongly express
CD30 (Ki-1) as well as T-cell antigens. Although these have been called B-cellanaplastic large cell lymphoma (B-ALCL), they do not have the same distinctive clinical
or genetic features of T/null-ALCL and are considered a morphologic variant of large B-cell lymphoma in the REAL/WHO classifications. The most significant
differential diagnostic problem presented by such cases is with classical Hodgkin's disease expressing B-cell antigens.
T-Cell–Rich/Histiocyte-Rich Large B-Cell Lymphoma. Some cases of large B-cell lymphoma have a prominent background of reactive T cells and often histiocytes,
so-called T-cell or histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma. They may resemble Hodgkin's disease of either lymphocyte predominance or mixed cellularity type. 372,373 In
contrast to those with Hodgkin's disease, patients with T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma typically present with disseminated disease involving the liver and
spleen and have a poor survival. The relationship of this disease to lymphocyte-predominance, classical Hodgkin's disease, or both remains to be elucidated.
Large B-Cell Lymphoma, Lymphomatoid Granulomatosis Type. The entity described as lymphomatoid granulomatosis, which had been thought to be related to nasal
or angiocentric lymphoma, has been shown in most cases to be an EBV+ large B-cell lymphoma with a T-cell–rich background. 374,375,376 and 377 The infiltrates show
extensive necrosis, often with only a few atypical large B cells in a background of lymphocytes; the infiltrate may be both angiocentric and angioinvasive. Patients
typically present with extranodal disease, most commonly involving lung, brain, kidneys, or all three. Evidence of past or present immunosuppression may be found.
Although the infiltrates may resemble those of nasal or angiocentric lymphoma, there is no biologic and little clinical overlap, since the latter is an NK cell or T-cell
neoplasm that involves the upper airway and midfacial region, skin, and sometimes the gastrointestinal tract, and rarely the lung or CNS.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas express one or more B-cell–associated antigens (CD19, CD20, CD22, CD79a), as well as CD45, and often but

not always, surface Ig. They may coexpress CD5 or CD10. 198,378 Twenty-five percent to 80% in various studies express bcl-2 protein, and this may be associated with
a worse prognosis.379,380,381,382 and 383 Approximately 70% express bcl-6 protein, consistent with a germinal center origin 382,383; this expression is independent of bcl-6
gene rearrangement.
GENETIC FEATURES. Most cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas have somatic mutations in the Ig variable region genes.

182,384
The bcl-2 gene is rearranged in 15%

to 30% of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas; it is associated with nodal and disseminated disease, but is not associated with either a worse prognosis or with bcl-2
expression. 379 The c-myc gene is rearranged in 5% to 15%, 385,386 and the bcl-6 gene is rearranged in 20% to 40% of cases 386,387 and shows mutations in the 5'
noncoding region in 70%. 388,389 Both the 5' noncoding mutations of the bcl-6 gene 390 and the Ig variable region gene mutations are found in normal germinal center
cells391; their presence in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas is consistent with a germinal center or post–germinal center stage of differentiation.
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is proliferating peripheral B cells, centroblasts or immunoblasts in most cases.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS. For large B-cell lymphoma, as for most of the aggressive lymphomas, the major differential diagnosis is with a nonlymphoid tumor, including

poorly differentiated carcinoma, germ cell tumor, glioma, melanoma, or sarcoma. Clinically, when patients present with lymphadenopathy, lymphoma is often at the top
of the differential diagnosis, but in extranodal sites, lymphoma may not be suspected. Clinical features that tend to favor lymphoma in extranodal sites include the
presence of multiple, noncontiguous lesions, characteristic radiographic findings (e.g., permeative lesions in bone, ring-enhancing lesions in the CNS), involvement of
lymphoid organs, and systemic symptoms such as fever and weight loss.
Histologically, the most important factor in establishing the diagnosis is a high index of suspicion and a recognition of the morphologic spectrum of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma. In this differential diagnosis, immunoperoxidase stains on paraffin sections are usually definitive; however, a panel of several antibodies must be used
(e.g., cytokeratin, EMA, CD45, pan-B and pan-T antigens, Ig light-chains, and if relevant, S-100 and HMB-45).
CLINICAL FEATURES. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma was the most common lymphoma in the international study of the REAL, accounting for 31% of the cases. Patients

typically present with a rapidly enlarging symptomatic mass, with B symptoms in one-third of the cases. 126,127 Localized (stage I or II) extranodal disease occurs in up
to 30%; bone marrow involvement was seen in only 16%. Up to 40% of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas are extranodal; common sites include the gastrointestinal tract,
bone, and CNS. The prognosis was highly associated with the International Prognostic Index score, 127 but not with histologic subclassification according to either the
Working Formulation or the Kiel Classification. Large B-cell lymphoma may occur as a high-grade transformation of several low-grade B-cell lymphomas (B-CLL,
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, follicular lymphoma, MALT lymphoma, splenic marginal zone lymphoma). Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of certain extranodal sites,
such as the CNS, may be clinically distinctive and may have specific treatment protocols.
THERAPY OF LOCALIZED DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA. Patients with localized diffuse large B-cell lymphoma often have extranodal disease. It now appears that

patients with localized extranodal lymphoma might have a better outcome than seen for patients with equal stage nodal lymphoma. 282 This might be related to an
occult MALT origin of the large cell lymphoma in some of these patients. The data are clearest for gastric lymphomas.
Before 1980, RT was the primary treatment for patients with localized diffuse large cell lymphoma. Approximately 50% of patients with stage I and 20% of patients with
stage II disease were alive without recurrence at 5 years. 392,393 Among the patients who had recurrences, 15% to 20% were within the radiation field; the remainder
were in distant sites. Early randomized trials, published in the 1980s, compared RT alone with RT followed by CVP or BACOP chemotherapy. 288,289,394 These studies
demonstrated a disease-free and overall survival advantage for combined CT and RT. This dramatically changed the treatment of localized large cell lymphoma.
Staging laparotomy and large-field RT became obsolete as combination chemotherapy with or without RT produced disease-free and overall survival rates equivalent
to or better than those seen even in the most selected studies reporting results with RT alone.
New clinical trials were then initiated to evaluate the role of RT as adjuvant to chemotherapy in patients with stage I or II diffuse large cell lymphoma. Small
retrospective studies had advocated chemotherapy alone 395,396 or combined chemotherapy and RT.397,398 and 399 Several centers reported excellent results using
reduced chemotherapy and involved-field irradiation. At the National Cancer Institute, more than 90% of the 49 stage I or IE patients with diffuse large cell lymphoma
treated with four cycles of ProMACE-MOPP (cyclophosphamide, etoposide, doxorubicin, nitrogen mustard, vincristine, procarbazine, high-dose methotrexate with
leucovorin rescue and prednisone) at reduced doses (75% of normal) followed by involved-field RT to 40 Gy remained disease free. 399 In a similar study from
Vancouver 78 patients were treated with three cycles of CHOP chemotherapy followed by involved-field RT to a total dose of 30 to 45 Gy; at 3 years the disease-free
survival was 84%.400 Both studies excluded patients with bulky disease (greater than 10 cm). In a third study, which included some patients with bulky disease, 183
patients treated with four cycles of CHOP and 40 to 44 Gy involved-field RT have 5-year relapse-free and overall survival rates of 83%. 401
Two prospective randomized trials have further evaluated the role of RT in patients with early-stage diffuse large cell lymphoma. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group randomized 365 patients with bulky stage I and patients with stage II diffuse large cell lymphoma to eight cycles of CHOP with or without involved-field RT.
Patients with complete response were randomized to 30 Gy involved-field RT or no further treatment. Patients with partial response received 40 Gy. The disease-free
survival (73% vs. 58%; P = .03), freedom from recurrence (73% vs. 58%; P = .04), and survival (84% vs. 70; P = .06) all favored the patients who received adjuvant
involved-field irradiation. 402 The Southwest Oncology Group Trial randomized 401 stage I and nonbulky stage II patients to receive either three cycles of CHOP and
involved-field irradiation (40 to 55 Gy) or eight cycles of CHOP alone. The 5-year progression-free survival (77% vs. 64%; P = .03) and overall survival (82% vs. 72%;
P = .02) favored the CHOP and involved-field RT treatment arm. 403 As a result of these trials, combination chemotherapy and adjuvant RT has become the standard of
care for patients with stage I and II diffuse large cell lymphoma.
There are no prospective trials evaluating dose of radiation when combined with chemotherapy in patients with early-stage diffuse large cell lymphoma. In general, the
dose of RT should be based on the number of cycles of chemotherapy and the bulk of disease. Patients with bulky mediastinal or abdominal disease or with multiple
sites of involvement have a somewhat worse prognosis; these patients should receive six cycles of CHOP combined with RT. 397,404,405 Prior studies support the use of
three to four cycles of CHOP combined with RT in patients with more limited disease. 399,400 and 401,403 With a complete response after six cycles of CHOP we
recommend 30-Gy involved-field RT for patients with favorable presentations, and 35 to 40 Gy for patients with initial bulky disease. Patients with diffuse large cell
lymphoma localized to the bone should receive 40 Gy. 406 With a complete response after four cycles of CHOP we recommend 40 Gy. These recommendations are

derived from the studies cited previously.
THERAPY OF DISSEMINATED DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA. The curability of disseminated diffuse large B-cell lymphoma using chemotherapeutic agents was

reported in the early 1970s. 407,408 In both early reports, the majority of patients who achieved a documented complete remission at the end of planned therapy did not
relapse on prolonged follow-up. These reports led to a large number of clinical trials documenting the possibility of cure for patients with disseminated diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma. Principles of therapy that have evolved include the administration of highly active drugs given in combination for several cycles and then to restage
the patient to document complete remission (Table 45.3-15). Two or more further cycles of chemotherapy are usually administered after complete remission is
documented. In most series, 50% to 75% of completely responding patients do not relapse. It appears that patients who achieve remission promptly are most likely to
be cured.409

TABLE 45.3-15. Combination Chemotherapeutic Regimens for Newly Diagnosed Aggressive Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma

A great deal of effort has gone into attempts to identify the best treatment regimen for patients with advanced diffuse aggressive lymphoma. Most patients in these
studies had diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. More than 40 randomized clinical trials have been reported. 407,408,410,411,412,413,414,415,416,417,418,419,420,421,422,423,424,425,426,427,428,
429,430,431,432,433,434,435,436,437,438,439,440,441,442,443,444,445,446,447,448,449,450,451,452 and 453
The majority of these trials have not found a significant treatment advantage for any
407,408,410,411,412,413,414,415,416,417,418,419,420,421,422,423,424,425, 426,427,428,429,430,431,432,433,434,435,436,437,438,439,440,441,442,443 and 444
particular regimen.
The most widely quoted trial was
410
carried out in the United States comparing CHOP, m-BACOD, ProMACE/CytaBOM, and MACOP-B (Table 45.3-16). This trial was carried out because of
enthusiasm generated by single-arm trials showing apparent superiority of m-BACOD, ProMACE/CytaBOM, and MACOP-B over the older CHOP regimen. 419,454,455
This study of 899 patients showed no improvement in failure-free or overall survival with the newer regimen, but did find increased toxicity with m-BACOD and
MACOP-B.410 The 6-year overall survival for the four regimens were CHOP, 33%; m-BACOD, 36%; ProMACE/CytaBOM, 34%; and MACOP-B, 32%. The conclusion
from the study was that the less complicated and less expensive CHOP regimen should be considered the treatment of choice. This has been widely applied, and
today most patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma or other aggressive lymphomas receive CHOP.

TABLE 45.3-16. Treatment of Aggressive Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma (Approximately 80% Diffuse Large B-Cell): A Comparison of Four Regimens

Several randomized trials have identified superiority of one chemotherapy regimen over another for the treatment of patients with diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma.414,419,424,445,446,447,448,449,450,451,452 and 453 The most consistent finding from these studies is the superiority of an anthracycline-containing chemotherapy regimen
over regimens that do not contain an anthracycline. 414,446,448,449 and 450 This appears to be true in older as well as younger patients. 446,447 An anthracycline, usually
doxorubicin, appears to be a key component in optimizing the chances for the cure of patients with diffuse aggressive lymphoma. Substitution of another anthracycline
such as mitoxantrone or epirubicin has been controversial, with some studies finding the drugs equivalent, 420,426,427,428 and 429 whereas others have found an advantage
for doxorubicin. 453
The importance of duration of follow-up in interpreting comparative trials is pointed out by a study done by the Australian and New Zealand lymphoma group. 411,445
Investigators carried out a trial comparing CHOP with MACOP-B. Two hundred thirty-six patients were eligible for analysis and an initial report showed no significant
difference in outcome between the two approaches, except for more severe toxicity with MACOP-B. The 4-year overall survival was 56% for MACOP-B and 51% for
CHOP, with 3.2-year median follow-up. The authors reported the study again with 6.5-year median follow-up. At that point the failure-free survival (i.e., 42% vs. 30%)
and overall survival (54% vs. 41%) favored the MACOP-B regimen.
Currently, there is no one superior regimen for the treatment of patients with disseminated diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Unfortunately, this is because all the
regimens are equally bad, rather than that they are all extremely effective. Patients with advanced-stage diffuse large B-cell lymphoma are cured with chemotherapy
less than 50% of the time. New treatment approaches are badly needed. Attempts have been made to improve the response to CHOP by combining it with the
monoclonal antibody rituximab. An early study of 33 patients showed a 97% response rate and a 73% complete response rate. 456 The place of combined
chemotherapy and monoclonal antibody therapy in the management of patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma will be determined by subsequent comparative
clinical trials.
One approach to improve treatment results in patients with disseminated diffuse large B-cell lymphoma would be the addition of adjuvant drugs, radiotherapy,
high-dose therapy with transplant, immunotherapy, or antibodies after a standard chemotherapy regimen. The addition of levamisole, bacille Calmette-Guérin, or both
did not improve treatment outcome.457 Aviles et al. found an improved disease-free and overall survival with the use of adjuvant interferon-a. 451 A combination of
standard chemotherapy regimens and monoclonal antibodies is currently being tested.
The most widely studied adjuvant therapy has involved high-dose therapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation. Attempts to shorten the standard
chemotherapy regimens and substitute high-dose therapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation have been disappointing. One study that randomized slowly
responding patients to continuing CHOP or to autologous transplantation found a superior overall survival in continuing CHOP (85% vs. 56%). 458
Two studies have found an improved disease-free survival and overall survival in patients who underwent autologous bone marrow transplantation after achieving a
remission with a standard chemotherapy regimen. 459,460 In both cases, benefits were restricted to patients who presented with a high International Prognostic Index
score. In a French study, the disease-free survival (59% vs. 39%) and overall survival (65% vs. 52%) both significantly favored adjuvant autologous bone marrow
transplantation. In an Italian study, the disease-free survival (87% vs. 48%) favored adjuvant autologous bone marrow transplantation, but there was no difference in
overall survival. In another Italian study, sequential high doses of individual drugs followed by autotransplant yielded a better disease-free survival (76% vs. 49%), but

not overall survival, than MACOP-B. 461 An international consensus conference 462 reached the conclusion that autologous high-dose therapy and autotransplantation
in patients with high-risk International Prognostic Index scores seemed to provide benefit.
SALVAGE THERAPY. The phrase salvage therapy encompasses subsequent treatment administered to patients who failed to achieve an initial remission and the

treatment administered to patients who relapse from complete remission. A major prognostic factor for patients receiving any form of salvage therapy relates to the
chemotherapy sensitivity of the lymphoma (i.e., patients who achieve an initial complete remission and then relapse generally have a better prognosis than patients
who are primarily resistant to chemotherapy). Patients with lymphoma that progresses on the previous chemotherapy regimen have a poorer outlook than those who
have stable or partially responding disease. 463,464 and 465 Patients who have been in complete remission and then relapsed require a rebiopsy before initiating salvage
therapy. Some patients who present with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma are found to have a follicular lymphoma at the time of relapse. 466
The initial step in planning salvage chemotherapy is to determine the goal of treatment. Some patients who fail to achieve an initial remission or relapse from
complete remission can be cured. This is less likely in elderly patients, those with extensive disease, and those with a poor performance status. In such patients less
intensive, palliative treatments might be better pursued.
Radiotherapy can frequently be used to alleviate the symptoms at a particular site of involvement in patients with relapsed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. This can
frequently be accomplished with minimal morbidity. However, the chance for cure with salvage radiotherapy is extremely small. Most patients receive second-line
combination chemotherapy regimens. These regimens usually incorporate drugs such as cisplatin, ifosfamide, etoposide, and cytarabine. 464,465,467,468,469,470,471 and 472
The chances for achieving a complete remission have varied widely in different studies, but generally fall in the 20% to 40% range. 464,465,467,468,469,470,471 and 472 A subset
of complete responding patients can be long-term survivors, with the overall cure rate for salvage chemotherapy in patients with relapsed diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma being approximately 5% to 10%.464,465,467,468,469,470,471 and 472
Other approaches used for salvage therapy in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma include the monoclonal antibody rituximab and interferon-a. In 30 patients
with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with rituximab, 11 (37%) had an objective response. Most responses were partial. The median time to progression had not
been reached at the time of the report. 473 Responding patients were more likely to have tumors less than 5 cm in maximum diameter, and no patient with a tumor
greater than 10 cm in maximum diameter responded. Occasional patients with relapsed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma respond to interferon-a. 474 These responses
can be complete and durable for several years.
Because of the poor response to salvage chemotherapy in patients with relapsed refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, autologous bone marrow transplantation
was tested soon after its development. In a study of 100 patients with relapsed diffuse aggressive lymphoma, both complete remission and prolonged disease-free
survival could be predicted by the history of previous response to chemotherapy. 475 Approximately 35% of patients who relapsed from complete remission but
remained sensitive to chemotherapy at relapse achieved prolonged disease-free survival and apparent cure, in contrast to approximately 10% of those who were
chemotherapy resistant at the time of relapse and no patients who were initially refractory to therapy and failed to achieve a complete remission. 476 This study formed
the basis for an international randomized trial referred to as the PARMA study. 477 In this trial, 109 patients who had relapsed from complete remission and responded
to two cycles of DHAP (dexamethasone, cytarabine, cisplatin) were randomly allocated to high-dose chemotherapy using BEAC regimen (carmustine, etoposide,
cytarabine, cyclophosphamide) or continued treatment with DHAP. Both groups were to receive involved-field radiotherapy. Bone marrow transplantation was
associated with a superior failure-free survival (51% vs. 12% at 5 years) and overall survival (53% vs. 32% at 5 years). At present, high-dose therapy and autologous
bone marrow transplantation are the treatments of choice for patients with chemotherapy-sensitive relapse who are young enough and healthy enough to undergo the
procedures.
Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation has been used less frequently for patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. While occasional patients failing autologous
transplantation can have prolonged survival with allogeneic transplantation, 478 overall results from the North American Bone Marrow Transplant Registry have favored
autologous transplantation.
Primary Mediastinal (Thymic) Large B-Cell Lymphoma
MORPHOLOGY. Primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma usually involves the thymus at presentation. 479,480 The tumor is composed of large cells with variable

nuclear features, resembling centroblasts, large centrocytes, or multilobated cells, often with pale or clear cytoplasm. Less often, the tumor cells resemble
immunoblasts. Reed-Sternberg–like cells may be present. Many cases have fine, compartmentalizing sclerosis.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. The tumor cells are often Ig–, but express B-cell–associated antigens (CD19, CD20, CD22, CD79a) and CD45.
GENETIC FEATURES. Ig heavy and light-chain genes are rearranged; the bcl-2 gene is usually germline.

480

480,481 and 482
Bcl-6 gene rearrangements are uncommon.483

Amplification of the REL oncogene has been described in a minority of the cases. 484
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is putative thymic (medullary) B cell.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS. The major differential diagnoses clinically are thymoma, germ cell tumor, and Hodgkin's disease. In female subjects, germ cell tumor can be

confidently excluded. Involvement of lymph nodes argues against a diagnosis of thymoma. The presence of superior vena cava syndrome argues against Hodgkin's
disease. Histologically, the diagnosis depends on recognition of the characteristic morphology; immunohistochemical stains, as for other diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas, are helpful.
CLINICAL FEATURES AND THERAPY. Primary diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the mediastinum is a distinct clinicopathologic entity, requiring knowledge of both

morphology, immunophenotype, and presenting site for the diagnosis. 126 It accounted for 7% of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (2.4% of all NHL) in the international
REAL study.126,127 There is a female predominance and a median age in the fourth decade; patients present with a locally invasive anterior mediastinal mass
originating in the thymus, with frequent airway compromise and superior vena cava syndrome. 485 Relapses tend to be extranodal, including liver, gastrointestinal tract,
kidneys, ovaries, and CNS.
Although early studies suggested an unusually aggressive, incurable tumor, others have reported cure rates similar to those for other large cell lymphomas with
aggressive therapy, usually combining chemotherapy with mediastinal irradiation. 485,486 With no evidence to the contrary, we recommend treating these patients
similar to other patients with localized diffuse large cell lymphoma (i.e., with four to six cycles of CHOP and involved-field RT). The prognosis of patients with localized
mediastinal large cell NHL is similar to other patients with poor prognosis early-stage disease; approximately 50% of patients are alive without disease at 5 years.
Patients who present with a pleural effusion or who remain gallium positive after CHOP have a worse prognosis. Patients without bulky disease have a better
prognosis. 487 Patients with disseminated disease should be treated like other patients with disseminated diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
Intravascular Large B-Cell Lymphoma
Rare cases of large cell lymphoma, usually of B-cell type, present with a disseminated intravascular proliferation of large lymphoid cells, involving small blood vessels,
without an obvious extravascular tumor mass or leukemia. 488,489 This tumor has also been variously known as intravascular lymphomatosis, angiotropic lymphoma,
and malignant angioendotheliomatosis. The neoplastic lymphoid cells are mainly lodged in the lumina of small vessels in many organs. The tumor cells are large with
vesicular nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and frequent mitotic figures. Malignant cells are rarely seen in cerebrospinal fluid, blood, or bone marrow. The organs most
commonly involved are CNS, kidneys, lungs, and skin, but virtually any site may be involved.
Patients present with a bewildering variety of symptoms related to organ dysfunction secondary to vascular occlusion, which may be transient. Patients often present
with neurologic dysfunction. 490,491 and 492 Other presentations include pulmonary involvement, 493,494 syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone production, 494 skin
lesions,495 lytic bone lesions, 495 endocrine dysfunction, 496 disseminated intravascular coagulation, 497 edema and hypoalbuminemia,498 and thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura.499 Because of the wide variety of presentations, diagnosis is often difficult, and many reported cases were diagnosed by autopsy. If a
timely diagnosis is made and combination chemotherapy instituted, patients can attain a complete remission, and long-term survival appears to be possible. 500

Burkitt's Lymphoma
DEFINITION. Burkitt's lymphoma is a B-cell lymphoma composed of monomorphic, medium-sized cells with basophilic cytoplasm and a high proliferation fraction,

characterized by translocation and deregulation of the c-myc gene on chromosome 8, which is often extranodal and occurs most often in children (endemic, sporadic)
and immunocompromised hosts.
MORPHOLOGY. Burkitt's tumor cells are monomorphic, medium-sized cells with round nuclei, multiple nucleoli, and basophilic cytoplasm. Cytoplasmic lipid vacuoles

are usually evident on imprints or smears. There is an extremely high rate of proliferation as well as a high rate of spontaneous cell death. A starry-sky pattern is
usually present, imparted by numerous benign macrophages that have ingested apoptotic tumor cells. Although most cases present no problem in diagnosis, some
cases may have larger cells or an admixture of immunoblast-like cells, and there is morphologic overlap with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. These borderline cases
are often called non-Burkitt501 or Burkitt-like.124 In children and human immunodeficiency virus–positive patients, these often have a c-myc translocation and behave
similarly to typical Burkitt's lymphoma, whereas in adults, so-called Burkitt-like lymphomas often have bcl-2 gene rearrangement and may represent an aggressive
variant of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. 502 In the international study of the REAL, 126 Burkitt-like lymphoma was a nonreproducible category, in which the pathologists
agreed on the diagnosis only 50% of the time: Disagreements were equally split between large B-cell and Burkitt's lymphoma.
The most appropriate way to handle this borderline between Burkitt's lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma has been the subject of debate in the WHO
classification project: Should it continue to be a separate, nonreproducible category; should it be a subtype of large B-cell lymphoma; or should it be a subtype of
Burkitt's lymphoma? From a clinical standpoint, it is important to identify patients who should be treated as though they had Burkitt's lymphoma, since patients with
Burkitt's lymphoma do not do well with treatment that would be effective for large cell lymphoma. On the other hand, treatment for Burkitt's lymphoma is considerably
more aggressive than that for large B-cell lymphoma and may have significant treatment-related morbidity, 503 so that it should not be used for usual large B-cell
lymphomas. The question is how to draw the line between large cell lymphoma and Burkitt's lymphoma so that morphologically borderline cases will be assigned to
the correct category?
The defining biologic feature of Burkitt's lymphoma is c-myc deregulation, as a consequence of which the tumor cells remain constantly in cycle. It is this phenomenon
that results in both its morphologic homogeneity and its clinical behavior. Unfortunately, detection of c-myc translocation is not practical in all clinical specimens for
technical reasons. In addition, some large B-cell lymphomas have t(8;14) and c-myc deregulation, and it is not clear if all such cases should be treated like Burkitt's
lymphoma. The best practical surrogate for c-myc deregulation is proliferation fraction: In a tumor with c-myc deregulation, 100% of viable cells should be in cycle and
should express Ki-67. Thus, the WHO committees concluded that a diagnosis of Burkitt-like lymphoma should only be made in a tumor with morphologic features
intermediate between Burkitt's lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, in which the Ki-67 fraction of viable cells is at least 99%. This tumor will be considered a
subtype of Burkitt's lymphoma in the WHO classification. 130 Cases with morphologic features of large cell lymphoma with a high proliferation fraction [or t(8;14)] and
cases that are morphologically borderline between Burkitt's lymphoma and large B-cell lymphoma with a lower proliferation fraction, should be classified as diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. Burkitt's lymphoma cells express SIgM and B-cell–associated antigens (CD19, CD20, CD22, CD79a), as well as CD10 and CD43; they lack CD5

and bcl-2 and typically lack CD23. 504 They show nuclear staining for BCL-6 protein, which is independent of bcl-6 gene rearrangement. 505
GENETIC FEATURES. Ig heavy and light-chain genes are rearranged. Studies of the Ig variable region genes show conflicting results: One study reported unmutated

genes,506 whereas others report somatic mutations and intraclonal heterogeneity, consistent with ongoing mutations. 507,508 and 509 Most cases have a translocation of
c-myc from chromosome 8 to either the Ig heavy-chain region on chromosome 14 [t(8;14)] or light-chain loci on 2 [t(2;8)] or 22 [t(8;22)]. In African (endemic) cases, the
breakpoint on chromosome 14 involves the heavy-chain joining region, whereas in nonendemic cases, the translocation involves the heavy-chain switch region. 510,511
Mutations in the 5' noncoding region of the bcl-6 gene, similar to those seen in large B-cell lymphoma, have been reported in 25% to 50% of the cases. 512 Most
African cases contain EBV genomes, as do 25% to 40% of the cases associated with AIDS. 513
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is peripheral B cell of unknown stage: perhaps B blast of early germinal center reaction.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS. Burkitt's lymphoma must be distinguished from other primary abdominal malignancies in childhood, including Wilms' tumor, neuroblastoma,

and peripheral neuroectodermal tumor. In the bone marrow, it must be distinguished from B- and T-precursor and myeloid leukemias. Morphologic features are
usually sufficient for the diagnosis if adequate material is available. The presence of leukocyte-associated antigens and Ig and the lack of TdT are important in
distinguishing Burkitt's lymphoma from the other tumors mentioned. Among peripheral B-cell lymphomas, the major differential diagnosis is with diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma; although this is usually straightforward on histologic grounds, occasional borderline cases occur; a provisional category of high-grade B-cell lymphoma,
Burkitt-like is used for these cases. Burkitt's lymphoma is more likely to express CD10 and to have c-myc rearrangement than is diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
CLINICAL FEATURES AND THERAPY. Three distinct clinical forms of Burkitt's lymphoma can be recognized: endemic, sporadic, and immunodeficiency-associated.

514

Although they are histologically identical and have similar clinical behavior, there are differences in epidemiology, clinical presentation, and genetic features between
the three forms. Endemic and sporadic Burkitt's lymphomas are both most common in children, but the median age is younger in endemic patients. Burkitt's lymphoma
accounts for 30% of nonendemic pediatric lymphomas, but less than 1% of adult NHLs; in human immunodeficiency virus–positive patients it typically affects those
with a relatively high CD4 count and no opportunistic infections. In all groups, the majority of patients are male (3 to 4:1). In endemic cases, the jaws and other facial
bones are often involved, as well as the mesentery and gonads. In sporadic cases, the majority are present in the abdomen, most often involving distal ileum, cecum,
mesentery, or both cecum and mesentery; ovaries, kidneys, or breasts may be involved. 515 Immunodeficiency-related cases more often involve lymph nodes, and both
these and sporadic cases may present as acute leukemia.
Patients typically present with rapidly growing tumor masses and often have a high serum LDH. Burkitt's lymphoma is highly aggressive but potentially curable with
aggressive therapy. Because of the extremely rapid progression of Burkitt's lymphoma, patients with this disease should be approached as a medical emergency.
Staging should be completed quickly and therapy initiated at the earliest possible time. Because of the risk of tumor lysis syndrome, patients should be well-hydrated,
receive allopurinol, and be watched closely after the initiation of therapy. Death from hyperkalemia has been reported. 516,517 Some patients require hemodialysis to
control hyperkalemia.
Burkitt's lymphoma was one of the first malignancies to be shown to be curable with chemotherapy, 518 and the majority of patients should be curable today with
aggressive combination chemotherapy regimens. High-dose regimens of fairly brief duration are used to treat patients with Burkitt's lymphoma. 519,520,521 and 522 Patients
with localized disease are cured in approximately 90% of the cases with these intensive regimens, and cure rates within excess of 50% have been reported in patients
with extensive disease. 519 When treated with similar regimens, adults and children have comparable outcomes. 519 Because of the propensity for CNS metastases,
treatment regimens for Burkitt's lymphoma always involve prophylactic therapy to the CNS. Salvage therapy for patients with relapsed Burkitt's lymphoma has
generally been unsatisfactory. However, occasional patients can be cured with autologous bone marrow transplantation. 523 Patients with isolated CNS relapse can
sometimes be cured with bone marrow transplantation 524 or a combination of systemic therapy at traditional doses and intrathecal treatment. 525
T-CELL AND NATURAL KILLER–CELL NEOPLASMS
Precursor T-Lymphoblastic Lymphoma/Leukemia (Precursor T-Cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia/ Precursor T-Cell Lymphoblastic Lymphoma)
DEFINITION. A T-cell and NK-cell neoplasm is a neoplasm of lymphoblasts committed to the T-cell lineage, typically composed of small to medium-sized blast cells with

scant cytoplasm, moderately condensed to dispersed chromatin and indistinct nucleoli, variably involving bone marrow and blood (precursor T-cell ALL), thymus,
lymph nodes, or all (precursor T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma).
MORPHOLOGY. On smears, lymphoblasts vary from small cells with scant cytoplasm, condensed nuclear chromatin, and indistinct nucleoli to larger cells with a

moderate amount of cytoplasm, dispersed chromatin, and multiple nucleoli. Azurophilic granules may be present. In tissue sections, the cells are small to
medium-sized, with scant cytoplasm, round, oval, or convoluted nuclei, and fine chromatin and indistinct or small nucleoli. Occasional cases have larger cells. The
pattern is infiltrative rather than destructive, with partial preservation of the subcapsular sinus and germinal centers. A starry-sky pattern may be present, but is
usually less prominent than in Burkitt's lymphoma.

IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. The lymphoblasts are typically positive for TdT and variably express CD2, CD7, CD3, CD5, CD1a, CD4, CD8, or all of these. Only CD3 is

considered lineage specific. The constellation of antigens defines stages of differentiation, ranging from early or pro-T (CD2, CD7, and cytoplasmic CD3), to common
thymocyte (CD1a, sCD3, CD4, and CD8), to late thymocyte (CD4 or CD8). Although there is some correlation with presentation and differentiation stage (cases with
bone marrow and blood presentation may show earlier differentiation stage than cases with thymic presentation), 526,527 there is overlap. 528
GENETIC FEATURES. Rearrangement of antigen receptor genes is variable in lymphoblastic neoplasms and may not be lineage specific; thus, precursor T-cell

neoplasms may have either or both TCR b or g chain gene rearrangements and Ig heavy-chain gene rearrangements. 529
Chromosomal translocations involving the TCR a and d loci at chromosome 14q11 and b and g loci at 7q34 are present in approximately one-third of the cases 150,530;
the partner genes are variable and include the transcription factors c-MYC (8q24), TAL1/SCL (1p32), RBTN1 (11p35), RBTN2 (11913), and HOX11 (10q24) and the
cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase LCK (1p34). In an additional 25%, the TAL1 locus at 1p32 has deletions in the 5' regulatory region. 531 Deletions of 9p involving deletion of
the p16INK4a tumor suppressor gene (cdk4 inhibitor) is also seen in T-lymphoblastic neoplasms.
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is precursor T lymphoblast at varying stages of differentiation.
CLINICAL FEATURES AND THERAPY. Precursor T-cell neoplasia occurs most frequently in late childhood, adolescence, and young adulthood, with a male predominance;

it accounts for 15% of childhood and 25% of adult ALL. 157 The prognosis is typically worse than that for precursor B-cell neoplasms and is not affected by
immunophenotype or genetic abnormalities. Patients typically present with a high leukocyte count and often a mediastinal mass. Clinically, a case is defined as
lymphoma if there is a mediastinal or other mass and less than 25% blasts in the bone marrow, and as leukemia if there are greater than 25% bone marrow blasts,
with or without a mass. In children, treatment is generally more aggressive than that for precursor B-ALL and is typically the same for lymphomatous and leukemic
presentations. 530
Adults with lymphoblastic lymphoma seem to have an excellent prognosis when presenting with stage I or II disease. 532 In such patients treatment with CHOP,
intrathecal methotrexate, and CNS radiotherapy, and maintenance chemotherapy with methotrexate and mercaptopurine yielded a 94% 5-year freedom from relapse
rate for patients with lymph node–based disease and a normal serum LDH level. 532 Patients who presented with bone marrow involvement, CNS involvement, or a
high serum LDH had a 5-year freedom from relapse rate of only 19%. Because of the propensity for CNS relapse, all patients with lymphoblastic lymphoma should
receive prophylactic treatment to the CNS.
More intensive chemotherapy regimens of the type used to treat ALL appeared to yield better results in patients with lymphoblastic lymphoma. 533,534 and 535 Adjuvant
autologous bone marrow transplantation in high-risk patients has been reported to improve the long-term disease-free survival rate. 536 These data have been
supported by the early results from a randomized trial. 537 There is some evidence that allogeneic bone marrow transplantation might have a superior result to
autologous bone marrow transplantation. 535 Some patients who relapse from remission can be cured with autologous or allogeneic bone marrow transplantation,
although the overall prognosis in such patients is poor. 538
Mature T Cell: Mycosis Fungoides
For a discussion of mycosis fungoides, see Chapter 45.4.
Adult T-Cell Lymphoma and Leukemia
DEFINITION. Adult T-cell lymphoma and leukemia is defined as a peripheral T-cell neoplasm caused by HTLV-I.
MORPHOLOGY. Cells with hyperlobated nuclei (flower cells) are common in the peripheral blood in leukemic cases. In addition, there is a small proportion of blast-like

cells with a deep basophilic cytoplasm. Bone marrow infiltrates are usually patchy, ranging from sparse to moderate. In lymph nodes, the infiltrates are diffuse with
architectural effacement. Neoplastic cells are usually medium to large with nuclear pleomorphism; the cytoplasm is amphophilic, basophilic, or pale. Mitotic activity is
variable. Reed-Sternberg–like cells and giant cells with convoluted or cerebriform nuclei may be present. Rare cases may be composed of small atypical lymphocytes
with nuclear pleomorphism or may resemble anaplastic large cell lymphoma. In the background there is a mild to moderate proliferation of high endothelial venules.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. Tumor cells express T-cell–associated antigens (CD2, CD3, CD5), but usually lack CD7. Most cases are CD4+ and CD8–. Rare cases are CD4–,

CD8+, or CD8+ and CD4+. CD25 is expressed in a majority of the cases. Anaplastic large cell types react with CD30, but are ALK (p80) negative.
GENETICS. Clonally integrated HTLV-I genes are found in all cases. The TCR genes are clonally rearranged.
POSSIBLE NORMAL COUNTERPART. The possible normal counterpart is peripheral CD4+ T cells in various stages of transformation.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS. Chronic and smoldering forms must be distinguished from benign lymphocytosis. Cutaneous involvement must be distinguished from

mycosis fungoides. Lymphomatous presentations may clinically and histologically resemble large B-cell or other peripheral T-cell lymphomas. The typical acute form
is clinically and morphologically distinctive, with leukocytosis and the characteristic flower cells in an Asian or Caribbean patient, often with hypercalcemia. Since the
disease may be mimicked by other peripheral T-cell lymphomas, and because of its highly aggressive course, serologic evaluation for HTLV-I infection is
recommended in any patient with a newly diagnosed peripheral T-cell lymphoma.
CLINICAL FEATURES. ATL is one manifestation of infection by HTLV-I. Tropical spastic paraparesis and HTLV-I–associated myelopathy appear to be more common

manifestations of infection than ATL. The diagnosis is established when a patient with a typical clinical and pathologic syndrome is found to have antibodies to
HTLV-I. Most patients are adults, although children are occasionally seen with the disorder when they received transfusions in infancy. The virus can be acquired by
vertical transmission from mother to child, sexual transmission, or via blood products. Most cases occur in Japan or the Caribbean, with sporadic cases found
elsewhere in the world.
In the United States the diagnosis is frequently difficult because ATL is not considered since many clinicians are not acquainted with the syndrome. Several variants
have been described depending on the clinical features: acute, lymphomatous, chronic, and smoldering. The most common acute type presents with neoplastic cells
in the blood, skin rashes, generalized lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and hypercalcemia. The lymphomatous type is characterized by prominent
lymphadenopathy but no blood involvement. The chronic type shows skin lesions and an increased white blood cell count with absolute lymphocytosis, but no
hypercalcemia. The smoldering type shows normal blood lymphocyte counts with £5% circulating neoplastic cells. Patients frequently have skin or pulmonary lesions,
but hypercalcemia is not present. Progression from chronic and smoldering to acute types eventually occurs in up to 25% of the cases. Peripheral blood and bone
marrow are the most frequent sites of involvement, although essentially any organ can be involved by the disease including gastrointestinal tract, liver, lung, and CNS.
THERAPY. The treatment of ATL has been unsatisfactory. Patients with the chronic or smoldering syndromes can sometimes be followed without therapy for extended

periods of time. When the disease becomes asymptomatic, combination chemotherapy regimens have usually been used. 145 Although patients frequently respond to
the initial combination chemotherapy regimen, the overall survival remains poor, with less than 10% of the patients surviving 5 years after initiating therapy. A variety
of the new treatment approaches has been studied including new chemotherapeutic agents, monoclonal antibodies, and allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. One
case of long-term, disease-free survival with allogeneic bone marrow transplantation has been described. 539
Peripheral T-Cell Lymphoma, Not Otherwise Categorized
DEFINITION. In peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise categorized, a number of distinct entities have been defined, which correspond to recognizable subtypes of

T-cell neoplasia. There remains a large group of predominantly nodal T-cell lymphomas, which make up the largest group of T-cell neoplasms in western countries.
Although a variety of morphologic subtypes has been described, no consistent immunophenotypic, genetic, or clinical features have been associated with most of
them. Therefore, for the time being, these presumably diverse cases are lumped under the heading peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise categorized, or

unspecified. This category includes heterogeneous diseases that require further definition.
MORPHOLOGIC FEATURES. Peripheral T-cell lymphomas typically contain a mixture of small and large atypical cells

540,541
and are classified as diffuse small cleaved,

mixed, large cell, and immunoblastic in the Working Formulation. 127,542 Admixed eosinophils or epithelioid histiocytes may be numerous 543; the term lymphoepithelioid
cell (Lennert's) lymphoma has been used for cases rich in epithelioid cells. 543 Because of their relative rarity and heterogeneity, it has been impossible to arrive at a
generally useful classification. 541,544,545,546 and 547 For the time being, these tumors are simply designated peripheral T-cell lymphomas, unspecified.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. T-cell–associated antigens are variably expressed (CD3+/–, CD2+/–, CD5+/–, CD7–/+), CD4 is more often expressed than CD8, and tumors may

be CD4– and CD8–. B-cell–associated antigens are lacking. 540,548
GENETIC FEATURES. The TCR genes are usually but not always rearranged; Ig genes are germline.

540,549
No specific cytogenetic or oncogene abnormality has been

reported, although complex karyotypes are common in cases with larger cells.
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is peripheral T cells in various stages of transformation.
CLINICAL FEATURES. Peripheral T-cell lymphomas accounted for only 6% of lymphomas in the international study of the REAL, 126,127 reflecting their rarity in American

and European populations. The median age was in the seventh decade, and 65% of the patients had stage IV disease. Blood eosinophilia, pruritus, and
hemophagocytic syndromes may occur550; lymph nodes, skin, liver, spleen, and other viscera may be involved. 551,552 The clinical course is aggressive, and relapses
are more common than in large B-cell lymphoma.545,553,554,555 and 556 In the international REAL study, this group had one of the lowest overall and failure-free survival
rates.126,127
THERAPY. Treatment regimens used for peripheral T-cell lymphoma are the same as used for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Because of the poorer overall survival in

peripheral T-cell lymphoma as compared with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, bone marrow transplantation is more likely to be used as part of the primary therapy.
Bone marrow transplantation may be as effective in peripheral T-cell lymphoma as in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. 557
Angioimmunoblastic T-Cell Lymphoma
DEFINITION. Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma is a T-cell lymphoma characterized by systemic disease, a polymorphous infiltrate involving lymph nodes, and a

prominent proliferation of high endothelial venules and FDCs.
MORPHOLOGY. The nodal architecture is effaced; peripheral sinuses are typically open and even dilated, but the abnormal infiltrate often extends beyond the capsule

into the perinodal fat. There are prominent arborizing high endothelial venules, many of which show thickened or hyalinized periodic acid–Schiff-positive walls.
Clusters of epithelioid histiocytes and numerous eosinophils and plasma cells may be present. Expanded aggregates of FDCs, visible on immunostained sections,
surround the proliferating blood vessels and may have the appearance of burnt-out germinal centers. The lymphoid cells are a mixture of small lymphocytes,
immunoblasts, plasma cells, and medium-sized cells with round nuclei and clear cytoplasm. B immunoblasts may be numerous.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. Tumor cells express T-cell–associated antigens and usually CD4, but many CD8+ cells are often present; expanded FDC clusters (CD21+) are

present around proliferated venules. 558 The latter feature is useful in distinguishing this disorder from other T-cell lymphomas. 547 Polyclonal plasma cells and B
immunoblasts may be numerous.
GENETIC FEATURES. The TCR genes are rearranged in 75%; IgH in 10%, corresponding to expanded B-cell clones. 558,559 EBV genomes are detected in many cases

and may be present in either T or B cells 560,561; trisomy 3, 5, or both may occur.562
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is peripheral T cell of unknown subset in various stages of transformation.
CLINICAL FEATURES. Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma is one of the more common peripheral T-cell lymphomas encountered in western countries. In the Kiel

Registry, it accounted for 20% of all T-cell lymphomas and approximately 4% of all lymphomas. 547 Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma is clinically distinctive:
Patients typically have generalized lymphadenopathy, fever, weight loss, skin rash, and polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia 563 and are susceptible to infections. The
course is moderately aggressive, with occasional spontaneous remissions, and is not reliably predicted by the histologic appearance.
THERAPY. Approximately 30% of the patients may have initial remission on corticosteroids alone, but most require some form of cytotoxic chemotherapy. Median

survivals range from 15 to 24 months, and curability has not been well established. Some patients develop a secondary EBV+ large B-cell lymphoma. A prospective
but nonrandomized trial compared an anthracycline-based combination chemotherapy regimen with prednisone followed by combination chemotherapy only if the
disease progressed. Initial chemotherapy yielded a higher complete remission rate (64% vs. 29%) and median survival (19 vs. 11 months). 564
Extranodal Natural Killer/T-Cell Lymphoma, Nasal Type (Formerly Angiocentric Lymphoma)
DEFINITION. Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, is an extranodal lymphoma, usually with an immature NK-cell phenotype and EBV+, with a broad morphologic

spectrum, frequent necrosis and angioinvasion, and most commonly presenting in the midfacial region, but also in other extranodal sites. It is designated NK/T
because of uncertainty regarding lineage.
MORPHOLOGIC FEATURES. Nasal NK/T-cell lymphoma is typically characterized by a polymorphous infiltrate composed of a mixture of normal appearing small

lymphocytes and atypical lymphoid cells of varying size, 565,566 along with plasma cells and occasionally eosinophils and histiocytes. A characteristic feature is invasion
of vascular walls and, usually, occlusion of lumina by lymphoid cells with varying degrees of cytologic atypia; however, this is not seen in all the cases. There is
usually prominent ischemic necrosis of both tumor cells and normal tissue. The term angiocentric lymphoma has proven confusing, since angiocentricity is not evident
in all cases. Since the most characteristic presentation is midfacial, and the cells have both T and NK features, the term extranodal T/NK-cell lymphoma, nasal type,
has been proposed. 567
Cases of pulmonary lymphomatoid granulomatosis were for a time considered to be part of the spectrum of angiocentric lymphoma. Studies suggest that most
pulmonary cases are EBV-associated B-cell proliferations, and therefore a distinct disease category 374,377; however, some pulmonary lymphomas with histologic
features of lymphomatoid granulomatosis lack CD20+ cells and EBV and may be examples of peripheral T-cell lymphoma. 377 Thus, pulmonary lymphomas with
angiocentric growth patterns and necrosis may be heterogeneous.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. The atypical cells in most cases are CD2+, CD56+, surface CD3–, and cytoplasmic CD3+ (Leu 4– but positive with the polyclonal anti-CD3,

which detects the epsilon chain of CD3). They are typically CD4– and CD8–, but may express CD4, CD7, or both. 566,568,569 Most cases express cytotoxic granule
proteins such as Granzyme B and TIA-1.570
GENETIC FEATURES. The TCR and Ig genes are usually germline; EBV genomes are usually present and are detectable in the majority of the cells in most cases by in

situ hybridization for EBER-1. 569,571
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is immature NK cell.
CLINICAL FEATURES. Nasal-type T/NK lymphoma is a rare disorder in the United States and Europe, but is more common in Asia and in native populations in Peru. It

may affect children or adults. Extranodal sites are invariably involved, including nose, palate, upper airway, gastrointestinal tract, and skin. 565,566,569,572,573 The clinical
course is typically aggressive, with relapses in other extranodal sites. 569,574 Hemophagocytic syndromes may occur. Some cases of the aggressive variant of NK-cell
leukemia and lymphoma may be related to this disorder. 575

THERAPY. Patients with localized NK/T-cell lymphoma in the nasal pharynx can be cured with a combination of chemotherapy and local radiotherapy.

576

With
radiotherapy alone, treatment failure is frequent. Patients with disseminated NK/T-cell lymphoma have an extremely poor outlook. Occasional long-term survivors are
seen using the CHOP regimen. 577 Less aggressive regimens have a uniformly poor outcome.
High-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation can be curative in some patients after relapse from standard therapy. 578,579 Because of the poor
results with standard chemotherapeutic approaches, incorporation of bone marrow transplantation as a primary management of patients with disseminated NK/T-cell
lymphoma might improve treatment outcome.
Enteropathy Type T-Cell Lymphoma
DEFINITION. Enteropathy type T-cell lymphoma is a tumor of intraepithelial T lymphocytes, usually associated with features of gluten-sensitive enteropathy, showing

varying degrees of transformation but usually presenting as a high-grade (blastic) tumor.
MORPHOLOGY. This disorder was originally termed malignant histiocytosis of the intestine, but has since been conclusively shown to be a T-cell lymphoma.

580

On gross
examination, circumferentially oriented jejunal ulcers are present, often multiple, and often with perforation. A mass may or may not be present. The tumors contain a
variable admixture of small, medium and mixed, large or anaplastic tumor cells, often with a high content of intraepithelial T cells in adjacent mucosa. The adjacent
mucosa may or may not show villous atrophy552; this varies depending on the segment analyzed, since in sprue, villous atrophy is most prominent in the proximal
small intestine and may be absent in distal jejunum or ileum. Early lesions may show mucosal ulceration with only scattered atypical cells and numerous reactive
histiocytes, without formation of large masses 581; these lesions are nonetheless clonal. Intraepithelial lymphocytes in apparently nonneoplastic mucosa may also be
clonal.582 Clonal TCR gene rearrangements have been found in cases of celiac disease unresponsive to a gluten-free diet, suggesting that these cases may represent
early T-cell lymphomas. 583 The tumor may involve liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and other viscera such as the gallbladder.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. The tumor cells are T cells expressing pan-T antigens (CD3+, CD7+), usually CD8+ and CD4–, and expressing the mucosal lymphoid antigen

CD103.584 CD30 may be positive in some cells. Expression of cytotoxic T-cell–associated proteins (Granzyme B, TIA-1, perforin) is seen in many of the cases. 585,586
GENETIC FEATURES. The TCRb gene is clonally rearranged

580

; no specific cytogenetic abnormality has been described.

POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is intestinal intraepithelial cytotoxic T cells in various stages of transformation.
CLINICAL FEATURES AND THERAPY. This disease occurs in adults, typically with a rather brief history of gluten-sensitive enteropathy, as the initial event in a patient

found to have villous atrophy in the resected intestine, or without evidence of enteropathy but with either or both antigliadin antibodies or the typical HLA type
(DQA1*0501, DQB1*0201) of patients with celiac disease. 587 It is uncommon in most areas of the United States and Europe, but is seen with increased frequency in
areas in which gluten-sensitive enteropathy is common. Treatment of celiac disease with a gluten-free diet effectively prevents the development of lymphoma, so that
patients diagnosed with celiac disease early in life usually do not develop lymphoma, and patients with lymphoma rarely have a long history of celiac disease. 136,588
Patients present with abdominal pain, often associated with jejunal perforation; stomach or colon are affected less often, 589 and other viscera, skin, or soft tissues may
be involved. 590,591 and 592 The course is aggressive, and death usually occurs from multifocal intestinal perforation due to refractory malignant ulcers. A poor response to
therapy has been reported. It is probably related to the severe nutritional and immunologic abnormalities found in patients with uncontrolled celiac disease.
Hepatosplenic gd T-Cell Lymphoma
DEFINITION. Hepatosplenic gd T-cell lymphoma is a neoplasm of mature gd T cells with sinusoidal infiltration of spleen, liver, and bone marrow.
MORPHOLOGY. Hepatosplenic gd T-cell lymphoma produces a sinusoidal infiltrate in liver and spleen, as well as bone marrow, of medium-sized lymphoid cells with

round nuclei, moderately condensed chromatin, and moderately abundant, pale cytoplasm. 593 Mitotic activity is generally low. 594 The white pulp is atrophic.
Erythrophagocytosis may be prominent in splenic and bone marrow sinuses.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. The tumor cells are CD2+, CD3+, CD5–, CD4–, CD8–, CD16+, CD56 +/–, and lack the ab TCR protein, expressing instead the gd complex.

Cytotoxic granule protein TIA-1 is typically expressed, but Granzyme B and perforin are absent, indicating a nonactivated cytotoxic T-cell phenotype. 595,596 and 597
GENETIC FEATURES. The TCR g and d genes are rearranged; the TCR b gene may be rearranged or germline. The tumor cells are EBV–. Isochromosome 7q and

trisomy 8 have been reported in many cases. 598,599 and 600
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is gd T cell of splenic type.
CLINICAL FEATURES AND THERAPY. This is a rare neoplasm, but because it has only relatively recently been characterized, its frequency is not known; cases have

probably been classified as T-CLL/prolymphocytic leukemia or peripheral T-cell lymphoma unspecified. The diagnosis is often difficult. These patients frequently
present as with a multisystem disease with hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or both. 594,601 The absence of lymphadenopathy and the sinusoidal pattern of infiltration of
the liver, spleen, and bone marrow make the diagnosis difficult. Frequently, only the demonstration of a T-cell gene rearrangement leads to the correct diagnosis.
Patients have been predominantly adolescent boys and young adult men. Although most patients were previously healthy, the disease has been described in
immunosuppressed, solid organ allograft recipients. 598,602 Unusual sites of involvement such as skin, nasal cavity, gastrointestinal tract, lung, mucosal, and
larynx603,604 have been described. Although circulating neoplastic cells are usually not prominent, subtle bone marrow involvement may be present. 605,606
Despite the relatively bland appearance of the cells, this is an aggressive tumor. Complete remission can occur with combination chemotherapy, 594,606 but most
patients relapse. Long-term survival has been described with autologous bone marrow transplantation. 594,606
Subcutaneous Panniculitis-Like T-Cell Lymphoma
DEFINITION. Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell lymphoma is a T-cell lymphoma that preferentially infiltrates subcutaneous tissue, with atypical cells of varying size,

showing prominent tumor necrosis and karyorrhexis.
MORPHOLOGIC FEATURES. There is a variable mixture of small, medium, and large atypical cells, often containing irregular, hyperchromatic nuclei and pale cytoplasm.

Reactive histiocytes with phagocytized nuclear debris, lipid, or both are numerous. Granulomas may be present. Individual adipocytes are rimmed by neoplastic
cells. 551,607
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. Most cases express pan-T antigens and usually CD8, although they may be CD4+, express cytotoxic granule proteins TIA-1 and perforin, and in

most cases, the a-b TCR.608 Occasional cases derive from gd T cells. 607
GENETIC FEATURES. TCR g genes are rearranged; usually b but occasionally d chain genes are rearranged.

607

No specific cytogenetic abnormalities have been

described.
POSTULATED NORMAL COUNTERPART. The postulated normal counterpart is the mature cytotoxic T cell.
CLINICAL FEATURES AND THERAPY. Patients present with one or more subcutaneous nodules and are often misdiagnosed as having panniculitis. Hemophagocytic

syndrome is common. The disease may present in an indolent fashion but typically becomes aggressive. 551,607 Patients may respond to combination chemotherapy
regimens, but the responses are usually transient. These lymphomas are generally radiosensitive, and radiotherapy can be used to control symptoms. However, the

long-term outlook with this disorder is poor.
Anaplastic Large T/Null-Cell Lymphoma, Primary Systemic Type
DEFINITION. Anaplastic large T/null-cell lymphoma, primary systemic type, is a neoplasm of large lymphoid cells with pleomorphic or multiple nuclei and abundant

cytoplasm, a cohesive growth pattern, and sinusoidal spread in lymph nodes, expressing CD30 and either T-cell or no lineage-specific antigens, involving lymph
nodes or extranodal sites, but not limited to the skin.
MORPHOLOGIC FEATURES. The tumor is usually composed of large blastic cells with round or pleomorphic, often horseshoe-shaped or multiple nuclei with multiple or

single prominent nucleoli, and abundant cytoplasm, which gives the cells an epithelial or histiocyte-like appearance. The so-called hallmark cell has an eccentric
nucleus and a prominent, eosinophilic Golgi region. 609 The tumor cells grow in a cohesive pattern and often preferentially involve the lymph node sinuses or
paracortex.610 In some cases, the tumor cells may have a more monomorphous appearance, with round to oval nuclei and no Reed-Sternberg–like cells; these cases
have in common with the more anaplastic cases a low nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, with dense, abundant cytoplasm and a cohesive, often sinusoidal growth
pattern.611 Lymphohistiocytic and small cell variants have been described, again, more commonly in children. 612,613 Study of cytogenetic and molecular genetic
abnormalities as well as clinical features suggests that these cases belong to the same disease entity as the more anaplastic cases. 609,614
A variant of ALCL resembling Hodgkin's disease of nodular sclerosis type has been described, 615,616 originally called ALCL Hodgkin's-related and included as a
provisional entity under the name ALCL Hodgkin's-like, in the REAL.124 This subtype is defined as having architectural features of Hodgkin's disease (nodularity and
sclerosis), but cytologic features of ALCL (sheets of neoplastic cells and sinusoidal infiltration). Many patients are young adults with mediastinal masses, and the
outcome was said to be intermediate between that of typical ALCL and nodular sclerosis Hodgkin's disease. Several studies suggest that these are not true borderline
cases. First, most cases of ALCL Hodgkin's-like lack the t(2;5) or ALK protein. 617,618 Second, most cases of Hodgkin's disease are now thought to be B-cell derived,
based on single-cell studies showing Ig gene rearrangement, 559,619,620,621 and 622 while ALCL is predominantly a T-cell disease; thus, there should be no true biologic
borderline. Finally, a randomized study showed that patients with ALCL Hodgkin's-like responded equally well to the ABVD regimen for Hodgkin's disease as to a
MACOP-B regimen for aggressive NHL,623 suggesting a closer relationship to Hodgkin's disease than to typical ALCL. The current consensus is that the majority of
these cases can be resolved as either Hodgkin's disease (CD15+, CD30+ T-cell antigen, ALK–) or ALCL (CD15–, CD30+ T-cell antigen +/–, ALK+/–) by a
combination of morphology and immunophenotype. Thus, this category will be eliminated from the WHO classification. 130
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. The tumor cells are CD30+ and usually express CD25 and EMA; they are typically CD45+ and CD15–; approximately 60% express one or more

T-cell–associated antigens (CD3, CD43, or CD45RO). Studies have shown cytotoxic granule proteins in many of the cases. 624,625 The ALK protein can be detected in
40% to 60% of the cases using the ALK1 monoclonal antibody, showing both nuclear and cytoplasmic staining in cases with the t(2;5), since nucleophosmin is a
nuclear protein. ALK+ cases are more common in children and have a better prognosis than ALK– cases. 617,618,626
GENETIC FEATURES. The majority of the cases have TCR genes rearranged; 20% to 30% have no rearrangement of TCR or Ig genes. Between 20% and 50% of

primary systemic ALCL have a t(2;5), 627,628 which results in a fusion of the nucleophosmin gene (NPM) on chromosome 5 to a novel tyrosine kinase gene on
chromosome 2, called anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK). The specificity of this translocation for ALCL has been debated, in part because of differing criteria for the
diagnosis of ALCL. Using the reverse transcriptase–PCR or an antibody to the fusion protein, the fusion gene product can be detected in approximately 50% of ALCL
of T and null type; however, it is also detected in some T-cell lymphomas without obvious anaplastic morphology. 626,628,629 Based on illustrations published in some of
these articles, the so-called nonanaplastic cases appear to represent examples of the monomorphic, small cell, or histiocyte-rich variants. 628 Rare cases of B-cell
lymphoma with the t(2;5) have been reported. 626,630 Finally, variant translocations have been described, which also result in overexpression of ALK protein but without
the nuclear localization. 631
Based on current information, t(2;5) and ALK expression are not considered defining features of ALCL, since negative case results exist; however, the positive case
results appear clinically relatively homogeneous: young patients with a relatively good prognosis.
regressing atypical histiocytosis, 632
melanoma, metastatic carcinoma, sarcoma) or as lymphocyte-depleted Hodgkin's disease. A high index of suspicion is important in recognizing the tumor as
lymphoid; immunophenotyping studies on paraffin sections (CD45, CD30, pan-T antigens, lack of epithelial or melanocyte-associated antigens) usually confirm the
diagnosis.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS. Many cases of ALCL were previously diagnosed as nonlymphoid tumors (malignant histiocytic tumors,

627

CLINICAL FEATURES. Anaplastic large cell lymphoma represents approximately 2% of all lymphomas, but approximately 10% of childhood lymphomas and 50% of large

cell pediatric lymphomas.125,126 and 127,547,633,634
Primary systemic ALCL may involve lymph nodes or extranodal sites, including the skin, but is not localized to the skin. Tumors that present with systemic disease
(with or without skin involvement) have a bimodal age distribution in children and adults and are associated with the t(2;5), particularly in children, in 20% to 40% of
the cases. Patients may present with isolated lymphadenopathy or extranodal disease in any site, including gastrointestinal tract and bone. 633 Anaplastic large cell
lymphoma in children is characterized by frequent high stage but a good response to therapy with overall excellent survival. 628,633,634 In adults the tumor is aggressive
but potentially curable, similar to other aggressive lymphomas. 635 Cases with the t(2;5) have a significantly better prognosis than cases lacking the t(2;5). 626
THERAPY. Treatment regimens used for anaplastic large T/null-cell lymphoma of the primary systemic type are the same as used in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Treatment results have been excellent, with better survival in ALK+ patients (71% to 93%) than in ALK– patients (31% to 37%). 636 Excellent results are seen in adults
as well as children. 616,637 One report using autologous bone marrow transplantation early in the treatment of patients with anaplastic large cell lymphoma reported an
excellent treatment outcome.638

SPECIAL CLINICAL SITUATIONS
CHILDREN
See Chapter 45.2 for a discussion of lymphomas and leukemias in children.
ELDERLY PATIENTS
The incidence of NHL increases with age 2 and more than 50% of patients are beyond 60 years of age at diagnosis. 7,639,640 and 641 Some studies have failed to identify
age as an important prognostic factor in patients who receive aggressive therapy for NHL, 642 although the vast majority of studies have shown that elderly patients
have worse outcomes than younger patients.643,644,645,646,647,648 and 649 The International Prognostic Index demonstrated that NHL patients older than 60 years of age had
a significantly lower complete remission rate, greater chance of relapsing from remission (relative risk, 1.8), and higher risk of death (relative risk, 1.96). 133
There are several explanations for the poorer outcome in elderly adults. Some analyses have shown that older patients were more likely to have mortality from
chemotherapy-related toxicity than younger patients, despite similar complete remission rates. 650 Other studies have identified higher relapse rates in elderly
patients. 644 Still other analyses have shown inferior survival in elderly patients to be a result of increased deaths from cardiovascular disease and other nonrelapse
causes.645,648,651 A Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Classification Project demonstrated that elderly patients were more likely to have a high International Prognostic Index
than younger patients. 648 Other studies have shown that older patients are more likely to have poor performance status, 647 advanced-stage disease,652 and diffuse
histology 647,653 and are more likely to have extranodal disease. 641,653 Older patients are also more likely to have comorbid conditions. 639,647 These factors have often
led to arbitrary dose reductions or use of less aggressive therapy, which may reduce the possibility of cure. 639,646,647 and 648 This is exemplified by Southwest Oncology
Group studies that revealed a complete remission rate of 37% in patients 65 years of age and above who received initial 50% dose reductions of cyclophosphamide
and doxorubicin. 643 Complete remission rates were 52%, a rate similar to younger patients, when full-dose chemotherapy was used.
Some analyses have shown that less intensive regimens may be associated with diminished mortality and equivalent outcomes when compared with more aggressive

regimens in elderly NHL patients. 654 These results have led to a multitude of phase II trials of chemotherapy regimens designed specifically for treatment of elderly
patients with NHL. In general, these regimens have used anthracyclines with less cardiotoxicity than doxorubicin, have substituted mitoxantrone for
doxorubicin,447,655,656,657 and 658 or have used short-duration weekly therapy. 657,659,660,661,662 and 663 Although these regimens may be well-tolerated, selection bias and lack
of appropriate comparisons make it difficult to determine whether these novel regimens are superior to standard regimens.
Several prospective randomized trials have examined results of NHL treatments in elderly patients. A Canadian trial compared standard CHOP administered every 3
weeks with a regimen in which CHOP was administered weekly at a one-third dose. 437 Patients were 65 years of age or older and had intermediate-grade NHL. No
significant differences in complete response rate or progression-free survival were observed, although 2-year overall survival was 74% in the CHOP group and 51% in
patients given weekly therapy ( P = .05). A Dutch trial compared CHOP and CNOP (cyclophosphamide, mitoxantrone, vincristine, and prednisone) in patients 60 years
of age and older with aggressive NHL. 453 The complete response rate was 49% in CHOP-treated patients and 31% in patients who received CNOP ( P = .03). Overall
survival at 3 years was 42% and 26%, respectively. A trial from the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer randomized patients older than age
70 with aggressive NHL between treatment with CHOP and a regimen consisting of etoposide, mitoxantrone, and prednimustine. 446 The complete response rate was
77% in the CHOP arm and 50% in the etoposide, mitoxantrone, and prednimustine arm ( P = .01). Progression-free survival was also significantly longer in the CHOP
arm and overall survival at 2 years was 65% and 30%, respectively ( P = .004). A Groupe d'Etude des Lymphomes de l'Adulte trial randomized patients beyond 69
years of age with aggressive NHL to treatment with cyclophosphamide, teniposide, and prednisolone or to treatment with cyclophosphamide, teniposide,
prednisolone, and pirarubicin. 447 The complete remission rate was 47% in patients who received the anthracycline-containing regimen, as compared with 32% in the
cyclophosphamide, teniposide, and prednisolone arm ( P = .0001). Time to treatment failure was significantly longer in patients who received the more aggressive
regimen, and 5-year overall survival rates were 27% and 19%, respectively ( P <.05). A British National Lymphoma Investigation trial studied two treatment regimens
in patients older than age 60 with aggressive NHL. 664 Patients were randomized between six-drug regimens that contained either doxorubicin or mitoxantrone. Toxic
deaths were significantly less common in patients who received the mitoxantrone-containing regimen, and the complete remission rate was 62%, as compared with
55% in patients who received doxorubicin ( P = .07). Overall survival at 4 years was 55% and 35%, respectively ( P = .0014).
Another Groupe d'Etude des Lymphomes de l'Adulte prospective randomized trial compared fludarabine versus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, teniposide, and
prednisolone (CHVP) plus interferon in patients older than age 59 with follicular lymphoma. 665 Higher response rates were noted in patients treated with CHVP and
interferon. Two-year failure-free survival was 63% in the CHVP plus interferon arm and 49% in the fludarabine arm ( P <.05). Overall survival rates were 77% and
62%, respectively (P <.05).
Elderly patients who participate in clinical trials may be subject to selection bias, 647,666 although these results suggest that these patients may be able to tolerate
aggressive anthracycline-containing regimens. When adverse characteristics such as poor performance status are excluded, elderly NHL patients may have
outcomes similar to younger patients. 667 It seems unreasonable to arbitrarily reduce drug dosages or to withhold aggressive therapy because of chronologic age alone
in NHL patients with good performance status and without significant comorbidity. These patients should be treated aggressively with CHOP or similar regimens,
which can be reduced in intensity at a later time if not tolerated. Other patients may still be candidates for less aggressive therapy, or even a watch and wait
approach, if disease is behaving indolently. The use of colony-stimulating factors (CSFs) may allow elderly patients to receive planned chemotherapy doses, although
they may be less effective for the oldest patients and do not entirely prevent neutropenic complications. 668,669 A randomized trial showed that granulocyte-CSF
(G-CSF) was able to reduce the incidence of neutropenia and infection in elderly patients receiving an aggressive NHL regimen, although response rates and survival
were not significantly different. 670
POSTTRANSPLANT LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE DISORDERS
The risk of developing lymphoma is markedly increased following solid organ transplantation. 671 PTLDs occur in 0.8% to 20.0% of transplanted patients. 672 Although
mortality of 60% to 80% is frequently reported, more favorable outcomes have been described. 673 Identical disorders are seen after allogeneic bone marrow
transplantation, especially in recipients of T-cell–depleted marrow. PTLDs are almost always EBV-related, although cases unrelated to EBV have been described. 674
The development of PTLD results from proliferation of EBV-transformed B-cell clones when patients receive immunosuppressive therapy following transplantation. 672
Occasional cases of Hodgkin's disease and T-cell NHL have been reported. 675 Most PTLDs following solid organ transplants are host derived. 676
The histologic appearance of PTLD is highly variable. Classification systems with clinical relevance have been proposed. 677,678 and 679 Lesions may be polymorphic or
monomorphic. In some cases the appearance may resemble infectious mononucleosis and other cases may be indistinguishable from aggressive NHL or
plasmacytomas.677,678 Lesions may be polyclonal, oligoclonal, or monoclonal. Clinically, patients may have a syndrome similar to infectious mononucleosis with fevers,
lymphadenopathy, tonsillar enlargement, and hepatitis. This presentation is more common in children and is frequently seen in the first year after transplantation.
Other patients have nodal or extranodal presentations more typical of NHL. Involvement of the CNS and extranodal sites is common, as is involvement of the
transplanted organ. 671
The risk of PTLD is highest in recipients of heart-lung transplants and lowest in kidney transplant recipients, although the incidence rate is still 20 times higher than
the general population. 671 Patients who receive the most aggressive immunosuppression are also more likely to develop PTLD, 680 as are patients who are EBV
seronegative before transplant. 672 Disease that occurs more than 1 year after transplantation has been associated with worse outcome in most, 671,681,682 but not all,
reports.683 The presence of BCL-6 gene mutations may also correlate with histology and poor response to therapy. 684
No prospective trials of PTLD treatment have been performed, and management decisions must be individualized. Interpretation of results is also hampered by lack of
standardized histologic classification. Suggested treatment guidelines have been published. 672 Initial management should consist of reduction or cessation of
immunosuppression. Patients who develop early-onset PTLD are most likely to benefit from this approach. 681 Many investigators recommend concurrent
administration of acyclovir or ganciclovir, although the value of this approach has been questioned. 685 Surgical excision or RT may be curative for patients with
localized PTLD. 672,683,685,686 Surgery should be considered for patients with isolated PTLD in renal transplants. Patients who fail to respond to reduction of
immunosuppression can be treated with anthracycline-based combination chemotherapy. Durable remissions can be seen, although mortality is higher than
nonimmunosuppressed NHL patients.683 Interferon may also be considered for patients who are not progressing rapidly. 685
Responses have also been reported with anti–B-cell monoclonal antibodies, including rituximab. 682,687 This modality may be considered before the use of
chemotherapy. Autologous lymphokine-activated killer cell infusion has also been investigated for PTLD following solid organ transplantation, 688 and donor leukocyte
infusion has become accepted therapy for patients who develop PTLD following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. 689
HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS–ASSOCIATED NON-HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA
The risk of developing NHL is markedly increased in patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1. Large cell lymphomas, small noncleaved cell NHL,
and primary CNS lymphoma are considered AIDS-defining conditions. 690 The risk of developing NHL after another AIDS-defining diagnosis is increased 165-fold in
the first 3.5 years. 13
AIDS-related lymphomas are B-cell neoplasms. Virtually all primary CNS lymphomas and approximately 50% of other AIDS-related NHL are EBV-related. 63 Most
cases are classified as small noncleaved cell histology or diffuse large cell lymphoma. The risk of low-grade NHL may also be increased, although these lymphomas
are not considered to be diagnostic of AIDS. Small noncleaved cell lymphomas are associated with c-myc activation in virtually all cases and are frequently
associated with p53 mutations. 63 Rearrangements of bcl-6 are detected in approximately 40% of diffuse large cell lymphomas. Primary effusion lymphoma is seen in
1% to 3% of AIDS patients and is associated with HHV-8. 63,77
AIDS-associated NHL usually behaves aggressively. Systemic symptoms are common, along with involvement of extranodal sites. 691 Gastrointestinal tract
involvement is common, as well as unusual sites such as anus and rectum, skin and soft tissues, and heart. Approximately 15% of cases are primary CNS
lymphomas.13 The prognosis for AIDS-associated NHL is poor. Median survival averages approximately 6 months and 2-year survival rates are 10% to 20%. 13,692
Factors associated with improved survival include higher CD4 counts, 692,693 and 694 EBV-negative lymphomas,692 higher performance status,691,693,695 younger age, 694
and low stage. 694,695 Patients with a history of drug abuse have worse outcomes, 694 and outcome is better for patients without an AIDS-defining illness before NHL

diagnosis. 691,693,695
Aggressive chemotherapy regimens are associated with significant toxicity, and the use of lower dose chemotherapy regimens have been investigated. A randomized
trial comparing m-BACOD with reduced-dose m-BACOD demonstrated median survival rates of 31 weeks and 35 weeks, respectively ( P = .25), with less toxicity in the
low-dose arm.696 Similar survival has been noted in a phase II trial of oral lomustine, etoposide, cyclophosphamide, and procarbazine. 697 Median survival was 9.3
months in AIDS-associated NHL patients who received the LNH-84 regimen, which incorporates CNS prophylaxis. 698 Median survival was 18 months using a regimen
of continuous infusion cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and etoposide combined with didanosine, 699 and median survival was 13 months using weekly methotrexate
combined with zidovudine.700
The lack of randomized trials makes it difficult to reach consensus on management approaches for AIDS patients with NHL. Dose-modified regimens should be
considered, although many patients can tolerate full-dose chemotherapy. 696,698 Other investigators have recommended CHOP or similar regimens for low-risk patients,
and dose-attenuated regimens for patients with poor performance status, low CD4 counts, or a prior AIDS-defining condition. 701 The benefits of CSFs are uncertain,
and no clear survival advantages have been demonstrated, although routine use may be justified. 702,703 Antiretroviral therapy and prophylactic antibiotics should be
continued during therapy. 698,701 There are differing opinions on the use of CNS prophylaxis, 698,701 although patients with small noncleaved histology and those with
sinus or testicular involvement should receive prophylactic intrathecal therapy.
The prognosis for AIDS patients with primary CNS lymphoma is also poor. Standard therapy has consisted of whole brain irradiation, although median survival is 3 to
4 months.698 Patients may respond to high-dose methotrexate, and the role of combined modality therapy is being investigated. No standardized approaches have
been developed for primary effusion lymphoma and these patients should probably be treated like other patients with AIDS-related NHL.
EXTRANODAL SITES
Primary Central Nervous System Lymphoma
Primary CNS lymphoma accounts for less than 5% of all primary brain tumors and approximately 1% to 2% of all lymphomas in immunocompetent patients. 704 The
incidence of primary CNS lymphoma rises with age and has increased four times as rapidly as extranodal NHL as a whole, although there is controversy as to whether
this increase is entirely explained by the AIDS epidemic. 8 Most cases are large cell lymphoma, although other histologic subtypes can be observed. 705 Ocular
lymphoma is common and slit-lamp examination should be performed for all patients. Leptomeningeal involvement also occurs commonly. Corticosteroid
administration may lead to rapid regression of primary CNS lymphoma and make it difficult to obtain diagnostic tissue. Every effort should be made to perform
biopsies before corticosteroids are administered to patients with suspected CNS lymphoma.
The median survival of untreated patients is less than 4 months. Median survival was 16 months and actuarial 5-year survival was 19% in a series of 226 patients
treated heterogeneously. 705 Overall survival is not improved after surgical resection, and surgery has little role except for diagnostic purposes. The use of RT
improves overall survival, although median survival after whole brain radiation is only approximately 12 months, a rate similar to glioblastoma multiforme. 706 Most
patients progress locally after RT despite high rates of remission.
Conventional regimens such as CHOP have little efficacy in primary CNS lymphoma. 707,708 Several regimens designed specifically for treatment of primary CNS
lymphoma have been developed. These regimens have generally employed drugs that penetrate the CNS, such as methotrexate and cytarabine, combined with
intrathecal prophylaxis, and RT. 705,709,710 and 711 It is thought that RT should be administered after chemotherapy because of evidence that neurotoxicity is enhanced if
radiation is administered first. Results from these phase II studies, as well as retrospective analyses, suggest that overall survival rates are improved with the use of
chemotherapy regimens containing high-dose methotrexate. 708,712
Unfortunately, the use of whole brain radiation results in rates of leukoencephalopathy that may be as high as 25% 5 years after treatment. 708 In other studies, the rate
of neurotoxicity was estimated to be nearly 80% in patients over the age of 60 who survived at least 1 year after treatment. 713 Few patients return to their former
functional status after treatment for primary CNS lymphoma and median survival is less than 12 months for patients who develop neurotoxicity. 708
Analyses of patient-related prognostic factors have consistently identified age over 60 years and poor performance status as adverse prognostic characteristics for
patients with primary CNS lymphoma.706,708,712 It has been suggested that improved results associated with combined modality therapy may be due to patient
selection, 714,715 and some trials have shown that regimens using chemotherapy, without whole brain radiation, may be as good as combined modality therapy. 716,717 and
718
Other investigators have reported high response rates using osmotic blood–brain barrier disruption and intraarterial chemotherapy for patients with primary CNS
lymphoma.719
We recommend that patients receive initial therapy with a regimen that uses high-dose methotrexate. It is unknown whether this eliminates the need for intrathecal
therapy, although some analyses have shown that overall survival was improved using regimens that included intrathecal chemotherapy. 712 The use of radiation as
initial therapy should be avoided, except in patients who are unlikely to tolerate chemotherapy. Because of the risk of leukoencephalopathy, withholding radiation after
chemotherapy may be considered, especially in older patients who achieve a complete remission with chemotherapy.
Testicle
Primary testicular NHL accounts for approximately 1% to 9% of all testicular neoplasms and is the most common testicular neoplasm in men over the age of 60. 720,721
Testicular lymphoma is frequently associated with involvement of Waldeyer's ring, skin and subcutaneous tissue, lung, and CNS. Involvement of the contralateral
testis is common at diagnosis or later in the course of disease. Most tumors are classified as diffuse large cell histology or immunoblastic lymphoma, although Burkitt's
lymphoma is common in children, and follicular lymphomas and other histologic subtypes have been described. 721,722 and 723
Most series have reported poor outcomes with relatively few long-term survivors. Five-year overall survival was 17% in a Danish population-based study. 724 Median
survival is less than 12 months in many series, 720 although somewhat better results have been reported in more recent series. 725,726,727 and 728 Nevertheless long-term
disease-free survival is poor, especially for patients with advanced disease, and most series have failed to show a survival plateau. Factors reported to be associated
with improved outcome have included localized disease, 723,724,729 low International Prognostic Index score, 727,730 age, 725 presence of sclerosis within biopsies, 729 tumor
size,731 and right-sided tumors. 729,732
Orchiectomy is universally recommended as initial therapy for patients with localized disease. Although long-term disease-free survival has been described after
orchiectomy alone, the vast majority of patients relapse, and this is not adequate therapy, even for patients with IE disease. 720 Furthermore, relapse rates exceeding
50% have been observed in the majority of reports in which adjuvant RT was used following orchiectomy. Relapses often occur in extranodal sites, and this suggests
that testicular NHL is usually a systemic disease, even when clinically localized. 720
These poor results have led to use of chemotherapy following orchiectomy for patients with stage IE and IIE disease. The Danish Lymphoma Study Group noted that
the relapse rate was 15.4% for stage IE or IIE patients who received combination chemotherapy after orchiectomy, as compared with 63.6% for the remaining patients
(P <.05).724 Median relapse-free survival was 28 months and 14 months, respectively. An analysis of men with stage IE disease at Harvard demonstrated that 5-year
relapse-free survival was 75% for men who got adjuvant chemotherapy, as compared with 50% for those who received no adjuvant therapy. 733 However, by 10 years
no difference in relapse-free survival was observed. The best results in patients with stage IE and IIE disease have been reported by the Vancouver group. 734 Patients
were treated with a brief course of doxorubicin-based chemotherapy followed by scrotal radiation for stage IE patients and additional pelvic and paraaortic radiation
for patients with stage IIE disease. The 4-year overall survival and relapse-free survival rates were 93%, as compared with 50% in a historic control group treated with
orchiectomy and radiation alone. No relapses in the contralateral testis or CNS were observed, and the routine use of CNS prophylaxis was thought to be
unnecessary.
However, other groups have reported CNS relapses and contralateral testis relapse after doxorubicin-based chemotherapy and RT in stage IE patients. 727,728,730,733
The use of adjuvant radiation has been recommended by some groups, 734,735 whereas others found no apparent advantage when pelvic or paraaortic radiation was

added to stage IE patients who received chemotherapy. 720,733 High rates of CNS relapse with aggressive combination chemotherapy have led some groups to
recommend routine CNS prophylaxis724,725 and 726,730,735 or to consider this for patients who achieve remission. 720 Others have questioned the value of this
approach. 728,734 The high rate of contralateral testis recurrence has led some to recommend prophylactic scrotal radiation. 723,728,730,734
Cardiac
Lymphoma involving the heart is not often recognized clinically. Cardiac involvement can be primary or secondary. Patients with mediastinal involvement by a
lymphoma frequently have secondary cardiac involvement, particularly pericardial disease. 736 In one series, 64% of the patients presenting with mediastinal lymphoma
were found to have cardiac involvement, with pericardial infusions or infiltration being the most common finding. 736 In one series of 150 patients undergoing autopsies
after death from lymphoma, cardiac involvement was found in 9%.737 Cardiac involvement is most often identified by echocardiography, but MRI and radionuclide
studies can be helpful. 736,738 Patients with secondary cardiac involvement are most likely to present with symptoms of pericardial disease, although arrhythmias have
been described 739 as well as ventricular perforation. 752
Primary cardiac lymphoma is unusual, but several cases have been described. 740,741,742,743,744 and 745 Primary cardiac lymphoma is often reported in patients with
AIDS,743,744,746 but is also seen in immunocompetent patients. 743,745 Primary cardiac lymphoma is often found at autopsy because of difficulty in diagnosis. However,
responses to combination chemotherapy are possible. 742
Thyroid and Adrenal
Most cases of thyroid NHL arise in a background of Hashimoto's thyroiditis, 54,747,748 and evidence of thyroiditis is frequently detected in biopsies. 749,750 and 751 Most
thyroid lymphomas are classified as diffuse large cell lymphomas and most of the remainder are MALT lymphomas. 54 These lymphomas may be difficult to distinguish
from thyroiditis, especially when fine-needle aspirates are performed. Large cell lymphomas frequently have a small cell component, suggesting a MALT
origin. 747,748,751,752 Factors reported to be associated with better prognosis have included lack of bulk, 750,753 stage IE disease, 753,754 and 755 and absence of mediastinal or
retrosternal extension. 749,753,755
The role of surgery in the management of thyroid NHL is controversial. Some authors have recommended complete surgical excision whenever possible, 749,756 while
others have argued against the use of extensive resection, particularly for patients with large cell histology, except for rare cases in which disease is confined to the
thyroid and resection can be accomplished without morbidity. 54,753,757,758 Results of RT for thyroid lymphoma vary widely, with 5-year relapse-free survival rates of 38%
to 64%.54 A retrospective BNLI study showed a 5-year cause-specific survival of 90% following RT of thyroid lymphomas of MALT origin, as compared with 55% for
patients without MALT histology ( P <.01).759 Radiation therapy alone is usually inadequate for primary large cell lymphoma, and reports have shown better outcomes
with the addition of chemotherapy. 750,760 Patients with localized thyroid large cell lymphoma can be successfully treated with a brief course of anthracycline-based
chemotherapy followed by involved-field radiation in the same manner as other localized lymphomas. 403 Patients with disseminated disease should receive a full
course of chemotherapy.
Primary adrenal lymphoma is unusual. Most patients have diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, and the disease is sometimes bilateral. 761,762 The disease might present with
adrenal insufficiency, but more commonly the presenting manifestation is an adrenal mass that might be found incidentally on imaging studies.
Pancreas
Lymphoma presenting in the pancreas is rare. Lymphomas presenting in the pancreas are usually diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Although rare, recognizing their
presence is extremely important for the patient. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma has a much better prognosis than adenocarcinoma of the pancreas, and failure to make
an accurate histologic diagnosis keeps a patient from appropriate therapy and a chance for cure.
Breast
Lymphomas presenting in the breast are rare. 763 Lymphomas in this site can be MALT lymphomas, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, and Burkitt's lymphoma. Breast
involvement and Burkitt's lymphoma have been seen particularly in association with pregnancy. 764
Kidney, Ureter, Bladder, and Prostate
Lymphomas presenting in the kidney, ureter, bladder, and prostate are rare. 765 The most common lymphoma seen involving the kidney is diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma. Prostatic involvement by lymphoma is often related to SLL.
Ovary, Uterus, and Vagina
Lymphomas presenting in the female genital tract are rare. 766,767 The most common has been diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, although MALT lymphoma can be
seen.768 An accurate histologic diagnosis is important to avoid inappropriate therapy.
Eye and Orbit
Lymphomas presenting in the orbit are most often MALT lymphomas. 769,770,771,772,773 and 774 In the past, these tumors were often called pseudolymphomas. In one series,
80% were MALT lymphomas, 14% were diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, and rare cases of mantle cell lymphoma and lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma were seen. 769
Patients with MALT lymphomas in the orbit most often present with unilateral swelling and most have stage I disease. Treatments used have included observation,
radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and combined modality therapy. Radiotherapy alone can produce durable remissions in the majority of patients with localized disease
and is probably the treatment of choice. Patients with more aggressive subtypes of lymphoma should be treated with modalities appropriate for that subtype.
Primary ocular lymphoma most often presents with altered vision or uveitis that is refractory to therapy. 775,776,777,778 and 779 Patients might also present with photophobia,
a red eye, retinal detachment, pain, glaucoma, or the symptoms of lymphoma involving other parts of the CNS. Intraocular lymphoma should be considered one
presentation of primary CNS lymphoma. Treatment of these patients should include radiotherapy of the eye along with combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy to
treat the entire CNS. 717
Lung
Lymphomas presenting in the lung are unusual and have a wide variety of histologic appearances. These include MALT lymphomas, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma,
lymphomatoid granulomatosis (which is usually a manifestation of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma), and intravascular lymphomatosis. 780 MALT lymphomas in the lung
and at other extranodal sites have an indolent course. Surgery can sometimes be curative. Patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma should receive aggressive
combination chemotherapy regimens.
Bone
NHL presenting primarily in the bone makes up as many as 5% of extranodal NHLs. Since the report by Parker and Jackson, 781 this has been recognized as a distinct
clinical pathologic entity. The vast majority of patients have diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and present with bone pain, a palpable mass, or both. 406,782,783,784,785 and 786 As
is always true in diagnosing lymphomas, an adequate biopsy is essential for accurate diagnosis.
Most patients with primary lymphoma of the bone have localized disease, often with extension to adjacent soft tissues. The masses can be quite large. Patients have
been treated with radiotherapy, chemotherapy, or combined modality therapy. 406,782,783,784 and 785,787,788,789 and 790 There is a trend in these reports for better failure-free

survival in patients treated with combined modality therapy. Patients should be managed in conjunction with an orthopedic surgeon because of the risk of fracture.
Delayed follow-up should include observation for avascular necrosis as a consequence of the therapy.
Pleura
Pleural involvement in NHL is not rare, with a frequency as high as 20% being reported. 791 Pleural involvement can be seen at presentation of the lymphoma or
develop during the course of the disease. Effusions can be seen in any subtype of NHL. Most effusions are exudative, with a few patients having chylous effusion.
Cytologic examination results are often positive. 792 In SLL the diagnosis can be difficult because of the bland nature of the lymphoma cells in the fluid. In these
circumstances, demonstration of a B-cell immunophenotype can be helpful, since most reactive pleural effusions have predominantly T lymphocytes. 793,794 The
presence of pleural effusion at the time of diagnosis does not seem to adversely affect prognosis in comparison with other patients with similar stages. 792
A distinct type of pleural involvement by lymphoma has been referred to as pleural effusion lymphoma.77 These patients demonstrate Kaposi's sarcoma–associated
herpesvirus (also known as HHV-8) in the lymphoma cells.77,795,796 These tumors also have been associated with EBV infection. 797 Patients have diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas, sometimes with immunoblastic or anaplastic appearance. 77 These lymphomas rarely express c-myc, bcl-2, or bcl-6 gene rearrangement. The tumors
often remain confined to the pleura. These patients have a poor prognosis, probably in large part because of the frequent occurrence of this lymphoma in patients
infected by the human immunodeficiency virus. However, this lymphoma has been reported in patients with negative results for human immunodeficiency virus. 798
Skin
Following the gastrointestinal tract, the skin is the second most common extranodal site primarily involved by NHL. As opposed to lymph nodes and most other
extranodal sites of presentation of lymphoma, the skin is unusual in that T-cell lymphomas occur more frequently than B-cell lymphomas. The most common
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, mycosis fungoides, is dealt with in Chapter 45.4. The most common presentation is a new or unusual skin lesion.
Skin lymphomas can be classified using the WHO classification. However, the European Organization for Research on the Treatment of Cancer 799 has also
developed a classification that specifically deals with primary cutaneous lymphomas. An important feature interpreting any histologic diagnosis of a cutaneous
lymphoma is to remember that the clinical behavior may be different than when the same diagnosis is identified in nodal or other extranodal sites. It is also important
to realize that full-thickness biopsies usually are required for diagnosis. The diagnosis of cutaneous lymphomas can be extremely difficult, even with
immunohistochemical and molecular genetics studies. Repeat biopsies are sometimes required for a definite diagnosis. In addition, the clinical history may be
important in making the diagnosis. Lymphomatoid papulosis is histologically quite similar to CD30+, T/null-cell lymphomas in the skin. Often a history of chronic
recurring lesions is the key to making the correct diagnosis. 800,801,802 and 803 There is a clinical spectrum of cutaneous CD30+ lymphoproliferative disorders ranging from
the benign behavior of lymphomatoid papulosis to an aggressive anaplastic large cell lymphoma. 804 Peripheral T-cell lymphomas that are CD30– can involve the skin
and typically follow an aggressive clinical course. 805 Tumors with a high proportion of large cells seem to be more aggressive. Angiocentric lymphomas can also have
cutaneous presentations and are associated with a highly aggressive course.
Primary B-cell lymphomas in the skin are less common, but occur more frequently than previously appreciated. These can include marginal zone lymphoma and
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Marginal zone lymphomas of the skin are typically of MALT type. 806,807 and 808 These lymphomas have an excellent survival with local
therapy, although local recurrence sometimes occurs. Primary diffuse large B-cell lymphoma occurring on the trunk tends to behave indolently and can be managed
with local therapy, in contrast to those that occur on the legs, which tend to follow a more aggressive course. 799,809,810
Paranasal Sinuses
Paranasal sinuses represent an unusual site of presentation of NHL in North America. In North America most of these patients have diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, 811
in contrast to frequent T-cell or NK-cell lymphoma with angiocentric involvement seen in Asia. 567 Patients typically present with pain, rhinorrhea, airway obstruction,
swelling, epistaxis, proptosis, or diplopia. In general, patients with disease confined to the primary site should receive combined modality therapy, with a combination
chemotherapy regimen including an anthracycline followed by radiotherapy. In some patients, the radiotherapy might be not given and a longer course of
chemotherapy may be used because of concerns about visual toxicity or persistently dry mouth. Because this type of lymphoma has a predilection to spread to the
CNS, these patients should receive prophylactic CNS treatment with intrathecal chemotherapy.
Gastrointestinal Tract
Gastrointestinal tract represents the most frequent extranodal site of presentation of NHLs. Lymphomas can present in the oral pharynx, 812,813 and 814 esophagus, 815
stomach,816,817,818,819,820 and 821 small intestine,822,823 or rectum.824 In North America, lymphomas in most of these sites are predominantly diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.
In the stomach MALT lymphomas represent a minority of NHLs in the United States, but are more common in other areas in the world. 20 Lymphomas occurring in the
small intestine can include enteropathy associated T-cell lymphomas and lymphomas arising in immunoproliferative disease of the small intestine. 825,826 In addition,
Burkitt's lymphomas as well as diffuse large B-cell lymphoma can be seen in the rectum in patients affected with human immunodeficiency virus. 824 Patients
presenting with multiple polyps in the colon usually have mantle cell lymphoma. 827
Symptoms and signs of presentation reflect the site of involvement. The most serious presenting symptoms include perforation and bleeding. These can also be
complications of therapy. Because of the seriousness of perforation of the colon, removal before the administration of systemic therapy is often appropriate. For
patients presenting with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in other sites, it is now clear that surgery, while associated with a modest chance for cure, 821,828 is not required
for cure, and that chemotherapy with or without radiotherapy seems to yield a higher cure rate. 818,819 and 820 Patients with gastric MALT lymphoma can be treated with
eradication of H pylori as described in the section on MALT lymphoma (see Infectious Agents, earlier in this chapter). For patients with MALT lymphoma who do not
respond to this treatment but have disease confined to the stomach, radiotherapy is usually curative.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Greenlee RT, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics, 2000. CA Cancer J Clin 2000;50:7.
2. Ries LAG, Kosary CL, Hankey BF, et al. SEER cancer statistics review. Bethesda, MD, 1999.
3. Rabkin CS, Devesa SS, Zahm SH, Gail MH. Increasing incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Semin Hematol 1993;30:286.
4. Newton R, Ferlay J, Beral V, Devesa SS. The epidemiology of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: comparison of nodal and extra-nodal sites. Int J Cancer 1997;72:923.
5. Seow A, Lee J, Sng I, Fong CM, Lee HP. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in an Asian population: 19681992 time trends and ethnic differences in Singapore. Cancer 1996;77:1899.
6. Greiner TC, Medeiros LJ, Jaffe ES. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer 1995;75:370.
7. Glass AG, Karnell LH, Menck HR. The National Cancer Data Base report on non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer 1997;80:2311.
8. Hartge P, Devesa SS, Fraumeni JF Jr. Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Cancer Surv 1994;20:423.
9. Devesa SS, Fears T. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma time trends: United States and international data. Cancer Res 1992;52:5432s.
10. Cartwright R, Brincker H, Carli PM, et al. The rise in incidence of lymphomas in Europe 19851992. Eur J Cancer 1999;35:627.
11. Rolland-Portal I, Tazi MA, Milan C, Couillault C, Carli PM. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: time trends for incidence and survival in Cote-d'Or, France. Int J Epidemiol 1997;26:945.
12. Corn BW, Marcus SM, Topham A, Hauck W, Curran WJ Jr. Will primary central nervous system lymphoma be the most frequent brain tumor diagnosed in the year 2000? Cancer
1997;79:2409.
13. Cote TR, Biggar RJ, Rosenberg PS, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma among people with AIDS: incidence, presentation and public health burden. AIDS/Cancer Study Group. Int J Cancer
1997;73:645.
14. Krogh-Jensen M, D'Amore F, Jensen MK, et al. Clinicopathological features, survival and prognostic factors of primary central nervous system lymphomas: trends in incidence of primary
central nervous system lymphomas and primary malignant brain tumors in a well-defined geographical area. Population-based data from the Danish Lymphoma Registry, LYFO, and the Danish
Cancer Registry. Leuk Lymphoma 1995;19:223.
15. Hao D, DiFrancesco LM, Brasher PM, et al. Is primary CNS lymphoma really becoming more common? A population-based study of incidence, clinicopathological features and outcomes in
Alberta from 1975 to 1996. Ann Oncol 1999;10:65.
16. Ziegler JL. Burkitt's lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1981;305:735.
17. Doglioni C, Wotherspoon AC, Moschini A, de Boni M, Isaacson PG. High incidence of primary gastric lymphoma in northeastern Italy [see comments]. Lancet 1992;339:834.
18. Shih LY, Liang DC. Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas in Asia. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1991;5:983.
19. Ortega V, Verastegui E, Flores G, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas in Mexico. A clinicopathological and molecular analysis. Leuk Lymphoma 1998;31:575.
20. Anderson JR, Armitage JO, Weisenburger DD. Epidemiology of the non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: distributions of the major subtypes differ by geographic locations. Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma
Classification Project. Ann Oncol 1998;9:717.
21. Herrinton LJ, Goldoft M, Schwartz SM, Weiss NS. The incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and its histologic subtypes in Asian migrants to the United States and their descendants. Cancer

Causes Control 1996;7:224.
22. Dinse GE, Umbach DM, Sasco AJ, Hoel DG, Davis DL. Unexplained increases in cancer incidence in the United States from 1975 to 1994: possible sentinel health indicators? Annu Rev Public
Health 1999;20:173.
23. Banks PM. Changes in diagnosis of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas over time. Cancer Res 1992;52:5453s.
24. Hartge P, Devesa SS. Quantification of the impact of known risk factors on time trends in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma incidence. Cancer Res 1992;52:5566s.
25. Holford TR, Zheng T, Mayne ST, McKay LA. Time trends of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: are they real? What do they mean? Cancer Res 1992;52:5443s.
26. Gail MH, Pluda JM, Rabkin CS, et al. Projections of the incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma related to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:695.
27. Lynch HT, Marcus JN, Lynch JF. Genetics of Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a review. Cancer Invest 1992;10:247.
28. Linet MS, Pottern LM. Familial aggregation of hematopoietic malignancies and risk of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer Res 1992;52:5468s.
29. Zhu K, Levine RS, Gu Y, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and family history of malignant tumors in a case- control study (United States). Cancer Causes Control 1998;9:77.
30. Siebert R, Louie D, Lacher M, Schluger A, Offit K. Familial Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: different patterns in first-degree relatives. Leuk Lymphoma 1997;27:503.
31. Weintraub M, Lin AY, Franklin J, et al. Absence of germline p53 mutations in familial lymphoma. Oncogene 1996;12:687.
32. Filipovich AH, Mathur A, Kamat D, Shapiro RS. Primary immunodeficiencies: genetic risk factors for lymphoma. Cancer Res 1992;52:5465s.
33. Mueller BU, Pizzo PA. Cancer in children with primary or secondary immunodeficiencies [see comments]. J Pediatr 1995;126:1.
34. Elenitoba-Johnson KS, Jaffe ES. Lymphoproliferative disorders associated with congenital immunodeficiencies. Semin Diagn Pathol 1997;14:35.
35. Morrell D, Cromartie E, Swift M. Mortality and cancer incidence in 263 patients with ataxia- telangiectasia. J Natl Cancer Inst 1986;77:89.
36. Taylor AM, Metcalfe JA, Thick J, Mak YF. Leukemia and lymphoma in ataxia telangiectasia. Blood 1996;87:423.
37. Lavin MF, Shiloh Y. The genetic defect in ataxia-telangiectasia. Annu Rev Immunol 1997;15:177.
38. Schaffner C, Stilgenbauer S, Rappold GA, Dohner H, Lichter P. Somatic ATM mutations indicate a pathogenic role of ATM in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1999;94:748.
39. Stilgenbauer S, Schaffner C, Winkler D, et al. The ATM gene in the pathogenesis of mantle-cell lymphoma. Ann Oncol 2000;11:127.
40. Perry GSD, Spector BD, Schuman LM, et al. The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome in the United States and Canada (18921979). J Pediatr 1980;97:72.
41. Kinlen LJ, Webster AD, Bird AG, et al. Prospective study of cancer in patients with hypogammaglobulinaemia. Lancet 1985;1:263.
42. Levine AM. Lymphoma complicating immunodeficiency disorders. Ann Oncol 1994;5:29.
43. Purtilo DT. Opportunistic non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in X-linked recessive immunodeficiency and lymphoproliferative syndromes. Semin Oncol 1977;4:335.
44. Sumegi J, Gross TG, Seemayer TA. The molecular genetics of X-linked lymphoproliferative (Duncan's) disease. Cancer J Sci Am 1999;5:57.
45. Yin L, Ferrand V, Lavoue MF, et al. SH2D1A mutation analysis for diagnosis of XLP in typical and atypical patients. Hum Genet 1999;105:501.
46. Kinlen L. Immunosuppressive therapy and acquired immunological disorders. Cancer Res 1992;52:5474s.
47. Gridley G, McLaughlin JK, Ekbom A, et al. Incidence of cancer among patients with rheumatoid arthritis [see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:307.
48. Mellemkjaer L, Linet MS, Gridley G, et al. Rheumatoid arthritis and cancer risk. Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:1753.
49. Moder KG, Tefferi A, Cohen MD, Menke DM, Luthra HS. Hematologic malignancies and the use of methotrexate in rheumatoid arthritis: a retrospective study. Am J Med 1995;99:276.
50. Kamel OW, Holly EA, van de Rijn M, Lele C, Sah A. A population based, case control study of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol 1999;26:1676.
51. Royer B, Cazals-Hatem D, Sibilia J, et al. Lymphomas in patients with Sjogren's syndrome are marginal zone B-cell neoplasms, arise in diverse extranodal and nodal sites, and are not
associated with viruses. Blood 1997;90:766.
52. Valesini G, Priori R, Bavoillot D, et al. Differential risk of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in Italian patients with primary Sjogren's syndrome. J Rheumatol 1997;24:2376.
53. Mariette X. Lymphomas in patients with Sjogren's syndrome: review of the literature and physiopathologic hypothesis. Leuk Lymphoma 1999;33:93.
54. Ansell SM, Grant CS, Habermann TM. Primary thyroid lymphoma. Semin Oncol 1999;26:316.
55. Abu-Shakra M, Gladman DD, Urowitz MB. Malignancy in systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum 1996;39:1050.
56. Pricolo VE, Mangi AA, Aswad B, Bland KI. Gastrointestinal malignancies in patients with celiac sprue. Am J Surg 1998;176:344.
57. Gale J, Simmonds PD, Mead GM, Sweetenham JW, Wright DH. Enteropathy-type intestinal T-cell lymphoma: clinical features and treatment of 31 patients in a single center. J Clin Oncol
2000;18:795.
58. Magrath I. Molecular basis of lymphomagenesis. Cancer Res 1992;52:5529s.
59. zur Hausen H. Viruses in human cancers. Science 1991;254:1167.
60. Tao Q, Robertson KD, Manns A, Hildesheim A, Ambinder RF. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in endemic Burkitt's lymphoma: molecular analysis of primary tumor tissue [published erratum appears in
Blood 1998;91:3091]. Blood 1998;91:1373.
61. Griffin BE, Xue SA. Epstein-Barr virus infections and their association with human malignancies: some key questions. Ann Med 1998;30:249.
62. Shiramizu B, Barriga F, Neequaye J, et al. Patterns of chromosomal breakpoint locations in Burkitt's lymphoma: relevance to geography and Epstein-Barr virus association. Blood
1991;77:1516.
63. Gaidano G, Carbone A, Dalla-Favera R. Genetic basis of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related lymphomagenesis. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1998;23:95.
64. Kieff E. Current perspectives on the molecular pathogenesis of virus-induced cancers in human immunodeficiency virus infection and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. J Natl Cancer Inst
Monogr 1998;23:7.
65. Subar M, Neri A, Inghirami G, Knowles DM, Dalla-Favera R. Frequent c-myc oncogene activation and infrequent presence of Epstein-Barr virus genome in AIDS-associated lymphoma. Blood
1988;72:667.
66. Liebowitz D. Epstein-Barr virus and a cellular signaling pathway in lymphomas from immunosuppressed patients [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1413.
67. Manns A, Hisada M, La Grenade L. Human T-lymphotropic virus type I infection [see comments]. Lancet 1999;353:1951.
68. Franchini G. Molecular mechanisms of human T-cell leukemia/lymphotropic virus type I infection. Blood 1995;86:3619.
69. Arisawa K, Soda M, Endo S, et al. Evaluation of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma incidence and its impact on non-Hodgkin lymphoma incidence in southwestern Japan. Int J Cancer
2000;85:319.
70. Blayney DW, Jaffe ES, Blattner WA, et al. The human T-cell leukemia/lymphoma virus associated with American adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma. Blood 1983;62:401.
71. Mori N, Fujii M, Ikeda S, et al. Constitutive activation of NF-kappaB in primary adult T-cell leukemia cells. Blood 1999;93:2360.
72. Hisada M, Okayama A, Shioiri S, et al. Risk factors for adult T-cell leukemia among carriers of human T-lymphotropic virus type I. Blood 1998;92:3557.
73. Antman K, Chang Y. Kaposi's sarcoma. N Engl J Med 2000;342:1027.
74. Soulier J, Grollet L, Oksenhendler E, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in multicentric Castleman's disease [see comments]. Blood 1995;86:1276.
75. Cesarman E, Chang Y, Moore PS, Said JW, Knowles DM. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in AIDS-related body-cavity-based lymphomas [see comments]. N
Engl J Med 1995;332:1186.
76. Mesri EA, Cesarman E, Arvanitakis L, et al. Human herpesvirus-8/Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus is a new transmissible virus that infects B cells. J Exp Med 1996;183:2385.
77. Nador RG, Cesarman E, Chadburn A, et al. Primary effusion lymphoma: a distinct clinicopathologic entity associated with the Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpes virus. Blood 1996;88:645.
78. Silvestri F, Pipan C, Barillari G, et al. Prevalence of hepatitis C virus infection in patients with lymphoproliferative disorders. Blood 1996;87:4296.
79. Zuckerman E, Zuckerman T, Levine AM, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection in patients with B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma [see comments]. Ann Intern Med 1997;127:423.
80. De Vita S, Sansonno D, Dolcetti R, et al. Hepatitis C virus within a malignant lymphoma lesion in the course of type II mixed cryoglobulinemia. Blood 1995;86:1887.
81. Karavattathayyil SJ, Kalkeri G, Liu HJ, et al. Detection of hepatitis C virus RNA sequences in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Am J Clin Pathol 2000;113:391.
82. Dammacco F, Gatti P, Sansonno D. Hepatitis C virus infection, mixed cryoglobulinemia, and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: an emerging picture. Leuk Lymphoma 1998;31:463.
83. Shariff S, Yoshida EM, Gascoyne RD, et al. Hepatitis C infection and B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in British Columbia: a cross-sectional analysis. Ann Oncol 1999;10:961.
84. Wotherspoon AC. Gastric lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue and Helicobacter pylori. Annu Rev Med 1998;49:289.
85. Wotherspoon AC, Ortiz-Hidalgo C, Falzon MR, Isaacson PG. Helicobacter pylori-associated gastritis and primary B-cell gastric lymphoma [see comments]. Lancet 1991;338:1175.
86. Parsonnet J, Hansen S, Rodriguez L, et al. Helicobacter pylori infection and gastric lymphoma [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1994;330:1267.
87. Zucca E, Bertoni F, Roggero E, et al. Molecular analysis of the progression from Helicobacter pylori-associated chronic gastritis to mucosa-associated lymphoid-tissue lymphoma of the
stomach. N Engl J Med 1998;338:804.
88. Isaacson PG. Gastric MALT lymphoma: from concept to cure. Ann Oncol 1999;10:637.
89. Hussell T, Isaacson PG, Crabtree JE, Spencer J. The response of cells from low-grade B-cell gastric lymphomas of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue to Helicobacter pylori [see comments].
Lancet 1993;342:571.
90. Pearce N, Bethwaite P. Increasing incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: occupational and environmental factors. Cancer Res 1992;52:5496s.
91. Scherr PA, Hutchison GB, Neiman RS. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and occupational exposure. Cancer Res 1992;52:5503s.
92. Fritschi L, Siemiatycki J. Lymphoma, myeloma and occupation: results of a case-control study. Int J Cancer 1996;67:498.
93. Persson B, Fredrikson M. Some risk factors for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Int J Occup Med Environ Health 1999;12:135.
94. Keller-Byrne JE, Khuder SA, Schaub EA, McAfee O. A meta-analysis of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma among farmers in the central United States. Am J Ind Med 1997;31:442.
95. Khuder SA, Schaub EA, Keller-Byrne JE. Meta-analyses of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and farming. Scand J Work Environ Health 1998;24:255.
96. Morrison HI, Wilkins K, Semenciw R, Mao Y, Wigle D. Herbicides and cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1866.
97. Hardell L, Eriksson M. A case-control study of non-Hodgkin lymphoma and exposure to pesticides [see comments]. Cancer 1999;85:1353.
98. Munro IC, Cardo GL, Orr JC, et al. A comprehensive, integrated review and evaluation of the scientific evidence relating to the safety of the herbicide 2,4-D. J Am Coll Toxicol 1992;11:559.
99. Cantor KP, Blair A, Everett G, et al. Pesticides and other agricultural risk factors for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma among men in Iowa and Minnesota [see comments]. Cancer Res 1992;52:2447.
100. Dich J, Zahm SH, Hanberg A, Adami HO. Pesticides and cancer. Cancer Causes Control 1997;8:420.
101. Cantor KP, Blair A, Everett G, et al. Hair dye use and risk of leukemia and lymphoma. Am J Public Health 1988;78:570.
102. Zahm SH, Weisenburger DD, Babbitt PA, et al. Use of hair coloring products and the risk of lymphoma, multiple myeloma, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia [see comments]. Am J Public
Health 1992;82:990.
103. La Vecchia C, Tavani A. Epidemiological evidence on hair dyes and the risk of cancer in humans. Eur J Cancer Prev 1995;4:31.
104. Thun MJ, Altekruse SF, Namboodiri MM, et al. Hair dye use and risk of fatal cancers in U.S. women [see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:210.
105. Holly EA, Lele C, Bracci PM. Hair-color products and risk for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a population-based study in the San Francisco bay area. Am J Public Health 1998;88:1767.
106. Lynge E, Anttila A, Hemminki K. Organic solvents and cancer. Cancer Causes Control 1997;8:406.
107. Hayes RB, Yin SN, Dosemeci M, et al. Benzene and the dose-related incidence of hematologic neoplasms in China. Chinese Academy of Preventive MedicineNational Cancer Institute
Benzene Study Group [see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1065.
108. Ward MH, Mark SD, Cantor KP, et al. Drinking water nitrate and the risk of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Epidemiology 1996;7:465.
109. Law G, Parslow R, McKinney P, Cartwright R. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and nitrate in drinking water: a study in Yorkshire, United Kingdom. J Epidemiol Community Health 1999;53:383.
110. Chiu BC, Cerhan JR, Folsom AR, et al. Diet and risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in older women [see comments]. JAMA 1996;275:1315.
111. De Stefani E, Fierro L, Barrios E, Ronco A. Tobacco, alcohol, diet and risk of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a case-control study in Uruguay. Leuk Res 1998;22:445.
112. Zhang S, Hunter DJ, Rosner BA, et al. Dietary fat and protein in relation to risk of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma among women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1751.
113. Nelson RA, Levine AM, Marks G, Bernstein L. Alcohol, tobacco and recreational drug use and the risk of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Br J Cancer 1997;76:1532.
114. Freedman DS, Tolbert PE, Coates R, Brann EA, Kjeldsberg CR. Relation of cigarette smoking to non-Hodgkin's lymphoma among middle-aged men [see comments]. Am J Epidemiol
1998;148:833.
115. Herrinton LJ, Friedman GD. Cigarette smoking and risk of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma subtypes. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1998;7:25.
116. Waddell BL, Blair A, Zahm SH. Re: “Relation of cigarette smoking to non-Hodgkin's lymphoma among middle-aged men” [letter; comment]. Am J Epidemiol 1999;150:661.

117. Abrahamsen JF, Andersen A, Hannisdal E, et al. Second malignancies after treatment of Hodgkin's disease: the influence of treatment, follow-up time, and age [see comments]. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:255.
118. van Leeuwen FE, Klokman WJ, Hagenbeek A, et al. Second cancer risk following Hodgkin's disease: a 20-year follow-up study. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:312.
119. Mauch PM, Kalish LA, Marcus KC, et al. Second malignancies after treatment for laparotomy staged IA-IIIB Hodgkin's disease: long-term analysis of risk factors and outcome. Blood
1996;87:3625.
120. Boice JD Jr. Radiation and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer Res 1992;52:5489s.
121. McMichael AJ, Giles GG. Have increases in solar ultraviolet exposure contributed to the rise in incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma? Br J Cancer 1996;73:945.
122. Bentham G. Association between incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and solar ultraviolet radiation in England and Wales [see comments]. BMJ 1996;312:1128.
123. Alexander FE. Blood transfusion and risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Lancet 1997;350:1414.
124. Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Stein H, et al. A revised European-American classification of lymphoid neoplasms: a proposal from the International Lymphoma Study Group [see comments]. Blood
1994;84:1361.
125. Weisenburger D. The International Lymphoma Study Group (ILSG) Classification of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL): pathology findings from a large multicenter study. Mod Pathol
1997;10:136A.
126. A clinical evaluation of the International Lymphoma Study Group classification of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. The Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Classification Project. Blood 1997;89:3909.
127. Armitage JO, Weisenburger DD. New approach to classifying non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: clinical features of the major histologic subtypes. Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Classification Project. J
Clin Oncol 1998;16:2780.
128. Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Chan JKC, Stein H, Vardiman J. Proposed World Health Organization classification of neoplastic diseases of hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues. Am J Surg Pathol
1997;21:114.
129. Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Diebold J, Muller-Hermelink HK. World Health Organization Classification of lymphomas: a work in progress. Ann Oncol 1998;9:S25.
130. Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Diebold J, et al. World Health Organization classification of neoplastic diseases of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues: report of the Clinical Advisory Committee
meetingAirlie House, Virginia, November 1997. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3835.
131. Rosenberg SA. Classification of lymphoid neoplasms [editorial; comment]. Blood 1994;84:1359.
132. Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Stein H, et al. Lymphoma classification proposal: clarification [letter; comment]. Blood 1995;85:857.
133. A predictive model for aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. The International Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Prognostic Factors Project [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1993;329:987.
134. Ferry J, White W, Grove A. Malignant lymphoma of ocular adnexa: a spectrum of B-cell neoplasia including low grade B-cell lymphoma of MALT type. Lab Invest 1992;66:77A.
135. Mattia AR, Ferry JA, Harris NL. Breast lymphoma. A B-cell spectrum including the low grade B-cell lymphoma of mucosa associated lymphoid tissue. Am J Surg Pathol 1993;17:574.
136. Conlan MG, Bast M, Armitage JO, Weisenburger DD. Bone marrow involvement by non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: the clinical significance of morphologic discordance between the lymph node and
bone marrow. J Clin Oncol 1990;8(7):1163.
137. Castellino RA, Dunnick NR, Goffinet DR, Rosenberg SR, Kaplan HS. Predictive value of lymphography for sites of subdiaphragmatic disease encountered at staging laparotomy in newly
diagnosed Hodgkin's disease and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:532.
138. Lee JK, Stanley RJ, Sagel SS, Levitt RG. Accuracy of computed tomography in detecting intraabdominal and pelvic adenopathy in lymphoma. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1978;131:311.
139. Hoane BR, Shields AF, Porter BA, Shulman HM. Detection of lymphomatous bone marrow involvement with magnetic resonance imaging [see comments]. Blood 1991;78:728.
140. Kaplan WD, Jochelson MS, Herman TS, et al. Gallium-67 imaging: a predictor of residual tumor viability and clinical outcome in patients with diffuse large-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol
1990;8:1966.
141. Finke J, Slanina J, Lange W, Dolken G. Persistence of circulating t(14;18)-positive cells in long-term remission after radiation therapy for localized-stage follicular lymphoma. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:1668.
142. Limpens J, de Jong D, van Krieken JH, et al. Bcl-2/JH rearrangements in benign lymphoid tissues with follicular hyperplasia. Oncogene 1991;6:2271.
143. Cabanillas F, McLaughlin MSP, Hagemeister FB, et al. Early achievement of molecular complete remission assayed by PCR predicts failure free survival (FFS) in grade follicular lymphomas
(LGFL). Blood 1995;86:604a(abst).
144. Carbone PP, Kaplan HS, Musshoff K, Smithers DW, Tubiana M. Report of the Committee on Hodgkin's Disease Staging Classification. Cancer Res 1971;31:1860.
145. Jagannath S, Velasquez WS, Tucker SL, et al. Tumor burden assessment and its implication for a prognostic model in advanced diffuse large-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:859.
146. Velasquez WS, Jagannath S, Tucker SL, et al. Risk classification as the basis for clinical staging of diffuse large-cell lymphoma derived from 10-year survival data. Blood 1989;74:551.
147. Coiffier B, Gisselbrecht C, Vose JM, et al. Prognostic factors in aggressive malignant lymphomas: description and validation of a prognostic index that could identify patients requiring a more
intensive therapy. The Groupe d'Etudes des Lymphomes Agressifs [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:211.
148. Shipp M, Harrington D, Anderson J, et al. A predictive model for aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1993;329:987.
149. Salles G, Shipp MA, Coiffier B. Chemotherapy of non-Hodgkin's aggressive lymphomas. Semin Hematol 1994;31:46.
150. Khalidi HS, Chang KL, Medeiros LJ, et al. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Survey of immunophenotype, French-American-British classification, frequency of myeloid antigen expression, and
karyotypic abnormalities in 210 pediatric and adult cases. Am J Clin Pathol 1999;111:467.
151. Pui CH, Rubnitz JE, Hancock ML, et al. Reappraisal of the clinical and biologic significance of myeloid-associated antigen expression in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:3768.
152. Kitchingman GR, Rovigatti U, Mauer AM, et al. Rearrangement of immunoglobulin heavy chain genes in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1985;65:725.
153. Tawa A, Hozumi N, Minden M, Mak TW, Gelfand EW. Rearrangement of the T-cell receptor beta-chain gene in non-T-cell, non-B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia of childhood. N Engl J Med
1985;313:1033.
154. Felix CA, Poplack DG, Reaman GH, et al. Characterization of immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor gene patterns in B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia of childhood. J Clin Oncol
1990;8:431.
155. Pui CH, Behm FG, Downing JR, et al. 11q23/MLL rearrangement confers a poor prognosis in infants with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:909.
156. Rubnitz JE, Pui CH, Downing JR. The role of TEL fusion genes in pediatric leukemias. Leukemia 1999;13:6.
157. Boucheix C, David B, Sebban C, et al. Immunophenotype of adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia, clinical parameters, and outcome: an analysis of a prospective trial including 562 tested
patients (LALA87). French Group on Therapy for Adult Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia. Blood 1994;84:1603.
158. Uckun FM, Sather HN, Gaynon PS, et al. Clinical features and treatment outcome of children with myeloid antigen positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a report from the Children's Cancer
Group. Blood 1997;90:28.
159. Ben-Ezra J, Burke JS, Swartz WG, et al. Small lymphocytic lymphoma: a clinicopathologic analysis of 268 cases. Blood 1989;73:579.
160. Lennert K, Stein H. Malignant lymphomas other than Hodgkin's disease: histology, cytology, ultrastructure, immunology. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1978.
161. Perry DA, Bast MA, Armitage JO, Weisenburger DD. Diffuse intermediate lymphocytic lymphoma. A clinicopathologic study and comparison with small lymphocytic lymphoma and diffuse small
cleaved cell lymphoma. Cancer 1990;66:1995.
162. Bonato M, Pittaluga S, Tierens A, et al. Lymph node histology in typical and atypical chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Am J Surg Pathol 1998;22:49.
163. Kipps TJ, Carson DA. Autoantibodies in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and related systemic autoimmune diseases. Blood 1993;81:2475.
164. Zukerberg LR, Medeiros LJ, Ferry JA, Harris NL. Diffuse low-grade B-cell lymphomas. Four clinically distinct subtypes defined by a combination of morphologic and immunophenotypic features
[see comments]. Am J Clin Pathol 1993;100:373.
165. Aoki H, Takishita M, Kosaka M, Saito S. Frequent somatic mutations in D and/or JH segments of Ig gene in Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) with
Richter's syndrome but not in common CLL. Blood 1995;85:1913.
166. Oscier DG, Thompsett A, Zhu D, Stevenson FK. Differential rates of somatic hypermutation in V(H) genes among subsets of chronic lymphocytic leukemia defined by chromosomal
abnormalities. Blood 1997;89:4153.
167. Damle RN, Wasil T, Fais F, et al. Ig V gene mutation status and CD38 expression as novel prognostic indicators in chronic lymphocytic leukemia [see comments]. Blood 1999;94:1840.
168. Juliusson G, Oscier DG, Fitchett M, et al. Prognostic subgroups in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia defined by specific chromosomal abnormalities. N Engl J Med 1990;323:720.
169. Knuutila S, Elonen E, Teerenhovi L, et al. Trisomy 12 in B cells of patients with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1986;314:865.
170. Juliusson G, Merup M. Cytogenetics in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Semin Oncol 1998;25:19.
171. Croce CM, Tsujimoto Y, Erikson J, Nowell P. Chromosome translocations and B cell neoplasia. Lab Invest 1984;51:258.
172. Tsujimoto Y, Yunis J, Onorato-Showe L, et al. Molecular cloning of the chromosomal breakpoint of B-cell lymphomas and leukemias with the t(11;14) chromosome translocation. Science
1984;224:1403.
173. Yang WI, Zukerberg LR, Motokura T, Arnold A, Harris NL. Cyclin D1 (Bcl-1, PRAD1) protein expression in low-grade B-cell lymphomas and reactive hyperplasia. Am J Pathol 1994;145:86.
174. Bosch F, Jares P, Campo E, et al. PRAD-1/cyclin D1 gene overexpression in chronic lymphoproliferative disorders: a highly specific marker of mantle cell lymphoma. Blood 1994;84:2726.
175. Zhu Y, Monni O, El-Rifai W, et al. Discontinuous deletions at 11q23 in B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Leukemia 1999;13:708.
176. Sembries S, Pahl H, Stilgenbauer S, Dohner H, Schriever F. Reduced expression of adhesion molecules and cell signaling receptors by chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells with 11q deletion.
Blood 1999;93:624.
177. Kipps TJ. The CD5 B cell. Adv Immunol 1989;47:117.
178. MacLennan IC, Liu YJ, Oldfield S, Zhang J, Lane PJ. The evolution of B-cell clones. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1990;159:37.
179. Inghirami G, Foitl DR, Sabichi A, Zhu BY, Knowles DM. Autoantibody-associated cross-reactive idiotype-bearing human B lymphocytes: distribution and characterization, including Ig VH gene
and CD5 antigen expression. Blood 1991;78:1503.
180. Caligaris-Cappio F. B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a malignancy of anti-self B cells. Blood 1996;87:2615.
181. Caligaris-Cappio F, Hamblin TJ. B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a bird of a different feather. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:399.
182. Klein U, Rajewsky K, Kuppers R. Human immunoglobulin (Ig)M+IgD+ peripheral blood B cells expressing the CD27 cell surface antigen carry somatically mutated variable region genes: CD27
as a general marker for somatically mutated (memory) B cells. J Exp Med 1998;188:1679.
183. O'Brien S, del Giglio A, Keating M. Advances in the biology and treatment of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1995;85:307.
184. Rozman C, Montserrat E, Vinolas N. Serum immunoglobulins in B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Natural history and prognostic significance. Cancer 1988;61:279.
185. Pangalis GA, Angelopoulou MK, Vassilakopoulos TP, Siakantaris MP, Kittas C. B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia, small lymphocytic lymphoma, and lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, including
Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia: a clinical, morphologic, and biologic spectrum of similar disorders. Semin Hematol 1999;36:104.
186. Morrison WH, Hoppe RT, Weiss LM, Picozzi VJ Jr, Horning SJ. Small lymphocytic lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:598.
187. Sthoeger ZM, Sthoeger D, Shtalrid M, et al. Mechanism of autoimmune hemolytic anemia in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Am J Hematol 1993;43:259.
188. Myint H, Copplestone JA, Orchard J, et al. Fludarabine-related autoimmune haemolytic anaemia in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Br J Haematol 1995;91:341.
189. Hamblin TJ, Oscier DG, Young BJ. Autoimmunity in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. J Clin Pathol 1986;39:713.
190. Rai KR, Peterson B, Elias L, et al. A randomized comparison of fludarabine and CLB for patients with previously untreated chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a CALGB, SWOG, CTG/NCI-C and
ECOG intergroup study. Blood 1996;88:14a(abst).
191. Johnson S, Smith AG, Loffler H, et al. Multicentre prospective randomised trial of fludarabine versus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and prednisone (CAP) for treatment of advanced-stage
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. The French Cooperative Group on CLL [see comments]. Lancet 1996;347:1432.
192. Leporrier M, Chevret S, Cazin B, et al. Randomised comparison of fludarabine, CAP and CHOP in 695 previously untreated stage B and C CLL. Hematology and Cell Therapy 1997;39:S58(abst
17).
193. Hochster HS, Oken MM, Winter JN, et al. Phase I study of fludarabine plus cyclophosphamide in patients with previously untreated low-grade lymphoma: results and long-term follow-upa report
from the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:987.
194. Osterborg A, Dyer MJ, Bunjes D, et al. Phase II multicenter study of human CD52 antibody in previously treated chronic lymphocytic leukemia. European Study Group of CAMPATH-1H
Treatment in Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1567.
195. Jensen M, Winkler U, Manzke O, Diehl V, Engert A. Rapid tumor lysis in a patient with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia and lymphocytosis treated with an anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody

(IDEC- C2B8, rituximab). Ann Hematol 1998;77:89.
196. Pavletic ZS, Bierman PJ, Vose JM, et al. High incidence of relapse after autologous stem-cell transplantation for B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia or small lymphocytic lymphoma. Ann
Oncol 1998;9:1023.
197. Khouri IF, Przepiorka D, van Besien K, et al. Allogeneic blood or marrow transplantation for chronic lymphocytic leukaemia: timing of transplantation and potential effect of fludarabine on acute
graft-versus-host disease. Br J Haematol 1997;97:466.
198. Stein H, Lennert K, Feller AC, Mason DY. Immunohistological analysis of human lymphoma: correlation of histological and immunological categories. Adv Cancer Res 1984;42:677.
199. Harris NL, Bhan AK. B-cell neoplasms of the lymphocytic, lymphoplasmacytoid, and plasma cell types: immunohistologic analysis and clinical correlation. Hum Pathol 1985;16:829.
200. Lennert K, Tamm I, Wacker H-H. Histopathology and immunocytochemistry of lymph node biopsies in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and immunocytoma. Leukemia Lymphoma
1991;5[Suppl]:157.
201. Crouzier R, Martin T, Pasquali JL. Monoclonal IgM rheumatoid factor secreted by CD5-negative B cells during mixed cryoglobulinemia. Evidence for somatic mutations and intraclonal diversity
of the expressed VH region gene. J Immunol 1995;154:413.
202. Sahota SS, Garand R, Bataille R, Smith AJ, Stevenson FK. VH gene analysis of clonally related IgM and IgG from human lymphoplasmacytoid B-cell tumors with chronic lymphocytic leukemia
features and high serum monoclonal IgG. Blood 1998;91:238.
203. Wagner SD, Martinelli V, Luzzatto L. Similar patterns of V kappa gene usage but different degrees of somatic mutation in hairy cell leukemia, prolymphocytic leukemia, Waldenstrom's
macroglobulinemia, and myeloma. Blood 1994;83:3647.
204. Krenacs L, Himmelmann AW, Quintanilla-Martinez L, et al. Transcription factor B-cell-specific activator protein (BSAP) is differentially expressed in B cells and in subsets of B-cell lymphomas.
Blood 1998;92:1308.
205. Dimopoulos MA, Alexanian R. Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia. Blood 1994;83:1452.
206. Agnello V, Chung RT, Kaplan LM. A role for hepatitis C virus infection in type II cryoglobulinemia [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1992;327:1490.
207. Pozzato G, Mazzaro C, Crovatto M, et al. Low-grade malignant lymphoma, hepatitis C virus infection, and mixed cryoglobulinemia. Blood 1994;84:3047.
208. Mazzaro C, Franzin F, Tulissi P, et al. Regression of monoclonal B-cell expansion in patients affected by mixed cryoglobulinemia responsive to alpha-interferon therapy. Cancer 1996;77:2604.
209. Jorgensen C, Legouffe MC, Perney P, et al. Sicca syndrome associated with hepatitis C virus infection. Arthritis Rheum 1996;39:1166.
210. Ascoli V, Lo Coco F, Artini M, et al. Extranodal lymphomas associated with hepatitis C virus infection [see comments]. Am J Clin Pathol 1998;109:600.
211. De Vita S, Sacco C, Sansonno D, et al. Characterization of overt B-cell lymphomas in patients with hepatitis C virus infection. Blood 1997;90:776.
212. Sansonno D, De Vita S, Cornacchiulo V, et al. Detection and distribution of hepatitis C virus-related proteins in lymph nodes of patients with type II mixed cryoglobulinemia and neoplastic or
non-neoplastic lymphoproliferation. Blood 1996;88:4638.
213. Brittinger G, Bartels H, Common H, et al. Clinical and prognostic relevance of the Kiel classification of non-Hodgkin lymphomas results of a prospective multicenter study by the Kiel Lymphoma
Study Group. Hematol Oncol 1984;2:269.
214. Engelhard M, Brittinger G, Heinz R, et al. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) and immunocytoma (LP-IC): clinical and prognostic relevance of this distinction. Leukemia Lymphoma
1991;5[Suppl]:161.
215. Petrucci MT, Avvisati G, Tribalto M, Giovangrossi P, Mandelli F. Waldenstrom's macroglobulinaemia: results of a combined oral treatment in 34 newly diagnosed patients. J Intern Med
1989;226:443.
216. Dimopoulos MA, Weber D, Delasalle KB, Keating M, Alexanian R. Treatment of Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia resistant to standard therapy with 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine: identification of
prognostic factors. Ann Oncol 1995;6:49.
217. Kantarjian HM, Alexanian R, Koller CA, Kurzrock R, Keating MJ. Fludarabine therapy in macroglobulinemic lymphoma. Blood 1990;75:1928.
218. Isaacson PG, Spencer J. Malignant lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue. Histopathology 1987;11:445.
219. Schmid C, Kirkham N, Diss T, Isaacson PG. Splenic marginal zone cell lymphoma. Am J Surg Pathol 1992;16:455.
220. Miklos J, Swerdlow S, Bahler D. Analysis of immunoglobulin VH genes used by low grade salivary gland lymphomas of the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues (MALT) type. Blood
1995;86:182a.
221. Qin Y, Greiner A, Trunk MJ, et al. Somatic hypermutation in low-grade mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue-type B-cell lymphoma. Blood 1995;86:3528.
222. Du M, Diss T, Xu C, et al. Somatic mutations and intraclonal variations in MALT lymphoma immunoglobulin genes. Blood 1995;86:181a.
223. Pan L, Diss TC, Cunningham D, Isaacson PG. The bcl-2 gene in primary B cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT). Am J Pathol 1989;135:7.
224. Finn T, Isaacson P, Wotherspoon A. Numerical abnormality of chromosomes 3, 7, 12, and 18 in low grade lymphomas of MALT type and splenic marginal zone lymphomas detected by
interphase cytogenetics on paraffin embedded tissue. J Pathol 1993;170:335A.
225. Auer IA, Gascoyne RD, Connors JM, et al. t(11;18)(q21;q21) is the most common translocation in MALT lymphomas. Ann Oncol 1997;8:979.
226. Ott G, Katzenberger T, Greiner A, et al. The t(11;18)(q21;q21) chromosome translocation is a frequent and specific aberration in low-grade but not high-grade malignant non- Hodgkin's
lymphomas of the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT-) type. Cancer Res 1997;57:3944.
227. Barth TF, Dohner H, Werner CA, et al. Characteristic pattern of chromosomal gains and losses in primary large B-cell lymphomas of the gastrointestinal tract. Blood 1998;91:4321.
228. Dierlamm J, Baens M, Wlodarska I, et al. The apoptosis inhibitor gene API2 and a novel 18q gene, MLT, are recurrently rearranged in the t(11;18)(q21;q21)p6 associated with
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas. Blood 1999;93:3601.
229. Willis TG, Jadayel DM, Du MQ, et al. Bcl10 is involved in t(1;14)(p22;q32) of MALT B cell lymphoma and mutated in multiple tumor types [see comments]. Cell 1999;96:35.
230. Radaszkiewicz T, Dragosics B, Bauer P. Gastrointestinal malignant lymphomas of the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue: factors relevant to prognosis. Gastroenterology 1992;102:1628.
231. Cogliatti SB, Schmid U, Schumacher U, et al. Primary B-cell gastric lymphoma: a clinicopathological study of 145 patients. Gastroenterology 1991;101:1159.
232. Isaacson PG. Gastrointestinal lymphoma. Hum Pathol 1994;25:1020.
233. Wotherspoon AC, Doglioni C, Diss TC, et al. Regression of primary low-grade B-cell gastric lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue type after eradication of Helicobacter pylori [see
comments]. Lancet 1993;342:575.
234. Pinotti G, Roggero E, Zucca E, et al. Primary low-grade gastric MALT lymphoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:393.
235. Isaacson PG, Matutes E, Burke M, Catovsky D. The histopathology of splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes. Blood 1994;84:3828.
236. Schechter NR, Portlock CS, Yahalom J. Treatment of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma of the stomach with radiation alone. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1916.
237. Hammel P, Haioun C, Chaumette MT, et al. Efficacy of single-agent chemotherapy in low-grade B-cell mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma with prominent gastric expression. J Clin
Oncol 1995;13:2524.
238. Bayerdorffer E, Neubauer A, Rudolph B, et al. Regression of primary gastric lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue type after cure of Helicobacter pylori infection. MALT Lymphoma
Study Group [see comments]. Lancet 1995;345:1591.
239. Neubauer A, Thiede C, Morgner A, et al. Cure of Helicobacter pylori infection and duration of remission of low-grade gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma [see comments]. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1350.
240. Steinbach G, Ford R, Glober G, et al. Antibiotic treatment of gastric lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue. An uncontrolled trial. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:88.
241. Fiche M, Caprons F, Berger F, et al. Primary pulmonary non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Histopathology 1995;26:529.
242. Dunbar SF, Linggood RM, Doppke KP, Duby A, Wang CC. Conjunctival lymphoma: results and treatment with a single anterior electron field. A lens sparing approach [see comments]. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:249.
243. Berger F, Felman P, Thieblemont C, et al. Non-MALT marginal zone B-cell lymphomas: a description of clinical presentation and outcome in 124 patients. Blood 2000;95:1950.
244. Isaacson PG. Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. Semin Hematol 1999;36:139.
245. Zinzani PL, Magagnoli M, Galieni P, et al. Nongastrointestinal low-grade mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma: analysis of 75 patients. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1254.
246. Sheibani K, Burke JS, Swartz WG, Nademanee A, Winberg CD. Monocytoid B-cell lymphoma. Clinicopathologic study of 21 cases of a unique type of low-grade lymphoma. Cancer
1988;62:1531.
247. Nizze H, Cogliatti SB, von Schilling C, Feller AC, Lennert K. Monocytoid B-cell lymphoma: morphological variants and relationship to low-grade B-cell lymphoma of the mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue. Histopathology 1991;18:403.
248. Ngan BY, Warnke RA, Wilson M, et al. Monocytoid B-cell lymphoma: a study of 36 cases [see comments]. Hum Pathol 1991;22:409.
249. Shin SS, Sheibani K, Fishleder A, et al. Monocytoid B-cell lymphoma in patients with Sjogren's syndrome: a clinicopathologic study of 13 patients [see comments]. Hum Pathol 1991;22:422.
250. Nathwani BN, Anderson JR, Armitage JO, et al. Clinical significance of follicular lymphoma with monocytoid B cells. Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Classification Project. Hum Pathol 1999;30:263.
251. Campo E, Miquel R, Krenacs L, et al. Primary nodal marginal zone lymphomas of splenic and MALT type. Am J Surg Pathol 1999;23:59.
252. Carbone A, Gloghini A, Pinto A, et al. Monocytoid B-cell lymphoma with bone marrow and peripheral blood involvement at presentation [see comments]. Am J Clin Pathol 1989;92:228.
253. Traweek ST, Sheibani K. Monocytoid B-cell lymphoma. The biologic and clinical implications of peripheral blood involvement [see comments]. Am J Clin Pathol 1992;97:591.
254. Nathwani BN, Drachenberg MR, Hernandez AM, Levine AM, Sheibani K. Nodal monocytoid B-cell lymphoma (nodal marginal-zone B-cell lymphoma). Semin Hematol 1999;36:128.
255. Pathology of the spleen: report on the workshop of the VIIIth meeting of the European Association for Haematopathology, Paris. Histopathology 1998;32:172.
256. Mollejo M, Menarguez J, Lloret E, et al. Splenic marginal zone lymphoma: a distinctive type of low-grade B-cell lymphoma. A clinicopathological study of 13 cases. Am J Surg Pathol
1995;19:1146.
257. Mollejo M, Lloret E, Menarguez J, Piris MA, Isaacson PG. Lymph node involvement by splenic marginal zone lymphoma: morphological and immunohistochemical features. Am J Surg Pathol
1997;21:772.
258. Matutes E, Morilla R, Owusu-Ankomah K, Houlihan A, Catovsky D. The immunophenotype of splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes and its relevance to the differential diagnosis with
other B-cell disorders. Blood 1994;83:1558.
259. Savilo E, Campo E, Mollejo M, et al. Absence of cyclin D1 protein expression in splenic marginal zone lymphoma. Mod Pathol 1998;11:601.
260. Zhu D, Oscier DG, Stevenson FK. Splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes involves B cells with extensively mutated Ig heavy chain variable region genes. Blood 1995;85:1603.
261. Dunn-Walters DK, Boursier L, Spencer J, Isaacson PG. Analysis of immunoglobulin genes in splenic marginal zone lymphoma suggests ongoing mutation. Hum Pathol 1998;29:585.
262. Oscier DG, Matutes E, Gardiner A, et al. Cytogenetic studies in splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes. Br J Haematol 1993;85:487.
263. Jadayel D, Matutes E, Dyer MJ, et al. Splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes: analysis of BCL-1 rearrangements and expression of the cyclin D1 gene. Blood 1994;83:3664.
264. Brynes RK, Almaguer PD, Leathery KE, et al. Numerical cytogenetic abnormalities of chromosomes 3, 7, and 12 in marginal zone B-cell lymphomas. Mod Pathol 1996;9:995.
265. Pittaluga S, Verhoef G, Criel A, et al. “ Small” B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas with splenomegaly at presentation are either mantle cell lymphoma or marginal zone cell lymphoma. A study
based on histology, cytology, immunohistochemistry, and cytogenetic analysis. Am J Surg Pathol 1996;20:211.
266. Arber DA, Rappaport H, Weiss LM. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoproliferative disorders involving the spleen. Mod Pathol 1997;10:18.
267. Mulligan SP, Matutes E, Dearden C, Catovsky D. Splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes: natural history and response to therapy in 50 cases. Br J Haematol 1991;78:206.
268. Bates I, Bedu-Addo G, Rutherford T, Bevan DH. Splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes in tropical West Africa [see comments]. Lancet 1992;340:575.
269. Catovsky D, Matutes E. Splenic lymphoma with circulating villous lymphocytes/splenic marginal-zone lymphoma. Semin Hematol 1999;36:148.
270. Yamazaki K, Shimizu S, Negami T, et al. Leukemic meningitis in a patient with splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes (SLVL). Meningitis as a possible initial manifestation of SLVL. Cancer
1994;74:61.
271. Bassan R, Amaru R, Rambaldi A, et al. The natural history of monoclonal villous lymphocytosis: a chronic lymphoproliferative disorder of CD11c+ B cells. Leuk Lymphoma 1996;21:181.
272. Matutes E, Catovsky D. Clinical and laboratory features of splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes. In: Armitage JO, Newland A, et al, eds. Cambridge medical reviews: haematological
oncology. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1995:135.
273. Bolam S, Orchard J, Oscier D. Fludarabine is effective in the treatment of splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes [see comments]. Br J Haematol 1997;99:158.
274. Mann RB, Berard CW. Criteria for the cytologic subclassification of follicular lymphomas: a proposed alternative method. Hematol Oncol 1983;1:187.
275. Harris NL, Nadler LM, Bhan AK. Immunohistologic characterization of two malignant lymphomas of germinal center type (centroblastic/centrocytic and centrocytic) with monoclonal antibodies.
Follicular and diffuse lymphomas of small- cleaved-cell type are related but distinct entities. Am J Pathol 1984;117:262.

276. Pittaluga S, Ayoubi TA, Wlodarska I, et al. BCL-6 expression in reactive lymphoid tissue and in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. J Pathol 1996;179:145.
277. Flenghi L, Bigerna B, Fizzotti M, et al. Monoclonal antibodies PG-B6a and PG-B6p recognize, respectively, a highly conserved and a formol-resistant epitope on the human BCL-6 protein
amino-terminal region. Am J Pathol 1996;148:1543.
278. Cleary ML, Meeker TC, Levy S, et al. Clustering of extensive somatic mutations in the variable region of an immunoglobulin heavy chain gene from a human B cell lymphoma. Cell 1986;44:97.
279. Bahler DW, Campbell MJ, Hart S, et al. Ig VH gene expression among human follicular lymphomas. Blood 1991;78:1561.
280. National Cancer Institute sponsored study of classifications of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: summary and description of a working formulation for clinical usage. The Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma
Pathologic Classification Project. Cancer 1982;49:2112.
281. Mac Manus MP, Hoppe RT. Is radiotherapy curative for stage I and II low-grade follicular lymphoma? Results of a long-term follow-up study of patients treated at Stanford University. J Clin
Oncol 1996;14:1282.
282. Gospodarowicz M, Lippuner T, Pintilie M, et al. Stage I and II follicular lymphoma: long-term outcome and pattern of failure following treatment with involved field radiation therapy alone. Int J
Radiat Biol Onocol Phys 1999;43:217a.
283. Gospodarowicz MK, Bush RS, Brown TC, Chua T. Prognostic factors in nodular lymphomas: a multivariate analysis based on the Princess Margaret Hospital experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1984;10:489.
284. Vaughan Hudson B, Vaughan Hudson G, MacLennan KA, Anderson L, Linch DC. Clinical stage 1 non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: long-term follow-up of patients treated by the British National
Lymphoma Investigation with radiotherapy alone as initial therapy. Br J Cancer 1994;69:1088.
285. Pendlebury S, el Awadi M, Ashley S, Brada M, Horwich A. Radiotherapy results in early stage low grade nodal non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Radiother Oncol 1995;36:167.
286. Hubbard SM, Chabner BA, DeVita VT Jr, et al. Histologic progression in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1982;59:258.
287. Acker B, Hoppe RT, Colby TV, et al. Histologic conversion in the non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:11.
288. Monfardini S, Banfi A, Bonadonna G, et al. Improved five year survival after combined radiotherapy-chemotherapy for stage I-II non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1980;6:125.
289. Landberg TG, Hakansson LG, Moller TR, et al. CVP-remission-maintenance in stage I or II non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: preliminary results of a randomized study. Cancer 1979;44:831.
290. Toonkel LM, Fuller LM, Gamble JF, et al. Laparotomy staged I and II non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: preliminary results of radiotherapy and adjunctive chemotherapy. Cancer 1980;45:249.
291. Kelsey SM, Newland AC, Hudson GV, Jelliffe AM. A British National Lymphoma Investigation randomised trial of single agent chlorambucil plus radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone in low
grade, localised non-Hodgkins lymphoma. Med Oncol 1994;11:19.
292. McLaughlin P, Fuller L, Redman J, et al. Stage I-II low-grade lymphomas: a prospective trial of combination chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Ann Oncol 1991;2[Suppl 2]:137.
293. Seymour JF, McLaughlin P, Fuller LM, et al. High rate of prolonged remissions following combined modality therapy for patients with localized low-grade lymphoma. Ann Oncol 1996;7:157.
294. Rosenberg SA. Karnofsky memorial lecture. The low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: challenges and opportunities. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:299.
295. Horning SJ, Rosenberg SA. The natural history of initially untreated low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. N Engl J Med 1984;311:1471.
296. Lister TA. The management of follicular lymphoma. Ann Oncol 1991;2[Suppl 2]:131.
297. Pittaluga S, Bijnens L, Teodorovic I, et al. Clinical analysis of 670 cases in two trials of the European Organization for the Research and Treatment of Cancer Lymphoma Cooperative Group
subtyped according to the Revised European-American Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms: a comparison with the Working Formulation. Blood 1996;87:4358.
298. McLaughlin P, Fuller LM, Velasquez WS, et al. Stage III follicular lymphoma: durable remissions with a combined chemotherapy-radiotherapy regimen. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:867.
299. Young RC, Longo DL, Glatstein E, et al. The treatment of indolent lymphomas: watchful waiting v aggressive combined modality treatment. Semin Hematol 1988;25:11.
300. Lister TA, Cullen MH, Beard ME, et al. Comparison of combined and single-agent chemotherapy in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of favourable histological type. BMJ 1978;1:533.
301. Ezdinli EZ, Anderson JR, Melvin F, et al. Moderate versus aggressive chemotherapy of nodular lymphocytic poorly differentiated lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:769.
302. Dana BW, Dahlberg S, Nathwani BN, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients with low-grade malignant lymphomas treated with doxorubicin-based chemotherapy or chemoimmunotherapy. J Clin
Oncol 1993;11:644.
303. McLaughlin P, Hagemeister FB, Romaguera JE, et al. Fludarabine, mitoxantrone, and dexamethasone: an effective new regimen for indolent lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1262.
304. Solal-Celigny P, Brice P, Brousse N, et al. Phase II trial of fludarabine monophosphate as first-line treatment in patients with advanced follicular lymphoma: a multicenter study by the Groupe
d'Etude des Lymphomes de l'Adulte. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:514.
305. Krikorian JG, Portlock CS, Cooney P, Rosenberg SA. Spontaneous regression of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a report of nine cases. Cancer 1980;46:2093.
306. Foon KA, Sherwin SA, Abrams PG, et al. Treatment of advanced non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with recombinant leukocyte A interferon. N Engl J Med 1984;311:1148.
307. O'Connell MJ, Colgan JP, Oken MM, et al. Clinical trial of recombinant leukocyte A interferon as initial therapy for favorable histology non-Hodgkin's lymphomas and chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. An Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group pilot study. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:128.
308. Rohatiner AZ, Richards MA, Barnett MJ, Stansfeld AG, Lister TA. Chlorambucil and interferon for low grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Br J Cancer 1987;55:225.
309. Price CG, Rohatiner AZ, Steward W, et al. Interferon-alpha 2b in the treatment of follicular lymphoma: preliminary results of a trial in progress. Ann Oncol 1991;2[Suppl 2]:141.
310. Petersen B, Petroni G, Oken MM, et al. Cyclophosphamide versus cyclophosphamide plus interferon alpha-2b in follicular low-grade lymphomas: an intergroup phase III trial (CALGB 8691 and
EST 7486). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;14a(abst 48).
311. Arranz R, Garcia-Alfonso P, Sobrino P, et al. Role of interferon alfa-2b in the induction and maintenance treatment of low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: results from a prospective,
multicenter trial with double randomization. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1538.
312. Solal-Celigny P, Lepage E, Brousse N, et al. Doxorubicin-containing regimen with or without interferon alfa-2b for advanced follicular lymphomas: final analysis of survival and toxicity in the
Groupe d'Etude des Lymphomes Folliculaires 86 Trial [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2332.
313. Smalley R, Weller E, Hawkins M, et al. Alpha-interferon in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. An update of the ECOG I-COPA trial (E6484). Blood 1998;92:486a(abst 2004).
314. Dana B, Unger J, Fisher R, et al. A randomized study of alpha-interferon consolidation in patients with low-grade lymphoma who have responded to PRO-MACE-MOPP (day 18) (SWOG 8809).
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;3a(abst 10).
315. Hagenbeek A, Carde P, Meerwaldt JH, et al. Maintenance of remission with human recombinant interferon alfa-2a in patients with stages III and IV low-grade malignant non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma. European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Lymphoma Cooperative Group. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:41.
316. Unterhalt M, Hermann R, Koch P, et al. Long term interferon alpha maintenance prolongs remission duration in advanced low grade lymphomas and is related to the efficacy of initial
cytoreductive chemotherapy. Blood 1996;88:453a(abst 1801).
317. Rohatiner A, Gregory W, Peterson B, et al. A meta-analysis of randomized trials evaluating the role of interferon as treatment for follicular lymphomas. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;4a(abst
11).
318. Czuczman MS, Grillo-Lopez AJ, White CA, et al. Treatment of patients with low-grade B-cell lymphoma with the combination of chimeric anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody and CHOP
chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:268.
319. Freedman AS, Gribben JG, Neuberg D, et al. High-dose therapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation in patients with follicular lymphoma during first remission. Blood 1996;88:2780.
320. Horning S, Negrin R, Hoppe R, et al. High dose therapy and autografting for follicular low grade lymphoma in first remission: the Stanford experience. Blood 1997;90:594a(abst).
321. Lopez-Guillermo A, Cabanillas F, McLaughlin P, et al. The clinical significance of molecular response in indolent follicular lymphomas. Blood 1998;91:2955.
322. Gribben JG, Neuberg D, Freedman AS, et al. Detection by polymerase chain reaction of residual cells with the bcl-2 translocation is associated with increased risk of relapse after autologous
bone marrow transplantation for B-cell lymphoma. Blood 1993;81:3449.
323. Salles G, Colombat P, Soubeyran P, et al. Early molecular responses in newly diagnosed follicular lymphoma patients with rituximab as first line treatment. Ann Oncol 1999;34(abst 103).
324. Bartlett NL, Rizeq M, Dorfman RF, Halpern J, Horning SJ. Follicular large-cell lymphoma: intermediate or low grade? J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1349.
325. Kantarjian HM, McLaughlin P, Fuller LM, et al. Follicular large cell lymphoma: analysis and prognostic factors in 62 patients. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:811.
326. Wendum D, Sebban C, Gaulard P, et al. Follicular large-cell lymphoma treated with intensive chemotherapy: an analysis of 89 cases included in the LNH87 trial and comparison with the
outcome of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Groupe d'Etude des Lymphomes de l'Adulte. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1654.
327. Garvin AJ, Simon RM, Osborne CK, et al. An autopsy study of histologic progression in non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. 192 cases from the National Cancer Institute. Cancer 1983;52:393.
328. Yuen AR, Kamel OW, Halpern J, Horning SJ. Long-term survival after histologic transformation of low-grade follicular lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1726.
329. Redman JR, Cabanillas F, Velasquez WS, et al. Phase II trial of fludarabine phosphate in lymphoma: an effective new agent in low-grade lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:790.
330. Kay AC, Saven A, Carrera CJ, et al. 2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine treatment of low-grade lymphomas [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:371.
331. Gallagher CJ, Gregory WM, Jones AE, et al. Follicular lymphoma: prognostic factors for response and survival. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1470.
332. Johnson PW, Rohatiner AZ, Whelan JS, et al. Patterns of survival in patients with recurrent follicular lymphoma: a 20-year study from a single center. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:140.
333. Maloney DG, Grillo-Lopez AJ, White CA, et al. IDEC-C2B8 (Rituximab) anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody therapy in patients with relapsed low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood
1997;90:2188.
334. Kaminski MS, Zasadny KR, Francis IR, et al. Iodine-131-anti-B1 radioimmunotherapy for B-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1974.
335. White CA, Halpern SE, Parker BA, et al. Radioimmunotherapy of relapsed B-cell lymphoma with yttrium 90 anti-idiotype monoclonal antibodies. Blood 1996;87:3640.
336. Webb A, Cunningham D, Cotter F, et al. BCL-2 antisense therapy in patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Lancet 1997;349:1137.
337. Levy R. Karnofsky lecture: immunotherapy of lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:7.
338. Freedman AS, Ritz J, Neuberg D, et al. Autologous bone marrow transplantation in 69 patients with a history of low-grade B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1991;77:2524.
339. Rohatiner AZ, Johnson PW, Price CG, et al. Myeloablative therapy with autologous bone marrow transplantation as consolidation therapy for recurrent follicular lymphoma. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:1177.
340. Bastion Y, Brice P, Haioun C, et al. Intensive therapy with peripheral blood progenitor cell transplantation in 60 patients with poor-prognosis follicular lymphoma. Blood 1995;86:3257.
341. Bierman PJ, Vose JM, Anderson JR, et al. High-dose therapy with autologous hematopoietic rescue for follicular low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:445.
342. Chopra R, Goldstone AH, Pearce R, et al. Autologous versus allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a case-controlled analysis of the European Bone Marrow
Transplant Group Registry data. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1690.
343. Majlis A, Pugh WC, Rodriguez MA, Benedict WF, Cabanillas F. Mantle cell lymphoma: correlation of clinical outcome and biologic features with three histologic variants. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:1664.
344. Lardelli P, Bookman MA, Sundeen J, Longo DL, Jaffe ES. Lymphocytic lymphoma of intermediate differentiation. Morphologic and immunophenotypic spectrum and clinical correlations. Am J
Surg Pathol 1990;14:752.
345. Ott MM, Ott G, Kuse R, et al. The anaplastic variant of centrocytic lymphoma is marked by frequent rearrangements of the bcl-1 gene and high proliferation indices. Histopathology
1994;24:329.
346. Banks PM, Chan J, Cleary ML, et al. Mantle cell lymphoma. A proposal for unification of morphologic, immunologic, and molecular data [see comments]. Am J Surg Pathol 1992;16:637.
347. Zukerberg LR, Yang WI, Arnold A, Harris NL. Cyclin D1 expression in non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Detection by immunohistochemistry. Am J Clin Pathol 1995;103:756.
348. Hummel M, Tamaru J, Kalvelage B, Stein H. Mantle cell (previously centrocytic) lymphomas express VH genes with no or very little somatic mutations like the physiologic cells of the follicle
mantle. Blood 1994;84:403.
349. Vandenberghe E, De Wolf-Peeters C, van den Oord J, et al. Translocation (11;14): a cytogenetic anomaly associated with B-cell lymphomas of non-follicle centre cell lineage. J Pathol
1991;163:13.
350. Rosenberg CL, Wong E, Petty EM, et al. PRAD1, a candidate BCL1 oncogene: mapping and expression in centrocytic lymphoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:9638.
351. Swerdlow SH, Yang WI, Zukerberg LR, et al. Expression of cyclin D1 protein in centrocytic/mantle cell lymphomas with and without rearrangement of the BCL1/cyclin D1 gene. Hum Pathol
1995;26:999.
352. de Boer CJ, Vaandrager JW, van Krieken JH, et al. Visualization of mono-allelic chromosomal aberrations 3' and 5' of the cyclin D1 gene in mantle cell lymphoma using DNA fiber fluorescence
in situ hybridization. Oncogene 1997;15:1599.
353. Quintanilla-Martinez L, Thieblemont C, Fend F, et al. Mantle cell lymphomas lack expression of p27Kip1, a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor. Am J Pathol 1998;153:175.
354. Greiner TC, Moynihan MJ, Chan WC, et al. p53 mutations in mantle cell lymphoma are associated with variant cytology and predict a poor prognosis. Blood 1996;87:4302.

355. Ott G, Kalla J, Ott MM, et al. Blastoid variants of mantle cell lymphoma: frequent bcl-1 rearrangements at the major translocation cluster region and tetraploid chromosome clones. Blood
1997;89:1421.
356. Dreyling MH, Bullinger L, Ott G, et al. Alterations of the cyclin D1/p16-pRB pathway in mantle cell lymphoma. Cancer Res 1997;57:4608.
357. Tirier C, Zhang Y, Plendl H, et al. Simultaneous presence of t(11;14) and a variant Burkitt's translocation in the terminal phase of a mantle cell lymphoma. Leukemia 1996;10:346.
358. Fisher RI, Dahlberg S, Nathwani BN, et al. A clinical analysis of two indolent lymphoma entities: mantle cell lymphoma and marginal zone lymphoma (including the mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissue and monocytoid B-cell subcategories): a Southwest Oncology Group study. Blood 1995;85:1075.
359. Isaacson PG, MacLennan KA, Subbuswamy SG. Multiple lymphomatous polyposis of the gastrointestinal tract. Histopathology 1984;8:641.
360. Meusers P, Engelhard M, Bartels H, et al. Multicentre randomized therapeutic trial for advanced centrocytic lymphoma: anthracycline does not improve the prognosis. Hematol Oncol
1989;7:365.
361. Berger F, Felman P, Sonet A, et al. Nonfollicular small B-cell lymphomas: a heterogeneous group of patients with distinct clinical features and outcome. Blood 1994;83:2829.
362. Zukerberg L, Medeiros L, Ferry J, Harris N. Diffuse low grade B-cell lymphomas: identification of four major immunophenotypic subtypes. Lab Invest 1991;65:87a(abst).
363. Bosch F, Lopez-Guillermo A, Campo E, et al. Mantle cell lymphoma: presenting features, response to therapy, and prognostic factors. Cancer 1998;82:567.
363a. Dorfman DM, Pinkus GS. Distinction between small lymphocytic and mantle cell lymphoma by immunoreactivity for CD23. Mod Pathol 1994;7:326.
364. Khouri IF, Romaguera J, Kantarjian H, et al. Hyper-CVAD and high-dose methotrexate/cytarabine followed by stem-cell transplantation: an active regimen for aggressive mantle-cell lymphoma.
J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3803.
365. Stewart DA, Vose JM, Weisenburger DD, et al. The role of high-dose therapy and autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for mantle cell lymphoma. Ann Oncol 1995;6:263.
366. Freedman AS, Neuberg D, Gribben JG, et al. High-dose chemoradiotherapy and anti-B-cell monoclonal antibody-purged autologous bone marrow transplantation in mantle-cell lymphoma: no
evidence for long-term remission [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:13.
367. Andersen NS, Donovan JW, Borus JS, et al. Failure of immunologic purging in mantle cell lymphoma assessed by polymerase chain reaction detection of minimal residual disease. Blood
1997;90:4212.
368. Corradini P, Ladetto M, Astolfi M, et al. Clinical and molecular remission after allogeneic blood cell transplantation in a patient with mantle-cell lymphoma. Br J Haematol 1996;94:376.
369. Coiffier B, Ketterer N, Haioun C, et al. A multicenter, randomized phase II study of rituximab (chimeric anti0CD20 mAb) at two dosages in patients with relapsed or refractory intermediate or
high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma or in elderly patients in first-line therapy. Blood 1997;90:510a(abst 2271).
370. Hiddemann W. Features of presentation and treatment strategies. Lymphoma Biology and Research 1997;1:4.
371. Engelhard M, Brittinger G, Huhn D, et al. Subclassification of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas according to the Kiel classification: distinction of centroblastic and immunoblastic lymphomas is a
significant prognostic risk factor. Blood 1997;89:2291.
372. Delabie J, Vandenberghe E, Kennes C, et al. Histiocyte-rich B-cell lymphoma. A distinct clinicopathologic entity possibly related to lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin's disease, paragranuloma
subtype. Am J Surg Pathol 1992;16:37.
373. McBride JA, Rodriguez J, Luthra R, et al. T-cell-rich B large-cell lymphoma simulating lymphocyte-rich Hodgkin's disease [see comments]. Am J Surg Pathol 1996;20:193.
374. Guinee D Jr, Jaffe E, Kingma D, et al. Pulmonary lymphomatoid granulomatosis. Evidence for a proliferation of Epstein-Barr virus infected B-lymphocytes with a prominent T-cell component
and vasculitis. Am J Surg Pathol 1994;18:753.
375. Haque AK, Myers JL, Hudnall SD, et al. Pulmonary lymphomatoid granulomatosis in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: lesions with Epstein-Barr virus infection. Mod Pathol 1998;11:347.
376. Katzenstein AL, Peiper SC. Detection of Epstein-Barr virus genomes in lymphomatoid granulomatosis: analysis of 29 cases by the polymerase chain reaction technique. Mod Pathol
1990;3:435.
377. Myers JL, Kurtin PJ, Katzenstein AL, et al. Lymphomatoid granulomatosis. Evidence of immunophenotypic diversity and relationship to Epstein-Barr virus infection. Am J Surg Pathol
1995;19:1300.
378. Doggett RS, Wood GS, Horning S, et al. The immunologic characterization of 95 nodal and extranodal diffuse large cell lymphomas in 89 patients. Am J Pathol 1984;115:245.
379. Gascoyne RD, Adomat SA, Krajewski S, et al. Prognostic significance of Bcl-2 protein expression and Bcl-2 gene rearrangement in diffuse aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood
1997;90:244.
380. Kramer MH, Hermans J, Parker J, et al. Clinical significance of bcl2 and p53 protein expression in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: a population-based study. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2131.
381. Sanchez E, Chacon I, Plaza MM, et al. Clinical outcome in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is dependent on the relationship between different cell-cycle regulator proteins. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:1931.
382. Skinnider BF, Horsman DE, Dupuis B, Gascoyne RD. Bcl-6 and Bcl-2 protein expression in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and follicular lymphoma: correlation with 3q27 and 18q21
chromosomal abnormalities. Hum Pathol 1999;30:803.
383. de Leval L, Shipp M, Neuberg D, et al. Nodal diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLB-CLs) are more likely to be derived from germinal center B-cells than extranodal DLB-CLs. Blood 1999;94(10).
384. Kuppers R, Rajewsky K, Hansmann ML. Diffuse large cell lymphomas are derived from mature B cells carrying V region genes with a high load of somatic mutation and evidence of selection
for antibody expression. Eur J Immunol 1997;27:1398.
385. Yunis JJ, Mayer MG, Arnesen MA, et al. bcl-2 and other genomic alterations in the prognosis of large-cell lymphoma [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1989;320:1047.
386. Kramer MH, Hermans J, Wijburg E, et al. Clinical relevance of BCL2, BCL6, and MYC rearrangements in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Blood 1998;92:3152.
387. Bastard C, Deweindt C, Kerckaert JP, et al. LAZ3 rearrangements in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: correlation with histology, immunophenotype, karyotype, and clinical outcome in 217 patients.
Blood 1994;83:2423.
388. Migliazza A, Martinotti S, Chen W, et al. Frequent somatic hypermutation of the 5' noncoding region of the BCL6 gene in B-cell lymphoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:12520.
389. Vitolo U, Gaidano G, Botto B, et al. Rearrangements of bcl-6, bcl-2, c-myc and 6q deletion in B-diffuse large-cell lymphoma: clinical relevance in 71 patients. Ann Oncol 1998;9:55.
390. Shen HM, Peters A, Baron B, Zhu X, Storb U. Mutation of BCL-6 gene in normal B cells by the process of somatic hypermutation of Ig genes. Science 1998;280:1750.
391. Kuppers R, Zhao M, Hansmann ML, Rajewsky K. Tracing B cell development in human germinal centres by molecular analysis of single cells picked from histological sections. Embo J
1993;12:4955.
392. Chen MG, Prosnitz LR, Gonzalez-Serva A, Fischer DB. Results of radiotherapy in control of stage I and II non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer 1979;43:1245.
393. Reddy S, Saxena VS, Pellettiere EV, Hendrickson FR. Early nodal and extra-nodal non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Cancer 1977;40:98.
394. Nissen NI, Ersboll J, Hansen HS, et al. A randomized study of radiotherapy versus radiotherapy plus chemotherapy in stage I-II non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Cancer 1983;52:1.
395. Cabanillas F, Bodey GP, Freireich EJ. Management with chemotherapy only of stage I and II malignant lymphoma of aggressive histologic types. Cancer 1980;46:2356.
396. Miller TP, Jones SE. Initial chemotherapy for clinically localized lymphomas of unfavorable histology. Blood 1983;62:413.
397. Mauch P, Leonard R, Skarin A, et al. Improved survival following combined radiation therapy and chemotherapy for unfavorable prognosis stage I-II non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. J Clin Oncol
1985;3:1301.
398. Rodriguez J, McLaughlin P, Hagemeister FB, et al. Follicular large cell lymphoma: an aggressive lymphoma that often presents with favorable prognostic features. Blood 1999;93:2202.
399. Longo DL, Glatstein E, Duffey PL, et al. Treatment of localized aggressive lymphomas with combination chemotherapy followed by involved-field radiation therapy. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1295.
400. Connors JM, Klimo P, Fairey RN, Voss N. Brief chemotherapy and involved field radiation therapy for limited- stage, histologically aggressive lymphoma. Ann Intern Med 1987;107:25.
401. Tondini C, Giardini R, Bozzetti F, et al. Combined modality treatment for primary gastrointestinal non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: the Milan Cancer Institute experience [see comments]. Ann Oncol
1993;4:831.
402. Glick J, Kim K, Earle J, O'Connell M. An ECOG randomized phase III trial of CHOP vs. CHOP + radiotherapy for intermediate grade early stage non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1995;391.
403. Miller TP, Dahlberg S, Cassady JR, et al. Chemotherapy alone compared with chemotherapy plus radiotherapy for localized intermediate- and high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma [see
comments]. N Engl J Med 1998;339:21.
404. Prestidge BR, Horning SJ, Hoppe RT. Combined modality therapy for stage I-II large cell lymphoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:633.
405. Velasquez WS, Fuller LM, Jagannath S, et al. Stages I and II diffuse large cell lymphomas: prognostic factors and long-term results with CHOP-bleo and radiotherapy. Blood 1991;77:942.
406. Dubey P, Ha CS, Besa PC, et al. Localized primary malignant lymphoma of bone. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:1087.
407. Levitt M, Marsh JC, DeConti RC, et al. Combination sequential chemotherapy in advanced reticulum cell sarcoma. Cancer 1972;29:630.
408. DeVita VT Jr, Canellos GP, Chabner B, et al. Advanced diffuse histiocytic lymphoma, a potentially curable disease. Lancet 1975;1:248.
409. Armitage JO, Weisenburger DD, Hutchins M, et al. Chemotherapy for diffuse large-cell lymphomarapidly responding patients have more durable remissions. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:160.
410. Fisher RI, Gaynor ER, Dahlberg S, et al. Comparison of a standard regimen (CHOP) with three intensive chemotherapy regimens for advanced non-Hodgkin's lymphoma [see comments]. N
Engl J Med 1993;328:1002.
411. Cooper IA, Wolf MM, Robertson TI, et al. Randomized comparison of MACOP-B with CHOP in patients with intermediate-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. The Australian and New Zealand
Lymphoma Group. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:769.
412. Dupont J, Pavlovsky S, Woolley P, et al. A comparison of two chemotherapy regimens, C-MOPP and BACOP, for the treatment of diffuse mixed (DML) and histiocytic (DHL) lymphomas. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1983;215(abst).
413. O'Connell M, Anderson J, Earle J, et al. Combined modality therapy of advanced unfavorable non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL): an ECOG randomized clinical trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1984;241(abst).
414. Hagberg H, Bjorkholm M, Glimelius B, et al. CHOP vs MEV for the treatment of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of unfavourable histopathology: a randomized clinical trial. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol
1985;21:175.
415. Gordon LI, Harrington D, Andersen J, et al. Comparison of a second-generation combination chemotherapeutic regimen (m-BACOD) with a standard regimen (CHOP) for advanced diffuse
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1992;327:1342.
416. Cooper IA, Ding JC, Matthews JP, et al. A randomized comparison of MACOP-B and CHOP in intermediate grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1991;271(abst).
417. Garcia-Conde J, Vinolas N, Estape J. ProMACE-CytaBOM vs CHOP in the treatment of unfavorable lymphomas: a randomized trial. Blood 1991;78:127a(abst).
418. Tura S, Zinzani PL, Mazza P, et al. F-MACHOP versus MACOP-B in the treatment of high grade malignant non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Blood 1991;78:109a.
419. Longo DL, DeVita VT Jr, Duffey PL, et al. Superiority of ProMACE-CytaBOM over ProMACE-MOPP in the treatment of advanced diffuse aggressive lymphoma: results of a prospective
randomized trial [published erratum appears in J Clin Oncol 1991;9:710]. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:25.
420. Gherlinzoni F, Guglielmi C, Mazza P, et al. Phase III comparative trial (m-BACOD v m-BNCOD) in the treatment of stage II to IV non-Hodgkin's lymphomas with intermediate- or high-grade
histology. Semin Oncol 1990;17:3; discussion 8.
421. Federico M, Moretti G, Gobbi PG, et al. ProMACE-cytaBOM versus MACOP-B in intermediate and high grade NHL. Preliminary results of a prospective randomized trial. Leukemia 1991;5:95.
422. Chisesi T, Santini G, Capnist G, et al. ProMACE-MOPP vs MACOP-B in high grade non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: a randomised study in a multicenter cooperative study group (NHLCSG).
Leukemia 1991;5:107.
423. Koppler H, Pfluger KH, Eschenbach I, et al. Sequential versus alternating chemotherapy for high grade non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: a randomized multicentre trial. Hematol Oncol 1991;9:217.
424. Carde P, Meerwaldt JH, van Glabbeke M, et al. Superiority of second over first generation chemotherapy in a randomized trial for stage III-IV intermediate and high-grade non- Hodgkin's
lymphoma (NHL): the 1980-1985 EORTC trial. The EORTC Lymphoma Group. Ann Oncol 1991;2:431.
425. Jerkeman M, Anderson H, Cavallin-Stahl E, et al. CHOP versus MACOP-B in aggressive lymphomaa Nordic Lymphoma Group randomised trial. Ann Oncol 1999;10:1079.
426. Pavlovsky S, Santarelli MT, Erazo A, et al. Results of a randomized study of previously untreated intermediate and high grade lymphoma using CHOP versus CNOP [see comments]. Ann
Oncol 1992;3:205.
427. Brusamolino E, Bertini M, Guidi S, et al. CHOP versus CNOP (N = mitoxantrone) in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: an interim report comparing efficacy and toxicity. Haematologica 1988;73:217.
428. Bezwoda W, Rastogi RB, Erazo Valla A, et al. Long-term results of a multicentre randomised, comparative phase III trial of CHOP versus CNOP regimens in patients with intermediate- and

high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Novantrone International Study Group. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:903.
429. Guglielmi C, Gherlinzoni F, Amadori S, et al. A phase III comparative trial of m-BACOD vs m-BNCOD in the treatment of stage II-IV diffuse non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Haematologica
1989;74:563.
430. Mazza P, Zinzani PL, Martelli M, et al. MACOP-B vs F-MACHOP regimen in the treatment of high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Leuk Lymphoma 1995;16:457.
431. Koppler H, Pfluger KH, Eschenbach I, et al. Randomised comparison of CHOEP versus alternating hCHOP/IVEP for high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: treatment results and prognostic
factor analysis in a multi-centre trial. Ann Oncol 1994;5:49.
432. Takagi T, Sampi K, Sawada U, Sakai C, Oguro M. A comparative study of CHOP versus MEVP (mitoxantrone, etoposide, vindesine, prednisolone) therapy for intermediate-grade and
high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a prospective randomized study. Int J Hematol 1993;57:67.
433. Cameron DA, White JM, Proctor SJ, et al. CHOP-based chemotherapy is as effective as alternating PEEC/CHOP chemotherapy in a randomised trial in high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Scotland and Newcastle Lymphoma Group. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:1195.
434. Bailey NP, Stuart NS, Bessell EM, et al. Five-year follow-up of a prospective randomised multi-centre trial of weekly chemotherapy (CAPOMEt) versus cyclical chemotherapy (CHOP-Mtx) in
the treatment of aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Central Lymphoma Group. Ann Oncol 1998;9:633.
435. Nair R, Ramakrishnan G, Nair NN, et al. A randomized comparison of the efficacy and toxicity of epirubicin and doxorubicin in the treatment of patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer
1998;82:2282.
436. Zinzani PL, Martelli M, Storti S, et al. Phase III comparative trial using CHOP vs CIOP in the treatment of advanced intermediate-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Leuk Lymphoma
1995;19:329.
437. Meyer RM, Browman GP, Samosh ML, et al. Randomized phase II comparison of standard CHOP with weekly CHOP in elderly patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:2386.
438. Silingardi V, Federico M, Cavanna L, et al. ProMECE-CytaBOM vs MACOP-B in advanced aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: long term results of a multicenter study of the Italian
Lymphoma Study Group (GISL). Leuk Lymphoma 1995;17:313.
439. Sertoli MR, Santini G, Chisesi T, et al. MACOP-B versus ProMACE-MOPP in the treatment of advanced diffuse non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: results of a prospective randomized trial by the
non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Cooperative Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1366.
440. Todd M, Cadman E, Spiro P, et al. A follow-up of a randomized study comparing two chemotherapy treatments for advanced diffuse histiocytic lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:986.
441. De Lena M, Maiello E, Lorusso V, et al. Comparison of CHOP-B vs CEOP-B in “poor prognosis” non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. A randomized trial. Med Oncol Tumor Pharmacother 1989;6:163.
442. Somers R, Burgers JM, Qasim M, et al. EORTC trial non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1987;23:283.
443. Gomez GA, Barcos M, Han T, Henderson ES. Cyclophosphamide, vincristine, adriamycin, and prednisone (CHOP) with and without intermediate dose methotrexate for the treatment of
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas of diffuse histology. Cancer 1987;60:18.
444. Gottlieb AJ, Anderson JR, Ginsberg SJ, et al. A randomized comparison of methotrexate dose and the addition of bleomycin to CHOP therapy for diffuse large cell lymphoma and other
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Cancer and Leukemia Group B study 7851. Cancer 1990;66:1888.
445. Wolf M, Matthews JP, Stone J, et al. Long-term survival advantage of MACOP-B over CHOP in intermediate-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. The Australian and New Zealand Lymphoma
Group. Ann Oncol 1997;8:71.
446. Tirelli U, Errante D, Van Glabbeke M, et al. CHOP is the standard regimen in patients > or = 70 years of age with intermediate-grade and high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: results of a
randomized study of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Lymphoma Cooperative Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:27.
447. Bastion Y, Blay JY, Divine M, et al. Elderly patients with aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: disease presentation, response to treatment, and survivala Groupe d'Etude des Lymphomes de
l'Adulte study on 453 patients older than 69 years. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2945.
448. Gams RA, Rainey M, Dandy M,et al. Phase III study of BCOP v CHOP in unfavorable categories of malignant lymphoma: a Southeastern Cancer Study Group trial. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1188.
449. Jones SE, Grozea PN, Metz EN, et al. Superiority of adriamycin-containing combination chemotherapy in the treatment of diffuse lymphoma: a Southwest Oncology Group study. Cancer
1979;43:417.
450. Bishop JF, Wiernik PH, Wesley MN, et al. A randomized trial of high dose cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisone plus or minus doxorubicin (CVP versus CAVP) with long-term
follow-up in advanced non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Leukemia 1987;1:508.
451. Aviles A, Calva A, Diaz-Maqueo JC, et al. Dose escalation of epirubicin in the CEOP-BLEO regimen: a controlled clinical trial comparing standard doses for the treatment of diffuse large cell
lymphoma. Leuk Lymphoma 1997;25:319.
452. Khaled HM, Zekri ZK, Mokhtar N, et al. A randomized EPOCH vs. CHOP front-line therapy for aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma patients: long-term results. Ann Oncol 1999;10:1489.
453. Sonneveld P, de Ridder M, van der Lelie H, et al. Comparison of doxorubicin and mitoxantrone in the treatment of elderly patients with advanced diffuse non-Hodgkin's lymphoma using CHOP
versus CNOP chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2530.
454. Klimo P, Connors JM. MACOP-B chemotherapy for the treatment of diffuse large-cell lymphoma. Ann Intern Med 1985;102:596.
455. Shipp MA, Yeap BY, Harrington DP, et al. The m-BACOD combination chemotherapy regimen in large-cell lymphoma: analysis of the completed trial and comparison with the M-BACOD
regimen. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:84.
456. Vose JM, Link BK, Grossbard ML, et al. Phase II study of Rituximab in combination with CHOP chemotherapy in patients with previously untreated intermediate or high-grade non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma (NHL). Ann Oncol 1999;10:195(abst).
457. Jones SE, Grozea PN, Miller TP, et al. Chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone alone or with levamisole or with levamisole plus BCG for malignant
lymphoma: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1318.
458. Verdonck LF, van Putten WL, Hagenbeek A, et al. Comparison of CHOP chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow transplantation for slowly responding patients with aggressive
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1045.
459. Haioun C, Lepage E, Gisselbrecht C, et al. Comparison of autologous bone marrow transplantation with sequential chemotherapy for intermediate-grade and high-grade non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma in first complete remission: a study of 464 patients. Groupe d'Etude des Lymphomes de l'Adulte [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2543.
460. Santini G, Salvagno L, Leoni P, et al. VACOP-B versus VACOP-B plus autologous bone marrow transplantation for advanced diffuse non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: results of a prospective
randomized trial by the non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Cooperative Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2796.
461. Gianni AM, Bregni M, Siena S, et al. High-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation compared with MACOP-B in aggressive B-cell lymphoma [see comments]. N Engl J
Med 1997;336:1290.
462. Shipp MA, Abeloff MD, Antman KH, et al. International Consensus Conference on high-dose therapy with hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphomas:
report of the jury. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:423.
463. Gribben JG, Goldstone AH, Linch DC, et al. Effectiveness of high-dose combination chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation for patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphomas who
are still responsive to conventional-dose therapy. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1621.
464. Cabanillas F, Hagemeister FB, Bodey GP, Freireich EJ. IMVP-16: an effective regimen for patients with lymphoma who have relapsed after initial combination chemotherapy. Blood
1982;60:693.
465. Cabanillas F, Hagemeister FB, McLaughlin P, et al. Results of MIME salvage regimen for recurrent or refractory lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:407.
466. Hoskins PJ, Le N, Gascoyne RD, et al. A dvanced diffuse large-cell lymphoma treated with 12-week combination chemotherapy: natural history of relapse after initial complete response and
prognostic variables defining outcome after relapse. Ann Oncol 1997;8:1125.
467. Press OW, Livingston R, Mortimer J, Collins C, Appelbaum F. Treatment of relapsed non-Hodgkin's lymphomas with dexamethasone, high-dose cytarabine, and cisplatin before marrow
transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:423.
468. Velasquez WS, Cabanillas F, Salvador P, et al. Effective salvage therapy for lymphoma with cisplatin in combination with high-dose Ara-C and dexamethasone (DHAP). Blood 1988;71:117.
469. Philip T, Chauvin F, Bron D, et al. PARMA international protocol: pilot study on 50 patients and preliminary analysis of the ongoing randomized study (62 patients). Ann Oncol 1991;2[Suppl
1]:57.
470. Chao NJ, Rosenberg SA, Horning SJ. CEPP(B): an effective and well-tolerated regimen in poor-risk, aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1990;76:1293.
471. Ruit JB, Lowenberg B, Hagenbeek A, et al. Phase II study of lomustine, cytarabine, mitoxantrone, and prednisone (CAMP) combination chemotherapy for doxorubicin-resistant intermediateand high-grade malignant non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Semin Oncol 1990;17:24.
472. Velasquez W, Hagemeister F, McLaughlin P, et al. E-SHAP: an effective treatment for refractory and relapsing lymphoma. A long follow-up. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;A1111(abst).
473. Coiffier B, Haioun C, Ketterer N, et al. Rituximab (anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody) for the treatment of patients with relapsing or refractory aggressive lymphoma: a multicenter phase II study.
Blood 1998;92:1927.
474. Armitage JO, Coiffier B. Activity of interferon-alpha in relapsed patients with diffuse large B-cell and peripheral T-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Ann Oncol 2000;11:1.
475. Philip T, Armitage JO, Spitzer G, et al. High-dose therapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation after failure of conventional chemotherapy in adults with intermediate-grade or
high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1987;316:1493.
476. Armitage JO. Bone marrow transplantation [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1994;330:827.
477. Philip T, Guglielmi C, Hagenbeek A, et al. Autologous bone marrow transplantation as compared with salvage chemotherapy in relapses of chemotherapy-sensitive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
[see comments]. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1540.
478. Vose JM, Bierman PJ, Anderson JR, et al. Progressive disease after high-dose therapy and autologous transplantation for lymphoid malignancy: clinical course and patient follow-up. Blood
1992;80:2142.
479. Addis BJ, Isaacson PG. Large cell lymphoma of the mediastinum: a B-cell tumour of probable thymic origin. Histopathology 1986;10:379.
480. Lamarre L, Jacobson JO, Aisenberg AC, Harris NL. Primary large cell lymphoma of the mediastinum. A histologic and immunophenotypic study of 29 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1989;13:730.
481. Moller P, Moldenhauer G, Momburg F, et al. Mediastinal lymphoma of clear cell type is a tumor corresponding to terminal steps of B cell differentiation. Blood 1987;69:1087.
482. Scarpa A, Bonetti F, Menestrina F, et al. Mediastinal large-cell lymphoma with sclerosis. Genotypic analysis establishes its B nature. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol 1987;412:17.
483. Tsang P, Cesarman E, Chadburn A, Liu YF, Knowles DM. Molecular characterization of primary mediastinal B cell lymphoma. Am J Pathol 1996;148:2017.
484. Joos S, Otano-Joos MI, Ziegler S, et al. Primary mediastinal (thymic) B-cell lymphoma is characterized by gains of chromosomal material including 9p and amplification of the REL gene. Blood
1996;87:1571.
485. Jacobson JO, Aisenberg AC, Lamarre L, et al. Mediastinal large cell lymphoma. An uncommon subset of adult lymphoma curable with combined modality therapy. Cancer 1988;62:1893.
486. Lazzarino M, Orlandi E, Paulli M, et al. Treatment outcome and prognostic factors for primary mediastinal (thymic) B-cell lymphoma: a multicenter study of 106 patients. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:1646.
487. Kirn D, Mauch P, Shaffer K, et al. Large-cell and immunoblastic lymphoma of the mediastinum: prognostic features and treatment outcome in 57 patients. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1336.
488. Ferry JA, Harris NL, Picker LJ, et al. Intravascular lymphomatosis (malignant angioendotheliomatosis). A B-cell neoplasm expressing surface homing receptors. Mod Pathol 1988;1:444.
489. Sheibani K, Battifora H, Winberg CD, et al. Further evidence that “malignant angioendotheliomatosis” is an angiotropic large-cell lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1986;314:943.
490. Demirer T, Dail DH, Aboulafia DM. Four varied cases of intravascular lymphomatosis and a literature review. Cancer 1994;73:1738.
491. Glass J, Hochberg FH, Miller DC. Intravascular lymphomatosis. A systemic disease with neurologic manifestations. Cancer 1993;71:3156.
492. Fredericks RK, Walker FO, Elster A, Challa V. Angiotropic intravascular large-cell lymphoma (malignant angioendotheliomatosis): report of a case and review of the literature. Surg Neurol
1991;35:218.
493. Yousem SA, Colby TV. Intravascular lymphomatosis presenting in the lung. Cancer 1990;65:349.
494. Pellicone JT, Goldstein HB. Pulmonary malignant angioendotheliomatosis. Presentation with fever and syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone. Chest 1990;98:1292.
495. Stroup RM, Sheibani K, Moncada A, Purdy LJ, Battifora H. Angiotropic (intravascular) large cell lymphoma. A clinicopathologic study of seven cases with unique clinical presentations. Cancer
1990;66:1781.
496. Kraus MD, Jones D, Bartlett NL. Intravascular lymphoma associated with endocrine dysfunction: a report of four cases and a review of the literature. Am J Med 1999;107:169.
497. Stahl RL, Chan W, Duncan A, Corley CC Jr. Malignant angioendotheliomatosis presenting as disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. Cancer 1991;68:2319.
498. Suzumiya J, Ohshima K, Kanda M, et al. Intravascular large cell lymphoma associated with hypoalbuminemia. Leuk Lymphoma 1998;32:179.

499. Sill H, Hofler G, Kaufmann P, et al. Angiotropic large cell lymphoma presenting as thrombotic microangiopathy (thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura). Cancer 1995;75:1167.
500. DiGiuseppe JA, Nelson WG, Seifter EJ, Boitnott JK, Mann RB. Intravascular lymphomatosis: a clinicopathologic study of 10 cases and assessment of response to chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:2573.
501. Grogan TM, Warnke RA, Kaplan HS. A comparative study of Burkitt's and non-Burkitt's “undifferentiated” malignant lymphoma: immunologic, cytochemical, ultrastructural, cytologic,
histopathologic, clinical and cell culture features. Cancer 1982;49:1817.
502. Yano T, van Krieken JH, Magrath IT, et al. Histogenetic correlations between subcategories of small noncleaved cell lymphomas. Blood 1992;79:1282.
503. Sweetenham JW, Pearce R, Taghipour G, et al. Adult Burkitt's and Burkitt-like non-Hodgkin's lymphomaoutcome for patients treated with high-dose therapy and autologous stem-cell
transplantation in first remission or at relapse: results from the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2465.
504. Garcia CF, Weiss LM, Warnke RA. Small noncleaved cell lymphoma: an immunophenotypic study of 18 cases and comparison with large cell lymphoma. Hum Pathol 1986;17:454.
505. Falini B, Fizzotti M, Pileri S, et al. Bcl-6 protein expression in normal and neoplastic lymphoid tissues. Ann Oncol 1997;8:101.
506. Carroll WL, Yu M, Link MP, Korsmeyer SJ. Absence of Ig V region gene somatic hypermutation in advanced Burkitt's lymphoma. J Immunol 1989;143:692.
507. Chapman CJ, Mockridge CI, Rowe M, Rickinson AB, Stevenson FK. Analysis of VH genes used by neoplastic B cells in endemic Burkitt's lymphoma shows somatic hypermutation and
intraclonal heterogeneity. Blood 1995;85:2176.
508. Chapman CJ, Zhou JX, Gregory C, Rickinson AB, Stevenson FK. VH and VL gene analysis in sporadic Burkitt's lymphoma shows somatic hypermutation, intraclonal heterogeneity, and a role
for antigen selection. Blood 1996;88:3562.
509. Klein U, Klein G, Ehlin-Henriksson B, Rajewsky K, Kuppers R. Burkitt's lymphoma is a malignancy of mature B cells expressing somatically mutated V region genes. Mol Med 1995;1:495.
510. Neri A, Barriga F, Knowles DM, Magrath IT, Dalla-Favera R. Different regions of the immunoglobulin heavy-chain locus are involved in chromosomal translocations in distinct pathogenetic
forms of Burkitt lymphoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:2748.
511. Pelicci PG, Knowles DMD, Magrath I, Dalla-Favera R. Chromosomal breakpoints and structural alterations of the c-myc locus differ in endemic and sporadic forms of Burkitt lymphoma. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1986;83:2984.
512. Capello D, Carbone A, Pastore C, et al. Point mutations of the BCL-6 gene in Burkitt's lymphoma. Br J Haematol 1997;99:168.
513. Hamilton-Dutoit SJ, Pallesen G, Franzmann MB, et al. AIDS-related lymphoma. Histopathology, immunophenotype, and association with Epstein-Barr virus as demonstrated by in situ nucleic
acid hybridization. Am J Pathol 1991;138:149.
514. Wright DH. What is Burkitt's lymphoma? [editorial]. J Pathol 1997;182:125.
515. Magrath IT, Shiramizu B. Biology and treatment of small non-cleaved cell lymphoma. Oncology (Huntingt) 1989;3:41; discussion 53.
516. Arseneau JC, Bagley CM, Anderson T, Canellos GP. Hyperkalaemia, a sequel to chemotherapy of Burkitt's lymphoma. Lancet 1973;1:10.
517. Cohen LF, Balow JE, Magrath IT, Poplack DG, Ziegler JL. Acute tumor lysis syndrome. A review of 37 patients with Burkitt's lymphoma. Am J Med 1980;68:486.
518. Ziegler JL, Magrath IT, Olweny CL. Cure of Burkitt's lymphoma. Ten-year follow-up of 157 Ugandan patients. Lancet 1979;2:936.
519. Magrath I, Adde M, Shad A, et al. Adults and children with small non-cleaved-cell lymphoma have a similar excellent outcome when treated with the same chemotherapy regimen. J Clin Oncol
1996;14:925.
520. Patte C, Philip T, Rodary C, et al. Improved survival rate in children with stage III and IV B cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and leukemia using multi-agent chemotherapy: results of a study of
114 children from the French Pediatric Oncology Society. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1219.
521. Murphy SB, Bowman WP, Abromowitch M, et al. Results of treatment of advanced-stage Burkitt's lymphoma and B cell (SIg+) acute lymphoblastic leukemia with high-dose fractionated
cyclophosphamide and coordinated high-dose methotrexate and cytarabine. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1732.
522. McMaster ML, Greer JP, Greco FA, et al. Effective treatment of small-noncleaved-cell lymphoma with high-intensity, brief-duration chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:941.
523. Philip T, Biron P, Philip I, et al. Massive therapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation in pediatric and young adults Burkitt's lymphoma (30 courses on 28 patients: a 5- year experience).
Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1986;22:1015.
524. Philip T, Biron P, Maraninchi D, et al. Massive chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow transplantation in 50 cases of bad prognosis non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Br J Haematol 1985;60:599.
525. Haddy TB, Adde MA, Magrath IT. CNS involvement in small noncleaved-cell lymphoma: is CNS disease per se a poor prognostic sign? J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1973.
526. Bernard A, Boumsell L, Reinherz EL, et al. Cell surface characterization of malignant T cells from lymphoblastic lymphoma using monoclonal antibodies: evidence for phenotypic differences
between malignant T cells from patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia and lymphoblastic lymphoma. Blood 1981;57:1105.
527. Gouttefangeas C, Bensussan A, Boumsell L. Study of the CD3-associated T-cell receptors reveals further differences between T-cell acute lymphoblastic lymphoma and leukemia. Blood
1990;75:931.
528. Quintanilla-Martinez L, Zukerberg LR, Harris NL. Prethymic adult lymphoblastic lymphoma. A clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical analysis. Am J Surg Pathol 1992;16:1075.
529. Szczepanski T, Pongers-Willemse MJ, Langerak AW, et al. Ig heavy chain gene rearrangements in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia exhibit predominant DH6-19 and DH7-27 gene usage,
can result in complete V-D-J rearrangements, and are rare in T-cell receptor alpha beta lineage. Blood 1999;93:4079.
530. Uckun FM, Sensel MG, Sun L, et al. Biology and treatment of childhood T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1998;91:735.
531. Begley CG, Green AR. The SCL gene: from case report to critical hematopoietic regulator. Blood 1999;93:2760.
532. Coleman CN, Picozzi VJ Jr, Cox RS, et al. Treatment of lymphoblastic lymphoma in adults. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1628.
533. Levine AM, Forman SJ, Meyer PR, et al. Successful therapy of convoluted T-lymphoblastic lymphoma in the adult. Blood 1983;61:92.
534. Jost LM, Jacky E, Dommann-Scherrer C, et al. Short-term weekly chemotherapy followed by high-dose therapy with autologous bone marrow transplantation for lymphoblastic and Burkitt's
lymphomas in adult patients. Ann Oncol 1995;6:445.
535. Bouabdallah R, Xerri L, Bardou VJ, et al. Role of induction chemotherapy and bone marrow transplantation in adult lymphoblastic lymphoma: a report on 62 patients from a single center. Ann
Oncol 1998;9:619.
536. Santini G, Pierluigi D, Congiu M, et al. Lymphoblastic lymphoma in adults: clinical aspects and therapy. FORUM Trends in Experimental and Clinical Medicine 1995;5:626.
537. Wilson WH, Grossbard ML, Alvarez M, et al. Dose-escalating EPOCH chemotherapy (CT) in previously untreated large cell lymphoma (LCL). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:65(abst 65).
538. Sweetenham JW, Liberti G, Pearce R, et al. High-dose therapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation for adult patients with lymphoblastic lymphoma: results of the European Group for
Bone Marrow Transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1358.
539. Hall TC, Choi OS, Abadi A, Krant MJ. High-dose corticoid therapy in Hodgkin's disease and other lymphomas. Ann Intern Med 1967;66:1144.
540. Weiss LM, Crabtree GS, Rouse RV, Warnke RA. Morphologic and immunologic characterization of 50 peripheral T-cell lymphomas. Am J Pathol 1985;118:316.
541. Suchi T, Lennert K, Tu LY, et al. Histopathology and immunohistochemistry of peripheral T cell lymphomas: a proposal for their classification. J Clin Pathol 1987;40:995.
542. Medeiros LJ, Lardelli P, Stetler-Stevenson M, Longo DL, Jaffe ES. Genotypic analysis of diffuse, mixed cell lymphomas. Comparison with morphologic and immunophenotypic findings. Am J
Clin Pathol 1991;95:547.
543. Patsouris E, Noel H, Lennert K. Histological and immunohistological findings in lymphoepithelioid cell lymphoma (Lennert's lymphoma). Am J Surg Pathol 1988;12:341.
544. Chott A, Augustin I, Wrba F, et al. Peripheral T-cell lymphomas: a clinicopathologic study of 75 cases. Hum Pathol 1990;21:1117.
545. Weisenburger DD, Linder J, Armitage JO. Peripheral T-cell lymphoma: a clinicopathologic study of 42 cases. Hematol Oncol 1987;5:175.
546. Hastrup N, Hamilton-Dutoit S, Ralfkiaer E, Pallesen G. Peripheral T-cell lymphomas: an evaluation of reproducibility of the updated Kiel classification. Histopathology 1991;18:99.
547. Lennert K, Feller A. Histopathology of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1992.
548. Borowitz MJ, Reichert TA, Brynes RK, et al. The phenotypic diversity of peripheral T-cell lymphomas: the Southeastern Cancer Study Group experience. Hum Pathol 1986;17:567.
549. Weiss LM, Picker LJ, Grogan TM, Warnke RA, Sklar J. Absence of clonal beta and gamma T-cell receptor gene rearrangements in a subset of peripheral T-cell lymphomas [published erratum
appears in Am J Pathol 1988;131:604]. Am J Pathol 1988;130:436.
550. Falini B, Pileri SA, Flenghi L, et al. Selection of a panel of monoclonal antibodies for monitoring residual disease in peripheral blood and bone marrow of interferon-treated hairy cell leukaemia
patients. Br J Haematol 1990;76:460.
551. Gonzalez CL, Medeiros LJ, Braziel RM, Jaffe ES. T-cell lymphoma involving subcutaneous tissue. A clinicopathologic entity commonly associated with hemophagocytic syndrome. Am J Surg
Pathol 1991;15:17.
552. Chott A, Dragosics B, Radaszkiewicz T. Peripheral T-cell lymphomas of the intestine. Am J Pathol 1992;141:1361.
553. Armitage JO, Greer JP, Levine AM, et al. Peripheral T-cell lymphoma. Cancer 1989;63:158.
554. Lippman SM, Miller TP, Spier CM, Slymen DJ, Grogan TM. The prognostic significance of the immunotype in diffuse large-cell lymphoma: a comparative study of the T-cell and B-cell
phenotype. Blood 1988;72:436.
555. Coiffier B, Brousse N, Peuchmaur M, et al. Peripheral T-cell lymphomas have a worse prognosis than B-cell lymphomas: a prospective study of 361 immunophenotyped patients treated with
the LNH-84 regimen. The GELA (Groupe d'Etude des Lymphomes Agressives). Ann Oncol 1990;1:45.
556. Dunn-Walters DK, Isaacson PG, Spencer J. Sequence analysis of rearranged IgVH genes from microdissected human Peyer's patch marginal zone B cells. Immunology 1996;88:618.
557. Vose JM, Peterson C, Bierman PJ, et al. Comparison of high-dose therapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation for T-cell and B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Blood 1990;76:424.
558. Feller AC, Griesser H, Schilling CV, et al. Clonal gene rearrangement patterns correlate with immunophenotype and clinical parameters in patients with angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy.
Am J Pathol 1988;133:549.
559. Weiss LM, Strickler JG, Hu E, Warnke RA, Sklar J. Immunoglobulin gene rearrangements in Hodgkin's disease [published erratum appears in Hum Pathol 1986;17:1106]. Hum Pathol
1986;17:1009.
560. Anagnostopoulos I, Hummel M, Finn T, et al. Heterogeneous Epstein-Barr virus infection patterns in peripheral T-cell lymphoma of angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy type. Blood
1992;80:1804.
561. Weiss LM, Jaffe ES, Liu XF, et al. Detection and localization of Epstein-Barr viral genomes in angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy and angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy-like lymphoma.
Blood 1992;79:1789.
562. Schlegelberger B, Feller A, Godde E, Grote W, Lennert K. Stepwise development of chromosomal abnormalities in angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy. Cancer Genet Cytogenet
1990;50:15.
563. Frizzera G, Moran EM, Rappaport H. Angio-immunoblastic lymphadenopathy with dysproteinaemia. Lancet 1974;1:1070.
564. Siegert W, Agthe A, Griesser H, et al. Treatment of angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy (AILD)-type T-cell lymphoma using prednisone with or without the COPBLAM/IMVP-16 regimen. A
multicenter study. Kiel Lymphoma Study Group. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:364.
565. Chan JK, Sin VC, Wong KF, et al. Nonnasal lymphoma expressing the natural killer cell marker CD56: a clinicopathologic study of 49 cases of an uncommon aggressive neoplasm. Blood
1997;89:4501.
566. Chan JK, Ng CS, Lau WH, Lo ST. Most nasal/nasopharyngeal lymphomas are peripheral T-cell neoplasms [published erratum appears in Am J Surg Pathol 1987;11:742]. Am J Surg Pathol
1987;11:418.
567. Jaffe ES, Chan JK, Su IJ, et al. Report of the Workshop on Nasal and Related Extranodal Angiocentric T/Natural Killer Cell Lymphomas. Definitions, differential diagnosis, and epidemiology.
Am J Surg Pathol 1996;20:103.
568. Ho FC, Srivastava G, Loke SL, et al. Presence of Epstein-Barr virus DNA in nasal lymphomas of B and “T” cell type. Hematol Oncol 1990;8:271.
569. Ferry JA, Sklar J, Zukerberg LR, Harris NL. Nasal lymphoma. A clinicopathologic study with immunophenotypic and genotypic analysis. Am J Surg Pathol 1991;15:268.
570. Elenitoba-Johnson KS, Zarate-Osorno A, Meneses A, et al. Cytotoxic granular protein expression, Epstein-Barr virus strain type, and latent membrane protein-1 oncogene deletions in nasal
T-lymphocyte/natural killer cell lymphomas from Mexico. Mod Pathol 1998;11:754.
571. Chan JK, Yip TT, Tsang WY, et al. Detection of Epstein-Barr viral RNA in malignant lymphomas of the upper aerodigestive tract [published erratum appears in Am J Surg Pathol 1994;18:1274].
Am J Surg Pathol 1994;18:938.
572. Ho FC, Choy D, Loke SL, et al. Polymorphic reticulosis and conventional lymphomas of the nose and upper aerodigestive tract: a clinicopathologic study of 70 cases, and immunophenotypic
studies of 16 cases. Hum Pathol 1990;21:1041.
573. Lipford EH Jr, Margolick JB, Longo DL, Fauci AS, Jaffe ES. Angiocentric immunoproliferative lesions: a clinicopathologic spectrum of post-thymic T-cell proliferations. Blood 1988;72:1674.
574. Cuadra-Garcia I, Proulx GM, Wu CL, et al. Sinonasal lymphoma: a clinicopathologic analysis of 58 cases from the Massachusetts General Hospital. Am J Surg Pathol 1999;23:1356.

575. Soler J, Bordes R, Ortuno F, et al. Aggressive natural killer cell leukaemia/lymphoma in two patients with lethal midline granuloma. Br J Haematol 1994;86:659.
576. Kwong YL, Chan AC, Liang R, et al. CD56+ NK lymphomas: clinicopathological features and prognosis. Br J Haematol 1997;97:821.
577. Chim CS, Kwong YL, Lie AK, Lee CK, Liang R. CEOP treatment results and validity of the International Prognostic Index in Chinese patients with aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Hematol
Oncol 1998;16:117.
578. Liang R, Chen F, Lee CK, et al. Autologous bone marrow transplantation for primary nasal T/NK cell lymphoma. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;19:91.
579. Nawa Y, Takenaka K, Shinagawa K, et al. Successful treatment of advanced natural killer cell lymphoma with high-dose chemotherapy and syngeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplantation.
Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;23:1321.
580. Isaacson PG, O'Connor NT, Spencer J, et al. Malignant histiocytosis of the intestine: a T-cell lymphoma. Lancet 1985;2:688.
581. Ashton-Key M, Diss TC, Pan L, Du MQ, Isaacson PG. Molecular analysis of T-cell clonality in ulcerative jejunitis and enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma. Am J Pathol 1997;151:493.
582. Murray A, Cuevas EC, Jones DB, Wright DH. Study of the immunohistochemistry and T cell clonality of enteropathy-associated T cell lymphoma. Am J Pathol 1995;146:509.
583. Carbonnel F, Grollet-Bioul L, Brouet JC, et al. Are complicated forms of celiac disease cryptic T-cell lymphomas? [see comments]. Blood 1998;92:3879.
584. Spencer J, Cerf-Bensussan N, Jarry A, et al. Enteropathy-associated T cell lymphoma (malignant histiocytosis of the intestine) is recognized by a monoclonal antibody (HML-1) that defines a
membrane molecule on human mucosal lymphocytes. Am J Pathol 1988;132:1.
585. Daum S, Foss HD, Anagnostopoulos I, et al. Expression of cytotoxic molecules in intestinal T-cell lymphomas. The German Study Group on Intestinal Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma. J Pathol
1997;182:311.
586. de Bruin PC, Connolly CE, Oudejans JJ, et al. Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphomas have a cytotoxic T-cell phenotype [published erratum appears in Histopathology 1997;31:578].
Histopathology 1997;31:313.
587. Howell WM, Leung ST, Jones DB, et al. HLA-DRB, -DQA, and -DQB polymorphism in celiac disease and enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma. Common features and additional risk factors
for malignancy. Hum Immunol 1995;43:29.
588. Egan LJ, Stevens FM, McCarthy CF. Celiac disease and T-cell lymphoma [letter; comment]. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1611.
589. Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Weekly clinicopathological exercises. Case 15-1996. A 79-year-old woman with anorexia, weight loss, and diarrhea after treatment for
celiac disease [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1996;334:1316.
590. Mantovani G, Esu S, Astara G, et al. Primary T cell CD30-positive anaplastic large-cell lymphoma associated with adult-onset celiac disease and presenting with skin lesions. Acta Haematol
1995;94:48.
591. Shiboski CH, Greenspan D, Dodd CL, Daniels TE. Oral T-cell lymphoma associated with celiac sprue. A case report. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1993;76:54.
592. Alegre VA, Winkelmann RK, Diez-Martin JL, Banks PM. Adult celiac disease, small and medium vessel cutaneous necrotizing vasculitis, and T cell lymphoma. J Am Acad Dermatol
1988;19:973.
593. Gaulard P, Bourquelot P, Kanavaros P, et al. Expression of the alpha/beta and gamma/delta T-cell receptors in 57 cases of peripheral T-cell lymphomas. Identification of a subset of
gamma/delta T-cell lymphomas. Am J Pathol 1990;137:617.
594. Farcet JP, Gaulard P, Marolleau JP, et al. Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma: sinusal/sinusoidal localization of malignant cells expressing the T-cell receptor gamma delta. Blood 1990;75:2213.
595. Boulland ML, Kanavaros P, Wechsler J, Casiraghi O, Gaulard P. Cytotoxic protein expression in natural killer cell lymphomas and in alpha beta and gamma delta peripheral T-cell lymphomas.
J Pathol 1997;183:432.
596. Salhany KE, Feldman M, Kahn MJ, et al. Hepatosplenic gamma-delta T-cell lymphoma: ultrastructural, immunophenotypic, and functional evidence for cytotoxic T lymphocyte differentiation.
Hum Pathol 1997;28:674.
597. Cooke CB, Krenacs L, Stetler-Stevenson M, et al. Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma: a distinct clinicopathologic entity of cytotoxic gamma delta T-cell origin [see comments]. Blood 1996;88:4265.
598. Francois A, Lesesve JF, Stamatoullas A, et al. Hepatosplenic gamma/delta T-cell lymphoma: a report of two cases in immunocompromised patients, associated with isochromosome 7q. Am J
Surg Pathol 1997;21:781.
599. Wang CC, Tien HF, Lin MT, et al. Consistent presence of isochromosome 7q in hepatosplenic T gamma/delta lymphoma: a new cytogenetic-clinicopathologic entity. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 1995;12:161.
600. Jonveaux P, Daniel MT, Martel V, Maarek O, Berger R. Isochromosome 7q and trisomy 8 are consistent primary, non-random chromosomal abnormalities associated with hepatosplenic T
gamma/delta lymphoma. Leukemia 1996;10:1453.
601. Diez-Martin JL, Lust JA, Witzig TE, Banks PM, Li CY. Unusual presentation of extranodal peripheral T-cell lymphomas with multiple paraneoplastic features. Cancer 1991;68:834.
602. Ross CW, Schnitzer B, Sheldon S, Braun DK, Hanson CA. Gamma/delta T-cell posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorder primarily in the spleen. Am J Clin Pathol 1994;102:310.
603. Arnulf B, Copie-Bergman C, Delfau-Larue MH, et al. Nonhepatosplenic gammadelta T-cell lymphoma: a subset of cytotoxic lymphomas with mucosal or skin localization. Blood 1998;91:1723.
604. Shapira MY, Caspi O, Amir G, Zlotogorski A, Naparstek Y. Gastric-mucocutaneous gd T cell lymphoma: possible association with Epstein-Barr virus? Leuk Lymphoma 1999;35:397.
605. Wong KF, Chan JK, Matutes E, et al. Hepatosplenic gamma delta T-cell lymphoma. A distinctive aggressive lymphoma type [see comments]. Am J Surg Pathol 1995;19:718.
606. Cooke C, Greiner T, Raffeld M, et al. T-cell lymphoma: a distinct clinicopathologic entity. Mod Pathol 1994;7:106A.
607. Salhany KE, Macon WR, Choi JK, et al. Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell lymphoma: clinicopathologic, immunophenotypic, and genotypic analysis of alpha/beta and gamma/delta subtypes.
Am J Surg Pathol 1998;22:881.
608. Kumar S, Krenacs L, Medeiros J, et al. Subcutaneous panniculitic T-cell lymphoma is a tumor of cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Hum Pathol 1998;29:397.
609. Benharroch D, Meguerian-Bedoyan Z, Lamant L, et al. ALK-positive lymphoma: a single disease with a broad spectrum of morphology. Blood 1998;91:2076.
610. Stein H, Mason DY, Gerdes J, et al. The expression of the Hodgkin's disease associated antigen Ki-1 in reactive and neoplastic lymphoid tissue: evidence that Reed-Sternberg cells and
histiocytic malignancies are derived from activated lymphoid cells. Blood 1985;66:848.
611. Chan J, Ng C, Hui P, et al. Anaplastic large cell Ki-1 lymphoma: delineation of two morphological types. Histopathology 1989;15:11.
612. Pileri S, Falini B, Delsol G, et al. Lymphohistiocytic T-cell lymphoma (anaplastic large cell lymphoma CD30+/Ki-1 + with a high content of reactive histiocytes). Histopathology 1990;16:383.
613. Kinney MC, Collins RD, Greer JP, et al. A small-cell-predominant variant of primary Ki-1 (CD30)+ T-cell lymphoma. Am J Surg Pathol 1993;17:859.
614. Falini B, Bigerna B, Fizzotti M, et al. ALK expression defines a distinct group of T/null lymphomas (“ALK lymphomas”) with a wide morphological spectrum. Am J Pathol 1998;153:875.
615. Pileri S, Bocchia M, Baroni CD, et al. Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (CD30 +/Ki-1+): results of a prospective clinico-pathological study of 69 cases. Br J Haematol 1994;86:513.
616. Zinzani PL, Bendandi M, Martelli M, et al. Anaplastic large-cell lymphoma: clinical and prognostic evaluation of 90 adult patients [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:955.
617. Pulford K, Lamant L, Morris SW, et al. Detection of anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) and nucleolar protein nucleophosmin (NPM)-ALK proteins in normal and neoplastic cells with the
monoclonal antibody ALK1. Blood 1997;89:1394.
618. Pittaluga S, Wiodarska I, Pulford K, et al. The monoclonal antibody ALK1 identifies a distinct morphological subtype of anaplastic large cell lymphoma associated with 2p23/ALK
rearrangements. Am J Pathol 1997;151:343.
619. Kanzler H, Kuppers R, Hansmann ML, Rajewsky K. Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells in Hodgkin's disease represent the outgrowth of a dominant tumor clone derived from (crippled) germinal
center B cells. J Exp Med 1996;184:1495.
620. Kuppers R, Rajewsky K, Zhao M, et al. Hodgkin disease: Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells picked from histological sections show clonal immunoglobulin gene rearrangements and appear to
be derived from B cells at various stages of development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:10962.
621. Hummel M, Ziemann K, Lammert H, et al. Hodgkin's disease with monoclonal and polyclonal populations of Reed-Sternberg cells [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1995;333:901.
622. Sundeen J, Lipford E, Uppenkamp M, et al. Rearranged antigen receptor genes in Hodgkin's disease [published erratum appears in Blood 1987;70:893]. Blood 1987;70:96.
623. Zinzani PL, Martelli M, Magagnoli M, et al. Anaplastic large cell lymphoma Hodgkin's-like: a randomized trial of ABVD versus MACOP-B with and without radiation therapy. Blood 1998;92:790.
624. Foss HD, Anagnostopoulos I, Araujo I, et al. Anaplastic large-cell lymphomas of T-cell and null-cell phenotype express cytotoxic molecules. Blood 1996;88:4005.
625. Krenacs L, Wellmann A, Sorbara L, et al. Cytotoxic cell antigen expression in anaplastic large cell lymphomas of T- and null-cell type and Hodgkin's disease: evidence for distinct cellular origin.
Blood 1997;89:980.
626. Shiota M, Nakamura S, Ichinohasama R, et al. Anaplastic large cell lymphomas expressing the novel chimeric protein p80NPM/ALK: a distinct clinicopathologic entity. Blood 1995;86:1954.
627. Mason DY, Bastard C, Rimokh R, et al. CD30-positive large cell lymphomas (“Ki-1 lymphoma”) are associated with a chromosomal translocation involving 5q35 [see comments]. Br J Haematol
1990;74:161.
628. Weisenburger DD, Gordon BG, Vose JM, et al. Occurrence of the t(2;5)(p23;q35) in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1996;87:3860.
629. Downing JR, Shurtleff SA, Zielenska M, et al. Molecular detection of the (2;5) translocation of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. Blood
1995;85:3416.
630. Sandlund JT, Pui CH, Roberts WM, et al. Clinicopathologic features and treatment outcome of children with large-cell lymphoma and the t(2;5)(p23;q35). Blood 1994;84:2467.
631. Wlodarska I, De Wolf-Peeters C, Falini B, et al. The cryptic inv(2)(p23q35) defines a new molecular genetic subtype of ALK-positive anaplastic large-cell lymphoma. Blood 1998;92:2688.
632. Headington JT, Roth MS, Schnitzer B. Regressing atypical histiocytosis: a review and critical appraisal. Semin Diagn Pathol 1987;4:28.
633. Reiter A, Schrappe M, Tiemann M, et al. Successful treatment strategy for Ki-1 anaplastic large-cell lymphoma of childhood: a prospective analysis of 62 patients enrolled in three consecutive
Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster group studies. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:899.
634. Sandlund JT, Pui CH, Santana VM, et al. Clinical features and treatment outcome for children with CD30+ large-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:895.
635. Greer JP, Kinney MC, Collins RD, et al. Clinical features of 31 patients with Ki-1 anaplastic large-cell lymphoma [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:539.
636. Skinnider BF, Connors JM, Sutcliffe SB, Gascoyne RD. Anaplastic large cell lymphoma: a clinicopathologic analysis. Hematol Oncol 1999;17:137.
637. Tilly H, Gaulard P, Lepage E, et al. Primary anaplastic large-cell lymphoma in adults: clinical presentation, immunophenotype, and outcome. Blood 1997;90:3727.
638. Fanin R, Silvestri F, Geromin A, et al. Primary systemic CD30 (Ki-1)-positive anaplastic large cell lymphoma of the adult: sequential intensive treatment with the F-MACHOP regimen (+/radiotherapy) and autologous bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1996;87:1243.
639. van Spronsen DJ, Janssen-Heijnen ML, Breed WP, Coebergh JW. Prevalence of co-morbidity and its relationship to treatment among unselected patients with Hodgkin's disease and
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, 19931996. Ann Hematol 1999;78:315.
640. Namboodiri KK, Harris RE. Hematopoietic and lymphoproliferative cancer among male veterans using the Veterans Administration Medical System. Cancer 1991;68:1123.
641. d'Amore F, Brincker H, Christensen BE, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in the elderly. A study of 602 patients aged 70 or older from a Danish population-based registry. The Danish
LYEO-Study Group. Ann Oncol 1992;3:379.
642. Grogan L, Corbally N, Dervan PA, Byrne A, Carney DN. Comparable prognostic factors and survival in elderly patients with aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma treated with standard-dose
adriamycin-based regimens. Ann Oncol 1994;5:47.
643. Dixon DO, Neilan B, Jones SE, et al. Effect of age on therapeutic outcome in advanced diffuse histiocytic lymphoma: the Southwest Oncology Group experience. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:295.
644. Solal-Celigny P, Chastang C, Herrera A, et al. Age as the main prognostic factor in adult aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Am J Med 1987;83:1075.
645. Vose JM, Armitage JO, Weisenburger DD, et al. The importance of age in survival of patients treated with chemotherapy for aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1838.
646. Rossini F, Mingozzi S, Pogliani EM, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the elderly. Prognostic factors and outcome. Recent Prog Med 1991;82:262.
647. Ansell SM, Falkson G, van der Merwe R, Uys A. Chronological age is a multifactorial prognostic variable in patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Ann Oncol 1992;3:45.
648. Effect of age on the characteristics and clinical behavior of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma patients. The Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Classification Project. Ann Oncol 1997;8:973.
649. Maartense E, Hermans J, Kluin-Nelemans JC, et al. Elderly patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: population-based results in The Netherlands. Ann Oncol 1998;9:1219.
650. Armitage JO, Potter JF. Aggressive chemotherapy for diffuse histiocytic lymphoma in the elderly: increased complications with advancing age. J Am Geriatr Soc 1984;32:269.
651. Neilly IJ, Ogston M, Bennett B, Dawson AA. High grade non-Hodgkins lymphoma in the elderly12 year experience in the Grampian Region of Scotland. Hematol Oncol 1995;13:99.
652. Elias L. Differences in age and sex distributions among patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer 1979;43:2540.
653. Carbone A, Volpe R, Gloghini A, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in the elderly. I. Pathologic features at presentation. Cancer 1990;66:1991.
654. Tirelli U, Zagonel V, Serraino D, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas in 137 patients aged 70 years or older: a retrospective European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
Lymphoma Group Study. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1708.
655. Sonneveld P, Michiels JJ. Full dose chemotherapy in elderly patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a feasibility study using a mitoxantrone containing regimen. Br J Cancer 1990;62:105.

656. Tirelli U, Zagonel V, Errante D, et al. A prospective study of a new combination chemotherapy regimen in patients older than 70 years with unfavorable non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol
1992;10:228.
657. Zinzani PL, Storti S, Zaccaria A, et al. Elderly aggressive-histology non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: first-line VNCOP-B regimen experience on 350 patients. Blood 1999;94:33.
658. Niitsu N, Umeda M. THP-COPBLM (pirarubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone, bleomycin and procarbazine) regimen combined with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)
for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in elderly patients: a prospective study. Leukemia 1997;11:1817.
659. McMaster ML, Johnson DH, Greer JP, et al. A brief-duration combination chemotherapy for elderly patients with poor-prognosis non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer 1991;67:1487.
660. O'Reilly SE, Klimo P, Connors JM. Low-dose ACOP-B and VABE: weekly chemotherapy for elderly patients with advanced-stage diffuse large-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:741.
661. O'Reilly SE, Connors JM, Howdle S, et al. In search of an optimal regimen for elderly patients with advanced-stage diffuse large-cell lymphoma: results of a phase II study of P/DOCE
chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2250.
662. Martelli M, Guglielmi C, Coluzzi S, et al. P-VABEC: a prospective study of a new weekly chemotherapy regimen for elderly aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2362.
663. Bertini M, Freilone R, Vitolo U, et al. P-VEBEC: a new 8-weekly schedule with or without rG-CSF for elderly patients with aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). Ann Oncol 1994;5:895.
664. Mainwaring PN, Cunningham D, Gregory W, et al. A BNLI randomized study of padriacebo vs. pmitcebo in patients with high-grade lymphoma (HGL) over 60 years of age. Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1998;12a.
665. Coiffier B, Neidhardt-Berard EM, Tilly H, et al. Fludarabine alone compared with CHVP plus interferon in elderly patients with follicular lymphoma and adverse prognostic parameters: a GELA
study. Groupe d'Etudes des Lymphomes de l'Adulte. Ann Oncol 1999;10:1191.
666. Meyer RM, Chen C, Skingley P. A comparison of outcomes of elderly patients with aggressive histology lymphoma (AHL) who were entered or not entered on to a randomized phase II trial.
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;17a.
667. Gomez H, Hidalgo M, Casanova L, et al. Risk factors for treatment-related death in elderly patients with aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: results of a multivariate analysis. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:2065.
668. Gomez H, Mas L, Casanova L, et al. Elderly patients with aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma treated with CHOP chemotherapy plus granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor:
identification of two age subgroups with differing hematologic toxicity. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2352.
669. Guerci A, Lederlin P, Reyes F, et al. Effect of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor administration in elderly patients with aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma treated with a
pirarubicin-combination chemotherapy regimen. Groupe d'Etudes des Lymphomes de l'Adulte. Ann Oncol 1996;7:966.
670. Zinzani PL, Pavone E, Storti S, et al. Randomized trial with or without granulocyte colony-stimulating factor as adjunct to induction VNCOP-B treatment of elderly high-grade non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma. Blood 1997;89:3974.
671. Opelz G, Schwarz V, Wujciak T, et al. Analysis of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas in organ transplant recipients. Transplant Rev 1995;9:231.
672. Paya CV, Fung JJ, Nalesnik MA, et al. Epstein-Barr virus-induced posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders. ASTS/ASTP EBV-PTLD Task Force and The Mayo Clinic Organized
International Consensus Development Meeting. Transplantation 1999;68:1517.
673. Shapiro R, Nalesnik M, McCauley J, et al. Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders in adult and pediatric renal transplant patients receiving tacrolimus-based immunosuppression.
Transplantation 1999;68:1851.
674. Leblond V, Davi F, Charlotte F, et al. Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders not associated with Epstein-Barr virus: a distinct entity? J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2052.
675. Bierman PJ, Vose JM, Langnas AN, et al. Hodgkin's disease following solid organ transplantation. Ann Oncol 1996;7:265.
676. Weissmann DJ, Ferry JA, Harris NL, et al. Posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorders in solid organ recipients are predominantly aggressive tumors of host origin. Am J Clin Pathol
1995;103:748.
677. Knowles DM, Cesarman E, Chadburn A, et al. Correlative morphologic and molecular genetic analysis demonstrates three distinct categories of posttransplantation lymphoproliferative
disorders. Blood 1995;85:552.
678. Harris NL, Ferry JA, Swerdlow SH. Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders: summary of Society for Hematopathology Workshop. Semin Diagn Pathol 1997;14:8.
679. Chadburn A, Chen JM, Hsu DT, et al. The morphologic and molecular genetic categories of posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorders are clinically relevant. Cancer 1998;82:1978.
680. Swinnen LJ, Costanzo-Nordin MR, Fisher SG, et al. Increased incidence of lymphoproliferative disorder after immunosuppression with the monoclonal antibody OKT3 in cardiac-transplant
recipients [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1723.
681. Armitage JM, Kormos RL, Stuart RS, et al. Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease in thoracic organ transplant patients: ten years of cyclosporine-based immunosuppression. J Heart Lung
Transplant 1991;10:877; discussion 886.
682. Benkerrou M, Jais JP, Leblond V, et al. Anti-B-cell monoclonal antibody treatment of severe posttransplant B-lymphoproliferative disorder: prognostic factors and long-term outcome. Blood
1998;92:3137.
683. Swinnen LJ. Durable remission after aggressive chemotherapy for post-cardiac transplant lymphoproliferation. Leuk Lymphoma 1997;28:89.
684. Cesarman E, Chadburn A, Liu YF, et al. BCL-6 gene mutations in posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorders predict response to therapy and clinical outcome. Blood 1998;92:2294.
685. Swinnen LJ. Overview of posttransplant B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders. Semin Oncol 1999;26:21.
686. Morrison VA, Dunn DL, Manivel JC, Gajl-Peczalska KJ, Peterson BA. Clinical characteristics of post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders. Am J Med 1994;97:14.
687. Milpied N, Vasseur B, Antoine C, et al. Chimeric anti CD20 monoclonal antibody (Rituximab) in B posttransplant lympho-proliferative disorders (B PTLDs): A retrospective analysis on 32
patients (PTS). Blood 1999;89:631a (abst 2803).
688. Nalesnik MA, Rao AS, Furukawa H, et al. Autologous lymphokine-activated killer cell therapy of Epstein-Barr virus-positive and -negative lymphoproliferative disorders arising in organ
transplant recipients. Transplantation 1997;63:1200.
689. Papadopoulos EB, Ladanyi M, Emanuel D, et al. I nfusions of donor leukocytes to treat Epstein-Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferative disorders after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation
[see comments]. N Engl J Med 1994;330:1185.
690. 1993 Revised classification system for HIV infection and expanded surveillance case definition for AIDS among adolescents and adults. MMWR 1992;41:961.
691. Kaplan LD, Abrams DI, Feigal E, et al. AIDS-associated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in San Francisco. JAMA 1989;261:719.
692. Kaplan LD, Shiramizu B, Herndier B, et al. Influence of molecular characteristics on clinical outcome in human immunodeficiency virus-associated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: identification of a
subgroup with favorable clinical outcome. Blood 1995;85:1727.
693. Gisselbrecht C, Oksenhendler E, Tirelli U, et al. Human immunodeficiency virus-related lymphoma treatment with intensive combination chemotherapy. French-Italian Cooperative Group. Am J
Med 1993;95:188.
694. Straus DJ, Huang J, Testa MA, Levine AM, Kaplan LD. Prognostic factors in the treatment of human immunodeficiency virus-associated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: analysis of AIDS Clinical
Trials Group protocol 142low-dose versus standard-dose m-BACOD plus granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:3601.
695. Levine AM, Sullivan-Halley J, Pike MC, et al. Human immunodeficiency virus-related lymphoma. Prognostic factors predictive of survival [see comments]. Cancer 1991;68:2466.
696. Kaplan LD, Straus DJ, Testa MA, et al. Low-dose compared with standard-dose m-BACOD chemotherapy for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma associated with human immunodeficiency virus infection.
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases AIDS Clinical Trials Group [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1641.
697. Remick SC, McSharry JJ, Wolf BC, et al. Novel oral combination chemotherapy in the treatment of intermediate-grade and high-grade AIDS-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:1691.
698. Kaplan LD. Clinical management of human immunodeficiency virus-associated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1998;23:101.
699. Sparano JA, Wiernik PH, Hu X, et al. Pilot trial of infusional cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and etoposide plus didanosine and filgrastim in patients with human immunodeficiency
virus-associated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:3026.
700. Tosi P, Gherlinzoni F, Mazza P, et al. 3'-Azido 3'-deoxythymidine + methotrexate as a novel antineoplastic combination in the treatment of human immunodeficiency virus-related
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Blood 1997;89:419.
701. Spina M, Vaccher E, Carbone A, Tirelli U. Neoplastic complications of HIV infection. Ann Oncol 1999;10:1271.
702. Errante D, Vaccher E, Tirelli U. Are hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors useful in association with chemotherapy in the treatment of HIV-related non-Hodgkin's lymphomas? Ann Oncol
1996;7:233.
703. Gabarre J, Lepage E, Thyss A, et al. Chemotherapy combined with zidovudine and GM-CSF in human immunodeficiency virus-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Ann Oncol 1995;6:1025.
704. Maher EA, Fine HA. Primary CNS lymphoma. Semin Oncol 1999;26:346.
705. Blay JY, Bouhour D, Carrie C, et al. The C5R protocol: a regimen of high-dose chemotherapy and radiotherapy in primary cerebral non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of patients with no known cause of
immunosuppression [see comments]. Blood 1995;86:2922.
706. Nelson DF, Martz KL, Bonner H, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the brain: can high dose, large volume radiation therapy improve survival? Report on a prospective trial by the Radiation
Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG): RTOG 8315 [see comments]. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;23:9.
707. Schultz C, Scott C, Sherman W, et al. Preirradiation chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and dexamethasone for primary CNS lymphomas: initial report of radiation
therapy oncology group protocol 88-06. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:556.
708. Blay JY, Conroy T, Chevreau C, et al. High-dose methotrexate for the treatment of primary cerebral lymphomas: analysis of survival and late neurologic toxicity in a retrospective series. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:864.
709. DeAngelis LM, Yahalom J, Thaler HT, Kher U. Combined modality therapy for primary CNS lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:635.
710. Bessell EM, Graus F, Punt JA, et al. Primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the CNS treated with BVAM or CHOD/BVAM chemotherapy before radiotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:945.
711. Brada M, Hjiyiannakis D, Hines F, Traish D, Ashley S. Short intensive primary chemotherapy and radiotherapy in sporadic primary CNS lymphoma (PCL). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;40:1157.
712. Reni M, Ferreri AJ, Garancini MP, Villa E. Therapeutic management of primary central nervous system lymphoma in immunocompetent patients: results of a critical review of the literature. Ann
Oncol 1997;8:227.
713. Abrey LE, DeAngelis LM, Yahalom J. Long-term survival in primary CNS lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:859.
714. Corry J, Smith JG, Wirth A, Quong G, Liew KH. Primary central nervous system lymphoma: age and performance status are more important than treatment modality. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1998;41:615.
715. O'Neill BP, Wang CH, O'Fallon JR, et al. Primary central nervous system non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (PCNSL): survival advantages with combined initial therapy? A final report of the North
Central Cancer Treatment Group (NCCTG) Study 86-72-52. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:559.
716. Cher L, Glass J, Harsh GR, Hochberg FH. Therapy of primary CNS lymphoma with methotrexate-based chemotherapy and deferred radiotherapy: preliminary results. Neurology 1996;46:1757.
717. Sandor V, Stark-Vancs V, Pearson D, et al. Phase II trial of chemotherapy alone for primary CNS and intraocular lymphoma [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3000.
718. Cheng AL, Yeh KH, Uen WC, et al. Systemic chemotherapy alone for patients with non-acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related central nervous system lymphoma: a pilot study of the
BOMES protocol. Cancer 1998;82:1946.
719. Doolittle ND, Miner ME, Hall WA, et al. Safety and efficacy of a multicenter study using intraarterial chemotherapy in conjunction with osmotic opening of the blood-brain barrier for the
treatment of patients with malignant brain tumors. Cancer 2000;88:637.
720. Shahab N, Doll DC. Testicular lymphoma. Semin Oncol 1999;26:259.
721. Doll DC, Weiss RB. Malignant lymphoma of the testis. Am J Med 1986;81:515.
722. Hyland J, Lasota J, Jasinski M, et al. Molecular pathological analysis of testicular diffuse large cell lymphomas. Hum Pathol 1998;29:1231.
723. Crellin AM, Hudson BV, Bennett MH, Harland S, Hudson GV. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the testis. Radiother Oncol 1993;27:99.
724. Moller MB, d'Amore F, Christensen BE. Testicular lymphoma: a population-based study of incidence, clinicopathological correlations and prognosis. The Danish Lymphoma Study Group, LYFO.
Eur J Cancer 1994;12:1760.
725. Linassier C, Desablens B, Yves Le Prise P, et al. Primary testicular non-lymphoblastic intermediate-high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: results of a goelams prospective study. Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1999;326a(abst 1253).
726. Niitsu N, Umeda M. Clinical features of testicular non-Hodgkin's lymphomafocus on treatment strategy. Acta Oncol 1998;37:677.

727. Tondini C, Ferreri AJ, Siracusano L, et al. Diffuse large-cell lymphoma of the testis. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2854.
728. Fonseca R, Habermann TM, Colgan JP, et al. Testicular lymphoma is associated with a high incidence of extranodal recurrence. Cancer 2000;88:154.
729. Ferry JA, Harris NL, Young RH, et al. Malignant lymphoma of the testis, epididymis, and spermatic cord. A clinicopathologic study of 69 cases with immunophenotypic analysis. Am J Surg
Pathol 1994;18:376.
730. Touroutoglou N, Dimopoulos MA, Younes A, et al. Testicular lymphoma: late relapses and poor outcome despite doxorubicin-based therapy. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1361.
731. Sussman EB, Hajdu SI, Lieberman PH, Whitmore WF. Malignant lymphoma of the testis: a clinicopathologic study of 37 cases. J Urol 1977;118:1004.
732. Read G. Lymphomas of the testisresults of treatment 196077. Clin Radiol 1981;32:687.
733. Zietman AL, Coen JJ, Ferry JA, et al. The management and outcome of stage IAE nonHodgkin's lymphoma of the testis. J Urol 1996;155:943.
734. Connors JM, Klimo P, Voss N, Fairey RN, Jackson S. Testicular lymphoma: improved outcome with early brief chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:776.
735. Zucca E, Roggero E, Bertoni F, Cavalli F. Primary extranodal non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Part 1: Gastrointestinal, cutaneous and genitourinary lymphomas. Ann Oncol 1997;8:727.
736. Tesoro-Tess JD, Biasi S, Balzarini L, et al. Heart involvement in lymphomas. The value of magnetic resonance imaging and two-dimensional echocardiography at disease presentation. Cancer
1993;72:2484.
737. McDonnell PJ, Mann RB, Bulkley BH. Involvement of the heart by malignant lymphoma: a clinicopathologic study. Cancer 1982;49:944.
738. Hamada S, Nishimura T, Hayashida K, Uehara T. Intracardiac malignant lymphoma detected by gallium-67 citrate and thallium-201 chloride. J Nucl Med 1988;29:1868.
739. Donnelly MS, Weinberg DS, Skarin AT, Levine HD. Sick sinus syndrome with seroconstrictive pericarditis in malignant lymphoma involving the heart: a case report. Med Pediatr Oncol
1981;9:273.
740. Pozniak AL, Thomas RD, Hobbs CB, Lever JV. Primary malignant lymphoma of the heart. Antemortem cytologic diagnosis. Acta Cytol 1986;30:662.
741. Curtsinger CR, Wilson MJ, Yoneda K. Primary cardiac lymphoma. Cancer 1989;64:521.
742. Nand S, Mullen GM, Lonchyna VA, Moncada R. Primary lymphoma of the heart. Prolonged survival with early systemic therapy in a patient. Cancer 1991;68:2289.
743. Gill PS, Chandraratna PA, Meyer PR, Levine AM. Malignant lymphoma: cardiac involvement at initial presentation. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:216.
744. Balasubramanyam A, Waxman M, Kazal HL, Lee MH. Malignant lymphoma of the heart in acquired immune deficiency syndrome. Chest 1986;90:243.
745. Ceresoli GL, Ferreri AJ, Bucci E, et al. Primary cardiac lymphoma in immunocompetent patients: diagnostic and therapeutic management. Cancer 1997;80:1497.
746. Holladay AO, Siegel RJ, Schwartz DA. Cardiac malignant lymphoma in acquired immune deficiency syndrome. Cancer 1992;70:2203.
747. Hyjek E, Isaacson PG. Primary B cell lymphoma of the thyroid and its relationship to Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Hum Pathol 1988;19:1315.
748. Kossev P, Livolsi V. Lymphoid lesions of the thyroid: review in light of the revised European-American lymphoma classification and upcoming World Health Organization classification. Thyroid
1999;9:1273.
749. Tupchong L, Hughes F, Harmer CL. Primary lymphoma of the thyroid: clinical features, prognostic factors, and results of treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1813.
750. Tsang RW, Gospodarowicz MK, Sutcliffe SB, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the thyroid gland: prognostic factors and treatment outcome. The Princess Margaret Hospital Lymphoma Group.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:599.
751. Lam KY, Lo CY, Kwong DL, Lee J, Srivastava G. Malignant lymphoma of the thyroid. A 30-year clinicopathologic experience and an evaluation of the presence of Epstein-Barr virus. Am J Clin
Pathol 1999;112:263.
752. Pedersen RK, Pedersen NT. Primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the thyroid gland: a population based study. Histopathology 1996;28:25.
753. Skarsgard ED, Connors JM, Robins RE. A current analysis of primary lymphoma of the thyroid. Arch Surg 1991;126:1199; discussion 1203.
754. Jensen MH, Davis RK, Derrick L. Thyroid cancer: a computer-assisted review of 5287 cases. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1990;102:51.
755. Vigliotti A, Kong JS, Fuller LM, Velasquez WS. Thyroid lymphomas stages IE and IIE: comparative results for radiotherapy only, combination chemotherapy only, and multimodality treatment.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1807.
756. Shaw JH, Holden A, Sage M. Thyroid lymphoma. Br J Surg 1989;76:895.
757. Pyke CM, Grant CS, Habermann TM, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the thyroid: is more than biopsy necessary? World J Surg 1992;16:604; discussion 609.
758. Matsuzuka F, Miyauchi A, Katayama S, et al. Clinical aspects of primary thyroid lymphoma: diagnosis and treatment based on our experience of 119 cases. Thyroid 1993;3:93.
759. Laing RW, Hoskin P, Hudson BV, et al. The significance of MALT histology in thyroid lymphoma: a review of patients from the BNLI and Royal Marsden Hospital. Clin Oncol 1994;6:300.
760. Doria R, Jekel JF, Cooper DL. Thyroid lymphoma. The case for combined modality therapy. Cancer 1994;73:200.
761. Salvatore JR, Ross RS. Primary bilateral adrenal lymphoma. Leuk Lymphoma 1999;34:111.
762. Wang J, Sun NC, Renslo R, et al. Clinically silent primary adrenal lymphoma: a case report and review of the literature. Am J Hematol 1998;58:130.
763. Brogi E, Harris NL. Lymphomas of the breast: pathology and clinical behavior. Semin Oncol 1999;26:357.
764. Armitage JO, Feagler JR, Skoog DP. Burkitt lymphoma during pregnancy with bilateral breast involvement. JAMA 1977;237:151.
765. Okuno SH, Hoyer JD, Ristow K, Witzig TE. Primary renal non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. An unusual extranodal site. Cancer 1995;75:2258.
766. Pelstring RJ, Essell JH, Kurtin PJ, Cohen AR, Banks PM. Diversity of organ site involvement among malignant lymphomas of mucosa-associated tissues. Am J Clin Pathol 1991;96:738.
767. Muntz HG, Ferry JA, Flynn D, Fuller AF Jr, Tarraza HM. Stage IE primary malignant lymphomas of the uterine cervix. Cancer 1991;68:2023.
768. van de Rijn M, Kamel OW, Chang PP, et al. Primary low-grade endometrial B-cell lymphoma. Am J Surg Pathol 1997;21:187.
769. Nakata M, Matsuno Y, Katsumata N, et al. Histology according to the Revised European-American Lymphoma Classification significantly predicts the prognosis of ocular adnexal lymphoma.
Leuk Lymphoma 1999;32:533.
770. Knowles DM, Jakobiec FA, McNally L, Burke JS. Lymphoid hyperplasia and malignant lymphoma occurring in the ocular adnexa (orbit, conjunctiva, and eyelids): a prospective multiparametric
analysis of 108 cases during 1977 to 1987 [see comments]. Hum Pathol 1990;21:959.
771. Medeiros LJ, Harris NL. Lymphoid infiltrates of the orbit and conjunctiva. A morphologic and immunophenotypic study of 99 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1989;13:459.
772. Medeiros LJ, Harmon DC, Linggood RM, Harris NL. Immunohistologic features predict clinical behavior of orbital and conjunctival lymphoid infiltrates. Blood 1989;74:2121.
773. Keleti D, Flickinger JC, Hobson SR, Mittal BB. Radiotherapy of lymphoproliferative diseases of the orbit. Surveillance of 65 cases. Am J Clin Oncol 1992;15:422.
774. Wotherspoon AC, Diss TC, Pan LX, et al. Primary low-grade B-cell lymphoma of the conjunctiva: a mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue type lymphoma. Histopathology 1993;23:417.
775. Char DH, Ljung BM, Miller T, Phillips T. Primary intraocular lymphoma (ocular reticulum cell sarcoma) diagnosis and management. Ophthalmology 1988;95:625.
776. Char DH, Margolis L, Newman AB. Ocular reticulum cell sarcoma. Am J Ophthalmol 1981;91:480.
777. Whitcup SM, de Smet MD, Rubin BI, et al. Intraocular lymphoma. Clinical and histopathologic diagnosis. Ophthalmology 1993;100:1399.
778. Peterson K, Gordon KB, Heinemann MH, DeAngelis LM. The clinical spectrum of ocular lymphoma. Cancer 1993;72:843.
779. Freeman LN, Schachat AP, Knox DL, Michels RG, Green WR. Clinical features, laboratory investigations, and survival in ocular reticulum cell sarcoma. Ophthalmology 1987;94:1631.
780. Habermann TM, Ryu JH, Inwards DJ, Kurtin PJ. Primary pulmonary lymphoma. Semin Oncol 1999;26:307.
781. Parker F, Jackson H Jr. Primary reticulum cell sarcoma of bone. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1939;68:45.
782. Susnerwala SS, Dinshaw KA, Pande SC, et al. Primary lymphoma of bone: experience of 39 cases at the Tata Memorial Hospital, India. J Surg Oncol 1990;44:229.
783. Baar J, Burkes RL, Bell R, et al. Primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of bone. A clinicopathologic study. Cancer 1994;73:1194.
784. Fairbanks RK, Bonner JA, Inwards CY, et al. Treatment of stage IE primary lymphoma of bone. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;28:363.
785. Dosoretz DE, Murphy GF, Raymond AK, et al. Radiation therapy for primary lymphoma of bone. Cancer 1983;51:44.
786. Baar J, Burkes RL, Gospodarowicz M. Primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of bone. Semin Oncol 1999;26:270.
787. Bacci G, Jaffe N, Emiliani E, et al. Therapy for primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of bone and a comparison of results with Ewing's sarcoma. Ten years' experience at the Istituto Ortopedico
Rizzoli. Cancer 1986;57:1468.
788. Mendenhall NP, Jones JJ, Kramer BS, et al. The management of primary lymphoma of bone. Radiother Oncol 1987;9:137.
789. Stokes SH, Walz BJ. Pathologic fracture after radiation therapy for primary non-Hodgkin's malignant lymphoma of bone. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:1153.
790. Lucraft HH. Primary lymphoma of bone: a review of 13 cases emphasizing orthopaedic problems. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) 1991;3:265.
791. Berkman N, Breuer R, Kramer MR, Polliack A. Pulmonary involvement in lymphoma. Leuk Lymphoma 1996;20:229.
792. Elis A, Blickstein D, Mulchanov I, et al. Pleural effusion in patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a case-controlled study. Cancer 1998;83:1607.
793. Katz RL, Raval P, Manning JT, McLaughlin P, Barlogie B. A morphologic, immunologic, and cytometric approach to the classification of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in effusions. Diagn Cytopathol
1987;3:91.
794. Celikoglu F, Teirstein AS, Krellenstein DJ, Strauchen JA. Pleural effusion in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Chest 1992;101:1357.
795. Said W, Chien K, Takeuchi S, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV or HHV8) in primary effusion lymphoma: ultrastructural demonstration of herpesvirus in lymphoma cells.
Blood 1996;87:4937.
796. Strauchen JA, Hauser AD, Burstein D, et al. Body cavity-based malignant lymphoma containing Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus in an HIV-negative man with previous Kaposi sarcoma.
Ann Intern Med 1996;125:822.
797. Horenstein MG, Nador RG, Chadburn A, et al. Epstein-Barr virus latent gene expression in primary effusion lymphomas containing Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus/human
herpesvirus-8. Blood 1997;90:1186.
798. Said JW, Tasaka T, Takeuchi S, et al. Primary effusion lymphoma in women: report of two cases of Kaposi's sarcoma herpes virus-associated effusion-based lymphoma in human
immunodeficiency virus-negative women. Blood 1996;88:3124.
799. Willemze R, Kerl H, Sterry W, et al. EORTC classification for primary cutaneous lymphomas: a proposal from the Cutaneous Lymphoma Study Group of the European Organization for
Research and Treatment of Cancer. Blood 1997;90:354.
800. LeBoit PE. Lymphomatoid papulosis and cutaneous CD30+ lymphoma. Am J Dermatopathol 1996;18:221.
801. Karp D, Horn T. Lymphoid papulosis. J Am Acad Dermatol 1994;30:379.
802. Willemze R, Beljaards RC. Spectrum of primary cutaneous CD30 (Ki-1)-positive lymphoproliferative disorders. A proposal for classification and guidelines for management and treatment. J Am
Acad Dermatol 1993;28:973.
803. Cabanillas F, Armitage J, Pugh WC, Weisenburger D, Duvic M. Lymphomatoid papulosis: a T-cell dyscrasia with a propensity to transform into malignant lymphoma. Ann Intern Med
1995;122:210.
804. de Bruin PC, Beljaards RC, van Heerde P, et al. Differences in clinical behaviour and immunophenotype between primary cutaneous and primary nodal anaplastic large cell lymphoma of T-cell
or null cell phenotype. Histopathology 1993;23:127.
805. Beljaards RC, Meijer CJ, Van der Putte SC, et al. Primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: clinicopathological features and prognostic parameters of 35 cases other than mycosis fungoides and
CD30-positive large cell lymphoma. J Pathol 1994;172:53.
806. Willemze R, Rijlaarsdam JU, Meijer CJ. Are most primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas “marginal cell lymphomas”? [comment]. Br J Dermatol 1995;133:950; discussion 953.
807. Bailey EM, Ferry JA, Harris NL, et al. Marginal zone lymphoma (low-grade B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue type) of skin and subcutaneous tissue: a study of 15 patients
[see comments]. Am J Surg Pathol 1996;20:1011.
808. LeBoit PE, McNutt NS, Reed JA, Jacobson M, Weiss LM. Primary cutaneous immunocytoma. A B-cell lymphoma that can easily be mistaken for cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia. Am J Surg
Pathol 1994;18:969.
809. Kerl H, Cerroni L. Primary B-cell lymphomas of the skin. Ann Oncol 1997;8:29.
810. Vermeer MH, Geelen FA, van Haselen CW, et al. Primary cutaneous large B-cell lymphomas of the legs. A distinct type of cutaneous B-cell lymphoma with an intermediate prognosis. Dutch
Cutaneous Lymphoma Working Group [see comments]. Arch Dermatol 1996;132:1304.
811. Abbondanzo SL, Wenig BM. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the sinonasal tract. A clinicopathologic and immunophenotypic study of 120 cases. Cancer 1995;75:1281.
812. Banfi A, Bonadonna G, Ricci SB, et al. Malignant lymphomas of Waldeyer's ring: natural history and survival after radiotherapy. BMJ 1972;3:140.
813. Hoppe RT, Burke JS, Glatstein E, Kaplan HS. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: involvement of Waldeyer's ring. Cancer 1978;42:1096.

814. Liang R, Ng RP, Todd D, et al. Management of stage I-II diffuse aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the Waldeyer's ring: combined modality therapy versus radiotherapy alone. Hematol
Oncol 1987;5:223.
815. Okerbloom JA, Armitage JO, Zetterman R, Linder J. Esophageal involvement by non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Am J Med 1984;77:359.
816. Brooks JJ, Enterline HT. Primary gastric lymphomas. A clinicopathologic study of 58 cases with long-term follow-up and literature review. Cancer 1983;51:701.
817. Hockey MS, Powell J, Crocker J, Fielding JW. Primary gastric lymphoma. Br J Surg 1987;74:483.
818. Shchepotin IB, Evans SR, Shabahang M, et al. Primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the stomach: three radical modalities of treatment in 75 patients. Ann Surg Oncol 1996;3:277.
819. Rabbi C, Aitini E, Cavazzini G, et al. Stomach preservation in low- and high-grade primary gastric lymphomas: preliminary results. Haematologica 1996;81:15.
820. Haim N, Leviov M, Ben-Arieh Y, et al. Intermediate and high-grade gastric non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a prospective study of non-surgical treatment with primary chemotherapy, with or without
radiotherapy. Leuk Lymphoma 1995;17:321.
821. Bozzetti F, Audisio RA, Giardini R, Gennari L. Role of surgery in patients with primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the stomach: an old problem revisited [see comments]. Br J Surg
1993;80:1101.
822. Domizio P, Owen RA, Shepherd NA, Talbot IC, Norton AJ. Primary lymphoma of the small intestine. A clinicopathological study of 119 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1993;17:429.
823. d'Amore F, Brincker H, Gronbaek K, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the gastrointestinal tract: a population-based analysis of incidence, geographic distribution, clinicopathologic presentation
features, and prognosis. Danish Lymphoma Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1673.
824. Freter CE. Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-associated lymphomas. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1990;10:45.
825. Rechavi G, Ramot B. Primary intestinal lymphoma and a-heavy-chain disease. In: Magrath IT, ed. The non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, 2nd ed. London: Arnold; 1997:513.
826. Salem PA, Jones DV. Treatment of malignant neoplasms of the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues. In: Magrath IT, ed. The non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, 2nd ed. London: Arnold; 1997:989.
827. Zucca E, Stein H, Coiffier B. European Lymphoma Task Force (ELTF): report of the workshop on Mantle Cell Lymphoma (MCL) [see comments]. Ann Oncol 1994;5:507.
828. Ernst M, Stein H, Ludwig D, et al. Surgical therapy of gastrointestinal non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Eur J Surg Oncol 1996;22:177.

SECTION 45.4 Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphomas
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 45.4
Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphomas
LYNN D. WILSON
GLENN W. JONES
BARRY M. KACINSKI
RICHARD L. EDELSON
PETER W. HEALD
Introduction
Pathobiology
Epidemiology
Etiology
Clinical Presentation
Mycosis Fungoides
Related Conditions
Adult T-Cell Leukemia-Lymphoma and Cd30+ Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphomas
Approach to Patients with Mycosis Fungoides
Skin Lesions
Lymph Nodes
Peripheral Blood
Patient Evaluation
History
Physical Examination
Diagnostic Tests
Principles of Therapy
Topical Chemotherapy
Psoralen and Ultraviolet A Therapy
Interferon
Local External-Beam Irradiation
Total Skin Electron-Beam Therapy
Systemic Therapies
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) is a lymphoproliferative disorder of epidermotropic, neoplastic T cells with a wide range of clinical manifestations. Although
previously considered as distinct clinical entities, mycosis fungoides (MF), Sézary syndrome (SS), reticulum cell sarcoma of the skin, and several other cutaneous
lymphocytic dyscrasias are now recognized as different clinical presentations of CTCL. 1 All forms of CTCL are neoplasms of T lymphocytes, which home to skin and
to the T-cell zones of lymphoid structures but generally not to bone marrow. The clinical value of the umbrella classification of CTCL is twofold. First, it highlights the
relationship between distinct clinical presentations that can nevertheless evolve into one another (i.e., the plaque stage of MF can develop into the erythrodermic SS)
or coexist [i.e., plaque-stage MF and lymphomatoid papulosis (LP)]. Second, the nomenclature emphasizes the clinical relevance of advances in the understanding of
the biology of the malignant T cells. Recognition of the malignant clone-specific properties of the T-cell receptor (TCR) for antigen on the CTCL cells in individual
patients has both provided the most sensitive diagnostic tool for the disease and offered an extraordinary target for selective immunologic attack of CTCL cells in such
treatments as photopheresis. Still, it remains fairly useful for the clinician to attach the subtype of CTCL to the name (e.g., CTCL/MF), as the management scheme
and prognosis for these subtypes differ.

PATHOBIOLOGY
CTCL is a clonal neoplasm 2,3 and 4 of mature CD4+ helper-inducer T cells, 5,6 which are capable of stimulating immunoglobulin synthesis by B cells, 7,8 perhaps by
secretion of interleukin-4 (IL-4) or other cytokines. 9 CTCL cells also express BE-2, a molecule related to heat-shock proteins the function of which is yet unknown; the
CD45RO marker characteristic of “memory” T cells 10; and cutaneous lymphoid antigen (CLA), a glycoprotein that is expressed on the surface of only a small fraction
of normal T cells in cutaneous infiltrates. 11 Both of the last two markers are simultaneously expressed on the surface of virtually all circulating CTCL cells. The
deficiency of normal T cells that can accompany the systemic dissemination of lymphoma may reflect the production of IL-10, an inhibitory cytokine produced by those
CTCL cells.
CLA is the physiologic ligand of endothelial cell E-selectin, a cell adhesion molecule expressed on the surface of endothelial cells of cutaneous venules during
chronic inflammation. 12,13 Interactions between CLA on the surface of CTCL cells and E-selectin on endothelial cells allow CTCL cells to adhere to the walls of
cutaneous venules, leave the circulation, and enter the skin.
Once CTCL cells enter into the skin, their most striking trait is their profound epidermotropism. 14 The latter may be a consequence of neoplastic and normal T-cell
production of interferon-g (IFN-g), which stimulates keratinocytes to express the intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) on their surface. 15 Because ICAM-1 is the
physiologic ligand for lymphocyte function–associated antigen-1 expressed on the surface of all T cells, CTCL cells should adhere to keratinocytes exposed to
IFN-g. 16 In addition, there is evidence for avid binding of CTCL cells to keratinocytes by other, non-ICAM-1–dependent mechanisms.
In addition to producing cytokines, CTCL cells are exposed to a complex paracrine environment composed of many growth factors and cytokines elaborated by
keratinocytes and stromal fibroblasts, macrophages, endothelial cells, and normal and neoplastic T lymphocytes. Preformed IL-1 may be released by proliferating
keratinocytes to stimulate both keratinocytes and benign or neoplastic T cells to release granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF). 17 The latter two cytokines enhance the antigen-presenting capabilities of Langerhans' cells (LC) and activate resting
macrophages, which respond by releasing a complex mix of cytokines active on keratinocytes, fibroblasts, and endothelial and lymphohematopoietic cells. 18
In more advanced stages of disease, CTCL cells lose their dependence on epidermal cell adhesion molecules and cytokines so that their epidermotropism either is
diminished (to permit the development of tumor nodules that extend deep into the dermis) or is lost completely (to permit dissemination of the neoplastic T cells to
nodal and visceral sites). At this stage, the clinical presentation of CTCL may become indistinguishable from that of a peripheral T-cell lymphoma, although the broad
involvement of the skin usually remains a distinguishing feature. Even at this advanced stage, the distinctive tissue distribution of the malignant cells (skin infiltration,
preferential localization in interfollicular regions of lymph nodes, and avoidance of bone marrow) remains evident.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
CTCL is a relatively rare neoplasm, and the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program 19 reports that the incidence had increased 3.2-fold between 1973
and 1984. The overall incidence rate is approximately 4 per 1,000,000, according to data from that program. 22 The actual incidence rate may be an order of
magnitude higher, given possible underreporting and the difficulty and confusion in making the diagnosis. The incidence of CTCL rises with age such that the majority
of patients are between 40 and 60 years old. The disease is 2.2 times more common in male than in female subjects, and incidence rates are somewhat higher in
African Americans than in whites.

ETIOLOGY
The inability to propagate CTCL cells in vitro after isolation from skin lesions, even from rapidly growing cutaneous tumors, has rendered molecular biologic studies of

CTCL far less informative than they have been for many other lymphoid neoplasms; to date, the molecular etiology of CTCL remains unclear. However, at least one
study has implicated rearrangements or deletions of the tal-1 and NFkB2/lyt-10 encoded transcription factors in a subset of CTCL patients with very aggressive
disease. 133 In addition, transgenic mice that constitutively synthesize IL-7 develop extensive dermal infiltrates that progress to a cutaneous lymphoma resembling
CTCL—results that suggest that overexpression of IL-7 might contribute to the development of CTCLs. 23,24 Such infiltrates develop even when the transgene is
expressed in athymic nude mice, implying that the evolution of IL-7–induced dermal lymphoma may be dependent on the skin rather than on the thymus. Although the
phenotypes of the lymphomatous T cells and their distribution in the skin are not identical with those of human CTCL, a refinement of this experimental system may
ultimately provide an animal model for the human disorder.
Given the inherent immunologic nature of the neoplastic cells responsible for this disorder, it has been proposed that chronic exposure to occupational chemicals,
pesticides, or tobacco may predispose to the development of CTCL; however, none of these potential associations has survived scrutiny. 20,21 The observations that
the disease is more common in African Americans than in whites and that it often presents first in areas normally shielded from the sun (i.e., “bathing trunk”
distribution) together suggest that actinic exposure may actually inhibit the evolution of the malignant clone from normal “cutaneous T cells.” It is noteworthy that the
epidermotropic collections of CTCL cells, referred to as Pautrier microabscesses, may represent congregation of malignant T cells around LC, the dendritic
antigen-presenting cells (DC) of the epidermis, and that LC are fairly sensitive to ultraviolet (UV) damage. This observation has suggested that epidermotropic CTCL
cells may receive growth signals from their contact with LC. Therefore, it is possible that UV damage of LC, more significant in whites than in African Americans
(whose darker pigment shields the LC), may interrupt this growth signal and inhibit the replication of CTCL cells in UV-exposed skin sites. It is also intriguing that the
often profound response of plaque-stage CTCL to UV treatment may reflect this phenomenon as well. The observation that individuals infected with the human T-cell
leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) often develop T-cell leukemias with skin involvement indistinguishable from those of CTCL has led some to hypothesize that CTCL may
be a consequence of infection with HTLV-I or another unknown retrovirus, a possibility that remains the subject of active investigation.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION
MYCOSIS FUNGOIDES
The classic MF presentation of CTCL progresses through the following four distinct phases:
1. A premycotic phase with an asymptomatic, scaling erythematous macular eruption, often in sun-shielded areas (i.e., bathing trunk distribution), which lasts for
months to years during which the diagnosis may be suspected but cannot be confirmed by standard clinical or histopathologic means
2. A patch phase with thin, barely palpable, erythematous and eczematous lesions the histologic features of which are at least “consistent with” the diagnosis of
CTCL
3. A plaque phase with more readily palpable erythematous lesions
4. A tumor phase, in which the neoplastic infiltrate extends below the upper dermis
Painful erythroderma may arise de novo or during any of the earlier described phases and is not always associated with frank T-cell leukemia (SS). Infrequently,
CTCL presents with cutaneous tumor nodules in the absence of patches or plaques. Patients may also present with involvement of internal organs.
RELATED CONDITIONS
The MF presentation of CTCL often manifests alongside (and can be confused with) several related, more benign cutaneous lymphoid dyscrasias. They include
LP,25,26 and 27 alopecia mucinosa–follicular mucinosis (AM-FM), 28,29 and pagetoid reticulosis (PR). 30 CTCL also has features in common with two other, clearly
malignant disorders: adult T-cell leukemia-lymphoma (ATLL) and CD30+ anaplastic large cell lymphoma.
LP is a dermatologic disorder that resembles pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta. LP lesions often appear as groups of erythematous brown papules that
develop a scale or crust. Resolving LP lesions may leave residual pigment or superficial atrophic scars. Depending on the clinical series, from 5% to 20% of patients
with LP eventually develop a non-B-cell lymphoma, most often CTCL. Regressing atypical histiocytosis is thought to be a variant of LP.
AM is an infiltrative, cutaneous T-cell dyscrasia also known as follicular mucinosis (FM). AM-FM is characterized by the accumulation of acid mucopolysaccharides in
the sebaceous glands and root sheaths of hair follicles. When the lesions of AM-FM develop in a hair-bearing area, patchy alopecia may be their presenting sign.
Overall, 15% to 30% of AM-FM patients either have or will develop CTCL.
PR, or Woringer-Kolopp disease, presents as a solitary cutaneous lesion of long duration and is characterized histologically by significant numbers of abnormal
mononuclear cells infiltrating the epidermis. The underlying dermis is involved by a mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate. Clonal T-cell gene rearrangements have been
observed in PR, which, in all likelihood, represents an indolent, particularly epidermotropic variant of CTCL.
ADULT T-CELL LEUKEMIA-LYMPHOMA AND CD30+ ANAPLASTIC LARGE CELL LYMPHOMAS
ATLL is a disorder that develops in some HTLV-I-infected individuals. The clinical presentation of ATLL is often acute, with rapidly growing cutaneous lesions,
hypercalcemia, marked lymphadenopathy, and infiltration of visceral organs. 100,101 and 102 Patients also present with systemic symptoms, such as drenching night
sweats and weight loss and, in marked contrast to CTCL, the diagnosis of ATLL is usually made soon after presentation. Patients may present with a leukemic form of
ATLL with extremely high white blood cell counts or may present a lymphomatous variant. ATLL patients are often severely immunocompromised and are susceptible
to a variety of opportunistic pathogens. Peripheral blood and cutaneous lymphocytes often express high levels of IL-2 receptor. Current therapy for ATLL consists of
simultaneous antiretroviral therapy (zidovudine) and IFN. 103
Ki-1 (CD30+) anaplastic large cell lymphoma may occur primarily in the skin or with systemic involvement. Patients may present with tumor-like lesions with central
ulceration, which may undergo spontaneous regression. Systemic involvement is unusual, and cutaneous lesions may be treated with radiation therapy alone.
However, lesions often relapse, even though the overall clinical course may be indolent. 130 Patients with systemic disease, age older than 60 years, or whose tumors
do not spontaneously regress appear to have a less favorable prognosis. Anaplastic (vs. nonanaplastic) cell histology does not imply a poorer prognosis; however,
prognosis is poor for those patients whose tumors are CD30–. 131 Serum levels of CD30 may serve as a marker for response to therapy. 132

APPROACH TO PATIENTS WITH MYCOSIS FUNGOIDES
The most important clinical prognostic variables related to CTCL are the type of lesion and the percentage of the total skin surface involved, nodal involvement,
dissemination to visceral sites, and the presence of CTCL cells in the circulation. These parameters have been codified in the modified TNM staging classification
(Table 45.4-1) proposed by the Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphoma Workshop in 1979. 31 Also, this staging system has yet to be modified to incorporate the many clinical,
immunologic, and molecular biologic discoveries relevant to the diagnosis and treatment of CTCL.

TABLE 45.4-1. TNM Classification of Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphomas

SKIN LESIONS
Prognosis in CTCL patients depends on both the type of lesions and the extent of cutaneous involvement. All patients should have the number and distribution of
each type of lesion and an estimate of the total skin surface involved by CTCL carefully recorded before initiation of therapy. Patients with patches or plaques that
involve less than 10% of the body surface (stage T1) are far more likely to be palliated over the long term or cured than those with the same types of lesions
occupying more than 10% of the skin surface (stage T2) ( Fig. 45.4-1). Prognosis is significantly worse for patients with cutaneous tumors (T3), although it is better for
patients with less than 10% of their skin surface involved by tumors than for those with more extensive involvement ( Fig. 45.4-2).128 Prognosis is poorer still for
patients with erythroderma either alone or in addition to patches, plaques, and tumors.

FIGURE 45.4-1. Patch-plaque (T1 to T2 disease).

FIGURE 45.4-2. Tumor (T3 disease).

Skin biopsies at multiple sites may be necessary to define T-stage, as lesion morphology varies from patient to patient and for different lesions from the same patient.
However, because the histopathologic criteria for the diagnosis of early CTCL are not firmly established and there is significant interobserver variability in the
pathologic interpretation of the same specimens, 32 accurate definition of T-stage and diagnostic correlation with pathologic material is far from routine. Such problems
are especially evident for early patch or plaque lesions wherein only a small fraction of the infiltrating T lymphocytes (confined exclusively to the epidermis) are
actually neoplastic. Most of the cells in the underlying, often much more impressive, dermal infiltrate are nonneoplastic, reactive CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes and
represent the host's immune response to the neoplastic clone. This typical histopathologic pattern can be significantly modified by prior therapy, as even topical
steroids can significantly alter the intensity and appearance of both the neoplastic and nonneoplastic lymphoid infiltrates.
CTCL biopsy specimens should be reviewed by dermatopathologists with specific experience and interest in the study and diagnosis of CTCL. Specimens that exhibit
epidermal collections of lymphocytes (i.e., Pautrier's microabscesses) with characteristic hyperchromatic, irregularly shaped nuclei without spongiosis are interpreted
as “diagnostic” for CTCL, and those that exhibit at least two of these features (epidermal collections of lymphocytes, atypical nuclei, or absence of spongiosis) are
judged “consistent with” CTCL. Histopathologic features of “transformation” to a high-grade lymphoma, such as an enlarged pale nucleus and prominent nucleoli or
loss of normal T-cell markers, are all associated with a poorer prognosis.
In an attempt to quantitate more precisely the histopathologic features of CTCL, one group of investigators has attempted to use vertical measurements (analogous to
the Breslow level in melanoma) to delineate the depth of the cutaneous infiltrates. 33 In their preliminary analysis, a positive correlation with morbidity was noted for the
distance from the granular layer of the epidermis to the lower limit of the CTCL infiltrate. Cell density has also been found to correlate with clinical outcomes. Jones et
al.144 have demonstrated that cell density predicted remission and progression-free, overall, and cause-specific survival after total skin electron-beam therapy
(TSEBT).
Skin biopsies should also be subjected to immunophenotyping to define better the identity of the benign and neoplastic cell populations present in the cutaneous
lesions. Several studies have reported correlations between the immunophenotypes of the cells present in the infiltrates and stage of disease. In general, as disease
progresses, fewer CD8+ cells are observed, and the relative ratio of CD4+ to CD8+ cells increases. 34,35 However, in one rare and clinically very aggressive form of
CTCL, the neoplastic T cells are CD8–, CD4–, as they have undergone Gd– but not ab–TCR chain rearrangement. 126
Immunogenotyping of skin biopsies can help to define whether an early lesion suggestive of CTCL actually contains a clonal T-cell population. Such analyses are
best performed by polymerase chain reaction–based (PCR-based) techniques, as one rarely obtains sufficient neoplastic cell DNA from skin biopsies for routine
Southern blot analyses. PCR analysis is performed with primers designed to amplify TCR G chain rearrangements that occur in all T cells before rearrangement of the
a and b chain loci. Such PCR-based assays are able to detect clonal T-cell populations in 90% of skin biopsies that show diagnostic CTCL pathology. The 10%
false-negative rate may reflect the fact that the currently available PCR primer pairs amplify only 90% of G chain variable regions. This high degree of sensitivity
contrasts with the somewhat lower (79%) sensitivity of standard Southern blot techniques that require significantly more DNA. 36
LYMPH NODES
The incidence of lymphadenopathy increases with T-stage and is associated with a poorer prognosis. Imaging studies (computed tomography scan or magnetic
resonance imaging) are recommended at initial evaluation for those with advanced disease and during follow-up to detect enlargement of thoracic, abdominal, or
pelvic nodes. In practice, biopsy of uninvolved nodal sites is uncommon; lymph nodes are subjected to biopsy either at initial staging or afterward only if they are
found to be obviously enlarged on physical examination or imaging studies.
Flow cytometry, immunophenotyping, and Southern blot (or PCR-based) genotyping for clonality are recommended for all nodal samples and may detect neoplastic T
cells even in so-called reactive, dermatopathic (stage N1) nodes not obviously involved by CTCL. In a study of lymph node samples from 17 patients with stage N1

disease, eight showed evidence of clonal T-cell abnormalities consistent with CTCL on Southern blotting, and these eight patients had a poorer prognosis than those
whose nodes were free of CTCL. 37 Another study of lymph nodes in patients with CTCL revealed that specific histologic factors were predictive of outcome. Those
patients with small cell infiltrates had a median survival of 40 months, and those with high-grade immunoblastic features had a median survival of only 9 months. 38
PERIPHERAL BLOOD
The level of circulating neoplastic cells in CTCL patients correlates adversely with prognosis and is an important parameter to document and quantitate both at
presentation and during follow-up. The application of nearly clone-specific, family-specific antibodies against the Vb regions of TCRs has also revealed that
morphologic evaluations alone often grossly underestimate the level of circulating CTCL cells.
In normal individuals, none of the more than 50 available anti-Vb monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) react with more than 2% to 5% of the circulating peripheral T cells. As
shown in Table 45.4-2, it is possible to use these mAbs to detect and quantitate precisely the levels of circulating CTCL cells. Such analyses have revealed a
remarkable clinical heterogeneity within patients who present with T4 disease. In most, the level of circulating CTCL cells is actually much higher than estimated by
less sensitive techniques. 39 In some, the expansion of the neoplastic T-cell clone is accompanied by depression of normal T cells to levels comparable with those
observed in advanced acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Such a de facto T-cell deficiency may both explain the susceptibility of erythrodermic CTCL patients to
infection by bacterial, viral, and fungal pathogens 129 and contribute to the progression of the disease, which is often held in check by host immune mechanisms.

TABLE 45.4-2. Peripheral Blood Values of Six Patients with Advanced Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphoma

In the absence of such specific anti-CTCL mAbs, flow cytometry and Southern blot (or PCR-based) analyses of G chain rearrangements can be used to detect and
quantitate circulating CTCL more accurately. Flow cytometry should be performed with antibodies to the CD4, CD8, CD3, CD45R0, and CD20 antigens. The ratio of
CD4+ to CD8+ cells is normally 0.5:3.5; elevations in this ratio correlate with total leukocyte count and with extent of skin disease in CTCL patients. An elevated ratio
of CD4+ to CD8+ cells in excess of 4.5:1 reliably indicates significant levels of circulating CTCL cells, and a routine leukocyte count, manual differential, and smear
supplemented by a measurement of the CD4:CD8 ratio serve as a good initial screen for circulating CTCL cells. If flow cytometric analysis reveals a marked elevation
of the CD4:CD8 ratio or an elevation in the percentage of CD45R0+ cells, it is worthwhile to perform flow cytometry with anti-Vb mAbs to determine whether a clonal
expansion of T cells is present.
If any of the aforementioned studies suggest the presence of circulating CTCL cells, the more laborious and expensive TCR gene rearrangement studies to confirm
their presence are also worthwhile. Even standard Southern blot assay for TCR rearrangement can detect a neoplastic clone that represents only 1% of the total
lymphocyte population and, thus, is far more sensitive in detecting circulating CTCL cells than any of the previously mentioned techniques, including flow cytometry.
Nonetheless, in only approximately 10% of CTCL cases with circulating cells are Southern blots the only laboratory abnormality. In one study of 11 CTCL patients in
whom circulating CTCL cells were documented by Southern blotting, ten also had CD4:CD8 ratios greater than 10:1. Only one patient's CD4:CD8 ratio was less than
2:1.40

PATIENT EVALUATION
HISTORY
The duration of the eruption and the evolution of its distribution should be carefully noted. The patient should also be asked about cutaneous integrity, temperature
imbalance, fissuring, pruritus, and the use of moisturizers.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A complete physical examination should be performed with particular attention to the skin and lymph nodes. Examination of the skin should record the number of
lesions, including their type (patch, plaque, tumor, or erythroderma), distribution, and the percentage of skin surface involved by CTCL lesions (i.e., by the “rule of
nines” used in the evaluation of burn patients). Evaluation of the abdomen should be performed to detect hepatosplenomegaly, and the site, size, and number of
palpable peripheral lymph nodes should be recorded.
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
Dermatopathology
At least two skin biopsies should be obtained for routine hematoxylin and eosin histopathology. Frozen specimens should be harvested for immunophenotyping for the
CD2, CD3, CD4, CD5, CD7, CD8, CD19, CD20, CD25, CD30, CD45R0, CD56, bF1, and d antigens. PCR for G chain rearrangements and, if available, b chain
rearrangements should be performed on either the paraffin or frozen section tissue.
Peripheral Blood Evaluation
A complete blood cell count with differential and smear examination supplemented by a flow cytometric analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes screen for circulating
CTCL cells. Flow cytometric analysis can measure peripheral blood involvement by revealing an elevation of the CD4:CD8 ratio, an increase in CD4+CD7–
lymphocytes, or an elevation of CD45R0+ lymphocytes. The interpretation of these findings is facilitated by the demonstration of the malignant clone by PCR testing
for gene rearrangement in the peripheral blood. The latter, in turn, is facilitated by similar PCR testing on the patient's skin biopsy. If the clone is detectable in skin,
the test is useful in the peripheral blood. If the clone is undetectable by PCR, this method is not interpretable when performed on the peripheral blood.
Other Studies
A posteroanterior and a lateral chest radiograph should be performed in all patients. Computed tomography or magnetic resonance scans should be carried out of the
chest, abdomen, and pelvis both to evaluate mediastinal, retroperitoneal, and pelvic nodes as well as to supplement physical examination of the axillary and inguinal
nodes in patients with T3 and T4 disease. 122 The location of pathologically enlarged nodes should be noted and their size recorded. Such enlarged nodes should
undergo biopsy (preferably by excision rather than needle sampling) to document both the presence of neoplastic T cells and the histopathologic pattern of
involvement (i.e., dermatopathic adenopathy vs. more extensive replacement). The latter can be supplemented by immunophenotypic and TCR rearrangement
analyses to document the presence of neoplastic T cells. Bone marrow evaluation is not routinely performed unless abnormalities are noted on complete blood cell
count or smear.

PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
The therapy for CTCLs is fairly distinct from that of other lymphomas. Hence, many therapeutic strategies that have proved successful with localized and disseminated
B-cell lymphomas have often been found to be inappropriate for CTCL. CTCL is first and foremost a disease of cutaneous lymphocytes. Hence, early-stage disease
that is localized to the skin has an excellent chance of cure with therapies directed to the skin alone. However, disease that has disseminated and become
established in lymph nodes or visceral sites (liver, lung, central nervous system) can be palliated but rarely cured, even with the most aggressive regimens of
systemic chemotherapy. This result contrasts with that seen in B-cell lymphomas in which patients with extensive nodal and visceral disease are often cured by
aggressive combination chemotherapy or bone marrow or stem cell transplantation.
Effective therapies for CTCL include both skin-directed and systemic therapies ( Table 45.4-3). Skin-directed therapy includes topical chemotherapy with such agents
as carmustine (BCNU) and nitrogen mustard (NM), systemically administered psoralens activated in the skin by psoralen and ultraviolet A light (PUVA) therapy, and
local and generalized superficial ionizing radiation that includes both electron-beam and x-ray therapy.

TABLE 45.4-3. General Management of Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphoma

All skin-directed therapies exert their primary effects on disease confined to the skin. All are capable of destroying CTCL cells directly, probably by triggering
T-lymphocyte apoptosis, 127 and all interfere with the local production of cytokines by epithelial and stromal cells necessary for neoplastic T-cell survival and
proliferation.
Photopheresis, a systemic immunologic therapy, acts both directly by killing T lymphocytes by the cytotoxic actions of UVA light/psoralen and indirectly by eliciting
anti–CTCL cell immune responses. Similarly, other systemic agents, such as retinoids and the biologic response modifiers (IFN-a and -G) may exert their therapeutic
effects by modifying production by keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts of cytokines necessary for neoplastic T-cell survival and proliferation. This is in addition to any
direct cytotoxic or cytostatic effects they exert on benign and neoplastic T lymphocytes. 41
TOPICAL CHEMOTHERAPY
Therapy for T1 and T2 CTCL can be carried out with either topical mechlorethamine (NM) or BCNU, both potent DNA-alkylating agents. Topical NM therapy is
generally administered daily with a fresh solution of 10 mg in 50 mL tap water, which is applied to the entire body surface. Because NM is a potent irritant, patients
should wear protective plastic gloves while applying the solution. Topical NM therapy results in delayed hypersensitivity reactions in up to 40% of patients, who often
require at least temporary cessation of therapy. Such reactions can be circumvented by induction of tolerance to NM by topical desensitization or by PUVA-induced
suppression of the hypersensitivity reaction. Ointment-based NM is less likely to induce allergic reactions and, in its typical formulation of 10 mg/dL, NM in Aquaphor
is stable at room temperature.
Other side effects of topical NM therapy include induction of second cutaneous malignancies (e.g., squamous cell carcinomas), hyperpigmentation, and
hypopigmentation. Between 64% and 90% of NM-treated patients with T1 and T2 CTCL can achieve a complete response (CR) to therapy. In one series of 243
patients, the median survival of treated patients was 8 years, and the response rate was better in those with less extensive disease. 42 Although some patients appear
to be cured by topical NM therapy, seven of eight patients experience relapse within 3 years unless a maintenance topical NM regimen has been instituted.
Maintenance topical NM can also be used to prevent or delay relapse of cutaneous lesions in patients who have achieved a CR to TSEBT or to treat minimal patch or
plaque recurrences after such therapy. 75,149
Another topical chemotherapeutic agent useful in the treatment of CTCL is BCNU. Because topical BCNU is not immunologically cross-reactive with NM, this agent
can be used in patients who have developed allergies to NM. Topical BCNU can be formulated either as a 10- to 40-mg/dL ointment stable indefinitely at room
temperature or as a 25- to 50-mg/dL solution in dilute alcohol, which is stable for at least 3 months when refrigerated.
Cutaneous hypersensitivity reactions to topical BCNU are rare and, in one series, such reactions interfered with continuation of therapy in only 10 of 152 patients.
However, significant erythema in the treated areas and posttreatment telangiectasia occur in one of three patients. Also, as a small fraction of the drug is absorbed,
marrow suppression can occur but is unusual unless the total dose exceeds 600 mg (in increments of 20 to 25 mg). 43 Therefore, hematologic monitoring is necessary
when using BCNU.
PSORALEN AND ULTRAVIOLET A THERAPY
Cutaneous photochemotherapy with orally administered PUVA irradiation of the skin, or PUVA therapy, kills cutaneous lymphocytes and interferes with antigen
presentation and cytokine production in the skin. PUVA therapy is also able to induce complete remissions as reliably as TSEBT therapy in CTCL patients with
patches or thin plaques. In patients with thicker plaques or tumors, PUVA therapy alone is unlikely to produce a CR but may be used to maintain the CRs induced by
other skin-directed therapies, including TSEBT.
PUVA therapy requires the ingestion of 0.6 mg/kg of 8-methoxypsoralen (8-MOP) 1 to 2 hours before the exposure of the skin surface to UVA light (320 to 400 nm).
To induce remission, treatments should begin three times per week at doses that are minimally phototoxic. After most of the lesions have cleared, the frequency of
PUVA can be decreased to twice weekly until the patient has achieved a CR. 44 Such a schedule of multiple treatments per week must be maintained for a minimum of
3 months and a maximum of 6 months. If a CR has not been achieved by this time, several strategies can be used to supplement or enhance the efficacy of PUVA.
We have often used local spot x-ray or electron-beam therapy to treat lesions refractory to PUVA, particularly in regions anatomically shielded from receiving the full
UVA dose. Addition of such “PUVA boosters” as IFNs, retinoids, or oral methotrexate can also be considered.
INTERFERON
IFN-a at doses of 3 to 6 MU can help to clear skin lesions refractory to PUVA alone. 45 However, the systemic side effects of such therapy can be troublesome,
although some patients experience no significant toxicity. Retinoids also have a role as adjunctive agents in achieving remission or palliating symptoms. Retinoids for
acne and psoriasis have been used in the past. However, the ability of bexarotene to improve CTCL as monotherapy 46 suggests that it will supplant other retinoids in
the adjunctive role with PUVA and other therapies. If such boosters are successful, maintenance PUVA therapy alone should be sufficient to maintain disease-free
status.
Once a CR has been achieved, PUVA is administered once weekly as maintenance therapy for 1 year. If the remission is sustained, the interval between treatments
can be extended to 2 weeks for a total of 26 sessions per year for an additional year. If there is still no evidence of relapse, the interval between treatments can be
extended to 3 weeks and continued for another 2 years. Interruptions of maintenance PUVA due to intercurrent illness or injury can be followed by recurrence of

disease, sometimes within 1 or 2 months. After 5 years of maintenance therapy, consideration can be given to cessation of therapy or to extending the interval
between PUVA treatments to 4 to 6 weeks.
Patients may be free of disease at this stage, but studies of patients treated with TSEBT have noted relapses at times more than 5 years later, particularly in those
with T2 disease. 64 Whether such late relapses are the consequence of the persistence and regrowth of the original neoplastic clone or are “true” second primary
CTCLs has not yet been defined. It is also not known whether such “late” recurrences or second primaries will also be observed in patients who have received 5 years
of maintenance PUVA. However, patients should probably not be considered “cured” until they have remained disease-free for at least 5 years after completing
therapy. Some reports suggest that PUVA therapy may result in true “cures,” because the mortality rate from early disease was decreased after the adoption of PUVA
as the standard therapy for CTCL in Scandinavia. 47
LOCAL EXTERNAL-BEAM IRRADIATION
Local x-ray therapy for CTCL lesions was first reported in 1902 by Scholtz, less than a decade after the discovery of x-rays by Roentgen. 48 The cutaneous lesions of
CTCL are extremely radioresponsive, and a dose-response relationship has been demonstrated. 49,50 and 51 Superficial [30 to 125 kV(p)] and orthovoltage [125 to 500
kV(p)] x-rays as well as electrons can be used to treat localized primary or recurrent patches, plaques, and tumors. 52 Doses between 20 and 36 Gy are effective in
fractional sizes of 1 to 2 Gy, depending on the size and location of the lesions. Such therapy is rarely first-line but can be considered for the unusual patient with very
localized primary patches, plaques, or tumors. Local x-ray or electron-beam therapy in similar doses is also fairly effective in clearing isolated lesions that fail to
respond to PUVA or recur after CR to PUVA or TSEBT.
Local treatment of isolated lesions is very effective, and the CR rate is in excess of 90% for both plaques and tumors. Cotter et al. 51 demonstrated that none of nine
patients failed when treated with doses in excess of 30 Gy, with a minimum of 1 year follow-up.Approximately 5% of patients with stage IA disease will present with a
solitary cutaneous lesion or several in close proximity. Wilson et al. 145 have found that the rate of clinical remission after local external-beam radiotherapy is 97%. A
total of 21 patients were evaluated with a minimum follow-up of 1 year and treated to a median dose of 20 Gy. Seventeen of the 21 patients received 20 Gy or higher.
The median follow-up was 36 months. The actuarial disease-free survival (DFS) rates at 5 and 10 years were 75% and 64%, respectively, with a local control rate of
75% at 10 years. Acute and chronic toxicities were minor, and such treatment does not preclude TSEBT in the future. For metastatic disease (e.g., nodes, central
nervous system and spine and lung involvement), radiation with 4 to 20 Gy may provide a meaningful palliative response.
TOTAL SKIN ELECTRON-BEAM THERAPY
Principles of Application
Treatment of the entire cutaneous surface with TSEBT is technically much more challenging than local x-ray therapy and should be attempted only in centers with
appropriate equipment and in which a close working relationship has been established between dermatologists and radiation oncologists committed to and
experienced in the treatment of patients with CTCL. TSEBT is excellent treatment for patients with diffuse involvement with thick plaques or cutaneous tumors and is
also suitable for patients with symptomatic erythroderma (T4 disease). TSEBT is also an excellent alternative for patients with extensive patches or thin plaques
refractory to PUVA or other skin-directed therapies.
The application of TSEBT for the treatment of CTCL was first reported by Trump et al. 52 in 1953, and since that time, a variety of fractionation schedules and
techniques have been implemented.53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63 and 64 In 1960, Karzmark et al.55 described the details of the “Stanford technique” for the administration of
TSEBT, which was later modified to a six-field array to improve the homogeneity of dose delivered to the total skin surface. 65,66,67
Electrons ranging in energy between 4 and 7 MeV are used to treat the epidermis and dermis homogeneously. Structures below the deep dermis are spared, as most
of the dose (80%) is delivered within the first 1.0 cm, and less than 5% beyond 2.0 cm depth. Blood and superficial lymph nodes may receive 20% to 40% of the skin
surface dose.
At Yale, treatment is offered via a Varian 6-MeV linear accelerator at a treatment distance of 7 m, with a single incident beam energy of 3.9 MeV at the skin. Therapy
is delivered via six fields, and supplemental local boosts to the scalp, perineum, and soles of the feet are administered with 120-kV(p) x-rays. Treatment is delivered to
the six fields over a 2-day cycle, with three of six fields (anteroposterior, left posterior oblique, right posterior oblique) treated on the first day and the remaining three
(posteroanterior, left anterior oblique, right anterior oblique) on the second. External and internal eye shields are used sequentially throughout, and the hands and
feet are shielded for 50% of the treatment course. Patients receive TSEBT 4 days per week for a total of 9 weeks, and the boost fields are treated concurrently.
The dose to the skin surface is 36 Gy, 4 Gy/wk and usually fractionated over 4 days and two cycles. Photon contamination to the body is 1.2% of the electron dose.
Supplemental boosts to the scalp, perineum, and soles of the feet are 6 Gy (2 Gy/d), 20 Gy, and 20 Gy (1 Gy/d), respectively. Areas “shadowed” from the electron
beam by large pendulous breasts, abdominal panniculi, or other deep skin folds receive similar boosts with 15 to 20 Gy (1 to 2 Gy/d) of electron-beam or orthovoltage
x-ray therapy. Gross tumor lesions that have not completely regressed by the completion of TSEBT should also be evaluated for supplementary boost via x-ray or
electron-beam therapy.
More commonly, a dual-beam six-field arrangement has been used. 143 Although the techniques differ between Yale and Hamilton, for example, the dosimetry is
similar, as are the clinical results. 140 Regardless of technique, it should be noted that 4 MeV electron energy and more than 30 Gy to the skin surface are
recommended. Jones and Thorson146 have demonstrated (as have other investigators) that improved progression-free, cause-specific, and overall survival are related
to these parameters.
Results
Clinical CR rates for patients with T1 or T2 (patch or plaque) disease range from 71% to 98% and are higher in patients with less extensive disease. Representative
data on disease-free and overall survival are presented in Table 45.4-4 and Table 45.4-5. In our institution, patients with T1 and T2 disease treated with TSEBT have
disease-free and overall survivals of 50% to 65% and 80% to 90%, respectively, at 5 years, although patients with antecedent or coexisting LP or AM-FM appear to
have shorter DFS after TSEBT than those who do not. 64 Patients with more advanced T3 and T4 disease fare significantly worse, with 5-year disease-free and overall
survivals of approximately 20% and 50%, respectively. However, those T3 patients with less than 10% of the total skin surface involved by CTCL have significantly
better disease-free and overall survival after TSEBT than those with more extensive disease. 128

TABLE 45.4-4. Progression-Free Survival and Remission Rates for Mycosis Fungoides Patients after Total Skin Electron-Beam Therapy

TABLE 45.4-5. Overall Survival at 5 and 10 Years for Mycosis Fungoides Patients after Total Skin Electron-Beam Therapy

For patients with erythrodermic MF (T4) who are managed with TSEBT alone (32 to 40 Gy), without concomitant or neoadjuvant therapy, the CR rate is 74%. The
5-year progression-free, cause-specific, and overall survivals are 26%, 52%, and 38%, respectively. 147
Palliation of adenopathy or visceral involvement in patients with N3 disease can be accomplished by the use of appropriate high-energy orthovoltage or megavoltage
photons to doses of 20 to 30 Gy. Even 6 to 8 Gy in 3 fractions is sufficient if added during TSEBT. Combinations of TSEBT with total nodal irradiation have been
investigated. Although feasible, such combinations do not appear to prolong survival and may be associated with hematologic toxicities not observed with TSEBT
alone. 68,69
TOXICITY. TSEBT is well tolerated by most patients, and acute sequelae either during or within the initial 6 months after treatment may include pruritus, desquamation,

epilation, hypohidrosis, xerosis, erythema, lower-extremity edema, bullae of the feet, and onychoptosis. Chronic changes can include atrophy of the skin,
telangiectasia, alopecia, hypohidrosis, and xerosis. 70 Because of the superficial penetration of the electron beam, patients do not experience gastrointestinal or
hematologic toxicities. Second malignancies, such as squamous and basal cell carcinomas, as well as malignant melanomas have been observed in patients treated
with TSEBT, and such risk is likely increased by other mutagenic, skin-directed therapies, such as PUVA or mechlorethamine (or both). It is interesting that additional
x-ray or electron-beam irradiation after TSEBT does not appear to increase the risk of second cutaneous malignancies. 71,72
REPEAT TREATMENT. For patients who have diffuse cutaneous recurrences after TSEBT not amenable to other skin-directed therapies, a second course of TSEBT is

both feasible and worthwhile. 60,73,74At Yale, a total of 14 patients have received two, and five patients have received three courses of TSEBT. The median total dose
after these additional courses was 57 Gy, and 86% of the patients achieved a CR after the second course, with a median disease-free interval of 11.5 months. Median
dose was 36 Gy for the first course, 18 Gy for the second, and 12 Gy for the third. 73 A similar experience was reported from Stanford, where 15 patients were
identified who had been treated with a second course of TSEBT (median dose, 20 Gy), with a CR rate of 40%. Nine of these patients had a partial response to
therapy, and the median total dose for the entire group was 56 Gy. In both series, repeat courses were relatively well tolerated, and sequelae were similar to those
observed during and after the first course of therapy. 74 Both studies also support the contention that the palliative benefits of additional courses of TSEBT outweigh
their risks in appropriately selected patients. Criteria for retreatment include an extended disease-free interval after the first course of TSEBT, a CR to the initial
course, diffuse cutaneous involvement, and the failure of other palliative modalities.
COMBINED AND SEQUENTIAL THERAPY. Several other CTCL therapies, including topical NM, systemic chemotherapy, etretinate, PUVA, and extracorporeal

photochemotherapy (ECP) have been administered concomitantly with or adjuvantly after TSEBT with varying degrees of success. 75,76,77 and 78
We have observed that the adjuvant use of PUVA after TSEBT in patients with T1 and T2 disease significantly decreases cutaneous relapse. Patients treated with
adjuvant PUVA after TSEBT had a 5-year DFS of 85%, compared to 50% for those not receiving PUVA ( P <.02). The median DFS for the T1 patients receiving
adjuvant PUVA was not reached at 103 months, versus 66 months for the non-PUVA group (P <.01). For those with T2 disease, the DFS figures were 60 and 20
months, respectively (P <.03).78,148 Adjuvant topical NM also appears able to delay cutaneous recurrence after TSEBT. At Stanford, the median DFS of patients was
prolonged from 29 to 37 months by the addition of topical NM therapy after TSEBT. 75 In 1999, Chinn et al.149 from Stanford showed that TSEBT with or without NM
provided improved response rates as compared to mustard alone for those patients with T2 and T3 level disease, respectively (76% vs. 39%; P = .03 for T2; 44% vs.
8%; P <.05 for T3). For those with patch-plaque (T2), adjuvant mustard offered improved freedom from relapse after TSEBT as compared to no adjuvant treatment. No
significant survival difference was noted between the groups. 149
Concurrent use of systemic chemotherapy with TSEBT was evaluated in a randomized clinical trial conducted by Kaye et al., 79 in which a combination of TSEBT (30
Gy) and combination chemotherapy was compared with a regimen of sequential skin-directed therapies followed by TSEBT if cutaneous lesions progressed. Those
patients who received concurrent TSEBT and chemotherapy experienced considerable hematologic toxicity but had a significantly higher CR rate than those who did
not. However, there was no statistically significant difference between the two groups with respect to either DFS (12.9 vs. 21.3 months; P = .19) or overall survival (91
vs. 76 months) at 75 months.
Several nonrandomized studies have suggested that the adjuvant use of single or combination systemic therapy after TSEBT might be of benefit in the treatment of
CTCL.80,81,82,83 and 84 In a study of adjuvant doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide after TSEBT, the DFS was longer for those patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy
for the first 2 to 3 years of follow-up. 85 However, this early advantage was no longer apparent after 5 years.
In contrast, ECP administered during and after TSEBT appears to improve survival ( P <.06) for patients with T3 or T4 disease who have achieved a CR to TSEBT, but
the group of treated patients is small, and the data are retrospective. 76 We currently do not administer adjuvant systemic chemotherapy after TSEBT but are
developing a randomized clinical trial to evaluate the potential utility of adjuvant ECP in patients with T3 and T4 CTCL. Wilson et al. 150 have found a significant
improvement in cause-specific survival for erythrodermic patients treated with the combination of TSEBT and ECP as compared to those not treated with ECP. The
2-year progression-free, cause-specific, and overall survival for those receiving TSEBT/ECP were 66%, 100%, and 88%, respectively, versus 36%, 69%, and 63% for
those not managed with the combination. These data should be interpreted with caution, though, as the total number of patients was low and the series was
nonrandomized.
SYSTEMIC THERAPIES
Systemic therapy for CTCL initially consisted of single- and multiple-agent cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens, often modeled after those that have been used with
great success in the treatment of advanced B-cell lymphomas. In most clinical settings, however, cytotoxic chemotherapy has been supplanted by a variety of
immunologically based therapies, including ECP (also known as photopheresis), IFNs, mAbs, and an investigational agent, the diphtheria toxin/IL-2 hybrid, DABIL-2.
Basic Principles: Photopheresis
Given the intrinsic immunologic nature of the cells responsible for CTCL, it is reasonable that agents that either directly or indirectly modulate T-cell function or other
aspects of host immune response should be applied to the therapy of CTCL. The efficacy of most chemotherapeutic and topical treatments used to treat CTCL has
never been directly evaluated by U.S. Food and Drug Administration advisory committees, but the agency has approved three systemic therapies for the specific
indication of CTCL. The earliest, ECP, received approval in 1988 and was the first such sanctioned selective immunotherapy for any malignancy. More recently,
Ontak (diphtheria toxin conjugated to IL-2) and Targretin (Bexarotene) have become available.
Development of Ontak followed Waldmann's original investigation 139 of an mAb against IL-2 that had shown efficacy in preliminary studies.Activated T cells may
develop avid receptors for this growth factor. By attaching a toxin to a carrier that binds to the IL-2 receptor, targeted malignant T cells can then be destroyed, sparing
non-IL-2 receptor–bearing bystander cells. Some limitations to the approach are that usually only a minority of CTCL cells, even in an actively expanding tumor, are

IL-2 receptor–positive.
ECP, or photopheresis, involves systemic pretreatment with oral or parenteral psoralens, removal of a portion of the patient's blood, pheresis of white blood cells away
from red blood cells, and exposure to UVA of the white blood cells that have undergone pheresis in an effort to photoactivate intercalated, DNA-bound psoralen to
produce psoralen monoadducts and diadducts in DNA. The irradiated cells are then reinfused back into the patient.
The reinfusion of the killed, irradiated CTCL cells appears to stimulate host immune responses selectively against neoplastic T cells. Evidence that such
clone-specific immunization actually occurs has come from several different lines of investigation.
Some observations with Vb-family–specific antibodies have demonstrated that only a minority of infiltrating T cells in patches and plaques are actually neoplastic, 86
and of the benign T cells found in CTCL plaques, approximately 20% are CD8+ cells. 87 When studied in vitro, these reactive, nonneoplastic CD8+ T cells have been
shown to produce large amounts of IFN-G and tumor necrosis factor-a. 88 Both of the last two cytokines increase benign and neoplastic T-cell surface expression of
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules and presentation of bound peptide antigens to other CD8+ cells, including cytotoxic T lymphocytes. In this
context, it is interesting to note that the CD8+ T cells of several patients who underwent photopheresis were found to be cytotoxic only for autologous CTCL cells.
Similarly, others have demonstrated that exposure of murine T-cell lymphoma cells to 8-MOP and UVA in an experimental protocol analogous to photopheresis, and
reinfusion of the treated cells into syngeneic mice protects them against subsequent challenge with this cell line. In theory, such anti-CTCL cell “immunization” should
occur after any therapy that selectively kills a significant number of neoplastic T cells; however, certain animal studies suggest that ECP may accomplish this by a
unique mechanism.
Ex vivo exposure of a lymphocytic murine tumor line to 8-MOP (at the temperature at which photopheresis is conducted) appears to block normal intracellular insertion
of cytoplasmic peptides into the peptide antigen-binding groove of MHC class I molecules, resulting in the unusual expression of “empty” class I molecules at the cell
surface. In theory, such empty class I molecules are free to bind any extracellular peptides that are recognized by the specific amino acid sequence of the
antigen-binding groove.
If such exogenous peptides happen to be derived from protein components of other dying, neoplastic T cells (i.e., the neoplastic clone's TCR), such MHC class
I–peptide antigen presentation should facilitate the expansion of clones of CD8+ “killer” and “suppressor” cells specifically directed against the neoplastic clone and
immunize the host against its own CTCL cells. Evidence that such phenomena actually occur in vivo in patients undergoing photopheresis has come from studies of
the peptide fractions eluted from the MHC class I molecules of CTCL patients who underwent photopheresis. Such peptide fractions appear to be unique and
characteristic only of the patient's neoplastic T cells and are not observed on nonneoplastic T cells or B lymphoblasts.
Currently, ECP is frequently used as monotherapy for CTCL, but its combination with other therapies such as TSEBT is currently under study. ECP is initially
administered on a once-a-month schedule, with therapy continued until maximal clearing is established. An additional 6 months of therapy may be administered to
consolidate the clinical response. After the patient's disease has stabilized, the interval between ECP treatments is gradually prolonged by 1 week per cycle every
three cycles. After the interval between treatments has reached 8 weeks for three cycles, therapy can be discontinued.
Patients may experience transient responses 1 to 2 days after photopheresis but begin to show sustained clinical improvement as early as the second month of
therapy. However, some do not clear or achieve their maximal response until 12 months after starting therapy. On the average, after 4 to 6 months of therapy, a
sustained decrease in erythema, scaling, and pruritus is observed. Patients often notice more subtle changes, such as the return of body hair, loss of rigors, and
return of the ability to sweat.
Previous reports suggest that conventional systemic therapies are ineffective in prolonging the survival of patients with erythrodermic CTCL. A population-based
estimate in one tumor registry survey revealed a 31-month median survival for patients with erythematous skin related to CTCL. A similar analysis of erythrodermic
patients in the Mycosis Fungoides Cooperative Group yielded a 30-month survival. In contrast, patients in the original cohort of ECP patients were found to have a
median survival of 60 months, or twice as long as had been obtained with prior conventional systemic therapies. 89,90,91,92,93 and 94
No side effects of ECP that compromises its continued administration have been observed in more than 7 years of follow-up. Patients with CTCL in the original cohort
treated with ECP have also been carefully studied to determine whether this therapy exerted any adverse effects on host immune response, but none were found.
Lymphocyte and leukocyte counts never decreased to low levels. Lymphocyte stimulation studies showed no evidence of immunosuppression, even after years of
therapy. Delayed hypersensitivity tests revealed improvement in recall responses after photopheresis; in fact, most of the patients had to experience significant
improvement in their erythroderma to allow the skin testing studies to be performed.
In the treatment of T4 CTCL, particularly in patients with markedly elevated white blood cell counts and immunosuppression, ECP has been combined with a variety of
other therapies, including IFNs, methotrexate, etoposide, and TSEBT. TSEBT can be particularly useful in producing prompt remissions of symptomatic erythroderma,
and results suggest that T4 patients treated with TSEBT and ECP have longer survival than those treated with either modality alone. 76,150
The mechanism of response to this immunotherapy appears to involve the simultaneous induction of large numbers of DCs and apoptotic CTCL cells. Passage
through the UV exposure apparatus, at a film thickness of only 1 mm, causes blood monocytes to adhere transiently to the plastic surface, thereby activating these
cells. Over the next few days, at least one-third of the treated monocytes are stimulated in this way to evolve into fully functional DC, the most efficient
antigen-presenting cells in the body. This effect is UV-independent, in contrast to the induction of apoptosis of CTCL cells by the photoactivated 8-MOP. The
apoptotic CTCL cells are ingested by the newly formed DC, a phenomenon that can be greatly enhanced by delaying the return of the treated blood for 1 day and
cocultivating the young DC with the damaged CTCL cells. The CTCL antigens are processed by the DC through the class I MHC pathway and presented to anti-CTCL
CD8 T cells, perhaps accounting for the observed enhanced antitumor responses. Trial of this variation on the conventional ECP approach has led to encouraging
results in a preliminary study and merits extended study before it becomes more widely used.
Interferons
Whereas all three IFNs—G, b, and a—have been studied in CTCL, most clinical studies have been performed with IFN-a. Early studies have reported a CR rate of
10% to 27% with response duration of less than 6 months with doses ranging from 3 to 12 MU/m 2 three times weekly (with the lower dose being the best tolerated). 95
As with other therapies, the extent of prior treatment correlated inversely with the clinical response. With IFN-G, partial responses were attained in one-third of the
patients, and improvements in the therapeutic response to PUVA have also been observed, as mentioned. Kuzel et al. 141 reported a series of 39 patients (stages I to
IV) treated with IFN-a 2a in combination with phototherapy and found a 90% response rate (62% CR), with a median duration of 28 months and survival of 62 months.
All IFNs induce similar toxicities. The first week of IFN therapy may be complicated by flu-like syndrome with fever, myalgia, fatigue, and listlessness. After these
acute symptoms remit, patients are often left with residual mild, chronic fatigue. Long-term toxicities of concern include neuropathy, dementia, and myelopathy. IFN
therapy can also be complicated by such autoimmune phenomena as proteinuria, thrombocytopenia, and anemia. 95,96
Retinoids (Vitamin A Derivatives)
Retinoids have found a role in the management of several malignancies, including all- trans-retinoic acid therapy of acute promyelocytic leukemia and topical
allitretinoin in the treatment of Kaposi's sarcoma. Each retinoid has distinct binding patterns with respect to the major classes of retinoid receptors: RAR and RXR.
Initial studies in CTCL demonstrated that the retinoids approved for acne and psoriasis (binding both RAR and RXR) could produce responses in CTCL. 117,118 and 119
These nonspecific retinoids had also been combined with other therapies, such as PUVA, 120 TSEBT,121 and IFN.123,124 and 125 Bexarotene is an oral RXR-selective
retinoid. In a clinical trial of heavily pretreated, refractory CTCL, oral monotherapy with bexarotene had a 50% response rate in a group of 94 patients with plaque,
tumor, or erythrodermic CTCL. 46 The ideal starting dose is 300 mg/m 2 as a single dose taken with a meal. The most frequent toxicity is hypertriglyceridemia
necessitating antilipemic therapy in the majority of patients. Hypothyroidism occurred in approximately one-third of patients, and supplemental thyroid hormone was
needed. In one report of nine patients with erythrodermic CTCL, there were rapid palliative and remitting responses induced (within 12 weeks) by monotherapy with
oral bexarotene. The nine patients with erythrodermic CTCL included those with SS and those without circulating atypical cells. Two achieved CR, and the other
seven showed partial responses. 46 As a treatment of erythroderma, this agent could be considered as monotherapy but, in the management of plaque and tumor
disease, bexarotene will most likely be combined with skin-directed therapies, including topical steroids. Given the high rate of partial responses with bexarotene

monotherapy, it would be anticipated that the combination treatments could achieve a CR, the desired goal of therapy.
Monoclonal Antibodies
Several forms of mAbs have been used in the treatment of CTCL. Miller and Levy 134 have studied the anti-CD5 antibody, and although preliminary study
demonstrated partial responses, subsequent investigations were less promising, with no CRs in 34 patients. 135,136 and 137 Anti-CD4 therapy has been shown by Knox et
al.138 to be effective in seven of eight patients, with a mean freedom from progression of 25 weeks. Seven of the eight patients had plaque disease, and no patient had
visceral or SS involvement. 142 Anti-Tac therapy has been studied by Waldmann 139 and, in an effort to enhance the effect, anti-TAC was used in concert with toxins
and a and b emitters. Of 17 patients studied, 11 had a partial or CR to such therapy.
Fusion Toxin
The efficacy of fusion toxin therapy was established in a trial treating patients with refractory CTCL. Fusion toxins are a family of targeted drugs that are recombinant
proteins generated by fusing the gene for the targeting factor (with CTCL, the T-cell growth factor IL-2 was used) with the gene for diphtheria toxin. The recombinant
peptide is selectively toxic for IL-2 receptor–positive T cells at picometer to nanomolar concentrations. This specific killing can be blocked by the addition of excess
IL-2 or mAb to the p55 portion of the IL-2 receptor. Patients are given intravenous infusions of the fusion toxin over a 30-minute period for 5 consecutive days and
repeated every 3 weeks. Using doses of 9 µg/kg/d and 18 µg/kg/d, it was possible to demonstrate the dose responsiveness of the efficacy of IL-2 fusion toxin in
treating CTCL. The toxicities were also dose-responsive. A vascular leak syndrome occurred at severe levels in 13% of patients. Pretreatment with systemic
corticosteroids appears to minimize this complication. Overall, the response rate in heavily treated patients was 30%. 97 Almost all responses occurred within the first
three infusion cycles and were maximal at eight cycles. Tumor and plaque lesions appeared to be the most responsive. Patient selection for fusion toxin therapy
traditionally depends on skin biopsy or flow cytometry demonstration of lymphocytes expressing the high affinity IL-2 receptor (CD25). However, dramatic responses
have occurred in CD25-negative CTCLs. The level for CD25 expression to confer toxicity from the fusion toxin is below the level of detection from immunoperoxidase.
Thus, the ultimate screening test for a response to fusion toxin is to monitor the patient over two to three cycles and then continue for a full eight cycles to optimize a
response. In those patients with remission, retreatment has recaptured the response.
Systemic Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy has been traditionally associated with increased toxicity in the management of CTCL. 79 Presumably, the immunosuppressive effects of advancing
CTCL render patients particularly prone to the suppressive effects of chemotherapy. In addition, central lines in patients with CTCL tend to become infected, owing to
the continuous seeding by bacteria from the open skin lesions. Thus, there are two strategies with chemotherapy in the management of CTCL: traditional intravenous
chemotherapy and low-dose oral chemotherapy. There have not been any formal studies comparing these two distinct dosing regimens. The oral agents used in
managing CTCL patients are methotrexate, 98 etoposide,104 and chlorambucil. 105,106 Methotrexate is probably the most commonly used, at doses of 15 to 50 mg/wk. 98 If
chlorambucil or etoposide is used, the peripheral blood cell count must be carefully monitored. More intense intravenous regimens with cytotoxic chemotherapy
palliate patients with CTCL. Single-agent therapy can yield CRs in approximately 30% of patients, but the response durations are relatively short. 84 Commonly used
agents have included cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, etoposide, and prednisone.
Several studies have reported that the adenine nucleotide derivatives 2'-deoxycoformycin, 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine, and fludarabine might be useful in the treatment
of CTCL.104,105,106,107,108,109,110,111,112,113 and 114,151 Although these agents are active against T lymphocytes through their inhibition of the enzyme adenosine deaminase,
their clinical utility in CTCL has been less than initially hoped. In early studies, response rates of approximately 40% were reported for both 2'-deoxycoformycin and
2-chlorodeoxyadenosine, whereas fludarabine was somewhat less effective. The duration of these responses was relatively short, however, and severe
myelosuppression was often observed. Combinations of these agents with IFN have been studied, but preliminary results reveal no significant advantages over either
modality alone. 115,116
Overall, combination systemic therapy yields CR rates of 35% to 50% in CTCL, but there is no significant advantage in the use of drug combinations over single-agent
therapy. Chemotherapy may be helpful for patients who are in need of symptomatic palliation when other modalities have proven ineffective or when visceral disease
is symptomatic. The use of high-dose systemic chemotherapy with stem cell or bone marrow rescue is investigational, and preliminary results have been
discouraging. 99
Acknowledgment
Dr. Edelson's work was supported in part by National Institutes of Health grant RO1-CA43058.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Edelson R. Membrane properties of the abnormal cells of cutaneous T cell lymphomas. Ann Intern Med 1975;83:536.
2. Edelson R, Berger C, Raafat J, Warburton D. Karyotype studies of cutaneous T cell lymphoma: evidence for clonal origin. J Invest Dermatol 1979;73:548.
3. Weiss LM, Hu E, Wood GS, et al. Clonal rearrangements of T-cell receptor genes in mycosis fungoides and dermatopathic lymphadenopathy. N Engl J Med 1985;313:539.
4. Berger CL, Eisenberg A, Soper L, et al. Dual genotype in cutaneous T cell lymphoma: immunoglobulin gene rearrangement in clonal T cell. J Invest Dermatol 1988;90:73.
5. Kung PC, Berger CL, Goldstein G, LoGerfo P, Edelson RL. Cutaneous T cell lymphoma: characterization by monoclonal antibodies. Blood 1981;57:261.
6. Haynes BF, Metzgar RS, Minna JD, Bunn PA. Phenotypic characterization of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: use of monoclonal antibodies to compare with other malignant T cells. N Engl J Med
1981;304:1319.
7. Broder S, Edelson R, Lutzner M, et al. The Sézary syndrome: a malignant proliferation of helper T cells. J Clin Invest 1976;58:1297.
8. Berger C, Warburton D, Raafat L, LoGerfo P, Edelson R. Cutaneous T cell lymphoma: neoplasm of T cell with helper activity. Blood 1979;53:642.
9. Vowels BR, Cassin M, Vonderheid EC, Rook AH. Aberrant cytokine production by Sézary syndrome patients: cytokine secretion pattern resembles murine Th2 cells. J Invest Dermatol
1992;99:90.
10. Nickoloff BJ, Griffiths CEM. Intraepidermal but not dermal T lymphocytes are positive for a cell-cycle-associated antigen (Ki-67) in mycosis fungoides. Am J Pathol 1990;136:261.
11. Picker LJ, Michie SA, Rott LS, Butcher EC. A unique phenotype of skin-associated lymphocytes in humans: preferential expression of the HECA-452 epitope by benign and malignant T cells at
cutaneous sites. Am J Pathol 1990;136:1053.
12. Picker LJ, Kishimoto TK, Smith CW, Warnock RA, Butcher EC. ELAM-1 is an adhesion molecule for skin-homing T cells. Nature 1991;349:796.
13. Berg EL, Yoshino T, Rott LS, et al. The cutaneous lymphocyte antigen is a skin lymphocyte homing receptor for the vascular lectin endothelial cell-leukocyte adhesion molecule-1. J Exp Med
1991;174:1461.
14. Lever WF, Schaumburg-Lever G. Histopathology of the skin. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co, 1990:819.
15. Nickoloff BJ, Griffiths CEM, Baadsgaard O, et al. Markedly diminished epidermal keratinocyte expression of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) in Sézary syndrome. JAMA
1998;261:2217.
16. Nickoloff BJ, Mitra RS, Shimuzu Y, et al. HUT 78 cells bind to noncytokine-stimulated keratinocytes using a non-CD18-dependent adhesion pathway. Am J Pathol 1992;140:1365.
17. Kupper TS, Lee F, Birchall N, Clark S, Dower S. Interleukin 1 binds to specific receptors on human keratinocytes and induces granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor mRNA and
protein. A potential autocrine role for interleukin 1 in epidermis. J Clin Invest 1998;82:1787.
18. Bergstresser PR, Cruz PD, Niederkorn JY, Takashima A. Third International Workshop on Langerhans Cells: discussion overview. J Invest Dermatol 1992;99:1S.
19. Weinstock MA, Horm J. Mycosis fungoides in the United States. Increasing incidence and descriptive epidemiology. JAMA 1988;260:42.
20. Tuyp E, Burgoyne A, Aitchison T, MacKie R. A case-control study of possible causative factors in mycosis fungoides. Arch Dermatol 1987;123:196.
21. Whittemore AS, Holly E, Lee IM, et al. Mycosis fungoides in relation to environmental exposures and immune response: a case-control study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:1560.
22. Wilson LD. Personal communication regarding the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program, National Cancer Institute. October 1995.
23. Dalloul A, Laroche L, Bagot M, et al. Interleukin-7 is a growth factor for Sézary cells. J Clin Invest 1992;90:1054.
24. Rich BE, Campos-Torres J, Tepper RI, Moreadith RW, Leder P. Cutaneous lymphoproliferation and lymphomas in interleukin 7 transgenic mice. J Exp Med 1993;177:305.
25. Macaulay WL. Lymphomatoid papulosis update . Arch Dermatol 1989;125:1387.
26. Weiss LM, Wood GA, Trela M, Warnke RA, Sklar J. Clonal T-cell populations in lymphomatoid papulosis: evidence of a lymphoproliferative origin for a clinically benign disease. N Engl J Med
1986;315:475.
27. Kardashian JL, Zachheim HS, Egbert BM. Lymphomatoid papulosis associated with plaque-stage and granulomatous mycosis fungoides. Arch Dermatol 1985;121:1175.
28. Mehregan D, Gibson L, Muller S. Follicular mucinosis: histopathologic review of 33 cases. Mayo Clin Proc 1991;66:387.
29. Buchner SA, Meier M, Rulfi T. Follicular mucinosis associated with mycosis fungoides. Dermatologica 1991;183:66.
30. Wood GS, Weiss LM, Hu CH, et al. T-cell antigen deficiencies and clonal rearrangement of T-cell receptor genes in pagetoid reticulosis (Woringer-Kolopp disease). N Engl J Med 1988;318:164.
31. Bunn PA, Lamberg SI. Report of the committee on staging and classification of cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:725.
32. Olerud JE, Kulin PA, Chew DE, et al. Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: evaluation of pretreatment skin biopsy specimens by a panel of pathologists. Arch Dermatol 1992;128:501.
33. Marti RM, Estrach T, Reverter JC, Mascaro JM. Prognostic clinicopathologic factors in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Arch Dermatol 1991;127:1511.
34. Hoppe RT, Medeous LJ, Warnke RA, Woods GS. CD8 positive tumor infiltrating lymphocytes influence the long term survival of patients with mycosis fungoides. J Am Acad Dermatol
1995;32:448.
35. Vonderheid EC, Tan E, Sobel EL, et al. Clinical implications of immunologic phenotyping in cutaneous T cell lymphoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1987;17:40.
36. Wood GS, Tung RM, Crooks CF, et al. Detection of early cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. J Invest Dermatol 1994;103:34.

37. Lynch JW, Linoilla I, Sausville EA, et al. Prognostic implications of evaluation for lymph node involvement by T-cell antigen receptor gene rearrangement in mycosis fungoides. Blood
1992;79:3293.
38. Vonderheid EC, Diamond LW, van Vloten WA, et al. Lymph node classification systems in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: evidence for the utility of the working formulation of non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas for clinical usage. Cancer 1994;73:207.
39. Heald P, Yan SL, Latkowski J, Edelson R. Profound deficiency in normal circulating T-cells in erythrodermic cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Arch Dermatol 1994;130:198.
40. Bakels V, van Oostveen JW, Gorkijn RL, Walboomers JM, Meijer CJ. Diagnostic value of T cell receptor beta gene rearrangement analysis in peripheral blood lymphocytes of patients with
erythroderma. J Invest Dermatol 1991;97:782.
41. Heald P, Rook A. The immunology of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Hematol Oncol Clin 1995;9:997.
42. Vonderheid EC, Tan ET, Cantor AF, et al. Long term efficacy, curative potential, and carcinogenicity of topical mechlorethamine chemotherapy and cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. J Am Acad
Dermatol 1989;20:416.
43. Zackheim HS, Epstein EH, Crain WR. Topical carmustine (BCNU) for cutaneous T cell lymphoma: a 15-year experience in 143 patients. J Am Acad Dermatol 1990;22:802.
44. Honigsmann H, Brenner W, Rauschmeier W, Konrad K, Wolff K. Photochemotherapy for cutaneous T cell lymphoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1984;10:238.
45. Mostow EN, Neckel SL, Oberhelman L, Anderson TF, Cooper KD. Complete remissions in psoralen and UV-A(PUVA)-refractory mycosis fungoides-type cutaneous T-cell lymphoma with
combined interferon alfa and PUVA. Arch Dermatol 1993;129:747.
46. Heald PW, Duvic M. Palliative and remittive properties of oral bexarotene in the management of erythrodermic cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Blood 1999 (in press).
47. Swanbeck G, Roupe G, Sandstrom MH. Indication of a considerable decrease in the death rate in mycosis fungoides by PUVA therapy. Acta Dermatovener 1994;74:465.
48. Scholtz W. Ueber den einflussder roentgenstohlen auf die haut in gesundem und krankem zustande. Arch Dermatol Syph (Berlin) 1902;59:421.
49. Kim JH, Nisce LZ, D'Angio GJ. Dose-time fractionation study in patients with mycosis fungoides and lymphoma cutis. Radiology 1976;119:439.
50. Hoppe RT, Fuks Z, Bagshaw MA. Radiation therapy in the management of cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:625.
51. Cotter GW, Baglan RJ, Wasserman TH, et al. Palliative radiation treatment of cutaneous mycosis fungoides: a dose response. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:1477.
52. Trump JG, Wright KA, Evans WW, et al. High energy electrons for the treatment of extensive superficial malignant lesions. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1953;69:623.
53. Fuks Z, Bagshaw MA. Total-skin electron treatment of mycosis fungoides. Radiology 1971;100:145.
54. Haybittle JL. A 24 curie strontium 90 unit for whole-body superficial irradiation with beta rays. Br J Radiol 1964;37:297.
55. Karzmark CJ, Loevinger R, Steele RE, et al. Technique for large-field, superficial electron therapy. Radiology 1960;74:633.
56. Hoppe RT, Cox RS, Fuks Z, et al. Electron-beam therapy for mycosis fungoides: the Stanford University experience. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:691.
57. Jones GW, Tadros A, Hodson DJ, et al. Prognosis with newly diagnosed mycosis fungoides after total skin electron radiation of 30 of 35 Gy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;28:839.
58. Lo TCM, Salzman FA, Moschella SL, et al. Whole body surface electron irradiation in the treatment of mycosis fungoides. Radiology 1979;130:453.
59. Micaily B, Moser C, Vonderheid EC, et al. The radiation therapy of early stage cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;18:1333.
60. Nisce LZ, Safai B, Kim JH. Effectiveness of once weekly total skin electron beam therapy in mycosis fungoides and the Sézary syndrome. Cancer 1981;47:870.
61. Reddy S, Parker CM, Shidnia H, et al. Total skin electron beam radiation therapy for mycosis fungoides. Am J Clin Oncol 1992;15:119.
62. Van Der Merwe DG. Total skin electron therapy: a technique which can be implemented on a conventional electron linear accelerator. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:391.
63. Van Vloten WA, de Vroome H, Noordijk EM, et al. Total skin electron irradiation for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides). Br J Dermatol 1985;112:692.
64. Wilson LD, Cooper DL, Goodrich AL, et al. Impact of non-CTCL dermatologic diagnoses and adjuvant therapies on cutaneous T-cell lymphoma patients treated with total skin electron beam
radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;28:829.
65. Bjarngard BE, Chen GTY, Piontek RW, et al. Analysis of dose distributions in whole body superficial electron therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1977;2:319.
66. Page V, Gardner P, Karzmark CJ. Patient dosimetry in electron treatment of large superficial lesions. Radiology 1970;94:635.
67. Hoppe RT, Wood GS, Abel EA. Mycosis fungoides and the Sézary syndrome: pathology, staging and treatment. Curr Probl Cancer 1990;14:295.
68. Micaily B, Campbell O, Moser C, et al. Total skin electron beam and total nodal irradiation of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:809.
69. Micaily B, Vonderheid EC, Brady LW, et al. Total skin electron beam and total nodal irradiation for treatment of patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1985;11:1111.
70. Price NM. Radiation dermatitis following electron beam therapy. Arch Dermatol 1978;114:63.
71. Licata AG, Wilson LD, Braverman IM, et al. Malignant melanoma and other second cutaneous malignancies in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (the influence of additional therapy after total skin
electron beam radiation). Arch Dermatol 1995;131:432.
72. Abel EA, Sendagorta E, Hoppe RT. Cutaneous malignancies and metastatic squamous cell carcinoma following topical therapies for mycosis fungoides. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986;14:1029.
73. Wilson LD, Quiros PA, Kolenik SA, et al. Additional courses of total skin electron beam therapy in the retreatment of patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1996;35:69.
74. Becker M, Hoppe RT, Knox SJ. Multiple courses of high-dose total skin electron beam therapy in the management of mycosis fungoides. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:1445.
75. Price NM, Hoppe RT, Constantine FS, et al. The treatment of mycosis fungoides: adjuvant topical mechlorethamine after electron-beam therapy. Cancer 1977;40:2851.
76. Wilson LD, Licata AL, Braverman IM, et al. Systemic chemotherapy and extracorporeal photochemotherapy for T3 and T4 cutaneous T-cell lymphoma patients who have achieved a complete
response to total skin electron beam therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:987.
77. Jones G, McLean J, Rosenthal D, et al. Combined treatment with oral etretinate and electron beam therapy in patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides and Sézary
syndrome). J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;26:960.
78. Wilson LD, Quiros P, Braverman IM, et al. Impact of prognostic factors, adjuvant therapies and retreatment on CTCL patients treated with TSEBT. Proceedings of the seventy-eighth annual
meeting of the American Radium Society, Paris, France, April 29May 3, 1995.
79. Kaye FJ, Bunn PA, Steinberg SM, et al. A randomized trial comparing combination electron-beam radiation and chemotherapy with topical therapy in the initial treatment of mycosis fungoides.
N Engl J Med 1989;321:1784.
80. Bunn PA, Fischmann AB, Schechter GP, et al. Combined modality therapy with electron-beam irradiation and systemic chemotherapy for cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. Cancer Treat Rep
1979;63:713.
81. Greim ML, Tokars RP, Petras V, et al. Combined therapy for patients with mycosis fungoides. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:655.
82. Hallahan DE, Griem ML, Griem SF, et al. Combined modality therapy for tumor stage mycosis fungoides: results of a 10 year follow-up. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1177.
83. Winkler CF, Sausville EA, Ihde DC, et al. Combined modality treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: results of a six year follow-up. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1094.
84. Bunn PA, Hoffman SJ, Norris D, et al. Systemic therapy of cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (mycosis fungoides and the Sézary syndrome). Ann Intern Med 1994;121:592.
85. Braverman IM, Yager NB, Chen M, et al. Combined total body electron beam irradiation and chemotherapy for mycosis fungoides J Am Acad Dermatol 1987;16:45.
86. Bagot M, Wechsler J, Lescs MC, et al. Intraepidermal localization of the clone in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;27:589.
87. Wood GS, Dubiel C, Mueller C, et al. Most CD8 + cells in skin lesions of CD3+ CD4+ mycosis fungoides are CD3+ T cells that lack CD11b, CD16, CD56, CD57, and human hanukah factor
mRNA. Am J Pathol 1991;138:1545.
88. Reinhold U, Pawelec G, Fratila A, et al. Phenotypic and functional characterization of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes in mycosis fungoides: continuous growth of CD4 + CD45R+ T-cell clones with
suppressor-inducer activity. J Invest Dermatol 1990;94:304.
89. Edelson RL, Berger CL, Gasparro F, et al. Treatment of cutaneous T cell lymphoma by extracorporeal photochemotherapy: preliminary results. N Engl J Med 1987;316:297.
90. Marks D, Rockman SP, Oziemski MA, Fox RM. Mechanisms of lymphocytotoxicity induced by extracorporeal photochemotherapy for cutaneous T cell lymphoma. J Clin Invest 1990;86:2080.
91. Armus S, Keyes B, Cahill C, et al. Successful treatment of cutaneous T cell lymphoma with photopheresis. J Am Acad Dermatol 1990;23:898.
92. Zic J, Arzubiaga C, Salhany KE, et al. Extracorporeal photopheresis for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;27:729.
93. Heald PW, Rook A, Perez M, et al. Treatment of erythrodermic cutaneous T-cell lymphoma patients with photopheresis. J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;27:427.
94. Heald P, Laroche L, Knobler R. Photoinactivated lymphocyte therapy of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Dermatol Clin 1994;12:443.
95. Bunn PA, Foon KA, Ihde DC, et al. Recombinant leukocyte A interferon: an active agent in advanced cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:484.
96. Olsen EA, Rosen ST, Vollmer RT, et al. Interferon a2A in the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. J Am Acad Dermatol 1989;203:395.
97. Olsen E, Duvic M, Frankel A, et al. Pivotal phase III trial of two dose levels of DAB-389IL-2 for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol (in press).
98. Zackheim HS, Epstein EH. Low dose methotrexate for the Sézary syndrome. J Am Acad Dermatol 1989;21:757.
99. Bigler RD, Crilly P, Micaily B, et al. Autologous bone marrow transplantation for advanced stage mycosis fungoides. Bone Marrow Transplant 1991;7:133.
100. Hollsberg P, Hafler DA. Pathogenesis of diseases induced by human lymphotropic virus type 1 infection. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1173.
101. Broder S, Bunn PA Jr. Neoplasms of T-cell origin: immunologic aspects and therapy. Semin Oncol 1980;7:310.
102. Bunn PA Jr, Schechter GP, Blayney D, et al. Clinical course of retrovirus-associated adult T-cell lymphoma in the United States. N Engl J Med 1983;309:257.
103. Gill PS, Harrington W, Kaplan M, et al. Treatment of adult T cell leukemia lymphoma with a combination of interferon alfa and zidovudine. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1744.
104. Rijlaarsdam JU, Huijgens PC, Beljaards RC, Bakels V, Willemze R. Oral etoposide in the treatment of cutaneous large-cell lymphomas. Br J Dermatol 1992;127:524.
105. Lorent A, Feermans W, Blondeel A, Meerts P, Achten G. Sezary syndrome: treatment with a prednisolone chlorambucil combination. Dermatologica 1982;165:464.
106. Winkelmann RK, Diaz-Perez JL, Buechner SA. The treatment of Sézary syndrome. J Am Acad Dermatol 1984;10:1000.
107. Cummings FJ, Kim K, Neiman RS, et al. Phase II trial of pentostatin in refractory lymphomas and cutaneous T-cell disease. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:565.
108. Dearden C, Matutes E, Catovsky D. Deoxycoformycin in the treatment of mature T-cell leukaemias. Br J Cancer 1991;64:903.
109. Kanofsky JR, Roth DG, Smyth J, et al. Treatment of lymphoid malignancies with 2'-deoxycoformycin: a pilot study. Am J Clin Oncol 1982;5:179.
110. Dang-VU AP, Olsen EA, Vollmer RT, Greenberg ML, Hershfield MS. Treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma with 2'-deoxycoformycin (pentostatin). J Am Acad Dermatol 1988;19:692.
111. Lee E, Kuzel T, Samuelson E, et al. Phase II trial of 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Proceedings of the thirty-fifth annual meeting of the American
Society of Hematology. Blood 1993;82[Suppl 1]:142a.
112. Saven A, Carrera CJ, Carson DA, Beutler E, Piro LD. 2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine: an active agent in the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Blood 1992;80:587.
113. Kuzel TM, Samuelson E, Roenigk HH Jr, Torp E, Rosen ST. Phase II trial of 2 chlorodeoxyadenosine for the treatment of mycosis fungoides or the Sézary syndrome. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1992;11:A1089(abst).
114. Von Hoff DD, Dahlberg S, Hartstock RJ, Eyre HJ. Activity of fludarabine monophosphate in patients with advanced mycosis fungoides: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. J Natl Cancer Inst
1990;82:1353.
115. Foss F, Tingsgaard P, Jorgensen H, Vejlsgaard Gl. Interferon treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Eur J Haematol 1993;51:63.
116. Foss FM, Ihde DC, Breneman DL, et al. Phase II study of pentostatin and intermittent high-dose interferon a2a in advanced mycosis fungoides/Sézary syndrome. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1907.
117. Molin L, Thomsen K, Volden G, et al. Oral retinoids in mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome: a comparison of isotretinoin and etretinate. Acta Dermatol Venereol 1987;67:232.
118. Thomsen K, Hammar H, Molin L, Volden G. Retinoids plus PUVA (RePUVA) and PUVA in mycosis fungoides, plaque stage: a report from the Scandinavian Mycosis Fungoides Group. Acta
Derm Venereol 1989;69:536.
119. Kessler JF, Jones SE, Levine N, Lynch PJ, Booth AR. Isotretinoin and cutaneous helper-T-cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides). Arch Dermatol 1987;123:201.
120. Thomsen K, Molin L, Volden G, Lange Wantzin G, Hellbe L. 13- Cis-Tretinoic acid effective in mycosis fungoides: a report from the Scandinavian Mycosis Fungoides Group. Acta Derm
Venereol 1984;64:563.
121. Jones G, McLean J, Rosenthal D, Roberts J, Sauder DN. Combined treatment with oral etretinate and electron beam therapy in patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides
and Sézary syndrome). J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;26:960.
122. Bass JC, Korobkin MT, Cooper KD, Kane NM, Platt JF. Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: CT in evaluation and staging. Radiology 1993;186:273.
123. Dreno B, Celerier P, Litoux P. Roferon-A in combination with Tigason in cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. Acta Haematol 1993;89[Suppl 1]:28.
124. Knobler RM, Trautinger F, Radaszkiewicz T, Kokoschka EM, Micksche M. T reatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma with a combination of low-dose interferon a2b and retinoids. J Am Acad
Dermatol 1991;24:247.

125. Altomare GF, Capella GL, Pigatto PD, Finzi AF. Intramuscular low dose alpha-2B interferon and etretinate for treatment of mycosis fungoides. Int J Dermatol 1993;32:138.
126. Heald P, Buckley P, Gilliam A, et al. Correlations of unique clinical, immunotypic, and histologic findings in cutaneous gamma/delta T-cell lymphoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;26:865.
127. Dewey WC, Ling CC, Meyn RE. Radiation-induced apoptosis: relevance to radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;33:781.
128. Quiros PA, Kacinski BM, Wilson LD. Extent of skin involvement as a prognostic indicator of disease free and overall survival in T3 stage cutaneous T-cell lymphoma patients treated with total
skin electron beam radiation therapy. Cancer 1996;77:1912.
129. Axelrod PI, Lorber B, Vanderheid EC. Infections complicating mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome. JAMA 1992;267:1354.
130. Beljaards RC, Kaudewitz P, Berti E, et al. Primary cutaneous CD 30positive large cell lymphoma: definition of a new type of cutaneous lymphoma with a favorable prognosis. A European
multicenter study of 47 patients. Cancer 1993;71:2097.
131. Pauli M, Berti E, Rosso R, et al. CD 30/Ki-1-positive lymphoproliferative disorders of the skin: clinicopathologic correlation and statistical analysis of 86 cases: a multicentric study from the
European organization for research and treatment of cancer cutaneous lymphoma project group. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1343.
132. Nadali G, Vinante F, Stein H, et al. Serum levels of the soluble form of CD30 molecule as a tumor marker in CD30+ anaplastic large-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1355.
133. Neri A, Fracchiolla NS, Roscetti E, et al. Molecular analysis of cutaneous B- and T-cell lymphomas. Blood 1995;86:3160.
134. Miller RA, Levy R. Response of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma to therapy with hybridoma monoclonal antibody. Lancet 1981;2:226.
135. Bunn PA, Norris DA. The therapeutic role of interferons and monoclonal antibodies in cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. J Invest Dermatol 1990;95:209S.
136. Dillman RO, Shawler DL, Dillman JB, Royston I. Therapy of chronic lymphocytic leukemia and cutaneous T-cell lymphoma with T101 monoclonal antibody. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:881.
137. Bertram JH, Gill PS, Levine AM, et al. Monoclonal antibody T101 in T cell malignancies: a clinical pharmacokinetic and immunologic correlation. Blood 1986;68:752.
138. Knox SJ, Levy R, Hodgkinson S, et al. Observations on the effect of chimeric anti-CD4 monoclonal antibody in patients with mycosis fungoides. Blood 1991;77:20.
139. Waldmann TA. Anti-IL-2 receptor monoclonal antibody (anti-Tac) treatment of T-cell lymphoma. Important Adv Oncol 1994;[review]:131.
140. Jones GW, Hoppe RT, Glatstein E. Electron beam treatment for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1995;9:1057.
141. Kuzel TM, Roenigk HH, Samuelson E, et al. Effectiveness of interferon alpha-2A combined with phototherapy for mycosis fungoides and the Sézary syndrome. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:257.
142. Knox S, Hoppe RT, Maloney D, et al. Treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma with chimeric anti-CD4 monoclonal antibody. Blood 1996;87:893.
143. Jones GW. Update of the Ontario experience of TSEBT for patients with newly diagnosed CTCL. Personal communication, May 1996.
144. Jones GW, Savilo E, Roberts JT, et al. Infiltrative cell density in pre-irradiated skin as a prognostic factor in Mycosis Fungoides. Clin Invest Med 17S:B119(abstract 706), 1994.
145. Wilson LD, Kacinski BM, Jones GW. Local superficial radiotherapy in the management of minimal stage IA cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;40:109.
146. Jones GW, Thorson B. Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides) Lancet 1999;348:130.
147. Jones GW, Rosenthal D, Wilson LD. Total skin electron radiation for patients with erythrodermic cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides and the Sézary syndrome). Cancer
1999;85:1985.
148. Quiros PA, Jones GW, Kacinski BM, et al. Total skin electron beam therapy followed by adjuvant psoralen/ultraviolet A light in the management of patients with T1 and T2 cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma (mycosis fungoides). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:1027.
149. Chinn DM, Chow S, Kim YH, et al. Total skin electron beam therapy with or without topical nitrogen mustard or nitrogen mustard alone as initial treatment of T2 and T3 mycosis fungoides. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:951.
150. Wilson LD, Jones GW, Kim D, et al. Experience with total skin electron beam therapy in combination with extracorporeal photopheresis in the management of patients with erythrodermic (T4)
mycosis fungoides. J Am Acad Dermatol 2000;43:54.
151. Kurzrock R, Pilat S, Duvic M. Pentostatin therapy of T-cell lymphomas with cutaneous manifestations. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3117.

SECTION 45.5 Primary Central Nervous System Lymphoma
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 45.5
Primary Central Nervous System Lymphoma
LISA M. DEANGELIS
JOACHIM YAHALOM
Introduction
Clinical Features
General
Brain
Eye
Leptomeninges
Spinal Cord
Diagnostic Tests
Cranial Imaging
Lumbar Puncture
Pathology
Management
Immunologically Normal Patients
Immunocompromised Patients
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) is the term applied to non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) arising in and confined to the central nervous system
(CNS). In the past, this tumor was called microglioma, reticulum cell sarcoma, or perivascular sarcoma, but its lymphocytic origin, usually the B cell, is now well
established. 1,2 and 3 How a lymphoma can develop within the CNS, which lacks lymph nodes and lymphatics, remains unanswered; however, lymphocytes do normally
traffic in and out of the CNS, and these lymphocytes may be the source of PCNSL.
PCNSL was formerly a rare tumor, accounting for only 0.5% to 1.2% of all intracranial neoplasms, and usually associated with congenital, acquired, or iatrogenic
immunodeficiency states such as Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome or renal transplantation. 2,4,5 The highest incidence has been reported in patients with the acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), in whom it is seen in 1.9% to 6.0%. 6,7 One autopsy study demonstrated an overall risk of 12%, but only one-half of patients were
suspected to harbor CNS disease before death. 8 There is a strong clinical impression among experienced clinicians that widespread use of highly active antiretroviral
therapy has reduced the incidence of PCNSL in the AIDS population, but this has yet to be confirmed by formal epidemiologic studies. However, there has been a
clear and dramatic increase in the incidence of PCNSL among apparently immunocompetent individuals. An epidemiologic study in the United States revealed a
threefold increase in the incidence of PCNSL between 1973 and 1984; a tenfold increase has been observed in southeast England. 9,10 This increase far exceeds the
3% to 4% per year increase seen in systemic NHLs during the same period. 11 Not all epidemiologic studies indicate an increased incidence, and it is unclear if these
geographic variations contain important etiologic clues. 12 Currently, PCNSL has an incidence of 0.31 per 100,000 person years, suggesting that approximately 800
new cases occur in the United States every year. 11 This change in incidence cannot be attributed to new diagnostic techniques or the adoption of a uniform nosology,
and the reason for this marked rise in PCNSL is unknown.

CLINICAL FEATURES
GENERAL
PCNSL affects all ages, from the very young to the elderly. Its peak incidence occurs in the sixth and seventh decades in immunocompetent patients and younger in
immunosuppressed patients. 13 Among apparently immunocompetent individuals, there is a 3:2 male to female ratio, but in the AIDS population, more than 90% of
patients are men.14
By definition, PCNSL is limited to the nervous system and has not metastasized there from a systemic site. Metastatic NHL typically involves the leptomeninges, rarely
the brain, and usually occurs in the setting of advanced disseminated disease. 15 Systemic staging of PCNSL patients has yielded only a 3% to 4% incidence of
systemic disease.16,17 In all patients, the systemic site was extranodal and identified by bone marrow biopsy or abdominopelvic computed tomographic scan,
suggesting that these are the only tests necessary for a systemic evaluation.
BRAIN
Most PCNSLs present with symptoms of an intracranial mass lesion. The specific presenting symptoms and signs reflect the location of the tumor, with focal cerebral
deficits occurring in approximately one-half of patients 13; however, the presentation of PCNSL has some differences from that of other brain tumors. Because the
frontal lobe is the most frequently involved region of the brain and multiple lesions are often seen, changes in personality and level of alertness are common
presenting symptoms. Headaches and symptoms of increased intracranial pressure are also seen frequently. Seizures are less common than in patients with other
types of brain tumors, occurring in approximately 10% of patients as a presenting sign, because most PCNSLs involve deep brain structures rather than seizure-prone
cerebral cortex. PCNSL is a rapidly growing tumor, and symptoms are usually present for only weeks to a few months before a diagnosis is made. Staging for PCNSL
should include the following tests:
Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium
Lumbar puncture
Ophthalmologic examination with slit lamp
Spinal MRI with gadolinium (when appropriate)
Abdominal computed tomographic scan
Bone marrow testing
Chest radiography
Human immunodeficiency virus-1 serology
PCNSL is often disseminated within the nervous system at diagnosis. Brain lesions are multifocal in 40% of immunocompetent patients and almost 100% of AIDS
patients. Multiple lesions often cause diagnostic confusion with brain metastases, particularly as 13% of PCNSL patients have a history of a prior systemic
malignancy.18 Many lesions are periventricular, allowing tumor cells to easily gain access to the CSF. At least 42% of patients have demonstrable leptomeningeal
seeding based on a positive CSF cytologic examination, pathologic leptomeningeal invasion, or unequivocal radiographic evidence of subarachnoid tumor, but
patients rarely have symptoms or signs of leptomeningeal lymphoma. 19 At autopsy, 100% of patients have leptomeningeal tumor from either direct invasion into the
ventricular system by periventricular tumor or local involvement of the leptomeninges overlying a cortical lesion. 20 In addition, approximately 20% of PCNSL patients
have ocular involvement at diagnosis. 21
EYE
The eye, a direct extension of the brain, is a common site of disease in PCNSL. Lymphoma can originate within the eye, and 50% to 80% of these patients eventually
develop cerebral lymphoma, usually after several years of latency. 22,23 Ocular lymphoma typically involves the vitreous, retina, or choroid, but optic nerve infiltration
can also occur. 22,23 and 24 Disease outside of the globe but within the orbit is not a feature of ocular lymphoma; it represents systemic NHL. Ocular lymphoma can

present with blurred vision or floaters, or it may be clinically silent; it may begin unilaterally, but most patients eventually develop bilateral, but asymmetric, disease. A
cellular infiltrate of the vitreous can be visualized only by slit-lamp examination, and choroidal or retinal lesions often require indirect ophthalmoscopy. Lymphoma can
be identified in vitrectomy specimens 22; false-negative biopsy results may occur when patients have too few vitreal lymphocytes for the pathologist to examine or if the
patient has been given corticosteroids to treat a presumed uveitis. 24,25
LEPTOMENINGES
Primary leptomeningeal lymphoma, in the absence of a parenchymal brain mass, is rare, accounting for approximately 7% of PCNSLs. 26,27 and 28 Patients can present
with progressive leg weakness, urinary incontinence or retention, cranial neuropathies, increased intracranial pressure, confusion, or a combination of these
symptoms. Symptoms are usually present for only 2 to 3 months before diagnosis, but occasionally a patient can have symptoms for 1 to 2 years before being
diagnosed.26 Diagnosis is established by demonstrating malignant lymphocytes in the CSF or on meningeal biopsy. The CSF invariably shows an elevated protein
concentration and a lymphocytic pleocytosis often in excess of 100 cells/µL; CSF glucose is low in approximately one-third of patients. A gadolinium MRI scan of the
head or spine reveals meningeal enhancement, hydrocephalus, or multiple intradural nodules.
SPINAL CORD
Primary spinal cord lymphoma is even less common than primary leptomeningeal lymphoma. 28,29,30 and 31 Lymphoma in the spinal cord parenchyma can occur in
isolation or with brain lymphoma. Patients present with painless bilateral limb weakness, usually involving the legs; sensory symptoms and signs may initially follow a
radicular pattern, but eventually a sensory level may be found. CSF may be normal or have a mildly elevated protein concentration with a few lymphocytes. Prognosis
has been poor, with patients surviving only a few months from the onset of symptoms, but this is often because the diagnosis was not made until autopsy and no
appropriate therapy was administered.

DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
CRANIAL IMAGING
MRI scanning is the standard imaging technique for any patient with a cerebral neoplasm. The MRI of PCNSL is usually quite distinctive, and the diagnosis may be
suspected on the basis of the radiographic appearance alone. The tumor has an isointense signal on the pregadolinium T1 MRI, and after contrast is administered,
there is dense and diffuse enhancement. 32,33 The lesions often have indistinct borders, and the amount of surrounding edema is quite variable. Unlike brain
metastases or malignant gliomas, ring enhancement is rarely seen.
Prominent contrast enhancement is characteristic of PCNSL, occurring in more than 90% of patients; however, nonenhancing lesions may be seen in 10% or fewer
patients, particularly at recurrence. 34 Nonenhancing tumor can occur in the absence of corticosteroid administration, particularly in immunosuppressed patients,
although it is also seen in immunocompetent patients. At its extreme, nonenhancing PCNSL can rarely present as lymphomatosis cerebri, with diffuse infiltration of the
entire brain, usually presenting as a progressive dementia. 35 Although it is a minor component of disease in most patients, nonenhancing PCNSL has important
therapeutic implications, indicating tumor behind a relatively intact blood–brain barrier.
The radiographic features of PCNSL in the immunosuppressed patient differ from the characteristic image seen in immunocompetent individuals. 33 In the AIDS
patient, ring enhancement is typical, reflecting the higher incidence of necrosis seen pathologically in this group. Consequently, it is impossible to distinguish PCNSL
from more common cerebral infections, such as toxoplasmosis, on the basis of MRI. However, positron emission tomography or single photon emission computed
tomographic imaging can reliably differentiate PCNSL from toxoplasmosis in most patients, frequently eliminating the need for histologic confirmation. 36,37 and 38
LUMBAR PUNCTURE
Lumbar puncture should be part of the diagnostic evaluation of every patient with PCNSL. The protein concentration is elevated in 85% of patients, although rarely
above 150 mg/dL.19,20,39,40 The glucose concentration is usually normal, but can be low when florid leptomeningeal tumor is present. A CSF pleocytosis is seen in
more than one-half of patients and always consists of lymphocytes, either reactive or malignant. An unequivocally positive CSF cytology eliminates the need for a
brain biopsy. This may be particularly important in the immunosuppressed or desperately ill patient at increased risk for a surgical complication. Occasionally,
immunohistochemical stains of CSF demonstrate a monoclonal population of cells establishing the neoplastic nature of the pleocytosis even if the cells appear to be
cytologically benign. 41 Tumor markers, such as b2-microglobulin, lactic acid dehydrogenase isoenzymes, and b-glucuronidase, when their levels are elevated, provide
circumstantial evidence for tumor invasion of the leptomeninges.
Systemic lymphomas in immunocompromised patients are often associated with the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV); the virus is believed to be oncogenic in these patients. 42
Using in situ hybridization and the polymerase chain reaction, EBV has been detected in the tumor tissue of most AIDS-related PCNSLs and some non-AIDS tumors
as well43,44; EBV may play an important role in the development of this tumor in immunosuppressed patients, comparable with its presumed role in systemic polyclonal
and monoclonal lymphoid proliferations in the immunocompromised host. Regardless of its role in the genesis of the neoplasm, it may serve a useful diagnostic
function. With polymerase chain reaction, EBV DNA has been detected in the CSF of AIDS patients with PCNSL, but not in the CSF of AIDS patients without PCNSL;
this approach offers a simple, noninvasive diagnostic alternative to brain biopsy in the AIDS population, 37,38,45,46 and when combined with a positive positron emission
tomography or single photon emission computed tomographic scan result, provides 100% specificity for a diagnosis of PCNSL. 37,38

PATHOLOGY
PCNSL is a NHL, usually of an intermediate malignant subtype. 2,28 Most are diffuse large cell lymphomas or diffuse large cell immunoblastic lymphomas. Response to
treatment or prognosis is not related to pathologic subtype; however, most series contain so few patients in any given category that a relationship may be missed.
Further prospective studies with a large number of patients may reveal differences comparable with that seen for systemic lymphomas. At this time, all PCNSLs are
treated in the same manner, regardless of subtype or cell of origin.
Macroscopically, PCNSL is usually a brownish space-occupying mass involving the deep white matter. 2 In some cases, only a thickened corpus callosum may occur
without discoloration, and in occasional patients the brain is grossly normal, but diffuse infiltration is seen microscopically. Histologically, PCNSL can grow as sheets
of cells, but a characteristic vasocentric growth pattern with tumor infiltrating the brain parenchyma between involved blood vessels is found in virtually all cases.
Neither necrosis nor hemorrhage is a dominant histologic feature. In autopsy specimens, tumor is always found in multiple regions of the CNS that appeared normal
on neuroimaging studies.
Several investigators have demonstrated the B-cell nature of this tumor, with immunohistochemistry showing monoclonal immunoglobulin heavy- or light-chain
production or identifying B-cell markers. 3,28,47 Immunoglobulin gene rearrangement has also been shown and may be diagnostically useful in some patients. 48 A study
of adhesion molecules revealed an identical pattern of expression for PCNSL and systemic lymphomas. 49 Bcl rearrangements have not been detected in PCNSL, and
no unique molecular marker has been identified to discriminate PCNSL from its systemic counterparts. 49 Rare, T-cell PCNSLs seem to have a predisposition to
develop in the leptomeninges. 50,51 and 52 Reports suggest a rising incidence in the number of T-cell PCNSLs. 53 This may be a result of newer immunohistochemical
techniques, or it may be an artifact of the difficulties interpreting immunohistochemical studies. In both the CSF and the tumor itself, these neoplasms may be
accompanied by a reactive lymphocytosis. 54 These reactive cells are T cells and can make interpretation of special stains difficult. For the most part, one can clearly
distinguish the cytologically malignant cells, which are usually B cells, from the reactive lymphocytes, which are T cells. In lesions partially treated by corticosteroids,
however, the reactive T cells may be all that is apparent on a biopsy specimen, making accurate diagnosis difficult.

MANAGEMENT
The appropriate management of a patient with PCNSL requires a correct diagnosis. This may be difficult because the clinical presentation of PCNSL is not distinctive
and other primary and secondary brain tumors are much more common; however, the method outlined here can aid in the approach to a patient who harbors this

tumor.
When an MRI scan reveals an intracranial mass, the radiographic appearance may strongly suggest PCNSL; multiple lesions, deep or periventricular location, diffuse
and dense contrast enhancement, and poorly defined borders are common imaging characteristics. In addition, the clinical setting in which the tumor arises may point
to the diagnosis (e.g., an immunocompromised patient). If PCNSL is a strong diagnostic consideration, corticosteroids should be withheld unless the patient is in
imminent danger of herniation, a rare situation. Corticosteroids may alter or even eliminate the ability to establish the diagnosis pathologically. Histologic confirmation
is essential, by stereotactic biopsy, lumbar puncture demonstrating leptomeningeal lymphoma, or vitreous biopsy demonstrating lymphomatous cells. If the patient
requires the immediate use of corticosteroids, or if PCNSL was not considered originally and the patient was placed on corticosteroids, a repeat MRI scan should be
done to evaluate for possible resolution or marked shrinkage of the lesion or lesions. Biopsy should still be considered if the lesions are reduced in size but still
evident; however, nondiagnostic tissue may be obtained. Corticosteroid-induced resolution of an intracranial mass does not establish the diagnosis of PCNSL,
because nonneoplastic contrast-enhancing processes such as multiple sclerosis or sarcoidosis can resolve after corticosteroid administration.
Using the clinical staging criteria developed for systemic lymphomas, PCNSL corresponds to stage IE (i.e., disease confined to a single extranodal site). Systemic
stage IE disease has a 100% complete response rate and at least a 70% 10-year survival, or cure, rate with focal radiotherapy. 55 Surprisingly, the prognosis for
PCNSL is poor. Despite the highly responsive nature of PCNSL to initial treatment, median survival is only 12 to 18 months with cranial radiotherapy, 21,28,39,40,56 and
the 5-year survival rate is only 3% to 4%. This short survival is a result of recurrence of PCNSL after an initial response to cranial irradiation. Relapse occurs primarily
in the brain, often in regions remote from the original site but within the prior radiation port; it also occurs in the leptomeninges and eye. Systemic lymphoma is found
in only 7% to 8% of autopsied patients, and the vast majority of these patients have a single focus of clinically silent disease, thought to represent a systemic
metastasis from recurrent nervous system tumor.21,39
Because of its poor prognosis, new treatment approaches have been developed. The therapeutic strategies differ, depending on the immunologic status of the patient.
Most data regarding effective therapies have been accumulated in immunocompetent patients. The presence of significant immunosuppression may compromise the
patient's ability to tolerate more vigorous forms of treatment. Thus, we divide the descriptions of existing and potential treatment regimens for PCNSL into treatments
for the immunologically intact patient and those for patients with diminished immune systems from a preexisting condition.
IMMUNOLOGICALLY NORMAL PATIENTS
Corticosteroids
A unique feature of PCNSL compared with other brain tumors is its exquisite sensitivity to corticosteroids. In at least 40% of patients, tumor masses significantly shrink
or disappear on MRI scan after corticosteroids are administered. 28,32,57 This apparent remission is a direct result of the cytotoxic effect of corticosteroids, comparable
with their effect in systemic lymphoma. Experimentally, corticosteroid receptor-like molecules have been identified on mouse lymphoma cells, and their presence
correlates with cell lysis after exposure to corticosteroids. 58 Clinically, disappearance of PCNSL lesions is accompanied by improvement, which may last long after the
corticosteroids have been discontinued. There are isolated reports of patients being cured or having prolonged survival after treatment with corticosteroids alone. 57
Regardless of apparent tumor regression, corticosteroid-induced remission is short-lived in most patients and is not definitive treatment. Biopsy after corticosteroid
administration often yields normal or nondiagnostic tissue. Occasionally, biopsy results are misleading as the corticosteroids can lyse the malignant B cells, leaving
the reactive T cells behind, which may be interpreted as an inflammatory process.
Surgery
Surgery is an important means of confirming the histologic diagnosis, but it has no therapeutic role. Mean survival of patients with PCNSL with supportive care alone
is 1.8 to 3.3 months.1,4,39 Surgical resection adds little, prolonging the average survival to only 3.3 to 5.0 months. 39,59,60 Unlike malignant glioma, for which extensive
resection is an important component of therapy, PCNSL's multifocal and infiltrative nature makes surgical extirpation difficult. Furthermore, the deep location of many
PCNSLs leaves the patient susceptible to severe postoperative deficits if a complete resection is attempted. 32 Therefore, the diagnostic method of choice is
stereotactic biopsy, which also allows for biopsy of deep lesions that cannot be approached safely by conventional surgery. If craniotomy is undertaken because the
diagnosis of PCNSL is not considered preoperatively, an intraoperative frozen section often establishes the diagnosis of PCNSL; the procedure can then be
terminated, because further resection is unnecessary.
Radiotherapy
Whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT), combined with corticosteroids, was the conventional treatment for PCNSL, yielding median survivals of 12 to 18 months. There is
no clear radiotherapy dose-response relationship in PCNSL. 61 The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group conducted a prospective study of patients with PCNSL treated
with 4000 cGy WBRT plus a 2000-cGy boost to the involved area, to assess whether dose intensification improved outcome. 56,61 Median survival was only 12.2
months, and most recurrences were in the boosted field. This is comparable with our experience at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, where relapses occurred
with equal frequency in a boosted region receiving a total of 5440 cGy and in other areas of the brain treated with only 4000 cGy. 62 Because the added radiotherapy
does not improve local control and can contribute to late neurologic sequelae, we have eliminated the boost and use 4500-cGy WBRT in our current protocol.
The primary treatment of ocular disease is radiotherapy to the globe 23,24,63; 3500 to 4000 cGy over 4 to 5 weeks is the recommended total dose. Because ocular
lymphoma is predominately a binocular process, both eyes should be irradiated, even when only monocular disease can be detected on slit-lamp examination. Most
patients experience both symptomatic improvement and resolution of cells in the vitreous after radiotherapy; however, some have vitreal clearing without improved
vision, and others may not respond to radiotherapy. The incidence of long-term ocular toxicity from radiotherapy in this disease is unknown, but it may increase with
improved survival because many of the complications are delayed. Accelerated cataract formation is almost a certainty after these doses of radiation therapy.
Conjunctivitis, dry eyes, retinal atrophy, and vitreous hemorrhage have all been reported in PCNSL patients after ocular radiotherapy. 63 However, most patients
tolerate a fractionated dose of 3600 cGy to both eyes without significant acute or permanent delayed complications.
Craniospinal irradiation has been proposed as the initial therapy for PCNSL because of the high incidence of clinically evident meningeal tumor at recurrence and the
invariable demonstration of leptomeningeal infiltration at autopsy. Few data exist to evaluate this approach, although results in the few patients treated with neuraxis
radiotherapy suggest improved survival over WBRT alone. 64 However, irradiation of such a large portion of the bone marrow compromises the patient's ability to
tolerate subsequent systemic chemotherapy that is likely to be necessary at relapse. Administration of intrathecal chemotherapy at diagnosis is an effective alternative
to neuraxis radiotherapy in treating leptomeningeal lymphoma, and it is associated with less systemic toxicity.
Chemotherapy
No large prospective trials have compared chemotherapy plus radiotherapy with radiotherapy alone, but accumulating data from multiple phase II studies clearly
document the chemosensitivity of PCNSL to systemic chemotherapy and superior outcomes with combined modality therapy. It is improbable that a phase III trial will
ever be mounted to study this issue given the small number of patients with PCNSL and the long time needed to complete such a protocol.
Most studies have focused on the use of preradiation chemotherapy for two reasons:
1. It permits assessment of response to treatment. Almost all patients have a complete, although short-lived, response to radiotherapy; therefore, no measurable
disease is present to assess adjuvant chemotherapy. This is particularly important in PCNSL because we are still trying to identify active agents and cannot
simply adopt regimens effective against comparable systemic NHLs.
2. The administration of drugs, particularly methotrexate, before radiotherapy may reduce the synergistic toxicity of combining chemotherapy with cranial
irradiation. Although methotrexate has been best studied, the enhanced neurotoxic potential of chemotherapy after cranial radiotherapy may apply to other
agents as well. Cranial irradiation opens the blood–brain barrier, and this may persist for weeks to months after radiotherapy is completed. This enhanced
permeability of the blood–brain barrier permits greater drug concentrations to accumulate in normal brain tissue. Completing chemotherapy before cranial
irradiation is started should minimize brain exposure to potentially neurotoxic agents.
Several investigators have used chemotherapeutic regimens for PCNSL that were successful in treating systemic NHL. The combinations of preradiation
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine with prednisone (CHOP) or dexamethasone (CHOD) have been studied most extensively. Stewart and associates

were the first to note responses of brain lesions to CHOP, although patients quickly developed florid leptomeningeal tumor. 65,66 Lachance and associates noted initial
responses, but patients rapidly developed multifocal brain recurrence in sites distant from the original location of disease before chemotherapy could be completed. 67
In contrast to these data, isolated patients have been reported to experience prolonged survival with CHOP plus WBRT. 68,69 However, two prospective, multicentered
trials clearly established the poor efficacy and high toxicity of CHOP/CHOD for PCNSL. 70,71 The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group conducted a study in which
patients received three cycles of CHOD followed by cranial irradiation. 70 The median survival was only 16.1 months for the 52 patients treated. A separate
multiinstitutional trial of preradiation CHOP included 46 evaluable patients with an estimated median survival of approximately 9.5 months. 71 Only 54% of patients
completed two cycles of CHOP before beginning radiotherapy; in the others disease progression or toxicity occurred, with a 15% mortality. Furthermore, it appears
that, when effective, CHOP is associated with a high incidence of delayed neurologic toxicity. 69 In addition to CHOP, Brada and associates studied methotrexate, 400
mg/m2, with doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone, and bleomycin (MACOP-B) preceding cranial radiotherapy, but median survival was only 14
months.72 When added to radiotherapy, neither CHOP nor MACOP-B improved survival over that seen with radiotherapy alone.
Although the agents in these regimens should have excellent activity against PCNSL cells, they are unable to penetrate an intact blood–brain barrier. Adequate drug
concentrations are likely to be achieved in areas of bulky disease seen on MRI scan where the blood–brain barrier is disrupted by tumor, which accounts for the initial
resolution of tumor masses; however, the drugs are unable to reach microscopic disease, which persists behind a relatively preserved blood–brain barrier. Drug
delivery issues may only partially explain the difficulty of treating PCNSL, but these data strongly argue for the use of drugs that can permeate the blood–brain barrier
(Table 45.5-1).

TABLE 45.5-1. Management of Primary Central Nervous System Lymphoma

High-dose methotrexate has emerged as the most important drug for the treatment of PCNSL. Two large retrospective studies have convincingly demonstrated that
methotrexate is the single most active agent for PCNSL. 73,74 and 75 A number of years ago, we treated PCNSL patients at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center with
systemic, 1 g/m2, and intra-Ommaya methotrexate followed by radiotherapy and high-dose cytarabine. 62 An analysis of this original cohort confirms a cause-specific
median survival of 42 months, with a 22% 5-year survival, a significant improvement over radiotherapy alone 76 (Fig. 45.5-1 and Table 45.5-2). Age older than 50 years
was a poor prognostic factor for response and survival. Others have confirmed that age and performance status are important prognostic factors, regardless of
treatment type.56,70,71,73,74 Additional regimens using nitrosoureas, procarbazine, cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin have all been used in a few patients, with
reported success.68,77,78 and 79

FIGURE 45.5-1. Kaplan-Meier curve demonstrating cause-specific survival for 31 patients treated with chemotherapy plus cranial irradiation. Median survival was 42
months, and the 5-year survival rate was 30%.

TABLE 45.5-2. Chemotherapy Regimens for Primary Central Nervous System Lymphoma

The history of treatment for systemic NHL documents the superiority of combination chemotherapy over single agents. Consequently, new regimens for PCNSL are
combining multiple agents that can penetrate the blood–brain barrier ( Table 45.5-3). An intergroup trial with the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group and the
Southwest Oncology Group, using a 10-week preradiation regimen of high-dose methotrexate, 2.5 g/m 2, procarbazine, and vincristine has just been completed.
Preliminary results show a median survival of 30 months 80 (Fig. 45.5-2). This is the first multicentered trial to demonstrate an improved outcome over radiation therapy
alone.

TABLE 45.5-3. Active Chemotherapy Regimens

FIGURE 45.5-2. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging scans demonstrating a complete response of primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma to
high-dose methotrexate, procarbazine, and vincristine. The prominent and diffuse enhancement pattern and periventricular location are characteristic of primary CNS
lymphoma.

In an effort to circumvent the blood–brain barrier and deliver multiagent treatment, Dahlborg and coworkers used blood–brain barrier disruption followed by
intraarterial methotrexate, combined with systemic cyclophosphamide, procarbazine, and dexamethasone without cranial irradiation. 81 Their 39 patients treated at the
time of diagnosis had a median survival of 40 months; however, 31% required WBRT. Neither the rate of relapse nor failure of the regimen was reported.
Although most studies have focused on preradiation chemotherapy, the question of adjuvant chemotherapy in patients who have completed WBRT and not received
prior chemotherapy often arises. It is unknown if adjuvant chemotherapy is equivalent to a preradiation drug, but preliminary data suggest it is superior to radiotherapy
alone. Chamberlain and Levin followed WBRT with procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine, achieving a 41-month median survival in 16 patients. 82 Therefore, four to
six cycles of procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine after WBRT is completed seem to be reasonable in patients who have received no prior chemotherapy. We have
avoided methotrexate in this setting because of potential CNS toxicity.
The prolonged survival seen with combined modality regimens has led to greater appreciation of treatment-induced late neurologic toxicity. Merchut and associates
first reported radiation necrosis in a patient with PCNSL treated with radiotherapy alone. 83 Liang and associates noted a high incidence of late toxicity in survivors
treated with CHOP and intrathecal methotrexate plus WBRT. 69 Long-term follow-up of our original cohort of patients reveals that almost 100% of patients older than
the age of 60 years at diagnosis experience significant late sequelae within 4 years of treatment, whereas only 30% of younger patients have similar problems after a
7.5-year latency.76 Mass and associates report no toxicity with intraarterial therapy; however, their own experimental work clearly demonstrates damage of normal
brain structures when chemotherapy follows blood–brain barrier disruption. 84 These issues led to an exploration of systemic chemotherapy alone as effective
treatment for PCNSL. Glass and associates reported long-term survival in a few patients treated with high-dose methotrexate alone. 85 We, and others, have treated
elderly patients with a multiagent chemotherapeutic regimen. 86,87 and 88 The response rate was greater than 90%, with most patients having a complete response.
Median survival for patients older than age 60 years was 33 months, superior to a median of 7.1 months for radiation therapy alone in a comparable age group. 56
Furthermore, no patient developed neurotoxicity. Similar results were observed in 14 patients treated by Sandor et al. with a high-dose methotrexate-based regimen
without radiation therapy. 89 These preliminary data suggest that good disease control can be achieved by chemotherapy alone.
There are few examples of ocular lymphoma being treated with chemotherapy. Barr and associates used cyclophosphamide and then vincristine in one patient with
metastatic ocular lymphoma without effect. 90 Sullivan and Dallow reported both systemic and ocular remission in a patient with a systemic histiocytic lymphoma and a
ciliary body metastasis, after treatment with procarbazine, CCNU, and vincristine. 91 Baumann and coworkers reported a patient with lymphomatous uveitis who
relapsed after ocular irradiation. 92 Treatment with intravenous cytarabine, 500 mg, and methotrexate, 200 mg, had no effect; however, high-dose cytarabine, 3 g/m 2,
produced a complete response that was long lasting. Furthermore, therapeutic cytarabine levels were documented in both aqueous and vitreous humor 90 minutes
after infusion was completed. Strauchen and associates treated six patients with primary ocular lymphoma with high-dose cytarabine, obtaining a response in five. 93
We have observed responses of ocular lymphoma to high-dose methotrexate before ocular radiotherapy. In addition, Valluri and coworkers used our original PCNSL
regimen to treat three patients with ocular lymphoma, two of whom had concurrent CNS disease; these patients remained in CNS and ocular remission 30 to 40
months after diagnosis. 94 The role of chemotherapy in treating ocular involvement in PCNSL remains to be clarified; however, these reports suggest that some agents
or combination regimens may prove useful in the future. Intravitreal injection of methotrexate was described as effective treatment for recurrent ocular lymphoma. 95
Although this approach eliminates systemic toxicity from intravenous chemotherapy, it requires frequent intraocular injections.
IMMUNOCOMPROMISED PATIENTS
The treatment modalities for PCNSL in immunocompetent patients are also used to treat AIDS-related PCNSL, although they are generally less effective and more
toxic in immunodeficient patients. The initiation of treatment first requires a histologic diagnosis of PCNSL. In the non-AIDS immunocompromised patient a
stereotactic biopsy should be performed when an intracranial mass lesion is first diagnosed. In AIDS patients, a noninvasive diagnosis can often be achieved with the
use of positron emission tomography or single photon emission computed tomographic imaging and the detection of EBV DNA in CSF. In the absence of a definitive
circumstantial diagnosis, biopsy should be performed. Toxoplasmosis continues to be the most common cause of an intracranial mass in an AIDS patient, but PCNSL
is the second most common. However, empiric treatment with 2 to 3 weeks of antitoxoplasmosis therapy is an unacceptable diagnostic trial because most PCNSL
patients markedly deteriorate during this time, severely limiting subsequent treatment options.
Corticosteroids and cranial irradiation are the mainstays of treatment for PCNSL in immunosuppressed patients. Use of corticosteroids should be limited because they
can contribute to the underlying immunosuppression; however, they are still valuable for short-term control of neurologic symptoms and may be necessary during the
course of WBRT. AIDS patients with PCNSL do respond to cranial irradiation, but median survival is only 2 to 5 months because most die of systemic or coexistent
CNS infections.96,97,98 and 99
Chemotherapy for PCNSL has been used infrequently in immunodeficient patients. Intrathecal methotrexate for leptomeningeal lymphoma was reported to be effective
in a single patient with immunoglobulin A deficiency, although the benefit was of short duration. 100 Potent intravenous chemotherapy programs are often inappropriate
for immunosuppressed patients, particularly those with AIDS. However, there is a subset of AIDS patients who benefit from a vigorous approach. 101,102 Typically, these
are patients with a good performance status, no active comorbid conditions, and a relatively high CD4 cell count (200/µL or more). Such patients do have prolonged
survival when chemotherapy is added to WBRT, often surviving more than 1 year and occasionally for many years. Again, high-dose methotrexate is the agent of
choice.103 There are isolated reports of patients with AIDS-related PCNSL who have been successfully treated with antiviral and biologic agents or reconstitution of
their immune system using highly active antiretroviral therapy. 104,105 These reports open new therapeutic avenues for what has been a virulent and deadly

complication of human immunodeficiency virus-1 infection. Furthermore, monitoring the level of CSF EBV DNA may prove helpful in assessing treatment response, in
addition to conventional imaging techniques. 106
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Burstein SD, Kernohan JW, Uihlein A. Neoplasms of the reticuloendothelial system of the brain. Cancer 1963;16:289.
2. Rubinstein LJ. Tumors of the central nervous system. In: Atlas of tumor pathology. Second series, Fascicle 6. Washington, DC: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 1972:215.
3. Taylor CR, Russell R, Lukes RJ, Davis RL. An immunohistological study of immunoglobulin content of primary central nervous system lymphomas. Cancer 1978;41:2197.
4. Jellinger K, Radaskiewicz TH, Slowik F. Primary malignant lymphomas of the central nervous system in man. Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 1975;(Suppl VI):95.
5. Zimmerman HM. Malignant lymphomas of the nervous system. Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 1975;(Suppl VI):69.
6. Rosenblum ML, Levy RM, Bredesen DE, et al. Primary central nervous system lymphoma in patients with AIDS. Ann Neurol 1988;(Suppl)23:S13.
7. Welch K, Finkbeiner W, Alpers CE, et al. Autopsy findings in the acquired immune deficiency syndrome. JAMA 1984;1152:252.
8. Goplen AK, Dunlop O, Liestol K, et al. The impact of primary central nervous system lymphoma in AIDS patients: a population-based autopsy study from Oslo. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr
Hum Retroviral 1997;14:351.
9. Eby NL, Grufferman S, Flannelly CM, et al. Increasing incidence of primary brain lymphoma in the US. Cancer 1988;62:2461.
10. Lutz JM, Coleman MP. Trends in primary cerebral lymphoma. Br J Cancer 1994;716:70.
11. Devesa SS, Fears T. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma time trends: United States and international data. Cancer Res 1992;(Suppl)52:5432S.
12. Hao D, DiFrancesco LM, Brasher PMA, et al. Is primary CNS lymphoma really becoming more common? A population-based study of incidence, clinicopathological features and outcomes in
Alberta from 1975 to 1996. Ann Oncol 1999;10:65.
13. DeAngelis LM, Yahalom J, Rosenblum M, Posner JB. Primary CNS lymphoma: managing patients with spontaneous and AIDS-related disease. Oncology 1987;52:1.
14. So YT, Choucair A, Davis RL, et al. Neoplasms of the central nervous system in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. In: Rosenblum ML, Levy RM, Bredesen DE, eds. AIDS and the nervous
system. New York: Raven Press, 1988:285.
15. Recht L, Straus DJ, Cirrincione C, et al. Central nervous system metastases from non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: treatment and prophylaxis. Am J Med 1988;84:425.
16. O'Neill BP, Dinapoli RP, Kurtin PJ, Habermann TM. Occult systemic non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) in patients initially diagnosed as primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL): how
much staging is enough? J Neurooncol 1995;67:25.
17. Herrlinger U. Primary CNS lymphoma: findings outside the brain. J Neurooncol 1999;43:227.
18. DeAngelis LM. Primary central nervous system lymphoma as a secondary malignancy. Cancer 1991;67:1431.
19. Balmaceda C, Gaynor JJ, Sun M, Gluck JT, DeAngelis LM. Leptomeningeal tumor in primary central nervous system lymphoma: recognition, significance, and implications. Ann Neurol
1995;38:202.
20. Schaumburg HH, Plank CR, Adams RD. The reticulum cell sarcoma-microglioma group of brain tumours: a consideration of their clinical features and therapy. Brain 1972;95:199.
21. DeAngelis LM. Current management of primary central nervous system lymphoma. Oncology 1995;63:9.
22. Char DH, Ljung B-M, Miller T, Phillips T. Primary intraocular lymphoma (ocular reticulum cell sarcoma) diagnosis and management. Ophthalmology 1988;95:625.
23. Rockwood EJ, Zakov ZN, Bay JW. Combined malignant lymphoma of the eye and CNS (reticulum-cell sarcoma). J Neurosurg 1984;61:369.
24. Whitcup SM, de Smet MD, Rubin BI, et al. Intraocular lymphoma clinical and histopathologic diagnosis. Ophthalmology 1993;100:1399.
25. Peterson K, Gordon KB, Heinemann MH, DeAngelis LM. The clinical spectrum of ocular lymphoma. Cancer 1993;72:843.
26. Lachance DH, O'Neill BP, Macdonald DR, et al. Primary leptomeningeal lymphoma: report of 9 cases, diagnosis with immunocytochemical analysis, and review of the literature. Neurology
1991;41:95.
27. Scott TF, Hogan EL, Carter TD, et al. Primary intracranial meningeal lymphoma. Am J Med 1990;89:536.
28. Hochberg FH, Miller DC. Primary central nervous system lymphoma. J Neurosurg 1988;68:835.
29. Bruni J, Bilbao JM, Gray T. Primary intramedullary malignant lymphoma of the spinal cord. Neurology 1977;27:896.
30. Hautzer NW, Aiyesimoju A, Robitaille Y. “Primary'' spinal intramedullary lymphomas: a review. Ann Neurol 1983;62:14.
31. Mitsumoto H, Breuer AC, Lederman RJ. Malignant lymphoma of the central nervous system: a case of primary spinal intramedullary involvement. Cancer 1980;46:1258.
32. DeAngelis LM, Yahalom J, Heinemann M-H, et al. Primary CNS lymphoma: combined treatment with chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Neurology 1990;40:80.
33. Herrlinger U, Schabet M, Bitzer M, et al. Primary central nervous system lymphoma: from clinical presentation to diagnosis. J Neurooncol 1999;43:219.
34. DeAngelis LM. Cerebral lymphoma presenting as a non-enhancing lesion(s) on CT/MR scan. Ann Neurol 1993;33:308.
35. DeAngelis LM. Primary central nervous system lymphoma: curable without toxicity? Cancer J Sci Am 1996;2:137.
36. Hoffman JM, Waskin HA, Schifter T, et al. FDG-PET in differentiating lymphoma from nonmalignant central nervous system lesions in patients with AIDS. J Nucl Med 1993;34:567.
37. Castagna A, Cinque P, d'Amico A, et al. Evaluation of contrast-enhancing brain lesions in AIDS patients by means of Epstein-Barr virus detection in cerebrospinal fluid and 201thallium single
photon emission tomography. AIDS 1997;11:1522.
38. Antinori A, De Rossi G, Ammassari A, et al. Value of combined approach with thallium-201 single-photon emission computed tomography and Epstein-Barr virus DNA polymerase chain
reaction in CSF for the diagnosis of AIDS-related primary CNS lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:554.
39. Henry JM, Heffner RR, Dillard SH, et al. Primary malignant lymphomas of the central nervous system. Cancer 1974;34:1293.
40. Littman P, Wang CC. Reticulum cell sarcoma of the brain. Cancer 1987;35:1412.
41. Li C-Y, Witzig TE, Phyliky RL, et al. Diagnosis of B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the central nervous system by immunocytochemical analysis of cerebrospinal fluid lymphocytes. Cancer
1986;57:737.
42. List AF, Greco FA, Vogler LB. Lymphoproliferative diseases in immunocompromised hosts: the role of Epstein-Barr Virus. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1673.
43. Rouah E, Rogers BB, Wilson DR, et al. Demonstration of Epstein-Barr virus in primary central nervous system lymphomas by the polymerase chain reaction and in situ hybridization. Hum
Pathol 1990;21:545.
44. DeAngelis LM, Wong E, Rosenblum M, Furneaux H. Epstein-Barr virus in AIDS and non-AIDS primary central nervous system lymphoma. Cancer 1992;70:1607.
45. MacMahon EME, Glass JD, Hayward SD, et al. Epstein-Barr virus in AIDS-related primary central nervous system lymphoma. Lancet 1991;969:338.
46. Clinque P, Brytting M, Vago L, et al. Epstein-Barr virus DNA in cerebrospinal fluid from patients with AIDS-related primary lymphoma of the central nervous system. Lancet 1993;398:342.
47. Nakhleh RE, Manivel JC, Hurd E, Sung JH. Central nervous system lymphomas: immunohistochemical and clinicopathologic study of 26 autopsy cases. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1989;1050:113.
48. Kumanishi T, Washiyama K, Nishiyama A, et al. Primary malignant lymphoma of the brain: demonstration of immunoglobulin gene rearrangements in four cases by the Southern blot
hybridization technique. Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 1989;23:79.
49. Jellinger KA, Paulus W. Primary central nervous system lymphomas: new pathological developments. J Neurooncol 1995;33:24.
50. Marsh WL, Stevenson DR, Long HJ. Primary leptomeningeal presentation of T-cell lymphoma: report of a patient and review of the literature. Cancer 1983;51:1125.
51. Schmitt-Graff A, Pfitzer P. Cytology of the cerebrospinal fluid in primary malignant lymphomas of the central nervous system. Acta Cytol 1983;27:267.
52. Grant JW, Gallagher PJ, Jones PD. Primary cerebral lymphoma: a histologic and immunohistochemical study of six cases. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1986;110:897.
53. Morgello S, Maiese K, Petito CK. T-cell lymphoma in the CNS: clinical and pathologic features. Neurology 1989;39:1190.
54. Bashir R, Chamberlain M, Ruby E, Hochberg FH. T-cell infiltration of primary CNS lymphoma. Neurology 1996;46:440.
55. Vokes EE, Ultmann JE, Golomb HM, et al. Long-term survival of patients with localized diffuse histiocytic lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1309.
56. Nelson DF, Martz KL, Bonner H, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the brain: can high dose, large volume radiation therapy improve survival? Report on a prospective trial by the Radiation
Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG): RTOG 8315. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;9:23.
57. Weller M. Glucocorticoid treatment of primary CNS lymphoma. J Neurooncol 1999;43:237.
58. Gametchu B. Glucocorticoid receptor-like antigen in lymphoma cell membranes: correlation to cell lysis. Science 1987;236:456.
59. Kawakami Y, Tabuchi K, Ohnishi R, et al. Primary central nervous system lymphoma. J Neurosurg 1985;62:522.
60. Mendenhall NP, Thar TL, Agee OF, et al. Primary lymphoma of the central nervous system: computerized tomography scan characteristics and treatment results for 12 cases. Cancer
1983;52:1993.
61. Nelson DF. Radiotherapy in the treatment of primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL). J Neurooncol 1999;241:43.
62. DeAngelis LM, Yahalom J, Thaler HT, Kher U. Combined modality treatment for primary CNS lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:635.
63. Margolis L, Fraser R, Lichter A, Char DH. The role of radiation therapy in the management of ocular reticulum cell sarcoma. Cancer 1980;45:688.
64. Rampen RHJ, van Andel JG, Sizoo W, van Unnik JAM. Radiation therapy in primary non-Hodgkin's lymphomas of the CNS. Eur J Cancer 1980;16:177.
65. Stewart DJ, Russell N, Atack EA, et al. Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and dexamethasone in primary lymphoma of the brain: a case report. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:287.
66. Stewart DJ, Russell N, Dennery M, et al. Cyclophosphamide, adriamycin, vincristine and dexamethasone in the treatment of bulky central nervous system lymphomas. J Neurooncol
1984;2:289(abst).
67. Lachance DH, Brizel DM, Gockerman JP, et al. Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone for primary central nervous system lymphoma: short-duration response and
multi-focal intracerebral recurrence preceding radiotherapy. Neurology 1994;44:1721.
68. Pollack IF, Lunsford LD, Flickinger JC, Dameshek HL. Prognostic factors in the diagnosis and treatment of primary central nervous system lymphoma. Cancer 1989;63:939.
69. Liang BC, Grant R, Junck L, et al. Primary central nervous system lymphoma: treatment with multiagent systemic and intrathecal chemotherapy with radiation therapy. Int J Oncol 1993;3:1001.
70. Schultz C, Scott C, Sherman W, et al. Preirradiation chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and dexamethasone (CHOD) for primary CNS lymphomas: Initial report of
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group protocol 88-06. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:556.
71. O'Neill BP, O'Fallon JR, Earle JD, et al. Primary central nervous system non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: survival advantages with combined initial therapy? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;33:663.
72. Brada M, Dearnaley D, Horwich A, Bloom HJG. Management of primary cerebral lymphoma with initial chemotherapy: preliminary results and comparison with patients treated with radiotherapy
alone. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;18:787.
73. Reni M, Ferreri AJM, Garancini MP, Villa E. Therapeutic management of primary central nervous system lymphoma in imunocompetent patients: results of a critical review of the literature. Ann
Oncol 1997;8:227.
74. Blay J-Y, Conroy T, Chevreau C, et al. High-dose methotrexate for the treatment of primary cerebral lymphomas: analysis of survival and late neurologic toxicity in a retrospective series. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:864.
75. DeAngelis LM. Primary CNS lymphoma: treatment with combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy. J Neurooncol 1999;43:249.
76. Abrey LE, DeAngelis LM, Yahalom J. Long-term survival in primary central nervous system lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:859.
77. Cohen IJ, Vogel R, Matz S, et al. Successful non-neurotoxic therapy (without radiation) of a multifocal primary brain lymphoma with a methotrexate, vincristine, and BCNU protocol (DEMOB).
Cancer 1986;6:57.
78. Socie G, Piprot-Chauffat C, Schlienger M, et al. Primary lymphoma of the central nervous system: an unresolved therapeutic problem. Cancer 1990;65:322.
79. Shibamoto Y, Tsutsui K, Dodo Y, et al. Improved survival rate in primary intracranial lymphoma treated by high-dose radiation and systemic
vincristine-doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide-prednisolone chemotherapy. Cancer 1990;65:1907.
80. DeAngelis LM, Seiferheld W, Schold SC, et al. Combined modality treatment of primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL): RTOG 93-10. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:140a.
81. Dahlborg SA, Henner WD, Crossen JR, et al. Non-AIDS primary CNS lymphoma: the first example of a durable response in a primary brain tumor using enhanced chemotherapy delivery
without cognitive loss and without radiotherapy. Cancer J Sci Am 1996;2:166.
82. Chamberlain MC, Levin VA. Primary central nervous system lymphoma: a role for adjuvant chemotherapy. J Neurooncol 1992;14:271.

83. Merchut MP, Haberland C, Naheedy MH, Rubino FA. Long survival of primary cerebral lymphoma with progressive radiation necrosis. Neurology 1985;35:552.
84. Mass MK, Remsen L, McCormick C, et al. Neurotoxicity of chemotherapeutic agents and immunoconjugates delivered after blood-brain barrier modification: neuropathological studies. Ann
Neurol 1995;38:342(abst).
85. Glass J, Gruber ML, Cher L, Hochberg FH. Preirradiation methotrexate chemotherapy of primary central nervous system lymphoma: long-term outcome. J Neurosurg 1994;81:188.
86. Freilich RJ, Delattre JY, Monjour A, DeAngelis LM. Chemotherapy without radiation therapy as initial treatment for primary central nervous system lymphoma in older patients. Neurology
1996;46:435.
87. Guha-Thakurta N, Damek D, Pollack C, Hochberg FH. Intravenous methotrexate as initial treatment for primary central nervous system lymphoma: response to therapy and quality of life of
patients. J Neurooncol 1999;43:259.
88. Abrey LE, Yahalom J, DeAngelis LM. Combination chemotherapy in primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:146a.
89. Sandor V, Stark-Vancs V, Pearson D, et al. Phase II trial of chemotherapy alone for primary CNS and intraocular lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3000.
90. Barr CC, Green WR, Payne JW, et al. Intraocular reticulum-cell sarcoma: clinico-pathologic study of four cases and review of the literature. Surv Ophthalmol 1975;19:224.
91. Sullivan SF, Dallow RL. Intraocular reticulum cell sarcoma: its dramatic response to systemic chemotherapy and its angiogenic potential. Ann Ophthalmol 1977;9:401.
92. Baumann MA, Ritch PS, Hande KR, et al. Treatment of intraocular lymphoma with high-dose Ara-C. Cancer 1986;57:1273.
93. Strauchen JA, Dalton J, Friedman AH. Chemotherapy in the management of intraocular lymphoma. Cancer 1989;63:1918.
94. Valluri S, Moorthy RS, Khan A, Rao NA. Combination treatment of intraocular lymphoma. Retina 1995;15:125.
95. Fishburne BC, Wilson DJ, Rosenbaum JT, Neuwelt EA. Intravitreal methotrexate as an adjunctive treatment of intraocular lymphoma. Arch Ophthalmol 1997;115:1152.
96. Gill PS, Levine AM, Meyer PR, et al. Primary central nervous system lymphoma in homosexual men: clinical, immunologic, and pathologic features. Am J Med 1985;78:741.
97. So YT, Beckstead LH, Davis RL. Primary central nervous system lymphoma in acquired immune deficiency syndrome: a clinical and pathological study. Ann Neurol 1986; 20:566.
98. Baumgartner JE, Rachlin JR, Beckstead JH, et al. Primary central nervous system lymphomas: natural history and response to radiation therapy in 55 patients with acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome. J Neurosurg 1990;73:206.
99. Ling SM, Roach III M, Larson DA, Wara WM. Radiotherapy of primary central nervous system lymphoma in patients with and without human immunodeficiency virus. Cancer 1994;73:2570.
100. Gregory MC, Hughes JT. Intracranial reticulum cell sarcoma associated with immunoglobulin A deficiency. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1973;36:769.
101. Forsyth PA, Yahalom J, DeAngelis LM. Combined-modality therapy in the treatment of primary central nervous system lymphoma in AIDS. Neurology 1994;44:1473.
102. Chamberlain MC. Long survival in patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome-related primary central nervous system lymphoma. Cancer 1994;73:1728.
103. Jacomet C, Girard PM, Lebrette MG, et al. Intravenous methotrexate for primary central nervous system non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in AIDS. AIDS 1998;12:1725.
104. Raez L, Cabral L, Cai J-P, et al. Treatment of AIDS-related primary central nervous system lymphoma with zidovudine, ganciclovir, and interleukin 2. AIDS Res Hum Retrovirus 1999;15:713.
105. McGowan JP, Shah S. Long-term remission of AIDS-related primary central nervous system lymphoma associated with highly active antiretroviral therapy. AIDS 1998;12:952.
106. Antinori A, Cingolani A, De Luca A, et al. Epstein-Barr virus in monitoring the response to therapy of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome related primary central nervous system lymphoma.
Ann Neurol 1999;5:259.

SECTION 45.6 Hodgkin's Disease
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 45.6
Hodgkin's Disease
VOLKER DIEHL
PETER M. MAUCH
NANCY LEE HARRIS
History
Etiology and Epidemiology
Biology and Cell of Origin
Lineage, Origin, and Clonality of Hodgkin's-Reed-Sternberg Cells
Genetic Alterations in Hodgkin's Disease
Immunology of Hodgkin's Disease
Pathology
Definition of Hodgkin's Disease
Classifications of Hodgkin's Disease
Differential Diagnosis of Classic Hodgkin's Disease
Diagnosis and Staging
Natural History and Patterns of Spread
Staging Classifications
Radiographic Staging above the Diaphragm
Radiographic Staging below the Diaphragm
Staging Laparotomy
Clinical Presentation
Treatment Methods
Radiotherapy
Techniques
Chemotherapy
Choice of Treatment
Prognostic Factors and Treatment Groups
Early-Stage Favorable Disease
Early-Stage Unfavorable Disease
Advanced-Stage Disease
Progressive and Relapsed Disease
Special Cases: Lymphocyte-Predominant Hodgkin's Disease
Clinical Features
Treatment Results
Transformation to Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma
Consequences for Future Treatment
Hodgkin's Disease in the Elderly Patient
Hodgkin's Disease During Pregnancy
Hodgkin's Disease in Human Immunodeficiency Virus–Positive Patients
Epidemiology and Clinical Presentation
Treatment
Sequelae
Pulmonary Complications
Cardiac Complications
Secondary Neoplasia
Gonadal Dysfunction
Other Complications
Quality of Life
New Drugs in Hodgkin's Disease
Vinorelbine
Idarubicin
Gemcitabine
Immunotherapy
Passive Immunotherapy
Active Immunotherapy
Gene Therapy
Chapter References

HISTORY
A great deal has been written about the life and accomplishments of Thomas Hodgkin. 1 In his historic paper entitled “On Some Morbid Appearances of the Exorbant
Glands and Spleen,” presented to the Medical Chirurgical Society in London on January 10, 1832, Hodgkin described the clinical history and postmortem findings of
the massive enlargement of lymph nodes and spleens of six patients studied at Guy's Hospital in London and of a seventh patient who had been seen by Carswell in
1828.2 Without a microscope, Hodgkin recognized that these patients had a disease that started in the lymph nodes located along the major vessels in the neck,
chest, or abdomen, rather than from an inflammatory condition.
In 1856, Sir Samuel Wilks, a Guy's Hospital pathologist, described ten postmortem cases that had “a peculiar enlargement of the lymphatic glands frequently
associated with disease of the spleen.” By 1865, Dr. Wilks had collected 15 cases, which were published in a second paper entitled “Cases of the Enlargement of the
Lymphatic Glands and Spleen (or Hodgkin's Disease) with Remarks.” 3 This linked Hodgkin's name permanently to this newly identified disease. Wilks's initial
descriptions gave us some of our earliest understanding of Hodgkin's disease (HD). He described the disease as a cancer that started and remained in the lymph
nodes for a long time, perhaps years, before involving the spleen and then spreading to other organs. He also noted anemia, weight loss, and fevers in some of the
patients with HD.
Although other physicians had provided descriptions of the characteristic giant cells present in the lymph nodes and spleens of patients with HD, Dr. W. S. Greenfield
in 1878 was the first to contribute drawings of them from a low microscopical magnification of a lymph node specimen. 4 Despite Greenfield's findings, Dr. Carl
Sternberg (in 1898) and Dr. Dorothy Reed (in 1902) are credited with the first definitive microscopical descriptions of HD. 5,6
Both Sternberg and Reed, along with many other physicians, believed that HD was caused by an associated infection rather than by a separate malignant process of
the lymph nodes. Proponents of the infectious theory cited the frequent association of HD with tuberculosis. Eight of Sternberg's thirteen cases of HD had coexistent
tuberculosis, and he believed HD to be a variant of tuberculosis. Other physicians believed that HD was a cancer of the lymph nodes. Clinical and pathologic studies,
available in the early twentieth century, helped to confirm their view. 7 Despite the very strong evidence for the malignant nature of HD over the last century, it has only
recently been shown that Hodgkin's-Reed-Sternberg (H-RS) cells are clonal, confirming their origin from a single malignant cell. 8

ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Approximately 7500 new cases of HD are diagnosed each year in the United States. Slightly more men than women develop this malignancy (1.4:1). In economically
developed countries, there is an age-related bimodal incidence for HD. The first peak occurs in the third decade of life, and a second rise in incidence occurs after the
age of 50 years. The incidence of HD by age also differs by histologic subtype. 9
Mycobacterium tuberculosis was first suspected of being the etiologic organism for HD because of the high coexistence of tuberculosis in these patients. 5 This theory

was later discounted when it was appreciated that HD was associated with deficits in the immune system that accounted for the increased presence of associated
infections. 10 Several studies in the 1970s suggested that HD might be contagious because of reports of clustering of the disease. The first reports, by Vianna and
Poln, 11 noted clustering among high school students exposed to HD. However, population-based studies, using cancer registries in Connecticut and California,
convincingly made the argument that the reported clusters occurred by chance alone, and a study that repeated the methodology of Vianna and Poln 11 in a different
location failed to confirm their findings. 12
A number of studies have suggested that a genetic predisposition for HD exists. There is an increased incidence in Jews and also among first-degree relatives. 13
Siblings appear to have a two- to fivefold increased risk; in siblings of the same gender, there is as much as a ninefold increased risk. 14 An increased risk among
parent-child pairs but not among spouses again suggests a genetic predisposition. Also, HD has been linked with certain HLAs. 15,16
There is less support for most other potential causes of HD. In contrast to other malignancies, HD rarely is seen as a second malignancy and does not appear to be
increased in patients with illness- or treatment-related chronic immunosuppression. Although HD has been noted in patients with the acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS), evidence for a direct correlation with the immunosuppression associated with AIDS is lacking. 17
In contrast, increasing evidence suggests a viral etiology for HD. In economically developed countries, studies report an association between HD in younger patients
and increased maternal education, decreased numbers of siblings and playmates, early birth order, and single-family dwellings in childhood. 18,19 This association
between HD and childhood factors that decrease exposure to infectious agents at an early age has led investigators to propose that the epidemiologic features of HD
appear to mimic those of a viral illness that has an age-related host response to infection.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is the leading viral candidate for HD causation. 20 There is a twofold to threefold excess in the incidence of HD among patients with a history
of mononucleosis, a disease caused by EBV. In addition, there appears to be an altered antibody pattern to EBV in patients before presenting clinically with HD, with
elevated titers against the viral capsid antigen and against the EBV nuclear antigen (EBNA) as compared to controls. 21 This suggests that such patients may have
had more severe initial EBV infections or more frequent viral replication associated with the development of HD.
Patients in nonindustrialized countries and from lower socioeconomic groups, as well as children, who develop HD are more likely to have EBV-positive HD than are
patients with high socioeconomic backgrounds in the young adult age group. 20,22 In these groups, even nodular sclerosis HD (NSHD) has a higher incidence of EBV
positivity than it does in the young adult cases.
Some cellular and molecular biology data have provided additional support for the association of EBV and HD. 23 Through the use of sensitive molecular probes,
including Southern blot, in situ hybridization, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays, 30% to 50% of HD specimens have been found to contain EBV genome
fragments in the diagnostic RS cells. 24 In the United States and Western Europe, the tumor cells of classic HD (CHD) are EBV-positive in approximately 50% of the
cases. The positivity rate is lower in NSHD (15% to 30%) and higher in mixed-cellularity HD (MCHD) (60% to 70%) ( Table 45.6-1).25

TABLE 45.6-1. Hodgkin's Disease: Differences in EBV Association (Approximate)

EBV genome status appears to be stable over time when studied in initial biopsies and at relapse. The latent gene products, latent membrane protein (LMP) and
EBNA2, have important roles in EBV-induced cell transformation in vitro. EBV genome–positive RS cells express the phenotype LMP1 and LMP2+/EBNA1+ EBNA2–,
a phenotype found in EBV genome–positive nasopharyngeal carcinoma and in a small portion of T-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHLs). LMP1 has transforming
activity for B cells, and its expression should give a survival advantage to infected cells. Because EBV is capable of immortalizing B cells, and because all the cells in
infected cases carry the same clone of EBV and express the most potent transforming protein (LMP1), the obvious conclusion is that EBV must play some role in the
pathogenesis of HD. However, the fact that EBV is not present in all the cases leaves open the question of the pathogenesis of EBV-negative cases and, more
important, the question of whether EBV is important even in positive cases.
Patients with autoimmune disease who are treated with rather mild immunosuppression with methotrexate occasionally develop a Hodgkin's-like lesion, which is
EBV-positive in nearly 50% of the cases. 26 Taken together, these observations suggest that immunosuppression per se does not predispose to the development of
HD but that, when it does develop, it is likely to be of mixed-cellularity (MC) or lymphocyte-depleted (LD) type and EBV-positive. 27
H-RS cells show a specific expression pattern of the viral latent genes with expression of EBNA1 and LMP. 28 This pattern is identical to that found in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma endemic in the southwest of China. It differs from such other EBV-associated neoplasias as endemic Burkitt's lymphoma and immunoblastic B-cell NHLs of
immunocompromised patients. Except for EBNA1, all latent viral proteins represent targets for cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). Thus, EBV-infected cells either
express the complete set of latent viral genes in an immunocompromised host (immunoblastic NHL) or they down-regulate these proteins except EBNA1 (Burkitt's
lymphoma), possibly to escape the host's immune response. Thus far, it remains unclear how the specific latent viral gene expression pattern in HD (EBNA2- and
LMP-positive) and the pronounced T-cell proliferation in affected lymph nodes relate to each other.
The functional relevance of LMP expression in H-RS cells is not understood. LMP has a transforming potential: Transformation of epithelial cells after transfection of
LMP has been described. In lymphocytes, apoptoses can be prevented by LMP via up-regulation of the bcl-2 gene. LMP is also a target for CTLs. In addition, it
up-regulates (partly in cooperation with EBNA2) numerous cellular genes [e.g., activation-associated antigens (CD23, CD30, CD39)] and adhesion molecules
[intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), lymphocyte function-associated antigen 3 (LFA-3)]. Thus it may render a cell indirectly more susceptible for a T-cell
response. Knecht et al.29 described in some HD cases mutations in the carboxy-terminal part of the LMP1 gene identical to those previously reported in LMP isolates
from Chinese nasopharyngeal carcinoma. These uthors discussed an association of these mutations with a clinically more aggressive HD phenotype.
At least three hypotheses can be advanced to explain EBV-negative cases of HD. First, another virus could be involved in these cases; however, studies to date have
failed to identify another virus. 30 Second, EBV may be involved in all the cases but may remain undetectable in some; this has been called the hit-and-run theory. In
this scenario, EBV infects the cell, alters the DNA in some way, and then is eliminated, leaving the cell either transformed or susceptible to transformation. Elimination
of EBV, with its immunogenic proteins, might be expected to occur most commonly in patients with active immune systems, such as the young women with NSHD.
However, a third possibility, and the one perhaps best supported by epidemiologic data, is that EBV is not important in the pathogenesis of any of the cases of HD
and that its presence in some cases simply reflects the presence of a larger reservoir of latently EBV-infected cells in these individuals.
Examination of the epidemiology of EBV-associated HD reveals several paradoxes, which cast doubt on the causative role of EBV in many cases. First, the group in
which EBV had been predicted most likely to be involved—young women from high socioeconomic groups with NSHD—proved to have the lowest incidence of EBV in
tumor tissue. 20 Second, there is no correlation between a history of either infectious mononucleosis or unusually high titers of antibodies to EBV and detectable EBV
in HD tissues. 31 Thus, in contrast to what one would expect if most HD cases were caused by EBV, populations in which HD is common (young women in affluent
societies) have EBV-negative HD and populations in which HD is rare (young children in underdeveloped countries, older individuals, and immunosuppressed
patients) have EBV-positive HD. 20 These apparent paradoxes force us to at least consider the possibility that EBV may be merely an epiphenomenon in HD, reflecting

a high incidence of EBV-infected B cells in the patient, rather than an etiologic factor.
In summary, despite data that suggest an etiologic role for EBV in HD, direct evidence of a causative role is lacking . The lack of an animal model and the difficulties
in studying the malignant cells in HD continue to frustrate investigators. Additional epidemiologic, serologic, and molecular data are needed to determine whether EBV
is a causative agent.

BIOLOGY AND CELL OF ORIGIN
LINEAGE, ORIGIN, AND CLONALITY OF HODGKIN'S-REED-STERNBERG CELLS
Specific Morphologic Features of Hodgkin's Disease
Lymph nodes affected by HD consist of a heterogeneous mixture of lymphocytes, histiocytes, eosinophils, plasma cells, fibroblasts, and other cells. The mononuclear
Hodgkin's cells and their polynucleated counterparts, the RS cells, which have long been considered to represent the malignant substrate of the disease, represent
only 0.1% to 1.0% of the entire cell population in CHD [i.e., lymphocyte-rich CHD (LRCHD) and the NS, MC, and LD subtypes]. 10 Similarly, in lymphocyte-predominant
HD (LPHD, nodular paragranuloma), the pathognomonic lymphocytic and histiocytic (L&H) cells represent only a small minority of the total cell population. This
scarcity of the putative tumor cells was one of the major obstacles for understanding the nature of these cells. Whereas in the LP subtype of HD, H-RS cells
consistently express B-cell-specific surface antigens (CD19, CD20), in CHD H-RS cells express, in the majority of cases, the activation markers Ki-1 (CD30), the
Leu-M1 antigen (CD15), the interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor (CD25), the transferrin receptor (CD71), and HLA class II molecules (HLA-DR), but not surface antigens,
which helped to determine their physiologic counterpart. 32 Until recently, the application of conventional molecular-genetic methods for a more detailed analysis of
H-RS cells was not possible owing to their scarcity. In addition, these cells could not be enriched from tissue affected by HD, presumably due to their fragility. Thus,
over decades, the cell of origin of the H-RS cells remained an enigma.
Cell Lines and Animal Models
The establishment of permanently growing cell lines permitted the biologic and genetic characterization of the tumor cell population in numerous human neoplasias. In
contrast, outgrowth of a cell line is extremely rare in HD. The first two permanent cell lines (designated L428 and L540) were established in 1979 from patients with
advanced-stage HD [clinical stage (CS) IVB]. 33 These cell lines grew from a pleural effusion and bone marrow. With few exceptions, all subsequently established cell
lines were also obtained from body fluids (bone marrow, pleural effusion, peripheral blood) of advanced-stage patients. 34 This observation may reflect an in vivo
adaptation of the cells to the conditions of suspension culture as prerequisite for in vitro outgrowth. Thus far, only 15 cell lines have been established that may be
regarded as HD-derived. Analysis of immunophenotype, karyotype, immunoglobulin (Ig), or T-cell receptor gene rearrangements of these cell lines revealed, in
analogy to analysis of primary tissue, heterogeneous results, not allowing any conclusion to be drawn on the cell of origin of HD. In addition, their derivation from
primary H-RS cells could not be determined unequivocally. 34 A novel EBV-negative cell line (L1236) has been established from the peripheral blood of a patient with
advanced HD of the MC subtype.35 Using H-RS single-cell PCR, it could be shown that the genomic sequences of the Ig gene rearrangements of the H-RS cells in the
patient's bone marrow were identical to those detected in L1236 cells. 36 Thus, in this cell line, the H-RS cell origin is definitely proven on the molecular level.
HD-derived cell lines were used successfully for the discovery of H-RS cell–associated antigens, which include CD30 (Ki-1), CD70, and Ki-27, 37,38 for cloning the
CD30 gene,39 and for studying the CD30 signal transduction pathway. They also enabled the in vitro testing of new immunotherapeutic modalities such as Ricin
A–linked anti-CD30 immunotoxins, 40 Saporin-linked anti-CD30 immunotoxins, 41 and anti-CD16/CD30 bispecific antibodies. 42
Though none of these HD-derived cell lines could be grown reproducibly in thymus-aplastic T-cell-deficient nude mice, the HD-derived cell lines L540, HD-MyZ, and
L1236 have been shown to disseminate intralymphatically after inoculation into T- and B-cell–deficient severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice. 35,43 The SCID
mouse model is used for the preclinical in vivo testing of new experimental therapeutic approaches. 43 However, no reproducible growth of primary H-RS cells has
been observed after transplantation of biopsy material. 44
Results of Single-Cell Analysis: Hodgkin's-Reed-Sternberg Cells Are Clonal B Cells
A methodologic breakthrough for the biologic analysis of H-RS cells was achieved by the establishment of micromanipulation of immunophenotyped single cells from
frozen sections, allowing the amplification and analysis of genes derived from a single cell. Küppers et al. 45 amplified rearranged Ig heavy-chain genes from single
H-RS cells micromanipulated from two cases of CHD and one case of LPHD. Sequence analysis revealed the clonal B-cell origin of the H-RS cells in all three cases.
In 14 of 15 additional cases of CHD, again clonally rearranged Ig genes were detected in the H-RS cells. Clonal Ig gene rearrangements in H-RS cells of CHD were
also found by others using micromanipulation and single-cell PCR. 46 Similarly, using the new method, clonally related Ig gene rearrangements were detected in L&H
cells isolated from frozen tissue sections of LPHD. 47 Thus, there is overwhelming evidence that at least a substantial proportion of cases (if not all cases) of CHD and
LPHD represent monoclonal B-cell disorders.
Germinal Center Derivation of H-RS Cells
The site of physiologic contact between a specific antigen and a B lymphocyte is the germinal center (GC) of a lymph node. This contact results in somatic mutations
accumulating in the Ig genes and leading to the expression of antibodies with a higher affinity due to amino acid exchanges. However, somatic mutations might also
result in a lower affinity of the antibody or even in generation of a stop codon. When B cells lose their ability to express an antibody or when they express an antibody
with lower affinity, they subsequently undergo apoptosis within the GC. All other B cells accumulating favorable mutations are rescued from apoptosis by expressing
the bcl-2 gene. These B cells clonally expand and can accumulate further mutations to improve the affinity of their antibody. After leaving the GC, they differentiate
into B memory cells or plasma cells. In a substantial proportion of LPHD cases, the clonal L&H cells revealed ongoing mutations, which provides evidence that L&H
cells are GC-derived B cells that depend on antigen binding and selection. 47 In this context, L&H cells are comparable with follicular lymphoma (FL) cells. Whereas
FL cells frequently harbor the chromosomal translocation t(14;18), resulting in activation of the bcl-2 gene, the transforming event in L&H cells remains unknown.
H-RS cells of CHD differ from FL as well as from LPHD in that they accumulate crippling somatic mutations within potentially functional Ig gene rearrangements, which
prevent further antibody expression. 36 These crippling mutations do not necessarily have to be located within the coding region of Ig genes. One case of MCHD has
been described in which a somatic mutation within a regulatory element of the IgH promoter was associated with down-regulation of Ig gene expression. 48 The
detection of crippling mutations rendering potential functional Ig gene rearrangements nonfunctional suggests that H-RS cells, as a rule, grow independently from
antigen selection and even antibody expression. Indeed, no Ig gene expression in H-RS cells could be demonstrated by several groups. The mechanism preventing
apoptosis of the H-RS cells within the GC still is unknown.
GENETIC ALTERATIONS IN HODGKIN'S DISEASE
Conventional karyotype analysis of Hodgkin's and RS cells is hampered by the low number of obtainable mitoses from lymph node suspensions and their poor
chromosome-banding qualities. In addition, karyotypes cannot be unequivocally attributed to malignant cells, as the cellular compartment with the highest mitotic
index in affected tissue is that of nonmalignant lymphocytes in the neighborhood of the H-RS cells. Thus, proliferating cells with a normal karyotype most probably
represent reactive lymphoid cells. 49 Depending on the histologic subtype, between 75% (NS) and 42% (LP) of cases studied yielded evaluable metaphases. In
karyotype analyses performed by different groups, the percentage of abnormal karyotypes varied considerably, between 22% and 83%. Although numeric and
structural cytogenetic abnormalities were observed, a specific chromosomal marker of HD—as, for instance, the Burkitt's lymphoma–specific chromosomal
translocations—has not yet been defined. 50 In a study of 60 lymph nodes obtained from untreated patients with HD, numeric or structural aberrations (or both) were
found in approximately one-half of the analyzable cases. 51 Among HD-associated chromosomal abnormalities, aneuploidy (100%) with hyperdiploidy (70%) is the
most frequent. Chromosomes 1, 2, 5, 12, and 21 are often triplicated. In a few cases, a loss of chromosomes is reported; for example, chromosomal translocations or
deletions were found in two-thirds of cases. 51
Analysis of whole tissue sections for genomic alterations or deregulated expression of the oncogenes MYC, JUN, RAF, and RAS did not reveal any characteristic
pattern.52 Because the t(14;18) translocation results in overexpression of the bcl-2 protein preventing apoptotic death of FL cells, many attempts were made using
PCR to detect breakpoints in the major breakpoint region (mbr) of t(14;18) in H-RS cells. In several studies, the t(14;18) translocation was found in 0% to 39% of HD
cases. Whether the translocation was localized in the H-RS cells remained unproven in these positive cases, however, particularly as the detection of the bcl-2

protein by immunohistochemistry in situ was not congruent with the detection of the translocation itself in all cases. In one report using micromanipulation of single
H-RS cells followed by PCR, the t(14;18) was shown to be localized in nonmalignant bystander B cells and not in a single case in the H-RS cells. 53 Mutations in the
p53 tumor suppressor, which are commonly found in a variety of human cancers, also could not be detected in H-RS cells using single-cell analysis. 54 In view of the
derivation of H-RS cells from the GC of lymph nodes, putative mechanisms preventing apoptosis of their precursors are of special interest for understanding the
transforming events. The nuclear transcription factor NFkB might be involved in prevention of apoptosis. Indeed, constitutive expression of NFkB has been found in
HD-derived cell lines as well as in primary H-RS cells in situ.55 It also has been suggested that defects in the inhibitory molecule IkB might underlie the overexpression
of NFkB, at least in some cases of HD. So far, however, the mechanisms preventing apoptosis in H-RS cells are not understood. 56
IMMUNOLOGY OF HODGKIN'S DISEASE
Cellular Immunodeficiencies
HD is associated with a complex deficiency in cellular immunity, including impairment of delayed cutaneous hypersensitivity, enhanced Ig production, high levels of
circulating immune complexes, production of antilymphocyte and anti-Ia antibodies, decreased natural killer (NK) cell cytotoxicity, enhanced sensitivity to suppressor
monocytes and T suppressor cells, and a variety of other disorders of serum factors, including high levels of circulating IL-2 receptors. In vitro, peripheral blood
lymphocytes show spontaneous DNA and IgG synthesis and depressed proliferative response to T-cell mitogen stimulation, with impairment of lymphokine production.
Increasing numbers of long-term survivors provided the opportunity to restudy anergy and in vitro lymphocyte responsiveness in patients who have been successfully
treated. Studies at the National Cancer Institute (NCI), in a population of uniformly staged and treated patients, showed that anergy did not influence prognosis within
a given stage. After successful treatment, anergy to recall antigens was reversible, although response to neoantigens remained suppressed. This defect appears to
be disease-related, as patients with other types of lymphomas did not show this defect. Unlike the defects in delayed hypersensitivity, most studies have shown that
the antibody response of B cells and the B-cell numbers are normal in HD patients, except in those with advanced disease.
Antigen-Presenting Phenotype of Hodgkin's-Reed-Sternberg Cells
In affected lymph nodes, the rare H-RS cells are surrounded by a majority of nonmalignant bystander cells. The majority of lymphocytes in affected lymphatic tissue
are activated T helper cells (CD4+, CD45R0+, CD45RB). 57 These lymphocytes represent the population with the highest mitotic index in affected lymph nodes. The
lymph nodes often grow slowly and show fluctuations in their size in early disease stages. These observations point toward a cellular immune reaction as the primary
reason for the lymph node enlargement in HD. In contrast to benign lymphoproliferative lesions (e.g., reactive lymph nodes), the immune reaction in HD is not
self-limited. One reason might be the inability of the immune system to eliminate the malignant cells expressing the target antigen. 58 The recently established
HD-derived cell line L1236 expresses HLA class I and II molecules, B7.1 and B7.2 (CD80, CD86), and the adhesion molecules ICAM-1 (CD54) and LFA-3 (CD58). 59
All of these molecules are essential for efficient T-cell recruitment (accessory molecules). Expression of HLA antigens and of B7.1 molecules has also been described
on H-RS cells in biopsy specimens and on other HD-derived cell lines (L428, L540; unpublished observation). The expression pattern of the surface antigens on H-RS
cells thus points toward an antigen-presenting functional phenotype.
Antigen-presenting cells and, in particular, dendritic cells play a major role in the recruitment and activation of antigen-specific T cells, which is mainly attributed to
their ability effectively to present antigens and to provide costimulatory signals via CD40, members of the B7 family (CD80, CD86), and adhesion molecules (CD11a,
CD11c, LFA-3, ICAM-1). Furthermore, immunoregulatory cytokines such as IL-12, secreted by dendritic cells, promote the development of Th1 T cells, which play a
major role in tumor-specific T-cell responses ( Fig. 45.6-1).

FIGURE 45.6-1. Antigen-presenting cell–like functional phenotype of a B-cell–derived tumor cell. Ag, antigen; H-RS, Hodgkin's-Reed-Sternberg; IL-10, interleukin-10;
MHC, major histocompatibility complex; TARC, thymus and activation regulated chemokine; TCR, T-cell receptor; TGF-b, transforming growth factor-b; Th2, T helper
cell 2.

Hodgkin's Disease and Immunity against Epstein-Barr Virus
In one study, it was shown that the H-RS cell population was uniformly HLA class I–positive in at least 75% of cases of EBV genome–positive HD, whereas the figure
was much lower in EBV genome–negative tumors.60 More than one-half of the EBV genome–negative tumors had no detectable HLA class I expression in tumor cells.
Analyses of transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) expression in H-RS cells found that almost all HD cases, regardless of EBV status, were positive for
TAP1 and for TAP2. Furthermore, it has been shown that in the HD-derived cell line L1236, the LMP2 can be processed and presented through the HLA class I
pathway. Although TAP expression in L1236 is not down-regulated, processing of the LMP2-derived target epitope might also have occurred via a TAP-independent
route.
Nerve Growth Factor Superfamily: Relevant Molecules?
The CD30 antigen, a member of the nerve growth factor superfamily, has been defined by a cluster of antibodies raised first against the HD-derived cell line L428. 61
Initially, the expression of CD30 seemed to be related exclusively to H-RS cells, thus representing a tumor-specific antigen. Subsequently, the CD30 antigen was also
found on activated T and B cells as well as on activated and differentiated macrophages. The highest CD30 expression is seen on HD lymphoma cells, CD30+ large
cell lymphomas (LCLs) with T-cell phenotype, and acute lymphocytic leukemia T cells.
The CD30/CD30 ligand (CD30/CD30L) interaction probably plays a central role in the complex interaction between H-RS cells and their microenvironment. A CD30L
has been described39 that exerts pleiotropic effects on different lymphoma subtypes in vitro and is expressed only on the bystander cells (T cells, monocytes,
granulocytes) but not on the H-RS cells. In tissue culture experiments, some biologic functions of the CD30/CD30L interaction have been characterized that point
toward a cytokine receptor function of the CD30 antigen. It remains to be established whether the pleiotropic effects of CD30/CD30L interaction in different cell types
are due to a different intracellular signaling or whether they reflect sequence differences in the CD30 gene.
The soluble form of CD30 (sCD30) is detectable in the serum of patients with advanced stages of HD. This has been considered to reflect a prognostic factor for an
unfavorable outcome. 62 It has been shown in vitro that CD40/CD40L signaling is able to down-regulate BCL-6 in B cells with a GC phenotype. A similar effect is
exerted in vitro also by LMP1, which is functionally homologous to CD40. It thus may be postulated that CD40 ligation is the major determinant of the phenotype of the
RS cell. The BCL-6 +/syn-1 – profile associates with 100% nodular LPHD (NLPHD), thus corroborating the notion that nodular lymphocyte predominance (NLP) is a
relatively homogeneous disorder closely reflecting the GC phenotype. 63 The BCL-6–/syn-1+ profile associates with the majority of CHD (NS and MC), indicating that
RS cells frequently are represented by post-GC B cells that have undergone preterminal differentiation. 64 Whereas CD40 is consistently expressed by both L&H and
RS cells, the abundance and distribution of CD40L+ T lymphocytes varies markedly in different HD categories. In CHD, CD40/CD40L signaling between neoplastic
and reactive cells seems to be a prominent feature that is associated with RS cells displaying the BCL-6–/syn-1 + phenotype.

Chronic Secretion of Cytokines
IL-2 receptor levels and other inflammatory cytokines are elevated in the sera of patients. The (deregulated?) expression of cytokines may at least partially explain the
complex interaction between H-RS and bystander cells. For instance, eosinophilia in HD is caused by IL-5, and fibrosis may be triggered by IL-1 and transforming
growth factor-b (TGF-b). IL-1, IL-6, and IL-9, which are produced by H-RS cells, may act as autocrine growth factors and as paracrine growth stimulators for T cells. 65
Vice versa, the T cells may stimulate H-RS cells via IL-2 and IL-6. Many cytokines, including IL-1, IL-5, IL-6, IL-9, IL-10, and TGF-b, are produced by RS cells, and it
is suspected that constitutive nuclear expression of NFkB is responsible for this phenomenon. 58
IL-10 is a pleiotropic cytokine with potent inhibitory effects toward Th1 cells and is mainly produced by Th2 cells, activated monocytes and macrophages, stimulated B
cells, and mast cells. It has been suggested that IL-10 is involved in the pathogenesis of malignant B-cell lymphomas. HD is characterized by an abnormal or
unbalanced secretion or production of cytokines, including IL-10, which supports growth of both neoplastic Hodgkin's and Reed-Sternberg (H-RS) cells and their
surrounding reactive bystander cells.
In untreated HD patients, 13% were found to be seropositive for IL-10 before therapy, whereas IL-10 was not detectable in a healthy control population. HD patients
whose disease was at an advanced clinical stage (stage III or IV) were found to have higher IL-10 serum levels. A univariate analysis indicated a correlation of
elevated IL-10 serum levels with early relapse and reduced long-term survival. The group of IL-10-seropositive HD patients showed a significant correlation of
elevated IL-10 serum level with a reduced relapse-free survival. Thus, the increased production of IL-10 in HD could be associated with a poor clinical prognosis and
may serve as a prognostic factor.66

PATHOLOGY
DEFINITION OF HODGKIN'S DISEASE
The clinical features and responses to treatment of HD differ dramatically from those of most so-called NHLs, suggesting that a specific immunologic reaction is
important not only in the definition but also in the clinical behavior of this disease. Studies in the 1980s showed that in NLPHD, the RS cell variants expressed
B-cell–associated antigens, 67 whereas these cells in most cases of NSHD and MCHD lacked these antigens. 68 This difference in immunophenotype, together with the
observation that NLPHD follows a more indolent clinical course, 69 led to the suggestion that NLPHD was a low-grade B-cell lymphoma and should be removed from
the category of HD and placed with the NHLs. However, both immunophenotypic and, more recently, molecular genetic studies have shown that CHD of the NS and
MC types can express B-cell–associated antigens and, similar to NLPHD, have rearranged Ig genes. 70,71 Furthermore, NLPHD and CHD share the feature of having a
small number of neoplastic cells in a reactive background, which distinguishes both from most B-cell NHLs. Thus, although it is now known that the neoplastic cells in
most cases of both LPHD and CHD are monoclonal B cells, their distinctive pathologic and clinical features still warrant placing them together in a separate category
from other lymphoid neoplasms.72 It is important for both pathologists and oncologists to recognize that HD is two distinct diseases. Therefore, current classifications
include two main categories of HD: CHD (NS, MC, and LD) and NLPHD. In summary, the Hodgkin's lymphomas are defined as lymphomas containing one of the
characteristic types of RS cells in a background of nonneoplastic cells; cases are subclassified according to the morphology and immunophenotype of the RS cells
and the composition of the cellular background. The differences in the morphology of the RS cells and the composition of the cellular background have formed the
basis for the pathologic subclassification of HD ( Table 45.6-2).

TABLE 45.6-2. Classifications of Hodgkin's Disease

CLASSIFICATIONS OF HODGKIN'S DISEASE
The early classification by Jackson and Parker 73 recognized three categories of HD: paragranuloma, granuloma, and sarcoma. The distinction among the three
categories was based on the ratio of neoplastic to normal cells, which increased from paragranuloma to granuloma to sarcoma, and predicted decreasing survival. In
1966, Lukes et al.74 recognized that the category of granuloma could be subdivided into two categories—NS and MC—which were characterized by distinctive
morphology and clinical features. Lukes et al. 74 also recognized that there were two variants of what they called lymphocytic or histiocytic predominance type
(replacing paragranuloma)—a nodular and a diffuse variant—which they found differed in prognosis. The Lukes and Butler classification was modified and simplified
at the Rye conference in 1966. 74 The Rye classification has remained the standard classification since that time.
In 1994, the International Lymphoma Study Group introduced an updated classification, incorporating new immunologic and molecular data, as part of the Revised
European-American Lymphoma (REAL) Classification. 75 These concepts have been incorporated into the new World Health Organization (WHO) classification of
hematologic malignancies, a joint effort of the Society for Hematopathology and the European Association of Hematopathologists.
Several major differences exist between the REAL/WHO classification of HD and older classifications. Most important is the recognition that there are two distinct
diseases that have been called HD: CHD, which consists predominantly of NS and MC, and NLPHD ( Table 45.6-3). Simply a predominance of lymphocytes in the
background is not sufficient to classify a case as NLPHD; cases that have the RS-cell morphology and immunophenotype of CHD, even if they contain predominantly
lymphocytes, are classified as lymphocyte-rich classic Hodgkin's disease(LRCHD). A second difference is that, in the Lukes-Butler and Rye classifications, MC was a
heterogeneous category, including both typical cases and all other cases that did not fit into one of the other categories. We now recommend that MC be restricted to
typical cases and that unclassifiable cases be categorized as HD unclassifiable. Finally, it is now clear that immunophenotype is important in the subclassification of HD,
both in distinguishing NLPHD from classic types and in distinguishing HD from NHL; thus, the immunophenotype is included in the definitions of HD in the REAL/WHO
classification. Typical freedom-from-treatment-failure (FFTF) and survival curves for the main histologic subtypes are illustrated in Figure 45.6-2 using German
Hodgkin's Lymphoma Study Group data.

TABLE 45.6-3. Morphologic and Immunophenotypic Features of Nodular Lymphocyte-Predominant and Classic Hodgkin's Disease

FIGURE 45.6-2. A: Reviewed histologic subtype: freedom from treatment failure in the German Hodgkin's Study Group trials, 1988 through 1998, all stages.
Significant (P£.01) comparisons: NS1 vs. NS2, P = .0012; LP vs. LD, P = .0088; NS1 vs. LD, P = .0017. B: Reviewed histologic subtype: survival in the German
Hodgkin's Study Group trials, 1988 through 1998. Significant ( P£.01) comparisons: NS1 vs. NS2, P = .0021. LD, lymphocyte-depleted (n = 35); LP,
lymphocyte-predominant (n = 144); NS1, nodular sclerosis grade 1 (n = 1397); NS2, nodular sclerosis grade 2 (n = 361); MC, mixed-cellularity (n = 596).

Nodular Lymphocyte-Predominant Hodgkin's Disease
MORPHOLOGIC FEATURES. NLPHD is defined as having at least a partially nodular growth pattern; diffuse areas are present in a minority of cases, and it is

controversial whether purely diffuse cases exist. 76 The RS-cell variants differ from mononuclear and classic RS cells: They have vesicular, polylobed nuclei and
distinct but small, usually peripheral nucleoli, without perinucleolar halos; these have been called L&H cells (after Lukes and Butler) or popcorn cells, because of the
resemblance of their nuclei to an exploded kernel of corn. 74 In fact, they resemble “exploded” centroblasts. Although popcorn cells may be very numerous, usually no
classic, diagnostic RS cells are found. In occasional cases, however, the RS cells may resemble classic or lacunar types; in such cases, immunophenotyping is
helpful in establishing the diagnosis. The background is predominantly lymphocytes; clusters of epithelioid histiocytes may be numerous; plasma cells, eosinophils,
and neutrophils rarely are seen and, if present, are not numerous. 77 Occasional sclerosis may cause some cases to resemble NSHD.
PROGRESSIVE TRANSFORMATION OF GERMINAL CENTERS. A distinctive type of follicular lymphoid hyperplasia, known as progressive transformation of germinal centers

(PTGCs), is seen focally in approximately 20% of lymph nodes involved by NLPHD and may be seen in the absence of HD in other lymph nodes in the same patient. 78
PTGCs are enlarged follicles that contain numerous small B cells of mantle zone type; these follicles may closely resemble the nodules of NLPHD. This phenomenon
has given rise to speculation that NLPHD may arise from PTGCs. PTGCs usually are seen as single or only a few enlarged follicles in a setting of nonspecific reactive
follicular lymphoid hyperplasia; however, on occasion, they may be numerous and associated with prominent lymph node enlargement, particularly in adolescents and
young adults. 79
NODULAR LYMPHOCYTE-PREDOMINANT HODGKIN'S DISEASE AND LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA. Patients with NLPHD have a slightly higher risk of developing NHL than do

patients with other types of HD. 80 Transformation of NLP to LCL, usually with a B-cell phenotype and often monoclonal with respect to Ig (both phenotype and
genotype), is most common. Hansmann et al.81 reported 2.6% in a series of 537 cases, and the British National Lymphoma Investigation (BNLI) reported a 2%
incidence in 182 cases 80; the range in recent reports is from 2% to 6.5%. 82 The LCL does not necessarily consist of typical L&H cells and usually resembles other
diffuse, large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs). 81 Most cases studied have had a B-cell immunophenotype, with B-lineage antigen expression in the majority and
monotypic Ig expression in approximately 30% to 50%. In some cases, a clonal relationship between the LP and the DLBCL has been shown by molecular genetic
analysis.83
In addition to the cases that progress to DLBCL, NLP may be composite with DLBCL in the same lymph node, at the time of either diagnosis or relapse. 84 In reported
cases, the prognosis of these patients appears to be significantly better than that for usual DLBCL, and patients who respond to treatment may later relapse with only
NLP. 84
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE. The immunophenotype is an important part of the definition of NLP. In contrast to CHD, the atypical cells are CD45+, express B-cell–associated

antigens (CD19, CD20, CD22, CD79a) and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), but lack CD15 and CD30. In contrast to typical B-cell lymphomas, however, they are
usually Ig-negative by routine techniques. J-chain has been demonstrated in many cases. 85 Studies using in situ hybridization for light-chain messenger RNA (mRNA)
have shown clonal expression in the atypical cells. 86 Popcorn cells also express the nuclear protein encoded by the bcl-6 gene, which is associated with normal GC
B-cell development, and the activation-associated molecules CD40 and CD86 (B7/BB1), which are involved in B-cell interaction with T cells. 87
The nodules of LP are actually altered follicles or GCs. The small lymphocytes in the nodules are a mixture of polyclonal B cells with a mantle zone phenotype (IgM
and IgD+), and numerous T cells, many of which are CD57+, similar to the T-cell population in normal and progressively transformed GCs. 88 T cells in NLP may
exhibit significant nuclear enlargement and irregularity, resembling centrocytes. In contrast to the T cells in reactive or progressively transformed follicles, which are
scattered singly and often concentrated in the light zone or at the junction with the mantle zone, the T cells in NLP form small aggregates, often giving the follicle a
broken-up, moth-eaten, or irregular contour. They typically surround the neoplastic B cells, forming rings, rosettes, or collarettes. Although several reports suggest
that the T cells surrounding popcorn cells are mostly CD57+, 89,90 this can be difficult to demonstrate in many cases, and absence of CD57+ cells in the rosettes does
not argue against the diagnosis. A prominent concentric meshwork of follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) is present within the nodules. The interfollicular region contains
predominantly T cells; when there are diffuse areas, the background lymphocytes are also predominantly T cells, and the FDC meshwork is lost. 91
CLINICAL FEATURES. NLPHD accounts for 4% to 5% of the cases of HD in most series. The median age of patients is in the mid 30s, but cases may be seen both in

children and the elderly. The male-female ratio is 3:1 or greater. NLPHD usually involves peripheral lymph nodes, with sparing of the mediastinum. Nearly 80% of the
patients in most series are stage I or II at the time of the diagnosis, but rare patients may present with stage III or IV disease, with a concomitantly worse prognosis.
More than 90% of the patients have a complete response to therapy, and 90% are alive at 10 years. The cause of death is often NHL, other cancers, or complications
of treatment, rather than HD.82,92
Classic Hodgkin's Disease
CHD is defined by the presence of classic, diagnostic RS cells in a background of NS, MC, or LD, with classic immunophenotype (CD15+, CD30+, T- and
B-cell–associated antigens usually negative). CHD includes NS, MC, and LD, as well as the proposed new category of LRCHD. Because the immunophenotype,
genetic features, and postulated normal counterpart are the same for all of the classic types, these will be discussed together at the end of this section.
NODULAR SCLEROSIS HODGKIN'S DISEASE. NSHD, by definition, has at least a partially nodular pattern, with fibrous bands separating the nodules in most cases; diffuse

areas are common, as is necrosis. The characteristic cell is the lacunar type RS cell, which may be very numerous. These are cells with characteristically multilobed
nuclei and small nucleoli, with abundant, pale cytoplasm that retracts in formalin-fixed sections, producing an empty space, or lacuna. Diagnostic RS cells also are
present but may be rare. The background usually contains lymphocytes, histiocytes, plasma cells, eosinophils, and neutrophils. 74
In some cases with characteristic lacunar cells and a nodular or diffuse pattern, fibrous bands may be absent, and differentiating this type from NLP may be difficult.
These cases have been called the cellular phase of NS74; in one series, the clinical course of these cases was slightly worse than that for typical cases. 93 Another
morphologic variant, syncytial NS, has been described, in which, focally, the NS pattern is lost and large sheets of cells resembling lacunar RS-cell variants are seen.

The prognosis of this variant was not reported to be different from that of typical NS. However, some studies have suggested that NS with lymphocyte depletion is
associated with large mediastinal masses, advanced stage, and poor response to radiotherapy alone. 94
Grading. The BNLI developed a system for grading NSHD (grade 1 and grade 2), based on the number and atypia of the RS cells in the nodules. 95 Cases of grade 2
NS overlap with the syncytial and LD variants already described. Based on this system, approximately 75% to 85% of the cases in most series are grade 1 and 15% to
25% are grade 2. In the BNLI series, grade 2 (NS2) tumors were associated with a worse prognosis than grade 1 (NS1) tumors, with NS2 tumors having an increased
rate of relapse, shorter survival, and worse response to initial therapy (see Fig. 45.6-2). The BNLI studies have been criticized because some series included patients
who were not pathologically staged and because, as compared to some other series, their patients had a relatively poor outcome.
Results from American and European centers have conflicted, showing either no influence on outcome or a significantly worse outcome for NS2 patients. 96,97 In
general, when a center reports either a relatively high rate of relapse or relatively poor survival, NS2 patients are found to have a significantly worse outcome than
NS1 patients; conversely, when overall relapse rates are low and survival high, grade has no impact on outcome. 97 This phenomenon was illustrated most clearly in a
study of 195 patients treated in the Netherlands 98; for patients treated between 1972 and 1980, when overall survival was relatively poor, grade 2 patients had a
significantly worse outcome (5-year overall survival for NS1 and NS2, 83% and 43%, respectively), whereas for those treated between 1981 and 1992, grade had no
impact on outcome (5-year overall survival for NS1 and NS2, 81% and 82%, respectively).
The impact of NS2 on survival is most evident in patients who experience relapse; those with NS2 have significantly shorter survival after relapse than do those with
NS1. Taken together, these results suggest that more aggressive therapy benefits grade 2 patients; they also suggest the possibility that patients with NS1 could be
treated less aggressively and still do as well. It could be argued that in future studies, NS should be consistently graded and that trials of less aggressive initial
treatment for NS1 might be appropriate.
Clinical Features. NSHD is the most common subtype of HD in developed countries (60% to 80% in most series). It is most common in adolescents and young adults
but can occur at any age; the number of affected female individuals equals or exceeds the number of affected male persons. The mediastinum and other
supradiaphragmatic sites are commonly involved.
MIXED-CELLULARITY HODGKIN'S DISEASE. In MCHD, the infiltrate is usually diffuse or, at best, vaguely nodular, without band-forming sclerosis, although fine interstitial

fibrosis may be present. RS cells are of the classic, diagnostic type and usually are easily identified. Many mononuclear variants are also usually present; rare lacunar
cells may be seen. Diagnostic RS cells are large cells with bilobed, double, or multiple nuclei, with a large, eosinophilic, inclusion-like nucleolus in at least two lobes
or nuclei. The infiltrate typically contains lymphocytes, epithelioid histiocytes, eosinophils, and plasma cells. 74
Clinical Features. MCHD is accountable for 15% to 30% of HD cases in most series; it may be seen at any age and lacks the early adult peak of NSHD. Involvement
of the mediastinum is less common than in NSHD, whereas abdominal lymph node and splenic involvement are more common.
LYMPHOCYTE-DEPLETED HODGKIN'S DISEASE. The infiltrate in lymphocyte-depleted HD (LDHD) is diffuse and often appears hypocellular, due to the presence of diffuse

fibrosis and necrosis; there are large numbers of RS cells and bizarre sarcomatous variants, with a paucity of other inflammatory cells. Confluent sheets of RS cells
and variants may occur and rarely predominate (reticular variant or Hodgkin's sarcoma). 74 Before the availability of immunophenotyping studies, many cases
diagnosed as LDHD were, in reality, cases of large B-cell lymphoma or T-cell lymphomas, often of the anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) type. Cases of the
reticular variant of LDHD may be difficult to distinguish from ALCL. 99
Clinical Features. LDHD is the least common variant of HD, accounting for fewer than 1% of the cases in recent reports. It is most common in older people, in human
immunodeficiency virus–positive (HIV-positive) individuals, 27 and in nonindustrialized countries. LDHD frequently presents with abdominal lymphadenopathy and
spleen, liver, and bone marrow involvement, without peripheral lymphadenopathy. 100 The stage is usually advanced at diagnosis; however, response to treatment is
reported not to differ from that of other subtypes of comparable stage. 94
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE OF CLASSIC HODGKIN'S DISEASE. In most cases of NSHD, MCHD, and LDHD, the tumor cells are CD15+, CD30+, and CD45–. The frequency with

which CD15 and CD30 are detected varies in reported series, probably because of technical problems. With microwave antigen retrieval and use of an anti-IgM
secondary antibody, the German Hodgkin's Study Group (GHSG) reported 83% of 1751 cases to be positive for CD15, 96% positive for CD30, and 5% positive for
CD20. Expression of B-cell antigens has been reported in a varying number of cases, usually only weakly and in a minority of the cells. 101 Thus, expression of B-cell
antigens does not exclude a diagnosis of HD if the morphologic features are typical.
The diagnosis of HD still is made on routine sections, and immunophenotyping studies are an adjunct to the diagnosis. In a morphologically typical case,
immunophenotyping studies are not absolutely necessary; however, they are becoming more standard practice. Failure to detect CD15 or CD30 or expression of a
B-cell–associated antigen does not preclude a diagnosis of HD; however, absence of both CD15 and CD30 and expression of CD20 should prompt reexamination of
the slides and consideration of either NLPHD or LRCHD. Expression of T-cell antigens is distinctly unusual, and should prompt both re-review of the slides and
molecular genetic analysis of the T-cell receptor gene.
In addition to CD15 and CD30, RS cells express CD25, HLA-DR, ICAM-1, CD95 (apo-1/fas), and both CD40 and CD86 (B7), molecules associated with B-cell
activation and interaction with T cells. T cells surrounding the RS cells express both CD40L and CD28, the ligand for CD86. In contrast to NLPHD, the RS cells of
CHD lack the nuclear bcl-6 protein associated with follicle center B cells. 102 In EBV-positive cases, the tumor cells express EBV LMP but not EBNA2.
CLINICAL BEHAVIOR OF CLASSIC HODGKIN'S DISEASE. Several studies have addressed the impact of immunophenotype on the survival of patients with CHD, with

varying results. The GHSG study found that cases that lacked CD15 but expressed CD30 had a significantly worse freedom from relapse and overall survival than did
CD15+ cases. Coexpression of CD20 with CD15 or CD30 (or both) had no impact on outcome, but cases that expressed CD20 alone had poor survival; this result is
similar to that reported by McBride et al. 103 and raises the question whether these may represent cases of T-cell–rich large B-cell lymphoma (see later, in Differential
Diagnosis of Classic Hodgkin's Disease ).
LYMPHOCYTE-RICH CLASSIC HODGKIN'S DISEASE. Some cases of HD with RS cells of the classic type, both by morphology and immunophenotype, may have a

background infiltrate that consists predominantly of lymphocytes, with rare or no eosinophils. The term lymphocyte-rich classic Hodgkin's disease was proposed for
these cases in the REAL classification. Some cases of LRCHD have a nodular pattern, with remnants of regressed GCs in the nodules and RS cells and variants
located within the mantle zones and interfollicular regions, 104 mimicking NLPHD. This has been termed follicular Hodgkin's lymphoma or nodular LRCHD.105
Of 426 cases initially diagnosed as LPHD, review and immunophenotyping by a panel formed by the European Task Force on Lymphoma (ETFL) revealed that only
51% were confirmed as NLPHD, whereas 27% were LRCHD with a nodular pattern, with RS cells in the mantles of reactive follicles and in the interfollicular
regions.105 In a study from the GHSG, a similar rate of misdiagnosis of NLPHD was found; only 44% of 208 cases considered by at least one pathologist as LPHD had
the immunophenotype of LPHD, whereas 56% were CHD. When the expert panel reclassified the cases by morphology alone, only 75% of the cases classified as
LPHD and 88% of the cases classified as CHD were confirmed by immunophenotyping. Thus, cases of LRCHD may very closely resemble NLPHD and require
immunophenotyping for differential diagnosis.
Immunophenotype. Cases of LRCHD have the immunophenotype of CHD, with expression of CD15 and CD30 by the RS cells; similar to other types of CHD, CD20 is
coexpressed in 3% to 5% of cases.105 In nodular areas, the background lymphocytes are predominantly B cells, similar to LPHD, and follicular meshworks of FDC are
seen with antibodies to CD21 or CD35. Staining for FDC often reveals a small, dense aggregate of FDC consistent with a regressed GC, associated with a broad
mantle zone with more loosely spaced FDC processes. The RS cells are found within the mantle area or at the junction of the mantle and interfollicular regions.
CD57+ T cells may also be present and may rim the RS cells; thus, it is actually the immunophenotype of the RS cells that distinguishes LRCHD from NLPHD.
Clinical Features. The frequency of LRCHD among cases classified as HD can be roughly calculated from the two GHSG reports. 106 Of 1959 cases of HD with
immunophenotyping for CD15, CD30, and CD20, LRCHD comprised 6% of cases (116) and LPHD 5% (92). In the ETFL and GHSG series, the clinical features at
presentation of LRCHD seem to be intermediate between those of LPHD and CHD: similar to those with NLPHD, patients had early-stage disease and lacked bulky
disease or B-cell symptoms; as in patients with either NLPHD or MCHD and in contrast to those with NLPHD, they lacked mediastinal disease and were
predominantly male and, like MCHD patients, their median age was older than either NLPHD or NSHD patients. In the ETFL series, the overall survival for both LPHD
and LRCHD patients was excellent but not significantly different from that for other types of HD. However, patients with NLPHD had an increased frequency of

multiple relapses and better survival after relapse, as compared with LRCHD, NSHD, and MCHD patients. In the GHSG study, the overall survival of LRCHD was
significantly worse than that of NLPHD. These data do not clearly define LRCHD as a distinct entity but are consistent with either an early phase of MCHD or a novel
subtype. It is suggested that this category continue to be recognized within the classification of HD, so that additional data can be collected.
ASSOCIATION OF CLASSIC HODGKIN'S DISEASE WITH OTHER LYMPHOMAS. CHD may be associated with other lymphomas, most often of the B-cell type.

107

These
lymphomas may occur before, simultaneously with, or after HD. Patients treated for HD are at risk for development of high-grade B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL or
Burkitt's or Burkitt-like lymphoma), which have been presumed to arise in a setting of immunosuppression secondary to therapy for HD; the estimated risk ranges from
1% to 5%. However, EBV has not been demonstrated in the secondary lymphomas, in contrast to the situation in most immunosuppression-associated NHLs.
Numerous cases of CHD associated with FL or DLBCL have been reported; the HD may precede, follow, or occur simultaneously with the NHL. 107,108 Two cases of HD
occurring with NHL (one case of composite HD and FL and one case of DLBCL followed by HD) have been studied by single-cell PCR; a common clone was found in
HD and NHL in both cases. 109 Rare cases of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) may contain cells with the morphology and immunophenotype of classic RS
cells, whereas other patients with typical CLL may go on to develop HD—a so-called HD variant of Richter's syndrome. 110 Several such cases have been studied
using single-cell PCR; in the majority of the cases, the RS cells were of the same clone as the CLL cells, though in one case, they were clonally unrelated. 111 Finally,
cases of mycosis fungoides or lymphomatoid papulosis associated with HD have been reported. 112 Thus, it is clear that patients with CHD are at some increased risk
for development of NHL. In some patients, a single neoplastic B cell can give rise to both HD and NHL, whereas in other patients, it appears that either
immunosuppression or other unknown factors can give rise to two independent malignancies.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF CLASSIC HODGKIN'S DISEASE
Two lymphomas have been described that have significant morphologic overlap with HD and may cause problems in differential diagnosis ( Fig. 45.6-3):
T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma (T/HRLBCL) and T-cell ALCL. In addition, DLBCLs with anaplastic cytology may be difficult to distinguish from HD with LD
(Table 45.6-4).

FIGURE 45.6-3. Differential diagnosis of Hodgkin's disease (HD). There is morphologic overlap between classic HD, T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma
(T/HRLBCL), B-cell anaplastic large cell lymphoma (B-ALCL), and T-cell anaplastic large cell lymphoma (T-ALCL). Immunophenotyping can be useful in the
differential diagnosis. DLBCL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma; LDHD, lymphocyte-depleted HD; LRCHD, lymphocyte-rich classic HD; NLPHD, nodular
lymphocyte-predominant HD.

TABLE 45.6-4. Differential Diagnosis of Hodgkin's Disease

T-Cell/Histiocyte-Rich Large B-Cell Lymphoma
In the late 1990s, several groups reported an unusual type of lymphoma with morphologic features reminiscent of diffuse LPHD or MCHD, with a predominance of
small T lymphocytes and scattered large neoplastic cells that express B-cell antigens. Patients typically present with advanced-stage disease and have a poor
prognosis. 103 The term histiocyte-rich or T-cell–rich large B-cell lymphomahas been used for these cases. The cases that resemble HD are different from earlier cases reported
as T-cell–rich B-cell lymphoma, many of which are simply B-cell lymphomas of follicle center or large cell type in which T cells compose 50% or more of the infiltrate.
Whether T/HRLBCL constitutes a distinct disease or is simply an aggressive variant of LPHD is not clear. However, it is important to distinguish it from either NLPHD
or CHD because of its aggressive clinical course.
T/HRLBCL is a diffuse lymphoma with a lymphocyte-rich background, with small clusters of epithelioid histiocytes and scattered large mononuclear cells, suggesting
either LPHD or CHD. The large cells may resemble popcorn cells, immunoblasts, or centroblasts, or all three.
The neoplastic cells express CD20 and other pan-B antigens, may or may not express cytoplasmic light chains, and may or may not have detectable Ig gene
rearrangement by Southern blot or whole section PCR. Like LPHD, they are often EMA-positive but are CD15-, CD30-, and EBV-negative. The background
lymphocytes are T cells that are CD57-negative, and FDC aggregates are not seen.
The immunophenotype of the large cells is of limited value in the differential diagnosis with LPHD, as it is similar; however, readily detectable Ig light chains would
tend to favor a diagnosis of T/HRLBCL. In addition, staining for CD20 may reveal a nodular pattern and a B-cell–rich background, which would favor NLPHD.
Follicular aggregates of FDC (anti-CD21) also favor NLPHD, as do large numbers of CD57+ cells. In distinguishing T/HRLBCL from CHD, immunophenotyping is
essential and helpful. If the large cells express CD20 and lack CD15 and CD30, the diagnosis of T/HRLBCL is strongly favored, whereas expression of either CD15 or
CD30 strongly favors a diagnosis of CHD. Furthermore, in cases diagnosed as CHD that express only CD20, the prognosis appears to be significantly worse than for
cases expressing CD15 or CD30, with or without CD20. 103,106
Anaplastic Large-Cell Lymphoma
ALCL is a T-cell lymphoma characterized by large malignant cells with prominent nucleoli and abundant cytoplasm, which may resemble mononuclear or
multinucleated RS-cell variants. 113 However, the tumor cells grow in cohesive sheets and frequently involve lymph node sinuses, a pattern that is unusual in HD. In
addition, the neoplastic cells usually are smaller than RS cells, have less conspicuous nucleoli, without perinucleolar halos, and often have bean-shaped or
horseshoe-shaped nuclei, with a prominent paranuclear hof, in contrast to the round nuclei of mononuclear RS cells. 114 ALCL has a bimodal age distribution, with one
peak in childhood and another in adulthood.

A subtype of ALCL, called Hodgkin's-related ACLC, has been described (modified to Hodgkin's-like in the REAL classification; a provisional entity). 115 This variant was
characterized by cytologic features similar to common ALCL—confluent sheets of tumor cells, a cohesive growth pattern, and sinusoidal infiltration—but with
architectural features that resemble HD of the NS type, with nodular growth of tumor cells and occasional fibrous bands. The immunophenotype of ALCL-HD was
reported to be similar to that of common ALCL, but some cases had CD15 expression and EBV infection. There has been an ongoing debate about whether ALCL
Hodgkin's-like is a variant of HD, a variant of ALCL, a heterogeneous mixture of the two, or a distinct disease.
Analysis of the t(2;5) associated with ALCL has helped to resolve this problem. Studies of the translocation have shown that it is absent in cases of typical HD. 116,117 In
immunophenotyping studies using antibodies to either the ALK protein or the p80 fusion product of the t(2;5), several groups have found the protein to be present in a
subset of ALCL but not in HD. Cases diagnosed as ALCL-HD typically lack the ALK protein. 118
Most hematopathologists now believe that cases reported in the literature as ALCL Hodgkin's-like are heterogeneous. Some represent LD variants of HD—either
NSHD (syncytial, LD, or NS grade 2) type or LD (LDHD; Hodgkin's sarcoma)—whereas others are cases of ALCL with a nodular growth pattern. Most cases can be
resolved as either HD (CD45–, CD15+, T-cell antigen–, CD20–/+, t(2;5)–, ALK1–, EMA–) or ALCL (CD45+, CD15–, T-cell antigen+, CD20–, t(2;5)+, ALK1+, EMA+).
In cases that are histologically borderline between HD and T-ALCL, immunophenotyping on paraffin sections with CD45, CD15, CD30, CD20, EMA, pan-T antigens,
ALK1 and, if necessary, genetic studies should be undertaken to resolve the differential diagnosis. Expression of CD15 or CD20 tends to exclude a diagnosis of
T-ALCL (CD20+ cases may be either HD or DLBCL), whereas expression of CD45, T-cell antigens, ALK1, or EMA tend to exclude HD. Southern blot or whole section
PCR analysis showing T-cell antigen receptor gene rearrangement would tend to exclude HD and confirm the diagnosis of ALCL. Ig gene rearrangement by these
techniques would not usually be detectable in HD and would favor DLBCL, but a weak band would not exclude HD. Cases that cannot be resolved by
immunophenotype or genetic studies should be considered unclassifiable; clinical judgment should be used in deciding whether to perform another biopsy or to treat
for either HD or ALCL. The category of ALCL Hodgkin's-like will be eliminated from the proposed WHO classification.
In summary, the data currently available suggest that there is no true borderline between HD and ALCL of the T-null type as defined in the REAL classification: HD is,
in most cases, a B-cell neoplasm, whereas ALCL is a T-cell neoplasm. There is morphologic but not biologic overlap between HD and ALCL. HD may resemble ALCL
by having areas of LD—that is, it may be ALCL-like—but this is a morphologic resemblance only, not a true biologic borderline. Similarly, ALCL may resemble HD by
having areas of nodularity, sclerosis, or granulocyte infiltration—that is, it may be Hodgkin's-like—but again, this is not a true biologic borderline. In contrast, because
HD is a B-cell neoplasm, there may be a true biologic borderline between B-cell lymphomas and HD of any type, between DLBCL and NLPHD, between T/HRLBCL
and either MC or LPHD, and between large B-cell lymphoma, anaplastic, CD30+ type and lymphocyte-depleted variants of CHD. It is these latter areas that present
the most challenging differential diagnoses currently.

DIAGNOSIS AND STAGING
NATURAL HISTORY AND PATTERNS OF SPREAD
The Swiss radiotherapist Gilbert is credited with first reporting that HD spread by contiguity from one lymph node chain to adjacent chains. 10,119 His work was
extended by Peters,120 Kaplan,121 and others, who evaluated the use of prophylactic radiotherapy to lymph nodes adjacent to those involved with disease. The
development of new radiographic studies and the routine use of staging laparotomy improved understanding of the presentation and evolution of HD. 121,122 Although
there is strong evidence that HD begins in a single group of lymph nodes and then spreads to contiguous lymph nodes, eventually the malignant cells become more
aggressive, may invade blood vessels, and spread to organs in a manner similar to other malignancies. This is more likely to occur in patients with stage III than with
stage I or II HD.
Most patients with NSHD or MCHD have a central pattern of lymph node involvement (cervical, mediastinal, paraaortic). In contrast, certain nodal chains (mesenteric,
hypogastric, presacral, epitrochlear, popliteal) seldom are involved. Occult adenopathy in patients with negative radiographic staging ranges from 6% to 35%. The
spleen is involved more frequently in patients with adenopathy below the diaphragm, systemic symptoms, and MC histology. Involvement of the liver in an untreated
patient is rare and almost always occurs with concomitant splenic involvement. Infiltration of the bone marrow is usually focal and almost invariably associated with
extensive disease, systemic symptoms, and unfavorable histology. In the great majority of patients, the initial pattern of spread occurs nonrandomly and predictably
via lymphatic channels to contiguous lymph node chains. This important observation, first made in the 1930s, continues to form the basis for prophylactic irradiation of
adjacent lymph node–bearing regions in patients with apparently localized HD treated with radiotherapy alone.
STAGING CLASSIFICATIONS
Prior experience with staging laparotomy, the advent of new imaging modalities, and the frequent use of combined modality treatment have made staging procedures
simpler and less invasive. The latest international staging classification was proposed in 1989 during a meeting held in Cotswolds, England. 123 The Cotswolds
classification (Table 45.6-5) is a modification of the Ann Arbor classification using information from staging and treatment over the 1970s and 1980s.

TABLE 45.6-5. Cotswolds Staging Classification for Hodgkin's Disease

Some of the recommended modifications include adding criteria for clinical involvement of the spleen and liver, including evidence of focal defects with two imaging
techniques, eliminating consideration of abnormalities of liver function, adding the suffix X to designate bulky disease (larger than 10 cm maximum dimension), adding
a new category of response to therapy (i.e., unconfirmed or uncertain complete remission) to accommodate the difficulty of persistent radiologic abnormalities of
uncertain significance after primary therapy, and separately classifying certain selected patients with localized extranodal disease (e.g., lung, pleura, chest wall, bone)
contiguous to involved nodes as the appropriate lymph node system stage followed by the subscript E. The E designation excludes multiple extranodal deposits or
bilateral lung extension, which constitute stage IV disease. Recommended staging procedures are listed in Table 45.6-6. An adequate surgical biopsy, possibly of
more than one intact lymph node, is required for histopathologic examination.

TABLE 45.6-6. Recommended Staging Procedures

RADIOGRAPHIC STAGING ABOVE THE DIAPHRAGM
More than 60% of patients with newly diagnosed HD have radiographic evidence of intrathoracic involvement. Frontal and lateral chest radiographs should be
routinely ordered and also represent the ideal for subsequent surveillance.
Massive mediastinal adenopathy [large mediastinal adenopathy (LMA)] has been arbitrarily defined as the ratio greater than one-third between the largest transverse
diameter of the mediastinal mass over the transverse diameter of the thorax at the diaphragm on a standing posteroanterior chest radiograph. 123 Alternatively, others
have defined extensive mediastinal disease as greater than 35% of the thoracic diameter at T5-6, or as measuring greater than 5 to 10 cm in width. Patients with LMA
have an increased risk of relapsing in nodal and extranodal sites above the diaphragm after radiotherapy alone. 124,125 These patients make up 20% to 25% of CS I to
II patients, generally present with involvement of multiple supradiaphragmatic nodal chains, and may have extension of tumor into the lung, pericardium, or chest
wall.124 Systemic symptoms frequently are present.
Staging with thoracic computed axial tomographic (CAT) scanning can more precisely identify sites of initial involvement. 126 CAT scanning is especially apt at
detecting pulmonary disease, pleural or pericardial involvement, apical cardiac nodal enlargement, and extension into the chest wall, and in defining the extent of
involved axillary lymph nodes. Such information has considerable potential to alter clinical management. 127 Identification of the extent of thoracic disease will help to
define the use of combination chemotherapy and the dose, extent, and need for radiotherapy.
With improved gamma camera resolution, several investigators have described the ability of 67Ga scanning to detect intrathoracic lymphadenopathy, though the
reported sensitivities and specificities are somewhat less than those of CAT scanning. Today, the primary role for 67Ga scanning in the thorax is to answer specific
questions that arise after treatment (e.g., whether a residual mass represents viable tumor rather than necrosis or fibrosis). As an alternative to gallium scanning,
positron emission tomography is being explored in Europe and in the United States. 128
Some investigations suggest that the ability of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to detect tumor in mediastinum or hilar lymph nodes is not superior to that of CAT
scanning. 129 Although, MRI can probably function as an alternative to CAT scanning in the thorax, particularly at the level of chest wall involvement, its continuing high
cost and lack of clinical data prevent this modality from being used routinely.
RADIOGRAPHIC STAGING BELOW THE DIAPHRAGM
CAT scanning, lymphangiography (LAG), MRI, and 67Ga scanning all have limitations in the radiologic evaluation of abdominal nodes. No single study is reliable for
detecting HD in normal-size nodes, and all studies have a 20% to 25% false-negative rate due to the inability to detect occult HD in the spleen. 130,131 Ninety percent of
patients who are up-staged have splenic involvement either alone or in addition to other infradiaphragmatic nodal sites. 130 Head-to-head comparisons of bipedal LAG
and CAT scanning suggests that LAG has a small statistical advantage over CAT, particularly in the presence of small lymphadenopathies, because it provides useful
information on lymph node architecture. On the other hand, CAT scanning can better evaluate adenopathy in the celiac axis, splenic hilus, porta hepatis, and
mesentery, relying almost exclusively on increases in the size of the nodes. CAT scanning can also demonstrate foci of HD in the liver and spleen; however, the
false-negative results are too numerous to allow one to rely heavily on CAT assessment of these organs.
During the late 1990s, LAG gave way to CAT scanning as the examination of choice. MRI may be more sensitive than CAT scanning in the evaluation of abdominal
nodes, but information on its usefulness is still limited. MRI appears to be a potentially valuable tool in investigating bone marrow involvement and can help in
directing image-guided biopsies. Gallium scanning can also complement LAG or CAT scanning, but its use in the abdomen may be hampered by normal uptake in the
liver, spleen, and bowel. With the infrequent use of staging laparotomy and splenectomy in the staging of HD, the risk of overstaging based on a single radiographic
test of abdominal involvement (false-positive outcome) has greater potential consequences. Therefore, we recommend that two separate studies (i.e., CAT scanning
and 67Ga scanning) be used to assess abdominal involvement and that positive findings on both tests be required to confirm abdominal involvement for the routine
radiographic staging of HD.
STAGING LAPAROTOMY
Staging laparotomy was extensively used when radiotherapy was the only potentially curative treatment for early-stage HD and when it was mandatory to define the
extent of abdominal disease to help determine the extent of radiation needed below the diaphragm. With the increasing use of combination chemotherapy, staging
laparotomy gradually evolved into a tool that aids in determining whether radiotherapy or chemotherapy should be selected as definitive treatment. With many groups
using prognostic factors to determine treatment for HD, laparotomy has disappeared as a routine staging procedure. Its use now is reserved for patients with limited
disease who are to receive limited treatment.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION
First reports about clinical manifestations of HD and patterns of its course of spreading were conducted by Gilbert, 132 Peters,120 and others. Their findings that HD
spreads by contiguity from one lymph node chain to adjacent chains were extended by the use of prophylactic radiotherapy to lymph node regions adjacent to those
involved with HD. The understanding of the presentation and evolution of HD has been improved by the development of new radiographic studies and the use of
staging laparotomy.130 Although there is evidence that the course of HD is characterized by its onset in a single lymph node or group of lymph nodes, followed by
spreading to contiguous lymph nodes, there are indications that the disease can spread to organs similar to other malignancies by invading blood vessels. 121 Most
convincing data for contiguous spread in HD were found for NS and MC histology. In NS and MC histologic subtypes, a central pattern of lymph node involvement
(cervical, mediastinal, paraaortic) was more common than nodal involvement of mesenteric, hypogastric, presacral, or popliteal regions.
In general, HD patients present with peripheral lymphadenopathy. The nodes usually are not tender, and changes in the overlying skin are not the norm. Otherwise,
tenderness and skin changes are believed to reflect rapid growth with stretching of nodal capsules. In most cases, the nodes are discrete and freely movable. Occult
presentation with central (chest and abdomen) lymphadenopathy, visceral involvement, or systemic symptoms of the disease is uncommon. The most characteristic
clinical presentation of HD is enlarged superficial lymph nodes in young adults, the most frequent locations being cervical and supraclavicular (60% to 80%), high in
the neck or axillary. Less often, such enlarged nodes are found in the inguinal-femoral region.
Mediastinal involvement is discovered often by routine staging chest radiography, and even fairly large masses may occur without producing local symptoms.
Otherwise, symptoms of retrosternal chest pain, cough, or shortness of breath may be clinical signs of an intrathoracic disease presentation. A bulky mediastinal mass
is not uncommonly associated with small amounts of pericardial and pleural fluid, but malignant effusions, diagnosed by thoracentesis or pleural biopsy, are rare.
Involvement of the liver in a patient with newly diagnosed HD is uncommon and occurs almost always with concomitant splenic involvement. HD limited to the spleen

is rare. Patients may present with abdominal swelling secondary to hepatomegaly or splenomegaly or, rarely, with ascites. Infradiaphragmatic lymphadenopathy may
give rise to discomfort and pain in the retroperitoneum or the paravertebral or loin regions, particularly in the supine position, by nodular compression of nerves or
nerve roots. Advanced intraabdominal disease may be associated with obstruction of the ureters or compression of the renal vein, with or without ascites.
Bone marrow infiltration is usually focal and, in most cases, is associated with extensive disease, including systemic symptoms. Laboratory findings such as
leukopenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia, and an elevated alkaline phosphatase level may give indications of bone marrow infiltration.
Involvement of the central nervous system is rare, although invasion of the epidural space can occur by nodular extension from the paraaortic region through the
intervertebral foramina, presenting neurologic symptoms and pain as leading clinical features. 133 Several paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes have been reported in
association with HD, but all are very rare.
Complaints due to extranodal manifestations of disease may occur, such as cough from pulmonary infiltration, jaundice from hepatic involvement, or abdominal pain
from disease adjacent to the bowel. Gastrointestinal involvement is an extremely rare event and might occur as infiltration from mesenteric lymph nodes. Initial
symptoms of disease limited to extranodal tissue are much rarer in HD than in NHLs.
A significant proportion of patients with undiagnosed HD present systemic symptoms before the discovery of enlarged lymph nodes. Typical symptoms are fever,
drenching night sweats, and weight loss (so-called B-symptoms, relating to the Ann Arbor classification). This characteristic HD-associated fever occurs intermittently
and recurs at variable intervals for several days or weeks. Fever and drenching night sweats are found in 25% of all patients at first presentation, increasing to 50% of
patients with more advanced disease. Other nonspecific symptoms are pruritus, fatigue, and the development of pain shortly after drinking alcohol. This pain usually
is transient at the site of nodal involvement and may be severe. Pruritus, although currently not a defined B-symptom, may be an important systemic symptom of
disease but occurs infrequently, in fewer than 20% of patients. It often occurs months or even a year before HD is first diagnosed. 134 The underlying pathophysiologic
mechanisms leading to pruritus are unknown but may be due to an autoimmune reaction in which a number of cytokines are activated by tumor lysis.

TREATMENT METHODS
RADIOTHERAPY
Principles
The early treatment of HD with crude x-irradiation in 1901 followed the discoveries by Roentgen, Becquerel, and the Curies at the end of the eighteenth century. The
first reports of x-ray treatments that would dramatically shrink enlarged lymph nodes produced great excitement and premature predictions for the successful
treatment of HD.135,136 During the first two decades of the twentieth century, physicians mainly used two methods to treat HD with radiation. Small doses of radiation
were administered to the entire trunk at weekly intervals for many weeks or were given as a single massive dose just to the tumor. Neither method controlled the HD,
and both caused severe side effects. 10 Enlarged nodes usually shrank with both techniques, but recurrence and spread to previously uninvolved nodes invariably
followed. After several courses of radiotherapy, the HD became more resistant to treatment, and very few patients survived 5 years from diagnosis. These multiple
recurrences were not attributed to poor radiotherapeutic techniques but were viewed as inherent to the HD itself. Consequently, by 1920, most physicians had
stopped using radiation as a means of curing HD. For the next 40 years, in most centers, treatment was mainly palliative, to shrink large nodes that were painful or
interfered with movement, eating, or breathing.
The development of modern radiotherapeutic techniques for the treatment of HD began with the work of Gilbert, 137 a Swiss radiotherapist, in the 1920s. He advocated
treatment to apparently uninvolved adjacent lymph node chains that might contain suspected microscopic disease, as well as to the evident sites of lymph node
involvement. Peters also adapted this technique at the Princess Margaret Hospital in the late 1930s and early 1940s. In her historic paper published in the American
Journal of Roentgenology in 1950, Peters 120 provided evidence that patients with limited HD could be cured with aggressive radiotherapy that treated involved nodal
disease as well as adjacent nodal sites. She did this by identifying a group of patients with limited-stage HD that was cured with high-dose, fractionated radiotherapy.
She reported 5-year and 10-year survival rates of 88% and 79%, respectively, for patients with disease limited to a single lymph node region, rates that were notably
high for a disease in which virtually no one survived 10 years. Nevertheless, the concept that early-stage HD might be curable with radiotherapy using higher doses
and larger fields was slow to be accepted. Before the 1960s, most patients with limited HD were not treated at all or with only small doses of radiation.
No one deserves more credit than Henry Kaplan for the development of successful modern treatment for HD. His accomplishments are many and include pioneering
work on developing the linear accelerator, 121,138 defining radiation field sizes and doses for a curative approach for early HD, 121 refining and improving diagnostic
staging techniques, developing models for translating laboratory findings into clinical practice, and promoting early randomized clinical trials in the United States.
TECHNIQUES
Excellent results in the treatment of early-stage HD have been achieved through careful delineation of disease and meticulous attention to technique. 139
Treatment-machine generated verification films should be used to ensure proper alignment. Daily doses of no more than 180 to 200 cGy to the mantle field (unless
the treatment field includes the entire heart or entire lung, in which case the dose should be limited to 150 cGy/d or less) reduces risks to both the heart and lungs.
Adjusting treatment on the basis of off-central axis dose calculations can reduce dose inhomogeneity from differences in patient separation within the large mantle
field. Extended source-to-skin distances of 110 cm or greater, rather than a source-to-skin distance of 100 cm, also reduces tissue inhomogeneity. Proper use of
megavoltage energies will ensure that superficial nodes are not underdosed in the buildup region. A 4- to 6-MeV linear accelerator should be used for mantle and
pelvic fields, whereas higher energies (10 to 15 MV) can be used for treating paraaortic nodes.
The mantle field encompasses the submandibular, cervical, supraclavicular, infraclavicular, axillary, mediastinal, subcarinal, and hilar lymph nodes. A total dose of
3000 cGy to the entire mantle field is sufficient for patients with supradiaphragmatic HD when radiotherapy alone is used. Areas of initial involvement should receive a
total dose of 3600 to 4000 cGy through the addition of a cone-down field. Reduction of the radiation dose to 3000 cGy to areas of initial involvement is recommended
for patients receiving combined modality therapy, especially when there has been a good response confirmed by CAT scanning. When at least four cycles of
chemotherapy have been given, radiation to initial uninvolved prophylactic sites probably is not needed. Further reduction to 1500 to 2500 cGy may be desirable in
prepubertal patients receiving combined modality treatment or, occasionally, in patients with extensive nodal involvement who are receiving treatments to large
radiation fields after chemotherapy.
There is an increasing use of involved field irradiation after chemotherapy in the treatment of early-stage HD. Involved field irradiation should encompass the entire
involved lymph node region, as defined initially by Stanford University Medical School. 10 For example, the ipsilateral cervical and supraclavicular nodes and the
inguinal and femoral nodes constitute single regions.
Mantle paraaortic-splenic irradiation after a negative laparotomy occasionally is used as a radiotherapy-alone approach for early-stage disease patients who have not
had a staging laparotomy. The paraaortic field encompasses the paraaortic nodes down to the fourth to fifth lumbar vertebral interspace (L4-5). Without staging
laparotomy and splenectomy, the entire spleen must be irradiated. A CAT scan should be used to localize the position of the spleen and enable blocking of as much
of the left kidney as is possible. The dose to the paraaortic lymph nodes should be 3000 cGy when there is no known disease, and radiotherapy alone is used. Beam
divergence from the mantle and paraaortic fields creates the potential for an overdose at the spinal cord. A number of different matching techniques have been
published.140
Prophylactic pelvic irradiation is used rarely in the modern-day treatment of supradiaphragmatic HD. However, pelvic irradiation continues to be used for patients
presenting with stage I or II infradiaphragmatic HD. Iliac wing blocks to spare bone marrow and a pelvic block to shield the bladder and central pelvic organs should
be part of the treatment technique (which includes irradiation of inguinal and femoral nodes). Loss of fertility in both men and women is a risk with the use of pelvic
irradiation for subdiaphragmatic HD, and techniques should be used to reduce this risk whenever possible. 141
CHEMOTHERAPY
The development of chemotherapeutic programs for HD is a story of success. After the discovery of the cytotoxic effects of nitrogen mustard in the 1940s, a number of
different drugs—including chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide, procarbazine, vinblastine, and vincristine—were developed and showed efficacy in HD. Response rates

were approximately 50% to 60% with 10% to 30% complete response. However, relapse was seen in almost all cases, and no cure could be achieved.
On the basis of a murine leukemia cell line, Skipper et al. 141a postulated a model of tumor cell kill based on the logarithmic cell growth and a logarithmic response to
cytotoxic agents. From this model, the authors predicted that response to chemotherapy would depend on tumor burden, drug dose, and kinetics of residual tumor
cells. It was further postulated that the simultaneous use of several drugs with different modes of action might yield superior results. The combination of drugs might
be tolerated if the toxicities were nonoverlapping. Initial attempts with two-drug combinations revealed the potential of this approach.
However, the relevance of this model was realized in 1967, when DeVita et al. 141b reported on a four-drug combination chemotherapy program, MOPP
[mechlorethamine, vincristine (Oncovin), procarbazine, and prednisone]. This combination established the curability of more than 50% of patients with stage III or IV
disease.
The development of MOPP was a milestone in oncology, demonstrating that advanced-stage HD could be cured. The differences in survival between historic controls
and MOPP-treated patients were so dramatic that randomized clinical trials were not needed to validate these results. Further information on chemotherapy is
provided in Advanced-Stage Disease later in this chapter.
Combined Modality Chemotherapy
In addition to the many factors that affect either chemotherapy or radiotherapy when used alone, there are several issues that arise specifically because of potential
interaction and summing of effects when they are combined. It is important to remember that the purpose of adding a second modality is to overcome resistance to the
first and, in the case of adding irradiation to chemotherapy for HD, it seems likely that full-dose irradiation may be needed to overcome primary resistance to
chemotherapy. Of particular interest are two German trials recently summarized, 142 in which patients with stage IA+B, IIA+B, and stage IIIA disease with extensive
mediastinal or splenic involvement or E lesions were treated with two-course cyclophosphamide, Oncovin, procarbazine, and prednisone (COPP) and doxorubicin
(Adriamycin), bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine (ABVD) followed by irradiation. In the first trial (HD1), responders to chemotherapy then were given
extended-field irradiation with a dose to nonbulky sites assigned randomly to be either 20 Gy or 40 Gy. In the second trial (HD5), a similar group of patients received
30 Gy to the nonbulky sites. Bulky sites received 40 Gy in each trial. Failure-free survival was the same in all groups, strongly implying that after optimal
chemotherapy, irradiation dose, at least to nonbulky sites, can be reduced without sacrificing efficiency.
The risk of two important late complications of irradiation may be reduced by lowering the dose. Studies of late sequelae of treatment for HD suggest that the risk of
second neoplasms, especially breast cancer in women, may be reduced by lower radiation dose. 143 The other late toxicity possibly associated with radiation dose is
cardiovascular. Stanford University investigators found that a higher dose of irradiation to the mediastinum was associated with increased mortality from cardiac
disease. 144
An alternative approach to reduce toxicity from irradiation when used in combined modality treatment is to reduce not the dose but the extent of the field
encompassed. Several trials involving patients with limited-stage HD have shown that results comparable to those achieved with irradiation alone to an extended field
can be achieved when chemotherapy is combined with involved field irradiation. 125,145 The ability to preserve efficacy while limiting toxicity by reducing the size of the
treatment fields is one of the most attractive aspects of using combined modality treatment.
The same theoretic considerations that apply to irradiation are relevant when one considers reduction of the dose of chemotherapy used in combined modality
treatment. The section Choice of Treatment examines these results in more detail.
In theory, either the chemotherapy or the radiotherapy could come first in the sequence of combined modality treatment. In practice, it is almost always desirable for
chemotherapy to precede radiotherapy. The reason for this includes early effective treatment of disseminated disease, delay in induction of irreversible loss of bone
marrow function, and the opportunity to use smaller, potentially less toxic radiation treatment fields after chemotherapy has induced tumor regression.
High-Dose Chemotherapy Plus Stem Cell Support
PRINCIPLES. High-dose chemotherapy (HDCT) has been used extensively in patients with relapsed and refractory HD. Implicit in the rationale for this approach is the

assumption of a steep dose-response relation for lymphoma patients subjected to chemoradiotherapy. Although care must be exercised in interpreting clinical results,
both animal models and clinical studies support the existence of such a relationship. 146
The use of autologous bone marrow or peripheral blood stem cells (PBSCs) to support intensification of chemotherapy as salvage treatment has changed the options
available for relapsed patients. Autologous transplantation involves the replacement of hematopoietic stem cells that have been irreversibly injured by HDCT or
radiotherapy (or both). This can be accomplished either with bone marrow cells obtained by multiple aspirations from the posterior iliac crest under anesthesia or with
PBSCs collected by apheresis. The use of PBSCs has surpassed the use of bone marrow, and PBSCs may be used exclusively in the future. The advantage of using
PBSCs includes avoiding general anesthesia and more rapid hematopoietic reconstitution.
CONDITIONING REGIMENS. Several conditioning regimens have been used and summarized previously.

147

The most commonly used are cyclophosphamide, etoposide
(VP-16), and BCNU (CVB) or BCNU, etoposide, cytarabine (arabinoside), and melphalan (BEAM) given in different dose schedules. When BCNU-containing
regimens are used, careful clinical monitoring to detect early signs of delayed lung toxicity is important, particularly when BCNU doses of 450 mg/m 2 are given.
Mucositis and enterocolitis represent the most significant nonhematologic toxicities associated with high-dose melphalan. Total body irradiation has been used only in
a few studies, owing to the fact that many HD patients have already received thoracic irradiation by the time they have reached the transplantation stage and to the
high treatment-related mortality of patients prepared by total body irradiation–containing regimens. 148,149 Although the toxicity profiles differ with these regimens, there
currently is no evidence to support the superiority of any particular regimen in HD.
Sequential HDCT is increasingly being used in the treatment of solid tumors and lymphoma. First results from phase II studies show that this kind of therapy is safe
and effective. 150,151 In accordance with the Norton-Simon hypothesis, after initial cytoreduction, a few non-cross-resistant agents are given in short intervals. 152 In
general, the transplantation of autologous stem cells and the use of growth factors allow application of the most effective drugs in highest doses in intervals of 1 to 3
weeks. Sequential HDCT permits the highest possible dosing in minimum time.
INCORPORATING RADIOTHERAPY IN HIGH-DOSE CHEMOTHERAPY PROGRAMS. Radiotherapy is a very effective locoregional treatment modality in HD. The rationale for

incorporation of radiotherapy into HDCT programs stems from the observation that disease progression after HDCT often occurs in sites of prior involvement. Several
investigators showed that in 65% to 95% of cases, the sites of failure are involved immediately before HDCT. 148,153 Retrospective analysis suggests that radiotherapy
may be incorporated as cytoreductive treatment before HDCT or as a consolidative therapy after HDCT. 154,155 However, no prospective clinical trial has yet answered
the questions regarding the extent of the radiation field, the timing of treatment, and the appropriate dose to use. The complementary role of radiotherapy in salvage
HDCT is uncertain and remains to be investigated.

CHOICE OF TREATMENT
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS AND TREATMENT GROUPS
A prognostic factor is a measurement or classification of an individual patient, performed at or soon after diagnosis, that gives information on the likely outcome of the
disease. This information will generally be phrased in terms of probabilities—for instance, the probability of cure for various values of a prognostic factor. It may be
used for informing the patient or, in the context of clinical trials, for defining or describing the study population or adjusting the data analysis; however, for the clinician,
the most important role of the prognostic factor is to help in selecting an appropriate treatment strategy.
In HD, patients have traditionally been divided into two or three prognostic groups, chiefly according to stage and B-symptoms but also taking various other factors
into consideration. Most basically, patients with stage IIIB or IV (advanced-stage) disease have been associated with the poorest prognosis and assigned an intensive
chemotherapy protocol, sometimes followed by adjuvant radiotherapy. Further prognostic factors often were used to assign stage IIIA or stage IIB patients to the
advanced-stage group. Among the remaining patients with early-stage disease who had previously continued to receive radiotherapy alone, an “unfavorable”

subgroup often was defined to select patients for combined modality therapy. Each group has thus been associated with a typical standard treatment strategy:
Early stages, favorable: radiation alone (extended field)
Early stages, unfavorable: moderate amount of chemotherapy (typically four cycles) plus radiation
Advanced stages: extensive chemotherapy (typically eight cycles) with or without consolidating (usually local) radiation
These “typical” strategies are not uniformly applied, and the investigation of alternatives (e.g., the use of chemotherapy in favorable early stages) is continuing. In the
scheme just listed, two divisions between the three prognostic groups must be noted, each division possibly being defined by a different set of factors. Furthermore,
the attempt has been made to identify advanced-stage patients with a particularly high risk of failure for intensified therapy (e.g., early HDCT with stem cell
support). 156 The selection of factors and the definition of the prognostic groups vary among institutions, as does the choice of treatment.
Prognostic factors are rarely the subject of specific clinical studies but are discovered and evaluated using data from large cohorts of uniformly treated,
well-documented, and reliably followed-up patients, usually from large clinical trials. 157,158 The diversity of diagnostic and treatment strategies used for the early
stages, as well as statistical problems caused by the low rate of treatment failure events, has led to the reporting and use of different prognostic factors by different
institutions and trial groups.
In the following few sections, recognized prognostic factors are described for early stages treated with radiotherapy alone, for early stages treated with chemotherapy,
and for advanced stages (treated with chemotherapy), respectively. Such factors are required to show independent prognostic value in multivariate analyses of large
numbers of patients. This account refers in general to clinically staged patients, because laparotomy is now rarely performed. The use of these factors to define
prognostic groups for treatment purposes, as practiced by various institutions and study groups, are described.
Prognostic Factors for Early-Stage Disease (Clinical Stage I or II) Treated with Radiotherapy Alone
For those patients with early-stage (CS I or II) disease who are to be treated by radiotherapy alone, recognized adverse factors are (1) advanced age (which
correlates with the presence of occult abdominal disease and with poor results of salvage therapy and may also be associated with treatment complications, leading
to reduced or delayed treatment); (2) male gender (which has a small effect only); (3) histologic subtype MC (which is associated with the presence of occult
abdominal disease); (4) the presence of B-symptoms (which is associated with the presence of occult abdominal disease); (5) presence of a large mediastinal mass
(LMM), for which there is some evidence of an increased relapse rate in the thorax (although there are few data, as few LMM patients were treated with radiotherapy
alone); (6) the number of involved nodal regions; (7) an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR); (8) presence of anemia; and (9) a low serum albumin level.
These factors are relevant to the decision as to which early-stage patients should be classed as unfavorable and receive combined modality therapy because their
prognosis with radiotherapy alone is relatively poor. Major study groups have used criteria as described next. Favorable patients were generally given radiation only,
although the additional application of mild chemotherapy has increased.
The European Organization for the Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) has, since 1982, defined CS I and II (supradiaphragmatic only) patients as
unfavorable if any of the following factors applied: age older than 50 years, asymptomatic with ESR in excess of 50, B-symptoms with ESR in excess of 30, and LMM,
based on the results of earlier EORTC trials H1 and H2. In previous trials, stage II, MC or LD histology, and number of involved regions also were counted as adverse
factors. 159
The GHSG has, since 1988, assigned combined modality treatment to CS I and II patients with any of the following adverse factors: (1) LMM, (2) number of regions
(3), (3) elevated ESR, (4) localized extranodal infiltration (so-called E-lesions), or (5) massive splenic involvement. 160 Owing to the rarity of splenectomy, the
last-mentioned factor was seldom reported and was abandoned for the present trial generation. It can be difficult to distinguish consistently between E-lesions and
stage IV disease, and varying assessments of the prognostic value of this feature have been obtained by different investigators ( Table 45.6-7). Stanford began in
1980 to give combined modality treatment to CS I and II patients with LMM or multiple E-lesions.

TABLE 45.6-7. Definition of Treatment Groups in Two Large Cooperative Trial Groups

The EORTC has investigated the use of localized radiotherapy in a “very favorable” subgroup of early-stage patients. Inclusion criteria were a stage IA female patient
younger than 40 years, with disease of NS or LP histology, without elevated ESR or LMM. A 30% long-term failure rate was observed, however, and this policy was
not continued.
Prognostic Factors for Early-Stage Disease (Clinical Stage I or II) Treated with Chemotherapy
Despite the different mode of action of chemotherapy as compared with radiotherapy, similar prognostic factors have emerged from analyses of cohorts treated with
radiation and with combined modality therapy. All the factors listed for radiation-treated patients have also been reliably confirmed in cohorts who also received
chemotherapy,161,162 either in early or in advanced stages. This similarity of prognostic effects is supported by the observation from a metaanalysis of radiotherapy
versus combined modality treatment in early stages that the size of the difference in failure-free survival between these two treatment strategies was essentially
constant over different prognostic groups. 163
As a consequence, the prognostic factors relevant to the division between unfavorable early and advanced-stage cases (i.e., between moderate and extensive
chemotherapy) are essentially the same as those listed for the division between favorable and unfavorable disease categories. However, generally only stage IIB or III
patients are given “advanced-stage” treatment owing to the presence of these factors.
The EORTC includes in its advanced-stage cohorts stages III and IV only, without regard to other factors, as did the U.S. NCI and several U.S. cooperative groups.
In the GHSG, all stage III and IV patients plus stage IIB with LMM or E-lesions are included in the advanced-stage group. Earlier trials included in the unfavorable
early-stage category either all stage IIIA patients or just those without any of the five GHSG factors listed. This gradual shift to use of more intensive therapy was
based on prognostic factor analyses.
Certain other trial groups include further stage I and II patients in the advanced prognostic group (e.g., IB and IIB or bulky stage II disease). 164
Prognostic Factors for Advanced-Stage Disease
The more uniform treatment modality and the greater frequency of treatment failure events has permitted more conclusive and generally applicable results for
prognostic factor analyses for the advanced stages, as compared with early stages. The results of the International Prognostic Factors Project, 161 though not

necessarily including all possible factors, can be taken as reliable ( Table 45.6-8).

TABLE 45.6-8. Final Cox Regression Model

All these factors were highly significant in the multivariate analysis of data from 5141 patients treated in 25 centers, and their prognostic power was confirmed in an
independent sample. Note that factors 1, 2, 4, and 5 are also prognostic for early-stage patients. All seven factors were associated with similar relative risks of
between 1.26 and 1.49. Therefore, Hasenclever and Diehl 161 recommended combining these factors into a single score by simply counting the number of adverse
factors, thus giving an integer prognostic score between 0 and 7. However, even patients exhibiting five or more factors (7% of cases) had a 5-year failure-free rate of
more than 40%. The best failure-free rate was close to 80% for those with, at most, one factor (29% of cases), suggesting that a group of advanced-stage patients
with a relatively favorable prognosis could be recognized (1618 patients included in the final analysis for FFTF, according to whether the prognostic score was 0 to 2
or 3 or higher) ( Fig. 45.6-4).

FIGURE 45.6-4. International prognostic score split at three prognostic factors.

A number of other factors have been shown to correlate with prognosis in advanced stages, but their independent importance is not proven due to conflicting results
or lack of confirmation in a large data set. These include pathologic grade in NSHD, presence of tissue eosinophilia, elevated inguinal involvement, high serum lactate
dehydrogenase level, and b 2-microglobulin.
Factors relevant to advanced-stage patients may be used to identify patients for either treatment intensification or treatment reduction. Reduction can be achieved by
creating a modified protocol or by including these patients in the early-stage group. Concerning intensification, various investigators have treated a poor-prognosis
subset of advanced-stage patients, who had attained a remission by conventional chemotherapy, with HDCT accompanied by hematologic stem cell support. 156,165
Proctor et al. 165 constructed a continuous numeric index for this purpose as a weighted sum of the variables age, stage, lymphocyte count, hemoglobin, and presence
of bulky disease, and included patients with an index greater than 0.5 in the poor-prognosis subset. Carella et al. 231 included patients with two or more of the following
factors: high lactate dehydrogenase level, very large mediastinal mass, two or more extranodal sites, inguinal involvement, low hematocrit, and bone marrow
involvement. However, none of these methods could consistently select a subset with a failure rate of less than 40% with conventional therapy. This means that the
early high-dose approach is unlikely to show a clinically relevant long-term survival benefit as compared with conventional treatment. 166
Concerning treatment reduction, the short-duration, reduced-dose Stanford V chemotherapeutic regimen (mechlorethamine, Adriamycin, vinblastine, vincristine,
etoposide, bleomycin, and prednisone) 194 with or without radiotherapy is currently being tested in patients with bulky stage II or advanced-stage disease who have, at
most, two International Prognostic Factor Project adverse factors. 167 Stanford V is, however, not merely a reduction of therapy but rather a rescheduling with lower
total doses but greater dose intensities. No data are available on the results of treatment reduction in a favorable subset of the advanced-stage patients.
In conclusion, the three-level scheme of division into early-stage favorable, early-stage unfavorable, and advanced-stage cases remains valid according to current
knowledge (see Table 45.6-7). Separation of very favorable early-stage or poor-risk advanced-stage patients for especially mild or intensive therapy, respectively,
does not appear justified. Several prognostic factors, other than clinical stage, are used in the divisions among favorable, unfavorable, and advanced cases, and no
universally valid set of factors has been determined. Nevertheless, the list of reliably confirmed, independent prognostic factors just reviewed encompasses most of
the factors used by the major institutions and study groups. For early-stage and advanced-stage disease patients receiving radiotherapy or chemotherapy or both, the
set of relevant factors is fairly similar.
A number of other factors have been shown to correlate with prognosis in advanced stages, but their independent importance is not proven due to conflicting results
or lack of confirmation in a large data set. These include both clinical factors, such as inguinal involvement, and biologic factors, such as pathologic grade in NSHD,
presence of tissue eosinophilia, high serum lactate dehydrogenase, and high b 2-microglobulin. The search for biologically specific factors directly related to tumor
activity is now an important research goal.
EARLY-STAGE FAVORABLE DISEASE
Reduction of Staging or Treatment: Ongoing and Recently Completed Trials
Increasing concern for the long-term consequences of treatment has prompted many investigators to reexamine the aggressive approaches developed for the staging
and treatment of early-stage HD in the 1970s and 1980s. Many of the ongoing and recently completed studies were developed in an attempt to reduce the long-term
complications of treatment without increasing mortality from HD. These include studies that look at reduction of radiation dose or reduction of field size in pure
radiotherapy; seek an optimal, short, or less toxic chemotherapeutic regimen; explore an optimal radiation volume in combined modality therapy; or evaluate
chemotherapy alone.
Clinical Trials of Radiotherapy Alone
RADIATION DOSE REDUCTION. Although a few studies have comprehensively reviewed dose-response data for HD, only one prospective randomized study is

available. 168 This multicenter trial by the GHSG evaluated the tumoricidal doses for subclinical involvement by HD. 169 A total of 376 laparotomy-staged
favorable-prognosis IA to IIB HD patients were enrolled. Only patients without risk factors were included in the trial. Any one of the following risk factors was cause for
exclusion: presence of LMA, massive splenic involvement, extranodal disease, an ESR of more than 30 and B-symptoms, an ESR of more than 50 and no

B-symptoms, or more than three regions of involvement. Patients were randomized to receive either 40-Gy extended-field radiotherapy or 30-Gy extended-field
radiotherapy followed by an additional 10 Gy to involved lymph node regions.
The 5-year FFTF results favored the 30-Gy extended-field plus 10 Gy arm over the 40-Gy extended-field arm (81% vs. 70%, respectively; P = .026). The 5-year FFTF
and survival rates were (nonsignificantly) higher in the reduced-dose arm, suggesting that 30 Gy is sufficient for treating subclinical involvement of HD with
radiotherapy alone. 169
RADIATION FIELD SIZE REDUCTION.

Mantle Irradiation Alone in Clinical Stage IA to IIA Patients. The use of mantle irradiation alone for early-stage HD is attractive because all treatment is completed
within 5 weeks, patients avoid the long-term risks of radiation to the upper abdomen, and the potential for salvage with combination chemotherapy is not
compromised. Results of prospective and retrospective studies of mantle irradiation alone for unselected CS I and II patients have been disappointing. The EORTC
H1 trial, one of the first studies to evaluate the role of chemotherapy in the treatment of early-stage HD, randomized clinically staged I and II patients to receive mantle
irradiation alone or combined with vinblastine chemotherapy. All CS I and II patients were enrolled. Fewer recurrences were seen in patients who received both
mantle irradiation and vinblastine chemotherapy. However, relapse rates were high in both groups. The freedom from recurrence was only 38% in the mantle-alone
group, and the 15-year survival rate was only 58%. This suggests that mantle irradiation alone is not adequate treatment for unselected patients with CS I to II HD and
that vinblastine is only partially effective in eliminating recurrences, many of which occurred below the diaphragm. 170 Similarly, the Toronto series reported a 10-year
rate of freedom from recurrence of only 54%. 171 These high recurrence rates in unselected patients are not surprising, as more than 20% of CS I to II patients have
occult abdominal involvement, and absence of treatment of potential abdominal disease (with radiotherapy or chemotherapy) will result in higher recurrence rates than
are achieved with more extensive treatment. When mantle irradiation was restricted to clinically staged, asymptomatic patients in whom a single lymph node region
was involved (CS IA), better results have been seen, with 10- to 15-year freedom-from-recurrence rates of 58% to 81%. 172
Clinically Staged Patients with a Very Low Risk of Abdominal Involvement. Clinically staged patients with a very low risk of abdominal involvement include female
patients with CS IA NSHD, patients with CS IA LP histology, and CS IA patients with interfollicular HD. 130 A similar subgroup of patients was defined by the EORTC
(women <40 years of age with CS IA lymphocytic predominance or NS histology and an ESR <50 mm) and treated with mantle irradiation alone without staging
laparotomy in the EORTC H7VF (very favorable) and H8VF trials. In the H7VF trial, 40 patients were treated with mantle irradiation alone; complete remission was
achieved in 95%. However, 23% of patients experienced relapse, yielding a 6-year event-free survival rate of 66%, a relapse-free survival rate of 73%, and overall
and cause-specific survival rates of 96%. 173 The relapse rates were thought to be unacceptably high in this selected subgroup of stage IA patients. The very favorable
subgroup now is treated according to the EORTC strategy for the favorable subgroup.
Mantle Irradiation Alone in Favorable-Prognosis Stage IA and IIA Patients. To determine the role of prophylactic abdominal irradiation in early-stage HD, the EORTC
H5 trial (1977 through 1982) compared the use of mantle and paraaortic-splenic pedicle irradiation to mantle irradiation alone in patients with favorable early-stage
HD. 159,170 This study included only patients with NS or LP histology, aged 40 years or younger, with prognostically staged (PS) I or II disease with mediastinal
adenopathy, and an ESR of less than 70. No differences were seen in disease-free survival or overall survival between the two treatment groups with or without
paraaortic irradiation. A 1997 update of this trial shows no statistical difference between the two treatment arms, either for treatment failure probability ( P = .62) or
overall survival ( P = .69).
In 1989, a single-arm prospective trial was initiated at the Harvard University Medical School Joint Center for Radiotherapy of mantle irradiation alone in
laparotomy-staged IA to IIA HD patients. The objectives were to identify patients most suitable for mantle irradiation alone, to establish guidelines for follow-up after
treatment, to evaluate the requirement for staging laparotomy, and to provide an assessment of risk versus gain for the reduction of treatment in early-stage HD. The
eligibility criteria for the study included a negative laparotomy, the absence of LMA and B-symptoms, and NS or LP histology. Thoracic CAT scanning and 67Ga
scanning were required to establish the extent of thoracic involvement, and patients with HD in hilar, subcarinal, or cardiophrenic lymph node regions were not eligible
for the trial. Eighty-four patients have been enrolled. The 5-year actuarial rate of freedom from recurrence exceeds 80%. These excellent results with mantle
irradiation alone also have been seen in other retrospective studies. 174
Clinical Trials of Combined Chemoradiotherapy
Some randomized trials of combined modality therapy are based on the premise that this approach results in a very high freedom from recurrence in early-stage HD
and that efficacy can be maintained when using less toxic chemotherapeutic and radiotherapeutic regimens.
LESS TOXIC CHEMOTHERAPY WITH RADIATION: COMPARISON WITH RADIATION ALONE. These trials use chemotherapeutic regimens given for four or six cycles in

combination with radiotherapy. The regimens are combined with involved-field or regional (mantle) radiotherapy with the premise that the drugs being tested will be
able to control both adjacent prophylactic sites and occult abdominal disease in clinically staged patients without upper abdominal and splenic irradiation. Analysis of
patterns and frequency of failure eventually will provide better guidelines for designing optimal regimens to control occult HD not appreciated on physical examination
or radiographic evaluation. If successful, these regimens should reduce treatment-related morbidity and mortality by reducing both the amount and toxicity of
chemotherapy and by using smaller radiation volumes.
With the objective of reducing acute toxicity and chronic morbidity (sterility, increased risk of leukemia), Horning et al. 175 developed a “nontoxic” chemotherapeutic
regimen—vinblastine, bleomycin, and methotrexate (VBM)—which was tested in a randomized trial of PS IA to IIB and PS IIIA patients. The trial compared subtotal or
total nodal irradiation to involved-field irradiation (44 Gy) followed by VBM. 175 Data on freedom from disease progression at 9 years favored involved-field irradiation
and VBM (98%) over subtotal or total nodal irradiation (78%) ( P = .01). No differences were seen in overall survival ( P = .09). The BNLI has confirmed the efficacy of
VBM with involved-field irradiation but, in that group's experience, this approach produced unacceptable pulmonary and hematologic toxicity. 176 Favorable results with
VBM and extended-field radiotherapy in CS IA to IIA HD also have been reported by the Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio dei Linfomi. 177 In that study of 50 patients, the
5-year progression-free survival rate was 82%. Sixteen percent of patients in the trial experienced pulmonary toxicity.
Based on the Stanford trial results reported above, 175 a follow-up Stanford University trial has been completed. 145 Patients with CS IA to IIA HD (staging laparotomy
and splenectomy were eliminated) were treated either with subtotal nodal and splenic irradiation or two cycles of VBM, followed by regional (mantle) irradiation,
followed by four additional cycles of VBM (with a reduced bleomycin dose). No differences in 4-year freedom from disease progression or survival were noted
between the two arms of the trial.
Epirubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and prednisone (EBVP) and involved-field irradiation (n = 168) versus mantle and paraaortic-splenic irradiation (n = 165) for
favorable-prognosis CS IA to IIA patients was tested in the EORTC H7F trial (1988 through 1993). The EORTC EBVP II regimen (one dose per cycle) was proposed
as a potentially less toxic but similarly effective regimen as compared to ABVD. In the H7F trial for patients with favorable disease, six cycles of EBVP were combined
with involved-field radiation and were randomly compared with subtotal nodal and splenic irradiation in favorable CS I and II patients. At 6 years, the relapse survival
rate was significantly higher for patients on the combined chemoradiotherapy arm than for those on the radiotherapy-alone arm (92% vs. 81%, respectively; P = .004).
The 6-year survival rate was excellent in both treatment arms (98% vs. 96%, respectively; P = .156).178,179 In contrast, in the H7U trial for patients with unfavorable
disease, EBVP and involved-field radiotherapy was inferior to MOPP and ABV and involved-field radiotherapy, suggesting that the use of prognostic factors is crucial
in selecting patients for treatment with reduced chemotherapeutic and radiotherapeutic regimens.
REDUCED NUMBER OF CHEMOTHERAPY CYCLES. The trials noted here use combination chemoradiotherapy with fewer than four cycles of chemotherapy. Although the

primary goal of these trials is to evaluate the efficacy of short courses of chemotherapy, new regimens are also being tested [i.e., Stanford V; vincristine, Adriamycin,
prednisolone, etoposide, cyclophosphamide, and bleomycin (VAPEC-B)]. The optimal extent of radiotherapy needed is less certain in the short-course trials. For
example, there are at least limited data that four to six cycles of chemotherapy are sufficient to control occult abdominal disease in the majority of CS I to II
patients. 124,180 With short-course chemotherapy, very few data are available on the effectiveness of different regimens to control HD outside of the involved regions, as
defined by physical examination or radiographic evaluation. This uncertainty is reflected in some of the trial designs that use subtotal nodal and splenic irradiation
rather than involved-field or mantle irradiation in combination with chemotherapy. Ongoing and recently completed short-course trials are listed in Table 45.6-9.

TABLE 45.6-9. Clinical Trials in Favorable-Prognosis Stage I–II Hodgkin's Disease: Trials to Identify the Optimal Number of Chemotherapy Cycles

The GHSG HD7 trial (1994 through 1998) randomized 643 favorable CS IA to IIB HD patients to subtotal nodal and splenic irradiation alone or to two courses of
ABVD and the radiotherapeutic regimen. A preliminary analysis of 365 patients showed an advantage in FFTF in the patients receiving ABVD (96%) as compared to
those treated with irradiation alone (87%; P = .05) (see Table 45.6-9).181
Several questions are raised by this study. First, with an expected long-term FFTF in favorable CS IA to IIA HD of approximately 70% to 75% with radiotherapy alone,
is the added benefit in FFTF with two cycles of ABVD worth the extra risk from the doxorubicin and bleomycin? Second, is it more difficult to salvage patients whose
disease recurs after subtotal nodal and splenic irradiation and two cycles of ABVD than after subtotal nodal and splenic irradiation alone? These are questions that
can be answered only with longer follow-up.
The GHSG HD10 trial (opened in 1998) has essentially the same eligibility criteria as does the GHSG HD7 trial. Patients are to be randomized to four arms, namely
the four combinations of two or four cycles of ABVD followed by 20- or 30-Gy involved-field radiotherapy. This trial should help to determine the number of cycles of
ABVD needed to control occult HD in the abdomen and to prevent recurrence of HD in apparently uninvolved sites adjacent to known HD (adjacent to the irradiated
involved site). It should also help to determine the dose of radiation needed to control HD when combined with limited chemotherapy.
In a Manchester pilot study and a BNLI trial, VAPEC-B chemotherapy is given for 4 weeks, followed by involved-field irradiation or mantle irradiation alone.
Preliminary reports from the Manchester pilot study using the relatively brief 4-week VAPEC-B regimen in early-stage HD provide background data for the ongoing
BNLI trial. In the Manchester study, 111 CS IA to IIA patients without mediastinal bulk have been randomized since 1989 to receive either limited radiotherapy alone
or VAPEC-B followed by local irradiation only to the involved regions. With a median follow-up time of 3.3 years, there have been only two recurrences in the
VAPEC-B–plus–local irradiation arm (progression-free survival rate at 3 years, 91%). 182 The current BNLI study has a similar design; however, the radiotherapy-alone
arm includes full mantle irradiation rather than a more limited field (see Table 45.6-9).
The Southwest Oncology Group–Cancer and Leukemia Group B (SWOG/CALGB) study of three cycles of adjuvant doxorubicin and vinblastine plus subtotal nodal
and splenic irradiation versus subtotal nodal and splenic irradiation alone in CS IA to IIA HD patients is ongoing (see Table 45.6-9). As of June 1998, 284 patients
have been enrolled in the study (information provided courtesy of Dr. Todd Wasserman, CALGB update, June 1998). Of these, 162 patients have been evaluated for
short-term toxicity. The questions raised by this study are similar to those for the GHSG HD7 study, including the potential extra toxicity of the doxorubicin and
vinblastine in a group of patients with an expected favorable prognosis with treatment by radiotherapy alone and the overall strategy in trial design of giving enough
chemotherapy to eliminate the need for abdominal irradiation.
The EORTC H8F trial (1993 through 1998), which compares three cycles of MOPP/ABV hybrid and involved-field irradiation to mantle and paraaortic-splenic
irradiation for favorable-prognosis CS IA to IIA patients, was activated in 1993 (see Table 45.6-9). This trial should answer the following important questions: Are
three cycles of standard chemotherapy sufficient to control subclinical HD in favorable-prognosis CS IA to IIA patients? Can patients who experience relapse after
three cycles of MOPP/ABV and involved-field radiotherapy be cured with an alternative treatment, short of HDCT and stem cell rescue? The one concern of the trial is
the use of the hybrid regimen, which confers some risk of sterility and leukemogenesis in these favorable-prognosis HD patients. ABVD and EBVP are proposed for
the H9 trials.
The modified Stanford V trial for early-stage favorable-prognosis HD involves a relatively short, but intensive, chemotherapeutic regimen given for 12 weeks to
patients with poor-prognosis stage I to II disease. 183 A modification of this trial has been opened for favorable-prognosis CS IA to IIA patients using 8 weeks of the
Stanford V regimen and modified involved-field irradiation to sites of initial involvement (identified radiographically as nodal enlargement of ³1.5 cm). The
chemotherapeutic regimen includes mechlorethamine (6 mg/m 2 in weeks 1 and 5), doxorubicin (25 mg/m 2 in weeks 1, 3, 5, and 7), vinblastine (6 mg/m 2 in weeks 1, 3,
5, and 7), prednisone (40 mg/m 2 on days 1 through 36, followed by tapering), vincristine (1.4 mg/m 2 in weeks 2, 4, 6, and 8), bleomycin (5 mg/m 2 in weeks 2, 4, 6, and
8), and VP-16 (60 mg/m2 on days 15 and 16 and days 43 and 44). This regimen will evaluate the ability of brief but intense chemotherapy to control HD outside of
initially involved sites in favorable-prognosis CS I to II patients.
RADIATION VOLUME AND DOSE. Two ongoing trials in favorable-prognosis early-stage HD are evaluating radiation dose to involved sites after chemotherapy. The

GHSG initiated a trial, HD10, that compares 30-Gy with 20-Gy irradiation after two cycles of ABVD, as described previously in the section Reduced Number of
Chemotherapy Cycles (see Table 45.6-9). The EORTC H9F trial is evaluating 36-Gy or 20-Gy irradiation or no radiation to involved sites in patients who have
achieved a complete remission after six cycles of EBVP.
Clinical Trials of Chemotherapy Alone
Probably the first published experience of the use of MOPP chemotherapy alone in early stages of childhood HD comes from Uganda, where no radiotherapy was
available. 184 Several small, retrospective studies have also reported treatment with MOPP alone. 185 On the basis of this limited experience, two randomized studies
were devised to compare radiotherapy alone to MOPP chemotherapy alone in laparotomy-staged patients; both studies have median follow-up times of 7.5 to 8 years.
Although both studies now are dated because of the use of the MOPP regimen and the requirement for staging laparotomy, results from these trials provide valuable
information for the design of future protocols.
CHEMOTHERAPY VERSUS RADIATION. The NCI study was initially designed to include patients with intermediate-prognosis HD.

186

Although the trial included patients
with favorable-prognosis PS IIA disease, the most favorable patients (PS IA patients with peripheral sites) were not included in the trial and were treated with
radiotherapy alone. Patients with an unfavorable prognosis (B-symptoms, LMA, and limited stage III disease) were included in the trial. Patients were randomized to 6
months of MOPP chemotherapy alone or to subtotal nodal irradiation alone. After researchers recognized that patients with massive mediastinal involvement and PS
IIIA disease were not optimal candidates for radiotherapy alone, the randomization criteria were changed while the study was ongoing. No difference in disease-free
or overall survival was seen at 10 years.
The Italian prospective study randomized patients with PS IA to IIA HD to receive either 6 months of MOPP alone or subtotal nodal irradiation alone. 187 There were no
differences in freedom from progression. However, the survival rate was significantly higher in patients treated with radiotherapy alone (93%) than in those treated
with chemotherapy alone (56%). The difference in survival was attributed to the inability to salvage patients who experienced relapse after MOPP chemotherapy;
these results are similar to the poor results of salvage ABVD in patients who experienced relapse after MOPP for advanced HD.
Both the NCI and the Italian studies demonstrated greater acute toxicities in patients who received MOPP chemotherapy. In the Longo et al. 186 study, more than 50%
of patients treated with MOPP had at least one hospital admission for fever and neutropenia.
The NCIC CTG HD6 study (unpublished data) is a modification of the NCI and Italian studies, with randomization of clinically staged, rather than pathologically
staged, patients and the use of ABVD as the chemotherapeutic regimen. Favorable-prognosis patients (NS or LP histology, age <40 years, ESR <50, one to three
sites of involvement) are randomized to subtotal nodal irradiation and splenic irradiation versus four cycles of ABVD alone. This study will test the efficacy of four

cycles of ABVD alone in favorable-prognosis early-stage HD. The study is open for accrual.
CHEMOTHERAPY VERSUS COMBINED MODALITY THERAPY. In 1977, the Grupo Argentino de Tratamiento de la Leucemia Aguda (GATLA)/Grupo Latinamericano de

Trataniento de Hematopatias Malignas cooperative groups initiated a randomized study 187a of chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide (600 mg/m2 on day 1),
vinblastine (6 mg/m2 on day 1), procarbazine (100 mg/m2 on days 1 through 14), and prednisone (40 mg on days 1 through 14) (CVPP) alone for six cycles versus
CVPP plus radiotherapy consisting of 30 Gy to involved areas for patients with CS I to II disease. Overall, the 7-year disease-free survival rate was 71% for
chemoradiotherapy as compared to 62% for chemotherapy alone (P = .01); survival rates were 89% and 81%, respectively ( P = .3). In a subgroup of patients with
favorable-prognosis CS I to II disease, no differences were observed in actuarial rates of disease-free survival (77% vs. 70%) or overall survival (92% vs. 91%),
respectively, for CVPP plus involved-field irradiation versus CVPP alone. In comparing these results with other adult studies, one should note that in this study and in
the subsequent GATLA study, nearly 50% of the patients were younger than 16 years. It is possible that treatment approaches with chemotherapy alone may be more
successful in children than in adult patients.
In the subsequent GATLA study, patients with favorable prognosis were randomized to CVPP for three cycles versus six cycles. 188 At 5 years, the actuarial event-free
survival (80% vs. 84%) and overall survival (91% vs. 92%) rates were not significantly different.
The ongoing EORTC three-armed trial (H9F) for favorable-prognosis CS I to II patients who achieve a complete remission after six cycles of EBVP are randomized to
36-Gy involved-field irradiation versus 20-Gy involved-field irradiation versus no radiotherapy.
The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center trial randomizes CS I through IIIA patients without LMA or bulky disease, who have achieved a complete remission after
six cycles of ABVD, to either mantle irradiation (35 Gy) or no further treatment. This trial has enrolled approximately 120 patients of a planned total of 200 patients.
Recommendations and Future Directions
Standard care currently provides a number of treatment options for patients with early-stage favorable-prognosis HD. These include the use of mantle irradiation
alone for selected patients with negative laparotomy staging, mantle plus paraaortic and splenic irradiation without laparotomy staging, and combination
chemotherapy and radiotherapy, often with a reduced number of cycles of chemotherapy and reduction of radiation field sizes and doses (e.g., ABVD for four cycles
followed by involved-field radiation to 20 to 30 Gy).
Current clinical trials are evaluating the use of alternative chemotherapy combinations, shortened courses of chemotherapy, chemotherapy with smaller radiation
fields or lower radiation doses, and chemotherapy without radiotherapy. Death from HD in favorable-prognosis early-stage patients is unusual, and mortality from
other causes occurs many years later. Therefore, survival is not a useful parameter for evaluating midterm results in early-stage HD. Current trials must be judged by
freedom-from-first-recurrence rates, acute morbidity, and by new criteria such as quality of life and, perhaps, cost-effectiveness. Trials aiming at high
freedom-from-first-recurrence rates may show that the tested regimens do not provide the optimum treatment once long-term (10- to 20-year) data are available;
treatment-related mortality may exceed HD mortality in favorable-prognosis early-stage patients. New methods in decision analysis should also help in the design of
trials and in the analysis of retrospective data.
Despite the increasing availability of guidelines for the treatment of HD, there must remain room for individualization of treatment. With different treatment options,
some of which may result in a higher recurrence risk at the gain of less toxic initial treatment, patient preferences must be assessed. In addition, treatment should be
individualized when a particular treatment approach might result in a higher risk of a serious late complication (e.g., risk of late breast cancer in young female patients
treated with large radiation fields). This is an exciting time for the development of new strategies in the treatment of early-stage HD. Many of the ongoing trials ask
questions that will allow us to optimize treatment for early-stage patients and minimize long-term toxicity.
EARLY-STAGE UNFAVORABLE DISEASE
Numerous studies analyzed clinical prognostic factors for patients with stage I to II HD in the 1970s and 1980s. 163,170 On the basis of these studies, clinical
investigators have defined favorable and unfavorable prognostic groups of patients with stage I to II HD in an effort to refine the design of clinical trials and to tailor
treatment in accordance with prognostic factors. Although the definition of favorable- and unfavorable-prognosis early-stage HD continues to vary among different
cooperative groups and institutions, three factors of poor prognostic significance are used as grouping criteria in most clinical trials: LMA or bulky disease,
B-symptoms, and advanced age. For each prognostic group, the goal is to define the precise amount of treatment that will both minimize recurrence and mortality from
HD and provide the least risk for long-term toxicity. Patients with unfavorable disease require, in general, more aggressive treatment than do those with favorable
disease. However, the likelihood of cure of patients with unfavorable stage I to II disease is still high and, therefore, consideration of long-term toxicity remains an
important issue in the treatment of these patients.
A number of clinical trials comparing radiotherapy alone to combined modality therapy for unfavorable-prognosis stage I to II HD were conducted in the 1970s and
1980s. The high recurrence rates with radiotherapy alone led to the development of strategies in current trials that use various combinations of chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. To illustrate, one large trial conducted by the EORTC (H5U) 159 randomized patients with unfavorable prognostic factors to total nodal irradiation or
MOPP chemotherapy (six cycles) and mantle irradiation. Although overall survival did not differ (69% in both arms at 15 years), treatment failure (35% vs. 16%; P
<.001) strongly favored the chemotherapy arm.
Trials to Identify the Best Chemotherapy Combination
The evolution of studies to identify the best chemotherapy combination for unfavorable early-stage HD paralleled analogous trials for advanced stages. Early trials
evaluated MOPP versus MOPP-like combinations, later trials compared these combinations with ABVD and, finally, the most recent trials compare new intense
chemotherapy combinations with ABVD.
The first combined modality trial to test MOPP versus ABVD in unfavorable-prognosis patients was the Milan study, conducted between 1974 and 1982, using
split-course treatment (three cycles of chemotherapy preceding and following subtotal nodal irradiation), which showed no significant difference in freedom from
progression. 189 However, in the EORTC H6U trial (1982 through 1988) comparing split-course MOPP and ABVD, the 10-year survival was equivalent in both arms, but
the FFTF rate was significantly higher with ABVD than with MOPP. 190,191
The GATLA trial and the EORTC H7U trial ( Table 45.6-10) studied modified nonalkylating agent regimens versus standard alkylating agent regimens in
unfavorable-prognosis early-stage patients. All patients received combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy. In both trials, the arms using modified chemotherapy
were associated with significantly higher recurrence rates.

TABLE 45.6-10. Randomized Clinical Trials in Unfavorable-Prognosis Stage I–II Hodgkin's Disease: Trials to Identify the Optimal Chemotherapy Combination

In the EORTC trial, the recurrence rate was high enough to result in early closure of the trial. Although, in favorable-prognosis stage I to II HD, less toxic and less
intense chemotherapeutic regimens have been effective in combined modality therapy programs, this does not appear to be the case for patients with
unfavorable-prognosis disease. In the GATLA trial, the event-free survival was 66% for doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone, and etoposide versus 85% for CVPP ( P =
.009).188 In the EORTC trial, the event-free survival was 68% for EBVP II and involved-field radiotherapy versus 90% for MOPP/ABV ( P = .0001).178
Several nonrandomized trials also have evaluated alternative chemotherapeutic regimens using a reduced number of cycles of chemotherapy or modified
chemotherapeutic regimens. 192,193 It is worth noting one recent trial: At Stanford, the Stanford V regimen, administered for 3 months, was followed by involved-field
irradiation to 36 Gy in 38 patients with large mediastinal disease. No patients have experienced relapse or died (median follow-up, 40 months). 194
Based mainly on trials in advanced HD, ABVD has become the standard regimen used in patients with CS I to II disease. A number of current trials compare
combined modality therapy using ABVD with more intense, novel regimens. Both the EORTC H9U and GHSG HD11 studies of combined modality therapy are
comparing four cycles of ABVD with four cycles of BEACOPP. 181 In the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) 2496 trial of combined modality therapy, six
cycles of ABVD are being compared to 3 months of the Stanford V regimen. 194
Trials to Identify the Optimal Number of Cycles of Chemotherapy
Two large, randomized trials are currently evaluating whether four cycles of combination chemotherapy and radiotherapy is sufficient treatment as compared to six
cycles of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The recently closed EORTC H8U study randomized patients to combined modality therapy with four or six cycles of
MOPP/ABV, but the results have not yet been reported (see Table 45.6-10). The new EORTC H9U trial randomizes patients to four and six cycles of ABVD. 181 A
number of retrospective or prospective single-arm studies have evaluated the role of the number of cycles of chemotherapy in patients with large mediastinal
disease. 193,195,196 The results vary, and the number of patients studied is small; a more definitive answer will need to come from the large, randomized trials currently
under way.
Trials to Identify the Appropriate Radiotherapy Volume
Several randomized trials have addressed the question of radiotherapy volumes in combined modality programs. The French trial reported by Zittoun et al. 197
randomized 218 stage I to II unfavorable-prognosis patients to six cycles of MOPP sandwiched around involved-field (40-Gy) or extended-field (40-Gy) irradiation.
The 6-year disease-free survival rates were 87% and 93%, respectively ( P = .15). The Milan study reported by Hoppe et al. 197a incorporated only 4 months of
chemotherapy (ABVD), followed by involved-field (36-Gy) or subtotal nodal irradiation (30 to 36 Gy). The 5-year freedom-from-progression rates were 96% and 93%,
respectively (Table 45.6-11).

TABLE 45.6-11. Randomized Clinical Trials in Unfavorable Prognosis Stage I–II Hodgkin's Disease: Trials to Identify the Appropriate Radiation Volume

The three-arm EORTC/Groupe d'Etude les Lymphomes de l'Adulte H8U trial, randomized patients to four cycles of MOPP/ABV plus involved-field irradiation or
subtotal nodal irradiation. 197b The GHSG HD8 trial, conducted between 1993 and 1998, used two cycles (4 months) of COPP/ABVD followed by either involved-field or
extended-field irradiation to 30 Gy (see Table 45.6-11).197b Preliminary evidence from these randomized trials as well as from several nonrandomized studies suggests
that radiation fields may be safely limited to involved regions in most combined modality programs when chemotherapy is given over 4 months or more. 198,199
Trials of Chemotherapy Alone versus Combined Modality Therapy
Only one prospective trial of chemotherapy alone versus combined modality therapy in unfavorable-prognosis stage I to II disease patients has been reported. The
GATLA randomized 104 patients with unfavorable disease characteristics to six cycles of CVPP alone or six cycles of CVPP sandwiched around involved-field
irradiation (30 Gy). 200 The 7-year survival rates were 66% and 84%, and the freedom-from-relapse rates were 34% and 75% ( P <.001), both favoring combined
modality treatment.
The ongoing NCI of Canada (NCI-C) HD6 trial evaluates patients with unfavorable disease characteristics but excludes patients with LMA or bulky disease. Patients
are randomized to receive combined modality therapy with two cycles of ABVD followed by irradiation (an extended mantle plus splenic irradiation or mantle plus
paraaortic and splenic irradiation) or four to six cycles of ABVD alone (depending on the rapidity of response).
Recommendations and Future Directions
The outcome of treatment for patients with unfavorable-prognosis stage I to II HD has improved dramatically since the 1970s. Mainly, this is due to the use of
combined modality therapy, as historically either radiotherapy alone or chemotherapy alone was associated with recurrence rates of approximately 50%. Current
clinical trials are exploring new combinations of radiotherapy and chemotherapy to try to reduce late morbidity and mortality while maintaining a high probability of
freedom from first recurrence.
ADVANCED-STAGE DISEASE
Basic Regimens: MOPP and ABVD
MECHLORETHAMINE , VINCRISTINE (ONCOVIN), PROCARBAZINE, AND PREDNISONE. Initially the four-drug MOPP program was administered with each drug given at full

dose over 2 weeks, resulting in a complete remission rate of 81%. Complete remission rates of 73% to 81%, long-term freedom from progression of 36% to 52%, and
long-term overall survival of 50% to 64% were obtained in major trials of MOPP in advanced-stage HD. 201,202 and 203
Despite the good initial results with MOPP therapy, several groups investigated alternative regimens to improve the efficacy or reduce toxicities. The CALGB showed
that omission of the alkylating agents nitrogen mustard or procarbazine from the MOPP regimen were associated with inferior complete remission rates. 204 Thus, the
four-drug principle was considered a standard at that time, to which all alternative combinations had to be compared.
Modifications of the MOPP scheme included the substitution of an alkylating agent such as cyclophosphamide or chlorambucil for mechlorethamine (COPP) or a vinca
alkaloid such as vinblastine or vincristine for Oncovin (MVPP), as well as alteration of the doses of procarbazine and prednisone.
The ECOG developed a five-drug regimen containing BCNU, cyclophosphamide, vinblastine, procarbazine, and prednisone (BCVPP) with MOPP. 205 Their results
showed that BCVPP had a significantly higher freedom-from-progression rate (50% vs. 33%) and overall survival rate (83% vs. 75%) than did MOPP at 5 years.

However, the interpretation of these results is complicated by the inclusion of previously treated patients.
In the United Kingdom, the MVPP combination was used, which revealed comparable results to MOPP, with complete remission rates of 60% to 80% and 5- year
overall survival rates of 70% to 80%. 206,207 Also in the United Kingdom, the chlorambucil, vinblastine, procarbazine, and prednisone (ChlVPP) regimen was developed
and showed similar efficacy with less acute toxicity as compared to MOPP, although a randomized comparison was not performed. The BNLI performed a randomized
trial to compare chlorambucil (Leukeran), Oncovin, procarbazine, and prednisone (LOPP) with MOPP. No significant differences were observed in complete remission
or overall survival rates. 208 Taken together, several MOPP-like regimens showed similar efficacy with less acute gastrointestinal and neurologic toxicities.
ADRIAMYCIN , BLEOMYCIN, VINBLASTINE, AND DACARBAZINE. MOPP and its derivatives had two limitations: Only approximately 50% of patients could be cured, and the

alkylating agent–based combination was associated with an increased risk of sterility and acute leukemia. In an attempt to develop a regimen for patients in whom
MOPP had failed, Bonadonna et al. 209 introduced the ABVD regimen. Vinblastine had demonstrated high activity as a single agent and lacked cross-resistance with
vincristine in human tumors. Both doxorubicin and bleomycin were very active drugs and showed objective responses in approximately 50% of patients. Dacarbazine
was added because it was active as a single agent and also showed synergism with doxorubicin.
The Milan group compared three cycles of MOPP or ABVD followed by extended-field irradiation and three additional cycles of the same chemotherapy. 210 A
significant difference in favor of ABVD could be achieved, with freedom-from-progression rates of 63% for MOPP versus 81% for ABVD.
Both MOPP and ABVD were highly active regimens and had nonoverlapping toxicities. It was therefore straightforward to test combinations of MOPP and ABVD to
further increase treatment results. The Milan group randomized patients with stage IV disease to MOPP or MOPP/ABVD for up to 12 cycles. The results were
emphatically in favor of the alternating program, with a statistically significant difference in freedom from progression at 8 years (36% MOPP vs. 65% MOPP/ABVD;
P<.005). 205 Subsequently, three large cooperative trial groups (ECOG, 211 CALGB,211a and EORTC 212) have confirmed these results and demonstrated superior results
with the combination of MOPP/ABVD over MOPP or a MOPP derivative. ECOG compared the MOPP derivative BCVPP with MOPP followed by ABVD. Both complete
remission and overall survival rates were superior with the MOPP/ABVD combination.
The CALGB tested, in a three-arm trial, six to eight cycles of MOPP, six to eight cycles of ABVD, and 12 cycles of MOPP alternating with ABVD. 211 At 10 years, the
failure-free survival rates were 38% for MOPP, 55% for ABVD, and 50% for MOPP/ABVD, with a probability value of .02. Overall survival was not significantly different
among the three arms, although there was a trend in favor of ABVD or MOPP/ABVD as compared to MOPP alone. 211
The EORTC compared two courses of MOPP alternating with two courses of ABVD to a total of eight courses. 212 Radiotherapy was given to initial bulk or residual
masses after chemotherapy. MOPP/ABVD showed a significantly higher failure-free survival rate at 6 years (43% MOPP vs. 60% MOPP/ABVD). 212
Thus, ABVD alone and MOPP/ABVD are more effective than MOPP alone. In addition, ABVD alone offers the advantage of less acute and long-term toxicities.
Viviani et al. 164
initially applied up to 12 cycles of MOPP and later, in the alternating program, eight cycles without reduction in efficacy. The CALGB trial demonstrated that eight
cycles of ABVD was comparable to 12 cycles of alternating MOPP/ABVD. 214 A total of eight to 12 cycles of chemotherapy was given in the more recent phase III trials.
Thus, although the optimal duration is not known precisely, eight cycles of MOPP, ABVD, or a combination appear to be sufficient.
DURATION OF THERAPY. In the original NCI studies of MOPP, two additional monthly cycles were given after a complete remission was achieved.

213

Hybrid Regimens
The theoretic basis for multidrug regimens is the predicted advantage of the early introduction of all active agents to avoid resistant tumor cell clones. This idea is
based on a model proposed by Goldie and Coldman, 215 who related the drug sensitivity of tumors to their spontaneous mutation rate. The model formed the basis of
“hybrid” schemes, which were tested by several groups in advanced-stage HD.
Groups in Vancouver and Milan independently designed two hybrids of MOPP and ABVD to test the Goldie-Coldman hypothesis prospectively. 215 The NCI-C
compared the MOPP-ABV hybrid with alternating MOPP/ABVD in patients with stage IIIB or IV HD. At 5 years, there was no significant difference in the overall
survival rates between both arms, although the hybrid regimen was associated with higher hematologic and nonhematologic toxicities. 216
The Milan group compared their MOPP/ABV hybrid with alternating MOPP/ABVD. Freedom-from-progression and overall survival rates at 10 years revealed no
significant difference between the hybrid and alternating arms. 164
The GHSG compared a new hybrid scheme—COPP, ABV, and ifosfamide, methotrexate, and etoposide (IMEP) with their standard COPP/ABVD. Complete
remissions, FFTF, and overall survival rates showed no statistically significant difference between the two treatment arms. 217
A second intergroup trial 217a that compared an MOPP/ABV hybrid with ABVD was performed in the United States, recruiting a total of 856 patients with stage III or IV
HD or recurrent disease after radiotherapy. This study was prematurely stopped by the Data and Safety Monitoring Board because an excess of treatment-related
deaths and second malignancies with the hybrid regimen was observed. At 3 years, similar failure-free survival rates were observed for ABVD (65%) and MOPP/ABV
(67%). From this trial, it was concluded that ABVD and MOPP/ABV are equally effective but that ABVD is less toxic and should remain the standard treatment.
The potential relevance of scheduling was exemplified in a recent BNLI study in which a significant difference was found between a LOPP and etoposide, vincristine,
and Adriamycin (EVA) hybrid and LOPP alternating with EVA that contained identical total doses. The complete remission was significantly less in the hybrid arm, and
the trial was stopped prematurely. 218
To summarize, the Goldie-Coldman hypothesis could not be proven in advanced-stage HD, although this could be due to the fact that the optimal hybrid regimen has
not been identified thus far. ABVD has emerged as the standard against which newer treatments must be compared. With ABVD, 60% to 70% of patients will be free
of disease at 5 years. ABVD is much less likely to cause severe myelotoxicity, acute leukemia, or sterility than are treatment programs that contain significant doses of
alkylating agents.
New Chemotherapeutic Regimens
The success of ABVD in the CALGB and in the intergroup trials indicated that alkylating agents are not essential for curative treatment for advanced HD. However,
the pulmonary toxicity of bleomycin, which is especially pronounced in children and in combination with mediastinal irradiation, remains a major concern with ABVD. A
number of drugs showing high efficacy in relapsed HD have become candidates for use in first-line therapy. The topoisomerase inhibitor etoposide has gained special
interest among several groups, as a 20% to 60% response rate in refractory HD was reported with single-agent etoposide. 219 On the basis of these considerations,
several etoposide-containing drug regimens have been developed.
At Stanford, the five-drug regimen Stanford V was developed. 183 The program was applied weekly over a total of 12 weeks. Sophisticated consolidative radiotherapy
to sites of initial bulky disease was used. In this phase II trial, 126 patients had been recruited. The estimated 5-year freedom-from-progression rate was 89%, and the
overall survival was 96% at a median observation time of 4.5 years in this single-center study. Reduced long-term toxicities with preserved fertility was a major goal
and could be achieved both in men and women. An intergroup trial of Stanford V versus ABVD has been initiated in selected patients with low-risk advanced HD.
Similarly, the Manchester group developed an abbreviated, 11-week chemotherapeutic program, VAPEC-B. In a randomized trial, VAPEC-B and the hybrid
ChlVPP/EVA were compared with radiotherapy applied to previous bulky disease or residual disease. 220 This study was stopped after 26 months owing to a threefold
increase in the rate of progression after VAPEC-B.
The Southampton group developed another abbreviated, weekly chemotherapeutic regimen consisting of PACE-BOM. 221 Radiotherapy was applied to residual
disease. A 64% failure-free survival was reported after a median observation time of 5 years.
Caution should be exercised when comparing results of different trials; particularly the amount of consolidative radiation, can vary widely. Large, randomized trials

provide the only reliable comparisons between regimens. Table 45.6-12 shows the doses and scheduling of polychemotherapeutic regimens in HD.

TABLE 45.6-12. Polychemotherapy Regimens Used in Hodgkin's Disease

Dose and Dose Intensity
In several animal models, a clear relationship between chemotherapy dose and tumor response has been demonstrated. In HD, retrospective analyses of drug
delivery with MOPP chemotherapy showed that patients receiving less than the optimal doses had inferior results. 222 Such dose effects were detected independently
with mustard, procarbazine, and vincristine.
Until recently, no prospective randomized trials to analyze the role of dose intensity in the treatment of advanced HD had been conducted. There are two principal
ways to test dose intensity: Doses of cytotoxic drugs can be intensified by increasing individual drug dose or by shortening the interval between treatments (or both).
Gerhartz et al. 223 compared COPP/ABVD with a dose- and time-escalated COPP/ABVD regimen given with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor support.
The delivered dose intensity in the dose-intensified arm was 1.22, as compared with 0.92 in the standard arm (1.0 = standard intended dose). The preliminary
analysis revealed a higher complete remission rate in the intensified arm, but definite results have not been reported yet.
The GHSG has conducted a series of clinical trials to address the role of dose intensity in advanced HD in a comprehensive way. A mathematic model of tumor
growth and chemotherapeutic effects was developed and fitted to the data from 705 patients treated by the GHSG. 224 This model predicted that moderate dose
escalation would increase tumor control by 10% to 15% at 5 years. The BEACOPP regimen was devised and used as a standard combination for dose escalation. 225
After establishing excellent tolerability as well as efficacy in a pilot trial, a second study of escalated BEACOPP was performed in which doxorubicin was increased to
a fixed level and doses of cyclophosphamide and etoposide were increased in a stepwise fashion with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor support. 226 Maximum
practicable doses were found to be 190% of cyclophosphamide and 200% of etoposide.
The GHSG then designed a three-arm study comparing COPP/ABVD, standard BEACOPP, and escalated BEACOPP in patients with advanced HD. 227 Radiotherapy
was prescribed for bulky disease at diagnosis or for residual disease after eight cycles of chemotherapy, and approximately two-thirds of patients received
consolidative radiotherapy. In 1996, at the time of a planned interim analysis, the COPP/ABVD arm of this trial was closed to accrual because of superior outcomes in
the combined BEACOPP arms.227 In a subsequent interim analysis, with 1070 patients evaluated, superior FFTF results were seen with escalated BEACOPP (88%)
versus standard BEACOPP (79%) and COPP/ABVD (69%). A major difference was observed in the rate of primary progressive disease during initial therapy, which
was significantly lower with escalated BEACOPP (2%) versus BEACOPP (8%) and COPP/ABVD (12%). Although there was a trend in the overall survival rate in favor
of BEACOPP, this was significant only at the time of this interim analysis.
As expected, escalated BEACOPP was associated with greater hematologic toxicity, including a greater use of both red blood cell and platelet transfusions. Second
malignancies, including acute myeloid leukemia possibly related to etoposide, were reported with BEACOPP. However, the rate of secondary high-grade NHLs was
similarly reduced after escalated BEACOPP. The mature data from this important study, particularly with survival as an end point, are awaited with great interest.
HDCT frequently is used in patients with first or later relapses of HD. Numerous phase II trials and two randomized trials from the BNLI and the GHSG have shown
superior results with a high-dose program as compared to conventional treatment. 228,229 and 230 In advanced-stage HD, limited data concerning the role of HDCT are
available. The Genua group of Carella et al. 231 conducted a phase II trial of myeloablative therapy and autografting among patients with poor-risk features as
described by Straus et al. 232 Subsequently, the European Bone Marrow Transplant Registry (EBMT) initiated a prospective study in poor-risk patients comparing
HDCT and autografting with additional chemotherapy after four cycles of ABVD-containing chemotherapy. Proctor et al. 165 have used their previously published model
to identify patients at risk for an ongoing study in which patients are randomized to additional chemotherapy or HDCT and autografting after three cycles of a hybrid
regimen and radiotherapy to bulky sites. 232 No interim results of these studies have yet been published.
Role of Radiotherapy
The ability of radiotherapy to provide local control in HD is well established. Furthermore, radiotherapy is non–cross-resistant with standard combination
chemotherapy. However, the role of radiotherapy in advanced-stage HD is still controversial. Despite this uncertainty, most large trial groups include some
radiotherapy as an integral part of their advanced-stage treatment strategy.
The potential contribution of radiotherapy depends on a variety of factors, including patient parameters (e.g., age, stage of the disease, and tumor mass) and the
chemotherapy program. The field and dose influence efficacy and toxicity. Radiotherapy in advanced HD can be considered in three clinical settings. First,
radiotherapy may be used as an adjuvant after complete remission with standard chemotherapy. Second, radiotherapy may be an integrated component of a
combined modality program, possibly with reduced or brief chemotherapy. Finally, radiotherapy can serve as a non-cross-resistant treatment for patients with partial
or uncertain response after chemotherapy.
There have been several reports indicating that patients treated with chemotherapy alone failed to completely respond or progressed, primarily in previously involved
nodal sites. In the SWOG study, 80% of relapses after MOP-BAP chemotherapy were detected in initially involved sites. 233 A number of authors have reported that
approximately 30% of selected patients who experienced relapse after chemotherapy can achieve long-term remissions with radiotherapy. However, the benefits of
consolidative radiotherapy must be balanced against the risk for serious side effects, particularly second malignancy in the irradiated field.
A number of phase III trials investigated the role of consolidative radiotherapy after primary chemotherapy, with divergent results. After MOP-BAP chemotherapy, 61%
of patients who achieved complete remission were randomized to low-dose involved-field radiotherapy or to no further treatment in a SWOG study. 233 In this trial, no
significant differences in remission duration or overall survival were detected.
The GHSG analyzed the role of low-dose (20-Gy) involved-field radiotherapy versus two cycles of additional chemotherapy consolidation in 288 patients in complete
remission after initial chemotherapy with COPP/ABVD. There was no significant difference in freedom-from-progression or overall survival rates between the
treatment arms.234
To overcome the insufficient power of the randomized studies with too few patients to detect a relevant difference, Loeffler et al. 235 performed a metaanalysis of 14
studies involving more than 1700 patients in total. Two study designs were compared: In the additional design, the same chemotherapy with and without additional
irradiation was compared, whereas in the parallel design, irradiation following chemotherapy was compared with further cycles of chemotherapy.
In the additional design, radiotherapy reduced the hazard rate by approximately 40%. The benefit of irradiation was more pronounced among patients with mediastinal
involvement and provided no reduction in relapse among patients with stage IV disease. There was no survival benefit detected by radiotherapy in any subgroup
analyzed. In the parallel design, there was no significant difference in disease-free survival. However, overall survival was significantly higher among patients treated

with chemotherapy alone. In the combined modality group, there were more deaths from causes other than HD, including leukemia. The results of the metaanalysis
should be regarded with caution, because the studies were initiated 20 or more years ago and because, in most instances, a MOPP-based chemotherapeutic regimen
was used, which is not regarded as standard therapy today.
The most important issue today relates to the added efficacy of radiotherapy as adjuvant treatment to modern anthracycline-containing chemotherapy and the added
late toxicity of this combined modality. Prospective, randomized trials, such as the comparison of a MOPP-ABV hybrid with or without consolidative radiotherapy by
the EORTC,236 are needed to address these questions. In this EORTC trial, patients in complete remission after MOPP/ABV receive two further chemotherapy cycles
followed by randomization to involved-field radiotherapy or observation. A similar approach with a potentially more active chemotherapeutic regimen, BEACOPP, is
currently being taken by the GHSG. In this trial, patients are randomized to eight cycles of escalated BEACOPP or four cycles of escalated BEACOPP plus four cycles
of BEACOPP-baseline. Subsequently, patients are randomized to radiotherapy to initial bulky and residual disease or to no further treatment. These two important
trials should define the role of radiotherapy applied with highly active chemotherapeutic protocols.
Conclusions
After more than 30 years of clinical research, advanced-stage HD became a curable disease in most instances. Adriamycin-containing chemotherapy has emerged as
the standard against which modern strategies must be compared. With modern chemotherapy, approximately 60% to 70% of patients will be alive and free of disease
at 5 years (Table 45.6-13). ABVD has a favorable toxicity profile and causes less myelotoxicity, acute leukemia, or sterility relative to many previous treatment
programs containing alkylating agents. However, 20% to 30 % of patients eventually experience relapse and then are frequently treated with high-dose programs.

TABLE 45.6-13. Results of Polychemotherapy Regimens in Advanced-Stage Disease

The two major goals in advanced HD are to improve the cure rate and to reduce acute and late toxicities. The definition of prognostic factors identified patients who
are at a higher risk for relapse as well as those for whom less toxic approaches might be tested. The optimal approach or program has not been identified yet,
although new chemotherapeutic regimens (e.g., Stanford V and BEACOPP) with increased efficacies have been identified. These new drug combinations hold the
promise of achieving these goals, but efficacy and toxicity data must mature before their contributions can be assessed with certainty ( Table 45.6-14). Although the
addition of radiotherapy improved disease control in some trials, a survival benefit was not identified and so the role of radiotherapy remains controversial.

TABLE 45.6-14. Randomized Clinical Trials in Advanced-Stage Hodgkin's Disease: Major Trials Currently Recruiting or Not Yet Published

Recommendations for primary treatment of early (favorable und unfavorable group) and advanced stages of disease outside clinical trials are given in Table 45.6-15.

TABLE 45.6-15. Recommendations for Primary Treatment Outside Clinical Trials

PROGRESSIVE AND RELAPSED DISEASE
Diagnosis and Staging at Disease Progression or Relapse
Although late relapses more than 10 years after primary treatment have been reported in HD, relapse generally occurs within 1 to 5 years after primary therapy. 237 At
relapse, a new histologic workup should be obtained, as the risk for second tumors—NHL or solid tumors—is increased. 238,239 Moreover, a proportion of NHL patients
initially receive a misdiagnosis, as HD or composite lymphomas are not detected during first diagnosis. 240 Therefore, another biopsy at the time of relapse or disease
progression is required.
In all patients with relapsed or primary progressive HD, clinical and radiographic restaging is recommended. Because most patients receive salvage treatment,
restaging has prognostic and therapeutic importance. Isolated nodal recurrence is associated with a better prognosis than is disseminated relapse, and salvage
treatment strategies vary depending on prior therapy and time of failure. The issue of how to define complete remission, partial remission, no change, or progressive

disease after salvage treatment is vital, because salvage therapies generally are more intense and more toxic than are first-line regimens. In salvage therapy studies,
the response criteria usually are defined as in first-line therapies. In most series reported, however, a minimum duration of response of 4 weeks after the end of a
salvage therapy is required.
Prognostic Factors
The likelihood of successful salvage therapy is determined by biologic features, which may be linked to certain clinical features. Adverse prognostic factors for
patients with treatment failure include the treatment modality used in first-line therapy, patient age, relapse sites, quantity of disease at relapse, and presence or
absence of systemic symptoms. In addition, the duration of first remission is a major determinant of a second complete response.
It was first noted in 1979 that the length of a remission after first-line chemotherapy had a marked effect on the ability of patients to respond to subsequent salvage
treatment.241 In 1992, the NCI updated their experience with the long-term follow-up of patients who experienced relapse after polychemotherapy. 242 Derived primarily
from investigations involving failures after MOPP and MOPP variants, the conclusions are relevant to other chemotherapeutic programs. On this basis, chemotherapy
failures can be divided into three subgroups:
Primary progressive HD (approximately 10% of all cases)—that is, patients who never achieved a complete remission
Early relapses within 12 months of complete remission (approximately 15% of all cases)
Late relapses after complete remission lasting longer than 12 months (approximately 15% of all cases)
Using conventional chemotherapies for patients with primary progressive disease, virtually no patient survives more than 8 years. In contrast, for patients with early
relapse or late relapse, the projected 20-year survival was 11% and 22%, respectively. 242
Patients in whom treatment with first-line radiotherapy, combination chemotherapy, or combined modality therapy fails can be divided into two groups and their
treatment selected accordingly: relapse after irradiation for early-stage disease and relapse after primary chemotherapy.
RELAPSE AFTER IRRADIATION FOR EARLY-STAGE DISEASE. Primary radiotherapy alone has been used more extensively in the past than in current practice. The survival

of patients treated with conventional chemotherapy after relapse of irradiated early-stage disease is at least equal to that of advanced-stage patients initially treated
with chemotherapy. Overall survival and disease-free survival range from 57% to 71%. 163,243,244
Patients who experience relapse after radiotherapy alone for localized HD (stage I and II) have satisfactory results with combination chemotherapy and are not
considered candidates for HDCT and autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT). The relapse rates after radiotherapy varied from 19% to 35%, the highest rates
being in the series that included only clinical rather than laparotomy staging. The majority of patients in these series had salvage treatment based on MOPP or similar
regimens. The range of 10-year survival was 57% to 71%, resembling the results of primary treatment with MOPP in patients with advanced disease. This suggests
that prior radiotherapy does not cause drug resistance or a clinically significant compromise of chemotherapy dose intensity.
Stage at relapse is an important prognostic variable in radiotherapy failures. A study from Stanford including more than 100 patients with relapsed HD after subtotal or
total nodal irradiation showed that conventional salvage chemotherapy is sufficient in patients with limited-stage disease having no systemic symptoms on recurrence
(stage IA and IIA); after 10 years, 90% of these patients remained disease-free. 244 In contrast, the 10-year disease-free survival for those with stage III and IV disease
or with B-symptoms (all stages) at the time of relapse was 58% and 34%, respectively. An analysis using the International Database on Hodgkin's Disease showed a
worse prognosis for patients whose relapse included an extranodal site and stage IV at relapse and for those patients older than 40 years. 245
Patients with LP or NS histology fared better than did those with MC or LD histology: Ten-year freedom from relapse for patients with favorable histologies was 67%
versus 47% (P = .04) for patients with unfavorable histologies. 243,246,247
The original experience using systemic therapy for radiation failures was based on the use of MOPP. The likelihood of freedom from second relapse was 57% at 10
years. 248 However, sufficient data from doxorubicin-based regimens indicate that the principles for selecting a salvage regimen for a relapse after radiotherapy are the
same as the principles for selecting a primary treatment for advanced disease. On the basis of the available evidence, ABVD has superior effects as compared with
MOPP for radiation recurrence. The Milan Cancer Institute observed a disease-free survival rate of 81% with ABVD variants, as compared to 54% with MOPP. 249
RELAPSE AFTER PRIMARY CHEMOTHERAPY. Treating recurrence after primary chemotherapy is a difficult issue. The choices available are salvage radiotherapy,

conventional salvage chemotherapy, and HDCT followed by ASCT.
Salvage Radiotherapy. There are relatively few instances in which radiotherapy alone would be considered the standard salvage treatment because the perception is
that recurrence indicates disseminated disease. However, salvage radiotherapy offers a potentially curative option with low morbidity for a subset of selected patients.
Salvage radiotherapy is a valid treatment alternative in patients without B-symptoms who have not been given radiation previously or who experience relapse locally
outside the initial radiation field.
This approach has been reported in series of more than 100 patients. Wirth et al. 250 reported the experience of salvage radiotherapy in 51 patients with relapsed or
refractory HD. Twenty-three patients (45%) achieved a complete response after irradiation. Five-year failure-free survival and overall survival rates were 26% and
57%, respectively. Significant prognostic factors for failure-free survival were B-symptoms at the time of salvage radiotherapy, extranodal involvement, and histology.
For overall survival, significant factors were B-symptoms, patient age, and number of prior chemotherapeutic regimens. For patients who relapsed in
supradiaphragmatic nodal sites without B-symptoms, 5-year failure-free survival and overall survival rates were 36% and 75%, respectively.
Table 45.6-16 demonstrates that selected patients who experience relapse after chemotherapy in an isolated nodal site without systemic symptoms can be salvaged
by radiotherapy alone. Comparing radiotherapy with other types of salvage treatment is difficult, because the selection criteria for the different forms of treatment vary
and no randomized study exists.

TABLE 45.6-16. Salvage Radiotherapy Alone for Relapse after Chemotherapy

Conventional Salvage Chemotherapy. Since 1990, a number of new salvage chemotherapeutic regimens have been tested that incorporate drugs not used in the
initial combination. Because most first-line management programs use MOPP, ABVD, or combinations of both, new salvage regimens have been designed
anticipating resistance to these drugs in patients who have relapsed. 251,252,253 and 254
Primary progressive disease and early relapse suggest cellular resistance to conventional doses of drugs. Patients with primary refractory HD on treatment with
MOPP or alternative regimens usually respond poorly to second or third induction attempts and have a particularly poor prognosis (life expectancy <1.5 years). Fewer

than 50% of patients who experience relapse after a short initial remission achieve a second complete remission, even when treated with non-cross-resistant
regimens, with a median survival of 2.5 to 4.0 years. For the vast majority of these patients, second-line chemotherapy followed by HDCT is required. In contrast,
more than 80% of patients with late relapse achieve a second complete remission with MOPP or alternative regimens, having a median survival of less than 4
years. 242 The Milan and NCI data suggest that late relapse does not necessarily imply resistance, as retreatment with the initial first-line regimen may result in
response. An important goal for any retreatment in late relapse is the achievement of a second complete response, as nearly 50% of second complete responses will
result in prolonged progression-free survival. 242,255
Table 45.6-17 lists the second-line salvage regimens for HD published since 1985. Detailed analysis and interpretation are difficult because, in some trials, the
number of patients is small, the clinical status of patients varied, the duration of first remission is heterogeneous, and a large number of these patients also received
subsequent HDCT plus ASCT. No randomized trial exists comparing the effectiveness of different conventional salvage chemotherapeutic regimens.

TABLE 45.6-17. Salvage Regimens for Hodgkin's Disease at Conventional Dosages

High-Dose Chemotherapy Plus Stem Cell Support. Most clinical results are derived from transplantation centers where a great deal of selection is used in referral and
in the decision for HDCT and ASCT. The encouraging results from numerous phase II studies and analyses using transplantation registry data, as well as the
reduction of early transplant-related mortality to less than 5%, have led to widespread acceptance of HDCT as an important component in the management of
progressive and relapsed HD. HDCT followed by ASCT has been shown to produce 30% to 70% long-term disease-free survival in selected patients with primary
progressive and relapsed disease. 153,256,257
Although results with HDCT have generally been better than those observed after conventional-dose salvage therapy, the validity of this comparison has been
questioned because of the lack of randomized trials. The most compelling evidence for the superiority of high-dose therapy in relapsed HD comes from two reports
from the BNLI and the GHSG together with the EBMT. In the BNLI trial, patients with relapsed or refractory HD were treated with a combination of BEAM at a
conventional-dose level (mini-BEAM) or a high-dose level (BEAM) with autologous bone marrow transplantation. The actuarial 3-year event-free survival was
significantly better in patients who received HDCT (53% vs. 10%). 258
The largest randomized, multicenter trial was performed by the GHSG/EBMT to determine the benefit of HDCT in relapsed HD. Patients with relapse after
polychemotherapy were randomized between four cycles of dexamethasone-BEAM and two cycles of the dexamethasone-BEAM regimen followed by HDCT (with
BEAM) and ASCT. The interim analysis of 142 evaluable patients revealed that for 115 patients with partial or complete response after two cycles of chemotherapy,
the FFTF in the HDCT group was 53%, as opposed to 39% for the patients receiving an additional two cycles of conventional chemotherapy ( Table 45.6-18).259

TABLE 45.6-18. Randomized Studies in Relapsed Hodgkin's Disease: High-Dose Chemotherapy versus Conventional Salvage Therapy

High-Dose Chemotherapy in Primary Progressive Hodgkin's Disease. Patients with primary progressive disease, defined as progression during induction treatment or
within 90 days after the end of treatment, have a particularly poor prognosis. Treatment of patients with primary progressive HD has consisted of salvage
chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and HDCT with ASCT. Conventional salvage regimens have given disappointing results in the vast majority of patients: Response to
salvage treatment is low, and the duration of response is often short. The 8-year overall survival ranges between 0% and 8%. FFTF in second remission is 0% at 4 to
8 years in small series reported. 242,260 Extensive disease often limits the use of radiotherapy.
In contrast, the data on HDCT and ASCT in these patients are more promising. The EBMT reported its analysis of 175 patients with primary progressive disease who
received HDCT and ASCT. 261 The 5-year actuarial progression-free and overall survival rates were 32% and 36%, respectively. The Autologous Blood and Marrow
Transplant Registry recently reported a progression-free survival of 38% and an overall survival of 50% at 3 years in 122 patients with primary induction failure. 262 In
single-institution series evaluating the efficacy of HDCT exclusively in induction failures, Reece et al. 263 reported a 42% progression-free survival at a median of 3.6
years. Similarly, an updated report from Stanford University showed an event-free survival of 49% at 4 years. 229 Gianni et al. 151 reported an event-free survival of 31%
at 4 years. The studies by Yuen et al. 264 and Andrè et al. 265 reported improved outcome after HDCT and ASCT as compared with historical control groups given
conventional chemotherapy for induction failures. Thus, HDCT and ASCT should be considered for HD patients with primary induction failure.
The GHSG retrospectively analyzed 206 patients with progressive disease to determine outcome after salvage therapy and to identify prognostic factors. 266 The
5-year freedom-from-second-failure and overall survival rates for all patients were 17% and 26%, respectively. As reported from transplantation centers, the 5-year
freedom-from-second-failure and overall survival rates for patients treated with HDCT were 42% and 48%, respectively, but only 33% of all patients received HDCT. A
high proportion of those patients will rapidly succumb to progressive disease. Life-threatening severe toxicity on salvage treatment occurred in 11% of the patients.
Insufficient stem cell harvest, poor performance status, and older age had also contributed to ineligibility for HDCT. In a multivariate analysis, the Karnofsky
performance score at progress (P <.0001), age (P = .019), and attainment of a temporary remission to first-line chemotherapy ( P = .0003) were significant prognostic
factors for survival. In conclusion, HDCT is an effective treatment for a proportion of patients with primary progressive HD. 267 Owing to the poor outcome of HD
patients with progressive disease, future trials must aim at identifying patients at very high risk for induction failure and modifying primary treatment in this group to
avoid progressive disease.
High-Dose Chemotherapy in Early and Late Relapsed Hodgkin's Disease. Patients who receive transplantation at first relapse from complete remission can often be
cured with HDCT and ASCT. 257,268,269 At present, patients with early relapse are good candidates for HDCT followed by ASCT. A report from Stanford in which
historical controls were used found a 4-year event-free survival of 56% for patients with early relapse, as compared to 19% in patients who received standard-dose
salvage chemotherapy.264 In addition, the HDR-1 study showed improved FFTF for patients with early relapse after HDCT, as compared with conventional

chemotherapy.259 Although the results reported with HDCT in patients with late relapse have been superior to those reported in most series of conventional
chemotherapy, the use of HDCT in late relapses has been an area of controversy. Patients with late relapse have high second complete remission rates even with
conventional chemotherapies and overall survival rates ranging from 40% to 55%. The HDR-1 study of the GHSG showed improved FFTF and overall survival after
HDCT as compared with conventional chemotherapy in patients with late relapses. Therefore, HDCT should be considered as standard treatment even for patients
with late relapses. 259
Several published studies have evaluated the importance of prognostic factors for patients with HD undergoing HDCT with subsequent ASCT. 228,257,270 Adverse
prognostic factors identified by multivariate analysis included age, chemoresistance, disease status, poor performance status, extranodal disease, female gender,
elevated lactate dehydrogenase level, and failure of more than two prior regimens. An important variable that affects outcome is the ability of conventional salvage
chemotherapy to reduce tumor volume before HDCT. Patients who experience relapse after chemotherapy but respond to subsequent conventional salvage therapy
make up most of the long-term survivors in transplantation programs. Nevertheless, the role of conventional salvage chemotherapy before HDCT has not been clearly
defined. Several studies have confirmed that a subset of patients with disease resistant to conventional salvage therapy clearly benefit from HDCT, with reported
long-term survival of 10% to 31%. 228,262,268,271 The number of patients with chemoresistant disease who benefit from HDCT and ASCT largely depends on the definition
of chemoresistance or the number and intensity of courses of chemotherapy administered to reduce the tumor burden. Accordingly, chemoresistant patients should
not routinely be excluded from transplantation programs.
Allogeneic stem cell transplantation has clear advantages as compared with autologous transplantation: Donor cells uninvolved by malignancy are used, avoiding the
risk of infusing occult lymphoma cells, which, despite purging, may contribute to relapse in patients who undergo autologous transplantation. In addition, donor
lymphoid cells can potentially mediate a graft-versus-lymphoma effect. As in all allograft studies, issues of donor availability and age constraints have limited its use.
Moreover, in all reports using allogeneic stem cell transplantation, a high treatment-related mortality rate of up to 75% was observed in patients with HD, which casts
doubt on the feasibility of this approach in larger series. 272,273 and 274 In most circumstances, allogeneic transplantation from HLA-identical siblings is not recommended
for patients with HD. The reduced relapse rate associated with a graft-versus-tumor effect is offset by lethal graft-versus-host toxicity.
In conclusion, patients who experience relapse after radiotherapy alone for localized HD have satisfactory results with combination chemotherapy and are not
considered candidates for HDCT with ASCT. Current data support the use of HDCT with ASCT for patients with relapse and refractory HD after combination
chemotherapy (Table 45.6-19).

TABLE 45.6-19. Recommendations for Treatment of Relapsed and Primary Progressive Hodgkin's Disease

SPECIAL CASES: LYMPHOCYTE-PREDOMINANT HODGKIN'S DISEASE
The early-stage characteristics, indolent course, and relatively good prognosis of LP variants of HD have been recognized since the 1930s. 275 Earlier studies
consistently demonstrated that patients with an LP variant of HD enjoyed a better prognosis than did those with other forms of the disease. 276 However, the
introduction of clinical staging showed that the extent of disease was a more important prognostic factor than was histology and that the localized nature of LPHD
could well account for the good prognosis of this subtype. 277 In addition, modern therapeutic strategies were able to improve survival and cure rates for all types of
patients, and prognostic differences due to histology often were no longer evident. 93,278 The clinical relevance of the recent REAL 75 and WHO classifications,
particularly the distinction between LPHD and LRCHD, has been clarified by the international retrospective study of the ETFL. 279 The many smaller studies of LPHD
paint a similar picture. 280,281 and 282

CLINICAL FEATURES
LPHD patients show a similar age distribution to MC patients and are somewhat older, on average, than NS patients ( Table 45.6-20). Approximately 75% of patients
are male, again similar to MC and different from NS (approximately 50%). Of LPHD patients, 53% had stage I and only 6% had stage IV disease. Thus, the proportion
of early stages is consistently high in comparison with CHD, and stage IV is consistently rare, although not negligible. B-symptoms were present in only 10% of cases,
far less than in CHD. LPHD seems to favor the peripheral upper neck and inguinal node sites and to occur relatively seldom in central sites such as the mediastinum
and upper abdomen.283

TABLE 45.6-20. Characteristics of 219 Cases Confirmed as LPHD in the European Task Force on Lymphoma Project Compared with Nodular Sclerosis and
Mixed-Cellularity Cases in the 1988–1994 Trials of the German Hodgkin's Study Group

TREATMENT RESULTS
There is some evidence to support the hypothesis that certain LPHD patients do well without any therapy beyond excision. Among the 51 nodular LP cases reported
by Miettinen, 284 31 were given no treatment except possibly surgical removal of the tumor, as malignant disease was not suspected. After 7 years' median follow-up,
only seven of the untreated patients died. These results must be cautiously interpreted, as it is likely that especially mild examples would predominate in this
retrospective sample. Most LPHD patients have received first-line therapy similar to that prescribed for CHD patients. LPHD cases appear to relapse just as frequently
as other subtypes, but the relapse is less aggressive, resulting in frequent multiple relapses and good survival rates (see Fig. 45.6-2).

TRANSFORMATION TO NON-HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA
The possibility of occurrence of an NHL after primary LPHD is clinically important for several reasons. The treatment should be chosen to prevent development or
progression of NHL; it should avoid inducing a secondary NHL; and a monitoring and diagnostic strategy should be chosen to detect and correctly identify recurrent
and secondary tumors. In an analysis from the International Database on Hodgkin's Disease, 285 a significantly higher risk for secondary NHL, increased by a factor
1.8, was found for LP patients as compared with NS and MC patients. Several smaller LPHD studies report secondary NHL, indicating a rate of 2% to 3% on average.
Miettinen et al. 284 reported four secondary NHLs among 31 cases of untreated LPHD, suggesting that some, if not all, such NHLs develop independently of treatment.

CONSEQUENCES FOR FUTURE TREATMENT
Although, the prognosis superiority of LPHD as compared with CHD is scarcely discernible under modern treatment, the relatively good prognosis of LPHD cases
under earlier, less intensive treatment does indicate a potential for treatment reduction. Furthermore, as many LPHD patients died of fatal treatment-related secondary
leukemias and solid tumors as died from HD directly. This suggests that current treatment strategies might be too intensive, particularly when other late effects, such
as cardiac and pulmonary complications, are taken into account. Disadvantages of treatment reduction could include the greater risk of disease progression or of
development of NHL.
Caution is needed in identifying those patients for whom treatment reduction is an option. First, immunostaining is needed for a reliable differential diagnosis among
LPHD, CHD, and certain NHL variants. Second, patients with advanced-stage LPHD (20% to 25%) had an overall survival and tumor-free survival that was
substantially worse than that of patients with early-stage LPHD and was similar to advanced-stage CHD patients. 279 This implies that thorough staging and, in the
case of advanced-stage disease, aggressive treatment are needed irrespective of histologic subtype.
A watch-and-wait treatment strategy, in which patients are monitored without treatment until the disease shows signs of progression, has been advocated for LPHD
and for other indolent lymphomas. However, most authors report only anecdotal untreated cases. 284 A prospective study with explicit inclusion criteria is required to
assess the feasibility, risks, and benefits of a watch-and-wait strategy. The EORTC is currently adopting a watch-and-wait approach for stage I supradiaphragmatic
LPHD after complete resection of the tumor; the involved field is to be irradiated only if the disease progresses. The GHSG is now treating CS IA LPHD without risk
factors with involved-field irradiation.
Involved-field radiotherapy has been shown to be inferior to more extensive irradiation in early-stage CHD but might be adequate for the very localized, less
aggressive LP subtype. Two study groups, the EORTC and the GHSG, are currently treating certain early-stage LPHD patients with involved-field irradiation.
A new development potentially relevant to LPHD is the use of immunotherapy. The monoclonal antibody Rituximab, in particular, is directed against the
B-cell-restricted CD20 antigen; this antigen is expressed by the L&H cells of LPHD but rarely by the H-RS cells of CHD. First experiences with indolent follicular B-cell
lymphomas have shown good results, with nearly 55% overall responses even in heavily pretreated patients. 286 This therapy is now being tested by the GHSG in
relapsed and refractory LPHD.

HODGKIN'S DISEASE IN THE ELDERLY PATIENT
HD treatment results, reflected in complete remission, relapse, and survival rates, tend to worsen with increasing age of the patient at diagnosis. There is no definite
threshold age for the onset of this effect, although many authors report changes appearing at approximately age 60 years and older.
HD rarely occurs in patients older than 60 years. Two basic problems in the management of elderly patients emerge as a recurrent theme: a high rate of toxicities
during treatment and frequent early relapses. At least two factors are considered to contribute to this poor prognosis. First, older patients differ from younger patients
in disease characteristics: Advanced clinical stage and MC histology 287 are more frequent. Second, the older patient may be more likely to experience treatment
complications, which in turn influence the given intensity of therapy.
The patient's physical and mental condition, disease history, and the presence of concurrent disorders influence the treatment strategy. Age, in general, is not a
contraindication for aggressive treatment. Biologically young patients in good physical and mental condition should be treated by stage-adapted regimens, analogous
to conventional treatment protocols. In this subgroup, complete remission rates and relapse-free and overall survival appear to be as good as in younger cohorts. 288
Combined modality treatment with a mild chemotherapeutic regimen and limited radiation (i.e., two cycles of ABVD plus involved-field radiotherapy) is increasingly
considered the standard therapy in favorable early-stage HD. If no chemotherapy can be administered, mantle or inverted-Y fields should be irradiated, possibly at a
reduced dose. For the patients with intermediate-stage (unfavorable early-stage) disease, two to four cycles of chemotherapy may be administered before
involved-field radiotherapy is undertaken.
In advanced-stage disease, treatment should also be given with curative intent. The well-established ABVD combination (six to eight cycles) represents a safe
regimen, whereas protocols with severe hematologic toxicities should be avoided. The time-intensified BEACOPP regimen, which has proved especially effective in
advanced-stage HD patients aged up to 65 years, appears to be too toxic for patients older than 65. 289 Support with hematopoietic growth factors (granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor) should be given liberally, as infectious complications due to prolonged neutropenia are common. Close monitoring of toxicity (i.e.,
electrocardiography, echocardiography, pulmonary function tests) and response to treatment are important for adjusting treatment at an early juncture.
Treatment for those patients with impairment of lung, liver, heart, or kidney should be individually adapted. Depending on preexisting impairment of organs, single
drugs with organ-specific toxicities (i.e., bleomycin, Adriamycin) may be omitted from the chemotherapeutic regimen, replaced, or modified in dose. Involved-field
radiotherapy, oral combination therapy (CCNU, etoposide, prednimustine), or less aggressive drugs, such as gemcitabine 290 in the initial treatment as well as the
combination of vinblastine, bleomycin, and methotrexate, 291 present possible treatment alternatives.

HODGKIN'S DISEASE DURING PREGNANCY
The peak incidence of HD occurs at female reproductive age. Therefore, the association with pregnancy is not uncommon. One case of HD has been reported per
1000 to 6000 deliveries, making it the fourth most common cancer diagnosed during pregnancy. 292 Several studies have shown that pregnancy does not worsen the
clinical course of the disease and that the 20-year survival of pregnant women with HD is not different from that of nonpregnant women. 293
The clinical presentation of HD is not influenced by pregnancy. However, there are significant limitations on staging and treatment of the pregnant patient. CAT
scanning should be avoided because it exposes the fetus to ionizing radiation. Ultrasonography, which is without known adverse fetal effects, is helpful not only for
assessing fetal development but also for detecting the presence of lymphadenopathy. MRI will complete the radiologic staging because it appears to be free from
genetic hazards. Decisions about the need for chest radiography should be made on the basis of clinical examination.
If HD is diagnosed in the first trimester, most experts agree that a therapeutic abortion should be encouraged. If the woman wishes to continue her pregnancy,
treatment should be deferred until the second trimester at least, because the options for therapy at the beginning of pregnancy are rather limited. If therapy is
indicated, supradiaphragmatic irradiation with doses less than 10 Gy or vinblastine chemotherapy for more advanced disease may be commenced.
In the second or third trimester, a stage I to II disease may be closely observed, and treatment should be postponed until an early delivery, usually at approximately
32 to 34 weeks' gestation. If there is any sign of rapid disease progression, in supradiaphragmatic lymphadenopathy radiotherapy alone is recommended. Most
studies indicate doses of 10 to 44 Gy to the classic mantle field or the involved field, with abdominal shielding to protect the fetus. In the second and third trimesters,
the risk of adverse sequelae for the fetus by supradiaphragmatic radiation is low. In infradiaphragmatic lymphadenopathy and in stage III to IV disease, combination
chemotherapy will be the choice of treatment. Because most chemotherapeutic agents freely cross the placenta and enter the fetal circulation, both the patient and
the fetus must be closely monitored. Chemotherapy administered in the second and third trimester may increase the risk of intrauterine growth retardation,
microcephaly, and mental retardation. 294 Application of cytotoxic drugs shortly before birth may be particularly hazardous, as the placenta is also the primary means of
drug elimination, and metabolism and excretion will be delayed in the neonatus. The current concept is that antimetabolites, especially methotrexate, confer a high
risk of teratogenesis, whereas alkylating agents, Adriamycin, bleomycin, etoposide, and the vinca alkaloids would appear acceptable. 294 The ABVD regimen may be

used when chemotherapy is indicated beyond the first trimester. Because chemotherapeutic agents reach significant levels in milk, mothers are best advised not to
breast feed during treatment.

HODGKIN'S DISEASE IN HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS–POSITIVE PATIENTS
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND CLINICAL PRESENTATION
The majority of recent studies demonstrate a slight increase in the incidence of HD in young adult and middle-aged homosexual men. They also suggest that, with
regard to a certain risk behavior, HD associated with HIV infection occurs preferentially in intravenous drug users. An increased incidence of HD among such other
risk groups as hemophiliacs or women with an increased risk for AIDS has not been convincingly demonstrated.
Several data support the thesis that EBV probably represents a relevant factor involved in the pathogenesis of HIV-associated HD. First, EBV is found in H-RS cells in
nearly 80% to 100% of HD tissue specimens from HIV-infected patients, in contrast to the HIV-negative population with EBV in 50% to 70% of HD cases. 295 Second, a
pathogenetic role of EBV in HIV-associated HD is supported by the fact that tumor cells of virtually all cases of HIV-associated HD express EBV-encoded LMP1. 296
A characteristic of HD in HIV-infected patients is the predominance of unfavorable histologic subtypes. 297 Most studies from Europe and the United States reported
MC to be the most frequent histologic subtype among HIV-infected patients (40% to 100%). NS was less frequent (0% to 40%) in the HIV population than in
HIV-negative persons. The incidence of the LP subtype was rather low (0% to 4%); in contrast, more than 20% of all cases were classified as LD. 298
At the time of diagnosis, 70% to 90% of all patients with HIV-associated HD present with advanced disease. Extranodal involvement is frequent (60%), the most
common sites being bone marrow, liver, and spleen. In contrast to non–HIV-related HD in the general population, in which the involvement of contiguous lymph node
groups is typical and dissemination and infiltration of extranodal sites are late occurrences, in HIV-infected patients noncontiguous spread of lymphoma, such as liver
involvement without splenic disease or lung involvement without mediastinal adenopathy, can be observed. Bone marrow involvement occurs in 40% to 50% of
patients and may be the first indicator of the presence of HD in nearly 20% of cases. 299 HD tends to develop as an earlier manifestation of HIV infection, presenting in
patients with a median CD4+ cell count in a range of 275 to 306/µL. 17 At the time of diagnosis, the majority of patients have persistent generalized lymphadenopathy
and, in 50% of cases, lymphoma may be concurrently present with persistent generalized lymphadenopathy in the same lymph node group. 300 Therefore, it is
important to be aware of HIV-associated HD as a differential diagnosis.
TREATMENT
Treatment is difficult, considering the underlying immunodeficiency caused by HIV itself, and may increase the risk of opportunistic infections by inducing further
immunosuppression. Survival of patients with HIV-associated HD is short, typically 12 to 18 months, and the incidence of opportunistic infections is increased owing to
standard therapeutic regimens. Because most patients have advanced HD, they have been treated with combination chemotherapeutic regimens such as MOPP and
ABVD, but the response was poor in comparison with HIV-unrelated HD. Retrospective evaluations show a complete response rate far below that of HIV-negative
patients with HD, poor tolerance of chemotherapy, and necessity of dose reduction or delay of treatment. 301 Other prospective studies show that tailored
chemotherapeutic regimens having moderate bone marrow toxicity (e.g., epirubicin, bleomycin, and vinblastine) in combination with antiretroviral treatment with
zidovudine result in a substantial decrease of opportunistic infection, yet overall survival was not significantly improved. 302 Improvement of response rate and median
survival could be achieved by full-dose regimens like EBVP 303 or ABVD304 combined with antiretroviral treatment, prophylaxis of the most common opportunistic
infection, Pneumocystis carinii, and the use of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. 305 Preliminary data with BEACOPP showed promising results regarding complete
remission, toxicity, and median survival. 306
In summary, treatment of HIV-associated HD demands a special approach. Therefore, it will likely be the combination of unconventional chemotherapy, antiretroviral
agents, prophylaxis of opportunistic infections, and hematopoietic growth factors that will lead to cure of HIV-associated HD. However, the individual components of
the recipe are not yet defined.

SEQUELAE
Long-term complications of mantle irradiation include lung, heart, and thyroid dysfunction, second primary cancers, and Lhermitte's syndrome ( Table 45.6-21).
Complications such as transverse myelitis and constrictive pericarditis should not occur with the use of modern radiotherapeutic techniques. Other long-term toxicities
are not totally avoidable but can be reduced in severity or frequency.

TABLE 45.6-21. Treatment-Related Complications after Curative Therapy for Hodgkin's Disease

PULMONARY COMPLICATIONS
Radiation pneumonitis typically occurs 1 to 6 months after completion of mantle irradiation. Once it resolves, usually there are no long-term sequelae. A mild,
nonproductive cough, low-grade fever, and dyspnea on exertion characterize symptomatic radiation pneumonitis. The overall incidence of symptomatic pneumonitis is
less than 5% after mantle irradiation; patients with LMA or who receive combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy have a two- to threefold greater risk (10% to
15%).307 Radiographically, pneumonitis is characterized by the formation of infiltrates confined to the original radiation fields. Infection rather than pneumonitis is more
likely if the infiltrates extend into areas of the lung initially protected from radiation. Severe pneumonitis may require treatment with steroids.
Various cardiac complications, including arrhythmias, myocardial infarction, and coronary artery disease, pericarditis, myocarditis, pericardial effusion, and
tamponade have been documented after radiotherapy to the mediastinum. 307,308 In many early studies, these complications were related to treatment techniques that
resulted in a high radiobiologic dose to the anterior mediastinum and heart. Current practice, which limits the dose to the whole heart, blocks the subcarinal region
part-way into treatment, delivers treatments equally from front and back, and uses a lower overall radiation dose and smaller treatment volumes by the use of
preradiation chemotherapy, has yielded more satisfactory results. Some studies have shown a modest increase in cardiac mortality after mantle irradiation. Boivin and
Hutchison 309 have demonstrated an increased, age-adjusted risk of death from myocardial infarction after mediastinal irradiation. When analyzed by year of diagnosis
of HD, the risk was much greater for patients treated in 1966 or earlier (relative risk, 6.33; confidence interval, 1.73 to 23.16) as compared to 1967 or later (relative
risk, 1.97; confidence interval, 0.75 to 5.17), suggesting an important role for modern treatment techniques in reducing the risk of complications.
CARDIAC COMPLICATIONS
The risk of chronic cardiomyopathy appears to increase as the cumulative dose of doxorubicin exceeds 400 to 450 mg/m 2. It is still unknown whether there is an
increased risk of cardiomyopathy at lower cumulative does (as commonly given with ABVD) in patients treated with mediastinal irradiation before or after

chemotherapy. Careful cardiac evaluation of patients treated with combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy is recommended because of concerns that mediastinal
irradiation may predispose to accelerated coronary arteriosclerosis, and this risk may be further increased by the administration of anthracyclines. Consideration
should also be given to using lower doses and blocking the lower portion of the heart whenever possible.
SECONDARY NEOPLASIA
The occurrence of second malignancies, including acute leukemia, NHL, and a variety of solid tumors, has become a well-acknowledged reality that adversely affects
survival of some patients cured of HD. Some of these cases may represent chance association. However, physicians should be aware that HD patients are at higher
risk of developing a second neoplasm.
A number of reports have stressed the possibility that the occurrence of acute nonlymphocytic leukemia is closely related to drug combinations containing alkylating
agents. The use of ABVD in chemotherapeutic regimens for HD has reduced the risk of leukemia. In most studies, the use of radiotherapy in combination with
chemotherapy does not increase the risk over chemotherapy alone, although there may be an increased risk when chemotherapy is combined with extensive
irradiation (i.e., total nodal irradiation). There does not appear to be an increased risk of developing acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia after radiotherapy alone.
The total incidence of acute leukemia, which usually occurs within the first 10 years after initial treatment, is reported in most published series to range from 2% to
6%. 310,311 The classic form of treatment-related leukemia is characterized by a relatively long latency period, namely 3 to 5 years, a preceding myelodysplastic phase,
trilineage bone marrow dysplasia, and abnormalities of chromosome 5 or 7 (or both). Topoisomerase II inhibitors—primarily the epipodophyllotoxins, but also
anthracyclines when given in combination with alkylating agents—have been implicated in the development of a clinically and cytogenetically distinct form of
secondary acute myeloid leukemia in both adult and pediatric patients. 312
Nearly all cases of NHL occurring after HD are of intermediate-grade or high-grade histology and are similar to lymphomas seen in patients with immunodeficiency
diseases or under chronic immunosuppression for organ transplantation or autoimmune disorders. These lymphomas have a cumulative risk of 1.2% to 2.1% at 15
years. 313,314
The actual incidence of solid tumors, which have not revealed a particular histopathologic pattern, is unknown, as the full extent of the expression of risk of a second
neoplasm may not be appreciated for another decade. The solid tumors tend to occur in the second decade after treatment and, thus far, appear to represent a
hazard of both radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The major risks appear to be lung cancer (mostly in smokers) and breast cancer among women when irradiated
young.310,315 Other cancers include sarcomas, melanomas, connective tissue and bone tumors, and salivary, stomach, and skin cancers. 314,316
A major argument against the use of radiotherapy as primary or adjunct therapy in HD has been its potential induction of secondary solid tumors by radiation.
The large study from the BNLI of 2846 patients included 987 patients who were treated with chemotherapy alone. 317 The BNLI study showed that the relative risk of
developing a secondary solid tumor after chemotherapy alone was 5.7. This was not significantly different from the relative risk after radiotherapy alone (4.8) or after
combined modality therapy (5.8). Furthermore, a case-control study from a collaborative group of population-based registries and cancer centers that maintains data
on 25,665 cases of HD318 showed that HD patients treated with chemotherapy alone were at approximately twice the risk of developing lung cancer as were those
treated by radiotherapy alone or by both modalities. Most of these data are from cases involving MOPP or MOPP-like regimens; little is known of the use of ABVD and
the risk of second solid tumors.
GONADAL DYSFUNCTION
Many patients who complete successful treatment for HD go on to raise normal children. However, under some circumstances, gonadal dysfunction is an important
iatrogenic toxicity that considerably affects the quality of life of patients after HD. Three to six cycles of MOPP or MOPP-like chemotherapy induces azoospermia in
50% to 100% of male patients. This finding is associated with germinal hyperplasia and increased follicle-stimulating hormone levels, with normal levels of luteinizing
hormone and testosterone. Only 10% to 20% of patients will eventually show recovery of spermatogenesis after a long interval. After MOPP alternated with ABVD, the
incidence of permanent azoospermia is approximately 50%. With full-course MOPP chemotherapy, nearly half of women become amenorrheal, with occurrence of
age-dependent premature ovarian failure (>30 years, 75% to 85%; <30 years, ~20%).
The Milan Cancer Institute has reported that the administration of ABVD chemotherapy produces only limited and transient germ cell toxicity in men and no
drug-induced amenorrhea. 319 To circumvent chemotherapy-induced sterility, the use of drug regimens not containing alkylating agents, procarbazine, or nitrosourea
derivatives is highly recommended. An alternative for men undergoing MOPP or MOPP/ABVD therapy is sperm storage before chemotherapy. The usefulness of the
administration of analogues of gonadotropin-releasing hormone in men or oral contraceptives in premenopausal women remains to be fully defined; however, limited
data have been discouraging.
OTHER COMPLICATIONS
Minor complications can be summarized as follows: Hypothyroidism is a common event (~30%) after mantle-field irradiation, typically picked up by means of an
elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone level. 307 Hormone replacement therapy is required. Herpes zoster is another common complication, self-limited and usually
occurring in one to two contiguous dermatomes within the first 2 years after treatment and affecting 15% to 20% of patients treated with radiotherapy or chemotherapy
alone, but the incidence appears higher in patients treated with combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Cutaneous dissemination and visceral involvement from
this virus are rare. Early treatment with antiviral agents may limit the intensity and duration of the infection. Acute transient radiation myelopathy or Lhermitte's sign
(paresthesias down the dorsal portion of the extremities when the neck is flexed) occurs in approximately 10% to 15% of patients after mantle irradiation. This
particular complication typically occurs 6 weeks to 3 months after radiotherapy and is self-limited, resolving in weeks to months. Xerostomia is a temporary
complication of mantle irradiation; saliva returns to normal usually within 6 months of treatment. However, xerostomia may be prolonged in patients older than 40
years at treatment, or if Waldeyer's ring is treated. Fluoride supplementation and careful dental care will minimize the risks of radiation caries. The risk of
postsplenectomy sepsis can occur particularly in children, 320 but it can be minimized by immunization with pneumococcal vaccine; in more recent years, vaccines have
been developed against Haemophilus and Neisseria species, the other microorganisms associated with small but finite risks of overwhelming postsplenectomy sepsis.

QUALITY OF LIFE
A review of most randomized clinical trials in HD reveals that quality of life has been neglected as a primary or even a secondary outcome measure. After a review of
the literature in pediatric oncology, Bradlyn et al. 321 demonstrated that only 3% of all randomized clinical trial reports reviewed (n = 70) include quality-of-life data.
However, mainly retrospective analyses of long-term survivors of HD have been performed. 322,323 These analyses showed that a substantial subgroup of patients still
shows serious sequelae of the disease and its treatment even many years after treatment has ended. In one study, men who have experienced serious illness since
treatment and who earn less than $15,000 U.S. annually, are currently unemployed, are single, or are less educated were found to be at high risk for maladaptation
years after treatment. Furthermore, 22% of the 273 patients studied met the criterion suggested for psychiatric diagnosis. 322 Currently, it remains unclear at which
point in the course of the disease patients with a good coping capacity can be distinguished from those without such a capacity. To characterize phases of
readaptation and maladaptation more precisely, quality-of-life assessment has to be implemented in prospective, randomized clinical trials. To obtain completeness of
data, quality-of-life investigations should be a mandatory component of the clinical trial design and part of the inclusion criteria. 324
The assessment of quality of life has become an essential tool in clinical trials, in particular in the evaluation of therapies given to patients with chronic illness such as
cancer. Although survival and survival without disease have long been used as the sole end points in clinical trials, these limits are no longer accepted today because
other characteristics now are considered to be as important as survival by both patients and physicians. Among these, treatment burden, treatment-related toxicity,
and the psychological and social impacts of disease and treatment are of great importance.
Obviously, this change originates from the dramatic improvement in the efficacy of cancer treatments, particular in HD. Effective therapies, however, have several
drawbacks that might limit their use. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy induce severe acute and late toxicities, which may diminish the long-term benefit of curative
treatment. Several studies including a quality-of-life approach have highlighted the difficulties that survivors may experience even long after the treatment, such as

general fatigue, poor health, and social problems.

NEW DRUGS IN HODGKIN'S DISEASE
VINORELBINE
Vinorelbine belongs to the family of vinca alkaloids and is a semisynthetic analogue of vinblastine (5'nor-anidro-vinblastine). The main side effect of vinorelbine is
myelosuppression. WHO grade III to IV neutropenia occurs in up to 70% of patients but is of very short duration, with a low incidence of infectious complications. 325
Vinorelbine used as single-agent therapy in HD was administered in all studies in a weekly schedule with 30 mg/m 2. Devizzi et al. 326 report on 22 patients with HD
refractory or resistant to at least two chemotherapeutic regimens, of which 50% (n = 11) showed an objective response (complete remission, n = 3; partial remission, n
= 8) with a median duration of 6 months. Benchekroun et al. 327 evaluated the response to vinorelbine in untreated patients with advanced HD. Thirty-two patients
received four weekly doses of vinorelbine before MOPP/ABVD chemotherapy, and 90% achieved a partial remission.
IDARUBICIN
Idarubicin is a semisynthetic drug that was first purified in 1976. Idarubicin differs from its parent drug daunorubicin only by the replacement of the C-4 methoxyl group
in the D ring with a hydrogen atom. This modification has major consequences for the pharmacokinetic characteristics: Idarubicin is much more lipophilic and can be
administered orally. Its main metabolite idarubicinol is as active as the parent compound. In addition, idarubicin has shown greater cytotoxicity than daunorubicin or
doxorubicin in vitro. Idarubicin exhibits less cardiotoxicity at equi-effective doses as compared with other anthracyclines, whereas hemotoxicity and mucositis appear
to be more pronounced. The GHSG is currently conducting a clinical phase II study in which idarubicin (8 mg/m 2, days 1 and 2) is administered together with
etoposide (60 mg/m2, days 1 to 4), ifosfamide (1000 mg/m2, days 1 to 4 continuous infusion), and dexamethasone (20 mg/m 2, days 1 to 4) in patients with relapsed or
refractory HD.
GEMCITABINE
Gemcitabine is a new pyrimidine antimetabolite with unique metabolic and mechanistic properties among the nucleoside analogues. 328 It is a derivative of
deoxycytidine, with fluorine substituted for the two hydrogen atoms in the 2'-position of the deoxyribose sugar. Although structurally similar to cytarabine, gemcitabine
differs pharmacokinetically and pharmacologically. It acts as a competitive substrate for incorporation into the DNA, where it leads to chain termination. Based on the
impressive results in solid tumors such as non–small cell lung cancer and pancreatic cancer, gemcitabine was given in a multicenter clinical phase II study in patients
with multiple relapsed or refractory HD who had received at least two prior chemotherapeutic regimens. 290 Gemcitabine was administered in a weekly schedule of
1250 mg/m2 on days 1, 8, and 15 of a 28-day cycle. An interim analysis of this trial showed an overall response of 39%, with 2 of 23 complete remissions and 7 of 23
partial remissions. Another ten patients had stable disease. Myelosuppression was the main toxicity.

IMMUNOTHERAPY
Tumor cells that survive intensive therapy in small quantities are defined as minimal residual disease. These partially dormant, chemoresistant lymphoma cells might
be eradicated by new immunotherapeutic strategies with a different mechanism of action. Current approaches comprise passive immunotherapy with antibody-based
regimens for specific targeting of malignant cells as well as active immunotherapy with modulation of the cellular immune response using cytokines, tumor vaccines,
or gene transfer. The combination of immunotherapeutic strategies with standard chemotherapeutic regimens seems to be most promising: Owing to different
mechanisms of action, cross-resistance of malignant cells is expected to be rare. Furthermore, the side effects of these two treatment modalities differ, so that toxicity
will not usually be additive.
PASSIVE IMMUNOTHERAPY
Systemically administered chemotherapeutic agents kill all rapidly dividing cells, whereas monoclonal antibodies can target tumor cells selectively. Normal cells that
lack specific tumor antigens are not harmed. For a variety of reasons, Hodgkin's lymphoma seems to be an ideal target for antibody-based therapeutic approaches:
First, H-RS cells express many different cell surface antigens, such as CD15, CD25, CD30, CD40, and CD80 (B7-1), which are present on only a minority of normal
human cells. 113 Due to low cross-reactivity with healthy human tissue, side effects are rare. Second, because many different markers can be detected on the surface
of Hodgkin's cells, “cocktails” (i.e., a combination of various antibody conjugates targeting different Hodgkin's-specific antigens) might be useful for selective
immunotherapy. If one malignant antigen-deficient cell clone is resistant to one antibody, cells might still be targeted by the second or third antibody conjugate
administered at the same time. Third, the number of malignant cells that must be killed is small, as the majority of cells in the involved lymph nodes are reactive
bystander cells. Fourth, lymphomas are well vascularized, 329 so that intravenously administered antibody conjugates can easily reach their target cells. Therefore,
chemotherapy or radiotherapy (or both) can be used for treatment of bulky disease, whereas immunotherapeutic agents are applied thereafter to eliminate minimal
residual disease and thus prevent relapses.
Native Monoclonal Antibodies
Ideally, the antibody targets with high specificity an antigen present only on the tumor cells and has no cross-reactivity with normal human tissue. The mechanisms of
action of native antibodies include complement activation, antibody-dependent cellular toxicity, phagocytosis of antibody-coated target cells, inhibition of cell-cycle
progression, and induction of apoptosis. In early phase I and II trials, native antibodies have exhibited moderate adverse effects, such as chills, fever, dyspnea,
nausea, diarrhea, and myalgia. Toxicity usually was related to the number of circulating tumor cells and the development of human anti–mouse antibodies. New
chimeric antibodies that consist of human constant and murine variable regions rarely induce human anti–mouse antibody formation. 286
Engert et al.330 evaluated more than 40 different monoclonal antibodies for their antitumor activity toward Hodgkin's-derived cell lines in vitro. Thus far, it has not been
possible to identify monoclonal antibodies against Hodgkin's-associated antigens that exhibit potency in vitro or in vivo when used in native form. The chimeric
monoclonal anti-CD20 antibody Rituximab (IDEC-C2B8) has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for treatment of patients with relapsed
advanced follicular NHL after a pivotal trial demonstrated response rates up to 50% in 166 patients. 331 Because the CD20 antigen is expressed on all malignant cells
in paragranuloma or LPHD, this entity might be a good target for treatment with Rituximab. An international study currently is investigating the safety and efficacy of
Rituximab in patients with relapsed or refractory LPHD and other multiple relapsed CD20-positive cases of CHD.
Immunotoxins
Immunotoxins generally consist of a binding moiety and a toxin moiety, which are either covalently linked via a chemical linker or generated by recombinant fusion
technology. The binding domain is usually a monoclonal antibody, a Fab' fragment, a single-chain variable fragment, or a cytokine, whereas the toxin is of bacterial or
plant origin. Recombinant toxins are constructed by fusing coding regions of toxins such as diphtheria toxin or Pseudomonas exotoxin-A to ligand genes. 332
Immunotoxins can bind selectively to their target cells. After internalization of the construct by endocytosis, the toxin is transferred to the ribosomal subunits, where it
interferes with protein synthesis, thus killing the tumor cell.
Another interesting target for selective immunotherapy in HD is the IL-2 receptor (CD25), which is expressed on the majority of H-RS cells. In a phase I study, 15
patients with refractory Hodgkin's lymphoma were treated with the anti-CD25 immunotoxin RFT5.dgA. 333 All patients in this trial were heavily pretreated with a mean of
five prior chemotherapeutic regimens, including autologous bone marrow transplantation. Most side effects were related to vascular leak syndrome. Clinical response
included two partial remissions, one minor response, and three stable diseases. Promising approaches include deleting immunodominant epitopes and humanizing
the antibody moiety of the immunotoxin.
A variety of monoclonal antibodies have been evaluated for their potential clinical use as ricin A chain immunotoxin against HD. 334 The most potent anti-CD30
immunotoxin, Ki-4.dgA, is currently being investigated in a clinical dose escalation trial. 335 In humans, sequential application of anti-CD30 antibodies linked to distinct
ribosome-inactivating proteins might prevent formation of human antibodies against the individual toxins.

Radioimmunoconjugates
Radioimmunoconjugates are constructed by linking a monoclonal antibody to radioisotopes without significantly altering the immunologic specificity of the protein. The
most important advantage of these constructs as compared to all other antibody-based therapeutic strategies is that b-particles emitted by radionuclides can kill
adjacent tumor cells through a crossfire effect, regardless of whether cells express the target antigen. As opposed to external-beam radiotherapy, radiolabeled
antibodies deliver radiation continuously at a low dose rate to the whole body, including occult micrometastases. 336 Currently, both nonmyeloablative and
myeloablative strategies involving radiolabeled antibodies are investigated for imaging and treatment of HD.
Low-energy radionuclides are coupled to monoclonal antibodies either for diagnostic use (immunoscintigraphy) or for low-dose radioimmunotherapy without severe
myelosuppression. A phase I trial was initiated to investigate the safety of the 99mTc-labeled anti-CD30 antibody Ber-H2 for immunoscintigraphy and possible
immunotherapy in patients with refractory HD and large cell anaplastic lymphoma. Preliminary results suggest good tolerance of the therapy with no major side effects
and satisfactory efficacy for imaging or detecting HD lesions. Future trials involving modern radioisotopes ( 111In, 90Y, 186Rh) are warranted.337
Stem cell support for hematopoietic recovery might be necessary in high-dose radioimmunotherapy. A phase I to II study with 90Y-labeled polyclonal antiferritin
antibodies for refractory Hodgkin's lymphoma followed by autologous bone marrow transplantation was performed by Vriesendorp et al. 338 Of 17 patients, seven
achieved complete remissions lasting 2 to 26 or more months, and four patients achieved partial remissions (2 to 6 months). Twelve patients received a reduced dose
(20 mCi) due to bone marrow involvement or unsuccessful marrow harvest. Complete remissions were observed in two and partial remissions in five of them. For all
doses, response rates were better in patients with small tumor burden. Based on these encouraging results, radioimmunotherapy appears to be a new promising
option, either alone or in combination with other chemotherapy or immunotherapy (or both).
Bi-Specific Monoclonal Antibodies
Bi-specific monoclonal antibodies contain two different recognition sites, one for antigens on tumor cells and another for antigens on immunologic effector cells, such
as macrophages, T lymphocytes, or NK cells. For treatment of HD with NK-cell–activating bi-specific antibodies, a CD16/CD30 bi-specific antibody was constructed
using hybridoma technology. 42 Heavily pretreated patients with refractory HD received intravenous infusions of the CD16/CD30 (A9/HRS-3) antibody four times every
3 or 4 days. 339 Fifteen patients with refractory HD were treated with escalating doses. Side effects were rare and consisted of short-lasting fever, pain in involved
lymph nodes, and a maculopapular rash. A total of one complete and one partial remission (lasting 16 and 3 months, respectively), three minor responses (1 to 11+
months), and one mixed response was observed.
ACTIVE IMMUNOTHERAPY
Therapeutic strategies modulating the cellular immune response have been investigated in lymphoma patients for more than 25 years. As immunotherapy with
Bacillus Calmette-Guérin had suggested therapeutic effects when combined with chemotherapy in patients with acute myelocytic leukemia and breast cancer, several
randomized clinical trials were initiated in patients with advanced Hodgkin's lymphoma as well. 340 Because of a documented lack of therapeutic benefit and a higher
frequency of unacceptable toxicity, trials investigating Bacillus Calmette-Guérin treatment were discontinued.
IL-2 was one of the first immunotherapeutic agents used for anticancer therapy. Several clinical studies were performed to investigate the efficacy of IL-2 alone or in
combination with autologous lymphokine activated killer cells (adoptive immunotherapy) in patients with refractory Hodgkin's lymphoma. 341,342 and 343 Toxicity was mild,
mainly comprising fever, rash, hypotension, and anemia. In these clinical pilot trials, several transient partial remissions were achieved in heavily pretreated patients
with relapsed or refractory disease. IL-2 is currently under clinical investigation as maintenance therapy alone or in combination with other cytokines after HDCT.
Case reports of a few patients who received interferon for treatment of viral infection noted minor responses of Hodgkin's lymphoma. Therefore, some pilot studies
were conducted to investigate the efficacy of interferon in the salvage or maintenance therapy of HD. Preliminary results suggest a limited activity of interferon-a in
patients with relapsed or refractory HD. 344
GENE THERAPY
Modulation of EBV-directed T-cell activity might be another interesting new immunotherapeutic option: Heslop et al. 345 developed EBV-specific CTLs for treatment of
EBV-associated lymphoma after bone marrow transplantation. Donors' blood samples were used for generation of EBV-transformed B-cell lines (LCLs) and for
production of CTLs.345 Incubation of activated CTLs with LCLs of the same probe induced formation of EBV-specific CTLs. In three of ten patients, elevated levels of
EBV DNA after allogeneic transplantation normalized after infusion of the EBV-specific CTLs. EBV-specific CTLs were isolated for an adoptive transfer in patients with
EBV-positive HD. 346 Nine patients with active, relapsed HD and four who were in complete remission after first or subsequent therapy were treated with autologous
EBV-specific CTLs: A 100-fold reduction of EBV DNA was observed in all patients; in two of them, B-symptoms ceased.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Hellman S. A brief consideration of Thomas Hodgkin and his times. In: Mauch PM, Armitage JO, Diehl V, Hoppe RT, Weiss LM, eds. Hodgkin's disease. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1999:3.
2. Hodgkin T. On some morbid appearances of the absorbent glands and spleen. Medico-Chirurg Trans 1832;17:68
3. Wilks S. Cases of enlargement of the lymphatic glands and spleen (or Hodgkin's disease), with remarks. Guy's Hosp Rep 1865;11:56.
4. Greenfield W. Specimens illustrative of the pathology of lymphadenoma and leucocythemia. Trans Pathol Soc Lond 1878;29:272.
5. Sternberg C. Uber eine eigenartige unter dem Bilde der Pseudoleukamie verlaufende Tuberculose des lymphatischen Apparates. Ztschr Heilk 1898;19:21.
6. Reed D. On the pathological changes in Hodgkin's disease, with special reference to its relation to tuberculosis. Johns Hopkins Hosp Rep 1902;10:133.
7. Benda C. Zur Histologie der pseudoleukamischen Geschwulste. Verh Dtsch Ges Pathol 1904:7.
8. Stein H, Diehl V, Marafioti T, et al. Hodgkin's disease. In: Mauch PM, Armitage JO, Diehl V, Hoppe RT, Weiss LM, eds. Hodgkin's disease. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
1999:121.
9. Correa P, O'Conor G, Berard C. International comparability and reproducibility in histologic subclassification of Hodgkin's disease. J Natl Cancer Inst 1973;50:1429.
10. Kaplan H. Hodgkin's disease, vol 2. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1980:245.
11. Vianna J, Poln A. Epidemiological evidence for transmission of Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1973;289:499.
12. Grufferman S, Cole P, Levitan T. Evidence against transmission of Hodgkin's disease in high schools. N Engl J Med 1979;300:1006.
13. Bernard S, Cartwright R, Darwin C, et al. Hodgkin's disease: case control epidemiological study in Yorkshire. Br J Cancer 1987;55:85.
14. Razis DV, Diamond HD, Craver LF. Familial Hodgkin's disease: its significance and implications. Ann Intern Med 1959;51:933.
15. Bryden H, MacKenzie J, Andrew L, et al. Determination of HLA-A*02 antigen status in Hodgkin's disease and analysis of an HLA-A*02-restricted epitope of the Epstein-Barr virus LMP-2 protein.
Int J Cancer 1997;72:614.
16. Poppema S, Visser L. Epstein-Barr virus positivity in Hodgkin's disease does not correlate with an HLA A2-negative phenotype. Cancer 1994;73:3059.
17. Lowenthal D, Straus D, Campbell S, et al. AIDS-related lymphoid neoplasia: the Memorial Hospital experience. Cancer 1988;61:2325.
18. Mueller N. Hodgkin's disease. In: Schnottenfeld D, Fraumeni J, eds. Cancer epidemiology and prevention, vol 2. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992:877.
19. Gutensohn N. Social class and age at diagnosis of Hodgkin's disease: new epidemiologic evidence for the “two-disease hypothesis”. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:689.
20. Glaser S, Lin R, Stewart S, et al. Epstein-Barr virus-associated Hodgkin's disease: epidemiologic characteristics in international data. Int J Cancer 1997;70:375.
21. Mueller N, Evans A, Harris N, et al. Hodgkin's disease and Epstein-Barr virus. Altered antibody pattern before diagnosis. N Engl J Med 1989;320:689.
22. Zarate-Osorno A, Roman L, Kingma D, et al. Hodgkin's disease in Mexico. Prevalence of Epstein-Barr virus sequences and correlations with histologic subtype. Cancer 1995;75:1360.
23. Ambinder RF, Weiss LM. Hodgkin's disease. In: Mauch PM, Armitage JO, Diehl V, Hoppe RT, Weiss LM, eds. Hodgkin's disease. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999:79.
24. Staal S, Ambinder R, Beschorner W, et al. A survey of Epstein-Barr virus DNA in lymphoid tissue. Frequent detection in Hodgkin's disease. Am J Clin Pathol 1989;91:1.
25. Brousset P, Chittal S, Schlaifer D, et al. Detection of Epstein-Barr virus messenger RNA in Reed-Sternberg cells of Hodgkin's disease by in situ hybridization with biotinylated probes on
specially processed modified acetone methyl benzoate xylene (ModAMeX) sections. Blood 1991;77:1781.
26. Kamel O, Weiss L, van dRM, et al. Hodgkin's disease and lymphoproliferations resembling Hodgkin's disease in patients receiving long-term low-dose methotrexate therapy. Am J Surg Pathol
1996;20:1279.
27. Pelstring R, Zellmer R, Sulak L, et al. Hodgkin's disease in association with human immunodeficiency virus infection. Pathologic and immunologic features. Cancer 1991;67:1865
28. Herbst H, Anagnostopoulos J, Heinze B, et al. ALK gene products in anaplastic large cell lymphomas and Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1995;86:1694.
29. Knecht H, Bachmann E, Brousset P, et al. Deletions within the LMP1 oncogene of Epstein-Barr virus are clustered in Hodgkin's disease and identical to those observed in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma. Blood 1993;82:2937.
30. Siebert J, Ambinder R, Napoli V, et al. Human immunodeficiency virus-associated Hodgkin's disease contains latent, not replicative, Epstein-Barr virus. Hum Pathol 1995;26:1191.
31. Armstrong A, Shield L, Gallagher A, et al. Lack of involvement of known oncogenic DNA viruses in Epstein-Barr virus-negative Hodgkin's disease. Br J Cancer 1998;77:1045.
32. Haluska FG, Brufsky AM, Canellos GP, et al. The cellular biology of the Reed-Sternberg cell. Blood 1994;84:1005.
33. Diehl V, Kirchner H, Burrichter H, et al. Characteristics of Hodgkin's disease-derived cell lines. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:615
34. Diehl V, von KC, Fonatsch C, et al. The cell of origin in Hodgkin's disease. Semin Oncol 1990;17:660.

35. Wolf J, Kapp U, Bohlen H, et al. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells of a patient with advanced Hodgkin's lymphoma give rise to permanently growing Hodgkin-Reed Sternberg cells. Blood
1996;87:3418.
36. Kanzler H, Hansmann M, Kapp U, et al. Molecular single cell analysis demonstrates the derivation of a peripheral blood-derived cell line (L1236) from the Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg cells of a
Hodgkin's lymphoma patient. Blood 1996;87:3429.
37. Stein H, Gerdes J, Schwab U, et al. Identification of Hodgkin and Sternberg-reed cells as a unique cell type derived from a newly-detected small-cell population. Int J Cancer 1982;30:445.
38. Schwab U, Stein H, Gerdes J, et al. Production of a monoclonal antibody specific for Hodgkin and Sternberg-Reed cells of Hodgkin's disease and a subset of normal lymphoid cells. Nature
1982;299:65.
39. Durkop H, Latza U, Hummel M, et al. Molecular cloning and expression of a new member of the nerve growth factor receptor family that is characteristic for Hodgkin's disease. Cell
1992;68:421.
40. Engert A, Martin G, Pfreundschuh M, et al. Antitumor effects of ricin A chain immunotoxins prepared from intact antibodies and Fab' fragments on solid human Hodgkin's disease tumors in
mice. Cancer Res 1990;50:2929.
41. Falini B, Bolognesi A, Flenghi L, et al. Response of refractory Hodgkin's disease to monoclonal anti-CD30 immunotoxin. Lancet 1992;339:1195.
42. Hombach A, Jung W, Pohl C, et al. A CD16/CD30 bispecific monoclonal antibody induces lysis of Hodgkin's cells by unstimulated natural killer cells in vitro and in vivo. Int J Cancer
1993;55:830.
43. Winkler U, Gottstein C, Schon G, et al. Successful treatment of disseminated human Hodgkin's disease in SCID mice with deglycosylated ricin A-chain immunotoxins. Blood 1994;83:466.
44. Kapp U, Wolf J, Hummel M, et al. Hodgkin's lymphoma-derived tissue serially transplanted into severe combined immunodeficient mice. Blood 1993;82:1247.
45. Kuppers R, Rajewsky K, Zhao M, et al. Hodgkin disease: Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells picked from histological sections show clonal immunoglobulin gene rearrangements and appear to
be derived from B cells at various stages of development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:10962.
46. Vockerodt M, Soares M, Kanzler H, et al. Detection of clonal Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells with identical somatically mutated and rearranged VH genes in different biopsies in relapsed
Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1998;92:2899.
47. Marafioti T, Hummel M, Anagnostopoulos I, et al. Origin of nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's disease from a clonal expansion of highly mutated germinal-center B cells. N Engl J Med
1997;337:453.
48. Jox A, Zander T, Kuppers R, et al. Somatic mutations within the untranslated regions of rearranged Ig genes in a case of classical Hodgkin's disease as a potential cause for the absence of Ig in
the lymphoma cells. Blood 1999;93:3964.
49. Rowley J. Chromosomes in Hodgkin's disease. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:639.
50. Thangavelu M, Le BM. Chromosomal abnormalities in Hodgkin's disease. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1989;3:221.
51. Tilly H, Bastard C, Delastre T, et al. Cytogenetic studies in untreated Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1991;77:1298.
52. Steenvoorden AC, Janssen JW, Drexler HD. Ras mutations in Hodgkin's disease. Leukemia 1988;2:325.
53. Gravel S, Delsol G, Al ST. Single-cell analysis of the t(14;18)(q32;q21) chromosomal translocation in Hodgkin's disease demonstrates the absence of this translocation in neoplastic Hodgkin
and Reed-Sternberg cells. Blood 1998;91:2866.
54. Emmerich F, Meiser M, Hummel M, et al. Overexpression of I kappa B alpha without inhibition of NF-kappaB activity and mutations in the I kappa B alpha gene in Reed-Sternberg cells. Blood
1999;94:3129.
55. Bargou R, Emmerich F, Krappmann D, et al. Constitutive nuclear factor-kappaB-RelA activation is required for proliferation and survival of Hodgkin's disease tumor cells. J Clin Invest
1997;100:2961.
56. Wood K, Roff M, Hay R. Defective IkBa in Hodgkin cell lines with constitutively active NF-kB. Oncogene 1998;16:2131.
57. van den Berg A, Visser L, Poppema S. High expression of the CC chemokine TARC in Reed-Sternberg cells. A possible explanation for the characteristic T-cell infiltratein Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Am J Pathol 1999;154:1685.
58. Bargou R, Leng C, Krappmann D, et al. High-level nuclear NF-kappa B and Oct-2 is a common feature of cultured Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg cells. Blood 1996;87:4340.
59. Kanzler H, Hansmann ML, Kapp U, et al. Molecular single cell analysis demonstrates the derivation of a peripheral blood-derived cell line (L1236) from the Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg cells of a
Hodgkin's lymphoma patient. Blood 1996;87:3429.
60. Lee S, Constandinou C, Thomas W, et al. Antigen presenting phenotype of Hodgkin Reed-Sternberg cells:analysis of the HLA class I processing pathway and the effects of interleukin-10 on
Epstein-Barr virus-specific cytotoxic T-cell recognition. Blood 1998; 92:1020.
61. Diehl V, Kirchner H, Schaadt M, et al. Hodgkin's disease: establishment and characterization of four in vitro cell lies. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1981;101:111.
62. Gause A, Jung W, Schmits R, et al. Soluble CD8, CD25 and CD30 antigens as prognostic markers in patients with untreated Hodgkin's lymphoma. Ann Oncol 1992;3[Suppl 4]:49.
63. Falini B, Bigerna B, Pasqualucci L, et al. Distinctive expression pattern of the BCL-6 protein in nodular lymphocyte predominance Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1996;87:465.
64. Carbone A, Gloghini A, Gaidano G, et al. Expression status of BCL-6 and syndecan-1 identifies distinct histogenetic subtypes of Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1998;92:2220.
65. Ludewig B, Graf D, Gelderblom HR. Spontaneous apoptosis of dendritic cells is efficiently inhibited by TRAP (CD40-ligand) and TNF-alpha, but strongly enhanced by interleukin-10. Eur J
Immunol 1995;25:1943.
66. Sarris A, Kliche K, Pethambaram P, et al. Interleukin-10 levels are often elevated in serum of adults with Hodgkin's disease and are associated with inferior failure-free survival. Ann Oncol
1999;10:433.
67. Pinkus G, Said J. Hodgkin's disease, lymphocyte predominance type, nodularfurther evidence for a B cell derivation. L & H variants of Reed-Sternberg cells express L26, a pan B cell marker.
Am J Pathol 1988;133:211.
68. Hall P, d'Ardenne A, Stansfeld A. Paraffin section immunohistochemistry. II. Hodgkin's disease and large cell anaplastic (Ki1) lymphoma. Histopathology 1988;13:161.
69. Regula DJ, Hoppe R, Weiss L. Nodular and diffuse types of lymphocyte predominance Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1988;318:214.
70. Brauninger A, Kuppers R, Strickler JG. Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells in lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin disease represent clonal populations of germinal centerderived tumor B cells.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:9337.
71. Kanzler H, Kuppers R, Hansmann M, et al. Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells in Hodgkin's disease represent the outgrowth of a dominant tumor clone derived from (crippled) germinal center B
cells. J Exp Med 1996;184:1495.
72. Mason D, Banks P, Chan J, et al. Nodular lymphocyte predominance Hodgkin's disease. A distinct clinicopathological entity [editorial]. Am J Surg Pathol 1994;18:526.
73. Jackson HJ, Parker FJ. Hodgkin's disease and allied disorders. New York: Oxford University Press, 1947:312.
74. Lukes R, Butler J, Hicks E. Natural history of Hodgkin's disease as related to its patholgical picture. Cancer 1966;19:317.
75. Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Stein H. A revised European-American classification of lymphoid neoplasms: a proposal from the International Lymphoma Study Group. Blood 1994;84:1361.
76. von Wasielewsky R, Werner M, Fischer R, et al. Lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's disease. An immunohistochemical analysis of 208 reviewed Hodgkin's disease cases from the German
Hodgkin Study Group. Am J Pathol 1997;150:793.
77. Burns B, Colby T, Dorfman R. Differential diagnostic features of nodular L & H Hodgkin's disease, including progressive transformation of germinal centers. Am J Surg Pathol 1984;8:253.
78. Poppema S, Kaiserling E, Lennert K. Nodular paragranuloma and progressively transformed germinal centers:ultrastructural and immunohistochemical findings. Virchows Arch [B] 1979;31:211.
79. Ferry J, Zukerberg L, Harris N. Florid progressive transformation of germinal centers. A syndrome affecting young men, without early progression to nodular lymphocyte predominance
Hodgkin's disease. Am J Surg Pathol 1992;16:252.
80. Bennett M, MacLennan K, Vaughan HG, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma arising in patients treated for Hodgkin's disease in the BNLI: a 20-year experience. British National Lymphoma
Investigation. Ann Oncol 1991;2[Suppl 2]:83.
81. Hansmann M, Wacker H, Radzun H. Paragranuloma is a variant of Hodgkin's disease with predominance of B-cells. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol 1986;409:171.
82. Orlandi E, Lazzarino M, Brusamolino E. Nodular lymphocyte predominance Hodgkin's disease (NLPHD): clinical behavior and pattern of progression in 66 patients. In: Proceedings of the Third
International Symposium on Hodgkin's Lymphoma, Cologne, Germany, 1995:85.
83. Wickert R, Weisenburger D, Tierens A, et al. Clonal relationship between lymphocytic predominance Hodgkin's disease and concurrent or subsequent large-cell lymphoma of B lineage. Blood
1995;86:2312.
84. Sundeen J, Cossman J, Jaffe E. Lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin's disease nodular subtype with coexistent “large cell lymphoma”. Histological progression or composite malignancy? Am J
Surg Pathol 1988;12:599.
85. Stein H, Hansmann M, Lennert K, et al. Reed-Sternberg and Hodgkin cells in lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's disease of nodular subtype contain J chain. Am J Clin Pathol 1986;86:292.
86. Stoler M, Nichols G, Symbula M, et al. Lymphocyte predominance Hodgkin's disease. Evidence for a kappa light chain-restricted monotypic B-cell neoplasm. Am J Pathol 1995;146:812.
87. Carbone A, Gloghini A, Gattei V, et al. Expression of functional CD40 antigen on Reed-Sternberg cells and Hodgkin's disease cell lines. Blood 1995;85:780.
88. Timens W, Visser L, Poppema S. Nodular lymphocyte predominance type of Hodgkin's disease is a germinal center lymphoma. Lab Invest 1986;54:457.
89. Poppema S. The nature of the lymphocytes surrounding Reed-Sternberg cells in nodular lymphocyte predominance and in other types of Hodgkin's disease. Am J Pathol 1989;135:351.
90. Kamel O, Gelb A, Shibuya R, et al. Leu 7 (CD57) reactivity distinguishes nodular lymphocyte predominance Hodgkin's disease from nodular sclerosing Hodgkin's disease, T-cell-rich B-cell
lymphoma and follicular lymphoma. Am J Pathol 1993;142:541.
91. Hansmann M, Stein H, Dallenbach F, et al. Diffuse lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's disease (diffuse paragranuloma). A variant of the B-cell-derived nodular type. Am J Pathol 1991;138:29.
92. Krayalcin G, Behm F, Geiser P. Lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin disease: clinicopathologic features and results of treatmentthe Pediatric Oncology Group experience. Med Pediatr Oncol
1997;29:519.
93. Colby T, Hoppe R, Warnke R. Hodgkin's disease: a clinicopathologic study of 659 cases. Cancer 1982;49:1848.
94. Kant J, Hubbard S, Longo D, et al. The pathologic and clinical heterogeneity of lymphocyte-depleted Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:284.
95. Bennett M, MacLennan K, Easterling M, et al. The prognostic significance of cellular subtypes in nodular sclerosing Hodgkin's disease: an analysis of 271 non-laparotomised cases (BNLI report
no. 22). Clin Radiol 1983;34:497.
96. Wijlhuizen T, Vrints L, Jairam R, et al. Grades of nodular sclerosis (NSI-NSII) in Hodgkin's disease. Are they of independent prognostic value? Cancer 1989;63:1150.
97. Hess J, Bodis S, Pinkus G, et al. Histopathologic grading of nodular sclerosis Hodgkin's disease. Lack of prognostic significance in 254 surgically staged patients. Cancer 1994;74:708.
98. van Spronsen D, Vrints L, Erdkamp F. Disappearance of prognostic value of subclassification of nodular sclerosing Hodgkin's disease in south-east Netherlands since 1972. In: Proceedings of
the Third International Symposium on Hodgkin's Lymphoma, Cologne, Germany, 1995:129.
99. Stein H, Herbst H, Anagnostopoulos I, et al. The nature of Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells, their association with EBV, and their relationship to anaplastic large-cell lymphoma. Ann Oncol
1991;2[Suppl 2]:33.
100. Neiman R, Rosen P, Lukes R. Lymphocyte depletion Hodgkin's disease. A clinicopathological entity. N Engl J Med 1973;288:751.
101. Falini B, Stein H, Pileri S, et al. Expression of lymphoid-associated antigens on Hodgkin's and Reed-Sternberg cells of Hodgkin's disease. An immunocytochemical study on lymph node
cytospins using monoclonal antibodies. Histopathology 1987;11:1229.
102. Falini B, Bigerna B, Pasqualucci L, et al. Distinctive expression pattern of the BCL-6 protein in nodular lymphocyte predominance Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1996;87:465.
103. McBride J, Rodriguez J, Luthra R, et al. T-cell-rich B large-cell lymphoma simulating lymphocyte-rich Hodgkin's disease. Am J Surg Pathol 1996;20:193.
104. Ashton-Key M, Thorpe P, Allen J, et al. Follicular Hodgkin's disease. Am J Surg Pathol 1995;19:1294.
105. Diehl V, Stein H, Sextro M. Lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin's disease: a European Task Force on Lymphoma project. Blood 1996;88:294a.
106. Wasielewski R, Mengel M, Fischer R. Classical Hodgkin's disease: clinical impact of the immunophenotype. Am J Pathol 1997;151:1123.
107. Jaffe E, Zarate-Osorno A, Medeiros L. The interrelationship of Hodgkin's disease and non-Hodgkin's lymphomaslessons learned from composite and sequential malignancies. Semin Diagn
Pathol 1992;9:297.
108. Travis L, Gonzalez C, Hankey B, et al. Hodgkin's disease following non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer 1992;69:2337.
109. Brauninger A, Hansmann M, Strickler J, et al. Identification of common germinal-center B-cell precursors in two patients with both Hodgkin's disease and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. N Engl J
Med 1999;340:1239.
110. Rubin D, Hudnall S, Aisenberg A, et al. Richter's transformation of chronic lymphocytic leukemia with Hodgkin's-like cells is associated with Epstein-Barr virus infection. Mod Pathol 1994;7:91.
111. Kuppers R, Rajewsky K. The origin of Hodgkin and Reed/Sternberg cells in Hodgkin's disease. Annu Rev Immunol 1998;16:471.

112. Brousset P, Lamant L, Viraben R, et al. Hodgkin's disease following mycosis fungoides: phenotypic and molecular evidence for different tumour cell clones. J Clin Pathol 1996;49:504.
113. Stein H, Mason D, Gerdes J, et al. The expression of the Hodgkin's disease associated antigen Ki-1 in reactive and neoplastic lymphoid tissue: evidence that Reed-Sternberg cells and
histiocytic malignancies are derived from activated lymphoid cells. Blood 1985;66:848.
114. Benharroch D, Meguerian-Bedoyan Z, Lamant L, et al. ALK-positive lymphoma: a single disease with a broad spectrum of morphology. Blood 1998;91:2076.
115. Zinzani P, Bendandi M, Martelli M, et al. Anaplastic large-cell lymphoma: clinical and prognostic evaluation of 90 adult patients. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:955.
116. Elmberger P, Lozano M, Weisenburger D, et al. Transcripts of the npm-alk fusion gene in anaplastic large cell lymphoma, Hodgkin's disease, and reactive lymphoid lesions. Blood
1995;86:3517.
117. Sarris A, Luthra R, Papadimitracopoulou V, et al. Long-range amplification of genomic DNA detects the t(2;5)(p23;q35) in anaplastic large-cell lymphoma, but not in other non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas, Hodgkin's disease, or lymphomatoid papulosis. Ann Oncol 1997;8[Suppl 2]:59.
118. Pulford K, Lamant L, Morris S, et al. Detection of anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) and nucleolar protein nucleophosmin (NPM)-ALK proteins in normal and neoplastic cells with the
monoclonal antibody ALK1. Blood 1997;89:1394.
119. Gilbert R. Radiotherapy in Hodgkin's disease (malignant granulomatosis); anatomic and clinical foundations; governing principles, results. Am J Roentgenol 1939;41:198.
120. Peters M. A study of survivals in Hodgkin's disease treated radiologically. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1950;63:299.
121. Kaplan H. The radical radiotherapy of regionally localized Hodgkin's disease. Radiology 1962;78:553.
122. Peters M. Prophylactic treatment of adjacent areas in Hodgkin's disease. Cancer Res 1966;26:1232.
123. Lister T, Crowther D, Sutcliffe S, et al. Report of a committee convened to discuss the evaluation and staging of patients with Hodgkin's disease: Cotswolds meeting. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1630.
124. Hughes-Davies L, Tarbell N, Coleman C, et al. Stage IA-IIB Hodgkin's disease: management and outcome of extensive thoracic involvement. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:361.
125. Hoppe R, Coleman C, Cox R, et al. The management of stage III Hodgkin's disease with irradiation alone or combined modality therapy: the Stanford experience. Blood 1982;59:455.
126. Rostock R, Siegelman S, Lenhard R, et al. Thoracic CT scanning for mediastinal Hodgkin's disease: results and therapeutic implications. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:1451.
127. Hopper K, Diehl L, Lesar M, et al. Hodgkin disease: clinical utility of CT in initial staging and treatment. Radiology 1988;169:17.
128. Castellino RA, Podoloff DA. Diagnostic radiology and nuclear medicine imaging in Hodgkin's disease. In: Mauch PM, Armitage JO, Diehl V, Hoppe RT, Weiss LM, eds. Hodgkin's disease.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999:241.
129. Webb W, Gatsonis C, Zerhouni E. CT and MRI imaging in staging non-small cell bronchogenic carcinoma: report of the Radiologic Diagnostic Group. Radiology 1991;178:705.
130. Mauch P, Larson D, Osteen R, et al. Prognostic factors for positive surgical staging in patients with Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:257.
131. Castellino R, Dunnick N, Goffinet D, et al. Predictive value of lymphography for sites of subdiaphragmatic disease encountered at staging laparotomy in newly diagnosed Hodgkin's disease and
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:532.
132. Gilbert R. La roentgentherapie de la granulomatose maligne. J Radiol Electrol 1925;9:509.
133. Sapozink M, Kaplan H. Intracranial Hodgkin's disease. A report of 12 cases and review of the literature. Cancer 1983;52:1301.
134. Gobbi P, Cavalli C, Gendarini A, et al. Reevaluation of prognostic significance of symptoms in Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1985;56:2874.
135. Pusey W. Cases of sarcoma and of Hodgkin's disease treated by exposures to X-rays: a preliminary report. JAMA 1902;38:166.
136. Senn N. Therapeutical value of roentgen ray in treatment of pseudoleukemia. N Y Med J 1903;77:665.
137. Gilbert R. La roentgentherapie de la granulomatose maligne. J Radiol Electrol 1925;9:509.
138. Ginzton E, Mallory K, Kaplan H. The Stanford Medical Linear Accelerator: I. Design and development. Stanford Med Bull 1957;15:123.
139. Kinzie J, Hanks G, MacLean C, et al. Patterns of care study: Hodgkin's disease relapse rates and adequacy of portals. Cancer 1983;52:2223.
140. Lutz W, Larsen R. Technique to match mantle and para-aortic fields. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:1753.
141. Horning S, Hoppe R, Kaplan H, et al. Female reproductive potential after treatment for Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1981;304:1377.
141a. Skipper HE, Schabel FM, Wilcox WS. Experimental evaluation of potential anticancer agents. XIII. On the criteria and kinetics associated with “curability” of experimental leukemia.
Chemother Rep 1964;35:1.

Cancer

141b. DeVita VT, Serpick AA. Combination chemotherapy in the treatment of advanced Hodgkin's disease. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1967;8:13.
142. Loeffler M, Diehl V, Pfreundschuh M, et al. Dose-response relationship of complementary radiotherapy following four cycles of combination chemotherapy in intermediate-stage Hodgkin's
disease. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2275.
143. Bahtia S, Robison LL, Oberlin O. Breast cancer and other second neoplasms after childhood Hodgkin`s disease. N Engl J Med 1996;334:745.
144. Hancock S, Tucker M, Hoppe R. Factors affecting late mortality from heart disease after treatment of Hodgkin's disease. JAMA 1993;270:1949.
145. Horning S, Hoppe R, Mason J, et al. Stanford-Kaiser Permanente G1 study for clinical stage I to IIA Hodgkin's disease: subtotal lymphoid irradiation versus vinblastine, methotrexate, and
bleomycin chemotherapy and regional irradiation. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1736.
146. Frei EI. Combined intensive alkylating agents with autologous bone marrow transplantation for metastatic solid tumors. In: Dicke K, Spitzer G, Zander A, eds. Autologous bone marrow
transplantation: proceedings of the first international symposium. Houston: University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1985:509.
147. Reece D, Phillips G. Intensive therapy and autotransplantation in Hodgkin's disease. Stem Cells 1994;12:477.
148. Phillips GL, Wolff SN, Herzig RH. Treatment of progressive Hodgkin`s disease with intensive chemoradiotherapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1989;73:2086.
149. Jagannath S, Dicke K, Armitage J, et al. High-dose cyclophosphamide, carmustine, and etoposide and autologous bone marrow transplantation for relapsed Hodgkin's disease. Ann Intern Med
1986;104:163.
150. Josting A, Mapara M, Reiser M. Novel three phase, high-dose sequential chemotherapy with autologous stem cell support for relapsed or refractory Hodgkin`s and high-grade Non-Hodgkin`s
lymphoma. Ann Oncol 1999;10:638.
151. Gianni A, Siena S, Bregni M, et al. High-dose sequential chemo-radiotherapy with peripheral blood progenitor cell support for relapsed or refractory Hodgkin's diseasea 6-year update. Ann
Oncol 1993;4:889.
152. Norton L, Simon R. The Norton-Simon hypothesis revisited. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:163.
153. Reece D, Connors J, Spinelli J, et al. Intensive therapy with cyclophosphamide, carmustine, etoposide +/ cisplatin, and autologous bone marrow transplantation for Hodgkin's disease in first
relapse after combination chemotherapy. Blood 1994;83:1193.
154. Yahalom J, Gulati S, Toia M, et al. Accelerated hyperfractionated total-lymphoid irradiation, high-dose chemotherapy, and autologous bone marrow transplantation for refractory and relapsing
patients with Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1062.
155. Poen J, Hoppe R, Horning S. High-dose therapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation for relapsed/refractory Hodgkin's disease: the impact of involved field radiotherapy on patterns of
failure and survival. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:3.
156. Goldstone A. The case for and against high-dose therapy with stem cell rescue for early poor prognosis Hodgkin's disease in first remission. Ann Oncol 1998;9[Suppl 5]:83.
157. Mauch P, Tarbell N, Weinstein H. Stage IA and IIA supradiaphragmatic Hodgkin's disease: prognostic factors in surgically staged patients treated with mantle and paraaortic irradiation. J Clin
Oncol 1988;6:1576.
158. Loeffler M, Pfreundschuh M, Hasenclever D. Prognostic risk factors in advanced Hodgkin's disease. Report of the German Hodgkin Study Group. Blut 1988;56:273.
159. Carde P, Burger JM, Henry-Amar M. Clinical stages I and II Hodgkin's disease: a specifically tailored therapy according to prognostic factors. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:239.
160. Loeffler M, Pfreundschuh M, Rühl U. Risk factor adapted treatment of Hodgkin's lymphoma: strategies and perspectives. Recent ResultsCancer Res 1989;117:142.
161. Hasenclever D, Diehl V. A prognostic score for advanced Hodgkin's disease. International Prognostic Factors Project on Advanced Hodgkin's Disease. N Engl J Med 1998;339:1506.
162. Lagarde P, Eghbali H, Bonichon F, et al. Brief chemotherapy associated with extended field radiotherapy in Hodgkin's disease. Long-term results in a series of 102 patients with clinical stages
I-IIIA. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1988;24:1191.
163. Specht LK, Hasenclever D. Prognostic factors of Hodgkin's disease. In: Mauch PM, Armitage JO, Diehl V, Hoppe RT, Weiss LM, eds. Hodgkin's disease. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1999:295.
164. Viviani S, Bonadonna G, Santoro A, et al. Alternating versus hybrid MOPP and ABVD combinations in advanced Hodgkin's disease: ten-year results. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1421.
165. Proctor S, Taylor P, Mackie M, et al. A numerical prognostic index for clinical use in identification of poor-risk patients with Hodgkin's disease at diagnosis. The Scotland and Newcastle
Lymphoma Group (SNLG) Therapy Working Party. Leuk Lymph 1992;7[Suppl]:17.
166. Hasenclever D, Schmitz N, Diehl V. Is there a rationale for high-dose chemotherapy as first line treatment of advanced Hodgkin's disease? German Hodgkin's Lymphoma Study Group (GHSG).
Leuk Lymph 1995;15[Suppl 1]:47.
167. Horning SJ, Yahalom J, Tesch H. Treatment of stage III-IV Hodgkin's disease. In: Mauch PM, Armitage JO, Diehl V, Hoppe RT, Weiss LM, eds. Hodgkin's disease. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 1999:483.
168. Vijayakumar S, Myrianthopoulos L. An updated dose-response analysis in Hodgkin's disease. Radiother Oncol 1992;24:1.
169. Duhmke E, Diehl V, Loeffler M, et al. Randomized trial with early-stage Hodgkin's disease testing 30 Gy vs. 40 Gy extended field radiotherapy alone. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;36:305.
170. Tubiana M, Henry-Amar M, Carde P. Toward comprehensive management tailored to prognostic factors of patients with clinical stages I and II in Hodgkin's disease. The EORTC Lymphoma
Group controlled clinical trials: 19641987. Blood 1989;73:47.
171. Sutcliffe S, Gospodarowicz M, Bergsagel D, et al. Prognostic groups for management of localized Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:393.
172. Wirth A, Chao M, Corry J, et al. Mantle irradiation alone for clinical stage I-II Hodgkin's disease: long-term follow-up and analysis of prognostic factors in 261 patients. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:230.
173. Noordijk E, Kluin-Nelemans J. Stage I or II Hodgkin's disease: more chemotherapy and less irradiation. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd 1997;141:1281.
174. Ganesan T, Wrigley P, Murray P, et al. Radiotherapy for stage I Hodgkin's disease: 20 years experience at St Bartholomew's Hospital. Br J Cancer 1990;62:314.
175. Horning S, Hoppe R, Hancock S. Vinblastine, bleomycin, and methotrexate: an effective adjuvant in favorable Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1822.
176. Bates N, Williams M, Bessell E, et al. Efficacy and toxicity of vinblastine, bleomycin, and methotrexate with involved-field radiotherapy in clinical stage IA and IIA Hodgkin's disease: a British
National Lymphoma Investigation pilot study. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:288.
177. Gobbi P, Pieresca C, Frassoldati A, et al. Vinblastine, bleomycin, and methotrexate chemotherapy plus extended-field radiotherapy in early, favorably presenting, clinically staged Hodgkin's
patients: the Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio dei Linfomi Experience. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:527.
178. Noordijk E, Carde P, Hagenbeek A. Combination of radiotherapy and chemotherapy is advisable in all patients with clinical stage I-II Hodgkin's disease. Six-year results of the EORTC-GPMC
controlled clinical trials “H7-VF,” “H7-F” and “H7-U.” Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:173(abst).
179. Carde P, Noordijk E, Hagenbeek A. Superiority of EBVP chemotherapy in copmbination with involved field irradiation over subtotal nodal irradiation in favorable clinical stage I-II Hodgkin's
disease: the EORTC-GPMC H7F randomized trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:13.
180. Andrieu J, Montagnon B, Asselain B, et al. Chemotherapy-radiotherapy association in Hodgkin's disease, clinical stages IA, II2A: results of a prospective clinical trial with 166 patients. Cancer
1980;46:2126.
181. Diehl V, Sieber M, Rüffer U. Treatment of early-stage Hodgkin's disease: considerations in the use of chemotherapy. Presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology, Los Angeles, CA, 1998.
182. Radford J, Cowen R, Ryder W. Four weeks of neo-adjuvant chemotherapy significantly reduces the progression rate in patients treated with limited field radiotherapy for clinical stage (CS
IA/IIA) Hodgkin's disease. Results of a randomized pilot. Ann Oncol 1996;7:66.
183. Bartlett N, Rosenberg S, Hoppe R, et al. Brief chemotherapy, Stanford V, and adjuvant radiotherapy for bulky or advanced-stage Hodgkin's disease: a preliminary report. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:1080.
184. Olweny C, Katongole-Mbidde E, Klife C. Childhood Hodgkin's disease in Uganda: a 10-year experience. Cancer 1978;42:787.
185. Colonna P, Andrieu J. MOPP chemotherapy alone: a suitable treatment for early stages of Hodgkin's disease? [letter]. Lancet 1985;1:1224.
186. Longo D, Glatstein E, Duffey P, et al. Radiation therapy versus combination chemotherapy in the treatment of early-stage Hodgkin's disease: seven-year results of a prospective randomized

trial. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:906.
187. Biti G, Cimino G, Cartoni C, et al. Extended-field radiotherapy is superior to MOPP chemotherapy for the treatment of pathologic stage I-IIA Hodgkin's disease: eight-year update of an Italian
prospective randomized study. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:378.
187a. Pavlovsky S, Maschio M, Santarelli MT, et al. Randomized trial of chemotherapy versus chemotherapy plus radiotherapy for stage I/II Hodgkin's disease. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;80:1466.
188. Pavlovsky S, Schvartzman E, Lastiri F, et al. Randomized trial of CVPP for three versus six cycles in favorable-prognosis and CVPP versus AOPE plus radiotherapy in intermediate-prognosis
untreated Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2652.
189. Santoro A, Viviani S, Zucali R. Comparative results and toxicity of MOPP vs ABVD combined with radiotherapy (RT) in PS IIB, III (A,B) Hodgkin's disease (HD). Presented at the annual
meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, San Diego, CA, 1983.
190. Carde P, Noordijk N, Hagenbeek A. Superiorty of MOPP/ABV over EBVP in combination with involved field irradiation in unfavorable clinical stage I-II Hodgkin's disease: the EORTC H7U
randomized trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1993;12:362.
191. Cosset J, Ferme C, Noordijk E. Combined modality therapy for poor prognosis stages I and II Hodgkin's disease. Semin Radiat Oncol 1996;6:185.
192. Hagemeister F, Purugganan R, Fuller L, et al. Treatment of early stages of Hodgkin's disease with novantrone, vincristine, vinblastine, prednisone, and radiotherapy. Semin Hematol
1994;31:36.
193. Andre M, Brice P, Cazals D, et al. Results of three courses of Adriamycin, bleomycin, vindesine, and dacarbazine with subtotal nodal irradiation in 189 patients with nodal Hodgkin's disease
(stage I, II and IIIA). Hematol Cell Ther 1997;39:59.
194. Horning S, Rosenberg S, Hoppe R. Brief chemotherapy (Stanford V) and adjuvant radiotherapy for bulky or advanced Hodgkin's disease: an update. Ann Oncol 1996;7[Suppl 4]:105.
195. Brusamolino E, Lazzarino M, Orlandi E, et al. Early-stage Hodgkin's disease: long-term results with radiotherapy alone or combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Ann Oncol 1994;5[Suppl
2]:101.
196. Colonna P, Jais J, Desablens B, et al. Mediastinal tumor size and response to chemotherapy are the only prognostic factors in supradiaphragmatic Hodgkin's disease treated by ABVD plus
radiotherapy: ten-year results of the Paris-Ouest-France 81/12 trial, including 262 patients. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1928.
197. Zittoun R, Audebert A, Hoerni B, et al. Extended versus involved fields irradiation combined with MOPP chemotherapy in early clinical stages of Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:207.
197a. Hoppe RT, Cosset JM, Santoro A, et al. Treatment of unfavorable stage III Hodgkin's disease. In: Mauch PM, Armitage JO, Diehl V, Hoppe RT, Weiss LM, eds. Hodgkin's disease.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999:475.
197b. Rüffer U, Sieber M, Pfistner B, et al. Involved field radiation is as effective as extended field radiation following chemotherapy for intermediate stage Hodgkin's disease expecting a reduction
of long term side-effects: interim analysis of the HD8 trial (GHSG). Ann Oncol 1999;10[Suppl 3]:250.
198. Andrieu J, Bayle-Weisgerber C, Boiron M. The chemotherapy-radiotherapy sequence in the management of Hodgkin's disease. Results of a clinical trial. Euro J Cancer 1979;48:153.
199. Preti A, Hagemeister F, McLaughlin P, et al. Hodgkin's disease with a mediastinal mass greater than 10 cm: results of four different treatment approaches. Ann Oncol 1994;5[Suppl 2]:97.
200. Pavlovsky S, Maschio M, Santarelli M, et al. Randomized trial of chemotherapy versus chemotherapy plus radiotherapy for stage I-II Hodgkin's disease. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:1466.
201. DeVita VJ, Hubbard SM. Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1993;328:560.
202. Longo D, Young R, Wesley M, et al. Twenty years of MOPP therapy for Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1295.
203. Bonadonna G, Valagussa P, Santoro A. Alternating non-cross-resistant combination chemotherapy or MOPP in stage IV Hodgkin's disease. A report of 8-year results. Ann Intern Med
1986;104:739.
204. Nissen NI, Pajak TF, Glidewell O. A comparative study of a BCNU containing 4-drug program versus MOPP versus 3-drug combinations in advanced Hodgkin's disease: a cooperative study by
the Cancer and Leukemia Group B. Cancer 1979;43:31.
205. Bakemeier R, Anderson J, Costello W, et al. BCVPP chemotherapy for advanced Hodgkin's disease: evidence for greater duration of complete remission, greater survival, and less toxicity than
with a MOPP regimen. Results of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group study. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:447.
206. Nicholson WM, Beard ME, Crowther D. Combination chemotherapy in generalized Hodgkin's disease. Br Med J 1970;3:7.
207. Sutcliffe SB, Wrigley PF, Peto J. MVPP chemotherapy regimen for advanced Hodgkin's disease. Br Med J 1978;1:679.
208. Hancock B. Randomised study of MOPP (mustine, Oncovin, procarbazine, prednisone) against LOPP (Leukeran substituted for mustine) in advanced Hodgkin's disease. British National
Lymphoma Investigation. Radiother Oncol 1986;7:215.
209. Bonadonna G, Zucali R, Monfardini S, et al. Combination chemotherapy of Hodgkin's disease with adriamycin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and imidazole carboxamide versus MOPP. Cancer
1975;36:252.
210. Santoro A, Bonadonna G, Valagussa P. Long-term results of combined chemotherapy-radiotherapy approach in Hodgkin's disease: superiority of ABVD plus radiotherapy versus MOPP plus
radiotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:27.
211. Glick J, Young M, Harrington D, et al. MOPP/ABV hybrid chemotherapy for advanced Hodgkin's disease significantly improves failure-free and overall survival: the 8-year results of the
intergroup trial. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:19.
211a. Canellos GP, Anderson JR, Propert KJ. Chemotherapy of advanced Hodgkin's disease with MOPP, ABVD, or MOPP alternating with ABVD. N Engl J Med 1992;327:1478.
212. Somers R, Carde P, Henry-Amar M, et al. A randomized study in stage IIIB and IV Hodgkin's disease comparing eight courses of MOPP versus an alteration of MOPP with ABVD: a European
Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Lymphoma Cooperative Group and Groupe Pierre-et-Marie-Curie controlled clinical trial. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:279.
213. DeVita VJ, Simon RM, Hubbard SM. Curability of advanced Hodgkin's disease with chemotherapy. Long-term follow-up of MOPP-treated patients at the National Cancer Institute. Ann Intern
Med 1980;92:587.
214. Canellos G, Anderson J, Propert K, et al. Chemotherapy of advanced Hodgkin's disease with MOPP, ABVD, or MOPP alternating with ABVD. N Engl J Med 1992;327:1478.
215. Goldie JH, Coldman AJ. A mathematic model for relating the drug sensitivity of tumors to their spontaneous mutation rate. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:1727.
216. Jones S, Haut A, Weick J, et al. Comparison of Adriamycin-containing chemotherapy (MOP-BAP) with MOPP-bleomycin in the management of advanced Hodgkin's disease. A Southwest
Oncology Group Study. Cancer 1983;51:1339.
217. Sieber M, Rueffer U, Tesch H. Rapidly alternating COPP+ABV+IMEP (CAI) is equally effective as alternating COPP+ABVD (CA) for Hodgkin's disease: final results of two randomised trials for
intermediate (HD5 protocol) and advanced (HD6 protocol) stages. Leuk Lymph 1998;29:93.
217a. Duggan D, Petroni G, Johnson J, et al. MOPP/ABV vs ABVD for advanced Hodgkin's disease: a preliminary report of CALGB 8952 (with SWOG, ECOG, NCIC). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1997;16:12a.
218. Gregory W, Vaughan-Hudson G, MacLennon K. Alternating CHlVPP/PABlOE versus PABlOE in advanced Hodgkin' s disease. Leuk Lymph 1998;29:08a(abst).
219. Schmoll H. Review of etoposide single-agent activity. Cancer Treat Rev 1982;9:21.
220. Radford JA, Rohatiner AZS, Dunlop DJ. Preliminary results of a four-centre randomised trial paring weekly VAPEC-B chemotherapy with the ChlVPP/EVA hybrid regimen in previously
untreated patients. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16:12.
221. Simmonds P, Mead G, Sweetenham J, et al. PACE BOM chemotherapy: a 12-week regimen for advanced Hodgkin's disease. Ann Oncol 1997;8:259.
222. Carde P, MacKintosh F, Rosenberg S. A dose and time response analysis of the treatment of Hodgkin's disease with MOPP chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:146.
223. Gerhartz HH, Schwencke H, Bazarbashi S. Randomized comparison of COPP/ABVD vs. dose and time-escalated COPP/ABVD with GM-CSF support for advanced Hodgkin's disease. Blood
1997;90:389.
224. Hasenclever D, Loeffler M, Diehl V. Rationale for dose escalation of first line conventional chemotherapy in advanced Hodgkin's disease. German Hodgkin's Lymphoma Study Group. Ann
Oncol 1996;7[Suppl 4]:95.
225. Diehl V. Dose-escalation study for the treatment of Hodgkin's disease. The German Hodgkin Study Group (GHSG). Ann Hematol 1993;66:139.
226. Diehl V, Franklin J, Hasenclever D, et al. BEACOPP: a new regimen for advanced Hodgkin's disease. German Hodgkin's Lymphoma Study Group. Ann Oncol 1998;9[Suppl 5]:67.
227. Diehl V, Franklin J, Hasenclever D, et al. BEACOPP, a new dose-escalated and accelerated regimen, is at least as effective as COPP/ABVD in patients with advanced-stage Hodgkin's
lymphoma: interim report from a trial of the German Hodgkin's Lymphoma Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3810.
228. Chopra R, McMillan A, Linch D, et al. The place of high-dose BEAM therapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation in poor-risk Hodgkin's disease. A single-center eight-year study of 155
patients. Blood 1993;81:1137.
229. Horning S, Chao N, Negrin R, et al. High-dose therapy and autologous hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation for recurrent or refractory Hodgkin's disease: analysis of the Stanford
University results and prognostic indices. Blood 1997;89:801.
230. Reece D, Phillips G. Intensive therapy and autologous stem cell transplantation for Hodgkin's disease in first relapse after combination chemotherapy. Leuk Lymph 1996;21:245.
231. Carella A, Carlier P, Congiu A, et al. Autologous bone marrow transplantation as adjuvant treatment for high-risk Hodgkin's disease in first complete remission after MOPP/ABVD protocol. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1991;8:99.
232. Straus D, Gaynor J, Myers J, et al. Prognostic factors among 185 adults with newly diagnosed advanced Hodgkin's disease treated with alternating potentially noncross-resistant chemotherapy
and intermediate-dose radiation therapy. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1173.
233. Fabian C, Mansfield C, Dahlberg S, et al. Low-dose involved field radiation after chemotherapy in advanced Hodgkin disease. A Southwest Oncology Group randomized study. Ann Intern Med
1994;120:903.
234. Diehl V, Loeffler M, Pfreundschuh M, et al. Further chemotherapy versus low-dose involved-field radiotherapy as consolidation of complete remission after six cycles of alternating
chemotherapy in patients with advance Hodgkin's disease. German Hodgkins' Study Group (GHSG). Ann Oncol 1995;6:901.
235. Loeffler M, Brosteanu O, Hasenclever D, et al. Meta-analysis of chemotherapy versus combined modality treatment trials in Hodgkin's disease. International Database on Hodgkin's Disease
Overview Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:818.
236. Raemaekers J, Burgers M, Henry-Amar M, et al. Patients with stage III/IV Hodgkin's disease in partial remission after MOPP/ABV chemotherapy have excellent prognosis after additional
involved-field radiotherapy:interim results from the ongoing EORTC-LCG and GPMC phase III trial. The EORTC Lymphoma Cooperative Group and Groupe Pierre-et-Marie-Curie. Ann Oncol
1997;8[Suppl 1]:111.
237. Canellos GP, Horvich A. Management of recurrent Hodgkin`s disease. In: Mauch P, Armitage JO, Diehl V, Hoppe RT, Weiss LM, eds. Hodgkin's disease. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1999:507.
238. Van Leeuwen FE, Klokmann WJ, Hagenbeek A. Second cancer risk following Hodgkin's disease: a 20-year follow-up study. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:312.
239. Henry-Amar M. Second cancers after treatment of Hodgkin's disease: experience at the International Database on Hodgkin's disease (IDHD). BullCancer 1992;79:389.
240. Hansmann M, Fellbaum C, Hui P, et al. Morphological and immunohistochemical investigation of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma combined with Hodgkin's disease. Histopathology 1989;15:35.
241. Fisher R, De VV, Hubbard S, et al. Prolonged disease-free survival in Hodgkin's disease with MOPP reinduction after first relapse. Ann Intern Med 1979;90:761.
242. Longo D, Duffey P, Young R, et al. Conventional-dose salvage combination chemotherapy in patients relapsing with Hodgkin's disease after combination chemotherapy: the low probability for
cure. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:210.
243. Horwich A, Specht L, Ashley S. Survival analysis of patients with clinical stages I or II Hodgkin's disease who have relapsed after initial treatment with radiotherapy alone. Eur JCancer

1997;33:848.
244. Roach Md, Brophy N, Cox R, et al. Prognostic factors for patients relapsing after radiotherapy for early-stage Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:623.
245. Mauch P, Henry-Amar M. International Database on Hodgkin's Disease: a cooperative effort to determine treatment outcome. Ann Oncol 1992;3[Suppl 4]:59.
246. Healey EA, Tarbell NJ, Kalish LA. Prognostic factors for patients with Hodgkin`s disease in first relapse. Cancer 1993;71:2613.
247. Specht L, Horwich A, Ashley S. Salvage of relapse of patients with Hodgkin's disease in clinical stages I or II who were staged with laparotomy and initially treated with radiotherapy alone. A
report from the international database on Hodgkin's disease. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:805.
248. Cannellos G, Young RC, De Vita VD. Combination chemotherapy for advanced Hodgkin`s disease in relapse following extensive radiotherapy. Clin Pharm Ther 1972;13:750.
249. Santoro A, Viviani S, Villarreal C, et al. Salvage chemotherapy in Hodgkin's disease irradiation failures: superiority of doxorubicin-containing regimens over MOPP. Cancer Treat Rep
1986;70:343.
250. Wirth A, Corry J, Laidlaw C, et al. Salvage radiotherapy for Hodgkin's disease following chemotherapy failure. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:599.
251. Pfreundschuh M, Rueffer U, Lathan B, et al. Dexa-BEAM in patients with Hodgkin's disease refractory to multidrug chemotherapy regimens: a trial of the German Hodgkin's Disease Study
Group. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:580.
252. Hagemeister F, Tannir N, McLaughlin P, et al. MIME chemotherapy (methyl-GAG, ifosfamide, methotrexate, etoposide) as treatment for recurrent Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:556.
253. Rodriguet MG, Schoppe WD, Fuchs R. Lomustine, etoposide, vindesine, and dexamethasone (CEVD) in Hodgkin's disease refractory to cyclophosphamide, vincristine, procarbacine, and
prednisone (COPP) and doxorubicine, bleomycin, vinblastine, and darcarbazine (ABVD): a multi-center trial of the German Hodgkin`s study group. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:1203.
254. Velasquez WS, Jagannath S, Hagemeister FB. Dexamethasone, high-dose ara-C and cisplatin as salvage treatment for relapsing Hodgkin`s disease. Proc Am Soc Hematol 1986;68:242.
255. Ferme C, Bastion Y, Lepage E, et al. The MINE regimen as intensive salvage chemotherapy for relapsed and refractory Hodgkin's disease. Ann Oncol 1995;6:543.
256. Bierman P, Bagin R, Jagannath S, et al. High dose chemotherapy followed by autologous hematopoietic rescue in Hodgkin's disease:long-term follow-up in 128 patients. Ann Oncol 1993;4:767.
257. Josting A, Katay I, Rueffer U, et al. Favorable outcome of patients with relapsed or refractory Hodgkin's disease treated with high-dose chemotherapy and stem cell rescue at the time of
maximal response to conventional salvage therapy (Dex-BEAM). Ann Oncol 1998;9:289.
258. Linch D, Winfield D, Goldstone A, et al. Dose intensification with autologous bone-marrow transplantation in relapsed and resistant Hodgkin's disease: results of a BNLI randomised trial. Lancet
1993;341:1051.
259. Schmitz N, Sextro M, Pfistner B. HDR-1: high-dose therapy (HDT) followed by hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) for relapsed chemosensitive Hodgkin's disease (HD): final results
of a randomized GHSG and EBMT trial (HD-R1). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18[Suppl 5]:18.
260. Bonfante V, Santoro A, Viviani S, et al. Outcome of patients with Hodgkin's disease failing after primary MOPP-ABVD. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:528.
261. Sweetenham JW, Carella AM, Taghipour G. High-dose therapy and autologous stem cell transplantation for adult patients with Hodgkin's disease who fail to enter remission after induction
chemotherapy: results in 175 patients reported to the EBMT. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3101.
262. Lazarus H, Rowlings P, Zhang M, et al. Autotransplants for Hodgkin's disease in patients never achieving remission:a report from the Autologous Blood and Marrow Transplant Registry. J Clin
Oncol 1999;17:534.
263. Reece D, Barnett M, Shepherd J, et al. High-dose cyclophosphamide, carmustine (BCNU), and etoposide (VP16-213) with or without cisplatin (CBV +/- P) and autologous transplantation for
patients with Hodgkin's disease who fail to enter a complete remission after combination chemotherapy. Blood 1995;86:451.
264. Yuen A, Rosenberg S, Hoppe R, et al. Comparison between conventional salvage therapy and high-dose therapy with autografting for recurrent or refractory Hodgkin's disease. Blood
1997;89:814.
265. Andre M, Henry-Amar M, Pico J, et al. Comparison of high-dose therapy and autologous stem-cell transplantation with conventional therapy for Hodgkin's disease induction failure: a
case-control study. Societe Francaise de Greffe de Moelle. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:222.
266. Josting A, Rüffer U, Franklin J. Prognostic factors and treatment outcome in patients with primary progressive Hodgkin's lymphomaa report from the German Hodgkin's disease Study Group
(GHSG). Blood 1999;94(10)[Suppl 1]:2299a.
267. Josting A, Reiser M, Rüffer U. Treatment of primary progressive Hodgkin's and aggressive non Hodgkin's diseaseIs there a chance for cure? J Clin Oncol 2000;18, 2, 332.
268. Brice P, Bouabdallah R, Moreau P, et al. Prognostic factors for survival after high-dose therapy and autologous stem cell transplantation for patients with relapsing Hodgkin's disease: analysis
of 280 patients from the French registry. Societe Francaise de Greffe de Moelle. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;20:21.
269. Sweetenham J, Taghipour G, Milligan D, et al. High-dose therapy and autologous stem cell rescue for patients with Hodgkin's disease in first relapse after chemotherapy: results from the
EBMT. Lymphoma Working Party of the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;20:745.
270. Crump M, Smith A, Brandwein J, et al. High-dose etoposide and melphalan, and autologous bone marrow transplantation for patients with advanced Hodgkin's disease: importance of disease
status at transplant. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:704.
271. Wheeler C, Eickhoff C, Elias A, et al. High-dose cyclophosphamide, carmustine, and etoposide with autologous transplantation in Hodgkin's disease: a prognostic model for treatment
outcomes. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 1997;3:98.
272. Milpied N, Fielding A, Pearce R, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplant is not better than autologous transplant for patients with relapsed Hodgkin's disease. European Group for Blood and
Bone Marrow Transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1291.
273. Anderson J, Litzow M, Appelbaum F, et al. Allogeneic, syngeneic, and autologous marrow transplantation for Hodgkin's disease: the 21-year Seattle experience. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2342.
274. Gajewski J, Phillips G, Sobocinski K, et al. Bone marrow transplants from HLA-identical siblings in advanced Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:572.
275. Rosenthal SR. Significance of tissue lymphocytes in the prognosis of lymphogranulomatosis. Arch Pathol 1936;21:628.
276. Westling P. Studies of the prognosis in Hodgkin's disease. Acta Radiol 1965;245:5.
277. Peters MV. A study of survivals in Hodgkin's disease treated radiologically. Am J Roentgenol 1950;63:299.
278. Culine S, Henry-Amar M, Diebold J, et al. Relationship of histological subtypes to prognosis in early stage Hodgkin's disease: a review of 312 cases in a controlled clinical trial. The Groupe
Pierre et Marie Curie. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1989;25:551.
279. Diehl V, Sextro M, Franklin J, et al. Clinical presentation, course, and prognostic factors in lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's disease and lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin's disease: report
from the European Task Force on Lymphoma Project on Lymphocyte-Predominant Hodgkin's Disease. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:776.
280. Hansmann M, Zwingers T, Boske A, et al. Clinical features of nodular paragranuloma (Hodgkin's disease, lymphocyte predominance type, nodular). J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1984;108:321.
281. Orlandi E, Lazzarino M, Brusamolino E, et al. Nodular lymphocyte predominance Hodgkin's disease: long-term observation reveals a continuous pattern of recurrence. Leuk Lymph
1997;26:359.
282. Pappa V, Norton A, Gupta R, et al. Nodular type of lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin's disease. A clinical study of 50 cases. Ann Oncol 1995;6:559.
283. Mauch P, Kalish L, Kadin M, et al. Patterns of presentation of Hodgkin disease. Implications for etiology and pathogenesis. Cancer 1993;71:2062.
284. Miettinen M, Franssila K, Saxen E. Hodgkin's disease, lymphocytic predominance nodular. Increased risk for subsequent non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Cancer 1983;51:2293.
285. Henry-Amar M. Second cancer after the treatment for Hodgkin's disease: a report from the International Database on Hodgkin's Disease. Ann Oncol 1992;3[Suppl 4]:117.
286. Maloney DG, Grillo-Lopez AJ, Bodkin DJ. IDEC-C2B8: results of a phase I multiple-dose trial in patients with relapsed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:3266.
287. Lokich L, Pinkus G, Moloney W. Hodgkin's disease in the elderly. Oncology 1974;29:484.
288. Specht L, Nissen N. Hodgkin's disease and age. Eur J Haematol 1989;43:127.
289. Franklin J, Sieber M, Paulus U. Toxicity and feasibility of the BEACOPP regimen for advanced stage Hodgkin's disease patients older than 65 years. Ann Oncol 1999;2:157.
290. Tesch H, Santoro A, Fiedler F. Phase II study of gemcitabine in pretreated Hodgkin's disease. Results of a multicenter study. Blood 1997;90:339.
291. Gherlinzoni F, Zinziani PL, Magagnoli M. VBM regimen for Hodgkin's disease in the elderly. Leuk Lymph 1998;29:72.
292. Sadural E, Smith LG. Haematological malignancies during pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 38;1995:535.
293. Gelb AB, Van de Rijn M, Warnke RA. Pregnancy-associated lymphomas. A clinicopathologic study. Cancer 1996;78:304.
294. Fisher P, Hancock B. Hodgkin's disease in the pregnant patient. Br J Hosp Med 1996;56:529.
295. Tirelli U, Errante D, Dolcetti R, et al. Hodgkin's disease and human immunodeficiency virus infection: clinicopathologic and virologic features of 114 patients from the Italian Cooperative Group
on AIDS and Tumors. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1758.
296. Carbone A, Dolcetti R, Gloghini A, et al. Immunophenotypic and molecular analyses of acquired immune deficiency syndromerelated and Epstein-Barr virus-associated lymphomas: a
comparative study. Hum Pathol 1996;27:133.
297. Tirelli U, Vaccher E, Rezza G, et al. Hodgkin disease and infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in Italy [letter]. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:309.
298. Bellas C, Santon A, Manzanal A, et al. Pathological, immunological, and molecular features of Hodgkin's disease associated with HIV infection. Comparison with ordinary Hodgkin's disease. Am
J Surg Pathol 1996;20:1520.
299. Andrieu J, Roithmann S, Tourani J, et al. Hodgkin's disease during HIV1 infection: the French registry experience. French Registry of HIV-associated Tumors. Ann Oncol 1993;4:635.
300. Tirelli U, Errante D, Vaccher E, et al. Hodgkin's disease in 92 patients with HIV infection: the Italian experience. GICAT (Italian Cooperative Group on AIDS & Tumors). Ann Oncol 1992;3[Suppl
4]:69.
301. Rubio R. Hodgkin's disease associated with human immunodeficiency virus infection. A clinical study of 46 cases. Cooperative Study Group of Malignancies Associated with HIV Infection of
Madrid. Cancer 1994;73:2400.
302. Errante D, Tirelli U, Gastaldi R, et al. Combined antineoplastic and antiretroviral therapy for patients with Hodgkin's disease and human immunodeficiency virus infection. A prospective study of
17 patients. The Italian Cooperative Group on AIDS and Tumors (GICAT). Cancer 1994;73:437.
303. Tirelli U, Erranta D, Gisselbrecht C. Epirubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine and prednisone (EBVP) chemotherapy in combination with antiretroviral therapy and primary use of G-CSF for patients
with Hodgkin's disease and HIV Infection (HD-HIV). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1996;15:304.
304. Levine AM, Cheung T, Tulpule A. Preliminary results of AIDS Clinical Trials Group (ACTG) Study No. 149: phase II trial of ABVD chemotherapy with G-CSF in HIV-infected patients with
Hodgkin's disease (HD). AIDS 1997;14:12.
305. Tirelli U, Carbone A, Strau DJ. HIV-related Hodgkin's disease. In: Mauch PM, Armitage JO, Diehl V, Hoppe RT, Weiss LM, eds. Hodgkin's disease. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
1999:701.
306. Hartmann P, Winkler U, Franzen C. BEACOPP chemotherapeutic regimen for treatment of HIV-infected patients with Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1998;92:540.
307. Tarbell N, Thompson L, Mauch P. Thoracic irradiation in Hodgkin's disease: disease control and long-term complications. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;18:275.
308. Hancock S, Hoppe R, Horning S, et al. Intercurrent death after Hodgkin disease therapy in radiotherapy and adjuvant MOPP trials. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:183.
309. Boivin J, Hutchison G. Coronary heart disease mortality after irradiation for Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1982;49:2470.
310. Van Leeuwen FE, Swerdlow AJ, Valaguss P. Hodgkin's disease. In: Mauch PM, Armitage JO, Diehl V, Hoppe RT, Weiss LM, eds. Hodgkin's disease. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1999:607.
311. Tucker M. Solid second cancers following Hodgkin's disease. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1993;7:389.
312. Sandoval C, Pui C, Bowman L, et al. Secondary acute myeloid leukemia in children previously treated with alkylating agents, intercalating topoisomerase II inhibitors, and irradiation. J Clin
Oncol 1993;11:1039.
313. Valagussa P. Second neoplasms following treatment of Hodgkin's disease. Curr Opin Oncol 1993;5:805.
314. Van Leeuwen F, Somers R, Taal B. Increased risk of lung cancer, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and leukemia following Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1046.
315. Hancock S, Tucker M, Hoppe R. Breast cancer after treatment of Hodgkin's disease. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:25.
316. Hancock S, Hoppe R. Long-term complications of treatment and causes of mortality after Hodgkin's disease. Semin Radiat Oncol 1996;6:225.
317. Swerdlow A, Douglas A, Hudson G, et al. Risk of second primary cancers after Hodgkin's disease by type of treatment: analysis of 2846 patients in the British National Lymphoma Investigation.
BMJ 1992;304:1137.
318. Kaldor J, Day N, Bell J, et al. Lung cancer following Hodgkin's disease: a case-control study. Int J Cancer 1992;52:677.
319. Bonadonna G. Modern treatment of malignant lymphomas: a multidisciplinary approach? The Kaplan Memorial Lecture. Ann Oncol 1994;5[Suppl 2]:5.
320. Chilcote R, Baehner R, Hammond D. Septicemia and meningitis in children splenectomized for Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1976;295:798.
321. Bradlyn A, Harris C, Spieth L. Quality of life assessment in pediatric oncology: a retrospective review of phase III reports. Soc Sci Med 1995;41:1463.

322. Kornblith A, Anderson J, Cella D, et al. Hodgkin disease survivors at increased risk for problems in psychosocial adaptation. The Cancer and Leukemia Group B. Cancer 1992;70:2214.
323. Joly F, Henry-Amar M, Arveux P, et al. Late psychosocial sequelae in Hodgkin's disease survivors: a French population-based case-control study. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2444.
324. Aaronson NK. Assessing the quality of life of patients in cancer clinical trials: common problems and common sense solution. Eur JCancer 1992;8:1304.
325. Devizzi L, Santoro A, Bonfante V, et al. Vinorelbine: a new promising drug in Hodgkin's disease. Leuk Lymph 1996;22:409.
326. Devizzi L, Santoro A, Bonfante V, et al. Vinorelbine: an active drug for the management of patients with heavily pretreated Hodgkin's disease. Ann Oncol 1994;5:817.
327. Benchekroun S, Chouffai Z, Harif M. Clinical study of Navelbine activity in Hodgkin's disease. Phase II study. In: Fabre P, ed. Navelbine (vinorelbine): update and new trends. Montrouge:
Oncologie, Libbey Eurotext, 1991:261.
328. Plunkett W, Huang P, Searcy CE. Gemcitabine: preclinical pharmacology and mechanism of action. Semin Oncol 1996;23:3.
329. Kaplan H. Hodgkin's disease: unfolding concepts concerning its nature, management and prognosis. Cancer 1980;45:2439.
330. Engert A, Martin G, Amlot P, et al. Immunotoxins constructed with anti-CD25 monoclonal antibodies and deglycosylated ricin A-chain have potent anti-tumour effects against human Hodgkin
cells in vitro and solid Hodgkin tumours in mice. Int J Cancer 1991;49:450.
331. McLaughlin P, Cabanillas F, Grillo-Lopez AJ. IDEC-C2B8 anti-CD20 antibody: final report on a phase III pivotal trial in patients with relapsed low-grade or follicular lymphoma. Blood
1996;88:349.
332. Fitzgerald D, Pastan I. Targeted toxin therapy for the treatment of cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:1455.
333. Engert A, Diehl V, Schnell R, et al. A phase-I study of an anti-CD25 ricin A-chain immunotoxin (RFT5-SMPT-dgA) in patients with refractory Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1997;89:403.
334. Schnell R, Linnartz C, Katouzi A, et al. Development of new ricin A-chain immunotoxins with potent anti-tumor effects against human Hodgkin cells in vitro and disseminated Hodgkin tumors in
SCID mice using high-affinity monoclonal antibodies directed against the CD30 antigen. Int J Cancer 1995;63:238.
335. Staak J, Schnell R, Schwartz C. Clinical experience with a novel ricin A-chain immunotoxin (Ki-4.dgA) in patients with refractory CD30+ lymphoma. Onkologie 1999;22:132.
336. O'Donoghue JA. The impact of tumor cell proliferation in radioimmunotherapy. Cancer 1994;73:974.
337. Winkler U, Stein H, Scheidhauer K. Radioimmunoconjugates for the therapy of Hodgkin's lymphoma: preliminary data of a clinical study using the anti-CD30 antibody 99mTc-BerH2. Fourth
International Symposium on Hodgkin's Lymphoma, March 28April 1, Cologne, Germany. Leuk Lymph 1998;29[Suppl.1]:115a.
338. Vriesendorp H, Herpst J, Germack M, et al. Phase I-II studies of yttrium-labeled antiferritin treatment for end-stage Hodgkin's disease, including Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 87-01. J Clin
Oncol 1991;9:918.
339. Hartmann F, Renner C, Jung W. Treatment of refractory Hodgkin's disease with an anti-CD16/CD30 bispecific antibody. Blood 1997;89:2042.
340. Vinciguerra V, Coleman M, Pajak T, et al. MER immunotherapy and combination chemotherapy for advanced, recurrent Hodgkin's disease. Cancer and Leukemia Group B study. Cancer
ClinTrials 1981;4:99.
341. Margolin K, Aronson F, Sznol M, et al. Phase II trial of high-dose interleukin-2 and lymphokine-activated killer cells in Hodgkin's disease and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Immunother
1991;10:214.
342. Bernstein Z, Vaickus L, Friedman N, et al. Interleukin-2 lymphokine-activated killer cell therapy of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and Hodgkin's disease. J Immunother 1991;10:141.
343. Tourani J, Levy V, Briere J, et al. Interleukin-2 therapy for refractory and relapsing lymphomas. Eur JCancer 1991;27:1676.
344. Koziner B. Alpha interferon in patients with progressive and/or recurrent Hodgkin's disease. Eur JCancer 1991;27[Suppl 4]:79.
345. Heslop HE, Brenner MK, Rooney CM. Long-term restoration of immunity against Epstein-Barr virus infection by adoptive transfer of gene-modified virus specific T-lymphocytes. Nat Med
1996;2:551.
346. Roskrow M, Suzuki N, Gan Y, et al. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes for the treatment of patients with EBV-positive relapsed Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1998;91:2925.

SECTION 46.1 Molecular Biology of Leukemias
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 46.1
Molecular Biology of Leukemias
CLARA D. BLOOMFIELD
MICHAEL A. CALIGIURI
Molecular Biology of Leukemias
Gene Fusions in Leukemia
Gene Fusions Involving Core-Binding Factor in Leukemia
Additional Gene Fusions with TEL
MLL Gene: Fusions with Multiple Partners Result in Acute Leukemia
Retinoic Acid Receptor Gene Rearrangements in Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia
Gene Fusions in B-Lineage Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Involving the
E2A Gene
Philadelphia-Positive Chronic Myeloid Leukemia and Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Result from a Fusion of
BCR with the Tyrosine Kinase ABL
Gene Fusions Involving the Nucleoporin Family of Proteins
Gene Activation in Leukemia
Gene Activation Involving Immunoglobulin Genes in B-Cell Leukemia and Lymphoma
Gene Activation Involving T-Cell Receptor Gene in T-Cell Leukemia and Lymphoma
Tumor Suppressor Genes in Leukemia
Inactivation of Tumor Suppressor by Gene Mutation
Inactivation of Tumor Suppressor by Gene Deletion
Inactivation of Tumor Suppressor by Hypermethylation
Molecular Monitoring of Leukemia
Assessment of Minimal Residual Disease
Chapter References

MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF LEUKEMIAS
Leukemia can be broadly defined as a disease whose malignant cell is derived from the hematopoietic system and manifests its expansion in the bone marrow with or
without peripheral blood involvement. The cytogenetic study of these malignant cells has revealed that recurrent chromosomal changes occur in over one-half of all
cases of leukemia. Most commonly, these are structural changes classified as translocations, inversions, or deletions. Further, it is usually the disruption or
deregulation of specific genes at the chromosome breaks that in turn contributes to the process of leukemogenesis. 1,2 In many instances, these genes have also been
found to be directly or indirectly involved in the normal development or maintenance of the hematopoietic system. Thus, leukemia results, at least in part, from the
disruption or deregulation of genes that normally regulate blood cell development, blood cell homeostasis, or both. 1,2,3,4 and 5 In this sense, the molecular biology of
leukemia is consistent with the paradigm established for cancer in general: Genes that predispose to human cancer (i.e., oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes) are
altered or inactivated versions of genes normally involved in the regulation of cell growth, cell development, and cell death. 4,6
Several generalizations about the molecular biology of leukemia can be made. 7 First, the chromosomal aberrations that result in the disruption or deregulation of
genes occur in somatic tissues (i.e., hematopoietic cells) and are not found in nonleukemic cells. The genetic mishap often occurs at a specific point in normal
hematopoiesis, giving rise to leukemia of a specific lineage that has arrested at a distinct maturational stage. This strongly suggests that the gene or genes altered in
a particular type of leukemia are important in a specific stage of development or homeostasis of its normal cell counterpart. There are, however, some notable
exceptions to this, such as the myeloid-lymphoid leukemia ( MLL) gene that can be involved in leukemia of different or mixed lineages.
The mechanisms by which disrupted or deregulated genes cause leukemia can be broadly classified into two categories. The first is gene fusion, whereby a distinct
protein, usually either a transcription factor or receptor tyrosine kinase, fuses with an unrelated gene to create a unique chimeric fusion protein that then critically
contributes to malignant transformation of the cell. This mechanism predominates in the genesis of myeloid leukemia, but is also found in lymphoid leukemia. The
second is gene activation, whereby a gene that normally controls transcription within the cell is inappropriately placed under the control of an active
promoter/enhancer from another gene, usually the immunoglobulin (Ig) or T-cell receptor (TCR) promoter/enhancer during the process of antigen receptor gene
rearrangement. Chromosomal translocations that result in gene activation usually occur in lymphoid tissue and lead to a deregulation in gene expression. 1,3,4 and 5 As
discussed in this chapter, more recently it has been appreciated that other genetic and epigenetic events, such as point mutations, gene deletions, and DNA
methylation, usually in tumor suppressor genes, can also contribute to the initiation or progression of leukemia.
The improved techniques for the study of chromosomes and the explosive growth in molecular biology are rapidly facilitating the elucidation of genes involved at
chromosomal breakpoints in cases of leukemia, and the list of oncogenes is increasing almost daily in the literature. Table 46.1-1 provides the reader with some
examples of genes involved in leukemogenesis by either gene fusion or gene activation, their chromosomal location and name derivation, a general description of
their function, if known, and the type of leukemia with which they are associated. However, it should be noted that nearly one-half of all cases of leukemia do not have
cytogenetic evidence of recurrent structural chromosomal rearrangements, but instead have changes only in chromosome number (e.g., monosomy 7 or trisomy 8), or
completely normal cytogenetics. This severely restricts the molecular biologist's ability to focus in on hot spots in the genome where evidence of gene fusion or gene
activation is likely to be found. Advances in a fraction of such cases have revealed that comparable genetic mechanisms of leukemogenesis are operative even in the
absence of structural cytogenetic abnormalities.

TABLE 46.1-1. Selected Examples of Cytogenetic and Molecular Abnormalities in Leukemia

In this chapter, we review the most common genetic disruptions that result from the recurrent cytogenetic aberrations in acute and chronic leukemia, and where
possible, provide an explanation as to how such alterations contribute to the molecular pathogenesis of the disease. In addition, we review instances in which the
molecular basis for leukemia has been determined in the absence of structural cytogenetic abnormalities. Finally, we discuss other genetic alterations, mostly in tumor
suppressor genes, that are likely to contribute to the genesis or progression of leukemia. We proceed with a molecular description of leukemia that simply follows the
list of the more common molecular defects provided in Table 46.1-1. There is little or no attention to the more traditional revised histologic classification of leukemia to
put more emphasis on the genetic basis of leukemia. 8 Derivations of abbreviations used for the genes discussed in the text can be found in Table 46.1-1.

GENE FUSIONS IN LEUKEMIA

GENE FUSIONS INVOLVING CORE-BINDING FACTOR IN LEUKEMIA
Core-binding factor (CBF) is a heterodimeric transcription factor, composed of CBFA2 and CBFB, that is involved in the regulation of hematopoiesis ( Fig. 46.1-1A).
The CBFA2 protein (originally described as AML1) has an amino terminus domain with homology to the Drosophila runt protein, which is an early acting factor that
regulates the expression of genes involved in segmentation during fly development. 9 The runt homology domain of CBFA2 confers at least two properties to the
protein. The first is a DNA-binding domain that recognizes the sequence TGT/cGGT, an enhancer core motif that serves as a regulatory element in several genes
important in hematopoiesis, such as LCK, myeloperoxidase, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, interleukin-3, colony-stimulating factor, neutrophil
elastase, and TCRa, b, and g.10 The second important function of the runt homology domain of CBFA2 is that it is required for heterodimerization of CBFA2 with its
normal partner CBFB. CBFB does not directly bind to DNA, but its binding to CBFA2 is thought to increase the heterodimeric transcription factor's affinity and stability
for the target DNA-binding sequence. 9 More recently, the carboxyl terminus of CBFA2 was discovered to contain a transactivation domain that binds the
transcriptional coactivator p300, a transcriptional regulator that has been shown to promote transcription via acetylation of histone proteins associated with targeted
genes (see Fig. 46.1-1A).11

FIGURE 46.1-1. A: Schematized representation of the wild-type CBFA2-CBFB transcription factor complex. The DNA-binding domain of CBFA2 (originally described
as AML1) recognizes the enhancer core motif of the target gene via its domain that has homology to the Drosophila runt protein. The CBFA2 runt domain is also
required for heterodimerization with CBFB (originally described as CBFb), which in turn increases the affinity and stability of CBFA2 binding to the core enhancer
sequence, thereby promoting efficient activation of target gene transcription. Additional factors that act as coactivators of transcription participate in this complex
formation (e.g., p300), depending on the particular target gene promoter or enhancer involved (e.g., myeloperoxidase, CSF-1 receptor, etc). B: Schematized
representation of the transcription factor complex that results from the CBFA2-CBFA2T1 (originally described as AML1-ETO) gene fusion in t(8;21)(q22;q22) acute
myeloid leukemia. The CBFA2 runt domain is left intact following the fusion, allowing it to (1) recognize and bind to the enhancer core motif of the target gene and (2)
heterodimerize with wild-type CBFB. However, its fusion partner, CBFA2T1, forms either a homodimer or a heterodimer (not shown) that then interacts with the
nuclear corepressors (N-COR) and SIN3A, which complex with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). This entire complex then facilitates repression of transcription by
altering chromatin structure via histone deacetylation. (Adapted from ref. 7.)

The CBF complex is the most frequent target of chromosomal translocations and inversions in human acute leukemia. At the molecular level, the t(8;21)(q22;q22)
generates a chimeric gene fusing CBFA2 with the CBFA2T1 gene (originally described as ETO) at chromosome band 8q22.12 The reciprocal CBFA2T1-CBFA2 fusion,
on the derivative chromosome 21, is often not expressed and thus does not appear to be essential for leukemogenesis. The CBFA2-CBFA2T1 fusion protein retains
the runt homology domain and therefore its protein-protein binding (to CBFB) and its DNA-binding properties. However, the fusion of CBFA2 with nearly the entire
CBFA2T1 coding sequence does create a protein that lacks the CBFA2 carboxyl terminal transactivation domain and may therefore interfere with CBF-mediated
transcriptional activation of hematopoiesis through a dominant-negative mechanism ( Fig. 46.1-1B).13
The CBFA2T1 protein binds to the human homologue of the murine nuclear receptor corepressor (N-COR). N-COR forms a complex with mammalian SIN3A and
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and facilitates repression of transcription by altering chromatin structure via histone deacetylation. 14,15 It is thus possible that in t(8;21)
acute myeloid leukemia (AML), the N-COR/SIN3A/HDAC1 complex is recruited to the CBF complex by the CBFA2-CBFA2T1 protein, thereby inducing repression of
transcription by deacetylation of CBFA2-targeted genes (see Fig. 46.1-1B). This process may result in the disruption of normal hematopoiesis and may also inactivate
tumor suppressor genes and other factors important for neoplastic transformation. 10,16 In support of such a hypothesis, there are data demonstrating that inhibitors of
histone deacetylase can reverse CBFA2T1-mediated transcriptional repression and can induce differentiation of CBFA2-CBFA2T1 leukemia cells. 17
At the molecular level, inv(16)(p13q22) and t(16;16) (p13;q22) both result in the fusion of the CBFB gene, the normal partner of CBFBA2 shown in Fig. 46.1-1A and
located at chromosome 16q22, with the MYH11 gene from chromosome 16p13.18 The MYH11 gene encodes a smooth muscle form of the myosin heavy chain, and it
is the fusion of its carboxyl terminus with almost the entire CBFB gene, including its CBFA2-binding domain, that appears important for leukemogenesis. The genomic
fusion between these two genes is quite variable, and at least eight different sized fusion transcripts have been described, the biologic and clinical significance of
which are unclear.19 The mechanism whereby the CBFB-MYH11 fusion gene contributes to malignant transformation remains to be fully elucidated. In vitro analyses
show that the CBFB-MYH11 chimeric protein can bind to the CBFA2 protein, which in turn can bind its TGT/cGGT core enhancer DNA sequence element, albeit with
reduced DNA-binding activity. The carboxyl terminus of MYH11 does contain a functional domain, the myosin long tail, that might mediate homodimerization of the
CBFB-MYH11 fusion protein into high-molecular-weight structures. It may therefore be possible that the CBFB-MYH11 homodimers could sequester CBFA2 subunits
into a nonfunctional complex, thereby inhibiting the transcriptional activation of genes important for hematopoiesis. Indeed, Adya et al. provided compelling in vitro
evidence in support of such a hypothesis, demonstrating that the CBFB-MYH11 homodimers could colocalize with the CBFA2 protein in actin filaments outside of the
nucleus. 20 These data would therefore support a dominant negative mechanism of CBFA2 gene inactivation by the CBFB-MYH11 fusion protein, leading to
dysregulated hematopoiesis.
Mice have been generated with Cbfb+Cbfb-MYH11 embryonic stem cells.21 The Cbfb+Cbfb-MYH11 mice are chimeric, in that they have hematopoietic stem cells with
and without the knocked-in Cbfb-MYH11 gene in the marrow. The mice have defective myeloid and lymphoid differentiation; however, they did not develop any
malignancies in their first year of life. To test the hypothesis that additional genetic events might be required, the mice were injected with a single sublethal dose of
N-ethyl-N nitrosourea, a potent DNA alkylating mutagen. Within 2 to 6 months after treatment, 84% of the treated Cbfb+Cbfb-MYH11 chimeric mice developed acute
myelomonocytic leukemia, whereas none of the control populations ( Cbfb+Cbfb-MYH11 chimeras without injection or wild-type mice with injection) developed
leukemia. Leukemic cells expressed the Cbfb-MYH11 fusion gene and, importantly, the mice did not show evidence of malignancy in other tissues where the
Cbfb-MYH11 fusion gene was not expressed. The data from this elegant experimental model and from others not discussed suggest that alterations in the CBF
complex serve to block hematopoietic differentiation, while a second hit that targets these particular cells may be necessary to induce frank leukemia. The molecular
analysis of human familial platelet disorder (FPD) with predisposition to AML (familial platelet disorder/AML) perhaps reveals the first clinical evidence in support of
the mouse model. Patients with familial platelet disorder/AML have haploinsufficiency of CBFA2, which causes an autosomal dominant congenital platelet defect and
may predispose to the acquisition of additional mutations that cause leukemia. 22
There are other examples of fusion with CBFA2 that lead to dysregulation of myeloid hematopoiesis and leukemic transformation. The t(3;21)(q26;q22) noted in
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), AML, and blast crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) results in a fusion of CBFA2 with the EVI1 gene, where the zinc finger
DNA-binding domains of EVI1 fuse with the amino terminus (runt homology) domain of CBFA2, similar to that described previously for CBFA2-CBFA2T1.23,24
However, like the CBFA2 fusion partner CBFA2T1, EVI1 also has properties that may contribute to leukemogenesis. Using the first zinc finger domain of EVI1, the
CBFA2-EVI1 fusion product has been shown to interact with SMAD3 and block transforming growth factor-b–mediated growth inhibition of myeloid cells. 25 Thus,
myeloid hematopoietic cells rendered unable to differentiate because of disrupted CBF function may be further induced toward malignant transformation by
interference with transforming growth factor-b–induced growth-inhibitory signals from the marrow stroma. It appears likely that additional CBFA2 partner genes will be
cloned from patients with de novo and secondary AML and MDS.26
An important example of CBFA2's involvement in lymphoid malignancies is the TEL-CBFA2 fusion that is associated with pediatric B-lineage acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL). The TEL gene, also known as ETV6, is a member of the ETS family of transcription factors that are defined by their highly conserved, 90–amino acid,

winged helix-turn-helix DNA-binding domain, also known as the ETS domain, that recognizes the consensus motif C/A GGA A/T. 27 A role for the TEL gene in human
hematopoiesis appears likely, as mice chimeric with Tel/ embryonic stem cells were unable to establish hematopoiesis in the bone marrow, as opposed to other sites
of hematopoietic activity during development. 28
The TEL-CBFA2 fusion of childhood B-lineage ALL results from the t(12;21)(p13;q22). However, it is best identified by fluorescence in situ hybridization, because the
juxtaposition of bands 12p13 and 21q22 is usually unrecognizable in banded metaphase preparations. The TEL-CBFA2 fusion occurs in approximately 25% of cases
of pediatric ALL and is therefore the most common gene rearrangement in any childhood cancer. 29,30 The fusion product contains the helix-loop-helix (HLH)
homooligomerization domain near the amino terminus of TEL linked to, essentially, the full-length CBFA2 gene, including both the runt homology domain as well as
the carboxyl terminus transactivation domain. Indeed, this is the only CBFA2 fusion in human leukemia currently known to incorporate the transactivation domain. It is
likely that the TEL-CBFA2 fusion contributes to a reduction in normal CBFA2 function via a dominant negative mechanism. 31 However, in addition, this fusion
invariably leads to the loss of the remaining wild-type TEL allele, suggesting that this might be an important contributor to leukemogenesis as well. 29,32 The
mechanism by which such a contribution might occur remains unknown. 33
The disruption of the CBF complex in t(8;21), inv(16), and t(12;21) confers a favorable prognosis on patients whose leukemic blasts harbor the consequent molecular
alterations.33,34 This does not appear to be the case for the t(3;21). The molecular basis for this clinical observation largely remains obscure, but there is at least
preliminary evidence that downstream genes that could confer resistance to standard induction chemotherapy might be dysregulated by disruptions in the CBF
complex.35
ADDITIONAL GENE FUSIONS WITH TEL
There are several chromosomal translocations in myeloid leukemia that disrupt the TEL gene, which, unlike the TEL-CBFA2 fusion noted in ALL, do not involve the
CBF complex. In some cases, the amino terminus of the TEL protein, which includes the HLH oligomerization domain, appears to be required for leukemogenesis,
whereas in other cases it is the DNA-binding ETS domain of TEL that appears to be relevant. Further, there is little, if any, homology or functional similarity between
most of the TEL fusion partner genes. While TEL gene rearrangements in myeloid malignancy are not frequent, their characterizations have revealed a multitude of
possible mechanisms whereby TEL may contribute to leukemogenesis.36
TEL was first identified when the t(5;12)(q33;p13) associated with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia was cloned. 37 This translocation produces an in-frame fusion of
the amino terminus of TEL, which includes the HLH oligomerization domain, with the transmembrane and tyrosine kinase domains of the platelet-derived growth factor
receptor-b (PDGFR-b), a receptor tyrosine kinase. The TEL-PDGFR-b fusion results in both constitutive activation of the truncated receptor tyrosine kinase as well as
its ectopic expression, and both properties are dependent on TEL and its HLH domain.38,39 In model systems it has been demonstrated that at least some of the
downstream effector molecules normally induced by PDGF, such as MYC, are induced by the TEL-PDGFR-b protein and are required for transformation. 40
The t(9;12)(q34;p13) fuses the TEL gene with another tyrosine kinase called ABL, named after its homologue, the Abelson leukemia virus oncogene. 41ABL is best
known as the fusion partner with BCR (breakpoint cluster region) in CML (see Philadelphia-Positive Chronic Myeloid Leukemia and Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
Result from a Fusion of BCR with the Tyrosine Kinase ABL, later in this chapter). The TEL-ABL fusion is strikingly similar to the TEL-PDGFR-b fusion, in that the
in-frame fusion joins the HLH domain of TEL with the catalytic (kinase) domain of ABL. Once again, the HLH domain serves to oligomerize the ABL kinase, with
subsequent constitutive ABL kinase activation. The fusion has been characterized in acute undifferentiated myeloid leukemia, atypical CML, and ALL. The similarities
between the roles of TEL and BCR in their fusion with ABL are striking. They both appear to function by primarily inducing ABL oligomerization and consequent
activation, i.e., a gain-of-function mechanism. Indeed, comparison of TEL-ABL and BCR-ABL transformation properties and downstream signal transduction events
suggests that the fusion proteins are indistinguishable. 42
The t(12;22)(p13;q11) is found in AML and in MDS. In contrast to the two fusions of TEL with tyrosine kinases noted previously, in which the HLH domain of TEL
functions to oligomerize and activate the kinase, this translocation fuses the carboxyl terminus-containing ETS domain of TEL with the MN1 gene that encodes a
nuclear protein whose function is unknown. Two types of MN1-TEL fusion transcripts have been identified, one that includes the TEL HLH domain as well and one
that disrupts the TEL HLH domain. This suggests that the oligomerization is not likely important in the process of malignant transformation, but rather that the
DNA-binding or ETS domain is, and that MN1-TELmediated leukemic transformation occurs via a molecular pathway that normally involves TEL. The reciprocal
TEL-MN1 fusion products are not known to contain any functional domains, suggesting little or no contribution of this protein to leukemogenesis. 43
MLL GENE: FUSIONS WITH MULTIPLE PARTNERS RESULT IN ACUTE LEUKEMIA
In our discussion of the TEL gene at chromosome band 12p13, we reviewed how TEL can fuse with a variety of partners, in a variety of ways, and participate in the
genesis of both lymphoid and myeloid leukemias. However, the best example of a promiscuous partner in leukemia is the MLL gene located at chromosome band
11q23. This gene fuses with an extraordinary number (over 30) of diverse partner genes, examples of which are shown in Table 46.1-1. The fusions manifest in
myeloid, lymphoid, or mixed lineage leukemias (defined by markers of more than one hematopoietic lineage) of infants, children, or adults, the clinical details of which
are provided in subsequent chapters. Further, the leukemias involving MLL may be de novo or primary, but also account for as many as 80% of secondary leukemias
that develop in patients who were successfully treated for other tumors at an earlier time with regimens that included topoisomerase II inhibitors. 44,45 and 46 Collectively,
the clinical and correlative laboratory data support the notion that MLL is important for early pluripotent and lineage-specific hematopoiesis, and that disruption of MLL
at 11q23 can give rise to leukemias of mixed or multiple lineages.
MLL (also known as ALL1, HRX, and HTRX1) was cloned by four independent groups and found to contain at least 36 exons that encode 3968 amino acids with a
predicted molecular mass of 431 kD.47,48,49 and 50 The various names for the single gene at 11q23 are derived from its association with MLL, its initial identification in a
case of ALL (ALL1), and because of its strong homology to the Drosophila trithorax protein (HRX and HTRX1). This trithorax homology includes a highly conserved
domain covering the carboxyl terminus known as SET, because it is also found in suvar3-9, enhancer-of-zeste, and trithorax proteins (Fig. 46.1-2A).49,50,51,52 and 53

FIGURE 46.1-2. A: The MLL protein and its known fusion partners with various motifs identified. Protein motifs are indicated in black. The shaded gray regions in ENL
and AF9 indicate known regions of homology. Fusion breakpoints are indicated by arrows. AF1q is unique in that its fusion breakpoint occurs six nucleotides
upstream of its open reading frame, resulting in a fusion protein without functional domains. Protein motifs are indicated in black. AT, AT hooks; bromo, bromodomain;
CREB, cAMP response element-binding protein site; DH, Dbl homology domain; DPF, aspartic acid-proline-phenylalanine repeat; GLGF,
glycine-leucine-phenylalanine domain; HAT, histone acetyltransferase activity; LZ, leucine zipper; MCBD, methyl-CpG binding domain; NLS, nuclear localization
signal; PDZ, PDZ domain; PH, pleckstrin homology domain; SH3, Src homology domain; TH, trithorax homology (SET domain); ZF, zinc fingers. B: The genomic
structures of MLL and MLL with an exon 6–exon 2 partial tandem duplication (PTD) are shown. Exons are indicated by vertical lines and boxes, and introns are
indicated by the horizontal line for each structure. Vertical arrow indicates point of unique self-fusion that results from the PTD. The predicted protein structure for MLL
with the 6-2 PTD is illustrated below and can be compared with the wild-type protein at top of the figure (A).

Collectively, the structural and functional data accumulated thus far strongly suggest that wild-type MLL is a maintenance factor for gene expression. For example, in

Drosophila, trithorax (the MLL fly homologue) maintains homeobox gene expression, critical for normal development of the head, thorax, and abdomen. 52
Gene-targeting studies in mice demonstrated that MLL is a positive regulator of homeobox ( Hox) gene expression and maintenance. 53,54 Mammalian Hox genes
encode DNA-binding, homeodomain-containing, helix-turn-helix transcription factors that appear critical in both skeletal and blood cell development. 55 The Mll–/–
mouse completely lacks Hox gene expression, has defects in yolk sac hematopoiesis, and is lethal to the embryo, while the Mll+/– mouse has a disruption in Hox gene
expression and various consequent defects in skeletal, neural, craniofacial, and hematopoietic development. 53,56 In vitro, Mll–/– embryonic stem cells fail to undergo
hematopoietic differentiation. 57 Structure function studies suggest that the SET domain of MLL is required for proper regulation of Hox gene expression.
Virtually all of the translocations involving MLL at 11q23 in human acute leukemia consistently disrupt the gene within an 8.5-kb region located between exons 5 and
11, joining the amino-terminal half of MLL to the partner gene. The large MLL fusion gene on the derivative 11 chromosome includes the AT hook minor groove
DNA-binding motifs, a methyl-CpG binding domain (MCBD), the nuclear localization domain, and all or part of the overlapping transcriptional repression domain.
Missing are the two protein-binding zinc finger domains in the mid region and the trithorax homology located in the SET domain at the carboxyl terminus of the protein
(see Fig. 46.1-2A). This derivative chromosome 11 (der 11) thus contains the MLL promoter and the amino terminus of MLL fused to the carboxyl terminus encoded
by the gene at the breakpoint of the partner chromosome and is always the one that is transcribed by the leukemic clone. 58
In contrast to many of the other common translocations discussed in this chapter, we have thus far learned little about the mechanisms of MLL-associated
leukemogenesis from the study of its many fusion partners (see Table 46.1-1 and Fig. 46.1-2A). There is limited similarity in protein structure between the partner
genes currently known to fuse with MLL in acute myeloid, lymphoid, or mixed lineage leukemia. To date, 18 MLL fusion partner genes have been cloned and
sequenced (see Fig. 46.1-2A), and there is no one structure-function that can unify their role in the malignant transformation of hematopoietic cells. Most of the cloned
partners are novel genes and inference about their functions comes from the study of their homologies or in vitro systems. Several partners, such as AF4, ENL, AF9,
CBP, and P300 have evidence for transcriptional activation or coactivation domains, suggesting that replacement of the MLL zinc finger and SET domains by these
partners could result in uncontrolled expression of MLL target genes, possibly within some lineage-specific, transcriptional context (e.g., MLL-AF4 in lymphoblasts). 59
However, this alone cannot be the only pathway to malignant transformation, as other partner genes (e.g., AF1q) lack homology to any known protein sequence and
contribute a minimal portion of its carboxyl terminus to the MLL fusion protein (see Fig. 46.1-2A), suggesting this fusion may only contribute through haploinsufficiency
or possibly via a dominant negative effect. 60
The multitude of partners that fuse with MLL in acute leukemia led us to hypothesize that the MLL gene might be rearranged without structural cytogenetic evidence of
translocations, inversions, or deletions at 11q23. We therefore looked for evidence of MLL gene rearrangements in cases of AML without cytogenetic abnormalities
involving 11q23, including cases with normal cytogenetics. Rearrangement of MLL was initially observed in cases of AML with trisomy 11 (+11) as a sole abnormality
and in cases of AML with normal cytogenetics. 61 These rearrangements were subsequently not found to result from cryptic fusions with other partner genes, but rather
from a partial tandem duplication (PTD) of MLL spanning exons 2 through 6 or exons 2 through 8 (see Fig. 46.1-2B).62,63 The putative partially duplicated protein
includes duplication of the AT hooks and MCBD, without loss of the carboxyl portion of the protein containing the SET domain. Molecular analysis of the
chromosomes in a limited number of cases with +11 or normal cytogenetics and the MLL PTD revealed that only one of the alleles carries the rearrangement. 64
Sequence analysis of the genomic fusion in nine cases of MLL PTD indicated that the rearrangement is most likely the result of Alu-Alu–mediated homologous
recombination events within the involved introns. 63,65,66 This is the first demonstration of homologous recombination between Alu elements as a consistent mechanism
for gene rearrangement in somatic tissue.
The PTD of MLL has been found to be present in the majority of AML patients with +11 as a sole cytogenetic abnormality, as well as in some patients with +11
accompanied by additional cytogenetic abnormalities, 67,68 and is the first consistent gene rearrangement associated with recurrent trisomy in human cancer. In a study
of 98 AML patients with normal cytogenetics, 11% of patients had rearrangement of MLL, and in eight of eight cases in which additional material was available, the
MLL PTD was documented. In patients with AML and normal cytogenetics, a rearranged MLL gene was associated with a poorer prognosis compared with the
remaining AML patients with normal cytogenetics. 69 These adverse prognostic data were confirmed in a separate study, but with a lower percentage (6%) of the MLL
PTD in AML cases with normal cytogenetics. 70 Thus, the MLL PTD is an example of a novel gene fusion detectable in a significant fraction of AML patients without
structural cytogenetic abnormalities.
MLL gene rearrangements are seen in 80% of infant ALL cases and in approximately 50% of infant AML cases. 71 There have now been several elegant reports of
infant twins developing acute leukemia with 11q23 translocations involving MLL in utero.72,73 and 74 The concordance rate for the development of 11q23-related acute
leukemia in monozygotic twins with shared circulation approaches 100%, with the disease manifesting quickly (i.e., 5 to 24 months of age). The concordance rate for
monozygotic twins with shared circulation who develop childhood common ALL, including those with the TEL-CBFA2 fusion, is estimated to be less than or equal to
5%, with the leukemia often developing 3 to 4 years after birth. 75 These twin studies suggest that proliferating pluripotent progenitor cells in the developing bone
marrow are uniquely susceptible to malignant transformation by MLL-associated chimeric fusion proteins. Further, the identical MLL gene rearrangements found within
each pair of twins suggests the leukemic clone arose in one infant and spread via the placental circulation to the other twin infant.
Approximately 80% of leukemias that develop secondarily in patients treated with DNA-topoisomerase II inhibitors such as the epipodophyllotoxins (e.g., etoposide)
and the anthracyclines are associated with a chimeric gene fusion involving MLL.44,45 and 46 While the MLL fusions in secondary AML occur within the 8.5-kb breakpoint
cluster region, they are more often distributed in the telomeric region, compared with the more centromeric region in cases of primary AML. Interestingly, the telomeric
region has scaffold attachment regions and topoisomerase II consensus binding sites. 76,77 The DNA-topoisomerase II inhibitors stabilize the DNA-topoisomerase II
complex after it cleaves double-stranded DNA, allowing for the accumulation of double-strand DNA breaks that are then presumably more susceptible to MLL
translocations via nonhomologous recombination events. Acute leukemia then develops within 6 to 24 months after diagnosis of the primary malignancy, and typically
without antecedent MDS. This is in distinct contrast to the secondary acute leukemias that develop following exposure to alkylating agents, which lack an association
with MLL, have a chromosome 7q- or 5q- karyotype, have a latency period of 5 to 10 years, and are more often associated with an antecedent MDS. 78
The short latency noted with MLL-associated infant and secondary acute leukemia suggests that the molecular defect itself might be all that is required for malignant
transformation, or might predispose the affected hematopoietic stem cells to rapidly undergo additional secondary mutations. For example, if the fusion with an MLL
partner gene protected against apoptosis or promoted enhanced cell growth, the stimulation from marrow stromal factors in the developing fetus or in the patient
recovering from topoisomerase II inhibitor chemotherapy-induced aplasia might lead to the rapid acquisition of additional genetic alterations associated with full
transformation of the leukemic clone. 79
RETINOIC ACID RECEPTOR GENE REARRANGEMENTS IN ACUTE PROMYELOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is one of the best examples of how a molecular characterization of leukemia can provide insights into the pathogenesis and the
success of a serendipitous treatment approach. A unique molecular defect, the PML/RAR-a fusion, segregates with a single phenotype, FAB M3 AML, and identifies a
set of patients who are essentially all initially responsive to differentiation therapy with all- trans-retinoic acid (ATRA). 80RAR-a is located on chromosome 17 and
encodes a transcriptionally active protein that contains two zinc finger DNA-binding domains and a ligand-binding domain that interacts with retinoic acid derivatives.
The promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene is located on chromosome 15 and encodes a protein that also has zinc finger motifs. 81,82 PML proteins are normally localized
to macromolecular nuclear organelles called PML oncogenic domains (PODs). With the t(15;17)(q22;q12-21), the resultant PML/RAR-a fusion protein contains each
of the functional domains described previously, yet appears to act as a dominant negative inhibitor of wild-type RAR-a function, and disrupts the PODs into a
dispersed microparticulate pattern, preventing localization of PML. Both of these effects likely lead to an arrest in myeloid differentiation at the promyelocyte stage,
and the subsequent development of APL, but the molecular details of this process are not yet clear. 83 One mechanism for the transcriptional inhibitory effect on
myeloid differentiation is the PML/RAR-a fusion protein's ability to bind DNA and form complexes with N-COR and HDAC1, as was shown for the CBFA2-CBFA2T1
fusion protein in Figure 46.1-1B. The complex in turn alters chromatin conformation in such a way that transcription of target genes responsible for myeloid
differentiation is repressed. 84,85 ATRA appears to overcome the dominant negative actions of the PML/RAR-a fusion protein and allows PML to relocalize to the PODs.
It releases the N-COR and HDAC1 complex from the PML/RAR-a DNA-bound protein, allowing RAR-a–mediated transcription and myeloid differentiation to
proceed.86 The serendipitous introduction of ATRA for the treatment of APL turned out to be the first truly effective targeted therapy for the treatment of acute
leukemia and has had a profound effect on improving the cure rate for this disease (see Chapter 46.2). Resistance to ATRA likely involves the up-regulation of
cellular retinoic acid–binding proteins as well as increased cellular degradation of ATRA.
The disruption of the RAR-a locus and its fusion with other nuclear proteins via chromosome translocation is responsible for the APL phenotype (see Table 46.1-1).
One of several variant translocations involving RAR-a is the t(11;17)(q23;q21), which fuses the PLZF (for promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger) gene with RAR-a and
results in APL that is not responsive to ATRA. 87 When fused with RAR-a, PLZF itself is capable of forming complexes with N-COR and HDAC1 88 that in turn inhibit the

transcription of target genes responsible for myeloid differentiation. However, unlike PML, PLZF does not disassociate from the complex on exposure to ATRA, thus
maintaining a repressed chromatin conformation and consequent inhibition of transcription in the presence of this treatment. 86
GENE FUSIONS IN B-LINEAGE ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA INVOLVING THE E2A Gene
The E2A gene encodes a basic HLH (bHLH) transcription factor that was originally discovered to regulate Ig kappa gene expression, 89 but was subsequently found to
have three differentially spliced products involved in multiple regulatory aspects of B-cell development. 90 The amino terminus of the E2A-encoded protein contains two
transcriptional activation domains, 91 and the carboxyl terminus contains the bHLH domain. The latter is responsible for both DNA binding and homodimerization or
heterodimerization with other bHLH proteins. The various protein partners normally dimerizing with the E2A gene products determine its DNA-binding specificity and
consequent gene activation during development. 92 The E2A homodimer is itself critically important during normal B-cell development. 93,94 It is the carboxyl end of E2A
that is disrupted by distinct partner genes in two important gene fusions associated with B-lineage ALL (see Table 46.1-1). Both of the fusion proteins invariably
contain the two transcriptional activation domains at the amino terminus of E2A.
The t(1;19)(q23;p13) occurs in childhood pre–B-cell ALL and fuses the amino terminus of E2A, including the two transactivation domains, to the homeodomain of
PBX1, a member of the TALE (three-amino acid extension) family of homeodomain proteins. 95,96PBX1 is normally not expressed during B-cell development. The
inclusion of the PBX1 homeodomain in the fusion protein is likely critical to leukemogenesis, as it allows complex formation with HOX proteins, substituting for the
severed bHLH DNA-binding protein interaction domain of E2A. Thus, although PBX1, by itself, has no transactivating ability, its fusion with the strong E2A
transactivating domains bestows this property on the novel chimeric protein, 97 allowing for activation of genes normally controlled by PBX1-HOX complexes, but with
inappropriate expression in the pre-B cell. Indeed, the first of such genes ( WNT-16, EB-1) have been identified and will likely provide additional insights into the
mechanism by which this fusion transcript induces malignant transformation of human pre-B cells. 98,99
E2A also fuses with the hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) gene in the t(17;19)(q22;p13) in a small subset of ALL patients with the proB-cell (CD45R+) phenotype and
only partial rearrangement of a functional heavy chain gene. 100,101HLF is a basic region/leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factor whose protein product has structural
similarity to the proapoptotic gene product of Caenorhabditis elegans, CES-2 (for cell-death specification-2). 102In vitro studies demonstrate that the E2A-HLF fusion
protein induces strong antiapoptotic gene expression in pro-B cells, 103 and that amino terminus-containing transactivation domains of E2A are critical for this function,
while the DNA-binding and protein dimerization motifs of HLF are not. 104 It thus appears that E2A-HLF contributes to leukemogenesis by interfering with an
evolutionarily conserved lineage-specific suicide pathway in pro-B cells, leading to prolonged survival and subsequent malignant transformation of genetically altered
cells normally programmed for cell death. 104
PHILADELPHIA-POSITIVE CHRONIC MYELOID LEUKEMIA AND ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA RESULT FROM A FUSION OFBCR WITH THE
TYROSINE KINASE ABL
The Philadelphia chromosome 105 is produced by a t(9;22) (q34;q11) 106 that results in a fusion of the phosphoprotein BCR with the truncated ABL tyrosine kinase
protooncogene on chromosome 22. 107,108 and 109 The t(9;22) and subsequently the fusion oncoprotein were first noted in patients with CML, and then in 30% to 40% of
adults and 3% to 5% of children with ALL. 110 In CML and in ALL, the ABL gene consistently fuses within its first intron to BCR, thus always contributing its complete
tyrosine kinase domain. However, in CML, BCR fuses to ABL within a 5.8-kb region known as the major breakpoint cluster region that spans exons 12 through 16 to
produce a chimeric oncoprotein product known as p210bcr-abl, while in ALL and a minority of patients with CML, ABL fuses with BCR at various sites within its first
intron known as the minor breakpoint cluster region to produce a chimeric oncoprotein product known as p185 bcr-abl or p190bcr-abl. A larger BCR-ABL fusion protein
(p230bcr-abl) has been found in a subgroup of CML patients with a more indolent clinical course (reviewed in reference 111).
The ability of the BCR-ABL fusion protein to transform cells has been studied in a host of elegant in vitro and in vivo systems by numerous investigators and has
provided insight into what regions of the fusion protein are required for transformation of cell lines and which signal transduction pathways are likely involved in
mediating this transformation. A comprehensive review of this work has been carefully undertaken. 112 The first 63 amino acids of BCR are responsible for the
tetramerization of the fusion protein, which is necessary for tyrosine kinase activation and activation of the F-actin binding function within ABL. Tyrosine 177 in the
BCR portion of the fusion protein is required for transformation because once phosphorylated by the ABL tyrosine kinase it serves as a docking site for the SH2
domain of Grb-2.113 The phosphoserine-threonine domain located between amino acids 192 and 413 of BCR may be responsible for activation of the ABL kinase.
The three regions in the ABL portion of the fusion protein that are required for transformation are the SH2 domain, the SH1 tyrosine kinase domain, and the F-actin
binding domain. 112 Three properties of the fusion protein appear to contribute critically to its in vitro transforming ability: First, BCR-ABL has constitutive and elevated
tyrosine kinase activity; second, this dysregulated kinase activity is confined to the cytoplasm, in distinct contrast to the wild-type ABL that moves between the nucleus
and the cytoplasm 114,115; and third, its constitutive activation of the tyrosine kinase domain in the cytoplasm results in the activation of a multitude of both cytoplasmic
and nuclear signaling pathways that enhance the cell's growth and survival ( Fig. 46.1-3). The substrates activated as a consequence of this signaling include CRKL,
CBL, RIN, RAS, RAF, phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase, JUN, MYC, STAT5, PAXILLIN, and FAK (reviewed in references 111 and 112). However, although these studies
reveal the complexity by which the BCR-ABL fusion protein can transform in vitro, it is unclear how much of this dysregulation is responsible for the clinical disease we
know as CML. The use of different promoters to drive the expression of the oncoprotein, the absence of the ABL-BCR gene, and the presence of two wild-type BCR
and ABL alleles may, among other in vitro conditions, all serve to sufficiently alter the dose or function of BCR-ABL in the transduced cell lines such that it may bear
only some resemblance to what may actually happen in vivo. The specific oral ABL kinase inhibitor STI571 was tested in chronic phase CML patients who had failed
to respond to interferon therapy, and complete hematologic response (i.e., normalization of counts for greater than or equal to 4 weeks) was obtained in 23 of 24
(96%) patients on treatment for at least 4 weeks, with minimal side effects. A significant fraction of these patients have also achieved a complete cytogenetic response
as well, again emphasizing how specific targeting of molecular defects is likely to have a significant effect on treatment outcome (see Chapter 46.3.1).116

FIGURE 46.1-3. Promiscuous cell signaling by the BCR-ABL oncoprotein. The t(9;22)(q34;q11) results in the fusion of the phosphoprotein BCR with the truncated
ABL tyrosine kinase protooncogene. The first 63 amino acids of BCR are responsible for the fusion protein tetramerization and consequent constitutive and elevated
tyrosine kinase activity that is restricted to the cytoplasm. This activation results in phosphorylation of a multitude of cellular and nuclear signaling molecules (some of
which are shown) whose pathways ultimately affect cell growth, differentiation, and cell survival. PI3-K, phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase; TK, tyrosine kinase.

GENE FUSIONS INVOLVING THE NUCLEOPORIN FAMILY OF PROTEINS
Nucleoporins (NUP) make up the nuclear pore complex (NPC), which promotes the selective transportation of both RNA and protein between the nucleus and the
cytoplasm in a bidirectional fashion. 117 In the past several years, a series of gene fusions involving two NUPs have been described in de novo AML, treatment-related
AML, and in T-cell ALL. The first such fusion to be cloned was DEK-CAN, found in children and young adults with t(6;9)(p23;q34) AML (see Table 46.1-1).118CAN,
also called NUP214, is an NPC protein that contains multiple NUP-specific Phe-Gly (FG) peptide sequence motifs that mediate protein-protein interaction thought to
be required for nuclear-cytoplasmic transport, cell-cycle control, and cell survival. 119,120NUP214 fuses with the amino terminus of DEK, a putative DNA-binding
transcription factor. NUP214 has also been shown, in a single case of inv(9)(q34q34) AML, 118 to fuse with SET, a nuclear protein that is thought to regulate G 1/S

transition by modulating the activity of cyclin E–cyclin-dependent kinase-2 activity via p21 Cip1.121SET-NUP214, like DEK-NUP214, is located exclusively in the
nucleus, leaves the FG repeat-rich motif intact, and therefore presumably interacts with the same cellular proteins likely to be important in leukemogenesis. 119
The other important NPC gene involved in leukemogenesis is NUP98, located at chromosome 11p15, which, like NUP214, lends it amino terminus FG repeat domains
to fuse in frame to a variety of partners in acute leukemia. NUP98 was first identified as part of the t(7;11)(p15;p15), associated primarily with AML. 122 In this instance,
NUP98 fuses with the carboxyl terminus of HOXA9, located at chromosome 7p15, a homeobox gene that regulates hematopoietic differentiation. Evidence suggests
that this fusion transcript requires the HOXA9 domains for DNA binding and interaction with PBX proteins, while the FG repeats of NUP98 act as transactivators of
gene transcription and recruit cAMP response element (CREB)–binding protein and p300 as requisite transcriptional coactivators. Thus, the properties of the
NUP98-HOXA9 fusion protein collectively result in a deregulation of HOX-responsive genes with consequent induction of AML. 123 The other fusion partners of NUP98
have not yet shed additional light on the mechanism of FG-rich NPC protein–mediated leukemogenesis, but do provide supporting evidence that NUP98 is a recurrent
target primarily in treatment-related AML/MDS.

GENE ACTIVATION IN LEUKEMIA
GENE ACTIVATION INVOLVING IMMUNOGLOBULIN GENES IN B-CELL LEUKEMIA AND LYMPHOMA
In the t(8;14)(q24;q32), the prototypic bHLH/bZIP transcription factor MYC is juxtaposed to a region of strong Ig heavy chain enhancer elements. Two variants have
also been described in which regulatory portions of the Igk gene on chromosome 2 or the Ig lambda (l) gene on chromosome 22 are juxtaposed to the MYC locus of
chromosome 8 (see Table 46.1-1). In each instance, the B cell experiences a deregulation of MYC gene expression because of its inappropriate activation and control
by Ig regulatory elements whose expression is B-cell specific. This resultant malignant B-cell transformation takes the form of either Burkitt's lymphoma or ALL. The
earliest of these studies were the first to demonstrate that rearrangement of specific genes that resulted from chromosomal translocations were actually at the heart of
malignant transformation. 124,125
MYC is capable of activating gene transcription by forming a heterodimer with MAX, which normally homodimerizes with itself or heterodimerizes with MAD or MXI-1
to repress transcription. Therefore, the overexpression of MYC in B lymphocytes, carrying the t(8;14)(q24;q32) or one of its variants, functions to disrupt the normal
equilibrium that MAX shares with its partners, ultimately leading to the inappropriate overexpression of a multitude of downstream genes activated by the MYC-MAX
heterodimer. How the activation of these downstream events in turn induces the malignant B-cell transformation is still incompletely understood and an area of intense
study (reviewed in references 126 and 127).
GENE ACTIVATION INVOLVING T-CELL RECEPTOR GENE IN T-CELL LEUKEMIA AND LYMPHOMA
A comparable group of transcription factors, normally active during early hematopoiesis, but not during more committed T-cell development, are rearranged via
chromosome translocation to lie near enhancers within the T-cell receptor TCRb (chromosome 7q34) and TCRa/d (chromosome 14q11) loci. As a consequence,
these regulatory genes become inappropriately expressed, and their protein products contribute to T-cell leukemogenesis. They include the bHLH
TAL1/SCL,128,129TAL2/SCL2,130LYL1,131 as well as MYC.132,133 and 134 Each of these specific translocations are listed in Table 46.1-1.
Rearrangements involving TAL account for up to 25% of childhood cases of T-cell ALL and T-cell lymphoma, but are seen infrequently in adults. TAL1 is normally
coexpressed with another transcription factor called LM02, and both are part of a larger transcriptional complex that includes the zinc finger transcription factors
GATA1 and E2A. The complex is likely to be important for normal erythropoiesis. 135LM02 and LM01 are both rearranged near the regulatory elements of TCR loci in
T-cell ALL (see Table 46.1-1).136,137 and 138 The mouse Hox11 gene is a homeobox transcription factor that is likely critical for lymphocyte development and survival, in
that it prevents apoptosis of splenocytes in the mouse. 139 Further, Hox11 interacts with a protein serine-threonine phosphatase, PP1C, allowing bypass of the G 2
checkpoint following injury and progression to the M phase. 140 Thus, its juxtaposition within the regulatory regions of the TCRb and TCRa/d loci141 results in its ectopic
expression in T cells, which likely contributes to T-cell ALL via its inhibition of normal programmed cell death and disruption of normal cell cycling, two processes that
facilitate tumor progression.
T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia (T-PLL) is a rare form of mature T-cell leukemia characterized by chromosomal inversions and translocations involving chromosome
band 14q11, containing the TCRa/d gene. The inv(14)(q11q32.1) and the t(14;14)(q11;q32) each juxtapose the T-cell leukemia-1 (TCL1) gene at 14q32.1 to TCRa/d,
and the rarely seen t(7;14) (q35;q32.1) juxtaposes TCL1 to the TCRb gene.142,143 The t(X;14) (q28;q11) rearranges another gene, MTCP1, within the TCRa/d locus as
well in T-PLL.144 While the function of TCL1 and MTCP1 remain unknown, they share 40% amino acid identity, and with the elucidation of the three-dimensional
structure of MTCP1 showing a compact eight-stranded b-barrel structure, it appears that these two gene products are the first members of a b-barrel family of
proteins.145

TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENES IN LEUKEMIA
INACTIVATION OF TUMOR SUPPRESSOR BY GENE MUTATION
Mutations in tumor suppressor genes that result in functional inactivation likely contribute to the process of malignant transformation by disrupting the signals that
normally inhibit cell growth (see Chapter 6). This process normally requires disruption of both copies of relevant tumor suppressor genes, which can occur by such
genetic alterations as point mutation, frame-shift mutation, and deletion, or by epigenetic alterations such as hypermethylation. 146,147 Approximately 10% to 20% of
patients with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia have mutations in p53, a tumor suppressor gene, with an increase in frequency as the disease progresses and a
correlation with poor clinical outcome. 148 p53 can also be inactivated by MDM2, itself an oncoprotein that is up-regulated by p53 and then serves to bind and
inactivate it in a negative feedback loop without gene mutation. An increased expression of MDM2 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia has been correlated with
progressive disease. 149
INACTIVATION OF TUMOR SUPPRESSOR BY GENE DELETION
The frequent deletion of the human chromosome 9p21 region in leukemia and other cancers led to the search and ultimate discovery of two tumor suppressor genes
at this locus, p16 and p15. p16 blocks cell-cycle progression by inhibiting cyclin-dependent kinase, as does p15, whose expression can be induced by transforming
growth factor-b. 150,151 and 152 A review of the literature on the frequency of p15 and p16 deletions (p15del and p16del, respectively) in leukemia showed they were
frequently deleted in T-lineage ALL, ranging between 47% and 64%, as well as in B-lineage ALL, with a frequency between 20% and 27%. Likewise, in CML lymphoid
blast crisis, the frequency of p15del was noted to be 27%, while p16del was 35%. There was little difference in frequency between children and adults with ALL, but
p15del and p16del were absent from infants with ALL. The frequency of p15del and p16del was noted to be low in chronic T- and B-cell leukemias and is uncommon
in AML, MDS, or CML (i.e., less than or equal to 2%). 153
ATM is a kinase and putative tumor suppressor gene thought to have a role in cell-cycle checkpoint control. Indeed, patients with the genetic disease
ataxia-telangiectasia have a loss of ATM, an increased frequency of translocations and inversions involving TCL1, and a clonal excess of mature T cells. This
develops years before a significant fraction of these patients progress to T-PLL. 154,155 This finding is consistent with a model by which the deregulation of TCL1 could
serve as a tumor initiator, and loss of tumor suppressor genes might function to further promote progression of T-PLL. In strong support of this model and in support of
ATM as a tumor suppressor gene, a large fraction of sporadic T-PLL cases, many with rearrangements of TCL1, have been shown to contain inactivating deletions
and missense mutations of ATM.156
INACTIVATION OF TUMOR SUPPRESSOR BY HYPERMETHYLATION
Methylation of CpG islands located in the 5' regulatory region of genes can lead to the repression of gene transcription and illustrates an epigenetic mechanism for
inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. 147 Multiple known tumor suppressor genes have been shown to be inactivated via hypermethylation in leukemia, including p15
and p16. While p16 is often inactivated by hypermethylation in epithelial tumors, it is p15 that is frequently inactivated by hypermethylation in hematologic
malignancies, most notably in AML and MDS, but also in ALL. Intriguingly, p16 is not inactivated in these cases by either deletion, methylation, or point mutation. 157,158
and 159
In AML, and possibly in MDS, the density of p15 methylation (i.e., the percent of CpG dinucleotides that are methylated on each allele) appears to correlate

best with the degree of gene silencing and may increase as the disease progresses. 157,160 Other candidate tumor suppressor genes, such as p73 in ALL,161 have also
been shown to be inactivated by hypermethylation.
While most investigations of aberrant CpG island methylation in human cancer have primarily taken a candidate gene approach, we performed a global analysis of
the methylation status of 1184 unselected CpG islands in each of 98 primary human tumors including AML using a technique termed restriction landmark genomic
scanning. This approach showed that an average of 608 CpG islands were aberrantly methylated in these tumors (range, 0 to 4500), and it allowed the identification
of patterns of CpG island methylation that were shared within each tumor type, together with a pattern that was specific for acute leukemia. Which tumor suppressor
genes are systematically silenced by this process has not yet been determined. However, these data suggest that the methylation of particular subsets of CpG islands
has specific consequences for leukemogenesis and is likely an important event in disease progression. 162 One of the exciting avenues being pursued by several
laboratories is the reversal of methylation status with pharmacologic agents such as 5-azacytidine, which often results in reexpression of the target gene.

MOLECULAR MONITORING OF LEUKEMIA
ASSESSMENT OF MINIMAL RESIDUAL DISEASE
Molecular analysis can not only play a role in the diagnosis and treatment of leukemia, but may also prove to be useful for monitoring a patient's response to therapy.
Both the exponential amplification of small fragments of DNA and RNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and reverse transcription PCR, respectively, and the
growing discovery of the unique gene fusions and Ig and TCR gene rearrangements in leukemia, form the basis for our ability to detect the presence of these genetic
alterations while a patient is in complete morphologic and clinical remission. There have been at least two important observations made with the advancement of this
technology and the explosion of literature on the subject of minimal residual disease (MRD) in leukemia. First, in some instances (e.g., MLL PTD, BCR-ABL), the
fusion transcripts can be detected in bone marrow, blood samples, or both from normal individuals. 163,164,165,166 and 167 The reasons for this are not entirely clear, but in
some cases the fusions in normal individuals are clearly distinct from the malignant gene fusions and likely occur through entirely different mechanisms. 66,164,165
Second, the persistence of PCR-detectable chimeric or rearranged genes is not at all a guarantee of persistent functional disease or eventual relapse in either CML 168
or some types of AML (e.g., CBFA2-CBFA2T1).169,170 The reasons for this are also not known, but likely involve the presence of the fusion transcript in a normal
parental clone, immunologic suppression of MRD by the host, or the absence of additional genetic alterations that were required for tumor initiation, progression, or
both. 171 There are some striking examples of how the detection of MRD by PCR can predict relapse in ALL 172 and APL,173 but most of these studies have yet to be
confirmed in large prospective trials with standardized criteria for quantitative methodologies and uniform evaluation intervals. The ability to accurately quantify these
genes and gene products using more fully automated technologies 174 might ultimately identify levels of MRD above which relapse is probable and below which
relapse is unlikely. However, as we learn more about the evolutionary history of the leukemic clone and the seemingly high likelihood that in many instances, a
multitude of genetic alterations are required for leukemogenesis, the simultaneous detection of several such alterations may prove to be more predictive of outcome
following the achievement of a clinical complete remission. The incorporation of genetic profiling with cDNA microarray technology is likely to have a significant effect
on unraveling the molecular complexity of leukemia for the purposes of diagnosis, classification, treatment, and monitoring clinical outcome. 175
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Tamra Brooks, John Byrd, Megan Cooper, Todd A. Fehniger, Peter J. Kourlas, Guido Marcucci, Krzysztof Mrózek, Laura Rush,
Matthew P. Strout, and Susan P. Whitman for their assistance. This work was supported in part by grants P30 CA16058, U10 CA37027, and T32 CA09338, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, and the Coleman Leukemia Research Fund.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Croce CM. Role of chromosome translocations in human neoplasia. Cell 1987;49:155.
2. Rowley JD. The critical role of chromosome translocations in human leukemias. Annu Rev Genet 1998;32:495.
3. Rabbitts TH. Translocations, master genes, and differences between the origins of acute and chronic leukemias. Cell 1991;67:641.
4. Rabbitts TH. Chromosomal translocations in human cancer. Nature 1994;372:143.
5. Look AT. Oncogenic transcription factors in the human acute leukemias. Science 1997;278:1059.
6. Bishop JM. The molecular genetics of cancer. Science 1987;235:305.
7. Look AT. Genes altered by chromosomal translocations in leukemias and lymphomas. In: Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW, eds. The genetic basis of human cancer. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998:109.
8. Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Diebold J, et al. World Health Organization classification of neoplastic diseases of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues: report of the Clinical Advisory Committee
MeetingAirlie House, November 1997. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3835.
9. Meyers S, Downing JR, Hiebert SW. Identification of AML-1 and the (8;21) translocation protein (AML- 1/ETO) as sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins: the runt homology domain is required
for DNA binding and protein-protein interactions. Mol Cell Biol 1993;13:6336.
10. Downing JR. The AML1-ETO chimaeric transcription factor in acute myeloid leukaemia: biology and clinical significance. Br J Haematol 1999;106:296.
11. Kitabayashi I, Yokoyama A, Shimizu K, Ohki M. Interaction and functional cooperation of the leukemia-associated factors AML1 and p300 in myeloid cell differentiation. EMBO J 1998;17:2994.
12. Erickson P, Gao J, Chang KS, et al. Identification of breakpoints in t(8;21) acute myelogenous leukemia and isolation of a fusion transcript, AML1/ETO, with similarity to Drosophila
segmentation gene, runt. Blood 1992;80:1825.
13. Meyers S, Lenny N, Hiebert SW. The t(8;21) fusion protein interferes with AML-1B-dependent transcriptional activation. Mol Cell Biol 1995;15:1974.
14. Wang J, Hoshino T, Redner RL, et al. ETO, fusion partner in t(8;21) acute myeloid leukemia, represses transcription by interaction with the human N-CoR/mSin3/HDAC1 complex. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:10860.
15. Gelmetti V, Zhang J, Fanelli M, Minucci S, et al. Aberrant recruitment of the nuclear receptor corepressor-histone deacetylase complex by the acute myeloid leukemia fusion partner ETO. Mol
Cell Biol 1998;18:7185.
16. Redner RL, Wang J, Liu JM. Chromatin remodeling and leukemia: new therapeutic paradigms. Blood 1999;94:417.
17. Wang J, Saunthararajah Y, Redner RL, Liu JM. Inhibitors of histone deacetylase relieve ETO-mediated repression and induce differentiation of AML1-ETO leukemia cells. Cancer Res
1999;59:2766.
18. Liu P, Tarle SA, Hajra A, et al. Fusion between transcription factor CBF beta/PEBP2 beta and a myosin heavy chain in acute myeloid leukemia. Science 1993;261:1041.
19. Liu PP, Hajra A, Wijmenga C, Collins FS. Blood 1997;89:1842]. Blood 1995;85:2289.
20. Adya N, Stacy T, Speck NA, Liu PP. The leukemic protein core binding factor beta (CBFbeta)-smooth-muscle myosin heavy chain sequesters CBFalpha2 into cytoskeletal filaments and
aggregates. Mol Cell Biol 1998;18:7432.
21. Castilla LH, Garrett L, Adya N, et al. The fusion gene Cbfb-MYH11 blocks myeloid differentiation and predisposes mice to acute myelomonocytic leukaemia. Nat Genet 1999;23:144.
22. Song WJ, Sullivan MG, Legare RD, et al. Haploinsufficiency of CBFA2 causes familial thrombocytopenia with propensity to develop acute myelogenous leukaemia. Nat Genet 1999;23:166.
23. Mitani K, Ogawa S, Tanaka T, et al. Generation of the AML1-EVI-1 fusion gene in the t(3;21)(q26;q22) causes blastic crisis in chronic myelocytic leukemia. EMBO J 1994;13:504.
24. Nucifora G, Begy CR, Kobayashi H, et al. Consistent intergenic splicing and production of multiple transcripts between AML1 at 21q22 and unrelated genes at 3q26 in (3;21)(q26;q22)
translocations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:4004.
25. Kurokawa M, Mitani K, Imai Y, et al. The t(3;21) fusion product, AML1/Evi-1, interacts with Smad3 and blocks transforming growth factor-beta-mediated growth inhibition of myeloid cells. Blood
1998;92:4003.
26. Roulston D, Espinosa R III, Nucifora G, et al. CBFA2(AML1) translocations with novel partner chromosomes in myeloid leukemias: association with prior therapy. Blood 1998;92:2879.
27. Nye JA, Petersen JM, Gunther CV, Jonsen MD, Graves BJ. Interaction of murine ets-1 with GGA-binding sites establishes the ETS domain as a new DNA-binding motif. Genes Dev 1992;6:975.
28. Wang LC, Swat W, Fujiwara Y, et al. The TEL/ETV6 gene is required specifically for hematopoiesis in the bone marrow. Genes Dev 1998;12:2392.
29. Golub TR, Barker GF, Bohlander SK, et al. Fusion of the TEL gene on 12p13 to the AML1 gene on 21q22 in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:4917.
30. Romana SP, Mauchauffe M, Le Coniat M, et al. The t(12;21) of acute lymphoblastic leukemia results in a tel-AML1 gene fusion. Blood 1995;85:3662.
31. Hiebert SW, Sun W, Davis JN, et al. The t(12;21) translocation converts AML-1B from an activator to a repressor of transcription. Mol Cell Biol 1996;16:1349.
32. Raynaud S, Cave H, Baens M, et al. The 12;21 translocation involving TEL and deletion of the other TEL allele: two frequently associated alterations found in childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Blood 1996;87:2891.
33. Rubnitz JE, Pui CH, Downing JR. The role of TEL fusion genes in pediatric leukemias. Leukemia 1999;13:6.
34. Bloomfield CD, Lawrence D, Byrd JC, et al. Frequency of prolonged remission duration after high-dose cytarabine intensification in acute myeloid leukemia varies by cytogenetic subtype.
Cancer Res 1998;58:4173.
35. Lutterbach B, Sun D, Schuetz J, Hiebert SW. The MYND motif is required for repression of basal transcription from the multidrug resistance 1 promoter by the t(8;21) fusion protein. Mol Cell
Biol 1998;18:3604.
36. Golub TR. TEL gene rearrangements in myeloid malignancy. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1997;11:1207.
37. Golub TR, Barker GF, Lovett M, Gilliland DG. Fusion of PDGF receptor beta to a novel ets-like gene, tel, in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia with t(5;12) chromosomal translocation. Cell
1994;77:307.
38. Carroll M, Tomasson MH, Barker GF, Golub TR, Gilliland DG. The TEL/platelet-derived growth factor beta receptor (PDGF beta R) fusion in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia is a transforming
protein that self-associates and activates PDGF beta R kinase-dependent signaling pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:14845.
39. Jousset C, Carron C, Boureux A, et al. A domain of TEL conserved in a subset of ETS proteins defines a specific oligomerization interface essential to the mitogenic properties of the
TEL-PDGFR beta oncoprotein. EMBO J 1997;16:69.
40. Bourgeade MF, Defachelles AS, Cayre YE. Myc is essential for transformation by TEL/platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGFRbeta). Blood 1998;91:3333.
41. Papadopoulos P, Ridge SA, Boucher CA, Stocking C, Wiedemann LM. The novel activation of ABL by fusion to an ets-related gene, TEL. Cancer Res 1995;55:34.
42. Okuda K, Golub TR, Gilliland DG, Griffin JD. p210BCR/ABL, p190BCR/ABL, and TEL/ABL activate similar signal transduction pathways in hematopoietic cell lines. Oncogene 1996;13:1147.
43. Buijs A, Sherr S, van Baal S, et al. Translocation (12;22)(p13;q11) in myeloproliferative disorders results in fusion of the ETS-like TEL gene on 12p13 to the MN1 gene on 22q11 [published

erratum appears in Oncogene 1995;10:809]. Oncogene 1995;10:1511.
44. Super HJ, McCabe NR, Thirman MJ, et al. Rearrangements of the MLL gene in therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia in patients previously treated with agents targeting DNA- topoisomerase
II. Blood 1993;82:3705.
45. Hunger SP, Tkachuk DC, Amylon MD, et al. HRX involvement in de novo and secondary leukemias with diverse chromosome 11q23 abnormalities. Blood 1993;81:3197.
46. Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Andersen MK, Johansson B. Balanced chromosome aberrations in leukemias following chemotherapy with DNA-topoisomerase II inhibitors. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1897.
47. Ziemin-van der Poel S, McCabe NR, Gill HJ, et al. Identification of a gene, MLL, that spans the breakpoint in 11q23 translocations associated with human leukemias [published erratum appears
in Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:4220]. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:10735.
48. Djabali M, Selleri L, Parry P, et al. A trithorax-like gene is interrupted by chromosome 11q23 translocations in acute leukaemias [published erratum appears in Nat Genet 1993;4:431]. Nat
Genet 1992;2:113.
49. Gu Y, Nakamura T, Alder H, et al. The t(4;11) chromosome translocation of human acute leukemias fuses the ALL-1 gene, related to Drosophila trithorax, to the AF-4 gene. Cell 1992;71:701.
50. Tkachuk DC, Kohler S, Cleary ML. Involvement of a homolog of Drosophila trithorax by 11q23 chromosomal translocations in acute leukemias. Cell 1992;71:691.
51. Jones RS, Gelbart WM. The Drosophila Polycomb-group gene Enhancer of zeste contains a region with sequence similarity to trithorax. Mol Cell Biol 1993;13:6357.
52. Simon J. Locking in stable states of gene expression: transcriptional control during Drosophila development. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1995;7:376.
53. Yu BD, Hess JL, Horning SE, Brown GA, Korsmeyer SJ. Altered Hox expression and segmental identity in Mll-mutant mice. Nature 1995;378:505.
54. Yu BD, Hanson RD, Hess JL, Horning SE, Korsmeyer SJ. MLL, a mammalian trithorax-group gene, functions as a transcriptional maintenance factor in morphogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 1998;95:10632.
55. van Oostveen JW, Bijl JJ, Raaphorst FM, Walboomers JJM, Meijer CJLM. The role of Homeobox genes in normal hematopoiesis and hematological malignancies. Leukemia 1999;13:1675.
56. Hess JL, Yu BD, Li B, Hanson R, Korsmeyer SJ. Defects in yolk sac hematopoiesis in Mll-null embryos. Blood 1997;90:1799.
57. Fidanza V, Melotti P, Yano T, et al. Double knockout of the ALL-1 gene blocks hematopoietic differentiation in vitro. Cancer Res 1996;56:1179.
58. Rowley JD. The der(11) chromosome contains the critical breakpoint junction in the 4;11, 9;11, and 11;19 translocations in acute leukemia. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1992;5:264.
59. Dimartino JF, Cleary ML. Mll rearrangements in haematological malignancies: lessons from clinical and biological studies. Br J Haematol 1999;106:614.
60. Tse W, Zhu W, Chen HS, Cohen A. A novel gene, AF1q, fused to MLL in t(1;11) (q21;q23), is specifically expressed in leukemic and immature hematopoietic cells. Blood 1995;85:650.
61. Caligiuri MA, Schichman SA, Strout MP, et al. Molecular rearrangement of the ALL-1 gene in acute myeloid leukemia without cytogenetic evidence of 11q23 chromosomal translocations.
Cancer Res 1994;54:370.
62. Schichman SA, Caligiuri MA, Gu Y, et al. ALL-1 partial duplication in acute leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:6236.
63. Schichman SA, Caligiuri MA, Strout MP, et al. ALL-1 tandem duplication in acute myeloid leukemia with a normal karyotype involves homologous recombination between Alu elements. Cancer
Res 1994;54:4277.
64. Caligiuri MA, Strout MP, Oberkircher AR, et al. The partial tandem duplication of ALL1 in acute myeloid leukemia with normal cytogenetics or trisomy 11 is restricted to one chromosome. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:3899.
65. So CW, Ma ZG, Price CM, et al. MLL self fusion mediated by Alu repeat homologous recombination and prognosis of AML-M4/M5 subtypes. Cancer Res 1997;57:117.
66. Strout MP, Marcucci G, Bloomfield CD, Caligiuri MA. The partial tandem duplication of ALL1 (MLL) is consistently generated by Alu-mediated homologous recombination in acute myeloid
leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:2390.
67. Bernard OA, Romana SP, Schichman SA, et al. Partial duplication of HRX in acute leukemia with trisomy 11. Leukemia 1995;9:1487.
68. Caligiuri MA, Strout MP, Schichman SA, et al. Partial tandem duplication of ALL1 as a recurrent molecular defect in acute myeloid leukemia with trisomy 11. Cancer Res 1996;56:1418.
69. Caligiuri MA, Strout MP, Lawrence D, et al. Rearrangement of ALL1 (MLL) in acute myeloid leukemia with normal cytogenetics. Cancer Res 1998;58:55.
70. Döhner K, Ulrich R, Liebisch C, et al. Prognostic significance of partial tandem duplication of the MLL gene in acute myeloid leukemia with normal cytogenetics: a study within a multicenter
treatment trial. Blood 1999;94[Suppl]:499a.
71. Greaves MF. Infant leukaemia biology, aetiology and treatment. Leukemia 1996;10:372.
72. Ford AM, Ridge SA, Cabrera ME, et al. In utero rearrangements in the trithorax-related oncogene in infant leukaemias. Nature 1993;363:358.
73. Ford AM, Pombo-de-Oliveira MS, McCarthy KP, et al. Monoclonal origin of concordant T-cell malignancy in identical twins. Blood 1997;89:281.
74. Gale KB, Ford AM, Repp R, et al. Backtracking leukemia to birth: identification of clonotypic gene fusion sequences in neonatal blood spots. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:13950.
75. Ford AM, Bennett CA, Price CM, et al. Fetal origins of the TEL-AML1 fusion gene in identical twins with leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:4584.
76. Broeker PL, Super HG, Thirman MJ, et al. Distribution of 11q23 breakpoints within the MLL breakpoint cluster region in de novo acute leukemia and in treatment-related acute myeloid
leukemia: correlation with scaffold attachment regions and topoisomerase II consensus binding sites. Blood 1996;87:1912.
77. Strissel PL, Strick R, Rowley JD, Zeleznik-Le NJ. An in vivo topoisomerase II cleavage site and a DNase I hypersensitive site colocalize near exon 9 in the MLL breakpoint cluster region. Blood
1998;92:3793.
78. Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Rowley JD. The balanced and the unbalanced chromosome aberrations of acute myeloid leukemia may develop in different ways and may contribute differently to
malignant transformation. Blood 1994;83:2780.
79. Downing JR, Look AT. MLL fusion genes in the 11q23 acute leukemias. In: Freireich EJ, Kantarjian H, eds. Leukemia: advances in research and treatment. Boston: Kluwer, 1995.
80. Lo Coco F, Diverio D, Falini B, et al. Genetic diagnosis and molecular monitoring in the management of acute promyelocytic leukemia. Blood 1999;94:12.
81. de The H, Lavau C, Marchio A, et al. The PML-RAR alpha fusion mRNA generated by the t(15;17) translocation in acute promyelocytic leukemia encodes a functionally altered RAR. Cell
1991;66:675.
82. Kakizuka A, Miller WH Jr, Umesono K, et al. Chromosomal translocation t(15;17) in human acute promyelocytic leukemia fuses RAR alpha with a novel putative transcription factor, PML. Cell
1991;66:663.
83. Slack JL. Biology and treatment of acute progranulocytic leukemia. Curr Opin Hematol 1999;6:236.
84. Grignani F, De Matteis S, Nervi C, et al. Fusion proteins of the retinoic acid receptor-alpha recruit histone deacetylase in promyelocytic leukaemia. Nature 1998;391:815.
85. Lin RJ, Nagy L, Inoue S, et al. Role of the histone deacetylase complex in acute promyelocytic leukaemia. Nature 1998;391:811.
86. He LZ, Guidez F, Tribioli C, et al. Distinct interactions of PML-RARalpha and PLZF-RARalpha with co-repressors determine differential responses to RA in APL. Nat Genet 1998;18:126.
87. Chen Z, Brand NJ, Chen A, et al. Fusion between a novel Kruppel-like zinc finger gene and the retinoic acid receptor-alpha locus due to a variant t(11;17) translocation associated with acute
promyelocytic leukaemia. EMBO J 1993;12:1161.
88. Hong SH, David G, Wong CW, Dejean A, Privalsky ML. SMRT corepressor interacts with PLZF and with the PML-retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARalpha) and PLZF-RARalpha oncoproteins
associated with acute promyelocytic leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:9028.
89. Murre C, McCaw PS, Baltimore D. A new DNA binding and dimerization motif in immunoglobulin enhancer binding, daughterless, MyoD, and myc proteins. Cell 1989;56:777.
90. Reya T, Grosschedl R. Transcriptional regulation of B-cell differentiation. Curr Opin Immunol 1998;10:158.
91. Aronheim A, Shiran R, Rosen A, Walker MD. The E2A gene product contains two separable and functionally distinct transcription activation domains. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:8063.
92. Lassar AB, Davis RL, Wright WE, et al. Functional activity of myogenic HLH proteins requires hetero-oligomerization with E12/E47-like proteins in vivo. Cell 1991;66:305.
93. Bain G, Maandag EC, Izon DJ, et al. E2A proteins are required for proper B cell development and initiation of immunoglobulin gene rearrangements. Cell 1994;79:885.
94. Zhuang Y, Soriano P, Weintraub H. The helix-loop-helix gene E2A is required for B cell formation. Cell 1994;79:875.
95. Kamps MP, Murre C, Sun XH, Baltimore D. A new homeobox gene contributes the DNA binding domain of the t(1;19) translocation protein in pre-B ALL. Cell 1990;60:547.
96. Nourse J, Mellentin JD, Galili N, et al. Chromosomal translocation t(1;19) results in synthesis of a homeobox fusion mRNA that codes for a potential chimeric transcription factor. Cell
1990;60:535.
97. Van Dijk MA, Voorhoeve PM, Murre C. Pbx1 is converted into a transcriptional activator upon acquiring the N-terminal region of E2A in pre-B-cell acute lymphoblastoid leukemia. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:6061.
98. Fu X, McGrath S, Pasillas M, Nakazawa S, Kamps MP. EB-1, a tyrosine kinase signal transduction gene, is transcriptionally activated in the t(1;19) subset of pre-B ALL, which express
oncoprotein E2a-Pbx1. Oncogene 1999;18:4920.
99. McWhirter JR, Neuteboom ST, Wancewicz EV, et al. Oncogenic homeodomain transcription factor E2A-Pbx1 activates a novel WNT gene in pre-B acute lymphoblastoid leukemia. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:11464.
100. Hunger SP, Ohyashiki K, Toyama K, Cleary ML. Hlf, a novel hepatic bZIP protein, shows altered DNA-binding properties following fusion to E2A in t(17;19) acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Genes Dev 1992;6:1608.
101. Inaba T, Roberts WM, Shapiro LH, et al. Fusion of the leucine zipper gene HLF to the E2A gene in human acute B- lineage leukemia. Science 1992;257:531.
102. Metzstein MM, Hengartner MO, Tsung N, Ellis RE, Horvitz HR. Transcriptional regulator of programmed cell death encoded by Caenorhabditis elegans gene ces-2. Nature 1996;382:545.
103. Inukai T, Inoue A, Kurosawa H, et al. SLUG, a ces-1-related zinc finger transcription factor gene with antiapoptotic activity, is a downstream target of the E2A-HLF oncoprotein. Mol Cell
1999;4:343.
104. Inukai T, Inaba T, Ikushima S, Look AT. The AD1 and AD2 transactivation domains of E2A are essential for the antiapoptotic activity of the chimeric oncoprotein E2A-HLF. Mol Cell Biol
1998;18:6035.
105. Nowell PC, Hungerford DA. A minute chromosome in human chronic granulocytic leukemia. Science 1960;132:1497.
106. Rowley JD. A new consistent chromosomal abnormality in chronic myelogenous leukaemia identified by quinacrine fluorescence and Giemsa staining. Nature 1973;243:290.
107. Bartram CR, de Klein A, Hagemeijer A, et al. Translocation of c-ab1 oncogene correlates with the presence of a Philadelphia chromosome in chronic myelocytic leukaemia. Nature
1983;306:277.
108. Shtivelman E, Lifshitz B, Gale RP, Canaani E. Fused transcript of abl and bcr genes in chronic myelogenous leukaemia. Nature 1985;315:550.
109. Stam K, Heisterkamp N, Grosveld G, et al. Evidence of a new chimeric bcr/c-abl mRNA in patients with chronic myelocytic leukemia and the Philadelphia chromosome. N Engl J Med
1985;313:1429.
110. Bloomfield CD, Peterson LC, Yunis JJ, Brunning RD. The Philadelphia chromosome (Ph1) in adults presenting with acute leukaemia: a comparison of Ph1+ and Ph1- patients. Br J Haematol
1977;36:347.
111. Sawyers CL. Chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1330.
112. Verfaillie CM. Biology of chronic myelogenous leukemia. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1998;12:1.
113. Pendergast AM, Quilliam LA, Cripe LD, et al. BCR-ABL-induced oncogenesis is mediated by direct interaction with the SH2 domain of the GRB-2 adaptor protein. Cell 1993;75:175.
114. Van Etten RA, Jackson P, Baltimore D. The mouse type IV c-abl gene product is a nuclear protein, and activation of transforming ability is associated with cytoplasmic localization. Cell
1989;58:669.
115. Lewis JM, Baskaran R, Taagepera S, Schwartz MA, Wang JY. Integrin regulation of c-Abl tyrosine kinase activity and cytoplasmic- nuclear transport. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:15174.
116. Druker BJ, Talpaz M, Resta D, et al. Clinical efficacy and safety of an ABL specific tyrosine kinase inhibitor as targeted therapy for chronic myelogenous leukemia. Blood 1999;94[Suppl]:368a.
117. Stoffler D, Fahrenkrog B, Aebi U. The nuclear pore complex: from molecular architecture to functional dynamics. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1999;11:391.
118. von Lindern M, Breems D, van Baal S, Adriaansen H, Grosveld G. Characterization of the translocation breakpoint sequences of two DEK-CAN fusion genes present in t(6;9) acute myeloid
leukemia and a SET-CAN fusion gene found in a case of acute undifferentiated leukemia. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1992;5:227.
119. Fornerod M, Boer J, van Baal S, Morreau H, Grosveld G. Interaction of cellular proteins with the leukemia specific fusion proteins DEK-CAN and SET-CAN and their normal counterpart, the
nucleoporin CAN. Oncogene 1996;13:1801.
120. Boer J, Bonten-Surtel J, Grosveld G. Overexpression of the nucleoporin CAN/NUP214 induces growth arrest, nucleocytoplasmic transport defects, and apoptosis. Mol Cell Biol 1998;18:1236.
121. Estanyol JM, Jaumot M, Casanovas O, et al. The protein SET regulates the inhibitory effect of p21(Cip1) on cyclin E-cyclin-dependent kinase 2 activity. J Biol Chem 1999;274:33161.
122. Borrow J, Shearman AM, Stanton VP Jr, et al. The t(7;11)(p15;p15) translocation in acute myeloid leukaemia fuses the genes for nucleoporin NUP98 and class I homeoprotein HOXA9. Nat
Genet 1996;12:159.
123. Kasper LH, Brindle PK, Schnabel CA, et al. CREB binding protein interacts with nucleoporin-specific FG repeats that activate transcription and mediate NUP98-HOXA9 oncogenicity. Mol Cell

Biol 1999;19:764.
124. Dalla-Favera R, Bregni M, Erikson J, et al. Human c-myc onc gene is located on the region of chromosome 8 that is translocated in Burkitt lymphoma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1982;79:7824.
125. Taub R, Kirsch I, Morton C, et al. Translocation of the c-myc gene into the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus in human Burkitt lymphoma and murine plasmacytoma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 1982;79:7837.
126. Klein G. Immunoglobulin gene associated chromosomal translocations in B-cell derived tumors. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1999;246:161.
127. Luscher B, Larsson LG. The basic region/helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper domain of Myc proto-oncoproteins: function and regulation. Oncogene 1999;18:2955.
128. Begley CG, Aplan PD, Davey MP, et al. Chromosomal translocation in a human leukemic stem-cell line disrupts the T-cell antigen receptor delta-chain diversity region and results in a
previously unreported fusion transcript. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:2031.
129. Fitzgerald TJ, Neale GA, Raimondi SC, Goorha RM. c-tal, a helix-loop-helix protein, is juxtaposed to the T-cell receptor- beta chain gene by a reciprocal chromosomal translocation:
t(1;7)(p32;q35). Blood 1991;78:2686.
130. Xia Y, Brown L, Yang CY, et al. TAL2, a helix-loop-helix gene activated by the (7;9)(q34;q32) translocation in human T-cell leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:11416.
131. Mellentin JD, Smith SD, Cleary ML. lyl-1, a novel gene altered by chromosomal translocation in T cell leukemia, codes for a protein with a helix-loop-helix DNA binding motif. Cell 1989;58:77.
132. Mathieu-Mahul D, Caubet JF, Bernheim A, et al. Molecular cloning of a DNA fragment from human chromosome 14(14q11) involved in T-cell malignancies. EMBO J 1985;4:3427.
133. McKeithan TW, Shima EA, Le Beau MM, et al. Molecular cloning of the breakpoint junction of a human chromosomal 8;14 translocation involving the T-cell receptor alpha-chain gene and
sequences on the 3' side of MYC. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1986;83:6636.
134. Finger LR, Harvey RC, Moore RC, Showe LC, Croce CM. A common mechanism of chromosomal translocation in T- and B-cell neoplasia. Science 1986;234:982.
135. Wadman IA, Osada H, Grutz GG, et al. The LIM-only protein Lmo2 is a bridging molecule assembling an erythroid, DNA-binding complex which includes the TAL1, E47, GATA-1 and Ldb1/NLI
proteins. EMBO J 1997;16:3145.
136. McGuire EA, Hockett RD, Pollock KM, et al. The t(11;14)(p15;q11) in a T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell line activates multiple transcripts, including Ttg-1, a gene encoding a potential
zinc finger protein. Mol Cell Biol 1989;9:2124.
137. Royer-Pokora B, Loos U, Ludwig WD. TTG-2, a new gene encoding a cysteine-rich protein with the LIM motif, is overexpressed in acute T-cell leukaemia with the t(11;14)(p13;q11). Oncogene
1991;6:1887.
138. Rabbitts TH. LMO T-cell translocation oncogenes typify genes activated by chromosomal translocations that alter transcription and developmental processes. Genes Dev 1998;12:2651.
139. Dear TN, Colledge WH, Carlton MB, et al. The Hox11 gene is essential for cell survival during spleen development. Development 1995;121:2909.
140. Kawabe T, Muslin AJ, Korsmeyer SJ. HOX11 interacts with protein phosphatases PP2A and PP1 and disrupts a G2/M cell-cycle checkpoint. Nature 1997;385:454.
141. Hatano M, Roberts CW, Minden M, Crist WM, Korsmeyer SJ. Deregulation of a homeobox gene, HOX11, by the t(10;14) in T cell leukemia. Science 1991;253:79.
142. Russo G, Isobe M, Pegoraro L, et al. Molecular analysis of a t(7;14)(q35;q32) chromosome translocation in a T cell leukemia of a patient with ataxia telangiectasia. Cell 1988;53:137.
143. Russo G, Isobe M, Gatti R, et al. Molecular analysis of a t(14;14) translocation in leukemic T-cells of an ataxia telangiectasia patient. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:602.
144. Stern MH, Soulier J, Rosenzwajg M, et al. MTCP-1: a novel gene on the human chromosome Xq28 translocated to the T cell receptor alpha/delta locus in mature T cell proliferations. Oncogene
1993;8:2475.
145. Fu ZQ, Du Bois GC, Song SP, et al. Crystal structure of MTCP-1: implications for role of TCL-1 and MTCP-1 in T cell malignancies. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:3413.
146. Levine AJ. Tumor suppressor genes. Bioessays 1990;12:60.
147. Baylin SB, Herman JG, Graff JR, Vertino PM, Issa JP. Alterations in DNA methylation: a fundamental aspect of neoplasia. Adv Cancer Res 1998;72:141.
148. Cordone I, Masi S, Mauro FR, et al. p53 expression in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a marker of disease progression and poor prognosis. Blood 1998;91:4342.
149. Shinn CA, Byrd JC, DS N, Flinn IW, Grever MR. Over expression of MDM2 in leukemic cells in previously treated patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1999;94[Suppl]:542a.
150. Serrano M, Hannon GJ, Beach D. A new regulatory motif in cell-cycle control causing specific inhibition of cyclin D/CDK4. Nature 1993;366:704.
151. Hannon GJ, Beach D. p15INK4B is a potential effector of TGF-beta-induced cell cycle arrest. Nature 1994;371:257.
152. Serrano M, Lee H, Chin L, et al. Role of the INK4a locus in tumor suppression and cell mortality. Cell 1996;85:27.
153. Drexler HG. Review of alterations of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor INK4 family genes p15, p16, p18 and p19 in human leukemia-lymphoma cells. Leukemia 1998;12:845.
154. Stern MH, Theodorou I, Aurias A, et al. T-cell nonmalignant clonal proliferation in ataxia telangiectasia: a cytological, immunological, and molecular characterization. Blood 1989;73:1285.
155. Narducci MG, Virgilio L, Isobe M, et al. TCL1 oncogene activation in preleukemic T cells from a case of ataxia- telangiectasia. Blood 1995;86:2358.
156. Stilgenbauer S, Schaffner C, Litterst A, et al. Biallelic mutations in the ATM gene in T-prolymphocytic leukemia. Nat Med 1997;3:1155.
157. Quesnel B, Guillerm G, Vereecque R, et al. Methylation of the p15(INK4b) gene in myelodysplastic syndromes is frequent and acquired during disease progression. Blood 1998;91:2985.
158. Herman JG, Civin CI, Issa JP, et al. Distinct patterns of inactivation of p15INK4B and p16INK4A characterize the major types of hematological malignancies. Cancer Res 1997;57:837.
159. Uchida T, Kinoshita T, Nagai H, et al. Hypermethylation of the p15INK4B gene in myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood 1997;90:1403.
160. Cameron EE, Baylin SB, Herman JG. p15(INK4B) CpG island methylation in primary acute leukemia is heterogeneous and suggests density as a critical factor for transcriptional silencing.
Blood 1999;94:2445.
161. Corn PG, Kuerbitz SJ, van Noesel MM, et al. Transcriptional silencing of the p73 gene in acute lymphoblastic leukemia and Burkitt's lymphoma is associated with 5' CpG island methylation.
Cancer Res 1999;59:3352.
162. Costello JF, Frühwald MC, Smiraglia DJ, et al. Aberrant CpG island methylation has non-random and tumor type-specific patterns. Nat Genet 2000;25:132.
163. Schnittger S, Wormann B, Hiddemann W, Griesinger F. Partial tandem duplications of the MLL gene are detectable in peripheral blood and bone marrow of nearly all healthy donors. Blood
1998;92:1728.
164. Caldas C, So CW, MacGregor A, et al. Exon scrambling of MLL transcripts occur commonly and mimic partial genomic duplication of the gene. Gene 1998;208:167.
165. Marcucci G, Strout MP, Bloomfield CD, Caligiuri MA. Detection of unique ALL1 (MLL) fusion transcripts in normal human bone marrow and blood: distinct origin of normal versus leukemic ALL1
fusion transcripts. Cancer Res 1998;58:790.
166. Bose S, Deininger M, Gora-Tybor J, Goldman JM, Melo JV. The presence of typical and atypical BCR-ABL fusion genes in leukocytes of normal individuals: biologic significance and
implications for the assessment of minimal residual disease. Blood 1998;92:3362.
167. Biernaux C, Loos M, Sels A, Huez G, Stryckmans P. Detection of major bcr-abl gene expression at a very low level in blood cells of some healthy individuals. Blood 1995;86:3118.
168. Faderl S, Talpaz M, Kantarjian HM, Estrov Z. Should polymerase chain reaction analysis to detect minimal residual disease in patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia be used in clinical
decision making? Blood 1999;93:2755.
169. Jurlander J, Caligiuri MA, Ruutu T, et al. Persistence of the AML1/ETO fusion transcript in patients treated with allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for t(8;21) leukemia. Blood
1996;88:2183.
170. Nucifora G, Larson RA, Rowley JD. Persistence of the 8;21 translocation in patients with acute myeloid leukemia type M2 in long-term remission. Blood 1993;82:712.
171. Greaves M. Silence of the leukemic clone. N Engl J Med 1997;336:367.
172. Rubnitz JE, Pui CH. Molecular diagnostics in the treatment of leukemia. Curr Opin Hematol 1999;6:229.
173. Diverio D, Rossi V, Avvisati G, et al. Early detection of relapse by prospective reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis of the PML/RARalpha fusion gene in patients with acute
promyelocytic leukemia enrolled in the GIMEMA-AIEOP multicenter “AIDA” trial. GIMEMA-AIEOP Multicenter “AIDA” Trial. Blood 1998;92:784.
174. Marcucci G, Livak KJ, Bi W, et al. Detection of minimal residual disease in patients with AML1/ETO- associated acute myeloid leukemia using a novel quantitative reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction assay. Leukemia 1998;12:1482.
175. Golub TR, Slonim DK, Tamayo P, et al. Molecular classification of cancer: class discovery and class prediction by gene expression monitoring. Science 1999;286:531.
176. Rubnitz JE, Morrissey J, Savage PA, Cleary ML. ENL, the gene fused with HRX in t(11;19) leukemias, encodes a nuclear protein with transcriptional activation potential in lymphoid and myeloid
cells. Blood 1994;84:1747.
177. Nakamura T, Alder H, Gu Y, et al. Genes on chromosomes 4, 9, and 19 involved in 11q23 abnormalities in acute leukemia share sequence homology and/or common motifs. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1993;90:4631.
178. Ida K, Kitabayashi I, Taki T, et al. Adenoviral E1A-associated protein p300 is involved in acute myeloid leukemia with t(11;22)(q23;q13). Blood 1997;90:4699.
179. Hollis GF, Mitchell KF, Battey J, et al. A variant translocation places the lambda immunoglobulin genes 3' to the c-myc oncogene in Burkitt's lymphoma. Nature 1984;307:752.
180. Magrath I, Erikson J, Whang-Peng J, et al. Synthesis of kappa light chains by cell lines containing an 8;22 chromosomal translocation derived from a male homosexual with Burkitt's lymphoma.
Science 1983;222:1094.

SECTION 46.2 Acute Leukemias
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 46.2
Acute Leukemias
DAVID A. SCHEINBERG
PETER MASLAK
MARK WEISS
Introduction
Epidemiology and Etiology
Incidence
Secondary Leukemias
Occupational and Environmental Exposures
Other Risk Factors
Biology of Acute Leukemias
Diagnosis and Classification of Acute Leukemias
Clinical Presentation
Classification of Acute Leukemia
Morphology and Cytochemistry
Immunophenotyping of Acute Leukemias
Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics of Acute Leukemias
Principles of Therapy for Acute Leukemia
Principles of Clinical Management of Acute Leukemia
Treatment of Newly Diagnosed Acute Myelogenous Leukemias
Induction
Postremission Therapy
Allogeneic Bone Marrow Transplantation
Autologous Bone Marrow Transplantation
Assessing the Options for Postremission Therapy in Acute Myelogenous Leukemias
Treatment of Relapsed Acute Myelogenous Leukemias
Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia
General Principles for the Treatment of Adult Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemias
Prognostic Features in Adult Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
Treatment of Newly Diagnosed Adult Patients with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
Treatment of Relapsed or Refractory Adult Patients with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
Central Nervous System Relapse in Adult Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
Bone Marrow Transplant for Adult Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
Treatment of Mature B-Cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
Granulocyte Sarcomas, Leukemia Cutis, and other Extramedullary Leukemic Involvement
Biologic and Immunologic Therapies of Acute Leukemias
Conclusions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Leukemias are clonal, neoplastic proliferations of immature cells of the hematopoietic system, which are characterized by aberrant or arrested differentiation.
Leukemia cells accumulate in the bone marrow cavity, ultimately replacing most of the normal hematopoietic cells, thus resulting in the signs and symptoms of the
disease. These include most prominently, bone marrow failure and its consequences of anemia, hemorrhage, and infection. Leukemia cells circulate into the blood
and other tissues throughout the body, with patterns characteristic of the particular type of leukemia. The acute leukemias, which can be broadly grouped as either
lymphoblastic or myelogenous, can be identified phenotypically and genetically and are characterized by a rapid clinical course usually necessitating immediate
treatment. Acute leukemias are derived from, and biologically resemble, primitive hematopoietic progenitor cells; in contrast, chronic leukemias have the phenotype
and biologic character of more mature cells. Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), however, over time may transform to an acute, blastic phase and thereafter more
closely resembles an acute leukemia in its biology, clinical course, and need for therapy.
The acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALLs) are distinguished generally from the lymphomas because the latter resemble more mature lymphoid cells and typically
inhabit the lymph nodes, spleen, or other extramedullary sites before spreading to involve the blood or bone marrow. Certain lymphomas, such as lymphoblastic
lymphomas and Burkitt's lymphomas, retain features of both the leukemias and lymphomas, but are derived from immature cells and require therapy similar to that
used for ALL. Other lymphomas, and sometimes multiple myelomas, however, may spread widely into the blood and bone marrow, and in such a phase, can be
described as leukemic, but are not true leukemias.
Leukemia (meaning white blood) was originally described in 1845 by Virchow. 1 Although acute leukemias are relatively rare cancers, these leukemias are the most
carefully studied and best characterized neoplasms. Numerous subtypes have been defined based on morphology, genetics, immunophenotype, and biologic
behavior. Oncogenes responsible for leukemogenesis are beginning to be identified, and there is an enlarging body of knowledge regarding the factors regulating
leukemia cell growth and function. Multiple drugs capable of killing leukemia cells are now available. Therapeutic strategies that have been developed often result in
clinical remissions of adult leukemias and, in a smaller fraction of patients, result in cures. Despite these advances, acute leukemia remains, for most patients, a
fulminant and incurable disease, requiring immediate diagnosis and treatment. The course of patients with acute leukemia is often complicated by the severity of the
treatments themselves (Fig. 46.2-1).

FIGURE 46.2-1. Overall survival for up to 25 years of follow-up in adults treated on protocols at Memorial Hospital, New York City. Patients older than 60 years of age
have a substantially worse prognosis for both acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALL) and acute myelogenous leukemias (AML). Patients treated on more recent
protocols have a similar outcome to those on earlier protocols. (Data accrued by B. D. Clarkson, C. Little, D. Tyson, L. Megharian, and D. A. Scheinberg.)

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY

INCIDENCE
The acute leukemias are rare diseases, but have a disproportionately large effect on cancer survival statistics among children and younger adults. Although the acute
leukemias account for less than 3% of all cancers, these diseases are the leading cause of death due to cancer in the United States in persons younger than 35 years
of age.2,3 The incidence rate of acute myelogenous leukemias (AMLs) in the United States is approximately 2.5 per 100,000 persons; for ALL, the rate is
approximately 1.3 per 100,000 persons. AML has a slight male predominance (1.5:1.0) and accounts for 25% of both acute and chronic leukemias. AML affects
approximately 9000 people a year in the United States. ALL affects approximately 4000 people, with a similar predominance of male subjects. The incidences of acute
leukemias in the United States have not changed substantially since the 1980s, although there is a slight trend upward among those diagnosed with ALL and a slight
decrease in the number of diagnoses of AML in this time period. Incidence rates for acute leukemia are similar worldwide. In ALL, the incidence rates in African
Americans are approximately one-half that seen in whites; in AML, rates are similar between these two groups. Age-specific incidences differ dramatically between
ALL, which has a median age at diagnosis of 10 years, and AML, which has a median age of 65 years. AML is rare below the age of 40, but the incidence increases
progressively with age from approximately 1 per 100,000 at age 40 to more than 15 per 100,000 at age 75 or older. In contrast, ALL has its peak incidence at less
than 10 years and has a second smaller increase in persons older than 70 ( Fig. 46.2-2).

FIGURE 46.2-2. Age-specific incidence of acute myelogenous leukemias (AML) ( circles) and acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALL) ( squares) in the United States.
(Adapted from ref. 3.)

SECONDARY LEUKEMIAS
For most patients with acute leukemia, the cause of the disease is unknown. Because leukemias are the result of a genetic alteration in a clonogenic cell, which can
often be identified by a chromosomal translocation, deletion, or mutation, known and suspected carcinogens have been explored as causative agents in acute
leukemia. A clear cause of leukemia can be found in the minority of patients with a history of prior chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Such secondary leukemias,
more than 90% of which are myeloid, are notoriously difficult to treat. The chromosomal abnormalities often observed in these secondary leukemias are associated
with a poor prognosis, even when observed in patients without a history of prior therapy or toxic exposure.
Secondary myeloid leukemias first became apparent in the early survivors of Hodgkin's disease. 4,5 Studies initially linked the use of alkylating agents such as nitrogen
mustard to the increased risk. Among a large cohort of patients treated with chemotherapy and radiotherapy for Hodgkin's disease, 163 cases of secondary leukemia
were found. 6 There were dose-related increases in secondary leukemia. More recent studies have not linked radiotherapy, when used alone, to an increased risk. 7
Mechlorethamine (nitrogen mustard), procarbazine, cyclophosphamide, lomustine, teniposide, and chlorambucil were all implicated in the increased risk. The risk for
secondary AML was greatest between 2 and 9 years after therapy, with 85% of cases occurring before the tenth year. 6,7
Curative therapy for childhood ALL has a risk of inducing secondary AML as well. 8,9 and 10 The increased risk of AML occurred within 6 years and was originally
associated with a T-cell phenotype of the original ALL 8 and use of an epipodophyllotoxin (etoposide or teniposide) 9 or alkylating agent. 10 The risk from
epipodophyllotoxins was proportional to the dose intensity of the drug, rather than the cumulative dose, with the highest risks associated with weekly or twice weekly
administration. 9 In contrast, secondary AML was not increased in pediatric ALL protocols in which epipodophyllotoxins were not used. 11
Several additional studies in both adults and children have confirmed the association between treatment with epipodophyllotoxins and secondary AML, 12,13 and 14 in
particular, monocytic leukemias with abnormalities of chromosome 11q23. Promyelocytic leukemias with t(15;17) have also been associated with etoposide and with
other chemotherapeutic agents, such as doxorubicin, that target topoisomerase II. 15
Dose-dependent risks for secondary AML have also been observed in adults treated with alkylating agents, including platinum-based drugs and radiotherapy for
breast cancer16 and ovarian cancer,17 and for a variety of neoplasms treated with an autologous bone marrow transplant (BMT) after high-dose radiation and
alkylating agent therapy. 18 Among the alkylating agents, cyclophosphamide appears to hold less risk; a study of the incidence of secondary leukemia in patients with
breast cancer treated with moderate doses of cyclophosphamide confirms this lower level of risk. 19
OCCUPATIONAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL EXPOSURES
The clear relationship between the atomic bomb radiation 20 or use of carcinogenic therapies and the development of secondary leukemias has led to the exploration
of the possible leukemogenic role of other potential carcinogens in the environment, such as low-dose radiation, chemicals, cigarette smoke, and electromagnetic
radiation. 21
Although electromagnetic fields have received considerable attention as a possible carcinogen, the actual risk of leukemia from exposure to commercial and
residential power fields remains controversial. 21,22 and 23 There are a large number of conflicting reports, but there is a lack of clear dose-response relationships, and a
causal relationship between leukemia and electromagnetic fields, either as a consequence of occupational exposure or residential power use, has little current
support. 21,22 and 23
Both ALL and AML risks increased as a result of exposure to the atomic bomb. 20 Risks associated with occupational exposure to low-dose radiation are controversial.
Early suspicions that paternal exposure at power plants resulted in an increased risk for subsequent children of the exposed workers have been disputed. 24,25
Cigarette smoke contains numerous carcinogens and has been linked in a dose-dependent manner to leukemia, 26,27 and 28 particularly in patients older than 60 years
and to specific chromosomal alterations known to be associated with chemical mutagens. As much as 20% of AML may be attributable to smoking. 27
Occupational exposure to benzene has been established as a cause of AML, 29 but low-level exposure in the workplace (e.g., less than 10 parts-per-million) has not
been clearly established as a risk. Other occupational exposures to solvents, such as to toluene or butadiene in the shoe and rubber industries, or hair dyes, have not
been shown conclusively to increase leukemia risk. 21
OTHER RISK FACTORS
Viruses, and in particular, RNA retroviruses, have been found to cause many neoplasms in experimental animals, including leukemia of mice 30 and cats; a human
retrovirus, human T-cell lymphotropic virus-1, has been identified as the cause of a mature T-cell lymphoma and leukemia in humans. 31 A clear retroviral cause for
acute leukemia in humans has not been identified. Epstein-Barr virus, a DNA virus, has been associated with oncogenesis in acute B-cell leukemias, Burkitt's
lymphomas, especially those of endemic origin, and human immunodeficiency virus–associated lymphomas. 31 Epstein-Barr virus may function by increasing lymphoid

proliferation in patients; this provides a setting in which a second oncogenic event, possibly myc oncogene activation, can result in the clonal, neoplastic
proliferation. 32 It has not been demonstrated, however, that simple infection with either an RNA- or DNA-based virus alone is a cause of acute leukemia.
Although leukemias are acquired disorders, there may be significant genetic and immunologic predispositions that allow their occurrence. Several genetic syndromes
are associated with increased risk of leukemias, including Down syndrome, Fanconi's anemia, Bloom's syndrome, and ataxia-telangiectasia. 33 and 34 Down syndrome is
associated with 20-fold increased risk of leukemia; this is typically a megakaryoblastic leukemia in children younger than 3 years of age and a pre-B ALL in children
who are older.35 These true leukemias must be differentiated from a transient abnormal myeloproliferative disorder. 36 Patients with transient abnormal
myeloproliferative disorder are neonates with hepatosplenomegaly, modest elevations in blasts, and pancytopenia. Although transient abnormal myeloproliferative
disorder is a clonal disorder, in two-thirds of cases the disease has a benign course.
An immunologic predisposition for acute leukemia has not been clearly delineated. However, analyses of HLA types with specific cytogenetically defined subgroups of
AML have pointed to associations between certain HLA A, B, C, and DR types and common chromosomal translocations or deletions. 37 These correlations may
become increasingly important as an understanding of the immune response to these breakpoints becomes clear. 38

BIOLOGY OF ACUTE LEUKEMIAS
More is known about the pathobiology of the acute leukemia cell than about any other neoplasm. This is the consequence of a confluence of discoveries regarding
hematopoietic growth factors, hematopoietic stem cells and progenitor cells, oncogenes, and transcription factors. These discoveries were made possible by the
availability of acute leukemia cell lines capable of immortal growth in culture, reliable assays for hematopoietic cell growth, and sensitive tests for specific gene
expression and protein expression. The important concepts about leukemia cell growth and function are likely to be useful paradigms that will aid in understanding all
cancers.
Cell lines derived from and biologically resembling AML and ALL have been available since the 1980s and have allowed careful study of the growth of leukemia cells
under controlled conditions and of the effects of antileukemic agents. 39 Mouse models mimicking human leukemias can be prepared by oncogene transfections. 40 In
addition, both cell lines and fresh acute leukemias have been propagated in immunocompromised nude or severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice, thus also
allowing controlled study of new therapies under conditions in vivo as well. 41 Fresh normal and neoplastic hematopoietic cells can also be grown in intermediate-term
cultures or colony-forming assays (over 2 to 8 weeks), in which maturation into specific lineages can be observed and modulated by use of exogenous growth factors,
drugs, and differentiating agents. 42,43 and 44 This has allowed the elucidation of the sequence and importance of the various growth factors and adhesion molecules
during normal and leukemia cell growth and cell death (apoptosis), 45 the identification and isolation of primitive normal stem cells, and the partial reconstitution of
normal hematopoiesis ex vivo.42,43,44,45,46 and 47 The growth of myeloid leukemia cells in vitro appears to be dependent on interleukin (IL)-3, granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), or macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) and may be regulated by IL-6
and tumor necrosis factor as well. 43,47,48 Autocrine production of colony-stimulating factors or mutations in their receptors by cells that also express the appropriate
receptors on their cell surfaces may allow unregulated proliferation in the absence of exogenous factors. 43,49,50 Comparable assays in vivo using immunosuppressed
mice that allow spleen colony formation or complete bone marrow reconstitution have demonstrated that viable hematopoiesis for an entire animal may require as few
as 30 hematopoietic stem cells. 51,52
Enzyme marker studies using glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase have shown that leukemia cells derive from a single clonogenic cell. 53,55 Depending on the cell of
origin, the leukemia clone may involve cells of more than one lineage (e.g., erythroid and myeloid) or only one lineage. Unlike normal hematopoiesis, the clonogenic
leukemia cell generally retains only a limited ability to differentiate into different lineages. 56 The cells responsible for leukemia colony growth in vitro represent a more
primitive subset of the entire leukemia cell population. 57
There is considerable aberrancy in the differentiation of leukemia cells, as compared with normal cells, when the cell is examined for surface protein phenotype. 58
There may also be abnormalities in apoptosis, or programmed cell death, that leads to persistence of the leukemic clone 45,59 or abnormalities in telomerase, which
promotes longevity.60 Apoptotic death may still be induced with appropriate growth factors in vitro, or in the case of promyelocytic leukemia, by clinical use of retinoic
acid (see Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia, later in this chapter). It is likely that many leukemogenic translocations or mutations (see Chapter 46.1, and Chapter 45.1)
result in dysregulation of the cell cycle. 61
Heterogeneity of the cells that make up the leukemic population is frequently seen. 53,54,57 Although the leukemic clone may involve multiple lineages, typically
leukemia blasts are phenotypically of one lineage; within this lineage, stages of maturation may vary, suggesting incomplete control of differentiation. The phenotypic
heterogeneity of the leukemia colony-forming cell also suggests that leukemias may arise at various stages of differentiation. This concept was surmised based on the
morphologic and phenotypic characteristics of different leukemias; evidence supporting the concept has been demonstrated in patients with acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL), in which the leukemia clone can be positively identified by use of sensitive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques for the t(15;17). In most
cases, the most primitive hematopoietic cells remained normal, whereas more mature progenitors contained the neoplastic translocation. 62
Despite the achievement of a complete clinical remission after therapy of acute leukemia, normal hematopoiesis derived from cells originally involved with the
leukemic clone is sometimes present. 63 Apparently normal granulocytes have exhibited persistence of chromosomal markers of the original leukemia. 64 The continued
presence of clonal hematopoiesis may suggest the existence of a preleukemic clone of cells that has a proliferative advantage to other normal cells. 63 In spite of this,
hematopoiesis in patients in remission is usually polyclonal or oligoclonal. 65

DIAGNOSIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF ACUTE LEUKEMIAS
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Although the signs and symptoms are relatively nonspecific, the diagnosis of acute leukemia is usually made easily with the history of the illness, the physical
examination, and an examination of the blood smear and bone marrow aspirate smear. Additional laboratory examinations (complete blood cell counts, coagulation
profile, chemistry profile) or diagnostic imaging (chest radiography, abdominal sonography) are important in the management of the disease, but are not usually
necessary for diagnosis. Patients with acute leukemia typically present with a 1- to 3-month history of fatigue or malaise, easy bruisability or frank bleeding, dyspnea,
minimal to modest weight loss, fever, bone pain, or abdominal pain ( Table 46.2-1). Excessive bleeding after a minor dental procedure or severe epistaxis may bring
the patient to the physician's attention. In adults with an antecedent myelodysplastic syndrome, symptoms may date back for up to a year or more.

TABLE 46.2-1. Diagnosis and Evaluation of Acute Leukemia

The physical examination typically shows pallor, consistent with anemia, and hemorrhage (in the gums, as epistaxis, in the stool, in the skin as petechiae or

ecchymoses, or as fundal hemorrhage). Less commonly, there is hepatic or splenic enlargement and lymphadenopathy. Fever and infection, usually of respiratory
origin are frequent; sepsis may occur. Neurologic signs and symptoms are infrequent at presentation, occur more commonly with ALL, and typically include cranial
neuropathies, nausea and vomiting, and headache.
The laboratory evaluation is notable for anemia and thrombocytopenia in most patients, with severe thrombocytopenia (less than 50,000/µL) in more than one-half of
patients. The white blood cell (WBC) count can be normal, reduced, or elevated; less than 20% of patients have greater than 100,000 cells per µL, and an equal
number of patients have less than 5000 cells per µL. Acute monocytic leukemias and T-cell leukemias may have the highest WBC counts. Examination of the
peripheral blood smear shows blasts in almost all cases. Peripheral blood blasts may be absent in some patients with lymphoblastic or Burkitt's lymphoma. Peripheral
blood myeloblast levels in excess of 100,000/µL represent a medical emergency requiring prompt reduction in the blast level to prevent leukostasis. The prothrombin
time and partial thromboplastin time may be elevated; in APL, this coagulopathy is often associated with reduced fibrinogen and other evidence of disseminated
intravascular coagulation (DIC) and is another medical emergency that must be treated urgently (see Principles of Clinical Management of Acute Leukemia , later in
this chapter). Subclinical DIC may be present in any form of acute leukemia.
Blood chemistry results are typically normal, but in advanced disease, or in infiltrative cases such as with monocytic leukemias, there may be evidence of renal
dysfunction (elevated creatinine). Renal infiltration and enlargement can be documented with ultrasonography. In cases of high cell turnover and cell death, such as in
patients with mature B-cell ALL (ALL-L3), there may be evidence of tumor lysis syndrome at presentation; this syndrome is more commonly seen during the rapid lysis
of large numbers of ALL cells, and less often AML cells, during chemotherapy. The laboratory picture of tumor lysis syndrome consists of hypocalcemia,
hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, increased lactate dehydrogenase, hyperuricemia and renal insufficiency; if untreated, this syndrome can be fatal (see Principles of
Clinical Management of Acute Leukemia , later in this chapter).
The clinical presentation of AML cannot usually be distinguished from ALL without examination of the blasts for immunophenotype and morphology (see Morphology
and Cytochemistry later in this chapter). There are signs and symptoms, however, that are more frequent with certain disease subgroups than with others. Bone pain
is more common in ALL, as are signs and symptoms of central nervous system (CNS) infiltration. Lymph node and organ infiltration and enlargement are also more
common in ALL and in monocytic subtypes of AML. Gum involvement is seen most frequently in acute monocytic leukemia (AML-M5). Mediastinal masses are found
in greater than 50% of patients with T-cell ALL. However, the overlap in symptoms and signs among the leukemia subtypes requires a pathologic diagnosis to be
made in all cases. Therefore, a bone marrow aspirate and biopsy, with appropriate cytochemical, immunochemical, and genetic evaluations, must be done in all
cases.
The differential diagnosis of acute leukemia includes other neoplastic hematopoietic disorders, such as lymphomas, myelodysplastic syndromes, multiple myeloma,
aplastic anemia, severe megaloblastic anemia due to folate or B 12 deficiency, severe lymphocytosis due to infection, such as with Epstein-Barr virus; severe
monocytosis due to tuberculosis; and bone marrow failure with release of early cells, such as in myelophthisis, due to carcinoma. Examination of the bone marrow
nearly always excludes the nonhematopoietic conditions because of the presence of increased numbers of blasts. Careful morphologic examination and
immunophenotyping of the cells then excludes virtually all the hematopoietic conditions based on lineage and maturational stage; one exception is the
myelodysplastic syndromes, which often differ from the acute leukemias only in the percentage of blasts in the marrow. Up to one-third of AMLs in patients older than
the age of 60 years have evolved from a prior myelodysplastic syndrome or other hematologic disorder, suggesting that the distinction between refractory anemia with
excess blasts or refractory anemia with excess blasts in transformation and true AML after myelodysplasia may be clinically unimportant. These conditions each
respond more poorly to chemotherapy than de novo AML, and progressive leukemia and bone marrow failure leading to death is the typical outcome.
CLASSIFICATION OF ACUTE LEUKEMIA
Modern classifications of acute leukemia must answer three questions to be diagnostically and prognostically useful: (1) What is the lineage? (2) What is the
maturational stage? (3) What is the genotype? Although traditional classifications relied primarily on morphology and cytochemistry, 66,67,68 and 69 these limited
characterizations are not always adequate for classifying leukemias into groups that assign the most appropriate therapy or predict outcome. Knowledge of the exact
immunophenotype and the genotype, either via cytogenetic analysis or molecular analysis, is critically important before commencing the most appropriate definitive
treatment, such as high-dose consolidation chemotherapy, BMT, or prolonged maintenance therapy.
MORPHOLOGY AND CYTOCHEMISTRY
The French-American-British (FAB) group has proposed a widely used classification of eight different types of AMLs (M0 to M7) and three types of ALLs (L1 to L3)
based on morphology and cytochemistry 66,67,69; monoclonal antibody–based immunophenotype is also used in undifferentiated cases in which morphology and
cytochemistry are inconclusive 69,70 (Table 46.2-2). Because the treatments of ALL and AML may differ significantly, the most important first step in the diagnostic
assignment is to distinguish the lymphoid and myeloid lineages to assign therapy. Among the lymphoid neoplasms, the distinction of FAB L3-ALL (Burkitt's type;
mature B cell) is a second important step, as treatment strategies and prognosis differ with this subgroup. Among the myeloid leukemias, identification of FAB
M3-AML (APL) is necessary because retinoic acid differentiation therapy is instituted instead of, or concurrently with, chemotherapy. Moreover, there is a significant
risk of highly morbid coagulopathy associated with APL. Because current therapies for all subtypes of AML, except APL, are generally similar, and outcomes are
typically poor, the advantages of the FAB classification are limited. In addition, morphology and cytochemistry are not diagnostic in 10% to 15% of cases or can be
misleading in a small percentage of patients. Moreover, concordance of diagnosis among reviewers may only be 70% to 85%. For these reasons, the FAB
classification should always be accompanied by immunophenotypic and genotypic analysis. 70,71 and 72

TABLE 46.2-2. Classification of Acute Leukemia

The FAB classification of AML, as modified by the National Cancer Institute, 71 is based on morphologic examination for lineage, confirmation of lineage by
cytochemical stains, quantitation of the number of blasts, and estimation of the degree of differentiation of the cells (see Table 46.2-2). Myeloid leukemia blasts are
typically large with round or irregular, smoothly grained nuclei, and with moderate cytoplasm often containing granules or Auer rods; the Auer rods are pathognomonic
for myeloblasts. In contrast, lymphoid blasts are typically small with more regular nuclei, clumpier chromatin, and scant, agranular cytoplasm. A cytoplasmic tail,
making the cell resemble a hand mirror is sometimes seen. B-lineage leukemia blasts are not distinguishable from T-lineage leukemia blasts based on morphology
alone, except if they are mature B-cell type (Burkitt's type, FAB L3) blasts, which have characteristic voluminous, vacuolated, deeply basophilic cytoplasm.
Myeloblasts are graded according to the number of and quality of granules (e.g., a type I blast has no granules; a type II blast has up to 15 delicate granules; a type III
blast has numerous azurophilic granules). The blasts associated with chronic myelogenous leukemia in blast crisis cannot be distinguished on morphologic or
phenotypic grounds alone.
The most important stains for determining lineage initially include myeloperoxidase, which can be positive (golden brown), even in the absence of visible primary
azurophilic granules, and Sudan black B, which stains primary and secondary granule lipids black. Myeloid differentiation is inferred if either of these stains are
positive in 3% or more blasts. AS-D chloroacetate esterase is another stain (red or blue) for maturing myeloid granules; a-naphthyl butyrate esterase staining
(red/brown) is indicative of monocytic differentiation. Acid phosphatase is generally most useful in T-cell ALL, where it stains as a block or patch.

In the small subset of cases in which lineage cannot be indicated by morphology or cytochemistry, immunophenotyping using specific monoclonal antibodies usually
determines lineage to be myeloid. 69,70,73 This group is designated AML-M0. The poorer prognosis of this subgroup makes their distinction from L2-ALL and other AML
subtypes important.
Another subgroup that is difficult to classify due to its pleomorphic morphology and unhelpful cytochemistry is acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AML-M7). 67,74 The
lineage can sometimes be identified by cytoplasmic blebs; electron microscopy for platelet peroxidase is confirmatory, although this is not a routinely or rapidly
available test. Monoclonal antibodies to platelet-specific antigens CD41 and CD61 are usually helpful, but false-positive results are seen often. 67,70,71 This disease is
often associated with bone marrow fibrosis and pancytopenia that obscures the percentage of blasts in aspirates and necessitates the use of a bone marrow biopsy
for morphologic diagnosis. 67,71
The FAB classification of ALL into L1 and L2 subtypes is based on an examination of blasts for nuclear cytoplasmic ratio, the number and appearance of nucleoli, the
regularity of the nuclear membrane outline, and cell size. 68 In general, L1 has a small size in greater than 50% of cells, a high nuclear cytoplasmic ratio in greater than
75% of cells, up to one small, ill-defined nucleoli in greater than 75% of cells, and a regular nuclear membrane in greater than 75% of cells. L2 generally has the
opposite characteristics. L1-type blasts are found more often among children and denote a better prognosis. L2 is more common in adults, but has little prognostic
significance in this population. L3-ALL is easily distinguished by its homogeneous large cells and basophilic cytoplasm with prominent vacuolization. L3-ALL cells
usually express cell surface immunoglobulin. The ALLs are usually distinguished by the absence of myeloid-specific immunophenotypic markers or cytochemical
stains and by the presence of lymphoid immunophenotypic patterns.
Additional diagnostic subgroups not classified by the FAB criteria include mixed lineage (biphenotypic) leukemias, mast cell leukemias, the histiocytoses, juvenile
chronic myelogenous leukemia, and eosinophilic leukemias.
IMMUNOPHENOTYPING OF ACUTE LEUKEMIAS
Approximately 160 antigen groups, known as clusters of differentiation (CDs), have been identified on the surface of hematopoietic cells by monoclonal antibodies.
These antigens are predominantly cell surface glycoproteins, and rarely carbohydrates or glycolipids. Although no leukemia-specific antigens have been identified,
the CD antigen characterization of hematopoietic cells using a panel of antibodies can establish lineage with reasonable certainty and may suggest maturational
stages of cells. Expression on a cell population of antigens not usually found together can also provide strong evidence for neoplasia. Currently, immunophenotyping
plays an important role in the understanding of hematopoietic biology and in the diagnosis of leukemia. The immunophenotype is used (1) to confirm the diagnosis in
cases in which the classification is clear; (2) to make a diagnosis when morphology and cytochemistry are equivocal, as in M0-AML; (3) to identify biphenotypic
leukemias; (4) to characterize aberrant antigen expression, which can be used to identify a neoplastic clone, even when found as minimal residual disease, as in
clinical remission; and (5) to assist in assigning leukemias into prognostic groups.
The lineage and state of maturation of normal hematopoietic cells may be identified by use of a flow cytometer to determine the cell size, granularity, and the
presence or absence of a panel of cell surface or cytoplasmic differentiation antigens (designated by their CD numbers). Such analyses, termed multidimensional or
multiparameter flow cytometry, are available at most cancer centers or commercial laboratories. Pathways describing the phenotype of normal B, T, and myeloid cells
have been constructed 70,75,76,77 and 78 (Fig. 46.2-3). Acute leukemias can also be characterized by a similar panel of markers, and in general, lineage can be assigned
by examination of expression of the same antigens as those found in normal cells. 58,70,79

FIGURE 46.2-3. Schematic diagram of selected important antigens expressed on normal hematopoietic cells and acute leukemia cells throughout the differentiation
and maturation of the normal cells. Acute leukemia cells may express these antigens aberrantly as described in the text. (Adapted from ref. 78.)

Acute lymphoid leukemias of T-cell lineage are characterized by expression of the T-cell markers CD2, CD5, CD7, and sometimes CD1 or dual staining of CD4 and
CD8. T-cell ALL or lymphoblastic lymphoma may also express the B-lineage markers CD10 and CD21. Acute lymphoid leukemias of B-cell lineage express CD19,
CD10, CD22, and, depending on maturational stage, CD20, and surface immunoglobulin. Acute myeloid leukemias express CD13, CD15, CD33, and, more often if
monocytoid, CD14. Terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase is expressed by most lymphoid blasts and approximately 20% of myeloid blasts. CD34 can be
expressed by blasts of all lineages, especially if the cells are primitive. HLA-DR is found on virtually all B-lineage leukemias, most myeloid and monocytic leukemias
(except FAB M3), and on a rare T-cell ALL.
The pathways of antigen expression, with regard to maturational stage, however, are often aberrant in leukemias. 58,70,78,79 In some cases, there is also abnormal
expression of antigens not expected to be found in the lineage. 81,82,83 and 84 Although such infidelity of antigen expression may prevent exact assignment of the
maturational stage of the leukemia cell, it may distinguish that cell as neoplastic from within a larger population of normal cells. Thus, aberrant antigen expression,
which can be an antigen of the wrong lineage, the simultaneous expression of antigens of different stages of maturation, or the lack of an expected antigen, can
provide a useful diagnostic marker for the leukemia cells. 79,81 In addition, such a marker may allow the flow cytometric detection of the leukemia cells at a level of 1
cell in 1000 to 10,000 normal cells, even in patients who have apparently normal bone marrow and blood examination by morphologic criteria. 85 The prognostic
significance of this detection is not yet clear, but is likely to predict relapse. 86
Mixed lineage leukemias are being increasingly identified as use of larger numbers of immunophenotypic markers becomes widespread. These leukemias exhibit the
phenotype of more than one, and sometimes more than two, lineages. 83 In most cases, this is the result of blasts that coexpress markers of several lineages; in other
rare cases, blasts of different lineages coexist in the same patient. 87 In the former, more common cases, the blasts may be obviously derived from one lineage, based
on morphologic, cytochemical, and immunophenotypic criteria; at the same time, the blasts express apparently aberrant markers from another lineage. Myeloid
antigen-positive ALL and lymphoid antigen-positive AML occur frequently. In some cases, assignment of true lineage is more difficult. Scoring systems designed to
weigh lineage-specific markers have been developed to assign lineage in these difficult cases ( Table 46.2-3).72

TABLE 46.2-3. Assigning Lineage in Mixed Lineage Leukemias a

Although several clinical entities of leukemias with aberrant phenotypes have been described, 82,84 there is considerable overlap in the immunophenotypes, rendering
such proposed subgroupings difficult to interpret. In addition, the aberrant markers found on AML blasts are associated with a variety of karyotypes and FAB
subgroups. 88,89 The prognostic significance of mixed lineage phenotype or the expression of aberrant markers is unclear, but single aberrant antigens appear to hold
little prognostic importance.
CYTOGENETICS AND MOLECULAR GENETICS OF ACUTE LEUKEMIAS
The frequent presence of nonrandom chromosomal translocations, oncogene mutations, and tumor suppressor gene abnormalities in leukemia cells has allowed
substantial progress to be made in understanding the pathogenesis of acute leukemias, 90,91,92,93 and 94 in diagnosing and developing prognostic models for subtypes of
leukemia,95,96,97 and 98 and in assessing the effects of therapy or detecting early relapse. 99,100 The molecular genotype or karyotype is rapidly becoming the gold
standard for diagnosis and prognosis in many subtypes of acute leukemia. A detailed discussion of the molecular biology of hematopoietic cancer is found in Chapter
45.1.
In ALL, the presence of t(9;22), found in up to 30% of adults, t(4;11), –7 or +8, which are more infrequently seen, are poor prognostic signs. Abnormal karyotypes are
seen in approximately 80% of patients with AML. 98 In AML, t(15;17), t(8;21), and inv(16) or t(16;16), have a favorable prognosis, whereas +8, –5, del (5q), –7, del
(7q), –20, +11, +13, inv (3), and involvement of 11q23, are unfavorable. Distinct pathologic and clinical syndromes, such as APL, are strongly associated with
t(15;17); AML-M2 with t(8;21); AML-M4EO with inv (16) or del 16p and AML-M7 with t(1;22). 98,101 Chemotherapeutic agents that interfere with DNA topoisomerase II,
such as epidophyllotoxins or anthracylines, can result in the balanced translocations described previously 102,103 and often appear 1 to 3 years after chemotherapy. In
contrast, alkylating agents more typically yield –5, –7, and complex chromosomal abnormalities, 2 to 9 years later, frequently initiate as myelodysplastic syndromes
and have a particularly poor prognosis. 104,105
PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY FOR ACUTE LEUKEMIA
Despite advances, the majority of adult patients with acute leukemia die as a result of the disease (see Fig. 46.2-1).106 Although most patients initially respond to
chemotherapy, relapse is common. The goal of therapy in acute leukemia is the eradication of the leukemic clone with the restoration of normal hematopoiesis. This is
usually accomplished by the use of profoundly myelosuppressive chemotherapy, which induces a period of relative bone marrow aplasia with the rapid reduction of
leukemia cells. It is during the recovery from aplasia, that a state of clonal competition develops.
Normal stem cells gain a growth advantage and repopulate the bone marrow, establishing the predominance of polyclonal hematopoiesis. Leukemia cells are
replaced by normal differentiated progeny, which are capable of providing vital life-sustaining functions. The disease process has been temporarily abated.
The transient nature of the initial clinical response is best understood in the context of the enormous size of the total leukemia burden and the limitations of the effect
of modern chemotherapy on this critical mass. Based on data from animal models, it has been estimated that there are approximately 10 12 leukemia cells in the body
at the time of diagnosis. Standard chemotherapy regimens generally result in a 2 to 3 log (99.0% to 99.9%) reduction in the total amount of tumor cells. 107 This places
the residual leukemia burden below the level of clinical detection, and based on morphologic criteria, the patient has been placed into a complete remission.
Laboratory and clinical evidence, however, would suggest that such a remission is far from complete for the great majority of patients. Although standard morphologic
evaluation shows no evidence of residual leukemia, a state of minimal residual disease exists, with estimates for the remaining leukemia burden approaching
approximately 10 billion cells. A number of laboratory techniques have been introduced in an effort to increase the resolution of detecting remaining leukemia cells
(Table 46.2-4). Although none of the available assays are ideal, current studies of minimal residual disease are attempting to establish the clinical validity of such
measures and whether the results from these assays may form the basis for therapeutic decisions in individual patients. The paradigm for this has been provided by
the reverse transcriptase-based (RT) PCR assay for the PML/aRAR gene rearrangement used in APL (see Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia, later in this
chapter). 71,81,85,97,108,109,110,111,112 and 113

TABLE 46.2-4. Current Methods Used Frequently for Detection of Minimal Residual Disease

The primary goal of the initial chemotherapy in AML is to achieve a complete response (CR). Despite the limitations of morphologic evaluation, clinical standards have
been adopted to define outcomes and establish reference points from which therapies can be compared. 71 CR is defined as less than 5% of blasts in the bone marrow
normally regenerated as evidenced by both an acceptable level of cellularity (greater than 20% on bone marrow biopsy) and the restoration of normal hematopoiesis
(as reflected by peripheral blood values of at least 1500 neutrophils per µL and 100,000 platelets per µL). Red cell parameters are not usually considered in this
definition. The peripheral blood should not contain circulating blasts (in the absence of growth factor use), and there should be no evidence of extramedullary
disease. These criteria must be sustained for a period of at least 4 weeks.
CR is the only significant form of clinical response in acute leukemia. The ability to achieve such a response has been directly correlated with survival and is a
necessary first step in a curative treatment strategy. Although some research studies have chosen to categorize lesser responses and define partial remission (or
response), the inability to morphologically clear leukemia cells from the bone marrow is a treatment failure with grave implications for the patient.
Current treatment strategies divide therapy into two basic parts: induction and postremission therapy. The purpose of remission induction is to achieve a CR. The goal
of postremission therapy is to eradicate minimal residual disease, thus preventing relapse and effecting a cure. Different approaches to postremission therapy have
been used and defined by a number of studies. Consolidation therapy is used to describe immediate postremission treatment regimens that are similar to induction
therapy. The doses of the drugs are either equivalent or slightly attenuated. Intensification is the application of higher doses of active agents while in CR.
Maintenance is defined as therapy given in greatly attenuated doses over extended periods.
Relapse is usually heralded by a change in a previously normal complete blood cell count. Reduction in normal cells or the reappearance of blasts in the peripheral
blood occur frequently; isolated extramedullary relapse is infrequent. Examination of the bone marrow confirms the relapse by demonstrating more than 5% blasts. In
situations in which there is only a borderline increase in blasts, it may be necessary to repeat the bone marrow examination in 1 to 2 weeks to confirm relapse. 71
PRINCIPLES OF CLINICAL MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE LEUKEMIA

The care of the patient with acute leukemia requires the ability to support the individual through the expected complications of myelosuppressive therapy, most
notably the period of pancytopenia, which may last for 2 to 5 weeks. Successful clinical management requires a detailed understanding of likely complications
accompanied by early therapeutic intervention designed to minimize life-threatening toxicities. With regard to these principles, much of the improvement seen in the
care of leukemia patients in the last few years can be directly attributed to advances in supportive care.
Infection and hemorrhage are the primary cause of death in patients with leukemia. 114 Many patients with acute leukemia initially present to the physician with fever
and neutropenia. Virtually all patients develop these complications after treatment with chemotherapy. Untreated, infection in the neutropenic host can be rapidly fatal.
Therefore, the early institution of antibiotic therapy is necessary. 115,116 Initial antibiotics must provide a broad spectrum of antibacterial coverage, with particular
emphasis on gram-negative organisms. The epidemiology of a single center's flora may be instrumental in determining the particular antibiotics used as first-line
therapy. Common regimens include an antipseudomonal penicillin or cephalosporin coupled with an aminoglycoside. Monotherapy with a third-generation
cephalosporin, such as ceftazidime, or a carbapenem, such as imipenem, is an alternative.
Changes in the initial antibiotic coverage are based either on the sensitivities of the organisms isolated or persistence of fever. Continued fever, despite 4 to 6 days of
antibacterial therapy usually requires empiric antifungal therapy with amphotericin B. Additionally, patients with indwelling central venous catheters or other prosthetic
devices may require the early institution of vancomycin. Antimicrobial agents should be continued until the absolute neutrophil count has risen above 500/µL. Patients
who have a documented bacterial source of infection should complete at least a 10- to 14-day course of therapy, whereas those patients with evidence of infection
secondary to invasive mycoses may require a more protracted course of therapy.
Despite the accepted approach to empiric therapy in patients with leukemia and neutropenic fever, there is considerable controversy regarding infection prophylaxis,
use of protected environments, reverse isolation, transfusion of granulocytes, or the use of hematopoietic growth factors to accelerate recovery. 117,118 and 119 Although
the duration of neutropenia has consistently been shortened by the use of G-CSF or GM-CSF in a number of studies, the effect on infectious complications and
mortality has been variable. 120,121,122,123,124 and 125 Careful attention to oral hygiene with regular use of oral rinsing and cleaning with soft tipped (sponge) devices to
prevent gingival trauma may prove useful. Rectal or vaginal manipulations should be avoided.
Immediate access to blood products is critical to sustain the patient; the hemoglobin level should be maintained at 8 g/dL or higher in patients with other medical
comorbidities (pulmonary disorders or coronary heart disease). There is a direct relationship between hemorrhage and reductions in the platelet count below 5000 to
10,000/µL. Hence, platelets are not only transfused in response to hemorrhage, but also to prevent hemorrhage. The routine use of platelet transfusions has had a
significant effect on the incidence of hemorrhagic death. Patients with uncomplicated thrombocytopenia can be transfused when the platelet count falls below
10,000/µL. Patients who are either febrile or have other complicating medical conditions such as severe mucositis or ongoing coagulopathy, require prophylactic
transfusions at higher levels. 126,127 and 128
Some patients become refractory to platelet transfusions. This may result either from alloimmunization in the patients who have received multiple transfusions or may
be secondary to other medical conditions such as persistent fever or disseminated intravascular coagulation. This refractoriness poses a particularly difficult
management problem for the clinician. Current strategies to overcome alloimmunization include the prevention of sensitization by the use of single, related donor
platelets or HLA-matched platelets as well as the use of leukocyte reduction filters. 129 Platelets from a potential bone marrow donor should be avoided in patients who
are eligible for allogeneic BMT.
A bleeding diathesis or frank DIC may be present in addition to thrombocytopenia and may result in either hemorrhage or thrombosis. This complication is most
frequently associated with APL, but may also be found in other subtypes of acute leukemia either at presentation or after the institution of cytotoxic therapy. The
coagulopathy has been attributed to the release of procoagulants from the leukemia cells as they lyse. The contribution of increased fibrinolysis to this hemostatic
disorder has come under scrutiny. 130
The approach to the patient with leukemia-associated coagulopathy remains controversial. Laboratory tests that are useful as indicators of coagulopathy include the
platelet count, prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, thrombin time, fibrinogen, fibrin split products, and d-dimer. Clinical management relies on
frequent monitoring of the patient with intervention based on a deteriorating clinical status or worsening trend in a laboratory value such as fibrinogen. The former
approach of managing the bleeding diathesis of APL with low-dose heparin (7 to 10 U/kg/h) has largely been replaced by early treatment with retinoids as well as
aggressive blood product support. 131,132 Platelets and fresh frozen plasma are transfused multiple times daily to maintain platelet counts above 50,000/µL and
fibrinogen levels above 100 mg/dL. The hemostatic abnormalities typically abate after the leukemia burden has been reduced.
Metabolic abnormalities can exist in the leukemia patient at presentation or with the institution of therapy. 133,134 Patients rarely present with disorders of potassium or
calcium, but can develop electrolyte problems during treatment with aminoglycosides, amphotericin, or other agents that affect kidney function. Rapid leukemia cell
death releases intracellular metabolites, notably uric acid, potassium, and phosphorus, causing a life-threatening metabolic condition known as the tumor lysis
syndrome. Uric acid, a product of purine metabolism, may then deposit in the joints, causing a gouty arthropathy or, more important, in the renal parenchyma or
collecting system, resulting in renal failure. Hyperuricemia may be detected. Prevention of these complications is usually accomplished by instituting vigorous
hydration with a brisk urine output (greater than 150 mL/h) and administering allopurinol before beginning cytotoxic therapy. The dose of allopurinol ranges from 300
to 900 mg/d. Alkalinization of the urine by adding sodium bicarbonate to the intravenous fluids, administering a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (such as acetazolamide),
or both are recommended in extreme cases, or in patients allergic to allopurinol, to increase the solubility of the uric acid.
Complications, such as cardiac disturbances with hyperkalemia or the precipitation of calcium phosphate resulting in renal failure due to hyperphosphatemia, can be
avoided in most cases with early attention to metabolic disturbances. Correction of these abnormalities is best accomplished by aggressive hydration with
concominant diuresis to wash out the toxic by-product of the dying leukemia cells. Additional benefit may be gained by using oral phosphate binders (aluminum
hydroxide or calcium acetate) to minimize absorption of additional phosphate from dietary sources. In situations in which hyperkalemia is complicated by renal
insufficiency, cation exchange resins (Kayexalate) may be indicated. Extreme circumstances may require renal dialysis to correct multiple abnormalities.
Tumor lysis syndrome most frequently complicates acute lymphoid leukemia (particularly Burkitt's type) and is most problematic in the setting of hyperleukocytosis
(peripheral blast counts greater than 100,000/µL). Patients with AML are at a relatively reduced risk of tumor lysis, relative to ALL, but are at an increased risk for
sludging of large myeloblasts in the microcirculation (leukostasis), resulting in cerebral or pulmonary compromise often associated with hemorrhage and, in extreme
circumstance, leading to death. The ability to rapidly decrease the circulating blast number, however, is an important factor for survival in these patients.
Leukapheresis can be used, but, at best, is only a temporizing measure. Instead, immediate treatment with chemotherapy should be undertaken with careful attention
to the expected metabolic abnormalities discussed previously.
TREATMENT OF NEWLY DIAGNOSED ACUTE MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIAS
Untreated, AML is a uniformly fatal disease. Although it is possible to support patients for a period with supportive medical care, they ultimately succumb to the
complications associated with bone marrow failure: infection or hemorrhage. Most patients seek medical attention for symptoms related to infection or bleeding, and
these patients typically require immediate therapeutic intervention. Other patients are not candidates for cytotoxic therapy because of a poor performance status or
other active severe medical comorbidities that complicate their care. In such settings, a supportive strategy may be most appropriate. The risks and potential benefits
and alternatives should be carefully considered in each case and discussed with the patient and the family.
Several prognostic factors have been identified in AML ( Table 46.2-5).114,135 The difference in treatment results among various trials using similar chemotherapy may,
in part, be explained by the frequency of these negative characteristics within a study population. 136 Age is inversely associated with the ability to achieve
remission.137,138 In patients older than the age of 60 years, standard therapy achieves CR in only 30% to 50% of treated individuals. AML that occurs as a
consequence of prior cytotoxic therapy, or that has developed from an antecedent hematologic disorder (e.g., myelodysplastic syndrome) has a particularly poor
outcome, with a lower incidence of achieving a CR and shorter duration of survival than for patients with de novo AML.139,140 Multiple studies have demonstrated the
prognostic importance of cytogenetic abnormalities in AML, making this the single most important predictor of outcome. 141,142 and 143 Patients with a good prognosis are
those with t(15;17), t(8;21), or inv(16), whereas poor-risk patients have loss of all or part of chromosome 5 or 7, translocations involving 11q23, or trisomy 8.

TABLE 46.2-5. Prognostic Features in Adult Acute Leukemia

Historically, the diagnosis of acute leukemia has left the physician with few therapeutic options. During the 1940s, Farber established the modern era of chemotherapy
by effectively using antimetabolites in pediatric patients with ALL. Subsequently, a number of other single agents were demonstrated to have antileukemic activity at
first in the laboratory and then later in the clinic. Many of the drugs initially used to treat adults with AML had been used in pediatric ALL, but they were not active in
AML, and the early clinical results were disappointing. The introduction of cytarabine (Ara-C) dramatically changed the therapy of patients with AML.
Ara-C is the most important drug in use today for the treatment of AML. Much of the clinical investigation done since the 1970s has focused on increasing the efficacy
of this drug by either combining it with other agents, escalating the dose, or changing the schedule of administration. Despite some minor modifications made in
treatment in the last few years, Ara-C remains the cornerstone of AML therapy.
INDUCTION
Standard induction therapy is based on the combination of Ara-C with an anthracycline or anthracenedione. CR rates in newly diagnosed AML patients younger than
the age of 60 years range from 50% to 75%, depending on the patient population studied ( Table 46.2-6).136 In the 1960s, investigators first demonstrated the ability of
Ara-C alone to induce responses in approximately 20% to 30% of patients. 144 Ara-C was then tried in combination, at first with 6-thioguanine and later with
daunorubicin, and found to increase the incidence of CR to approximately 40% to 50%. 145 When the dose of the Ara-C and daunorubicin used was increased, the
response rates improved. Ara-C given for 7 days at 100 mg/m 2/d as a continuous infusion with daunorubicin given at 45 mg/m 2/d for 3 days became the standard
regimen and is referred to as the 3 + 7 or 7 + 3 regimen. Patients who do not achieve a CR with one course of induction therapy may still be induced into a CR with a
second cycle of this therapy. A randomized trial by the Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) reported a 59% CR rate using 3 + 7 induction therapy and found this
response to be superior to a briefer course of similar therapy. 138,146

TABLE 46.2-6. Toronto Leukemia Study Group: Effect of Patient Subsets on Complete Response Rate

The initial success of increasing response rates through dose intensification prompted studies designed to improve the 3 + 7 combination by either adding agents or
further increasing doses. Given the prior results with 6-thioguanine, this agent was added to the daunorubicin and Ara-C to form the DAT or TAD regimens. In a
number of nonrandomized, single-arm studies, the CR rates were similar to those obtained with 3 + 7 regimen. 147,148 The CALGB conducted a randomized study
between 3 + 7 and DAT and found the addition of 6-thioguanine provided no significant benefit. 149 The extension of the Ara-C infusion to 10 days was also found to be
without an advantage. A subsequent study failed to show a statistical advantage to doubling the Ara-C dose during the 7-day infusion, although a greater number of
treatment-related deaths were noted in patients younger than 60 years of age. 150
As new drugs with antileukemic activity have been introduced into the clinic, trials have been undertaken in an attempt to improve on 3 + 7 induction ( Table 46.2-7).
The substitution of doxorubicin for daunorubicin produced no significant benefit, but instead resulted in increased gastrointestinal toxicity. 137 In another study, the
addition of etoposide to 3 + 7 produced an improved remission duration in a younger cohort of patients. 151 Mitoxantrone, amsacrine, rubidazone, and aclarubicin have
all been substituted for daunorubicin in induction, but no clinical trial has demonstrated the unequivocal superiority of any of these second-generation
regimens.152,153,154 and 155

TABLE 46.2-7. Representative Treatment Regimens in Acute Myelogenous Leukemias (AML)

Three randomized trials have compared idarubicin with daunorubicin and have demonstrated that the idarubicin regimens increased response rates in patients
younger than 60 years of age. 156,157 and 158 More patients treated with idarubicin were able to achieve CR after only one course. The toxicity profiles between the two
regimens were similar. In two of the studies, the idarubicin combination demonstrated a survival advantage. An update of these studies has suggested a survival
advantage could still be detected in one trial (but not the other two) with a follow-up of 5 years. 159
Despite these findings, the anthracycline of choice in the induction regimens remains controversial. Criticism of the idarubicin studies cited previously has centered on
the issue of dose equivalency between the idarubicin dose (12 or 13 mg/m 2) and the daunorubicin dose (45 or 50 mg/m 2) used for comparison. The CR rate (58%,

58%, and 59%, respectively) in the daunorubicin arm was lower than other studies that used a standard 3 + 7 induction. Several nonrandomized trials have used
higher doses of daunorubicin (70 mg/m 2) and have described response rates similar to those seen with idarubicin, suggesting that the dose of the anthracycline used
may be more important than the choice of anthracycline. 147 In addition, preliminary results of a large Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) trial that
randomized elderly patients between induction regimens using daunorubicin, idarubicin, or mitoxantrone failed to show an advantage to using the newer agents. 160
Despite conflicting results, idarubicin has been widely adopted as part of current treatment regimens.
The ability of high doses of Ara-C to overcome drug resistance and induce remission has been demonstrated in relapsed disease. Such an approach has been
applied to upfront induction therapy in an effort to improve response. Ara-C doses ranging from 0.5 to 6.0 g/m 2/d for 3 to 8 days have been investigated. The effect of
these regimens on treatment outcomes has been variable. A University of California, Los Angeles, study randomized patients between a 3 + 7 induction and an
intermediate-dose Ara-C regimen and found that both remission rate and actuarial 4-year disease-free survival were similar in the two cohorts. 161 Two other
randomized studies, however, have shown a benefit to high-dose Ara-C–based inductions, demonstrating an advantage not in the likelihood of achieving a CR but in
producing more durable responses and a superior disease-free survival. 162,163 Toxicity was increased with the high-dose regimens and particularly evident during the
postremission period when infections were increased and recovery times delayed.
Hematopoietic growth factors have been tested in clinical trials in an attempt to reduce the toxicities seen with dose-intensive treatments. In older patients, significant
toxicity with standard therapy has prevented testing more dose-intensive regimens. Treatment-related mortality in patients older than the age of 60 years is higher
compared with younger patients treated with similar therapy and remains a primary cause of treatment failure in this group. 114 As the hematopoietic growth factors had
been used successfully to speed granulocyte recovery after chemotherapy in other malignancies, this approach was tested in older patients with AML. Initially, there
was concern over using a myeloid growth factor in AML; however, a clinical trial conducted in patients with relapsed disease did not demonstrate stimulation of
leukemia cells when growth factor was used in support of chemotherapy. 119 A number of small, nonrandomized studies have investigated the use of either G-CSF or
GM-CSF after treatment in poor-risk populations and found an advantage in ameliorating treatment-related toxicity. 164,165 Other studies have explored a novel
application of using growth factors to modify drug sensitivity in addition to their potential supportive role. Both G-CSF and GM-CSF have been used before
chemotherapy (as priming) in an effort to increase leukemia cell proliferation and increase sensitivity to cell-cycle–specific agents. 160,167,168 None of these trials have
demonstrated any benefit to such a strategy.
Given the conflicting data in the early studies, several large randomized trials were conducted in an attempt to clarify the role of growth factors in AML
therapy. 120,121,122,123,124 and 125 Although these studies have generally demonstrated a decrease in the duration of neutropenia, the significance of this effect has
remained controversial. A study from the ECOG was able to show a decrease in treatment-related mortality with GM-CSF, while another large randomized study from
CALGB was not able to demonstrate any significant clinical benefit from this growth factor. 120,121 It should be noted that two different forms of the recombinant growth
factor were used, which could account for the disparity in outcomes. Moreover, large numbers of patients were removed from treatment in the CALGB study, which
may have altered the outcome. Using G-CSF, the French AML Cooperative Study Group demonstrated an increased CR rate but no survival benefit. 122 The Southwest
Oncology Group also tested G-CSF in older patients (older than 55 years old) and found a reduction in time of neutrophil recovery and decreased duration of
infection, but no difference in either CR rate or overall survival. 124 A separate European and Australian phase III study also showed similar response and survival
rates in the G-CSF and control groups, but was able to demonstrate significant reduction in measures of morbidity such as duration of fever, requirements of
antimicrobials, and duration of hospitalization. 123 This study was not confined to the older population but included all patients older than the age of 16 years with de
novo AML seen during the study period. Hence, despite intensive investigation, there is still no consensus regarding growth factor use in AML therapy other than the
observation that their use is safe and reduces the neutropenic period. More recently, cost-to-benefit considerations have been introduced into the equation, and future
clinical trials may incorporate economic data when dealing with this question. 168
POSTREMISSION THERAPY
Although the exact form of postremission therapy is controversial, the need for such therapy is widely accepted. Induction therapy fails to provide adequate cell kill,
and leukemia cells survive the initial treatment. The benefit of postremission therapy was established by two randomized multicenter trials that showed that
maintenance therapy was superior to no further treatment in prolonging remission duration. 169,170 This concept of continuing low-dose therapy over a prolonged period
was further modified by subsequent clinical trials. The CALGB addressed the question of the duration of maintenance in a randomized study that compared 36 months
of therapy versus 8 months of therapy.149 No benefit was found for the more prolonged duration of treatment. Additional studies have suggested that more intensive
therapy delivered within a shorter period appeared to offer clinical benefit. 171,172 One study from ECOG randomized patients younger than than 65 years of age to
receive either one course of intensive consolidation versus 2 years of maintenance therapy and found superior survival in patients receiving the more intensive form
of therapy. 173 This has led to the concept that state-of-the-art therapy of AML includes induction, intensive consolidations, but no maintenance ( Table 46.2-8).
However, this concept has been challenged by the experience reported in APL (see Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia, later in this chapter).

TABLE 46.2-8. State-of-the-Art Treatment Programs for Adult Acute Leukemia

The logical progression of the experience that established consolidation was to further intensify the chemotherapy used in postremission treatment. The efficacy of
high-dose Ara-C in treating patients with relapsed AML led to regimens for postremission therapy. A number of nonrandomized trials using Ara-C doses ranging from
1 to 3 g/m2 (typically given every 12 hours for 6 to 12 doses) have reported 4-year disease-free survivals ranging from 30% to 40%. 174,175 These results appear to be
superior to the 15% to 20% survival reported with standard consolidation regimens. The most compelling evidence for intensification, however, has been provided by
a large randomized study conducted by the CALGB. 80 After achieving remission with a standard 3 + 7 regimen, patients with de novo AML were randomized to receive
four courses of Ara-C at one of three dose levels: 100 mg/m 2/d for 5 days by continuous infusion (standard-dose arm); 400 mg/m 2/d for 5 days by continuous infusion
(intermediate-dose arm); or 3 g/m 2 twice daily via a 3-hour infusion on days 1, 3, and 5 (high-dose arm). A subsequent analysis of this trial according to cytogenetic
data underscored the importance of this prognostic factor, with 84% of the patients who had favorable cytogenetics [defined in this study as t(8;21) or inv (16)] able to
have prolonged disease-free survival. 176 Although the results from this trial have been used to bolster the argument for single-agent high-dose Ara-C intensification,
all patients received four courses of maintenance therapy in the form of attenuated doses Ara-C and daunorubicin in addition to the high-dose Ara-C intensification.
The effect of such therapy on outcomes is uncertain, causing some speculation as to whether comparable results can be achieved by administering the high-dose
Ara-C intensification alone. Still, the results from this trial compare favorably with studies using allogeneic BMT as postremission therapy and have heightened the
debate regarding the standard of care in the postremission setting.
ALLOGENEIC BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTATION
The use of bone marrow or stem cell transplantation as postremission therapy represents dose intensification carried to the extreme of myeloablation. High doses of
chemotherapy with or without total body radiation are used in an effort to maximize leukemia cell kill. Hematopoiesis is restored by the infusion of stem cells harvested
from an HLA-compatible donor, thereby rescuing the patient from the consequences of bone marrow failure. The donor bone marrow and peripheral blood stem cells
(graft) may also have a number of immunologic effects. Because of differences in HLA composition, the graft may reject the host, resulting in graft-versus-host disease
(GVHD). This complication may increase the risk of infection and represents a major source of morbidity and mortality in patients who undergo this procedure. 177 This

immunologic effect may, however, also translate into antileukemic activity as evidenced by the lower relapse rates observed in patients with GVHD. This
graft-versus-leukemia effect is an evolving area of investigation and probably accounts for the lower relapse rates seen in allogeneic BMT as compared with
syngeneic (or autologous) transplants in which similar conditioning regimens are used. 178
Despite treatment-related complications, allogeneic BMT is effective antileukemic therapy. This was first established in a small number of heavily pretreated refractory
AML patients who were successfully treated with allogeneic BMT. The concept that the efficacy of this therapy could be improved and its toxicity lessened if
transplants were performed earlier in the course of the disease led to a number of nonrandomized trials from large centers or cooperative groups. These trials showed
that allogeneic BMTs in first CR using HLA-compatible related donors resulted in 5-year disease-free survival of approximately 45% to 50%, with relapse rates
ranging only from 10% to 20%. 179 A significant number of patients, however, succumb to such complications as GVHD, infection, or interstitial pneumonitis, affecting
the overall survival of the group as a whole.
Therefore, the major criticism of allogeneic BMT in first CR is that although it is effective therapy with a relatively low incidence of relapse, it is quite toxic, expensive,
and not necessarily better than other forms of dose-intensive therapy. The complication rate increases with age, and it is not standard practice to offer allogeneic BMT
with a conventional graft to patients older than the age of 50 to 55 years. As the median age of patients with AML is approximately 65 years, it is clear that most
patients with this disease are not eligible for this form of therapy. Because of entry criteria, BMT trials report results in younger groups of patients who may do well
with other forms of dose-intensive therapy, but are generally not representative of the majority of patients with AML. In addition, only approximately 30% of eligible
patients have an HLA-compatible donor. Despite meeting the minimum requirements of age and availability of a donor, a significant number of patients still fail to
undergo transplantation. 180 Therefore, it has been estimated that allogeneic BMT is only applicable in 2% to 10% of patients with AML. 106 Strategies using unrelated
HLA-matched or haplotype-mismatched individuals as alternative donors or using nonmyeloablative transplant regimens with reduced toxicity as part of a
minitransplant for older patients have been introduced and are currently undergoing investigation. 181,182
AUTOLOGOUS BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTATION
Despite efforts to expand the donor pool for allogeneic BMT, the majority of patients do not have an acceptable HLA-matched donor and cannot undergo allogeneic
BMT. In an attempt to allow such patients to undergo high-dose therapy with curative intent, investigators began to explore the use of the patient's own bone marrow,
obtained while in CR, as a source of hematopoietic reconstitution. 183 Such an approach was thought to provide the antileukemic benefits associated with high-dose
conditioning regimens yet avoid the toxic complications such as GVHD. One major disadvantage, however, is the potential contamination of the autologous graft by
residual leukemia cells. The inability of currently available laboratory techniques to reliably detect minimal residual disease and predict outcome based on its
presence represents a major problem in leukemia therapy. Hence, there is concern that despite the high-dose conditioning designed to eradicate residual leukemia
cells in the body, patients will ultimately relapse because undetectable leukemia cells will be reinfused with the graft. One innovative study from St. Jude Children's
Hospital attempted to address this important question. 184 Cells in an autologous bone marrow graft were marked with a neomycin-resistant gene before transplantation
into two patients with AML. After clinical relapse of the patients, the neomycin-resistant gene marker was detected in the leukemia blast cells of both patients, implying
that the remission marrow that had been reinfused contributed to disease recurrence.
Despite this laboratory evidence and the rationale for attempting to remove minimal residual disease from the stem cell graft, the clinical benefits of purging the graft
remain unclear. Clinical trials using unpurged bone marrow as the source for hematopoietic reconstitution in first CR have reported treatment results comparable with
studies using a purged graft. Results from these trials have generally reported disease-free survival of approximately 40% to 50%. 183 Relapse rates (50% to 60%) are
higher than allogeneic BMT, but, as expected, the toxicities are less. In studies that have used either immunologic or pharmacologic methods to purge bone marrow,
there has been a profound suppression of normal bone marrow progenitors, resulting in delayed engraftment and a prolonged period of hematologic recovery.
Given the experience in other malignancies using peripheral blood stem cells as the source of hematopoietic reconstitution after high-dose therapy, this approach has
been investigated in patients with AML. 185 One potential advantage to this approach is the hypothesis that there is a difference between the normal stem cell and
leukemia cell compartments in recovery rates after a priming stimulus such as chemotherapy. The normal cells are thought to have a temporary competitive growth
advantage so that the cells that initially repopulate the peripheral blood are more likely to be normal progenitors instead of clonogenic leukemic stem cells. Therefore,
collecting stem cells early in the priming process may be thought to provide the graft with a kinetic purge, making it relatively free from contamination by residual
leukemia cells. Some evidence to support this hypothesis has been provided by a study that used standard cytogenetic analysis to assay for contamination of residual
leukemia cells and failed to detect them early in the collection process. 186 Further support for the feasibility of this approach as been provided by the experience of
harvesting pure populations of progenitor cells after chemotherapy in CML and myelodysplastic syndromes. 187 Studies using newer, more sensitive techniques, such
as PCR or multiparameter flow cytometry, will continue to address the issue of graft contamination by minimal residual disease. 188
The clinical results using peripheral blood stem cells have generally shown a decrease in the duration of neutropenia and thrombocytopenia. The effect on treatment
outcomes, however, has been less clear, with some groups reporting relapse rates comparable with trials using unpurged bone marrow grafts. 189 Other studies have
shown superior leukemia-free survival using purged bone marrow grafts. Although no studies have appeared, as yet, using purged peripheral stem cells, there has
been great interest in intensifying the chemotherapy before collection of these stem cells and, in effect, achieving a form of in vivo purging.190 This approach has been
applied in both peripheral stem cell and bone marrow grafts, with the most compelling evidence provided by the results from the Medical Research Council (MRC)
AML 10 trial (discussed in the following section). 191
ASSESSING THE OPTIONS FOR POSTREMISSION THERAPY IN ACUTE MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIAS
Currently, the options for postremission therapy in younger patients with AML involve three forms of dose-intensive treatments: allogeneic or autologous
transplantation and high-dose chemotherapy. These can be applied either alone or in combination. A number of studies have compared the different approaches in an
effort to establish the optimal therapy. Although the initial comparisons reported the superiority of allogeneic BMT over chemotherapy, these studies used
standard-dose attenuated consolidation regimens. 179 In the modern era, many would consider this suboptimal postremission therapy for patients younger than 60
years of age. More recent studies, however, have compared outcomes in patients who have undergone allogeneic BMT from HLA-compatible donors with those who
have received either dose-intensive chemotherapy or autologous BMT. 192,193 and 194 The results from several of these studies are summarized in Table 46.2-9. These
trials have consistently reported decreased relapse rates with higher treatment-related morbidity and mortality in the BMT groups, but no significant benefit in survival.
In fact, a large U.S. intergroup study showed a marginally better overall survival in the cohort treated with a single course of high-dose Ara-C after a standard
Ara-C/idarubicin consolidation. 194 In contrast, the MRC 10 trial found a decreased relapse rate with a survival benefit for patients who received autologous BMT after
three cycles of intensive postremission chemotherapy. 191 It should be noted that these two studies differed in the amount of therapy patients received before
autologous BMT, as well as the conditioning regimen used for the autologous transplant.

TABLE 46.2-9. Randomized Comparisons of Dose-Intensive Postremission Regimens

The results from these randomized studies have failed to provide a clear answer to the postremission question, but have caused many centers to reevaluate the
approach to AML patients in first remission. Although some institutions still recommend allogeneic BMT for suitable candidates with HLA-compatible donors, other

centers reserve BMT for relapse. This strategy is based on the relative equivalence of treatment outcomes. Despite a higher risk of relapse with chemotherapy, BMT
can salvage some patients who fail chemotherapy-based consolidation, leading to equivalent overall survival while avoiding unnecessary toxicity in those patients
who may be cured by chemotherapy alone. Patients should have either a potential donor identified or stem cells (bone marrow or peripheral blood) harvested and
cryopreserved during first remission, in the event relapse occurs and a salvage strategy becomes necessary. 194,195 Treatment options are limited in patients who are
not candidates for BMT, who are the largest fraction of patients.

TREATMENT OF RELAPSED ACUTE MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIAS
The majority of patients with AML relapse and ultimately die from the consequences of resistant disease. Chemotherapy is generally not curative in this setting. The
data from multiple trials suggest median survivals of only a few months after a second remission is obtained. 196 Both allogeneic and autologous BMT have been
reported to provide prolonged disease-free survival in 30% to 40% of patients treated in first relapse or second CR. 197,198 Therefore, suitable patients who have
relapsed should undergo BMT as this represents the best chance for cure.
The timing of BMT in relapsed disease is controversial. Previous strategies have relied on the ability of salvage chemotherapy to decrease the leukemia burden and
induce a second CR. However, a significant proportion of patients are unable to achieve a second CR, and the ability to proceed to allogeneic BMT may be
compromised by the additional morbidity seen with such therapy. This is particularly true as high-dose regimens have been moved up front, limiting the treatments
available on relapse. Data from the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center have suggested that allogeneic BMT performed early in first relapse yields similar results to those
transplants performed after a second CR has been obtained. 197 Although a number of centers have adopted this strategy, it requires that patients are able to proceed
to allogeneic BMT in a timely manner. The feasibility of this approach, however, is often problematic as the readiness of the transplant facility or the availability of the
donor may instead require the patient to receive some form of chemotherapy before allogeneic BMT. Further complicating the application of this relapse strategy has
been disagreements over the definition of early relapse and concern regarding the maximal level of leukemia burden that will allow a successful transplantation to
take place.
A similar strategy may be used for patients proceeding to autologous BMT. 198 Patients who relapse and previously had stem cells (either peripheral blood or bone
marrow) harvested and cryopreserved, may proceed directly to autologous BMT. If no provision has been made for the patient and stem cells have not been collected
in first CR, a second remission must be obtained. A number of studies have reported durable disease-free survival of approximately 30% in patients who have
received autologous BMT in second CR and approximately 20% in third CR. 199,200 Results were not dependent on whether purged or unpurged marrow was used as
the source of hematopoietic reconstitution.
Most patients, however, are not candidates for either type of BMT. For such patients, the goal in treating relapse is to induce a second remission. The ability to
achieve a second remission is primarily dependent on the duration of the first remission. 196,201 Several groups have found that the response rates to salvage therapies
are lower in patients with first remission durations of 6 to 12 months. Patients with an exceptionally short remission duration (less than 6 months) are unlikely to
respond to any of the standard agents now available. In such patients, the use of investigational approaches are appropriate. 202 Alternatively, patients who relapse
after 2 years in remission may achieve a second CR by repeating the original induction regimen. Because of the potential cumulative toxicity of the anthracyclines,
patients who receive up to three cycles of such chemotherapy require evaluation of cardiac function before additional re-treatment with these agents.
Because most patients with relapsed disease, however, do not respond to repetition of the original induction regimen, research efforts have sought to define the
underlying basis for clinical drug resistance with the ultimate goal of identifying new therapeutic approaches. One suspected mechanism of clinical drug resistance
that has received much attention is the multidrug-resistant (MDR) phenotype. This laboratory phenomenon describes the observation that cell lines can become
cross-resistant to unrelated, structurally diverse chemotherapeutic agents. The mechanism of resistance is linked to a 170- to 180-kD glycoprotein that functions via
decreasing the intracellular accumulation of drugs, resulting in decreased cytotoxicity of these agents. The MDR phenotype has been observed in approximately 70%
of patients with relapsed or refractory disease but also in 25% to 30% of patients with untreated disease. 203 The variable correlation of clinical response with
expression of MDR phenotypes suggests alternative mechanisms may be active in determining resistance of AML cells to current chemotherapy. 204,205 In addition,
other potential mediators of drug resistance, such as lung resistance protein, have been described, and the relationship of this resistant phenotype to MDR and
outcome remains under investigation. 206 The emphasis on the MDR data may be explained by the potential to use modulators that alter the phenotype and restore
chemotherapy sensitivity. Several trials have been undertaken that attempt to use the cyclosporin derivative, PSC-833, in an effort to reverse the MDR phenotype. 207
These studies are ongoing in both relapsed disease and up front as part of a strategy to increase CR rate and improve outcomes. Although such an approach has
been shown to be feasible, efficacy remains to be established. A major criticism of this approach is that resistance to the most important antileukemia agent, Ara-C, is
not affected by MDR, and that these studies basically ignore a common yet important mechanism of failure. Several investigators, however, have attempted to modify
Ara-C efficacy in several different ways: increasing the intracellular concentration of the drug by giving high-dose Ara-C or combining Ara-C with fludarabine or
attempting to exploit the cytokinetic properties of hematopoietic growth factors to recruit leukemia cells into cell cycle, thereby increasing the sensitivity to the drug. 167
Among the drugs tested in the relapsed setting, high-dose Ara-C, either alone or in combination, has consistently been found to have the greatest antileukemic
activity.208,209 Although the dose and schedule of Ara-C has varied somewhat between studies, high-dose Ara-C is usually given at 2 to 3 g/m 2 every 12 hours for eight
to 12 doses. Several centers now administer the Ara-C once daily or twice daily on an every other day schedule in an effort to decrease toxicity. Responses to such
regimens have ranged from approximately 30% to 50%. Other active agents, such as daunorubicin, mitoxantrone, idarubicin, and etoposide, have been combined with
high-dose Ara-C, but the therapeutic advantage of these combinations remain unclear. Substantial differences in treatment results between trials containing similar
agents may be explained by patient selection and the small numbers of patients enrolled on these trials.
Patients who fail to achieve CR after receiving two courses of standard dose therapy are considered to have primary refractory disease. The prognosis for such
patients is exceptionally poor, and response to salvage regimens is rare. Approximately 20% to 40% of these patients who are able to undergo allogeneic BMT can be
rendered free of disease with durable remissions. 210 This ability to salvage primary refractory patients underscores the importance of identifying potential donors early
in the therapy of patients who may be eligible for BMT. Patients who are not transplant candidates are best enrolled in investigational studies.
As more patients receive some form of high-dose therapy as their initial treatment, the options at relapse have changed. For some patients relapsing after high-dose
Ara-C postremission therapy, studies suggest that either autologous BMT or allogeneic BMT can be curative. Those patients who are not BMT candidates may
undergo therapy with alternative salvage regimens. Although the initial reports of potentially non–cross-resistant combinations, such as mitoxantrone/etoposide or
carboplatin, were encouraging, subsequent studies have shown that these regimens are relatively ineffective. 211,212 The combination of cyclophosphamide and
etoposide, given in near myeloablative doses, has been shown to induce CR in approximately 30% of patients who are refractory to regimens containing high-dose
Ara-C.213 Similar to the experience with other chemotherapy-based salvage regimens, such responses are usually short-lived.
Relapse of AML after allogeneic BMT poses a difficult and frustrating management problem, 214,215 with a median survival of 3 to 4 months. However, results are not
significantly improved with current available therapy. Treatment options are determined by the performance status of the patient as well as the interval from transplant
to relapse. Although a CR rate of approximately 35% has been reported to standard induction regimens, patients who relapse within the first 100 days after BMT are
unlikely to respond and have a high treatment-related mortality. Selected young patients who relapse after 1 year may be candidates for a second allogeneic BMT,
but the survival at 3 years has been reported to be approximately 10%. Therapeutic approaches, including the use of G-CSF, modulation of the graft-versus-leukemia
effect by discontinuing immunosuppressives such as cyclosporin, or infusing donor leukocytes have been reported to induce remission in this setting. 216 Although
donor leukocyte infusions have received much attention, most of the data have been generated in patients with CML and the results of such therapies in AML have
been disappointing, although investigations continue.

ACUTE PROMYELOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
APL represents a distinct entity among the myeloid leukemias. The unique biology that characterizes the disease also serves to make it the paradigm for targeted
antineoplastic therapy. Historically, the importance of the prompt recognition of this subtype of AML has been stressed because of the coagulopathy associated with
the disease and the potential for lethal hemorrhage with the institution of cytotoxic chemotherapy. The incorporation of all- trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) into up-front
therapy further underscores the importance of rapid and accurate diagnosis.
When treated with standard Ara-C/anthracycline–based chemotherapy, there is a higher rate of periinduction mortality in APL than in the other AML subtypes. 217,218 A
variety of supportive interventions have been introduced in an effort to control the hemorrhagic diathesis of the disease, but these complications remain a source of

significant morbidity and, even with best available therapy, constitute a major reason for induction failures. Despite the early hazards associated with cytotoxic
treatment, the long-term survival in APL with this therapy is far superior to the other subtypes of AML. In groups that have emphasized dose intensity of the
anthracycline, long-term disease-free survival as high as 60% has been reported. 219
The clinical use of ATRA changed the emphasis from cytotoxic therapy and established differentiation therapy as an effective modality in the therapy of human
cancer. The initial experience with this agent was reported by Huang et al. and subsequently confirmed by other groups. 220,221 and 222 ATRA is not a cytotoxic agent but
instead causes a proliferation of the abnormal clone coincident with maturation, eventual terminal differentiation, and ultimately, apoptotic cell death. CR is obtained in
90% to 95% of newly diagnosed cases of APL without inducing aplasia and without the toxic effects associated with standard chemotherapy. Instead of worsening
APL-related coagulopathy, there is stabilization and improvement of the condition within days of the institution of ATRA therapy. The biologic effects of ATRA are not
restricted to de novo disease but are also seen in patients who have relapsed after chemotherapy as demonstrated by CR rates between 85% and 90% in this
population.221,223
Despite the many advantages of ATRA therapy, it is not without potential complications. Although there is prompt improvement of coagulopathy with ATRA, many
trials continue to report a 10% to 15% periinduction mortality due to both thrombosis and hemorrhage as well as the occurrence of a newly recognized toxicity named
the retinoic acid syndrome (RAS). Approximately 25% of patients develop symptoms consistent with a capillary leak syndrome with features similar to acute
respiratory distress syndrome or endotoxic shock. 224 Therefore, RAS is characterized by fever, dyspnea, peripheral edema with resultant weight gain, pleural and
pericardial effusions, hypotension, and occasionally renal failure. Untreated, RAS can lead to rapid clinical deterioration and death.
The pathogenesis of RAS and its relationship to the other biologic effects observed with ATRA remain unclear. The description of a similar symptom complex in
patients with APL who have not received ATRA has raised the hypothesis that this syndrome is directly related to the underlying disease process. 225 Leukocytosis,
which is seen in up to 40% of patients with the institution of ATRA and may be an indicator of a biologic response, has, in some series, been associated with RAS. 226
This observation has lead some investigators to advocate the early institution of cytotoxic chemotherapy with ATRA in patients who initially present with a high WBC
count (greater than 5000/µL) or who demonstrate a rapid increase in WBC count during therapy (5000/µL by day 6 ATRA; 10,000/µL by day 10; or 15,000/µL by day
15). Although this strategy has been highly successful in reducing the incidence of RAS, it does expose a significant proportion of these patients to early
chemotherapy.227 Because RAS may occur in as many as one-third of the cases regardless of leukocytosis, alternative strategies have been developed. Early therapy
with a short course of high-dose corticosteroids (dexamethasone, 10 mg IV twice a day for 3 or more days) at the first onset of symptoms can effectively halt the
progression of RAS and has markedly reduced the mortality from this complication. 223,228 Other investigators have proposed corticosteroid prophylaxis be used with
ATRA therapy to avoid the RAS.
Although highly successful in inducing remission, ATRA alone is insufficient therapy for APL. 223 If left on a continuous schedule of ATRA, patients eventually develop
resistance to this agent. They are unable to sustain adequate plasma concentrations of the drug and generally relapse within a few months. In addition, most patients
have persistent minimal residual disease and remain positive for the PML/RAR-a, the molecular signature of APL, after ATRA monotherapy. These observations have
lead to the incorporation of standard chemotherapeutic agents to the treatment of APL.
Initially, ATRA, in conjunction with anthracycline/Ara-C–based postremission regimens, were used as sequential therapy in phase II studies and resulted in improved
disease-free survival compared with historical controls treated with similar chemotherapy given without the retinoid. Large randomized studies from both Europe and
North America demonstrated the superiority of ATRA-containing regimens over chemotherapy alone. 227,229
In an effort to exploit the known sensitivity of APL to anthracyclines, extend the durability of remissions obtained with ATRA chemotherapy–based regimens, and
reduce ATRA-related toxicity, the Italian cooperative groups, GIMEMA-AIEPO, moved the chemotherapy up to induction by including idarubicin with ATRA (AIDA). 230
Ninety-five percent of patients achieved CR with AIDA induction and, when followed by three courses of postremission chemotherapy, the actuarial event-free survival
at 2 years was reported to be 79%. Only 2.5% of patients developed RAS. Sequential ATRA chemotherapy was subsequently compared with simultaneous
administration during induction in a large randomized study conducted by the European APL study group. 231 Although the actuarial relapse rates at 2 years were
marginally better in the ATRA-plus chemotherapy group, the estimated 2-year survival was statistically similar. In addition, patients who received maintenance in the
form of either chemotherapy or intermittent ATRA had superior overall survival. This is in sharp contrast to the other forms of AML in which maintenance therapy after
a dose-intensive course of consolidation is generally without benefit.
The unique disruption of the RAR-a locus results in novel fusion proteins that given the current level of sophistication in the laboratory, are readily detectable and
provide a useful tool for the clinician. The PML/RAR-a transcript defines sensitivity to ATRA, and the ability of RT-PCR to readily detect the PML/RAR-a fusion
product allows for rapid genetic confirmation of the diagnosis, which given the various morphologic variants can be difficult even for the experienced eye. 99,100 In
addition to helping in the diagnosis and planning an effective treatment strategy, RT-PCR has facilitated the detection of minimal residual disease and has made APL
a paradigm for the use of molecular techniques to monitor therapy. 232
Despite the spectacular CR rates and the equally impressive survival results, approximately 30% of patients treated in the large randomized studies relapse. Similar
to the experience in other AML subtypes, such patients are generally incurable with chemotherapy alone and achieving a second remission may be difficult. Many are
resistant to rechallenge with the retinoid, particularly if the disease relapses early (within 6 to 12 months). Arsenic trioxide has been used to achieve CR in heavily
pretreated patients. 233 For those patients who are able to obtain a remission, both allogeneic and autologous BMT have been reported to offer a chance for cure. The
results with autologous transplantation are dependent on the pretransplant status of minimal residual disease with 75% of patients who were PCR-negative before the
autograft in molecular and clinical remission with a median follow-up of 28 months. 234
The therapy of APL in the modern era is marked by great clinical success accompanied by a new understanding of the fundamental biology of the disease. The
promise for future progress in AML may lie in mechanism-based drug design. The observation that arsenic trioxide leads to increased expression of caspases
resulting in enhanced apoptosis has prompted investigators to combine this agent with the differentiating effects of ATRA in an attempt to amplify the effect of each
agent by exploiting the different mechanisms of action. In vitro, this combination has been found to be synergistic, and the investigation of arsenic and ATRA has been
undertaken in animal models.41 The interaction between PML/RAR-a fusion products, corepressor binding proteins, and histone deacetylation have been implicated
in the pathogenesis of APL. This has led to interest in a class of drugs, the histone deacetylase inhibitors, that may usher in a new era in the drug therapy of
leukemia.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR THE TREATMENT OF ADULT ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIAS
Treatment of adults with ALL has been modeled on therapy developed for childhood ALL. The similarity between the childhood and adult forms of this disease allows
for inferences to be drawn from experience in the pediatric population. However, adults with ALL have a far poorer outcome when compared with children. Some of
this difference can be attributed to differences in ability to tolerate intensive therapy coupled with an increased incidence of unfavorable cytogenetic subgroups
[particularly t(9;22) and t(4;11)] and a decreased incidence of favorable cytogenetic subgroups [such as hyperdiploidy or t(12;21)]. Despite these mitigating features,
the distinctly different outcomes of therapy have led to questions regarding how advances in pediatrics can be used in adult ALL. A broad review of the St. Jude
experience in pediatric ALL demonstrated a dramatic stepwise improvement in treatment results since the 1970s. 235 However, adults with ALL have not shared in this
remarkable success story. 236
Treatment of adult ALL is typically divided into four broad categories: induction, consolidation, maintenance, and CNS prophylaxis. At presentation, many patients are
quite ill with active infection, hemorrhage, or both, and induction regimens for adult ALL have typically emphasized relatively myeloid-sparing cytotoxic agents.
Consolidation therapy is administered at a relatively higher level of intensity to patients already in complete remission. Before beginning this phase of therapy,
patients have normal blood counts and generally a good performance status. They are therefore able to tolerate significant myelosuppression with acceptable toxicity.
Maintenance therapy is administered to patients in remission after the more intensive consolidation therapy. It is administered at a low level of intensity, but for a
protracted period. Current opinion is that 2 years of maintenance therapy is required for optimal results.
The fourth category of treatment is CNS prophylaxis. This is administered concurrently with systemic chemotherapy. Despite aggressive systemic therapy, the CNS
remains a sanctuary site and without specific meningeal-directed therapy approximately 35% of adult patients develop CNS disease.

To understand the natural history of adult ALL and to assign specific therapy, the FAB subclassification (see Morphology and Cytochemistry, earlier in this chapter) is
less useful than an immunophenotypic subclassification, which recognizes three major groups: The most common subtype is pre–B-cell ALL, which represents
approximately 70% of patients. The term pre-B refers to the fact that these cells are committed to the B-cell lineage, as manifested by immunoglobulin gene
rearrangement and expression of typical early B-cell markers such as CD19 and terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase, but do not express the hallmark of the
mature B cell, surface immunoglobulin. In addition to CD19 and terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase, the lymphoblasts of patients with pre–B-cell ALL typically
express CD10, which was previously known as common ALL antigen (CALLA).
The second subtype of ALL is T-cell disease. T-cell ALL and lymphoblastic lymphoma are essentially the same disease. This disease typically affects young adults
and has a significant male predominance. The malignant process begins as a rapidly growing mediastinal mass with early dissemination to the bone marrow. Patients
present with symptoms related to their mediastinal mass (cough, dyspnea, chest pain) or to bone marrow involvement (infection and bleeding). Patients without
evident bone marrow involvement at diagnosis are said to have lymphoblastic lymphoma. Those with scant bone marrow involvement are said to have stage IV
lymphoblastic lymphoma and those with significant (greater than 30%) bone marrow involvement are said to have T-cell ALL. These distinctions are largely semantic
and are without important clinical implications. All patients with lymphoblastic lymphoma/T-cell ALL require therapy as for ALL.
The third and least common subtype (approximately 5% of adult ALL) is mature B-cell ALL. As the name implies, these leukemic cells are slightly more mature than
their pre–B-cell counterparts and express surface immunoglobulin. The typical patient is a young man who presents with a rapidly growing abdominal mass (initial
sites are typically the appendix and the ileocecal valve) and early dissemination to the bone marrow. The most common presentation is with symptoms related to the
abdominal mass (pain, bloating, and small bowel obstruction) or to bone marrow involvement (infection and bleeding). Patients who present to medical attention
without evidence of bone marrow involvement are said to have Burkitt's lymphoma. Once significant bone marrow infiltration occurs, this disease is called mature
B-cell ALL. In contrast to pre–B-cell ALL and T-cell ALL, mature B-cell ALL requires a different treatment regimen for optimal results (see Treatment of Mature B-Cell
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia, later in this chapter).
PROGNOSTIC FEATURES IN ADULT ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA
There have been several evaluations of prognostic features in adult ALL. The two most widely accepted multivariate analyses were performed by the German
multicenter group and the Memorial Sloan-Kettering group. 237,238 Other analyses have in general supported these two studies and have led to five widely accepted
prognostic features: WBC count, age, leukemic cell immunophenotype, Philadelphia chromosome–positive disease, and time to achieve CR (see Table 46.2-5).
Multivariate analyses indicate that a high WBC count at diagnosis is associated with poor prognosis. There is both a reduced likelihood of achieving a CR as well as
shorter duration of remission (and overall survival) for those who achieve a CR. An increased WBC count probably has prognostic significance in part on the basis as
a measure of tumor burden, but also because of its correlation with adverse cytogenetics [e.g., t(4;11) and t(9;22)]. A high WBC count is probably a continuous
variable (the higher the count, the worse the prognosis), and different studies have used different levels of elevated WBC count as their cutoff for an adverse feature.
In the Memorial Hospital study, WBC counts greater than 10,000/µL were associated with a lower frequency of achieving a CR, whereas counts greater than
20,000/µL were associated with a shorter duration of CR. The German study indicated that WBC counts greater than 30,000/µL carry an adverse prognosis.
Older age is also associated with a worse prognosis. Age is probably a continuous variable (the older the patient, the worse the prognosis). In pediatric series,
adolescent patients typically have the worst prognosis, though in adult series this is almost always the most favorable group. Different studies have defined different
ages as having a poor prognosis, the two most important being age 35 years from the German group and age 60 from the Memorial Hospital study.
The immunophenotype of the leukemic cell also carries prognostic implication. 237,238 and 239 T-cell disease has a favorable prognosis, pre-B-cell (common) ALL has an
intermediate prognosis, whereas mature B-cell disease has a poor prognosis when treated with standard regimens. It should be noted that modern regimens designed
specifically for mature B-cell ALL improve the prognosis for this subtype significantly. Previously, null cell ALL was considered to have a poor prognosis. Modern
immunophenotyping has essentially eliminated this entity. It is possible that in the past some acute leukemias now classified as AML-M0 would have been considered
null cell ALL; not surprisingly these would fare poorly with vincristine/prednisone-based therapy.
Philadelphia chromosome–positive disease carries a poor prognosis. Adult patients with this entity are essentially never cured by chemotherapeutic regimens. A
minority of patients with this disease may be cured if they undergo allogeneic transplant in first CR. 240 Other cytogenetic abnormalities also have prognostic
implications, but their frequency is not sufficient to be noted in multivariate analysis. Most notable of these is the poor prognosis associated with t(4;11).
Time to achieve a CR during induction therapy carries significant prognostic implications. Patients requiring more than 4 weeks 70,241 or 5 weeks238 to achieve a CR
have a lower likelihood of being cured. It is not clear if this reflects an innate sensitivity to (and curability by) the chemotherapeutic agents used or rather that rapid
cytoreduction of the leukemic cell mass minimizes the opportunity for drug resistance to develop and ultimately allows for cure of the patient.
TREATMENT OF NEWLY DIAGNOSED ADULT PATIENTS WITH ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA
A variety of different treatment regimens for adults with ALL have been developed since the 1970s. These regimens, which borrow heavily from advances made in
childhood ALL, have many features in common. Current therapy can induce complete remission in approximately 65% to 85% of adults. However, the majority of these
patients subsequently relapse, and overall only 20% to 30% of adults with ALL prove to be cured of their disease (see Fig. 46.2-1).242,243,244,245,246,247,248 and 249 The
mainstay of induction therapy for ALL has been the combination of vincristine and prednisone. Vincristine and prednisone achieves a CR in approximately 50% of
patients. Addition of an anthracycline to induction therapy was demonstrated in a randomized trial to increase the likelihood of achieving a CR (83% vs. 47%). 250 This
increased incidence of CR did not translate into improved survival for the patients randomized to receive the anthracycline. Although lacking support from randomized
clinical trials, further intensification of induction therapy with cyclophosphamide or l-asparaginase, is widely accepted as improving remission induction, and one or
both of these drugs are therefore included in essentially all induction regimens. Current induction regimens are therefore labeled as four drug (vincristine, prednisone,
anthracycline, and cyclophosphamide or asparaginase) or five drug (vincristine, prednisone, anthracycline, cyclophosphamide, and asparaginase) regimens. There
are no data currently available to favor one of these induction regimens over another.
Consolidation therapy has evolved over time to include several drugs given in varying sequence. Though there is no standard consolidation therapy, some
generalizations can be made. The drug most prominently used in consolidation of adult ALL is Ara-C. Consolidation regimens include Ara-C combined with other
drugs, most typically anthracyclines, epidophyllotoxins, or antimetabolites (such as methotrexate or thioguanine). Multiple studies seem to indicate the value of such
consolidations. Most of these studies are uncontrolled phase II studies or comparisons with historical controls. 243,246,248,249 The experience at M. D. Anderson is typical
in this regard in which implementation of such therapy increased 3-year survival from 15% to 40%. 251 A randomized phase III trial demonstrating the importance of
cytarabine-containing consolidations was reported by Fiere et al. 242 In this study, after remission induction, patients were randomized to receive consolidation therapy
with cytarabine, doxorubicin, and asparaginase or to immediately receive maintenance therapy. Three-year disease-free survival in the consolidation arm was
markedly superior (38%) to the no consolidation arm (0%) ( P <.005). Although most authors accept that intensive consolidations are beneficial, there is a report by
Ellison et al. of a randomized trial that failed to show significant benefit to cytarabine-based consolidation. 252
Protracted maintenance therapy is a feature unique to treatment strategies for ALL. All other chemotherapeutically curable human malignancies are typically cured
with 3 to 6 months of therapy. In pediatric ALL, maintenance therapy is clearly necessary, and most regimens prescribe 2 to 3 years of such treatment. In adults, the
necessity of maintenance therapy has been less clearly addressed. Only a few studies have failed to use maintenance therapy, and the low reported disease-free
survival seen in the CALGB study (18% at 3 years) and the ECOG study (13% at 4 years) suggests the importance of maintenance therapy in adult ALL. 253,254 The two
most important drugs in maintenance chemotherapy are a combination of oral methotrexate and mercaptopurine. In pediatric ALL, these two drugs alone can be
sufficient for maintenance therapy; in adults, however, most maintenance regimens are intensified by incorporating other active agents such as vincristine,
prednisone, anthracyclines, and cyclophosphamide.
The CNS, along with the eye and the testis, are viewed as sanctuary sites. These are areas where penetration of systemically administered cytotoxic agents is
compromised, leading to the potential of localized relapse. In adults, ocular relapse is extremely rare. Testicular disease occurs occasionally in patients with mature
B-cell ALL, less frequently in patients with Philadelphia chromosome–positive ALL, and is extremely uncommon in other adults with ALL. Of the three sanctuary sites,
CNS relapse is by far the most common. The incidence of CNS disease at presentation in adult ALL is typically 5% to 10%. Risk factors for developing CNS disease
include high WBC count at diagnosis and mature B-cell immunophenotype. Patients who do not receive prophylactic therapy have a cumulative risk of approximately

35% of developing CNS involvement during the course of their disease. Prophylaxis with intrathecal chemotherapy (with or without whole brain irradiation) effectively
reduces the cumulative incidence to approximately 10%. Intrathecal chemotherapy can be delivered by lumbar puncture or intraventricularly via Ommaya reservoir. If
whole brain irradiation is used, intrathecal chemotherapy can be delivered by lumbar puncture (and requires fewer treatments) to achieve acceptable results. Patients
not receiving whole brain irradiation as part of their prophylaxis require a greater number of intrathecal treatments and should have these treatments administered via
an Ommaya reservoir. Patients should achieve a complete remission of their systemic disease before having an Ommaya reservoir placed to avoid this surgery in the
subset of patients who have primary refractory disease or die during induction therapy. Intrathecal chemotherapy does not require adjustments for body surface area,
and a typical adult dose is 12 mg of methotrexate (or 60 mg of cytarabine). A variety of administration schedules have been used, but for patients not receiving brain
irradiation, we recommend six doses during the first 2 months of treatment, two doses per month during consolidation therapy, and two doses for every 3 months of
maintenance therapy. The addition of whole brain radiotherapy to intrathecal chemotherapy can reduce the amount of intrathecal chemotherapy required for adequate
CNS prophylaxis (and obviate the need for an Ommaya reservoir); however, concerns of late toxicity, including loss of cognitive function and leukoencephalopathy, 255
have led many investigators to omit whole brain radiotherapy from prophylactic regimens. CNS prophylaxis, although effective at reducing the incidence of CNS
relapse, has no demonstrable effect on systemic relapse or overall survival. 256
Features common to state-of-the-art treatment programs for adult ALL are summarized in Table 46.2-8. Since the 1970s, treatment regimens that incorporate these
features have been developed at many centers. Multiple formulations have been tested that vary the drug dose and schedule during induction, the number and
intensity of chemotherapy cycles during consolidation, and the sequencing and duration of maintenance. Despite years of experience with multiple variations of this
treatment strategy, no single formulation appears to be superior to the others. The wide variation in reported outcomes of clinical trials would superficially suggest the
superiority of certain regimens (Table 46.2-10). Closer inspection, however, does not support this view. Interpretation of the literature is complicated primarily by
differences in patient mix and duration of follow-up. It is easy to understand how duration of follow-up affects disease-free survival. Figure 46.2-1 indicates overall
survival for the 272 adult patients with ALL treated at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center on several sequential treatment protocols. All of these treatment
regimens were designed according to the principles listed in Table 46.2-7. Although 2-year survival is almost 50%, the survival curve continues to fall and a plateau is
not reached until 6 years out at approximately 24%. Therefore, studies that report only 2- or 3-year survival markedly overestimate their actual results and can appear
superior to regimens that report 5-year survival.

TABLE 46.2-10. Clinical Chemotherapy Studies in Adult Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia

The prognostic features of patients treated on a particular study are as important as duration of follow-up in interpreting the results of clinical trials in adult ALL.
Certain patients with adult ALL, such as those with Philadelphia chromosome–positive disease have little likelihood of long-term survival. Because these patients may
constitute 15% to 30% of unselected adults with ALL, their inclusion in clinical trials can have a major effect on reported results. Age is another important selection
criteria that can vary from study to study with a major effect on reported survival. An analysis by Ohno of the relationship between median age and disease-free
survival in 18 published studies of adult ALL reveals a tight correlation between the median age of the patients treated and the long-term disease-free survival. 257 This
suggests that the apparent differences in results among published studies likely reflect patient mix rather than differences in treatment regimen.
The uniformity of results seen with vincristine/prednisone-based regimens has led to exploration of new induction approaches in adults. A phase II study at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center used an induction regimen of cytarabine combined with a high single dose of mitoxantrone (80 mg/m 2). Vincristine and prednisone
were not used during induction therapy. When compared with historical controls, this regimen demonstrated a higher incidence of CR ( P = .056), a lower incidence of
failure with resistant disease ( P = .028), a significantly reduced time to CR ( P = .003), and a trend to improved survival. 258 This regimen appeared to have particularly
good activity in patients with Philadelphia chromosome–positive disease. A prospective multicenter randomized trial comparing this regimen to a standard four-drug
induction regimen is currently ongoing.
TREATMENT OF RELAPSED OR REFRACTORY ADULT PATIENTS WITH ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA
Most current induction regimens obtain CRs in 65% to 85% of newly diagnosed patients. Early deaths account for some of the induction failures, but in most studies
10% to 25% of patients have disease resistant to vincristine/prednisone-based regimens. In addition to these primary refractory patients, 60% to 70% of patients
achieve a CR relapse. Treatment of relapsed and refractory patients is therefore an important and common problem. Numerous regimens have been reported in the
setting of relapsed ALL. The most important regimens can be divided into two main groups: those that repeat the regimens used for newly diagnosed patients (this
strategy is obviously not used for primary refractory patients) and those that involve high-dose chemotherapy. High-dose regimens appear to obtain a greater
incidence of second CRs when compared with reinduction with vincristine/prednisone-based regimens. The high-dose regimens with the greatest likelihood for
inducing a second CR are high-dose cytarabine-based regimens.
High-dose cytarabine has been used alone and in combination with a number of different agents. In combination with l-asparaginase, 259,260 and 261 doxorubicin,262
idarubicin, 263 and 264 or mitoxantrone,265,266,267 and 268 CRs as high as 72% have been reported in relapsed patients with ALL. Issues of patient mix make it difficult to
assess if a specific regimen is superior to others, but in general a combination of high-dose cytarabine and an anthracycline has the greatest likelihood of achieving a
second CR in relapsed patients (or a first CR in refractory patients). The toxicity of these regimens should be balanced against the benefits of achieving a CR.
However, second CRs are difficult to maintain and typically each succeeding response is briefer than the preceding one. Patients with a suitable allogeneic transplant
option should probably be referred for such a transplant in second CR. 269 The role of autologous or matched unrelated transplants in relapsed adult ALL has not been
clearly established and should be considered investigational.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM RELAPSE IN ADULT ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA
CNS relapse occurs in approximately 10% of patients who have received appropriate prophylaxis. In the majority of patients, simultaneous bone marrow relapse can
be documented. In occasional patients, CNS relapse may occur without demonstrable systemic relapse (so-called isolated CNS relapse); however, this event almost
always predicts subsequent bone marrow relapse, and patients with isolated CNS relapse should receive reinduction chemotherapy as well. Treatment of established
CNS disease requires a combination of radiotherapy and intrathecal chemotherapy. Radiotherapy should consist of 1800 to 2400 cGy (in 150- to 200-cGy fractions)
administered to the whole brain. Higher doses should be avoided because of the risk of late toxicity and the fact that some patients may later require total body
irradiation as part of a conditioning regimen for an allogeneic transplant. Despite encouraging results in children, spinal radiotherapy should be avoided in adults
because the dose of radiotherapy to marrow-bearing areas subsequently limits the ability to administer necessary systemic chemotherapy. Intrathecal therapy with
methotrexate (12 mg) for patients with established CNS disease should be administered intraventricularly via an Ommaya reservoir. Intrathecal chemotherapy can be
administered as often as two or three times per week until the CSF is cleared of leukemic blasts, then twice a week for 3 weeks, and twice a month for 2 or 3
additional months. Patients who develop CNS disease despite prophylaxis with intrathecal methotrexate, or those who do not clear the blasts from the CSF promptly
(within two treatments) with methotrexate, should receive intraventricular therapy with cytarabine at a dose of 60 mg.
BONE MARROW TRANSPLANT FOR ADULT ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA
HLA identical sibling BMTs have been used in adults with ALL in a variety of settings. This dose-intense treatment approach has the ability to eradicate leukemia in a
subset of patients with disease refractory to conventional chemotherapy. However, the lack of availability of HLA-matched donors and the toxicity and mortality seen

with transplant limits the utility of this approach. There is significant controversy over the use and timing of allogeneic transplant in adult ALL. Analysis of patterns of
failure highlight a fundamental difference in the use of this modality for ALL compared with AML. Patients with AML (in first or second CR) treated with allogeneic
transplant tend to fail therapy because of treatment-related mortality (infectious complications, GVHD, and so forth). Failure because of relapsed AML after allogeneic
transplant (for patients in first or second CR) is relatively uncommon. The results for ALL, however, indicate that even for patients who survive the transplant, there is
a significant relapse rate, and overall few patients are long-term disease-free survivors. The ability of allogeneic transplants to cure malignant diseases rests in part
on the ability of the transplanted (donor) immune system to eliminate residual leukemic cells; this is known as the graft-versus-leukemia effect. There is evidence to
suggest that this effect may be less important in ALL than in either AML or in CML. Data from the International Bone Marrow Transplant Registry compared identical
twin to HLA identical sibling transplants. 270 Presumably, graft-versus-leukemia should be more pronounced in the HLA identical sibling transplants as compared with
the identical twin transplants. In this study, there was a significantly higher relapse rate in the identical twin transplants for AML and CML, but not for ALL. This implies
that graft-versus-leukemia is less important in ALL. A second indication that graft-versus-leukemia is less active in ALL comes from an analysis of studies of donor
T-cell infusions used to treat leukemia that has relapsed after allogeneic BMT. In this study, donor lymphocyte infusions produced CRs in 73% of patients with CML,
29% of patients with AML, and in 0% of patients with ALL. 219 The lack of graft-versus-leukemia in ALL may in part explain the high relapse rate and the relatively low
incidence of long-term disease-free survival after allogeneic transplant for adult ALL.
A review of the published experience of allogeneic BMT in adult ALL reveals that only a small fraction of patients are cured by this modality. The results of 192 adults
with ALL transplanted at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center report a 5-year disease-free survival of only 15% for patients transplanted in second CR or beyond. 269
Another study that suggested more favorable results is difficult to interpret because this study presents combined results for pediatric and adult patients or patients in
first CR (who may already be cured) with higher risk patients. 271
The ability to cure a small subset of relapsed patients with allogeneic transplant has led investigators to test this modality in first CR. However, two large comparisons
of allogeneic transplant versus standard chemotherapy for patients in first CR have failed to demonstrate an improved survival for the transplant arm. 272,273 In one of
these studies, subset analysis suggests a benefit for certain high-risk patients. 272 This benefit was not confirmed in the other study. 273 Currently, the only group for
whom allogeneic transplant in first CR can be routinely recommended is patients with t(9;22) and t(4;11) disease. For other adult patients, allogeneic transplant
should be reserved for second CR.
Autologous transplant for adult ALL is even less effective than allogeneic transplant. 274 The extremely poor results for patients in second CR or beyond has led to this
modality being tested in first CR. However, both a nonrandomized 244 and randomized trial 275 showed no benefit for autotransplant compared with maintenance
chemotherapy. This modality should be considered experimental and not routinely performed in first CR.
TREATMENT OF MATURE B-CELL ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA
Mature B-cell ALL is an uncommon disorder that accounts for approximately 5% of all patients with ALL. This disease has an extremely poor prognosis when treated
with traditional ALL regimens such as those described previously. Studies indicate that a majority of patients with mature B-cell ALL can be cured with certain
intensive regimens. The important features of regimens for this disease are rapid cycling of drugs, fractionated cyclophosphamide, high-dose methotrexate, and
intensive CNS prophylaxis. Maintenance therapy is not used in these regimens. A retrospective review of the French experience with this form of therapy indicates
that 12 of 22 (55%) patients older than the age of 18 years were cured in this poor-risk group of patients. 276
GRANULOCYTE SARCOMAS, LEUKEMIA CUTIS, AND OTHER EXTRAMEDULLARY LEUKEMIC INVOLVEMENT
Acute leukemia cells may diffusely infiltrate any organ of the body during the course of disease, or may form collections and large masses known as granulocytic
sarcomas or chloromas, due to their green hue from the myeloperoxidase. Diffuse involvement of the skin by acute leukemia cells is referred to as leukemia cutis and
should be distinguished from Sweet's syndrome, which is an infiltration of the skin by neutrophils. The initial presentation of acute leukemia at a primary
extramedullary site with normal marrow and blood findings is extremely rare. 278 However, if extramedullary leukemia is misdiagnosed as carcinoma or lymphoma and
treated without leukemia-specific therapy, the prognosis is poor; overt leukemia usually appears within a year, and death occurs at a median of 3 months later. In
contrast, granulocytic sarcomas may occur secondarily in approximately 5% of patients, especially in those with (8;21) or (9;11) translocations or inv(16) chromosome
abnormalities, and in patients with other monocytic leukemias. 277,278 and 279
The occurrence of extramedullary disease virtually always heralds systemic relapse and should be treated as such. 278 Specific therapy directed at the extramedullary
disease, unless it is located in the CNS, is usually not indicated. Treatment of CNS leukemia is discussed earlier in this chapter (see Central Nervous System Relapse
in Adult Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia). The prognostic significance of extramedullary disease is usually negative even when it is associated with other good
prognostic signs [e.g., t(8;21)]. 279 Extramedullary disease is treated by systemic therapy of the kind used to consolidate or intensify systemic leukemia. Leukemia cutis
has been treated by external electron beam therapy, but this has been associated with fatal dermatitis in patients who had also received anthracyclines commonly
used to treat AML.280
Involvement of the CNS is rare at presentation in AML, in contrast to ALL, in which it occurs more frequently; therefore, in the absence of symptoms of neurologic
involvement, examination of the CSF in patients with AML is not indicated at presentation. In patients with ALL, the CSF should be examined routinely during the
initiation of treatment and prophylactic intrathecal chemotherapy should be administered; more aggressive therapy should be initiated if the CSF is involved (as
described previously). In AML, CNS disease is more common in patients with high blast counts in the blood and with monocytic leukemias, especially the M4EO
variant. 281 and 282 Cranial neuropathies, when present, are most likely to involve the fifth or seventh nerves. 283 Leukemic infiltration of the cranial nerves can
occasionally be detected by computed tomography; magnetic resonance imaging is a better choice, but the diagnosis is usually made by demonstration of leukemia
blasts in the CSF. Some patients may not display positive CSF findings; emergency treatment with irradiation and intrathecal methotrexate is sometimes indicated
even without diagnostic CSF.
Neurologic symptoms, such as headache or confusion, may also be the consequence of leukostasis and microemboli in the cerebral microvasculature; this is a rare
occurrence except in myeloid leukemias with blood blast counts in excess of 100,000/µL. 284 In these cases, urgent therapy (either by leukopheresis or chemotherapy)
to lower the blast count is indicated.
BIOLOGIC AND IMMUNOLOGIC THERAPIES OF ACUTE LEUKEMIAS
Modern attempts to treat acute leukemias with agents designed to alter the biology and growth of the leukemia cells or to kill the cells via immunologic means have
met with variable success.285,286 and 287 Early work focused on nonspecific immunostimulators such as interferon, IL-2, and linomide in the setting of advanced disease;
more recently these agents have been proposed for use after induction therapy to eliminate residual leukemia. 288,289,290,291,292 and 293 Interferon has demonstrated
sporadic and limited success in inducing remissions in ALL of children, but has never achieved the consistent results observed in hairy cell leukemia or chronic
myelogenous leukemia.122,285,288,289 Moreover, the lack of potency and requirement for prolonged use to achieve effects, combined with the marked toxicity of
interferons (including fever, malaise, myalgia, neurologic disorders, and cytopenias), make chronic use as a long-term agent for postremission or maintenance
therapy difficult. A mechanism of action of interferon in treating acute leukemia has not been demonstrated.
IL-2, which promotes the growth of T cells and natural killer cells and activates natural killer cells to become lymphokine-activated killer cells, has demonstrated
potent activity in vitro in stimulating autologous effector cells to kill leukemia blasts, and to block leukemia cell growth in culture in vitro and in mouse
models.286,287,290,291,292 and 293 Clinical trials of IL-2 have shown significant antileukemia effects in inverse relationship to the leukemic burden 291,293,294; therefore, studies
have focused on the use of IL-2 in patients in remission or posttransplantation. There is some preliminary evidence that relapse rates may be reduced in AML but not
in ALL. 274,292,295 IL-2 is also under investigation as a means to enhance specific therapy with monoclonal antibodies directed to AML cells, because of its ability to
enhance antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. 296,297
Specific monoclonal antibody therapy of acute leukemia has been under investigation since 1981 using passively infused murine monoclonal antibodies, radiolabeled
monoclonal antibodies, immunotoxins, and, most recently, genetically engineered humanized monoclonal antibodies. 286,287,296,297,298,299,300,301,302 and 303 Passive
serotherapy in relapsed ALL and AML has generally not been effective because of the lack of antibody potency, rapid loss of the target antigen from the leukemia cell
surface, and development of human antimurine antibody responses. Attempts to use genetically engineered humanized antibodies, which have greater potency and
can be repeatedly infused, have begun to show activity in the setting of residual disease, particularly in APL. 287,297,298,300,301 A new drug-conjugated antibody and an

alpha-emitting construct appears to have significant activity in relapsed AML as well. 302 and 303 Randomized trials to assess the effectiveness of these approaches are
in progress. The application of radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies as an ablative agent before BMT in patients with acute leukemia is also under study. 287,304,305 and 306
CR rates approaching 100% have been achieved using these combined modalities, without detriment to engraftment or significant worsening of toxicity associated
with the transplant; the demonstration of a therapeutic advantage of this approach in survival awaits randomized studies.
Antibody therapy can also be used ex vivo to purge bone marrow of residual leukemia before autologous
reinfusion. 286,287,288,289,290,291,292,293,294,295,296,297,298,299,300,301,302,303,304,305,306 and 307 Though initial clinical results are encouraging, no randomized studies confirming the
efficacy of this approach have been reported.
Active specific immunotherapy (vaccine therapy) has been explored for its potential in the treatment of leukemias. In principle, peptide sequences derived from
oncogene products and translocated fusion proteins may serve as leukemia-specific targets for stimulated cytolytic T cells. 38,308 Such approaches are most likely to be
effective in the setting of minimal disease or transplantation.

CONCLUSIONS
Two decades of empiric therapy in leukemia have led to long-term cures in a fraction of adult patients with acute leukemia. Advances in the molecular genetics,
immunology, and biology of normal and neoplastic hematopoiesis have produced significant progress in understanding the pathogenesis of acute leukemia. This
knowledge is leading to an explosion of new, sensitive molecular assays for minimal disease, new diagnostic and prognostic tests, and to more specific, and less toxic
therapies. However, there is still a large gap between the patients who initially achieve remission and those who are ultimately cured. The appropriate care of patients
with leukemia requires specialized resources and remains a difficult and complicated task with significant morbidity and mortality. Patients with acute leukemias
should continue to be referred to cancer centers and enrolled in investigational treatment protocols until a greater fraction of patients achieve long-term survival.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Virchow R. Weisses, Blut and Milztumoren. Med Z 1847;16:19.
2. Hernández JA, Land KJ, McKenna RW. Leukemia, myeloma, and other lymphoreticular neoplasms. Cancer 1995;75:381.
3. Wingo PA, Tong T, Bolden S. Cancer statistics, 1995. CA Cancer J Clin 1995;45:8.
4. Arseneau JC, Sponzo RW, Levin DL, et al. Nonlymphomatous malignant tumors complicating Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1972;287:1119.
5. Aisenberg AC. Acute nonlymphocytic leukemia after treatment for Hodgkin's disease. Am J Med 1983;75:449.
6. Kaldor JM, Day NE, Clarke EA, et al. Leukemia following Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1990;322:7.
7. van Leeuwen FE, Chorus AMJ, van den Belt-Dusebout AW, et al. Leukemia risk following Hodgkin's disease: relation to cumulative dose of alkylating agents, treatment with teniposide
combinations, number of episodes of chemotherapy, and bone marrow damage. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1063.
8. Pui CH, Behm FG, Raimondi SC, et al. Secondary acute myeloid leukemia in children treated for acute lymphoid leukemia. N Engl J Med 1989;321:136.
9. Pui C-H, Ribeiro RC, Hancock ML, et al. Acute myeloid leukemia in children treated with epipodophyllotoxins for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1682.
10. Tucker MA, Meadows AT, Bioce JD, et al. Leukemia after therapy with alkylating agents for childhood cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1977;78:459.
11. Neglia JP, Meadows AT, Robison LL, et al. Second neoplasms after acute lymphoblastic leukemia in childhood. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1330.
12. Hawkins MM. Secondary leukaemia after epipodophyllotoxins. Lancet 1991;338:1408.
13. DeVore R, Whitlock J, Hainsworth JD, Johnson DH. Therapy-related acute nonlymphocytic leukemia with monocytic features and rearrangement of chromosome 11q. Ann Intern Med
1989;110:740.
14. Ratain MJ, Kaminer LS, Bitran JD, et al. Acute nonlymphocytic leukemia following etoposide and cisplatin combination chemotherapy for advanced non-small-cell carcinoma of the lung. Blood
1987;70:1412.
15. Detourmignies L, Castaigne S, Stoppa AM, et al. Therapy-related acute promyelocytic leukemia: a report on 16 cases. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1430.
16. Curtis RE, Boice JD Jr, Stovall M, et al. Risk of leukemia after chemotherapy and radiation treatment for breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1745.
17. Travis LB, Holowaty EJ, Bergfeldt K, et al. Risk of leukemia after platinum-based chemotherapy for ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;340:351.
18. Kumar L. Secondary leukaemia after autologous bone marrow transplantation. Lancet 1995;345:810.
19. Tallman MS, Gray R, Bennett JM, et al. Leukemogenic potential of adjuvant chemotherapy for early-stage breast cancer: the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group experience. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:1557.
20. Preston DL, Kusumi S, Tomonaga M, et al. Cancer incidence in atomic bomb survivors. Part III: leukemia, lymphoma and multiple myeloma, 19501987. Radiat Res 1994;137:S68.
21. Sandler DP. Recent studies in leukemia epidemiology. Curr Opin Oncol 1995;7:12.
22. Linet MS, Hatch EE, Kleinerman RA, et al. Residential exposure to magnetic fields and acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1.
23. Taubes G. Another blow weakens EMF-cancer link . Science 1995;269:1816.
24. Doll R, Evans HJ, Darby SC. Paternal exposure not to blame. Nature 1994;367:678.
25. Sorahan T, Roberts PJ. Childhood cancer and paternal exposure to ionizing radiation: preliminary findings from the Oxford Survey of Childhood Cancers. Am J Indust Med 1993;23:343.
26. Sandler DP, Shore DL, Anderson JR, et al. Cigarette smoking and risk of acute leukemia: associations with morphology and cytogenetic abnormalities in bone marrow. J Natl Cancer Inst
1993;85:1994.
27. Siegel M. Smoking and leukemia: evaluation of a causal hypothesis. Am J Epidemiol 1993;138:1.
28. Kabat GC, Augustine A, Hebert JR. Smoking and adult leukemia: a case-control study. J Clin Epidemiol 1988;41:907.
29. Austin A, Delzell E, Cole P. Benzene and leukemia: a review of the literature and risk assessment. Am J Epidemiol 1988;127:419.
30. Ben-David Y, Bernstein A. Friend virus-induced erythroleukemia and the multistage nature of cancer. Cell 1991;66:831.
31. Poiesz BJ, Ruscetti FW, Gazdar AF, et al. Detection and isolation of type C retrovirus particles from fresh and cultured lymphocytes of patient with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1980;77:7415.
32. Lombardi L, Newcomb EW, Dalla-Favera R. Pathogenesis of Burkitt's lymphoma: expression of an activated c- myc oncogene causes the tumorigenic conversion of EBV-infected human B
lymphoblasts. Cell 1987;49:161.
33. Pui C-H. Childhood leukemias. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1618.
34. Taylor AMR, Metcalfe JA, Thick J, Mak Y-F. Leukemia and lymphoma in ataxia telangiectasia. Blood 1995;15:423.
35. Pui C-H, Raimondi SC, Borowitz MJ, et al. Immunophenotypes and karyotypes of leukemic cells in children with Down syndrome and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1361.
36. Homans A, Verissimo AM, Vlacha V. Transient abnormal myelopoiesis of infancy associated with trisomy 21. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1993;15:392.
37. Joventino LP, Stock W, Lane NJ, et al. Certain HLA antigens are associated with specific morphologic and cytogenetic subsets of acute myeloid leukemia. Leukemia 1995;9:433.
38. Bocchia M, Korontsvit T, Xu A, et al. Specific human cellular immunity to bcr-abl oncogene-derived peptides. Blood 1996;82:3587.
39. Koeffler HP, Golde DW. Human myeloid leukemia cell lines: a review. Blood 1980;56:344.
40. Li S, Ilaria RL Jr, Million RP, Daley GQ, Van Etten RA. The P190, P210 and P230 forms of the bcr/abl oncogene induce a similar chronic myeloid leukemia-like syndrome in mice but have
different lymphoid leukemogenic activity. J Exp Med 1999;189:1399.
41. Lallemand-Breitenbach V, Guillemin M-C, Janin A, et al. Retinoic acid and arsenic synergize to eradicate leukemic cells in a mouse model of acute promyelocytic leukemia. J Exp Med
1999;189:1043.
42. Moore MAS. Hematopoietic reconstruction: new approaches. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:3.
43. Metcalf D. The roles of stem cell self-renewal and autocrine growth factor production in the biology of myeloid leukemia. Cancer Res 1989;49:2305.
44. Suda J, Suda T, Ogawa M. Analysis of differentiation of mouse hematopoietic stem cells in culture by sequential replating of paired progenitors. Blood 1984;64:393.
45. Wickremasinghe RG, Hoffbrand AV. Biochemical and genetic control of apoptosis: relevance to normal hematopoiesis and hematological malignancies. Blood 1999;93:3587.
46. Timens W. Cell adhesion molecule expression and homing of hematologic malignancies. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 1995;19:111.
47. Gabrilove JL. Hematopoietic growth factors. In: Holland JF, et al., eds. Cancer medicine. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1993:948.
48. Hoang T, Nara N, Wong G, et al. Effects of recombinant GM-CSF on the blast cells of acute myeloblastic leukemia. Blood 1986;68:313.
49. Hunter MG, Avalos BR. Deletion of a critical internalization domain in the G-CSFR in acute myelogenous leukemia preceded by severe congenital neutropenia. Blood 1999;93:440.
50. Ward AC, van Aesch YM, Schelen AM, Touw IP. Defective internalization and sustained activation of truncated granulocyte-colony stimulating factor receptor found in severe congenital
neutropenia/acute myeloid leukemia. Blood 1999;93:447.
51. Till JE, McCulloch EA. A direct measurement of the radiation sensitivity of normal mouse bone marrow cells. Radiat Res 1961;14:213.
52. Spangrude GJ, Heimfeld S, Weissman IL. Purification and characterization of mouse hematopoietic stem cells. Science 1988;241:58.
53. Fialkow PJ, Singer JW, Raskind WH, et al. Clonal development, stem cell differentiation, and clinical remissions in a acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1987;317:468.
54. Fialkow PJ, Singer JW, Adamson JW, et al. Acute nonlymphocytic leukemia: heterogeneity of stem cell origin. Blood 1981;57:1068.
55. Ferraris AM, Broccia G, Meloni T, et al. Clonal origin of cells restricted to monocytic differentiation in acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1984;64:817.
56. Griffin JD, Lowenberg B. Clonogeneic cells in acute myeloblastic leukemia. Blood 1986;68:1185.
57. Sabbath KD, Ball ED, Larcom P, David RB, Griffin JD. Heterogeneity of clonogenic cells in acute myeloblastic leukemia. J Clin Invest 1985;75:746.
58. Terstappen LWMM, Safford M, Unterhalt M, et al. Flow cytometric characterization of acute myeloid leukemia: IV. Comparison to the differentiation pathway of normal hematopoietic progenitor
cells. Leukemia 1992;6:993.
59. Sachs L, Lotem J. Control of programmed cell death in normal and leukemic cells: new implications for therapy. Blood 1993;82:15.
60. Counter CM, Gupta J, Harley CB, Leber B, Bacchetti S. Telomerase activity in normal leukocytes and in hematologic malignancies. Blood 1995;85:2315.
61. Hirama T, Koeffler HP. Role of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors in the development of cancer. Blood 1995;86:841.
62. Turhan AG, Lemoine FM, Debert C, et al. Highly purified primitive hematopoietic stem cells are PML/RARa negative and generate nonclonal progenitors in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Blood
1995;85:2154.
63. Singer JW, Fialkow PJ. Nature of remission in acute myeloid leukemia: more questions than answers. Leukemia 1992;6:60.
64. Fearon ER, Burke PJ, Schiffer CA, et al. Differentiation of leukemia cells to polymorphonuclear leukocytes in patients with acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1986;315:15.
65. Lo Coco F, Pelicci PG, D'Adamo F, et al. Polyclonal hematopoietic reconstitution in leukemia patients at remission after suppression of specific gene rearrangements. Blood 1993;82:606.
66. Bennett JM, Catovsky D, Daniel MT, et al. Proposed revised criteria for the classification of acute myeloid leukemia. Ann Intern Med 1985;103:620.
67. Bennett JM, Catovsky D, Daniel MT, et al. Criteria for the diagnosis of acute leukemia of megakaryocytic lineage (M7). Ann Intern Med 1985;103:460.
68. Bennett JM, Catovsky D, Daniel MT, et al. The morphological classification of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: concordance among observers and clinical correlations. Br J Haematol

1981;47:553.
69. Jennings CD, Foon KA. Recent advances in flow cytometry: application to the diagnosis of hematologic malignancy. Blood 1997;90:2863.
70. Bennett JM, Catovsky D, Daniel MT, et al. Proposed revised criteria for the classification of acute myeloid leukemia. (AML-M0). Br J Haematol 1991;78:325.
71. Cheson BD, Cassileth PA, Head DR, et al. Report of the National Cancer Institute-sponsored workshop on definitions of diagnosis and response to acute myeloid leukemia. J Clin Oncol
1990;8:813.
72. Catovsky D, Matutes E, Buccheri V, et al. A classification of acute leukaemia for the 1990s. Ann Hematol 1991;62:16.
73. Lee EJ, Pollak A, Leavitt RD, Testa JR, Schiffer CA. Minimally differentiated acute nonlymphocytic leukemia: a distinct entity. Blood 1987;70:1400.
74. Windebank KP, Tefferi A, Smithson WA, et al. Acute megakaryocytic leukemia (M7) in children. Mayo Clin Proc 1989;64:1339.
75. Loken MR, Shah VO, Datilio KL, Civin CI. Flow cytometric analysis of human bone marrow: I. Normal erythroid development. Blood 1987;70:1316.
76. Terstappen LWMM, Huang S, Picker LJ. Flow cytometric assessment of human T-cell differentiation in thymus and bone marrow. Blood 1992;79:666.
77. Terstappen LWMM, Safford M, Loken MR. Flow cytometric analysis of human bone marrow III. Neutrophil development. Leukemia 1990;4:657.
78. Terstappen LWMM. Cell differentiation and maturation in normal bone marrow and acute leukaemia. In: Macey MG, ed. Flow cytometry clinical applications. Oxford: Blackwell, 1995:101.
79. Terstappen LWMM, Safford M, Könemann S, et al. Flow cytometric characterization of acute myeloid leukemia II. Phenotypic heterogeneity at presentation. Leukemia 1991;5:757.
80. Mayer RJ, David RB, Schiffer CA, et al. Intensive postremission chemotherapy in adults with acute myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 1994;331:896.
81. Reading CL, Estey EH, Huh YO, et al. Expression of unusual immunophenotype combinations in acute myelogenous leukemia. Blood 1993;81:3083.
82. Cross AH, Goorha RM, Nuss R, et al. Acute myeloid leukemia with T-lymphoid features: a distinct biological and clinical entity. Blood 1988;72:579.
83. Greaves MF, Chan LC, Furley AJW, Watt SM, Molgaard HV. Lineage promiscuity in hematopoietic differentiation and leukemia. Blood 1986;67:1.
84. Lo Coco F, De Rossi G, Pasqualetti D, et al. CD7 positive acute myeloid leukaemia: a subtype associated with cell immaturity. Br J Haematol 1989;73:480.
85. Campana D, Pui C-H. Detection of minimal residual disease in acute leukemia: methodologic advances and clinical significance. Blood 1995;85:1416.
86. Syrjälä M, Anttila V-J, Ruutu T, Jansson S-E. Flow cytometric detection of residual disease in acute leukemia by assaying blasts co-expressing myeloid and lymphatic antigens. Leukemia
1994;8:1564.
87. Ferrara F, Del Vecchio L. Clinical relevance of acute mixed-lineage leukemias. Leukemia Lymphoma 1993;12:11.
88. Ball ED, Davis RB, Griffin JD, et al. Prognostic value of lymphocyte surface markers in acute myeloid leukemia. Blood 1991;77:2242.
89. Paietta E, Van Ness B, Bennett J, et al. Lymphoid lineage-associated features in acute myeloid leukaemia: phenotypic and genotypic correlations. Br J Haematol 1992;82:324.
90. Rowley JD. Recurring chromosome abnormalities in leukemia and lymphoma. Semin Hematol 1990;27:122.
91. Nichols J, Nimer S. Transcription factors, translocations, and acute leukemia. Blood 1992;80:2953.
92. Gilliland DG. Molecular genetics of human leukemia. Leukemia 1998;12:S7.
93. Look AT. Oncogenic transcription factors in the human acute leukemias. Science 1997;278:1059.
94. Korsmeyer SJ. Chromosomal translocations in lymphoid malignancies reveal novel proto-oncogenes. Annu Rev Immunol 1992;10:785.
95. Heim S, Mitelman F. Cytogenetic analysis in the diagnosis of acute leukemia. Cancer 1992;70:1701.
96. Wetzler M, Dodge RK, Mrózek K, et al. Prospective karyotype analysis in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia: the cancer and leukemia group B experience. Blood 1999;93:3983.
97. Dabaja BS, Faderl S, Thomas D, et al. Deletions and losses in chromosomes 5 or 7 in adult acute lymphocytic leukemia: incidence, associations and implications. Leukemia 1999;13:869.
98. Mrózek K, Heinonen K, de la Chapelle A, Bloomfield CD. Clinical significance of cytogenetics in acute myeloid leukemia. Semin Oncol 1997;24:17.
99. Miller WH Jr, Levine K, DeBlasio A, et al. Detection of minimal residual disease in acute promyelocytic leukemia by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction assay for the PML/RAR-a
fusion mRNA. Blood 1993;82:1689.
100. Miller WH Jr, Kakizuka A, Frankel SR, et al. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction for the rearranged retinoic acid receptor a clarifies diagnosis and detects minimal residual disease
in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:2694.
101. Koeffler HP. Syndromes of acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. Ann Intern Med 1987;107:748.
102. Levine EG, Bloomfield CD. Leukemias and myelodysplastic syndromes secondary to drug, radiation, and environmental exposure. Semin Oncol 1992;19:47.
103. Rubin CM, Arthur DC, Woods WG, et al. Therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia in children: correlation between chromosomal abnormalities and prior therapy.
Blood 1991;78:2982.
104. Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Philip P. Two different classes of therapy-related and de-novo acute myeloid leukemia. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1991;55:119.
105. Boultwood J, Lewis S, Wainscoat JS. The 5q-Syndrome. Blood 1994;84:3253.
106. Brinker H. Estimates of overall treatment results in acute non-lymphocytic leukemia based on age-specific rates of incidence and of complete remission. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:5.
107. Skipper HE, Schabel FM, Jay R, et al. Experimental evaluation of potential antitumor agents: on the criteria and kinetics associated with curability of experimental leukemia. Cancer Treat Rep
1974;4:137.
108. Freireich EJ, Cork A, Stass SA, et al. Cytogenetics for detection of minimal residual disease in acute myeloblastic leukemia. Leukemia 1992;6:500.
109. Anastasi J, Vardiman JW, Rudinsky R, et al. Direct correlation of cytogenetic findings with morphology using in situ hybdridization: an analysis of suspicious cells in bone marrow specimens of
two patients completing therapy for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1991;77:2456.
110. Zehnbauer BA, Pardol DM, Burke PJ, Graham ML. Immunoglobulin gene rearrangement in remission bone marrow specimens from patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood
1986;67:835.
111. San Miguel JF, Martinez A, Macedo A, et al. Immunophenotyping investigation of minimal residual disease is a useful approach for predicting relapse in acute myeloid leukemia patients. Blood
1997;90:2465.
112. Bader P, Beck J, Frey A, et al. Serial and quantitative analysis of mixed hematopoietic chimerism by PCR in patients with acute leukemias allows prediction of relapse after allogeneic BMT.
Bone Marrow Transplant 1998;21:487.
113. Diverio D, Rossi V, Avvisati G, et al. Early detection of relapse by prospective reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction of the PML/RARa fusion gene in patients with acute
promyelocytic leukemia enrolled in the GIMEMA-AIOP multicenter “AIDA” trial. Blood 1998;92:784.
114. Anderlini P, Luna M, Kantarjian H, et al. Causes of initial remission induction failure in patients with acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome. Leukemia 1996;10:600.
115. Hughes WT, Armstrong D, Bodey GP, et al. Guidelines for the use of antimicrobial agents in neutropenic patients with unexplained fever. A statement by the Infectious Disease Society of
America. J Infect Dis 1990;161:381.
116. Pizzo P. Fever in immunocompromised patients. N Engl J Med 1999;341:893.
117. Uzun O, Anaissie EJ. Antifungal prophylaxis in patients with hematologic malignancies: a reappraisal. Blood 1995;86:2063.
118. Straus RG. Therapeutic granulocyte transfusions in 1993. Blood 1993;81:1675.
119. Ohno R, Tomonaga M, Kobayashi T, et al. Effect of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor after intensive induction therapy in relapsed or refractory acute leukemia. N Engl J Med 1990;323:871.
120. Stone RM, Berg DT, George SL, et al. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor after initial chemotherapy for elderly patients with primary acute myelogenous leukemia. N Engl J Med
1995;332:1671.
121. Rowe JW, Andersen JW, Mazza JJ, et al. A randomized placebo-controlled phase III study of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in adult patients (>55 to 70 years of age) with
acute myelogenous leukemia: a study of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (E1490). Blood 1995;86:457.
122. Dombret H, Chastang C, Fenaux P, et al. A controlled study of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in elderly patients after treatment for acute myelogenous leukemia. N
Engl J Med 1995;332:1678.
123. Heil G, Hoelzer D, Sanz MA, et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase III study of filgrastim in remission induction and consolidation therapy for adults with de novo acute
myeloid leukemia. Blood 1997;90:4710.
124. Godwin JE, Kopecky KJ, Head DR, et al. A double-blind, placebo controlled trial of granulocyte colony stimulating factor in elderly patients with previously untreated acute myeloid leukemia: a
Southwest Oncology Group Study (9031). Blood 1998;91:3607.
125. Witz F, Sadoun A, Perrin MC, et al. A placebo-controlled study of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor administered during and after induction treatment for
de novo acute myelogenous leukemia in elderly patients. Blood 1998;91:2722.
126. Gmur J, Burger J, Schanz U, Fehr J, Schaffner A. Safety of stringent prophylactic platelet transfusion policy for patients with acute leukemia. Lancet 1991;338:1223.
127. Rebulla P, Finazzi G, Marangoni F, et al. The threshold for prophylactic platelet transfusions in adults with acute myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1870.
128. Wandt H, Frank M, Ehninger G, et al. Safety and cost effectiveness of a 10 × 10 9/L trigger for prophylactic platelet transfusions compared with traditional 20 × 10 9/L trigger: a prospective
comparative trial in 105 patients with acute myeloid leukemia. Blood 1998;91:3601.
129. Trial to Reduce Alloimmunization to Platelets Study Group. Leukocyte reduction and ultraviolet B irradiation of platelets to prevent alloimmunization and refractoriness to platelet transfusions. N
Engl J Med 1997;337:1861.
130. Tallman MS, Kwaan HC. Reassessing the hemostatic disorder associated with acute promyelocytic leukemia. Blood 1992;79:543.
131. Goldberg MA, Ginsburg D, Mayer RJ, et al. Is heparin administration necessary during induction chemotherapy for patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia? Blood 1987;69:187.
132. Barbui T, Finazzi G, Falanga A. The impact of all- trans-retinoic acid on coagulopathy of acute promyelocytic leukemia. Blood 1998;91:3093.
133. O'Regan S, Carson S, Chesney RW, Drummond KN. Electrolyte and acid base disturbances in the management of leukemia. Blood 1997;49:345.
134. Mir WA, Delamore IW. Metabolic disorders in acute myeloid leukemia. Br J Haematol 1978;40:79.
135. Swirsky DM, DeBastos M, Parish SE, Rees JKH, Hayhoe FGJ. Features affecting outcome during remission induction of acute myeloid leumemia in 619 adult patients. Br J Hematol
1986;64:435.
136. Keating A, Baker MA. Effect of exclusion criteria on interpretation of clinical outcome in AML. In: Gale RP, ed. Acute myelogenous leukemia: progress and controversies. New York: Wiley-Liss,
1990:235.
137. Yates J, Gildewell O, Wienik P, et al. Cytosine arabinoside with daunorubicin or adriamycin for therapy of acute myelocytic leukemia: A CALGB study. Blood 1982;60:454.
138. Rai KR, Holland JF, Glidewell OJ, et al. Treatment of acute myelocytic leukemia: a study by Cancer and Leukemia Group B. Blood 1981;58:1203.
139. Neugut AI, Robinson E, Nieves J, Murray T, Tsai WY. Poor survival of treatment-related acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. JAMA 1990;264:1006.
140. Gajewski JL, Ho WG, Nimer SD, et al. Efficacy of intensive chemotherapy for acute myelogenous leukemia associated with preleukemic syndrome. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1637.
141. Keating MJ, Smith TL, Kantarjian H, et al. Cytogenetic pattern in acute myelogenous leukemia: a major reproducible determinant of outcome. Leukemia 1988;2:403.
142. Schiffer CA, Lee EJ, Tomiyasu T, Wiernik PH, Testa JR. Prognostic impact of cytogenetic abnormalities in patients with de novo acute nonlymphcytic leukemia. Blood 1989;73:263.
143. Ferrant A, Lapopin M, Frassoni F, et al. Karyotype in acute myeloblastic leukemia: prognostic significance for bone marrow transplantation in first remission: a European Group for Blood and
Marrow Transplantation Study. Blood 1997;76:2931.
144. Ellison RR, Holland JF, Weil M, et al. Arabin osyl cytosine: a useful agent in the treatment of acute leukemia in adults. Blood 1968;32:507.
145. Carey RW, Ribas-Mundo M, Ellison RR, et al. Comparative study of cytosine arabinoside therapy alone and combined with thioguanine, mercaptopurine, or daunorubicin in acute myelocytic
leukemia. Cancer 1975;36:1560.
146. Yates JW, Wallace HT Jr, Ellison RR, Holland JF. Cytosine arabinoside (NSC 63878) and daunorubicin (NSC 83142) therapy in acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. Cancer Chemother Rep
1973;57:485.
147. Gales RP, Cline MJ. High remission induction rate in acute myeloid leukaemia. Lancet 1977;1:49.
148. Amadori S, Papa G, Meloni G, et al. Daunorubicin, cytosine arabinoside and 6-thioguanine (DAT) combination therapy for the treatment of acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. Leuk Res
1979;3:147.
149. Preisler H, Davis RB, Kirshner J, et al. Comparison of three remission induction regimens and two post induction strategies for the treatment of acute nonlymphocytic leukemia: a Cancer and
Leukemia Group B study. Blood 1987;69:1441.
150. Dillman RO, David RB, Green MR, et al. A comparative study of two different doses of cytarabine for acute myeloid leukemia: a phase III trial of cancer and Leukemia Group B. Blood
1991;78:2520.

151. Bishop JF, Lowenthal RM, Joshua D, et al. Etoposide in acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1990;75:27.
152. Arlin Z, Case DC, Moore J, et al. Randomized multicenter trial of cytosine arabinoside with mitoxantrone or daunorubicin in previously untreated adult patients with acute nonlymphocytic
leukemia (ANLL). Leukemia 1990;4:177.
153. Berman E, Arlin ZA, Gaynor J, et al. Comparative trial of cytarabine and thioguanine in combination with amsacrine or daunorubicin in patients with untreated acute nonlymphocytic leukemia:
results of the L-16M protocol. Leukemia 1989;3:115.
154. Harousseau JL, Milpied N, Briere J, et al. Double intensive consolidation chemotherapy in adult acute myeloid leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1991;8:1432.
155. Hansen OP, Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Ellegaard J, et al. Aclarubicin plus cytosine arabinoside versus daunorubicin plus cytosine arabinoside in previously untreated patients with acute myeloid
leukemia: A Danish National Phase III trial. Leukemia 1991;5:510.
156. Berman E, Heller G, Santorsa J, et al. Results of a randomized trial comparing idarubicin and cytosine arabinoside with daunorubicin and cytosine arabinoside in adult patients with newly
diagnosed acute myelogenous leukemia. Blood 1991;77:1666.
157. Vogler WR, Velez-Garcia E, Weiner RS, et al. A phase III trial comparing idarubicine and daunorubicin in combination with cytarabine in acute myelogenous leukemia: a Southeastern cancer
study group study. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1103.
158. Wiernik PH, Banks PLC, Case Jr, et al. Cytarabine plus idarubicin or daunorubicin as induction and consolidation therapy for previously untreated adult patients with acute myeloid leukemia.
Blood 1992;79:313.
159. Berman E, Wiemik P, Vogler R, et al. Long term follow-up of three randomized trial comparing idarubicin and daunorubicin as induction therapies for patients with untreated acute myeloid
leukemia. Cancer 1997;80(Suppl 2):2181.
160. Rowe JM, Neuberg D, Friedenberg W, et al. A phase III study of daunorubicin vs. idarubicin vs. mitoxantrone for older adult patients (>55yrs) with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML): a study
of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (E3993). Blood 1998;92(Suppl 1):1284(abst).
161. Schiller G, Gajewski J, Nimer S, et al. A randomized study of intermediate versus conventional-dose cytarabine as intensive induction for acute myelogenous leuaemia. Br J Haematol
1992;81:170.
162. Bishop JF, Matthews JP, Young GA, et al. A randomized study of high dose cytarabine in induction in acute myeloid leukemia. Blood 1996;87:1710.
163. Weick J, Kopecky K, Appelbaurn F, et al. A randomized investigation of high-dose versus standard dose cytosine arabinoside with daunorubicin in patients with patients with previously
untreated acute myeloid leukemia. Blood 1996;88:2841.
164. Buchner T, Hiddenman W, Koenigsmann M, et al. Recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor after chemotherapy in patients with acute myeloid leukemia at higher
age or after relapse. Blood 1991;78:1190.
165. Maslak P, Weiss M, Berman E, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor following chemotherapy in elderly patients with newly diagnosed acute myelogenous leukemia. Leukemia
1996;10:32.
166. Ohno R, Naoe T, Kanamaru T, et al. A double-blind controlled study of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor started two days before induction chemotherapy in refractory acute myeloid
leukemia. Blood 1994;83:2086.
167. Estey E, Thall P, Andreeff M, et al. Use of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor before, during, and after fludarabine plus cytarabine induction therapy of newly diagnosed acute myelogenous
leukemia or myelodysplastic syndromes: comparison with fludarabine plus cytarabine with granulocytes colony-stimulating factor. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:671.
168. Bennett CL, Stinson TJ, Tallman MS, et al. Economic analysis of a randomized placebo-controlled phase III study of granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor in adult patients (>55 to
70 years of age) with acute myelogenous leukemia. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (E1490). Ann Oncol 1999;10:177.
169. Buchner T, Urbanitz D, Hiddemann W, et al. Intensified induction and consolidation with and without maintenance chemotherapy for acute myeloid leukemia: two multicenter studies of the
German AML Cooperative Group. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1583.
170. Cassileth PA, Harrington DP, Hines JD, et al. Maintenance chemotherapy prolongs remission duration in adult acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:583.
171. Cassileth PA, Begg CB, Bennett JM, et al. A randomized study of the efficacy of consolidation therapy in adult acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1984;63:843.
172. Sauter C, Berchtold W, Foop M, et al. Acute myelogenous leukemia: maintenance chemotherapy after early consolidation does not prolong survival. Lancet 1984;1:379.
173. Cassileth PA, Lynch E, Hines JD, et al. Varying intensity of postremission therapy in acute myeloid leukemia. Blood 1992;79:1924.
174. Bolwell BJ, Cassileth PA, Gale RP. High dose cytarabine: a review. Leukemia 1988;2:253.
175. Schiller G, Gajewski J, Territo M, et al. Long-term outcome of high-dose cytarabine consolidation chemotherapy for adults with acute myelogenous leukemia. Blood 1992;80:2977.
176. Bloomfield CD, Lawrence D, Arthur DC, et al. Curative impact of intensification with high-dose cytarabine (HiDAC) in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) varies by cytogenetic group. Blood
1994;84(Suppl 1):431(abst).
177. Sullivan KM, Weiden PL, Storb R, et al. Influence of acute and chronic graft-versus-host disease on relapse and survival after bone marrow transplantation from HLA-identical siblings as
treatment of acute and chronic leukemia. Blood 1989;73:1720.
178. Horowitz MM, Gale RP, Sondel PM, et al. Graft-versus-leukemia reactions after bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1990;75:555.
179. Stockerl-Goldstein A, Blume K, Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation for adult patients with acute myeloid leukemia. In: Thomas ED, Blume K, Forman S, eds. Hematopoietic cell
transplantation. 2nd ed. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 1999:823.
180. Berman E, Little C, Gee T, O'Reilly R, Clarkson B. Reasons that patients with acute myelogenous leukemia do not undergo allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med
1992;326:156.
181. Szydlo R, Goldman JM, Klein JP, et al. Results of allogeneic bone marrow transplants for leukemia using donors other than HLA-Identical siblings. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1767.
182. Slavin S, Nagler A, Naparstek E, et al. Nonmyeloablative stem cell transplantation and cell therapy as an alternative to conventional bone marrow transplantation with lethal cytoreduction for
the treatment of malignant and nonmalignant hematologic diseases. Blood 1998;91:756.
183. Gorin NC. Autlogous stem cell transplantation in acute myelocytic leukemia. Blood 1998;92:1073.
184. Brenner MK, Rill DR, Moen RC, et al. Gene-marking to trace origin of relapse after autologous bone-marrow transplantation. Lancet 1993;341:85.
185. To LB, Juttner CA. Peripheral blood stem cell autografting: a new therapeutic option for AML? Br J Hematol 1987;66:285.
186. To LB, Russell J, Moore S, Juttner CA. Residual leukemia cannot be detected in very early remission peripheral blood stem cell collections in acute non-lymphoblastic leukemia. Leuk Res
1987;11:327.
187. Carella AM, Cunningham I, Lerma E, et al. Mobilization and transplantation of Philadelphia-negative peripheral blood progenitor cells early in chronic myelogenous leukemia. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:1575.
188. Miyamoto T, Nagafuji K, Harada M, et al. Quantitative analysis of AML 1/ETO transcripts in peripheral blood stem cell harvests from patients with t(8;21) acute myelogenous leukaemia. Br J
Hematol 1995;91:132.
189. Korbling M, Fliedner TM, Holle R, et al. Autologous blood stem cell (ABSCT) versus purged bone marrow transplantation (pABMT) in standard risk AML: influence of source and cell
composition of the autograft on hemopoietic reconstitution and disease-free survival. Bone Marrow Transplant 1991;7:343.
190. Stein AS, O'Donnell MR, Chai A, et al. In vivo purging with high-dose cytarabine followed by high dose chemoradiotherapy and reinfusion of unpurged bone marrow for adult acute
myelogenous leukemia in first complete remission. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2206.
191. Burnett AK, Goldstone AH, Stevens RM, et al. Randomised comparison of addition of autologous bone-marrow transplantation to intensive chemotherapy for acute myeloid leukaemia in first
remission: results of MRC AML 10 trial. Lancet 1998;351:700.
192. Zittoun RA, Mandelli F, Willemze R, et al. Autologous or allogeneic bone marrow transplantation compared with intensive chemotherapy in acute myelogenous leukemia. N Engl J Med
1995;332:217.
193. Harousseau J-L, Cahn J-Y, Pignon B, et al., Comparison of autologous bone marrow transplantation and intensive chemotherapy as postremission therapy in adult acute myeloid leukemia.
Blood 1997;90:2978.
194. Cassileth PA, Harrington DP, Appelbaum FR, et al. Chemotherapy compared with autologous or allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in the management of acute myeloid leukemia in first
remission. N Engl J Med 1998;339:1649.
195. Schiffman K, Clift R, Applebaum FR, et al. Consequences of cryopreserving first remission autologous marrow for use after relapse in patients with acute myeloid leukemia. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1993;11:227.
196. Keating MJ, Kantarjian H, Smith TL, et al. Response to salvage therapy and survival after relapse in acute myelogenous leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1071.
197. Clift RA, Buckner CD, Applebaum FR, et al. Allogeneic marrow transplantation during untreated first relapse of acute myeloid leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1723.
198. Petersen FB, Lynch MHE, Clift RA, et al. Autologous marrow transplantation for patients with acute myeloid leukemia in untreated first relapse or in second complete remission. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:1353.
199. Chopra R, Goldstone AH, McMillan AK, et al. Successful treatment of acute myeloid leukemia beyond first remission with autologous bone marrow transplantation using
busulfan/cyclophosphamide and unpurged marrow: the British autograft group experience. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1840.
200. Yeager AM, Kaizer H, Santos GW, et al. Autologous bone marrow transplantation in patients with acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia using ex vivo in marrow treatment with 4
hydroperocyclophoaphamide. N Engl J Med 1986;315:141.
201. Hiddemann W, Martin WR, Sauerland CM, Heinecke A, Bochner T. Definition of refractoriness against conventional chemotherapy in acute myeloid leukemia: a proposal based on the results of
retreatment by thiogauanine, cytosine arabinoside, and daunorubicin (TAB 9) in 150 patients with relapse after standardized first line therapy. Leukemia 1990;4:184.
202. Vey N, Keating M, Giles F, et al. Effect of complete remission on survival in patients with acute myelogenous leukemia receiving first salvage therapy [letter]. Blood 1999;93:3149.
203. Maslak P, Hegewisch-Becker S, Godfrey L, Andreeff M. Flow cytometric determination of the multi-drug resistant phenotype in acute leukemia. Cytometry 1994;17:84.
204. Leith CP, Chen I-M, Kopecky KJ, et al. Correlation of multidrug resistance (MDR1) protein expression with functional dye/drug efflux in acute myeloid leukemia by multiparameter flow
cytometry: identification of discordant CD34+/MDR1-/efflux+ and MDR1+/efflux- cases. Blood 1995;86:2329.
205. Filipits M, Suchomel RW, Zochbauer, et al. Multidrug resistance associated protein in acute myeloid leukemia: no impact on treatment outcome. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:1419.
206. Filipits M, Pohl G, Stranzl T, et al. Expression of the lung resistance protein predicts poor outcome in de novo acute myeloid leukemia. Blood 1998;91:1508.
207. Advani R, Saba HI, Tallman MS, et al. Treatment of refractory and relapsed acute myelogenous leukemia with combination chemotherapy plus the multidrug resistance modulator PSC 833
(Valspdar). Blood 1999;93:787.
208. Herzig RH, Wolff SN, Lazarus HM, et al. High-dose cytosine arabinoside therapy for refractory leukemia. Blood 1983;62:361.
209. Bolwell BJ, Cassileth PA, Gale RP. High dose cytarabine: a review. Leukemia 1988;2:253.
210. Forman SJ, Schmidt GM, Nademanee AP, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation as therapy for primary induction failure for patients with acute leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1570.
211. Ho AD, Lipp T, Ehninger G, et al. Combination of mitoxantrone and etoposide in refractory acute myelogenous leukemiaan active and well-tolerated regimen. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:213.
212. Vogler WR, Harrington DP, Winton EF, et al. Phase II clinical trial of carboplatin in relapsed and refractory leukemia. Leukemia 1992;6:1072.
213. Brown RA, Herzig RH, Wolff SN, et al. High-dose etoposide and cyclophosphamide without bone marrow transplantation for resistant hematologic malignancy. Blood 1990;76:473.
214. Kumar L. Leukemia; management of relapse after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1710.
215. Giralt SA, Champlin RE. Leukemia relapse after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: a review. Blood 1994;84:3603.
216. Kolb H-J, Schattenberg A, Goldman JM, et al. Graft-versus-Leukemia effect of donor lymphocyte transfusions in marrow grafted patients. Blood 1995;86:2041.
217. Kantajian HM, Keating MJ, Walters RS, et al. Acute promyelocytic leukemia: M.D. Anderson Hospital experience. Am J Med 1986;80:789.
218. Cunningham I, Gee TS, Reich LM, et al. Acute promyelocytic leukemia: treatment results during a decade at Memorial Hospital. Blood 1989;73:116.
219. Head D, Kopecky KJ, Weick J, et al. Effect of aggressive daunomycin therapy on survival in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Blood 1995;86:1717.
220. Huang ME, Ye YC, Chen SR, et al. Use of all-trans retinoic acid in the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia. Blood 1988;72:567.
221. Degos L, Dombret H, Chomienne C, et al. All-trans retinoic acid as a differentiating agent in the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia. Blood 1995;85:2643.
222. Warrell RP Jr, Frankel SR, Miller WH Jr, et al. Differentiation therapy of acute promyelocytic leukemia with tretinoin (all-trans-retinoic acid). N Engl J Med 1991;324:1385.
223. Warrell RP, Maslak P, Eardley A, et al. Treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia with all-trans retinoic acid: an update of the New York experience. Leukemia 1994;8:929.
224. Frankel SR, Eardley A, Lauwers G, Weiss M, Warrell RP Jr. The “retinoic acid syndrome” in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:292.
225. Stadler M, Ganser A, Hoelzer D. Acute promyelocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1994;330:140.

226. Castaigne S, Chomienne C, Daniel MT, et al. All-trans retinoic acid as a differentiation therapy for acute promyelocytic leukemia. I. Clinical results. Blood 1990;76:1704.
227. Fenaux P, Le Deley MC, Castaigne S, et al. Effect of all-trans retinoic acid in newly diagnosed acute promyelocytic leukemia: results of a multicenter randomized trial. Blood 1993;82:3241.
228. Vahdat L, Maslak P, Miller WH Jr, et al. Early mortality and the retinoic acid syndrome in acute promyelocytic leukemia: impact of leukocytosis, low-dose chemotherapy, PML/RAR-a isoform,
and CD13 expression in patients treated with all-trans retinoic acid. Blood 1994;8:3843.
229. Tallman MS, Andersen J, Schiffer CA, et al. All-trans retinoic acid in acute promyelocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1021.
230. Mandelli F, Diverio D, Avvisati G, et al. Molecular remission in PML/RARa-positive acute promyelocytic leukemia by combined all-trans retinoic acid and idarubicin (AIDA) therapy. Blood
1997;90:1014.
231. Fenaux P, Chastang C, Chevret S, et al. A randomized comparison of all transretinoic acid (ATRA) followed by chemotherapy and ATRA plus chemotherapy and the role of maintenance
therapy in newly diagnosed acute promyelocytic leukemia. Blood 1999;94:1192.
232. Lo Coco F, Diverio D, Avvisati G, et al. Therapy of molecular relapse in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Blood 1999;94:2225.
233. Soignet S, Maslak P, Wang Z-G, et al. Complete remission after treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia with arsenic trioxide. N Engl J Med 1998;339:1341.
234. Meloni G, Diverio D, Vignetti M, et al. Autologous bone marrow transplantation for acute promyelocytic leukemia in second remission: prognostic relevance of pretransplant minimal residual
disease by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction of the PML/a fusion gene. Blood 1997;90:1321.
235. Rivera GK, Pinkel D, Simone JV, Hancock ML, Crist WM. Treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia: 30 years' experience at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital. N Engl J Med
1993;329:1289.
236. Hoelzer D. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia-progress in children, less in adults. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1343.
237. Hoelzer D, Thiel E, Löffler H, et al. Prognostic factors in a multicenter study for treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia in adults. Blood 1988;71:123.
238. Gaynor J, Chapman D, Little C, et al. A cause-specific hazard rate analysis of prognostic factors among 199 adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia: the Memorial Hospital experience since
1969. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1014.
239. Boucheix C, David B, Sebban C, et al. Immunophenotype of adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia, clinical parameters and outcome: an analysis of a prospective trial including 562 tested
patients (LALA87). Blood 1994;84:1603.
240. Barrett AJ, Horowitz MM, Ash RC, et al. Bone marrow transplantation for Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1992;79:3067.
241. Watkins CH, Hall BE. Monocytic leukemia of the Naegeli and Schilling types. Am J Clin Pathol 1940;10:387.
242. Fiere D, Extra JM, David B, et al. Treatment of 218 adult acute lymphoblastic leukemias. Semin Oncol 1987;14:64.
243. Hoelzer D, Thiel E, Löffler H, et al. Intensified therapy in acute lymphoblastic and acute undifferentiated leukemia in adults. Blood 1984;64:38.
244. Kantarjian HM, Walters RS, Keating MJ, et al. Results of the vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone regimen in adults with standard-and high-risk acute lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin
Oncol 1990;8:994.
245. Larson RA, Dodge RK, Burns CP, et al. A five-drug remission induction regimen with intensive consolidation for adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia: cancer and leukemia group B study
8811. Blood 1995;85:2025.
246. Linker CA, Levitt LJ, O'Donnell M, Forman SJ, Ries CA. Treatment of adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia with intensive cyclical chemotherapy: a follow-up report. Blood 1991;78:2814.
247. Stewart K, Keating A, Sutton D, et al. Adult acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: the value of therapy intensification. Leukemia Lymphoma 1991;4:103.
248. Hussein KK, Dahlberg D, Head D, et al. Treatment of acute ly/mphoblastic leukemia in adults with intensive induction, consolidation, and maintenance chemotherapy. Blood 1989;73:57.
249. Schauer P, Arlin ZA, Mertelsmann R, et al. Treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia in adults: results of the L-10 and L-10M protocols. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:462.
250. Gottlieb AJ, Weinbert V, Ellison RR, et al. Efficacy of daunorubicin in the therapy of adult acute lymphocytic leukemia: a prospective randomized trial by Cancer and Leukemia Group B. Blood
1984;64:267.
251. Preti A, Kantarjian HM. Management of adult acute lymphocytic leukemia: present issues and key challenges. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1312.
252. Ellison RR, Mick R, Cuttner J, et al. The effects of postinduction intensification treatment with cytarabine and daunorubicin in adult acute lymphocytic leukemia: a prospective randomized
clinical trial by Cancer Leukemia Group B. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:2002.
253. Cassileth PA, Anderson JW, Bennett JM, et al. Adult acute lymphocytic leukemia: the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group experience. Leukemia 1992;6:178.
254. Cuttner J, Mick R, Budman DR, et al. Phase III trial of brief intensive treatment of adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia comparing daunorubicin and mitoxantrone-A CALGB study. Leukemia
1991;5:425.
255. Inati A, Sallan SE, Cassady JR, et al. Efficacy and morbidity of central nervous system “prophylaxis” in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: eight years' experience with cranial irradiation
and intrathecal methotrexate. Blood 1983;61:297.
256. Omura GA, Moffitt S, Vogler WR, Salter MM. Combination chemotherapy of adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia with randomized central nervous system prophylaxis. Blood 1980;55:199.
257. Ohno R. Current progress in the treatment of adult acute leukemia in Japan. Jpn J Clin Oncol 1993;22:85.
258. Weiss M, Maslak P, Feldman E, et al. Cytarabine with high dose mitoxantrone induces rapid complete remissions in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) without the use of vincristine or
prednisone. J Clin Oncol 1996;148:2480.
259. Capizzi RL, Poole M, Cooper MR, et al. Treatment of poor risk acute leukemia with sequential high-dose Ara-C and asparaginase. Blood 1984;63:694.
260. Amadori S, Papa G, Avvisati G, et al. Sequential combination high-dose Ara-C and asparaginase for the treatment of advanced acute leukemia and lymphoma. Leuk Res 1984;8:729.
261. Wells RJ, Feusner J, Devney R, et al. Sequential high dose cytosine arabinoside-asparaginase treatment in advance childhood leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:998.
262. Ishii E, Mara T, Ohkubo K, et al. Treatment of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia with intermediate-dose cytosine arabinoside and adriamycin. Med Pediatr Oncol 1986;14:73.
263. Giona F, Testi A, Amadori G, et al. Idarubicin and high-dose cytarabine in the treatment of refractory and relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Ann Oncol 1990;1:51.
264. Tan C, Steinherz P, Meyers P. Idarubicin in combination with high-dose cytosine arabinoside in patients with acute leukemia in relapse. Proc Annu Meet Am Assoc Cancer Res
1990;31:A1133(abst).
265. Hiddemann W, Kreutzman H, Straif K, et al. High-dose cytosine arabinoside in combination with mitoxantrone for the treatment of refractory acute myeloid and lymphoblastic leukemia. Semin
Oncol 1987;14:73.
266. Leclerc J, Rivard G, Blanch M, et al. The association of once a day high-dose Ara-C followed by mitoxantrone for three days induces a high rate of complete remission in children with poor
prognosis acute leukemia. Blood 1988;72(Suppl):210(abst).
267. Kantarjian H, Walters R, Keating M, et al. Mitoxantrone and high dose cytosine arabinoside for the treatment of refractory acute lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer 1990;65:5.
268. Feldman EJ, Alberts DS, Arlin Z, et al. Phase I clinical and pharmacokinetic evaluation of high-dose mitoxantrone in combination with cytarabine in patients with acute leukemia. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:2002.
269. Doney K, Fisher LD, Appelbaum FR, et al. Treatment of adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia with allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Multivariate analysis of factors affecting acute
graft-versus-host disease, relapse, and relapse-free survival. Bone Marrow Transplant 1991;7:453.
270. Gale RP, Horowitz MM, Ash RC, et al. Identical-twin bone marrow transplants for leukemia. Ann Intern Med 1994;120:646.
271. Weisdorf DJ, Woods WG, Nesbit ME Jr, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: risk factors and clinical outcome. Br J Haematol 1994;86:62.
272. Sebban C, Lepage E, Vernant J-P, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia in first complete remission: a comparative study. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:2580.
273. Zhang M-J, Hoelzer D, Horowitz MM, et al. Long-term follow-up of adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia in first remission treated with chemotherapy or bone marrow transplantation. Ann
Intern Med 1995;123:428.
274. Attal M, Blaise D, Marit G, et al. Consolidation treatment of adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a prospective, randomized trial comparing allogeneic versus autologous bone marrow
transplantation and testing the impact of recombinant interleukin-2 after autologous bone marrow transplant. Blood 1995;86:1619.
275. Fière D, Lepage E, Sebban C, et al. Adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a multicentric randomized trial testing bone marrow transplantation as postremission therapy. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:1990.
276. Soussain C, Patte C, Ostronoff M, et al. Small noncleaved cell lymphoma and leukemia in adults. A retrospective study of 65 adults treated with the LMB pediatric protocols. Blood 1995;85:664.
277. Tallman MS, Hakimian D, Shaw K, et al. Granulocytic sarcoma is associated with the 8;21 translocation in acute myeloid leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:690.
278. Byrd JC, Edenfield WJ, Shields DJ, Dawson NA. Extramedullary myeloid cell tumors in acute nonlymphocytic leukemia: a clinical review. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1800.
279. Byrd JC, Weiss RB, Arthur DC, et al. Extramedullary leukemia adversely affects hematologic complete remission rate and overall survival in patients with t(8;21) (q22;q22): Results from
Cancer and Leukemia Group B 8461. Blood 1999;93:2143.
280. Baer MR, Barcos M, Farrell H, et al. Acute myelogenous leukemia with leukemia cutis. Cancer 1989;63:2192.
281. Cassileth PA, Sylvester LS, Bennett JM, Begg CB. High peripheral blast counts in adult acute myelogenous leukemia is a primary risk factor for CNS leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:495.
282. Holmes R, Keating MJ, Cork A. A unique pattern of central nervous system leukemia in acute myelomonocytic leukemia associated with inv(16) (p13q22). Blood 1985;6:495.
283. Brinch L, Evensen SA, Stavem P. Leukemia in the central nervous system. J Intern Med 1988;224:173.
284. McKee LC Jr, Collins RD. Intravascular leucocyte thrombi and aggregates as a course of morbidity and mortality in leukemia. Medicine 1974;52:463.
285. Schiffer CA. Interferon studies in the treatment of patients with leukemia. Semin Oncol 1995;18:1.
286. Caron PC, Scheinberg DA. Immunotherapy for acute leukemias. Curr Opin Oncol 1994;6:14.
287. Jurcic J, Scheinberg DA. Recent developments in the radioimmunotherapy of cancer. Curr Opin Immunol 1994;6:715.
288. Meyers JD, Flournoy N, Sanders JE, et al. Prophylactic use of human leukocyte interferon after allogeneic marrow transplantation. Ann Intern Med 1987;107:809.
289. Ochs J, Brecher ML, Mahoney D, et al. Recombinant interferon-a given before and in combination with standard chemotherapy in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia in the first marrow
relapse: a Pediatric Oncology Group (POG) pilot study. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:777.
290. Lotzová E, Savary CA, Herberman RB. Induction of NK cell activity against fresh human leukemia in culture with interleukin 2. J Immunol 1987;138:2718.
291. Foa R. Does interleukin-2 have a role in the management of acute leukemia? J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1817.
292. Soiffer RJ, Murray C, Gonin R, Ritz J. Effect of low-dose interleukin-2 on disease relapse after T-cell-depleted allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1994;84:964.
293. Foa R, Meloni G, Tosti S, et al. Treatment of acute myeloid leukaemia patients with recombinant interleukin 2: a pilot study. Br J Haematol 1991;77:491.
294. Meloni G, Foa R, Vignetti M, et al. Interleukin-2 may induce prolonged remissions in advanced acute myelogenous leukemia. Blood 1994;84:2158.
295. Benyunes MC, Massumoto AY, Higuchi CM, et al. Interleukin-2 with or without lymphokine-activated killer cells as consolidative immunotherapy after autologous bone marrow transplantation
for acute myelogenous leukemia. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:159.
296. Caron PC, Lai LT, Scheinberg DA. Interleukin-2 enhancement of cytotoxicity by humanized monoclonal antibody M195 (anti-CD33) in myelogenous leukemia. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:63.
297. Kossman SE, Scheinberg DA, Jurcic JB, Jimenez J, Caron PC. A phase I trial of humanized monoclonal antibody HuM195 (anti-CD33) with low dose Interleukin-2 (IL-2) in acute myelogenous
leukemia. Clin CA Res 1999;5:2748.
298. Grossbard ML, Press OW, Appelbaum FR, Bernstein ID, Nadler LM. Monoclonal antibody-based therapies of leukemia and lymphoma. Blood 1992;80:863.
299. Caron PC, Jurcic JG, Scott AM, et al. A phase IB trial of humanized monoclonal antibody M195 (anti-CD33) in myeloid leukemia: specific targeting without immunogenicity. Blood
1994;83:1760.
300. Caron PC, Dumont L, Scheinberg DA. Super-saturating infusional humanized anti-CD33 monoclonal antibody HuM195 in myelogenous leukemia. Clin CA Res 1998;4:1421.
301. Jurcic J, DeBlasio T, Dumont L, Yao TJ, Scheinberg DA. Molecular remission induction without relapse and after anti-CD33 antibody in APL. Submitted 1998.
302. Sievers EL, Appelbaum FR, Spielberger RT, et al. S elective ablation of acute myeloid leukemia using antibody-targeted chemotherapy: a phase I study of an anti-CD33 calicheamicin
immunoconjugate. Blood 1999;93:3678.
303. Jurcic JG, McDevitt MR, Sgouros G, et al. Phase I trial of targeted alpha-particle therapy for myeloid leukemias with bismuth-213-HuM195 (anti-CD33). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:7a(abst).
304. Matthews DC, Appelbaum FR, Eary JF, et al. Development of a marrow transplant regimen for acute leukemia using targeted hematopoietic irradiation delivered by 131I-labeled anti-CD45
antibody combined with cyclophosphamide and total body irradiation. Blood 1995;85:1122.
305. Schwartz MA, Lovett DR, Redner A, et al. A dose-escalation trial of M195 labeled with iodine 131 for cytoreduction and marrow ablation in relapsed or refractory myeloid leukemias. J Clin

Oncol 1993;11:294.
306. Jurcic JG, Divgi CR, McDevitt MR, et al. Potential for myeloablation with yttrium-90-labeled HuM195 (anti-CD33): a phase I trial in advance myeloid leukemias. Blood
1998;92(Suppl):613a(abst).
307. Selvaggi KJ, Wilson JW, Mills LE, et al. Improved outcome for high-risk acute myeloid leukemia patients using autologous bone marrow transplantation and monoclonal antibody-purged bone
marrow. Blood 1994;83:1698.
308. Pinilla-Ibarz J, Cathcart K, Korontsvit T, et al. Vaccination of patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia with bcr-abl oncogene breakpoint fusion peptides generates specific immune
responses. Blood 2000;95:1781.

SECTION 46.3.1 Chronic Leukemias: Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 46.3.1
Chronic Leukemias: Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia
HAGOP M. KANTARJIAN
STEFAN FADERL
MOSHE TALPAZ
Introduction
Epidemiology
Etiology and Pathogenesis
Etiology
Molecular Pathogenesis
Cellular Pathogenesis
Diagnosis and Clinical Course
Clinical Manifestations
Laboratory Tests
Progression of Chronic Myeloid Leukemia
Treatment
Historical and Conventional Treatments for Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia
Stem Cell Transplantation
Interferon-a
Treatment Decision Analysis: Interferon-a Versus Stem Cell Transplantation
Management of Accelerated and Blastic Phase Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia
New Agents and Approaches
Conclusions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a clonal myeloproliferative disorder of a pluripotent hematopoietic progenitor cell. It is characterized by excessive
proliferation of marrow granulocytes, erythroid precursors, megakaryocytes, and connective tissue–forming cells. Clonal proliferation and transformation of myeloid
progenitor cells usually dominate the clinical picture. The CML cells harbor a distinctive cytogenetic abnormality, the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph). It results from a
translocation between the long arms of chromosomes 9 and 22. Segments of the ABL gene on chromosome 9 are fused to segments of BCR on chromosome 22. The
BCR-ABL fusion genes are translated into chimeric proteins with increased tyrosine kinase activity such as p210. Downstream signaling events, which heavily involve
ras pathways, eventually activate genes responsible for the uncontrolled proliferation of the leukemic clone.
CML is divided into three clinical phases. The benign or chronic phase may last for a few years. Transformation through an accelerated phase into a blastic phase
typically follows. Whereas outcome in the transformed phases is still unsatisfactory, advances in stem cell transplantation (SCT), interferon-based therapies, and
supportive care have had a major effect on prognosis in chronic phase disease. Novel treatments based on immunomodulation and our increasing understanding of
signal transduction pathways in the leukemic cells have generated new targets for therapy that are currently being investigated in clinical trials.
Current state-of-the-art therapies result in increasing numbers of patients who achieve complete cytogenetic remissions. However, highly sensitive molecular assays
such as fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) frequently detect BCR-ABL rearrangements in these patients. In many cases,
these patients stay in remission for many years, raising the question of the significance of molecular cures versus functional cures and the mechanisms that sustain
these remissions. Thus, CML has not only become a paradigm for our understanding of leukemogenesis and targeted drug development, but is also an ideal model
for the study of minimal residual disease in hematologic malignancies.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Some 4000 to 5000 patients are diagnosed with CML in the United States annually. The incidence of CML is 1 to 2 per 100,000 population with a male to female ratio
of 1.4 to 2.2:1.0. CML accounts for 7% to 15% of leukemias among adults. The median age at presentation is between 45 and 55 years. One-third of the patients are
older than 60 years. 1 This incidence used to be higher in earlier studies and the more recently reported decrease may be a consequence of earlier detection, referral
of younger patients to large centers, and exclusion of patients with CML-like conditions such as chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, Ph-negative CML, or other
myeloproliferative disorders. Nevertheless, the proportion of patients over age 60 is important when considering therapeutic options such as allogeneic SCT, which is
associated with a high treatment-related mortality, or interferon-a (IFN-a), which has more side effects in older patients. CML is uncommon in children and
adolescents in whom it accounts for less than 5% of the leukemias.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS
ETIOLOGY
The etiology of CML is unknown. There is little evidence for genetic factors linked to CML. Lack of concordance in monozygotic twins and the demonstration of Ph in
hematopoietic progenitor cells only, suggest that CML is an acquired disorder. 2 Offspring of parents with CML do not have a higher incidence of CML than the general
population. The incidence of CML is higher among survivors of the atomic bomb explosions in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 3 Effects of therapeutic doses of radiation on
the development of CML are disputed. No association has been established with infectious agents.
MOLECULAR PATHOGENESIS
More than 90% of patients with the clinical picture of CML demonstrate Ph in 95% to 100% of marrow cell metaphases. Through a reciprocal translocation between
the long arms of chromosomes 9 and 22, a large 3' segment of the ABL gene on chromosome 9q34 is fused to a 5' segment of the BCR gene on chromosome 22q11,
creating a hybrid BCR-ABL gene on 22q11 and, in two-thirds of patients, a reciprocal ABL-BCR gene on chromosome 9q+.4,5 In most cases, ABL exons 2 to 11 (also
referred to as a2 to a11) are transposed into the major breakpoint cluster region (M-bcr) of BCR between exons 13 or 14 (also called b2 or b3). The BCR-ABL fusion
mRNA extends over 8.5 kb and contains a b2a2 or b3a2 junction. It is translated into a chimeric protein of 210 kD called p210. 6,7 In most cases, CML cells express
either b2a2 or b3a2 transcripts, but in approximately 5% alternative splicing causes expression of both forms. No significant difference exists with respect to response
to treatment, prognosis, or clinical features, except for a higher platelet count in patients with b3a2 transcripts. 8,9
In rare cases of CML, but in 50% of adults and up to 80% of children with Ph-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia, the breakpoint on chromosome 22 is located
centromeric to M-bcr between exons e1 and e2 referred to as the minor breakpoint cluster region (m-bcr). The e1a2 fusion gene is translated into a protein of 190 kD
termed p190.10 A third breakpoint location occurs telomeric from M-bcr, creating a fusion transcript with an e19a2 junction and a protein of 230 kD termed p230 ( Fig.
46.3.1-1).11 Expression of p190 in CML has been associated with monocytosis, and of p230 with the chronic neutrophilic leukemia variant and with thrombocytosis. 12

FIGURE 46.3.1-1. Probability of survival after human leukocyte antigen–identical sibling stem cell transplantation for chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase
by age, 1991 through 1997. (International Bone Marrow Transplant Registry data, with permission.)

In approximately two-thirds of cases, the reciprocal ABL-BCR rearrangement can be detected on the derivative chromosome 9q+. The 5' remnant of ABL exon 1 is
transposed to the 3' tail of BCR exons 14 or 15 (b3 or b4). No pathogenetic role in CML has been documented for this rearrangement. 13
Both in vitro and in vivo animal experiments using transgenic mice and retrovirus-mediated gene transfer into murine hematopoietic cells have demonstrated that
expression of BCR-ABL can imitate the clinical manifestations of CML, including the progression from chronic to blastic phase. Thus, the combined data from animal
experiments support the role of BCR-ABL and its fusion proteins as central mediators of myeloid proliferation and transformation in CML. 14
Whereas ABL encodes a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase (p145) whose activity is rigorously controlled and which is involved in signal transduction and regulation of cell
growth, p210 and p190 show increased and uncontrolled kinase activity. Constitutive activation of the kinases initiates downstream signaling pathways that
up-regulate transcription of genes mediating proliferation and transformation of CML hematopoietic progenitor cells. A central element of BCR-ABL signaling is Ras.
Activation of Ras is mediated through a series of adapter proteins that in turn also connect p210 to other kinases and signal transduction systems. 7,15
CELLULAR PATHOGENESIS
CML is dominated by expansion of myeloid progenitor cells at various stages of maturation, their premature release into the circulation, and their tendency to home to
extramedullary sites. Clonal expansion may also involve the erythroid, megakaryocytic, and B- as well as occasionally T-lymphoid lineages. The disorderly expansion
of leukemic progenitors in chronic phase may reflect both alterations in their proliferative activity and shifts in the balance of self-renewal and differentiation. Although
Ph-positive primitive hematopoietic cells (long-term culture-initiating cells) are found in lower frequencies than are colonies of normal progenitor cells and have a
longer generation time, they may undergo additional cell divisions. 16 Leukemic progenitor mass is also increased by altered regulation at the stem cell level, shifting
the balance between self-renewal and differentiation toward the differentiating cell pool, a process that has been referred to as discordant maturation.17 Stem cells
become part of the proliferating compartment, causing the neoplastic population to expand exponentially in later maturational compartments. At this stage, leukemic
progenitor cells may also be less responsive to growth regulatory signals from either cytokines or the bone marrow microenvironment. 16,17 and 18 Defective adherence of
CML progenitors to bone marrow stromal elements further facilitates their premature release into the peripheral blood. 19 Although differentiation remains relatively
unaffected during chronic phase disease, transforming events in accelerated and blastic phase substantially deregulate the delicate balance between normal and
leukemic progenitor colonies, leading to maturation arrest similar to events observed in acute leukemias.

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL COURSE
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
CML is a triphasic disease ( Table 46.3.1-1). At diagnosis, more than 90% of patients are in chronic phase. Symptoms at presentation reflect the increase in mass and
turnover of the CML hematopoietic progenitor cells. Patients may complain of lethargy and weakness, night sweats, and weight loss. Increase in abdominal girth and
abdominal discomfort may be due to an enlarged spleen. Less frequently, easy bruisability and bleeding are recorded due to platelet dysfunction. Ten percent to 20%
of patients from older series and as many as one-half of patients in more recent studies have no symptoms and are diagnosed by routine blood tests. Presentations in
accelerated or blastic phases occur in 5% to 10%. Splenomegaly occurs in up to 50% and is the most common finding on physical examination. Generalized
lymphadenopathy and fever, rare in chronic phase, may indicate an accelerated disease course. 20,21

TABLE 46.3.1-1. Phases of Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia

LABORATORY TESTS
Peripheral Blood and Bone Marrow
Myeloid hyperplasia in the marrow associated with neutrophilic leukocytosis, thrombocytosis, and basophilia in the peripheral blood are typical chronic phase CML
laboratory features. Peripheral blood leukocytosis exceeding 100 × 10 9/L occurs in 70% to 90% of patients. Anemia of varying degrees is frequent. The marrow is
markedly hypercellular with a myeloid to erythroid ratio between 9:1 to 15:1. Myeloid cells display all stages of maturation, with a preponderance of myelocytes and
promyelocytes. Megakaryocytes are frequently increased, especially in accelerated phase. Marrow fibrosis is focal in early disease stages and may progress to a
more diffuse pattern with disease evolution. 22
Cytogenetic Analysis
Cytogenetic analysis is the gold standard for demonstration of the Ph translocation and other abnormalities that occur frequently with disease progression (clonal
evolution). 23 Cytogenetic analysis is tedious and time-consuming, and only 20 to 25 metaphases per sample are examined. In approximately 10% of patients with
CML, no t(9;22) is detected by cytogenetic analysis. However, in up to one-third of these patients, molecular studies detect BCR-ABL rearrangements. The remaining
patients are Ph and BCR-ABL negative. These patients carry a worse prognosis and have to be distinguished from typical CML ( Table 46.3.1-2).24

TABLE 46.3.1-2. Differential Diagnosis of Philadelphia Chromosome and BCR-ABL–Negative Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia

Molecular Analysis
Molecular assays are used in the diagnosis of CML and the assessment of response to therapeutic modalities. PCR, Southern and Northern blot, and
immunoprecipitation can determine the exact breakpoints of the fusion genes, detect BCR-ABL transcripts at the RNA level, and demonstrate the p210 protein using
antibodies against the N-terminal region of BCR and the C-terminal region of ABL.
Patients on therapy are frequently monitored by PCR and FISH. 25 FISH allows analysis of metaphase and nondividing interphase cells and is easily quantifiable.
Interphase FISH can be performed on peripheral blood specimens. 26 However, it overestimates the degree of cytogenetic responses at high Ph-positive percent
values and has a false-positive rate of up to 10%. Hypermetaphase FISH is as time efficient as interphase FISH, does not generate false-positive results, but cannot
be done on peripheral blood samples. 27 The use of double color probes for FISH is being investigated and may have superior sensitivity and specificity. 28

PROGRESSION OF CHRONIC MYELOID LEUKEMIA
When treated with chemotherapeutic agents such as hydroxyurea or busulfan, CML invariably progresses into an accelerated phase that is followed after 3 to 18
months by a blastic transformation. Criteria for the definition of accelerated and blastic phase disease have been proposed (see Table 46.3.1-1).29,30
Whereas Ph predominates throughout chronic phase, up to 80% of patients develop additional cytogenetic abnormalities when they progress (clonal evolution).
Common changes during clonal evolution of CML are trisomy 8, isochromosome i(17q), trisomy 19, and an additional Ph. Trisomy 8 and isochromosome i(17q) are
common during myeloid transformation.23 Alterations of molecular markers during clonal evolution include p53, RB1, c-MYC, p16, Ras, and AML/EVI-1, a fusion
protein resulting from translocation t(3;21)(q26;q22). Abnormalities of p53 occur in 20% to 30% of patients and are mainly associated with myeloid transformation. 31,32
Loss of function of p53 has been associated with suppression of apoptosis and progression into blastic phase. Abnormalities of RB1 have been associated with
lymphoid transformation.

TREATMENT
Criteria for assignment of response to therapies are summarized in Table 46.3.1-3. A number of poor prognostic features have been identified, and prognostic
systems have been developed in CML (Table 46.3.1-4). These systems allow patients to be categorized into good-, intermediate-, and poor-risk groups with
respective median survivals of 6, 3 to 4, and 2 years in patients receiving conventional therapy. These models are useful in evaluating the effect of new strategies
within different risk groups (see Table 46.3.1-4).

TABLE 46.3.1-3. Criteria for Cytogenetic and Hematologic Remissions in Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia

TABLE 46.3.1-4. Prognostic Models in Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia

HISTORICAL AND CONVENTIONAL TREATMENTS FOR CHRONIC MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIA
The median survival of patients with CML used to be 3 years, and less than 20% of patients were alive 5 years after diagnosis. Nowadays, patients in chronic phase
can expect a median survival time of 5 to 7 years, and up to 9 years in good-prognosis patients. Five and 10-year survival rates are 60% to 70% and 30% to 40%,
respectively. Earlier diagnosis, better supportive care, and more effective anti-CML therapies account mostly for this change. 33
The use of arsenicals (Fowler's solution) was first advocated for the treatment of CML in 1856. In the early 1900s up to approximately 1950, total body or splenic
radiation therapy was shown to be effective in controlling the signs and symptoms of CML. Its benefit was, however, short-lived and the overall survival was not
affected significantly. It is a rarely used modality today.
In the early 1950s, oral alkylating agents such as busulfan became the new mainstay of treatment. 35 Busulfan is inexpensive and allows long periods of hematologic

control, but may be associated with serious side effects such as delayed myelosuppression and pulmonary toxicities ( Table 46.3.1-5). Busulfan was replaced by
hydroxyurea in the 1970s. 36 Hydroxyurea is a cell-cycle–specific inhibitor of DNA synthesis that allows rapid hematologic control and is well tolerated (see Table
46.3.1-5). Both hydroxyurea and busulfan cause complete hematologic remissions in up to 80% of patients. Cytogenetic remissions occur, but are rare, and neither
agent has any notable effect on the natural course of the disease. In a large randomized study, both median survival (56 vs. 44 months) and median duration of
chronic phase (47 vs. 37 months) were significantly longer in patients treated with hydroxyurea compared with busulfan. 37 Busulfan therapy before allogeneic SCT
has also an adverse outcome on posttransplant survival (3-year disease-free survival of 61% for patients treated with hydroxyurea vs. 45% for patients on busulfan). 38

TABLE 46.3.1-5. Dosage and Side Effects of Hydroxyurea and Busulfan in the Management of Patients with Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia

While other agents (dibromomannitol, melphalan, 6-mercaptopurine, 6-thioguanine, cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil) have also been used in the treatment of CML,
they have been associated with worse outcome. Uncontrolled thrombocytosis on therapy with hydroxyurea may respond to anagrelide, the addition of IFN-a, or
intermittent therapy with thiotepa (75 mg/m 2 intravenously every 2 to 4 weeks).
Splenectomy may benefit occasional patients with persistent and symptomatic splenomegaly and refractory cytopenias. Splenectomy pretransplant reduces the time
to marrow recovery, but does not influence long-term prognosis. 39
STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION
Matched Related Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation
SCT has become an effective treatment for CML and can cure a substantial proportion of carefully selected patients with suitable donors. In most studies of chronic
phase CML, projected actuarial 3-year to 5-year survival rates range between 50% and 60%, with values up to 80% in large centers. Relapses occur in 15% to 30%,
and plateau at 5 to 7 years after transplantation, suggesting a cure for some patients. Late relapses 10 to 12 years posttransplant can occur. Allogeneic SCT is limited
by availability of matched siblings and age restrictions. Less than 30% of patients in Europe and North America receive SCT from matched sibling donors. 40
Transplant-related mortality ranges between 10% and 40%, but can be as high as 68% in subgroups of patients who receive marrows from mismatched or unrelated
donors. Several variables influence transplant outcome. 41
AGE. Younger patients do best (see Fig. 46.3.1-1): Disease-free survival is from 60% to 70%, transplant-related mortality 10%, and probability of relapse 20%. Above

age 20, patients appear to have a continuous and inverse relationship between age and survival. Older patients do worse mainly because of an increased
treatment-related mortality in this age group; the relapse rates are similar. One center reported favorable outcomes for carefully selected patients above age 50: The
2-year estimated survival rate among 57 such patients was 80%. 42 Results from other transplant centers or registry studies are worse. In the International Bone
Marrow Transplant Registry (IBMTR) studies, the 5-year survival rate for patients above age 50 was only 30%. In the European Bone Marrow Transplant Registry
(EBMTR), patients over age 45 had a treatment-related mortality of 47% and a 5-year disease-free survival rate of 25%. 43,44
PHASE OF DISEASE. The largest effect of treatment is achieved in the chronic phase of CML. Disease free survival rates decrease from 40% to 60% in chronic phase to

less than 15% in blastic phase ( Fig. 46.3.1-2).21,38 Transplantation in transformed CML phases is accompanied by increased rates of leukemia relapse and
treatment-related mortality. Posttransplant outcome in accelerated phase is better when clonal evolution is the single criterion for disease acceleration: Disease-free
survival up to 60% has been reported in these patients. 45 Timing of transplantation in chronic phase is more controversial. Based on earlier data, most centers
propose transplantation in early chronic phase CML (i.e., within 1 year of diagnosis) ( Fig. 46.3.1-3).38 However, updates of these data suggest similar rates for 5-year
disease-free survival for transplants performed within 12 to 24 months from diagnosis and a critical prognostic cut-off point at around 2 years from diagnosis is
suggested.44,46

FIGURE 46.3.1-2. Probability of survival after human leukocyte antigen–identical sibling stem cell transplantation for chronic myelogenous leukemia by disease status
pretransplant, 1991 through 1997. (International Bone Marrow Transplant Registry data, with permission.)

FIGURE 46.3.1-3. Probability of survival after human leukocyte antigen–identical sibling stem cell transplantation for chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase
by disease duration, 1991 through 1997. (International Bone Marrow Transplant Registry data, with permission.)

PRETRANSPLANT CHEMOTHERAPY. Anti-CML therapy before transplantation influences posttransplant outcome. Disease-free survival at 5 years is significantly higher

in chronic phase patients pretreated with hydroxyurea than with busulfan (61% vs. 45%). Prior therapy with IFN-a does not appear to affect outcome of matched
related SCT. The influence of IFN-a on matched unrelated donor transplantation is more controversial. 47,48,49 and 50
PREPARATIVE REGIMENS. Results are conflicting regarding the best preparative regimen. Virtually all regimens produce toxic effects, with severe mucositis of the

gastrointestinal tract being most common. The combination of busulfan with cyclophosphamide appears as effective as the combination of cyclophosphamide with
total body irradiation, except for the more unfavorable toxicity profile of the latter. 51
GRAFT-VERSUS-HOST DISEASE PROPHYLAXIS. Acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) occurs in 8% to 63% of patients and is the cause of death in up to 13%.

38

The
rates for chronic GVHD can be as high as 75% with a mortality of up to 10%. The use of methotrexate with cyclosporine has resulted in better outcomes than single
methotrexate or methotrexate in other combinations. 52 T-cell depletion pretransplant improves tolerance and reduces treatment-related mortality. However, this
advantage is offset by increased leukemia relapse, indicating the importance of immune-mediated effects (e.g., graft-versus-leukemia effect) in maintaining remission
in CML.53,54
The incidence of relapse posttransplant ranges from 10% to 70%. It is lowest in patients transplanted in chronic phase and highest in blastic phase. 55 Second
transplants from human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-identical sibling donors can achieve disease-free survival rates up to 30%. Results, however, depend on the time
interval between transplant and relapse and are most favorable in the setting of a long first remission duration. 56 IFN-a may induce long-lasting cytogenetic remissions
in 20% to 40% of patients with cytogenetic relapse in chronic phase postallogeneic SCT. 57 Donor lymphocyte infusions (DLI) have generated cytogenetic and
complete hematologic response rates in 60% to 80% of patients. Disease-free survival at 3 years is between 40% and 85%. Responses are considerably less
frequent and short-lived in transformed CML phases. A strong correlation exists between development of GVHD and response to DLI, which supports a role for the
graft-versus-leukemia activity generated by infused donor T lymphocytes. DLI toxicity can be substantial and includes myelosuppression and severe GVHD. 58
Matched Unrelated Donor Transplants
It is possible to identify HLA-compatible unrelated donors for approximately half the patients who lack an HLA-matched sibling through the National Marrow Donor
Program in the United States and similar transplant registries throughout the world. The median time from donor search to transplant is approximately 6 months.
Although encouraging results have been obtained with matched unrelated donor transplants, they are associated with significant treatment-related morbidity and
mortality depending on age and degree of matching. 59,60 Graft failure as well as severe acute and extensive chronic GVHD contribute to a treatment-related mortality
above 50% in some groups of patients. Good-risk patients for matched unrelated donor transplants are younger (less than 30 years), in early chronic phase,
cytomegalovirus seronegative, and have received non–T-cell–depleted marrow infusions. 60 Molecular matching is emerging as a highly significant parameter of
treatment outcome. The EBMTR group analyzed the effect of HLA class II matching on results of matched unrelated donor transplants in 366 patients, two-thirds of
whom had been transplanted in chronic phase. 61 Matching at the HLA-DRB1 locus was the most significant factor influencing overall survival, disease-free survival,
and treatment-related mortality. Patients transplanted in first chronic phase, with non–T-cell–depleted marrows, and a matched HLA-DRB1 locus had a 2-year survival
of 51%, a treatment-related mortality of 47%, and a relapse rate of 2%. Treatment-related mortality was 80% for HLA-DRB1 mismatches.
In carefully selected patients, 5-year survival rates may be as high as 70%, relapse rates less than 10%, rates of graft failure below 10%, and rates of severe acute
GVHD below 50%. Until experience with matched unrelated donor transplants has matured, it should be offered preferentially to younger patients in chronic phase
who are resistant to IFN-a and who have a fully matched donor available. 60
Intensive Chemotherapy and Autologous Transplantation
Autografting with unpurged autologous marrow generates transient cytogenetic responses, but a survival advantage has not been proven. 62 Relapse due to reinfused,
Ph-positive cells may occur. 63
To reduce contaminating Ph-positive cells, several purging strategies have been developed. These include in vitro manipulations with cyclophosphamide derivatives
and biologic response modifiers (interferon-g, interleukin-2), tyrosine kinase inhibitors, antisense oligonucleotides, ribozymes, positive or negative selections based
on phenotype determination or long-term bone marrow cultures, and high-dose combination chemotherapy.
Intensive chemotherapy, to eradicate Ph-positive clones, was patterned after acute leukemia programs. Cytogenetic remissions were induced in 60% to 70% of
patients and were complete in 35% to 50%. However, the cytogenetic responses were brief and not improved by maintenance with IFN-a. 64 Intensive chemotherapy
has been used preceding autologous SCT as a method for in vivo purging that allows collection of Ph-negative marrow and peripheral blood stem cells during early
hematopoietic recovery. 65,66
INTERFERON-a
IFNs are a complex group of naturally occurring proteins produced by eukaryotic cells in response to various stimuli. They have pleiotropic biologic activities including
inhibition of cellular proliferation, regulation of cytokine expression, and modulation of the immune system. IFNs consist of three distinct groups of peptides: IFN-a,
IFN-b, and IFN-g. IFN-a and IFN-b are acid stable, bind to the same receptor, and are produced by leukocytes and fibroblasts, respectively. IFN-g is an acid-labile,
structurally distinct molecule that binds to a different receptor and is produced mainly by T lymphocytes. 67 IFN-a has been used most commonly in the treatment of
solid and hematologic malignancies. The mechanism of action of IFN-a is not known. While antiproliferation is thought to be important, other possible mechanisms
include (1) restoration of cytoadhesion of hematopoietic cells to marrow stroma; (2) immunomodulation; and (3) antiangiogenesis.
Single-Arm Studies of Interferon-a in Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia
The clinical activity of interferons in CML was first demonstrated with partially purified IFN-a (Finnish Red Cross, Helsinki), given at doses of 3 to 9 million U/d to early
chronic phase patients. Preliminary studies showed that laboratory indices of disease activity (elevated lactate dehydrogenase and B 12 levels, increased bone marrow
cellularity) normalized among responding patients. Subsequently, cytogenetic responses with various degrees of Ph suppression were found in 41% of the patients. 68
In the original studies at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, patients received IFN-a at a dose of 5 million U/m 2 or the maximally tolerated lower dose daily. 69 Complete
hematologic response rates were 80% and cytogenetic response rates 58%. The estimated median survival was 89 months. Achieving a cytogenetic response after
12 months of therapy conferred a significant survival benefit by landmark analysis: 5-year survival rates from 12 months into therapy were 90% with a complete
cytogenetic response, 88% with a partial cytogenetic response, 76% with a minor cytogenetic response, and 38% in other response categories ( P <.001) (Fig.
46.3.1-4). The benefit of cytogenetic response was identified by multivariate analysis, introducing it as a time-dependent variable. It was also observed within each
risk group. The 4-year survival dated from the 12-month landmark analysis in good-risk patients was 79% with cytogenetic response versus 62% without cytogenetic
response (P <.01); in the intermediate-risk group the rates were 82% versus 35% ( P <.01); and in the poor-risk group these rates were 83% versus 39% ( P <.01). This
study confirmed the independent effect of achieving a cytogenetic response on prolongation of survival, and supported efforts aimed at suppressing Ph-positive
clones. Among patients with good-risk disease (50% of patients), the median survival was 102 months, and the major cytogenetic response rate 50%.

FIGURE 46.3.1-4. Probability of survival of patients in chronic phase chronic myelogenous leukemia on interferon-a (1983 through the present) compared with
historical control groups.

Three other trials reported similar results ( Table 46.3.1-6). The high hematologic and cytogenetic response rates observed with IFN-a were dose-dependent.
Furthermore, survival was significantly influenced by achieving a complete hematologic response at 3 months and a cytogenetic response at 12 months of treatment
with IFN-a (see Fig. 46.3.1-4).70,71,72 and 72a

TABLE 46.3.1-6. Single Arm Studies with Interferon-a

Randomized Studies
In four randomized trials from Japan, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Germany patients treated with IFN-a achieved higher rates of major and complete cytogenetic
responses than with conventional chemotherapy (Table 46.3.1-7).73,74,75 and 76 Achievement of cytogenetic response was associated with prolonged survival in the
Italian and Japanese trials and in an updated report of the Medical Research Council data from the United Kingdom. 77 An updated report from the Italian Cooperative
Study Group on CML with prolonged follow-up (range, 95 to 129 months) demonstrated continued significantly better survival for patients on IFN-a versus
chemotherapy.78 Median and 10-year survival of low-risk patients were 104 months versus 64 months and 47% versus 30% ( P = .03), and 69 months versus 46
months and 16% versus 5% for intermediate and high-risk patients ( P = .006), respectively. The German trial found a survival benefit with both IFN-a and hydroxyurea
therapy compared with busulfan, but no difference between IFN-a and hydroxyurea. 75 When the data were updated for patients who were on IFN-a for more than 3
months and when intended versus actually delivered therapy was considered, survival was better with IFN-a than with hydroxyurea. 79

TABLE 46.3.1-7. Randomized Studies with Interferon-a

A metaanalysis compared IFN-a with chemotherapy in CML and suggested better survival with IFN-a (57% at 5 years) than with either hydroxyurea ( P = .001) or
busulfan (P = .00007) (42% at 5 years). 80
Interferon-a in Combination with Cytosine Arabinoside
IFN-a alone in late chronic and accelerated phases of CML yielded modest results. In a study from M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 140 patients with Ph-positive early
chronic phase CML received IFN-a (5 million U/m 2) in combination with low-dose Ara-C, 10 mg subcutaneously daily, or intermittent Ara-C (7 d/mo). 81 With daily IFN-a
and daily Ara-C, complete hematologic responses were seen in 92% of patients and cytogenetic responses in 74% (major 50%, complete 31%). The estimated 4-year
survival rate was 70%. The median time to achievement of a major cytogenetic response was also significantly shorter with daily Ara-C ( P <.01).
In a French trial, 721 patients in early chronic-phase CML received either hydroxyurea (50 mg/kg), and IFN-a (5 million U/m 2/d) alone, or with monthly courses of
Ara-C (20 mg/m2 for 10 d/mo).82 The complete hematologic response rate was 66% in the IFN-a plus Ara-C group and 55% in the IFN-a group ( P = .003). Patients
treated with IFN-a and Ara-C survived significantly longer than did patients treated with IFN-a (3-year survival rate 86% vs. 79%, P = .02). This difference remained
independently significant by multivariate analysis. Patients achieving a cytogenetic response with either IFN-a alone ( P <.001) or with IFN-a plus Ara-C (P <.001) had
a significantly longer survival than those who did not achieve a cytogenetic response.
The Italian Cooperative Study Group on CML randomized 540 patients in chronic phase CML to IFN-a alone (median dose, 3.65 million U/m 2/d) versus IFN-a (median
dose, 3.8 million U/m2/d) with low-dose Ara-C (40 mg/kg/d subcutaneously × 10 d/mo). 83 Cytogenetic responses were observed in 54% of patients on IFN-a plus Ara-C
versus 47% in the IFN-a group. The rate of major and complete cytogenetic responses was significantly higher in the combined treatment arm (28% vs. 19%, P = .01).
At a median follow-up of 24 months, the study demonstrated a significantly higher survival rate among good-risk patients with IFN-a plus Ara-C versus IFN-a alone
(3-year survival rates 85% vs. 80%, P = .03).
Toxicities of Interferon-a and Clinical Management

Toxicities are common with IFN-a. Almost all patients experience some constitutional side effects, up to 50% of patients require dose reductions, and discontinuation
of treatment due to toxicity is necessary in up to 18%. 84 Early adverse effects consist of flu-like symptoms and include fever, chills, postnasal dripping, and anorexia.
These are usually not dose limiting, can be managed symptomatically ( Table 46.3.1-8), and abate once tachyphylaxis develops within 1 to 2 weeks. Common chronic
side effects are fatigue, depression, insomnia, weight loss, alopecia, reduced libido, and impotence. Neurotoxicity (lack of concentration, depression, psychosis) is
more common in patients with psychiatric problems and those 60 years and older. Autoimmune phenomena occur in less than 5% of patients: hemolytic anemia and
thrombocytopenia, Raynaud's phenomenon, collagen vascular disorders, hypothyroidism, and nephrotic syndrome. Cardiac arrhythmias and manifestations of
congestive heart failure are rare but mandate discontinuation of therapy as do severe autoimmune phenomena, severe neurotoxicity, and refractory depression. 85

TABLE 46.3.1-8. Side Effects and Guidelines for Therapy with Interferon-a in Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia

The use of IFN-a during pregnancy is controversial. IFN-a has antiproliferative and antiangiogenic activities that may affect the placenta and fetal development.
Mutagenicity in vitro and teratogenicity in animal studies are not documented with IFN-a, but IFN-a caused abortions in rhesus monkeys at dose levels above those
used clinically. 86 Case reports of uncomplicated pregnancies with successful delivery of healthy newborns on IFN-a given either at the time of conception or during
pregnancy may not be representative, since adverse outcomes may be less frequently reported, and possible damaging consequences for fetal development by IFN-a
cannot be excluded. 87 Alternative treatments of pregnant patients with CML are supportive care or pheresis in the first 3 months, then hydroxyurea until delivery, and
resumption of IFN-a thereafter.
TREATMENT DECISION ANALYSIS: INTERFERON-a VERSUS STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION
SCT can be curative. However, treatment-related mortality and disabling morbidity can be substantial, especially in older patients and those with other comorbid
conditions. Therapy with IFN-a can effectively suppress the Ph-positive clone and induce durable cytogenetic responses. Any treatment decision should be based on
weighing potential benefits of one treatment approach against its disadvantages. An example of this approach is shown in Figure 46.3.1-5.88,89

FIGURE 46.3.1-5. Clinical decision making in chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). For patients in early chronic phase CML, allogeneic stem cell transplantation
(SCT) and interferon-a are possible first-line therapies. The decision depends on several factors: (1) availability of a matched sibling; (2) age and performance status
of the patient; (3) presence of other comorbid conditions; and (4) socioeconomic situation. For patients who have a matched sibling donor and whose physical
condition allows SCT with an acceptable treatment-related morbidity and mortality (less than 20%), allogeneic SCT should be the first choice. For other patients, a
trial with interferon-a may be preferable given the manageable side-effect profile with absence of treatment-related mortality. Furthermore, a prospective study on 840
patients below age 56 with chronic phase CML found increased survival with matched sibling allogeneic transplant only in those patients who were younger than 32
years and had intermediate- or high-risk CML. Patients in late chronic phase or accelerated phase should be offered investigational therapies or undergo allogeneic
transplantation. 88,89 CGR, cytogenetic response; CHR, complete hematologic response; HLA, human leukocyte antigen.

Delaying allogeneic SCT in favor of IFN-a has raised concerns including worse transplant outcome in late chronic phase CML, adverse effects of prior IFN-a therapy
on SCT, risk of sudden disease transformation while on IFN-a, and the fact that almost all patients treated with IFN-a, even in complete cytogenetic remission,
express the BCR-ABL transcript compared with only one-third after successful transplantation. However, studies have shown that postponing allogeneic SCT up to 2
years into chronic phase does not adversely affect outcome. Likewise, prior IFN-a therapy, if discontinued for more than 3 months before transplantation, has no
adverse effects on transplantation. The risk of sudden disease transformation is low during the first 3 years. 90 The significance of persisting BCR-ABL transcripts is
unknown. Patients in long-term complete cytogenetic remission in whom IFN-a has been discontinued and who are still PCR-positive for BCR-ABL have been
reported.91 This observation is consistent with the situation in many other malignant conditions that are considered to be cured despite persistent expression of
molecular markers of disease [translocation (14;18), inv(16), translocation (8;21)]. Moreover, long-term cytogenetic responders on IFN-a may become negative. 92
MANAGEMENT OF ACCELERATED AND BLASTIC PHASE CHRONIC MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIA
Treatment results in the transformed phases of CML are unsatisfactory. 93 Disease-free survival of selected patients after SCT is less than 15%. IFN-a has no effect on
the disease course. Control of elevated white cell counts may be achieved by increasing doses of hydroxyurea and combination with other cytotoxic drugs in the
short-term. Symptomatic splenomegaly may be treated with splenectomy. Anemia and thrombocytopenia can be managed with transfusions. New agents and
combinations of drugs are being developed and can be offered on investigational protocols.
In one-third of the patients, blastic phase is of lymphoid phenotype with expression of markers such as terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT), CD19, CD20, or
CD10 common acute lymphoblastic leukemia antigen (CALLA). Most cases with lymphoid blastic phase (80%) coexpress myeloid markers (CD13, CD14, CD33). The
remaining two-thirds have an acute myeloblastic or undifferentiated leukemia-like phenotype and form a heterogeneous group. Patients with lymphoid blastic phase
respond better to treatment with regimens active against acute lymphoid leukemia. The complete remission rate is 60%, one-half of the patients may have
suppression of Ph-positive cells (cytogenetic response), and the remission duration is 9 to 12 months. Patients with myeloid blastic phase have a low objective
response rate of 20% to 30%, may respond to high-dose cytosine-arabinoside, other antiacute myeloid leukemia regimens, or to hypomethylating agents such as
5'-deoxyazacitidine (decitabine), and to BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitors. 94,95
NEW AGENTS AND APPROACHES

Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors
Although many molecules along the signaling cascade can be targeted (blockade of SH3, farnesyl transferase, Ras, further downstream targets), inhibition of
phosphotyrosine kinase activity has been studied most extensively. Natural inhibitors of tyrosine kinases (herbimycin A, genistein, erbstatin, lavendustin A), extracted
from fungal sources, have only broad specificity for a variety of enzyme substrates. To improve target specificity, synthetic compounds have been modeled after the
naturally occurring kinase inhibitors. They have been called tyrphostins, and more than 20 of them are known today. Analysis of some of these compounds (AG1112,
AG568) showed a growth-inhibitory effect on CML cell lines in vitro, inhibition of the tyrosine kinase activity of p210, and induction of differentiation and death in a
CML cell blast crisis cell line K562. 96,97 Identification of the crystal structure of several protein kinases allowed the generation of more specific tyrosine kinase
inhibitors. In preclinical studies, signal transduction inhibitor 571 (STI571), formerly known as CGP57148B, was found to (1) inhibit the ABL tyrosine kinase at
submicromolar concentrations; (2) inhibit the proliferation of BCR-ABL expressing cell lines; (3) inhibit colony formation of BCR-ABL–positive hematopoietic cell lines;
and (4) only minimally inhibit the formation of normal bone marrow colonies. Based on these promising results, phase I clinical studies have been conducted in
patients with CML in chronic and in transformed phases. Among 54 patients with chronic phase CML who have failed therapy with IFN-a and received STI571 at
doses of 300 mg orally daily and more, 96% achieved a complete hematologic remission and 33% a cytogenetic response. After about 3 months of therapy, the
cytogenetic response rate is anticipated to exceed 50%, being complete in over 20% to 30%. Responses in de novo patients treated with STI571 may be even
higher.98 In 46 patients with CML in blastic phase (32 myeloid, 14 acute lymphoid leukemia or lymphoid blast crisis), 18 (39%) patients had a complete clearance of
blood and bone marrow leukemic cells. The marrow complete response rate for patients with myeloid blast crisis was 29%, but responses were often transient. In
accelerated phase, the hematologic response is about 70%, cytogenetic responses have been noted in 20%, and responses appear durable. 99 STI571 was well
tolerated and no dose-limiting toxicity has yet been reached except for myelosuppression at doses of 300 to 800 mg orally daily. Side effects included nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, and muscle cramps, mostly mild in nature.
Antisense Oligonucleotides
Antisense oligonucleotides are short DNA sequences modified to bind target RNA sequences within the cell, preventing translation of the RNA message into
functional proteins. Effective targets for antisense approaches are BCR-ABL itself, Ras, PI-3-kinase, c-Myb, and c-Myc. BCR-ABL antisense oligonucleotides alone or
in combination with sequences targeted against additional oncogenes reduce the level of p210 bcr-abl in CML cells and slow the rate of growth and proliferation.
Antisense sequences directed against BCR-ABL for ex vivo purging in autologous SCT are of interest. 100
Polyethylene Glycol Interferon
Polyethylene glycol interferon is a modified IFN-a molecule that is covalently attached to polyethylene glycol. Polyethylene glycol interferon has a significantly longer
half-life than its parent compound and can be given once weekly instead of daily. Early data suggest an improved side-effect profile compared with IFN-a. Complete
hematologic remissions and cytogenetic responses have been reported. Results with polyethylene glycol interferon are promising, and further investigations are
required to validate its role in the treatment of CML. 101
Homoharringtonine
Homoharringtonine (HHT) is a plant alkaloid derived from the Cephalotaxus fortuneii tree. Used in a low-dose continuous infusion schedule (2.5 mg/m 2 for 14 days for
remission induction followed by a 7-day monthly infusion as maintenance), HHT resulted in complete hematologic remission in two-thirds of patients and cytogenetic
response in one-third (one-half of which were major). 102 More than one-half of the patients were resistant to prior therapy with IFN-a. In early chronic phase disease,
HHT was given for six cycles as remission induction followed by IFN-a maintenance: Complete hematologic remission rate was 92% and cytogenetic response rate
was 68%.103 Combinations of HHT with IFN-a and Ara-C in the clinical setting, including early chronic phase CML, are in progress with promising results. 104
5-Aza-2'-Deoxycytidine
5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (decitabine) is a potent hypomethylating cytidine analogue. Decitabine produced response rates of 25% in blastic phase and 53% in
accelerated phase. Further clinical trials are in progress including decitabine in combination with busulfan and cyclophosphamide as part of a preparative regimen for
allogeneic SCT, and as salvage therapy together with stem cell rescue after relapse from allogeneic SCT. 105
Adoptive Immunotherapy
That leukemic cell proliferation is under the control of the immune system is based on several observations: (1) there is an increased frequency of disease recurrence
with T-cell depleted SCTs; (2) DLIs in patients who relapse after an allogeneic transplant reestablish cytogenetic remissions in a high percentage of patients; (3) there
is a positive correlation between GVHD and reduced risk of relapse after transplant; and (4) cytogenetic response correlates with IFN-associated autoimmune
phenomena. Response to DLIs suggests a pivotal role for graft-versus-leukemia activity generated by infused donor T lymphocytes in suppressing Ph-positive clones.
Research is focusing on identification of (1) specific T-cell clones able to eliminate leukemic progenitors and (2) proteins that can serve as targets, even though only a
few tumors express structures unique to them. CML is a good model because p210 is uniquely associated with the Ph translocation. Minor histocompatibility antigens,
overexpressed normal antigens, and other leukemia-restricted antigens are studied as further immunologic targets. 106 In one study, cultures of CD34-positive CML
progenitor cells incubated with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, interleukin-4, and tumor necrosis factor stimulated the formation in vitro of dendritic
cells, leukemic-antigen-presenting cells that are strong inducers of T-cell responses in vitro.107 Identification of leukemia-specific antigens and stimulation of
leukemia-specific T-cell responses may allow us to use immunogenicity of CML cells in approaches such as immune gene therapy and peptide vaccination.
Investigational combined modalities using T-cell–depleted allogeneic SCT upfront (to reduce GVHD and treatment-related mortality), followed by periodic incremental
doses of selected T-cell subsets for DLIs (to eradicate minimal residual disease), may render allogeneic SCT safer and more effective and extend its use to older
patients and those with unrelated or mismatched donors.

CONCLUSIONS
CML is one of the most extensively studied human malignancies and a prime example of how advances in our understanding of molecular biology can be translated
into novel and effective treatment strategies. The most beneficial treatment for the patient in early chronic phase, transplantation versus IFN-a–based therapy, has to
be decided on an individual basis. Numerous patient- and treatment-related factors have to be considered, particularly the acceptable threshold of transplant-related
mortality, which may be different for different patients. Socioeconomic and logistic factors may play an increasing role in choosing the most appropriate therapy.
These recommendations may change drastically as data mature on the efficacy of new investigational treatments, particularly the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(STI571), and on the safety of new SCT approaches (e.g., mini-SCT). The effect of current treatments in accelerated phases of CML is modest at best, making
investigational therapies the best option for these patients.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Kinlen LJ. Leukemia. In: Doll R, Fraumeni JF, Muir DS, eds. Trend in cancer incidence and mortality. Cancer surveys 1994, 19/20, 475. Plainview, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press,
1994.
2. Hasle H, Olsen JH. Cancer in relatives of children with myelodysplastic syndrome, acute and chronic myeloid leukaemia. Br J Haematol 1997;97:127.
3. Lange R, Moloney W, Yamawaki T. Leukemia in atomic bomb survivors. 1. General observations. Blood 1954;9:514.
4. Nowell PC, Hungerford DA. A minute chromosome in human chronic granulocytic leukemia. Science 1960;132:1497.
5. Rowley JD. A new consistent chromosomal abnormality in chronic myelogenous leukemia identified by quinacrine, fluorescence and Giemsa staining. Nature 1970;243:290.
6. De Klein A, Van Kessel G, Grosveld G, et al. A cellular oncogene is translocated to the Philadelphia chromosome in chronic myelogenous leukemia. Nature 1982;300:765.
7. Faderl S, Talpaz M, Estrov Z, Kantarjian HM. T he biology of chronic myelogenous leukemia. N Engl J Med 1999;341:164.
8. Melo JV. The molecular biology of chronic myeloid leukemia. Leukemia 1996;10:751.
9. Shepherd P, Suffolk R, Hasley J, Allan N. Analysis of molecular breakpoint and mRNA transcripts in a prospective randomized trial of interferon in chronic myeloid leukaemia: no correlation
with clinical features, cytogenetic response, duration of chronic phase, or survival. Br J Haematol 1995;89:546.
10. Kurzrock R, Shtalrid M, Romero P, et al. A novel c-abl protein product in Philadelphia-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Nature 1987;325:631.
11. Pane F, Frigeri F, Sindona M, et al. Neutrophilic-chronic myeloid leukemia: a distinct disease with a specific molecular marker. Blood 1996;88:2410 [Erratum, Blood 1997;89:4244].

12. Melo JV, Myint H, Galton DAG, Goldman JM. P190 BCR-ABL chronic myeloid leukemia: the missing link with chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia? Leukemia 1994;8:208.
13. Melo J, Hochhaus A, Yan X-H, Goldman J. Lack of correlation between ABL-BCR expression and response to interferon-a in chronic myeloid leukemia. Br J Haematol 1996;92:684.
14. Li S, Ilaria RL Jr, Million RP, Daley GQ, Van Etten RA. The p190, p210, and p230 forms of the BCR/ABL oncogene induce a similar chronic myeloid leukemia-like syndrome in mice but have
different leukemogenic activity. J Exp Med 1999;189:1399.
15. Verfaillie CM. Biology of chronic myelogenous leukemia. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1998;12:1.
16. Udomsakdi C, Eaves CJ, Swolin B, et al. Rapid decline of chronic myeloid leukemic cells in long-term culture due to a defect at the leukemic stem cell level. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1992;89:6192.
17. Strife A, Lambek C, Wisniewski D, et al. Discordant maturation as the primary biological defect in chronic myelogenous leukemia. Cancer Res 1988;48:1035.
18. Eaves CJ, Eaves AC. Cell culture studies in CML. Baillieres Clin Haematol 1987;1:931.
19. Verfaillie CM, Hurley R, Zhao RCH, et al. Pathophysiology of CML: do defects in integrin function contribute to the premature circulation and massive expansion of the BCR/ABL positive clone?
J Lab Clin Med 1997;129:584.
20. Savage DG, Szydlo RM, Goldman JM. Clinical features at diagnosis in 430 patients with chronic myeloid leukemia seen at a referral centre over a 16-year period. Br J Haematol 1997;96:111.
21. Kantarjian HM, Deisseroth A, Kurzrock R, Estrov Z, Talpaz M. Chronic myelogenous leukemia: a concise update. Blood 1993;82:691.
22. Kamada N, Uchino H. Chronologic sequence in appearance of clinical and laboratory findings characteristic of chronic myelocytic leukemia. Blood 1978;51:843.
23. Mitelman F. The cytogenetic scenario of chronic myeloid leukemia. Leukemia Lymphoma 1993;11(Suppl 1):11.
24. Cortes J, Talpaz M, O'Brien S, et al. Philadelphia chromosome negative chronic myelogenous leukemia with rearrangement of the breakpoint cluster region: long-term follow-up results. Cancer
1995;75:464.
25. Cuneo A, Bigoni R, Emmanuel B, et al. Fluorescence in situ hybridization for the detection and monitoring of the Ph-positive clone in chronic myelogenous leukemia: comparison with
metaphase banding analysis. Leukemia 1998;12:1718.
26. Muhlmann J, Thaler J, Hilbe W, et al. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) on peripheral blood smears for monitoring Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
during interferon treatment: a new strategy for remission assessment. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1998;21:90.
27. Seong D, Kantarjian H, Ro J, et al. Hypermetaphase fluorescence in situ hybridization for quantitative monitoring of Philadelphia chromosome-positive cells in patients with chronic
myelogenous leukemia during treatment. Blood 1995;86:2343.
28. Grand FH, Chase A, Iqbal S, et al. A two-color BCR-ABL probe that greatly reduces the false positive and false negative rates for fluorescence in situ hybridization in chronic myeloid leukemia.
Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1998;12:1718.
29. Kantarjian HM, Dixon D, Keating MJ, et al. Characteristics of accelerated disease in chronic myelogenous leukemia. Cancer 1988;61:1441.
30. Sokal JE, Baccarani M, Russo D, Tusa S. Staging and prognosis in chronic myelogenous leukemia. Semin Hematol 1988;25:49.
31. Ishikura H, Yufu Y, Yamashita S, et al. Biphenotypic blast crisis of chronic myelogenous leukemia: abnormalities of p53 and retinoblastoma genes. Leukemia Lymphoma 1997;25:573.
32. Ahuja H, Bar-Eli M, Advani SH, Benchimol S, Cline MJ. Alterations in the p53 gene and the clonal evolution of the blast crisis of chronic myelocytic leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1989;86:6783.
33. Kantarjian HM, Giles FJ, O'Brien SM, Talpaz M. Clinical course and therapy of chronic myelogenous leukemia with interferon-alpha and chemotherapy. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am
1998;12:31.
34. Sokal JE, Cox EB, Baccarani M, et al. Prognostic discrimination in “good-risk” chronic granulocytic leukemia. Blood 1984;63:789.
35. Galton D. Myleran in chronic myeloid leukemia. Lancet 1953;1:208.
36. Kennedy BJ. Hydroxyurea therapy in chronic myelogenous leukemia. Cancer 1972;29:1052.
37. Hehlmann R, Heimpel H, Hasford J, et al. Randomized comparison of busulfan and hydroxyurea in chronic myelogenous leukemia: prolongation of survival by hydroxyurea. Blood 1993;82:398.
38. Goldman JM, Szydlo R, Horowitz MM, et al. Choice of pretransplant treatment and timing of transplants for chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronoic phase. Blood 1993;82:2235.
39. Bouvet M, Babiera GV, Termuhlen PM, et al. Splenectomy in the accelerated or blastic phase of chronic myelogenous leukemia: a single-institution, 25-year experience. Surgery 1997;122:20.
40. Horowitz MM, Rowlings PA, Passweg JR. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for CML: a report from the International Bone Marrow Transplant Registry. Bone Marrow Transplant
1996;17(Suppl 3):S5.
41. Clift RA, Buckner CD, Thomas ED, et al. Marrow transplantation for chronic myelogenous leukemia: a randomized study comparing cyclophosphamide and total body irradiation with busulfan
and cyclophosphamide. Blood 1994;84:2036.
42. Clift RA, Storb R. Marrow transplantation for CML: the Seattle experience. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;17(Suppl 3):S1.
43. Gratwohl A, Hermanns J, Niederwieser D, et al. Bone marrow transplantation for chronic myeloid leukemia: long-term results. Chronic Leukemia Working Party of the European Group for Bone
Marrow Transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:509.
44. Van Rhee F, Szydlo RM, Germans J, et al. Long-term results after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase: a report from the Chronic
Leukemia Working Party of the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;20:553.
45. Cortes J, Talpaz M, O'Brien S, et al. Suppression of cytogenetic clonal evolution with interferon alfa therapy in patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia. J
Clin Oncol 1998;16:3279.
46. Clift RA, Anasetti C. Allografting for chronic myeloid leukemia. Bailleres Clin Haematol 1997;10:319.
47. Giralt SA, Kantarjian HM, Talpaz M, et al. Effect of prior interferon alfa therapy on the outcome of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for chronic myelogenous leukemia. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:1055.
48. Tomas JF, Lopez-Lorenzo JL, Requena MJ, et al. Absence of influence of prior treatment with interferon on the outcome of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for chronic myeloid
leukemia. Bone Marrow Transplant 1998;22:47.
49. Beelen DW, Elmaagacli AH, Schaefer UW. The adverse influence of pretransplant interferon-a (IFN-a) on transplant outcome after marrow transplantation for chronic phase chronic
myelogenous leukemia increases with duration of IFN-a exposure [letter]. Blood 1999;93:1779.
50. Morton AJ, Gooley T, Hansen JA, et al. Association between pretransplant interferon-alpha and outcome after unrelated donor marrow transplantation for chronic myelogenous leukemia in
chronic phase. Blood 1998;92:394.
51. Clift RA, Buckner CD, Thomas ED. Marrow transplantation for chronic myeloid leukemia: a randomized study comparing cyclophosphamide and total body irradiation with busulfan and
cyclophosphamide. Blood 1994;84:2036.
52. Chao NJ, Schmidt GM, Niland JC, et al. Cyclosporine, methotrexate, and prednisone compared with cyclosporine and prednisone for prophylaxis of acute graft-versus-host disease. N Engl J
Med 1993;329:1225.
53. Horowitz MM, Gage RP, Sondel DM, et al. Graft versus leukemia reactions after bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1990;75:555.
54. Goldman JM, Gale RP, Horowitz MM, et al. Bone marrow transplantation for chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase. Increased risk for relapse with T-cell depletion. Ann Intern Med
1988;108:806.
55. Arcese W, Goldman JM, D'Arcangelo E, et al. Outcome for patients who relapse after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for chronic myeloid leukemia. Blood 1993;82:3211.
56. Mrsíc M, Horowitz MM, Atkinson K, et al. Second HLA-identical sibling transplants for leukemia recurrence. Bone Marrow Transplant 1992;9:269.
57. Higano CS, Raskind WH, Singer JW. Use of a-interferon for the treatment of relapse of chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Blood
1992;80:1437.
58. Giralt SA, Kolb HJ. Donor lymphocyte infusions. Curr Opin Oncol 1996;8:96.
59. McGlave P, Bartsch G, Anasetti C, et al. Unrelated donor marrow transplantation therapy for chronic myelogenous leukemia: initial experience of the National Marrow Donor Program. Blood
1993;81:543.
60. Hansen JA, Gooley TA, Martin PJ, et al. Bone marrow transplants from unrelated donors for patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 1998;338:962.
61. Devergie A, Apperley JF, Labopin M, et al. European results of matched unrelated donor bone marrow transplantation for chronic myeloid leukemia. Impact of HLA class II matching. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1997;20:11.
62. Khouri IF, Kantarjian HM, Talpaz M, et al. Results with high-dose chemotherapy and unpurged autologous stem cell transplantation in 73 patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia: the MD
Anderson experience. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;17:775.
63. Deisseroth AB, Zu Z, Claxton D, et al. Genetic marking shows that Ph+ cells present in autologous transplants of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) contribute to relapse after autologous
bone marrow in CML. Blood 1994;83:3068.
64. Kantarjian HM, Vellekoop L, McCredie KB, et al. Intensive combination chemotherapy (ROAP) and splenectomy in the management of chronic myelogenous leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:192.
65. Kantarjian HM, Talpaz M, Hester J, et al. Collection of peripheral blood diploid cells from chronic myelogenous leukemia patients early in the recovery phase from myelosuppression induced by
intensive-dose chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:554.
66. Talpaz M, Kantarjian H, Liang J, et al. Percentage of Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-negative and Ph-positive cells found after autologous transplantation for chronic myelogenous leukemia
depends on percentage of diploid cells induced by conventional-dose chemotherapy before collection of autologous cells. Blood 1995;85:3257.
67. Estrov Z, Kurzrock R, Talpaz M. Interferons. Basic principles and clinical applications. 1st ed. Austin: R.G. Landes Company, 1993.
68. Talpaz M, Kantarjian HM, McCredie KB, et al. Clinical investigation of human alpha interferon in chronic myelogenous leukemia. Blood 1987;69:1280.
69. Kantarjian H, Smith T, O'Brien S, et al. Prolonged survival following achievement of cytogenetic response with alpha interferon therapy in chronic myelogenous leukemia. Ann Intern Med
1995;122:254.
70. Alimena G, Morra E, Lazzarino M, et al. I nterferon alpha-2b as therapy for Ph'-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia: a study of 82 patients treated with intermittent or daily administration.
Blood 1988;72:642.
71. Ozer H, George SL, Schiffer CA, et al. Prolonged subcutaneous administration of recombinant a2b interferon in patients with previously untreated Philadelphia chromosome-positive
chronic-phase chronic myelogenous leukemia: effect on remission duration and survival: Cancer and Leukemia Group B Study 8583. Blood 1993;82:2975.
72. Mahon FX, Faberes C, Pueyo S, et al. Response at three months is a good predictive factor for newly diagnosed chronic myeloid leukemia patients treated by recombinant interferon-alpha.
Blood 1998;92:4059.
72a. Ohnishi K, Ohno R, Tomonaga M, et al. A randomized trial comparing interferon-a with busulfan for newly diagnosed chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase. Blood 1995;86:916.
73. Allan NC, Richards SM, Shepherd PCA, on behalf of the UK Medical Research Council's Working Parties for Therapeutic Trials in Adult Leukaemia. UK Medical Research Council randomised,
multicentre trial of interferon-an1 for chronic myeloid leukemia: improved survival irrespective of cytogenetic response. Lancet 1995;345:1392.
74. The Italian Cooperative Study Group On Chronic Myeloid Leukemia. Interferon alfa-2a as compared with conventional chemotherapy for the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J
Med 1994;330:820.
75. Hehlmann R, Heimpel H, Hasford J. Randomized comparison of interferon-a with busulfan and hydroxyurea in chronic myelogenous leukemia. The German CML Study Group. Blood
1994;84:4064.
76. Ohnishi K, Ohno R, Tomonaga M, et al. A randomized trial comparing interferon-a with busulfan for newly diagnosed chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase. Blood 1995;86:906.
77. Allan NC, Richards SM, Shepherd PCA. Interferon-a therapy with busulfan or hydroxyurea compared with either BU or HU alone in treatment of chronic phase CML. Results from MRC CML III
trial. Int J Hematol 1996;64(Suppl 1):S68.
78. The Italian Cooperative Study Group on Chronic Myeloid Leukemia. Long-term follow-up of the Italian trial of interferon-alpha versus conventional chemotherapy in chronic myeloid leukemia.
Blood 1998;92:1541.
79. Ansari H, Hasford J, Hehlmann R, and the German CML Study Group. Fallacies of the intent-to-treat analysis. J Mol Med 1997;75:B243.
80. Chronic Myeloid Leukemia Trialists' Collaborative Group. Interferon alfa versus chemotherapy for chronic myeloid leukemia: a meta-analysis of seven randomized trials. J Natl Cancer Inst
1997;89:1616.

81. Kantarjian HM, O'Brien S, Smith TL, et al. Treatment of Philadelphia chromosome-positive early chronic phase chronic myelogenous leukemia with daily doses of interferon alpha and low dose
cytosine arabinoside. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:284.
82. Guilhot F, Chastang C, Michallet M, et al. Interferon alfa-2b combined with cytarabine versus interferon alone in chronic myelogenous leukemia. N Engl J Med 1997;337:223.
83. Rosti G, Bonifazi F, De Vivo A, et al. Cytarabine increases karyotypic response in aIFN treated chronic myeloid leukemia patients: results of a national prospective randomized trial of the Italian
Cooperative Study Group on CML Blood 1999;94:600a.
84. Quesada JR, Talpaz M, Rios A, Kurzrock R, Gutterman JU. Clinical toxicity of interferons in cancer patients: a review. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:234.
85. Sacchi S, Kantarjian H, Cohen P, Pierce S, Talpaz M. Immune-mediated and unusual complications during alpha-interferon therapy in chronic myelogenous leukemia. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:2401.
86. Vassiliadis S, Athanassakis I. Type II interferon may be a potential hazardous therapeutic agent during pregnancy. Br J Haematol 1992;82:782.
87. Haggstrom J, Adrianson M, Hybbinette T, Harnby E, Thorbert G. Two cases of CML treated with alpha-interferon during second and third trimester of pregnancy with analysis of the drug in the
new-born immediately postpartum. Eur J Haematol 1996;102
88. Italian Study Group on Chronic Myeloid Leukemia and Italian Group for Bone Marrow Transplantation. Monitoring treatment and survival in chronic myeloid leukemia. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:1858.
89. Silver RT, Woolf SH, Hehlmann R, et al. An evidence-based analysis of the effect of busulfan, hydroxyurea, interferon, and allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in treating the chronic phase
of chronic myeloid leukemia: developed for the American Society of Hematology. Blood 1999;94:1517.
90. Thomas D, Kantarjian H, O'Brien S, et al. “Sudden” blastic phase (SBP) transformation in the first 2 years (YRS) of interferon-a (IFN) therapy (RX) for chronic phase (CP) chronic myelogenous
leukemia (CML). Blood 1998;92:251a.
91. Talpaz M, Estrov Z, Kantarjian H, et al. Persistence of dormant leukemic progenitors during interferon-induced remission in chronic myelogenous leukemia. J Clin Invest 1994;94:1383.
92. Kurzrock R, Estrov Z, Kantarjian H, Talpaz M. Conversion of interferon-induced, long-term cytogenetic remissions in chronic myelogenous leukemia to polymerase chain reaction negativity. J
Clin Oncol 1998;16:1526.
93. Kantarjian H, Keating M, Talpaz M, et al. Chronic myelogenous leukemia in blast crisis. Analysis of 242 patients. Am J Med 1987;83:445.
94. Kantarjian H, O'Brien S, Beran M, et al. Results with decitabine, a hypomethylating agent, in the treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia in accelerated or blastic phases. Blood
1996;88:199b.
95. Walters R, Kantarjian H, Keating M, et al. Therapy of lymphoid and undifferentiated chronic myelogenous leukemia in blast crisis with continuous vincristine and Adriamycin infusions plus high
dose decadron. Cancer 1987;81:516.
96. Levitzki A, Gazit A. Tyrosine kinase inhibition: an approach to drug development. Science 1995;267:1782.
97. Druker BJ, Sawyers CL, Talpaz M, et al. Phase I trial of a specific ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitor, CGP 57148, in interferon refractory chronic myelogenous leukemia patients. Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1999;18:7a.
98. Druker BJ, Talpaz M, Resta D, et al. Clinical efficacy and safety of an ABL specific tyrosine kinase inhibitor as targeted therapy for chronic myelogenous leukemia. Blood 1999;94:368a.
99. Talpaz M, Sawyers CL, Kantarjian H, et al. Activity of an ABL specific tyrosine kinase inhibitor in patients with BCR-ABL-positive acute leukemias, including chronic myelogenous leukemia in
blast crisis. Proc ASCO 2000;19:4a.
100. Skorski T, Nieborowska-Skorska M, Wlodarski P, et al. Antisense oligodeoxynucleotide combination therapy of primary chronic myelogenous leukemia blast crisis in SCID mice. Blood
1996;88:1005.
101. Talpaz M, Cortes J, O'Brien S, et al. Phase I study of polyethylene glycol (PEG) interferon alpha-2b (intron-A) in CML patients. Blood 1998;92(Suppl 1):251a.
102. O'Brien SM, Kantarjian H, Keating M, et al. Homoharringtonine therapy induces responses in patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia in late chronic phase. Blood 1995;86:3322.
103. Kantarjian HM, Talpaz M, Cortes J, et al. Homoharringtonine and low-dose cytosine (LDara-C) in late chronic phase chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). Blood 1999;94:274b.
104. O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, Koller C, et al. Sequential homoharringtonine and interferon-a in the treatment of early chronic phase chronic myelogenous leukemia. Blood 1999;93:4149.
105. Kantarjian HM, O'Brien SM, Estey E, et al. Decitabine studies in chronic and acute myelogenous leukemia. Leukemia 1997;11(Suppl 1):S35.
106. Molldrem JJ, Clave E, Jiang YZ, et al. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes specific for a nonpolylmorphic proteinase 3 peptide preferentially inhibit chronic myeloid leukemia colony-forming units. Blood
1997;90:2529.
107. Choudhoury A, Gajewski JL, Liang JC, et al. Use of leukemic dendritic cells expressing bcr/abl from CD34 positive chronic myeloid leukemia precursor cells. Blood 1997;89:1133.

SECTION 46.3.2 Chronic Leukemias: The Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemias
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 46.3.2
Chronic Leukemias: The Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemias
BRUCE D. CHESON
Introduction
Cell of Origin
Immune Function and Autoimmunity in Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
Cytogenetics
Molecular Biology and Genetics
Diagnosis
Clinical Features
Clinical Presentation
Infections
Aggressive Transformation
Autoimmunity
Pure Red Blood Cell Aplasia
Second Malignancies
Staging and Prognostic Factors
Staging Systems
Prognosis
Therapy
Initial Approach to the Patient with Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemias
Single-Agent Chemotherapy
Purine Analogues
Combination Regimens
Second-Line Therapy
Other Chemotherapy Agents
Biologic Therapy
Bone Marrow Transplantation
Other Therapeutic Measures
Assessment of Response to Therapy in Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemias
Related B-Cell Leukemias
Prolymphocytic Leukemia
Hairy Cell Leukemia
Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma in a Leukemic Phase
Chronic T-Cell Leukemias
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most common form of leukemia affecting adults in Western countries. The current annual incidence estimates vary from
approximately 8100 to 12,500 new cases in the United States. 1,2 An apparent decrease from 3.3 in 100,000 population in 1973 to 2.3 in 100,000 in 1990 may reflect
an improved ability to distinguish CLL from other chronic lymphoid leukemias. CLL occurs more often in males, with a relative frequency of 1.3:1 to 2.6:1. The median
age at diagnosis of CLL is 62 years; approximately 10% to 15% of patients with CLL present younger than 50 years of age, and 20% are younger than 55 years. 3 A
10-year-old child with CLL has been reported. 4 The increase in younger patients most likely represents the more routine use of automated blood counts and
differentials. Although younger patients with stage 0 disease may survive as long as a normal age-matched population, those with more advanced stages of the
disease have a median survival comparable to older patients when corrected for non–CLL-related causes of death. 3,5 CLL occurs more commonly in Jewish people of
Russian or Eastern European ancestry, and it is infrequent in Japan, China, and Asian countries. 6,7
No clear etiologic factors exist for CLL, although few carefully conducted studies have been performed. 8 CLL is one of the few leukemias that does not appear to be
associated with prior exposure to ionizing radiation, chemicals, or drugs, and it was the only leukemia not associated with atomic bomb explosions. 9,10,11 and 12
A clear familial incidence of CLL has been established. Approximately 20% of patients with this disease have relatives with CLL or another lymphoid malignancy,
although no genetic linkage has yet been identified. Rare sets of twins have been affected. 13,14 A lack of concordance of oncogene expression was reported in
monozygous twin sisters who both had CLL.15 Immigrants from Japan to the United States maintain their low incidence of CLL. The occurrence in spouses has been
observed.16

CELL OF ORIGIN
The precise origin of the CLL lymphocyte has not been clearly defined. CLL lymphocytes have been assumed to be the malignant counterpart of normal lymphocytes
because of their similar morphology. However, whereas B-CLL cells share some immunologic features with normal B cells, marked molecular and immunologic
differences distinguish the two cell populations.
CLL cells express pan-B antigens (e.g., HLA class II, CD19, CD20), as well as activation antigens (e.g., CD5, CD23, CD25, CD71), but not terminal differentiation
antigens exhibited by plasma cells. 17 This profile supports the hypothesis that the B-CLL cell is an “activated” B lymphocyte, meaning that the cells can be activated
without dividing, but it does not suggest that they are in a state of active proliferation. Overexpression of BCL-2 is restricted to the malignant cells. CLL B cells express
a restricted repertoire of V H1 genes, which is distinct from that of normal B cells. 18
Two major features that distinguish CLL cells from normal B cells is their expression of CD5 and the barely detectable amount of surface immunoglobulins. Although
CD5 was formerly considered to be a restricted T-cell antigen, CD5+ B cells are normally present in the mantle zone of normal lymph nodes, and small numbers can
be found in the peripheral blood of normal individuals. CD5+ B cells are found in increased numbers in patients with autoimmune disorders (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis,
Sjögren's syndrome, and systemic lupus erythematosus), immune thrombocytopenic purpura, and after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. 19,20 These
observations have led to the current theory that B-CLL is a monoclonal proliferation of mantle zone–based anergic CD5+ self-reactive B cells devoted to the
production of polyreactive autoantibodies. 21 A wide variety of growth factors have been implicated in the disordered proliferation and differentiation of B cells in CLL,
including tumor necrosis factor,22 interleukin-2 (IL-2), 23,24 IL-4,25,26 IL-6,27 IL-7,28 IL-8, IL-10, IL-11, IL-12, IL-13, interferon-g (IFN-g), granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor, transforming growth factor-b, and others. 29,30,31,32,33 and 34

IMMUNE FUNCTION AND AUTOIMMUNITY IN CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
CLL is characterized by an accumulation of immunologically incompetent B cells. These cells produce reduced amounts of normal immunoglobulins in response to
antigenic stimuli. 21 Quantitative and qualitative abnormalities of normal B cells, T cells, and natural killer (NK) cells also have been reported, with a reduction in the
number and function of normal T cells and the function of NK cells, and impaired complement activation. 35,36 Elevated levels of circulating IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) may
down-regulate helper T-cell function and may play a role in the pathogenesis of the immunodeficiency. 23,24 B-CLL cells express CD40, which down-modulates CD40
ligand (CD154) on CD4+ T cells. Because CD40 ligand allows B cells to respond to T cells, this effect may contribute to the immune incompetence in CLL. 37

CYTOGENETICS
Conventional banding techniques detect cytogenetic abnormalities in more than 50% of cases of CLL. 38,39 and 40 More recently, fluorescent in situ hybridization has
identified cytogenetic abnormalities in more than 80% of cases. 41,42 and 43 The most common cytogenetic abnormality in CLL appears to be deletion of 13q, which is
present in 55% of cases. Patients with 13q14 abnormalities tend to experience a more benign course with a normal lifespan. Whether deletion of the breast cancer
gene BRCA2 at 13q12 is involved is controversial. 44,45
Deletions of 11q23 are detected in 18% of cases and are associated with massive lymphadenopathy that is often out of proportion to the increase in peripheral blood
lymphocyte count. Trisomy 12 occurs in 16% of cases and is associated with atypical morphology and a poor outcome. Lymphocytes with trisomy 12 tend to have
unmutated immunoglobulin variable (V H) genes, whereas those with 13q14 have evidence of somatic mutations. 46 Mutations or deletions of p53 at 17p13.3 have been
reported in approximately 15% of patients. Chromosome 17 abnormalities are found more frequently in cases of atypical CLL and are associated with a higher
likelihood of Richter's transformation and a poor prognosis. 47
BCL-3 translocations, t(14;19)(q32.3;q13.2), are uncommon and, in approximately one-half of cases, occur in association with trisomy 12. These patients tend to be
young and have rapidly progressive disease. Of note is the lack of translocations in patients with CLL.

MOLECULAR BIOLOGY AND GENETICS
Lymphocytes from approximately one-half of patients with CLL contain V H genes that are mutated postgerminal center B cells [immunoglobulin D (IgD)–, CD38+)],
whereas the other half are naïve and unmutated (IgD+/IgM+, CD38–). 48,49 and 50 These two populations are characterized by markedly different clinical outcomes, with
the unmutated group having a significantly shorter survival rate. Studies of gene use in CLL have indicated that there may be nonrandom differential usage of V H and
Vl genes used in the cell of origin, with an apparent increase in the usage of the V H1-69 (51p1) gene from the VH1 family.46,51
No single oncogene has been implicated in the pathogenesis of CLL. Early reports of cases with the BCL-1 translocation were more likely mantle cell lymphoma
(MCL).52,53 and 54 The translocations associated with BCL-2 [t(14;18)(q32;q21)] and BCL-3 [t(14;19)(q32;q13.1)] have been detected in only 5% to 10% of cases. 55,56
However, overexpression of the BCL-2 gene is present in more than 70% of cases, even in the absence of the chromosome rearrangement. 57 The ratio of the
antiapoptotic gene BCL2 to the proapoptotic gene BAX is increased in CLL cells, which favors cell survival. Deletions of 13q have been identified using molecular
techniques, even in cases without cytogenetic changes. This abnormality was thought to be at the site of the retinoblastoma (RB) suppressor gene but has since been
shown to be telomeric to that region with a novel suppressor gene referred to as DBM (disrupted in B-cell malignancy). 58 An apparent correlation exists between the
antiapoptotic protein Mcl-1 and resistance to chemotherapy. 59
Considerable interest has focused on the ATM gene, which is mutated in patients with ataxia telangiectasia, who are at an increased risk for developing lymphoid
neoplasms. The ATM gene is located at chromosome 11q22-23 and encodes for a high-molecular-weight protein that is involved in cell-cycle control, DNA repair, and
DNA recombination. However, only a subset of patients with deletions at 11q22-23 show mutations in the coding region of the remaining ATM allele, 60 suggesting a
pathogenetic role for other genes.
Abnormalities of p53 occur in at least 15% of patients and are associated with a higher percentage of prolymphocytes, advanced stage, chemoresistance, and a
poorer outcome.61,62 and 63
DIAGNOSIS
Most patients with CLL are asymptomatic at presentation, and the diagnosis is often made when lymphocytosis is noted at the time of a routine complete blood cell
count. Physical examination is normal in 20% to 30% of patients at presentation. As the disease progresses, however, generalized adenopathy and splenomegaly are
common.
The diagnosis of CLL requires more than 5000 per µL of small, mature-appearing lymphocytes circulating in the peripheral blood that are unexplained by other clinical
disorders. The bone marrow aspirate and biopsy are infiltrated by at least 30% lymphocytes. A bone marrow aspirate and biopsy are rarely required to make the
diagnosis of CLL, but they may provide prognostic information and are valuable for assessing response to therapy. 64,65
The immunophenotype of CLL cells readily distinguishes CLL from other disorders associated with increased numbers of circulating atypical lymphoid cells [e.g.,
prolymphocytic leukemia (PLL), hairy cell leukemia (HCL), and hairy cell variant (HCL V)], from non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHL) in a leukemic phase (e.g.,
lymphoplasmacytic lymphomas; marginal zone NHL, including splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes; mantle cell NHL), and from plasma cell leukemia 66 (Fig.
46.3.2-1). CLL lymphocytes are monoclonal B cells that express CD19, CD20, CD23, and CD5, along with low levels of surface immunoglobulin (sIg). T-cell antigens
(e.g., CD2, CD3) are absent.66 Mouse red blood cell rosettes on peripheral blood lymphocytes are characteristic of CLL, but this test is no longer routinely performed.
In an occasional patient, CLL B cells express additional antigens more characteristic of hairy cells, monocytes, or myeloid cells. 17,67 Immunoglobulin heavy-chain gene
rearrangements are invariably present but are not required to make the diagnosis.68 Disorders characterized by CD5– chronic lymphocytosis should not be
considered CLL because they differ in immunologic, molecular, and functional features. 69

FIGURE 46.3.2-1. Morphologic and immunophenotypic characteristics, respectively, of (A) chronic lymphocytic leukemia (small, compact nucleus; no visible nucleoli;
homogeneous cells; sIg dim, CD19+, CD20+, CD23+, CD5+, CD103–, CD10–); (B) prolymphocytic leukemia (larger, prominent nucleoli; mixed population; sIg+,
CD19+, CD20+, CD5+/–, CD23+/–, CD103–, CD10–); (C) hairy cell leukemia (filamentous projections; sIg+, CD19+, CD20+, CD23–, CD5–, CD103+, CD10–); (D)
follicular small cleaved cell lymphoma (small, cleaved cells; SIg+; CD19+, CD20+, CD5–, CD10+/–, CD23–); and (E) mantle cell lymphoma (small to medium cleaved;
sIg+, CD19+, CD20+, CD23–, CD5–,CD103–, CD10+). sIg, surface immunoglobulin.

CLINICAL FEATURES
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Patients with CLL are generally symptomatic at presentation, and the diagnosis is often made incidentally when a lymphocytosis is noted at the time of a routine
evaluation. Physical examination is normal at presentation in 20% to 30% of patients, with lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly, or both, noted in an additional
40% to 50% of patients. As the disease progresses, however, generalized adenopathy and splenomegaly become common features of this disease ( Fig. 46.3.2-2).

Pulmonary and central nervous system involvement are uncommon. 70,71

FIGURE 46.3.2-2. Pronounced cervical, supraclavicular, and axillary lymphadenopathy in a patient with chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

INFECTIONS
Hypogammaglobulinemia is common in CLL, especially in patients with advanced disease. The increased susceptibility to infections reflects an inability to produce
specific antibodies and abnormal activation of the complement system. 36 Historically, the most common pathogens were those that require opsonization for bacterial
killing, such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Haemophilus influenzae. The increased use of immunosuppressive agents, such as
fludarabine, 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine (2-CdA), and 2'-deoxycoformycin (DCF), has markedly altered the spectrum of pathogens encountered in patients with CLL, with
an increase in infections seen with opportunistic organisms such as Candida, Listeria, Pneumocystis carinii, Cytomegalovirus, Aspergillus, Herpesvirus infections, and
others that were rarely encountered before the widespread use of nucleoside analogues. 72,73,74 and 75 A febrile patient with CLL receiving one of the new nucleoside
analogues can no longer be assumed to have a common bacterial pathogen, and aggressive diagnostic measures may be required. Prophylactic antimicrobial
regimens cannot be routinely recommended for all fludarabine-treated patients because the broad spectrum of potential pathogens would require multiple, potentially
toxic drugs. However, such regimens should be considered for patients with extensive prior therapy, who have failed fludarabine, who have a history of recurrent
infections, or are on corticosteroids. 75,76
High-dose intravenous immunoglobulins have been evaluated for their ability to prevent infections in CLL. 77 Although a reduction in the total number of bacterial
infections is reported with this treatment, these are primarily of trivial to moderate severity, with no decrease in the total number of major infections, either viral or
fungal, or in the number of patients experiencing an infection, and with no improvement in overall survival. The prophylactic use of intravenous immunoglobulins is not
cost-effective78 and should be reserved for select patients with documented, repeated bacterial infections. 79
Whether myeloid growth factors can protect against chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression has not yet been demonstrated. 80 In one study,81 the use of granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor to support fludarabine therapy reduced the occurrence of pneumonias but not other forms of severe infections.
AGGRESSIVE TRANSFORMATION
Approximately 3% to 15% of CLLs evolve into a more aggressive lymphoid malignancy. The most common of these is Richter's syndrome, which was initially
described in 1928 by Maurice Richter. 82 He reported a 46-year-old man with CLL who experienced a rapid clinical deterioration characterized by lymphocytosis,
massive and diffuse adenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and abdominal discomfort. At autopsy, large abdominal and retroperitoneal lymph nodes were infiltrated not
only by small lymphocytes, but with larger cells, which reflected the large cell lymphoma component. Additional cases were subsequently reported by Lortholary et
al.,83 who designated the entity as Richter's syndrome. Richter's syndrome develops in approximately 5% of CLL patients. 84 Patients characteristically present with
increasing lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, fever, abdominal pain, weight loss, progressive anemia, and thrombocytopenia, with a rapid rise in the peripheral
blood lymphocyte count. A lymph node biopsy reveals a large cell lymphoma. This transformation is not clearly related to either the nature or the extent of prior
therapy. The large cell lymphoma shares immunologic, cytogenetic, and molecular features with the original CLL clone in one-half of the cases. 85,86 and 87 Nucleic acid
sequence analysis of the heavy- and light-chain–variable region supports the theory that Richter's syndrome is derived from the same malignant clone in most
patients. 88,89 Response of patients with Richter's syndrome to systemic therapy is poor, with a median survival of 4 to 5 months using alkylating agents, but may be
longer with nucleoside analogue–based regimens. 84,90
CLL may also evolve over the years into PLL. This transformation is associated with progressive anemia and thrombocytopenia, with at least 55% prolymphocytes in
the peripheral blood. 91 Clinical features include lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly with a wasting syndrome, and an increasing resistance to therapy.
Anecdotal reports have been published of a transformation to acute lymphoblastic leukemia, plasma cell leukemia, multiple myeloma, or Hodgkin's disease. 91,92 and 93
AUTOIMMUNITY
A positive Coombs' antiglobulin test may be present in 20% to 30% of cases of CLL, with clinical hemolysis in 10% to 25% of patients. 94,95 The frequency of immune
thrombocytopenia appears to be approximately 2%. 94,95 The immune hemolysis is more often related to a warm-reactive than a cold antibody. In most cases, these
antibodies are polyclonal and, therefore, not produced by the malignant B cells. 21,96 This phenomenon probably reflects impaired interactions among the malignant B
cells, normal B cells, and T cells. 21 However, two VH genes have been shown to be preferentially expressed in cells from CLL patients with warm-reacting antibodies:
51pl/DP-10 gene and a DP-50 gene. 97,98 These observations suggest that, whereas the antibodies that are produced by the CLL are not involved in the red blood cell
destruction, they may still be involved in the pathogenesis of the autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
Autoimmune anemia, or thrombocytopenia, generally responds to corticosteroids, such as prednisone, 60 to 100 mg/d, which may be tapered after 1 or 2 weeks after
evidence of response. Patients who are unresponsive to corticosteroids may respond to high-dose intravenous immunoglobulins using an initial loading dose daily for
5 days followed by 0.4 g/kg every 3 weeks. Splenectomy may be considered when systemic approaches fail. 99 Splenic irradiation induces only transient responses.
Rituximab has been associated with dramatic responses (B. Cheson, unpublished observation).
PURE RED BLOOD CELL APLASIA
Pure red blood cell aplasia has been reported to occur in up to 6% of cases of CLL, although that figure is likely an overestimate. 100 This complication is characterized
by severe anemia (hematocrit generally less than 21%) without a reticulocyte response or bone marrow normoblasts and in the absence of neutropenia or
thrombocytopenia. Corticosteroids may induce transient responses. Chemotherapy increases the hematocrit in the majority of patients with a response of the CLL.
Cyclosporine A, with or without concurrent corticosteroids, may also achieve responses, often within 2 to 3 weeks and without requiring a reduction in tumor mass. 101
SECOND MALIGNANCIES
Secondary malignancies occur with increased frequency in patients with CLL, related both to the immune defects of the disease as well as the consequences of
therapy. 102,103,104,105,106,107 and 108 The most common tumors are lung cancers and melanomas; others include Hodgkin's disease, essential thrombocythemia, multiple
myeloma, and acute myeloid leukemia. Coincidence of CLL and chronic myeloid leukemia also has been observed 109,110 (B. Cheson, unpublished observation).

STAGING AND PROGNOSTIC FACTORS

STAGING SYSTEMS
CLL patients have markedly differing outcomes and may require different therapeutic approaches. Over the years, a number of classification systems have been
developed to organize CLL patients into risk groups. 111,112 and 113 The first widely accepted attempt to identify various prognostic groups of patients was the five-stage
Rai classification ( Table 46.3.2-1): Stage 0 includes patients with only lymphocytosis (median survival, more than 12.5 years); stage I patients also have
lymphadenopathy (median survival, 8.5 years); stage II is characterized by splenomegaly with or without hepatomegaly (median survival, 6 years); stage III includes
anemia (not related to hemolysis) (median survival, 2 to 4 years); and stage IV includes thrombocytopenia (median survival, 2 to 4 years). 114 This system was
subsequently simplified to three stages: low risk (stage 0), intermediate risk (stages I–II), and high risk (stages III–IV) 115 (Fig. 46.3.2-3). In Europe a few years later,
Binet described his three-stage stage system: Stage A patients have fewer than three node-bearing areas (median survival, more than 10 years); stage B patients
have three or more node-bearing areas (median survival, 5 years); and stage C patients have anemia and/or thrombocytopenia (median survival, 2 years) 116 (Table
46.3.2-2). The Rai classification is the most commonly used in the United States, whereas the Binet system is often applied in Europe. A major difference between the
two systems is the failure of the Binet system to identify Rai stage 0 patients, who have a 10-year survival rate of approximately 60%. Binet stage A patients include
all Rai 0, two-thirds of Rai I, and one-third of Rai II. Neither system identifies patients with lymphocytosis and splenomegaly without lymphadenopathy. Nevertheless,
the two systems have similar prognostic value. Other staging systems do not appear to provide an advantage over the two already in widespread use. 117,118

TABLE 46.3.2-1. Modified Rai Staging System for Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia

FIGURE 46.3.2-3. Simplification of the five-stage Rai classification into three risk groups based on survival. Stage 0, low risk; stages I and II, intermediate risk; stages
III and IV, high risk.

TABLE 46.3.2-2. Binet Staging System for Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia

At diagnosis, approximately 20% to 30% of patients are Rai stage 0, and 70% to 80% of patients are in low- or intermediate-risk groups in both the Rai and Binet
classifications. 5,106,114,116,118,119,120,121 and 122
PROGNOSIS
Clinical features and laboratory studies are used to predict survival in CLL. Montserrat and coworkers 123,124 were the first to use the term smoldering CLL to distinguish
patients with early-stage disease who were unlikely to progress from those who were more likely to require treatment. The laboratory features included a hemoglobin
of 12 g% or higher, a lymphocyte count of less than 30,000 cells per µL, a platelet count of more than 150,000 cells perµL, and a nondiffuse pattern of bone marrow
involvement with fewer than 80% lymphocytes.
A rapid lymphocyte doubling time appears to be a better predictor of a poor outcome than the absolute number of circulating lymphocytes. 124,125
In more than one-half of CLL cases, the bone marrow is diffusely infiltrated by small lymphocytes; in the remaining patients, the pattern of infiltration is nodular,
interstitial, or a mixture of the two. The diffuse pattern has been suggested to be a strong independent adverse prognostic factor, 121 although this finding does not
clearly add to clinical stage. 5,126,127,128 and 129
Additional features associated with a shorter survival include male gender, black race, poor performance status, abnormal liver chemistries, decreased serum
albumin, and vertebral bone marrow involvement detected by magnetic resonance imaging. 106,118,130,131
Of the numerous immunologic characteristics that have been evaluated, soluble CD23 and serum b 2-microglobulin appear to have a particularly strong predictive
value.132,133,134,135,136 and 137 Others include the function of various lymphocyte subpopulations, 138 expression of surface IgM, FMC7, loss of CD23, increased serum
levels of soluble CD54, 139,140,141,142,143,144 and 145) and soluble IL-2 receptors. 23,24

A serum or urine paraprotein can be detected in more than 60% of cases of CLL, including the presence of Bence Jones proteinuria, 146,147 but the level of paraprotein
does not appear to have prognostic value. There has been no consistent relationship between hypogammaglobulinemia and survival among series. 118,142,148,149
Cytogenetic and molecular studies best predict outcome in CLL. Patients with 13q abnormalities experience the longest survival and rarely require therapy, whereas
complex abnormalities are associated with the poorest outcome. 43 Deletions of the long arm of chromosome 11 (11q21-25) tend to occur in patients who are younger
and have more aggressive disease; peripheral, abdominal, and mediastinal adenopathy; advanced stage; and a shorter survival. Trisomy 12 has a prognosis that is
intermediate between the two. Cytogenetic studies are not recommended as part of the routine evaluation of the patient with CLL because they are expensive, difficult
to perform, and most important, we do not yet know how to apply the information to treatment decisions.
Although BCL-2 expression has not uniformly correlated with outcome, the ratio of BCL-2 to BAX favors survival in CLL cells with enhanced in vitro cell survival and
correlates with clinical resistance to chemotherapy and clinical outcome. 150,151 and 152 P53 deletions predict for poor response to therapy with fludarabine or
pentostatin. 62
Studies49,50 have shown a strong independent correlation between V H gene mutations, CD38 expression, and survival. The V H mutation status distinguishes more
primitive from more mature B cells and appears to separate CLL patients into markedly distinct prognostic groups ( Fig. 46.3.2-4).

FIGURE 46.3.2-4. Patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia can be separated into survival groups on the basis of the mutational status of the immunoglobulin
variable gene (A) and CD38 expression (B). (From ref. 50, with permission.)

THERAPY
Patients with low-risk CLL often do not require therapy for many years after diagnosis and eventually die of apparently unrelated causes. Anecdotal reports of
transient spontaneous remissions also have been published. 153,154 Many patients with intermediate-risk disease may remain stable for many years as well, whereas
others may die from disease-related complications within a few months of diagnosis, despite appropriate therapy. Most patients with high-risk CLL need treatment at
diagnosis.
INITIAL APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIAS
Currently available therapies do not cure patients with CLL155 ( Fig. 46.3.2-5), yet they may be associated with substantial toxicities. Moreover, early intervention has
not been shown to benefit patients with early-stage disease. 107,156,157,158 and 159 The French Cooperative Group on CLL conducted two studies in patients with Binet
stage A disease.107,158 In the first study, patients were randomized to daily oral chlorambucil or observation. In the second trial, patients received either intermittent
chlorambucil plus prednisone or no initial treatment. Neither study detected an advantage to early intervention. Moreover, a greater number of fatal, secondary solid
tumors were reported in the first study, which was not noted in the study using an intermittent drug schedule. 158 Therefore, therapy should not be initiated in patients
with early-stage CLL without specific indications, which include disease-related symptoms (e.g., fevers, chills, weight loss, pronounced fatigue); increasing bone
marrow failure with anemia and/or thrombocytopenia, autoimmune anemia, or thrombocytopenia; massive or progressive hepatosplenomegaly or lymphadenopathy;
and recurrent infections. 65 An elevated lymphocyte count alone is not sufficient to prompt therapy; however, a lymphocyte doubling time of less than 6 months may
support the decision to treat. 5,125

FIGURE 46.3.2-5. Survival of 741 previously untreated patients seen at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center over three decades, ending in 1990, demonstrating a lack
of any incremental improvement in survival with therapies available during that period. (From ref. 155, with permission.)

SINGLE-AGENT CHEMOTHERAPY
The most active classes of chemotherapy drugs in CLL are alkylating agents, such as chlorambucil and cyclophosphamide, and the nucleoside analogues
fludarabine, 2-CdA, and DCF (pentostatin). 155,160,161 When chlorambucil is administered orally, either at a dose of 4 to 8 mg/m 2 daily for 4 to 8 weeks, or as pulses of
15 to 30 mg/m2 every 2 to 4 weeks, responses are attained in approximately 30% to 70% of previously untreated patients, although few of these are complete
responses.157,162,163 The activity of cyclophosphamide appears to be similar to chlorambucil, but it is generally used only when chlorambucil has failed or is poorly
tolerated, and in combination regimens.
Corticosteroids are less active than alkylating agents in CLL and should be reserved for patients with autoimmune complications because of the risks of bacterial,
viral, and fungal infections; diabetes; and osteoporosis.
PURINE ANALOGUES
Fludarabine (2-fluoro-ara-adenosine monophosphate) is the most active agent for the treatment of CLL ( Table 46.3.2-3). The currently recommended schedule of
administration of fludarabine is as an intravenous bolus of 25 mg/m 2 daily for 5 consecutive days once a month. Patients failing to respond to two or three courses
should be switched to an alternative treatment. Patients who achieve a complete response probably do not warrant additional treatment. For those patients with a
partial response, therapy is continued to best response plus two additional courses, not exceeding 1 year of therapy because of concerns of cumulative myelotoxicity.

Other schedules have not been as active. 185,186 and 187 The oral bioavailability of fludarabine is 50% to 60%, and an oral formulation is in clinical trials. 188

TABLE 46.3.2-3. Purine Analogues in Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia

Fludarabine induces complete remissions in approximately 30% of previously untreated patients, with an overall response rate higher than 70%. 163,165,166,169,170 In a
long-term follow-up of a large, single institution series, the median time to progression of responders was 31 months, and the overall median survival was 74
months.189 Those who achieve an immunophenotypic and molecular complete remission appear to experience a longer survival than those with only a clinical and
hematologic remission.190
Fludarabine has been compared with an alkylating agent–based regimen in several phase III trials 163,169,170,191 (Table 46.3.2-4).

TABLE 46.3.2-4. Comparisons between Fludarabine and Alkylating Agent Regimens as Initial Therapy of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia

In a North American Intergroup study, 544 untreated patients with advanced-stage, active disease were randomized to either fludarabine at the standard dose,
chlorambucil (40 mg/m2 single dose), or a combination of the two agents (fludarabine 20 mg/m 2 daily for 5 days; chlorambucil 20 mg/m 2 day 1) every 4 weeks for up to
12 months. Patients who were unsuccessful with one of the single agents were crossed over to receive the alternate drug. The 167 patients in the fludarabine group
had an overall response rate of 70%, including 27% complete remissions, which was significantly higher than with chlorambucil (43% responses, 3% complete
remissions; P <.0001). The duration of response was 32 months with fludarabine versus 18 months with chlorambucil ( P = .0002), with a median progression-free
survival of 27 months with fludarabine and 17 months for chlorambucil ( P <.0001). However, no apparent prolongation of survival was reported, related in part to the
crossover design of the study. The combination arm was prematurely closed because it was more toxic with no likelihood of being more effective than fludarabine
alone.
A European collaborative group randomized 196 patients with stage A (2), B (104), or C (89) to either fludarabine or one of two anthracycline-based regimens
[cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and prednisone (CAP) or cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (CHOP)]. 169 A higher response rate was
attained with fludarabine in the untreated patients, although the difference was not significant. The advantage for fludarabine was significant for remission duration,
with a trend toward a survival advantage (P = .087). In a subsequent trial by the International Working Group on CLL, including 486 stage B and 209 stage C
patients, 170 a complete hematologic remission was observed in 37% of the fludarabine group, 28% of the CHOP group, and 13% of the CAP-treated patients. The
differences were significant between fludarabine and CAP and between CHOP and CAP ( P <.0001) in response and survival, but not between fludarabine and CHOP
(P = .15). Nevertheless, fewer deaths were reported in the fludarabine group, resulting in a significant survival advantage ( P = .05).
These results establish fludarabine as the preferred initial treatment for most patients with CLL. However, for patients who are elderly or those who have a reduced
performance status or an active infection, chlorambucil may be a reasonable first-line treatment option. Another alternative is a 3-day schedule of fludarabine, which
appears to be almost as active but has fewer associated toxicities. 187
The major toxicities associated with fludarabine at the currently used schedules are moderate myelosuppression and severe immunosuppression, with occasional
neurotoxicity, particularly at higher than recommended doses. 74,192,193 Lymphocyte counts decrease within weeks, particularly CD4 cells, which do not return to normal
for 1 year or longer after treatment has been discontinued. 74,166 Fludarabine has not been found to be more myelotoxic but has been associated with more
opportunistic infections than alkylating agent regimens. 163,169
Tumor lysis syndrome is a rare complication of treatment of CLL with alkylating agents, radiation, combination chemotherapy, or fludarabine. 194
Approximately 55% to 85% of patients who are treated with 2-CdA as their initial therapy respond to this agent, but only 10% to 15% achieve complete remissions,
and the duration of response appears to be shorter than reported for fludarabine 176,177,195 (see Table 46.3.2-3). Data with pentostatin as initial therapy are insufficient
to assess its level of activity 161 (see Table 46.3.2-3).
COMBINATION REGIMENS
Combination regimens are not clearly superior to single-agent therapy for CLL. 157,169,196,197,198,199,200,201 and 202 The most commonly used multiagent regimens include
chlorambucil plus prednisone (CP) or cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisone (CVP). CP and CVP induce responses in fewer than 10% to more than 60% of
previously untreated patients, although few of these responses are complete, and the median survival is shorter than 2 years. 157,162,196,197 and 198,203 The French
Cooperative Group randomized 151 patients with Binet stage B CLL to indefinite daily oral chlorambucil and 140 patients to cyclophosphamide, Oncovin, and
prednisone (COP). No difference was noted in response rate, reduction in clinical stage, or overall survival. 204
More aggressive regimens that include multiple alkylating agents or anthracyclines also have not shown an advantage over less intensive programs. 170,201,202,205,206
One small randomized trial suggested a survival advantage for an attenuated CHOP regimen (including doxorubicin at 25 mg/m 2 every 4 weeks) over COP in a small
number of patients with stage C disease. 199 Moreover, data from the same investigators suggest an advantage for CHOP over CAP. 170 However, several other
randomized trials and a metaanalysis have not confirmed superiority for anthracycline-containing regimens. 157,159,198,200

Combinations of fludarabine with chlorambucil, anthracyclines or related compounds, cytarabine, and IFN-a are not clearly better than fludarabine
alone. 163,207,208,209,210,211,212,213 and 214 The addition of prednisone to fludarabine does not increase the response rate but is associated with more frequent opportunistic
infections. 72,75,166 Preliminary encouraging data with combinations of fludarabine and cyclophosphamide have led to phase III studies. 215,216
DCF has been combined with alkylating agents and steroids with high response rates but considerable toxicity. 217
SECOND-LINE THERAPY
Treatment decisions for relapsed and refractory patients should be based on criteria similar to those used for initial management. 65 Because therapy is palliative in
this setting, treatment should not be initiated unless it is clearly needed.
Patients with CLL who relapse after or are refractory to initial treatment should be referred to a clinical trial. For patients who are not eligible for or are unwilling to
participate in clinical research, salvage therapy is determined by the initial treatment and response to that treatment. Alkylating agents and fludarabine remain the
most widely used drugs in this setting. Most other cytotoxic drugs have failed to show activity. 218,219
Patients who initially respond to an alkylating agent can often be successfully retreated with that agent; however, the quality of the subsequent response and its
duration are usually inferior to the initial treatment. 196,201,205 Response rates with multiple alkylating agents of anthracycline-containing regimens are significantly lower
as second-line therapy, with few complete remissions. 169,201,205
Fludarabine has become the standard agent for treating patients unsuccessful with alkylating agents. 164,166,167 and 168,172,185,220,221 Grever et al. 164 were the first to report
activity for fludarabine in a series of 32 previously treated patients. Although they achieved only 3% complete responses and 9% partial responses, a large number of
other patients experienced major clinical improvement. When current response criteria were applied, the overall response rate was 45%. 65 Keating and
coworkers155,165,220,222 reported 57% complete responses and 36% partial responses of 28 relapsed patients, and 28% complete responses and 10% partial responses
of 50 refractory patients (63% of complete responses had residual lymphoid nodules in the bone marrow) (see Table 46.3.2-3). The median time to progression was
18 months for patients who were refractory to alkylating agents and 17 months for patients who had relapsed after prior treatment. Lower response rates and durability
of response were noted in patients with advanced-stage disease, extensive prior therapy, and poor performance status. 171,172 When compared with CAP as
second-line therapy, 169 fludarabine was associated with a significantly higher response rate as well as a longer remission duration and survival, although these
differences were not significant.
Re-treatment with fludarabine is successful in one-half of those patients whose initial response to fludarabine lasted 1 year or longer. 165,189 On the other hand, few
effective therapeutic options are available to patients whose disease is refractory to fludarabine. 163,165
2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine
In general, response rates with 2-CdA for relapsed and refractory patients are in the range of 30% to 40%, but with few complete remissions. 160,174,177 Saven et al.160
reported 4% complete responses and 40% partial responses of 90 relapsed and refractory patients with CLL, with a median duration of response of 4 months (see
Table 46.3.2-3). Variability in response rates among series reflect differences in drug administration schedule, patient selection, response criteria, and other factors.
2-CdA has limited activity in fludarabine failures. 223,224
2'-Deoxycoformycin (Pentostatin)
Almost one-fourth of alkylating agent failures respond to DCF, although few of these responses are complete or durable 161,181,183,184,193,225,226 and 227 (see Table 46.3.2-3).
A few reports of combinations of DCF with other cytotoxic or biologic agents in CLL in relapsed patients have been published. 217,228
OTHER CHEMOTHERAPY AGENTS
Despite the lack of single-agent data for cisplatin and cytarabine, these drugs have been incorporated into multidrug regimens, although their contribution to those
regimens is unclear. 229,230 and 231 Theophylline appears to synergize with chlorambucil in vitro in inducing apoptosis and has shown clinical activity. 232,233 and 234
Several newer agents are currently under investigation in CLL. Compound GW506U78, a prodrug for ara-G, is a new nucleoside analogue with impressive activity in
a variety of hematologic malignancies. 235 Responses have been reported in patients with chronic B-cell and T-cell leukemias, even after failure with fludarabine and
alkylating agents. 236,237 Interest in the use of arsenicals in CLL stems from several preclinical studies suggesting that arsenic induces apoptosis of malignant
lymphocytes at clinical achievable doses. 238,239 The protein kinase C inhibitors bryostatin and UCN-01, the cyclin inhibitor flavopiridol, and the histone deacetylase
inhibitor depsipeptide are being evaluated as single agents and in combinations. 240,241,242,243 and 244 A variety of in vitro observations suggest a potential role for
antiangiogenesis agents. 245
BIOLOGIC THERAPY
Interferon-a
IFN-a has limited activity in CLL, with transient partial responses in patients with limited-stage disease. 246,247,248 and 249 Preliminary data suggesting benefit for IFN
maintenance after a response to induction chemotherapy with alkylating agents 246 were not confirmed in studies with fludarabine. 250,251
Monoclonal Antibodies
Early studies with monoclonal antibodies targeting CD5 did not show adequate activity to pursue in larger trials. 252,253 and 254 However, several newer antibodies have
shown considerable promise.
The CAMPATH-1H monoclonal antibody recognizes the CD52 antigen, which is present on B cells as well as T cells. This antibody has shown impressive activity
against both in CLL and PLL. 255,256,257,258 and 259 Responses occur in approximately one-third of patients who have been unsuccessful with other treatments, including
fludarabine. 260 This agent appears to be more active against peripheral blood and bone marrow involvement than nodal disease.
Rituximab (Rituxan) is an anti-CD20 antibody C2B8 with major activity against follicular lymphomas. 261 However, its activity using the recommended dose and
schedule has not been impressive in patients with small lymphocytic leukemia or CLL, with response rates in the range of 10% to 15% and no complete
remissions.261,262,263,264 and 265 This lack of activity may reflect the dim expression of CD20 on CLL cells. Attempts are being made to improve on this activity by
increasing the dose, altering the schedule of administration, or augmenting CD20 expression. 264,266,267 and 268) Rituximab may sensitize tumor cells to chemotherapy
agents, and combinations of the antibody with fludarabine are in development. Patients with CLL who are treated with this antibody are at risk for potentially
life-threatening toxicities characterized by cytokine release syndrome or rapid tumor clearance. 264,269
The development of antibodies conjugated to radioisotopes, such as iodine 131 or yttrium 90, will be more difficult because of concerns that antibody localization in
the bone marrow results in significant myelotoxicity. 270,271

BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTATION
Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation has been performed to a limited extent in patients with CLL, primarily because these patients tend to be older and it has been
difficult to eradicate the disease in the patient. 272,273,274 and 275 Although more than 70% of patients may be induced into a remission with bone marrow
transplantation, 272,274,275 only approximately one-half of patients are alive and free of disease after long-term follow-up. The best outcome has been reported for
patients with no evidence of minimal residual disease by polymerase chain reaction. 276 However, the treatment-related death rate has been approximately 30% to
50%, related to a high rate of graft-versus-host disease. Whereas some patients with advanced disease clearly benefit from bone marrow transplantation, the
occurrence of late relapses raises questions as to how many patients are actually cured.
Submyeloablative preparative regimens, or “mini-transplants,” have been reported to induce successful engraftment without substantial acute graft-versus-host
disease. The necessary immunosuppression is provided by a drug such as fludarabine, with a moderately myelosuppressive dose of cyclophosphamide. 277,278 This
approach permits eligibility to older patients and those with impaired performance status or organ function. Further refinement of this technology is needed before it
becomes a standard approach.
Autologous stem cell transplantation as currently performed has a limited role for patients with CLL, with the possible exception of patients who can be induced into a
molecular remission.272,273,276,279
OTHER THERAPEUTIC MEASURES
Small, unconfirmed series have suggested a role for such treatments as leukopheresis 285 or photochemotherapy 286 in the management of CLL; however, these
approaches have not been widely accepted.
Splenectomy
Splenectomy may play an important role in the palliative management of patients with CLL who have failed systemic treatment for autoimmune hemolytic anemia or
thrombocytopenia, who have mechanical complications from splenomegaly that is unresponsive to chemotherapy, or in patients with hypersplenism who are tolerating
chemotherapy poorly. 99 Splenectomy may also assist in making the diagnosis of a suspected Richter's transformation. Thrombocytopenia is the most likely cell type to
respond after splenectomy. When performed by an experienced surgeon, the mortality of the procedure is less than 10%. 99
Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy has a limited role in the current management of patients with CLL. Older studies suggesting therapeutic benefit have not been substantiated, and it
adds little benefit but considerable morbidity when combined with chemotherapy. 280,281 Splenic irradiation to palliate symptoms or in the treatment of autoimmune
hemolytic anemia achieves only brief responses. 282,283 and 284
ASSESSMENT OF RESPONSE TO THERAPY IN CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIAS
Several sets of response criteria for CLL have been published. 287,288 and 289 The recommendations of the National Cancer Institute Sponsored Working Group on CLL,
published first in 1988 and updated in 1996, are the most widely used for clinical research protocols ( Table 46.3.2-5).64,65 These guidelines standardized eligibility,
response, and toxicity criteria; provided dose modifications for drug-related myelosuppression; and provided a grading system for infectious complications.

TABLE 46.3.2-5. Revised National Cancer Institute Working Group Guidelines for Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia

RELATED B-CELL LEUKEMIAS
PROLYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
PLL can occur either de novo or, less often, as a transformation from CLL. In contrast to the small, mature-appearing lymphocytes of CLL, PLL cells are large, with a
round nucleus and a prominent nucleolus. 91,92 and 93,290 In de novo PLL, most of the peripheral blood mononuclear cells tend to be prolymphocytes; in PLL that has
transformed from CLL, there is a dimorphic population of lymphocytes in the peripheral blood. 290,291
Cells from patients with PLL exhibit immunologic differences from B-CLL cells. They may be CD5– and may express CD20 brightly. They lack mouse red blood cell
rosettes and more frequently express FMC7. 139,292 In one-fourth of cases, the t(11;14) leads to the BCL-1 rearrangement, suggesting that these cases represent
mantle cell lymphoma. A consistent chromosomal abnormality, t(6;12), has been reported in addition to the more common 14q+. A high frequency of somatic mutation
in the Vh genes is expressed in PLL. 293 P53 abnormalities are identified in more than 50% of cases, which may confer drug resistance. 62
Patients with de novo PLL tend to be older than those with transformed PLL. They are usually symptomatic and may experience a wasting syndrome. They are
generally Rai stage III or IV at presentation, with marked splenomegaly and a higher white blood cell count but less lymphadenopathy. The clinical course tends to be
aggressive. Nevertheless, the outcome for those patients who have transformed appears to be even worse. The median survival for de novo PLL has been reported to
be 3 years, compared with only 9 months for those who have transformed from CLL to PLL. Patients with PLL tend to respond poorly to either single-agent or
combination chemotherapy, with overall response rates of less than 25% and rare complete responses. Small series and anecdotal cases suggest impressive activity
for fludarabine and pentostatin in refractory PLL 184,294,295 and 296 and for cladribine in previously untreated patients. 297
HAIRY CELL LEUKEMIA
HCL was initially described by Bouroncle et al. 298 in 1958 and called leukemic reticuloendotheliosis. This chronic B-cell leukemia is characterized by splenomegaly
and pancytopenia and, occasionally, lymphadenopathy.
HCL occurs in approximately 500 new patients each year in the United States, and it makes up 2% of all leukemias. It tends to occur in older persons, with a strong
male predominance. Patients generally present with symptoms referable to cytopenias, including infections in 29% and weakness or fatigue in 27%. Less common
presentations include left upper quadrant pain related to splenomegaly (5%) or bleeding related to thrombocytopenia (4%). Incidence of second malignancies is
increased. The most common findings include palpable splenomegaly (72% to 86%), hepatomegaly (13% to 20%), hairy cells in the peripheral blood (85% to 89%),

thrombocytopenia (fewer than 100,000 cells per mm3, 53%), anemia (hemoglobin less than 12 cells per dL, 71% to 77%), and neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count
less than 500 cells per mm3, 32% to 39%).
The hairy cells generally have an eccentric, spongiform kidney-shaped nucleus, with characteristic filamentous cytoplasmic projections. Bone marrow biopsy is
generally required to make the diagnosis, because the aspirate is often not obtainable. The malignant cells are of B-cell origin, expressing CD19, CD20, and the
monocyte antigen CD11c. Perhaps the most specific marker is CD103. It is most difficult to distinguish HCL from HCLv; the latter is often associated with a high
circulating white blood cell count, cells containing bilobed nuclei with prominent nucleoli, and a typical bone marrow histology with interstitial infiltration of clumped
cells. 299 An important distinguishing, almost diagnostic, feature is the resistance of this disease to treatment with IFN-a, cladribine, and pentostatin. 299
HCL may be an indolent disorder, and 10% of patients may never require treatment. In most patents, however, treatment is eventually warranted because of massive
or progressive splenomegaly, worsening blood counts, recurrent infections, more than 20,000 hairy cells per µL of peripheral blood, or bulky lymphadenopathy. Until
the early 1980s, splenectomy was the standard treatment for HCL. In most patients, this procedure improves symptoms related to splenomegaly and peripheral blood
counts, often for prolonged periods, but it does not affect the disease itself. Splenectomy now plays a minor role in the management of HCL and is reserved for the
rare patient who is refractory to treatment and has splenomegaly that is either symptomatic or is resulting in cytopenias.
The first systemic therapy to demonstrate activity in HCL was IFN. At doses of 2 × 10 6 U/m2/d or 3 × 106 U three times per week, IFN produces responses in 80% of
patients; however, only 10% of these are complete responses. Although responses generally occur within 3 to 4 months, it may take more than 1 year of therapy to
achieve the maximal response. The leukemia invariably recurs after IFN therapy is discontinued, and maintenance therapy is associated with excessive toxicity and
expense without any apparent survival benefit. Many patients who recur will again respond when retreated. IFN is associated with flu-like symptoms (fevers, myalgias,
malaise) in almost all patients. Other toxicities include rash; application site disorders; and gastrointestinal symptoms, with nausea, vomiting, and anorexia. Reduced
doses are associated with less toxicity but lower response rates.
The purine analogues have revolutionized the treatment of patients with HCL. 300,301 In 1984, Spiers et al. 302 first reported complete responses in patients with HCL
treated with pentostatin. DCF at doses of 4 mg/m2 intravenously every other week for 4 to 6 months achieves complete responses in 60% to 89% of previously treated
or untreated patients, including those who have been unsuccessful with IFN, with overall response rates of 80% to 90%. Moreover, only 25% of patients have
relapsed with more than 5 years of follow-up. In an intergroup trial, 350 previously untreated patients with HCL were randomized to IFN or DCF; the complete
response rate was approximately 11% for IFN compared with 76% for DCF, with a significant advantage to DCF in the durability of response. 300
In 1990, Piro et al. 301 reported 11 complete responses of 12 patients with HCL who had received a single 7-day continuous infusion of 2-CdA. Numerous studies have
now confirmed that the original schedule or a 2-hour infusion for 5 to 7 days achieves responses in 80% to more than 90% of patients, including 65% to 80% complete
remissions. These responses tend to be durable, with 20% to 30% of patients relapsing with prolonged follow-up. Relapse can be predicted by the demonstration of
minimal residual disease using sensitive immunohistochemical methods. 303 In many cases, relapse is characterized only by an increase in bone marrow hairy cells,
with no indication for treatment. Most patients who require re-treatment achieve a second durable response.
The results with DCF are equivalent to those with 2-CdA. However, the shorter duration of treatment makes 2-CdA somewhat more attractive, although no advantage
exists with regard to toxicity.
New monoclonal antibodies have shown promise for patients with HCL who are unsuccessful with purine analogue therapy or for those with HCL v.304,305
NON-HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA IN A LEUKEMIC PHASE
Patients with NHL may present with or subsequently develop a leukemic picture, 306,307 most commonly those with a follicular small-cleaved cell histology, MCL, or
marginal zone lymphoma. Although morphologic differences exist among these cells, immunophenotyping is necessary to distinguish among these entities. 66
Follicular NHL in a leukemic phase is characterized by cells that are small, with clefts and little or no visible cytoplasm, called buttock cells. These cells strongly
express sIg, are positive for FMC7, CD22, and CD10, and are negative for CD5 and CD23. 17,66 The leukemic manifestation of MCL is characterized by a mixture of
small- to medium-size lymphocytes with nuclei that are generally cleaved but may be nearly round, leading to a misdiagnosis of CLL or PLL and small lymphocytic
leukemia. MCL cells also express CD5, but in contrast to CLL cells, they strongly express sIg but not CD23. 66
Leukemic follicular small-cleaved cell lymphomas and mantle zone lymphomas have a median survival rate of 2.0 to 3.5 years and 2 years, respectively, whereas
those derived from a large cell NHL have a median survival of only 1 to 3 months. Patients tend to respond poorly to therapy, including aggressive regimens such as
CHOP. Anecdotal reports suggest activity for fludarabine in leukemic forms of low-grade NHL.
Splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes is a marginal-zone NHL that generally presents with significant splenomegaly, often with circulating cells exhibiting villous
projections. 308,309 The diagnosis may not be apparent until the spleen is examined histologically after splenectomy. The malignant cells are larger than CLL cells and
often contain a prominent nucleolus. They tend to stain positively for acid phosphatase, which is not tartrate resistant and which distinguishes them from HCL. The
cells express B-cell markers, including CD19, CD20, CD22, SIg, and FMC-7. In contrast to CLL, they are negative for CD5 and CD23. Anemia and thrombocytopenia
are common. A small concentration of an IgG or IgM monoclonal gammopathy can be detected in either the serum or urine from most cases. Fludarabine is active in
this disorder. 310
CHRONIC T-CELL LEUKEMIAS
The mature (postthymic) T-cell leukemia disorders consist of large granular lymphocytic leukemia (LGL), T-PLL, adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma, and the Sézary
syndrome. The chronic T-cell leukemias are a heterogeneous group of rare disorders that differ significantly from B-CLL with respect to their immunophenotype,
virology, biology, morphology, and response to therapy. The term T-cell CLL is no longer used in current classification systems. 66
Large Granular Lymphocytic Leukemia
LGL is the most common chronic T-cell leukemia. 311 The etiology of this clonal disorder is unknown. It is often diagnosed in the setting of an incidental T-cell
lymphocytosis with more than 2000 circulating T cells per µL. The peripheral blood lymphoid cells demonstrate characteristic azurophilic granulation. Monoclonal
antibodies directed against the V-gene region of the T-cell receptor gene and the p58 family on NK cells may help make the diagnosis. 312
Proliferations of LGL may be either CD3+ (T-LGL) or CD3- (NK-LGL). Approximately 95% are CD4–/CD8+, although some cases may be CD4–/CD8–. T-LGL is the
most common of these entities and occurs more often in women, with a median age of 57 years. Physical examination is notable for splenomegaly. Neutropenia is
common and may be severe, with recurrent infections in 40% of patients. Peripheral blood NK cells are often decreased in numbers. The bone marrow is involved in
almost all patients. There is a 30% incidence of rheumatoid arthritis, often with Felty's syndrome. Polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear
antibodies, and circulating immune complexes are often present. 313 Pure red blood cell aplasia also has been reported. More than two-thirds of cases eventually
require therapy, primarily because of recurrent infections. Responses may be achieved with alkylating agents, corticosteroids, or cyclosporine A. DCF and 2-CdA
have shown activity. 314,315 Splenectomy is generally not associated with long-term benefit.
Disorders associated with an increase in NK cells form a spectrum, from more indolent NK-cell lymphocytosis to an aggressive NK-LGL leukemia/lymphoma. Chronic
NK-cell lymphocytosis is a clonal disorder characterized by a sustained increase in cells with a CD3–/CD16+/CD2–/CD8+ phenotype. 316 The bone marrow is usually
involved. The median age of patients with NK-LGL is 60 years, and the disease appears to be more common in men. Most patients note constitutional symptoms, but
lymphadenopathy or splenomegaly are not common at presentation. Associated diseases include pure red blood cell aplasia and vasculitis syndromes. The outcome
is similar to that of T-LGL. However, vasculitis and cytopenias may be life-threatening. Cyclophosphamide may be effective in controlling the vasculitis syndrome. 316
NK-LGL leukemia/lymphoma is an aggressive disease characterized by constitutional symptoms and splenomegaly. Response to therapy is poor, and the median
survival rate is only a few months.
T-Cell Prolymphocytic Leukemia

T-PLL is characterized by massive splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy in 40% of patients, and skin infiltration in 20%. 317 The presenting white blood cell count often
exceeds 100,000 cells per µL. The malignant cells generally express CD3, CD4, CD5, and CD7, but are negative for CD8– and CD25–, although one-third of cases
are CD4+/CD8+ or CD4–/CD8+. There are no apparent clinical differences among these subsets. A consistent abnormality of chromosome 14 has been reported with
two breakpoints at 14q11 and 14q32. 317
The prognosis of T-PLL is poor, with a median survival of 7 months. The purine analogues are active agents; DCF has achieved complete responses in up to 10% of
patients, with partial responses in one-third. 296,314 Response rates of more than 70% have been reported in small series with CAMPATH-1H in T-PLL, including almost
60% complete responses.256
Adult T-Cell Leukemia/Lymphoma
Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma occurs most commonly in patients from the Caribbean and southwestern islands of Japan. 318 This uncommon lymphoid malignancy is
associated with infection with human T-cell leukemia virus type 1. The immunophenotype of the malignant cells includes CD2+, CD3+, CD5+, CD4+, CD8–, CD25++,
and CD56/57–. The disease exhibits a clinical spectrum ranging from an indolent disease that may not require treatment for several years to an extremely aggressive
disease characterized by anemia, hypercalcemia, bone lesions, splenomegaly, skin infiltration, central nervous system involvement, opportunistic infections,
circulating leukemia cells, and a very poor outcome. 319,320 DCF has been used with modest success. 321,322
Sézary Syndrome
One-third of patients with mycosis fungoides will have circulating malignant cells at diagnosis. The peripheral blood of patients with skin patches may reveal
circulating cerebriform cells in 0% to 22%, in 9% to 30% of those with plaques, in 27% to 50% with skin tumors, and in 90% to 96% of those with erythroderma. The
presence of circulating cells may be an independent negative prognostic factor. Treatment of this disorder is discussed in Chapter 45.4.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Greenlee RT, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics, 2000. CA Cancer J Clin 2000;50:7.
2. Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) Program Report 1998.
3. Mauro FR, Foa R, Gianarelli D, et al. Clinical characteristics and outcome of young chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients: a single institution study of 204 cases. Blood 1999;94:448.
4. Sonnier JA, Buchanan GR, Howard-Peebles PN, Rutledge J, Graham Smith R. Chromosomal translocation involving the immunoglobulin kappa-chain and heavy-chain loci in a child with
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1983;309:590.
5. Montserrat E, Gomis F, Vallespí T, et al. Presenting features and prognosis of chronic lymphocytic leukemia in younger adults. Blood 1991;78:1545.
6. Linet MS, Cartwright RA. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia: epidemiology and etiologic findings. Nouv Rev Fr Hematol 1988;30(56):353.
7. Kwong YL, Wong KF, Chan LC, et al. The spectrum of chronic lymphoproliferative disorders in Chinese people. An analysis of 64 cases. Cancer 1994;74:174.
8. Malone KE, Koepsell TD, Daling JR, et al. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia in relation to chemical exposures. Am J Epidemiol 1989;130:1152.
9. Bizzozero JOJ, Johnson KG, Ciocco A, Kawasaki S, Toyoda S. Radiation-related leukemia in Hiroshima and Nagasaki 19461964. Ann Intern Med 1967;55:522.
10. Arp JEW, Wolf PH, Checkoway H. Lymphocytic leukemia and exposure to benzene and other solvents in the rubber industry. J Occup Med 1983;25:598.
11. Zahm SH, Weisenburger DD, Babbitt PA, et al. Use of hair coloring products and the risk of lymphoma, multiple myeloma, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Am J Public Health 1992;82:990.
12. Inskip PD, Kleinerman RA, Stovall M, et al. Leukemia, lymphoma, and multiple myeloma after pelvic radiotherapy for benign disease. Radiat Res 1993;135:108.
13. Linet MS, Van Natta MI, Brookmeyer R, et al. Familial cancer history and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Am J Epidemiol 1989;130:655.
14. Blattner WA, Strober W, Muchmore AV, et al. Familial chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Immunologic and cellular characterization. Ann Intern Med 1976;84:554.
15. Brok-Simoni F, Rechavi G, Katzir N, Ben-Bassat I. Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia in twin sisters: monozygous but not identical. Lancet 1987;1:329.
16. Cuttner J. Increased incidence of hematologic malignancies in first-degree relatives of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer Invest 1992;10:103.
17. Freedman AS, Nadler LM. Immunologic markers in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. In: Cheson BD, ed. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia: scientific advances and clinical developments. New
York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1993:1.
18. Johnson TA, Rassenti LZ, Kipps TJ. Ig VH1 genes expressed in B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia exhibit distinctive molecular features. J Immunol 1997;158:235.
19. Plater-Zyberk C, Maini RN, Lam K, Kennedy TD, Janossy G. A rheumatoid arthritis B cell subset expresses a phenotype similar to that in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Arthritis Rheum
1985;28:971.
20. Mizutani H, Furubayashi T, Kashiwagi H, et al. B cells expressing CD5 antigen are markedly increased in peripheral blood and spleen lymphocytes from patients with immune thrombocytopenic
purpura. Br J Haematol 1991;78:474.
21. Caligaris-Cappio F, Hamblin TJ. B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a bird of a different feather. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:399.
22. Foa R, Massaia M, Cardona S, et al. Production of tumor necrosis factor-alpha by B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells: a possible regulatory role of TNF in the progression of the disease.
Blood 1990;76:393.
23. Semenzato G, Foa R, Agostini C, et al. High serum levels of soluble interleukin 2 receptor in patients with B chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1987;70:396.
24. Kay NE, Burton J, Wagner D, Nelson DL. The malignant B cells from B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients release TAC-soluble interleukin-2 receptors. Blood 1988;72:447.
25. Dancescu M, Rubio-Trujillo M, Biron G, et al. Interleukin 4 protects chronic lymphocytic leukemic B cells from death by apoptosis and upregulates bcl-2 expression. J Exp Med 1992;176:1319.
26. Frankfurt OS, Byrnes JJ, Villa L. Protection from apoptotic cell death by interleukin-4 is increased in previously treated chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients. Leuk Res 1997;21:9.
27. Aderka D, Maor Y, Novick D, et al. Interleukin-6 inhibits the proliferation of B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells that is induced by tumor necrosis factor-a or b. Blood 1993;81:2076.
28. Digel W, Schmid M, Heil G, et al. Human interleukin-7 induces proliferation of neoplastic cells from chronic lymphocytic leukemia and acute leukemias. Blood 1991;78:753.
29. Kremer JP, Reisbach G, Nerl C, Dormer P. B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia cells express and release transforming growth factor-b. Br J Haematol 1992;80:480.
30. Reittie JE, Yong KL, Panayiotidis P, Hoffbrand AV. Interleukin-6 inhibits apoptosis and tumour necrosis factor induced proliferation of B-chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Leuk Lymphoma
1996;22:83.
31. Frishman J, Long B, Knospe W, Gregory S, Plate J. Genes for interleukin 7 are transcribed in leukemic cell subsets of individuals with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Exp Med 1993;177:955.
32. di Celle PF, Mariani S, Riera L, et al. Interleukin-8 induces the accumulation of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells by prolonging survival in an autocrine fashion. Blood 1996;87:4382.
33. Jurlander J, Lei CF, Tan J, et al. Characterization of interleukin-10 receptor expression on B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells. Blood 1997;89:4146.
34. Chaouchi N, Wallon C, Goujard C, et al. Interleukin-13 inhibits interleukin-2-induced proliferation and protects chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells from in vitro apoptosis. Blood 1996;87:1022.
35. Foa R. Pathogenesis of the immunodeficiency in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. In: Cheson BD, ed. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia: scientific advances and clinical developments. New
York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1993:147.
36. Heath ME, Cheson BD. Defective complement activity in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Am J Hematol 1985;19:63.
37. Cantwell M, Hua T, Pappas J, Kipps TJ. Acquired CD40-ligand deficiency in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Nature Med 1997;3:984.
38. Bird ML, Ueshima Y, Rowley JD, Haren JM, Vardiman JW. Chromosome abnormalities in B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia and their clinical correlations. Leukemia 1989;3:182.
39. Oscier D, Fitchett M, Herbert T, Lambert R. Karyotypic evolution in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1991;3:16.
40. Juliusson G, Gahrton G. Chromosome abnormalities in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. In: Cheson BD, ed. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia: scientific advances and clinical developments.
New York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1993:83.
41. Anastasi J, Le Beau MM, Vardiman JW, et al. Detection of trisomy 12 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia by fluorescence in situ hybridization to interphase cells: a simple and sensitive method.
Blood 1992;79:1796.
42. Escudier SM, Pereira-Leahy JM, Drach JW, et al. Fluorescent in situ hybridization and cytogenetic studies of trisomy 12 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1993;81:2702.
43. Stilgenbauer S, Döhner K, Bentz M, Kichter P, Döhner H. Molecular cytogenetic analysis of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Ann Hematol 1998;76(34):101.
44. Garcia-Marco JA, Caldas C, Price CM, et al. Frequent somatic deletion of the 13q12 locus encompassing BRCA2 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1996;88:1568.
45. Panayiotidis P, Ganeshaguru K, Rowntree C, et al. Lack of clonal BRCA2 gene deletion on chromosome 13 in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Br J Haematol 1997;99:708.
46. Oscier D, Thompsett A, Zhu D, Stevenson FK. Differential rates of somatic hypermutation in Vh genes among subsets of chronic lymphocytic leukemia defined by chromosome abnormalities.
Blood 1997;89:4153.
47. Geisler CH, Philip P, Christensen BE, et al. In B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia chromosome 17 abnormalities and not trisomy 12 are the single most important cytogenetic abnormalities
for the prognosis: a cytogenetic and immunophenotypic study of 480 unselected newly diagnosed patients. Leuk Res 1997;21:1011.
48. Fais F, Ghiotto F, Hashimoto S, et al. C hronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells express restricted sets of mutated and unmutated antigen receptors. J Clin Invest 1998;102:1515.
49. Hamblin T, Davis Z, Gardiner A, Oscier DG, Stevenson FK. Unmutated Ig Vh genes are associated with a more aggressive form of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1999;94:1848.
50. Damle RN, Wasil T, Fais F, et al. Ig V gene mutation status and CD38 expression as novel prognostic indicators in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1999;94:1840.
51. Kipps TJ. Immunoglobulin genes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood Cells 1993;19:615.
52. Tsujimoto Y, Yunis JJ, Onorato-Showe L, et al. Molecular cloning of the chromosomal breakpoint of B-cell lymphomas and leukemias with the t(11;14) chromosome translocation. Science
1984;224:1403.
53. Madeiros LJ, Van Krieken JH, Jaffe ES, Raffeld M. Association of bcl-1 rearrangements with lymphocytic lymphoma of intermediate differentiation. Blood 1990;76:2086.
54. Williams ME, Whitefield M, Swerdlow SH. Analysis of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p18 and p19 in mantle-cell lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Ann Oncol 1997;8[Suppl
2]:S71.
55. McKeithan TW, Ohno H, Diaz MO. Identification of a transcriptional unit adjacent to the breakpoint in the 14;19 translocation of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Genes Chromosomes Cancer
1990;1:247.
56. Dyer MJS, Zani VJ, Lu WZ, et al. BCL2 translocations in leukemias of mature B cells. Blood 1994;83:3682.
57. Hanada M, Delia D, Aiello A, Stadtmauer E, Reed JC. bcl-2 gene hypomethylation and high-level expression in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1993;82:1820.
58. Bullrich F, Veronese ML, Kitada S, et al. Minimal region of loss at 13q14 in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1996;88:3109.
59. Kitada S, Andersen J, Akar S, et al. Expression of apoptosis-regulating proteins in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: correlations with in vitro and in vivo chemoresponses. Blood 1998;91:3379.
60. Stilgenbauer S, Schaffner C, Lichter P, Döhner H. Deletion of bands 11q22-q23 in B-CLL and other lymphoproliferative disorders. Proceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on CLL.
1999;17(abst S01).
61. Cordone I, Masi S, Mauro FR, et al. p53 expression in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a marker of disease progression and poor prognosis. Blood 1998;91:4342.
62. Döhner H, Fischer K, Bentz M, et al. p53 gene deletion predicts for poor survival and non-response to therapy with purine analogs in chronic B-cell leukemias. Blood 1995;85:1580.
63. Döhner H. The role of p53 mutations in B-CLL. Proceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on CLL. 1999:17(abst S03).

64. Cheson BD, Bennett JM, Rai KR, et al. Guidelines for clinical protocols for chronic lymphocytic leukemia: report of the NCI-sponsored Working Group. Am J Hematol 1988;29:152.
65. Cheson BD, Bennett JM, Grever M, et al. N ational Cancer Institutesponsored Working Group guidelines for chronic lymphocytic leukemia: revised guidelines for diagnosis and treatment. Blood
1996;87:4990.
66. Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Stein H, et al. A revised European-American classification of lymphoid neoplasms: a proposal from the International Lymphoma Study Group. Blood 1994;84:1361.
67. Wormsley SB, Baird SM, Gadol N, Rai KR, Sobol RE. Characteristics of CD11c+CD5+ chronic B-cell leukemias and the identification of novel peripheral blood B-cell subsets with chronic
lymphoid leukemia immunophenotypes. Blood 1990;76:123.
68. Liang R, Chan V, Chan TK, et al. Detection of immunoglobulin gene rearrangement in acute and chronic lymphoid leukemias of B-cell lineage by polymerase chain reaction gene amplification.
Am J Hematol 1991;38:189.
69. Freedman AS, Freeman G, Whitman J, et al. Studies of in vitro activated CD5+ and CD5 B cells. Blood 1989;73:202.
70. Berkman N, Polliack A, Breuer R, Okon E, Kramer M. Pulmonary involvement as the major manifestation of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Leuk Lymphoma 1992;8:495.
71. Stagg MP, Gumbart CH. Chronic lymphocytic leukemic meningitis as a cause of the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone. Cancer 1987;60:191.
72. Anaissie E, Kontoyiannis DP, Kantarjian H, et al. Listeriosis in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia who were treated with fludarabine and prednisone. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:466.
73. Spielberger RT, Stock W, Larson RA. Listeriosis after 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine treatment [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1993;328:813.
74. Cheson BD. Immunologic and immunosuppressive complications of purine analogue therapy. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2431.
75. Anaissie EJ, Kontoyiannis DP, O'Brien S, et al. Infections in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia treated with fludarabine. Ann Intern Med 1998;129:559.
76. Byrd JC, Hargis JB, Kester KE, et al. Opportunistic pulmonary infections with fludarabine in previously treated patients with low-grade lymphoid malignancies: a role for Pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia prophylaxis. Am J Hematol 1995;49:135.
77. Cooperative Group for the Study of Immunoglobulin in Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia. Intravenous immunoglobulin for the prevention of infection in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. A
randomized, controlled clinical trial. N Engl J Med 1988;319:902.
78. Weeks JC, Tierney MR, Weinstein MC. Cost effectiveness of prophylactic intravenous immune globulin in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1991;325:81.
79. Molica S, Musto P, Chiurazzi F, et al. Prophylaxis against infections with low-dose intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Results of a crossover study.
Haematologica 1996;81:121.
80. Vadhan-Raj S, Velasquez WS, Butler JJ, et al. Stimulation of myelopoiesis in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and in other lymphoproliferative disorders by recombinant human
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. Am J Hematol 1990;33:189.
81. O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, Beran M, et al. Fludarabine and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Leukemia 1997;11:1631.
82. Richter MN. Generalized reticular cell sarcoma of lymph nodes associated with lymphocytic leukemia. Am J Pathol 1928;4:285.
83. Lortholary P, Boiron M, Ripault P, et al. Leucemie lymphoide chronique secondairemonte associee a une reticulopathie maligne, syndrome de Richter. Nouv Rev Fr Hematol 1964;78:621.
84. Robertson LE, Pugh W, O'Brien S, et al. Richter's syndrome: a report on 39 patients. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1985.
85. Michiels JJ, van Dongen JJM, Hagemeijer A, et al. Richter's syndrome with identical immunoglobulin gene rearrangements in the chronic lymphocytic leukemia and the supervening
non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Leukemia 1989;3:819.
86. Raziuddin S, Assaf HM, Teklu B. T cell malignancy in Richter's syndrome presenting as hyper IgM. Induction and characterization of a novel CD3+, CD4, CD8+ T cell subset from
phytohemagglutinin-stimulated patient's CD3+, CD4+, CD8+ leukemic T cells. Eur J Immunol 1989;19:469.
87. Tohda S, Morio T, Suzuki T, et al. Richter syndrome with two B cell clones possessing different surface immunoglobulins and immunoglobulin gene rearrangements. Am J Hematol 1990;35:32.
88. Cherepakhin V, Baird SM, Meisenholder GW, Kipps TJ. Common clonal origin of chronic lymphocytic leukemia and high-grade lymphoma of Richter's syndrome. Blood 1993;82:3141.
89. Bessudo A, Kipps TJ. Origin of high-grade lymphomas in Richter syndrome. Leuk Lymphoma 1995;18(56):367.
90. Giles FJ, O'Brien S, Kantarjian HM, et al. Sequential cis-platinum, fludarabine, and arabinosyl cytosine (PFA) or cyclophosphamide, fludarabine and arabinosyl cytosine (CFA) in patients with
Richter's syndrome. Blood 1996;88[Suppl 1]:93a.
91. Melo JV, Catovsky D, Galton DAG. The relationship between chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and prolymphocytic leukaemia. I. Clinical and laboratory features of 300 patients and
characterization of an intermediate group. Br J Haematol 1986;63:377.
92. Melo JV, Catovsky D, Galton DAG. The relationship between chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and prolymphocytic leukaemia IV. Patterns of evolution of “prolymphocytoid” transformation. Br J
Haematol 1986;64:77.
93. Melo JV, Catovsky D, Gregory WM, Galton DAG. The relationship between chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and prolymphocytic leukaemia. IV. Analysis of survival and prognostic features. Br J
Haematol 1987;65:2329.
94. Hamblin TJ, Oscier DJ, Young BJ. Autoimmunity in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Pathol 1986;39:713.
95. Duhrsen U, Augener W, Zwingers T, Brittinger G. Spectrum and frequency of autoimmune derangements in lymphoproliferative disorders: analysis of 637 cases and comparison with
myeloproliferative diseases. Br J Haematol 1987;67:235.
96. Kipps TJ, Carson DA. Autoantibodies in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and related systemic autoimmune diseases. Blood 1993;81:2475.
97. Efremov DG, Ivanovski M, Siljanovski N, et al. Restricted immunoglobulin VH region repertoire in chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients with autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Blood
1996;87:3869.
98. Efremov DG, Ivanovski M, Burrone OR. The pathologic significance of the immunoglobulins expressed by chronic lymphocytic leukemia B-cells in the development of autoimmune hemolytic
anemia. Leuk Lymphoma 1998;28(34):285.
99. Seymour JF, Cusack JD, Lerner SA, Pollock RE, Keating MJ. Case/control study of the role of splenectomy in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:52.
100. Chikkappa G, Zarrabi MH, Tsan MF. Pure red-cell aplasia in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Medicine 1986;65:339.
101. Chikkappa G, Pasquale D, Zarrabi MH, et al. Cyclosporine and prednisone therapy for pure red cell aplasia in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Am J Hematol 1992;41:5.
102. Travis LB, Curtis RE, Hankey BF, Fraumeni JF Jr. Second cancers in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1422.
103. Davis JW, Weiss NS, Armstrong BK. Second cancers in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;78:91.
104. Molica S, Alberti A. Second neoplasms in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: analysis of incidence as a function of the length of follow-up. Haematologica 1989;74:481.
105. Stern N, Shemesh J, Ramot B. Chronic lymphatic leukemia terminating in acute myeloid leukemia: review of the literature. Cancer 1981;47:1849.
106. Catovsky D, Fooks J, Richards S. Prognostic factors in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia: the importance of age, sex and response to treatment in survival. A report from the MRC CLL 1 trial. Br J
Haematol 1989;72:141.
107. French Cooperative Group on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia F. Effects of chlorambucil and therapeutic decision in initial forms of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (stage A): results of a
randomized trial on 612 patients. Blood 1990;75:1414.
108. Cheson BD, Vena D, Barrett J, Freidlin B. Second malignancies as a consequence of nucleoside analog therapy of chronic lymphoid leukemias. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2454.
109. Maher VE, Gill L, Townes PL, et al. Simultaneous chronic lymphocytic leukemia and chronic myelogenous leukemia. Evidence of a separate stem cell origin. Cancer 1993;71:1993.
110. Esteve J, Cervantes F, Rives S, et al. Simultaneous occurrence of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia and chronic myeloid leukemia with further evolution to lymphoid blast crisis.
Haematologica 1997;82:596.
111. Boggs DR, Sofferman SA, Wintrobe MM, Cartwright GE. Factors influencing the duration of survival of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Am J Med 1966;40:243.
112. Galton DAG. The pathogenesis of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Can Med Assoc J 1966;94:1005.
113. Dameshek W. Chronic lymphocytic leukemiaan accumulative disease of immunologically incompetent lymphocytes. Blood 1967;29:566.
114. Rai KR, Sawitsky A, Cronkite EP, et al. Clinical staging of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1975;46:219.
115. Rai KR. A critical analysis of staging in CLL. In: Gale RP, Rai KR, ed. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Recent progress and future direction. New York: Alan R Liss, 1987:253.
116. Binet JL, Auquier A, Dighiero G, et al. A new prognostic classification of chronic lymphocytic leukemia derived from a multivariate survival analysis. Cancer 1981;48:198.
117. Jaksic B, Vitale B. T otal tumour mass score (TTM): a new parameter in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Br J Haematol 1981;49:405.
118. Mandelli F, De Rossi G, Mancini P, et al. Prognosis in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a retrospective multicentric study from the GIMEMA group. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:398.
119. Skinnider LF, Tan L, Schmidt J, Armitage G. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia. A review of 745 cases and assessment of clinical staging. Cancer 1982;50:2951.
120. Baccarani M, Cavo M, Gobbi M, Lauria F, Tura S. Staging of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1982;59:1191.
121. Rozman C, Montserrat E, Rodríguez-Fernández JM, et al. Bone marrow histologic patternthe best single prognostic parameter in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a multivariate survival analysis
of 329 cases. Blood 1984;64:642.
122. De Rossi G, Mandelli F, Covelli A, et al. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) in younger adults: a retrospective study of 133 cases. Hematol Oncol 1989;7:127.
123. Montserrat E, Viñolas N, Reverer JC, Rozman C. Natural history of chronic lymphocytic leukemia: on the progression and prognosis of early stages. Nouv Rev Fr Hematol 1988;30:359.
124. French Cooperative Group on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia. Natural history of stage A chronic lymphocytic leukaemia untreated patients. Br J Haematol 1990;76:45.
125. Montserrat E, Sanchez-Bisono J, Viñolas N, Rozman C. Lymphocyte doubling time in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia: analysis of its prognostic significance. Br J Haematol 1986;62:567.
126. Desablens B, Claisse JF, Piprot-Choffat C, Gontier MF. Prognostic value of bone marrow biopsy in chronic lymphoid leukemia. Nouv Rev Fr Hematol 1989;31:179.
127. Pangalis GA, Boussiotis VA, Kittas C. B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Disease progression in 150 untreated stage A and B patients as predicted by bone marrow pattern. Nouv Rev Fr Hematol
1988;30:373.
128. Molica S, Tucci L, Levato D, Docimo C. Clinico-prognostic evaluation of bone marrow infiltration (biopsy versus aspirate) in early chronic lymphocytic leukemia. A single institution study.
Haematologica 1997;82:286.
129. Zwiebel J, Cheson BD. Prognostic factors in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Semin Oncol 1998;25:42.
130. Lee JS, Dixon DO, Kantarjian HM, Keating MJ, Talpaz M. Prognosis of chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a multivariate regression analysis of 325 untreated patients. Blood 1987;69:929.
131. Lecouvet FE, Vande Berg BC, Michaux L, et al. Early chronic lymphocytic leukemia: prognostic value of quantitative bone marrow MR imaging findings and correlations with hematologic
variables. Radiology 1997;204:813.
132. Reinish W, Willheim M, Hilgarth M, et al. Soluble CD23 reliably reflects disease activity in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2146.
133. Sarfati M, Chevret S, Chastang C, et al. Prognostic importance of serum soluble CD23 level in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1996;88:4259.
134. Molica S, Levato D, Dell'Olio M, et al. Cellular expression and serum circulating levels of CD23 in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Implications for prognosis. Haematologica 1996;81:428.
135. Simonsson B, Wibell L, Nilsson K. b 2-microglobulin in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Scand J Haematol 1980;24:174.
136. Tötterman T, Nilsson K, Simonsson B. Phorbol esterinduced production of beta-2-microglobulin in B-CLL cells: relation to IgM secretory response and disease activity. Br J Haematol
1986;62:95.
137. Keating MJ, Lerner S, Kantarjian H, Freireich EJ, O'Brien S. The serum b 2-microglobulin (b 2M) level is more powerful than stage in predicting response and survival in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL). Blood 1995;86[Suppl 1]:606(abst 2412).
138. Apostolopoulos A, Symeonidis A, Zoumbos N. Prognostic significance of immune function parameters in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Eur J Haematol 1990;44:39.
139. Catovsky D, Cherchi M, Brooks D, Bradley J, Zola H. Heterogeneity of B-cell leukemias demonstrated by the monoclonal antibody FMC7. Blood 1981;58:406.
140. Caligaris-Cappio F, Gobbi M, Bergui L, et al. B-chronic lymphocytic leukaemia patients with stable benign disease show a distinctive membrane phenotype. Br J Haematol 1984;56:655.
141. Dadmarz R, Cawley JC. Heterogeneity of CLL: high CD23 antigen and alpha-IFN receptor expression are features of favourable disease and of cell activation. Br J Haematol 1988;68:279.
142. Tefferi A, Phyliky RL. Role of immunophenotyping in chronic lymphocytosis: review of the natural history of the condition in 145 adult patients. Mayo Clin Proc 1988;63:806.
143. Hamblin TJ, Oscier DG, Stevens JR, Smith JL. L ong survival in B-CLL correlates with surface IgMk phenotype. Br J Haematol 1987;66:21.
144. De Rossi G, Zarcone D, Mauro F, et al. Adhesion molecule expression of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells: malignant cell phenotypes define distinct disease subsets. Blood
1993;81:2679.
145. Molica S, Levato D, Dell'Olio M, et al. Clinico-prognostic implications of increased levels of soluble CD54 in the serum of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients. Results of a multivariate
survival analysis. Haematologica 1997;82:148.
146. Sinclair D, Dagg JH, Dewar AE, et al. The incidence, clonal origin and secretory nature of serum paraproteins in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Br J Haematol 1986;64:725.

147. Deegan MJ, Abraham JP, Sawdyk M, Van Slyck EJ. High incidence of monoclonal proteins in the serum and urine of chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients. Blood 1984;64:1207.
148. Ultmann JE, Fish W, Osserman E, Gellhorn A. The clinical implications of hypogammaglobulinemia in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia and lymphocytic lymphosarcoma. Ann Intern
Med 1959;51:501.
149. Rozman C, Montserrat E, Viñolas N. Serum immunoglobulins in B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Natural history and prognostic significance. Cancer 1988;61:279.
150. Robertson LE, Plunkett W, McConnell K, Keating MJ, McDonnell TJ. Bcl-2 expression in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and its correlation with the induction of apoptosis and clinical outcome.
Leukemia 1996;10:456.
151. Pepper C, Bentley P, Hoy T. Regulation of clinical chemoresistance by bcl-2 and bax oncoproteins in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Br J Haematol 1996;95:513.
152. Pepper C, Hoy T, Bentley DP. Bcl-2/Bax ratios in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and their correlation with in vitro apoptosis and clinical resistance. Br J Cancer 1997;76:935.
153. Holmes JA, Whittaker JA. Spontaneous remission in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Br J Haematol 1988;69:97.
154. Ribera J, Vinolas N, Urbano-Ipizua A, et al. “Spontaneous” complete remissions in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: report of three cases and review of the literature. Blood Cells 1987;12:481.
155. Keating MJ. Chemotherapy of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. In: Cheson BD, ed. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia: scientific advances and clinical developments. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc,
1993:297.
156. Shustik C, Mick R, Silver R, et al. Treatment of early chronic lymphocytic leukemia: intermittent chlorambucil versus observation. Hematol Oncol 1988;6:7.
157. Spanish Cooperative Group P. Treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a preliminary report of Spanish (PETHEMA) trials. Leuk Lymphoma 1991;5[Suppl]:89.
158. Dighiero G, Maloum K, Desablens B, et al. Chlorambucil in indolent chronic lymphocytic leukemia. French Cooperative Group on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1506.
159. CLL Trialists' Collaborative Group. Chemotherapeutic options in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a meta-analysis of the randomized trials. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:861.
160. Saven A, Carrera CJ, Carson DA, Beutler E, Piro LD. 2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine treatment of refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Leuk Lymphoma 1991;5[Suppl]:133.
161. Dillman RO, Mick R, McIntyre OR. Pentostatin in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a phase II trial of Cancer and Leukemia Group B. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:433.
162. Sawitsky A, Rai KR, Glidewell O, Silver RT. Comparison of daily versus intermittent chlorambucil and prednisone therapy in the treatment of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood
1977;50:1049.
163. Rai KR, Peterson B, Elias L, et al. A randomized comparison of fludarabine and chlorambucil for patients with previously untreated chronic lymphocytic leukemia. A CALGB, SWOG,
CTC/NCI-C and ECOG inter-group study. Blood 1996;88[Suppl 1]:141a(abst 552).
164. Grever MR, Kopecky KJ, Coltman CA, et al. Fludarabine monophosphate: a potentially useful agent in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Nouv Rev Fr Hematol 1988;30:457.
165. Keating MJ, O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia treated with fludarabine as a single agent. Blood 1993;81:2878.
166. O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, Beran M, et al. Results of fludarabine and prednisone therapy in 264 patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia with multivariate analysisderived prognostic model for
response to treatment. Blood 1993;82:1695.
167. Whelan JS, Davis CL, Rule S, et al. Fludarabine phosphate for the treatment of low grade lymphoid malignancy. Br J Cancer 1991;64:120.
168. Hiddemann W, Rottmann R, Wormann B, et al. Treatment of advanced chronic lymphocytic leukemia by fludarabine. Results of a clinical phase-II study. Ann Hematol 1991;63:1.
169. French Cooperative Group on CLL, Johnson S, Smith AG, et al. Multicentre prospective randomised trial of fludarabine versus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and prednisone (CAP) for
treatment of advanced-stage chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Lancet 1996;347:1432.
170. Leporrier S, Chevret B, Cazin B, et al. Randomized comparison of fludarabine, CAP and ChOP, in 695 previously untreated stage B and C chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Early stopping
of the CAP accrual. Blood 1997;90[Suppl 1]:529a(abst 2357).
171. Montserrat E, López-Lorenzo JL, Manso F, et al. Fludarabine in resistant or relapsing B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. The Spanish Group experience. Leuk Lymphoma 1996;21:467.
172. Sorensen JM, Vena D, Fallavollita A, Chun HG, Cheson BD. T reatment of refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia with fludarabine phosphate via the Group C mechanism of the National
Cancer Institute: 5-year follow-up report. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:458.
173. Juliusson G, Liliemark J. High complete remission rate from 2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine in previously treated patients with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia: response predicted by rapid
decrease in blood lymphocyte count. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:679.
174. Tallman MS, Hakimian D, Zonzig C, et al. Cladribine in the treatment of relapsed or refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:983.
175. Delannoy A, Martiat P, Gala JL, et al. 2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine (CdA) for patients with previously untreated chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Leukemia 1995;9:1130.
176. Saven A, Lemon RH, Kosty M, Beutler E, Piro LD. 2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine activity in patients with untreated chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:570.
177. Robak T, Blasinka-Morawiec M, Krykowski E, et al. Intermittent 2-hour intravenous infusions of 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine in the treatment of 110 patients with refractory or previously untreated
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Leuk Lymphoma 1996;22:509.
178. Rondelli D, Lauria F, Zinzani PL, et al. 2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine in the treatment of relapsed/refractory chronic lymphoproliferative disorders. Eur J Haematol 1997;58:46.
179. Robak T, Blonski JZ, Urbanska-Rys H, Blasinska-Morawiec M, Skotnicki AB. 2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine (cladribine) in the treatment of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia 55 years old
and younger. Leukemia 1999;13:518.
180. Robak T, Blasinska-Morawiec M, Blonski JZ, Dmoszynska A. 2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine (cladribine) in the treatment of elderly patients with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Leuk Lymphoma
1999;34:151.
181. Grever MR, Leiby JM, Kraut EH, et al. Low-dose deoxycoformycin in lymphoid malignancy. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1196.
182. O'Dwyer PJ, Wagner B, Leyland-Jones B, et al. 2'-Deoxycoformycin (pentostatin) for lymphoid malignancies. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:733.
183. Ho AD, Thaler J, Strykmans P, et al. Pentostatin in refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a phase II trial of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1990;82:1416.
184. Dearden C, Catovsky D. Deoxycoformycin in the treatment of mature B-cell malignancies. Br J Cancer 1990;62:4.
185. Puccio CA, Mittelman A, Lictman SM, et al. A loading dose/continuous infusion schedule of fludarabine phosphate in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1562.
186. Kemena A, O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, et al. A phase II clinical trial of fludarabine in chronic lymphocytic leukemia on a weekly low-dose schedule. Leuk Lymphoma 1993;10:187.
187. Robertson LE, O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, et al. A 3-day schedule of fludarabine in previously treated chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Leukemia 1995;9:1444.
188. Foran JM, Oscier D, Orchard J, et al. Pharmacokinetic study of single doses of oral fludarabine phosphate in patients with “low-grade” non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and B-cell chronic lymphocyte
leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1574.
189. Keating MJ, O'Brien S, Lerner S, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) receiving fludarabine regimens as initial therapy. Blood 1998;92:1165.
190. Robertson LE, Huh YO, Butler JJ, et al. Response assessment in chronic lymphocytic leukemia after fludarabine plus prednisone: clinical, pathologic, immunophenotypic, and molecular
analysis. Blood 1992;80:29.
191. Spriano M, Chiurazzi F, Liso V, et al. Multicentre prospective randomized trial of fludarabine versus chlorambucil and prednisone in previously untreated patients with active B-CLL.
Proceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on CLL. 1999:52(abst P086).
192. Cheson BD, Vena D, Foss F, Sorensen JM. Neurotoxicity of purine analogs: a review. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2216.
193. Cheson BD. Toxicities associated with nucleoside analog therapy. In: Cheson BD, Keating MJ, Plunkett W, ed. Nucleoside analogs in cancer therapy. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1997:415.
194. Cheson BD, Frame JN, Vena D, Quashu N, Sorensen JM. Tumor lysis syndrome: an uncommon complication of fludarabine therapy of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:2313.
195. Juliusson G, Christiansen I, Hansen MM, et al. Oral cladribine as primary therapy for patients with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2160.
196. Montserrat E, Alcala A, Parody R, et al. Treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia in advanced stages. A randomized trial comparing chlorambucil plus prednisone versus cyclophosphamide,
vincristine, and prednisone. Cancer 1985;56:2369.
197. Raphael B, Andersen JW, Silber R, et al. Comparison of chlorambucil and prednisone versus cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisone as initial treatment for chronic lymphocytic
leukemia: long-term follow-up of an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group randomized clinical trial. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:770.
198. Hansen MM, Andersen E, Birgens H, et al. CHOP versus chlorambucil + prednisolone in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Leuk Lymphoma 1991;5:97.
199. French Cooperative Group on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia. Long-term results of the CHOP regimen in stage C chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Br J Haematol 1989;73:334.
200. Kimby E, Millstedt H. Chlorambucil/prednisone versus CHOP in symptomatic chronic lymphocytic leukemias of B-cell type. A randomized trial. Leuk Lymphoma 1991;5[Suppl]:93.
201. Keating MJ, Scouros M, Murphy S, et al. Multiple agent chemotherapy (POACH) in previously treated and untreated patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Leukemia 1988;2:157.
202. Keating MJ, Hester JP, McCredie KB, et al. Long-term results of CAP therapy in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Leuk Lymphoma 1990;2:391.
203. Liepman M, Votaw ML. The treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia with COP chemotherapy. Cancer 1978;41:1664.
204. French Cooperative Group on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia. A randomized clinical trial of chlorambucil versus COP in stage B chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1990;75:1422.
205. Kempin S, Lee BJ 3rd, Thaler HT, et al. Combination chemotherapy of advanced chronic lymphocytic leukemia: the M-2 protocol (vincristine, BCNU, cyclophosphamide, melphalan, and
prednisone). Blood 1982;60:1110.
206. Montserrat E, Alcala A, Alonso C, et al. A randomized trial comparing chlorambucil plus prednisone vs cyclophosphamide, melphalan, and prednisone in the treatment of chronic lymphocytic
leukemia stages B and C. Nouv Rev Fr Hematol 1988;30:429.
207. Elias L, Stock-Novak D, Grever M, et al. A phase I trial of combination fludarabine and chlorambucil in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1991;10:221(abst 745).
208. Weiss M, Kempin S, Berman E, Eardley A, Gee T. Results of a phase I study of fludarabine phosphate (FAMP) plus chlorambucil (CLB) in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Proc Am
Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11:276(abst 914).
209. Gandhi V, Nowak B, Keating MJ, Plunkett W. Modulation of arabinosylcytosine metabolism by arabinosyl-2-fluoroadenine in lymphocytes from patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia:
implications for combination therapy. Blood 1989;74:2070.
210. Gandhi V, Kemena A, Keating MJ, Plunkett W. Fludarabine infusion potentiates arabinosylcytosine metabolism in lymphocytes of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer Res
1992;52:897.
211. O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, Koller C, et al. Fludarabine-prednisone: a highly effective regimen in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11:260(abst 850).
212. Foss F, Ihde D, Phelps R, et al. Phase II study of fludarabine and interferon-alfa-2A in advanced mycosis fungoides/Sézary syndrome (MF/SS). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11:315(abst
1068).
213. Rummel M, Schenk M, Renner C, et al. Fludarabine and epirubicin in the treatment of CLL as first line therapy or in first relapseresults of a phase-II study. Blood 1997;90[Suppl 1]:530a(abst
2359).
214. Bosch F, Perales M, Cobo F, et al. Fludarabine, cyclophosphamide and mitoxantrone (FCM) therapy in resistant or relapsed chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) or follicular lymphoma (FL).
Blood 1997;90[Suppl 1]:530a(abst 2360).
215. O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, Beran M, et al. Fludarabine (FAMP) and cyclophosphamide (CTX) therapy in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Int J Hematol 1996;64[Suppl 1]:S56(abst 214).
216. Flinn IW, Byrd JC, Morrison C, et al. Fludarabine and cyclophosphamide: a highly active and well tolerated regimen in patients with previously untreated chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood
1998;92[Suppl 1]:104a(abst 424).
217. Oken MM, Lee S, Cassileth PA, Krigel RL. Pentostatin, chlorambucil and prednisone for the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL): Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG)
protocol E1488. Proc ASCO 1998;17:6a(abst 22).
218. Keller JW, Omura GA, Gams RA, Bartolucci AA. Weekly mitoxantrone therapy of Hodgkin's disease, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Am J Clin Oncol
1987;10:194.
219. O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, Ellis A, et al. Topotecan in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer 1995;75:1104.
220. Keating MJ, Kantarjian H, Talpaz M, et al. Fludarabine: a new agent with major activity against chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1989;74:19.
221. Zinzani PL, Rondelli D, Lauria F, et al. Fludarabine: an effective drug in refractory lymphoproliferative disorders. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11:268(abst 881).
222. Keating MJ. Fludarabine monophosphate in the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Semin Oncol 1990;17[Suppl 8]:49.
223. Saven A, Lemon RH, Piro LD. 2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine for patients with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia resistant to fludarabine [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1993;328:812.
224. O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, Estey E, et al. Lack of effect of 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine therapy in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia refractory to fludarabine therapy. N Engl J Med
1994;330:319.
225. Kefford RF, Fox RM. Deoxycoformycin-induced response in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia: deoxyadenosine toxicity in non-replicating lymphocytes. Br J Haematol 1982;50:627.

226. Grever MR, Siaw MFE, Jacob WF, et al. The biochemical and clinical consequences of 2'-deoxycoformycin in refractory lymphoproliferative malignancy. Blood 1981;57:406.
227. Ho AD, Ganeshaguru K, Knauf WU, et al. Clinical response to deoxycoformycin in chronic lymphoid neoplasms and biochemical changes in circulating malignant cells in vivo. Blood
1988;72:1884.
228. Bernard S, Gill P, Rosen P, et al. A phase I trial of alpha-interferon in combination with pentostatin in hematologic malignancies. Med Pediatr Oncol 1991;19:276.
229. Velasquez WS, McLaughlin P, Swan F, et al. Dexamethasone, high dose ara-C and cisplatin (DHAP) combination for progressive chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1986;68[Suppl
1]:234a(abst 815).
230. McCroskey RD, Mosher DF, Spencer CD, Prendergast E, Longo WL. Acute tumor lysis syndrome and treatment response in patients treated for refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia with
short-course, high-dose cytosine arabinoside, cisplatin, and etoposide. Cancer 1990;66:246.
231. De Rossi G, Mauro FR, Pizzo F, et al. Combination of cytosine-arabinoside (ARA-C), cyclophosphamide and prednisone in the treatment of B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia in advanced stages
and progressive disease. Leuk Lymphoma 1991;5[Suppl]:101.
232. Binet JL, Mentz F, Leblond V, Merle-Beral H. Synergistic action of alkylating agents and methylxanthine derivatives in the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Leukemia 1995;9:2159.
233. Makower D, Malik U, Novik Y, Wiernik PH. Therapeutic efficacy of theophylline in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Med Oncol 1999;16:69.
234. Mentz F, Merle-Beral H, Dalloul AH. Theophylline-induced B-CLL apoptosis is partly dependent on cyclic AMP production but independent of CD38 expression and endogenous IL-10
production. Leukemia 1999;13:78.
235. Kurtzberg J, Keating MJ, Plunkett W, et al. Compound 506 (2-amino-6-methoxypurine arabinoside) is active against resistant T-cell malignancies: preliminary results of an ongoing phase I trial.
J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1750(abst 2022).
236. Gandhi V, Keating M, O'Brien S, Plunkett W. Compound GW506U78 in refractory hematologic malignancies: relationship between cellular pharmacokinetics and clinical response. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:3607.
237. O'Brien S, Thomas D, Kantarjian H, et al. Compound 506U has activity in mature lymphoid leukemia. Blood 1998;92[Suppl 1]:490a(abst 2022).
238. Akao Y, Mizoguchi H, Kojima S, et al. Arsenic induces apoptosis in B-cell leukaemic cell lines in vitro: activation of caspases and down-regulation of Bcl-2 protein. Br J Haematol
1998;102:1055.
239. Zhu XH, Shen YL, Jing YK, et al. Apoptosis and growth inhibition in malignant lymphocytes after treatment with arsenic trioxide at clinically achievable concentrations. J Natl Cancer Inst
1999;91:772.
240. Al-Katib A, Mohammed RM, Dan M, et al. Bryostatin 1induced hairy cell features on chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells in vitro. Exp Hematol 1993;21:61.
241. Varterasian ML, Mohammad RM, Eilender DS, et al. Phase I study of bryostatin 1 in patients with relapsed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:56.
242. Byrd JC, Shinn CA, Bedi A, et al. Flavopiridol has marked in vitro activity against B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) and induces apoptosis independent of p53 status. Blood
1997;90[Suppl 1]:531a(abst 2366).
243. Waselenko JK, Przygodzki R, Grever MR, et al. Flavopiridol, UCN-01, FR901228 and gemcitabine have significant in vitro activity in de novo B-cell prolymphocytic leukemia with aberrant p53
function. Blood 1997;90[Suppl 1]:532a(abst 2369).
244. Byrd JC, Shinn C, Ravi R, et al. Depsipeptide (FR901228): a novel therapeutic agent with selective, in vitro activity against human B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells. Blood
1999;94:1401.
245. Menzel T, Rahman Z, Calleja E, et al. Elevated intracellular level of basic fibroblast growth factor correlates with stage of chronic lymphocytic leukemia and is associated with resistance to
fludarabine. Blood 1996;87:1056.
246. Ferrara F, Rametta V, Mele G, et al. Recombinant interferon-alpha2A as maintenance treatment for patients with advanced stage chronic lymphocytic leukemia responding to chemotherapy.
Am J Hematol 1992;41:45.
247. O'Connell MJ, Colgan JP, Oken MM, et al. Clinical trial of recombinant leukocyte A interferon as initial therapy for favorable histology non-Hodgkin's lymphomas and chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. An Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group pilot study. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:128.
248. Rozman C, Montserrat E, Viñolas N, et al. Recombinant a2-interferon in the treatment of B chronic lymphocytic leukemia in early stages. Blood 1988;71:1295.
249. Molica S, Alberti A. Recombinant alpha-2a interferon in treatment of B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia. A preliminary report with emphasis on previously untreated patients in early stage of
disease. Haematologica 1990;75:75.
250. O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, Beran M, et al. Interferon maintenance therapy for patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia in remission after fludarabine. Blood 1995;86:1296.
251. Zinzani PL, Bendandi M, Magagnoli M, et al. Results with fludarabine induction and alpha-interferon maintenance protocol in pretreated patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia and
low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Eur J Haematol 1997;59:82.
252. Dillman RO, Shawler DL, Dillman JB, Royston I. Therapy of chronic lymphocytic leukemia and cutaneous T-cell lymphoma with T101 monoclonal antibody. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:881.
253. Hertler AA, Schlossman DM, Borowitz MJ, et al. A phase I study of T101-ricin A chain immunotoxin in refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Biol Respir Mod 1988;7:97.
254. DeNardo GJ, Lewis JP, DeNardo SJ, O'Grady LF. Effect of Lym-1 radioimmunoconjugate on refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer 1993;73:1425.
255. Dyer MJS, Hale G, Hayhoe FGJ, Waldmann H. Effects of CAMPATH-1 antibodies in vivo in patients with lymphoid malignancies: influence of antibody isotype. Blood 1989;73:1431.
256. Pawson R, Dyer MJS, Barge R, et al. Treatment of T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia with human CD52 antibody. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2667.
257. Österborg A, Dyer MJS, Bunjes D, et al. Phase II multicenter study of human CD52 antibody in previously treated chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1567.
258. Rawstron AC, Davies FE, Evans P, et al. CAMPATH1H therapy for patients with refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Blood 1997;90[Suppl 1]:529a(abst 2356).
259. Dearden C, Matutes E, Dyer MJS, Catovsky D. CAMPATH-1H treatment of T-PLL. Proceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on CLL. 1999;:68(abst P131).
260. Bowen AL, Zomas A, Emmett E, et al. Subcutaneous CAMPATH-1H in fludarabine-resistant/relapsed chronic lymphocytic and B-prolymphocytic leukaemia. Br J Haematol 1997;96:617.
261. McLaughlin P, Grillo-López AJ, Link BK, et al. Rituximab chimeric anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody therapy of relapsed indolent lymphoma: half of patients respond to a four-dose treatment
program. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2825.
262. Maloney DG, Grillo-López AJ, White CA, et al. IDEC-C2B8 (Rituximab) anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody therapy in patients with relapsed low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood
1997;90:2188.
263. Piro LD, White CA, Grillo-Lopez AJ, et al. Extended rituximab (anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody) therapy for relapsed or refractory low-grade or follicular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Ann Oncol
1999;10:655.
264. Winkler U, Jensen M, Manzke O, et al. Cytokine-release syndrome in patients with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia and high lymphocyte counts after treatment with an anti-CD20
monoclonal antibody (Rituximab, IDEC-C2B8). Blood 1999;94:2217.
265. Foran JM, Rohatiner AZ, Cunningham D, et al. European phase II study of rituximab (Chimeric anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody) for patients with newly diagnosed mantle-cell lymphoma and
previously treated mantle-cell lymphoma, immunocytoma, and small B-cell lymphocytic lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:317.
266. O'Brien S, Thomas DA, Freireich EJ, et al. Rituxan has significant activity in patients with CLL. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:603a(abst 2684).
267. Venugopal P, Sivaraman S, Huang X, et al. Upregulation of CD20 expression in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells by in vitro exposure to cytokines. Blood 1998;92[Suppl 1]:247a(abst
1009).
268. Byrd JC, Grever MR, Davis B, et al. Phase I/II study of thrice weekly rituximab in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)/small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL): a feasible and active regimen. Blood
1999;94[Suppl 1]:704a(abst 3114).
269. Byrd JC, Waselenko JK, Maneatis T, et al. Rituximab therapy in hematologic malignancy patients with circulating tumor cells: association with increased infusion-related side effects and rapid
blood tumor clearance. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:791.
270. Kaminski MS, Zasadny KR, Francis IR, et al. Iodine-131-anti-B1 radioimmunotherapy for B-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1974.
271. Witzig TE, White CA, Wiseman GA, et al. Phase I/II trial of IDEC-Y2B8 radioimmunotherapy for treatment of relapsed or refractory CD20(+) B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:3793.
272. Rabinowe SN, Soiffer RJ, Gribben JG, et al. Autologous and allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for poor prognosis patients with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1993;82:1366.
273. Khouri IF, Keating MJ, Vriesendorp HM, et al. Autologous and allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for chronic lymphocytic leukemia: preliminary results. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:748.
274. Michallet M, Archimbaud E, Bandini G, et al. HLA-identical sibling bone marrow transplantation in younger patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:311.
275. Khouri IF, Przepiorka D, van Besien K, et al. Allogeneic blood or marrow transplantation for chronic lymphocytic leukaemia: timing of transplantation and potential effect of fludarabine on acute
graft-versus-host disease. Br J Haematol 1997;97:466.
276. Provan D, Bartlett-Pandite L, Zwicky C, et al. Eradication of polymerase chain reactiondetectable chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells is associated with improved outcome after bone marrow
transplantation. Blood 1996;88:2228.
277. Slavin S, Nagler A, Naparstek E, et al. Nonmyeloablative stem cell transplantation and cell therapy as an alternative to conventional bone marrow transplantation with lethal cytoreduction for
the treatment of malignant and nonmalignant hematologic diseases. Blood 1998;91:756.
278. Khouri IF, Keating M, Körbling M, et al. Transplant-lite: induction of graft-versus-malignancy using fludarabine-based nonablative chemotherapy and allogeneic blood progenitor-cell
transplantation as treatment for lymphoid malignancies. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2817.
279. Pavletic ZS, Bierman PJ, Vose JM, et al. High incidence of relapse after autologous stem-cell transplantation for B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia or small lymphocytic lymphoma. Ann
Oncol 1998;9:1023.
280. Johnson RE. Treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia by total body irradiation alone and combined with chemotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1979;5:159.
281. Bennett JM, Raphael B, Moore D, et al. Comparison of chlorambucil and prednisone vs total body irradiation and chlorambucil:prednisone vs cytoxan, vincristine, prednisone for the therapy of
active chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a long term follow-up of two ECOG studies. In: Gale RP, Rai KR, ed. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia: recent progress and future directions. New York: Alan
R Liss, 1987:317.
282. De Rossi G, Biagini C, Lopez M, Tombolini V, Mandelli F. Treatment by splenic irradiation in 22 chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients. Tumori 1982;68:511.
283. Chisesi T, Capnist G, Dal Flor S. Splenic irradiation in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Eur J Haematol 1990;46:202.
284. Paule B, Brion N, Brion G. Remission of autoimmune hemolytic anemia associated with chronic lymphocytic leukemia following splenic irradiation. Nouv Rev Fr Hematol 1989;31:413.
285. Marti GE, Folks T, Longo DL, Klein H. Therapeutic cytapheresis in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Apheresis 1983;1:243.
286. Knobler RM, Pirker R, Kokoschka EM, et al. Experimental treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia with extracorporeal photochemotherapy. Blut 1990;60:215.
287. Committee of the Chronic Leukemia-Myeloma Task Force. Proposed guidelines for protocol studies. Cancer Chemother Rep 1973;4:141.
288. Silver RT, Sawitsky A, Rai K, Holland JF, Glidewell O. Guidelines for protocol studies in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Am J Hematol 1978;4:343.
289. International Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia: recommendations for diagnosis, staging, and response criteria. Ann Intern Med 1989;110:236.
290. Galton DAG, Goldman JM, Wiltshaw E, et al. Prolymphocytic leukaemia. Br J Haematol 1974;27:7.
291. Kjeldsberg CR, Marty J. Prolymphocytic transformation of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer 1981;48:2447.
292. Bennett JM, Catovsky D, Daniel MT, et al. Proposals for the classification of chronic (mature) B and T lymphoid leukaemias. J Clin Pathol 1989;42:567.
293. Davi F, Maloum K, Michel A, et al. High frequency of somatic mutations in the VH genes expressed in prolymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1996;88:3953.
294. Kantarjian HM, Childs C, O'Brien S, et al. Efficacy of fludarabine, a new adenine nucleoside analogue, in patients with prolymphocytic leukemia and the prolymphocytoid variant of chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Am J Med 1991;90:223.
295. Sporn JR. Sustained response of refractory prolymphocytic leukemia to fludarabine. Acta Haematol 1991;85:209.
296. Döhner H, Ho AD, Thaler J, et al. Pentostatin in prolymphocytic leukemia: phase II trial of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Leukemia Cooperative Study
Group. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:658.
297. Saven A, Lee T, Schlutz M, et al. Major activity of cladribine in patients with de novo B-cell prolymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1997;15:37.
298. Bouroncle BA, Wiseman BK, Doan CA. Leukemic reticuloendotheliosis. Blood 1958;13:609.
299. Sainati L, Matutes E, Mulligan S, et al. A variant of hairy cell leukemia resistant to alpha-interferon: clinical and phenotypic characteristics of 17 patients. Blood 1990;76:157.
300. Grever M, Kopecky K, Foucar MK, et al. A randomized comparison of pentostatin vs alpha-interferon in previously untreated patients with hairy cell leukemia: an intergroup study. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:974.

301. Piro LD, Carrera CJ, Carson DA, Beutler E. Lasting remissions in hairy cell leukemia induced by a single infusion of 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1117.
302. Spiers ASD, Parekh SJ, Bishop M. Hairy-cell leukemia: induction of complete remission with pentostatin (2'-deoxycoformycin). J Clin Oncol 1984;2:1336.
303. Tallman MS, Hakimian D, Rademaker AW, et al. Relapse of hairy cell leukemia after 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine: long-term follow-up of the Northwestern University experience. Blood
1996;88:1954.
304. Thomas DA, O'Brien S, Cortes J, et al. Pilot study of rituximab in refractory or relapsed hairy cell leukemia. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:705a(abst 3116).
305. Kreitman RJ, Wilson WH, Robbins D, et al. Responses in refractory hairy cell leukemia to a recombinant immunotoxin. Blood 1999;94:3340.
306. Come SE, Jaffe ES, Andersen JC, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas in leukemic phase: clinicopathologic correlations. Am J Med 1980;69:667.
307. Mintzer DM, Hauptman SP. Lymphosarcoma cell leukemia and other non-Hodgkin's lymphomas in leukemic phase. Am J Med 1983;75:110.
308. Mulligan SP, Matutes E, Dearden C, Catovsky D. Splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes: natural history and response to therapy in 50 cases. Br J Haematol 1991;78:206.
309. Isaacson PG, Matutes E, Burke M, Catovsky D. The histopathology of splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes. Blood 1994;84:3828.
310. Lefrère F, Troussard X, Hermine O, et al. Fludarabine for splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes (SLVL). Blood 1997;90[Suppl 1]:308b(abst 4136).
311. Loughran TP Jr. Clonal diseases of large granular lymphocytes. Blood 1993;82:1.
312. Semenzato G, Zambello R, Starkebaum G, Oshimi K, Loughran TP Jr. The lymphoproliferative disease of granular lymphocytes: updated criteria for diagnosis. Blood 1997;89:256.
313. McKenna RW, Arthur DC, Gajl-Peczalska J, Flynn P, Brunning RD. Granulated T cell lymphocytosis with neutropenia: malignant or benign chronic lymphoproliferative disorder. Blood
1985;66:259.
314. Dearden C, Matutes E, Catovsky D. Deoxycoformycin in the treatment of mature T-cell leukaemias. Br J Cancer 1991;64:903.
315. O'Brien S, Kurzrock R, Duvic M, et al. 2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine therapy in patients with T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders. Blood 1994;84:733.
316. Tefferi A, Li CY, Witzig TE, et al. Chronic natural killer cell lymphocytosis: a descriptive clinical study. Blood 1994;84:2721.
317. Catovsky D. Diagnosis and treatment of CLL variants. In: Cheson BD, ed. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia: scientific advances and clinical developments. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1993:369.
318. Uchiyama T, Yodoi J, Sagawa K, Takatsuki K, Uchino H. Adult T-cell leukemia: clinical and hematologic features of 16 cases. Blood 1977;50:481.
319. Kinoshita K, Amagasaki T, Ikeda S, et al. Preleukemic state of adult TG cell leukemia: abnormal T lymphocytosis induced by human adult T cell leukemia-lymphoma virus. Blood 1985;66:120.
320. Gibbs WN, Lofters WS, Campbell M, et al. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma in Jamaica and its relation to adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma. Ann Intern Med 1987;106:361.
321. Lofters W, Campbell M, Gibbs WN, Cheson BD. 2'-Deoxycoformycin therapy in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma. Cancer 1987;60:2605.
322. Yamaguchi K, Nishimura H, Kohrogi H, et al. A proposal for smoldering adult T-cell leukemia: a clinicopathologic study of five cases. Blood 1983;62:758.

SECTION 46.4 Plasma Cell Neoplasms
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 46.4
Plasma Cell Neoplasms
NIKHIL C. MUNSHI
GUIDO TRICOT
BART BARLOGIE
Introduction
History
Epidemiology
Etiology
Environmental Exposure
Pathogenesis
Murine Model
Cytogenetic and Molecular Genetic Alterations
Disease Evolution
Cytokines
Adhesion Molecules
Phenotype
Immunosuppression
Clinical Manifestations
Anemia
Renal Failure
Hypercalcemia and Bone Disease
Infections
Neurologic Symptoms
Hyperviscosity
Coagulopathy
Extramedullary Disease
Diagnosis
Staging and Risk Assessment
Protein Electrophoresis
Bone Marrow Examination
Cytogenetics
Labeling Index
Radiographic Evaluation
Differential Diagnosis
Prognostic Variables
Treatment
Solitary Plasmacytoma
Indolent Myeloma
Symptomatic Multiple Myeloma
Waldenström's Macroglobulinemia
Perspective
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Plasma cell neoplasms represent a spectrum of diseases characterized by clonal proliferation and accumulation of immunoglobulin-producing cells that are terminally
differentiated B cells. The spectrum includes clinically benign conditions, such as monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance (MGUS) and rare disorders such
as Castleman's disease and a heavy-chain disease; indolent conditions such as Waldenström's macroglobulinemia; the more common malignant entity, plasma cell
myeloma, a disseminated B-cell malignancy; and a more aggressive form, plasma cell leukemia, with circulating malignant plasma cells in the blood. All of these
disorders share common features in the form of plasma cell morphology, production of immunoglobulin molecules, and immune dysfunction. A plasma cell neoplasm
is considered to originate from a single B cell, with resultant monoclonal protein secretion that characterizes its type. Occasional oligoclonal or polyclonal protein
abnormalities are observed in conditions such as Castleman's disease. Current laboratory data based on complementarity determining region III (CDRIII) confirm the
monoclonal origin of this disease. 1
There are five major classes of immunoglobulin synthesized by normal B cells and plasma cells: IgG, IgA, IgM, IgD, and IgE. The dysfunctional plasma cells secrete
one of these molecules or, in some instances, produce only k or l light chain molecules. 2,3 and 4 Usually, intact immunoglobulin molecules are secreted by the plasma
cells; however, there may be a discrepancy in the production of the heavy and light chains leading to an imbalance, with an excess of free light chain that is excreted
in the urine (Bence Jones proteinuria). Occasionally, plasma cells do not secrete any paraproteins (nonsecretory type myeloma); however, they usually have
cytoplasmic immunoglobulin and produce low levels of immunoglobulins undetectable by current methods. Although myeloma can be associated with any of the
immunoglobulin subtypes, the IgM type is predominately associated with other malignant conditions such as Waldenström's macroglobulinemia and chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).
The clinical manifestations of plasma cell dyscrasias range from total absence of any symptoms in subjects with MGUS to formation of tumors, paraproteinemia,
hypogammaglobulinemia due to decreased levels of the uninvolved immunoglobulins, bone disease, especially osteolytic lesions, hematopoietic and immune
dysfunction, kidney function abnormalities, and infectious problems. These clinical manifestations are the result of a variety of pathogenic mechanisms, including
cytokine production by the tumor or by the microenvironment, effect of the tumor mass itself, the deposition of the M protein into various organs, suppression of the Tand B-cell functions, and occasionally autoimmune disorders.

HISTORY
The earliest evidence of myeloma has been reported from the Egyptian mummies; however, the first published clinical description of the disease was reported in 1850
in England. A patient, Thomas Alexander McBean, presented with symptoms of episodes of fatigue, diffuse bone pain, and urinary frequency to Dr. William Macintrye
of London in 1845. The urinalysis test results detected a urinary protein with the heat properties often observed for urinary light chains and McIntyre called it “mollities
and fragilitas ossium” based on the patient's bony symptoms. 5 Later that year, Dr. Henry Bence Jones also tested urine specimens provided by Macintyre and
corroborated the heat properties of urinary light chains. Bence Jones thought that the protein was the “hydrated deuteroxide of albumin” (now called Bence Jones
proteins) and published his findings several years before Macintyre published his case report. 6 Bence Jones also emphasized the potential importance of looking for
this urinary protein in other cases with mollities ossium. After the patient died in 1846, a surgeon, Dr. John Dalrymple, examined several bones and made gross and
microscopic observations. 7 His drawings are consistent with morphology of myeloma cells.
The term multiple myeloma was coined by Rustizky in 1873 following his independent observation in a similar patient with multiple bone lesions. 8 Kahler in 1889
published a review on this condition and the disease became known, particularly in Europe, as Kahler's disease. 9 Ellinger, in 1899, described the increased serum
proteins and sedimentation rate in myeloma. 10 In 1900, Wright described the involvement of plasma cells in this neoplasm instead of original belief of its origin from
the red marrow and for the first time he used roentgenographic abnormality in myeloma, which to date remains one of the diagnostic tests. 11
The development of bone marrow aspiration in 1929, 12 electrophoresis to separate serum proteins in 1937, 13 and a later report of a specific spike in the g globulin
region 14 enhanced the diagnosis and understanding of myeloma. Identification of the heavy and light chains in the monoclonal protein by immunoelectrophoresis was
described by Grabar in 1953, confirming the monoclonality of immunoglobulin in this disease. 5 Other developments from 1960s to 1980s include a staging system,

role of several cytokines such as interleukin-1 (IL-1) and IL-6, and significance of chromosome 13 changes in myeloma.
No effective systemic therapy existed before 1947, when urethan was reported to show initial results in a few patients. 16 However, a subsequent randomized trial
indicated that the survival of patients receiving urethan was inferior to that observed with a placebo. 17 The first successful use of chemotherapeutic agent in myeloma
was reported in 1958 by Blokhin and colleagues with the use of a racemic mixture of d-and L-phenylalanine mustards (Sarcolysine). Subsequently, the d- and
L-isomers of phenylalanine mustard were tested separately, and the antimyeloma activity was found to reside in the L-isomer, melphalan. In 1962, Bergsagel and
colleagues of the Southwest Oncology Group reported remissions in approximately one-third of myeloma patients with melphalan. 18 Administration of high doses of
the glucocorticoid was first reported to induce remissions in relapsing or refractory myeloma in 1967. 19 The use of melphalan in combination with prednisone was then
studied extensively.20 The role of high-dose therapy was investigated by McElwain and Powles in 1984, and addition of bone marrow transplantation with improved
safety and further dose escalation was reported in 1986 by Barlogie et al. 21,22 Since then, numerous developments have taken place including activity of tandem
transplant and the role of bisphosphonates and thalidomide.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
According to the most recent data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program, multiple myeloma is a relatively uncommon malignancy in the
United States, representing 1.0% of all malignancies in whites and 2.0% in African Americans. Among hematologic malignancies, it constitutes 10% of the tumors and
ranks as the second most frequently occurring hematologic cancer in the United States after non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. At any one time, the prevalence of myeloma is
around 40,000 and approximately 14,000 new patients are diagnosed each year, with 11,000 people dying each year from myeloma. The disease is more common in
men and has average annual age-adjusted (1970 U.S. standard) incidence rates per 100,000 among whites of 4.7 in men and 3.2 in women, whereas for African
Americans the incidence is 10.2 in men and 6.7 in women. The increased incidence in African Americans is not explained by factors such as social or economic
condition, household size, or family income. 23 The incidence data for other ethnic groups including native Hawaiians, female Hispanics, American Indians from New
Mexico, and Alaskan natives also show higher myeloma rates relative to U.S. whites in the same geographic group; however, the Chinese and Japanese populations
have a lower incidence than whites. The incidence of multiple myeloma has slowly increased in the U.S. white population since 1970; however, the incidence among
African Americans has increased more prominently during the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s.
The incidence of myeloma and other plasma cell disorders increases with advancing age. The median age of onset is 68 years. The mortality pattern also closely
follows the incidence curves for age distribution with median age at death in men of 70 years and women of 71 years. As seen in Figure 46.4-1, fewer than 2% of
patients are younger than 40 years, whereas more than 40% of the patients are older than 70 years. 24 A similar age distribution is also observed in other related
plasma cell disorders including MGUS and Waldenström's macroglobulinemia.

FIGURE 46.4-1. Multiple myeloma average annual age-, sex-, and race-specific incidence per 100,000 in the United States, 1992 to 1996. Increase in incidence is
noted with advancing age, and higher incidence is observed in male than female subjects and in African American than white populations.

ETIOLOGY
ENVIRONMENTAL EXPOSURE
Exposure to ionizing radiation is the strongest single factor linked to an increased risk of multiple myeloma. 25 This has been documented in atomic bomb survivors
with a five times greater incidence than the control group and a latent period of approximately 20 years from exposure. 26 People exposed to low levels of radiation
also demonstrate an increased incidence of myeloma, including radiologists, people employed in the nuclear industry, or those handling radioactive materials. 27 An
increase in myeloma risk with increasing numbers of diagnostic radiographs was demonstrated without an increased risk of leukemia or lymphoma, suggesting that
even a low level of radiation may be a risk factor for myeloma. An association between exposure to various chemicals and the risk of multiple myeloma remains ill
defined. Exposure to metals, especially nickel; agricultural chemicals; benzene and petroleum products; other aromatic hydrocarbons; and silicon have been
considered as potential risk factors. 25,28,29,30,31,32 and 33 Alcohol and tobacco consumption has not been clearly linked to myeloma. Among medications, only mineral oil
used as a laxative has been reported to be associated with an increased risk of multiple myeloma in some patients. 34,35
Hereditary and genetic factors may predispose to myeloma development. 36,37 Among 37 families with at least two family members who had myeloma, occurrence
among siblings was reported in 25 of the families. However, direct genetic linkage has not been established. 38 Myeloma risk also appears to be enhanced by the
presence of HLA-Cw2 in both African American and white populations.
MGUS has been considered a premalignant condition; however, the rate of conversion to myeloma remains extremely small and often associated with additional
genetic changes. 39,40 Repeated infections or antigenic stimulation of the plasma cell compartment has also been proposed as a possible predisposing condition for
myeloma. In one interesting patient report in the literature, a prior therapy with horse antiserum against tetanus lead to subsequent development of MGUS, which
lasted for three decades before conversion to multiple myeloma. At the time of myeloma diagnosis, the serum IgG component was found to react specifically against
horse a2-macroglobulin. 41 This report suggests an initial antigen-driven stimulation of monoclonal protein-producing plasma cells, eventually becoming malignant after
acquiring additional genetic alterations. 42
Epidemiologic studies have not been able to conclusively establish an association between multiple myeloma and infectious or autoimmune diseases. The human
herpes virus (HHV-8; Kaposi's sarcoma herpes virus) has been shown to be present in the bone marrow dendritic cells of the majority of patients with multiple
myeloma.43,44 Its association with other lymphoproliferative diseases, such as Castleman's disease, 45 body cavity lymphoma,46 and Kaposi's sarcoma,47 has been
previously demonstrated. Although this association has been reported by some, 44,48,49 others have failed to identify HHV-8 in dendritic cells from various sources
including mobilized peripheral blood stem cells. 50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61 and 62 In the initial report, 100% of myeloma patients demonstrated evidence of ORF26
sequences in dendritic cells, compared with zero in normal controls. However, one study reports that 60% of 30 myeloma samples were positive for ORF26, with 44%
of 25 normal controls demonstrating positive results. This study also failed to show positivity for the viral genes ORF72 and 75 in both myeloma and control
samples.49 Antibodies against HHV-8 have not been observed in multiple myeloma. Since HHV-8 produces unique gene products, including possible
growth-promoting factors for myeloma such as IL-6, insulin-like growth factor-1, and an IL-8-like molecule, the possible linkage of HHV-8 to myeloma is intriguing, with
infection of the stromal cell elements, part of the tumor microenvironment, exerting cell survival or antiapoptotic signals on the tumor cells. 63,64

PATHOGENESIS
Myeloma occurs not only in humans, but also in mice, canines, and hamsters. In fact, genetic susceptibility to plasma cell tumors has been demonstrated in an inbred
strain of mice. A common factor in various species has been considered to be the prevalence of endogenous retroviruses. 65,66 Animal models are now providing a
basis for understanding the role of various molecular events, including the activation of oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, and various cytokines, and the role of

the microenvironment not only in causing bone destruction but sustaining and promoting growth, survival, drug resistance, and genetic instability.
MURINE MODEL
C57BL/Ka strains of inbred mice spontaneously develop monoclonal gammopathies without tumor formation in 16% of the mice by 2 years. 65,67,68 Other strains, such
as BALB/c, have a low spontaneous incidence of monoclonal gammopathies. In BALB/c mouse, however, induction of plasmacytoma or myeloma is easily observed
after intraperitoneal injection of mineral oil or its clinically defined component, pristane. 65 Production of such tumors can be blocked by administration of indomethacin
and accelerated by subsequent infection of the mice with Abelson's virus. The plasmacytomas develop within the oil or other foreign body–mediated granulomas with
lymphoplasmacytic infiltration. Plasmacytoma progression is associated with dysregulated expression of c-MYC as a result of translocation analogous to t(8;14) in
humans. These plasmacytomas produce IgA immunoglobulins, and a growth factor present in the peritoneal fluid has been confirmed to be IL-6. Interestingly,
however, the C57BL/Ka strain with a high incidence of spontaneous monoclonal gammopathies is relatively resistant to induction of plasmacytoma by mineral oil.
An association between antigenic stimulation of normal B cells and development of plasmacytoma has been demonstrated in the pristine oil–treated BALB/c mouse
model. When animals are raised in a germ-free environment, incidence of myeloma after mineral oil stimulation is markedly reduced, whereas that of other lymphoid
neoplasms increases.65 These studies suggest an important role of immune stimulation toward myeloma development.
Human myeloma cell lines can grow and disseminate in a severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mouse model, providing a unique opportunity to study this
disease in an in vivo setting.69,70 and 71 The introduction of fetal human bone in to SCID mice (SCID-Hu) has allowed engraftment and proliferation of primary human
myeloma cells in more than 80% of mice with human myeloma-specific immunoglobulin and light chains detected in murine blood samples. 72,73 In this murine model of
primary human disease, the fetal bone undergoes osteoporotic and osteolytic change as a consequence of clonotypic plasma cell proliferation and production of
human cytokines.74 Interestingly, the murine bones remain uninvolved at least in the early stages of the disease. This model provides a unique opportunity to study
the importance of stromal cell–myeloma cell interaction and the cytokines, chemokines, and various genetic and molecular mechanisms critical for myeloma growth
and dissemination. This model also can provide clues to the origin of myeloma stem cells, as well as the opportunity to evaluate new treatment approaches, such as
antiangiogenesis therapy.
CYTOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR GENETIC ALTERATIONS
Myeloma karyotypes are complex, with an average of 11 numeric and structural abnormalities per cell. 75,76 and 77 The relative incidence of gain or loss of various
chromosomes and its p and q arm are shown in Figure 46.4-2. The inherent problem in the low proliferative activity of the tumor cells and possible clonal evolution
have been obstacles to identify specific chromosomal and molecular changes in myeloma. However, the newer techniques of multicolor fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) and spectral karyotyping along with refined G-banding techniques in a large number of patients have identified many nonrandom changes. 78,79

FIGURE 46.4-2. Summary karyotypic abnormalities in 158 patients with evaluable abnormal cytogenetics from study of 492 patients demonstrating chromosomal
chaos. A: Numeric changes with trisomies (gain) and monosomies (loss). B: Structural changes involving short (p) and long (q) arms. (Courtesy of Jeffery R. Sawyer.)

Partial or complete deletion chromosome 13 q arm confers a poor prognosis, even with high-dose therapy, and suggests a putative tumor suppressor gene. 80 Using
the RB1 gene as a probe, FISH analysis reveals RB-1 deletion in more than 40% of these patients. 81 On detailed analysis of the 13q chromosome with a 11 probe
panel of FISH probes, more than 80% of 50 patients showed molecular deletions, with 13q14 representing a critical region most frequently involved. 82 Additionally,
constitutive phosphorylation of pRB is reported in myeloma cells, which is further enhanced by IL-6. 83 Cycline D, cycline-dependent kinases (CDK) and CDK inhibitors
p15 and p16 (ink), p21 and p27 (cip), and p57 (kip) have also been investigated in myeloma based on their effect on pRB phosphorylation. Abnormalities in p16 in
75% and p15 in 67% of myeloma patients have been reported, suggesting an important defect in the pRB regulatory pathway. 84,85,86 and 87
The immunoglobulin heavy-chain gene at 14q32 is involved in translocation in 20% to 30% of myeloma by conventional cytogenetics and higher percentage by
molecular techniques.75,76,88 Demonstration of this abnormality in MGUS may suggest its involvement in the initial step of the transformation. 89 The most common
translocation involving 14q32 is t(11;14), resulting in overexpression of cycline D. 88,90 Additional interesting partners are 4p, 16q, and chromosome 9. Involved in the
4p16 region are fibroblast growth factor receptor III (FGFR3) and MMSET genes. Mutated FGFR3 has been shown to confer resistance to caspase 3–related
apoptosis.91,92 With the help of spectral karyotyping a nonrandom involvement of t(14:16) (q32:q22-23) has been described. Molecular analysis of the locus at
chromosome 16q22 shows fusion of immunoglobulin heavy chain with the sequence near the cMAF oncogene. 93 Additionally, t(9;14) involving PAX5 gene and t(6;14)
involving IRF4 genes have been described. 94,95 In the majority of the cases, however, the translocating partner chromosome locus is not identified. Although, 14q32 is
one of the common translocation points, its real significance remains unclear in relation to myelomagenesis because of the variety of partner chromosomes involved
and lack of prognostic implications.
One of the commonly altered genes in many malignancies is p53. However, in myeloma, abnormalities in p53 in early disease are detected in only 10% of
patients. 96,97 and 98 However, it represents an important late event associated with progression to an aggressive form of the disease. A study of frequency of p53 gene
mutations in a series of 52 patients with myeloma in different clinical phases showed 7 of 52 patients with abnormalities, all with an advanced and clinically aggressive
acute leukemic form of multiple myeloma (7 of 16, 43%). Three of these cases with mutated p53 had been evaluated earlier during the indolent form of the disease
and were negative for p53 mutations. 96 One study showed poor prognosis in patients with p53 gene deletion, as assessed by FISH when treated with standard-dose
therapy. 97 The effect of p53 deletion in relation to high-dose therapy has not yet been evaluated. In contrast to primary patient samples, mutations in p53 are more
commonly detected in myeloma cell lines, which are usually derived from patients with aggressive myeloma. MDM2, an important inhibitor of p53 function, is
overexpressed in the majority of myeloma cell lines; however, its abnormality is infrequently observed in primary myeloma cells. 99 Changes in another important
cell-cycle regulatory gene, c-myc, are also observed in a majority of patients in the form of either abnormal size transcript or high level of expression. 100,101
An important antiapoptotic gene, BCL-2, is uniformly overexpressed in low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. In this family of genes, BCL-2 and BCL-XL are
antiapoptotic genes, while BAX, BAD, and BCL XS are proapoptotic genes. A balance between these genes determines cell survival. The t(14:18) translocation
involving the BCL-2 gene is quite rare (2% to 3%) in myeloma. However, numerous myeloma cell lines as well as primary cells express high levels of BCL-2. 102,103 Its
relation with development of drug resistance as well as radiation resistance in myeloma cells is also well described. 104,105,386 The relation of BCL-2 expression and
prognosis remains controversial as one small study failed to correlate it with short survival. Another study in 63 patients, however, showed a significant correlation
between BCL-2 expression and resistance to therapy with interferon but not melphalan and prednisone. 106 BCL-XL is up-regulated in myeloma cells after exposure to
IL-6 through activation of STAT-3. 107,108 It confers a drug-resistant phenotype and in conjunction with BCL-2 leads to increased genetic instability. These and other
molecular changes involving gp130, NF-kB, and STATs combined lead to the development and progression of myeloma. 109
High telomerase activity has also been demonstrated in myeloma cells compared with normal cells, as well as other malignant cell lines. 110 The clinical implication of

this activity remains under investigation; however, telomerase activity provides an additional target for therapeutic intervention.
DISEASE EVOLUTION
Multiple myeloma is a germinal center-derived tumor with mainly a post-switch B-cell phenotype characterized by extensive Ig gene hypermutation in the CDRs, which
interacts with the antigen. This is reflected in the exceedingly rare occurrence of IgM myeloma. Somatic mutations of other loci, such as BCL-6, have also been
reported in the B cells along with the immunoglobulin gene rearrangement. 111 Similar mechanisms may also be affecting other cell-cycle control genes important for
cell proliferation and malignant transformation.
As in most malignancies, pathogenesis of multiple myeloma appears to be associated with dysregulated expression and the function of multiple key cellular genes
controlling apoptosis, cell growth, and proliferation. Understanding the evolution of myeloma from MGUS has provided a background for a multistep process involving
alterations in various oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. One report suggests the presence of 14q32 abnormalities in patients with MGUS and an additional
chromosome 13 change, with a transformation to overt multiple myeloma. 89 This has lead to a theory that a subset of myeloma may originate from prior MGUS with a
high incidence of monosomy 13 and a second group of de novo myeloma in which other genetic abnormalities may be involved. 89
CYTOKINES
IL-6 is an important cytokine originally identified as a B-cell differentiation factor that causes proliferation of plasmablastic cells and induces terminal differentiation of
B cells into antibody-producing cells. Several studies have confirmed its activity as an autocrine and paracrine growth factor for myeloma cell lines and primary
cells. 112,113,114 and 115 Evidence supporting this includes in vitro myeloma cell growth in the presence of recombinant IL-6, 83 IL-6 production by some of the myeloma cells
themselves,116 expression of high levels of IL-6 receptors, 112 and suppression of in vitro myeloma cell proliferation by anti–IL-6 antibodies. 117 Close cell–cell contact
between myeloma cells and the bone marrow stromal cells triggers a large amount of IL-6 production by stromal cells, which supports the growth of myeloma cells and
protects them from apoptosis induced by dexamethasone or other chemotherapeutic agents. 118,119 Correlation has been reported between serum IL-6 levels or
C-reactive protein (CRP) levels, an indirect measurement of IL-6 activity, and disease severity as well as extent of bone marrow plasmacytosis 120; frequent lytic bone
lesions; and some tumor-associated symptoms such as fever, fatigue, and weight loss. In addition, indirect evidence of the role of IL-6 in B-cell disorders is provided
through IL-6 transgenic mice. These animals have a high incidence of polyclonal plasmacytosis. Transduction of the IL-6 gene in hematopoietic cells in mice leads to
a disorder resembling Castleman's disease. 121 IL-6, however, is not an absolute requirement for myeloma cell growth as some of the myeloma cells do not proliferate
in response to IL-6, nor do they require IL-6 for their continued growth. Therapy with anti–IL-6 antibody has also not provided significant clinical benefit. 122,123
Expression by myeloma cells of IL-1b, tumor necrosis factor-b (TNF-b), and hepatocyte growth factor has been described, resulting in development of resistance to
therapy, possibly through activation of NF-kB. 124,125,126 and 127 Myeloma cells express a variety of cytokine receptors that play a significant role in cell–cell interactions
as well as autocrine and paracrine growth control. A majority of myeloma cell lines and primary cells express IL-6–related receptors gp80 and gp130. 128,129
Additionally, receptors are expressed for TNF-a, IL-11, IL-1, IL-2, IL-7, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), stem cell factor, leukocyte
inhibitory factor, oncostatin-M, and insulin-like growth factor-1 and -2. 130,131,132,133 and 134 These findings suggest that in addition to IL-6, interferon-g, IL-1, IL-2, IL-7,
GM-CSF, TNF, and insulin growth factor have at least a direct biologic effect on myeloma cells.
The soluble cytokines can be used in vitro to expand the pre-B cells to mature plasma cell stage with cytoplasmic immunoglobulin expression. An important
combination of cytokines in this regard is IL-6 and IL-3. However, secretion of immunoglobulin requires contact between marrow stromal cells and myeloma cells; this
occurs through adhesion molecules on the surface of the myeloma cells and their counterparts on the stromal cell or extracellular matrix in the bone marrow. 135
The role of angiogenesis in myeloma has been investigated, showing that advanced-stage myeloma is associated with high microvessel density in bone marrow
compared with indolent myeloma or MGUS.136,137 An association between increased bone marrow microvessel density at diagnosis with poor event-free and overall
survival has also been reported. 138 Angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelium growth factor-1 (VEGF-1) and fibroblast growth factor are expressed by myeloma
cells. 139 This observation has lead to an evaluation of thalidomide as antiangiogenic therapy in myeloma with encouraging results. 140
ADHESION MOLECULES
Adhesion molecules, especially those expressed by myeloma cells and the bone marrow stromal cells, play an important role in mediating the interaction between the
host and tumor cells to regulate tumor growth and migration of these cells in vivo. It is believed that after class switching in lymph nodes, myeloma cells home to the
bone marrow through acquisition of a variety of adhesion molecules including syndecan-1 (CD138), CD44, very late antigen-4 (VLA-4) (CD49d) and VLA-5 (CD49e),
lymphocyte function–associated antigen-1 (LFA-1), intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (CD54), neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) (CD56), and MPC-1. 141,142 The
homing to the marrow leads to binding of myeloma cells to bone marrow stromal cells, which in turn mediates signal transduction events including IL-6 production by
the stromal cells. 72 The adhesion molecules in the bone marrow that myeloma cells bind to, and require for their homing, include heparan sulfate proteoglycan,
intracellular adhesion molecule-1, and vascular cellular adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) on the bone marrow stromal cell, as well as fibronectin and type I collagen in
the extracellular matrix. 143,144,145 and 146 With further progress of the disease, CD56 (NCAM), syndecan-1 (CD138), and VLA-5 are down-regulated; in the case of
syndecan-1, this occurs in response to IL-6. Some of these changes may allow circulation of clonotypic plasma cells in blood. The acquisition of CD11b may also help
in invasion and metastatic spread through its interaction with the endothelium. All plasma cells express CD38, which is a receptor for CD31, expressed on endothelial
cells with potential implications for trafficking of myeloma cells through blood vessels. Interestingly, the majority of the plasmacytic myeloma cells, but not
plasmablastic and plasma cell leukemia cells, have also been reported to express CD31. 147 Other than syndecan-1, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP), especially
MMP-2 and MMP-9, have also been implicated in myeloma cell proliferation and spread. 136,148,149 Serum syndecan-1 levels are reflective of tumor burden as is
hepatocyte growth factor.127,150In vitro and in vivo studies have documented a role of syndecan-1 in cell–cell and cell–matrix adhesion and in inducing myeloma cell
apoptosis.144 Syndecan-1 expressed by myeloma cell may also serve to trap the growth regulatory molecules such as fibroblast growth factor and insulin-like growth
factor as well as angiogenic molecules, such as VEGF and fibroblast growth factor. 149 Expression of different adhesion and surface molecules on normal plasma cells,
myeloma cells, and plasma cell leukemia cells are listed in Table 46.4-1.

TABLE 46.4-1. Adhesion Molecule Expression on Normal Plasma Cells and Multiple Myeloma Cells

PHENOTYPE
Myeloma cells display heterogenous phenotypes with differences in the molecules among different patients expressed on the cell surface as well as differences within
the same patient at different disease stages. 135 In general, all myeloma cells express high levels of CD38 with immature plasma cell additionally expressing CD45 and
the IL-6 receptor. 116,151,152 and 153 More mature myeloma cells do not express CD45 and lack the IL-6 receptor expression. 154 A subpopulation of myeloma cells may also
express CD10, CD56, or CD49e (VLA-5). 154,155,156 and 157 CD28 expression is associated with more aggressive disease 158,159 and CD20 expression is present in 20% of

myeloma patients, which can be further up-regulated with interferon-a. 160 The phenotypic heterogeneity of myeloma cells in fact describes the differentiation process
that is an important part of the disease development. The identity of the myeloma stem cell still remains an enigma. B cells expressing CD19 and CD11b can be
induced to mature with the help of stromal cells into monotypic plasma cells, suggesting that this cellular compartment may comprise myeloma cell progenitors. 161
Using the allele-specific oligonucleotide PCR and the SCID-hu model, the myeloma stem cell will be better defined in the future.
IMMUNOSUPPRESSION
Myeloma patients present with suppressed immune function from a variety of factors. The most significant observation is suppression of uninvolved immunoglobulins
(e.g., in patients with IgG myeloma there is suppression of serum IgA and IgM levels). 162 The factors causing such suppression include the direct role of monoclonal
immunoglobulin, increased soluble Fc-receptor or Fc-expressing cells, suppression of helper cell functions through the effect of monoclonal immunoglobulin, and an
ill-defined macrophage-related factor that affects B-cell maturation to plasma cell. 163 Recovery of uninvolved immunoglobulin following effective therapy has been
associated with improved survival as well as protection from infectious complications. In regard to T-cell function, deficiency of T 4 helper cell is most pronounced. 164
The total T-cell count may be decreased; however, in a substantial number of patients it could be normal with no significant change in CD8 cells. 165,166,167 and 168 There
has been demonstration of a stage-dependent suppression of NK cells. 169 Antiidiotypic T-cell response has been demonstrated in the majority of the patients with
higher Id-specific T-cell frequency in MGUS and early-stage myeloma compared with advanced disease. 170 This has lead to a provocative hypothesis that in the early
stage of the disease immunologic response plays an important role in controlling proliferation of the malignant clone, and at some point the system is overwhelmed or
fails, leading to an overt or more aggressive form of the disease. This also provides a scientific basis to develop idiotype-specific T-cell response through vaccination
or in vitro production of idiotype or myeloma-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes for therapeutic purpose. 171

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Patients with multiple myeloma may be entirely asymptomatic and could be diagnosed on routine blood work or may present with a myriad of symptoms, including
hematologic manifestations, bone-related problems, infections, various organ dysfunctions, neurologic complaints, or bleeding tendencies ( Table 46.4-2). These signs
and symptoms result from direct tumor involvement in the bone marrow or location of various plasmacytomas in the body, the effect of the protein produced by the
tumor cells and deposited in various organs, production of cytokines by the tumor cells or by the bone marrow microenvironment, and the effect on the immune
system.

TABLE 46.4-2. Clinical Features of Multiple Myeloma

ANEMIA
A normochromic normocytic anemia is usually observed in myeloma patients and it may originate from tumor cell involvement in the marrow as well as inadequate
erythropoietin responsiveness. Anemia gives rise to fatigue, weakness, and occasionally shortness of breath. In addition to the decreased production of red cells due
to marrow infiltration, the effect of various cytokines on erythropoiesis and the effect of renal dysfunction on erythropoietin production may account for some of these
effects. High immunoglobulin levels aggravate the anemia due to dilutional effects. In the Durie-Salmon staging system, the level of anemia is considered as one of
the criteria to determine the tumor mass load.
RENAL FAILURE
Nephropathy is one of the serious adverse complications that can be observed at the time of clinical presentation. The etiology of renal failure can be multifactorial.
However, the most common cause is development of light chain tubular casts leading to interstitial nephritis (myeloma kidney). 172 Another common cause of renal
dysfunction is development of hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria leading to osmotic diuresis and volume depletion and prerenal azotemia. Other modes of kidney
involvement in myeloma are light chain deposition disease, which is more commonly associated with k light chain proteins with impaired glomerular filtration; and AL
amyloidosis, which is more frequently associated with l light chain, especially l light chain subtype VI, and may have an initial presentation as nephrotic range
proteinuria, and renal calcium deposition leading to interstitial nephritis. 173,174,175 and 176 The presence of l light chain in the urine is also more commonly associated with
myeloma kidney when compared with k light chain. Bence Jones proteins bind to a common peptide segment of Tom-Horsfall glycoprotein to promote heterotypic
aggregation.177,178 and 179 Tom-Horsfall protein deposition in the kidney and its measurement in the urine may be a sensitive measure to predict renal dysfunction. 180
Additional factors complicating the renal failure in myeloma patients includes use of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs for pain control, hyperuricemia, nephrotoxic
chemotherapeutic agents, intravenous contrast for radiographic studies, and calcium deposition and stones in the kidney. 181 The proteinuria observed in patients with
amyloidosis is more often nonspecific, which can help differentiate it from typical myeloma-related kidney problems in which patients have excessive light chain
excretion.182 A demonstration of the development of pathologic renal changes similar to human myeloma-related nephropathy in an IL-6 transgenic mice expressing
IL-6 under metallothionein-1 promoter indicates a relationship between constitutive high IL-6 expression in the liver inducing dysproteinemia and long acute-phase
response and renal changes. 183
HYPERCALCEMIA AND BONE DISEASE
The mechanism of bone abnormalities, especially destruction, in myeloma is an unbalanced process of increased osteoclast activity and suppressed osteoblast
activity. These changes are exerted by an increase in osteoclast-activating factors produced predominantly by the bone marrow microenvironment but additionally
contributed by the myeloma cells. 126,184 These factors include IL-1b, TNF-b (lymphotoxin), and IL-6. 124,125,387 Newly identified factors such as osteoprotegerin and its
ligand TRANCE and RANK ligand, which acts as a decoy receptor for TRANCE, have been implicated in the development of bone changes in myeloma. 185,186
TRANCE is a member of the TNF family and was originally discovered to be secreted by T cells to induce maturation of dendritic cells. TRANCE is also secreted by
stromal cells and osteoblasts and induces differentiation and maturation of osteoclast progenitors. Its production is elicited by factors such as parathyroid hormone,
parathyroid hormone–related protein, and osteoclast-activating factors. Radiographic findings of such destruction are shown in Figure 46.4-3.184,187 All of these
changes lead to the development of osteoporotic changes and subsequent development of lytic bone lesions. These bone changes frequently involve the vertebral
column, leading to compression fracture and lytic bone lesions that lead to pain-related complications in this disease. A new onset of back pain or other bone pain is a
frequent presenting symptom in myeloma patients. These changes in the cytokine milieu and bone destruction may also lead to development of hypercalcemia, which
is observed in approximately 25% of patients at some stage of the disease. It may reflect a high tumor burden and the presence of symptoms related to high calcium,
which include mental status changes, lethargy, constipation, and vomiting. High paraprotein levels, low albumin levels, or both, commonly observed in patients with
myeloma require measurement of ionized calcium rather than total calcium to reliably diagnose hypercalcemia. Hypercalcemia also contributes to renal failure and
should be considered an oncologic emergency requiring prompt intervention.

FIGURE 46.4-3. Biology of bone destruction in multiple myeloma (MM): 1. MM cells adhere to stroma. 2. Stromal cells secrete osteoclast-activating factors. 3.
Osteoclast-activating factors elicit stroma and osteoblasts to secrete TRANCE. 4a. TRANCE is blocked by osteoprotegerin (OPG); OPG levels are reduced in MM due
to syndecan trapping OPG. 4b. Excess TRANCE is available to stimulate osteoclast differentiation and maturation. 5. Increased osteoclastic activity leads to
increased cytokine release from the bone matrix. 6. These cytokines stimulate MM cell growth, which increases process 1. 7. These cytokines also cause release of
parathyroid hormone–related protein (PTHrP) from MM cells, which activates stromal cells to secrete additional TRANCE. FGF-1 and 2, fibroblast growth factor-1 and
2; IGF-1 and 2, insulin growth factor-1 and 2; IL, interleukin; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; TGF-b, transforming growth factor-b; TNF-b, tumor necrosis
factor-b. (Adapted from ref. 187.)

INFECTIONS
Myeloma patients are at risk for developing recurrent bacterial infections due to deficiencies in both humoral and cellular immunity. 163,188,189 and 190 Various factors
including high monoclonal immunoglobulin levels, soluble Fc receptor in serum, and transforming growth factor-b lead to suppression of B-cell function, which in turn
leads to depressed uninvolved immunoglobulins. 191,192 and 193 This impairment in patients' abilities to mount humoral responses predisposes patients to bacterial
infections that are ordinarily opsonized by specific antibodies against the bacterial antigens. Patients also have profound T-cell dysfunction originating from various
immunosuppressive cytokines such as transforming growth factor-b secreted by the microenvironment and fas ligand present on the membrane of the myeloma cells.
The therapy for myeloma, which frequently includes high-dose corticosteroids, also increases the infection-related risks in these patients.
NEUROLOGIC SYMPTOMS
The most common cause of neurologic abnormalities is related to a tumor mass effect, especially compression of the spinal cord or cranial or spinal nerves. This may
present as motor or, less frequently, sensory problems. Depositions of amyloids in the paraneural or vasa nervorum may lead to polyneuropathies. An interesting
group of symptoms described as POEMS syndrome (polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal gammopathy, and skin changes) is observed in
osteosclerotic myeloma with prominent sensory neuropathy. 194,195,196,197 and 198 The biologic and cellular basis of these manifestations is not yet well understood.
Leptomeningeal involvement in myeloma has been described, usually in the late phase of the disease and with manifestations involving the CNS. 199,200 Paraneoplastic
CNS syndromes have also been described, possibly related to an immune mechanism directed at proteins present in the CNS including the cerebellum. Additionally,
neurologic symptoms may occur as a consequence of hypercalcemia or hyperviscosity.
HYPERVISCOSITY
The M components in myeloma can lead to circulatory problems when the serum immunoglobulin levels exceed certain levels. Such effects require sufficient
concentration of an M protein; the incidence is highest in Waldenström's macroglobulinemia with IgM, followed by IgA myeloma, and is least common in IgG
myeloma.201,202 and 203 It can also be observed when the immunoglobulins have a self-aggregation property leading to increased viscosity. The syndrome is observed
usually when serum viscosity exceeds 4.0 centipoule (cp) units relative to normal serum and it usually manifests with circulatory problems involving the CNS, kidneys,
and pulmonary function and may also be associated with bleeding complications. Due to varying characteristics of idiotypes, the same level of increased viscosity may
produce different severity of symptoms in different patients. Its incidence in IgA myeloma is 25% of the patients, whereas in IgG myeloma it is observed in less than
10% of the patients. In IgG myeloma, the IgG3 subclass is more commonly associated with hyperviscosity. 204 As prompt plasmapheresis can alleviate the symptoms
and possibly other irreversible organ damage, a high level of suspicion for this syndrome is important in any patient with paraproteinemia and either mental changes
or pulmonary distress.
COAGULOPATHY
Myeloma patients may acquire coagulation abnormalities related to a high level of paraprotein interfering with the normal coagulation cascade or exhibit specific
antibody activity leading to a clinical syndrome similar to acquired deficiency of factor VIII. 205,206 and 207 Additional factors such as thrombosis in capillary circulation
associated with hyperviscosity and anoxia may lead to coagulation-related complications in 15% of patients with IgG myeloma and in more than 33% of the patients
with IgA myeloma. Although platelet counts are not suppressed in the early stages of myeloma, functional abnormalities of platelets have been described and may
contribute to bleeding-related problems.
Patients may also present in a hypercoagulable state related to acquired deficiencies in protein C, protein S, or lupus anticoagulates, leading to thromboembolic
complications.208
The fab fragment of the antibody of the myeloma protein binds to fibrin and may prevent its aggregation. This may represent one of the common mechanisms of
coagulopathy in myeloma. 209 Additionally, factor X deficiency is reported in patients with systemic AL amyloidosis. 210 However, an inhibitor has not been demonstrated
in vitro to account for this manifestation.
EXTRAMEDULLARY DISEASE
Extramedullary disease manifestations are uncommon in patients with myeloma at presentation. However, with more aggressive therapy and improved survival an
increasing frequency of such manifestations has been observed. Solitary or multiple extramedullary plasmacytomas have been described in the liver, spleen, lymph
nodes, kidneys, subcutaneous tissues, and brain parenchyma. Such extramedullary involvement may be suspected in patients who have more aggressive features of
myeloma including high lactate dehydrogenase levels, immunoblastic morphology, high tumor cell labeling index, and complex karyotypic features. 211

DIAGNOSIS
As myeloma patients present with a variety of symptoms not specific to the disease, the diagnosis of myeloma is quite often delayed. An older patient with a new
onset of unexplained back pain or bone pain, recurrent infection, anemia, or renal insufficiency should be screened for myeloma. Additional finding such as
hyperproteinemia or proteinuria, anemia, hypoalbuminemia, low immunoglobulin levels, or marked elevation of erythrocyte sedimentation rate should prompt a further
complete evaluation for diagnosis of plasma cell myeloma.
The initial evaluation includes a hemogram, complete skeletal radiographic survey, serum and urine protein electrophoresis and immunofixation, quantitative
immunoglobulin levels, urinary protein excretion in 24 hours, and bone marrow aspiration and biopsy ( Table 46.4-3). The diagnostic criteria for MGUS, smoldering
and indolent myeloma, and multiple myeloma are shown in Table 46.4-4.

TABLE 46.4-3. Patient Evaluation in Multiple Myeloma

TABLE 46.4-4. Diagnostic Criteria for Multiple Myeloma, Myeloma Variants, and Monoclonal Gammopathy of Unknown Significance

STAGING AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Following preliminary investigation, more detailed cellular and molecular studies are required to stage myeloma and evaluate other prognostic variables that
determine the patient's probable outcome.
PROTEIN ELECTROPHORESIS
Among patients with myeloma, 70% have IgG, whereas 20% have IgA subtype with an additional 5% to 10% having production of monoclonal light chains only. A
small proportion, less than 1%, of patients produce monoclonal IgD, IgE, IgM or have nonsecretory myelomas. Suppression of uninvolved immunoglobulins (e.g., IgM
and IgA in IgG myeloma) is present in the majority of the patients at diagnosis. Suppression of all of the three major classes of immunoglobulin should raise the
possibility that the patient may have light chain only disease or a nonsecretory disease. When multiple immunoglobulin class suppression is associated with small M
peak on serum protein electrophoresis, a less common variety of myeloma involving IgD or IgE may be suspected. Patients producing intact immunoglobulin can also
have excess light chain production with excretion in the urine ( Fig. 46.4-4). The distribution of k and l light chains in the majority of myeloma cases is similar except in
IgD myeloma in which l light chain is more common. Currently, there is no difference in therapeutic approach between the different types of myeloma; however,
patients with IgA myeloma, despite a higher initial response rate, have poorer survival outcomes.

FIGURE 46.4-4. Serum (SPE) and urine protein electrophoresis ( left) showing abnormal monoclonal protein bands ( arrows). Quantitation of the M protein is performed
by nephelometric measurement of the band. Identification of serum and urine M component by immunofixation electrophoresis (IFE) ( right). The labels indicate the
specificity of the antiserum used in developing the immunofixation pattern. The top is immunoglobulin (IgG) A-g in serum and bottom is free g light chain in urine.

Myeloma plasma cells usually produce a single, abnormal, unique, monoclonal antibody with a constant isotype and light chain restriction. Rare occurrences of
biclonal and triclonal cases have been reported at the time of diagnosis. 212 Occurrence of isotype switch and appearance of abnormal protein bands have, however,
been reported in myeloma patients after therapy, especially high-dose therapy. 213 This appears to be related to recovery of normal immunoglobulin production rather
than alteration in disease biology. This change is also associated with improved survival. Occasionally, patients with initially intact immunoglobulin production relapse
with only Bence Jones proteinuria (light chain escape), nonsecretory disease, or high lactate dehydrogenase disease, and this change has been correlated with more
aggressive disease. 214
Further analysis of a unique variable region in the myeloma-related idiotype (e.g., CDRIII) provides information on the monoclonal nature of the protein and also
provides a tool to investigate minimal residual disease by polymerase chain reaction using allele-specific oligonucleotide, thus allowing determination of molecular
complete remissions.215
BONE MARROW EXAMINATION
Various degrees of bone marrow infiltration are observed in myeloma, with the majority of the patients having an excess number of plasma cells (more than 5%). The
pattern of bone marrow involvement (diffuse vs. nodular) is important, as patients with nodular disease seem to have poorer outcomes (in contrast to CLL). 216 The
morphology of the plasma cell seems to be an important factor determining severity of the disease. This is based on histologic examination (Bartl grade) in which
grade I suggests a slow-growing disease, whereas grade III represents plasmablastic disease with an aggressive course. 217 There is also an increased incidence of
cytogenetic abnormalities in patients with Bartl grade III when compared with grade I. As plasma cells contain cytoplasmic immunoglobulins with a constant heavy and
light chain, its frequency can be evaluated by flow cytometric analysis using immunohistochemical staining of the plasma cells. 218 When coupled with DNA staining
using propidium iodide, two-parameter analysis can detect changes in DNA content in the myeloma cells ( Fig. 46.4-5). DNA aneuploidy is observed in the bone
marrow of more than 80% of patients, suggesting the existence of chromosomal abnormalities in the majority of patients. 218,219 and 220 This also provides an objective
marker for evaluation of therapy and to distinguish reactive from clonal plasmacytosis, especially in nonsecretory disease. A hypodiploid tumor cell has also been

associated with refractoriness to standard-dose therapy.

FIGURE 46.4-5. A: Bone marrow plasma cells in a patient with immunoglobulin G myeloma showing neoplastic plasma cells at various stages of differentiation. B:
Two-parameter flow cytometry of DNA content of bone marrow cells; abscissa (propidium iodide), and cytoplasmic immunoglobulin (ordinate, anti-k or g FiTC). At
diagnosis approximately 45% hyperdiploid tumor cells with k light chain restriction are seen ( left panel); at the time of maximal response no hyperdiploid light chain
restricted cells are seen (middle panel); at the time of early relapse reappearance of small hyperdiploid and k light chain–restricted population (<1%) is indicative of
reemergence of a small number of clonal cells that may not yet be apparent on cytologic examination of the bone marrow ( right panel).

CYTOGENETICS
As the myeloma cell represents a mature differentiated cell with low proliferative activity, cytogenetic abnormalities are not frequently found. Abnormalities are
detected in only one-third of the patients at the time of diagnosis; however, repeated analysis improves the yield to almost one-half of the patients. The normal
karyotypic pattern observed in the remaining half most likely originates from dividing normal hematopoietic cells. 75
As described previously, a complex karyotypic pattern is frequently observed and its distribution is shown in Figure 46.4-2. Although a predominant constant
cytogenetic abnormality has not been identified, certain recurrent changes have been noticed. These include the common B-cell tumor-related changes in the 14q32
region involving the IGH region, chromosome 1q, and chromosome 13–related changes. 221,222 and 223 A longitudinal analysis in patients undergoing high-dose
chemotherapy has shown clinical evolution including changes involving chromosome 5 and 7, commonly associated with myelodysplastic syndrome. 224 Acquisition of
such changes in the myeloma karyotype appears to portend poor prognosis. Detection of chromosome 13 deletion abnormalities at diagnosis as well as after
high-dose chemotherapy has now been reported to carry a poor prognosis. The application of FISH technology has improved our ability to detect genetic changes by
using interphase cells. The Rb-1 probe detects an abnormality on the 13q14 region, and its deletion has been reported in 40% of patients by interphase FISH, also
suggesting a prognostically poor-risk group of patients treated by standard-dose therapy. 225 Interphase FISH analysis for numeric chromosomal aberrations has
identified chromosomes 6, 9, and 17 as also carrying favorable outcomes.79 Plasma cell leukemia has been reported to frequently contain a t(11:14); however, this
translocation has also been detected in patients with MGUS without any prognostic relevance. 226
LABELING INDEX
The proportion of myeloma cells in the cell cycle is small early in the disease. A study of cycling myeloma cells with bromodeoxyuridine or tritiated thymidine methods
shows a median of 1% cycling cells at diagnosis. The labeling index has important prognostic significance as patients with more than 1% cells in S phase in bone
marrow have worse outcomes.218,227,228,229 and 230
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
The radiographic survey of the bone is a standard diagnostic workup, which shows osteopenia in an early phase of the disease and, with increasing tumor burden,
lytic punched out lesions (Fig. 46.4-6). Osteosclerotic lesions are observed in POEMS syndrome. 194,195,196 and 197 Due to the predominant osteolytic activity with
osteoblastic inactivity, bone scans are seldom positive unless a recent fracture has occurred and not useful in the diagnosis of multiple myeloma. 231

FIGURE 46.4-6. Typical skeletal changes on roentgenogram. A: Example of punched-out lytic lesions in skull. B: Small lytic lesions in the left femur. C: Large lytic
lesion in sacrum ( arrows). D: Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the vertebral lesion. (Courtesy of Hemendra Shah.)

As demineralization of bone (osteoporosis) is one of the common manifestations of myeloma, measurement of bone mineral density (BMD) by dual-energy x-ray
absorptiometry is an important evaluation at diagnosis. 232 In a study of 66 patients at diagnosis, majority of the patients had decreased BMD: lumbar mean BMD value
(Z score) –1.24 ± 1.45. Following standard-dose therapy, lumbar BMD increased 0.7%, while in a group treated with high-dose therapy the improvement was 4.6% ( P
= .02).233 Similar improvements in BMD have also been noted in patients undergoing high-dose therapy with addition of bisphosphonates 234 and show differential
effects of pamidronate on cortical and cancellous bones in patients with myeloma undergoing autotransplants. 233,234
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of bone marrow provides a better assessment of tumor burden and is essential in the workup of a patient with solitary
plasmacytomas of bone.235 More than 95% of myeloma patients have MRI abnormalities: one-third have diffuse involvement of the bone marrow, one-third have focal
lesions, while the other one-third have heterogenous marrow with both focal and diffused involvement. As myeloma is well recognized as a macrofocal disease,
random bone marrow sampling may not be entirely diagnostic or predictive of disease status. MRI short tau inversion recovery images (STIR) provide a better
assessment of tumor load in myeloma.236,237,238 and 239 A focal marrow plasmacytoma can be further analyzed through computed tomographically (CT)-guided
fine-needle aspiration allowing cytologic diagnosis, which can be combined with further risk assessment through evaluation of cytogenetic and FISH analysis as well
as labeling index. As therapies become more effective, the MRI pattern may change as seen in Figure 46.4-7A, Figure 46.4-7B, and Figure 46.4-7C; a diffuse
involvement of the marrow may unravel into a focal disease. Normalization of MRI abnormalities may provide a better definition of complete responses as the therapy
for this disease with autologous or allogenic transplantations aims toward cure. Positron emission tomography scanning has been evaluated in a small number of
studies and may provide a better functional definition of the lesions observed on MRI or CT and allow selection of lesions for biopsy. 240

FIGURE 46.4-7. A: Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) pattern in multiple myeloma at diagnosis. T1-weighted and short tau inversion recovery (STIR) imaging shows
approximately one-third of patients each presenting with heterogeneous pattern (A), focal plasmacytoma lesions (B), or diffuse homogeneous hyperintense marrow
pattern (C). Hyperintensity of marrow on short inversion time inversion recovery image is suggestive of uniform marrow involvement by myeloma. Few patients have a
hypointense and homogenous pattern also seen in normal individuals (D). B: The hyperintense marrow pattern (arrows) suggestive of extensive marrow involvement
pretherapy (left) changes to hypointense pattern following complete response and normalization of marrow (right). C: MRI is useful in differentiating myelomatous
involvement from amyloidosis or infection. The active plasmacytoma appears as bright on a STIR image (A, arrow), whereas amyloidosis appears as a dark lesion (B,
thick arrow). A bright shadow above the amyloid (thin arrow) is suggestive of associated small plasmacytoma. Fine-needle aspiration examination in 72 patients with
MRI focal disease showed tumor in 92%, indicating that MRI focal lesions in myeloma represent tumor. (Courtesy of Ramesh Avva.)

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
In the presence of lytic bone lesions and greater than 30% marrow plasmacytosis, the myeloma diagnosis can be readily established. However, in the absence of lytic
bone lesions or diffused osteoporosis, other criteria have to be fulfilled to differentiate overt myeloma from MGUS. 39 These include anemia, high levels of monoclonal
protein in serum and urine, and marrow plasmacytosis as described in Table 46.4-4.241,242 Distinguishing smoldering myeloma and monoclonal gammopathy may be
difficult as this distinction is essentially based on levels of serum monoclonal proteins and marrow plasmacytosis. 243 The differentiating features are shown in Table
46.4-5, and in the majority of the patients with monoclonal gammopathy, anemia, bone lesions, or MRI abnormalities are absent. Conventional cytogenetic results are
usually negative in MGUS; however, monoclonal plasma cells in some cases with MGUS may be aneuploid. Patients with nonsecretory myeloma are diagnosed
based on marrow plasmacytosis and bone lesion. MRI abnormalities and CT- or MRI-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy are important for follow-up of the disease.

TABLE 46.4-5. Major Diagnostic Criteria among Monoclonal Gammopathy of Unknown Significance, Smoldering Multiple Myeloma, and Multiple Myeloma

Diagnosis of solitary plasmacytoma of bone or soft tissue requires intense investigation to rule out systemic disease. Bone marrow examination in a true solitary
lesion is negative with no clonal cell population on DNA cIg examination. MRI evaluation for myelomatous involvement of the bone marrow helps detect early lesions
before their detection by standard roentgenographic examination. Detection of such lesions and cytologic confirmation through CT- or MRI-guided fine-needle
aspiration biopsy may help confirm solitary plasmacytoma and its genetic makeup. In case of MGUS, such detection may change the diagnosis to solitary or multiple
myeloma. It is important to note that patients with MGUS or solitary plasmacytoma seldom have suppression of uninvolved immunoglobulins.
Besides plasma cell neoplasms, various other conditions can present with monoclonal immunoglobulin secretion. These conditions include other B-cell neoplasms
such as CLL and B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma; autoimmune conditions such as cold agglutinin diseases, mixed cryoglobulinemia, hypergammaglobulinemia, and
Sjögren's syndrome; inflammatory or storage diseases such as lichen myxedematous, Gaucher's disease, sarcoidosis, and cirrhosis; and rarely other malignancies
such as chronic myelogenous leukemia, and colon, breast, or prostate cancer.
Protein deposition disease involving various organs requires additional special diagnostic procedures. Deposition of amyloid protein (amyloidosis) can be clinically
suspected based on macroglossia, vascular fragility ( raccoon's eyes, periorbital subcutaneous hemorrhages), carpal tunnel syndrome, organomegaly, nephropathy,
and cardiomegaly with arrhythmia. Detection of Congo red–positive amyloid in perivascular area and in subcutaneous fat, bone marrow, or rectal biopsy and classic
apple-green birefringence when visualized under polarized light are diagnostic of AL amyloid. Electrocardiography may reveal a low voltage, and echocardiographic
evaluation shows thickening of the interventricular septum or classic spackled pattern in the myocardium. Endomyocardial biopsy may establish the diagnosis of
cardiac amyloid. Another manifestation of amyloid deposition includes autonomic dysfunction due to amyloid deposition in the vasa nervorum of the autonomic
nerves, leading to orthostatic hypotension. Deposition in adrenal glands leads to hypoadrenalism. Amyloid deposition in spleen may lead to hyposplenism with
observation of thrombocytosis. Deposition in liver may be suspected based on elevated alkaline phosphatase and g-glutamyl transpeptidase, and deposition in
gastrointestinal tract leads to malabsorption syndrome. Renal dysfunction needs to be further investigated with a renal biopsy, as diagnosis of light chain cast
nephropathy or light chain deposition disease may be reversible following aggressive therapy while deposition of amyloid would require a different therapeutic
approach. As deposition of immunoglobulin and light chain can mimic many manifestations of AL amyloid, immunofluorescence analysis of unfixed tissue is important
for diagnosis.

PROGNOSTIC VARIABLES
Patients with multiple myeloma have variable disease courses with survival ranging from less than 1 year with aggressive disease to more than 10 years with indolent
presentation of sensitive disease. Various characteristics have been identified to predict the possible course of the disease. Evaluation of prognostic factors is
important to define therapeutic strategies, permit comparison of clinical trial results, and predict life expectancy after diagnosis. As shown in Table 46.4-6, prognostic
factors are related to tumor burden, intrinsic property of the tumor, host and microenvironmental influences, and treatment intervention–related factors.

TABLE 46.4-6. Prognostic Variables

Studies measuring in vitro immunoglobulin production by patients' myeloma cells have lead to the development of clinically applicable methods to estimate tumor
mass. A clinical staging system developed by Durie and Salmon for multiple myeloma using standard laboratory measurements has been applied to predict clinical
outcomes after standard-dose chemotherapy. 244,245 As shown in Table 46.4-7, this system uses monoclonal protein or immunoglobulin levels in serum, light chain
excretion in a 24-hour urine sample, presence of hypercalcemia, anemia, extent of bone lesions, and presence or absence of renal failure. In a study by National
Cancer Institute Canada, overall survival with standard-dose therapy in patients with low-disease burden (stage I) was 49 months and with high-tumor burden (stage
III) was 25 months. Including the renal failure in the staging system, patients with stage IIIa disease had a median survival of 30 months and stage IIIb disease, 15
months.246 The accuracy and predictive value of the Durie-Salmon system is less pronounced in patients undergoing high-dose chemotherapy. 247 The high-dose
chemotherapy is probably able to treat the disease burden more successfully, with the patient's outcome depending more on tumor biology factors. As the
Durie-Salmon system considers tumor burden variables and depends on subjective interpretation of lytic bone lesions, additional other variables have been
investigated to better assess patients' risk.

TABLE 46.4-7. Myeloma Staging System

b2-microglobulin (b2m) has been identified as one of the most important predictors of survival in plasma cell myeloma. b 2m is the light chain gene of the class I
histocompatibility antigens expressed on the surface of all nucleated cells and shed into the blood. Its renal excretion explains its elevation in renal failure. In multiple
myeloma it reflects both tumor burden and renal function. 248,249 High b2m (greater than 2.5 mg/L) levels carry a poor prognosis with both standard-dose and high-dose
therapy. 247 Other independent factors associated with poor prognosis include elevated CRP and less consistently serum IL-6 activity and sIL-6R and IgA isotype. 250
Because CRP levels reflect IL-6 activity and elevated levels can be associated with various acute-phase reactions including inflammation and infections, its predictive
value is important only when other possible causes of elevated CRP are ruled out.
The bone marrow plasmacytosis reflects tumor burden and has been considered in prognosticating survival. Peripheral blood monoclonal plasma cell has also been
reported as a predictor of survival in myeloma. In a study of 254 patients, blood monoclonal plasma cell count was greater than or equal to 4% in 57% of patients, with
median survival of 2.4 years compared with 4.4 years in patients with a count less than 4. 251
Among the various other disease biology variables, Bartl grading of tumor cells correlates with survival even in patients undergoing high-dose chemotherapy. Flow
cytometry of DNA and cytoplasmic immunoglobulin (DNA-cIg) can identify hypodiploid tumor cells, associated with resistance to standard-dose chemotherapy, which
can be overcome by high-dose chemotherapy.252 The plasma cell proliferation rate as measured by the labeling index is a valuable prognostic factor, with an index of
greater than 2% predicting inferior survival. One study combining b 2m and labeling index identified a low-risk group with both parameters low, intermediate-risk group
with one parameter high, and high-risk group with both parameters high, with median survival of 71 months, 40 months, and 15 months, respectively. 230
Cytogenetic analysis has now been identified as a major prognosticator in plasma cell myeloma. Abnormalities involving chromosome 13 carry a poor prognosis with
short survival as well as inferior response to high-dose chemotherapy. Additional tumor-related factors associated with inferior survival include increased soluble IL-6
receptor level, elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase level usually associated with extramedullary disease, and increased mitotic activity (greater than one per high
power field).
Among the microenvironment-related factors, bone marrow microvessel density has been identified as an important prognosticator. High microvessel density in the
bone marrow (greater than or equal to four per high power field) at the diagnosis confers shorter event-free (2.7 vs. 4.3 years; P = .03) and overall survival (7.9+ vs.
4.3 years; P = .006) after high-dose chemotherapy. 138 This may be reflective of increased VEGF expression by myeloma cells or other microenvironmental factors. 139
An increased level of serum syndecan-1 has been described as carrying poor prognosis. Soluble CD16 levels have been correlated with disease activity, with
significantly reduced levels of soluble CD16 found in sera from patients with multiple myeloma as compared with MGUS patients and normal controls; a
stage-dependent decrease in soluble CD16 was observed in myeloma. 253
Among therapy- and intervention-related prognostic factors, more than 12 months of prior standard-dose therapy affects survival most significantly in patients
undergoing high-dose chemotherapy. Additionally, the tandem transplant and the time between the two transplants are also significantly correlated with superior
event-free and overall survival. 247 Age over 65 years has been reported to be associated with inferior survival using standard-dose therapy; however, with high-dose
therapy, age does not appear to predict poor survival. 254
As high-dose therapy is able to overcome the problems related to increased disease burden as well as to some other biologic features associated with drug
resistance, some traditional prognostic factors are no longer predictive of survival after high-dose chemotherapy. With this background, in a study of 1000 patients
receiving high-dose chemotherapy with melphalan, 200 mg/m 2, the three most significant adverse variables associated with a shorter survival were the presence of
chromosome 13 abnormality, b2m greater than 2.5 mg/L at the time of transplant, and more than 12 months of preceding conventional-dose therapy. When patients
are divided into groups with none of the previously mentioned risk factors, presence of one of the risk factors, or presence of both the risk factors, inferior prognosis is
associated with an increase in the number of risk factors. As shown in Figure 46.4-8, even among these three groups presence of chromosome 13 abnormality
predicts inferior survival, confirming its overriding influence. Additional molecular studies with FISH analysis as well as expression of various proteins such as
BCL-family proteins, p53, and activation of STAT and NF-kB pathways in the future may provide new insight into the understanding of predicative factors important for
prognostication.

FIGURE 46.4-8. Multivariate analysis of 972 patients undergoing at least one high-dose melphalan with autologous peripheral blood stem cell rescue showed
chromosome 13 abnormality, b2-microglobulin (b2m) >4.0 mg/L, and C-reactive protein >3 mg/L to be the most significant predictors of poor outcome, followed by >12
months of prior therapy. Patients were divided into three groups based on their b 2m and C-reactive protein values; those with both values normal (risk 0), those with
one of the two values abnormal (risk 1), and those with both the values abnormal (risk 2). These patients were evaluated for event-free (EFS) ( left) and overall
survival (OS) (right) and divided into those with (top) or without (bottom) chromosome 13 abnormality. As seen in the figure, patient groups divided based on b 2m and
C-reactive protein show significantly superior EFS and OS as the number of risk factors increases (risk 0 to 2). However, within each group the presence of
chromosome 13 abnormality (upper panel compared with lower panel) predicts significantly inferior EFS and OS, suggesting adverse effect of chromosome 13
abnormality irrespective of other risk factors.

TREATMENT
The diagnosis of a monoclonal protein does not always require immediate treatment of the patient. Although multiple myeloma is generally a disseminated disease,
patients can present with solitary plasmacytomas that can be treated with local therapy or they may present with indolent asymptomatic myeloma, which can smolder
for a long period of time before becoming symptomatic and requiring treatment.
SOLITARY PLASMACYTOMA
Solitary plasmacytoma requires specialized techniques for more accurate staging including a CT scan and MRI to exclude more disseminated disease. Solitary
plasmacytomas of the bone involve vertebral bodies in one-third of the patients and frequently affect men (70%) at a younger age (median, 56 years). 255 A measurable
monoclonal protein in the serum is observed in 24% to 54% of the patients and in a large proportion, no detectable monoclonal protein is observed, even on
immunofixation. Extramedullary plasmacytomas are diagnosed less frequently and require a complete workup including MRI and positron emission tomography
scanning to rule out any additional site or disseminated disease. The optimal therapy for true solitary plasmacytoma is curative-dose radiotherapy with 4000 to 5000
cGy.256,257 and 258 With such a dose, the local tumor recurrence rate has been less than 10%, and 30% of patients with solitary bone lesions compared with more than
70% of patients with solitary extramedullary plasmacytomas have a long disease-free survival. 259,260 The monoclonal protein disappears after radiotherapy in 25% to
50% of the patients, suggesting possible eradication of all detectable disease. Reappearance of monoclonal protein predicts recurrence of disease. It can be
anticipated that with better staging with MRI true solitary plasmacytoma of the bone can be cured in a high proportion of patients. 261
INDOLENT MYELOMA
Myeloma patients with a low tumor mass and slowly progressive disease may present without specific symptoms. These patients generally have less than 20% bone
marrow plasmacytosis and low monoclonal protein levels as shown in Table 46.4-5.243,262 They have no lytic bone lesions, no hypercalcemia or renal disease, and
hemoglobin greater than 10 g/dL. In patients with indolent light chain disease, Bence Jones proteinuria does not exceed more than 10 g/d. These patients do not
present with cytogenetic abnormalities using conventional karyotyping and do have a low labeling index and low b 2m. Features predictive of early progression to
symptomatic myeloma include lytic bone lesions, high serum myeloma protein levels (greater than 3 g/dL IgG or greater than 2 g/dL IgA), and focal MRI
abnormalities. 263 Median time to progression is 26 months for all patients, 10 months in patients with bone lesions and high monoclonal protein, and 61 months for
those without any of these features. Such indolent myeloma patients are typically not treated with chemotherapy until disease progression, onset of symptoms, or
development of new lytic bone lesions. However, pamidronate has been used as soil-directed treatment to delay the onset of bone-related complications. Additionally,
cytogenetic analysis of bone lesions through CT-guided biopsy provides important prognostic information that may dictate the need for early chemotherapeutic
intervention.
SYMPTOMATIC MULTIPLE MYELOMA
Standard-Dose Therapy
Since the observation of induction of remission defined as greater than or equal to 50% decrease in paraprotein levels with melphalan in one-third of the myeloma
patients studied, various standard-dose chemotherapeutic combinations have been evaluated. Oral melphalan and prednisone was the first successful combination
chemotherapy for myeloma and in subsequent years various other single agents and combinations have been investigated and reported to have significant
antimyeloma activity.
MELPHALAN AND PREDNISONE. Treatment with oral melphalan and prednisone was introduced 30 years ago and has remained the standard of therapy, providing

symptomatic relief as well as tumor mass reduction. 264 A partial response as defined by greater than 50% reduction in monoclonal protein has been observed in 50%
to 60% of the patients and between 3% and 5% of patients achieve a complete response. The absorption of oral melphalan is unpredictable, requiring its ingestion on
empty stomach and increase in dose if the patient does not develop cytopenia. 265 With availability of the intravenous formulation, dose and pharmacokinetics are now
predictable. In patients receiving melphalan and prednisone, a prompt response was associated with a poor survival, reflecting possibly a highly proliferative tumor.
The median response duration was 18 months and overall survival was 24 to 36 months. One of the frequent complications of melphalan and prednisone therapy was
the development of cytopenia and eventually myelodysplastic changes in the marrow. With successful treatment with high-dose therapy, melphalan and prednisone
are not being used as induction therapy because the ability to mobilize adequate numbers of stem cells decreases with prolonged use of this combination; the
incidence of treatment-related myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia increases and partial resistance even to high-dose chemotherapy develops.
OTHER ALKYLATING AGENT-BASED COMBINATIONS. Various chemotherapeutic combinations have been investigated in myeloma, including vincristine (V),

cyclophosphamide (C), carmustine (BCNU; B), melphalan (M), doxorubicin (Adriamycin; A), and prednisone (P). Commonly used combinations include VBMCP or
VMCP/VBAP.266,267,268,269,270,271,272,273,274,275,276,277 and 278 These combinations in randomized studies achieved similar response rates and event-free and overall survival
when compared with melphalan and prednisone. Results from large studies evaluating standard-dose chemotherapy regimens are listed in Table 46.4-8 and Table
46.4-9. In the majority of the studies, there was no benefit of any of these combinations over melphalan and prednisone, and the toxicity problems, including bone
marrow stem cell damage, remained the same. A metaanalysis of 18 published studies with 3814 patients randomized to receive melphalan and prednisone or various
other chemotherapeutic combinations showed that melphalan and prednisone and other chemotherapeutic combinations are equivalent.

TABLE 46.4-8. Results of Large Trials for Remission Induction with Combination Chemotherapy Regimens Showing a Statistically Significant Improvement in Survival

TABLE 46.4-9. Results of Large Trials for Remission Induction with Multiagent Chemotherapy Compared with Simple Alkylating Agent Therapy That Failed to Show a
Survival Advantage

VINCRISTINE , ADRIAMYCIN, AND DEXAMETHASONE AND HIGH-DOSE DEXAMETHASONE. The role of high-dose corticosteroids was initially investigated in the late 1960s

with an observation of therapeutic benefit in small numbers of patients. Glucocorticoids down-regulate IL-6 production and induce apoptosis in vitro. The molecular
mechanism of corticosteroid-induced apoptosis in myeloma involves a decrease in NF-kB activity through IkB activation. Interestingly, myeloma cells can be rescued
from glucocorticoid-mediated killing by addition of IL-6 to in vitro cultures or by coculturing them with stromal cells, which are a source of IL-6 in vivo. High-dose
dexamethasone was evaluated in combination with vincristine and Adriamycin. The dosages of these agents (VAD) were vincristine at 0.25 mg/m 2 and Adriamycin at 9
mg/m2 given by continuous infusion over 24 hours for 4 days, along with dexamethasone, 40 mg orally on days 1 to 4, 9 to 12, and 17 to 20, with the cycle repeated
every 5 weeks.279,280 More than 50% of refractory myeloma patients showed rapid and marked response, defined as greater than 75% cytoreduction, with better
efficacy in patients responsive to prior therapy. Response with VAD was much faster, with the median tumor halving time of 21 days compared with greater than 6
weeks for other combination therapies. The advantages of this combination include quick response, effectiveness in hypercalcemia, quick relief of bone pain,
applicability in patients with renal failure, and no cumulative bone marrow stem cell damage, allowing subsequent successful mobilization of stem cells. Studies using
high-dose dexamethasone alone given in doses similar to the VAD regimen have shown response rates almost similar to those observed with VAD in primary resistant
myeloma but higher in relapsing disease, indicating that dexamethasone is clearly an important agent in VAD. In a study evaluating glucocorticosteroid dose intensity,
chemotherapy regimens with higher glucocorticosteroid dose intensity yielded higher response rates and improved survival ( P = .02). 281 VAD is associated with
minimal bone marrow toxicity, and continuous infusion of Adriamycin prevents cardiac toxicity. Randomized comparisons between VAD and other chemotherapeutic
combinations have failed to show any survival benefit for VAD; however, lack of stem cell damage provides an advantage in using VAD for initial cytoreduction before
stem cell mobilization and transplant. Addition of cyclophosphamide to VAD (CVAD) has been shown to achieve responses in up to 40% of VAD-refractory patients.
INTERFERON. The role and efficacy of interferon in the management of myeloma remains controversial. It has been shown to have up to a 20% response rate in

relapsed myeloma patients. Its mode of action remains multifactorial; direct growth inhibitory action as well as its antiangiogenic and immunomodulatory activity may
contribute to its overall action. However, in combination with other chemotherapeutic regimens, it has failed to demonstrate beneficial effect. 282 In a metaanalysis of 16
trials involving 2286 patients, response rate was 45.9% in the chemotherapy alone group versus 54.4% for the chemotherapy with interferon group. 283 The difference
in overall survival was 5 months. Its role in maintenance therapy after standard-dose therapy has generally been more positive, with demonstration in some of the
studies of significant prolongation of survival for groups receiving interferon-a. 282,284 However, other studies have failed to show benefit. A metaanalysis of eight trials
involving 929 patients randomized to interferon versus no treatment showed prolongation of relapse-free survival by 7 months and overall survival by 5 months.
However, in younger patients and those with lower tumor burden interferon was more effective. 283 Its role, if any, after high-dose therapy is entirely unclear. 285 It is
associated with flu-like symptoms, weight loss, impotence, depression, mental status changes, and cytopenia, and its prolonged use has been associated with
inability to mobilize stem cells.
Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy was considered the mainstay of the treatment for myeloma before availability of chemotherapeutic options. However, with more effective
chemotherapy, especially high-dose chemotherapy, the role of radiation has now been limited. 286 A definitive role remains in patients with solitary bone and
extramedullary plasmacytoma. In this setting, it provides excellent local control, and in a subset of patients it provides long-term disease-free survival when a solitary
lesion is confirmed through extensive radiographic workup. Patients with solitary bone plasmacytoma following definitive radiation therapy (4000 to 5000 cGy) have
progression-free survival of 30% compared with extramedullary plasmacytoma in which progression-free survival is around 70%. 256,257,258,259 and 260 The indication for
radiation therapy in multiple myeloma remains palliative in cases of impending pathologic fracture and spinal cord compression. In patients with bone pains or
symptomatic soft tissue masses, radiation is only considered when patients have failed chemotherapeutic options. 287,288 Radiation to the extensive marrow-containing
area, such as the pelvic bone, should be considered carefully in light of the need for collection of stem cells. The dose for palliative radiation therapy has been
substantially lower, in the range of 1500 to 2500 cGy. Studies to date have failed to show any benefit of hemibody radiation in multiple myeloma. However, total body
radiation has been used in relation with allogeneic transplantation as well as autologous transplantation. More recent studies have demonstrated that total body
irradiation does not provide additional cytoreductive potential and it actually increases treatment-related morbidity and mortality and delays immune recovery following
high-dose therapy possibly affecting disease control. Total body irradiation as part of conditioning for allogeneic transplantation is especially important in the optimal
regimen for achieving engraftment; however, its role in cytoreduction in this setting also remains questionable. Newer studies are evaluating low-dose radiation
therapy with or without chemotherapy in nonmyeloablative conditioning regimens that may be associated with lower morbidity and still achieve tumor control through
graft versus myeloma effect.
High-Dose Therapy with Peripheral Blood Stem Cell Support
The low incidence of complete response with standard induction chemotherapy, even in newly diagnosed patients, suggests a marked drug resistance that is possibly
acquired during a prolonged subclinical course of the disease evidenced by the presence of complex karyotypic aberrations and multiple molecular changes. This
observation led to a pilot study by the late Tim McElwain and his colleagues at the Royal Marsden Hospital where they evaluated role of melphalan dose escalation
(140 mg/m2). They reported complete remissions in refractory patients. 21 However, treatment-related mortality was high due to bone marrow toxicity. Bone marrow
support in the subsequent studies improved the treatment-related mortality 22 and further dose escalation of melphalan to 200 mg/m 2 and by added total body
irradiation provided further improvement in response. 289,290
HIGH-DOSE THERAPY WITH AUTOLOGOUS HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL SUPPORT IN NEWLY DIAGNOSED PATIENTS. Initial demonstration of activity of high-dose melphalan

therapy has lead to series of evaluations by various institutions of this treatment with stem cell support to avoid prolonged cytopenia ( Table 46.4-10). A large

single-institution study from the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences evaluated intensive remission induction with three non–cross-resistant regimens [VAD,
high-dose cyclophosphamide, and etoposide, dexamethasone, Ara-C, and cis-platinum (EDAP)] followed by two cycles of myeloablative therapy with melphalan, 200
mg/m2, with hematopoietic stem cell support. A total of 231 newly diagnosed multiple myeloma patients aged 70 years or younger were treated on this protocol. The
partial remission and complete remission rates after induction therapy were 69% and 14%; after the first high-dose melphalan dose they were 82% and 30%, and after
the second transplant, 95% and 48%, respectively. On an intent-to-treat-basis, the true complete remission rate was 37%. With a median follow-up of 37 months,
event-free and overall survival were 43 and 62 months, respectively. Treatment-related mortality in the first 12 months on the study was 4%. The median duration of
neutropenia less than 500/mL and platelets less than 50,000/mL was 6 and 7 days, respectively. 247

TABLE 46.4-10. Results of High-Dose and Autologous Transplant in Myeloma

The superiority of high-dose chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow support was confirmed in a randomized trial conducted by Intergroupe Français du Myelome
study. The reported response rate (greater than or equal to 50% reduction in myeloma protein) in 100 patients receiving high-dose therapy (Mel-140 + total body
irradiation) and in a similar number of patients receiving standard-dose VMCP regimen was 81% (22% complete remission) and 57% (5% complete remission),
respectively (P <.001). Significantly longer event-free (median, 28 vs. 18 months) and overall survival (median, 57 vs. 42 months) were reported with high-dose
therapy (Fig. 46.4-9). The projected 5-year event-free survival is 28% and overall survival is 52% with high-dose therapy compared with 10% and 12%, respectively,
for the standard therapy arm.291

FIGURE 46.4-9. Comparative trials of high-dose therapy (HDT) versus standard dose chemotherapy (SDT). A: IFM-90 (Intergroupe Français de Myelome)
randomized trial with 100 patients accrued to each arm comparing SDT with vincristine, melphalan, cyclophosphamide, prednisone/vincristine, carmustine,
Adriamycin, and prednisone and HDT with melphalan, 140 mg/m 2, plus total body irradiation (800 cGy). Higher complete response rates and significantly longer
event-free and overall survival were noted with HDT. B: Pair-mate comparison of 116 patients receiving HDT with total therapy as opposed to mainly vincristine,
Adriamycin, dexamethasone (VAD)-based chemotherapy according to Southwest Oncology Group trials, matched for b 2m, creatinine, and age. With total therapy,
complete response was obtained in 40% and both event-free and overall survivals were markedly extended. C: Randomized study of early high-dose therapy with
melphalan, 140 mg/m2, plus total body irradiation (800 cGy) versus initial standard dose therapy followed by high-dose therapy at relapse. With early high-dose
therapy a superior complete response rate and event-free survival was observed with superior quality of life; however, overall survival was similar between the two
arms. CR, complete response; EFS, event-free survival; OS, overall survival.

The superiority of high-dose therapy was also confirmed in a pair-mate analysis comparing 116 patients treated on the tandem transplant arm with a similar number of
patients selected from 1123 patients treated with standard therapy on various Southwest Oncology Group studies and selected for important prognostic factors. Using
an intent-to-treat-approach, compared with standard therapy, patients undergoing tandem transplant as part of the total therapy regimen had a superior partial
response rate (86% vs. 52%; P = .0001) and longer median duration of event-free survival (49 vs. 22 months; P = .0001) and overall survival (62+ vs. 48 months; P =
.01), with a projected 5-year event-free survival of 36% versus 19% and overall survival of 61% versus 39%. 292
The role of single versus tandem transplants has been evaluated by the French Intergroup. With a short follow-up, no differences in response, complete remission
(32% and 33%), or event-free (54% and 57%) and overall survival (71% and 67%) were observed in the whole group. However, a subgroup of patients with low b 2m
showed a significant survival benefit with tandem transplant. Longer follow-up will determine if all or a subset of patients may benefit from such an approach.
Other institutions have studied high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell support in myeloma. As seen in Table 46.4-10, complete remissions are obtained in up to 50%
of patients and event-free and overall survival are extended to more than 3 years and more than 5 to 6 years, respectively. 293,294,295,296,297,298,299 and 300
PREVIOUSLY TREATED PATIENTS. Various investigators have studied high-dose therapy in previously treated patients showing its effectiveness in achieving complete

responses. Harousseau et al. report 21% complete response and 66% partial response in 44 refractory or relapsed multiple myeloma patients treated with melphalan,
140 mg/m2, with peripheral blood stem cell support. 301 The median overall survival was 17 months in this group. Vesole et al. studied 135 patients with advanced
refractory myeloma treated with high-dose chemotherapy reporting event-free and overall survival of 21 and 43+ months, respectively. 302 Patients with primary
unresponsive disease (not responding to standard induction therapy) had outcomes superior to patients with resistant relapse (relapsing after initial response) with
event-free survival of 37 versus 17 months ( P = .0004) and overall survival of 43+ versus 21 months ( P = .0003), respectively.
Molecular complete responses have been observed in myeloma after high-dose therapy. Björkstrand et al. have reported sustained molecular complete responses in
four of five patients by allele-specific oligonucleotide polymerase chain reaction for CDRIII up to 33 months from high-dose therapy. 303
Various factors need special consideration in the management of myeloma with high-dose chemotherapy. These factors include source of stem cell, conditioning
regimen, timing of transplant, and tumor-cell purging.
TIMING OF HIGH-DOSE THERAPY. To obtain high-quality hematopoietic stem cells, ideal timing for stem cell collection is early in the course of the induction treatment.

Ability to collect adequate stem cells (greater than or equal to 2 × 10 6 CD34+ cells/kg) in patients with less than 12 months of prior therapy is 86% compared with 48%
in patients with more than 24 months of prior therapy. 304 The role of early high-dose therapy (n = 91) compared with initial standard-dose therapy followed by
high-dose therapy at the time of relapse (n = 94) has been investigated by Fermand et al. in a randomized trial. Overall survival was similar in both arms after early
and late transplant (median, 64.6 and 64 months, respectively). Median event-free survival was 39 months after high-dose therapy, whereas median time to transplant
after randomization to conventional chemotherapy was only 13 months (see Fig. 46.4-9). However, patients randomized to early high-dose therapy had a longer time
without symptoms, treatment, and treatment-related toxicity, thus providing a rationale for early high-dose therapy. 305 A delay in high-dose chemotherapy and

transplantation may lead to increased drug resistance, as well as further genetic changes resulting in more aggressive disease. An ongoing Intergroup trial in the
United States randomizing patients to up-front high-dose therapy or standard therapy with high-dose therapy as a salvage treatment should also further define the
role of high-dose therapy.
2

HIGH-DOSE REGIMEN. High-dose melphalan (140 to 200 mg/m ) with or without total body irradiation is the most common conditioning regimen used in

myeloma.250,289,302,306,307,308 and 309 Melphalan's predominant myelotoxicity and metabolism independent of renal function is ideal for multiple myeloma patients who
commonly have renal function abnormalities. Melphalan seems to be superior to thiotepa when given with total body irradiation, with patients achieving longer
relapse-free and overall survival duration. 310 A combination regimen containing high-dose carboplatin with etoposide and Cytoxan (cyclophosphamide) or a
combination with CBV has also been investigated in resistant patients with only occasional responses. 311,312 and 313 However, no regimen has shown marked superiority
over others. The addition of total body irradiation has not been shown to improve cytoreduction, and in fact it increases morbidity and treatment-related mortality. A
poor outcome in one study using total body irradiation was considered to be related to delayed immune recovery.
STEM CELL PURGING. Myeloma cell contamination as evaluated by polymerase chain reaction or sensitive immunofluorescence is universally observed in stem cell

products. Purging of tumor cells by positive selection of CD34+ cells leads to a 3- to 5-log reduction in contamination. 314,315 and 316 Negative selection by the
monoclonal antibody cocktail containing CD10 (common acute lymphoblastic leukemia antigen); CD20 (a pan B-cell antigen); and PCA-1, (plasma cell-associated
antigen) or peanut agglutinin (PNA) and anti-CD19 antibodies results in undetectable myeloma cells by conventional flow cytometry. 298 The early follow-up results
from these studies have not revealed any significant advantage in responses or survival, but they consistently show a delay in engraftment posttransplantation. Even
when cells were purged using fluorescence-activated cell sorting of early hematopoietic stem cells (CD34+, Thy1+, Lin-) devoid of any clonal B cells, relapses were
frequent and patients had delayed hematopoietic engraftment and suppressed immune status for prolonged periods of time. 317,318 These effects lead to infectious
complications. As complete responses are observed in 30% to 50% of patients, greater emphasis needs to be placed on achieving better tumor cytoreduction in the
patient.
HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL SOURCE. Mobilized peripheral blood stem cells provide faster engraftment compared with bone marrow. Myeloma patients with less than 1

year of prior therapy had faster granulocyte and platelet recovery after peripheral blood stem cell transplants compared with bone marrow autografts. 319 The duration
of prior chemotherapy, especially with stem cell–damaging agents (melphalan, BCNU, and high-doses of cyclophosphamide) along with radiation to bone
marrow–containing areas, significantly affects the ability to procure adequate quantities of peripheral blood stem cells and engraftment kinetics posttransplant. 320
Differential mobilization with cyclophosphamide and GM-CSF of normal hematopoietic stem cells during the first 3 days of leukapheresis is observed, while peak
levels of myeloma cell contamination are present on subsequent days. These myeloma cells show a higher labeling index and a more immature phenotype
(CD19+).321
Transplantation in Older Patients
Because myeloma is a disease of older patients, the role of high-dose chemotherapy has been evaluated in patients older than 65 years of age. No significant
differences in clinical characteristics have been observed between younger and older patients. Age does not impair stem cell mobilization or engraftment. 254 In a study
of patients over the age of 65 years (range, 65 to 83 years) undergoing high-dose melphalan with stem cell transplant, 22% complete responses were achieved. A
pair-mate analysis was conducted for these patients and patients younger than 65 with similar high-dose therapy who were matched for relevant prognostic features.
Results showed no significant difference in event-free survival (2.1 vs. 1.5 years; P = .2) and overall survival (3.9 vs. 3.7 years; P = .4) for younger versus older
patients, respectively ( Fig. 46.4-10). In a study involving 71 older patients (age greater than 60 years) receiving intermediate-dose melphalan at 100 mg/m 2 with stem
cell support applied two to three times, the older patients were compared with 71 pair-mates matched for age and b 2m and treated with oral melphalan and
prednisone. Complete response rates were observed in 47% versus 5% ( P <.001), median event-free survival was 34 versus 17.7 months (P <.001), and median
overall survival 56+ versus 48 months ( P <.01) in patients receiving high-dose therapy and melphalan and prednisone, respectively. 322

FIGURE 46.4-10. Outcome of 67 patients over the age of 65 and undergoing high-dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell rescue were compared with a
matched pair of patients with age less than 65 and similar prognostic features including chromosome 13 abnormality, C-reactive protein, b 2m, and months of prior
therapy and treated with similar high-dose chemotherapy. There is no difference in overall (OS) and event-free survival (EFS) between the two groups, suggesting
that when myeloma patients are treated with high-dose therapy older age does not predict for poor outcome.

Transplant in Patients with Renal Failure
One-third of multiple myeloma patients have renal dysfunction in the initial stage of the disease, and one-half of them recover renal function after correction of
hypercalcemia, improved hydration, or effective chemotherapy. 323 Melphalan324 and busulfan, 325 both active agents in myeloma, are pharmacokinetically independent
of renal function, allowing high-dose administration in myeloma patients with renal dysfunction. Thirty-six patients with severe renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance
less than 40 mL/min), including eight patients on chronic hemodialysis, were treated with high-dose melphalan followed by peripheral blood stem cell rescue. No
effects on median half-life, area under the curve, and clearance of melphalan were observed in patients with renal failure compared with patients who had normal
renal function. Renal insufficiency did not affect posttransplant engraftment or overall survival. However, the patients with renal insufficiency required longer
hospitalization due to prolonged mucositis and anorexia.
Myelodysplastic Syndrome after High-Dose Therapy in Myeloma
Treatment-related myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia are well-recognized complications following alkylating agent therapy. Myeloma patients with
their advanced age may have coexisting myelodysplastic syndrome at a preclinical stage detected by cytogenetic changes that may be exacerbated by alkylating
agent therapy 224 and may be further affected by high-dose melphalan and stem cell transplant. In myeloma following high-dose therapy and stem cell support
increased incidence of cytogenetically detected myelodysplastic syndrome is observed. The increase observed after 2 years was lowest in patients less than 50 years
age and with less than 12 months of prior standard-dose therapy (1% to 2%); and it increased to 7% to 10% in older patients (>50 years) with more than 12 months of
prior therapy, especially when CD34 mobilization was impaired ( Fig. 46.4-11). Thus, in the background of older age and cumulative DNA damage caused by
standard-dose alkylating agent therapy, the hematopoietic reconstitution following high-dose therapy may lead to excess telomeric shortening with genomic instability
and an increased chance of myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia. 326,327

FIGURE 46.4-11. Development of myelodysplasia using cytogenetic criteria (-5 or del 5q, -7 or del 7q, trisomy 8, del 20q11) following autologous hematopoietic stem
cell–supported high-dose therapy with melphalan, 200 mg/m 2 (one or two cycles). Cumulative incidence of cytogenetic myelodysplastic syndrome in relationship to
months of prior therapy (£12 vs. >12 months) and age (£50 vs. >50 years). Patients with no more than 12 months of prior therapy and aged 50 years or younger had
the lowest risk of myelodysplastic syndrome compared with the three other groups.

Allogeneic Transplantation
Patients with identical siblings have an option of syngeneic transplantation with true tumor-free graft. 328 In the setting of maximal cytoreductive therapy data from the
European Bone Marrow Registry involving 16 patients undergoing syngeneic transplant, a complete response rate of 50% and median event-free and overall survival
of 32 and 60 months were seen.
HLA-matched sibling donor transplantation enables myeloma patients to achieve 15% to 30% long-term disease-free survival, as shown by various large groups and
summarized in Table 46.4-11.298,329,330,331 and 332 In this study, between 30% and 50% of patients achieved a complete remission; however, an extremely high 1-year
mortality (up to 50%) has been reported (Fig. 46.4-12 ). This unusually high treatment-related mortality compared with other diseases, including chronic myelogenous
leukemia and acute leukemia, might be related to the older patient population, an immunosuppressed state due to the disease, corticosteroid treatment leading to
higher bacterial and fungal infections, and the prior long duration of chemotherapy. 333 Definitive evidence of graft-versus-myeloma effect has been demonstrated and
is considered responsible for the reduced probability of disease progression. 334,335 However, outcome after allografts are poor compared with autografts both as
primary and salvage therapy. European Bone Marrow Transplant Registry retrospective analysis in a matched pair setting showed superior overall survival after
autotransplants (34 vs. 18 months). 336 Surprisingly, even autograft performed as salvage in patients with resistant or relapsed disease resulted in superior overall
survival (32 vs. 20 months), compared with allotransplant. 337 This is mainly due to excessive treatment-related mortality associated with allografts. Newer approaches
are now being investigated with nonmyeloablative transplants, TK gene–transduced donor lymphocyte infusion, and CD6-depleted transplants and CD4+ donor
lymphocyte infusion to reduce treatment-related mortality and improve overall survival. 298

TABLE 46.4-11. Allogeneic Transplant Results

FIGURE 46.4-12. Results of allogeneic transplantation from three large groups show high early mortality with relapse-free survival around 25% to 30%. However, later
relapses are observed. EBMTR, European Bone Marrow Transplant Registry; Rx, treatment; Tx, transplant.

Salvage Therapies
Patients unresponsive or relapsing after standard alkylating agent therapies such as melphalan and prednisone are responsive to high-dose dexamethasone pulsing
alone or in combination with drugs such as VAD or CVAD. 306,338,339 and 340 Such patients still remain candidates for high-dose melphalan with peripheral blood stem cell
rescue if adequate quantities of stem cells can be procured after salvage therapies. Patients relapsing after prior VAD and autotransplant have been treated with
combination chemotherapy consisting of dexamethasone in a pulsing fashion and cyclophosphamide, 400 mg/m 2/d, etoposide, 40 mg/m2/d, and cisplatin, 15 mg/m2/d
by continuous infusion for 4 days (DCEP). In a study of 57 patients relapsing after tandem transplant, more than 40% achieved greater than or equal to 75% tumor
mass reduction, including true complete remission in 13% patients. 341 The responses were seen in high-risk disease settings, including chromosome 13 abnormalities
and high labeling index. The efficacy of thalidomide in this setting (see Thalidomide, later in this chapter) has led to the evaluation of a combination of DCEP with
thalidomide and Adriamycin (DTPACE) followed by G-CSF administration as induction therapy before transplantation. The preliminary results of this combination
appear to be extremely promising, with more than 75% of previously treated patients achieving partial response after two cycles. These combinations, with success in
the salvage setting, are now being evaluated as induction therapy and posttransplant consolidation. In fact, superior overall and event-free survival have been
reported in high-risk patients (chromosome 13 abnormalities) receiving posttransplant DCEP consolidation. 342
Newer Phase I Agents
BISPHOSPHONATES. The second- and third-generation bisphosphonates, pamidronate and zoledronate, reduce skeletal complications and bone pain in myeloma

(Table 46.4-12).343,344 The mechanism of action includes down-regulation of osteoclast activity, decreased IL-6 production, and induction of apoptosis of osteoclasts
through inhibition of farnesyl and geranyl-geranyl transferase activity. 345,346 Besides reducing bone-related problems, continued administration over 21 months showed

some survival advantage (21 vs. 14 months; P = .041) in a subgroup of patients receiving salvage chemotherapy and pamidronate versus same chemotherapy
alone. 343,347In vitro cytotoxic effects have been observed in myeloma cell lines, 348,349 tumor specimens, and the SCID-hu system. Preliminary reports of pamidronate
alone administered frequently, every 2 weeks, have shown response or delay in disease progression in occasional patients. 350

TABLE 46.4-12. Summary of Published Placebo-Controlled Trials of Bisphosphonates in Patients with Multiple Myeloma

THALIDOMIDE. In 180 patients, thalidomide was investigated using incremental doses of 200 to 800 mg. Thalidomide may act in many different ways including through

antiangiogenic activity, down-regulation of anti–TNF-a activity, immunomodulation, and changes in adhesion molecules. 351,352 In this group of patients with advanced
posttransplant relapsed myeloma, a partial response was attained in 26% and an overall response was observed in 34% of patients with single-agent thalidomide. 140
As the major toxicities are somnolence, constipation, neurologic symptoms, and fatigue, it may be an ideal drug to combine with other traditional chemotherapeutic
regimens (Fig. 46.4-13).

FIGURE 46.4-13. A: A patient initially undergoing allogeneic transplantation followed by interleukin-2 treatment and salvage therapy with DCEP (dexamethasone,
cyclophosphamide, etoposide, cis-platinum) at relapse without response was treated with escalating doses of thalidomide starting at 200 mg and increasing to 800 mg
daily. Within 12 weeks the patient had achieved a complete response, with normalization of bone marrow plasmacytosis from 95% involvement before thalidomide
and reduction of immunoglobulin A from over 8 g/dL to normal range. The patient was maintained at a 400 mg daily dose. Following sustained response for over 16
months, the patient showed signs of relapse and is being treated with a higher thalidomide dose now. B: Event-free and overall survival of 89 relapsed or refractory
myeloma patients treated with single-agent thalidomide.

OTHER POTENTIAL AGENTS. With the success of thalidomide, newer potent antiangiogenic agents and thalidomide analogues are of interest in myeloma. Other

potential agents under investigation include TNF-a inhibitors, oral tamoxifen, arsenic trioxide, and a newer generation of bisphosphonates. 131,353,354 and 355 Additionally,
with altered ras activity and high telomerase levels in myeloma, approaches directed at these molecular targets are being investigated. The SCID-hu model provides a
perfect setting for such evaluation before human studies.

WALDENSTRÖM'S MACROGLOBULINEMIA
Dr Jan Waldenström first described a condition in two patients characterized by bleeding tendencies from mucosa, anemia, lymphadenopathy, and high serum
viscosity with high molecular mass M component. 356 This disease subsequently was recognized to have lymphoplasmacytic differentiation that differed from myeloma
in various aspects including absence of lytic bone disease and presence of hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, or both.
Macroglobulinemia is less frequent than myeloma, affecting approximately 1500 people a year in the United States, with a higher incidence in men and in whites than
in African Americans and a median age at diagnosis of 63 years. 357,388 The pathogenetic mechanisms are not well understood. However, mechanisms similar to those
in myeloma can be considered. Familial occurrence and a case report of occurrence in monozygotic twins have been reported. 358,359 A patient working as a canary
breeder developed macroglobulinemia and showed reactivity of monoclonal IgM to an antigen in the canary droppings, suggesting a role of constant antigenic
stimulation in the pathogenesis of the disease. 360 Infrequency of the disease, however, has limited detailed epidemiologic and pathogenetic studies. Like myeloma the
tumor cells are postantigen selection memory B cells with somatic hypermutation and rearrangement in the variable region and unique CDR. The normal B cells
produce IgM as primary immune response and with further antigenic stimulation and selection undergo class switching and produce IgG. Waldenström's
macroglobulinemia cells, with production of IgM, are arrested before class switching. However, no clonal diversity is observed and no isotype switching is reported.
Viral infections with hepatitis C virus appear to be a significant risk for cryoglobulinemia, which is often associated with Waldenström's macroglobulinemia. The role of
Kaposi's sarcoma herpes virus, which has been reported to be present in dendritic cells derived from bone marrow from patients with Waldenström's
macroglobulinemia, and hepatitis G virus are unclear in pathogenesis of this disease. 361,362 and 363 Phenotypically the malignant cells are surface and cytoplasmic Ig+
cells expressing various pan B-cell markers such as CD19, CD20, and CD22. CD5 and CD23 are observed in a small number of patients. The immunophenotypic
differences between cells in multiple myeloma, Waldenström's macroglobulinemia, CLL, and normal B cells are shown in Table 46.4-13.364 Bone marrow examination
shows various subtypes from small lymphocytes to lymphocytes with varying levels of plasmacytoid differentiation to presence of mature plasma cells along with mast
cells and Dutcher bodies.

TABLE 46.4-13. Immunophenotype of Waldenström's Cells

Chromosomal changes have been reported in a small number of patients with Waldenström's macroglobulinemia, mainly due to low proliferative potential of this
disease. Complex karyotypic changes include trisomies, deletions, and structural abnormalities of various chromosomes. 365 As with myeloma and other B-cell tumors,
translocations involving 14q32 are reported with various partners. 366,367 These includes chromosome 18 (BCL-2), 8 (c-myc), 11 (PRAD-1), and importantly,
chromosome 9 involving PAX5 gene, which is expressed at a higher level in normal pre-B cells, and its expression decreases as the cells become plasma cells. 368
The clinical presentation is variable and is related to high IgM levels and lymphoplasmacytic cell infiltration of various organs. 369 The usual manifestations related to
tissue infiltration include pulmonic symptoms with cough and dyspnea, gastrointestinal infiltration with diarrhea and bleeding, skin plaques, and periorbital
exophthalmos and nerve palsies. The large molecular size of IgM leads to higher serum viscosity than seen with comparable levels of IgG or IgA. Hyperviscosity is
seldom seen with IgG or IgA levels less than 5 g/dL, whereas IgM levels of greater than 3 g/dL may lead to clinical manifestations. Relative plasma viscosity above 5
cp is usually associated with symptoms. Hyperviscosity may present with fatigue, blurred vision, headache, shortness of breath, mucosal bleeding, and mental status
changes or coma. Type I cryoglobulinemia, which is caused by physicochemical interactions with the paraprotein and observed in small numbers of patients, may
present with purpura, urticaria, Raynaud's phenomenon, acrocyanosis, malleolar ulcers, or necrosis. 370 Cryoglobulinemia type II, which is due to antibody reactivity,
may present with arthralgia, proteinuria, renal failure, polyneuropathy, and mononeuritis. 364,371 Additional special presentation may be related to the presence of cold
agglutinins leading to a mild hemolytic anemia or exacerbation of Raynaud's phenomenon. Severe demyelinating sensorimotor neuropathies is observed in 10% of
the patients. One-half of these patients have detectable antibodies against myelin-associated glycoprotein (anti-MAG antibodies). 372,373,389 Sensory or ataxic
neuropathy is observed more commonly in patients with anti-MAG antibodies. The frequency of common presenting features is listed in Table 46.4-14.

TABLE 46.4-14. Clinical Manifestations in 260 Patients with Waldenström's Macroglobulinemia

Laboratory evaluation usually shows anemia; however, early leukopenia and thrombocytopenia in untreated patients is uncommon. Elevated erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, monoclonal IgM protein in serum with occasional light chains in the urine, and elevated b 2m in a subset of patients is observed. Bone marrow
shows typical lymphoplasmacytic infiltration with the presence of mast cells. CT scan evaluation of chest, abdomen, and pelvis may show the presence of
lymphadenopathy with enlargement of liver, spleen, or both. Skeletal survey is done to rule out IgM myeloma as bone lesions are not seen in Waldenström's
macroglobulinemia. Depending on clinical findings of immunologic effects or involvement of other organs, specialized test are required. Tissue infiltration may require
confirmation with biopsies.
Asymptomatic presentation of Waldenström's macroglobulinemia does not require immediate cytoreductive therapy as it does not alter the outcome and delays
chemotherapy-related bone marrow suppression. Patients with preserved hemoglobin and low b 2m are ideal candidates for observation. Patients with high IgM-related
symptoms, such as hyperviscosity, hemolytic anemia, neuropathy, and cryoglobulinemia, benefit from plasmapheresis without conventional chemotherapy. 374,375 and 376
Patients who are symptomatic from the disease or have marked hepatosplenomegaly, cytopenia, or progressive disease have been treated with alkylating agents.
Chlorambucil alone or with corticosteroids produces response rates as defined by greater than 50% drop in paraproteins and tumor mass in 60% to 75% of previously
untreated patients, and complete responses observed in less than 5% of the patients. 377 Responses are slow and may take up to 12 to 18 months from the beginning
of treatment. Treatment is continued until maximal reduction is observed. Median survival from diagnosis is more than 10 years. More aggressive combination therapy
with multiple agents has achieved more than 80% response rate. However, there is no improvement in overall survival. Prolonged alkylating agent therapy has led to
development of myelodysplastic syndrome or acute myeloid leukemia in up to 10% of the patients.
Purine analogues fludarabine at a dose of 25 mg/m 2 intravenously for 5 days every 4 weeks and cladribine at a dose of 0.1 mg/kg by continuous infusion for 7 days
have produced responses in up to 80% of previously untreated patient populations and complete responses in 10% of patients. Effectiveness of purine analogues in
previously treated patients has been in the range of 30%, with higher responses in patients relapsing after cessation of prior therapy and less frequent responses in
patients with resistant relapse. 263,390,391,392,393 and 394 Patients relapsing after receiving one purine analogue do not usually respond to another purine analogue. In a
large prospective multicenter study by the Southwest Oncology Group in newly diagnosed patients, however, fludarabine showed only 39% response rate. 378 Younger
patients are shown to respond better than older patient populations. Anemia, b 2m greater than 2.5 mg/dL, and IgM greater than 4 g/dL were predicative of poor
outcome in that study. The major side effects with purine analogues are prolonged cumulative cytopenia and immunosuppression leading to opportunistic infections.
Nonchemotherapeutic treatment options include Rituxan (anti-CD20 mo-ab) with 20% to 30% responses in small studies, 364 and interferon-a with a 30% response
rate.395,396,397 and 398 High-dose dexamethasone pulsing has produced some responses in refractory patients. 379,380 There have been reports of occasional responses
following splenectomy. 381,382 The role of high-dose chemotherapy has been evaluated in six patients with extensive prior therapy showing five patients achieving a
partial response and one patient achieving a complete response. 383 However, as prolonged prior therapy affects stem cell mobilization, especially after purine
analogues and chlorambucil, mobilization, at an earlier stage of the treatment, is necessary. The role of thalidomide in this disease remains under investigation.

PERSPECTIVE
New discoveries in molecular biology, better understanding of B-cell development and immune regulation, and improved imaging techniques have advanced our
understanding of the biology of multiple myeloma and related plasma cell neoplasms in the last decade. A new entity of multiple myeloma with chromosome 13
abnormalities has been recognized, carrying an extremely adverse prognosis even with high-dose chemotherapy. A putative tumor suppressor molecule is under
investigation and a risk-based therapeutic approach is applied with more aggressive treatment in this subgroup of patients, including up-front allogeneic
transplantation. High-dose chemotherapy has been clearly shown to be effective in improving complete response rates and event-free and overall survival in
comparison with standard-dose therapy. It has been successfully applied in older patients or in the presence of renal dysfunction. Over 40% of patients now achieve
complete remission compared with 5% with standard-dose therapy a decade ago, and for the first time durable complete responses have been reported in patients
without standard risk factors and absence of chromosome 13 abnormalities. MRI with inversion recovery images provides better assessment of bone marrow
involvement with myeloma cells and CT- and MRI-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsies provide cytologic and molecular diagnosis of the residual bone lesions.
Progress is being made in better defining complete responses and now includes normalization of MRI (MRI complete response). Preliminary investigations appear to
predict superior survival in such patients. Allogeneic transplants continue to remain difficult, with up to 50% 1-year morality. However, nonmyeloablative allogeneic
transplant regimens are being evaluated to decrease treatment-related morality while at the same time using graft-versus-myeloma effect to achieve disease control,
especially in patients with chromosome 13 changes. The demonstration of the role of neoangiogenesis in myeloma has led to identification of an effective new agent,
thalidomide, in refractory myeloma patients. With its different spectrum of adverse effects, it may be an ideal drug to be combined with chemotherapeutic agents.
Soil-directed therapy with the use of bisphosphonates has shown antitumor effects along with improvement in bone density and a decrease in skeletal events.

Future directions include investigation of thalidomide in induction as well as maintenance therapy, evaluation of post–high-dose chemotherapy consolidation with
chemotherapeutic agents, development of tumor cell–specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes, and safe administration of allogeneic transplantation. Better understanding of
the molecular mechanism of the disease, especially of factors that prevent apoptosis with the help of subtractive libraries and micro array chips, should provide newer
tools to effectively and specifically treat this disease.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Bakkus MH. Ig gene sequences in the study of clonality. Pathol Biol (Paris) 1999;47:128.
2. Macro M, Andre I, Comby E, et al. IgE multiple myeloma. Leuk Lymphoma 1999;32:597.
3. Blade J, Kyle RA. Nonsecretory myeloma, immunoglobulin D myeloma, and plasma cell leukemia. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1999;13:1259.
4. Poncet JC, Toussirot E, Wendling D. Specific features of immunoglobulin D multiple myeloma. Revue Du Rhumatisme [English Edition] 1997;64:410.
5. Macintyre W. Case of mollities and fragilitas ossium, accompanied with urine strongly charged with animal matter. Med Chir Trans Lond 1859;33:211.
6. Bence J. On a new substance occurring in the urine of a patient with mollities and fragilits ossium. Phil Trans R Soc Lond 1848;55:673.
7. Dalrymple J. On the microscopical character of mollities ossium. Dublin Q J Med Sci 1846;2:85.
8. Rustizky J. Multiple myeloma. Deutsch Z Chir 1873;3:162.
9. Kahler O. Zur Symptomatologie des multiplen Myeloma: beobachtung von Albumosurie. Prog Med Wochnschr 1889;14:33.
10. Ellinger A. Das Vorkommen des Bence Jones' schen Korpes in Harn bei Tumoren des Knochenmarks und seine diagnostische Bedeutung. Deutsch Arch Klin Med 1899;62:266.
11. Wright J. A case of multiple myeloma. Bull Johns Hopkins Hosp 1933;52:156.
12. Arinkin M. Die intravitale Untersuchungs-Methodik des Knochenmarks. Folia Haematol (Lepiz) 1929;38:233.
13. Tiselius A. Electrophoresis of serum globulin. II Electrophoretic analysis of normal and immune sera. Biochem J 1937;31:1464.
14. Longsworth L. Electrophoretic patterns of normal and pathological human blood serum and plasma. J Exp Med 1939;70:399.
15. Grabar P. Methode permettant l'etude conjugee des proprietes electrphoretiques et immunochimiques d'un melange de proteines. Application au serum sanguin. Biochim Biophys Acta
1953;10:193.
16. Alwall N. Urethane and stilbamidine in multiple myeloma: report on 2 cases. Lancet 1947;2:388.
17. Holland JR, Hosley H, Scharlau C, et al. A controlled trial of urethane treatment in multiple myeloma. Blood 1966;27:328.
18. Bergsagel D. Evaluation of new chemotherapeutic agents in the treatment of multiple myeloma. IV. L-Phenylalanine mustard (NSC-8806). Cancer Chemother Rep 1962;21:87.
19. Salmon SE, Shadduck RK, Schilling A. Intermittent high-dose prednisone (NSC-10023) therapy for multiple myeloma. Cancer Chemother Rep 1967;51:179.
20. Alexanian R, Bonnet J, Gehan E, et al. Combination chemotherapy for multiple myeloma. Cancer 1972;30:382.
21. McElwain T, Powles R. High-dose intravenous melphalan for plasma-cell leukemia and myeloma. Lancet 1983;1:822.
22. Barlogie B, Hall R, Zander A, Dicke K, Alexanian R. High-dose melphalan with autologous bone marrow transplantation for multiple myeloma. Blood 1986;67:1298.
23. Cohen HJ, Crawford J, Rao MK, Pieper CF, Currie MS. Racial differences in the prevalence of monoclonal gammopathy in a community-based sample of the elderly [published erratum
appears in Am J Med 1998;105:362]. Am J Med 1998;104:439.
24. Devesa SS, Silverman DT, Young JL Jr, et al. Cancer incidence and mortality trends among whites in the United States, 194784. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;79:701.
25. Riedel DA, Pottern LM. The epidemiology of multiple myeloma. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1992;6:225.
26. Ichimaru M, Ishimaru T, Mikami M, Matsunaga M. Multiple myeloma among atomic bomb survivors in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, 195076: relationship to radiation dose absorbed by marrow. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1982;69:323.
27. Omar RZ, Barber JA, Smith PG. Cancer mortality and morbidity among plutonium workers at the Sellafield plant of British Nuclear Fuels. Br J Cancer 1999;79:1288.
28. Bergsagel DE, Wong O, Bergsagel PL, et al. Benzene and multiple myeloma: appraisal of the scientific evidence. Blood 1999;94:1174.
29. Lundberg I, Milatou-Smith R. Mortality and cancer incidence among Swedish paint industry workers with long-term exposure to organic solvents. Scand J Work Environ Health 1998;24:270.
30. Salmon SE, Kyle RA. Silicone gels, induction of plasma cell tumors, and genetic susceptibility in mice: a call for epidemiologic investigation of women with silicone breast implants [editorial]. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1040.
31. Tricot GJ, Naucke S, Vaught L, et al. Is the risk of multiple myeloma increased in patients with silicone implants? Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1996;210:357.
32. Cuzick J, De Stavola B. Multiple myelomaa case-control study. Br J Cancer 1988;57:516.
33. Fritschi L, Siemiatycki J. Lymphoma, myeloma and occupation: results of a case-control study. Int J Cancer 1996;67:498.
34. Doody MM, Linet MS, Glass AG, et al. Risks of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, multiple myeloma, and leukemia associated with common medications. Epidemiology 1996;7:131.
35. Linet MS, Harlow SD, McLaughlin JK. A case-control study of multiple myeloma in whites: chronic antigenic stimulation, occupation, and drug use. Cancer Res 1987;47:2978.
36. Brown LM, Linet MS, Greenberg RS, et al. Multiple myeloma and family history of cancer among blacks and whites in the U.S. Cancer 1999;85:2385.
37. Grosbois B, Jego P, Attal M, et al. Familial multiple myeloma: report of fifteen families. Br J Haematol 1999;105:768.
38. Watanabe T, Suzuki Y, Murakami S, Komatsu M. [Multiple myeloma in siblings]. Rinsho Ketsueki 1999;40:135.
39. Kyle RA. Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance. Am J Med 1978;64:814.
40. Avet-Loiseau H, Facon T, Daviet A, et al. 14q32 translocations and monosomy 13 observed in monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance delineate a multistep process for the
oncogenesis of multiple myeloma. Intergroupe Francophone du Myelome. Cancer Res 1999;59:4546.
41. Seligmann M, Sassy C, Chevalier A. A human IgG myeloma protein with anti- 2 macroglobulin antibody activity. J Immunol 1973;110:85.
42. Salmon SE, Seligmann M. B-cell neoplasia in man. Lancet 1974;2:1230.
43. Rettig MB, Ma HJ, Vescio RA, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus infection of bone marrow dendritic cells from multiple myeloma patients [see comments]. Science 1997;276:1851.
44. Said JW, Rettig MR, Heppner K, et al. Localization of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus in bone marrow biopsy samples from patients with multiple myeloma [see comments]. Blood
1997;90:4278.
45. Soulier J, Grollet L, Oksenhendler E, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in multicentric Castleman's disease [see comments]. Blood 1995;86:1276.
46. Said W, Chien K, Takeuchi S, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV or HHV8) in primary effusion lymphoma: ultrastructural demonstration of herpesvirus in lymphoma cells.
Blood 1996;87:4937.
47. Schalling M, Ekman M, Kaaya EE, Linde A, Biberfeld P. A role for a new herpes virus (KSHV) in different forms of Kaposi's sarcoma. Nat Med 1995;1:707.
48. Chauhan D, Bharti A, Raje N, et al. Detection of Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus DNA sequences in multiple myeloma bone marrow stromal cells. Blood 1999;93:1482.
49. Tisdale JF, Stewart AK, Dickstein B, et al. Molecular and serological examination of the relationship of human herpesvirus 8 to multiple myeloma: orf 26 sequences in bone marrow stroma are
not restricted to myeloma patients and other regions of the genome are not detected. Blood 1998;92:2681.
50. Cull GM, Carter GI, Timms JM, et al. Low incidence of human herpesvirus 8 in stem cell collections from myeloma patients. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;23:759.
51. Tarte K, Chang Y, Klein B. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus and multiple myeloma: lack of criteria for causality. Blood 1999;93:3159.
52. De Greef C, Van De Voorde W, Bakkus M, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV/HHV-8) DNA sequences are absent in leukapheresis products and ex vivo expanded CD34+
cells from multiple myeloma patients. Br J Haematol 1999;106:1033.
53. Harada N, Hata H, Matsuno F, et al. Absence of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) in bone marrow cells from Japanese myeloma patients [letter]. Leukemia 1999; 13:1465.
54. Bellos F, Goldschmidt H, Dorner M, Ho AD, Moos M. Bone marrow derived dendritic cells from patients with multiple myeloma cultured with three distinct protocols do not bear Kaposi's
sarcoma associated herpesvirus DNA. Ann Oncol 1999;10:323.
55. Olsen SJ, Tarte K, Sherman W, et al. Evidence against KSHV infection in the pathogenesis of multiple myeloma. Virus Res 1998;57:197.
56. Yi Q, Ekman M, Anton D, et al. Blood dendritic cells from myeloma patients are not infected with Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV/HHV-8). Blood 1998; 92:402.
57. Tarte K, Olsen SJ, Yang Lu Z, et al. Clinical-grade functional dendritic cells from patients with multiple myeloma are not infected with Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus. Blood
1998;91:1852.
58. Parravicini C, Lauri E, Baldini L, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus infection and multiple myeloma [letter; comment]. Science 1997;278:1969.
59. Cottoni F, Uccini S. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus infection and multiple myeloma [letter; comment]. Science 1997;278:1972; discussion 1972.
60. Masood R, Zheng T, Tupule A, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus infection and multiple myeloma [letter; comment]. Science 1997;278:1970.
61. Whitby D, Boshoff C, Luppi M, Torelli G. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus infection and multiple myeloma [letter; comment]. Science 1997;278:1971.
62. Brousset P, Meggetto F, Attal M, Delsol G. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus infection and multiple myeloma [letter; comment]. Science 1997;278:1972; discussion 1972.
63. Berenson JR, Vescio RA. HHV-8 and multiple myeloma. Pathol Biol (Paris) 1999;47:115.
64. Berenson JR, Bergsagel PL, Munshi N. Initiation and maintenance of multiple myeloma. Semin Hematol 1999;36:9.
65. Potter M. Experimental plasmacytomagenesis in mice. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1997;11:323.
66. Radl J. Multiple myeloma and related disorders. Lessons from an animal model. Pathol Biol (Paris) 1999;47:109.
67. Radl J. Animal model of human disease. Benign monoclonal gammopathy (idiopathic paraproteinemia). Am J Pathol 1981;105:91.
68. Radl J, Croese JW, Zurcher C, Van den Enden-Vieveen MH, de Leeuw AM. Animal model of human disease. Multiple myeloma. Am J Pathol 1988;132:593.
69. Huang YW, Richardson JA, Vitetta ES. Anti-CD54 (ICAM-1) has antitumor activity in SCID mice with human myeloma cells. Cancer Res 1995;55:610.
70. Feo-Zuppardi FJ, Taylor CW, Iwato K, et al. Long-term engraftment of fresh human myeloma cells in SCID mice. Blood 1992;80:2843.
71. Ahsmann EJ, van Tol MJ, Oudeman-Gruber J, et al. The SCID mouse as a model for multiple myeloma. Br J Haematol 1995;89:319.
72. Urashima M, Chen BP, Chen S, et al. The development of a model for the homing of multiple myeloma cells to human bone marrow. Blood 1997;90:754.
73. Yaccoby S, Barlogie B, Epstein J. Primary myeloma cells growing in SCID-hu mice: a model for studying the biology and treatment of myeloma and its manifestations. Blood 1998;92:2908.
74. Yaccoby S, Barlogie B, Epstein J. Primary myeloma cells growing in SCID-hu mice: a model for studying the biology and treatment of myeloma and its manifestations. Blood 1998;92:2908.
75. Sawyer J, Waldron J, Jagannath S, Barlogie B. Cytogenetics findings in 200 patients with multiple myeloma. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1995;82:41.
76. Dewald GW, Kyle RA, Hicks GA, Greipp PR. The clinical significance of cytogenetic studies in 100 patients with multiple myeloma, plasma cell leukemia, or amyloidosis. Blood 1985;66:380.
77. Gould J, Alexanian R, Goodacre A, et al. Plasma cell karyotype in multiple myeloma. Blood 1988;71:453.
78. Sawyer JR, Lukacs JL, Munshi N, et al. Identification of new nonrandom translocations in multiple myeloma with multicolor spectral karyotyping. Blood 1998;92:4269.
79. Perez-Simon JA, Garcia-Sanz R, Tabernero MD, et al. Prognostic value of numerical chromosome aberrations in multiple myeloma: a FISH analysis of 15 different chromosomes. Blood
1998;91:3366.
80. Tricot G, Sawyer J, Jagannath S, et al. Poor prognosis in multiple myeloma is associated only with partial or complete deletion of chromosome 13 or abnormalities involving 11q and not with
other karyotype abnormalities. Blood 1995;86:4250.
81. Dao DD, Sawyer JR, Epstein J, et al. Deletion on of the retinoblastoma gene on multiple myeloma. Leukemia 1994;8:1280.
82. Shaughnessy J, Barlogie B. Chromosome 13 deletion in myeloma. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1999;246:199.
83. Urashima M, Ogata A, Chauhan D, et al. Interleukin-6 promotes multiple myeloma cell growth via phosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein. Blood 1996;88:2219.
84. Ng MH, Chung YF, Lo KW, et al. Frequent hypermethylation of p16 and p15 genes in multiple myeloma. Blood 1997;89:2500.
85. Tasaka T, Berenson J, Vescio R, et al. Analysis of the p16INK4A, p15INK4B and p18INK4C genes in multiple myeloma. Br J Haematol 1997;96:98.
86. Urashima M, Teoh G, Ogata A, et al. Characterization of p16(INK4A) expression in multiple myeloma and plasma cell leukemia. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:2173.
87. Kawano MM, Mahmoud MS, Ishikawa H. Cyclin D1 and p16INK4A are preferentially expressed in immature and mature myeloma cells, respectively. Br J Haematol 1997;99:131.

88. Hallek M, Bergsagel LP, Anderson KD. Multiple myeloma: increasing evidence for a multistep transformation process. Blood 1998;91:3.
89. Avet-Loiseau H, Li JY, Morineau N, et al. Monosomy 13 is associated with the transition of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance to multiple myeloma. Intergroupe
Francophone du Myelome. Blood 1999;94:2583.
90. Chesi M, Bergsagel PL, Brents LA, et al. Dysregulation of cyclin D1 by translocation into an IgH gamma switch region in two multiple myeloma cell lines [see comments]. Blood 1996;88:674.
91. Chesi M, Nardini E, Brents LA, et al. Frequent translocation t(4;14)(p16.3;q32.3) in multiple myeloma is associated with increased expression and activating mutations of fibroblast growth factor
receptor 3. Nat Genet 1997;16:260.
92. Chesi M, Nardini E, Lim RS, et al. The t(4;14) translocation in myeloma dysregulates both FGFR3 and a novel gene, MMSET, resulting in IgH/MMSET hybrid transcripts. Blood 1998;92:3025.
93. Chesi M, Bergsagel PL, Shonukan OO, et al. Frequent dysregulation of the c-maf proto-oncogene at 16q23 by translocation to an Ig locus in multiple myeloma. Blood 1998;91:4457.
94. Iida S, Rao PH, Butler M, et al. Deregulation of MUM1/IRF4 by chromosomal translocation in multiple myeloma. Nat Genet 1997;17:226.
95. Mahmoud MS, Huang N, Nobuyoshi M, et al. Altered expression of Pax-5 gene in human myeloma cells. Blood 1996;87:4311.
96. Neri A, Baldini L, Trecca D, et al. p53 gene mutations in multiple myeloma are associated with advanced forms of malignancy. Blood 1993;81:128.
97. Drach J, Ackermann J, Fritz E, et al. Presence of a p53 gene deletion in patients with multiple myeloma predicts for short survival after conventional-dose chemotherapy. Blood 1998;92:802.
98. Portier M, Moles JP, Mazars GR, et al. p53 and RAS gene mutations in multiple myeloma. Oncogene 1992;7:2539.
99. Teoh G, Urashima M, Ogata A, et al. MDM2 protein overexpression promotes proliferation and survival of multiple myeloma cells. Blood 1997;90:1982.
100. Selvanayagam P, Blick M, Narni F, et al. Alteration and abnormal expression of the c-myc oncogene in human multiple myeloma. Blood 1988;71:30.
101. Greil R, Fasching B, Loidl P, Huber H. Expression of the c-Myc proto-oncogene in multiple myeloma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia: an in situ analysis. Blood 1991;78:180.
102. Pettersson M, Jernberg-Wiklund H, Larsson LG, et al. Expression of the Bcl-2 gene in human multiple myeloma cell lines and normal plasma cells. Blood 1992;79:495.
103. Puthier D, Pellat-Deceunynck C, Barille S, et al. Differential expression of Bcl-2 in human plasma cell disorders according to proliferation status and malignancy. Leukemia 1999;13:289.
104. Tu Y, Xu FH, Liu J, et al. Upregulated expression of BCL-2 in multiple myeloma cells induced by exposure to doxorubicin, etoposide, and hydrogen peroxide. Blood 1996;88:1805.
105. Tu Y, Renner S, Xu F, et al. BCL-X expression in multiple myeloma: possible indicator of chemoresistance. Cancer Res 1998;58:256.
106. Sangfelt O, Osterborg A, Grander D, et al. Response to interferon therapy in patients with multiple myeloma correlates with expression of the Bcl-2 oncoprotein. Int J Cancer 1995;63:190.
107. Ogata A, Chauhan D, Urashima M, et al. Blockade of mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade signaling in interleukin 6-independent multiple myeloma cells. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:1017.
108. Catlett-Falcone R, Landowski TH, Oshiro MM, et al. Constitutive activation of Stat3 signaling confers resistance to apoptosis in human U266 myeloma cells. Immunity 1999;10:105.
109. Feinman R, Koury J, Thames M, et al. Role of NF-kappaB in the rescue of multiple myeloma cells from glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis by bcl-2. Blood 1999;93:3044.
110. Shammas M, Batchu RB, Hurley LH, et al. Inhibitors of telomerase can reduce the proliferative potential of myeloma cells. Blood 1999;94:311a.
111. Sahota SS, Davis Z, Hamblin TFS. Discordant somatic mutation of immunoglobulin variable region genes and bcl-6 genes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 1999;94:662.
112. Klein B, Zhang XG, Lu ZY, Bataille R. Interleukin-6 in human multiple myeloma. Blood 1995;85:863.
113. Klein B, Zhang X, Jourdan M, et al. Paracrine rather than autocrine regulation of myeloma-cell growth and differentiation by interleukin-6. Blood 1989;73:517.
114. Anderson KC, Lust JA. Role of cytokines in multiple myeloma. Semin Hematol 1999;36:14.
115. Treon SP, Anderson KC. Interleukin-6 in multiple myeloma and related plasma cell dyscrasias. Curr Opin Hematol 1998;5:42.
116. Hata H, Xiao HQ, Petrucci MT, et al. Interleukin-6 gene expression in multiple myeloma: a characteristic of immature myeloma cells. Blood 1993;81:3357.
117. Villunger A, Egle A, Kos M, et al. Constituents of autocrine IL-6 loops in myeloma cell lines and their targeting for suppression of neoplastic growth by antibody strategies. Int J Cancer
1996;65:498.
118. Grigorieva I, Thomas X, Epstein J. The bone marrow stromal environment is a major factor in myeloma cell resistance to dexamethasone. Exp Hematol 1998;26:597.
119. Hardin J, MacLeod S, Grigorieva I, et al. Interleukin-6 prevents dexamethasone-induced myeloma cell death. Blood 1994;84:3063.
120. Papadaki H, Kyriakou D, Foudoulakis A, et al. Serum levels of soluble IL-6 receptor in multiple myeloma as indicator of disease activity. Acta Haematol 1997;97:191.
121. Brandt SJ, Bodine DM, Dunbar CE, Nienhuis AW. Dysregulated interleukin 6 expression produces a syndrome resembling Castleman's disease in mice. J Clin Invest 1990;86:592.
122. Bataille R, Barlogie B, Lu ZY, et al. Biologic effects of anti-interleukin-6 murine monoclonal antibody in advanced multiple myeloma. Blood 1995;86:685.
123. Legouffe E, Liautard J, Gaillard JP, et al. Human anti-mouse antibody response to the injection of murine monoclonal antibodies against IL-6. Clin Exp Immunol 1994;98:323.
124. Cozzolino F, Torcia M, Aldinucci D, et al. Production of interleukin-1 by bone marrow myeloma cells. Blood 1989;74:380.
125. Garrett R, Durie B, Nedwin G, et al. Production of lymphotoxin, a bone resorbing cytokine, by cultured human myeloma cells. N Engl J Med 1987;317:526.
126. Mundy GR, Raisz LG, Cooper RA, Schechter GP, Salmon SE. Evidence for the secretion of an osteoclast stimulating factor in myeloma. N Engl J Med 1974;291:1041.
127. Borset M, Hjorth-Hansen H, Seidel C, Sundan A, Waage A. Hepatocyte growth factor and its receptor c-met in multiple myeloma. Blood 1996;88:3998.
128. Klein B. Update of gp130 cytokines in multiple myeloma. Curr Opin Hematol 1998;5:186.
129. Tupitsyn N, Kadagidze Z, Gaillard JP, et al. Functional interaction of the gp80 and gp130 IL-6 receptors in human B cell malignancies. Clin Lab Haematol 1998;20:345.
130. Nishimoto N, Ogata A, Shima Y, et al. Oncostatin M, leukemia inhibitory factor, and interleukin 6 induce the proliferation of human plasmacytoma cells via the common signal transducer,
gp130. J Exp Med 1994;179:1343.
131. Jourdan M, Tarte K, Legouffe E, et al. Tumor necrosis factor is a survival and proliferation factor for human myeloma cells. Eur Cytokine Network 1999;10:65.
132. Georgii-Hemming P, Wiklund HJ, Ljunggren O, Nilsson K. Insulin-like growth factor I is a growth and survival factor in human multiple myeloma cell lines. Blood 1996; 88:2250.
133. Hjorth-Hansen H, Waage A, Borset M. Interleukin-15 blocks apoptosis and induces proliferation of the human myeloma cell line OH-2 and freshly isolated myeloma cells. Br J Haematol
1999;106:28.
134. Jelinek DF, Witzig TE, Arendt BK. A role for insulin-like growth factor in the regulation of IL-6-responsive human myeloma cell line growth. J Immunol 1997;159:487.
135. Epstein J. Myeloma stem cell phenotype. Implications for treatment. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1997;11:43.
136. Vacca A, Ribatti D, Presta M, et al. Bone marrow neovascularization, plasma cell angiogenic potential, and matrix metalloproteinase-2 secretion parallel progression of human multiple
myeloma. Blood 1999;93:3064.
137. Vacca A, Ribatti D, Roncali L, et al. Bone marrow angiogenesis and progression in multiple myeloma. Br J Haematol 1994;87:503.
138. Munshi N, Wilson C, Penn J, et al. Angiogenesis in newly diagnosed multiple myeloma (MM): poor prognosis with increased microvessel density (MVD) in bone marrow biopsies (BMBX). Blood
1998;92:98a.
139. Bellamy WT, Richter L, Frutiger Y, Grogan TM. Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptors in hematopoietic malignancies. Cancer Res 1999; 59:728.
140. Singhal S, Mehta J, Desikan R, et al. Antitumor activity of thalidomide in refractory multiple myeloma [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1565.
141. Ridley RC, Xiao H, Hata H, et al. Expression of syndecan regulates human myeloma plasma cell adhesion to type I collagen. Blood 1993;81:767.
142. Teoh G, Anderson KC. Interaction of tumor and host cells with adhesion and extracellular matrix molecules in the development of multiple myeloma. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1997;11:27.
143. Dhodapkar MV, Sanderson RD. Syndecan-1 (CD 138) in myeloma and lymphoid malignancies: a multifunctional regulator of cell behavior within the tumor microenvironment. Leuk Lymphoma
1999;34:35.
144. Dhodapkar MV, Abe E, Theus A, et al. Syndecan-1 is a multifunctional regulator of myeloma pathobiology: control of tumor cell survival, growth, and bone cell differentiation. Blood
1998;91:2679.
145. Wijdenes J, Vooijs WC, Clement C, et al. A plasmocyte selective monoclonal antibody (B-B4) recognizes syndecan-1. Br J Haematol 1996;94:318.
146. Vacca A, Di Loreto M, Ribatti D, et al. Bone marrow of patients with active multiple myeloma: angiogenesis and plasma cell adhesion molecules LFA-1, VLA-4, LAM-1, and CD44. Am J
Hematol 1995;50:9.
147. Vallario A, Chilosi M, Adami F, et al. Human myeloma cells express the CD38 ligand CD31. Br J Haematol 1999;105:441.
148. Barille S, Akhoundi C, Collette M, et al. Metalloproteinases in multiple myeloma: production of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), activation of proMMP-2, and induction of MMP-1 by
myeloma cells. Blood 1997;90:1649.
149. Kaushal GP, Xiong X, Athota AB, et al. Syndecan-1 expression suppresses the level of myeloma matrix metalloproteinase-9. Br J Haematol 1999;104:365.
150. Dhodapkar MV, Kelly T, Theus A, et al. Elevated levels of shed syndecan-1 correlate with tumour mass and decreased matrix metalloproteinase-9 activity in the serum of patients with multiple
myeloma [published erratum appears in Br J Haematol 1998 May;101:398]. Br J Haematol 1997;99:368.
151. Jensen GS, Mant MJ, Pilarski LM. Sequential maturation stages of monoclonal B lineage cells from blood, spleen, lymph node, and bone marrow from a terminal myeloma patient. Am J
Hematol 1992;41:199.
152. Pilarski LM, Jensen GS. Monoclonal circulating B cells in multiple myeloma. A continuously differentiating, possibly invasive, population as defined by expression of CD45 isoforms and
adhesion molecules. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1992;6:297.
153. Jensen GS, Mant MJ, Belch AJ, et al. Selective expression of CD45 isoforms defines CALLA+ monoclonal B-lineage cells in peripheral blood from myeloma patients as late stage B cells. Blood
1991;78:711.
154. Kawano MM, Huang N, Harada H, et al. Identification of immature and mature myeloma cells in the bone marrow of human myelomas. Blood 1993;82:564.
155. Epstein J, Barlogie B, Katzmann J, Alexanian R. Phenotypic heterogeneity in aneuploid multiple myeloma indicates pre-B cell involvement. Blood 1988;71:861.
156. Omede P, Boccadoro M, Fusaro A, Gallone G, Pileri A. Multiple myeloma: ‘early' plasma cell phenotype identifies patients with aggressive biological and clinical characteristics. Br J Haematol
1993;85:504.
157. Kawano MM, Mahmoud MS, Huang N, et al. High proportions of VLA-5- immature myeloma cells correlated well with poor response to treatment in multiple myeloma. Br J Haematol
1995;91:860.
158. Zhang XG, Olive D, Devos J, et al. Malignant plasma cell lines express a functional CD28 molecule. Leukemia 1998;12:610.
159. Robillard N, Jego G, Pellat-Deceunynck C, et al. CD28, a marker associated with tumoral expansion in multiple myeloma. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:1521.
160. Treon SP, Shima Y, Preffer FI, et al. Treatment of plasma cell dyscrasias by antibody-mediated immunotherapy. Semin Oncology 1999;26:97.
161. Thomas X, Xiao HQ, Chang R, Epstein J. Circulating B lymphocytes in multiple myeloma patients contain an autocrine IL-6 driven pre-myeloma cell population. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol
1992;182:201.
162. Pilarski LM, Andrews EJ, Mant MJ, Ruether BA. Humoral immune deficiency in multiple myeloma patients due to compromised B-cell function. J Clin Immunol 1986;6:491.
163. Munshi NC. Immunoregulatory mechanisms in multiple myeloma. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1997;11:51.
164. Pilarski LM, Mant MJ, Ruether BA, et al. Abnormal clonogenic potential of T cells from multiple myeloma patients. Blood 1985;66:1266.
165. Herrmann F, Lochner A, Jauer B, Sieber G, Ruhl H. Lymphocyte subsets in the peripheral blood of patients with multiple myeloma and benign monoclonal gammopathy. Klin Wochensch
1983;61:819.
166. Ludwig H, Fritz E. [Lymphocyte subpopulations in multiple myeloma. Shift in the helper/suppressor cell relation]. Acta Medica Austriaca 1982;9:215.
167. Mellstedt H, Holm G, Pettersson D, et al. T cells in monoclonal gammopathies. Scand J Haematol 1982;29:57.
168. Mills KH, Cawley JC. Abnormal monoclonal antibody-defined helper/suppressor T-cell subpopulations in multiple myeloma: relationship to treatment and clinical stage. Br J Haematol
1983;53:271.
169. Osterborg A, Nilsson B, Bjorkholm M, Holm G, Mellstedt H. Natural killer cell activity in monoclonal gammopathies: relation to disease activity. Eur J Haematol 1990;45:153.
170. Yi Q, Osterborg A, Bergenbrant S, et al. Idiotype-reactive T-cell subsets and tumor load in monoclonal gammopathies. Blood 1995;86:3043.
171. Yi Q, Osterborg A. Idiotype-specific T cells in multiple myeloma: targets for an immunotherapeutic intervention? Med Oncol 1996;13:1.
172. Solomon A, Weiss DT, Kattine AA. Nephrotoxic potential of Bence Jones proteins [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1845.
173. Khamlichi AA, Rocca A, Touchard G, et al. Role of light chain variable region in myeloma with light chain deposition disease: evidence from an experimental model. Blood 1995;86:3655.
174. Pozzi C, Fogazzi GB, Banfi G, et al. Renal disease and patient survival in light chain deposition disease. Clin Nephrol 1995;43:281.
175. Kyle RA. Monoclonal proteins and renal disease. Annu Rev Med 1994;45:71.
176. Clark AD, Shetty A, Soutar R. Renal failure and multiple myeloma: pathogenesis and treatment of renal failure and management of underlying myeloma. Blood Rev 1999;13:79.
177. Huang ZQ, Sanders PW. Localization of a single binding site for immunoglobulin light chains on human Tamm-Horsfall glycoprotein. J Clin Invest 1997;99:732.
178. Huang ZQ, Sanders PW. Biochemical interaction between Tamm-Horsfall glycoprotein and Ig light chains in the pathogenesis of cast nephropathy. Lab Invest 1995;73:810.

179. Sanders PW. Pathogenesis and treatment of myeloma kidney. J Lab Clin Med 1994;124:484.
180. Huang ZQ, Kirk KA, Connelly KG, Sanders PW. Bence Jones proteins bind to a common peptide segment of Tamm-Horsfall glycoprotein to promote heterotypic aggregation. J Clin Invest
1993;92:2975.
181. Reeves WB, Foley RJ, Weinman EJ. Nephrotoxicity from nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. South Med J 1985;78:318.
182. Kyle RA, Greipp PR. Amyloidosis (AL): clinical and laboratory features in 229 cases. Mayo Clin Proc 1983;58:665.
183. Fattori E, Della Rocca C, Costa P, et al. Development of progressive kidney damage and myeloma kidney in interleukin-6 transgenic mice. Blood 1994;83:2570.
184. Roodman GD. Mechanisms of bone lesions in multiple myeloma and lymphoma. Cancer 1997;80:1557.
185. Lacey DL, Timms E, Tan HL, et al. Osteoprotegerin ligand is a cytokine that regulates osteoclast differentiation and activation. Cell 1998;93:165.
186. Simonet WS, Lacey DL, Dunstan CR, et al. Osteoprotegerin: a novel secreted protein involved in the regulation of bone density [see comments]. Cell 1997;89:309.
187. Tricot G. New Insights into role of microenvironment in multiple myeloma. Lancet 2000;355:248.
188. Ullrich S, Zolla-Pazner S. Immunoregulatory circuits in myeloma. Clin Haematol 1982;11:87.
189. Broder S, Humphrey R, Durm M, et al. Impaired synthesis of polyclonal (non-paraprotein) immunoglobulins by circulating lymphocytes from patients with multiple myeloma Role of suppressor
cells. N Engl J Med 1975;293:887.
190. Jacobson DR, Zolla-Pazner S. Immunosuppression and infection in multiple myeloma. Semin Oncol 1986;13:282.
191. Cook G, Campbell JD, Carr CE, Boyd KS, Franklin IM. Transforming growth factor beta from multiple myeloma cells inhibits proliferation and IL-2 responsiveness in T lymphocytes. J Leukocyte
Biol 1999;66:981.
192. Kyrtsonis MC, Repa C, Dedoussis GV, et al. Serum transforming growth factor-beta 1 is related to the degree of immunoparesis in patients with multiple myeloma. Med Oncol 1998;15:124.
193. Urashima M, Ogata A, Chauhan D, et al. Transforming growth factor-beta1: differential effects on multiple myeloma versus normal B cells. Blood 1996;87:1928.
194. Soubrier MJ, Dubost JJ, Sauvezie BJM. Syndrome at FSGoP. POEMS syndrome: a study of 25 cases and a review of the literature. Am J Med 1994;97:543.
195. Schey S. Osteosclerotic myeloma and ‘POEMS' syndrome. Blood Rev 1996;10:75.
196. Lacy MQ, Gertz MA, Hanson CA, Inwards DJ, Kyle RA. Multiple myeloma associated with diffuse osteosclerotic bone lesions: a clinical entity distinct from osteosclerotic myeloma (POEMS
syndrome). Am J Hematol 1997;56:288.
197. Miralles GD, O'Fallon JR, Talley NJ. Plasma-cell dyscrasia with polyneuropathy. The spectrum of POEMS syndrome. N Engl J Med 1992;327:1919.
198. Waldenstrom JG, Adner A, Gydell K, Zettervall O. Osteosclerotic “plasmocytoma” with polyneuropathy, hypertrichosis and diabetes. Acta Med Scand 1978;203:297.
199. Leifer D, Grabowski T, Simonian N, Demirjian ZN. Leptomeningeal myelomatosis presenting with mental status changes and other neurologic findings. Cancer 1992;70:1899.
200. Truong LD, Kim HS, Estrada R. Meningeal myeloma. Am J Clin Pathol 1982;78:532.
201. Pruzanski W, Watt JG. Serum viscosity and hyperviscosity syndrome in IgG multiple myeloma. Report on 10 patients and a review of the literature. Ann Intern Med 1972;77:853.
202. Preston FE, Cooke KB, Foster ME, Winfield DA, Lee D. Myelomatosis and the hyperviscosity syndrome. Br J Haematol 1978;38:517.
203. Chandy KG, Stockley RA, Leonard RC, et al. Relationship between serum viscosity and intravascular IgA polymer concentration in IgA myeloma. Clin Exp Immunol 1981;46:653.
204. Capra JD, Kunkel HG. Aggregation of gamma-G3 proteins: relevance to the hyperviscosity syndrome. J Clin Invest 1970;49:610.
205. Perkins HA, MacKenzie MR, Fudenberg HH. Hemostatic defects in dysproteinemias. Blood 1970;35:695.
206. Lackner H. Hemostatic abnormalities associated with dysproteinemias. Semin Hematol 1973;10:125.
207. Kelsey PR, Leyland MJ. Acquired inhibitor to human factor VIII associated with paraproteinaemia and subsequent development of chronic lymphatic leukaemia. Br Med J Clin Res Ed
1982;285:174.
208. Deitcher SR, Erban JK, Limentani SA. Acquired free protein S deficiency associated with multiple myeloma: a case report. Am J Hematol 1996;51:319.
209. Coleman M, Vigliano EM, Weksler ME, Nachman RL. Inhibition of fibrin monomer polymerization by lambda myeloma globulins. Blood 1972;39:210.
210. Furie B, Greene E, Furie BC. Syndrome of acquired factor X deficiency and systemic amyloidosis in vivo studies of the metabolic fate of factor X. N Engl J Med 1977;297:81.
211. Barlogie B, Smallwood L, Smith T, Alexanian R. High serum levels of lactic dehydrogenase identify a high-grade lymphoma-like myeloma. Ann Intern Med 1989;110:521.
212. Pizzolato M, Bragantini G, Bresciani P, et al. IgG1-kappa biclonal gammopathy associated with multiple myeloma suggests a regulatory mechanism. Br J Haematol 1998;102:503.
213. Zent CS, Wilson CS, Tricot G, et al. Oligoclonal protein bands and Ig isotype switching in multiple myeloma treated with high-dose therapy and hematopoietic cell transplantation. Blood
1998;91:3518.
214. Kozuru M, Uike N, Takahira H, et al. Immunoglobulin class switch from IgA1 to IgG2 and simultaneous association with Bence Jones proteinuria in the escape phase in a myeloma patient
treated with interferon alpha. Br J Haematol 1997;98:114.
215. Billadeau D, Quam L, Thomas W, et al. Detection and quantitation of malignant cells in the peripheral blood of multiple myeloma patients. Blood 1992;80:1818.
216. Barlogie B, Gale RP. Multiple myeloma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia: commonalities and differences in biology and therapy. Leuk Lymphoma 1991;26:27.
217. Bartl R, Frisch B. Clinical significance of bone marrow biopsy and plasma cell morphology in MM and MGUS. Pathol Biol (Paris) 1999;47:158.
218. Barlogie B, Alexanian R, Pershouse M, Smallwood L, Smith L. Cytoplasmic immunoglobulin content in multiple myeloma. J Clin Invest 1985;76:765.
219. Latreille J, Barlogie B, Dosik G, et al. Cellular DNA content as a marker of human multiple myeloma. Blood 1980;55:403.
220. Latreille J, Barlogie B, Johnston D, Drewinko B, Alexanian R. Ploidy and proliferative characteristics in monoclonal gammopathies. Blood 1982;59:43.
221. Bergsagel PL, Nardini E, Brents L, Chesi M, Kuehl WM. IgH translocations in multiple myeloma: a nearly universal event that rarely involves c-myc. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1997;224:283.
222. Tricot G, Sawyer JR, Jagannath S, et al. Unique role of cytogenetics in the prognosis of patients with myeloma receiving high-dose therapy and autotransplants. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2659.
223. Sawyer JR, Tricot G, Mattox S, Jagannath S, Barlogie B. Jumping translocations of chromosome 1q in multiple myeloma: evidence for a mechanism involving decondensation of
pericentromeric heterochromatin. Blood 1998;91:1732.
224. Govindarajan R, Jagannath S, Flick J, et al. Preceeding standard therapy is the likely cause of MDS after autotransplants for multiple myeloma. Br J Haematol 1996;95:349.
225. Dao DD, Sawyer JR, Epstein J, et al. Deletion of the retinoblastoma gene in multiple myeloma. Leukemia 1994;8:1280.
226. Avet-Loiseau H, Li JY, Facon T, et al. High incidence of translocations t(11;14)(q13;q32) and t(4;14)(p16;q32) in patients with plasma cell malignancies. Cancer Res 1998;58:5640.
227. Greipp PR, Katzmann JA, O'Fallon WM, Kyle RA. Value of b 2-microglobulin level and plasma cell labeling indices as prognotic factors in patients with newly diagnosed myeloma. Blood
1988;72:219.
228. Durie BG, Salmon SE, Moon TE. Pretreatment tumor mass, cell kinetics, and prognosis in multiple myeloma. Blood 1980;55:364.
229. Witzig TE, Gonchoroff NJ, Katzmann JA, et al. Peripheral blood B-cell labeling indices are a measure of disease activity in patients with monoclonal gammopathies. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1041.
230. Greipp PR, Lust JA, O'Fallon WM, et al. Plasma cell labeling index and beta 2-microglobulin predict survival independent of thymidine kinase and C-reactive protein in multiple myeloma [see
comments]. Blood 1993;81:3382.
231. Agren B, Lonnqvist B, Björkstrand B, Rudberg U, Aspelin P. Radiography and bone scintigraphy in bone marrow transplant multiple myeloma patients. Acta Radiol 1997;38:144.
232. Mariette X, Khalifa P, Ravaud P, et al. Bone densitometry in patients with multiple myeloma [see comments]. Am J Med 1992;93:595.
233. Mariette X, Bergot C, Ravaud P, et al. Evolution of bone densitometry in patients with myeloma treated with conventional or intensive therapy. Cancer 1995;76:1559.
234. Chodimella U, Dhodapkar M, Weinstein R, et al. Differential effects of pamidronate (PAM) on cortical and cancellous bone in patients with myeloma (MM) undergoing autotransplants (AT). Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998:10.
235. Moulopoulos LA, Dimopoulos MA, Weber D, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging in the staging of solitary plasmacytoma of bone. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1311.
236. Moulopoulos LA, Dimopoulos MA, Smith T, et al. Prognostic significance of magnetic resonance imaging in patients with asymptomatic multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:251.
237. Moulopoulos LA, Dimopoulos MA. Magnetic resonance imaging of the bone marrow in hematologic malignancies. Blood 1997;90:2127.
238. Vande Berg BC, Lecouvet FE, Michaux L, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging of the bone marrow in hematological malignancies. Eur Radiol 1998;8:1335.
239. Kusumoto S, Jinnai I, Itoh K, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging patterns in patients with multiple myeloma. Br J Haematol 1997;99:649.
240. el-Shirbiny AM, Yeung H, Imbriaco M, et al. Technetium-99m-MIBI versus fluorine-18-FDG in diffuse multiple myeloma. J Nucl Med 1997;38:1208.
241. Merlini G, Waldenstrom JG, Jayakar SD. A new improved clinical staging system for multiple myeloma based on analysis of 123 treated patients. Blood 1980;55:1011.
242. Woodruff RK, Wadsworth J, Malpas JS, Tobias JS. Clinical staging in multiple myeloma. Br J Haematol 1979;42:199.
243. Kyle RA, Greipp PR. Smoldering multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med 1980;302:1347.
244. Salmon SE, Smith BA. Immunoglobulin synthesis and total body tumor cell number in IgG multiple myeloma. J Clin Invest 1970;49:1114.
245. Durie B, Salmon S. Clinical staging system for myeloma: correlation of measured myeloma cell mass with presenting clinical features, response to treatment, and survival. Cancer 1975;36:842.
246. Bergsagel DE, Bailey AJ, Langley GR, et al. The chemotherapy on plasma-cell myeloma and the incidence of acute leukemia. N Engl J Med 1979;301:743.
247. Barlogie B, Jagannath S, Desikan KR, et al. Total therapy with tandem transplants for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. Blood 1999;93:55.
248. Child JA, Norfolk DR, Cooper EH. Serum beta 2-microglobulin in myelomatosis [letter]. Br J Haematol 1986;63:406.
249. Garewal H, Durie BG, Kyle RA, et al. Serum beta 2-microglobulin in the initial staging and subsequent monitoring of monoclonal plasma cell disorders. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:51.
250. Vesole DH, Tricot G, Jagannath S, et al. Autotransplants in multiple myeloma: what have we learned? Blood 1996;88:838.
251. Witzig TE, Gertz MA, Lust JA, et al. Peripheral blood monoclonal plasma cells as a predictor of survival in patients with multiple myeloma [see comments]. Blood 1996;88:1780.
252. Barlogie B, Alexanian R, Dicke KA, et al. High-dose chemoradiotherapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation for resistant multiple myeloma. Blood 1987;70:869.
253. Mathiot C, Galon J, Tartour E, et al. S oluble CD16 in plasma cell dyscrasias. Leuk Lymphoma 1999;32:467.
254. Siegel DS, Desikan KR, Mehta J, et al. Age is not a prognostic variable with autotransplants for multiple myeloma. Blood 1999;93:51.
255. Dimopoulos MA, Moulopoulos A, Delasalle K, Alexanian R. Solitary plasmacytoma of bone and asymptomatic multiple myeloma. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1992;6:359.
256. Woodruff RK, Whittle JM, Malpas JS. Solitary plasmacytoma. I: extramedullary soft tissue plasmacytoma. Cancer 1979;43:2340.
257. Mill WB, Griffith R. The role of radiation therapy in the management of plasma cell tumors. Cancer 1980;45:647.
258. Liebross RH, Ha CS, Cox JD, et al. Solitary bone plasmacytoma: outcome and prognostic factors following radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:1063.
259. Corwin J, Lindberg RD. Solitary plasmacytoma of bone vs. extramedullary plasmacytoma. Cancer 1979;43:1007.
260. Woodruff RK, Malpas JS, White FE. Solitary plasmacytoma. II: solitary plasmacytoma of bone. Cancer 1979;43:2344.
261. Fruehwald FX, Tscholakoff D, Schwaighofer B, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging of the lower vertebral column in patients with multiple myeloma. Invest Radiol 1988;23:193.
262. Alexanian R. Localized and indolent myeloma. Blood 1980;56:521.
263. Dimopoulos MA, Moulopoulos A, Smith T, Delasalle KB, Alexanian R. Risk of disease progression in asymptomatic multiple myeloma. Am J Med 1993;94:57.
264. Bergsagel DE, Sprague CC, Austin C, Griffith KM. Evaluation of new chemotherapeutic agents in the treatment of myeloma IV: phenylalaine mustard. Cancer Chemother Rep 1962;21:87.
265. Alexanian R, Haut A, Khan AU, et al. Treatment for multiple myeloma. Combination chemotherapy with different melphalan dose regimens. JAMA 1969;208:1680.
266. Boccadoro M, Marmont F, Tribalto M, et al. Multiple myeloma: VMCP/VBAP alternating combination chemotherapy is not superior to melphalan and prednisone even in high-risk patients. J Clin
Oncol 1991;9:444.
267. Gregory WM, Richards MA, Malpas JS. Combination chemotherapy versus melphalan and prednisolone in the treatment of multiple myeloma: an overview of published trials [see comments]. J
Clin Oncol 1992;10:334.
268. Salmon SE, Haut A, Bonnet JD, et al. Alternating combination chemotherapy and levamisole improves survival in multiple myeloma: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. J Clin Oncol
1983;1:453.
269. MacLennan IC, Chapman C, Dunn J, Kelly K. Combined chemotherapy with ABCM versus melphalan for treatment of myelomatosis. The Medical Research Council Working Party for
Leukaemia in Adults [see comments]. Lancet 1992;339:200.
270. Hansen OP, Clausen NA, Drivsholm A, Laursen B. Phase III study of intermittent 5-drug regimen (VBCMP) versus intermittent 3-drug regimen (VMP) versus intermittent melphalan and
prednisone (MP) in myelomatosis. Scand J Haematol 1985;35:518.
271. Birgens HS, Hansen OP, Clausen NT. A methodological evaluation of 14 controlled clinical trials in myelomatosis. Scand J Haematol 1985;35:26.
272. Palva IP, Ahrenberg P, Ala-Harja K, et al. Treatment of multiple myeloma with an intensive 5-drug combination or intermittent melphalan and prednisone; a randomised multicentre trial. Finnish

Leukaemia Group. Eur J Haematol 1987;38:50.
273. Palva IP, Ahrenberg P, Ala-Harja K, et al. Treatment of multiple myeloma in old patients. Finnish Leukaemia Group. Eur J Haematol 1989;43:328.
274. Palva IP, Ahrenberg P, Ala Harja K, et al. Intensive chemotherapy with combinations containing anthracyclines for refractory and relapsing multiple myeloma. Finnish Leukaemia Group. Eur J
Haematol 1990;44:121.
275. Cohen HJ, Silberman HR, Tornyos K, Bartolucci AA. Comparison of two long-term chemotherapy regimens, with or without agents to modify skeletal repair, in multiple myeloma. Blood
1984;63:639.
276. Kildahl-Andersen O, Bjark P, Bondevik A, et al. Multiple myeloma in central and northern Norway 19811982: a follow-up study of a randomized clinical trial of 5-drug combination therapy
versus standard therapy. Eur J Haematol 1988;41:47.
277. Cooper MR, McIntyre OR, Propert KJ, et al. Single, sequential, and multiple alkylating agent therapy for multiple myeloma: a CALGB Study. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1331.
278. Pavlovsky S, Saslavsky J, Tezanos Pinto M, et al. A randomized trial of melphalan and prednisone versus melphalan, prednisone, cyclophosphamide, MeCCNU, and vincristine in untreated
multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:836.
279. Barlogie B, Smith L, Alexanian R. Effective treatment of advanced multiple myeloma refractory to alkylating agents. N Engl J Med 1984;310:1353.
280. Alexanian R, Barlogie B, Dixon D. High-dose glucocorticoid treatment of resistant myeloma. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:8.
281. Salmon SE, Crowley JJ, Grogan TM, et al. Combination chemotherapy, glucocorticoids, and interferon alfa in the treatment of multiple myeloma: a Southwest Oncology Group study [see
comments]. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2405.
282. Mandelli F, Avvisati F, Amadori S, et al. Maintenance treatment with recombinant interferon alfa-2b in patients with multiple myeloma responding to conventional induction chemotherapy. N
Engl J Med 1990;322:1430.
283. Gisslinger H. Interferon alpha in the therapy of multiple myeloma. Leukemia 1997;11(Suppl 5):S52.
284. Ludwig H, Cohen AM, Polliack A, et al. Interferon-alpha for induction and maintenance in multiple myeloma: results of two multicenter randomized trials and summary of other studies. Ann
Oncol 1995;6:467.
285. Ludwig H, Fritz E, Zulian GB, Browman GP. Should-alpha-interferon be included as standard treatment in multiple myeloma? Eur J Cancer 1998;34:12.
286. Hu K, Yahalom J. Radiotherapy in the management of plasma cell tumors. Oncology 2000;14:101.
287. Wallington M, Mendis S, Premawardhana U, et al. Local control and survival in spinal cord compression from lymphoma and myeloma. Radiother Oncol 1997;42:43.
288. Rowell NP, Tobias JS. The role of radiotherapy in the management of multiple myeloma. Blood Rev 1991;5:84.
289. Barlogie B, Dicke KA, Alexanian R. High dose melphalan for refractory myelomathe M.D. Anderson experience. Hematol Oncol 1988;6:167.
290. McElwain TJ, Selby PJ, Gore ME, et al. High-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation for myeloma. Eur J Haematol 1989;51(Suppl):152.
291. Attal M, Harousseau JL, Stoppa AM, et al. A prospective, randomized trial of autologous bone marrow transplantation and chemotherapy in multiple myeloma. Intergroupe Francais du
Myelome. N Engl J Med 1996;335:91.
292. Barlogie B, Jagannath S, Vesole D, et al. Superiority of tandem autologous transplantation over standard therapy for previously untreated multiple myeloma. Blood 1996;89:789.
293. Cunningham D, Paz-Ares L, Milan S, et al. High-dose melphalan and autologous bone marrow transplantation as consolidation in previously untreated myeloma. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:759.
294. Cunningham D, Paz-Ares L, Gore ME, et al. High-dose melphalan for multiple myeloma: long-term follow-up data. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:764.
295. Bensinger WI, Rowley SD, Demirer T, et al. High-dose therapy followed by autologous hematopoietic stem-cell infusion for patients with multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1447.
296. Fermand JP, Ravaud P, Chevret S, et al. High-dose therapy and autologous blood stem cell transplantation in multiple myeloma: preliminary results of a randomized trial involving 167 patients.
Stem Cells 1995;13:156.
297. Björkstrand B, Ljungman P, Bird JM, et al. Autologous stem cell transplantation in multiple myeloma: results of the European Group for Bone Marrow Transplantation. Stem Cells 1995;13:140.
298. Anderson KC, Andersen J, Soiffer R, et al. Monoclonal antibody-purged bone marrow transplantation therapy for multiple myeloma. Blood 1993;82:2568.
299. Reiffers J, Marit G, Boiron JM. Autologous blood stem cell transplantation in high-risk multiple myeloma [letter]. Br J Haematol 1989;72:296.
300. Harousseau JL, Attal M, Divine M, et al. Autologous stem cell transplantation after first remission induction treatment in multiple myeloma. A report of the French Registry on autologous
transplantation in multiple myeloma. Stem Cells 1995;13:132.
301. Harousseau JL, Milpied N, Laporte JP, et al. Double-intensive therapy in high-risk multiple myeloma. Blood 1992;79:2827.
302. Vesole DH, Barlogie B, Jagannath S, et al. High-dose therapy for refractory multiple myeloma: improved prognosis with better supportive care and double transplants. Blood 1994;84:950.
303. Björkstrand B, Ljungman P, Bird JM, Samson D, Gahrton G. Double high-dose chemoradiotherapy with autologous stem cell transplantation can induce molecular remissions in multiple
myeloma. Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;15:367.
304. Tricot G, Jagannath S, Vesole D, et al. Peripheral blood stem cell transplant for multiple myeloma: identification of favorable variables for rapid engraftment in 225 patients. Blood 1995;85:588.
305. Fermand JP, Ravaud P, Chevret S, et al. Early versus late high dose therapy and autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation in multiple myeloma. Blood 1996;88:685a.
306. Barlogie B, Alexanian R. Therapy of primary resistant and relapsed multiple myeloma. Onkologie 1986;9:210.
307. Desikan KR, Fassas A, Siegel D, et al. Superior outcome with melphalan 200 mg/m2 (MEL 200) for scheduled second autotransplant compared with MEL+TBI or CTX for myeloma (MM) in
pre-tx-2 PR. Blood 1997;90:231a.
308. Schey SA, Kazmi M, Ireland R, Lakhani A. The use of intravenous intermediate dose melphalan and dexamethasone as induction treatment in the management of de novo multiple myeloma.
Eur J Haematol 1998;61:306.
309. Selby P, Zulian G, Forgeson G, et al. The development of high dose melphalan and of autologous bone marrow transplantation in the treatment of multiple myeloma: Royal Marsden and St
Bartholomew's Hospital studies. Hematol Oncol 1988;6:173.
310. Jagannath S, Barlogie B. Autologous bone marrow transplantation for multiple myeloma. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1992;6:437.
311. Fermand JP, Levy Y, Gerota J, et al. Treatment of aggressive multiple myeloma by high-dose chemotherapy and total body irradiation followed by blood stem cells autologous graft. Blood
1989;73:20.
312. Ventura GJ, Barlogie B, Hester JP, et al. High dose cyclophosphamide, BCNU and VP-16 with autologous blood stem cell support for refractory multiple myeloma. Bone Marrow Transplant
1990;5:265.
313. Adkins DR, Salzman D, Boldt D, et al. Phase I trial of dacarbazine with cyclophosphamide, carmustine, etoposide, and autologous stem-cell transplantation in patients with lymphoma and
multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1890.
314. Lemoli RM, Fortuna A, Motta MR, et al. Concomitant mobilization of plasma cells and hematopoietic progenitors into peripheral blood of multiple myeloma patients: positive selection and
transplantation of enriched CD34+ cells to remove circulating tumor cells. Blood 1996;87:1625.
315. Vescio RA, Hong CH, Cao J, et al. The hematopoietic stem cell antigen, CD34, is not expressed on the malignant cells in multiple myeloma. Blood 1994;84:3283.
316. Schiller G, Vescio R, Freytes C, et al. Transplantation of CD34+ peripheral blood progenitor cells after high-dose chemotherapy for patients with advanced multiple myeloma. Blood
1995;86:390.
317. Gazitt Y, Reading CC, Hoffman R, et al. Purified CD34+Lin-Thy+ stem cells do not contain clonal myeloma cells. Blood 1995;86:381.
318. Tricot G, Gazitt Y, Leemhuis T, et al. Collection, tumor contamination, and engraftment kinetics of highly purified hematopoietic progenitor cells to support high dose therapy in multiple
myeloma. Blood 1998;91:4489.
319. Harousseau JL, Attal M, Divine M, et al. Comparison of autologous bone marrow transplantation and peripheral blood stem cell transplantation after first remission induction treatment in
multiple myeloma. Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;15:963.
320. Tricot G, Jagannath S, Vesole D, et al. Peripheral blood stem cell transplants for multiple myeloma: identification of favorable variables for rapid engraftment in 225 patients. Blood
1995;85:588.
321. Gazitt Y, Tian E, Barlogie B, et al. Differential mobilization of myeloma cells and normal hematopoietic stem cells in multiple myeloma after treatment with cyclophosphamide and
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. Blood 1996;87:805.
322. Palumbo A, Triolo S, Argentino C, et al. Dose-intensive melphalan with stem cell support (MEL100) is superior to standard treatment in elderly myeloma patients. Blood 1999;94:1248.
323. Barlogie B, Alexanian R, Jagannath S. Plasma cell dyscrasias. JAMA 1992;268:2946.
324. Tricot G, Alberts DS, Johnson C, et al. Safety of autotransplants with high-dose melphalan in renal failure: a pharmacokinetic and toxicity study. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:947.
325. Mansi J, da Costa F, Viner C, et al. High-dose busulfan in patients with myeloma. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1569.
326. Shapiro F, Engelhardt M, Ngok D, Han W, Moore MAS. Telomere length shortening and recovery following high-dose chemotherapy with autologous peripheral stem cell rescue. Blood
1997;88:601a.
327. Boultwood J, Fidler C, Kusec R, et al. Telomere length in myelodysplastic syndromes. Am J Hematol 1997;56:266.
328. Bensinger WI, Demirer T, Buckner CD, et al. Syngeneic marrow transplantation in patients with multiple myeloma. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;18:527.
329. Gahrton G. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in multiple myeloma. Pathol Biol (Paris) 1999;47:188.
330. Gahrton G, Tura S, Ljungman P, et al. An update of prognostic factors for allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in multiple myeloma using matched sibling donors. European Group for Blood
and Marrow Transplantation. Stem Cells 1995;13:122.
331. Gahrton G, Tura S, Ljungman P, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in multiple myeloma. European Group for bone marrow transplantation [see comments]. N Engl J Med
1991;325:1267.
332. Bensinger W, Buckner C, Anasetti C, et al. Allogeneic marrow transplantation for multiple myeloma: an analysis of risk factors on outcome. Blood 1996;88:2787.
333. Kulkarni S, Powles RL, Treleaven JG, et al. Impact of previous high-dose therapy on outcome after allografting for multiple myeloma. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;23:675.
334. Tricot G, Vesole DH, Jagannath S, et al. Graft-versus-myeloma effect: proof of principle. Blood 1996;87:1196.
335. Mehta J, Singhal S. Graft-versus-myeloma. Bone Marrow Transplant 1998;22:835.
336. Björkstrand B, Ljungman P, Svensson H, et al. Allogenic bone marrow transplantation versus autologous stem cell transplantation in multiple myeloma: a retrospective case-matched study from
the european group for blood and marrow transplantation. Blood 1996;88:4711.
337. Mehta J, Tricot G, Jagannath S, et al. Salvage autologous or allogeneic transplantation for multiple myeloma refractory to or relapsing after a first-line autograft? Bone Marrow Transplant
1998;21:887.
338. Mineur P, Menard JF, Le Loet X, et al. VAD or VMBCP in multiple myeloma refractory to or relapsing after cyclophosphamide-prednisone therapy (protocol MY 85). Br J Haematol
1998;103:512.
339. Gertz MA, Kalish LA, Kyle RA, et al. Phase III study comparing vincristine, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and dexamethasone (VAD) chemotherapy with VAD plus recombinant interferon alfa-2 in
refractory or relapsed multiple myeloma. An Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group study. Am J Clin Oncol 1995;18:475.
340. Dimopoulos MA, Weber D, Kantarjian H, Delasalle KB, Alexanian R. HyperCVAD for VAD-resistant multiple myeloma. Am J Hematol 1996;52:77.
341. Munshi NC, Desikan KR, Jagannath S, et al. Dexamethasone, cyclophosphamide, etoposide, and cis-platinum (DCEP): an effective regimen for relapse after high-dose chemotherapy and
autologous transplantation. Blood 1996;88:586a.
342. Desikan R, Siegel D, Fassas A, et al. DCEP consolidation after tandem autotransplants (AT) in high risk multiple myeloma (MM)improved prognosis compared with matched historical controls.
ASH Abstract , 1998.
343. Berenson JR, Lichtenstein A, Porter L, et al. Efficacy of pamidronate in reducing skeletal events in patients with advanced multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med 1996;334:488.
344. Apperley JF, Croucher PI. Bisphosphonates in multiple myeloma. Pathol Biol (Paris) 1999;47:178.
345. Berenson JR, Lipton A. Bisphosphonates in the treatment of malignant bone disease. Annu Rev Med 1999;510:237.
346. Shipman CM, Croucher PI, Russell RG, Helfrich MH, Rogers MJ. The bisphosphonate incadronate (YM175) causes apoptosis of human myeloma cells in vitro by inhibiting the mevalonate
pathway. Cancer Res 1998;58:5294.
347. Berenson JR, Lichtenstein A, Porter L, et al. Long-term pamidronate treatment of advanced multiple myeloma patients reduces skeletal events. Myeloma Aredia Study Group. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:593.
348. Aparicio A, Gardner A, Tu Y, et al. In vitro cytoreductive effects on multiple myeloma cells induced by bisphosphonates. Leukemia 1998;12:220.
349. Shipman CM, Rogers MJ, Apperley JF, et al. Anti-tumour activity of bisphosphonates in human myeloma cells. Leuk Lymphoma 1998;32:129.

350. Dhodapkar MV, Singh J, Mehta J, et al. Anti-myeloma activity of pamidronate in vivo. Br J Haematol 1998;103:530.
351. Kruse FE, Joussen AM, Rohrschneider K, Becker MD, Volcker HE. Thalidomide inhibits corneal angiogenesis induced by vascular endothelial growth factor. Graefes Archive for Clinical and
Experimental Opthalmology 1998;236:461.
352. Raje N, Anderson K. Thalidomidea revival story [editorial; comment]. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1606.
353. Barlogie B, Epstein J, Selvanayagam P, Alexanian R. Plasma cell myelomanew biological insights and advances in therapy. Blood 1989;73:865.
354. Rousselot P, Labaume S, Marolleau JP, et al. Arsenic trioxide and melarsoprol induce apoptosis in plasma cell lines and in plasma cells from myeloma patients. Cancer Res 1999;59:1041.
355. Munshi NC, Barlogie B, Desikan KR, Wilson C. Novel approaches in myeloma therapy. Semin Oncol 1999;26:28.
356. Waldenstrom J. Incipient myelomatosis or “essential hyperglobulinemia with fibrinogenopenia: a new syndrome? Acta Med Scand 1944;117:216.
357. Groves FD, Travis LB, Devesa SS, Ries LA, Fraumeni JF Jr. Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia: incidence patterns in the United States, 19881994. Cancer 1998;82:1078.
358. Fine JM, Muller JY, Rochu D, et al. Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia in monozygotic twins. Acta Med Scand 1986;220:369.
359. Renier G, Ifrah N, Chevailler A, et al. Four brothers with Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia. Cancer 1989;64:1554.
360. James JM, Brouet JC, Orvoenfrija E, et al. Waldenstrom's macroglobulinaemia in a bird breeder: a case history with pulmonary involvement and antibody activity of the monoclonal IgM to
canary's droppings. Clin Exp Immunol 1987;68:397.
361. Izumi T, Sasaki R, Shimizu R, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection in Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia [letter]. Am J Hematol 1996;52:238.
362. Izumi T, Sasaki R, Tsunoda S, et al. B cell malignancy and hepatitis C virus infection. Leukemia 1997;11:516.
363. Silvestri F, Barillari G, Fanin R, et al. Risk of hepatitis C virus infection, Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia, and monoclonal gammopathies [letter; comment]. Blood 1996;88:1125.
364. Dimopoulos MA, Panayiotidis P, Moulopoulos LA, Sfikakis P, Dalakas M. Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia: clinical features, complications, and management. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:214.
365. Calasanz MJ, Cigudosa JC, Odero MD, et al. Cytogenetic analysis of 280 patients with multiple myeloma and related disorders: primary breakpoints and clinical correlations. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 1997;18:84.
366. van den Akker TW, Radl J, Franken-Postma E, Hagemeijer A. Cytogenetic findings in mouse multiple myeloma and Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1996;86:156.
367. Nishida K, Taniwaki M, Misawa S, Abe T. Nonrandom rearrangement of chromosome 14 at band q32.33 in human lymphoid malignancies with mature B-cell phenotype. Cancer Res
1989;49:1275.
368. Iida S, Rao PH, Nallasivam P, et al. The t(9;14)(p13;q32) chromosomal translocation associated with lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma involves the PAX-5 gene. Blood 1996;88:4110.
369. Waldenstrom JG. Macroglobulinemiaa review. Haematologica 1986;71:437.
370. Andriko JA, Aguilera NS, Chu WS, Nandedkar MA, Cotelingam JD. Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia: a clinicopathologic study of 22 cases. Cancer 1997;80:1926.
371. Pruzanski W, Chu R, Damji NF, Galler S, Norman CS. Anemia, splenomegaly and hyperviscosity syndrome. Can Med Assoc J 1980;123:731.
372. Meier C, Roberts K, Steck A, et al. Polyneuropathy in Waldenstrom's macroglobulinaemia: reduction of endoneurial IgM-deposits after treatment with chlorambucil and plasmapheresis. Acta
Neuropathol 1984;64:297.
373. Virella G, Lopes-Virella MF. Effects of therapeutically useful thiols (DL-penicillamine and alpha-mercaptopropionylglycine) on immunoglobulins. Clin Exp Immunol 1970;7:85.
374. Waldenstrom JG. Plasmapheresisbloodletting revived and refined. Acta Med Scand 1980;208:1.
375. Waldenstrom JG. Plasmapheresis and cold sensitivity of immunoglobulin molecules. II. A study of macroglobulinemia polyclonalis spuria and immune complex disease. Acta Med Scand
1984;216:467.
376. Buskard NA, Galton DA, Goldman JM, et al. Plasma exchange in the long-term management of Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia. Can Med Assoc J 1977;117:135.
377. Petrucci MT, Avvisati G, Tribalto M, Giovangrossi P, Mandelli F. Waldenstrom's macroglobulinaemia: results of a combined oral treatment in 34 newly diagnosed patients. J Intern Med
1989;226:443.
378. Dhodapkar M, Jacobson J, Gertz M, et al. Phase II intergroup trial of fludarabine in Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia: results of Southwest Oncology Group trial (SWOG 9003) in 220 patients.
Blood 1997;90:577a.
379. Clamon GH, Corder MP, Burns CP. Successful doxorubicin therapy of primary macroglobulinemia resistant to alkylating agents. Am J Hematol 1980;9:221.
380. Jane SM, Salem HH. Treatment of resistant Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia with high dose glucocorticosteroids. Aust NZ J Med 1988;18:77.
381. Humphrey JS, Conley CL. Durable complete remission of macroglobulinemia after splenectomy: a report of two cases and review of the literature. Am J Hematol 1995;48:262.
382. Takemori N, Hirai K, Onodera R, Kimura S, Katagiri M. Durable remission after splenectomy for Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia with massive splenomegaly in leukemic phase. Leuk
Lymphoma 1997;26:387.
383. Desikan KR, Dhodapkar M, Siegel D, et al. High-dose therapy with autologous peripheral blood stem cell support for Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia: a pilot study. Br J Hematol
1999;105:993.
384. Belch A, Shelley W, Bergsagel D, et al. A randomized trial of maintenance versus no maintenance melphalan and prednisone in responding multiple myeloma patients. Br J Cancer 1988;57:94.
385. Lahtinen R, Laakso M, Palva I, Virkkunen P, Elomaa I. Randomised, placebo-controlled multicentre trial of clodronate in multiple myeloma. Finnish Leukaemia Group [published erratum
appears in Lancet 1992;340:1420; see comments]. Lancet1992;340:1049.
386. Gazitt Y, Fey V, Thomas C, Alvarez R. Bcl-2 overexpression is associated with resistance to dexamethasone, but not melphalan, in multiple myeloma cells. Int J Oncol 1998;13:397.
387. Bataille R, Manolagas SC, Berenson JR. Pathogenesis and management of bone lesions in multiple myeloma. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1997;11:349.
388. Herrinton LJ, Weiss NS. Incidence of Waldenström's macroglobulinemia. Blood 1993; 82:3148.
389. Dalakas MC, Flaum MA, Rick M, Engel WK, Gralnick HR. Treatment of polyneuropathy in Waldenström's macroglobulinemia: role of paraproteinemia and immunologic studies. Neurology
1983;33:1406.
390. Dimopoulos MA, Weber DM, Kantarjian H, et al. 2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine therapy of patients with Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia previously treated with fludarabine. Ann Oncol 1994;5:288.
391. Dimopoulos MA, Kantarjian H, Weber D, et al. Primary therapy of Waldenström's macroglobulinemia with 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2694.
392. Kantarjian HM, Alexanian R, Koller CA, et al. Fludarabine therapy in macroglobulinemic lymphoma. Blood 1990;75:1928.
393. Zinzani PL, Gherlinzoni F, Bendandi M, et al. Fludarabine treatment in resistant Waldenström's macroglobulinemia. Eur J Haematol 1995;54:120.
394. Betticher DC, Hsu Schmitz SF, Ratschiller D, et al. Cladribine (2-CDA) given as subcutaneous bolus injections is active in pretreated Waldenström's macroglobulinaemia. Swiss Group for
Clinical Cancer Research (SAKK). Br J Haematol 1997;99:358.
395. Quesada JR, Alexanian R, Kurzrock R, et al. Recombinant interferon gamma in hairy cell leukemia, multiple myeloma, and Waldenström's macroglobulinemia. Am J Hematol 1988;29:1.
396. Ohno R, Kodera Y, Ogura M, et al. Treatment of plasma cell neoplasm with recombinant leukocyte A interferon and human lymphoblastoid interferon. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1985;14:34.
397. Rotoli B, De Renzo A, Frigeri F, et al. A phase II trial on alpha-interferon (alpha IFN) effect in patients with monoclonal IgM gammopathy. Leuk Lymphoma 1994;13:463.
398. Legouffe E, Rossi JF, Laporte JP, et al. Treatment of Waldenström's macroglobulinemia with very low doses of alpha interferon. Leuk Lymphoma 1995;19:337.
399. Durie BGM, Dixon B, Carter S, et al. Improved survival duration with combination chemotherapy induction for multiple myeloma: a Southwest Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1127

SECTION 46.5 Myelodysplastic Syndromes
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 46.5
Myelodysplastic Syndromes
HAGOP M. KANTARJIAN
ELIHU ESTEY
Introduction
Incidence
Etiology
Classification and Risk Groups
Biology and Pathophysiology
Clinical Manifestations
Laboratory Features
Differential Diagnosis
Significance of the 30% Blast Cutoff to Distinguish High-Risk Myelodysplastic Syndromes from Acute Myeloid Leukemia
Specific Subtypes of Myelodysplastic Syndromes
5Q Syndrome
Other Myelodysplastic Syndrome Subtypes
Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia
Therapy
Background
General Treatment Principles
Supportive Care
Vitamins, Androgens, Differentiating Agents, and Interferon
Hematopoietic Growth Factors
Low-Dose Cytarabine
Acute Myeloid Leukemia–Type Combination Regimens
Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation
Novel Agents and Strategies
Summary
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are heterogeneous clonal hematopoietic stem cell disorders grouped together because of the presence of dysplastic changes
in one or more of the hematopoietic lineages. 1,2 Dysplasia signifies abnormal or discordant nuclear cytoplasmic maturation and is the morphologic hallmark of
apoptosis. Indeed, MDS is associated with apoptosis 3,4,5 and 6 and excessive proliferation, resulting in the paradoxic picture of peripheral cytopenias and cellular
marrows. The common findings in MDS include anemia-associated problems, infections and bleeding, generally in elderly patients, frequent exposure to carcinogens
or leukemogenic agents, a wide range of transformation rates (10% to 80%) to acute leukemia, and a high incidence of cytogenetic abnormalities associated with poor
prognoses. 7 The MDS were previously referred to as smoldering leukemia or preleukemia, oligoblastic leukemia, or hematopoietic dysplasia,8 implying an indolent
course. More recent studies have emphasized the aggressive nature and poor prognosis of some subsets of high-risk MDS, defined by excess marrow or peripheral
blasts, cytogenetic abnormalities, or both. 9,10

INCIDENCE
The estimated incidence of MDS is 7000 to 12,000 new cases in the United States annually. 11 With a median survival of 1 to 3 years, the estimated prevalence is
10,000 to 25,000 cases. The true incidence of MDS is probably underestimated, because the diagnosis is often overlooked or not reported. Those cases often receive
no specific therapy because of older age, complicating medical illnesses, and unavailability of effective low-risk treatment modalities. Some MDS may be
misdiagnosed as other entities such as hypoplastic or aplastic anemia (hypoplastic MDS), acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) (high blast percent), or
myeloproliferative disorders (high white blood cell counts).

ETIOLOGY
The etiology of most MDS cases is unknown. Smoking and exposures to ionizing irradiation, organic chemicals, heavy metals, herbicides, pesticides, fertilizers, stone
and cereal dusts, exhaust gases, nitroorganic explosives, petroleum and diesel derivatives, alkylating agents, benzene, solvents other than benzene (e.g., toluene,
xylene), chloramphenicol, and marrow-damaging agents including chemotherapeutic agents may increase the risk of developing MDS. 12,13,14,15 and 16 Patients with clear
exposure to such agents are referred to as having secondary MDS or treatment-related MDS and constitute approximately 20% to 30% of MDS cases. Their
proportion is increasing as more patients with other cancers are exposed to and cured with such treatments. Secondary MDS accounts for 30% of MDS cases referred
to M. D. Anderson Cancer Center since 1990, compared with 15% before 1990. Alkylating agents (melphalan, chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide, procarbazine) and
radiation therapy are associated with the highest risk of development of MDS. 17 Their effects are synergistic, particularly in older patients. Patients with Hodgkin's
disease and other lymphomas, myeloma, breast and ovarian cancers, and those undergoing stem cell transplantation (SCT) are often exposed to such treatments. 17,18
Among patients with Hodgkin's disease or lymphoma undergoing autologous SCT with high-dose cyclophosphamide and total body irradiation, the estimated
cumulative risk of developing MDS at 5 to 6 years is 11% to 18%, the risk being higher with use of total body irradiation, with increasing age, with longer time from first
treatment to transplant, and with low platelet counts at time of SCT. 18 X-chromosome inactivation analysis has shown replacement of polyclonal hematopoiesis with
clonal hematopoiesis preceding the development of MDS in some patients. Patients with MDS are older than those with AML and have a higher incidence of
unfavorable chromosomal abnormalities, including losses of parts or all of chromosome 5 or 7.
There is no known association between viral or other infections and development of MDS. There may be an increased risk of MDS in families of patients with MDS.
Rare familial forms of MDS or AML and monosomy 7 have been described.19 Studies of the frequency of specific polymorphism in enzymes activating, detoxifying, or
both activating and detoxifying carcinogens in MDS patients versus normal controls may help in understanding the disease pathophysiology and identifying
individuals at risk for developing MDS.

CLASSIFICATION AND RISK GROUPS
The French-American-British (FAB) classification categorizes patients with MDS based on the percentage of marrow and peripheral blasts and the presence of
monocytosis and Auer rods. Categories include refractory anemia (RA), RA with ringed sideroblasts (RARS), RA with excess blasts (RAEB), and RAEB in
transformation (RAEBT). Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), a hybrid disorder of excessive myeloid proliferation, monocytosis, and dysplastic changes in the
erythroid and megakaryocytic series, is sometimes considered as a fifth MDS category or as a separate disorder ( Table 46.5-1).20,21

TABLE 46.5-1. French-American-British Classification of Myelodysplastic Syndromes

The FAB classification of MDS has shortcomings. 22 For example, Auer rods, which characterize RAEBT, have been associated with favorable rather than poor
prognosis. 23 Confusion arises when monocytosis is present with 5% to 29% blasts as to whether such cases should be referred to as RAEBT (if blasts more than
20%) or as a separate category of accelerated-phase CMML. Finally, there is great variability in prognosis within a single FAB subtype, indicating the need to
incorporate further information into the FAB system. 24 Investigators have attempted to improve on the classification by including prognostically relevant variables such
as the percentage of marrow blasts, chromosomal abnormalities, and cytopenias (anemia or thrombocytopenia). 25,26
An International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) was developed that assigns points to each of several prognostic factors ( Table 46.5-2).27 It divides patients into
low, intermediate-1, intermediate-2, and high-risk groups with median survivals of 5.7, 3.5, 1.2, and 0.4 years, respectively. Although it is an improvement over the
FAB system, the IPSS also suffers from variability within single-risk groups. For example, the median survivals of patients with IPSS low and intermediate-1 groups
referred to M. D. Anderson were only 2.1 and 1.2 years, respectively, significantly different from those reported in the IPSS study (5.7 and 3.5 years, respectively),
despite similar therapeutic measures ( Table 46.5-3).24,27 The IPSS was derived from newly diagnosed untreated patients, and survival was calculated from diagnosis.
However, patients referred to tertiary centers have often had prior therapy, the patients were referred because of some need for therapy, and their survival was
measured from the referral date. Thus, latent variables, unrecognized by the prognostic models and related to the referral, might account for differences in prognosis
of different study groups categorized in the same IPSS risk groups. Investigations of aberrant cellular or molecular events in MDS (e.g., RAS mutations, apoptosis,
clonality, loss of suppressor genes, methylation, and others) may yield new clinically relevant biologic prognostic factors.

TABLE 46.5-2. International Prognostic Scoring System and Model

TABLE 46.5-3. Prognosis in Myelodysplastic Syndrome According to the International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS)

BIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Preclinical studies have provided insight into different pathophysiologic processes in MDS, and several models of MDS evolution have been proposed. 28,29
The clonal nature of MDS appears restricted to hematopoietic population subsets. 30,31 Primitive progenitors (CD34+, Thy 1+) and T cells, perhaps in the earlier MDS
phases, appear nonclonal. Late-stage hematopoietic cells of myeloid and erythroid lineage, as well as B-cell lymphocytes, were often clonal. 30,31,32,33,34 and 35
Hematopoietic recovery in remission marrows is frequently nonclonal. 35,36
In some patients, nonclonal CD8+ T cells directed against HLA class I–restricted antigens may suppress normal hematopoiesis, as evidenced by enhanced in vitro
growth of granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming units following T-cell depletion (cyclosporin, anti-CD8). 37 This provides the rationale for the use of
immunosuppressive therapy in MDS.
In vitro colony formation is generally reduced in MDS and correlates with survival. 8,38 Addition of growth factors [erythropoietin, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
(G-CSF), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), interleukin-3 (IL-3)] increases colony formation. This provided hope that at least some
patients in early MDS phases or with mild lineage involvement may benefit from such therapy. Serum levels of growth factors (e.g., erythropoietin) were inversely
correlated with the degree of cytopenia, indicating appropriate host compensatory mechanisms. Cytopenias may be improved with pharmacologic doses of growth
factors.
Dysplasia appears to signify high apoptotic rates, explaining the unilineage or multilineage peripheral cytopenias. 3,4,5 and 6 According to one hypothesis, the primary
lesion in MDS is the high cell death rate, which is counterbalanced by a compensatory early phase of excessive hematopoiesis. This is supported by studies
demonstrating both increased apoptosis and proliferation 3,4,5 and 6 and may explain the apparent paradox of peripheral cytopenia and hypercellular marrows. Increased
apoptosis has also been observed in the marrow microenvironment cells, suggesting that the primitive stem cell involved is a progenitor to both hematopoietic and
stromal cells.5

What might contribute to increased apoptosis? High levels of tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) or other proapoptotic cytokines, and the effect of TNF-a on induction of
Fas expression on CD34+ cells, may be pathophysiologic. 39,40 Elevated TNF-a levels in MDS may be restricted to the earlier phases (RA, RARS) and were not found
in normal control subjects or in patients with AML. 41,42 The source of TNF-a production may be the increased marrow macrophages in MDS, which may be stimulated
by elevated macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) levels, through point mutations in c-fms, which encodes the M-CSF receptor. 43,44 and 45 That TNF-a
production in MDS is relevant is suggested by (1) enhanced in vitro colony growth in MDS by incubation with TNF-a neutralizing antibodies 46; and (2) the correlation
of TNF-a levels with severity of anemia, poor response to erythropoietin, and increased apoptosis. 5,41,47 Strategies to suppress TNF-a levels may help therapeutically.
Other proapoptotic cytokines of interest include interferon-g and IL-1b. Interferon-g production appears to be important in aplastic anemia but less so in MDS. 42 IL-1b
levels are highest in RA, tend to correlate with apoptosis but not proliferation, and may be due to deficient production of the receptor antagonist in MDS stromal cells,
which increase IL-1b levels and thus apoptosis. 48
Involvement of the Fas/Fas ligand system in MDS apoptosis has also been proposed, 4,5 as well as a role for other molecular events including Ras mutations or
aberrations in the RAS pathways that may be dysfunctional without Ras mutations. 49 Understanding the pathophysiology of RAS in MDS and CMML (10% to 25% with
Ras mutations) may result in rational intervention approaches with RAS inhibitors (antisense, farnesyl-transferase inhibitors). Antiapoptotic signaling pathways,
including bcl-2 overexpression, and shortening of telomeres may be important in advanced MDS states. 4,5,50
Chromosomal abnormalities may serve as fingerprints for the molecular abnormalities. Chromosome 5 abnormalities (losses in the long arm, 5q-) are common. Many
hematopoietic growth regulatory genes have been mapped to this region. 51 These include M-CSF, GM-CSF, IL-4 and IL-5, CD-14, interferon regulatory factor-1, the
receptors for platelet-derived growth factor and M-CSF (Fms), and others. Fms is a tyrosine kinase protooncogene, and the viral form of Fms (v-Fms) has
transforming properties. Fms point mutations have been described in patients with MDS and AML and those receiving chemotherapy, suggesting its possible role in
MDS pathogenesis.45,52 Other abnormalities include mutations in p53, overexpression of bcl-2 and c-mpl, deletions of IRF-1, methylation of p15 INK4b and
others.53,54,55,56 and 57 C-mpl expression was low in low-risk MDS and high in RAEB, RAEBT, and CMML (40% to 45%). In RAEB and RAEBT, c-mpl expression
correlated with other adverse features and with poor survival ( P = .02).54
How do these observations fit into a general multistep pathophysiologic process in MDS? It is possible that an initial injury results in suppression of normal
hematopoietic stem cell growth and differentiation, directly or through stimulation of an immunologic response of polyclonal T cells. The cytotoxic suppressor T cells
induce hematopoietic suppression through production of proapoptotic cytokines including TNF-a and the Fas/Fas ligand system. The roles of increased M-CSF, c-fms
mutation, increased macrophages and contribution to TNF-a production, and interferon-g and IL-1b need further elucidation. These processes are more prominent in
the early phase of MDS (RA, RARS), producing excessive apoptosis and cytopenias, and are more amenable to therapeutic approaches including growth factors,
antiapoptotic strategies (e.g., against TNF-a), and immunomodulation (e.g., cyclosporin A, antithymocyte globulins [ATG], corticosteroids). As compensatory
proliferation continues, and perhaps mediated by the process of telomeric shortening and genomic instability, the hematopoietic progenitor cells allow the escape and
growth advantage of clonal malignant hematopoiesis. This process may predominate in MDS advanced phases (RAEB, RAEBT, CMML), in which proliferation and
maturation arrest (rather than apoptosis) are frequent, and in which a new set of molecular events dictate the pathophysiology, including enhanced Bcl-2 and p53
mutations, RAS mutations and dysfunction, and hypermethylation of p15 INK4b (leading to suppression of tumor suppressor genes). In these stages, more appropriate
investigations include AML-like strategies to suppress the abnormal clone, or ones directed against specific molecular targets including hypomethylating agents or
RAS inhibitors.
Thus, MDS might appropriately be divided into two distinct entities, early and late MDS, which are governed by different sets of pathophysiologic processes and in
which different directed strategies should be investigated.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The median age in MDS is 65 to 75 years, with a clear-cut age-related incidence. Younger patients who develop MDS have generally had exposure to leukemogenic
agents. There is a male preponderance with a male to female ratio of 1.3:1.0. Presenting manifestations are due to cytopenia-associated problems including fatigue,
pallor, infections, and bleeding ( Table 46.5-4). Lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly are uncommon, occurring in less than 10% to 20% of patients. Central
nervous system involvement is rare.

TABLE 46.5-4. Presentation of Myelodysplastic Syndrome (M. D. Anderson, 1980–1999, 1358 Patients)

LABORATORY FEATURES
Anemia is the most common finding; neutropenia and thrombocytopenia are frequent. Monocytosis greater than 10 9/L in the peripheral blood, in the setting of other
MDS features, leads to a diagnosis of CMML. Smears of the bone marrow and blood show various degrees of dysplasia (mild, moderate, severe) in one or more
lineages (myeloid, erythroid, megakaryocytic). While the degree and lineage involvement by dysplasia have been correlated with prognosis, assessment of dysplasia
may be subjective. Blasts in MDS are myeloid in origin as determined by histochemistry (myeloperoxidase-positive, positive monocytic stain results) and by
immunophenotyping (CD13, CD14, CD33 positivity); some cases exhibit B-lineage lymphoid (CD19 or CD10) or mixed-lineage morphologies.
Bone marrow biopsies or aspirates are usually hypercellular, but may be normocellular or hypocellular. Twenty percent of cases may have a cellularity below 20%,
which may be important in the context of immune-mediated mechanisms and of immunomodulatory strategies. Other abnormalities include hypogranulation or
hyposegmentation (Pelger-Huët–like) of granulocytes; anisocytosis, poikilocytosis, and macrocytosis of peripheral red cells; and marrow dyserythropoiesis including
ringed sideroblasts, asynchronous maturation, abnormal nuclear shapes, and chromatin clumping. Peripheral platelet dysplasia may be noted with large abnormally
granular platelets or hypogranular platelets. Marrow micromegakaryocytes are also frequent.
Cytochemical stains of importance in the workup of MDS include stains for (1) iron to identify ringed sideroblasts, (2) myeloperoxidase to identify abnormal granulation
of myeloblasts, (3) periodic acid–Schiff to identify abnormal erythroblasts, (4) reticulin to define the degree of fibrosis, and (5) platelet antibodies to mark
micromegakaryocytes.58
Blood chemistries should include B 12 and folic acid levels to exclude vitamin deficiency–induced MDS-like changes. Serum and urinary lysozymes may be increased
in CMML. Hypokalemia (lysozyme-induced renal tubular loss), renal dysfunction (leukemic involvement), and hyperuricemia may be present. Testing for the human
immunodeficiency virus excludes MDS-like changes associated with human immunodeficiency virus–positive disease. 59
Additional abnormalities observed in MDS include polyclonal gammopathies in up to one-third of patients, monoclonal gammopathies or hypogammaglobulinemia, the

presence of autoimmune antibodies, and B- or T-cell abnormalities.
Cytogenetic studies demonstrate karyotypic abnormalities in 40% to 75% of patients. These are more common in higher risk MDS and secondary MDS and often
involve chromosome 5 or 7 abnormalities, trisomy 8, 20q-, and complex abnormalities (see Table 46.5-4).7,51,60 A characteristic chromosomal abnormality involving
5q23, or the 5q- syndrome, is often associated with an indolent form of RA. 51 Patients with MDS may infrequently demonstrate favorable chromosomal abnormalities
such as t(8;21) or inversion 16. 61

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Dysplastic changes in the bone marrow are not pathognomonic for MDS, and the first concern is to exclude more treatable conditions associated with cytopenias.
These include B 12 or folic acid deficiencies; exposure to antibiotics, chemotherapy, ethanol, benzene or lead; or a regenerating bone marrow following hypoplasia
induced by drugs or infections. Patients with human immunodeficiency virus–positive disease, chronic inflammation, tuberculosis, liver disorders, hypersplenism,
Hodgkin's disease, lymphomas, and metastatic disease to the marrow may present with cytopenias and marrow dysplastic changes. In these situations, appropriate
tests and an observation period clarify the diagnosis.
Hypoplastic MDS with a marrow cellularity of less than 10% to 20% may be confused with aplastic or hypoplastic anemia. 62 Cytogenetic studies may help in the
differential diagnosis, but some aplastic conditions may also be clonal or associated with cytogenetic abnormalities. 63 MDS with maturation arrest at the promyelocytic
stage may be confused with acute promyelocytic leukemia; this is clarified by the characteristic promyelocytic blastic morphology and appropriate cytogenetic and
molecular studies. Predominance of myelofibrosis in MDS may confuse it with myelofibrosis 64 or occasionally with hairy cell leukemia, because of the constellation of
cytopenia, dry marrow aspiration, fibrosis, and splenomegaly in an elderly man. A high blast percentage may result in difficulty classifying MDS-RAEBT versus AML,
but this distinction may not be critical for therapeutic choices or prognosis.

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE 30% BLAST CUTOFF TO DISTINGUISH HIGH-RISK MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES FROM ACUTE MYELOID
LEUKEMIA
The 30% blast cutoff has been traditionally proposed by the FAB classification to distinguish MDS from AML. The original intent was to avoid misdiagnosis and
treatment of benign conditions as AML. This was supported by the view that MDS are indolent disorders often observed or treated with supportive care.
More recent studies have shown that high-risk MDS has as poor a prognosis as AML, and that other factors, some known, such as cytogenetic abnormalities, and
others yet to be discovered (apoptotic, proliferative, angiogenesis, and methylation patterns, molecular abnormalities), may provide more rational methods to classify
AML and MDS. In multivariate analysis, when account was taken of cytogenetics, patients with AML and high-risk MDS had similar outcomes following the use of
anti-AML chemotherapy, independent of the blast percent. 9,65 Thus, the use of 30% marrow blasts to distinguish and to assign different treatments to AML versus
high-risk MDS may not be relevant. A committee of the World Health Organization has recommended that patients with 20% or more marrow blasts be treated as they
would for AML.66

SPECIFIC SUBTYPES OF MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES
5Q SYNDROME
This syndrome is often found in elderly women who present with isolated anemia. 51 The median age is 65 years; the female to male ratio is 3:1. The disease presents
as RA or RARS, has an indolent course, rarely transforms to AML, and is associated with a median survival longer than 5 years. The peripheral blood shows
macrocytic anemia and normal or slightly elevated white blood cell and platelet counts. The bone marrow may show characteristic monolobulated megakaryocytes.
Cytogenetic studies usually demonstrate 5q23 as the single abnormality. Additional chromosome abnormalities, when present, are associated with a worse prognosis.
Since repeated transfusions are a major component of supportive care, iron-chelating therapy (desferioxamine) is important in these patients, particularly if they have
received more than 20 units of packed red cells, or when serum ferritin levels exceed 400 to 800 mg/L.
OTHER MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROME SUBTYPES
Hypoplastic MDS, 62 like aplastic anemia, may respond to immunomodulatory therapy such as corticosteroids, cyclosporin A, or ATG. Some cases may have disease
induced by T-cell suppression of normal hematopoiesis. Myelofibrosis may predominate in some MDS cases 64 and raises the differential diagnosis of acute or chronic
myelofibrosis, AML-M7 (megakaryocytic leukemia), and occasionally hairy cell leukemia.
Rarely, MDS may present with prominent eosinophilia or monocytosis without fulfilling the criterion of 10 9/L peripheral monocytes. These are referred to as MDS with
eosinophilia or with monocytosis. The latter is probably a variant of CMML without excessive myeloproliferation.
CHRONIC MYELOMONOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
Originally categorized as MDS, CMML is now recognized as a hybrid disorder characterized by increased myeloid proliferation with monocytosis and erythroid and
megakaryocytic dysplasia. 67,68 Thus, it shares characteristics of both MDS and myeloproliferative disorders in different lineages. The median age of patients is 65 to
75 years; there is a male predominance with a ratio of 2:1. Anemia and thrombocytopenia are common; hepatosplenomegaly is present in 25% to 50%; extramedullary
disease involves the skin and subcutaneous tissues. Gingival or central nervous system involvement is rare. Patients with CMML and significant leukocytosis may
present with organ infiltration and dysfunction including pulmonary insufficiency, cardiac decompensation, and renal failure. This may be exacerbated once treatment
has started, and patients may develop bilateral lung infiltrates (leukemic cell necrosis and inflammation) and a picture resembling adult respiratory distress syndrome.
Subtle renal dysfunction at the start may worsen transiently on therapy as tumor lysis complications develop. Patients presenting with severe leukocytosis,
monocytosis, and organ dysfunction may benefit from leukapheresis, measures to prevent tumor lysis (allopurinol, alkalinization, hydration, oral aluminum hydroxide
to bind calcium), corticosteroids, and, at times, early hemodialysis for renal failure. Cytogenetic abnormalities are less frequent than in MDS. When present, they
involve monosomy 7, trisomy 8, or other structural changes including 12p. Ras mutations are more common in CMML than in MDS (30% to 40%). The median survival
of patients with CMML is approximately 18 months. Characteristics associated with shorter survival include increased marrow blasts, anemia, thrombocytopenia,
cytogenetic abnormalities, and perhaps older age and excessive monocytosis.

THERAPY
BACKGROUND
The standard of care in MDS is generally accepted to be supportive care. This practice reflects (1) the older age and concomitant medical problems of MDS patients,
making AML-like combination regimens risky; (2) the lack of effective nontoxic modalities; and (3) the prevailing notion that MDS is an indolent disorder. However, as
discussed, the 30% blast cutoff is arbitrary, and survival of patients with high-risk MDS is similar to that of patients with AML. Hence, the same treatment
considerations in elderly AML patients also apply to MDS. The belief that MDS is incurable except with allogeneic SCT is now contradicted by studies using AML-type
therapy and intensive supportive care for patients with MDS. In such studies, the overall 3-year complete response duration rates of 25% were similar, among
comparable age groups, to patients undergoing allogeneic SCT. 9,69
There is marked heterogeneity in MDS. An indolent course is generally seen only in patients with RA or RARS, or low- and intermediate-1 IPSS risk groups. Other
patients, making up the majority of referrals to specialized centers, have a poor prognosis and estimated median survivals of 1 year or less, similar to patients with
AML. Low-risk MDS generally refers to RA and RARS in the FAB classification and to the low-risk IPSS group. High-risk patients include RAEB and RAEBT in the
FAB classification and the high- and intermediate-2 IPSS risk groups. The intermediate-1 IPSS categorization depends on the population under study, being lower
risk in community-based studies, and higher risk in studies from specialized centers (see Table 46.5-3).

GENERAL TREATMENT PRINCIPLES
Treatment strategies should be individualized to the patient's condition and disease manifestations. MDS may be appropriately divided into two generally distinct
entities pathophysiologically and for therapeutic purposes: low-risk and high-risk MDS. Patients with low-risk MDS and minimal findings should be observed. If they
develop significant cytopenias and complications, growth factor support, as single agents or in combinations, may be indicated depending on patient's symptoms and
frequency of transfusions and infections. For patients with low-risk MDS, trials of high doses of vitamins (e.g., B 6) or androgens could benefit occasional patients.
Immunomodulatory therapy with corticosteroids, cyclosporin A, and ATG may benefit 30% to 50% of selected patients. Low-risk patients may also be offered
investigational single-agent chemotherapy, cytokines, antiapoptotic, or targeted modalities. Because of the poor prognosis of high-risk MDS, efforts should be made to
involve patients in investigational studies including novel single chemotherapeutic agents, cytokines, gene or other targeted approaches (e.g., RAS-inhibitors,
monoclonal antibodies), or AML-type combination regimens.
SUPPORTIVE CARE
Most patients succumb to complications of marrow failure and cytopenias before transformation has occurred. Patients with anemia may be transfused with packed
red cells when symptoms develop. If the frequency of transfusions increases (e.g., more than 1 to 2 per month), trials of vitamins, androgens, erythropoietin alone or
in combinations, and immunomodulatory strategies may be indicated. With granulocytopenia and repeated infectious episodes (e.g., two or more) antibiotic
prophylaxis with or without G-CSF appears reasonable, although not established in randomized studies or in high-risk patient subsets.
Thrombocytopenia may be managed with platelet transfusions when platelets are reduced below 10 × 10 9/L or if bleeding occurs. Patients may become refractory to
platelet transfusions; investigational strategies with cytokines, immunomodulation, new agents, or chemotherapy combinations should then be considered.
VITAMINS, ANDROGENS, DIFFERENTIATING AGENTS, AND INTERFERON
Although occasional patients may benefit from vitamin B 6, androgens, and corticosteroids, the approaches have had a low success rate. Differentiating agents have
been investigated including vitamin D, vitamin A, retinoids, hexamethylene bisacetamide, and sodium phenylbutyrate. These were associated with low response
rates,70,71,72,73,74 and 75 as did interferon alone or with chemotherapy and vitamins. 76
HEMATOPOIETIC GROWTH FACTORS
Erythropoietin has improved anemia and reduced transfusion requirements in 16% to 25% of selected patients, despite elevated endogenous erythropoietin levels in
85% of patients. 77 Better responses are noted in RA and RAEB compared with RARS (22% vs. 7%), in patients without transfusion requirements, in the absence of
ringed sideroblasts, or with low to normal serum levels of endogenous erythropoietin (below 2000 U/L). Erythropoietin, 10,000 U, 3 times weekly, or 40,000 U weekly,
may show benefit within 8 weeks of therapy.
G-CSF and GM-CSF improve neutropenia in 70% to 80% of patients and occasionally in other lineage cytopenias. Randomized studies comparing supportive care
with G-CSF or GM-CSF have not shown them to reduce infectious episodes, prolong survival, or influence the rate of transformation to acute leukemia. 78,79
Combinations of G-CSF and erythropoietin may synergize in improving cytopenias. 80,81 Other cytokines investigated include IL-3 alone and in combinations, IL-6, and
IL-11, and thrombopoietins for thrombocytopenia. 82,83,84 and 85 Growth factors with low-dose cytarabine were not better than chemotherapy alone. 86
LOW-DOSE CYTARABINE
Large-scale analyses of cytarabine, 10 to 20 mg/m 2 daily for up to 3 weeks, in MDS showed response rates of 10% to 15%. 87 Cytotoxicity, rather than differentiation,
was the anti-MDS mechanism. Morbidity and mortality were substantial, and survival was not improved. Randomized studies of low-dose cytarabine, one with
GM-CSF, versus supportive care did not show a survival benefit with cytarabine. 88,89
ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA–TYPE COMBINATION REGIMENS
In the early 1980s, two retrospective studies showed that regimens used to treat AML could induce complete response in patients with MDS. 90,91 Since then, several
studies reported on the use of intensive chemotherapy in MDS 92,93,94,95,96,97,98,99,100 and 101 (Table 46.5-5). Remission rates have ranged from 40% to 60% and mortality
from 20% to 40%. Appropriate supportive care measures and prophylactic antibiotics have reduced this mortality to 6% to 20%. Complete response rates were 70% to
80% with favorable or normal karyotypes, and 40% to 50% with unfavorable karyotypes. Cytogenetic remissions generally accompanied complete responses. 35,36
Factors influencing outcome were age, karyotype, and FAB diagnosis. Patients most likely to benefit were younger than 50 years, had normal karyotypes, and had
RAEBT95 (Table 46.5-6). Long-term event-free survival was possible with intensive chemotherapy: Among age-comparable groups, the 3-year complete response and
survival rates were similar with intensive chemotherapy versus allogeneic SCT 69 (see Table 46.5-6).

TABLE 46.5-5. Combination Chemotherapy in Myelodysplastic Syndromes

TABLE 46.5-6. Outcome of Myelodysplastic Syndrome with Acute Myeloid Leukemia–Type Chemotherapy by Different Characteristics and Therapy

ALLOGENEIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION
Allogeneic SCT is applicable to a small subset of MDS patients because of age restrictions, concomitant medical conditions, and donor availability. Disease-free
survival rates of 30% to 50% have been reported. 102,103 and 104 Results were better in younger patients, with low-risk MDS, and if transplant was applied within 1 year
from diagnosis. 102 Failure was primarily due to transplant-associated mortality in low-risk MDS and to disease recurrence in high-risk MDS. In the latter disorders, the
long-term follow-up to studies showed 3-year survival rates of 23%, similar to those with intensive chemotherapy. 69,102 Allogeneic SCT after tumor reduction to less
than 5% blasts in high-risk MDS produced better results, but may have selected inherently better patients. 103 In an update of the Seattle experience, patients were
evaluated by the IPSS.104 The disease-free survival rates were 60% in low-risk, 36% in intermediate-1, and 28% in intermediate-2 risk groups. This is compared with
5-year survival rates of 55%, 35%, and 7%, respectively, for unselected patients not receiving SCT. Considering the risk to benefit ratios (early transplant mortality but
potential event-free survival) and the comparison of disease-free survival versus survival rates, it appears that SCT may benefit high-risk MDS patients.
While autologous SCT has been advocated as a treatment for MDS, this applies to patients who have achieved complete response, could be harvested, and were
candidates for the procedure. The 2-year survival rate was only 39%, despite the highly selected nature of the patients. 105
Improvement in results of SCT may occur through (1) targeted marrow ablative approaches (e.g., radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies against CD33 or CD45); (2)
reductions in SCT-related mortality (e.g., mini-SCT); (3) preallogeneic and postallogeneic SCT-effective chemotherapy or immunomodulation; and (4) broader
application of safer procedures in the setting of matched unrelated donor transplant. 106
NOVEL AGENTS AND STRATEGIES
Topotecan
Topotecan , a topoisomerase I inhibitor, given as a single agent at 2 mg/m 2 by continuous infusion daily for 5 days every 4 to 6 weeks, produced complete response in
31% of patients. 107 Side effects were severe mucositis and diarrhea (23% and 17%, respectively).
Combinations of topotecan, 1.25 mg/m2 daily × 5 and Ara-C 1 g/m2 over 2 hours daily × 5, every 4 to 6 weeks, were given with intensive supportive care, prophylactic
antibiotics, and the use of the protected environment among patients 50 years or older. Eighty-six patients have been treated (59 MDS, 27 CMML). Their median age
was 64 years; 35% had prior therapy and 50% had unfavorable chromosomal abnormalities. Complete response was observed in 56% and induction mortality in 7%. 35
Complete response rates were higher with RAEB than with RAEBT and CMML (complete response rate of 80% vs. 47% vs. 44%; P = .01), but were similar by
different age groups and cytogenetic abnormalities. Median complete response duration was 8 months, and median survival was 14 months. Severe mucositis or
diarrhea occurred in only 3%. This suggested a possible role for topotecan in patients with poor prognoses (older, poor cytogenetics), who have a high incidence of
expression of the multidrug resistance phenotype and may benefit from agents that are not multidrug resistance–dependent, such as topoisomerase I inhibitors.
Investigations to improve prognosis include (1) addition of cyclophosphamide to topotecan and Ara-C; (2) consolidation strategies in complete response (targeted
therapies, immunomodulation, anticytokines); (3) newer topoisomerase I inhibitors 108,109; and (4) different dose schedules (e.g., oral topotecan in lower dose, longer
exposure schedules).
Hypomethylating Agents
DNA site-specific methylation may be associated with tumor resistance and progression in many solid and hematologic cancers including MDS. 110 In MDS, frequent
hypermethylation of p15 INK4b has been reported. 56,57,111 Agents shown to induce general and selective hypomethylation include 5-azacitidine, decitabine, and the
newer methyl transferase antisense inhibitors.
Following pilot studies of continuous intravenous and subcutaneous 5-azacitidine in MDS, Silverman et al. conducted a large-scale randomized trial of subcutaneous
5-azacitidine, 75 mg/m 2 daily × 7 every 4 weeks (n = 99), versus observation (n = 92) in 191 patients with high-risk MDS. 112,113 Cross-over to 5-azacitidine was allowed
if there was progression on the observation arm. Responses occurred in 61% of 5-azacitidine–treated MDS patients (9% complete response, 15% partial response,
35% hematologic improvement) versus 5% in the observation arm (P <.01). The median time to leukemia transformation (21 vs. 13 months; P <.01) and the median
survival (24 vs. 14 months; P = .10) were longer among 5-azacitidine–treated patients. 112 Quality of life was also improved. 113 Thus, 5-azacitidine therapy effectively
modified the natural history of MDS.
Wijermans et al. treated elderly patients with high-risk MDS with decitabine, 40 to 50 mg/m 2 over 24 hours daily × 3 every 6 weeks (120 to 150 mg/m 2/course), and
later at 15 mg/m 2 over 4 hours every 8 hours for 3 days (135 mg/m2/course) every 6 weeks. 114 In an update of 125 patients in three studies (median age, 70 years;
IPSS risk intermediate-1 in 35, intermediate-2 in 38, and high-risk in 52) 49% responded: complete response in 24 (20%), partial response in 12 (10%), and
hematologic improvement in 23 (19%). 114 Response rates were 58% in IPSS high-risk and 39% and 45% in IPSS intermediate-1 and -2 risk groups, respectively. Ten
patients (8%) died during therapy. In 15 patients with chromosomal abnormalities who obtained complete response, disappearance of the cytogenetic abnormalities
was noted. The median response duration was 9 months. The median survival was 15 months: 19 months in intermediate -1, 13 months in intermediate -2, and 14
months in high-risk patients. Hypermethylation at three cytosine residues in the 5' region of the p15 gene was detected in 59% of patients. Efficient reduction of
methylation with decitabine therapy either accompanied or preceded suppression of bone marrow blasts and improvement of cytopenias. However, responses to
decitabine also occurred in the absence of p15 hypermethylation, suggesting that p15 is one but not the only molecular target of pharmacologic demethylation in
MDS, or that decitabine may induce anti-MDS activity through mechanisms other than hypomethylation. 111
Other Chemotherapeutic Agents
Homoharringtonine, a semisynthetic plant alkaloid, showed activity in chronic myelogenous leukemia and AML. 115 Feldman et al. treated 15 patients with MDS with
homoharringtonine, 5 mg/m2 by continuous infusion daily for 9 days every month, and observed four responses (27%). 116 Significant myelosuppression and high
induction mortality discouraged further studies. Lower dose schedules of homoharringtonine, 2.5 mg/m 2 daily × 7, alone or in combinations, may prove effective and
less toxic.115
Amifostine
Amifostine , an organic thiophosphonate, increases normal hematopoiesis in vitro, suppresses apoptosis, and inhibits production of TNF-a and other inflammatory
cytokines. In a multiinstitutional study, patients with MDS received amifostine, 200 or 400 mg/m 2 intravenously 3 times weekly for 3 weeks every 5 weeks. Among 75
evaluable patients, single or multilineage hematologic response was observed in 27 (36%). A 50% decrease in blasts was noted in ten patients (13%) and a 50%
decrease in ringed sideroblasts in nine patients (total 16 patients). Ten of the 16 also had peripheral blood responses. 117 Other studies reported lower response
rates.118
Immunotherapy
Immunosuppression may be pathophysiologic in some MDS cases, and immune therapy may be beneficial. 119 Patients with hypoplastic MDS have had complete and
durable remissions with therapies similar to those used in aplastic anemia. ATG resulted in responses in 44% of patients. 120 Cyclosporin A resulted in clinical
improvements in 14 of 17 patients treated for low-risk MDS. 121 Studies of combinations of ATG, cyclosporine A, growth factors, and corticosteroids are in progress.
Other Strategies
Monoclonal antibodies targeted against surface antigens expressed in MDS (e.g., CD33 and CD45) may be useful. 122 Anti-TNF strategies using pentoxifylline-based
combinations were not beneficial. 123 Other anti-TNF strategies may incorporate amifostine and pentoxifylline or use soluble TNF receptors alone or in combination
with amifostine, pentoxifylline, and anti-Fas ligand. Antiangiogenesis therapy with thalidomide, 200 to 800 mg orally daily, produced complete response in only one of
nine patients in one study 124; another study reported clinical benefits in 10 of 20 evaluable patients (50%). 125 Based on the association of p53 mutations with

MDS,53,126 Bishop et al. investigated whether inactivation of p53 RNA by antisense and rebound in p53 expression through the use of OL(1)p53 would be effective.
Only one of ten high-risk MDS patients treated had a transient response. 127 Approaches attempting to enhance immunologic response in MDS, using linomide or IL-2,
have not been successful. 128,129 Investigations of the new RAS inhibitors and antitelomeric strategies will be of interest in MDS. 130,131
Agents with interesting differentiation properties include hexamethylene bisacetamid and sodium phenylbutyrate. In two studies in MDS, hexamethylene bisacetamid
given by continuous infusion induced complete response in three patients and partial response in six patients among a total of 57 patients treated (objective response
rate, 17%).74,132 Sodium phenylbutyrate, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, was given to 27 patients at doses up to 440 mg/kg daily × 7 every 4 weeks: 17 had
improvements in granulocyte counts and 3 had improvements in platelet counts. 71
Correlative Studies and Mechanism of Actions
While each of these new approaches has provided encouraging results, little is known about how they influence specifically the pathophysiology of MDS.
Understanding how these agents affect methylation, cytokines, and genes involved in apoptosis or proliferation cascades may refine treatments to be more selective
and less toxic and help combine them in more appropriate simultaneous and sequential schedules.

SUMMARY
While several strategies were initially thought to be hopeful in MDS (e.g., low-dose Ara-C, growth factors), progress has been modest. Better understanding of the
pathophysiology of MDS (e.g., apoptosis, clonality, cytokines) may produce tailored strategies. The improved classification of MDS may allow more appropriate
therapies for low- versus high-risk groups. Growth factors and immunosuppressive strategies may improve results in low-risk MDS, while the combination of more
selective anti-MDS agents (topoisomerase I inhibitors, hypomethylating agents) may improve outcome in high-risk MDS. Progress in SCT (graft-versus-MDS,
mini-SCT, preparative regimens) could result in its broader applications. Finally, it is hoped that new targets and targeted therapies will emerge that will add to our
knowledge and better treatment of MDS.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Heaney M, Golde D. Myelodysplasia. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1649.
2. Hofman W-K, Hoelzer D. Current therapeutic options in myelodysplastic syndromes. Hematology 1999;4:91.
3. Raza A, Mundle S, Shetty V, et al. Novel insights into the biology of myelodysplastic syndromes: excessive apoptosis and the role of cytokines. Int J Hematol 1996;63:265.
4. Rajapaksa R, Ginzton N, Rott LS, Greenberg PL. Altered oncoprotein expression and apoptosis in myelodysplastic syndrome marrow cells. Blood 1996;88:4275.
5. Raza A, Gezer S, Mundle S, et al. Apoptosis in bone marrow biopsy samples involving stromal and hematopoietic cells in 50 patients with myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood 1995;6:268.
6. Clark DM, Lampert IA. Apoptosis is a common histopathological finding in myelodysplasia: the correlate of ineffective haematopoiesis. Leuk Lymphoma 1990;2:415.
7. Noel P, Tefferi A, Pierre RV, Jenkins RB, Dewald GW. Karyotypic analysis in primary myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood Rev 1993;7:10.
8. Greenberg PL, Mara B. The preleukemic syndrome: correlation in vitro parameters of granulopoiesis with clinical features. Am J Med 1979;66:951.
9. Estey E, Thall P, Beran M, et al. Effect of diagnosis (refractory anemia with excess blasts, refractory anemia with excess blast in transformation, or acute myeloid leukemia [AML]) on outcome
of AML-type chemotherapy. Blood 1997;90:2969.
10. Morel P, Declercq C, Hebbar M, Bauters F, Fenaux P. Prognostic factors in myelodysplastic syndromes: critical analysis of the impact of age and gender and failure to identify a very-low-risk
group using standard mortality ratio techniques. Br J Haematol 1996;94:116.
11. Cartwright RA. Incidence and epidemiology of the myelodysplastic syndromes. In: Multi GJ, Galton DAG, eds. The myelodysplastic syndromes. London: Churchill Livingstone, 1992:23.
12. West RR, Stafford DA, Farrow A, Jacobs A. Occupational and environmental exposures and myelodysplasia: a case-control study. Leuk Res 1995;19:127.
13. Nisse C, Lorthois C, Dorp V, et al. Exposure to occupational and environmental factors in myelodysplastic syndromes: preliminary results of a case-control study. Leukemia 1995;9:693.
14. Rigolin GM, Cuneo A, Roberti MG, et al. Esposure to myelotoxic agents and myelodysplasia: case-control study and correlation with clinicobiologic findings. Br J Haematol 1998;103:189.
15. Brown LM, Blair A, Gibson R, et al. Pesticide exposures and other risk factors for leukemia among men in Iowa and Minnesota. Cancer Res 1990;50:6585.
16. Garfinkel L, Boffeta P. Association between smoking and leukemia in two American cancer society prospective studies. Cancer 1990;65:2356.
17. Kantarjian HM, Keating MJ. Therapy-related leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome. Semin Oncol 1987;14:435.
18. Stone RM, Neuberg D, Soiffer R, et al. Myelodysplastic syndrome as a late complication following autologous bone marrow transplantation for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:2535.
19. Paul B, Reid MM, Davison EV, Abela M, Hamilton PJ. Familial myelodysplasia: progressive disease associated with emergence of monosomy 7. Br J Haematol 1987;65:321.
20. Bennett JM, Catovsky D, Daniel MT, et al. Proposals for the classification of the myelodysplastic syndromes. Br J Haematol 1982;51:189.
21. Michaux JL, Martiat P. Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) a myelodysplastic or myeloproliferative syndrome? Leuk Lymphoma 1993;9:35.
22. Verhoef GEG, Pittaluga S, Wolfe-Peters CDE, Boogaerts MA. FAB classification of myelodysplastic syndromes: merits and controversies. Ann Hematol 1995;71:3.
23. Seymour J, Estey E. The contribution of Auer rods to the classification and prognosis of myelodysplastic syndromes. Leuk Lymphoma 1995;17:79.
24. Estey E, Keating M, Pierce S, Beran M. Application of the international scoring system for myelodysplasia to M. D. Anderson patients. Blood 1997;90:2843.
25. Sanz GF, Sanz MA, Vallespi T, Canizo M. Two regression models and a scoring system for predicting survival and planning treatment in myelodysplastic syndromes: a multivariate analysis of
prognostic factors in 370 patients. Blood 1989;74:395.
26. Morel P, Hebbar M, Lai JL, Duhamel A. Cytogenetic analysis has strong independent prognostic value in de novo myelodysplastic syndromes and can be incorporated in a new scoring system:
a report on 408 cases. Leukemia 1993;7:1315.
27. Greenberg P, Cox C, LeBeau M, et al. International scoring system for evaluating prognosis in myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood 1997;89:2079.
28. Gallagher A, Darley RL, Padua R. The molecular basis of myelodysplastic syndromes. Haematologica 1997;82:191.
29. Rosenfeld CS, List A. A hypothesis for the pathogenesis of myelodysplastic syndrome: implications for new therapies. Leukemia 2000;14:2.
30. Janssen JWG, Buschle M, Layton M, et al. Clonal analysis of myelodysplastic syndromes: evidence of multipotent stem cell origin. Blood 1989;73:248.
31. Tefferi A, Thibodeau SN, Solberg LA Jr. Clonal studies in the myelodysplastic syndrome using X-linked restriction fragment length polymorphisms. Blood 1990;75:1770.
32. Saitoh K, Miura I, Takahashi N, Miura AB. Fluorescence in situ hybridization of progenitor cells obtained by fluorescence-activated cell sorting for the detection of cells affected by chromosome
abnormality trisomy 8 in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood 1998;92:2886.
33. Van Kamp H, Fibbe WE, Jansen RPM, et al. Clonal involvement of granulocytes and monocytes, but not of T and B lymphocytes and natural killer cells in patients with myelodysplasia: analysis
by X-linked restriction fragment length polymorphisms and polymerase chain reaction of the phosphoglycerate kinase gene. Blood 1992;80:1774.
34. Kroef MJPL, Fibbe WE, Mout R, et al. Myeloid but not lymphoid cells carry the 5q deletion: polymerase chain reaction analysis of loss of heterozygosity using mini-repeat sequences on highly
purified cell fractions. Blood 1993;81:1849.
35. Beran M, Kantarjian H, O'Brien S, et al. Topotecan, a topoisomerase I inhibitor, is active in the treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. Blood
1996;88:2473.
36. Beran M, Estey EH, O'Brien S, et al. Topotecan and cytarabine is an active combination regimen in myelodysplastic syndromes and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:2819.
37. Molldrem JJ, Jiang YZ, Stetler-Stevenson M, et al. Hematological response of patients with myelodysplastic syndrome to anti-thymocyte globulin is associated with a loss of
lymphocyte-mediated inhibition of CFU-GM and alterations in T-cell receptor Vb profiles. Br J Haematol 1998;102:1314.
38. Greenberg P. In vitro hemopoietic cell culture studies in MDS. Semin Oncol 1992;19:34.
39. Selleri C, Sato T, Anderson S, Young NS, Maciejewski JP. Interferon-gamma and tumor necrosis factor-alpha suppress both early and late stages of hematopoiesis and induce programmed cell
death. J Cell Physiol 1995;165:538.
40. Maciejewski J, Selleri C, Anderson S, Young NS. Fas antigen expression on CD34+ human marrow cells is induced by interferon g and tumor necrosis factor a and potentiates
cytokine-mediated hematopoietic suppression in vitro. Blood 1995;85:3183.
41. Verhoef GEG, De Schouwer P, Ceuppens JL, et al. Measurement of serum cytokine levels in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes. Leukemia 1992;12:1268.
42. Kitagawa M, Saito I, Kuwata T, et al. Overexpression of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a and interferon (IFN)-g bone marrow cells from patients with myelodysplastic syndromes. Leukemia
1997;11:2049.
43. Kitagawa M, Kamiyama R, Kasuga T. Increase in number of bone marrow macrophages in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes. Eur J Haematol 1993;51:56.
44. Janowska-Wieczorek A, Belch AR, Jacobs A, et al. Increased circulating colony-stimulating factor-1 in patients with preleukemia, leukemia, and lymphoid malignancies. Blood 1991;77:1796.
45. Tobal K, Pagliuca A, Bhatt B. Mutation of the human FMS gene (M-CSF receptor) in myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myeloid leukemia. Leukemia 1990;4:486.
46. Gersuk GM, Yamaguchi M, Beckham C, et al. A role for FAS, FAS-ligand and TNF-a in the dysregulation of hematopoiesis in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Blood 1996;88(Suppl 1):639a.
47. Stasi R, Brunetti M, Bussa S, et al. Serum levels of tumour necrosis factor-a predict response to recombinant human erythropoietin in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome. Clin Lab
Haematol 1997;19:197.
48. Mundle SD, Venugopal P, Cartlidge JD, et al. Indication of an involvement of interleukin-1b converting enzyme-like protease in intramedullary apoptotic cell death in the bone marrow of
patients with myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood 1996;88:2640.
49. Paquette RL, Landaw EM, Pierre RV, et al. N-ras mutations are associated with poor prognosis and increased risk of leukemia in myelodysplastic syndrome. Blood 1993;82:590.
50. Ohyashiki JH, Ohyashiki K, Fujimura T, et al. Telomere shortening associated with disease evolution patterns in myelodysplastic syndromes. Cancer Res 1994;54:3557.
51. Boultwood J, Lewis S, Waincoar JS. The 5q-syndrome. Blood 1994;84:3253.
52. Ridge SA, Worwood M, Oscier D, Jacobs A, Padua RA. Fms mutations in myelodysplastic, leukemic, and normal subjects. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:1377.
53. Mori N, Hidai H, Yokota J, et al. Mutations of the p53 gene in myelodysplastic syndrome and overt leukemia. Leukemia Res 1995;19:869.
54. Bouscary D, Preudhomme C, Ribrag V, et al. Prognostic value of c-mpl expression in myelodysplastic syndromes. Leukemia 1995;9:783.
55. Willman CL, Sever CE, Pallavicini MG, et al. Deletion of IRF-1, mapping to chromosome 5q31.1, in human leukemia and preleukemic myelodysplasia. Science 1993;259:968.
56. Uchida T, Kinoshita T, Nagai H, et al. Hypermethylation of the p15INK4b gene in myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood 1997;90:1403.
57. Quensel B, Guillerm G, Vereecque R, et al. Methylation of the p15INK4b gene in myelodysplastic syndromes is frequent and acquired during disease progression. Blood 1998;91:2985.
58. Seo IS, Li C-Y, Yam LT. Myelodysplastic syndrome: diagnostic implications of cytochemical and immunocytochemical studies. Mayo Clin Proc 1993;68:47.
59. Schneider DR, Picker LJ. Myelodysplasia in the acquired immune deficiency syndrome. Am J Clin Pathol 1985;84:144.
60. Wattel E, Lai JL, Hebbar M, Preudhomme C. De novo myelodysplastic syndrome with deletion of long arm of chromosome 20: a subtype of MDS with distinct hematological and prognostic
features? Leuk Res 1993;17:921.
61. Estey E, Trujillo J, Cork A, O'Brien S, et al. AML-associated cytogenetic abnormalities (inv(16), del(16), t(8;21)) in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes. Hematol Pathol 1992;6:43.

62. Nand S, Godwin JE. Hypoplastic myelodysplastic syndromes. Cancer 1988;62:958.
63. Appelbaum FR, Barrall J, Storb R, et al. Clonal cytogenetic abnormalities in patients with otherwise typical aplastic anemia. Exp Hematol 1987;15:1134.
64. Lambertenghi-Deliliers G, Orazi A, Luksch R, Annaloro C, Soligo D. Myelodysplastic syndrome with increased marrow fibrosis: a distinct clinicopathological entity. Br J Haematol 1991;78:161.
65. Estey EH, Keating MJ, Dixon DO, et al. Karyotype is prognostically more important than FAB system's distinction between myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myelogenous leukemia.
Hematol Pathol 1987;7:203.
66. Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Diebold J, et al. World Health Organization Classification of neoplastic diseases of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues: report of the Clinical Advisory Committee
Meeting. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3835.
67. Fenaux P, Benscart R, Lai JL, Jouet JP, Bauters F. Prognostic factors in adult chronic myelomonocytic leukemia: analysis of 107 cases. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1417.
68. Bennett JM, Catovsy D, Daniel MT, et al. The chronic myeloid leukemias: guidelines for distinguishing chronic granulocytic, atypical chronic myeloid and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. Br J
Haematol 1994;87:746.
69. Anderlini P, Pierce S, Kantarjian H, Estey E. AML-type chemotherapy for myelodysplasia. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1404.
70. Doll DC, Ringenberg QS, Yarbro JW. Danazol therapy in acquired idiopathic sideroblastic anemia. Acta Haematol 1987;77:170.
71. Gore SD, Miller CB, Weng LJ, et al. Clinical development of sodium phenylbutyrate as a putative differentiating agent in myeloid malignancies. Anticancer Res 1997;17:3938a.
72. Kurzrock R, Estey E, Talpaz M. All-trans retinoic acid: tolerance and biologic effects in myelodysplastic syndrome. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1489.
73. Koeffler HP, Heitjan D, Mertelsmann R, et al. Randomized study of 13-cis retinoic acid v placebo in the myelodysplastic disorders. Blood 1988;71:703.
74. Andreeff M, Stone R, Michaeli J, et al. Hexamethylene bisacetamide in myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myelogenous leukemia: a phase II clinical trial with a differentiation-inducing agent.
Blood 1992;80:2604.
75. Morosetti R, Koeffler HP. Differentiation therapy in myelodysplastic syndromes. Semin Hematol 1996;33:236.
76. Hellstrom E, Robert KH, Gahrton G, et al. Therapeutic effects of low-dose cytosine arabinoside, alpha-interferon, 1 alpha-hydroxyvitamin D3 and retinoic acid in acute leukemia and
myelodysplastic syndromes. Eur J Haematol 1988;40:449.
77. Hellstrom-Lindberg E. Efficacy of erythropoietin in the myelodysplastic syndromes: a meta-analysis of 205 patients from 17 studies. Br J Haematol 1995;89:67.
78. Willemze R, van der Lely N, Zwierzina H, et al. A randomized phase I/II multicenter study of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) therapy for
patients with myelodysplastic syndromes and a relatively low risk of acute leukemia. Ann Hematol 1992;64:173.
79. Greenberg P, Taylor K, Larson R, et al. Phase III randomized multicenter trial of G-CSF vs. observation for myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood 1993;82(Suppl 1):196a(abst).
80. Negrin RS, Stein R, Doherty K, et al. Maintenance treatment of the anemia of myelodysplastic syndromes with recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and erythropolietin:
evidence for in vivo synergy. Blood 1996;87:4076.
81. Hellstrom-Lindberg E, Ahlgren T, Beguin Y, et al. Treatment of anemia in myelodysplastic syndromes with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor plus erythropoietin: results from a randomized
phase II study and long-term follow-up of 71 patients. Blood 1998;92:68.
82. Nand S, Sosman J, Godwin JE. A phase I/II study of sequential interleukin 3 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood 1994;83:357.
83. Gordon MS, Nemunaitis J, Hoffman R, et al. A phase I trial of recombinant human interleukin-6 in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes and thrombocytopenia. Blood 1995;85:3066.
84. Tepler I, Elias L, Smith JW II, et al. A randomized placebo-controlled trial of recombinant human interleukin-11 in cancer patients with severe thrombocytopenia due to chemotherapy. Blood
1996;87:3615.
85. Fanucchi M, Glapsy J, Crawford J, et al. Effects of polyethylene glycol-conjugated recombinant human megakaryocyte growth and development factor in platelet counts after chemotherapy for
lung cancer. N Engl J Med 1997;336:404.
86. Gerhartz HH, Marcus R, Delmer A. A randomized phase II study of low-dose cytosine arabinoside plus GM-CSF in MDS with a high risk of developing leukemia. Leukemia 1994;8:16.
87. Cheson BD, Jasperese DM, Simon R, Friedman MA. A critical appraisal of low-dose cytosine arabinoside in patients with acute non-lymphocytic leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes. J
Clin Oncol 1986;4:1857.
88. Miller KB, Kim K, Morrison FS, et al. The evaluation of low-dose ara-C in the treatment of myelodysplastic syndromesa phase III intergroup study. Ann Hematol 1992;65:162.
89. Gerhartz H, Marcus R, Delmer A, et al. A randomized phase II study of low-dose cytosine arabinoside (LD-ara-C) plus granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (rhGM-CSF) in
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) with a high risk of developing leukemia. Leukemia 1994;8:16.
90. Mertelsmann R, Thaler HT, To L, et al. Morphological classification, response to therapy, and survival in 263 adult patients with acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1980;56:773.
91. Armitage JO, Dick FR, Needleman SW, et al. Effect of chemotherapy for the dysmyelopoietic syndrome. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:601.
92. De Witte T, Suciu S, Peetermans M, et al. Intensive chemotherapy for poor prognosis myelodysplasia (MDS) and secondary acute myeloid leukemia (sAML) following MDS of more than 6
months duration: a pilot study by the Leukemia Cooperative Group of the European Organization for Research and Treatment in Cancer (EORTC-LCG). Leukemia 1995;9:1805.
93. Estey E. Treatment of acute myelogenous leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes. Semin Hematol 1995;32:132.
94. Parker JE, Pagliuga A, Mijovic A, et al. Fludarabine, cytarabine, G-CSF and idarubicin (FLAG-IDA) for the treatment of poor-risk myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myeloid leukemia. Br J
Haematol 1997;99:939.
95. Fenaux P, Morel P, Rose C, et al. Prognostic factors in adult de novo myelodysplastic syndromes treated by intensive chemotherapy. Br J Haematol 1991;77:497.
96. Ruutu T, Hanninen A, Jarventie G, et al. Intensive chemotherapy of poor prognosis myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myeloid leukemia following MDS with idarubicin and cytarabine. Leuk
Lymphoma 1997;21:133.
97. Invernizzi R, Pecci A, Rossi G, et al. Idarubicin and cytosine arabinoside in the induction and maintenance therapy of high-risk myelodysplastic syndromes. Haematologica 1997;82:9.
98. Economopoulos T, Papageorgiou E, Stathakis N, et al. Treatment of high-risk myelodysplastic syndromes with idarubicin and cytosine arabinoside supported by granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor. Leuk Lymphoma 1995;20:385.
99. Wattel E, de Botton S, Lai J, et al. Long-term follow-up of de novo myelodysplastic syndromes treated with intensive chemotherapy: incidence of long-term survivors and outcome of partial
responders. Br J Haematol 1997;98:983.
100. Bernstein SH, Brunetto VL, Davey FR, et al. Acute myeloid leukemia-type chemotherapy for newly diagnosed patients without antecedent cytopenias having myelodysplastic syndrome as
defined by French-American-British criteria: a Cancer and Leukemia Group B study. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2486.
101. Loffler H, Schmitz N, Gassmann W. Intensive chemotherapy and bone marrow transplantation for myelodysplastic syndromes. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1992;6:619.
102. Anderson JE, Appelbaum FR, Schoch G, et al. Allogeneic marrow transplantation for myelodysplastic syndrome with advanced disease morphology: a phase II study of busulfan,
cyclophosphamide, and total-body irradiation and analysis of prognostic factors. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:220.
103. Casto-Malaspina H, Childs B, Gillio A, et al. Improved disease-free survival in patients with low risk (<5% marrow blasts) myelodysplastic syndromes treated with HLA-identical sibling-derived
T-cell depleted (SBA-E) marrow transplants. Blood 1994;34:518A(abst).
104. Appelbaum F, Anderson J. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for myelodysplastic syndrome-outcomes analysis according to IPSS score. Leukemia 1998;12(Suppl 1):S25.
105. de Witte T, van Biezen A, Hermans J, et al. Autologous bone marrow transplantation for patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or acute myeloid leukemia following MDS. Blood
1997;90:3863.
106. Anderson J, Anasetti C, Appelbaum F, et al. Unrelated donor marrow transplantation for myelodysplasia (MDS) and MDS-related acute myeloid leukemia. Br J Haematol 1996; 93:59.
107. Beran M, Estey E, O'Brien S, et al. Results of topotecan single-agent therapy in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. Leuk Lymphoma 1998;31:521.
108. Vey N, Kantarjian H, Tran H, et al. Phase I and pharmacologic study of 9-aminocamptothecin colloidal dispersion formulation in patients with refractory or relapsed acute leukemia. Ann Oncol
1999;10:577.
109. Kantarjian H, Cortes J, O'Brien S, et al. 9-nitro-20-(S)-camptothecin (9-NC, RFS2000): an effective agent for treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999:83.
110. Baylin SB, Herman JG, Graff JR, et al. Alterations in DNA methylationa fundamental aspect of neoplasia. Adv Cancer Res 1998;72:141.
111. Daskalakis MNTT, Wijermans P, Jomes PA, Lubbert M. Frequent hypermethylation of p15/INK4B in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes is decreased following treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (decitabine). Blood 1998;92(Suppl 1):715a.
112. Silverman LR, Demakos EP, Peterson B, et al. A randomized controlled trial of subcutaneous azacytidine (AZA C) in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS): a study of the Cancer and
Leukemia Group B. Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;34:12a.
113. Kornblith AB, Silverman LR. The impact of 5-azacytidine on the quality of life of patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) treated in a randomized phase III trial of the Cancer and
Leukemia Group B. Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;34:189.
114. Wijermans P, Luebbert M, Verhoef G, et al. DNA demethylating therapy in MDSthe experience with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (decitabine). Blood 1999;94(Suppl 1):306a.
115. Kantarjian H, Keating M, McCredie K, Freireich E. Phase II study of homoharringtonine in refractory acute myelogenous leukemia. Cancer 1989;63:813.
116. Feldman EJ, Seiter KP, Ahmed T, Baskind P, Arlin ZA. Homoharringtonine in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and MDS evolving to acute myeloid leukemia. Leukemia
1996;10:40.
117. List A, Holmes H, Greenberg P, Bennett J, Oster W. Phase II study of amifostine in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood 1999;94(Suppl 1):305a.
118. Bowen DT, Denzlinger C, Brugger W, et al. Poor response rate to a continuous schedule of amifostine therapy for “low/intermediate risk” myelodysplastic patients. Br J Haematol 1998;103:785.
119. Biesma DH, van den Tweel JG, Vendonck LF. Immunosuppressive therapy for hypoplastic myelodysplastic syndrome. Cancer 1997;70:1548.
120. Molldrem JJ, Caples M, Mavroudis D, et al. Antithymocyte globulin for patients with myelodysplastic syndrome. Br J Haematol 1997;99:699.
121. Jonasova A, Neuwirtova R, Cermak J, et al. Cyclosporin A therapy in hypoplastic MDS patients and certain refractory anemias without hypoplastic bone marrow. Br J Haematol 1998;100:304.
122. Caron PC, Dumont L, Scheinberg DA. Supersaturating infusional humanized anti-CD33 monoclonal antibody HuM195 in myelogenous leukemia. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:1421.
123. Nemunaitis J, Rosenfield C, Getty L, et al. Pentoxifylline and ciprofloxacin in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome. Am J Clin Oncol 1995;18:189.
124. Thomas DA, Aguayo A, Estey E, et al. Thalidomide as anti-angiogenesis therapy in refractory or relapsed leukemias. Blood 1999;94(Suppl 1):507a(abstr).
125. Raza A, Lisak L, Andrews C, et al. Thalidomide produces transfusion independence in patients with long-standing refractory anemias and myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood 1999;94(Suppl
1):661a(abst).
126. Wattel E, Preudhomme C, Hecquet B, et al. p53 mutations are associated with resistance to chemotherapy and short survival in hematologic malignancies. Blood 1994;84:3148.
127. Bishop MR, Iversen PL, Bayever E, et al. Phase I trial of an antisense oligonucleotide OL(1)p53 in hematologic malignancies. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1320.
128. Nand S, Stock W, Stiff P, et al. A phase II trial of interleukin-2 in myelodysplastic syndromes. Br J Haematol 1998;101:205.
129. Rosenfeld CS, Zeigler ZR, Shadduck RK, Nilsson B. Phase II study of roquinimex in myelodysplastic syndrome. Am J Clin Oncol 1997;20:189.
130. Sharma S, Raymond E, Soda H, et al. Preclinical and clinical strategies for development of telomerase and telomere inhibitors. Ann Oncol 1997;8:1063.
131. Rowinsky EK, Windle JJ, Von Hoff DD. Ras protein farnesyltransferase: a strategic target for anticancer therapeutic development. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3631.
132. Rowinsky EK, Conley BA, Jones RJ, et al. Hexamethylene bisacetamide in myelodysplastic syndrome: effect of five-day exposure to maximal therapeutic concentrations. Leukemia 1992;6:526.

CHAPTER 47 Paraneoplastic Syndromes
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 47
Paraneoplastic Syndromes
SUSANNE M. ARNOLD
ROY PATCHELL
ANDREW M. LOWY
KENNETH A. FOON
Introduction
Endocrinologic Manifestations of Cancer
Ectopic Adrenocorticotropic Hormone Syndrome
Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuretic Hormone
Hypocalcemia
Oncogenous Osteomalacia
Calcitonin Production by Tumors
Chromogranin A
Gonadotropins
Tumor-Produced Human Placental Lactogen, Growth Hormone–Releasing Hormone, Prolactin, and Thyrotropic Substance
Hypoglycemia
Hematologic Manifestations of Cancer
Erythrocytosis
Anemia
Granulocytosis
Granulocytopenia
Eosinophilia and Basophilia
Thrombocytosis
Thrombocytopenia
Thrombophlebitis
Coagulopathies and Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation
Nonbacterial Thrombotic Endocarditis
Gastrointestinal Manifestations of Cancer
Protein-Losing Enteropathy
Anorexia and Cachexia in the Cancer Patient
Renal Manifestations of Nonrenal Cancer
Glomerular Disorders
Microvascular Lesions
Tumor Infiltration
Cutaneous Paraneoplastic Syndromes
Pigmented Lesions and Keratoses
Neutrophilic Dermatoses
Erythemas
Endocrine and Metabolic Lesions
Bullous and Urticarial Lesions
Miscellaneous Lesions
Hereditary Disorders
Neurologic Manifestations of Cancer
Frequency
Pathogenesis
Diagnosis
Autoantibodies
Treatment
Specific Syndromes
Miscellaneous Paraneoplastic Syndromes
Hypertrophic Osteoarthropathy
Fever
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Tumors may produce signs and symptoms at sites distant from the primary tumor or its metastases and these are referred to as paraneoplastic syndromes. The
syndromes may be due to (1) tumor production of substances that directly or indirectly cause distant symptoms, (2) depletion of normal substances that leads to a
paraneoplastic manifestation, or (3) host response to the tumor that results in the syndrome. The evidence for the existence of a paraneoplastic syndrome may range
from the mere association of the syndrome with the presence of an actively growing tumor to the cloning of the gene responsible for the syndrome. Among the best
characterized of the paraneoplastic syndromes are those producing polypeptide hormones, such as adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) or parathyroid hormone, that affect
organ function at remote sites. In such situations, the paraneoplastic syndrome parallels the underlying malignancy, and treatment of the underlying tumor leads to
disappearance of the hormone. Additional tumor-derived proteins responsible for paraneoplastic syndromes have been identified, including various growth factors and
cytokines such as interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF). Antibodies produced by certain malignancies may lead to neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes
such as the Eaton-Lambert syndrome. Many paraneoplastic syndromes, especially those of an immune etiology, do not respond to treatment of the underlying
malignancy.
The paraneoplastic syndrome may be the first sign of a malignancy, and its recognition may be critical for early cancer detection. Certain paraneoplastic syndromes
that secrete proteins can be used as tumor markers in monitoring patients before and after therapy. In some situations, the underlying disease cannot be treated, but
the symptoms and complications of the paraneoplastic syndrome must be treated. This chapter reviews the wide range of paraneoplastic syndromes including the
endocrinologic, hematologic, gastrointestinal (GI), renal, cutaneous, and neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes.

ENDOCRINOLOGIC MANIFESTATIONS OF CANCER
Endocrine syndromes of cancer are caused by the tumor's direct production of hormones, hormone-precursors, or cytokines, as well as cancer metabolism of steroids
to active forms.1
ECTOPIC ADRENOCORTICOTROPIC HORMONE SYNDROME
In 1928, Brown first described the syndrome of ectopic ACTH overproduction, when he reported a patient with small cell lung carcinoma and associated hirsutism,
diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and adrenal hyperplasia. 2 The syndrome was further characterized in 1965 when 88 patients with Cushing's syndrome and cancer
were described. 3 This report was the first to suggest that tumors produced ACTH or an ACTH-like substance, which led to adrenal hyperplasia and hypercortisolism,
coining the term ectopic ACTH production. Subsequently, propiomelanocortin (POMC), the precursor hormone of ACTH, was described, containing not only ACTH, but
melanocyte stimulating hormone, b-lipotropin, endorphins, and enkephalins. 4,5 and 6
Many normal tissues produce minute amounts of POMC, while carcinomas produce higher quantities, and in some instances can convert these to active ACTH,
producing the Cushing's syndrome. Patients with ectopic ACTH syndrome have a much higher ratio of ACTH precursors to endogenous ACTH, when compared with

patients with Cushing's disease (hypercortisolism secondary to a pituitary adenoma). 7 The molecular control of this process lies in the fact that three promoter regions
control transcription of the POMC gene. In normal pituitary glands the P 2 promoter is active, while in cancer-associated ACTH production, the P 1 promoter
predominates.8 It is postulated that loss of tumor suppressor genes leads to overproduction of the C-fos oncogene, which leads to increased POMC gene expression,
along with many other proteins in the oncogenic cascade. 9 Some neoplasms then convert pro-ACTH to active ACTH, resulting in the ectopic ACTH syndrome. 1
Ectopic ACTH is commonly associated with small cell carcinoma of the lung, but can also be found in a variety of neoplasms ( Table 47-1). While 3% to 7% of patients
with small cell carcinoma of the lung develop Cushing's syndrome, many patients with small cell carcinoma of the lung secrete ACTH precursors without the
development of the syndrome. 10

TABLE 47-1. Tumors Associated with Ectopic Adrenocorticotropic Hormone

Clinical Presentation
Cushing's initial description of the peripheral effects of a hyperfunctioning pituitary adenoma included truncal obesity, purple striae, hypertension, fatigue, moon
facies, buffalo hump, weakness, depression, amenorrhea, hirsutism, and edema. The differential diagnosis of a patient with hypercortisolism includes Cushing's
disease, adrenal dysfunction, ectopic ACTH production, and corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) overproduction. Pituitary overproduction (Cushing's disease) is
the most common etiology, occurring in 55% to 82% of patients, while adrenal dysfunction occurs in 5% to 32%, ectopic ACTH production in 11% to 25%, and CRH
overproduction in less than 1% to 2%. 11,12,13 and 14 Although signs and symptoms of hypercortisolism are not specific, several features of ectopic ACTH production are
distinguishing: Myopathy with weakness, muscle wasting, hyperpigmentation, and hypokalemia are more common in ectopic ACTH production. Cushing's disease is
more common in young women (3 to 1), whereas older men (at higher risk for lung cancer) typically have ectopic ACTH production. 10 Commonly, hirsutism, severe
hypertension, and hyperpigmentation are noted on physical evaluation, while glucose intolerance, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis make up the usual
biochemical profile. The hypokalemia can be severe and life threatening.
Diagnosis
Distinguishing between pituitary adenoma, ectopic ACTH production, and primary adrenal disorders is the primary focus of the diagnostic workup ( Fig. 47-1). The two
most common screening tests for cortisol overproduction are the 24-hour urinary free cortisol and the low-dose dexamethasone suppression test. In normal subjects
cortisol production should be suppressed by a relatively low dose of dexamethasone, whereas patients with Cushing's disease or ectopic ACTH production are not
affected.

FIGURE 47-1. Diagnostic algorithm for the evaluation of patients with suspected Cushing's syndrome. See text for details of various tests. ACTH, adrenocorticotropic
hormone.

With reliable radioassays of ACTH, plasma levels can be determined early in the diagnostic workup. In primary adrenal disease, ACTH levels are low, while in
ACTH-dependent Cushing's syndrome the ACTH level is elevated. 14 Classically, plasma ACTH and ACTH precursor levels in ectopic ACTH production are much
higher than in Cushing's disease (pituitary adenoma); however, there is a great deal of overlap, particularly in the case of slow-growing malignancies such as
bronchial carcinoids. Once primary adrenal disease is eliminated, with normal or elevated ACTH levels, a high-dose dexamethasone suppression test is indicated.
High-dose dexamethasone suppresses cortisol production (and thus the urinary study results) in patients with Cushing's disease but not ectopic ACTH production or
primary adrenal disorders. 10 False-positive dexamethasone suppression test results are seen when dexamethasone is metabolized more rapidly than normal. Drugs
such as diphenylhydantoin, phenobarbital, and primidone, as well as disease states such as thyrotoxicosis cause rapid dexamethasone metabolism. Furthermore,
bronchial carcinoids can have ACTH and cortisol suppression with high-dose dexamethasone testing in 40% to 50% of cases. 15
While the reliability of the dexamethasone suppression test is good, the test is cumbersome and its performance characteristics (sensitivity and specificity) are not
perfect. For these reasons, the metyrapone and CRH stimulation tests have been developed. In both tests the sensitivity of pituitary adenoma to stimulation by either
cortisol deprivation (metyrapone) or directly (CRH) is exploited. Metyrapone blocks the production of cortisol in the adrenal by inhibiting the conversion of
11-deoxycortisol to cortisol, leading to an increased ACTH secretion in normal patients, thus testing the integrity of the adrenal-cortisol-pituitary feedback loop.
Patients with Cushing's disease show stimulated ACTH production, whereas ectopic ACTH production is unaffected. In the largest reported study, the metyrapone test
correctly predicted Cushing's in 71% of patients with ACTH-dependent Cushing's syndrome. The combination of the dexamethasone suppression test and the
metyrapone test predicted 82% of the cases (significantly better than either test alone). 16 Similarly, pituitary adenomas are generally responsive to ovine CRH
stimulation, while ectopic ACTH-producing tumors are not. In one report of 41 patients with ACTH-dependent hypercortisolism, 29 of 33 patients with pituitary
adenoma were stimulated with ovine CRH, whereas none of the 8 patients with ectopic ACTH production were stimulated. 17 This led to a sensitivity of 88%, a
specificity of 100%, and a diagnostic accuracy of 90%, which compared favorably with the standard dexamethasone suppression test. Again, the combination of CRH
stimulation and dexamethasone suppression led to a superior diagnostic accuracy of 98%.
Other evaluations that are more invasive or less well established in diagnosing Cushing's syndrome include inferior petrosal blood sampling with or without CRH
stimulation,18 continuous dexamethasone infusion, 19 and serum chromogranin A.20 Inferior petrosal venous samples show a marked gradient with peripheral samples
in pituitary adenoma. The diagnostic accuracy is high, but the test is expensive and invasive. One hundred twenty-one patients were evaluated with 7-hour continuous
infusion dexamethasone at 1 mg/h. The sensitivity for pituitary disease was 100%, the specificity was 90%, and the diagnostic accuracy was 98%. This evaluation was
thought to be more convenient and accurate, but these results have not been confirmed. Serum chromogranin A has been shown to be a potential marker of ectopic

production. The results, at this point, are preliminary, however.
Treatment
Localization is the most important aspect of therapy. Since a major portion of patients with ectopic ACTH have lung cancer, chest evaluation is initially in order. Plain
radiographs followed by computed tomography (CT) detect more than 90% of the lung tumors associated with ACTH production. 11,21,22 The exception is bronchial
carcinoid tumors, which are visualized on 36% of initial radiographs, but are localized by CT scan in approximately 85% of cases. 23 Octreotide receptor scintigraphy
has been promoted for localizing ACTH-producing tumors, because many such tumors have octreotide receptors. 24 An additional advantage of localizing tumors with
octreotide receptor scintigraphy is the suggestion of possible therapy with either somatostatin analogues or radiolabeled octreotide.
Surgery is the treatment of choice in patients with early-stage tumors producing Cushing's syndrome because it can completely alleviate symptoms. In one series of
41 patients with ectopic ACTH and absence of small cell cancer of the lung, 16 of 21 (76%) patients with localized tumors were cured of Cushing's syndrome with
surgery. Specifically, 81% of bronchial carcinoid tumors were cured with resection, and 9 of 12 (75%) patients with occult ACTH production were palliated with
bilateral adrenalectomy. 25 While bilateral adrenal removal is effective in treating Cushing's syndrome, the patient must have lifelong glucocorticoid and
mineralocorticoid replacement. Patients with severe muscle weakness and uncontrolled hypertension are candidates for this approach. The use of laparoscopic
adrenalectomy has been reported to effectively palliate patients with Cushing's with minimal morbidity and no mortality reported. 26
The majority of patients do not have surgically resectable disease and may have ongoing symptoms related to Cushing's syndrome. Medical therapy for ectopic ACTH
production centers on inhibiting cortisol production with mitotane, aminoglutethimide, metyrapone, or ketoconazole ( Table 47-2).27,28 and 29 Mitotane is effective in
lowering cortisol levels; however, it is rarely used because of its severe toxicity and slow onset of action. Aminoglutethimide is used in only limited situations, because
of incomplete responses. Metyrapone is an effective treatment, particularly in combination with aminoglutethimide. Because of its rapid onset of action and favorable
toxicity profile, ketoconazole has evolved as the therapy of choice for ectopic ACTH. In one small study, 66% of patients with ectopic ACTH production had a
hormonal response and symptomatic improvement with ketoconazole at a dose of 400 to 1200 mg/d. A minority developed symptomatic hypoadrenalism.

TABLE 47-2. Drugs Used for Treating Ectopic Adrenocorticotropic Hormone Production

Suppression of primary ACTH production can be accomplished by two means: cytotoxic chemotherapy, for the primary problem, and octreotide suppression of ACTH
release. In general, chemotherapy alone is not associated with control of Cushing's syndrome, but is combined with adrenal suppression in most cases. As well, if
patients show significant localization with octreotide receptor scintigraphy, a trial of octreotide may be in order. In one small study of ten patients treated with
octreotide, four had significant rapid responses. 30 The combination of ketoconazole and octreotide has also been reported. 31
SYNDROME OF INAPPROPRIATE ANTIDIURETIC HORMONE
The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone production (SIADH) was first reported in two patients with lung cancer and hyponatremia. 32 The proposed
etiology was an abnormal production of ADH or an ADH-like substance by the cancer. In 1968, arginine vasopressin (ADH) was extracted from cancers associated
with this syndrome, confirming the original hypothesis. 33 While the majority of small cell lung tumors positively stain for arginine vasopressin by radioimmune
assay,34,35 and 36 only 3% to 15% of patients with small cell lung carcinoma have this syndrome. 37,38 Clearly, as with ectopic ACTH production, the vast majority of
tumors that contain these substances does not produce the clinical syndrome.
The pathophysiology of SIADH is well described. After vasopressin is released, it binds to specific receptors in the renal collecting ducts and ascending limb of the
loop of Henle. Excess water is reabsorbed and increased sodium is delivered to the distal nephron. This increases intravascular volume, which in turn increases renal
perfusion and decreases proximal tubular resorption of sodium. ADH secretion continues in SIADH despite the decrease in plasma osmolality, causing eventual
hyponatremia.39,40
Clinical Features and Diagnosis
The cardinal features of SIADH are water intoxication and hyponatremia, including the following principal findings: decreased serum osmolarity, inappropriate
elevation of urine osmolarity with urine sodium levels greater than 20 mEq/L, euvolemia (absence of hypovolemia), normal renal function, normal adrenal function,
and normal thyroid function. Most patients are asymptomatic, but when symptoms develop they generally reflect central nervous system toxicity. In its early stages,
patients complain of fatigue, anorexia, headaches, and mild altered mental status. As the syndrome progresses, patients may experience continued delirium,
confusion, fatigue, and seizures. Ultimately, patients develop refractory seizures, coma, and rarely death. Most patients, however, experience minimal symptoms and
are discovered on routine laboratory evaluation when they have hyponatremia.
In evaluating a patient with hyponatremia and cancer, other causes of hyponatremia need to be considered. In general, the first step in evaluating patients with
hyponatremia is to assess volume status. SIADH is one of the so-called euvolemic hyponatremic states. Therefore, it is necessary to eliminate states associated with
volume overload such as congestive heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, malignant ascites, and significant liver disease. It is also essential to exclude extrarenal
volume depletion and renal sodium wasting. Once the patient is determined to be euvolemic, other causes of euvolemic hyponatremia must be ruled out, including
hypothyroidism, renal dysfunction, and Addison's disease. A careful review of medications is also essential.
Once the diagnosis of SIADH is made, a wide variety of etiologies must be considered, including central nervous system diseases, pulmonary diseases, and drugs.
Tumor-associated SIADH is a diagnosis of exclusion. For the purposes of treatment, however, differentiating tumor-related SIADH from other causes of SIADH is not
necessary. Of note, it is rarely necessary to perform a water-loading test in order to make the diagnosis of SIADH. Because these patients are often unable to excrete
free water, they can develop significant water intoxication, leading to serious morbidity in this setting.
The principal malignancy associated with SIADH is small cell lung carcinoma, although others have been described (non–small cell lung cancer, head and neck
cancers, and others). Seventy-five percent of all SIADH associated with malignancy is secondary to small cell lung carcinoma. Previously it was proposed that SIADH
was a marker of tumor burden as well as a negative prognostic factor. 41 However, more recent reports have indicated that SIADH is neither an indicator of poor
outcome nor disease burden. 42 Indeed, many patients with small cell lung carcinoma only develop SIADH after treatment. 43 Of interest, several chemotherapeutic
agents commonly used in oncology cause transient SIADH including vincristine, vinblastine, vinorelbine, ifosfamide, cyclophosphamide, and cisplatin. 44,45 and 46
Treatment
As with any syndrome associated with ectopic hormone production, treating the underlying disease is the most effective means of controlling SIADH. Chemotherapy
treatment of the associated small cell lung cancer is generally associated with improvement in the syndrome. SIADH has not been shown to be a negative prognostic

factor in terms of response to chemotherapy. In situations in which brain metastases are present, the addition of radiation therapy is important. Because surgery is not
generally thought to be an effective modality in patients with small cell lung cancer, surgery is rarely undertaken in patients with malignancy-associated SIADH. In
chemotherapy-related SIADH, the offending drug should be stopped.
Supportive measures such as fluid restriction and pharmacologic therapy can be undertaken to treat SIADH. Patients with sodium levels under 130 mmol/L are placed
on a free water restriction (500 mL/d), in addition to treatment of the primary malignancy. 47 In the event that this measure does not bring the serum sodium above 130
mmol/L, pharmacologic agents such as demeclocycline can be instituted. Demeclocycline inhibits the effect of arginine vasopressin on the kidneys. 48 The
recommended dose of demeclocycline is 600 to 1200 mg/d in divided doses. Other less common medications that have reported efficacy include fludrocortisone,
urea, and lithium. Finally, in severe cases in which patients have life-threatening convulsions or coma, patients can be treated with hypertonic saline solution with
intravenous furosemide. It is important not to raise the serum sodium too rapidly (the recommendation is 1 mEq/L/h) due to the risk of central pontine myelinolysis. 49 It
is generally thought that hypertonic saline and Lasix treatment should be carried out in the intensive care unit setting.
HYPOCALCEMIA
Although most of the discussion regarding disturbance of calcium balance and malignancy revolves around hypercalcemia, hypocalcemia is actually more common in
patients with bone metastases.50,51 Tumors associated with lytic bone metastases such as breast, prostate, and lung cancers, can lead to hypocalcemia. 52,53 Also,
rarely, hypocalcemia can occur in patients whose tumors secrete calcitonin (i.e., medullary carcinoma of the thyroid). More common than hypercalcemia,
hypocalcemia is rarely symptomatic. Patients occasionally develop the features of hypocalcemia such as tetany and neuromuscular irritability, but can show mild
neuromuscular dysfunction by electromyography. Therapy, consisting of calcium infusion, is reserved for those patients with findings of neuromuscular irritability or
symptoms such as tetany and seizures. Signs of neuromuscular irritability including Chvostek's sign and Trousseau's sign (carpal spasm with decreased blood flow)
indicate the need for calcium infusion. For a discussion of hypercalcemia, please refer to the chapter on Metabolic Emergencies (see Chapter 51.3).
ONCOGENOUS OSTEOMALACIA
Rickets is a well-recognized inborn error of metabolism, while the adult counterpart, osteomalacia, is usually secondary to intestinal malabsorption syndrome, renal
tubular acidosis, and chronic renal insufficiency. Oncogenous osteomalacia is a rare syndrome characterized by osteomalacia, hypophosphatemia,
hyperphosphaturia, and decreased vitamin D levels. Mean age at diagnosis is approximately 35 years. Patients typically present with bone pain, phosphaturia, renal
glycosuria, hypophosphatemia, normocalcemia with normal parathyroid hormone function, low 1,25-(OH) 2-D3, and increased alkaline phosphatase. The proposed
mechanisms include inhibition of the conversion of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D and a tumor-secreted phosphaturic substance. It is usually associated with benign
mesenchymal tumors including hemangiomas and hemangiopericytomas, but rarely is seen with multiple myeloma and prostate cancer. 54,55,56,57 and 58 The typical tumor
involves prominent giant cells, spindle cells, and a high degree of vascularity. Approximately one-half of the tumors are in the lower extremities, and the remaining
tumors are divided between the head and upper extremities with some patients having tumors at multiple sites. The definitive therapy is removal of the tumor, if
possible. Otherwise, treatment requires large doses of vitamin D and phosphate.
CALCITONIN PRODUCTION BY TUMORS
Calcitonin is a polypeptide hormone that is produced by C cells of the thyroid. Calcitonin prevents calcium release from bone and causes increased renal excretion of
calcium, sodium, and phosphate. 59 Because medullary thyroid carcinoma produces calcitonin, calcitonin serum levels are a sensitive tumor marker to monitor this
disease. They are also useful in identifying patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, a familial disorder involving an association of medullary carcinoma of the
thyroid, pheochromocytoma, and parathyroid adenomas.
A variety of tumors, including small cell lung cancer, carcinoids, breast cancer, and GI cancer also may secrete calcitonin. 60,61 and 62 While calcitonin levels may reflect
clinical tumor status in these diseases, they are not used as tumor markers. Furthermore, there is no known paraneoplastic syndrome associated with calcitonin.
CHROMOGRANIN A
Chromogranin A is a 68-kD glycoprotein found in the neurosecretory granules of normal and malignant amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation cells. 63,64
Chromogranin A is released into the circulation via exocytosis from neuroendocrine storage vesicles. It may act in neuroendocrine secretion by binding intravesicular
calcium. Its sequence is nearly identical to pancreastatin, which inhibits insulin and somatostatin secretion from the pancreas. 65 As with calcitonin, it is unknown
whether chromogranin A is associated with a paraneoplastic syndrome. Chromogranin A secretion is most commonly associated with small cell lung cancer and
neuroendocrine tumors. 66,67 and 68
GONADOTROPINS
The human hormones with gonadotropic properties are follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG). 69
These three hormones are composed of two polypeptide chains; a and b subunits. The a subunit is common to all of the hormones and the b subunit determines
biologic and immunologic specificity. Both subunits are required for bioactivity. In normal individuals, the pituitary produces FSH and LH. Biologically active HCG is
produced by the placenta and is therefore normally found only in pregnant women. Because the levels of FSH and LH vary under normal physiologic conditions, the
b-HCG hormone is typically used for following paraneoplastic syndromes.
Gonadotropin secretion may occur in pituitary tumors, gestational trophoblastic tumors, germ cell tumors, hepatoblastomas in children, bronchogenic carcinomas, and
GI cancers. 70,71,72 and 73 Gonadotropins measured in tumors arising in gestational tissue, testes, ovaries, and endocrine organs are valuable tumor markers and are
discussed in the following chapters: Cancers of the Endocrine System, Gynecologic Tumors, Cancer of the Ovary, and Cancer of the Testes.
Although many studies have suggested elevations in HCG in a number of common tumors, it may also be elevated in nonmalignant chronic diseases. Values for the a
and b subunits of HCG are significantly higher in cancer patients than in patients with nonmalignant disease. 69,74 Elevations of b-FSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone- b,
and b-LH have not been observed. With rare exceptions, however, these markers are not routinely used to follow common cancers.
The frequency of symptoms associated with tumor-produced gonadotropin is unknown. The most common problem is a male patient presenting with unexplained
gynecomastia. In this situation, a b-HCG determination should be performed as well as a careful examination of the testes and radiographic examination of the chest
and mediastinum. Germ cell tumors of the testes or extragonadal sites and lung cancers are the most frequent causes of the combination of gynecomastia and HCG
elevation. 75 Other extragonadal tumors that produce HCG include lung cancer, adrenal carcinoma, hepatoma, GI tract tumors, and tumors of the genitourinary
tract. 76,77,78,79,80,81 and 82 Histologic specimens have revealed that all of these tumors contain syncytial giant cells or choriocarcinomatous elements similar to
trophoblastic germ cell tumors. Conversely, 40% of patients with extragonadal germ cell tumors masquerading as poorly differentiated carcinomas had
immunohistochemical staining for b-HCG and a-fetoprotein without serum elevation of these markers. 83 Many of these patients responded to chemotherapy, as would
be expected of germ cell tumors.
TUMOR-PRODUCED HUMAN PLACENTAL LACTOGEN, GROWTH HORMONE–RELEASING HORMONE, PROLACTIN, AND THYROTROPIC SUBSTANCE
Human placental lactogen (hPL) has been detected in a small percentage of patients with nontrophoblastic nongonadal tumors. 84,85 This may be associated with
elevated levels of estrogen, HCG, and gynecomastia. hPL in nonpregnant women is diagnostic of malignancy. 85
Elevated growth hormone levels have been reported in rare patients with gastric and lung cancer. 86 Whether this is due to ectopic production or overproduction by
cells that retain the ability to secrete growth hormone from primordial origin remains controversial.
Growth hormone–releasing hormone production has been reported in nonpituitary tumors and, like pituitary tumors, results in acromegaly. 87,88 and 89 This 44 amino acid
peptide has been isolated from pancreatic tumors as well as bronchial and foregut carcinoids. Secretion of growth hormone–releasing hormone can be controlled by

administration of long-acting somatostatin analogues. The definitive therapy is removal of the tumor, whenever possible.
Patients with cancers of the lung, colon, breast, ovary, and cervix, as well as hypernephroma have been reported with elevated prolactin levels, and one case was
associated with galactorrhea. 90,91 and 92 Symptoms can be subtle; male subjects may only exhibit decreased libido, whereas postmenopausal women may have no
symptoms. Treatment of the tumor decreases prolactin levels. Because these cases are extremely rare, it is important to exclude the presence of a pituitary lesion in
patients with elevated prolactin levels.
Tumor-associated thyroid-stimulating hormone production without thyrotoxicosis has been reported. 93 An association has been reported between hyperthyroidism and
gestational trophoblastic disease with biochemical hyperthyroidism. 94 This may also be seen in testicular tumors. In some cases, the excess HCG produced by
trophoblastic tumors appears to be the thyroid-stimulating substance. 95
HYPOGLYCEMIA
Insulinomas frequently produce hypoglycemia; however, hypoglycemia associated with non–islet cell tumors is an unusual paraneoplastic syndrome. Mesenchymal
tumors including a variety of sarcomas and mesotheliomas are the most common cause of non–islet cell–induced hypoglycemia. Rarely, adrenal carcinomas, GI
cancers, and varied other tumors have been associated. 90,96 These tumors are typically large, often invade the liver, and have a protracted course. The patient may
present with typical signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia, including generalized neurologic abnormalities.
These tumors may cause hypoglycemia by a variety of mechanisms including production of nonsuppressible insulin-like growth factors-1 and -2 (IGF-1 and -2),
hypermetabolism of glucose, production of substances stimulating ectopic insulin release, massive liver infiltration, production of hepatic glucose inhibitor, insulin
binding by an M protein in myeloma, insulin receptor proliferation, or rarely ectopic insulin production. 97,98,99,100,101 and 102 The most likely mechanism is tumor production
of IGFs (also called somatomedins), a family of peptide hormones normally produced by the liver under growth hormone regulation. 103,104,105 and 106 Several reports
have specifically identified excess production of PRO-IGF-2, which binds to insulin and IGF receptors in malignancy. This in turn down-regulates growth hormone
secretion and decreases hepatic production of IGF-binding proteins with eventual hypoglycemia. 107,108
The treatment of paraneoplastic hypoglycemia initially involves glucose infusion. Following this, tumor debulking should be carried out, although the long-term effect
of debulking is poorly understood. If treatment of the tumor is not possible, then the use of subcutaneous and long-acting intramuscular glucagon or high-dose
corticosteroids might be considered.

HEMATOLOGIC MANIFESTATIONS OF CANCER
Paraneoplastic syndromes that involve hematopoietic cells and clotting factors are extremely common. While the etiologies of most of these paraneoplastic
abnormalities remain unexplained, advances in the understanding of hormones and growth factors that regulate hematopoiesis has led to a better understanding of
some of these disorders. 109,110
ERYTHROCYTOSIS
Erythrocytosis secondary to a wide variety of tumors is well described in the literature. The most common solid tumor leading to erythrocytosis is renal cell carcinoma,
which is often associated with elevated serum erythropoietin levels. Benign renal lesions such as cystic kidneys may also cause erythrocytosis, and other tumors of
the kidneys such as Wilms' tumor and hemangiomas rarely cause erythrocytosis. The next most common malignancy leading to erythrocytosis is hepatoma, also likely
secondary to erythropoietin production. Cerebellar hemangioblastomas are also known to produce erythrocytosis. Other tumors leading to erythrocytosis include
uterine fibroids, adrenal tumors, and pheochromocytomas. 111,112 Adrenal cortical tumors and virilizing ovarian tumors can produce androgenic hormones that may lead
to erythrocytosis. 113 Prostaglandins produced from tumors can enhance the effect of erythropoietin and lead to erythrocytosis.
It is still important to rule out other causes of erythrocytosis even in the presence of a tumor. Polycythemia rubra vera is typically associated with elevated white count
and platelets as well as splenomegaly. There are obvious causes of polycythemia secondary to arterial desaturation associated with hemoglobulinopathies,
carboxyhemoglobin, and so forth. Erythropoietin can be measured from the blood when it is suspected that it is overproduced secondary to a tumor. Erythrocytosis
secondary to tumors is usually not high enough to require treatment, but if the hematocrit is extremely high (i.e., greater than 55% for a man or greater than 50% for a
woman) phlebotomy can be used. Control of the tumor usually controls the erythrocytosis, as well.
ANEMIA
The most common anemias in cancer patients are the normocytic normochromic anemia of chronic disease, anemia secondary to bone marrow invasion, which may
be associated with leukoerythroblastosis, and anemia secondary to chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Normochromic, normocytic anemia, or anemia of cancer, is a
common paraneoplastic syndrome, characterized by low serum iron, normal or increased ferritin, normal iron stores, and a low serum erythropoietin level. It is thought
that IL-1, TNF, and transforming growth factor-b are produced by tumors and effect a decreased erythropoietin response. 114
A rare cause of anemia in cancer patients is pure red cell aplasia. The relationship of thymoma and pure red cell aplasia often associated with
hypogammaglobulinemia is well described in the literature. 115,116 Pure red cell aplasia may also be associated with a variety of lymphoid malignancies including
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and large granular lymphocytic lymphoma and leukemia. 117 Rarely, pure red cell aplasia is associated with solid tumor
malignancies.
Autoimmune hemolytic anemias are typically associated with B-cell malignancies including CLL and lymphomas, 118,119 and arise secondary to immunoregulatory
abnormalities in these diseases, rather than a direct secretion of tumor-derived substances. Hallmarks of the disease are a positive direct antiglobulin test result,
elevated reticulocyte count, decreased haptoglobin, and elevated lactate dehydrogenase. Warm antibody hemolytic anemia is most commonly associated with
lymphomas, CLL, and mucin-producing adenocarcinomas. Cold agglutinin disease is most common in Waldenström's macroglobulinemia and lymphomas. 120
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia is rarely associated with solid tumor malignancies; however, an association with ovarian, GI, lung, breast, and renal cell cancers has
been reported. 121 Corticosteroid treatment appears to be less effective in autoimmune hemolytic anemia associated with carcinomas than in those that are idiopathic
or associated with lymphoid malignancies. The Coombs' test result may revert to negative with control of the tumor.
Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia is characterized by fragmentation of red cells and is observed in diseases associated with lesions in small blood vessels such as
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, congenital vascular abnormalities, and the hemolytic uremic syndrome. Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia has also been
reported in association with malignancy. 122,123 Such patients may have intimal proliferation of arterioles, intravascular tumor growth, or intravascular fibrin precipitation.
Thrombocytopenias may also be associated. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) may contribute to microangiopathic hemolytic anemia in metastatic
carcinomas by inducing the red cell fragmentation from fibrin strands. Patients typically have pronounced schistocytosis with microspherocytes, which are
spherocyte-shaped erythrocytes less than 5 m in diameter. The reticulocyte count is typically increased and a leukoerythroblastic blood picture may predominate. The
mechanism remains unknown. The microangiopathic hemolytic anemia syndrome may respond to effective anticancer therapy. It is typically associated with
adenocarcinoma of the GI tract, heart, lung, and prostate, as well as after mitomycin C chemotherapy.
GRANULOCYTOSIS
Granulocytosis with elevation of the white blood cell count above 15× 10 9/l without infection or leukemia is common in neoplasms. 124,125,126 and 127 Isolated or associated
monocytosis is also described. 128 Neoplasms most commonly associated with granulocytosis include Hodgkin's disease, lymphoma, and a variety of solid tumors
including gastric, lung, pancreatic, and brain, as well as malignant melanoma. The granulocytosis associated with a paraneoplastic leukemoid reaction consists of
mature neutrophils with some band forms seen. This differs significantly from chronic myelogenous leukemia in which there are many more immature cells, basophils,
and eosinophils; a decreased leukocyte alkaline phosphatase; elevated vitamin B 12 and vitamin B12–binding capacity; and the presence of the Philadelphia
chromosome. The common mechanism associated with tumor-associated granulocytosis is tumor production of growth factors including granulocyte

colony-stimulating factor, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, IL-3, IL-1, and a variety of others. 129,130
GRANULOCYTOPENIA
Granulocytopenia is typically secondary to chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or tumor infiltration of bone marrow. It is possible in some cases that the tumors may
produce a factor that suppresses granulopoiesis by interfering with any number of growth factors. As well, there are rare reports of antibodies against granulocytes in
patients with Hodgkin's disease and nonchemotherapy-induced neutropenia. 131 Neutropenia associated with large granular lymphocytic leukemia and lymphoma may
be caused by immune dysregulation of T cells. The preferred therapy for severe granulocytopenia is direct stimulation with growth factors including granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, or both.
EOSINOPHILIA AND BASOPHILIA
Eosinophilia is commonly associated with Hodgkin's disease and mycosis fungoides and is rarely associated with other lymphomas and solid tumors. 132 The tumor
cells may be producing a factor that specifically stimulates eosinophil production. In one study, a tumor-associated eosinophil-stimulating factor was found to be a
glycoprotein of 45 kD. 133 Other candidate cytokines include granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, IL-3, and IL-5, which are involved in the development
and differentiation of eosinophils. 134 Eosinophilia is rarely of sufficiently high counts to lead to symptoms of Löffler's-like syndrome, which is associated with nodular
pulmonary infiltrates with cough and fever. Basophilia is associated with chronic myelogenous leukemia and a variety of other myeloproliferative disorders, but is not
typically associated with symptoms. 135
THROMBOCYTOSIS
Thrombocytosis is quite common in cancer patients and may be associated with Hodgkin's disease, lymphomas, and a variety of carcinomas and leukemias. 136
Thrombocytosis is expected early in the course of a variety of myeloproliferative diseases including polycythemia rubra vera and chronic myelogenous leukemia. It is,
of course, the hallmark of primary thrombocytosis. Thrombocytosis may also be associated with inflammatory disorders, hemorrhage, iron deficiency, hemolytic
anemia, and postsplenectomy. The thrombocytosis secondary to malignancies may be secondary to overproduction of thrombopoietin. 137 Thrombosis and hemorrhage
are rarely associated with this paraneoplastic syndrome and treatment is not generally indicated.
THROMBOCYTOPENIA
Thrombocytopenia in cancer patients is typically secondary to chemotherapy, radiation therapy, DIC, or tumor infiltration of bone marrow. A syndrome similar to
idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura is commonly seen in lymphoid malignancies including CLL and lymphomas, as well as Hodgkin's disease. Rarely, solid tumors
such as lung, breast, and GI cancers have been associated with a similar syndrome. 138,139,140,141,142 and 143 These patients may have bleeding, petechia, and purpura
and may respond to high-dose prednisone, splenectomy, or both. Other common causes of thrombocytopenia, such as heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, thiazide
diuretics, and a variety of other drugs, should be ruled out. Typical of any other idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura, the patients have adequate or increased
megakaryocytes in the bone marrow associated with the thrombocytopenia and do not respond to transfused platelets.
THROMBOPHLEBITIS
The association of cancer and thrombophlebitis was first observed by Trousseau and this association still bears his name. 144 The incidence of thrombophlebitis in
cancer patients is quite common and migratory thrombophlebitis is well documented. Recurrent deep venous thrombosis, warfarin resistance, and thrombosis at
unusual sites should increase suspicion of occult malignancy in a patient without a known diagnosis of cancer. The greatest risk of migratory thrombophlebitis is with
pancreatic cancer; however, it may be seen in a variety of adenocarcinomas, including breast, ovarian, and prostate cancer. 123 The activation of coagulation by tissue
factor is clearly implicated in the patients with solid tumors when compared with normal controls. 145 As well, mucinous adenocarcinomas produce a sialic acid moiety
that can activate factor X, causing a hypercoagulable state. 146 It is likely that cancer-related thrombosis represents a complex imbalance of coagulation and
fibrinolysis: Increased fibrinogen and platelet catabolism; decreased protein C, S, and antithrombin; direct generation of thrombin; and thrombocytosis all represent
abnormalities associated with malignancy. 147
The treatment, although difficult, must be initiated with heparin; however, it is often unsuccessful and long-term therapy with either warfarin or heparin is typically not
satisfactory. Initial reports of the beneficial effects of low-molecular-weight heparin in cancer patients with thrombosis 148 are supported by a retrospective
metaanalysis. In this study, a significant reduction in mortality was reported in cancer patients treated with low-molecular-weight heparin compared with those treated
with unfractionated heparin for deep venous thrombosis. The cause of reduced mortality appeared to be an indirect effect that persisted well beyond discontinuation
of the drug.149 Treatment of the underlying malignancy is the most definitive therapy, but usually in these particular diseases is also unsuccessful.
COAGULOPATHIES AND DISSEMINATED INTRAVASCULAR COAGULATION
The most common coagulation abnormalities in cancer patients are elevated levels of fibrin or fibrinogen degradation products, thrombocytosis, and
hyperfibrinogenemia, representing overcompensated DIC with fibrinolysis. This may be accompanied by an increased synthesis of fibrinogen and various clotting
factors and platelets. Overt DIC with consumption of platelets and clotting factors and bleeding is rare and is most commonly associated with acute promyelocytic
leukemia and adenocarcinomas.150 DIC is detected by a combination of abnormal prothrombin time, thrombocytopenia, and hypofibrinogenemia. 151,152 The platelet
count is abnormal in more than 90% of cases of DIC. The most useful confirmation test for DIC is the measurement of fibrin degradation products. Identification and
treatment of precipitating factors is critical in the management of DIC. Some investigators have advocated replacement of coagulation factors and platelets in
combination with heparin. The use of heparin alone is controversial and is more commonly used with thromboembolic or necrotizing complications typically seen in the
chronic DIC of malignancy. A variety of other therapies including antiplatelet drugs and fibrinolytic inhibitors and activators have been suggested, but have no proven
efficacy. Epsilon amino caproic acid is contraindicated. Treatment of the underlying malignancy is essential.
NONBACTERIAL THROMBOTIC ENDOCARDITIS
Nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis may lead to thrombotic or hemorrhagic complications and may occur with or without DIC. 153,154 and 155 It is characterized by sterile
verrucous fibrin platelet lesions in the left-sided heart valves. A typical presentation is emboli to the brain and other organs associated with focal or diffuse neurologic
abnormalities. Typical diffuse abnormalities include confusion, seizures, and disorientation. The definitive diagnostic test is cerebral angiography showing multiple
arterial occlusions. While some patients may have heart murmurs, the majority do not. Echocardiography picks up vegetations larger than 2 mm. The association of
nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis is most common with adenocarcinoma of the lung. Other adenocarcinomas are less frequently associated, and rarely
nonadenocarcinomas, lymphomas, and leukemias are associated. 156 Bleeding may be found in the skin, central nervous system, genitourinary tract, upper respiratory
tract, GI tract, and lower respiratory tract. Treatment of the underlying malignancy is the primary therapy. Anticoagulants are not indicated.

GASTROINTESTINAL MANIFESTATIONS OF CANCER
PROTEIN-LOSING ENTEROPATHY
Protein-losing enteropathy is a disorder defined by an excessive loss of serum proteins into the GI tract, which generally leads to hypoproteinemia. It was postulated
that the hypoproteinemia associated with protein-losing enteropathy was due to impaired protein synthesis. However, it has been shown that synthesis of proteins in
these patients is normal or slightly increased, while the serum half-life of protein such as albumin is dramatically decreased. 157 It has also been shown that enteric
loss of proteins contributes to, but is not the sole etiology of, the hypoproteinemia seen in patients with this disorder. 158
Normally, the GI tract plays a small role in the catabolism of serum proteins. 159 Approximately 10% of all normal protein loss of albumin and globulin loss is through
the GI tract. 160 It is thought that malignancy-related protein-losing enteropathy results from the increased mucosal permeability to serum proteins due to abnormal
cellular structure, mucosal erosion or ulceration or lymphatic obstruction. 161 Hypoalbuminemia can be seen in virtually any cancer of the GI tract including esophageal,
gastric, colonic, and carcinoid syndrome. 162 It has also been described in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients with Kaposi's sarcoma. 163 Intestinal

involvement of lymphoma including Waldenström's macroglobulinemia, Hodgkin's disease, and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma can lead to protein-losing enteropathy. 164,165
In contrast to renal protein loss, the protein loss in GI disorders is independent of the size of the protein. Therefore, proteins of various sizes such as albumin,
immunoglobulins, and ceruloplasmin all are lost equivalently in contrast to patients with nephrotic syndrome. Once the protein loss becomes greater than the body's
ability to synthesize proteins, decreased protein levels in the serum result. Usually, this decline in serum proteins progresses until a new set point is reached. At that
point, the protein level stabilizes and a new homeostasis is achieved. Also, of note, in both GI as well as non-GI sources of hypoproteinemia, proteins of long serum
half-life (i.e., albumin) tend to be more affected than proteins of shorter serum half-life (i.e., retinol-binding protein). Other serum constituents associated with these
proteins may be affected by the hypoproteinemia. Specifically, constituents that depend on carrier proteins, such as iron, copper, and calcium, may be depressed
when patients develop hypoproteinemic states.
Clinically, patients with protein-losing enteropathy develop hypoproteinemia. This may or may not be associated with peripheral edema, but is rarely associated with
severe edema or anasarca. Despite the fact that globulin levels are depressed, the patients rarely develop opportunistic infections and rarely develop coagulopathy
even though clotting factors are also lost. Patients may or may not have other GI symptoms, such as diarrhea.
The diagnosis of protein-losing enteropathy is generally not difficult. Patients are noted to be hypoproteinemic on routine chemistry evaluation. Other sources of
hypoproteinemia such as malnutrition and liver disease must be excluded. In the past, cumbersome nuclear studies were performed looking for protein loss in the
stool. These have largely been replaced by new techniques using a 1-antitrypsin, a protein, which is not degraded in the lower GI tract. Therefore, if it is lost in
excessive amounts it is excreted unchanged in the stool. Clearance of this protein is used to confirm the diagnosis of protein-losing enteropathy. 166 It should be noted
that the presence of diarrhea could abnormally influence the interpretation of this study. 166 Also, fecal occult blood can falsely elevate this study result.
Once the diagnosis of protein-losing enteropathy has been made in association with cancer, the treatment consists of treatment of the primary malignancy. In
situations with lymphatic obstruction, a low-fat diet should be instituted. Patients frequently require the use of medium-chain triglycerides, which do not require
intestinal lymphatic transport. With appropriate treatment of the cancer and dietary therapy, approximately 50% of the patients improve with treatment. 157
ANOREXIA AND CACHEXIA IN THE CANCER PATIENT
Cancer anorexia-cachexia syndromes (CACS), as it is now referred, is the most common paraneoplastic syndrome, consisting of anorexia, nausea, and weight loss.
While it afflicts patients with solid tumors most commonly, more than 50% of all cancer patients have some demonstrable weight loss, and 15% experience loss of
greater than 10% of their normal body weight. 167 Survival is negatively affected if a patient has greater than 10% weight loss, 167 in part due to problems with infection
and wound healing. 168 Problems associated with weight loss may be exacerbated by treatment with surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation. As well, cancer therapy can
lead to new difficulties with food intake such as postoperative ileus, esophagitis, and stomatitis.
Multifactorial derangements in biochemical pathways lead to cancer-related decreased food intake. 162 Tumors produce factors that change the patient's perception of
food, particularly taste and smell, which leads to a lack of enjoyment. The central nervous system's control of appetite can be altered by tumor factors, 163 such as
serotonin. Local obstruction and abnormal swallowing interfere with food intake when tumors involve these portions of the alimentary tract. Maldigestion and
malabsorption may result from obstruction of biliary or pancreatic secretions. When patients become nauseated due to either anatomic factors related to their tumor or
as a result of chemotherapy or radiation treatment, they may develop a psychological aversion for food, which is difficult to control.
Cancer patients possess abnormally high serum levels of IL-1b, TNF-a, IL-6, IFN-g, and serotonin, 169,170 produced as a response to the tumor, rather than by the
tumor itself. Administration of these cytokines is capable of reproducing CACS, thus further supporting their role in its etiology. 171 The physiologic changes induced by
the tumor through these cytokines are numerous and result in progressive weight loss through a variety of mechanisms (i.e., serotonin changing the taste and smell of
food). As well, in cancer patients, there is an increased basal energy expenditure with alterations in carbohydrate, protein, and lipid metabolism. In cases of
starvation, weight loss arises primarily from fat stores, whereas in cancer patients there is equal loss of fat and skeletal muscle. 172 Skeletal proteins are frequently
sacrificed in accelerated gluconeogenesis with the loss of amino acids and subsequent loss of lean body mass. 173 However, CACS is not solely a state of starvation;
the tumor continues to grow while the host is depleted with an increase in total body protein conversion and destruction of peripheral muscle stores. 173 Even when
sufficient calories are supplied to patients through various means, the patients are unable to incorporate amino acids into lean body proteins. 173 A cancer-driven
inflammatory response can divert resources used for production of normal serum proteins to other organ sites (i.e., liver). 174 Malnourished cancer patients also lose a
great deal of their lipid reserve; a decrease in lipoprotein lipase, responsible for moving triglycerides into fat cells, results in weight loss. 175 Treatment with individual
anticytokine antibodies reverses specific features of CACS, but no single antibody eradicates all aspects of the syndrome. 176
When clinically evaluating a cancer patient for CACS, appetite, intake over prior weeks, weight, and weight loss are all critical. In one study, a weight less than 90% of
ideal body weight, 10% weight loss over the last 6 months, or both were associated with a poor prognosis. 177 Plasma proteins such as albumin have limited value in
evaluating CACS, because they are affected by factors other than nutrient status. Immune responsiveness assessed by delayed type hypersensitivity skin tests, as
well as total lymphocyte count, correlate not only with the patient's nutrient status, but also the ability to fight off various infections. In summary, the best means of
determining a patient's nutrient status is a history and physical examination by an experienced clinician.
Treating patients with malnutrition and cancer is similar to treating other forms of severe stress such as burns, trauma, and sepsis; the primary objective is adequate
caloric intake excluding calories from protein sources. Often the most difficult decision facing the clinician is choosing the route of administration. The widespread
availability of total parenteral nutrition has made this an attractive option, particularly when patients are severely anorexic. However, numerous studies have found no
survival benefit using total parenteral nutrition in cancer patients, with an increase in infectious and mechanical complications. 178 It has become axiomatic to use the
GI tract for nutritional support whenever possible, because it has the benefit of being less expensive and more physiologic, and it maintains gut barrier function. The
Harris-Benedict equation is useful for determining basal caloric needs. Generally, stress factors of cancer (estimated at 20% to 30% of the basal metabolic rate) are
added to the patient's caloric needs. If other forms of stress are present, such as infection, these factors should be added. In addition to the caloric needs, 1.0 to 1.5 g
of protein per kilogram of body weight is also given, and 25% to 40% of nonprotein calories should be in the form of lipid. The enteral formulations have been
developed to balance these factors. When total parenteral nutrition is necessary, these same formulas are used for determining calorie protein and lipid intake. Once
nutritional support is initiated, a 24-hour urine collection for nitrogen loss should be undertaken. If the patient has no diarrhea, 2 g of nitrogen should be added for
insensible losses of nitrogen in the stool. Using these values, a nitrogen balance can be calculated; this balance should be positive, meaning that the patient receives
more nitrogen than he or she excretes. This is critical in determining whether the patient is receiving adequate caloric intake.
Pharmacologic approaches to improving nutritional status in the cancer patient include appetite stimulants, corticosteroids and progestational agents, anabolic
steroids, antidepressants, analgesics, and antiemetics. Unfortunately, most of these medications are of marginal benefit. Several studies have examined the utility of
corticosteroids and found that in the short-term, they can increase appetite and elevate mood, but are limited because of progressive muscle weakness.
Progestational agents including megestrol acetate and medroxyprogesterone acetate are appetite stimulants. Eight prospective randomized studies have now
revealed that although these agents do stimulate appetite and weight gain, no survival benefit is associated with their use. One study found that 12 weeks of
megestrol acetate (480 mg daily) produced an average weight gain of 5.41 kg, but no gain in performance status or quality of life. 179180 The major risk of progestational
agents is an increased risk of thromboembolic events. Cannabinoids such as dronabinol have been used, but most of these studies related to their use are in patients
with AIDS-related anorexia, and definitive data in cancer patients are pending.
Unfortunately, the current therapy for CACS remains largely ineffective. Nutritional support, counseling, and the use of progestational agents continue to play the
predominant role in management. Novel agents such as cytokine inhibitors have yet to be tested in randomized controlled trials.

RENAL MANIFESTATIONS OF NONRENAL CANCER
Patients with nonrenal carcinoma develop many important renal complications. Treatment-related nephropathies, tubular interstitial defects, glomerular abnormalities,
and fluid and electrolyte disorders are seen in many patients with cancer. Radiation nephritis and drug-induced toxicities from antineoplastic drugs (e.g., cisplatin),
antibiotics, analgesics, and radiographic contrast agents all induce various forms of renal failure. Infiltrative disorders from leukemias and lymphomas, tubular
precipitation abnormalities such as protein cast nephropathy, uric acid nephropathy, hypercalcemic nephropathy, and obstructive nephropathy lead to tubular
interstitial diseases. Membranous glomerulopathy, minimal change disease, amyloidosis, and consumptive coagulopathy all lead to glomerular abnormalities. Finally,
hypercalcemia, hypocalcemia, hyponatremia, and tumor lysis syndrome, covered in other areas of this book, lead to fluid and electrolyte disorders. While renal

manifestations of systemic cancer and its therapy are common, several classes of renal insult are specifically paraneoplastic in nature.
GLOMERULAR DISORDERS
Most cases of membranous nephropathy are idiopathic, but a reasonable number have been associated with cancers, especially in the elderly. In an early report of
101 patients with idiopathic nephrotic syndrome, 11% had cancer with 8% having membranous nephropathy. 181 In 80% of cases the diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome
is made concurrently or after the malignant disease, lending credence to the idea that it is a paraneoplastic process. Nephrotic range proteinuria, hypertension, and
microscopic hematuria characterize the syndrome. Sixty percent of cancers of the stomach, lung, and colon have membranous nephropathy, 182 while other cancers
such as rectal, pancreas, head and neck, ovary, bile duct, prostate, breast, kidney, and skin rarely produce glomerulonephritis. 183,184 Immunofluorescence studies
reveal granular deposits of immunoglobulin and complement, whereas electron microscopy shows evidence of subepithelial deposits, which are the pathologic
hallmarks of this process. Immune complexes are thought to play a role in malignancy-associated glomerular disease. 182 The responsible antigens include fetal
antigens, autologous nontumor antigens, tumor-associated antigens, and viral antigens. 185
Nephrotic syndrome has been reported to resolve with successful treatment of the underlying malignancy. 186 Other standard therapies include loop diuretics to
symptomatically treat the peripheral edema associated with the syndrome. As well, careful monitoring for the development of thrombosis is warranted in severe protein
wasting, especially renal vein thrombosis.
Other glomerular diseases include membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis 187 and minimal change disease.183 Hodgkin's disease is the cause of most cases of
minimal change disease, while other lymphoproliferative disorders, pancreatic carcinoma, and mesothelioma are also seen. 188,189 There is a parallel relationship
between the activity of the lymphoma and the degree of proteinuria. Other cancer-associated glomerulopathies include focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis with
CLL, T-cell lymphomas, and acute myelogenous leukemia; IgA nephropathy with lung, head and neck, and pancreatic cancers, mycosis fungoides, and liposarcoma;
and membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis with CLL, Burkitt's, and other lymphomas, hairy cell leukemia, and malignant melanoma. Rarely rapidly progressive
glomerulonephritis has been associated with lymphoma and monoclonal gammopathies. 190
MICROVASCULAR LESIONS
Hemolytic uremic syndrome is most often seen after chemotherapeutic agents such as mitomycin C, but has also been reported in malignancy. Giant hemangiomas
and hemangioendotheliomas 191 and specific malignancies such as acute promyelocytic leukemia, prostate, gastric, and pancreatic cancers are the most common
culprits. A renal vasculitis secondary to Henoch-Schönlein purpura has also been reported in a patient with lung cancer, but this is an extremely rare complication of
malignancy. More frequent is the association of renal vasculitis secondary to a process such as cryoglobulinemia, a known complication of hepatocellular carcinoma
and concomitant hepatitis C disease. 190
TUMOR INFILTRATION
Autopsy series show the kidney is commonly affected by infiltrative and metastatic processes 192; 40% to 60% of patients with leukemia have tumor infiltration of the
kidney. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma more commonly invades the kidney than Hodgkin's disease, 193 although not all series support this distinction. 194 There is a strong
association between bone marrow involvement by tumor and renal infiltration. In both non-Hodgkin's lymphoma as well as Hodgkin's disease the involvement tends to
be nodular and bilateral, whereas in leukemia the involvement is infiltrative. 195 Treatment of the underlying malignancy often results in resolution of the renal lesions.
Other tubular abnormalities, such as protein cast precipitation syndrome, paraprotein disease, uric acid nephropathy, hypercalcemia, and obstructive uropathy, are
discussed in Metabolic Emergencies, Chapter 51.3, and Plasma Cell Neoplasms, Chapter 46.4.

CUTANEOUS PARANEOPLASTIC SYNDROMES
A wide variety of cutaneous syndromes are associated with malignancies and may precede, be concurrent with, or follow the discovery of the underlying malignancy.
It is critical that once a potential cutaneous paraneoplastic syndrome has been diagnosed, an appropriate systemic evaluation for a neoplasm is undertaken. The
initial workup includes detailed medical history, complete physical examination, and routine screening laboratory tests. This is followed by studies directed by the
abnormalities discovered during the preliminary evaluation, emphasizing those malignancies most strongly associated with the particular skin lesion. Some cutaneous
syndromes are uncommon and usually are associated with cancer, whereas other cutaneous lesions are extremely common and associated with benign disorders or
cancers. Certain cutaneous lesions are always associated with a particular tumor, whereas others are associated with a variety of malignancies. In general, the cause
of the cutaneous lesions is typically unknown.
PIGMENTED LESIONS AND KERATOSES
Acanthosis nigricans (Table 47-3) is characterized by a gray-brown hyperpigmented, symmetric, velvety plaque that often affects the neck, axilla, and flexor areas and
anogenital region. There are four groups: the malignant, inherited, endocrine, and idiopathic. The malignant form appears the same as the benign form, but may
progress rapidly; pruritus is common. The malignant variety may precede the tumor, occur simultaneously, or even follow the appearance of the tumor. It affects men
and women equally and is typically associated with adenocarcinomas of the GI tract, predominantly gastric cancer, but has also been associated with a variety of
other adenocarcinomas including lung, breast, ovarian, and even hematologic malignancies. 196,197 and 198 The pathogenesis remains uncertain.

TABLE 47-3. Pigmented Lesions and Keratoses

Tripe palms is associated with thickened palms and characterized by exaggerated ridges with a velvety texture and brown hyperpigmentation. 199,200 Virtually, all of
these cases are associated with cancer, and, in most patients, occur in association with acanthosis nigricans. The condition is usually associated with lung and gastric
cancer.
Melanosis is caused by abnormal deposition of melanin, causing diffuse gray-brown pigmentation in the skin. 201,202 and 203 Melanosis may appear before or after the
primary melanoma is detected, and it is often accentuated in light-exposed areas of the upper body. Histopathology demonstrates melanin granules in perivascular or
interstitial melanophages; free granules may be seen in the dermis. Melanosis can also be caused by ACTH-producing tumors. 204 Hemochromatosis from iron
deposition may appear similar to melanosis.
The sign of Leser-Trélat is characterized by the sudden appearance of seborrheic keratoses. Such keratoses may occur in elderly patients, and one could argue
reports of cutaneous lesions regressing after the cancer is treated are only coincidental. 205,206 Adenocarcinoma of the stomach is the most common malignancy;
lymphoma, breast cancer, and squamous cell carcinoma are also reported. 207

Acrokeratosis paraneoplastica or Bazex's syndrome is characterized by symmetric psoriasiform acral hyperkeratosis. It is almost always associated with cancer,
typically squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus, head and neck, or lungs. 208,209 The skin lesions may precede the detection of the tumor or parallel the growth of
the malignancy. Antigenic cross-reaction of basement membrane and tumor antigens, as well as secretion of growth factors such as insulin-like growth factor-1
(ILGF-1) or transforming growth factor-a are postulated to cause this syndrome. 210
Paget's disease of the breast is characterized by erythematous keratotic patches over the areola, nipple, or accessory breast tissue and is associated with breast
cancer. 211 Extramammary Paget's disease is an erythematous exudative dermatitis located on the vulva in women, the genitals in men, and the perianal area in both
sexes. Histopathologically, Paget's disease demonstrates large pale cells within the epidermis, and often in the cutaneous appendages. Extramammary Paget's
disease is associated with an internal malignancy in 50% of cases. Most of these cancers are usually related to the site of the dermatosis. The most common sites of
Paget's disease are in decreasing order: breast, uterus, rectum, bladder, vagina, and prostate gland.
NEUTROPHILIC DERMATOSES
Sweet's syndrome is associated with fever, neutrophilia, and the appearance of erythematous painful raised cutaneous plaques. The distribution is typically on the
face, neck, and upper extremities. Histopathology demonstrates a dermal infiltration of well-differentiated neutrophils, as opposed to leukemia cutis, which contains
immature myeloid blasts. This syndrome may be associated with an underlying malignancy (approximately 20%), most frequently, acute myelogenous leukemia. Some
cases have been associated with myeloproliferative and lymphoproliferative disorders, myelodysplastic syndromes, and carcinomas. 212,213 and 214 Sweet's syndrome
may precede the detection of malignancy by many years or occur concomitantly. The etiology is thought to be hypersensitivity, and response to corticosteroids is
usually prompt.
The lesions of pyoderma gangrenosum appear as painful papules that subsequently ulcerate with violaceous irregular borders and a purulent, hemorrhagic exudate
with a necrotic base. Histopathology demonstrates a lymphocytic vasculitis or neutrophilic infiltrate. It is associated with basal and squamous cell carcinomas as well
as cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. 215
ERYTHEMAS
Erythema gyratum repens (Table 47-4) is an unusual progressive scaling erythema with prorates and a wood grain appearance. 216,217 and 218 It is almost always
associated with internal malignancies, most commonly lung, breast, uterus, and GI tract.

TABLE 47-4. Erythemas

Necrolytic migratory erythema is a rare disorder characterized by circinate and gyrate areas of blistering and erosive erythema on the face, abdomen, and limbs. 219,220
It is the hallmark of a glucagonoma. The eruption clears following resection of the tumor.
Flushing is an episodic reddening of the face and neck, lasting a few minutes, typically associated with the carcinoid syndrome but also seen with leukemia, medullary
carcinoma of the thyroid, renal cell carcinoma, and other forms. 221,222 and 223 Vasoactive peptides such as serotonin are thought to mediate this syndrome. 224,225
Erythema annulare centrifugum is characterized by slowly migrating annular and configurate erythematous lesions; rarely, it is associated with cancer, but this
association remains unproven. 226,227
Exfoliative dermatitis is a progressive erythema followed by scaling, which is classically associated with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma but may be seen in other
lymphomas.228,229
ENDOCRINE AND METABOLIC LESIONS
Systemic nodular panniculitis or subcutaneous fat necrosis ( Table 47-5) is characterized by violaceous nodules associated with adenocarcinoma of the pancreas and
may be accompanied by polyarthralgia, fever, and eosinophilia. 230 Similar lesions are seen with pancreatitis, due to the release of pancreatic enzymes such as lipase,
amylase, and trypsin into the serum.231

TABLE 47-5. Endocrine and Metabolic Lesions

Cushing's syndrome is associated with broad purple striae, hyperpigmentation, telangiectasia, atrophy of the skin, and mild hirsutism. Cushing's syndrome is caused
by increased ACTH, typically from small cell lung cancer, thyroid cancer, testicular cancer, ovarian cancer, adrenal tumors, and a variety of other tumors. 6,11
Addison's syndrome is characterized by generalized hyperpigmentation, especially in scars, pressure points, and points of friction. This syndrome is caused by
decreased glucocorticoids and may be seen with malignant replacement of the adrenal gland.

Hirsutism is associated with virilism and is caused by increased glucocorticoids and testosterone, typically from adrenal and ovarian tumors.
BULLOUS AND URTICARIAL LESIONS
Paraneoplastic pemphigus is most frequently seen in B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders including lymphomas and CLL, as well as Castleman's disease, thymoma,
Waldenström's macroglobulinemia, and spindle cell neoplasms. 232,233 and 234 Patients develop painful bullous ulcers and intraepidermal and lichenoid skin lesions.
Internal organ involvement is common and respiratory failure causes death in 30% of patients with this disorder. 235 Patients with paraneoplastic pemphigus
demonstrate autoantibodies to desmogleins 1 and 3, which cause acantholytic blistering. 236 Antibodies to other cytoskeletal elements such as plakins have also been
described. 235 The course of the disease is progressive and independent of the underlying malignancy. Corticosteroids and cyclosporin have been advocated and
high-dose cyclophosphamide without stem cell rescue has been successful in one patient. 237. Table 47-6 describes the bullous and urticarial lesions.

TABLE 47-6. Bullous and Urticarial Lesions

Bullous pemphigoid is characterized by large tense bullae. Histopathology demonstrates absent acantholysis. It is reported to be associated with lymphomas, but this
remains controversial.
Muir-Torre syndrome is a sebaceous gland neoplasm that may precede, follow, or coexist with visceral cancers. 238,239 and 240 It is most often associated with GI tract
adenocarcinoma of the colon, genitourinary tract, or lymphoma.
MISCELLANEOUS LESIONS
Acquired ichthyosis ( Table 47-7) is characterized by generalized dry, crackling skin, hyperkeratotic palms and soles, and rhomboidal scales. It is most commonly
associated with Hodgkin's disease, but may be seen with lymphomas, multiple myeloma, and other malignancies. 241,242 It has also been associated with Kaposi's
sarcoma and AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. 243,244 Remission of the cancers may be accompanied by disappearance of the ichthyosis.

TABLE 47-7. Micellaneous Lesions

Dermatomyositis is a rare severe inflammatory myelopathy with erythema or telangiectasias of the knuckles, upper chest, or periorbital regions. 245,246,247 and 248
Dermatomyositis has been linked to malignancies, especially in adults after the age of 40. Frequency of cancer in adults is reported to vary from 10% to 50%,
increasing with age. Malignancy can precede, follow, or occur with dermatomyositis; the most frequent pattern is onset of cancer within 1 year of the diagnosis of
dermatomyositis.
Pachydermoperiostosis is characterized by thickening of the skin and creation of new folds; thickened lips, ears, and lids; macroglossia; clubbing; thickening of the
forehead and scalp; and excessive sweating. 249 The cause of this syndrome is unknown, but it is most often associated with bronchogenic carcinoma.
Hypertrichosis lanuginosa (malignant down) is the development of long, silky hair on the ears, forehead, and possibly the entire body, associated with lung, colon,
bladder, and a variety of other cancers. 250,251
Pruritus may be the initial feature of an occult malignancy or the clinical manifestations of a previously diagnosed tumor. It is most frequently associated with
Hodgkin's disease, but may be seen with polycythemia vera, cutaneous T-cell lymphomas, and a variety of other diseases. 252,253 and 254 Severe pruritus localized in the
nostrils has been reported in some patients with advanced brain tumors.
Amyloid deposits, which may manifest as macroglossia, superficial waxy yellow and pink elevated nodules on the skin, may be associated with multiple myeloma or
Waldenström's macroglobulinemia. They may also be associated with benign disorders such as primary systemic amyloid.
Herpes zoster is a vesicular eruption in a dermatomal pattern typically associated with the immunosuppression associated with Hodgkin's disease, lymphomas, and
leukemias.255,256 and 257
HEREDITARY DISORDERS
Cowden's disease (Table 47-8) is characterized by multiple hamartomas and is a rare autosomal dominant condition characterized by both benign and malignant
tumors.258,259,260 and 261 The main features are fibromas of the oral mucosa characterized by cobblestoning of the tongue and acral palmoplantar keratoses. Multiple
facial trichilemmomas appear to be pathognomonic. There is an increased prevalence of malignancy, most often in women, typically breast and thyroid cancer.

TABLE 47-8. Hereditary Disorders

Gardner's syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition with a high malignant transformation rate. The syndrome includes multiple osteomas, fibromas, lipomas,
desmoid tumors, fibrosarcomas, epidermoid cysts, and leiomyoma, as well as dental abnormalities. 262,263 The hallmark is intestinal polyposis of the colon and rectum,
with development of colon carcinoma before the age of 30 in at least one-half of the patients. If untreated, death occurs before the age of 50; therefore, total
colectomy is recommended for prevention.
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is autosomal dominant characterized by hamartomatous polyps of the GI tract and mucocutaneous pigmentation of the lips, face, and oral
mucosa and is commonly associated with both benign and malignant neoplasms. 264,265,266,267 and 268 There is a risk of approximately 2% to 3% of adenocarcinomas of
the GI tract, and the carcinomas may arise in the hamartomatous polyps. Non-GI carcinomas affect mainly the breast, genitals, and pancreas. Cancers develop more
frequently at younger ages.
Keratosis palmaris et plantaris or tylosis is an autosomal dominant disease associated with esophageal carcinoma. The disease consists of discreet hyperkeratotic
papules on the palms and soles. 269,270 and 271
Neurofibromatosis or von Recklinghausen is an autosomal dominant syndrome and is characterized by neurofibromas and café au lait spots. Malignancies develop in
a minority of patients and are most often pheochromocytoma. 272
The nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome is an autosomal dominant syndrome with early onset of multiple basal cell carcinomas, multiple jaw cysts, and anomalies
of the skeletal system, specifically rib abnormalities such as ectopic calcification in the pits of the hands and feet. 273,274 and 275 The pits are pathognomonic of the
syndrome, occurring in approximately two-thirds of adults with the syndrome. Medulloblastoma is the most common tumor. Leiomyomas and fibromas of the ovary can
also occur. Central nervous system tumors have also been reported in early childhood. There are numerous additional hereditary disorders associated with
malignancy described in Table 47-8.276,277,278,279,280 and 281

NEUROLOGIC MANIFESTATIONS OF CANCER
Remote effects of cancer on the central nervous system are neurologic disorders of unknown cause that occur exclusively, or with increased frequency, in patients
with cancer.282 Technically, the phrase neurologic paraneoplastic syndrome is a more general description that refers to any neurologic dysfunction that occurs in
cancer patients that is not caused by metastasis or direct invasion of the nervous system by cancer. However, both phrases ( neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes
and remote effects of cancer on the nervous system ) are often used interchangeably in the more restrictive sense and are used that way in this review.
The neurologic paraneoplastic disorders can logically be separated into anatomic categories, although there is often overlap. This is particularly true of the
dementias, which are often lumped together with brain stem, cerebellar, and spinal cord lesions under the rubric of carcinomatous encephalomyelitis. The older term
carcinomatous neuromyopathy has been used to describe all the remote effects of cancer on the nervous system as well as the disorders of peripheral nerves and
muscle associated with cancer.
FREQUENCY
Even though most patients with cancer can be demonstrated to have some mild degree of neuromuscular dysfunction (usually in the form of myopathy or peripheral
neuropathy), the frequency of clearly defined, symptomatic neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes is extremely low. Recognized neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes
occur in less than 1% of patients with cancer. 282
However, the situation is complicated by the fact that not all patients with neurologic syndromes that appear to be paraneoplastic actually have an underlying cancer.
In approximately 50% of patients with known cancer, the nervous system symptoms precede the discovery of the underlying malignancy. 282,283 The probability that a
given paraneoplastic syndrome is associated with an underlying cancer in patients who have not had a tumor identified varies with the specific type of paraneoplastic
syndrome (Table 47-9).

TABLE 47-9. Estimated Incidence of Neurologic Disorders That Are Paraneoplastic Syndromes

PATHOGENESIS
The cause and pathogenesis of the neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes are not known. However, a variety of causative mechanisms have been proposed to explain
the individual syndromes. 282 In 1888, Oppenheim was the first to suggest that the tumors themselves released substances that were directly neurotoxic. 284 No known
paraneoplastic syndromes have been shown to be caused by this mechanism, although the nervous system can be secondarily affected when tumors release
hormones [e.g., adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) and parathyroid hormone related peptide (PTHRP)] and cytokines [e.g., tumor necrosis factors (TNF) and the
interleukins (ILs)].
Opportunistic infections have also been invoked as a possible cause of paraneoplastic syndromes. Progressive multifocal encephalitis, formerly classified as a
paraneoplastic syndrome, has been shown to arise from the JC virus 285; it is possible that other infections may be responsible for other paraneoplastic syndromes.
Detection of 14-3-3 protein, commonly found in the CSF of patients with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, has also been found in the CSF of 12.5% of patients with

paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes (including paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration and limbic encephalitis). Although this etiologic link to slow viruses is
intriguing, it is not clear how the 14-3-3 protein is involved in the development of paraneoplastic syndromes, 286 and further research in this area is warranted.
Another possible mechanism involves competition by the tumor for a biochemical nutrient or substrate. In this way, large metastatic carcinoid tumors produce an
encephalopathy by depletion of tryptophan and niacin. 287 However, no evidence has been found of competition for a vital nutrient in any of the known paraneoplastic
syndromes. Furthermore, it is unlikely that the small tumors frequently associated with paraneoplastic syndromes could consume enough of any substrate to produce
a deficiency syndrome, and paraneoplastic syndromes usually run a course independent of that of the tumor.
There is increasing evidence that many of these syndromes are mediated by a T-lymphocyte mechanism. Pathologic study of the central nervous system of patients
with paraneoplastic syndromes shows an intense inflammatory infiltrate (including T cells), 288,289 while T-cell receptor studies show that tumor-infiltrating T
lymphocytes are specifically targeted to neuronal antigens. 290 Peripheral blood lymphocytes show an increase in memory helper T cells in seropositive patients with
paraneoplastic syndromes versus seronegative controls. 291 Further, a report of cytotoxic T-cell activity in a patient with paraneoplastic sensory neuronopathy and
anti-Hu antibodies provides provocative data regarding the relationship of T cells to the paraneoplastic process. 292 Further study in this area is ongoing.
The most widely accepted cause of many neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes appears to involve an autoimmune reaction. It is likely that certain antigenic molecules
normally produced only in the central nervous system are produced ectopically by specific tumors. When the immune system reacts to these antigens, the neural
tissues that share the same or similar antigens are also attacked. Subacute cerebellar degeneration, optic neuritis, opsoclonus-myoclonus, subacute sensory
neuropathy, myasthenia gravis, and the Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) have all been associated with the production of autoantibodies. 293 The most
compelling evidence resides in the well-described LEMS in which autoantibodies against voltage-gated calcium channels are expressed by small cell lung cancer, 294
although no paraneoplastic syndrome has yet been proven conclusively to be caused by an autoimmune reaction.
DIAGNOSIS
Because most neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes occur in patients who do not have cancer or have not had a diagnosis of cancer made before the neurologic
syndrome develops, diagnosis is often difficult. The clinical problem is twofold: (1) Either the patient is known to have cancer, and the question is whether the
neurologic symptoms are due to a remote effect or to metastatic disease, or (2) the patient is not known to have cancer and the questions are whether there is a
paraneoplastic syndrome present and does the patient need to be carefully evaluated for an occult cancer.
In the first instance, remote effects are so rare and metastatic disease so common that in the patients with known cancer the physician is obligated to consider and
rule out all of the other neurologic complications of systemic cancer before diagnosing a paraneoplastic syndrome. Neurologic symptoms that may cause diagnostic
difficulty include dementia, cerebellar dysfunction, and weakness of the extremities. Dementia is one of the well-described remote effects of cancer on the nervous
system. However, similar symptoms may occur in patients with multiple cerebral metastases, leptomeningeal involvement, or in older patients with low brain reserve
and systemic metabolic alterations or early neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease. Cerebral metastases are usually visible on MRI and CT scans,
while with neurodegenerative disorders, one usually sees hydrocephalus on neuroimaging and CSF abnormalities. Also, if the patient has become acutely demented,
metabolic brain disease is a possible diagnosis, as are the late effects of radiation therapy to the brain for previous metastasis. In patients with lymphoma, infections
of the central nervous system including progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, toxoplasmosis, and fungal meningitis must also be considered.
If cerebellar dysfunction develops in a patient with a known cancer, it is much more likely that the patient is suffering from a metastasis in the cerebellum than from a
remote effect. Clinically, subacute cerebellar degeneration as a remote effect is characterized by bilateral appendicular signs (point to point test difficulties in both
upper and lower extremities) and by dysarthria, usually without nystagmus. Dementia is common as well. Metastatic disease of the cerebellum usually causes
difficulties with gait without involvement of the upper extremities or speech (midline lesion), or it causes unilateral ataxia without gross dysarthria (hemispheral lesion).
An MRI or CT scan usually clarifies the diagnosis.
The most serious diagnostic problems arise in patients developing weakness of the lower extremities with absent reflexes and with or without bladder or bowel
dysfunction. The physician may suspect a paraneoplastic peripheral neuropathy, but invasion of the cauda equina by leptomeningeal tumor is more likely. The
diagnosis can usually be established by careful examination of the CSF and spinal imaging studies.
Most paraneoplastic neurologic diseases, such as sensomotor peripheral neuropathy, dementia, and acute transverse myelopathy, occur only slightly more commonly
in patients with cancer than in the general population. In such patients, a careful search for an underlying neoplasm is unlikely to be fruitful and is probably not
warranted. However, several neurologic syndromes occur exclusively or with a much higher frequency in patients with cancer. These syndromes include
dermatomyositis in middle-aged and elderly men, subacute cerebellar degeneration, subacute sensory neuropathy, and a subacute motor neuropathy. Any patient
presenting with one of the previously mentioned neurologic syndromes deserves a careful search for an occult cancer. If the initial search result is negative, a tumor
should still be suspected until a definitive diagnosis is established.
AUTOANTIBODIES
Some patients with paraneoplastic syndromes develop detectable autoantibodies and these are outlined in Table 47-10. When found in the patient without a history of
cancer, a search for an underlying malignancy should be undertaken. While several of these are most commonly associated with one specific syndrome (as in
antivoltage-gated calcium channel and LEMS), they are not absolutely specific to a particular syndrome. For example, anti-Hu autoantibodies are seen in
paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis, sensory neuronopathy, cerebellar degeneration, and opsoclonus-myoclonus. 295 Specific cancers are often associated with various
paraneoplastic syndromes: 90% of anti-Yo autoantibodies indicates an underlying breast or gynecologic cancer. 293 However, autoantibodies are not required for the
diagnosis of a paraneoplastic disorder to be made. Conversely, the presence of an autoantibody does not always herald the development of a paraneoplastic
syndrome. Individual autoantibodies are discussed under the specific paraneoplastic syndromes with which they are associated.

TABLE 47-10. Antineuronal Antibodies and Associated Paraneoplastic Syndromes and Cancers

TREATMENT
Treatment for most neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes is generally ineffective. The major exceptions are LEMS in which plasmapheresis and 3,4-diaminopyridine
therapy are effective, and opsoclonus-myoclonus, which often responds to corticosteroid therapy. As well, treatment of the underlying malignancy has been
successful in LEMS and opsoclonus-myoclonus. 296 A report of the successful use of protein A immunoadsorption in a wide variety of neurologic paraneoplastic
syndromes is encouraging, 297 but waits confirmation in larger randomized studies before it can be recommended as a standard of care. A possible reason for the
general failure of treatment in these disorders is that most of the syndromes have a rapid onset, and there is usually insufficient time to make a diagnosis and start
treatment before irreversible damage is done. It is also postulated that immunosuppression may promote tumor growth, thus resulting in more rapid cancer-related

deaths in these patients.
SPECIFIC SYNDROMES
Encephalomyelitis
Encephalomyelitis is a global term for paraneoplastic syndromes with an intense inflammatory response, perivascular lymphocyte cuffing, and lymphocyte
accumulation in brain or spinal cord. 298 The manifestation of the paraneoplastic inflammatory process can be quite varied, depending on the affected area of the
central nervous system. For example, spinal cord involvement can lead to transverse myelitis or motor neuropathy, while sympathetic autonomic effects can lead to
orthostatic hypotension. 293 It is unclear why specific areas of the central nervous system are affected in individual patients. There is no known treatment and the
disorder runs a subacute course ending in severe debilitation.
Paraneoplastic Cerebellar Degeneration
Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration is a disorder that is characterized clinically by cerebellar signs and symptoms (ataxia, dysarthria, dysphagia) and
pathologically by the diffuse loss of Purkinje cells in the cerebellum. 299 It is the most common paraneoplastic syndrome that affects the central nervous system, yet
affects less than 1% of patients with cancer. Although the syndrome is sometimes present in patients without cancer, it is most often associated with cancers of the
lung (especially small cell carcinoma), ovary, breast, and lymphomas (especially Hodgkin's disease). 300,301 and 302
Evidence of diffuse cerebellar dysfunction is the most common clinical presentation of the disorder. In the majority of cases, the neurologic signs and symptoms
antedate the discovery of underlying cancer by months to years. 282 The onset of symptoms is usually abrupt, with symmetric ataxia of the arms and legs progressing
over weeks to months, usually associated with dysarthria and sometimes nystagmus. The seropositive patients appear to progress more rapidly. 303 In addition, a mild
to moderate degree of dementia is often present. MRI and CT initially show no abnormalities; however, as the disease progresses, some degree of cerebellar atrophy
is usually found on imaging studies. CSF may be normal, but there is usually a mild pleocytosis and increased protein. 304 There is frequently an increase in the CSF
IgG, and oligoclonal bands may also be present. 282,283,302 The clinical course is one of subacute worsening and then stabilization at a severe level of neurologic
dysfunction, with improvement highly unlikely.
Several autoantibodies have been found in association with paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration. 303,304 and 305 When present, the titers of these antibodies are
usually much higher in the CSF than in the serum, suggesting synthesis within the central nervous system. The most commonly found autoantibodies are high-titer
polyclonal IgG anti-Purkinje cell antibodies (anti-Yo antibodies). These antibodies are found almost exclusively in female patients with paraneoplastic cerebellar
degeneration and underlying cancers of the breast, ovary, or female genital tract. 306
Other patients do not have anti-Yo antibodies but instead have other, less specific, autoantibodies including type 1 antineuronal nuclear autoantibodies (anti-Hu
antibodies)295 and anti-Ri antibodies. 304 Anti-Hu antibodies are more commonly associated with paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis and sensory neuronopathy;
however, some patients with small cell lung carcinoma may develop a cerebellar syndrome that is clinically indistinguishable from the anti-Yo associated form, even
though these patients lack anti-Yo and have only anti-Hu antibodies. A separate group of patients have been identified who have breast cancer, anti-Ri antibodies,
and cerebellar degeneration (often with opsoclonus-myoclonus) in the absence of either anti-Yo or anti-Hu antibodies. In addition, some patients with Hodgkin's
disease and a number of other neoplasms may have paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration in the complete absence of any antineuronal antibodies.
In most instances, patients with paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration have similar clinical presentations and clinical courses. 292 However, spontaneous remissions
do occur, predominantly in patients with Hodgkin's disease and without anti-Purkinje cell autoantibodies. 300
Limbic Encephalitis
Paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis is a rare complication of testicular neoplasms, small cell lung carcinoma, and other cancers; it can also occur in the absence of
cancer. 282 Pathologically, the syndrome is characterized by loss of neurons in the amygdala, hippocampus, and insular cortex, occasionally with additional
involvement of other deep gray matter structures. 302,307 There is usually gliosis, lymphocyte cuffing of blood vessels, and microglial nodules. The clinical
manifestations include subacute development of personality changes and loss of short-term memory occurring over days to weeks. Less commonly there can be
seizures, hallucinations, and disorientation. Autoantibodies have been described in patients with limbic encephalitis and testicular cancer. These anti-Ta antibodies
recognize proteins (Ma1 and Ma2) present in the nucleus and cytoplasm of neurons. The function of these proteins is unknown. 308 There is no proven treatment,
although there have been anecdotal reports of improvement when the underlying primary tumor responded to treatment.
Paraneoplastic Opsoclonus-Myoclonus
Opsoclonus is a problem of saccadic instability and consists of high-amplitude, involuntary, chaotic, conjugate, saccadic eye movements. These are often associated
with focal myoclonus and ataxia. Opsoclonus is seen in two settings. In children, opsoclonus can be a self-limited condition that is probably due to a viral infection that
involves the brain stem and is not related to cancer. More rarely, opsoclonus (with or without myoclonus) can also be a paraneoplastic syndrome. In children, the
paraneoplastic syndrome is most often associated with neuroblastoma and occurs in approximately 2% of patients with neuroblastoma. 309 Approximately 50% of
children who present with opsoclonus have an underlying neuroblastoma. 310 In one-half the cases, the opsoclonus predates the diagnosis of cancer. Paraneoplastic
opsoclonus-myoclonus in children responds to corticosteroids; however, in a review 69% of these patients had long-term residual neurologic damage. 311
In adults, opsoclonus-myoclonus is much less common than in children and less likely to be associated with an underlying neoplasm. Only approximately 20% of
adults who present with opsoclonus have tumors, 282 and unlike children, the most commonly associated tumor is lung cancer. 312 As with many paraneoplastic
syndromes, the neurologic abnormalities usually precede the diagnosis of an underlying neoplasm. The clinical picture is one of progressive eye movement
abnormalities and myoclonus. The CSF usually shows a mild pleocytosis with slightly increased protein. Neuroimaging study results are usually normal. Treatment is
rarely effective, but spontaneous remissions and remissions after treatment of the primary tumor occur infrequently. Neuropathologic findings run the spectrum from
normal to a picture similar to paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration with loss of Purkinje cells. Anti-Hu and anti-Ri antibodies have been found in a small number of
cases, but no consistent pattern or presence of antibodies has been identified. 282
Cancer-Associated Retinopathy
Degeneration of the photoreceptors in the retina is a rare paraneoplastic syndrome. In more than 90% of the described cases, small cell carcinoma of the lung is the
primary tumor; malignant melanoma is the second most common primary tumor associated with the condition. The major pathologic findings are widespread
degeneration of the rods, cones, and ganglion cells of the retina. 313 There is also usually degeneration of the outer neuronal layer of the retina with lymphocytic
infiltration. Clinical findings consist of photosensitivity, scotomatous visual loss, and attenuation of the caliber of retinal arterioles. Frequently, decreased color vision,
night blindness, and decreased visual acuity are also present. The CSF is usually normal. Electroretinography is abnormal; however, visual-evoked responses are
normal. Serum autoantibodies that react with retinal cells have been identified in some, but not all cases. Antineuronal antibodies recognizing the photoreceptor
recoverin are the best described. 314 Corticosteroids have sometimes resulted in improved visual symptoms.
Subacute Sensory Neuronopathy
Subacute sensory neuronopathy is a rare paraneoplastic disorder that presents with sensory loss in the extremities. The disorder occurs in patients with cancer but
more commonly is found in patients without cancer and in association with primary Sjögren's syndrome. 302,315,316 In most patients, the sensory symptoms precede the
diagnosis of cancer, and only approximately 20% of patients with the syndrome are ever demonstrated to have an underlying neoplasm. 282 When present, the most
common underlying cancer is small cell carcinoma of the lung in 90% of cases. 316 Women are affected more often than men.
Pathologic findings consist of severe neuronal loss of primary sensory neurons in the dorsal root ganglia and gasserian ganglia. The cell loss is often patchy and
sensory large fibers (e.g., proprioceptive nerves) are preferentially involved. There is often variable lymphocytic infiltration of the ganglia and secondary loss of white
matter tracts in the posterior columns. The initial clinical symptoms are numbness, tingling, and dysesthetic pain in the distal extremities. The sensory loss progresses

over days to weeks to involve all four extremities and ascends to involve the trunk and face. Deep tendon reflexes are lost; however, motor power is usually normal.
The disease tends to stabilize after several months at a severe level of disability; most patients are unable to walk. Treatment with corticosteroids and plasmapheresis
has not been successful. Occasionally, the syndrome remits spontaneously or improves after the primary tumor is treated.
Subacute Motor Neuronopathy
Subacute motor neuronopathy is a condition associated primarily with Hodgkin's disease and other lymphomas (although there have been rare occurrences with other
tumors).317 The syndrome is characterized by subacute, progressive lower extremity weakness without significant sensory loss. The weakness is of the lower motor
neuron type. Nerve conduction velocities are normal, and electromyography shows evidence of denervation. There is usually a mild elevation of protein in the CSF
without pleocytosis. Pathologic findings include anterior horn cell degeneration, demyelination of the anterior (motor) nerve roots, and variable demyelination of spinal
cord white matter. A specific motor neuropathy, Guillain-Barré syndrome, is increased in frequency in patients with Hodgkin's disease and is therefore labeled a
paraneoplastic syndrome. 203
Unlike most other neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes, subacute motor neuronopathy usually develops after the diagnosis of the underlying neoplasm has been
made, and the disorder frequently develops while the cancer is in remission (e.g., following curative mantle radiotherapy). The weakness usually does not produce
profound debilitation and runs a course independent of the underlying malignancy. Typically, the weakness stabilizes or improves after several months. Presently,
there is no effective treatment.
Paraneoplastic Sensomotor Peripheral Neuropathy
Mixed motor and sensory peripheral neuropathies are extremely common in cancer patients. In most cases the neuropathies are caused by neurotoxic chemotherapy,
malnutrition, or metabolic problems that are not per se paraneoplastic. However, a rare subacute or chronic sensomotor neuropathy has been described, 315 and is
most frequently associated with lung cancer. The neuropathy involves the distal extremities in a characteristic glove and stocking distribution; bulbar structures are
usually not involved. The CSF is usually normal or shows only a mild increase in protein. Nerve conduction study results are usually consistent with an axonal
neuropathy, and electromyography demonstrates denervation. Pathologic study of nerves shows axonal degeneration, segmental demyelination, or a combination of
the two. The neuropathy tends to stabilize and remain chronic. However, the condition can also remit and recur. No specific treatment is available.
Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome
LEMS is a disorder of the myoneural junction that results in proximal muscle weakness. Approximately 40% of patients do not have an underlying cancer; women
make up the majority of patients in this group. 318 Of the 60% of patients with an underlying neoplasm, approximately two-thirds have small cell lung carcinoma. 203
LEMS is caused by an antibody attack on the presynaptic nerve terminal, specifically on the voltage-dependent calcium channels. 319 The antibodies block the entry of
calcium into the terminal in response to an action potential and this decreases acetylcholine release. LEMS has been induced in animals by passive transfer
experiments in which animals were injected with IgG from patients with the disorder. 294,320
The clinical findings include muscle weakness and fatigability that is usually worse in the proximal muscles. Unlike classic myasthenia gravis, the weakness usually
does not involve the bulbar musculature, although approximately 30% of patients experience dysphagia. Approximately one-half of patients have symptoms of
cholinergic dysautonomia (e.g., dry mouth and impotence). 293
Nerve conduction velocities show a characteristic pattern with normal conduction velocities and initially low amplitude compound muscle action potential. After
exercise, the CMAPs increase to near normal levels. Repetitive nerve stimulation studies show a decrement of the compound muscle action potentials at low
stimulation rates and an increase in the compound muscle action potentials at high stimulation rates.
In contrast to most paraneoplastic syndromes, the LEMS has been reported to respond to plasmapheresis, intravenous immune globulin, and immunosuppression. 282
Drugs that increase transmitter release (e.g., 3,4-diaminopyridine) relieve symptoms and may be beneficial in maintenance therapy. Pyridostigmine propagates the
effect of 3,4-diaminopyridine, but is usually ineffective when given alone. 293 Treatment of the underlying cancer also results in clinical improvement.
Dermatomyositis and Polymyositis
Dermatomyositis and polymyositis are inflammatory myopathies characterized by the subacute development of proximal muscle weakness, with or without pain and
muscle tenderness.321 Dermatomyositis has the classic heliotrope rash over the face, elbows, knees, and knuckles, in addition to the muscle weakness. Both
conditions are usually idiopathic and are associated with cancer in only approximately 10% of cases. 322 The muscle syndrome usually precedes the diagnosis of the
underlying cancer. When the characteristic findings are present in men older than 40 years, there is a higher incidence of underlying cancer, especially carcinoma of
the lung, and a search for cancer is warranted. The most commonly associated cancers are breast and lung tumors.
In addition to proximal symmetric muscle weakness and skin changes, there is usually an elevation in muscle creatinine kinase. Electromyography is consistent with a
myopathic process, and muscle biopsy usually shows inflammatory infiltrates, necrotic fibers, and atrophic fibers, sometimes in a perifascicular pattern. Treatment with
immunosuppressive agents, including corticosteroids, is the standard therapy. The syndrome follows an inconsistent course and often is independent of that of the
tumor.
Miscellaneous Syndromes
The following syndromes have been described that have less concrete supporting data and are so rare that an in-depth review is not warranted. Stiff-person
syndrome has been reported rarely in women with breast cancer, often preceding the oncologic diagnosis. Symptoms include painful muscle cramps and stiffness.
Antiamphiphysin autoantibodies are associated with this syndrome. 323 Acute necrotizing myopathy has been described in several patients with rapid progression of
symmetric, proximal muscle weakness, with pathologic evidence of muscle fiber necrosis without inflammation. 324 Paraneoplastic vasculitic neuropathy is a syndrome
characterized by nonsystemic subacute vasculitic neuropathy, usually due to small cell lung and lymphoma. Neuropathy varies from mononeurotherapy multiplex to
polyneuropathy. Axonal neuropathy is the characteristic finding in electrophysiologic studies, while the microscopic evaluation reveals a vasculitis. Unlike most other
paraneoplastic syndromes, treatment of the underlying cancer or immunotherapy for vasculitis is helpful. 325 Myasthenia gravis, a classic paraneoplastic syndrome
associated with thymoma, is discussed in depth in Neoplasms of the Mediastinum, Chapter 32, and is not discussed here.

MISCELLANEOUS PARANEOPLASTIC SYNDROMES
HYPERTROPHIC OSTEOARTHROPATHY
A clinical syndrome, presumably hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (HOA), has been in the medical literature since antiquity. Hippocrates described the syndrome, which
was most certainly digital clubbing, 25 centuries ago, and this syndrome was called hippocratic fingers. In the past, the problem was termed pulmonary HOA,326 but
because other nonpulmonary diseases can cause the syndrome, the term was simplified to HOA. In 1992, an international workshop on HOA met in Florence, Italy,
and established a consensus for the diagnosis classification and assessment of this syndrome. 327
To fulfill diagnostic criteria of this disease, both digital clubbing and periostosis must be present. Digital clubbing can be defined as paronychial soft tissue expansion
associated with the loss of the curved linear lucency normally present at the junction between the nail and the skin. This may progress to a prominent bulbus
enlargement of the distal end of the digit, representing an underlying increase in vascular and connective tissues. Periostosis is represented by periosteal proliferation
in tubular bones, particularly the tibia and femurs. Incomplete forms of HOA have been recognized including clubbing alone, isolated periostosis, and pachydermia
associated with any of the minor manifestations of the syndrome (synovial effusions, seborrhea, folliculitis, hyperhidrosis, hypertrophic gastropathy, and
acroosteolysis). 328 Some investigators have also used a response to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents to confirm the diagnosis of HOA. 329
HOA can be characterized as either primary or secondary. The secondary forms are either generalized or localized. The localized forms are seen in patients with

hemiplegia, aneurism, infectious arthritis, and patent ductus arteriosis. The generalized syndromes are more common and are associated with six major disease
categories including pulmonary diseases, cardiac diseases, liver disease, intestinal disease, mediastinal disease, and miscellaneous problems. By far the most
common are the pulmonary syndromes including non–small cell lung cancer, metastatic malignancy, cystic fibrosis, pulmonary fibrosis, chronic infections such as
abscess or bronchiectasis, and arteriovenous fistula. Cyanotic congenital heart disease is the most likely etiology of cardiac-associated HOA. Cirrhosis is the most
common liver problem associated with HOA, but the syndrome can also be seen with hepatic carcinoma. Inflammatory bowel disease including Crohn's disease and
ulcerative colitis, as well as other chronic infections and bowel malignancies, are rarely associated with HOA. The mediastinal diseases associated with HOA are
esophageal carcinoma, thymoma, and achalasia, while the miscellaneous category is headed by Grave's disease and thalassemia.
The treatment of HOA is somewhat disappointing. As with virtually all paraneoplastic syndromes, successful treatment of the underlying disease is associated with a
rapid resolution of the problem. However, in most cases of lung cancer the disease is generally in an advanced state and, therefore, successful treatment is difficult.
Patients with severe pain have been successfully treated with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. 330 Surgery and other arthritic treatments such as colchicine have
been less successful. 331 Liver transplantation in patients with liver diseases associated with HOA has been related to dramatic improvement in symptoms, 332 as has
lung transplantation in patients with underlying lung disease. 333 Many times, however, the symptoms can be quite debilitating and do not respond to therapy.
FEVER
Fever occurs in many patients with cancer. The causes of fever in cancer patients include infection, tumor, drug fever, reaction to blood products, and autoimmune
diseases. Thirty percent of patients with cancer develop fever at some point during the course of their malignancy, 334 with the majority having an underlying
infection. 335 The major differential point in determining whether the fever is due to infection is the presence or absence of neutropenia. In patients with low white blood
cell count, infection causes more than two-thirds of all fevers, 336 while patients with normal white blood cell counts are infected far less frequently. Twenty percent of
fevers in nonneutropenic patients are secondary to infection, whereas 45% remain unexplained after complete evaluation. 337
In the absence of infection, it is thought that cancer cells can produce cytokines, which cause fever. Renal cell carcinoma is the most common cancer associated with
fever in up to one-half of patients, 338 while hepatoma patients develop fever one-third of the time. 339 Pel-Ebstein fever is seen in patients with Hodgkin's disease and is
an important prognostic feature of this disease. Fever is also seen in patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. 340 Acute leukemia, osteosarcoma, atrial myxoma, adrenal
carcinoma, pheochromocytoma, and hypothalamic tumors are also rarely associated with the development of fever. 341
The endogenous pyrogens have been well described over the past 20 years. IL-1 replaces the term endogenous pyrogen, which was initially used to describe this
cytokine associated with Hodgkin's disease. 342 Subsequently, IL-1 has been shown to increase circulating neutrophils and cortisol and be intimately involved in the
acute phase response. TNF (a and b subtypes) has also been shown to cause fever, although it does not use the same receptors as IL-1 and appears to induce
IL-1.343 As well, interferon and IL-6 have been shown to produce fever, and it is expected that several more cytokines will eventually be added to the class of
endogenous pyrogens. 344
The most important point in the management of fever in patients with cancer is evaluating for infection. In patients with neutropenia this could be life threatening, but it
is also important in nonneutropenic patients. If infection is excluded, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs are a reasonable means to manage patients with fever.
Nonsteroidal drugs effect a decrease in fever by inhibiting cyclooxygenase, reducing prostaglandin E 2 synthesis. Some investigators use the response to nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs to differentiate fever caused by infection from that caused by a tumor. In two separate studies, response to indomethacin and naproxen was
associated with a high incidence of tumor-related fever compared with infectious etiologies. 345,346 Corticosteroids are also effective antipyretics, both through inhibition
of prostaglandin E 2 and blocking transcription of mRNA for pyrogenic cytokines. 344
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Odell W. Endocrine/metabolic syndromes of cancer. Semin Oncol 1997;214:299.
2. Brown WH. A case of pluriglandular syndrome: diabetes of bearded women. Lancet 1928;2:1022.
3. Liddle GW, Island DP, Ney RL, et al. Non-pituitary neoplasms and Cushing's syndrome. Arch Intern Med 1963;11:471.
4. Odell WD, Wolfsen AR, Yoshimoto Y, et al. Ectopic peptide synthesisa universal concomitant of neoplasia. Trans Assoc Am Physicians 1977;90:204.
5. Baylin SB, Mendelsohn G. Ectopic (inappropriate) hormone production by tumors: mechanism involved and the biological and clinical implications. Endocr Rev 1980;1:45.
6. Wajchenberg BL, Mendonca BB, Liberman B, et al. Ectopic adrenal corticotropic hormone syndrome. Endocr Rev 1994;15:752.
7. Stewart PM, Gibson S, Crosby SR, et al. ACTH precursors characterize the ectopic ACTH syndrome. Clin Endocrinol 1994;40:199.
8. Kraus J, Buchfelder M, Holt V. Regulatory elements of the human proopiomelanocortin gene promoter. DNA Cell Biol 1993;12:527.
9. Amsler U, Pasi A, Qu B. A novel hypothesis: specific oncogenes and tumor suppression genes are involved in the expression of the proopiomelanocortin gene by small cell lung cancer. Med
Hypotheses 1994;42:397.
10. Crapo L. Cushing's syndrome: a review of diagnostic tests. Metabolism 1979;28:955.
11. Wajchenberg BL, Mendonca BB, Liberman B, et al. Ectopic ACTH syndrome. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1995;53:139.
12. Carpenter PC. Diagnostic evaluation of Cushing's syndrome. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1988;17:455.
13. Oldfield EH, Doppman JL, Nieman LK, et al. Petrosal's sign is sampling with and without corticotropin-releasing hormone for the differential diagnosis of Cushing's syndrome. N Engl J Med
1991;325:897.
14. Odell WD, Appleton WS. Hormonal manifestations of cancer. In: Wilson JD, Foiter DW, eds. Williams endocrinology. 8th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1990.
15. Pass HI, Doppman J, Nieman L, et al. Management of the ectopic ACTH-syndrome due to thoracic carcinoids: the HIH experience and review of the world literature. Ann Thorac Surg
1990;50:52.
16. Avgerinos PC, Wanovski JA, Oldfield EH, et al. The metyrapone and dexamethasone suppression tests for the differential diagnosis of the adrenocorticotropin-dependent Cushing syndrome: a
comparison. Ann Intern Med 1994;121:318.
17. Nieman LK, Chrousos GP, Oldfield EH, et al. The ovine corticotropin-releasing hormone stimulation test and the dexamethasone suppression test in the differential diagnosis of Cushing's
syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:862.
18. Midgette AS, Aron DC. High dose dexamethasone suppression testing versus inferior petrosal sign and sampling and the differential diagnosis of adrenocorticotropin-dependent Cushing's
syndrome: a decision analysis. Am J Med Sci 1995;309:162.
19. Biemond P, de Jong FH, Lamberts SW. Continuous dexamethasone infusion for seven hours in patient with Cushing's syndrome. A superior differential diagnostic test. Ann Intern Med
1990;112:738.
20. Nobels FR, de Herder WW, Kwekkeboom DJ, et al. Serum chromatin A in a differential diagnosis of Cushing's syndrome. Eur J Endocrinol 1994;131:589.
21. Jex RK, Little van Heerden JA, Carpenter PC, et al. Ectopic ACTH syndrome diagnostic and therapeutic aspects. Am J Surg 1985;149:276.
22. Howlett TA, Drury PL, Perry L, et al. Diagnosis and management of ACTH-dependent Cushing's syndrome: comparison of the features in ectopic and pituitary ACTH production. Clin Endocrinol
1986;24:699.
23. Leinung MC, Young WF Jr, Whitaker MD, et al. Diagnosis of corticotropin-producing bronchial carcinoid tumors causing Cushing's syndrome. Mayo Clin Proc 1990;65:1315.
24. de Herder WW, Krenning EP, Malchoff CD, et al. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy: its value in tumor localization in patients with Cushing's syndrome caused by ectopic corticotropin or
corticotropin-releasing hormone secretion. Am J Med 1994;96:305.
25. Zeiger MA, Pass HI, Doppman JD, et al. Surgical strategy in the management of non-small cell ectopic adrenal corticotropic hormone syndrome. Surgery 1992;112:994.
26. Pujol J, Viladrich M, Rafecas A, et al. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy. A review of 30 initial cases. Surg Endosc 1999;13:488.
27. Misbin RI, Canary J, Willard D. Amino glutethimide in the treatment of Cushing's syndrome. J Clin Pharmacol 1976;16:645.
28. Jeffcoate WJ, Rees LH, Tomlin S, et al. Metyrapone in the long-term management of Cushing's disease. BMJ 1977;2:215.
29. Winquist EW, Laskey J, Crump M, et al. Ketoconazole in the management of paraneoplastic Cushing's syndrome secondary to ectopic adrenal corticotropin production. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:157.
30. Woodhouse NJ, Dagogo-Jack S, Ahmed M, et al. Acute and long-term effects of octreotide in patients with ACTH-dependent Cushing's syndrome. Am J Med 1993;95:305.
31. Vignati F, Loli P. Additive effect of ketoconazole and octreotide in the treatment of severe adrenocorticotropin-dependent hypercortisolism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1996;81:2885.
32. Schwartz WB, Bennet W, Curelop S, Bartter FC. A syndrome of renal sodium loss in hyponatremia probably resulting from inappropriate secretion of anti-diuretic hormone. Am J Med
1957;23:529.
33. Vorherr H, Massry S, Utiger R, et al. Anti-diuretic principle in malignant tumor extracts from patients with inappropriate ADH syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1968;28:162.
34. Hamilton BPM. Presence of neurophysin proteins in tumors associated with the syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion. NY Acad Sci 1975;248:153.
35. Legros JJ. The radioimmunoassay of human neurophysins: contribution to the understanding of the physiopathology of neurohypophyseal. NY Acad Sci 1975;248:281.
36. Legros JJ, Geenen V, Carvelli T, et al. Neurophysins as markers of vasopressin and oxytocin release. Horm Res 1990;34:151.
37. Rasham JW, Anderson G. Incidence of paramalignant disorders in bronchogenic carcinoma. Thorax 1975;30:86.
38. Lokich JJ. The frequency in clinical biology of ectopic hormone syndromes of small cell carcinoma. Cancer 1982;50:2111.
39. Hays R. Alteration in luminal membrane structure by antidiuretic hormone. Am J Physiol 1983;245:289.
40. Barri Y, Knochel J. Hypercalcemia and electrolyte disturbances in malignancy. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:775.
41. Comis RL, Miller N, Ginsberg SJ. Abnormalities in water homeostasis in small cell anaplastic lung cancer. Cancer 1980;45:2414.
42. Bondy PK, Gilby ED. Endocrine function in small cell and differential carcinoma of the lung. Cancer 1982;50:2147.
43. List AF, Hainsworth JD, Davis BW, et al. A syndrome of inappropriate secretion of anti-diuretic hormone (SIADH) in small cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1191.
44. Steele TH, Serpick AA, Block JB. Anti-diuretic response to cyclophosphamide in man. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1973;185:245.
45. Cutting H. Inappropriate secretion of anti-diuretic hormone secondary to vincristine therapy. Am J Med 1971;51:269.
46. Goldberg M. Hyponatremia. Med Clin North Am 1981;65:251.
47. Glover D, Glick J. Metabolic oncologic emergencies. CA Cancer J Clin 1987;37:302.

48. Cerrill D, State R, Birge J, et al. Demeclocycline treatment in the syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone secretion. Ann Intern Med 1975;83:654.
49. Ayus J, Krothapali R, Arieff A. Treatment of symptomatic hyponatremia and its relation to brain damage. N Engl J Med 1987;317:1190.
50. Raskin P, McClain CJ, Medsger TA. Hypocalcemia associated with metastatic bone disease. Arch Intern Med 1973;132:539.
51. Hall TC, Griffiths CT, Petranek JR. Hypocalcemia: an unusual metabolic complication of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1966;275:1474.
52. Sackner MA, Spivak AP, Balian LJ. Hypocalcemia in the presence of osteoblastic metastases. N Engl J Med 1960;262:173.
53. Ehrlich M, Goldsten M, Heinemann HO. Hypocalcemia, hypoparathyroidism and osteoblastic metastases. Metabolism 1963;12:516.
54. Ryan EA, Reiss E. Oncogenous osteomalacia. Review of the world literature of 42 cases and report of two new cases. Am J Med 1984;77:501.
55. Salassa RM, Jowsey J, Arnaud C. Hypophosphatemia osteomalacia associated with “nonendocrine” tumors. N Engl J Med 1970;283:65.
56. Stanbury W. Tumor-associated hypophosphatemia, osteomalacia and rickets. Clin Endocrinol Metab 1972;1:256.
57. Daniels RA, Weisenfeld I. Tumorous phosphaturic osteomalacia. Report of a case associated with multiple hemangiomas of bone. Am J Med 1979;67:155.
58. Siris ES, Clemens TL, Dempster DW, et al. Tumor-induced osteomalacia. Kinetics of calcium, phosphorus, and vitamin D metabolism and characteristics of bone histomorphometry. Am J Med
1987;82:307.
59. Tashjian AH, Wolfe HJ, Voelkel EF. Human calcitonin: immunologic assay, cytologic localization and studies of medullary thyroid carcinoma. Am J Med 1974;56:840.
60. Silva OL, Broder LE, Doppman JL, et al. Calcitonin as a marker for bronchogenic cancer: a prospective study. Cancer 1979;44:680.
61. Bertagna XY, Nicholson WE, Pettengill OS, et al. Ectopic production of high molecular weight calcitonin and corticotropin by human small cell carcinoma cells in tissue culture: evidence for
separate precursors. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1978;47:1390.
62. Hillyard V, Coombes RC, Greenberg PB, et al. Calcitonin in breast and lung cancer. Clin Endocrinol 1976;5:1.
63. O'Connor DT, Bernstein KN. Radioimmunoassay of chromogranin A in plasma as a measure of exocytotic sympathoadrenal activity in normal subjects and patients with pheochromocytoma. N
Engl J Med 1984;311:764.
64. Wilson BS, Lloyd RV. Detection of chromogranin in neuroendocrine cells with a monoclonal antibody. Am J Pathol 1984;115:458.
65. Huttner WB, Benedum UM. Chromogranin A and pancreastatin. Nature 1987;325:305.
66. Sobol RE, O'Connor DT, Addison J, et al. Elevated serum chromogranin A concentrations in small cell lung carcinoma. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:698.
67. O'Connor DT, Frigon RP, Sokoloff RI. Human chromogranin A: purification and characterization from catecholamine storage vesicles of human pheochromocytoma. Hypertension 1984;6:2.
68. O'Connor DT, Deftos LJ. Secretion of chromogranin A by peptide-producing endocrine neoplasms. N Engl J Med 1986;314:1145.
69. Blackman MR, Weintraub BD, Rosen SW, et al. Human placental and pituitary glycoprotein hormones and their subunits as tumor markers: a quantitative assessment. J Natl Cancer Inst
1980;65:81.
70. Kenimer JG, Hershman JM, Higgins HP. The thyrotropin in hydatidiform moles is human chorionic gonadotropin. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1975;40:481.
71. Faiman C, Colwell JA, Ryan RJ, et al. Gonadotropin secretion from a bronchogenic carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1967;277:1395.
72. Fusco FD, Rosen SW. Gonadotropin-producing anaplastic large-cell carcinomas of the lung. N Engl J Med 1966;275:507.
73. Anderson T, Waldmann TA, Javadpour N, Glatstein E. Testicular germ-cell neoplasms: recent advances in diagnosis and therapy. Ann Intern Med 1979;90:373.
74. Vaitukaitis JL, Ross GT, Braunstein GD, Rayford PL. Gonadotropins and their subunits: basic and clinical studies. Recent Prog Horm Res 1976;32:289.
75. Rudnick P, Odell WD. In search of a cancer. N Engl J Med 1971;284:405.
76. Muggia FM, Rosen SW, Weintraub BD, Hansen HH. Ectopic placental proteins in nontrophoblastic tumors: serial measurements following chemotherapy. Cancer 1975;36:1327.
77. Kahn CR, Rosen SW, Weintraub BD, et al. Ectopic production of chorionic gonadotropin and its subunits by islet cell tumors: a specific marker for malignancy. N Engl J Med 1977;197:565.
78. Bender RA, Weintraub BD, Rosen SW. Prospective evaluation of two tumor-associated proteins in pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Cancer 1979;45:591.
79. Broder LE, Weintraub BD, Rosen SW, et al. Placental proteins and their subunits as tumor markers in prostatic carcinoma. Cancer 1977;40:211.
80. Metz SA, Weintraub B, Rosen SW, et al. Ectopic secretion of chorionic gonadotropin by a lung carcinoma. Pituitary gonadotropin and subunit secretion and prolonged chemotherapeutic
remission. Am J Med 1978;65:325.
81. Tashjian AH Jr, Weintraub BD, Barowksy NJ, et al. Subunits of human chorionic gonadotropin: unbalanced synthesis and secretion by clonal cell strains derived from a bronchogenic
carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1973;70:1419.
82. Skrabanek P, Kirrane J, Powell D. A unifying concept of chorionic gonadotropin production in malignancy. Invest Cell Pathol 1979;2:75.
83. Greco FA, Fer MF, Oldham RD, et al. Intracytoplasmic localization of ectopic b-human chorionic gonadotropin and a-fetoprotein in suspected extragonadal germ cell cancers by
immunohistochemical methods. Clin Res 1980;28:415A.
84. Weintraub BD, Rosen SW. Ectopic production of human chorionic somatomammotrophin by nontrophoblastic cancers. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1971;32:94.
85. Rosen SW, Weintraub BD, Vaitukaitis JL, et al. Placental proteins and their subunits as tumor markers. Ann Intern Med 1975;82:71.
86. Steiner H, Dahlback O, Waldenstrom J. Ectopic growth-hormone production and osteoarthropathy in carcinoma of the bronchus. Lancet 1968;1:783.
87. Sonksen PH, Ayres AB, Braimbridge M, et al. Acromegaly caused by pulmonary carcinoid tumors. Clin Endocrinol 1976;5:505.
88. Scheithauer BW, Bloch B, Carpenter PC, Brazeau P. Ectopic secretion of a growth hormone-releasing factor. Report of a case of acromegaly with bronchial carcinoid tumor. Am J Med
1984;76:605.
89. Boizel R, Labat F, Bachelot I, et al. Acromegaly due to a growth hormone releasing hormone secreting bronchial carcinoid tumor. Further information on the abnormal responsiveness of the
somatotroph cells and their recovery after successful treatment. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1987;64:304.
90. Blackman MR, Rosen SW, Weintraub BD. Ectopic hormones. Adv Intern Med 1978;23:85.
91. Lees LH. The biosynthesis of hormones by nonendocrine tumorsa review. J Endocrinol 1975;67:143.
92. Ilan Y, Sibirsky O, Livni N, et al. Plasma and tumor prolactin in colorectal cancer. Dig Dis Sci 1995;40:2010.
93. Hennen G. Characterization of a thyroid-stimulating factor in human cancer tissue. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1967;27:610.
94. Odell WD, Bates RW, Rivlin RS, et al. Increased thyroid function without clinical hyperthyroidism in patients with choriocarcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1963;23:658.
95. Cave WT Jr, Dunn JT. Choriocarcinoma with hyperthyroidism: probable identity of the thyrotropin with human chorionic gonadotropin. Ann Intern Med 1976;85:60.
96. Odell WD, Wolfsen AR. Humoral syndromes associated with cancer. Ann Rev Med 1978;29:379.
97. Sluiter WJ, Marrink J, Houwen B. Monoclonal gammopathy with an insulin binding IgG(k) M-component associated with severe hypoglycemia. Br J Haematol 1986;62:679.
98. Stuart CA, Prince MJ, Peters EJ, et al. Insulin receptor proliferation: a mechanism for tumor-associated hypoglycemia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1986;63:879.
99. Younus S, Soterakis J, Sossi AJ, et al. Hypoglycemia secondary to metastases to the liver. A case report and review of the literature. Gastroenterology 1977;72:334.
100. Kiang DT, Bauer GE, Kennedy BJ. Immunoassayable insulin in carcinoma of the cervix associated with hypoglycemia. Cancer 1973;31:801.
101. Silvert CK, Rossini AA, Ghazvinian S, et al. Tumor hypoglycemia: deficient splanchnic glucose output and deficient glucagon secretion. Diabetes 1976;25:202.
102. Solomon J. Case report: spurious hypoglycemia and hyperkalemia in myelomonocytic leukemia. Am J Med Sci 1974;267:359.
103. Zapf J, Walter H, Froesch ER. Radioimmunological determination of insulin-like growth factors I and II in normal subjects and in patients with growth disorders and extrapancreatic tumor
hypoglycemia. J Clin Invest 1981;68:3121.
104. Gorden P, Hendricks CM, Kahn CR, et al. Hypoglycemia associated with non-islet cell tumor and insulin like growth factors. N Engl J Med 1981;305:1452.
105. Li TCM, Reed C, Stubenbard WT, et al. Surgical cure of hypoglycemia associated with cystosarcoma phylloides and elevated NSILP. Am J Med 1983;74:1080.
106. Van Wyk JJ, Underwood LE, Hintz RL, et al. The somatomedins: a family of insulin-like hormones under growth hormone control. Recent Prog Horm Res 1974;30:259.
107. Daughaday W, Emanuele M, Brooks M, et al. Synthesis and secretion of IGF-II by leiomyosarcoma with associated hypoglycemia. N Engl J Med 1988;319:1434.
108. Ron D, Powers A, Pandian M, et al. Increased IGF-II production and consequent suppression of GH secretion: a dual mechanism for tumor-induced hypoglycemia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1989;68:701.
109. Hocking W, Goodman J, Golde D. Granulocytosis associated with tumor cell production of colony stimulating activity. Blood 1983;61:600.
110. Clark SC, Kamen R. The human hematopoietic colony stimulating factors. Science 1987;236:1229.
111. Hammond D, Winnick S. Paraneoplastic erythrocytosis and ectopic erythropoietins. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1974;230:219.
112. Valentine WN, Hennessy TG, Lang E, et al. Polycythemia: erythrocytosis and erythema. Ann Intern Med 1968;69:587.
113. Lees LH. The biosynthesis of hormones by nonendocrine tumorsa review. J Endocrinol 1975;67:143.
114. Spivak J. Cancer-related anemia: its cause and characteristics. Semin Oncol 1994;21(Suppl 3):3.
115. Jacobs EM, Hutter RVP, Pool JL, Ley AB. Benign thymoma and selective erythroid aplasia of the bone marrow. Cancer 1959;12:47.
116. Vasavada PJ, Bournigal LJ, Reynolds RW. Thymoma associated with pure red cell aplasia and hypogammaglobulinemias. Postgrad Med 1973;54:93.
117. Akard LP, Brandt J, Lee L, et al. Chronic T cell lymphoproliferative disorder and pure red cell aplasia. Am J Med 1987;83:1069.
118. Barry KG, Crosby WH. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia arrested by removal of an ovarian teratoma: review of the literature and report of a case. Ann Intern Med 1957;47:1002.
119. Packman CH, Leddy JP. Acquired hemolytic anemia due to warm-reacting autoantibodies. In: Beutler I, Lichtman MA, Coller BS, Kipps TJ, eds. Williams hematology. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1995:677.
120. Frenkel E, Bick R, Rutherford C. Anemia of malignancy. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1997;10:861.
121. Spira MA, Lynch EC. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia and carcinoma: an unusual association. Am J Med 1979;67:753.
122. Antman KH, Skarin AT, Mayer RJ, et al. Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia and cancer: a review. Medicine (Baltimore) 1979;58:377.
123. Sack GH, Levin J, Bell WR. Trousseau's syndrome and other manifestations of chronic disseminated coagulopathy in patients with neoplasms. Medicine (Baltimore) 1977;56:1.
124. Robinson WA. Granulocytosis in neoplasia. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1974;230:212.
125. Meyer LM, Rotter SD. Leukemoid reaction (hyperleukocytosis) in malignancy. Am J Clin Pathol 1942;12:218.
126. Fahey RJ. Unusual leukocyte response in primary carcinoma of the lung. Cancer 1952;4:930.
127. Hughes WF, Highley CS. Marked leukocytosis resulting from carcinomatosis. Ann Intern Med 1952;37:1095.
128. Barrett O Jr. Monocytosis in malignant disease. Ann Intern Med 1970;73:991.
129. Hocking W, Goodman J, Golde E. Granulocytosis associated with tumor production of colony stimulating factor. Blood 1983;61:600.
130. Sato K, Fujii Y, Kakiuchi T, et al. Paraneoplastic syndrome of hypercalcemia and leukocytosis caused by squamous carcinoma cells (T3M-1) producing parathyroid hormone-related protein,
interleukin 2, and granulocyte colony stimulating factor. Cancer Res 1989;49:4740.
131. Heyman M, Walsh T. Autoimmune neutropenia and Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1987;59:1903.
132. Wardlaw AJ, Kay AB. Eosinopenia and eosinophilia. In: Beutler E, Lichtman MA, Coller BS, Kipps TJ, eds. Williams hematology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995:844.
133. Slungaard A, Ascensao J, Zanjani E, Jacob HS. Pulmonary carcinoma with eosinophilia: demonstration of a tumor-derived eosinophilopoietic factor. N Engl J Med 1983;309:778.
134. Weller P. The immunobiology of eosinophils. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1110.
135. Lichtman MA. Basophilopenia, basophilia, and mastocytosis. In: Beutler E, Lichtman MA, Coller BS, Kipps TJ, eds. Williams hematology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995:852.
136. Levin J, Conley CL. Thrombocytosis associated with malignant disease. Arch Intern Med 1964;114:497.
137. Estrov Z, Talpaz M, Maligit G, et al. Elevated plasma thrombopoietin activity in patients with cancer related thrombocytosis. Am J Med 1995;98:551.
138. Kim HD, Boggs DR. A syndrome resembling idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura in 10 patients with diverse forms of cancer. Am J Med 1979;67:371.
139. Doan C, Bouroncle BA, Wiseman BK. Idiopathic and secondary thrombocytopenic purpura. Clinical study and evaluation of 381 cases over a period of 28 years. Ann Intern Med 1960;53:861.
140. Bellone JD, Kunicki TS, Aster RH. Immune thrombocytopenia associated with carcinoma. Ann Intern Med 1983;99:470.
141. Kaden BR, Rosse WF, Hauch TW. Immune thrombocytopenia in lymphoproliferative diseases. Blood 1979;53:545.
142. Khilanani P, Al-Sarraf M. The association of autoimmune thrombocytopenia and Hodgkin's disease. Oncology 1973;28:238.
143. Jones SE. Autoimmune disorders and malignant lymphoma. Cancer 1973;31:1092.
144. Trousseau A. Phlegmasia alba dolens. Clinique medicale de l'Hotel-Dieu de Paris, London. N Sydenham Soc 1865;3:94.

145. Kakkar A, DeRuvo N, Chinswangwatanakul V, et al. Extrinsic-pathway activation in cancer with high factor VIIa and tissue factor. Lancet 1995;346:1004.
146. Pineo G, Brain M, Gallus A. Tumors, mucus production and hypercoagulability. Ann NY Acad Sci 1974;230:262.
147. Bick R, Struass J, Frenkel E. Thrombosis and hemorrhage in oncology patients. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1997;10:875.
148. Green D, Hull RD, Brant R, Pineo GF. Lower mortality in cancer patients treated with low-molecular weight heparin versus standard heparin. Lancet 1992;339:1476.
149. Siragusa S, Cosmi B, Piovella F, et al. Low-molecular-weight heparins and unfractionated heparin in the treatment of patients with acute venous thromboembolism: results of a meta-analysis.
Am J Med 1996;100:269.
150. Grainick HR, Abrell E. Studies of the procoagulant and fibrinolytic activity of promyelocytes in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Br J Hematol 1973;24:59.
151. Goodnight SH Jr. Bleeding and intravascular clotting in malignancy: a review. Ann NY Acad Sci 1974;230:271.
152. Siegal T, Seligsohn U, Aghai E, Modan M. Clinical and laboratory aspects of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC): a study of 118 cases. Thromb Haemost 1978;39:122.
153. MacDonald RA, Robbins SL. The significance of nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis: autopsy and clinical study of 78 patients. Ann Intern Med 1957;46:255.
154. Studdy P, Wiloughby JMT. Non-bacterial thrombotic endocarditis in early cancer. Br J Med 1976;1:752.
155. Rosen P, Armstrong D. Nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis in patients with malignant neoplastic disease. Am J Med 1973;54:23.
156. Gonzales Quintela A, Candela M, Vidal C, et al. Non-bacterial thrombotic endocarditis in cancer patients. Acta Cardiol 1991;46:1.
157. Waldmann TA. Protein losing enteropathy. Gastroenterology 1966;50:422.
158. Waldmann TA. Protein losing enteropathies. In: Haubrich WS, Kalser MA, Roth JL, Schaffner F, eds. Bockus gastroenterology. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1985:1814.
159. Florent C, L'Hirondel C, Dexmazures C, et al. Intestinal clearance of alpha1-anti-trypsin. A sensitive method for the detection of protein losing enteropathy. Gastroenterology 1981;81:777.
160. Thomas DW, Sinatra FR, Merritt RJ. Random fecal alpha1-anti-trypsin concentration in children with gastrointestinal disease. Gastroenterology 1981;80:776.
161. Jeffries GH. Protein losing enteropathy. In: Sleisenger MH, Fortrand JS, eds. Gastrointestinal disease:pathophysiology, diagnosis, management. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1989:283.
162. Schwartz M, Jarnum S. Protein losing gastroenteropathy: hypoproteinemia due to gastrointestinal protein loss of varying aetiology, diagnosed by means of 131I-albumin. Dan Med Bull
1961;8:1.
163. Laine L, Politoske EJ, Gill P. Protein losing enteropathy in acquired immune deficiency syndrome due to intestinal Kaposi's sarcoma. Arch Intern Med 1987;147:1174.
164. Bedine MS, Yeardley JH, Elliot HL, et al. Intestinal involvement in Waldenström's macroglobulinemia. Gastroenterology 1973;65:308.
165. Sum PT, Hoffman MM, Webster DR. Protein losing gastroenteropathy in patients with gastrointestinal cancer. Can J Surg 1964;7:1.
166. Strygler B, Nicor MJ, Santangelo WC, et al. Alpha1-anti-trypsin excretion in stool in normal subjects and in patients with gastrointestinal disorders. Gastroenterology 1990;99:1380.
167. DeWys WD, Begg D, Lavin PT, et al. Prognostic effect of weight loss prior to chemotherapy in cancer patients. Am J Med 1980;69:491.
168. Hickman DM, Miller RA, Rambeau JL, et al. Serum albumin and body weight as predictors of post-operative course in colorectal cancer. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1980;4: 314.
169. Langstein HN, Norton JA. Mechanisms of cancer cachexia. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1991;5:103.
170. Mantovani G, Maccio A, Lai P, et al. Cytokine involvement in cancer anorexia/cachexia: role of megestrol acetate and medroxyprogesterone acetate on cytokine downregulation and
improvement of clinical symptoms. Crit Rev Oncol 1998;9:99.
171. Oliff A, Defeo-Jones D, Boyer M. Tumors secreting human TNF/cachectin induce cachexia in mice. Cell 1987;50:555.
172. Tisdale MJ. Cancer cachexia: metabolic alterations and clinical manifestations. Nutrition 1997;13:1.
173. Lundholm K, Byland AC, Holm J, et al. Skeletal muscle metabolism in patients with malignant tumors. Eur J Cancer 1976;12:465.
174. Warren RS, Jeevanandam M, Brennan MF. Protein synthesis in tumor-influenced hepatocyte. Surgery 1985;98:275.
175. Kralovic RC, Zepp A, Canedella RJ. Studies of the mechanism of fat depletion in experimental cancer. Eur J Cancer 1977;13:1071.
176. Moldawer LL, Copeland EM. Proinflammatory cytokines, nutritional support, and the cachexia syndrome: interactions and therapeutic options. Cancer 1997;79:1828.
177. Seltzer MH, Slocum BA, Cataldi-Betcher EL, et al. Instant nutritional assessment: absolute weight loss and surgical mortality. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1982;6:218.
178. Body JJ. The syndrome of anorexia-cachexia. Curr Opin Oncol 1999;11:255.
179. Ottery FD, Walsh D, Strawford A. Pharmacologic management of anorexia/cachexia. Semin Oncol 1998;25(Suppl 6):35.
180. Vadell C, Segui MA, Giminez-Arnau JM, et al. Anticachectic efficacy of megestrol acetate at different doses and versus placebo in patients with neoplastic cachexia. Am J Clin Oncol
1998;4:347.
181. Lee JC, Yamauchi H, Hopper J. The association of cancer and nephrotic syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1966;64:41.
182. Dinh BL, Brassard A. Renal lesion associated with the Walker 256 adenocarcinoma in the rat. Br J Exp Pathol 1968;49:145.
183. Zimmerman SW, Vishnu-Moorthy A, Burkholder PM, et al. Glomerulopathies associated with neoplastic disease. In: Rieselbach RE, Garnick NB, eds. Cancer in the kidney. 1st ed. Philadelphia:
Lea & Febiger, 1982.
184. Stuart K, Faloon BG, Cardi NA. Development of nephrotic syndrome in a patient with prostatic carcinoma. Am J Med 1986;80:295-298.
185. Eagen JW, Lewis EJ. Glomerulopathies of neoplasia. Kidney Int 1977;11:297.
186. Coltharp W, Lee S, Miller R, et al. Nephrotic syndrome complicating adenocarcinoma of the lung with resolution after resection. Ann Thorac Surg 1991;51:308.
187. Heaton JM, Menzin MA, Carney DN. Extrarenal malignancy and the nephrotic syndrome. J Clin Pathol 1975;28:944.
188. Whelan TV, Hirszel P. Minimal-change nephropathy associated with pancreatic carcinoma. Arch Intern Med 1988;148:975.
189. Schroeter NJ, Rushing DA, Parker JP, et al. Minimal-change in nephrotic syndrome associated with malignant mesothelioma. Arch Intern Med 1986;148:1834.
190. Maesaka J, Mittel S, Fishbane S. Paraneoplastic syndromes of the kidney. Semin Oncol 1997;24:373.
191. Lesesne J, Rothschild N, Erickson B. Cancer-associated hemolytic-uremic syndrome: analysis of 85 cases from a national registry. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:781.
192. Martinez-Maldonado M, Ramirez de Arellano JA. Renal involvement in malignant lymphomas: a survey of 49 cases. J Urol 1966;95:485.
193. Richmond J, Sherman RS, Diamond HD, et al. Renal lesions associated with malignant lymphoma. Am J Med 1962;32:184.
194. Weimar G, Culp DA, Loening S, et al. Urogenital involvement by malignant lymphomas. J Urol 1981;125:230.
195. Shapiro JH, Ramsay CG, Jacobson HG, et al. Renal involvement in lymphomas and leukemias in adults. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1962;88:928.
196. Brown J, Winkelmann RK. Acanthosis nigricans, a study of 90 cases. Medicine 1968;47:33.
197. Curth HO, Hilberg AW, Machacek GF. The site and histology of the cancer associated with malignant acanthosis nigricans. Cancer 1962;15:364.
198. Ackerman AB, Lantis LR. Acanthosis nigricans associated with Hodgkin's disease: concurrent remission and exacerbation. Arch Dermatol 1967;95:202.
199. Cohen RP, Grossman ME, Almeida L, Kurzrock R. Tripe palms and cancer. Clin Dermatol 1993;11:165.
200. Cohen PR, Kurzrock R. Malignancy-associated tripe palms. J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;27(2 Pt 1):271.
201. Fitzpatrick TB, Montgomery H, Lerner AB. Pathogenesis of generalized dermal pigmentation secondary to malignant melanoma and melanuria. J Invest Dermatol 1954;22:163.
202. Eldar M, Weinberger A, Ben Bassat M, et al. Diffuse melanosis secondary to disseminated malignant melanoma. Cutis 1980;25:416.
203. Sexton M, Snyder CR. Generalized melanosis in occult primary melanoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1989;20:261.
204. Nelson DH, Meakin JW, Thorn GW, et al. ACTH-producing pituitary tumors following adrenalectomy for Cushing's syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1960;52:560.
205. Venencie PY, Perry HO. Sign of Leser-Trélat: report of two cases and review of the literature. J Am Acad Dermatol 1984;10:83.
206. Sperry K, Wall J. Adenocarcinoma of the stomach with eruptive seborrheic keratoses: the sign of Leser-Trélat. Cancer 1980;45:2434.
207. Holdiness MR. The sign of Leser-Trélat. Int J Dermatol 1986;25:564.
208. Richard M, Giroux JM. Acrokeratosis paraneoplastica (Bazex's syndrome). J Am Acad Dermatol 1987;16:178.
209. Boudoulas O, Camisa C. Paraneoplastic acrokeratosis: Bazex's syndrome. Cutis 1986;37:449.
210. Bolognia JL. Bazex's syndrome. Clin Dermatol 1993;11:37.
211. Ashikari R, Park K, Huvos AG, Urban JA. Paget's disease of the breast. Cancer 1970;26:680.
212. Cohen PR, Kurzrock R. Sweet's syndrome and malignancy. Am J Med 1987;82:1220.
213. Cooper PH, Innes DJ, Greer KE. Acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis (Sweet's syndrome) and myeloproliferative disorders. Cancer 1983;51:1518.
214. Cohen PR, Talpaz M, Kurzrock R. Malignancy-associated Sweet's syndrome. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1887.
215. Cohen P, Kurzrock R. Mucocutaneous paraneoplastic syndromes. Semin Oncol 1997;24:334.
216. Langolis JC, Shaw JM, Odland GF. Erythema gyratum repens unassociated with internal malignancy. J Am Acad Dermatol 1985;12:911.
217. Solomon H. Erythema gyratum repens. Arch Dermatol 1969;100:639.
218. Thomson J, Stankler J. Erythema gyratum repens. Br J Dermatol 1970;82:406.
219. Hashizume T, Kiryu H, Noda K, et al. Glucagonoma syndrome. J Am Acad Dermatol 1988;19:377.
220. Mallinson CN, Bloom SR, Warin AP, et al. A glucagonoma syndrome. Lancet 1974;2:1.
221. Murray JS, Paton RR, Pope CE. Pancreatic tumor associated with flushing and diarrhea. N Engl J Med 1961;264:436.
222. Cunliffe WJ, Black MM, Hall R, et al. A calcitonin secreting thyroid carcinoma. Lancet 1968;2:63.
223. Plaskin J, Landau Z, Coslovsky R. A carcinoid-like syndrome caused by a prostaglandin secreting renal cell carcinoma. Arch Intern Med 1980;140:1095.
224. Wilkin JK. Flushing reactions: consequences and mechanisms. Ann Intern Med 1981;95:468.
225. Resnick RH, Gray SJ. Serotonin metabolism and the carcinoid syndrome: a review. Med Clin North Am 1960;44:1323.
226. Shelley WB. Erythema annulare centrifugum. Arch Dermatol 1964;90:54.
227. Mahood JM. Erythema annulare centrifugum: a review of 24 cases with special reference to its associations with underlying disease. Clin Exp Dermatol 1983;8:383.
228. Abrahams F, McCarthy JT, Sanders SL. 101 cases of exfoliative dermatitis. Arch Dermatol 1963;87:96.
229. Nicolis GD, Helwig EB. Exfoliative dermatitis: a clinicopathologic study of 135 cases. Arch Dermatol 1973;108:788.
230. MacMahon HE, Brown PA, Shen EM. Acinar cell carcinoma of the pancreas with subcutaneous fat necrosis. Gastroenterology 1965;49:555.
231. Hughes PSH, Apisarnthanarax P, Mullins F. Subcutaneous fat necrosis associated with pancreatic disease. Arch Dermatol 1975;111:506.
232. Anhalt GJ, Kim SC, Stanley JR, et al. Paraneoplastic pemphigus. An autoimmune microcutaneous disease associated with neoplasia. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1729.
233. Krain LS, Bierman SM. Pemphigus vulgaris and internal malignancy. Cancer 1974;33:1091.
234. Armin A, Nadimi H, Robinson J. Pemphigus vulgaris and malignancy. Int J Oral Surg 1985;14:376.
235. Nousari H, Anhalt G. Pemphigus and bullous pemphigoid. Lancet 1999;354:667.
236. Amagai M, Nishikawa T, Nousari HC, et al. Antibodies against desmoglein 3 (pemphigus vulgaris antigen) are present in sera from patients with paraneoplastic pemphigus and cause
acantholysis in vivo in neonatal mice. J Clin Invest 1998;102:775.
237. Nousari H, Brodsky R, Jones R, et al. Immunoablative high-dose cyclophosphamide without stem cell rescue in paraneoplastic pemphigus: report of a case and review of this new therapy for
severe autoimmune disease. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999;40:750.
238. Finan MC, Connolly SM. Sebaceous gland tumors and systemic disease: a clinicopathologic analysis. Medicine 1984;63:232.
239. Housholder MS, Zeligman I. Sebaceous neoplasms associated with visceral carcinomas. Arch Dermatol 1980;116:61.
240. Burgdorf WHC, Pitha J, Fahmy A. Muir-Torre syndrome. Histologic spectrum of sebaceous proliferations. Am J Dermatopathol 1986;8:202.
241. Aram H. Acquired ichthyosis in mycosis fungoides. J Assoc Milit Dermatol 1984;10:32.
242. Polisky RB, Bronson DM. Acquired ichthyosis in a patient with adenocarcinoma of the breast. Cutis 1986;38:359.
243. Krakowski A, Brenner S, Covo J, et al. Acquired ichthyosis in Kaposi's sarcoma. Dermatologica 1973;147:348.
244. Young L, Steinman HK. Acquired ichthyosis in a patient with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome and Kaposi's sarcoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 1987;16:395.
245. Cox NH, Lawrence CM, Langtry JAA, et al. Dermatomyositis. Disease associations and an evaluation of screening investigations for malignancy. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:61.
246. Basset-Seguin M, Roujeau JC, Gherardi R, et al. Prognostic factors and predictive signs of malignancy in adult dermatomyositis. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:633.
247. Barnes BE. Dermatomyositis and malignancy: a review of the literature. Ann Intern Med 1976;84:68.

248. Sigurgeirsson B, Lindelöf B, Edhag O, et al. Risk of cancer in patients with dermatomyositis or polymyositis. N Engl J Med 1992;326:363.
249. Vogl A, Goldfischer S. Pachydermoperiostosis. Primary or idiopathic hypertrophic osteoarthropathy. Am J Med 1962;33:166.
250. Lyell A, Whittle CH. Hypertrichosis lanuginosa acquired type. Br J Dermatol 1951;63:411.
251. Hegedus SI, Schorr WF. Acquired hypertrichosis lanuginosa and malignancy. Arch Dermatol 1972;106:84.
252. Lober CW. Should the patient with generalized pruritus be evaluated for malignancy? J Am Acad Dermatol 1988;19(2 Pt 1):350.
253. Rajka G. Investigation of patients suffering from generalized pruritus, with special references to systemic diseases. Acta Derm Venereol 1966;46:190.
254. Cormia FE. Pruritus, an uncommon but important symptom of systemic cancer. Arch Dermatol 1965;92:36.
255. Schimpff S, Serpick A, Stoler B, et al. Varicella-zoster infection in patients with cancer. Ann Intern Med 1972;76:241.
256. Dolin R, Reichman RC, Mazur MH, Whitley RJ. Herpes zoster-varicella infections in immunosuppressed patients. Ann Intern Med 1978;89:375.
257. Huberman M, Fossieck BE Jr, Bunn PA Jr, et al. Herpes zoster and small cell bronchogenic carcinoma. Am J Med 1980;68:214.
258. Lloyd KM II, Denis M. Cowden disease: a possible new symptom complex with multiple system involvement. Ann Intern Med 1963;58:136.
259. Salem OS, Steck WD. Cowden's disease (multiple hamartoma and neoplasia syndrome). A case report and review of the English literature. J Am Acad Dermatol 1983;8:686.
260. Elston DM, James WD, Rodman OG, et al. Multiple hamartoma syndrome (Cowden's disease) associated with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Arch Dermatol 1986;122:572.
261. Starink TM, Van der Veen JPW, Arwert F, et al. The Cowden syndrome: a clinical and genetic study in 21 patients. Clin Genet 1986;29:222.
262. Leppard B, Bussey HJR. Epidermoid cysts, polyposis coli and Gardner's syndrome. Br J Surg 1975;62:387.
263. Thomas KF, Watne AL, Johnson JF, et al. Natural history of Gardner's syndrome. Am J Surg 1968;115:218.
264. Reid JD. Intestinal carcinoma in the Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. JAMA 1974;229:833.
265. Perzin KH, Bridge MF. Adenomatous and carcinomatous changes in hamartomatous polyps of the small intestine (Peutz-Jeghers syndrome): report of a case and review of the literature.
Cancer 1982;49:971.
266. Ryo UY, Roh SK, Balkin RB, et al. Extensive metastases in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. JAMA 1978;239:2268.
267. Giardiello FM, Welsh SB, Hamilton SR, et al. Increased risk of cancer in the Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. N Engl J Med 1987;316:1511.
268. Trau H, Schewach-Millet M, Fisher BK, et al. Peutz-Jeghers syndrome and bilateral breast carcinoma. Cancer 1982;50:788.
269. Howel-Evans W, McConnell RB, Clarke CA, et al. Carcinoma of the oesophagus with keratosis palmaris et plantaris (tylosis). A study of two families. Q J Med 1958;107:413.
270. Bennion SD, Patterson JW. Keratosis punctata palmaris et plantaris and adenocarcinoma of the colon: a possible familial association of punctate keratoderma and gastrointestinal malignancy.
J Am Acad Dermatol 1984;10:587.
271. Murata Y, Kumano K, Tani M. Acquired diffuse keratoderma of the palms and soles with bronchial carcinoma: report of a case and review of the literature. Arch Dermatol 1988;124:497.
272. Crowe FW. Axillary freckling as a diagnostic aid in neurofibromatosis. Ann Intern Med 1964;61:1142.
273. Howell JB. Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Profile of genetic and environmental factors in oncogenesis. J Am Acad Dermatol 1984;11:98.
274. Howell JB, Freeman RG. Structure and significance of the pits with their tumors in the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. J Am Acad Dermatol 1980;2:224.
275. Gorlin RJ. Nevoid basal-cell carcinoma syndrome. Medicine 1987;66:98.
276. Butterworth T, Wilson M Jr. Dermatologic aspects of tuberous sclerosis. Arch DermatolSyph 1941;43:1.
277. Christoferson LA, Gustafson MB, Petersen AG. Von Hippel-Lindau's disease. JAMA 1961;178:280.
278. Doll R, Kinlen L. Immunosurveillance and cancer: epidemiologic evidence. BMJ 1970;4:420.
279. Frizzera G, Rosai J, Dehner LP, et al. Lymphoreticular disorders in primary immunodeficiencies: new findings based on an up-to-date histologic classification of 35 cases. Cancer 1980;46:692.
280. Helm F, Helm J. Cutaneous markers of internal malignancies. In: Helm F, ed. Cancer dermatology. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1979:247.
281. Epstein CJ, Martin GM, Schultz AL, Motulsky AG. Werner's syndrome: a review of the symptomatology, natural history, pathologic features, genetics, and relationship to the natural aging
process. Medicine (Baltimore) 1966;45:177.
282. Posner JB. Paraneoplastic syndromes. In: Posner JB, ed. Neurologic complications of cancer. Philadelphia: F.A. Davis, 1995:353.
283. Posner JB. Paraneoplastic syndromes. Neurol Clin 1991;9:919.
284. Oppenheim H. Uber Hirnsymptome bei Carcinomatose ohne nachweisbare. Veranderungen im Gehirn. Charite-Annalen (Berlin) 1888;13:335.
285. Houff S, Major E, Katz D, et al. Involvement of the JC virus-infected mononuclear cells from the bone marrow and spleen in the pathogenesis of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. N
Engl J Med 1998;318:301.
286. Saiz A, Graus F, Dalmau J, et al. Detection of 14-3-3 brain protein in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with paraneoplastic neurologic disorders. Ann Neurol 1999;46:774.
287. Patchell RA, Posner JB. Neurologic complications of carcinoid. Neurology 1986;36:745.
288. Dalmau J, Furneaux HM, Rosenblum MK, Graus F, Posner JB. Detection of the anti-Hu antibody in specific regions of the nervous system and tumor from patients with paraneoplastic
encephalomyelitis/sensory neuronopathy. Neurology 1991;41:1757.
289. Jean WC, Dalmau J, Ho A, Posner JB. Analysis of the IgG subclass distribution and inflammatory infiltrates in patients with anti-Hu-associated paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis. Neurology
1994;44:140.
290. Voltz R, Dalmau J, Posner JB, Rosenfeld MR. T-cell receptor analysis in anti-Hu associated paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis. Neurology 1998;51:1146
291. Benyahia B, Liblau R, Merle-Beral H, et al. Cell mediated auto-immunity in paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes with anti-Hu antibodies. Ann Neurol 1999;45:162.
292. Tanaka K, Tanaka M, Inuzuka T, et al. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte-mediated cell death in paraneoplastic sensory neuronopathy with anti-Hu antibody. J Neurol Sci 1999;163:159.
293. Dalmau J, Posner J. Paraneoplastic syndromes affecting the nervous system. Semin Oncol 1997;24:318.
294. Lang B, Newsom-Davis J, Wray D. Autoimmune aetiology for myasthenic (Eaton-Lambert) syndrome. Lancet 1981;1:224.
295. Dalmau J, Graus F, Rosenblum MK, et al. Anti-Hu-associated paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis/sensory neuronopathy. A clinical study of 71 patients. Medicine (Baltimore) 1992;71:59.
296. Grisold W, Drlicek M, Liszka-Setinek U, et al. Anti-tumour therapy in paraneoplastic disease. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 1995;97:106.
297. Batchelor T, Platten M, Hochberg F. Immunoadsorption therapy for paraneoplastic syndromes. J Neurooncol 1999;40:131.
298. Henson RA, Urich H. Encephalomyelitis with carcinoma. In:Henson R, Urich H, eds. Cancer and the nervous system. 1st ed. London: Blackwell Scientific, 1992:314.
299. Verschuuren J, Chuang L, Rosemblum MK, et al. Inflammatory infiltrates and complete absence of Purkinje cells in anti-Yo associated paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration. Acta Neuropathol
(Berl) 1996;91:519.
300. Hammack JE, Kotanides H, Rosenblum MK, Posner JB. Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration: clinical and immunologic findings in 21 patients with Hodgkin's disease. Neurology
1992;42:1938.
301. Peterson K, Rosenblum M, Kotenides H, et al. Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration I: a clinical analysis of 55 anti-Yo antibody positive patients. Neurology 1992;42:1931.
302. Henson RA, Urich H. Remote effects of malignant disease: certain intracranial disorders. In: Vinken PJ, Bruyn GW, Klawans HL, eds. Handbook of clinical neurology. Amsterdam:
North-Holland, 1979:625.
303. Anderson NE, Rosenblum MK, Posner JB. Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration: clinical-immunological correlations. Ann Neurol 1988;24:559.
304. Dropcho EJ, Kline LB, Riser J. Antineuronal (anti-Ri) antibodies in a patient with steroid-responsive opsoclonus-myoclonus. Neurology 1993;43:207.
305. Tsukamoto T, Yamamoto H, Iwasaki Y, et al. Antineural autoantibodies in patients with paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration. Arch Neurol 1989;46:1225.
306. Hinton R. Paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:909.
307. Brain WR, Norris FH, eds. The remote effects of cancer on the nervous system . New York: Grune & Stratton, 1965.
308. Voltz R, Gultekin S, Rosenfeld M, et al. A serologic marker of paraneoplastic limbic and brain-stem encephalitis in patients with testicular cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1788.
309. Altman AJ, Baehner RL. Favorable prognosis for survival in children with coincident opso-myoclonus and neuroblastoma. Cancer 1976;37:846.
310. Telander RL, Smithson WA, Groover RV. Clinical outcome in children with acute cerebellar encephalopathy and neuroblastoma. J Pediatr Surg 1989;24:11.
311. Russo C, Cohn S, Petruzzi M, et al. Long-term neurologic outcome in children with opsoclonus-myoclonus associated with neuroblastoma: a report from the Pediatric Oncology Group. Med
Pediatr Oncol 1997;28:284.
312. Digre KB. Opsoclonus in adults. Arch Neurol 1986;43:1165.
313. Jacobson DM, Thirkill CE, Tipping SJ. A clinical triad to diagnose paraneoplastic retinopathy. Ann Neurol 1990;28:162.
314. Adamus G, Guy J, Schmiel J, et al. Role of anti-recoverin autoantibody in cancer associated retinopathy. Invest Ophthalmol US Sci 1993;34:2626.
315. Croft PB, Urich H, Wilkinson M. Peripheral neuropathy of sensorimotor type associated with malignant disease. Brain 1967;90:31.
316. Chalk CH, Windebank AJ, Kimmel DW, McManis PG. The distinctive clinical features of paraneoplastic sensory neuronopathy. Can J Neurol Sci 1992;19:346.
317. Schold SC, Cho ES, Somasundaram M, et al. Subacute motor neuronopathy: a remote effect of lymphoma. Ann Neurol 1979;5:271.
318. O'Neill JH, Murray NMF, Newsom-Davis J. The Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. A review of 50 cases. Brain 1988;111:577.
319. Leys K, Lang B, Johnston I, et al. Calcium channel autoantibodies in the Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. Ann Neurol 1991;29:307.
320. Fukunaga H, Engel AG, Lang B, et al. Passive transfer of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome with IgG from man to mouse depletes the presynaptic membrane active zones. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1983;80:7636.
321. Plotz PH, Dalakas M, Leff RL, et al. Current concepts in the idiopathic inflammatory myopathies: polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and related disorders. Ann Intern Med 1989;111:143.
322. Dalakas MC, ed. Polymyositis and dermatomyositis. Boston: Butterworths, 1988.
323. Folli F, Solimena M, Cofiell R, et al. Autoantibodies to a 128-kd synaptic protein in three women with stiff-man syndrome and breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1993;328:546.
324. Levin M, Mazaffar T, Al-Lozi M, et al. Paraneoplastic necrotizing myopathy: clinical and pathologic features. Neurology 1998;50:764.
325. Oh S. Paraneoplastic vasculitis of the peripheral nervous system. Neurol Clin 1997;15:849.
326. Altman RD, Gray RG. Bone disease. In: Katzwa WA, ed. Diagnosis and management of rheumatic diseases. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1988:620.
327. Martinez-Lavin M, Matucci-Cerinic M, Jajic I, Pineda C. Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy: consensus on its definition, classification, assessment and diagnostic criteria. J Rheumatol
1993;20:1386.
328. Matucci-Cerinic M, Lotti T, Jajic I, et al. The clinical spectrum of pachydermoperiostosis (primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy). Medicine 1991;70:208.
329. Caldwell DS, McCallum RM. Rheumatic manifestations of cancer. Med Clin North Am 1986;70:385.
330. Martinez-Lavin M, Weisman MH, Pineda CJ. Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy. In: Schumacher HR Jr, ed. Primer on rheumatic diseases. 9th ed. Atlanta: Arthritis Foundation, 1988:240.
331. Matucci-Cerinic M, Ceruso M, Lotti T, et al. The medical and surgical treatment of finger clubbing and hypertrophic osteoarthropathy. A blind study with coltrosine and a surgical approach to
finger clubbing resection. Clin Exp Rheumatol 1992;10(Suppl 7):67.
332. Pitt P, Mowat A, Williams R, Hamilton E. Hepatic hypertrophic osteoarthropathy in liver transplantation. Ann Rheumatol Dis 1994;53:338.
333. Sansores RH, Villalba-Caloca J, Romerez-Venegas A, et al. Reversal of digital clubbing after lung transplantation. Chest 1995;107:283.
334. Greenberg SB, Taber L. Fever of unknown origin. In: Mackowiak PA, ed. Fever: basic mechanisms in management. New York: Raven Press, 1991:183.
335. Bodey GP. Overview of the problem of infections in the immunocompromised host. Am J Med 1985;79(Suppl 5B):56.
336. Wade JC. Management of infection in patients with acute leukemia. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1993;7:293.
337. Pizzo PA, Robichaud KJ, Wesley R, Commers JR. Fever in the pediatric and young adult patient with cancer. Medicine 1982;61:153.
338. Friocourt L, Jouquan J, Khoury S, et al. Fever in adult renal cancer. In: Renal tumors: proceedings of the first international symposium on kidney tumors. New York: Alan R. Liss, 1982:283.
339. Ashraf SJ, Arya SC, El-Sayed M, et al. A profile of primary hepatocellular carcinoma patients in the gizan area of Saudi Arabia. Cancer 1986;58:2163.
340. Larson EB, Featherstone HJ, Petersdorf RG. Fever of undetermined origin: diagnosis and follow-up of 105 cases, 19701980. Medicine 1982;61:269.
341. Dominguez EA, Rupp ME, Preagim LC. Fever without neutropenia. In: Abeloff MD, Armitage JO, Lichter AS, Niederhuber JE, eds. Clinical oncology. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1995.
342. Bodel P, Ralph P, Wenc K, et al. Endogenous pyrogen production by Hodgkin's disease and human histiocytic lymphoma cell lines in vivo. J Clin Invest 1980;65:514.
343. Dinarello C, Cannon J, Wolff S, et al. Tumor necrosis factor (cachectin) is an endogenous pyrogen and induces production of interleukin 1. J Exp Med 1986;163:1433.
344. Dinarello C, Bunn P. Fever. Semin Oncol 1997;24:288.

345. Warshaw AL, Carey RW, Robinson DR. Control of fever associated with visceral cancers by indomethacin. Surgery 1981;89:414.
346. Chang JC, Gross HM. Utility of naproxen in the differential diagnosis of fever of undetermined origin in patients with cancer. Am J Med 1983;76:597.

CHAPTER 48 Cancer of Unknown Primary Site
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 48
Cancer of Unknown Primary Site
FRANK A. GRECO
JOHN D. HAINSWORTH
Introduction
Poorly Differentiated Neoplasms of Unknown Primary Site
Immunoperoxidase Tumor Staining
Electron Microscopy
Genetic Analysis
Adenocarcinoma of Unknown Primary Site
Clinical Characteristics
Pathology
Diagnostic Evaluation
Treatment
Squamous Carcinoma of Unknown Primary Site
Squamous Carcinoma Involving Cervical and Supraclavicular Lymph Nodes
Squamous Carcinoma Involving Inguinal Lymph Nodes
Squamous Carcinoma Metastatic to Other Sites
Poorly Differentiated Carcinoma (With or Without Features of Adenocarcinoma) of Unknown Primary Site
Clinical Characteristics
Pathologic Evaluation
Diagnostic Evaluation
Treatment
Neuroendocrine Carcinoma of Unknown Primary Site
Low-Grade Neuroendocrine Carcinoma
Small Cell Carcinoma
Poorly Differentiated Neuroendocrine Carcinoma
Special Issues
Carcinoma of Unknown Primary Site as a Distinct Clinicopathologic Entity
Extragonadal Germ Cell Cancer Syndrome
Single Site of Neoplasm
Unsuspected Gestational Choriocarcinoma
Isolated Pleural Effusion
Germ Cell Tumors with Metastases of Other Histologies
Melanoma and “Amelanotic” Melanoma
Evolving Role of Prognostic Factors: Therapeutic Implications
“Shrinking Population” of Patients with Cancer of Unknown Primary Site
Conclusion: Future Trends
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Cancers of unknown primary site are common. Their exact incidence is unknown, because many of such patients are “assigned” other diagnoses (an issue discussed
later in Carcinoma of Unknown Primary Site As a Distinct Clinicopathologic Entity ) and are, therefore, not represented accurately in tumor registries. Nonetheless,
unknown primary cancers accounted for 2% of all cancer diagnoses reported by Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results registries between 1973 and 1987. 1 We
believe that a more realistic estimate of the incidence of these patients is 6% of all invasive cancers in the United States per year (approximately 80,000 to 90,000
patients). Within this heterogeneous patient group are found several clinical presentations and histologic tumor types. The largest group of patients has metastatic
carcinoma of unknown primary site. Others have equivocal histologic diagnoses and tumors that create difficulty in classification using the time-honored method of
light-microscopical examination. Specialized pathologic studies are essential in delineating the type of neoplasm present in many of these patients and, at times, may
suggest the site of origin. Extreme heterogeneity in clinical presentations, histologic appearances, and natural histories has rendered systematic evaluation of such
patients difficult, and an established base of knowledge has developed slowly. Only a few investigators have been interested in detailed studies of these patients.
Therefore, past information suffers from many generalizations and is not representative of the entire patient population. These data are derived from grouping all
patients and deal primarily with results of various chemotherapeutic regimens.
Over the last few decades, several important oncologic issues have changed. Combination chemotherapy, often used with surgery or radiation therapy, has proved to
be potentially curative for selected patients with several metastatic tumors. In addition, palliation and prolongation of survival have been demonstrated after systemic
therapy for patients with many other tumor types. Furthermore, treatment continues to evolve and improve. Such therapeutic improvements have relevance for
patients with cancers of unknown primary site, because some have these responsive neoplasms (i.e., with occult primaries or atypical histologies).
Diagnostic pathology has improved remarkably. More routine use of electron microscopy and the emerging fields of immunohistochemistry and molecular genetics are
contributing to more precise diagnosis of neoplasms. Now possible is defining more reliably the histology and, at least in selected patients, the origin and biology of
neoplasms. In concert with evolving diagnostic techniques, several clinical syndromes and features are being recognized and are helping physicians to understand
and better manage patients with unknown primary cancer. Oncologists are rethinking issues involving patients with cancers of unknown primary site.
Appropriate patient management requires an understanding of several clinicopathologic features that help to identify patients with more responsive tumors. Typically,
patients with cancer of unknown primary site develop symptoms or signs at a metastatic site, and the diagnosis is made by biopsy of a metastatic lesion. History,
physical examination, and other appropriate evaluation of such patients fail to identify the primary site. The initial biopsy should be generous, because many studies
may be required. Routine light-microscopical histology establishes the neoplastic process and provides a practical classification system by which the patient
subsequently can be evaluated and managed. The broad category of cancers of unknown primary site offers four major light-microscopical diagnoses: (1) poorly
differentiated neoplasm, (2) well-differentiated and moderately well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, (3) squamous cell carcinoma, and (4) poorly differentiated
carcinoma (with or without features of adenocarcinoma). These diagnoses vary with respect to clinical characteristics, recommended diagnostic evaluation, treatment,
and prognosis. The approximate size of the various groups and subsets of patients are illustrated according to clinicopathologic evaluation in Figure 48-1.

FIGURE 48-1. Relative size of various clinical and histologic subgroups of patients as determined by optimal clinical and pathologic evaluation. PDA, poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma; PDC, poorly differentiated carcinoma; PDMN, poorly differentiated malignant neoplasm. (From Hainsworth JD, Greco FA. Treatment of

patients with cancer of an unknown primary site. N Engl J Med 1995;329:257, with permission.)

POORLY DIFFERENTIATED NEOPLASMS OF UNKNOWN PRIMARY SITE
If pathologists are confident of a cancer but cannot differentiate a general category of neoplasm (e.g., carcinoma, lymphoma, melanoma, sarcoma), it is designated as
a poorly differentiated neoplasm of unknown primary site. A more precise diagnosis is essential in patients having this type of cancer, because many have responsive
tumors. Approximately 5% of all patients with cancers of unknown primary site (nearly 4000 U.S. patients annually) present with this diagnosis on initial
light-microscopical appearance, but few remain without a defined lineage after specialized pathologic study. The most frequent tumor for which effective therapy is
available is non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. In reported series, 35% to 65% of poorly differentiated neoplasms were found to be lymphomas after further pathologic
study.2,3,4 and 5 Most of the remaining tumors in this group are carcinomas. Melanoma and sarcoma together account for fewer than 15% of all tumors in such patients.
The evaluation of poorly differentiated tumors requires specialized pathologic studies. Immunoperoxidase tumor staining, electron microscopy, and genetic analysis
can be helpful in the differential diagnosis. The most common cause of a nonspecific light-microscopical diagnosis is an inadequate or poorly handled biopsy
specimen. If possible, fine-needle aspiration biopsy should not be performed in affected patients as an initial diagnostic procedure, because the histologic pattern is
not preserved and the ability to perform special studies is limited. We have documented several instances in which a fine-needle aspiration has suggested a specific
diagnosis, which was proved later to be incorrect by an incisional biopsy. Frequently, a more definitive diagnosis can be made by obtaining a larger biopsy.
Communication with pathologists is important, as special tissue processing may be necessary for some pathologic studies. In addition, all clinical information also may
help pathologists to narrow down, or become more certain of, diagnoses. Some neoplasms remain unclassifiable by light microscopy, even with an adequate biopsy
specimen. Additional pathologic study always is indicated in such cases.
IMMUNOPEROXIDASE TUMOR STAINING
Immunoperoxidase staining is the specialized technique most widely available for the classification of neoplasms. Often, immunoperoxidase staining can be done on
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue, which broadens its applicability, rendering repeat biopsy unnecessary in some patients. Immunoperoxidase antibodies are
either monoclonal or polyclonal and are directed at cell components or products, which can include enzymes [e.g., prostatic acid phosphate, neuron-specific enolase
(NSE)]; normal tissue components [e.g., keratin, desmin, vimentin, neurofilaments, common leukocyte antigen (CLA)]; hormones and hormone receptors (e.g.,
estrogen receptor); oncofetal antigens [e.g., a-fetoprotein (AFP)]; carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA); and other substances (e.g., S-100 protein, chromogranin). Many
new antibodies are being developed, and this area of diagnostic pathology is a dynamic and evolving field. Usually, specific diagnoses cannot be made on the basis
of immunoperoxidase staining alone, because none of these reagents is directed at tumor-specific antigens. Staining also can be extremely variable, and a particular
stain may be negative; yet, other data may nonetheless support a particular tumor type. For example, a neuroendocrine carcinoma does not stain invariably with all
neuroendocrine reagents. Therefore, results must be interpreted in conjunction with the light-microscopical appearance and the clinical picture. Some
immunoperoxidase staining patterns that are useful in the differential diagnosis of neoplasms are outlined in Table 48-1.

TABLE 48-1. Immunoperoxidase Tumor-Staining Patterns Useful in the Differential Diagnosis of Poorly Differentiated Neoplasms

Usually, several important questions can be answered by immunoperoxidase staining. The CLA stain usually can be used to make the important distinction between
lymphoma and carcinoma.6,7 Staining for NSE, chromogranin, and synaptophysin can suggest a neuroendocrine carcinoma (e.g., small cell lung cancer, carcinoid,
islet cell tumor, etc.). 8,9 and 10 Staining for prostate-specific antigen (PSA) strongly suggests prostate carcinoma in a man with metastatic adenocarcinoma. 10,11 Certain
staining characteristics can suggest breast carcinoma (e.g., estrogen or progesterone receptors, gross cystic fluid protein 15), amelanotic melanoma (e.g., positive
staining for S-100 protein, vimentin, HMB-45), or sarcoma (e.g., positive staining for desmin, vimentin, factor VIII antigen). 12,13,14,15 and 16 Staining for human chorionic
gonadotropin (HCG) or AFP can suggest the diagnosis of a germ cell tumor in an appropriate clinical situation. 17,18
Several problems are associated with immunoperoxidase stains. Technical expertise is required to perform these tests accurately and reproducibly, and proper
interpretation requires an experienced pathologist. Appropriate control slides are stained and examined concurrently, because nonspecific staining occasionally is a
problem. Care must be taken to avoid overinterpretation, because no staining pattern is entirely specific. Certain stains, particularly CLA and PSA, are relatively
specific; however, false-positive and false-negative results can occur with any of these stains. For example, some carcinomas stain with vimentin, some sarcomas
stain with keratin, and a wide variety of carcinomas (other than neuroendocrine and germ cell tumors) stain with NSE and HCG, respectively.
In some circumstances, diagnoses based on immunoperoxidase staining in patients with poorly differentiated neoplasms of unknown primary site can be used to plan
therapy and to predict outcome. Undifferentiated neoplasms identified as lymphoma on the basis of positive CLA staining respond well to the combination
chemotherapy used for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. 2 In 35 patients with equivocal routine light-microscopical histology and positive CLA staining, treatment with a
variety of standard lymphoma regimens results in an actuarial disease-free survival of 45% at 30 months. These patients' outcome was similar to that of a group of
concurrently treated patients who had non-Hodgkin's lymphomas with typical light-microscopical histology. In patients whose diagnoses were based on
immunoperoxidase staining with tumors other than lymphoma, only limited data exist concerning treatment outcome.
ELECTRON MICROSCOPY
A diagnosis can be made by electron microscopy in some poorly differentiated neoplasms. Electron microscopy is not widely available, requires special tissue fixation,
is relatively expensive, and should be reserved for the study of neoplasms with unclear lineage after routine light microscopy and immunoperoxidase staining. Like
immunoperoxidase staining, electron microscopy is reliable in differentiating lymphoma from carcinoma. It may be superior to immunoperoxidase staining for the
identification of poorly differentiated sarcoma. Other structures, such as neurosecretory granules (neuroendocrine tumors) or premelanosomes (melanoma), can
suggest a particular tumor. Often, undifferentiated tumors have nonspecific ultrastructural features; therefore, the absence of a particular ultrastructural finding cannot
be used to rule out a specific diagnosis. Some neoplasms defy further classification despite specialized pathologic study.
In some instances, electron microscopy provides evidence for adenocarcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma. Features of adenocarcinoma include intercellular and
intracellular lumina and surface microvilli. Squamous carcinomas are characterized by frequent and prominent desmosomes and by prominent bundles of prekeratin
filaments in the adjacent cytoplasm. Usually, determining the origin of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma or squamous carcinoma is not possible by
electron-microscopical features. Treatment implications are unclear for adenocarcinoma and squamous carcinoma recognized only by ultrastructural features.
GENETIC ANALYSIS
The identification of chromosomal abnormalities and genetic changes associated with neoplasms is becoming increasingly important. The use of tumor-specific

chromosomal abnormalities in diagnosis still is limited, but future research likely will identify many additional specific genetic abnormalities.
The biology of the primary tumor in patients with unknown primary neoplasms remains an enigma. Certainly, these tumors possess a metastatic phenotype. Some of
these primary tumors may regress or involute or grow very slowly. Possibly some arise from embryonic epithelial “rest cells” that did not complete their appropriate
migration. Often, karyotypic analysis of metastatic carcinomas demonstrates diverse multiple complex abnormalities, and is not yet helpful (in most instances) for
diagnosis or classification, but is more representative of advanced neoplasms of many types (e.g., various chromosome 1p abnormalities). 19 Overexpression of p53,
bcl-2, C-myc, Ras, and Her-2-neu has been observed in unknown primary carcinomas 20,21 and 22; however, controversy continues regarding the frequency of expression
and the clinical relevance. Tumors that strongly express p53 and bcl-2 may be more responsive to platinum-based chemotherapy. 21 Recently, we showed that 10% of
the poorly differentiated carcinomas are strongly positive for Her-2-neu staining (F. A. Greco and J. D. Hainsworth, unpublished data). Patients affected by these
tumors will be reasonable candidates for an anti-Her-2-neu antibody therapeutic trial. Recently, DNA microarrays have been studied in acute leukemias, 23 and this
technique holds promise as a method of classifying neoplasms on the basis of gene expression monitoring, perhaps identifying specific genetic patterns or
fingerprints independent of previous histologic and biologic knowledge. In the future, this and other techniques may identify more specific tumor lineages or primary
tumor types subject to specific therapies in patients with unknown primary cancers. On the other hand, the pathogenesis of some carcinomas of unknown primary site
may arise from specific genetic lesions. Possibly, many such tumors have similar gene expression distinct from specific carcinomas of recognized primary sites. This
possibility is suggested by the unusual occurrence of metastatic adenocarcinoma of unknown primary site in monozygotic twin brothers with a primary
immunodeficiency disorder (X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome). 24 The technology is now available to classify unknown primary carcinoma by gene expression, a technique
that also has the potential to identify their primary origin and to provide more specific therapy by pharmacogenomic evaluation. As more precise and specific genetic
lesions are identified in primary neoplasms and their metastases (e.g., lung, breast, ovary, germ cell), we can expect these data to provide more useful diagnostic and
therapeutic information for unknown primary cancers. The identification of germ cell tumors already has met this expectation.
Chromosomal abnormalities have been well characterized in several hematopoietic neoplasms. Most B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas are associated with
tumor-specific immunoglobulin gene rearrangements, and typical chromosomal changes have been identified in some B-cell and T-cell lymphomas and in Hodgkin's
disease. 25,26 In the rare instance when the diagnosis of lymphoma cannot be established definitively with either immunoperoxidase staining or electron microscopy,
detection of chromosomal translocations t(14:18); t(8:14); or t(11:14) or the presence of an immunoglobulin gene rearrangement provides definitive diagnostic
information.
A few other nonrandom chromosomal rearrangements associated with nonlymphoid tumors have been identified. A chromosomal translocation, t(11:22), has been
found in peripheral neuroepitheliomas and frequently in Ewing's tumor. 27,28 An isochromosome of the short arm of chromosome 12 (i12p) and other chromosome 12
abnormalities are found in a large percentage of germ cell tumors. 29,30 A recently developed genomic hybridization technique can detect extra 12p material in
paraffin-embedded tissue specimens. 31 This technique likely will improve the applicability of testing, as tissue culture is not necessary. Several other nonrandom
cytogenetic abnormalities found in other tumors include t(2:13) in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma; 3p deletion in small cell lung cancer; 1p deletion in neuroblastoma;
t(X:18) in synovial sarcoma; and 11p deletion in Wilms' tumor. Polymerase chain reaction has been used to identify Epstein-Barr viral genomes in the tumor cells of
patients with cervical lymph node metastases of unknown primary site, suggesting nasopharyngeal primaries. 32 Among head and neck tumors, Epstein-Barr virus has
been associated only with nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Because some of these tumor types discussed are poorly differentiated and often are metastatic at the time of
diagnosis, identification of these genetic changes may provide a specific diagnosis. Genetic diagnosis has been applied successfully to a subset of patients with
carcinoma of unknown primary site (see Poorly Differentiated Carcinoma, later in this chapter).

ADENOCARCINOMA OF UNKNOWN PRIMARY SITE
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Well-differentiated and moderately well-differentiated adenocarcinoma are the most frequent light-microscopical diagnoses in patients with carcinoma of unknown
primary site, accounting for approximately 60% of patients (some 50,000 U.S. patients annually). Typically, patients with this diagnosis are elderly and have
metastatic tumors at multiple sites. Frequently, the sites of tumor involvement determine the clinical presentation; common metastatic sites include lymph nodes, liver,
lung, and bone.
Often, the clinical course is dominated by symptoms and signs related to the metastases. The primary site becomes obvious in only 15% to 20% of patients during
life.33 At autopsy, however, a primary site is detected in 70% to 80% of patients. The most common primary sites identified at autopsy are the lung and pancreas,
accounting for approximately 40%. 34 Other gastrointestinal sites (e.g., stomach, colon, liver) are frequent, although adenocarcinomas from a wide variety of other
primary sites occasionally are encountered. Adenocarcinomas of the breast, prostate, and ovary are rare in patients in this group. 34 Also, an unexpected metastatic
pattern seems to be observed; for example, occult pancreatic primaries more frequently involve bone rather than liver.
Historically, as a group, patients with metastatic adenocarcinoma of unknown primary site have a very poor prognosis, with inexorable progression and a median
survival of only 3 to 4 months. This finding is not surprising, considering the fact that many such patients harbor lung or gastrointestinal neoplasms. Many patients in
this group have widespread metastases and poor performance status at the time of diagnosis. However, stereotyping all patients with adenocarcinoma of unknown
primary site would be an error, because within this large group are subsets of patients with more favorable prognoses. In addition, chemotherapy has improved
considerably in the last 5 years, and many patients now candidates for chemotherapy have a reasonable expectation of clinical benefit and improved survival.
PATHOLOGY
The diagnosis of well-differentiated or moderately well-differentiated adenocarcinoma is based on light-microscopical features, particularly the formation of glandular
structures by neoplastic cells. We have considered patients with well-differentiated or moderately well-differentiated adenocarcinoma as one group. These histologic
features are shared by adenocarcinomas, and the site of the primary tumor usually cannot be determined by histologic examination. Typically, certain histologic
features are associated with a particular tumor type (e.g., papillary features with ovarian cancer and signet-ring cells with gastric cancer). However, these
characteristics are not specific enough to be used as definitive evidence of the primary site. Immunoperoxidase stains and electron microscopy are of limited value in
identifying the site of origin of most well-differentiated or moderately well-differentiated adenocarcinomas. The stain for PSA is an exception because it is relatively
specific for prostate cancer, and it should be used in men with suggestive clinical findings. Positive immunoperoxidase staining for estrogen or progesterone receptors
and gross cystic fluid protein 15 suggests metastatic breast cancer in women with metastatic adenocarcinoma. Occasionally, neuroendocrine stains (e.g., NSE,
chromogranin, synaptophysin) can identify an unsuspected neuroendocrine neoplasm. Several other stains or batteries of stains have been evaluated, 35,36,37 and 38 but
none are truly tumor-specific and, if used, should be used in connection with all other clinical data.
The diagnosis of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma should be viewed differently, because some affected patients are distinctive in tumor biology and
responsiveness to systemic therapy (see Poorly Differentiated Carcinoma, later in this chapter). Usually, this diagnosis is made when only minimal or questionable
glandular formation is seen on histologic examination or, on occasion, when tumors exhibit positive staining for mucin but have no “glandular features.”
Well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, and poorly differentiated carcinoma are diagnoses that probably represent parts of a
spectrum of tumor differentiation rather than specific, sharply demarcated entities. These histologies represent a heterogeneous group of tumors with various biologic
and clinical properties. Different pathologists may use slightly different criteria for making each of these three diagnoses. Therefore, an appropriate approach is to
perform additional study with immunoperoxidase staining or electron microscopy in all poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas.
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
An exhaustive search for the primary site is not indicated because it rarely can be found. Therefore, the clinical evaluation should be performed to evaluate any
suspicious clinical symptoms or signs and to determine the extent of metastatic disease. Initial evaluation should include a thorough history and physical examination,
standard laboratory screening tests (i.e., complete blood cell count, liver function tests, serum creatinine, urinalysis), and chest radiography. All men should have a
serum PSA determination, and all women should undergo mammography. Computed tomography (CT) scans of the abdomen can identify a primary site in 10% to
35% of affected patients and frequently are useful in identifying additional sites of metastatic disease. 39,40 Additional symptoms, signs, or abnormal physical and
laboratory findings should be evaluated with appropriate diagnostic studies. Extensive imaging evaluation of asymptomatic areas rarely is useful in identifying a
primary site, is expensive, and often results in confusing or false-positive results.
Positron emission tomography (PET) may be an important addition for the evaluation of potential primary sites. These data are very limited now, but one small series

identified likely primary sites in 7 of 29 patients (24%). 41 The availability of various tumor markers (CEA; CA-15-3; CA-19-9; CA-125, B-HCG, a-fetoprotein) has not
proved, in general, to be useful for diagnosis or prognosis but can be used to follow the response to therapy. 42,43
TREATMENT
The group of patients with adenocarcinoma of unknown primary site contains several clinically defined subgroups for which useful, rather specific therapy can be
given. Therapy can be useful also for some patients who are not a part of one of these subgroups, as empiric chemotherapy recently has improved.
Peritoneal Carcinomatosis in Women
Adenocarcinoma causing diffuse peritoneal involvement is typical of ovarian carcinoma, although carcinomas from the gastrointestinal tract, lung, or breast
occasionally can produce this clinical picture. In several women described with diffuse peritoneal carcinomatosis, no primary site was found in the ovaries or
elsewhere in the abdomen at the time of laparotomy. 44,45,46,47,48 and 49 These patients frequently had histologic features typical of ovarian carcinoma, such as papillary
configuration or psammoma bodies. This syndrome has been termed multifocal extraovarian serous carcinoma or peritoneal papillary serous carcinoma. These
patients have a primary peritoneal carcinoma. In the early 1980s, several anecdotal case reports documented excellent responses to cisplatin-based chemotherapy in
women with this syndrome.44,45,46 and 47 This tumor is more common in women with a family history of ovarian cancer, and preventive oophorectomy, as expected, does
not protect them from this disease. 48 As for ovarian carcinoma, the incidence of primary peritoneal carcinoma is increased in women with BRCA1 mutations.49
Table 48-2 summarizes the results of seven series including a total of 258 women with this syndrome. 50,51,52,53,54,55 and 56 The clinical features are similar to ovarian
carcinoma or abdominal carcinomatosis. Many patients have elevated serum levels of CA-125 antigen. An occasional patient will present with pleural effusion only.
Metastases outside the peritoneal cavity are unusual, and their histologic features are similar to those of ovarian carcinoma (usually papillary configurations but also
other histologies, including poorly differentiated carcinoma). The initial treatment plan for most patients included laparotomy with surgical cytoreduction, and the
majority of these patients was treated with cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy. A few patients received cisplatin, chlorambucil, or melphalan alone. Recent
series have documented the activity of paclitaxel. 56 A summary of the results in 258 women are as follows: Twenty-two percent (range, 10% to 40%) of all patients had
a complete response to chemotherapy, median survival was 18 months (range, 11 to 24 months), and long-term survival (more than 2 years) was 16% (range, 6% to
26%).

TABLE 48-2. Therapy for Women with Peritoneal Adenocarcinomatosis of Unknown Primary Site

Frequently, women with metastatic adenocarcinoma involving the peritoneal surface and no obvious primary site have biologically distinct tumors and often are
responsive to chemotherapy. The site of origin of these carcinomas likely is the peritoneal surface (primary peritoneal carcinoma). Because ovarian epithelium is in
part an extension of the mesothelial surface, some carcinomas arising from the peritoneal (mesothelial) surface may share a similar lineage (Müllerian derivation) and
biology with ovarian carcinoma. Certainly, this possibility should be considered and would not be surprising (e.g., papillary mesothelioma). Optimal management of
these patients includes aggressive surgical cytoreduction followed by postoperative chemotherapy. Cisplatin or carboplatin plus paclitaxel considered optimal for the
treatment of advanced ovarian cancer would seem a reasonable choice for initial chemotherapy, and the results are likely to be similar to ovarian carcinoma. 57,58
Approximately 20% of the patients in this group have complete responses to therapy, and some 16% have prolonged disease-free survival.
We have encountered a few men with this syndrome (papillary adenocarcinoma), but confirming the precise biology is difficult, and the lesions may be metastatic from
an occult primary tumor arising elsewhere. A trial of chemotherapy also should be considered.
Women with Axillary Lymph Node Metastases
Breast cancer should be suspected in women who have axillary lymph node involvement with adenocarcinoma. Occasionally, the histologic finding is poorly
differentiated carcinoma. Men with occult breast cancer can present in this fashion but are rare. The initial lymph node biopsy should include measurement of
estrogen and progesterone receptors. Elevated levels provide strong evidence for the diagnosis of breast cancer. 59 If no other metastases are identified, these
patients may have stage II breast cancer with an occult primary, which is potentially curable with appropriate therapy. A few reports using PET and magnetic
resonance imaging scans have identified occult breast cancer even with normal mammography results. 60,61 Additional study is necessary before these procedures are
recommended routinely in this setting. Modified radical mastectomy has been recommended in affected patients, even when physical examination and mammography
results are normal. An occult breast primary has been identified after mastectomy in 44% to 80% of patients. 62,63 and 64 Usually, primary tumors are less than 2 cm in
diameter; in occasional patients, only noninvasive tumor is identified in the breast. 65 Prognosis after primary therapy is similar to that of other patients with stage II
breast cancer.62,63,64,65 and 66 Radiation therapy to the breast after axillary lymph node dissection is an effective alternative primary therapy. Adjuvant systemic
chemotherapy is indicated in this setting and is similar to standard therapy for stage II breast cancer.
Women with metastatic sites in addition to the axillary lymph nodes may have metastatic breast cancer with an occult primary tumor. Such women should be managed
as if they have metastatic breast cancer. Elevated serum levels of CA-15-3 or CA-27-29 suggest the possibility of breast cancer. Estrogen and progesterone receptor
status is of particular importance because those with positive hormone receptors may derive major palliative benefit from hormonal therapy, chemotherapy, or both.
Men with Possible Prostate Carcinoma
PSA concentrations should be measured in men with adenocarcinoma of unknown primary site. These tumors also can be stained for PSA. Even when clinical
features (i.e., metastatic patterns) do not suggest prostate cancer, a positive PSA (serum or tumor stain) is reason for a trial of hormonal therapy. 67,68 Osteoblastic
bone metastases also are an indication for an empiric hormone trial, regardless of the PSA findings.
Chemotherapy for Metastatic Adenocarcinoma of Unknown Primary Site
Approximately 90% of patients with well-differentiated or moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of unknown primary site are not listed in one of the several
foregoing clinical subgroups. In the past, chemotherapy of various types has produced low response rates, very few complete responses, and no long-term
survivals. 69
The results of chemotherapy in reported series of 10 or more patients from 1964 to 1991 have been reviewed. A total of 1102 patients were reported in 33
trials.33,70,71,72,73,74,75,76,77,78,79,80,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90,91,92 and 93 The only single agent studied adequately was 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), with response rates ranging from 0%
to 16%.33,70,71 Cisplatin has been reported as a single drug in only one series, 72 with a response rate of 19%. Other single agents (including methotrexate,
doxorubicin, mitomycin C, vincristine, and semustine) that have been reported produced response rates from 6% to 16%. 73 The FAM regimen (5-FU, doxorubicin, and
mitomycin C) and various modifications have been used often, their use based on the demonstrated activity of these combination regimens in some gastrointestinal

cancers.74,75,76,77,78,79,80,81,82,83,84 and 85 Response rates varied from 8% to 39% (mean, 20%); complete responders registered fewer than 1%; median survival was 4 to
15 months (mean, 6 months); survival beyond 2 years was rare; and disease-free survival beyond 3 years was nonexistent.
These data should be viewed with several factors in mind. Some of the series are small, and large randomized comparisons are lacking. In addition to those with
adenocarcinomas, some patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma of unknown primary site were included in many of these series. The patients did not undergo
standard evaluation or comparison in regard to sites of metastasis (nodal vs. visceral), performance status, gender, or age.
Cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy has not been evaluated adequately. However, two small randomized comparisons of doxorubicin with or without
cisplatin 74,77 (subject to the many confounding factors previously mentioned) demonstrated no difference in median survival but more toxicity in the cisplatin-containing
arm. A third, more recent, small randomized trial 94 did show the superiority of cisplatin, epirubicin, and mitomycin C as compared to mitomycin C alone (median
survival, 9.4 months vs. 5.4 months). We also have seen some useful clinical responses to cisplatin or carboplatin-based chemotherapy and to 5-FU plus leucovorin.
The combination of 5-FU and leucovorin has not been evaluated adequately but does not appear active in patients with liver metastasis arising from an unknown
primary site, 95 a group most likely to have gastrointestinal primaries.
Several retrospective analyses have identified clinical and pathologic features associated with a more favorable response to empiric chemotherapy. 96,97,98 and 99 Some
of these features include tumor location in lymph nodes, female gender, and poorly differentiated histology. Patients with liver or bone involvement have a relatively
poor prognosis.96
Recent chemotherapy has improved considerably for patients who have adenocarcinoma and poorly differentiated carcinoma but do not fit into a specific “treatable”
subset. The introduction of several new drugs with rather broad-spectrum antineoplastic activity is changing the standard treatment for patients having any of several
common epithelial cancers. These drugs include the taxanes, gemcitabine, vinorelbine, and the topoisomerase I inhibitors. We have completed several phase II trials
incorporating paclitaxel and docetaxel into first-line therapy for patients with carcinoma of unknown primary site. The initial trial included 71 patients, and the
preliminary results of the first 55 patients were published. 100 The chemotherapy regimen, patients' characteristics, and treatment results are summarized in Table 48-3,
and the survival curve is shown in Figure 48-2 for all 71 patients (F. A. Greco and J. D. Hainsworth, unpublished data). With a minimum follow-up of 34 months, the
median survival was 11 months, and the 1-, 2-, and 3-year survivals were 48%, 20%, and 14%, respectively. This paclitaxel-based regimen delivered in a multicenter
community-based setting (Minnie Pearl Research Network) was well tolerated and easily administered in the outpatient area. Only patients who had carcinoma of
unknown primary site (any histology) and were not in a previously defined treatable subset, with the exception of poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma,
were eligible for this trial. The response rate of 66 evaluable patients was 48%, with ten complete responses (15%). The toxicity was moderate, primarily
myelosuppression, but with only 12 hospitalizations for fever-neutropenia and no treatment-related deaths. Long-term follow-up for these 71 patients (minimum
follow-up, 34 months) is of interest; the median survival was 11 months, and the median 1-, 2-, and 3-year actual survivals of patients with complete response (20
months, 80%, 40%, 20%, respectively) was significantly longer ( P = .025) than those with partial response or stable disease (11 months, 50%, 15%, 10%,
respectively). This latter group survived significantly longer ( P = .033) than did patients who progressed on therapy ( Fig. 48-3).

TABLE 48-3. Summary of Phase II Trial of Paclitaxel, Carboplatin, and Extended-Schedule Oral Etoposide

FIGURE 48-2. Survival curve for 71 patients with adenocarcinomas or poorly differentiated carcinoma. Patients with poor prognostic features were selected. The
minimum follow-up is 34 months; median survival is 11 months; 1-, 2-, and 3-year survivals are 48%, 20%, and 14%, respectively.

FIGURE 48-3. Survival curve for patients with complete response (CR) was significantly better (0.025) than for those with partial response (PR) or stable tumor, which
in turn was better (0.033) than for those with progressive tumor.

Subsequently, we turned our attention to docetaxel and have performed two sequential phase II trials in the same patient population with either docetaxel (75 mg/m 2)
and cisplatin (75 mg/m 2) given every 3 weeks in 26 patients or docetaxel (65 mg/m 2) and carboplatin [area under the curve (AUC) = 5] every 3 weeks in 47 patients (F.
A. Greco and J. D. Hainsworth, unpublished data January 1999). These combinations also were active, but the docetaxel-plus-cisplatin regimen was associated with
substantial gastrointestinal toxicity, and the carboplatin regimen was associated with more myelosuppression. More than 20% of all patients responded to these
regimens, with no differences for those with well-differentiated adenocarcinoma or poorly differentiated carcinoma. Although the follow-up is shorter than that of the
paclitaxel-based trial, the 1 and 2 year survivals are similar. By combining these taxane-based chemotherapy trials, a total of 144 patients (71 on paclitaxel regimen,
73 on docetaxel regimens) have been treated and followed up ( Fig. 48-4). Some preliminary analysis of these patients is of interest. The median follow-up is 25

months, and median survival is 10 months, with actuarial survival at 1, 2, 3, and 4 years of 42%, 22%, 17%, and 17%, respectively. Complete responders, partial
responders, and stable disease patients survive significantly longer than do those with progressive disease, and the study revealed a major trend for improvement in
survival for poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas (too few in number to reach statistical significance). No difference was seen in survival for
adenocarcinoma versus the poorly differentiated carcinomas. However, patients with known favorable subsets were not included in these trials. Women survived
significantly longer than did men, and those with performance status 0, 1 (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group scale) lived longer than did those with performance
status 2. The progression-free survival of these 144 patients reveals that a small number of patients remain alive without progressive cancer: 1 year, 16%; 2 years,
9%; and 3 years, 9%. A subsequent, recently reported trial by others of 72 patients confirmed the activity of paclitaxel and carboplatin with a 41% response rate. 101
The median survival had not been reached but was greater than 8 months.

FIGURE 48-4. Survival curve for 144 patients who received taxane-based combination chemotherapy. With a median follow-up of 25 months, the median survival is
10 months, and the 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-year survivals are 42%, 22%, 17%, and 17%, respectively.

These data are encouraging. The patients who have more common unknown primary adenocarcinoma or poorly differentiated carcinoma but do not fit into any
previously defined “treatable” subset now can attain substantial clinical benefits from taxane-based combination chemotherapy. Despite the fact that randomized trials
still are lacking, both the median survival and 1-, 2-, and 3-year survival results are superior to the results seen in the past and are now comparable to the survivals of
several other groups of advanced carcinoma patients receiving various types of chemotherapy (e.g., extensive-stage small cell lung cancer and advanced non–small
cell lung cancer). Certainly, vast room for improvement exists, and basic and clinical research remain a priority for further enhancing the therapy for such patients.
We have continued to study empiric chemotherapy. Recently, gemcitabine was tested as secondary therapy in previously treated patients, and a response rate of only
approximately 10% was observed, but several other patients had minor response or subjective improvement (or both). Topotecan given orally is being evaluated in
previously treated patients. For previously untreated patients, the combination of paclitaxel, carboplatin, gemcitabine (followed by weekly paclitaxel consolidation) is
ongoing.

SQUAMOUS CARCINOMA OF UNKNOWN PRIMARY SITE
Squamous carcinoma at a metastatic site represents approximately 5% of all patients with unknown primary carcinomas (nearly 4000 U.S. patients annually). Effective
treatment is available for patients with certain clinical syndromes, and appropriate evaluation of these patients is important.
SQUAMOUS CARCINOMA INVOLVING CERVICAL AND SUPRACLAVICULAR LYMPH NODES
The cervical lymph nodes are the most common metastatic site. Usually, patients are middle-aged or elderly, and frequently they have abused tobacco or alcohol.
When the upper or middle cervical lymph nodes are involved, a primary tumor in the head and neck region should be suspected. Clinical evaluation should include an
examination of the oropharynx, hypopharynx, nasopharynx, larynx, and upper esophagus by direct endoscopy, with biopsy of any suspicious areas. CT of the neck
better defines the disease in the neck and occasionally identifies a primary site. PET scanning also may identify primary sites but remains controversial. 102,103
Detection of Epstein-Barr virus genome in the tumor tissue is highly suggestive of a nasopharyngeal primary site 31 (see Genetic Analysis, earlier in this chapter),
particularly in poorly differentiated carcinomas. Other genetic studies of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck region have shown genetic alterations in
“normal tissue” as a precursor of invasive carcinoma. 104 Further study is indicated, as these findings do not yet have a practical application. When the lower cervical
or supraclavicular lymph nodes are involved, a primary lung cancer should be suspected. Fiber-optic bronchoscopy should be performed if the chest radiograph and
head and neck examination results are normal, as this has a high yield, frequently identifying a lung primary. 105
When no primary site is identified, local treatment should be given to the involved neck. The reported results in more than 1400 patients are primarily retrospective,
single-institution experiences, often using a variety of treatment modalities. 106,107,108,109,110,111,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,120,121,122,123,124,125,126,127,128 and 129 In many of these
series, a large minority of patients had poorly differentiated carcinoma and adenocarcinoma (see Special Issues, Single Site of Neoplasm, later in this chapter). A
substantial percentage (usually 30% to 40%) of patients achieved long-term disease-free survival after local treatment modalities. The results obtained using radical
neck dissection, high-dose radiation therapy, or a combination of these modalities have been similar. The volume of tumor in the involved neck influences outcome,
with N1 or N2 disease having a significantly higher cure rate than N3 disease or massive neck involvement. 126,128 Poorly differentiated carcinoma also represents a
poor prognostic factor in such patients. When resection alone is used as the primary treatment modality, a primary tumor in the head and neck subsequently becomes
apparent in 20% to 40% of patients. Primary tumors surface less commonly when radiation therapy is used, presumably owing to the eradication of occult head and
neck primary sites within the irradiation field. Radiation therapy dosages and techniques should be similar to those used in patients with primary head and neck
cancer, 117 and the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and hypopharynx may be included in the irradiated field.
Patients with low cervical and supraclavicular nodes do not do as well, because lung cancer is a frequent site of occult primary tumors. Patients with no detectable
disease below the clavicle should be treated with aggressive local therapy, because 10% to 15% of these patients will have long-term disease-free survival.
Chemotherapy also should be considered for such patients.
The role of chemotherapy for metastatic squamous carcinoma in cervical lymph nodes is controversial. One small nonrandomized comparison of patients treated with
local modalities alone or with local modalities combined with chemotherapy (cisplatin and 5-FU) showed a higher complete response rate (81% vs. 60%) and longer
median survival time (>37 months vs. 24 months) in patients also receiving chemotherapy. 120 Paclitaxel-based chemotherapy may be more effective. Neoadjuvant
chemotherapy and radiation therapy in locally advanced head and neck carcinoma is gaining acceptance, and consideration of chemotherapy for these unknown
primary tumor patients now would also seem reasonable. In those who receive local therapy first, adjuvant platinum-based or paclitaxel-based chemotherapy should
be considered.
SQUAMOUS CARCINOMA INVOLVING INGUINAL LYMPH NODES
Most patients with a tumor in inguinal lymph nodes have a detectable primary site in the genital or anorectal areas. Careful examination of vulva, vagina, cervix, penis,
and scrotum is important and should include biopsy of any suspicious areas. Digital examination and anoscopy should be performed to exclude lesions in the
anorectal area. Identification of a primary site in such patients is important, because curative therapy is available for carcinomas of the vulva, vagina, cervix, and
anus, even after spread to regional lymph nodes. Nearly 50% of patients with inguinal presentations have poorly differentiated carcinoma. For patients in whom no
primary site is identified, surgical resection with or without radiation therapy to the inguinal area sometimes results in long-term survival. 73,124 Such patients should be
considered also for neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy.
SQUAMOUS CARCINOMA METASTATIC TO OTHER SITES
Usually, metastatic tumor in areas other than the cervical or inguinal lymph nodes represents metastasis from an occult primary lung cancer. CT scans of the chest
and fiber-optic bronchoscopy should be considered. Chemotherapy with regimens employed in the treatment of non–small cell lung cancer may be considered in

patients with good performance status. Other rare presentations include primary tumors from the head and neck, esophagus, anus, and skin.
Patients with the diagnosis of poorly differentiated squamous carcinoma should be evaluated carefully, particularly if other clinical features are atypical for lung cancer
(i.e., young patients, nonsmokers, unusual metastatic sites). Occasionally, adenocarcinomas, particularly in the breast, undergo squamous differentiation at
metastatic sites. As with the diagnosis of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, this histologic diagnosis (squamous cell) sometimes is based on minimal histologic
findings. Additional pathologic evaluation with immunoperoxidase stains or electron microscopy should be considered. When the diagnosis remains unclear, such
patients should be considered for a trial of therapy for poorly differentiated carcinoma.

POORLY DIFFERENTIATED CARCINOMA (WITH OR WITHOUT FEATURES OF ADENOCARCINOMA) OF UNKNOWN PRIMARY SITE
Patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma or adenocarcinoma of unknown primary site appear to represent distinctive subgroups with specific therapeutic
implications. They account for approximately 30% of all patients with carcinoma of unknown primary site (nearly 25,000 U.S. patients annually); approximately
two-thirds have poorly differentiated carcinoma, and one-third has poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Often, chemotherapy trials in the past included such patients
and the more common patients with well-differentiated adenocarcinoma of unknown primary. All such patients were assumed to be similar, and they experienced both
a poor response to 5-FU-based chemotherapy and a short survival. These chemotherapy trials included drugs likely to be useful in a palliative sense for a minority of
patients with gastrointestinal, lung, and breast carcinomas. Some patients with poorly differentiated carcinomas have responsive neoplasms, and some are curable
with cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy. 99,130,131,132,133,134,135,136,137 and 138 Clinical and pathologic evaluation is, therefore, crucial in patients with poorly
differentiated carcinoma.
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS
The clinical characteristics in this diverse group of patients appear to differ—albeit with considerable overlap—from the characteristics of patients with
well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. The median age of this patient group is younger, although both groups have a wide age range. Often, patients with poorly
differentiated carcinoma reveal a history of rapid progression of symptoms (often <30 days) and have objective evidence of rapid tumor growth. 34,99,130 Most important,
the location of metastases often differs, and the predominant sites of involvement frequently are lymph nodes, mediastinum, and retroperitoneum, occurring much
more commonly than in well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. Some of these relatively distinctive clinical features are useful in identifying chemotherapy-responsive
subsets of patients (see following Pathologic Evaluation section).
PATHOLOGIC EVALUATION
Light-microscopical features that can differentiate chemotherapy-responsive tumors from nonresponsive tumors have not been identified. 131 Even with careful
retrospective review of these tumors, responsive tumors of well-defined types (e.g., germ cell tumor, lymphoma) only rarely are identified.
These tumors should undergo routine additional pathologic study with immunoperoxidase staining; in selected tumors, electron microscopy and genetic analysis also
are appropriate. The use of routine light microscopy alone is not adequate to assess such tumors. The information provided by these additional pathologic studies has
been summarized previously (see Poorly Differentiated Neoplasms, earlier in this chapter). The frequency of more specific diagnoses, particularly lymphoma, is much
lower in the carcinoma group than in the group initially diagnosed by routine light microscopy as poorly differentiated neoplasm. This is not surprising, because
carcinoma is a more specific diagnosis. Other diagnoses still may be suggested.
To assess the clinical utility of immunoperoxidase tumor cell staining in patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma of unknown primary site, we retrospectively
performed a battery of stains on archival tumors from patients treated prospectively. 132 Poorly differentiated carcinoma or poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma was
diagnosed on the basis of routine light-microscopical examination, and all patients were treated before the technology of immunoperoxidase staining was used
routinely (1978 to 1983). Therefore, results of immunoperoxidase staining could be correlated with clinical outcome in this group of similarly treated patients with a
long median follow-up. Immunoperoxidase staining confirmed the diagnoses of poorly differentiated carcinoma in 49 patients (56%) and yielded other diagnoses in 16
patients (18%): melanoma in eight patients, lymphoma in four, prostatic carcinoma in one, and neuroendocrine tumor in three (see Neuroendocrine Carcinoma of
Unknown Primary Site, later in this chapter). In 24 patients (28%), the immunoperoxidase staining pattern was inconclusive; electron microscopy occasionally was
helpful in clarifying the diagnosis in affected patients. Seventy-five patients (86%) received combination chemotherapy with a cisplatin-based regimen, and 24 patients
(28%) had a complete response. Nine of these patients later were given specific diagnoses by immunoperoxidase staining; lymphoma was diagnosed in four patients,
melanoma in four patients, and yolk sac tumor in one patient. All patients with an immunoperoxidase diagnosis of lymphoma had clinical features compatible with
lymphoma and are long-term survivors. Patients with immunoperoxidase features suggesting melanoma were surprisingly responsive to chemotherapy, with three of
seven complete responses and two long-term survivors. Patients with melanoma diagnosed by immunoperoxidase staining alone should not be excluded from a trial
of cisplatin-based therapy. Immunoperoxidase staining is useful in the routine evaluation of metastatic poorly differentiated carcinoma of unknown primary site, as
occasionally it can suggest the lineage of the tumor and can have specific therapeutic implications. Others have reported similar findings in patients treated with
cisplatin-containing chemotherapy. 139
Immunoperoxidase staining should be used in the evaluation of poorly differentiated carcinomas to do the following: (1) confirm the diagnosis of carcinoma; (2)
identify a primary site of a recognized carcinoma (e.g., prostate); (3) identify patients who may have other neoplasms, such as lymphoma or melanoma (although
therapeutic recommendations for neoplasms other than lymphoma identified in this manner remain to be established); and (4) identify a group of patients in whom
electron microscopy may provide important additional information.
Electron microscopy can be useful for a small minority of these carcinomas. In general, electron microscopy should be reserved for those tumors not diagnosed by
immunoperoxidase stains. Lymphoma can be diagnosed reliably (in most instances) in those tumors mistakenly believed to be carcinoma. In addition, sarcoma,
melanoma, mesothelioma, and neuroendocrine tumors occasionally are defined by subcellular features. Neuroendocrine differentiation is particularly important.
Chromosomal or genetic analysis is becoming an increasingly important method of diagnosis. Specific abnormalities have been identified in several neoplasms.
Evaluation for these abnormalities may be useful in patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma of unknown primary site. In reference to germ cell tumors, Motzer et
al.140 performed genetic analysis on tumors in 40 patients with primarily midline carcinomas of uncertain histology. In 12 of the 40 patients with poorly differentiated
carcinoma, abnormalities of chromosome 12 (e.g., i[12p]; del[12p]; multiple copies of 12p) were diagnostic of germ cell tumor. Other specific abnormalities were
diagnostic of melanoma (two patients), lymphoma (one patient), peripheral neuroepithelioma (one patient), and desmoplastic small cell tumor (one patient). Of the
germ cell tumors diagnosed on the basis of genetic analysis, five achieved a complete response to cisplatin-based chemotherapy. This outcome confirms our
previously formulated hypothesis that some of these patients have histologically atypical germ cell tumors. 130,134 These genetic findings can be diagnostic in these
patients. Additional specific genetic abnormalities or gene expression monitoring in solid tumors likely will improve our ability further to establish tumor lineage or
biology and, it is hoped, also will improve therapy. Preliminary results using polymerase chain reaction to identify Epstein-Barr viral genomes in neck nodes have
established an occult nasopharyngeal primary in some patients.
Autopsy data looking specifically at patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma of unknown primary site are limited. Additionally, the number of postmortem
examinations in medicine in general is declining. On the basis of limited necropsy data we have accumulated, primary sites appear to be found in only a minority of
such patients (40%). These findings are contrary to those for well-differentiated adenocarcinoma of unknown primary site, in which the primary site is found in most
patients (>75%) at autopsy. 34
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
The clinical evaluation of patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma of unknown primary site is similar to that described for patients with well-differentiated
adenocarcinoma of unknown primary site. A medical history, physical examination, routine laboratory testing, and chest radiograph should be obtained for each
patient. Any clues are followed with appropriate diagnostic testing. CT scans of the chest and abdomen should be performed in all patients in this group, owing to the
frequency of mediastinal and retroperitoneal involvement. Serum levels of HCG and AFP should be measured because substantial elevations of these markers
suggest the diagnosis of germ cell tumor. Serum tumor markers, such as CEA, CA-125, CA-19-9, and CA-15-3, can be helpful in monitoring response to
chemotherapy. PET scanning may have a role in diagnosis and after therapy, but further data are necessary before recommending PET scanning as standard.

TREATMENT
When additional pathologic studies identify a specific neoplasm (e.g., lymphoma, sarcoma), appropriate therapy can be administered. Patients with elevated serum
levels of HCG or AFP and clinical features suggestive of extragonadal germ cell tumor (e.g., mediastinal or retroperitoneal mass) should be treated with
chemotherapy that is effective for germ cell tumors, even when pathologic examination results are not diagnostic.
Most affected patients have multiple metastases and only the nonspecific diagnoses of poorly differentiated carcinoma or poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma
despite additional pathologic study. The first reports showing that some of these patients (a small subset) have highly responsive tumors appeared in the late
1970s.133,134,135 and 136 Most such patients were young men with mediastinal tumors; serum levels of HCG or AFP frequently were elevated. Most of these patients were
thought to have histologically atypical extragonadal germ cell tumors. Although several other tumor lineages subsequently have been identified in these patients (i.e.,
thymoma, neuroendocrine tumors, sarcomas, lymphomas), most still defy precise classification.
Further evidence for the responsiveness of many other tumors in patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma of unknown primary site has accumulated during the
last 20 years. On the basis of encouraging results in a few patients treated from 1976 to 1978, we prospectively studied the role of cisplatin-based therapy for patients
with poorly differentiated carcinoma of unknown primary site. In a series of reports, we have documented a high overall response rate and long-term disease-free
survival in a minority of such patients. 130,131,132,133,134,135,136,137 and 138 Our experience in the treatment of 220 such patients, accumulated between 1978 and 1989, is
summarized in Table 48-4. Most of the patients in this group did not have clinical characteristics strongly suggestive of extragonadal germ cell tumor. However,
involvement of the mediastinum, retroperitoneum, and peripheral lymph node groups was relatively common. In the early years of this study, most patients received
treatment with cisplatin, vinblastine, and bleomycin (PVB) with or without doxorubicin, then the most commonly used regimen for the treatment of advanced testicular
cancer. Later, as etoposide replaced vinblastine, these patients received cisplatin and etoposide with or without bleomycin. All patients received an initial treatment
trial of two courses of therapy, and responding patients received a total of four treatment courses. Major tumor responses were seen in 138 of 220 patients (62%), and
58 patients (26%) had complete response to treatment.

TABLE 48-4. Clinical Characteristics of 220 Patients with Poorly Differentiated Carcinoma of Unknown Primary Site

Our most recent update of this initial group of patients shows the following: 12% (26 patients) of the entire group has remained alive and free of tumor at a minimum
follow-up of 6 years, with a range of 6 to 17 years (median, 11 years). Fourteen patients who were relapse-free at a minimum of 11 months at the time of our original
report 141 cannot be documented now as alive and free of the original tumor. Six patients are lost to follow-up, though each was known to be alive and relapse-free at
1, 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4, and 7 years, respectively. Four patients died with progressive carcinoma of unknown primary site (two at 1 year and two at 7 years after initial
chemotherapy). Three patients developed new cancers: one brain tumor, one pancreatic carcinoma, one lymphoma (two at 9 years and one at 17 years, respectively,
after the initial therapy). One patient died of an unrelated cause 4 years after therapy.
The survival curves for the entire group of 220 patients and for the subset of 58 (26%) who had a complete response to chemotherapy are shown in Figure 48-5 and
Figure 48-6. The median survival of complete responders was approximately 3 years. Median survival for all patients was 20 months. Of the 58 complete responders,
22 patients remain alive and relapse-free (38%), representing 10% of the entire group of 220. Four additional patients were treated in an “adjuvant setting” after
resection of all gross tumor and all remain alive, bringing the total to 12% of all patients relapse-free. These long-term survival statistics are not censored. Patients
who are lost to follow-up (six), died of second unrelated cancers (three), or died of other causes (one) are included as deaths on the curves. It is of note that 50 of the
220 patients were treated by oncologists outside our center, and their long-term results are equivalent. These results in a large series of patients support the notion
that these poorly differentiated histologic types, as a whole, represent more sensitive tumors than well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, and substantial prolongation of
life is possible for some of these patients, with the expectation of cure for a small minority.

FIGURE 48-5. Survival curve for all 220 patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma (12% at 17 years).

FIGURE 48-6. Survival curve of complete responders (38% at 17 years).

In only 32 of the 220 patients (14%) was the primary site or specific tumor type eventually identified ( Table 48-5). In 19 of these 32 patients, the definitive diagnosis

was made at repeat biopsy later during the course of the disease or at autopsy. In the remainder, retrospective specialized pathology studies provided the basis for
diagnosis. All six lymphomas were identified retrospectively: four by immunoperoxidase staining, one by repeat biopsy at the time of tumor relapse, and one by
genetic analysis (detection of an immunoglobulin gene rearrangement). However, only 30 autopsies were performed, and in only 11 (37%) was a primary site
identified. In the remainder, metastatic, poorly differentiated carcinoma or poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with no primary site was found. This observation is
nearly opposite for those patients with well-differentiated adenocarcinoma; in nearly 80% of them, a primary tumor was found at autopsy. In addition, nine patients
were thought to have melanoma on the basis of pathologic review or special pathologic studies; however, none of these patients had a known primary site, and none
had typical light-microscopical findings of melanoma.

TABLE 48-5. Specific Pathologic Diagnoses Confirmed

Since 1989, we have either seen or collected clinical and pathologic data from 700 additional patients with carcinomas of unknown primary site. Before 1997, the
majority of these patients with poorly differentiated carcinomas received cisplatin plus etoposide with or without bleomycin, and the results are similar to those of the
220 previously reported patients. We are reviewing all these data.
In the last 5 years, we have treated most patients with carboplatin and etoposide, with or without a taxane (paclitaxel or docetaxel), either as initial therapy or after first
relapse. The response rate appears similar to those of cisplatin-based regimens. Furthermore, we have explored the paclitaxel-based 100 and docetaxel-based
chemotherapy (unpublished data) in this group, in addition to the well-differentiated adenocarcinoma group, and found these regimens useful. We are attempting to
confirm that taxane-based chemotherapy is superior to other chemotherapy regimens.
At present, the treatment for most patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma (with or without features of adenocarcinoma) is controversial, but we think that they
should be treated initially with a regimen containing paclitaxel, carboplatin, and oral etoposide. Follow-up with docetaxel-based therapy is less, but early results
support a similar survival rate. The optimal regimen has not been defined. Treatment after relapse from primary therapy is difficult, but some new drugs, including
gemcitabine, occasionally produce clinical benefit. For those patients with features highly suggestive of an extragonadal germ cell tumor, we continue to recommend
the classic regimen of cisplatin and etoposide with or without bleomycin. We do not use bleomycin now, as it does not appear to improve the therapy of known germ
cell tumors when four courses of chemotherapy are administered, and occasionally it produces severe pulmonary toxicity, particularly if thoracic irradiation is
administered later.
Other investigators also have demonstrated the responsiveness of these poorly differentiated tumors. 94,101,142,143,144 and 145 Complete remissions are seen in a minority
(10% to 20%) of these patients, as is a small cohort (5% to 10%) of long-term disease-free survivors. Usually, these results were seen with combination
chemotherapy, cisplatin-based or carboplatin-based. Results with carboplatin-based combinations are at least as good as previous results using cisplatin, vinblastine,
and bleomycin and are achieved with less toxicity. More recently, taxane-based combination chemotherapy has broadened the usefulness of therapy for many
affected patients. A therapeutic trial of two courses should be given. Responders should complete a total of at least four treatment courses. No evidence substantiates
that more prolonged treatment will improve results, and nearly all long-term survivors have received only four to six treatment courses. In patients with residual
palpable or radiographic abnormalities, surgical resection or radiation therapy should be contemplated.
Although the foregoing results represent marked improvement as compared with the dismal historical results (response rate <30%, no complete responders, no
long-term survivors), this group of patients is heterogeneous, and many patients have relatively unresponsive tumors. Many such patients should be considered for
either taxane-based chemotherapy (as discussed) or investigational trials of newer approaches.
Favorable Prognostic Factors
As only a minority of patients have excellent treatment responses, we have analyzed patients for clinical features predictive of treatment responsiveness and
long-term survival. 141 Prognostic features evaluated in a multivariate analysis included age, gender, smoking history, serum tumor marker status (HCG, AFP), serum
chemistries, number of metastatic sites, predominant site of tumor involvement, and light-microscopical histology (poorly differentiated carcinoma vs. poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma). The probability of complete response to therapy and various features is illustrated in Table 48-6. Several features were independently
predictive of favorable treatment outcome, including tumor location in the retroperitoneum or peripheral lymph nodes, tumor limited to one or two metastatic sites,
younger age, and negative smoking history.

TABLE 48-6. Clinical and Pathologic Characteristics Predictive of Chemotherapy Responsiveness

Because most of the highly responsive tumors cannot be identified despite extensive pathologic evaluation, a variety of clinical features have been found to be useful
as prognostic indicators ( Table 48-6). Although evaluation of these clinical features allows the identification of patients with a higher chance of complete response,
none of these indicators is specific enough to be able to exclude a patient reliably from a therapeutic trial. However, these features can better define relatively poor
prognostic subsets and more favorable subsets of patients.
More than two decades ago, we hypothesized that highly responsive carcinomas probably were unrecognized or histologically atypical extragonadal germ cell tumors.
We still believe that some of the highly responsive tumors are germ cell tumors that are marker-negative and are not identifiable using all available pathologic
methods. Patients with clinical features highly suggestive of extragonadal germ cell tumors were analyzed for response to therapy and long-term survival. This group
included 34 men who were younger than 45 years and had predominant disease in the mediastinum or retroperitoneum. Six of these men had elevated serum levels
of AFP, HCG, or both. The histologic features of all tumors in this group were rereviewed, and only one had typical features of a germ cell tumor (yolk sac tumor). 131 In
this group, 29 of 34 patients (85%) responded to therapy, with 17 patients (50%) having complete response. Seven patients in this group (20%) remain disease-free.

Therefore, selection of patients with clinical features highly suggestive of extragonadal germ cell tumor, despite the nondiagnostic histology, defines a subgroup with a
complete-response rate and long-term survival higher than those of the group as a whole. As discussed, Motzer et al. 140 provided strong support for the hypothesis
that some of these patients have extragonadal germ cell tumors. Those researchers demonstrated chromosome 12 abnormalities diagnostic of germ cell tumors in
several young men with poorly differentiated midline carcinomas of unknown primary site. The excellent response to treatment and survival (50% complete
responders, 20% disease-free survival) for patients in our initial series with clinical features highly suggestive of extragonadal germ cell tumor suggests that these
tumors are germ cell tumors, albeit histologically atypical. These treatment results do not differ greatly from those in patients with known extragonadal germ cell
tumors treated with standard cisplatin-based therapy. 146,147 If feasible, genetic analysis on tumor tissue should be performed as a diagnostic test for selected patients
with carcinoma of unknown primary site.
Responsive tumors are heterogeneous in their origin, and only a small subset of patients have histologically atypical germ cell tumors. A few of the patients have
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Certain lymphomas may be confused with anaplastic carcinomas; some lymphomas, notably the Ki-1 lymphomas, also can stain positively
with epithelial membrane antigen, further complicating their differentiation from carcinoma. 148 It is hoped that this confusion will be minimized or eliminated with the
routine use of immunoperoxidase staining for CLA. A second group of highly responsive tumors are poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas. The origin of
such tumors remains speculative, but they may be an anaplastic variant of occult primary carcinoid.
The nature of the other responsive tumors in this heterogeneous group of patients remains even more speculative. Malignant thymoma is a tumor recently recognized
to be responsive to cisplatin-based therapy, with some patients experiencing long-term complete remissions. 149 Some patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma
located predominantly in the mediastinum may have thymoma. In our original series, a few patients who were long-term survivors were identified as having
“melanoma” on the basis of immunoperoxidase stains. This diagnosis seems unusual because melanoma is a tumor that normally is unresponsive to chemotherapy.
Possibly, melanomas identifiable only by immunoperoxidase staining or electron microscopy represent a uniquely chemotherapy-sensitive subset. Finally, some
responsive tumors possibly represent a heretofore undefined tumor type. Alternatively, some may represent highly undifferentiated—and therefore perhaps
chemotherapy-sensitive—epithelial tumors from occult primary sites, which usually are much less responsive to systemic therapy. Future knowledge and refinements
in genetic diagnosis may establish the identity of many of these tumors.
Table 48-7 shows the relation of response and long-term survival (>6 years) to the site of dominant tumor involvement. Regardless of other factors, dominant tumor in
the retroperitoneum, peripheral lymph nodes, or mediastinum is fairly favorable. Forty-five of 105 patients in these categories had a complete response, and 20
patients remain alive and relapse-free (19%).

TABLE 48-7. Chemotherapy Response, Survival, and Predominant Site of Tumor

Prognostic factors also have been evaluated in a large series of patients reported from the M. D. Anderson Hospital. This large group was heterogeneous, containing
patients with all histologic subtypes. Those with clinical features of extragonadal germ cell tumors were excluded, and only a minority of patients with poorly
differentiated carcinoma received cisplatin-based treatment as used in the treatment of germ cell tumors. Some of the same clinical features that we identified were
found to be important prognostic features, including limited number of organ sites involved, tumor location in lymph nodes (including mediastinum and
retroperitoneum) other than the supraclavicular lymph nodes, and female gender (seen also in our recent series). In addition, the relatively poor outcome of patients
with adenocarcinoma as compared to other histologies was confirmed. However, they could not identify a subset of patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma and
long-term survival after chemotherapy. 96,150,150 Although these prognostic features are useful, occasional excellent responses are seen even in patient groups with
“unfavorable” clinical features. At present, even these patients should be considered for a trial of chemotherapy.

NEUROENDOCRINE CARCINOMA OF UNKNOWN PRIMARY SITE
Improved pathologic methods for diagnosing neuroendocrine tumors has resulted in the recent recognition of a wider spectrum of these neoplasms. The incidence of
unknown primary neuroendocrine tumors is not known, but an estimate suggests approximately 4000 U.S. patients annually. Most of the well-described adult
neuroendocrine tumors have distinctive histology and a known primary site of origin ( Table 48-8). The well-differentiated or low-grade neuroendocrine tumors (typical
carcinoid, islet cell tumors, and others) occasionally present without a recognizable primary site and usually possess an indolent biologic behavior. Carcinoid tumors
of unknown primary site appear to be increasing. 1 A second group of neuroendocrine tumors are poorly differentiated by light microscopy but have “neuroendocrine
features (typical small cell, atypical carcinoid, or poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma) and act aggressively. A third group of neuroendocrine tumors,
recently recognized, has high-grade biology and no distinctive neuroendocrine features by light microscopy. The initial diagnosis in this group usually is poorly
differentiated carcinoma, and neuroendocrine features are recognized only when immunoperoxidase staining (or, more definitively, if electron microscopy) is
performed. Neuroendocrine carcinomas of unknown primary site occur in each of these three categories.

TABLE 48-8. Adult Neuroendocrine Tumors with Known Primary Sites

LOW-GRADE NEUROENDOCRINE CARCINOMA
Occasionally, metastatic neuroendocrine tumors with histologic features typical of low-grade well-differentiated carcinoid or islet cell tumor are found without obvious
primary site. In this situation, metastatic tumor usually involves the liver or bone (or both) and sometimes is associated with clinical syndromes produced by the
secretion of bioactive substances (e.g., carcinoid syndrome, glucogonoma syndrome, vipomas, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome). In some affected patients, further
evaluation reveals primary sites in the small intestine, rectum, pancreas, or bronchus.

As predicted by the histologic appearance, these neuroendocrine tumors usually exhibit an indolent biology, and slow progression over years is likely. Management
should follow guidelines established for metastatic carcinoid or islet cell tumors from obvious primary sites. Often, these neoplasms are refractory to systemic
chemotherapy, and cisplatin-based chemotherapy produces low response rates. 151 Depending on the clinical situation, appropriate management may include local
therapy (resection of isolated metastasis, hepatic artery ligation-embolization), treatment of associated syndromes with somatostatin analogs, streptozocin,
doxorubicin, 5-FU-based systemic therapy, or symptomatic management.
SMALL CELL CARCINOMA
Patients with a history of cigarette smoking and small cell undifferentiated carcinoma at a metastatic site usually have a lung primary tumor. CT of the chest and
fiber-optic bronchoscopy should be performed. Perhaps PET scanning may be useful in this setting, but data are limited. If a pulmonary lesion is identified, affected
patients should be treated according to recommendations for small cell lung cancer. Small cell carcinoma can arise also from a variety of extrapulmonary primary
sites. Patients with localizing symptoms should undergo appropriate diagnostic studies.
When no primary site is identified, patients with small cell carcinoma should be treated with combination chemotherapy as recommended for small cell lung cancer.
We have found that paclitaxel, carboplatin, and oral etoposide is a very active therapy for these patients and have continued to evaluate this regimen. Initially, these
tumors are chemotherapy-sensitive, and major palliative benefit can be derived from treatment. An occasional patient will enjoy long-term benefit. In the rare instance
in which the tumor appears at a single metastatic site, the addition of radiation therapy or resection (or both) to combination chemotherapy should be considered.
POORLY DIFFERENTIATED NEUROENDOCRINE CARCINOMA
In approximately 10% of poorly differentiated carcinomas, electron microscopy reveals neurosecretory granules, a finding diagnostic of neuroendocrine carcinoma.
These tumors have been called poorly differentiated neuroendocrine tumors, atypical carcinoids, or primitive neuroectodermal tumors. In some of these tumors,
neuroendocrine features are recognizable by light microscopy; in others, the light-microscopical diagnosis is “poorly differentiated carcinoma.” Though electron
microscopy is the most accurate means of pathologic diagnosis, most of the tumors also have typical immunoperoxidase staining patterns with positive staining for
neuron specific enolase, chromogranin, and synaptophysin.
Previously, we reported on a group of 29 patients with poorly differentiated neuroendocrine tumors 137 and later updated our experience to include 51 patients, 46
treated with combination chemotherapy (Table 48-9). Most of these patients had clinical evidence of high-grade tumor, and most had metastases in multiple sites.
Thirty-three of 43 evaluable patients (77%) responded to chemotherapy with a cisplatin-based combination regimen. Thirteen patients (26%) had complete responses,
and eight remain continuously disease-free more than 2 years after completion of therapy. Our more recent experience would favor the use of paclitaxel, carboplatin,
and oral etoposide in such patients.

TABLE 48-9. Poorly Differentiated Neuroendocrine Tumors of Unknown Primary Site in 51 Patients

The origin of these poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas remains unclear. In four of our patients, specific diagnoses were made either subsequently in
their clinical course or at autopsy. Two patients had carcinoid tumors with “undifferentiated” growth pattern (both presented with abdominal carcinomatosis); one had
small cell lung cancer; and one had extragonadal germ cell tumor with predominant neuroendocrine differentiation. Likely some additional patients with small cell
histology had small cell lung cancer with occult primary tumor, but more than one-half of these patients had no smoking history, and the absence of overt pulmonary
involvement renders this diagnosis unlikely in most patients. Probably, some of these tumors are undifferentiated variants of well-recognized neuroendocrine tumors
(e.g., carcinoid tumor), without a recognizable primary site. In the undifferentiated form, the clinical and pathologic characteristics no longer resemble the
characteristics of the more differentiated counterpart. Anaplastic or atypical carcinoid tumors arising in the gastrointestinal tract are responsive to cisplatin-based
chemotherapy, whereas carcinoid tumors with typical histology usually are resistant. 151 A few reports of patients with “extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma of unknown
primary site” also have documented chemotherapy responsiveness and occasional long-term survival after systemic therapy. 152,153 However, the term extrapulmonary
small cell carcinoma implies the existence of a known primary site (e.g., head and neck, salivary gland, prostate, cervix, esophagus, bladder, etc.); therefore, these
tumors are more aptly described as neuroendocrine carcinoma of unknown primary site.
Although the origins of these poorly differentiated neuroendocrine tumors remain undefined, the presence of neurosecretory granules in the tumors of patients with
poorly differentiated carcinoma identifies a highly treatable subgroup. Molecular genetic studies may be helpful if an 11:22 translocation (peripheral neuroepithelioma
or soft tissue Ewing's sarcoma) or i(12p) abnormality (germ cell tumor) is identified. All patients with disease not otherwise specifically diagnosed should be treated
with a trial of combination chemotherapy. As are small cell neuroendocrine carcinomas, these tumors are very sensitive to the combination of paclitaxel, carboplatin,
and oral etoposide. Some patients with a single site of tumor involvement may be curable with local treatment modalities alone; however, a course of adjuvant
chemotherapy also should be considered in such patients if clinically feasible.

SPECIAL ISSUES
CARCINOMA OF UNKNOWN PRIMARY SITE AS A DISTINCT CLINICOPATHOLOGIC ENTITY
We have been struck over the last two decades by the number of times patients and their referring physicians (often oncologists) are very frustrated by unknown
primary cancer. Often, they are somewhat obsessed with finding the primary site or at least giving their patients a more specific diagnosis. Many reasons underlie
these feelings. Some patients think that their oncologists are not clever enough as diagnosticians and seek the advice of others. Some oncologists feel relatively
inadequate and wonder what other tests they might order; some have been relatively tentative, not feeling confident in recommending any therapy. Certainly, a
reasonable clinical and pathologic evaluation of these patients and their tumors is indicated, with oncologists being aware of possible primary sites and the relevance
in particular patients. However, once these considerations and evaluation are complete and no additional helpful information is forthcoming (as often is the case),
physicians should stop, discuss the issue with their patients and their families, and accept the clinicopathologic diagnosis as an unknown primary tumor. Indeed, most
patients at this point have unknown primary cancer; such tumors only occasionally surface during life and often cannot even be found at autopsy. Patients will be
better served, and physicians will eventually feel more comfortable—and therefore manage these patients more effectively—once their patients accept and
understand this diagnosis as a distinct clinicopathologic entity. They have a diagnosis.
A second very practical issue in the United States is the determination of Medicare reimbursement for chemotherapy for cancer diagnoses. Most typically, these
reimbursements are determined by Medicare (and several other third-party insurers) by consulting two compendia: the American Hospital Formulary Drug Information
(AHFS) and the United States Pharmacopeia Drug Information (USPDI). Their entries are listed by an indication index or by tumor types [ICD-9( International
Classification of Diseases-9) codes] and a generic drug index. Tumor types and drugs used for a particular tumor type are listed. The list is based on published
literature showing “effectiveness” or clinical benefit in a specific tumor type. This system is particularly arbitrary. The diagnosis code for unknown primary cancer is not
listed at all in AHFS or USPDI. Therefore, no drugs are listed as “useful” for patients with unknown primary cancer. Usually, Medicare will not pay for any drug not

listed as an indication.
Many patients with unknown primary cancer are coded with another diagnosis by oncologists. At times, this is a “good guess” of the possible primary tumor (e.g.,
non–small cell lung cancer in patients with lung lesions or mediastinal node involvement; hepatoma, pancreatic, or colon cancer for patients with liver involvement,
etc.). Furthermore, patients at times are assigned a diagnosis based on the pathology report alone (e.g., adenocarcinoma consistent with pancreatic or colon primary
tumor). Certainly, this practice allows for reimbursement for some drug costs by a system that otherwise has not even recognized unknown primary cancer. This
activity, in turn, causes the true incidence of unknown primary cancer to be underestimated. Recently, we and others provided the editors of AHFS and USPDI with
considerable data concerning unknown primary cancer, and we hope that the diagnosis code and specific drugs useful for this entity will appear in their pages soon.
Currently, more than enough clinical and pathologic data allow classification of patients confidently as having an unknown primary cancer, and the more global
acceptance of this entity will help these patients to establish an identity, will stimulate more interest by physician investigators, and eventually will improve general
understanding of such patients and their tumors.
EXTRAGONADAL GERM CELL CANCER SYNDROME
Selected patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma almost certainly have germ cell tumors, although the histologic features are atypical even when generous
pathologic specimens are available for study. Chromosomal analysis (as discussed) may provide a definitive diagnosis in some of these patients, particularly if their
tumor cells contain specific chromosome 12 abnormalities. Even if they are not found or in the absence of a genetic study, young people who have mediastinal or
retroperitoneal masses or multiple lung nodules (with or without elevated serum levels of HCG or AFP) should be suspected of harboring a germ cell tumor.
Lymphomas should be ruled out by immunoperoxidase stains, electron microscopy, or (if necessary) cytogenetic studies. The “extragonadal germ cell cancer
syndrome” was described in 1979.133,134 The full syndrome displays the following features: (1) It occurs in young men (<50 years); (2) tumors are predominantly
located in the midline (mediastinum, retroperitoneum) or multiple pulmonary nodules; (3) the symptom interval is short (<3 months) and history is of rapid tumor
growth; (4) serum levels of HCG, AFP, or both are elevated; and (5) a good response to previously administered radiation therapy or chemotherapy is demonstrated.
Few patients have all elements of this syndrome. These clinical features are those of extragonadal germ cell tumors but, without definitive histology, the diagnosis is
not unequivocal. In rare cases, women can develop these tumors, and the other features also are not absolute. Any one feature suggests the possibility of a germ cell
tumor. Treatment with cisplatin-based therapy is prudent in affected patients who may have atypical germ cell tumors.
SINGLE SITE OF NEOPLASM
In situations in which only one site of neoplasm is identified (e.g., one node group or one large mass), the possibility of an unusual primary tumor mimicking metastatic
disease should be considered. Several unusual tumors could present in this fashion, including Merkel-cell tumors, skin adnexal tumors (e.g., apocrine, eccrine, and
sebaceous carcinomas), and even sarcomas, melanomas, or lymphomas that are interpreted mistakenly as metastatic carcinoma (pathologically and clinically).
Usually, patients with one site of involvement have metastatic carcinoma, and many other sites are present but are not detectable. In the absence of any other
documented metastatic disease, such patients should be treated with aggressive local therapy (i.e., resection, radiation therapy, or both) because a minority will enjoy
long-term disease-free survival. Patients who present with isolated cervical, supraclavicular, and inguinal adenopathy often have squamous cell carcinoma, but a
minority harbor poorly differentiated carcinoma and adenocarcinoma. In addition to receiving definitive local therapy, these patients also should receive either
neoadjuvant or adjuvant platinum-based or paclitaxel-based chemotherapy, but knowing whether this treatment is superior to local therapy alone is difficult.
On occasion, patients will present with apparent solitary metastasis of adenocarcinoma or poorly differentiated carcinoma in the brain, liver, subcutaneous tissue,
intestine, or other areas. In most instances, other metastases will become clinically apparent with time. Certainly, some examples highlight resection or irradiation of
these single areas and illustrate patients doing well with no evidence of recurrence. At times, the resection may be planned as palliative, particularly with a brain
metastasis. The method of choice in managing these patients is to resect the single lesion. After resection, and depending on the other clinical circumstances,
patients may be candidates for chemotherapy, particularly if their histology is poorly differentiated carcinoma. In those patients with single metastases (i.e., brain),
radiation therapy is a prudent consideration after surgical resection. Often, isolated axillary carcinoma in women arises from an occult breast cancer and has
important therapeutic implications (see Adenocarcinoma of Unknown Primary Site, earlier in this chapter).
UNSUSPECTED GESTATIONAL CHORIOCARCINOMA
In young women with poorly differentiated carcinoma or anaplastic neoplasms, particularly with lung nodules, oncologists must be aware of the possibility of
metastatic gestational choriocarcinoma. The history of recent pregnancy, spontaneous abortion, or missed menstrual periods should suggest this possibility. In this
group of patients, serum HCG levels invariably are elevated. On occasion, biopsy specimens do not show the classic appearance of choriocarcinoma but simply that
of metastatic carcinoma, usually poorly differentiated. Ultrasonography or CT scan of the abdomen may show an enlarged uterus, and a dilation and curettage may be
indicated in such patients. Most affected patients are curable with single-agent methotrexate.
ISOLATED PLEURAL EFFUSION
Occasionally, an isolated pleural effusion containing carcinoma in women will represent metastatic disease from occult ovarian carcinoma or primary peritoneal
carcinomatosis. Even when affected patients have no symptoms or signs and an abdominopelvic CT scan result is normal, the primary tumor may reside in the
abdomen or pelvis. Such occult abdominal neoplasms may arise from the ovary or the peritoneal surface (see Adenocarcinoma of Unknown Primary Site, Peritoneal
Carcinomatosis in Women, earlier in this chapter) and most characteristically cause a pleural effusion. In the absence of clues of neoplasm in the abdomen, an
elevated plasma CA-125 level suggests the possibility of this phenomenon. In the absence of clinical findings in the abdomen, laparoscopy or exploratory laparotomy
might be diagnostic, but these procedures are not therapeutic in this setting. Some of these tumors are particularly responsive to chemotherapy with paclitaxel and a
platinum agent.
An isolated pleural effusion can be a manifestation of a peripheral lung carcinoma (usually adenocarcinoma), a mesothelioma or, rarely, a lesion from other sites.
Diagnosis may be difficult; at times the primary tumor is not apparent even after thorocostomy and chest tube drainage. Usually, cytology shows adenocarcinoma.
Electron microscopy may reveal ultrastructural features diagnostic of mesothelioma. The therapy for such patients is difficult. In those with poor performance status or
advanced age, a trial of tamoxifen or megestrol acetate is reasonable. In fit patients, a trial of chemotherapy (as discussed) for unknown primary carcinoma should be
considered.
GERM CELL TUMORS WITH METASTASES OF OTHER HISTOLOGIES
On occasion, patients with germ cell tumors, particularly extragonadal primaries, may have a metastatic lesion that consists of only somatic tumor cells. This is
particularly true for neuroendocrine or sarcomatous differentiation. Patients, therefore, may be diagnosed as having a neuroendocrine tumor or sarcoma. In these rare
instances, a primary germ cell tumor (usually extragonadal) is present elsewhere and subsequently will be clinically apparent. Making the diagnosis initially is difficult.
An elevated plasma AFP or HCG level is suggestive. The presence of a mediastinal, retroperitoneal, or testicular mass supports this possibility. Chromosomal
analysis of tumor tissue may be diagnostic if a specific chromosome 12 abnormality is found. If affected patients have metastatic germ cell tumor with metastases of
other histologies, the treatment of choice is cisplatin-based chemotherapy. Such patients appear to have a worse prognosis than do those with typical germ cell
tumors, probably because the somatic cell tumors are less sensitive to chemotherapy.
MELANOMA AND “AMELANOTIC” MELANOMA
Approximately 10% to 15% of all melanomas presenting with an unknown primary site are believed to be “amelanotic.” We have viewed this diagnosis with
considerable skepticism. At times, the only reason for the pathologic diagnosis is the histologic pattern's similarity to melanoma, even though no pigment is
demonstrated. In our experience, detailed pathologic and molecular study occasionally has revealed a group of other specific diagnoses, including lymphomas,
neuroendocrine tumors, germ cell tumors, sarcomas, and poorly differentiated carcinoma (otherwise not specified).
Melanosomes or premelanosomes seen on electron micrographs have been considered diagnostic of melanoma but, on rare occasion, these structures are seen in
other tumors. Some believe amelanotic melanomas do not always form premelanosomes, opening the question as to whether they really are melanomas.
Immunoperoxidase panels also are useful in suggesting the diagnosis of melanoma (see Table 48-1). Of considerable interest is that in our original series of 220

patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma, 9 later were thought possibly to harbor amelanotic melanoma on the basis of immunoperoxidase stains or electron
microscopy (or both). Generally, these patients responded well to cisplatin-based chemotherapy, and several had long-term survival, an unexpected result for
“melanoma.”
Certainly, the history of a resected, abraded, or frozen pigmented skin lesion would favor a metastatic melanoma in affected individuals. In addition, the rare primary
visceral melanoma should be considered (eye, adrenal, bowel, etc.) as the source of the disease in questionable cases. Except in those patients who are discovered
not to have melanoma but a specific tumor lineage requiring relatively specific therapy, the therapy for a questionable amelanotic melanoma is the same as that for
carcinoma of unknown primary site presenting in a single site (local resection with or without radiation therapy). Such patients may have stage II melanoma and are
potentially curable with resection. For patients with poorly differentiated tumor, including amelanotic melanoma, we also favor chemotherapy after local treatment.
EVOLVING ROLE OF PROGNOSTIC FACTORS: THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS
The prognoses of those small groups of patients with squamous cell carcinoma and poorly differentiated neoplasm (otherwise not classified) are relatively good. Many
patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma have chemotherapy-responsive tumors, and complete responses and long-term survival have been documented for a
minority of patients. Conversely, in the past, the even larger group of patients with well-differentiated adenocarcinoma has had relatively resistant tumors, with virtually
no complete responses to chemotherapy and no long-term survivals. In the last several years, patients with other “favorable” factors have been recognized. Such
patients, many managed with specific therapies, have a better prognosis than do those in the group as a whole. We have stressed that both pathologic and clinical
factors now can define several patients with a better prognosis ( Table 48-10). Although other unrecognized favorable features undoubtedly exist, apparently the
prognosis of patients who do not fit into a favorable subset have a particularly poor prognosis, regardless of their initial light-microscopical diagnosis
(well-differentiated adenocarcinoma or poorly differentiated carcinoma). Patients in this group recently have been treated with taxane-based chemotherapy, and the
treatment does appear to improve the response rate (with some complete responses) and survival of these groups of patients with historically very poor prognoses.
The degree of response seen in poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma also is noteworthy. Furthermore, the taxane-based chemotherapy appears as
effective, with less toxicity, as cisplatin-based chemotherapy, even for those patients within favorable prognostic subsets who otherwise require chemotherapy. The
one exception is patients with the extragonadal germ cell syndrome, for whom cisplatin-based therapy remains the treatment of choice. Further study of such patients
with poor prognoses is necessary to continue to build on the progress seen with taxane-based combination chemotherapy.

TABLE 48-10. Favorable Prognostic Factors in Cancer of Unknown Primary Site

“SHRINKING POPULATION” OF PATIENTS WITH CANCER OF UNKNOWN PRIMARY SITE
As our ability to identify specific tumor lineages (lymphoma, germ cell tumors, sarcoma, melanoma, etc.) improves, the total population of patients with cancer of
unknown primary site is becoming smaller. In the future, advances in molecular genetics may enable the diagnosis of most neoplasms with a specific genetic
fingerprint. In addition, subsets of patients with more favorable prognostic features (neuroendocrine tumors, peripheral lymph node sites, retroperitoneum, etc.) now
are apparent. Many affected patients are likely to be labeled or more specifically identified, at least into a treatable or responsive clinicopathologic subset. This
evolution is likely to continue, as improved chemotherapy now is developing for patients with many advanced neoplasms (including non–small cell lung, ovarian,
urothelial, head and neck, colorectal, esophageal, thymic, and pancreatic cancers). The remaining patients who do not fit a “responsive subset” will be the true
unknown primary patients in the future. Paradoxically effective treatment for them will remain very difficult.

CONCLUSION: FUTURE TRENDS
The recognition of subsets of responsive tumors in patients within the large heterogeneous population of cancers of unknown primary site represents an improvement
in the management of such patients. Approximately 40% of all patients fall within a defined subset with important treatment implications (see Fig. 48-1). Often, such
patients with more responsive tumors can be defined with appropriate clinical and pathologic evaluation. A summary of several subsets and an outline of the
evaluation necessary for their identification is given in Table 48-11. As the therapy for various neoplasms improves, the outcomes for more patients with cancers of
unknown primary site also improves. Recently, taxane-based combination chemotherapy has been shown to be useful for many of these patients. A therapeutic trial is
the only absolute method to determine whether a patient has a responsive tumor. Even for most responsive carcinomas, the tumor origin, biology, and precise lineage
often continue to be an enigma. Consequently, groups of patients with insensitive tumors remain. Improved therapy for such patients probably will follow advances in
the treatment of non–small cell lung cancer, pancreatic cancer, and the other gastrointestinal cancers, because most insensitive carcinomas probably arise from these
occult primary sites.

TABLE 48-11. Carcinoma of Unknown Primary Site: Summary of Evaluation and Therapy for Responsive Subsets

We have established a registry—a repository for pathologic material—and are collecting and cataloging patients' data from other physicians around the country.
Pathologic material, clinical summaries, and follow-up data from all such patients are being requested. A bank of unstained slides is maintained, and special stains
developed in the future may be evaluated rapidly. We are establishing a frozen-tissue bank for genetic studies. Eventually, further studies may provide a better
assessment of the frequency and spectrum of these neoplasms and could improve our knowledge of their biology and, subsequently, the therapy for affected patients.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Muir C. Cancer of unknown primary site. Cancer 1995;75:353.
2. Horning SJ, Carrier EK, Rouse RV, et al. Lymphomas presenting as histologically unclassified neoplasms: characteristics and response to treatment. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1281.

3. Hales SA, Gatter KC, Heryet A, Mason DY. The value of immunocytochemistry in differentiating high-grade lymphoma from other anaplastic tumours: a study of anaplastic tumours from 1940
to 1960. Leuk Lymphoma 1989;1:59.
4. Gatter KC, Alcock C, Heryet A, Mason DY. Clinical importance of analysing malignant tumours of uncertain origin with immunohistochemical techniques. Lancet 1985;1:1302.
5. Azar HA, Espinoza CG, Richman AV, et al. “Undifferentiated” large cell malignancies: an ultrastructural and immunocytochemical study. Hum Pathol 1982;13:323.
6. Warnke RA, Gatter KC, Falini B, et al. Diagnosis of human lymphoma with monoclonal antileukocyte antibodies. N Engl J Med 1983;109:1275.
7. Battifora H, Trowbridge IS. A monoclonal antibody useful for the differential diagnosis between malignant lymphoma and nonhematopoietic neoplasms. Cancer 1983;51:816.
8. Tapra FJ, Polak JM, Barbosa AJA, et al. Neuron-specific enolase is produced by neuroendocrine tumors. Lancet 1981;1:808.
9. O'Connor DT, Burton D, Deftos LJ. Immunoreactive human chromogranin A in diverse polypeptide hormone producing human tumors and normal endocrine tissues. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1983;57:1084.
10. Mackey B, Ordonez NG. Pathological evaluation of neoplasms with unknown primary tumor site. Semin Oncol 1993;20:206.
11. Allhof EP, Proppe KH, Chapman CM. Evaluation of prostate-specific acid phosphatase and prostate-specific antigen. J Urol 1983;57:1084.
12. Denk H, Knepler R, Artlieb U, et al. Proteins of intermediate filaments: an immunohistochemical and biochemical approach to the classification of soft tissue tumors. Am J Pathol 1983;110:193.
13. Osborn M, Weber K. Biology of disease: tumor diagnosis by intermediate filament typea novel tool for surgical pathology. Lab Invest 1983;48:372.
14. Kahn HJ, Marks A, Thom H, et al. Role of antibody to S-100 protein in diagnostic pathology. Am J Clin Pathol 1983;79:341.
15. Gown AM, Vogel AM, Hoak D, et al. Monoclonal antibodies specific for melanocytic tumors distinguish subpopulations of melanocytes. Am J Pathol 1986;123:195.
16. Kaufmann O, Deidesteimer T, Muehlenberg M, et al. Immunohistochemical differentiation of metastatic breast carcinomas from metastatic adenocarcinomas of other primary sites.
Histopathology 1996;29:233.
17. Bosman FT, Giard RWM, Nieuwenhuijen-Kruseman AC, et al. Human chorionic gonadotrophin and alpha fetoprotein in testicular germ cell tumors: a retrospective immunohistochemical study.
Histopathology 1980;4:673.
18. Kurman KJ, Scardino PT, McIntire KR, et al. Cellular localization of alpha fetoprotein and human chorionic gonadotropin in germ cell tumors of the testis using an indirect immunoperoxidase
technique: a new approach to classification utilizing tumor markers. Cancer 1977;40:2136.
19. Abbruzzese JL, Lenzi R, Raber MN, et al. The biology of unknown primary tumors. Semin Oncol 1993;20:238.
20. Bar-Eli M, Abbruzzese JL, Lee-Jackson D, et al. P53 gene mutation spectrum in human unknown primary tumors. Anticancer Res 1993;13:1619.
21. Briasoulis E, Tsakos M, Fountzilas G, et al. Bc12 and p53 protein expression in metastatic carcinoma of unknown primary origin: biological and clinical implications. A Hellenic Cooperative
Oncology Group study. Anticancer Res 1998;18:1907.
22. Pavlidis N, Briasoulis E, Baj M, et al. Overexpression of C-myc, Ras and C-erb-2 oncoproteins in carcinoma of unknown primary origin. Anticancer Res 1995;15:2563.
23. Golub TR, Slovim DK, Tamayo P, et al. Molecular classification of cancer: class discovery and class prediction by gene expression monitoring. Science 1999;286:531.
24. Wood LA, Venner PM, Pabst HF. Monozygotic twin brothers with primary immunodeficiency presenting with metastatic adenocarcinoma of unknown primary. Acta Oncologica 1998;37:771.
25. Arnold A, Cossman J, Bakhshi A, et al. Immunoglobulin-gene rearrangements as unique clonal markers in human lymphoid neoplasms. N Engl J Med 1983;309:1593.
26. Rowley JD. Recurring chromosome abnormalities in leukemia and lymphoma. Semin Hematol 1990;27:122.
27. Turc-Carel C, Philip I, Berger MP, et al. Chromosomal translocation in Ewing's sarcoma. N Engl J Med 1983;309:497.
28. Whang-Peng J, Triche TJ, Knutsen T, et al. Chromosome translocation in peripheral neuroepithelioma. N Engl J Med 1984;311:584.
29. Atkin NB, Baker MC. Specific chromosome change, i(12p), in testicular tumors. Lancet 1982;2:1349.
30. Ilson DH, Motzer RJ, Rodriguez E, et al. Genetic analysis in the diagnosis of neoplasms of unknown primary tumor site. Semin Oncol 1993;20:229.
31. Summersgill B, Goker H, Osin P, et al. Establishing germ cell origin of undifferentiated tumors by identifying gain of 12p material using comparative genomic hybridization analysis of
paraffin-embedded samples. Diagn Mol Pathol 1998;7:260.
32. Feinmesser R, Miyazaki I, Chenng R, et al. Diagnosis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma by DNA amplification of tissue obtained by fine-needle aspiration. N Engl J Med 1992;326:17.
33. Schildt RA, Kennedy PS, Chen TT, et al. Management of patients with metastatic adenocarcinoma of unknown origin: a Southwest Oncology Group study. Cancer Treat Rep 1983; 67:77.
34. Nystrom JS, Weiner JM, et al. Metastatic and histologic presentations in unknown primary cancer. Semin Oncol 1977;4:53.
35. Brown RW, Campagna LB, Dunn JK, Cagle PT. Immunohistochemical identification of tumor markers in metastatic adenocarcinoma. A diagnostic adjunct in the determination of primary site.
Am J Clin Pathol 1997;107:12.
36. Kaufman O, Deidesheimer T, Muehlenberg M, Deicke P, Dietel M. Immunohistochemical differentiation of metastatic breast carcinomas from metastatic adenocarcinomas of other common
primary sites. Histopathology 1996;29:233.
37. Lagendijk JH, Mullink H, VanDiest PJ, Meijer GA, Meijer CJ. Tracing the origin of adenocarcinomas with unknown primary using immunohistochemistry: differential diagnosis between colonic
and ovarian carcinomas as primary sites. Hum Pathol 1998;29:491.
38. Tot T. Adenocarcinomas metastatic to the liver: the value of cytokeratins 20 and 7 in the search for unknown primary tumors. Cancer 1999;85:171.
39. McMillan JH, Levine E, Stephens RH. Computed tomography in the evaluation of metastatic adenocarcinoma from an unknown primary site. Radiology 1982;143:143.
40. Karsell PR, Sheedy PF, O'Connell MJ. Computerized tomography in search of cancer of unknown origin. JAMA 1982;248:340.
41. Kole AC, Nieweg OE, Prium J, et al. Detection of unknown occult primary tumors using positron emission tomography. Cancer 1998;82:1160.
42. Currow DC, Findlay M, Cox K, Harnett PR. Elevated germ cell markers in carcinoma of unknown primary site do not predict response to platinum-based chemotherapy. Eur J Cancer
1996;32A:2357.
43. Pavlidis N, Kalef-Ezra J, Briasoulis E, et al. Evaluation of six tumor markers in patients with carcinoma of unknown primary. Med Pediatr Oncol 1994;22:162.
44. Hochstere H, Wernz JC, Muggia FM. Intra-abdominal carcinomatosis with histologically normal ovaries[Letter]. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:931.
45. Gooneratne S, Sassone M, Blaustein A, Talerman A. Serous surface papillary carcinoma of the ovary: a clinicopathologic study of 26 cases. Int J Gynecol Pathol 1982;1:258.
46. Chen KT, Flam MS. Peritoneal papillary serous carcinoma with long-term survival. Cancer 1986;58:1371.
47. August CZ, Murad TM, Newton M. Multiple focal extraovarian serous carcinoma. Int J Gynecol Pathol 1985;4:11.
48. Tobacman JK, Greene MH, Tucker MA, et al. Intra-abdominal carcinomatosis after prophylactic oophorectomy in ovarian cancer-prone families. Lancet 1982;2:795.
49. Schorge JO, Muto MG, Welch WR, et al. Molecular evidence for multifocal papillary serous carcinoma of the peritoneum in patients with germ-line BRCA1 mutations. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90:841.
50. Lele SB, Piver MJ, Mathara J, et al. Peritoneal papillary carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1988;31:315.
51. Dalrymple JC, Bannatyne P, Russell P, et al. Extraovarian peritoneal serous papillary carcinoma: a clinicopathologic study of 31 cases. Cancer 1989;64:110.
52. Strnad CM, Grosh WW, Baxter J, et al. Peritoneal carcinomatosis of unknown primary site in women. Ann Intern Med 1989;111:213.
53. Ransom DT, Patel SR, Keeney GL, et al. Papillary serous carcinoma of the peritoneum: a review of 33 cases treated with cisplatin-based chemotherapy. Cancer 1990;66:1091.
54. Fromm GL, Gershenson DM, Silva EG. Papillary serous carcinoma of the peritoneum. Obstet Gynecol 1990;75:89-95.
55. Bloss JD, Liao SY, Buller RE, et al. Extraovarian peritoneal serous papillary carcinoma: a case-control retrospective comparison to papillary adenocarcinoma of the ovary. Gynecol Oncol
1993;50:347.
56. Piver MS, Eltabbakh GH, Hempling RE, et al. Two sequential studies for primary peritoneal carcinoma: induction with weekly cisplatin followed by either cisplatin/doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide
or paclitaxel/cisplatin. Gynecol Oncol 1997;67:141.
57. Muggia FM, Baranda J. Management of peritoneal carcinomatosis of unknown primary tumor site. Semin Oncol 1993;20:268.
58. McGuire WP, Hoskins WJ, Brady MF, et al. A phase III trial comparing cisplatin/cytoxan and cisplatin/taxol in advanced ovarian cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1993;12:255.
59. Bhatia SK, Saclarides TJ, Witt TR, et al. Hormone receptor studies in axillary metastases from occult breast cancer. Cancer 1987;59:1170.
60. Block EF, Meyer MA. Positron emission tomography in diagnosis of occult adenocarcinoma of the breast. Am Surg 1998;64:906.
61. Schorn C, Fischer U, Luftner-Nagel S, Westerhof JP, Grabbe E. MRI of the breast in patients with metastatic disease of unknown primary. Eur Radiol 1999;9:470.
62. Ashikari R, Rosen PP, Urban JA, Senoo T. Breast cancer presenting as an axillary mass. Ann Surg 1976;183:415.
63. Patel J, Nemoto T, Rosner D, et al. Axillary lymph node metastases from an occult breast cancer. Cancer 1981;47:2923.
64. Merson M, Andreola S, Galimberti V, et al. Breast carcinoma presenting as axillary metastases without evidence of a primary tumor. Cancer 1992;70:504.
65. Rosen PP. Axillary lymph node metastases in patients with occult noninvasive breast carcinoma. Cancer 1980;46:1298.
66. Ellerbroek N, Holmes F, Singletary E, et al. Treatment of patients with isolated axillary nodal metastases from an occult primary carcinoma consistent with breast origin. Cancer 1990;66:1461.
67. Tell DT, Khoury JM, Taylor HG, et al. Atypical metastasis from prostate cancer: clinical utility of the immunoperoxidase technique for prostate-specific antigen. JAMA 1985;253:3574.
68. Gentile PS, Carloss HW, Huang T-Y, et al. Disseminated prostate carcinoma simulating primary lung cancer. Cancer 1988;62:711.
69. Sporn JR, Greenberg BR. Empirical chemotherapy for adenocarcinoma of unknown primary tumor site. Semin Oncol 1993;20:261.
70. Johnson RO, Castro R, Ansfield FJ. Response of primary unknown cancers to treatment with 5-fluorouracil. Cancer Chemother Rep 1964;38:63.
71. Moertel CG, Reitemeier RJ, Schutt AJ, Hahn RG. Treatment of the patient with adenocarcinoma of unknown origin. Cancer 1972;30:1469.
72. Wagener DJT, de Muelder PHM, Burghouts JT, et al. Phase II trial of cisplatin for adenocarcinoma of unknown primary site. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:755.
73. Casciato DA. Metastasis of unknown origin. In: Haskell CM, ed. Cancer treatment, 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1995:1128.
74. Milliken ST, Tattersall MHN, Woods RL, et al. Metastatic adenocarcinoma of unknown primary site: a randomized study of two combination chemotherapy regimens. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol
1987;23:1645.
75. McKeen E, Smith F, Haidak D, et al. Fluorouracil, Adriamycin and mitomycin-C for adenocarcinoma of unknown origin. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1980;21:358(abst).
76. Woods RL, Fox RM, Tattersall MHN, et al. Metastatic adenocarcinoma of unknown primary: a randomized study of two combination-chemotherapy regimens. N Engl J Med 1980;303:87.
77. Eagan RT, Thermean TM, Rubin J, et al. Lack of value for cisplatin added to mitomycin-doxorubicin combination chemotherapy for carcinoma of unknown primary site. Am Clin Oncol
1987;10:82.
78. Goldberg RM, Smith FP, Ueno W, et al. Fluorouracil, adriamycin and mitomycin in the treatment of adenocarcinoma of unknown primary. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:395.
79. Kambhu I, Kelsen D, Niedzwiecki D, et al. Phase II trial of mitomycin-C, vindesine, and adriamycin and predictive variables in the treatment of patients with adenocarcinoma of unknown
primary site. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1986;27:734(abst).
80. Flore JJ, Kelsen DP, Gralla RJ, et al. Adenocarcinoma of unknown primary origin. Treatment with vindesine and doxorubicin. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:591.
81. Valentine J, Rosenthal S, Arseneau JC. Combination chemotherapy for adenocarcinoma of unknown primary origin. Cancer Clin Trials 1979;2:265.
82. Rudnick S, Tremont S, Staab E, et al. Evaluation and therapy of adenocarcinoma of unknown primary. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1981;1:379(abst).
83. Sulkes A, Uziely B, Isacson R, et al. Combination chemotherapy in metastatic tumors of unknown origin. Isr J Med Sci 1988;24:604.
84. Van der Gaast A, Verweij J, Planting AST, et al. 5-Fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and mitomycin C (FAM) combination chemotherapy for metastatic adenocarcinoma of unknown primary. Eur J
Cancer Clin Oncol 1988;24:765.
85. Treat J, Falchuk SC, Tremblay C, et al. Phase II trial of methotrexate-FAM in adenocarcinoma of unknown primary. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1989;25:1053.
86. Alberts AS, Falkson G, Falkson HC, et al. Treatment and prognosis of metastatic carcinoma of unknown primary: analysis of 100 patients. Med Pediatr Oncol 1989;17:188.
87. Walach N, Horn Y. Combination chemotherapy in the treatment of adenocarcinoma of unknown primary origin. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:605.
88. Anderson H, Thatcher N, Rankin E, et al. VAC (vincristine, Adriamycin and cyclophosphamide) chemotherapy for metastatic carcinoma from an unknown primary site. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol
1983;19:49.
89. Bedikian AY, Valdivieso M, Bodey GP, et al. Sequential chemotherapy for adenocarcinoma of unknown primary. Am J Clin Oncol 1983;6:219.
90. Jadeja J, Legha S, Burgess M, et al. Combination chemotherapy with 5-FU, Adriamycin, cyclophosphamide, and cis-platinum in the treatment of adenocarcinoma of unknown primary and
undifferentiated carcinomas. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1983;2:926(abst).
91. Pasterz R, Savoraj N, Burgess M. Prognostic factors in metastatic carcinoma of unknown primary. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1652.
92. Becouarn Y, Brunet R, Barbe-Gaston C. Fluorouracil, doxorubicin, cisplatin and altretamine in the treatment of metastatic carcinoma of unknown primary. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1989;25:861.

93. Lenzi R, Abbruzzese J, Amato R, et al. Cisplatin, 5-FU, and folinic acid for the treatment of carcinoma of unknown primary. A phase II study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1991;10:1055(abst).
94. Falkson CI, Cohen GL. Mitomycin C, epirubicin and cisplatin versus mitomycin C alone as therapy for carcinoma of unknown primary origin. Oncology1998;55:116.
95. Nole F, Colleoni M, Buzzoni R, et al. Fluorouracil plus folinic acid in metastatic adenocarcinoma of unknown primary site suggestive of a gastrointestinal primary. Tumori 1993;79:116.
96. Abbreuzese JL, Abbruzzese MC, Hess KR, et al. Unknown primary carcinoma: natural history and prognostic factors in 657 consecutive patients. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1272.
97. Hainsworth JD, Johnson DH, Greco FA. Cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy in the treatment of poorly differentiated carcinoma and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of unknown
primary site: results of a 12-year experience. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:912.
98. Theodore C, Fizazi K, Borol C, et al. Carcinoma of an unknown primary site (CUP): results of a chemotherapy strategy based on histologic differentiation. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1997;15:308a(abst).
99. van der Gaast A, Verweij J, Henzen-Logmans SC, Rodenburg CJ, Stoter G. Carcinoma of unknown primary: identification of a treatable subset. Ann Oncol 1990;1:119.
100. Hainsworth JD, Erland JB, Kalman LA, et al. Carcinoma of unknown primary: treatment with 1-hour paclitaxel, carboplatin, and extended schedule etoposide. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2385.
101. Pavlidis N, Kalofonos H, Bafaloukos D, et al. Cisplatin/Taxol combination chemotherapy in 72 patients with metastatic cancer of unknown primary site: a phase II trial of the Hellenic
Cooperative Oncology Group. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:195a(abst).
102. Assar OS, Fischbein NG, Caputo GR, et al. Metastatic head and neck cancer: role and usefulness of FDG PET in locating occult primary tumors. Radiology 1999;210:177.
103. Braams JW, Pruim J, Kole AC, et al. Detection of unknown primary head and neck tumor by positron emission tomograph. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1997;26:112.
104. Califano J, Westra WH, Koch W, et al. Unknown primary head and neck squamous carcinoma: molecular indemnification of the site of origin. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:599.
105. Jones AS, Cook JA, Phillips DE, et al. Squamous carcinoma presenting as an enlarged cervical lymph node. Cancer 1993;72:1756.
106. Barrie JR, Knapper WH, Strong EW. Cervical nodal metatases of unknown origin. Am J Surg 1970;120:466.
107. Jesse RH, Perez CA, Fletcher GH. Cervical lymph node metastasis: unknown primary cancer. Cancer 1973;31:854.
108. Coker DD, Casterline PF, Chambers RG, Jacques DA. Metastases to lymph nodes of the head and neck from an unknown primary site. Am J Surg 1977;134:517.
109. Jose B, Bosch A, Caldwell WL, Frias Z. Metastasis to neck from unknown primary tumor. Acta Radiol Oncol 1979;18:161.
110. Nordstrom DG, Tewfik HH, Latourette HB. Cervical lymph node metastases from an unknown primary. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1979;5:73.
111. Fermont AC. Malignant cervical lymphadenopathy due to an unknown primary. Clin Radiol 1980;31:355.
112. Leipzig B, Winter ML, Hokanson JA. Cervical nodal metastases of unknown origin. Laryngoscope 1981;91:593.
113. Pacini P, Olmi P, Cellai E, Chiavacci A. Cervical lymph node metastases from an unknown primary tumour. Acta Radiol Oncol 1981;20:311.
114. Spiro RH, DeRose G, Strong EW. Cervical node metastasis of occult origin. Am J Surg 1983;146:441.
115. Mobit-Tabatabasi MA, Dasmaphapatra KS, Rush BF Jr, Ohanian M. Management of squamous cell carcinoma of unknown origin in cervical lymph nodes. Am Surg 1986; 52:152.
116. Yang ZY, Hu YH, Yan JH, et al. Lymph node metastases in the neck from an unknown primary: report on 113 patients. Acta Radiol Oncol 1983;22:17.
117. Carlson LS, Fletcher GH, Oswald MJ. Guidelines for the radiotherapeutic techniques for cervical metastases from an unknown primary. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:2101.
118. McCunniff AJ, Raber M. Metastatic carcinoma of the neck from an unknown primary. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:1849.
119. Bataini JP, Rodriguez J, Jaulerry C, et al. Treatment of metastatic neck nodes secondary to an occult epidermoid carcinoma of the head and neck. Laryngoscope 1987;97:1080.
120. De Braud F, Heilbrun LK, Ahmed K, et al. Metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of an unknown primary localized to the neck: advantages of an aggressive treatment. Cancer 1989;64:510.
121. Marcial-Vega VA, Cardenes H, Perez CA, et al. Cervical metastasis from unknown primaries: radiotherapeutic management and appearance of subsequent primaries. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1990;19:919.
122. LeFevre JL, Coche-Dequeant D, Ton Van J, et al. Cervical lymph nodes from unknown primary tumor in 190 patients. Am J Surg 1990;160:443.
123. Weir L, Keane T, Cummings B, et al. Radiation treatment of cervical lymph node metastasis from an unknown primary: an analysis of outcome by treatment volume and other prognostic
factors. Radiother Oncol 1995;35:206.
124. Brizel DM, Albers ME, Fisher SR, et al. Hyperfractionated irradiation with or without concurrent chemotherapy for locally advanced head and neck cancer. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1798.
125. Wendt TG, Grabenbauer GG, Rodel CM, et al. Simultaneous radiochemotherapy versus radiotherapy alone in advanced head and neck cancer: a randomized multicenter study. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:1318.
126. Coletier PJ, Garden AS, Morrison WH, et al. Postoperative radiation for squamous cell carcinoma metastatic to cervical lymph nodes from an unknown primary site: outcomes and patterns of
failure. Head Neck 1998;20:674.
127. Fernandez JA, Suarez C, Martinez JA, et al. Metastatic squamous cell carcinoma in cervical lymph nodes from an unknown primary tumor: prognostic factors. Clin Otolaryngol 1998;23:158.
128. Medini E, Medini AM, Lee CK, Gapany M, Levitt SR. The management of metastatic squamous cell carcinoma in cervical lymph nodes from an unknown primary. Am J Clin Oncol 1998;21:121.
129. Guarischi A, Keane TJ, Elhakim T. Metastatic inguinal nodes from an unknown primary neoplasm: a review of 56 cases. Cancer 1987;59:572.
130. Greco FA, Vaughn WK, Hainsworth JD. Advanced poorly differentiated carcinoma of unknown primary site: recognition of a treatable syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1986; 104:547.
131. Hainsworth JD, Wright EP, Gray GF Jr, Greco FA. Poorly differentiated carcinoma of unknown primary site: correlation of light microscopic findings with response to cisplatin-based
combination chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1272.
132. Hainsworth JD, Wright EP, Johnson DH, Davis BW, Greco FA. Poorly differentiated carcinoma of unknown primary site: clinical usefulness of immunoperoxidase staining. J Clin Oncol
1991;9:1931.
133. Richardson RL, Greco FA, Wolff S, et al. Extragonadal germ cell malignancy: value of tumor markers in metastatic carcinoma of young males. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1979;20:204(abst).
134. Richardson RL, Schoumacher RA, Fer MF, et al. The unrecognized extragonadal germ cell cancer syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1981;94:181.
135. Hainsworth JD, Greco FA. Poorly differentiated carcinoma of unknown primary site. In: Fer MF, Greco FA, Oldham R, eds. Poorly differentiated neoplasms and tumors of unknown origin.
Orlando: Grune & Stratton, 1986:189.
136. Fox RM, Woods RL, Tattersall MHN. Undifferentiated carcinoma in young men: the atypical teratoma syndrome. Lancet 1979;1:1316.
137. Hainsworth JD, Johnson DH, Greco FA. Poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma of unknown primary site: a newly recognized clinicopathologic entity. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:364.
138. Hainsworth JD, Greco FA. Treatment of patients with cancer of an unknown primary site. N Engl J Med 1995;329:257.
139. van der Gaast A, Verweij J, Planting AS, et al. The value of immunohistochemistry in patients with poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and undifferentiated carcinoma of unknown primary
site. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1996;122:181.
140. Motzer RJ, Rodriguez E, Reuter VE, et al. Molecular and cytogenic studies in the diagnosis of patients with midline carcinomas of unknown primary site. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:274.
141. Hainsworth JD, Johnson DH, Greco FA. Cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy in the treatment of poorly differentiated carcinoma and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of unknown
primary site: results of a 12 year experience at a single institution. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:912.
142. Raber MN, Faintuch J, Abbruzzese J, et al. Continuous infusion 5-fluorouracil, etoposide and cis-diamminedichloroplatinum in patients with metastatic carcinoma of unknown primary site. Ann
Oncol 1991;2:519.
143. Pavlidis N, Kosmidis P, Skaros D, et al. Subsets of tumors responsive to cisplatin or combinations in patients with carcinoma of unknown primary site. Ann Oncol 1992:236.
144. Zarba J, Izzo J, Hahjoubi R, et al. Treatment of unknown primary adenocarcinoma with fluorouracil, mitomycin, epirubicin and platinum. Eur J Cancer 1991;27[Suppl 2]:1350(abst).
145. Briasoulis E, Txavaris N, Fountzilas G, et al. Combination regimen with carboplatin, epirubicin and etoposide in metastatic carcinomas of unknown primary site: a Hellenic Cooperative
Oncology Group phase II trial. Oncology 1998;55:426.
146. Hainsworth JD, Einhorn LH, Williams SD, et al. Advanced extragonadal germ cell tumors: successful treatment with combination chemotherapy. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:7.
147. Israel A, Bosl GJ, Golbey RB, et al. The results of chemotherapy for extragonadal germ cell tumors in the cisplatin era: the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center experience (19751982). J
Clin Oncol 1985;3:1073.
148. Agnarsson BA, Kadin ME. Ki-1 positive large cell lymphoma: a morphologic and immunologic study of 19 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1988;12: 264.
149. Loehrer PJ, Perez CA, Roth LM, et al. Chemotherapy for advanced thymoma: preliminary results of an intergroup study. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:520.
150. Lenzi R, Hess KR, Abbruzzese MC, et al. Poorly differentiated carcinoma and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of unknown primary origin: favorable subsets of patients with unknown
primary cancer ? J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2056.
151. Moertel CG, Kovals LK, O'Connell MJ, et al. Treatment of neuroendocrine carcinomas with combined etoposide and cisplatin: evidence of major therapeutic activity in the anaplastic variants of
these neoplasms . Cancer 1991;68:227.
152. van der Gaast A, Verwey J, Prins E, Splinter TAW. Chemotherapy as treatment of choice in extrapulmonary undifferentiated small cell carcinoma. Cancer 1990;65:422.
153. Kasimis BS, Wuerker RB, Malefatto JP, Moran EM. Prolonged survival of patients with extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma arising in the neck. Med Pediatr Oncol 1983;11:27.

CHAPTER 49 Peritoneal Carcinomatosis
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 49
Peritoneal Carcinomatosis
DAVID L. BARTLETT
Introduction
Pathophysiology
Diagnosis
Histologic Subtypes
Pseudomyxoma Peritonei
Peritoneal Mesothelioma
Primary Peritoneal Carcinoma
Desmoplastic Small Round Cell Tumors
Gastrointestinal Primary Tumors
Gynecologic Primary Tumors
Other Forms
Treatment
Surgery
Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy
Other Intraperitoneal Therapies
Palliation
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Peritoneal carcinomatosis is defined as the spread and implantation of tumor cells throughout the peritoneal cavity, and it is considered an incurable disease state
leading to significant patient suffering. However, oncologists should recognize peritoneal carcinomatosis not as a terminal event for the patient but as a regional
disease entity that requires special attention and as a therapeutic challenge for consideration of novel management strategies. Although the primary histology dictates
the clinical course, important concepts of diagnosis and treatment are common among all forms. Also, the palliative management of complications, such as bowel
obstruction and ascites, warrants special consideration. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a general overview of peritoneal carcinomatosis as a regional stage
of metastatic disease. This includes a discussion of the biology of tumor spread and implantation and techniques for early recognition of peritoneal tumors. General
concepts regarding regional treatment approaches are reviewed.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The peritoneum is a serous lining of mesothelial cells with a rich vascular and lymphatic capillary network. 1 The flow of abdominal fluid provides clues to the
development and pattern of peritoneal carcinomatosis. Gravity, diaphragmatic and intestinal movement, and diaphragmatic and omental absorption via lymphatics
leads to a characteristic peritoneal fluid circulation ( Fig. 49-1).2 Lymphatic endothelial cells have been shown to form channels extending from the peritoneal cavity
directly into lymphatics, 3 most notably in the diaphragm. Flessner et al. 4 demonstrated that the absorption of 125I-labeled albumin from the peritoneal cavity
concentrated in the diaphragm and abdominal wall peritoneum but not in the visceral peritoneum. The most dependent recess is the pouch between the rectum and
uterus or bladder. Hagiwara et al. 5 demonstrated a site-specific correlation between the number of milky spots at specific peritoneal locations and the number of
infiltrating tumor cells. Milky spots represent an immunologic filter similar to the lymphatic drainage of solid organs and seem to represent sites where peritoneal fluid
drains into lymphatic channels. If fluid is actively absorbed into these spots, it is easy to hypothesize that free clumps of tumor cells could become trapped at these
spots and develop into tumors. Milky-spot tissues are found in the hepatoduodenal ligament, base of mesentery, appendiceal epiploicae, gonadal fat (corresponding
to the pouch of Douglas), and the greater omentum. The omentum contains the highest concentration of milky spots. The constant flux of fluid, the sites of absorption
and filtration, and gravity all play a role in the pattern of peritoneal tumors. It has been proposed that more aggressive, invasive tumors have a “stickier” phenotype
and are more likely not to follow the experimental observations of peritoneal spread but have a more random distribution close to the initial site of peritoneal
contamination.6 In addition, more aggressive, invasive tumors are better at forming tumors on moving surfaces, such as the serosal surface of the small bowel.

FIGURE 49-1. Circulation of fluid in the peritoneal cavity. Flow is generated by diaphragmatic movement, absorption of material from the diaphragmatic lymphatic
channel, and gravity. 1, Lesser sac; 2, foramen of Winslow; 3, Morison's pouch; 4, right triangular ligament; 5, right subphrenic space; 6, falciform ligament; 7, left
subphrenic space; 8, phrenocolic ligament; 9, bare area of the descending colon; 10, root of the small bowel mesentery; 11, bare area of ascending colon; 12,
duodenum; 13, esophagus; 14, root of the transverse mesocolon; 15, bare area of the rectum; 16, bladder. (From ref. 2, with permission.)

Tumor cells reach the peritoneal cavity by direct invasion of aggressive gastrointestinal (GI) tumors through the serosal lining of the organ or through a pressure-burst
effect of less invasive tumors that push through the serosal surface without tissue invasion. This is characteristic of appendiceal and ovarian tumors, in which even a
benign tumor can grow large enough to break through the wall of the organ and contaminate the peritoneal cavity with neoplastic cells. 7 It is possible for
hematogenous metastases from extraperitoneal tumors to invade secondarily or burst into the abdominal cavity, leading to peritoneal carcinomatosis. A final source
for peritoneal contamination of tumor cells is iatrogenic spillage of neoplastic cells. A classic example is during cholecystectomy in the setting of unrecognized
gallbladder cancer, in which the subserosal plane of tumor cell invasion is dissected during the resection, spilling tumor cells throughout the region. 8 It is also possible
to contaminate the peritoneal cavity during a needle biopsy for diagnosis.
Seeding of the peritoneal cavity with tumor cells does not necessarily lead to implantation, proliferation, and formation of carcinomatosis. 9 Different tumors and
heterogeneous cell populations within a single tumor will lead to different efficiencies with regard to tumor formation after peritoneal seeding. 10 The requirements for
peritoneal tumor seeding are different from the requirements for hematogenous metastases. The tumor cells must make their way into the cavity, then stick to the
peritoneal surface via adhesion molecules. 11 They must avoid immunologic destruction and, once implanted, be able to stimulate angiogenesis for continued growth.
In general, this can be accomplished with a less aggressive tumor cell than that required for hematogenous spread. Also, it may be possible for tumors to grow to a
limited extent within the peritoneal cavity without implantation and vascularization but relying on nutrients within peritoneal exudate for survival.

DIAGNOSIS
Although the follow-up and early detection of metastatic cancers in general is in debate in the absence of effective therapy, 12 the early diagnosis of peritoneal spread

of cancer would be preferable in the setting of experimental protocols for regional therapy. In other cases, the early detection of peritoneal spread might alter the
management of the primary tumor or avoid surgical exploration for hepatic or pulmonary metastasectomy. However, peritoneal spread is diagnosed in most patients
after surgical exploration for bowel complications or after clinical ascites develops. At this stage in the setting of invasive tumors, a regional therapy approach is
probably beyond any chance of success.
Standard imaging tests, including ultrasonography and helical computed tomography (CT) scans, are notably insensitive for the detection of peritoneal tumor. The
sensitivity of CT scan for peritoneal nodules measuring smaller than 1 cm is on the order of 15% to 30%. 13 Ultrasonography is similarly insensitive. It is important to
consider findings other than solid-tumor detection that may suggest the presence of peritoneal carcinomatosis. These include the presence of ascites, fixing together
of bowel loops, thickening of mesentery, and omental matting.
Advances in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have been demonstrated to improve significantly detection of peritoneal tumor nodules. 14 Low et al.15 have
demonstrated that abdominal MRI is superior to helical CT for the detection of peritoneal and bowel wall abnormalities. It may be that MRI of the peritoneal cavity is
improved with dilute oral barium contrast materials. In general, CT scans are easier to interpret for the general oncologist and are cheaper to obtain and, therefore,
are still more widely used than MRI. For patients on clinical protocol, however, improved imaging should be a goal for the oncologist, to aid in follow-up of peritoneal
disease. Nelson et al. 16 studied intraperitoneal infusion of contrast material before CT scanning, but this did not significantly improve the sensitivity for detection of
peritoneal metastases.
Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging for metastatic GI tumors is under investigation at numerous institutions and may improve the sensitivity for detecting
small nodules. In general, PET has not been shown to be sensitive for lesions measuring smaller than 1 cm in the abdominal cavity. Extrahepatic peritoneal nodules
of smaller than 1 cm were not detected by [ 18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET scanning as a preoperative screen for patients undergoing hepatic metastasectomy for
colorectal cancer. 17
Another mechanism for screening for peritoneal spread of tumor involves peritoneal lavage cytology. This can be performed as a percutaneous closed technique or at
the time of laparoscopy or laparotomy for resection of primary disease. The sensitivity of this test depends on the ability to lavage completely all regions of the
peritoneal cavity and the ability to detect cancer cells accurately. Sensitivity may be improved using polymerase chain reaction techniques or
immunohistochemistry.18,19 The sensitivity also depends on the number of cells being shed into the peritoneal cavity by the tumor. Even in cases with advanced,
grossly evident peritoneal metastases, the ascites can be negative for tumor cells. A study by Fujiwara et al. 20 compared closed abdominal lavage cytology to
second-look laparotomy. In this study, 14 patients who had positive cytology results also had positive disease on second-look laparotomy. Three patients with
negative cytology had positive disease on second-look laparotomy. The other 23 patients had negative cytology and negative second-look laparotomy. This illustrates
the fact that cytology can be helpful in predicting the presence of carcinomatosis, but it is not as sensitive as direct inspection and palpation of the peritoneal surfaces.
Much has been studied regarding the prognostic utility of lavage cytology for patients at high risk of peritoneal spread, as in the case of gastric cancer, colon cancer,
and pancreatic cancer. 21,22 Positive cytology correlates with full-thickness invasion through the bowel wall, as would be expected. 23 Positive cytology also seems to
correlate with a poor prognosis for peritoneal recurrence. 24,25 It is not clear, however, whether cytology has any added prognostic value over the stage of the primary
tumor. It should be noted also that cells shed into the peritoneal cavity may not be viable or may not be able to establish new tumor sites; therefore, the presence of
tumor cells may not predict the development of carcinomatosis.
By far the most sensitive modality for detecting the spread of tumor is direct visualization of the peritoneal surfaces along with palpation of the abdominal contents.
Visualization of the peritoneal surfaces can be accomplished with a minimally invasive approach. Laparoscopy is now used routinely in most cancer centers as a
staging modality for patients with resectable pancreatic and gastric cancers. Its greatest utility is in diagnosing small peritoneal metastases and small surface liver
metastases that are not detected on imaging tests. 26 The minimally invasive laparoscopy allows for safe, directed peritoneal lavage for cytology as well. Laparoscopy
should be considered for the detection of peritoneal surface tumors in patients in whom therapy would be altered or investigational therapy considered for tumor
spread in this fashion. This includes patients who are considered for preoperative neoadjuvant regional therapy before surgical resection for resectable pancreatic
and gastric cancer. Laparoscopy may also be of utility in patients with carcinomatosis who should be followed up for response to therapy to determine whether to
change therapies or continue the current treatment strategy. 27,28 Repeat laparoscopy for following up disease status at intervals during therapy is feasible. The
adhesions after multiple tumor debulkings and laparoscopies may ultimately limit the sensitivity of detection and increase the risk of laparoscopy. Open abdominal
exploration and palpation of the peritoneal surfaces is extremely sensitive for even small 1- to 2-mm peritoneal surface nodules. Palpation of the areas at high risk
should be performed during any cancer surgery for intraperitoneal malignancies. This includes the greater omentum, the deepest recess of the pelvic peritoneum, the
base of the small bowel mesentery and transverse mesocolon, the falciform ligament, and the diaphragm.

HISTOLOGIC SUBTYPES
PSEUDOMYXOMA PERITONEI
Classically, the diagnosis of Pseudomyxoma peritonei includes any low-grade or benign tumor within the abdominal cavity that produces copious amounts of
mucinous ascites. The term was first coined in 1884 by Werth 29 as a description of the gelatinous material filling the peritoneal cavity of a patient with a ruptured
cystadenoma of the ovary. In 1901, Fraenkel 30 first associated P peritonei with a ruptured mucocele of the appendix. Because of the relative rarity of this clinical
entity, it is generally poorly understood by oncologists. The spectrum of conditions that are considered to fall under the general diagnosis of P peritonei is quite large. 7
This leads to confusion in determining the expected clinical outcome and treatment approaches for this condition.
The condition of diffuse mucinous ascites can be caused by any tumor that has spread into the peritoneal cavity and produces significant amounts of mucin. This
includes well-differentiated adenocarcinomas of the GI tract and benign mucin-secreting adenomas of the appendix. 7 A benign tumor of the appendix can grow to a
size that ruptures the wall of the appendix and leads to spillage of benign cells into the peritoneal cavity. These cells can then continue to proliferate and produce
copious amounts of mucin despite a completely benign histology, with the inability to invade into tissues and metastasize hematogenously or via lymphatics. The most
important prognosticator for patients with mucinous ascites is, therefore, whether the primary tumor is benign or malignant.
Clinical evidence of malignancy includes the presence of lymph node metastases and gross evidence of an invasive phenotype. Histologically, malignant tumors will
have moderate to abundant cellularity, show evidence of invasion, and demonstrate cellular atypia and nuclear pleomorphism consistent with malignancy. Benign
tumors have scant cellularity with no evidence of invasion into tissues and no cellular atypia. In difficult cases, it is helpful to examine the primary tumor carefully to
determine whether the primary tumor represents invasion of tumor cells through the wall of the organ or a benign process that has ruptured the wall without invasion.
The site of origin of cells producing mucinous ascites often is difficult to define. This is especially the case when, in women, both the appendix and the ovaries are
obliterated by tumor. Although the ovary can be a site for mucinous borderline tumors of low malignant potential or mucinous carcinomas, these are almost never
associated with diffuse copious mucinous ascites. 7 Therefore, all cases of P peritonei with benign-appearing mucinous epithelial cells emanate from an appendiceal
mucinous adenoma. These tumors often involve the ovaries at early stages but should not be confused with a primary ovarian cancer. Ruptured ovarian follicles may
allow for a rich soil and sticky surface on which benign tumor cells can stick and proliferate. In surgical debulking procedures, appendectomy and bilateral
oophorectomy should be performed.
Ronett et al.31 have extensive experience in P peritonei, and they have classified cases of P peritonei into three pathologically and prognostically distinct groups: (1)
disseminated peritoneal adenomucinosis; (2) peritoneal mucinous carcinomatosis; and (3) peritoneal mucinous carcinomatosis with intermediate or discordant
features (Table 49-1). They have shown distinct difference in survival and prognosis in patients with disseminated peritoneal adenomucinosis as compared to those
with carcinomatosis or discordant features ( Fig. 49-2). This work verifies the importance of differentiating a malignant from a benign diagnosis. In their study, the
median survival for patients with disseminated peritoneal adenomucinosis had not been reached with a median follow-up of approximately 6 years, whereas the
median survival for patients with a malignant tumor producing mucinous ascites was approximately 16 months.

TABLE 49-1. Distinguishing Pathologic Features of Disseminated Peritoneal Adenomucinosis and Peritoneal Mucinous Carcinomatosis

FIGURE 49-2. Kaplan-Meier curves demonstrating survival rates for patients with disseminated peritoneal adenomucinosis (DPAM), peritoneal mucinous
carcinomatosis (PMCA), and PMCA with intermediate or discordant features. There is a statistically significant difference in survival between the three groups ( P
<.0001). (From ref. 7, with permission.)

Despite this dramatic difference in prognosis, most studies include all forms of P peritonei together, and this confuses outcome determinants for therapy in this
condition. It would be best not to use the term P peritonei without further classification into mucinous adenocarcinoma or benign mucinous tumors. The treatment
approach should be different for patients with benign mucin-producing tumors as compared to those with mucinous carcinomatosis. Patients with benign tumors
should be treated with aggressive surgical debulking to limit the symptoms of compression and abdominal distention caused by extensive mucinous ascites within the
abdominal cavity. It has been reported that long-term disease-free survival can be accomplished with repeated tumor debulking. 32 The extent of required surgery and
the indication for chemotherapy are controversial. 33 The complication rate of the procedure should be seriously considered in recommending treatment for a condition
with such an indolent course. It may be that aggressive regional chemotherapy approaches should not be offered until their efficacy has been better defined in
carcinomas. In the case of low-grade mucinous carcinomatosis, the uniformly poor prognosis encourages innovative and aggressive approaches. This includes
intensive regional chemotherapy in combination with cytoreduction (as discussed in the Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy section).
Because of inconsistencies in pathologic diagnosis as well as different philosophies with regard to aggressiveness of surgery, it is difficult to define the prognosis and
the best treatment strategies. The largest series of mucinous appendiceal tumors with peritoneal spread has been reported by Sugarbaker and Chang. 34 A total of 385
patients were reviewed. Patients with benign adenomucinosis had a 5-year survival of 80%, as compared to those with low-grade mucinous carcinomas, who had a
5-year survival of approximately 25%. The 5-year survival for those patients undergoing a complete resection was approximately 80%, as compared to those
undergoing an incomplete resection, in which it was approximately 25%. It is probably not a coincidence that characteristics of surgical debulking and pathology lead
to similar survival rates: Complete resection is more likely in patients with benign mucinous neoplasms as compared to those with more infiltrative mucinous
carcinomas. As discussed in the Surgery section, the fact that complete cytoreduction has an improved prognosis over incomplete cytoreduction does nothing to
support aggressive surgery for this disease. Of note, the mortality rate for extensive cytoreduction and early postoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy in the
Sugarbaker and Chang 34 series is 2%, with major morbidity of 27%.
Gough et al. 35 (from the Mayo Clinic) reviewed 56 patients with the malignant form of P peritonei. Only 20% of their patients had complete cytoreduction, and they
reported a 10-year survival rate of 32%. Smith et al. 36 (from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center) reviewed 17 patients undergoing surgical debulking for P
peritonei without histologic classification. They reported a 10-year survival rate of 60%.
In summary, the entity of P peritonei is becoming better defined. Classification of the benign and malignant subtypes is essential and should be used to define and
compare therapeutic approaches for this disease. The use of aggressive surgery and regional chemotherapy approaches remains experimental and requires
investigation in a multiinstitutional randomized format to make standard treatment recommendations.
PERITONEAL MESOTHELIOMA
Peritoneal mesothelioma is a primary tumor of the mesothelial lining of the peritoneum. It is a rare tumor of approximately two cases per million population per year,
but the incidence appears to be increasing. Tumors can be classified into benign lesions, borderline malignant lesions, and malignant tumors. 37 Benign lesions
include adenomatoid mesothelioma and localized fibrous mesothelioma, which are rare tumors treated by surgical excision alone, with a good prognosis. Borderline
tumors include multicystic peritoneal mesothelioma and well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma of the peritoneum. 38,39 and 40 Both of these tumors carry an indolent
course, which can be treated with surgical debulking. These borderline tumors are characterized by local recurrences that can ultimately lead to complications within
the abdominal cavity. It is not clear whether the tumors themselves will ultimately lead to the death of the patient. In a review of 22 patients, none died directly
because of their disease, but several died as a result of complications of therapy. 41 One patient who died 29 years after he received a diagnosis of well-differentiated
papillary mesothelioma had residual disease but died of unrelated causes. Microscopically, well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma consists of mesothelial cells in a
well-developed papillary pattern with bland mesothelial appearance and cuboidal epithelium. It can be difficult to differentiate histologically the well-differentiated
papillary mesothelioma from diffuse malignant mesothelioma, so multiple sections of tumor should be examined.
The malignant peritoneal mesotheliomas are less common than pleural mesotheliomas and have been associated with asbestos exposure and abdominal therapeutic
radiation. 42 The association of malignant peritoneal mesothelioma and asbestos exposure has been reported to be as high as 83%; however, in our experience, it is
much lower. These tumors often present with nonspecific abdominal pain and increasing abdominal girth secondary either to tumor mass or to the development of
ascites. The diagnosis can be suggested by cytologic examination of ascites and verified by percutaneous biopsy of the omentum. These tumors tend to present with
diffuse involvement of the peritoneal cavity, including an omental “cake” and diaphragmatic and pelvic tumor deposits ( Fig. 49-3).

FIGURE 49-3. Diffuse malignant peritoneal mesothelioma of the papillary form. A thick omental “cake” is evident here, as is disease involving the mesentery of the
small bowel. Notice the general sparing of the mobile surfaces of the small intestine. This disease was successfully debulked and treated with continuous
hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion.

The epithelial type of malignant peritoneal mesothelioma is the most common type and has the best prognosis. The sarcomatoid and mixed (elements of both
epithelial and sarcomatoid) forms are more aggressive, leading to fixed abdominal contents and an inability to successfully debulk these tumors surgically. Even
among the primary epithelial form, there may be a spectrum of phenotypic aggressiveness and a variable clinical course. Some patients primarily experience ascites
with no significant invasiveness to the tumors themselves, allowing for easy debulking and management of ascites. Other patients have more aggressive forms that
can invade through the diaphragm to involve the chest, through the wall of the intestine (leading to complications of intestinal obstruction and bleeding), and into
lymph nodes. The more invasive forms are difficult to debulk and have a worse prognosis. The sarcomatoid and mixed forms are rapidly growing tumors leading to
intraabdominal complications and death within a year. 43
Death from malignant mesothelioma is usually caused by complications from intraperitoneal progression. Hematogenous metastases are extremely rare, and
secondary involvement of the chest occurs at a late stage and is usually not a life-threatening feature of this disease. Lymphatic metastases can be identified within
the abdominal cavity with the more aggressive forms of epithelial mesothelioma and the sarcomatoid mesothelioma. 44 Patients with peritoneal mesothelioma in
general have a better prognosis than those with pleural mesothelioma. CA-125 levels may be increased in patients with diffuse mesothelioma and can be followed up
for response to therapy.
The natural history of diffuse mesothelioma is difficult to define. Reported series are small, owing to the rarity of this disease. Original reports suggested that the
median survival was less than 1 year from the time of diagnosis. 45 However, multiple varied treatment approaches, usually combining surgical debulking with
chemotherapy or total abdominal radiation (or both), may result in long-term survival. 46 Langer et al. 47 demonstrated a median survival of 22 months using surgical
debulking and intraperitoneal chemotherapy with cisplatin and etoposide. No control, untreated arm is included in these trials to prove that the natural history is not
sometimes indolent. It is also difficult to know whether adjuvant therapies improve the results of surgical debulking alone, as no series exists of aggressive surgical
debulking alone for this disease. It is suggested, however, that the package of treatment strategies that have been used can successfully alter the natural history of
this disease. Lederman et al. 48 reported that six of ten patients remain free of disease up to 6 years after diagnosis after treatment with surgical debulking,
combination chemotherapy, and whole abdomen radiation. Whole abdomen radiation is not well tolerated and has not gained widespread acceptance. Other
investigators have used intraperitoneal chemotherapy alone (cisplatin or cisplatin plus mitomycin C) with modest clinical responses and improvement in ascites but
have failed to demonstrate a survival benefit. Markman and Kelsen 49 reported 47% palliation of ascites and a median survival of 9 months in 19 patients who were
treated with intraperitoneal cisplatin and mitomycin C.
We have explored the combination of extensive surgical debulking followed by intraoperative, intraperitoneal chemotherapy in the form of continuous hyperthermic
peritoneal perfusion with cisplatin combined with early postoperative intraperitoneal dwell chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and paclitaxel. 50 Patients who
presented with incapacitating ascites have complete resolution of their ascites and long-term disease-free survival. The median time to progression after treatment in
18 patients was approximately 27 months, with a median overall survival not being reached after a median potential follow-up of 19 months ( Fig. 49-4). Ninety percent
of patients had complete resolution of their ascites after therapy. Three patients were treated after recurrence of ascites approximately 2 years after their primary
treatment, and all had resolution of their ascites again after retreatment. Other investigators have demonstrated similar success using the hyperthermic peritoneal
treatment with mitomycin C for mesothelioma.51

FIGURE 49-4. Kaplan-Meier survival curve for 18 patients treated with continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion with cisplatin at the National Cancer Institute for
peritoneal mesothelioma. *The progressive free survival analysis includes three patients who have been treated twice. (Adapted from ref. 50.)

PRIMARY PERITONEAL CARCINOMA
Primary peritoneal carcinoma has been called by many names, including papillary carcinoma of the peritoneum, extraovarian papillary serous carcinoma, serous
surface papillary carcinoma, and psammocarcinoma.52,53 and 54 The cell of origin for primary peritoneal carcinoma is not clear. Both the germinal epithelium of the ovary
and the mesothelium of the peritoneum arise from the same embryologic origin; therefore, the peritoneum may retain the multipotentiality of the Müllerian system,
allowing for the development of a primary carcinoma. Hereditary predisposition may play a role in this disease, as patients have an increased risk with the BRCA1
mutation.55
Primary peritoneal carcinoma diffusely involves the peritoneal surface while sparing or only minimally involving the ovaries. It is histologically indistinguishable from
primary epithelial ovarian carcinoma, and its diagnosis requires differentiation from mesothelioma and ovarian cancer. Immunohistochemistry differentiates this from
peritoneal mesothelioma. 56 Primary ovarian cancer is ruled out by the following criteria 57: (1) Both ovaries must be normal in size; (2) the extraovarian involvement
must be greater than the involvement on the surface of the ovary; (3) the ovarian component must be less than 5 × 5 mm within the ovary or confined to the ovarian
surface; and (4) the cytologic characteristics must be of the serous type. This is a tumor described almost exclusively in women. Patients are older than those with
epithelial ovarian cancers. The presentation of primary peritoneal carcinoma is abdominal distention and diffuse nonspecific abdominal pain secondary to ascites.
In general, these tumors are treated as ovarian cancers with cytoreduction and adjuvant therapy with platinum-based chemotherapeutic regimens. The median
survival for women with primary peritoneal carcinoma has been reported to range from 12 to 25 months. This is similar or slightly worse than for epithelial ovarian
cancer. Carboplatin or cisplatin in combination with paclitaxel leads to a high response rate and a reported median survival of 40 months. 52,58

DESMOPLASTIC SMALL ROUND CELL TUMORS
The rare desmoplastic small round cell tumors typically occur in adolescents and young men and present with extensive involvement of the peritoneal surfaces. Rapid
multifocal growth and hematogenous metastases to the liver, lungs, and lymph nodes are common. Reported median survival is 17 months, and long-term survival is
uncommon. A combination of aggressive surgical debulking and systemic chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine interspersed with
ifosfamide, etoposide, and mesna (P6 protocol) appears to lead to an improved outcome. 59 The genetics of this tumor are interesting in that a consistent chromosomal
translocation has been identified, which results in fusion of the Ewing's sarcoma gene with the Wilms' tumor gene. 60 This tumor can sometimes be difficult to
differentiate from malignant peritoneal mesothelioma.
GASTROINTESTINAL PRIMARY TUMORS
GI primary tumors are the most common source of peritoneal carcinomatosis in male patients. This includes colon cancer, gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer,
gallbladder cancer, and primary small bowel adenocarcinomas. The range of aggressiveness of these cancers is quite broad. However, as opposed to appendiceal
tumors, the majority of other GI primary tumors are aggressive, invasive forms. The most important risk factor for developing peritoneal carcinomatosis is the depth of
invasion of the primary tumor. If the tumor has invaded through the serosa (T3), the entire peritoneal surface is at risk for the development of carcinomatosis. These
patients should be considered for adjuvant regional chemotherapy.
Patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis from these types of aggressive GI cancers usually present with symptoms of partial small bowel obstruction, as opposed to
diffuse ascites, as is seen with the less invasive malignancies. Successful management of these patients with a regional approach is unlikely by the time they develop
symptoms and complications of intraperitoneal spread. Because of their invasive nature, these tumors often invade the retroperitoneum and bowel wall and
extensively involve lymphatics, where intraperitoneal chemotherapy may not reach. Adequate surgical debulking becomes less feasible for these aggressive GI
malignancies. The treatment goal should be prophylaxis against the development of carcinomatosis or treatment of those patients who are incidentally found, at the
time of primary resection, to have minimal peritoneal spread that can be managed with complete surgical excision. Because of the uniformly poor prognosis with
peritoneal spread, an aggressive, prophylactic regional chemotherapy approach seems warranted.
GYNECOLOGIC PRIMARY TUMORS
Ovarian, endometrial, and cervical cancer can all invade into the peritoneal cavity and have a clinical course dominated by intraperitoneal spread of the tumor.
Ovarian tumors (similar to appendiceal primary tumors) can lead to peritoneal contamination even in the setting of relatively low-grade, minimally aggressive tumors. 61
As compared to GI tumors (other than appendiceal), the ovarian carcinomatosis is less aggressive and, therefore, more amenable to surgical cytoreduction and
regional intraperitoneal chemotherapy. Because of the sensitivity of ovarian tumors to systemic chemotherapy, carcinomatosis from an ovarian primary tumor
represents a rare instance in which systemic chemotherapy can provide a long-term disease-free interval and potential cure. 62 It has been demonstrated that surgical
debulking can improve the response and results of systemic chemotherapy. 63 The systematic staging of the peritoneal surface in patients with primary ovarian cancer
is required to document microscopic metastases to the peritoneum, which would alter the treatment paradigm. Ascites is a common complication of peritoneal
carcinomatosis from ovarian cancer, and palliation of ascites can play a significant role in the management of this disease.
OTHER FORMS
Other forms of peritoneal carcinomatosis are less common, and peritoneal spread does not normally dominate the clinical course of these tumors. Among these
lesions are tumors from the genitourinary tract, such as testicular cancer, transitional cell cancer of the bladder, and renal cancer. 64 We have seen
hemangiopericytoma, adrenal cancer, and pediatric solid tumors contaminate the peritoneal cavity. Peritoneal sarcomatosis is discussed in Chapter 39. Breast cancer
can also lead to peritoneal carcinomatosis and ascites, which can be the only site of progressive disease in some patients. Palliation of ascites in these patients may
improve their overall prognosis.

TREATMENT
SURGERY
Surgical debulking for peritoneal carcinomatosis is standard for the management of benign and low-grade malignant processes, such as P peritonei, mesothelioma,
and ovarian cancer. In these settings, the goal of debulking is to “reset the clock” for development of symptoms. The more tumor that is removed, the longer the
interval until the tumor grows to a symptomatic stage. Investigational strategies combine surgical cytoreduction with regional therapy. The goal of cytoreduction in this
case is to leave behind only tumors smaller than 5.0 mm in diameter so as to allow for topical chemotherapy to penetrate and treat all cells within the tumor. 65 The
best scenario is complete cytoreduction, wherein only microscopic disease is left behind. This is similar to bathing cells with chemotherapy in a Petri dish, ensuring
delivery of chemotherapy to the cells.
Common sites for tumor spread should be closely examined, and resection of tumors is indicated where possible. This includes complete resection of the greater
omentum, lesser omentum, falciform ligament, and peritoneum overlying the diaphragm; the base of the small bowel and transverse colon mesentery; and the pelvis.
The splenic hilum is often involved with tumor, necessitating a splenectomy. Appendices epiploicae commonly are involved and may require limited bowel resections.
The most difficult sites in which to achieve complete clearance are the hepatoduodenal ligament and pelvis. Oophorectomy, hysterectomy, partial bladder resection,
and sigmoid colon resection may be required in the pelvis. Care must be taken to preserve blood supply to the stomach when dissecting the lesser omentum. The
extent of resection should be dictated by the realistic treatment goal. Complete removal of all microscopic disease in the peritoneal cavity is not realistic, so the goal is
to remove macroscopic disease in the hopes that chemotherapy or other adjuvant therapy will be more effective. An extensive procedure to remove pelvic peritoneal
drop metastases in the setting of unresectable hepatic hilar disease does not make sense. Incidental extensive stripping of the peritoneum to address microscopic
disease is not generally accepted, as all surfaces and all microscopic disease cannot be addressed.
Except in ovarian cancer, extensive cytoreduction for peritoneal carcinomatosis has not been objectively studied. Numerous trials demonstrate improved prognosis in
patients who undergo complete debulking as compared to those whose tumors cannot be debulked, 52,66,67 but this is only a mirror of the aggressiveness of the tumor
or late presentation. The ability to debulk completely correlates with an improved prognosis, but this should not be accepted as an indication to perform the procedure.
Nevertheless, well-controlled trials are extremely difficult to perform in this disease state, and many definitive answers will not be obtained for some time. It is
generally accepted in the setting of indolent, benign, or low-grade tumors, in which survival is dictated by complications of regional growth, that tumor debulking can
extend survival. It is also accepted that intraperitoneal approaches that require direct absorption of chemotherapy into tumors will be more successful in the setting of
minimal to microscopic residual disease. Complications of the procedure and quality of life must be considered in the decision for aggressive surgery. Enterotomies
can lead to fistulas, bowel anastomoses can dehisce (leading to peritonitis), and a permanent colostomy may not be a reasonable outcome for a disease with an
expected indolent course.
Sugarbaker68 has been a proponent of aggressive peritoneal resection for carcinomatosis in selected circumstances. He has described “peritonectomy” procedures,
which have been widely quoted in the literature, by which the peritoneum and associated expendable structures are removed. The six procedures are (1)
omentectomy-splenectomy; (2) left upper quadrant stripping; (3) right upper quadrant stripping; (4) lesser omentectomy and cholecystectomy; (5) pelvic peritoneal
stripping, including hysterectomy and sigmoid colectomy; and (6) antrectomy. The procedures were undertaken only where gross tumor was present. The morbidity of
such procedures in the context of intraperitoneal chemotherapy has been reported by the same group for 200 patients undergoing aggressive cytoreductive surgery
and hyperthermic, intraoperative, intraperitoneal chemotherapy. The mortality rate was 1.5%, and grade III and grade IV morbidity were seen in 27% of patients. 69
INTRAPERITONEAL CHEMOTHERAPY
Systemic chemotherapy has been notoriously poor for the treatment of peritoneal carcinomatosis. This is mostly due to the fact that most GI solid tumors are not
sensitive to chemotherapy, but other theoretic concerns exist regarding the successful penetration of chemotherapy into the peritoneal cavity (and into solid tumors in
general). It should be noted that ovarian cancer patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis can be cured with systemic chemotherapy in rare cases. 63 The concept of
delivering chemotherapy directly into the peritoneal cavity is appealing, theoretically allowing higher concentrations to be delivered to the tumor while minimizing
systemic side effects. The mesothelial lining acts as a barrier to absorption of chemotherapy agents. Casper et al. 70 demonstrated 30-fold higher peritoneal

concentration of cisplatin when delivered into the peritoneal cavity as compared to intravenous delivery. High concentrations of chemotherapy topically applied to
tumor cells should be more effective than what can be achieved with intravascular delivery.
The pharmacokinetic rationale for intraperitoneal chemotherapy has been recognized for many years, 71 and intraperitoneal chemotherapy trials blossomed in the early
1980s.72,73,74 and 75 Larger, water-soluble and ionized compounds exit the peritoneal compartment more slowly than smaller lipid-soluble and un-ionized molecules.
Pharmacokinetic models of peritoneal delivery have been developed. 76,77 Patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis may have decreased clearance of all drugs from the
peritoneal cavity due to obstruction of lymphatic channels. In addition, the majority of compounds delivered into the peritoneal cavity are cleared by the portal
circulation and, therefore, may be metabolized by the liver. Compounds that have a delayed clearance from the peritoneal cavity may allow for prolonged exposure of
slowly dividing cells to the chemotherapy agent. If the agent requires mitosis for efficacy, this improves the chance of it being effective, compared to the relatively brief
exposure provided by systemic delivery. Finally, by confining the treatment to direct absorption, systemic binding agents can be delivered and bind and inactivate
systemically absorbed drug to minimize systemic toxicity. 78
The main pitfalls for intraperitoneal chemotherapy include the difficulty in obtaining even distribution throughout the peritoneal cavity and the limited absorption of
agents into tumor nodules. 79 Prior abdominal surgery leads to numerous loculations within the peritoneal cavity and prevents even distribution of intraperitoneal
agents. Prolonged intraperitoneal dwell chemotherapy can be hampered by scarring around the delivery catheter, allowing for escape of tumor cells within protected
areas of the abdomen. Large treatment volumes (>2 liters) have been shown to improve distribution. 80 Intraoperative and early postoperative intraperitoneal
chemotherapy may allow for treatment of all peritoneal surfaces before dense, loculated scarred areas develop, but this may increase the morbidity associated with
the procedure. 81 A randomized trial of adjuvant intraperitoneal chemotherapy with carbon-absorbed mitomycin in gastric cancer was prematurely terminated due to a
statistically significant increase in major postoperative morbidity in the patients receiving chemotherapy. 82
The ideal setting for ensuring complete distribution of chemotherapy to the peritoneal cavity is intraoperative treatment at the time of surgical debulking. Recirculating
circuits and physical manipulation of abdominal contents during therapy may enhance distribution. Studies suggest, and logic concludes, that the best means for
ensuring complete distribution during intraperitoneal therapy is to manipulate the contents of the peritoneal cavity by hand during treatment. This can be
accomplished by a variety of techniques with the patient under general anesthesia, allowing a hand to be inserted into the abdominal cavity without spilling the
chemotherapy solution.
Tumor penetration of drugs delivered into the peritoneal cavity has been studied. Los et al. 83 demonstrated that the tumor concentration of cisplatin was significantly
elevated after intraperitoneal delivery, as compared to systemic delivery, at a depth of 1.0 mm but not at 1.5 mm. Increasing pressure within the peritoneal cavity may
improve penetration, and vasoactive agents that decrease capillary uptake of drugs in the tumor may allow for deeper penetration of drugs. Larger molecules may
penetrate more deeply into some tissues than low-molecular-weight agents because of decreased capillary permeability and vascular washout of the compounds. On
the other hand, if increased interstitial pressure occurs within tumors, as has been described, this may be an advantage to low-molecular-weight agents. Although it is
easy to determine clearance from the peritoneal cavity and easy to assume that decreased clearance leads to increased exposure of intraperitoneal tumor to
chemotherapy, it is not clear how decreased clearance correlates with absorption into tumor tissue. Decreased clearance may correlate with decreased tumor
absorption, which may be counterproductive. On the other hand, for the treatment of microscopic cells that have not developed into tumor nodules, prolonged
exposure in the peritoneal cavity should be advantageous.
A variety of agents have been delivered into the peritoneal cavity, and these are summarized in Table 49-2. The mean peritoneal cavity peak concentrations over
peak plasma concentrations range from 20 in the case of cisplatin to more than 600 for cytarabine and mitoxantrone and more than 1000 for paclitaxel. Regional
toxicity has not been a major problem with most of these agents. Even mitomycin C, which is considered a very caustic agent to tissues when infiltrated, has been
delivered into the peritoneal cavity safely. The most common agents that have been used in intraperitoneal trials include cisplatin, mitomycin C, 5-FU, and, recently,
paclitaxel. Gemcitabine currently is being studied with intraperitoneal delivery.

TABLE 49-2. Pharmacokinetic Advantages Associated with Intraperitoneal Antineoplastic Drug Delivery

In general, trials of intraperitoneal chemotherapy have been poorly controlled, with numerous treatment regimens for different histologies of varying prognosis at
different stages of peritoneal involvement, making interpretation of results difficult. 81,84 In addition, the combination of aggressive surgical debulking and intraoperative
or early postoperative chemotherapy make the interpretation of morbidity difficult. Sugarbaker 85 has used a complex scheme for assessing the extent of peritoneal
disease and completeness of resection ( Fig. 49-5). Adoption of this or similar standardized criteria should help in the standardization and interpretation of clinical
trials. Histologic grade and clinical invasive phenotyping should also improve trial interpretation.

FIGURE 49-5. Proposed standardized scheme for assessing extensive peritoneal disease. The peritoneal cancer index (PCI) represents the sum of the lesion size
scores for the different regions. (Reproduced from ref. 85, with permission.)

The utility and advantages of intraperitoneal chemotherapy have been demonstrated in randomized trials. Sugarbaker et al. 86 performed a small randomized trial
comparing postoperative adjuvant 5-FU delivered intravenously (n = 30) to intraperitoneal delivery (n = 36) for patients with high-risk primary colorectal cancers.
Although there was no difference in survival between the groups, the patients with intraperitoneal delivery had a significantly lower incidence of intraperitoneal
recurrences and less hematologic and hepatic toxicity. More recently, the combined Southwest Oncology Group, Gynecologic Oncology Group, and Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group Intergroup Study examined intravenous versus intraperitoneal cisplatin with intravenous cyclophosphamide for stage III ovarian
cancer. 87 This large, randomized, prospective, phase III trial demonstrated a significant survival advantage for patients receiving intraperitoneal cisplatin (49 vs. 41
months). In addition, this group experienced significantly less clinical hearing loss, neutropenia, and neuromuscular toxicity. Yu et al. 88 examined early postoperative

intraperitoneal chemotherapy as compared to no treatment after resection of gastric cancer (n = 248). This group demonstrated no overall survival benefit, but subset
analysis suggested improved survival for stage III disease, as might be expected (49% 5-year survival vs. 18%). Follow-up trials should be focused on stage III
disease. These results should stimulate continued interest in the peritoneal delivery of chemotherapy for peritoneal carcinomatosis and emphasize the need for
randomized trials for GI malignancies to define better the advantages of intraperitoneal delivery.
One procedure that is becoming increasingly popular across the world for the treatment of peritoneal carcinomatosis is the intraoperative combination of hyperthermia
and chemotherapy delivered as a recirculating perfusion. 89,90,91,92,93,94 and 95 Temperatures of 41C to 42C are maintained in the tissues over a period of 90 minutes by
recirculating fluid that passes through a roller pump and heat exchanger delivering high concentrations of chemotherapy to the peritoneal cavity ( Fig. 49-6). The most
common drugs used in this fashion have been cisplatin and mitomycin C. 96 The theoretic advantages of this technique include the improved mixing and surface
exposure associated with the increased pressure and high flow rates of the perfusate along with intraoperative manipulation of the abdominal contents. The
hyperthermia has been demonstrated to have selective cytotoxicity against cancer cells while the normal cells recover. 97 In addition, hyperthermia has been shown to
enhance chemotherapy penetration into tumors, 98 improve intraperitoneal pharmacokinetics, 99 and work synergistically with chemotherapy to kill cancer cells. 100

FIGURE 49-6. Peritoneal perfusion technique used at the National Cancer Institute. Chemotherapy solution is circulated through the roller pump, then through a heat
exchanger and into the abdominal cavity. The outflow is collected from the pelvis and passes to a small reservoir and then back through the roller pump. Peritoneal
temperatures are monitored via three probes inserted in different places in the peritoneal cavity, and intraabdominal pressures are monitored during the procedure.

This therapy has been demonstrated to be successful in randomized trials in Japan for completely resected advanced gastric cancer ( Table 49-3). These trials
include mitomycin C as the active agent or mitomycin C and cisplatin in combination. Fujimoto et al. 101 reported an 8-year survival of 88% in patients receiving
hyperthermic perfusion with mitomycin C for high-risk (serosal invasion) gastric cancers, as compared to 49% for surgery alone. Peritoneal recurrence was 23% in the
control group, as compared to 1% in the treatment group.

TABLE 49-3. Clinical Results of Multiarm Studies Evaluating the Efficacy of Prophylactic or Therapeutic Continuous Hyperthermic Peritoneal Perfusion Immediately
after Resection for Gastric Cancer

We have reported our results with continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion in a phase I study with tumor necrosis factor and cisplatin against all forms of
peritoneal carcinomatosis. 102 In that trial and subsequent trials, the response of patients with peritoneal mesothelioma stands out as being notable. We have
demonstrated a median progression-free survival of 26 months and overall 2-year survival rate of 80% in patients with peritoneal mesothelioma treated with peritoneal
perfusion with cisplatin. 50 This compares favorably to the natural history of peritoneal mesothelioma and the results of other therapeutic trials. Numerous centers are
now reporting their results with heated peritoneal perfusion for different forms of peritoneal carcinomatosis. In an attempt to maximize chemotherapy delivery to these
tumors, we (and others) have now combined postoperative intraperitoneal dwell chemotherapy with intraoperative heated peritoneal perfusion. Close scrutiny of the
complication rates with these procedures is important, as their benefit at this point is only theoretic. A randomized trial comparing surgical debulking and systemic
chemotherapy to surgical debulking plus intraoperative hyperthermic chemotherapy perfusion is necessary to demonstrate the true utility of these procedures.
OTHER INTRAPERITONEAL THERAPIES
Other approaches for regional therapy for peritoneal carcinomatosis have been investigated. Total abdominal irradiation, in combination with surgical debulking and
chemotherapy, has been shown to be effective in peritoneal mesothelioma and has been studied in other malignancies. 103 In general, the toxicity of total abdominal
irradiation is unsatisfactory; therefore, this treatment approach has not become standard. Photodynamic therapy of the peritoneal cavity is under active investigation
for all forms of peritoneal carcinomatosis. Patients receive an intravenous photosensitizing dose of dihematoporphyrin ethers followed by exposure of the peritoneal
surfaces to laser light. 104 The approach has undergone phase I studies, but its efficacy has not been reported in phase II studies. Intraperitoneal immunotherapy
approaches are under investigation, including the intraperitoneal delivery of adoptively transferred lymphocytes. 105 Gene therapy approaches are also being
investigated, as intraperitoneal tumor cells may be ideally exposed to intraperitoneal delivered vectors, leading to a high transduction efficiency. 106
PALLIATION
Major complications of peritoneal carcinomatosis include partial and complete obstruction of the GI tract, leading to crampy abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting.
The other significant complication is the development of ascites, which can become incapacitating and the direct cause of death. The palliative management of these
entities by the oncologist is required. Patients with crampy, abdominal pain suggesting partial small bowel obstruction should be worked up with a CT scan and upper
GI series. A determination should be made about whether a simple bypass or resection of an obstructed region can be performed, in which case the appropriate
operation is undertaken. In the setting of diffuse disease that cannot be bypassed, a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube should be inserted for palliation. 107
This is a simple procedure that can be performed with minimal complications, yet provides lasting palliation. Signs of peritonitis or systemic sepsis should raise
concerns of a closed loop obstruction that may require emergent surgical resection. It is often helpful to ensure patency of the rectum in patients being explored for
bypass of a small bowel obstruction in the setting of peritoneal carcinomatosis. A shelf of tumor in the pelvic peritoneal recess may lead to obstruction, placing a
proximal bowel anastomosis at risk. Rarely, patients may require a colostomy or ileostomy for palliation. The nutritional management of patients who require a
palliative gastrostomy in the setting of peritoneal carcinomatosis and bowel obstruction is controversial. In general, it is accepted that total parenteral nutrition does
nothing to improve the quality of life or prolong survival in patients having peritoneal carcinomatosis secondary to aggressive GI malignancies. However, in the case
of low-grade malignancies, these patients can survive for a very long time after palliative gastrostomy; therefore, parenteral nutrition should be considered. We have
had the experience of managing a patient on total parenteral nutrition for more than a year with a good quality of life after palliative gastrostomy in the setting of a

low-grade, mucinous adenocarcinoma causing compressive bowel obstruction.
Management of malignant ascites is a challenge for the oncologist. In cases of malignant mesothelioma and ovarian cancer, the best therapy may involve aggressive
surgical debulking and intraperitoneal chemotherapy. Numerous patients who have been considered terminal because of incapacitating ascites have been treated
successfully in this manner. Schilsky et al. 84 demonstrated successful resolution of ascites with intraperitoneal dwell chemotherapy with 5-FU and cisplatin. Diuretics
are ineffective in the management of malignant ascites, and intermittent paracentesis may be effective in the short term but invariably leads to electrolyte imbalance,
hypoproteinemia, hypovolemia, and, ultimately, renal failure and death. Peritoneovenous shunts can be effective and should be considered. Straus et al. 108 reported
that 89% of their shunts relieved symptoms of nausea, distention, loss of appetite, and dyspnea and that 79% of the shunts functioned for longer than 3 months or
until death. Qazi and Savlov 109 reported 70% effective palliation with peritoneovenous shunt. As these shunts are rather easy to insert (under local anesthesia in most
cases) with at least temporary palliation, they should be considered in patients with reasonable performance status and incapacitating ascites.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Henriksen JH, Winkler K. Peritoneum and ascites formation. In: Bengmark S, ed. The peritoneum and peritoneal access. London: Wright Publishers, 1989:94.
2. Levison ME, Pontzer RE. Peritonitis and other intra-abdominal infections In: Mandell GL, Douglas RG Jr, Bennett JE, eds. Principles and practice of infectious diseases. New York: John Wiley
and Sons, 1979:476.
3. Watters WB, Buck RC. Scanning electron microscopy of mesothelial regeneration in the rat. Lab Invest 1972; 26(5):604.
4. Flessner MF, Fenstermacher JD, Blasberg RG, Dedrick RL. Peritoneal absorption of macromolecules studied by quantitative autoradiography. Am J Physiol 1985;248:H26.
5. Hagiwara A, Rakahashi T, Sawai K, et al. Milky spots at the implantation site for malignant cells in peritoneal dissemination in mice. Cancer Res 1993;53:687.
6. Sugarbaker P. Observations concerning cancer spread within the peritoneal cavity and concepts supporting an ordered pathophysiology. In: Sugarbaker P, ed. Peritoneal carcinomatosis:
principles of management. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996:79.
7. Ronnett BM, Shmookler BM, Sugarbaker PH, Kurman RJ. Pseudomyxoma peritonei: new concepts in diagnosis, origin, nomenclature, and relationship to mucinous borderline (low malignant
potential) tumors of the ovary. Anat Pathol 1997;2:197.
8. Bartlett DL. Tumors of the gallbladder. In: Blumgart L, Fong Y, eds. Surgery of the liver and biliary tract. London: Harcourt, Brace, 2000 (in press).
9. Weiss L. Metastatic inefficiency: intravascular and intraperitoneal implantation of cancer cells. Cancer Treat Res 1996;82:1.
10. Veatch AL, Carson LF, Ramakrishnan S. Phenotypic variations and differential migration of NIH:OVCA R-3 ovarian carcinoma cells isolated from athymic mice. Clin Exp Metastasis
1995;13:165.
11. Liebman JM, Burbelo PD, Yamada Y, Feldman R, Kleinman HK. Altered expression of basement-membrane components and collagenases in ascitic xenografis of OVCA R-3 ovarian cancer
cells. Int J Cancer 1993;55:102.
12. Graham RA, Wang S, Catalano PJ, Haller DG. Postsurgical surveillance of colon cancer: preliminary cost analysis of physician examination, carcinoembryonic antigen testing, chest x-ray, and
colonoscopy. Ann Surg 1998;228:59.
13. Archer AG, Sugarbaker PH, Jelinek JS. Radiology of peritoneal carcinomatosis. Cancer Treat Res 1996;82:263.
14. Chou CK, Liu GC, Su JH, et al. MRI demonstration of peritoneal implants. Abdom Imaging 1994;19:95.
15. Low RN, Semelka RC, Worawattarakul S, Alzate GD, Sigeti JS. Extrahepatic abdominal imaging in patients with malignancy: comparison of MR imaging and helical CT, with subsequent
surgical correlation. Radiology 1999;21:625.
16. Nelson RC, Chezmar JL, Hoel MJ, Buck DR, Sugarbaker PH. Peritoneal carcinomatosis: preoperative CT with intraperitoneal contrast material. Radiology 1992;182:133.
17. Fong Y, Waldinger PF, Akhurst T, et al. Utility of 18F-FDG positron emission tomography scanning on selection of patients for resection of hepatic colorectal metastases. Am J Surg
1999;178:282.
18. Nakao A, Oshima K, Takeda S, et al. Peritoneal washings cytology combined with immunocytochemical staining in pancreatic cancer. Hepatogastroenterology 1999;46:2974.
19. Vogel P, Ruschoff J, Kummel S, et al. Immunocytology improves prognostic impact of peritoneal tumour cell detection compared to conventional cytology in gastric cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol
1999;25:515.
20. Fujiwara K, Yamauchi H, Yoshida T, et al. Relationship between peritoneal washing cytology through implantable port system (IPS-cytology) and second-look laparotomy in ovarian cancer
patients with unmeasurable residual diseases. Gynecol Oncol 1998;70:231.
21. Kodera Y, Yamamura Y, Shimizu Y, et al. Peritoneal washing cytology: prognostic value of positive findings in patients with gastric carcinoma undergoing a potentially curative resection. J Surg
Oncol 1999;72:60.
22. Makary MA, Warshaw AL, Centeno BA, et al. Implications of peritoneal cytology for pancreatic cancer management. Arch Surg 1998;133:361.
23. Funami Y, Tokumoto N, Miyauchi H, Ochiai T, Kuga K. Prognostic value of peritoneal lavage cytology and chemotherapy during surgery for advanced gastric cancer. Int Surg 1999;84: 220.
24. Bando E, Yonemura Y, Takeshita Y, et al. Intraoperative lavage for cytological examination in 1,297 patients with gastric carcinoma. Am J Surg 1999;178:256.
25. Hayes N, Wayman J, Wadehra V, et al. Peritoneal cytology in the surgical evaluation of gastric carcinoma. Br J Cancer 1999;79:520.
26. Jerby BL, Milsom JW. Role of laparoscopy in the staging of gastrointestinal cancer. Oncology (Huntingt) 1998;12:1353.
27. Huizing MT, van Warmerdam LJ, Rosing H, et al. Phase I and pharmacologic study of the combination paclitaxel and carboplatin as first-line chemotherapy in stage III and IV ovarian cancer. J
Clin Oncol 1997;15:1953.
28. Abu-Rustum NR, Barakat RR, Siegel PL, et al. Second-look operation for epithelial ovarian cancer: laparoscopy or laparotomy? Obstet Gynecol 1996;88:549.
29. Werth H. Klinische und anatomische untersuchungen zue lehre von den bauchgeschwuelsten und der laparotomie. Arch Gynaekol 1884;24:100.
30. Fraenkel E. Ueber das sogennante pseudomyxoma peritonei. Muench Med Wochenschr 1901;48:965.
31. Ronnett BM, Zahn CM, Kurman RJ, et al. Disseminated peritoneal adenomucinosis and peritoneal mucinous carcinomatosis: a clinicopathologic analysis of 109 cases with emphasis on
distinguishing pathologic features, site of origin, prognosis, and relationship to Pseudomyxoma peritonei. Am J Surg Pathol 1995;19:1390.
32. Little JM, Halliday JP, Glenn DC. Pseudomyxoma peritonei. Lancet 1969;27:659.
33. Sugarbaker PH, Kern K, Lack E. Malignant Pseudomyxoma peritonei of colonic origin. Natural history and presentation of a curative approach to treatment. Dis Colon Rectum 1987;30:772.
34. Sugarbaker PH, Chang D. Results of treatment of 385 patients with peritoneal surface spread of appendiceal malignancy. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:727.
35. Gough DB, Donohue JH, Schutt AJ, et al. Pseudomyxoma peritonei:long-term patient survival with an aggressive regional approach. Ann Surg 1994;219:112.
36. Smith JW, Kemeny N, Caldwell C, et al. Pseudomyxoma peritonei of appendiceal origin. The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center experience. Cancer 1992;70:396.
37. Kass ME. Pathology of peritoneal mesothelioma. In: Sugarbaker P, ed. Peritoneal carcinomatosis: drugs and diseases. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996:213.
38. Hutchinson R, Sokhi GS. Multicystic peritoneal mesothelioma: not a benign condition. Eur J Surg 1992;158:451.
39. Miles JM, Hart WR, McMahon JT. Cystic mesothelioma of the peritoneum. Cleve Clin Q 1986;53:109.
40. Hoekman K, Tognon G, Risse EKJ, Bloemsma CA, Vermorken JB. Well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma of the peritoneum: a separate entity. Eur J Cancer 1996;43A:255.
41. Daya D, McCaughey W. Well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma of the peritoneum: a clinicopathologic study of 22 cases. Cancer 1990;65:292.
42. Manavoglu O, Orhan B, Evrensel T, et al. Malignant peritoneal mesothelioma following asbestos exposure. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol 1996;15:191.
43. Averbach AM, Sugarbaker PH. Peritoneal mesothelioma: treatment approach based on natural history. Cancer Treat Res 1996;81:193.
44. Kannerstein M, Churg J. Peritoneal mesothelioma. Hum Pathol 1977;8:83.
45. van Gelder T, Hoogsteden HC, Versnel MA, et al. Malignant peritoneal mesothelioma: a series of 19 cases. Digestion 1989;43:222.
46. Antman K, Osteen R, Klegar K, et al. Early peritoneal mesothelioma: a treatable malignancy. Lancet 1985;2:977.
47. Langer CJ, Rosenblum N, Hogan M, et al. Intraperitoneal cisplatin and etoposide in peritoneal mesothelioma: favorable outcome with a multimodality approach. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1993;32:204.
48. Lederman GS, Recht A, Herman T, et al. Long-term survival in peritoneal mesothelioma. Cancer 1987;59:1882.
49. Markman M, Kelsen D. Efficacy of cisplatin-based intraperitoneal chemotherapy as treatment of malignant peritoneal mesothelioma. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1992;118:547.
50. Park BJ, Alexander HR, Libutti SK, et al. Treatment of primary peritoneal mesothelioma by continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion (CHPP). Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:582.
51. Loggie BW, Fleming RA, Geisinger KR. Cytologic assessment before and after intraperitoneal hyperthermic chemotherapy for peritoneal carcinomatosis. Acta Cytol 1996;40:1154.
52. Kennedy AW, Markman M, Webster KD, et al. Experience with platinum-paclitaxel chemotherapy in the initial management of papillary serous carcinoma of the peritoneum. Gynecol Oncol
1998;71:288.
53. Whitcomb BP, Kost ER, Hines JF, Zahn CM, Hall KL. Primary peritoneal psammocarcinoma: a case presenting with an upper abdominal mass and elevated CA-125. Gynecol Oncol
1999;73:331.
54. Chu CS, Menzin AW, Leonard DG, Rubin SC, Wheeler JE. Primary peritoneal carcinoma: a review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol Surv 1999;54:323.
55. Bandera CA, Muto MM, Schorge J. BRCA1 gene mutations in women with papillary serous carcinoma of the peritoneum. Obstet Gynecol 1998;92:596.
56. Ordonez NG. Role of immunohistochemistry in distinguishing epithelial peritoneal mesotheliomas from peritoneal and ovarian serous carcinomas. Am J Surg Pathol 1998;22:1203.
57. Chu CS, Menzin AW, Leonard DGB, Rubin SC, Wheeler JE. Primary peritoneal carcinoma: a review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol Surv 1999;54:323.
58. Menzin AW, Aikins JK Jr, Wheeler JE, Rubin SC. Surgically documented responses to paclitaxel and cisplatin in patients with primary peritoneal carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1996;62:55.
59. Schwarz RE, Gerald WL, Kushner BH, et al. Desmoplastic small round cell tumors: prognostic indicators and results of surgical management. Ann Surg Oncol 1998;5:416.
60. Benjamin LE, Fredericks WJ, Barr FG, Rauscher FR. Fusion of the EWS1 and WT1 genes as a result of the t(11;22)(p13;q12) translocation in desmoplastic small round cell tumors. Med
Pediatr Oncol 1996;27:434.
61. Gershenson DM, Silva EG, Tortolero-Luna G, et al. Serous borderline tumors of the ovary with noninvasive peritoneal implants. Cancer 1998;83:2157.
62. Benedetti-Panici P, Greggi S, Scambia G, et al. Very high-dose chemotherapy with autologous peripheral stem cell support in advanced ovarian cancer. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:1987.
63. Munkarah AR, Hallum AV, Morris M, et al. Prognostic significance of residual disease in patients with stage IV epithelial ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1997;64:13.
64. Chrysikopoulos H, Manlatis V, Roussakis A, Pappas J, Andreou J. Peritoneal metastases from transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary tract: CT and MR imaging. Abdom Imaging 1998;23:91.
65. Alexander HR, Bartlett DL, Libutti SK. National Cancer Institute experience with regional therapy for unresectable primary and metastatic cancer of the liver or peritoneal cavity. In: Markman M,
ed. Regional chemotherapy: clinical research and practice(current clinical oncology). Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 2000:127.
66. Bristow RE, Montz FJ, Lagasse LD, Leuchter RS, Karlan BY. Survival impact of surgical cytoreduction in stage IV epithelial ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1999;72:278.
67. Portilla AG, Sugarbaker PH, Chang D. Second-look surgery after cytoreduction and intraperitoneal chemotherapy for peritoneal carcinomatosis from colorectal cancer: analysis of prognostic
features. World J Surg 1999;23:23.
68. Sugarbaker PH. Peritonectomy procedures. Ann Surg 1995;221:29.
69. Stephens AD, Alderman R, Chang D, et al. Morbidity and mortality analysis of 200 treatments with cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy using the
coliseum technique. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:790.
70. Casper ES, Kelsen DP, Alcock NW, Lewis JL Jr. IP cisplatin in patients with malignant ascites: pharmacokinetic evaluation and comparison with the IV route. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:235.
71. Dedrick RL, Myers CE, Bungay PM, DeVita VT Jr. Pharmacokinetic rationale for peritoneal drug administration in the treatment of ovarian cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:1.
72. Howell SB, Pfeifle CE, Olshen RA. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy with melphalan. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:14.
73. Howell SB, Pfeifle CE, Wung WE. Intraperitoneal cisplatin with sodium thiosulfate protection. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:845.
74. Speyer JL, Collins JM, Dedrick R. Phase I pharmacological studies of 5-fluorouracil administered intraperitoneally. Cancer Res 1980;40:567.
75. Markman M, Howell SB, Lucas WE. Combination intraperitoneal chemotherapy with cisplatin, cytarabine, and doxorubicin for refractory ovarian carcinoma and other malignancies principally

confined to the peritoneal cavity. J Clin Oncol 1984;1:1321.
76. Dedrick RL. Interspecies scaling of regional drug delivery. J Pharm Sci 1986;75:1047.
77. Cho H-K, Lush RM, Bartlett DL, et al. Pharmacokinetics of cisplatin administered by continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion (CHPP) to patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis. J Clin
Pharmacol 1999;39:1.
78. Howell SB, Pfeifle CG, Wung WE, et al. Intraperitoneal cisplatin with systemic thiosulfate protection. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:845.
79. Dedrick RL, Flessner MF. Pharmacokinetic problems in peritoneal drug administration: tissue penetration and surface exposure. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:480.
80. Dunnick NR, Jones RB, Doppman JL, Speyer J, Myers CE. Intraperitoneal contrast infusion for assessment of intraperitoneal fluid dynamics. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1979;133:221.
81. Dlias D, Dubé P, Blot F, et al. Peritoneal carcinomatosis treatment with curative intent: the Institut Gustave-Roussy experience. Eur J Surg Oncol 1997;23:317.
82. Rosen HR, Jatzko G, Repse S, et al. Adjuvant intraperitoneal chemotherapy with carbon-adsorbed mitomycin in patients with gastric cancer: results of a randomized multicenter trial of the
Austrian Working Group for Surgical Oncology. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2733.
83. Los G, Mutsaers PHA, van der Vijgh WJF, et al. Direct diffusion of cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) in intraperitoneal tumors after intraperitoneal chemotherapy: a comparison with systemic
chemotherapy. Cancer Res 1989;49:33.
84. Schilsky RL, Choi KE, Grayhack J, et al. Phase I clinical and pharmacologic study of intraperitoneal cisplatin and fluorouracil in patients with advanced intraabdominal cancer. J Clin Oncol
1990;8:2054.
85. Sugarbaker PH. Successful management of microscopic residual disease in large bowel cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1999;43:S15.
86. Sugarbaker PH, Gianola FJ, Speyer JC, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of intravenous versus intraperitoneal 5-fluorouracil in patients with advanced primary colon or rectal cancer. Surgery
1985;98:414.
87. Alberts DS, Liu PY, Hannigan EV, et al. Intraperitoneal cisplatin plus intravenous cyclophosphamide versus intravenous cisplatin plus intravenous cyclophosphamide for stage III ovarian
cancer. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1950.
88. Yu W, Whang I, Suh I, et al. Prospective randomized trial of early postoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy as an adjuvant to resectable gastric cancer. Ann Surg 1998;228:347.
89. Elias D, Antoun S, Raynard B, et al. Treatment of peritoneal carcinomatosis using complete excision and intraperitoneal chemohyperthermia: a phase III study defining the best technical
procedures. Chirurgie 1999;124:380.
90. Zoetmulder FA, van der Vange N, Witkamp AJ, et al. Hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) in patients with peritoneal Pseudomyxoma or peritoneal metastases of colorectal
carcinoma; good preliminary results from the Netherlands Cancer Institute. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd 1999;143:1863.
91. Gilly FN, Beaujard A, Glehen O, et al. Peritonectomy combined with intraperitoneal chemohyperthermia in abdominal cancer with peritoneal carcinomatosis: phase III study. Anticancer Res
1999;19:2317.
92. Cavaliere F, di Filippo F, Cosimelli M, et al. The integrated treatment of peritoneal carcinomatosis: a preliminary experience. J Exp Clin Cancer Res 1999;18:151.
93. Sugarbaker PH. Successful management of microscopic residual disease in large bowel cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1999;43:S15.
94. Fujimoto S, Takahashi M, Mutou T, Kobayashi K, Toyosawa T. Successful intraperitoneal hyperthermic chemoperfusion for the prevention of postoperative peritoneal recurrence in patients with
advanced gastric carcinoma. Cancer 1999;85:529.
95. Huff T, Brand E. Pseudomyxoma peritonei: treatment with the argon beam coagulator. Obstet Gynecol 1992;80:569.
96. Fujimura T, Yonemura Y, Muraoka K, et al. Continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion for the prevention of peritoneal recurrence of gastric cancer: randomized controlled study. World J
Surg 1994;18:150.
97. Giovanella BC, Stehlin JS Jr, Morgan AC. Selective lethal effect of supranormal temperatures on human neoplastic cells. Cancer Res 1976;36:3944.
98. Benoit L, Duvillard C, Rat P, Chauffert B. The effect of intra-abdominal temperature on the tissue and tumor diffusion of intraperitoneal cisplatin in a model of peritoneal carcinomatosis in rats.
Chirurgie 1999;124:375.
99. Zakris EL, Dewhirst MW, Riviere JE, et al. Pharmacokinetics and toxicity of intraperitoneal cisplatin combined with regional hyperthermia. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1613.
100. Miller RC, Richards M, Baird C, Martin S, Hall EJ. Interaction of hyperthermia and chemotherapy agents; cell lethality and oncogenic potential. Int J Hyperthermia 1994;10:89.
101. Fujimoto S, Takahashi M, Mutou T, Kobayashi K, Toyosawa T. Successful intraperitoneal hyperthermic chemoperfusion for the prevention of postoperative peritoneal recurrence in patients with
advanced gastric carcinoma. Cancer 1999;85:529.
102. Bartlett DL, Buell JF, Libutti SK, et al. A Phase I trial of continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion with tumor necrosis factor and cisplatin in the treatment of peritoneal carcinomatosis.
Cancer 1998;83:1251.
103. Wong CS, Harwood AR, Cummings BJ, et al. Total abdominal irradiation for cancer of the colon. Radiother Oncol 1984;2:209.
104. Sindelar WF, DeLancy TF, Tochner Z, et al. Technique of photodynamic therapy for disseminated intraperitoneal malignant neoplasms: phase I study. Arch Surg 1991;126:318.
105. Freedman RS, Lenzi R, Kudelka AP, et al. Intraperitoneal immunotherapy of peritoneal carcinomatosis. Cytokines Cell Mol Ther 1998;4:121.
106. Lechanteur C, Princen F, Lo Bue S, et al. HSV-1 thymidine kinase gene therapy for peritoneal carcinomatosis. Adv Exp Med Biol 1998;451:119.
107. Scheidbach H, Horbach T, Groitl H, Hohengerger W. Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy/jejunostomy (PEG/PEJ) for decompression in the upper gastrointestinal tract. Initial experience with
palliative treatment of gastrointestinal obstruction in terminally ill patients with advanced carcinomas. Surg Endosc 1999;13:1103.
108. Straus AK, Roseman DL, Shapiro TM. Peritoneovenous shunting in the management of malignant ascites. Arch Surg 1979;114:489.
109. Qazi R, Savlov ED. Peritoneovenous shunt for palliation of malignant ascites. Cancer 1982;49:600.
110. Koga S, Hamazoe R, Maeta M, et al. Prophylactic therapy for peritoneal recurrence of gastric cancer by continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion with mitomycin C. Cancer 1988;61:232.
111. Kaibara N, Hamazoe R, Iitsuka Y, Maeta M, Koga S. Hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion combined with anticancer chemotherapy as prophylactic treatment of peritoneal recurrence of gastric
cancer. Hepatogastroenterology 1989;36:75.
112. Fujimoto S, Shrestha RD, Kokuban M, et al. Positive results of combined therapy of surgery and intraperitoneal hyperthermic perfusion for far-advanced gastric cancer. Ann Surg 1990;212:592.
113. Hamazoe R, Maeta M, Kaibara N. Intraperitoneal thermochemotherapy for prevention of peritoneal recurrence of gastric cancer. Cancer 1994;73:2048.

SECTION 50.1 AIDS-Related Malignancies
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 50.1
AIDS-Related Malignancies
ROBERT YARCHOAN
RICHARD F. LITTLE
Introduction
Kaposi's Sarcoma
Pathogenesis
Staging and Prognosis
Treatment
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome–Associated Lymphomas
Epidemiology and Overview
Pathology and Classification
Histology
Systemic Lymphomas
Primary Effusion Lymphoma
Clinical Presentation and Staging of Peripheral Lymphomas
Treatment of Peripheral Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome Lymphomas
Primary Central Nervous System Lymphoma in Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
Effect Of Antiretroviral Therapy On Primary Central Nervous System Lymphoma Incidence
Overview and Pathology
Treatment
Hodgkin's Disease
Epidemiology
Pathogenesis
Clinical Presentation, Treatment, and Prognosis
Anogenital Cancers in Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection
Cervical Cancer
Anal Cancer
Future Directions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Individuals with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection are at substantially increased risk of developing a number of neoplasms ( Table 50.1-1).1,2 Three
malignant conditions are now considered as defining acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) when they occur in HIV-infected individuals: Kaposi's sarcoma
(KS), certain aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHLs), and invasive cervical cancer. 3 The risk of KS among gay and bisexual men with AIDS is greater than
100,000-fold that of the background population. 4 Also, NHLs occur overall with approximately 60-fold greater frequency than expected based on rates of NHL in
HIV-negative populations. 5 There are conflicting data regarding the excess frequency of cervical cancer in HIV-infected women, 6,7 but cervical intraepithelial neoplasia
appears to be more difficult to control and invasive cancer appears to be more aggressive in HIV infection. 8

TABLE 50.1-1. Post–Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome Relative Risks of Various Malignant Conditions in Patients with Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome

In addition, a number of other cancers that do not confer a diagnosis of AIDS occur with increased incidence among HIV-infected persons. In one study, a
probabilistic matching algorithm comparing over 1 million people with AIDS, cancer, or both, the occurrence of several non–AIDS-defining cancers was found to be
significantly increased in HIV infection (see Table 50.1-1); these include angiosarcoma (36.7-fold), Hodgkin's disease (7.6-fold), multiple myeloma (4.5-fold), brain
cancer (3.5-fold), and seminoma (2.9-fold). 1 Age-, sex-, and period-adjusted standardized incidence ratios (SIR) in New South Wales, Australia, identified an
increased incidence of Hodgkin's disease (SIR 18.3), multiple myeloma (SIR 12.1), leukemia (SIR 5.76), lip cancer (SIR 5.94), and lung cancer (SIR 3.80). 2 Thus,
oncologists can expect to see a variety of malignant conditions with increased frequency in HIV-infected patients. One pattern that is emerging is that many tumors
highly associated with HIV [such as KS or primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL)] appear to be caused by oncogenic viruses. It will be important to
understand the mechanisms by which HIV and these viruses interact, and this understanding should in turn lead to an increased appreciation for the pathogenesis of
other tumors. On the other hand, certain tumor associations with HIV may have arisen because cohorts at risk for HIV may also have risk factors for other tumors
(e.g., from increased exposure to other oncogenic viruses, increased cigarette smoking, and so forth) rather than because of HIV itself or HIV-induced alterations in
immune function. Also, it should be pointed out that the relative risk of a large number of tumors is not increased in HIV disease, and this must be considered in
evaluating the potential role of immunosurveillance in the pathogenesis of such tumors.
This chapter focuses primarily on those tumors that are considered as AIDS defining, but in general, certain principles common to the treatment of HIV-infected
patients with cancer apply to various malignant conditions. The treatment of such patients can be quite complex and requires expertise in both the tumor and HIV
infection. The goals of cancer therapy (i.e., curative versus palliative), and the relationship of these goals to the status of the underlying HIV infection should be
evaluated in each case.

KAPOSI'S SARCOMA
A cluster of cases of KS among young homosexual men in 1982 was one of the first epidemiologic signs of the AIDS epidemic. 9 One hundred sixty-two cases of KS
were reported over an 11-month period that year, with most cases indexed to New York City. This was a striking epidemiologic finding given that only three cases had
been reported in the period 1961 to 1979 for the same age group in New York City. 9 KS is now the most common tumor seen in HIV-infected patients. 10,11 and 12
AIDS-associated KS well illustrates the interactions of basic, clinical, and applied sciences in unraveling the determinants of disease, resulting in both disease
prevention and improved therapy. For many years, a relatively indolent form of KS had been sporadically reported in elderly men in Eastern Europe and countries
bordering the Mediterranean (classic KS). 13 More recently, KS has been observed with increased frequency in Africa and in transplantation recipients. It was
suggested from the initial pattern of the AIDS epidemic, even before the identification of HIV as the cause of AIDS, that sexual transmission of an infectious agent was
likely to be involved in the etiology of KS. Specifically, those at highest risk for developing KS were those with evidence of cellular immune deficiency and whose

sexual partners had sex with other men.10,14,15 After the 1984 joint discovery of HIV as the causative agent of AIDS by Gallo 16 and Montagnier, 17 studies showed that
the epidemiologic pattern of KS was not satisfactorily explained by HIV epidemiology alone, and the search for a KS cofactor intensified. During this period, institution
of educational and preventive strategies resulted in changes in sexual practices, 18 and lower rates of sexually transmitted diseases in groups at high risk for KS. 19
Since then, there has been a decreasing incidence and prevalence of HIV infection as well as of KS among homosexuals in the United States and other western
industrialized countries. 3,19 Before 1985, KS was reported as the initial manifestation of AIDS in approximately 30% of cases, 20 but in the period 1992 through 1997, it
was the initial manifestation in 12.5%. 3 The decrease in KS as the index disease for AIDS has occurred in part because the Centers for Disease Control (CDC)
revised its definition of AIDS in 1992 to include a CD4 cell count under 200/µL, 21 and thus cases of KS that occur at lower CD4 cell counts are excluded from the
index-case count. However, there has been a further decline in incident cases from 60 to 20 per 1000 person-years between 1992 and 1997, 21 invoking cause beyond
a simple change in case definition. It should be noted, however, that KS is much more frequent in other areas of the world, particularly sub-Saharan Africa. In parts of
Uganda, for example, KS represents almost one-half of all cases of cancers in male subjects and is the second most frequent tumor in female subjects. 22,23
In 1994, Drs. Chang, Moore, and their colleagues discovered a new herpesvirus, called KS-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) or human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8), and
subsequent studies showed that this was an essential causative agent for all forms of KS. 24,25 This discovery has in turn enabled seroepidemiologic analyses of its
pattern of infection indicating that populations with a high incidence of KS also had a high incidence of KSHV infection and that the epidemic of KSHV infection in gay
men in the United States emerged almost simultaneously with that of HIV. 26 The seroincidence of KSHV then appeared to taper beginning after 1983, in concert with
efforts to encourage safer sex practices among gay men at risk for HIV infection. Also, as discussed later (see Treatment), improved treatments for the underlying HIV
infection may have contributed to the decline in KS incidence. 27,28
KSHV transmission correlates with a history of sexually transmitted disease and the number of male sexual partners: Strictly heterosexual men appear to have a
relatively lower risk. 29,30 Coinfection with both KSHV and HIV increases the risk of developing KS by as much as 10,000-fold as compared with KSHV infection alone,
and disease manifestation occurs at a younger age. Individuals infected with KSHV but not HIV can develop KS, but it is rare and usually occurs after their fifth
decade of life. The risk of developing AIDS-KS appears to be related to the CD4 cell count. The majority of cases occur when the CD4 cell count is below 200/µL, and
the risk increases substantially as the CD4 cell count falls below 100/µL. 4,31 The 10-year probability of developing KS after coinfection with both HIV and KSHV
approaches 50%. 30 Also, there is evidence that the risk of KS appears to be higher for those who acquire KSHV subsequent to HIV infection, 32 suggesting there is an
important role for immune surveillance of KSHV and the risk of KS.
PATHOGENESIS
KS is a multicentric tumor that arises simultaneously in multiple nonmetastatic sites ( Fig. 50.1-1). The lesions are highly vascular, accounting for their purplish hue.
Microscopically, the tumors are characterized by a predominance of spindle-shaped cells. 33 There is heterogeneity of the cells that make up the lesions, but vascular
endothelial cell histogenesis of both the vascular and spindle cell components of KS is suggested by the cellular expression of endothelial cell-associated antigens
such as factor VIII–related antigen, HLA-DR antigens, E92, and OKM5. 33 However, there remains some uncertainty as to the cell of origin of this tumor. Cells in KS
lesions also stain for coexpression of macrophage markers (PAM-1, CD68, and CD14). 34,35 Although advanced KS may involve monoclonal proliferation, 36 there is
evidence that proangiogenic factor-driven hyperproliferation of endothelial-derived spindle cells is important at all stages of the disease. 37,38 Spindle cells produce and
respond to proangiogenic factors such as basic fibroblast growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). 37,39

FIGURE 50.1-1. Cutaneous manifestation of Kaposi's sarcoma.

The angiogenic polypeptide cytokine oncostatin M, which is produced by activated lymphoid cells, shares functional similarity and structural homology to leukemia
inhibitory factor and interleukin-6 (IL-6), 40,41 and 42 and has autocrine growth properties for cells derived from AIDS-KS. 43,44 Cells exposed to oncostatin M develop
spindle morphology, increase proliferation in soft agar, and increase secretion of IL-6, 44 and induction of basic fibroblast growth factor. 45 The soluble form of IL-6
receptor-a (sIL-6a) makes cells expressing gp 130 (the oncostatin M receptor) responsive to IL-6. 46 Since AIDS-KS cells express high levels of IL-6, it is likely that, in
the presence of soluble IL-6 receptor-a, cells with the oncostatin M receptor acquire an IL-6 autocrine growth loop. 46,47
The discovery in 1994 of a novel herpesvirus called KSHV or HHV-8 has introduced some clarity regarding this complex array of cellular markers and cytokine
pathways.25 Essentially all patients with KS are infected with this virus and KSHV/HHV-8 appears to represent an essential factor in the pathogenesis of KS. 48,49,50,51,52
and 53 KSHV/HHV-8 is present in the flat endothelial cells lining vascular spaces of KS lesions as well as in typical KS spindle cells. 50 KSHV/HHV-8 can induce the
production of a number of virally encoded mimics of human cytokines and other factors involved in KS pathogenesis. 54,55 KSHV encodes for viral homologues to
human IL-6, macrophage inhibitory protein, and interferon regulatory factor. It alters other cellular angiogenic factors, which, also, with viral IL-6 and the viral
macrophage inhibitory proteins, have the potential for stimulating spindle cells as well as angiogenesis. 54,55 Also, the constitutively active KSHV/HHV-8–encoded
G-protein coupled receptor (KSHV GPCR), expressed on infected cells, 56 up-regulates production of VEGF and other angiogenic factors. 57 In addition, there is some
evidence that the kinase domain region (KDR) receptor for VEGF is up-regulated in cells infected with KSHV, providing a basis for the paracrine effects of this
angiogenic factor in KS. 58 The KSHV GPCR can also cause oncogenic transformation in transfected cells. 59 Moreover, chemokines, such as IL-8 and growth-related
protein-a can activate KSHV GPCR over constitutive levels in vitro, suggesting that endogenous chemokines may be evolved in KS pathogenesis, in part through
KSHV-related pathways.60
Although HIV can markedly increase the incidence of KS in KSHV/HHV-8–infected individuals, the precise role of HIV in KS pathogenesis is somewhat unclear. A
number of observations invoke the role of HIV Tat protein as a coregulator of KS development. In vitro, HIV Tat protein can stimulate endothelial and KS-derived
spindle cell growth and proliferation. 61 Normal vascular cells acquire spindle morphology and become responsive to the mitogenic effect of Tat after culture with
inflammatory cytokines. Tat promotes adhesion of AIDS-KS and normal vascular cells through a specific interaction with the integrin receptors a 5, b1, and avb3, whose
expression is increased by inflammatory cytokines. 62,63 However, the degree of extracellular Tat released in HIV-infected patients is unclear. Other mechanisms by
which HIV may potentiate the development of KS include increased levels of IL-6 and decreased cellular immunity (perhaps permitting increased KSHV/HHV-8
replication). These mechanisms may explain why in some cases, KS appears to improve with effective treatment of HIV. 64,65
STAGING AND PROGNOSIS
The unique clinical presentation of KS requires a departure from the standard oncologic staging approach. The widely used tumor, node, metastasis system (TNM), or
other staging systems that incorporate histologic grade and biologic indices as the primary prognostic variables, 66 are not satisfactory in KS for a number of reasons.
One is the multicentric nature of the disease. Lesions arise simultaneously at multiple sites without an obvious primary site (see Fig. 50.1-1). Almost all KS patients
would be classified as having metastatic disease using the TNM system, but multiple areas of skin involvement may not necessarily imply a worse prognosis relative
to more focal involvement. Indeed, it is not at all clear how to use the term metastatic in relation to KS. Also, assessment of tumor bulk is extremely difficult in KS.
Consequently, staging has been relatively nonstandardized, relative to other cancers.

Uniform staging is central to response assessment and is necessary to help compare results among trials and with historic controls. The most widely used staging
system for KS, devised by the AIDS Clinical Trials Group Oncology Committee, is the TIS staging system ( Table 50.1-2). This system scores patients based on the
extent of tumor involvement (T), the immune status of the patient (I), and other AIDS-related systemic illness (S) in an attempt to stratify risk of poor prognosis. 67,68
The TIS system stages patients as being overall either good risk or poor risk, depending on the presence or absence of localized tumor versus more extensive tumor
with associated edema, ulceration, visceral disease, or extensive oral KS; CD4 cells over or below 150/µL; and the presence or absence of antecedent opportunistic
infections, thrush, constitutional symptoms, other HIV-related illness, and Karnofsky's performance status. Good risk is designated with a subscript 0, and poor risk by
the subscript 1, the summary taking the form T 0 or 1, I0 or 1, S0 or 1. A patient who is poor risk in any single category is considered poor risk overall.

TABLE 50.1-2. Revised Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome Clinical Trials Group Staging Classification for Kaposi's Sarcoma a

Although this staging system is subject to observer bias, it is nevertheless predictive of survival. One of the most important prognostic factors is the CD4 count. A CD4
cell count greater than 150 to 200 cells/µL implies a better prognosis, 68,69 and 70 regardless of visceral involvement by KS. 68
The extent of KS lesions as a prognostic factor has not uniformly been validated, 69,70 but the potentially confounding role of immunosuppression degree was not
adequately controlled for in certain analyses. The degree of immunosuppression predicts life expectancy after the diagnosis of KS. 71 The clinical course of KS is quite
variable, from remarkably indolent to rapidly fulminant, but there are no clear criteria on which to assess the risk of aggressive versus indolent disease. KS behavior
can be affected by the degree of immunosuppression or alternatively by the degree of HIV replication. 61,62 and 63,72 There is evidence that KS may become more
indolent with good control of HIV, but the long-term course of KS in patients with highly active antiretroviral regimens is not known. The role of other factors, such as
the activity of KSHV/HHV-8, are not well understood at present, but could potentially contribute to risk assessment.
TREATMENT
During the 1980s, KS was a frequent cause of death in AIDS patients. 73,74 In the late 1990s, however, a number of advances in the therapy of this disease have been
seen. While KS is still a cause of considerable morbidity and mortality in HIV-infected individuals, better tumor control is now attainable in most patients than was
possible several years ago. In addition, there is evidence that the development of highly effective antiretroviral regimens has contributed to a decline in the incidence
of KS in HIV-infected individuals. 75,76 Finally, advances in understanding the pathogenesis of KS offer the possibility of developing new pathogenesis-based therapies
that may be less toxic than the current agents.
In order to best understand the effect of more recent advances in the therapy of KS, it is useful to recount the standard therapy for this condition as of approximately
1993 to 1994. Overall, the initial therapies identified as being active against KS during the first few years of the AIDS epidemic can be divided into three groups: local
measures, immunotherapy (interferon-a), and cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents.
Local Therapy
Local therapies include surgical excision of the lesions, cryotherapy, photodynamic therapy, intralesional injections, radiation therapy, and topical application of
various drugs and are most useful for patients with limited cutaneous disease that is cosmetically disturbing to the patient. 77 Intralesional injection or iontophoresis of
low-dose vinblastine (0.1 mL of 0.1 mg/mL) or 3% sodium tetradecyl sulfate injection (0.1 to 0.3 mL) causes a nonspecific necrosis or sclerosis of mucocutaneous
tissue with sometimes reasonable cosmetic outcome for small lesions. 78,79,80 and 81 Cryotherapy is easy to administer and unlike surgical excision, it can be
accomplished without local anesthesia. 82 However, cryotherapy can cause permanent destruction of melanocytes, particularly in dark-skinned individuals. Topical
9-cis retinoic acid (Panretin Gel), approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in KS, may result in responses in over 45% of lesions but can
cause local inflammation and lightening of the skin, yielding inadequate cosmesis in some cases. 83,84
Radiotherapy is useful for localized disease, but as with other nonsystemic therapies, does not control disease outside of the treatment area. In addition, there are
reports of a decreased tolerance to radiation among AIDS-KS patients, particularly on the mucosal surfaces where severe mucositis can occur. 85,86 Reappearance of
KS in the area of previous irradiation can occur. Radiotherapy is useful as adjunctive therapy in severe disease to treat areas of painful involvement that may respond
only slowly to systemic therapy. The use of carbon dioxide laser therapy to remove tumors of the mouth, oropharynx, and larynx has been reported to result in
immediate improved oral intake and with less toxicity than is sometimes seen with radiation to the oral cavity. 87 Radiotherapy is also useful for cosmetic purposes,
such as involvement of the eyelid or conjunctiva, when other local therapies are not practical. Applied doses vary between 800 rad given over one fraction to 3000 rad
given over ten fractions, depending on the site of involvement, and disease status entering into the dosing algorithm. Complete responses can be seen in over 90% of
lesions, but sometimes residual radiation-induced pigmentation or telangiectasia, which can at times be severe, limits the cosmetic outcome. 85,88 Doses of 1500 rad
for oral lesions and doses of 2000 rad for lesions involving eyelids, conjunctiva, and genitals have been shown to be sufficient to produce shrinkage of the tumor and
good palliation of the symptoms. Short-course radiotherapy may be useful and effective in some settings. Treatment comparisons of either 1600 rad over four
fractions over 4 days or 800 rad as a single fraction yielded similar response rates of 78% to 81%. The toxicity was somewhat site dependent, and thus single-fraction
therapy may not be appropriate in all cases. 89 Radiation therapy can be used for palliation of visceral disease, including pulmonary involvement, and may be
reasonably well tolerated in some circumstances. 90
Photodynamic therapy has been reported to be effective in KS, yielding high response rates, and has the advantage over other local therapies in that 40 to 50 lesions
can be treated during a single session. 91,92 It is frequently associated with moderate pain and then photosensitivity for a number of weeks following the treatment.
Immunotherapy
Immunotherapy with interferon-a was identified as being active in KS in the early 1980s, particularly in patients with over 200 CD4 cells/µL and disease limited to the
skin.93,94 Interferon-a appears to be more effective when used in combination with zidovudine monotherapy than when used alone, 95 and as will be discussed below,
studies are underway to test this agent in combination with potent combination anti-HIV therapy (see Antiangiogenesis Approches, later in this chapter). The use of
interferon-a is associated with a decreased white blood count, flu-like symptoms, and sometimes depression.
Cytotoxic Chemotherapy
Early in the AIDS-KS epidemic, several cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents were found to yield tumor responses with acceptable toxicity. 96 Vinca alkaloids (either
vincristine, vinblastine, or an alternating regimen of the two) were among the first to be studied. Other active single-agent drugs included etoposide, bleomycin, and
doxorubicin. Subsequently, several studies showed that the combination of doxorubicin, bleomycin, and vinca alkaloids (ABV) was effective, even in patients with
extensive KS or disease that was refractory to other therapies. 97,98 The initial clinical studies of ABV in KS generally used relatively high doses of doxorubicin, either

40 mg/m2 every 4 weeks or 20 mg/m2 every 2 to 3 weeks.97,98 Impressive response rates of 84% and 88%, respectively, were seen. However, the therapy was
frequently limited by neutropenia and concomitant non-KS opportunistic infections. Also, although many patients derived benefit from such agents and regimens, as
late as 1999 it was not infrequent to see patients die with severe, progressive KS in spite of optimal therapy.
This situation has improved somewhat with the development of two new chemotherapeutic approaches for KS: liposomal anthracyclines and paclitaxel. 99 Liposomal
formulations of anthracyclines were considered in part because they were predicted to have a smaller volume of distribution than unencapsulated drug and thus
remain in the circulation for longer periods of time. 100,101 Two such formulations, liposomal daunorubicin (DaunoXome) and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (Doxil)
have now been developed and found to be active in patients with KS and have prolonged half-lives as compared with unencapsulated forms. Moreover, there is some
evidence that encapsulation of the drugs in liposomes helps target them to KS lesions, in part because of the sequestering of blood that occurs because of the leaky
blood vessels in the lesions. 102 In early clinical studies, both preparations were found to induce major tumor responses, even in patients who had failed standard
chemotherapy.100,103
With this background, liposomal anthracyclines as single agents were tested against active combination regimens in several randomized trials. In one study,
liposomal daunorubicin (40 mg/m2 every 2 weeks) was found to have a response rate comparable with ABV, although with somewhat less neutropenia. 104 It is
noteworthy that the 28% major response rate of ABV in this study was substantially less than that found on previous studies. One likely reason for this is that the dose
of doxorubicin used (10 mg/m2 every 2 weeks) was less than that used in the earlier ABV studies. Another likely reason is that the patients in this randomized trial had
advanced HIV disease with a median CD4 count of 29 cells/µL. The substantial difference in response rates to ABV in these two trials highlights the sensitivity of KS
response rates to disease status and other parameters.
In two separate trials, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin was found to have better response rates against KS than either bleomycin plus vincristine (BV) or an ABV
regimen with either less or roughly comparable toxicities. 105,106 In the study comparing it with BV, the major response rate to pegylated liposomal doxorubicin alone
was 58%. Both of these liposomal preparations have now been approved by the FDA for the therapy of KS.
To address whether the liposomal anthracyclines were better used alone or in place of doxorubicin in combination regimens, a study of liposomal doxorubicin alone
compared with liposomal doxorubicin, bleomycin, and vincristine (DBV) in patients with advanced KS was initiated. 107 At a protocol-mandated interim analysis on 126
evaluable patients (62 on liposomal doxorubicin and 64 on DBV), the major tumor responses (partial and complete responses) were similar in the two treatment arms
(79% on liposomal doxorubicin vs. 80% on the combination regimen). However, more patients receiving DBV had toxicities requiring cessation of treatment than did
patients receiving liposomal doxorubicin alone, and there was a trend toward better survival in favor of liposomal doxorubicin alone (11 vs. 18 deaths, P = .079). The
study concluded that single-agent liposomal doxorubicin had equivalent activity but lower toxicity than DBV, and all patients were switched to liposomal doxorubicin
alone.
Paclitaxel was also developed for use in KS during this period based on observations that it targets cellular microtubules (such as vinca alkaloids shown to be active
in KS, albeit causing the opposite effect) and its in vitro inhibition of a KS-derived spindle cell line. 108 An initial trial of paclitaxel at the National Cancer Institute (NCI)
using a dose of 135 to 175 mg/m2 administered over 3 hours every 3 weeks showed substantial activity in patients with advanced KS; 20 of 28 assessable patients
had complete or partial responses for a major response rate of 71.4%. 108,109 It was noteworthy that five of six patients with pulmonary KS responded, as did four
patients who had previously received anthracycline therapy.
Gill, Scadden, and their colleagues at the University of Southern California and Harvard University conducted a second trial of paclitaxel in 56 mostly previously
treated patients with advanced KS. 110 This trial used a somewhat different regimen: 100 mg/m 2 of paclitaxel administered over 3 hours every 2 weeks. Overall, the
major response rate in this trial was 59%. It was noteworthy that of the 32 patients who had received prior anthracycline therapy, 55% responded. In both trials,
neutropenia was the dose-limiting toxicity, and a number of patients had improvement in KS-related symptoms. Largely based on the results of these two studies, the
FDA approved paclitaxel as second-line therapy for KS in 1997. Also, it is important to emphasize that corticosteroids can result in dramatic acceleration of KS
growth. Premedication with 10 mg of dexamethasone is adequate for premedication in taxane-based therapy, but corticosteroids should otherwise be avoided when
possible.
The development of the liposomal anthracyclines and paclitaxel for KS appears to have enabled better palliation of symptoms with less toxicity than was possible with
previous regimens, and at the present time, most oncologists treating KS patients consider these to be the two most valuable modalities for the treatment of advanced
KS (Table 50.1-3). For most such patients, the liposomal anthracyclines (and especially liposomal doxorubicin) are generally considered the preferred first-line
therapy. Paclitaxel is generally considered as a valuable second-line therapy, although for patients with particularly severe KS, some oncologists use it as initial
therapy (this is a deviation from the current FDA labeling of the drug). Other therapies that are considered useful in some patients include ABV, weekly alternating
vincristine and vinblastine, or BV.

TABLE 50.1-3. Therapies for Patients with Advanced Kaposi's Sarcoma

In an attempt to explore the relative merits of these agents as first-line therapy for KS, von Roenn and colleagues in the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group and the
AIDS Malignancy Consortium of the NCI have initiated a phase III trial comparing liposomal doxorubicin (Doxil), 20 mg/m 2 every 3 weeks, with paclitaxel, 100 mg/m2
every 2 weeks in patients with advanced, untreated KS. This study should provide valuable guidance for therapy in advanced KS.
Experimental Approaches to the Treatment of Kaposi's Sarcoma
Although the development of liposomal anthracyclines and paclitaxel has improved the therapeutic armamentarium for advanced KS, these agents have the potential
for substantial toxicity. In particular, both cause bone marrow and immunologic suppression, although there is evidence that paclitaxel is relatively sparing of CD4
cells as compared with other cytotoxic agents. 111 Moreover, even in the absence of HIV infection, the regeneration of CD4 cells after cytotoxic therapy can take many
months, especially in adults or older children. 112 For these reasons, there is a substantial interest in developing effective less toxic pathogenesis-based therapies.
ANTIANGIOGENESIS APPROACHES. One active area of research in this regard is the inhibition of new blood vessel growth, a field that has been pioneered by Folkman

and colleagues. 113,114 and 115 KS is a highly vascular tumor, and for this reason, there is currently an interest in exploring the use of angiogenesis inhibitors in patients
with KS. Compounds of interest that have been in phase I or II testing include pentosan polysulfate, 116 TNP-470 (an analogue of the fungal product fumagillin), 117,118
IL-12,119 IM-862,120 SU5416, and thalidomide. 121,122 Preliminary results from two initial phase II trials of thalidomide both showed that this agent had activity in a subset
of patients with KS. 121,122
IL-12 possesses a number of interesting immunologic and antiangiogenic characteristics that make it a potentially attractive agent for HIV-associated KS. There is
evidence that HIV-infected patients have a specific defect in T-cell help for cellular response (Th1 cells), and that IL-12 selectively stimulates such responses. 123,124 In
addition, IL-12 has been shown to be a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis, 115,125 possibly through induction of inducible protein 10, a potent inhibitor of

angiogenesis. 125,126 and 127 Interestingly, the constitutively active KSHV GPCR expressed on KS cells is inhibited by inducible protein 10, 128 leading to potentially
decreased production of VEGF and other angiogenic factors by KSHV/HHV-8–infected cells. 59,129 A potential concern in the use of IL-12 is that it has been shown to
slightly increase HIV replication in vitro.130 However, this can easily be controlled by anti-HIV drugs. 130 Preliminary results from a phase I trial of IL-12 in patients with
KS show that it has some activity. 119 In the future, it may also be of interest to explore the possible clinical utility of inducible protein 10 in this disease.
The results seen with thalidomide and IL-12, plus advances in angiogenesis research, have led to further interest in this approach to the treatment of KS. The AIDS
Malignancy Consortium is conducting studies of novel antiangiogenic agents, including a phase I trial of the metalloproteinase inhibitor col-3 and of IM-862 versus
placebo for evidence of therapeutic effect. There has been substantial interest in two biologic antiangiogenesis agents, endostatin and angiostatin, 131,132 and as
development proceeds, they may be studied in KS.
Finally, it should be noted that interferon-a can inhibit angiogenesis, 133 and that this may be one mechanism for its anti-KS activity. Initial studies suggested that this
agent was principally active in patients with disease limited to the skin and with over 200 CD4 cells/µL. 93,94,134 However, subsequent trials suggested that this agent
also manifested anti-KS activity in patients with lower CD4 counts if given with nucleoside anti-HIV therapy. 95 To extend these observations, the AIDS Malignancy
Consortium is now studying the effectiveness of interferon-a in combination with highly active antiretroviral therapy (AIDS Malignancy Consortium Trial 004) in
patients with HIV-associated KS.
RETINOIC ACIDS. KS-derived spindle cells have been shown to proliferate in response to IL-6 and certain retinoids have been shown to down-regulate IL-6 receptors,

at least on myeloma lines, and to have an antiproliferative effect on KS-derived cell lines. 135,136 and 137 Much of the initial interest in the retinoids centered on
all-trans-retinoic acid. However, the results with this agent were inconclusive. 138,139 and 140 Also, a problem with the use of all- trans-retinoic acid is that it rapidly induces
enzymes that significantly increase its metabolism, resulting in a substantially diminished area under the time concentration curve. 141 In part because of this and in
part because it has a different pattern of receptor binding, more recent clinical work has focused on 9- cis retinoic acid. Preliminary reports from two clinical trials have
provided evidence that this agent is active when administered orally to patients with KS. 142,143 The response rates in these studies were 46% and 37%. The most
frequent side effects were headache and skin changes. Additional studies will be needed to further define the role of this agent in KS. As noted previously, topical
9-cis retinoic acid has been approved by the FDA for use in KS.
HORMONAL APPROACHES. One of the interesting epidemiologic features of AIDS-KS is that the vast majority of patients are male.

10

This male predominance is more

than can be explained by patterns of KSHV/HHV-8 infection, 51,144 and it suggests that there may be some hormonal effect on the disease pathogenesis. Several years
ago, Lundardi-Iskandar, Gallo, and coworkers found that a factor in the urine of pregnant women blocked the growth of a KS-derived cell line. 145 This factor was
initially thought to be human chorionic gonadotropin, but subsequent investigation has suggested that it is a related urinary protein that is found in certain
preparations of human chorionic gonadotropin. 146 Early clinical trials have shown that preparations of human chorionic gonadotropin containing this factor could
induce regressions in KS. 147,148 Ongoing studies are now focused on better defining this active factor.
KAPOSI'S SARCOMA–ASSOCIATED HERPESVIRUS, HUMAN HERPESVIRUS-8, AND HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS–RELATED APPROACHES. The discovery of KSHV/HHV-8

has opened up many avenues of research in KS. 24,25 Most of the cells in KS lesions are infected with KSHV/HHV-8 in a latent state. 52 However, a small percentage of
cells in KS lesions appear to contain KSHV/HHV-8 in a lytic state of replication, and if these few cells are important in ongoing tumor pathogenesis, then antiherpes
drugs might have anti-KS activity. Although preliminary evidence suggests that antiherpes drugs such as acyclovir, foscarnet, or ganciclovir do not substantially
decrease the population of KSHV/HHV-8–infected cells in the circulation, there is some anecdotal evidence of KS remissions being associated with the use of
foscarnet.49,149,150 Perhaps more noteworthy is the finding from a randomized clinical trial of oral ganciclovir that administration of this agent was associated with a
lower rate of KS.151 This result indicates that an antiherpes drug can reduce the incidence of KS, although it still remains unclear as to how it can affect established
lesions.
While the role of ongoing KSHV/HHV-8 replication in the growth of KS lesions is still unclear, there is somewhat better evidence of a linkage between KS growth and
HIV replication. The incidence of KS is much higher among patients coinfected with HIV and KSHV/HHV-8 than in those with just KSHV/HHV-8 infection, and there are
reports of KS regression during highly active anti-HIV therapy. 152 Also, there is evidence that the incidence of KS has declined in HIV-infected patients since the
introduction of potent combination anti-HIV therapy. 153 Possible mechanisms for this association include interaction of HIV Tat protein with KS-derived spindle cells, 154
HIV-induced immunosuppression, HIV-related cytokine dysregulation, and the possible role of other HIV-encoded proteins. These epidemiologic findings provide a
paradigm for the prevention of a tumor by antiviral control of the underlying viral and immunosuppressive disease.

ACQUIRED IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROME–ASSOCIATED LYMPHOMAS
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND OVERVIEW
Beginning in 1973, before recognition of the AIDS epidemic, there was a clear increase in reported cases of lymphoma. 176,177 and 178 This trend overlapped with the
early years of the epidemic, and from 1973 to 1988, there was a 50% increase in the incidence of NHL based on analysis of the NCI's Surveillance, Epidemiology,
and End Results program data. 155 The incidence rates for primary brain lymphomas increased during the same period. 156 The increased incidence rates for large cell
immunoblastic and small noncleaved cell NHL observed during the 1980s has been attributed largely, although not entirely, to the AIDS epidemic. 155
Immune dysfunction had previously been associated with the development of lymphoproliferative disease and lymphomas, and with this background, investigators
were alerted early in the AIDS epidemic to the possibility that this new disease might be associated with lymphomagenesis. 157 Indeed, as early as 1982, only 1 year
after AIDS was recognized as a new epidemic disease, four cases of aggressive lymphoma in young men ranging in age from 24 to 35 years were reported within a
10-month period in the San Francisco area. 158,159 This was seen as remarkable because only one case of aggressive lymphoma had been reported in the age group
20 to 39 years for the period 1977 to 1980. It was thus recognized that the then-termed KS and opportunistic infection syndrome may predispose affected persons to
more than one kind of tumor. 14,15,158
Additional significance to the emerging problem of NHL was highlighted in 1985 with publication of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program
database, which suggested a ninefold increase of the morbidity odds ratio for aggressive lymphomas among never-married men (a term used to approximate
homosexual men for epidemiologic purposes) in the San Francisco area 1981 to 1982 as compared with 1973 to 1980. 160 Ultimately, it was found that there was an
overall 60-fold increase in the ratio of observed cases of NHL in HIV-infected persons compared with that expected in the HIV-negative population. 5 Because of these
epidemiologic and immunologic considerations, NHL of high-grade pathologic type (diffuse, undifferentiated) and of B-cell or unknown immunologic phenotype,
diagnosed by biopsy, was included in the case definition of AIDS in 1985. 161
NHL is now the second most common AIDS-associated malignancy and is the AIDS-defining diagnosis in roughly 3% of HIV-positive patients. 3,162 It is not clear what
percentage of HIV-infected patients ultimately develop NHL, since the occurrence of a second AIDS-defining event is not reportable. Estimates of incidence up to 10%
per year with a prevalence of 4.5% to 25.0% have been documented in certain patient populations. 163,164,165 and 166 In addition to an increased risk of NHL in
HIV-infected persons, the pattern of presentation differs from the HIV-negative population. Over 80% of lymphomas in HIV-infected patients are high-grade B-cell
lymphomas,5,167,168 whereas only 10% to 15% of lymphomas among HIV-negative patients are of this type. 169
Data collected by the NCI suggest that between 8% and 27% of the approximately 40,000 annual cases of NHL are HIV-related. 11 In a long-term follow-up of patients
participating in phase I trials of zidovudine, the predicted occurrence of NHL by Kaplan-Meier statistics was 8% after 24 months and 29% after 36 months of
zidovudine.163 A high risk of lymphoma development was also observed in patients followed for a long time on a phase I trial of didanosine. 166 Lymphoma risk
appeared to be increased with the degree and duration of immunosuppression. These reports suggested that anti-HIV therapy might possibly increase the cumulative
risk of HIV-infected individuals developing lymphoma by extending overall survival. 163,166 However, when these reports were published, concern arose that nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors might directly contribute to development of lymphoma. The finding that that lifetime exposure in rodents was associated with vaginal
tumors and the subsequent finding that administration of high-dose zidovudine to pregnant mice was associated with increased cancer rates among the offspring,
further raised concern that these drugs were potentially carcinogenic in humans. 170,171 and 172 Clinical studies have not supported these concerns, however. First, some
studies have reported relatively low overall rates of the development of lymphoma. In one study, only 24 (2.3%) of 1030 AIDS patients receiving zidovudine developed
NHL.162 With 1463 person-years of follow-up, the rate was 1.6 per 100 person-years of therapy. Also, data from a case-control study provided no evidence that the

use of zidovudine increased the risk of lymphoma in HIV infection. 173
Another piece of evidence arguing against a role of zidovudine increasing the risk of B-cell lymphoma is that zidovudine is not implicated in lymphomagenesis or in
inducing B-cell activation. 174 Also, it is worth remembering that an increased incidence of lymphoma in HIV-infected patients was found even before the introduction of
zidovudine.161
The excess risk of developing AIDS-NHL appears to be independent of the particular risk group for HIV acquisition 5,165,175 or lifestyle factors such as drug use, 175
although one autopsy series suggested that patients with a prior history of KS had a 5.3-fold higher risk of NHL compared with HIV-infected patients with other
AIDS-defining illnesses. 164 The risk, however, does vary with age. It has been reported that the excess risk of NHL in HIV is approximately 360-fold for the age group
under 19 years, and 20-fold for the age group over 60 years of age. 5 However, NHL is a rare disease in western children (0.1 to 0.3 per 100,00), 176 such that a small
number of excess cases translate into higher ratios of observed versus expected cases. 5 It has also been reported that male subjects and whites are at higher risk
than other groups, 177 but this feature does not distinguish AIDS-NHL from the epidemiology of non–AIDS-NHL. 178,179 NHL is the most frequent AIDS-related
malignancy among hemophiliacs, 161 primarily because KS appears so rarely in this group.
There may be innate biologic characteristics that predispose certain HIV-infected persons to develop NHL. In a study of 746 HIV-infected persons, the 3'A variant of
stromal cell-derived factor-1 chemokine was associated with an approximate doubling of the NHL risk in heterozygotes and a fourfold increase in homozygotes. 180 The
stromal cell-derived factor-1 3'A chemokine variant is carried by 37% of whites and 11% of blacks and may contribute to the lower risk of AIDS-NHL in blacks
compared with whites.
A deletion in the CCR5 chemokine receptor gene has been reported to alter the risk for HIV infection and progression to AIDS. 181 In a matched case-control study, the
CCR5 deletion variant CCR5- D32 offered approximately a threefold protection against NHL. 182 By contrast, the AIDS-protective variant CCR2-64I had no significant
effect on the risk of lymphoma. The CCR5 gene was not associated with a difference in risk for Kaposi's sarcoma, or development of opportunistic infections. 183
Costimulation of normal B cells with the CCR5 ligand RANTES (regulated on activation, normally T-cell expressed and secreted) induces a proliferative response,
indicating that RANTES is a mitogen for B cells. 184,185 Perhaps the CCR5-D32 mutation is protective through a mechanism involving a decreased response of B cells
to the mitogenic activity of RANTES. 183 It is possible that such factors may provide a means of assessing the risk of NHL in HIV-infected persons and provide insights
for preventive and treatment approaches for this disease.
It is conceivable that potent antiretroviral therapy (PAT) for HIV infection will have an effect on the incidence of AIDS-NHL. In the Australian AIDS registration data,
NHL has decreased by 37.5% as an AIDS-defining diagnosis since 1994, coincident with the introduction of PAT as common anti-HIV therapy. 186 The French
database has also suggested a decrease in NHL: Of 66,202 HIV-seropositive subjects, the incidence of lymphoma (peripheral and primary CNS) per 1000
patient-years in the first half of 1997 decreased 44% compared with the incidence in the first half of 1996. 28 The effect of PAT on PCNSL may be clearer. This effect is
not surprising as PCNSL most commonly develops in patients with fewer that 50 CD4 cells/µL 163,166,187 and as PAT can profoundly increase the CD4 counts. In a
prospective study, the probabilities of developing focal brain lesions were analyzed for linear trend comparing 1991 through 1996, a period before PAT, with 1997
through 1998, when PAT became commonly available. The odds ratio of developing PCNSL was 0.46 in the PAT era compared with pre-PAT. 188 Others studies have
found less evidence of a substantial effect on the incidence of lymphoma. An analysis of data from the Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study showed that the incidence of
NHL as the AIDS-defining condition has remained fairly constant over time. 27 Among a total of 6587 patients enrolled in AIDS Clinical Trials Group trials between
November 1987 and February 1997, incidence rates of both KS and NHL per 100 person-years declined in concert with decreases in mortality, but the decreases in
NHL were somewhat inconsistent, suggesting that current therapies have not appreciably ameliorated the incidence of NHL. 76 It is hard to predict the ultimate effect
PAT will have on the development of NHL. On the one hand, it may reduce the immediate incidence through its beneficial effect on the viral load and CD4 count. On
the other hand, as patients live longer with PAT, there may be a cumulative increase in the risk of patients developing NHL.
PATHOLOGY AND CLASSIFICATION
Efforts to understand disease mechanisms for AIDS-NHL have involved consideration of NHL occurring in other conditions of disordered immunity.
Immune-suppressive therapy in solid organ transplantation is associated with a 30- to 300-fold increase in the risk of lymphomas and has been used as a model of
AIDS-associated lymphomagenesis.168,189 These lymphoproliferations can sometimes respond to reduction in immunosuppressive therapy, but in other instances can
also be aggressive and poorly responsive to treatment. 190,191,192 and 193 The congenital immunodeficiency syndromes also confer a predisposition to malignancy,
providing yet another model in which to consider lymphomagenesis. 194,195 For example, in ataxia-telangiectasia, there are specific immune defects that have been
identified and linked to chromosome breakpoints in genes involved in both the immune system and in certain malignancies such as Burkitt's lymphoma. 196,197 Further
illustrating the role of immune dysfunction is the increased frequency of lymphoproliferative disease and lymphomas occurring in patients with autoimmune
disease. 198,199 Autoimmune factors in HIV infection are suggested by the finding that antibodies to the HIV-1 gp41 protein cross-react with self-MHC class II antigens,
triggering chronic antigenic stimulation of B cells. 200 Further, immunoglobulin somatic hypermutation with the preferential use of the V H4 family of
immunoglobulin-variable genes (molecular events that are produced under chronic lymphoproliferative conditions) has been seen in AIDS-associated
lymphomas.201,202 and 203 Elevated serum IL-6 levels in HIV-infected patients have also been associated with a higher risk of certain forms of NHL. 166,204 Thus, chronic
antigen stimulation from HIV, concomitant infections, or autoimmune phenomena can potentially lead to B-cell proliferation and oligoclonal expansion in a multistep
process rapidly progressing from clinically undetectable hyperplastic adenopathy 205,206 to malignant monoclonal lymphoma in the setting of immunosuppression or
other host factors such as deregulated cytokine production (i.e., IL-6, IL-10, tumor necrosis factor-b). 166,204,207,208
HISTOLOGY
AIDS-NHLs are histologically heterogeneous and are almost invariably derived from monoclonal B-cell populations, 209,210,211 and 212 although there are sporadic reports
of T-cell lymphomas associated with HIV. 213,214 There are three major categories of HIV-associated B-cell lymphomas: (1) Burkitt's and Burkitt-like lymphomas; (2)
B-cell immunoblastic lymphomas; and (3) the rarely occurring primary effusion lymphomas (PEL), also termed body cavity lymphomas.5,167,209,212,215,216,217,218,219 and 220
The Revised European-American Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms classifies all these lymphomas as either (1) Burkitt's and Burkitt-like, which includes small
non–cleaved cell lymphomas (SNCCL) and account for approximately 20% of the cases; and (2) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, which include the large non–cleaved
cell and large cell-immunoblastic plasmacytoid types and account for approximately 60% of cases. 221,222 HIV-associated PCNSLs are almost always of this latter
morphologic type.223 The World Health Organization proposes a unique classification for PEL. 224
Occasional lymphomas arising in HIV-infected individuals have been reported to be polyclonal. 225 These tumors are most often Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-negative
tumors with no evidence of c-myc rearrangement. Less frequently, these polyclonal tumors are found to be EBV-positive with similarities to lymphoproliferations seen
in transplant patients. Polyclonality is said to confer a favorable prognosis. 226 However, most authorities agree that the majority of AIDS-lymphomas are monoclonal. 217
Other lymphomas that are seen in the setting of HIV but are not AIDS-defining conditions, include classical Hodgkin's disease, 227,228 polymorphic lymphoproliferative
disorders resembling posttransplant-associated lymphoproliferative disease, 229 and lymphomatoid granulomatosis. 230 Multicentric Castleman's disease is sporadically
reported in patients with AIDS-NHL and KS and is of interest because of its association with KSHV/HHV-8 and other similarities with lymphomagenesis. 231
SYSTEMIC LYMPHOMAS
As noted previously, the vast majority of systemic lymphomas developing in HIV-infected individuals are either diffuse large cell lymphomas or SNCCL. The presence
of distinct genetic pathways for AIDS-SNCCL and AIDS-diffuse large cell lymphomas correlates with a number of clinical features that distinguish these two groups of
tumors, including differences in the age of onset, CD4 counts at the time of presentation, time elapsed since HIV infection, and clinical presentation ( Table 50.1-4).209
EBV expression patterns are distinct from posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders related to iatrogenic immunosuppression and are heterogeneous among
AIDS-NHLs.232 These patterns appear to correlate with histiogenic origin of the malignant clone. 233

TABLE 50.1-4. Comparison of Human Immunodeficiency Virus–Associated Lymphomas

Large B-cell lymphomas in HIV-infected patients are associated with EBV infection in 70% to 90% of cases and are more likely to occur later in the course of HIV
infection in older patients with relatively low CD4 cell counts. 209,234 Cells tend to exhibit EBV-latency type 3 expression and in particular express Epstein-Barr nuclear
antigen-2 (EBNA-2) and latent membrane protein-1 (LMP-1), which are EBV-specific antigenic targets. 235,236 and 237 It has been hypothesized that HIV-infected patients
have a defect in these EBV-specific cytotoxic T-cell responses, thus allowing immune escape of the emerging lymphomatous clone. The viral oncogene LMP-1 may
be involved in lymphomagenesis by increasing the threshold for cells to undergo programmed cell death 238 through up-regulation of the cellular antiapoptotic
oncogene, bcl-2.239,240 Unlike HIV-negative lymphomas of similar histology in which translocations of bcl-2 are often found, 221,241,242 rearrangements of bcl-2 are not
generally found in peripheral AIDS-NHLs. 212 However, bcl-2 may be densely expressed in some cases.243 EBNA-2 expression has been reported to be associated with
extranodal disease, 244 which is a prominent feature of the large cell AIDS-NHLs.
SNCCL is more likely to occur earlier in the course of HIV infection in younger patients with relatively preserved CD4 cell counts. Only a minority of cases (25% to
40%) express EBV.209,245 If EBV is found in SNCCL, EBNA-2 and LMP-1 are not typically expressed, as is also observed in EBV-positive cases of (sporadic) Burkitt's
lymphoma in the general population. The lack of EBV protein expression could contribute to the ability of tumor cells to escape the relatively intact immune
surveillance in these patients.
The different patterns of EBV expression found in these lymphomas may relate in part to the observation that the synthesis of various EBV transformation-associated
proteins is regulated by different cellular factors depending on the differentiation stage of the host cell. 233 A number of these tumors express BCL-6, a protein
selectively expressed by germinal center (GC) B cells, and it has been suggested that these lymphomas may originate from the GC. 246 Deregulated BCL-6 expression
may contribute to lymphomagenesis by preventing post-GC differentiation. 247,248 Syndecan-1 (syn-1) is a proteoglycan that is not expressed in GC B cells, but it is
expressed in specific subsets of post-GC B cells, including immunoblasts and plasma cells. It is absent on circulating and peripheral B lymphocytes, but is
reexpressed on their differentiation into immobilized plasma cells. 249 BCL-6 and syn-1 appear to segregate into two major phenotypic subsets, suggesting that tumors
displaying the BCL-6+/syn-1– phenotype originate from GC-related B cells, whereas tumors displaying the BCL-6–/syn-1+ phenotype derive from post-GC B cells.
The differential expression of BCL-6 and syn-1 appears to be related to expression of LMP-1. Among EBV-infected AIDS-NHL, expression of the LMP-1 antigen can
be found only in BCL-6–/syn-1+ tumors, suggesting that the GC stage is not permissive for LMP-1 expression, and that tumors expressing LMP-1 derive from more
mature post-GC B cells. Cases with immunoblastic plasmacytoid features and LMP-1 expression thus appear to be BCL-6–/syn-1+ with post-GC histiogenic origin,
whereas most SNCCL and large non–cleaved cell lymphomas appear to originate from more immature GC B cells expressing BCL-6+/syn-1– and LMP-1–. Such
considerations may provide insight into the complicated pattern of EBV expression in NHL.
Clustering of the protooncogenes c-myc, BCL-6, and the tumor suppressor gene product p53 is also predictable according to histologic subtype: C-myc activation is
seen among 65% to 100% of SNCCL cases, but rarely in large cell lymphomas. 245 Inappropriately regulated expression of c-myc, which can be independent of EBV
infection in AIDS-NHL, 245 may contribute to lymphomagenesis by causing the down-regulation of lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 adhesion molecules and
loss of B-cell adhesion to cytotoxic T cells and natural killer cells. 250 This may provide another mechanism for malignant cells to escape immune surveillance. BCL-6
rearrangements occur in approximately 20% of large cell lymphomas, but are not found in SNCCL. p53 overexpression is restricted to SNCCL, possibly resulting in
disruptions in programmed cell death. 245 A small number of cases of both large cell and SNCCL have been observed to express activated RAS, potentially
distinguishing these tumors from those found in the immunocompetent host. 245
The Burkitt-like AIDS-NHL may be a distinct clinical entity from the HIV-negative morphologic counterpart. Most AIDS–Burkitt-like lymphomas appear to have a
molecular pattern similar to that of typical Burkitt's lymphoma: The c-myc oncogene appears to be rearranged in the majority of cases but not the bcl-2 gene, 216
whereas in HIV-negative Burkitt-like lymphomas, rearrangement of c-myc is uncommon, and the bcl-2 gene is rearranged in 30% of cases. 251 However, some features
clearly differentiate AIDS–Burkitt-like lymphomas from AIDS-Burkitt's lymphomas. The frequency of EBV infection in AIDS–Burkitt-like lymphomas (80%) is similar to
that in diffuse large cell lymphoma, but the pattern of viral latency is similar to that seen in Burkitt's lymphoma (i.e., no LMP-1 or EBNA-2 expression) in approximately
60% of the cases. Also, patients with AIDS–Burkitt-like lymphomas usually have a relatively low CD4 count, similar to that seen in the diffuse large cell immunoblastic
lymphomas. However, Burkitt-like lymphomas do not seem to share the predilection for CNS involvement associated with Burkitt's lymphoma. Burkitt-like lymphomas
may be a morphologic variant in a continuum from Burkitt's lymphoma to diffuse large cell lymphomas in the context of the range of immunodepletion that occurs in
HIV-infected patients.
PRIMARY EFFUSION LYMPHOMA
PEL, also termed body cavity lymphoma, is a rare entity, and as the name implies, these tumors typically grow mainly in the pleural, pericardial, and abdominal
cavities as lymphomatous effusions. 217,252,253,254 and 255 Sometimes, however, the initial presentation can be nodal, and in some cases the tumor can involve soft tissue
or the gastrointestinal tract. PELs exhibit distinctive clinical and biologic features, including immunoblastic morphology and indeterminate immunophenotype.
Monoclonality can be established by the finding of clonal immunoglobulin gene rearrangements indicating late B-cell genotype derivation that may have undergone
antigenic selection. 203,256 These tumors are universally associated with KSHV/HHV-8 and appear to follow the same epidemiologic pattern as KS (i.e., the greatest
frequency of occurrence is among those who acquire HIV infection from an individual who has sex with other men). 253 The majority of PELs are also EBV positive,
although some PEL cell lines are EBV negative, and these usually lack rearrangements in c-myc. 253,257,258,259 and 260 There is evidence that VEGF is involved in the
pathogenesis of this tumor. 261 KSHV/HHV-8 up-regulates production of VEGF, and SCID/beige mice inoculated intraperitoneally with BCBL-1 cells (an KSHV/HHV-8
infected PEL cell line) develop effusion lymphoma. Treatment with neutralizing anti-VEGF antibody inhibits formation of the lymphoma. 262 While the role of
KSHV/HHV-8 is unclear, this virus may have a direct transforming role in PEL. In particular, viral BCL-2, IL-6, and cyclin D homologues may serve to delay apoptotic
cell death or stimulate lymphomatous cell proliferation. 54,59,259 These observations may provide insights toward developing novel therapeutic strategies for this rare
tumor. These tumors are often quite resistant to cytotoxic chemotherapy.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND STAGING OF PERIPHERAL LYMPHOMAS
HIV-related NHLs frequently present as advanced stage 3 or 4 disease and behave aggressively with unusual patterns of organ involvement. 163,167,263,264 The majority
of patients present with either a rapidly growing mass lesion or the development of systemic B symptoms (unexplained fever, drenching night sweats, or unexplained
weight loss in excess of 10% of the normal body weight). 265 Extranodal involvement is common, including the bone marrow (25% to 40%), gastrointestinal tract (26%),
and the CNS (17% to 32%).167,168,211
In addition to the standard NHL staging for HIV-negative patients, CD4 cell count, HIV viral load, and CNS assessment should be performed on all HIV-infected
patients with lymphoma. Computed tomography of the brain with contrast is adequate to assess for parenchymal brain lesions, but magnetic resonance imaging with
gadolinium has the potential advantage of revealing evidence of leptomeningeal involvement by lymphoma. 266 Cytologic examination of the cerebrospinal fluid should
be performed in all cases.
NHL is significantly associated with a worse prognosis than many other complications of AIDS. 267 For systemic lymphomas, the factor most correlated with prognosis

is the CD4 cell count. With standard therapy, patients with fewer than 100 CD4 cells/µL have a median survival of approximately 4 months, whereas those with 100 or
greater CD4 cells/µL have a median survival of 11 months. 263,268 Other factors associated with poor outcome are age over 35 to 40 years, high serum lactate
dehydrogenase levels, presence of extranodal sites, intravenous drug use, and preexisting AIDS diagnosis. 269,270 The international prognostic index for lymphoma is
thus of some utility in AIDS-lymphomas, although its use is not widely reported. 271 In a multivariate analysis of 192 patients, patients who had none or one of such
factors had a median survival of 46 weeks, and 30% were alive at 144 weeks, suggesting longer term survival can be achieved in the subset of patients without
unfavorable characteristics. 272 With the advent of PAT, it is quite possible that overall prognosis in AIDS-NHL will improve.
TREATMENT OF PERIPHERAL ACQUIRED IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROME LYMPHOMAS
Nearly two decades into the AIDS epidemic, optimal therapy for AIDS-NHL remains incompletely defined ( Table 50.1-5). As noted previously, patients who develop
AIDS-NHL continue to have a poor prognosis in spite of efforts to sort out the role of dose-intensive chemotherapy regimens for the immunocompromised host. The
rapid improvements in therapy for the underlying HIV infection complicate the ability to compare clinical trials conducted at different times. To put this in perspective, it
is instructive to consider some of the issues that have motivated the different treatment strategies for AIDS-NHL.

TABLE 50.1-5. Selected Regimens and Outcomes for Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome–Associated Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma

At the beginning of the AIDS epidemic, oncologists who treated AIDS-NHL recognized that patients frequently tolerated multiagent chemotherapy poorly, and that
responses occurred in only a low percentage of patients and were often of short duration. 211,273,274 Importantly, in the early 1980s, prophylaxis against opportunistic
infections had not yet been defined as standard practice, 275 and PAT was not available. At that point in time, second- and third-generation lymphoma regimens such
as m-BACOD, ProMACE-CytaBOM, and MACOP-B were being explored in AIDS-NHL based on preliminary evidence that they may have been more efficacious in the
treatment of lymphoma.276,277,278 and 279 However, these regimens themselves were observed to sometimes cause opportunistic infections such as Pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia in HIV-negative patients. 279,280 In 1993, an intergroup randomized trial failed to show that these regimens were more effective than cyclophosphamide,
hydroxydaunorubicin (Adriamycin), Oncovin, and prednisone (CHOP) in HIV-negative patients and were perhaps associated with greater toxicity. 281 Before that report,
based on early observations that these lymphoma regimens were toxic in AIDS patients, investigators began to consider lower dose modifications of the second- and
third-generation lymphoma regimens in an attempt to reduce the toxicity and immunodeficiency caused by these regimens. 282 A large randomized trial comparing
standard- with low-dose m-BACOD was completed in 1997, showing equivalent results in both groups, with complete responses ranging from 41% to 52%, but with a
lower incidence of febrile neutropenia in the low-dose group. 283 However, the incidence of opportunistic infections was equivalent in both groups, and the low-dose
arm was not shown to yield an improved survival outcome. Also, this study was not designed or adequately powered to determine if the subset of patients with more
favorable HIV prognostic characteristics might have benefited from the higher dose intensity of the standard dose m-BACOD. 284 This issue is potentially important, as
some studies of aggressive lymphomas in HIV-negative patients have suggested that chemotherapy dose intensity is associated with curative potential. 285 However,
the strategy of low-dose chemotherapy clearly resulted in better quality of life with fewer treatment-related hospitalizations for a substantial proportion of the patients
treated. In addition, several small studies using dose-reduced CHOP in AIDS-NHL have generally shown equivalent efficacy to standard dose CHOP, although the
numbers are relatively small for assessment. 286,287 and 288
At least one study suggests that more intensive chemotherapy may benefit the subset of patients with favorable prognostic factors. In a prospective multicenter study,
141 patients, with a median CD4 cell count of 227/µL, were treated with three cycles of doxorubicin, 75 mg/m 2; cyclophosphamide, 1200 mg/m2; vindesine, 2 mg/m2 for
2 days; bleomycin, 10 mg for 2 days; and prednisolone, 60 mg/m 2 for 5 days, followed by a consolidation phase of high-dose methotrexate plus leucovorin, ifosfamide,
etoposide, asparaginase, and cytarabine (LNH84) and CNS prophylaxis with intrathecal methotrexate. 289 Zidovudine was started after chemotherapy. Eighty-nine
patients (63%) achieved complete remission and 19 (13%) partial remission. With a median follow-up of 28 months, median survival and disease-free survival were 9
and 16 months, respectively. Twenty-three patients subsequently died of opportunistic infections while in complete remission. This study, conducted in the era before
PAT, demonstrates that a subset of patients with AIDS-NHL were able to tolerate aggressive antilymphoma therapy and appeared to do reasonably well in terms of
lymphoma-free survival. This study also highlights the potential importance of improved anti-HIV therapy in patients free of lymphoma.
A greater understanding of HIV disease has resulted in the standard prophylaxis against opportunistic infections and more effective treatment of the underlying HIV
infection. These therapies have translated into improved survival and quality of life for patients with HIV disease. Prophylaxis for opportunistic infections clearly plays
a major role during cytotoxic chemotherapy in such patients, but it is as yet unclear how advances in antiretroviral therapy will affect the treatment outcome of
AIDS-NHL. To explore this issue, investigators have begun to administer newer antiretroviral regimens along with the chemotherapy regimens. 204,290 This is a
complicated issue and as yet only scant data exist to guide best use of these drugs during chemotherapy. Preliminary results were recently reported from an
NCI-sponsored trial conducted by the AIDS Malignancy Consortium. This trial involved 63 patients with a median CD4 cell count of 136/µL who received either
modified or full-dose CHOP while receiving PAT with stavudine, lamivudine, and indinavir. 288 Sixty percent of patients had stage 3 or 4 lymphoma. HIV viral loads
were stable, with many remaining below the level of detection for the test throughout the course of chemotherapy. The overall complete response rate for the trial was
equivalent between the two dose groups: 33% for the modified and 32% for the full-dose group. These rates are similar to those previously reported without
PAT, 274,283,286 although such comparisons may be of limited value. Pharmacokinetic data were collected and compared with historic controls. Elimination of
cyclophosphamide was decreased from 70 mL/min/m2 in historic controls to 39 mL/min/m 2 in the study patients, but without apparent effect on toxicity of the regimen.
Doxorubicin elimination and the area under the time concentration curve of indinavir were similar to that in previous studies of these agents. These results highlight
the feasibility of administering antineoplastic and antiretroviral drugs concomitantly, in spite of the potential complicated pharmacokinetics involved in this approach.
At the same time, they show that there may be pharmacokinetic interactions and that there is room for improvement in the therapy of this disease.
In a study of 12 patients with AIDS-NHL treated with 96-hour continuous intravenous infusion of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and etoposide (CDE) plus filgrastim,
patients also received saquinavir and one or two nucleoside analogue anti-HIV drugs. Severe mucositis occurred in 8 of 12 patients (67%) treated with CDE plus
saquinavir, which is more than the 3 in 25 (12%) rate of this toxicity in a previous trial of CDE without saquinavir. 291 This raises the possibility that pharmacokinetic
interactions may have contributed to these different rates of toxicity. In addition, such approaches may affect the consistency of antiretroviral dosing. 287,291 In another
trial of CDE, plasma etoposide levels were reported to be decreased by 11% to 38% on chemotherapy cycles given with didanosine compared with cycles without
didanosine administration. 292 These results serve as a reminder that there may be complex and unexpected drug interactions when one attempts to combine complex
chemotherapy regiments with complex anti-HIV regimens and that these interactions may affect the outcome of either therapy.
Preliminary results from a study at the NCI showed that 19 of 24 patients (79%) with HIV-associated NHL had a complete response using a modification of
chemotherapy with etoposide, prednisone, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin (EPOCH). 293,294 Cyclophosphamide was initially dosed according to CD4
count (187 mg/m2 for CD4 cells less than 100/µL; 375 mg/m2 if CD4 cells 100/µL or greater), and then adjusted up or down each cycle (by 187 mg/m 2 to a maximum of
750 mg/m2) depending on the neutrophil nadir. Antiretroviral therapy was suspended until completion of chemotherapy (maximum of six cycles), and then restarted.
The median progression-free survival and overall survival had not been reached, but were 83% and 79%, respectively, at 22.5 months. Over 90% of the planned
maximum dose intensity of doxorubicin [10 mg/m2/24 hours continuous intravenous infusion (CIV) for 4 days], etoposide (50 mg/m 2/24 hours CIV × 4 days), and
vincristine (0.4 mg/m 2/24 hours CIV × 4 days), and 56% of the cyclophosphamide was administered with relatively little associated toxicity. Febrile neutropenia
occurred in only 12% of the cycles administered. No new opportunistic infections developed in these patients despite the withdrawal of antiretroviral treatment on

initiation of chemotherapy (Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia prophylaxis was administered to all patients, and Mycobacterium avium-complex prophylaxis to at-risk
patients). All patients who had responded to antiretroviral therapy before development of AIDS-NHL responded again to PAT when it was subsequently started
postchemotherapy. CD4 counts recovered to baseline within 12 months after PAT reinstitution. 294 While this strategy may have the advantage of optimizing dose
intensity and protecting patients against development of resistant HIV, some physicians may feel uncomfortable withdrawing antiretroviral therapy (even for a
relatively short period of time), and the results require further study.
A high percentage (15% to 20%) of HIV-associated lymphomas have involvement of the CNS at presentation. 263 CNS progression is a potentially important cause of
mortality in this setting, 274 and as patients potentially live longer with better antiretroviral treatment after chemotherapy, CNS relapse may become a relatively more
important issue. Therefore, in HIV-associated lymphomas, routine CNS prophylaxis with intrathecal methotrexate or cytosine arabinoside should be considered
standard practice. 187,295
Novel approaches to AIDS-NHL are clearly needed. Infusional chemotherapy regimens appear to have a favorable toxicity profile and may be useful in AIDS-NHL, but
comparative trials with conventional intravenous bolus regimens have not been conducted. Until such data are available, it is unclear whether the encouraging data
from small phase II trials of CDE and etoposide, prednisone, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin truly represent an advance in the treatment of this
condition. There is current interest in the potential role of the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody, rituximab (Rituxan) in AIDS-NHL, and trials are currently planned to test
this approach. Interest has also evolved in the use of stem cell transplantation in AIDS-NHL. Both autologous and allogeneic transplantation, with transfer of
HIV-resistant genes into the marrow infusate are areas of interest being studied in clinical trials. In a collaborative trial being conducted by investigators at the
National Institutes of Health, nonmyeloablative matched-sibling donor allogeneic transplantation is being studied with encouraging initial results. 296

PRIMARY CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM LYMPHOMA IN ACQUIRED IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROME
OVERVIEW AND PATHOLOGY
PCNSL makes up approximately 19% of AIDS-NHLs, which is substantially higher than that in non–AIDS-NHL (approximately 1%). 165,222,297 The frequency of PCNSL
is more than 3000-fold higher in patients with AIDS than in the general population, occurring in up to 12% of HIV-infected individuals. 298 From 20% to 30% of CNS
lesions in patients with AIDS are ultimately found to have PCNSL. 5,299,300 PCNSL is the second most common mass lesion found in patients with AIDS, and the most
common brain tumor in this population. 301,302 The survival of patients with HIV-associated PCNSL is 2 to 5 months, which is substantially shorter than that in the
non–HIV-infected population with PCNSL. 298,303 PCNSL occurs most frequently in patients with a CD4 cell count less than 50/µL and can occur in the setting of other
CNS pathology such as toxoplasmosis. 163,303,304
Definitive diagnosis of focal brain lesions in AIDS patients requires biopsy and yields a greater than 92% diagnostic rate. 305 However, there is often some reluctance
to do this procedure. While stereotactic biopsy is generally safe, the location of some lesions poses technical challenge and can introduce potential morbidity to the
patient as well as risk to the surgical team. 306 Therefore, in many medical centers it has become standard practice to treat AIDS patients who have focal brain lesions
and antitoxoplasmosis antibodies empirically with antitoxoplasmosis therapy, reserving biopsy for those patients who are seronegative for antitoxoplasma antibodies
or fail to respond to treatment. 307 However, delay in diagnosis can adversely affect survival in AIDS-PCNSL. 308 Such factors necessitate consideration of alternative,
less invasive diagnostic modalities.
Computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging scans usually demonstrate single or multiple contrast-enhancing masses that are not reliably distinguishable
from toxoplasmosis or other CNS processes. Preliminary studies suggest that 18F-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose and positron emission tomography may have some utility in
distinguishing malignant and nonmalignant conditions, since high FDG uptake most likely represents a malignant process. 309 Also, there is some evidence that
thallium 201 single photon emission computed tomography might be a useful, noninvasive method for differentiating intracranial lymphoma from nonneoplastic lesions
in patients with AIDS. 310,311 However, these modalities have not been confirmed in large studies, and a high degree of intercenter variability in procedure may reduce
the reliability of these techniques.
It has been shown that detection of CSF EBV DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in HIV-infected patients is reliably associated with PCNSLs, 312 lending support
for the use of this assay as a diagnostic test for this condition. The basis for this approach is the observation that nearly all HIV-associated PCNSLs are associated
with EBV infection.313 In a series of 95 patients, including 40 patients with AIDS-PCNSL, the sensitivity and specificity of PCR for EBV DNA detection in lumbar CSF
were 80% and 100%, respectively. 312 Lumbar puncture and subsequent assessment of EBV DNA would have allowed a correct diagnosis in 63.2% of patients with
AIDS-PCNSL and excluded this diagnosis in 76.3% of patients without lymphoma (because EBV DNA was not detected). 312 Another group reported an even higher
diagnostic confidence of AIDS-related focal brain lesions using minimally invasive procedures. 314 By combining CSF EBV DNA detection by PCR with 201Tl single
photon emission computed tomography, the presence of increased uptake, positive EBV DNA, or both had 100% sensitivity and 100% negative predictive value.
Because PCNSL likelihood is extremely high in patients with hyperactive lesions and positive EBV DNA, brain biopsy may be avoided, and patients could promptly
undergo definitive therapy. 314
Most cases of PCNSL are of immunoblastic morphology with plasmacytic differentiation, large cell lymphomas with immunoblastic features, or are centroblastic
polymorphic lymphomas. 223 SNCCL are rare. EBV is consistently detected by PCR. The bcl-2 oncoprotein and LMP-1 of EBV are frequently strongly expressed. In a
study of 11 AIDS-related primary brain lymphomas, LMP-1 and bcl-2 were expressed in all cases but one, 315 potentially implicating their involvement in CNS
lymphomagenesis. Expression of mutated p53, or rearrangement of bcl-2 or the c-myc oncogene is not reported. 316,317 The precise histogenetic derivation and the
molecular pathogenesis of PCNSL is poorly understood. Evidence suggests that these tumors may be segregated into two major biologic categories based on the
expression pattern of BCL-6, LMP-1, and BCL-2. 318 In an analysis of 26 AIDS-related and 23 AIDS-unrelated PCNSL cases, expression of BCL-6 protein, which is
restricted to GC B cells throughout physiologic B-cell maturation, was detected in all of the AIDS-unrelated PCNSL. However, only 56% of the AIDS-related cases
expressed BCL-6. Expression of BCL-6 was mutually exclusive with expression of EBV-encoded LMP-1, and with few exceptions, of BCL-2. All but one PCNSL
expressed hMSH2, which among mature B cells selectively stains GC B cells. Thus, a proportion of AIDS-PCNSLs may represent a divergent biologic spectrum from
their non-AIDS counterparts.
TREATMENT
Treatment modalities for immunocompetent patients are applied to patients with AIDS-PCNL, but generally with substantially more toxicity and poorer results. PCNSL
is highly responsive to whole brain irradiation, and a substantial proportion of patients can be expected to have complete tumor eradication; however, they have a
high likelihood of subsequently succumbing to opportunistic infection 319 or recurrent lymphoma.320 In a study of 55 AIDS patients with biopsy-proven primary CNS
lymphomas, all tumors responded both clinically and radiologically to whole brain radiation therapy consisting of 4000 rad in 267-rad fractions over 3 weeks or an
equivalent dose. 319 The mean duration of survival from the appearance of symptoms consistent with the mass lesion was significantly greater in patients who received
radiation therapy than in those who did not (134 vs. 42 days). Autopsy findings showed that patients who did not receive radiation therapy generally died from tumor
progression, whereas those who completed radiation therapy often died of opportunistic infections. Such observations emphasize the need for early diagnosis and
treatment, and for treatment of opportunistic infections and the underlying HIV infection. 319 Relapse can occur remote from the primary site, but also within the
radiation port.
Experience combining chemotherapy with radiotherapy suggests that a subgroup of patients can benefit from this approach, with survival reaching over 1 year. 320,321
However, this is still shorter than survival in non-AIDS patients, and still only a minority of patients so treated have survival greater than 1 year. 322
Surgery has no therapeutic role in PCNSL since microscopic tumor infiltration into brain parenchyma extends from the site of primary involvement. 323

EFFECT OF ANTIRETROVIRAL THERAPY ON PRIMARY CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM LYMPHOMA INCIDENCE
Since AIDS-PCNSL appears to be an opportunistic illness associated with profound CD4 depletion (usually occurring in patients with less than 50 CD4 cells), it might
be expected that better therapy for HIV would result in a decrease in the incidence of PCNSL. A large medical records analysis showed a decrease in the incidence of
PCNSL from 8.5 cases per 1000 person-years in early 1994 to 0.9 cases per 1000 person-years in late 1996 ( P = .04). This change was coincident with changes in
antiretroviral treatment patterns and an increase in the use of two or more drugs from 20% to 46% of patients. 75 Other data support these findings. 28,188 However,

many patients are now developing resistance to available therapies, and it is possible that the incidence may increase in the near future. Also, it is possible that the
cumulative incidence of AIDS-related lymphomas may rise as patients live longer with HIV infection. 163

HODGKIN'S DISEASE
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Although Hodgkin's disease is not an AIDS-defining condition, its association with HIV is apparent for several reasons: it presents in HIV-infected patients with distinct
clinical and biologic characteristics that distinguish it from its HIV-negative counterpart ( primary Hodgkin's disease); and it occurs with somewhat increased frequency
among HIV-infected patients.1,324,325 By contrast, many registries have indicated a slight decrease in primary Hodgkin's disease incidence in recent decades. 326 An
eightfold excess of Hodgkin's disease in HIV-infected patients has been found by linking AIDS and cancer registry data. 12 However, there is some controversy over
the epidemiology, as some studies have not found an increased incidence of Hodgkin's disease in areas of high prevalence for HIV infection. 327,328
Overall, Hodgkin's disease of the nodular sclerosis subtype (the most frequent subtype in HIV-negative patients) has increased over time, whereas Hodgkin's disease
of mixed cellularity has declined. 326 However, among HIV-infected patients, the most common histologic subtype is mixed cellularity, followed by lymphocyte
depleted. 228,329,330,331,332,333 and 334
PATHOGENESIS
EBV infection appears to be more predominant among cases of HIV-associated Hodgkin's disease than in cases of primary Hodgkin's disease. 334 Monoclonal
expansions of EBV-infected cells have been found in from 78% to 100% of HIV-related Hodgkin's disease, but in only 15% to 48% of primary Hodgkin's disease
cases.227,333,335 EBV-encoded LMP-1 has been demonstrated in the tumor cells in from 25% to 50% of primary Hodgkin's disease cases, but in up to 100% of both the
nodular sclerosing and mixed cellularity subtypes of Hodgkin's disease in HIV-positive patients. 335 The pattern of EBV gene expression may favor immune escape in
HIV-related Hodgkin's disease. The EBV latency C promoter drives expression of the immunodominant EBNAs that are targeted by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. In
EBV-associated Hodgkin's disease, the C promoter is inactive and the immunodominant EBNAs are thus not expressed. 336 This finding may be relevant to the
frequent occurrence of Hodgkin's disease in relatively immunocompetent HIV-infected patients. 228,331,333
CLINICAL PRESENTATION, TREATMENT, AND PROGNOSIS
Patients with HIV-associated Hodgkin's disease generally present at a younger age, with higher stage disease, less frequent mediastinal involvement, more frequent
involvement of extranodal sites of disease, and more frequent occurrence of B symptoms compared with their HIV-negative counterparts ( Table 50.1-6).333 These
differences are more than can be accounted for by the overrepresentation of the mixed cellularity histologic subtype in HIV-associated Hodgkin's disease, 331 a
histologic subtype that involves the mediastinal less often compared with nodular sclerosing Hodgkin's disease. Compared with AIDS-associated NHL, in which the
CD4 cell count is frequently less than 100/µL, the median CD4 cell count in HIV-associated Hodgkin's disease has been reported to be over 275 cells/µL in large
patient series. 228,331,333

TABLE 50.1-6. Comparison of Human Immunodeficiency Virus–Associated Hodgkin's Disease and Primary Hodgkin's Disease

Prognosis is generally poorer for HIV-Hodgkin's disease than for primary Hodgkin's disease. HIV-Hodgkin's disease patients frequently have a number of features that
have been associated with poor prognosis in primary non–HIV-associated Hodgkin's disease, including male sex, large number of sites involved, and mixed cellularity
or lymphocyte-depleted histology. 337 Because of this, the precise contribution of HIV infection per se to the poor prognosis is uncertain. In general, complete response
rates are relatively high with systemic chemotherapy (50% to over 80%), 333,338,339 although rates as low as 14% have also been reported. 340 Relapse of Hodgkin's
disease and progression of AIDS are common, contributing to poor overall survival. The CD4 cell count at the time of diagnosis is a prognostic factor. Patients with a
CD4 cell count less than 250 to 200 CD4 cells/µL have a median survival of less than 11 months, 331,333 whereas higher CD4 cell counts are associated with somewhat
better outcome. Although most patients do not have an AIDS diagnosis when they develop HIV-Hodgkin's disease, 48% to 71% develop AIDS within 3 years after
treatment for HIV-Hodgkin's disease, 331,333 compared with development of AIDS in 22% for most other HIV-infected patients with similar CD4 cell counts. 341 These
findings underscore the need for skilled management of the underlying HIV.
Most patients with HIV-Hodgkin's disease are treated with conventional chemotherapy regimens (i.e., radiotherapy, mechlorethamine, vincristine, procarbazine, and
prednisone; doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine; or alternating the two regimens; epirubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and prednisone; or combined
modality therapy). 329,338,342 Because of the occurrence of multiple poor prognostic factors in HIV-Hodgkin's disease, most oncologists advocate use of systemic
chemotherapy in all clinically staged patients. The CNS is rarely involved, so CNS prophylaxis is not commonly used. Strategies to improve outcome have included
the use of antiretrovirals and colony-stimulating factors, but before the use of protease inhibitor anti-HIV therapy, outcomes were essentially equivalent among
trials.338,339,343 It is hoped that treatment outcomes with PAT may change these grim statistics.

ANOGENITAL CANCERS IN HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS INFECTION
Cervical cancer was added to the CDC list of AIDS-defining conditions in 1993. 21 Anal cancer, though not an AIDS-defining condition, is also relatively prevalent
among HIV-infected women and homosexual and bisexual men with HIV infection. 344 These cancers are associated with human papilloma-virus (HPV) infection 345 and
appear to be more aggressive in HIV-infected than in non–HIV-infected individuals. It is thus recommended that HIV-infected women undergo regular periodic cervical
Papanicolaou (Pap) testing. The CDC has recommended cytologic screening as part of the initial evaluation when HIV seropositivity is diagnosed. The CDC
recommends that if the initial Pap smear is normal, at least one additional evaluation should be repeated within 6 months. 346 If the repeat result is normal, then
reevaluation should be done at least annually. If the initial or follow-up Pap smear shows severe inflammation with reactive squamous cellular changes, another Pap
smear should be collected within 3 months. If the initial or follow-up Pap smear shows squamous intraepithelial lesions or atypical squamous cells of undetermined
significance, the woman should be referred for a colposcopic examination of the lower genital tract and, if indicated, undergo colposcopically directed biopsies. HIV
infection is not an indication for colposcopy among women with normal Pap smear results. Because of the common occurrence of HPV-associated cytologic
abnormalities in the anal mucosa of both HIV-infected women and homosexual men, some experts have suggested that routine periodic cytologic examination of the
anal mucosa should also be considered in high-risk individuals. 6,347,348 and 349 A model to estimate the clinical benefits and cost-effectiveness of screening HIV-positive
homosexual and bisexual men for anal squamous intraepithelial lesions and anal squamous cell cancer indicates that Pap screening every 1 to 2 years beginning in
early HIV disease would result in an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of $13,000 to $16,000 per quality-adjusted life year saved, and thus offers quality-adjusted
life expectancy benefits at a cost comparable with other accepted clinical preventive interventions. 350

CERVICAL CANCER
Epidemiology
Squamous intraepithelial lesions, vulvovaginal condyloma acuminata, and anal intraepithelial neoplasia are seen with approximately fivefold increase in HIV-infected
women compared with women not infected with HIV.6,351,352 The prevalence of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia has been reported to range from 11% to 29% overall
for HIV-infected women,6,353 which may be higher than the 4% to 13% prevalence in HIV-negative women. 354,355 Among sexually active women, HIV-infected women
have a substantially higher rate of persistent HPV infections of the types most strongly associated with intraepithelial lesions and invasive cervical cancer (i.e.,
HPV-16 or HPV-18). 356,357 HPV infection is associated with development of squamous intraepithelial lesions 358 and increased prevalence of HPV infection among
HIV-infected women may explain the increased incidence of squamous intraepithelial lesions in this population. 359 Greater immune suppression is associated with
increased incidence of high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia in HIV-infected women, who may also present with invasive cervical cancer at a younger age and
with more aggressive advanced stage disease compared with HIV-seronegative women. 8,360 This suggests that progression of HPV-associated dysplasia to frank
invasive anogenital cancers may be more rapid in this population. Women with a CD4 cell count less than 500/µL appear to be at greater risk for poor outcome. 360
The incidence of invasive cervical cancer appears unchanged since the advent of PAT, 75 but it is unclear whether this is due to reduce usage of these medications
among the women at highest risk for both HIV and HPV, or some other factor. Likewise, the effect of PAT on the incidence of anal squamous intraepithelial lesions is
as yet unclear, but the data suggest that PAT may not result in regression of these lesions. 361
Progressive immune deficiency may increase the risk of persistent oncogenic HPV infection, 347,362 but the association between HIV infection and HPV-associated
anogenital disease could also be related to molecular mechanisms of HIV modulation of HPV expression. 363 For example, HIV Tat increases HPV-16 upstream
regulatory region-directed chloramphenicol acetyltransferase expression driven by the native HPV-16 promoter (P97). Tat also reverses E2-mediated repression of
P97-directed chloramphenicol acetyltransferase expression. Treatment of cells with HIV, Tat, or IL-6 modulates the expression of naturally integrated HPV-18 genes
at the transcriptional level. However, in cell lines, the translation of HPV-18 proteins seems to occur only during HIV coinfection. 364,365 HIV Rev and Rev-responsive
elements appear to modulate expression of the HPV type 16 L1 protein in epithelial cells. 366,367
Among women infected with HPV-16 who have not developed cervical intraepithelial neoplasia, the amount of HPV-16 DNA in cervicovaginal lavage is significantly
increased in those who are infected with HIV. 368 Consistent with this thesis is the observation that women with HIV viral loads over 10,000 copies per milliliter are at
relatively higher risk of HPV infection-related abnormal PAP smear results. 369 Also, HPV appears to be more persistent in the anal mucosa of HIV-infected
individuals. 370 Thus, it appears that HIV may be a cofactor for the oncogenic effects of HPV.
Therapy
Standard therapy for preinvasive cervical neoplasia, including cryotherapy, laser therapy, cone biopsy, and loop excision, appears to be somewhat less effective in
women with HIV infection due to the twofold higher frequency of recurrence even among those with high CD4 cell count. 371 The lower the CD4 count, the higher the
risk for recurrence. Preliminary data suggest that early preinvasive lesions can regress with effective antiretroviral therapy, 372 and that PAT reduces recurrence and
progression following standard excisional therapy. 373
Invasive cervical cancer should be approached with the same principles of oncologic management that guide treatment of cervical cancer in HIV-negative patients.
Patients with well-controlled HIV infection and relative immune preservation can be expected to have outcomes similar to that of HIV-negative women. Patients with
advanced HIV disease may be more intolerant of the myelosuppressive effects of radiation therapy and combination chemotherapy. When such therapy is
administered concomitantly with antiretroviral therapy, potential for overlapping toxicity of the various agents should be considered in the therapeutic plan. Following
surgery, recurrence is common. 374
ANAL CANCER
Evidence of HPV infection of the anal canal and anal cancer and the immediate precursor lesions, high-grade anal intraepithelial neoplasia, are common among
HIV-infected women6 and among men who have sex with men, especially those with HIV or immunosuppression.347,375 HPV infection of the anal epithelium has been
reported to be double that of cervical and the prevalence of anal cytologic abnormalities in HIV-infected women have been reported to be 14% to 27% 6,352 compared
with 7% in HIV-negative women.352 Among men, a longitudinal study conducted of 287 HIV-seronegative and 322 HIV-seropositive men attending a community-based
clinic revealed anal HPV DNA at entry among 91.6% of men with HIV and 65.9% of men without HIV. 370 History of recent anal warts predicted for HPV DNA in all men.
Anal squamous intraepithelial lesions do not appear to regress in patients receiving PAT, but among those with high CD4 cell counts the effect appears to be
variable. 376
For invasive anal cancer, standard combined chemotherapy and radiation appears to effectively control disease in most patients. 377,378 Patients with CD4 counts less
than 200/µL appear more likely to suffer treatment-related toxicity including cytopenias, intractable diarrhea, or moist desquamation requiring hospitalization or a
colostomy either for a therapy-related complication or for salvage. Patients with CD4 of 200/µL or greater appear to have better disease control with acceptable
morbidity.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Most AIDS-associated cancers are virally mediated neoplastic processes. In this regard, HIV can play a varied role. It can induce an immunosuppressed host in which
oncogenic viral infection and opportunistic neoplasia can develop relatively unchecked, and it can serve to stimulate the immune system to secrete cytokines that
promote cellular proliferation and oligoclonal expansions of cells infected with a variety of known oncogenic viruses. Molecular interactions between HIV-related
proteins (or factors induced by HIV) and genomic sequences in some of these viruses may modulate their oncogenic potential. Many AIDS-associated cancers thus
appear to be preventable. However, as with other cancers, it is unlikely that behavioral prevention alone will eliminate these epidemic neoplasms. Great strides in the
treatment of HIV infection have been made, although it is too soon to determine the ultimate effect of these advances on opportunistic neoplastic disease. The greater
understanding of the virologic and molecular basis of these cancers may provide opportunities for advancement in prevention and treatment through antiangiogenesis
approaches, antiviral-, vaccine-, and immune-based therapies. Research in AIDS malignancies has the potential to affect a number of other important fields in
oncology, including general tumor angiogenesis, viral oncogenesis, immunologic control of tumors, and molecular pathogenesis of tumors. This should prove to be a
fruitful area of research over the next decade.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Goedert JJ, Cote TR, Virgo P, et al. Spectrum of AIDS-associated malignant disorders. Lancet 1998;351:1833.
2. Grulich AE, Wan X, Law MG, Coates M, Kaldor JM. Risk of cancer in people with AIDS. AIDS 1999;13:839.
3. MMWR. Surveillance for AIDS-defining opportunistic illnesses, 19921997. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1999:SS2.
4. Biggar RJ, Rosenberg PS, Cote T. Kaposi's sarcoma and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma following the diagnosis of AIDS. Multistate AIDS/Cancer Match Study Group. Int J Cancer 1996;68:754.
5. Beral V, Peterman T, Berkelman R, Jaffe H. AIDS-associated non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Lancet 1991;337:805.
6. Williams AB, Darragh TM, Vranizan K, et al. Anal and cervical human papillomavirus infection and risk of anal and cervical epithelial abnormalities in human immunodeficiency virus-infected
women. Obstet Gynecol 1994;83:205.
7. Chiasson MA, Ellerbrock TV, Bush TJ, Sun XW, Wright TC Jr. I ncreased prevalence of vulvovaginal condyloma and vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia in women infected with the human
immunodeficiency virus. Obstet Gynecol 1997;89:690.
8. Northfelt DW. Cervical and anal neoplasia and HPV infection in persons with HIV infection. Oncology (Huntingt) 1994;8:33;discussion 38.
9. MMWR. Kaposi's sarcoma and pneumocystis pneumonia among homosexual menNew York City and California. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control, 1981.
10. Beral V, Peterman TA, Berkelman RL, Jaffe HW. Kaposi's sarcoma among persons with AIDS: a sexually transmitted infection? Lancet 1990;335:123.
11. Rabkin CS, Biggar RJ, Horm JW. Increasing incidence of cancers associated with the human immunodeficiency virus epidemic. Int J Cancer 1991;47:692.
12. Biggar RJ, Rabkin CS. The epidemiology of AIDS-related neoplasms. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:997.
13. Kaposi M. Idiopathisches multiples Pigmensarkom der Haut. Arch Derm Syph 1872;4:265.
14. Gottlieb MS, Schroff R, Schanker HM, et al. Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia and mucosal candidiasis in previously healthy homosexual men: evidence of a new acquired cellular
immunodeficiency. N Engl J Med 1981;305:1425.
15. Masur H, Michelis MA, Greene JB, et al. An outbreak of community-acquired Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia: initial manifestation of cellular immune dysfunction. N Engl J Med 1981;305:1431.
16. Gallo RC, Salahuddin SZ, Popovic M, et al. Frequent detection and isolation of cytopathic retroviruses (HTLV-III) from patients with AIDS and at risk for AIDS. Science 1984;224:500.

17. Laurence J, Brun-Vezinet F, Schutzer SE, et al. Lymphadenopathy-associated viral antibody in AIDS. Immune correlations and definition of a carrier state. N Engl J Med 1984; 311:1269.
18. deFrancesco S, Austin D, Bordowitz G, Carlomusto J, Hoskins V. The design and development of AIDS educational materials. Int Conf AIDS 1990;6:306(abst F.D.898).
19. MMWR. US HIV and AIDS cases reported through December 1994. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report. Vol. 6. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1995:1.
20. Safai B, Johnson KG, Myskowski PL, et al. The natural history of Kaposi's sarcoma in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1985;103:744.
21. MMWR. 1993 Revised classification system for HIV infection and expanded surveillance case definition for AIDS among adolescents and adults. MMWR 1992;41(RR-17).
22. Wabinga HR, Parkin DM, Wabwire-Mangen F, Mugerwa JW. Cancer in Kampala, Uganda, in 1989-91: changes in incidence in the era of AIDS. Int J Cancer 1993;54:26.
23. Parkin DM, Wabinga H, Nambooze S, Wabwire-Mangen F. AIDS-related cancers in Africa: maturation of the epidemic in Uganda. AIDS 1999;13:2563.
24. Moore PS, Chang Y. Detection of herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in Kaposi's sarcoma in patients with and without HIV infection. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1181.
25. Chang Y, Cesarman E, Pessin M, et al. Identification of herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. Science 1994;266:1865.
26. O'Brien TR, Kedes D, Ganem D, et al. Evidence for concurrent epidemics of human herpesvirus 8 and human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in US homosexual men: rates, risk factors, and
relationship to Kaposi's sarcoma. J Infect Dis 1999;180:1010.
27. Jacobson LP. Impact of highly effective antiretroviral therapy on the incidence of malignancies among HIV-infected individuals. Second National AIDS Malignancy Conference, Bethesda, MD,
April 68, 1998.
28. Costagliola D. Clinical manifestations of HIV infections in the era of highly active antiretroviral treatment (HAART) in France. Int Conf AIDS Vol. 12, Geneva, 1998.
29. Kedes DH, Operskalski E, Busch M, et al. T he seroepidemiology of human herpesvirus 8 (Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus): distribution of infection in KS risk groups and evidence for
sexual transmission. Nat Med 1996;2:918.
30. Martin JN, Ganem DE, Osmond DH, et al. Sexual transmission and the natural history of human herpesvirus 8 infection. N Engl J Med 1998;338:948.
31. Melbye M, Cook P, Hjalgrim H, et al. Risk factors for HHV-8 seropositivity and progression to Kaposi's sarcoma in a cohort of homosexual men, 198196. 1st National AIDS Malignancy
Conference, Bethesda, MD, April 1, 1997, Vol. 14. Lippincott-Raven.
32. Renwick N, Halaby T, Weverling GJ, et al. Seroconversion for human herpesvirus 8 during HIV infection is highly predictive of Kaposi's sarcoma. AIDS 1998;12:2481.
33. Rutgers JL, Wieczorek R, Bonetti F, et al. The expression of endothelial cell surface antigens by AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. Evidence for a vascular endothelial cell origin. Am J Pathol
1986;122:493.
34. Uccini S, Ruco LP, Monardo F, et al. Co-expression of endothelial cell and macrophage antigens in Kaposi's sarcoma cells. J Pathol 1994;173:23.
35. Russell Jones R, Orchard G, Zelger B, Wilson Jones E. Immunostaining for CD31 and CD34 in Kaposi sarcoma. J Clin Pathol 1995;48:1011.
36. Rabkin CS, Janz S, Lash A, et al. Monoclonal origin of multicentric Kaposi's sarcoma lesions. N Engl J Med 1997;336:988.
37. Ensoli B, Nakamura S, Salahuddin SZ, et al. AIDS-Kaposi's sarcoma-derived cells express cytokines with autocrine and paracrine growth effects. Science 1989;243:223.
38. Miles SA, Rezai AR, Salazar-Gonzalez JF, et al. AIDS Kaposi sarcoma-derived cells produce and respond to interleukin 6. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:4068.
39. Friedlander M, Brooks PC, Shaffer RW, et al. Definition of two angiogenic pathways by distinct alpha v integrins. Science 1995;270:1500.
40. Zarling JM, Shoyab M, Marquardt H, et al. a growth regulator produced by differentiated histiocytic lymphoma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1986;83:9739.
41. Vasse M, Pourtau J, Trochon V, et al. Oncostatin M induces angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 1999;19:1835.
42. Modur V, Feldhaus MJ, Weyrich AS, et al. Oncostatin M is a proinflammatory mediator. In vivo effects correlate with endothelial cell expression of inflammatory cytokines and adhesion
molecules. J Clin Invest 1997;100:158.
43. Nair BC, DeVico AL, Nakamura S, et al. Identification of a major growth factor for AIDS-Kaposi's sarcoma cells as oncostatin M. Science 1992;255:1430.
44. Miles SA, Martinez-Maza O, Rezai A, et al. Oncostatin M as a potent mitogen for AIDS-Kaposi's sarcoma-derived cells. Science 1992;255:1432.
45. Wijelath ES, Carlsen B, Cole T, et al. Oncostatin M induces basic fibroblast growth factor expression in endothelial cells and promotes endothelial cell proliferation, migration and spindle
morphology. J Cell Sci 1997;110:871.
46. Murakami-Mori K, Taga T, Kishimoto T, Nakamura S. The soluble form of the IL-6 receptor (sIL-6R alpha) is a potent growth factor for AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) cells; the soluble
form of gp130 is antagonistic for sIL-6R alpha-induced AIDS-KS cell growth. Int Immunol 1996;8:595.
47. Murakami-Mori K, Taga T, Kishimoto T, Nakamura S. AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) cells express oncostatin M (OM)- specific receptor but not leukemia inhibitory factor/OM receptor
or interleukin-6 receptor. Complete block of OM-induced KS cell growth and OM binding by anti-gp130 antibodies. J Clin Invest 1995;96:1319.
48. Whitby D, Howard MR, Tenant-Flowers M, et al. Detection of Kaposi sarcoma associated herpesvirus in peripheral blood of HIV-infected individuals and progression to Kaposi's sarcoma.
Lancet 1995;346:799.
49. Humphrey RW, O'Brien TR, Newcomb FM, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma (KS)-associated herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs): association with KS and
persistence in patients receiving anti-herpes drugs. Blood 1996;88:297.
50. Boshoff C, Schulz TF, Kennedy MM, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus infects endothelial and spindle cells. Nat Med 1995;1:1274.
51. Gao SJ, Kingsley L, Li M, et al. KSHV antibodies among Americans, Italians and Ugandans with and without Kaposi's sarcoma. Nat Med 1996;2:925.
52. Staskus KA, Zhong W, Gebhard K, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus gene expression in endothelial (spindle) tumor cells. J Virol 1997;71:715.
53. Davis DA, Humphrey RW, Newcomb FM, et al. Detection of serum antibodies to a Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-specific peptide. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1071.
54. Moore PS, Boshoff C, Weiss RA, Chang Y. Molecular mimicry of human cytokine and cytokine response pathway genes by KSHV. Science 1996;274:1739.
55. Boshoff C, Endo Y, Collins PD, et al. Angiogenic and HIV-inhibitory functions of KSHV-encoded chemokines. Science 1997;278:290.
56. Arvanitakis L, Geras-Raaka E, Varma A, Gershengorn MC, Cesarman E. Human herpesvirus KSHV encodes a constitutively active G-protein-coupled receptor linked to cell proliferation. Nature
1997;385:347.
57. Bais C, Santomasso B, Coso O, et al. G-protein-coupled receptor of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus is a viral oncogene and angiogenesis activator. Nature 1998;391:86.
58. Flore O, Rafii S, Ely S, et al. Transformation of primary human endothelial cells by Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus. Nature 1998;394:588.
59. Cesarman E, Nador RG, Bai F, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus contains G protein-coupled receptor and cyclin D homologs which are expressed in Kaposi's sarcoma and
malignant lymphoma. J Virol 1996;70:8218.
60. Gershengorn MC, Geras-Raaka E, Varma A, Clark-Lewis I. Chemokines activate Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus G protein-coupled receptor in mammalian cells in culture. J Clin
Invest 1998;102:1469.
61. Ensoli B, Barillari G, Salahuddin SZ, Gallo RC, Wong-Staal F. Tat protein of HIV-1 stimulates growth of cells derived from Kaposi's sarcoma lesions of AIDS patients. Nature 1990;345:84.
62. Barillari G, Gendelman R, Gallo RC, Ensoli B. The Tat protein of human immunodeficiency virus type 1, a growth factor for AIDS Kaposi sarcoma and cytokine-activated vascular cells, induces
adhesion of the same cell types by using integrin receptors recognizing the RGD amino acid sequence. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:7941.
63. Albini A, Barillari G, Benelli R, Gallo RC, Ensoli B. Angiogenic properties of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:4838.
64. Du Clary F, Bendenoun M, Eliaszewicz M, Treilhou M, Dupont B. Prolonged recovery of visceral Kaposi sarcoma in two AIDS patients treated with HAART including antiprotease 6 months after
the end of chemotherapy: first report. Int Conf AIDS Vol. 12, Geneva, 1998.
65. Santambrogio S, Ridolfo AL, Tosca N, et al. Effect of highly active antiretroviral treatment (HAART) in patients with AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma (KS). 12th World AIDS Conference,
Geneva, June 28 to July 3, 1998.
66. Ohori M, Wheeler TM, Scardino PT. The New American Joint Committee on Cancer and International Union Against Cancer TNM classification of prostate cancer. Clinicopathologic
correlations. Cancer 1994;74:104.
67. Krown SE, Metroka C, Wernz JC. Kaposi's sarcoma in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: a proposal for uniform evaluation, response, and staging criteria. J Clin Oncol 1989; 7:1201.
68. Krown SE, Testa MA, Huang J. AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma: prospective validation of the AIDS Clinical Trials Group staging classification. AIDS Clinical Trials Group Oncology Committee.
J Clin Oncol 1997;15:3085.
69. Tambussi G, Repetto L, Torri V, et al. Epidemic HIV-related Kaposi's sarcoma: a retrospective analysis and validation of TIS staging. GICAT. Gruppo Italiano Collaborativo AIDS e Tumori. Ann
Oncol 1995;6:383.
70. Antinori A, Izzi I, Ammassari A, et al. Evaluation of different staging systems for Kaposi's sarcoma in HIV-infected patients. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1992;118:635.
71. Jacobson LP, Kirby AJ, Polk S, et al. Changes in survival after acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS): 19841991. Am J Epidemiol 1993;138:952.
72. Mellors JW, Munoz A, Giorgi JV, et al. Plasma viral load and CD4+ lymphocytes as prognostic markers of HIV-1 infection. Ann Intern Med 1997;126:946.
73. Mitsuyasu RT, Taylor JMG, Glaspy J, Fahey JL. Heterogeneity of epidemic Kaposi's sarcoma. Implications for therapy. Cancer 1986;57:1657.
74. Yarchoan R, Venzon DJ, Pluda JM, et al. CD4 count and the risk for death in patients infected with HIV receiving antiretroviral therapy. Ann Intern Med 1991;115:184.
75. Jones J, Hanson D, Ward J. Effect of antiretroviral therapy on recent trends in cancers among HIV-infected persons. Second National AIDS Malignancy Conference, Bethesda, MD, April 68,
1998.
76. Rabkin CS, Testa MA, Huang J, Von Roenn JH. Kaposi's sarcoma and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma incidence trends in AIDS Clinical Trial Group study participants. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr
1999;21(Suppl 1):S31.
77. Northfelt DW. Treatment of Kaposi's sarcoma. Current guidelines and future perspectives. Drugs 1994;48:569.
78. Serfling U, Hood AF. Local therapies for cutaneous Kaposi's sarcoma in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Arch Dermatol 1991;127:1479.
79. Konzelman JL, Smith K, Swango P, et al. Vinblastine iontophoresis of Kaposi's sarcoma (KS). Int Conf AIDS, Vol. 8, Amsterdam, 1992.
80. Smith KJ, Konzelman JL, Lombardo FA, et al. Iontophoresis of vinblastine into normal skin and for treatment of Kaposi's sarcoma in human immunodeficiency virus-positive patients. The
Military Medical Consortium for Applied Retroviral Research. Arch Dermatol 1992;128:1365.
81. Lucatorto FM, Sapp JP. Treatment of oral Kaposi's sarcoma with a sclerosing agent in AIDS patients. A preliminary study. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1993;75:192.
82. Kaliebe T, Schmitz T, Schroder U, Maciejewski W, Breit R. Cryotherapy of AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. Int Conf AIDS, Vol. 9, 1993.
83. Dman-Kien AF, Conant M. North American phase 3 study (protocol L1057T-31) of Panretin gel (LGD1057, ALRT1057) for cutaneous AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. Int Conf AIDS
1998;12:319.
84. Bodsworth N. Topical 9-cis-retinoic acid (Panretin) gel as treatment of cutaneous AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma: interim results of an international, placebo-controlled trial (ALRT 1057-503).
International Panretin KS Study Group, Int Conf AIDS, Vol. 12, Geneva, 1998.
85. Kirova YM, Belembaogo E, Frikha H, et al. Radiotherapy in the management of epidemic Kaposi's sarcoma: a retrospective study of 643 cases. Radiother Oncol 1998;46:19.
86. Hughes-Davies L, Young T, Spittle M. Radiosensitivity in AIDS patients [letter]. Lancet 1991;337:1616.
87. Hadderingh RJ, van der Meulen FW. Carbon dioxide laser treatment of oral Kaposi's sarcoma. Int Conf AIDS, Vol. 5, 1989.
88. Conill C, Alsina M, Verger E, Henriquez I. Radiation therapy in AIDS-related cutaneous Kaposi's sarcoma. Dermatology 1997;195:40.
89. Harrison M, Harrington KJ, Tomlinson DR, Stewart JS. Response and cosmetic outcome of two fractionation regimens for AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. Radiother Oncol 1998;46:23.
90. Nobler MP. Pulmonary irradiation for Kaposi's sarcoma in AIDS. Am J Clin Oncol 1985;8:441.
91. Schweitzer VG, Visscher D. Photodynamic therapy for treatment of AIDS-related oral Kaposi's sarcoma. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1990;102:639.
92. Bernstein ZP, Wilson BD, Oseroff AR, et al. Photofrin photodynamic therapy for treatment of AIDS-related cutaneous Kaposi's sarcoma. AIDS 1999;13:1697.
93. Krown SE, Real FX, Cunningham-Rundles S, et al. Preliminary observations on the effect of recombinant leukocyte A interferon in homosexual men with Kaposi's sarcoma. N Engl J Med
1983;308:1071.
94. Groopman JE, Gottlieb MS, Goodman J, et al. Recombinant alpha-2 interferon therapy for Kaposi's sarcoma associated with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Ann Intern Med
1984;100:671.
95. Fischl MA, Finkelstein DM, He W, et al. A phase II study of recombinant human interferon-alpha 2a and zidovudine in patients with AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. AIDS Clinical Trials Group. J
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol 1996;11:379.
96. Volberding PA, Abrams DI, Conant M, et al. Vinblastine therapy for Kaposi's sarcoma in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1985;103:335.
97. Laubenstein LJ, Krigel RL, Odajnyk CM, et al. Treatment of epidemic Kaposi's sarcoma with etoposide or a combination of doxorubicin, bleomycin, and vinblastine. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:1115.
98. Gill PS, Rarick M, McCutchan JA, et al. Systemic treatment of AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma: results of a randomized trial. Am J Med 1991;90:427.
99. Yarchoan R. Therapy for Kaposi's sarcoma: recent advances and experimental approaches. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1999;21(Suppl 1):S66.

100. Presant CA, Scolaro M, Kennedy P, et al. Liposomal daunorubicin treatment of HIV-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. Lancet 1993;341:1242.
101. Gill PS, Espina BM, Muggia F, et al. Phase I/II clinical and pharmacokinetic evaluation of liposomal daunorubicin. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:996.
102. Harrison M, Tomlinson D, Stewart S. Liposomal-entrapped doxorubicin: an active agent in AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:914.
103. Northfelt DW, Dezube BJ, Thommes JA, et al. Efficacy of pegylated-liposomal doxorubicin in the treatment of AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma after failure of standard chemotherapy. J Clin
Oncol 1997;15:653.
104. Gill PS, Wernz J, Scadden DT, et al. Randomized phase III trial of liposomal daunorubicin versus doxorubicin, bleomycin, and vincristine in AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. J Clin Oncol
1996;14:2353.
105. Northfelt DW, Dezube B, Thommes J, et al. Randomized comparative trial of Doxil vs. adriamycin, bleomycin, and vincristine (ABV) in the treatment of severe AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma
(AIDS-KS). 3rd Conf Retro Opportun Infect 1996:123.
106. Stewart S, Jablonowski H, Goebel FD, et al. Randomized comparative trial of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin versus bleomycin and vincristine in the treatment of AIDS-related Kaposi's
sarcoma. International Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:683.
107. Mitsuyas R, Roenn JY, Krown S, et al. Comparison study of liposomal doxorubicin (DOX) alone or with bleomycin and vincristine (DBV) for treatment of advanced AIDS-associated Kaposi's
sarcoma (AIDS-KS): AIDS Clinical Trial Group (ACTG) protocol 286. American Society of Clinical Oncology, Denver, May 1720, 1997.
108. Saville MW, Lietzau J, Pluda JM, et al. Treatment of HIV-associated Kaposi's sarcoma with paclitaxel. Lancet 1995;346:26.
109. Welles L, Saville MW, Lietzau J, et al. Phase II trial with dose titration of paclitaxel for the therapy of human immunodeficiency virus-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1112.
110. Gill P, Scadden D, Groopman J, et al. Low dose paclitaxel (Taxol) is highly effective in the treatment of patients with advanced AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. In : J AIDS & HR, 1st National
AIDS Malignancy Conference, Bethesda, MD, April 1, 1997, Vol. 14, Lipppincott-Raven.
111. Hakim FT, Cepeda R, Kaimei S, et al. Constraints on CD4 recovery postchemotherapy in adults: thymic insufficiency and apoptotic decline of expanded peripheral CD4 cells. Blood
1997;90:3789.
112. Mackall CL, Fleisher TA, Brown MR, et al. Age, thymopoiesis, and CD4+ T-lymphocyte regeneration after intensive chemotherapy. N Engl J Med 1995;332:143.
113. Ingber D, Fujita T, Kishimoto S, et al. Synthetic analogues of fumagillin that inhibit angiogenesis and suppress tumour growth. Nature 1990;348:555.
114. D'Amato RJ, Loughnan MS, Flynn E, Folkman J. Thalidomide is an inhibitor of angiogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:4082.
115. Voest EE, Kenyon BM, O'Reilly MS, et al. Inhibition of angiogenesis in vivo by interleukin 12. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:581.
116. Pluda JM, Shay LE, Foli A, et al. Administration of pentosan polysulfate to patients with human immunodeficiency virus-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1585.
117. Pluda JM, Wyvill K, Lietzau J, et al. A phase I trial of TNP-470 (AGM-1470) administered to patients with HIV-associated Kaposi's sarcoma (KS). The First National Conference on Human
Retroviruses and Related Infections, Washington, DC, December 1216, 1993.
118. Dezube BJ, Von Roenn JH, Holden-Wiltse J, et al. Fumagillin analog in the treatment of Kaposi's sarcoma: a phase I AIDS Clinical Trial Group study. AIDS Clinical Trial Group No. 215 Team. J
Clin Oncol 1998;16:1444.
119. Little R, Pluda J, Wyvill K, et al. Interleukin 12 (IL-12) appears to be active in AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma (KS): early results of a pilot study. 7th Conference on Retroviruses and
Opportunistic Infections, San Francisco, January 30 to February 2, 2000.
120. Tulpule A, Espina BM, Cabriales S, et al. IM862 nasal solution is an active anti-angiogenic agent in the treatment of AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. American Society of Clinical Oncology 35th
Anual Meeting, Atlanta, May 1518, 1999.
121. Welles L, Little R, Wyvill K, et al. Preliminary results of a phase II study of oral thalidomide in patients with HIV infections and Kaposi's sarcoma (KS). 1st National AIDS Malignancy Conference,
Bethesda, MD, April 1, 1997, Vol. 14, Lippincott-Raven.
122. Bower M, Howard M, Gracie F, Phillips R, Fife K. A Phase II study of thalidomide for Kaposi's sarcoma: activity and correlation with KSHV DNA load . 1st National AIDS Malignancy Conference,
Bethesda, MD, April 1, 1997, Vol. 14, Lippincott-Raven.
123. Clerici M, Lucey DR, Berzofsky JA, et al. Restoration of HIV-specific cell-mediated immune responses by interleukin-12 in vitro. Science 1993;262:1721.
124. Chougnet C, Wynn TA, Clerici M, et al. Molecular analysis of decreased interleukin-12 production in persons infected with human immunodeficiency virus. J Infect Dis 1996;174:46.
125. Sgadari C, Angiolillo AL, Tosato G. Inhibition of angiogenesis by interleukin-12 is mediated by the interferon-inducible protein 10. Blood 1996;87:3877.
126. Angiolillo AL, Sgadari C, Taub DD, et al. Human interferon-inducible protein 10 is a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis in vivo. J Exp Med 1995;182:155.
127. Sgadari C, Angiolillo AL, Cherney BW, et al. Interferon-inducible protein-10 identified as a mediator of tumor necrosis in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:13791.
128. Geras-Raaka E, Varma A, Ho H, Clark-Lewis I, Gershengorn MC. Human interferon-gamma-inducible protein 10 (IP-10) inhibits constitutive signaling of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus G protein-coupled receptor. J Exp Med 1998;188:405.
129. Russo JJ, Bohenzky RA, Chien MC, et al. Nucleotide sequence of the Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (HHV8). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:14862.
130. Foli A, Saville MW, Baseler MW, Yarchoan R. Effects of the Th1 and Th2 stimulatory cytokines interleukin-12 and interleukin-4 on human immunodeficiency virus replication. Blood
1995;85:2114.
131. O'Reilly MS, Holmgren L, Shing Y, et al. Angiostatin: a novel angiogenesis inhibitor that mediates the suppression of metastases by a Lewis lung carcinoma. Cell 1994;79:315.
132. O'Reilly MS, Boehm T, Shing Y, et al. Endostatin: an endogenous inhibitor of angiogenesis and tumor growth. Cell 1997;88:277.
133. Chang E, Boyd A, Nelson CC, et al. Successful treatment of infantile hemangiomas with interferon-alpha-2b. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1997;19:237.
134. Gelmann EP, Preble OT, Steis R, et al. Human immunoblastoid interferon treatment of Kaposi's sarcoma in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Am J Med 1985;78:737.
135. Miles SA, Rezai AR, Salazar-Gonzalez JF, et al. AIDS Kaposi sarcoma-derived cells produce and respond to interleukin 6. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:4068.
136. Corbeil J, Rapaport E, Richman DD, Looney DJ. Antiproliferative effect of retinoid compounds on Kaposi's sarcoma cells. J Clin Invest 1994;93:1981.
137. Sidell N, Taga T, Hirano T, Kishimoto T, Saxon A. Retinoic acid-induced growth inhibition of a human myeloma cell line via down-regulation of IL-6 receptors. J Immunol 1991;146:3809.
138. Gill PS, Espina BM, Moudgil T, et al. All- trans retinoic acid for the treatment of AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma: results of a pilot phase II study. Leukemia 1994;8:S26.
139. Bailey J, Pluda JM, Foli A, et al. Phase I/II study of intermittent all-trans-retinoic acid, alone and in combination with interferon alfa-2a, in patients with epidemic Kaposi's sarcoma. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:1966.
140. Von Roenn J, von Gunten C, Mullane M, et al. All-transretinoic acid (TRA) in the treatment of AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. Abstracts of the IXth International Conference on AIDS IVth STD
World Congress 1993;I:397(abst PO-B12-1571).
141. Adamson PC, Boylan JF, Balis FM, et al. Time course of induction of metabolism of all- trans-retinoic acid and the up-regulation of cellular retinoic acid-binding protein. Cancer Res
1993;53:472.
142. Aboulafia D, Norris D, Grossman RJ, et al. Interim analysis of phase ii study (protocol L1057-28) of Panretin Capsules (LGD1057, ARLT1057) for AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. 2nd National
AIDS Malignancy Meeting, Bethesda, MD, April 68, 1998. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol Vol 17, Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.
143. Friedman-Kien A, Dezube B, Lee J, et al. Oral 9-cis-retinoic acid is active in AIDS related Kaposi's sarcoma: AIDS Associated Malignancy Consortium Study 002. 2nd National AIDS Malignancy
Meeting, Bethesda, MD, April 68, 1998, Vol. 17, Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.
144. Lennette ET, Blackbourn DJ, Levy JA. Antibodies to human herpesvirus type 8 in the general population and in Kaposi's sarcoma patients. Lancet 1996;348:858.
145. Lundardi-Iskandar Y, Bryant JL, Zeman RA, et al. Tumorigenesis and metastasis of neoplastic Kaposi's sarcoma cell line in immunodeficient mice blocked by a human pregnancy hormone.
Nature 1995;375:64.
146. Lunardi-Iskandar Y, Bryant JL, Blattner WA, et al. Effects of a urinary factor from women in early pregnancy on HIV-1, SIV and associated disease. Nat Med 1998;4:428.
147. Gill PS, Lunardi-Ishkandar Y, Louie S, et al. The effects of preparations of human chorionic gonadotropin on AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1261.
148. Gill PS, McLaughlin T, Espina BM, et al. Phase I study of human chorionic gonadotropin given subcutaneously to patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related mucocutaneous
Kaposi's sarcoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1797.
149. Morfeldt L, Torssander J. Long-term remission of Kaposi's sarcoma following foscarnet treatment in HIV-infected patients. Scand J Infect Dis 1994;26:749.
150. Humphrey RW, Davis DA, Newcomb FM, Yarchoan R. Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) in the pathogenesis of Kaposi's sarcoma and other diseases. Leuk Lymphoma 1998;28:25564.
151. Martin DF, Kuppermann BD, Wolitz RA, et al. Oral ganciclovir for patients with cytomegalovirus retinitis treated with a ganciclovir implant. Roche Ganciclovir Study Group. N Engl J Med
1999;340:1063.
152. Chieco-Bianchi L. HAART Treatment for AIDS-Related KS. 1999 International Meeting of the Institute of Human Virology, August 28 to September 2, 1999.
153. Jones J. Effect of antiretroviral therapy on recent trends in cancers among HIV infected persons. 2nd National AIDS Malignancy Conference, Bethesda, MD, April 6, 1998.
154. Ensoli B, Barillari G, Gallo RC. Cytokines and growth factors in the pathogenesis of AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. Immunol Rev 1992;127:147.
155. Greiner TC, Medeiros LJ, Jaffe ES. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer 1995;75:370.
156. Eby NL, Grufferman S, Flannelly CM, et al. Increasing incidence of primary brain lymphoma in the US. Cancer 1988;62:2461.
157. Gail MH, Pluda JM, Rabkin CS, et al. Projections of the incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma related to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:695.
158. MMWR. Diffuse, undifferentiated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma among homosexual malesUnited States. MMWR 1982;31:277.
159. Ziegler JL, Miner RC, Rosenbaum E, et al. Outbreak of Burkitt's-like lymphoma in homosexual men. Lancet 1982;2:631.
160. Biggar RJ, Horm J, Lubin JH, et al. Cancer trends in a population at risk of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. J Natl Cancer Inst 1985;74:793.
161. MMWR. Current trends revision of the case definition of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome for national reportingUnited States. MMWR 1985;34:373.
162. Moore RD, Kessler H, Richman DD, Flexner C, Chaisson RE. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in patients with advanced HIV infection treated with zidovudine. JAMA 1991;265:2208.
163. Pluda JM, Yarchoan R, Jaffe ES, et al. Development of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in a cohort of patients with severe HIV infection on long-term antiretroviral therapy. Ann Intern Med
1990;113:276.
164. Ridolfo AL, Santambrogio S, Mainini F, et al. High frequency of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in patients with HIV-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. AIDS 1996;10:181.
165. Cote TR, Biggar RJ, Rosenberg PS, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma among people with AIDS: incidence, presentation and public health burden. AIDS/Cancer Study Group. Int J Cancer
1997;73:645.
166. Pluda JM, Venzon DJ, Tosato G, et al. Parameters affecting the development of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in patients with severe human immunodeficiency virus infection receiving
antiretroviral therapy. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1099.
167. Tirelli U, Spina M, Vaccher E, et al. Clinical evaluation of 451 patients with HIV related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: experience on the Italian cooperative group on AIDS and tumors (GICAT).
Leuk Lymphoma 1995;20:91.
168. Levine AM. Lymphoma complicating immunodeficiency disorders. Ann Oncol 1994; 5(Suppl 2):29.
169. National Cancer Institute sponsored study of classifications of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: summary and description of a working formulation for clinical usage. The Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma
Pathologic Classification Project. Cancer 1982;49:2112.
170. Zhang Z, Diwan BA, Anderson LM, et al. Skin tumorigenesis and Ki-ras and Ha-ras mutations in tumors from adult mice exposed in utero to 3'-azido-2',3'-dideoxythymidine. Mol Carcinogen
1998;23:45.
171. Olivero OA, Beland FA, Fullerton NF, Poirier MC. Vaginal epithelial DNA damage and expression of preneoplastic markers in mice during chronic dosing with tumorigenic levels of
3'-azido-2',3'-dideoxythymidine. Cancer Res 1994;54:6235.
172. Olivero OA, Anderson LM, Diwan BA, et al. Transplacental effects of 3'-azido-2',3'-dideoxythymidine (AZT): tumorigenicity in mice and genotoxicity in mice and monkeys. J Natl Cancer Inst
1997;89:1602.
173. Levine AM, Bernstein L, Sullivan-Halley J, et al. Role of zidovudine antiretroviral therapy in the pathogenesis of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related lymphoma. Blood 1995;86:4612.
174. Widney D, Yawetz S, van der Meyden M, et al. Effects of zidovudine on B lymphocyte activation. Cell Immunol 1994;158:140.
175. Armenian HK, Hoover DR, Rubb S, et al. Risk factors for non-Hodgkin's lymphomas in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Am J Epidemiol 1996;143:374.
176. Philip T. Burkitt's lymphoma in Europe. In: Lenoir G, O'Connor G, Olweny C, eds. Burkitt's lymphoma: a human cancer model. Lyon: IARC, 1985:107.
177. Obrams GI, Grufferman S. Epidemiology of HIV associated non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Cancer Surv 1991;10:91.
178. Cantor KP, Fraumeni JF Jr. Distribution of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in the United States between 1950 and 1975. Cancer Res 1980;40:2645.
179. Ries L, Hankey B, Miller B, et al. Cancer statistics review, 19731988. Bethesda, MD: NIH, 1991:2789.

180. Rabkin CS, Yang Q, Goedert JJ, et al. Chemokine and chemokine receptor gene variants and risk of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in human immunodeficiency virus-1-infected individuals. Blood
1999;93:1838.
181. Michael NL, Chang G, Louie LG, et al. The role of viral phenotype and CCR-5 gene defects in HIV-1 transmission and disease progression. Nat Med 1997;3:338.
182. Dean M, Carrington M, Winkler C, et al. Genetic restriction of HIV-1 infection and progression to AIDS by a deletion allele of the CKR5 structural gene. Hemophilia Growth and Development
Study, Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study, Multicenter Hemophilia Cohort Study, San Francisco City Cohort, ALIVE Study. Science 1996;273:1856.
183. Dean M, Jacobson LP, McFarlane G, et al. Reduced risk of AIDS lymphoma in individuals heterozygous for the CCR5-delta32 mutation. Cancer Res 1999;59:3561.
184. Bacon KB, Premack BA, Gardner P, Schall TJ. Activation of dual T cell signaling pathways by the chemokine RANTES. Science 1995;269:1727.
185. Taub DD, Turcovski-Corrales SM, Key ML, Longo DL, Murphy WJ. Chemokines and T lymphocyte activation: I. Beta chemokines costimulate human T lymphocyte activation in vitro. J Immunol
1996;156:2095.
186. Grulich AE. AIDS-associated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1999;21(Suppl 1:)S27.
187. Levine AM. Epidemiology, clinical characteristics, and management of AIDS-related lymphoma. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1991;5:331.
188. Antinori A, Cingolani A, Ammassari A, et al. AIDS-related focal brain lesions in the era of HAART. 6th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections, Chicago, January 31 to February
4, 1999.
189. Hoover R, Fraumeni JF Jr. Risk of cancer in renal-transplant recipients. Lancet 1973;2:55.
190. Nalesnik MA, Jaffe R, Starzl TE, et al. The pathology of posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders occurring in the setting of cyclosporine A-prednisone immunosuppression. Am J Pathol
1988;133:173.
191. Sokal EM, Antunes H, Beguin C, et al. Early signs and risk factors for the increased incidence of Epstein-Barr virus-related posttransplant lymphoproliferative diseases in pediatric liver
transplant recipients treated with tacrolimus. Transplantation 1997;64:1438.
192. Natkunam Y, Elenitoba-Johnson KS, Kingma DW, Kamel OW. Epstein-Barr virus strain type and latent membrane protein 1 gene deletions in lymphomas in patients with rheumatic diseases.
Arthritis Rheum 1997;40:1152.
193. Cheung AN, Chan AC, Chung LP, et al. Post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disorder of donor origin in a sex-mismatched renal allograft as proven by chromosome in situ hybridization. Mod
Pathol 1998;11:99.
194. Gatti RA, Good RA. The immunological deficiency diseases. Med Clin North Am 1970;54:281.
195. Henley WL. Immunodeficiency disorders. Pediatr Ann 1976;5:418.
196. Hecht F, Hecht BK. Chromosome changes connect immunodeficiency and cancer in ataxia- telangiectasia. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1987;9:185.
197. Xu Y, Ashley T, Brainerd EE, et al. Targeted disruption of ATM leads to growth retardation, chromosomal fragmentation during meiosis, immune defects, and thymic lymphoma. Genes Dev
1996;10:2411.
198. Santana V, Rose NR. Neoplastic lymphoproliferation in autoimmune disease: an updated review. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 1992;63:205.
199. Jaffe ES. An increased risk of B-cell lymphomas in autoimmune lyphoproliferative syndrome. 3rd National AIDS Malignancy Meeting, Bethesda, MD, May 2627, 1999, National Cancer Institute.
200. Golding H, Robey FA, Gates FT, et al. Identification of homologous regions in human immunodeficiency virus virus I gp41 and human MHC class II beta 1 domain. J Exp Med 1988;167:914.
201. Ng VL, Hurt MH, Herndier BG, Fry KE, McGrath MS. VH gene use by HIV type 1-associated lymphoproliferations. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1997;13:135.
202. Riboldi P, Gaidano G, Schettino EW, et al. Two acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-associated Burkitt's lymphomas produce specific anti-i IgM cold agglutinins using somatically mutated
VH4-21 segments. Blood 1994;83:2952.
203. Bessudo A, Cherepakhin V, Johnson TA, et al. Favored use of immunoglobulin V(H)4 Genes in AIDS-associated B-cell lymphoma. Blood 1996;88:252.
204. Levine AM, Tulpule A, Espina B, et al. Low dose methotrexate, bleomycin, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and dexamethasone with zalcitabine in patients with acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome-related lymphoma. Effect on human immunodeficiency virus and serum interleukin-6 levels over time. Cancer 1996;78:517.
205. Przybylski GK, Goldman J, Ng VL, et al. Evidence for early B-cell activation preceding the development of Epstein-Barr virus-negative acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related lymphoma.
Blood 1996;88:4620.
206. Joshi VV, Kauffman S, Oleske JM, et al. Polyclonal polymorphic B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder with prominent pulmonary involvement in children with acquired immune deficiency
syndrome. Cancer 1987;59:1455.
207. Amadori A, Gallo P, Zamarchi R, et al. IgG oligoclonal bands in sera of HIV-1 infected patients are mainly directed against HIV-1 determinants. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1990;6:581.
208. Silvestris F, Williams RC Jr, Dammacco F. Autoreactivity in HIV-1 infection: the role of molecular mimicry. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 1995;75:197.
209. Gaidano G, Pastore C, Lanza C, Mazza U, Saglio G. Molecular pathology of AIDS-related lymphomas. Biologic aspects and clinicopathologic heterogeneity. Ann Hematol 1994;69:281.
210. Carbone A, Tirelli U, Gloghini A, Volpe R, Boiocchi M. Human immunodeficiency virus-associated systemic lymphomas may be subdivided into two main groups according to Epstein-Barr viral
latent gene expression. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1674.
211. Ziegler JL, Beckstead JA, Volberding PA, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in 90 homosexual men. Relation to generalized lymphadenopathy and the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. N
Engl J Med 1984;311:565.
212. Knowles DM. Etiology and pathogenesis of AIDS-related non--Hodgkin's lymphoma. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:1081.
213. Chadburn A, Cesarman E, Jagirdar J, et al. CD30 (Ki-1) positive anaplastic large cell lymphomas in individuals infected with the human immunodeficiency virus. Cancer 1993;72:3078.
214. Hollingsworth HC, Stetler-Stevenson M, Gagneten D, et al. Immunodeficiency-associated malignant lymphoma. Three cases showing genotypic evidence of both T- and B-cell lineages. Am J
Surg Pathol 1994;18:1092.
215. Levine AM. Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related lymphoma. Blood 1992;80:8.
216. Davi F, Delecluse HJ, Guiet P, et al. Burkitt-like lymphomas in AIDS patients: characterization within a series of 103 human immunodeficiency virus-associated non-Hodgkin's lymphomas.
Burkitt's Lymphoma Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3788.
217. Knowles DM. Immunodeficiency-associated lymphoproliferative disorders. Mod Pathol 1999;12:200.
218. Raphael MM, Audouin J, Lamine M, et al. Immunophenotypic and genotypic analysis of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Correlation with histologic
features in 36 cases. French Study Group of Pathology for HIV-Associated Tumors. Am J Clin Pathol 1994;101:773.
219. Cesarman E, Chang Y, Moore PS, Said JW, Knowles DM. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in AIDS- related body-cavity-based lymphomas. N Engl J Med
1995;332:1186.
220. Carbone A, Gloghini A, Gaidano G, et al. AIDS-related Burkitt's lymphoma. Morphologic and immunophenotypic study of biopsy specimens. Am J Clin Pathol 1995;103:561.
221. Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Stein H, et al. A revised European-American classification of lymphoid neoplasms: a proposal from the International Lymphoma Study Group. Blood 1994;84:1361.
222. Biggar RJ, Rabkin CS. The epidemiology of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related lymphomas. Curr Opin Oncol 1992;4:883.
223. Morgello S. Epstein-Barr and human immunodeficiency viruses in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related primary central nervous system lymphoma. Am J Pathol 1992;141:441.
224. Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Diebold J, et al. World Health Organization classification of neoplastic diseases of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues: report of the Clinical Advisory Committee
meeting-Airlie House, Virginia, November 1997. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3835.
225. Shiramizu B, Herndier B, Meeker T, Kaplan L, McGrath M. Molecular and immunophenotypic characterization of AIDS-associated, Epstein-Barr virus-negative, polyclonal lymphoma. J Clin
Oncol 1992;10:383.
226. Kaplan LD, Shiramizu B, Herndier B, et al. Influence of molecular characteristics on clinical outcome in human immunodeficiency virus-associated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: identification of a
subgroup with favorable clinical outcome. Blood 1995;85:1727.
227. Moran CA, Tuur S, Angritt P, Reid AH, O'Leary TJ. Epstein-Barr virus in Hodgkin's disease from patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection. Mod Pathol 1992;5:85.
228. Rubio R. Hodgkin's disease associated with human immunodeficiency virus infection. A clinical study of 46 cases. Cooperative Study Group of Malignancies Associated with HIV Infection of
Madrid. Cancer 1994;73:2400.
229. Kingma DW, Mueller BU, Frekko K, et al. Low-grade monoclonal Epstein-Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferative disorder of the brain presenting as human immunodeficiency virusassociated encephalopathy in a child with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1999;123:83.
230. Jaffe ES, Wilson WH. Lymphomatoid granulomatosis: pathogenesis, pathology and clinical implications. Cancer Surv 1997;30:233.
231. Cesarman E, Knowles DM. The role of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV/HHV-8) in lymphoproliferative diseases. Semin Cancer Biol 1999;9:165.
232. Shibata D, Weiss LM, Hernandez AM, et al. Epstein-Barr virus-associated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in patients infected with the human immunodeficiency virus. Blood 1993;81:2102.
233. Contreras-Brodin BA, Anvret M, Imreh S, et al. B cell phenotype-dependent expression of the Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigens EBNA-2 to EBNA-6: studies with somatic cell hybrids. J Gen
Virol 1991;72:3025.
234. Hamilton-Dutoit SJ, Pallesen G, Franzmann MB, et al. AIDS-related lymphoma: histopathology, immunophenotype, and association with Epstein-Barr virus as demonstrated by in situ nucleic
acid hybridization. Am J Pathol 1991;138:149.
235. Murray RJ, Kurilla MG, Brooks JM, et al. Identification of target antigens for the human cytotoxic T cell response to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV): implications for the immune control of
EBV-positive malignancies. J Exp Med 1992;176:157.
236. Khanna R, Burrows SR, Nicholls J, Poulsen LM. Identification of cytotoxic T cell epitopes within Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) oncogene latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1): evidence for HLA A2
supertype-restricted immune recognition of EBV-infected cells by LMP1-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Eur J Immunol 1998;28:451.
237. Redchenko IV, Rickinson AB. Accessing Epstein-Barr virus-specific T-cell memory with peptide-loaded dendritic cells. J Virol 1999;73:334.
238. Wang D, Liebowitz D, Kieff E. An EBV membrane protein expressed in immortalized lymphocytes transforms established rodent cells. Cell 1985;43:831.
239. Finke J, Lange W, Mertelsmann R, Dolken G. BCL-2 induction is part of the strategy of Epstein-Barr virus. Leuk Lymphoma 1994;12:413.
240. Henderson S, Rowe M, Gregory C, et al. Induction of bcl-2 expression by Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 protects infected B cells from programmed cell death. Cell 1991;65:1107.
241. Gaidano G, Pastore C, Volpe G. Molecular pathogenesis of non-Hodgkin lymphoma: a clinical perspective. Haematologica 1995;80:454.
242. Lai R, Arber DA, Chang KL, Wilson CS, Weiss LM. Frequency of bcl-2 expression in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a study of 778 cases with comparison of marginal zone lymphoma and
monocytoid B-cell hyperplasia. Mod Pathol 1998;11:864.
243. Schlaifer D, Brousset P, Attal M, et al. bcl-2 proto-oncogene and Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein-1 expression in AIDS-related lymphoma. Histopathology 1994;25:77.
244. Hamilton-Dutoit SJ, Rea D, Raphael M, et al. Epstein-Barr virus-latent gene expression and tumor cell phenotype in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Correlation of lymphoma phenotype with three distinct patterns of viral latency. Am J Pathol 1993;143:1072.
245. Ballerini P, Gaidano G, Gong JZ, et al. Multiple genetic lesions in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1993;81:166.
246. Carbone A, Gaidano G, Gloghini A, et al. BCL-6 protein expression in AIDS-related non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: inverse relationship with Epstein-Barr virus-encoded latent membrane protein-1
expression. Am J Pathol 1997;150:155.
247. Flenghi L, Ye BH, Fizzotti M, et al. A specific monoclonal antibody (PG-B6) detects expression of the BCL-6 protein in germinal center B cells. Am J Pathol 1995;147:405.
248. Cattoretti G, Chang CC, Cechova K, et al. BCL-6 protein is expressed in germinal-center B cells. Blood 1995;86:45.
249. Sanderson RD, Lalor P, Bernfield M. B lymphocytes express and lose syndecan at specific stages of differentiation. Cell Regulation 1989;1:27.
250. Inghirami G, Grignani F, Sternas L, et al. Down-regulation of LFA-1 adhesion receptors by C-myc oncogene in human B lymphoblastoid cells. Science 1990;250:682.
251. Yano T, van Krieken JH, Magrath IT, et al. Histogenetic correlations between subcategories of small noncleaved cell lymphomas. Blood 1992;79:1282.
252. Knowles DM, Inghirami G, Ubriaco A, Dalla-Favera R. Molecular genetic analysis of three AIDS-associated neoplasms of uncertain lineage demonstrates their B-cell derivation and the possible
pathogenetic role of the Epstein-Barr virus. Blood 1989;73:792.
253. Nador RG, Cesarman E, Chadburn A, et al. Primary effusion lymphoma: a distinct clinicopathologic entity associated with the Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpes virus. Blood 1996;88:645.
254. Arvanitakis L, Mesri EA, Nador RG, et al. Establishment and characterization of a primary effusion (body cavity-based) lymphoma cell line (BC-3) harboring Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus (KSHV/HHV-8) in the absence of Epstein-Barr virus. Blood 1996;88:2648.
255. Green I, Espiritu E, Ladanyi M, et al. Primary lymphomatous effusions in AIDS: a morphological, immunophenotypic, and molecular study. Mod Pathol 1995;8:39.
256. Stamatopoulos K, Kosmas C, Stavroyianni N, Belessi C, Papadaki T. Selection of immunoglobulin diversity gene reading frames in B cell lymphoproliferative disorders. Leukemia 1999;13:601.
257. Jaffe ES. Primary body cavity-based AIDS-related lymphomas. Evolution of a new disease entity [editorial; comment]. Am J Clin Pathol 1996;105:141.

258. Karcher DS, Alkan S. Human herpesvirus-8-associated body cavity-based lymphoma in human immunodeficiency virus-infected patients: a unique B-cell neoplasm. Hum Pathol 1997;28:801.
259. Friborg J Jr, Kong WP, Flowers CC, et al. Distinct biology of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus from primary lesions and body cavity lymphomas. J Virol 1998;72:10073.
260. Carbone A, Cilia AM, Gloghini A, et al. Establishment and characterization of EBV-positive and EBV-negative primary effusion lymphoma cell lines harbouring human herpesvirus type-8. Br J
Haematol 1998;102:1081.
261. Aoki Y, Jaffe ES, Chang Y, et al. Angiogenesis and hematopoiesis induced by Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-encoded interleukin-6. Blood 1999;93:4034.
262. Aoki Y, Tosato G. Pathophysiological role of vascular endothelial growth factory/vascular permeability factor (VEGF/VPF) in primary effusion lymphomas. 3rd National AIDS Malignancy
Meeting, Bethesda, MD, May 2627, 1999. National Cancer Institute.
263. Levine AM. AIDS-associated malignant lymphoma. Med Clin North Am 1992;76:253.
264. Levine AM, Gill PS, Muggia F. Malignancies in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Curr Probl Cancer 1987;11:209.
265. Carbone PP, Kaplan HS, Musshoff K, Smithers DW, Tubiana M. Report of the Committee on Hodgkin's Disease Staging Classification. Cancer Res 1971;31:1860.
266. Yousem DM, Patrone PM, Grossman RI. Leptomeningeal metastases: MR evaluation. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1990;14:255.
267. Luo K, Law M, Kaldor JM, McDonald AM, Cooper DA. The role of initial AIDS-defining illness in survival following AIDS. AIDS 1995;9:57.
268. Tirelli U, Errante D, Spina M, et al. Long-term survival of patients with HIV-related systemic non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Hematol Oncol 1996;14:7.
269. Hagemeister FB, Khetan R, Allen P, et al. Stage, serum LDH, and performance status predict disease progression and survival in HIV-associated lymphomas. Ann Oncol 1994; 5(Suppl 2):41.
270. Vaccher E, Tirelli U, Spina M, et al. Age and serum lactate dehydrogenase level are independent prognostic factors in human immunodeficiency virus-related non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: a
single-institute study of 96 patients. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2217.
271. Navarro JT, Ribera JM, Oriol A, et al. International prognostic index is the best prognostic factor for survival in patients with AIDS-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma treated with CHOP. A
multivariate study of 46 patients. Haematologica 1998;83:508.
272. Straus DJ, Huang J, Testa MA, Levine AM, Kaplan LD. Prognostic factors in the treatment of human immunodeficiency virus-associated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: analysis of AIDS Clinical
Trials Group protocol 142low-dose versus standard-dose m-BACOD plus granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:3601.
273. Levine AM, Gill PS, Meyer PR, et al. Retrovirus and malignant lymphoma in homosexual men. JAMA 1985;254:1921.
274. Gill PS, Levine AM, Krailo M, et al. AIDS-related malignant lymphoma: results of prospective treatment trials. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1322.
275. MMWR. Guidelines for prophylaxis against Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia for persons infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1. MMWR 1989;38(Suppl S-5):1.
276. Shipp MA, Yeap BY, Harrington DP, et al. The m-BACOD combination chemotherapy regimen in large-cell lymphoma: analysis of the completed trial and comparison with the M-BACOD
regimen. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:84.
277. Skarin AT, Canellos GP, Rosenthal DS, et al. Improved prognosis of diffuse histiocytic and undifferentiated lymphoma by use of high dose methotrexate alternating with standard agents (MBACOD). J Clin Oncol 1983;1:91.
278. Klimo P, Connors JM. MACOP-B chemotherapy for the treatment of diffuse large-cell lymphoma. Ann Intern Med 1985;102:596.
279. Longo DL, DeVita VT Jr, Duffey PL, et al. Superiority of ProMACE-CytaBOM over ProMACE-MOPP in the treatment of advanced diffuse aggressive lymphoma: results of a prospective
randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:25.
280. Browne MJ, Hubbard SM, Longo DL, et al. Excess prevalence of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in patients treated for lymphoma with combination chemotherapy. Ann Intern Med
1986;104:338.
281. Fisher RI, Gaynor ER, Dahlberg S, et al. Comparison of a standard regimen (CHOP) with three intensive chemotherapy regimens for advanced non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. N Engl J Med
1993;328:1002.
282. Levine AM, Wernz JC, Kaplan L, et al. Low-dose chemotherapy with central nervous system prophylaxis and zidovudine maintenance in AIDS-related lymphoma. A prospective
multi-institutional trial. JAMA 1991;266:84.
283. Kaplan LD, Straus DJ, Testa MA, et al. Low-dose compared with standard-dose m-BACOD chemotherapy for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma associated with human immunodeficiency virus infection.
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases AIDS Clinical Trials Group. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1641.
284. Wilson WH. Chemotherapy for AIDS-related lymphomas [letter; comment]. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1172; discussion, 1173.
285. Kwak LW, Halpern J, Olshen RA, Horning SJ. Prognostic significance of actual dose intensity in diffuse large-cell lymphoma: results of a tree-structured survival analysis. J Clin Oncol
1990;8:963.
286. Kaplan LD, Kahn JO, Crowe S, et al. Clinical and virologic effects of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in patients receiving chcmotherapy for human
immunodeficiency virus-associated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:929.
287. Vaccner E, Spina M, Santarossa S, et al. Concomitant CHOP chemotherapy (CT) and highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) in patients with HIV-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
(HIV-NHL). Int Conf AIDS, Vol. 12, Geneva, 1998.
288. Ratner L, Redden D, Hamzeh F, et al. Chemotherapy for HIV-NHL in combination with HAART. 3rd National AIDS Malignancy Meeting, Bethesda, MD, May 2628, 1999.
289. Gisselbrecht C, Oksenhendler E, Tirelli U, et al. Human immunodeficiency virus-related lymphoma treatment with intensive combination chemotherapy. French-Italian Cooperative Group. Am J
Med 1993;95:188.
290. Gabarre J, Lepage E, Thyss A, et al. Chemotherapy combined with zidovudine and GM-CSF in human immunodeficiency virus-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Ann Oncol 1995;6:1025.
291. Sparano JA, Wiernik PH, Hu X, et al. Saquinavir enhances the mucosal toxicity of infusional cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and etoposide in patients with HIV- associated non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma. Med Oncol 1998;15:50.
292. Sparano J, Wiernik P, Hu X, Sarta C, Schwartz E. Pilot Trial of infusional cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and etoposide plus didanosine and filgrastim in patients with human
immunodeficiency virus-associated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:3026.
293. Wilson WH, Bryant G, Bates S, et al. EPOCH chemotherapy: toxicity and efficacy in relapsed and refractory non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1573.
294. Little RF, Pearson D, Steinberg S, et al. Dose-Adjusted EPOCH Chemotherapy (CT) in previously untreated HIV-associated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (HIV-NHL). American Society of Clinical
Oncology35th Annual Meeting, Atlanta, May 1518, 1999.
295. Schurmann D, Grunewald T, Weiss R, et al. Intensive treatment of AIDS-related non-Hodgkin's lymphomas with the MACOP-B protocol. Eur J Haematol 1995;54:73.
296. Tisdale J, Little RF, Childs R, Barret J. Unpublished observation, 1999.
297. von Gunten CF, Von Roenn JH. Clinical aspects of human immunodeficiency virus-related lymphoma. Curr Opin Oncol 1992;4:894.
298. Goplen AK, Dunlop O, Liestol K, et al. The impact of primary central nervous system lymphoma in AIDS patients: a population-based autopsy study from Oslo. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr
Hum Retrovirol 1997;14:351.
299. Biggar RJ, Burnett W, Mikl J, Nasca P. Cancer among New York men at risk of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Int J Cancer 1989;43:979.
300. Cote TR, Manns A, Hardy CR, Yellin FJ, Hartge P. Epidemiology of brain lymphoma among people with or without acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. AIDS/Cancer Study Group. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1996;88:675.
301. DeAngelis LM. Primary brain tumors in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Curr Opin Neurol 1995;8:419.
302. Ruiz A, Post MJ, Bundschu C, Ganz WI, Georgiou M. Primary central nervous system lymphoma in patients with AIDS. Neuroimaging Clin North Am 1997;7:281.
303. Levine AM, Sullivan-Halley J, Pike MC, et al. Human immunodeficiency virus-related lymphoma. Prognostic factors predictive of survival. Cancer 1991;68:2466.
304. Camilleri-Broet S, Davi F, Feuillard J, et al. AIDS-related primary brain lymphomas: histopathologic and immunohistochemical study of 51 cases. The French Study Group for HIV- Associated
Tumors. Hum Pathol 1997;28:367.
305. Iacoangeli M, Roselli R, Antinori A, et al. Experience with brain biopsy in acquired immune deficiency syndrome-related focal lesions of the central nervous system. Br J Surg 1994;81:1508.
306. Yarchoan R, Jaffe ES, Little R. Diagnosing central nervous system lymphoma in the setting of AIDS: a step forward [editorial; comment]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:346.
307. Mathews C, Barba D, Fullerton SC. Early biopsy versus empiric treatment with delayed biopsy of non-responders in suspected HIV-associated cerebral toxoplasmosis: a decision analysis. AIDS
1995;9:1243.
308. Holloway RG, Mushlin AI. Intracranial mass lesions in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: using decision analysis to determine the effectiveness of stereotactic brain biopsy. Neurology
1996;46:1010.
309. Hoffman JM, Waskin HA, Schifter T, et al. FDG-PET in differentiating lymphoma from nonmalignant central nervous system lesions in patients with AIDS. J Nucl Med 1993;34:567.
310. Ruiz A, Ganz WI, Post MJ, et al. Use of thallium-201 brain SPECT to differentiate cerebral lymphoma from toxoplasma encephalitis in AIDS patients. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1994;15:1885.
311. O'Malley JP, Ziessman HA, Kumar PN, et al. Diagnosis of intracranial lymphoma in patients with AIDS: value of 201TI single-photon emission computed tomography. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1994;163:417.
312. Cingolani A, De Luca A, Larocca LM, et al. Minimally invasive diagnosis of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related primary central nervous system lymphoma. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90:364.
313. MacMahon EM, Glass JD, Hayward SD, et al. E pstein-Barr virus in AIDS-related primary central nervous system lymphoma. Lancet 1991;338:969.
314. Antinori A, De Rossi G, Ammassari A, et al. Value of combined approach with thallium-201 single-photon emission computed tomography and Epstein-Barr virus DNA polymerase chain
reaction in CSF for the diagnosis of AIDS-related primary CNS lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:554.
315. Camilleri-Broet S, Davi F, Feuillard J, et al. High expression of latent membrane protein 1 of Epstein-Barr virus and BCL-2 oncoprotein in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related primary
brain lymphomas. Blood 1995;86:432.
316. Bergmann M, Blasius S, Bankfalvi A, Mellin W. Primary non-Hodgkin lymphomas of the CNS-proliferation, oncoproteins and Epstein-Barr-virus. Gen Diagn Pathol 1996;141:235.
317. Jellinger KA, Paulus W. Primary central nervous system lymphomasnew pathological developments. J Neurooncol 1995;24:33.
318. Larocca LM, Capello D, Rinelli A, et al. The molecular and phenotypic profile of primary central nervous system lymphoma identifies distinct categories of the disease and is consistent with
histogenetic derivation from germinal center-related B cells. Blood 1998;92:1011.
319. Baumgartner JE, Rachlin JR, Beckstead JH, et al. Primary central nervous system lymphomas: natural history and response to radiation therapy in 55 patients with acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome. J Neurosurg 1990;73:206.
320. Deangelis LM. Current management of primary central nervous system lymphoma. Oncology 1995;9:63; discussion 71.
321. Chamberlain MC. Long survival in patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome-related primary central nervous system lymphoma. Cancer 1994;73:1728.
322. Forsyth PA, Yahalom J, DeAngelis LM. Combined-modality therapy in the treatment of primary central nervous system lymphoma in AIDS. Neurology 1994;44:1473.
323. Deangelis LM, Yahalom J, Rosenblum M, Posner JB. Primary CNS lymphoma: managing patients with spontaneous and AIDS- related disease. Oncology 1987;1:52.
324. Reynolds P, Saunders LD, Layefsky ME, Lemp GF. The spectrum of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-associated malignancies in San Francisco, 19801987. Am J Epidemiol
1993;137:19.
325. Hessol NA, Katz MH, Liu JY, et al. Increased incidence of Hodgkin disease in homosexual men with HIV infection. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:309.
326. Hartge P, Devesa SS, Fraumeni JF Jr. Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Cancer Surv 1994;19:423.
327. Harnly ME, Swan SH, Holly EA, Kelter A, Padian N. Temporal trends in the incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and selected malignancies in a population with a high incidence of acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Am J Epidemiol 1988;128:261.
328. Bernstein L, Levin D, Menck H, Ross RK. AIDS-related secular trends in cancer in Los Angeles County men: a comparison by marital status. Cancer Res 1989;49:466.
329. Monfardini S, Tirelli U, Vaccher E, Foa R, Gavosto F. Hodgkin's disease in 63 intravenous drug users infected with human immunodeficiency virus. Gruppo Italiano Cooperativo AIDS & Tumori
(GICAT). Ann Oncol 1991;2(Suppl 2):201.
330. Serraino D, Carbone A, Franceschi S, Tirelli U. Increased frequency of lymphocyte depletion and mixed cellularity subtypes of Hodgkin's disease in HIV-infected patients. Italian Cooperative
Group on AIDS and Tumours. Eur J Cancer 1993;14:1948.
331. Levy R, Colonna P, Tourani JM, et al. Human immunodeficiency virus associated Hodgkin's disease: report of 45 cases from the French Registry of HIV-Associated Tumors. Leuk Lymphoma
1995;16:451.
332. Bouabdallah R, Quiles N, Bonnet E, et al. Hodgkin's disease (HD) in HIV infected patients: clinical, histologic and therapeutic aspects. Int Conf AIDS, Vol. 9, 1993.
333. Tirelli U, Errante D, Dolcetti R, et al. Hodgkin's disease and human immunodeficiency virus infection: clinicopathologic and virologic features of 114 patients from the Italian Cooperative Group

on AIDS and Tumors. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1758.
334. Bellas C, Santon A, Manzanal A, et al. Pathological, immunological, and molecular features of Hodgkin's disease associated with HIV infection. Comparison with ordinary Hodgkin's disease. Am
J Surg Pathol 1996;20:1520.
335. Audouin J, Diebold J, Pallesen G. Frequent expression of Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein-1 in tumour cells of Hodgkin's disease in HIV-positive patients. J Pathol 1992;167:381.
336. Deacon EM, Pallesen G, Niedobitek G, et al. Epstein-Barr virus and Hodgkin's disease: transcriptional analysis of virus latency in the malignant cells. J Exp Med 1993;177:339.
337. Tubiana M, Henry-Amar M, Hayat M, et al. Prognostic significance of the number of involved areas in the early stages of Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1984;54:885.
338. Levine AM, Cheung T, Huang J, Testa M. Prospective, multicenter phase II trial of ABVD chemotherapy with G-CSF in HIV-infected patients with Hodgkin's disease (HD): AIDS Clinical Trials
Group (ACTG) study 149. Proc Annu Meet Am Soc Clin Oncol 1997;16 (abst).
339. Errante D, Gabarre J, Ridolfo AL, et al. Hodgkin's disease in 35 patients with HIV infection: an experience with epirubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine and prednisone chemotherapy in combination
with antiretroviral therapy and primary use of G-CSF. Ann Oncol 1999;10:189.
340. Tirelli U, Errante D, Oksenhendler E, et al. Prospective study with combined low-dose chemotherapy and zidovudine in 37 patients with poor-prognosis AIDS-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
French-Italian Cooperative Study Group. Ann Oncol 1992;3:843.
341. Venet A, Tourani JM, Beldjord K, et al. Actuarial rate of clinical and biological progression in a cohort of 250 HIV-1-seropositive subjects. Laennec HIV Study Group. Clin Exp Immunol
1990;80:151.
342. Andrieu JM, Roithmann S, Tourani JM, et al. Hodgkin's disease during HIV1 infection: the French registry experience. French Registry of HIV-associated Tumors. Ann Oncol 1993;4:635.
343. Errante D, Tirelli U, Gastaldi R, et al. Combined antineoplastic and antiretroviral therapy for patients with Hodgkin's disease and human immunodeficiency virus infection. A prospective study of
17 patients. The Italian Cooperative Group on AIDS and Tumors (GICAT). Cancer 1994;73:437.
344. Palefsky JM. Human papillomavirus infection and anogenital neoplasia in human immunodeficiency virus-positive men and women. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1998;23:15.
345. Frisch M, Glimelius B, van den Brule AJ, et al. Sexually transmitted infection as a cause of anal cancer. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1350.
346. MMWR. 1993 sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1993.
347. Palefsky JM, Holly EA, Ralston ML, Jay N. Prevalence and risk factors for human papillomavirus infection of the anal canal in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-positive and HIV-negative
homosexual men. J Infect Dis 1998;177:361.
348. Northfelt DW, Swift PS, Palefsky JM. Anal neoplasia. Pathogenesis, diagnosis, and management. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:1177.
349. Palefsky JM, Holly EA, Ralston ML, et al. Anal cytological abnormalities and anal HPV infection in men with Centers for Disease Control group IV HIV disease. Genitour Med 1997;73:174.
350. Goldie SJ, Kuntz KM, Weinstein MC, et al. The clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of screening for anal squamous intraepithelial lesions in homosexual and bisexual HIV-positive
men. JAMA 1999;281:1822.
351. Wright TC Jr, Ellerbrock TV, Chiasson MA, Van Devanter N, Sun XW. Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia in women infected with human immunodeficiency virus: prevalence, risk factors, and
validity of Papanicolaou smears. New York Cervical Disease Study. Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:591.
352. Hillemanns P, Ellerbrock TV, McPhillips S, et al. Prevalence of anal human papillomavirus infection and anal cytologic abnormalities in HIV-seropositive women. AIDS 1996;10:1641.
353. Spinillo A, Tenti P, Zappatore R, et al. Prevalence, diagnosis and treatment of lower genital neoplasia in women with human immunodeficiency virus infection. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod
Biol 1992;43:235.
354. Wright TC, Ellerbrock TV, Chiasson MA, Dole P. Cervical disease in HIV-infected women: prevalence, incidence, risk factors, detection and use of loop electrosurgical excision for treatment.
HIV Infect Women Conf 1995:S59.
355. Edelman M, Fox AS, Alderman EM, et al. Cervical Papanicolaou smear abnormalities in inner city Bronx adolescents: prevalence, progression, and immune modifiers. Cancer 1999;87:184.
356. Motti PG, Dallabetta GA, Daniel RW, et al. Cervical abnormalities, human papillomavirus, and human immunodeficiency virus infections in women in Malawi. J Infect Dis 1996;173:714.
357. Sun XW, Kuhn L, Ellerbrock TV, et al. Human papillomavirus infection in women infected with the human immunodeficiency virus. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1343.
358. Carter JJ, Koutsky LA, Wipf GC, et al. The natural history of human papillomavirus type 16 capsid antibodies among a cohort of university women. J Infect Dis 1996; 174:927.
359. Klein RS, Ho GY, Vermund SH, Fleming I, Burk RD. Risk factors for squamous intraepithelial lesions on Pap smear in women at risk for human immunodeficiency virus infection. J Infect Dis
1994;170:1404.
360. Maiman M, Fruchter RG, Guy L, et al. Human immunodeficiency virus infection and invasive cervical carcinoma. Cancer 1993;71:402.
361. Palefsky JM. Anal squamous intraepithelial lesions: relation to HIV and human papillomavirus infection. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1999;21(Suppl 1):S42.
362. Petry KU, Scheffel D, Bode U, et al. Cellular immunodeficiency enhances the progression of human papillomavirus-associated cervical lesions. Int J Cancer 1994;57:836.
363. Vernon SD, Hart CE, Reeves WC, Icenogle JP. The HIV-1 tat protein enhances E2-dependent human papillomavirus 16 transcription. Virus Res 1993;27:133.
364. Tornesello ML, Buonaguro FM, Beth-Giraldo E, Giraldo G. Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 tat gene enhances human papillomavirus early gene expression. Intervirology 1993;36:57.
365. Dolei A, Curreli S, Pierangeli A, et al. HIV induces the expression of naturally integrated HPV18 both at the transcriptional and the translational level. Int Conf AIDS, Vol. 11, 1996.
366. Tan W, Schwartz S. The Rev protein of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 counteracts the effect of an AU-rich negative element in the human papillomavirus type 1 late 3' untranslated
region. J Virol 1995;69:2932.
367. Tan W, Felber BK, Zolotukhin AS, Pavlakis GN, Schwartz S. Efficient expression of the human papillomavirus type 16 L1 protein in epithelial cells by using Rev and the Rev-responsive
element of human immunodeficiency virus or the cis-acting transactivation element of simian retrovirus type 1. J Virol 1995;69:5607.
368. Wright T, Sun XW, Ellerbrock TV, Chiasson MA. Comparison of the amount of HPV 16 DNA in cervicovaginal secretions of HIV-infected and -uninfected women, using quantitative
competitive-polymerase chain reaction (QC-PCR). Int Conf AIDS, Geneva, Vol. 12, 1998.
369. Luque AE, Demeter LM, Reichman RC. Association of human papillomavirus infection and disease with magnitude of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) RNA plasma level among
women with HIV-1 infection. J Infect Dis 1999;179:1405.
370. Chlow CC, Hawes SE, Kuypers JM, et al. Effect of HIV infection on the natural history of anal human papillomavirus infection. Int Conf AIDS, Geneva, Vol. 12, 1998.
371. Maiman M, Fruchter RG, Serur E, et al. Recurrent cervical intraepithelial neoplasia in human immunodeficiency virus-seropositive women. Obstet Gynecol 1993;82:170.
372. Heard I, Schmitz V, Costagloila D, Orth G, Kazatchkine MD. Early regression of cervical lesions in HIV-seropositive women receiving highly active antiretroviral treatments (HAART). Int Conf
AIDS, Geneva, Vol. 12, 1998.
373. Robinson W, Hamilton C, Michaels S, Kissinger P. The effect of excisional therapy and highly active antiretroviral therapy on cervical intraepithelial neoplasis HIV-infected women. 3rd National
AIDS Malignancy Meeting, Bethesda, MD, May 2627, 1999.
374. Leyria C, Flichman JC, Wainstein C, Blumtritt CC. Human papilloma virus (HPV) lesions in HIV+ and AIDS patients. Int Conf AIDS, Geneva, Vol. 12, 1998.
375. Friedman HB, Saah AJ, Sherman ME, et al. Human papillomavirus, anal squamous intraepithelial lesions, and human immunodeficiency virus in a cohort of gay men. J Infect Dis 1998;178:45.
376. Palefsky JM, Holly EA, Ralston ML, et al. The effect of HAART on the natural history of anal squamous intraepithelial lesions in HIV+ men. 3rd National AIDS Malignancy Meeting, Bethesda,
MD, May 2627, 1999.
377. Hocht S, Wiegel T, Kroesen AJ, et al. Low acute toxicity of radiotherapy and radiochemotherapy in patients with cancer of the anal canal and HIV-infection. Acta Oncol 1997;36:799.
378. Hoffman R, Welton ML, Klencke B, Weinberg V, Krieg R. The significance of pretreatment CD4 count on the outcome and treatment tolerance of HIV-positive patients with anal cancer. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;44:127.
379. Tavio M, Vaccher E, Antinori A, et al. Combination chemotherapy with doxorubicin, bleomycin, and vindesine for AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. Cancer 1996;77:2117.
380. Gill P, Mitsuyasu R, Montgomery T, et al. A IDS Clinical Trials Group Study 094: a phase I/II trial of ABV chemotherapy with zidovudine and recombinant human GM-CSF in AIDS-related
Kaposi's sarcoma. Cancer J Sci Am 1997;3:278.
381. Kaplan L, Abrams D, Volberding P. Treatment of Kaposi's sarcoma in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome with an alternating vincristine-vinblastine regimen. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:1121.
382. Gaidano G, Carbone A, Dalla-Favera R. Pathogenesis of AIDS-related lymphomas: molecular and histogenetic heterogeneity. Am J Pathol 1998;152:623.
383. Knowles DM, Chamulak GA, Subar M, et al. Lymphoid neoplasia associated with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS): the New York University Medical Center experience with 105
patients (19811986). Ann Intern Med 1988;108:744.
384. Sparano JA, Wiernik PH, Strack M, et al. Infusional cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and etoposide in HIV-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a follow-up report of a highly active regimen. Leuk
Lymphoma 1994;14:263.

SECTION 50.2 Transplantation-Related Malignancies
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 50.2
Transplantation-Related Malignancies
STANLEY R. RIDDELL
Introduction
Immune Surveillance and Tumor Development
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Recipients
Solid Tumors after Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
Lymphoproliferative Disorders Associated with Epstein-Barr Virus in Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Recipients
Hodgkin's Disease and Late-Onset Non-Hodgkin's Lymphomas in Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Recipients
Acute Leukemia and Myelodysplastic Syndrome after Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
Organ Transplant Recipients
Cancer of the Skin and Lip
Epstein-Barr Virus–Associated Lymphoproliferative Disorders in Organ Transplant Recipients
Late-Onset Lymphomas and Hodgkin's Disease in Organ Transplant Recipients
Kaposi's Sarcoma
Other Human Herpesvirus-8–Associated Malignancies in Organ Transplant Recipients
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells to restore bone marrow function after high-dose cytotoxic therapy for malignant and nonmalignant diseases and the
surgical implantation of an allogeneic solid organ to restore organ function have become increasingly effective therapeutic modalities. The survival of patients
undergoing hematopoietic stem cell and solid organ transplantation has improved as a result of more effective prophylaxis and treatment of infections in the early
posttransplant period and the introduction of refined immunosuppressive regimens for preventing or treating graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and graft rejection,
respectively.1,2,3,4,5,6 and 7 As larger numbers of patients are being cured of their underlying disease with transplantation, late complications, including the development of
a malignancy, have assumed greater importance in the medical management of transplant patients.
The development of registries that collect data on large numbers of patients who have received hematopoietic stem cell or solid organ transplants has provided a
mechanism to identify the late development of malignancies in transplant recipients. 8,9 The method most commonly used for analysis of the risk of a new malignancy is
the standardized incidence ratio, which refers to the incidence of the malignancy observed in patients who have undergone transplantation compared with the
expected incidence in the general population of the same age and gender. In the 1980s and 1990s, large numbers of patients undergoing hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT) and solid organ allografting have been followed, and several malignancies that occur with increased frequency compared with the general
population have been identified.

IMMUNE SURVEILLANCE AND TUMOR DEVELOPMENT
It has been hypothesized that the host has a natural immunologic resistance against the development of cancer and that the prolonged or intense immunosuppression
that is administered to transplant recipients would result in the frequent development of tumors. Class I and II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules
expressed on the surface of cells bind cellular peptides for presentation to CD8+ and CD4+ T cells, respectively, and this provides a mechanism whereby T cells,
which are essential for protecting the host from virus infection, could also recognize and eliminate cells that have developed mutations that induce malignant
transformation. Studies have shown that many common tumors in humans do present antigens to T cells, but there has been little direct evidence to support a role for
immune surveillance in the development of these cancers.
Although immune surveillance does not appear to limit the development of common malignancies in normal hosts, the observation that many cancers that develop in
chronically immunosuppressed transplant recipients are associated with oncogenic viruses such as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8), or
with exposure to ultraviolet light suggests that immune surveillance mechanisms may function against these highly antigenic tumors. Virus-associated malignancies
often undergo complete regression with withdrawal of immunosuppressive drugs or after restoration of functional T-cell responses to viral antigens by adoptive
immunotherapy, and these observations provide direct evidence of a role for host immunity in containing the outgrowth of these tumors. Thus, immunodeficient
transplant recipients provide a unique opportunity to reexamine the role of the immune system in tumor development and to determine the principles for effectively
treating tumors in humans with immunotherapy.

HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANT RECIPIENTS
Approximately 12,000 allogeneic and 18,000 autologous stem cell transplants are performed worldwide each year. 10 Several studies have demonstrated that patients
who have received either an allogeneic or autologous HSCT are at an increased risk for the development of a new malignancy compared with the general population.
Allogeneic HSCT recipients are at increased risk for the development of lymphoproliferative disorders and solid tumors, and autologous HSCT recipients are at
increased risk for developing acute myeloid leukemia (AML) or myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and solid tumors. The peak time for the occurrence of these
malignancies after transplant suggests distinct factors are involved in their pathogenesis. Solid tumors show a steady increase in incidence with time,
lymphoproliferative disorders typically occur during the first year at the height of the immunodeficiency, and AML and MDS primarily occur in the first 3 years after
transplant (Fig. 50.2-1).

FIGURE 50.2-1. Time course and relative risk of the major categories of malignancies that develop after hematopietic stem cell transplantation. MDS, myelodysplastic
syndrome. (Reproduced with permission from Deeg HJ, Socie G. Malignancies after hematopietic stem cell transplantation: many questions, some answers. Blood
1998;91:1833.)

SOLID TUMORS AFTER HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION
Epidemiology
Early studies in rhesus monkeys and in dogs given gamma irradiation and either autologous or allogeneic HSCT revealed a striking increase in the development of

solid tumors when compared with control unirradiated animals. 11,12 and 13 Tumors developed in these animal models a median of 8 years after transplantation, and it
was anticipated that long-term follow-up of humans who received cytotoxic conditioning and HSCT might similarly reveal an increase in the incidence of solid tumors.
The first large study to address the development of solid tumors in HSCT recipients evaluated 2145 patients who underwent allogeneic or syngeneic HSCT between
1970 and 1987 as treatment for leukemia or aplastic anemia. In this study, 13 solid tumors developed a median of 56 months (range, 2.5 to 163.0 months) after
transplantation. 14 The histology of these malignancies was varied and included glioblastoma, melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma of the skin or oral cavity, basal cell
carcinoma of the skin, adenocarcinoma of the gastrointestinal tract and lung, and hepatoma. Subsequent studies at other centers confirmed the late development of
solid tumors in HSCT recipients. 15,16 and 17 These early studies validated the concern raised by animal models of stem cell transplantation and identified a need to
evaluate larger numbers of patients to define the risk of individual tumors and to elucidate the pathogenesis of tumor development in these patients.
A multicenter study analyzed the occurrence of solid tumors in 19,220 patients who received allogeneic or syngeneic HSCT between 1964 and 1992. 18 Overall, the
ratio of observed to expected (O/E) cases of new solid tumors was 2.7, with a cumulative incidence rate of 2.2% at 10 years and 6.7% at 15 years. 18 The rapid
increase in the incidence of solid tumors between 10 and 15 years suggests that the risk will be even greater with longer follow-up. Cancers that occur with
significantly increased frequency in HSCT recipients include melanoma (O/E = 5.0), cancers of the buccal cavity or oropharynx (O/E = 11.1), liver (O/E = 7.5), brain
(O/E = 7.6), thyroid (O/E = 6.6), bone (O/E = 13.4), and connective tissues (O/E = 8.0) ( Table 50.2-1). Breast, lung, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary tumors, which
represent the most common malignancies in the general population, are not increased in HSCT recipients ( Table 50.2-2).

TABLE 50.2-1. Ratio of Observed to Expected Cases of Solid Tumors in Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Recipients: Tumors That Occur with Increased
Frequency Compared with the General Population a

TABLE 50.2-2. Ratio of Observed to Expected Cases of Solid Tumors in Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Recipients: Tumors That Occur with the Same
Frequency as in the General Population

The factors associated with a significantly increased risk of solid tumor development in HSCT recipients are younger age at the time of transplant and the use of total
body irradiation in the pretransplant conditioning regimen. 18 The risk of developing a tumor posttransplant is 36 times higher than expected for children who are
younger than the age of 10 years at the time of transplant, 4.6 times higher for patients aged 10 to 29, and nearly normal for those patients who are aged 30 and
older. The excess risk in children younger than age 10 years is primarily due to the development of brain and thyroid tumors in patients who have received
pretransplant cranial irradiation. Total body irradiation in doses of greater than 10 Gy in a single dose or greater than 13 Gy in fractionated doses is associated with
an increased risk for squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity (relative risk = 3.0), melanoma (relative risk = 8.2), thyroid (relative risk = 5.8), and central nervous
system (CNS) tumors (relative risk = 4.3). 18
The analysis of risk factors does not support a role for defective immune surveillance in the development of most solid tumors after HSCT because T-cell depletion of
the stem cell graft; acute, chronic, or both acute and chronic GVHD; or transplantation from MHC-mismatched donors are not associated with an increased risk.
However, there may be a potential role for immune deficiency or dysregulation in the development of melanoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity in
HSCT recipients. Transplantation of stem cells that are depleted of donor T cells to prevent GVHD confers an increased risk for melanoma (relative risk = 4.5). 18
Additionally, patients who develop chronic GVHD and require longer than 1 year of immunosuppressive therapy exhibit a significantly increased risk of squamous cell
carcinoma of the buccal cavity (relative risk = 6.0) and skin (relative risk = 22.6). 18
Solid tumors also develop with increased frequency in recipients of autologous HSCT, although the available data are derived from analysis of smaller numbers of
patients and are not sufficient to accurately define the risk for specific tumors. 15,19 However, the types of solid tumors reported after autologous HSCT are similar to
those seen in allogeneic HSCT recipients and include squamous and basal cell carcinoma of the skin, melanoma, CNS tumors, and thyroid carcinoma. The major risk
factor for the development of solid tumors after autologous HSCT is the use of total body irradiation in the conditioning regimen. Studies assessing larger numbers of
autologous HSCT recipients will be helpful in further defining the epidemiology of tumors in these patients. Because autologous HSCT recipients do not develop
GVHD or receive immunosuppressive drug therapy, comparison of the incidence and types of malignancies that develop in these patients with allogeneic HSCT
recipients may assist in elucidating the contributions of GVHD and immunosuppressive drug therapy to the pathogenesis of tumor development.
Pathogenesis
The mechanisms operative in the genesis of solid tumors developing after HSCT have not been fully elucidated. 20 The use of total body irradiation is associated with
a higher risk of solid tumor development, suggesting that DNA damage induced by ionizing radiation is an important contributor to tumorigenesis. Chronic GVHD is a
risk factor for squamous cell cancer of the oral cavity, suggesting that chronic inflammation induced by alloreactivity at the local site, prolonged treatment with
immunosuppressive drugs, decreased immune surveillance, or all of these factors may be involved in the development of tumors at this site. 18,21 DNA from viruses
with known oncogenic potential, such as human papilloma virus and EBV, have occasionally been detected in squamous cell carcinomas developing in the skin or at
mucosal sites in immunosuppressed patients, and additional studies are necessary to determine if these viruses contribute significantly to tumor development in
HSCT recipients. 22,23,24 and 25
The association of T-cell depleted transplantation with an increased risk of melanoma suggests a potential role for defective T-cell function in the pathogenesis of
melanoma. T cells reactive with melanocyte differentiation antigens such as Melan A, gp100, and tyrosinase, which are expressed in both normal melanocytes and
melanomas, have been identified in normal individuals. 26 A role in immune surveillance has not been proven, but such T cells are expanded in the blood and tumor
infiltrates of some patients with melanoma, recognize and kill tumor cells in vitro, and can mediate tumor regression after in vitro expansion and adoptive transfer to
tumor-bearing hosts.27,28

Clinical Features, Diagnosis, and Management
The clinical features of solid tumors developing in HSCT recipients have not been distinguishable from tumors of the same histology developing in normal individuals,
and diagnosis and management should be performed in accordance with standard practice for tumors of the same stage in nontransplant patients.
The increase in the incidence of second malignancies after HSCT does have an effect on long-term survival of these patients. A study that examined the causes of
late deaths in patients free of their original disease 2 years after allogeneic HSCT found that new cancers accounted for 6% of the late deaths. 29 The median
follow-up of patients in this study was only 80 months, and tumors that exhibit a longer latency may yet emerge. Thus, longer follow-up of HSCT recipients will be
essential to fully evaluate the risk of solid tumor development and the effect on long-term survival. The current data would suggest that all HSCT recipients should be
counseled pretransplant as to their risk of solid tumor development and that symptoms or signs that may be indicative of a malignancy be promptly evaluated to
ensure early diagnosis and institution of therapy.
Newer approaches to allogeneic HSCT are being developed that use less intensive conditioning regimens either not containing total body irradiation or using lower
doses of irradiation. 30,31 These approaches are not myeloablative and rely on the allogeneic graft-versus-tumor effect to eradicate the underlying malignancy. If such
less intensive conditioning regimens prove to be equally efficacious as conventional myeloablative regimens and are widely adopted, the risk of secondary
malignancies in allogeneic HSCT recipients may be reduced.
LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS IN HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANT RECIPIENTS
Epidemiology
Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLDs), the overwhelming majority of which are of donor B cell origin and associated with EBV infection, are a
life-threatening complication of allogeneic HSCT. 32,33,34 and 35 In contrast to solid tumors, which typically develop after an interval of several years, PTLDs most
commonly develop during the first 6 months after HSCT and represent the most frequent new malignancy in the first 5 years after transplant. 20,36 In a large multicenter
study of 18,014 patients who received allogeneic HSCT between 1969 and 1992, the cumulative incidence of PTLD was 1.0% at 10 years. 36 More than 80% of the
cases occurred in the first year after transplant with the peak incidence in the third month posttransplant.
The risk of developing a PTLD differs dramatically in subsets of patients, depending on factors that interfere with the reconstitution of T-cell immunity. The use of
MHC-mismatched donors, the administration of anti–T-cell antibodies in the preparative regimen or as GVHD prophylaxis or therapy, and depletion of T cells from the
stem cell inoculum are all associated with an increased risk of PTLD. 15,33,34,35 and 36 Recipients of transplants from unrelated donors or donors mismatched at two or
more MHC alleles with the recipient have a 3.7-fold greater risk of PTLD than recipients of transplants from matched related donors. 36 The use of antithymocyte
globulin or anti-CD3 monoclonal antibodies as prophylaxis or therapy for GVHD is also associated with a markedly increased risk of PTLD. 14,36
Patients who receive a stem cell transplant that is depleted of T cells to prevent GVHD are at higher risk (relative risk = 9.1) for developing PTLD than those who
receive unmodified bone marrow or peripheral blood stem cells. 36 However, the method used to deplete T cells from the stem cell inoculum influences the risk of
PTLD. A high risk of PTLD is seen when T-cell depletion is performed using monoclonal antibodies directed against surface markers expressed only by T cells or by
both T cells and natural killer cells (relative risk = 12.8), or using sheep red blood cell E-rosetting techniques (relative risk = 15.6). 36 In contrast, depletion of T cells
using techniques that eliminate both T and B cells, such as with the CAMPATH-1 antibody, which recognizes the CD52 surface molecule; elutriation, which removes
lymphocytes based on size and density; or agglutination with soybean lectin, does not increase the risk of PTLD compared with unmodified HSCT. 36,37,38,39 and 40 The
lower incidence of PTLD with these methods of T-cell depletion is presumably due to the removal of EBV-infected B cells from the stem cell inoculum. 37,39,41
Pathogenesis
EBV is a ubiquitous human gamma herpesvirus that establishes a persistent infection in more than 90% of adults, and the near universal association of this virus with
PTLD implies a direct role in tumor development. During primary EBV infection in normal hosts, the virus enters B lymphocytes by an interaction between the viral
envelope glycoprotein gp350/220 and the B-cell surface molecule CD21, which serves as the receptor for the C3d complement fragment. 42 Some infected B cells may
express the entire array of viral genes and undergo lytic infection and cell death, but a characteristic of primary EBV infection is expression of a limited set of viral
proteins that include EBNA-1, EBNA-2, EBNA-3A, EBNA-3B, EBNA-3C, EBNA-LP, LMP-1, LMP-2A, and LMP-2B.43 This pattern of EBV gene expression, termed the
latency III program, is responsible for the proliferation of B cells observed in the early stages of primary EBV infection and in PTLD developing in immunosuppressed
patients.
How EBV induces B-cell proliferation continues to be the subject of intense investigation. The consensus is that immortalization of B cells requires the coordinated
action of several EBV proteins. EBNA-1 is required for maintenance of the viral episome, and EBNA-2 functions as a transcriptional activator that induces the
expression of viral and cellular genes that regulate cell growth. 44,45 and 46 LMP-1 acts as an analogue of a constitutively active form of the CD40 signaling molecule in B
cells and activates NF-kB. 47,48 and 49 The expression of LMP-1 as a transgene in mice resulted in the development of oligoclonal or monoclonal B-cell lymphomas,
suggesting that this molecule is critically involved in B-cell transformation. 50
In response to primary infection with EBV, immunocompetent hosts mount both a humoral and cellular immune response that limits the spread of replicating virus and
eliminates the proliferating EBV-infected B cells that express the latency III program of viral genes. The T-cell response is characterized by major expansions of CD3+
CD8+ cytotoxic T cells (CTLs) that recognize both EBV lytic phase viral antigens and, with the notable exception of EBNA-1, antigens that are expressed in the
proliferating EBV-infected B cells. 51,52 and 53 The elimination of proliferating EBV-infected B cells by CTLs assists in terminating the acute infection. However, residual
virus remains in resting memory B cells in which the viral DNA persists as an episome and EBNA-1 is the only viral gene that is expressed. 44,54,55 and 56 The presence
of glycine/alanine repeat sequences in the EBNA-1 protein precludes its efficient processing and presentation to CTLs, thus latently infected B cells are able to evade
immune elimination and serve as a reservoir for reactivation. 57 Reactivation of EBV in latently infected B cells may be characterized by expression of the lytic program
of gene expression and production of new virions, or the latency III program that induces B-cell proliferation. Because of this persistent reservoir of virus, memory CTL
responses to EBV must be maintained for the life of the host to prevent the outgrowth of EBV-infected B cells.
The balance that is established between host T-cell immunity and persistent EBV in immunocompetent hosts is acutely and dramatically perturbed in the setting of
allogeneic HSCT. The administration of cytotoxic therapy before HSCT destroys the host T cells, which are required to maintain EBV in a latent state, and also
eliminates the reservoir of host EBV-infected B cells. The infusion of unmanipulated allogeneic stem cells from an EBV-seropositive donor provides a new source of
EBV-infected B cells and replaces the host EBV strain with the EBV strain of the donor. 58 Reconstitution of EBV-specific T-cell immunity is essential to reestablish
control of EBV infection. However, a quantitative deficiency of EBV-specific CTLs is common in the first 6 months after allogeneic transplant. 59,60 T-cell depletion of
the stem cell graft, which reduces the number of EBV-specific T cells administered to the recipient, or the use of monoclonal anti T-cell antibodies for GVHD
prophylaxis or therapy, which eliminates EBV-specific T cells in vivo, further impairs T-cell recovery. In the setting of a severe deficiency of EBV-specific CTLs, EBV
may reactivate, induce polyclonal proliferation of B cells, and result in the emergence of rapidly growing oligoclonal or monoclonal populations.
Clinical Features and Diagnosis
PTLD in HSCT recipients commonly presents with fever and progressive lymphadenopathy. Involvement of pharyngeal lymphoid tissue with an exudative pharyngitis
is observed in one-third of patients. 38 The lesions may be extranodal and involve the spleen, liver, lungs, gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, and CNS. Thus, PTLD should
be included in the differential diagnosis of symptoms or signs related to these organs in a patient at high risk.
The diagnosis is usually established by biopsy and demonstration of the presence of EBV in involved tissue. Tumors developing after HSCT almost always consist of
oligoclonal or monoclonal populations of donor B cells and most commonly exhibit a monomorphic diffuse large cell morphology, although plasmacytoid or
polymorphic morphology are also seen. 38,61 The presence of EBV in the tumor is established by Southern blot of DNA extracted from tumor tissue or by analysis of
EBV gene expression in tissue sections. Two EBV-encoded RNAs (EBERs) are abundantly expressed in PTLD and can be detected in tissue sections by in situ
hybridization. 62 Immunohistochemical staining with antibodies against EBV proteins can also be used to confirm the presence of EBV in the tumor. 63 Analysis of Ig

gene rearrangements or characterization of repeat sequences at EBV DNA episomal joints is used to determine the clonality of tumor cells. Detection of high EBV
DNA levels by polymerase chain reaction analysis of DNA in peripheral blood has been associated with PTLD and may be useful for early diagnosis and monitoring
response to therapy. 64
Therapy and Prophylaxis of Posttransplant Lymphoproliferative Disorders
The development of PTLD in HSCT recipients is an ominous sign due to the propensity for these tumors to grow rapidly, and urgent therapy is usually necessary.
Reduction in the intensity of immunosuppression is indicated, although this may not be possible in patients with severe GVHD. Surgical resection or irradiation may
be appropriate as a temporary measure to control anatomically localized disease, but recurrences at other sites are common. Efforts to treat PTLD with chemotherapy
regimens similar to those used to treat non-Hodgkin's lymphoma are only occasionally successful in HSCT recipients in part due to the toxicity of administering
systemic chemotherapy to these patients.
Anecdotal reports and studies in small numbers of patients have examined systemic therapy with antiviral drugs and interferon-a. Although the administration of
acyclovir or ganciclovir is often used as a component of therapy for PTLD, these drugs target the viral thymidine kinase, which is expressed in the replicative phase of
EBV infection but not in proliferating EBV-infected B cells. These agents do not inhibit the growth of EBV-transformed B cells in vitro and would not be expected to be
beneficial for PTLD. Pharmacologic induction of the viral thymidine kinase gene in EBV-infected cells by administration of arginine butyrate has been reported to
render EBV-associated PTLD susceptible to ganciclovir and induce a complete regression in four of six patients. 65 The administration of interferon-a and
immunoglobulin was reported to induce regression of PTLD in a small number of patients in an early study, but this approach has not been widely adopted. 32
The infusion of anti–B-cell monoclonal antibodies directed at the CD21 and CD24 surface molecules has induced regression of PTLD in approximately 50% of
patients. However, this approach is less effective in patients with oligoclonal or monoclonal disease and, at the present time, these antibodies are not commercially
available. 66,67 and 68 The use of anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (Rituxan) has been reported to induce remission of PTLD after HSCT in some patients, and the results
of additional studies of this agent are eagerly awaited. 69,70
The association of deficient EBV-specific T-cell immunity with the development of PTLD has led to efforts to restore T-cell responses to EBV by the adoptive transfer
of T cells obtained from the stem cell donor. Support for this approach was provided by a study of five patients who developed PTLD after T-cell–depleted allogeneic
HSCT and received infusions of unirradiated donor peripheral blood mononuclear cells containing 1 × 10 6 CD3+ T cells per kilogram of recipient body weight. 71
Clinical and pathologic regression of the PTLD was observed in all five patients, and three of these patients became long-term survivors. Two patients with pulmonary
involvement developed fatal respiratory failure after the lymphocyte infusions, and two of the three surviving patients developed chronic GVHD. 71 In a subsequent
report, 19 patients with PTLD were treated with donor lymphocytes, and 16 achieved complete pathologic and clinical resolution of their disease. 38 Studies analyzing
the frequency of EBV-specific CTLs in the blood before and after therapy demonstrated a rapid amplification of EBV-specific CTLs to levels equivalent to normal
donors. However, due to the presence of alloreactive T cells in the donor cells used for therapy, GVHD developed in 50% of the patients treated with this approach. 38
An approach to cellular therapy of PTLD that alleviates the problem of GVHD uses donor T cells that are enriched for EBV-specific reactivity and depleted of
alloreactivity by in vitro culture. The infusion of such cultured EBV-specific T cell lines is effective in treatment of established PTLD in HSCT recipients. Transferred T
cells can be identified in the regressing tumor and persist in the blood for longer than 18 months after infusion. 72,73 The prophylactic administration of EBV-specific T
cell lines to patients who have received a T-cell–depleted HSCT has been effective in preventing PTLD in these high-risk patients. 74 At the present time, the major
impediment to the broader application of cellular therapy for EBV-associated PTLD is the technical expertise and resources required to isolate EBV-reactive T cells.
HODGKIN'S DISEASE AND LATE-ONSET NON-HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMAS IN HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANT RECIPIENTS
Epidemiology
Hodgkin's disease has been reported to occur with increased frequency in immunosuppressed patients, including solid organ transplant recipients and human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients. 75,76 The incidence of Hodgkin's disease has been evaluated in 18,531 allogeneic HSCT recipients and compared with
the incidence in the general population. 77 Eight cases of Hodgkin's disease were observed in the HSCT patients, which was significantly more than expected in the
age- and sex-matched general population (O/E = 6.2). There was a trend toward a significantly increased risk in patients who developed grade 3 or 4 GVHD. The
majority of cases were of mixed cellularity histology and contained the EBV genome; however, in contrast to EBV-associated PTLD, which typically occurs in the first 6
months after transplant, the onset of Hodgkin's disease occurred at a median of 4.2 years after transplant. 77 Cases of late-onset non-Hodgkin's lymphoma have also
been reported in HSCT recipients, but the majority of these are T cell in origin and an association with lymphotropic viruses, such as EBV or human T-cell
lymphotropic virus, has not been demonstrated. 78
Clinical Manifestations and Management
The cases of Hodgkin's disease reported in HSCT recipients were characterized by an aggressive histology, with 75% being mixed cellularity or lymphocyte depleted.
Therapy with conventional chemotherapy or radiotherapy is usually effective, however, with six of the eight patients in the largest series alive 2.7 to 9.6 years after the
diagnosis of Hodgkin's disease. 77
ACUTE LEUKEMIA AND MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROME AFTER HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION
Epidemiology
AML and MDS are well-recognized complications of conventional chemotherapy and radiotherapy for Hodgkin's disease, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, breast cancer,
and other malignancies. 79,80,81 and 82 Patients who receive high-dose chemotherapy and autologous HSCT for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and Hodgkin's disease have
also been reported to have an increased risk of secondary AML or MDS compared with the general population. In three large series, the cumulative incidence of
AML/MDS in recipients of autologous HSCT for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma or Hodgkin's disease was 5% at 5 years, 83 18% at 6 years,84 and 14.5% at 5 years,85
respectively. Risk factors for the development of AML/MDS were age older than 40 years at the time of transplant, pretransplant irradiation, pretransplant therapy with
alkylating agents, mobilization of stem cells with VP-16, and a low pretransplant platelet count. 83,84,85 and 86 In one study, the use of total body irradiation in the
conditioning regimen was a risk factor for the development of AML/MDS after transplant. 83
Rare cases of leukemia developing in donor cells after allogeneic HSCT have also been reported. 87,88,89 and 90 In these cases, the donor reportedly remained healthy
and the mechanism of leukemogenesis in the recipient remained unexplained. Inadvertent transplantation of marrow from a donor with AML has also been reported. 91
Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of secondary AML/MDS in patients who receive conventional chemotherapy or combined chemoradiotherapy is related to DNA damage in
hematopoietic stem cells induced by alkylating agents, epidophyllotoxins, or ionizing radiation. It is unclear whether the risk of AML/MDS is entirely due to damage to
stem cells from prior chemotherapy or if the conditioning regimen administered immediately before transplant further adds to the risk. A study of patients with multiple
myeloma who underwent autologous HSCT found that the risk of developing AML/MDS correlated with the intensity and duration of pretransplant conventional
chemotherapy.92 However, the increased risk of AML/MDS when total body irradiation was a component of the conditioning regimen suggests that there may be
additional contributions from regimen-related damage to residual stem cells in the patient or to the marrow stroma. 83
Cytogenetic abnormalities are occasionally found in the marrow of patients being evaluated for autologous HSCT. In a few cases in which the marrow was
morphologically normal and was used for transplant despite the presence of cytogenetic alterations, the patients developed MDS or AML in the first 12 months after
transplant. 93 Thus, cytogenetic analysis of the bone marrow should be considered in patients with extensive prior therapy who are being evaluated for HSCT.
Clinical Features and Management

The clinical features of AML/MDS after autologous HSCT are the same as those seen in cases of secondary AML/MDS that develop after conventional chemotherapy
or low-dose radiation. These include frequent abnormalities of chromosomes 5 and 7 and a poor response to therapy. A small number of patients who have developed
AML/MDS after autologous HSCT have subsequently been treated with a second high-dose cytotoxic regimen followed by allogeneic HSCT. 94 This approach is
complicated by a high risk of regimen-related toxicity but can be curative.

ORGAN TRANSPLANT RECIPIENTS
The transplantation of allogeneic solid organs has become a widely used and often life-saving therapy, with more than 20,000 procedures performed in 1997 in the
United States. 95 However, recipients of organ allografts generally require life-long therapy with immunosuppressive drugs to prevent or treat episodes of graft
rejection and are at increased risk for the development of a malignancy. The overwhelming majority of tumors arising in solid organ transplant recipients are de novo
malignancies of recipient origin, 9,96,97 or recurrence of a malignancy existing in the recipient before transplant. 98,99 and 100 However, a malignancy of donor origin may
occasionally arise in the transplanted organ de novo or be inadvertently transmitted to the recipient via the transplanted organ. 101,102,103,104,105 and 106 Polymorphic
molecular markers that differ between donor and recipient can be used to determine the origin of the malignancy, and these studies should be considered in
suspicious cases because withdrawal of immunosuppression can sometimes result in regression of donor-derived malignancies. 102,103
Data from single institutions and large international registries have shown that the incidence of cancer in organ allograft recipients is increased three- to fourfold
compared with the general population. 9,97,107,108 and 109 The incidence of tumor development increases with the length of observation after transplant. In two studies of
renal allograft recipients, the risk of developing cancer at 20 years after transplant was 40% to 50% compared with a 6% cumulative risk in the general population of
age-matched individuals. 97,108 Similar to the findings in HSCT recipients, malignancies that develop frequently in the general population, such as those occurring in
breast, lung, prostate, colon, and cervix, are not increased in solid organ transplant recipients. 110,111 The incidence of cancers of the skin and lip, and B-cell
lymphoproliferative diseases are increased in both solid organ transplant and HSCT recipients. 9,97,108,112 Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), which is rarely seen in HSCT
recipients, is significantly increased in organ allograft recipients. 113,114
CANCER OF THE SKIN AND LIP
Epidemiology
Cancer of the skin or lip is the most common neoplasm developing in organ allograft recipients, and the risk of a cutaneous neoplasm is increased 3.2- to 24.0-fold
compared with the general population. 115 The most dramatic increase is in squamous cell carcinoma, but the risk of developing basal cell carcinoma, melanoma, and
Merkel's cell carcinoma is also significantly increased. The cumulative incidence of skin cancer increases with time after transplantation ( Table 50.2-3). The incidence
of skin cancer in renal transplant recipients was 70% at 20 years in a study from Australia where sun exposure is high, 116 and 40% in a study from the Netherlands. 115
In two studies of heart transplant recipients, the incidence of skin cancer was 44% and 35% at 7 and 10 years, respectively. 117,118 In the general population, basal cell
carcinoma of the skin occurs five times more frequently than squamous cell carcinoma, whereas in organ transplant recipients, squamous cell carcinoma occurs one
to three times more frequently than basal cell carcinoma. 114

TABLE 50.2-3. Cumulative Incidence of Skin Cancer in Organ Transplant Recipients

Cumulative sun exposure, the length of time after transplant, and mismatching between donor and recipient at the HLA-B locus or homozygosity at the HLA-DR locus
have been identified as risk factors for the development of skin cancer in organ transplant recipients. 117,119,120 Features prevalent in patients with skin cancer in the
general population, including light skin and blonde or red hair, are also prevalent in transplant recipients.
The length of time from transplant is an important risk factor and presumably reflects the contributions of immunosuppressive drug therapy to tumorigenesis.
Insufficient data are available to conclude whether specific immunosuppressive drugs or the intensity of the regimen influences the risk of skin cancer. Patients who
receive cyclosporine in addition to azathioprine and prednisolone 121 or who receive OKT3117 have been reported to be at higher risk for the development of skin
cancer. However, other studies have not found an association between the type of immunosuppressive drug regimen used and the risk of skin cancer. 116
Sun exposure and cigarette smoking are risk factors for the development of cancer of the lip in organ transplant recipients. In addition to an increased incidence of
malignant lesions, transplant recipients have a higher incidence of leukoplakia and dysplastic lesions of the lip when compared with age- and sex-matched controls. 122
Pathogenesis
Multiple factors may be involved in the pathogenesis of cancers of the skin and lip in organ allograft recipients, including underlying genetic predisposition,
environmental factors, immunologic alterations induced by the transplant, immunosuppressive drugs, and viral infection. The mechanism by which transplantation and
immunosuppressive drug therapy potentiates the development of skin cancer remains elusive. In murine models, tumors induced by ultraviolet light are often highly
antigenic when transplanted into syngeneic mice, suggesting defects in the host immune response are required for tumor formation. 123 There is evidence that
ultraviolet light induces local immunosuppressive effects that facilitate the establishment of tumors, and immunosuppressive drugs may potentiate this local
impairment in host immunity.124,125 Consistent with this hypothesis, the skin of renal allograft recipients exhibits a decrease in the density of CD4+ and CD8+ T
lymphocytes, and CD1a+ dermal Langerhans' cells when compared with normal controls. 126 Moreover, melanomas that occur in solid organ transplant recipients lack
the mononuclear cell infiltrates that are frequently seen in tumors in immunocompetent hosts and are associated with a good prognosis. 127 A potential role for
cyclosporine in tumorigenesis that is distinct from its immunosuppressive properties has been identified. Exposure of tumor cells to cyclosporine increases the
production of transforming growth factor-b, which results in increased tumor cell motility and invasiveness in vitro and enhanced tumor growth and metastasis in
vivo.128
The association of viral infections with the development of malignancies in immunosuppressed patients has prompted a search for viruses in skin cancers in organ
allograft recipients. There have been reports of the detection of human papilloma-virus DNA in a significant fraction of skin cancers in organ transplant
recipients.22,24,129,130,131,132 and 133 However, other studies have failed to detect human papilloma-virus, and the role of this agent in the development of skin cancer in
transplant recipients remains controversial. 25,134 EBV DNA and gene expression has been detected in tumors from 10 of 15 cardiac allograft recipients with squamous
cell carcinoma, suggesting a potential role for EBV as a cofactor in tumor development. 25
Clinical Features, Management, and Prevention
Skin disorders that resemble malignancies, such as warts, hyperkeratoses, and keratoacanthomas, are frequently observed in transplant patients, and a biopsy

should be performed for suspicious lesions for accurate diagnosis. Premalignant lesions have been successfully treated with topical tretinoin 135 or a combination of
low-dose etretinate and topical tretinoin. 136
Skin cancers in organ transplant recipients are generally considered to be more aggressive than tumors that develop in the general population. Fifty percent to 80% of
patients have multiple lesions, and individual lesions characteristically exhibit greater local invasiveness. 108,137 Squamous cell carcinomas in organ transplant patients
are also more likely to metastasize to lymph nodes and distant sites. 137 Treatment of skin cancers in these patients is performed with the same modalities used for
tumors in the general population, including surgical excision, cryosurgery, or radiotherapy.
Given the aggressive nature of skin cancers in organ allograft recipients, it is essential to educate patients about the hazards associated with sun exposure, provide
strategies for protecting the skin from sunlight, and promote awareness of the importance of early detection and treatment. 138,139 Chemoprophylaxis of skin cancer with
systemic retinoids may also be appropriate in high-risk patients. Acitretin has been suggested to reduce the number of new tumors in renal transplant recipients and
to prevent keratotic skin lesions and skin cancer in a placebo-controlled trial. 140,141 The most effective preventive measure for skin cancer may come from the
development of novel approaches to induce specific tolerance to the donor organ that do not require long-term administration of drugs that cause global
immunosuppression.142
EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS–ASSOCIATED LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE DISORDERS IN ORGAN TRANSPLANT RECIPIENTS
Epidemiology
PTLDs associated with EBV infection are the second most frequent malignancy in solid organ transplant recipients. 114 In a study of 45,141 kidney transplant recipients
and 7634 heart transplant recipients, the incidence of PTLD during the first year after transplant was 0.2% for kidney transplant recipients and 1.2% for heart
transplant recipients. 143 These rates are 20 and 120 times higher, respectively, than the incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in the general population. 143 The
incidence of PTLD is highest in the first year after transplant, but these tumors may develop with increased frequency for more than 6 years after transplant. PTLD in
organ allograft recipients develop in host B cells, although the EBV strain may be derived from reactivation of latent virus in the host or virus transmitted with the
donor organ. 144,145 Transplant recipients who are EBV seronegative and receive an organ from an EBV-seropositive donor are up to 76 times more likely to develop a
PTLD than EBV-seropositive recipients. 146,147 and 148
The drug regimen used to prevent or treat graft rejection influences the risk of PTLD, with the highest risk of PTLD observed in patients who receive cyclosporine,
FK-506, or anti-CD3 monoclonal antibodies. 143 Heart, lung, or heart and lung transplants have a higher incidence of PTLD than patients receiving kidney or liver
transplants because intensive immunosuppression must be maintained in these patients to prevent life-threatening graft rejection. 143 The administration of anti-CD3
monoclonal antibodies confers a particularly high risk of PTLD related both to the suppression of T-cell function and the release of T-cell cytokines that activate B
cells. 149
Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of PTLD occurring in solid organ transplant recipients is similar to that in HSCT recipients and reflects defective control of EBV by the host immune
response. The immunosuppressive drugs administered to organ transplant patients potently suppress EBV-specific CTL activity in vitro and in vivo.150 A study of 30
cardiothoracic transplant recipients who received cyclosporin A and azathioprine as rejection prophylaxis showed that EBV-specific CTL activity in the peripheral
blood was suppressed or undetectable in all patients during the first 6 months after transplant. 151 Recovery of EBV-specific T-cell responses is further impaired in
patients who require additional immunosuppressive therapy with prednisone or azathioprine to treat rejection episodes. 151 These studies support a deficiency of
EBV-specific CTLs as the critical factor in pathogenesis, but the clinical presentation of PTLD in organ allograft recipients suggests that local factors at the tumor site
also play a role. Tumors frequently involve the transplanted organ, the CNS, and the gastrointestinal tract, suggesting that immunoregulatory factors in the
microenvironment may act in concert with a deficiency of EBV-specific CTLs to predispose to the development of PTLD. The organ allograft is a site of chronic
antigenic stimulation, and local cytokines produced by alloreactive T cells have been suggested to promote the activation and growth of EBV-infected B cells. 152
Clinical Features, Diagnosis, and Management
Patients developing PTLD may present with an infectious mononucleosis syndrome, including fever, peripheral lymphadenopathy, and tonsillar enlargement.
Occasionally, the disease presents with a fulminant course characterized by rapidly progressive diffuse multiorgan involvement and severe systemic symptoms. More
commonly, PTLD presents with localized lesions in lymph nodes, extranodal sites, such as the gastrointestinal tract, CNS, lung, and the transplanted organ, or both
nodes and extranodal sites. 153,154 and 155
The diagnosis of PTLD is made by biopsy of involved tissue as described earlier for HSCT recipients. Three morphologic variants of PTLD are recognized in solid
organ transplant recipients. These include plasmacytic hyperplasia, which is typically polyclonal, polymorphic B cell hyperplasia, which is typically monoclonal, and
monomorphic lymphoma or multiple myeloma, which is monoclonal and contains alterations in oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, or both, in addition to the EBV
genome.61,156 Studies suggest that patients with the monomorphic/myeloma morphology or with bcl-6 mutations have a poor response to therapy. 157,158
A standard approach to the management of PTLD in organ allograft recipients has not been established. The therapeutic approach may depend on the site of tumor
involvement, the rate of tumor growth, and the necessity to maintain intense immunosuppression. Initial therapy frequently consists of a reduction or withdrawal of
immunosuppressive drug therapy, which can result in expansion of endogenous EBV-specific T cells and complete regression of the tumor. 159,160 However, this
strategy may lead to rejection of the organ allograft, which, with the exception of renal transplant recipients who can return to dialysis therapy, can have disastrous
consequences. Anatomically localized lesions may be amenable to surgical resection or limited field irradiation, but tumor recurrence is common.
Systemic therapy is usually necessary to control PTLD that fails to regress after a reduction in immunosuppressive therapy. The use of a combination of anti-B cell
monoclonal antibodies targeting CD21 and CD24 for PTLD in organ transplant recipients resulted in a 55% survival at a median of 61 months, although the subset of
patients with visceral disease, CNS involvement, or onset longer than 1 year after transplant responded poorly to therapy. 68 Early results with the anti-CD20 antibody
(Rituxan) suggest a comparable response rate, although the follow-up on these patients is short. 161
Chemotherapy has been used in patients who fail to respond to a reduction in immunosuppression or who have rapidly progressive disease. In small studies,
standard regimens used for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, such as cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin (Adriamycin), Oncovin, and prednisone or
ProMACE-CytaBOM have induced durable complete remissions in the majority of patients. 162,163 However, other studies have reported significantly less promising
results due both to a high incidence of infectious complications related to neutropenia and refractory disease. 155,164
Based on the encouraging results in allogeneic HSCT recipients, the use of cellular immunotherapy to restore EBV-specific T-cell immunity is being explored as
therapy for PTLD occurring in solid organ transplant recipients. In contrast to the allogeneic HSCT recipients who have an immunocompetent stem cell donor that can
be used as a source of T cells for therapy, EBV-specific T cells must be generated from the organ transplant recipient's blood before transplant and cryopreserved for
later use. The feasibility of isolating and adoptively transferring EBV-reactive T cells from both EBV-seropositive and EBV-seronegative organ transplant recipients
has been demonstrated. 165,166 The transfer of EBV-specific T cells resulted in an increase in the frequency of EBV-specific CTLs in the blood, and in a single patient
with an established PTLD was associated with tumor regression. 166
LATE-ONSET LYMPHOMAS AND HODGKIN'S DISEASE IN ORGAN TRANSPLANT RECIPIENTS
The overwhelming majority of PTLD are EBV-associated and of B cell origin, but well-documented cases of T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders have been described
in organ transplant recipients. The T-cell lymphoproliferations typically occur several years after transplant, involve the bone marrow and peripheral blood at
presentation, and are not related to EBV, human T-cell lymphotropic virus, or HHV-8 infection. 167 The prognosis for these patients is poor despite the administration of
chemotherapy and reduction of immunosuppression. 167
Hodgkin's disease has also been reported in organ allograft recipients, and the tumors are usually EBV positive. 76 The clinical presentation is typical of Hodgkin's

disease in the general population, and these patients respond to conventional therapy.
KAPOSI'S SARCOMA
Epidemiology
The incidence of Kaposi's sarcoma is up to 500 times greater in organ transplant recipients than in the general population. 168,169 and 170 An analysis of patients reported
to the Cincinnati Transplant Tumor Registry revealed that more transplant patients are diagnosed with KS than with colorectal, breast, or prostate cancer. 114 The
major risk factors for the development of KS in organ transplant recipients include African or Middle Eastern origin and the use of antilymphocyte serum for
immunosuppression.171
A human gamma herpesvirus termed HHV-8 has been detected in KS lesions but not in uninvolved tissues from the same individual, leading to speculation that it
plays either a direct causative role or is a critical cofactor in the pathogenesis of this tumor. 172,173,174 and 175 The role of HHV-8 in KS in organ transplant recipients has
been examined by analysis of the serostatus of recipients and donors. The presence of HHV-8 antibodies before or after transplantation is highly predictive of the
development of posttransplant KS, supporting a role for reactivation of endogenous HHV-8 or transmission of HHV-8 in the pathogenesis of KS. 171 The direct
transmission of HHV-8 by the organ allograft has been demonstrated and, in conjunction with intensive immunosuppression, associated with the development of
posttransplant KS.176,177
Pathogenesis
The finding of HHV-8 DNA in KS lesions suggests that this herpes virus is central to the pathogenesis of the tumor. HHV-8 has been shown to reactivate soon after
transplantation, and increasing levels of virus in the blood are associated with the development of KS. 178 Despite tantalizing leads from molecular studies of HHV-8
reviewed in the preceding chapter, the mechanisms by which HHV-8 induces tumor formation have not been elucidated. The role played by immunosuppressive drug
therapy in the development of KS is also unresolved. In vitro, corticosteroids activate the lytic cycle of HHV-8 gene expression, suggesting that immunosuppression
may increase viral load in vivo.179 The spontaneous regression in KS lesions observed with withdrawal of immunosuppression in organ transplant recipients or with the
resolution of immunodeficiency in HIV infection suggests that cellular immune responses have a crucial role in control of HHV-8 infection and preventing the
development of KS. CD8+ CTLs specific for antigens expressed in latent and lytic infection have been identified in HHV-8 seropositive individuals, 180 and it anticipated
that future studies will address the role of deficient T-cell responses to HHV-8 in the pathogenesis of KS.
Clinical Features and Management
Sixty percent of organ allograft recipients with KS present with localized skin or mucosal lesions, and the remainder present with visceral disease involving the
gastrointestinal tract, lungs, and lymph nodes. 114,181 The diagnosis of KS, which can be difficult in cases of visceral disease, is made by biopsy and histologic analysis.
The mainstay of therapy for KS developing after solid organ transplant is reduction in immunosuppressive therapy. This intervention alone induces a complete
response in approximately 25% of patients. 114,181 However, reintroduction of intensive immunosuppression to treat episodes of graft rejection has been associated with
recurrence of the tumor. Due to the inability to maintain reduced levels of immunosuppression in many organ allograft recipients, chemotherapy using regimens
described for KS in HIV infection is frequently required to control KS. 181,182 Novel less toxic approaches to treat KS are likely to emerge as the biology of these tumors
is better understood. Cellular therapy with HHV-8–specific T cells may have a role in future therapeutic strategies. Additionally, KS cells have been shown to express
the interleukin-4 receptor, and administration of interleukin-4 linked to a toxin molecule was highly effective in mediating tumor regression in a mouse xenograft model
of established subcutaneous KS. 183
OTHER HUMAN HERPESVIRUS-8–ASSOCIATED MALIGNANCIES IN ORGAN TRANSPLANT RECIPIENTS
HHV-8 has also been associated with other malignancies, including primary effusion lymphoma in HIV-infected patients and multicentric Castleman's diseases in both
HIV-positive and -negative patients. 184,185 Primary effusion lymphoma with integrated HHV-8 DNA has been reported to occur rarely in solid organ transplant recipients
and can be distinguished from the more common PTLD by the presence of malignant pleural, peritoneal, or pericardial effusions without tumor mass, or
adenopathy.186,187
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Goodman JL, Winston DJ, Greenfield RA, et al. A controlled trial of fluconazole to prevent fungal infections in patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med 1992;326:845.
2. Goodrich JM, Bowden RA, Fisher L, et al. Ganciclovir prophylaxis to prevent cytomegalovirus disease after allogeneic marrow transplant. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:173.
3. Winston DJ, Ho WG, Bartoni K, et al. Ganciclovir prophylaxis of cytomegalovirus infection and disease in allogeneic bone marrow transplant recipients. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:179.
4. Gane E, Saliba F, Valdecasas GJ, et al. Randomised trial of efficacy and safety of oral ganciclovir in the prevention of cytomegalovirus disease in liver-transplant recipients. Lancet
1997;350:1729.
5. Merigan TC, Renlund DG, Keay S, et al. A controlled trial of ganciclovir to prevent cytomegalovirus disease after heart transplantation. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1182.
6. Fraund S, Pethig K, Franke U, et al. Ten year survival after heart transplantation: palliative procedure or successful long term treatment? Heart 1999;82:47.
7. McGiffin DC, Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Bourge RC. Competing outcomes after heart transplantation: a comparison of eras and outcomes. J Heart Lung Transplant 1997;16:190.
8. Horowitz MM, Rowlings PA. An update from the International Bone Marrow Transplant Registry and the Autologous Blood and Marrow Transplant Registry on current activity in hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation. Curr Opin Hematol 1997;4:395.
9. Penn I. Occurrence of cancers in immunosuppressed organ transplant recipients. Clin Transplant 1998;147.
10. Horowitz M. Uses and growth of hematopoietic cell transplantation. In: Thomas ED, Blume KG, Forman SJ, eds. Hematopoietic cell transplantation. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 1999:12.
11. Broerse JJ, Hollander CF, van Zwieten MJ. Tumour induction in Rhesus monkeys after total body irradiation with X-rays and fission neutrons. Int J Radiat Biol 1981;40:671.
12. Deeg HJ, Prentice R, Fritz TE, et al. Increased incidence of malignant tumors in dogs after total body irradiation and marrow transplantation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:1505.
13. Deeg HJ, Storb R, Prentice R, et al. Increased cancer risk in canine radiation chimeras. Blood 1980;55:233.
14. Witherspoon RP, Fisher LD, Schoch G, et al. Secondary cancers after bone marrow transplantation for leukemia or aplastic anemia. N Engl J Med 1989;321:784.
15. Bhatia S, Ramsay NK, Steinbuch M, et al. Malignant neoplasms following bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1996;87:3633.
16. Kolb HJ, Guenther W, Duell T, et al. Cancer after bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1992;10:135.
17. Socie G, Henry-Amar M, Cosset JM, et al. Increased incidence of solid malignant tumors after bone marrow transplantation for severe aplastic anemia. Blood 1991;78:277.
18. Curtis RE, Rowlings PA, Deeg HJ, et al. Solid cancers after bone marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med 1997;336:897.
19. Andre M, Henry-Amar M, Blaise D, et al. Incidence of second cancers (SC) and causes of death after autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) for Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1995;[Suppl
1]86:460a.
20. Deeg HJ, Socie G. Malignancies after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: many questions, some answers. Blood 1998;91:1833.
21. Kolb HJ, Duell T, Socie G, et al. New malignancies in patients surviving more than 5 years after marrow transplantation. Blood 1995;(Suppl 1)86:460a.
22. Lutzner MA, Orth G, Dutronquay V, et al. Detection of human papillomavirus type 5 DNA in skin cancers of an immunosuppressed renal allograft recipient. Lancet 1983;2:422.
23. Orozco-Topete R, Archer-Dubon C, Valadez-Huerta N, et al. Cutaneous neoplasms and human papillomavirus in renal transplant patients: experience of one center in Mexico. Transplant Proc
1996;28:3314.
24. Shamanin V, zur Hausen H, Lavergne D, et al. Human papillomavirus infections in nonmelanoma skin cancers from renal transplant recipients and nonimmunosuppressed patients. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1996;88:802.
25. Ternesten-Bratel A, Kjellstrom C, Ricksten A. Specific expression of Epstein-Barr virus in cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas from heart transplant recipients. Transplantation 1998;66:1524.
26. Pittet MJ, Valmori D, Dunbar PR, et al. High frequencies of naive Melan-A/MART-1-specific CD8(+) T cells in a large proportion of human histocompatibility leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A2
individuals. J Exp Med 1999;190:705.
27. Rosenberg SA. A new era for cancer immunotherapy based on the genes that encode cancer antigens. Immunity 1999;10:281.
28. Van Pel A, van der Bruggen P, Coulie PG, et al. Genes coding for tumor antigens recognized by cytolytic T lymphocytes. Immunol Rev 1995;145:229.
29. Socie G, Stone JV, Wingard JR, et al. Long-term survival and late deaths after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med 1999;341:14.
30. McSweeney PA, Storb R. Mixed chimerism: preclinical studies and clinical applications. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 1999;5:192.
31. Giralt S, Estey E, Albitar M, et al. Engraftment of allogeneic hematopoietic progenitor cells with purine analog-containing chemotherapy: harnessing graft-versus-leukemia without myeloablative
therapy. Blood 1997;89:4531.
32. Shapiro RS, Chauvenet A, McGuire W, et al. Treatment of B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders with interferon alfa and intravenous gamma globulin. N Engl J Med 1988;318:1334.
33. Antin JH, Bierer BE, Smith BR, et al. Selective depletion of bone marrow T lymphocytes with anti-CD5 monoclonal antibodies: effective prophylaxis for graft-versus-host disease in patients with
hematologic malignancies. Blood 1991;78:2139.
34. Gerritsen EJ, Stam ED, Hermans J, et al. Risk factors for developing EBV-related B cell lymphoproliferative disorders (BLPD) after non-HLA-identical BMT in children. Bone Marrow Transplant
1996;18:377.
35. Zutter MM, Martin PJ, Sale GE, et al. Epstein-Barr virus lymphoproliferation after bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1988;72:520.
36. Curtis RE, Travis LB, Rowlings PA, et al. Risk of lymphoproliferative disorders after bone marrow transplantation: a multi-institutional study. Blood 1999;94:2208.
37. Hale G, Waldmann H. Risks of developing Epstein-Barr virus-related lymphoproliferative disorders after T-cell-depleted marrow transplants. Blood 1998;91:3079.
38. O'Reilly RJ, Small TN, Papadopoulos E, et al. Biology and adoptive cell therapy of Epstein-Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferative disorders in recipients of marrow allografts. Immunol Rev
1997;157:195.

39. Flinn I, Orentas R, Noga SJ, et al. Low risk of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD) in patients receiving elutriated allogeneic marrow
transplants may reflect depletion of EBV infected lymphocytes from the graft. Blood 1995;(Suppl 1)85:626a.
40. Gross TG, Steinbuch M, DeFor T, et al. B cell lymphoproliferative disorders following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: risk factors, treatment and outcome. Bone Marrow Transplant
1999;23:251.
41. Gross TG, Hinrichs SH, Davis JR, et al. Depletion of EBV-infected cells in donor marrow by counterflow elutriation. Exp Hematol 1998;26:395.
42. Nemerow GR, Moore MD, Cooper NR. Structure and function of the B-lymphocyte Epstein-Barr virus/C3d receptor. Adv Cancer Res 1990;54:273.
43. Kieff E. Epstein-Barr virus and its replication. In: Fields BN, Knipe DM, Howley PM, eds. Fields virology. Philadelphia: Raven Press, 1996:2343.
44. Kempkes B, Pich D, Zeidler R, Sugden B, Hammerschmidt W. Immortalization of human B lymphocytes by a plasmid containing 71 kilobase pairs of Epstein-Barr virus DNA. J Virol
1995;69:231.
45. Grossman SR, Johannsen E, Tong X, Yalamanchili R, Kieff E. The Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 2 transactivator is directed to response elements by the J kappa recombination signal
binding protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:7568.
46. Hsieh JJ, Hayward SD. Masking of the CBF1/RBPJ kappa transcriptional repression domain by Epstein-Barr virus EBNA2. Science 1995;268:560.
47. Kilger E, Kieser A, Baumann M, Hammerschmidt W. Epstein-Barr virus-mediated B-cell proliferation is dependent upon latent membrane protein 1, which simulates an activated CD40 receptor.
EMBO J 1998;17:1700.
48. Busch LK, Bishop GA. The EBV transforming protein, latent membrane protein 1, mimics and cooperates with CD40 signaling in B lymphocytes. J Immunol 1999;162:2555.
49. Liebowitz D. Epstein-Barr virus and a cellular signaling pathway in lymphomas from immunosuppressed patients. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1413.
50. Kulwichit W, Edwards RH, Davenport EM, et al. Expression of the Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 induces B cell lymphoma in transgenic mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1998;95:11963.
51. Callan MF, Tan L, Annels N, et al. Direct visualization of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells during the primary immune response to Epstein-Barr virus in vivo. J Exp Med 1998;187:1395.
52. Callan MF, Steven N, Krausa P, et al. Large clonal expansions of CD8+ T cells in acute infectious mononucleosis. Nat Med 1996;2:906.
53. Cohen JI. The biology of Epstein-Barr virus: lessons learned from the virus and the host. Curr Opin Immunol 1999;11:365.
54. Miyashita EM, Yang B, Babcock GJ, Thorley-Lawson DA. Identification of the site of Epstein-Barr virus persistence in vivo as a resting B cell. J Virol 1997;71:4882.
55. Decker LL, Klaman LD, Thorley-Lawson DA. Detection of the latent form of Epstein-Barr virus DNA in the peripheral blood of healthy individuals. J Virol 1996;70:3286.
56. Chen F, Zou JZ, di Renzo L, et al. A subpopulation of normal B cells latently infected with Epstein-Barr virus resembles Burkitt lymphoma cells in expressing EBNA-1 but not EBNA-2 or LMP1.
J Virol 1995;69:3752.
57. Levitskaya J, Coram M, Levitsky V, et al. Inhibition of antigen processing by the internal repeat region of the Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen-1. Nature 1995;375:685.
58. Gratama JW, Oosterveer MA, Zwaan FE, et al. Eradication of Epstein-Barr virus by allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: implications for sites of viral latency. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1988;85:8693.
59. Lucas KG, Small TN, Heller G, Dupont B, O'Reilly RJ. The development of cellular immunity to Epstein-Barr virus after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1996;87:2594.
60. Crawford DH, Mulholland N, Iliescu V, Hawkins R, Powles R. Epstein-Barr virus infection and immunity in bone marrow transplant recipients. Transplantation 1986;42:50.
61. Knowles DM, Cesarman E, Chadburn A, et al. Correlative morphologic and molecular genetic analysis demonstrates three distinct categories of posttransplantation lymphoproliferative
disorders. Blood 1995;85:552.
62. Ambinder RF, Mann RB. Detection and characterization of Epstein-Barr virus in clinical specimens. Am J Pathol 1994;145:239.
63. Young L, Alfieri C, Hennessy K, et al. Expression of Epstein-Barr virus transformation-associated genes in tissues of patients with EBV lymphoproliferative disease. N Engl J Med
1989;321:1080.
64. Rooney CM, Loftin SK, Holladay MS, et al. Early identification of Epstein-Barr virus-associated post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disease. Br J Haematol 1995;89:98.
65. Faller DV, Hermine O, Small T, et al. Treatment of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated lymphomas and PTLD using arginine butyrate to induce viral TK gene expression: initial findings of a
phase I/II trial. Blood 1999;94(Suppl 1):523a.
66. Fischer A, Blanche S, Le Bidois J, et al. Anti-B-cell monoclonal antibodies in the treatment of severe B-cell lymphoproliferative syndrome following bone marrow and organ transplantation. N
Engl J Med 1991;324:1451.
67. Blanche S, Le Deist F, Veber F, et al. Treatment of severe Epstein-Barr virus-induced polyclonal B-lymphocyte proliferation by anti-B-cell monoclonal antibodies. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:199.
68. Benkerrou M, Jais JP, Leblond V, et al. Anti-B-cell monoclonal antibody treatment of severe posttransplant B-lymphoproliferative disorder: prognostic factors and long-term outcome. Blood
1998;92:3137.
69. Faye A, Van Den Abeele T, Peuchmaur M, Mathieu-Boue A, Vilmer E. Anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody for post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders. Lancet 1998;352:1285.
70. Kuehnle I, Huls HH, Liu Z, et al. CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab) for therapy of epstein-barr virus lymphoma after hemopoietic stem-cell transplantation. Blood 2000;95:1502.
71. Papadopoulos EB, Ladanyi M, Emanuel D, et al. Infusions of donor leukocytes to treat Epstein-Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferative disorders after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.
N Engl J Med 1994;330:1185.
72. Rooney CM, Smith CA, Ng CY, et al. Use of gene-modified virus-specific T lymphocytes to control Epstein-Barr-virus-related lymphoproliferation. Lancet 1995;345:9.
73. Heslop HE, Ng CY, Li C, et al. Long-term restoration of immunity against Epstein-Barr virus infection by adoptive transfer of gene-modified virus-specific T lymphocytes. Nat Med 1996;2:551.
74. Rooney CM, Smith CA, Ng CY, et al. Infusion of cytotoxic T cells for the prevention and treatment of Epstein-Barr virus-induced lymphoma in allogeneic transplant recipients. Blood
1998;92:1549.
75. Tirelli U, Errante D, Dolcetti R, et al. Hodgkin's disease and human immunodeficiency virus infection: clinicopathologic and virologic features of 114 patients from the Italian Cooperative Group
on AIDS and Tumors. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1758.
76. Garnier JL, Lebranchu Y, Dantal J, et al. Hodgkin's disease after transplantation. Transplantation 1996;61:71.
77. Rowlings PA, Curtis RE, Passweg JR, et al. Increased incidence of Hodgkin's disease after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1999;10:3122.
78. Zutter MM, Durnam DM, Hackman RC, et al. Secondary T-cell lymphoproliferation after marrow transplantation. Am J Clin Pathol 1990;94:714.
79. Abrahamsen JF, Andersen A, Hannisdal E, et al. Second malignancies after treatment of Hodgkin's disease: the influence of treatment, follow-up time, and age. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:255.
80. Travis LB, Curtis RE, Boice JD Jr, Hankey BF, Fraumeni JF Jr. Second cancers following non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer 1991;67:2002.
81. Curtis RE, Boice JD Jr, Stovall M, et al. Risk of leukemia after chemotherapy and radiation treatment for breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1745.
82. Levine EG, Bloomfield CD. Leukemias and myelodysplastic syndromes secondary to drug, radiation, and environmental exposure. Semin Oncol 1992;19:47.
83. Darrington DL, Vose JM, Anderson JR, et al. Incidence and characterization of secondary myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myelogenous leukemia following high-dose chemoradiotherapy
and autologous stem-cell transplantation for lymphoid malignancies. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2527.
84. Stone RM, Neuberg D, Soiffer R, et al. Myelodysplastic syndrome as a late complication following autologous bone marrow transplantation for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:2535.
85. Miller JS, Arthur DC, Litz CE, et al. Myelodysplastic syndrome after autologous bone marrow transplantation: an additional late complication of curative cancer therapy. Blood 1994;83:3780.
86. Krishnan A, Bhatia S, Slovak ML, et al. Predictors of therapy-related leukemia and myelodysplasia following autologous transplantation for lymphoma: an assessment of risk factors. Blood
2000;95:1588.
87. Fialkow PJ, Thomas ED, Bryant JI, Neiman PE. Leukaemic transformation of engrafted human marrow cells in vivo. Lancet 1971;1:251.
88. Thomas ED, Bryant JI, Buckner CD, et al. Leukaemic transformation of engrafted human marrow cells in vivo. Lancet 1972;1:1310.
89. Newburger PE, Latt SA, Pesando JM, et al. Leukemia relapse in donor cells after allogeneic bone-marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med 1981;304:712.
90. Deeg HJ, Sanders J, Martin P, et al. Secondary malignancies after marrow transplantation. Exp Hematol 1984;12:660.
91. Niederwieser DW, Appelbaum FR, Gastl G, et al. Inadvertent transmission of a donor's acute myeloid leukemia in bone marrow transplantation for chronic myelocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med
1990;322:1794.
92. Govindarajan R, Jagannath S, Flick JT, et al. Preceding standard therapy is the likely cause of MDS after autotransplants for multiple myeloma. Br J Haematol 1996;95:349.
93. Chao NJ, Nademanee AP, Long GD, et al. Importance of bone marrow cytogenetic evaluation before autologous bone marrow transplantation for Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1575.
94. Anderson J. Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation for myelodysplastic and myeloproliferative disorders. In: Thomas ED, Blume KG, Forman SJ, eds. Hematopoietic cell transplantation.
Malden, MA: Blackwell, 1999:872.
95. United Network for Organ Sharing Web Site. Available at http://www.unos.org.
96. Penn I. Tumors after renal and cardiac transplantation. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1993;7:431.
97. Birkeland SA, Storm HH, Lamm LU, et al. Cancer risk after renal transplantation in the Nordic countries, 19641986. Int J Cancer 1995;60:183.
98. Penn I. Effect of immunosuppression on preexisting cancers. Transplant Proc 1993;25:1380.
99. Doutrelepont JM, De Pauw L, Gruber SA, et al. Renal transplantation exposes patients with previous Kaposi's sarcoma to a high risk of recurrence. Transplantation 1996;62:463.
100. Gazdar AF. Tumors arising after organ transplantation. JAMA 1997;277:154.
101. Hoppner W, Grosse K, Dreikorn K. Renal cell carcinoma in a transplanted kidney: successful organ-preserving procedure. Urol Int 1996;56:110.
102. Conlon PJ, Smith SR. Transmission of cancer with cadaveric donor organs. J Am Soc Nephrol 1995;6:54.
103. Loh E, Couch FJ, Hendricksen C, et al. Development of donor-derived prostate cancer in a recipient following orthotopic heart transplantation. JAMA 1997;277:133.
104. Detry O, Bonnet P, Honore P, Meurisse M, Jacquet N. What is the risk of transferral of an undetected neoplasm during organ transplantation? Transplant Proc 1997;29:2410.
105. Healey PJ, Davis CL. Transmission of tumours by transplantation. Lancet 1998;352:2.
106. Suranyi MG, Hogan PG, Falk MC, et al. Advanced donor-origin melanoma in a renal transplant recipient: immunotherapy, cure, and retransplantation. Transplantation 1998;66:655.
107. First MR, Peddi VR. Malignancies complicating organ transplantation. Transplant Proc 1998;30:2768.
108. London NJ, Farmery SM, Will EJ, Davison AM, Lodge JP. Risk of neoplasia in renal transplant patients [published erratum appears in Lancet1995;9(8976):714]. Lancet 1995;346:403.
109. Sheil AG. Cancer in immune-suppressed organ transplant recipients: aetiology and evolution. Transplant Proc 1998;30:2055.
110. Kelly DM, Emre S, Guy SR, et al. Liver transplant recipients are not at increased risk for nonlymphoid solid organ tumors. Cancer 1998;83:1237.
111. Stewart T, Tsai SC, Grayson H, Henderson R, Opelz G. Incidence of de-novo breast cancer in women chronically immunosuppressed after organ transplantation. Lancet 1995;346:796.
112. Gupta AK, Cardella CJ, Haberman HF. Cutaneous malignant neoplasms in patients with renal transplants. Arch Dermatol 1986;122:1288.
113. Erer B, Angelucci E, Muretto P, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;19:629.
114. Penn I. Neoplastic complications of organ transplantation. In: Ginns LC, Cosimi AB, Morris PJ, eds. Transplantation. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 1999:770.
115. Hartevelt MM, Bavinck JN, Kootte AM, Vermeer BJ, Vandenbroucke JP. Incidence of skin cancer after renal transplantation in The Netherlands. Transplantation 1990;49:506.
116. Bouwes Bavinck JN, Hardie DR, et al. The risk of skin cancer in renal transplant recipients in Queensland, Australia. Transplantation 1996;61:715.
117. Lampros TD, Cobanoglu A, Parker F, et al. Squamous and basal cell carcinoma in heart transplant recipients. J Heart Lung Transplant 1998;17:586.
118. Espana A, Redondo P, Fernandez AL, et al. Skin cancer in heart transplant recipients. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995;32:458.
119. Sheil AG. Skin cancer in renal transplant recipients. Transplant Sci 1994;4:42.
120. Bouwes Bavinck JN, Vermeer BJ, van der Woude FJ, et al. Relation between skin cancer and HLA antigens in renal-transplant recipients. N Engl J Med 1991;325:843.
121. Jensen P, Hansen S, Moller B, et al. Skin cancer in kidney and heart transplant recipients and different long-term immunosuppressive therapy regimens. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999;40:177.
122. King GN, Healy CM, Glover MT, et al. Increased prevalence of dysplastic and malignant lip lesions in renal-transplant recipients. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1052.
123. Kripke ML. Immunoregulation of carcinogenesis: past, present, and future. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:722.
124. Hill LL, Shreedhar VK, Kripke ML, Owen-Schaub LB. A critical role for Fas ligand in the active suppression of systemic immune responses by ultraviolet radiation. J Exp Med 1999;189:1285.
125. Shreedhar VK, Pride MW, Sun Y, Kripke ML, Strickland FM. Origin and characteristics of ultraviolet-B radiation-induced suppressor T lymphocytes. J Immunol 1998;161:1327.
126. Galvao MM, Sotto MN, Kihara SM, Rivitti EA, Sabbaga E. Lymphocyte subsets and Langerhans cells in sun-protected and sun-exposed skin of immunosuppressed renal allograft recipients. J
Am Acad Dermatol 1998;38:38.
127. Penn I. Malignant melanoma in organ allograft recipients. Transplantation 1996;61:274.

128. Hojo M, Morimoto T, Maluccio M, et al. Cyclosporine induces cancer progression by a cell-autonomous mechanism. Nature 1999;397:530.
129. Barr BB, Benton EC, McLaren K, et al. Human papilloma virus infection and skin cancer in renal allograft recipients. Lancet 1989;1:124.
130. Mansat-Krzyzanowska E, Dantal J, Hourmant M, et al. Frequency of mucosal HPV DNA detection (types 6/11, 16/18, 31/35/51) in skin lesions of renal transplant patients. Transplant Int
1997;10:137.
131. Arends MJ, Benton EC, McLaren KM, et al. Renal allograft recipients with high susceptibility to cutaneous malignancy have an increased prevalence of human papillomavirus DNA in skin
tumours and a greater risk of anogenital malignancy. Br J Cancer 1997;75:722.
132. Euvrard S, Chardonnet Y, Pouteil-Noble C, et al. Association of skin malignancies with various and multiple carcinogenic and noncarcinogenic human papillomaviruses in renal transplant
recipients. Cancer 1993;72:2198.
133. Stark LA, Arends MJ, McLaren KM, et al. Prevalence of human papillomavirus DNA in cutaneous neoplasms from renal allograft recipients supports a possible viral role in tumour promotion. Br
J Cancer 1994;69:222.
134. McGregor JM, Farthing A, Crook T, et al. Posttransplant skin cancer: a possible role for p53 gene mutation but not for oncogenic human papillomaviruses. J Am Acad Dermatol 1994;30:701.
135. Euvrard S, Verschoore M, Touraine JL, et al. Topical retinoids for warts and keratoses in transplant recipients. Lancet 1992;340:48.
136. Rook AH, Jaworsky C, Nguyen T, et al. Beneficial effect of low-dose systemic retinoid in combination with topical tretinoin for the treatment and prophylaxis of premalignant and malignant skin
lesions in renal transplant recipients. Transplantation 1995;59:714.
137. Barrett WL, First MR, Aron BS, Penn I. Clinical course of malignancies in renal transplant recipients. Cancer 1993;72:2186.
138. Cowen EW, Billingsley EM. Awareness of skin cancer by kidney transplant patients. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999;40:697.
139. Seukeran DC, Newstead CG, Cunliffe WJ. The compliance of renal transplant recipients with advice about sun protection measures. Br J Dermatol 1998;138:301.
140. McKenna DB, Murphy GM. Skin cancer chemoprophylaxis in renal transplant recipients: 5 years of experience using low-dose acitretin. Br J Dermatol 1999;4:656.
141. Bavinck JN, Tieben LM, Van der Woude FJ, et al. Prevention of skin cancer and reduction of keratotic skin lesions during acitretin therapy in renal transplant recipients: a double-blind,
placebo-controlled study. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1933.
142. Harlan DM, Kirk AD. The future of organ and tissue transplantation: can T-cell costimulatory pathway modifiers revolutionize the prevention of graft rejection? JAMA 1999;282:1076.
143. Opelz G, Henderson R. Incidence of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in kidney and heart transplant recipients. Lancet 1993;342:1514.
144. Haque T, Thomas JA, Falk KI, et al. Transmission of donor Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in transplanted organs causes lymphoproliferative disease in EBV-seronegative recipients. J Gen Virol
1996;77:1169.
145. Cen H, Breinig MC, Atchison RW, Ho M, McKnight JL. Epstein-Barr virus transmission via the donor organs in solid organ transplantation: polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment
length polymorphism analysis of IR2, IR3, and IR4. J Virol 1991;65:976.
146. Walker RC, Paya CV, Marshall WF, et al. Pretransplantation seronegative Epstein-Barr virus status is the primary risk factor for posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorder in adult heart,
lung, and other solid organ transplantations. J Heart Lung Transplant 1995;14:214.
147. Sokal EM, Antunes H, Beguin C, et al. Early signs and risk factors for the increased incidence of Epstein-Barr virus-related posttransplant lymphoproliferative diseases in pediatric liver
transplant recipients treated with tacrolimus. Transplantation 1997;64:1438.
148. Swinnen LJ. Treatment of organ transplant-related lymphoma. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1997;11:963.
149. Swinnen LJ, Costanzo-Nordin MR, Fisher SG, et al. Increased incidence of lymphoproliferative disorder after immunosuppression with the monoclonal antibody OKT3 in cardiac-transplant
recipients. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1723.
150. Burman K, Crawford DH. Effect of FK 506 on Epstein-Barr virus specific cytotoxic T cells. Lancet 1991;337:297.
151. Haque T, Thomas JA, Parratt R, et al. A prospective study in heart and lung transplant recipients correlating persistent Epstein-Barr virus infection with clinical events. Transplantation
1997;64:1028.
152. Haque T, Crawford DH. The role of adoptive immunotherapy in the prevention and treatment of lymphoproliferative disease following transplantation. Br J Haematol 1999;106:309.
153. DeMario MD, Liebowitz DN. Lymphomas in the immunocompromised patient. Semin Oncol 1998;25:492.
154. Swinnen LJ. Overview of posttransplant B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders. Semin Oncol 1999;(Suppl 14) 5:21.
155. Leblond V, Sutton L, Dorent R, et al. Lymphoproliferative disorders after organ transplantation: a report of 24 cases observed in a single center. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:961.
156. Frizzera G, Hanto DW, Gajl-Peczalska KJ, et al. Polymorphic diffuse B-cell hyperplasias and lymphomas in renal transplant recipients. Cancer Res 1981;41:4262.
157. Chadburn A, Chen JM, Hsu DT, et al. The morphologic and molecular genetic categories of posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorders are clinically relevant. Cancer 1998;82:1978.
158. Cesarman E, Chadburn A, Liu YF, et al. BCL-6 gene mutations in posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorders predict response to therapy and clinical outcome. Blood 1998;92:2294.
159. Khatri VP, Baiocchi RA, Peng R, et al. Endogenous CD8+ T cell expansion during regression of monoclonal EBV-associated posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder. J Immunol
1999;163:500.
160. Starzl TE, Nalesnik MA, Porter KA, et al. Reversibility of lymphomas and lymphoproliferative lesions developing under cyclosporin-steroid therapy. Lancet 1984;1:583.
161. Milpied N, Antoine C, Garnier JL, et al. Humanized anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab) in B post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders: a retrospective analysis of 32 patients. Ann
Oncol 1999;10:5(abst).
162. Garrett TJ, Chadburn A, Barr ML, et al. Posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorders treated with cyclophosphamide-doxorubicin-vincristine-prednisone chemotherapy. Cancer
1993;72:2782.
163. Swinnen LJ, Mullen GM, Carr TJ, Costanzo MR, Fisher RI. Aggressive treatment for postcardiac transplant lymphoproliferation. Blood 1995;86:3333.
164. Morrison VA, Dunn DL, Manivel JC, et al. Clinical characteristics of post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders. Am J Med 1994;97:14.
165. Haque T, Amlot PL, Helling N, et al. Reconstitution of EBV-specific T cell immunity in solid organ transplant recipients. J Immunol 1998;160:6204.
166. Khanna R, Bell S, Sherritt M, et al. Activation and adoptive transfer of Epstein-Barr virus-specific cytotoxic T cells in solid organ transplant patients with posttransplant lymphoproliferative
disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:10391.
167. Hanson MN, Morrison VA, Peterson BA, et al. Posttransplant T-cell lymphoproliferative disordersan aggressive, late complication of solid-organ transplantation [see comments]. Blood
1996;88:3626.
168. Ziegler JL, Templeton AC, Vogel CL. Kaposi's sarcoma: a comparison of classical, endemic, and epidemic forms. Semin Oncol 1984;11:47.
169. Biggar RJ, Rabkin CS. The epidemiology of AIDS-related neoplasms. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:997.
170. Stribling J, Weitzner S, Smith GV. Kaposi's sarcoma in renal allograft recipients. Cancer 1978;42:442.
171. Farge D, Lebbe C, Marjanovic Z, et al. Human herpes virus-8 and other risk factors for Kaposi's sarcoma in kidney transplant recipients. Transplantation 1999;67:1236.
172. Chang Y, Cesarman E, Pessin MS, et al. Identification of herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma. Science 1994;266:1865.
173. Moore PS, Chang Y. Detection of herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in Kaposi's sarcoma in patients with and without HIV infection. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1181.
174. Weiss RA, Whitby D, Talbot S, Kellam P, Boshoff C. Human herpesvirus type 8 and Kaposi's sarcoma. Monogr Natl Cancer Inst 1998;51.
175. Alkan S, Karcher DS, Ortiz A, et al. Human herpesvirus-8/Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus in organ transplant patients with immunosuppression. Br J Haematol 1997; 96:412.
176. Regamey N, Tamm M, Wernli M, et al. Transmission of human herpesvirus 8 infection from renal-transplant donors to recipients. N Engl J Med 1998;339:1358.
177. Parravicini C, Olsen SJ, Capra M, et al. Risk of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpes virus transmission from donor allografts among Italian posttransplant Kaposi's sarcoma patients. Blood
1997;90:2826.
178. Mendez JC, Procop GW, Espy MJ, et al. Relationship of HHV8 replication and Kaposi's sarcoma after solid organ transplantation. Transplantation 1999;67:1200.
179. Hudnall SD, Rady PL, Tyring SK, Fish JC. Hydrocortisone activation of human herpesvirus 8 viral DNA replication and gene expression in vitro. Transplantation 1999;67:648.
180. Osman M, Kubo T, Gill J, et al. Identification of human herpesvirus 8-specific cytotoxic T-cell responses. J Virol 1999;73:6136.
181. Shepherd FA, Maher E, Cardella C, et al. Treatment of Kaposi's sarcoma after solid organ transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2371.
182. Gill PS, Rarick M, McCutchan JA, et al. Systemic treatment of AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma: results of a randomized trial. Am J Med 1991;90:427.
183. Husain SR, Kreitman RJ, Pastan I, Puri RK. Interleukin-4 receptor-directed cytotoxin therapy of AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma tumors in xenograft model. Nat Med 1999;5:817.
184. Cesarman E, Chang Y, Moore PS, Said JW, Knowles DM. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in AIDS-related body-cavity-based lymphomas. N Engl J Med
1995;332:1186.
185. Soulier J, Grollet L, Oksenhendler E, et al. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in multicentric Castleman's disease. Blood 1995;86:1276.
186. Dotti G, Fiocchi R, Motta T, et al. Primary effusion lymphoma after heart transplantation: a new entity associated with human herpesvirus-8. Leukemia 1999;13:664.
187. Jones D, Ballestas ME, Kaye KM, et al. Primary-effusion lymphoma and Kaposi's sarcoma in a cardiac-transplant recipient. N Engl J Med 1998;339:444.

SECTION 51.1 Superior Vena Cava Syndrome
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 51.1
Superior Vena Cava Syndrome
JOACHIM YAHALOM
Introduction
Anatomy and Pathophysiology
Etiology and Natural History
Diagnostic Procedures
Management
Small Cell Lung Cancer
Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma
Nonmalignant Causes
Catheter-Induced Obstruction
Treatment
Radiation Therapy
Endovascular Stenting and Angioplasty
Surgery
Thrombolytic Therapy
General Measures
Recommendations
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Superior vena cava syndrome (SVCS) is the clinical expression of obstruction of blood flow through the SVC. Characteristic symptoms and signs may develop quickly
or gradually when this thin-walled vessel is compressed, invaded, or thrombosed by processes in the superior mediastinum. The first pathologic description of SVC
obstruction, in a patient with syphilitic aortic aneurysm, appeared in 1757. 1 In 1954, Schechter2 reviewed 274 well-documented cases of SVCS reported in the
literature; 40% of them were due to syphilitic aneurysms or tuberculosis mediastinitis. These entities have since virtually disappeared, and cancer of the lung is now
the underlying process in approximately 70% of patients with SVCS. It is estimated that, in the United States, 15,000 people develop SVCS each year. 3

ANATOMY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The SVC is the major vessel for drainage of venous blood from the head, neck, upper extremities, and upper thorax. It is located in the middle mediastinum and is
surrounded by relatively rigid structures, such as the sternum, trachea, right bronchus, aorta, pulmonary artery, and the perihilar and paratracheal lymph nodes. The
SVC extends from the junction of the right and left innominate veins to the right atrium, for a distance of 6 to 8 cm. The distal 2 cm of the SVC is within the pericardial
sac, with a point of relative fixation of the vena cava at the pericardial reflection. The azygos vein, the main auxiliary vessel, enters the SVC posteriorly, just above the
pericardial reflection. The width of the SVC is 1.5 to 2.0 cm and it maintains blood at a low pressure. The SVC is thin-walled, compliant, and easily compressible, and
is vulnerable to any space-occupying process in its vicinity. The SVC is completely encircled by chains of lymph nodes that drain all the structures of the right thoracic
cavity and the lower part of the left thorax. The auxiliary azygos vein is also threatened by enlargement of paratracheal nodes. Other critical structures in the
mediastinum, such as the main bronchi, esophagus, and the spinal cord, may be involved by the same process that led to obstruction of the SVC. 4, 5 and 6
When the SVC is fully or partially obstructed, an extensive venous collateral circulation may develop. The azygos venous system is the most important alternative
pathway. Carlson 7 found that dogs could not survive sudden ligation of the SVC below the level of the azygos vein, but they tolerated well ligation of the SVC above it.
He could, however, successfully obstruct the SVC and the azygos vein in operations performed in two stages, presumably by allowing time for collaterals to form.
Other collateral systems are the internal mammary veins, lateral thoracic veins, paraspinous veins, and the esophageal venous network. The subcutaneous veins are
important pathways, and their engorgement in the neck and thorax is a typical physical finding in SVCS. Despite these collateral pathways, venous pressure is almost
always elevated in the upper compartment if there is obstruction of the SVC. Venous pressures have been recorded as high as 200 to 500 cm H 2O in severe SVCS.8

ETIOLOGY AND NATURAL HISTORY
SVCS usually has an insidious onset and progresses to typical symptoms and signs. Review of the data from three series ( Table 51.1-1) shows dyspnea to be the
most common symptom.9, 10 and 11 Dyspnea occurred in 63% of patients with SVCS. A sensation of fullness in the head and facial swelling was reported by 50% of the
patients. Other complaints were cough (24%), arm swelling (18%), chest pain (15%), and dysphagia (9%). The characteristic physical findings were venous distention
of the neck (66%) and chest wall (54%), facial edema (46%), plethora (19%), and cyanosis (19%). These symptoms and signs may be aggravated by bending forward,
stooping, or by lying down.

TABLE 51.1-1. Common Symptoms and Physical Findings of Superior Vena Cava Syndrome

Malignant disease is the most common cause of SVCS. The percentage of patients in different series with a confirmed diagnosis of malignancy varies from 78% to
86% (Table 51.1-2). Lung cancer was diagnosed in 65% of 415 patients analyzed in these series. 4,10, 11 and 12 Armstrong et al.9 did a retrospective review of 4100 cases
treated for bronchogenic carcinoma between 1965 and 1984, and they identified 99 patients (2.4%) with SVCS. Salsali and Cliffton 13 observed SVCS in 4.2% of 4960
patients with lung cancer; 80% of the tumors inducing SVCS were of the right lung. Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is the most common histologic subtype ( Table
51.1-3), and it was found in 38% of the patients who had lung cancer and SVCS. In six large series of SCLC, 9% to 19% of patients demonstrated SVCS. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18
and 19
The second most common histologic subtype is squamous cell carcinoma, found in 26% of lung cancer patients with SVCS.

TABLE 51.1-2. Primary Pathologic Diagnoses for Superior Vena Cava Syndrome

TABLE 51.1-3. Lung Cancer Subtypes Associated with Superior Vena Cava Syndrome

Lymphoma involving the mediastinum was the cause of SVCS in 8% of patients reported in the series (see Table 51.1-2). Armstrong et al.9 found SVCS in 1.9% of
952 lymphoma patients. Perez-Soler et al. 20 identified 36 cases (4%) of SVCS among 915 patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) treated at the M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center. Twenty-three patients (64%) had diffuse large cell lymphoma, 12 (33%) had lymphoblastic lymphoma, and one patient had follicular large cell
lymphoma. Of their patients with diffuse large cell lymphoma and lymphoblastic lymphoma, 7% and 21% had SVCS, respectively. In a series of patients with primary
mediastinal B-cell lymphoma with sclerosis, SVCS was present in 57% of patients. 21 Hodgkin's lymphoma commonly involves the mediastinum, but it rarely causes
SVCS. Other primary mediastinal malignancies that cause SVCS are thymoma and germ cell tumors. Breast cancer is the most common metastatic disease that
causes SVCS.4,10,12 In one report, breast cancer was the cause of SVCS in 11% of cases. 22
Nonmalignant conditions causing SVCS are not as rare as previously reported. 9,23 When the data were collected from general hospitals, as many as 22% of patients
had noncancerous causes of SVCS.4,10,12 Parish et al.10 reported 19 patients with benign causes of SVCS, and Schraufnagel et al. 4 included 16 such patients in his
series. Fifty percent of the patients in both reports had a diagnosis of mediastinal fibrosis, which was probably due to histoplasmosis. Parish et al. 10 reported six
patients with thrombosis of SVC, and in five, the thrombosis developed in the presence of central vein catheters or pacemakers. Sculier and Field 24 reviewed 24 cases
of central venous catheter–induced SVC. Of these, 18 were caused by pacemaker catheters. LeVeen peritoneovenous shunts, Swan-Ganz catheters, and
hyperalimentation catheters were also involved. The increasing use of these devices for the delivery of chemotherapy agents or for hyperalimentation contributes to
the development of SVCS in the cancer patient. 25
Obstruction of SVC in the pediatric age group is rare and has a different etiologic spectrum. The causative factors are mainly iatrogenic 26 secondary to cardiovascular
surgery for congenital heart disease, ventriculoatrial shunt for hydrocephalus, and SVC catheterization for parenteral nutrition. In a report of 175 children with SVCS,
70% were iatrogenic. Of the remaining 53 cases, 37 (70%) were caused by mediastinal tumors, eight (15%) were caused by benign granuloma, and four (7.5%) by
congenital anomalies of the cardiovascular system. Two-thirds of the tumors causing SVCS in childhood are lymphomas. 26,27 Of 16 children reported from St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital with SVCS at presentation, eight were diagnosed with NHL, four had acute lymphoblastic leukemia, two had Hodgkin's disease, one had
neuroblastoma, and one had a yolk sac tumor. 22 Most children who developed SVCS late in the course of their malignancy had recurrent solid tumors. 28 Issa et al.27
reported that mediastinal fibrosis secondary to histoplasmosis caused SVCS in 7 (5%) of the 150 patients reviewed.

DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
SVCS has long been considered to be a potentially life-threatening medical emergency. 5,23,29 It was common practice to immediately apply radiation therapy with initial
high-dose fractions, sometimes even before the histologic diagnosis of the primary lesion was established. 23,29,30 Diagnostic procedures, such as bronchoscopy,
mediastinoscopy, thoracotomy, or supraclavicular lymph node biopsy, were often avoided because they were considered to be hazardous in the presence of SVCS. 5,23
However, the safety of these invasive procedures in patients with SVCS has markedly improved, and the modern treatment of SVCS has become disease-specific
from the outset.4,31,32 Temporizing emergency mediastinal irradiation before biopsy is rarely used because it may preclude proper interpretation of the specimen in
almost one-half of patients. 33
The clinical identification of SVCS is simple because the symptoms and signs are typical and unmistakable. The chest film shows a mass in most patients. Only 16%
of the patients studied by Parish had normal chest films. 10 The most common radiographic abnormalities are superior mediastinal widening and pleural effusion ( Table
51.1-4). Computed tomography (CT) provides more detailed information about the SVC, its tributaries, and other critical structures, such as the bronchi and the cord. 34
The additional information is necessary because the involvement of these structures requires prompt action for relief of pressure. CT phlebography provides excellent
imaging information on the site and extent of obstruction and the status of collaterals. 35 Helical CT phlebography replaced the combination of CT and digital
phlebography that was advocated in the past. 36 The role of magnetic resonance imaging has been insufficiently investigated but appears promising, especially
because this modality is noninvasive. 37

TABLE 51.1-4. Chest Radiographic Findings for 86 Patients with Superior Vena Cava Syndrome

Contrast venography provides important information for determining if the vena cava is completely obstructed or remains patent and extrinsically compressed. 31,38
Dyet and Moghissi39 demonstrated by venography that 41% of patients with SVCS have a patent SVC that is displaced or involved but not obstructed by a tumor.
Another 19% have SVC obstruction below the azygos vein, for which collateral venous compression should be adequate. Venography is valuable if surgical bypass is
considered for the obstructed vena cava. 40 Lokich and Goodman 23 stated that venograms are relatively contraindicated because the interruption of the integrity of the
vessel wall, in the presence of increased intraluminal pressures, may result in excessive bleeding from the puncture site. However, no evidence of this complication
has been reported. Although a venography can confirm the clinical diagnosis and outline the anatomy, priority should still be given to procedures that help establish
the histologic diagnosis. Radionuclide technetium (Tc) 99m venography is an alternative, minimally invasive method of imaging the venous system. 41, 42 and 43 Although
images that are obtained by this method are not as well defined as those achieved with contrast venography, they demonstrate patency and flow patterns. Collateral
circulation can be evaluated in a general manner and quantified to some degree by radionuclide venography. Gallium single photon emission CT may be of value in
selected cases.44
In 58% of 107 patients reported by Schraufnagel et al., 4 the SVCS developed before the primary diagnosis was established. The diagnostic procedures used in
different studies are summarized in Table 51.1-5. Sputum cytology established the diagnosis for almost one-half of patients. Cytologic diagnosis is as accurate as
tissue diagnosis in small cell carcinoma. 45 Bronchoscopy supplies the malignant cells for cytologic evaluation in most cases of small cell disease. 46 In the presence of
pleural effusion, thoracocentesis established the diagnosis of malignancy in 71% of patients. Biopsy of a supraclavicular node, especially if there was a suspicious
palpatory finding, was rewarding in two-thirds of the reported attempts. SCLC and NHL often involve the bone marrow. A biopsy of the bone marrow may provide the
diagnosis and stage for these patients. Mediastinoscopy has a very high success rate for providing a diagnosis, and a complication rate of approximately 5%. 47
Reports by Jahangiri and Goldstraw 48 (34 patients) and Mineo et al. 47 (80 patients), on using mediastinoscopy for patients with SVCS whose histologic diagnosis
could not be established with less invasive techniques, confirmed the safety and high diagnostic yield of mediastinoscopy. No perioperative mortality was recorded
and the diagnosis yield was excellent.

TABLE 51.1-5. Positive Yield of Diagnostic Procedures for Patients with Superior Vena Cava Syndrome

Percutaneous transthoracic CT-guided fine-needle biopsy is emerging as an effective and safe alternative to an open biopsy or mediastinoscopy. 49,50 Successful
diagnostic transluminal atherectomy also has been reported. 51 A thoracotomy is diagnostic if all other procedures have failed.
Ahmann31 examined the traditional opinion that diagnostic procedures carry with them significant hazard, primarily excessive bleeding. 23,29 He reviewed 843 invasive
and semiinvasive diagnostic procedures and found that only ten reported complications, none of them fatal. Ahmann 31 and others12,32 found minimal evidence to
suggest that diagnostic procedures such as venographies, thoracotomies, bronchoscopies, mediastinoscopies, and lymph node biopsies carry an excessive risk in
patients with SVCS. In 163 patients treated at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center for anterior mediastinal mass, 44 underwent general anesthesia. There were
no deaths and only four patients had prolonged intubation, demonstrating the low risk of modern anesthesia in thoracic patients. 52

MANAGEMENT
The goals of treatment of SVCS are to relieve symptoms and to attempt the cure of the primary malignant process. SCLC, NHL, and germ cell tumors constitute
almost one-half of the malignant causes of SVCS. These disorders are potentially curable, even in the presence of SVCS. The treatment of SVCS should be selected
according to the histologic disorder and stage of the primary process. The prognosis of patients with SVCS strongly correlates with the prognosis of the underlying
disease.
When the therapeutic goal is only palliation of SVCS, or when urgent treatment of the venous obstruction is required, direct opening of the occlusion should be
considered. The newer techniques of endovascular stenting and angioplasty with possible thrombolysis should provide prompt relief of symptoms before more specific
cancer therapy.3
SMALL CELL LUNG CANCER
Chemotherapy alone or in combination with thoracic irradiation therapy is the standard treatment for SCLC. 53 Both chemotherapy and radiotherapy as initial
treatments are effective in rapidly improving the symptoms of SVCS. 19 In an analysis of 50 patients with SCLC who presented with SVCS, investigators from Ontario,
Canada recorded a response rate to chemotherapy of 93% and a similar response to mediastinal irradiation of 94%. 19 In this series, 70% of patients remained
SVCS-free before death. It is of interest that, when the total treatment of SCLC included both chemotherapy and radiation, the risk of SVCS recurrence was
significantly lower than when the treatment was chemotherapy alone. 19 A small randomized trial, however, could not show that the addition of mediastinal radiation
after chemotherapy in patients with SCLC and SVCS increased the protection from local recurrence or improved the survival rate. 16
Among 643 patients with SCLC, Sculier et al. 15 identified 55 patients (8.5%) with SVCS. One-half of patients developed the manifestations of SVCS before the
histologic diagnosis was established. In the other patients, the syndrome developed after the pathologic diagnosis of SCLC was made, but before a specific treatment
was started. Symptomatic relief of SVCS was obtained in 35 of 48 patients (73%) initially treated with chemotherapy and in three of seven patients (43%) who were
initially treated with radiation. Relief of SVCS occurred within 7 to 10 days after initiation of therapy. In SCLC patients with recurrent or persistent SVCS after initial
chemotherapy, the obstruction responded in five of seven patients (71%) who received additional chemotherapy and in 25 of 32 patients (78%) who received
radiotherapy. 19 These data support retreatment of SVCS for palliation of symptoms.
In some series of SCLC, SVCS was a favorable prognostic sign, 15,16,18 whereas its presence did not affect survival in other reports. 14,17 A study of 408 patients with
SCLC by Wurschmidt et al. 18 showed that the presence of SVCS independently predicted for better survival. Other independent predictors for better survival were
stage and performance status. 18 The reason for the possible association of SVCS with better prognosis remains obscure. It is of interest to note that some
researchers found a higher incidence of brain metastases at the time of diagnosis in SCLC patients with SVCS compared to patients without SVCS. 17,18,53
Although randomized trials of the contribution of thoracic irradiation to chemotherapy have not consistently demonstrated an advantage to the combined modality
approach, metaanalysis of these studies showed a small but significant improvement in local control and survival of patients with limited disease with the addition of
radiotherapy. 54,55 The optimal sequence of the two modalities, and the dose and fractionation of radiotherapy, have not been fully established yet. 56 However, the use
of combination chemotherapy as the initial modality, with subsequent rapid shrinkage of the tumor, may eliminate the necessity of irradiating a large volume of lung
tissue. When chemotherapy is administered, the arm veins should be avoided. Veins of the lower extremities provide an alternative simple venous access.
NON-HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA

The most extensive experience in treating SVCS secondary to NHL is reported from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. 20 Twenty-two patients with diffuse large cell
lymphoma and eight patients with lymphoblastic lymphoma were evaluated for results of treatment. The patients were treated with chemotherapy alone, chemotherapy
combined with irradiation, or radiotherapy alone. All patients achieved complete relief of SVCS symptoms within 2 weeks of the onset of any type of treatment. No
treatment modality appeared to be superior in achieving clinical improvement. The presence of dysphagia, hoarseness, or stridor was a major adverse prognostic
factor for patients with lymphoma presenting with SVCS. Eighteen of 22 patients (81%) with large cell lymphoma achieved complete response. Relapse occurred in all
six patients treated with irradiation alone, in four of seven patients treated with chemotherapy alone, and in five of nine patients treated with chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. The median survival rate was 21 months. All eight patients with lymphoblastic lymphoma achieved complete response. Six relapses occurred in this
group, and all were in sites not initially involved. Median survival was 19 months.
From these results, the researchers concluded that SVCS secondary to lymphoma is rarely an emergency that requires treatment before a histologic diagnosis is
made. They recommended that the choice of treatment should be based on the histologic diagnosis and that the patients should undergo, if possible, a complete
staging workup before therapy. However, lymphangiography should be avoided to prevent embolization of contrast material that could result in respiratory failure.
They advocated chemotherapy as the treatment of choice, because it provides both local and systemic therapeutic activity. They suggested that local consolidation
with radiation therapy may be beneficial in patients with large cell lymphoma with mediastinal masses larger than 10 cm.
A similarly favorable experience in children with T-cell lymphoma or leukemia (nine patients) and Hodgkin's disease (two patients) presenting with SVCS was reported
from Israel.57 Tissue diagnosis was obtained before specific therapy in all children; SVCS responded to chemotherapy within 2 to 10 days, and the overall 3-year
disease-free survival rate was 78%.
NONMALIGNANT CAUSES
Patients with nonmalignant causes of SVCS differ significantly from patients with malignant disease. If the cause is not malignant, the patients often have symptoms
long before they seek medical advice; it takes more time to establish the diagnosis; and their survival is markedly longer. 4 Schraufnagel et al. 4 reported that the
average survival rate was 9 years if the primary process was benign, compared with an average survival of 5 months for patients with lung cancer. Mahajan et al. 58
reviewed the literature of benign SVCS and reported 16 new cases. Twelve (75%) of these 16 patients had a mediastinal granuloma that was attributed to
histoplasmosis. Most patients had an insidious onset of SVCS and were relatively young. Ten patients who were available for a follow-up of 1 to 11 years were all
doing well at the time of the report. It was suggested that the good prognosis of patients with benign SVCS caused by fibrosing mediastinitis does not provide a role
for SVC bypass surgery.58,59 However, Nieto and Doty38 advocated surgery for SVCS caused by benign disorders if the syndrome develops suddenly, progresses, or
persists after 6 to 12 months of observation for possible collateral development. 38 In patients whose histoplasmosis complement fixation titers suggest active disease,
ketoconazole treatment may prevent recurrent SVCS. 60
CATHETER-INDUCED OBSTRUCTION
In catheter-induced SVCS, the mechanism of obstruction is usually thrombosis. Streptokinase, urokinase, or recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator may
cause lysis of the thrombus early in its formation. 24,61, 62, 63 and 64 Heparin and oral anticoagulants may reduce the extent of the thrombus and prevent its progression.
Removal of the catheter, if possible, is another option and should be combined with anticoagulation to avoid embolization. In patients for whom electrodes of a
pacemaker must be changed, the broken wire should be removed to prevent the risk of developing SVCS. 24,61,65 Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty, with or
without thrombolytic therapy, and stent insertion have been successfully used to open catheter-induced SVC obstructions. 62,66, 67, 68 and 69

TREATMENT
RADIATION THERAPY
In patients with SVCS as a result of non-SCLC, radiotherapy has long been the primary treatment. The likelihood of relieving the symptoms and signs of SVCS is
high,5,9 but the overall prognosis for these patients is poor. 4,5,9,25 In the series of Armstrong et al., 9 the 1-year survival for these patients was 17%, and the survival at 2
years declined to 2%. More recently, the use of percutaneous metal stent insertion to improve blood flow through the SVC has been introduced as an alternative to
palliative radiation therapy in malignant SVCS. 3,70
Radiotherapy is an optional treatment for most patients with SVCS. 23,29,30 It is also used as an effective initial treatment if a histologic diagnosis cannot be established
and the clinical status of the patient is deteriorating. However, some reviews suggest that SVC obstruction alone rarely represents an absolute emergency that
requires radiotherapy without a specific diagnosis, and endovascular stenting may be used as an alternative to radiotherapy for obtaining immediate relief of the
obstruction. 3,12,31,32,70 Yet, SVCS may be the earliest manifestation of invasive involvement of additional critical structures in the thorax ( Table 51.1-6), such as the
bronchi. Under such circumstances, prompt treatment with irradiation may be required without any delay.

TABLE 51.1-6. Complications of Malignant Invasion Associated with Superior Vena Cava Syndrome

The fractionation schedule of radiation that has been recommended includes two to four large initial fractions of 3 to 4 cGy, followed by conventional fractionation to a
total dose of 30 to 50 cGy. 5,23,29 However, no data clearly support a particular fractionation scheme. 19 In one study, patients treated with initial high-dose fractions
showed a slightly faster symptomatic improvement than patients receiving conventional-dose radiation. 9 Improvement within 2 weeks or less was observed in 70% of
those treated with initial high-dose fractions and in 56% of patients receiving conventional-dose therapy. This difference was not statistically significant.
A radiotherapy study evaluated the efficacy of treating patients with SVCS with a short course of hypofractionated irradiation. 71 The study compared a regimen of 8 Gy
per fraction once a week to a total dose of 24 Gy to a program of delivering only two fractions of 8 Gy (total of 16 Gy) within 1 week. Transient dysphagia was the
main side effect in almost one-half of patients in both programs. The 24-Gy regimen resulted in a complete resolution of symptoms in 56% of patients and a partial
response in another 40%. The 16-Gy regimen yielded a complete response in only 28% of patients. The mean time for SVCS recurrence and the median overall
survival rate were longer in the higher-dose regimen (6 months and 9 months, respectively) compared to the low-dose regimen (3 months and 3 months, respectively).
Serial venograms and autopsies 31 suggest that the symptomatic improvement achieved by radiotherapy is not always due to improvement of flow through the SVC, but
it is probably also a result of the development of collaterals after the pressure in the mediastinum is eased.
The field of radiation for SVCS induced by lung cancer should encompass the gross tumors with appropriate margins, and mediastinal, hilar, and supraclavicular
lymph nodes. In Armstrong et al.'s series, 9 supraclavicular failures occurred in 8 of 91 patients (9%) receiving radiation therapy to the supraclavicular fossae and in

two of six patients (33%) not receiving therapy to these lymph nodes. 9
ENDOVASCULAR STENTING AND ANGIOPLASTY
Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty using the balloon technique, insertion of expandable wire stents, or both, has been successfully used to open and maintain the
patency of SVC obstruction resulting from malignant and benign causes. 3,69,70,72
Thrombolysis is often an integral part of the endovascular management of SVCS because thrombosis is often a critical component of the obstruction and lysis is
necessary to allow the passage of the wire. Balloon dilatation (angioplasty) may also be used before stenting. Most reports have emphasized the use of combination
endovascular therapy—thrombolysis, angioplasty, and stent therapy. 3
The experience with stenting has been growing rapidly. Most experience has been with three stents: the Gianturco Z-stent, the Wallstent, and the Palmaz stent. The
Wallstent is the most commonly used device. 3 It is self-expanding and built of woven stainless steel wire. Its tight weave deters tumor ingrowth.
Total occlusion of the SVC is not a contraindication to stent therapy, and a success rate of 85% in total occlusion situations has been reported. 73 The largest
experience in using stents to open malignant obstruction of the SVC was reported by Nicholson et al. in Great Britian. 70 The British team used Wallstents in 75
patients and obtained improvement of obstruction in all patients; 90% remained free of symptoms until death. This study retrospectively compared stent therapy with
radiation therapy and found that only 12% of patients treated with radiation remained free of SVCS until death. However, long-term experience in maintaining patency
after stent therapy in patients with SVCS from benign causes who are expected to have long survival, is still limited. 69
Complication rates for endovascular therapy have ranged from 0% to 50% and include bleeding, stent migration, stent occlusion, and pulmonary embolus. 3 Most
complications can be successfully treated with percutaneous methods.
SURGERY
The experience with successful direct bypass graft for SVC obstruction is limited. It was recommended that autologous grafts of almost the same size as the SVC
should be used. 74 Doty et al. 75 used a composite spiral graft, which was constructed from the patient's saphenous vein. They reported 23 years of experience with this
procedure in 16 patients with benign obstruction of SVC; 14 patients maintained patency and 15 were relieved of symptoms of SVCS. Avashti and Moghissi 76 reported
successful bypasses of obstructed SVCs using Dacron protheses. Magnan and associates 77 used an expanded polytetrafluoroethylene prosthesis to reconstruct the
SVC in nine patients with malignancy-induced SVCS and in one patient with chronic mediastinitis. In all, patients' symptoms disappeared promptly after the operation,
the grafts remained open, and survival rates at 1, 2, and 5 years were 70%, 25%, and 12.5%, respectively. 77
The preferred bypass route is between an innominate or jugular vein on the left side and the right atrial appendage, using an end-to-end anastomosis. 45 Piccione et
al.78 used the autologous pericardium to reconstruct the SVC after resection for malignant obstruction. In patients with malignancy-induced SVCS, surgical
intervention should be considered only after other therapeutic maneuvers with irradiation and chemotherapy have been exhausted. Most patients with SVCS of benign
origin have long survivals without surgical intervention. 58,59 However, if the process progresses rapidly or if there is arterosternal goiter or aortic aneurysm, surgical
intervention may relieve the obstruction.
THROMBOLYTIC THERAPY
Thrombolysis is an important component of comprehensive endovascular therapy. 3 Successful experience with thrombolytic agents was also obtained in the treatment
of catheter-induced SVCS. 24,64,79 A review of the response of SVCS to thrombolytic therapy from the Cleveland Clinic 64,80 showed that in 8 of 11 patients (73%) with a
central venous catheter, lysed after thrombolytic therapy compared with only one of five patients who responded to thrombolytic therapy in the absence of a central
catheter. The higher yield of thrombolytic therapy in patients with catheters is probably related to the mechanism of obstruction, the ability to deliver the agent directly
to the thrombus, and to earlier recognition of SVCS in patients with malfunctioning catheters. In the Cleveland Clinic experience, 64 urokinase was more effective than
streptokinase, and a delay administering therapy beyond 5 days of symptom onset was associated with a treatment failure. Favorable experience with recombinant
tissue-type plasminogen activator as a thrombolytic agent for catheter-induced SVCS has been reported. 62,63
GENERAL MEASURES
Medical measures other than specific chemotherapy may be beneficial in temporarily relieving the symptoms of SVCS. Bed rest with the head elevated and oxygen
administration can reduce the cardiac output and venous pressure. Diuretic therapy and a reduced-salt diet to reduce edema may have an immediate palliative effect,
but the risk of thrombosis enhanced by dehydration should not be ignored. Steroids are commonly used, but their effectiveness has never been properly evaluated.
They may improve obstruction by decreasing a possible inflammatory reaction associated with tumor or with irradiation. However, Green and colleagues 81
demonstrated the lack of inflammatory reaction and edema after radiotherapy for experimental SVCS, but documentation in a controlled fashion is lacking.
Thrombolytic therapy with urokinase, streptokinase, and recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator was effective in SVCS induced by indwelling
catheters.62,64,79,80

RECOMMENDATIONS
In patients without a clear cause of SVCS, an efficient diagnostic effort should be attempted before any oncologic treatment. However, percutaneous endovascular
intervention should be considered, because it relieves symptoms without masking the diagnosis.
Three deep-cough sputum specimens should be obtained for cytologic analysis. A positive cytologic evaluation provides reliable pathologic information, particularly in
the diagnosis of SCLC.45 If there is pleural effusion, thoracocentesis should be performed and the centrifuge-prepared specimen examined for the presence of
malignant cells. If a suspicious lymph node is palpable, particularly in the supraclavicular area, a needle or open biopsy should be the next diagnostic step. In the
absence of positive sputum results, pleural effusion, or accessible suspicious lymph node analysis, a bronchoscopy should be performed, and brushing, washing, and
biopsy samples should be obtained for cytologic and histologic analysis. If these efforts do not provide the histologic diagnosis of the primary process, percutaneous
transthoracic fine-needle biopsy under CT or fluoroscopic guidance is safe and highly effective. 49,51 In the rare patient for whom less-invasive procedures have failed
to establish the diagnosis, the location of the suspicious lesion in the chest and the experience of the surgical team should determine whether mediastinoscopy or
thoracotomy is performed.
During the diagnostic process, the patient can benefit from bed rest with the head elevated and with oxygen administration. Some clinicians advocate the use of
diuretics and steroids (6 to 10 mg of dexamethasone given orally or intravenously every 6 hours) as a temporary palliative measure if the patient is uncomfortably
symptomatic. Anticoagulation is of no proven benefit and may interfere with diagnostic procedures. After the cause of SVCS has been established, treatment of the
primary process should promptly follow. Combination chemotherapy with an appropriate regimen is the treatment of choice for SCLC and NHL. Radiation therapy of
the lesion and adjacent nodal areas may enhance control after initial response to chemotherapy. Non-SCLC causing SVCS is best treated with radiation therapy or
endovascular stent insertion or both. The incorporation of CT scan information into a carefully designed treatment plan may enable the administration of a total
radiation dose of more than 5000 cGy, which may provide long-term local control for some patients. Most patients with nonmalignant causes for SVCS have an
indolent course and a good prognosis. Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty or stent insertion should be considered an effective alternative to surgery. However, the
long-term maintenance of patency with stent insertion is still unknown. Surgery is indicated only when the process is rapidly progressing or caused by a retrosternal
goiter or an aortic aneurysm. If SVCS is induced by a catheter, the catheter should be removed if possible. Heparin should be administered during the removal of the
catheter to prevent embolization. In catheter-induced SVCS, urokinase, streptokinase, or recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator are of value if used early in
the thrombotic process.60, 61 and 62,80
The clinical course of SVCS rarely represents an absolute emergency. In these situations, the bronchus is likely to be obstructed by the same basic process, and
irradiation may have to be started immediately, even before the histologic diagnosis is established.

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Hunter W. The history of an aneurysm of the aorta, with some remarks on aneurysms in general. Med Observ Inq 1757;1:323.
2. Schechter MM. The superior vena cava syndrome. Am J Med Sci 1954;227:46.
3. Schindler N, Vogelzang RL. Superior vena cava syndrome. Experience with endovascular stents and surgical therapy. Surg Clin North Am 1999;79:683.
4. Schraufnagel DE, Hill R, Leech JA, Pare JAP. Superior vena caval obstruction. Is it an emergency? Am J Med 1981;70:1169.
5. Davenport D, Ferree C, Blake D, Raben M. Radiation therapy in the treatment of superior vena caval obstruction. Cancer 1978;42:2600.
6. Rubin P, Hicks GL. Biassociation of superior vena caval obstruction and spinal-cord compression. N Y State J Med 1973;73:2176.
7. Carlson HA. Obstruction of the superior vena cava: an experimental study. Arch Surg 1934;29:669.
8. Roswit B, Kaplan G, Jacobson HG. The superior vena cava syndrome in bronchogenic carcinoma. Radiology 1953;61:722.
9. Armstrong BA, Perez CA, Simpson JR, Hederman MA. Role of irradiation in the management of superior vena cava syndrome. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:531.
10. Parish JM, Marschke RF, Dines DE, Lee RE. Etiologic considerations in superior vena cava syndrome. Mayo Clin Proc 1981;56:407.
11. Bell DR, Woods RL, Levi JA. Superior vena caval obstruction: a 10-year experience. Med J Aust 1986;145:566.
12. Yellin A, Rosen A, Reichert N, Lieberman Y. Superior vena cava syndrome. The myththe facts. Am Rev Respir Dis 1990;141:1114.
13. Salsali M, Cliffton EE. Superior vena caval obstruction in carcinoma of lung. N Y State J Med 1969;69:2875.
14. Dombernowsky P, Hansen HH. Combination chemotherapy in the management of superior vena caval obstruction in small-cell anaplastic of the lung. Acta Med Scand 1978;204:513.
15. Sculier JP, Evans WK, Feld R, et al. Superior vena caval obstruction in small cell lung cancer. Cancer 1986;57:847.
16. Spiro SG, Shah S, Harper PG, et al. Treatment of obstruction of the superior vena cava by combination chemotherapy with and without irradiation in small-cell carcinoma of the bronchus.
Thorax 1983;38:501.
17. Urban T, Lebeau B, Chastang C, et al. Superior vena cava syndrome in small-cell lung cancer. Arch Intern Med 1993;153:384.
18. Wurschmidt F, Bunemann H, Heilmann HP. Small cell lung cancer with and without superior vena cava syndrome: a multivariate analysis of prognostic factors in 408 cases. Int J Rad Oncol
Biol Phys 1995;33:77.
19. Chan RH, Dar AR, Yu E, et al. Superior vena cava obstruction in small-cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:513.
20. Perez-Soler R, McLaughlin P, Velasquez WS, et al. Clinical features and results of management of superior vena cava syndrome secondary to lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:260.
21. Lazzarino M, Orlandi E, Paulli M, et al. Primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma with sclerosis: an aggressive tumor with distinctive clinical and pathologic features. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2306.
22. Chen JC, Bongard F, Klein SR. A contemporary perspective on superior vena cava syndrome. Am J Surg 1990;97:1005.
23. Lokich JJ, Goodman R. Superior vena cava syndrome: clinical management. JAMA 1975;231:58.
24. Sculier JP, Feld R. Superior vena cava obstruction system: recommendation for management. Cancer Treat Rev 1985;12:209.
25. Bertrand M, Presant CA, Klein L, Scott E. Iatrogenic superior vena cava syndrome. A new entity. Cancer 1984;54:376.
26. Janin Y, Becker J, Wise L, et al. Superior vena cava syndrome in childhood and adolescence: a review of the literature and report of three cases. J Pediatr Surg 1982;17:290.
27. Issa PY, Brihi ER, Janin Y, Slim MS. Superior vena cava syndrome in childhood: report of ten cases and review of the literature. Pediatrics 1983;71:337.
28. Ingram L, Rivera GK, Shapiro DN. Superior vena cava syndrome associated with childhood malignancy: analysis of 24 cases. Med Pediatr Oncol 1990;18:476.
29. Perez CA, Presant CA, Van Amburg AL III. Management of superior vena cava syndrome. Semin Oncol 1978;5:123.
30. Scarantino C, Salazar OM, Rubin R, et al. The optimum radiation schedule in the treatment of superior vena caval obstruction: importance of 99m Tc scintinangiograms. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1979;5:1987.
31. Ahmann FR. A reassessment of the clinical implications of the superior vena cava syndrome. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:961.
32. Shimm DS, Lugue GL, Tigsby LC. Evaluating the superior vena cava syndrome. JAMA 1981;245:951.
33. Loeffler JS, Leopold KA, Recht A, et al. Emergency prebiopsy radiation for mediastinal masses: impact on subsequent pathologic diagnosis and outcome. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:716.
34. Yedlicka JW, Schultz K, Moncada R, Flisak M. CT findings in superior vena cava obstruction. Semin Roentgenol 1989;24:84.
35. Qanadli SD, El Hajjam M, Bruckert F, et al. Helical CT phlebography of the superior vena cava: diagnosis and evaluation of venous obstruction. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1999;172:1327.
36. Moncada R, Cardella R, Demos TC, et al. Evaluation of superior vena cava syndrome by axial CT and CT phlebography. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1984;143:731.
37. Hansen ME, Spritzer CE, Sostman HD. Assessing the patency of mediastinal and thoracic inlet veins: value of MR imaging. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1990;155:1177.
38. Nieto AF, Doty DB. Superior vena cava obstruction: clinical syndrome, etiology and treatment. Curr Prob Cancer 1986;10:442.
39. Dyet JF, Moghissi K. Role of venography in assessing patients with superior vena cava obstruction caused by bronchial carcinoma for bypass operations. Thorax 1980;35:628.
40. Stanford W, Jolles H, Ell S, Chiu LC. Superior vena cava obstruction: a venographic classification. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1987;148:259.
41. Son YH, Wetzel RA, Wilson WA. 99mTc pertechnetate scintiphotography as diagnostic and followup aids in major vascular obstruction due to malignant neoplasm. Radiology 1968;91:349.
42. Van Houtte P, Fruhling J. Radionuclide venography in the evaluation of superior vena cava syndrome. Clin Nucl Med 1981;6:177.
43. Conte FA, Orzel JA. Superior vena cava syndrome and bilateral subclavian vein thrombosis: CT and radionuclide venography correlation. Clin Nucl Med 1986;11:698.
44. Swayne LC, Kaplan IL. Gallium SPECT detection of neoplastic intravascular obstruction of superior vena cava. Clin Nucl Med 1989;14:823.
45. Yesner R, Gersti B, Auerbach O. Application of the World Health Organization classification of lung carcinoma to biopsy material. Ann Thorac Surg 1965;1:33.
46. Ihde DC, Cohen MH, Bernath AM, et al. Serial fiberoptic bronchoscopy during chemotherapy of small cell carcinoma of the lung. Chest 1978;74:531.
47. Mineo TC, Ambrogi V, Nofroni I, et al. Mediastinoscopy in superior vena cava obstruction: analysis of 80 consecutive patients. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;68:223.
48. Jahangiri M, Goldstraw P. The role of mediastinoscopy in superior vena caval obstruction. Ann Thorac Surg 1995;59:453.
49. Cosmos L, Haponik EF, Dariak JJ, Summer WR. Neoplastic superior vena caval obstruction: diagnosis with percutaneous needle aspiration. Am J Med Sci 1987;293:99.
50. Reyes CV, Thompson KS, Massarani-Wafai R, et al. Utilization of fine-needle aspiration cytology in the diagnosis of neoplastic superior vena caval syndrome. Diagn Cytopathol 1998;19:84.
51. Dake MD, Zemel G, Dolmatch BL, Katzen BT. The cause of superior vena cava syndrome diagnosis with percutaneous atherectomy. Radiology 1990;174:957.
52. Ferrari LR, Bedford RF. General anesthesia prior to the treatment of anterior mediastinal masses in pediatric cancer patients. Anesthesiology 1990;72:991.
53. Seifter EJ, Ihde DC. Therapy of small cell lung cancer: a perspective on two decades of clinical research. Semin Oncol 1988;15:278.
54. Warde P, Payne D. Does thoracic irradiation improve survival and local control in limited stage small cell carcinoma of the lung? A meta-analysis. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:890.
55. Pignon JP, Arriagada R, Ihde DC, et al. A meta-analysis of thoracic radiotherapy for small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med 1992;327:1618.
56. Murray N, Coy P, Pater JL, et al. Importance of timing for thoracic irradiation in the combined modality treatment of limited-stage small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:336.
57. Yellin A, Mandel M, Rechavi G, et al. Superior vena cava syndrome associated with lymphoma. Am J Dis Child 1992;146:1060.
58. Mahajan V, Strimlan V, Van Ordstrand HS, Loop FD. Benign superior cava syndrome. Chest 1975;68:32.
59. Effler DB, Groves LK. Superior vena caval obstruction. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1962;43:574.
60. Urshel HC Jr, Razzuk MA, Netto GJ, Disiere J, Chung SY. Sclerosing mediastinitis: improved management with histoplasmosis titer and ketoconazole. Ann Thorac Surg 1990;50:215.
61. Goudevonos JA, Reid PG, Adams PC, Holden MP, Williams DO. Pacemaker-induced superior vena cava syndrome: report of four cases and review of the literature. PACE 1989;12:1890.
62. Fine DG, Shepherd RF, Welch TJ. Thrombolytic therapy for superior vena cava syndrome [Letter]. Lancet 1989;1:1200.
63. Greenberg S, Kosinski R, Daniels J. Treatment of superior vena cava thrombosis with recombinant tissue type plasminogen activator. Chest 1991;99:1298.
64. Gray BH, Olin JW, Grador RA, et al. Safety and efficacy of thrombolytic therapy for superior vena cava syndrome. Chest 1991;99:54.
65. Blackburn T, Dunn M. Pacemaker-induced superior vena cava syndrome: consideration of management. Am Heart J 1988;116:893.
66. Grace AA, Sutters M, Schofield PM. Balloon dilation of pacemaker-induced stenosis of the superior vena cava. Br Heart J 1991;65:225.
67. Montgomery JH, D'Souza VJ, Dyer RB, et al. Non-surgical treatment of the superior vena cava syndrome. Am J Cardiol 1985;56:829.
68. Sunder SK, Ekong EA, Sivalingam K, Kumar A. Superior vena cava thrombosis due to pacing electrodes: successful treatment with combined thrombolysis and angioplasty. Am Heart J
1992;123:790.
69. Kee ST, Kinoshita L, Razavi MK, et al. Superior vena cava syndrome: treatment with catheter-directed thrombolysis and endovascular stent placement. Radiology 1998;206:187.
70. Nicholson AA, Ettles DF, Arnold A, et al. Treatment of malignant superior vena cava obstruction: metal stents or radiation therapy. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1997;8:781.
71. Rodrigues CI, Njo KH, Karim ABMF. Hypofractionated radiation therapy in the treatment of superior vena cava syndrome. Lung Cancer 1993;10:221.
72. Shah R, Sabanathan S, Lowe RA, et al. Stenting in malignant obstruction of superior vena cava. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1996;112:335.
73. Crowe MT, Davies CH, Gaines PA, et al. Percutaneous management of superior vena cava occlusions. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 1995;18:367.
74. Scherck JP, Kerstein MD, Stansel HC. The current status of vena caval replacement. Surgery 1974;76:209.
75. Doty JR, Flores JH, Doty DB. Superior vena cava obstruction: bypass using spiral vein graft. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;67:1111.
76. Avashti RB, Moghissi K. Malignant obstruction of the superior vena cava and its palliation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1977;74:244.
77. Magnan PE, Thomas P, Giudicelli R, Fuentes P, Branchereau A. Surgical reconstruction of the superior vena cava. Cardiovasc Surg 1994;2:598.
78. Piccione W Jr, Faber LP, Warren WH. Superior vena caval reconstruction using autologous pericardium. Ann Thorac Surg 1990;50:417.
79. Meister FL, McLaughlin TF, Tenney RD, Sholkoff SD. Urokinase. A cost-effective alternative treatment of superior vena cava thrombosis and obstruction. Arch Intern Med 1989;149:1209.
80. Comerota AJ. Safety and efficacy of thrombolytic therapy for superior vena caval syndrome. Chest 1991;99:3.
81. Green J, Rubin P, Holzwasser G. The experimental production of superior vena cava obstruction. Radiology 1963;81:406.

SECTION 51.2 Spinal Cord Compression
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 51.2
Spinal Cord Compression
BRIAN G. FULLER
JOHN D. HEISS
EDWARD H. OLDFIELD
Introduction
Epidemiology
Pathophysiology
Clinical Presentation
Diagnostic Evaluation
Treatment
Corticosteroids
Surgery
Radiation Therapy
Chemotherapy
Pediatric Spinal Cord Compression
Conclusion
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Spinal cord compression from metastatic cancer remains an important source of morbidity despite the fact that with early diagnosis, treatment is effective in 90% of
patients. 1 Technical improvements in spinal imaging, radiation therapy, and surgery have allowed treatment of spinal cord compression to be dispensed with greater
precision. However, the most important weapon against the devastation of paraplegia or sphincter dysfunction is a heightened awareness of possible spinal cord
compression in the cancer patient and early intervention.
Despite its common occurrence, there have been few prospective studies 1,2,3 and 4 and randomized trials have been exceedingly rare. 5,6 and 7 At the dawn of the new
millennium, treatment recommendations are based largely on empiric experiences described in retrospective reports. However, the pathophysiology of cord
compression and the factors that predict treatment outcome are well known.
Malignant spinal cord compression is defined as the compressive indentation, displacement, or encasement of the spinal cord's thecal sac by metastatic or locally
advanced cancer. Compression can occur via posterior extension of a vertebral body mass, resulting in compression of the anterior aspect of the spinal cord, or
through anterior or anterolateral extension of a mass arising from the dorsal elements or invading the vertebral foramen, respectively. Intramedullary spinal cord
metastases produce edema, distortion, and compression of the spinal cord parenchyma, resulting in symptoms and signs that are similar to epidural spinal cord
compression. Virtually any neoplasm capable of metastasis or local invasion can produce malignant spinal cord compression. The response to nonsurgical therapy
and the duration of survival following treatment can vary considerably among the different histologic tumor types. Therapy for the individual patient can be optimized
once the tumor's histologic type is known and the extent, severity, and mechanism of spinal compression are established.
The degree of pretreatment neurologic dysfunction is the strongest predictor of treatment outcome. Ambulation can be preserved in greater than 80% of patients who
are ambulatory at presentation. 1,2,8,9 and 10 Paraplegia, quadriplegia, and loss of bowel or bladder function are potential consequences of cord compression if it is
diagnosed late or left untreated. Once lost, neurologic function cannot be regained in the majority of patients. The diagnosis of cord compression is easy to establish
with contemporary diagnostic evaluations, and with early intervention the results of treatment are good to excellent. Therefore, the key to successful management is a
heightened awareness of signs and symptoms, specifically newly developed back pain or motor dysfunction, leading to early diagnosis and treatment.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
In adults, metastatic spinal cord compression occurs in roughly 3.0% to 7.4% of patients with lung, prostate, and breast cancer, 8 and the overall frequency of
malignant spinal cord compression has been reported to be approximately 5%. 11,12 Spinal cord compression is the second most frequent neurologic complication of
metastatic cancer. 13 It can be identified at autopsy in 5% to 10% of patients dying of cancer. 14,15 Ten percent of adult patients with malignant spinal cord compression
present without a known primary tumor or with cord compression as the initial presentation of a malignancy. 13 Cord compression at initial presentation is more
commonly seen at general hospitals than at regional cancer centers. 16 Tertiary referral centers specializing in cancer may see 50 to 100 cases per annum, although
the true incidence of malignant spinal cord compression is not known. 17 Intramedullary lesions make up only 0.8% to 3.8% of all cases of metastatic spinal cord
compression.18 Second episodes of malignant spinal cord compression occur in 7% to 16% of cases. 19,20
In children, the frequency of metastatic spinal cord compression is approximately 4.0% to 5.5%. 21,22 and 23 In one report roughly 50% of cases presented with cord
compression at the time of initial diagnosis, and 50% developed compression from secondary spinal metastases. 23 The most frequent tumor types producing pediatric
cord compression are neuroblastoma (7.9% to 50%), Ewing's sarcoma (15% to 28.5%), rhabdomyosarcoma (15% to 28%), osteosarcoma (6% to 9%), lymphoma
(6.0% to 7.5%), and leukemia (6%). 21,22,23 and 24 Cord compression has been reported to be more frequent in male than in female children, reflecting the epidemiology
of childhood cancer. 21,23,24

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
In the majority of cases, vertebral body metastases result from the hematogenous dissemination of tumor clonogens that express tropism for the vertebral column
bone marrow. More frequently growing in the well-vascularized marrow space of the posterior vertebral body, spinal metastases can produce cord compression in two
ways. The first results from continued growth and obliteration of the marrow space with expansion into the epidural space, producing impingement on the anterior
thecal sac and its surrounding venous plexus ( Fig. 51.2-1). Alternatively, destruction of cortical bone by tumor can result in vertebral body collapse with anterior
angulation and posterior displacement of bony fragments into the epidural space against the thecal sac and epidural venous plexus. Compression of the cord, its
blood vessels, and nerve roots can also occur from the posterolateral direction via invasion of tumor through the neural foramen. Paraspinous tumors or expanding
paraaortic nodal metastases use this mechanism of compression. Posterior thecal sac compression from metastatic involvement of the neural arch does occur but
with less frequency. Finally, intramedullary metastases that result from hematogenous dissemination produce internal compression of the spinal cord structures and
parenchymal vasculature. The signs and symptoms of intramedullary cord compression are similar to those of external cord compression. However, myelography is
less reliable for detection of intramedullary compression. Patterns of metastatic involvement of the spine are illustrated in Figure 51.2-2 and displayed in Figure
51.2-3, Figure 51.2-4, Figure 51.2-5, and Figure 51.2-6.

FIGURE 51.2-1. An appreciation of the anatomic relationships within the spinal canal is important in understanding the pathophysiology of spinal cord compression.
A: The normal spinal cord structures are shown. Note the relationship of the epidural venous plexus to the vertebral body and bony canal. B: The change in these
relationships produced by a metastatic tumor arising from the vetebral body is illustrated. Note the obliteration of the epidural venous plexus and the compressive
displacement of the spinal cord and its nerve roots. (Courtesy of Howard Bartner and Martha Blalock.)

FIGURE 51.2-2. Metastatic involvement of the spine. Intramedullary metastases reach the cord through hematogenous dissemination and grow within the cord
parenchyma (1). Leptomeningeal metastases involve the meningeal membranes of the subarachnoid space, which are extramedullary and intradural (2). Epidural
metastases usually arise from the highly vascular posterior aspect of the vertebral body and produce compression of the anterior aspect of the spinal cord (3).
Epidural compression can also result from paravertebral tumors that invade the vertebral foramina (4) and, less often, from metastases arising in the epidural space
itself (5). (Adapted from ref. 103.)

FIGURE 51.2-3. This sagittal view of a magnetic resonance image demonstrates an intramedullary metastasis in the lumbar spine from renal cell carcinoma.

FIGURE 51.2-4. This sagittal magnetic resonance image of the lumbar spine demonstrates anterior compression of the cauda equina below the conus medullaris.
Note the pathologic fracture of the L-2 vertebral body and the retropulsed bone fragments compressing the thecal sac.

FIGURE 51.2-5. This axial view from a magnetic resonance image of the thoracic spine demonstrates posterolateral compression of the spinal cord resulting from
invasion of the left neuroforamen.

FIGURE 51.2-6. A sagittal magnetic resonance image of the spine demonstrating posterior compression of the spinal cord from a metastasis arising in the spinous

process. Laminectomy is the most useful approach for tumors arising posterior to the cord.

In an early study of spinal cord compression employing Murphy-Sturm lymphoma in Sprague-Dawley rats, Rubin demonstrated the ability of radiation to produce
neurologic recovery and the absence of significant radiation-induced edema in the treated spinal cord. 25 Usio et al., using a Walker 256 carcinoma cord compression
model in rats, were able to document the early development of white matter necrosis and gliosis with preservation of large blood vessels. 26 Similar findings were
reported by Ikeda et al. using a rabbit model of malignant epidural cord compression. Early pathologic changes included axonal swelling and white matter edema.
Later changes consisted of white matter necrosis with relative sparing of gray matter. Microangiography of the compressed spinal cords revealed preservation of the
anterior and posterior spinal arteries, while the central arteries were deformed and decreased in number. Stenosis and obstruction of the epidural venous plexus was
observed in the earliest stages of neurologic dysfunction. 27
An analysis of spinal cord blood flow in rats with cord compression by Kato et al. revealed three distinct phases in the development of spinal cord compression: (1)
initial circulatory disturbance resulting in white matter edema and neurologic dysfunction secondary to venous outflow obstruction; (2) decreased spinal cord blood
flow resulting from vasogenic edema and mechanical compression of the cord; and (3) rapid loss of spinal cord blood flow in small arterioles and capillaries resulting
in infarction with preservation of large extramedullary nutritional vessels. 28 The validity of this sequence of events was further confirmed by Arbit et al., who found loss
of medullary centrifugal blood vessels at the level of compression, with preservation of radicular and subcommissural vessels. Spongy vacuolization and pallor of the
white matter as well as spinal cord edema were also described. 29
Within the spinal cord itself, existing evidence suggests that the pathophysiology of spinal cord compression is vascular in nature. 26,28,29,30,31,32,33 and 34 This has been
shown repeatedly in animal models and has been corroborated by autopsy findings. 35 Initial extension of tumor into the epidural space results in compression of the
epidural venous plexus, which normally drains blood from the spinal cord. Compression of the venous plexus leads to venous stasis. Relative hypoxia, increased
vascular permeability, and interstitial edema appear to selectively involve the white matter, 27,28 and 29 although increased vascular permeability was observed involving
gray matter in one model.26 Edema in the spinal cord caused by increased vascular permeability impairs spinal cord function, resulting in weakness and sensory
impairment. Interstitial edema increases the pressure within small arterioles early in the evolution of spinal cord compression and therefore retards blood flow. In the
more advanced stages, pressure on small intramedullary arterioles produced by increasing interstitial edema combined with progressive direct physical pressure on
the spinal cord by the expanding mass ultimately leads to arrest of capillary blood flow, resulting in ischemia of white matter. If left untreated, there is infarction of
ischemic white matter and permanent neurologic loss.
Siegal and colleagues have evaluated the roles of cytokines, inflammatory mediators, and neurotransmitters in the pathophysiology of cord compression in a series of
reports.45,46,47,48,49 and 50 Spinal cord injury from compression was associated with increased water content, increased vascular permeability, and increased specific
gravity in the compressed spinal cord as well as increased extravasation of blood cells into the cord parenchyma. 45 Treatment with dexamethasone phosphate was
shown to reduce tissue-specific gravity in the compressed cord and to delay the onset of paralysis. 46,47 Similar results were obtained with indomethacin, which also
decreased the elevated water content and reduced prostaglandin E 2 (PGE2) levels in the compressed segments of the spinal cord. 46,47
Later experiments demonstrated the ability of free dexamethasone to decrease free water content and PGE 2 levels in compressed segments of the spinal cord. 48 The
potential role of glutamate in the production of cytotoxic edema was suggested when it was shown that N-methyl- d-aspartate receptor antagonists reduced the spinal
cord free water. 49 This group also demonstrated that inhibitors of serotonin synthesis could reduce the elevated serotonin levels associated with spinal cord injury.
Serotonin receptor antagonists reduced PGE 2 synthesis, reduced spinal cord vascular permeability, and delayed the onset of paraplegia. 50 These studies form the
basis for development of new pharmacologic approaches to the treatment of cord compression.
The role of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in the pathophysiology of malignant spinal cord compression is being increasingly recognized. In the early
stages of malignant spinal cord compression, venous stasis and relative hypoxia stimulate VEGF production. 44 VEGF increases vascular permeability and vasogenic
edema in the spinal cord in response to transient ischemia 36 and trauma.37,38 The progressive hypoxia, resulting from interstitial edema and decreased microcapillary
perfusion, continues to drive VEGF production. Several observations suggest that the beneficial effects of dexamethasone are at least in part meditated by its effect
on VEGF activity. Dexamethasone down-regulates VEGF gene expression, 39,40 and 41 inhibits VEGF activity, 42 and prevents the VEGF-induced cytoskeletal changes
associated with vascular permeability (i.e., plasmalemmal ruffling and widening of intracellular spaces) in rat brain endothelial cells. 43 A model of the pathophysiology
of malignant spinal cord compression is presented in Figure 51.2-7.

FIGURE 51.2-7. A simplified schematic representation of the pathophysiologic changes leading to neuronal damage from cord compression. Several histologic
studies suggest that the initial pathophysiologic changes resulting in vasogenic edema are confined principally to white matter. 27,28 and 29 PGE2, prostaglandin E 2;
VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.

The importance of the magnitude, rate, and duration of compression in regard to the neurologic outcome was studied in dogs with an epidural inflatable balloon by
Tarlov et al. Paraparesis resulting from rapid compression of the cord could be reversed if decompression occurred within 9 hours. Paraparesis resulting from more
gradual compression over 20 to 48 hours could be successfully reversed by decompression within the next 7 days, emphasizing that neurologic deficits are more
likely to be reversed if compression occurs gradually rather than rapidly. 30,31 and 32 This has also been observed in humans. Rades et al. reported 96 patients treated
with radiotherapy for spinal cord compression who were compared based on the duration of motor symptoms before treatment. Improvement of neurologic function 2
weeks after radiotherapy occurred in a higher percentage (89%) of patient with deficits that developed greater than 14 days before treatment, compared with patients
who developed symptoms less than 14 days before treatment (12%). A separate cohort of patients with severe deterioration of motor function occurring within 48
hours before treatment experienced improvement in only 6% of cases. 51
In summary, spinal cord damage and loss of neurologic function result from venous stasis, spinal cord edema, reduced capillary blood flow, ischemia, and mechanical
compression culminating in infarction. Prostaglandins, cytokines, excitatory neurotransmitters, and inflammatory mediators regulate the sweeping pathophysiologic
changes associated with hypoxia, edema, ischemia, and injury resulting from malignant compression. The rapidity of progression of neurologic symptoms indicates
the severity of spinal cord injury and the likelihood of permanent neurologic loss. Dexamethasone and other antiinflammatory agents can delay the onset of paralysis
and improve symptoms until decompressive measures intervene.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION
The majority of patients who present with spinal cord compression have a known diagnosis of cancer. However, in 8% to 34% of cases it can represent the initial
manifestation of cancer. 52,53 and 54 The frequency of tumor types for over 1000 patients with cord compression from the literature is listed in Table 51.2-1. Spinal cord

compression develops within 3 months of the initial diagnosis of cancer in the majority of cases complicating lung carcinoma, whereas it can develop as long as 24
years after the initial diagnosis of breast cancer. 3,9,52

TABLE 51.2-1. Frequency of Tumor Types Producing Cord Compression

The most frequently involved site is the thoracic spine (59% to 78%), followed by the lumbar spine (16% to 33%) and the cervical spine (4% to 15%) ( Fig. 51.2-8).
Multiple epidural sites of compression can occur in 26% to 49%. 55,56,57,58 and 59 Intramedullary cord compression, accounting for only 1% to 4% of cases, is usually
solitary and is often associated with parenchymal brain metastases. 18,55,60,146

FIGURE 51.2-8. The frequency of involvement in the different regions of the spine is shown.

Pain accompanies malignant spinal cord compression in 70% to 96% of cases. 7,52,53,61,62 It usually precedes the diagnosis of spinal cord compression by days to
months.52,63 The pain may be local, radicular, or both. Local pain is present in the vast majority of cases and is caused by expansion, destruction, or fracture of the
involved vertebral elements. The site of compression can usually be localized to the site of back or neck pain. Local back or neck pain is usually dull, aching,
constant, and progressive. Back pain from vertebral destruction resulting in retropulsion of bone fragment is often worse in the supine position, a feature
distinguishing cord compression from a herniated disc. Local back or neck pain can be exacerbated by movement, sneezing, straining, or neck flexion. The location of
the involved vertebral body can usually be established by gentle spinal percussion. Radicular pain, which is usually, but not always, associated with local back or
neck pain, is caused by compression of the nerve roots or cauda equina. Radicular pain is often shooting in quality and localizes to within one to two vertebral
segments of the compression. Bilateral band-like girdle pain is characteristic of thoracic cord lesions, and unilateral radicular pain is more characteristic of lumbar or
cervical lesions. Radicular pain from a cervical or lumbar lesion may involve the shoulder, hip, groin, perineum, or extremity.
Weakness, the second most common symptom at presentation, is usually what prompts the patient to seek medical intervention. Weakness, which usually follows the
development of local or radicular pain, can develop gradually in association with progressive balance disturbance and numbness. Initial unilateral weakness is
common when paresis develops gradually. Complete loss of motor and sensory function below the affected level (cord shock) can occur abruptly as vascular
insufficiency progresses to frank ischemia. Neurologic examination of the patient with cord shock reveals absent motor, sensory, reflex, and autonomic function below
the level of the lesion, and the affected extremities demonstrate flaccidity and absence of tone. Absence of perineal and anal reflexes and painless overflow
incontinence complete the neurologic presentation. Flaccidity and areflexia are gradually replaced by paraplegia in flexion. Compression of the upper cervical spinal
cord can produce paralysis of the upper extremities and respiratory failure, if acute. Chronic injuries of the cervical spine can produce wasting of the intrinsic muscles
of the hand, forearm, or arm as well as progressive weakness of the intercostal muscles and diaphragm, leading ultimately to respiratory arrest. Lesions involving the
conus medullaris or cauda equina produce flaccid paralysis of the lower extremities, absent or flexor plantar responses, saddle anesthesia, urinary retention leading
to incontinence, and male impotence. The frequency of symptoms and signs of cord compression is presented in Table 51.2-2.

TABLE 51.2-2. Frequency of Symptoms and Signs Accompanying Cord Compression

DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
The diagnostic evaluation of suspected cord compression should include a careful history, physical and neurologic examination, radiologic evaluation including a
sagittal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) survey of the spine, and, if indicated, urgent consultation by physicians in neurology, neurosurgery, radiation oncology,
and medical oncology, when compression is caused by a chemosensitive neoplasm. Clear indications of epidural cord compression such as focal weakness, ataxia,
and unexplained bowel or bladder dysfunction accompanied by back pain in the cancer patient demand urgent evaluation.
The medical history obtained from the cancer patient suspected of spinal cord compression should emphasize the onset, quality, location, and temporal pattern of
back or neck pain. Back pain associated with spinal cord compression may be exacerbated by movement, lying flat, neck flexion, straight leg raising, straining,
coughing, or sneezing. Symptoms of motor dysfunction are often described as stiffness or weakness that usually begins in one extremity and remains unilateral in
nerve root compression but becomes bilateral with compression of the spinal cord or conus medullaris. Paresthesias due to involvement of the spinothalamic tract

begin distally, usually in the foot, and ascend to the level of involvement. Numbness and paresthesias are typically noticed later in the history than motor dysfunction.
Physical examination should emphasize localization of the level of suspected compression. This is often best initialized by asking the patient to point out the site of
the back pain. Gentle percussion over the spine can confirm the site of involvement and help elucidate other sites of vertebral metastases. Flexor and extensor motor
testing, deep tendon and plantar reflex assessment, sensory level identification via pin prick, and anal sphincter tone assessment are required components of any
diagnostic evaluation for cord compression.
There are several radiologic and tumor imaging techniques that are potentially useful in the diagnosis and treatment of cord compression. Plain radiographic films
continue to be quite useful in evaluation of cord compression associated with bony involvement of the spine or due to compression fracture. However, they are
relatively insensitive for detecting bone involvement and soft tissue masses, and they cannot demonstrate the actual spinal cord itself.
Despite these limitations, plain films can be useful in diagnosing cord compression and in planning therapy. Plain radiographs detect bony abnormalities in 72% of
patients with epidural cord compression. 5 Plain film radiographs detect the presence and location of epidural metastases in 83% of patients complaining of back pain.
Vertebral body collapse, destruction of the pedicle, and blastic or sclerotic changes are characteristic findings observable with plain film radiography. However,
paraspinous masses or vertebral body involvement resulting in less than 50% destruction of the cortex cannot be appreciated with plain film techniques. In addition, in
up to 60% of patients with epidural compression by lymphoma and pediatric malignancies, plain films may be normal. Posterior or posterolateral compression
resulting from a paraspinous mass invading the vertebral foramen is most common with these tumor types. Computed tomography (CT) and MRI are able to detect
posterior or posterolateral cord compression secondary to neuroforamina invasion and are superior to plain films, bone scintigraphy, or myelography in that regard.
Myelography has the advantage over plain films of visualizing the level of the compression as indicated by a blockage of myelographic contrast. However, multiple
sites of compression, which may be present in greater than 30% of cases, may require more than one subarachnoid puncture. For these reasons, CT, and to a much
greater extent MRI, have emerged as the most useful techniques for imaging cord compression.
Bone scintigraphy is more sensitive than plain films in detecting metastatic involvement and provides information about the entire skeleton in a single examination.
This facilitates screening the skeletal system for potential sources of referred pain, and it is useful in planning radiation therapy to multiple sites. However, bone
scintigraphy is not as sensitive and specific in detecting spinal metastases as MRI 64,65 and 66 and is incapable of describing the soft tissue and spinal cord anatomy
required for the proper diagnosis and treatment of cord compression. Furthermore, primarily osteolytic metastases produced by multiple myeloma, lymphoma, and
other malignancies may not be detected by bone scan. 67,68
In the pre-MRI era, myelography and CT were the imaging modalities of choice for the diagnosis of cord compression, and either or both of these tests are mandatory
when MRI is not available or is nondiagnostic. When a complete myelographic block is detected following routine lumbar injection, an additional injection from above
through a C-1 to C-2 puncture is required to evaluate possible additional sites of compression. CT following metrizamide myelography is an alternative to a C-1 to C-2
puncture in patients with a complete myelographic bloc. However, MRI is superior to both CT and myelography in convenience, anatomic detail, and cost. 69 Yet CT
exceeds MRI in the evaluation of vertebral stability and bone destruction. Therefore, CT should be obtained before vertebral body resection or surgical stabilization of
the vertebral column.
Positron emission tomography has been used to evaluate metabolic changes in the cervical spinal cord following mechanical spinal cord compression 70,71 and to
identify intramedullary spinal cord metastases. 72 Although positron emission tomography is increasingly being studied in the setting of malignant spinal cord
compression,61,72 its current role is not completely defined.
MRI has replaced myelography and CT scanning as the diagnostic procedure of choice for evaluating cord compression. 61,64,73,74,75,76,77,78,79 and 80 MRI has a sensitivity
of 93%, a specificity of 97%, and an overall diagnostic accuracy of 95% in detecting cord compression. 75 It is superior to bone scintigraphy in sensitivity and specificity
for spinal metastases 64,65 and 66 and can distinguish between benign and metastatic causes of vertebral body collapse with a sensitivity of 97.6%, a specificity of 100%,
and an overall accuracy of 98.2%. 75 The advantages of MRI over myelography for evaluating cord compression include its noninvasive ability to image soft tissue
anatomy in great detail (tumors, spinal cord) and its ability to image multiple levels of cord impingement in one examination. Paraspinous and neuroforaminal tumors
are not as easily identified with myelography as with MRI. 80 In addition, MRI allows avoidance of the 16% to 24% chance of neurologic deterioration following lumbar
puncture for myelography. 81 MRI excels in demonstrating intramedullary metastases that can be missed completely by myelography.
The advantages of MRI over CT include its ability to distinguish the spinal cord proper from other soft tissue masses in the spinal canal, and its ability to assess thecal
sac impingement in the presence of disrupted cortical bone as is frequently encountered with myeloma and blastic lesions from prostate cancer. MRI is safer, more
convenient, better tolerated, more informative, and less expensive than other techniques used to diagnose cord compression. Jordan et al. compared the cost of
evaluation of spinal cord compression with and without MRI. Establishing the diagnosis of cord compression was 65% more expensive when MRI was not used. 69
Because of its diagnostic accuracy and ability to image multiple levels of involvement, MRI is extremely useful in planning local treatment. Identification of
paravertebral tumor, neuroforamina invasion, and additional sites of vertebral metastases is important for designing radiotherapy portals and for planning surgical
resection. Multiple sites of cord and nerve root impingement or compression are frequent. Myelography detects multiple sites of impingement in approximately 30% of
cases, and MRI detects multiple sites in approximately 40% to 50% of cases 55,56,57,58 and 59 (Table 51.2-3). The frequency of multiple sites of impingement and
compression decreases by approximately 50% when imaging is limited to only one spinal region (i.e., thoracic or lumbar). 58 It is therefore imperative that the entire
spine be evaluated radiologically. A sagittal T1 nonenhanced survey of the entire spine quickly and easily identifies multiple sites of compression and should guide
the acquisition of axial views through areas of involvement. Bone metastases appear as dark botches relative to normal bone marrow in unenhanced T1 images. CSF
and edematous tumor appear bright on T2 sequences. T2 sequences display CSF brightly, producing images that are similar to a myelogram. Axial T2 sequences can
be useful in identifying small tumor nodules on nerve roots. Focal blastic lesions may produce decreased intensity on T2 images. In most cases of suspected epidural
cord compression, MRI can be performed without contrast. However, gadolinium contrast images may complement noncontrast images in demonstrating paravertebral
tumor and intramedullary metastases (see Fig. 51.2-3). Visualization of leptomeningeal involvement requires MRI contrast. 82 Myelography with or without CT is
mandatory when MRI is nondiagnostic, when it is not available, or in cases of claustrophobia or severe scoliosis.

TABLE 51.2-3. Patterns of Radiographic Impingement, Compression, or Both

TREATMENT
The diagnosis of cord compression requires emergent treatment. Delays in initiating treatment have been associated with deterioration in motor and autonomic
function. 54 Animal models and clinical results have documented better functional outcome when pretreatment motor loss has been gradual and worse functional
outcome when the onset of motor loss has been rapid. 30,31 and 32,51

Rades et al. reported significantly better motor function and ambulation in patients with gradual rather than rapid onset of pretreatment paresis. 51 Despite these
differences in expected outcome based on the rate of neurologic progression, there is no justification for delaying therapy once the diagnosis of cord compression has
been made. Although untreated epidural cord compression is not fatal, the consequences of paralysis are devastating and loss of ambulation has been associated
with shortened survival in a number of reports. 1,2,9,10,83,84,85,86 and 87
Treatment of cord compression should be individualized, but started immediately. Ambulatory patients with radiographic evidence of early cord compression and no
motor or sensory dysfunction can be treated safely without dexamethasone. 1,8 All other patients should be administered corticosteroids as soon as the diagnosis of
cord compression is reached, regardless of whether diagnostic workup is complete. Surgical indications include spinal instability, retropulsion of bone fragments
producing compression, previous radiotherapy at the site of compression, and lack of tissue diagnosis in the setting of rapid neurologic deterioration. Patients without
an initial diagnosis of cancer can be biopsied using CT or MRI guidance if neurologic dysfunction is absent or is evolving slowly. Radiotherapy should follow surgical
resection if the site has not been previously irradiated. All other patients should be considered for primary radiotherapy alone. Chemotherapy can be used as initial
therapy for the highly chemosensitive adult or pediatric tumors in patients who are not candidates for surgery or radiation therapy.
The results of treatment of cord compression have improved in recent years as a result of earlier diagnosis with the greater availability of MRI and due to a
heightened awareness of cord compression as a potential oncologic emergency. 2,57,58,61,84,88,89 and 90 The pretreatment degree of neurologic dysfunction is the strongest
predicator of therapeutic outcome. Eighty percent to 100% of patients with minimal or no ambulatory dysfunction retain ambulation posttreatment. 2,4,5,7,8,9 and
10,52,53,83,87,90,91,92 and 93
Paraparesis improves with treatment in 34% to 63% of cases, 2,8,10,88,92 whereas paraplegia improves in up to 10% to 55% of cases. 2,8,9,88,92 The
influence of pretreatment motor function is summarized in Table 51.2-4.

TABLE 51.2-4. Effect of Motor Function on Treatment Outcome

Surgical techniques used to resect epidural tumors have become increasingly specialized. Laminectomy, the classic surgical approach for the treatment of cord
compression is primarily reserved for resection of posterior or posterolateral tumors, despite the favorable results reported by Landmann et al. 88 When used for
treatment of anterior epidural compression, the goal of laminectomy is to relieve pressure on the spinal cord via removal of the spinous processes and laminae from
one vertebra above to one vertebra below the level of compression. While this approach does not readily allow debulking of tumor anterior to the spinal cord, it does
allow relaxation of the spinal cord away from the impinging mass. However, the results of a laminectomy for tumors anterior to the spinal cord have been
disappointing. 7,14,94,95 This is in part due to the inability to resect tumor anterior to the spinal cord, but more importantly due to the decreased spinal instability that can
develop when posterior supporting elements are removed from an often eroded or collapsed vertebral body.
The development of alternatives to laminectomy, including techniques for anterior decompression 34,96,97 and 98 and newer techniques such as endoscopically assisted
anterior decompression,99 coupled with the limitations of laminectomy, have resulted in laminectomy being no longer regarded as the standard neurosurgical
procedure for treatment of anterior epidural cord compression. As a general principle, the location of involvement within the vertebral column should determine the
neurosurgical approach. Anterior decompression with spinal stabilization should be considered for tumors in the vertebral body producing anterior epidural
compression, and laminectomy should be used for the minority of cases in which tumor involves the posterior vertebral elements or invades the neuroforamina.
Recommendations regarding the use of surgery or radiotherapy alone or in combination should be individualized. Despite the common occurrences of cord
compression, there have been no randomized trials containing more than 30 patients in each arm. 5,6 and 7 Thus, the guidelines for treatment of cord compression are
largely empiric. Appropriate treatment recommendation can only be made after assessing the patient's expected survival; the location, number, and mechanism of
spinal cord compression(s); the tumor histology; the rapidity of neurologic progression; and any history of previous radiotherapy administered to the site under current
consideration.
CORTICOSTEROIDS
Corticosteroids (dexamethasone, methylprednisolone) are among the most effective treatments of neurologic dysfunction resulting from cord compression.
Dexamethasone reduces edema, inhibits PGE2 synthesis, and decreases the specific gravity of the compressed spinal cord. 48 It also was shown to delay the onset of
paraplegia in experimental cord compression. 45,48 Although the mechanisms of dexamethasone action are not completely understood, dexamethasone has been
shown to down-regulate VEGF expression in smooth muscle cells 100,101 and to prevent cytoskeletal changes associated with increased vascular permeability. 43
Despite the established role of dexamethasone in treatment of cord compression, the optimal dose and schedule have never been proven. 8
There have been several prospective evaluations of dexamethasone in the treatment of cord compression, yet the superiority of high- versus low-dose
dexamethasone has never been proven. Greenberg et al. reported the results of a prospective trial of high-dose dexamethasone and radiation for epidural cord
compression. Eighty-three patients with epidural cord compression received 100 mg of intravenous dexamethasone at the time of diagnosis, followed by 96 mg for 3
days, and a subsequent taper of dexamethasone dose during the course of radiotherapy. Fifty-seven percent of patients were ambulatory following treatment. This
result was no better than those previously reported for lower dose corticosteroid regimens. However, 64% of patients reported substantial pain reduction the first day
of therapy. 4 Sørensen et al. conducted a prospective randomized trial of high-dose dexamethasone versus no corticosteroid therapy. In 57 patients treated with
radiation for cord compression, 81% of the dexamethasone group and 65% of the radiation alone group were ambulatory at 3 months. 5 A prospective randomized
study comparing a single high dose of intravenous dexamethasone (100 mg) with conventional dose intravenous dexamethasone (10 mg), both followed by 4 mg
orally every 6 hours, demonstrated no significant benefit for the initial high-dose bolus. 6 While a prolonged administration of high-dose corticosteroids may have been
a more worthy trial regimen, serious toxicities from high-dose dexamethasone have been reported in up to 14% of patients. 4,5,102
Thus, the results of clinical trials support a role for corticosteroids in the treatment of cord compression, but they have not indicated an advantage for higher versus
lower doses. Currently, there is no clear benefit, other than pain relief, from the routine use of high-dose corticosteroids in patients who can otherwise be treated with
conventional doses. We recommend an initial 10-mg dose of intravenous dexamethasone. The dose can be increased incrementally if no improvement is detected in
the first 4 to 8 hours. After 2 days on a stable dose of intravenous dexamethasone, therapy can be switched to 4 to 8 mg of oral dexamethasone given every 6 hours.
Corticosteroid doses are tapered every 4 days in a manner described by Byrne. 103 If neurologic decline results from dose reduction, the dose is maintained at effective
levels until dose reduction is possible. Patients without neurologic dysfunction other than back or neck pain should be managed without corticosteroids whenever
possible. Maranzano demonstrated that the use of steroids can be safely avoided in selected patients with no evidence of neurologic dysfunction, or with
radiculopathy only. Twenty patients were reviewed who had tumors invading less than 50% of the spinal cord diameter and involving not more than two vertebral levels, or
greater than two vertebral levels in patients with radiculopathy. All patients received 30 Gy in ten fractions. The results were equivalent or superior to those achieved
with the use of dexamethasone.2,4 Sixteen patients were ambulatory before treatment, and all 20 patients were ambulatory posttreatment. Palliation of pain was
achieved in 85% of patients. 1

SURGERY
Although radiation therapy is currently the treatment of choice for most spinal metastases, radioresistant and recurrent neoplasms remain therapeutic dilemmas. 34
Accepted indications for surgery are (1) unknown diagnosis, (2) spinal instability or compression by bone, (3) failure to respond to radiotherapy, and (4) maximal
allowable radiation dose already administered to the spinal cord. 14 Patients who may require surgery should also have chest radiography, electrocardiography, and
blood tests, including complete blood count, electrolytes, glucose, creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, hepatic enzymes, prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times,
platelet count, and type and crossmatch.
When the diagnosis is in doubt and open surgery is not indicated, fluoroscopic or CT-guided percutaneous vertebral biopsy may diagnose metastatic carcinoma with
less incisional pain and a shorter recuperative period than open surgery. 104,105 A paraspinal or a transpedicular approach can be used to place the needle, depending
on the position and size of the tumor. CT guidance facilitates precise needle placement and avoidance of neurologic injury. Local anesthesia and mild sedation allow
neurologic monitoring during the procedure, which can be performed in less than 1 hour.
Surgical decompression of the spinal cord should be approached from the side of the impinging mass. 106 Since typically the site of metastatic tumor involvement is the
vertebral body rather than the neural arch, tumor or pathologic fracture usually compresses the anterior surface of the spinal cord. Anterior tumors are not exposed by
laminectomy, which has little therapeutic benefit and causes spinal instability in such cases. 35 Findlay noted that 51% of patients with cord compression had vertebral
collapse, defined as over 50% loss of vertebral height, and that 25% of patients treated with laminectomy sustained major neurologic deterioration related to their
surgery. 94,95 In keeping with the premise that decompression should occur from the side of the spinal cord compression, laminectomy should be reserved for the
removal of posterior lesions.
Anterior decompression with mechanical stabilization has supplanted laminectomy as the principal surgical treatment for epidural metastases arising from the
vertebral body. This approach allows total removal of the pathologic vertebral body via thoracotomy or a retroperitoneal approach. 29 The vertebral body is replaced
with methylmethacrylate, which is supplemented with a metal prosthesis that attaches to the adjacent vertebral bodies. 29,107 Moore and Uttley reported their results
with anterior decompression and stabilization in 26 patients with anterior vertebral collapse who suffered from spinal cord compression or intractable pain. 108 Of 16
patients who were unable to walk preoperatively, 10 were ambulatory after surgery, 3 were not, and 3 died. Of seven patients who were operated on for intractable
pain, five were pain free and two died. Morbidity included wound infection, CSF discharge, and the need for posterior stabilization later. During the period of the study
(1982 to 1987) 20 additional patients were considered unsuitable for surgery because of “multiple levels of disease, complete paraplegia, or a parlous general
condition.” 109 Even though anterior spinal decompression and fusion is more effective than laminectomy, its effectiveness appears to be limited to patients in good
medical condition who have myelopathy from anteriorly placed tumors. In addition, metastatic disease must be focal since spinal stabilization devices require a
foundation of solid, rather than tumor-infiltrated, bone at adjacent spinal levels. Surgical decompression entails considerable mortality, morbidity, and convalescence,
even in selected patients. To reduce operative blood loss, intravascular 109 or intravertebral 110 embolization of the vasculature of vertebral metastases may be
performed preoperatively.
The indiscriminate use of laminectomy in candidates for radiation has been challenged. While some reports have suggested a more favorable outcome with combined
laminectomy and radiation, selection bias prevents the assessment of differences in outcome in those studies. 5,12,88 Indeed, several retrospective studies and one
small prospective study failed to demonstrate significant differences in outcome for radiation alone as compared with laminectomy and radiation. 2,7,52,53,85
In a retrospective study from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Gilbert et al. found no advantage for the addition of laminectomy to radiation in the treatment of
cord compression.52 Two hundred thirty-five patients with greater than 80% extradural block on myelography were reviewed. Sixty-five underwent surgical
decompression followed by radiation, and 170 were treated with radiation alone. Patients with lymphoma or paraplegia usually received radiotherapy alone. Those
with uncertain diagnosis, prior radiotherapy, or rapid progression of symptoms underwent surgery. Of the 235 patients, 34% were ambulatory, 41% paraparetic, and
17% paraplegic. Forty-six percent of the laminectomy group were ambulatory after treatment, as compared with 49% in the radiation alone group. Tumors considered
radiosensitive (lymphoma, seminoma, myeloma, and neuroblastoma) responded better to either treatment than tumors not considered radiosensitive (carcinoma,
sarcoma, melanoma). Patients with rapid development of weakness (over 48 hours) responded more frequently to radiation (7 of 13) compared with those treated with
laminectomy (0 of 9; P <.002). The duration of neurologic improvement was greater for patients with radiosensitive tumors; however, the duration of improvement was
similar for laminectomy and for radiation alone. Fifty-eight percent of patients who were ambulatory before treatment remained so after treatment. 52 Although superior
results have been reported in more contemporary series, others have also reported that laminectomy adds little to the efficacy of radiotherapy. 2,7,53,85,111
A small prospective study of laminectomy plus radiotherapy was reported by Young et al. 7 Twenty-nine patients were randomized to laminectomy plus radiation (16
patients) or radiation alone (13 patients). One-half (three of six) of the surgically treated patients who were ambulatory before treatment remained so after treatment,
whereas all (five of five) retained ambulation following radiotherapy. Forty-four percent of nonambulatory patients were ambulatory after laminectomy, as compared
with 33% after radiation. By 4 months the rate of ambulation for patients in both groups was 33%. Sphincter function and pain relief were likewise similar in each
treatment group. There were no significant differences in outcome. 7 Although this series has been criticized for its small numbers, it is the only prospective
randomized trial comparing laminectomy and radiation with radiation alone. The results, which suggest that laminectomy does not contribute to the efficacy of
radiotherapy, are corroborated by several retrospective analyses. 2,52,53
In contrast to the experience in adults, laminectomy in children with spinal cord compression often improves neurologic outcome over radiation, radiation and
chemotherapy, or chemotherapy alone. 22,24 Because pediatric sarcomas are often located in a posterolateral location in the epidural space, they are amenable to
removal via laminectomy, which relieves spinal cord compression more rapidly than chemotherapy and radiotherapy and prevents permanent spinal cord injury from
developing.
RADIATION THERAPY
Radiation plays a central role in the treatment of newly diagnosed epidural cord compression. The goals of treatment are decompression of the spinal cord and nerve
roots through cytoreduction of tumor, prevention of progressive neurologic symptoms, relief of pain, prevention of further structural damage to the vertebral column,
and the establishment of durable local control. Radiation reduces pain in approximately 70% of patients, improves motor function in 45% to 60%, and reverses
paraplegia in up to 11% to 21%. 2,52,83,89 While most patients with previously untreated metastatic cord compression are candidates for emergent radiation, patients
with compression from retropulsed bone, those with spinal instability, or those without a clinical or pathologic diagnosis of cancer and a rapidly progressing loss of
neurologic function should be considered for surgery. Children, and in certain circumstances adults with highly chemosensitive tumors, should be considered for initial
chemotherapy. Immediate surgical decompression should be considered for any patient with neurologic progression during radiotherapy. The results of several
radiotherapy series are listed in Table 51.2-5.

TABLE 51.2-5. Results of Radiotherapy for Malignant Spinal Cord Compression

There has been and continues to be interest in hypofractionated regimens for palliation of cord compression. A seminal experience in this regard was reported by
Greenberg et al., 4 who treated patients with hypofractionated radiotherapy and initial high-dose dexamethasone. Patients received 100 mg of intravenous
dexamethasone and 500 cGy per fraction daily for the first 3 days of treatment. Following a 4-day rest, radiation was continued in 300-cGy fractions to a total dose of
3000 cGy. Fifty-seven percent of patients were ambulatory after treatment. No patients with total paraplegia regained ambulation. Ambulation was preserved in 62%
of patients with radiosensitive tumors and 55% of those with less radiosensitive tumors. Patients with renal and prostate tumors had the highest rate of ambulation
following treatment, and patients with lung cancer had the least favorable outcome. Although these results are no better than those reported for conventional
regimens, the achievement of pain relief in 64% of patients after the first day of treatment was impressive. 4
Maranzano et al. have addressed several issues regarding the radiotherapy of cord compression including hypofractionation in a series of reports from 1989 to 2000.
A prospective study of radiotherapy and corticosteroids without surgical resection was reported in 1995. 2 Of the 209 evaluable patients, 52% had minimal or no
neurologic impairment, 39% were paraparetic and unable to walk, and 9% were paraplegic at presentation. Ambulation was maintained in 94% of those with minimal
or no neurologic impairment. Treatment consisted of 3000 cGy in ten fractions (used primarily for radioresponsive tumors, i.e., seminoma, lymphoma, myeloma) or the
fractionation scheme of Greenberg et al. (500 cGy × 3, 4-day rest, 300 cGy × 5). High-dose intravenous corticosteroid (1 g of methylprednisolone) was used for
paraparetic or paraplegic patients, and standard-dose dexamethasone (16 mg/d) was used in all other patients. Sixty percent of paraparetic, nonambulant patients
regained their ability to walk. Only 11% of paraplegic patients became ambulatory. Overall, 76% of patients were ambulant after treatment. Sphincter dysfunction
improved in 44% of patients. Those with favorable histologies (breast, prostate, lymphoma, myeloma, seminoma, small cell carcinoma) more frequently enjoyed
restoration of gait and recovery of bladder function. The median survival for the group was 6 months, and 28% were alive at 1 year. Ambulation before treatment was
associated with a median survival of 8 months, versus 4 months for those nonambulant before treatment ( P = .02). Ambulation after treatment was associated with a
median survival of 9 months versus 1 month for nonambulant patients after treatment (P <.01). Survival for favorable tumor types was 10 months versus 3 months for
unfavorable histologies ( P <.01). Clearly, early diagnosis of cord compression was the factor that most significantly influenced the outcome in this study. Tumor
histology had the greatest influence on outcome in patients with loss of ambulation, bladder dysfunction, or paraplegia. This study also demonstrated that the results
of radiotherapy plus corticosteroids compared favorably with the results of laminectomy. 2
In a subsequent report, Maranzano et al. demonstrated that corticosteroids could be omitted from the treatment of cord compression in selected patients. Twenty
patients with cord compression and no neurologic dysfunction, or dysfunction limited to radiculopathy, were evaluated. This group included patients with intact motor
and sensory function and tumors involving less than 50% of the spinal cord diameter or fewer than two vertebrae longitudinally. Patients with radiculopathy or greater
than two vertebral levels involved were included. Six patients presented with radiculopathy, and 14 patients presented with cord impingement. Radiotherapy consisted
of 3000 cGy in ten fractions. Back pain responded in 85% of cases. All patients were ambulatory without support following treatment, including four patients who had
required support for ambulation before therapy. These excellent results suggest that routine administration of corticosteroids in patients with asymptomatic early cord
compression is not necessary. 1
More recently, the same authors explored the use of hypo-fractionated regimens for treatment of cord compression. Fifty-three patients with radiographic evidence of
cord compression and unfavorable histology with or without neurologic defects, or patients with favorable histology (breast, prostate, myeloma, lymphoma) who
presented with plegias, paresis, or low performance status (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance score of less than or equal to 2) and short life
expectancy were treated with a single 800-cGy fraction generally delivered via a posterior port. This treatment was repeated after 1 week in responding or stable
patients. Of 49 evaluable patients, 4 also received laminectomy, and 4 patients did not receive the second fraction due to systemic disease progression. Pain relief
was achieved in 67% of patients, motor function remained intact or improved in 63%. None of the paraplegic patients regained ambulation. The authors claimed that
the results were not substantially different from previously published results in similar patients. 2 However, the results were numerically inferior to those achieved with
3000 cGy in ten fractions. 86
In another publication from this group, two hypofractionated regimens were compared in patients with cord compression from prostate cancer. There was no
difference in palliation of pain, neurologic outcome, or survival based on the treatment regimen. 87 These studies have demonstrated that hypofractionated regimens,
despite producing more acute toxicity, are reasonably well tolerated and relatively effective. However, split courses and large fraction sizes are fundamentally
radiobiologically unfavorable due to the likely presence of tumor hypoxia and the proliferation of tumor during splits in treatment. 125 These considerations combined
with the lack of radiographic response data to evaluate the success of these regimens, and the complete absence of data describing late toxicities, prevents the
routine recommendation of these schedules. The 800 cGy × 2 regimen may be appropriate for the bedridden paraplegic hospice patient requiring palliation of back
pain caused by a cord compression.
In a report from Hanover, Germany, 96 patients with motoric deficits were divided into two subgroups based on the duration of development of motoric deficits: 1 to 13
days (49 patients), group A; and greater than or equal to 14 days (47 patients), group B. The two groups were comparable in pretreatment ambulatory function (33%
and 32%, respectively). At 2 weeks and 3 months, more patients were ambulatory in group B (77% and 81%) than in group A (31% and 30%). A separate group of
patients (31) with rapid loss of motor function within 48 hours of presentation was evaluated. At 2 weeks and 3 months, only 13% and 15% of patients were
ambulatory. In this third group of patients with rapid loss of motor function, 65% had experienced further deterioration by 2 weeks posttreatment. 51 Thus, the success
of radiotherapy in reversing paralysis correlates with the rapidity of loss of motor function. Recovery of ambulation occurs more frequently in patients with gradual
rather than abrupt loss of ambulation. 51,112 Delays in the recovery of ambulation can last as long as 15 months. 112 These findings are consistent with the results of
experimental mechanical cord injury in dogs. 30,31 and 32
The role of corticosteroids during radiotherapy has not been adequately studied. Although corticosteroids are universally prescribed and subsequently tapered during
or after radiotherapy, corticosteroids do not appear to be necessary in patients who present with no neurologic dysfunction. 1 Radiation produces no clinically
significant spinal cord edema itself, 25 and the benefit of corticosteroids is temporary. 26 Maintaining corticosteroids during radiation is clearly indicated if symptoms
progress on withdrawal; however, routine maintenance of corticosteroids throughout the course of radiotherapy is unnecessary. High-dose corticosteroids have no
proven greater efficacy than low-dose corticosteroids and remain controversial. High-dose corticosteroid therapy and radiation was significantly superior to radiation
alone in one study, but whether similar results could have been achieved with low-dose corticosteroids was not determined. 5 A prospective study of high- versus
low-dose corticosteroids revealed no difference in the rate of ambulatory patients after treatment. 6 Despite this, the routine use of high-dose corticosteroids has been
advocated by some investigators. 4,8,103,113
An analysis of prognostic factors in 153 patients treated with radiotherapy and/or laminectomy for cord compression was reported by Helweg-Larsen et al. As has
been shown repeatedly in numerous studies, ambulation pretreatment predicted ambulation posttreatment. Tumor type was shown to influence the interval from initial
diagnosis to development of cord compression. Shorter intervals were observed in patients with lung cancer, and the longest intervals were observed in patients with
breast cancer (P <.0005). Lung cancer patients also had more severe gait dysfunction at diagnosis than did patients with other tumor types ( P = .003). Likewise, the
interval between initial diagnosis of cancer and the development of cord compression was predictive of the severity of gait dysfunction. Shorter intervals were
associated with more severe gait disturbance ( P = .016). Survival posttreatment was dependent on the interval from diagnosis to cord compression, the pretreatment
gait function, and most importantly, ambulation posttreatment. The median survival for ambulatory patients posttreatment was 7.9 months compared with 1.2 months
for nonambulatory patients posttreatment. 114
Radiotherapy Technique
The size and configuration of radiotherapy portals should be designed using all relevant data from the history and physical examination, plain films, bone scans,
myelograms, CT, and spinal MRI. An MRI with sagittal views of the entire length of the spine should be carefully studied to identify any additional sites of cord
compression before completing the radiotherapy treatment plan. Additional sites of epidural compression can be detected in 10% to 50% of patients depending on the
imaging modality and the length of spine evaluated (see Table 51.2-3).55,56,57,58 and 59,64,73,115,116 Although MRI is superior to CT myelography, either study is capable of
defining vertebral and paravertebral involvement, and either is adequate for treatment planning.
Radiation portals should be centered on the site of epidural compression. Of the 16% to 25% of patients who develop recurrent cord compression after radiation, 64%
of early recurrences (within the first 3 months) are within two vertebral bodies of the site of initial compression. 20 Accordingly, radiation portals customarily extend two
vertebral bodies above and two vertebral bodies below the site of compression. Adjacent sites of bony involvement and paravertebral masses should also be
encompassed in the treatment port. Lesions in the cervical spine, a common site for myeloma, should be treated with opposed lateral fields to reduce radiation
exposure of the pharyngeal mucosa. Thoracic spine lesions are generally treated with a simple posterior field. Although the majority of compressing metastases
develop in the posterior aspect of the vertebral body, the radiation dose should be prescribed to a depth corresponding to the anterior aspect of the involved vertebral

body. This ensures full-dose delivery to the tumor and adequate treatment of the entire bone. The anterior edge of the affected vertebral body can be determined with
a lateral spine simulator film. If this depth equals or exceeds the midplane of the patient, or if beam energies sufficient to prevent greater than a 110% hot spot on the
spinal cord are not available, opposed anteroposterior fields should be used. Ad hoc prescription of a depth for posterior fields without measurement of the
prescription depth should be discouraged. The lumbar spine is usually treated with opposed anteroposterior fields, since the lumbar vertebrae are generally at
midplane.
An important goal of radiotherapy for epidural compression is to deliver an effective palliative dose of radiation expeditiously without exceeding the spinal cord
tolerance. To this end, an optimal dose and fractionation scheme has not been established. Radioresponsive tumors, such as neuroblastoma, can be treated with
2000 to 3000 cGy.117 Epidural cord compression caused by lymphoma more often responds completely when total doses greater than 2500 cGy are employed. 118
Patients with cord compression by malignant melanoma are more likely to respond to total doses greater than 3000 cGy. Complete recovery is more often associated
with higher total doses, rather than with the use of large doses per fraction. 119,120
Initial large daily fractions (400 to 500 cGy) produce more rapid neurologic recovery in animal models with cord compression. 25,113 In contrast, larger doses per
fraction provided less durable pain relief from bone metastases 121 and neurologic recovery from cord compression is not superior to that achieved by conventional
dose regimens.4,91,119,122 Nevertheless, some authors continue to recommend delivery of large doses per fraction (400 to 500 cGy) on the first 3 days of treatment to
achieve rapid lysis of tumor, followed by smaller doses (200 to 300 cGy) for the remainder of the treatment. 4,9,123 By convention, patients usually receive 200 to 300
cGy per fraction to a total dose not exceeding 3000 to 4000 cGy to the spinal cord in 2 to 4 weeks. 124 The results of several radiotherapy series are summarized in
Table 51.2-5.
CHEMOTHERAPY
Neurologic recovery from spinal cord compression in response to chemotherapy has been reported in adults and
children. 126,127,128,129,130,131,132,133,134,135,136,137,138,139,140,141 and 142 In adults, cytotoxic chemotherapy and hormonal therapy have been used to successfully alleviate spinal
cord compression from prostate cancer, 130,135,138,139 Hodgkin's disease, 133,140 myeloma,127,141 germ cell tumors,131,137 lymphoma,128,136,141 and breast cancer. 129 The use
of chemotherapy combined with radiation was associated with a prolonged survival in patients presenting with epidural cord compression from non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma.142 These studies suggest that in certain cases, chemotherapy should be considered more frequently than is currently accepted. Chemotherapy can be
used in combination with radiotherapy for treatment of spinal cord compression, 141 or alone in adults who are not surgical or radiation candidates, but who have
chemosensitive tumors such as lymphoma, small cell carcinoma, myeloma, breast, prostate, or germ cell tumors. 127,128,129,130,131,132,133,134,135,136,137,138,139,140,141 and 142

PEDIATRIC SPINAL CORD COMPRESSION
Malignant spinal cord compression in children differs from that in adults in several respects including the tumor types that most frequently produce compression, the
mechanisms of impingement, and most importantly the approach to treatment. Unlike in adults, motor weakness can be as frequent a symptom as local pain, being
present in 82% to 100% of cases. 24,117,143 Neuroblastoma, Ewing's sarcoma, Wilms' tumor, lymphoma, and soft tissue and bone sarcomas are the most frequent tumor
types producing compression in children, 22,23 and 24 yet they are infrequently encountered in adults (see Table 51.2-1). The majority of tumors causing cord
compression in children do so via neuroforaminal invasion producing the so-called dumbbell tumors. 22,24,144,145 Unlike treatment of adult malignant spinal cord
compression, there is a greater emphasis on the use of chemotherapy in pediatric patients. This is due to the greater chemosensitivity of most pediatric cancers and
the profound interest in avoiding iatrogenic spinal deformities and second cancers in children, which can result from radiotherapy.
The most impressive results of pediatric cord compression treatment with chemotherapy were reported by Hayes et al. Fourteen patients with spinal cord compression
from neuroblastoma or Ewing's sarcoma received combination chemotherapy alone. All patients with neurologic signs or symptoms (10 of 14) experienced complete
or near complete recovery following chemotherapy. 126 Sanderson et al. had similar results. Four of four patients presenting with paraparesis or paraplegias from cord
compression by neuroblastoma had complete neurologic recovery following treatment with chemotherapy alone. 134
When chemotherapy is used for treatment of spinal cord compression, the response to treatment should be monitored closely by a multidisciplinary team including a
neurosurgeon, pediatric oncologist, radiation oncologist, and neuroradiologist so that alternate interventions can be instituted quickly to alleviate neurologic
progression.
Klein et al. reviewed 112 cases of pediatric cord compression from St. Jude Children's Hospital. Patients with soft tissue sarcomas treated with laminectomy as a
component of their overall treatment had statistically superior ambulation following treatment compared with those who received chemotherapy or radiation alone. 22
Raffel et al. studied children with severe cord compression as evidenced by greater than 50% replacement of the spinal canal by tumor on MRI or CT. 24 Twenty-five of
26 children treated with laminectomy improved compared with four of seven treated nonsurgically. Since posterior cord compression resulting from vertebral foramen
invasion occurs in a larger percentage of pediatric cases, laminectomy may be of greater benefit than in adults.
However, in a retrospective analysis of pediatric neuroblastoma with cord compression, there was no significant difference based on whether or not laminectomy was
used. There were, however, numerically more ambulatory patients following surgical treatment. 145 Thus, pediatric patients with soft tissue or bone sarcomas and
severe neurologic dysfunction from compression should be considered for osteoplastic laminotomy or laminectomy followed by adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation. In
other circumstances, treatment with initial chemotherapy alone may be appropriate.

CONCLUSION
Paraplegia from epidural cord compression is preventable if diagnosis and treatment are instituted before severe neurologic deficits develop. A heightened awareness
of the significance of new or progressive back pain is the most important factor in the successful treatment of cord compression. Plain films, myelography, MRI, or CT
should be obtained when the history and neurologic examination suggest spinal involvement with tumor or cord compression. Corticosteroids should be administered
in symptomatic patients when the diagnosis has been established, and oncology, neurology, neurosurgery, and radiation oncology consultants should provide urgent
evaluations.
Fortunately, management recommendations can be made despite the lack of definitive randomized trials evaluating contemporary treatments. Treatment
recommendations are outlined in Table 51.2-6. Radiotherapy is indicated in all patients with minimal or no neurologic deficits. Radiation should also be administered
following surgery in patients who have not previously received radiation. Spinal instability, compression from bone fragments, previous radiotherapy, and neurologic
progression during radiotherapy are indications for surgery in appropriate candidates. Surgery should be considered in patients with a life expectancy of greater than
2 months. The surgical approach should be determined by the location of vertebral involvement and direction of compression.

TABLE 51.2-6. Recommendations for Management of Patients with Metastatic Cord Compressiona

Chemotherapy should be the initial treatment for children with chemosensitive tumors. Patients treated with chemotherapy should be monitored closely so that
immediate intervention can proceed if there is an inadequate response or neurologic progression. Children with severe neurologic deficits from cord compression
should be considered for primary laminectomy. Adults with chemotherapy-sensitive or hormone-sensitive tumors should receive chemotherapy as an adjuvant or as
the primary treatment if radiation or surgery are contraindicated. Corticosteroid therapy remains one of the most effective treatments for acute spinal cord
compression.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Maranzano E, Latini P, Beneventi S, et al. Radiotherapy without steroids in selected metastatic spinal cord compression patients. A phase II trial. Am J Clin Oncol 1996;19:179.
2. Maranzano E, Latini P. Effectiveness of radiation therapy without surgery in metastatic spinal cord compression: final results from a prospective trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;15:959.
3. Helweg-Larsen S. Clinical outcome in metastatic spinal cord compression. A prospective study of 153 patients. Acta Neurol Scand 1996;94:269.
4. Greenberg HS, Kim JH, Posner JB. Epidural spinal cord compression from metastatic tumor: results with a new treatment protocol. Ann Neurol 1980;8:361.
5. Sorenson S, Helweg-Larsen S, Mouridsen H, Hansen HH. Effect of high-dose dexamethasone in carcinomatous metastatic spinal cord compression treated with radiotherapy: a randomised
trial. Eur J Cancer 1994;30A:22.
6. Vecht CJ, Haaxima-Reiche H, Van Putten WLT, et al. Initial bolus of conventional versus high dose dexamethasone in metastatic spinal cord compression. Neurology 1989;39:1255.
7. Young RF, Post EM, King GA. Treatment of spinal epidural metastases. Randomized prospective comparison of laminectomy and radiotherapy. J Neurosurg 1980;53:741.
8. Loblaw DA, Laperriere NJ. Emergency treatment of malignant extradural spinal cord compression: an evidence-based guideline. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1613.
9. Kovner F, Spigel S, Rider I, et al. Radiation therapy of metastatic spinal cord compression. Multidisciplinary team diagnosis and treatment. J Neurooncol 1999;42:85.
10. Solberg A, Bremnes RM. Metastatic spinal cord compression: diagnostic delay, treatment, and outcome. Anticancer Res 1999;19:677.
11. Barron KD, Hirano A, Araki S, Terry RD. Experiences with metastatic neoplasms involving the spinal cord. Neurology 1959;9:91.
12. Bach F, Agerlin N, Sorensen JB, et al. Metastatic spinal cord compression secondary to lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1781.
13. Boogerd W, van der Sande JJ. Treatment of complications: diagnosis and treatment of spinal cord compression in malignant disease. Cancer Treat Rep 1993;19;129.
14. Black P. Spinal epidural tumors. In Wilkins RH, Rengachary SS, eds. Neurosurgery. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1985:1062.
15. Walsh GL, Gokaslan ZL, McCutcheon IE, et al. Anterior approaches to the thoracic spine in patients with cancer: indications and results. Ann Thorac Surg 1997;64:1611.
16. Grant R, Papadopoulos SM, Sandler HM, Greenberg HS. Metastatic epidural spinal cord compression: current concepts and treatment. J Neurooncol 1994;19:79.
17. Posner JB. Management of central nervous system metastases. Semin Oncol 1977;4:81.
18. Grosh W, Greco FA. Spinal cord compression: comparison of extradural and intramedullary metastases. J Tenn Med Assoc 1981;74:821.
19. Helweg-Larsen S, Hansen SW, Sorensen PS. Second occurrence of symptomatic metastatic spinal cord compression and findings of multiple spinal epidural metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1995;33:595.
20. Kaminski HJ, Diwan VG, Ruff RL. Second occurrence of spinal epidural metastases. Neurology 1991;41:744.
21. Lewis DW, Packer RJ, Raney B, et al. Incidence, presentation and outcome of spinal cord disease in children with systemic cancer. Pediatrics 1986;78:438.
22. Klein SL, Sanford RA, Muhlbauer MS. Pediatric spinal epidural metastases. J Neurosurg 1991;74:70.
23. Bouffet E, Marec-Berard P, Thiesse P, et al. Spinal cord compression by secondary epi- and intradural metastases in childhood. Childs Nerv Syst 1997;13:383.
24. Raffel C, Neave VCD, Lavine S, McComb JG. Treatment of spinal cord compression by epidural malignancy in childhood. Neurosurgery 1991;28:349.
25. Rubin P. Extradural spinal cord compression by tumor. Part I: experimental production and treatment trials. Radiology 1993;263:1243.
26. Ushio Y, Posner R, Posner JB, Shapiro WR. Experimental spinal cord compression by epidural neoplasms. Neurology 1977;27:422.
27. Ikeda H, Ushio Y, Hayakawa T, Mogami H. Edema and circulatory disturbance in the spinal cord compressed by epidural neoplasms in rabbits. J Neurosurg 1980;52:203.
28. Kato A, Ushio Y, Hayakawa T, et al. Circulatory disturbance of the spinal cord with epidural neoplasm in rats. J Neurosurg 1985;63:260.
29. Arbit E, Galicich JH. Vertebral body reconstruction with a modified Harrington rod distraction system for stabilization of the spine affected with metastatic disease. J Neurosurg 1995;83:617.
30. Tarlov IM, Klinger H, Vitale S. Spinal cord compression studies. I Experimental techniques to produce acute and gradual compression. Arch Neurol Psychiatry 1957;70:813.
31. Tarlov IM, Klinger H. Spinal cord compression studies. II. Time limits for recovery after acute compression in dogs. Arch Neurol Psychiatry 1954;71:271.
32. Tarlov IM. Spinal cord compression studies. III. Time limits for recovery after gradual compression in dogs. Arch Neurol Psychiatry 1954;71:588.
33. Doppman JL, Girton M. Angiographic study of the effect of laminectomy in the presence of acute anterior epidural masses. J Neurosurg 1976;45:19.
34. Siegal T, Siegal T. Current considerations in the management of neoplastic spinal cord compression. Spine 1989;14:223.
35. Kakulas BA, Harper CG, Shibasaki K, Bedbrook GM. Vertebral metastases and spinal cord compression. Clin Exp Neurol 1978;15:98.
36. Hayashi T, Sakurai M, Abe K, et al. Expression of angiogenic factors in rabbit spinal cord after transient ischaemia. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 1999;25:63.
37. Vaquero J, Zurita M, de Oya S, Coca S. Vascular endothelial growth/permeability factor in spinal cord injury. J Neurosurg 1999;90(Suppl 4):220.
38. Bartholdi D, Rubin BP, Schwab ME. VEGF mRNA induction correlates with changes in the vascular architecture upon spinal cord damage in the rat. Eur J Neurosci 1997;9:2549.
39. Steinbrech DS, Mehrara BJ, Saadeh PB, et al. VEGF expression in an osteoblast-like cell line is regulated by a hypoxia response mechanism. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2000;278:C853.
40. Klekamp JG, Jarzecka K, Hoover RL, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor is expressed in ovine pulmonary vascular smooth muscle cells in vitro and regulated by hypoxia and
dexamethasone. Pediatr Res 1997;42:744.
41. Heiss JD, Papavassiliou E, Merrill MJ, et al. Mechanism of dexamethasone suppression of brain tumor-associated vascular permeability in rats. Involvement of the glucocorticoid receptor and
vascular permeability factor. J Clin Invest 1996;98:1400.
42. Gonzalez MV, Gonzalez-Sancho JM, Caelles C, Munoz A, Jimenez B. Hormone-activated nuclear receptors inhibit the stimulation of the JNK and ERK signalling pathways in endothelial cells.
FEBS Lett 1999;459:272.
43. Criscuolo GR, Balledux JP. Clinical neurosciences in the decade of the brain: hypotheses in neuro-oncology. VEG/PF acts upon the actin cytoskeleton and is inhibited by dexamethasone:
relevance to tumor angiogenesis and vasogenic edema. Yale J Biol Med 1996;69:337.
44. Dang CV, Semenza GL. Oncogenic alterations of metabolism. Trends Biochem Sci 1999;24:68.
45. Siegal T, Siegal TZ, Shapira Y, et al. Experimental neoplastic spinal cord compression. Evoked potentials, edema, prostaglandins, and light and electron microscopy. Spine 1987;12:440.
46. Siegal T, Shohami E, Siegal TZ. Indomethacin and dexamethasone treatment in experimental spinal cord compression. Part I. Effect on water content and specific gravity. Neurosurgery
1988;22:328.
47. Siegal T, Shoshami E, Shapira Y, Siegal TZ. Indomethacin and dexamethasone treatment in experimental spinal cord compression. Part II. Effect on edema and prostaglandin synthesis.
Neurosurgery 1988;22:334.
48. Siegal T, Siegal T, Shohami E, Shapira Y. Comparison of soluble dexamethasone sodium phosphate with free dexamethasone and indomethacin in treatment of experimental neoplastic spinal
cord compression. Spine 1988;13:1171.
49. Siegal T, Siegal T, Shohami E, Lossos F. Experimental neoplastic spinal cord compression: effect of ketamine and MK-801 on edema and prostaglandins. Neurosurgery 1990;26:963.
50. Siegal T. Spinal cord compression: from laboratory to clinic. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:1748.
51. Rades D, Blach M, Nerreter V, Bremer M, Karstens JH. Metastatic spinal cord compression. Influence of time between onset of motoric deficits and start of irradiation on therapeutic effect.
Strahlenther Onkol 1999;175:378.
52. Gilbert RW, Kim J-H, Posner JB. Epidural spinal cord compression from metastatic tumor: diagnosis and treatment. Ann Neurol 1978;3:40.
53. Stark RJ, Henson RA, Evans SJW. Spinal metastases. A retrospective survey from a general hospital. Brain 1982;105:189.
54. Husband DJ. Malignant spinal cord compression: prospective study of delays in referral and treatment. BMJ 1998;317:18.
55. Pigott KH, Baddeley H, Maher EJ. Pattern of disease in spinal cord compression on MRI scan and implications for treatment. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) 1994;6:7.
56. Heldmann U, Myschetzky PS, Thomsen HS. Frequency of unexpected multifocal metastasis in patients with acute spinal cord compression. Evaluation by low-field MR imaging in cancer
patients. Acta Radiol 1997;38:372.
57. Cook AM, Lau TN, Tomlinson MJ, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging of the whole spine in suspected malignant spinal cord compression: impact on management. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol)
1998;10:39.
58. Schiff D, O'Neill BP, Wang CH, O'Fallon J. Neuroimaging and treatment implications of patients with multiple epidural spinal metastases. Cancer 1998;83:1593.
59. Khaw FM, Worthy SA, Gibson MJ, Gholkar A. The appearance on MRI of vertebrae in acute compression of the spinal cord due to metastases. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1999;81:830.
60. Crasto S, Duca S, Davini O, et al. MRI diagnosis of intramedullary metastases from extra-CNS tumors. Eur Radiol 1997;7:732.
61. Bilsky MH, Lis E, Raizer J, Lee H, Boland P. The diagnosis and treatment of metastatic spinal tumor. Oncologist 1999;4:459.
62. Helweg-Larsen S, Sorensen PS. Symptoms and signs in metastatic spinal cord compression: a study of progression from first symptom until diagnosis in 153 patients. Eur J Cancer
1994;30A:396.
63. Portenoy RK, Lipton RB, Foley KM. Back pain in the cancer patient: an algorithm for evaluation and management. Neurology 1987;37:134.
64. St. Amour TE, Hodges SC, Laakman RW, Tamas DE, eds. MRI of the spine. New York: Raven, 1994:435.
65. Frank JA, Ling A, Patronas NJ, et al. Detection of malignant bone tumors: MRI vs. scintigraphy. AJRAm J Roentgenol 1990;155:1043.
66. Algra PR, Bloem JL, Tissing H, et al. Detection of vertebral body metastases: comparison between MR imaging and bone scintigraphy. Radiographics 1991;11:219.
67. Avrahami E, Tadmor R, Dally O, Hadar H. Early MR demonstration of spinal metastases in patients with normal radiographs and CT and radionuclide bone scans. J Comput Assist Tomogr
1989;13:598.
68. Gjorup T, Hartling OJ, Munck-Hansen J, Munck O. Bone-scan “cold” lesion caused by an osteolytic metastasis from an adenocarcinoma of the thyroid. Eur J Nucl Med 1985;10:470.
69. Jordan JE, Donaldson SS, Enzmann DR. Cost effectiveness and outcome assessment of magnetic resonance imaging in diagnosing cord compression. Cancer 1995;75:2579.
70. Kamoto Y, Sadato N, Yonekura Y, et al. Visualization of the cervical spinal cord with FDG and high-resolution PET. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1998;22:487.
71. Baba H, Uchida K, Sadato N, et al. Potential usefulness of 18F-2-fluoro-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography in cervical compressive myelopathy. Spine 1999;24:1449.
72. Poggi M, Fuller B, et al. Intramedullary spinal cord metastasis from renal cell carcinoma: confirmation by positron emission tomography ( submitted).
73. Smoker WRK, Goderski JC, Knutzon RK, et al. The role of MR imaging in evaluating metastatic spinal disease. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1987;149:1241.
74. Godersky JC, Smoker WR, Knutzon R. Use of magnetic resonance imaging in the evaluation of metastatic spinal disease. Neurosurgery 1987;21:676.
75. Li KC, Poon PY. Sensitivity and specificity of MRI in detecting malignant spinal cord compression and in distinguishing malignant from benign compression fractures of vertebrae. Magn Reson
Imaging 1988;6:547.
76. Lien HH, Blomlie V, Heimdal K. Magnetic resonance imaging of malignant extradural tumors with acute spinal cord compression. Acta Radiol 1990;31:187.
77. Carmody RF, Yang PJ, Seeley GW, et al. Spinal cord compression due to metastatic disease: diagnosis with MR imaging versus myelography. Radiology 1989;173:225.
78. Quint DJ. Indications for emergent MRI of the central nervous system. JAMA 2000;283:853.
79. Ratanatharathorn V, Powers WE. Epidural spinal cord compression from metastatic tumor: diagnosis and guidelines for management. Cancer Treat Rev 1991;18:55.
80. Sze G. Magnetic resonance imaging in the evaluation of spinal tumors. Cancer 199115;67(Suppl 4):1229.
81. Hollis PH, Malis LI, Zappulla RA. Neurological deterioration after lumbar puncture below complete spinal subarachnoid block. J Neurosurg 1986;64:253.
82. Gomori JM, Heching N, Siegal T. Leptomeningeal metastases: evaluation by gadolinium enhanced spinal magnetic resonance imaging. J Neurooncol 1998;36:55.
83. Leviov M, Dale J, Stein M, et al. The management of metastatic spinal cord compression: a radiotherapeutic success ceiling. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:231.

84. Hicks F, Thom V, Alison D, Corcoran G. Spinal cord compression: the hospice perspective. J Palliat Care 1993;3:9.
85. Martenson JA, Evans RG, Lie MR, et al. Treatment outcome and complications in patients treated for malignant epidural spinal cord compression (SCC). J Neuro-Oncol 1985;3:77.
86. Maranzano E, Latini P, Perrucci E, et al. Short-course radiotherapy (8 Gy 2) in metastatic spinal cord compression: an effective and feasible treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1997;38:1037.
87. Maranzano E, Latini P, Beneventi S, et al. Comparison of two different radiotherapy schedules for spinal cord compression in prostate cancer. Tumori 1998;84:472.
88. Landmann C, Hunig R, Gratzl O. The role of laminectomy in the combined treatment of metastatic spinal cord compression. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:627.
89. Turner S, Marosszeky B, Timms I, Boyages J. Malignant spinal cord compression: a prospective evaluation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;26:141.
90. Sorensen PS, Borgesen SE, Rohde K, et al. Metastatic epidural spinal cord compression. Cancer 1990;65:1502.
91. Kim RY, Spencer SA, Meredith RF, et al. Extradural spinal cord compression: analysis of factors determining functional prognosisa prospective study. Radiology 1990;176:279.
92. Sundaresan N, Sachdev VP, Holland JF, et al. Surgical treatment of spinal cord compression from epidural metastasis. Clin Oncol 1995;13:2330.
93. Katagiri H, Takahashi M, Inagaki J, et al. Clinical results of nonsurgical treatment for spinal metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:1127.
94. Findlay GFG. The role of vertebral body collapse in the management of malignant spinal cord compression. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1987;50:151.
95. Findlay GFG. Adverse effects of the management of malignant spinal cord compression. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1984;47:761.
96. Harrington KD. Anterior cord compression and spinal stabilization for patients with metastatic lesions of the spine. J Neurosurg 1984;61:107.
97. Sundaresan N, DiGiacinto GV, Krol G, Hughes JEO. Spondylectomy for malignant tumors of the spine. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1485.
98. Moore AJ, Uttley D. Anterior decompression and stabilization of the spine in malignant disease. Neurosurgery 1989;24:713.
99. McLain RF. Endoscopically assisted decompression for metastatic thoracic neoplasms. Spine 1998;23:1130.
100. Nauck M, Karakiulakis G, Perruchoud AP, Papakonstantinou E, Roth M. Corticosteroids inhibit the expression of the vascular endothelial growth factor gene in human vascular smooth muscle
cells. Eur J Pharmacol 1998;341:309.
101. Nauck M, Roth M, Tamm M, et al. Induction of vascular endothelial growth factor by platelet-activating factor and platelet-derived growth factor is downregulated by corticosteroids. Am J Respir
Cell Mol Biol 1997;16:398.
102. Heimdal K, Hirschberg H, Slettebo H, Watne K, Nome O. High incidence of serious side effects of high-dose dexamethasone treatment in patients with epidural spinal cord compression. J
Neuro-Oncol 1992;12:141.
103. Byrne TN. Current concepts. Spinal cord compression from epidural metastases. N Engl J Med 1992;327:614.
104. Ottolenghi CE. Aspiration biopsy of the spine: technique for the thoracic spine and results of twenty-eight biopsies in this region and over-all results of 1050 biopsies of other spinal segments. J
Bone Joint Surg Am 1969;51:1531.
105. Adapon BD, Legada BD, Lim EVA, et al. CT-guided closed biopsy of the spine. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1981;5:73.
106. Bell GR. Surgical treatment of spinal tumors. Clin Orthop 1997;335:54.
107. Pennin RG, McBroom RJ. Spinal fixation after anterior decompression for symptomatic spinal metastasis. Neurosurgery 1988;22:324.
108. Moore AJ, Uttley D. Anterior decompression and stabilization of the spine in malignant disease. Neurosurgery 1989;24:713.
109. Choi IS, Berenstein A, Scott J. The use of ethyl alcohol in the treatment of malignant tumors. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1985;6:462.
110. Chiras J, Cognard C, Rose M, et al. Percutaneous injection of an alcoholic embolizing emulsion as an alternative preoperative embolization for spine tumor. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
1993;14:1113.
111. Cobb CA, Leavens ME, Eckles N. Indications for nonoperative treatment of spinal cord compression due to breast cancer. J Neurosurg 1977;47:653.
112. Helwig-Larsen S, Rasmusson B, Sorensen PS. Recovery of gait after radiotherapy in paralytic patients with metastatic epidural spinal cord compression. Neurology 1990;40:1234.
113. Henson JW, Posner JB. Neurologic complications. In: Holland JF, Frei E, Bast RC, et al., eds. Cancer medicine. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1993:2268.
114. Helweg-Larsen S, Sorensen PS, Kreiner S. Prognostic factors in metastatic spinal cord compression: a prospective study using multivariate analysis of variables influencing survival and gait
function in 153 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2000;46:1163.
115. Van der Sande JJ, Kroger R, Boogerd W. Multiple spinal epidural metastases; an unexpectedly frequent finding. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1990;53:1001.
116. Calkins AR, Olson MA, Ellis JH. Impact of myelography on the radiotherapeutic management of malignant spinal cord compression. Neurosurgery 1986;19:614.
117. Punt J, Pritchard J, Pincott J, Till K. Neuroblastoma: a review of 21 cases presenting with spinal cord compression. Cancer 1980;45:3095.
118. Friedman M, Kim TH, Panahon AM. Spinal cord compression in malignant lymphoma. Cancer 1976;37:1485.
119. Rate WR, Solin LJ, Turrisi AT. Palliative radiotherapy for metastatic malignant melanoma: brain metastases, bone metastases, and spinal cord compression. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1988;15:859.
120. Herbert SH, Solin LJ, Rate WR, Schultz DJ, Hanks GE. The effect of palliative radiation therapy on epidural compression due to metastatic malignant melanoma. Cancer 1991;67:2472.
121. Bates T. A review of local radiotherapy in the treatment of bone metastases and cord compression. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;23:217.
122. Podd TJ, Carpenter DS, Baughan CA, Percival D, Dyson P. Spinal cord compression: prognosis and implications for treatment fractionation. Clin Oncol 1992;4:341.
123. Faul CM, Flickinger JC. The use of radiation in the management of spinal metastases. J Neuro-Oncol 1995;23:149.
124. Leibel SA. ACR appropriateness criteria. Expert Panel on Radiation Oncology, American College of Radiology. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:125.
125. Hall E. Radiobiology for the radiologist, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1993.
126. Hayes FA, Thompson EI, Hvizdala E, O'Conor D, Green AA. Chemotherapy as an alternative to laminectomy and radiation in the management of epidural tumor. J Pediatr 1984;104:221.
127. Sinoff CL, Blumsohn A. Spinal cord compression in myelomatosis: response to chemotherapy alone. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1989;25:197.
128. Posner JB, Howieson J, Cvitkovic E. “Disappearing” spinal cord compression: oncolytic effect of glucocorticoids (and other chemotherapeutic agents) on epidural metastases. Ann Neurol
1977;2:409.
129. Boogerd W, van der Sande JJ, Kroger R, Bruning PF, Somers R. Effective systemic therapy for spinal epidural metastases from breast carcinoma. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1989;25:149.
130. Edelman IS. Paraplegia secondary to metastatic prostate cancer treated with stilbestrol: report of a case. Ann Intern Med 1949;31:1098.
131. Friedman HM, Sheetz S, Levine HL, Everett JR, Hong WK. Combination chemotherapy and radiation therapy. The medical management of epidural spinal cord compression from testicular
cancer. Arch Intern Med 1986;146:509.
132. Marshall LF, Langfitt TW. Combined therapy for metastatic extradural tumors of the spine. Cancer 1977;40:2067.
133. Burch PA, Grossman SA. Treatment of epidural cord compression from Hodgkin's disease with chemotherapy. Am J Med 1988;84:555.
134. Sanderson IR, Pritchard J, Marsh MT. Chemotherapy as the initial treatment of spinal cord compression due to disseminated neuoblastoma. J Neurosurg 1989;70:688.
135. Sasagawa J, Guton H, Miyabayashi H, Yamaquchi O, Shiraiara Y. Hormonal treatment of symptomatic spinal cord compression in advanced prostate cancer. Int Urol Nephrol 1991;21:351.
136. Clarke PRR, Saunders M. Steroid-induced remission in spinal canal reticulum cell sarcoma. J Neurosurg 1975;42:346.
137. Cooper K, Bajorin D, Shapiro W, et al. Decompression of epidural metastases from germ cell tumors with chemotherapy. J Neurooncol 1990;8:275.
138. Gonzalez-Barcena D, Vadillo-Buenfil M, Cortez-Morales A, et al. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone antagonist cetrorelix as primary single therapy in patients with advanced prostatic
cancer and paraplegia due to metastatic invasion of spinal cord. Urology 1995;45:275.
139. Wakisaka M, Takagishi Y. Paraparesis due to metastatic prostatic cancer effectively treated with a high dose of diethylstilbestrol diphosphate: a case report. Hinyokika Kiyo 1993;39:1055.
140. Gershanovich ML, Arkhipov AI, Vilensky BS. Nitrosourea derivatives for the treatment of Hodgkin's disease involving the central nervous system: a study of 23 cases. Bull Cancer (Paris)
1990;77:821.
141. Wallington M, Mendis S, Premawardhana U, Sanders P, Shahsavar-Haghighi K. Local control and survival in spinal cord compression from lymphoma and myeloma. Radiother Oncol
1997;42:43.
142. Rathmell AJ, Gospodarowicz MK, Sutcliffe SB, Clark RM. Localized extradural lymphoma: survival, relapse pattern and functional outcome. Radiother Oncol 1992;24:14.
143. Conrad EU 3d, Olszewski AD, Berger M, Powell E, Bruckner J. Pediatric spine tumors with spinal cord compromise. J Pediatr Orthop 1992;12:454.
144. King D, Goodman J, Hawk T, Boles ET Jr, Sayers MP. Dumbbell neuroblastomas in children. Arch Surg 1975;110:888.
145. Hoover M, Bowman LC, Crawford SE, et al. Long-term outcome of patients with intraspinal neuroblastoma. Med Pediatr Oncol 1999;32:353.
146. Schiff D, O'Neill BP. Intramedullary spinal cord metastases: clinical features and treatment outcome. Neurology 1996;47:906.
147. Törmä T. Malignant tumors of the spine and spinal epidural space: a study based on 250 histologically verified cases. Acta Chir Scand 1957;225:1.

SECTION 51.3 Metabolic Emergencies
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 51.3
Metabolic Emergencies
RAYMOND P. WARRELL, JR.
Introduction
Hypercalcemia
Epidemiology
Differential Diagnosis
Clinical Manifestations
Pathophysiology
Summary
Treatment of Cancer-Related Hypercalcemia
General Measures
Specific Measures
General Approach to Treatment of Hypercalcemia
Emergency Treatment of Hospitalized Patients
Ambulatory Management of Hypercalcemic Patients
Management of Chronic Recurrent Hypercalcemia
Hyperuricemia
Treatment
Tumor Lysis Syndrome
Treatment
Lactic Acidosis
Hypoglycemia
Pathophysiology
Therapy
Adrenal Failure
Clinical Manifestations
Evaluation and Treatment
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Patients with cancer may develop a number of metabolic and endocrinologic problems, frequently to an exaggerated degree. This section reviews metabolic
complications of cancer that require urgent therapy for treatment or prevention.

HYPERCALCEMIA
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Hypercalcemia is the most common life-threatening metabolic disorder in patients with cancer. The prevalence of this disorder approximates 15 to 20 cases per
100,000 persons.1,2 The incidence varies depending on the underlying cancer diagnosis, being highest in myeloma and breast cancer (approximately 40%),
intermediate in non–small cell lung cancer, and uncommon in colon, prostate, and small cell lung carcinomas. 3,4 and 5
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Hypercalcemia is associated with a wide variety of pathologic states ( Table 51.3-1). Primary hyperparathyroidism and cancer are the two most common causes of
hypercalcemia, and both diseases are prevalent. 6,7 Patients who present with a recent onset of symptomatic hypercalcemia and weight loss are more likely to have a
malignant disorder. In hypercalcemic patients who require hospitalization, cancer has been previously diagnosed or becomes apparent after minimal diagnostic
evaluation in most cases. By contrast, asymptomatic hypercalcemia and chronic symptoms are the most common presentations of primary hyperparathyroidism. The
diagnostic evaluation and differential diagnosis of patients with hypercalcemia have been reviewed. 8,9 and 10 Generally, an elevation in serum calcium with a low or
normal serum immunoreactive parathyroid hormone (PTH) level, especially when combined with an increase in serum PTH-related protein (see Parathyroid Hormone
and the Parathyroid Hormone–Related Protein , later in this chapter) can exclude the diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism with high confidence. 11

TABLE 51.3-1. Diseases Associated with Hypercalcemia

Serum calcium is highly bound to albumin, and measurements of total serum calcium fluctuate with changes in serum protein concentrations. Occasional patients with
myeloma present with striking elevations of total serum calcium due solely to an increase in serum calcium-binding proteins. 12 Measurements of ionized calcium by
ion-specific electrode are essential in such cases. However, for most patients an approximate estimate of the severity of hypercalcemia can be made by using one of
several formulas that adjust serum calcium levels for serum albumin concentration, as follows:
Corrected [calcium] (mg/dL)* = measured [calcium] (mg/dL) – [albumin] (g/dL) + 4.0 13
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Patients with hypercalcemia can present with a wide variety of symptoms affecting multiple organ symptoms ( Table 51.3-2). The severity of the presentation is not
exclusively related to the degree of elevation in serum calcium. Patients with a slight-to-moderate elevation (12 to 13 mg/dL) may be obtunded if the increase has
occurred acutely. Conversely, patients with long-standing hypercalcemia (such as those with parathyroid carcinoma) may tolerate a serum calcium greater than 14
mg/dL with few symptoms. Other factors (especially age, performance status, sites of metastases, and hepatic or renal dysfunction) also contribute to the severity of
symptoms.

TABLE 51.3-2. Clinical Manifestations of Cancer-Related Hypercalcemia

In patients with evolving hypercalcemia, fatigue, lethargy, constipation, nausea, and polyuria are the most common initial complaints. It is important to evaluate the
serum calcium in patients who have these relatively nonspecific complaints because the combination of polyuria and nausea can lead to rapid dehydration and
substantial worsening of the hypercalcemic state. Patients in late stages may present in stupor or coma, and the condition is easily mistaken for diabetic ketoacidosis
or drug overdose.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
In the past, cancer-related hypercalcemia was conveniently categorized according to the presence or absence of bone involvement. Hypercalcemia in the former
group was believed to be associated with direct bone destruction by cancer cells (so-called local osteolytic hypercalcemia), and the second group was characterized
by various humorally mediated mechanisms.14 However, it is now evident that hypercalcemia, even in patients with extensive osteolysis, is mediated by factors
released by malignant cells that ultimately act to resorb calcium from bone. Some of these factors also stimulate calcium reabsorption from the renal tubule, but this
effect is secondary in importance to accelerated osteoclastic bone resorption.
Parathyroid Hormone and the Parathyroid Hormone–Related Protein
Many patients with cancer-related hypercalcemia have biochemical characteristics suggestive of PTH stimulation, including increased tubular reabsorption of calcium,
hypophosphatemia with phosphaturia, and elevated levels of nephrogenous cyclic adenosine monophosphate. However, most studies of ectopic hyperparathyroidism
were based on bioassays or measurements of immunoreactive material.15 Studies examining PTH-specific mRNA in tumors have confirmed that ectopic PTH
production is not a common cause of cancer-related hypercalcemia. 16 Other than cases of parathyroid carcinoma, 17 tumor secretion of authentic PTH by malignant
tumors is exceptionally rare. 18,19 Nonetheless, primary hyperparathyroidism caused by parathyroid adenomas is a common feature of the heritable multiple endocrine
neoplasia syndromes 1 and 2a.
A PTH-related protein (PTH-RP), which is elaborated by cancer cells and binds to the PTH receptor, has now been fully characterized. 20,21,22 and 23 Genes encoding
PTH-RP and authentic human PTH have been mapped to the short arms of chromosomes 12 and 11, respectively. The proteins are homologous for only 8 of the first
13 amino acids in the amino-terminal portion, which contains the receptor-binding domain. PTH-RP is widely distributed in normal tissues such as brain, kidney,
parathyroid, skin, atrium, uterus, and breast. 24,25,26 and 27 PTH-RP mediates the effects of a protein known as Indian hedgehog that is a negative regulator of
chondrocyte differentiation. 28,29 The protein seems to be involved only in local signaling and under normal conditions is not released into the general circulation.
Although at least one case of elevated PTH-RP has been reported in association with a benign tumor (called humoral hypercalcemia of benignancy),30 this
phenomenon is extremely rare. PTH-RP appears to be the most common mediator of cancer-related hypercalcemia. 31,32,33,34,35,36 and 37 Increased blood levels of
PTH-RP are commonly found in patients with solid tumors ( Fig. 51.3-1), particularly patients with squamous (epidermoid) carcinomas. 32,33 and 34 Elevated serum
PTH-RP levels have been found in 30% to 50% of hypercalcemic patients with breast cancer, 33,34 and 35 even though this disease was formerly thought to characterize
the bone metastasis form of hypercalcemia. The factor does not appear to be associated with most hematologic cancers such as myeloma or lymphoma. 32,33 and 34,36
However, the viral tax protein transactivates the PTH-RP gene promoter, 38,39 and high levels of PTH-RP have been reported in patients with human T-cell
lymphotropic virus 1–associated leukemia and lymphoma. 40 The factor is elaborated at sites of bone metastases in breast 41 and prostate42 cancer, and women with
high basal levels of immunoreactive PTH-RP in the primary tumor appear more likely to develop metastases in bone than in soft tissues. 43 The absolute serum level of
PTH-RP is not affected by hypocalcemic treatment. 44,45 Several studies have shown that patients with high levels tend to have an inferior response when treated with
bisphosphonates 46,47 and a poorer life expectancy. 48

FIGURE 51.3-1. Plasma levels of parathyroid-related protein (PTHrP) in normocalcemic control patients with solid tumors, patients with solid tumors with (BM+) or
without (BM-) bone metastases or in whom the presence or absence of bone metastases was not determined (BM?), patients with various hematologic cancers, and
patients with primary hyperparathyroidism (pHPT). (From ref. 34, with permission.)

Vitamin D3
Elevated serum 1,25 (OH) 2-vitamin D3 levels have been reported in patients with Hodgkin's disease, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, myeloma, 49,50,51 and 52 and occasional
patients with solid tumors. 53 This effect probably results from increased enzymatic conversion of 25-OH-vitamin D 3 by 1a-vitamin D-hydroxylase, similar to
well-documented processes that occur in patients with granulomatous disease. However, these observations do not necessarily establish an etiologic association.
The measured elevations in serum vitamin D 3 concentrations in such patients have generally been well below levels that are known to cause hypercalcemia in
patients with sarcoidosis. 54 The levels are also below serum levels in subjects who have ingested oral calcitriol and who remain normocalcemic. 55 Moreover, serum
vitamin D3 levels may not be appropriately suppressed in hypercalcemic patients with elevated PTH-RP levels. 56 Whether vitamin D 3 plays a critical pathophysiologic
role, acting alone or in concert with other factors, or acts merely as a marker of tumor burden is still unclear. Nonetheless, normalization of serum vitamin D 3 levels
and resolution of hypercalcemia occur with control of the underlying disease.
Prostaglandins
Prostaglandins have long been implicated as circulating mediators of cancer-related hypercalcemia, and certain prostaglandins (notably of the E series) have potent

bone-resorptive activity in vitro.57 Although occasional hormonally induced flares of hypercalcemia in breast cancer have been linked to prostaglandin release, 58
cancer-related hypercalcemia rarely responds clinically to treatment with classic cyclooxygenase inhibitors (such as aspirin or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs). 57,59 Furthermore, circulating levels of prostaglandin E in hypercalcemic patients are far too low to account for the observed degree of accelerated bone
resorption. 60 Thus, prostaglandins may have an important (but time-dependent and highly focal) role in cancer-related osteolysis. 61
Cytokines
A number of soluble osteoclast-activating factors have been isolated that are potent inducers of bone resorption in vitro. The transforming growth factors (TGFs) are
released in an autocrine manner by many cancer cells and regulate both resorption and formation of normal bone. TGF-a shares partial amino acid homology with
epidermal growth factor, binds to the epidermal growth factor receptor, and is a potent inducer of bone resorption in vitro, both alone and in combination with
PTH-RP.62,63 Conversely, TGF-b is secreted by osteoblasts and may regulate osteoblast growth and differentiation. Thus, dysregulated TGF secretion might lead to
uncoupling of the normal processes of bone resorption and formation and could partly account for the mixed lytic and blastic appearance of skeletal metastases in
diseases such as breast and prostate cancer.
Interleukin-6 increases bone resorption in vitro,64 acts as an autocrine growth factor in myeloma, 65 and may be associated with hypercalcemia in kidney cancer. 66
Hypercalcemia induced in vivo by interleukin-6 administration is blocked by treatment with specific neutralizing antibodies. 67 Other cytokines, including interleukin-1, 68
tumor-derived hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors, 69 and tumor necrosis factor [particularly tumor necrosis factor-b (lymphotoxin)], 70 are also potent inducers of
bone resorption in vitro. However, clinical therapy with suprapharmacologic amounts of therapeutic recombinant cytokines is not associated with hypercalcemia. Thus,
although the focal interaction of these factors at sites of bone involvement may be complex, there is little evidence that circulating cytokines are important mediators of
cancer-related hypercalcemia.
SUMMARY
With the discovery of the PTH-RP and its high prevalence in patients with cancer-related hypercalcemia, a unifying hypothesis for the etiology of this syndrome has
become more apparent. PTH-RP, not normally released to the general circulation, is a potent mediator of hypercalcemia. In general, patients who elaborate this
factor, particularly patients with epidermoid carcinomas, are more resistant to treatment with antihypercalcemic drugs. Osteotropic tumors, such as breast and
prostate cancer, appear to require proximity to bone in order to effect bone resorption, possibly via release of TGFs, PTH-RP, prostaglandins, or all three. The
extensive osteolysis observed in multiple myeloma may be due to focally increased production of interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-b that accelerates bone
resorption by normal osteoclasts. A large number of patients with cancer have lytic bone disease, but only a small proportion develop hypercalcemia; thus, interaction
of these factors and amplification of the pathophysiology by the kidney must also occur.

TREATMENT OF CANCER-RELATED HYPERCALCEMIA
GENERAL MEASURES
Although the best treatment for cancer-related hypercalcemia is therapy directed at the underlying disease, hypercalcemia most commonly occurs in patients with
advanced disease who have failed prior cytotoxic therapy. The usual therapies for hypercalcemia are directed at decreasing serum calcium by increasing urinary
calcium excretion or decreasing bone resorption by inhibition of osteoclast function. 71,72 For practical purposes, increased intestinal absorption of calcium does not
make an important contribution to hypercalcemia in patients with cancer. Low-calcium diets are generally unpalatable and distinctly ineffective; their use is strongly
discouraged.
Where possible, immobilization should be minimized because inactivity tends to aggravate hypercalcemia. Drugs that inhibit urinary calcium excretion (e.g., thiazides)
or agents that may decrease renal blood flow (nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and H 2-receptor antagonists) should be discontinued if possible. Patients should
be carefully interviewed with respect to dietary aberrations, and medications containing calcium, vitamin D, vitamin A, or other retinoids should be stopped.
Formerly, hypercalcemic patients were commonly treated with vigorous intravenous hydration and diuretics for several days, and specific hypocalcemic drugs were
reserved for patients who did not respond to hydration. As noted in Intravenous Fluids and Diuretics , later in this chapter, this approach is outdated. Most patients
benefit substantially from the early introduction of specific antihypercalcemic therapy, and this approach leads to more rapid clinical improvement, lower overall
toxicity, and decreased cost.
SPECIFIC MEASURES
Until recently, the literature on the treatment of cancer-related hypercalcemia contained few controlled studies. Interpretation of older clinical trial results is therefore
confounded by enormous variability in patient selection, underlying diagnoses, severity of hypercalcemia, and unique methods of reporting results. 73Figure 51.3-2
depicts results from four major clinical studies, all of which were well-designed, randomized, double-blinded, and which generally employed similar entry and response
criteria. Table 51.3-3 summarizes current therapies with an estimate of their relative clinical efficacy in acutely restoring normocalcemia.

FIGURE 51.3-2. Results from four randomized double-blind comparisons of the major drugs used for acute treatment of cancer-related hypercalcemia. Bars depict
proportion of patients who achieved a normal serum calcium value subsequent to treatment with the assigned agent. All analyses are based on intent to treat.
Numbers at bottom indicate number of patients responding over number of patients treated per group. The test drugs were administered on the following
dose-schedules: (A) gallium nitrate (200 mg/m 2) as a continuous IV infusion daily for 5 days, and etidronate (7.5 mg/kg) as a 4-hour infusion daily for 5 days131; (B)
pamidronate (60 mg) as a single 24-hour infusion, and etidronate (7.5 mg/kg) as a 4-hour infusion daily for 3 days90; (C) alendronate (10 or 15 mg) as a single 2-hour
infusion, and etidronate (7.5 mg/kg) as a 4-hour infusion daily for 3 days105; (D) gallium nitrate (200 mg/m 2) as a continuous IV infusion daily for 5 days, and
pamidronate (60 or 90 mg) as a single 24-hour infusion. 95

TABLE 51.3-3. Therapy for the Treatment of Cancer-Related Hypercalcemia

Intravenous Fluids and Diuretics
Hypercalcemic patients frequently present with dehydration owing to vomiting and obligate water losses associated with calciuresis. Fluid repletion, usually with
isotonic saline, has been a mainstay of acute therapy, because volume expansion and natriuresis can increase renal blood flow and enhance calcium excretion. 74 The
rate of fluid administration depends on a clinical estimate of the extent of dehydration, cardiovascular function, and renal excretory capacity. Assuming renal and
cardiac functions are adequate, saline infusion at a rate of 300 to 400 or more mL/h can be used for 3 to 4 hours in severely dehydrated patients. Slower hydration is
indicated for less severe disturbances or in patients with congestive heart failure or oliguria. Serum calcium, creatinine, potassium, and magnesium should be
reassessed frequently during this period.
The heroic degrees of saline hydration and forced diuresis that made up past therapy for cancer-related hypercalcemia 75 are no longer indicated. Such treatment is
excessively toxic since it frequently causes fluid overload and occasionally life-threatening pulmonary edema. The resulting weight gain and lower extremity edema
that occurs in hypoproteinemic patients with advanced cancer may not resolve during the life of that individual and can be severely disabling. Moreover, hydration
(with or without diuretics) is not very effective. In a prospective study of 16 patients with serum calcium greater than or equal to 13.0 mg/dL (3.25 mmol/L), only five
patients (31%) achieved normocalcemia with normal saline (4000 cc/d × 2 days). 76 Although furosemide-induced natriuresis theoretically enhances urinary calcium
excretion, no controlled studies were ever conducted to indicate that hypercalcemic patients benefit from routine furosemide treatment. Furosemide also increases the
risk for developing hypovolemia; the resultant decrease in glomerular filtration may actually stimulate renal calcium reabsorption, inadvertently reinduce dehydration,
and worsen the clinical condition. Therefore, the use of furosemide should be restricted to balancing fluid intake and urinary output in patients who have been fully
rehydrated. In most hospitalized patients, fluid administration should not be employed alone, and treatment with antiresorptive drugs should be initiated promptly
following rehydration for control of hypercalcemia.
Bisphosphonates
Bisphosphonates (formerly diphosphonates), chemical analogues of pyrophosphate that are resistant to hydrolysis by pyrophosphatase, have become the most
commonly used drugs for the treatment of hypercalcemia. Bisphosphonates adsorb to the surface of crystalline hydroxyapatite and inhibit calcium release from bone
by interfering with the metabolic activity of osteoclasts. 77 There are numerous bisphosphonates available or undergoing clinical investigation, including etidronate,
clodronate, pamidronate, zoledronate, alendronate, tiludronate, ibandronate, and risedronate. As a class, bisphosphonates have low oral bioavailability (less than
1%), and none of these agents is currently recommended as an oral therapy for hypercalcemia.
Intravenous pamidronate has become the most widely prescribed drug for treatment of hypercalcemia. This drug is well-tolerated and its side effects are usually
limited to infusion-site irritation, fever, and flu-like symptoms that occur after the first infusion in approximately 20% of patients. Although multiple doses and schedules
have been tested, 78,79 pamidronate is most commonly given at doses of 60 or 90 mg infused over 2 hours. Although the higher dose has been suggested for patients
with more sever hypercalcemia (e.g., a total serum calcium greater than 13.0 mg/dL), there are conflicting data whether any substantial dose-response relationship
exists above 60 mg.80,81,82 and 83 Similar doses have been widely used to reduce skeletal morbidity from bone metastases. 84
Considerable data indicate that the response to pamidronate is inferior in patients whose hypercalcemia is mediated by PTH-RP. 85,86,87 and 88 The hypocalcemic effect
also appears to decrease with repeated dosing. 88 This reduced activity is clinically important because PTH-RP is the most common cause of cancer-related
hypercalcemia.
Alendronate has also been studied by the intravenous route in hypercalcemia, 89,90 but this formulation is not widely available. The usual doses are 10 or 15 mg
administered over 2 hours. Oral alendronate is widely used for treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis; however, there are no data available supporting oral
alendronate as a treatment for hypercalcemia. Based on similarly designed randomized studies compared with etidronate (see Fig. 51.3-2),78,89 pamidronate and
alendronate appear to have comparable degrees of clinical efficacy.
Among other bisphosphonates, etidronate has been compared with pamidronate, alendronate, and gallium nitrate in randomized double-blind studies. The response
to etidronate in all three studies was similar: 42%, 33%, and 43%, respectively 78,83,89 (see Fig. 51.3-2). This result was significantly inferior relative to each of the other
agents tested, and these data have largely accounted for its diminished use. Clodronate is available in Europe, but current data suggest that it is not as effective as
pamidronate.91,92 Ibandronate 93 and zoledronate 94,95 are other bisphosphonates undergoing clinical testing that are more potent (on a milligram per milligram basis)
than earlier bisphosphonates. However, it is unclear if increased potency will translate to improved clinical efficacy, and early results suggest comparable clinical
activity.
Gallium Nitrate
Gallium nitrate is a potent inhibitor of bone resorption. 96,97 and 98 Elemental gallium is incorporated into bone 99,100 and renders hydroxyapatite less soluble and more
resistant to cell-mediated resorption. 126 However, the drug's principal mechanism of action is inhibition of an ATPase-dependent proton pump that is located in the
ruffled membrane of the osteoclast. 101 This effect impairs osteoclast acidification and consequent dissolution of the underlying bone matrix. Randomized double-blind
studies have demonstrated superiority of gallium nitrate compared with calcitonin 102 and etidronate 103 for acute treatment of resistant hypercalcemia, and preliminary
data from one study also suggested superiority compared with pamidronate (see Fig. 51.3-2).83
Following administration as a continuous intravenous infusion (200 mg/m 2/d over 24 hours for up to 5 days), gallium nitrate induces normocalcemia in 70% to 90% of
patients. 83,96,102,103 The maximal hypocalcemic effect occurs several days after the drug has been discontinued; therefore, the drug infusion should be discontinued
once the patient has achieved normocalcemia. In earlier studies that used high-dose gallium nitrate as primary cancer treatment, nephrotoxicity was dose-limiting;
however, the incidence of renal insufficiency in controlled hypercalcemia studies has been similar to calcitonin, etidronate, and pamidronate. 83,102,103 Like the
bisphosphonates, gallium nitrate should be started after the patient has been rehydrated and urinary output ensured. A daily urinary output of 2000 mL should be
maintained during the infusion. Concurrent use of highly nephrotoxic drugs, such as aminoglycosides, amphotericin B, and cisplatin, should be avoided.
Calcitonin
Pharmacologic doses of calcitonin reduce serum calcium by increasing renal calcium excretion and inhibiting bone resorption. 104 Calcitonin is especially
advantageous due to its rapid onset of action (2 to 4 hours) 102,105 and its lack of serious toxicity (other than rare hypersensitivity reactions). Notwithstanding these
desirable features, the hypocalcemic effect of calcitonin is relatively weak; the acute response peaks at 48 hours and diminishes thereafter despite continued
treatment.102 Less than 30% of hypercalcemic patients treated with calcitonin as a single agent achieve a normal serum calcium value. High doses of calcitonin (6 to 8
IU/kg every 6 hours) should be employed for acute treatment of hypercalcemia. Absent thrombocytopenia, the drug should be administered intramuscularly rather
than subcutaneously to ensure complete absorption. Corticosteroids probably do not enhance the hypocalcemic effects of calcitonin in patients whose underlying
disease is not steroid-responsive. 102 The drug does not appear to be effective when administered by nasal insufflation. 106 Because of its rapid action, calcitonin has
been increasingly used in combination with more potent antiresorptive drugs such as gallium nitrate and pamidronate, and this combination, in addition to vigorous
intravenous hydration, is excellent therapy for critically ill patients with acute severe hypercalcemia. 107
Corticosteroids
Corticosteroids acutely inhibit osteoclast-mediated bone resorption in vitro108 and decrease gastrointestinal calcium resorption. 109 Corticosteroids are most useful in
patients whose underlying tumor is responsive to the cytostatic action of these drugs. These diseases include myeloma, lymphoma, leukemia, and occasional patients
with carcinoma of the breast (particularly those who have a hypercalcemic flare during hormonal therapy). Corticosteroids do not have consistent hypocalcemic

activity in other diseases 110,111 and should not be used in these conditions due to adverse effects. Prednisone (40 to 100 mg/d or its equivalent) is usually effective in
controlling hypercalcemia caused by hematologic cancers; lower doses (15 to 30 mg/d) may suffice for patients with hypercalcemic flares caused by breast cancer.
However, most patients who require therapy should be treated with a specific antiresorptive drug.
Phosphates
An increase in serum phosphorus concentration decreases osteoclastic activity, inhibits calcium resorption from bone, and causes a significant reduction in urinary
calcium excretion.112 However, administration of exogenous phosphate to hypercalcemic patients also shifts calcium from blood to other tissues that can result in
severe toxicity. Oral phosphate (0.5 to 3.0 g/d) may be highly effective, particularly in mild forms of hypercalcemia 113; principal side effects are diarrhea and nausea,
which may lead to noncompliance. Serum phosphorus concentrations should be monitored in all patients who receive phosphates, especially patients with decreased
renal function or preexisting hyperphosphatemia. 114 Serum creatinine should be regularly monitored to avoid renal insufficiency. When the [calcium × phosphorus
product] (expressed in milligrams per deciliter) exceeds 55, phosphate should be discontinued.
Intravenous phosphate is highly effective and the onset of hypocalcemic action occurs more rapidly than with any other hypocalcemic therapy. However, renal failure,
hypotension, extraskeletal calcification, and severe hypocalcemia are common sequelae of parenteral phosphate therapy, 115 and the use of intravenous phosphate
has largely been abandoned. Although uncommon, these effects have occasionally been seen with oral phosphates. 114,116
Plicamycin
Plicamycin (formerly mithramycin) induces hypocalcemia by a direct cytotoxic effect on osteoclasts, 117 thereby decreasing cell-mediated bone resorption. Plicamycin
is administered at doses ranging from 10 to 50 µg/kg of body weight. The usual dose is 25 µg/kg or a total dose of 1.5 to 2.0 mg given as a brief infusion. Since the
onset of action occurs after 24 to 48 hours, 118,119 doses should not be repeated more frequently than every 2 days. Except for nausea, single injections are generally
well tolerated; the incidence of adverse effects (renal insufficiency, hepatotoxicity, thrombocytopenia, and a hemorrhagic diathesis) increases with multiple
injections. 120

GENERAL APPROACH TO TREATMENT OF HYPERCALCEMIA
Patients with hypercalcemia can be divided according to those who require urgent in-hospital therapy and those for whom outpatient therapy can be considered.
Table 51.3-4 presents a list of considerations that influence this level of care decision. Hospitalization should be considered for any patient with a serum calcium
greater than 12.0 mg/dL or for any patient with significant signs and symptoms, particularly nausea, dehydration, or confusion. Hypercalcemia that has evolved slowly
may rapidly progress after a patient begins vomiting or if mentation is impaired.

TABLE 51.3-4. Approach to the Management of Patients with Cancer-Related Hypercalcemia: Criteria to Ascertain Level of Care

EMERGENCY TREATMENT OF HOSPITALIZED PATIENTS
Intravenous hydration should be initiated immediately in patients who require hospitalization. Furosemide should be given only if diuresis is inadequate or to treat
problems related to fluid retention. Most patients with significant hypercalcemia (total calcium greater than or equal to 12.0 mg/dL) do not respond satisfactorily to
intravenous fluids, and pamidronate, which is now first-line therapy, should be administered shortly after hydration has been started and satisfactory urinary output
established. Patients who do not respond to two pamidronate infusions (administered 48 to 72 hours apart) should be considered for additional therapy, such as
gallium nitrate. For patients with a serum calcium greater than or equal to 15.0 mg/dL or severe symptoms (e.g., coma, cardiac irritability), calcitonin (8 U/kg as an
intramuscular injection every 6 hours for 2 to 3 days) can be added immediately to provide an acute hypocalcemic effect. 107,121 Corticosteroids should also be given,
but only if the underlying disease is steroid-responsive. Mithramycin should generally be reserved for patients without thrombocytopenia or significant renal or hepatic
dysfunction who do not respond to pamidronate or gallium nitrate. Hypercalcemic patients with marked renal insufficiency (especially those with myeloma) should be
considered candidates for immediate dialysis. 122
AMBULATORY MANAGEMENT OF HYPERCALCEMIC PATIENTS
One of the major goals of outpatient therapy is to reduce the need for hospitalization. Ambulatory patients must receive clear instructions regarding increased oral
fluid intake. The amount of fluid should be stated in terms that the patient and family understand. It is imperative that a family member or companion attend the patient
to ensure that nausea caused by worsening hypercalcemia does not lead to further dehydration. Diuretics such as furosemide should not be added since the risk of
dehydration outweighs any theoretical benefits in ambulatory patients who are not edematous.
The most commonly used therapy is pamidronate (60 to 90 mg intravenously over 2 to 4 hours). The schedule can be titrated according to the patients needs, but the
drug is usually given every 7 to 14 days. Oral bisphosphonates are not useful. In patients with PTH-RP–mediated hypercalcemia, neutral phosphorus (1 to 3 g/d in
divided doses) can be quite useful in the setting of hypophosphatemia, so long as renal function is maintained. Oral corticosteroids are helpful if the underlying
disease is steroid-responsive. The use of calcitonin has largely been supplanted by the bisphosphonates. Plicamycin can also be administered in doses of 10 to 25
µg/kg once or twice per week with close monitoring for evidence of myelosuppression or changes in renal or hepatic function. 123
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC RECURRENT HYPERCALCEMIA
The management of acute hypercalcemic episodes is relatively straightforward. However, an increasing problem is the patient whose underlying disease is poorly or
incompletely responsive to primary antitumor therapy, and who continues to develop multiple episodes of hypercalcemia. In this setting, the primary goal of treatment
is to prevent exacerbations that require repeated hospitalization. Several principles underlie the management of such patients. First, hypocalcemic treatment must be
given on a chronic schedule and must not reserved for treatment of acute recurrent episodes, even if the patient is relatively normocalcemic. Second, the dosing
schedule of pamidronate, once initiated, can be progressively intensified up to a maximum of 90 mg IV twice per week. Third, hypocalcemic drugs should be
continued indefinitely unless the patient has sustained a major antitumor response. Patients should not be declared pamidronate -resistant. Rather, the
bisphosphonate should be continued on a maximally intensive schedule and additional drugs, including gallium nitrate, calcitonin, oral phosphate, and plicamycin,
should be added to the regimen until the serum calcium can be consistently maintained below 12.0 mg/dL.

HYPERURICEMIA
Uric acid is formed as a result of the sequential catalysis of hypoxanthine and xanthine by xanthine oxidase. Renal insufficiency develops when urine becomes
supersaturated with urate and crystals of uric acid form in the renal tubules and distal collecting system. 124 Uric acid stones may also develop, although this

presentation is more commonly associated with chronic hyperuricemia.
Renal complications and arthritis are the most important consequences of acute or chronic hyperuricemia. The disorder occurs most commonly in hematologic
neoplasms, particularly the leukemias, high-grade lymphomas, and myeloproliferative diseases. 125,126 and 127 Acute urate nephropathy has also been reported after
chemotherapy for solid tumors. Patients at highest risk include those with bulky high-grade lymphomas, patients with high leukocyte counts undergoing
remission-induction chemotherapy for acute or chronic leukemia, and individuals with preexisting renal impairment (especially those with ureteral obstruction).
Hyperuricemia is also a side effect of certain agents, notably diuretics (thiazides and furosemide), and antituberculosis drugs (pyrazinamide, ethambutol, and nicotinic
acid).
TREATMENT
Recognition of patients at risk is essential for proper therapy. It is essential that prophylactic measures be undertaken before cytotoxic therapy is initiated. Drugs that
tend to elevate serum urate or that produce an acidic urine (thiazides and salicylates) should be withdrawn. All patients should receive intravenous hydration to
correct preexisting deficits of intravascular volume and to ensure continued urinary output. Increased urinary volume decreases the concentration of urate in urine and
thus minimizes problems with respect to urate solubility. 128 Although furosemide theoretically promotes increased tubular urate reabsorption, this effect is outweighed
by its acute diuretic action; thus, the drug can be safely used to maintain satisfactory urine output so long as fluid status and serum electrolytes are monitored and
replaced. Alkalinization of the urine should be initiated to maintain a urine pH greater than or equal to 7.0. Although oral sodium bicarbonate can be used, it is usually
simpler to add sodium bicarbonate solution (50 to 100 mmol/L) to intravenous fluids and then to adjust the admixture so that an alkaline urine pH is maintained.
Acetazolamide (an inhibitor of carbonic anhydrase) may be used to increase the effects of alkalinization. However, it must be emphasized that alkalinization is
secondary to the overall goal of decreasing urinary uric acid concentration by increasing urinary volume.
The mainstay of current drug therapy is allopurinol, which inhibits xanthine oxidase and consequently increases plasma and urinary concentrations of xanthine and
hypoxanthine. Although xanthine is somewhat more soluble than uric acid, allopurinol has occasionally been associated with renal failure due to xanthine
nephropathy.129 The drug is generally well tolerated. The most common adverse reaction is a blanching, erythematous skin rash that indicates hypersensitivity. The
onset of this reaction is usually delayed for several days after initial administration, and the drug can usually be continued throughout periods of greatest risk in
patients who have not had prior exposure. In acute situations, the drug is administered orally once or twice per day in daily doses ranging from 300 to 900 mg. The
dose of certain drugs that are metabolized by xanthine oxidase (e.g., 6-mercaptopurine) must be substantially reduced during treatment with allopurinol.
Patients in renal failure and allopurinol-sensitive individuals represent uncommon but difficult management problems. 130 Intravenous administration of uricase has also
been useful in certain circumstances. 131,132 In the face of acute oliguria, ultrasonography or computed tomographic (CT) scanning should be used to evaluate possible
ureteral obstruction by urate calculi. Administration of intravenous contrast agents for pyelography should be avoided due to an increased risk of acute tubular
necrosis.133 Peritoneal or hemodialysis has been quite effective in reversing renal failure due to urate deposition.

TUMOR LYSIS SYNDROME
The tumor lysis syndrome occurs as a result of the rapid release of intracellular contents into the blood stream, which then increase to life-threatening concentrations.
The syndrome is characterized by hyperuricemia, hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, and hypocalcemia. 127,134,135 Lethal cardiac arrhythmias are the most serious
consequences of hyperkalemia. Hyperphosphatemia may result in acute renal failure. 136,137 Elevated serum phosphorus may also decrease renal function, which can
lead to further reductions in urinary potassium and phosphate excretion. Hypocalcemia, a result of hyperphosphatemia, may cause muscle cramps, cardiac
arrhythmias, and tetany.138
The tumor lysis syndrome occurs most commonly in diseases with large tumor burdens and high proliferative fractions that are exquisitely sensitive to cytotoxic
treatment. These disorders include high-grade lymphomas, 139 leukemias with high leukocyte counts, 140 and (much less commonly) solid tumors.141,142 The syndrome
has been observed not only with agents that have potent myelosuppressive activity, but also with drugs such as interferon-a, 143 tamoxifen,144 cladribine, 145 and
intrathecal methotrexate. 146 Although not related to tumor lysis, severe hypocalcemia has been associated with estrogenic treatment of prostate cancer 147 and with
accelerated bone formation in patients with leukemia. 148
TREATMENT
Recognition of risk and prevention are essential to management. Patients at risk should be identified before the initiation of chemotherapy. If possible, intravenous
hydration should be started 24 to 48 hours before administration of chemotherapy. Any acid–base or electrolyte disorders should be corrected (although intravenous
administration of sodium bicarbonate may aggravate symptoms of hypocalcemia). Treatment with allopurinol should be undertaken along with other measures to
minimize hyperuricemia as described previously. Serum electrolytes, uric acid, phosphorus, calcium, and creatinine should be checked every few hours for 3 to 4 days
after initiating cytotoxic treatment. The frequency of monitoring should depend on the clinical condition of the patient. If significant hyperkalemia or hypocalcemia
become evident, an electrocardiogram should be obtained and the cardiac rhythm should be monitored while these abnormalities are corrected. In most patients,
hypocalcemia can be corrected with intravenous administration of calcium gluconate; however, patients who have persistent hypocalcemia should be treated with
calcitriol until the syndrome resolves. 149 Hyperkalemia (serum [K+] greater than or equal to 5.0 mg/dL) should be treated with an oral sodium-potassium exchange
resin (e.g., Kayexalate, 15 g orally every 6 hours) or with combined insulin and glucose therapy.
In the face of acutely worsening renal function after administration of chemotherapy, consideration should be given to the early initiation of renal dialysis in order to
rapidly control serum concentrations of potassium, calcium, phosphate, and uric acid, as well as other problems related to uremia. The dose of many drugs, especially
antineoplastics, requires substantial modification in the presence of renal insufficiency.

LACTIC ACIDOSIS
Lactic acidosis is a rare but potentially severe metabolic complication in patients with cancer. Type A lactic acidosis results from impaired delivery of oxygen to
peripheral tissue and is commonly seen with shock and septicemia. Type B lactic acidosis is associated with a variety of diseases (including diabetes, renal failure,
liver disease, infection, and cancer) as well as drugs (such as metformin), toxins, and hereditary diseases. 150,151 and 152 Lactic acidosis is characterized by decreased
arterial pH (less than 7.37) secondary to accumulation of blood lactate (greater than 2 mEq/L). The disorder is a consequence of both increased lactate production
and impaired use. Lactate is a metabolite of pyruvate and is produced in a cytosolic reaction catalyzed by lactic dehydrogenase, an enzyme with an absolute
requirement for nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD). Consequently, the concentrations of pyruvate, hydrogen ion, and NAD regulate lactate metabolism.
Accelerated glycogenolysis increases pyruvate production and decreases tissue oxygen, which in turn decreases levels of NAD. As NAD is depleted,
gluconeogenesis is halted and pyruvate increases. Anaerobic metabolism of pyruvate to lactate is increased, which also leads to accumulation of NADH and
hydrogen ion.153
In a review of 25 cases of lactic acidosis in which the underlying tumor was believed to represent the primary etiologic factor, more than two-thirds were associated
with leukemia or lymphoma.154 The development of lactic acidosis coincided with the onset of progressive disease in the hematologic cancers, whereas most patients
with solid tumors had extensive liver metastases. Antiviral drugs, such as azidothymidine and fialuridine, have produced hepatic failure and severe lactic
acidosis.155,156 Typically, the patient with lactic acidosis presents with hyperventilation and hypotension. Nonspecific clinical symptoms such as tachycardia, weakness,
nausea, and stupor may proceed to frank shock as the acidosis worsens. Laboratory studies show decreased blood pH, a widened anion gap (greater than 18), and
low serum bicarbonate.151 It must be noted that primary cancer-induced lactic acidosis is a rare event, and the diagnostic workup should always search for other,
potentially more treatable causes.
The prognosis for patients with a serum lactate concentration greater than 4 mEq/L is exceedingly poor; however, the outcome is largely determined by the underlying
disease and not the acidosis per se. Several reports have suggested that administration of sodium bicarbonate may actually increase lactate and CO 2 production and
impair oxygen delivery.155,156 and 157 Although some deleterious effects of severe acidemia on cardiovascular function could theoretically be ameliorated by sodium
bicarbonate, 158 no study has shown a convincing survival advantage for alkali therapy in this condition. 159 Despite ongoing controversy, bicarbonate administration

remains a reasonably safe and conservative therapy. 152,160,161 and 162

HYPOGLYCEMIA
Insulin-producing islet cell tumors are the most frequent cause of hypoglycemia in patients with cancer; however, more than 250 cases of hypoglycemia associated
with non–islet cell tumors have also been reported. 163 Non–islet cell tumors associated with hypoglycemia tend to be large. In such patients, mesenchymal tumors
(fibrosarcomas, leiomyomas, rhabdomyosarcomas, liposarcomas, and mesotheliomas) account for approximately 50% of cases; another 25% are hepatomas. 163,164,165
and 166
Classic symptoms of hypoglycemia (e.g., weakness, dizziness, diaphoresis, and nausea) are nonspecific and may develop slowly. In the initial phases,
symptoms tend to be worse in the early morning (due to overnight fasting) and improve after ingestion of food. However, patients may also present acutely with
seizures, coma, and focal or diffuse neurologic deficits.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Several etiologic mechanisms for cancer-related hypoglycemia have been proposed: (1) secretion of insulin-like substances; (2) excessive glucose use by the tumor
that exceeds hepatic production; and (3) failure of counterregulatory mechanisms that usually prevent hypoglycemia (e.g., reduction in levels of growth hormone).
Various substances with nonsuppressible insulin-like activities have been detected in serum from patients with hypoglycemia. These factors are composed of two
general classes: one of relatively low-molecular-weight substances that are soluble in acid ethanol, and the other of high molecular weight that are acid-ethanol
precipitable. The low-molecular-weight compounds consist of four peptides, the insulin-like growth factors (IGF-1, IGF-2, somatomedin A, and somatomedin C). 167,168
The IGFs share a high degree of amino acid similarity with proinsulin, are bound by circulating proteins that inactivate them, and mediate their biologic activities after
binding to specific cell surface receptors. 167,168 They do not react with antiinsulin antibodies and they have only 1% to 2% of the specific metabolic activity of insulin.
Insulin itself has a weak affinity for the IGF-1 receptor but not for IGF-2R. IGFs appear to act as growth factors for various tumors and have been proposed as targets
for anticancer therapy.
In most patients with non–islet cell tumors that have been associated with hypoglycemia, serum levels of IGF-1 have been appropriately suppressed, whereas levels
of IGF-2 have been relatively normal (as measured by radioimmunoassay). 168 However, it now appears that the high-molecular-weight,
nonsuppressible-insulin-like-activities molecule is actually a propeptide of IGF-2, so-called big IGF-2, secreted by tumor cells that are incompletely cleaved. 169 The
large size either prevents formation of an acid-labile subunit from binding or impairs binding of a critical molecule (IGF-binding protein 3), which inactivates the
protein; thus, the bound molecule retains its biologic activity. 170 and 171
Accelerated glucose use by large tumors may also account for cancer-related hypoglycemia in some patients. It has been estimated that a 1-kg tumor may use from
50 to 200 g of glucose per day. 172 Since the liver can produce approximately 700 g of glucose per day, hepatic production should theoretically be sufficient to prevent
hypoglycemia. However, many patients with hypoglycemia have tumors that weigh several kilograms along with extensive hepatic metastases; thus, the combination
of accelerated glucose use with impaired production may lead to hypoglycemia.
Finally, a failure of the usual counterregulatory mechanisms in patients with large tumors may also induce hypoglycemia. 173 Impaired liver function can decrease
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. Certain patients with cancer have a depressed hyperglycemic response to the administration of glucagon 174; depressed
secretion of counterregulatory hormones such as glucagon, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), glucocorticoids, and growth hormone has also been reported.
However, there remains little direct evidence to support this hypothesis as an important clinical mechanism of tumor-induced hypoglycemia.
THERAPY
Therapy of hypoglycemia should match the severity of the condition. As with most paraneoplastic syndromes, specific antitumor therapy is the preferred treatment. To
date, chemotherapeutic agents that are cytotoxic for islet cells or that block insulin release or activity have had little effect on production, release, or activity of IGFs.
Mild hypoglycemia can usually be managed by increasing the frequency of meals. In patients with more severe or unpredictable symptoms, the administration of
corticosteroids and glucagon may afford symptomatic relief. Intravenous infusions of glucose provide temporary support while other specific treatment is administered
(i.e., surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation). Under certain circumstances, continuous infusions of glucagon using portable pumps have been used with some
success.173

ADRENAL FAILURE
Symptomatic adrenocortical insufficiency due to destruction of cortical tissue by metastatic carcinoma is uncommon. More common are iatrogenic causes such as
surgical adrenalectomy, treatment with mitotane (o-p'-DDD) and inhibitors of steroid synthesis such as aminoglutethimide, chronic corticosteroid therapy, and
occasionally adrenal hemorrhage. 174,175,176,177,178 and 179 Nonetheless, technical improvements in CT and magnetic resonance imaging have increased the likelihood of
making an antemortem diagnosis of adrenal metastases. In one study, 19% of patients with metastatic cancer and enlargement of the adrenal glands by CT scans
developed symptoms of adrenal insufficiency. 174 In a separate study wherein 15 patients with metastatic cancer and adrenal enlargement on CT scan were evaluated
by ACTH stimulation, one-third were judged to have adrenal insufficiency. Further clinical study revealed symptoms of nausea, anorexia, and orthostatic hypotension
in all of these patients. 175 Adrenal insufficiency may thus develop insidiously in patients with adrenal metastasis, and CT scans and ACTH testing may be useful
diagnostic tools.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Classic signs and symptoms of adrenal insufficiency include weakness, weight loss, anorexia, hyperpigmentation, and postural hypotension. One or more of these
symptoms are evident in almost all patients, but the onset of symptoms is frequently insidious. Circulatory collapse and shock are uncommon but may develop with
the onset of infection. Biochemical evaluation frequently reveals a mild acidosis (without an anion gap), hyponatremia, and hypokalemia.
EVALUATION AND TREATMENT
Because an ACTH-stimulation test is a benign procedure, this test is recommended when symptoms suggestive of adrenal insufficiency are evident. Typically,
patients receive Cosyntropin, 0.25 mg intravenously, and serum cortisol is monitored at baseline, 30 minutes, and 1 hour. An increase in serum cortisol of 5 to 7 µg/dL
over baseline levels (to a minimum of 15 µg/mL) is considered normal. If adrenal insufficiency is strongly suspected on clinical grounds, steroid replacement (or stress
doses of steroids) should be started immediately, and subsequent therapy can be reevaluated when results of the ACTH test become available.
Physiologic glucocorticoid replacement is attained by administration of cortisone acetate (25 mg in the morning and 12.5 mg in the early evening). During periods of
stress (e.g., operative procedures or infection), these doses may need to be doubled or tripled. Occasionally, mineralocorticoid replacement (0.05 to 0.1 mg of
fludrocortisone) is required in addition to cortisone acetate. In patients with no adrenocortical function whatsoever, maintenance doses of dexamethasone or
prednisone do not provide adequate mineralocorticoid coverage and fludrocortisone must be given. Pharmacologic doses of parenteral glucocorticoids are required in
the setting of acute adrenal failure and circulatory collapse. Typically, aqueous-soluble forms of hydrocortisone (e.g., sodium succinate salt) at doses of 100 mg
intravenously every 8 hours are required. Thereafter, the patient should be monitored for evidence of hyperglycemia, hypokalemia, or hypernatremia.
*Concentrations in milligrams per deciliter can be converted to SI units after multiplication by 0.2495, which yields a concentration expressed in millimoles per liter.

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Raue F. Epidemiological aspects of hypercalcemia of malignancy. Rec Res Cancer Res 1994;137:99.
2. Vassilopoulou-Sellin R, Newman B, Taylor SH, et al. I ncidence of hypercalcemia in patients with malignancy referred to a comprehensive cancer center. Cancer 1993;71:1309.
3. Brada M, Rowley M, Grant DJ, et al. Hypercalcemia in patients with disseminated breast cancer. Acta Oncol 1990;29:577.
4. Coggeshall J, Merrill W, Hande K, et al. Implications of hypercalcemia with respect to diagnosis and treatment of lung cancer. Am J Med 1986;80:325.
5. Van Dijk JM. Hypercalcemia in prostatic carcinoma: case report and review of the literature. Am J Clin Oncol 1993;16:329.
6. Axelrod DM, Bockman RS, Wong GY, et al. Distinguishing features of primary hyperparathyroidism in patients with breast cancer. Cancer 1987;60:1620.
7. Hutchesson ACJ, Bundred NJ, Ratcliffe WA. Survival in hypercalcemic patients with cancer and co-existing primary hyperparathyroidism. Postgrad Med J 1995;71:28.

8. Lafferty FW. Differential diagnosis of hypercalcemia. J Bone Miner Res 1991;6(Suppl 2):S51.
9. Schmidt-Gayk H, Haerdt H. Differential diagnosis of hypercalcemia: laboratory assessment. Rec Res Cancer Res 1994;137:122.
10. Nussbaum SR, Potts JT Jr. Immunoassays for parathyroid hormone 184 in the diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism. J Bone Miner Res 1991;6(Suppl 2):S43.
11. Ratcliffe WA, Hutcheson ACJ, Bundred NJ, et al. Role of assays for parathyroid hormone-related protein in investigation of hypercalcemia. Lancet 1992;339:164.
12. Annesley TM, Burritt MF, Kyle RA. Artifactual hypercalcemia in multiple myeloma. Mayo Clin Proc 1982;57:572.
13. Payne RB, Carver ME, Morgan DB. Interpretation of serum total calcium: effects of adjustment for albumin concentration on frequency of abnormal values and on detection of change in the
individual. J Clin Pathol 1979;32:56.
14. Stewart AF, Horst R, Deftos LJ, et al. Biochemical evaluation of patients with cancer-associated hypercalcemia: evidence for humoral and non-humoral groups. N Engl J Med 1980;303:1377.
15. Skrabanek P, McPartlin J, Powell D. Tumor hypercalcemia and “ectopic hyperparathyroidism.” Medicine 1980;59:262.
16. Simpson EL, Mundy GR, D'Souza SM, et al. Absence of parathyroid messenger RNA in nonparathyroid tumors associated with hypercalcemia. N Engl J Med 1983;309:325.
17. Wynne AG, Van Heerden J, Carney JA, et al. Parathyroid carcinoma: clinical and pathological features in 43 patients. Medicine 1992;71:197.
18. Nussbaum SR, Gaz RD, Arnold A. Hypercalcemia and ectopic secretion of parathyroid hormone by an ovarian carcinoma with rearrangement of the gene for parathyroid hormone. N Engl J
Med 1990;323:1324.
19. Strewler GJ, Budayr AA, Clark OH, et al. Production of parathyroid hormone by a malignant nonparathyroid tumor in a hypercalcemic patient. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993;76:1373.
20. Moseley JM, Kubota M, Dieffenbach-Jagger H, et al. Parathyroid hormone-related protein purified from a human lung cancer cell line. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987;84:5048.
21. Suva LJ, Winslow GA, Wettenhall REH, et al. A parathyroid hormone-related protein implicated in malignant hypercalcemia: cloning and expression. Science 1987;237:894.
22. Mangin M, Webb AC, Dreyer BE, et al. Identification of a cDNA encoding a parathyroid hormone-like peptide from a human tumor associated with humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:597.
23. Abol-Samra A-B, Juppner H, Force T, et al. Expression cloning of a common receptor for parathyroid hormone and parathyroid hormone-related peptide from rat osteoblast-like cells: a single
receptor stimulates intracellular accumulation of both cAMP and inositol triphosphates and increases intracellular free calcium. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:2732.
24. Weir EC, Brines ML, Ikeda K, et al. Parathyroid hormone-related peptide gene is expressed in the mammalian central nervous system. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:108.
25. Thiede MA, Daifotis AG, Weir EC, et al. Intrauterine occupancy controls expression of the parathyroid hormone-related peptide gene in preterm rat myometrium. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1990;87:6969.
26. Yamamoto M, Harm SC, Grasser WA, et al. Parathyroid hormone-related protein in the rat urinary bladder: a smooth muscle relaxant produced locally in response to mechanical stretch. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:5326.
27. Deftos LJ, Burton DW, Brandt DW. Parathyroid hormone-like protein is a secretory product of atrial myocytes. J Clin Invest 1993;92:727.
28. Vortkamp A, Lee K, Lanske B, et al. Regulation of rate of cartilage differentiation by Indian Hedgehog and PTH-related protein. Science 1996;273:613.
29. Lanske B, Karaplis AC, Kaechong L, et al. PTH/PTHrP receptor in early development and Indian hedgehog-regulated bone growth. Science 1996;273:663.
30. Knecht TP, Behling CA, Burton DW, et al. The humoral hypercalcemia of benignancy: a newly appreciated syndrome. Am J Clin Pathol 1996;105:487.
31. Burtis WJ, Brady TG, Orloff JJ, et al. Immunochemical characterization of circulating parathyroid hormone-related protein in patients with humoral hypercalcemia of cancer. N Engl J Med
1990;322:1106.
32. Rankin W, Grill V, Martin TJ. Parathyroid hormone-related protein and hypercalcemia. Cancer 1997;80:1564.
33. Wysolmerski JJ, Broadus AE. Hypercalcemia of malignancy: the central role of parathyroid hormone related protein. Annu Rev Med 1994;45:189.
34. Blind E. Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy: role of parathyroid hormone-related protein. Rec Res Cancer Res 1994;137:20.
35. Bucht E, Rong H, Pernow Y, et al. Parathyroid hormone-related protein in patients with primary breast cancer and eucalcemia. Cancer Res 1998;58:4113.
36. Firkin F, Schneider H, Grill V. Parathyroid hormone-related protein in hypercalemia associated with hematological malignancy. Leuk Lymphoma 1998;29:499.
37. Dunbar ME, Wysolmerski JJ, Broadus AE. Parathyroid hormone-related protein: from hypercalcemia of malignancy to developmental regulatory molecule. Am J Med Sci 1996;312:287.
38. Watanabe T, Yamaguchi K, Takasuki K, et al. Constitutive expression of parathyroid hormone-related protein gene in human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) carriers and adult T-cell
leukemia patients that can be transactivated by HTLV-1 tax gene. J Exp Med 1990;172:759.
39. Prager D, Rosenblatt JD, Ejima E. Hypercalcemia, parathyroid hormone-related protein expression and human T-cell leukemia virus infection. Leuk Lymphoma 1994;14:395.
40. Motokura T, Fukumoto S, Matsumoto T, et al. Parathyroid hormone-related protein in adult T-cell leukemia-lymphoma. Ann Intern Med 1989;111:484.
41. Powell GJ, Southby J, Danks JA, et al. Localization of parathyroid hormone-related protein in breast cancer metastases: increased incidence in bone compared with other sites. Cancer Res
1991;51:3059.
42. Iwamura M, Sant'Agnese PA, Wu G, et al. Immunohistochemical localization of parathyroid hormone-related protein in human prostate cancer. Cancer Res 1993;53:1724.
43. Bouizar Z, Spyratos F, Deytieux S, et al. Polymerase chain reaction analysis of parathyroid hormone-related protein gene expression in breast cancer patients and occurrence of bone
metastases. Cancer Res 1993;53:5076.
44. Budayr AA, Zysset E, Jenzer A, et al. Effects of treatment of malignancy-associated hypercalcemia on serum parathyroid hormone-related protein. J Bone Miner Res 1994;9:521.
45. Body JJ, Dumon JC, Thirion M, et al. Circulating PTH-RP concentration in tumor-induced hypercalcemia: influence on the response to bisphosphonate and changes after therapy. J Bone Miner
Res 1993;8:701.
46. Wimalawansa SJ. Significance of plasma PTH-rp in patients with hypercalcemia of malignancy treated with bisphosphonate. Cancer 1994;73:2223.
47. Gurney H, Grill V, Martin TJ. Parathyroid hormone-related protein and response to pamidronate in tumour-induced hypercalcaemia. Lancet 1993;341:1611.
48. Pecherstorfer M, Schilling T, Blind E, et al. Parathyroid hormone-related protein and life expectancy in hypercalcemic cancer patients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;78:1268.
49. Seymour JF, Gagel RF. Calcitriol: the major humoral mediator of hypercalcemia in Hodgkin's disease and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1993;82:1383.
50. Seymour JF, Gagel RF, Hagemeister FB, et al. Calcitriol production in hypercalcemic and normocalcemic patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Ann Intern Med 1994;121:633.
51. Cox M, Haddad JG. Lymphoma, hypercalcemia, and the sunshine vitamin [Editorial]. Ann Intern Med 1994;121:709.
52. Adams JS, Fernandez M, Gacad MA, et al. Vitamin D metabolite-mediated hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria in patients with AIDS and non-AIDS-related lymphoma. Blood 1989;73:235.
53. Shigeno H, Yamamoto I, Dokoh S, et al. Identification of 1,24 (R)-dihydroxyvitamin D 3-like bone-resorbing lipid in a patient with cancer-associated hypercalcemia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1985;61:761.
54. Sandler LM, Winearls CG, Fraher LJ, et al. Studies of the hypercalcemia of sarcoidosis: effects of steroids and exogenous vitamin D 3 on the circulating concentrations of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin
D3. Q J Med 1984;53:165.
55. Broadus AE, Erickson SB, Gertner JM, et al. An experimental model of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D-mediated hypercalciuria. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1984;59:202.
56. Schweitzer DH, Hamdy NAT, Frolich M, et al. Malignancy-associated hypercalcemia: resolution of controversies over vitamin D metabolism by a pathophysiological approach to the syndrome.
Clin Endocrinol 1994;41:251.
57. Brenner BE, Harvey HA, Lipton A, et al. A study of prostaglandin E2, parathormone, and response to indomethacin in patients with hypercalcemia of malignancy. Cancer 1982;49:556.
58. Valentin-Opran A, Eilon G, Saez S, et al. Estrogens and antiestrogens stimulate release of bone-resorbing activity by cultured human breast cancer cells. J Clin Invest 1985;75:726.
59. Metz SA, McRae JR, Robertson RP. Prostaglandins as mediators of paraneoplastic syndromes: review and update. Metabolism 1981;30:299.
60. Robertson RB, Baylink DJ, Metz SA, et al. Plasma prostaglandin E in patients with cancer with and without hypercalcemia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1976;43:1330.
61. Bringhurst FR, Bierer BE, Godeau F, et al. Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy: release of a prostaglandin-stimulating bone-resorbing factor in vitro by human transitional-cell carcinoma
cells. J Clin Invest 1986;77:456.
62. Ibbotson KJ, Twardzik DR, D'Souza SM, et al. Stimulation of bone resorption in vitro by synthetic transforming growth factor-a. Science 1985;228:1007.
63. Guise TA, Yoneda T, Yates AJ, et al. The combined effect of tumor-produced parathyroid hormone-related protein and transforming growth factor-a enhance hypercalcemia in vivo and bone
resorption in vitro. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993;77:40.
64. Ishimi Y, Miyaura C, Jin CH, et al. IL-6 is produced by osteoblasts and induces bone resorption. J Immunol 1990;145:3297.
65. Bataille R, Jourdan M, Zhang X-G, et al. Serum levels of interleukin-6, a potent myeloma cell growth factor, as a reflection of disease severity in plasma cell dyscrasias. J Clin Invest
1989;84:604.
66. Weissglas MG, Schamhart DH, Lowik CW, et al. The role of interleukin-6 in the induction of hypercalcemia in renal cell carcinoma transplanted into nude mice. Endocrinology 1997;138:1879.
67. Yoneda T, Nakai M, Moriyama K, et al. Neutralizing antibodies to human interleukin 6 reverse hypercalcemia associated with a human squamous carcinoma. Cancer Res 1993;53:737.
68. Stashenko P, Dewhirst FE, Peros WJ, et al. Synergistic interactions between interleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor, and lymphotoxin in bone resorption. J Immunol 1987;138:1464.
69. Sato K, Mimura H, Han DC, et al. Production of bone-resorbing activity and colony-stimulating activity in vivo and in vitro by a human squamous cell carcinoma associated with hypercalcemia
and leukocytosis. J Clin Invest 1986;78:145.
70. Garrett IR, Durie BGM, Nedwin GE, et al. Production of lymphotoxin, a bone-resorbing cytokine, by cultured human myeloma cells. N Engl J Med 1987;317:526.
71. Chisholm MA, Mulloy AL, Taylor AT. Acute management of cancer-related hypercalcemia. Ann Pharmacother 1996;30:507.
72. Barri YM, Knochel JP. Hypercalcemia and electrolyte disturbances in malignancy. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:775.
73. Warrell RP Jr. Questions about clinical trials in hypercalcemia [Editorial]. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:759.
74. Massry SG, Friedler RM, Coburn JW. Excretion of phosphate and calcium: physiology of their renal handling and relation to clinical medicine. Arch Intern Med 1973;131:828.
75. Suki WN, Yium JJ, Von Minden M, et al. Acute treatment of hypercalcemia with furosemide. N Engl J Med 1970;283:836.
76. Hosking DJ, Cowley A, Bucknall CA. Rehydration in the treatment of severe hypercalcemia. Q J Med 1981;200:473.
77. Carano A, Teitelbaum SL, Konsek JD, et al. Bisphosphonates directly inhibit the bone resorption activity of isolated avian osteoclasts in vitro. J Clin Invest 1990;85:456.
78. Gucalp R, Ritch P, Wiernik PH, et al. Comparative study of pamidronate disodium and etidronate disodium in the treatment of cancer-related hypercalcemia. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:134.
79. Gucalp R, Theriault R, Gill I, et al. T reatment of cancer-associated hypercalcemia: double-blind comparison of rapid and slow intravenous infusion regimens of pamidronate disodium and
saline alone. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1935.
80. Nussbaum SR, Younger J, VandePol CJ, et al. Single-dose intravenous therapy with pamidronate for the treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy: comparison of 30-, 60-, and 90-mg
dosages. Am J Med 1993;95:297.
81. Body JJ, Dumon JC. Treatment of tumour-induced hypercalcaemia with the bisphosphonate pamidronate: dose-response relationship and influence of tumour type. Ann Oncol 1994;5:359.
82. Gallacher SJ, Ralston SH, Fraser WD, et al. A comparison of low versus high dose pamidronate in cancer-associated hypercalcemia. Bone Miner 1991;15:249.
83. Bertheault-Cvitkovic F, Armand J-P, Tubiana-Hulin M, et al. Randomized, double blind comparison of pamidronate vs. gallium nitrate for acute control of cancer-related hypercalcemia.
Proceedings of the 9th EORTC/NCI Symposium on New Drugs in Cancer Therapy 1996;140.
84. Hortobagyi GN, Theriault RL, Lipton A, et al. Long-term prevention of skeletal complications of metastatic breast cancer with pamidronate. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2038.
85. Gallacher SJ, Fraser WD, Logue FC, et al. Factors predicting the acute effect of pamidronate on serum calcium in hypercalcemia of malignancy. Calcif Tissue Int 1992;51:419.
86. Walls J, Ratcliffe WA, Howell A, et al. Response to intravenous bisphosphonate therapy in hypercalcemic patients with and without bone metastases: the role of parathyroid hormone-related
protein. Br J Cancer 1994;70:169.
87. Dodwell DJ, Abbas SK, Morton AR, et al. Parathyroid hormone-related protein (5069) and response to pamidronate therapy for tumour-induced hypercalcemia. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:1629.
88. Body JJ, Louviaux I, Dumon JC. Decreased efficacy of bisphosphonates for recurrences of tumor-induced hypercalcemia-mechanisms and influence of the tumor type. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1998;17:169.
89. Warrell RP Jr, Mullane M, Bilezikian J, et al. Treatment of cancer-associated hypercalcemia with alendronate: a randomized double-blind comparison with etidronate. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1993;12:438.
90. Nussbaum SR, Warrell RP Jr, Rude R, et al. A dose-response study of alendronate for the treatment of malignancy-associated hypercalcemia. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1618.
91. O'Rourke NP, McCloskey EV, Vasikaran S, et al. Effective treatment of malignant hypercalcemia with a single intravenous infusion of clodronate. Br J Cancer 1993;67:560.
92. Kanis JA, McCloskey EV. Clodronate. Cancer 1997;80(Suppl):1691.
93. Pecherstorfer M, Herrmann Z, Body JJ, et al. Randomized phase II trial comparing different doses of the bisphosphonate ibandronate in the treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy. J Clin

Oncol 1996;14:268.
94. Body JJ, Ford JM, Vigneron AM, et al. A dose finding study of zoledronate intravenous infusion in patients with tumour induced hypercalcemia. J Bone Miner Res 1996;11(Suppl):S485
95. Body JJ. Clinical research update: zoledronate. Cancer 1997;80(Suppl 1):1699.
96. Warrell RP Jr, Bockman RS, Coonley CJ, et al. Gallium nitrate inhibits calcium resorption from bone and is effective treatment for cancer-related hypercalcemia. J Clin Invest 1984;73:1487.
97. Hall TJ, Chambers TJ. Gallium inhibits bone resorption by a direct effect on osteoclasts. Bone Miner 1990;8:211.
98. Warrell RP Jr, Alcock NW, Skelos A, et al. Gallium nitrate inhibits accelerated bone turnover in patients with bone metastases. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:292.
99. Bockman RS, Repo MA, Warrell RP, et al. Distribution of trace levels of therapeutic gallium in bone as mapped by synchrotron x-ray microscopy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:4149.
100. Bockman RS, Bosley A, Blumenthal NC, et al. Gallium increases bone calcium and crystallite perfection of hydroxyapatite. Calcif Tissue Int 1986;39:376.
101. Blair HC, Teitelbaum SL, Tan H-L, et al. Reversible inhibition of osteoclastic activity by bone-bound gallium (III). J Cell Biochem 1992;48:401.
102. Warrell RP Jr, Israel R, Frisone M, et al. A randomized double-blind study of gallium nitrate versus calcitonin for acute treatment of cancer-related hypercalcemia. Ann Intern Med
1988;108:669.
103. Warrell RP Jr, Heller G, Murphy WP, et al. A randomized double-blind study of gallium nitrate compared to etidronate for acute control of cancer-related hypercalcemia. J Clin Oncol
1991;9:1467.
104. Austin LA, Heath H III. Calcitonin: physiology and pathophysiology. N Engl J Med 1981;304:269.
105. Wisneski LA. Salmon calcitonin in the acute management of hypercalcemia. Calcif Tissue Int 1990;46:S26.
106. Dumon JC, Magritte A, Body JJ. Nasal human calcitonin for tumour-induced hypercalcemia. Calcif Tissue Int 1992;51:18.
107. Warrell RP Jr, Crown JP. Recovery from extreme hypercalcemia [Letter]. Lancet 1993;342:375.
108. Raisz LG, Trummel CL, Wener JA, et al. Effect of glucocorticoids on bone resorption in tissue culture. Endocrinology 1972;90:961.
109. Kimberg DB, Baerg RD, Gershon E, et al. Effect of cortisone treatment on the active transport of calcium by the small intestine. J Clin Invest 1971;50:1309.
110. Percival RC, Yates AJP, Grey RES, et al. Role of glucocorticoids in the management of malignant hypercalcemia. BMJ 1984;289:287.
111. Kristensen B, Ejlertsen B, Holmegaard SN, et al. Prednisolone in the treatment of severe malignant hypercalcemia in metastatic breast cancer: a randomized study. J Intern Med 1992;232:237.
112. Yates AJ, Oreffo ROC, Mayor K, et al. Inhibition of bone resorption by inorganic phosphate is mediated by both reduced osteoclast formation and decreased activity of mature osteoclasts. J
Bone Miner Res 1991;6:473.
113. Heath DA. The use of inorganic phosphate in the management of hypercalcemia. Metab Bone Dis Rel Res 1980;2:213.
114. Ayala G, Chertow BS, Shah JH, et al. Acute hyperphosphatemia and acute persistent renal insufficiency induced by oral phosphate therapy. Ann Intern Med 1975;83:520.
115. Carey RW, Schmott GW, Kopald HH, et al. Massive extraskeletal calcification during phosphate treatment of hypercalcemia. Arch Intern Med 1968;122:150.
116. Laflamme GH, Jowsey J. Bone and soft tissue changes with oral phosphate supplements. J Clin Invest 1972;51:2834.
117. Kiang DT, Loken MK, Kennedy BJ. Mechanism of the hypocalcemic effect of mithramycin. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1979;48:341.
118. Ralston SH, Gardner MD, Dryburgh FJ, et al. Comparison of aminohydroxypropylidene diphosphonate, mithramycin, and corticosteroids/calcitonin in treatment of cancer-associated
hypercalcemia. Lancet 1985;2:907.
119. Thurlimann B, Waldburger R, Semm HJ, et al. Plicamycin and pamidronate in symptomatic tumor-related hypercalcemia: a prospective randomized crossover trial. Ann Oncol 1992;3:619.
120. Green L, Donehower RC. Hepatic toxicity of low doses of mithramycin in hypercalcemia. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:1379.
121. Thiebaud D, Jacquet AF, Burckhardt P. Fast and effective treatment of malignant hypercalcemia: combination of suppositories of calcitonin and a single infusion of 3-amino
1-hydroxypropylidene-1-bisphosphonate. Arch Intern Med 1990;150:2125.
122. Miach PJ, Dawborn JK, Martin TJ, et al. Management of the hypercalcemia of malignancy by peritoneal dialysis. Med J Aust 1975;1:782.
123. Bilezkian JP. Management of acute hypercalcemia. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1196.
124. Klinenberg JR, Kippen I, Bluestone R. Hyperuricemic nephropathy: pathophysiologic features and factors influencing urate deposition. Nephron 1975;14:88.
125. Cohen LF, Balow JE, Magrath IT, et al. Acute tumor lysis syndrome. A review of 37 patients with Burkitt's lymphoma. Am J Med 1980;68:486.
126. Garnick MB, Mayer RB. Acute renal failure associated with neoplastic disease and its treatment. Semin Oncol 1978;5:155.
127. Kalemkerian GP, Darwish B, Varterasian ML. T umor lysis syndrome in small cell carcinoma and other solid tumors. Am J Med 1997;103:363.
128. Conger JD, Falk SA. Intrarenal dynamics in the pathogenesis and prevention of acute urate nephropathy. J Clin Invest 1977;59:786.
129. Hande KR, Hixson CV, Chabner BA. Postchemotherapy purine excretion in lymphoma patients receiving allopurinol. Cancer Res 1981;41:2273.
130. Simmonds HA, Cameron JS, Morris GS, et al. Allopurinol in renal failure and the tumor lysis syndrome. Clin Chim Acta 1986;160:189.
131. Jankovic M, Zurlo MG, Rossi E, et al. U rate-oxidase as hypouricemic agent in a case of acute tumor lysis syndrome. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1985;7:202.
132. Wolf G, Hegewisch-Becker S, Hossfeld DK, Stahl RA. Hyperuricemia and renal insufficiency associated with malignant disease: urate oxidase as an efficient therapy? Am J Kidney Dis
1999;34:E20.
133. Mandell GA, Swacus JR, Rosenstock J, et al. Danger of urography in hyperuricemic children with Burkitt's lymphoma. J Can Assoc Radiol 1983;34:273.
134. Arrambide K, Toto RD. Tumor lysis syndrome. Semin Nephrol 1993;13:273.
135. Castro MP, VanAuken J, Spencer-Cisek P, et al. Acute tumor lysis syndrome associated with concurrent biochemotherapy of metastatic melanomaa case report and review of the literature.
Cancer 1999;85:1055.
136. Vachvanichsanong P, Maipang M, Dissaneewate P, et al. Severe hyperphosphatemia following acute tumor lysis syndrome. Med Pediatr Oncol 1995;24:63.
137. Thatte L, Oster JR, Singer I, et al. Review of the literature: severe hyperphosphatemia . Am J Med Sci 1995;310:167.
138. Abramson EC, Gajardo H, Kukreja SC. Hypocalcemia in cancer. Bone Miner 1990;10:161.
139. Fleming DR, Doukas MA. Acute tumor lysis syndrome in hematologic malignancies. Leuk Lymphoma 1992;8:315.
140. Razis E, Arlin ZA, Ahmed T, et al. Incidence and treatment of tumor lysis syndrome in patients with acute leukemia. Acta Haematol 1994;91:171.
141. Drakos P, Bar-Ziv J, Catane R. Tumor lysis syndrome in nonhematologic malignancies. Am J Clin Oncol 1994;17:502.
142. Persons DA, Garst J, Vollmer R, et al. Tumor lysis syndrome and acute renal failure after treatment of non-small-cell lung carcinoma with combination irinotecan and cisplatin. Am J Clin
Oncol-Cancer Clin Trials 1998;21:426.
143. Fer MF, Bottino GC, Sherwin SA, et al. Atypical tumor lysis syndrome in a patients with T-cell lymphoma treated with recombinant leukocyte interferon. Am J Med 1984;77:953.
144. Cech P, Block JB, Cone IA, et al. Tumor lysis syndrome after tamoxifen flare. N Engl J Med 1986;315:263.
145. Dann EJ, Gillis S, Polliack A, et al. Brief report: tumor lysis syndrome following treatment with 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine for refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med
1993;329:1547.
146. Simmons ED, Somberg KA. Acute tumor lysis syndrome after intrathecal methotrexate administration. Cancer 1991;67:2062.
147. Harley HA, Mason R, Phillips PJ. Profound hypocalcemia associated with oestrogen treatment of carcinoma of the prostate. Med J Aust 1983;2:41.
148. Schenkein DP, O'Neill WC, Shapiro J, et al. Accelerated bone formation causing profound hypocalcemia in acute leukemia. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:375.
149. Dunlay RW, Camp MA, Allon M, et al. Calcitriol in prolonged hypocalcemia due to the tumor lysis syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1989;110:162.
150. Uribarri J, Oh MS, Carroll HJ. D-Lactic acidosis: a review of clinical presentation, biochemical features, and pathophysiologic mechanisms. Medicine 1998;77:73.
151. Ishihara K, Szerlip H. Anion gap acidosis. Semin Nephrol 1998;18:83.
152. Adrogué HJ, Madias NE. Management of life-threatening acid-base disorders. N Engl J Med 1998;338:26.
153. Gore DC, Jahoor F, Hibbert JM, et al. Lactic acidosis during sepsis is related to increased pyruvate production, not deficits in tissue oxygen availability. Ann Surg 1996;224:97.
154. Sculier JP, Nicaise C, Klastersky J. Lactic acidosis: a metabolic complication of extensive metastatic cancer. Eur J Clin Oncol 1983;19:597.
155. Sundar K, Suarez M, Banogon PE, et al. Zidovudine-induced fatal lactic acidosis and hepatic failure in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: report of two patients and review of
the literature. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1425.
156. McKenzie R, Fried MW, Sallie R, et al. Hepatic failure and lactic acidosis due to fialuridine (FIAU), an investigational nucleoside analogue for chronic hepatitis B. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1099.
157. Narins RC, Cohen JJ. Bicarbonate therapy for organic acidosis: the case for its continued use. Ann Intern Med 1987;106:615.
158. Cooper DJ, Walley KR, Wiggs BR, et al. Bicarbonate does not improve hemodynamics in critically ill patients who have lactic acidosis. A prospective controlled clinical study. Ann Intern Med
1990;112:492.
159. Stacpoole PW. Lactic acidosis: the case against bicarbonate therapy [Editorial]. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:276.
160. Ritter JM, Doktor HS, Benjamin N. Paradoxical effect of bicarbonate on cytoplasmic pH. Lancet 1990;335:1243.
161. Stacpoole PW, Wright EC, Baumgartner TG, et al. A controlled clinical trial of dichloroacetate for treatment of lactic acidosis in adults. N Engl J Med 1992;327:1564.
162. Gutierrez G, Wulf ME. Lactic acidosis in sepsis: a commentary. Intensive Care Med 1996;22:6.
163. Daughaday WH. Hypoglycemia in patients with non-islet cell tumors. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1988;18:91.
164. LeRoith D, Clemmons D, Nissley P, et al. Insulin-like growth factors in health and disease. Ann Intern Med 1992;116:854.
165. Macaulay VM. Insulin-like growth factors and cancer. Br J Cancer 1992;65:311.
166. Daughaday WH, Emanuele MA, Brooks MH, et al. Synthesis and secretion of insulin-like growth factor II by a leiomyosarcoma with associated hypoglycemia. N Engl J Med 1988;319:1434.
167. Ishida S, Noda M, Kuzuya N, et al. Big insulin-like growth factor II-producing hepatocellular carcinoma associated with hypoglycemia. Intern Med 1995;34:1201.
168. Shapiro ET, Bell GI, Polonsky KS, et al. Tumor hypoglycemia: relationship to high molecular weight insulin-like growth factor-II. J Clin Invest 1990;85:1672.
169. Zapf J, Futo E, Peter M, et al. Can “big” insulin-like growth factor II in serum of tumor patients account for the development of extrapancreatic tumor hypoglycemia? J Clin Invest 1992;90:2574.
170. Daughaday WH, Trivedi B, Baxter RC. Serum “big insulin-like growth factor II from patients with tumor hypoglycemia lacks normal E-domain O-linked glycosylation, a possible determinant of
normal propeptide processing. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90: 5823.
171. Zapf J. IGFs: function and clinical importance: role of insulin-like growth factor (IGF) II and IGF binding proteins in extrapancreatic tumour hypoglycaemia. J Intern Med 1993; 234:543.
172. Tisdale MJ, Brennan RA. Metabolic substrate utilization by a tumour cell line which induces cachexia in vivo. Br J Cancer 1986;54:601.
173. Davis MR, Shamoon H. Deficient counterregulatory hormone responses during hypoglycemia in a patient with insulinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1991;72:788.
174. Hoff AO, Vassilopoulou-Sellin R. The role of glucagon administration in the diagnosis and treatment of patients with tumor hypoglycemia . Cancer 1998;82:1585.
175. Samaan NA, Pham FK, Sellin RV, et al. Successful treatment of hypoglycemia using glucagon in a patient with an extrapancreatic tumor. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:404.
176. Subramanian S, Goker H, Kanji A, et al. Clinical adrenal insufficiency in patients receiving megestrol therapy. Arch Intern Med 1997;157:1008.
177. Redman DG, Pazdur R, Zingas AP, et al. Prospective evaluation of adrenal insufficiency in patients with adrenal metastasis. Cancer 1987;60:103.
178. Gamelin E, Beldent V, Rousselet M-C, et al. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma presenting with primary adrenal insufficiency: a disease with an underestimated frequency? Cancer 1992;69:2333.
179. Hug V, Kau S, Hortobagyi GN, et al. Adrenal failure in patients with breast carcinoma after long-term treatment of cyclic alternating oestrogen progesterone. Br J Cancer 1991;63:454.
180. Dahlberg PJ, Goellner MH, Pehling GB. Adrenal insufficiency secondary to adrenal hemorrhage: two case reports and a review of cases confirmed by computed tomography. Arch Intern Med
1990;150:905.
181. Siu SCB, Kitzman DW, Sheedy PF II, et al. Adrenal insufficiency from bilateral adrenal hemorrhage. Mayo Clin Proc 1990;65:664.

SECTION 51.4 Urologic Emergencies
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 51.4
Urologic Emergencies
McCLELLAN M. WALTHER
Introduction
Urinary Tract Infection
Urinary Sepsis
Periurethral Abscess
Cystitis
Chemical Cystitis
Intravesical Phototherapy
Radiation
Antibiotics
Bladder Hemorrhage
Urinary Obstruction
Upper Tracts
Lower Tract
Priapism
Paraphimosis
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Urologic oncologic emergencies may arise secondary to the underlying malignancy, treatment, or unrelated medical conditions. Initial evaluation of symptoms of
sepsis, hematuria, urinary obstruction, priapism, and other urologic emergencies leads to diagnosis and initial management. Urologic consultation may be necessary
for definitive treatment.

URINARY TRACT INFECTION
URINARY SEPSIS
Neutropenic sepsis occurs after 1.1% to 14.0% of cycles of chemotherapy, most frequently associated with malignancies that impair granulocyte function or with more
intensive bone marrow suppression, such as CHOP-M (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone, with methotrexate) or similar regimens. 1,2 Of the
sepsis episodes, as many as 8.9% are urosepsis. 1 Urinary tract infections are most frequently associated with urethral catheterization and require surveillance in
immunocompromised patients.3,4
Treatment includes broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage until sensitivity results are available ( Chapter 54). Broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage resulting in appropriate
empiric antibiotic treatment has been associated with improved survival and shorter hospital stay, compared to inappropriate empiric antibiotic coverage. 5,6 Use of
antibiotics before hospital admission, advanced patient age, and male gender have been predictive of a resistant uropathogen. 7
Altered renal function, flank pain, urinary retention, or other signs or symptoms of urinary obstruction requires immediate evaluation to provide relief. Percutaneous
nephrostomy gives direct drainage of an obstructed infected ureter and allows manual irrigation of viscous purulent fluid if drainage is not adequate.
PERIURETHRAL ABSCESS
Periurethral abscess is a life-threatening infection of the male urethra and periurethral tissues. 8 Patients present with sepsis and perineal or scrotal abscess or
phlegmon. Urethral strictures, found in 60% to 85% of these patients, cause a high urethral voiding pressure, and lead to periurethral extravasation of infected urine,
particularly after urethral instrumentation. 8,9 The infection can range from a small abscess confined by Buck's fascia, to an extensive necrotizing fasciitis of the penis,
scrotum, and perineum.
The differential diagnosis includes tissue edema, follicular abscess, perirectal abscess, Fournier's gangrene, and penile or urethral cancer. 10,11 Physical examination
will identify urethral involvement, extent of phlegmon, and crepitance caused by gas-forming organisms. Urinalysis and culture usually isolate gram-negative and
anaerobic bacteria. Retrograde urethrogram will demonstrate diagnostic extravasation of contrast into the periurethral tissues. 12,13
Treatment of periurethral abscess consists of emergent débridement and suprapubic drainage of urine. In the presulfonamide era, mortality was at least 50%. 9
Broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage for gram-negative organisms and anaerobes, using aminoglycoside and cephalosporins, have been associated with a 1.6%
mortality.8 Additional débridement and skin grafts or secondary wound closure can be required with extensive tissue necrosis.
As many as 20% of patients develop recurrent periurethral abscess during follow-up, apparently due to extensive urethral stricture disease. Evaluation after resolution
of sepsis should exclude contributory factors, such as an unstable bladder, urethral diverticula, or watering-pot perineum. Construction of a perineal urethrostomy may
prevent abscess recurrence and should be considered if significant urethral disease is present. 8,9,14

CYSTITIS
Cystitis, defined symptomatically as an irritation of the bladder, presents with suprapubic discomfort, frequency, dysuria, and urgency. Severe manifestations include
urge incontinence and hematuria. Patients may present with acute exsanguinating hematuria but more commonly develop milder symptoms and pathologic disease.
The etiology may be related to a toxic chemical agent, radiation, thrombocytopenia with subsequent bleeding, or myelosuppression with associated infection.
General measures taken in the initial evaluation of patients with cystitis should exclude urinary infection and the presence of malignancy. Symptomatic relief of
discomfort on voiding can be obtained with urinary analgesics, such as phenazopyridine hydrochloride (Pyridium). Suprapubic discomfort, frequency, urgency, and
urge incontinence require antispasmodics to obtain relief; oxybutynin chloride (Ditropan), propantheline bromide (Pro-Banthine), hyoscyamine sulfate (Cystospaz,
Levsin), and flavoxate hydrochloride (Urispas) are used for this purpose. Combinations of drugs, sometimes including antiseptics, are often helpful. These include
Urised (methenamine, methylene blue, phenyl salicylate, benzoic acid, atropine sulfate, and hyoscyamine), Pyridium Plus (phenazopyridine, hyoscyamine, and
butabarbital), and Azogantrisin (sulfisoxazole and phenazopyridine). Severe symptoms may require belladonna and opium rectal suppositories. Patients with mild
voiding dysfunction associated with chronic bladder pain may benefit from a trial of tricyclic antidepressants. 15 Many treatment measures are unique to each etiology.
CHEMICAL CYSTITIS
Oxazaphosphorines
Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), the most commonly used oxazaphosphorine, is an alkylating agent first used in the treatment of malignant tumors in Europe in 1957.
Currently, Cytoxan has a role in the treatment of solid tumors and lymphomas, as well as benign inflammatory states, Wegener's granulomatosis and rheumatoid
arthritis being the most common. Other oxazaphosphorines—ifosfamide, trophosphamide, and sufosfamide—have been used since the 1970s for the treatment of
solid malignancies and lymphomas. Dose-limiting toxicity with these compounds is usually urinary tract toxicity.

Urinary symptoms, including frequency, urgency, dysuria, and nocturia, develop in as many as 24% of patients treated with oral Cytoxan. 16 Microhematuria occurs in
7% to 53% of patients and gross hematuria in 0.6% to 15.0%. 16,17,18 and 19 Gross hematuria can range from lightly stained urine to exsanguinating hemorrhage.
Symptoms usually occur soon after Cytoxan is given but may occur years later. 17 Malignant lesions, usually transitional cell carcinoma, occur in 2% to 5.5% of
patients who receive oral Cytoxan for nonmalignant disease. 16,19,20 The entire urothelium can be affected, but the bladder is the most frequently involved area.
Bladder pathology has been attributed to toxic metabolites of these compounds. Hepatic microsomal cells break down cyclophosphamide to
hydroxycyclophosphamide, then by target cells to aldophosphamide, and then to phosphoramide mustard, the active antineoplastic metabolite, and acrolein, which
has no significant antitumor activity. 21,22 and 23 Similarly, ifosfamide is metabolized to iphosphoramide mustard and acrolein. 22 Urinary excretion of acrolein is believed
to be the major source of urothelial toxicity. 22 Most normal cells are able to break down the toxic metabolites and diminish their effect. Glutathione is a naturally
occurring thiol that can confer such protection in most cells but is present in low levels in urine. 21 Oxazaphosphorine toxicity has been demonstrated in several animal
models with their systemic administration and by instillation of their normal metabolic products directly into the bladder. 24,25 and 26
Bladder damage from these compounds is cumulative and generally dose-related. “Cytoxan cystitis” occurs frequently and early after intravenous therapy, especially
dose-intensive regimens. Fibrosis has been found in as many as 25% of children receiving high-dose cyclophosphamide. 27 Severe hematuria and telangiectasia are
more common in these patients.27 Cystitis usually takes weeks to develop after oral treatment but has been seen after as little as one dose. 28 Oxazaphosphorine
cystitis is potentiated by prior pelvic radiation. 17,29
Laboratory values reveal normal coagulation profiles, a normal platelet count, and negative urine culture. Because these patients are at risk for developing urothelial
malignancies, episodes of cystitis and hematuria must be evaluated, including urinalysis and urine cytology. Patients receiving cyclophosphamide develop markedly
abnormal cytologies, including marked atypia, increased nuclear size, and bizarrely shaped cytoplasm, which frequently resolves with cessation of the drug. 30 These
findings can be suggestive of malignancy and need to be interpreted with caution. 31 Patients with abnormal cytologies that have not been investigated previously
should undergo a thorough urologic evaluation. Cystoscopy may reveal a tumor or changes compatible with Cytoxan cystitis ( Fig. 51.4-1). Acutely diffuse inflammation
is seen. Chronic changes include a pale bladder mucosa with telangiectasia. Areas of edema can be present with patchy hemorrhagic areas that stain with methylene
blue, an indicator of mucosal injury. 24 Biopsies reveal hyperemia, hemorrhage, edema, mucosal thinning, and ulceration of the urothelium. Necrosis of mucosa,
muscle, and small arterioles and telangiectasia can be present. 24,26,32 Atypia can be prominent, and abundant mitoses often occur. 26,30,32 These findings are similar to
those seen after radiation therapy. Mucosal lesions of cyclophosphamide-induced cystitis may be identified early, before the appearance of microscopic hematuria. 33

FIGURE 51.4-1. Cytoxan cystitis. Microscopic hematuria is found in approximately one-half of patients receiving oral Cytoxan. Increased vascularity with fragile
“corkscrew” vessels are seen at cystoscopy here. Submucosal hemorrhage adjacent to larger vessels occurred after bladder distention. Fulgaration of these small
vessels will temporarily alleviate bleeding. Radiation cystitis appears similar at cystoscopy.

Hemorrhagic cystitis is managed by stopping or reducing the drug. Replacing the drug, usually with azathioprine, is necessary in as many as one-third of patients who
develop severe cystitis after chronic oral administration. 34 Hydration and diuresis are routinely used to dilute the metabolites in the urine and minimize their toxicity
after intravenous administration. 23 The cystitis usually improves within several days after cessation of the drug but can occasionally persist for months. Patients
receiving high doses of oxazaphosphorines require additional measures to counter their effects. 35 Bladder irrigation is helpful in many of these patients taking
cyclophosphamide. 36
Sodium 2-mercaptoethane sulfonate (mesna) was designed to function in the urinary tract to detoxify azophosphorine metabolites with urothelial toxicity. Mesna is a
sulfhydryl compound that is administered intravenously and rapidly excreted by the urinary tract. After intravenous administration, mesna undergoes oxidation, forming
disulfide bonds and making an unreactive dimer (dimesna). One concern regarding such a class of drugs is that they might affect the antineoplastic properties of
oxazaphosphorines. Mesna and dimesna are very hydrophilic and do not normally penetrate cells, explaining its antineoplastic sparing effect. 23 This unreactive
form—dimesna—is filtered by the kidneys and undergoes tubular reabsorption, where one-third of it is reduced to its active form, mesna, by glutathione reductase. 23
In the urinary tract, the sulfhydryl group of mesna complexes with the terminal methyl group of acrolein, joining the compound to the double bond of acrolein and
forming a nontoxic thioether. 23 The presence of mesna also inhibits spontaneous breakdown of cyclophosphamide to acrolein in the urine. 37 In addition to decreasing
chemical cystitis, the risk of bladder cancer is significantly reduced when mesna is used in the Sprague-Dawley rat model. 38
Oral mesna is well absorbed but slow to achieve adequate urinary concentrations. It has an unpleasant taste, which makes patient compliance poor, particularly when
there is concomitant administration of a chemotherapy that induces nausea. 21 Mesna is best given intravenously, and the manufacturer recommends three doses. A
loading dose equivalent to 20% (wt/wt) of the ifosfamide dose, given 15 minutes before the ifosfamide, is followed by two similar doses 4 and 8 hours after the
ifosfamide.23 Doses as high as 60% to 120% (wt/wt) have been used with cyclophosphamide, given at a similar schedule. The timing of dosages of mesna is
important, as the half-life of mesna is 35 minutes, while that of cyclophosphamide is 4 hours. 23,39 Mesna toxicity is minimal, the major side effects being diarrhea,
headaches, and limb pain. 21
Another thiol compound, N-acetyl- L-cysteine, has been used less extensively to ameliorate the effects of oxazaphosphorines. Animal data demonstrate that the
bladder is protected when it is given at a dose of 1:1 (wt/wt) with cyclophosphamide in a similar schedule as mesna. 40 Problems with N-acetyl-L-cysteine include a
wide distribution in the body with low urinary levels. High intravenous doses or intravesical administration is required to reach effective concentrations. 41 Conflicting
data concerning impairment of antitumor activity have not been resolved.
Bone Marrow Transplantation
Hemorrhagic cystitis occurs in approximately 2% of conditioning regimens not containing Cytoxan and is frequently related to thrombocytopenia. 29 The incidence of
hemorrhagic cystitis in regimens with cyclophosphamide is 5% to 15%. 29,42,43 and 44 Allogeneic bone marrow and unrelated transplantation appear to have a higher risk
than autologous bone marrow transplantation. 42,43 Prior cyclophosphamide, radiation, urethral catheterization, infection (bacterial or previous viral), concurrent
medication, or coagulation disorders (thrombocytopenia) can all contribute to the development of hemorrhagic cystitis in these patients. Prior administration of
busulfan, an alkyl sulfonate, increases the risk of hemorrhagic cystitis to as high as 36%, compared to 4% in patients receiving the same regimen without prior
exposure.45 Concomitant use of these agents is associated with hemorrhagic cystitis in 0.5% to 50.0% of patients. 29,44,46,47 Patients with acute bleeding have
decreased survival compared to patients without bleeding. 43
Several viruses have been implicated in the etiology of hemorrhagic cystitis in patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation, either as viral reactivation or a new
infection. These include polyoma (BK) virus, 29,48 adenovirus, 42 especially adenovirus 11, 48,49 papovavirus, influenza A, and cytomegalovirus. 47,48 Patients in whom
viral particles were recovered developed hematuria later after transplantation (55 days) 48 than patients with so-called idiopathic hemorrhagic cystitis (25 to 27 days). 29

The viral type also had a longer duration than idiopathic cystitis. 48,49 Diagnosis of viral cystitis is improving with polymerase chain reaction technology. 50
It has been recommended that patients receiving the combination of Cytoxan and busulfan should receive continuous bladder irrigation during treatment. 47
Prophylactic treatment with mesna seems equally efficacious 51,52 and 53 and does not appear to affect engraftment. 54 Mesna 60% (wt/wt) has been an adequate dose in
children, but adults appear to require a higher dose [120% to 160% (wt/wt)]. 54 Treatment in these patients is symptomatic.
Intravesical Chemotherapy
Intravesical treatment of superficial bladder tumors with chemotherapeutic agents or biologic modifiers may cause a chemical cystitis or inflammatory response with
marked symptoms. Several agents are commonly used. Thiotepa is well tolerated, although 2% to 49% of patients experience cystitis 55,56 and approximately one-third
develop hematuria. 55 One-third of patients receiving epodyl 56 and 26% to 50% of patients receiving doxorubicin (Adriamycin) develop cystitis. 56,57 Mitomycin C is best
tolerated, with 6% to 33% of patients developing cystitis, and one-third developing hematuria. 55,56 and 57 Most hematuria is microscopic. Significant hemorrhagic cystitis
is uncommon with any of these agents. Bladder contractures have rarely been reported in patients receiving thiotepa or mitomycin.
Most patients receiving bacille Calmette-Guérin develop irritative voiding symptoms, which can be the most severe of all intravesical treatments. Biopsies in these
patients reveal acute and chronic inflammatory changes and granuloma formation. Urinary analgesics and antispasmodics are particularly helpful in this group. If
symptoms are prolonged, isoniazid and acetaminophen or ibuprofen are given until symptoms resolve. It is uncommon for treatment regimens to be stopped because
of toxicity. 58
Other
Oral 9-nitrocamptothecin, a water-insoluble topoisomerase I inhibitor, and other camptothecins are associated with dose-related hematuria in up to 25% of patients. 59
Hematuria may be a chemical cystitis related to the significant urinary elimination of the drug, although it can also be associated with profound thrombocytopenia.
Increasing fluid intake to 3 liters/d has been associated with decreased cystitis and ability to finish treatment.
Busulfan, an alkyl sulfonate used in the treatment of chronic granulocytic leukemia, has also been reported as a cause of hemorrhagic cystitis. 45,60,61 As many as 16%
of patients in regimens with intravenous busulfan and without cyclophosphamide develop hemorrhagic cystitis. 29 Cystoscopy in these patients reveals generalized
inflammation and edema. Biopsies demonstrate metaplastic changes in the urothelium, submucosal inflammation, and telangiectasia. 60 Both cystoscopic and
histologic findings are similar to radiation or oxazaphosphorine cystitis. Bladder malignancies have not been associated with its use. Given orally, a cumulative dose
of 2 to 5 kg appears necessary to induce these changes. 60,62 Stopping the drug and alleviation of irritative symptoms are the primary treatment.
Other chemotherapeutic regimens that do not include agents with known bladder toxicity appear to be able to induce a cystitis and hematuria without associated
thrombocytopenia.63 The mechanism in these patients is not clear, although bleomycin has been suggested to be the culprit. 63,64
INTRAVESICAL PHOTOTHERAPY
Kelly and Snell first performed treatment of superficial bladder tumors with “phototherapy” in 1975. Treatment involves administration of an intravenous
photosensitizer (usually a hematoporphyrin derivative), waiting 2 days, and then activation of the compound with light. The time lag allows preferential uptake of
sensitizer by tumor, with normal tissue levels decreasing, thus increasing the therapeutic index. An optical fiber placed in the bladder through a cystoscope transmits
light to activate the sensitizer. Patients whose entire bladder mucosa is illuminated develop marked bladder irritation with suprapubic discomfort, urgency, and urge
incontinence. Symptoms can be surprisingly mild the first day after activation but peak in the second and third day. Symptoms improve quickly and usually resolve by
4 to 6 weeks. Cystoscopy initially reveals exuberant local reaction and edema. 65 Biopsies initially reveal coagulative necrosis and hemorrhage. 65 Later, acute and
chronic inflammation and atypia are present. 66 The acute response can resolve with little residual effect visually apparent. Bladder fibrosis and reflux are
unpredictable side effects of this therapy. Treatment of the acute symptoms includes Foley drainage to put the bladder to rest and B&O suppositories for control of
bladder discomfort.
RADIATION
Patients undergoing primary radiotherapy of malignant pelvic tumors, most commonly uterine, bladder, and prostate neoplasms, can suffer direct or incidental damage
to the bladder. The risk is increased when urinary infection is present, repeated or high-dose radiation is given, or when surgery has been performed in the area.
Cyclophosphamide, given systemically in combination with pelvic radiotherapy, greatly increases the risk of radiation cystitis. 67
In the first 4 to 6 weeks after treatment, an acute inflammatory response with resultant irritative symptoms or hematuria (or both) develops. Mild symptoms occur in as
many as 50% to 82% of patients and generally do not require medication. 68,69
Hemorrhagic cystitis can occur later, even years after successful treatment, 69 and frequently is associated with tumor recurrence. 70 The time between treatment and
development of delayed symptoms (frequency, dysuria, and hematuria) is proportional to the dose received. 69 Patients with late cystitis develop bladder ulcers,
bladder fibrosis, and ureteral strictures. They require thorough evaluation, as these patients are at increased risk for transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder.
Bladder biopsies should be performed sparingly, as the bladder mucosa heals poorly.
Approximately 3.7% of patients receiving intravaginal intracavitary radiation alone (3200 cGy) for stage I endometrial carcinoma after radical hysterectomy have been
reported to develop cystitis. 71 When external-beam radiation (4000 to 5400 cGy) is added, 4.0% to 6.5% of patients develop cystitis. 71,72 Patients undergoing definitive
radiation treatment of cervical carcinoma have a risk of cystitis that is dose-related. 70,73 At doses of less than 6000 cGy, the development of cystitis has been strongly
linked to recurrent tumor. 70 The incidence of cystitis in this group is 2.8% to 8.0%. 69,74,75 Between 1.2% and 18.0% of patients receiving external-beam radiation (3000
to 8500 cGy) for bladder cancer developed cystitis, 70,76,77 8% hematuria, 70 and 5% a contracted bladder. 77 Chronic cystitis developed in 15% of patients.
Radiation to the prostate (5000 to 7200 cGy) and draining lymph nodes (5000 cGy) for cure of prostate cancer elicits dysuria and mild to moderate hematuria in 18%
to 40% of patients. 78,79 Between 0.8% and 8.3% develop severe dysuria or hematuria, and 3.4% to 9.0% develop strictures or urethral obstruction as a delayed
presentation. 78,79 and 80
During the acute phase, cystoscopy reveals edema, erythema, and increased vascularity, which can be associated with a mild decrease in bladder capacity. Later, the
bladder is pale, and telangiectasia is present. Focal areas of hyperemia and bullous edema may be present. Often there is no focal area of bleeding. With extensive
damage, necrosis and calcification can occur. Biopsy findings are dose- and time-dependent. In the first 24 hours, there is erythema due to hyperemia. This develops
into a diffuse inflammatory response with hyperemia, edema, lymphocytic infiltration, and degeneration of the urothelium with atypia. 68,69,81 Shallow ulcers are
occasionally seen but usually occur as a late response. This response lasts up to 4 months after therapy. 82 Later, sclerosing endarteritis, fibrosis, and atrophy occur.
There may be edema and an inflammatory infiltrate. There can be ulceration, and healing is poor. 77,82,83 Treatment is symptomatic.
ANTIBIOTICS
While most cystitis seen in the setting of oncologic care is related to antineoplastic agents, penicillins used in the treatment of chemotherapy related infections
represent another source. Methicillin, nafcillin, ticarcillin, piperacillin, carbenicillin, and penicillin G have all been implicated. The incidence of cystitis associated with
the use of these agents is small, occurring in 4% to 8% of patients. 84 Symptoms are typical of cystitis. Laboratory investigation reveals eosinophilia, pyuria, hematuria,
proteinuria, and negative urine cultures. The submucosal deposition of C3, immunoglobulins G and M, and dimethoxyphenylpenicilloyl, a methicillin antigen, supports
a hypersensitivity etiology. 84,85 and 86 A diffuse hemorrhagic cystitis is seen at cystoscopy. 85 Biopsies show an intense inflammatory reaction with erosion. 87 With
repeated use, the time to development of symptoms shortens. Symptoms usually resolve promptly on cessation of the drug or substitution with an unrelated drug. 85,86

BLADDER HEMORRHAGE
Severe cystitis can result in hemorrhage resulting in clot retention and requiring transfusion. If bedside bladder clot evacuation and continuous irrigation are not
successful, cystoscopic evacuation of clots with fulguration of bleeding sites will cure most patients ( Table 51.4-1). Correction of thrombocytopenia before cystoscopy
will frequently stop bleeding and is necessary to prevent further bleeding episodes. Patients resistant to conservative therapy have been treated with intravesical
instillation of chemical astringents or fixatives started immediately after cystoscopic treatment and cystogram to exclude vesicoureteral reflux. 88 Bladder instillation is
performed using gravity drainage with minimal hydrostatic head required for filling.

TABLE 51.4-1. Management of Bladder Hemorrhage

Silver nitrate is a cauterizing agent that results in cellular protein coagulation and eschar formation. A 0.5% to 1.0% water solution as continuous bladder irrigation
has been used in the management of radiation and chemical cystitis. 89 Chloride salts in solution or from ulcerated mucosal lesions are avoided as they can result in
precipitation of silver chloride. 90 When effective, bleeding usually stops within 24 to 72 hours.
Continuous irrigation with 1% alum is used in a similar manner as silver nitrate. 91,92 Specific toxicities are related to aluminum absorption and include renal
dysfunction, altered mental status, and encephalopathy. 93,94
Formalin is a tissue fixative and embalming agent. Because of its potential toxicity, formalin is used only in the management of patients with life-threatening hematuria
unresponsive to other measures. After cystoscopic examination, a 1% to 5% solution of formalin is instilled for 3 to 10 minutes in the operating room. 95,96 and 97
Complications and response are directly related to concentration and duration of exposure. Complications include bladder rupture, vesicorectal or vesicovaginal
fistula, renal failure, acidosis, altered mental status, and chemical skin burns. 96,98,99 and 100 Formalin toxicity may be abrogated by dialysis to decrease blood levels and
correct the metabolic acidosis.
Formaldehyde exists as a gas and has a maximum solubility of 37% in aqueous solution. A 37% aqueous solution of formaldehyde is equivalent to a 100% solution of
formalin. Dilution of formaldehyde to formalin in treatment concentrations is best performed in the pharmacy.
Bladder irrigation with any chemical agent can be irritating, with local pain and bladder spasms requiring medical treatment. Complications related to intravesical
instillation of chemical agents include ureteral stricture, bladder fibrosis with loss of volume, and death. 90,91,95,101 With signs of toxicity, the bladder irrigation is
changed to water or saline to wash out any residual drug. As bladder healing occurs, hematuria can frequently recur if the underlying pathology still exists.
Other less-tried regimens have been shown to have activity in the treatment of radiation- or cyclophosphamide-induced hemorrhagic cystitis. These include
intravesical installation of prostaglandins, 102,103 oral pentosanpolysulphate, 104 conjugated estrogens, 102,103 or hyperbaric oxygen. 105,106 and 107 Open cystotomy with
bladder packing has rarely been used. 108

URINARY OBSTRUCTION
Urinary obstruction associated with loss of renal function can lead to accumulation of water, urea, and electrolytes as well as loss of renal concentrating ability.
Immediately after release of obstruction, these can lead to brisk diuresis, hypovolemia, and shock. Patients are monitored hourly for elevated urine output and if not
able to match with oral intake, require intravenous supplementation. 109,110 Rarely, patients with severe fluid and electrolyte disturbances may require dialysis. 111
UPPER TRACTS
Malignant ureteral obstruction occurs in as many as 4.4% of patients with advanced cancer. 112 The most common associated malignancies are prostate, bladder,
cervical, colon, or lymphoid cancers. 113,114 Definitive radiation treatment of cervical cancer has been reported to have a continuous increasing of risk of 0.15% per year
over 25 years.115 Ureteral obstruction may be an incidental finding on computed tomography imaging and associated with altered renal function. Radionuclide imaging
may be helpful if the clinical picture is not diagnostic of obstruction. 116
Cystoscopic placement of ureteral stents maintains quality of life better than percutaneous nephrostomy. 117 Stent placement may be difficult when the ureteral orifices
are obscured by local tumor invasion. Ureteral stents placed for obstruction at the bladder level are more predisposed to bleeding and obstruction than are those
placed for retroperitoneal metastases causing extrinsic ureteral obstruction. As many as 49% to 63% of patients with bladder malignancies may end up with
percutaneous nephrostomy.111,113
Patients undergoing percutaneous nephrostomy placement can usually undergo antegrade placement of a ureteral stent. 118 These stents can be changed
cystoscopically, taking care not to lose access to the ureteral orifice. Ureteral stents are generally changed every 3 months to prevent encrustation and obstruction. 119
Minor hematuria and bladder spasms are often associated with ureteral stent placement and treated symptomatically. As many as 5% of patients have significant
bleeding, usually associated with tumor invasion in the bladder. 113
Patients with ureteral obstruction and urinary conduits may require initial percutaneous nephrostomy followed by internalization of the ureteral stent. 120 Percutaneous
management with ureteroscopic incision of a benign stricture has been affective in up to 57% of patients. 121 Residual ureteral stricture requiring definitive surgical
treatment is uncommon, as most responses to treatment are short-lived. Late strictures after radiation therapy have had limited success with excision and ureteral
reimplantation.115
Untreated patients with bilateral ureteral obstruction succumb to renal failure within a month. 114 Recovery of renal function after relief of obstruction depends on
duration of obstruction and initial renal function. 122 Preservation of renal parenchyma and renal function has been reported as long as 5 months after complete
unilateral ureteral obstruction. 123 When there is partial ureteral obstruction, return to normal function has been reported in 68% of patients, with marked improvement
in 24%.114 Patients with ureteral obstruction from hormone-sensitive prostate cancer have had longer survival 111,112 and 113 than those with gastric, pancreatic, or colon
cancer. 111,124
LOWER TRACT

Prostate
Urinary voiding symptoms may occur in debilitated patients after surgery, chemotherapy, or significant medical events. Symptoms may range from urinary frequency
with decreased force of stream and nocturia to urinary retention.
Urinary retention may be obstructive, pharmacologic, neurogenic, or psychogenic in nature. 125 Patient medical and voiding history is examined with these factors in
mind. Urinary tract infection or prostatitis should be detected early and treated appropriately. Manipulation of the urinary tract or prostate in these patients is kept to a
minimum to prevent sepsis.
Relief of urinary obstruction with catheter drainage offers immediate relief. Patients with urethral stricture disease, benign prostatic hypertrophy, prostate cancer,
meatal stenosis, or phimosis can be challenging to catheterize. Urethral dilation or use of a specialized angulated (Coudé) catheter to pass an enlarged prostate
median lobe may be necessary. Placement of suprapubic trochar drainage is performed when urethral catheterization is not possible or there are concerns about
promoting sepsis. Individuals especially trained in their use best perform these procedures. Minor surgical procedures can be performed to relieve phimosis or meatal
stenosis.
Permanent affects on ability to void can occur after abdominoperineal resection, radical hysterectomy, or extensive pelvic operations that interrupt normal pelvic
parasympathetic innervation to the bladder. Temporary loss of voiding may occur secondary to anticholinergic agents that block detrusor activity, pain that results in
increased sympathetic bladder neck tone, and narcotics that inhibit the urge to void. Of patients with urinary retention as a presenting complaint, as many as 18% to
23% will reestablish normal voiding if given a voiding trial. 126,127 Of patients with urinary retention after nonurologic surgery, as many as 69% reestablish normal
voiding patterns if placed on intermittent self-catheterization, generally within 3 months. 128
Evaluation of urinary retention associated with nonsurgical medical disorders is less well defined. Assessment of prehospital admission American Urological
Association voiding symptom score in all these patients is helpful in identifying patients who may require treatment of prostate obstruction. 129,130,131,132 and 133
Urodynamics may be indicated to distinguish bladder outlet obstruction from impaired detrusor contractility. 134 Transurethral resection of the prostate remains the
standard against which other treatment regimens for urinary retention due to benign prostate hypertrophy are measured. 135 Use of alternative methods, such as
holmium laser resection, urethral stent, or chronic indwelling catheter drainage, may be dictated by available technology or patient health.
Patients with urinary retention due to prostate cancer had good relief of obstruction 1 month after bilateral orchiectomy. 136 Similar results have been observed using
luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone antagonists, although improvement may take longer. 137 Urethral stents have been used to hasten spontaneous voiding.
Urethra
Patients in whom a catheter cannot be passed may have benign prostatic hypertrophy or urethral stricture disease. A Coudé catheter more easily follows the natural
angulation of the urethra into the bladder. A small catheter may pass through a stricture that is not severe. 138 Urethral dilation by trained personnel may be required.
Forceful advancement of the catheter is to be avoided, as the integrity of the urethra can be violated, contributing to bleeding, urinary extravasation, local cellulitis,
and stricture formation.139 Cystoscopic placement of a Foley catheter may be required if this occurs. Urethral bleeding after traumatic catheter placement or inflation of
a balloon in the urethra will stop when the Foley is in place if coagulation parameters are normal. Urine should be checked for infection and treated appropriately.
A Foley catheter balloon may not deflate, preventing its removal. Scissors removal of the valve will allow drainage if that is the location of the obstruction. Obstruction
at a distal level can be relieved by balloon rupture with a spinal needle under ultrasound guidance. 138 Suprapubic or transvaginal routes are preferred, although the
transrectal route is technically feasible.

PRIAPISM
Priapism is the emergent condition defined as sustained painful erection of the corpora cavernosal tissue not associated with sexual stimulation. Two types of
priapism have been described, ischemic (low-flow) and nonischemic (high-flow), with different treatment and prognosis.
Ischemic priapism is associated with decreased penile venous outflow and stasis of blood resulting in intracavernosal blood acidosis and low oxygen tension.
Ischemic priapism is treated emergently, as irreversible cellular damage and corporal fibrosis, which can result in erectile dysfunction, occur within 24 to 48 hours.
Ischemic priapism may be caused by sickle cell disorders, oral or injected medications, or tumor infiltrate. 140,141 and 142 Nonischemic priapism usually results from
perineal trauma with injury to the internal pudendal artery with arteriovenous fistula formation. 143,144 and 145 Nonischemic priapism is painless, can increase in
tumescence after sexual stimuli, and can be managed electively.
Patient history may reveal drug use, sickle cell anemia, perineal trauma, or malignancy. Priapism is usually found in men but has been reported rarely in women. 146
On physical examination, the corpora cavernosa are rigid. The glans, an extension of the corpora spongiosa, is usually soft. Voiding symptoms may occur in as many
as 25% of patients when tumor involves the corpora spongiosa or urethra. 147 Pseudopriapism is characterized by rigidity and edema associated with metastases
rather than venous stasis. Pain is thought to be due to tissue anoxia. In malignant priapism, tumor infiltration of the cavernosa or invasion of venous drainage is
thought to lead to stasis and thrombosis.
As many as 10% of patients develop priapism related to malignancy. 148,149 Penile metastases are most often symptom-free, with associated priapism in 20% to 53% of
patients. 150 Prostate, bladder, and kidney cancer are most commonly involved in adults. 150,151 Leukemia is the most common malignant cause in children. 149,152 Needle
biopsy or aspiration of the firm corpora cavernosa can confirm the diagnosis. The management of priapism varies according to cause. 153,154,155,156 and 157
Treatment of malignant priapism is initially aimed at relief of pain and anxiety with hydration, analgesia, and rest. 153 Treatment of the underlying malignancy can be
associated with relief. 150 Hormonal therapy of prostate cancer and chemotherapy of leukemia 156,158 would have higher expectations of response. Radiation is palliative
if more emergent relief is needed or therapeutic options are limited. Intracavernosal injection of pharmacologic agents has had anecdotal success. 159,160 Without
systemic treatment, survival in malignant priapism is poor, as most patients have metastatic disease at presentation. 150,161,162 Sixty percent of patients died at a median
of 4 months (range, 0.2 to 60 months) after developing priapism. 150
Surgical treatment of priapism involves creation of a shunt between the glans penis and the corpora cavernosa. 163 Under anesthesia, a tru-cut needle placed through
the glans into each corpora cavernosum will achieve this. Anoxia occurring during priapism or shunting performed as treatment can result in impotence. A penile
prosthesis may be required if the corpora cavernosa become fibrosed and unable to distend in normal fashion.

PARAPHIMOSIS
Paraphimosis is the pathologic state occurring after retraction of the foreskin proximal to the glans penis, characterized by local swelling and difficulty in returning the
foreskin to its normal position. Retention of the preputial ring proximal to the coronal sulcus is associated with tissue tension greater than lymphatic pressure and
results in edema of the prepuce and glans. If not reduced, the edema can become massive, associated with pain and skin breakdown. Manual reduction is usually
performed, using anesthetic jelly and pressure to remove edema. The penis is grasped with both hands, placing the last three fingers along the shaft. The index
fingers are used to pull the foreskin over the glans, while the thumbs push the glans back through the constricting ring of the prepuce. 139 When this is not possible, a
local anesthetic block may be required to release the trapped foreskin. 138 A dorsal slit procedure will allow relief of an acute constricting paraphimosis or phimosis if
conservative measures fail.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Wilkinson TJ, Robinson BA. Neutropenic sepsis complicating treatment of solid tumours, lymphoma and myeloma. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) 1992;4:355.
2. Rotstein C, Cummings KM, Nicolaou AL, Lucey J, Fitzpatrick J. Nosocomial infection rates at an oncology center. Infect Control 1988;9:13.

3. Bryan CS, Reynolds KL. Hospital-acquired bacteremic urinary tract infection: epidemiology and outcome. J Urol 1984;132:494.
4. Rosser CJ, Bare RL, Meredith JW. Urinary tract infections in the critically ill patient with a urinary catheter. Am J Surg 1999;177:287.
5. Leibovici L, Shraga I, Drucker M, et al. The benefit of appropriate empirical antibiotic treatment in patients with bloodstream infection. J Intern Med 1998;244:379.
6. Leibovici L, Drucker M, Konigsberger H, et al. Septic shock in bacteremic patients: risk factors, features and prognosis. Scand J Infect Dis 1997;29:71.
7. Leibovici L, Greenshtain S, Cohen O, Wysenbeek AJ. Toward improved empiric management of moderate to severe urinary tract infections. Arch Intern Med 1992;152:2481.
8. Walther MM, Mann BB, Finnerty DP. Periurethral abscess. J Urol 1987;138:1167.
9. Baker WJ, Wilkey JL, Barson LJ. An evaluation of the management of peri-urethral phlegmon in 272 consecutive cases at the Cook County Hospital. J Urol 1949;61:943.
10. Tashiro S, Hinman F. Periurethral and perirectal infections: pathologic and clinical differentiation. J Urol 1947;57:338.
11. Paty R, Smith AD. Gangrene and Fournier's gangrene. Urol Clin North Am 1992;19:149.
12. Veiga-Pires JA, Elebute EA. Urethrocystography in the male. Br J Urol 1967;39:194.
13. Finestone EO. Urinary extravasation (periurethral phlegmon) pathogenesis and experimental study. Surg Obstet Gynecol 1941;73:218.
14. Wilkey JL, Barson LJ, Portney FR. Urinary extravasation and periurethral phlegmon: clinical analysis of 100 cases. J Urol 1959;82:657.
15. Pranikoff K, Constantino G. The use of amitriptyline in patients with urinary frequency and pain. Urology 1998;51:179.
16. Stillwell TJ, Benson RC Jr, DeRemee RA, McDonald TJ, Weiland LH. Cyclophosphamide-induced bladder toxicity in Wegener's granulomatosis. Arthritis Rheum 1988;31:465.
17. Stillwell TJ, Benson RC Jr, Burgert EO Jr. Cyclophosphamide-induced hemorrhagic cystitis in Ewing's sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:76.
18. Lawrence HJ, Simone J, Aur RJ. Cyclophosphamide-induced hemorrhagic cystitis in children with leukemia. Cancer 1975;36:1572.
19. Talar-Williams C, Hijazi YM, Walther MM, et al. Cyclophosphamide-induced cystitis and bladder cancer in patients with Wegener's granulomatosis. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:477.
20. Fairchild WV, Spence CR, Solomon HD, Gangai MP. The incidence of bladder cancer after cyclophosphamide therapy. J Urol 1979;122:163.
21. Shaw IC, Graham MI. Mesnaa short review. Cancer Treat Rev 1987;14:67.
22. Cox PJ. Cyclophosphamide cystitisidentification of acrolein as the causative agent. Biochem Pharmacol 1979;28:2045.
23. Schoenike SE, Dana WJ. Ifosfamide and mesna. Clin Pharm 1990;9:179.
24. Chaviano AH, Gill WB, Ruggiero KJ, Vermeulen CW. Experimental Cytoxan cystitis and prevention by acetylcysteine. J Urol 1985;134:598.
25. Brock N, Pohl J, Stekar J. Detoxification of urotoxic oxazaphosphorines by sulfhydryl compounds. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1981;100:311.
26. Philips FS, Sternberg SS, Cronin AP, Vidal PM. Cyclophosphamide and urinary bladder toxicity. Cancer Res 1961;21:1577.
27. Johnson WW, Meadows DC. Urinary-bladder fibrosis and telangiectasia associated with long-term cyclophosphamide therapy. N Engl J Med 1971;284:290.
28. Host H, Nissen-Meyer R. A preliminary clinical study of cyclophosphamide. Cancer Chemother Rep 1960;9:47.
29. Brugieres L, Hartmann O, Travagli JP, et al. Hemorrhagic cystitis following high-dose chemotherapy and bone marrow transplantation in children with malignancies: incidence, clinical course,
and outcome. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:194.
30. Forni AM, Koss LG, Geller W. Cytological study of the effect of cyclophosphamide on the epithelium of the urinary bladder in man. Cancer 1964;17:1348.
31. Liedberg CF, Rausing A, Langeland P. Cyclophosphamide hemorrhagic cystitis. Scand J Urol Nephrol 1970;4:183.
32. Koss LG. A light and electron microscopic study of the effects of a single dose of cyclophosphamide on various organs in the rat: I. The urinary bladder. Lab Invest 1967;16:44.
33. Kimura M, Tomita Y, Morishita H, Takahashi K. Presence of mucosal change in the urinary bladder in nonhematuric patients with long-term exposure and/or accumulating high-dose
cyclophosphamide. Possible significance of follow-up cystoscopy on preventing development of cyclophosphamide-induced hemorrhagic cystitis. Urol Int 1998;61:8.
34. Fauci AS, Haynes BF, Katz P, Wolff SM. Wegener's granulomatosis: prospective clinical and therapeutic experience with 85 patients for 21 years. Ann Intern Med 1983;98:76.
35. Droller MJ, Saral R, Santos G. Prevention of cyclophosphamide-induced hemorrhagic cystitis. Urology 1982;20:256.
36. Blume KG, Beutler E, Bross KJ, et al. Bone-marrow ablation and allogeneic marrow transplantation in acute leukemia. N Engl J Med 1980;302:1041.
37. Brock N, Stekar J, Pohl J, Niemeyer U, Scheffler G. Acrolein, the causative factor of urotoxic side-effects of cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, trofosfamide and sufosfamide.
Arzneimittelforschung 1979;29:659.
38. Petru E, Schmahl D. Anticancer drugs: second malignanciesrisk reduction. Cancer Treat Rev 1987;14:337.
39. Cytoxan. In: Schumacher MM, Dowd AL, eds, Physician's Desk Reference. Montvale, NJ: Medical Economics Company, 1991:723.
40. Tolley DA. The effect of N-acetyl cysteine on cyclophosphamide cystitis. Br J Urol 1977; 49:659.
41. Ormstad K, Ohno Y. N-acetylcysteine and sodium 2-mercaptoethane sulfonate as sources of urinary thiol groups in the rat. Cancer Res 1984;44:3797.
42. Sencer SF, Haak, RJ, Weisdorf DJ. Hemorrhagic cystitis after bone marrow transplantation. Risk factors and complications. Transplantation 1993;56:875.
43. Nevo S, Swan V, Enger C, et al. Acute bleeding after bone marrow transplantation (BMT)incidence and effect on survival. A quantitative analysis in 1,402 patients. Blood 1998;91:1469.
44. Seber A, Shu XO, Defor T, Sencer S, Ramsay N. Risk factors for severe hemorrhagic cystitis following BMT. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;23:35.
45. Thomas AE, Patterson J, Prentice HG, et al. Haemorrhagic cystitis in bone marrow transplantation patients: possible increased risk associated with prior busulfan therapy. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1987;1:347.
46. Nevill TJ, Barnett MJ, Klingemann HG, et al. Regimen-related toxicity of a busulfan-cyclophosphamide conditioning regimen in 70 patients undergoing allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. J
Clin Oncol 1991;9:1224.
47. Atkinson K, Biggs J, Noble G, et al. Preparative regimens for marrow transplantation containing busulfan are associated with haemorrhagic cystitis and hepatic veno-occlusive disease but a
short duration of leucopenia and little oro-pharyngeal mucositis. Bone Marrow Transplant 1987;2:385.
48. Arthur RR, Shah KV, Baust SJ, Santos GW, Saral R. Association of BK viruria with hemorrhagic cystitis in recipients of bone marrow transplants. N Engl J Med 1986;315:230.
49. Miyamura K, Takeyama K, Kojima S, et al. Hemorrhagic cystitis associated with urinary excretion of adenovirus type 11 following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1989;4:533.
50. Echavarria MS, Ray SC, Ambinder R, Dumler JS, Charache P. PCR detection of adenovirus in a bone marrow transplant recipient: hemorrhagic cystitis as a presenting manifestation of
disseminated disease. J Clin Microbiol 1999;37:686.
51. Turkeri LN, Lum LG, Uberti JP, et al. Prevention of hemorrhagic cystitis following allogeneic bone marrow transplant preparative regimens with cyclophosphamide and busulfan: role of
continuous bladder irrigation. J Urol 1995;153:637.
52. Meisenberg B, Lassiter M, Hussein A, et al. Prevention of hemorrhagic cystitis after high-dose alkylating agent chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow support. Bone Marrow Transplant
1994;14:287.
53. Vose JM, Reed EC, Pippert GC, et al. Mesna compared with continuous bladder irrigation as uroprotection during high-dose chemotherapy and transplantation: a randomized trial. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:1306.
54. Blacklock H, Ball L, Knight C, Schey S, Prentice G. Experience with mesna in patients receiving allogeneic bone marrow transplants for poor prognostic leukaemia. Cancer Treat Rev
1983;10:45.
55. Heney NM, Koontz WW, Barton B, et al. Intravesical thiotepa versus mitomycin C in patients with Ta, T1 and TIS transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder: a phase III prospective randomized
study. J Urol 1988;140:1390.
56. Lamm D. Intravesical therapy of superficial bladder cancer. AUA Update Series 1983;2:2.
57. Herr H, Laudone V. Intravesical therapy for superficial bladder cancer. AUA Update Series 1989;8:90.
58. Lamm DL, Stogdill VD, Stogdill BJ, Crispen RG. Complications of bacillus Calmette-Guérin immunotherapy in 1,278 patients with bladder cancer. J Urol 1986;135:272.
59. Verschraegen CF, Natelson EA, Giovanella BC, et al. A phase I clinical and pharmacological study of oral 9-nitrocamptothecin, a novel water-insoluble topoisomerase I inhibitor. Anticancer
Drugs 1998;9:36.
60. Pode D, Perlberg S, Steiner D. Busulfan-induced hemorrhagic cystitis. J Urol 1983;130:347.
61. Bandini G, Belardinelli A, Rosti G, et al. Toxicity of high-dose busulfan and cyclophosphamide as conditioning therapy for allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in adults with haematological
malignancies. Bone Marrow Transplant 1994;13:577.
62. Millard RJ. Busulfan-induced hemorrhagic cystitis. Urology 1981;18:143.
63. Cantwell BM, Harris AL, Patrick D, Hall RR. Hemorrhagic cystitis after IV bleomycin, vinblastine, cisplatin, and etoposide for testicular cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;70:548.
64. Creagan ET, Ahmann DL, Schutt AJ, Green SJ. Phase II study of the combination of vinblastine, bleomycin, and cisplatin in advanced malignant melanoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:567.
65. Benson RC, Kinsey JH, Cortese DA, Farrow GM, Utz DC. Treatment of transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder with hematoporphyrin derivative phototherapy. J Urol 1983;130:1090.
66. Prout GR, Lin CW, Benson R, et al. Photodynamic therapy with hematoporphyrin derivative in the treatment of superficial transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. N Engl J Med
1987;317:1251.
67. Jayalakshmamma B, Pinkel D. Urinary-bladder toxicity following pelvic irradiation and simultaneous cyclophosphamide therapy. Cancer 1976;38:701.
68. Fajardo LF, Berthrong M. Radiation injury in surgical pathology. Am J Surg Pathol 1978;2:159.
69. Oration JP. Complications following radiation therapy in carcinoma of the cervix and their treatment. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1964;88:854.
70. Dean RJ, Lytton B. Urologic complications of pelvic irradiation. J Urol 1978;119:64.
71. Kucera H, Vavra N, Weghaupt K. Benefit of external irradiation in pathologic stage I endometrial carcinoma: a prospective clinical trial of 605 patients who received postoperative vaginal
irradiation and additional pelvic irradiation in the presence of unfavorable prognostic factors. Gynecol Oncol 1990;38:99.
72. Jampolis S, Martin P, Schroder P, Horiot JC. Treatment tolerance and early complications with extended field irradiation in gynaecological cancer. Br J Radiol 1977;50:195.
73. Montana GS, Fowler WC. Carcinoma of the cervix: analysis of bladder and rectal radiation dose and complications. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;16:95.
74. Montana GS, Fowler WC, Varia MA, Walton LA, Mack Y. Analysis of results of radiation therapy for Stage II carcinoma of the cervix. Cancer 1985;55:956.
75. Buchler DA, Kline JC, Peckham BM, Boone ML, Carr WF. Radiation reactions in cervical cancer therapy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1971;111:745.
76. Shiels RA, Nissenbaum MM, Mark SR, Browde S. Late radiation cystitis after treatment for carcinoma of the bladder. S Afr Med J 1986;70:727.
77. Ram MD. Visceral complications of supervoltage radiotherapy for carcinoma of the bladder. Br J Surg 1970;57:409.
78. Ray GR, Cassady JR, Bagshaw MA. Definitive radiation therapy of carcinoma of the prostate. A report on 15 years of experience. Radiology 1973;106:407.
79. Taylor WJ, Richardson RG, Hafermann MD. Radiation therapy for localized prostate cancer. Cancer 1979;43:1123.
80. Harisiadis L, Veenema RJ, Senyszyn JJ, et al. Carcinoma of the prostate: treatment with external radiotherapy. Cancer 1978;41:2131.
81. Warren S VII. Effects of radiation on the urinary system. Arch Pathol 1942;34:1079.
82. Haemorrhagic cystitis after radiotherapy. Lancet 1987;1:304.
83. Gowing NF III. Pathological changes in the bladder following irradiation. Br J Radiol 1960;33:484.
84. Relling MV, Schunk JE. Drug-induced hemorrhagic cystitis [clinical conference]. Clin Pharm 1986;5:590.
85. Bracis R, Sanders CV, Gilbert DN. Methicillin hemorrhagic cystitis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1977;12:438.
86. Marx CM, Alpert SE. Ticarcillin-induced cystitis cross-reactivity with related penicillins. Am J Dis Child 1984;138:670.
87. Cook FV, Farrar WE Jr, Kreutner A. Hemorrhagic cystitis and ureteritis, and interstitial nephritis associated with administration of penicillin G. J Urol 1979;122:110.
88. West NJ. Prevention and treatment of hemorrhagic cystitis. Pharmacotherapy 1997;17:696.
89. Kumar AP, Wrenn ELJ, Jayalakshmamma B, et al. Silver nitrate irrigation to control bladder hemorrhage in children receiving cancer therapy. J Urol 1976;116:85.
90. Raghavaiah NV, Soloway MS. Anuria following silver nitrate irrigation for intractable bladder hemorrhage. J Urol 1977;118:681.
91. Arrizabalaga M, Extramiana J, Parra JL, et al. Treatment of massive haematuria with aluminous salts. Br J Urol 1987;60:223.
92. Goel AK, Rao MS, Bhagwat AG, et al. Intravesical irrigation with alum for the control of massive bladder hemorrhage. J Urol 1985;133:956.
93. Sherrard DJ. Aluminum toxicity. Kidney 1988;20:31.
94. Murphy CP, Cox RL, Harden EA, et al. Encephalopathy and seizures induced by intravesical alum irrigations. Bone Marrow Transplant 1992;10:383.
95. Donahue LA, Frank IN. Intravesical formalin for hemorrhagic cystitis: analysis of therapy. J Urol 1989;141:809.

96. Godec CJ, Gleich P. Intractable hematuria and formalin. J Urol 1983;130:688.
97. Dewan AK, Mohan GM, Ravi R. Intravesical formalin for hemorrhagic cystitis following irradiation of cancer of the cervix. Int J Gynecol Obstet 1993;42:131.
98. Vicente J, Rios G, Caffaratti J. Intravesical formalin for the treatment of massive hemorrhagic cystitis: retrospective review of 25 cases. Eur Urol 1990;18:204.
99. Sarnak MJ, Long J, King AJ. Intravesicular formaldehyde instillation and renal complications. Clin Nephrol 1999;51:122.
100. Axelsen RA, Leditschke JF, Burke JR. Renal and urinary tract complications following the intravesical instillation of formalin. Pathology 1986;18:453.
101. Jerkins GR, Noe HN, Hill DE. An unusual complication of silver nitrate treatment of hemorrhagic cystitis: case report. J Urol 1986;136:456.
102. Yamamoto M, Hibi H, Ohmura M, Miyake K. Successful treatment of hemorrhagic cystitis secondary to cyclophosphamide chemotherapy with intravesical instillation of prostaglandin F2 alpha.
Hinyokika Kiyo 1994;40:833.
103. Miller LJ, Chandler SW, Ippoliti CM. Treatment of cyclophosphamide-induced hemorrhagic cystitis with prostaglandins. Ann Pharmacother 1994;28:590.
104. Hampson SJ, Woodhouse CR. Sodium pentosanpolysulphate in the management of haemorrhagic cystitis: experience with 14 patients. Eur Urol 1994;25:40.
105. Lee HC, Liu CS, Chiao C, Lin SN. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy in hemorrhagic radiation cystitis: a report of 20 cases. Undersea Hyperb Med 1994;21:321.
106. Weiss JP, Mattei DM, Neville EC, Hanno PM. Primary treatment of radiation-induced hemorrhagic cystitis with hyperbaric oxygen: 10-year experience. J Urol 1994;151:1514.
107. Mathews R, Rajan N, Josefson L, Camporesi E, Makhuli Z. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy for radiation induced hemorrhagic cystitis. J Urol 1999;161:435.
108. Andriole GL, Yuan JJ, Catalona WJ. Cystotomy, temporary urinary diversion and bladder packing in the management of severe cyclophosphamide-induced hemorrhagic cystitis. J Urol
1990;143:1006.
109. O'Reilly PH, Brooman PJ, Farah NB, Mason GC. High pressure chronic retention. Incidence, aetiology and sinister implications. Br J Urol 1986;58:644.
110. Howards SS. Post-obstructive diuresis: a misunderstood phenomenon. J Urol 1973;110:537.
111. Norman RW, Mack FG, Awad SA, et al. Acute renal failure secondary to bilateral ureteric obstruction: review of 50 cases. Can Med Assoc J 1982;127:601.
112. Paul AB, Love C, Chisholm GD. The management of bilateral ureteric obstruction and renal failure in advanced prostate cancer. Br J Urol 1994;74:642.
113. Shekarriz B, Shekarriz H, Upadhyay J, et al. Outcome of palliative urinary diversion in the treatment of advanced malignancies. Cancer 1999;85:998.
114. Zadra JA, Jewett MA, Keresteci AG, et al. Nonoperative urinary diversion for malignant ureteral obstruction. Cancer 1987;60:1353.
115. McIntyre JF, Eifel PJ, Levenback C, Oswald MJ. Ureteral stricture as a late complication of radiotherapy for stage IB carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Cancer 1995;75:836.
116. Dubovsky EV, Russell CD. Advances in radionuclide evaluation of urinary tract obstruction. Abdom Imaging 1998;23:17.
117. Yachia D. Overview: role of stents in urology. J Endourol 1997;11:379.
118. Harding JR. Percutaneous antegrade ureteric stent insertion in malignant disease. J R Soc Med 1993;86:511.
119. Watson G. Problems with double-J stents and nephrostomy tubes. J Endourol 1997;11:413.
120. Soper JT, Blaszczyk TM, Oke E, Clarke-Pearson D, Creasman WT. Percutaneous nephrostomy in gynecologic oncology patients. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988;158:1126.
121. Meretyk S, Clayman RV, Kavoussi LR, Kramolowsky EV, Picus DD. Endourological treatment of ureteroenteric anastomotic strictures: long- term follow-up. J Urol 1991;145:723.
122. Shokeir AA, Provoost AP, Nijman RJ. Recoverability of renal function after relief of chronic partial upper urinary tract obstruction. B J U Int 1999;83:11.
123. Okubo K, Suzuki Y, Ishitoya S, Arai Y. Recovery of renal function after 153 days of complete unilateral ureteral obstruction. J Urol 1998;160:1422.
124. Donat SM, Russo P. Ureteral decompression in advanced nonurologic malignancies. Ann Surg Oncol 1996;3:393.
125. Bakht FR, Guerriero WG. Genitourinary emergencies. Prim Care 1989;16:905.
126. Taube M, Gajraj H. Trial without catheter following acute retention of urine. Br J Urol 1989;63:180.
127. Murray K, Massey A, Feneley RC. Acute urinary retentiona urodynamic assessment. Br J Urol 1984;56:468.
128. Anderson JB, Grant JB. Postoperative retention of urine: a prospective urodynamic study. BMJ 1991;302:894.
129. Barry MJ, Fowler FJJ, O'Leary MP, et al. The American Urological Association symptom index for benign prostatic hyperplasia. The Measurement Committee of the American Urological
Association. J Urol 1992;148:1549.
130. Kaplan SA, Olsson CA, Te AE. The American Urological Association symptom score in the evaluation of men with lower urinary tract symptoms: at 2 years of follow-up, does it work? J Urol
1996;155:1971.
131. Lawrence K. Measurement properties of the AUA symptom score: a methodological clarification. Br J Urol 1996;77:175.
132. Guess HA. Epidemiology and natural history of benign prostatic hyperplasia. Urol Clin North Am 1995;22:247.
133. Meigs JB, Barry MJ, Giovannucci E, et al. Incidence rates and risk factors for acute urinary retention: the health professionals follow-up study. J Urol 1999;162:376.
134. Chancellor MB, Blaivas JG, Kaplan SA, Axelrod S. Bladder outlet obstruction versus impaired detrusor contractility: the role of outflow. J Urol 1991;145:810.
135. Holtgrewe HL. Transurethral prostatectomy. Urol Clin North Am 1995;22:357.
136. Thomas DJ, Balaji VJ, Coptcoat MJ, Abercrombie GF. Acute urinary retention secondary to carcinoma of the prostate. Is initial channel TURP beneficial? J R Soc Med 1992;85:318.
137. Hampson SJ, Davies JH, Charig CR, Shearer RJ. LHRH analogues as primary treatment for urinary retention in patients with prostatic carcinoma. Br J Urol 1993;71:583.
138. Stine RJ, Avila JA, Lemons MF, Sickorez GJ. Diagnostic and therapeutic urologic procedures. Emerg Med Clin North Am 1988;6:547.
139. Neuwirth H, Frasier B, Cochran ST. Genitourinary imaging and procedures by the emergency physician. Emerg Med Clin North Am 1989;7:1.
140. Fowler JEJ, Koshy M, Strub M, Chinn SK. Priapism associated with the sickle cell hemoglobinopathies: prevalence, natural history and sequelae. J Urol 1991;145:65.
141. Hamre MR, Harmon EP, Kirkpatrick DV, Stern MJ, Humbert JR. Priapism as a complication of sickle cell disease. J Urol 1991;145:1.
142. Banos JE, Bosch F, Farre M. Drug-induced priapism. Its aetiology, incidence and treatment. Med Toxicol Adverse Drug Exp 1989;4:46.
143. Ilkay AK, Levine LA. Conservative management of high-flow priapism. Urology 1995;46:419.
144. Bastuba MD, Saenz DT, Dinlenc CZ, et al. Arterial priapism: diagnosis, treatment and long-term follow-up. J Urol 1994;151:1231.
145. Hakim LS, Kulaksizoglu H, Mulligan R, Greenfield A, Goldstein I. Evolving concepts in the diagnosis and treatment of arterial high flow priapism. J Urol 1996;155:541.
146. Monllor J, Tano F, Arteaga PR, Galbis F. Priapism of the clitoris. Eur Urol 1996;30:521.
147. Belville WD, Cohen JA. Secondary penile malignancies: the spectrum of presentation. J Surg Oncol 1992;51:134.
148. Kulmala RV, Lehtonen TA, Tammela TL. Preservation of potency after treatment for priapism. Scand J Urol Nephrol 1996;30:313.
149. Winter CC, McDowell G. Experience with 105 patients with priapism: update review of all aspects. J Urol 1988;140:980.
150. Chan PT, Begin LR, Arnold D, et al. Priapism secondary to penile metastasis: a report of two cases and a review of the literature. J Surg Oncol 1998;68:51.
151. Perez LM, Shumway RA, Carson CC, Fisher SR, Hudson WR. Penile metastasis secondary to supraglottic squamous cell carcinoma: review of the literature. J Urol 1992;147:157.
152. Nelson JH, Winter CC. Priapism: evolution of management in 48 patients in a 22-year series. J Urol 1977;117:455.
153. Powars DR, Johnson CS. Priapism. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:1363.
154. Mulhall JP, Honig SC. Priapism: etiology and management. Acad Emerg Med 1996;3:810.
155. Lee M, Cannon B, Sharifi R. Chart for preparation of dilutions of alpha-adrenergic agonists for intracavernous use in treatment of priapism. J Urol 1995;153:1182.
156. Becker HC, Pralle H, Weidner W. Therapy of priapism in high counting myeloid leukemiaa combined oncological-urological approach. Two case reports. Urol Int 1985;40:284.
157. Altebarmakian VK, Rabinowitz R, Rana SR, Ettinger LJ. Transglandular cavernosum-spongiosum shunt for leukemic priapism in childhood. J Urol 1980;123:287.
158. Schreibman SM, Gee TS, Grabstald H. Management of priapism in patients with chronic granulocytic leukemia. J Urol 1974;111:786.
159. van Driel MF, Mooibroek JJ, Mensink HJ. Treatment of priapism by injection of adrenaline into the corpora cavernosa penis. Scand J Urol Nephrol 1991;25:251.
160. Shantha TR, Finnerty DP, Rodriquez AP. Treatment of persistent penile erection and priapism using terbutaline. J Urol 1989;141:1427.
161. Yokoi K, Miyazawa N, Muraki J, et al. Penile metastasis from lung cancer. JpnJ Clin Oncol 1992;22:297.
162. Daniels GFJ, Schaeffer AJ. Renal cell carcinoma involving penis and testis: unusual initial presentations of metastatic disease. Urology 199137:369.
163. Kulmala R. Treatment of priapism: primary results and complications in 207 patients. Ann Chir Gynaecol 1994;83:309.

SECTION 52.1 Metastatic Brain Cancer
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 52.1
Metastatic Brain Cancer
PATRICK Y. WEN
PETER MCLAREN BLACK
JAY S. LOEFFLER
Introduction
Incidence and Epidemiology
Method of Spread and Distribution
Clinical Manifestations
Diagnosis
Imaging Studies
Brain Metastases without a Known Primary Tumor
Management
Symptomatic Therapy
Definitive Treatment
Prognosis
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Brain metastases are a common complication in cancer patients 1 and an increasingly important cause of morbidity and mortality. In adults, brain metastases are the
most common cause of brain tumors, occurring five to ten times more frequently than primary tumors. 2,3 In recent years, there have been important advances in the
diagnosis and management of this condition. 2,3 and 4 As a result, most patients receive effective palliation, and the majority do not die from their brain metastases.
Further studies defining the optimal role of conventional treatments and future advances in the use of chemotherapy, radiosurgery, and more novel cancer therapies
may lead to further increases in the effectiveness of treatments for brain metastases.
Brain metastases develop when tumor cells originating in tissues outside the nervous system spread secondarily to directly involve the brain. Intracranial metastases
may involve the brain parenchyma, the cranial nerves, the blood vessels (including the dural sinuses), the dura, the leptomeninges, and the inner table of the skull. Of
the intracranial metastases, the most common are intraparenchymal metastases, and these are the main focus of this chapter.

INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Brain metastases develop in approximately 10% to 30% of adults and 6% to 10% of children with cancer. 2,3,4,5,6,7,8 and 9 It is estimated that each year in the United
States, there are between 97,800 and 170,000 new cases of brain metastases. 2,3,5,9 This number may be increasing as a result of the increased ability of magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) to detect small metastases and prolonged survival due to improvement in systemic therapy. 2,3,9,10 and 11
In adults, the most common primary tumors responsible for brain metastases are lung (50%), breast (15% to 20%), unknown primary (10% to 15%), melanoma (10%),
and colon (5%) (Table 52.1-1).2,3,5,6,12 In children, the most common sources of brain metastases are sarcomas, neuroblastoma, and germ cell tumors. 2,3,7,13,14 Certain
tumors almost never metastasize to the brain parenchyma. These include carcinomas of the esophagus, oropharynx, and prostate and nonmelanoma skin cancers.

TABLE 52.1-1. Frequency of Brain Metastases by Primary Tumor Type

METHOD OF SPREAD AND DISTRIBUTION
The most common mechanism of metastasis to the brain is by hematogenous spread. 2 These metastases are usually located directly beneath the gray-white
junction. 14 Brain metastases tend to occur at this site because the blood vessels decrease in size at this point and act as a trap for clumps of tumor cells. Brain
metastases also tend to be more common at the terminal “watershed areas” of arterial circulation. 2,14 The distribution of metastases roughly follows the relative weight
of (and blood flow to) each area. Approximately 80% of brain metastases are located in the cerebral hemispheres, 15% in the cerebellum, and 5% in the brain stem. 14
For unclear reasons, pelvic (prostate and uterus) and gastrointestinal tumors have a predilection to metastasize to the posterior fossa. 14
Metastases from breast, colon, and renal cell carcinoma are often single, while melanoma and lung cancer have a greater tendency to produce multiple
metastases.2,3,14 Studies using MRI suggest that the percentage of single metastases is lower than was previously believed, accounting for only one-third to one-fourth
of patients with cerebral metastases. 3,15 With the widespread use of MRI and new improvements in MRI contrast agents and resolution, the proportion of multiple
metastases probably will be even higher in the future.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
It is estimated that more than two-thirds of patients with cerebral metastases experience neurologic symptoms during the course of their illness. 2,3 The clinical features
due to brain metastases are extremely variable, and the presence of brain metastases should be suspected in any cancer patient who develops new neurologic
symptoms. The majority of patients present with progressive neurologic dysfunction resulting from a gradually expanding tumor mass and the associated edema or,
rarely, to the development of obstructive hydrocephalus. Approximately 10% to 20% of patients present acutely with seizures, while another 5% to 10% present
acutely as a result of strokes caused by embolization of tumor cells or invasion or compression of an artery by tumor or as a result of hemorrhage into a
metastases.10,16,17 Melanoma, choriocarcinoma, thyroid, and renal carcinoma have a particular propensity to bleed. 10
The clinical presentation of brain metastases is similar to that of other brain tumors and includes headaches, focal neurologic dysfunction, cognitive dysfunction, and
seizures. Headaches occur in approximately 40% to 50% of patients with brain metastases. These headaches are usually dull and nonthrobbing and often are
indistinguishable from tension headaches. 18 The headaches are usually on the same side as the tumor, although they can be diffuse. Headaches characteristic of
increased intracranial pressure, such as early morning headaches or headaches exacerbated by coughing, bending, and straining, are present in fewer than one-half
of patients with brain metastases. These headaches may be associated with nausea, vomiting, and transient visual obscurations. Patients with multiple metastases

and posterior fossa metastases have a higher frequency of headaches. 2 Papilledema is present in fewer than 10% of patients at the time of presentation. Focal
neurologic dysfunction is the presenting symptom of 20% to 40% of patients. Hemiparesis is the most common complaint, but the precise symptom varies depending
on the location of the metastases. 2 Cognitive dysfunction, including memory problems and mood or personality changes, are the presenting symptoms in one-third of
patients, while seizures are the presenting symptom in another 10% to 20%. 19,20,21 and 22

DIAGNOSIS
Brain metastases must be distinguished from primary brain tumors, abscesses, demyelination, cerebral infarctions or hemorrhages, progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy, and effects of treatment, including irradiation necrosis. In a study by Patchell et al., 23 11% of patients who were initially thought to have a single
brain metastasis eventually turned out to have a different diagnosis after the lesion was subjected to biopsy. One-half of the nonmetastatic lesions were primary brain
tumors, while the other one-half were infections. The false-positive rate for diagnosis of multiple metastases is undoubtedly significantly less than the 11% for single
metastases. Nonetheless, in any patient where the diagnosis of brain metastases is in doubt, a biopsy should be performed, since this is the only reliable method of
establishing the diagnosis.
Breast cancer patients with a single dura-based lesion pose a particular diagnostic dilemma. The incidence of meningiomas is increased in patients with breast
cancer so that it is important to differentiate a dura-based metastasis from a meningioma. 24,25 Frequently, imaging studies will be inconclusive, and these patients will
require a biopsy or surgical resection of the lesion to establish the diagnosis.
In addition to diagnosing the brain metastases, it is also important to differentiate those patients with single or solitary metastases from patients with multiple brain
metastases, since their subsequent treatment will be different. The term single brain metastasis refers to an single cerebral lesion, and no implication is made
regarding the extent of extracranial disease. In contrast, the term solitary brain metastasis describes the relatively rare occurrence of a single brain metastasis that is
the only known site of metastatic cancer in the body. 2,14
IMAGING STUDIES
Although computed tomographic (CT) scans detect the majority of brain metastases, the best diagnostic test for brain metastases is contrast-enhanced MRI. 15,26,27
This test is more sensitive than enhanced CT scanning or nonenhanced MRI in detecting lesions in patients suspected of having cerebral metastases and in
differentiating these metastases from other central nervous system (CNS) lesions. 26,27 Radiographic features that help to differentiate brain metastases from other
CNS lesions include the presence of multiple lesions (which helps to distinguish metastases from gliomas or other primary tumors), localization of the lesion at the
gray-white junction, more circumscribed margins, and relatively large amounts of vasogenic edema compared to the size of the lesion. 3 Triple-dose contrast
administration may help to clarify the presence of metastases in selected patients with equivocal lesions or to detect additional lesions in patients with a single lesion
on conventional single-dose contrast MRI. 28,29 Magnetization-transfer MRI, a technique that increases the contrast between enhancing and nonenhancing lesions by
suppressing background signal, 27,30,31 may also increase the sensitivity of MRI. However, the usefulness of these approaches is limited by their availability and cost. In
general, they may have a limited role in selected patients with a single or a small number of metastases on standard MRI and who are being considered for
aggressive local therapy. In these patients, the detection of additional lesions may change the usefulness of surgery or radiosurgery. Functional imaging techniques,
such as single-photon emission computed tomography, positron emission tomography, magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and perfusion and diffusion MRI, do not
have a role in the diagnosis of brain metastases but may help in differentiating tumor from radiation necrosis. 27

BRAIN METASTASES WITHOUT A KNOWN PRIMARY TUMOR
In the majority of patients (80%), brain metastases develop after the diagnosis of systemic cancer (metachronous presentation). 2 However, in some patients, brain
metastases may be diagnosed before the primary tumor is found (precocious presentation) or at the same time (synchronous presentation). For patients who present
with brain metastases without a known primary tumor, the lung should be the focus of the evaluation. More than 60% of these patients will have a lung primary or
pulmonary metastases from a primary tumor located elsewhere. 2,32,33 and 34 Other frequent causes include malignant melanoma and colon cancer, while the primary
remains unknown in approximately 25% to 30% of cases. 32,33 and 34 Breast cancer is an uncommon cause of brain metastases without a known primary tumor, possibly
due to its earlier detection on physical examination and its tendency to produce brain metastases in the setting of widely disseminated disease. 33 The history and
physical examination will demonstrate the site of origin in one-third to one-fourth of patients. In others, the chest radiograph is the most useful test. If it is
nondiagnostic, a chest CT scan should be performed, as this significantly increases the likelihood of detecting a lung tumor. 32 These patients should also have a CT
scan of the abdomen and pelvis and a bone scan to determine the extent of metastatic disease.

MANAGEMENT
The management of patients with brain metastases can be divided into symptomatic therapy and definitive therapy. Symptomatic therapy includes the use of
corticosteroids for the treatment of peritumoral edema, anticonvulsants for control of seizures, and anticoagulants or inferior vena cava (IVC) filters for the
management of venous thromboembolic disease.3,10 Definitive therapy includes such treatments as surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and hormonal therapy
directed at eradicating the tumor itself.
SYMPTOMATIC THERAPY
Corticosteroids
Corticosteroids were first used for treating peritumoral edema by Kofman et al. 35 in 1957 in patients with breast cancer. Subsequently, Galicich et al. 36 introduced the
use of dexamethasone in 1961, and this has remained the standard treatment for peritumoral edema ever since. Corticosteroids produce their antiedema effect by
reducing the permeability of tumor capillaries 37 and are indicated in any patient with symptomatic edema. Most patients are usually started on dexamethasone, which
has the advantage over other corticosteroids of having relatively little mineral corticoid activity, reducing the potential for fluid retention. In addition, dexamethasone
may be associated with a lower risk of infection and cognitive impairment. 37 The usual starting dose is a 10-mg load, followed by 4 mg four times daily, although there
is some evidence that lower doses (4 to 8 mg/d) may be as effective. 38 While most patients improve symptomatically within 24 to 72 hours, neuroimaging studies may
not show a decrease in the amount of edema for up to 1 week. 39 In general, headaches tend to respond better than focal deficits. If 16 mg of dexamethasone is
insufficient, the dose may be increased up to 100 mg/d. Steroids are usually tapered after irradiation, although the taper may begin earlier in patients with little
peritumoral edema.
Despite their usefulness, corticosteroids are associated with a large number of well-known side effects, including myopathy, weight gain, fluid retention,
hyperglycemia, insomnia, gastritis, acne, and immunosuppression. 40 The frequency of these complications can be reduced by using the lowest possible dose of
corticosteroids. There is increasing evidence that brain tumor patients on corticosteroids are at increased risk of developing Pneumocystis carinii pneumonitis. 41,42
This complication can be prevented by treating patients, especially those older than the age of 50, who are on prolonged courses of corticosteroid with
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis. 3
Anticonvulsants
Seizures are the presenting symptom in approximately 10% to 20% of patients with brain metastases and are present at some stage of the illness in another 10% to
20% of patients. 19,20,21 and 22 Patients with brain metastases who present with seizures should be treated with standard anticonvulsants. To minimize toxicity, the lowest
effective dose of medication should be used and polytherapy avoided whenever possible. Electroencephalography may be useful if the diagnosis of seizures is in
doubt but is not routinely needed for patients who give a clear history of seizures or do not have symptoms suggestive of seizures.
In addition to the usual complications of anticonvulsants, brain tumor patients experience an increased incidence of particular side effects, especially drug rashes.
Approximately 20% of brain tumor patients treated with phenytoin and carbamazepine develop a morbilliform rash, and a small percentage develop Stevens-Johnson
syndrome,43,44 and 45 while patients receiving phenobarbital have an increased incidence of shoulder-hand syndrome. 46

In addition to producing adverse effects, anticonvulsants also have clinically significant interactions with other drugs commonly used in patients with brain metastases.
Phenytoin induces the hepatic metabolism of dexamethasone and significantly reduces its half-life and bioavailability. 47 Conversely, dexamethasone may also reduce
phenytoin levels. 48 A number of chemotherapeutic agents commonly used in cancer patients interact with phenytoin, causing the levels to fall and potentially leading
to breakthrough seizures, 49 while hepatic enzyme–inducing anticonvulsants, such as phenobarbital and phenytoin, may interfere with chemotherapeutic agents, such
as taxol. 50
Because the risk of seizures in patients with infratentorial metastases is very small, anticonvulsant therapy is usually not indicated. The role of anticonvulsant therapy
in patients with supratentorial brain metastases who have not had a seizure is controversial. Cohen et al. 20 retrospectively reviewed 160 patients with brain
metastases and who have not had a seizure and found that those patients receiving prophylactic anticonvulsant therapy with phenytoin had the same frequency of
late seizures (10%) as patients receiving no treatment. 20 However, two-thirds of patients who developed seizure while on phenytoin had a subtherapeutic serum
phenytoin concentration. Glantz et al. 21 conducted a prospective, placebo-controlled, randomized study involving 74 patients and evaluated the efficacy of valproic
acid in protecting patients with newly diagnosed brain metastases from seizures. There was no significant difference in the incidence of seizures between patients
receiving valproic acid (35%) or placebo (24%), suggesting that prophylactic anticonvulsants were not effective in these patients. Weaver et al. 51 conducted a
prospective randomized study of prophylactic anticonvulsants in 100 brain tumor patients, including 60 with metastases who have not had seizures. 22 Overall, 26% of
patients had seizures. There was no difference in the seizure rate between patients taking anticonvulsants and those who were on no medications. Recently, Glantz
et al.51 reviewed the evidence concerning the efficacy of prophylactic anticonvulsants. Because the number of patients in these studies was small, they also performed
a metaanalysis of the randomized clinical trials addressing this issue. They concluded that there was no statistical evidence showing a significant benefit of
prophylactic anticonvulsant.
Because of the increased incidence of allergic reactions in patients with brain metastases receiving anticonvulsant therapy and of the lack of clear evidence that
anticonvulsant therapy reduces the incidence of seizures, routine anticonvulsant therapy is probably unnecessary in patients with brain metastases who have not
experienced a seizure. Possible exceptions to this are patients with brain metastases in areas of high epileptogenicity (e.g., motor cortex), patients with multiple
melanoma metastases,52 and patients with both brain metastases and leptomeningeal metastases. 10 These patients have a higher incidence of seizures and may
benefit from prophylactic anticonvulsant therapy.
Venous Thromboembolic Disease
Venous thromboembolic disease is common in patients with brain metastases, occurring in approximately 20% of patients. 53 The optimal therapy is unknown. These
patients are often perceived to be at increased risk of intracranial hemorrhage with anticoagulation because of the vascularity of the tumors and anecdotal case
reports of hemorrhage. As a result, the majority of brain metastases patients with venous thromboembolic disease are managed with IVC filters rather than
anticoagulation. However, this may not be the optimum approach, since there is a high rate of complications with filtration devices in these patients. In a retrospective
study of 42 patients with intracranial malignancy and venous thromboembolic disease treated with IVC filters, the complication rate was 62%. Fifty-seven percent
developed IVC or filter thrombosis, recurrent deep venous thrombosis, or postphlebitic syndrome, and 12% developed recurrent pulmonary embolism. 54 In addition to
the high complication rate with IVC filters, there is increasing evidence that the risk of intracranial hemorrhage in patients with primary brain tumors who are
anticoagulated outside the immediate postoperative period may not be significantly increased. 55 More recently, Schiff and DeAngelis 56 reviewed the experience at the
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center with anticoagulation in patients with brain metastases who developed venous thromboembolic disease. 56 Of the 42 patients
who received anticoagulation at some stage of their treatment, only 3 (7%) experienced cerebral hemorrhage, 2 in the setting of supratherapeutic anticoagulation.
These studies suggest that anticoagulation may be more effective than IVC filter placement and is acceptably safe when the prothrombin time is maintained in the
therapeutic range, especially in patients with brain metastases that generally do not hemorrhage, such as breast cancer.
DEFINITIVE TREATMENT
The management of brain metastases is directed at relieving neurologic symptoms and achieving long-term control of the tumors. The therapeutic modalities available
include surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and hormonal therapy. The optimal combination of therapies for each patient depends on careful evaluation of
numerous factors, including the location, size, and number of brain metastases; patient age, general condition, and neurologic status; extent of systemic cancer; as
well as the tumor's response to past therapy and its potential response to future treatments. 3
Surgery
The role of surgery in patients with brain metastases is to provide immediate relief of symptoms resulting from the mass effect of the tumor, to establish a histologic
diagnosis, and to improve local control of the tumor. Recent advances in neuroanesthesia and neurosurgery, including the use of computer-assisted stereotaxy,
intraoperative functional mapping, intraoperative ultrasonography, and functional and intraoperative MRI, have significantly improved the safety of surgical resection
of brain metastases.3,57,58
For surgical candidates, the most important factor to consider is the extent of the extracranial disease. Patients with extensive systemic disease generally have a very
limited prognosis and only rarely benefit from surgery. Other important factors influencing the decision concerning surgery include the presence of single or multiple
metastases, the location of the tumor, the neurologic status of the patient, and the interval between diagnosis of the primary neoplasm and the brain metastasis. 3,59,60
and 61

SINGLE BRAIN METASTASES. Until relatively recently, the optimal treatment for patients with a single brain metastasis was controversial. A number of uncontrolled

retrospective studies suggested that patients with a single brain metastasis who underwent surgical resection in addition to radiotherapy generally had better
outcomes than patients treated with radiotherapy alone. However, these studies were limited by the inevitable selection bias resulting from the inclusion of patients in
better condition in surgical series. 10,59,60,61,62,63,64 and 65 There are now three randomized prospective studies that have evaluated the role of surgery as an adjunct to
whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT) for patients with a single brain metastasis. 23,66,67 and 68
Patchell et al. 23 were the first to address this issue in a prospective randomized study. Fifty-four patients with or without active systemic cancer and a single brain
metastasis were randomly assigned to receive either biopsy of the metastases followed by WBRT (36 Gy in 12 fractions) or surgical resection followed by
radiotherapy. Six of the 54 patients (11%) did not have a metastasis and were excluded from the study, leaving 48 patients. The patients treated with surgery and
WBRT had fewer local recurrences (20% vs. 52%), improved survival (40 weeks vs. 15 weeks), and a better quality of life as measured by the Karnofsky performance
status than did patients receiving WBRT alone. The median time to recurrence for patients receiving surgery and radiotherapy was more than 59 weeks, compared to
21 weeks for patients receiving WBRT alone. A multivariate analysis showed that the factors that correlated significantly with increased survival were surgical
treatment of the metastasis, the absence of extracranial disease, longer time to the development of the brain metastasis, and younger age.
A second prospective randomized trial evaluating the role of surgery for patients with single brain metastasis was conducted by Vecht et al. 66,67 In this study, 63
patients with a single brain metastasis documented by CT scanning were randomly chosen to receive either surgery and WBRT or WBRT alone. The radiotherapy
dose was an unconventional scheme of two fractions a day of 2 Gy each, for a total of 40 Gy given over 2 weeks. Unlike Patchell's study, patients randomly selected
to receive radiotherapy alone did not undergo a stereotactic biopsy to confirm the diagnosis of metastases, and MRI was not performed to exclude multiple small
metastases that may have been missed by CT imaging. The overall survival of patients treated with surgery and radiotherapy was significantly longer than that of
patients treated with radiotherapy alone (10 months vs. 6 months; P = .04). In addition, combined treatment also resulted in significantly increased functionally
independent survival (FIS) (7.5 months vs. 3.5 months; P = .06). The greatest benefit was seen in patients with stable extracranial disease (median survival, 12 vs. 7
months; median FIS, 9 vs. 4 months). Patients with active extracranial disease had a median survival of only 5 months and a FIS of 2.5 months and did not appear to
benefit from the addition of surgery. This is consistent with the concept that the extent of systemic disease largely determines the survival of the patient and
overcomes any potential advantage the addition of surgery may have provided in controlling the brain metastasis. 9 Patients older than 60 years had decreased
survival rates as compared to younger patients (hazard ratio of dying, 2.74; P = .001), consistent with the general importance of age as an adverse prognostic factor
for brain tumors.
In contrast to these two studies, a more recent multicenter randomized study conducted by Mintz et al. 68 failed to detect a difference in survival or quality of life
between patients who underwent surgery plus radiotherapy and those having radiotherapy alone. In this study, the 43 patients randomly assigned to radiotherapy

alone had a median survival of 6.3 months, while the 41 patients randomly assigned to surgery and radiotherapy had a median survival of only 5.6 months. The failure
of this study to demonstrate that the addition of surgery to radiotherapy improved the outcome of patients may be due to the fact that it included patients with a lower
baseline median Karnofsky performance score (KPS) and a higher proportion of extracranial disease. 68,69
A fourth study, conducted by the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) and the Southwest Oncology Group, was initially intended to be a randomized study
comparing surgery and radiotherapy to radiotherapy alone. However, because of poor patient accrual, its design was changed to a prospective physician preference
trial. Ultimately, 80 of the 97 registered patients were evaluable. Patients treated with surgery and radiotherapy showed greater neurologic improvement (79% vs.
59%), decreased recurrence (22% vs. 45%), and improved survival, when corrected for other prognostic factors, compared to patients receiving radiotherapy alone. 70
Overall, these studies provide support for the use of surgery in addition to WBRT for patients with a single brain metastasis and stable extracranial disease.
MULTIPLE BRAIN METASTASES. The role of surgery in patients with multiple brain metastases is usually limited to resection of a large, symptomatic, or life-threatening

lesion, to obtain tissue for diagnosis in patients without a known primary tumor, or to differentiate a brain metastasis from other cerebral lesions, such as a
meningioma. 3 However, as surgical techniques have improved, the ability to resect multiple lesions is becoming more feasible. In one study, Bindal et al. 71 evaluated
the efficacy of surgery in 56 patients with multiple brain metastases. These patients were divided into those who had one or more lesions remaining after surgery
(group A; n = 30) and those who had all lesions removed (group B; n = 26). In addition, the patients in group B were matched by tumor type, presence or absence of
extracranial disease, and time from diagnosis of primary tumor to diagnosis of brain metastases to a group of patients undergoing surgery for a single metastasis
(group C; n = 26). The median survivals for patients in groups A, B, and C were 6, 14, and 14 months, respectively. These results suggest that if all the lesions can be
removed surgically in patients with multiple brain metastases, the outcome is significantly improved, and comparable to the outcome of patients who underwent
surgery for a single lesion. In a second study, Hernandez-Avila et al. 72 evaluated the outcome of 34 patients with multiple metastases treated with surgery. The
median survival of patients with controlled systemic disease was 17 months, compared to only 3.1 months for those with active systemic disease, suggesting that
surgery for patients with multiple metastases may be feasible in patients with limited systemic disease. However, in contrast to these studies, Hazuka et al. 73 found
that surgery was of little benefit in patients with multiple brain metastases. They reported a series consisting of 28 patients with a single metastasis and 18 patients
with multiple metastases. The patients with multiple metastases who underwent surgery and radiotherapy had a median survival of only 5 months, compared to 12
months for those with single brain metastases. In these studies, the surgical morbidity and mortality for patients with multiple brain metastases were low and
comparable to those reported for patients with a single metastasis undergoing surgery. However, these conflicting results render it difficult to draw firm conclusions
regarding the value of surgical resection in patients with multiple brain metastases.
RECURRENT METASTATIC BRAIN TUMORS. Surgery may have a role in patients who develop recurrent disease after standard treatment for brain metastases, especially

if there is a single, symptomatic lesion. In an early study, Sundaresan et al. 74 reported the results of reoperation in 21 patients with brain metastasis. Two-thirds of the
patients experienced neurologic improvement, and the median duration of the improvement was 6 months. There was no mortality, and only one patient developed
increased neurologic deficits after surgery.
Bindal et al. 75 reviewed the experience from M. D. Anderson Cancer Center of 48 patients who underwent reoperation for recurrent brain metastasis. 75 The median
interval between the first craniotomy and the diagnosis of recurrence was 6.7 months and the median survival after reoperation was 11.5 months. After surgery, 75%
of patients improved symptomatically. Multivariate analysis revealed that survival was negatively affected by the presence of systemic disease ( P = .008); KPS
exceeded 70 (P = .008); time to recurrence was less than 4 months (P = .008); age exceeded 40 years (P = .051); and the primary tumor type was breast or
melanoma (P = .028). There was no operative mortality. Five patients (10.4%) developed new or increased neurologic deficits after surgery.
Arbit et al. 76 reported the results from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center of 109 patients with recurrent brain metastases from non–small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Thirty-two of these patients (30%) underwent a reoperation. The median interval between the first and second operation was 5 months. The median survival
after the second operation was 10 months. The group of patients who underwent reoperation survived significantly longer (median survival, 15 months from the time of
the first operation) than a group of 77 patients who did not undergo a second procedure (median survival, 10 months; P <.001).
These results provide support for surgical resection of recurrent brain metastases in selected patients with symptomatic lesions. Factors that should be considered
include the length of time since the initial operation, location of the recurrent tumor, age and performance status of the patient, extent of extracranial disease, and
radiosensitivity of the tumor. 9,77 In general, the sooner the metastasis recurs after initial resection, the less likely reoperation will provide a significant period of
palliation. 3,77
Radiotherapy
PRIMARY RADIOTHERAPY. Radiotherapy has been the mainstay of treatment for patients with brain metastases for more than 40 years. The median survival of patients

with brain metastases who are not treated or are treated with corticosteroids alone is 1 to 2 months. Conventional WBRT increases the median survival to 3 to 6
months.2,3,12 Irradiation is effective in the palliation of neurologic symptoms and also significantly decreases the likelihood of death due to neurologic causes ( Fig.
52.1-1). However, for most patients, overall survival is more likely to be determined by the activity and extent of extracranial disease rather than the success or failure
of radiotherapy or surgery in controlling brain metastases.

FIGURE 52.1-1. Axial T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging with gadolinium of 66-year-old man with a single metastasis from colon cancer. A: Before whole brain
radiotherapy. B: After whole brain radiotherapy showing almost complete resolution of the metastasis.

The main goal of radiotherapy for the treatment of brain metastases is to improve neurologic deficits cause by the tumor deposit. The overall response rate is
symptom-dependent but ranges from 50% to 85%.19,78,79 In one study, 74% of patients had improvement of neurologic symptoms, such as headaches, and 65%
maintained this for the duration of their lives or for at least 9 months. 80 Cranial nerve deficits improve in approximately 40% of patients. However, the potential for
improvement is directly related to the time from diagnosis to radiotherapy. 2,3 Early treatment is generally associated with a better outcome. The majority of patients
with significant neurologic dysfunction improve with the use of steroids and radiotherapy, while fewer than 50% of patients with moderate neurologic dysfunction will
improve after therapy.78
The optimal dose fractionation schedules for patients with brain metastases have been evaluated with randomized trials conducted by the RTOG. 78,81,82 The RTOG
completed two trials of several dose-fraction schedules that were subsequently reported together. 78 In the first trial, patients were randomly assigned to 40 Gy in 4
weeks, 40 Gy in 3 weeks, 30 Gy in 3 weeks, or 30 Gy in 2 weeks. The second trial randomly assigned patients to 40 Gy in 3 weeks, 30 Gy in 2 weeks, or 20 Gy in 1
week. The overall response rate and median survival were equivalent in all arms of these studies. The median survival was 18 weeks in the first trial and 15 weeks in
the second trial. Brain metastases was the cause of death in 40% of patients in both trials. Patients treated in the shortest time, with larger fractions, responded more
quickly, but the duration of the clinical response and the time to progression were similar in each treatment arm. Symptoms were palliated in 75% to 80% of the
patients in all treatment arms of these protocols. 82
To explore the efficacy and toxicity of ultrarapid treatment schedules, the RTOG treated 26 patients with 10 Gy in one fraction and 36 patients with 12 Gy in two

fractions.83 While the promptness of response, percentage of patients demonstrating neurologic improvement, and overall survival were similar to the more protracted
schedules described, the median duration of improvement was only 4 weeks compared to 10 weeks in the protracted radiotherapy trials.
While the studies of the RTOG failed to identify the best dose and fractionation schedule for the treatment of brain metastasis, they allowed the identification of
clinical factors associated with better survival. 84,85 Patients with breast cancer and no soft tissue metastases, ambulatory lung cancer patients with no extracranial
disease, or other ambulatory patients with no extracranial metastases had a median survival of 28 weeks versus 11 weeks for the remaining patients. There was no
survival advantage to any fractionation scheme, even among this selected group of patients.
To examine the role of irradiation dose escalation in this prognostically favorable subset of patients with brain metastases, the RTOG randomly assigned 309 of these
patients to either 30 Gy in 10 fractions or 50 Gy in 20 fractions. 86 The median survival of the 30-Gy arm was 18 weeks, and that of the 50-Gy arm was 17 weeks. The
1-year survival rate, response rate, time to achieving response, duration of response, and time to progression were the same for both arms, suggesting that there was
no therapeutic benefit to dose escalation.
Another approach that has been explored to improve the results of WBRT for patients with brain metastases is the use of accelerated fractionation. Accelerated
fractionation is a technique that uses multiple fractions of radiotherapy per day with the goal to decrease overall treatment time and reduce the risk of tumor cell
repopulation. The RTOG performed a phase I and phase II trial of acceleratedfractionation for patients with single or multiple brain metastases with controlled, stable,
or absent primary disease or in patients with uncontrolled primary disease but no evidence of extracranial metastases. 87 The entire brain was treated twice daily with
1.6-Gy fractions to a total dose of 32 Gy and then a twice-daily boost to encompass all of the disease. The boost dose was increased in successive groups from 16
Gy to 22.4 Gy to 32 Gy to 42.4 Gy. The median survival increased from 4.2 months at a 48-Gy total dose to 5.3 months at a 54.4-Gy total dose to 4.8 months at 60 Gy
to 6.4 months at 70.4 Gy. The 1-year survival for 48 Gy was 15%, and the other arms had a 30% 1-year survival. Based on these encouraging results, the RTOG
conducted a randomized phase III study comparing accelerated hyperfractionated radiotherapy (1.6 Gy b.i.d.) to a total dose of 54.4 Gy versus standard therapy
consisting of 30 Gy in 10 daily fractions in patients with unresected brain metastases, limited systemic disease, and good KPS (³70). There were 429 evaluable
patients, two-thirds of whom had lung primaries. However, the median survival in both groups was 4.5 months, suggesting that there was no benefit of accelerated
hyperfractionation over conventional therapy. 88
The use of biochemical modification (irradiation sensitizers) of irradiation effect has also been explored in patients with brain metastases. However, the results to date
have been generally disappointing. Studies using radiosensitizers, such as misonidazole 89 and bromodeoxyuridine,90 failed to show any additional benefit over
radiotherapy alone. Nonetheless, there continues to be interest in irradiation sensitizers and agents, such as gadolinium texaphyrin, 91,92 RSR 13,93 and
pentoxifylline, 94 are currently being evaluated in clinical trials. There is also interest in the concurrent use of radiotherapy with chemotherapeutic agents, such as the
topoisomerase II inhibitor lucanthone. 95
There is currently no consensus on the optimal irradiation schedule for patients with brain metastases. The standard treatment regimen for brain metastasis now
includes all of the dose ranges evaluated in the early RTOG studies 78 and is dependent on such issues as the severity of CNS symptomatology, extent of systemic
disease, and physician preference. Typical irradiation treatment schedules consist of total doses of 30 to 50 Gy in 1.5- to 4-Gy daily fractions. The most common
treatment schedule employed consists of 30 Gy in 10 fractions over 2 weeks. 96 For patients with good prognosis who are likely to survive more than 1 year, more
prolonged fractionation (e.g., 40 Gy in 2-Gy fractions) may reduce the long-term morbidity from irradiation.
POSTOPERATIVE RADIOTHERAPY. The goal of postoperative WBRT in patients with solitary brain metastasis is to destroy microscopic residual cancer cells at the site of

resection and at other locations within the brain. Theoretically, this should reduce the recurrence rate and prolong survival. Although it is standard practice for patients
to receive postoperative radiotherapy as adjuvant therapy to surgery, until recently the value of this approach was based only on retrospective studies ( Table
52.1-2).97,98,99,100,101 and 102 Some of these studies demonstrated that adjuvant WBRT reduced the recurrence rate, 98,99,102 and two studies demonstrated prolonged
survival. 98,102 Recently, Patchell et al. 103 published the results of a randomized trial that examined the role of postoperative WBRT in patients with single metastasis. 103
In this study, 95 patients underwent surgical resection of the metastasis and were then randomly assigned to treatment with WBRT (50.4 Gy in 28 fractions) or no
further treatment. Patients who received irradiation were significantly less likely to fail in the brain (18% vs. 70%; P <.001), and this was true both at the original site of
disease (10% vs. 46%; P <.001) and other areas of the brain (14% vs. 37%; P <.01). Treated patients were also less likely to die of neurologic causes (14% vs. 44%;
P = .003), but there was no difference in overall survival (48 vs. 43 weeks; P = .39) or duration of functional independence (37 vs. 35 weeks; P = .61) between the
treated and untreated groups. The results of this study suggest that postoperative WBRT in patients with a resected solitary metastasis significantly reduces the
incidence of neurologic death but has little impact on the overall survival of the patient, who is mainly dependent on the extent of systemic disease. The authors of this
study concluded that the reduction of neurologic death justifies the routine use of postoperative radiotherapy. However, the relatively small size of this study
precluded any subgroup analysis. As a result, it remains unclear whether all patients who undergo surgical resection should also receive adjuvant radiotherapy. There
may be certain groups of patients, such as those with radio-resistant tumors, such as melanoma or renal cell cancer, for whom WBRT may not be useful after
complete surgical resection of the metastases. In addition, the long-term neurocognitive complications of WBRT and its effects on quality of life have not been fully
evaluated.

TABLE 52.1-2. Studies Evaluating the Role of Postoperative Radiotherapy

LATE TOXICITY. An important benefit of aggressive treatment for brain metastases is the likelihood that some patients will become long-term survivors. In these

patients, late complications of WBRT can be debilitating. These complications include leukoencephalopathy and brain atrophy leading to neurocognitive deterioration
and dementia; brain necrosis resulting in more specific neurologic sequelae, depending on the site of necrosis; and communicating hydrocephalus, causing cognitive,
gait, and bladder dysfunction. 10,40,104 Neuroendocrine dysfunction, such as hypothyroidism, may also occur. 40,105 The risk for late complications from WBRT is related
to total dose, fraction size, patient age, extent of disease, and neurologic impairment at presentation. 106 Prior or concurrent chemotherapy may also effect the
occurrence of late CNS toxicity. If WBRT is to be given, a dose-fraction schedule should be used, which takes into account the overall clinical status of the patient
while maximizing the palliation of symptoms and, if appropriate, minimizing the risk of long-term complications. In a retrospective review by DeAngelis et al. 104 of 70
patients treated with postoperative radiotherapy using no less than 300-cGy fractions, 11% showed evidence of dementia. 104 Therefore, patients with good prognosis,
such as those with single brain metastasis with no or controlled systemic disease, are best treated with daily fractions of 200 cGy or less to decrease the likelihood of
long-term CNS toxicity (e.g., 40 to 45 Gy in 1.8- to 2.0-Gy daily fractions).
REIRRADIATION. Occasionally, patients are reirradiated with whole brain or partial brain radiotherapy at the time of brain recurrence. The percentage of patients who

undergo reirradiation is quite small, since most patients who recur within the CNS also have progressive extracranial disease and are treated with supportive
measures only. However, there are times when recurrence of brain metastasis develops in a patient with controlled systemic disease. Patients with a solitary or a few
(£3) metastases are candidates for treatment with radiosurgery, as this will have less toxicity than repeating WBRT (discussed later in Stereotactic Radiosurgery) and
is more likely to be effective than systemic therapy. Other patients should be considered for treatment with systemic chemotherapy or hormonal therapy. For patients
not eligible for radiosurgery or systemic therapy, treatment with whole or partial brain radiation may be indicated. Several retrospective studies have addressed this
issue. 107,108,109 and 110 A recent review evaluated 189 patients from three separate studies who were reirradiated. 109 The overall clinical response rate was 42% to 75%,
and the median survival from the time of reirradiation was between 3.5 and 5 months. The published techniques of reirradiation include doses from 8 Gy in 2 weeks to

30.6 Gy in 3 weeks, with the median of approximately 20 Gy in 2 weeks, but there is no consensus on which dose fractionation schedule is appropriate or how long
after the initial course of radiotherapy it is appropriate to reirradiate. 110 Some investigators have argued that reirradiation should be considered for patients who
remain in good general condition but experience neurologic deterioration 4 or more months after a satisfactory response to the initial course of WBRT. 110 The
tolerance of the brain is more than likely to be exceeded by reirradiation but, with the limited survival of these patients, there are inadequate data to evaluate the
consequences of this treatment.
Stereotactic Radiosurgery
Stereotactic radiosurgery is a technique of external irradiation that uses multiple convergent beams to deliver a high single dose of radiation to a radiographically
discrete treatment volume. 111 Radiosurgery can be performed with high-energy roentgenograms produced by linear accelerators, with gamma rays from the gamma
knife and, less frequently, with charged particles, such as protons produced by cyclotrons. 112 All the stereotactic irradiation techniques result in rapid fall-off of dose at
the edge of the target volume, resulting in a clinically insignificant radiation dose to normal nontarget tissue. Metastases are usually small (<3 cm) radiographically
discrete lesions that are noninvasive, rendering them ideal targets for radiosurgery. 113
An increasing number of uncontrolled studies confirm the effectiveness of stereotactic radiosurgery in treating brain metastases ( Table 52.1-3). To date, more than
1780 patients with more than 2700 lesions have been reported in the literature. 111,113 Radiosurgery produces local control rates of 73% to 94% and is associated with
a 5% to 10% risk of irradiation necrosis. The median survival from these series ranges from 6 to 15 months, with an average of 9.4
months.3,111,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,120,121,122,123,124,125,126,127,128,129,130 and 131 In a multiinstitutional trial involving 116 patients treated with radiosurgery for single brain
metastasis using a mean dose of 17.5 Gy, local tumor control was obtained in 99 patients (85%). 116 The 2-year actuarial tumor control rates for the entire group was
67% ± 8%, with a plateau in the curve at 18 months. In a multivariate analysis, better local control was obtained in patients who received WBRT in addition to
radiosurgery and in those patients with “radioresistant” histologies (melanoma and renal cell carcinoma). In the largest series to date, Alexander et al. 114 reported the
results of radiosurgery using a linear accelerator for the treatment of 248 patients with 421 metastatic lesions. At the time of radiosurgery, 77 patients had no evidence
of systemic disease, while 171 patients had stable systemic disease. Of the lesions treated, 126 were classified as radioresistant (melanoma, renal cell carcinoma,
and sarcoma), with the remaining 295 lesions representing all other histologies. With a median observation period of 26 months, 48 of 421 lesions (11%) progressed
within the radiosurgery volume. The actuarial 1-, 2-, and 3-year local control rates were 85%, 65%, and 65%, respectively. Radioresistant histologies had statistically
equal control rates as other lesions. The median survival for the entire group was 9.4 months, measured from the radiosurgery treatment. In a multivariate analysis,
the absence of systemic disease (relative risk, 4.4; P = .0001) and age younger than 60 years (relative risk, 1.6; P = .002) were factors associated with improved
survival. The development of symptomatic irradiation necrosis requiring reoperation for increasing mass effect and steroid dependency occurred in 7% of patients in
this series.

TABLE 52.1-3. Radiosurgery for Brain Metastases: Results of Representative Series

The optimal role for radiosurgery in patients with brain metastases and its effectiveness in prolonging patient survival remains unclear. However, a recent study by
Kondziolka et al. 132 comparing WBRT to WBRT with radiosurgery for patients with multiple metastases (two to four) was stopped at interim analysis because of the
significantly better tumor control seen in the group receiving both treatments. In this study, 27 patients with two to four brain metastases (all £25 mm in diameter) and
a known primary tumor were randomly assigned to WBRT alone or with radiosurgery. Combination therapy was associated with a much lower rate of local failure at 1
year (8% vs. 100%) and a longer median time to local failure (36 vs. 6 months). However, there was no significant improvement in median survival (11 vs. 7.5 months;
P = .22), which was related to the extent of extracranial disease. An RTOG trial (95-08) is currently under way in which patients with one to three untreated brain
metastases will be randomly assigned to WBRT or WBRT and radiosurgery. The study will provide further data on the usefulness of adding radiosurgery to WBRT.
The studies by Patchell et al., 23 Vecht et al., 66 and Noordijk et al. 67 indicate that there is a survival advantage for patients with a single brain metastasis treated with
surgery and radiotherapy as compared to radiotherapy alone. Many clinical investigators believe that radiosurgery can act as an alternative to surgical
resection.111,113,115,117,121,131 Moreover, radiosurgery has several potential advantages over surgery. It can be used to treat metastases in surgically inaccessible areas
of the brain, such as the brain stem. Since it is a noninvasive procedure that can be performed on an outpatient basis, it is associated with less morbidity than surgery.
In addition, there is increasing evidence that radiosurgery may also be more cost-effective than surgery. 131,133 In the study by Mehta et al.,133 the average cost per
week of survival was $310 for radiotherapy, $524 for resection plus irradiation, and $270 for radiosurgery plus irradiation. 133
While there are no completed randomized trials comparing radiosurgery to surgery, Auchter et al. 117 identified 122 patients who met the selection criteria used by
Patchell et al. 23 and were treated with WBRT (median, 37.5 Gy) followed by a radiosurgery boost (median, 17 Gy). The overall local control rate was 86%, with an
actuarial median survival of 56 weeks and a neurologic median survival of KPS greater than 70 of 44 weeks. These results are comparable to the surgery and
irradiation therapy arms of the studies by Patchell et al., 23 Vecht et al., 66 and Noordijk et al.67 and better than the arms of the whole brain treatment alone. In a second
retrospective study, Muacevic et al. 134 compared 52 patients with single brain metastasis treated with surgery and WBRT with 56 patients treated with radiosurgery
alone. The 1-year local tumor control rates after surgery and radiosurgery were 75% and 83%, respectively, and the 1-year neurologic death rates were 37% and
39%, respectively, suggesting that the local tumor control rates are similar in the two groups. The 1-year survival rate and median survival were 53% and 68 weeks,
respectively, in the surgical group and 43% and 35 weeks, respectively, in the radiosurgical group. The shorter overall survival time in the radiosurgery group was
related to higher rate of death from systemic disease. Brandt et al. 135 also compared surgery and radiosurgery in a series of 56 patients. In this study, the median
survival of the radiosurgically treated patients was 11.4 months, comparable to the 10.4 months for the surgically treated patients. In a fourth study, by Shu et al., 136
patients with single brain metastases treated with radiosurgery had a median survival of 16 months. In contrast, Bindal et al. 137 conducted a retrospective study
comparing 34 consecutive patients treated with radiosurgery with 62 clinically matched patients treated surgically. The median survival for patients treated surgically
was 16.4 months, compared to 7.5 months for those treated with radiosurgery ( P = .0009). Based on these results, the authors concluded that surgery was superior to
radiosurgery for the treatment of a single brain metastasis. However, the low local control rate in the radiosurgically treated patients in this study (61%) and
differences in the extent of systemic disease between the surgery and radiosurgery groups may have accounted for the poor results of radiosurgery. Ideally, a
prospective randomized study comparing surgery to radiosurgery in the treatment of single brain metastases would resolve the issue of the relative efficacy of these
two treatments. However, previous attempts at such a study have been unsuccessful due to poor patient accrual as a result of patient or physician preference (or
both) for either surgery or radiosurgery.
The role of WBRT in patients treated with radiosurgery is controversial, especially for patients with relatively radioresistant tumors, such as melanoma. 121,131 In the
study by Patchell et al., 103 37% of patients failed in other sites within the brain if they did not receive whole brain irradiation. While some studies have shown improved
local control in patients who received whole brain radiotherapy in addition to radiosurgery, 116 overall patient survival is generally not increased. 114,123,131 Currently,
most centers treat patients with brain metastases with both radiosurgery and whole brain radiotherapy ( Fig. 52.1-2) and limit the use of up-front radiosurgery alone to
cases for which there are no alternatives, such as prior high-dose irradiation to the head and neck area or when the patient refuses whole brain radiation therapy.
However, there are several retrospective studies suggesting that for selected patients, radiosurgery alone may be as effective as the combination of radiosurgery and
WBRT, with potentially less morbidity. 138,139,140 and 141 In a study by Sneed et al., 138 the outcome of 62 patients with up to four newly diagnosed brain metastases treated
with radiosurgery alone were compared with 43 patients with newly diagnosed metastases treated with the combination of radiosurgery and WBRT. The median

survival and the 1-year local freedom from progression (FFP) were the same for radiosurgery alone and for radiosurgery and WBRT (median survival, 11.3 vs. 11.1
months; 1-year local FFP, 71% vs. 79%, respectively). More patients treated with radiosurgery failed in the brain (new metastases or local failure or both) than those
receiving the combination of radiosurgery and WBRT (brain FFP at 1 year, 28% for radiosurgery compared to 69% for the combination of radiosugery and WBRT).
However, brain control, allowing for successful salvage of a first failure, was not significantly different between the two groups. This study suggests that omission of
WBRT in the initial management of patients treated with radiosurgery for up to four brain metastases does not appear to compromise survival or intracranial control
and allows for salvage therapy as indicated. A second small retrospective study of 35 patients with melanoma brain metastases found no difference in survival
between the patients treated with radiosurgery and the combination of radiosurgery and WBRT. 139 A third study by Pirzkall et al. 140 comparing the outcome of 158
patients with one to three brain metastases treated by radiosurgery with 78 patients treated with radiosurgery and WBRT also found no statistical difference in
survival and local control between the two groups, although there was a trend toward improved local control and increased survival in the group that received WBRT.
Randomized studies comparing radiosurgery and the combination of radiosurgery and WBRT are currently under way to assess survival, quality of life, and
cost-effectiveness in patients with newly diagnosed brain metastases.

FIGURE 52.1-2. A 48-year-old woman with non–small cell lung cancer presenting with lethargy and left-sided weakness. A: Axial T1-weighted magnetic resonance
imaging shows a 3-cm enhancing metastasis in the right anterior parietal lobe and a smaller 1-cm metastasis in the left parietal lobe. The right parietal lesion was
resected, and the left parietal lesion was treated with stereotactic radiosurgery (1800 cGy), followed by whole brain radiation therapy. B: Follow-up magnetic
resonance imaging 6 months later showing no residual tumor at either site. Twenty months after her surgery, the patient remains well neurologically, with no evidence
of recurrent metastases in her brain. However, she has developed recurrent disease in her lung.

COMPLICATIONS OF RADIOSURGERY. Acute complications within the first week of treatment are uncommon, occurring in fewer than 10% of patients.

114,128,129,142
These

include seizures (2.3% to 6.1%), headaches, exacerbation of preexisting neurologic deficits (2% to 6%), nausea (especially in patients receiving more than 375 cGy to
the area postrema) and, rarely, hemorrhage. 125 The risk of seizures can be reduced by treating patients with anticonvulsants before the radiosurgery procedure. 114
Patients with lesions near the posterior fossa may benefit from premedication with antiemetics. Acute neurologic deficits can be reduced by using doses of less than
30 Gy.113
Subacute complications occurring within 6 months of treatment consists of alopecia in patients whose scalp received more than 4.4 Gy of irradiation 114 and neurologic
deterioration due to necrosis and peritumoral edema. 113
Chronic complications due to irradiation necrosis occur in approximately 8% to 16% of patients. These patients present with increased seizures, headaches, or
worsening neurologic deficits. 113,114,120 These side effects can usually be treated with corticosteroids. However, 5% to 10% of patients develop severe symptomatic
necrosis and may require surgical resection. 113,114 Cranial nerve palsies are rare and develop in fewer than 1% of patients. 142
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS. Young patients with good performance status, limited extracranial disease, and one or two small lesions are particularly suited to treatment by

radiosurgery. 113,114,131 Poor prognostic factors include poor performance status (<70), progressive systemic disease, large tumor size, infratentorial location, and
multiple metastases (more than two lesions). 113,119,122 The efficacy of radiosurgery appears to be independent of the histology of the lesion. Radioresistant tumors,
such as renal cell carcinoma, 143 malignant melanoma,144,145 and NSCLC146 have statistically the same control rate as other tumors. 111,113
SUMMARY. The introduction of radiosurgery over the last decade represents one of the major advances in the treatment of brain metastases. For patients with a single

small asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic lesion, radiosurgery can probably be used as a substitute for surgery with comparable outcomes. 113,117 Radiosurgery also
has an important role in patients with recurrence of brain metastasis after whole brain radiotherapy and, perhaps, in the initial treatment of patients with several
metastases and limited systemic disease.
Interstitial Brachytherapy
Interstitial brachytherapy involves the implantation of radioactive nuclides into the wall of the surgical cavity to deliver an additional dose of radiation to the residual
tumor while limiting the irradiation to the surrounding brain. The relatively sharp border between metastases and the surrounding brain renders them ideal lesions for
brachytherapy. Brachytherapy for metastases has been evaluated in several small uncontrolled studies using iodine 125 sources, and median survivals have ranged
from 9 to 18.3 months.147,148 and 149 Although brachytherapy is rarely performed for small lesions suitable for radiosurgery, it may have a limited role for metastases that
are too large for radiosurgery.
A more recent brachytherapy strategy involves using a photon radiosurgery system. This is a battery-powered miniature x-ray generator with an attached probe that
can be placed stereotactically into metastases at the time of craniotomy to deliver a single fraction of high-dose radiation (12.5 Gy) in less than an hour. 149,150
Preliminary results suggest that this procedure is well tolerated and produces effective local tumor control. 149,150
Chemotherapy
The role of chemotherapy for the treatment of patients with brain metastases has not been defined. At present, chemotherapy is rarely used as part of the overall
management of brain metastases. Traditionally, it had been assumed that the blood–brain barrier prevented chemotherapeutic agents from entering the CNS.
However, there is evidence that the blood–brain barrier is in fact partially disrupted within brain tumors. 151 This suggests that other factors may also contribute to the
generally disappointing results of chemotherapy for brain metastases, such as the intrinsic resistance to chemotherapy of many tumors that metastasize to the brain;
the use of chemotherapeutic agents designed to penetrate the blood–brain barrier rather than agents known to be most effective against the primary malignancy; and
the tendency for brain metastases to develop after the failure of primary chemotherapeutic agents to control systemic disease. 151,152
Although the overall results of chemotherapy for brain metastases have been generally disappointing, a number of uncontrolled studies have demonstrated favorable
response rates in brain metastases from chemosensitive tumors, such as breast cancer, small cell lung cancer (SCLC), and germ cell tumors. 2,3,151,152
Patients with metastatic breast cancer have been treated with chemotherapy since 1970. In the largest series to date, Rosner et al. 153 treated 100 consecutive breast
cancer patients with brain metastases with several chemotherapy regimens, including cyclophosphamide, 5-fluorouracil, and prednisone, or with this regimen together
with methotrexate and vincristine. These patients had not received prior chemotherapy for their systemic disease. Overall, 50% of patients had an objective response
(10% had a complete response, and 40% had a partial response). In addition, 9% had stable disease. The median duration of remission for complete responders was
10 months and, for partial responders, it was 7 months. Rosner et al. 154 subsequently treated an additional 26 patients with progressive brain metastases from breast
cancer with four different chemotherapeutic regimens: cyclophosphamide, 5-fluorouracil, and prednisone; cyclophosphamide, 5-fluorouracil, and prednisone together
with methotrexate and vincristine; cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin (Adriamycin); and mitomycin and vinblastine (Velban). 154 Objective responses were seen in 61%
of patients, while another 15% had stable disease. The median survival for responders was 12 months, compared to 2.4 months for nonresponders. Interestingly, prior

systemic chemotherapy did not affect the response of the brain metastases, arguing against the concept of the brain as a pharmacologic sanctuary.
Franciosi et al. 155 treated 56 patients with brain metastases from breast cancer with the combination of cisplatin and etoposide for a maximum of six cycles and
observed complete responses in 13%, partial responses in 26%, and stable disease in 21% of patients. The median survival was approximately 8 months. Boogerd et
al.156 treated 20 patients with cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil, or cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and 5-fluorouracil. Seven patients had recurrent
disease after WBRT. Objective tumor regression occurred in 76% of patients after two cycles of chemotherapy. The median duration of neurologic remission was 30
weeks, and the median survival was 25 weeks. When the results o these chemotherapy patients were compared to 29 historic controls treated with WBRT, the
neurologic response rate, duration of response, and median survival were better in those patients treated with chemotherapy.
Several other small series have reported responses to a variety of regimens, including a combination of drugs combining thioguanine, procarbazine, dibromodulcitol,
lomustine (CCNU), 5-fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea designed to improve the efficacy of CCNU. 157 Recently, there has also been a report of patients with brain
metastases from breast cancer responding to high-dose chemotherapy. 158
There have also been many studies evaluating the response of brain metastases from SCLC to chemotherapy. 151,159 Kristensen et al. 159 reviewed 12 patient series
with a total of 116 patients published between 1981 and 1990. Eleven of these studies contained an epipodophyllotoxin and, in five, this was combined with either
cisplatin or carboplatin. The overall response rate to chemotherapy without irradiation in patients with intracranial metastases at diagnosis was 76%, while the
response rate at relapse was 43%. These results suggest that intracranial metastases from SCLC respond to chemotherapy as readily as other metastatic locations of
SCLC.
Favorable responses have also been seen with chemotherapy for metastases from choriocarcinoma, germ cell tumors, and ovarian cancer. 151,160,161 and 162 The results
of chemotherapy for brain metastases from less chemosensitive tumors, such as NSCLC and melanoma, have been generally disappointing. However, newer
regimens, such as thioguanine, procarbazine, dibromodulcitol, CCNU, 5-fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea157; carboplatin and etoposide155; cisplatin and etoposide 163;
cisplatin and tenoposide 164; and tenoposide alone 165 for NSCLC166 and temozolamide for melanoma have produced slightly higher response rates. In a study by
Franciosi et al., 155 43 patients with NSCLC were treated with cisplatin and etoposide. The combined complete and partial response rates were 30%, and median
survival was 8 months.
Overall, these studies suggest that chemotherapy has some activity against brain metastases, especially from chemosensitive tumors, such as breast cancer, SCLC,
and choriocarcinoma. In these patients, chemotherapy may have a role as palliative therapy in patients with recurrent disease after radiotherapy or possibly as initial
treatment in patients with small asymptomatic tumors. As newer drugs are introduced, the effectiveness of chemotherapy for brain metastases may improve.
Hormonal Therapy
In patients with hormone-responsive tumors, such as breast cancer, there are anecdotal reports of patients responding to hormonal agents, such as tamoxifen 167 and
megestrol acetate.168

PROGNOSIS
The median survival of patients with untreated brain metastases is approximately 1 month. 169 The addition of steroids increases survival to 2 months, 14,79 while whole
brain radiotherapy further improves survival to 3 to 6 months. 12,78,79,85,170,171 Patients with single brain metastases and limited extracranial disease who are treated with
surgery and WBRT have a median survival of approximately 10 to 16 months. 23,64,66,67 Favorable prognostic factors include the absence of systemic disease, young
age (<60 years), good performance status (KPS ³70), long time to development of metastasis, surgical resection, less than three lesions, and possibly response to
steroids. 2,3,64,78,85,172,173,174 and 175 Patients with brain metastases as the only manifestation of an undetected primary tumor also have a favorable prognosis, with an
overall median survival of 13.4 months. 176 Breast cancer patients with brain metastases generally have a more favorable prognosis than brain metastases from other
types of primary tumor.82,84,85 On the other hand, patients with colorectal carcinoma tend to have a poorer prognosis. 177 This may be due to the tendency of these
patients to have a higher frequency of cerebellar metastases, which are associated with an adverse prognosis.
Recently, Gaspar et al. 173 performed a recursive partitioning analysis of prognostic factors from three RTOG brain metastases trials and identified three prognostic
classes. Class 1 patients had a KPS of 70 or higher, were younger than 65 years of age, had a controlled primary and no extracranial metastases, and had a median
survival of 7.1 months. Class 3 patients had a KPS of less than 70 and a median survival of 2.3 months. Class 2 patients included all remaining patients and had a
median survival of 4.2 months. Agboola et al. 174 evaluated the validity of this classification system in 125 patients with brain metastases treated with surgical resection
and WBRT. The median survival in classes 1, 2, and 3 were 14.8 months, 9.9 months, and 6 months, respectively. Use of this classification may identify patients most
likely to benefit from treatment and potentially allows new therapies to be evaluated on homogeneous patient groups. 174,175
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Clouston PD, DeAngelis LM, Posner JB. The spectrum of neurological disease in patients with systemic cancer. Ann Neurol 1992;31:268.
2. Patchell R. Brain metastases. Handbook Neurol 1997;25:135.
3. Wen PY, Loeffler JS. Management of brain metastases. Oncology 1999;13:941.
4. Davey P. Brain metastases. Curr Probl Cancer 1999;23:59.
5. Posner JB. Management of brain metastases. Rev Neurol 1992;148:477.
6. Sawaya R, Bindal RK. Metastatic brain tumors. In: Kaye AH, Laws ER, eds. Brain tumors. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1995:923.
7. Graus F, Walker RW, Allen JC. Brain metastases in children. J Pediatr 1983;103:558.
8. Takakura K, Sano K, Hojo S, et al. Metastatic tumors of the central nervous system. Tokyo: Igaku-Shoin, Ltd, 1982.
9. Johnson JD, Young B. Demographics of brain metastasis. Neurosurg Clin North Am 1996;7:337.
10. Posner JB. Neurologic complications of cancer. Philadelphia: FA Davis Co, 1995.
11. Paterson AH, Agarwal M, Lees A, et al. Brain metastases in breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant chemotherapy. Cancer 1982;49:651.
12. Zimm S, Wampler GL, Stablein D, et al. Intracerebral metastases in solid tumor patients: natural history and results of treatment. Cancer 1981;48:384.
13. Bouffet E, Doumi N, Thiesse P, et al. Brain metastases in children with solid tumors. Cancer 1997;79:403.
14. Delattre JY, Krol G, Thaler HT, Posner JB. Distribution of brain metastases. Arch Neurol 1988;45:741.
15. Sze G, Milano E, Johnson C, et al. Detection of brain metastases: comparison of contrast-enhanced MR with unenhanced MR and contrast CT. Am J Neuroradiol 1990;11:785.
16. Cairncross JG, Posner JB. The management of brain metastases. In: Walker MD, eds. Oncology of the nervous system. Boston: Nijhoff, 1983:341.
17. Nutt SH, Patchell RA. Intracranial hemorrhage associated with primary and secondary tumors. Neurosurg Clin North Am 1992;3:591.
18. Forsyth PA, Posner JB. Headaches in patients with brain tumors: a study of 111 patients. Neurology 1993;43:1678.
19. Coia LR, Aaronson N, Linggood R, et al. A report of the consensus workshop panel on the treatment of brain metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;23:223.
20. Cohen N, Strauss G, Lew R, et al. Should prophylactic anticonvulsants be administered to patients with newly diagnosed cerebral metastases? A retrospective analysis. J Clin Oncol
1988;6:1621.
21. Glantz M, Cole B, Friedberg M, et al. A randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled trial of divalproex sodium prophylaxis in adults with newly diagnosed brain tumors. Neurology 1996;46:985.
22. Weaver S, DeAngelis LM, Fulton D, et al. A prospective randomized study of prophylactic anticonvulsants in patients with primary or metastatic brain tumors and without seizures. Ann Neurol
1997;42:430.
23. Patchell RA, Tibbs PA, Walsh JW, et al. A randomized trial of surgery in the treatment of single metastases to the brain. N Engl J Med 1990;322:494.
24. Schoenberg BS, Christine BW, Whisnant JO. Nervous system neoplasms and primary malignancy of other sites: the unique association between meningiomas and breast cancer. Neurology
1975;25:705.
25. Rubinstein AB, Schein M, Reichenthal E. The association of carcinoma of the breast with meningioma. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1989;169:334.
26. Davis PC, Hudgins PA, Peterman SB, et al. Diagnosis of cerebral metastases: double-dose delayed CT vs contrast-enhanced MR imaging. AJNRAm J Neuroradiol 1991;12:293.
27. Schaefer PW, Budzik RF, Gonzalez RG. Imaging of cerebral metastases. Neurosurg Clin North Am 1996;7:393.
28. Sze G, Johnson C, Kawamura Y, et al. Comparison of single- and triple-dose contrast material in the MR screening of brain metastases. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1988;19:821.
29. Yuh WT, Fisher DJ, Runge VM, et al. Phase III multicenter trial of high-dose gadoteridol in MR evaluation of brain metastases. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1994;15:1037.
30. Finelli DA, Hurst GC, Gullapali RP, et al. Improved contrast of enhancing brain lesions of postgadolinium, T 1-weighted spin-echo images with the use of magnetization transfer. Radiology
1994;190:553.
31. Peretti-Viton P, Taieb D, Viton JM, et al. Contrast-enhanced magnetization transfer MRI in metastatic lesions of the brain. Neuroradiology 1998;40:783.
32. Latief KH, White CS, Protopapas Z, et al. Search for a primary lung neoplasm in patients with brain metastasis: is the chest radiograph sufficient? AJR Am J Roentgenol 1997;168:1339.
33. Merchut MP. Brain metastases from undiagnosed systemic neoplasms. Arch Intern Med 1989;149:1076.
34. Van de Pol M, van Aalst VC, Wilmink JT, Twijnstra A. Brain metastases from an unknown primary tumor: which diagnostic procedures are indicated? J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
1996;61:321.
35. Kofman S, Garvin JS, Nagamani D, et al. Treatment of cerebral metastases from breast cancer with prednisone. JAMA 1957;163:1473.
36. Galicich JH, French LA, Melby JC. Use of dexamethasone in the treatment of cerebral edema associated with brain tumors. Lancet 1961:81:46.

37. Batchelor T, DeAngelis LM. Medical management of cerebral metastases. Neurosurg Clin North Am 1996;7:435.
38. Vecht CJ, Hovestadt A, Verbiest HBC, et al. Dose-effect relationship of dexamethasone on Karnofsky performance in metastatic brain tumors: a randomized study of doses of 4, 8, and 16
milligrams per day. Neurology 1994;44:675.
39. Vecht CJ, Verbiest HBC. Use of glucocorticoids in neuro-oncology. In: Wiley RG, ed. Neurological complications of cancer. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 1995:199.
40. Delattre JY, Posner JB. Neurological complications of chemotherapy and radiation therapy. In: Aminoff MJ, ed. Neurology and general medicine. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1994:421.
41. Henson JW, Jalaj JK, Walker RW, et al. Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in patients with primary brain tumors. Arch Neurol 1991;48:406.
42. Slivka A, Wen PY, Shea WM, Loeffler JS. Pneumocystis pneumonia during steroid taper in patients with primary brain tumors. Am J Med 1993;94:216.
43. Delattre JY, Safai B, Posner JB. Erythema multiforme and Stevens-Johnson syndrome in patients receiving cranial irradiation and phenytoin. Neurology 1988;38:194.
44. Mamon H, Wen PY, Loeffler JS. Allergic skin reactions to anticonvulsant medications in patients receiving cranial radiation. Epilepsia 1999;40:341.
45. Khe HX, Delattre J-Y, Poisson M. Stevens-Johnson syndrome in a patient receiving cranial irradiation and carbamazepine. Neurology 1990;40:1144.
46. Taylor LP, Posner JB. Phenobarbital rheumatism in patients with brain tumor. Ann Neurol 1989;25:92.
47. Werk EE, Choi Y, Sholiton Z, et al. Interference in the effect of dexamethasone by diphenylhydantoin. N Engl J Med 1969;281:32.
48. Lawson LA, Blouin RA, Smith RB, et al. Phenytoin-dexamethasone interaction: a previously unreported observation. Surg Neurol 1981;16:23.
49. Grossman SA, Sheidler VR, Gilbert MR. Decreased phenytoin levels in patients receiving chemotherapy. Am J Med 1989;87:505.
50. Fetell MR, Grossman SA, Fisher JD, et al. Preirradiation paclitaxel in glioblastoma multiforme: efficacy, pharmacology, and drug interactions. New Approaches to Brain Tumor Therapy Central
Nervous System Consortium. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:3121.
51. Glantz MJ, Cole BF, Forsyth PA, et al. Anticonvulsant prophylaxis in patients with brain tumors: a systematic review of the evidence ( in press).
52. Byrne TN, Cascino TL, Posner JB. Brain metastasis from melanoma. J Neurooncol 1983;1:313.
53. Sawaya R, Zuccarello M, Elkalliny M, et al. Postoperative venous thromboembolism and brain tumors: I. Clinical profile. J Neurooncol 1992;14:119.
54. Levin JM, Schiff, Loeffler JS, et al. Complications of therapy for venous thromboembolic disease in patients with brain tumors. Neurology 1993;43:1111.
55. Ruff RL, Posner JB. The incidence and treatment of peripheral venous thombosis in patients with glioma. Ann Neurol 1983;13:334.
56. Schiff D, DeAngelis LM. Therapy of venous thromboembolism in patients with brain metastases. Cancer 1994;73:493.
57. Kelly PJ, Abe H, Aida T, et al. Results of computed tomography-based computer-assisted stereotactic resection of metastatic intracranial tumors. Neurosurgery 1988;22:7.
58. Lang FF, Sawaya R. Surgical treatment of metastatic brain tumors. Semin Surg Oncol 1998;14:53.
59. Sundaresan N, Galicich J. Surgical treatment of brain metastases: clinical and computerized tomography evaluation of the results of treatment. Cancer 1985;55:1382.
60. Galicich JH, Sundaresan N, Arbit E, et al. Surgical treatment of single brain metastasis: factors associated with survival. Cancer 1980;45:381.
61. Winston KR, Walsh JW, Fischer EG. Results of operative treatment of intracranial metastatic tumors. Cancer 1980;45:2639.
62. White K, Fleming T, Laws E. Single metastasis to the brain. Surgical treatment in 122 consecutive patients. Mayo Clin Proc 1981;56:424.
63. Pieper DR, Hess KR, Sawaya RE. Role of surgery in the treatment of brain metatases in patients with breast cancer. Ann Surg Oncol 1997;4:484.
64. Wronski M, Arbit E, McCormick B, Wronski M. Surgical treatment of 70 patients with brain metastases from breast carcinoma. Cancer 1997;80:1746.
65. Mandell L, Harris B, Sullivan M, et al. The treatment of single brain metastasis from nonoat cell lung carcinoma. Surgery and radiation vs. radiation alone. Cancer 1986;58:641.
66. Vecht CJ, Haaxma-Reiche EM, Noordijk GW, et al. Treatment of single brain metastasis: radiotherapy alone or combined with neurosurgery? Ann Neurol 1993;583.
67. Noordijk EM, Vecht CJ, Haaxma-Reiche H, et al. The choice of treatment of single brain metastasis should be based on extracranial tumor activity and age. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1994;29:711.
68. Mintz AP, Kestle J, Rathbone MP, et al. A randomized trial to assess the efficacy of surgery in addition to radiotherapy in patients with a single brain metastasis. Cancer 1996;78:1470.
69. Mintz AP, Cairncross JG. Treatment of a single brain metastasis. The role of radiation following surgical resection. JAMA 1998;280:1527.
70. Sause W, Crowley J, Morantz R, et al. Solitary brain metastasis: results of an RTOG/SWOG protocol evaluating surgery + RT versus RT alone. Am J Clin Oncol 1990;3:427.
71. Bindal RK, Sawaya R, Leavens ME, et al. Surgical treatment of multiple brain metastases. J Neurosurg 1993;79:210.
72. Hernandez-Avila G, Black PMcL, Loeffler JS, et al. Is it worth operating on a patient with more than one intracranial metastasis? (Abstract 32) Congress of Neurological Surgeons, forty-ninth
annual meeting, 1999.
73. Hazuka MB, Burleson W, Stroud DN, et al. Multiple brain metastases are associated with poor survival in patients treated with surgery and radiotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:369.
74. Sundaresan N, Sachdev V, DiGiacinto G. Reoperation for brain metastases. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1625.
75. Bindal RK, Sawaya R, Leavens ME, et al. Reoperation for recurrent metastatic brain tumors. J Neurosurg 1995;83:600.
76. Arbit E, Wronski M, Burt M, Galicich JH. The treatment of patients with recurrent brain metastases. Cancer 1995;76:765.
77. Kaye A. Malignant brain tumors: late reoperation for metastatic tumors. In: Little J, Awad I, eds. Reoperative neurosurgery. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1992:72.
78. Borgelt B, Gelber R, Kramer S, et al. The palliation of brain metastases. Final results of the first two studies by the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:1.
79. Sneed PK, Larson DA, Wara WM. Radiotherapy for cerebral metastases. Neurosurg Clin North Am 1996;7:505.
80. Cairncross JG, Kim JH, Posner JB. Radiation therapy for brain metastasis. Ann Neurol 1980;7:529.
81. Vermeulen SS. Whole brain radiotherapy in the treatment of metastatic brain tumors. Semin Surg Oncol 1998;14:64.
82. Berk L. An overview of radiotherapy trials for the treatment of brain metastases. Oncology 1995;9:1205.
83. Borgelt B, Gelber R, Larson M, et al. Ultra-rapid high dose irradiation for the palliation of brain metastases: final results of the first two studies by the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:1633.
84. Gelber R, Larson M, Borgelt B, et al. Equivalence of radiation schedules for the palliative treatment of brain metastases in patients with favorable prognosis. Cancer 1981;48:1749.
85. Diener-West M, Dobbins TW, Phillips TL, et al. Identification of an optimal subgroup for treatment evaluation of patients with brain metastases using RTOG study 7916. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1989;16:669.
86. Kurtz JM, Gelber R, Brady LW, et al. The palliation of brain metastases in a favorable patient population. A randomized clinical trial by the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:891.
87. Sause W, Scott C, Krisch R, et al. Phase I/II trial of accelerated fractionation in brain metastases RTOG 85-28. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;26:653.
88. Murray KJ, Scott C, Greenberg HM, et al. A randomized phase III study of accelerated hyperfractionation versus standard in patients with unresected brain metastases: a report of the Radiation
Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 9104. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:571.
89. Kamarnicky LT, Phillips TL, Martz K, et al. A randomized phase III protocol for the evaluation of misonidazole combined with radiation in the treatment of patients with brain metastases
(RTOG-7916). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:53.
90. Phillips TL, Scott CB, Leibel SA, et al. Results of a randomized comparison of radiotherapy and bromodeoxyuridine with radiotherapy alone for brain metastases: report of RTOG trial 89-05. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;33:339.
91. Carde P, Timmerman D, Koprowski C, et al. Gadolinium-texaphyrin (GD-TEX) radiation sensitizer: improved survival in a phase IB/II trial in patients with brain metastases. Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1998;17:379a(abst 1463).
92. Viala J, Vanel D, Meingan P, et al. Phases IB and II multidose trial of gadolinium texaphyrin, a radiation sensitizer detectable at MR imaging: preliminary results in brain metastases. Radiology
1999;212:755.
93. Kleinberg L, Grossman SA, Piantadosi S, et al. Phase I trial to determine the safety, pharmacodynamics, and pharmacokinetics of RSR 13, a novel radioenhancer, in newly diagnosed
glioblastoma multiforme. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2593.
94. Johnson FE, Harrison BR, McKirgan LW, et al. A phase II evaluation of pentoxifylline combined with radiation in the treatment of brain metastases. Int J Oncol 1998;13:801.
95. Del Rowe JD, Bello J, Mitnick R, et al. Accelerated regression of brain metastases in patients receiving whole brain radiation and the topoisomerase II inhibitor, lucanthone. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1999;43:89.
96. Coia LR, Hanks GE, Martz K, et al. Practice patterns of palliative care for the United States 19841985. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:209.
97. Dosoretz DE, Blitzer PH, Russell AH, et al. Management of solitary metastasis to the brain: the role of elective brain irradiation following complete surgical resection. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1980;6:1727.
98. Smalley S, Schray M, Laws E, et al. Adjuvant radiation therapy after surgical resection of solitary brain metastasis: association with pattern of failure and survival. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1987;13:1611.
99. DeAngelis LM, Mandell LR, Thaler HT, et al. The role of postoperative radiotherapy after resection of single brain metastases. Neurosurgery 1989;24:798.
100. Hagen N, Cirrincione C, Thaler H, et al. The role of radiation therapy following resection of single brain metastasis from melanoma. Neurology 1990;40:158.
101. Armstrong JG, Wronski M, Galicich J, et al. Postoperative radiation for lung cancer metastatic to the brain. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2340.
102. Skibber JM, Soong S, Austin L, et al. Cranial irradiation after surgical excision of brain metastases in melanoma patients. Ann Surg Oncol 1996;3:118.
103. Patchell RA, Tibbs PA, Regine WF, et al. P ostoperative radiotherapy in the treatment of single brain metastases to the brain. JAMA 1998;280:1485.
104. DeAngelis L, Delattre J-Y, Posner JB. Radiation-induced dementia in patients cured of brain metastases. Neurology 1989;39:789.
105. Heikens J, Michiels EM, Behrendt H, et al. Long-term neuro-endocrine sequelae after treatment for childhood medulloblastoma. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:1592.
106. Schultheiss TE, Kun LE, Ang KK, et al. Radiation response of the central nervous system. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:1093.
107. Kurup P, Reddy S, Hendrikson FR. Results of re-irradiation for cerebral metastases. Cancer 1980;46:2587.
108. Hazuka MB, Kinzie JJ. Brain metastases: results and effects of re-irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:433.
109. Wong WW, Schild SE, Sawyer TE, Shaw EG. Analysis of outcome in patients reirradiated for brain metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;34:585.
110. Cooper JS, Steinfield A, Lerch IA. Cerebral metastases: value of reirradiation in selected patients. Radiology 1990;174:883.
111. Loeffler JS, Barker FG, Chapman PH. Role of radiosurgery in the management of central nervous system metastases. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1999;43:S11.
112. Phillips MH, Stelzer KJ, Griffin TW, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery: a review and comparisons of methods. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1085.
113. Boyd TS, Mehta MP. Stereotactic radiosurgery for brain metastases. Oncology 1999;13:1397.
114. Alexander E III, Moriarty TM, Davis RB, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery for the definitive, noninvasive treatment of brain metastases. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:34.
115. Mehta MP, Rozental JM, Levin AB, et al. Defining the role of radiosurgery in the management of brain metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:619.
116. Flickinger JC, Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, et al. A multi-institutional experience with stereotactic radiosurgery for solitary brain metastasis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;28:797.
117. Auchter RM, Lamond JP, Alexander E III, et al. A multi-institutional outcome and prognostic factor analysis of radiosurgery for resectable single brain metastasis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1996;35:27.
118. Alexander E, Moriarty TM, Loeffler JS. Radiosurgery for metastases. J Neurooncol 1996;27:279.
119. Cho KH, Hall WA, Gerbi BJ, et al. Patient selection criteria for the treatment of brain metastases with stereotactic radiosurgery. J Neurooncol 1998;40:73.
120. Engenhart R, Kimmig B, Hover K, et al. Long term follow-up for brain metastases treated with percutaneous single high dose radiation. Cancer 1993;71:1353.
121. Flickinger JC, Lunsford LD, Somaza S, Kondziolka D. Radiosurgery: its role in brain metastasis management. Neurosurg Clin North Am 1996;7:497.
122. Joseph J, Adler JR, Cox RS, Hancock SL. Linear accelerator-based stereotaxic radiosurgery for brain metastases: the influence of number of lesions on survival. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1085.
123. Kihlstrom L, Karlson B, Lindquist C. Gamma knife surgery for brain metastasis: implications for survival based on 16 years experience. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg 1993;61:45.
124. Valentino V. The results of radiosurgical management of 139 single cerebral metastases. Acta Neurochir 1995;63:95.
125. Fukuoka S, Seo Y, Takanashi S, et al. Radiosurgery of brain metastases with the gamma knife. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg 1996;66:193.
126. Gerosa M, Nicolato A, Severi F, et al. Gamma knife radiosurgery for intracranial metastases: from local tumor control to increased survival. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg 1996;66:184.
127. Weltman E, Salvajoli JV, Oliveira VC, et al. Score index for stereotactic radiosurgery of brain metastases. J Radiosurg 1998;1:89.
128. Breneman JC, Warnick RE, Albright RE, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery for the treatment of brain metastases: results of a single institution series. Cancer 1997;79:551.
129. Shiau CY, Sneed PK, Shu HK, et al. Radiosurgery for brain metastases: relationship of dose and pattern of enhancement to local control. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:375.

130. Schoeggl A, Kitz K, Ertl A, et al. Prognostic factor analysis of multiple brain metastases after gamma knife radiosurgery: results of 97 patients. J Neurooncol 1999;42:169.
131. Young RF. Radiosurgery for the treatment of brain metastases. Semin Surg Oncol 1998;14:70.
132. Kondziolka D, Patel A, Lunsford LD, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery plus whole brain radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone for patients with multiple brain metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1999;45:427.
133. Mehta M, Noyes W, Craig B, et al. A cost-effectiveness and cost-utility analysis of radiosurgery vs. resection for single-brain metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:445.
134. Muacevic A, Kreth FW, Horstmann GA, et al. Surgery and radiotherapy compared with gamma knife radiosurgery in the treatment of solitary cerebral metastases of small diameter. J Neurosurg
1999;91:35.
135. Brandt RA, Cruz J, Scluajolitz J, et al. Neurosurgical treatment of brain metastases: microsurgery or radiosurgery. From the American Association of Neurological Surgeons Annual Meeting.
1996:328(abst).
136. Shu HK, Sneed PK, Shiau CY, et al. Factors influencing survival after gamma knife radiosurgery for patients with single and multiple brain metastases. Cancer J Sci Am 1996;2:335.
137. Bindal AK, Bindal RK, Hess KR, et al. Surgery versus radiosurgery in the treatment of brain metastases. J Neurosurg 1996;84:748.
138. Sneed PK, Lamborn KR, Forstner JM, et al. Radiosurgery for brain metastases: is whole brain radiotherapy necessary? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:549.
139. Grob JJ, Regis J, Laurans R, et al. Radiosurgery without whole brain radiotherapy in melanoma brain metastases. Club de Cancerologie Cutanee. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:1187.
140. Pirrzkall A, Debus J, Lohr F, et al. Radiosurgery alone or in combination with whole-brain radiotherapy for brain metastases. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3563.
141. Shirato H, Takamura A, Tomita M, et al. Stereotactic irradiation without whole brain irradiation for single brain metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:385.
142. Loeffler JS, Alexander E. Radiosurgery for the treatment of intracranial metastases. In: Alexander E, Loeffler JS, Lunsford D, eds. Stereotactic radiosurgery. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993.
143. Becker G, Duffner F, Kortmann R, et al. Radiosurgery for the treatment of brain metastases in renal cell carcinoma. Anticancer Res 1999;19:1611.
144. Mori Y, Kondziolka D, Flickinger JC, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery for cerebral metastatic melanoma: factors affecting local disease control and survival. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;42:581.
145. Lavine SD, Petrovitch Z, Cohen-Gadol AA, et al. Gamma knife radiosurgery for metastatic melanoma: an analysis of survival, outcome, and complications. Neurosurgery 1999;44:59.
146. Williams J, Enger C, Wharam M, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery for brain metastases: comparison of lung carcinoma vs. non-lung tumors. J Neurooncol 1998;37:79.
147. Bernstein M, Cabantog A, Laperriere N, et al. Brachytherapy for recurrent single brain metastases. Can J Neurol Sci 1995;22:13.
148. Schulder M, Black PM, Shrieve DC, et al. Permanent low-activity iodine-125 implants for cerebral metastases. J Neurooncol 1997;33:213.
149. McDermott MW, Cosgrove GR, Larson DA, et al. Interstitial brachytherapy for intracranial metastases. Neurosurg Clin North Am 1996;7:485.
150. Cosgrove GR, Hochberg FH, Zervas NT, et al. Interstitial irradiation of brain tumors using a miniature radiosurgery device: initial experience. Neurosurgery 1997;40:518.
151. Lesser GJ. Chemotherapy of cerebral metastases from solid tumors. Neurosurg Clin North Am 1996;7527.
152. Buckner JC. The role of chemotherapy in the treatment of patients with brain metastases from solid tumors. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1991;10:335.
153. Rosner D, Nemoto T, Lane WW. Chemotherapy induces regression of brain metastases in breast carcinoma. Cancer 1986;58:832.
154. Rosner D, Flowers A, Lane WW. Chemotherapy induces regression of brain metastases in breast carcinoma patients: update study. Proc Annu Meet Am Soc Clin Oncol 1993; A508(abst).
155. Franciosi V, Cocconi G, Michiara M, et al. Front-line chemotherapy with cisplatin and etoposide for patients with brain metastases from breast carcinoma, nonsmall cell lung carcinoma, or
malignant melanoma: a prospective study. Cancer 1999;85:1599.
156. Boogerd W, Dalesio O, Bais EM, et al. Response of brain metastases from breast cancer to systemic chemotherapy. Cancer 1992;69:972.
157. Kaba SE, Kyritsis AP, Hess K, et al. TPDC-FuHu chemotherapy for the treatment of recurrent metastatic brain tumors. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1063.
158. Fleming DR, Goldsmith GC, Stevens DA, Herzig RH. Dose-intensive chemotherapy for breast cancer with brain metastases: a case series. Am J Clin Oncol 1999;22:371.
159. Kristensen CA, Kristjansen PEG, Hansen HH. Systemic chemotherapy of brain metastases from small-cell lung cancer: a review. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1498.
160. Rustin GJ, Newlands ES, Begent RH, et al. Weekly alternating etoposide, methotrexate, and actinomycin/vincristine and cyclophosphamide chemotherapy for the treatment of CNS metastases
of choriocarcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:900.
161. Cooper KG, Kitchener HC, Parkin DE. Cerebral metastases from epithelial ovarian carcinoma treated with carboplatin. Gynecol Oncol 1994;55:318.
162. Cormio G, Gabriele A, Maneo A, et al. Complete remission of brain metastases from ovarian carcinoma with carboplatin. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1998;78:91.
163. Malacarne P, Santini A, Maestri A. Response of brain metastases from lung cancer to systemic chemotherapy with carboplatin and etoposide. Oncology 1996;53:210.
164. Minotti V, Crino L, Meacci ML, et al. Chemotherapy with cisplatin and tenoposide for cerebral metastases in non-small cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer 1998;20:93.
165. Boogerd W, van der Sande JJ, van Zandwijk N. Tenoposide sometimes effective in brain metastases from non-small cell lung cancer. J Neurooncol 1999;41:285.
166. Kelly K, Bunn PA Jr. Is it time to reevaluate our approach to the treatment of brain metastases in patients with non-small cell lung cancer? Lung Cancer 1998;20:85.
167. Pors H, Edler von Eyben F, Sorensen OS, et al. Long-term remission of multiple brain metastases with tamoxifen. J Neurooncol 1991;10:173.
168. Van der Gaast A, Alexieva-Figusch J, Vecht C, et al. Complete remission of a brain metastasis to third line hormonal treatment with megestrol acetate. Am J Clin Oncol 1990;13:507.
169. Markesbery WR, Brooks WH, Gupta GD, et al. Treatment for patients with cerebral metastases. Arch Neurol 1978;35:754.
170. Lagerwaard FJ, Levendag PC, Nowak PJ, et al. Identification of prognostic factors in patients with brain metastases: a review of 1292 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:795.
171. Hsiung CY, Leung SW, Wang CJ, et al. The prognostic factors of lung cancer patients with brain metastases treated with radiotherapy. J Neurooncol 1998;36:71.
172. Swift P, Phillips T, Martz K, et al. CT characteristics of patients with brain metastases treated in RTOG study 79-16. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:209.
173. Gaspar L, Scott C, Rotman M, et al. Recursive partitioning analysis (RPA) of prognostic factors in three Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) brain metastases trials. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1997;37:745.
174. Agboola O, Benoit B, Cross P, et al. Prognostic factors derived from recursive partition analysis (RPA) of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) brain metastases trials applied to
surgically resected and irradiated brain metastatic cases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:155.
175. Lagerwald FJ, Levendag PC, Nowak PJ, et al. Identification of prognostic factors in patients with brain metastases: a review of 1292 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:795.
176. Nguyen LN, Maor MH, Oswald MJ. Brain metastases as the only manifestation of an undetected primary tumor. Cancer 1998;83:2181.
177. Wronski M, Arbit E. Resection of brain metastases from colorectal carcinoma in 73 patients. Cancer 1999;85:12677.
178. Markesbery WR, Brooks WH, Gupta GD, Young AB. Treatment for patients with cerebral metastases. Arch Neurol 1978;35:754.

SECTION 52.2 Metastatic Cancer to the Lung
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 52.2
Metastatic Cancer to the Lung
JOE B. PUTNAM, JR.
Introduction
Historical Perspective
Identification of Pulmonary Metastases
Selection of Patients for Surgery
Preparation of the Patient for Metastasectomy
Surgical Incisions
Resection of Pulmonary Metastases
Survival Analysis
Results of Resection of Sarcomatous Pulmonary Metastases
Osteogenic Sarcoma
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
Childhood Sarcomas
Nonpulmonary Metastases from Sarcomas
Colorectal Neoplasms
Breast Carcinoma
Testicular Neoplasms
Gynecologic Neoplasms
Renal Cell Carcinoma
Melanoma
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Wilms' Tumor
Metastasis or Primary Bronchogenic Carcinoma?
Recurrent Pulmonary Metastases
Extended Resection of Pulmonary Metastases
Prognostic Indicators
Disease-Free Interval
Location and Stage of Primary Tumor
Number of Nodules on Preoperative Imaging Studies
Number of Metastases Resected
Tumor-Doubling Time
Resectability
Endobronchial or Nodal Metastases
Multivariate Analysis of Prognostic Indicators
Novel Treatment Strategies
Molecular and Genetic Strategies
Regional Drug Delivery to the Lung
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Metastases often represent diffuse systemic or untreatable spread of a primary neoplasm. However, selected patients with metastases isolated to the lung may be
resected safely and achieve prolonged survival compared to patients with unresectable metastases. In general, patients with complete resection of pulmonary
metastases have associated prolonged survival (regardless of histology) compared to patients with unresectable metastases. This observation is surprising because
surgery alone cannot control micrometastases. After complete resection of pulmonary metastases (including multiple and bilateral metastases), the long-term survival
rate (more than 5 years) may be expected in approximately one-third of patients.

HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
The history of resection of pulmonary metastases has been reviewed. 1,2 One of the earliest resections for pulmonary metastases was performed after resection of a
chest wall sarcoma in 1882 by Weinlechner. 1 In 1883, Kronlein 3 resected a recurrent chest wall sarcoma in a young woman. The patient lived for several years after
the surgery and died of recurrent disease. The first resections of a pulmonary metastasis as a separate procedure were described in 1926 by Divis 4 and in 1930 by
Torek.5 One of the first long-term survivors of any pulmonary metastasectomy was reported by Barney and Churchill 6 after resection of a metastasis from a patient with
renal cell carcinoma. Local control of the primary tumor was achieved, and the patient survived for 23 years after resection of the metastasis and died from unrelated
causes. Alexander and Haight 7 reported the first large series (25 patients) of metastasectomy in 1947. Multiple metastases from osteochondroma of the tibia were
resected in 1953 by Mannix, with the patient surviving more than 2 years. 1 Other authors8,9 and 10 have noted that certain clinical characteristics may enable clinicians to
identify patients with more favorable disease-free and overall survival rate prognoses. Since the late 1970s, resection of solitary and multiple pulmonary metastases
from sarcomas and various other primary neoplasms have been performed with long-term survival in up to 40% of patients so treated. 11

IDENTIFICATION OF PULMONARY METASTASES
Routinely, clinicians may evaluate patients for pulmonary metastases based on screening chest roentgenograms ( Fig. 52.2-1) obtained at various intervals after
resection of the primary. Although their specificity exceeds 95% when nodules consistent with metastases are identified, their sensitivity [compared to computed
tomography (CT) of the chest] is low, and this deficiency has prompted some clinicians to screen patients at high risk of recurrent metastases with CT chest scans
(Fig. 52.2-2). Duda et al.12 examined 130 patients with soft tissue and bone sarcomas. Sixty-six patients had no evidence of pulmonary metastases on chest x-ray
(CXR) and subsequently had linear tomography or CT of the chest performed. Only 1 of 53 patients with a normal CXR and no local recurrence had an abnormal
tomogram. Two patients of 13 with locally recurrent sarcoma and a normal CXR had an abnormal tomogram. The authors concluded that a screening CXR in the
absence of local recurrence is the most cost-effective test. However, tomograms should be performed for evaluation of the extent of disease (e.g., pulmonary
metastases) in patients with locally recurrent sarcomas. 12

FIGURE 52.2-1. Chest x-ray (posteroanterior and lateral views) of patient with multiple metastases from malignant fibrous histiocytoma. The number and location of
these metastases preclude resection.

FIGURE 52.2-2. Correlation of chest x-ray and computed tomography in a patient with pulmonary metastases from soft tissue sarcoma. Serial chest x-rays (A,B) and
corresponding computed tomography of the chest (C,D) were taken 4 months apart. The patient subsequently underwent median sternotomy and complete resection
of bilateral pulmonary metastases.

CT has replaced linear tomograms as the examination of choice in patients with suspected pulmonary metastases 13 (see Fig. 52.2-2). CT scans of the chest provide a
sensitive and specific noninvasive examination for patients with pulmonary metastases. 14,15 and 16 CT scans of the chest are sensitive and identify smaller nodules (3 to
7 mm) earlier than conventional linear tomography, although these nodules may not necessarily be metastases. Theoretically, earlier detection and treatment of
metastases can improve survival. However, in one study that detected occult metastases during median sternotomy with bilateral lung exploration, survival was not
improved over patients having a single thoracotomy, even though a significant percentage of patients would be expected to have occult metastases. 17
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is routinely performed to evaluate the local site of resection for recurrence. MRI is not routinely helpful for the radiographic
diagnosis of pulmonary metastases; rather, CT of the chest is preferred. 18 MRI is helpful when the pulmonary metastases are of great size and may abut or invade the
mediastinum.19 Pulmonary metastases from sarcomas “push” tissue rather than invade, and exploration is often required to determine the extent of host-tumor
interactions. The MRI may assist the surgeon in planning the approach needed for resection of these complex intrathoracic neoplasms.
Lucas et al. 20 examined the role of whole body [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG PET) in the diagnosis of pulmonary metastases from soft
tissue tumors. The authors made 70 comparisons between FDG PET and chest CT for the identification of lung metastases. The sensitivity of FDG PET was 86.7%
and the specificity was 100% (13 true-positive, two false-negative). CT of the chest had a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 96.4%. However, FDG PET identified
13 other sites of metastases. The authors suggested that FDG PET might be used for evaluation of local recurrence as well as pulmonary and extrathoracic
metastases. The use of all three modalities (CT of the chest, MRI, and FDG PET) may most accurately define the total extent of disease. The cost effectiveness of
these three examinations has not been studied. 20

SELECTION OF PATIENTS FOR SURGERY
Predictors for improved survival have been studied retrospectively for various tumor types to allow the clinician to identify selected patients who will optimally benefit
from pulmonary metastasectomy.8,11,21,22,23,24 and 25 These “prognostic indicators” are clinical, biologic, and molecular criteria, which describe the biologic interaction
between the metastases and the patient, and the association of the two with prolonged survival. These prognostic indicators may be used to identify those patients
who are most likely to benefit after resection of pulmonary metastases. Many patients with metastases will not benefit from surgery because of a biologically
aggressive tumor [e.g., extensive disease, a short disease-free interval (DFI) between control of their primary tumor and identification of unresectable pulmonary
metastases, and rapid metastatic growth]. Biologic characteristics also differ with the tumor histology.
Analysis of prognostic indicators in groups of patients with pulmonary metastases from heterogeneous tumors describe prolonged survival in patients with resectable
metastases.8,23 Within this group of resectable patients, longer DFI, longer tumor-doubling time (TDT), fewer numbers of metastases, and specific primary histology
may be favorably associated with improved survival. 8,21,22,24 A disadvantage of studying prognostic indicators in heterogeneous groups of neoplasms is the wide
variability in biologic characteristics of metastases, particularly among different primary neoplasms. The study of pulmonary metastases from patients with the same
tumor histology will provide better information on prognostic indicators that may influence survival after resection of these metastases.
Pastorino and colleagues 26 retrospectively reviewed more than 5000 patients with metastases treated with resection. Overall, actuarial 5-year survival was 36%,
10-year survival was 26%, and 15-year survival was 22%. Patients could generally be staged by the presence of favorable clinical indicators. These indicators
included a DFI of more than 3 years, a solitary pulmonary nodule, and germ cell histology. 26
Kandioler and colleagues 27 confirmed the biologically favorable characteristics of patients with pulmonary metastases who could be completely resected of their
disease. Overall median survival for a heterogeneous population of patients with pulmonary metastases was 60 months.

PREPARATION OF THE PATIENT FOR METASTASECTOMY
The patient's overall medical condition and prior treatment must be considered in planning resection of pulmonary metastases. As with any patient undergoing
thoracotomy, the patient must have sufficient physiologic reserves to withstand the anesthesia and the surgical procedure. Routine blood chemistries, chest
roentgenogram, and CT of the chest and abdomen are routinely performed. CT of the area of primary neoplasm and other studies may be obtained to evaluate the
site for local recurrence. 28 Only if appropriate system-related symptoms were identified, such as headaches or neurologic deficits, or bone pain, would a brain CT or
bone scan, respectively, be obtained. The evaluation of pulmonary function includes arterial blood gas measurement, xenon ventilation-perfusion lung scans, DLCO
(carbon monoxide diffusing capacity of the lungs), and maximal oxygen consumption (MVO 2). These studies are obtained to evaluate the patient's suitability for
general anesthesia and one-lung anesthesia and to estimate the potential for sufficient postoperative pulmonary reserve. Cardiac assessment (e.g.,
electrocardiogram, stress test) may be necessary for older patients. For patients previously treated with Adriamycin chemotherapy, an echocardiogram should be
obtained to evaluate ejection fraction as a measure of extent of cardiomyopathy.
If preoperative chemotherapy has been given, surgery should be delayed a minimum of 4 weeks or longer to allow for sufficient bone marrow recovery [for low
absolute leukocyte count (fewer than 5000 cells per mm 3) or low platelet count (fewer than 50,000 per mm 3)]. If marrow suppression precludes recovery of platelets,
then perioperative support with platelet transfusions may be required. Absolutely no smoking is permitted for a minimum of 2 weeks before surgery to enhance
pulmonary hygiene. Patients are encouraged to use an incentive spirometer several times daily. The patient is routinely admitted to the hospital the morning of
surgery.
In the operating room, two large-bore intravenous lines, a radial arterial line, and oxygen saturation monitors are placed. A central line is not routinely used for wedge
resections of the lung. A Foley catheter is placed routinely if the operation is expected to exceed 3 hours or if a thoracic epidural catheter is placed for perioperative
analgesia. The pertinent radiographic examinations (chest roentgenograms and CT scans of the chest) are displayed prominently in the operating room. After
intubation with a single-lumen endotracheal tube, a bronchoscopy is performed to evaluate the distal trachea and tracheobronchial tree. A double-lumen endotracheal
tube is used to facilitate sequential exposure and palpation of the lungs.

SURGICAL INCISIONS
Surgical procedures for resection include single thoracotomy, staged bilateral thoracotomy, or median sternotomy. These procedures have almost no mortality and
minimal morbidity. 11,17,29,30,31,32,33 and 34 The procedure chosen does not influence survival in patients resected of all disease; however, various advantages and
disadvantages are inherent to each approach ( Table 52.2-1). Patients with pulmonary metastases may also undergo multiple procedures for re-resection of
metastases, with prolonged survival after complete resection. 35,36 and 37

TABLE 52.2-1. Advantages and Disadvantages of Various Surgical Resections

For median sternotomy, the patient is positioned supine with the entire anterior thorax exposed from the neck to the umbilicus and laterally to the anterior axillary line.
The sternum is divided and the lungs sequentially deflated. The pulmonary ligament is divided to mobilize the lung completely. The deflated lung is palpated to
identify metastases, and these are resected with a surgical stapling device or other means (laser or Bovie electrocautery). The deflated right lung may be brought
completely into the field by placing folded sponges behind the hilum (for elevation). Metastases may be resected with the lung inflated, but the metastases must be
marked with a suture, and metastases deep within the parenchyma may be difficult to resect with wedge excision alone. The lung is reinflated.
Exposure of the left lower lobe through a median sternotomy may be more difficult than exposure of the other lobes because of the overlying heart. With appropriate
gentle traction on the pericardium, the left lower lobe can be exposed readily and brought into the operative field. Technical aids, such as an internal mammary artery
retractor, may provide for better exposure, particularly for basilar (left lower lobe) tumors or posterior hilar left lower lobe masses.
The posterolateral thoracotomy is a familiar and “standard” approach to pulmonary resection for carcinoma of the lung, although several authors encourage median
sternotomy for both resection of lung carcinoma 38 and for pulmonary metastases.17 In contrast to median sternotomy, posterolateral thoracotomy (either with division
of the latissimus dorsi or “muscle sparing”) may be more uncomfortable for the patient during the postoperative convalescence. Improvements in postoperative pain
management with intercostal nerve analgesia, thoracic epidural analgesia, and patient-controlled analgesia can control or even eliminate postoperative pain. The
posterior or posterolateral thoracotomy does provide better exposure for metastases located posterior and near the hilum, particularly on the left side, and limits the
surgeon to one hemithorax. In only rare circumstances would bilateral thoracotomies be performed in the same patient during the same operation.

RESECTION OF PULMONARY METASTASES
Patients with bilateral metastases may be explored with a median sternotomy, staged bilateral thoracotomies, or posterolateral thoracotomy. Prior evaluation of
patients with sarcomas and unilateral nodules demonstrated bilateral metastases in 38% to 60% of patients. 17,33 Postresection survival from median sternotomy and
from bilateral staged thoracotomies is similar. 17 Numbers of nodules, presence of unilateral or bilateral nodules, location of nodules, and the size of various nodules
can be identified and, if required, resected through a median sternotomy. A median sternotomy is recommended for the initial exploration and resection in patients
with unilateral or bilateral nodules, and in patients with pulmonary metastases from osteogenic sarcoma (OST) or soft tissue sarcoma (STS), and should be
considered the procedure of choice in patients with suspected bilateral metastases. 32,34 Multiple authors have advocated median sternotomy for lobectomy for
resection of primary carcinoma of the lung, 38,39 and 40 particularly in patients with impaired pulmonary function. A posterolateral thoracotomy approach may be required
for left lower lobectomy in patients with obesity, cardiomegaly, or an elevated left hemidiaphragm. 38
All nodules are resected with a margin of normal tissue. Nodules should not be “shelled out,” because viable tumor cells remain on the periphery of the resected area.
Often the decision of margin adequacy is the surgeon's alone, because lung parenchyma may become distorted around the nodule after resection, giving the illusion
of a “positive” or “close” margin. Mediastinal lymph nodes can also be examined for potentially rare involvement from pulmonary metastases. 10,41
Laser-assisted pulmonary resection using the neodymium:yttrium aluminum garnet laser may provide a better means of resecting pulmonary metastases than with the
surgical stapler. 29 Disadvantages of laser resection may include longer operating time and the potential for prolonged postoperative air leaks; however, use of the
laser may enhance preservation of lung parenchyma with less distortion. 42 Bovie electrocautery may also spare lung parenchyma by removing the metastases with
minimal distortion of remaining lung. Air leaks can be sealed by the use of fibrin glue. 43
Thoracoscopic resection or video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) using high-resolution video cameras may be helpful for diagnosis of metastases 44,45; however, its
usefulness is limited to metastases identified on the surface or outer one-third of the lung. Metastases within the lung parenchyma may be undetectable with this
technique. 46 Landreneau and associates 47 have described minimal morbidity and no mortality in 41 patients who underwent 52 thoracoscopic pulmonary resections
for small lesions (less than 3 cm) in the outer one-third of the lung parenchyma.
At this time, wedge resection of pulmonary metastases using VATS techniques has no proven advantage over resection using standard “open” techniques. Even
patients at increased physiologic risk from thoracotomy may tolerate a simple wedge resection of the lung without difficulty. VATS may be inadequate to detect all
metastases. McCormack and colleagues48 demonstrated that a combination of chest CT and VATS had a 56% failure rate to detect and resect all lesions. The
frequency of bilateral and occult metastases, particularly in sarcoma, precludes the use of thoracoscopy. Thoracoscopy may play a role in highly selected patients
with a solitary metastasis of nonsarcomatous origin with a long DFI.
Complications specific to thoracoscopic resection of pulmonary metastases have been described. The subjective risks of an incomplete, inadequate, or inconsistent
operation must be compared to the benefits of the VATS approach. The surgeon must consider the technical skills required, the desired objectives for the patient, the
instrumentation available for manipulation of the lung and other thoracic organs, and an assessment of the risk of a “closed” versus “open” procedure. An inadequate
resection of pulmonary metastases may cause more morbidity than the benefits achieved by VATS. The obvious chest wall implant from tumor seeding has
devastating effects on the patient. 49 Postoperative pain from periosteal injury affects some patients. Patient selection remains a critical step in the appropriate use of
VATS in thoracic surgical oncology. 50 VATS is considered appropriate for diagnosis or intrathoracic staging ( Fig. 52.2-3).

FIGURE 52.2-3. A: Computed tomography with a peripheral nodule in a 45-year-old man with a prior history of a superficial melanoma (Clark's level 2) removed from
his forearm 2 years previously. B: Video-assisted thoracic surgery resection was performed for complete resection of a granuloma. No other intrathoracic lesions were
noted. The patient has remained free of disease from his melanoma. An open procedure, thoracotomy, was avoided. Minimal scarring is present.

SURVIVAL ANALYSIS
Survival may be absolute or actuarial and is usually calculated from the time the surgical procedure is performed until death or the date of last follow-up. For example,
patients followed for a minimum of 5 years (survivors) or until death provide an absolute 5-year survival rate (number patients alive of all patients studied); patients
followed for varying periods (i.e., 2 to 7 years) may be evaluated using an actuarial survival curve. Actuarial survival and disease-free survival may be estimated using
the method of Kaplan and Meier. 51 Patients, grouped into two or more populations, are defined as meeting or not meeting an objective criteria and compared so that
differences in survival can be evaluated. Univariate analysis (or comparisons between groups) may be made using the generalized Wilcoxon test of Gehan 52 or
log-rank test; if sample sizes are small, the Thomas exact test 53 may be used. Cox's proportional hazards model 54 would be used to determine the relative effect of
various prognostic indicators on survival. Univariate analysis identifies the most important prognostic indicators. Multivariate analysis evaluates the predictive ability of
two or more prognostic indicators to provide additional prognostic value.

RESULTS OF RESECTION OF SARCOMATOUS PULMONARY METASTASES
An evaluation of prognostic indicators and results of resection of pulmonary metastasectomy is difficult, because numerous primary histologies are often combined to
discuss the value of pulmonary metastasectomy. Although identification of trends is helpful, analysis of factors that are associated with improved survival depend on a
single histology and a group of patients sufficiently large from which to draw conclusions. Prognostic indicators have been reviewed to assess their association,
singularly and in combination, with postresection survival in patients with pulmonary metastases and to assist clinically in better selecting appropriate patients for
resection of pulmonary metastases. Age and gender of the patient; histology, stage, grade, and location of the primary tumor; disease-free survival; number of
nodules on preoperative radiologic studies; whether the metastases are unilateral or bilateral, or synchronous or metachronous; and TDT all may be evaluated
preoperatively. In addition, resectability, technique of resection, nodal spread, the number of metastases and their location, and re-resection may be examined
postoperatively.
OSTEOGENIC SARCOMA
Pulmonary metastases from OST occur in up to 80% of patients who relapse after treatment for their primary neoplasm, whether or not they receive adjuvant
chemotherapy.55,56 and 57 Ninety percent of all recurrences occur within 3 years. 58 Because these metastases are often isolated to the lungs, surgical resection may
render a significant number of patients disease-free and enhance long-term survival. 44,55,56,59,60 and 61 The 5-year survival rate may range up to 50%. 62
Various groups have evaluated survival and prognostic factors in patients with pulmonary metastases from OST. Series from the National Cancer Institute in the early
1980s evaluated 80 patients with primary OST of the extremity. Forty-three patients developed pulmonary metastases. Thirty-nine patients were deemed resectable
and underwent one or more thoracic explorations for resection of their metastases. The 5-year survival rate was 38%. Various prognostic factors were analyzed.
Fewer number of nodules (three or less), longer DFI, resectable metastases, and fewer metastases identified and resected were associated with longer
postthoracotomy survival. A multivariate analysis did not find any combination of factors to be more predictive than the number of nodules identified on preoperative
tomograms.9 Surgical resectability was the only predictive factor associated with prolonged survival for recurrent OST. 55
Chemotherapy has been effective in prolonging the DFI between the surgical treatment of the primary tumor and the appearance of pulmonary metastases.
Chemotherapy offers no survival advantage in treating bulk metastases from OST; however, chemotherapy may prevent or cure micrometastatic disease not
amenable to surgery.60 Goorin et al. 55 reported on 113 patients treated with adjuvant therapy for primary OST. Adjuvant chemotherapy improved event-free survival
over surgery alone ( P = .00) for primary OST. Relapses occurred in the lungs in more than 80% of patients. Survival after relapse was not influenced by
chemotherapy. The only factor associated with improved survival after relapse (in the lungs) was complete resection of all metastases, rendering the patient
disease-free (P = .03).55
More recently, the value of chemotherapy for treatment of patients with pulmonary metastases from OST was examined by Antunes and colleagues 63 in a review of
198 patients operated on for OST of the limbs. The patients were treated with a combination of chemotherapy and surgery. The patients received three cycles of
preoperative chemotherapy with methotrexate, Adriamycin, and cisplatin. Patients underwent surgery approximately 1 month later and received chemotherapy
postoperatively (Adriamycin and ifosfamide). With chemotherapy and surgery for pulmonary metastases, the 3-year survival rate was 61%, compared to 79% in
patients without metastases. Of all patients with pulmonary metastases who died, they died of progressive pulmonary metastases. Chemotherapy to achieve a
biologic response, followed by surgery for “salvage” and local control, followed by more chemotherapy for micrometastatic disease, is a reasonable and effective
means of treatment of pulmonary metastases from OST. Patients with synchronous pulmonary metastases with their primary tumor have a worse survival rate, even
with chemotherapy and complete resection. 64,65
SOFT TISSUE SARCOMAS
STSs comprise a family of nonossifying malignant neoplasms arising from mesenchymal connective tissues. As with OST, local recurrence is common (20%), and
metastases are predominantly to the lungs 66 (Fig. 52.2-4). Casson et al. 67 evaluated determinants of 5-year survival in 58 patients who had complete resection and
who were followed until death or for a minimum of 5 years. Absolute 5-year survival was 25% (15 of 58 patients). Favorable prognostic factors included TDT of more
than 40 days, unilateral disease, three or fewer nodules identified on preoperative tomograms, two or fewer metastases resected, and tumor histology (median
survival of 33 months for malignant fibrous histiocytoma vs. 17 months for all others). Using multivariate analysis, the number of nodules (four or more) was the most
significant prognostic indicator. The addition of tumor histology (malignant fibrous histiocytoma) improved the predictive ability of this model. 67

FIGURE 52.2-4. A: Overall survival for patients with pulmonary metastases from soft tissue sarcoma. Patients were selected for surgery based on the potential for
complete resection of their metastases. The 5-year survival rate was 25%. (From ref. 103, with permission.) B: Survival for resectable and nonresectable patients with
pulmonary metastases from soft tissue sarcoma. Patients with complete resection have an associated survival advantage over patients with incomplete resection or
unresectable metastases. (From ref. 103, with permission.)

One study10 evaluated 67 patients with histologically documented pulmonary metastases from STS treated at the National Cancer Institute. Significant preoperative
predictors of enhanced survival included TDT (more than 20 days), number of metastases on preoperative tomograms (four or fewer nodules), and the DFI (more than
12 months). Predictive ability was improved when all three prognostic factors were combined. These patients represent the patients who have the best response (i.e.,
prolonged postresection survival) to pulmonary metastasectomy. 10,68
Patients with recurrent pulmonary metastases and complete resection also have improved postresection survival. 35,36 and 37 Increased age and female gender were
associated with an increased risk of death from disease in resected patients with recurrent pulmonary metastases in contrast to initial isolated pulmonary

metastases.36 Resectable patients and those with one metastasis have the best postresection survival. 35
Chemotherapy given before resection of pulmonary metastases has variable impact on postresection survival. In a study of patients with pulmonary metastases from
STS, 69 chemotherapy (doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and dacarbazine) was given before metastasectomy. Time from treatment initiation to thoracotomy ranged
from 1 to 57 months. Patients were grouped according to response. Five patients had a complete response (not surgically confirmed) and recurred 5 to 57 months
later. Seven patients had a partial response. Twelve patients had either no change or progression. Thirty-eight procedures were performed. Resectable patients had a
median survival of 30 months and an actuarial 5-year survival rate of 25% (see Fig. 52.2-4A). Complete resection was associated with an improved survival compared
to unresectable patients (see Fig. 52.2-4B). No differences were found in postresection survival between any groups. Postthoracotomy survival cannot be predicted
from initial response to this chemotherapy regimen. 69
Adriamycin and ifosfamide have activity in more than 20% of patients with metastatic sarcoma. In addition, the combination of both chemotherapeutic agents may be
greater than either single agent. The value of chemotherapy as an adjuvant is unknown, but several studies suggest a modest relapse-free and survival benefit. The
authors70 correctly note that patients with STSs should be studied in prospective clinical trials. Newer and more active chemotherapeutic agents are needed. 70
CHILDHOOD SARCOMAS
Primary sarcomas of childhood, such as Ewing's sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma, commonly spread to the lungs 71,72; however, other sites of metastasis are
frequent, with the exception of metastases associated with OST. Chemotherapy remains the major treatment modality for metastases in multiple sites. Pulmonary
resection for metastases may be required to document metastases in the lungs or to assess the tumor's response to chemotherapy or the viability of the remaining
tumor. Resection of all disease in the lung may enhance postresection survival in these children with resectable metastases. Children undergoing median sternotomy
for resection of pulmonary metastases from OST have almost a complete recovery of preoperative pulmonary function. 73
Ewing's sarcoma and OST metastasize preferentially to the lungs in children and may be resected. Patients with resectable pulmonary metastases from Ewing's
sarcoma have prolonged survival (actuarial 5-year survival rate, 15%; median, 28 months) compared to those patients explored but found to have unresectable
metastases (no survivors beyond 22 months; median survival, 12 months; P = .0047). Patients with four or fewer nodules have better survival than patients with four
or more nodules.74 Other studies71,72,75 support these findings.
OST metastasizes preferentially to the lungs. 61 Resection of pulmonary metastases from OST also results in prolonged postresection survival. 44,55,59,76,77 Adjuvant
therapy, such as chemotherapy 55,59,60,78 or lung irradiation, 79,80 may also be valuable, particularly for micrometastases. Post resection survival may be as high as 40%
at 5 years.44
NONPULMONARY METASTASES FROM SARCOMAS
Location of sarcomatous recurrence or metastases may vary by the original location or histology of the primary tumor. Biopsy of suspicious lesions is needed to
confirm the presence of local recurrence or distant metastases. A needle biopsy, or a core biopsy, may be considered. 81
Metastases from OST and STSs occur most commonly in the lungs but may also occur in other organs. Potter et al. 66 noted that only 53% of recurrences in those
patients completely resected of primary sarcoma recurred in the lung. In another early study 82 of 255 patients with STS treated with preoperative chemotherapy and
radiation followed by limb-sparing surgery, 85 patients developed metastatic disease (isolated local recurrence, 13; isolated pulmonary metastases, 43; lung and
other, 11; and multiple sites, 18). Poor 2-year survival rate (less than 10%) occurred in those patients with multiple recurrence sites. Resection of isolated metastases
appears to benefit a portion of patients with metastatic disease. 82 More recently, Billingsley et al. 83 noted that, in patients with primary extremity sarcoma, 23% of all
patients develop metastases. Of these patients, 73% develop pulmonary metastases. Other sites of metastasis include the skin and soft tissues of the head and neck,
trunk, and extremities.83
In contrast to the expected pulmonary site for metastases, myxoid liposarcomas may metastasize preferentially to extrathoracic sites. In one study from the University
of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, 84 102 patients with myxoid tumors had 33 distant recurrences. Extrapulmonary soft tissue sites were the most
common (e.g., the retroperitoneum, chest wall, pleura, pericardium, pelvic sidewall, and soft tissue of the back; n = 31), whereas pulmonary metastases were rare (n =
2). In this study, pleomorphic tumors more frequently recurred in the lung (10 of 18 patients recurred: three of ten extrapulmonary, seven of ten pulmonary) than did
the myxoid tumors (P <.05; myxoid vs. pleomorphic). 84
Angiosarcoma is a high-grade aggressive sarcoma with local recurrences likely in 20% of patients and distant metastases in 49%. The location of metastases is
commonly the lungs, lymph nodes, soft tissues, bone, liver, and other sites. 85
In another study, 86 of 981 patients with sarcoma, 65 were noted as having developed hepatic metastases. Most patients (n = 61) had an intraabdominal primary site of
high-grade leiomyosarcoma. Even with resection in 14 patients, all recurred; however, a median survival of 30 months was achieved. The opportunity for complete
resection of hepatic metastases is rare, but complete resection of hepatic metastases must be considered to obtain a survival advantage. 87
In patients with brain metastases from STSs, complete resection may also provide a survival advantage (14 months vs. 6 months) compared to patients with
incomplete resection. The authors concluded that complete resection of brain metastases from STS patients with a good performance status (Karnofsky performance
score greater than 70) is associated with a good prognosis. Even if synchronous lung metastases were present, complete resection of all metastases provided the
patient with a survival of 11.8 months (median). 88

COLORECTAL NEOPLASMS
Colorectal metastases commonly spread to local or regional nodes or are trapped in the liver through the portal venous drainage. Patients with prior colorectal
neoplasms have had pulmonary metastases resected with prolonged postresection survival. An absolute distinction cannot be made between a single carcinomatous
metastasis and a primary bronchogenic carcinoma except by direct visual comparison between the two neoplasms. As with other isolated pulmonary metastases,
patients with pulmonary metastases from colorectal carcinoma may be resected safely with low morbidity and mortality and long-term survival (see Fig. 52.2-4).
Reports89,90,91,92,93 and 94 describe 5-year survival rates ranging from 21% up to 50% after resection of pulmonary metastases from colon carcinoma. Differences in age
and gender of the patient and location, grade, and stage of the primary colorectal cancer are not associated with either improved or worsened survival after resection
of these metastases. Patients with metachronous liver lesions excised for cure may also be candidates for resection of pulmonary metastases. Sauter et al. 95
evaluated 49 patients with isolated pulmonary metastases (n = 18) and hepatic metastases (n = 31). Patients with pulmonary metastases had a 47% 5-year survival
rate compared to patients with hepatic metastases (5-year survival, 19%). Of 1578 patients treated for colon and rectal cancer, 117 of 1013 patients with rectal
carcinoma (11.5%) and 20 of 565 patients with colon cancer (3.5%) recurred in the lungs. 96 In 66 patients who underwent resection of pulmonary metastases from
colorectal adenocarcinoma, patients with a solitary metastasis had a longer postresection survival than others. 94 The 5-year survival rate was 38% in both studies. In
another study of 62 patients, 93 metastases less than 3 cm in diameter were associated with improved survival.
In a series from the Mayo Clinic, McAfee et al. 97 reported 139 patients who underwent resection of pulmonary metastases from colorectal carcinoma. Operative
mortality was 1.4%. Overall, the 5-year survival rate was 30.5%, and the median follow-up was 7 years. Patients with a solitary pulmonary metastasis and those with a
preoperative carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level of less than 4.0 ng/mL had a better postthoracotomy than others. A longer DFI and metastases smaller than 3 cm
in diameter were not associated with improved survival.
Patients with resection of colon metastases from the lung and the liver have a survival advantage with complete resection. 98,99 Forty-eight patients had both liver and
lung metastases. Twenty-five patients underwent resection of these metastases, and the remaining 23 patients did not. Median survival was longer after resection of
the last metastasis than in those individuals who did not undergo resection (16 months vs. 6 months; P <.001). The authors also noted that patients with
metachronous resections survived longer than patients with synchronous resections (median of 70 months vs. 22 months; P <.001). Robinson et al. 100 noted that the
ideal candidate for resection is a patient younger than 50 years old with a solitary liver metastasis and a 4-year interval between the colorectal cancer resection and
the occurrence of the pulmonary metastasis. The patient least suited for resection is one older than 70 years with multiple liver metastases and synchronous

disease. 100 In addition, a French study 101 examined 43 patients who previously had undergone complete resection of hepatic metastasis and then developed
pulmonary metastases. The median survival was 19 months, and the 5-year survival was estimated to be 11%. Patients with a CEA of more than 0.5 ng/mL had a
significantly lower probability of survival than those with lower levels (less than 0.5 ng/mL; P = .0018).101
In patients with colorectal metastases to both liver and lung, complete resection is generally associated with improved survival. Whether the liver metastases occur
first and then the lung metastases, or whether lung metastases occur first followed by liver metastases, complete surgical resection tends to be associated with longer
survival. Poorer survival was noted in those patients who cannot be completely resected or who are deemed unresectable without operation. Of the total population of
patients with colorectal metastases, those individuals with completely resectable lung or hepatic metastases represent a small percentage and one with the most
favorable “biology” of the tumor. The surgeon can take advantage of this biologically favorable subset of patients. With complete resection of both lung and hepatic
metastases, survival may be enhanced.

BREAST CARCINOMA
Patients with metastases from breast carcinoma usually do poorly because metastases occur in multiple sites. Patanaphan and colleagues 102 described 145 patients
with metastatic breast carcinoma (145 of 558; 26%) in whom bone (51%), lung (17%), brain (16%), and liver (6%) metastases occurred. Overall median survival was
12 months for patients with lung metastases, most of whom were treated with palliative chemotherapy, irradiation, or both. 102 Lanza and associates 103 reviewed 44
women with a prior history of breast cancer who underwent pulmonary resection for new pulmonary lesions. Seven patients were excluded who had benign nodules (n
= 3) or unresectable metastases (n = 4). In 37 resectable patients, actuarial 5-year survival was 50% ( Fig. 52.2-5). A DFI of more than 12 months was associated with
a longer median survival (82 months) and 5-year survival rate (57%) compared with patients with a DFI of less than 12 months (15 months median; 0% 5-year
survival; P = .004). Estrogen receptor–positive status tended to be associated with a longer postthoracotomy survival ( P = .098). Another favorable prognostic factor
included positive receptor status of the primary tumor that was associated with improved 3-year survival (61%) compared to negative receptor status (38%). Resection
of solitary metastasis resulted in a 35% 5-year survival rate compared to 0% for resection of five or more metastases. 104 More recently, favorable selection of patients
has enabled survival to increase up to 62% at 5 years in one series. 105

FIGURE 52.2-5. Overall survival for patients after resection of pulmonary metastases from breast carcinoma. The 5-year survival rate was 50%.

Staren et al.174 evaluated 33 patients treated with surgical resection of pulmonary metastases from breast carcinoma and compared the results to that of 30 patients
treated primarily with systemic chemotherapy and hormonal therapy. Patients having complete resection of metastases had a better median survival than patients with
medical therapy, particularly when single nodules were compared (58 months median survival vs. 34 months, respectively). The 5-year survival rate in patients treated
with some surgical resection was 36%, compared to 11% in those patients treated with other than surgical treatment.

TESTICULAR NEOPLASMS
Nonseminomatous testicular tumors can be diagnosed by the occurrence of new pulmonary nodules identified on CXR or by CT scan. 106,107 Metastatic testicular
seminoma most commonly is identified as mediastinal nodal enlargement. CT scan, therefore, is more accurate in diagnosis of seminomatous metastases than plain
chest roentgenograms.108
Cytoreductive surgery for disseminated nonseminomatous germ cell tumors of the testis may be performed after chemotherapy for removal of residual metastatic
disease. The response to chemotherapy may be assessed when no further reduction in size of the nodules is noted. The majority of patients require retroperitoneal
lymph node dissections (69%), although thoracotomies may be required in 18% of patients. Several authors 109,110 and 111 evaluated 80 patients with germ cell tumors
and lung metastases treated with chemotherapy and subsequent surgery. Thirty-five percent (n = 28) achieved complete response after chemotherapy. Thirty-six
patients with partial response underwent surgery for resection of metastases in the abdomen (n = 17), the lungs (n = 15), or both (n = 4). Twenty-seven of 36 patients
achieved complete response after both chemotherapy and surgery. Carter et al. 112 noted that extensive pulmonary metastases (unresectable metastases) are a
predictor of ultimate treatment failure.
Liu and colleagues 113 evaluated the role of pulmonary metastasectomy for testicular germ cell tumors over a 28-year period. The typical patient was young (median
age, 27 years) and complete resection generally could be accomplished. Most of these patients had already undergone chemotherapy. Viable metastasis was present
in 44% of the patients; 25% had metastasis to other sites after resection of their pulmonary metastasis. Overall, the 5-year survival rate was 68%, and for the patients
diagnosed after 1985, the survival rate was 82%. The authors of the study noted that extrathoracic metastasis (nonpulmonary visceral sites) as well as the presence
of viable tumor in the resected specimens were adverse prognostic indicators. Of interest was the observation that preoperative tumor markers were normal in the
majority of patients and that patients with multiple metastases predominated. Approximately one-half of the patients had synchronous presentation of their metastasis,
and 66% of patients had no viable tumor; mature teratoma and fibrosis/necrosis were equally represented. Patients with metastases outside the pulmonary
parenchyma and elevated tumor markers from viable tumor had a worse prognosis. Parenchymal resection not only removed all identifiable disease but also provided
a measure as to the effectiveness of their chemotherapy treatment. 113 More recently, 28 patients with pulmonary metastases from germ cell/testicular neoplasms were
treated with bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin. Complete response was achieved in 21 patients (75%), and a complete response was achieved in 11 patients.
Resection of residual mass was necessary in 12 patients with normalized serum markers. Overall, the cure rate was 89.3%. Resection of the residual mass was
recommended for histology and may modify subsequent treatment. 114
The value of repeat surgical resection of pulmonary metastasis has not been as well studied as individuals having only one resection. In one report of 396 operations
in 330 patients, 27 the authors identified a subgroup of 35 patients who had undergone reoperation for pulmonary metastasis. In this group, the 5- and 10-year survival
rates were 48% and 28%, respectively. The favorable prognostic factors included a DFI of more than 1 year. No survival advantage was associated with histology
(epithelial carcinoma, osteosarcoma, or STS). In this patient population, successful repeat surgical resections of pulmonary metastasis and survival advantage are
probably related to a favorable biologic behavior. The specific criteria for this favorable behavior are not yet known. 27

GYNECOLOGIC NEOPLASMS
Fuller and colleagues 115 from the Massachusetts General Hospital reviewed a 40-year experience of treating 15 patients with pulmonary metastases from gynecologic
cancer, which included primary tumors involving the cervix (6), endometrium (3), and ovary (2), as well as two uterine sarcomas and two choriocarcinomas. The
5-year survival rate was 36%. Lesions less than 4 cm in diameter and a DFI of more than 36 months were associated with prolonged survival.
Levenback et al. 116 reviewed 45 patients with pulmonary metastases from uterine sarcomas. Most patients (71%) had unilateral lesions, and 51% had only one lesion.
The 5-year survival rate was 43%. Unilateral metastases or fewer numbers of metastases were not significantly associated with prolonged survival.
Kumar181 reviewed 97 patients with metastatic gestational trophoblastic disease; chemotherapy was the treatment of choice. Selective thoracotomy in patients with

solitary lung metastases reduced the treatment time and need for further aggressive chemotherapy. Overall, 2-year survival after diagnosis was 65%. A DFI of less
than 1 year was associated with poorer survival.
Barter et al. 117 studied 2116 patients with primary cervical malignancy between 1969 and 1984 and found 88 patients (4.16%) with pulmonary lesions consistent with
metastases. Prognosis was poor with chemotherapy only (median survival, 8 months; only 2 of 88 long-term survivors). Imachi et al. 118 identified 50 of 817 patients
(6.1%) treated for carcinoma of the uterine cervix who developed pulmonary metastases. Eighty-one percent of patients had local recurrence or other metastases, and
chemotherapy was given. The authors suggest that surgery may be considered for patients with pulmonary metastases without extrathoracic metastases. Resection of
pulmonary metastases from squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the uterine cervix also has been described. 119

RENAL CELL CARCINOMA
Various series have examined the value of resection of pulmonary metastases from renal cell carcinoma. Five-year survival rates have ranged from 21% 120 to 60%.121
Schott et al. 122 reported 39 of 938 patients (4.1%) with pulmonary metastases after nephrectomy for renal carcinoma. Patients with pulmonary metastases less than 2
cm in diameter and limited to one site had prolonged survival and DFI compared to other patients. Dernevik and colleagues 120 resected 33 patients for pulmonary
metastases and evaluated them with a minimum follow-up period of 5 years or until death. Longer DFI (more than 1 year) was better than a shorter DFI (less than 1
year). Pogrebniak and associates 121 from the National Cancer Institute reported 23 patients who underwent resection of pulmonary metastases from renal cell
carcinoma, 18 of which had previous interleukin-2–based immunotherapy. Resectable patients (15 of 23; 65%) had a longer survival (mean, 49 months; median not
yet reached) compared to unresectable patients (median, 16 months, P = .02). Postresection survival did not depend on tomogram nodules, resected nodules, or the
DFI.123
The 5-year survival rate after complete resection was 44% in one study of 50 patients undergoing resection of metastases from renal cell carcinoma. 123 Twelve
patients had repeat resection (42% 5-year survival after second resection). Complete resection was the most important factor associated with 5-year survival.

MELANOMA
The overall biologic behavior of melanoma cannot be predicted. Most commonly, pulmonary metastases occur in addition to other visceral sites, and overall long-term
survival is poor. Immunotherapy has been used with some favorable results. In the rare patients who present with isolated pulmonary metastases, resection may be
associated with long-term survival. 124 Current 5-year survival ranges from 4.5% to 25%. In a large series of 1521 patients with American Joint Committee on Cancer
stage IV melanoma, 5-year survival was only 4% (median survival, 8.3 months). 125,126
Gorenstein and colleagues 127 evaluated 56 patients with histologically proven pulmonary metastases from melanoma. The overall postresection survival was 25% at 5
years. Patients with earlier primary-stage melanoma, or patients with metastases to the lungs as the first site of metastasis, had longer postresection survival than
other patients. Location of the primary tumor, histology, thickness, Clark level, nodal metastases, TDT, or type of resection of the primary tumor was not associated
with improved postresection survival.
Harpole et al. 128 evaluated pulmonary metastases in 945 patients with melanoma out of a population of 7564 melanoma patients. Bilateral and multiple metastases
were present in the majority of these patients. Multivariate predictors of survival included complete resection, DFI, chemotherapy, two or fewer metastases, negative
lymph nodes, and histologic type. The 5-year survival rate for all patients (n = 7564) was 4%, in contrast to 20% 5-year survival in patients with resection of pulmonary
metastases.

SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA
Patients with primary SCC outside the lungs frequently have disease metastasize to the lungs. These secondary lung neoplasms may be resected with subsequent
survival benefit. 129 With solitary pulmonary lesions after treatment of primary SCC elsewhere in the body, the origin of the lesion is uncertain. The lesion may
represent a solitary metastasis, a primary bronchogenic carcinoma, or a benign process. The recommended treatment for such a solitary lesion is bronchoscopy
thoracic exploration and excisional biopsy. If a SCC is identified, a lobectomy and mediastinal lymph node dissection should be performed in the same manner as if
the lesion were a second primary neoplasm. Less desirable is a generous wedge excision and mediastinal lymph node dissection, because local control may be
limited.
Finley et al. 130 described factors associated with improved survival in patients with SCC metastases from head and neck cancers. These included complete resection,
control of primary tumor, early stage of the head and neck primary, one nodule on CXR, and longer DFI (more than 2 years) from primary resection. Complete
resection of all malignant disease was associated with a 5-year survival rate of 29%. The number of nodules was not significantly associated with survival. In eight
patients with more than one nodule, median survival was 2 years, and no 5-year survivors were reported. Therefore, the benefits of resection of multiple pulmonary
metastases from head and neck primary SCC are not completely clear. In another study of 44 patients, 131 5-year survival after pulmonary resection was 43%. Mazer et
al.131 noted that single nodules, primary tumor stage, or absence of locoregional recurrence were not associated with enhanced survival. The presence of mediastinal
disease was associated with the worst outcome.
Lefor and colleagues 132 attempted to correlate primary carcinomas of the head and neck with subsequent development of pulmonary metastases or second primary
lung carcinomas. An algorithm was used that considered the DFI, histology, radiographic findings, and characteristics of the lung lesion, as well as the identification of
mediastinal lymphadenopathy. The authors recommended that treatment of indeterminate lesions be treated as primary lung carcinomas (e.g., with lobectomy and
mediastinal lymph node dissection) because this strategy provides the best local control of the disease and potential for cure.

WILMS' TUMOR
Patients with Wilms' tumor may present with pulmonary metastases at diagnosis or relapse after initial treatment. 133 Early diagnosis using CT may identify metastases
in up to 36% of patients. 134 Pulmonary metastases may be resected safely from children with Wilms' tumor. 71,135 In contrast, 136 211 patients entered on the National
Wilms' Tumor Study whose initial relapse was in the lungs did not show any survival advantage to resection of pulmonary metastases compared to treatment with
chemotherapy and whole lung irradiation.

METASTASIS OR PRIMARY BRONCHOGENIC CARCINOMA?
Pulmonary metastases from sarcomas or other distinctive nonpulmonary neoplasms are usually easy to diagnose. However, solitary carcinomatous metastasis from
breast or colon, or SCC metastasis from head and neck primary tumors, are difficult to distinguish from primary lung carcinoma. Patients with two or more pulmonary
nodules can be considered to have metastases. In tumors without a propensity for bilaterality (e.g., nonsarcomatous histology), a solitary pulmonary nodule may be
approached through a lateral thoracotomy incision. A generous wedge excision or lobectomy and mediastinal lymph node dissection should be performed. The final
pathology may suggest histology amenable to adjuvant therapy.
Traditionally, a comparison of the primary neoplasm and the lung nodule using light microscopy has been the only method for determining origin of the lung nodule or
neoplasm. Electron microscopy137 or specific molecular or genetic characteristics may identify more precisely the origin of such neoplasms. Monoclonal antibodies
can assist in discriminating between primary bronchogenic adenocarcinoma and colon carcinoma metastatic to the lung. 138 Characteristics of amplified K-ras
oncogene expression present in the primary tumor can be used to identify pulmonary metastases. 139 Monoclonal antibodies can identify colorectal carcinoma
metastases.140 The monoclonal antibody was not sufficient to discriminate primary lung from metastatic adenocarcinoma. Flow cytometry and DNA analysis have been
used95,141,142 to describe primary carcinomas of the lung and to distinguish them from metastases.
Algorithms have been developed 132 for patients with SCCs of the head and neck who develop pulmonary nodules after treatment. Characteristics of metastases and of
primary lung carcinoma were examined in an attempt to better direct subsequent therapy.

RECURRENT PULMONARY METASTASES
If pulmonary metastases recur in the lungs, resection can again be accomplished safely with prolonged postthoracotomy survival. 143 Patients are screened by the
criteria in Table 52.2-2. Patients with pulmonary metastases may undergo multiple procedures for re-resection of metastases, with prolonged survival after complete
resection. Several studies have reviewed results of multiple resections for recurrent pulmonary metastases. Rizzoni and associates 37 described 29 patients with
recurrent pulmonary metastases from STSs who underwent two or more resections of pulmonary metastases. Patients with favorable tumor biology [resectable
metastases, longer TDT, three or fewer nodules, longer DFI (more than 6 months)] had longer survival. No operative mortality occurred, and the complication rate was
7.5%. Median survival was 14.5 months and overall 5-year survival was 22%. Resectable patients had a median survival of 24 months. These findings were confirmed
by Casson and colleagues, 35 who described 39 patients with adult STSs. Thirty-four patients were resectable (median survival, 28 months; 5-year survival,
approximately 32%). Unresectable patients had a median survival of 7 months. Survival after resection of a solitary recurrent metastasis was 65 months (median)
compared to patients with two or more nodules (median, 14 months; P = .01).

TABLE 52.2-2. Criteria for Resection of Pulmonary Metastases

Repeat resection of pulmonary metastasis may salvage a subset of pediatric patients with sarcomatous histologies, including OST, nonrhabdomyosarcoma STS, and
Ewing's sarcoma. At the National Cancer Institute, 70 patients underwent at least one reoperation between 1965 and 1995. 144 Osteosarcoma predominated (36
patients), and single-wedge resection was the most common operation performed (84%). The authors noted that complete resection was the most important and
favorable prognostic factor. Patients with complete resection had improved survival compared with those who were incompletely resected. Median survival was 2.25
years; in resectable patients, median survival was 5.6 years, compared to 0.7 year in unresectable patients ( P <.0001). The authors concluded that an aggressive
surgical approach in patients with small numbers of nodules, a longer DFI, and the ability to obtain a complete resection is warranted and associated with prolonged
survival. 144

EXTENDED RESECTION OF PULMONARY METASTASES
Pneumonectomy or other extended resection of pulmonary metastases may be performed safely in selected patients with associated long-term disease-free survival.
Fewer than 3% of all patients undergoing resection of pulmonary metastases will require an extended resection. Pneumonectomy or en bloc resection of pulmonary
metastases with chest wall or other thoracic structures, such as diaphragm, pericardium, and superior vena cava, have been performed in a small number of patients
with good results. 145 In this series of pneumonectomy (n = 19) and other extended resection (n = 19), the 5-year actuarial survival rate was 25%. Mortality was 5% and
occurred in those patients having pneumonectomy often after multiple prior wedge resections for metastases.
Pneumonectomy is performed infrequently for resection of pulmonary metastases. The need for pneumonectomy may be evident in the large metastases that involve
the majority of one lung and that compress the heart and shift the mediastinum ( Fig. 52.2-6). In a French study of 42 patients treated over 10 years, 146 29 patients
underwent pneumonectomy for sarcoma; 12 for carcinoma; and one for a lipoma. Most metastases were centrally located. Two postoperative deaths occurred, and
four patients had major complications; five patients (12%) had recurrences in the residual lung. The median survival was only 6.25 months, and the 5-year survival
rate was 16%. The standard surgical mortality for operations for pulmonary metastases is less than 1%. Patients with large centrally located metastases may require
pneumonectomy for complete resection. Although mortality for pneumonectomy for pulmonary metastases corresponds to mortality for other histologies, the 5-year
survival rate of only 16% demands careful selection of patients before resection. The authors suggest that young patients, those with a long DFI, and those with
normal CEA levels (e.g., patients with metastases from colorectal carcinoma) be considered as potential candidates for pneumonectomy for pulmonary metastases. 146

FIGURE 52.2-6. A: Chest roentgenogram with a massive pulmonary metastasis from malignant fibrous histiocytoma compressing and shifting the mediastinum into the
contralateral hemithorax. Compression of the heart and airway is noted. Impairment of ventilation to the involved hemithorax and secondary compression of the
contralateral hemithorax further impairs ventilation. B: Chest computed tomography with a massive pulmonary metastasis from osteogenic sarcoma compressing the
superior vena cava, right heart, and right lung, and shifting the mediastinum into the left chest. Resection often requires extracorporeal support to allow
decompression and manipulation of the heart and pulmonary veins. An approach to the right pulmonary artery and veins and the right mainstem bronchus via a
median sternotomy allows for control of the pulmonary vasculature and airway before removal of the tumor.

The value of pneumonectomy was also examined by retrospective review of the International Registry of Lung Metastases. 147 Of the 5206 patients who were enrolled,
133 patients (2.6%) had undergone pneumonectomy for pulmonary metastases between 1962 and 1994. Eighty-four percent of these patients underwent complete
resection, and the 30-day mortality rate was 3.6%. Five-year survival was 20% with complete resection. For incomplete resection, the perioperative mortality was
19%, and the majority did not survive beyond 5 years. The authors identified favorable prognostic factors of single metastasis, negative mediastinal lymph nodes, and
complete resection. The authors concluded that pneumonectomy might be performed safely with adequate long-term survival. 147
Intraatrial extension of sarcoma through the pulmonary vein is rare but may also be safely treated with pulmonary resection and pneumonectomy, and resection of the
tumor from the left atrium (Fig. 52.2-7). Extracorporeal circulatory support (cardiopulmonary bypass) is required. 148

FIGURE 52.2-7. Metastatic synovial cell sarcoma. The patient has an azygoesophageal mass abutting the left atrium and esophagus without direct invasion. The
mass is confirmed by chest computed tomography (A) and magnetic resonance imaging (B). Pulmonary metastases were resected. Using hypothermic circulatory
arrest, the patient also underwent complete resection of the posterior wall of the left atrium en bloc with the metastasis. Patch reconstruction of the posterior wall of
the left atrium was required.

PROGNOSTIC INDICATORS
Predictors for improved survival have been studied retrospectively for various tumor types to identify selected patients who will benefit from pulmonary
metastasectomy (Table 52.2-3). These prognostic indicators are clinical, biologic, and molecular criteria that describe the biologic interaction between the metastases
and the patient and their association with prolonged survival. These prognostic indicators may be used to identify those patients who are most likely to benefit after
resection of pulmonary metastases.

TABLE 52.2-3. Prognostic Indicators Associated with Better Postresection Survival for Patients with Pulmonary Metastases from Various Tumor Types a

Analyses of prognostic indicators in groups of patients with pulmonary metastases from heterogeneous tumors describe prolonged survival in patients with resectable
metastases. Resectable patients, longer DFI, longer TDT, fewer numbers of metastases, or solitary metastasis are prognostic indicators generally associated with
prolonged postresection survival. Prognostic indicators should be studied in patients with the same primary tumor to define their association with postresection
survival. A wide variability exists in the characteristics of pulmonary metastases from different primary neoplasms and the subsequent survival of patients with these
metastases. The study of prognostic indicators from the same primary neoplasm yields the most precise information on association with postresection survival. Age or
gender does not usually influence postthoracotomy survival. Neither age nor gender should be considered as prognostic factors.
DISEASE-FREE INTERVAL
The DFI extends from resection of the primary tumor until pulmonary metastases are detected. A short DFI may indicate a poor prognosis because metastases may
be multiple and growing rapidly. A longer DFI may represent a less biologically aggressive tumor and correlate with a longer postresection survival.
The DFI may also be defined as the time between resection of the pulmonary metastases and recurrence of metastases in the lungs or elsewhere. DFIs of more than
12 months are usually associated with improved survival in patients with breast carcinoma, 149 colorectal carcinoma,90,94 OST,150 STS,10,25 and renal cell carcinoma. 151
Patients with pulmonary metastases from OST and a DFI of more than 6 to 12 months demonstrated a survival advantage 9,150 in contrast to others who demonstrated
no such advantage.25,60,61,152 In STS, a DFI of more than 12 months10,25,68 was usually associated with a better postresection survival. Evaluation of patients with
Ewing's sarcoma74 did not reveal differences in survival based on DFI.
LOCATION AND STAGE OF PRIMARY TUMOR
Postresection survival is not usually influenced by the specific anatomic location of the primary tumor. Postresection survival in patients with more advanced stage
primary neoplasms does not usually differ from patients with earlier stage disease. Still, initial or primary stage may suggest the biologic aggressiveness of the tumor.
Schlappack et al. 149 found that a negative nodal status predicted improved postresection survival for patients with breast cancer. McCormack et al. 153 found better
postthoracotomy survival in patients with Duke's class A colorectal carcinoma (5-year survival, 37.5%) compared to Duke's class C patients (5-year survival, 15%),
although this was not confirmed by the study by McAfee et al. 97
NUMBER OF NODULES ON PREOPERATIVE IMAGING STUDIES
CT has replaced linear tomograms as the examination of choice in patients with suspected pulmonary metastases. CT of the chest provides a sensitive and specific
study for patients with pulmonary metastases. CT of the chest is sensitive but less specific than conventional linear tomography or CXR. Nodules may or may not
represent metastases. Theoretically, earlier detection and treatment of metastases can improve survival. Laterality (unilateral or bilateral) of pulmonary metastases
does not directly influence postresection survival; the number of nodules is a more precise prognostic indicator.
In patients with OST or STS, better postresection survival was found in patients with fewer number of nodules identified on preoperative full lung linear tomograms or
CT scans of the chest. CT scans are more sensitive than other studies, and better survival was noted in those patients with OST with fewer than four nodules 61 and
those with STS with five or fewer nodules. 68 Full lung tomograms were performed in several older studies. Patients with OST with fewer than four metastases
identified on full lung tomography, 9,25 or four or fewer nodules in STS, 10,25,68 had better postresection survival than those individuals with more nodules. Unilateral or
bilateral pulmonary metastases do not influence postresection survival; the number of nodules is a more precise prognostic indicator.
NUMBER OF METASTASES RESECTED
Nodules on preoperative roentgenograms usually correspond to the number of metastases present; however, not all nodules are malignant. 126 Usually, the fewer the
number of pulmonary metastases at the time of resection, the better the postresection survival. Postresection survival after complete resection of pulmonary
metastases has been examined in patients with pulmonary metastases from multiple histologies to evaluate the influence of number of metastases resected. Patients
with OST and with fewer than six 150 or four or fewer 9 metastases resected, or patients with STS and fewer than 16 metastases, 10 had a better postresection survival
than patients with more metastases resected. Postresection survival for number of metastases resected after complete resection has been examined in patients with

pulmonary metastases from OST152 or STS.68,154
TUMOR-DOUBLING TIME
TDT is calculated 155,156 and 157 by measuring the same metastasis on similar studies (e.g., serial chest roentgenograms) separated by a minimum of 10 to 14 days. The
most rapidly growing nodule is selected, and changing diameters of the metastasis is plotted on semilogarithmic paper. A formula may be used to precisely calculate
TDT:

where ln is the natural logarithm, M1 is the first measurement, M2 is the second measurement, and T is the number of days between measurements.
Metastases from the same primary may or may not grow at similar rates, because differing growth rates between tumor nodules reflect heterogeneity of metastases
from the primary. The TDT indirectly reveals the biologic nature or aggressiveness of the metastases, which influences the patient's postresection survival. The TDT
may vary based on the size of the metastasis itself or the effect of chemotherapy.
Pulmonary metastases initially grow exponentially, and the growth rate slows with increased size. Growth may also be expressed by “Gompertzian” kinetics, 158,159
which considers a gradual diminution in TDT with time and increased size of the metastasis. TDT only reflects the growth rate during the interval measured.
TDT is not a significant predictor of postresection survival in patients with pulmonary metastases from OST. 9,25 TDT of more than 20 days in patients with STS
resulted in a better postthoracotomy survival than those patients with rapid TDTs (less than 20 days). One study of patients with STS 68 found no correlation between
TDT and postresection survival.

RESECTABILITY
Complete resection consistently correlates with improved postthoracotomy survival for patients with pulmonary metastases. If pulmonary metastases cannot be
completely removed, the postthoracotomy survival is shortened for patients with most tumors in comparison to those individuals completely resected.
ENDOBRONCHIAL OR NODAL METASTASES
Involvement of mediastinal lymph nodes from pulmonary metastases is rare. Udelsman et al. 41 noted that patients with endobronchial metastases from adult STSs
have a short postresection survival rate. Seven of 11 patients with endobronchial metastases lived 6 months or less. Jablons et al. 68 found that survival is poor (5
months) in patients with mediastinal lymph node involvement from STSs compared to patients without nodal metastases (31 months).

MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS OF PROGNOSTIC INDICATORS
Multivariate analysis of prognostic factors may define which patients are most likely to achieve long-term survival. Separate prognostic variables may be combined to
enhance the predictive value for survival. Jablons et al. 68 noted the DFI, gender, resectability, and truncal location in patients with pulmonary metastases from STSs to
be the best predictors of postthoracotomy survival. Putnam et al. 10 noted that a DFI of more than 12 months, a TDT of more than 20 days, and four or fewer nodules
on preoperative full lung tomograms as a single prognostic indicator was the best predictor of postthoracotomy survival in patients with pulmonary metastases from
STSs. Roth et al. 25 compared prognostic indicators in patients with OST and STS. TDT, number of metastases on preoperative full lung tomograms, and DFI, when
combined, improved predictive ability over any single indicator or pair of indicators.

NOVEL TREATMENT STRATEGIES
MOLECULAR AND GENETIC STRATEGIES
Molecular events associated with pulmonary metastases have been identified in patients with OST. Amplification of the MDM2 gene (the human homologue of a
murine p53 binding protein) may regulate p53 protein function by inactivating the protein and deregulating or enhancing tumor growth. In one small study, 160 no
detectable MDM2 gene amplification in primary OST was found compared to 14% of metastases (three pulmonary metastases, one local metastasis). Amplification of
MDM2 may be associated with metastases and tumor progression in OST.
In STS, alterations (mutations) of the p53 gene (a tumor suppressor gene) may provide for uncontrolled cell growth. Restoration of normal p53 (wild-type) in STS may
provide for more controlled cell growth or even programmed cell death (apoptosis). In one in vitro study,161 transduction of wild-type p53 into STSs bearing mutated
p53 genes altered the malignant potential of the tumor. After transduction, transfected cells expressed wild-type p53, decreased cell proliferation, decreased colony
formation in soft agar, and demonstrated decreased tumor formation in severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice in vivo. The ability to restore wild-type p53
function in STS in vitro and in SCID mice may ultimately be considered as future therapy for patients with STS. 161 Other investigations have shown that pulmonary
metastases from STS can develop from clonal expansion of primary tumor cells bearing p53 mutations. 162 Examination of tissue specimens from OST and STS
demonstrated p53 mutations in 25% of OSTs, yet in only 1 of 16 metastases. 163 Use of specific molecular markers may provide better selection of patients who will
optimally benefit from surgery, chemotherapy, or other treatment modalities.
Other targets of gene therapy may include those chemotherapy-resistant tumors or those tumors with greater propensity for metastatic spread. Overexpression of the
MDR1 gene product P glycoprotein is an important predictor of poor prognosis in osteosarcoma patients treated with chemotherapy. In these patients, the MDR
phenotype is not de novo more aggressive (e.g., more metastatic); however, the poor outcome of patients with the MDR phenotype related to P glycoprotein
overexpression is related to the cells' failure to respond to cytotoxic drugs. 164
In another study, 165 42% of patients with OSTs had metastases that expressed ErbB-2 and correlated with early development of pulmonary metastasis and poor
survival. ErbB-2, therefore, may enhance tumor growth and promote metastases. These authors recommended that ErbB-2 might be considered as a prognostic factor
for patients with osteosarcoma.
ErbB-2 protein is expressed in approximately 42% of osteosarcomas. It has been strongly correlated with early pulmonary metastasis and poor survival. ErbB-2 may
enhance tumor aggressiveness and metastasis in osteosarcoma. As a marker, ErbB-2 may be useful as a prognostic indicator. 165
A rodent model of OST has been developed with high propensity for pulmonary metastases. In this metastatic tumor model, matrix metalloproteinase 2 activity is
increased as well as expression of vascular endothelial growth factor messenger RNA. 166
Gene therapy strategies are being studied also. Systematic delivery of recombinant adenovirus (Ad) vector containing herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (TK)
gene [with an Osteocalcin (OC) promoter (Ad-OC-TK)] supplemented with the prodrug acyclovir (ACV) may be an effective strategy for osteosarcoma metastases to
the lungs.167
Preclinical studies noted that, after Ad-OC-beta-gal administration, specific beta-gal expression was found in tumor cells deposited in the lung. Induced rat osteogenic
lung metastases in nude rats were followed by systemic Ad-OC-TK and intraperitoneal ACV treatment, resulting in decreased numbers of tumor nodules and
increased survival in treated animals compared to controls. Ad-OC-TK/ACV may be a future treatment for pulmonary metastases from osteosarcoma. Other preclinical
treatment methods may include nebulized interleukin-2 liposomes. 168
REGIONAL DRUG DELIVERY TO THE LUNG

Novel drug delivery systems may enhance chemotherapy treatment effects by increasing drug concentration in lung tissues and minimizing systemic effects of such
treatment. In many patients, surgery has been used as salvage treatment after maximal chemotherapy response has been achieved. Systemic toxicity may limit the
amount of chemotherapy given to an individual patient. Regional drug delivery to the lungs minimizes systemic drug delivery, preventing systemic toxicity; however,
this technique dramatically increases the drug delivered to the lung over a short period. This isolated lung perfusion technique may be done unilaterally, with the
contralateral lung serving as an “oxygenator” while the ipsilateral lung is perfused. Bilateral pulmonary perfusion may be performed, although extracorporeal
circulatory support (cardiopulmonary bypass) is required.
Preclinical studies in rodents with experimental pulmonary metastases from a methylcholanthrene-induced syngeneic sarcoma 169,170 and 171 have shown that
chemotherapy may be delivered to pulmonary tissue in significantly higher concentrations than with systemic delivery. Minimal to no systemic toxicity was noted. In
this model, isolated single-lung perfusion with Adriamycin (doxorubicin) was safe and effective. 169 This simple microsurgical technique was performed in rats. After left
thoracotomy, the pulmonary artery and pulmonary vein were isolated and clamped. The lung was flushed before infusing doxorubicin. The infusion occurred over 10
minutes. Then the drug was flushed out before removing the cannulas and restoring circulation. A perfusion concentration of 255 mg/L caused less general toxicity
than a systemic dose equivalent to 75 mg/m2, the extraction ratio was 58%, and the pulmonary tissue concentration of Adriamycin was 25-fold higher than with the
systemic dose. The technique was also effective: Nine of ten animals treated at 320 mg/L had complete eradication of metastases from an implanted
methylcholanthrene-induced sarcoma. 169
Previous clinical studies of lung perfusion 172,173 have shown higher drug concentrations in pulmonary tissue, although clinical tumor response has been mixed.
Johnston and colleagues 173 described a continuous perfusion of the lungs with Adriamycin (single lung, continuous perfusion) as a safe technique and subsequently
applied their technique clinically. Drug concentrations in normal lung and tumor generally increased with higher drug dosages. Two of eight patients had major
complications: One patient developed pneumonia and sternal dehiscence; one patient developed respiratory failure 4 days after lung perfusion. No objective
responses occurred (none of four patients with sarcomas). Although continuous perfusion with a pump circuit offers some theoretical advantages, the technique is
cumbersome, equipment-intensive, and time-consuming, and it has the inherent problem of the incompatibility of Adriamycin and heparin. Pass et al. 172 examined
isolated single-lung perfusion with tumor necrosis factor-a, interferon-g, and moderate hyperthermia for patients with unresectable pulmonary metastases. No hospital
deaths occurred, and a short-term (less than 6 months) decrease in nodule size was noted in 3 of 15 patients.
Phase I studies in patients with unresectable pulmonary metastases from STS are currently under way at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. A
paucity of effective treatment and the potential for high drug concentrations for pulmonary metastases by regional lung perfusion warrants further clinical study.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Meade RH. A history of thoracic surgery. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas Publisher, 1961.
2. Martini N, McCormack PM. Evolution of the surgical management of pulmonary metastases. Chest Surg Clin North Am 1998;8:13.
3. Kronlein RU. Ueber Lungenchirirugie. Berlin Klin Wschr 1884;9:129.
4. Divis G. Ein Beitrag zur operativen Behandlung der Lungengeschwultse. Acta Chir Scand 1927;62:329.
5. Torek F. Removal of metastatic carcinoma of the lung and mediastinum: suggestions as to technic. Arch Surg 1930;21:1416.
6. Barney JD, Churchill EJ. Adenocarcinoma of the kidney with metastasis to the lung cured by nephrectomy and lobectomy. J Urol 1939;42:269.
7. Alexander J, Haight C. Pulmonary resection for solitary metastatic sarcoma and carcinoma. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1947;85:129.
8. Takita H, Edgerton F, Karakousis C, et al. Surgical management of metastases to the lung. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1981;194:191.
9. Putnam JB, Roth JA, Wesley MN, Johnston MR, Rosenberg SA. Survival following aggressive resection of pulmonary metastases from osteogenic sarcoma: analysis of prognostic factors. Ann
Thorac Surg 1983;38:516.
10. Putnam JB, Roth JA, Wesley MN, Johnston MR, Rosenberg SA. Analysis of prognostic factors in patients undergoing resection of pulmonary metastases from soft tissue sarcomas. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 1984;87:260.
11. Pastorino U, Buyse M, Friedel G, et al. Long-term results of lung metastasectomy: prognostic analyses based on 5206 cases. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1997;113:37.
12. Duda RB, Beatty JD, Kokal WA, Riihimaki DU, Terz JJ. Radiographic evaluation for pulmonary metastases in sarcoma patients. J Surg Oncol 1988;38:271.
13. Davis SD. CT evaluation for pulmonary metastases in patients with extrathoracic malignancy. Radiology 1991;180:1.
14. Chang AE, Schaner EG, Conkle DM, et al. Evaluation of computed tomography in the detection of pulmonary metastases: a prospective study. Cancer 1979;43:913.
15. Schaner EG, Chang AE, Doppman JL, et al. Comparison of computed and conventional whole lung tomography in detecting pulmonary nodules: a prospective radiologic-pathologic study. AJR
Am J Roentgenol 1978;131:51.
16. Pass HI, Dwyer A, Makuch R, Roth JA. Detection of pulmonary metastases in patients with osteogenic and soft-tissue sarcomas: the superiority of CT scans compared with conventional linear
tomograms using dynamic analysis. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1261.
17. Roth JA, Pass HI, Wesley MN, et al. Comparison of median sternotomy and thoracotomy for resection of pulmonary metastases in patients with adult soft-tissue sarcomas. Ann Thorac Surg
1986;42:134.
18. Lise M, Rossi CR, Alessio S, Foletto M. Multimodality treatment of extra-visceral soft tissue sarcomas M0: state of the art and trends. Eur J Surg Oncol 1995;21:125.
19. Wyttenbach R, Vock P, Tschappeler H. Cross-sectional imaging with CT and/or MRI of pediatric chest tumors. Eur Radiol 1998;8:1040.
20. Lucas JD, O'Doherty MJ, Wong JC, et al. Evaluation of fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography in the management of soft-tissue sarcomas. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1998;80:441.
21. Takita H, Merrin C, Didolkar MS, et al. The surgical management of multiple lung metastases. Ann Thorac Surg 1992;24:359.
22. Morrow CE, Vassilopoulos PP, Grage TB. Surgical resection for metastatic neoplasms of the lung: experience at the University of Minnesota Hospitals. Cancer 1980;45:2981.
23. Wright JO III, Brandt B III, Ehrenhaft JL. Results of pulmonary resection for metastatic lesions. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1982;83:94.
24. Mountain CF, McMurtrey MJ, Hermes KE. Surgery for pulmonary metastasis: a 20-year experience. Ann Thorac Surg 1984;38:323.
25. Roth JA, Putnam JB, Wesley MN, Rosenberg SA. Differing determinants of prognosis following resection of pulmonary metastases from osteogenic and soft tissue sarcoma patients. Cancer
1985;55:1361.
26. Long-term results of lung metastasectomy: prognostic analyses based on 5206 cases. The International Registry of Lung Metastases. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1997;113:37.
27. Kandioler D, Kromer E, Tuchler H, et al. Long-term results after repeated surgical removal of pulmonary metastases. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;65:909.
28. Sauter ER, Hoffman JP, Eisenberg BL. Diagnosis and surgical management of locally recurrent soft-tissue sarcomas of the extremity. Semin Oncol 1993;20:451.
29. Kodama K, Doi O, Higashiyama M, Tatsuta M, Iwanaga T. Surgical management of lung metastases. Usefulness of resection with the neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet laser with median
sternotomy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1991;101:901.
30. Pastorino U, Valente M, Gasparini M, et al. Median sternotomy and multiple lung resections for metastatic sarcomas. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1990;4:477.
31. Kelm C, Achatzy R, Ritscher R, et al. Surgery of lung metastases. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1988;36:118.
32. Vogt-Moykopf I, Meyer G. Surgical technique in operations on pulmonary metastases. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1986;34(2):125.
33. Johnston MR. Median sternotomy for resection of pulmonary metastases. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1983;85:516.
34. Meng RL, Jensik RL, Kittle CF, Faber LP. Median sternotomy for synchronous bilateral pulmonary operations. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1980;80:7.
35. Casson AG, Putnam JB, Natarajan G, et al. Efficacy of pulmonary metastasectomy for recurrent soft tissue sarcoma. J Surg Oncol 1991;47:1.
36. Pogrebniak HW, Roth JA, Steinberg SM, Rosenberg SA, Pass HI. Reoperative pulmonary resection in patients with metastatic soft tissue sarcoma [see comments]. Ann Thorac Surg
1991;52:197.
37. Rizzoni WE, Pass HI, Wesley MN, Rosenberg SA, Roth JA. Resection of recurrent pulmonary metastases in patients with soft-tissue sarcomas. Arch Surg 1986;121:1248.
38. Urschel HC Jr, Razzuk MA. Median sternotomy as a standard approach for pulmonary resection. Ann Thorac Surg 1986;41:130.
39. Watanabe Y, Ichihashi T, Iwa T. Median sternotomy as an approach for pulmonary surgery. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1988;36:227.
40. Asaph JW, Keppel JF. Midline sternotomy for the treatment of primary pulmonary neoplasms. Am J Surg 1984;147:589.
41. Udelsman R, Roth JA, Lees D, Jelenich SE, Pass HI. Endobronchial metastases from soft tissue sarcoma. J Surg Oncol 1986;32:145.
42. Landreneau RJ, Haxelrigg SR, Johnson JA, et al. Neodymium:yttrium-aluminum garnet laserassisted pulmonary resections. Ann Thorac Surg 1991;51:973.
43. Vincent JG, van de Wal HJ, Meijer JM, van Herwaarden C, Lacquet LK. Postponing the limits. Multiple and repeated pulmonary metastasectomy by parenchyma sparing electrocautery
excision. Helv Chir Acta 1990;57:295.
44. Snyder CL, Saltzman DA, Ferrell KL, Thompson RC, Leonard AS. A new approach to the resection of pulmonary osteosarcoma metastases. Results of aggressive metastasectomy. Clin Orthop
1991;Sept:247.
45. LoCicero J III, Frederiksen JW, Hartz RS, Michaelis LL. Laser-assisted parenchyma-sparing pulmonary resection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1989;97:732.
46. Landreneau RJ, Herlan DB, Johnson JA, et al. Thorascopic neodymium:yttrium-aluminum garnet laserassisted pulmonary resection. Ann Thorac Surg 1991;52:1176.
47. Landreneau RJ, Hazelrigg SR, Ferson PF, et al. Thoracoscopic resection of 85 pulmonary lesions. Ann Thorac Surg 1992;54:415.
48. McCormack PM, Bains MS, Begg CB, et al. Role of video-assisted thoracic surgery in the treatment of pulmonary metastases: results of a prospective trial. Ann Thorac Surg 1996;62:213.
49. Walsh GL, Nesbitt JC. Tumor implants after thoracoscopic resection of a metastatic sarcoma. Ann Thorac Surg 1995;59:215.
50. Celik M, Halezeroglu S, Senol C, et al. Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery: experience with 341 cases. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1998;14:113.
51. Kaplan EL, Meier P. Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observations. J Am Stat Assoc 1958;53:457.
52. Gehan EA. A generalized Wilcoxon test for comparing arbitrarily singly censored samples. Biometrika 1965;522:203.
53. Thomas DG. Exact and asymptotic methods for the combination of 2 2 tables. Comput Biomed Res 1975;8:423.
54. Cox DR. Regression models and life-tables. J R Stat Soc B 1972;34:187.
55. Goorin AM, Shuster JJ, Baker A, et al. Changing pattern of pulmonary metastases with adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with osteosarcoma: results from the multiinstitutional osteosarcoma
study. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:600.
56. Al Jilaihawi AN, Bullimore J, Mott M, Wisheart JD. Combined chemotherapy and surgery for pulmonary metastases from osteogenic sarcoma. Results of 10 years experience. Eur J
Cardiothorac Surg 1988;2:37.
57. Huth JF, Eilber FR. Patterns of recurrence after resection of osteosarcoma of the extremity. Arch Surg 1989;124:122.
58. Korholz D, Verheyen J, Kemperdick HF, Gobel U. Evaluation of follow-up investigations in osteosarcoma patients: suggestions for an effective follow-up program. Med Pediatr Oncol
1998;30:52.
59. Pastorino U, Gasparini M, Tavecchio L, et al. The contribution of salvage surgery to the management of childhood osteosarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1357.

60. Belli L, Scholl S, Livartowski A, et al. Resection of pulmonary metastases in osteosarcoma. A retrospective analysis of 44 patients. Cancer 1989;63:2546.
61. Meyer WH, Schell MJ, Kumar AP, et al. Thoracotomy for pulmonary metastatic osteosarcoma. An analysis of prognostic indicators of survival. Cancer 1987;59:374.
62. Saeter G, Hoie J, Stenwig AE, et al. Systemic relapse of patients with osteogenic sarcoma. Prognostic factors for long term survival. Cancer 1995;75:1084.
63. Antunes M, Bernardo J, Salete M, et al. Excision of pulmonary metastases of osteogenic sarcoma of the limbs. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1999;15:592.
64. Bacci G, Briccoli A, Mercuri M, et al. Osteosarcoma of the extremities with synchronous lung metastases: long-term results in 44 patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. J Chemother
1998;10:69.
65. Harris MB, Gieser P, Goorin AM, et al. Treatment of metastatic osteosarcoma at diagnosis: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3641.
66. Potter DA, Glenn J, Kinsella T, et al. Patterns of recurrence in patients with high-grade soft-tissue sarcomas. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:353.
67. Casson AG, Putnam JB, Natarajan G, et al. Five-year survival after pulmonary metastasectomy for adult soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer 1992;69:662.
68. Jablons D, Steinberg SM, Roth J, et al. Metastasectomy for soft tissue sarcoma. Further evidence for efficacy and prognostic indicators. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1989;97:695.
69. Lanza LA, Putnam JB Jr, Benjamin RS, Roth JA. Response to chemotherapy does not predict survival after resection of sarcomatous pulmonary metastases. Ann Thorac Surg 1991;51:219.
70. O'Byrne K, Steward WP. The role of chemotherapy in the treatment of adult soft tissue sarcomas. Oncology (Huntingt) 1999;56:13.
71. Di Lorenzo M, Collin PP. Pulmonary metastases in children: results of surgical treatment. J Pediatr Surg 1988;23:762.
72. Lembke J, Havers W, Doetsch N, Rohm N, Sadony V. Long-term results following surgical removal of pulmonary metastases in children with malignomas. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
1986;34:137.
73. Paul KP, Toomes H, Vogt Moykopf I. Lung volumes following resection of pulmonary metastases in paediatric patientsa retrospective study. Eur J Pediatr 1990;149:862.
74. Lanza LA, Miser JS, Pass HI, Roth JA. The role of resection in the treatment of pulmonary metastases from Ewing's sarcoma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1987;94:181.
75. Winkler K. Surgical treatment of pulmonary metastases in childhood. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1986;34:133.
76. Ellis PM, Tattersall MH, McCaughan B, Stalley P. Osteosarcoma and pulmonary metastases: 15-year experience from a single institution. Aust N Z J Surg 1997;67:625.
77. Beattie EJ, Harvey JC, Marcove R, Martini N. Results of multiple pulmonary resections for metastatic osteogenic sarcoma after two decades. J Surg Oncol 1991;46:154.
78. Yamaguchi H, Nojima T, Yagi T, et al. The alteration in the pattern of pulmonary metastasis with adjuvant chemotherapy in osteosarcoma. Int Orthop 1988;12:305.
79. Burgers JM, van Glabbeke M, Busson A, et al. Osteosarcoma of the limbs. Report of the EORTC-SIOP 03 trial 20781 investigating the value of adjuvant treatment with chemotherapy and/or
prophylactic lung irradiation. Cancer 1988;61:1024.
80. Zaharia M, Caceres E, Valdivia S, Moran M, Tejada F. Postoperative whole lung irradiation with or without Adriamycin in osteogenic sarcoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:907.
81. Dodd LG, Chai C, McAdams HP, Layfield LJ. Fine needle aspiration of osteogenic sarcoma metastatic to the lung. A report of four cases. Acta Cytologica 1998;42:754.
82. Huth JF, Elber FR. Patterns of metastatic spread following resection of extremity soft-tissue sarcomas and strategies for treatment. Semin Surg Oncol 1988;4:20.
83. Billingsley KG, Lewis JJ, Leung DH, et al. Multifactorial analysis of the survival of patients with distant metastasis arising from primary extremity sarcoma. Cancer 1999;85:389.
84. Pearlstone DB, Pisters PW, Bold RJ, et al. Patterns of recurrence in extremity liposarcoma: implications for staging and follow-up. Cancer 1999;85:85.
85. Meis-Kindblom JM, Kindblom LG. Angiosarcoma of soft tissue: a study of 80 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1998;22:683.
86. Jaques DP, Coit DG, Casper ES, Brennan MF. Hepatic metastases from soft-tissue sarcoma. Ann Surg 1995;221:392.
87. Hafner GH, Rao U, Karakousis CP. Liver metastases from soft tissue sarcomas. J Surg Oncol 1995;58:12.
88. Bindal RK, Sawaya RE, Leavens ME, Taylor SH, Guinee VF. Sarcoma metastatic to the brain: results of surgical treatment. Neurosurgery 1994;35:185; discussion, 190.
89. Murray KD. Excision of pulmonary metastasis of colorectal cancer. Semin Surg Oncol 1991;7:157.
90. Brister SJ, de Varennes B, Gordon PH, Sheiner NM, Pym J. Contemporary operative management of pulmonary metastases of colorectal origin. Dis Colon Rectum 1988;31:786.
91. Roberts DG, Lepore V, Cardillo G, et al. Long-term follow-up of operative treatment for pulmonary metastases. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1989;3:292.
92. Scheele J, Altendorf Hofmann A, Stangl R, Gall FP. Pulmonary resection for metastatic colon and upper rectum cancer. Is it useful? Dis Colon Rectum 1990;33:745.
93. Goya T, Miyazawa N, Kondo H, et al. Surgical resection of pulmonary metastases from colorectal cancer: 10-year follow-up. Cancer 1989;64:1418.
94. Mansel JK, Zinsmeister AR, Pairolero PC, Jett JR. Pulmonary resection of metastatic colorectal adenocarcinoma. A ten year experience. Chest 1986;89:109.
95. Sauter ER, Bolton JS, Willis GW, Farr GH, Sardi A. Improved survival after pulmonary resection of metastatic colorectal carcinoma. J Surg Oncol 1990;43:135.
96. Pihl E, Hughes ES, McDermott FT, Johnson WR, Katrivessis H. Lung recurrence after curative surgery for colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1987;30:417.
97. McAfee MK, Allen MS, Trastek VF, et al. Colorectal lung metastases: results of surgical excision. Ann Thorac Surg 1992;53:780.
98. Murata S, Moriya Y, Akasu T, Fujita S, Sugihara K. Resection of both hepatic and pulmonary metastases in patients with colorectal carcinoma. Cancer 1998;83:1086.
99. McCormack PM, Burt ME, Bains MS, et al. Lung resection for colorectal metastases. 10-year results. Arch Surg 1992;127:1403.
100. Robinson BJ, Rice TW, Strong SA, Rybicki LA, Blackstone EH. Is resection of pulmonary and hepatic metastases warranted in patients with colorectal cancer? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
1999;117:66.
101. Regnard JF, Grunenwald D, Spaggiari L, et al. Surgical treatment of hepatic and pulmonary metastases from colorectal cancers. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;66:214.
102. Patanaphan V, Salazar OM, Risco R. Breast cancer: metastatic patterns and their prognosis. South Med J 1988;81:1109.
103. Lanza LA, Natarajan G, Roth JA, Putnam JB Jr. Long-term survival after resection of pulmonary metastases from carcinoma of the breast. Ann Thorac Surg 1992;54:244; discussion, 248.
104. Friedel G, Linder A, Toomes H. The significance of prognostic factors for the resection of pulmonary metastases of breast cancer. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1994;42:71.
105. Simpson R, Kennedy C, Carmalt H, McCaughan B, Gillett D. Pulmonary resection for metastatic breast cancer. Aust N Z J Surg 1997;67:717.
106. Lien HH, Lindskold L, Fossa SD, Aass N. Computed tomography and conventional radiography in intrathoracic metastases from non-seminomatous testicular tumor. Acta Radiol 1988;29:547.
107. Tesoro-Tess JD, Pizzocaro G, Zanoni F, et al. Reliability of diagnostic imaging after orchiectomy alone in follow-up of clinical stage I testicular carcinoma: excessive cost with potential risk.
Lymphology 1987;20:161.
108. Williams MP, Husband JE, Heron CW. Intrathoracic manifestations of metastatic testicular seminoma: a comparison of chest radiographic and CT findings. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1987;149:473.
109. Kulkarni RP, Reynolds KW, Newlands ES, et al. Cytoreductive surgery in disseminated non-seminomatous germ cell tumours of testis. Br J Surg 1991;78:226.
110. Van Schil P, Vaneerdeweg W, Schoofs E, Van Oosterom A, Bourgeois N. Surgical excision of pulmonary metastases from primary testicular cancercase reports. Acta Chir Belg 1989;89:175.
111. Carsky S, Ondrus D, Schnorrer M, Majek M. Germ cell testicular tumours with lung metastases: chemotherapy and surgical treatment. Int Urol Nephrol 1992;24:305.
112. Carter GE, Lieskovsky G, Skinner DG, Daniels JR. Reassessment of the role of adjunctive surgical therapy in the treatment of advanced germ cell tumors. J Urol 1987;138:1397.
113. Liu D, Abolhoda A, Burt ME, et al. Pulmonary metastasectomy for testicular germ cell tumors: a 28-year experience. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;66:1709.
114. Schnorrer M, Ondrus D, Carsky S, et al. Management of germ cell testicular cancer with pulmonary metastases. Neoplasma 1996;43:47.
115. Fuller AF Jr, Scannell JG, Wilkins EW Jr. Pulmonary resection for metastases from gynecologic cancers: Massachusetts General Hospital experience, 19431982. Gynecol Oncol 1985;22:174.
116. Levenback C, Rubin SC, McCormack PM, et al. Resection of pulmonary metastases from uterine sarcomas. Gynecol Oncol 1992;45:202.
117. Barter JF, Soong SJ, Hatch KD, Orr JW, Shingleton HM. Diagnosis and treatment of pulmonary metastases from cervical carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 1990;38:347.
118. Imachi M, Tsukamoto N, Matsuyama T, Nakano H. Pulmonary metastasis from carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Gynecol Oncol 1989;33:189.
119. Seki M, Nakagawa K, Tsuchiya S, et al. Surgical treatment of pulmonary metastases from uterine cervical cancer. Operation method by lung tumor size. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
1992;104:876.
120. Dernevik L, Berggren H, Larsson S, Roberts D. Surgical removal of pulmonary metastases from renal cell carcinoma. Scand J Urol Nephrol 1985;19:133.
121. Pogrebniak HW, Haas G, Linehan WM, Rosenberg SA, Pass HI. Renal cell carcinoma: resection of solitary and multiple metastases. Ann Thorac Surg 1992;54:33.
122. Schott G, Weissmuller J, Vecera E. Methods and prognosis of the extirpation of pulmonary metastases following tumor nephrectomy. Urol Int 1988;43:272.
123. Fourquier P, Regnard JF, Rea S, Levi JF, Levasseur P. Lung metastases of renal cell carcinoma: results of surgical resection. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1997;11:17.
124. Ollila DW, Morton DL. Surgical resection as the treatment of choice for melanoma metastatic to the lung. Chest Surg Clin North Am 1998;8:183.
125. Barth A, Wanek LA, Morton DL. Prognostic factors in 1,521 melanoma patients with distant metastases. J Am Coll Surg 1995;181:193.
126. Pogrebniak HW, Stovroff M, Roth JA, Pass HI. Resection of pulmonary metastases from malignant melanoma: results of a 16-year experience. Ann Thorac Surg 1988;46:20.
127. Gorenstein LA, Putnam JB, Natarajan G, Balch CA, Roth JA. Improved survival after resection of pulmonary metastases from malignant melanoma [see comments]. Ann Thorac Surg
1991;52:204.
128. Harpole DH Jr, Johnson CM, Wolfe WG, George SL, Seigler HF. Analysis of 945 cases of pulmonary metastatic melanoma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1992;103:743.
129. Nibu K, Nakagawa K, Kamata S, et al. Surgical treatment for pulmonary metastases of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Am J Otolaryngol 1997;18:391.
130. Finley RK, Verazin GT, Driscoll DL, et al. Results of surgical resection of pulmonary metastases of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Am J Surg 1992;164:594.
131. Mazer TM, Robbins KT, McMurtrey MJ, Byers RM. Resection of pulmonary metastases from squamous carcinoma of the head and neck. Am J Surg 1988;156:238.
132. Lefor AT, Bredenberg CE, Kellman RM, Aust JC. Multiple malignancies of the lung and head and neck. Second primary tumor or metastasis? Arch Surg 1986;121:265.
133. Macklis RM, Oltikar A, Sallan SE. Wilms' tumor patients with pulmonary metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:1187.
134. Wilimas JA, Douglass EC, Magill HL, Fitch S, Hustu HO. Significance of pulmonary computed tomography at diagnosis in Wilms' tumor. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1144.
135. de Kraker J, Lemerle J, Voute PA, et al. Wilm's tumor with pulmonary metastases at diagnosis: the significance of primary chemotherapy. International Society of Pediatric Oncology
Nephroblastoma Trial and Study Committee. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1187.
136. Green DM, Breslow NE, Ii Y, et al. The role of surgical excision in the management of relapsed Wilms' tumor patients with pulmonary metastases: a report from the National Wilms' Tumor
Study. J Pediatr Surg 1991;26:728.
137. Herrera GA, Alexander CB, Jones JM. Ultrastructural characterization of pulmonary neoplasms. II. The role of electron microscopy in characterization of uncommon epithelial pulmonary
neoplasms, metastatic neoplasms to and from lung, and other tumors, including mesenchymal neoplasms. Surv Synth Pathol Res 1985;4:163.
138. Ghoneim AH, Brisson ML, Fuks A, Mobasher AA, Kreisman H. Monoclonal anti-CEA antibodies in the discrimination between primary pulmonary adenocarcinoma and colon carcinoma
metastatic to the lung. Mod Pathol 1990;3:613.
139. Slebos RJ, Habets GG, Evers SG, Mooi WJ, Rodenhuis S. Allele-specific detection of K-ras oncogene expression in human non-small-cell lung carcinomas. Int J Cancer 1991;48:51.
140. Flint A, Lloyd RV. Pulmonary metastases of colonic carcinoma. Distinction from pulmonary adenocarcinoma. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1992;116:39.
141. Nomori H, Hirohashi S, Noguchi M, Matsuno Y, Shimosato Y. Tumor cell heterogeneity and subpopulations with metastatic ability in differentiated adenocarcinoma of the lung. Histologic and
cytofluorometric DNA analyses. Chest 1991;99:934.
142. Salvati F, Teodori L, Gagliardi L, et al. DNA flow cytometric studies of 66 human lung tumors analyzed before treatment. Prognostic implications. Chest 1989;96:1092.
143. Groeger AM, Kandioler D, Mueller MR, et al. Survival after surgical treatment of recurrent pulmonary metastases. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1997;12:703.
144. Temeck BK, Wexler LH, Steinberg SM, et al. Reoperative pulmonary metastasectomy for sarcomatous pediatric histologies. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;66:908.
145. Putnam JB Jr, Suell DM, Natarajan G, Roth JA. Extended resection of pulmonary metastases: is the risk justified? Ann Thorac Surg 1993;55:1440.
146. Spaggiari L, Grunenwald DH, Girard P, Solli P, Le Chevalier T. Pneumonectomy for lung metastases: indications, risks, and outcome. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;66:1930.
147. Koong HN, Pastorino U, Ginsberg RJ. Is there a role of pneumonectomy in pulmonary metastases? Ann Thorac Surg 1999;68:2039.
148. Heslin MJ, Casper ES, Boland P, Gold JP, Burt ME. Preoperative identification and operative management of intraatrial extension of lung tumors. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;65:544.
149. Schlappack OK, Baur M, Steger G, Dittrich C, Moser K. The clinical course of lung metastases from breast cancer. Klin Wochenschr 1988;66:790.
150. Pastorino U, Valente M, Gasparini M, et al. Lung resection as salvage treatment for metastatic osteosarcoma. Tumori 1988;74:201.
151. Jett JR, Hollinger CG, Zinsmeister AR, Pairolero PC. Pulmonary resection of metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Chest 1983;84:442.
152. Goorin AM, Delorey MJ, Lack EE, et al. Prognostic significance of complete surgical resection of pulmonary metastases in patients with osteogenic sarcoma: analysis of 32 patients. J Clin
Oncol 1984;2:425.
153. McCormack PM, Attiyeh FF. Resected pulmonary metastases from colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1979;22:553.
154. Pastorino U, Valente M, Gasparini M, et al. Lung resection for metastatic sarcomas: total survival from primary treatment. J Surg Oncol 1989;40:275.
155. Collins VP, Loeffler RK, Tivey H. Observations on growth rates of human tumors. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1956;76:988.

156. Joseph WL, Morton DL, Adkins PC. Prognostic significance of tumor doubling time in evaluating operability in pulmonary metastatic disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1971;61:23.
157. Joseph WL, Morton DL, Adkins PC. Variation in tumor doubling time in patients with pulmonary metastatic disease. J Surg Oncol 1971;3:143.
158. Gompertz B. On the nature of the function expressive of the law of human mortality, and on a new mode of determining the value of life contingencies. Philos Trans 1825;513.
159. Laird AK. Dynamics of tumor growth. Br J Cancer 1960;18:490.
160. Ladanyi M, Cha C, Lewis R, et al. MDM2 gene amplification in metastatic osteosarcoma. Cancer Res 1993;53:16.
161. Pollock R, Lang A, Ge T, et al. Wild-type p53 and a p53 temperature-sensitive mutant suppress human soft tissue sarcoma by enhancing cell cycle control. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:1985.
162. Pollock RE, Lang A, Luo J, el-Naggar AK, Yu D. Soft tissue sarcoma metastasis from clonal expansion of p53 mutated tumor cells. Oncogene 1997;12:2035.
163. Mousses S, McAuley L, Bell RS, Kandel R, Andrulis IL. Molecular and immunohistochemical identification of p53 alterations in bone and soft tissue sarcomas. Mod Pathol 1996;9:1.
164. Scotlandi K, Serra M, Nicoletti G, et al. Multidrug resistance and malignancy in human osteosarcoma. Cancer Res 1996;56:2434.
165. Onda M, Matsuda S, Higaki S, et al. ErbB-2 expression is correlated with poor prognosis for patients with osteosarcoma. Cancer 1996;77:71.
166. Asai T, Ueda T, Itoh K, et al. Establishment and characterization of a murine osteosarcoma cell line (LM8) with high metastatic potential to the lung. Int J Cancer 1998;76:418.
167. Shirakawa T, Ko SC, Gardner TA, et al. In vivo suppression of osteosarcoma pulmonary metastasis with intravenous osteocalcin promoter-based toxic gene therapy. Cancer Gene Ther
1998;5:274.
168. Khanna C, Anderson PM, Hasz DE, et al. Interleukin-2 liposome inhalation therapy is safe and effective for dogs with spontaneous pulmonary metastases. Cancer 1997;79:1409.
169. Weksler B, Lenert J, Ng B, Burt M. Isolated single lung perfusion with doxorubicin is effective in eradicating soft tissue sarcoma lung metastases in a rat model. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
1994;107:50.
170. Weksler B, Ng B, Lenert JT, Burt ME. Isolated single-lung perfusion with doxorubicin is pharmacokinetically superior to intravenous injection. Ann Thorac Surg 1993;56:209.
171. Weksler B, Schneider A, Ng B, Burt M. Isolated single lung perfusion in the rat: an experimental model. J Appl Physiol 1993;74:2736.
172. Pass HI, Mew DJ, Kranda KC, et al. Isolated lung perfusion with tumor necrosis factor for pulmonary metastases. Ann Thorac Surg 1996;61:1609.
173. Johnston MR, Minchen RF, Dawson CA. Lung perfusion with chemotherapy in patients with unresectable metastatic sarcoma to the lung or diffuse bronchioloalveolar carcinoma. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 1995;110:368.
174. Staren ED, Salerno C, Rongione A, Witt TR, Faber LP. Pulmonary resection for metastatic breast cancer. Arch Surg 1992;127:1282.
175. Wilking N, Petrelli NJ, Herrera L, Regal AM, Mittelman A. Surgical resection of pulmonary metastases from colorectal adenocarcinoma. Dis Colon Rectum 1985;28:562.
176. Pastorino U, Gasparini M, Valente M, et al. Primary childhood osteosarcoma: the role of salvage surgery. Ann Oncol 1992;3[Suppl 2]:S43.
177. Schott G, Weissmuller J, Vecera E. Methods and prognosis of the extirpation of pulmonary metastases following tumor nephrectomy. Urol Int 1988;43:272.
178. Karp NS, Boyd A, DePan HJ, Harris MN, Roses DF. Thoracotomy for metastatic malignant melanoma of the lung. Surgery 1990;107:256.
179. Wong JH, Euhus DM, Morton DL. Surgical resection for metastatic melanoma to the lung. Arch Surg 1988;123:1091.
180. Thayer JO Jr, Overholt RH. Metastatic melanoma to the lung: long-term results of surgical excision. Am J Surg 1985;149:558.
181. Kumar J, Ilancheran A, Ratnam SS. Pulmonary metastasis in gestational trophoblastic disease: a review of 97 cases. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1988;95:70.

SECTION 52.3 Metastatic Cancer to the Liver
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 52.3
Metastatic Cancer to the Liver
H. RICHARD ALEXANDER
CARMEN J. ALLEGRA
THEODORE S. LAWRENCE
Introduction
Natural History of Liver Metastases
Imaging of Hepatic Metastases
Resection of Hepatic Metastases
Resection of Metastatic Disease: Technical Considerations
Results of Hepatic Resection for Colorectal Cancer
Posthepatic Resection Adjuvant Hepatic Artery Infusional or Intravenous Therapy in Colorectal Cancer
Neoadjuvant Therapy for Initially Unresectable Colorectal Hepatic Metastases
Results of Resection for Noncolorectal Cancers
Infusional Therapy for Hepatic Metastases
Hepatic Artery Infusional Therapy: Technical Considerations
Hepatic Artery Infusional Therapy for Colorectal Cancer
Other Applications of Hepatic Artery Infusional Therapy
Intermittent Hepatic Artery Infusion Therapy
Hepatic Artery Infusion with Venous Filtration
Isolated Hepatic Perfusion
Local Ablative Therapy
Cryotherapy
Cryotherapy Plus Adjuvant Chemotherapy
Microwave Tissue Coagulation and Radiofrequency Ablation
Radiofrequency Ablation Plus Adjuvant Chemotherapy
Interstitial Laser Photocoagulation
Percutaneous Ethanol Injection
Results of Whole Liver Irradiation with or without Chemotherapy
Conclusions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Metastatic cancer in the liver can represent the sole or life-limiting component of disease for many patients with a variety of tumor histologies, including colorectal
cancer, ocular melanoma, neuroendocrine tumors, and, less commonly, other histologies. The liver is a common site of hematogenous metastases for tumors arising
in the gastrointestinal tract, presumably because of the unique venous drainage through the portal venous system to the liver. On the other hand, factors that
predispose ocular melanoma to metastasize almost exclusively to liver are unknown; liver metastases must occur through hematogenous spread via the arterial
system. Once metastases to the liver are diagnosed, the prognosis is generally poor. Even with aggressive therapy, the median survival for patients with ocular
melanoma in the liver is between 2 and 7 months 1,2 and 12 to 24 months for patients with colorectal cancer. 3 Because of the unique vascular anatomy of the liver, a
number of regional therapies designed to maximize efficacy while minimizing systemic toxicity have been under clinical evaluation. For patients with colorectal cancer
the ability to resect disease is associated with 5-year disease-free survival in 20% to 50% of patients, 4,5,6,7 and 8 and patients with liver metastases from functional
neuroendocrine tumor can derive substantial palliative benefit from resection. 9,10 Infusional therapy is administered into the hepatic artery using intermittent
percutaneous catheterization with or without particle embolization of the tumor neovasculature or via continuous hepatic artery infusional (HAI) therapy with indwelling
implantable pumps. Local ablative therapy is administered via laparotomy or percutaneously placed probes or needles to deliver cryotherapy or radiofrequency
ablation of tumors or direct injection of cytotoxic agents such as ethanol. Combined approaches have been used, such as adjuvant HAI after resection or local
ablation, in an attempt to prolong disease control in the liver. Newer regional therapies, such as isolated hepatic perfusion (IHP) or intraarterial delivery of
gene-modified viral vectors are being evaluated.
Much of the data regarding regional therapy for hepatic metastases relate to colorectal cancer because of its high incidence. It is estimated that 150,000 new cases of
colorectal carcinoma occur annually in the United States and approximately 75,000 deaths occur. 11 Synchronous hepatic metastases are identified in 10% to 20% of
patients with colorectal cancer 12 and are the sole or life-limiting component of disease in up to 60% of patients. 13 Only a small proportion of patients have resectable
disease 14 and therefore the vast majority of patients are best suited for a regional therapy as mentioned previously. This section reviews the natural history of patients
with hepatic metastases and the advances in imaging modalities. The results of resection alone or with adjuvant therapy for patients with resectable disease are
presented as well as results with other regional therapies such as local ablative techniques, HAI therapies, and newer approaches such as IHP ( Table 52.3-1).

TABLE 52.3-1. Various Regional Treatments under Clinical Evaluation for Cancers Confined to the Liver

NATURAL HISTORY OF LIVER METASTASES
The natural history of hepatic metastases from various histologies has been largely derived from retrospective studies and without the benefit of routine imaging
modalities currently available. For patients who are staged using computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or, for patients with neuroendocrine
tumors, somatostatin receptor scintigraphy, survival may appear better than historic controls for whom the number and extent of hepatic metastases were not easily
quantified (Fig. 52.3-1). In addition, it has become increasingly apparent that there is considerable variability in the rate of progression of disease in the liver. This is
reflected by the fact that in patients with colorectal cancer metastatic to liver, there are occasional long-term survivors, and there is a considerable disparity between
median and mean survival (see Fig. 52.3-1). In one series from Roswell Park Cancer Institute of 30 patients with untreated colorectal cancer metastatic to liver, the
mean survival was 16 months, with a range of 2 to 58 months. 15 A classification system for staging of hepatic metastases has been proposed based on the number
and distribution of lesions in the liver. 16 Heterogeneity in tumor progression has also been demonstrated in patients with neuroendocrine tumors metastatic to liver. 17

FIGURE 52.3-1. A: Survival in patients with untreated colorectal cancer with metastases confined to the liver based on percent hepatic replacement of less than or
equal to 20 (dotted line) or greater than 20 (solid line). B: Survival in patients with metastatic ocular melanoma with or without hepatic metastases. (Modified from refs.
19 and 22.)

In an older series of 125 patients with colorectal metastases to liver staged primarily with technetium 99 sulfur colloid scans, the overall median survival was 12.5
months.3 Extent of disease and histologic grade of the tumor were the two most important factors influencing survival. Those with four or more nodules, hepatomegaly,
or abnormal liver test results had a median survival of less than 12 months. The immediate cause of death was liver failure in almost 90% of patients despite the
coexistence of metastases to other sites in 40% of patients. In another series of 175 patients with hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer, factors potentially
influencing survival were subjected to a multifactorial analysis. 18 Although median survival in the group was only 6.1 months, one patient survived for 67 months.
Extent of disease as reflected by the number of hepatic nodules, bilobar disease, or abnormal liver test results was independently correlated with survival. Stage of
the primary tumor and number of positive lymph nodes also correlated with outcome. In a series from the United Kingdom of 90 patients with colorectal cancer
metastatic to liver there was a median survival of 10.3 months. 19
In a more recent series of 544 patients with unresectable colorectal liver metastases documented by laparotomy, CT, or ultrasound, the factors that independently
predicted outcome on multivariate analysis were performance status, extent of liver disease (number of involved segments), abnormal liver test results (prothrombin
time and alkaline phosphatase), and site of primary. 14 Those with no adverse factors (i.e., normal performance status and liver test results) had a 1-year survival of
46%. The apparent beneficial effect from chemotherapy in retrospective studies of patients with liver metastases from colorectal cancer and other histologies 3,14,18,20
probably reflects selection bias rather than true treatment effect. In general, patient factors such as gender or age do not influence survival, whereas performance
status, which reflects tumor burden, does. 3,14,18,19
In patients with treated primary ocular melanoma the overall 5-year survival is approximately 70%, but once metastases occur the liver is the sole or life-limiting
component of disease in 70% to 80% of patients. 2,21 Age older than 50 years and male gender are associated with a shorter survival after recurrence, 2 but the most
important factor influencing outcome is the presence of liver metastases 22 (see Fig. 52.3-1). In one study, median survival in patients with recurrence was 19 months,
but only 7 months when the liver was involved. 22 Although survival is longer in patients with liver metastases diagnosed by screening (5 vs. 3 months) and in those
receiving treatment (5 vs. 2 months), the differences in terms of individual patient benefit are negligible and highlight the grave prognosis associated with liver
metastases.1
Ayoub and coworkers reported outcome in more than 1500 patients with metastases from unknown primary tumors. 20 Five hundred patients had metastases to liver, of
whom 27% (135 patients) eventually had primary tumors diagnosed arising from lung, colon or rectum, or pancreas. The presence of liver metastases was associated
with a significantly shorter survival, but was most favorable in those with neuroendocrine histology. Sutliff and coworkers have shown that the pattern of progression in
patients with metastatic gastrinoma to liver is highly variable. 17 Over a follow-up interval of 29 months, 5 of 19 (26%) demonstrated no growth of tumor, whereas 42%
had rapid growth in less than 1 year. Tumor progression, most commonly in liver, is the main determinant of survival in patients with gastrinoma. 23,24 For patients with
other functional neuroendocrine tumors, liver metastases and the development of the uncontrolled sequelae from excess hormone production are the main causes of
death. 25

IMAGING OF HEPATIC METASTASES
Currently there are several imaging options available for assessment of liver metastases. Considerable advancement in imaging technology has made it possible to
accurately detect the number, size, and distribution of hepatic lesions and frequently distinguish between malignant or benign lesions. The most commonly used tests
include CT scan, MRI, ultrasound, and, more recently, positron emission tomography using the glucose analogue, [ 18F]fluorodeoxyglucose. Ultrasound is commonly
used for screening because of its availability and relative inexpensiveness, but has its most important application as an intraoperative modality to assess suitably for
resection and to gauge the adequacy of treatment when using cryotherapy. In general, intraoperative ultrasound identifies 20% more occult lesions in the liver
compared with CT scan26 and therefore should be used before any contemplated resection.
CT scan is used most commonly to assess a patient with possible hepatic metastases. It has the advantages of being widely available and, by using new generation
rapid acquisition scanners, the entire chest, abdomen, and pelvis can be evaluated in a single study. 5 Moreover, the use of rapid helical or spiral CT allows for a scan
of the entire abdomen in a single breath hold, eliminating the problem of respiratory misregistration. Because liver tumors have a variable degree of vascularity and
derive their perfusion from the arterial tree, CT arterioportography has been used to enhance the sensitivity of the test, particularly for hypovascular lesions, but
involves placement of a catheter and injection of contrast into the superior mesenteric artery with capture of images during both the arterial and portal venous phase
of hepatic perfusion. 27 Dual arterial and venous phase CT scans after intravenous injection of contrast agent using high-speed helical CT scanners are now commonly
used in place of CT arterioportography, 28 but may have limited additional sensitivity for detection of hypovascular tumors compared with portal phase CT alone. 29 On
the other hand, because hypervascular lesions are frequently isoattenuating in relation to normal liver parenchyma, arterial phase helical CT detects more liver
metastases than conventional portal venous phase CT in this setting. 30
MRI scanning is also used routinely and has particular advantages for imaging of focal liver lesions. Two contrast agents with liver specificity are currently being used;
one is manganese pyridoxal disphosphate, a paramagnetic agent taken up by hepatocytes, and the other is superparamagnetic iron oxide particles, which are taken
up by the reticuloendothelial system. 31,32 and 33 The optimal MRI protocols for evaluation of liver lesions vary depending on the available equipment and contrast agents
being used. Although there are disadvantages with MRI because of motion artifact from the heart or aorta, it can distinguish benign cysts or hemangiomas from
malignant lesions based on characteristic findings on T1 versus T2 spin-weighted sequences. 31
Positron emission tomography scanning uses the glucose analogue [ 18F]fluorodeoxyglucose, which is selectively retained in malignant tissue because of increased
glucose metabolism compared with nonneoplastic tissue. It has been shown to have sensitivity comparable with CT scan and can often distinguish benign and
malignant lesions, but has potential for false-positive findings in abscesses and false-negative findings in hepatocellular carcinoma. 34 Somatostatin receptor
scintigraphy has been used with increasing regularity and is extremely accurate in imaging neuroendocrine tumors, 35,36 and 37 with the exception of insulinoma, and may
be superior to MRI in detecting islet cell tumors in liver. 35 In addition, because hemangiomas are not visible on somatostatin receptor scintigraphy, the study can be
used to distinguish benign versus malignant lesions when there are equivocal findings on CT or MRI. 38

RESECTION OF HEPATIC METASTASES
RESECTION OF METASTATIC DISEASE: TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS
The benefit of resection in selected patients with hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer and potentially other histologies, such as neuroendocrine tumors, has
been fairly well established in the literature. Several advances in hepatic surgery have made hepatic resection a more routine procedure with minimal patient
morbidity. Initial evaluation of the abdominal cavity at exploration should be carefully done to exclude the presence of extrahepatic disease. Intraoperative ultrasound
should be routinely used to screen for the presence of deep-seated or occult metastases, and resection should be based when possible on functional anatomic

considerations, including segmental resection, to preserve unaffected hepatic parenchyma and minimize blood loss during resection ( Fig. 52.3-2). The liver is
mobilized, including division of the falciform and left or right triangular ligaments, depending on the nature of the resection. A cholecystectomy is performed, and the
small direct venous branches between the liver and vena cava are systematically isolated, ligated, and divided ( Fig. 52.3-3). The division of the portal triad structures
and hepatic vein on the side of resection are being done more frequently with the use of vascular stapling devices. It is usually possible to isolate and divide the
hepatic vein in its extrahepatic position before commencing parenchymal dissection. Vascular inflow occlusion via the Pringle's maneuver and maintenance of a low
central venous pressure minimizes blood loss during dissection of the hepatic parenchyma. 39,40 Extensive resection involving contiguous vena caval resection or
reimplantation of the hepatic veins are rarely indicated but have been reported. 41,42 Argon beam coagulation helps with hemostasis after resection. Drains are not
routinely used in uncomplicated hepatic resection, and early ambulation of the patient is advisable. The mortality associated with major hepatic resection is less than
5% and is most commonly secondary to inadequate hepatic synthetic reserve 5,6,7 and 8 (Table 52.3-2). Other complications from hepatic resection include biliary fistula,
hemorrhage, and abscess or wound infection. 6

FIGURE 52.3-2. Segments of the liver used in planning hepatic resection. The principal plane divides the right and left lobes of the liver. Extent of hepatic resection
planned on the basis of an understanding of the segmental anatomy of the liver has resulted in minimal morbidity and mortality associated with the procedure.
(Modified from ref. 6.)

FIGURE 52.3-3. A: Technique of isolation and B: division of the direct venous tributaries between the inferior vena cava and the liver that are routinely divided before
a right or left hepatic lobectomy. V, vein. (From ref. 4, with permission.)

TABLE 52.3-2. Results of Resection of Colorectal Liver Metastases from Selected Series

RESULTS OF HEPATIC RESECTION FOR COLORECTAL CANCER
The overall 5-year survival after resection of hepatic metastases in patients with colorectal cancer ranges from 25% to almost 40% in recent series (see Table 52.3-2).
Factors associated with improved outcome after resection in most series include tumor- and treatment-related variables. Patient characteristics, such as age or
gender, have not been identified as significant prognostic variables, but elevation in preoperative serum carcinoembryonic antigen levels is associated with poorer
outcome in most series. 43,44 and 45 Tumor-related factors associated with poor outcome after resection include positive lymph node status of the primary tumor, a
disease-free interval between resection of the primary tumor and liver metastases less than 1 year, and the presence of extrahepatic disease, including regional
periportal lymph nodes. With respect to the liver metastases, factors that generally reflect advanced tumor burden, such as increasing number of lesions, 43,46,47 size of
largest lesion larger than 5 or 10 cm, 47,48 bilobar distribution of disease, 49,50 percent hepatic replacement, 51 or weight of resected specimen, 43 have been shown to
predict shorter survival compared with those without these parameters ( Fig. 52.3-4). Satellitosis, 48,52 tumor grade,43,44 and ploidy 53 have been reported as negative
prognostic variables. Treatment or technical factors predictive of poor outcome include positive resection margin, 46,48,50,54 margin smaller than 1 cm,55 and, in some
studies, intraoperative transfusion. 44,52 Repeat hepatic resection in selected patients has been reported with 5-year survival rates ranging from 21% to 26%. 56,57,58,59 and
60

FIGURE 52.3-4. Five-year overall survival in patients undergoing resection of hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer based on number of lesions. Survival is

better in patients with one lesion ( open square) compared with those with two or three (filled triangles) or four or more lesions ( filled boxes). (From ref. 45, with
permission.)

Fong and coworkers 45 have developed a clinical scoring system using five widely used and available clinical and pathologic parameters to predict outcome after
resection of colorectal liver metastases ( Table 52.3-3). Based on the outcome of 1001 patients undergoing resection with curative intent, an increasing clinical risk
score was associated with decreased survival (Fig. 52.3-5). Of note, patients with a clinical risk score of 5 had an actuarial 5-year survival of only 14% and in fact no
patient had survived 5 years at the time of the report. These data provide a basis for stratification of patients at high risk of recurrence after hepatic resection and may
provide a method of selecting those suitable for adjuvant treatments postoperatively.

TABLE 52.3-3. Clinical Risk Score for Tumor Recurrence in Patients Undergoing Resection for Colorectal Metastases to Liver a

FIGURE 52.3-5. Five-year overall survival in 1001 patients with metastatic colorectal cancer to the liver undergoing resection with curative intent. Outcome was
analyzed based on the absence or presence of various prognostic factors as outlined in Table 52.3-3. Patients with 0 or 1 prognostic factor had improved survival
compared with those with increasing numbers of adverse prognostic variables (P <.0001). Open box score = 0; filled triangle score = 1; open circle score = 2; filled
circle score = 3; filled box score= 4; and open triangle score = 5. (From ref. 45, with permission.)

POSTHEPATIC RESECTION ADJUVANT HEPATIC ARTERY INFUSIONAL OR INTRAVENOUS THERAPY IN COLORECTAL CANCER
Several nonrandomized clinical investigations in the United States, Germany, and Japan suggest a potential advantage for the use of adjuvant chemotherapy after
complete surgical resection of hepatic metastases in patients with colorectal carcinoma. Using weekly hepatic arterial infusion of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) at a dose of 15
mg/kg for an intended course of 6 months, investigators at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center noted an extrahepatic-only recurrence rate of 33% and a liver-only
recurrence rate of 17% in 20 patients. 61 At 39 months of follow-up, 50% of patients were alive and free of disease. In a nonrandomized but prospective study, Lorenz
and colleagues from Germany found a nonsignificant prolongation in median survival ( P = .064) of 52 months in 60 patients treated with resection followed by hepatic
arterial therapy with either floxuridine (FUDR) or 5-FU with or without leucovorin (LV) versus 33 months in 21 patients treated with surgery alone. Furthermore, these
investigators noted a marked delay in the time to hepatic recurrence from 17 months to 63 months ( P = .015) in patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy versus
those treated with surgery alone. 62 With a median follow-up of more than 2 years, Okuno and colleagues studied the recurrence rate in 18 patients treated with
surgical resection followed by hepatic arterial interleukin-2 plus 5-FU (250 mg) and mitomycin C (4 mg) given weekly for 6 months and found an overall recurrence
rate of 22% with no recurrences in the liver (17% lung; 6% pelvis). 63 More recently, investigators in Japan performed a retrospective investigation of 174 patients who
had been treated with hepatic resection for metastases resulting from colorectal carcinoma and identified three separate groups, including those treated with surgery
alone (66 patients), surgery plus hepatic artery infusion (78 patients), and surgery plus peripheral venous infusion (30 patients). 64 The hepatic arterial therapy
consisted of 5-FU, 50 mg/m2/d × 14 days, plus bolus injections of an anthracycline analogue, aclarubicin (40 mg), suspended in a lipid contrast medium given every 3
to 6 months for up to 3 years. These investigators noted that the patients treated with surgery followed by hepatic artery infusion had a significantly decreased hepatic
recurrence rate and a more prolonged disease-free and overall survival compared with either of the other groups and had a 5-year survival rate of 35% compared with
13% for those treated with surgery plus peripheral venous infusion therapy and 9% for those treated with surgery alone. Investigators from Tokyo retrospectively
analyzed 115 patients with hepatic-only metastatic colorectal carcinoma treated with potentially curative therapy with resection alone (40 patients) versus surgery
followed by either hepatic arterial (28 patients) or intraportal vein (ten patients) 5-FU/LV, with or without mitomycin C, versus surgery followed by either oral or
systemic intravenous mitomycin C, or 5-FU, or oral tegafur with or without uracil (37 patients). 65 These investigators found an overall 5-year survival for all patients of
42.2%. Estimates of median survivals from the published graphs show survivals of 35, 43, and 60 months for those patients treated with surgery alone versus surgery
plus HAI versus surgery plus systemic therapy, respectively. Although these differences did not reach statistical significance, the disease-free survival appeared to be
statistically worse in patients treated with surgery alone compared with those who received systemic adjuvant therapy. Nonami and colleagues from Japan, in a
nonrandomized trial, treated patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma using surgery alone (26 patients) or surgery followed by hepatic arterial 5-FU (250 mg/kg/d
× 14 days) plus an anthracycline (20 to 40 mg/kg days 1 and 8), plus mitomycin C (4 to 8 mg/kg days 1 and 8) (31 patients) every 3 months for 1 year. 66 These
investigators noted an approximately 12% 5-year survival rate for patients treated with surgery alone versus 57% for those treated with surgery followed by hepatic
artery chemotherapy.
Based on relatively promising results from nonrandomized studies, several groups have conducted prospective randomized studies with the goal of defining the role
of adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma treated with complete surgical resection of hepatic metastases. As shown in Table 52.3-4,
an intergroup trial randomized 109 patients with isolated hepatic metastases from colorectal carcinoma to treatment with either surgery alone (56 patients) or surgery
followed by continuous hepatic artery infusion of FUDR for four cycles plus systemically administered 5-FU for 12 cycles (53 patients). 67 Although none of the survival
differences reached a statistically significant level, those patients treated with surgery followed by chemotherapy enjoyed a 63% 5-year survival versus 32% for those
treated with surgery alone. The median survival for those treated with surgery plus chemotherapy of 34.2 months was less, albeit not significantly less, than those
treated with surgery (47.5 months). A significant decrease in overall recurrence rate was noted for the group treated with surgery plus chemotherapy (42% vs. 66%)
as well as a decrease in hepatic-only recurrences (26% vs. 55%) compared with those treated with resection alone. Investigators from Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center randomized 74 patients with hepatic-only disease to surgery followed by hepatic arterial FUDR and dexamethasone plus systemic therapy with 5-FU
plus LV for 6 months and 82 patients to surgery followed by systemic therapy with 5-FU/LV alone for 6 months. 68 These investigators found a statistically significant
improvement in 2-year survival rate of 86% for those treated with both HAI and systemic chemotherapy versus those treated with surgery followed by systemic
chemotherapy alone (72%) (P = .023) (see Table 52.3-4). Furthermore, although the overall recurrence rates were not different between the two groups, there was a
marked decrease in hepatic recurrence in the group treated with the addition of HAI chemotherapy (10% vs. 40%, P = .000012). Toxicities were similar for the two
groups of patients, with the exception of a greater incidence of grade 3 to 4 diarrhea and an 18% incidence of hyperbilirubinemia (greater than 3) in those patients

treated with the addition of the hepatic artery therapy. In all but one patient, the bilirubin returned to normal.

TABLE 52.3-4. Prospective Randomized Trials of Adjuvant Chemotherapy following Hepatic Resection in Patients with Metastatic Colorectal Cancer

Lygidakis and colleagues from Greece found an almost threefold increase in median survival from 11 to 30 months and a decrease in hepatic recurrence rates from
40% to 0% in patients treated with surgery followed by chemoimmunotherapy. 69 Chemoimmunotherapy consisted of splenic and gastroduodenal artery infusion of
interferon-g and interleukin-2 emulsified in radiographic contrast medium. In addition, patients received bolus transarterial infusion of mitomycin C, carboplatin, 5-FU,
LV, and an anthracycline analogue every 3 to 6 months for 3 years. In contrast to these studies, Lorenz and colleagues from Germany prospectively randomized a
total of 226 patients to treatment with surgery alone (113 patients) versus surgery followed by hepatic arterial 5-FU (1000 mg/m 2/d) plus LV (200 mg/m2/d) given for 5
days each month for 6 months (see Table 52.3-4). The investigators found no difference in overall median survival or time to disease progression and concluded that
it was highly unlikely that the addition of chemotherapy to surgical resection would improve survival by more than 15%. 70 However, the power of this study to detect
differences was markedly reduced by a substantial decrease in the number of patients completing the chemotherapy (only 34 of 113 randomized to the adjuvant arm).
These studies generally support the use of adjuvant chemotherapy after surgical resection of hepatic metastases in high-risk patients with colorectal carcinoma.
NEOADJUVANT THERAPY FOR INITIALLY UNRESECTABLE COLORECTAL HEPATIC METASTASES
Chemotherapy has also been used in a neoadjuvant setting for those patients initially deemed inoperable with the goal of enabling resection. Bismuth and coworkers
treated 53 patients with initially unresectable disease with systemic chemotherapy, which included 5-FU/LV and oxaliplatin, for an average of 8 months before
resection and for at least 6 months after surgery. Major hepatectomy was performed in 37 patients and minor resections in the balance of patients. Although surgical
complications occurred in 14 patients, there was no operative mortality. Although hepatic recurrence was observed in 66% of patients, the overall 5-year survival was
found to be 40%, suggesting a potential role for neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients initially considered unresectable. 71
RESULTS OF RESECTION FOR NONCOLORECTAL CANCERS
Series of hepatic resection for tumor histologies other than colorectal cancer have been reported, but the benefit of this approach has not been conclusively
demonstrated. Table 52.3-5 summarizes outcomes of selected series of patients with different histologies. There are anecdotal reports of long-term survivors after
hepatic resection for noncolorectal gastrointestinal primary tumors such as gastric or pancreatic cancer 72,73; however, this is not considered standard treatment as
most patients with advanced upper intestinal adenocarcinomas have recurrences at multiple sites in addition to liver such as lymph nodes and peritoneum. Five-year
survival in patients undergoing resection of neuroendocrine hepatic metastases ranges from 10% to 54%. 10,74,75,76,77 and 78 Chen and coworkers reported that outcome
was significantly improved in patients undergoing resection compared with a retrospectively matched cohort who did not undergo resection. 77 Actuarial 5-year survival
after resection of clinically isolated hepatic metastases in breast cancer patients is reported between 9% and 18%. 79,80 Based on the typical systemic pattern of
recurrence in patients with advanced breast cancer, this approach must be considered palliative in nature with little expectation of long-term disease control. Other
histologies for which hepatic resection has been reported include metastatic soft tissue sarcoma 81 and cutaneous82 or ocular 83 melanoma. Actuarial 5-year survival of
60% has been reported for patients undergoing resection for tumors arising from the genitourinary tract, including testicular, adrenal, ovarian, renal, uterine, and
cervix.84,85 Presumably, patients with noncolorectal cancers and hepatic metastases were selected for operation based on factors thought to be favorable such as a
long interval of radiographically isolated and resectable liver metastases and good operative risk.

TABLE 52.3-5. Results of Resection of Noncolorectal Cancers from Selected Series

INFUSIONAL THERAPY FOR HEPATIC METASTASES
HEPATIC ARTERY INFUSIONAL THERAPY: TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS
HAI therapy has had substantial clinical application based on the development of an implantable pump (or port) that can deliver a continuous infusion of therapeutic
agents via the hepatic artery and the availability of agents that have an established pharmacokinetic advantage for HAI delivery because of a high first-pass extraction
in liver and a concentration-dependent therapeutic effect. The implantable pump is a low-profile dual-chamber device that is placed in a subcutaneous pocket over the
lower abdominal wall connected to a catheter that is positioned in the gastroduodenal artery for infusion of agents into the liver via the hepatic artery. 86 The pump is
activated by filling the inner chamber with saline or therapeutic agent and as the inner reservoir expands it compresses a hydrofluorocarbon gas contained in the
outer chamber from a gas to a liquid (see Chapter 29.2). The body temperature then expands the gas, thereby compressing the inner chamber's contents through a
resistor to maintain constant flow into the arterial catheter.
The two most important technical considerations in placing the device are to ensure that the entire liver is perfused with the therapeutic agent and that no extrahepatic
visceral perfusion occurs. Typically patients undergo preoperative angiography to define the arterial anatomy of the liver. All accessory or aberrant arterial vessels
should be ligated. In addition, careful dissection of the gastroduodenal artery and hepatic artery should be performed to ensure that no collateral flow to the viscera
occurs. Distribution of the infusate is assessed with fluorescein intraoperatively and postoperatively using technetium 99–labeled albumin scintigraphy before
commencing therapy. Interestingly, a positive arterial nuclide scan using technetium 99–labeled macroaggregated albumin has been shown to predict tumor response
to subsequent intraarterial therapy. 87
As an alternative, an arterial catheter connected to a subcutaneously placed port can be used that is accessed with a noncoring Huber's needle and the infusate
delivered by an external programmable infusion pump. 88 This device has been used because of the considerably higher cost of the implanted pump although

maintenance costs are higher with the port. Fordy and coworkers evaluated the frequency of treatment interruptions and complication rates associated with the use of
either device in 95 patients undergoing a total of 959 treatment cycles. 88 The port was associated with a significantly higher incidence of catheter blockages requiring
nurse intervention, and in ten cases the needle dislodged during infusion. Because of the higher complication rate with ports, there were treatment interruptions in
5.7% of treatments compared with only 1.7% for pumps. Curley and coworkers reviewed the technical aspects of arterial port or pump placement in 180 patients 89 and
found aberrant hepatic arterial anatomy in 37% of patients. Ligation of the variant vessel is normally all that is required except in rare circumstances in which
temporary occlusion of the variant vessel results in severe ischemia of one hepatic lobe. In this case, a two-cannulae system may be necessary. Although the early
complication rate (within 30 days of the procedure) is 5% for both ports and pumps, the late complication rate is twofold greater for ports (49%) versus pumps (28%).
Operative mortality from placement of any device is less than 1%. 90
Treatment responses have been reported to be the same after HAI therapy in colorectal cancer patients with aberrant arterial anatomy compared with those with
normal anatomy by some89 but not by others. 91 Burke and coworkers found that aberrant arterial anatomy occurred in 18% of patients and was associated with
reduced effectiveness after 4 months of therapy. 91 Complete perfusion of the liver is essential for adequate delivery of drug to tumor 92 and if incomplete or
misperfusion is demonstrated after catheter placement, it can usually be corrected by selective angiography and coil embolization of the necessary artery. 93 It also
appears that surgeon experience is an important factor in minimizing complications during device placement. 94 Because of the desire to minimize complications and
treatment interruptions in patients with a potentially limited life expectancy, the implanted pump is most commonly used.
It has long been known that established tumor metastases derive their blood supply from the arterial anatomy. 95 FUDR is a 5-FU derivative 96 that has a high first-pass
extraction in liver, 94% to 99% compared with 20% to 55% for 5-FU. 97,98 After injection of FUDR into the hepatic artery or portal vein, the mean concentration of FUDR
in liver is similar, but tumor concentrations of FUDR are significantly higher after intraarterial injection. 99 Furthermore, FUDR is rapidly cleared from the systemic
circulation and has a short (less than 10-minute) serum half-life. Other drugs with a short serum half-life and for which there is a pharmacokinetic advantage for
intraarterial therapy include cisplatin, doxorubicin, mitomycin C, and bischlorethylnitroureas. 4
HEPATIC ARTERY INFUSIONAL THERAPY FOR COLORECTAL CANCER
A number of phase II studies have evaluated continuous HAI of FUDR administered over a 14-day interval repeated every 28 days in patients with colorectal cancer
metastatic to liver, many of whom had failed prior systemic therapy with 5-FU. 90,100 These studies documented that HAI with FUDR or 5-FU consistently resulted in
overall response rates substantially greater than that seen with systemic therapy. In ten reported trials, the mean response rate was 42% (range, 15% to 83%) and
median survival ranged from 12 to 26 months. 101 However, the initial results with FUDR administered via HAI were associated with an unacceptable incidence of
biliary toxicity manifested by ischemic cholangiopathy and increased serum bilirubin ( Table 52.3-6). Several modifications have been made to the initial regimens to
optimize efficacy and minimize toxicity, including alternating FUDR and 5-FU, 102 reducing the dose of FUDR, and adding LV 103 and dexamethasone.104

TABLE 52.3-6. Hepatic Arterial Infusion Therapy Toxicity

Kemeny and coworkers reported that 0.3 mg/kg/d of FUDR, 15 mg/m2/d of LV, and 20 mg of dexamethasone administered as a 14-day infusion to 33 previously
untreated patients with metastatic colorectal cancer to liver resulted in an overall response rate of 78% and a median duration of survival of almost 25 months. 104 In 29
previously treated patients, the regimen resulted in an overall response rate of 52% and a median survival of 13.5 months. The addition of dexamethasone was
associated with a significantly lower incidence of biliary sclerosis compared with the same regimen without dexamethasone (3% vs. 21%, respectively) without
adversely affecting response rates (75% vs. 69%, respectively).
A number of prospective random assignment trials were reported in the 1980s and 1990s comparing FUDR administered via HAI to either systemic therapy or best
supportive care (Table 52.3-7). In general, all studies demonstrated a significantly superior response rate for HAI compared with systemic therapy, but this did not
consistently translate into a survival advantage due to several possible explanations. Three of the five studies conducted in the United States, including the two
largest, allowed patient crossover, thereby obscuring any potential survival advantage for HAI therapy. The dose of FUDR used in these trials, 0.3 mg/kg/d, was
associated with significant toxicity, resulting in treatment interruptions for many patients. In addition, technical difficulties with pump placement or function prevented
some patients from receiving HAI therapy. For example, in the Northern California Oncology Group trial, 9 of 67 patients randomized to HAI therapy did not receive
therapy because of technical difficulties with pump placement or function, and of 50 evaluable patients receiving HAI therapy, one-half of the patients terminated
therapy because of toxicity rather than disease progression. 105 Twenty-eight of 65 patients receiving intravenous therapy crossed over to HAI therapy, and although
median survival was longer in those treated with HAI versus intravenous only, these differences may be due largely to a favorable selection bias in those able to
undergo crossover treatment. Another prospective random assignment trial from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center evaluated response and survival for
patients with laparotomy-confirmed unresectable disease confined to liver treated with HAI or intravenous therapy. 106 Although there was a significantly higher
response rate with HAI therapy compared with intravenous therapy (50% vs. 20%, respectively), no overall survival differences were observed. Of note, in both
studies in which crossover was allowed, the responses to those previously treated with intravenous therapy were lower than those treated initially with HAI. In the
study from the National Cancer Institute, significant biliary sclerosis was observed in 21% of patients. 107 In an unplanned subgroup analysis, there was a significant
survival advantage in the group with histologically negative periportal lymph nodes who received HAI therapy. Because patients in the intravenous therapy arm did not
have the benefit of surgical staging, improved outcome in the HAI node-negative group was presumably due to more accurate surgical staging and exclusion of those
with occult extrahepatic disease. The other United States trial that did not allow crossover to HAI therapy was from the Mayo Clinic, and no difference in overall
survival was observed between groups. 108

TABLE 52.3-7. Hepatic Arterial Infusion Therapy: Randomized Trials in Colorectal Cancer

Two European studies did show a survival advantage, but patients were randomized to HAI therapy or best supportive care, which included cytotoxic therapy in only
one-third of patients, a control treatment arm not commonly used in the United States. The study from the United Kingdom treated patients with 0.2 mg/kg/d of FUDR,
which was well tolerated. 109 Overall survival and improved quality of life were observed in the treated versus best supportive care group in whom intravenous
chemotherapy was administered for palliation of symptoms only. The French study also demonstrated a survival benefit with HAI therapy; only one-half of the patients
in the control arm received systemic therapy. 110
Two metaanalyses of the published prospective random assignment trials have concluded there is a modest survival advantage to HAI therapy 111,112 (Fig. 52.3-6).
Currently, there is another ongoing prospective random assignment trial in the United States (cancer and leukemia group B 9841). This is a noncrossover design trial
with stratification parameters for extent of hepatic involvement, prior chemotherapy, and the presence or absence of synchronous primary disease. The HAI treatment
arm will receive a 14-day infusion of 0.18 mg/kg/d of FUDR, 10 mg/m 2 of LV, and 20 mg of dexamethasone, a combination previously associated with a 78% response
rate and a low incidence of biliary toxicity. 104 The systemic therapy arm will receive 425 mg/m2/d of 5-FU and 20 mg/m 2/d of LV for 5 days.

FIGURE 52.3-6. Five-year overall survival in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer to the liver treated with hepatic artery infusional (HAI) therapy using a
floxuridine-based regimen compared with systemic therapy (No HAI). Survival curves based on a metaanalysis of the published literature of phase III random
assignment trials comparing these two treatment strategies. HAI therapy has a significantly improved survival compared with those treated with no HAI therapy (Log
rank test, P = .0009). (From ref. 112, with permission.)

OTHER APPLICATIONS OF HEPATIC ARTERY INFUSIONAL THERAPY
HAI therapy has been used with other agents for patients with various histologies, including interleukin-2 and chemotherapy for colorectal cancer patients, 113
doxorubicin for hepatocellular cancer patients, 114 and carboplatin 115 or fotemustine 116 for patients with metastatic ocular melanoma to liver. Leyvraz and coworkers
treated 31 patents with ocular melanoma metastatic to liver with 100 mg/m 2 as a 4-hour infusion weekly for 3 weeks followed by a repeat cycle every 21 days via an
implanted intraarterial port. 116 Objective radiographic responses were observed in 12 of 30 assessable patients (40%), and the median duration of response was 11
months. These data are similar to those reported with chemoebolization 117 and show encouraging activity in a disease for which there are no good options.
INTERMITTENT HEPATIC ARTERY INFUSION THERAPY
The use of HAI therapy requires a surgical procedure coupled with the risk of infection and bleeding associated with the requirement for the placement of a
semipermanent catheter and port. One approach to circumvent the cost and toxicities associated with chronic indwelling devices is the use of an intermittently placed
percutaneous hepatic arterial catheter. The feasibility of this approach has been demonstrated by several groups. 118,119 Jung and colleagues demonstrated the safety
and feasibility of the approach in 21 patients with primary or metastatic cancer in the liver. Major complications requiring catheter removal and reimplantation occurred
in 19% of patients. Patients with metastatic breast cancer to the liver were treated with percutaneous hepatic artery infusion of cisplatin, 120 mg/m 2 (31 patients), or
vinblastine, 2 mg/m 2 (26 patients), daily for 5 days each month via percutaneous hepatic artery catheters. 71,120 Partial responses were noted in 19% of patients treated
with platinum and 36% of those treated with vinblastine, and toxicities were found to be acceptable with both regimens. Experience using this approach in 36 patients
treated at the University of Nebraska has been published. 121 Patients entered onto this trial had unresectable hepatic metastases from colorectal carcinoma and were
treated with FUDR plus LV continuously for 4 days via hepatic arterial infusion followed in 1 week by intravenous continuous infusion 5-FU and oral LV for 21 days
each month for six cycles followed by maintenance systemic 5-FU and oral LV. The overall response rate was 45%, with a median survival of 1 year.
HEPATIC ARTERY INFUSION WITH VENOUS FILTRATION
An interesting approach to enable the use of high doses of chemotherapy while limiting systemic toxicities involves the use of venous filtration wherein high doses of
cytotoxins may be administered into the arterial supply while the liver and hepatic venous blood is collected via a catheter positioned in the retrohepatic vena cava
and in which balloons are inflated above and below the hepatic veins to isolate and collect hepatic venous effluent. The collected blood is passed through a
charcoal-containing device capable of filtering the cytotoxic compounds and returned to the systemic circulation. This technique was originally developed by
Ravikumar and coworkers at Yale University School of Medicine. 122 They applied this approach to 23 patients with primary or metastatic hepatic cancers using either
high doses of 5-FU (1000 to 5000 mg/m 2) in 12 patients or doxorubicin (50 to 120 mg/m 2) in nine patients. Each patient received at least two treatments with a 3-week
interval between treatments. The extraction efficiency of the system was 64% to 91% and accompanied by acceptable toxicity. The most common toxicity was
neutropenia and transient hypotension due to the catecholamine-depleting effects of the charcoal filters and diminished cardiac return during the procedure.
Dose-limiting myelotoxicity was observed at 5000 mg/m 2 of 5-FU and 120 mg/m2 of doxorubicin. Similar results were obtained from investigators at M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center in ten patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma wherein dose-limiting toxicities were encountered at 120 mg/m 2 of doxorubicin. This
approach holds promise for the delivery of relatively high doses of chemotherapy into an isolated organ; however, because the isolation is not complete, systemic
toxicities limit drug exposure; thus, the value of this approach clearly requires further investigation.
In an attempt to simplify the technique, Ku and colleagues from Japan have developed a single-catheter technique of hepatic isolation and charcoal hemoperfusion
that required only a single cutdown rather than the three needed for the double-balloon technique described previously. 123 They compared their single-catheter
technique with the original technique as developed by Ravikumar in 16 patients, with either primary or metastatic cancer to the liver. Nine of these patients were
treated using the new technique and seven using the original double-balloon technique. Although this group found either technique feasible and relatively safe, their
study suggests that the single-catheter technique may result in a significant decrease in systemic exposure, presumably due to greater efficiency of removal of the
cytotoxin from the venous effluent. The hemofiltration concept was further tested in 23 patients with hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer (seven previously
treated with 5-FU/LV) who were treated with hepatic arterial chemotherapy using a combination of mitomycin (30 to 50 mg/m 2) and epirubicin (60 to 90 mg/m 2)
combined with intraperitoneal cisplatin (60 mg/m 2) coupled with a venous filtration catheter placed in the retrohepatic inferior vena cava. 124 This high-dose regimen
was supplemented with four subsequent cycles of the same agents given at more standard doses. The investigators found this regimen to be feasible and associated
with acceptable toxicities that included grade 3 to 4 hematologic (12%), gastrointestinal (19%), and hepatic effects (9%) and pain (9%). They identified an overall
response rate of 59%, with a median duration of response of 10 months and an overall median survival of 14 months. In a subsequent study from investigators in
Belgium, hemofiltration was used in eight patients with unresectable hepatic metastases from colorectal carcinoma. This group used hepatic arterial infusion of 5-FU,
mitomycin C, and doxorubicin. They noted a 46% overall response rate with essentially negligible major gastrointestinal or renal toxicities. 125
ISOLATED HEPATIC PERFUSION
IHP is a regional treatment that has been used at a limited number of centers since its original clinical application in the 1950s 126 and is similar to isolated limb
perfusion used for extremity melanoma or sarcoma in which the cancer-bearing region is perfused with a recirculating closed circuit containing a reservoir, heat
exchanger for delivery of hyperthermia, and roller pump (see Chapter 29.3).127 IHP is administered via a major operative procedure during which the liver is
extensively mobilized to prevent leak of systemic perfusate during treatment. Venous outflow is from a cannula positioned in an isolated segment of the retrohepatic

inferior vena cava and arterial inflow is through a cannula or cannulae placed in the gastroduodenal artery and sometimes in the portal vein. During perfusion the
splanchnic portal venous and inferior vena caval blood flow is temporarily occluded and must be shunted to the systemic circulation using a venovenous bypass
circuit similar to that used in hepatic transplantation procedures. 128
Because of its technical complexity, the morbidity associated with the procedure reported in older series, and the lack of documented efficacy using
chemotherapeutics alone, 127 it has not gained widespread or consistent clinical evaluation. However, in the early 1990s, several centers initiated trials of IHP using
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and melphalan with the benefit of continuous intraoperative leak monitoring using radiolabeled erythrocytes or albumin to ensure minimal
or no leak of perfusate during treatment. 129 There are data from three centers in Europe and the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Maryland, reporting results
with IHP using TNF and melphalan ( Table 52.3-8). De Vries and coworkers treated nine patients with advanced unresectable metastatic cancer confined to liver and
reported a considerable treatment mortality of 33% but did observe significant antitumor activity. 130,131 However, the median duration of response was only 18 weeks,
and median survival was 10 months. Oldhafer and coworkers reported a series of 12 patients of whom six received TNF and melphalan. 132 Tumor biopsies obtained
on posttreatment day 1 showed tumor necrosis in most patients and there was an overall radiographic response rate of 50% and a median survival of 11 months. A
Swedish group treated 11 patients and had an operative mortality of 18%. Antitumor activity was observed in three of six patients with ocular melanoma to liver and in
zero of five patients with colorectal cancer. The modest antitumor activity may be secondary to the low doses of agents used, only 0.2 to 0.3 mg of TNF and 0.5 mg/kg
of melphalan, which are considerably lower than the maximum safe tolerated doses determined in phase I trials at the National Cancer Institute. 127,133

TABLE 52.3-8. Summary of Isolated Hepatic Perfusion Trial Using Tumor Necrosis Factor and Chemotherapeutics

Alexander and coworkers from the National Cancer Institute reported results in 34 patents with metastatic unresectable cancers confined to liver using 1 mg of TNF
and 1.5 mg/kg of melphalan. 134 Treatment mortality was 3% and despite the fact that most had received previous therapy and many had advanced tumor burden in
liver, there was an overall radiographic response rate of 75%. Responses were consistent across all histologies treated, including ocular melanoma and colorectal
cancer and observed in those with advanced disease ( Table 52.3-9). More recently, results in 51 patents with isolated unresectable colorectal cancer confined to liver
treated with IHP using TNF and melphalan or melphalan alone followed by HAI therapy using FUDR and LV have been presented by the group. 135Seventy-three
percent of patents had failed previous systemic therapy with a 5-FU–based regimen. There was one treatment-related mortality (2%). Of note, the overall responses
remained similar to their initial report, 77% for patents treated with TNF and melphalan IHP and 74% for patents treated with IHP using melphalan alone, but median
time to progression in liver was significantly prolonged with the addition of HAI therapy (10 months vs. 14.5 months, respectively). These data suggest that continued
clinical evaluation of IHP for patents with advanced refractory metastatic cancers confined to liver is warranted.

TABLE 52.3-9. Response to Isolated Hepatic Perfusion Based on Number of Lesions, Diameter of Largest Tumor, or Percent Hepatic Replacement in Patients
Treated with Tumor Necrosis Factor and Melphalan

Chemoembolization
Chemoembolization involves the administration of chemotherapy followed by vascular occlusion using a variety of agents such as degradable starch microspheres,
gelatin powders, polyvinyl chloride, or pledgets. Responding patients usually undergo multiple procedures over time as tumors and vasculature regrow. This approach
has been widely applied in the treatment of primary hepatocellular carcinoma (see Chapter 33.5). For patients with metastatic cancer, the most common application is
in patients with unresectable metastases from carcinoid or islet cell tumors. Because most tumors are highly vascular and have an indolent course in many patients, a
partial response can provide long-term palliation. Furthermore, many patients who do not achieve an objective response have improvements in symptoms resulting
from hormonal secretion. The overall objective response rate tends to be in the range of 30% to 50%, and the great majority of patients show reduced hormone
secretion and improvement of symptoms (Table 52.3-10). Although there has been a shift in practice from embolization alone to chemoembolization with a variety of
agents, there is no clear evidence that the use of chemotherapy improves response or patient outcome. 136

TABLE 52.3-10. Outcome in Patients with Neuroendocrine Tumors Metastatic to the Liver after Chemoembolization

Chemoembolization has also been attempted for patients with colorectal cancer metastatic to the liver. In contrast to neuroendocrine tumors, most patients with

metastatic colorectal cancer demonstrate a more aggressive course both within the liver and systemically. Two small randomized trials showed no statistically
significant benefit of chemoembolization over embolization only ( Table 52.3-11).

TABLE 52.3-11. Outcome in Patients with Colorectal Cancer Metastatic to the Liver after Chemoembolization

Embolization procedures cause significant pain (requiring narcotic analgesics), fever, nausea, and malaise lasting 2 to 7 days in nearly all patients. Portal venous
thrombosis, while rarely seen (in contrast to hepatocellular carcinoma), is an absolute contraindication to hepatic arterial embolization.
Chemoembolization Plus Adjuvant Chemotherapy
Chemoembolization appears to have value as a local therapy for patients with liver-only or liver-predominant unresectable carcinoma. Given the potential value of
adjuvant chemotherapy after hepatic resection, at least two groups have sought to investigate the potential value of adjuvant chemotherapy after chemoembolization
in patients with gastrointestinal malignancies metastatic to the liver. The Puget Sound Oncology Consortium performed an investigation of alternating systemic
continuous infusion 5-FU (250 mg/m 2/d for 28 days) interspersed with two or three transcatheter arterial chemoembolization treatments using foam particles with
cisplatin in 32 patients. Although this group believed that toxicity was acceptable with this regimen, they did have grade 3 toxicities occur in 81% of patients and grade
4 in 31%. Furthermore, the overall 40% response rate, median duration of response of 4.2 months and overall median survival of 14.3 months are similar to what one
might anticipate with systemic chemotherapy alone. 137 A similar experience was published by the Southwest Oncology Group, who combined chemoembolization
(collagen mixed with cisplatin, mitomycin C, and doxorubicin) with systemic continuous infusion 5-FU/LV in 31 patients. This group found an overall response rate of
29% with a median survival of 14 months. 138 These outcomes are similar to what one might have anticipated with the use of systemic chemotherapy alone. Thus, the
value of combining hepatic chemoembolization with adjuvant chemotherapy using agents currently available does not appear promising.

LOCAL ABLATIVE THERAPY
Several techniques are being used for local ablation of hepatic metastases, including cryotherapy, percutaneous injection of toxic agents, hyperthermic coagulative
necrosis, and newer experimental techniques (Table 52.3-12).139 The goal of local ablative therapy is to achieve complete necrosis of the tumor with minimal injury to
surrounding normal hepatic parenchyma. Currently, their use is indicated in patients who are not surgical candidates, for those whose tumors are not amenable to
resection because of multiple tumors involving both lobes, tumors arising in cirrhotic livers in which preservation of parenchyma is imperative, tumors straddling the
interlobar plane that would otherwise require an extended resection, recurrent tumors after previous resection in which reresection may be unsafe or anatomically
impossible, and as an adjunct to surgical resection by treating microscopically positive margins.

TABLE 52.3-12. Techniques for Local Ablation

Limitations of local ablation therapies include the inability to treat subclinical or occult tumor deposits, inability to treat tumors larger than several centimeters in
diameter, inability to treat tumors abutting major vascular structures, and difficulty in assessing the adequacy of tissue destruction during therapy. Real-time
ultrasound and MRI scanning are routinely used during treatment, but further refinement in technique and imaging is required.
CRYOTHERAPY
Cryotherapy is a term representing the in situ destruction of tissue by the freeze and thaw process. James Arnott first used freezing to decrease the size of breast and
cervical cancers in England in 1845. 140 The most widespread application has been in the field of dermatology in which the cure rate for skin tumors has been reported
at 97% to 98%. Subsequently, encouraging results have been reported with deep tumors of the liver, lung, breast, prostate, and brain. The process of freezing tissue
can cause direct cellular destruction that is dependent on the rate of tissue cooling, and this can be variable during cryosurgery. Microcirculatory failure secondary to
freezing within the vasculature and subsequent vascular damage may be an additional tumoricidal mechanism. 141
Two main technical advances have made cryotherapy applicable to liver tumors on a broad scale. The first is the development of vacuum-insulated cryoprobes that
allow controlled freezing of tumors deep within the liver, and the second is the use of intraoperative ultrasound to allow precise probe placement into the center of
tumors and to monitor the progression of the freeze margin in real time. 142 The most commonly used probes range from 6 to 12 mm in diameter and a disk-shaped
probe can be used for freezing thin surface lesions or for freezing a positive or close resection margin. Liquid nitrogen is circulated through the tip of the probes at a
temperature of –196°C, which results in a probe-tip temperature between –160°C and –180°C. The probe is placed into the center of the lesion under ultrasound
guidance to ensure that uniform freezing will extend symmetrically in all directions from the tip of the probe. Repeated freeze and thaw cycles can improve tumor cell
killing 143 and vascular inflow occlusion to the liver (Pringle's maneuver) can improve the cooling rate and may allow successful freezing of larger tumors with smaller
probes.
The 8-mm probe can reliably create a spheric ice ball of 3 cm, and the 12-mm probe can create an ice ball of 5 cm in nonischemic liver. Newer cryosurgical systems
are designed to allow simultaneous circulation of liquid nitrogen through multiple probes. 144 Smaller 2- to 3-mm needle tip probes have been used in combination to
freeze large tumors and minimize bleeding from the probe tract in the liver. Smaller probes can be inserted through laparoscopic ports. The advancing interface
between frozen tissue and normal tissue can be monitored by ultrasound as a distinct hyperechoic ring. 145 The advancement of this ring is monitored until it extends at
least 1 cm beyond the tumor in all directions. The ice ball creates an acoustic shadow, making it impossible to monitor the advancement of all edges simultaneously.
The ultrasound transducer should be moved as necessary to visualize the entire circumference and ensure complete freezing to 1 cm beyond the tumor.

A number of studies were published in the early 1990s from centers reporting their initial experience with the technique. Zhou et al. from the Shanghai Medical
University in China reported a series of 107 patients with primary liver cancer treated with cryotherapy 146 and observed a 5-year survival of 15% for 49 patients
treated with cryotherapy. Onik and coworkers reported a series of 59 patients with unresectable hepatic metastases treated with cryosurgery. 147 At a median follow-up
of 21 months the disease-free survival rate was 27% and overall survival was 52.5%. The number of tumors treated ranged from one to 16, and 73% of patients
treated had bilobar disease and many had tumors directly abutting major vessels. Ravikumar and coworkers reported an initial series of 32 patients treated with
cryosurgery resulting in a 2-year disease-free survival of 28% and overall survival of 62%. 148 A second series from the same investigator 26 reported results in 21
patients undergoing cryosurgery and at a median follow-up of 16 months. In both series, the liver recurrence rate was approximately 25% to 30%, and one-half of
patients failed systemically. Preketes and coworkers have reported their results of cryosurgery in 38 patients with unresectable multiple liver metastases from
colorectal carcinoma. 149 They report a 12.5% 2-year survival rate for the 11 patients receiving cryotherapy alone.
Currently, the world literature reports results in more than 900 patients treated with the technique, 150 with more recent reports detailing patient, treatment, and tumor
parameters associated with successful outcome. 151,152,153,154 and 155 Seifert and Morris reported that 116 patients with colorectal cancer treated with cryotherapy had an
overall morbidity of 28%. 154 There was a single mortality secondary to treatment (0.9%). Factors found to be independently correlated with favorable outcome after
therapy are listed in Table 52.3-13. In a second report of 85 patients presumably also included in the first series, the mean disease-free interval at the cryosite was 42
months and was 60% at 3 years.155 The median hepatic disease-free interval was 15 months and 17% at 3 years. Weaver and coworkers reported a median survival
of 34 months and an 82% hepatic recurrence rate in 136 patients undergoing 158 cryotherapy procedures. 153 Repeat156 and laparoscopic treatments 157,158 have been
reported.

TABLE 52.3-13. Factors with Independent Prognostic Significance in Colorectal Patients Undergoing Cryotherapy of Hepatic Metastases

A single prospective random assignment trial evaluating cryosurgery versus conventional resection in patients with liver metastases from a variety of histologies has
been reported. 159 Liver recurrences and overall survival were similar in both groups, and the authors concluded that cryotherapy is as effective as surgical resection
for liver metastases. However, the heterogeneous nature of the patients treated and the unconventional treatment administered routinely to patients postoperatively
make the interpretation of the data difficult. Others have reported results in patients with neuroendocrine 160 or other tumors161,162 of the liver and have reported good
palliation and a greater than 90% reduction in circulating tumor-related functional proteins (i.e., gastrin or 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid) in more than 90% of patients for
a median of 10 to 13 months after cryotherapy. 160,163
In general, cryotherapy is considered a safe and effective means for treating hepatic tumors of all histologies with low morbidity. Cryotherapy has also been used in
conjunction with hepatic resection to assist in resection of a deep-seated lesion, 164,165 treat an inadequate margin after resection, 166 and in addition to resection to
preserve hepatic tissue. 167 The main advantage of cryotherapy over surgery is the minimal damage suffered by the normal hepatic parenchyma and the avoidance of
the risk of hemorrhage and damage to bile ducts that occurs during parenchymal dissection. Most patients experience an increase in liver enzymes to approximately
twice normal, with normalization by postoperative day 5. Leukocytosis and low-grade fevers are common. Hemorrhage from the probe tract is generally easily
controlled with pressure, packing with absorbable gelatin sponge or absorbable knitted fabric, or both. Complications related specifically to cryotherapy include
pleural effusions in 6%, hepatic cracking with associated intraoperative hemorrhage in 4%, biliary fistula in 3%, abscess in 1.7%, and myoglobinuria with renal failure
in 1.4%. 150,168
CRYOTHERAPY PLUS ADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY
Given the potential value of adjuvant chemotherapy in the setting of hepatic resection, it may be reasonable to expect a similar improvement in outcome with the
addition of adjuvant chemotherapy to other local ablative therapies, including cryotherapy. A study from Australia (38 patients) and one from New Zealand (30
patients) investigated the value of adjuvant chemotherapy after cryotherapy in patients who had hepatic colorectal metastases that were deemed inoperable. 149,169
Each of these groups of investigators found the regimen of hepatic cryotherapy followed by hepatic arterial chemotherapy using 5-FU plus LV to be relatively safe and
well tolerated, and each found a similar median survival of approximately 18 months in patients treated with the combined approach. In a small group of 11 patients
nonrandomly treated with cryotherapy alone in the Australian trial, the investigators noted a median survival of only 8 months, suggesting that adjuvant chemotherapy
may well be a useful adjunct to hepatic cryotherapy. Using systemic 5-FU plus LV, a group of investigators from Roswell Park Cancer Institute found that the use of
this adjuvant systemic chemotherapy in four patients treated with prior cryotherapy was highly toxic and recommended caution when combining systemic adjuvant
chemotherapy with cryotherapy.170
MICROWAVE TISSUE COAGULATION AND RADIOFREQUENCY ABLATION
Another form of local ablative therapy for liver tumors is percutaneous microwave or hyperthermic coagulation. A probe inserted into the middle of a tumor emits
microwaves or radiowaves from its tip, which heats the surrounding tissue. Energy penetrates a few centimeters into the surrounding tissue, causes molecular
vibration of dipoles (particularly of water), and is converted to heat, resulting in tissue coagulative necrosis. A single electrode emitting 2450 MHz for 60 seconds
produces coagulation necrosis of a spindle-shaped region approximately 2 cm in diameter. 171 Evaluation of the zone of necrosis in real time can be achieved with
ultrasound, which shows strong hyperechogenic foci representing cellular destruction. Percutaneous microwave coagulation has efficacy in ablating hepatocellular
tumors up to 6.5 cm in diameter.172 Microwave therapy has advantages over laser photocoagulation as a larger zone of necrosis can be obtained with a shorter
treatment.173 In contrast to other forms of local ablation, the zone of cellular destruction does not extend beyond the tip of the electrode. This allows precise treatment
at the deep edge of the tumor where ultrasound visualization is often limited. 171
A number of studies have been reported outlining results in patients treated with percutaneous or open radiofrequency thermal ablation (RFA) ( Table 52.3-14). The
success of RFA in successful ablation of primary or metastatic tumor deposits within the liver is influenced by the expertise and diligence of the treating physician to
ensure that an adequate zone of thermal necrosis has been delivered to the entire tumor. For large tumors, this requires multiple consecutive propregnant placements
and, because the zone of thermal necrosis cannot be definitively imaged with intraoperative ultrasound, it is somewhat difficult to determine which areas within a large
tumor have or have not been adequately treated. Solbiati and coworkers reported results in 29 patients with 44 hepatic metastases ranging in size from 1.3 to 5.1 cm
in diameter. 174 The authors report successful ablation of all identifiable tumor in 91% of treated metastases, but a local progression rate of 34%. Liviaghi and
coworkers subsequently reported a series of 14 patients with liver metastases and one patient with a primary cholangiocarcinoma treated with RFA. 175 Fourteen of 25
lesions were completely obliterated and ranged in size from 1.2 to 3.9 cm. Partial necrosis in 12 additional lesions was noted, with diameters ranging from 1.5 to 4.5
cm. Nagata and coworkers reported results of RFA treatment in 173 patients with primary or hepatic cancers. 176 Additional therapy, including arterial embolization,
radiotherapy, immunotherapy, and systemic chemotherapy, were also combined with RFA treatment in this series. Treatments were administered percutaneously, and
more than 80% of patients underwent more than four sessions of RFA. In 45 patients treated with metastatic tumor deposits, there was no response or disease
progression in 53%. Cuschieri and coworkers reported results of microscopically administered ultrasound-guided RFA of hepatic tumors and successfully achieved
total ablation in seven of eight patients with metastatic colorectal cancer to the liver. 177 At the time of publication, follow-up ranged from 6 to 20 months, and eight of
ten patients remained free of tumor. The largest series of patients treated with RFA was reported by Curley and coworkers from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. 178

The investigators treated 123 patients with RFA either using the percutaneous or open operative technique with ultrasound guidance. A total of 169 tumors ranging in
size from 0.5 to 12 cm (median diameter, 3.4 cm) were ablated. Three-fourths of patients underwent open operative RFA, and there were no treatment-related deaths
in the study. The authors report three tumor recurrences in 169 treated lesions (1.8%) at a median follow-up of 15 months (see Table 52.3-14). The low recurrence
rate may be due to the fact that many patients were treated operatively to facilitate probe placement and more reliably assess adequacy of therapy. In addition, the
authors used inflow occlusion via the Pringle's maneuver, which may have enhanced the effectiveness of the thermal ablation. However, it should be noted the
intraoperative use of RFA does not take full advantage of its technology. For example, the small probe size and the fact that the tissue is cauterized along the track
eliminates the risk of bleeding from the probe track or cracking of the liver on removal of the probe. For patients undergoing operative local ablative therapy, the use
of cryotherapy allows one to use real-time intraoperative ultrasound to accurately assess the adequacy of the zone of destruction, which is more difficult to assess
using RFA. In practice, the technology behind the various local ablative therapies is evolving, and, as smaller probe sizes are developed and techniques for
monitoring adequacy of tissue destruction are refined, the advantages of one form of ablative therapy over another may become increasingly obscure.

TABLE 52.3-14. Local Recurrence after Radiofrequency Ablation of Hepatic Neoplasms

RADIOFREQUENCY ABLATION PLUS ADJUVANT CHEMOTHERAPY
A group of investigators from Japan investigated the feasibility of combining intrahepatic artery 5-FU (750 to 1250 mg) administered as a weekly 5-hour infusion with
RFA therapy in nine patients with hepatic metastases from colorectal carcinoma. 179 These investigators found the combination to be feasible and safe with three of
nine patients surviving for more than 2 years. Clearly, the potential value of adjuvant chemotherapy in the setting of local therapy using radiofrequency should be
further investigated.
INTERSTITIAL LASER PHOTOCOAGULATION
Interstitial laser photocoagulation is a minimally invasive technique for local ablation of tumors first developed in 1983. 180 A thin optical fiber is inserted
percutaneously into the center of a liver tumor and a laser light is delivered to the tip of the fiber. The laser light emitted from the fiber tip is absorbed as heat by the
surrounding tumor. The laser light penetrates the surrounding tissue in an isotropic fashion around the fiber tip. In general, 1 to 2 W of continuous near-infrared laser
energy is delivered for durations of 300 to 1000 seconds. Most of the work has been performed with a neodymium:yttrium aluminum garnet laser. Cells in the target
volume undergo coagulative necrosis resulting from protein denaturation at temperatures greater than 60°C. 181 Special diffusion fiber tips have been developed to
allow even scatter and penetration of the laser light throughout the tumor, avoiding a local charring effect that subsequently blocks laser penetration. 182
As with cryotherapy, the zone of tissue necrosis can be followed in real time by ultrasound and MRI. 183 The accuracy of ultrasound during the treatment of large
tumors is inferior to the results with cryotherapy. 184 Tumors up to 9 cm have been treated with this technique using multiple probes and multiple treatment sessions. In
general, a single probe is adequate for a tumor 0.5 cm in diameter. If multiple probes are necessary, they are spaced 1.0 to 1.5 cm apart. This is adequate to achieve
complete homogeneous necrosis between the fiber tips. 184 As with cryotherapy, this treatment is less effective in tumors close to large vessels, as the blood flow cools
the adjacent tissue, preventing thermal necrosis. The advantage over cryotherapy is the small size of the delivery fibers, allowing accurate and safe percutaneous
insertion.
Clinical reports of interstitial laser photocoagulation are limited. Amin and coworkers reported results in a total of 55 tumors with interstitial laser photocoagulation. 185
Eighty-two percent of tumors had a partial response (greater than 50% necrosis identified on CT imaging), and 38% underwent complete necrosis. Metastases smaller
than 4 cm responded better than larger tumors. Complications were minimal, but included pain, subcapsular hematoma, and pleural effusion. Nolsoe and coworkers
reported a pilot study of 11 patients with 16 colorectal liver metastases. 186 Twelve of 16 tumors were considered completely destroyed by the procedure, including a
3.7-cm tumor. No serious complications were encountered. Amin and coworkers compared interstitial laser photocoagulation in 54 colorectal liver metastases with
percutaneous alcohol injection in 22 tumors. 184 They report that 52% of tumors treated with photocoagulation had complete necrosis of the tumor on dynamic CT scan
compared with zero patients receiving alcohol injection. There were no major complications in either group, but pain was more significant in the alcohol-injected
group.
In summary, interstitial laser photocoagulation is a safe and simple technique for treating small localized liver tumors. The zone of necrosis is smaller than with
cryotherapy, thereby requiring multiple probes per tumor. This makes following the progression of cellular destruction with ultrasound more difficult and increases the
chance of leaving viable cells. Further refinements in imaging may make this treatment more successful.
PERCUTANEOUS ETHANOL INJECTION
Percutaneous ethanol injections into malignant deposits in the liver have most broadly been applied to the treatment of patients with hepatocellular carcinomas. The
density of tumors associated with hepatocellular carcinoma and the common occurrence of this malignancy in the setting of severe underlying hepatic disease lends
itself to this form of local therapy as opposed to surgical resection, which is often not possible in patients with severe underlying hepatic cirrhosis. Currently, there are
no randomized studies comparing the value of percutaneous ethanol injection with any of the other local modalities for the treatment of patients with hepatic
malignancy. Thus, its value relative to other local techniques is uncertain. However, there have been several series of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma treated
by percutaneous ethanol injection reported in the literature, primarily from investigators in Japan and Italy. In patients with hepatocellular carcinoma with either single
or multiple hepatic tumors treated with curative intent, the investigators from Japan found 3- and 5-year overall survival rates of 62% to 65% and 28% to 52%,
respectively.187,188 The 3-year recurrence rate for these patients was approximately 60% to 65%, with the vast majority of new recurrences occurring in portions of the
liver not previously treated with ethanol injections. The 3- and 5-year overall survival rates were slightly better in the studies from Italy (approximately 70% and 40%,
respectively); however, these differences may well be attributed to the differences in the underlying hepatic disease, which is an important prognostic factor. 189,190
Patients classified as Child's A have a 2-year survival, approximately twofold greater than those patients classified as Child's C (approximately 90% vs. less than
40%, respectively). In addition to Child's classification, the prognosis of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma is negatively influenced by a greater number of
deposits of carcinoma as well as increasing size of the deposits and elevated pretreatment a-fetoprotein levels. 191 Although generally restricted to patients with tumors
smaller than approximately 3 to 5 cm in size, Livraghi and colleagues published their experience with percutaneous ethanol injection in 108 patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma with tumors larger than 5 cm and performed in a single session under general anesthesia. Despite the size of the lesions treated, this group
found a 3-year survival of 57% for those in patients with single lesions measuring 5.0 to 8.5 cm and 42% for those with multiple lesions measuring 5 to 10 cm. 192 The
overall rate of major complications in this study was less than 5%, thus suggesting that percutaneous ethanol injections may be a useful modality even in the setting of
lesions up to 10 cm in size.
Although no randomized comparisons between percutaneous ethanol injection and hepatectomy have been performed, several studies address this issue through
retrospective comparisons or the use of contemporary patient cohorts. In a cohort study from Spain, 193 patients with solitary hepatocellular carcinomas smaller than or
equal to 4 cm were treated with surgical resection (n = 33) or percutaneous ethanol injection (n = 30). Despite a significant increased proportion of Child's A patients
in the surgically treated group (91% vs. 33%) and a decreased proportion of patients with ascites (6% vs. 47%), these authors found that the overall survival rates in
the two groups were not different. Similar results were obtained in a study of 40 patients with solitary hepatocellular carcinomas smaller than 2 cm in diameter treated

by Kotoh and colleagues wherein 17 were treated with hepatectomy, 12 with percutaneous ethanol injection, and 11 with a combination of percutaneous ethanol
injections and arterial embolization with gel-containing mitomycin C and Adriamycin. These authors found no difference in median survival (3.5 to 4.0 years) or
recurrence rates (70% to 80%) between patients undergoing hepatectomy versus those treated with ethanol injection with or without arterial embolization despite a
greater proportion of patients with Child's class A disease in the surgically treated group (73% vs. 36%). 194 In a large retrospective analysis of 391 patients, Livraghi
and colleagues found no difference in 3-year survival for 120 patients treated by surgical resection (79% Child's A; 40% Child's B) versus 155 treated by
percutaneous ethanol injection (71% Child's A; 41% Child's B); however, they noted a significantly inferior (threefold lower) survival for those patients who were not
treated with either percutaneous ethanol injection or hepatectomy. 195 Similarly, Orlando and colleagues used a matched historic comparison group to compare the
outcome of this untreated group (65 patients) with small hepatocellular carcinomas (smaller than 4 cm) with 35 patients treated by percutaneous ethanol injection and
found that the 3-year survival of patients treated with percutaneous ethanol injections was superior to the historic comparison group (33% vs. 14%, respectively), but
that the primary difference in survival outcome was restricted to those patients with Child's A disease (71% vs. 21%, respectively) whereas those with Child's B had a
similar, but poor, 3-year survival outcome regardless of whether they were treated with percutaneous ethanol injections or left untreated (9% for both groups). 196
These results suggest that percutaneous ethanol injections may be associated with a more favorable outcome compared with those patients who are treated with best
supportive care only and that clinical outcome with this form of local therapy may be similar to that of hepatectomy.
Given the potential value of percutaneous ethanol injections and transcatheter arterial embolization, several groups have combined these two approaches. In 86
patients with Child's class A or B cirrhosis and large hepatocellular carcinomas (3.1 to 8.0 cm), Lencioni and colleagues found 69% and 47% 3- and 5-year survivals,
with 56% and 82% recurrence rates at 3 and 5 years in patients treated with transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (gelatin sponge with epirubicin emulsified in
iodized oil) followed by percutaneous ethanol injection. 197 Investigators in Germany compared the survival of 132 patients with inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma
nonrandomly treated with best supportive care (45 patients) or percutaneous ethanol infusion (15 patients), or transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (33 patients),
or the combination of both local therapies (39 patients). 198 These investigators found that patients treated with a combination of percutaneous ethanol infusion and
transarterial chemoembolization had an improved survival when compared with those patients treated with either chemoembolization alone or with best supportive
care only. However, patients treated with chemoembolization alone had larger and more advanced hepatic disease compared with those treated with ethanol alone or
the combination of local therapies, as ethanol injections (either alone or combined with chemoembolization) were reserved for those patients with fewer than three
lesions with none larger than 5 cm in size. Those assigned to supportive care had disease too advanced to be treated by either chemoembolization or alcohol
injections. Given these caveats, the supportive care group had the worst median survival compared with any of the treatment groups (2 months vs. 25 months in the
combination group). Although these data support the use and feasibility of combining transarterial chemoembolization with percutaneous ethanol injection, the true
value of this combined approach versus either approach used individually requires further investigations using a randomized prospective trial design.
RESULTS OF WHOLE LIVER IRRADIATION WITH OR WITHOUT CHEMOTHERAPY
Early studies demonstrated that whole liver radiation produces temporary palliation of pain for patients with cancer metastatic for the liver. 199 However, it was soon
discovered that doses greater than 30 to 35 Gy could produce a condition that has become known as radiation hepatitis.200,201 and 202 Radiation hepatitis is better
described as radiation-induced liver disease (RILD), as the pathologic evaluation shows no evidence of hepatitis. Patients who develop RILD present 2 weeks to 3
months after the completion of radiation therapy with weight gain and bloating, and, in severe cases, confusion. Jaundice as a presenting symptom is uncommon (and
suggests that the patient has already developed impending liver failure). Physical examination reveals anicteric ascites and painful hepatomegaly. Laboratory
evaluation shows a marked elevation of alkaline phosphatase out of proportion to the typically modest increases in alanine aminotransferase, aspartate
aminotransferase, and bilirubin (which tends to be unconjugated), elevations in prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time, and thrombocytopenia. Paracentesis
and radiologic studies (CT, MRI, or both) fail to show progressive disease. Liver biopsy reveals venoocclusive disease pathologically identical to that resulting from a
variety of insults. Although most patients recover in 1 to 2 months, 10% to 20% develop overt liver failure and death. 203,204
A tolerable whole liver dose produces only short-term palliation and patient survival ( Table 52.3-15). This is true regardless of whether the radiation is given daily or
twice daily in 1.5-Gy fractions. To attempt to improve on these results, whole liver radiation has been combined with systemic and hepatic arterial chemotherapy. The
most widely used drugs have been 5-FU 205 and FUDR,206,207 as both are cytotoxic and radiosensitizing agents. The objective response rates and survival after
combination chemoradiotherapy appears to be somewhat superior to that obtained by radiation alone ( Table 52.3-16). Whole liver radiation tolerance does not seem
to be affected by the concurrent use of fluoropyrimidines in contrast with other chemotherapeutic agents such as alkylating agents or mitomycin C, 208,209 and 210 which
appear to increase RILD risk. Tolerable courses (5% chance of RILD) for whole liver radiation in patients who have not received alkylator therapy appear to be 21 Gy
in 3-Gy fractions, 25 Gy in 2.5-Gy fractions, and 30 Gy in 2-Gy fractions.

TABLE 52.3-15. Results of Treatment of Metastatic Cancer to the Liver Treated with Whole Liver Irradiation Alone

TABLE 52.3-16. Results of Treatment of Metastatic Cancer to the Liver Treated with Whole Liver Irradiation with Chemotherapy

Three techniques have been explored to increase focal radiation dose: yttrium 90 microspheres, interstitial implantation of radioactive sources, and three-dimensional
conformal external-beam radiation. The theory behind the use of 90Y microspheres is described in the chapter on hepatocellular carcinoma (see Chapter 33.5). A
number of phase I trials have been conducted in patients with metastatic disease to the liver (chiefly colorectal cancer) demonstrating that an estimated whole liver
absorbed dose of 100 to 150 Gy is tolerable. Furthermore, in the range of 20% to 25% of patients have shown objective responses. 211,212,213 and 214 Should 90Y
microspheres become available for clinical use in the United States, it will be important to administer them with careful attention to technical details such as avoiding
pulmonary shunting and perfusion of other organs (such as the stomach) by aberrant blood vessels.
A second method of delivering high doses of radiation to parts of the liver is to use interstitial brachytherapy (placement of radioactive sources inside the tumor). In
one series, 22 patients were treated with a single high dose-rate application of 192 iridium placed in catheters implanted at the time of laparotomy. The time of

irradiation ranged from 10 minutes to 4.5 hours as a function of the size and number of lesions. 215 In another approach, permanent 125I seeds have been implanted at
the time of laparotomy or under ultrasound guidance. 216 The maximum tumor size in this latter series was smaller than 5 cm. Additional phase II experience is required
to assess the efficacy of these approaches.
External-beam irradiation can be used to treat patients with localized unresectable metastatic cancer to the liver. These efforts have been based on the hypothesis
that, just as substantial fractions of the liver can be resected if the remaining fraction can support liver function, focal high-dose liver radiation can be safely
administered if sufficient normal liver is spared. As summarized in the chapter on hepatobiliary cancer (see Chapter 33.5), conformal planning can use beams not
confined to the axial plane to reduce normal liver irradiation. 217,218 Furthermore, three-dimensional planned treatment has allowed the development of a quantitative
understanding of the relationships among dose, volume, and risk of complication. 218,219
A phase I and II trial for patients with unresectable hepatic cancer using either standard two-dimensional techniques 220 or three-dimensional conformal external-beam
irradiation combined with hepatic arterial FUDR have demonstrated that high-dose focal radiation can produce up to a 50% response rate in previously treated
patients. 221,222 However, the freedom from hepatic progression in one study was only 29% at 1 year, suggesting that higher doses will be required to produce
long-term control. 222 More recent results support the hypothesis that the dose delivered is an important prognostic factor in both local control and survival for patients
with metastatic colorectal cancer. In this study, dose is prescribed (to a maximum of 90 Gy) according to the fraction of normal liver that is spared based on a normal
tissue complication probability model (see Chapter 33.5). Patients who could receive greater than or less than 70 Gy have a median survival in excess of 17 months,
which approaches that achieved by surgical resection. Dose was an independent prognostic factor, and was not correlated with tumor size. 223

CONCLUSIONS
Despite the fact that isolated hepatic metastases are a significant clinical problem frequently associated with a poor prognosis, there are evolving regional treatment
strategies that increasingly expand the options available for patients afflicted with this condition. For patients with resectable hepatic deposits primarily of colorectal,
neuroendocrine, or genitourinary origin, the benefit in terms of overall survival or palliation appears to be well established. For patients undergoing resection for
colorectal cancer, various patient, tumor, and treatment variables have been identified as important prognostic factors and can be used to select patients for adjuvant
therapy. For those with unresectable colorectal cancers confined to the liver, HAI therapy using FUDR-based regimens have high response rates, but the influence on
overall survival has not been conclusively demonstrated. Local ablative therapies have the advantage of being able to ablate local tumor deposits, but their influence
on overall survival has not been demonstrated. As the technology behind local ablative treatments advances, they will no doubt become more widely used alone or in
combination with postablation HAI, systemic therapy, or both. Chemoembolization has been used in patients with advanced cancers of the liver and can result in
palliation in a significant percentage of those treated. Newer therapies, including IHP and gene therapy, are under active clinical evaluation and may gain more
widespread acceptance with further refinement of treatment in the future. HAI of a recombinant adenoviral construct containing the wild-type p53 gene is being
evaluated in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer to the liver. 224 The range of regional therapies highlight the acknowledged importance and difficulty in treating
hepatic metastases and provide an expectation that durable complete disease control within the liver with an associated improvement in quality of life and overall
survival may be routinely achieved.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Gragoudas ES, Egan KM, Seddon JM, et al. Survival of patients with metastases from uveal melanoma. Ophthalmology 1991;98:383.
2. Rajpal S, Moore R, Karakousis CP. Survival in metastatic ocular melanoma. Cancer 1983;52:334.
3. Goslin R, Steele G Jr, Zamcheck N. Factors influencing survival in patients with hepatic metastases from adenocarcinoma of the colon or rectum. Dis Colon Rectum 1982;25:749.
4. Daly JM, Kemeny NE. Metastatic cancer to the liver. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles & practice of oncology (5th ed). Philadelphia: LippincottRaven,
1997:2551.
5. Fong Y, Salo J. Surgical therapy of hepatic colorectal metastasis. Semin Oncol 1999;26:514.
6. Yoon SS, Tanabe KK. Surgical treatment and other regional treatments for colorectal cancer liver metastases. Oncologist 1999;4:197.
7. Choti MA, Bulkley GB. Management of hepatic metastases. Liver Transplant Surg 1999;5:65.
8. Curley SA, Vecchio R. New trends in the surgical treatment of colorectal cancer liver metastases. Tumori 1998;84:281.
9. Chen H, Pruitt A, Nicol TL, Gorgulu S, Choti MA. Complete hepatic resection of metastases from leiomyosarcoma prolongs survival. J Gastrointest Surg 1998;2:151.
10. Que FG, Nagorney DM, Batts KP, Linz LJ, Kvols LK. Hepatic resection for metastatic neuroendocrine carcinomas. Am J Surg 1995;169:36.
11. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics, 1999. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:8.
12. Görög D, Toth A, Weltner J. Prognosis of untreated liver metastasis from rectal cancer. Acta Chir Hung 1997;36:106.
13. Burke D, Allen-Mersh TG. Colorectal liver metastases. Postgrad Med J 1996;72:464.
14. Rougier P, Milan C, Lazorthes F, et al. Prospective study of prognostic factors in patients with unresected hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer. Br J Surg 1995;82:1397.
15. Palmer M, Petrelli NJ, Herrera L. No treatment option for liver metastases from colorectal adenocarcinoma. Dis Colon Rectum 1989;32:698.
16. Petrelli NJ, Bonnheim DC, Herrera LO. A proposed classification system for liver metastases from colorectal carcinoma. Dis Colon Rectum 1984;27:249.
17. Sutliff VE, Doppman JL, Gibril F, et al. Growth of newly diagnosed, untreated metastatic gastrinomas and predictors of growth patterns. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2420.
18. Lahr CJ, Soong S-J, Cloud G, et al. A multifactorial analysis of prognostic factors in patients with liver metastases from colorectal carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:720.
19. Finan PJ, Marshall RJ, Cooper EH, Giles GR. Factors affecting survival in patients presenting with synchronous hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer: a clinical and computer analysis. Br
J Surg 1985;72:373.
20. Ayoub J-P, Hess KR, Abbruzzese MC, et al. Unknown primary tumors metastatic to liver. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2105.
21. Seregard S, Kock E. Prognostic indicators following enucleation for posterior uveal melanoma. Acta Ophthalmol Scand 1995;73:340.
22. Kath R, Hayungs J, Bornfeld N, et al. Prognosis and treatment of disseminated uveal melanoma. Cancer 1993;72:2219.
23. Weber HC, Venzon DJ, Fishbein VA, et al. Determinants of metastatic rate and survival in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES): a prospective long-term study. Gastroenterology
1995;108:1637.
24. Yu F, Venzon DJ, Serrano J, et al. Prospective study of the clinical course, prognostic factors, causes of death, and survival in patients with long-standing Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. J Clin
Oncol 1999;17:615.
25. Fraker DL, Jensen RT. Cancer of the endocrine system. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology. Philadelphia: LipincottRaven, 1997:1678.
26. Ravikumar TS, Buenaventura S, Salem RR, D'Andrea B. Intraoperative ultrasonography of liver: detection of occult liver tumors and treatment by cryosurgery. Cancer Detect Prev 1994;18:131.
27. Inoue E, Fujita M, Hosomi N, et al. Double phase CT arteriography of the whole liver in the evaluation of hepatic tumors. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1998;22:64.
28. Johnson DBS, Francis IR, Eckhauser FE, Knol JA, Chang AE. Dual-phase helical CT of nonfunctioning islet cell tumors. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1998;22:59.
29. Ch'en IY, Katz DS, Jeffrey B Jr, et al. Do arterial phase helical CT images improve detection or characterization of colorectal liver metastases? J Comput Assist Tomogr 1997;21:391.
30. Oliver JH III, Baron RL, Federle MP, Jones BC, Sheng R. Hypervascular liver metastases: do unenhanced and hepatic arterial phase CT images affect tumor detection? Radiology
1997;205:709.
31. Paley MR, Ros PR. Hepatic metastases: computed tomography versus magnetic resonance imaging in 1997. Endoscopy 1997;29:524.
32. Reimer P, Tombach B. Hepatic MRI with SPIO: detection and characterization of focal liver lesions. Eur Radiol 1998;8:1198.
33. Awaya H, Ito K, Jonjo K, et al. Differential diagnosis of hepatic tumors with delayed enhancement at gadolinium-enhanced MRI: a pictorial essay. Clin Imaging 1998;22:180.
34. Delbeke D, Martin WH, Sandler MP, et al. Evaluation of benign vs malignant hepatic lesions with positron emission tomography. Arch Surg 1998;133:510.
35. Gibril F, Reynolds JC, Doppman JL, et al. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy: its sensitivity compared with that of other imaging methods in detecting primary and metastatic gastrinomas. A
prospective study. Ann Intern Med 1996;125:26.
36. Termanini B, Gibril F, Reynbolds JC, et al. Value of somatostatin receptor scintigraphy: a prospective study in gastrinoma of its effect on clinical management. Gastroenterology 1997;112:335.
37. Lamberts SWJ, Bakker WH, Reubi JC, Krenning EP. Somatostatin receptor imaging in the localization of endocrine tumors. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1246.
38. Termanini B, Gibril F, Doppman JL, et al. Distinguishing small hepatic hemangiomas from vascular liver metastases in gastrinoma: use of a somatostatin-receptor scintigraphic agent.
Radiology 1997;202:151.
39. Emond JC, Kelley SC, Heffron TG, et al. Surgical and anesthetic management of patients undergoing major hepatectomy using total vascular exclusion. Liver Transplant Surg 1996;2:91.
40. Melendez JA, Arslan V, Fischer ME, et al. Perioperative outcomes of major hepatic resections under low central venous pressure anesthesia: blood less, blood transfusion, and the risk of
postoperative renal dysfunction. J Am Coll Surg 1998;187:620(abst).
41. Nakamura S, Suzuki S, Konno H, Baba S. Resection of metastatic liver tumors with special reference to hepatic venous system. Hepato-gastroenterology 1998;45:24.
42. Miyazaki M, Ito H, Nakagawa K, et al. Aggressive surgical resection for hepatic metastases involving the inferior vena cava. Am J Surg 1999;177:294.
43. Cady B, Jenkins RL, Steele GD Jr, et al. Surgical margin in hepatic resection for colorectal metastasis. A critical and improvable determinant of outcome. Ann Surg 1998;227:566.
44. Ohlsson B, Stenram U, Tranberg K-G. Resection of colorectal liver metastases: 25-year experience. World J Surg 1998;22:268.
45. Fong Y, Fortner J, Sun RL, Brennan MF, Blumgart LH. Clinical score for predicting recurrence after hepatic resection for metastatic colorectal cancer. Ann Surg 1999;230:309.
46. Fuhrman GM, Curley SA, Hohn DC, Roh MS. Improved survival after resection of colorectal liver metastases. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:537.
47. Fong Y, Cohen AM, Fortner JG, et al. Liver resection for colorectal metastases. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:938.
48. Scheele J, Stang R, Altendorf-Hofmann A, Paul M. Resection of colorectal liver metastases. World J Surg 1995;19:59.
49. Nadig DE, Wade TP, Fairchild RB, Virgo KS, Johnson FE. Major hepatic resection. Indications and results in a National Hospital System from 1988 to 1992. Arch Surg 1997;132:115.
50. Bakalakos EA, Kim JA, Young DC, Martin EW Jr. Determinants of survival following hepatic resection for metastatic colorectal cancer. World J Surg 1998;22:399.
51. Doci R, Bignami P, Montalto F, Gennari L. Prognostic factors for survival and disease-free survival in hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer treated by resection. Tumori 1995;81:143(abst).
52. Jamison RL, Donohue JH, Nagorney DM, et al. Hepatic resection for metastatic colorectal cancer results in cure for some patients. Arch Surg 1997;132:505.
53. Cady B, Stone MD, McDermott WV Jr, et al. Technical and biological factors in disease-free survival after hepatic resection for colorectal cancer metastases. Arch Surg 1992;127:561.
54. Ambiru S, Miyazaki M, Isono T, et al. Hepatic resection for colorectal metastases. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:632.
55. Hughes KS, Simon R, Songhorabodi S. Resection of the liver for colorectal carcinoma metastases: a multi-institutional study of indications for resection. Surgery 1988;103:278.
56. Kin T, Nakajima Y, Kanehiro H, et al. Repeat hepatectomy for recurrent colorectal metastases. World J Surg 1998;22:1087.
57. Fernandez-Trigo V, Shamsa F, Sugarbaker PH. Repeat liver resections from colorectal metastasis. Surgery 1995;117:296.

58. Bines SD, Doolas A, Jenkins L, Millikan K, Roseman DL. Survival after repeat hepatic resection for recurrent colorectal hepatic metastases. Surgery 1996;120:591.
59. Adam R, Bismuth H, Castaing D, et al. Repeat hepatectomy for colorectal liver metastases. Ann Surg 1997;225:51.
60. Chiappa A, Zbar AP, Biella F, Staudacher C. Survival after repeat hepatic resection for recurrent colorectal metastases. Hepato-gastroenterology 1999;46:1065.
61. Curley SA, Roh MS, Chase JL. Adjuvant hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy after curative resection of colorectal liver metastases. Am J Surg 1993;66:746.
62. Lorenz M, Staib-Sebler E, Loch B. The value of postoperative hepatic arterial infusion following curative liver resection. Anticancer Res 1997;17:3825.
63. Okuno K, Shigeoka H, Lee YS. Adjuvant hepatic arterial IL-2 and MMC, 5-FU after curative resection of colorectal liver metastases. Hepato-gastroenterology 1996;43:688.
64. Ambiru S, Miyazaki H, Ito H. Adjuvant regional chemotherapy after hepatic resection for colorectal metastases. Br J Surg 1999;86:1025.
65. Kokudo N, Seki M, Ohta H, et al. Effects of systemic and regional chemotherapy after hepatic resection for colorectal metastases. Ann Surg Oncol 1998;5:706.
66. Nonami T, Takeuchi Y, Yasui M. Regional adjuvant chemotherapy after partial hepatectomy for metastatic colorectal carcinoma. Semin Oncol 1997;24:S6-130.
67. Kemeny MM, Adak S, Lipsitz S. Results of the intergroup [Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) and Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG)] prospective randomized study of surgery
alone versus continuous hepatic artery infusion of FuDR and continuous systemic infusion of 5FU after hepatic resection for colorectal liver metastases. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:1012.
68. Kemeny N, Huang Y, Cohen A, et al. Hepatic arterial infusion of chemotherapy after resection of hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;341:2039.
69. Lygidakis NJ, Ziras N, Parissis J. Resection versus resection combined with adjuvant pre- and post-operative chemotherapyimmunotherapy for metastatic colorectal liver cancer. A new look at
an old problem. Hepato-gastroenterology 1995;42:155.
70. Lorenz M, Müller H-H, Schramm H, et al. Randomized trial of surgery versus surgery followed by adjuvant hepatic arterial infusion with 5-fluorouracil and folinic acid for liver metastases of
colorectal cancer. Ann Surg 1998;228:756.
71. Fraschini G, Fleishman G, Charnsangavej C. Continuous 5-day infusion of vinblastine for percutaneous hepatic arterial chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer. Cancer Treat Rep
1987;11:1005.
72. Ochiai T, Sasako M, Mizuno S. Hepatic resection for metastatic tumours from gastric cancer: analysis of prognostic factors. Br J Surg 1994;81:1175.
73. Bines SD, England G, Deziel DJ, et al. Synchronous, metachronous and multiple hepatic resections of liver tumors originating from primary gastric tumors. Surgery 1993;114:799.
74. Thompson GB, van Heerden JA, Grant CS, Carney JA, Ilstrup DM. Islet cell carcinomas of the pancreas: a twenty-year experience. Surgery 1988;104:1011.
75. Declore R, Friesen SR. Gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors. J Am Coll Surg 1994;178:188.
76. Godwin JD. Carcinoid tumors: an analysis of 2837 cases. Cancer 1975;36:560.
77. Chen H, Hardacre JM, Uzra A, Cameron JL, Choti MA. Isolated liver metastases from neuroendocrine tumors: does resection prolong survival? J Am Coll Surg 1998;187:88.
78. Ihse I, Persson B, Tibblin S. Neuroendocrine metastases of the liver. World J Surg 1995;19:76.
79. Raab R, Nussbaum KT, Behrend M, Weimann A. Liver metastases of breast cancer: results of liver resection. Anticancer Res 1998;18:2231.
80. Elias D, Lasser PH, Montrucolli D, Bonvallot S, Spielmann M. Hepatectomy for liver metastases from breast cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol 1995;21:510.
81. Jaques DP, Coit DG, Casper ES, Brennan MF. Hepatic metastases from soft-tissue sarcoma. Ann Surg 1995;221:392.
82. Schwartz SI. Hepatic resection for noncolorectal nonneuroendocrine metastases. World J Surg 1995;19:72.
83. Salmon RJ, Levy C, Plancher C, et al. Treatment of liver metastases from uveal melanoma by combined surgery-chemotherapy. Eur J Surg Oncol 1998;24:127.
84. Harrison LE, Brennan MF, Newman E, et al. Hepatic resection for noncolorectal, nonneuroendocrine metastases: a fifteen-year experience with ninety-six patients. Surgery 1997;121:625.
85. Fujisaki S, Takayama T, Shimada K, et al. Hepatectomy for metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Hepato-gastroenterology 1997;44:817.
86. Niederhuber JE, Ensminger W, Gyves J, et al. Regional chemotherapy of colorectal cancer metastatic to the liver. Cancer 1984;53:1336.
87. Daly JM, Butler J, Kemeny N, et al. Predicting tumor response in patients with colorectal hepatic metastases. Ann Surg 1985;202:384.
88. Fordy C, Burke D, Earlam S, Twort P, Allen-Mersh TG. Treatment interruptions and complications with two continuous hepatic artery floxuridine infusion systems in colorectal liver metastases.
Br J Surg 1995;82:1023.
89. Curley SA, Chase JL, Roh MS, Hohn DC. Technical considerations and complications associated with the placement of 180 implantable hepatic arterial infusion devices. Surgery 1993;114:928.
90. Kemeny NE, Ron IG. Hepatic arterial chemotherapy in metastatic colorectal patients. Semin Oncol 1999;26:524.
91. Burke D, Earlan S, Fordy C, Allen-Mersh TG. Effect of aberrant hepatic arterial anatomy on tumour response to hepatic artery infusion of floxuridine for colorectal liver metastases. Br J Surg
1995;82:1098.
92. Sigurdson ER, Ridge JA, Daly JM. Fluorodeoxyuridine uptake by human colorectal hepatic metastases after hepatic artery infusion. Surgery 1986;100:285.
93. Bloom AI, Gordon RL, Ahl KH, et al. Transcatheter embolization for the treatment of misperfusion after hepatic artery chemoinfusion pump implantation. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:350.
94. Campbell KA, Burns RC, Sitzmann JV, et al. Regional chemotherapy devices: effect of experience and anatomy on complications. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:822.
95. Breedis C, Young G. Blood supply of neoplasms of the liver. Am J Pathol 1954;30:969.
96. Dorr RT, Von Hoff DD. Floxuridine. In: Anonymous, Cancer chemotherapy handbook. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1994:489.
97. Ensminger WD, Rosowsky A, Raso V, et al. A clinical-pharmacologic evaluation of hepatic arterial infusions of 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine and 5-fluorouracil. Cancer Res 1978;38:3784.
98. Ensminger WD, Walker SC, Stetson PL, et al. Clinical pharmacology of hepatic arterial infusions of 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine. Cancer Res 1996;54:2121.
99. Sigurdson ER, Ridge JA, Kemeny N, Daly JM. Tumor and liver drug uptake following hepatic artery and portal vein infusion in man. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1836.
100. Venook AP. Update on hepatic intra-arterial chemotherapy. Oncology 1997;11:947.
101. Kemeny NE. Regional chemotherapy of colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:1271.
102. Stagg RJ, Venook AP, Chase JL, et al. Alternating hepatic intra-arterial floxuridine and fluorouracil: a less toxic regimen for treatment of liver metastases from colorectal cancer. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1991;83:423.
103. Kemeny N, Seiter K, Conti JA, et al. Hepatic arterial floxuridine and leucovorin for unresectable liver metastases from colorectal carcinoma. New dose schedules and survival update. Cancer
1994;73:1134.
104. Kemeny N, Conti JA, Cohen A, et al. Phase II study of hepatic arterial floxuridine, leucovorin, and dexamethasone for unresectable liver metastases from colorectal carcinoma. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:2288.
105. Hohn DC, Stagg RJ, Friedman MA, et al. A randomized trial of continuous intravenous versus hepatic intraarterial floxuridine in patients with colorectal cancer metastatic to the liver: the
Northern California oncology group trial. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1646.
106. Kemeny N, Daly J, Reichman B, et al. Intrahepatic or systemic infusion of fluorodeoxyuridine in patients with liver metastases from colorectal carcinoma. Ann Intern Med 1987;107:459.
107. Chang AE, Schneider PD, Sugarbaker PH, et al. A prospective randomized trial of regional versus systemic continuous 5-fluorodeoxyuridine chemotherapy in the treatment of colorectal liver
metastases. Ann Surg 1987;206:685.
108. Martin JK, O'Connel MJ, Wieand HS, et al. Intra-arterial floxuridine vs systemic fluorouracil for hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer. Arch Surg 1990;125:1022.
109. Allen-Mersh TG, Earlam S, Fordy C, Abrams K, Houghton J. Quality of life and survival with continuous hepatic-artery floxuridine infusion for colorectal liver metastases. Lancet 1994;344:1255.
110. Rougier P, LaPlanche A, Huguier M, et al. Hepatic arterial infusion of floxuridine in patients with liver metastases from colorectal carcinoma: long-term results of a prospective randomized trial.
J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1112.
111. Harmantas A, Rothstein LE, Langer B. Regional versus systemic chemotherapy in the treatment of colorectal carcinoma metastatic to the liver. Is there a survival difference? Meta-analysis of
the published literature. Cancer 1996;78:1639.
112. Anonymous. Reappraisal of hepatic arterial infusion in the treatment of nonresectable liver metastases from colorectal cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;88:252.
113. Okuno K, Yasutomi M, Kon M, et al. Intrahepatic interleukin-2 with chemotherapy for unresectable liver metastases: a randomized multicenter trial. Hepato-gastroenterology 1999;46:1116.
114. Minoyama A, Yoshikwa M, Ebara M, et al. Study of repeated arterial infusion chemotherapy with a subcutaneously implanted reservoir for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. J Gastroenterol
1995;30:356.
115. Cantore M, Fiorentini G, Aitini E, et al. Intra-arterial hepatic carboplatin-based chemotherapy for ocular melanoma metastatic to the liver. Report of a phase II study. Tumori 1994;80:37.
116. Leyvraz S, Spataro V, Bauer J, et al. Treatment of ocular melanoma metastatic to the liver by hepatic arterial chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2589.
117. Mavligit GM, Charnsangavej C, Carrasco CH, et al. Regression of ocular melanoma metastatic to the liver after hepatic arterial chemoembolization with cisplatin and polyvinyl sponge. JAMA
1988;260:974.
118. Jung HY, Shim HJ, Kwak BK. Percutaneously implantable catheter-port system for chemotherapeutic infusion through the hepatic artery. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1999;172:641.
119. Maruyama M, Takamatsu S, Nagahama T. Adjuvant hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy for gastrointestinal malignancies with removable hepatoarterial catheter. J Surg Oncol 1999;71:246.
120. Fraschini G, Fleishman G, Yap HY. Percutaneous hepatic arterial infusion of cisplatin for metastatic breast cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:313.
121. Copur MS, Matamoros A, Capadano M. Alternating hepatic arterial infusion and systemic chemotherapy for liver metastases from colorectal cancer: a phase II trial using intermittent
percutaneous hepatic arterial access. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:955.
122. Ravikumar TS, Pizzorno G, Bodden W, et al. Percutaneous hepatic vein isolation and high-dose hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy for unresectable liver tumors. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:2723.
123. Ku Y, Tominaga M, Iwasaki T, et al. Percutaneous hepatic venous isolation and extracorporeal charcoal hemoperfusion for high-dose intraarterial chemotherapy in patients with colorectal
hepatic metastases. Surg Today 1996;26:305.
124. Dazzi C, Fiorentini G, Davitti B. High-dose intra-arterial plus intraperitoneal chemotherapy combined with hemofiltration in liver metastases from colorectal cancer. Tumori 1994;80:204.
125. Taton G, Ghanem G, Pandin P. First results of a clinical pilot study on intraarterial chemotherapy with haemofiltration of locally advanced gastrointestinal cancers. Acta Chir Belg 1996;96:206.
126. Ausman RK. Development of a technic for isolated perfusion of the liver. N Y State J Med 1961;61:3393.
127. Alexander HR, Bartlett DL, Libutti SK. Isolated hepatic perfusion: a potentially effective treatment for patients with metastatic or primary cancers confined to the liver. Cancer J Sci Am 1998;4:2.
128. Diebel LN, Wilson RF, Bender J, Paules B. A comparison of passive and active shunting for bypass of the retrohepatic IVC. J Trauma 1991;31:987.
129. Barker WC, Andrich MP, Alexander HR, Fraker DL. Continuous intraoperative external monitoring of perfusate leak using I-131 human serum albumin during isolated perfusion of the liver and
limbs. Eur J Nucl Med 1995;22:1242.
130. de Vries MR, Rinkes IH, van de Velde CJ, et al. Isolated hepatic perfusion with tumor necrosis factor alpha and melphalan: experimental studies in pigs and phase I data from humans. Recent
Results Cancer Res 1998;147:107.
131. de Vries MR, Rinkes IH, van de Velde CJ, et al. Isolated hepatic perfusion with tumor necrosis factor alpha and melphalan: experimental studies in pigs and phase I data from humans. Recent
Results Cancer Res 1998;147:107.
132. Oldhafer KJ, Lang H, Frerker M, et al. First experience and technical aspects of isolated liver perfusion for extensive liver metastasis. Surgery 1998;123:622.
133. Hafström L, Naredi P. Isolated hepatic perfusion with extracorporeal oxygenation using hyperthermia TNFa and melphalan: Swedish experience. Rec Res Cancer Res 1998;147:120.
134. Alexander HR Jr, Bartlett DL, Libutti SK, et al. Isolated hepatic perfusion with tumor necrosis factor and melphalan for unresectable cancers confined to the liver. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1479.
135. Bartlett DL, Libutti SK, Alexander HR. Results of isolated hepatic perfusion (IHP) in patients with regionally advanced unresectable colorectal cancer. Soc Surg Oncol 1999;14(abst).
136. Kim YH, Ajani JA, Carrasco CH. Selective hepatic arterial chemoembolization for liver metastases in patients with carcinoid tumor or islet cell carcinoma. Cancer Invest 1999;17:474.
137. Bavisotto LM, Patel NH, Althaus SJ, et al. Hepatic transcatheter arterial chemoembolization alternating with systemic protracted continuous infusion 5-fluorouracil for gastrointestinal
malignancies metastatic to liver: a phase II trial of the Puget Sound Oncology Consortium (PSOC 1104). Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:95.
138. Leichman CG, Jacobson JR, Modiano M. Hepatic chemoembolization combined with systemic infusion of 5-fluorouracil and bolus leucovorin for patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma: a
Southwest Oncology Group pilot trial. Cancer 1999;86:775.
139. D'Agostino HB, Solinas A. Percutaneous ablation therapy for hepatocellular carcinomas [comment]. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1995;164:1165.
140. Arnott J. On the treatment of cancer by the regulated application of an anaesthetic temperature. London: J. Churchill, 1851:32.
141. Rubinsky B, Lee CY, Bastacky J, Onik G. The process of freezing and the mechanism of damage during hepatic cryosurgery. Cryobiology 1990;27:85.
142. Ravikumar TS, Steele GD. Hepatic cryosurgery. Surg Clin North Am 1989;69:433.
143. Stewart GJ, Preketes A, Horton M, Ross WB, Morris DL. Hepatic cryotherapy: double-freeze cycles achieve greater hepatocellular injury in man. Cryobiology 1995;69:215.
144. Cuschieri A, Crosthwaite G, Shimi S, et al. Hepatic cryotherapy for liver tumors. Development and clinical evaluation of a high-efficiency insulated multineedle probe system for open and
laparoscopic use. Surg Endosc 1995;9:483.

145. Onik G, Kane R, Steele G, et al. Monitoring hepatic cryosurgery with sonography. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1986;147:665.
146. Zhou XD, Tang ZY, Yu YQ, et al. The role of cryosurgery in the treatment of hepatic cancer: a report of 113 cases. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1993;120:100.
147. Onik GM, Atkinson D, Zemel R, Weaver ML. Cryosurgery of liver cancer. Semin Surg Oncol 1993;9:309.
148. Ravikumar TS, Kane R, Cady B, et al. A 5-year study of cryosurgery in the treatment of liver tumors. Arch Surg 1991;126:1520.
149. Preketes AP, Caplehorn JR, King J, et al. Effect of hepatic artery chemotherapy on survival of patients with hepatic metastases from colorectal carcinoma treated with cryotherapy. World J
Surg 1995;19:768.
150. Seifert JK, Junginger T, Morris DL. A collective review of the world literature on hepatic cryotherapy. J R Coll Surg Edinburg 1998;43:141.
151. Dale PS, Souza JW, Brewer DA. Cryosurgical ablation of unresectable hepatic metastases. J Surg Oncol 1998;68:242.
152. Yeh KA, Fortunato L, Hoffman JP, Eisenberg BL. Cryosurgical ablation of hepatic metastases from colorectal carcinomas. Am Surg 1997;63:63.
153. Weaver ML, Ashton JG, Zemel R. Treatment of colorectal liver metastases by cryotherapy. Semin Surg Oncol 1998;14:163.
154. Seifert JK, Morris DL. Prognostic factors after cryotherapy for hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer. Ann Surg 1998;228:201.
155. Seifert JK, Morris DL. Indicators of recurrence following cryotherapy for hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer. Br J Surg 1999;86:234.
156. Seifert JK, Morris DL. Repeat hepatic cryotherapy for recurrent metastases from colorectal cancer. Surgery 1999;125:233.
157. Iannitti DA, Heniford T, Hale J, Grundfest-Broniatowski S, Gagner M. Laparoscopic cryoablation of hepatic metastases. Arch Surg 1998;133:1011.
158. Heniford BT, Arca MJ, Jannitti DA, Walsh RM, Gagner M. Laparoscopic cryoablation of hepatic metastases. Semin Surg Oncol 1998;15:194.
159. Korpan NN. Hepatic cryosurgery for liver metastases. Long-term follow-up. Ann Surg 1997;225:193.
160. Bilchik AJ, Sarantou T, Foshag LJ, Giuliano AE, Ramming KP. Cryosurgical palliation of metastatic neuroendocrine tumors resistant to conventional therapy. Surgery 1997;122:1040.
161. Bilchik AJ, Sarantou T, Wardlaw JC, Ramming KP. Cryosurgery causes a profound reduction in tumor markers in hepatoma and noncolorectal hepatic metastases. Am Surg 1997;63:796.
162. Crews KA, Kuhn JA, McCarty TM, et al. Cryosurgical ablation of hepatic tumors. Am J Surg 1997;174:614.
163. Seifert JK, Cozzi PJ, Morris DL. Cryotherapy for neuroendocrine liver metastases. Semin Surg Oncol 1998;14:175.
164. Polk W, Fong Y, Karpeh M, Blumgart LH. A technique for the use of cryosurgery to assist hepatic resection. J Am Coll Surg 1995;180:171.
165. Johnson LB, Krebs TL, Van Echo D, et al. Cytoablative therapy with combined resection and cryosurgery for limited bilobar hepatic colorectal metastases. Am J Surg 1997;174:610.
166. Dwerryhouse SJ, Seifert JK, McCall JL, et al. Hepatic resection with cryotherapy to involved or inadequate resection margin (edge freeze) for metastases from colorectal cancer. Br J Surg
1998;85:185.
167. Wallace JR, Christians KK, Pitt HA, Quebbeman EJ. Cryotherapy extends the indications for treatment of colorectal liver metastases. Surgery 1999;126:766.
168. Ross WB, Horton M, Bertolino P, Morris DL. Cryotherapy of liver tumoursa practical guide. HPB Surg 1995;8:167.
169. Stubbs RS, Alwan MH, Booth MWC. Hepatic cryotherapy and subsequent hepatic arterial chemotherapy for colorectal metastases to the liver. HPB Surg 1998;11:97.
170. Rodriguez-Bigas MA, Klippenstein D, Meropol NJ. A pilot study of cryochemotherapy for hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer. Cryobiology 1996;33:600.
171. Murakami R, Yoshimatsu S, Yamashita Y, et al. Treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma: value of percutaneous microwave coagulation. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1995;164:1159.
172. Hamazoe R, Hirooka Y, Ohtani S, Katoh T, Kaibara N. Intraoperative microwave tissue coagulation as treatment for patients with nonresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 1995;75:794.
173. Seki T, Wakabayashi M, Nakagawa T, et al. Ultrasonically guided percutaneous microwave coagulation therapy for small hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 1994;74:817.
174. Solbiati L, Goldberg SN, Ierace T, et al. Hepatic metastases: percutaneous radio-frequency ablation with cooler-tip electrodes. Radiology 1997;205:367.
175. Livraghi T, Goldberg SN, Monti F, et al. Saline-enhanced radio-frequency tissue ablation in the treatment of liver metastases. Radiology 1997;202:205.
176. Nagata Y, Hiraoka M, Nishimura Y, et al. Clinical results of radiofrequency hyperthermia for malignant liver tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;38:359.
177. Cuschieri A, Bracken J, Boni L. Initial experience with laparoscopic ultrasound-guided radiofrequency thermal ablation of hepatic tumours. Endoscopy 1999;31:318.
178. Curley SA, Izzo F, Delrio P, et al. Radiofrequency ablation of unresectable primary and metastatic hepatic malignancies: results in 123 patients. Ann Surg 1999;230:9.
179. Kainuma O, Asano T, Aoyama H. Combined therapy with radiofrequency thermal ablation and intra-arterial infusion chemotherapy for hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer.
Hepato-gastroenterology 1999;46:1071.
180. Bown SG. Phototherapy of tumours. World J Surg 1983;7:700.
181. Amin Z, Harries SA, Lees WR, Bown SG. Interstitial tumour photocoagulation. Endosc Surg Allied Technol 1993;1:224.
182. van Hillegersberg R, van Staveren HJ, Kort WJ, Zondervan PE, Terpstra OT. Interstitial Nd:YAG laser coagulation with a cylindrical diffusing fiber tip in experimental liver metastases. Lasers
Surg Med 1994;14:124.
183. Gewiese B, Beuthan J, Fobbe F, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging-controlled laser-induced interstitial thermotherapy. Invest Radiol 1994;29:345.
184. Amin Z, Bown SG, Lees WR. Local treatment of colorectal liver metastases: a comparison of interstitial laser photocoagulation (ILP) and percutaneous alcohol injection (PAI). Clin Radiol
1993;48:166.
185. Amin Z, Donald JJ, Masters A, et al. Hepatic metastases: interstitial laser photocoagulation with real-time US monitoring and dynamic CT evaluation of treatment. Radiology 1993;187:339.
186. Nolsoe CP, Torp-Pedersen S, Burcharth F, et al. Interstitial hyperthermia of colorectal liver metastases with a US-guided Nd-YAG laser with a diffuser tip: a pilot clinical study. Radiology
1993;187:333.
187. Ebara M, Ohto M, Sugiura N. Percutaneous ethanol injection for the treatment of small hepatocellular carcinoma. Study of 95 patients. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1990;5:616.
188. Shiina S, Tagawa K, Niwa Y. Percutaneous ethanol injection therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma: results in 146 patients. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1993;160:1023.
189. Lencioni R, Pinto F, Armillotta N. Long-term results of percutaneous ethanol injection therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis: a European experience. Eur Radiol 1997;7:514.
190. Giorgio A, Tarantino L, Mariniello N. Percutaneous ethanol injection under general anesthesia for hepatocellular carcinoma: 3 year suvival in 112 patients. Eur J Ultrasound 1998;8:201.
191. Castellano L, Calandra M, Del Vecchio Blanco C. Predictive factors of survival and intrahepatic recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis after percutaneous ethanol injection: analysis
of 71 patients. J Hepatol 1997;27:862.
192. Livraghi T, Benedini V, Lazzaroni S. Long term results of single session percutaneous ethanol injection in patients with large hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 1998;83:48.
193. Castells A, Bruix J, Bru C. Treatment of small hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhotic patients: a cohort study comparing surgical resection and percutaneous ethanol injection. Hepatology
1993;18:1121.
194. Kotoh K, Sakai H, Sakamoto S. The effect of percutaneous ethanol injection therapy on small solitary hepatocellular carcinoma is comparable to that of hepatectomy. Am J Gastroenterol
1994;89:194.
195. Livraghi T, Bolondi L, Buscarini L. No treatment, resection and ethanol injection in hepatocellular carcinoma: a retrospective analysis of survival in 391 patients with cirrhosis. J Hepatol
1995;22:522.
196. Orlando A, Cottone M, Virdone R. Treatment of small hepatocellular carcinoma associated with cirrhosis by percutaneous ethanol injection. A trial with a comparison group. Scand J
Gastroenterol 1997;32:598.
197. Lencioni R, Paolicchi A, Moretti M. Combined transcatheter arterial chemoembolization and percutaneous ethanol injection for the treatment of large hepatocellular carcinoma: local therapeutic
effect and long-term survival rate. Eur Radiol 1998;8:439.
198. Allgaier HP, Deibert P, Olschewski M. Survival benefit of patients with inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma treated by a combination of transarterial chemoembolization and percutaneous
ethanol injectiona single-center analysis including 132 patients. Int J Cancer 1998;79:601.
199. Phillips R, Karnofsky DA, Hamilton LD, Nickson JJ. Roentgen therapy of hepatic metastases. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1954;71:826.
200. Ingold DK, Reed GB, Kaplan HS, Bagshaw MA. Radiation hepatitis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1965;93:200.
201. Ogata K, Hizawa A, Yoshida M. Hepatic injury following irradiationa morphologic study. Tukushima J Exp Med 1963;9:240.
202. Reed GB, Cos AJ. The human liver after radiation injury. A form of veno-occlusive disease. Am J Pathol 1966;48:597.
203. Lawrence TS, Robertson JM, Anscher MS, et al. Hepatic toxicity resulting from cancer treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:1237.
204. Jirtle RL, Anscher MS, Alati T. Radiation sensitivity of the liver. Adv Radiat Biol 1990;14:269.
205. Byfield JE, Calabro-Jones P, Klisak LL, Kulhanian F. Pharmacologic requirements for obtaining sensitization of human tumor cells in vitro to combined 5-fluorouracil or forafur and x rays. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8:1923.
206. Bruso CE, Shewach DS, Lawrence TS. Fluorodeoxyuridine-induced radiosensitization and inhibition of DNA double strand break repair in human colon cancer cells. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1990;19:1411.
207. Heimburger DK, Shewach DS, Lawrence TS. The effect of fluorodeoxyuridine on sublethal damage repair in human colon cancer cells. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:983.
208. McCracken JD, Weatherall TJ, Oishi N, Janaki L, Boyer C. Adjuvant intrahepatic chemotherapy with mitomycin and 5-FU combined with hepatic irradiation in high-risk patients with carcinoma
of the colon: a Southwest Oncology Group phase II pilot study. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:129.
209. Hadda E, Le Bourgeois JP, Kuentz M, Lobo P. Liver complications in lymphomas treated with a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy: preliminary results. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1983;9:1313.
210. Schacter L, Crum E, Spitzer T, et al. Fatal radiation hepatitis: a case report and review of the literature. Gynecol Oncol 1986;24:373.
211. Andrews JD, Walker SC, Ackermann RJ, et al. Hepatic radioembolization with Yttrium-90 containing glass microspheres: preliminary results and clinical follow-up. J Nucl Med 1993;35:1637.
212. Anderson JH, Goldberg JA, Bessent RG. Glass yttrium-90 microspheres for patients with colorectal liver metastases. Radiother Oncol 1988;25:137.
213. Herba MJ, Ilescas FF, Thirlwell MP. Hepatic malignancies: improved treatment with intraarterial Y-90. Radiology 1988;169:311.
214. Gray BN, Anderson JE, Burton MA. Regression of liver metastases following treatment with yttrium-90 microspheres. Aust N Z J Surg 1992;62:105.
215. Thomas DS, Nauta RJ, Rodgers JE. Intraoperative high-dose rate interstitial irradiation of hepatic metastases from colorectal carcinoma. Results of a phase III trial. Cancer 1993;71:1977.
216. Donath D, Nori D, Turnbull A, Kaufman N, Fortner JG. Brachytherapy in the treatment of solitary colorectal metastases to the liver. J Surg Oncol 1990;44:55.
217. Ten Haken RK, Lawrence TS, McShan DL, et al. Technical considerations in the use of 3-D beam arrangements in the abdomen. Radiother Oncol 1991;22:19.
218. Lawrence TS, Tesser RJ, Ten Haken RK. An application of dose volume histograms to the treatment of intrahepatic malignancies with radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1990;19:1041.
219. McGinn CJ, Ten Haken RK, Ensminger WD, et al. Treatment of intrahepatic cancers with radiation doses based on a normal tissue complication probability model. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2246.
220. Mohuiddin M, Chen E, Ahmad N. Combined liver radiation and chemotherapy for palliation of hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:722.
221. Lawrence TS, Dworzanin LM, Walker-Andrews SC. Treatment of cancers involving the liver and porta hepatis with external beam irradiation and intraarterial hepatic fluorodeoxyuridine. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;20:555.
222. Robertson JM, Lawrence TS, Walker S, et al. The treatment of colorectal liver metastases with conformal radiation therapy and regional chemotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1995;32:445.
223. Dawson LA, McGinn NJ, Ensminger W, Walker SC, Lawrence TS. Preliminary results of escalated focal liver radiation and hepatic artery floxuridine for unresectable liver malignancies. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:86a.
224. Habib NA, Hodgson HJF, Lemoine N, Pignatelli M. A phase I/II study of hepatic artery infusion with twp53-CMV-Ad in metastatic malignant liver tumours. Human Gene Ther 1999;10:2019.
225. Bartlett DL, Fong Y. Solitary small hepatic metastases: when and how? In: Blumgart L, Poston G, eds. Clinical challenges in hepatobiliary and pancreatic surgery. Oxford: Isis Medical Media
Limited, 1999.
226. Wagman LD, Kemeny MM, Leong L, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the treatment of colorectal cancer metastatic to the liver. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1885.
227. Ruszniewski P, Rougier P, Legmann P. Hepatic arterial chemoembolization in patients with liver metastases of endocrine tumors. Cancer 1993;71:2624.
228. Therasse E, Briettmayer F, Roche A. Transcatheter chemoembolization of progressive carcinoid liver metastasis. Radiology 1993;189:541.
229. Marlink RG, Lokich JJ, Robins JR, Clouse ME. Hepatic arterial embolization for metastatic hormone-secreting tumors. Cancer 1990;65:2227.
230. Perry LJ, Stuart K, Stokes KR, Clouse ME. Hepatic arterial chemoembolization for metastatic neuroendocrine tumors. Surgery 1994;116:1111.
231. Ajani JA, Carrasco CH, Charnasagavej C, et al. Islet cell tumors metastatic to the liver: effective palliation by sequential hepatic artery embolization. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:340.
232. San-Altamira PM, Spence LD, Huberman MS. Selective chemoembolization in the management of hepatic metastases in refractory colorectal carcinoma. Dis Colon Rectum 1997;40:770.

233. Tellez C, Benson IAB, Lyster MT. Phase II trial of chemoembolization for the treatment of metastatic colorectal carcinoma to the liver and review of the literature. Cancer 1998;82:1250.
234. McGinn CJ, Robertson JM, Lawrence TS, et al. A phase I/II trial of chemoembolization with mitomycin C following hepatic arterial fluorodeoxyuridine/leucovorin and whole liver radiotherapy for
patients with intrahepatic malignancies. Cancer Ther 1998;1:88.
235. Martinelli DJ, Wadler S, Bakal CW. Utility of embolization or chemoembolization as second line treatment in patients with advanced or recurrent colorectal carcinoma. Cancer 1994;74:1706.
236. Goldberg JA, Kerr DJ, Wilmott N, McKillop JH, McArdle CS. Regional chemotherapy for colorectal liver metastases: a phase II evaluation of targeted hepatic arterial 5-fluorouracil for colorectal
liver metastases. Br J Surg 1990;77:1238.
237. Hunt TM, Flowerdew ADS, Birch SJ, et al. Prospective randomized controlled trial of hepatic arterial embolization or infusion chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil and degradable starch
microspheres for colorectal liver metastases. Br J Surg 1990;77:779.
238. Civalleri D, Pector C, Hakansson L, et al. Treatment of patients with irresectable liver metastases from colorectal cancer by chemo-occlusion and degradable starch microspheres. Br J Surg
1994;81:1338.
239. Alexander HR, Bartlett DL, Fraker DL, Libutti SK. Regional treatment strategies for unresectable primary or metastatic cancer confined to the liver. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA,
eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1996:1.
240. Rossi S, di Stasi M, Buscarini E, et al. Percutaneous radiofrequency interstitial thermal ablation in the treatment of small hepatocellular carcinoma: report of 24 patients. Cancer JSci Am
1995;1:73.
241. Allgaier HP, Diebert P, Zuber I, Olschewski M, Blum HE. Percutaneous radiofrequency interstitial thermal ablation of small hepatocellular carcinoma. Lancet 1999;353:1676.
242. Borgelt BB, Gelber R, Brady LW, Griffin T, Hendrickson FR. The palliation of hepatic metastases: results of the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group pilot study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1981;7:587.
243. Liebel SA, Pajak TF, Massullo V. A comparison of misonidazole sensitized radiation therapy to radiation therapy alone for the palliation of hepatic metastases: results of a Radiation Therapy
Oncology Group randomized prospective trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;7:105.
244. Prasad B, Lee M-S, Henderson FR. Irradiation of hepatic metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1977;2:129.
245. Russell AH, Clyde C, Wasserman TH, Turner SS, Rotman M. Accelerated hyperfractionated hepatic irradiation in the management of patients with liver metastases: results of the RTOG dose
escalating protocol. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:117.
246. Friedman M, Cassidy M, Levine M, et al. Combined modality therapy of hepatic metastasis. Northern California Oncology Group Pilot Study. Cancer 1979;44:906.
247. Friedman M, Cassidy M, Levine M, et al. Combined modality therapy of hepatic metastasis. Northern California Oncology Group Pilot Study. Cancer 1979;44:906.
248. Herbsman H, Hassan A, Gardner B. Treatment of hepatic metastases with a combination of hepatic artery infusion chemotherapy and external radiotherapy. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1978;127:13.
249. Lokich J, Kinsella T, Perri J, Malcomb A, Clouse M. Concomitant hepatic radiation and intraarterial fluorinated pyrimidines therapy: correlation of liver scan, liver function tests, and plasma CEA
with tumor response. Cancer 1981;48:2569.
250. Raju PL, Maruyama Y, DeSimone P, MacDonald J. Treatment of liver metastases with a combination of chemotherapy and hyperfractionated external radiation therapy. Am J Clin Oncol
1987;10:41.
251. Rotman M, Kuruvilla AM, Choi K. Response of colo-rectal hepatic metastases to concomitant radiotherapy and hyperfractionated external radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1986;12:2179.
252. Sherman DM, Weichselbaum R, Order SE, et al. Palliation of hepatic metastasis. Cancer 1978;41:2013.
253. Webber BM, Soderberg CH, Leone LA, Rege VB, Glicksman AS. A combined treatment approach to management of hepatic metastases. Cancer 1978;42:1087.
254. Wiley AL, Wirtanen GW, Stephenson JA, et al. Combined hepatic artery 5-fluorouracil and irradiation of liver metastases. A randomized study. Cancer 1989;64:1783.
255. Wolberding P, Friedman MA, Resser KJ, Phillip TL. Therapy of liver tumors metastatic from colorectal cancer with whole-liver radiation combined with 5-FU, adriamycin, and methotrexate.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1982;9:1

SECTION 52.4 Metastatic Cancer to the Bone
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 52.4
Metastatic Cancer to the Bone
HOLLY K. BROWN
JOHN H. HEALEY
Introduction
Presentation
Pathogenesis
Diagnostic Evaluation
Treatment Goals
Imaging of Bone Lesions
Plain Radiography
Bone Scintigraphy
Computed Tomography
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Positron Emission Tomography
Therapeutic Modalities
Systemic Therapy
Radiation Therapy
Surgery
Specific Anatomic Sites
Spine
Proximal Femur
Pelvis and Acetabulum
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Most of the more than 560,000 people in the United States who die of cancer each year have tumor metastasis. 1 Bone is the third most common organ involved by
metastasis, behind lung and liver. 2 In breast cancer, bone is the second most common site of metastatic spread, and 90% of patients dying of breast cancer have
bone metastasis. 2,3 Breast and prostate cancers metastasize to bone most frequently, which reflects the high incidence of both of these tumors, as well as their
prolonged clinical courses. 2 Other tumors that commonly cause symptomatic bone metastases include kidney and thyroid cancer and multiple myeloma. The
increasing age and size of the population leads to an increased number of cases of cancer. This, coupled with longer patient survival, increases the incidence of
metastatic lesions to bone. Patients with bone metastasis from breast cancer have an average 2-year survival from the time of presentation with their first bone lesion.
As more patients are living with bone metastases, the challenge is to improve their quality of life.
Current management of skeletal cancer involves a multimodality approach, including systemic therapies (chemotherapy, hormone and immune therapies, and other
drugs such as bisphosphonates), radiation (external-beam and targeted radioisotopes), and surgery. Medical, radiation, surgical, and orthopedic oncologists, with
diagnostic assistance from radiologists and pathologists, form a multidisciplinary team to manage these complex and often very ill patients. Early detection and
aggressive management of metastases should be the goal, to maintain and maximize patients' quality of life and functional level. Nihilism is no longer appropriate.
However, due to economic considerations and a dearth of data to support intensive surveillance for metastases, physicians may be lulled into a sense of
complacency. Currently, care is optimized in only a fraction of patients with bone metastases.

PRESENTATION
Patients with metastatic disease to the skeleton most often present with pain as the principal symptom. The pain associated with bone metastasis comprises two
components: biologic and mechanical. Biologic pain is related to the local release of cytokines and chemical mediators by the tumor cells, periosteal irritation,
stimulation of intraosseous nerves by these mediators, and the pressure or mass effect of the tumor tissue within the bone. Mechanical pain is related to the loss of
bone strength and stiffness caused by the metastatic lesion, which leads to activity-related pain. Mechanical pain is seen most often with osteolytic lesions but can
also occur in osteoblastic lesions, because the disorganized pattern of tumor-related bone lacks structural integrity.
The initial pain pattern of a metastasis mimics that of primary bone tumors and osteonecrosis. The symptoms are intermittent but may be sharp and severe. Pain
tends to be worst at night and may be partially relieved by activity. As the lesion progresses, symptoms become more constant and take on a more mechanical
character.
Patients with metastatic disease can present with a pathologic fracture. Pathologic fractures most often occur with osteolytic lesions. The majority of pathologic
fractures are seen in patients with metastatic breast cancer. In one study, the incidence of pathologic fracture was 8% in 1800 cancer patients, with 53% of those
fractures occurring secondary to breast cancer metastases. 4 Other malignant culprits for pathologic fracture in this series were kidney in 11%, lung in 8%, thyroid in
5%, lymphoma in 5%, and prostate in 3%.4
Hypercalcemia of malignancy occurs in 5% to 10% of patients with bone metastasis and is seen predominantly in breast cancer, multiple myeloma, and squamous
carcinomas of the lung. Thirty percent of patients with breast cancer will develop hypercalcemia during the course of their disease. 5 Hypercalcemia is mediated by
multiple factors: local osteolysis caused by the skeletal metastasis, parathyroid-like hormone released by the tumor cells and having both a local (paracrine) and
systemic (endocrine) effect, and disuse osteolysis related to the immobility of these patients.
Neurologic abnormality related to spinal cord compression can occur with spinal metastasis. Knowledge of the course and character of neurologic symptoms is
important in directing the radiographic evaluation and treatment plan. Neurologic compromise secondary to spinal involvement with metastasis has a major impact on
quality of life and function.
Systemic issues include generalized debilitation, leading to immobility. Bed rest exacerbates hypercalcemia and can lead to atelectasis, thromboembolic disease, and
skin pressure necrosis. In addition, patients with systemic malignancy who are immobilized are prone to developing disseminated intravascular coagulation. Careful
screening for these conditions is imperative in the management of these patients. Doppler ultrasound tests are a convenient and sensitive way of identifying deep
venous thrombosis. Loss of ambulatory ability is a poor prognostic factor in metastatic disease, particularly spine disease. Performance status should be specifically
quantified as part of the preoperative evaluation. 6,7

PATHOGENESIS
The pattern of metastatic involvement of bone is related to blood flow. Metastases most commonly occur in the more heavily vascularized parts of the skeleton,
particularly the axial skeleton, including the ribs and the vertebral column, as well as the proximal ends of the long bones. 8 Batson's plexus is a low-pressure,
high-volume, valveless system of vertebral veins that communicates with the pelvic venous plexus. The high number of vertebral metastases in prostate cancer is
attributed to Batson's plexus. Arterial spread may also be important. The patterns of metastatic distribution to bone seen after intracardiac injection of tumor cells in
animal models are similar to those seen clinically. 9 Histopathologic evaluation of metastatic development and distribution in these animal models confirms that the
metastatic lesions originate at the terminal end of the major arteries supplying the bone. 10 Specific radiographic evaluation of metastatic disease in the spine indicates
a role for arterial spread as well. 11
A great deal of research has been conducted recently into the mechanisms of tumor metastasis. Tumor metastasis is believed to be related to several factors:
angiogenesis, which allows for primary tumor growth and subsequent access to the systemic circulation to colonize secondary sites 9; adhesion via cell surface

molecules, which allow tumor cells to attach to other cells and to extracellular matrix components; invasion, mediated by proteolytic enzymes such as matrix
metalloproteinases, 12,13 which allow tumor cells to pass across extracellular matrix barriers; and proliferation, which is mediated by growth factors and the uncoupling
of the normal mechanisms of cell growth and suppression. Of particular interest in bone metastases is the ability of tumor-released factors to cause osteolysis. There
is evidence that this osteolysis is mediated by stimulation of osteoclastic bone resorption by tumor cytokines and direct bone degradation by tumor cells. 8 Matrix
metalloproteinases appear not only to mediate the ability of tumor cells to invade via basement membrane hydrolysis but also directly to degrade bone matrix. 12,13
Better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of metastatic tumor spread allows for the development of new therapies to target these areas, as well as more
effective use of existing techniques.

DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
A careful history and physical examination, including careful breast or prostate evaluations and thyroid palpation, remain the cornerstone for identification of the site
of primary disease in patients who present with a bone lesion without a known primary tumor. In those patients with a history of cancer and a new bone lesion, the
coexistence of disease other than metastasis must be ruled out.
Plain radiographs remain the most specific test for diagnosing bone diseases. Scintigraphy is extremely sensitive and practical for use in metastatic evaluation,
because it can screen the entire body at one time. Certainly, any abnormality found on bone scan should be correlated with plain radiographs.
Metastatic disease is characterized by the presence of multiple bone lesions. Single metastases occur rarely and must be differentiated from primary bone tumors.
Typically, the so-called solitary metastasis is merely the first of many lesions to be identified. Thyroid and renal cancers and myeloma (plasmacytoma) are the most
likely to present with an isolated metastasis. Even patients with these favorable cancers typically develop widespread disease, suggesting that there is unrecognized
dissemination of cancer at the time that the first bone metastasis is identified. 14,15
Diagnostic workup entails the use of several laboratory tests to help narrow the differential diagnosis and identify the primary site of disease. A basic screening panel
includes a complete blood cell count with platelets, to evaluate for anemia and myelosuppression; serum calcium, phosphorus, and alkaline phosphatase levels to
identify markers of bone turnover and evaluate for hypercalcemia; and assessment of serum electrolytes, liver function tests, and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate for
systemic evaluation. If clinically indicated, such additional specific tests as the following can be ordered: parathyroid hormone level, to evaluate for metabolic bone
disease; serum or urine protein electrophoresis or b 2-microglobulin if multiple myeloma or lymphoma is suspected; or specific markers such as cancer antigen 125 for
breast cancer or prostate-specific antigen for prostate cancer. Biochemical markers of bone turnover, such as urine N-telopeptide and urine deoxypyridinoline, also
are noted to have a significant association with the probability of bone metastasis. 16
The technique of screening blood and marrow with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or reverse transcriptase–PCR (RT-PCR) for specific tumor cell DNA is being
investigated as a tool for diagnosing metastatic disease and following the response to systemic therapy. The attraction of PCR technology is that it can detect a very
small number of tumor cells (1 tumor cell in 10 to 100 million normal cells), potentially identifying patients with marrow or circulating cancer cells who are at risk for the
development of clinical metastases. As technology improves, the genetics of tumors are being better defined and the PCR technique is becoming more standardized,
such that it is likely to prove a useful adjuvant in the diagnosis of, and monitoring of therapeutic response in, bone metastases patients. 17
Chest radiography and computed tomographic (CT) scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis also are used in the diagnostic workup of bone lesions without a known
primary lesion. These studies can help to identify the primary tumor in 85% of patients, as well as identifying additional sites of metastatic disease. 18 They are
particularly useful because the predominant lesions causing metastases of unknown origin are lung and renal carcinomas.
A firm diagnosis must be obtained before a fracture involving a solitary bone lesion is fixed internally. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be helpful in
differentiating pathologic fracture due to osteoporosis from that due to metastatic disease, particularly in the spine. MRI is also helpful in delineating the soft tissue
extension and component of tumors involving bone. When the diagnosis cannot be discerned from clinical information and the baseline tests of plain films and bone
scan, MRI can be a helpful diagnostic adjuvant. 19,20
Solitary bone lesions warrant a biopsy before treatment. Primary bone sarcomas occur in the same population under consideration for metastatic disease. Lytic
phases of dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma and Paget's sarcoma can also produce pathologic fractures ( Fig. 52.4-1). In addition, metabolic bone disease is in the
differential diagnosis of skeletal abnormalities in this older age group (older than 40 years). Brown tumor of hyperparathyroidism can produce multiple lytic bone
lesions, and osteoporosis can lead to pathologic fracture, particularly in the spine. Osteomalacia can mimic metastatic disease by producing multiple fractures
throughout the skeleton, resulting in a bone scan indistinguishable from that seen with multiple metastatic foci. All of these entities must be distinguished from
metastatic disease, as the management of such conditions is very different from that for metastases.

FIGURE 52.4-1. Dedifferentiated chondrosar-coma presents as a predominantly lytic, destructive lesion in an older patient, mimicking a metastatic lesion. Internal
fixation in this case is inappropriate, and a biopsy is needed to exclude the presence of a primary bone tumor, particularly with a solitary bone lesion such as this. A:
Compression hip screw and cement used for internal fixation of a fractured chondrosarcoma. B: Gross appearance of the resected bone after removing the screw.
White-gray cartilage percolates across the fracture site and down the intramedullary canal.

Bone scan can be of further assistance in planning a biopsy. When the symptomatic lesion involves a weight-bearing bone, biopsy worsens the fracture risk by
creating a new hole in the bone cortex. Bone scan can identify other bone lesions and possibly locate one that can be subjected to biopsy with greater ease and less
morbidity.
CT-guided needle biopsy is usually satisfactory when the lesion is osteolytic, offering diagnostic accuracy of 80%. When the lesion is osteoblastic or exhibits a thick
overlying cortical rim, inserting a needle and obtaining an adequate tissue sample is extremely difficult. Such cases necessitate open surgical biopsy. Regardless of
whether the biopsy of a weight-bearing bone is performed by closed or open technique, there is a genuine fracture risk. Weight bearing must be protected until bone
healing occurs, which experimentally has been shown to require at least 6 weeks. Sufficient tissue for immunohistochemical studies should always be obtained to
improve the ability of the biopsy to yield a definitive tissue diagnosis.

TREATMENT GOALS
There are four main goals in managing patients with metastatic disease to the skeleton: pain relief, preservation and restoration of function, skeletal stabilization, and
local tumor control (e.g., relief of tumor impingement on normal structures, prevention of release of chemical mediators that have local and systemic effects).
Symptomatic relief is usually satisfactory from a combination of radiation and medical therapy. Most patients without a fracture do not require surgery for the bone
metastasis; however, fractures are best treated by operative internal fixation. Even when fractures can heal by nonoperative therapy, the protracted treatment time
required for closed management is inappropriate, as this period generally is increased by the presence of tumor negatively affecting the ability of the fracture to heal.

The goals of surgical intervention vary in metastatic tumor patients. Primary goals are to allow immediate weight bearing and return to activity, not necessarily to
promote fracture healing. Prosthetic replacement and stabilization with polymethyl methacrylate are frequently selected, whereas such techniques would be avoided
in the treatment of nonneoplastic fractures.
The duration of any management course must be carefully considered in a patient with a limited life expectancy. Generally, pathologic fractures through
weight-bearing bones (e.g., femur) should be treated if the patient has more than 1 month to live, whereas non–weight-bearing bones should be treated if life
expectancy is more than 3 months. Definitions and indications for treatment of impending fractures are discussed later in Impending Fractures: Prophylactic Fixation .
Impending fractures warrant fixing if (1) such repair will help to eliminate the need for narcotic analgesics or will reduce the patient's overall pain by approximately
50%, (2) equally effective nonoperative treatments are lacking, or (3) treatment for the impending fracture is significantly safer or more effective than surgery once the
bone has fractured completely.
Management and intervention should be tailored to the patient's overall prognosis and life expectancy. The medical goals of patient comfort and independence are
predominant in these situations. Increasing importance is being placed on quality-of-life issues and measures in these patients, and the goals of therapy have shifted
from maximization of duration of life to maximization of pain management and function. Outcome measures and quality-of-life assessment tools are being actively
investigated. The Functional Living Index–Cancer (FLIC); Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy Scale (FACT), Short Form 36 (SF-36); Karnofsky Scale;
International Society of Limb Salvage–Musculoskeletal Tumor Society (ISOLS-MSTS) assessment; and Toronto Extremity Salvage Score (TESS) are tools currently in
use. The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) is moving toward use of the FACT and away from the FLIC. 21,22,23 and 24 Other tools are being developed
and validated that pertain not only to patients with cancer but also to those with musculoskeletal issues. These new functional assessments strive to combine the
recently developed American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons Modems with oncologic assessments such as the Health-Related Quality of Life (HR-QOL) and the
FACT. These tools will become increasingly important in evaluating the efficacy and value of new therapies for patients with metastatic bone disease.

IMAGING OF BONE LESIONS
PLAIN RADIOGRAPHY
Plain radiographs are the foundation of evaluation, surgical planning, and monitoring of metastatic lesions of bone. Radiographs are a fast, inexpensive, and readily
available technique for evaluating bone metastases. Other techniques may be more sensitive, but radiographs give the best integration of overall bone structure and
alignment and correlate best with clinical features. Therefore, plain radiography should be the first test ordered in the evaluation of bone pain.
Three radiographic patterns of metastatic disease typically are seen: osteolytic, osteoblastic, and mixed. 25 Because of variations in the bone microenvironment and
clonal differentiation of tumors, different patterns may exist throughout the skeleton or within a single bone. Prostate cancer metastases are classically osteoblastic,
breast cancer bone lesions usually show a lytic or mixed pattern, and lung cancer metastases are predominantly lytic. Radiographic variability can also be seen
during the course of therapy, as the radiographic appearance of a lesion changes during treatment. Osteoblastic areas seen radiographically correspond to the
reaction of the host bone to the metastases, not to the tumor itself. Fast-growing tumors tend to have a lytic or mixed pattern, and the bone reaction cannot keep pace
with the rate of tumor growth. Reactive bone often lacks mechanical strength, as it forms in a random pattern lacking normal Haversian structure.
Periosteal changes can also occur with metastatic disease to the bone. Rapidly growing tumor can elevate the periosteum, causing an irregular periosteal reaction.
Lung cancer and prostate cancer with cortical involvement commonly display this pattern. Stress fracture through the underlying bone lesion can also be associated
with periosteal reaction. Nevertheless, periosteal elevation is usually a hallmark of primary bone neoplasm; therefore, sarcoma should be excluded when periostitis is
present.
Radiographs assist greatly in surgical planning. Disease spreads diffusely within long bones. In patients with proximal femoral metastases in whom radiographic
evaluation is confined to the hip, potential lesions distal in the femur are overlooked. It is important that the entire bone be imaged, so that all lesions can be
addressed and stabilized during the same operative procedure.
Finally, sequential radiographs of involved areas are important for monitoring response to treatment, local recurrence, and disease progression. X-ray films of
subsequently symptomatic regions are important for identifying further metastatic foci, allowing for early intervention and management. In addition, certain tumors
(most notably multiple myeloma) do not stimulate the increased bone turnover required for positive readings on bone scan. Patients with such tumors are best
evaluated for other foci of skeletal disease by a plain radiographic skeletal survey.
BONE SCINTIGRAPHY
Technetium diphosphonate bone scans are extremely valuable in identifying occult bone lesions and diagnosing metastatic disease. Whereas 30% to 50% of bone
mineral must be lost for a lesion to appear on plain radiograph, bone scans show skeletal involvement much earlier. Bone scintigraphy is an essential part of cancer
staging for skeletal metastases, identifies sites of both symptomatic and asymptomatic lesions, and locates potential sources of referred pain. In 85% of patients with
metastatic cancer to bone and a single symptomatic focus, multiple additional foci will be seen on bone scan. Certain tumors, such as lung cancer and melanoma,
grow rapidly and evoke little reactive bone formation, leading to false-negative scans. In addition, multiple myeloma is notorious for resulting in false-negative bone
scans. Bone scans lack anatomic detail and, although they can localize the site of involvement, the specific characteristics of the lesion are not visualized. Bone scan
results should be correlated with additional imaging modalities such as plain-film radiographs or CT scans.
Bone scintigraphy can be used to evaluate the response to chemotherapy, hormone therapy, or radiation therapy, by reflecting the biology of the lesion and the extent
of the host response. The method has been most useful in evaluating treatment in breast cancer patients. Up to 15% of patients will experience an initial increase in
radioisotope uptake on bone scan with treatment, called the flare phenomenon.26 This reflects new bone formation as a healing response around the quiescent lesion.
Over time, the surrounding bone heals, and osteoblast activity, which is estimated by the uptake on bone scan, will diminish. Development of additional scintigraphic
lesions early in treatment does not necessarily reflect disease progression. Instead, this can reflect healing and ossification of areas where the tumor did not evoke a
response initially.
A limitation of the bone scan technique is that it measures solely the metabolic activity of the bone and not its structural integrity. Biologic control of the tumor does not
necessarily translate into mechanical restoration of the skeleton. Therefore, close correlation of follow-up bone scan information with plain radiographs or CT
scanning is necessary.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
CT scanning is very effective in evaluating the three-dimensional integrity of bone and the characteristics of lesions identified on bone scan. 27 It helps to confirm the
presence of metastatic disease, particularly when evaluating lesions localized to the pelvic and shoulder girdles. Spine lesions can also be imaged by CT scans but
are better evaluated by MRI in most circumstances. 28 CT scanning is superior to MRI in demonstrating bone mineral content and cortical integrity and is therefore
more useful in evaluating the structure of the involved bone. MRI will often show extensive marrow involvement in a bone, even though the structural integrity is
preserved. CT scans help to discriminate between the presence of cellular and structurally significant disease.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
MRI is an excellent technique for evaluating bone marrow, which is the first site of metastatic involvement of bone. 19,28,29 and 30 Though it is very sensitive for this
indication, it is nonspecific. However, MRI is particularly useful in round cell lesions such as leukemia, lymphoma, and multiple myeloma, which replace the marrow
space. The high fat content of bone marrow translates to high signal intensity or brightness on T1-weighted and low signal intensity on T2-weighted images. This
essentially provides a contrast medium juxtaposed to the tumor, which, because of its high water content, has high signal intensity on T2-weighted and low signal
intensity on T1-weighted images.
MRI provides good three-dimensional anatomic information throughout the skeleton and is excellent in defining soft tissues and delineating soft tissue involvement by
tumor. In the spine, MRI is especially useful because it is sensitive for tumor involvement, shows sagittal and cross-sectional alignment, and details tumor present in
the spinal canal, dural impingement, and spinal cord compression. MRI is particularly helpful in distinguishing between pathologic fracture due to osteoporosis and

that due to tumor. This is particularly important for postmenopausal women, who may experience both metastatic disease and osteoporosis. 30 MRI is useful in the
evaluation of skeletal metastatic disease but is an imperfect discriminator and therefore requires close correlation with additional studies and the clinical situation.
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY
Positron emission tomographic (PET) scanning is a newly used tool in the evaluation of metastatic bone disease. Though nonspecific, PET scans identify
metabolically active areas by their differential uptake of radiolabeled glucose ([ 18F]fluorodeoxyglucose), similar to the technetium labeling of areas of bone turnover in
bone scan. PET scanning was used in a study of 29 patients with bone metastases and an unknown primary tumor in whom conventional diagnostic workup had
failed. 31 In these 29 patients, all but one known metastatic site was visualized by PET scan, and additional metastatic sites were identified in 5 patients. PET was able
to identify the primary tumor in only 7 of these 29 patients (24%). 31 Data regarding the current clinical relevance of PET scanning are limited. The technique is used
predominantly in an investigational role. However, PET scanning does show utility in selected instances for diagnosis of bone and soft tissue metastases.

THERAPEUTIC MODALITIES
Multiple therapeutic modalities are available in the armamentarium for management of metastatic disease to bone. These modalities comprise three broad categories:
systemic therapy, radiation therapy, and surgery.
SYSTEMIC THERAPY
Systemic therapies include chemotherapy, bone marrow transplantation, hormone therapy, immunotherapy, and medications. The medical oncologist directs the
majority of systemic management. Systemic chemotherapy with antineoplastic agents is primary tumor–specific. Until the development of bisphosphonates, no specific
drugs were directed to the general entity of bone metastases. Bisphosphonates have shown great utility in the management of patients with metastatic bone lesions,
most notably in cases of breast cancer and multiple myeloma.
Bisphosphonates
Bisphosphonates are stable analogs of naturally occurring inorganic pyrophosphate. They inhibit the precipitation of calcium phosphate in vitro and biologic
calcification in vivo. They also inhibit bone resorption, particularly that occurring in certain metastatic lesions of bone. The mechanism by which bisphosphonates
inhibit bone resorption is inhibition of osteoclasts by interruption of the mevalonate metabolic pathway and, possibly, by causing osteoclast apoptosis as well.
First-generation bisphosphonates such as clodronate and etidronate, second-generation drugs such as tiludronate and pamidronate, and third-generation
medications such as ibandronate and zoledronate, have differing potencies and effects. The bisphosphonates are generally safe compounds with few side effects.
The drugs are not metabolized in the human body, with 50% to 60% of each dose rapidly absorbed by bone, followed by slow renal elimination; the other 40% to 50%
is rapidly excreted by the kidneys.
Bisphosphonates have proven efficacy in the treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy, Paget's disease of bone, osteoporosis, and bone metastasis in breast cancer
and multiple myeloma. Pamidronate is approved for use in hypercalcemia of malignancy, Paget's disease, and bone metastasis, whereas therapeutic approval for
other bisphosphonates varies: Etidronate is approved for use in hypercalcemia of malignancy, alendronate for the treatment of osteoporosis, and tiludronate for the
treatment of Paget's disease. Pamidronate, 90 mg by IV infusion every 3 to 4 weeks, is the dosing regimen that has been shown to provide the most rapid onset of
pain reduction and increased mobility, with minimal side effects. 32 Several large randomized trials have been performed to analyze the efficacy of pamidronate in the
management of metastatic bone lesions. 33
Theriault et al. 33 reported on their randomized, double-blind trial involving 372 patients with breast cancer and at least one lytic bone lesion who received standard
hormone therapy. The skeletal morbidity was significantly reduced in the patients receiving pamidronate; however, there was no significant difference in survival or
objective bone response rate. Not until 6 months was a difference observed between the two groups, at which point the curves diverged, with an upward shift of the
placebo group's skeletal event rate curve, though the curves for both treatment groups maintained the same slope. 34
Hortobagyi et al. 35 reported on their randomized, double-blind trial involving 382 patients with metastatic breast cancer and lytic bone lesions who were receiving
standard chemotherapy. Again, a significantly decreased risk of bone lesion complications was seen in the pamidronate group as compared to the placebo group. 35
Berenson et al.36 reported on their randomized, double-blind trial of 392 patients with stage III myeloma and at least one lytic bone lesion who were receiving either
first-line or second-line antimyeloma chemotherapy. There was a significant reduction in skeletal events in the pamidronate group, although survival was not different
between the pamidronate and placebo patients. Again, the skeletal event curves of the pamidronate and placebo groups diverged, in this instance from the initiation
of the study. The placebo group's curve was shifted upward, but the two curves continued to have similar slopes, as was seen in the breast cancer trials. 36
In light of the outcomes from these large randomized trials, bisphosphonates have been added to the therapeutic armamentarium in the treatment of bone metastasis
due to breast cancer or multiple myeloma. Although bisphosphonates have not been proven to be efficacious in managing bone metastasis due to other tumors,
theoretically these compounds should be of value in all cancers causing lytic bone lesions. There is also evidence that bisphosphonates may actually prevent the
development of bony metastases. In several animal models, injected tumor cells failed to establish colonies in bone that had been pretreated with bisphosphonate. 37,38
The magnitude of benefit of bisphosphonates in other cancers, its possible early use in the management of patients with metastatic disease, and the details of the
mechanism of action of this drug class all warrant further investigation. Despite their benefits, bisphosphonates act over the course of several months. When a more
rapid response is needed, radiation therapy or surgery (or both) still are required.
Chemotherapy and Hormone Therapy
Because of the significant percentage of patients with breast cancer who develop metastatic bone lesions, the effects of chemotherapy and hormone therapy on these
lesions have been investigated. The goals of chemotherapy and hormone therapy in patients with metastatic disease involving bone are pain control, disease
stabilization, and reduction of the risk of morbid skeletal events (e.g., pathologic fracture). In a series of patients from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center who were
treated with 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide, bone lesions showed an 18% complete and a 65% partial response to the regimen.
Hormone-sensitive breast carcinoma has a predilection to metastasize to bone; therefore, hormone therapy can be effective in these cases. As with other therapies, a
peritreatment lesion “flare” may occur that makes the evaluation of overall response difficult. However, the use of chemotherapy and hormone therapy in metastatic
breast cancer has been shown to prolong survival and can render patients better able to respond to bone lesion–specific therapy such as bisphosphonates or
systemic radionuclides, reducing overall skeletal morbidity. 39
RADIATION THERAPY
External-Beam Radiation Therapy
Radiation is an important technique for treatment of tumor that has metastasized to the bone. The indications for radiation therapy are pain relief and suppression of
local tumor growth. Suppression of local tumor growth is important in the treatment of impending fractures, after surgical fixation of metastatic lesions, and in the
treatment of neural compression. This is exemplified by irradiation of tumor for spinal cord compression. Tumor reduction and pain relief can begin immediately,
particularly for very radiosensitive round cell tumors. Thoughtfully planned treatment with high-energy radiation causes minimal morbidity, and the benefits far exceed
the risks in most situations. Radiation is of therapeutic value in patients with localized symptomatic lesions and should be considered in all but the few cases in whihc
either the disease is very responsive to systemic treatment (e.g., germ cell tumor, lymphoma) or the lesions are resectable for cure.
Despite its efficacy, radiation therapy should not be used indiscriminately. Marrow fibrosis can be a late complication that precludes chemotherapy. The radiation
oncologist must collaborate with the medical oncologist and surgical personnel to optimize treatment. This interdisciplinary cooperation is critical in the management
of an impending fracture. Occasionally, a lesion will heal with radiation therapy, especially if it is mechanically protected. 40 Treating an isolated lesion may allow the
radiation oncologist to use a narrower radiation field. However, fracture and subsequent intramedullary fixation necessitate treatment of the entire bone, which can be

difficult to implement if a radiation treatment protocol has already been applied within the new field.
More than 80% of patients with a limited number of well-localized bony metastases can be treated effectively by external-beam irradiation. 41,42 and 43 High-dose
radiation, coupled with careful subsequent observation, is suitable, cost-effective oncologic management for most cancer patients, especially if the available
chemotherapeutic regimens are not well established. Radiation may render the patient asymptomatic and control the disease for an extended period.
Patients with numerous areas of skeletal involvement require systemic therapy. Chemotherapy or endocrine therapy is the most appropriate. If symptoms persist over
the course of several months, alternative management for localized disease should be considered. External-beam irradiation to the most symptomatic or potentially
troublesome areas should be used to supplement systemic therapy. Hemibody radiation or systemic radionuclide therapy should be considered for widely
disseminated bone disease. 44,45 and 46
Metastases involving the spine are best treated early in the course of disease because progression can produce grave morbidity. 47,48 The spine should be braced until
the lesions can heal. Irradiation of a weight-bearing bone such as the femur should be undertaken only after careful evaluation of the potential fracture risk produced
by the underlying lesion (as discussed later in Impending Fractures: Prophylactic Fixation ). There is an increased risk of pathologic fracture in the peri-irradiation
period due to an induced hyperemic response at the periphery of the tumor. This weakens the adjacent bone and increases the risk of spontaneous fracture.
Mechanical protection is important until the bone's structural integrity has been restored. Identification of disease progression and management of associated
morbidity by the treatment team is very important during the course of irradiation, because other treatments often are suspended during this time. The interdisciplinary
communication essential for high-quality treatment often is best provided through a medical practice environment in which all the specialists are in geographic
proximity. This minimizes the need for excessive travel by the patient who is experiencing a limitation in mobility and is at risk for fracture.
TREATMENT PLANNING. Data from a patient's medical history, physical examination, bone radiographs, and three-dimensional imaging help to direct radiation fields.

The radiation fields should include all soft tissue masses as identified by the aforementioned studies. The margin of normal tissue treated around the lesion is
variable. The goal, as in surgery, is to avoid having to treat the same bone on multiple occasions. MRI is used to image proximal and distal lesions in the spine.
Appropriate radiation portals can then be defined to avoid repetitive irradiation of the spinal cord. Careful planning in this fashion avoids overtreatment and
complications such as transverse myelitis, bowel toxicity, and peripheral edema.
Radiation suppresses hematopoiesis in the bones within the treatment portal. Marrow suppression is a more significant concern in patients receiving chemotherapy,
as combined myelosuppression can be severe. Aggressive chemotherapy regimens that depress stem cell populations are the most dangerous in this regard.
Complete blood cell counts must be closely monitored, often on a daily basis.
PAIN RELIEF. Irradiation achieves at least partial relief of pain in 80% to 90% of patients.

49

The speed of response varies. When the cause of pain is neurologic, tumor
regression can be prompt and relief rapid. Spinal cord compression from lymphoma is a classic example of this phenomenon. 50,51 Most symptomatic bony metastases
begin to respond over the course of 10 to 14 days. Seventy percent of patients experience some pain relief within 2 weeks of starting therapy and, within 3 months,
90% of patients achieve pain relief. 52 Tong et al., 53 from the Radiation Treatment Oncology Group (RTOG), found that approximately 55% to 70% of patients who
responded initially did not develop recurrent pain in the treatment field. These data support other studies that note sustained pain relief for 1 year or more in 55% to
65% of patients. 54 There is no convincing evidence that different histologic cancers respond differently to irradiation. Although undoubtedly there are some variations,
they seem to be as great among cancers of the same histologic type as they are between primary cancer types. 55
Evaluation of pain relief and tumor responsiveness has failed to account properly for the mechanical contribution to pain. Even when cancer cells respond well to
therapy, lytic tumors may lack matrix, and thus the underlying bone may require more time to restore its mechanical strength. This may explain the clinical observation
that radiation is less successful in palliating lung and kidney cancer lesions, which tend to be predominantly lytic. The RTOG reported that patients with breast and
prostate metastases, cancers that have a significant amount of associated matrix, derived better pain relief from irradiation than did patients with long bone lesions
from other primary tumors.53 Patients with more severe and frequent pain as well as those in whom other treatments have failed are in a poor prognostic category.
When patients do not achieve relief on a therapeutic schedule consistent with that already described, a separate etiology should be considered for the pain. The
clinician should have a high index of suspicion for comorbid conditions. A sudden increase in pain after the start of treatment may indicate that a pathologic fracture
has occurred. Radiographic and orthopedic evaluation should be obtained before the radiation course is continued.
RADIATION DOSE AND FRACTIONATION. The optimal dose and fractionation regimen for palliative therapy of metastatic bone lesions is debated. 42,49,56 Dose, duration,

and fractionation of treatment are interrelated concerns. Metastatic cancer patients with limited life expectancies should receive effective treatment over as short a
time course as possible. Short-term toxicity is the major concern in patients with pathologic fractures because of their reduced life expectancies. Short-course
irradiation minimizes the number of treatments and necessary travel time while producing high response rates.
The RTOG's randomized study of differing dose fractionation schedules in 759 patients reported no significant difference in pain relief among five different schedules
of fractionation (270 cGy × 15, 300 cGy × 10, 300 cGy × 5, 400 cGy × 5, and 500 cGy × 5). 43,53 Complete pain relief and the elimination of the need for narcotic
analgesics occurred more frequently with protracted fractionation. According to Blitzner's reanalysis of the RTOG data, 43 the 270 × 15 or 300 ×10 regimens were most
effective. At the Royal Marsden Hospital, 288 patients were treated for painful bony metastases with either 800 cGy × 1 or 300 cGy × 10. 42,57 The response rate in
each arm of the trial was 80%. Retrospective analysis of single low-dose (400- to 1500-cGy) versus multiple moderate-dose (2000- to 4000-cGy) programs have
shown remarkably little difference. 58,59 These studies indicate that there is no consistent dose-response relationship governing pain relief after the irradiation of bone
metastases. The heterogeneous nature of patients studied, however, and differences in posttreatment survival times may mask such a relationship.
Some authorities continue to recommend higher doses and longer courses of irradiation to palliate bone metastases. The effectiveness of high-dose therapy is
supported by Arcangeli and Micheli, 60 who reported that doses of more than 4000 cGy effected a higher complete response rate. Therefore, patients with a projected
long survival and good performance status may be best treated by a full dose (more than 4000 cGy) with conventional fractionation.
Patients with disseminated bone metastases are candidates for hemibody radiation. 59 This method is an alternative for patients for whom localized treatment would be
inadequate and effective systemic therapy is lacking. The usual protocol is the administration of 6 to 10 Gy in one fraction to the upper, middle, or lower body.
Premedication with antiemetics and corticosteroids and hydration are necessary to treat the acute radiation effects. Response rates are consistently in excess of 70%,
with more than 20% of patients experiencing complete pain relief and fewer than 50% requiring additional irradiation for recurrent bone pain. Toxicity occurs in fewer
than 10% of patients, and severe toxicity is less common in treatment of the middle or lower body. Prostate cancer appears to be particularly well suited for this form
of therapy: Persistent palliation of pain until death has been noted in 82% of patients receiving upper body irradiation and in 67% of those receiving lower body
irradiation. However, concerns regarding the permanent impact on bone marrow reserve, with the possible future need for chemotherapy in these patients, has made
hemibody radiation less popular, particularly in the setting of available systemic radiopharmaceuticals that target metastatic foci and do not carry similar systemic
risks.
Systemic Radionuclides
The systemic administration of radionuclides can be very effective in treating symptomatic bone metastases. This approach is appealing as compared with any other
local or systemic therapy in that it treats all involved sites rapidly and selectively, thereby reducing toxicity and enhancing the therapeutic ratio. 49 Strategies include
using a carrier that seeks the tumor or a vehicle that localizes in bone matrix. The antineoplastic effect both relieves pain and allows for healing of the underlying
bone lesion. Iodine 131 is the prototype, localizing within well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma cells.
Strontium 89 is the most commonly used radioisotope in bony metastatic disease and is advocated for a variety of primary cancer histologic types. 61,62 It localizes in
the mineral of bone by combining with the calcium component of hydroxyapatite. Actively calcifying areas concentrate most of the isotope, just as with radionuclide
scintigraphy. Therefore, it has particular efficacy in osteoblastic lesions, such as those occurring with metastatic prostate or breast cancer. Degradation of the isotope
in the host bone administers local short-acting radiation to the adjacent tumor cells. 89Sr has very good response rates ranging from 51% to 91%. Patients with
prostate cancer showed more than 80% symptomatic improvement after 89Sr therapy. The only significant toxic effect of 89Sr is myelotoxicity, with a 25% reduction in
platelets and leukocytes, and it is usually temporary.

The low-energy b-emission of 89Sr is safer and better tolerated than are high-energy isotopes such as orthophosphate 32. Other radiopharmaceuticals are also
available, including such isotopes as 186Rh, tin-11m-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid, 153Sm, and gallium nitrate. The mechanism of action relates to the half-life of
the isotope in the lesion, the penetrance and mean energy of emitted radioactive particle, and the delivered dose. Isotopes with short half-lives, such as 186Rh, emit
both g rays, permitting imaging of lesions, and b-particles, which confer therapeutic value. All agents cause bone marrow suppression, which is worse in heavily
pretreated patients undergoing chemotherapy. However, premedication, as is required with hemibody radiation, is not necessary with the use of systemic
radionuclides.
Radiopharmaceuticals can cause an initial exacerbation of pain (the flare response) in 10% to 15% of patients. A flare response can indicate good overall analgesic
value.63 In addition, it has been shown that 89Sr can be safely used in conjunction with external-beam irradiation, either in patients who have previously received
wide-field radiation and present with symptomatic bony lesions or in patients who have not received previous external-beam irradiation and so can receive
external-beam irradiation subsequent to treatment with 89Sr.64,65
SURGERY
General Considerations
BONE MECHANICS. Bone strength depends on a combination of material and structural properties.

66

Material properties are of greatest importance when overall bone
geometry remains unchanged. Alterations in bone mineral content influence strength and stiffness exponentially. 67 Alterations in bone proteins after chemotherapy or
radiation therapy may influence the ability of bone to reconstitute. Bone structural properties reflect the underlying geometry and distribution of material in space,
integrating the contribution of medullary trabecular bone and cortical compact bone. Both lytic and blastic lesions dramatically alter the bone modulus of elasticity and
reduce bone strength. Lytic disease reduces bone strength more so than blastic metastases. 68,69 However, blastic metastases also reduce bone strength secondary to
the disorganized nature of this tumor-related bone.
Most of the compressive strength of bone is due to its mineral component, whereas it is the combination of mineral and protein that lends strength in tension. 70 During
normal activity, most forces are either of compression or tension. Torsional or rotational forces, which come into play when the lower extremity is planted and the
patient pivots, are also important. 71 These forces typically occur during transfers such as getting into and out of a chair. Bone is weakest in torsion. A single 6-mm drill
hole, the size used for bone biopsy, reduces torsional strength 50%. 71,72 and 73 Larger defects create even greater stress risers, decreasing torsional strength by 70%
and more.68 Defects larger than the diameter of the bone are termed open segment defects and can reduce both bending and torsional strength as much as 90%.
Weak bone tends to fracture in a transverse configuration, as compared with normal bone, which fractures in an oblique or spiral pattern. Overall bone alignment
usually is good in pathologic fractures as long as a large destructive lesion is not present.
BONE BIOLOGY. The local presence of cancer precludes bone healing in most pathologic fracture situations. The rapid growth of metastatic lesions overwhelms the

healing response. Gainor and Buchert 40 evaluated 123 patients with pathologic long bone fractures. Healing occurred in 45 of the 129 fractures (35%). Healing rates
were related to tumor type: In this series, 67% of fractures due to multiple myeloma, 44% of fractures due to renal cancer, and 37% of fractures due to breast cancer
healed. No pathologic fractures due to lung cancer healed.
The length of patient survival correlated best with fracture healing rates, although healing was considered multifactorial. The five factors that related to the healing of
pathologic fractures included diagnosis, survival, internal fixation, postoperative irradiation, and chemotherapy. 40 Melanoma and lung and colorectal cancers failed to
heal. Lesions due to multiple myeloma and breast and renal cancers tended to heal most frequently; however, they also occurred earlier in the course of these
diseases, while other therapeutic options still remained. Survival was directly related to diagnosis, and this correlated with improved healing rates for patients living
longer than 6 months. Rigid internal fixation supplemented with bone cement was found to increase the probability of bone union. Bone cement not only contributes to
stability but also may present a mechanical obstacle to tumor growth in the fracture region. High doses of postoperative radiation (>3000 cGy) were associated with
poor healing. Because of the variety of agents and therapeutic courses of chemotherapy, this series could not extrapolate the influence of chemotherapy on fracture
healing. However, other studies suggest that healing is reduced 50% by such common agents as methotrexate and doxorubicin. 74
Other systemic factors may make a contribution to fracture healing in patients with metastatic bony lesions, including osteoporosis, hormone manipulation, and
cachexia.
Fracture Treatment
Management of pathologic fractures with internal fixation or prosthetic replacement is the most effective and expedient means by which to control pain and restore
function. Effective orthopedic procedures for metastatic disease convert open segment to closed segment defects, restore bone strength in bending and torsion, and
allow immediate weight bearing. Stabilization of a fracture requires control of the proximal and distal fracture fragments. In this respect, fracture location is an
important consideration, and management strategies are different for epiphyseal, metaphyseal, and diaphyseal locations.
EPIPHYSEAL FRACTURES. Epiphyseal fractures present the easiest problem. Fracture healing is not a consideration, even with nondisplaced fractures, because it

almost never occurs. Resection of the fracture and associated diseased tissue is appropriate, and arthroplasty should be performed, usually involving a cemented
implant. Stem length should be chosen to treat existing or potential lesions within the same bone. Widespread use of bisphosphonate therapy may reduce the need
for long-stemmed prostheses in the future.
METAPHYSEAL FRACTURES. Metaphyseal fractures are more complex. The fracture geometry, quality and quantity of residual bone, and histologic subtype must be

considered. It is especially important to judge the fracture healing potential using the Gainor criteria discussed in the previous Bone Biology section. If a patient is
early in the course of treatment, effective systemic therapies are available, and the tumor is sensitive to irradiation, internal fixation can support the bone while healing
occurs. Lymphoma, occasionally myeloma, and breast cancer are the tumor types for which a long-term, bone-healing strategy has merit.
Internal fixation methods are familiar to orthopedists who treat nonpathologic fractures. Techniques can be classified according to their use of load-bearing devices
(plates and screws) or load-sharing devices (intramedullary rods). A good indication for plate and screw fixation in metaphyseal fractures is densely sclerotic bone, for
which intramedullary fixation or the insertion of a prosthetic device with a long intramedullary stem would be very difficult. One drawback of plate and screw fixation is
that the entire bone is not stabilized in the same procedure. This leaves the patient susceptible to a future fracture proximal or distal to the fixation. Plating techniques
also are more prone to failure than are intramedullary fixation methods. Dijstra, 75 citing a series of 167 fractures, reported that plate fixation is associated with an 11%
failure rate within 7 weeks and a 40% cumulative 5-year failure rate. However, intramedullary fixation of metaphyseal fractures often is impractical because of
inadequate control of the epiphyseal fracture fragment by the device.
Prosthetic replacement of metaphyseal lesions can be very difficult. Generally, the bone in the surrounding apophyseal areas should be saved because it helps to
retain soft tissue attachments. Examples of these areas are the greater and lesser trochanters of the hip and the greater and lesser tuberosities of the humerus.
Securing these attachments to a hemiarthroplasty device in a dependable fashion is difficult. When necessary, supplemental fixation methods with mesh, tension
bands, wires, or cable systems can be used, but the constructs are usually unsatisfactory and result in persistent muscle weakness and pain. In addition, it is difficult
to assess bone alignment and length accurately when treating metaphyseal fractures with prosthetic replacement. In these instances, the significant bone loss
resulting from the metastatic lesion that indicates prosthetic replacement also eliminates or distorts the typical bony landmarks needed to orient the reconstruction.
Problems with limb length inequality, joint instability, and limb weakness typically follow such surgical attempts.
DIAPHYSEAL FRACTURES. Diaphyseal lesions are treated successfully by intramedullary fixation. The method requires the establishment of excellent fixation proximal

and distal to the fracture. This often is possible even when there is total destruction of the affected area. Fixation is achieved by combining interlock screw fixation
with cementing of the bony defect. Flexion and bending strength are well restored with intramedullary rods. 76 Compression strength depends on the magnitude and
extent of the bone deficiency. Methyl methacrylate cement used to fill bone gaps restores strength in compression. Torsional strength and stiffness are restored poorly
by intramedullary devices; therefore, successful use of such devices requires the limitation of torsional forces and the use of appropriate interlocking technique and
cement to control the proximal and distal bone fragments. 77,78 If such control is lacking, plate fixation should be considered.

When diaphyseal lesions are combined with a metaphyseal tumor deposit, prosthetic replacement with a long-stemmed device removes the metaphyseal disease and
stabilizes the diaphyseal shaft fracture with strong intramedullary fixation. 79,80 The secondary tumor deposit should be treated, in most instances, even if this
necessitates opening of the fracture site. Closed intramedullary fracture treatment should be reserved only for those fractures that will heal with stabilization and
supplemental radiation or in patients with rapidly advancing preterminal disease in whom the fixation alone will outlast the patient's projected survival. Long-term
success of the technique requires good apposition of bone fragments and removal of local tumor so that healing occurs.
OTHER MANAGEMENT OPTIONS. Although most surgeons and patients choose internal fixation or prosthetic replacement as the most effective treatment of pathologic

fractures, other management options are available. These include external fixation, cast or brace immobilization, and amputation.
External fixation and cast or brace immobilization can be considered in patients (1) with extensive localized disease that cannot be immobilized by internal means; (2)
who are preterminal and in whom analgesic modalities such as narcotics or rhizotomy can control symptoms; or (3) in whom infection, nadir sepsis, pneumonia, or
other temporary medical problems prevent surgery. These measures can be used in the hospital and translate well to outpatient, home, or hospice care situations.
Amputation continues to play a role in the management of metastatic cancer, with complications of disease and therapy triggering the need for amputation. 81,82 The
indications for amputation fall into three categories: (1) extremity lesions that cannot be reconstructed or are inappropriately reconstructed; (2) complications of the
tumor or treatment, such as a fungating infected lesion; and (3) intractable pain.
Acrometastases (metastases that occur in the distal extremity) present at variable times during the progression of metastatic disease. They are rare, occurring in
0.007% to 0.3% of patients with osseous metastasis, and usually represent a preterminal event. Lung, renal, and esophageal cancer accounted for 48% of the primary
lesions causing the 31 cases of acrometastases reviewed by Healey et al. 83 In this review, seven of the cases were the first presentation of cancer, and another seven
cases constituted the first presentation of metastatic disease.
Amputation is quite suitable for a distal extremity lesion, particularly in the foot. Depending on the primary diagnosis, amputation may provide an opportunity for
extended disease control of early or solitary metastases. Because rehabilitation of distal sites can be difficult and time-consuming, amputation presents the best way
to relieve symptoms and resume function.83,84 More proximal amputations are considered in the lower extremity, particularly when complex reconstruction would be
required. The aggressive treatment methods developed for limb salvage in primary bone tumors are an inappropriate use of time and resources in skeletal
metastases. Intractable pain is sometimes an indication for amputation, but rhizotomy and chordotomy can accomplish the same goal while retaining the extremity.
Recent interest has been demonstrated in a technique that uses radiographically guided percutaneous injection of polymethyl methacrylate into certain metastatic
bony lesions. The basic goal of this technique is to address mechanical symptoms by improving the mechanical stability, particularly in compression, of bones
involved by lytic lesions. In vertebroplasty, under radiographic guidance, liquid methyl methacrylate is injected directly into vertebral body lesions. One of the major
complications of the injection technique is the extravasation of cement from within the contained bony space, with impingement on adjacent structures. This is
particularly important in the spine, where spinal cord compression by cement can cause catastrophic neurologic compromise and requires immediate surgical
decompression. 85,86 With use of this technique for pelvic lesions, reported complications include intraarticular extension of cement into the hip joint and extravasation
around the sciatic nerve. 87 One of the contraindications of the technique is associated fracture, which allows for extravasation of the injected cement outside the bone.
Because of the complications associated with percutaneous injection of polymethyl methacrylate, it is important to coordinate the procedure to allow for emergent
surgical backup to address acute extravasation issues. 85
Tumor Excision
The metastatic tumor deposit should be excised under most fracture circumstances and in selected instances of bone biopsy, treatment of impending fracture, and
solitary bone metastasis. Treatment options consist of intralesional excision, wide excision, or excision plus a surgical adjuvant.
Intralesional therapy occurs either at the time of biopsy or as a planned intervention. Once the biopsy confirms metastatic disease, a decision must be made as to
whether to remove all gross disease, debulking the tumor, or to rely on external irradiation and systemic therapy for local control of the lesion. It is helpful if the
members of the oncology team discuss the treatment options before beginning a course of therapy. Judgment, sensitivity, and skill are needed to integrate the biopsy
process with overall tumor management and to prepare the patient and his or her family appropriately before surgery. Combining biopsy with tumor removal and bone
stabilization best meets the goals of diagnosis, pain relief, and functional restoration. This is particularly important because biopsy further disrupts the already
weakened bone.
Intralesional curettage of tumor in and around the fracture site is the principal strategy in addressing metastatic lesions involving bone. Eliminating gross tumor
achieves an immediate “partial response” that could take weeks to be achieved by other methods, improving local tumor control. Furthermore, the remaining structural
bone is identified. The resultant defect can be filled much more effectively with methyl methacrylate cement, giving better long-term stability to the fractured bone. 88
Extralesional excision can be accomplished by either marginal or wide excision. The appeal of complete local excision is obvious. It is the most effective way to
eliminate the biologic contribution to pain while correcting the structural deficiency. Isolated solitary metastases should be evaluated for potential resectability. 7,89
Occasional cures are reported after resection of bone metastases, but these are infrequent. Radical ablative surgery usually is not appropriate. A long interval
between primary tumor presentation and the development of a metastatic focus argues well for cancer resectability. Patients with a projected long survival, such as
those with renal or thyroid cancers, are best suited to undergo extralesional excision of metastases. The sacroiliac region and spine are common sites of a solitary
metastasis. Tumors in these areas are large and bulky, and the surgery is dangerous. Plasmacytomas should also be considered for resection. Even if systemic
disease later develops, some clinicians contend that survival may be prolonged in surgically resected cases. 14,90
Surgical adjuvants are helpful, whether intralesional or excisional procedures are considered, and include angiography, cryosurgery, chemotherapy, and radiation
therapy. Preoperative angiography and tumor embolization greatly reduce blood flow and intraoperative hemorrhage, particularly in vascular tumors such as thyroid
and renal cell carcinoma. 91,92,93 and 94 Cryosurgery can be used in the local management of bone lesions 95; Marcove96 pioneered its use in metastatic disease. It is
particularly suited for cancers that have failed to respond to systemic treatment or local radiation therapy and in which local tumor progression is expected.
The addition of chemotherapeutic agents to the methyl methacrylate bone cement used in implant and fixation constructs is under investigation as a method of local
delivery of antineoplastic drugs for enhanced local, and potentially systemic, disease control. Preliminary studies show promising results, but further clinical
investigation is required before this method can be entered into the therapeutic armamentarium. 97,98
Radiation therapy remains the principal surgical adjuvant. It should be delivered to the entire surgical field and extend the length of any prosthesis or internal fixation
device.41,52 This addresses tumor cells that have been spread by the surgical procedure along the intramedullary canal and soft tissues. Local tumor control helps to
prevent destabilization of the implant construct by preventing local tumor progression from affecting the structural integrity of the bone in which the implant is fixed.
Impending Fractures: Prophylactic Fixation
There is no specific definition of an impending fracture, and the indications for operative treatment of impending fractures continue to be controversial. This
controversy remains extant in part because of the evidence in the literature. Snell and Beals, 99 in their review of 19 pathologic femur fractures due to metastatic breast
cancer, found that a lesion of 2.5-cm diameter involving the femoral cortex with pain, irrespective of location, was a positive predictor of pathologic fracture. Parrish
and Murray100 reported on their experience with 104 pathologic fractures due to metastatic disease and identified increasing pain, more than 33% cortical destruction,
and lack of radiographic improvement after radiation therapy as indicators of impending fracture. Fidler, 101 in his retrospective study of 19 long bone fractures, showed
that with 50% or more cortical involvement in a long bone, there is at least a 50% incidence of spontaneous fracture. Zickel and Mouradian, 102 in their retrospective
review of 34 patients, found that size did not correlate with risk of fracture and that, instead, pure lysis on radiography, medial cortical involvement at the hip, and
increasing pain were indicative of a high risk of fracture. Harrington, 103 in his review of the literature, summarized the positive predictors of pathologic fracture through
a metastatic lesion as (1) a lesion of 2.5-cm or larger diameter involving the femur, (2) lytic destruction of at least 50% of the cortex of a long bone, and (3) continued
pain with weight bearing after radiation therapy.

Keene et al.104 evaluated clinical and radiographic risk factors in an attempt to predict pathologic fracture of the femur. This study involved 2673 breast cancer
patients who had undergone skeletal surveys. Of these, 203 patients had evaluable proximal femoral metastases. The authors found no criteria to identify the bone at
risk for fracture. They concluded that plain radiographic measurements are insufficient to identify high-risk lesions. This study, however, was limited to the single
anteroposterior radiographic evaluation present in the skeletal survey.
Mirels105 proposed a graduated scoring system that further refined the risk-factor criteria. Included are clinical and radiographic factors, which generate a composite
score from 0 to 12 that correlates with fracture risk. Four factors—anatomic site, pain pattern, radiographic nature, and lesion size—were each evaluated on a 0 to 3
scale. Table 52.4-1 depicts this scoring system and its ability to predict pathologic fracture. Mirels investigated 78 lesions followed up over the course of 6 months.
Fifty-one lesions resulted in fracture, and 27 did not. The mean score for the nonfracture patients was 7, versus a mean score of 10 for the fracture patients; however,
there was significant overlap between the two groups. The author concluded that lesions with scores of less than 7 could be irradiated, whereas those with a higher
score should be managed with internal fixation followed by postoperative irradiation.

TABLE 52.4-1. Mirels' Scoring System to Predict Pathologic Fracture 105

Equally valuable is the ability of this scoring system to predict which lesions would not fracture. 105 The fracture rate was small (5%) when the lesion was less than
two-thirds of the bone diameter, but it increased to 81% for lesions larger than two-thirds of the shaft diameter. It was stressed that standard radiographs are
inadequate to grade many lesions, and CT scanning was recommended to improve diagnostic accuracy. Mirels 105 also made an important distinction between pain
and “functional” pain, the latter being pain that worsens with weight bearing. Thus, functional pain reflects the structural insufficiency of bone and was found to be the
most significant indicator of bone failure, enjoying an almost universal success in predicting fracture. Lesions measuring larger than twice the bone diameter were
closely associated with functional pain. Fracture probability in patients with smaller lesions was only 10%.
The scientific foundation for predicting fracture risk has been improved and summarized by Callaway and Healey. 106 Computer modeling of the proximal femur in in
vitro testing has allowed some investigators to predict femoral strength more accurately. 107,108 and 109 Evaluating intertrochanteric and subtrochanteric lesions subject to
bending forces, these researchers found that endosteal reabsorption of one-half the cortical width weakens the bone by 70% and leaves the patient at high fracture
risk. Similar analysis is not available for other anatomic sites.
At the MSKCC, a functional system has been used that has practical implications. 30,110,111 In each of the following four circumstances, major bone loss has usually
been encountered surgically, and the bone was found to be essentially fractured:
A painful medullary lytic lesion resulting in endosteal reabsorption of at least 50% of the cortical thickness
A painful lytic lesion involving the cortex that is larger than the cross-sectional diameter of the bone
A painful cortical lesion more than 2.5-cm long
A lesion producing functional pain after radiation therapy
Prophylactic fixation should be performed as described earlier in Fracture Treatment.

SPECIFIC ANATOMIC SITES
For each site, unique patterns of metastases and functional and prognostic implications exist. The spine, proximal femur, and pelvis cause the most problems and will
be dealt with individually.
SPINE
Metastatic disease most often affects the vertebral bodies. The lumbar spine is the site of the greatest number of metastases. 112 However, any site within the spine
can develop symptomatic metastases. The primary cancers responsible for spinal metastases are breast, lung, and prostate. Among reports regarding the prevalence
of spine metastases, most emanate from referral centers. However, Stark et al. 48 note that from a general hospital, lung cancer was responsible in 33%, breast cancer
in 28%, other identifiable sites in 25%, and unknown primary lesions in 14% of cases. Remarkably, in 47% of the 131 patients with neurologic symptoms reported by
Stark et al.,48 the spinal metastases were the initial presentation of malignant disease. In an autopsy study of 832 patients dying of metastatic cancer, 36% were found
to have spinal metastases, and 26% of these patients had negative plain radiographs of the spine despite the gross evidence of tumor. 113
Pain is the most common presenting symptom. It may be caused by intraosseous disease, motion segment instability, vertebral fracture, epidural compression, or
nerve root impingement. Vascular insufficiency of the spine can also occur due to tumor or to associated spinal instability, surgery, radiation therapy, or embolization
of the spinal arteries. 114 Neurologic deficit is seen commonly in symptomatic patients. Myelopathy, radiculopathy, or cauda equina syndromes are recorded. Of
particular importance is loss of proprioception and sphincter function. These are harbingers of serious neurologic damage and are much less likely to return after any
form of treatment.
Various staging systems for vertebral involvement have been advanced. 115,116 The Tomita system is the most logical and offers the greatest clinical applicability. 117 It
identifies disease involving the vertebral body, pedicle, posterior spinous elements, epidural space, and paraspinal region as distinct components. Clinical staging has
also been identified as an important prognostic factor. Tokuhashi et al. 118 have identified six parameters for staging, each of which is assigned 0 to 2 points: (1)
general condition, (2) number of extraspinal bone metastases, (3) number of vertebral metastases, (4) visceral metastases, (5) primary cancer site, and (6) severity of
spinal cord palsy. Outcome was correlated to total score. These authors recommended that an excisional operation be performed in patients with 9 or more points,
whereas palliative surgery is indicated for the more seriously ill, those patients scoring fewer than 5 points. 118
The natural history of metastases is variable. Influential factors are anatomic location of metastases, functional status, treatment, and primary tumor histology. Tomita
et al.119 reported on a group of 78 patients with epidural metastases who were treated with irradiation and high-dose steroids. Among the patients, 2 improved and 11
became paraplegic, whereas in 65, symptoms stabilized. There was a major difference in outcome based on the ability to restore ambulation. Ambulators had a
53-week survival in contrast to nonambulators, who survived less than 5 weeks.
Radiation is the first line of treatment for most patients with spinal metastases and pain. Rao et al. 120 reported on 19 patients with cervical metastases without
neurologic deficits. All patients received radiation therapy or chemotherapy. Symptomatic control lasted for 6 months, with subsequent deterioration that necessitated
another treatment. Median survival was less than 15 months. The authors concluded that nonoperative treatment is appropriate for most patients without neurologic
signs, particularly if the expected survival is in the 6- to 12-month range. 120 Similarly, Young et al. 47 performed a randomized trial of radiation therapy versus
laminectomy and posterior decompression of the spinal cord. They found no benefit from this form of surgery and therefore favored nonoperative treatment. However,

the series was small, was not stratified for tumor location, and preceded the application of modern spine instrumentation methods.
Surgery may be important to improve the quality of life of these patients. 121 The goals of surgery in metastatic spine disease are to decompress the spinal cord and
neural elements and to stabilize the spine. Laminectomy alone rarely accomplishes these goals and may further destabilize the spine. 47 It is indicated for rare
posterior element disease or peripheral root compression only.
The debate continues as to whether an anterior, posterior, or combined anterior-posterior approach is better. Proponents of anterior decompression contend that it is
often preferable because it addresses the primary site of the disease. 122,123 Harrington, 122 in his original report of 14 patients, found that 9 of 12 patients with major
neurologic dysfunction recovered completely, 2 recovered partially, and 1 was unchanged. Vertebral body resection and cement and rod vertebral body reconstruction
achieved excellent pain relief in 13 of 14 patients. Sundaresan et al. 124 reported on 101 vertebral body resections. Patients were stabilized anteriorly or posteriorly as
required; pins and cement usually were inserted to replace the vertebral body. Seventy-eight percent regained ambulatory ability, and 85% experienced pain relief.
Morbidity was the least in patients who were treated de novo and underwent subsequent radiation therapy. In a follow-up study of 54 patients with de novo surgery,
Sundaresan et al. 115 noted that 25 patients survived 2 years or more, with 92% maintaining ambulatory ability. The overall complication rate in this series was a low
15%.
Rosenthal et al. 125 reviewed a 3-year experience at the MSKCC, where anterior corpectomy and reconstruction with pins and cement were used for metastatic
disease. Deterioration in function or pain control occurred in 7 months for cervical lesions, in 11 months for lumbar lesions, and in 22 months for thoracic lesions.
Junctional sites were more unstable, leading to early deterioration. Anterior surgery alone was satisfactory for patients with short survival times. If survival was
expected to exceed the durability of the anterior reconstruction, then staged, posterior stabilization was recommended. Currently, the group at MSKCC is advocating a
posterolateral, transpedicular approach that permits circumferential neural decompression, corpectomy, anterior pin and cement fixation, and segmental posterior
fixation (Fig. 52.4-2).126 This strategy has achieved excellent tumor control, pain relief, and neurologic preservation in a preliminary series of 25 patients. It is
particularly suitable for patients with extensive epidural disease and those who have had a previous thoracotomy or thoracic irradiation or who have significant
pulmonary disease, which is a relative contraindication for thoracotomy.

FIGURE 52.4-2. Metastatic disease involving the spine with fracture and spinal cord compression at T9. A: T2 stir, fat-suppressed magnetic resonance imaging scan
demonstrating multiple-level vertebral involvement with extension of tumor involving the T9 vertebral body into the spinal canal with cord impingement. B:
Postoperative radiograph after decompression and stabilization using the single-stage posterolateral, transpedicular approach with anterior reconstruction with pins
and cement and long posterior fusion with pedicle screw fixation.

Segmental spine fixation, including pedicle fixation, has greatly improved the ability to stabilize the spine posteriorly. 127 Anterior devices, including plates or multiple
rod fixation, have greatly expanded the options for vertebral body reconstruction. 128,129,130 and 131 Each anterior construct can be combined with bone or synthetic
replacements for the vertebra. The choice here depends on the expected survival of the patient. In most situations, survival is insufficient for bone healing to occur
and is well within the limits of synthetic durability. This is in distinction to the case for curative resection of solitary metastases or primary tumors.
Finally, Tomita et al. 132 have described total en bloc spondylectomy for metastatic and primary disease in a selected series of 24 patients. This is the most
oncologically sound procedure described to date, removing the posterior elements as a single segment and resecting the vertebral body as a single segment. Careful
spine stabilization and meticulous technique have prevented neurologic damage. Eighteen patients had substantial neurologic improvement. Among the 12 patients
who were alive at 14-month review, no local recurrence was found. These results are in contrast to the high local recurrence rates (up to 49%) that have been
reported by King et al. 133 and other experienced spine surgeons.
Current surgical indications agreed on by most authors are (1) cord compression with myelopathy, (2) bone impinging into the spinal canal and producing thecal
compression, (3) spinal instability with unremitting mechanical pain, (4) fracture-dislocation of the spine, (5) radiculopathy with progressive or uncontrolled symptoms,
(6) tumor growth unresponsive to radiation therapy, and (7) direct tumor extension from primary lesions, such as Pancoast tumor invading the vertebra.
Embolization of spinal metastases from renal carcinoma has been recommended as the sole treatment for patients with late-stage disease. O'Reilly et al. 93 described
this treatment in four patients who achieved progressive neurologic improvement that lasted for 12 weeks or more. Preoperative tumor embolization is warranted in
renal carcinoma and, possibly, in other hypervascular lytic tumors. Olerud et al. 92 noted that the average blood loss was cut by two-thirds after embolization in 11
cases of renal cancer, as compared with 18 similar procedures in which embolization was not performed. The value of embolization in the treatment of other tumors
has not been as well documented, but it is often useful in the treatment of metastases to difficult sites such as the acetabulum.
PROXIMAL FEMUR
Fractures of the proximal femur are the most common surgical problem in bony metastatic disease. Sixty-six percent of pathologic long bone fractures involve the
femur, and 80% of these occur in the proximal portion. The femoral neck is the location for approximately 52% of these fractures, with the intertrochanteric region
responsible for another 15% and the subtrochanteric region for the remaining 33%. 134 Walking, rising from a chair, climbing stairs, and even lifting the leg to swing out
of bed all apply forces in excess of three times one's body weight on the hip joint and proximal femur. Underlying mechanical weakness from even a treated
metastasis leaves the bone unable to withstand the forces of normal activity.
It is a tragic mistake to spare the patient an operation when the procedure can make an important improvement in the quality of the patient's remaining life. This is true
even for patients in whom anticancer therapy and resuscitation are no longer indicated. As in other anatomic locations, the goal of treatment is to reduce pain and
maintain function. Maintenance of function usually means preservation of walking ability but, in severely disabled patients, functional restoration means regaining
transfer ability, which facilitates nursing care. General indications for surgery are a life expectancy of at least 1 month, a general physical condition adequate to
tolerate surgery, a result from surgery that will expedite patient mobilization and facilitate general care, and bone adequate to support fixation or a prosthesis proximal
or distal to the fracture. 134 Conversely, patients with major neurologic impairment or potential large persistent narcotic requirement are unlikely to benefit greatly from
surgery.
Generally, all fractures require supplemental radiation therapy to treat underlying tumor. Treatment of the fracture frequently exposes new areas to tumor spread.
Tumor can be seeded down the femoral canal during intramedullary reaming, insertion of an intramedullary device, or injection of cement down the canal. This newly
contaminated region must be treated with radiation to avoid tumor proliferation and a new fracture distal to the implant.
Surgical treatment is largely dependent on fracture location and anatomy, which is discussed earlier, in Fracture Treatment.
PELVIS AND ACETABULUM
Most patients with pelvic and acetabular metastases have pain; however, it does not always arise directly from the hip joint. Avulsion fractures of the iliac crest or

anterior-inferior iliac spine are common and should be treated nonoperatively. However, mechanical insufficiency of the acetabulum can be managed only surgically.
The general surgical indications for metastatic disease involving the acetabulum are (1) continued acute symptoms despite management with protected weight
bearing, antineoplastic treatment, and analgesics; (2) unsatisfactory function and pain control 1 to 3 months after irradiation; (3) a pathologic fracture of the
acetabulum; or (4) an impending fracture in the ipsilateral femur requiring surgery.
Harrington and Rock 135,136 described four types of acetabular bone deficiency and their surgical management among 58 patients with pelvic metastases. Their
classification system is based on the extent of bony involvement by tumor and reflects surgical treatment. Overall results were good for most patient groups. Pain
relief was effective for at least 6 months in 67% of patients and for more than 2 years in 43%. Eighty percent of patients remained ambulatory for 6 months or more.
Harrington did, however, treat a generally favorable group of patients, with 30 of 58 (51%) surviving 2 years or more after surgery.
Preoperative evaluation, including Judet radiographs, must be performed carefully, to define disease in the anterior and posterior acetabular columns. 137,138 CT
scanning is indispensable to evaluate the medial acetabulum and acetabular dome and to define any associated soft tissue mass. It is the best study for assessing
overall bone integrity. Pathologic anatomy is better described by a four-part system that assesses the anterior column, posterior column, acetabular dome, and medial
wall as separate components. Bone in each region can then be graded as sufficient or insufficient, whereby sufficient bone provides adequate support for the
acetabular component and insufficient bone does not. Thus, the classification system combines both anatomic and reconstructive considerations.
At the MSKCC, this four-part system was used to analyze a series of 55 patients who required surgical reconstruction of the acetabulum for metastatic disease. 139 In
this series, ten patients (18%) had insufficiency of both anterior and posterior columns, whereas 36 patients (65%) had single column insufficiency. Forty-two of 55
patients (76%) had an insufficient medial wall combined with either an insufficient column or dome, and 47 patients (85%) had an acetabular fracture. In all 55
patients, the reconstruction was reinforced with pins or cannulated screws incorporated into cement, using a modified Harrington technique. This allows for bypass of
major acetabular defects with proximal fixation of the socket into the remaining iliac bone. Insertion of pins or screws can be performed in an antegrade fashion from
the iliac crest, using a vector guide, or retrograde from the bone defect. A protrusio ring “revision” hip socket can be used to transfer load to the remaining intact
cortical bone when medial wall defects are present ( Fig. 52.4-3). Of the 41 out of the 55 patients (75%) in this series that were evaluable at 3 months, 34 (83%)
experienced significant pain relief, 9 of 18 nonambulatory patients had regained walking ability, and 14 of 17 patients maintained their ability to ambulate in the
community. Fourteen of 55 patients (25%) developed significant local disease progression, but only 5 patients (9%) experienced fixation failure. Early complications
developed in 12 patients (22%). Of the 21 patients (38%) who had more than 1 year of follow-up, 14 (67%) continued to experience improved pain relief and 12 (57%)
remained community or household ambulators. In this series, despite the fact that patients with significant acetabular metastasis had a short life expectancy, the
positive effect on both pain relief and functional improvement validated the role of surgery in managing this group. Acetabular reconstruction using the outlined
techniques showed a low incidence of fixation failure, supporting the biomechanical stability of the construct and providing sufficient durability in these patients.

FIGURE 52.4-3. Reconstructions using the techniques outlined for metastatic cancer to the pelvis and acetabulum. A: Plain radiograph shows the use of antegrade
cannulated screws, a protrusio ring acetabular component (Healey Cup, Biomet, Warsaw, IN) with fixation screws, and cement to reconstruct a large acetabular defect
with medial wall deficiency. B: Reconstruction of a large lesion involving the posterior column, medial wall, and acetabular dome using antegrade pins, a protrusio
ring acetabular component, and cement. The prominent lateral iliac pin demonstrates pin back-out. The protrusio ring acetabular component lateralizes the socket and
helps to bypass the central defect.

Finally, massive pelvic involvement can be treated by acetabular resection and reconstruction using a saddle prosthesis (Waldemar Link, Hamburg, Germany), as
reported by Aboulafia et al., 140 or with a pelvic endoprosthesis. Such aggressive surgical approaches may help selected patients with intermediate-term life
expectancies.
When coupled with systemic measures to control bony metastases, local care with radiation therapy and/or judicious surgery can achieve the goals of pain relief and
functional preservation in patients surviving with metastatic cancer that involves bone.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics, 1999. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49(1):8.
2. Walther HE. Krebsmetastasen. Basel: Bens Schwabe Verlag, 1948.
3. Mundy GR, Yoneda T. Facilitation and suppression of bone metastasis. Clin Orthop 1995;312:34.
4. Higinbotham NL, Marcove RC. The management of pathological fractures. J Trauma 1965;5:792.
5. Galasko CSB, Burn JI. Hypercalcemia in patients with advanced mammary cancer. Br Med J 1971;3:573.
6. Roila F, Lupattelli M, Sassi M, et al. Intra- and interobserver variability in cancer patients' performance status assessed according to Karnofsky and ECOG scales. Ann Oncol 1991;2:437.
7. Takashi M, Takagi Y, Sakata T, Shimoji T, Miyake K. Surgical treatment of renal cell carcinoma metastases: prognostic significance. Int Urol Nephrol 1995;27:1.
8. Mundy GR. Mechanisms of bone metastasis. Cancer 1997;80[Suppl 8]:1546.
9. Sasaki A, Alcalde RE, Nishiyama A, et al. Angiogenesis inhibitor TNP-470 inhibits human breast cancer osteolytic bone metastasis in nude mice through the reduction of bone resorption.
Cancer Res 1998;58(3):462.
10. Yoneda T. Arterial microvascularization and breast cancer colonization in bone. Histol Histopathol 1997;12(4):1145.
11. Sugiyama A. Study of vertebral metastasis by MR imaging: significance of T2* weighted image (gradient field echo) and metastatic pattern. Nippon Igaku Hoshasen Gakkai Zasshi
1994;54(8):767.
12. Cockett MI, Murphy G, Birch ML, et al. Matrix metalloproteinases and metastatic cancer. Biochem Soc Symp 1998;63:295.
13. Sanchez-Sweatman OH, Lee J, Orr FW, Singh G. Direct osteolysis induced by metastatic murine melanoma cells: role of matrix metalloproteinases. Eur J Cancer 1997;33(6):918.
14. Holland J, Trenkner DA, Wasserman TH, Fineberg B. Plasmacytoma treatment results and conversion to myeloma. Cancer 1992;69:1513.
15. Tongaonkar HB, Kulkarni JN, Kamat MR. Solitary metastases from renal cell carcinoma: a review. J Surg Oncol 1992;49:45.
16. Demers LM, Costa L, Chinchilli VM, et al. Biochemical markers of bone turnover in patients with metastatic bone disease. Clin Chem 1995;41(10):1489.
17. Raj GV, Moreno JG, Gomella LG. Utilization of polymerase chain reaction technology in the detection of solid tumors. Cancer 1998;82(8):1419.
18. Rougraff BT, Kneisl JS, Simon MA. Skeletal metastases of unknown origin. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1993;75(9):1276.
19. Gosfield E, Alavi A, Kneeland B. Comparison of radionuclide bone scans and magnetic resonance imaging in detecting spinal metastases. J Nucl Med 1993;34:2191.
20. Pomeranz SJ, Pretorius HT, Ramsingh PS. Bone scintigraphy and multimodality imaging in bone neoplasia: strategies for imaging in the new health care climate. Semin Nucl Med 1994;24:188.
21. Cella DF, Tulsky DS, Gray G, et al. The Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy scale: development and validation of the general measure. J Clin Oncol 1993;11(3):570.
22. Clohisy DR, Le CT, Umen AJ. Measuring health status in patients with skeletal metastases. Am J Clin Oncol 1997;20(4):424.
23. Davis AM, Bell RS, Badley EM, Yoshida K, Williams JI. Evaluating functional outcome in patients with lower extremity sarcomas. Clin Orthop 1999;358:90.
24. Verger E, Salamero M, Conill C. Can Karnofsky Performance Status be transformed to the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Scoring Scale and vice versa? Eur J Cancer
1992;28A(89):1328.
25. Wilner D, ed. Cancer metastasis to bone. In: Wilner D, ed. Radiology of bone tumors. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1982:3641.
26. Pollne JJ, Witztum KF, Ashburn WL. The flare phenomenon of radionuclide bone scan in metastatic prostate cancer. Am J Radiol 1984;142:773.
27. Weissman RB, Gilbert M, Wang H, Grossman SA. The use of computed tomography of the spine to identify patients at high risk for epidural metastases. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1541.
28. Zimmer WD, Berquist TH, McLeod RA, et al. Bone tumors: magnetic resonance imaging versus computed tomography. Radiology 1985;155:709.
29. Colletti PM, Dang HT, Deseran MW, et al. Spinal MR imaging in suspected metastases: correlation with skeletal scintigraphy. Magn Reson Imaging 1991;9:349.
30. Tan SB, Kozak JA, Mawad ME. The limitations of magnetic resonance imaging in the diagnosis of pathologic vertebral fractures. Spine 1991;16:919.
31. Kole AC, Nieweg OE, Pruim J, et al. Detection of unknown occult primary tumors using positron emission tomography. Cancer 1998;82(6):1160.
32. Cascinu S, Graziano F, Alessandroni P, et al. Different doses of pamidronate in patients with painful osteolytic bone metastases. Support Care Cancer 1998;6:139.
33. Fulfaro F, Casuccio A, Ticozzi C, Ripamonti C. The role of bisphosphonates in the treatment of painful metastatic bone disease: a review of phase III trials. Pain 1998;78:157.
34. Theriault RL, Lipton A, Horrobaggi ON, et al. Pamidronate reduces skeletal morbidity in women with advanced breast cancer and lytic bone lesions: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. J Clin

Oncol 1999;17(3):846.
35. Hortobaggi ON, Theriault RL, Lipton A, et al. Long-term prevention of skeletal complications of metastatic breast cancer with pamidronate. J Clin Oncol 1998;16(6):2038.
36. Berenson JR, Lichtenstein A, Porter L, et al. Long-term pamidronate treatment of advanced multiple myeloma patients reduces skeletal events. J Clin Oncol 1998;16(2):593.
37. Tamura H, Ishii S, Enomoto K, et al. Evaluation of the therapeutic efficacy of bisphosphonate (BP) to bone metastasis of breast cancer in a rat model. Proc Annu Meet Am Assoc Cancer Res
1994;35:A2787(abst).
38. Goodship AE, Walker PC, McNally D, Chambers T, Green JR. Use of a bisphosphonate (pamidronate) to modulate fracture repair in ovine bone. Ann Oncol 1994;5[Suppl 7]:S53.
39. Harvey HA. Issues concerning the role of chemotherapy and hormonal therapy of bone metastases from breast carcinoma. Cancer 1997;80[8 Suppl]:1646.
40. Gainor BJ, Buchert P. Fracture healing in metastatic bone disease. Clin Orthop 1983;178:297.
41. Takahashi I, Niibe H, Mitsuhashi N, et al. Palliative radiotherapy of bone metastasis. Adv Exp Med Biol 1992;324:227.
42. Bates T, Yarnold JR, Blitzer P, et al. Bone metastasis consensus statement. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;23:215.
43. Blitzer P. Reanalysis of the RTOG study of the palliation of symptomatic osseous metastasis. Cancer 1985;55:1468.
44. Ahmed M, Bjurholm A, Kreicbergs A, Schultzberg M. Sensory and autonomic innervation of the facet joint in the rat lumbar spine. Spine 1993;18:2121.
45. Algara M, Valls A, Ruiz V, et al. Half-body irradiation: palliative efficacy and predictive factors of response in 78 procedures. Med Clin (Barc) 1994;103:85.
46. Zelefsky MJ, Scher HI, Forman JD, et al. Palliative hemiskeletal irradiation for widespread metastatic prostate cancer: a comparison of single dose and fractionated regimens. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1989;17:1281.
47. Young RF, Post EM, King GA. Treatment of spinal epidural metastases: randomized prospective comparison of laminectomy and radiotherapy. J Neurosurg 1980;53:741.
48. Stark RJ, Henson RA, Evans SJ. Spinal metastases: a retrospective survey from a general hospital. Brain 1982;105:189.
49. Porter AT, Fontanesi J. Palliative irradiation for bone metastasis: a new paradigm [Editorial]. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:1199.
50. Lucraft HH. Primary lymphoma of bone: a review of 13 cases emphasizing orthopedic problems. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) 1991;3:265.
51. Lewis SJ, Bell RS, Fernandes BJ, Burkes RL. Malignant lymphoma of bone. Can J Surg 1994;37:43.
52. Allen KL, Johnson TW, Hibbs GG. Effective bone palliation as related to various treatment regimens. Cancer 1976;37(2):984.
53. Tong D, Gillick L, Hendrickson FR. The palliation of symptomatic osseous metastases: final results of the study by the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group. Cancer 1982;50:893.
54. Gilbert HA, Kagan HR, Nussbaum H. Evaluation of radiation therapy of bone metastases: pain relief and qualify of life. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1977;129:1095.
55. Bauer HC, Wedin R. Survival after surgery for spinal and extremity metastases: prognostication in 241 patients. Acta Orthop Scand 1995;66:143.
56. Cole DJ. A randomized trial of a single treatment versus conventional fractionation in the palliative radiotherapy of painful bone metastases. Clin Orthop 1989;1:59.
57. Price P, Hoskin PJ, Easton E. Low dose single fraction radiotherapy in the treatment of metastatic bone pain: a pilot study. Radiother Oncol 1988;12:297.
58. Garmatis CJ, Chu FCH. The effectiveness of radiation therapy in the treatment of bone metastases from breast cancer. Radiology 1978;126:235.
59. Varga O, Glicksman AS, Boland J. Single-dose radiation therapy in the palliation of metastatic disease. Radiology 1969;93:1180.
60. Arcangeli G, Micheli A. The responsiveness of bone metastases to radiotherapy: the effect of site histology and radiation dose on pain relief. Radiother Oncol 1989;14:95.
61. Perez CA, Cosmatos D, Garcia DM, Eisbruch A, Poulter CA. Irradiation in relapsing carcinoma of the prostate. Cancer 1993;71:1110.
62. Porter AT, McEwan AJB, Powe JE. Results of a randomized phase-III trial to evaluate the efficacy of strontium-89 adjuvant to local field external beam irradiation in the management of
endocrine resistant metastatic prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:805.
63. Houston SJ, Rubens RD. The systemic treatment of bone metastases. Clin Orthop 1995;312:95.
64. Robinson RG, Preston DF, Scheifelbein M, Baxter KG. Strontium 89 therapy for the palliation of pain due to osseous metastases. JAMA 1995;274(5):420.
65. McEwan AJB, Porter AT, Venner PM, Amyotte G. An evaluation of the safety and efficacy of treatment with Strontium-89 in patients who have previously received wide field radiotherapy.
Antibody Immunoconj Radiopharm 1990;3:9.
66. Reilly DT, Burstein AH. Review article: the mechanical properties of cortical bone. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1974;56:1001.
67. Reilly DT, Burstein AH, Frankel VH. The elastic modulus for bone. J Biomech 1974;7:271.
68. Hipp JA, Katz G, Hayes WC. Local demineralization as a model for bone strength reductions in lytic transcortical metastatic lesions. Invest Radiol 1991;26:934.
69. Hipp JA, Rosenberg AE, Hayes WC. Mechanical properties of trabecular bone within and adjacent to osseous metastases. J Bone Miner Res 1992;7:1165.
70. Burnstein AH, Zika JM, Heiple KG, Klein L. Contribution of collagen and mineral to the elastic-plastic properties of bone. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1975;57:956.
71. Brooks DB, Burstein AH, Frankel VH. The biomechanics of torsional fractures: the stress concentration effect of a drill hole. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1970;52:507.
72. Burnstein AH, Currey J, Frankel VH, et al. Bone strength: the effect of screw holes. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1972;54:1143.
73. Hipp JA, Edgerton BC, An KN, Hayes WC. Structural consequences of transcortical holes in long bones loaded in torsion. J Biomech 1990;23:1261.
74. Pelker RR, Friedlaender GE, Panjabi MM, et al. Chemotherapy-induced alterations in the biomechanics of rat bone. J Orthop Res 1985;3:91.
75. Dijstra S, Wiggers T, Van Geel BN, Boxma H. Impending and actual pathological fractures in patients with bone metastases of the long bones: a retrospective study of 233 surgically treated
fractures. Eur J Surg 1994;160:535.
76. Martens M, Frankel VH, Burstein AH. Ultimate properties of intramedullary nails. Injury 1972;4:18.
77. Van Der Hulst RR, Van Den Wildenberg FA, Vroemen JP, Greve JW. Intramedullary nailing of (impending) pathologic fractures. J Trauma 1994;36:211.
78. Williams WW, Hudson I, Hall AJ, et al. Nailing of impending and pathological fractures of the proximal femur. Int Orthop 1992;169:93.
79. Keating JF, Burke T, Macauley P. Proximal femoral replacement for pathological fracture. Injury 1990;21:231.
80. Chan D, Carter SR, Grimer RJ, Sneath RS. Endoprosthetic replacement for bony metastases. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 1992;74:13.
81. Malawer MM, Buch RG, Thompson WE, Sugarbaker PH. Major amputations done with palliative intent in the treatment of local bony complications associated with advanced cancer. J Surg
Oncol 1991;47:121.
82. Leiger JF, Tauber LN. Solitary metastasis of occult prostatic carcinoma simulating osteogenic sarcoma. Cancer 1968;22:168.
83. Healey JH, Turnbull AD, Miedema B, Lane JM. Acrometastases: a study of twenty-nine patients with osseous involvement of the hands and feet. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1986;68(5):743.
84. Morris DM, House HC. The significance of metastasis to the bones and soft tissues of the hand. J Surg Oncol 1985;28:146.
85. Cotten A, Boutry N, Cortet B, et al. Percutaneous vertebroplasty: state of the art. Radiographics 1998;18(2): 311.
86. Cotten A, Dewatre F, Cortet B, et al. Percutaneous vertebroplasty for osteolytic metastases and myeloma: effects of the percentage lesion filling and the leakage of methylmethacrylate at
clinical follow-up. Radiology 1996;200(2):525.
87. Weill AH, Kobaiter H, Chiras J. Acetabulum malignancies: technique and impact on pain of percutaneous injection of acrylic surgical cement. Eur Radiol 1998;8(1):123.
88. Harrington KD, Johnston JO, Turner RA, Green DL. The use of methylmethacrylate as an adjunct in the internal fixation of malignant neoplastic fractures. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1972;54:1665.
89. Althausen P, Althausen A, Jennings LC, Mankin HJ. Prognostic factors and surgical treatment of osseous metastases secondary to renal cell carcinoma. Cancer 1997;80(6):1103.
90. Loftus CM, Michelsen CB, Rapoport F, Antunes JL. Management of plasmacytomas of the spine. Neurosurgery 1983;13:30.
91. Sundaresan N, Choi IS, Huges JE, Sachder VP, Berenstein A. Treatment of spinal metastases from kidney cancer by presurgical embolization and resection. J Neurosurg 1990;73:548.
92. Olerud C, Jonsson H Jr, Lofberg AM, Lovelius LE, Sjostrom L. Embolization of spinal metastases reduces preoperative blood loss: 21 patients operated on for renal cell carcinoma. Acta Orthop
Scand 1993;64:9.
93. O'Rielly GV, Kleefield J, Klein LA, et al. Embolization of solitary spinal metastases from renal cell carcinoma: alternative therapy for spinal cord or nerve root compression. Surg Neurol
1989;31:268.
94. Roscoe MW, McBroom RJ, St. Louis E, Grossman H, Perrin R. Preoperative embolization in the treatment of osseous metastases from renal cell carcinoma. Clin Orthop 1989;238:302.
95. Malawar MM, Marks MR, McChecney D. The effect of cryosurgery and polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) in dogs with experimental bone defects comparable to tumor defects. Clin Orthop
1988;226:229.
96. Marcove RC. A 17-year review of cryosurgery in the treatment of bone tumors. Clin Orthop 1982;163:231.
97. Wang HM, Galasko CSB, Crank S, Oliver G, Ward CA. Methotrexate loaded acrylic cement in the management of skeletal metastases: biomechanical biological and systemic effect. Clin
Orthop 1995;312:173.
98. Karagiri H, Saro K, Takahashi M, et al. Use of Adriamycin-impregnated methylmethacrylate in the treatment of tumor metastasis in the long bones. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg 1997;116(67):329.
99. Snell WE, Beals RK. Femoral metastases and fractures from breast cancer. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1964;119:22.
100. Parrish FF, Murray JA. Surgical treatment for secondary neoplastic fractures. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1970;52:665.
101. Fidler M. Prophylactic internal fixation of secondary neoplastic deposits in long bones. Br Med J 1973;1:341.
102. Zickel RE, Mouradian WH. Intramedullary fixation of pathological fractures and lesions of the subtrochanteric region of the femur. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1976;58:1061.
103. Harrington KD. New trends in the management of lower extremity metastases. Clin Orthop 1982;169:53.
104. Keene JS, Sellinger DS, McBeath AA, Engber WD. Metastatic breast cancer in the femur: a search for the lesion at risk of fracture. Clin Orthop 1986;203:282.
105. Mirels H. Metastatic disease in long bones: a proposed scoring system for diagnosing impending pathologic fractures. Clin Orthop 1989;249:256.
106. Callaway GH, Healey JH. Surgical management of metastatic carcinoma. Curr Opin Orthop 1990;1:416.
107. McBroom RJ, Cheal EJ, Hayes WC. Strength reductions from metastatic cortical defects in long bones. J Orthop Res 1988;6:369.
108. Hipp JA, McBroom RJ, Cheal EJ, Hayes WC. Structural consequences of endosteal metastatic lesions in long bones. J Orthop Res 1989;7:828.
109. Beaupre GS, Carter DR, Dueland RT, Caler WE, Spengler DM. A biomechanical assessment of plate fixation with insufficient bony support. J Orthop Res 1988;6:721.
110. Robbins SG, Lane JM, Healey JH, Cornell CN. Metastatic bone disease: epidemiology, biology, diagnosis, and treatment. In: Lane JM, Healey JH, eds. Diagnosis and management of
pathologic fractures. New York: Raven Press, 1993:99.
111. Lane JM, Sculco TP, Zolan S. Treatment of pathological fractures of the hip by endoprosthetic replacement. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1980;62:954.
112. Schaberg J, Gainor BJ. A profile of metastatic carcinoma of the spine. Spine 1985;10:19.
113. Wong DA, Fornasier VL, MacNab I. Spinal metastases: the obvious, the occult, and the impostors. Spine 1990;15:1.
114. Smith MD, Emery SE, Dudley A, Murray KJ, Leventhal M. Vertebral artery injury during anterior decompression of the cervical spine: a retrospective review of ten patients. J Bone Joint Surg Br
1993;75:410.
115. Sundaresan N, Digriacinto GV, Huges JE, Cafferty M, Vallejo A. Treatment of neoplastic spinal cord compression: results of a prospective study. Neurosurgery 1991;29:645.
116. Weinstein JN, Differential diagnosis and surgical treatment of pathologic spine fractures. In: Eilert RE, ed. Instructional Course Lectures. Illinois: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons;
1992:301.
117. Tomita K, Toribatake Y, Kawahara N, Ohnari H, Kose H. Total en bloc spondylectomy and circumspinal decompression for solitary spinal metastasis. Paraplegia 1994;32:36.
118. Tokuhashi Y, Matsuzaki H, Toriyama S, Kawano H, Ohsaka S. Scoring system for the preoperative evaluation of metastatic spine tumor prognosis. Spine 1990;15:1110.
119. Tomita T, Galicich JH, Sundaresan N. Radiation therapy for spinal epidural metastases with complete block. Acta Radiol Oncol 1983;22:135.
120. Rao S, Badani K, Schildhauer T, Borges M. Metastatic malignancy of the cervical spine: a nonoperative history. Spine 1992;17[Suppl 10]:S407.
121. Solini A, Paschero B, Orsini G, Guercio N. The surgical treatment of metastatic tumors of the lumbar spine. Ital J Orthop Traumatol 1985;11:427.
122. Harrington KD. The use of methylmethacrylate for vertebral-body replacement and anterior stabilization of pathological fracture-dislocations of the spine due to metastatic malignant disease. J
Bone Joint Surg Am 1981;63(1):36.
123. Harrington KD. Metastatic tumors of the spine: diagnosis and treatment. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 1993;1(2):76.
124. Sundaresan N, Galicich JH, Lane JM, Bains MS, McCormack P. Treatment of neoplastic epidural cord compression by vertebral body resection and stabilization. J Neurosurg 1985;63:676.
125. Rosenthal HG, Healey JH, Peterson M, et al. Outcome analysis of corpectomy without posterior instrumentation. In: Brown KLB, ed. Complications of limb salvage: prevention, management,
and outcome. Montreal: International Society of Limb-Sparing Surgery, 1991.
126. Bilsky MH, Boland PJ, Lis E, Raizer JJ, Healey JH. Single stage posterolateral transpedicle approach (PTA) for spondylectomy, epidural decompression, and circumferential fusion of spinal
metastases. Spine 1999.

127. Roy-Camille R, Saillant G, Mazel C. Internal fixation of the lumbar spine with pedicle screw plating. Clin Orthop 1986;203:7.
128. Zdeblick TA, Shirado O, McAfee PC, deGroot H, Warden KE. Anterior spinal fixation after lumbar corpectomy: a study in dogs. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1991;73:527.
129. McAfee PC, Zdeblick TA. Tumors of the thoracic and lumbar spine: surgical treatment via the anterior approach. J Spinal Disord 1989;2:145.
130. Kaneda K, Asano S, Hashimoto T, Satoh S, Fujiya M. The treatment of osteoporotic-posttraumatic vertebral collapse using the Kaneda device and a bioactive ceramic vertebral prosthesis.
Spine 1992;17:S295.
131. Bohm H, Harms J, Donk R, Zielke K. Correction and stabilization of angular kyphosis. Clin Orthop 1990;258:56.
132. Tomita K, Kawahara N, Baba H, et al. Total en bloc spondylectomy: a new surgical technique for primary malignant vertebral tumors. Spine 1997;22(3):324.
133. King GJ, Kostuik JP, McBroom RJ, Richardson W. Surgical management of metastatic renal carcinoma of the spine. Spine 1991;16:265.
134. Sim FH. Instructional Course Lecturesmetastatic bone diseases: management of lesions of hip and acetabulum. In: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons 66th Annual Meeting. Anaheim,
CA; 1999.
135. Harrington KD. Pathological fractures of the pelvis and acetabulum. In: Harrington KD, ed. Orthopaedic management of metastatic bone disease. St Louis: Mosby, 1988:215.
136. Rock MG, Harrington KD. Pathologic fractures of the acetabulum and the pelvis. Orthopedics 1992;15:569.
137. Sarolaine ER, Ebraheim NA, Jackson WT, Conover SR. Modified Judet radiographic projection in evaluation of acetabular insufficiency secondary to metastatic disease. Orthopedics
1990;13:1154.
138. Sim FH. Metastatic bone disease of the pelvis and femur. In: Eilert RE, ed. Instructional Course Lectures. Illinois: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons: 317.
139. Marco RAW, Sheth DS, Boland PJ, et al. Functional and oncological outcome of acetabular reconstruction for the treatment of metastatic disease. Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery
2000;82A(5):642.
140. Aboulafia AJ, Faulks W, Li W, et al. Reconstruction using the Saddle prosthesis following excision of malignant periacetabular tumors. In: Brown KLB, ed . Complications of limb salvage:
prevention, management, and outcome. Montreal: International Society of Limb-Sparing Surgery, 1991.

SECTION 52.5 Malignant Pleural and Pericardial Effusions
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 52.5
Malignant Pleural and Pericardial Effusions
DAO M. NGUYEN
DAVID S. SCHRUMP
Malignant Pleural Effusion
Pathogenesis of Malignant Pleural Effusion
Clinical Presentation
Diagnosis and Evaluation
Treatment
Summary
Malignant Pericardial Effusion
Pathogenesis and Etiology
Clinical Presentation
Diagnostic Modalities
Treatment
Summary
Chapter References

MALIGNANT PLEURAL EFFUSION
Forty percent of all pleural effusions are due to malignancy, 1 and cancer is the second leading cause of pleural effusion in patients older than 50 years of age.
Approximately 100,000 cases of malignant pleural effusion (MPE) occur annually in the United States, and MPE is the initial manifestation in 10% to 50% of cancer
patients. 2 Two-thirds of MPEs are attributable to lung carcinoma (35%) or breast carcinoma (23%) and lymphoma (10%). Carcinomas of unknown primary origin
account for an additional 12% of MPEs. 3 Presence of MPE frequently indicates advanced and incurable disease. Although the overall prognosis of patients with MPE
depends on the histology and extent of their primary disease, significant palliation can be achieved in these individuals by accurate and timely diagnosis and
interventions associated with minimal morbidity.
PATHOGENESIS OF MALIGNANT PLEURAL EFFUSION
The pleural space functions as a mechanical coupling system between the lung and the chest wall. The normal pleural space is between 7 and 27 µm in width and is
filled with 10 to 40 mL of hypoproteinemic plasma. 4,5 Most of the pleural fluid originates from the capillary bed of the parietal pleura. The major route of pleural fluid
efflux is through the parietal pleural lymphatics, which have a clearance capacity 28 times greater than the rate of fluid formation. 6 Under normal conditions, a dynamic
equilibrium exists between the osmotic and hydrostatic pressures that control the secretion and absorption of the pleural fluid. Accumulation of fluid within the pleural
space may be the consequence of any of the following 7:
Increased hydrostatic pressure in the microvascular circulation
Decreased oncotic pressure in the microvascular circulation
Decreased pressure in the pleural space
Increased permeability of the microvascular circulation
Impaired lymphatic drainage from the pleural space
Transudation of fluid from the peritoneum via lymphatics or anatomic defects in the diaphragm
MPEs typically arise as the result of altered microvascular permeability, as well as diffuse metastatic involvement of mediastinal or subpleural lymphatics. Pulmonary
parenchymal tumors (primary or metastatic) may erode the visceral pleura, spilling cells and disrupting the normal resorption of fluid by the visceral pleura.
Alternatively, the parietal and visceral pleura themselves are common sites of deposits, resulting in increased capillary permeability due to inflammation, overt
endothelial disruption, or obstruction of efferent flow with elevated lymphatic hydrostatic pressure. Primary or metastatic involvement of hilar or mediastinal lymph
nodes obstructs normal visceral and parietal lymphatic drainage, resulting in pleural effusion. 8 In an autopsy study of 29 patients with lung cancer, Meyer 9 observed
that the development of pleural effusion was closely related to malignant infiltration of mediastinal lymph nodes but not the extent of pleural metastases. Typically,
involvement of the mesothelial surface results in exfoliation of tumor cells into the pleural fluid; however, few malignant cells will be found in the pleural fluid in the
setting of submesothelial involvement.
Occasionally, pleural effusions in cancer patients are negative for malignancy despite exhaustive diagnostic efforts. Although related to the underlying cancer, these
paramalignant effusions are not due to metastatic disease involving the pleura but rather are caused by obstruction of the hilar-mediastinal lymph nodes or bronchial
obstruction, resulting in pneumonitis or atelectasis. Such paramalignant effusions, if associated with non–small cell lung cancer, should not preclude patients from
undergoing potentially curative resection if otherwise indicated. However, in most lung cancer patients, cytologically negative pleural effusions eventually are found to
be inoperable. 10,11 Decker et al.11 observed that only 4 of 73 patients (5.5%) with lung cancer and cytologically negative pleural effusions had resectable disease, 11
demonstrating that pleural effusions of any kind in lung cancer patients typically are indicative of locally advanced, incurable disease. Furthermore, occult malignant
cells have been detected by pleural washing in nearly 15% of patients undergoing resection of presumed stage I non–small cell lung cancer 12; survival of these
individuals is as poor as that reported for patients with stage III disease, indicating the ominous nature of pleural space metastases of any kind in lung cancer
patients.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
MPE is often an initial manifestation of cancer; nearly 50% of individuals presenting with MPE have no history of malignancy. 13,14 Most patients with MPE are
symptomatic, with dyspnea of varying severity being the predominant symptom; cough and chest discomfort ranging from dull ache (often characterized as heaviness
or pressure) to sharp pleuritic pain may also be present. 13 Physical examination usually reveals decreased breath sounds, with dullness to percussion and diminished
tactile fremitus. Tracheal deviation and low cardiac output related to mediastinal compression occasionally may be seen with large effusions.
DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION
Radiographic Examinations
As little as 200 mL of pleural fluid, evidenced by blunting of the costophrenic angle, can be detected by standard posterolateral and lateral chest radiographs. Upright
posteroanterior, lateral, and lateral decubitus chest radiographs that allow assessment of “free-flowing” pleural effusion should be performed as initial investigations.
Particularly in the setting of a newly diagnosed effusion, computed tomographic (CT) scan of the chest should be performed to define fluid loculations or hilar
lymphadenopathy, pleural masses, and parenchymal disease. Complete opacification of the hemithorax occurs in approximately 15% of MPE; an opacified hemithorax
with mediastinal shift toward the contralateral side indicates massive effusion, whereas opacification without a shift may be due to a combination of pleural fluid and
lung collapse resulting from proximal airway obstruction, effusion with mediastinal fixation by malignant lymphadenopathy, or malignant mesothelioma. 15
Invasive Diagnostic Maneuvers
After appropriate radiographic assessment, thoracentesis should be performed to obtain fluid for biochemical and cytopathologic analysis, to relieve symptoms, and to
determine the extent of lung expansion after pleural fluid drainage. In the presence of free-flowing effusion, thoracentesis can be safely performed at the level of the
posterior sixth or seventh intercostal space, removing 500 to 1000 mL of fluid. In the presence of a large pleural effusion occupying more than 50% of the pleural

cavity, gradual drainage of the fluid is prudent to avoid postexpansion pulmonary edema. 16,17 and 18 If the pleural collection is loculated, ultrasound- or CT-guided
drainage is recommended. A small sample of pleural fluid should be sent for biochemical analysis; the remaining fluid should be processed for cytopathologic
examination.
After thoracentesis, patients frequently experience less dyspnea and chest heaviness, even in situations in which the lung fails to expand after evacuation of the
effusion due to encasement with malignant or inflammatory “peel.” Possible complications of thoracentesis include bleeding, pneumothorax requiring tube
thoracostomy (in approximately 5%), vagovagal reaction, pain from reexpansion of the lung and apposition of pleural surfaces, and reexpansion pulmonary
edema.19,20
The initial cytology result is positive in approximately one-half of patients who are ultimately found to have MPE. If initial cytology results are negative, repeat
thoracentesis should be performed, since malignant cells will be identified in an additional 20% of patients. Closed pleural biopsy performed either by random
sampling of the pleura just before thoracentesis (to minimize lung injury) or using CT guidance may be considered to expedite diagnosis of patients with presumed
MPE. However, recent data indicate that closed pleural biopsy is complementary to pleural fluid cytology and only slightly increases the yield in diagnosing
malignancy.21 In a direct comparison of closed pleural biopsy with cytologic examination, Nance et al. 22 observed that pleural biopsy was diagnostic in 45% of patients
with MPE, 75% of whom had positive cytology results; pleural biopsy was informative in only 3% of patients whose cytology results were negative. 22 The low yield of
closed pleural biopsy is related to the focal nature of metastatic disease in the pleural space. In contrast, thoracoscopy performed either by direct pleuroscopy under
local anesthesia with intravenous sedation or with video assistance under general anesthesia has a diagnostic yield of nearly 100% for malignant disease involving
the pleura. 23,24 and 25 Therefore, patients whose effusions remain undiagnosed after two thoracentesis procedures should be referred for thoracoscopy.
Biochemical and Pathologic Analysis
Pleural fluid obtained by diagnostic thoracentesis should be routinely sent for protein, glucose, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) analysis and for cell counts,
cultures, and pathologic examinations. MPE is most commonly exudative (LDH >200 U/mL; fluid-serum LDH ratio >0.6; fluid-serum protein ratio >0.5). 26 Frequently,
fluid is blood-tinged or grossly hemorrhagic, owing to disruption of capillaries or venules by direct tumor invasion or cytokine-mediated vasodilation. 15 Typically, the
pleural fluid is hypercellular, with leukocytes (1000 to 10,000 cells/mm 3, predominantly lymphocytes and monocytes), reactive mesothelial cells, and exfoliated tumor
cells. Approximately one-third of MPEs are acidic (pH <7.3), with glucose-serum ratios of less than 0.5. These biochemical parameters correlate with advanced
disease, poor response to palliative pleurodesis maneuvers, and diminished survival in patients with MPE. 27,28
The diagnosis of MPE is confirmed in approximately 50% of patients after initial cytopathologic evaluation. Second and third thoracentesis procedures may increase
the diagnostic yield to 65% and 70%, respectively 3,29; analysis of carcinoembryonic antigen has not proven to be specific enough to discriminate benign from
malignant epithelial effusions. 30 Pleural fluid cytology is positive in fewer than 33% of patients with lymphomas and leukemias; cytogenetic studies can confirm the
malignant nature of pleural effusions in 80% of these individuals. 3
Almost all patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma present with effusions. Atypical mesothelial cells are nearly always present in all pleural effusions irrespective
of the underlying malignancy, and differentiating malignant mesothelioma from metastatic adenocarcinoma can be difficult. Analysis of hyaluronidase levels (which
frequently are elevated in malignant pleural mesothelioma) has not proven to be sufficiently sensitive to be diagnostic 31; as such, immunohistochemistry techniques
must be used to distinguish epithelial pleural mesotheliomas from pulmonary adenocarcinomas. In general, pulmonary adenocarcinomas tend to express
carcinoembryonic antigen, LeuM1, B72.3, and BerEP4; in contrast, the majority of epithelial mesotheliomas do not express these antigens. 32 Histopathologic
diagnosis of malignant mesothelioma frequently requires relatively large tissue samples obtained by thoracoscopy techniques.
TREATMENT
The treatment of MPE should focus on palliation of symptoms and must be tailored to the patient's physical condition and prognosis. Overall, 54% and 84% of patients
with MPE succumb within 1 month and 3 months, respectively, after diagnosis. However, survival is related to the histology of the underlying disease. Patients with
malignant effusions secondary to breast cancer may live 1 year or more, whereas individuals with ovarian cancer have an average survival of 9 months. In contrast,
patients with lung or gastric carcinomas typically do not survive more than 3 months after detection of MPE. 2
Thoracentesis
Thoracentesis may be an appropriate treatment for MPE in patients with limited life expectancy who cannot tolerate any surgical procedure. Recurrent effusions are
observed in 97% of individuals within 30 days after thoracentesis. In general, pleurodesis immediately after thoracentesis is not effective, since residual pleural fluid
dilutes the sclerosing agent, thus diminishing its irritant effects on the pleura. Loculations may form after such treatment, rendering definitive therapy of the pleural
effusion more complicated. In patients presenting with MPE as the initial manifestation of breast cancer, small cell lung cancer, germ cell tumors, or lymphoma,
thoracentesis followed by systemic chemotherapy may successfully treat disease in the pleural space. However, most patients with MPE require more aggressive
intervention to prevent recurrence.
Tube Thoracostomy with or without Pleurodesis
After thoracentesis and reexpansion of the lung, pleural fluid should be completely evacuated with a tube thoracostomy to allow apposition of the visceral and parietal
pleura. Recurrent effusions are noted in 60% to 100% of patients after tube thoracostomy drainage alone; in general, obliteration of the pleural space, either by
parietal pleurectomy or instillation of sclerosants causing inflammation and subsequent pleural symphysis, is required to ensure durable relief. Chemical pleurodesis
is the preferred treatment for patients with MPE, and the efficacy of this intervention depends on (1) complete drainage of the pleural space and reexpansion of the
lung to ensure apposition of the pleural surfaces and (2) instillation of an effective sclerosing agent into the pleural space and retention of this agent in the chest for
several hours to induce an inflammatory fibrosis.
The chest tube (28 Fr. to 32 Fr.) is routinely inserted at the level of the sixth or seventh intercostal space laterally and directed posteriorly to the most dependent
portion of the pleural cavity. Once complete drainage is achieved (as confirmed by chest radiograph and daily drainage of <150 mL), the sclerosing agent (suspended
or dissolved in 100 to 150 mL of normal saline) is instilled into the pleural space via the chest tube. The tube is then clamped for 1 to 2 hours, during which time the
patient changes position periodically to enhance distribution of the sclerosant; subsequently the tube is unclamped and connected to suction. The tube is removed
when the daily drainage is again less than 150 mL.
Traditionally, this method of treatment requires hospitalization for 4 to 6 days and placement of a large-bore chest tube for complete evacuation of the exudative
effusion prior to chemical pleurodesis. However, several studies have indicated that pigtail catheter drainage and sclerosis may be as successful as more traditional
chest tube pleurodesis procedures. 33,34 Recently, outpatient management of MPE with a small-bore all-purpose drainage catheter (10.3 Fr.) and bleomycin
pleurodesis has been described. 35 Pleural fluid was drained by a catheter connected to a collection bag until drainage was less than 100 mL/day. Bleomycin (60 U in
50 mL of 5% dextrose in water) was then instilled to the chest via the drainage catheter, and the tube was removed 24 hours after pleurodesis. Fifty-three percent of
patients treated in this manner experienced complete responses, and an additional 25% had partial responses. In another study, MPE was drained by a 12-Fr. van
Sonnenberg pigtail catheter inserted under ultrasound guidance in 15 patients, 11 of whom had loculated pleural effusion (which necessitated this method of
drainage). 36 Talc (5 g suspended in 100 mL of injectable normal saline) was instilled into the pleural cavity once pleural fluid drainage was less than 100 mL/day.
Control of MPE was achieved in 80% of these cases; additional talc instillation was required in two patients to treat residual pockets of effusion with good results.
These data suggest that outpatient management of MPE may be appropriate in patients with MPE who typically have limited life expectancies.
Pleurodesis Agents
Various agents have been used in the last 50 years to induce adhesive obliteration of the pleural space. Nitrogen mustard was one of the first agents used to treat
MPE. The overall response rate was 52%. 37,38 The main complications related to its use were bone marrow suppression, pain, fever, nausea, and vomiting. Thiotepa,
5-fluorouracil, and bacille Calmette-Guérin 39,40 were also used but were found to have limited efficacy and unacceptable toxicity. Radioactive zinc, gold, chromium, or
phosphorus were used in the 1940s to treat MPE, with a cumulative response rate of approximately 53%. 41,42 The main disadvantages of radioactive colloids were

cost, short half-lives, and potential hazards to treatment personnel; these agents are no longer used clinically.
Certain chemicals have been extensively evaluated in both randomized and nonrandomized clinical studies for their efficacy as pleurodesis agents. None of them
except bleomycin are known to possess antitumor activity. They induce intense pleural inflammation and, subsequently, adhesive fibrosis of the parietal and visceral
pleurae.
TETRACYCLINE-DOXYCYCLINE. Tetracycline was extensively used as a sclerosing agent to treat pleural effusions of benign and malignant etiologies because of its

efficacy, low cost, and safety. The overall efficacy of tetracycline in controlling MPE was 70%. 43,44 The usual dose was 500 to 1000 mg diluted in 100 mL of normal
saline. The main side effects were pleuritic pain (20% to 70%) at the time of drug instillation and low-grade fever (33%). Lidocaine (20 mL of 1% or 2% solution) could
be mixed with tetracycline prior to administration to decrease pleuritic pain. Injectable tetracycline is no longer available in the United States since 1991, because the
drug preparations did not meet the U.S. Food and Drug Administration purity standards; as such, the tetracycline derivatives doxycycline and minocycline have been
used for pleurodesis. Three small, uncontrolled clinical trials have reported response rates of 67% to 88% after doxycycline pleurodesis. 45,46 and 47 The side effects are
similar to those observed with tetracycline. Most patients require repeated doxycycline instillation for successful pleurodesis. In these reported series, only 15% of
patients responded to a single treatment, and 9% required more than four instillations. Intrapleural minocycline (300 mg with 1% lidocaine) was given to seven
patients with MPE, of whom six responded (86%).48 The small number of patients studied, unspecified criteria for success, and duration of treatment response make
for difficult comparisons of minocycline with other agents.
BLEOMYCIN. Intrapleural administration of bleomycin (60 to 120 U) achieves pleurodesis in 65% of patients with MPE (range, 62% to 81%). 49,50,51 and 52 Intrapleural

bleomycin is well tolerated and associated with few side effects. 53 In a multicenter, randomized trial, 43 bleomycin was superior to tetracycline for pleurodesis; 70% of
patients treated with bleomycin had successful control of their MPE, as compared to only 47% of patients treated with tetracycline. However, bleomycin is expensive;
typically, each treatment dose ranges from US $1100 to $1300. Bleomycin has been compared with less expensive talc pleurodesis in a prospective randomized study
of 29 women with MPE secondary to breast cancer. Of 22 evaluable patients (with 3 patients having had bilateral pleurodesis), all 10 patients (100%) treated with talc
had complete control of their MPE, as compared to 10 of 15 patients (67%) receiving bleomycin. 51
54

was the first to use talc to treat MPE.54 Talc produces an intense chemical pleuritis that effectively obliterates the pleural space. 55 Asbestos-free,
gas-sterilized, or heat-sterilized talc USP may be administered via chest tube as a slurry (5 g in 100 mL of normal saline) or insufflated as a powder during
thoracoscopy or thoracotomy. Talc pleurodesis is highly effective, with the overall response rates ranging from 80% to 100%. 54,56,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65,66 and 67 The
most commonly reported adverse effects of talc pleurodesis are fever (16%) and pain (7%). Less common complications include empyema, pneumonitis (similar to
acute respiratory distress syndrome), and respiratory failure. 65,68,69 Pulmonary complications noted in earlier series have not been observed as frequently in more
recent trials and tend to occur in patients who receive 10 to 12 g of talc or undergo either bilateral pleurodesis or unilateral pleurodesis in conjunction with pleural
biopsy (raising the possibility of talc emboli). Viallat et al. 64 reviewed their experience with thoracoscopic talc poudrage pleurodesis for MPE in 360 cases, including 88
mesothelioma patients and 272 individuals with effusions secondary to a variety of malignancies. Approximately 3 to 4.5 g of heat-sterilized asbestos-free talc was
insufflated via atomizer during thoracoscopy. Pleurodesis was successful in 90% of 327 evaluable patients at 1 month, and 82% of individuals had lifelong
pleurodesis. Complications included fever (10%), empyema (2.5%), pulmonary infection (0.8%), and malignant invasion of the thoracoscopy trocar site in a
mesothelioma patient. Aelony et al. 67 reported effective talc pleurodesis using thoracoscopy in patients whose pleural fluid was acidic (<7.2), with a response rate of
88%. This high success rate compares favorably with the low response (57%) previously reported by Rodriguez-Panadero and Mejias. 28 Failure of talc thoracoscopic
pleurodesis in these two studies was more closely correlated with the presence of trapped lung than with low pleural fluid pH.
TALC. Chambers

Talc has consistently been shown to be superior to other commonly used sclerosing agents, such as tetracycline-doxycycline and bleomycin. The efficacy of past and
currently used pleurodesis agents is summarized in Table 52.5-1. In a randomized controlled trial, Fentiman et al. 56 compared the efficacy of talc poudrage and
tetracycline in 33 breast cancer patients with MPE. Ninety-two percent of patients receiving talc had successful pleurodesis, as compared to only 42% of patients
receiving tetracycline. In another study, successful pleurodesis was observed in 97% of patients undergoing intrapleural talc insufflation by thoracoscopy, as
compared to 70% and 47% of patients receiving bleomycin and tetracycline, respectively. 63 Thoracoscopic talc poudrage was also very effective in producing durable
pleurodesis in patients with recalcitrant MPE who failed prior treatment with tetracycline. 67 Zimmer et al.70 prospectively evaluated the efficacy of either bleomycin (60
U; 14 patients) or talc slurry (5 g; 19 patients) administered at the bedside via tube thoracostomy in 33 patients. Permanent control of MPE was noted in 79% of
patients receiving bleomycin and 90% of patients treated with talc pleurodesis. The difference, however, did not reach statistical significance ( P = .34). Due to the high
cost of bleomycin, the authors recommended talc as the agent of choice for bedside chest tube pleurodesis. Talc poudrage has traditionally been performed by
insufflating dry sterilized talc powder into the pleural cavity via the thoracoscope to ensure proper distribution and coating of the pleural surfaces. This technique
incurs high costs due to operating room charges and specialized equipment. Pleurodesis achieved via talc slurry administered by thoracostomy tube appears to be
more cost-effective than thoracoscopic talc poudrage ( Table 52.5-2). A phase III randomized clinical trial comparing talc slurry via chest tube and talc insufflation by
thoracoscopy is being conducted in North America with the participation of the Cancer and Leukemia Group B, the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, the
Southwest Oncology Group, and the North Central Cancer Treatment Group 71; the primary end points are evaluation of efficacy and cost-effectiveness of these two
pleurodesis techniques.

TABLE 52.5-1. Efficiency of Sclerosing Agents Used in Treating Patients with Malignant Pleural Effusion

TABLE 52.5-2. Efficacy of Talc Pleurodesis by Thoracoscopic Talc Poudrage or Talc Slurry by Tube Thoracostomy for Malignant Pleural Effusion

QUINACRINE. Quinacrine (mepacrine), an antimalarial agent, has been a popular drug for pleurodesis of pleural effusion in Scandinavian countries. As with other

aforementioned sclerosing agents, intrapleural instillation of quinacrine produces significant chemical pleuritis that promotes intrapleural adhesion formation. 72 The
response rates to intrapleural quinacrine range from 75% to 100% and 70% to 90% after thoracentesis or chest tube drainage, respectively, in controlled clinical

series. 72 Toxicities associated with quinacrine include fever, hypotension, and hallucination. 73
CORYNEBACTERIUM PARVUM. Injection of the lipopolysaccharide extracts of C parvum (an anaerobic gram-positive bacterium) into the pleural space induces a strong,

nonspecific inflammatory reaction. 74 Clinical experience with this agent was described in reports from nine studies performed in Europe, but C parvum is not available
in the United States. Intrapleural injection of 3.5 to 14.0 g of C parvum (commercially available as Copravax, Wellcome Research, Beckenham, Kent, UK) has resulted
in a cumulative response rate of 76% (129 of 169 evaluable patients), although significant variability has been noted in these studies (response rates ranging from
32% to 90%). The main untoward side effects include pain (43%), nausea (39%), and fever (5%). C parvum has been reported to be as effective as bleomycin or
tetracycline75,76 and 77 for chemical pleurodesis.
BIOLOGIC RESPONSE MODIFIERS. Chemical agents used for pleurodesis induce inflammatory adhesion of the pleurae, thus obliterating the pleural space and

preventing reaccumulation of pleural effusion. Biologic response modifiers, such as interferons and interleukins, have been used to treat MPE primarily on the basis of
their antitumor activity. Adequate drug levels can be achieved only by high systemic doses that are associated with severe side effects. Regional intrapleural
administration of these agents yields biologically relevant drug concentrations with fewer systemic side effects. None of these agents, however, are routinely used to
treat MPE. (They are briefly discussed here for academic interest.)
Interferons. Goldman et al. 78 studied the toxicity and efficacy of intrapleural administration of interferon-2b (50 million to 75 millions units) for MPE associated with
cancers of different histologies in 23 patients. The pleural fluid was completely evacuated, and interferon was instilled via the chest tube for a maximum of three
treatments per patient. Complete and partial resolution of MPE was documented in 14 of 20 evaluable patients (70%). The most common side effect was the flu-like
syndrome followed by grade 3 hematologic toxicity in three patients who received high doses of 75 million units. Other studies also indicated somewhat lower
response rates and similar toxicity profiles. 79,80
Interleukin-2. Intrapleural administration of recombinant interleukin-2 (rIL-2) as a means to treat MPE has been evaluated in numerous small phase I trials. 81,82,83 and 84
Yasumoto and Ogura82 treated 43 patients with MPE due to non–small cell lung cancer with daily intrapleural administrations of rIL-2 for an average of 14 days (5 to
33 days) after pleural effusion had been completely evacuated. Control of MPE was achieved in 21 of 35 evaluable patients (60%), with 13 experiencing complete
disappearance of MPE. More impressive was the observation of disappearance of malignant cells in the pleural fluid samples sequentially obtained during treatment
for cytologic analysis. This was noted in 26 of 35 evaluable patients (74%) and the effect lasted for more than 4 weeks in 19 patients (54%). This observation had also
been reported by other investigators. 84 Viallat et al. 81 studied the effects and toxicity profiles of intrapleural injections of rIL-2 in 23 patients with MPE associated with
cancers of various histologies. Objective responses were observed in 5 of 21 evaluable patients (24%). Side effects included fever, transient increase in pleural
effusion, skin rash, and pruritus. Staphylococcus empyema attributed to prolonged chest tube drainage was noted in two patients. 81
OK432. OK432 is a heat- and penicillin-treated lyophilized powder of the SU substrain of Streptococcus pyogenes A3. This immune modulator has recently been
found to be useful in treating malignant ascites. Malignant ascites may decrease in volume and even disappear. The OK432 therapy increases neutrophils,
macrophages, and lymphocyte85 counts and augments autologous tumoricidal activity of large granular lymphocytes in ascites fluid. 86 Luh et al.87 conducted a
randomized trial to compare the efficacy of OK432 and mitomycin C in controlling MPE caused by lung cancer. Twenty-six patients received weekly injections of
OK432 for 4 weeks. The overall response rate was 88%: 73% (19 of 26 patients) had complete response, and 15% (4 of 26 patients) experienced partial response.
Fever, chills, and local pleuritic chest pain were the most common side effects and were observed in 80% of cases.
Intrapleural Chemotherapy
Few clinical studies were conducted to investigate the efficacy of intrapleural chemotherapy for MPE. Regional chemotherapy in the form of intrapleural chemotherapy
for malignant mesothelioma is discussed in Chapter 40.2. The overall response rates of intrapleural chemotherapy are low, and the treatments, even though regional,
are associated with significant systemic side effects. Unless studied within a context of a clinical trial, intrapleural chemotherapy has no role in the management of
MPE.
Intrapleural combinations of cisplatin (100 mg/m 2) and cytosine arabinoside (600 to 1200 mg/m 2) have been used to treat MPE in two studies. 88,89 This combination
produced a complete response in only 27% of the patients, and adverse effects including pain (66%), cardiopulmonary symptoms (54%), bone marrow suppression
(52%), and renal toxicity (34%) were noted in 76% of the patients, suggesting that significant systemic absorption of the chemotherapeutic agents occurred in these
individuals. Intrapleural doxorubicin at doses ranging from 10 to 40 mg has produced complete responses in 12 of 55 (22%) evaluable patients. 90,91 and 92 Adverse
effects included pain (29%), fever (15%), nausea and vomiting (29%), and anorexia (24%). Repeated, escalating doses of etoposide (100 to 225 mg/m 2) have been
administered intrapleurally to nine patients with MPE, 93 of whom none experienced clinical responses.
Cost-Effectiveness of Pleurodesis for Malignant Pleural Effusions
The most effective and economic method for the treatment of MPE is still a matter of debate. It is important for physicians who manage patients with MPE to be
knowledgeable regarding the efficacy, toxicities, and costs of available treatment modalities. Even though the sclerosant is not expensive ($0.15 to $0.50 for a 2.5- to
10-g dose), the cost of talc pleurodesis performed by thoracoscopy is high because of operating room and professional fees. The total cost of treatment has been
determined to be $20,996 (1992 U.S. dollars). The high success rate may justify the expense of talc pleurodesis. The 6-month cost of talc pleurodesis, estimated to be
$149 per symptom-free day, should drop significantly if the procedure is performed by pleuroscopy under intravenous sedation and local anesthesia or by instillation
of talc slurry via chest tube. Both these techniques are as effective as talc poudrage performed by video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery under general anesthesia.
Bleomycin is the most expensive pleurodesis agent, the cost per dose averaging $1104; however, the total cost of treatment is relatively low, owing to the high
efficiency of pleurodesis achieved with a single administration of this drug. The 6-month cost per symptom-free day was approximately $132 in an analysis reported
by Belani et al. 71 Tetracycline and its currently available substitute, doxycycline, are costly ($159 and $218 per symptom-free day, respectively), given the fact that
repeated administrations of these agents are required to achieve successful pleurodesis, thus prolonging hospitalization and increasing the risk of treatment-related
complications.
Pleurectomy
Stripping of the parietal pleura is 100% effective in controlling MPE. Although it may have a role in the treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma, 94 pleurectomy via
thoracotomy is not routinely performed because the morbidity (23%) and mortality (10%) 95,96 cannot be justified in debilitated patients for whom less invasive and
equally successful treatment options may be available. However, several recent studies have indicated that parietal pleurectomy can be performed via video-assisted
thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) with acceptable risk in patients. Waller et al. 97 performed VATS parietal pleurectomy in 19 patients with MPE secondary to
mesothelioma or metastatic adenocarcinoma. Symptomatic recurrent effusion occurred in three patients (15.7%). Tumor seeding at the thoracoscopic trocar sites
occurred in 5 of 13 mesothelioma patients. More recently, Harvey et al. 98 performed VATS pleurectomy in 11 (5 non–small cell lung cancer, 4 breast cancer, 1
mesothelioma, 1 cancer of unknown primary) patients, with no recurrence and one death (1 of 11; 9%) due to sepsis from a necrotic tumor involving the liver. Other
complications included prolonged air leak (one patient) and bleeding requiring reoperation and transfusion (one patient). The results of these two small series should
not be viewed as justifications for more liberal application of VATS parietal pleurectomy as the first line of treatment for MPE. Instead, parietal pleurectomy should be
reserved for malignant effusions that are refractory to less invasive and less expensive interventions. 96
Pleuroperitoneal Shunt
The pleuroperitoneal shunt, introduced in 1982, has been evaluated as a therapeutic option for the treatment of MPE. 97 It may be used for recurrent effusions that are
refractory to tube thoracostomy and pleurodesis or for MPE associated with trapped lung. 99,100 and 101 The most commonly used device is the Denver pleuroperitoneal
shunt (Denver Biomaterials, Inc., Golden, CO). The shunt is a silicone rubber conduit consisting of a unidirectional valved pump chamber connecting to pleural and
peritoneal catheters. The pumping chamber can be implanted into a subcutaneous pocket or exteriorized as an external pumping chamber. Because of the negative
pressure differential between the pleural and peritoneal cavities, manual compression of the pumping chamber is required for fluid drainage from the chest. Each
compression transports 1.5 mL of fluid, and patients are frequently asked to compress the pump for 5 to 10 minutes four times daily. Implantation of the shunt can be
performed under local or general anesthesia. Petrou et al. 100 used pleuroperitoneal shunt in 63 patients with recurrent MPE and trapped lung. There were no
operative deaths, and complications were noted in 5 patients (8%). Effective palliation was achieved in more than 95% of cases. Catheter occlusion was noted in
eight patients (12%) at 1 week to 4 months after insertion, with five patients requiring replacement or revision of the shunt and three patients requiring shunt removal

and treatment of empyema. Contraindications include pleural infection, multiple loculations, inability of the patient to press the chamber, short life expectancy, and
obliterated peritoneal space. 102 The need for active pumping of the chamber a minimum of 400 times per day limits its usefulness to patients with excellent
performance status. In addition, the shunt may malfunction over time, further limiting its usefulness. As such, the pleuroperitoneal shunt should be considered as one
of the last alternatives for patients with refractory effusions. 71
Indwelling Pleural Catheter
Malignant pleural fluid can be drained for prolonged periods by a small-caliber biocompatible silicone rubber indwelling catheter. The Tenckoff (Quinton Instrument,
Seattle, WA) and Denver (Denver Biomaterials) catheters have similar design, consisting of a 15-Fr. translucent silicone rubber tube with a radiopaque stripe, a felt or
polyester cuff, and a plastic occluding device that may be opened to drain the fluid. The catheter is inserted in the operating room under local anesthesia. Two small
skin incisions are made in the anterolateral chest. The catheter is brought through a 15-cm subcutaneous tunnel between these two incisions. The pleural cavity is
accessed with a needle and, using the Seldinger technique and a Tear Apart Introducer kit (Quinton Instrument), the catheter is introduced into the pleural cavity and
positioned so that the felt cuff on the catheter lies just within the exit wound. The advantages of pleural catheter placement are the ease of insertion and minimal
discomfort due to the catheter, rapid drainage of recurrent symptomatic effusion, and minimal or no hospitalization required for catheter insertion and care. Robinson
et al.103 used the Tenckoff catheter to manage MPE in nine patients, with three patients having bilateral catheter placement for a total of 12 catheters inserted. Four of
the nine patients had recurrent pleural effusion after failed tube thoracostomy and chemical pleurodesis. None of the patients had trapped lung. The authors reported
excellent palliation of symptoms in all patients. Complications were minor, with insertion-site cellulitis that was easily managed with oral antibiotic in 3 of 12 catheter
sites (25%).
A phase III trial comparing the efficacy of the Denver pleural catheter versus chest tube and doxycycline sclerotherapy for recurrent symptomatic MPE in 144 patients
was recently completed (99 patients had Denver catheter, and 45 patients had doxycycline pleurodesis). 104 The Denver pleural catheter was as effective as
doxycycline pleurodesis in relieving symptoms related to MPE and improving quality of life. At 90 days, pleurodesis was achieved in 69% of patients treated with
Denver pleural catheter alone, as compared to 50% of patients treated with doxycycline. No patient in the catheter group experienced fluid reaccumulation. Moreover,
patients treated with pleural catheter had shorter hospital stay (mean, 1.83 days) than those treated with chest tube and doxycycline pleurodesis (mean, 6.83 days).
Pleural catheter, either a Tenckoff or a Denver catheter, is indicated for recurrent MPEs refractory to pleurodesis or those associated with trapped lung. The pleural
catheter is particularly useful in debilitated patients in whom a reliable and painless method of fluid drainage is required or in patients with effusions secondary to
chemosensitive malignancies.
External-Beam Irradiation
Only lymphomatous pleural effusions seem to respond favorably to external-beam irradiation. Close to 90% of malignant lymphoma effusions have been controlled by
mediastinal and hemithorax irradiation in a small series of patients (1.4 to 2.3 Gy). 105
SUMMARY
The prognosis of patients with MPE varies with the histologic type of the primary tumor. In general, 65% of patients with MPE are dead within 3 months and 80%
within 6 months. As such, treatment of MPE should focus on expeditious and cost-efficient palliation. Our approach to patients with MPE having good performance
status is talc pleurodesis. Indwelling pleural catheters have been frequently used for intermittent drainage of effusions in patients with trapped lung or limited life
expectancies, as well as individuals on protocols requiring sequential analysis of molecular end points in tumor cells readily obtained from malignant effusions. The
algorithm for the diagnosis and treatment of malignant pleural effusion is outlined in Figure 52.5-1.

FIGURE 52.5-1. Treatment algorithm for malignant pleural effusion. CT, computed tomography.

MALIGNANT PERICARDIAL EFFUSION
Patients with malignant pericardial disease may be asymptomatic or may present with a number of manifestations, with pericardial effusion being the most common.
Pericardial tamponade due to malignant pericardial effusion (MPCE) accounts for at least 50% of all reported cases of pericardial fluid collection that require
intervention. Similar to cancerous pleural effusions, MPCEs are frequently indicative of advanced incurable malignancy; overall median survival of patients with MPCE
is less than 6 months.
PATHOGENESIS AND ETIOLOGY
Malignant cells gain access to the pericardium either via direct invasion from an adjacent tumor or by hematogenous or lymphatic routes. 106,107 and 108 Many cardiac and
pericardial metastases as well as pericardial effusions result from retrograde progression of disease through lymphatic channels draining the heart and
pericardium.106,108 The normal lymphatic circulation of the heart and pericardium consists of an extensive subendocardial plexus that drains via an intercommunicating
system of myocardial channels into a subepicardial plexus. Efferent branches form from this subepicardial plexus and unite into larger trunks that initially follow, then
subsequently diverge from, the coronary artery vessels near the aortic root and drain either directly into a cardiac node between the innominate artery and superior
vena cava or into a pretracheal node and then into the cardiac node. 108 The cardiac node, in turn, drains into the mediastinal system. In addition, the subepicardial
plexus interconnects with a superficial adventitial plexus of lymphatics surrounding the aorta. 109 The latter plexus drains through the paraaortic node and enters
directly into the thoracic duct or the paratracheal system. 110 The parietal pericardium contains a relatively unimportant lymphatic system. 110 Thus, pericardial fluid
drains primarily via the subepicardial plexus through a few large trunks to the cardiac node and then into the mediastinal nodal system; a secondary pathway involves
communication with the lymphatic plexus of the aortic adventitia. Thus, lymphatics from the heart and pericardium appear to have a vulnerable isthmus-like section
near the base of the heart. Consequently, impairment of cardiac lymphatic drainage with retrograde epicardial invasion may occur with limited mediastinal
metastases.108 Obstruction of epicardial venous and lymphatic drainage by neoplastic invasion alters the equilibrium between hydrostatic and osmotic forces and
capillary filtration favoring fluid accumulation in the pericardial space. The rate of fluid accumulation (which can be rapid if accompanied by intrapericardial
hemorrhage) and the degrees of pericardial compliance (which can be low from prior inflammation, irradiation, or tumor infiltration) determine the severity of clinical
manifestations of MPCE.
Metastases involving the heart or pericardium (or both) occur relatively frequently in cancer patients. 111,112 and 113 Several autopsy series, 114,115 and 116 including one by
Klatt and Heitz, 114 have indicated that cardiac metastases occur in approximately 10% of patients dying from cancer; the epicardium is involved in 75% of metastatic
lesions, and pericardial effusions are present in one-third of these cases. 115,116 Metastasis from the lung (all histologies) and breast and hematologic malignancies
account for three-fourths of MPCEs, with lung cancer being the most common etiology; virtually all malignancies (except primary brain tumors) may cause MPCE.
Neoplasms that invade the mediastinal lymphatics and obstruct pericardial lymphatic flow are commonly associated with pericardial effusion. Kline 117 observed cardiac
metastases in 61 of 716 cancer patients; all the patients with cardiac involvement had metastases in mediastinal lymph nodes and lymphatics of the epicardium and

pericardium. Metastases to the pericardium or heart have been noted in approximately 30% of patients dying from lung cancer, 118 65% of whom have pericardial
effusion; the predominant metastatic pathway involves the hilar lymphatics in these individuals.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
In most cases, MPCE is observed in patients with a previous diagnosis of cancer, typically at late stages of their disease. MPCE is rarely seen as the initial
manifestation of extracardiac malignancy; only 90 cases were reported in the English-language literature over a 55-year period. 119 The most common symptoms
attributed to pericardial effusion are dyspnea, cough, chest pain, fever, and edema. Nonspecific complaints are also frequent; as such, pericardial effusion may
remain unsuspected in patients in whom nonspecific symptoms are attributed to disease progression. The frequency of cardiac tamponade as the initial manifestation
of malignant effusion is highly variable and depends on the rate of fluid accumulation, volume of the fluid, and underlying cardiac function. The pericardium may
distend over a period to accommodate a large volume of fluid prior to the clinical appearance of tamponade. Impedance of right atrial and ventricular filling by
pericardial fluid results in cardiac tamponade. Signs and symptoms of cardiac tamponade include dyspnea, orthopnea, low output (peripheral vasoconstriction, cold
clammy extremities, poor capillary refill, and diaphoresis), jugular venous distention, distant heart sounds, pulsus paradoxus, and narrowed pulse pressure.
Electrocardiography may show low voltage complexes in all leads and electrical alternans.
DIAGNOSTIC MODALITIES
Radiographic and Echocardiographic Studies
Pericardial effusion in asymptomatic patients is most frequently detected by plain posteroanterior and lateral chest radiographs. The typical finding on chest
radiograph is an enlarged globular water-bottle pericardial silhouette ( Fig. 52.5-2). Moreover, when pericardial effusion and tamponade are caused by malignancy,
concomitant parenchymal involvement or pleural effusion (or both) are observed in 30% to 50% of cases, respectively. 120 Once disease is suspected,
echocardiography should be performed to confirm the presence and hemodynamic significance of pericardial effusion. Two-dimensional echocardiography can define
the location and amount of effusion, as well as the presence of pericardial or intracardiac masses. Right atrial and ventricular collapse are the most common
echocardiographic signs of cardiac tamponade, with sensitivity ranging from 38% to 60% and specificity ranging from 50% to 100% ( Fig. 52.5-3).121 Echocardiography
is frequently used to provide guidance for safe and accurate pericardiocentesis. 122,123

FIGURE 52.5-2. Posteroanterior chest radiograph of a patient with significant pericardial effusion as indicated by an enlarged cardiac silhouette.

FIGURE 52.5-3. An early diastolic frame from the transthoracic echocardiogram (four-chamber view) of a patient who had classic clinical findings of pericardial
tamponade. Note the large pericardial effusion (2-cm dark “echo-free” space) circumferentially around the heart. Early diastolic collapse of the right atrium—a useful,
characteristic echo finding of tamponade physiology—is clearly seen where the right atrial cavity (RA) wall ( arrow) is deviated inward, into the RA chamber. LV, left
ventricle; RV, right ventricle. (Courtesy of Eben E. Tucker, M.D., NHLBI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.)

Pericardial effusion can also be diagnosed by CT scan, which can detect as little as 50 mL of pericardial fluid ( Fig. 52.5-4). This is not the diagnostic method of choice
for pericardial effusion, since it is time-consuming to perform and is no more accurate than echocardiography. CT scan may be helpful in evaluating intrapericardial
masses as well as defining the nature of the pericardial fluid, as the attenuation coefficients for exudates, chyle, serous fluid, or blood may differ. 121,124,125

FIGURE 52.5-4. The chest computed tomographic scan of this patient with metastatic ovarian carcinoma shows a large malignant pericardial effusion and bilateral
malignant pleural effusions (right more than left).

Cytopathology and Histopathology
The foregoing imaging techniques provide information regarding the amount and hemodynamic significance of pericardial effusion but not its benign or malignant
nature. Only 50% to 60% of pericardial effusions in cancer patients are confirmed by cytologic examination to be malignant. 126,127 and 128 Posner et al.129 studied 31
patients with pericardial disease associated with various malignancies. Fifty-eight percent of the patients had MPCE, 32% had idiopathic pericarditis, and 10% had

radiotherapy-induced pericarditis. Pericardiocentesis and cytologic examination of the fluid identified malignancy in 85% of positive cases; open biopsy was required
for diagnosis in the remaining 15%. Weiner et al. 116 reviewed 95 cases of pericardial effusion treated initially by pericardiocentesis. Malignant cells were identified in
pericardial fluid from two-thirds of cancer patients; cytology correlated with histologic diagnosis of the underlying malignancy in 100% of these individuals. Press and
Livingston 130 reviewed 190 cases of MPCE diagnosed by pericardiocentesis. Pericardial fluid was positive for malignant cells in 151 patients with documented
neoplastic pericarditis (specificity, 79%); hence, cytologic examination of pericardial fluid remains valuable in the diagnosis of MPCE, especially when positive for
malignant cells. In contrast, parietal pericardial biopsy is frequently nondiagnostic, since the principal site of malignant infiltration is the visceral pericardium and its
subepicardial lymphatics. Clarke and Cosgrove 131 performed a prospective study to determine the diagnostic value of pericardial biopsy in 25 patients with malignancy
and pericardial effusions. Fluid cytology revealed malignant cells in 11 patients (44%), of whom only 5 had histologic evidence of malignancy in pericardial biopsy
specimens.
TREATMENT
The goals of treatment for MPCE include relief of immediate symptoms, confirmation of the malignant nature of the fluid, and prevention of recurrence. Although
simple pericardiocentesis may be life-saving in cases of cardiac tamponade, this procedure alone is rarely adequate therapy for MPCE because of the high rate of
fluid reaccumulation 120; thus, if initially performed, pericardiocentesis should be followed by a more definitive medical or surgical procedure to prevent recurrence.
Therapy for MPCE should be tailored to the performance status and prognosis of each patient; options include surgical procedures, such as subxiphoid
pericardiostomy (pericardial window), transthoracic pericardial window or pericardiectomy (either by video-assisted thoracoscopy or thoracotomy), and medical
interventions, such as percutaneous tube pericardiostomy with or without intrapericardial instillation of sclerosing agents.
Subxiphoid Pericardiostomy (Subxiphoid Pericardial Window)
The subxiphoid pericardiostomy approach is now the most commonly performed surgical procedure for benign as well as MPCEs. This procedure can be performed
under local anesthesia with intravenous sedation or general anesthesia ( Fig. 52.5-5). It can be performed as the initial procedure for MPCE in medically stable
patients or after needle pericardiocentesis in patients with signs and symptoms of significant cardiac tamponade. A small vertical skin incision is made from the
xyphoid process caudally for 4 to 6 cm. The upper linear alba is divided in the midline, and the xyphoid is either bisected or resected. The peritoneum is not open. The
preperitoneal fat is dissected cephalad by blunt finger dissection. The plane between the posterior sternum and the anterior pericardium is then developed to allow
insertion of a retractor to elevate the lower end of the sternum. The pericardium is identified as the bulging, grayish white, fibrous membrane. The anterior pericardium
is then incised, fluid is drained, and samples are collected for cytologic and microbiologic analyses. The pericardium then is explored digitally to identify adhesions
and tumor masses. A piece of pericardium (2 to 4 cm 2) is excised and submitted for microbiologic as well as pathologic studies. Through a separate stab wound in the
upper abdomen, a 28-Fr. curved chest tube is placed in the pericardial space through the pericardial window for postoperative drainage. Some authors advocate
leaving the tube in place for 4 to 5 days, regardless of the drainage amount, to promote local inflammation and fusion of the visceral and parietal pericardium. No
attempts are made to create a communication between the pericardial space and either the pleural or peritoneal space. Allen et al. 132 noted that autopsies of six
patients who had undergone the subxiphoid procedure revealed complete pericardial symphysis with extensive adhesions. A comprehensive review of the clinical
experience pertaining to 654 patients with effusion of different etiologies who underwent subxiphoid pericardiostomy has indicated an overall mortality rate of
approximately 0.46% (range, 0% to 5%), an overall morbidity rate of approximately 1.53% (range, 0% to 10%), and a recurrence rate of approximately 3.5% (range,
0% to 9.1%). These low mortality, morbidity, and recurrence rates compare very favorably with those attributable to percutaneous pericardiocentesis and
pericardiostomy with or without sclerosis (0.7% mortality, 3% morbidity, and 13% recurrence; Table 52.5-3, Table 52.5-4).

FIGURE 52.5-5. Subxiphoid pericardial window (pericardiostomy). Resection of a small pericardial segment and evacuation of the effusion (A) and insertion of a
pericardial tube via a separate stab wound in the upper abdominal wall (B). (From ref. 126, with permission.)

TABLE 52.5-3. Subxiphoid Pericardiostomy for Pericardial Effusions

TABLE 52.5-4. Percutaneous Catheter Drainage for Pericardial Effusions

Partial Pericardiectomy or Pericardial Window via Thoracotomy
Before the recent resurrection of subxiphoid pericardial window as the preferred surgical treatment for pericardial effusion, pericardial window or even pericardiectomy

via a thoracotomy incision were advocated. Piehler et al. 133 reviewed their experience with surgical management of pericardial effusions in 145 patients and
suggested that the extent of pericardial resection influenced incidence of recurrent effusions. However, several recent series indicate no difference in recurrence rates
of patients treated by subxiphoid pericardiostomy as compared to those undergoing transthoracic drainage. 134,135 More importantly, postoperative complications
(pneumonia, pleural effusion, respiratory failure, cardiac arrhythmia, deep vein thrombosis, and pulmonary embolism) are much less frequent after subxiphoid
pericardial drainage as compared to transthoracic pericardial resection (10% vs. 50%, respectively). Thus, transthoracic pericardial resection is not a suitable initial
procedure for drainage of MPCE.
If possible, VATS136,137 and 138 should be used if transthoracic pericardial resection is required for recurrent effusion after subxiphoid pericardiostomy or for diagnosis
and treatment of simultaneous pleural-parenchymal pathology. Compared to thoracotomy, minimally invasive approaches are more suitable interventions in debilitated
cancer patients. The potential limitation of VATS pericardiectomy is the need for general anesthesia and single-lung ventilation. Pericardial resection via laparoscopy
or video-assisted subxiphoid pericardial window have been reported 139; however, there is no added benefit of these expensive minimally invasive techniques
compared to standard subxiphoid pericardiostomy. Pericardial-peritoneal shunt, using a Denver pleuroperitoneal catheter with pumping chamber, has been used to
treat MPCE in a limited number of patients 140; experience with this technique is too limited to allow adequate assessment of its clinical utility, although it may be
suitable for pericardial effusions that are refractory to repeated pericardiostomy procedures.
Pericardiocentesis
Pericardiocentesis can be life-saving when performed on patients with hemodynamically significant cardiac tamponade. Removal of as little as 50 mL of pericardial
fluid can significantly improve signs and symptoms of acute tamponade. Traditionally, after subcutaneous infiltration of 1% lidocaine (Xylocaine) local anesthetic
solution, the needle is inserted at the right side of the xyphoid process and directed 45 degrees dorsally, aiming toward the tip of the left scapula ( Fig. 52.5-6). In
cancer patients with symptomatic pericardial effusion, pericardiocentesis may be performed to stabilize patients prior to more definitive drainage procedures, such as
percutaneous tube pericardiostomy or subxiphoid pericardial window.

FIGURE 52.5-6. Percutaneous pericardiocentesis and placement of an indwelling catheter for pericardial effusion. (From DWO Moores, SW Dziuban. Pericardial
drainage procedures. Chest Surg Clin North Am 1995;5:359, with permission.)

As the sole treatment for MPCE, pericardiocentesis is associated with recurrence requiring further treatment in up to 70% of cases. 141 This procedure has been
associated with a significant incidence of complications, some of which are fatal even when performed by experienced physicians. Allen et al. 132 observed clinically
significant complications in 5 of 23 patients (22%) undergoing percutaneous pericardiocentesis, including three right ventricular perforations (with one fatality)
requiring surgical interventions, one ventricular arrhythmia requiring cardioversion, and one pneumothorax. The complication rate observed by Allen et al. exceeds
that reported by Vaitkus et al., 142 who summarized experience with pericardiocentesis in 139 patients with MPCEs. Percutaneous pericardiocentesis successfully
alleviated symptoms in 97% of the cases; morbidity and mortality in this series were 3% and 0.7%, respectively.
Echocardiography may reduce complications and improve the success of the pericardiocentesis by delineating the size and location of the effusion relative to cardiac
structures. Overall rates of complication and success are approximately 2.4% and 100%, respectively, after ultrasound-guided pericardial drainage 144,145 as compared
to 4.8% and 90%, respectively, after unassisted pericardiocentesis. 131,146
Percutaneous Tube Pericardiostomy and Pericardial Sclerotherapy
The rates of fluid reaccumulation have been reported to range from as low as 44% to as high as 70% after pericardiocentesis. 147 It is now a common practice to place
a 9-Fr. pigtail draining catheter into the pericardial space after successful needle pericardiocentesis using the Seldinger technique to enable more complete
evacuation of the effusion and provide access for sclerotherapy. Although several agents have been used in the past, tetracycline and its currently available
derivative, doxycycline, have been most extensively evaluated as sclerosing agents for pericardial effusion. Maher et al. 147 reported their experience with 93 patients
with MPCE treated by percutaneous pericardial drainage followed by tetracycline or doxycycline sclerosis. Successful placement of the pericardiostomy tube was
achieved in 85 patients (91.4%). Pericardial effusion was controlled in 75 of the 85 patients (88%); 10 of the 85 patients (12%) did not respond to sclerosis, of whom 8
subsequently underwent surgical pericardiostomy. Sclerotherapy necessitated one to eight instillations of tetracycline or doxycycline (median, 3); 50 patients required
three or more instillations to control their effusions. Treatment-related complications (in decreasing order of frequency) included pain, catheter occlusion, fever, and
atrial arrhythmias. The apparently favorable results of this minimally invasive treatment strategy are offset by the need for repeated instillations of the sclerosing agent
to achieve pericardial symphysis. Liu et al. 148 recently conducted a prospective study to evaluate the efficacy and toxicity of bleomycin versus doxycycline as the
sclerosing agents for MPCE. Bleomycin was found to be as effective as doxycycline in achieving satisfactory control of MPCE, yet with much less retrosternal pain. As
a result, these authors recommended that bleomycin be considered the first-line chemical sclerosing agent for treating MPCE. In addition to bleomycin or doxycycline,
other sclerosing agents used for treating MPCE include OK-432 (a penicillin-treated and heat-treated lyophilized powder of the Staphylococcus aureus substrain
A3),148 cisplatin, 149 vinblastine, 150 and sterile talc. The clinical utility of these adjunctive sclerosing agents is not known, and their use cannot be considered standard
of care at this time.
Percutaneous Balloon Tube Pericardiostomy
Percutaneous balloon tube pericardiostomy, initially advocated by Ziskind et al. 151 and subsequently studied by others, 152,153 appears to be an extension of the more
commonly performed percutaneous tube pericardiostomy. After successful pericardiocentesis, dilatation of the needle tract is performed under fluoroscopy using a
balloon catheter. Ziskind et al. 151 reported that this technique was effective in relieving pericardial effusion in 46 of 50 patients (92%). Procedure-related complications
included fever (six patients), pleural effusion requiring chest tube placement or thoracentesis (eight patients), small pneumothorax (two patients), and right ventricular
injury requiring surgery (one patient), for an overall clinically significant complication rate of 18%. Even though this is an effective minimally invasive technique of
pericardial drainage, its widespread application may be limited by the need for specialized equipment as well as for interventional cardiologists or radiologists. The
high incidence of inadvertent pleural effusions requiring drainage renders this technique less attractive compared with others discussed.
Local or Systemic Therapies for Malignant Pericardial Effusion
Radiotherapy is generally reserved for MPCE associated with lymphoma or breast carcinoma. Vaitkus et al. 142 reviewed the experience of 54 patients treated with
radiotherapy as the primary mode of therapy for MPCE. Of these patients, 39 (72%) underwent initial pericardiocentesis. The majority received neither systemic nor
other direct pericardial intervention. Radiation therapy was successful in controlling MPCE in 36 patients (66.7%). The highest success rates were noted in
leukemia-lymphoma and breast cancer patients (93% and 71%, respectively). Surprisingly, 45% of patients with other solid tumors had adequate control of their
effusions. Although noninvasive, radiotherapy requires repeated visits or even prolonged hospitalization and may theoretically cause acute pericarditis or myocarditis.
These potential complications may not be relevant in many patients, owing to their limited survival.
Patients with MPCE secondary to lymphoma or breast carcinoma may have effusions controlled with systemic chemotherapy. Vaitkus et al. 142 reported their

experience with 46 patients with breast tumor (n = 38), lymphoma (n = 2), or other solid tumors (n = 6) treated with systemic chemotherapy. Thirty-six patients (78%)
underwent initial therapeutic pericardiocentesis. Systemic chemotherapy prevented recurrence of effusion in 31 patients (67%); successful control of effusion was
achieved in more than two-thirds of these individuals irrespective of whether pericardiocentesis preceded systemic therapy.
SUMMARY
MPCE is frequently an indication of advanced, incurable malignancy. Hence, the goals of intervention include relief of symptoms and prevention of recurrence. The
treatment of MPCE should proceed in a stepwise fashion ( Fig. 52.5-7). Surgical interventions (subxiphoid pericardiostomy) or medical interventions
(ultrasound-guided percutaneous tube pericardiostomy and sclerotherapy) have acceptable risks and provide excellent results. We favor surgical drainage as the
primary approach for patients with MPCE because of its simplicity and extremely high success rate without the need for intrapericardial instillation of sclerosing agents
and tube manipulations that may be associated with patient discomfort. Recurrent MPCE can be managed either by repeat pericardiostomy or insertion of a shunt.
Patients responding to treatment with complete control of the effusion should have a meaningful survival with life expectancy (average, 9 months) contingent on the
histology of the underlying malignancy.

FIGURE 52.5-7. Treatment algorithm for malignant pericardial effusion. VATS, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery.

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Matthew RA, Coppage L, Shaw C, Filderman AE. Malignancies metastatic to the pleura. Invest Radiol 1990;25:601.
2. Fenton KN, Richardson JD. Diagnosis and management of malignant pleural effusion. Am J Surg 1995;170:69.
3. Hausheer FH, Yarbro JW. Diagnosis and treatment of malignant pleural effusion: an overview. Semin Oncol 1985;12:54.
4. Agostini E, Miserocchi G, Bonanni MV. Thickness and pressure of the pleural liquid in some mammals. Respir Physiol 1969;6:245.
5. Wang NS. Morphological data of pleuranormal conditions. In: Chretien J, Hirsh A, eds. Disease of the pleura. New York: Masson, 1982:10.
6. Lee FK, Olak J. Anatomy and physiology of the pleural space. Chest Surg Clin North Am 1994;4:391.
7. Moores DWO. Management of malignant pleural effusion. Chest Surg Clin North Am 1994;4:481.
8. DeCamp MM, Mentzer SJ, Swanson SJ, Sugarbaker DJ. Malignant effusive disease of the pleura and pericardium. Chest 1997;112:291S.
9. Meyer PC. Metastatic carcinoma of the pleura. Thorax 1966;21:473.
10. Canto A, Ferrer G, Romangosa V. Lung cancer and pleural effusion. Chest 1985;87:649.
11. Decker DR, Dines DE, Payne WS. The significance of a cytologically negative pleural effusion in bronchogenic carcinoma. Chest 1978;74:640.
12. Dresler CM, Fratelli C, Babb J. Prognostic value of positive pleural lavage in patients with lung cancer resection. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;67:1435.
13. Chernow B, Sahn SA. Carcinomatous involvement of the pleura: an analysis of 96 patients. Am J Med 1977;63:695.
14. Martini N, Bain MS, Beattie EJ Jr. Indications for pleurectomy in malignant pleural effusion. Cancer 1975;35:734.
15. Sahn SA. Pleural effusion in lung cancer. Clin Chest Med 1993;14:189.
16. Ratliff JL, Chavez CM, Hamchuk A. Reexpansion pulmonary edema. Chest 1973;64:654.
17. Trapnell DH, Thurston JGB. Lateral pulmonary edema after pleural aspiration. Lancet 1970;1:1376.
18. Yamazaki S, Ogawa J, Shohyu A. Pulmonary blood flow to rapidly re-expanded lung on spontaneous pneumothorax. Chest 1982;81:118.
19. Collins TR, Sahn SA. Thoracentesis: clinical value, complications, technical problem and patient experience. Chest 1987;91:817.
20. Seneff MG, Corwin RW, Gold LH. Complications associated with thoracentesis. Chest 1986;90:97.
21. Kennedy L, Sahn SA. Noninvasive evaluation of the patient with pleural effusion. Chest Surg Clin North Am 1994;4:451.
22. Nance KV, Shermer RW, Askin FB. Diagnostic efficacy of pleural biopsy as compared with that of pleural fluid examination. Mol Pathol 1991;4:320.
23. Boutin C, Vaalat JR, Cargnino P. Thoracoscopy in malignant pleural effusions. Am Rev Respir Dis 1981;124:58.
24. Menzies R, Charboneau M. Thoracoscopy for the diagnosis of pleural disease. Ann Intern Med 1991;114:271.
25. DeCamp MM, Jaklitsch MT, Mentzer SJ, Harpole DH. The safety and versatility of video-thoracoscopy: a prospective analysis of 895 cases. J Am Coll Surg 1995;181:113.
26. Assi Z, Caruso JL, Herndon J, Patz EF. Cytologically proved malignant pleural effusion. Chest 1998;113:1302.
27. Sahn SA, Good TJ. Pleural fluid in malignant pleural effusion. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:345.
28. Rodriguez-Panadero F, Mejias IL. Low glucose and pH levels in malignant pleural effusions. Am Rev Respir Dis 1989;139:663.
29. Salyer WR, Eggleston JC, Erozan YS. Efficacy of pleural needle biopsy and pleural fluid cytopathology in the diagnosis of malignant neoplasms involving the pleura. Chest 1975;67:536.
30. Pavesi F, Lotzniker M, Cremaschi P. Detection of malignant pleural effusions by tumor marker evaluation. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1988;24:1005.
31. Rasmussen KN, Faher V. Hyaluronic acid in 247 pleural fluid. Scand J Respir Dis 1967;48:366.
32. Hammar SP. The pathology of benign and malignant pleural disease. Chest Surg Clin North Am 1994;4:405.
33. Morrison MC, Muller PR, Lee MJ. Sclerotherapy of malignant pleural effusion through sonographically placed small-bore catheter. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1992;158:41.
34. Parker LA, Charnock GC, Delany DJ. Small-bore catheter drainage and sclerotherapy for malignant pleural effusion. Cancer 1989;64:1218.
35. Patz EF. Malignant pleural effusions. Recent advances and ambulatory sclerotherapy. Chest 1998;113:74S.
36. Thompson RL, Yau JC, Donnelly RF, Gowan DJ, Matzinger FRK. Pleurodesis with iodized talc for malignant effusions using pigtail catheters. AnnPharmacother 1998;32:739.
37. Austin EH, Flye MW. The treatment of recurrent malignant pleural effusion. Ann Thorac Surg 1979;28:190.
38. Greenwald DW, Phillips C, Bennett JM. Management of malignant pleural effusion. J Surg Oncol 1978;10:361.
39. Richman SP, Hersh EM, Gutterman JU, et al. Administration of BCG cell wall skeleton into malignant effusions: toxic and therapeutic effects. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:383.
40. Anderson AP, Brinker H. Intracavitary thiotepa in malignant pleural and peritoneal effusion. Acta Radiol Ther Phys Biol 1968;7:369.
41. Kent EM, Moses C. Radioactive isotopes in the palliative management of carcinomatosis of the pleura. J Thorac Surg 1951;22:503.
42. Card RY, Cold DR, Hensche UK. Summary of 10 years of the use of radioactive colloids in intracavitary therapy. J Nucl Med 1960;1:195.
43. Ruckdeschel JC, Moores D, Lee JY, et al. Intrapleural therapy for malignant pleural effusions. A randomized comparison of bleomycin and tetracycline [published erratum appears in Chest
1993 May;103(5):1640]. Chest 1991;100:1528.
44. Gravelyn TR, Michelson MK, Gross BH, Sitrin RG. Tetracycline pleurodesis for malignant pleural effusions. A 10-year retrospective study. Cancer 1987;59:1973.
45. Heffner JE, Standerfer RJ, Torstveit J, Unruh L. Clinical efficacy of doxycycline for pleurodesis. Chest 1994;105:1743.
46. Mansson T. Treatment of malignant pleural effusion with doxycycline. Scand J Infect Dis Suppl 1988;53:29.
47. Kitamura S, Sugiyama Y, Izumi T. Intrapleural doxycycline for control of malignant pleural effusion. Curr Ther Res 1981;30:515.
48. Hatta T, Tsubota N, Yoshimura M, Yanagawa M. Intrapleural minocycline for postoperative air leakage and control of malignant pleural effusion. Kyobu Geka 1990;43:283.
49. Ostrowski MJ. An assessment of the long-term results of controlling the reaccumulation of malignant effusions using intracavitary bleomycin. Cancer 1986;57:721.
50. Kessinger A, Wigton RS. Intracavitary bleomycin and tetracycline in the management of malignant pleural effusions: a randomized study. J Surg Oncol 1987;36:81.
51. Hamed H, Fentiman IS, Chaudary MA, Rubens RD. Comparison of intracavitary bleomycin and talc for control of pleural effusions secondary to carcinoma of the breast. Br J Surg
1989;76:1266.
52. Moores DW. Malignant pleural effusion. Semin Oncol 1991;18:59.
53. Ostrowski MJ, Halsall GM. Intracavitary bleomycin in the management of malignant effusions: a multicenter study. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:1903.
54. Chambers JS. Palliative treatment of neoplastic pleural effusion with intercostal intubation and talc installation. West J Surg Obstet Gynecol 1958;66:26.
55. Colt HG, Russack V, Chiu Y, et al. A comparison of thoracoscopic talc insufflation, slurry, and mechanical abrasion pleurodesis. Chest 1997;111:442.
56. Fentiman IS, Rubens RD, Hayward JL. A comparison of intracavitary talc and tetracycline for the control of pleural effusions secondary to breast cancer. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1986;22:1079.
57. Marchandise FX, Vandenplas O, Wallon J, Francis C. Thoracoscopy in the diagnosis and management of chronic pleural effusions. Acta Clin Belg 1993;48:5.
58. Boniface E, Guerin JC. Value of talc administration using thoracoscopy in the symptomatic treatment of recurrent pleurisy. Apropos of 302 cases. Rev Mal Respir 1989;6:133.
59. Ladjimi S, M'Raihi L, Djemel A, et al. Results of talc administration using thoracoscopy in neoplastic pleurisies. Apropos of 218 cases. Rev Mal Respir 1989;6:147.
60. Weissberg D, Ben-Zeev I. Talc pleurodesis. Experience with 360 patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1993;106:689.
61. Canto A, Rivas J, Moya J, et al. Pleural effusion of malignant etiology. Thoracoscopic use of talc as an effective method of pleurodesis. Med Clin (Barc) 1985;84:806.
62. Sanchez-Armengol A, Rodriguez-Panadero F. Survival and talc pleurodesis in metastatic pleural carcinoma, revisited. Report of 125 cases. Chest 1993;104:1482.
63. Hartman DL, Gaither JM, Kesler KA, et al. Comparison of insufflated talc under thoracoscopic guidance with standard tetracycline and bleomycin pleurodesis for control of malignant pleural
effusions. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1993;105:743.
64. Viallat JR, Rey F, Astoul P, Boutin C. Thoracoscopic talc poudrage pleurodesis for malignant effusions. A review of 360 cases. Chest 1996;110:1387.
65. Kennedy L, Rusch VW, Strange C, Ginsberg RJ, Sahn SA. Pleurodesis using talc slurry. Chest 1994;106:342.
66. Webb WR, Ozmen V, Moulder PV, Shabahang B, Breaux J. Iodized talc pleurodesis for the treatment of pleural effusions. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1992;103:881.
67. Aelony Y, King RR, Boutin C. Thoracoscopic talc poudrage in malignant pleural effusions: effective pleurodesis despite low pleural pH. Chest 1998;113:1007.

68. Rinaldo JE, Owens GR, Rogers RM. Adult respiratory distress syndrome following intrapleural instillation of talc. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1983;85:523.
69. Bouchama A, Chastre J, Gaudichet A, Soler P, Gibert C. Acute pneumonitis with bilateral pleural effusion after talc pleurodesis. Chest 1984;86:795.
70. Zimmer PW, Hill M, Casey K, Harvey E, Low DE. Prospective randomized trial of talc slurry vs bleomycin in pleurodesis for symptomatic malignant pleural effusions. Chest 1997;112:430.
71. Belani CP, Pajeau TS, Bennett CL. Treating malignant pleural effusion cost consciously. Chest 1998;113:78S.
72. Stiksa G, Korsgaard R, Simonsson BG. Treatment of recurrent pleural effusion by pleurodesis with quinacrine. Comparison between instillation by repeated thoracenteses and by tube drainage.
Scand J Respir Dis 1979;60:197.
73. Borja ER, Pugh RP. Single-dose quinacrine (atabrine) and thoracostomy in the control of pleural effusions in patients with neoplastic disease. Cancer 1973;31:899.
74. Rossi GA, Felletti R, Balbi B, et al. Symptomatic treatment of recurrent malignant pleural effusions with intrapleurally administered Corynebacterium parvum. Clinical response is not associated
with evidence of enhancement of local cellular-mediated immunity. Am Rev Respir Dis 1987;135:885.
75. Walker-Renard PB, Vaughan LM, Sahn SA. Chemical pleurodesis for malignant pleural effusions. Ann Intern Med 1994;120:56.
76. Hillerdal G, Kiviloog J, Nou E, Steinholtz L. Corynebacterium parvum in malignant pleural effusion. A randomized prospective study. Eur J Respir Dis 1986;69:204.
77. Ostrowski MJ, Priestman TJ, Houston RF, Martin WM. A randomized trial of intracavitary bleomycin and Corynebacterium parvum in the control of malignant pleural effusions. Radiother Oncol
1989;14:19.
78. Goldman CA, Skinnider LF, Maksymiuk AW. Interferon instillation for malignant pleural effusions. Ann Oncol 1993;4:141.
79. Davis M, Williford S, Muss HB, et al. A phase I-II study of recombinant intrapleural alpha interferon in malignant pleural effusions. Am J Clin Oncol 1992;15:328.
80. Rosso R, Rimoldi R, Salvati F, et al. Intrapleural natural beta interferon in the treatment of malignant pleural effusions. Oncology 1988;45:253.
81. Viallat JR, Boutin C, Rey F, et al. Intrapleural immunotherapy with escalating doses of interleukin-2 in metastatic pleural effusions. Cancer 1993;71:4067.
82. Yasumoto K, Ogura T. Intrapleural application of recombinant interleukin-2 in patients with malignant pleurisy due to lung cancer. A multi-institutional cooperative study. Biotherapy 1991;3:345.
83. Suzuki H, Abo S, Kitamura M, Hashimoto M, Izumi K. The intrapleural administration of recombinant interleukin-2 (rIL-2) to patients with malignant pleural effusion: clinical trials. Surg Today
1993;23:1053.
84. Astoul P, Viallat JR, Laurent JC, Brandely M, Boutin C. Intrapleural recombinant IL-2 in passive immunotherapy for malignant pleural effusion. Chest 1993;103:209.
85. Kanato M, Torisu M. New approach to the management of malignant ascites with a streptococcal preparation OK432: II. Intraperitoneal inflammatory cell mediated tumor cell destruction.
Surgery 1983;93:365.
86. Uchida A, Micksche M, Hoshino T. Intrapleural administration of OK432 in cancer patients: augmentation of autologous tumor killing activity of tumor-associated large granular lymphocytes.
Cancer Immunol Immunother 1984;18:5.
87. Luh KT, Yang PC, Kuo SH, et al. Comparison of OK-432 and mitomycin C pleurodesis for malignant pleural effusion caused by lung cancer. A randomized trial. Cancer 1992;69:674.
88. Markman M, Cleary S, King ME, Howell SB. Cisplatin and cytarabine administered intrapleurally as treatment of malignant pleural effusions. Med PediatrOncol 1985;13:191.
89. Rusch VW, Figlin R, Godwin D, Piantadosi S. Intrapleural cisplatin and cytarabine in the management of malignant pleural effusions: a Lung Cancer Study Group trial. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:313.
90. Kefford RF, Woods RL, Fox RM, Tatterall MH. Intracavitary Adriamycin nitrogen mustard and tetracycline in the control of malignant effusions: a randomized study. Med J Aust 1980;2:447.
91. Desai SD, Figueredo A. Intracavitary doxorubicin in malignant effusions [Letter]. Lancet 1979;1:872.
92. Masuno T, Kishimoto S, Ogura T, et al. A comparative trial of LC9018 plus doxorubicin and doxorubicin alone for the treatment of malignant pleural effusion secondary to lung cancer. Cancer
1991;68:1495.
93. Holoye PY, Jeffries DG, Dhingra HM, et al. Intrapleural etoposide for malignant effusion. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1990;26:147.
94. Soysal O, Karaoglanoglu N, Demiracan S, et al. Pleurectomy/decortication for palliation in malignant pleural mesothelioma: results of surgery. Eur J CardiothoracSurg 1997;11:210.
95. Martini N, Bains MS, Beattie EJJ. Indications for pleurectomy in malignant effusion. Cancer 1975;35:734.
96. Fry WA, Khandekar JD. Parietal pleurectomy for malignant pleural effusion. Ann Surg Oncol 1995;2:160.
97. Waller DA, Morritt GN, Forty J. Video-assisted thoracoscopic pleurectomy in the management of malignant pleural effusion. Chest 1995;107:1454.
98. Harvey JC, Erdman CB, Beattie EJ. Early experience with videothoracoscopic hydrodissection pleurectomy in the treatment of malignant pleural effusion. J Surg Oncol 1995;59:243.
99. Tsang V, Fernando HC, Goldstraw P. Pleuroperitoneal shunt for recurrent malignant pleural effusions. Thorax 1990;45:369.
100. Petrou M, Kaplan D, Goldstraw P. Management of recurrent malignant pleural effusions. The complementary role talc pleurodesis and pleuroperitoneal shunting. Cancer 1995;75:801.
101. Reich H, Beattie EJ, Harvey JC. Pleuroperitoneal shunt for malignant pleural effusions: a one-year experience. Semin Surg Oncol 1993;9:160.
102. Ponn RB, Blancaflor J, D'Agostino RS, et al. Pleuroperitoneal shunting for intractable pleural effusions. Ann Thorac Surg 1991;51:605.
103. Robinson RD, Fullertyon DA, Albert JD, Sorensen J, Johnston MR. Use of pleural Tenckoff catheter to palliate malignant pleural effusion. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;57:286.
104. Putnam JB, Ponn R, Olak J, et al. A phase III trial of treatment for malignant pleural effusions: PLEURX pleural catheter (PC) versus chesttube + doxycycline sclerosis (CT-S). Chest
1997;112:26S.
105. Weick JK, Kiely JM, Harrison EGJ, Carr DT, Scanlon PW. Pleural effusion in lymphoma. Cancer 1973;31:848.
106. Hancock EW. Neoplastic pericardial disease. Cardiol Clin 1990;8:673.
107. Olopade OI, Ultmann JE. Malignant effusion. CA Cancer Clin J 1991;41:166.
108. Fraser RS, Viloria JB, Wang N-S. Cardiac tamponade as a presentation of extracardiac malignancy. Cancer 1980;45:1679.
109. Johnson RA. Lymphatics of blood vessels. Lymphology 1969;2:44.
110. Haagensen CD, Feind CR, Herter FP, Slanetz CA, Weinberg JA. The lymphatics in cancer. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1972:245.
111. Roberts WC, Glancy DL, DeVita VT Jr. Heart in malignant lymphoma (Hodgkin's disease, lymphosarcoma, reticulum cell sarcoma and mycosis fungoides). A study of 196 autopsy cases. Am J
Cardiol 1968;22:85.
112. Hanfling SM. Metastatic cancer to the heart: review of the literature and report of 127 cases. Circulation 1960;22:474.
113. Nelson BE, Rose PG. Malignant pericardial effusion from squamous cell cancer of the cervix. J Surg Oncol 1993;52:203.
114. Klatt EC, Heitz DR. Cardiac metastases. Cancer 1990;65:1456.
115. Abraham KP, Reddy V, Gattuso P. Neoplasms metastatic to the heart: review of 3314 consecutive autopsies. Am J Cardiovasc Pathol 1990;3:195.
116. Weiner HG, Kristensen IB, Haubeck A. The diagnostic value of pericardial cytology: an analysis of 95 cases. Acta Cytol 1991;35:149.
117. Kline IK. Cardiac lymphatic involvement by metastatic tumor. Cancer 1972;29:799.
118. Tamura A, Mashubara O, Yoshimura N. Cardiac metastasis of lung cancer. A study of metastatic pathways and clinical manifestations. Cancer 1992;70:437.
119. Fincher R-ME. Case report: malignant pericardial effusion as the initial manifestation of malignancy. Am J Med Sci 1993;305:106.
120. Shepherd F, Morgan C, Evans W, et al. Medical management of pericardial effusion by tetracycline sclerosis. Am J Cardiol 1987;60:1161.
121. Chong HH, Plotnick GD. Pericardial effusion and tamponade: evaluation, imaging modalities, and management. Compr Ther 1995;21:378.
122. Goldberg BB, Pollack HM. Ultrasonically guided pericardiocentesis. Am JCardiol 1973;31:490.
123. Callahan JA, Sewart JB, Tajik AJ. Pericardiocentesis assisted by two-dimensional echocardiography. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1983;85:877.
124. Johnson FE, Wolverson MK, Sundaram M, Heiberg E. Unsuspect malignant pericardial effusion causing cardiac tamponade: rapid diagnosis by computed tomography. Chest 1998;82:501.
125. Copland NL, Kennish AJ, Burgess NL. Pericardial mesothelioma masquerading as a benign pericardial effusion. J Am Coll Cardiol 1984;4:1307.
126. Moores DW, Allen KB, Faber LP, et al. Subxiphoid pericardial drainage for pericardial tamponade. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1995;109:546.
127. Iles R, Lininger L. Subxiphoid pericardial drainage for pericardial tamponade. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1995;109:546.
128. Hsu FI, Keef D, Desiderio D, Downey RJ. Echocardiographic and surgical correlation of pericardial effusions in patients with malignant disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1998;115:1215.
129. Posner MR, Cohen GI, Skarin AT. Pericardial disease in patients with cancer. The differentiation of malignant from idiopathic and radiation-induced pericarditis. Am J Med 1981;71:407.
130. Press OW, Livingston R. Management of malignant pericardial effusion and tamponade. JAMA 1987;257:1088.
131. Clarke DP, Cosgrove DO. Real-time ultrasound scanning in the planning and guidance of pericardiocentesis. Clin Radiol 1987;38:119.
132. Allen KB, Faber LP, Warren WH, Shaar CJ. Pericardial effusion: subxiphoid pericardiostomy versus percutaneous catheter drainage. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;67:437.
133. Piehler JM, Pluth JR, Schaff HV, et al. Surgical management of effusive pericardial disease. Influence of extent of pericardial resection on clinical course. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
1985;90:506.
134. Naunheim KS, Kesler KA, Fiore AC, et al. Pericardial drainage: subxiphoid vs. transthoracic approach. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1991;5:99.
135. Park JS. Surgical management of pericardial effusion in patients with malignancies. Comparison of subxiphoid window versus pericardiectomy. Cancer 1991;67:76.
136. Liu HP, Chang C-H, Lin PJ, et al. Thoracoscopic management of effusive pericardial disease: indications and technique. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;58:1695.
137. Mack MJ, Landreneau RJ, Hazelrigg SR, Acuff TE. Videothoracoscopic management of benign and malignant pericardial effusion. Chest 1993;103:390.
138. Hazelrigg SR, Mack MJ, Landreneau RJ, et al. Thoracoscopic pericardiectomy for effusive pericardial disease. Ann Thorac Surg 1993;56:792.
139. Yim AP, Ho JKS. Video-assisted subxiphoid pericardiectomy. JLaparoendosc Surg 1995;5:193.
140. Wang N, Feikes JR, Mogensen T, Vhymeister EE, Bailey LLM. Pericardioperitoneal shunt: an alternative treatment for malignant pericardial effusion. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;57:289.
141. Akagi Y, Hirokawa Y, Kagemoto M, et al. Optimum fractionation for high-dose-rate endoesophageal brachytherapy following external irradiation of early stage esophageal cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:525.
142. Vaitkus PT, Herrmann HC, LeWinter MM. Treatment of malignant pericardial effusion. JAMA 1994;272:59.
143. Celermajer DS, Boyer MJ, Bailey BP, Tattersall MH. Pericardiocentesis for symptomatic malignant pericardial effusion: a study of 36 patients. Med J Aust 1991;154:19.
144. Callahan JA, Seward JB, Nishimura RA, et al. Two-dimensional echocardiographically guided pericardiocentesis: experience in 117 consecutive patients. Am J Cardiol 1985;55:476.
145. Gatenby RA, Hartz WH, Kessler HB. Percutaneous catheter drainage for malignant pericardial effusion. J Vasc Interv Radiol 1991;2:151.
146. Wong B, Murphy J, Chang CJ, Haaenein K, Dunn M. The risk of pericardiocentesis. Am J Cardiol 1979;44:1110.
147. Maher EA, Shepherd FA, Todd TJR. Pericardial sclerosis as the primary management of malignant pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1996;112:637.
148. Liu G, Crump M, Goss PE, Dancey J, Shepherd FA. Prospective comparison of the sclerosing agents doxycycline and bleomycin for the primary management of malignant pericardial effusion
and cardiac tamponade. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:3141.
149. Fiorentino MV, Daniele O, Morandi P. Intrapericardial instillation of platin in malignant pericardial effusion. Cancer 1988;62:1904.
150. Primrose WR, Clee MD, Johnston RN. Malignant pericardial effusion managed with vinblastine. Clin Oncol 1983;9:76.
151. Ziskind AA, Pearce AC, Lemmon CC, et al. Percutaneous balloon pericardiotomy for the treatment of cardiac tamponade and large pericardial effusions: description of technique and report of
the first 50 cases. J Am Coll Cardiol 1993;21:1.
152. Palacios IF, Tuzcu ME, Ziskind AA, Younger J, Block PC. Percutaneous balloon pericardial window for patients with malignant pericardial effusion and tamponade. Cathet Cardiovasc Diagn
1991;22:244.
153. Di Segni E, Lavee J, Kaplinsky E, Vered Z. Percutaneous balloon pericardiostomy for treatment of cardiac tamponade. Eur Heart J 1995;16:184.
154. Yim AP, Chan AT, Lee TW, Wan IY, Ho JK. Thoracoscopic talc insufflation versus talc slurry for symptomatic malignant pleural effusion. Ann Thorac Surg 1996;62:1655.
155. Kennedy L, Rusch VW, Strange C, Ginsberg RJ, Sahn SA. Pleurodesis using talc slurry. Chest 1994;106:342.
156. Okamato H, Shinkae T, Yamakido M, Saijo N. Cardiac tamponade caused by primary lung cancer and the management of pericardial effusion. Cancer 1993;71:93.
157. Chan A, Rishchin D, Clerk CP, Woodruff RK. Subxiphoid partial pericardiostomy with or without sclerosant instillation in the treatment of symptomatic pericardial effusions in patients with
malignancy. Cancer 1991;68:1021.
158. Sugimoto JT, Little AG, Ferguson MK. Pericardial window: mechanism of efficacy. Ann Thorac Surg 1990;50:442.
159. Palatianos GM, Thurer RJ, Pompeo MQ, Kaiser GA. Clinical experience with subxiphoid drainage of pericardial effusion. Ann Thorac Surg 1989;48:381.
160. Reitknecht F, Regal AM, Antkowiak JG, Takita H. Management of cardiac tamponade in patients with malignancy. J Surg Oncol 1985;30:19.
161. Ghosh SC, Larrieu AJ, Ablaza SGG, Grana VP. Clinical experience with subxiphoid pericardial decompression. Int Surg 1985;70:5.
162. Levin BH, Aaron BL. The subxiphoid pericardial window. Surg GynecolObstet 1982;155:804.

163. Prager RL, Wilson CH, Bender HW. The subxiphoid approach to pericardial disease. Ann Thorac Surg 1982;34:6.
164. Santos GH, Frater RWN. The subxiphoid approach in the treatment of pericardial effusion. Ann Thorac Surg 1977;23:477.
165. Kopecky SL, Callahan JA, Tajik J, Seward JB. Percutaneous pericardial catheter drainage: report of 42 consecutive cases. Ann J Cardiol 1986;58:633.
166. Davis S, Rambotti P, Grignani F. Interpericardial tetracycline sclerosis in the management of malignant pericardial effusion: an analysis of thirty-three cases. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:631.
167. Lemmon CC, Ziskind AA. Percutaneous balloon pericardiotomy: nonsurgical alternative for treating malignancy-related pericardial effusions. Cardiol B Rev 1993;10:53.

SECTION 52.6 Malignant Ascites
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 52.6
Malignant Ascites
FRANCESCO M. MARINCOLA
DOUGLAS J. SCHWARTZENTRUBER
Introduction
Diagnosis and Workup
Treatment of Malignant Ascites
Diuresis and Restriction of Salt and Fluid Intake
Repeated Paracentesis and External Drains
Intracavitary Therapy
Radical Surgery
Peritoneovenous Shunting
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The collection of intraperitoneal fluid in a patient with known intraabdominal cancer is most likely due to intraperitoneal spread of disease and if neoplastic cells are
identified, the term malignant ascites is used. This finding has multiple implications: (1) the recognition of small quantities of intraperitoneal fluid may have staging and
prognostic significance and alter a planned surgical intervention; (2) symptomatic large collections are a sign of disseminated carcinomatosis and may reflect
end-stage disease. Although the expected survival in this case is on the order of months, 1 several palliative options can be considered; (3) the presence of malignant
ascites may be part of a clinical picture amenable to curative efforts. In such cases, as lymphoma and ovarian cancer, strategies aimed at obtaining regression of
tumor and prolongation of survival should be considered.
The therapeutic approaches used to treat patients with malignant ascites may include extensive surgical debulking in preparation for local or systemic
chemotherapy,2,3 and 4 intracavitary chemotherapy with or without hyperthermia, 3,4,5,6,7,8 and 9 phototherapy,10 instillation of biologic response modifiers, 11,12,13,14 and 15 and
intracavitary particle radiation. 16 Although prolongation of survival has been attributed to some of these therapies, no definitive study has ever demonstrated
effectiveness or superiority of one strategy over the other. 17 It is possible that the lack of randomized clinical trials reflects the skepticism of many investigators about
the therapeutic effectiveness of available options and the desire to explore new treatment modalities in the context of phase I or phase II studies.

DIAGNOSIS AND WORKUP
Abdominal distension and changes in abdominal girth are classic symptoms of ascites ( Table 52.6-1). Signs of ascites include dullness to percussion, shifting
dullness, and fluid wave. These may be totally absent in smaller effusions (100 mL or less) diagnosed incidentally during the workup of malignancy by
ultrasonography, 18 magnetic resonance imaging, or computed tomography.19 In these cases, radiologic techniques are useful to guide probes for diagnostic purpose
into effusions that are not clinically evident. 20 Delayed enhancement of ascitic fluid after intravenous administration of contrast agents has been associated with
bloody effusion and malignant characteristics. However, a prospective study failed to show sufficient specificity of this technique. 21

TABLE 52.6-1. Assessment of the Patient with Ascites: Diagnosis/Workup

Nonneoplastic causes of ascites include congestive heart failure, cirrhosis, renal or pancreatic disease, hypoproteinemia, infectious processes, and benign
gynecologic conditions such as endometriosis. Although malignant ascites represents approximately 10% of all cases of ascites, 22 in a patient with advanced cancer it
is the most likely diagnosis. As a rule of thumb, a small amount of ascitic fluid along the gutter or in the pelvis of an asymptomatic patient with known intraperitoneal
malignancy undergoing systemic therapy should not be aspirated since it can be assumed to be secondary to the malignancy itself. A peritoneal tap is indicated when
a definitive diagnosis of malignant ascites is necessary for staging purposes or when planning surgical resection. Other indications may include malignant ascites in
cancer patients with no known intraperitoneal disease or in cryptogenic ascites. This is particularly true for female patients because of the high likelihood of a
gynecologic primary that may benefit from tumor debulking followed by systemic or locoregional therapy. 23
The ascitic fluid should be evaluated for various chemistry, tumor, and cytologic markers ( Table 52.6-1 and Table 52.6-2). Five hundred milliliters of fluid are generally
sufficient to collect enough cells for cytologic evaluation; if no cancer cells are found with this amount, additional fluid will not be more informative. A serous (rather
than bloody) character of the fluid suggests a hydraulic cause such as portal hypertension, cardiac failure, nephrotic syndrome, reduced oncotic pressure, or
pancreatic ascites. Infection is generally associated with other systemic symptoms, whereas tubercular and malignant ascites may be particularly difficult to
differentiate as several markers, except cholesterol, 24 express a similar pattern. The presence of chylous fluid can be related to obstruction or injury of large
retroperitoneal lymphatic channels seen with extensive intraabdominal lymphomas or after external beam radiation. 25

TABLE 52.6-2. Tools for the Evaluation of Malignant Serous Effusions

Only a minority of all causes of ascitic fluid collections is malignancy, particularly in children, 22 and approximately one-third of patients with known malignancy have
nonmalignant causes of ascites. 26 Thus, assays have been described that help determine the neoplastic origin of the ascites. 27,28 and 29 A prognostic significance has
been attributed to biochemical or immunologic markers. 30,31 and 32 Peritoneal fluid cytology yields a diagnosis in a large proportion of patients. 26 The presence of
elevated ascitic/serum ratios of protein or lactic dehydrogenase, carcinoembryonic antigen, CA-125, fibronectin, or cholesterol favor neoplasm. 24,33 Others proposed
the measurement of human chorionic gonadotropin in serum and ascitic fluid for the identification of gynecologic malignancies. 34 Vascular endothelial growth factor
levels have been noted to be significantly elevated in malignant ascites compared with ascites from benign causes. 35 Immunochemical combinations have been
described for the diagnosis of adenocarcinomas and other malignancies. 27,36 El-Habashi et al. 36 reported the use of a battery of monoclonal antibodies against p53,
B72.3, and c-erbB-2 as complement to conventional cytology to enhance diagnostic sensitivity and accuracy.
Approximately 20% of patients with malignant ascites present without an identified primary cause. 37 In these patients, particularly women, 23 attempts to identify the
tumor of origin should be undertaken because the identification of the primary histology may influence the treatment strategy. Laparoscopy in 129 patients with
unknown primary identified carcinomatosis in 60% 38 and laparoscopy with peritoneal biopsy was able to establish the cause of ascites in 86% of these cases.
Although laparoscopy in patients with ascites has been rarely associated with prolonged leak from the port site 38,39 or port site recurrence, 40 it can be considered a
safe tool for the evaluation of ascites. Approximately 75% of women presenting with malignant ascites of unknown origin have a gynecologic cause (ovary, uterus, or
cervix) and another 10% a gastrointestinal cause, while in men the gastrointestinal etiology predominates. 23,37,41,42 Other histologies should be considered, particularly
when a primary tumor deposit is not recognized after routine studies of the abdominal cavity. These unusual causes of malignant ascites may create a difficult
diagnostic challenge such as the differentiation of mesothelioma cells from normal mesothelial cells 28,29 or the analysis of lymphoid-rich effusions in the case of
lymphoma.42 Unusually, ascites can be the result of cancer treatment. 43

TREATMENT OF MALIGNANT ASCITES
As the pathogenesis of malignant ascites differs from the pathogenesis of most ascitic fluid collections secondary to benign processes, the treatment is often different
in many respects.23 Excess fluid formation44 as well as obstruction of lymphatic channels 45,46 are believed to be the most relevant factors inducing malignant ascites.
Since most of the time there is no underlying venous obstruction, portal hypertension is unusual and vascular shunting procedures are not indicated. Several
strategies have been used with the primary goal of achieving palliation, as the presence of malignant ascites is perceived as a sign of end-stage disease. A survey of
practicing physicians suggested that the most common mean of managing malignant ascites is paracentesis, which is also believed to be the most effective. 17 After
paracentesis, diuretics and peritoneovenous shunting were most commonly used. In particular cases, radical surgical procedures or aggressive intracavitary therapies
have been advocated, however, to date no well-controlled prospective randomized trial has been performed to compare alternative treatments. The encouraging
results reported by many pilot phase I or II studies involving intracavitary instillation of chemotherapeutic agents have not matured, with few exceptions, into
randomized phase III trials. The median survival of patients with symptomatic malignant ascites is approximately 2 months ( Table 52.6-3).23 In general for nonovarian
malignant ascites, the focus is on palliation of symptoms. Patients with malignant ascites secondary to ovarian cancer represent an exception because they have a
significantly better survival expectation. 47 Thus, investigation of female patients presenting with ascites of unknown origin should be particularly thorough. Patients
with large volume nonovarian ascites have a high mortality (41%) following major abdominal surgery. For these patients, Yazdi et al. 48 have suggested intraperitoneal
chemotherapy or peritoneovenous shunt placement at the time of the abdominal operation.

TABLE 52.6-3. Patient Survival after Peritoneovenous Shunting

DIURESIS AND RESTRICTION OF SALT AND FLUID INTAKE
Loop diuretics, salt restriction, and aldosterone-inhibiting diuretics are generally not beneficial since sodium retention is not a cause of malignant ascites, although
spironolactone is seldom used. Pockros et al. 49 noted that cancer patients with portal hypertension-related ascites caused by massive hepatic metastases were most
likely to experience palliation when treated with diuretics. The administration of albumin was never proven beneficial in delaying fluid reaccumulation nor more
effective than crystalloid solutions in restoring intravascular volume depletion after drainage of large quantities of peritoneal fluid.
REPEATED PARACENTESIS AND EXTERNAL DRAINS
Symptoms of malignant ascites may be relieved by repeated abdominal taps as needed. Gough et al. 50 reported no difference in survival and quality of life between
patients treated with repeated abdominal paracentesis and patients treated with peritoneovenous shunts. However, several concerns are raised by this approach,
including the risk of infection, electrolyte and fluid imbalances secondary to the sudden depletion of body fluids, and the risk of causing intraperitoneal visceral injury.
For this reason multiple methodologies describing the implantation of permanent drains in the peritoneal cavity have been described. 51 Although good palliation can
be achieved in this fashion, the life span of these drains is limited by the need for removal because of malfunction or infection. Lorentzen et al. 52 have reported the
use of ultrasonically guided insertion of peritoneogastric shunts in patients with malignant ascites using a Denver shunt connected to a gastrostomy tube. This
technique allows intermittent removal of fluid that, on pumping, is shunted to the stomach lumen. Others have advocated peritoneal-urinary drainage for the treatment
of refractory ascites. 53 These methods have potential benefits compared with the external drain (in which the ascitic fluid is totally removed from the body) and
peritoneovenous shunts (returning the drained fluid from the peritoneal cavity directly to the intravascular space).
INTRACAVITARY THERAPY
Instillation of radioactive isotopes, including colloidal suspensions of 32CrPO4, was originally reported with minimal side effects. 16 Weisberger et al. performed
intraperitoneal administration of nitrogen mustard in seven patients with advanced ovarian cancer with effective reduction of the amount of ascites in all patients. 54
The rationale for this therapeutic approach is based on the intuition that, due to limited peritoneal absorption, some drugs could be administered in high
concentrations in the peritoneum with relatively few systemic effects. 55 Cisplatin and mitoxantrone used alone or in combination with other agents have become
first-line chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment of peritoneal carcinomatosis. 5,56,57 Cisplatin is mostly used for the intraperitoneal treatment of ovarian carcinoma
because of its high effectiveness against this cancer when given systemically. To enhance the local effectiveness of intraperitoneally administered cisplatin while
diminishing the side effects related to its systemic absorption, intravenous administration of thiosulfate has been recommended. 56 Kirmani et al. reported a 30%
complete response rate in patients who underwent intraperitoneal cisplatin and etoposide administration after failure of first-line platin-containing systemic
treatments.58 This study was performed on patients with small bulk of disease (less than 2 cm) and suggested that, as for systemic therapy, the load of tumor may play
a role in the response rate. Several authors have investigated the use of intraperitoneal treatment in combination with debulking surgery 8 or after first-line systemic
therapy. 59 As previously discussed, Howell et al. reported a 49-month median survival with intraperitoneal instillation of cisplatin in 25 patients with microscopic
disease (less than 0.5 cm) after first-line chemotherapy. The dose intensity of cisplatin administration has been increased without added toxicity. Bonetti et al.
administered high-dose intraperitoneal cisplatin twice a week. 60 Hagiwara et al. reported a 92% response rate with the intraperitoneal administration of cisplatin lactic

acid oligomer microspheres in patients with malignant ascites. 61 Park et al. reported their experience in treating 18 patients with primary peritoneal mesothelioma with
continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion and cisplatinum. 3 Thirteen of the 18 patients had associated malignant ascites. Continuous hyperthermic peritoneal
perfusion with cisplatinum was successful in 12 of the 13 cases. The median progression-free survival in this study was 26 months and the overall 2-year survival was
80%, superior to the survival reported in historical controls. The same group has evaluated the feasibility of a combination continuous hyperthermic peritoneal
perfusion, cisplatinum, and tumor necrosis factor. 15 This combination was evaluated in 27 patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis of multiple etiologies. There was no
mortality, the complication rate was minimal, and the clinical outcome of this modality of treatment is presently under investigation. Gilly et al. reported resolution of
malignant ascites in 11 of 12 patients treated with intraperitoneal chemotherapy and hyperthermia consisting of either cisplatin or mitomycin C after surgical resection
of bulk disease. Intraperitoneal instillation of the chemotherapeutic agent was done after closure of the abdominal cavity and heated at the inflow temperature of 46°
to 49°C. 7 Patients had ascites secondary to digestive or ovarian primary; the median survival was 11.2 months, and the 1-year survival rate was 46.9%. Similarly,
Loggie et al. reported a median survival of 10.1 months in patients with nonovarian malignant ascites treated with cytoreductive surgery and intraperitoneal
hyperthermic chemotherapy with mitomycin C.47 Interestingly, in the same trial, 12 additional patients who did not present with ascites but had positive cytologic
evaluations at the time of operation were treated with the same treatment protocol. None of these patients developed ascites subsequent to this treatment and their
median survival was 32.7 months, suggesting that intraperitoneal hyperthermic chemotherapy may have a role in preventing the formation of malignant ascites.
Several other authors have addressed the use of hyperthermia in combination with local chemotherapy for the treatment of gastrointestinal malignancies with similar
results. 8,9
To evaluate the relative effectiveness of intraperitoneal versus systemic administration of cisplatin in patients with ovarian cancer, Kirmani et al. completed a phase III
randomized trial.62 This is the only randomized trial addressing the efficacy of intracavitary versus systemic therapy for peritoneal carcinomatosis. In this study,
patients (29) were randomized to receive six cycles of intraperitoneal cisplatin (22 mg/m 2) and etoposide (350 mg/m2). As an example of the importance of prospective
randomized trials, in spite of the anecdotally derived enthusiasm for intracavitary therapy, no difference was noted in response rate (48% intraperitoneally vs. 52%
intravenously). The rate of complete response at second-look laparotomy was 31% and 33%, respectively, and at a median follow-up of 46 months there was no
difference in response duration and survival. Furthermore, there was no difference in response rate in relation to the bulk of tumor present at the time of
chemotherapy (less than or equal to or greater than 1 cm). The authors concluded that the small number of patients tested did not allow a definitive dismissal of the
usefulness of the intraperitoneal approach. To our knowledge, no follow-up evaluation of a larger cohort of patients has been published since, and the same group
has turned its interest toward the evaluation of new agents such as the intraperitoneal instillation topotecan. 63 Other alternatives to cisplatin have been suggested
including the intraperitoneal administration of carboplatin, etoposide, and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, 64 with a partial response rate of 69%.
Steller et al. reported the treatment of small-volume residual ovarian cancer with continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion and carboplatin in the context of a
phase I trial. 4 This well-tolerated modality of treatment may have important applications for novel therapies given intraperitoneally.
Biologic response modifiers have been used as an alternative to chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment of intraperitoneal carcinomatosis. Single-agent
interferon-a,11,14 or interferon-b, 65 tumor necrosis factor,66 and interleukin-2, with or without adoptive administration of lymphokine-activated killer cells, 12,13,65,67 have
been reported with variable success. A randomized trial has compared the effectiveness of interleukin-2, interferon-a or interferon-b for the control of malignant
effusions, suggesting a higher efficacy of interleukin-2, particularly in patients with mesothelioma. 65 Others have reported effectiveness of the combined
intraperitoneal administration of interleukin-2 and OK-423 in patients with ascites secondary to gastric malignancy. 68 The authors reported an incidence of cytologic
disappearance of cancer and decrease of ascites in 81% of 22 evaluable patients. The role of interferon-g has also been explored in patients with malignant ascites
because of the ability of this cytokine to induce up-regulation of tumor-associated antigens, 69 major histocompatibility complex molecules, or both in tumor cells. 70 This
property suggested possible therapeutic usefulness combining this cytokine with the administration of major histocompatibility complex–restricted T cells in view of the
enhanced lysability of tumor cells expressing higher amounts of major histocompatibility complex molecules. 71 Phase I studies of adoptive cellular immunotherapy with
intraperitoneal injection of activated human blood monocytes have shown the feasibility of this approach. 72 Radioiodinated monoclonal antibodies directed against
tumor markers have also been used.73
RADICAL SURGERY
Peritonectomy has been advocated by Sugarbaker 2: this is an extensive debulking procedure using a ball-type electrocautery device. It includes six possible steps:
(1) greater omentectomy-splenectomy; (2) left upper quadrant peritonectomy; (3) right upper quadrant peritonectomy; (4) lesser omentectomy-cholecystectomy with
stripping of the omental bursa; (5) pelvic peritonectomy with sleeve resection of the sigmoid colon; and (6) antrectomy. The purpose of the procedure is cytoreduction
in preparation for intraperitoneal chemotherapy. The authors reported good long-term results in selected patients affected with peritoneal carcinomatosis,
sarcomatosis, and mesothelioma. 2,74,75 Intraperitoneal chemotherapy included mitomycin C and 5-fluorouracil for patients with adenocarcinoma and cisplatin and
doxorubicin for patients with sarcoma. 75 Among patients with enteric carcinomatosis, favorable prognostic characteristics were identified that include low-grade
histopathology, absence of lymph nodal metastases, and completeness of the cytoreductive procedure (survival at 3 years was 99%). 74 A follow-up report from the
same group identified a significant difference in 5-year survival between patients with stage III gastric cancer who had undergone surgery alone (18.4%) versus
patients who underwent additional intraperitoneal chemotherapy (49.1%; P = .011).63 In this series patients had resectable gastric cancer and no ascites. This
randomized study demonstrates, in principle, that intraperitoneal chemotherapy may have a role in the treatment of aggressive, nonovarian, intraabdominal cancers
likely to lead to malignant ascites. A pilot study describing the use of photodynamic therapy as adjuvant therapy after aggressive debulking of disseminated
intraperitoneal malignancies by Sindelar et al. 10 has shown a 26% disease-free survival rate at 18 months. These results in selected patients, however, still await
confirmation by a randomized trial.
PERITONEOVENOUS SHUNTING
An extensive discussion about the application of shunting procedures for the treatment of malignant ascites has been reviewed by Alexander and Fraker. 76 In patients
with symptomatic malignant ascites, internal peritoneovenous shunting represents the standard modality of care. The devices consist of (1) a length of multiply
perforated tubing to be inserted in the free peritoneal cavity, (2) a length of tubing to be inserted into the superior vena cava (or other large venous vessel), and (3) a
unidirectional flow valve connecting the two limbs ( Fig. 52.6-1). The two most popular devices are the LeVeen shunt and the Denver shunt. The latter shunt has a
one-way pump that can be manually pumped by the patient or physician to clear debris. Originally, the shunts were used for the treatment of ascites secondary to
nonmalignant causes, but this technique was eventually applied to malignant ascites as well. 77,78,79,80,81 and 82 Briefly, the principle underlying the function of the shunt
takes advantage of the pressure gradient (5 to 15 cm H 2O) existing between the abdominal and the thoracic cavities. On inspiration, the further increase in pressure
gradient (due to increased negative pressure within the thorax) drains fluid from the abdominal cavity by allowing the unidirectional valve to open. The surgical
procedure for the placement of the shunt can be done under local or general anesthesia. Prophylactic antibiotic coverage is recommended, as with the placement of
any prosthetic material. In the traditional approach, a muscle-splitting subcostal incision is performed and the intraperitoneal portion of the shunt is placed using a
nonabsorbable pursestring suture to secure the limb in a watertight fashion. Current product guidelines recommend the percutaneous insertion of the peritoneal
catheter using a peel-away introducer if allowed by the patient's anatomy. A second incision is performed in the neck to expose the internal jugular vein in which the
venous portion of the shunt will be introduced. Alternatively, the venous catheter may be inserted percutaneously into the subclavian vein. A subcutaneous pocket is
fashioned for the pump over the lower rib cage (in the case of a Denver shunt) and a subcutaneous tunnel is developed linking the abdominal and neck or chest
incision. The venous limb is passed through the tunnel and introduced in the central venous system according to the chosen technique. Before placement of the
intravenous portion of the shunt, the flow of ascitic fluid through the device needs to be demonstrated to exclude malpositioning or kinking within the abdominal cavity.
Before terminating the procedure, shunt placement needs to be checked either fluoroscopically or with a portable chest and abdominal radiograph as malposition or
kinking of the catheter may be responsible for immediate malfunction.

FIGURE 52.6-1. The peritoneovenous shunt in situ.

The indication for the placement of a peritoneovenous shunt has traditionally been the relief of symptoms caused by malignant ascites refractory to medical
management. It is, therefore, reasonable to expect that, with the development of more effective systemic or intraperitoneal therapy the need for this procedure will
decline. The median survival of 674 patients with refractory malignant ascites (gastrointestinal primary in 33%, ovarian primary in 27%, and other malignancies in
39%) undergoing placement of a peritoneovenous shunt is 5 to 33 weeks with 0% to 13% of patients alive at 1 year ( Table 52.6-3). Therefore, the goal of the
peritoneovenous shunt placement is to minimize the side effects caused by the procedure and the presence of a foreign body and provide significant palliation. The
wide variation in the range of patient survival after placement of a peritoneovenous shunt is most likely due to differences in patient selection criteria. Other variables
such as protein content 83 or number of neoplastic cells in the ascitic fluid 83 have accounted for differences in shunt function and patient survival. A comparison of
survival and quality of life in patients receiving shunting procedures versus repeated paracentesis failed to demonstrate significant differences. 50
Immediate postinsertion complications related to placement of the peritoneovenous shunt include shunt malfunction due to technical reasons and pulmonary
congestion due to sudden flow of ascitic fluid within the intravascular space. 79,84 Checking the position of the device fluoroscopically before ending the surgical
procedure can prevent malfunction; fluid overload can be prevented by removing a significant proportion of ascitic fluid at the time of placement of the shunt. 85,86
Careful preoperative patient selection and postoperative monitoring of fluid and electrolyte balance is important to minimize this complication. Disseminated
intravascular coagulation following shunt placement is a rare event in malignant ascites when compared with cirrhotic ascites 87 because of the significantly decreased
fibrinolytic activity present in malignant effusion. 88 However, the coexistence of liver malfunction (e.g., liver metastases) may enhance the risk of coagulopathy. 89 The
development of a coagulopathy after placement of a shunt needs to be managed according to standard treatment for this condition. A common postoperative symptom
associated with placement of a peritoneovenous shunt is fever and should not be considered by itself as a sign of sepsis. 77,79,90 Finally, a rare complication of
placement of a peritoneovenous shunt is the development of pulmonary tumor embolization with a possibly fatal outcome. 91
A significant proportion of shunts stop functioning before the patient's demise because of occlusion, which is independent of the type of device used. 50,78,79 and 80,84,86
Although the Denver shunt provides a pump that allows manual flushing at periodic intervals, the literature has failed to demonstrate functional superiority of this
device. It has been reported, however, that flushing of the Denver shunt combined with the administration of thrombolytic agents can occasionally restore shunt
function. 84 Relocation of the catheter is usually necessary to establish patency since thrombolytic agents are infrequently successful in this situation. The goal in
reestablishing flow in the system is correction of the source, avoiding replacement of the entire shunt. Shunt malfunction is usually manifested by recurrence of
ascites and can be demonstrated by visualization of nucleotide in the lungs after intraperitoneal injection of 99mTc macroaggregate albumin. 92 A shuntogram
performed by percutaneous injection of radiographic contrast agents into the venous limb of the shunt (into the pump reservoir if a Denver shunt) helps determine the
site of obstruction. We previously described shunt occlusion by thrombofibrinous encasement of the venous limb, manifesting as a characteristic contrast outline of
the tubing during shuntogram. 93
Another complication of peritoneovenous shunt placement is infection in the peritoneal cavity. This can be associated with postoperative leakage of peritoneal fluid
around the insertion site and is prevented by placing watertight double-pursestring sutures. The development of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, unrelated to
operative infection or to perforation of a viscous due to the malignant process, is, for unknown reasons, less likely in patients with malignant ascites than in cirrhotic
patients. It has been noted that malignant peritoneal fluid has significantly higher concentrations of transferrin than cirrhotic ascites. As transferrin concentration in
peritoneal fluid is inversely correlated with bacterial growth, it is possible that patients with malignant ascites are somewhat more protected against peritonitis than
cirrhotic patients. 94 Evidence of hematologic dissemination of tumor cells from the ascitic fluid and tumor growth along the shunt tract has been reported and it is likely
to occur relatively often. 78,91,95,96 However, this theoretical risk has not been a problem, most likely because of the limited survival of these patients.
The decision to place a peritoneovenous shunt should be made after consideration of the various risks and potential benefits. According to Souter et al., 97 a patient
with malignant ascites whose only considered therapeutic goal is palliation, should first undergo repeated paracentesis and medical management with diuretics. If the
rate of reaccumulation of the fluid is rapid, fluid consistency is not viscous or bloody, there is no evidence of intracavitary loculation, 83 and the expected survival is
more than 3 months, shunting should be considered. Contraindications for placement of the shunt are presence of intraperitoneal infection and cardiac or renal
insufficiency. To avoid the massive fluid shifts associated with drainage of refractory ascites, Daimon et al. proposed the use of extracorporeal ultrafiltration of the
ascites followed by intravenous reinjection of the ultrafiltered fluid. 98 Among the various patients treated in this fashion, two had malignant ascites. This approach was
well tolerated and both patients died of their primary disease free of symptoms related to ascites.
In summary, malignant ascites represents in most instances a debilitating symptom of end-stage cancer. Purely palliative measures on one extreme and aggressive
therapeutic intervention on the other represent the wide range of treatment options. Reported survival of patients treated with curative intent, in general, is better than
that of patients receiving palliative procedures, but clearly reflects differences in patient selection (differences in stage, histology, extent of disease, and so forth). No
randomized studies have been performed to evaluate the treatment of malignant ascites. Several questions remain unanswered, such as the value of a
peritoneovenous shunt insertion compared with medical management or intermittent drainage; the role of external versus internal drains; and the effectiveness of
locoregional curative efforts. Scant information is available regarding the effectiveness of intracavitary versus systemic therapy.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. van de Molengraft FJ, Vooijs GP. Survival of patients with malignancy-associated effusions. Acta Cytol 1989;33:911.
2. Sugarbaker PH. Peritonectomy procedures. Ann Surg 1995;221:29.
3. Park BJ, Alexander HR, Libutti SK, et al. Treatment of primary peritoneal mesothelioma by continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion (CHPP). Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:582.
4. Steller MA, Egorin MJ, Trimble EL, et al. A pilot phase I trial of continuous hypethermic peritoneal perfusion with high-dose carboplatin as primary treatment of patients with small-volume
residual ovarian cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1999;43:106.
5. Markman M, Howell SB, Lucas WE, Pfeifle CE, Green MR. Combination intraperitoneal chemotherapy with cisplatin, cytarabine, and doxorubicin for refractory ovarian carcinoma and other
malignancies principally confined to the peritoneal cavity. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:1321.
6. McClay EF, Howell SB. Intraperitoneal therapy in the management of patients with ovarian cancer. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1992;6:915.
7. Gilly FN, Carry PY, Brachet A, et al. Treatment of malignant peritoneal effusion in digestive and ovarian cancer. Med Oncol Tumor Pharmacother 1992;9:177.
8. Sayag AC, Gilly FN, Carry PY, et al. Intraoperative chemohyperthermia in the management of digestive cancers. A general review of literature. Oncology 1993;50:333.
9. Fujimoto S, Shrestha RD, Kokubun M, et al. Positive results of combined therapy of surgery and intraperitoneal hyperthermic perfusion for far-advanced gastric cancer. Ann Surg 1990;212:592.
10. Sindelar WF, DeLaney TF, Tochner Z, et al. Technique of photodynamic therapy for disseminated intraperitoneal malignant neoplasms. Phase I study. Arch Surg 1991;126:318.
11. Bezwoda WR, Seymour L, Dansey R. Intraperitoneal recombinant interferon-alpha 2b for recurrent malignant ascites due to ovarian cancer. Cancer 1989;64:1029.
12. Steis RG, Urba WJ, VanderMolen LA, et al. Intraperitoneal lymphokine-activated killer-cell and interleukin-2 therapy for malignancies limited to the peritoneal cavity. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1618.
13. Eggermont AM, Sugarbaker PH. Efficacy of intracavitary administration of cyclophosphamide, interleukin-2 and lymphokine activated killer cells against established intraperitoneal tumor. Acta
Med Austriaca 1989;16:47.
14. Stuart GC, Nation JG, Snider DD, Thunberg P. Intraperitoneal interferon in the management of malignant ascites. Cancer 1993;71:2027.
15. Bartlett DL, Buell JF, Libutti SK, et al. A phase I trial of continuous hypethermic peritoneal perfusion with tumor necrosis factor and cisplatin in the treatment of peritoneal carcinomatosis.
Cancer 1998;83:1251.
16. Jackson GL, Blosser NM. Intracavitary chromic phosphate (32-P) colloidal suspension therapy. Cancer 1981;48:2596.
17. Lee CW, Bociek G, Faught W. A survey of practice in management of malignant ascites. J Pain Symptom Manag 1998;16:96.
18. Goldberg BB, Goodman GA, Clearfield HR. Evaluation of ascites by ultrasound. Radiology 1970;96:15.
19. Wall SD, Hricak H, Bailey GD, et al. MR imaging of pathologic abdominal fluid collections. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1986;10:746.
20. Chang KJ, Albers CG, Nguyen P. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of pleural and ascitic fluid. Am J Gastroenterol 1995;90:148.
21. Cooper C, Silverman PM, Davros WJ, Zeman RK. Delayed contrast enhancement of ascitic fluid on CT: frequency and significance [see comments]. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1993;161:787.
22. Runyon BA. Care of patients with ascites. N Engl J Med 1994;330:337.
23. Parsons SL, Watson SA, Steele RJC. Malignant ascites. Br J Surg 1996;83:6.
24. Sood A, Garg R, Kumar R, et al. Ascitic fluid cholesterol in malignant and tubercular ascites. JAPI 1995;43:745.
25. Lentz SS, Schray MF, Wilson TO. Chylous ascites after whole-abdomen irradiation for gynecologic malignancy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:435.
26. Runyon BA. Malignancy-related ascites and ascitic fluid humoral tests of malignancy [editorial]. J Clin Gastroenterol 1994;18:94.
27. Shield PW, Callan JJ, Devine PL. Markers for metastatic adenocarcinoma in serous effusion specimens. Diagn Cytopathol 1994;11:237.
28. Granados R, Cibas ES, Fletcher JA. Cytogenetic analysis of effusions from malignant mesothelioma. A diagnostic adjunct to cytology. Acta Cytol 1994;38:711.
29. Ferrandez-Izquierdo A, Navarro-Fos S, Gonzalez-Devesa M, Gil-Benso R, Llombart-Bosch A. Immunocytochemical typification of mesothelial cells in effusions: in vivo and in vitro models.
Diagn Cytopathol 1994;10:256.
30. Nishiyama M, Takashima I, Tanaka T, et al. Carcinoembryonic antigen levels in the peritoneal cavity: useful guide to peritoneal recurrence and prognosis for gastric cancer. World J Surg
1995;19:133.

31. Rubin SC, Finstad CL, Wong GY, et al. Prognostic significance of HER-2/neu expression in advanced epithelial ovarian cancer: a multivariate analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;168:162.
32. Plante M, Rubin SC, Wong GY, et al. Interleukin-6 level in serum and ascites as a prognostic factor in patients with epithelial ovarian cancer. Cancer 1994;73:1882.
33. Bansai S, Kaur K, Bansai AK. Diagnosing ascitic ethiology on a biochemical basis. Hepatogastroenterology 1998;45:1673.
34. Grossmann M, Hoermann R, Gocze PM, et al. Measurement of human chorionic gonadotropin-related immunoreactivity in serum, ascites and tumour cysts of patients with gynaecologic
malignancies. Eur J Clin Invest 1995;25:867.
35. Zebrowski BK, Liu W, Ramirez K, et al. Markedly elevated levels of vascular endothelial growth factor in malignant ascites. Ann Surg Oncol 1999;6:373.
36. el-Habashi A, el-Morsi B, Freeman SM, el-Didi M, Marrogi AJ. Tumor oncogenic expression in malignant effusions as a possible method to enhance cytologic diagnostic sensitivity. An
immunocytochemical study of 87 cases. Am J Clin Pathol 1995;103:206.
37. Ringenberg QS, Doll DC, Loy TS, Yarbro JW. Malignant ascites of unknown origin. Cancer 1989;64:753.
38. Chu CM, Lin SM, Peng SM, Wu CS, Liaw YF. The role of laparoscopy in the evaluation of ascites of unknown origin. Gastrointest Endosc 1994;40:285.
39. Menzies RI, Fitzgerald JM, Mulpeter K. Laparoscopic diagnosis of ascites in Lesotho. BMJ 1985;291:473.
40. Wexner SD, Cohen SM. Port site metastases after laparoscopic colorectal surgery for cure of malignancy. Br J Surg 1995;82:295.
41. Wilailak S, Linasmita V, Srivannaboon S. Malignant ascites in female patients: a seven year review. J Med Assoc Thai 1999;82:15.
42. Walts AE, Svidler R, Tolmachoff T, Marchevsky AM. Lymphoid-rich effusions. Diagnosis by morphometry using the CAS 200 System. Am J Clin Pathol 1994;101:526.
43. Kemeny N, Seiter K, Martin D, et al. A new syndrome: ascites, hyperbilirubinemia, and hypoalbuminemia after biochemical modulation of fluorouracil with N-phosphonacetyl-L-aspartate (PALA)
[see comments]. Ann Intern Med 1991;115:946.
44. Hirabayashi K, Graham J. Genesis of ascites in ovarian cancer. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1970;106:492.
45. Feldman GB, Knapp RC. Lymphatic drainage of the peritoneal cavity and its significance in ovarian cancer. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1974;119:991.
46. Coates G, Bush RS, Aspin N. A study of ascites using lymphoscintigraphy with 99m Tc-sulfur colloid. Radiology 1973;107:577.
47. Loggie BW, Perini M, Fleming RA, Russell GB, Geisenger K. Treatment and prevention of malignant ascites associated with disseminated intraperitoneal malignancies by aggressive
combined-modality therapy. Am Surg 1997;63:137.
48. Yazdi GP, Miedema BW, Humphrey LJ. High mortality after abdominal operaton in patients with large-volume malignant ascites. J Surg Oncol 1996;62:93.
49. Pockros PJ, Esrason KT, Nguyen C, Duque J, Woods S. Mobilization of malignant ascites with diuretics is dependent on ascitic fluid characteristics. Gastroenterology 1992;103:1302.
50. Gough IR, Balderson GA. Malignant ascites. A comparison of peritoneovenous shunting and nonoperative management. Cancer 1993;71:2377.
51. Lomas DA, Wallis PJ, Stockley RA. Palliation of malignant ascites with a Tenckhoff catheter. Thorax 1989;44:828.
52. Lorentzen T, Sengelov L, Nolsoe CP, et al. Ultrasonically guided insertion of a peritoneo-gastric shunt in patients with malignant ascites. Acta Radiol 1995;36:481.
53. Rozenblit GN, Del Guercio LR, Rundback JH, Poplausky MR, Lebovics E. Peritoneal-urinary drainage for treatment of refractory ascites: a pilot study. J Vasc Intervent Radiol 1998;9:998.
54. Weisberger AS, Levine B, Storasli JP. Use of nitrogen mustard in the treatment of serous effusions of neoplastic origin. JAMA 1955;159:1704.
55. Dedrick RL, Myers CE, Bungay PM, DeVita VT Jr. Pharmacokinetic rationale for peritoneal drug administration in the treatment of ovarian cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:1.
56. Howell SB, Pfeifle CL, Wung WE, et al. Intraperitoneal cisplatin with systemic thiosulfate protection. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:845.
57. Lorusso V, Catino A, Gargano G, et al. Mitoxantrone in the treatment of recurrent ascites of pretreated ovarian carcinoma. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol 1994;15:75.
58. Kirmani S, Lucas WE, Kim S, et al. A phase II trial of intraperitoneal cisplatin and etoposide as salvage treatment for minimal residual ovarian carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:649.
59. Howell SB, Zimm S, Markman M, et al. Long-term survival of advanced refractory ovarian carcinoma patients with small-volume disease treated with intraperitoneal chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol
1987;5:1607.
60. Bonetti A, Howell SB, McClay E, et al. High-dose biweekly intraperitoneal cisplatin: an effective way to increase cisplatin dose intensity. Gynecol Oncol 1993;49:318.
61. Hagiwara A, Takahashi T, Sawai K, et al. Clinical trials with intraperitoneal cisplatin microspheres for malignant ascitesa pilot study. Anticancer Drug Des 1993;8:463.
62. Kirmani S, Braly PS, McClay EF, et al. A comparison of intravenous versus intraperitoneal chemotherapy for the initial treatment of ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1994;54:338.
63. Plaxe SC, Christen RD, O'Quigley J, et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic study of intraperitoneal topotecan. Invest New Drugs 1998;16:147.
64. McClay EF, Braly PD, Kirmani S, et al. A phase II trial of intraperitoneal high-dose carboplatin and etoposide with granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor support in patients with
ovarian carcinoma. Am J Clin Oncol 1995;18:23.
65. Lissoni P, Barni S, Tancini G, et al. Intracavitary therapy of neoplastic effusions with cytokines: comparison among interferon alpha, beta and interleukin-2. Support Care Cancer 1995;3:78.
66. del Mastro L, Venturini M, Giannessi PG, et al. Intraperitoneal infusion of recombinant human tumor necrosis factor and mitoxantrone in neoplastic ascites: a feasibility study. Anticancer Res
1995;15:2207.
67. Ottow RT, Eggermont AM, Steller EP, Sugarbaker PH. The requirements for successful immunotherapy of intraperitoneal cancer using interleukin-2 and lymphokine-activated killer cells.
Cancer 1987;60:1465.
68. Yamaguchi Y, Satoh Y, Miyahara E, et al. Locoregional immunotherapy of malignant ascites by intraperitoneal administration of OK-423 plus IL-2 in gastric cancer patients. Anticancer Res
1995;15:2201.
69. Guadagni F, Roselli M, Schlom J, Greiner JW. In vitro and in vivo regulation of human tumor antigen expression by human recombinant interferons: a review. Int J Biol Markers 1994;9:53.
70. D'Acquisto R, Markman M, Hakes T, et al. A phase I trial of intraperitoneal recombinant gamma-interferon in advanced ovarian carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:689.
71. Rivoltini L, Baracchini KC, Viggiano V, et al. Quantitative correlation between HLA class I allele expression and recognition of melanoma cells by antigen specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
Cancer Res 1995;55:3149.
72. Wiesel ML, Faradji A, Grunebaum L, et al. Hemostatic changes in human adoptive immunotherapy with activated blood monocytes or derived macrophages. Ann Hematol 1992;65:75.
73. Buckman R, De Angelis C, Shaw P, et al. Intraperitoneal therapy of malignant ascites associated with carcinoma of ovary and breast using radioiodinated monoclonal antibody 2G3. Gynecol
Oncol 1992;47:102.
74. Sugarbaker PH, Jablonski KA. Prognostic features of 51 colorectal and 130 appendiceal cancer patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis treated by cytoreductive surgery and intraperitoneal
chemotherapy. Ann Surg 1995;221:124.
75. Sugarbaker PH. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy for treatment and prevention of peritoneal carcinomatosis and sarcomatosis. Dis Colon Rectum 1994;37:S115.
76. Alexander HR, Fraker DL. Shunting procedures for malignant ascites and pleural effusions. In: Lotze MT, Rubin JB, eds. Regional therapy for malignant ascites and pleural effusions.
Philadelphia: LippincottRaven, 1997:271.
77. Holman JM Jr, Albo D Jr. Peritoneovenous shunting in patients with malignant ascites. Am J Surg 1981;142:774.
78. Souter RG, Wells C, Tarin D, Kettlewell MG. Surgical and pathologic complications associated with peritoneovenous shunts in management of malignant ascites. Cancer 1985;55:1973.
79. Kostroff KM, Ross DW, Davis JM. Peritoneovenous shunting for cirrhotic versus malignant ascites. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1985;161:204.
80. Sonnenfeld T, Tyden G. Peritoneovenous shunts for malignant ascites. Acta Chir Scand 1986;152:117.
81. Soderlund C. Denver peritoneovenous shunting for malignant or cirrhotic ascites. A prospective consecutive series. Scand J Gastroenterol 1986;21:1161.
82. Schumacher DL, Saclarides TJ, Staren ED. Peritoneovenous shunts for palliation of the patient with malignant ascites. Ann Surg Oncol 1994;1:378.
83. Qazi R, Savlov ED. Peritoneovenous shunt for palliation of malignant ascites. Cancer 1982;49:600.
84. Lund RH, Moritz MW. Complications of Denver peritoneovenous shunting. Arch Surg 1982;117:924.
85. Reinhold RB, Lokich JJ, Tomashefski J, Costello P. Management of malignant ascites with peritoneovenous shunting. Am J Surg 1983;145:455.
86. Holm A, Halpern NB, Aldrete JS. Peritoneovenous shunt for intractable ascites of hepatic, nephrogenic, and malignant causes. Am J Surg 1989;158:162.
87. Ragni MV, Lewis JH, Spero JA. Ascites-induced LeVeen shunt coagulopathy. Ann Surg 1983;198:91.
88. Scott-Coombes DM, Whawell SA, Vipond MN, Crnojevic L, Thompson JN. Fibrinolytic activity of ascites caused by alcoholic cirrhosis and peritoneal malignancy. Gut 1993; 34:1120.
89. Tempero MA, Davis RB, Reed E, Edney J. Thrombocytopenia and laboratory evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation after shunts for ascites in malignant disease. Cancer
1985;55:2718.
90. Greig PD, Langer B, Blendis LM, Taylor BR, Glynn MF. Complications after peritoneovenous shunting for ascites. Am J Surg 1980;139:125.
91. Smith RR, Sternberg SS, Paglia MA, Golbey RB. Fatal pulmonary tumor embolization following peritoneovenous shunting for malignant ascites. J Surg Oncol 1981;16:27.
92. Singh A, McAfee JG, Thomas FD, Grossman ZD. Radionuclide assessment of peritoneo-venous shunt patency. Clin Nucl Med 1979;4:447.
93. Schwartzentruber DJ, Leapman SB, Filo RS, Madura JA. Thrombofibrinous sheath occlusion of peritoneovenous shunts. Surgery 1987;102:534.
94. Romero A, Perez-Arellano JL, Gonzalez-Villaron L, et al. Effect of transferrin concentration on bacterial growth in human ascitic fluid from cirrhotic and neoplastic patients. Eur J Clin Invest
1993;23:699.
95. Maat B, Oosterlee J, Spaas JA, White H, Lammes FB. Dissemination of tumour cells via LeVeen shunt [letter]. Lancet 1979;1:988.
96. Tarin D, Price JE, Kettlewell MG, et al. Mechanisms of human tumor metastasis studied in patients with peritoneovenous shunts. Cancer Res 1984;44:3584.
97. Souter RG, Tarin D, Kettlewell MG. Peritoneovenous shunts in the management of malignant ascites. Br J Surg 1983;70:478.
98. Daimon S, Yasuhara S, Saga T, et al. Efficacy of extracorporeal ultrafiltration of ascitic fluid as a treatment of refractory ascites. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:2617.
99. Chen SJ, Wang SS, Lu CW, et al. Clinical value of tumour markers and serum-ascites albumin gradient in the diagnosis of malignancy-related ascites. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1994;9:396.
100. Lee CM, Changchien CS, Shyu WC, Liaw YF. Serum-ascites albumin concentration gradient and ascites fibronectin in the diagnosis of malignant ascites . Cancer 1992;70:2057.
101. Scholmerich J, Volk BA, Kottgen E, Ehlers S, Gerok W. Fibronecting concentration in ascites differentiates between malignant and cirrhotic ascites. Gastroenterology 1984;87:1160.
102. Nystrom JS, Dyce B, Wada J, Bateman JR, Haverback B. Carcinoembryonic antigen titers on effusion fluid. A diagnostic tool? Arch Intern Med 1977;137:875.
103. Pedersen N, Schmitt M, Ronne E, et al. A ligand-free, soluble urokinase receptor is present in the ascitic fluid from patients with ovarian cancer. J Clin Invest 1993; 92:2160.
104. Onsrud M, Shabana A, Austgulen R, Nustad K. Comparison between soluble tumor necrosis factor receptors and CA125 in peritoneal fluids as a marker for epithelial ovarian cancer. Gynecol
Oncol 1995;57:183.
105. Vergote IB, Onsrud M, Bormer OP, Sert BM, Moen M. CA125 in peritoneal fluid of ovarian cancer patients. Gynecol Oncol 1992;44:161.
106. Kraft A, Weindel K, Ochs A, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor in the sera and effusions of patients with malignant ascites. Cancer 1999;85:178.
107. Robinson RJ, Royston D. Comparison of monoclonal antibodies AUA1 and BER EP4 with anti- CEA for detecting carcinoma cells in serous effusions and distinguishing them from mesothelial
cells . Cytopathology 1993;4:267.
108. Athanassiadou PP, Veneti SZ, Kyrkou KA, Athanassiades PH. Detection of c-Ha-ras oncogene expression in pleural and peritoneal smear effusions by in situ hybridization. Cancer Detect Prev
1993;17:585.
109. Giavazzi R, Nicoletti MI, Chirivi RG, et al. Soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) is released into the serum and ascites of human ovarian carcinoma patients and in nude mice
bearing tumour xenografts. Eur J Cancer 1994;30A:1865.
110. Moradi MM, Carson LF, Weinberg B, et al. Serum and ascitic fluid levels of interleukin-1, interleukin-6, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha in patients with ovarian epithelial cancer. Cancer
1993;72:2433.
111. Andus T, Gross V, Holstege A, et al. High concentrations of soluble tumor necrosis factor receptors in ascites. Hepatology 1992;16:749.
112. Andus T, Gross V, Holstege A, et al. Evidence for the production of high amounts of interleukin-6 in the peritoneal cavity of patients with ascites. J Hepatol 1992;15:378.
113. Hurteau JA, Simon HU, Kurman C, Rubin L, Mills GB. Levels of soluble interleukin-2 receptor-alpha are elevated in serum and ascitic fluid from epithelial ovarian cancer patients [see
comments]. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:918.
114. Gerdes B, Tobollik S, Lausen M. [Rectal endosonography for detection of free fluid in the abdomen]. Chirurg 1994;65:709.
115. Campioni N, Pasquali Lasagni R, Vitucci C, et al. Peritoneovenous shunt and neoplastic ascites: a 5-year experience report. J Surg Oncol 1986;33:31.
116. Roussel JG, Kroon BB, Hart GA. The Denver type for peritoneovenous shunting of malignant ascites . Surg Gynecol Obstet 1986;162:235.
117. Shepherd KE, Miller BJ. Peritoneovenous shunts--devices of last resort. Can J Surg 1988;31:444.
118. Edney JA, Hill A, Armstrong D. Peritoneovenous shunts palliate malignant ascites. Am J Surg 1989;158:598.
119. Smith DA, Weaver DW, Bouwman DL. Peritoneovenous shunt (PVS) for malignant ascites. An analysis of outcome. Am Surg 1989;55:445.
120. Faught W, Kirkpatrick JR, Krepart GV, Heywood MS, Lotocki RJ. Peritoneovenous shunt for palliation of gynecologic malignant ascites . J Am Coll Surg 1995;180:472.

121. Wickremesekera SK, Stubbs RS. Peritoneovenous shunting for malignant ascites. NZ Med J 1997;110:33.
Books@Ovid
Copyright © 2001 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
Vincent T. DeVita, Jr., Samuel Hellman, Steven A. Rosenberg
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 53.1 Transfusion Therapy
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 53.1
Transfusion Therapy
PETER L. PERROTTA
EDWARD L. SNYDER
Introduction
Blood Component Therapy
Red Blood Cells
Blood Donations
Platelet Transfusion Therapy
Granulocytes
Plasma
Cryoprecipitate
Plasma Derivatives
Transfusion Reactions and Complications
Acute Intravascular Hemolytic Reactions
Delayed Extravascular Hemolytic Reactions
Febrile Nonhemolytic Reactions
Allergic Reactions
Septic Reactions
Transfusion-Related Acute Lung Injury
Transfusion-Associated Graft-Versus-Host Disease
Transfusion-Transmitted Disease
Use of Special Blood Products in Oncology Patients
Leukoreduction
Irradiation
Cytomegalovirus-Seronegative and Cytomegalovirus Safe
Apheresis
Conclusions
Effect of Growth Factors on Transfusion Medicine
Blood Substitutes
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Despite the increasing use of hematopoietic growth factors, transfusion therapy continues to play an important role in the care of oncology patients. In fact,
transfusion therapy has become increasingly critical as improved therapeutic regimens prolong the survival of patients with malignant disease. These patients often
require frequent blood transfusions when they develop severe anemia, hemorrhage, thrombocytopenia, and coagulation disorders caused by their disease, treatment,
or both.
The development of sterile, disposable, and flexible plastic containers has resulted in the concept of blood component therapy.1 Whole blood is first separated into
cellular and noncellular components including red blood cells, platelets, and plasma. Individual blood components are then stored under optimal conditions and only
that portion of blood required by the patient is transfused ( Table 53.1-1). Thus, blood resources that often reach critically low inventory levels in the blood bank are
more efficiently used. 2 Anticoagulants and additives currently used in blood collection containers allow storage of liquid red cells for up to 42 days. These advances
have essentially eliminated the use of whole blood for allogeneic blood transfusion. Cancer patients may also require coagulation factor concentrates, albumin, or
immune globulin, all of which are prepared by fractionating human plasma. Cell separators capable of collecting platelets, plasma, granulocytes, peripheral blood
stem cells, and more recently, red blood cells, 3 are playing an increasingly important role in transfusion medicine.

TABLE 53.1-1. Use of Blood Transfusion Components in Oncology Patients

Routine blood bank procedures including ABO typing, antibody screening, and compatibility testing identify most patients at risk for serious immune-mediated red cell
transfusion reactions. Furthermore, a better understanding of red cell, platelet, and leukocyte antigen structure, as well as the immune responses to these antigens,
has vastly improved transfusion therapy. Changes in recruiting and screening blood donors, as well as advances in the testing of donor blood, have drastically
reduced the risk of viral transmission in the United States and Europe. All units of blood collected in the United States are tested for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, human
immunodeficiency virus 1 and 2 (HIV), human T-cell lymphotropic virus-I and II (HTLV-I/II), and syphilis. Nucleotide amplification testing for hepatitis C and HIV is now
performed in most European countries and the United States. Nevertheless, there remain significant risks of transfusion therapy. Complications that are not unique to
oncology patients include acute and delayed hemolytic, febrile nonhemolytic, allergic, and septic reactions. Of particular concern in patients who receive large
numbers of allogeneic transfusions is the development of HLA alloimmunization and graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). The presence of numerous recipient red cell
alloantibodies can also severely limit the number of compatible units that will be available for a patient. Development of platelet alloantibodies can result in a
refractory state to platelet transfusions. Fortunately, routine precautions taken in oncology patients including leukoreduction and irradiation of all cellular blood
products have reduced the incidence of alloimmunization and GVHD.
Although the hazards of blood transfusion are relatively small, the expected benefit of a transfusion must still outweigh any risk to the patient. Therefore, practitioners
of hematology and oncology need to clearly understand the indications and complications of blood transfusion therapy to minimize the exposure of patients to
unnecessary allogeneic blood products and to prevent wasting of limited blood resources.

BLOOD COMPONENT THERAPY
RED BLOOD CELLS
Preparation and Storage

Red blood cells, formerly called packed cells, are prepared by first centrifuging whole blood and then by removing most of the plasma. A standard whole blood
collection involves removing 450 ± 45 mL of whole blood 4 into sterile containers containing an anticoagulant and preservative solution. Solutions composed of citrate,
phosphate buffers, and dextrose (CPD) originally allowed storage of red cells for 21 days at 1 to 6°C. It was later found that red cell shelf life could be increased to 35
days by adding adenine to the preservative solution (CPDA-1). Adenine improves cell viability by increasing intracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) levels,
whereas dextrose provides a substrate for red cell metabolism. Shelf life is further extended to 42 days by using an additive solution that contains a higher
concentration of adenine than is present in CPDA-1 units. 5 The hematocrit of red cell units varies from 70% (CPDA-1) to 55% to 60% (additive solution). Citrate
contained in blood preservatives inhibits clotting by binding calcium. Symptomatic hypocalcemia and alkalosis related to citrate toxicity are rare complications of red
cell therapy limited to massively transfused patients. Red blood cells with rare antigen profiles can be frozen within 6 days of collection and stored for up to 10 years.
They are frozen in approximately 40% glycerol to avoid cell dehydration and damage during the freezing process. Frozen red cells are indicated for oncology patients
who have an alloantibody to a high-incidence antigen or have multiple alloantibodies.
Indications for Red Cell Transfusion
The decision to transfuse red cells is no longer based solely on a patient's hematocrit. 6 The patient's overall clinical status and laboratory parameters are both
considered when deciding to transfuse a patient. Symptoms and signs of anemia include excessive fatigue, malaise, headache, tachycardia, and hypotension. Acute
blood loss of greater than 30% total blood volume leads to hypotensive shock. Oncology patients typically have more slowly developing chronic anemias that are
tolerated better than rapid onset anemias due to the ability of the body's fluid compensatory mechanisms. Red cell transfusion is rarely indicated when the hemoglobin
is greater than 10 g/dL and is often not considered until the hemoglobin is less than 7 g/dL. 7 Younger patients usually tolerate a given degree of anemia better than
older patients who may have underlying coronary, myocardial, or pulmonary disease. Patients with unstable angina or acute myocardial infarction may benefit from
red cells when their hemoglobin is less than 10 g/dL. 8 Thus, red cell transfusion should be based on clinical criteria rather than broadly applied threshold hemoglobin
values. Transfusing a single red cell unit typically increases the hemoglobin by 1 g/dL (hematocrit by 3%) in the absence of active red cell destruction.
Antibody Screening, Antibody Identification, and Cross-Matching
Even in emergency situations, a properly labeled sample must be sent to the blood bank before a red cell unit is issued. This sample is used to type a patients' red
cells for ABO and Rh status. Front typing involves reacting patient red cells with commercial antibodies directed against the A, B, and D antigens. Blood grouping is
confirmed during back typing in which patient serum is tested for anti-A and anti-B antibodies using commercial type A and B cells. Following blood grouping, recipient
serum or plasma is screened for atypical red cell antibodies. Antibody screening is performed by incubating a patient's serum with two to four commercial group O red
screening cells that together express most clinically significant red cell antigens on their membrane surface. If an antibody is present in the patient sample, it reacts
with the screening cell(s) and causes red cell agglutination. Antibody screening is often referred to as the indirect antiglobulin test. Antigen-antibody reactions can be
enhanced by adding various substances such as polyethylene glycol, low-ionic strength saline, and albumin. Most blood banks perform tube testing in which red cell
agglutinates are identified in standard test tubes, but there are a number of newer techniques that are being used to detect antigen-antibody reactions. These include
gel systems based on the differential mobility of red cell agglutinates through gel columns, and capture systems in which test red cells are immobilized on microtiter
plates. Newer automated and semiautomated systems will likely replace tube testing for the majority of ABO grouping, Rh typing, and antibody screening in the future.
Antibody identification is performed by testing a patient's serum against a panel of 8 to 12 commercial group O red cells of known antigen phenotype. The antibody
can usually be identified based on the reactivity pattern. A number of techniques are used to facilitate red cell antibody identification. Most use substances that either
enhance or suppress the reactivity of a specific antibody. Some patient's serum reacts with all panel cells, a situation termed panreactivity or panagglutinins.
Panagglutinins can be caused by (1) a single antibody directed against a high-incidence antigen present on all panel test red cells, (2) multiple antibodies that in total
react with all test cells, or (3) an autoantibody. Autoantibodies are often found in warm autoimmune hemolytic anemias, in which case the patient's serum also reacts
with his or her own red cells (positive auto control).
The direct antiglobulin test (DAT), or direct Coombs, is performed to identify in vivo coating of red cells with globulins, IgG and C3d in particular. It is performed by
incubating a suspension of patient red cells with antihuman antibodies directed against IgG, IgA, IgM, C3, or C4. A positive DAT result implies that the patient's red
cells are coated with the corresponding globulin. DATs are no longer performed on volunteer blood donors because they are positive in up to 1 per 7000 blood
donors, and more importantly, have no clinical significance. 9 In addition, DATs are not routinely performed at most large medical centers as part of routine
pretransfusion testing; the test must be specifically requested. Positive DAT results are also seen in patients with delayed hemolytic transfusion reactions (DHTRs),
autoimmune hemolytic anemias, autoimmune disorders (systemic lupus erythematosus), and malignancy (especially B-cell malignancies such as chronic lymphocytic
leukemia).
Cross-matching is performed by reacting patient serum with donor red cells from the unit selected for transfusion. If no reaction is observed, the unit is released as
compatible. Cross-matching is only omitted in emergency life-threatening situations in which there is truly insufficient time to perform compatibility testing. Many
hospitals supply group O Rh negative red cells in the emergency or operating rooms until a patient sample is received in the blood bank. Type-specific
uncross-matched blood (e.g., A positive unit transfused to A positive recipient) is permitted only when the recipient's ABO Rh status is known with certainty. Use of
type-specific blood is particularly helpful when supplies of O negative red cells are severely limited during blood shortages. More recently, computer cross-matches
have been instituted at several hospitals in North America. 10 Patients of known ABO and Rh types and who have a negative antibody screen are provided
computer-selected ABO compatible blood while omitting the cross-match step described previously. Although a true serologic cross-match is not performed, the
computer cross-match is safe in the vast majority of transfusions if appropriate safeguards are in place to prevent typing errors and to ensure proper patient
identification.
Red Cell Autoantibodies
Oncology patients may develop autoimmune hemolytic anemias as a direct result of their disease or from treatment of that disease. In particular, patients with chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, non-Hodgkin's and Hodgkin's lymphoma, and plasma cell disorders frequently develop warm autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Autoantibodies
consist of immunoglobulins (IgG, IgM) that react with a wide range of self-antigens including membrane and intracellular components, adsorbed plasma proteins, and
nuclear antigens. The DAT result is positive in most cases. Patients with warm autoimmune hemolytic anemia often require transfusion. The blood bank may have
difficulty identifying compatible red cell units because the patient's serum not only reacts with his or her own red cells, but also with those of all donor red cells.
Therefore, additional time may be required to exclude the presence of a significant underlying alloantibody that is obscured by the autoantibody. Upward of 25% of
previously transfused autoimmune hemolytic anemia patients may have an underlying alloantibody. 11 An underlying alloantibody, if undetected, may result in
accelerated red cell destruction of a transfused red cell unit that carries the corresponding antigen. Therefore, transfusion therapy must be carefully planned and used
in these patients. Autoimmune antibodies often appear to have specificity for Rh antigens (e.g., anti-E), but transfusing antigen-negative red cells (e.g., E negative) is
not indicated as in vivo red cell survival of antigen-negative cells is usually no better than with antigen-positive cells.
BLOOD DONATIONS
Blood donations can be divided into several categories as follows: (1) autologous is donation of one's blood for one's own use, (2) allogeneic or homologous is
donation of one's blood for use by others, and (3) directed is donation of one's blood for use by a specific recipient. Directed donations are important to some cancer
patients. A friend or family member of a potential recipient typically donates a directed donor unit. In fact, blood supplies can be greatly supplemented by relatives and
friends of oncology patients during critical periods of their treatment. Depending on institutional guidelines directed units not needed by the intended recipient may be
crossed over to the general blood bank stock and distributed to other patients provided the donor meets all requirements for allogeneic donation.
Autologous Transfusions
The most commonly used forms of autologous transfusion include preoperative blood donation, acute normovolemic hemodilution, and autologous blood salvage.
Each type of autologous transfusion may be useful in certain oncology patients. 12 Many blood centers provide autologous preoperative blood donation services in
which a patient's blood is drawn and stored for later use, usually during a surgical procedure. 13 Although the criteria for autologous donations are less stringent than
those for allogeneic donors, oncology patients are often too anemic to donate their own blood. Patients must feel well on the day of donation and cannot be
hypotensive, febrile, or septic because of the risk of bacterial contamination. Thus, the donor cannot have open wounds, such as from a recent biopsy, or have
indwelling vascular or urinary catheters. Platelets and granulocytes contained in an autologous blood unit rapidly degrade with storage and are essentially
nonfunctional by the time the unit is transfused. If the autologous unit is stored as whole blood, the plasma contained in this unit has low levels of labile coagulation

factors. Plasma can be separated from autologous whole blood and frozen to maintain the activity of all coagulation factors. Although autologous blood is intended for
the patient–donor, most blood centers test autologous units for the same transfusion disease markers required for allogeneic blood. Preoperative blood donation can
be used in older oncology patients, although there is a higher risk of anemia and more serious cardiovascular complications associated with the donation. 14 The use
of autologous blood decreases the risk of viral infection, but the risk of bacterial contamination remains. Autologous preoperative blood donation is not crossed over
because most of these patients do not meet all requirements for allogeneic blood donation.
Acute normovolemic hemodilution is performed by removing blood from a patient immediately before surgery and replacing the blood volume with crystalloid or colloid
solutions to maintain hemodynamic stability. 15 The withdrawn blood is then later reinfused. Autologous blood salvage is performed by collecting and then returning
blood lost during or shortly following operative procedures using intraoperative salvage devices. 16 This technique is primarily employed in cardiac and orthopedic
surgery. Autologous blood salvage is generally contraindicated in cancer surgery because of the risk of returning contaminating tumor cells to the systemic circulation.
There is some evidence that irradiating salvaged blood with 50 Gy can destroy the proliferative ability of malignant cells, but more studies are needed before this
technique can be safely applied to cancer surgery. 17
Autologous Platelet Donation
Although oncology patients can bank their own red cells through autologous donation, it is not usually feasible for these patients to donate autologous platelets.
Platelets stored in the liquid phase at room temperature have a shelf life of only 5 days. Platelets collected by apheresis and frozen preserved in dimethyl sulfoxide
can be stored at –80°C. 18 They are then thawed, washed, and resuspended in autologous plasma or other solutions before transfusion. Platelets prepared by this
technique do undergo a number of structural and metabolic changes that decreases their recovery and survival as compared with liquid-stored platelet concentrates. 19
Furthermore, most patients cannot donate enough platelets to support a full course of induction chemotherapy. It is possible, however, to store significant numbers of
frozen autologous platelets for patients who are refractory to platelet transfusion provided the blood bank is technically capable of preparing and storing these
specialized products. 20
Directed Blood Donation and Dedicated Donor Units
Directed blood donations are those donations made for a specific patient. These units, most frequently obtained from family members or friends, can greatly augment
the blood supply. Donors wishing to make directed donations must meet the same criteria for blood donation as other allogeneic donors. These units undergo all
required testing for transmissible diseases. Therefore, due to the possibility of unexpected test results, it is important that the donor understand his or her blood will be
tested for viral diseases such as HIV and hepatitis C. In fact, directed blood donors are more likely to be positive for some infectious disease markers than other
allogeneic blood donors. 2 This increased frequency of positive infectious disease markers most likely reflects in part the higher percentage of first-time donors in the
directed donor group who were not previously screened.
The cytomegalovirus (CMV) status of the blood donor and the needs of the oncology patient also affect the use of directed blood donation. CMV-seronegative blood
products are often required by oncology patients, in particular, those patients who are marrow transplant candidates or recipients. As in the allogeneic donor pool,
many directed donor units are seropositive for CMV. Thus, units from some directed donors may not be appropriate for the intended recipient. In this situation, the
patient's oncologist must decide if a CMV-seropositive directed unit can be transfused to that patient. CMV status of directed units may be less of a concern as
prestorage leukodepleted blood products prepared using cyclic good manufacturing practices gain further acceptance as an alternative to CMV-seronegative
products.
Dedicated donor blood units are primarily used by pediatric oncology patients to reduce their exposure to blood from different donors. A dedicated unit is simply a unit
of allogeneic red cells that is specifically set aside by the blood bank for use by a single patient. The unit is obtained from the general blood bank stock or from a
directed donor. When necessary, small aliquots are removed from the units for transfusion. This approach is not feasible in adult oncology patients because of the
larger blood volume requirements. However, a single dedicated unit could supply as many as ten separate transfusions in a pediatric patient, thus dramatically
reducing multiple donor exposures.
PLATELET TRANSFUSION THERAPY
Preparation and Storage
Plastic primary collection bags with attached satellite containers allow harvesting of platelets as a by-product of red cell separation. In the United States, platelets are
usually prepared by the platelet-rich plasma method, whereas the buffy coat method is used in Europe. 21 Each random donor platelet unit (RDP) prepared by
differential centrifugation of a single whole blood collection contains at least 5.5 × 10 10 platelets suspended in 50 mL of plasma. The shelf life of all platelet
preparations is 5 days when stored at 20 to 24°C under constant agitation in plastic containers that allow oxygen diffusion. Storage longer than 5 days is precluded by
the increased risk of bacterial growth and the development of platelet function abnormalities. RDP are typically administered in four to six unit pools. In the absence of
conditions associated with decreased platelet survival, each RDP unit should increase a recipient's platelet count by 5000 to 10,000/µL. Single donor platelets (SDPs)
prepared by apheresis are often transfused to oncology patients in order to minimize their exposure to multiple donors. SDPs contain more than 3 × 10 11 platelets
suspended in approximately 200 mL of plasma. Thus, one SDP is equivalent to five to six average RDP units.
ABO type-specific platelets are provided whenever possible. This is because transfusing out-of-type platelets may result in a postplatelet increment 10% to 20% less
than that expected for ABO type-specific platelets. In addition, Rh antigens found on the small number of contaminating red cells present in platelet concentrates are
sufficient to immunize a small number of Rh-negative recipients. If Rh-negative platelet concentrates are not available for an Rh-negative patient, Rh-positive platelets
can be transfused followed by administration of Rh immune globulin within 72 hours of transfusion. Until relatively recently, only intramuscular Rh immune globulin
was available to prevent Rh immunization. These injections could be dangerous in oncology patients who have low platelet numbers and coagulation disorders.
Fortunately, an intravenous preparation has been licensed for preventing Rh alloimmunization (WinRho, NABI, Boca Raton, FL). 22 This therapy has been proven
effective, and is clearly more convenient and less painful to the patient.
Indications for Platelet Transfusion
Platelets are transfused to thrombocytopenic patients who are actively bleeding or to severely thrombocytopenic patients as a prophylactic precautionary measure. 23
Spontaneous bleeding is rarely encountered when a patient's platelet count is more than 20,000/µL. In fact, studies suggest that oncology patients receiving
chemotherapy can tolerate platelet counts as low as 5,000 to 10,000/µL. 24,25 and 26 Postsurgical patients with platelet counts more than 50,000/µL may require platelet
transfusions to control or prevent postoperative bleeding. Overall coagulation status should also be considered because patients with plasma coagulation factor
disorders are more likely to bleed at marginal platelet counts. Actively bleeding patients on aspirin, an irreversible inhibitor of platelet function, may require
transfusions at higher platelet counts. Obviously, transfused platelets are similarly inhibited if the patient remains on aspirin.
Platelet Refractory State
Platelet refractoriness is a major problem for cancer patients who are dependent on platelet transfusions. There are many causes of an apparent lack of response to
platelet transfusions, either through immune or nonimmune mechanisms (Table 53.1-2). In most cases, platelet refractoriness is attributed to nonimmune causes
including sepsis, splenomegaly, and disseminated intravascular coagulation. 27 The corrected count increment (CCI) is used to identify patients who are refractory to
platelet transfusions through either HLA or platelet alloimmunization. The CCI is calculated as follows:

TABLE 53.1-2. Potential Causes of Platelet Refractoriness in Cancer Patients

where Pre is pretransfusion platelet count, Post is posttransfusion platelet count drawn 1 to 4 hours after completion of the transfusion, number of platelets transfused
(1 RDP unit approximately 0.5 × 10 11 platelets; 1 SDP unit approximates 3.0 ×; 10 11 platelets), and BSA is body surface area in square meters. Patients with a low CCI
(less than 5000) may benefit from cross-match–compatible platelets or HLA-matched single donor platelets.
Platelet cross-matching is performed by adding recipient serum to wells coated with donor platelets. After appropriate antibodies and an indicator reagent are added,
the compatibility of the patient's serum and the donor's platelets is determined based on reactivity patterns. An incompatible cross-match predicts a poor CCI more
than 90% of the time, whereas a negative cross-match is only 50% predictive of a successful transfusion. 28 Depending on a particular hospital's blood supplier,
cross-match–compatible platelets or HLA-selected platelets may be more readily available. 29 Some centers use a combination of the two techniques: Platelet units are
selected for cross-matching based on the HLA type of the donor and recipient.
Cross-match–compatible and HLA-selected platelets are not readily available in all blood banks. Increasing the dose of standard platelet concentrates can be
considered until these products are obtained. For example, a dose of eight to ten RDPs is transfused instead of the more typical four to six unit pools. In fact,
investigators have suggested that higher platelet doses (approximately 4 to 6 × 10 11 platelets per dose) given prophylactically to patients with hematologic
malignancies reduce the number of platelet transfusions and thus, the number of donor exposures. 30 Ideally, the platelets are ABO identical because ABO
incompatibility may decrease posttransfusion platelet increments by 10% to 20%. 31 Some medical centers provide platelet drips to bleeding refractory patients.
Three-unit RDP pools are continuously infused through an electromechanical pump every 4 hours, providing a total of 18 RDP units over 24 hours. Electromechanical
pumps do not appear to harm platelets. 32 Platelet drips could theoretically maintain a lower platelet count, but this has not been proven. There are no studies that
have fully compared the efficacy of intermittent platelet boluses and platelet drips in refractory patients. Corticosteroids, chemotherapy, splenectomy, and intravenous
immunoglobulin, effective treatments for many autoimmune thrombocytopenias, are not useful in platelet refractory patients.
Leukocyte reduction filters, as well as ultraviolet B irradiation, decrease the rate of HLA alloimmunization to platelets. 33,34 Therefore, leukocyte reduced filtered blood
products should be provided to oncology patients who require many platelet transfusions (see Leukoreduction, later in this chapter). Presumably, leukoreduction
removes donor antigen-presenting cells, which may play a key role in initiating HLA alloimmunization.
GRANULOCYTES
Granulocytes continue to play a small role in the supportive care of neutropenic oncology patients with serious infections, including allogeneic and autologous marrow
transplant recipients. Improvements in apheresis collection technique now allow collection of larger numbers of granulocytes (6 to 8 × 10 10) from volunteer donors
than was previously possible. 35 These changes include the administration of corticosteroids or growth factors to white cell donors before apheresis. 36 Granulocytes
are typically transfused to neutropenic oncology patients who have developed gram-positive or gram-negative bacterial sepsis unresponsive to antibiotic therapy for a
minimum of 24 to 48 hours (Table 53.1-3).37 Granulocytes collected from nonstimulated (no corticosteroids or growth factors) healthy donors contain at least 1 × 10 10
neutrophils per unit. These units can be stored for only 24 hours at 20 to 24°C without agitation. Granulocyte units contain 20 to 25 mL of red cells and thus must be
cross-matched with the recipient's serum. Donated granulocytes are rarely HLA matched for the recipient, even for those patients with known HLA antibodies because
there are little data suggesting that HLA-matched granulocytes have improved survival and recovery. Granulocytes should be irradiated (2500 cGy) to inactivate the
large number of lymphocytes found in the product. They are considered for patients who have an absolute neutrophil count less than 500/µL and a reasonable chance
of marrow recovery.

TABLE 53.1-3. General Guidelines for Granulocyte Transfusions

Because of their short half-life, granulocytes are typically provided daily until the patient can maintain an absolute neutrophil count greater than 500/µL without
transfusion or until the infection resolves. Infusion of larger numbers of granulocytes (on the order of 6 to 8 × 10 10 granulocytes) produces measurable increases in
adult recipient neutrophil counts, but the optimal dose and frequency remain undefined. Febrile reactions to granulocytes are common, the reactions seem to be more
severe when amphotericin is infused near the time of granulocyte transfusions. Overall, the additional benefit of granulocyte transfusions for these neutropenic
patients as compared with antibiotic treatment alone is unclear as there are no well-controlled clinical trials. In addition, the clinical benefit of transfusing larger
numbers of granulocytes collected from donors stimulated by corticosteroids or growth factors has not been proven. The collection of granulocytes, or any blood
component, by apheresis is not an entirely innocuous process. The donor is at risk for uncommon, but potentially serious adverse reactions including hydroxyethyl
starch–related hypotension and anaphylaxis and citrate-induced hypocalcemia. Hydroxyethyl starch is used as a sedimenting agent to maximize granulocyte yields.
Minor, but typically tolerable, side effects of pretreating granulocyte donors with dexamethasone (insomnia, flushing), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, or both
(bone pain, headaches, insomnia) occur in a substantial number of donors. 38 The long-term effects of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor on volunteer donors are
unknown.
Adverse recipient reactions to granulocytes are common because of the activity of transfused white cells, as well as their degradation products. These reactions are
typical of febrile nonhemolytic transfusion reactions (FNTRs) following other blood product administration. Granulocytes should be transfused slowly, 1 to 2 mL/min
through a standard microaggregate filter. Obviously, a leukocyte reduction filter should never be used to administer granulocytes. In addition, the recipient should be
premedicated with acetaminophen or some other antiinflammatory agent before the granulocyte transfusion.
PLASMA
Plasma is prepared by centrifuging whole blood and then freezing the removed plasma within 8 hours of collection. Rapid freezing maintains the activity of labile

coagulation factors such as factors V and VIII. The most commonly available form of plasma, fresh frozen plasma (FFP), contains all coagulation factors, other plasma
proteins, and complement. FFP should not be used for volume expansion because there is a risk of transfusion-transmitted disease (TTD); other safer nonplasma
substitutes are available. A unit of FFP contains from 180 to 270 mL of plasma. The primary indications for FFP transfusion in oncology patients include deficiencies
of multiple coagulation factors as seen in liver disease, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and hypofibrinogenemia. 39 It is often used for urgent reversal of
warfarin therapy in bleeding patients and before procedures. FFP is not the treatment of choice for replacing most individual clotting factors because of the large
volumes that would be required to obtain adequate factor levels. The patient's cardiovascular and fluid status may preclude the use of large amounts of plasma. In
fact, large transfusions of FFP can produce fluid overload and subsequent heart failure in some patients. FFP is not the treatment of choice for coagulopathies in
cases in which virally inactivated or recombinant products exist such as for deficiencies of factor VIII (hemophilia A) or factor IX (hemophilia B).
CRYOPRECIPITATE
Cryoprecipitate is prepared by thawing FFP between 1 and 6°C. A single 10- to 15-mL unit of cryoprecipitate contains fibrinogen (100 to 350 mg/U), Factor VIII (at
least 80 IU/U), and some von Willebrand factor. Thus, a similar dose of fibrinogen can be provided in a much smaller volume as compared with FFP. Use of
cryoprecipitate is generally limited to patients with severe hypofibrinogenemia (less than 100 mg/dL) and von Willebrand's disease. It should not be used alone in
disseminated intravascular coagulation because it contains no factor V. Cryoprecipitate, thrombin, and calcium are combined to make fibrin glue.40 This biologic
sealant is most often used to limit surgical bleeding. Since cryoprecipitate is used, the recipient is exposed to the risks of TTD. A fibrin sealant that contains solvent
and detergent-treated plasma has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration.
PLASMA DERIVATIVES
Albumin
Solutions containing 5% human albumin in saline are primarily used to replace intravascular volume and more rarely, to treat hypoalbuminemia. Its use as a volume
expander has decreased because other nonplasma colloidal solutions such as dextran and hydroxyethyl starch are readily available. Albumin is also used to replace
plasma removed during apheresis. Albumin prepared in the United States is virally inactivated by heat treatment. Properly prepared albumin has not been reported to
transmit viral disease including hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus (HCV), and HIV types 1 and 2. Albumin is not a viable nutritional source for patients with chronic
protein deficiency states seen in oncology patients. 41
Immunoglobulins
Immune globulin products include intravenously administered immune globulin, intramuscularly administered immune globulin, and several specialized products such
as Rh(D) immune globulin and hepatitis B immune globulin. In the United States, immune globulin products are prepared from donor plasma screened for TTDs.
Individual plasma units are then pooled and separated by alcohol fractionation or by anion exchange chromatography that results in a product that is considered safe
from virus transmission. 42 Polyspecific intravenous immune globulin is used to treat immune-mediated thrombocytopenias, autoimmune hemolytic anemias, and
demyelinating polyneuropathies such as Guillain-Barré syndrome. It is also provided to patients with primary and secondary immune deficiencies. Patients who are
IgA-deficient are at risk of anaphylaxis due to production of IgG anti-IgA immunoglobulin. For these patients, IgA-deficient preparations should be used. Some
immunoglobulin preparations use a chemical inactivation step employing solvent and detergent processing to reduce infectivity for lipid enveloped viruses including
HIV and hepatitis C. Specific immune globulin preparations are made from donors with hyperimmune serum and can be used prophylactically or after exposure to
prevent infections from viruses such as hepatitis B.
Clotting Factors
Antihemophilic factor (factor VIII) and factor IX are commercially available derivatives prepared from large pools of human plasma. These products were originally
high risk for transmitting viruses until virus-inactivation methods were developed that did not damage the product's coagulant activity. These methods include heat
inactivation and solvent and detergent exposure. Individual coagulation factors of extremely high purity are produced using antibody-affinity purification procedures.
Recombinant factors VIII, IX, and VIIa are currently available and should be considered as an alternative to pooled products in specific situations. The use of these
products in cancer patients is generally limited to replacement of individual clotting factors or to the treatment of specific factor inhibitors.

TRANSFUSION REACTIONS AND COMPLICATIONS
Oncology patients, like other transfusion recipients, experience adverse reactions to blood component therapy. Although cancer patients per se are not at an
increased risk for the more common febrile and allergic transfusion reactions, they are likely to experience one of these reactions if they are or have been multiply
transfused during their treatment. Most reactions occur during or shortly after a blood transfusion, but may present several hours to days later. In general, transfusion
reactions are broadly categorized as immune or nonimmune based on their presumed mechanism ( Table 53.1-4). Of particular concern to cancer patients is (1) the
development of alloimmunization, or antibodies to red cell or platelet membranes components, through repeated allogeneic blood exposure, and (2) posttransfusion
associated GVHD, a potentially fatal, but uncommon complication. Chronic iron overload and secondary hemochromatosis, long-term complications of red cell
transfusion therapy, also occur in patients with hematologic malignancies who experience long-term survival. 43

TABLE 53.1-4. Complications of Blood Transfusion Therapy in Cancer Patients

ACUTE INTRAVASCULAR HEMOLYTIC REACTIONS
Acute intravascular hemolytic transfusion reactions (AIHTRs) are serious complications that are usually avoided by carefully adhering to standard protocols for
administering blood products. These reactions occur in blood recipients who have preexisting antibodies directed against antigens present on the transfused red cells.
ABO incompatibility remains the most common cause of immediate intravascular hemolytic reactions, but they are also caused by incompatibility within other blood
group systems such as Duffy (Fy a, Fyb) and Kidd (Jka, Jkb). Transfusion of ABO incompatible blood is typically due to clerical errors involving misidentification of the
patient. 44 Proper labeling of clots used by the blood bank for compatibility testing and careful identification of patients are the best ways to prevent potentially fatal
ABO incompatible reactions. Donor erythrocytes carrying either A, B, or both antigens avidly bind to the recipient's naturally occurring anti-A, anti-B, or both
antibodies. This binding results in complement fixation, formation of the C5b-9 membrane attack complex, and finally, hemolysis. It is now clear that biologic response
modifiers such as proinflammatory cytokines [interleukin-1 (IL-1), tumor necrosis factor-a], chemokines (IL-8), and complement fragments (C3a, C5a) play a major role
in the pathophysiology of AIHTRs. 45
AIHTRs present as fever, chills, the sudden onset of back pain, hypotension, tachycardia, diaphoresis, and dyspnea. The symptoms are usually evident in recipients
shortly after beginning the transfusion. Laboratory studies reveal an increase in unconjugated bilirubin up to 2 to 3 mg/dL and marked elevation of lactate
dehydrogenase. The classic signs of intravascular hemolysis include acute onset hemoglobinuria and hemoglobinemia. The DAT or direct Coombs' test, becomes

reactive due to the coating of donor red cells with the recipient's antibodies. AIHTRs are medical emergencies. Treatment consists of immediately stopping the
transfusion, close monitoring of vital signs, and use of intravenous fluids to maintain urine output greater than 100 mL/h with or without a loop diuretic ( Table 53.1-5).
Blood pressure and airway support, pressors, and mechanical ventilation may be necessary. Dialysis should be considered in patients who develop renal failure as
result of acute red cell hemolysis and subsequent acute tubular necrosis.

TABLE 53.1-5. Identification and Initial Management of Transfusion Reactions in Oncology Patients

DELAYED EXTRAVASCULAR HEMOLYTIC REACTIONS
DHTRs typically occur in patients who initially have a negative antibody screen on pretransfusion testing, but who then experience accelerated destruction of
transfused red cells 7 to 14 days posttransfusion. In most cases, red cell destruction is caused by an antibody that is of low titer, below the detection limits of most
routine screening techniques. On reexposure to the offending antigen, the antibody rapidly forms and binds to the transfused red cells. DHTRs are also caused by
primary sensitization in which a patient synthesizes a new antibody. Antibodies implicated in DHTRs usually fix complement only to the C3 level and thus, cause
extravascular as opposed to intravascular hemolysis. Antibodies most commonly identified in DHTRs include those directed against Rh (E, c), Duffy, Kidd, and Kell
blood group antigens. DHTRs are often diagnosed following an unexpected posttransfusion drop in hematocrit, an elevation of unconjugated bilirubin, and the
appearance of a newly positive DAT. There is usually a delay of 3 days to 2 weeks between transfusion and the onset of extravascular hemolysis. Only rarely do
delayed reactions cause intravascular hemolysis with associated hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria, but in any case, these patients should be followed until the
hemolysis resolves. DHTRs should also be recognized to avoid unnecessary diagnostic procedures that are considered to evaluate an unexpected decrease in
hematocrit. These patients typically do not develop cytokine storm and are for the most part asymptomatic.
FEBRILE NONHEMOLYTIC REACTIONS
FNTRs following red cell and platelet transfusions are common in cancer patients. They are presumably caused by antibodies (leukoagglutinins) in the recipient that
are directed against HLA-, leukocyte-specific, or both antigens on donor white blood cells and platelets. Reactions between leukoagglutinins present in the transfused
product and recipient leukocyte antigens may also play a role. Formation of leukocyte antigen-antibody complexes then results in complement binding and release of
endogenous pyrogens such as IL-1, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-a. Cytokines generated by leukocytes during platelet and red cell storage may also contribute to
FNTRs.46 Symptoms typically occur during or several hours after the transfusion and include low-grade (greater than 1°C increase) and high-grade fevers
accompanied by shaking chills. Rarely vomiting, dyspnea, hypotension, and decreased oxygen saturation ensue. The severity of symptoms is often directly related to
the number of leukocytes contained in the product or the rate of transfusion. Leukoreduction of blood components decreases, but does not eliminate, the frequency of
FNTRs and therefore, white cell–reduced products should be considered in patients who have experienced febrile reactions. Premedication with an antipyretic such
as acetaminophen may minimize mild FNTRs, but is not entirely effective. Antihistamines do not prevent or treat FNTRs. Corticosteroids can minimize FNTRs if they
are administered several hours before the transfusion and should be considered for patients who have had several severe reactions. Intravenous or intramuscular
meperidine can resolve severe rigors in a matter of minutes. 47 If symptoms do not resolve in less than 4 hours or are especially severe, other complications such as
sepsis caused by contaminated blood products, or a hemolytic reaction should be seriously considered. Under some circumstances, it may be difficult to distinguish
between FNTRs from other causes of fever in immunocompromised cancer patients. Specific conditions that can mimic benign FNTRs include preexisting or
impending patient sepsis, infusion of a contaminated unit of blood or platelets, and a hemolytic transfusion reaction.
ALLERGIC REACTIONS
Allergic reactions to plasma, platelets, and red cells are relatively common in cancer patients. They present as pruritus, urticaria, or both, usually in the absence of
fever. Allergic reactions are classically IgE mediated and most symptoms are attributed to histamine release. At times it is difficult to distinguish between allergic and
febrile transfusion reactions when urticarial symptoms are accompanied by low-grade fever. Other common symptoms and signs include pruritus, erythema, papular
rashes, and wheals. Severe anaphylaxis resulting in bronchospasm and hypotension rarely occur, but can be life threatening. As in other allergic processes,
symptoms are not dose related and severe manifestations can occur following small exposures. Treatment of mild allergic reactions consists of stopping the
transfusion and administering diphenhydramine or other antihistamines. For mild allergic reactions (e.g., pruritus and hives only without fever or vasomotor instability),
it is reasonable to resume transfusing the same unit provided the symptoms promptly resolve. If the symptoms recur after the transfusion is restarted, a new unit
should then be obtained. Severe anaphylactic reactions with bronchospasm and cardiovascular collapse are fortunately rare and should be treated like any other
anaphylactic reaction with corticosteroids, vasopressors, and airway support. Washed red cells in which the residual donor plasma has been removed and replaced
by saline may benefit patients with repeated or severe allergic reactions. 48 Leukocyte reduction filters are not helpful because they do not remove the implicated
soluble mediators.
SEPTIC REACTIONS
Blood products are rarely contaminated by bacteria during the collection process. This may occur if the donor is transiently bacteremic at the time of collection or if the
arm is improperly cleansed before venipuncture. 49 Transfusing blood products that are contaminated by bacteria is potentially dangerous and can result in profound
hypotension, shock, and death. Currently, there are no laboratory tests to screen for bacterial contamination and contaminated units cannot be easily identified on
pretransfusion inspection. The risk of septic transfusion reactions (STRs) is higher for platelet transfusions than for other blood components because platelets are
stored at room temperature.50 Refrigeration of red cells markedly diminishes the growth of most bacteria. Common organisms that cause STRs include gram-positive
(Staphylococcus sp.) and gram-negative (Enterobacter, Yersinia, Pseudomonas sp.) bacteria. 51 Yersinia enterocolitica is a more common cause of red cell STRs
because this organism grows at cold temperature and multiplies during refrigerated storage of red blood cell products. 52 Blood cultures should be obtained from
patients who develop high fevers during or shortly after transfusion, especially if they become hypotensive. A Gram's stain or acridine orange stain of the suspected
contaminated product is helpful when organisms are seen, but this test is not highly sensitive. Both the patient and the implicated blood unit should be cultured
whenever a STR is suspected. Other symptoms associated with STRs are attributed to preformed endotoxin and cytokines and include skin flushing, severe rigors,
and cardiovascular collapse. These symptoms may occur during or minutes to hours after completing the transfusion. Treatment includes fluids and cardiovascular
support. Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be started immediately, even before culture results can guide further therapy. Severe febrile reactions can mimic STRs,
but febrile reactions are self-limited in nature and are generally not associated with profound hypotension.
TRANSFUSION-RELATED ACUTE LUNG INJURY
Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) is a rare but serious complication of blood transfusion that presents as noncardiogenic pulmonary edema. It typically
occurs within 6 hours of transfusion and is clinically identical to the adult respiratory distress syndrome. The most common clinical findings include the rapid onset of
dyspnea, tachypnea, cyanosis, fever, and hypotension. 53 Lung auscultation reveals diffuse crackling and decreased breath sounds. Invasive cardiac monitoring
shows normal cardiac pressures and function with hypoxemia and decreased pulmonary compliance. Radiographic findings include diffuse, fluffy infiltrates consistent
with pulmonary edema. The presumed etiology involves immune-mediated reaction of HLA antibodies or other leukoagglutinins with white cells, which subsequently
leads to leukocyte activation. 54 Granulocytes are first activated in the peripheral circulation by HLA or other Ag-Ab complexes. The activated leukocytes then migrate
to the lungs where they bind to the pulmonary capillary bed via integrins and other cell adhesion molecules. Proteolytic enzymes are then released that destroy tissue,

resulting in a capillary leak syndrome and pulmonary edema. More recently, reactive lipid products released from donor cell membranes have been associated with
the development of TRALI.55 TRALI should be suspected in patients with rapid onset respiratory distress following transfusion therapy or pulmonary edema without
hypervolemia and congestive heart failure. Definitive diagnosis requires identifying HLA, granulocyte antibodies, or both in either the donor's or recipient's serum. The
corresponding antigens should also be found on the recipient's or donor's leukocytes. This specialized testing is performed in few specialized laboratories.
Approximately 80% to 90% of patients with TRALI survive with supportive care consisting of aggressive respiratory support, supplemental oxygen, and mechanical
ventilation when necessary. Based on the presumed pathogenesis of TRALI, leukoreduced blood products could potentially decrease the incidence of TRALI. Drugs
used to treat TRALI have included corticosteroids and diuretics, but there are no controlled studies demonstrating the efficacy of these agents because of the low
incidence of TRALI.
TRANSFUSION-ASSOCIATED GRAFT-VERSUS-HOST DISEASE
Transfusion-associated GVHD is a rare complication of blood transfusion that is fatal in approximately 90% of patients. Transfusion-associated GVHD occurs when
donor immunocompetent T and natural killer cells attack recipient cells because these recipient cells appear foreign due to differences in major or minor
histocompatibility antigens. 56 GVHD is commonly seen following allogeneic bone marrow transplant, but may also rarely occur in immunodeficient or
immunosuppressed patients following blood transfusion. Removing T cells from donor grafts can minimize acute GVHD in oncology patients, but is associated with
increased graft failure and a decrease in a beneficial graft-versus-leukemia or graft-versus-tumor effect. The risk of transfusion-associated GVHD is related to the
number of viable T lymphocytes transfused, the recipient's immune status, and the HLA disparity between donor and recipient. Therefore, multiply transfused patients
who receive cells from donors who share HLA haplotypes (haploidentical) with the recipient are at greatest risk. Clinically, transfusion-associated GVHD is
characterized by the acute onset of rash, abdominal pain, diarrhea, liver function abnormalities, and bone marrow suppression beginning 2 to 30 days following
transfusion. The maculopapular rash seen is similar to that observed in acute GVHD following bone marrow transplant. Biopsy of the skin can confirm the diagnosis.
Pancytopenia in transfusion-associated GVHD may be severe and is attributed to destruction of recipient marrow stem cells by donor lymphocytes.
Immunosuppressive therapy with prednisone and cyclosporine has not been reported effective in transfusion-associated GVHD. There is no known effective treatment
for transfusion-associated GVHD, but therapeutic strategies have been proposed based on the presumed mechanism of its onset. 57 Fortunately,
transfusion-associated GVHD can be prevented by irradiating products before transfusion. Specifically, irradiating cellular blood products with 2500 cGy inactivates
donor lymphocytes and is the most effective method for preventing transfusion-associated GVHD. 58

TRANSFUSION-TRANSMITTED DISEASE
The risk of TTD, primarily viral transmission, has dramatically decreased over the past 25 years. Bacterial contamination of units is not usually considered a TTD, but
actually is far more common than viral or fungal transmission. The use of volunteer donors and predonation screening questionnaires were the earliest effective steps
taken to reduce the risk of transfusion-related hepatitis and HIV. These risks continue to drive government-mandated pretransfusion testing requirements. 59 The
development of enzyme immunoassays in the 1970s and nucleotide testing in the late 1990s have further decreased the risk of TTD 60 (Table 53.1-6).
Transfusion-associated HIV and hepatitis are a persistent problem in parts of the world that do not have access to screening tests.

TABLE 53.1-6. Risks of Transfusion-Transmitted Disease

Pretransfusion TTD testing in the United States includes screening for syphilis, hepatitis B (HBsAg, anti-Hbc), hepatitis C (anti-HCV), HIV (anti-HIV-1/2, HIV-1 p24
antigen), and HTLV (anti-HTLV-I/II). Serum alanine aminotransferase, measured in most European countries as a nonspecific surrogate marker of hepatitis, is no
longer required by American Association of Blood Bank standards. 61 Positive screening test results are confirmed by supplemental or confirmatory testing. Current
estimates for the risk of transfusion-related HIV range from 1:500,000 to 1:750,000 units transfused. 62 Despite improvements in tests used to detect HIV antibodies in
donors, the window period in which HIV could be transmitted by an infected, but HIV seronegative, donor remained in 1996 at approximately 25 days. The introduction
of screening for HIV-1 p24 antigen in 1997 decreased the window period to approximately 15 days. The implementation of HIV nucleotide testing will further decrease
the window period to an estimated 10 days.
Routine vaccination of infants and young children with hepatitis B vaccine should also decrease the risk of transfusion-transmitted hepatitis B as these children enter
the blood donor pool. Chronic carriers of hepatitis B (HBsAg positive, anti-Hbc IgG positive, HBeAg positive or negative, anti-HBe positive or negative) can transmit
the disease through blood donation or by other blood-borne exposures. Those carriers with measurable HBeAg are probably more infectious and accordingly, more
likely to transmit disease through blood exposure or by vertical transmission. The chances of a health care worker contracting hepatitis B from a single contaminated
needle stick is estimated to be between 2% and 40%. By contrast, the chances of acquiring HIV from a single contaminated needle stick is less than 1%. These
differences may be at least in part related to the higher number of viral particles present in the blood of carriers of hepatitis B. The rate of transmitting hepatitis C
through needle stick is probably on the order of 5%. 63 Nevertheless, health care workers must strictly adhere to universal precautions to protect themselves and their
patients.
Genomic testing for HCV RNA was implemented in the United States and Europe to detect seronegative, yet infectious units. Nucleotide testing for hepatitis C and
HIV is typically performed on samples pooled from multiple donors. 64 The importance of hepatitis C transmission in blood therapy has been confirmed in many
countries by retrospective review. During these reviews, recipients of blood components from donors later found to be positive by anti-HCV screening (instituted in
1991) are examined. A large percentage of these recipients, up to 75%, are found to be anti-HCV positive. 65,66 Unlike hepatitis B, the majority of those recipients who
become HCV seropositive develop chronic liver disease. Therefore, these patients must be offered counseling that addresses the complications of hepatitis C, as well
as the risk to close contacts and family members. 67 Nucleotide amplification testing will decrease the incidence of transfusion-related hepatitis C by narrowing the
window period from approximately 60 to 80 to 10 to 20 days. Hepatitis G virus has been transferred by blood transfusion, but its significance is unclear in that
transfusion-acquired infection has not been associated with acute or chronic hepatitis. 68
Several techniques have been developed to inactivate viruses in plasma including solvent and detergent treatment and photochemical inactivation using psoralens
and long wavelength ultraviolet A light. 69 Methods used to inactivate infectious pathogens in cellular blood components such as platelets and red cells are not
currently available but are under clinical development. Due to the low risk of viral infection by transfusion and the fact that most patients who receive plasma also
receive cellular blood components, the cost-effectiveness of virally inactivated plasma is low. 70 Albumin, immune globulin, factor concentrates, and other plasma
derivatives are also virally attenuated by standard treatment protocols.
Other pathogens such as CMV and parvovirus B19 are common in the general donor population and may pose a serious threat in immunocompromised and
splenectomized patients. 71 Approximately 40% to 60% of blood donors have been exposed to CMV during their lifetime and thus, have developed antibodies directed
against CMV. However, only approximately 2% of CMV-seropositive donors are actively infected, in which case transfusion of their blood to an immunocompromised
recipient could cause potentially serious disease. The actual risk of posttransfusion seroconversion of a CMV-negative recipient who receives CMV-untested blood
depends on the prevalence of CMV seropositivity in the donor population. This prevalence varies widely in different parts of the United States and other countries.
A number of other infectious diseases are known or are suspected to be transmitted by blood transfusion. These include malaria, Chagas' disease, leishmaniasis, and

toxoplasmosis.72 Parvovirus B19, malaria, and babesiosis are of particular risk to immunocompromised patients. The risk of acquiring babesiosis by blood transfusion
is unknown because it is endemic in many areas and often results in asymptomatic infection. Small clusters of blood transfusion–associated babesiosis have been
described attributed to single asymptomatic blood donors. 73 Thus, oncologists should recognize that babesiosis can cause febrile hemolytic disorders after diagnosis
because it is a potentially fatal, yet treatable disease. Transmission of Borrelia burgdorferi by transfusion has not yet been documented. The risk of new variant
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, first described in 1996, is unknown. It is unclear whether new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is transmissible by blood transfusion, and
this route of transmission has not been reported. 74 Fears of transmitting new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, however, have resulted in implementation of a
universal white blood cell reduction policy in the United Kingdom. 75 In the United States, donors are now deferred indefinitely if they have spent 6 months or more,
cumulatively, in the United Kingdom from 1980 through 1996. This policy will have a negative effect on blood supplies.

USE OF SPECIAL BLOOD PRODUCTS IN ONCOLOGY PATIENTS
Cancer patients are often immunosuppressed as a result of their disease, treatment, or both. Accordingly, they are prone to a wide variety of viral and bacterial
infections and to harmful cellular-mediated immune responses. By virtue of their frequent exposure to transfusions, they are highly susceptible to developing HLA
alloantibodies that can adversely effect their therapy if appropriate precautions are not taken. Specifically, HLA antibodies are implicated in common febrile
transfusion reactions and the development of refractoriness to platelet transfusions. Thus, oncology patients should receive blood products that have been specially
processed to prevent these and other complications. Currently available special blood products include those that are leukoreduced, irradiated blood products, and
CMV seronegative or CMV safe. Patients should be individually considered for each of these products, and the patient's needs must be periodically reevaluated.
LEUKOREDUCTION
Leukocytes contained in blood components can provoke febrile nonhemolytic reactions, induce HLA alloimmunization, and transmit CMV to both immunocompetent
and immunosuppressed recipients. Leukocytes are effectively removed from red cell and platelet concentrates by leukocyte reduction filters. Currently used
third-generation leukocyte reduction filters remove 3 to 4 log 10 of the total intact leukocytes found in red cell and platelet concentrates. American Association of Blood
Bank standards require that units labeled leukoreduced contain less than 5 ×; 10 6 residual white cells. Red cells are leukoreduced shortly after blood collection
(pre-storage leukodepletion), following refrigerated storage (poststorage leukodepletion), or at the bedside during transfusion. Filters are similarly used to
leukoreduce platelet concentrates. Platelets collected by modern apheresis devices are designed to directly collect leukoreduced platelets. Many physicians believe
that these products do not require further leukoreduction. White cell reduction by each of these techniques requires quality control measures (using cyclic good
manufacturing practices) that verify adequate leukoreduction of cellular blood products.
Leukoreduction reduces the incidence and severity of febrile transfusion reactions and decreases the risk of HLA alloimmunization. Specifically, leukoreduced
products are less likely to stimulate the HLA alloantibodies implicated in both febrile transfusion reactions and antibody-mediated platelet reactions. Other generally
accepted benefits of white cell reduction include delaying platelet refractoriness and decreasing the risk of transmitting white cell–related infectious agents including
CMV and HTLV-I/II.76 Thus, leukodepleted products are recommended for all autologous and allogeneic bone marrow and peripheral blood stem cell transplant
recipients and candidates. They are also indicated for patients with leukemia, lymphoma, and aplastic anemia. Patients with solid tumors who are not transplant
patients but who have large anticipated cellular blood product needs should also receive leukoreduced products, as should any patient with chronic transfusion needs
(thalassemia, sickle cell disease).
Prestorage leukoreduced products are preferable because they are also devoid of cytokines and other biologic response modifiers that play a role in transfusion
complications. Many of these proteins are not efficiently removed by leukocyte reduction filters. 77 This is particularly true in platelet concentrates stored at room
temperature because there is continued elaboration of biologically active substances such as tumor necrosis factor, IL-1 and IL-6. 78 With the dramatic decrease in the
risk of viral transmission, investigators are focusing on the immunomodulatory effects of blood transfusion. 79 These effects involve associations between allogeneic
transfusion and bacterial infection, tumor progression, and tumor recurrence. 80,81 Universal leukoreduction of both red cells and platelets is required in a number of
countries including the United Kingdom and will be implemented shortly in the United States.
IRRADIATION
Blood components are irradiated to prevent potentially lethal transfusion-associated GVHD by interfering with the ability of lymphocytes to proliferate. Irradiation of
supportive blood components is indicated in bone marrow or peripheral blood stem cell transplant recipients, patients with congenital immunodeficiency states,
neonates, premature infants, and during intrauterine exchange transfusion. 82 Directed blood donations made by relatives should also be irradiated. Patients with
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome commonly receive irradiated components, although there is no clear increased risk of transfusion-associated GVHD in this
population. Standard guidelines recommend irradiating red blood cells, platelets, and granulocytes with a minimum dose of 2500 cGy. 83 Platelets and red cells are not
adversely affected by this exposure. It is not believed necessary to irradiate FFP or cryoprecipitate because they do not contain viable leukocytes. Leukoreduction is
not a substitute for irradiation as transfusion-associated GVHD has been described following transfusion of leukoreduced, nonirradiated blood. 84 Bone marrow or
peripheral blood stem cells must never be irradiated before transplant for obvious reasons.
There is preliminary evidence from a murine transfusion model that photochemical treatment with psoralen S-59 and long wavelength ultraviolet light can prevent
transfusion-associated GVHD. 85 Using a murine transfusion model, clinical and histologic evidence of GVHD could be prevented by both gamma irradiating or
photochemically treating splenic leukocytes. Photochemical treatment was originally developed to inactivate contaminating viruses, bacteria, and leukocytes in blood
components. This technology is currently under investigation in the United States and Europe.
CYTOMEGALOVIRUS-SERONEGATIVE AND CYTOMEGALOVIRUS SAFE
CMV infection is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in marrow and solid organ transplant patients. Most serious CMV infections develop in these populations
as a result of latent reactivation of recipient CMV, but nevertheless, CMV can be transmitted by blood transfusion. Therefore, blood banks supply products that have a
low potential of transmitting CMV. These products include CMV-seronegative units prepared from donors who are CMV IgG antibody negative and leukodepleted
components. The latter refers to blood components leukoreduced in a blood center or laboratory using good manufacturing techniques and strict quality control
measures. Depending on the donor population, as many as 80% to 90% of blood donors may be CMV seropositive. In this situation, the demand for
CMV-seronegative products can easily exceed supply. In addition, CMV-seronegative products are capable of transmitting CMV disease; CMV seronegativity does not
guarantee the product is incapable of causing acute CMV disease. Studies suggest that CMV seronegative and leukodepleted filtered products are equivalent in
preventing CMV transmission. 76 In this study, however, all five deaths attributed to CMV pneumonitis occurred in patients who received leukoreduced products.
Many transfusion specialists consider quality-assured leukodepleted units as CMV “safe” in that they are unlikely to transmit CMV disease. In addition to
CMV-seronegative marrow and solid organ transplant recipients, CMV-seronegative or -safe components are generally indicated for premature infants, during
intrauterine transfusions, for patients with congenital immunodeficiencies, CMV-seronegative pregnant women, and seronegative patients with HIV. The British
Committee for Standards in Hematology concluded that leukoreduced components are an “effective alternative” to seronegative products for preventing
transfusion-related CMV transmission. 86

APHERESIS
Apheresis, derived from the Greek word meaning to take away, is the process of selectively removing one component of whole blood and returning the remainder to
the donor or patient. Today, sophisticated and highly automated blood cell separators are available for processing large volumes of donor or patient blood to remove
the desired blood component. There are two broad applications of apheresis: apheresis for blood component collection and therapeutic apheresis. Apheresis is
currently used in blood centers to collect plasma, platelets, granulocytes, and peripheral blood stem cells. In the United States, most plasma used by the fractionation
industry to produce coagulation factor concentrates, albumin, and immune globulin is obtained by plasmapheresis. Plateletpheresis provides many of the single donor
platelets used by oncology patients. Collecting large numbers of platelets from specific donors is important to many patients who poorly respond to platelet transfusion
as a result of alloimmunization to HLA or platelet-specific antibodies. Leukapheresis is used to describe the removal of granulocytes (used for granulocytes
transfusions in neutropenic cancer patients), peripheral blood stem cells (autologous or allogeneic), and other mononuclear cells. Red cell units are being collected
using automated cell separators.
Therapeutic apheresis is a procedure commonly performed for a variety of conditions. 87 Generally recognized indications for plasma exchange include thrombotic

thrombocytopenic purpura, Waldenström's macroglobulinemia, myasthenia gravis, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, the Guillain-Barré syndrome,
and rheumatoid arthritis. Plasma exchange may help prevent the initiation or continuation of dialysis in patients with rapidly progressive renal failure secondary to
multiple myeloma. 88 Therapeutic plasmapheresis has been used in cancer patients who develop a wide array of paraneoplastic syndromes, but its efficacy has not
been confirmed by clinical trials. 89 Simple removal of red cells from patients with polycythemia is performed by simple phlebotomy and does not require a cell
separator. On the other hand, automated separators very efficiently exchange red cells in patients in sickle cell crisis and patients with Babesia infection. Oncology
patients with myeloid leukemias may require cellular apheresis to reduce tumor burden before receiving chemotherapy. 90
Leukapheresis is typically performed in acute or chronic myeloid leukemia in blast crisis when the blast count exceeds 100,000/µL. Patients may or may not have
symptoms of leukostasis or hyperviscosity at these levels. Lymphoid leukemias are less likely to produce leukostatic symptoms, but are also treated by leukopheresis
in certain situations, or when the blast count is rapidly increasing. As blood viscosity increases, flow in cerebral and myocardial circulations slows, resulting in tissue
hypoperfusion and organ hypoxia. The presence of central nervous system or pulmonary symptoms may be an indication for more urgent care. A single leukapheresis
can reduce the leukocyte count by 20% to 50% and reduce hyperviscosity symptoms. On occasion, the cell count may actually rise postleukapheresis as malignant
cells are released from the spleen and lymphoid organs. Leukapheresis is rarely needed for chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase. Thrombocytapheresis is
used for patients with myeloproliferative disease who have platelet counts over 1,000,000/µL. These patients with significant thrombocytosis may be actively
hemorrhaging or show signs of thrombosis. The platelet count invariably rebounds postprocedure unless chemotherapy is initiated. Prophylactic plateletpheresis is
rarely indicated for such patients.

CONCLUSIONS
EFFECT OF GROWTH FACTORS ON TRANSFUSION MEDICINE
Hematopoietic growth factors as applied to oncologic transfusion therapy are designed to limit the exposure of patients to allogeneic blood. 43,91 The isolation,
characterization, and subsequent synthesis of erythropoietin by recombinant technology (rHuEPO) was one of the most important advances in decreasing red cell
transfusions. Use of rHuEPO has dramatically reduced the transfusion needs of patients with a various anemias. 92 rHuEPO has also been employed to increase the
yield of autologous donations and to stimulate erythropoiesis after surgery. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor has been shown to decrease infection rates in
neutropenic patients undergoing chemotherapy, replacing marginally effective granulocyte transfusions. The limitations and risks of platelet transfusion therapy
continue to drive the development of agents that stimulate platelet production in oncology patients. 93 There is rapid growth in the use of growth factors including FLT-3
ligand, c-MPL ligand (thrombopoietin), 94 and various combinations of growth factors. IL-11, in particular, has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
for preventing severe thrombocytopenia in patients receiving myelosuppressive chemotherapy. Thrombopoietic growth factors also have the potential to stimulate
platelet apheresis donors, increase stem cell harvest yields, and expand progenitor cells ex vivo.95 Development of neutralizing antibodies against endogenous
thrombopoietin has plagued clinical testing of thrombopoietic growth factors.
BLOOD SUBSTITUTES
Red cell substitutes currently in development include hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers (HBOCs), perfluorocarbon emulsions, and liposome-encapsulated
hemoglobin. 78 The two major types of blood substitutes, HBOCs and perfluorocarbon emulsions, are in phase II and III clinical trials. None are currently approved for
clinical use in the United States. 96 HBOCs are artificially derived products with oxygen-carrying properties. They are structurally similar to hemoglobin but do not
contain red cell stroma, which is toxic and leads to renal damage. Development of HBOCs has been hampered by the relatively short half-life of these oxygen carriers
in the circulation. Perfluorocarbon s are synthetic hydrocarbons that have the ability to carry dissolved oxygen. The particles circulate for only a few hours until they
are removed by the reticuloendothelial system. Research efforts to modify or remove red blood cell antigens from donor units is proceeding slowly, but a truly
universal compatible red cell unit may one day be within reach.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Rossi EC. Principles of transfusion medicine. 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1996.
2. Wallace EL, Churchill WH, Surgenor DM, et al. Collection and transfusion of blood and blood components in the United States, 1992. Transfusion 1995;35:802.
3. Knutson F, Rider J, Franck V, et al. A new apheresis procedure for the preparation of high-quality red cells and plasma. Transfusion 1999;39:565.
4. Vengelen-Tyler V, American Association of Blood Banks. Technical manual. 13th ed. Bethesda, MD: American Association of Blood Banks, 1999.
5. Klein H. Standards for blood banks and transfusion services. 17th ed. Bethesda, MD: American Association of Blood Banks, 1996.
6. Welch HG, Meehan KR, Goodnough LT. Prudent strategies for elective red blood cell transfusion. Ann Intern Med 1992;116:393.
7. Hasley PB, Lave JR, Kapoor WN. The necessary and the unnecessary transfusion: a critical review of reported appropriateness rates and criteria for red cell transfusions. Transfusion
1994;34:110.
8. Hebert PC, Wells G, Blajchman MA, et al. A multicenter, randomized, controlled clinical trial of transfusion requirements in critical care. Transfusion Requirements in Critical Care Investigators,
Canadian Critical Care Trials Group. N Engl J Med 1999;340:409.
9. McCullough JJ. Transfusion medicine. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998.
10. Judd WJ. Requirements for the electronic crossmatch. Vox Sang 1998;74:409.
11. Leger R, Garratty G. Evaluation of methods for detecting alloantibodies underlying warm autoantibodies. Transfusion 1999;39:11.
12. Toy PT, Menozzi D, Strauss RG, et al. Efficacy of preoperative donation of blood for autologous use in radical prostatectomy. Transfusion 1993;33:721.
13. Goodnough LT, Brecher ME, Kanter MH, et al. Transfusion medicine. Second of two partsblood conservation. N Engl J Med 1999;340:525.
14. Gandini G, Franchini M, Bertuzzo D, et al. Preoperative autologous blood donation by 1073 elderly patients undergoing elective surgery: a safe and effective practice. Transfusion 1999;39:174.
15. Kreimeier U, Messmer K. Hemodilution in clinical surgery: state of the art 1996. World J Surg 1996;20:1208.
16. Ereth MH, Oliver WC Jr., Santrach PJ. Perioperative interventions to decrease transfusion of allogeneic blood products. Mayo Clin Proc 1994;69:575.
17. Hansen E, Knuechel R, Altmeppen J, et al. Blood irradiation for intraoperative autotransfusion in cancer surgery: demonstration of efficient elimination of contaminating tumor cells. Transfusion
1999;39:608.
18. Bock M, Schleuning M, Heim MU, et al. Cryopreservation of human platelets with dimethyl sulfoxide: changes in biochemistry and cell function. Transfusion 1995;35:921.
19. Funke I, Wiesneth M, Koerner K, et al. Autologous platelet transfusion in alloimmunized patients with acute leukemia. Ann Hematol 1995;71:169.
20. Torretta L, Perotti C, Pedrazzoli P, et al. Autologous platelet collection and storage to support thrombocytopenia in patients undergoing high-dose chemotherapy and circulating progenitor cell
transplantation for high-risk breast cancer. Vox Sang 1998;75:224.
21. Murphy S, Heaton WA, Rebulla P. Platelet production in the Old Worldand the New. Transfusion 1996;36:751.
22. Anderson B, Shad AT, Gootenberg JE, et al. Successful prevention of post-transfusion Rh alloimmunization by intravenous Rho (D) immune globulin (WinRho SD). Am J Hematol 1999;60:245.
23. Contreras M. Consensus conference on platelet transfusion. Final statement. Blood Rev 1998;12:239.
24. Rebulla P, Finazzi G, Marangoni F, et al. The threshold for prophylactic platelet transfusions in adults with acute myeloid leukemia. Gruppo Italiano Malattie Ematologiche Maligne dell'Adulto. N
Engl J Med 1997;337:1870.
25. Navarro JT, Hernandez JA, Ribera JM, et al. Prophylactic platelet transfusion threshold during therapy for adult acute myeloid leukemia: 10,000/microL versus 20,000/microL. Haematologica
1998;83:998.
26. Wandt H, Frank M, Ehninger G, et al. Safety and cost effectiveness of a 10 10(9)/L trigger for prophylactic platelet transfusions compared with the traditional 20 10(9)/L trigger: a prospective
comparative trial in 105 patients with acute myeloid leukemia. Blood 1998;91:3601.
27. Contreras M. Diagnosis and treatment of patients refractory to platelet transfusions. Blood Rev 1998;12:215.
28. Friedberg RC, Donnelly SF, Mintz PD. Independent roles for platelet crossmatching and HLA in the selection of platelets for alloimmunized patients. Transfusion 1994;34:215.
29. Kekomaki S, Volin L, Koistinen P, et al. Successful treatment of platelet transfusion refractoriness: the use of platelet transfusions matched for both human leucocyte antigens (HLA) and human
platelet alloantigens (HPA) in alloimmunized patients with leukaemia. Eur J Haematol 1998;60:112.
30. Norol F, Bierling P, Roudot-Thoraval F, et al. Platelet transfusion: a dose-response study. Blood 1998;92:1448.
31. Duquesnoy RJ, Anderson AJ, Tomasulo PA, et al. ABO compatibility and platelet transfusions of alloimmunized thrombocytopenic patients. Blood 1979;54:595.
32. Snyder EL, Rinder HM, Napychank P. In vitro and in vivo evaluation of platelet transfusions administered through an electromechanical infusion pump. Am J Clin Pathol 1990;94:77.
33. Leukocyte reduction and ultraviolet B irradiation of platelets to prevent alloimmunization and refractoriness to platelet transfusions. The Trial to Reduce Alloimmunization to Platelets Study
Group. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1861.
34. Novotny VM. Prevention and management of platelet transfusion refractoriness. Vox Sang 1999;76:1.
35. Stroncek DF, Jaszcz W, Herr GP, et al. Expression of neutrophil antigens after 10 days of granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor. Transfusion 1998;38:663.
36. Liles WC, Huang JE, Llewellyn C, et al. A comparative trial of granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor and dexamethasone, separately and in combination, for the mobilization of neutrophils in the
peripheral blood of normal volunteers. Transfusion 1997;37:182.
37. Klein HG, Strauss RG, Schiffer CA. Granulocyte transfusion therapy. Semin Hematol 1996;33:359.
38. McCullough J, Clay M, Herr G, et al. Effects of granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor on potential normal granulocyte donors. Transfusion 1999;39:1136.
39. Lundberg G. Practice parameter for the use of fresh-frozen plasma, cryoprecipitate, and platelets. Fresh-Frozen Plasma, Cryoprecipitate, and Platelets Administration Practice Guidelines
Development Task Force of the College of American Pathologists. JAMA 1994;271:777.
40. Jackson MR, MacPhee MJ, Drohan WN, et al. Fibrin sealant: current and potential clinical applications. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 1996;7:737.
41. Erstad BL, Gales BJ, Rappaport WD. The use of albumin in clinical practice. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:901.
42. Tabor E. The epidemiology of virus transmission by plasma derivatives: clinical studies verifying the lack of transmission of hepatitis B and C viruses and HIV type 1. Transfusion 1999;39:1160.
43. Dunphy FR, Harrison BR, Dunleavy TL, et al. Erythropoietin reduces anemia and transfusions: a randomized trial with or without erythropoietin during chemotherapy. Cancer 1999;86:1362.
44. Linden JV, Paul B, Dressler KP. A report of 104 transfusion errors in New York State. Transfusion 1992;32:601.
45. Capon SM, Goldfinger D. Acute hemolytic transfusion reaction, a paradigm of the systemic inflammatory response: new insights into pathophysiology and treatment. Transfusion 1995;35:513.

46. Snyder EL. The role of cytokines and adhesive molecules in febrile non-hemolytic transfusion reactions. Immunol Invest 1995;24:333.
47. Burks LC, Aisner J, Fortner CL, et al. Meperidine for the treatment of shaking chills and fever. Arch Intern Med 1980;140:483.
48. Heddle NM, Klama L, Meyer R, et al. A randomized controlled trial comparing plasma removal with white cell reduction to prevent reactions to platelets. Transfusion 1999;39:231.
49. Goldman M, Blajchman MA. Blood product-associated bacterial sepsis. Transfusion Med Rev 1991;5:73.
50. Morrow JF, Braine HG, Kickler TS, et al. Septic reactions to platelet transfusions. A persistent problem. JAMA 1991;266:555.
51. Krishnan LA, Brecher ME. Transfusion-transmitted bacterial infection. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1995;9:167.
52. Stubbs JR, Reddy RL, Elg SA, et al. Fatal Yersinia enterocolitica (serotype 0:5,27) sepsis after blood transfusion. Vox Sang 1991;61:18.
53. Popovsky MA, Moore SB. Diagnostic and pathogenetic considerations in transfusion-related acute lung injury. Transfusion 1985;25:573.
54. Silliman CC. Transfusion-related acute lung injury. Transfusion Med Rev 1999;13:177.
55. Silliman CC, Voelkel NF, Allard JD, et al. Plasma and lipids from stored packed red blood cells cause acute lung injury in an animal model. J Clin Invest 1998;101:1458.
56. Vogelsang GB, Hess AD. Graft-versus-host disease: new directions for a persistent problem. Blood 1994;84:2061.
57. Saigo K, Ryo R. Therapeutic strategy for post-transfusion graft-vs.-host disease. Int J Hematol 1999;69:147.
58. Williamson LM, Warwick RM. Transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease and its prevention. Blood Rev 1995;9:251.
59. Dodd RY. The risk of transfusion-transmitted infection. N Engl J Med 1992;327:419.
60. Schreiber GB, Busch MP, Kleinman SH, et al. The risk of transfusion-transmitted viral infections. The Retrovirus Epidemiology Donor Study. N Engl J Med 1996;334:1685.
61. Menitove J. Standards for blood banks and transfusion services. 19th ed. Bethesda, MD: American Association of Blood Banks, 1999.
62. Lackritz EM, Satten GA, Aberle-Grasse J, et al. Estimated risk of transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus by screened blood in the United States. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1721.
63. Hamid SS, Farooqui B, Rizvi Q, et al. Risk of transmission and features of hepatitis C after needlestick injuries. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:63.
64. Cardoso MS, Koerner K, Kubanek B. Mini-pool screening by nucleic acid testing for hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and HIV: preliminary results. Transfusion 1998;38:905.
65. Long A, Spurll G, Demers H, et al. Targeted hepatitis C lookback: Quebec, Canada. Transfusion 1999;39:194.
66. Dike AE, Christie JM, Kurtz JB, et al. Hepatitis C in blood transfusion recipients identified at the Oxford Blood Centre in the national HCV look-back programme. Transfusion Med 1998;8:87.
67. Zarski JP, Leroy V. Counselling patients with hepatitis C. J Hepatol 1999;31:136.
68. Heuft HG, Berg T, Schreier E, et al. Epidemiological and clinical aspects of hepatitis G virus infection in blood donors and immunocompromised recipients of HGV-contaminated blood. Vox
Sang 1998;74:161.
69. Corash L. Inactivation of viruses, bacteria, protozoa, and leukocytes in platelet concentrates: current research perspectives. Transfusion Med Rev 1999;13:18.
70. Pereira A. Cost-effectiveness of transfusing virus-inactivated plasma instead of standard plasma. Transfusion 1999;39:479.
71. Moor AC, Dubbelman TM, VanSteveninck J, et al. Transfusion-transmitted diseases: risks, prevention and perspectives. Eur J Haematol 1999;62:1.
72. Dodd RY. Transmission of parasites by blood transfusion. Vox Sang 1998;74:161.
73. Dobroszycki J, Herwaldt BL, Boctor F, et al. A cluster of transfusion-associated babesiosis cases traced to a single asymptomatic donor. JAMA 1999;281:927.
74. Turner ML, Ironside JW. New-variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: the risk of transmission by blood transfusion. Blood Rev 1998;12:255.
75. Murphy MF. New variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (nvCJD): the risk of transmission by blood transfusion and the potential benefit of leukocyte-reduction of blood components. Transfusion
Med Rev 1999;13:75.
76. Bowden RA, Slichter SJ, Sayers M, et al. A comparison of filtered leukocyte-reduced and cytomegalovirus (CMV) seronegative blood products for the prevention of transfusion-associated CMV
infection after marrow transplant. Blood 1995;86:3598.
77. Geiger TL, Perrotta PL, Davenport R, et al. Removal of anaphylatoxins C3a and C5a and chemokines interleukin 8 and RANTES by polyester white cell-reduction and plasma filters.
Transfusion 1997;37:1156.
78. Muylle L, Wouters E, Peetermans ME. Febrile reactions to platelet transfusion: the effect of increased interleukin 6 levels in concentrates prepared by the platelet-rich plasma method.
Transfusion 1996;36:886.
79. Blajchman MA. Transfusion-associated immunomodulation and universal white cell reduction: are we putting the cart before the horse? Transfusion 1999;39:665.
80. McAlister FA, Clark HD, Wells PS, et al. Perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion does not cause adverse sequelae in patients with cancer: a meta-analysis of unconfounded studies. Br J
Surg 1998;85:171.
81. Amato AC, Pescatori M. Effect of perioperative blood transfusions on recurrence of colorectal cancer: meta-analysis stratified on risk factors. Dis Colon Rectum 1998;41:570.
82. Przepiorka D, LeParc GF, Stovall MA, et al. Use of irradiated blood components: practice parameter. Am J Clin Pathol 1996;106:6.
83. Guidelines on gamma irradiation of blood components for the prevention of transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease. BCSH Blood Transfusion Task Force. Transfusion Med
1996;6:261.
84. Akahoshi M, Takanashi M, Masuda M, et al. A case of transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease not prevented by white cell-reduction filters. Transfusion 1992;32:169.
85. Grass JA, Wafa T, Reames A, et al. Prevention of transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease by photochemical treatment. Blood 1999;93:3140.
86. Chapman J, Forman K, Kelsey P, et al. Guidelines on the clinical use of leucocyte-depleted blood components. Transfusion Med 1998;8:59.
87. Rock G, Herbert C. The Canadian Apheresis Group and therapeutic plasma exchange. Transfusion Sci 1999;20:145.
88. Moist L, Nesrallah G, Kortas C, et al. Plasma exchange in rapidly progressive renal failure due to multiple myeloma. A retrospective case series. Am J Nephrol 1999;19:45.
89. Graus F, Vega F, Delattre JY, et al. Plasmapheresis and antineoplastic treatment in CNS paraneoplastic syndromes with antineuronal autoantibodies. Neurology 1992;42:536.
90. Strauss RG, Ciavarella D, Gilcher RO, et al. An overview of current management. J Clin Apheresis 1993;8:189.
91. Thatcher N, De Campos ES, Bell DR, et al. Epoetin alpha prevents anaemia and reduces transfusion requirements in patients undergoing primarily platinum-based chemotherapy for small cell
lung cancer. Br J Cancer 1999;80:396.
92. Goldberg MA. Erythropoiesis, erythropoietin, and iron metabolism in elective surgery: preoperative strategies for avoiding allogeneic blood exposure. Am J Surg 1995;170:37S.
93. Webb IJ, Anderson KC. Risks, costs, and alternatives to platelet transfusions. Leuk Lymphoma 1999;34:71.
94. Kaushansky K. Thrombopoietin: the primary regulator of platelet production. Blood 1995;86:419.
95. Kuter DJ. Thrombopoietins and thrombopoiesis: a clinical perspective. Vox Sang 1998;74:75.
96. Winslow RM. New transfusion strategies: red cell substitutes. Annu Rev Med 1999;50:337.

SECTION 53.2 Autologous Stem Cell Transplantation
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 53.2
Autologous Stem Cell Transplantation
DENNIS L. COOPER
STUART SEROPIAN
Introduction
History
Stem Cell Mobilization
Inadequate Mobilization of Stem Cells
Tumor Contamination
Practical Considerations for the Potential High-Dose Therapy and Autologous Stem Cell Rescue Patient
High-Dose Therapy Regimens: New Directions
Late Toxicity: Myelodysplasia
Future Directions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
High-dose chemotherapy and autologous proximal stem cell rescue is now considered standard therapy for relapsed Hodgkin's disease 1 and intermediate-grade
lymphomas,2 and it is currently being tested as part of initial therapy for patients with adverse risk features and one of the following diagnoses: Hodgkin's disease,
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), multiple myeloma, breast cancer, and germ cell tumors. The movement of high-dose therapy from a treatment of last resort to a more
proximal position is due in large part to improvements in supportive care that have nearly eliminated treatment-related mortality and have, at the same time, facilitated
the transfer of much of the care from the hospital to the outpatient setting. 3,4 and 5 Perhaps the most important advance in the ability to support patients receiving
high-dose therapy has been the use of peripheral blood stem cells (PBSCs). The duration of neutropenia and thrombocytopenia after marrow “ablative” therapy and
PBSC rescue is now only moderately longer than that expected after aggressive standard therapy. In most centers, advanced age has become much less important
than comorbidity as an important barrier to treatment, and the improved therapeutic index of high-dose therapy has resulted in exploratory studies for the treatment of
refractory autoimmune disorders, including systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and multiple sclerosis. 6
In many respects, because of the availability of PBSC and growth factors, treatment-induced myelosuppression is no longer considered an obstacle to treatment.
However, several issues remain unresolved with the use of PBSCs, including the growing recognition that a substantial percentage of collections are contaminated
with tumor cells. In fact, strategies for PBSC mobilization have focused on increasing the collections of progenitor cells with much less attention given to the impact on
tumor cell mobilization. In addition, a small percentage of patients can still not achieve acceptable PBSC collections, a finding that highlights our ignorance of the
biology of stem cell mobilization and the fact that only modest progress has been made in the ability to successfully expand progenitor cells in vitro.
Finally, as the general ease of collection and use of PBSCs compared with bone marrow has changed the focus from the procedure (“transplantation”) to the
treatment, it is clear that high-dose therapy has not been able to overcome significant drug resistance. These results suggest that newer drugs for preparative
regimens (including monoclonal antibodies) and novel treatment strategies to eliminate minimal residual disease are needed to further substantially improve cure
rates.

HISTORY
In the aftermath of the destruction caused by the atomic bomb at the end of World War II and the subsequent nuclear arms race, a dramatic increase in research was
directed at reducing or avoiding bone marrow injury from radiation. In a landmark paper published in 1949, Jacobson et al. 7 reported that lead shielding of the spleen
prevented death from bone marrow aplasia in mice after a lethal dose of total body irradiation. Protected mice developed only transient leukopenia and
thrombocytopenia and had histologic evidence of bone marrow regeneration 8 days after radiation. In contrast, control mice died without evidence of residual
hematopoiesis. Although the authors recognized that a “cellular factor” from the spleen could be responsible for bone marrow recovery in the experimental group, they
favored a humoral mechanism because survival in spleen-shielded mice was significantly increased even if the spleen was removed shortly after radiation. 8 Indeed, it
was another 7 years before the humoral theory of bone marrow recovery was finally laid to rest.
In retrospect, survival in Jacobson's mice proved that stem cells circulate in the blood and restore hematopoiesis. Thus, bone marrow recovery in the mice that had a
splenectomy soon after irradiation must have been due to migration of protected (by lead shielding) stem cells from the spleen to the blood and then to the bone
marrow. However, investigators of several studies in mice, 9 guinea pigs, 10 and dogs11 are generally given credit for confirming the normal presence of circulating
hematopoietic progenitor cells in mammals, and in 1975, the presence of pluripotential stem cells in the blood of humans was unequivocally demonstrated. 12
Although the presence of circulating progenitor cells was established, it was unknown whether enough cells could be collected to reconstitute hematopoiesis in a
patient who had received marrow ablative therapy. Indeed, in vitro assays showed that an equivalent number of nucleated cells from the bone marrow produced
substantially more granulocyte colonies than did the same number of cells from the blood. 13 An important exception to the latter finding was observed in patients in the
chronic phase of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). 14 In affected patients, the percentage of colony-forming cells collected from the buffy coat layer was higher
than in the bone marrow and was approximately fivefold higher than in bone marrow cells from healthy volunteers. 14 These data provided a rationale for rescuing
aggressively treated patients in blast crisis with autologous cells harvested at the time of diagnosis, 15 but the data also clearly indicated that the results in CML
patients could not be generalized to patients with other diseases.
In fact, the first clinical trials of PBSC rescue in the late 1970s and early 1980s appeared to establish important differences between the engraftment potential of blood
stem cells of CML patients and normal donors. Goldman et al. 15 reported complete engraftment in 19 of 20 patients with CML in transformation who were given
myeloablative therapy and then rescued with autologous chronic phase, buffy coat cells. In contrast, two patients, one with Ewing's sarcoma 16 and one with
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, 17 did not engraft with blood stem cells from healthy identical twin siblings. In both patients, normal hematopoiesis was restored
after bone marrow infusions from the same healthy donors. The effectiveness of syngeneic bone marrow but not PBSCs from normal donors used to restore
hematopoiesis was in agreement with laboratory experiments that showed important differences in the capacity for self-renewal between blood and bone marrow
cells. 18 Because no further reports of PBSC rescue in patients with diseases other than CML were published for the next 5 years, the results of these early clinical
studies must have been particularly discouraging.
The first semi-successful PBSC transplantations were reported in 1985 by Juttner et al. 19 in two patients with acute nonlymphocytic leukemia (ANLL). These were also
the first “mobilized” stem cell transplantations, as leukapheresis was timed to coincide with the period of hematopoietic recovery after induction chemotherapy.
Previous work from the same group had shown that, after aggressive chemotherapy, granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming units (GM-CFUs) were increased
25-fold higher than the mean level in normal subjects and were also higher than the GM-CFU yield from 1 L of bone marrow. 20 In the clinical trial, both patients had
rapid evidence of trilineage recovery after being given mobilized stem cells after high-dose therapy. In one patient, however, transient recovery was followed by
significant neutropenia and thrombocytopenia before leukemia recurred; in the other patient, disease recurrence precluded assessment of the long-term viability of the
graft.
Subsequently, five centers described PBSC transplantations in a total of eight patients. 21,22,23,24 and 25 In four of the studies, PBSCs were collected after chemotherapy,
and in one report of two patients, 24 stem cells were collected during steady-state myelopoiesis. Although these studies showed the feasibility of PBSC rescue,
important reservations remained about the broader use of PBSCs. For example, because four of the six patients with mobilized PBSC transplantations had acute
leukemia, the mobilizing chemotherapy was intensively myelosuppressive and was associated with a prolonged period of aplasia. As a result, the applicability of
chemotherapy mobilization for patients with other diseases was unclear. Similarly, in the patients who had nonmobilized collections, the long period (28 days in one
patient) that was required to collect enough progenitor cells was impractical for patients with aggressive disease. Finally, these studies did not establish the number of
progenitor cells necessary for engraftment, nor did they establish the durability of PBSC autografts. Thus, in view of the known effectiveness of autologous bone
marrow rescue, most centers reserved PBSC transplantation for patients who were not eligible for autologous bone marrow transplantation. Potential candidates

included patients with marrow tumor involvement, previous pelvic irradiation, or bone marrow hypocellularity.
The transition toward the use of PBSCs, now complete for autologous rescue and moving in that direction for allogeneic transplantations, 26 has been made possible
because of the tremendous number of progenitor cells that can be collected relatively easily and noninvasively.

STEM CELL MOBILIZATION
In 1976, Richman et al. 27 reported that, as blood counts recovered after chemotherapy, a significant increase in circulating neutrophil progenitor cells was seen, and
these authors speculated that large-volume apheresis could be used to collect enough stem cells to avert the myelosuppressive effects of chemotherapy. Twelve
years later, hematopoietic growth factors were shown to mimic 28 as well as to potentiate the effect of chemotherapy 29 in mobilizing progenitor cells. In addition to
neutrophil precursors, megakaryocyte progenitors also were increased 28; however, in the absence of assays that measured self-renewal and pluripotential capacity,
the ability of circulating “mobilized” progenitor cells to establish permanent trilineage engraftment remained speculative. Accordingly, in most early clinical trials, blood
progenitor cells were used in addition to autologous bone marrow. These studies confirmed that neutrophil recovery was more rapid in patients given the blood
progenitor cells, but the studies also showed an improvement in platelet and red blood cell recovery. 30,31,32,33 and 34 The latter findings provided the rationale for
mobilized progenitor cells to be used alone with bone marrow held in reserve and, more recently, without the need to harvest “backup” bone marrow. In 1994, rescue
with PBSCs surpassed the use of bone marrow after high-dose therapy.
The discovery of the CD34 antigen as a stem cell marker significantly facilitated the development of strategies to maximize the mobilization and collection of blood
progenitor cells. The CD34 antigen was initially described in 1984 on tissue culture cells derived from a patient with ANLL and was subsequently found to be present
on nearly all colony-forming progenitor cells detected by in vitro assays.35 The “stemness” of CD34+ cells was established by successfully engrafting lethally irradiated
baboons and, later, humans with CD34+-selected cells. 36,37 These studies suggested that both pluripotential and more committed progenitor cells are contained within
the small fraction of bone marrow (1% to 2%) and peripheral blood mononuclear cells that are CD34+.
The presence of the semi-unique CD34 antigen on the surface of stem cells enabled the development of a flow cytometry assay that provides a rapid quantitative
analysis of stem (CD34+) cell number. 38 Enumeration of stem cells by flow cytometry has virtually replaced more intensive and time-consuming in vitro assays in
which the adequacy of stem cell collection is inferred from the number of progenitor colonies that are formed in agar after 2 weeks of growth. With the availability of
same-day results of the CD34+ blood cell count permitted by flow cytometry, apheresis can be optimally timed to coincide with rising CD34+ cell counts rather than
with a surrogate marker, such as neutrophil recovery. Similarly, because the collected number of CD34+ cells also can be counted quickly, apheresis procedures can
be limited to the number required to reach the target number of CD34+ cells. In fact, well-mobilized patients often require only one procedure to achieve an adequate
collection.
The CD34 count of the infused product is generally considered the most reliable factor for predicting the speed and durability of engraftment after high-dose therapy.
After myeloablative therapy, the infusion of more than 5 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram results in neutrophil and platelet recovery within 14 days in nearly 85% of
patients, and 95% have recovery within 20 days. 39 With an intermediate dose (between 2.5 and 5.0 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram), neutrophil recovery appears to
be as rapid as at higher CD34+ cell numbers, but a detectable incidence of delayed platelet recovery is reported, particularly in more heavily pretreated patients and
in those given posttransplantation myeloid growth factors. 40,41 A minimum number of CD34+ cells per kilogram that is required for engraftment has not been defined,
in part because many regimens are not truly myeloablative. In a study of 48 patients who received 1.0 to 2.5 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram, all patients achieved
neutrophil engraftment at a median of day 11, but 19% had delayed platelet recovery beyond 21 days and 9% had a delay longer than 100 days. 42 The clinical
significance of lower CD34 cell doses is longer duration of hospitalization, longer use of antibiotics, and an increased and more prolonged need for transfusions. 43
Taken together, these results suggest that the use of 5 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram or more is optimal; 2.5 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram or more is acceptable;
and in patients who only achieve between 1.0 and 2.4 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram, the decision to proceed to transplantation must be individualized.
At present, blood progenitor cells are mobilized in most patients with the use of chemotherapy followed by growth factors or with growth factors alone ( Table 53.2-1).
The combination of myelosuppressive chemotherapy plus growth factors generally is considered the most productive strategy for mobilizing stem cells and, in
comparison with the use of growth factors alone, offers the advantage of providing additional treatment against the underlying disorder. In fact, with the tremendous
number of CD34+ cells that are often mobilized into the blood by chemotherapy plus growth factors, often only a single apheresis is required, and the costs and
toxicities associated with multiple aphereses can be reduced. On the other hand, the apparent advantages resulting from a reduction in the number of aphereses may
be more than offset by the costs and toxicity associated with the use of more myelosuppressive chemotherapy, including the prolonged use of growth factors as well
the potential need for hospitalization, intravenous antibiotics, and transfusions. In addition, because no advantage may exist for giving more stem cells than the
number necessary to ensure rapid neutrophil and platelet engraftment (between 2.5 and 5.0 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram), a strong argument can be made for
using a less toxic mobilization program.

TABLE 53.2-1. Mobilization Strategies

Although much of the earlier stem cell mobilizing literature was dominated by the use of intensively myelosuppressive regimens, it is clear that, in most patients,
standard disease-specific chemotherapy followed by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is generally sufficient to collect an adequate number of stem cells.
For example, in a group of patients with NHL in whom high-dose therapy and stem cell rescue was planned as part of initial therapy, Pettengell et al. 44 required only a
single pheresis to collect more than 2.5 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram after treatment with vincristine, doxorubicin, prednisone, VP-16, and bleomycin (VAPEC-B)
and G-CSF. Even in more heavily pretreated relapsed NHL patients, the well-tolerated combination of ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide followed by G-CSF
resulted in successful mobilization (2.0 ¥ 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram or more) in 86% of patients, and 61% of patients had 6.0 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram or
more collected. 45 Similarly, the outpatient regimen of cyclophosphamide, 1.5 g/m 2, followed by G-CSF, 10 µg/kg, is a reliable and safe mobilizing program that can be
timed to avoid the need for weekend pheresis. 46 In breast cancer patients, Taxol 47 or Taxol-based combinations 48 have been particularly potent in mobilizing stem
cells. For example, compared with cyclophosphamide plus G-CSF, the addition of Taxol was associated with a greater than tenfold increase in CD34+ cells per
kilogram per collection. 48
An alternative to the use of chemotherapy plus growth factors for stem cell mobilization is the use of growth factors alone. Mobilization with growth factors, although
generally not as productive as the combination of chemotherapy plus growth factors, offers several practical advantages. First, the potential morbidity and need for
hospitalization secondary to myelosuppressive chemotherapy can be avoided. Second, the timing of pheresis can be scheduled, making weekend pheresis
unnecessary. Finally, the lack of significant acute or known long-term toxicity with growth factors makes them acceptable for stem cell mobilization when normal
donors are used for stem cell mobilization. G-CSF is the most commonly used cytokine when growth factors are used alone. GM-CSF is inferior to G-CSF as a
mobilizing agent, but the combination of GM-CSF plus G-CSF may mobilize a higher number of early progenitor cells (CD34+, CD38–) than either cytokine used
alone. 49 Because it is not clear that the increase in earlier progenitor cells resulting from the combination of cytokines offers any significant advantage, G-CSF is
currently most often used alone.

INADEQUATE MOBILIZATION OF STEM CELLS
The failure to mobilize stem cells (less than 1.0 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram) is associated with the type and number of previous treatments. Thus, in a population
of patients with Hodgkin's disease and NHL who received mobilizing chemotherapy and growth factors, an average decrease of 0.2 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram
was noted for every cycle of previous chemotherapy. 50 Although this study did not specifically correlate the type of chemotherapy and its impact on stem cell
mobilization, it is known that some drugs are more toxic to stem cells than others. Because of their association with myelodysplasia (MDS) and leukemia, it is not
surprising that melphalan, nitrosourea agents, nitrogen mustard, and procarbazine are potent stem cell toxins. Less well known for causing stem cell toxicity are
fludarabine 51,52 and high cumulative doses (7.5 g/m2 or more) of cytosine arabinoside. 53 The use of prior wide-field radiation also has been correlated with a reduction
in stem cell mobilization. Mediastinal radiation appears to be as toxic as pelvic radiation. 50
When stem cell collections are inadequate after treatment with growth factors or chemotherapy plus growth factors, inconsistent results have been achieved with
alternative strategies. In patients who do not have effective mobilization with G-CSF alone, the use of myelosuppressive chemotherapy plus G-CSF may be
worthwhile, but it is unproven as an effective strategy. In patients who do not have adequate mobilization after chemotherapy plus G-CSF, no data are available to
suggest that the benefits of more myelosuppressive regimens outweigh the risks associated with more prolonged neutropenia.
The use of autologous bone marrow in poorly mobilized patients also has been disappointing and suggests that the inability to collect adequate stem cells should be
considered a marker for an injured bone marrow. For example, Watts et al. 54 described 12 patients in whom fewer than 1.0 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram and fewer
than 1 × 10 5 granulocyte-monocyte colony-forming cells per kilogram were mobilized. When a subsequent bone marrow harvest was given in addition to collected
stem cells, 5 of the 12 patients experienced transplantation- related mortality; 4 of 11 assessable patients had neutrophil recovery delayed beyond 21 days, and eight
patients had delayed platelet recovery. 54
In patients who experience a poor mobilization either with G-CSF alone or with chemotherapy plus G-CSF, it appears that a variable number can achieve an
acceptable (but rarely optimal) number of stem cells after higher doses of G-CSF alone. In a preliminary report, Fraipont et al. 55 studied 27 patients, 25 of whom had
collections of less than 2.0 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram after chemotherapy plus G-CSF. Seven patients remobilized with chemotherapy plus G-CSF achieved
similar stem cell collections to the first mobilization. In patients remobilized with 10 µg/kg G-CSF alone, the peripheral CD34 count, as well as the number of CFU-GM
and CD34+ cells collected per apheresis, was statistically increased in the group treated with G-CSF only. 55 Similarly, Jennis et al. 56 studied 20 patients who had
unsuccessful initial mobilization (median total collection of 0.57 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram), 16 of whom previously had been treated with chemotherapy plus
G-CSF, 5 µg/kg twice daily, and four of whom had been treated with G-CSF alone. After a 7-day period of G-CSF withdrawal, G-CSF was given at a dose of 16 µg/kg
twice daily. The median total collection for the second collection was 1.53 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram, and only two patients did not achieve a cumulative stem
cell collection considered adequate to undergo high-dose therapy. 56 Using a slightly different strategy, Gazitt et al. 57 immediately treated mobilization failures (fewer
than 0.2 ¥ 106 CD34+ cells per kilogram after 2 to 3 days of pheresis) with G-CSF, 32 µg/kg/d, with apheresis beginning approximately 5 days later. An adequate
number of CD34+ cells was collected in 15 of 17 patients. 57 In all three of the studies just described, patients who went on to receive high-dose therapy and stem cell
rescue recovered neutrophil and platelets at a median time that was only slightly prolonged compared to more optimally mobilized patients.
Weaver et al. 58 showed that, in patients who obtained fewer than 2.5 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram after first mobilization, the yield of second stem cell collections
was significantly increased, regardless of whether chemotherapy plus G-CSF or G-CSF alone was used. 58 These results suggested that the first mobilization attempt
had a priming effect on the second or that other factors may have compromised the first attempt. Chemotherapy plus G-CSF and G-CSF alone proved equally but only
mildly effective, because fewer than one-half of the patients had enough (more than 2.5 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram) collected to proceed to transplantation. A
relationship appears to exist between G-CSF dose and the yield of CD34+ cells collected, but it did not reach statistical significance.
The sum of the studies discussed suggest that, in patients who achieve suboptimal first collections (1.0 to 2.4 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram), approximately one-half
or more may achieve a safe (2.5 × 106 CD34+ cells per kilogram or fewer) cumulative stem cell collection after a second mobilization with high-dose (32 µg/kg) G-CSF
alone. However, a significant qualitative difference may exist between “hard-to-mobilize” patients who achieve marginal yields (1.0 to 2.4 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per
kilogram) and “nonmobilizable” patients (fewer than 1.0 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram). 59 Indeed, more recent engraftment data suggest that the former group may
not really need or significantly benefit from the second collection, 42 whereas the latter group has a high incidence of transplantation-related mortality, despite the use
of backup bone marrow in addition to blood stem cells. 54 Further studies clearly are required to determine whether high-dose G-CSF is effective in nonmobilizing
patients.
Combinations of GM-CSF and G-CSF also have been tested in patients who did not achieve a blood CD34 level considered appropriate (10 cells per microliter) for
collection or in whom an institutionally acceptable number of CD34 cells could not be collected with the first collection. In one preliminary report, 10 of 11 patients
treated with 10 µg/kg GM-CSF for 2 days followed by G-CSF, 10 to 16 µg/kg, for 4 days achieved CD34+ cell collections of more than 1 × 10 6 cells per kilogram,
including four patients who obtained more than 4 × 10 6 per kilogram.60 Nine patients who went on to receive high-dose therapy achieved neutrophil engraftment at a
median of 11 days. The median time to platelet engraftment was delayed at 27 days. In a second study, GM-CSF (10 µg/kg) and G-CSF (10 µg/kg) were used
concurrently, and a statistically significant increase in the collected number of CD34 cells was seen in the second mobilization, including 13 of 23 patients who
achieved an “acceptable” cumulative CD34+ cell dose of more than 3 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram. 61 After high-dose therapy, neutrophil and platelet engraftment
were said to be rapid. However, in neither study just described was the cytokine combination compared with high-dose G-CSF alone. In addition, it would appear that
many of the patients in the second study would not be considered nonmobilizable. Thus, successful results in this group cannot necessarily be extrapolated to those
who have previously shown very little or no evidence of progenitor mobilization.
Although the optimal cytokine cocktail for mobilization is unknown, promising results have been achieved with the combination of stem cell factor (SCF) and G-CSF. In
a phase I/II randomized trial, patients with NHL in chemosensitive first relapse were randomized to either G-CSF alone (10 µg/kg/d) or the same dose of G-CSF with
escalating doses of SCF (5 to 20 µg/kg/d). 62 Leukapheresis was performed on days 5 to 7. Although no significant differences were observed in the yield of CD34+
cells between the two groups, a second analysis limited to the cohort that had been extensively pretreated showed a sixfold increase in the median number of CD34+
cells per kilogram that were collected in the group receiving G-CSF plus any dose of SCF. A second randomized study in patients with multiple myeloma compared
cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), 4 g/m 2, followed by G-CSF, 5 µg/kg/d, with or without the addition of SCF, 20 µg/kg/d. 63 The median number of CD34+ cells per
kilogram collected was nearly three times higher in the group receiving SCF, and 65% of the patients had more than 5 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram collected in a
single leukapheresis, compared with 40% in the group given G-CSF alone. Like the studies of GM-CSF already discussed, it is possible that, in these two cohorts,
similar results could have been achieved with higher doses of G-CSF. The apparent dramatic impact of the addition of SCF to the heavily pretreated patients in the
first study, however, suggests more than a simple dose-response effect.
To date, only one preliminary report of the combination of SCF and G-CSF in previously nonmobilizable (fewer than 1 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram) patients has
been published. 64 Ten patients were treated with SCF, 20 µg/kg/d, and G-CSF, 10 µg/kg/d. Pheresis was timed to a blood CD34 count of 10 cells per microliter and
continued until a minimum “engraftable dose” of 1 × 10 6 CD34 cells per kilogram was achieved. If the CD34 count did not reach 10 cells per microliter by day 8,
patients were removed from study. All ten patients achieved an engraftable dose after a median of 2.5 collections. These results, although exciting, are incomplete,
because no information was presented on subsequent engraftment after high-dose therapy. If a defective bone marrow microenvironment plays a role in poor
mobilization, then it is at least theoretically possible that such patients might require more rather than fewer stem cells.
The conflicting and somewhat disappointing results in nonmobilizing patients underscores how little is known about the biology of stem cell mobilization. In fact, the
mechanism(s) of progenitor cell mobilization is unknown, including whether cytokines and chemotherapy act through the same or different pathways. Similarly, it is not
known whether alternative mobilization strategies differentially impact on tumor cell mobilization, a variable that ultimately may prove to be more important than
optimizing the number of stem cells harvested.

TUMOR CONTAMINATION
One of the early indications for the use of PBSCs was pathologic evidence of bone marrow tumor involvement. Implicit in this recommendation was the probability that
the blood was likely to be less contaminated with tumor cells than bone marrow. In fact, several studies in breast cancer and neuroblastoma patients show that the
concentration of tumor cells is significantly less in blood stem cell collections. 65,66,67,68 and 69 This advantage may be reduced or eliminated because of the larger
number of cells in the PBSC graft and because of the effects of mobilization. 70 In a study of lymphoma patients, for example, less than 1 log fewer tumor cells was

found in the bone marrow than in the blood under baseline conditions. 71 However, the advantage of blood over marrow disappeared and in some cases was reversed
after mobilization. 71 In six of seven patients followed closely during mobilization, tumor cells increased and, in two cases, tripled compared to baseline levels.
Similarly, in patients with multiple myeloma, neoplastic plasma cells appear to be concomitantly mobilized with progenitor cells after treatment with high-dose
cyclophosphamide and G-CSF.72 In six patients who underwent CD34+ cell selection, tumor cells were decreased by 2 to 3 logs, but were still detectable in five of six
patients.
Chemotherapy can also result in tumor cell mobilization in patients with solid tumors. In 42 previously untreated patients with solid tumors and no evidence of blood
involvement, circulating tumor cells were detected in nine patients (21%) after mobilization with chemotherapy and G-CSF, including 100% of patients with breast
cancer and 50% of patients with small cell lung cancer. 73 The peripheralization of tumor cells with stem cell mobilization is related to stage of disease and appears to
be substantially reduced by prior effective chemotherapy. In a study of breast cancer patients in whom leukapheresis was performed after each of three planned
cycles of chemotherapy plus G-CSF, tumor cell contamination was significantly lower, albeit not eliminated, after the second and third courses of treatment. 74 In
addition, the use of effective chemotherapy in the mobilization regimen may have the additional benefit of inhibiting tumor clonogenic growth. 75 Nevertheless, the
effect of different mobilization strategies on tumor cell contamination has not been well studied.
The clinical significance of administering tumor-contaminated stem cells is unclear. Gene marking studies in three different malignancies show that infused tumor cells
contribute to relapse, 76,77 and 78 but no data suggest that they are the sole or even principal cause of recurrence. In patients with breast cancer, two studies have shown
comparable outcomes in patients who did and did not have occult tumor in their stem cell product. 79,80 In patients with multiple myeloma, higher numbers of circulating
tumor cells were associated with a shorter time to recurrence and a decrease in overall survival, but the presence of circulating tumor cells was not significant in a
multivariate analysis that included plasma cell labeling index and b 2 microglobulin. 81 These latter results suggest that the presence of circulating tumor cells was a
sign of more aggressive disease rather than a direct cause of failure.
To date, studies in which occult tumor cells are reduced by purging or CD34 selection have shown the most impressive results in patients with low-grade lymphoma.
Investigators from the Dana Farber Cancer Institute have updated their experience with patients with follicular lymphoma treated with total body irradiation
(TBI)/cyclophosphamide and a purged bone marrow product. 82 Of 113 patients who were evaluable by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology, 48 patients had
PCR-negative marrows after purging, only six of whom relapsed. In contrast, 49 of 65 patients with a persistently positive PCR relapsed after transplantation.
Importantly, no obvious differences were noted between the two populations of patients with respect to stage, B symptoms, gender, bulky disease, remission status at
harvest, or histologic evidence of marrow involvement. Although it can be argued that the pattern of relapse in previous sites of disease is evidence against the
importance of infused tumor cells, it is also possible that infused tumor cells homed to sites of prior disease because of a favorable microenvironment. 83 In another
study of patients with lymphoma, a potential positive impact of purging was inferred from the observation that patients who received lower doses of GM-CFU after
purging had a lower relapse rate. 84 A similar correlation between the effectiveness of ex vivo purging as reflected by a more profound reduction in postpurging
GM-CFU colony formation was previously established in patients with leukemia. 85 A case-matched comparison of purged versus unpurged marrow in lymphoma
patients by the European Blood and Marrow Transplant Registry showed a benefit for purging in overall survival but not in progression-free survival. 86 However, the
use of different purging protocols and imbalances in the use of conditioning regimens make it difficult to interpret these data.
In patients with multiple myeloma, a randomized study showed that CD34 selection reduced tumor cell contamination of stem cells by a mean of 3.1 logs, but a
preliminary analysis showed no benefit in terms of disease-free or overall survival rates. 87,88 As noted earlier in this section, the failure of CD34 selection to improve
the clinical outcome in this group of patients likely represents incomplete tumor cell purging 72 as well as the inability to eradicate disease with the conditioning
regimen.81 Importantly, CD34 selection may not be benign. Because of the concomitant T-cell, natural killer cell, and monocyte depletion, there may be an increased
risk of opportunistic infections that are otherwise rare in the autologous setting. In a study from Seattle, 7 of 31 patients (22.6%) seropositive for cytomegalovirus
developed cytomegalovirus disease, and four patients (12.9%) died. In patients given unselected cells at the same institution, the risk of infection and disease were
only 4.2% and 2.1%, respectively. 89
Prospects for further improvement in tumor purging appear strongest for patients with CD20+ B-cell lymphoma; Rituximab (Rituxan) alone or in combination with
chemotherapy results in profound B-cell depletion and achievement of a PCR-negative status in some patients with low-grade lymphomas. 90 Rituxan, perhaps in
combination with other B-cell depletion strategies, will be intensively tested over the next several years. For patients with aggressive lymphomas, myeloma, and
breast cancer, however, it seems clear that even substantial improvement in tumor purging will have little clinical benefit in the absence of better conditioning
programs and more effective posttransplantation therapy.

PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE POTENTIAL HIGH-DOSE THERAPY AND AUTOLOGOUS STEM CELL RESCUE PATIENT
Because of the potential deleterious effect of prior therapy on stem cell mobilization, the possibility that a patient may be a candidate for high-dose therapy should be
considered from the time of diagnosis. For example, given the current importance of high-dose therapy in multiple myeloma 91 and the stem cell toxicity of melphalan
and prednisone combination therapy, induction with VAD (vincristine, doxorubicin, dexamethasone) or dexamethasone alone should be considered for initial
treatment.41 Similarly, MOPP (Mustargen, Oncovin, procarbazine, and prednisone)-like regimens, which are already considered second-line for most patients with
Hodgkin's disease, should probably not be used until stem cells are collected. More recently, fludarabine, which is playing an increasingly important role in the
treatment of low-grade B-cell lymphomas, has been identified as a stem cell toxin in some studies, 51,52,92 but not in others.93 These results suggest that potential
high-dose therapy candidates should have stem cells collected before fludarabine therapy, or at least before extensive treatment.
Stem cell mobilization can be accomplished with chemotherapy plus G-CSF or with G-CSF alone. In general, chemotherapy plus G-CSF is favored by most clinicians
because of the additional antineoplastic effect afforded by chemotherapy. 94 If CD34+ cell selection also is being considered, the higher yields achieved with
chemotherapy plus G-CSF may be important because of the obligatory loss of CD34+ cells that occurs during selection.
Despite evidence of a dose-response effect when G-CSF is used alone for mobilization, 95 the data are conflicting regarding the efficacy of higher doses of G-CSF
when used in conjunction with chemotherapy. Demirer et al. 96 have presented unpublished data showing that, after treatment with three different
cyclophosphamide-based regimens, G-CSF, 16 µg/kg/d, resulted in higher yields than 10 µg/kg/d. On the other hand, a preliminary report of a randomized study did
not show a greater effect for higher doses of G-CSF when combined with chemotherapy. 97 Currently, in most patients, G-CSF, 10 µg/kg/d, is started 1 to 4 days after
chemotherapy to hasten hematopoietic recovery and to increase the yield of stem cells. 98 However, in nonheavily pretreated patients (i.e., those in first remission) who
are treated with highly myelosuppressive mobilizing regimens, the brisk myeloid rebound that occurs with higher doses of G-CSF can be associated with symptoms of
hyperleukocytosis.99 Lower doses of G-CSF can be considered in such patients.
The timing of stem cell collection after chemotherapy plus G-CSF can be optimized (lower number of procedures) by measuring the blood CD34+ cell count during the
period of brisk neutrophil recovery. If collection is started when the CD34 count exceeds 20 cells per microliter, the majority of patients can collect more than 2 × 10 6
CD34+ cells per kilogram in one or two procedures. 100,101,102 and 103 However, because patients who show less evidence of mobilization (5 to 15 cells per microliter) may
also obtain a potentially engraftable number of CD34+ cells (more than 1 × 10 6 cells per kilogram) with three or more leukaphereses, 104 the use of the 20 cells per
microliter value should be limited to patients who can be anticipated to be good mobilizers (nonheavily pretreated). In settings in which the blood CD34 count is
unavailable, it would appear that the best time to begin collection is when the white blood cell (WBC) count has increased to more than 3,000 to 10,000 per
microliter44,48,105,106 and the patient has a rising platelet count. 96,107
The target number of stem cells is generally at least 2.5 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram, but at more than 5.0 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram, most patients have
WBC and platelet recovery within 2 weeks. 39 Particularly if CD34+ cell selection or tandem transplantations are possible, higher doses are clearly desirable. Although,
as noted earlier in this section, more than 1 × 10 6 CD34+ cells per kilogram is considered sufficient to establish engraftment in most patients, 10% to 20% have
slowed or incomplete platelet recovery. 42 In addition, because a substantial percentage of patients who are transplanted relapse and require additional treatment, it is
unclear whether marrow reserve in such patients is adequate to sustain treatment.
After stem cell infusion, considerable controversy exists regarding the utility of hematopoietic growth factors. 108,109,110,111,112,113,114 and 115 Although most studies show a
favorable impact of G-CSF on shortening the period of neutropenia, it is much less certain that G-CSF is of significant clinical benefit. For example, it is possible that
shorter reported periods of hospitalization with the use of posttransplantation G-CSF may simply reflect clinicians' tendency to discharge patients once they reach a
certain WBC count. 109,116 It also seems possible that patients who are most likely to benefit from the addition of G-CSF are those who have received fewer progenitor

cells110; however, the administration of posttransplantation G-CSF in this group is also associated with delays in platelet engraftment, suggesting that G-CSF may
drive a limited number of progenitor cells toward neutrophil differentiation. 40,114,117
If G-CSF is used after transplantation, most but not all 118 studies suggest that there is no benefit to beginning G-CSF immediately versus delaying 5 to 7 days after
stem cell infusion. 119,120,121 and 122 In addition, in patients who were treated with G-CSF beginning on day 0, the use of G-CSF at a dose of 16 µg/kg/d was no more
effective than at a dose of 5 µg/kg/d for accelerating neutrophil engraftment. 123 Larger randomized trials clearly are necessary to define the value, if any, for the use of
posttransplantation G-CSF.

HIGH-DOSE THERAPY REGIMENS: NEW DIRECTIONS
In contrast to allogeneic transplantation, for which increasing evidence indicates that cure can, and perhaps most often is, achieved by an immunologic effect of the
graft, cure after autologous rescue requires complete tumor eradication by the high-dose regimen. As a result, it seems likely that preparative programs for the two
procedures eventually may radically diverge. Allogeneic conditioning programs have moved toward less acutely toxic, more intentionally immunosuppressive
programs to facilitate donor engraftment. 124,125 In contrast, further improvement in autologously rescued patients will require the development of programs with greater
antineoplastic activity. However, little evidence of progress in the construction of more effective autologous high-dose regimens has been seen over a period of 15
years, and it seems likely that the better outcomes reported more recently are more likely due to improvements in patient selection and supportive care.
Alkylating agents have been the nucleus of most preparative programs, primarily because they demonstrate a disproportionate ratio of marrow to nonmarrow toxicity
that is uniquely amenable to dose escalation followed by stem cell replacement. In addition, in vitro studies show a steep dose-response curve against tumor cell lines
and minimal cross-resistance with other alkylating agents. 126,127 Indeed, in contrast to drugs such as anthracyclines, vinca alkaloids, and topoisomerase inhibitors, it is
extremely difficult, even under tissue culture conditions, to make tumor cells more than a few-fold resistant to alkylating agents. As a result, minor degrees of drug
resistance can theoretically be overcome by dose escalation or by the addition of other alkylating agents. Finally, analogous to other curative regimens, the
combination of alkylating agents with nonoverlapping extramyeloid toxicity is theoretically possible with maintenance of near-maximum tolerated doses of each
agent. 128 Thus, most high-dose drug regimens, particularly exemplified by the different generations of STAMP (solid tumor autologous marrow program), have used
two or more alkylating agents. 129 External-beam radiation, which shares many of the same advantageous biologic features of alkylating agents, cannot be
dose-escalated, except to very limited fields; thus, the use of TBI has been limited to highly radiation-sensitive neoplasms, such as leukemia and lymphoma. It is not
certain that radiation is superior to chemotherapy, however, even in the latter two diseases.
In clinical practice, dose escalation of alkylating agent–based regimens has been limited by excessive nonmarrow toxicity, including mucositis, pneumonitis, and
veno-occlusive disease. 128,129 In fact, new toxicities not predicted by single-agent studies have emerged when high doses of alkylating agents have been used in
combination. As a result, the initial promise of all of the currently used programs has not been realized: Significant drug resistance has not been overcome by the
modest dose escalation permitted by stem cells and growth factors. In fact, with the exception of a small percentage of patients with refractory Hodgkin's disease, the
vast majority of cures after high-dose therapy and autologous stem cell rescue have been observed in patients with chemosensitive lymphoid malignancies. 130,131 and 132
Currently, several strategies are being explored to improve the results of high-dose therapy ( Table 53.2-2). First, as morbidity, mortality, and cost are reduced,
high-dose therapy will increasingly be explored earlier in treatment, when there is less likelihood of significant drug resistance. Promising results with early high-dose
therapy have already been achieved in randomized studies of patients with multiple myeloma 91 and NHL 133 and is being further tested in ongoing trials.

TABLE 53.2-2. Improving the Results of High-Dose Therapy (HDT): New Approaches and Limitations

A second approach has been to increase the intensity of preparative regimens. Based on favorable reports from single-institution studies, 134,135,136 and 137 the Southwest
Oncology Group tested the addition of high-dose etoposide to Cytoxan and TBI in patients with either relapsed or refractory NHL. 138 Patients who were not candidates
for TBI received BCNU (bischloroethylnitrosourea), along with the same doses of Cytoxan plus etoposide used in the TBI regimen. The authors reported that, in
primary induction and salvage therapy failures, the results with the more aggressive regimens appeared to be superior than their previous results with
cyclophosphamide and TBI but without etoposide. In patients with chemosensitive disease, the more intensive regimen was not better than the group's previous
experience. Patients treated with this regimen had a high incidence of grade III–IV mucosal (63%) and grade II or lower skin toxicity (30%) and a 10.6%
treatment-related mortality. As a result, further increments in treatment are unlikely. A preliminary report of a study in which amifostine was added to decrease
mucosal and skin toxicity did not show any obvious benefit. 139
Another method of intensifying high-dose therapy in patients with NHL or leukemia is to deliver all or part of the TBI in the form of targeted radioactive monoclonal
antibody. Theoretically, radiation delivered in the form of tagged monoclonal antibodies could allow higher doses of radiation to be delivered to tumor-bearing areas
without a similar increase in radiation to the lungs and liver. The Seattle group has shown the feasibility of such an approach in patients with lymphoma 140 and
leukemia.141
In view of the difficulties inherent in increasing the doses or the number of drugs included in high-dose regimens, an alternative approach is to give “conventional”
high-dose therapy for two or more cycles. At modestly escalated doses, this strategy can be safely accomplished with growth factors alone, but at higher doses of
therapy, stem cells with or without growth factors can be used to accelerate myeloid recovery. At the Dana Farber Cancer Institute, four courses of high-dose CHOP
[cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone], in which the Cytoxan dose was increased more than fivefold and doxorubicin was increased by
50%, were used in patients with poor-prognosis lymphoma. The study showed that 70% of patients achieved a durable complete response. 142 This regimen is
currently being compared with CHOP in a randomized study. Gianni et al. 133 randomized patients with intermediate-grade lymphoma to standard MACOP-B
(methotrexate-leucovorin, Adriamycin, cyclophosphamide, Oncovin, prednisone, bleomycin) versus sequential courses of high-dose therapy in which stem cell rescue
is given after a final course of marrow ablative therapy. A highly statistically significant benefit was found in disease-free survival, and borderline significant
improvement was noted in overall survival favoring the high-dose arm. Patients who relapsed after MACOP-B and then were treated with high-dose therapy did
poorly. The latter finding suggests either that drug resistance is more easily overcome earlier in treatment or, alternatively, that several cycles of standard therapy
induces a level of drug resistance that makes later dose intensification less effective. Tandem cycles of high-dose therapy also have shown promising results in
patients with refractory Hodgkin's disease, 143 recurrent germ cell tumors,144 and as consolidation therapy for patients with multiple myeloma. 145,146 The use of tandem
versus single courses of high-dose therapy is being tested in ongoing clinical trials.
Finally, although high-dose therapy alone may not be curative in most patients, interest is increasing in using the achievement of minimal residual disease as a
platform for additional posttransplantation therapy. Several approaches are being explored, including the induction of an autologous graft-versus-host
reaction147,148,149,150 and 151; posttransplantation vaccination with tumor-specific proteins 152; subsequent therapy with monoclonal antibodies, such as Rituxan 153,154 and
trastuzumab (Herceptin); and, finally, the use of additional non–cross-resistant chemotherapy. 155

LATE TOXICITY: MYELODYSPLASIA
A review of published studies suggests that extensive prior alkylating-agent chemotherapy and TBI-containing preparative regimens are the most important risk
factors for the development of MDS and ANLL after high-dose therapy and autologous stem cell rescue. 156,157,158,159,160,161,162,163,164,165 and 166 In individuals with neither
risk factor (e.g., breast cancer patients), the risk of MDS and ANLL does not appear to be substantially increased above that expected after conventional
treatment.161,166 Similarly, in patients with Hodgkin's disease and multiple myeloma who are conditioned with high-dose chemotherapy alone, most of the risk of MDS
and ANLL appears to be due to prior cumulative stem cell injury from agents such as mechlorethamine, chlorambucil, melphalan, and nitrosourea agents. 162,165
On the other hand, there appears to be an increased risk of MDS after treatment with TBI-based regimens that is independent of prior therapy. In a study from
Nebraska, late MDS in NHL patients was limited to those who received TBI. 158 Of even greater concern is the observed risk of MDS and ANLL in follicular lymphoma
patients transplanted in first remission. In one series of patients conditioned with TBI/cyclophosphamide, 5 of 75 patients (6.6%) at risk developed MDS. 167 Before
transplantation, these patients had only received 6 to 8 cycles of CHOP, suggesting that the preparative regimen of TBI/cyclophosphamide was the major cause of the
subsequent MDS.
The mechanism(s) by which TBI in the preparative regimen contributes to the development of MDS is unclear, because the infused stem cells are not exposed to the
radiation and the remaining in situ marrow is theoretically destroyed. Although damage to the bone marrow stroma leading to late marrow injury is possible, the rarity
of MDS after allogeneic transplantation despite identical conditioning regimens is evidence against a toxic microenvironment. A more likely probability is that most, if
not all, preparative regimens are not completely myeloablative 168,169 and that marrow that is genetically damaged but not destroyed eventually achieves a growth
advantage, leading to MDS and leukemia. This sequence of events presumably does not occur after allogeneic stem cell transplantation because host hematopoiesis
is destroyed or suppressed by a graft-versus–endogenous marrow effect. 170 MDS may be more common after TBI-based regimens either because radiation is a more
potent mutagen or because it is less myeloablative than high-dose chemotherapy regimens.
Some studies have implicated blood stem cells as a risk factor for the development of MDS and ANLL. Traweek et al. 157 and, more recently, Andre et al. 164 reported a
trend toward an increased incidence of MDS and AML in patients who received PBSC alone or in combination with bone marrow compared with bone marrow alone.
Similarly, in an update of an earlier series from the University of Minnesota, 156 Bhatia et al.160 reported a significantly higher actuarial incidence of MDS in patients
who received PBSC (35.8%) than bone marrow (4.1%) in patients transplanted for Hodgkin's disease and NHL. These data are difficult to interpret because the use of
PBSC versus marrow was not random, and in some patients, PBSC may have been used because of a prior marrow injury (e.g., hypocellular marrow or previous
pelvic radiotherapy) more likely to be associated with late MDS and ANLL. In contrast to these results, investigators from the University of Nebraska have not found
an increased incidence of MDS and ANLL in patients who received PBSC. 170 The uncertain susceptibility of stem cells to the damaging effects of prior therapy
provides a further rationale for the early collection of stem cells in potential candidates for high-dose therapy.
It seems likely that the risk of MDS and ANLL should be lower in the future, given the trend away from the use of high cumulative doses of agents toxic to stem cells in
potential high-dose therapy candidates. For example, in a study from Arkansas 162 no cases of MDS and ANLL were reported in 71 patients with multiple myeloma
treated with a brief course of VAD followed by tandem transplantations. In contrast, cytogenetic abnormalities suggestive of MDS and ANLL were observed in 7 of 111
patients who had received an average of 2 years of chemotherapy before receiving tandem courses of high-dose therapy and stem cell rescue.
It should also be emphasized that bone marrow cytogenetic abnormalities after transplantation do not indicate that MDS or ANLL is inevitable. In a preliminary report,
only 28% of patients with clonal cytogenetic abnormalities developed MDS and ANLL. 171 Even in patients with notoriously ominous abnormalities, such as partial or
complete deletions of chromosome 5, 5 of 17 patients did not develop MDS. Similarly, 16 of 37 patients with deletions of chromosome 7 did not develop MDS, and
deletions of chromosome 20 were not predictive of MDS. These results show that clonal cytogenetic abnormalities (estimated to be present sporadically in as many as
50% of patients transplanted at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute 159) are far more common than the true incidence of bone marrow morphologic dysplasia or late
ANLL. This fact would also suggest that the reported 15% to 20% incidence of posttransplantation MDS is much higher than the true incidence of clinical MDS.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS
During the first decade of the twenty-first century, clinical trials in patients with unfavorable prognostic factors should provide substantial insight into the effectiveness
of early high-dose therapy. Even for patients who are not cured, quality-of-life studies may provide a further rationale for treating patients briefly but intensively. In
patients with drug-sensitive, potentially curable disease, strategies to measure and eliminate tumor cell contamination from stem cell products may incrementally
improve cure rates. However, a theoretically perfect purging program will appear ineffective in the absence of more effective antineoplastic therapy. In this regard, the
incorporation of monoclonal antibodies into conditioning regimens may allow more intensive therapy to be delivered without proportional toxicity. Posttransplantation
immune modulation will likely assume a more important role in overall treatment, especially for patients with a high likelihood of microscopic disease.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Marshall NA, DeVita VT Jr. Hodgkin's disease and transplantation: a room with a (nontransplanter's) view. Semin Oncol 1999;26:67.
2. Philip T, Guglielmi C, Hagenbeek A, et al. Autologous bone marrow transplantation as compared with salvage chemotherapy in relapses of chemotherapy-sensitive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. N
Engl J Med 1995;333:1540.
3. Schwartzberg LS, Birch R, West WH, et al. Sequential treatment including high-dose chemotherapy with peripheral blood stem cell support in patients with high-risk stage IIIII breast cancer:
outpatient administration in community cancer centers. Am J Clin Oncol 1998;21:523.
4. Weaver CH, Schwartzberg L, Zhen B, et al. High-dose chemotherapy and peripheral blood stem cell infusion in patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: results of outpatient treatment in
community cancer centers. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;20:753.
5. Seropian S, Nadkarni R, Jillella AP, et al. Neutropenic infections in 100 patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma or Hodgkin's disease treated with high-dose BEAM chemotherapy and peripheral
blood progenitor cell transplant: outpatient treatment is a viable option. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;23:599.
6. Burt RK, Traynor AE, Pope R, et al. Treatment of autoimmune disease by intense immunosuppressive conditioning and autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Blood
1998;92:3505.
7. Jacobson LO, Marks EK, Robson MJ, Gaston E, Zirkle RE. The effect of spleen protection on mortality following X-irradiation. J Lab Clin Med 1949;34:1538.
8. Jacobson LO. Evidence for a humoral factor (or factors) concerned in recovery from radiation injury: a review. Cancer Res 1952;12:315.
9. Goodman JW, Hodgson GS. Evidence for stem cells in the peripheral blood of mice. Blood 1962;19:702.
10. Malinin TI, Perry VP, Kerby CC, Dolon MF. Peripheral leukocyte infusion into lethally irradiated guinea pigs. Blood 1965;25:693.
11. Cavins JA, Scheer SC, Thomas ED, Feerebee JW. The recovery of lethally irradiated dogs given infusions of autologous leukocytes preserved at 80°C. Blood 1964;23:38.
12. Barr RD, Whang-Peng J, Perry S. Hematopoietic stem cells in human peripheral blood. Science 1975;190:284.
13. McCarthy DM, Goldman JM. Transfusion of circulating stem cells. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci 1984;20:1.
14. Goldman JM, Th'ng KH, Lowenthal RM. In vitro colony forming cells and colony stimulating factor in chronic granulocytic leukaemia. Br J Cancer 1974;30:1.
15. Goldman JM, Catovsky D, Goolden AWG, Johnson SA, Galton DAG. Buffy coat autografts for patients with chronic granulocytic leukaemia in transformation. Blut 1981;42:149.
16. Abrams RA, Glaubiger D, Appelbaum FR, Deisseroth AB. Result of attempted reconstitution using isologous peripheral blood mononuclear cells: a case report. Blood 1980;56:516.
17. Hershko C, Gale RP, Ho WG, Cline MJ. Cure of aplastic anaemia in paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria by marrow transfusion from identical twin: failure of peripheral-leucocyte transfusion
to correct marrow aplasia. Lancet 1979;1:945.
18. Micklem HS, Anderson N, Ross E. Limited potential of circulating haemopoietic stem cells. Nature 1975;256:41.
19. Juttner CA, To LB, Haylock DN, Branford A, Kimber RJ. Circulating autologous stem cells collected in very early remission from acute nonlymphoblastic leukaemia produce prompt but
incomplete haemopoietic reconstitution after high dose melphalan or supralethal chemoradiotherapy. Br J Haematology 1985;61:739.
20. To LB, Haylock DN, Kimber RJ, Juttner CA. High levels of circulating haemopoietic stem cells in very early remission from acute non-lymphoblastic leukaemia and their collection and
cryopreservation. Br J Hematol 1984;58:399.
21. Reiffers J, Bernard P, David B, et al. Successful autologous transplantation with peripheral blood hemopoietic cells in a patient with acute leukemia. Exp Hematol 1986;14:312.
22. Korbling M, Dorken B, Ho AD, et al. Autologous transplantation of blood-derived hemopoietic stem cells after myeloablative therapy in a patient with Burkitt's lymphoma. Blood 1986;67:529.
23. Bell AJ, Figes A, Oscier DG, Hamblin TJ. Peripheral blood stem cell autografting. Lancet 1986;1:1027.
24. Kessinger A, Armitage JO, Landmark JD, Weisenburger D. Reconstitution of human hematopoietic function with autologous cryopreserved circulating stem cells. Exp Hematol 1986;14:192.
25. Tilly H, Bastit D, Lucet JC, et al. Haemopoietic reconstitution after autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation in acute leukaemia. Lancet 1986;154:154.
26. Bensinger W, Martin P, Clift R, et al. A prospective, randomized trial of peripheral blood stem cells or marrow for patients undergoing allogeneic transplantation for hematologic malignancies.
Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:368(abst).
27. Richman CM, Weiner RS, Yankee RA. Increase in circulating stem cells following chemotherapy in man. Blood 1976;47:1031.
28. Duhrsen U, Villeval JL, Boyd J, et al. Effects of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor on hematopoietic progenitor cells in cancer patients. Blood 1988;72:2074.
29. Socinski MA, Cannistra SA, Elias A, et al. Granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor expands the circulating haemopoietic progenitor cell compartment in man. Lancet 1988;1:1194.
30. Gianni AM, Bregni M, Siena S, et al. Rapid and complete hemopoietic reconstitution following combined transplantation of autologous blood and bone marrow cells. A changing role for high
dose chemo-radiotherapy? Hematol Oncol 1989;7:139.
31. Sheridan WP, Begley CG, Juttner CA, et al. Effect of peripheral-blood progenitor cells mobilised by filgrastim (G-CSF) on platelet recovery after high-dose chemotherapy. Lancet 1992;339:640.
32. Peters WP, Rosner G, Ross M, et al. Comparative effects of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) on priming

peripheral blood progenitor cells for use with autologous bone marrow after high-dose chemotherapy. Blood 1993;81:1709.
33. Bolwell BJ, Fishleder A, Andresen SW, et al. G-CSF primed peripheral blood progenitor cells in autologous bone marrow transplantation: parameters affecting bone marrow engraftment. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1993;12:609.
34. Chao NJ, Schriber JR, Grimes K, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor “mobilized” peripheral blood progenitor cells accelerate granulocyte and platelet recovery after high-dose
chemotherapy. Blood 1993;81:2031.
35. Civin CI, Strauss LC, Brovall C, et al. Antigenic analysis of hematopoiesis III. A hematopoietic progenitor cell surface antigen defined by a monoclonal antibody raised against KG-la cells. J
Immunol 1984;133:157.
36. Berenson RJ, Andrews RG, Bensinger WI, et al. Antigen CD34+ marrow cells engraft lethally irradiated baboons. J Clin Invest 1988;81:951.
37. Berenson RJ, Bensinger WI, Hill RS, et al. Engraftment after infusion of CD34+ marrow cells in patients with breast cancer or neuroblastoma. Blood 1991;77:1717.
38. Siena S, Bregni M, Brando B, et al. Flow cytometry for clinical estimation of circulating hematopoietic progenitors for autologous transplantation in cancer patients. Blood 1991;77:400.
39. Weaver CH, Hazelton B, Birch R, et al. An analysis of engraftment kinetics as a function of the CD34 content of peripheral blood progenitor cell collections in 692 patients after the
administration of myeloablative chemotherapy. Blood 1995;86:3961.
40. Bensinger W, Appelbaum F, Rowley S, et al. Factors that influence collection and engraftment of autologous peripheral-blood stem cells. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2547.
41. Tricot G, Jagannath S, Vesole D, et al. Peripheral blood stem cell transplants for multiple myeloma: identification of favorable variables for rapid engraftment in 225 patients. Blood
1995;85:588.
42. Weaver CH, Potz J, Redmond J, et al. Engraftment and outcomes of patients receiving myeloablative therapy followed by autologous peripheral blood stem cells with a low CD34+ cell content.
Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;19:1103.
43. Ketterer N, Salles G, Raba M, et al. High CD34(+) cell counts decrease hematologic toxicity of autologous peripheral blood progenitor cell transplantation. Blood 1998;91:3148.
44. Pettengell R, Morgenstern GR, Woll PJ, et al. Peripheral blood progenitor cell transplantation in lymphoma and leukemia using a single apheresis. Blood 1993;82:3770.
45. Moskowitz CH, Bertino JR, Glassman JR, et al. Ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide: a highly effective cytoreduction and peripheral blood progenitor cell mobilization regimen for
transplant-eligible patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3776.
46. Jones HM, Jones SA, Watts MJ, et al. Development of a simplified single apheresis approach for peripheral-blood progenitor-cell transplantation in previously treated patients with lymphoma. J
Clin Oncol 1994;12:1693.
47. Burtness BA, Psyrri A, Rose M, et al. A phase I study of paclitaxel for mobilization of peripheral blood progenitor cells. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;23:311.
48. Demirer T, Buckner CD, Storer B, et al. Effect of different chemotherapy regimens on peripheral-blood stem-cell collections in patients with breast cancer receiving granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:684.
49. Lane TA, Law P, Maruyama M, et al. Harvesting and enrichment of hematopoietic progenitor cells mobilized into the peripheral blood of normal donors by granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) or G-CSF: potential role in allogeneic marrow transplantation. Blood 1995;85:275.
50. Haas R, Mohle R, Fruhauf S, et al. Patient characteristics associated with successful mobilizing and autografting of peripheral blood progenitor cells in malignant lymphoma. Blood
1994;83:3787.
51. O'Donnell P, Loper K, Flinn I, et al. Effect of fludarabine chemotherapy on peripheral blood stem cell transplantation. Blood 1998;92[Suppl 1]:120(abst).
52. Laszlo D, Galieni P, Scalia G, et al. Fludarabine containingregimens may adversely affect peripheral blood stem cell harvesting in low-grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma patients. Blood
1998;92[Suppl 1]:273.
53. Moskowitz CH, Glassman JR, Wuest D, et al. Factors affecting mobilization of peripheral blood progenitor cells in patients with lymphoma. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:311.
54. Watts MJ, Sullivan AM, Leverett D, et al. Back-up bone marrow is frequently ineffective in patients with poor peripheral-blood stem-cell mobilization. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1554.
55. Fraipont V, Sautois B, Baudoux E, et al. Failure of adequate mobilization of peripheral blood progenitor cell with chemotherapy and G-CSF: G-CSF alone is superior to chemotherapy + G-CSF
for second mobilization. Blood 1998;92[Suppl 1]:268(abst).
56. Jennis A, Pecora A, Preti R, et al. High-dose G-CSF stem cell mobilization after initial stem cell mobilization failure. Blood 1998;92[Suppl 1]:271(abst).
57. Gazitt Y, Freytes CO, Callander N, et al. Successful PBSC mobilization with high-dose G-CSF for patients failing a first round of mobilization. J Hematother 1999;8:173.
58. Weaver CH, Tauer K, Zhen B, et al. Second attempts at mobilization of peripheral blood stem cells in patients with initial low CD34+ cell yields. J Hematother 1998;7:241.
59. Stiff PJ. Management strategies for the hard-to-mobilize patient. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;23:S29.
60. Buddharaju LN, Tricot G, Rapoport AP, et al. Successful mobilization of CD34+ cells using GM-CSF plus G-CSF in patients with mobilization failure after initial chemotherapy and cytokine
combinations. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:1467.
61. Bashey A, Corringham S, Fields KK, et al. Use of concurrent GM-CSF and G-CSF administration to re-mobilize patients who fail initial mobilization: results on twenty-three patients from two
centers. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:327.
62. Moskowitz CH, Stiff P, Gordon MS, et al. Recombinant methionyl human stem cell factor and filgrastim for peripheral blood progenitor cell mobilization and transplantation in non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma patientsresults of a phase I/II trial. Blood 1997;89:3136.
63. Facon T, Harousseau JL, Maloisel F, et al. Stem cell factor in combination with filgrastim after chemotherapy improves peripheral blood progenitor cell yield and reduces apheresis
requirements in multiple myeloma patients: a randomized, controlled trial. Blood 1999;94:1218.
64. Powles R, Cunningham D, Kulkarni S, et al. Combination of Ancestin (r-metHu stem cell factor) and filgrastim for peripheral blood stem cell collection in patients who have previously failed to
mobilize with G-CSF alone. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:606(abst).
65. Ross AA, Cooper BW, Lazarus HM, et al. Detection and viability of tumor cells in peripheral blood stem cell collections from breast cancer patients using immunocytochemical and clonogenic
assay techniques. Blood 1993;82:2605.
66. Datta YH, Adams PT, Drobyski WR, et al. Sensitive detection of occult breast cancer by the reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:475.
67. Franklin WA, Shpall EJ, Archer P, et al. Immunocytochemical detection of breast cancer cells in marrow and peripheral blood of patients undergoing high dose chemotherapy with autologous
stem cell support. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1996;41:1.
68. Miyajima Y, Horibe K, Fukuda M, et al. Sequential detection of tumor cells in the peripheral blood and bone marrow of patients with stage IV neuroblastoma by the reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction for tyrosine hydroxylase mRNA. Cancer 1996; 77:1214.
69. Vredenburgh JJ, Silva O, Broadwater G, et al. The significance of tumor contamination in the bone marrow from high-risk primary breast cancer patients treated with high-dose chemotherapy
and hematopoietic support. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 1997;3:91.
70. Ross AA. Minimal residual disease in solid tumor malignancies: a review. J Hematother 1998;7:9.
71. Leonard BM, Hetu F, Busque L, et al. Lymphoma cell burden in progenitor cell grafts measured by competitive polymerase chain reaction: less than one log difference between bone marrow
and peripheral blood sources. Blood 1998;91:331.
72. Lemoli RM, Cavo M, Fortuna A. Concomitant mobilization of plasma cells and hematopoietic progenitors into peripheral blood of patients with multiple myeloma. J Hematother 1996;5:339.
73. Brugger W, Bross KJ, Glatt M, et al. Mobilization of tumor cells and hematopoietic progenitor cells into peripheral blood of patients with solid tumors. Blood 1994;83:636.
74. Gluck S, Ross AA, Layton TJ, et al. Decrease in tumor cell contamination and progenitor cell yield in leukapheresis products after consecutive cycles of chemotherapy for breast cancer
treatment. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 1997;3:316.
75. Passos-Coelho JL, Ross AA, Kahn DJ, et al. Similar breast cancer cell contamination of single-day peripheral-blood progenitor-cell collections obtained after priming with hematopoietic growth
factor alone or after cyclophosphamide followed by growth factor. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2569.
76. Brenner MK, Rill DR, Moen RC, et al. Gene-marking to trace origin of relapse after autologous bone-marrow transplantation. Lancet 1993;341:85.
77. Deisseroth AB, Zu Z, Claxton D, et al. Genetic marking shows that Ph+ cells present in autologous transplants of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) contribute to relapse after autologous
bone marrow in CML. Blood 1994;83:3068.
78. Rill DR, Santana VM, Roberts M, et al. Direct demonstration that autologous bone marrow transplantation for solid tumors can return a multiplicity of tumorigenic cells. Blood 1994;84:380.
79. Cooper BW, Moss TJ, Ross AA, Ybanez J, Lazarus HM. Occult tumor contamination of hematopoietic stem-cell products does not affect clinical outcome of autologous transplantation in
patients with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3509.
80. Weaver CH, Moss T, Schwartzberg LS, et al. High-dose chemotherapy in patients with breast cancer: evaluation of infusing peripheral blood stem cells containing occult tumor cells. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1998;21:1117.
81. Gertz MA, Witzig TE, Pineda AA, et al. Monoclonal plasma cells in the blood stem cell harvest from patients with multiple myeloma are associated with shortened relapse-free survival after
transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;19:337.
82. Freedman AS, Neuberg D, Mauch P, et al. Long-term follow-up of autologous bone marrow transplantation in patients with relapsed follicular lymphoma. Blood 1999;94:3325.
83. Freedman AS, Gribben JG, Nadler LM. High dose therapy and autologous stem cell transplantation in follicular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Leuk Lymphoma 1998;28:219.
84. Fouillard L, Laporte JP, Labopin M, et al. Autologous stem-cell transplantation for non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: the role of graft purging and radiotherapy posttransplantationresults of a
retrospective analysis on 120 patients autografted in a single institution. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2803.
85. Rowley SD, Jones RJ, Piantadosi S, et al. Efficacy of ex vivo purging for autologous bone marrow transplantation in the treatment of acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1989;74:501.
86. Williams CD, Goldstone AH, Pearce RM, et al. Purging of bone marrow in autologous bone marrow transplantation for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a case-matched comparison with unpurged
cases by the European Blood and Marrow Transplant Lymphoma Registry. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2454.
87. Vescio R, Schiller G, Stewart AK, et al. Multicenter phase III trial to evaluate CD34(+) selected versus unselected autologous peripheral blood progenitor cell transplantation in multiple
myeloma. Blood 1999;93:1858.
88. Stewart AK, Schiller G, Vescio R, et al. CD34 selection does not prolong disease free or overall survival in myeloma patients undergoing autologous stem cell transplant: results of a phase III
study. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:714.
89. Holmberg LA, Boeckh M, Hooper H, et al. Increased incidence of cytomegalovirus disease after autologous CD34-selected peripheral blood stem cell transplantation. Blood 1999;94:4029.
90. Czuczman MS, Grillo-Lopez AJ, White CA, et al. Treatment of patients with low-grade B-cell lymphoma with the combination of chimeric anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody and CHOP
chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:268.
91. Attal M, Harousseau JL, Stoppa AM, et al. A prospective, randomized trial of autologous bone marrow transplantation and chemotherapy in multiple myeloma. Intergroupe Francais du
Myelome. N Engl J Med 1996;335:91.
92. Perales M, Marin P, Alfaro J, et al. Impact of fludarabine on peripheral blood progenitor cells mobilization in patients with indolent lymphoproliferative disorders. Blood 1999; 94[Suppl 1]:139.
93. Itala M, Pelliniemi TT, Rajamaki A, Remes K. Autologous blood cell transplantation in B-CLL: response to chemotherapy prior to mobilization predicts the stem cell yield. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1997;19:647.
94. Gajewski JL, Donato M, Anderlini P, et al. Intensive chemotherapy with G-CSF mobilization yields improved peripheral blood progenitor cell collection, quicker recovery after high-dose
chemotherapy and reduces progression risk compared to G-CSF alone. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:665(abst).
95. Weaver CH, Birch R, Greco FA, et al. Mobilization and harvesting of peripheral blood stem cells: randomized evaluations of different doses of filgrastim. Br J Haematol 1998;100:338.
96. Demirer T, Buckner CD, Bensinger WI. Optimization of peripheral blood stem cell mobilization. Stem Cells 1996;14:106.
97. Ings SJ, Schey S, Hancock B, et al. Results of a BNLI randomized trial of G-CSF dose after cyclophosphamide 1.5 gm/m 2 for progenitor cell mobilization. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:666(abst).
98. Schwartzberg L, Heffernan M, Birch R, West W. Comparison of different G-CSF schedules in conjunction with cyclophosphamide, etoposide, and cisplatin for peripheral blood stem cell (PBSC)
mobilization. Blood 1994;82[Suppl 1]:641(abst).
99. Salloum E, Stoessel KM, Cooper DL. Hyperleukocytosis and retinal hemorrhages after chemotherapy and filgrastim administration for peripheral blood progenitor cell mobilization. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1998;21:835.
100. Meldgaard Knudsen L, Gaarsdal E, Jensen L, Nikolaisen K, Johnsen HE. Evaluation of mobilized CD34+ cell counts to guide timing and yield of large-scale collection by leukapheresis. J
Hematother 1998;7:45.
101. de Fabritiis P, Gonzalez M, Meloni G, et al. Monitoring of CD34+ cells during leukapheresis allows a single, successful collection of hemopoietic progenitors in patients with low numbers of
circulating stem cells. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;23:1229.
102. Birhiray R, Plank D, Rushing D, et al. Peripheral blood CD34 count as a predictive tool for collection of stem cells for autologous transplantation. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:3356.

103. Fontao-Wendel R, Lazar A, Melges S, Altobeli C, Wendel S. The absolute number of circulating CD34+ cells as the best predictor of peripheral hematopoietic stem cell yield. J Hematother
1999;8:255.
104. Ballester OF, Wilcox P, Hill C, et al. Peripheral blood CD34+ count predicts the adequacy of stem cell collection for autologous transplants. Blood 1998;92[Suppl 1]:296(abst).
105. Ho AD, Gluck S, Germond C, et al. Optimal timing for collections of blood progenitor cells following induction chemotherapy and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor for
autologous transplantation in advanced breast cancer. Leukemia 1993;7:1738.
106. Dreger P, Marquardt P, Haferlach T, et al. Effective mobilisation of peripheral blood progenitor cells with “Dexa-BEAM” and G-CSF: timing of harvesting and composition of the leukapheresis
product. Br J Cancer 1993;68:950.
107. Krieger MS, Schiller G, Berenson JR, et al. Collection of peripheral blood progenitor cells (PBPC) based on a rising WBC and platelet count significantly increases the number of CD34+ cells.
Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;24:25.
108. Dunlop DJ, Fitzsimons EJ, McMurray A, et al. Filgrastim fails to improve haemopoietic reconstitution following myeloablative chemotherapy and peripheral blood stem cell rescue. Br J Cancer
1994;70:943.
109. Spitzer G, Adkins DR, Spencer V, et al. Randomized study of growth factors post-peripheral-blood stem-cell transplant: neutrophil recovery is improved with modest clinical benefit. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:661.
110. Klumpp TR, Mangan KF, Goldberg SL, Pearlman ES, Macdonald JS. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor accelerates neutrophil engraftment following peripheral-blood stem-cell
transplantation: a prospective, randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1323.
111. Tarella C, Castellino C, Locatelli F, et al. G-CSF administration following peripheral blood progenitor cell (PBPC) autograft in lymphoid malignancies: evidence for clinical benefits and reduction
of treatment costs. Bone Marrow Transplant 1998;21:401.
112. McQuaker IG, Hunter AE, Pacey S, Haynes AP, Iqbal A, Russell NH. Low dose filgrastim significantly enhances neutrophil recovery following autologous peripheral-blood stem-cell
transplantation in patients with lymphoproliferative disorders: evidence for clinical and economic benefit. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:451.
113. Linch DC, Milligan DW, Winfield DA, et al. G-CSF after peripheral blood stem cell transplantation in lymphoma patients significantly accelerated neutrophil recovery and shortened time in
hospital: results of a randomized BNLI trial. Br J Haematol 1997;99:933.
114. Kawano Y, Takaue Y, Mimaya J, et al. Marginal benefit/disadvantage of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor therapy after autologous blood stem cell transplantation in children: results of a
prospective randomized trial. The Japanese Cooperative Study Group of PBSCT. Blood 1998;92:4040.
115. Ojeda E, Garcia-Bustos J, Aguado M, et al. A prospective randomized trial of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor therapy after autologous blood stem cell transplantation in adults. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1999;24:601.
116. Ojeda E, Garcia-Bustos J, Aguado MJ, et al. G-CSF after PBSC transplantation [Letter]. Br J Haematol 1998;101:594.
117. Shpall EJ, Jones RB, Bearman SI, et al. Transplantation of enriched CD34-positive autologous marrow into breast cancer patients following high-dose chemotherapy: influence of CD34-positive
peripheral-blood progenitors and growth factors on engraftment. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:28.
118. Colby C, McAfee SL, Finkelstein DM, Spitzer TR. Early vs delayed administration of G-CSF following autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation [see comments]. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1998;21:1005.
119. Faucher C, Le Corroller AG, Chabannon C, et al. Administration of G-CSF can be delayed after transplantation of autologous G-CSF-primed blood stem cells: a randomized study. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1996;17:533.
120. Bolwell BJ, Pohlman B, Andresen S, et al. Delayed G-CSF after autologous progenitor cell transplantation: a prospective randomized trial. Bone Marrow Transplant 1998;21:369.
121. Maiolino A, Biasoli I, Nucci M, Spector N, Pulcheri W. Delayed G-CSF after autologous bone marrow transplantation [Letter]. Bone Marrow Transplant 1998;22:832.
122. Bence-Bruckler I, Bredeson C, Atkins H, et al. A randomized trial of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (Neupogen) starting day 1 vs day 7 postautologous stem cell transplantation. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1998;22:965.
123. Bolwell B, Goormastic M, Dannley R, et al. G-CSF post-autologous progenitor cell transplantation: a randomized study of 5, 10, and 16 micrograms/kg/day. Bone Marrow Transplant
1997;19:215.
124. Khouri IF, Keating M, Korbling M, et al. Transplant-lite: induction of graft versus malignancy using fludarabine-based nonablative chemotherapy and allogeneic blood progenitor-cell
transplantation as treatment for lymphoid malignancies. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2817.
125. Slavin S, Nagler A, Naparstek E, et al. Nonmyeloablative stem cell transplantation and cell therapy as an alternative to conventional bone marrow transplantation with lethal cytoreduction for
the treatment of malignant and nonmalignant hematologic diseases. Blood 1998;91:756.
126. Frei ED, Canellos GP. Dose: a critical factor in cancer chemotherapy. Am J Med 1980;69:585.
127. Frei ED, Cucchi CA, Rosowsky A, et al. Alkylating agent resistance: in vitro studies with human cell lines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1985;82:2158.
128. Peters WP, Eder JP, Henner WD, et al. High-dose combination alkylating agents with autologous bone marrow support: a phase 1 trial. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:646.
129. Eder JP, Antman K, Peters W, et al. High-dose combination alkylating agent chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow support for metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:1592.
130. Philip T, Armitage JO, Spitzer G, et al. High-dose therapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation after failure of conventional chemotherapy in adults with intermediate-grade or
high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1987;316:1493.
131. Lazarus HM, Rowlings PA, Zhang MJ, et al. Autotransplants for Hodgkin's disease in patients never achieving remission: a report from the Autologous Blood and Marrow Transplant Registry. J
Clin Oncol 1999;17:534.
132. Josting A, Reiser M, Rueffer U, et al. Treatment of primary progressive Hodgkin's and aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: is there a chance for cure? J Clin Oncol 2000;18:332.
133. Gianni AM, Bregni M, Siena S, et al. High-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation compared with MACOP-B in aggressive B-cell lymphoma. N Engl J Med
1997;336:1290.
134. Gulati S, Yahalom J, Acaba L, et al. Treatment of patients with relapsed and resistant non-Hodgkin's lymphoma using total body irradiation, etoposide, and cyclophosphamide and autologous
bone marrow transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:936.
135. Blume KG, Forman SJ. High-dose etoposide (VP-16)-containing preparatory regimens in allogeneic and autologous bone marrow transplantation for hematologic malignancies. Semin Oncol
1992;19:63.
136. Horning SJ, Negrin RS, Chao JC, et al. Fractionated total-body irradiation, etoposide, and cyclophosphamide plus autografting in Hodgkin's disease and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:2552.
137. Weaver CH, Petersen FB, Appelbaum FR, et al. High-dose fractionated total-body irradiation, etoposide, and cyclophosphamide followed by autologous stem-cell support in patients with
malignant lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2559.
138. Stiff PJ, Dahlberg S, Forman SJ, et al. Autologous bone marrow transplantation for patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: value of augmented
preparative regimensa Southwest Oncology Group trial. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:48.
139. Rodriguez R, Nademanee A, Ivers B, et al. Amifostine before fractionated total body irradiation, followed by VP-16, Cytoxan and autologous PBSCT for patients with relapsed NHL, HD and
acute leukemia: toxicity analysis. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:145(abst).
140. Liu SY, Eary JF, Petersdorf SH, et al. Follow-up of relapsed B-cell lymphoma patients treated with iodine-131-labeled anti-CD20 antibody and autologous stem-cell rescue. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:3270.
141. Matthews DC, Appelbaum FR, Eary JF, et al. Phase I study of (131)I-anti-CD45 antibody plus cyclophosphamide and total body irradiation for advanced acute leukemia and myelodysplastic
syndrome. Blood 1999;94:1237.
142. Janicek M, Kaplan W, Neuberg D, et al. Early restaging gallium scans predict outcome in poor-prognosis patients with aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma treated with high-dose CHOP
chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1631.
143. Ahmed T, Lake DE, Beer M, et al. Single and double autotransplants for relapsing/refractory Hodgkin's disease: results of two consecutive trials. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;19:449.
144. Margolin BK, Doroshow JH, Ahn C, et al. Treatment of germ cell cancer with two cycles of high-dose ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide with autologous stem-cell support [see comments]. J
Clin Oncol 1996;14:2631.
145. Barlogie B, Jagannath S, Desikan KR, et al. Total therapy with tandem transplants for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. Blood 1999;93:55.
146. Barlogie B, Jagannath S, Vesole DH, et al. Superiority of tandem autologous transplantation over standard therapy for previously untreated multiple myeloma. Blood 1997;89:789.
147. Giralt S, Weber D, Colome M, et al. Phase I trial of cyclosporine-induced autologous graft-versus-host disease in patients with multiple myeloma undergoing high-dose chemotherapy with
autologous stem-cell rescue. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:667.
148. Hess AD, Thoburn CJ. Immunobiology and immunotherapeutic implications of syngeneic/autologous graft-versus-host disease. Immunol Rev 1997;157:111.
149. Meehan KR, Arun B, Gehan EA, et al. Immunotherapy with interleukin-2 and alpha-interferon after IL-2-activated hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for breast cancer. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1999;23:667.
150. Vogelsang G, Bitton R, Piantadosi S, et al. Immune modulation in autologous bone marrow transplantation: cyclosporine and gamma-interferon trial. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;24:637.
151. Wu DY, Goldschneider I. Cyclosporin Ainduced autologous graft-versus-host disease: a prototypical model of autoimmunity and active (dominant) tolerance coordinately induced by recent
thymic emigrants. J Immunol 1999;162:6926.
152. Reichardt VL, Okada CY, Liso A, et al. Idiotype vaccination using dendritic cells after autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation for multiple myelomaa feasibility study. Blood
1999;93:2411.
153. Tsai DE, Moore HCF, Hardy CL, et al. Rituximab (anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody) therapy for progressive intermediate-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma after high-dose therapy and autologous
peripheral stem cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;24:521.
154. Rapoport AP, Jaberi P, Fassas A, et al. Autotransplantation for refractory aggressive B-cell lymphoma followed by post-transplant Rituxan plus GM-CSF and consolidative chemotherapy. Blood
1999;94[Suppl 1]:404 (abst).
155. Desikan R, Munshi N, Zangari M, et al. DCEP consolidation chemotherapy after two cycles of melphalan-based high dose therapyhigh incidence of complete response and superior outcome in
comparison with matched historical controls. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:316(abst).
156. Miller JS, Arthur DC, Litz CE, et al. Myelodysplastic syndrome after autologous bone marrow transplantation: an additional late complication of curative cancer therapy. Blood 1994;83:3780.
157. Traweek ST, Slovak ML, Nademanee AP, et al. Clonal karyotypic hematopoietic cell abnormalities occurring after autologous bone marrow transplantation for Hodgkin's disease and
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1994;84:957.
158. Darrington DL, Vose JM, Anderson JR, et al. Incidence and characterization of secondary myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myelogenous leukemia following high-dose chemoradiotherapy
and autologous stem-cell transplantation for lymphoid malignancies. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2527.
159. Stone RM, Neuberg D, Soiffer R, et al. Myelodysplastic syndrome as a late complication following autologous bone marrow transplantation for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:2535.
160. Bhatia S, Ramsay NK, Steinbuch M, et al. Malignant neoplasms following bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1996;87:3633.
161. Laughlin MJ, McGaughey DS, Crews JR, et al. Secondary myelodysplasia and acute leukemia in breast cancer patients after autologous bone marrow transplant. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1008.
162. Govindarajan R, Jagannath S, Flick JT, et al. Preceding standard therapy is the likely cause of MDS after autotransplants for multiple myeloma. Br J Haematol 1996;95:349.
163. Deeg HJ, Socie G. Malignancies after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: many questions, some answers. Blood 1998;91:1833.
164. Andre M, Henry-Amar M, Blaise D, et al. Treatment-related deaths and second cancer risk after autologous stem-cell transplantation for Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1998;92:1933.
165. Harrison CN, Gregory W, Hudson GV, et al. High-dose BEAM chemotherapy with autologous haemopoietic stem cell transplantation for Hodgkin's disease is unlikely to be associated with a
major increased risk of secondary MDS/AML. Br J Cancer 1999;81:476.
166. Sobecks RM, Le Beau MM, Anastasi J, Williams SF. Myelodysplasia and acute leukemia following high-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow or peripheral blood stem cell
transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;23:1161.
167. Freedman AS, Gribben JG, Neuberg D, et al. High-dose therapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation in patients with follicular lymphoma during first remission. Blood 1996;88:2780.
168. Laporte JP, Fouillard L, Douay L, et al. GM-CSF instead of autologous bone-marrow transplantation after the BEAM regimen. Lancet 1991;338:601.
169. Baranov AE, Selidovkin GD, Butturini A, Gale RP. Hematopoietic recovery after 10-Gy acute total body radiation. Blood 1994;83:596.
170. Anderson JR, Vose J, Kessinger A. Myelodysplastic syndrome after autologous transplant for lymphoma [Letter]. Blood 1994;84:3988.

171. LaCasce A, Neuberg D, Janosova A, et al. Clonal karyotypic abnormalities after autologous bone marrow transplantation for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma are common and not always associated
with myelodysplastic syndrome. Blood 1999;94:344.
172. Bokemeyer C, Kollmannsberger C, Meisner C, et al. First-line high-dose chemotherapy compared with standard-dose PEB/VIP chemotherapy in patients with advanced germ cell tumors: a
multivariate and matched pair analysis. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3450.
173. Kwak LW. Tumor vaccination strategies combined with autologous peripheral stem cell transplantation. Ann Oncol 1998;9:S41.
174. Cuellar-Ambrosi F, Seropian S, McGuirk J, et al. Allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplant for patients with high risk aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:381b
(abst).

SECTION 53.3 Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 53.3
Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation
RICHARD W. CHILDS
Historical Perspective
Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation for Hematologic Malignancies
Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation for Nonmalignant Disorders
Preparative Regimens
Graft-versus-Leukemia Effect
Clinical Significance
Mechanisms
Complications of Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
Venoocclusive Disease
Pulmonary Complications
Late Complications
Epstein-Barr Virus Lymphoproliferative Disorder
Graft-versus-Host Disease
Graft Failure
Cytomegalovirus Infection
Sources of Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cells
Allogeneic Peripheral Blood Stem Cell Transplants
Umbilical Cord Blood Transplantation
Unrelated Donors
Mismatched Related Donors
Nonmyeloablative Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation
Nonmyeloablative Conditioning Regimens
Nonmyeloablative Transplantation Toxicity
Engraftment after Nonmyeloablative Stem Cell Transplantation
Graft-versus-Host Disease
Graft-versus-Leukemia Effect after Nonmyeloablative Stem Cell Transplantation
Graft-versus-Tumor Effects
Future Directions for Nonmyeloablative Stem Cell Transplantation
Results of Conventional Allogeneic Transplantation for Hematologic Malignancies
Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia
Acute Myelogenous Leukemia
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
Myelodysplastic Syndrome
Other Hematologic Malignancies
Future Prospects
Chapter References

HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
The concept that allogeneic hematopoietic progenitor cells could be used to rescue marrow function in humans after myeloablative doses of whole body irradiation or
high-dose chemotherapy arose predominantly from research in mouse models. Mice, after exposure to lethal doses of irradiation, could be reproducibly rescued from
marrow aplasia after intravenous infusion of splenocytes or bone marrow cells. 1,2 These observations were followed by mostly unsuccessful clinical applications of
bone marrow transplantation (BMT) in humans in the late 1950s, predominantly owing to a limited knowledge of the methods required for the safe application of
dose-intensive chemotherapy or total body irradiation (TBI). 3 However, through the dedicated persistence of researchers such as Thomas et al., 4 who pioneered in the
field, the biology and mechanisms required to optimize the procedure were gradually defined. Identification of the HLA system as the major determinant of
transplantation outcome was the breakthrough required to establish the field of allogeneic BMT as a successful clinical discipline. 5
By the 1970s, BMT began to gain acceptance in the medical community as its application expanded from the treatment of patients with hematologic malignancies,
such as acute leukemia and chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), to the treatment of patients with nonmalignant hematologic conditions, such as congenital
immunodeficiency syndromes and aplastic anemia. The improved safety and efficacy of dose-intensive treatment regimens, as well as the development of better
supportive care measures, laid the foundation for successful allogeneic BMT during this period.
The potential of allogeneic BMT to cure otherwise fatal hematologic malignancies rapidly became established. However, the numerous toxicities associated with the
procedure—namely, severe organ toxicity from dose-intensive conditioning, graft rejection, opportunistic infections, and graft-versus-host disease (GVHD)—were
quickly defined as well. 4 Although a number of effective drugs became available to prevent or manage many of these complications, such as cyclosporin A (CSA) for
the prevention of acute GVHD and ganciclovir for the treatment of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection, transplant-related mortality remained high, in the range of 30% to
40%.6 Furthermore, attempts to improve transplantation outcome by preventing disease relapse through intensification of the conditioning regimen proved to be
largely unsuccessful, mostly owing to an increase in toxicities associated with these intensified regimens.
Great strides were made in the field of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (SCT) in the 1990s, in improving both transplantation safety and efficacy.
The association of an increased risk of leukemic relapse after T-cell depletion of the allograft, as well as the observation that relapse was less likely in patients with a
history of acute or chronic GVHD, lent credence to the concept that a donor immune-mediated antimalignancy effect, called graft-versus-leukemia (GVL), occurred
after such procedures. 7,8 The most compelling evidence for the GVL effect is seen in patients with relapsed CML after transplantation who are successfully induced
back into a complete and durable remission following the infusion of donor lymphocytes. Similar GVL effects after donor lymphocyte infusion (DLI) have been
observed in other malignancies, including acute leukemias, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and multiple myeloma.
The success of DLI, particularly in relapsed CML, has generated intense interest in exploring the nature of this powerful immune effect and has raised the question of
whether GVL alone, without toxic high-dose chemotherapy or radiotherapy, could be sufficient to eradicate some hematologic malignancies. To answer this question,
a number of investigators have explored the concept of using low-intensity, immunosuppressive but nonmyeloablative conditioning regimens to permit engraftment of
the donor immune system for the generation of GVL effects while sparing patients the toxicities associated with myeloablative therapy. Early results have been
encouraging, demonstrating that such transplantation regimens are well tolerated, with a decreased incidence of transplant-related morbidity and mortality, even in
high-risk patients. 278,279,280,281,282,283,284 and 285 More important, they have demonstrated that GVL alone, without toxic myeloablative conditioning, is sufficient to cure
some hematologic malignancies. 279,282,286 These findings highlight the unique and potentially curative immune aspects that are intrinsic to this form of therapy.

ALLOGENEIC HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION FOR HEMATOLOGIC MALIGNANCIES
The relationship between the intensity of chemo/radiotherapy and the antitumor effect led to the development of most high-intensity BMT strategies. Myeloablative
doses of chemo/radiotherapy, which are intended to eradicate the malignancy completely, are followed by the infusion of compatible donor hematopoietic progenitor
cells to rescue the patient from conditioning-induced bone marrow aplasia. This concept is applied most appropriately to malignancies such as leukemia that originate
from the bone marrow itself. However, increasing evidence reveals that even the most intense of conditioning regimens often does not completely eradicate leukemic
clones. Rather, a powerful immune reaction generated from donor cells against residual leukemia (GVL) ensues in the majority of responding patients, rendering them
leukemia-free.9,10,11,12,13,14 and 15 It is through the combination of these two components—dose-intensive tumor killing followed by the GVL effect—that allogeneic
hematopoietic SCT has its curative potential.

ALLOGENEIC HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION FOR NONMALIGNANT DISORDERS
Allogeneic hematopoietic SCT can be used to successfully treat nonmalignant diseases associated with defective bone marrow function or metabolic disorders
associated with lysosomal enzyme defects. These disorders, although nonmalignant, often result in an extremely poor quality of life and may have long-term
life-threatening sequelae, thus justifying the risks of morbidity and mortality associated with the procedure. The list of nonmalignant diseases curable by allogeneic
hematopoietic SCT is long and includes severe aplastic anemia, Fanconi's anemia, thalassemia major, chronic granulomatous disease, sickle cell anemia, and a
number of immunodeficiency syndromes, such as the severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome, Chédiak-Higashi disease, and the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome.16,17,18,19 and 20 Because the eradication of malignant cells is not a concern, the preparative regimens used in these diseases usually are of lower intensity or
do not include irradiation, serving primarily to provide sufficient immunosuppression to allow for the engraftment of normal donor bone marrow cells. In some
diseases, particularly sickle cell anemia and thalassemia major in children, excellent results have been achieved with disease-free survivals greater then 95%. 21,22 and
23

PREPARATIVE REGIMENS
In the treatment of malignant diseases, the primary purpose of the preparative regimen is to eradicate malignant cells and to induce immunosuppression in the
recipient so that rejection is prevented and engraftment of the donor hematopoietic system is permitted. The decision to use a particular preparative regimen often is
guided by the sensitivity of the underlying malignancy to the agents contained within that regimen. Although a number of different agents have been used for their
antitumor effects in hematologic malignancies, in general, they can be divided into two categories: TBI-based and chemotherapy-based.
Most regimens based on TBI are composed of high-dose cyclophosphamide given as 60 mg/kg IV on 2 consecutive days, followed by varying doses of fractionated
TBI to a cumulative dose of 1200 to 1500 cGy. 24,25 and 26 Although there is some evidence that the higher doses of TBI may be more effective in terms of preventing
disease relapse, toxicity appears to increase concomitantly, thus negating any overall benefit. 27,28 and 29 Results, in terms of toxicity and disease-free survival, appear
similar between regimens composed of TBI and etoposide (60 mg/kg) and those composed of TBI and cyclophosphamide. 30
Although a number of chemotherapy-based regimens that do not include irradiation have been used, 31,32,33 and 34 the combination of cyclophosphamide (60 mg/kg IV on
2 consecutive days) and busulfan (4 mg/kg PO on 4 consecutive days) has gained increasing popularity and use since its conception in the early 1980s. 35 Similar to
the experience with TBI, dose intensification of chemotherapy-based regimens usually results in increased toxicity, thus negating any potential survival benefit that
might occur as a result of less disease relapse.
The decision guiding which preparative regimen to use often is based on the predicted tumor-specific activity of that regimen. In general, radiation- and
chemotherapy-based regimens are associated with an equal probability of achieving long-term disease-free survival. Two randomized trials evaluating
cyclophosphamide (60 mg/kg × 2) and busulfan versus TBI and cyclophosphamide (60 mg/kg × 2) in patients with chronic-phase CML revealed equal efficacy
between both regimens.36,37 However, in acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL), TBI-based regimens may be the treatment of choice, as a randomized trial reported a
significantly increased risk of relapse in patients with ALL who received conditioning with chemotherapy alone (busulfan and etoposide). 38
The toxicity profile of preparative regimens varies considerably, a factor that often determines the choice of which regimen to use for an individual patient. In general,
TBI-based regimens are associated with a higher risk of secondary malignancies and growth retardation, while chemotherapy-based regimens, particularly those
containing busulfan, are associated with a higher risk of severe mucositis and venoocclusive disease (VOD), with minimal effects on growth and
development.39,40,41,42,43 and 44
A number of investigators have explored the concept of using low-intensity preparative regimens (either low-dose chemotherapy, low-dose TBI, or both) in attempts to
decrease the risk of toxicity and mortality associated with myeloablative conditioning. 45,46,47 and 48 The preparative regimen in such nonmyeloablative stem cell
transplantations (NSTs; discussed later in Nonmyeloablative Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation ) does not eradicate host hematopoiesis and is used primarily to
induce immunosuppression in the recipient to allow for engraftment of donor cells for the subsequent generation of GVL effects. Such low-intensity transplantations
rely completely on the GVL effect to eradicate malignancy. Although these regimens vary considerably between institutions, preliminary results are promising,
showing high degrees of donor engraftment with considerably less conditioning-related toxicity than is seen with conventional high-dose myeloablative regimens,
even in older (older than 55 years) and debilitated patients. Most of the severe and life-threatening complications associated with conventional preparative regimens,
such as VOD, pneumonitis, and severe mucositis, have rarely been observed with NST. More important, sufficient engraftment of donor immune cells has been
achieved to induce complete remission in a number of different hematologic malignancies. 278,279,280,281,282 and 283 The improved safety profile of NST, in both the short
and long term, will likely make this transplantation approach the procedure of choice for patients at high risk for complications with conventional dose-intensive
regimens (i.e., older or debilitated patients). Furthermore, NST may have its greatest benefit among younger patients in whom growth retardation, sterility, and the risk
of secondary malignancy may be completely avoided. The toxicity profiles of TBI-based, chemotherapy-based, and nonmyeloablative transplantation regimens are
shown in Table 53.3-1.

TABLE 53.3-1. Toxicity Profiles of Conditioning Regimens

GRAFT-VERSUS-LEUKEMIA EFFECT
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
The concept that donor immune cells might make an important contribution to the antileukemic effect of allogeneic BMT was first suggested in the 1950s on the basis
of observations in animal models. Mice with leukemia given syngeneic BMTs died of leukemia, whereas mice given allogeneic cells were rescued from leukemia but
died from acute GVHD.50 Subsequently, a large body of evidence began to point toward similar antileukemic effects in humans, mediated through donor cells after
allotransplantation. Observations supporting this donor-mediated antileukemic (GVL) effect initially were based on the observation that relapse of leukemia was less
likely in patients who developed GVHD after BMT than in those who never developed GVHD. 51 Additional support for the GVL effect included the observation that
leukemic relapse occurred more frequently in identical twin transplants and in transplantations in which recipients received T-lymphocyte–depleted marrow for the
prevention of GVHD.52,53 Furthermore, recipients of T-cell–depleted transplants have an increased risk of relapse even after adjusting for GVHD, further supporting an
antileukemic effect of donor immune cells separate from acute GVHD. Patients with a history of both acute and chronic GVHD were observed to have the lowest risk
of relapse. 9 Data from the International Bone Marrow Transplant Registry showing the relationship of GVHD, T-cell depletion, and the type of allograft to the
probability of relapse are shown in Figure 53.3-1.54 Data from this registry suggest that these effects vary according to the type of leukemia but are most evident in
patients with chronic-phase CML undergoing transplantation. Further indirect evidence for the GVL effect includes the observation that up to 50% of patients with
CML have small numbers of cells that are Philadelphia-chromosome positive or remain positive for the bcr/abl transcript for months after allogeneic BMT. In the
majority of cases, these abnormal cells and bcr/abl transcripts become undetectable over time. 55,56,57 and 58 Additionally, abrupt discontinuation of CSA after detection

of disease relapse in CML has been associated with reinduction of cytogenetic remission. 59,60

FIGURE 53.3-1. Actuarial probability of relapse after bone marrow transplantation for early leukemia according to type of graft and development of graft-versus-host
disease (GVHD). AGVHD, acute GVHD; CGVHD, chronic GVHD. (From ref. 9, with permission.)

Finally, the most compelling evidence supporting the powerful and potentially curative nature of the GVL effect is the observation that complete and durable
remissions can be induced by the transfusion of lymphocytes from the marrow donor, without chemotherapy or radiotherapy, in patients with CML who have relapsed
after marrow transplantation.61,62,63,64,65 and 66 The efficacy of DLI for the treatment of relapsed leukemia is disease-dependent, with remission induction occurring in a
substantially higher percentage of patients with chronic-phase CML than in patients with advanced CML or other acute leukemias. 49 In general, 70% to 80% of
patients with cytogenetic or hematologic relapse of CML can be expected to achieve a molecular remission after DLI, with 87% of these patients remaining
disease-free at 3 years. 67,68 Remissions usually are not observed until months after DLI, consistent with the time required to expand antileukemic clones ( Fig. 53.3-2).

FIGURE 53.3-2. Time to complete remission in acute (AML) and chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) patients treated with donor lymphocyte infusion (DLI). (From
ref. 49, with permission.)

In contrast to the relatively high efficacy of DLI in relapsed chronic-phase CML, only a minority of patients with relapsed acute leukemia achieve remission after this
approach. In a report from the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplant, only 29% of patients with relapsed acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) and none
with relapsed ALL (0 of 11) achieved remission after DLI. 67,68 Unlike chronic-phase CML, remission after DLI for advanced-phase CML and acute leukemia appears to
be of limited duration, with the majority of responders experiencing relapse within 1 year of treatment. The poor response of accelerated or blast crisis CML to DLI is
perhaps due to clonal evolution of the leukemia leading to selective expansion of malignant cells capable of escaping immune recognition. 69
Disease regression after DLI has also been described in patients with multiple myeloma, CLL, and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma who experience relapse after
allotransplantation, although too few have been treated to define the efficacy of this approach in these diseases. 70,71
The major complication associated with DLI is acute and chronic GVHD. Acute GVHD, which may be severe or life-threatening (grade III or IV) in 15% to 20% of
cases, may develop after DLI in up to 70% to 80% of patients. 64,65,66,67 and 68,72 The propensity for GVHD after DLI is likely affected by the relatively large dose of T
lymphocytes that traditionally have been infused (1 to 10 ×10 7 CD3 cells/kg), as well as the fact that these cells are usually given without GVHD prophylaxis. Two
approaches to reduce the incidence of GVHD after DLI have been developed. One approach is to selectively infuse lymphocytes depleted of CD8+ T cells: This
approach was investigated based on the experience that allografts depleted of CD8+ cells were associated with a low incidence of GVHD without an increased risk of
relapse.73,74 and 75 Several nonrandomized trials have shown that DLI depleted of CD8+ cells can reinduce remission, with a rate of GVHD that is lower than that
observed with unmanipulated DLI. 76,77 The other strategy involves the infusion of donor lymphocytes in multiple aliquots, starting at low cell numbers and escalating
the dosage at variable intervals until a GVL effect is achieved. 78 This approach is based on the premise that lower T-cell numbers might induce remission while
decreasing the risk of GVHD. One trial comparing these two different lymphocyte infusion approaches in patients with relapsed chronic-phase CML revealed a
significantly lower incidence of GVHD in the group that received dose-escalating lymphocyte infusions than in the group receiving traditional single “bulk-dose”
regimens (10% vs. 44%). Importantly, although the incidence of acute GVHD was extremely low in the escalating-dose group, the GVL effect was preserved, with 91%
of these patients achieving a complete remission by 2 years ( Fig. 53.3-3).79

FIGURE 53.3-3. Probability of achieving cytogenetic remission for 48 patients who received escalating-dose (EDR) or bulk-dose infusion regimens (BDR) dated from
the first (or only) infusion of donor lymphocytes (DLI). (From ref. 79, with permission.)

The other potentially life-threatening complication of DLI is marrow aplasia. Approximately 30% to 40% of patients who receive DLI for relapsed CML develop
pancytopenia, which typically occurs at the time of the GVL response. 67,68 Although most patients still have mixed or complete T-cell chimerism at the time of DLI,
myeloid chimerism may be predominantly recipient in origin, originating from the leukemic clone, thus leaving the marrow aplastic after a graft-versus-host
hematopoietic effect occurs. The duration of aplasia is variable and is directly dependent on the number of residual donor hematopoietic progenitor cells. Although, in
most cases, spontaneous reconstitution of marrow by donor cells usually occurs, some patients have persistent aplasia and may require additional donor stem cell

infusions to rescue marrow function. Reconditioning before such stem cell infusions is not required, as most patients have predominantly donor immunity and
therefore are tolerant of donor stem cells. Although the infusion of donor lymphocytes with stem cells has been used successfully to treat relapsed leukemia, it is
unclear whether the incidence and severity of bone marrow aplasia is mitigated. 80

MECHANISMS
Although considerable evidence supports the existence and clinical significance of the GVL effect, the dominant antigens on leukemic cells and the effector cells
mediating the antileukemic effect are not well characterized. The high incidence of leukemic relapse in syngeneic transplantations suggests that a significant
component of the GVL effect is allogeneic in nature. Minor histocompatibility antigens, disparate between patient and donor, are likely targets for both GVHD and the
GVL effect.81,82,83,84,85,86 and 87 The tissue-restricted pattern of minor histocompatibility antigens (mHa) likely explains why some patients respond to DLI without the
development of GVHD: T-cell populations mediating an antileukemic reaction through mHa restricted to hematopoietic cells would not be expected to cause GVHD, in
contrast to T cells targeting such antigens expressed broadly on both normal tissue and leukemic cells, where both GVHD and a GVL effect would occur. Indeed,
T-cell clones have been generated in vitro that specifically recognize mHa restricted to leukemic cells and normal hematopoietic cells. 81,86
Although leukemia-restricted peptides would appear to be an attractive target for donor immune cells, convincing evidence has not yet been found to implicate a
specific antileukemic effect in GVL. However, the observation that some patients with relapsed leukemia achieve remission after DLI without GVHD lends credence to
the notion that GVL may occasionally be a targeted antileukemic process. In vitro, it is possible to generate T-cell clones against leukemia cells as well as
leukemia-specific peptides. Peptides corresponding to the binding region of P210 BCR/ABL in CML, and the fusion region of the hybrid protein PML/RAR in acute
promyelocytic leukemia, can be used to generate T-cell populations with leukemia-specific cytolytic activity. 88,89,90,91,92 and 93 Although potentially attractive for targeted
immunotherapeutic approaches, no clear evidence supports the hypothesis that these leukemia-specific peptides are a target for GVL. 94
The nature of the effector cells mediating the GVL effect is not entirely known. In animal models, these effectors often are leukemia- and mouse strain–specific, thus
limiting insight into the GVL process in humans. Both CD4+ T helper cells and CD8+ cytotoxic T cells with direct antileukemic activity have been isolated from patients
after allogeneic BMT, therefore implicating both as having a role in GVL. 95,96,97,98,99 and 100 CD4+ T cells appear to play a particularly important role in the GVL effect in
CML. Indeed CD4+ T cells have been generated that are cytolytic to CML cells in vitro and can be used successfully to treat relapsed leukemia in patients after
BMT.76,77 Although other cell populations such as natural killer cells, lymphokine-activated killer cells, and gd T cells may have antileukemic activity, it is not clear
what their overall contribution is to the GVL effect. 101,102 The ability to separate GVL from GVHD will depend on the future delineation of these effector populations and
their target antigens.

COMPLICATIONS OF ALLOGENEIC HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION
Allogeneic hematopoietic SCT is associated with a number of complications, many unique to this type of therapy, which can be divided into two general categories:
toxicities related to conditioning and toxicities related to the transplantation of an allogeneic immune system into the patient—specifically, graft rejection, GVHD, and
infectious complications associated with immunosuppression.
The complications associated with myeloablative doses of chemo/radiotherapy vary in terms of incidence and severity, depending on the intensity and type of agents
used in conditioning. These complications may occur as an immediate side effect, at or shortly after administration of the preparative regimen, or in a delayed fashion,
years after transplantation. Commonly observed immediate toxicities include nausea and vomiting, mucositis, parotid gland inflammation related to TBI, and
neutropenia with associated fever or opportunistic bacterial or invasive fungal infection.
High-dose cyclophosphamide may be associated with hemorrhagic cystitis or, more rarely, rapidly progressive heart failure. 103,104 The routine use of mesna, hydration,
and forced diuresis has largely eliminated early hemorrhagic cystitis. 105 In contrast, late hemorrhagic cystitis, occurring beyond 72 hours after cyclophosphamide
infusion, remains a continuing problem in allogeneic BMT and usually is viral in origin (polyoma virus BK or adenovirus). 106 High-dose busulfan is associated with
grand mal seizures; many busulfan-containing regimens use seizure prophylaxis with phenytoin (Dilantin) or phenobarbital. 107
Opportunistic infections as a consequence of preparative regimen–induced neutropenia remain a significant complication associated with allogeneic BMT. Most
fungal and bacterial infections originate from microorganisms colonizing the skin, oral cavity, perianal area, or gastrointestinal or respiratory tract. The most common
life-threatening infections occur during the neutropenic period and involve gram-negative and aerobic gram-positive bacteria. These pathogens gain entry into the
host through indwelling vascular catheters or as a consequence of the breakdown of gastrointestinal mucosa related to high-dose chemo/radiotherapy.
Decontamination of the gastrointestinal tract with nonabsorbable antibiotics such as neomycin or vancomycin have met with mixed success, with poor patient
compliance being a major drawback to this approach. 108,109 Such prophylactic oral quinolones as ciprofloxacin and norfloxacin appear to decrease the incidence of
febrile neutropenia and gram-negative infections, although possibly at the expense of more episodes of gram-positive bacteremia. 110,111
Candida and Aspergillus species are the most common fungal pathogens, frequently causing infection during periods of neutropenia or systemic corticosteroid use for
GVHD. Oral triazoles, such as fluconazole, have been shown in randomized trials to decrease the incidence of opportunistic candidal infections but have no impact on
the incidence of infections with resistant species such as Aspergillus or Candida krusei.112,113 It is unclear whether the shortened duration of absolute neutropenia
associated with the use of recombinant hematopoietic growth factors [i.e., granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)] will lead to a decrease in the incidence of
infections by these opportunistic pathogens.
VENOOCCLUSIVE DISEASE
One of the most serious life-threatening complications of dose-intensive chemo/radiotherapy is hepatic VOD. VOD produces a clinical syndrome of jaundice, tender
hepatomegaly, and unexplained weight gain or ascites. 114,115 Clinically evident VOD occurs in approximately 30% of allogeneic BMT patients conditioned with
busulfan-containing regimens, with approximately 25% of those affected having severe life-threatening disease leading to progressive liver failure, hepatic
encephalopathy, or hepatorenal syndrome. The exact pathogenesis of VOD is unknown, although the earliest event is believed to be endothelial damage due to BMT
conditioning, leading to fibrinogen and collagen deposition in vessel walls at the interface of hepatic sinusoids and terminal venules, which ultimately become
obstructed. Damage to zone three hepatocytes also is present. Predisposing factors for VOD include a history of liver disease, advanced age, elevated liver enzymes
before transplantation, dose intensity of the conditioning regimen, presence of acute GVHD, and transplants from alternative donors such as matched, unrelated
donors or haploidentical donors. 116,117 and 118 The diagnosis of VOD is based on the presence of clinical criteria (jaundice, tender hepatomegaly, and unexplained
weight gain or ascites); there is a 90% correlation between the presence of all three criteria and a histologic confirmation by liver biopsy. 119
Therapy for established VOD is unsatisfactory and consists mostly of measures to support renal function, fluid balance, and coagulation status. Recombinant tissue
plasminogen activator (tPA) and prostaglandin E 1 have had mixed success, making it unclear what, if any, role these agents should play in the treatment of
established disease. 120,121,122 and 123 In a single-institution trial, defibrotide, a polydeoxyribonucleotide with activity in several vascular disorders, was used to treat
patients with severe VOD after SCT. The drug was well tolerated and showed promising efficacy, with 42% of patients having complete resolution of VOD, warranting
further investigation of this agent. 124 The therapeutic drug monitoring of busulfan, with appropriate dose adjustments, appears to be useful in reducing the incidence of
VOD in patients receiving this agent. Data regarding pharmacologic prophylaxis against VOD have been contradictory. One double-blind, randomized trial showed a
significant reduction in the incidence of VOD in patients taking ursodiol prophylaxis as compared to those taking placebo (50% vs. 15%). Ursodiol was well tolerated
and may prove particularly useful as prophylaxis in patients defined to be at high risk for VOD. 125
PULMONARY COMPLICATIONS
Pulmonary complications occur frequently after allogeneic BMT and may be related to infectious agents, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, or pulmonary edema, or may
have an idiopathic origin. Common infectious etiologies include Aspergillus species or other fungi, respiratory syncytial virus, and CMV. Late pneumonia from
Pneumocystis carinii may occur up to 1 year after transplantation and usually is related to prolonged CD4+ lymphopenia associated with T-cell depletion of the
allograft or GVHD. Interstitial pneumonitis (IP), characterized by fever, hypoxia, and diffuse pulmonary infiltrates, occurs in 20% to 40% of patients, usually within the
first 3 months of transplantation, and may be lethal in up to one-half of cases. 126,127,128,129 and 130 Nearly 90% of the cases of IP either are related to CMV infection or
have an idiopathic origin [idiopathic interstitial pneumonitis (IIP)]. 131 The incidence of early CMV pneumonitis appears to have decreased significantly in the 1990s

through the use of both effective prophylactic regimens (intravenous immunoglobulin and ganciclovir) and better methods for early detection of CMV reactivation.
Patient-specific risk factors for IP include older age, prior history of exposure to pulmonary toxic drugs such as bleomycin, history of acute or chronic GVHD, dose
intensity of the conditioning regimen, or use of TBI. 126,127,128,129 and 130,132,133 Regimens that use a lower dose rate or total dose of TBI, as well as hyperfractionated TBI,
may be associated with a lower risk of IP.
Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage should be used in all patients with IP to differentiate IIP from infectious causes or diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. Empiric use
of anti-CMV agents such as ganciclovir or foscarnet should be considered when bronchoalveolar lavage is not feasible. Although evidence exists supporting the
efficacy of high-dose steroids in patients with diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, their effectiveness in the treatment of IIP remains equivocal. 134,135
LATE COMPLICATIONS
The delayed complications associated with allogeneic SCT depend on patient age at transplantation and are a consequence of the effects of long-term damage to
normal tissues by either the preparative regimen or chronic GVHD. These effects include growth retardation, infertility, endocrine failure, cataracts, renal insufficiency,
restrictive pulmonary defects, neurocognitive defects, and secondary malignancies. 136,137 The use of TBI in the conditioning regimen seems to be the major factor
associated with secondary malignancies. 138,139 and 140 On long-term follow-up of 1036 patients undergoing BMT for a wide range of malignant and nonmalignant
conditions, a 12.6% incidence of secondary neoplasms was reported at 15 years, a rate that was 3.8 times higher than that for an age-matched control population. 141
The most frequently observed secondary neoplasms were of the skin and oral cavity, with older patient age and use of CSA for chronic GVHD being significant risk
factors for new malignant disease.
EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE DISORDER
Posttransplantation Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)–associated lymphoproliferative disorder (LPD) represents an aggressive and potentially fatal B-cell lymphoid
proliferation that occurs after 5% to 30% of allogeneic transplantations. This lymphoma originates from B cells infected with EBV, typically of donor origin, and usually
stems from a deficiency of EBV-specific cytotoxic T cells associated with the use of immunosuppressive drugs or T-cell depletion of the allograft. 142,143 and 144 EBV LPD
can be successfully treated by infusing unmanipulated donor leukocytes that contain cytotoxic T cells presensitized to EBV. 145 One trial in children receiving
T-cell-depleted transplants from HLA-mismatched donors demonstrated that the prophylactic infusion of ex vivo–generated EBV-specific T cells can successfully
prevent EBV LPD without causing acute GVHD. 146 Others have shown that B-cell depletion of the allograft can also be used to prevent this disorder. 147 The use of
Rituximab (Rituxan), a monoclonal antibody to the B-cell antigen CD20, has recently been shown to be an alternative strategy that can successfully treat established
LPD. 148
GRAFT-VERSUS-HOST DISEASE
GVHD is the consequence of immunocompetent donor T cells targeting recipient tissues that possess antigens absent from the donor. 149,150 and 151 The major target
tissues of GVHD are the skin, liver, and gastrointestinal tract, although other tissues may be involved. The diagnosis of acute GVHD may be based on one or a myriad
of characteristic clinical and laboratory findings. 152,153,154 and 155 Skin manifestations include an erythematous maculopapular rash often involving the palms and soles
and, under severe circumstances, may be associated with desquamation. Hepatic involvement is characterized by a rise in alkaline phosphatase and total bilirubin,
often in association with a mild to moderate increase in hepatic transaminases. Gastrointestinal GVHD predominantly involves the distal small bowel and colon and
clinically is associated with cramping abdominal pain and watery diarrhea, which may be voluminous and bloody under severe circumstances. Endoscopic findings
are variable and may range from mild bowel edema to total denuding of intestinal mucosa; colonic biopsy usually reveals classic pathologic features showing crypt
cell necrosis with apoptotic bodies and lymphocytic infiltrates, although disease involvement can be patchy and missed on random biopsy. Upper gastrointestinal
involvement, although more rare, may be associated with recurrent nausea, vomiting, and dyspepsia. 156 Traditionally, acute GVHD has been divided into severity
grades I through IV, depending on the extent of skin involvement, volume of diarrhea, or level of bilirubin elevation ( Table 53.3-2).157

TABLE 53.3-2. Glucksberg Clinical Stage and Grade of Acute Graft-Versus-Host Disease

Donor T cells are the principle mediators of GVHD. In an HLA-mismatched setting, CD8+ T cells may target major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I
mismatched antigens, while CD4+ T cells are responsible for the recognition and targeting of MHC class II mismatched antigens. 158,159,160,161 and 162 The antigens that
are disparate between patient and donor and serve as a target for GVHD in HLA-identical sibling transplants are referred to as minor histocompatibility antigens
(mHa). Relatively few mHa have been characterized to date, although there is increasing evidence to suggest that the degree of disparity between recipient and donor
mHa is a major determinant for the development of both acute and chronic GVHD. 163,164,165 and 166 The development of GVHD is a multistep process in which recipient
tissues are recognized as foreign by the donor immune system, followed by the activation and expansion of GVHD effector populations, ultimately leading to
T-cell–mediated direct cytotoxic damage of target tissues.
GVHD remains a significant contributor to transplant-related morbidity and mortality. The incidence and severity of GVHD is determined by a number of variables,
including degrees of HLA disparity between patient and donor, use of a T-cell–replete versus T-cell–depleted allograft, patient age, and the agents used in GVHD
prophylaxis.167,168 and 169 Furthermore, acute GVHD after T-cell–replete allogeneic BMT often is most severe within the first month after transplantation and appears to
be exacerbated by conditioning-induced cytokine release from damaged recipient tissues. In general, the incidence of clinically significant acute GVHD (grades II
through IV) in patients undergoing a T-cell–replete allogeneic SCT (from an HLA-identical sibling) in which conventional GVHD prophylaxis is used (CSA and
methotrexate) is on the order of 30% to 40%, with approximately 15% of patients developing severe grade III or IV disease. 167 In recipients of partially matched related
donor or partially matched unrelated donor transplants, acute GVHD occurs more frequently, affecting more than 70% of patients. 170
The two most common methods for preventing acute GVHD include the use of prophylactic immunosuppressive agents and the use of allografts from which donor T
cells have been depleted. Although the combined use of CSA and methotrexate has been found to be superior to either agent alone in the prevention of GVHD, the
addition of prednisone to these agents does not appear to offer any additional benefit. 171,172 and 173 In both HLA-identical sibling and unrelated transplantations, T-cell
depletion is the most effective method for preventing GVHD but is associated with an increased risk of graft rejection, opportunistic viral infection, and leukemic
relapse. Although the risk of disease relapse is leukemia-specific, a large retrospective analysis from the International Bone Marrow Transplant Registry showed clear
evidence that T-cell depletion was associated with a lower disease-free survival in CML. 174 Novel methods of T-cell depletion that appear to decrease this risk of
acute GVHD without increasing the risk of disease relapse include the use of allografts that have been selectively depleted of CD8+ T cells and the use of
T-cell–depleted transplants followed by a delayed infusion of donor lymphocytes months after the original transplantation to preserve the GVL effect. 74,75,175
The mainstay of therapy for the treatment of acute GVHD is corticosteroid therapy, usually in association with CSA or FK506. Approximately 40% to 60% of patients
with grade II to IV GVHD can be expected to respond to these agents. 176,177 and 178 One randomized trial of low-dose (2 mg/kg) versus high-dose (10 mg/kg)
methylprednisolone for acute GVHD showed no difference in response rates with either regimen. 179 Response to steroids appears to predict survival, with
steroid-refractory patients being at a significantly higher risk of transplant-related mortality than steroid-responsive patients. Antithymocyte globulin (ATG) has been

used with minimal success in patients with steroid-refractory disease, and it appears to be inferior to steroids or CSA as an initial therapy for acute GVHD. 180 Other
approaches that have shown early promise for the treatment of steroid-resistant disease include the use of the immunosuppressive drug mycophenolate mofetil,
monoclonal antibodies that target a number of different T-cell antigens, and extracorporeal photopheresis. 181,182,183,184,185,186 and 187
Chronic GVHD occurs in 15% to 50% of long-term survivors of allogeneic BMT and typically manifests with symptoms 3 months to 2 years after transplantation. The
etiology of chronic GVHD appears to be related to alloreactive T cells that infiltrate and damage tissues and cause abnormalities in immune regulation. 188,189 and 190 The
greatest risk factor for chronic GVHD is a prior history of acute GVHD, although older patient age, use of mismatched or unrelated donors, a history of DLI for
relapsed malignancy, and use of peripheral blood stem transplants also appear to increase the risk. 191,192 Patients with chronic GVHD often are severely
immunocompromised, either as a consequence of the immunosuppressive therapy used to treat the disorder or from the underlying immune dysregulation associated
with the disease process. Chronic GVHD is lethal in approximately 20% to 30% of cases, with death being predominantly related to infectious causes. 193 Patients with
a particularly poor prognosis include those with hepatic involvement or thrombocytopenia.
Chronic GVHD is traditionally classified as either limited or extensive, limited disease being defined as localized skin involvement with or without mild hepatic
involvement and extensive disease being generalized skin involvement with or without other target organ involvement. The characteristic clinical manifestations are
numerous and include lichenoid or sclerodermatous skin involvement, hepatic cholestasis, friable nails, dry eyes (Sjögren's syndrome), fasciitis, xerostomia, lichenoid
buccal changes, bronchiolitis obliterans, vaginal dryness, serositis, malabsorption, diarrhea, gastrointestinal dysmotility, and pancytopenia. Treatment depends on the
extent of disease. Systemic disease typically is treated with alternate-day CSA or FK506 and low-dose corticosteroids. 194 Patients not responding to standard therapy
often benefit from alternative therapies, including mycophenolate mofetil, psoralen and ultraviolet A for skin involvement, thalidomide, total lymphoid irradiation and,
more recently, extracorporeal photopheresis. 186,195,196 and 197 As infections are the main cause of death, prophylaxis for organisms such as P carinii and encapsulated
bacteria usually is warranted, particularly in those patients receiving systemic immunosuppressive therapy.
GRAFT FAILURE
Failure to achieve or maintain sustained donor hematopoietic engraftment after allogeneic transplantation is referred to as graft failure. Graft failure may manifest as
persistent neutropenia, without evidence of engraftment (primary graft failure) or as initial engraftment followed by a delayed fall in blood counts (late or secondary
graft failure). Graft rejection is the term used to describe graft failure that occurs as a consequence of the active rejection of donor hematopoietic cells by residual
immunocompetent host cells. Clinically, graft rejection manifests as transient donor engraftment followed by a lymphocytosis of recipient origin, which ultimately leads
to the rejection of donor hematopoietic cells and pancytopenia or, in some cases, autologous hematopoietic recovery. The mediators of graft rejection include natural
killer cells or residual recipient T cells recognizing donor-mismatched MHC molecules or, in an HLA-matched setting, mHa. 198,199 and 200
Primary graft failure should be suspected in all transplant patients who remain pancytopenic for longer than 3 to 4 weeks. It is associated with a significant risk of
death from hemorrhage or infection. Although graft failure occurs in fewer than 2% of patients undergoing allogeneic SCT from an HLA-identical sibling, the incidence
increases for recipients of T-cell–depleted transplants, particularly those from HLA-mismatched or unrelated donors. 201,202 and 203 Other risk factors for graft rejection
include the infusion of low stem cell numbers (i.e., <1 × 10 6 CD34+ cells/kg), history of multiple blood transfusions, HLA disparity between the patient and donor, use
of low-intensity or dose-reduced conditioning regimens, and transplantation for severe aplastic anemia. 204,205 Although graft rejection is more common after BMT for
aplastic anemia, the addition of TBI or ATG to the conditioning regimen (usually high-dose cyclophosphamide) has decreased the incidence from 30% to less than
10%.206
Differentiating graft failure from pancytopenia related to other causes, including marrow suppression from infection, medications, or chronic GVHD, is important.
Furthermore, it is important to give early consideration for a second donor stem cell infusion, given the difficult logistics of collecting more donor cells.
Non–immunologically mediated graft failure has been successfully treated with hematopoietic growth factors such as granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor or G-CSF, followed by a second infusion of donor stem cells in those who fail to experience hematopoietic recovery. 207,208 and 209 Graft rejection, in which donor
hematopoietic cells are no longer detectable by cytogenetic or molecular methods, requires repeat conditioning to eradicate these host “rejection” cells, followed by
the infusion of a second donor allograft. Although the outcome in patients requiring a second donor marrow infusion for graft failure often is poor, successful and
sustained donor engraftment has been reported in 57% of primary and 37% of secondary graft failure patients. 210
CYTOMEGALOVIRUS INFECTION
CMV is a member of the herpesvirus family and may be associated with serious and life-threatening pathology after allogeneic BMT. 211,212 Most patients who develop
CMV disease do so as a consequence of viral reactivation from a previous primary infection. The cellular immune system plays an important role in the suppression of
viral reactivation. Disruption of cellular immunity associated with T-cell depletion, GVHD, or immunosuppressive therapy can lead to CMV reactivation and subsequent
disease. The clinical features of CMV disease include pneumonitis, hepatitis, upper gastrointestinal involvement, and colitis. Reactivation tends to occur 3 weeks to
100 days after transplantation and is most strongly associated with acute GVHD and pretransplantation seropositivity of the recipient to CMV. Prior to the
development of reactivation screening techniques and prophylactic drug regimens, CMV pneumonitis was observed in 10% to 30% of patients and was fatal in 50% to
90% of cases.213
Effective prevention can be achieved through the use of CMV-negative or leukocyte-filtered blood products (in seronegative patient-donor pairs) and prophylactic
intravenous immunoglobulin and ganciclovir. 214,215,216,217 and 218 As CMV will never reactivate in 40% to 50% of patients, an alternative and effective approach is to
reserve ganciclovir use for patients with detectable viral reactivation, either by polymerase chain reaction methods or by immunofluorescent techniques designed to
detect viral antigen on the surface of neutrophils (CMV antigenemia). 219 Both techniques allow for early detection and treatment of CMV reactivation long before
symptoms develop. Indeed, these early detection methods have dramatically decreased the incidence and mortality associated with CMV disease.
A recently investigated alternative to CMV drug prophylaxis is to infuse CMV-specific cytotoxic lymphocytes generated from donor cells in vitro, early after
T-cell–depleted transplantation. 220 This cell-based approach for the prevention of CMV reactivation has shown early success and may serve as a paradigm for future
protocols that use tumor-specific T cells to prevent disease relapse.

SOURCES OF ALLOGENEIC HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELLS
ALLOGENEIC PERIPHERAL BLOOD STEM CELL TRANSPLANTS
Based on the success of autologous peripheral blood stem cell (PBSC) transplants, allogeneic transplantation regimens, which use peripheral blood–derived stem
cells as apposed to marrow cells, have been used with increasing frequency since the mid-1990s, with early favorable clinical outcome. 221,222,223,224,225,226 and 227 The
recombinant growth factor G-CSF usually is given to donors for 4 to 6 consecutive days (10 mg/kg/d) to mobilize hematopoietic progenitors into the circulation,
followed by one or two leukapheresis procedures. G-CSF-mobilized PBSC transplants contain higher numbers of progenitor cells than do marrow grafts, usually in the
range of 5 to 10 × 10 6 CD34+ cells/kg. Although the use of lower doses of G-CSF is associated with a decreased incidence of cytokine-related side effects, the
number of CD34+ cells mobilized into circulation may be lower, necessitating additional leukapheresis procedures. 228
PBSC transplants have potential advantages for both the donor and the patient. Donors do not require hospitalization and are spared the pain and potential risks of
general anesthesia associated with marrow harvesting, although the long-term consequences of G-CSF administration remain unknown. Also, PBSC grafts contain
higher numbers of hematopoietic progenitor cells, natural killer cells, and T cells, as compared with bone marrow. 229 Engraftment, therefore, usually is faster, and the
GVL effect may be enhanced.230 Initial concerns that the 10- to 20-fold higher T-cell dose in peripheral blood allografts might be associated with a greater risk of acute
GVHD have been dispelled. Indeed, two trials comparing allogeneic bone marrow to PBSC transplantation have shown that PBSCs are associated with a shorter
period of neutropenia and red blood cell and platelet transfusion dependence, with an equal probability of acute and chronic GVHD. 231,232 The failure to observe a
correlation between the number of T lymphocytes in the allograft and GVHD might be related to the polarizing of donor T cells by G-CSF to a type 2 (suppressor)
cytokine profile.
A phase III trial of allogeneic transplantation in 138 patients with hematologic malignancies found that PBSC grafts were associated with more rapid engraftment and
better disease-free and overall survival than marrow grafts, without a greater risk of acute GVHD. 233 Neutrophil engraftment occurred 6 days earlier (day 15 vs. day

21), and platelet recovery occurred 8 days earlier (day 13 vs. day 21) among those receiving PBSC transplants. The incidence of acute grade III or IV GVHD was
equal between groups, occurring in 16% of PBSC graft and 13% of bone marrow graft recipients. The cumulative incidence of chronic GVHD was also similar,
occurring in 38% of PBSC and 28% of marrow recipients. This study provided the first evidence that PBSC transplantation may be associated with a survival
advantage over conventional marrow transplantation. Two-year survival in the PBSC group was 71%, as compared to 51% in the marrow group, a statistically
significant difference that led to the early termination of this trial. These, as well as the previously mentioned benefits, make it likely that PBSC transplantation will
replace BMT in the allogeneic setting.
UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD TRANSPLANTATION
Umbilical cord blood is a new and promising source of hematopoietic progenitor cells for transplantation in both malignant and nonmalignant disorders. The
realization that cord blood, obtained from the placenta after delivery, contained long-term repopulating progenitor cells led to its investigational use as a source of
stem cells for allogeneic transplantation. 234,235,236 and 237 Cord blood has been shown to contain primitive hematopoietic stem cells with remarkable proliferative
potential, which may overcome the limitation of relatively low absolute cell numbers. 238,239 and 240 Also, the immature lymphocytes in cord blood appear to decrease the
risk and severity of acute and chronic GVHD, potentially permitting greater HLA disparity and expanding donor availability.
In a trial evaluating umbilical cord transplants in 44 children with malignant and nonmalignant hematologic diseases receiving grafts from an HLA-identical or
single-antigen-mismatched donor, 85% engrafted and only 3% developed grade II or worse acute GVHD. 235 A subsequent multiinstitutional study from Europe
reported similar engraftment rates in 78 recipients of cord blood from related donors, with acute GVHD occurring in 9% of the recipients of HLA-matched cord blood
and in 50% of the recipients of HLA-mismatched cord blood. 241 Neutrophil engraftment was favorably associated with a younger patient age (younger than 6 years)
and weight (<20 kg) and occurred in 85% of patients receiving 37 million or more mononuclear cells per kilogram of recipient body weight. In the recipients of
unrelated cord blood, neutrophil engraftment occurred in 94% of those who received 37 million or more mononuclear cells per kilogram, with only 32% of patients
developing grade II or worse GVHD.
These early successes have led to the creation of an increasing number of umbilical cord blood banks worldwide. However, graft failure, which is most closely
associated with patient size, age, and low cord stem cell doses, remains a significant problem that will likely limit the applicability of this approach in adults.
UNRELATED DONORS
Although allogeneic hematopoietic SCT is a potentially curative modality for a number of otherwise fatal malignancies, only one-third or so of patients have access to
an HLA-identical sibling. The growing demand for donors has led to research in the development of techniques for the use of alternative sources of stem cells. The
knowledge that the HLA system played a critical role in transplantation outcomes led to the successful use of HLA-matched unrelated donors (MUDs) and subsequent
establishment of volunteer donor registries. 242,243,244 and 245 More than 5 million typed volunteer donors have been registered worldwide, and it is estimated that nearly
70% of white patients will have an HLA-A, -B and -DR-matched unrelated donor. 246 Because of the increasing availability of volunteer unrelated donors, it is
anticipated that more than 2000 MUD transplantations will be performed in the year 2000. 247 Nonetheless, finding a suitable unrelated donor remains a significant
problem for many patients, particularly ethnic and racial minority individuals.
Early MUD transplantations involved donors who were chosen on the basis of serologic HLA typing. The subsequent development of high-resolution molecular HLA
typing revealed that many of these serologically typed donors often were mismatched, likely contributing to the increased risk of graft rejection and severe GVHD
observed in these trials. 248 The results of extensive published data on unrelated donor transplantations reveal engraftment rates of 85% to 100%, grade II or worse
acute GVHD in 21% to 98%, chronic GVHD in 50% to 74%, and disease-free survival rates of between 1% and 74%. 247,249,250,251 and 252 This wide range in outcome is
explained mostly by variations in patient populations, transplantation methods, and HLA typing techniques. The use of molecular-based typing has been associated
with a significant improvement in transplantation outcome, including a decrease in life-threatening acute and chronic GVHD. 253,254 Furthermore, typing beyond HLA-A,
-B, and -DR loci may be of further benefit, as other MHC antigens appear to have a significant impact on transplantation outcome. 256,257
More precise HLA typing has also increased the difficulty of finding a completely matched donor. T-cell depletion of MUD allografts is associated with a decrease in
severe acute and chronic GVHD, although there appears to be no beneficial impact on overall survival. 258 There is some evidence, however, that survival may be
better in the recipients of MUD transplants containing higher stem cell doses. 259 This observation has stimulated interest in the development of transplants that use
higher total CD34+ cell doses—for instance, through the use of G-CSF-mobilized PBSC allografting. Whether this approach will improve the outcome of unrelated
transplantations, particularly in terms of prolonging patient survival, remains to be determined. 255 Future trials that optimize donor selection, conditioning regimens,
and GVHD prophylaxis will be required to improve the outcome of MUD transplantations.
MISMATCHED RELATED DONORS
The availability of haploidentical (“half-matched”) related donors has led to the use of mismatched family members as an alternative source of stem cells for those
patients who lack an HLA-identical sibling. 259,260 and 261 The majority of patients with living family members would be expected to have a relative who could serve as a
partially mismatched donor. These donors may actually have a closer histocompatibility profile than MUDs, as the shared donor haplotype is genetically identical to
that of the patient, which may be associated with better matching of mHa. Furthermore, potential family donors can usually be identified quickly and usually are more
readily available than are MUDs. The number of mismatched MHC antigens in the patient is conventionally used to define the degree of mismatch and may range
from three (haploidentical) to zero antigens, depending on the number of phenotypically shared antigens coming from the mismatched haplotype. 247
Graft rejection, GVHD, and ineffective immunity leading to fatal opportunistic infection are the major immune-mediated complications associated with HLA disparity;
the greater the HLA disparity, the higher these risks. 262,263 Early as well as recent trials comparing outcome in patients receiving partially mismatched related versus
matched sibling donor allografts showed that engraftment, GVHD, and survival were inferior in the recipients of partially mismatched transplants. 264,265 More intensified
conditioning regimens have resulted in better engraftment at the expense of more regimen-related organ toxicity.
Severe GVHD exceeded 50% in early trials using unmanipulated allografts, with T-cell doses in the allograft correlating with the probability of developing severe
GVHD.266,267 T-cell depletion, as in matched unrelated transplants, is associated with a significant decrease in the incidence of severe GVHD, although the incidence
of graft rejection is increased. 268,269 and 270 Through the use of modified conditioning regimens and more effective T-cell depletion methods, several groups have begun
to report improved outcome using mismatched family donors. Henslee-Downey et al. 271,272 were the first to report similar 3-year disease-free survivals in patients with
lymphoblastic leukemia using partially matched related donors versus matched sibling donors (39% vs. 37%). Subsequently, other investigators have reported
regimens with modified conditioning and T-cell depletion techniques associated with a high rate of donor engraftment and a low risk of GVHD, with long-term
disease-free survivals in the range of 20% to 40%. 273,274 These results are significant, as most patients treated in these trials had advanced, high-risk hematologic
malignancies associated with poor transplantation outcome, even in a matched sibling setting.
Another recently explored approach involves the induction of donor T-cell anergy to recipient alloantigens. This technique involves ex vivo culturing of haploidentical
donor marrow with recipient lymphocytes in the presence of CTLA-4 immunoglobulin to inhibit the “second signal” required for T-cell activation. Donor T cells in this
environment do not receive costimulation and are therefore rendered “tolerant” to recipient alloantigens. Although only a small number of haploidentical
transplantations have been performed using this approach, early results have been encouraging, without the occurrence of graft rejection or death from acute
GVHD.275
Although opportunistic infections and disease relapse remain problematic, modifications in this procedure have demonstrated that the use of full haplotype
mismatched donors can be tolerated and is a viable transplantation alternative in patients lacking matched sibling donors. The improvement in haploidentical
transplants will likely lead to randomized trials comparing partially mismatched related donors to MUDs to discern which alternative stem cell source is preferable.

NONMYELOABLATIVE ALLOGENEIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION
Allogeneic hematopoietic SCT using high-dose, myeloablative chemo/radiotherapy is associated with a high incidence of treatment-related complications and a 20%
to 35% risk of transplant-related mortality. Debilitated or older patients with hematologic malignancies are at particularly high risk, thus limiting the applicability of this

potentially curative treatment modality to relatively younger patients with a good performance status. 276,277 The desirable antitumor effects of dose-intensive
conditioning often are offset by their substantial and potentially life-threatening toxicities. A greater understanding and appreciation of the powerful and potentially
curative nature of the GVL effect led to the notion that GVL alone, without intensive cytoreductive therapy, might be sufficient to obtain long-term control of
hematologic malignancies. Patients with relapsed leukemia after allogeneic transplantation whose disease is induced into remission after DLI lend the greatest
credence to this concept.
Subsequent to these observations, a number of investigators began to explore the concept of using low-intensity conditioning regimens, immunosuppressive enough
to permit engraftment of the donor immune system for the generation of GVL effects while sparing patients the toxicities associated with myeloablative therapy. 278,279
and 280 Although NST is still in its infancy, a number of institutions investigating a variety of nonmyeloablative approaches have reported remarkable early
success.281,282,283 and 284 Despite the use of low-intensity conditioning, engraftment rates have been high, and long-term remissions, induced purely through a donor
immune-mediated antitumor effect, have been observed in a variety of different hematologic and nonhematologic malignancies. 285 Importantly, regimen-related toxicity
and mortality appear to be low, thus expanding eligibility for allogeneic transplantation to include older or debilitated patients, as well as allowing for exploration of
graft-versus-tumor (GVT) effects in other treatment-refractory or incurable malignancies. Furthermore, the majority of late side effects attributed to myeloablative
conditioning, including growth retardation, sterility, endocrinopathies, cataracts, and secondary malignancies, will likely be avoided using nonmyeloablative
transplants.
NONMYELOABLATIVE CONDITIONING REGIMENS
Although a variety of low-intensity conditioning regimens have been explored, they are all, by definition, nonmyeloablative, as recipient hematopoietic stem cells are
not eradicated, allowing for the possibility of autologous hematopoietic recovery. Two features are common to all these regimens: First, they avoid acute and chronic
toxicities of dose-intensive chemo/radiotherapy by using a relatively low-intensity nontoxic preparative regimen and, second, they attempt to induce sufficient host
immunosuppression to allow for engraftment of the donor immune system.
The minimum amount of immunosuppression required to allow for donor engraftment is unlikely to be defined, as it depends on multiple variables, including the
competence of the patient's immune system (related to the amount and intensity of prior therapy), degree of patient-donor HLA and mHa disparity, donor
immunocompetence, and the dose of T cells in the allograft. Nonetheless, a number of different conditioning regimens with variable degrees of intensity have been
used successfully to establish donor engraftment with minimum toxicity, including regimens consisting of purine analogs in combination with alkylating agents,
low-dose TBI alone, or thymic irradiation in combination with cyclophosphamide with or without ATG.
Based on results from canine preclinical trials, Storb et al. 286,287 pioneered a novel NST approach that uses low-dose TBI (200 cGy) as well as pre- and
posttransplantation immunosuppression with CSA and mycophenolate mofetil to prevent both graft rejection and GVHD. This regimen usually achieves a state of
recipient-donor mixed chimerism, which can serve as a platform for the subsequent infusion of donor lymphocytes to enhance GVL effects. Although a heterogeneous
population of patients has been treated with a variety of different regimens, conditioning-associated toxicity and mortality appear to be significantly lower than with
conventional myeloablative approaches. Because host hematopoietic elements are not ablated, recovering myeloid cells are usually of both recipient and donor origin
(mixed chimerism). This state of mixed chimerism has both beneficial and negative effects on transplantation outcome. Mixed chimerism is capable of inducing donor
and recipient tolerance, thus preventing the development of acute GVHD. 288,289 However, mixed chimerism also is associated with an increased risk of graft failure,
and the tolerance that it induces may inhibit beneficial GVL effects. These negative aspects of mixed chimerism can be overcome by infusing donor lymphocytes,
which can shift chimerism from a mixed to a complete donor type, thus avoiding tolerance and enhancing the GVL effect.
NONMYELOABLATIVE TRANSPLANTATION TOXICITY
Conditioning-induced toxicity is relatively mild with nonmyeloablative regimens as compared to myeloablative approaches (see Table 53.3-1). Most patients tolerate
the preparative regimen well, without the occurrence of mucositis or requirement for total parenteral nutrition. VOD occurs infrequently, is usually mild, and is
observed predominantly with the use of regimens that contain busulfan. 279 Although most patients become pancytopenic, the occurrence of partial autologous
hematopoietic recovery appears to shorten the overall depth and duration of neutropenia while reducing platelet and red blood cell transfusion requirements. Most
trials have reported transplantation-related mortality rates in the range of 10% to 15%, which is remarkably low given the advanced age and poor performance status
of the majority of these patients. Some low-intensity protocols, particularly those that use low-dose TBI alone, appear ideally suited for outpatient use. 286 NST is too
new to make any conclusions regarding long-term complications, although it is reasonable to assume that growth retardation, sterility, and secondary malignancies
will be observed with reduced frequency as compared to conventional myeloablative transplantation.
ENGRAFTMENT AFTER NONMYELOABLATIVE STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION
The ability to establish engraftment of donor hematopoietic and lymphoid cells is directly related to the degree of host immunosuppression induced by the preparative
regimen. Most, if not all, NST regimens result in some degree of early donor-recipient mixed chimerism. Although graft rejection occurs with a higher frequency than
with myeloablative approaches, in general, more than 80% of patients can be expected to have long-term stable donor engraftment. Regimens that use low-dose TBI
alone are associated with a higher incidence of graft rejection, although the addition of fludarabine appears to overcome this problem. 290,291
We evaluated the engraftment kinetics in 50 patients with hematologic and nonhematologic malignancies receiving an NST from an HLA-identical or single-locus
mismatched sibling donor using a preparative regimen of cyclophosphamide (60 mg/kg × 2) and fludarabine (25 mg/m 2 × 5).292 Lineage-specific chimerism analysis
using the polymerase chain reaction of minisatellite regions was performed on myeloid (CD14+ and CD15+) and T cells (CD3+) obtained weekly from peripheral
blood. A unique pattern of engraftment was observed in which myeloid cells at the time of neutrophil recovery were mixed chimeric (both donor and patient), although
predominantly recipient in origin, in contrast to T cells, which were also mixed chimeric but predominantly donor in origin ( Fig. 53.3-4A). By day 30, half of the patients
had made the transition to full-donor T-cell chimerism, while myeloid chimerism often remained mixed ( Fig. 53.3-4B). After the withdrawal of CSA and, in some
patients, after DLI, chimerism changed to a complete donor type in all cellular lineages in the majority of cases. The establishment of full-donor T-cell chimerism
consistently preceded full-donor myeloid chimerism, compatible with a graft-versus-host hematopoietic effect. 289 Forty-eight of 50 patients (96%) ultimately achieved
stable donor engraftment, with only 2 (4%) experiencing graft rejection, which was followed by complete autologous hematopoietic recovery. Of note, acute GVHD and
GVL effects were usually not observed until full-donor T-cell chimerism was achieved. T-cell chimerism, therefore, appears to be of central importance and can be
used successfully to guide posttransplantation immune manipulation.

FIGURE 53.3-4. Percentage of donor T (CD3+) cells ( black bars) and myeloid (CD14+ and CD15+) cells (gray bars) in 15 individual patients on days 14 (A) and 30
(B) after transplantation. NE, nonevaluable. (From ref. 289, with permission.)

GRAFT-VERSUS-HOST DISEASE
Although mixed T-cell chimerism is associated with GVHD tolerance, withdrawal of CSA and giving DLI, usually to enhance a GVL effect, often results in a rapid

transition to full-donor T-cell chimerism and may be associated with the onset of acute GVHD. Acute GVHD appears to be the major nonrelapse life-threatening
complication associated with NST. Several trials have reported grade II through IV acute GVHD rates of 30% to 50%, this outcome being lethal in up to 15% of treated
patients. 278,279 and 280,290,292 Older patient age, prior history of autologous transplantation, and rapid T-cell engraftment appear to be associated with an increased risk of
GVHD. We observed a sixfold increase in acute GVHD in those patients who had 90% or more donor T-cell chimerism by day 14 after transplantation. The majority of
NST regimens have used CSA or FK506 alone for prophylaxis of GVHD. Future strategies to decrease the incidence and severity of acute GVHD, which include the
additional use of prophylactic drugs such as methotrexate or mycophenolate mofetil, or methods to deplete alloreactive T cells selectively, will likely improve the
safety of these novel regimens.
GRAFT-VERSUS-LEUKEMIA EFFECT AFTER NONMYELOABLATIVE STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION
GVL effects after NST have been observed in a heterogeneous group of hematologic malignancies, with some patients achieving durable remissions. 278,279,280,281,282 and
283,286,289,293,294 and 295
To date, too few patients have been treated in any one disease category to make any generalizations regarding the antileukemic potential of this
approach. However, the induction of molecular remissions in CML, CLL, and low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma suggest that the GVL reactions induced after NST
are at least as powerful as those after conventional BMT and will likely be of curative potential. Furthermore, complete remissions in advanced and
chemotherapy-refractory diseases have been achieved in debilitated and older patients (i.e., older than 60 years) who normally would have been ineligible for a
standard myeloablative transplantation due to an unacceptably high risk of treatment-related mortality. 296
As autologous hematopoietic recovery usually occurs, recurrent and sometimes progressive disease may be observed during the first 3 to 6 months after
transplantation. The onset of the GVL effect typically is delayed from the time of transplant conditioning and usually follows the establishment of full-donor T-cell
chimerism and the withdrawal of GVHD prophylaxis or DLI. 289Figure 53.3-5 shows the typical pattern of donor engraftment in myeloid and T-cell lineages in a
56-year-old man undergoing NST for CMML using this approach. Mixed T-cell chimerism on day 30 improved in the direction of the donor after withdrawal of CSA and
a DLI of 2 × 106 CD3+ cells/kg. Myeloid recovery was mixed but predominantly autologous in origin. After 100% donor T-cell chimerism was established, a brief period
of leukopenia was followed by a rapid increase in the percentage of donor myeloid cells, consistent with a graft-versus-host hematopoietic effect. A 20q- cytogenetic
abnormality, which was observed in all bone marrow metaphases on day 60, was no longer detectable by the day 100 analysis, and the patient remains in remission
more than 24 months after transplantation without ever having developed GVHD. Similar patterns of delayed disease regression have been observed in patients with
CML, CLL, and Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphomas.

FIGURE 53.3-5. Typical pattern of donor engraftment in myeloid and T-cell lineages in a 56-year-old man undergoing nonmyeloablative stem cell transplantation for
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML). CSA, cyclosporin A; DLI, donor lymphocyte infusion.

GRAFT-VERSUS-TUMOR EFFECTS
The low risk of transplant-related mortality with NST renders this approach appealing for the investigation of GVT effects in patients with metastatic and
treatment-refractory solid tumors. In 1997, my colleagues and I initiated a pilot trial to investigate for GVT effects in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma and
melanoma in whom conventional therapy had failed and who had an HLA-compatible sibling. 284,289,297,298 We chose to investigate for GVT effects in these two
malignancies owing to their highly immunogenic profiles and known sensitivity to immunomodulation-based therapy (interleukin-2 and interferon-a), in which T cells
are believed to be the principle mediators of an antitumor response. None of the first eight patients with melanoma had a sustained disease response. However,
several patients with advanced, treatment-refractory metastatic renal cell carcinoma have had a disease response, including three with a complete response, two of
whom remain in remission longer than 2 years after transplantation. The disease regressions we observed were typically delayed in onset, occurring at a median of 4
months after transplantation, and followed the withdrawal of CSA, establishment of 100% donor T-cell chimerism and, in one patient, following a DLI, all compatible
with a donor-mediated GVT effect. These results illustrate that antitumor effects induced through an allogeneic immune system may be as or more potent than
strategies designed to enhance autologous antitumor immunity. They also provide the first evidence that a GVT effect alone can induce complete and clinically
meaningful regression of a metastatic solid tumor. Similar trials have been initiated to investigate for GVT effects in patients with other treatment-refractory tumors.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS FOR NONMYELOABLATIVE STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION
The results of these early trials have been encouraging, showing that low-intensity transplantation regimens are well tolerated with a low risk of transplant-related
toxicity and mortality, even in high-risk patients. More important, the trials have shown that adequate engraftment of the donor immune system can be achieved for the
generation of powerful antitumor effects, without the use of toxic myeloablative conditioning regimens. Indeed, they provide strong evidence that the GVL effect may
be the primary modality, contributing to the curative potential of allogeneic hematopoietic SCT in some malignancies. Because toxicity is decreased, patient eligibility
for allogeneic transplantation will likely be expanded to include older or debilitated patients who were historically ineligible for standard BMT. Furthermore, the ability
to generate GVL effects resulting in complete remissions of hematologic malignancies will likely lead to prospective randomized trials comparing NST to more
conventional myeloablative transplantations. Finally, NST appears to be the ideal platform from which to investigate safely for more targeted adoptive allogeneic
immunotherapeutic approaches that use tumor-specific T cells to enhance the antimalignancy effect of allogeneic lymphocytes.

RESULTS OF CONVENTIONAL ALLOGENEIC TRANSPLANTATION FOR HEMATOLOGIC MALIGNANCIES
Allogeneic hematopoietic SCT is potentially curative for a number of different hematologic malignancies, including acute and chronic leukemias, myelodysplastic
syndromes, Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and multiple myeloma. The indications for allogeneic SCT vary according to disease categories and are
influenced by factors such as cytogenetic abnormalities, response to prior therapy, patient age and performance status, disease status (remission vs. relapsed),
disease-specific prognostic factors and, most important, availability of a suitable allogeneic stem cell donor. The decision of whether to proceed with allogeneic
transplantation often is difficult and controversial and ultimately is guided by the potential benefits and risks of such therapy. Diseases such as CML, curable only by
allograft transplantation, are associated with an excellent posttransplantation outcome and high probability of long-term disease-free survival, justifying the risks of
regimen-related toxicity. Conversely, diseases such as multiple myeloma are associated with a high risk of treatment-related mortality and disease relapse, making
the decision to proceed with transplantation more difficult. 298 Nevertheless, for the majority of patients who undergo this approach, allogeneic SCT remains the only
chance of cure.
CHRONIC MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIA
CML is a clonal myeloproliferative disease of hematopoietic stem cell origin, characterized by an early chronic phase of 3 to 5 years' duration followed by an
accelerated phase of 3 to 6 months, which ultimately terminates in a fatal blastic phase. Although a minority of patients have sustained cytogenetic remission of the
Philadelphia chromosome [t(9;22)] after treatment with interferon-a, allogeneic SCT remains the only treatment approach with definitive curative potential. Patient age,
disease status (chronic phase vs. accelerated or blastic phase), and the time interval from diagnosis to transplant (i.e., <1 year vs. >1 year) are the most powerful
predictors of long-term survival following allogeneic transplantation. 299,300,301,302 and 303 In general, 65% to 80% of patients with chronic-phase CML who receive a
transplant can expect to be cured, in contrast to a minority (10% to 15%) who undergo transplantation in the accelerated or blastic phase. Patients with chronic-phase

CML who receive a transplant within 1 year of diagnosis have the best outcome, with long-term disease-free survivals of 75% to 80%. A study from the Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Center involving 196 patients undergoing allogeneic SCT from a matched unrelated donor reported a 5-year survival of 75%, a rate that compared
favorably to that institution's results using HLA-matched sibling donors. 304
Among hematologic malignancies, CML appears most susceptible to the GVL effect. 54 The majority of CML patients who experience disease relapse after allogeneic
SCT can expect to be induced back into remission with DLI. 61,62,63,64,65 and 66 This sensitivity to GVL has led to a number of trials investigating NST as a less toxic
approach for patients with chronic-phase CML. Early results using NST have been promising, with several molecular remissions having been reported. 279,282 Notably,
patients older than 60 years have been successfully treated with minimal conditioning-associated toxicity, an important finding given the median age at diagnosis of
65 years. 296 These favorable results will expand patient eligibility for this curative modality to include the majority of older patients who are diagnosed with CML and
who have a suitable donor, and will likely lead to randomized trials comparing NST with conventional myeloablative approaches.
ACUTE MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIA
With the exception of those with favorable or low-risk karyotypic abnormalities [i.e., t(8;21), t(15;17), inv or del(16)], most patients with AML are at high risk for disease
relapse after chemotherapy-induced remission. 305,306 Allogeneic SCT after first complete remission (CR1) is associated with a lower risk of relapse, with studies
demonstrating 5-year disease-free survivals of 46% to 62%. 306,307,308,309 and 310 Patients in CR2 or with untreated relapsed AML usually are curable only by allogeneic
SCT, although they are less likely to achieve long-term survival (22% to 30%). 311,312 Therefore, the decision to perform transplantation after CR1 is influenced by the
predicted increase in disease-free survival versus the risk of regimen-related mortality. Based on these observations, it is reasonable to proceed to transplantation in
CR1 in patients who are at intermediate or high risk of relapse (i.e., normal karyotype, abnormal chromosome 5 or 7, complex karyotype abnormalities), withholding
the procedure until first relapse or CR2 in lower-risk patients. Primary chemotherapy-refractory AML, although associated with a significantly worse prognosis than
AML in remission, is salvageable by allogeneic SCT in 10% to 20% of cases.
ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA
Although 65% to 85% of adults with ALL achieve remission with primary chemotherapy, 60% to 70% eventually experience relapse, which is rarely curable with
salvage chemotherapy. Factors associated with a poor outcome (high risk) include age older than 60 years, leukocyte count greater than 30,000 on presentation, and
chromosomal translocations involving t(4;11), t(1;19), t(8;14), or the Philadelphia chromosome t(9;22), which can be found in 15% to 30% of adult ALL cases. 313,314,315
and 316
In adults, allogeneic SCT performed during CR1 usually is reserved for patients with high-risk features, for whom cure with chemotherapy is unlikely. 317,318
Several studies of allogeneic SCT in high-risk patients who received a transplant during CR1 have reported long-term disease-free survivals of 41% to 61%, rates
considerably higher than those observed with chemotherapy alone. 319,320 Allogeneic SCT usually is recommended in CR2 for patients lacking high-risk factors, as
disease will be cured in some with chemotherapy alone. Furthermore, the long-term disease-free survival rate (35% to 40%) is comparable in these patients,
regardless of whether they undergo transplantation in CR1 or CR2. 321 As chemotherapy is considerably more effective in achieving durable remissions in children,
allogeneic SCT usually is reserved for those who fail to be cured with primary therapy or who have Philadelphia chromosome–positive ALL. 322
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROME
Allogeneic SCT is the only curative therapy available for patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). In general, 30% to 50% of patients with MDS can be
expected to achieve long-term disease-free survival. 323 Factors associated with improved outcome include younger age, lower pretransplantation marrow blast
percentage, shorter disease duration, and favorable cytogenetics. A retrospective trial of 131 patients with MDS undergoing allogeneic BMT reported disease-free
and overall survival rates of 34% and 41%, respectively. 324 Disease-free survival depended on pretransplantation bone marrow blast percentages, with refractory
anemia/refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts (RA/RARS), refractory anemia with excess blasts (RAEB), refractory anemia with excess blasts in transformation
(RAEB-T), and secondary AML patients having disease-free survivals of 52%, 34%, 19%, and 26%, respectively.
A retrospective analysis of transplantation events in relation to the International Prognostic Scoring System cytogenetic categories showed that cytogenetic
abnormalities alone were highly predictive of posttransplantation outcome. 325 The event-free survival for good-, intermediate-, and poor-risk cytogenetic subgroups
were 51%, 40%, and 6%, respectively, with corresponding relapse rates of 19%, 12%, and 82%. International Prognostic Scoring System cytogenetic categories were
defined as good-risk if patients had normal karyotype, -Y alone, del(5q) alone, or del(20q) alone: poor-risk if patients had anomalies of chromosome 7 or complex
cytogenetics (three or more anomalies); and intermediate-risk if other karyotypic anomalies were present that did not meet the criteria for good- or poor-risk. The
identification of an extremely high incidence of relapse in the poor-risk group (82%) is important, as new and more effective treatment strategies should be directed
specifically toward these patients.
OTHER HEMATOLOGIC MALIGNANCIES
The role of allogeneic SCT in multiple myeloma, CLL, and Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is less well defined than in the acute leukemias or chronic-phase
CML.326,327,328,329,330 and 331 Most studies published to date have consisted of small retrospective analyses or anecdotal case reports. Nevertheless, reports of durable
remissions in patients with relapsed or chemotherapy-refractory disease, often in association with GVHD or after DLI, provide strong evidence that these diseases are
susceptible to a potentially curative GVL effect.
The largest series to date of patients with CLL undergoing allogeneic BMT reported a 49% disease-free survival at 27 months, with an extraordinarily high
treatment-related mortality of 46%. 326 Although a number of patients with multiple myeloma have achieved long-term disease-free survival after allogeneic SCT,
transplant-related mortality may be as high as 50%, thus limiting the full therapeutic potential of this approach. 327 Regimens with reduced transplant-related toxicities,
such as NST, may avoid these complications and improve disease-free survival. Indeed several studies exploring NST in diseases such as low-grade non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma, CLL, and multiple myeloma have shown early promising results, with durable complete responses being achieved in all disease categories. 278,280,283,284,294
Although CLL and low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma are notorious for delayed relapses, the observation of molecular remissions raises the prospect that NST may
have curative potential in these diseases.

FUTURE PROSPECTS
Allogeneic SCT remains the only curative treatment modality for a large number of patients with hematologic malignancies. Exciting advances in the field have made
this approach an essential component in the treatment of an increasing number of malignant diseases. Furthermore, an expanded understanding of the requirements
for the engraftment of donor cells and of the basic immunologic mechanisms involved in GVHD and GVL reactions have greatly improved both the safety and efficacy
of the procedure. The eventual identification of leukemia- and tumor-specific antigens will likely lead to more targeted allogeneic immunotherapy approaches that
avoid the morbidity associated with GVHD. The discovery that GVL effects alone have curative potential for a number of different malignancies already has led to new
transplantation approaches that appear destined to reduce transplant-related mortality and improve long-term outcome for patients undergoing this procedure.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Jacobson LO, Simmons EL, Marks EK, et al. The risk of the spleen in radiation injury and recovery. J Lab Clin Med 1956;35:746.
2. Lorenz E, Congdon CC, Uphoff D. Modification of acute irradiation injury in mice and guinea pigs by bone marrow injections. Radiology 1952;58:863.
3. Thomas ED, Lochte HL, Waa Ching Lu, Ferrebee JU. Intravenous infusion of bone marrow in patients receiving radiation and chemotherapy. N Engl J Med 1957;257:491.
4. Thomas ED, Storb R, Clift RA, et al. Bone marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med 1975;292:832.
5. Daussett J, Rapapert FT, Ivany IP, Colongani J. Tissue alloantigens and transplantation. In: Bainer H, Cleton FJ, Eernisse JC, eds. Histocompatibility Testing. Copenhagen: Munksgaad,
1965:63.
6. Bortin MM, Horowitz MM, Barrett AJ, et al. Changing trends in allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for leukemia in the 1980's. JAMA 1992;262:607.
7. Sullivan K, Storb R, Buckner C, et al. Graft versus host disease as adoptive immunotherapy in patients with advanced hematological malignancies. N Engl J Med 1989;320:828.
8. Kolb HJ, Mittermuller J, Clemm CH, et al. Donor leukocyte transfusions for treatment of recurrent CML in marrow transplant patients. Blood 1990;76;2462.
9. Horowitz MM, Gale RP, Sondel PM, et al. Graft vs. leukemia reactions after bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1990;75:555.
10. Weiden PL, Flourney N, Thomas ED, et al. Antileukemia effect of graft-versus-host disease in human recipients of allogeneic grafts. N Engl J Med 1979;300:1068.
11. O'Kunewick JP, Meredith RF, eds. Graft-versus-leukemia in man and animal models. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1981.
12. Sosman JA, Sondel PM. The graft versus leukemia effect following bone marrow transplantation: a review of laboratory and clinical data. Hematol Rev 1987;2:77.
13. Weiden Pl, Sullivan KM, Flourney N, Storb R, Thomas ED. Antileukemia effect of chronic graft versus-host-disease: contribution to improved survival after allogeneic marrow transplantation.

N

Engl J Med 1981;304:1529.
14. Butturini A, Bortin MM, Gale RP. Graft-vs-leukemia following bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1987;2:233.
15. Butturini A, Gale RP. The role of T-cells in preventing relapse in chronic myelogenous leukemia. Bone Marrow Transplant 1987;2:351.
16. Fischer A, Landais P, Friedrich FW, et al. Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) in Europe for primary immunodeficiency disease: a report from the European Group for Immunodeficiency
Disease. Blood 1994;83:1149.
17. Filipovitch AH, Shapiro RS, Ramsay NKC, et al. Unrelated donor bone marrow transplantation for correction of lethal congenital immunodeficiencies. Blood 1992;80:270.
18. Lenarsky C, Weinberg K, Kohn DB, Parkman R. Unrelated donor BMT for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:145.
19. Barrett AJ, McCarthy DM. Bone marrow transplantation for genetic disorders. Blood Rev 1990;4:116.
20. Lucarelli G, Galimberti M, Polchi P, et al. Bone marrow transplantation in patients with thalassemia. N Engl J Med 1990;322:417.
21. Lucarelli G, Polchi P, Izzi T, et al. Marrow transplantation for thalassemia following treatment with busulfan and cyclophosphamide. Lancet 1985;1:1355.
22. Blazar DR, Ramsay NKC, Kersey JH. Pretransplant conditioning with busulfan and cyclophosphamide for nonmalignant diseases. Transplantation 1985;39:597.
23. Walters MC, Patience M, Leisenring W, et al. Bone marrow transplantation for sickle cell disease. N Engl J Med 1996;335:369.
24. Deeg HJ, Sullivan KM, Buckner CD, et al. Marrow transplantation for acute non-lymphoblastic leukemia in first remission; toxicity and long-term follow up of patients conditioned with single
dose or fractionated total body irradiation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1986;1:151.
25. Thomas ED, Clift RA, Hersman J, et al. Marrow transplantation for acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia in first remission using fractionated or single dose irradiation. Int Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1982;8:817.
26. Brockstein JA, Kernan NA, Groshen S, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation after hyperfractionated total body irradiation and cyclophosphamide in children with acute leukemia. N Engl
J Med 1987;317:1618.
27. Clift RA, Buckner CD, Applebaum FA, et al. Allogeneic marrow transplants for patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia in the chronic phase: a randomized trial of two irradiation regimens.
Blood 1991;77:1660.
28. Clift RA, Buckner CD, Applebaum FA, et al. Allogeneic marrow transplants for patients with acute myelogenous leukemia in first remission: a randomized trial of two irradiation regimens. Blood
1988;76:1867.
29. Kim TH, Khan FM, Galvin JM. A report of the working party: comparison of total body irradiation techniques for bone marrow transplantation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1980;6:779.
30. Snyder DS, Negrin RS, O'Donnell MR, et al. Fractionated total-body irradiation and high-dose etoposide as a preparatory regimen for bone marrow transplantation for 94 patients with chronic
myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase. Blood 1994;84:1672.
31. Locatelli E, Pession A, Bonetti F, et al. Busulfan, cyclophosphamide and melphalan as conditioning regimen for bone marrow transplantation in children with myelodysplastic syndrome.
Leukemia 1994;8:844.
32. Emminger W, Emminger-Schmidmeier W, Haas OA, et al. Treatment of infant leukemia with busulfan cyclophosphamide + etoposide and bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1992;10:313.
33. Ratanatharathorn V, Karanes C, Lum LG, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in high risk myeloid disorders using busulfan, cytosine arabinoside and cyclophosphamide (BAC). Bone
Marrow Transplant 1992;9:49.
34. Zander AR, Culbert S, Jaggenath S, et al. High dose cyclophosphamide BCNU, and VP-1 (CBV) as a conditioning regimen for allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for patients with acute
leukemia. Cancer 1987;59:1083.
35. Santos GW, Tutschka PJ, Brookmeyer R, et al. Marrow transplantation for acute nonlymphocytic leukemia after treatment with busulfan and cyclophosphamide. N Engl J Med 1983;309:1347.
36. Clift RA, Buckner CD, Thomas ED, et al. Marrow transplantation for chronic myeloid leukemia: a randomized study comparing cyclophosphamide and total body irradiation with busulfan and
cyclophosphamide. Blood 1994;84:2036.
37. Devergie A, Blaise D, Attal M, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for chronic myeloid leukemia in first chronic phase: a randomized trial of busulfan-cytoxan versus cytoxantotal body
irradiation as preparative regimen: a report from the French Society of Bone Marrow Graft. Blood 1995;85:2263.
38. Blume KG, Kopecky KJ, Henslee-Downey JP, et al. A prospective randomized comparison of total body irradiationetoposide versus busulfan-cyclophosphamide as preparatory regimens for
bone marrow transplantation in patients with leukemia who were not in first remission: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. Blood 1993;81:2187.
39. Baglin TP. Veno-occlusive disease of the liver complicating bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1994;13:1.
40. Ozkaynak M, Weinberg K, Kohn D, et al. Hepatic veno-occlusive disease postbone marrow transplantation in children conditioned with busulfan and cyclophosphamide: incidence, risk factors,
and clinical outcome. Bone Marrow Transplant 1991;7:467.
41. Weiner RS, Bortin MM, Gale RP, et al. Risk factors associated with interstitial pneumonia following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for leukemia. Transplant Proc 1985;17:470.
42. Kolb HJ, Bender-Gotze CH. Late complications after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1990;4:61.
43. Sanders JE, Pritchard S, Mahoney P et al. Growth and development following marrow transplantation for leukemia. Blood 1986;68:1129.
44. Leiper AD, Stanhorpe R, Lou T, et al. The effect of total body irradiation and bone marrow transplantation during childhood and adolescence on growth and endocrine function. Br J Haematol
1987;67:419.
45. Giralt S, Estey E, Albitar M, et al. Engraftment of allogeneic hematopoietic progenitor cells with purine analogcontaining chemotherapy: harnessing graft-versus-leukemia without myeloablative
therapy. Blood 1997;89:4531.
46. Slavin S, Nagler A, Naparastak E, et al. Nonmyeloablative stem cell transplantation and cell therapy as an alternative to conventional bone marrow transplantation with lethal cytoreduction for
the treatment of malignant and nonmalignant hematologic diseases. Blood 1998;91:756.
47. Khouri I, Keating MJ, Korbling M, et al. Transplant-lite: induction of graft-versus-malignancy using fludarabine-based nonablative chemotherapy and allogeneic progenitor-cell transplantation as
treatment for lymphoid malignancies. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2817.
48. Childs R, Clave E, Contentin N, et al. Engraftment kinetics after nonmyeloablative allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplantation: full donor T-cell chimerism preceded alloimmune
responses. Blood 1999;94(9):3234.
49. Collins RH Jr, Shpilberg O, Drobyski WR et al. Donor leukocyte transfusions in 140 patients with relapsed malignancy after allogeneic transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:433.
50. Barnes DHW, Loutit JF. Treatment of murine leukemia with x-rays and homologous bone marrow. Br J Haematol 1957;3:241.
51. Weiden PL, Sullivan KM, Flournoy N, et al. Antileukemic effect of chronic graft-versus-leukemia disease. Contribution to improved survival after allogeneic marrow transplantation. N Engl J
Med 1981;304:1529.
52. Gale RP, Horowitz MM, Ash RC, et al. Identical twin bone marrow transplants for leukemia. Ann Intern Med 1994;120:646.
53. Goldman JM, Gale RP, Horowitz MM, et al. Bone marrow transplantation for chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase. Increased relapse associated with T-cell depletion. Ann Intern Med
1988;108:806.
54. Horowitz MM, Gale RP, Sondel PM, et al. Graft-versus-leukemia reactions after bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1991;75:555.
55. Offit K, Burns JP, Cunningham L, et al. Cytogenetic analysis of chimerism and leukemia relapse in chronic myelogenous leukemia patients after T-cell depleted bone marrow transplantation.
Blood 1990;75:1346.
56. Lee M, Khouri I, Champlin R, et al. Detection of minimal residual disease by polymerase chain reaction of bcr/abl transcripts in chronic myelogenous leukemia following allogeneic bone marrow
transplantation. Br J Haematol 1992;82:708.
57. DeLage R, Soiffer RJ, Dear K, Ritz J. Clinical significance of bcr/abl gene rearrangement detected by polymerase chain reaction after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in chronic
myelogenous leukemia. Blood 1991;78:2759.
58. Pignon JM, Henni T, Amselem S, et al. Frequent detection of minimal residual disease by use of the polymerase chain reaction in long-term survivors after bone marrow transplantation for
chronic myeloid leukemia. Leukemia 1990;4:83.
59. Higano C, Brixey M, Bryant E, et al. Durable complete remission of acute nonlymphocytic leukemia associated with discontinuation of immunosuppression following relapse after allogeneic
bone marrow transplantation: a case report of a probable graft-versus-leukemia effect. Transplantation 1990;50:175.
60. Collins R, Rogers Z, Bennett M, et al. Hematologic relapse of chronic myelogenous leukemia following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: apparent graft-versus-leukemia effect following
abrupt discontinuation of immunosuppression. Bone Marrow Transplant 1992;10:391.
61. Kolb HJ, Beisser K, Holler E, et al. Donor buffy coat transfusions for adoptive immunotherapy in human and canine chimeras. Periodicum Biologorum 1991;93:81.
62. Kolb HJ, Mittermuller J, Clemm C, et al. Donor leukocyte transfusions for treatment of recurrent chronic myelogenous leukemia in marrow transplant patients. Blood 1990; 76:2462.
63. Porter DL, Roth MS, McGarigle C, Ferrara JIM, Antin JH. Induction of graft versus-host disease as immunotherapy for relapsed chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 1994;330:100.
64. Bar BMAM, Schattenberg A, Mensink EJBM, et al. Donor leukocyte infusions for chronic myeloid leukemia relapsed after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:513.
65. Helg C, Roux E, Beris P, et al. Adoptive immunotherapy for recurrent CML after BMT. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:125.
66. Drobyski WR, Keever CA, Roth MS, et al. Salvage immunotherapy using donor leukocyte infusions as treatment for relapsed chronic myelogenous leukemia after bone marrow transplantation:
efficacy and toxicity of a defined T-cell dose. Blood 1993;82:2310.
67. Kolb HJ, Schattenberg A, Goldman J, et al. Graft vs leukemia effect of donor lymphocyte transfusions in marrow grafted patients. Blood 1995;86(5):2041.
68. van Rhee F, Kolb HJ. Donor leukocyte transfusions for leukemic relapse. Curr Opin Hematol 1995;2:423.
69. Dermime S, Mavroudis D, Jiang YZ, et al. Immune escape from a graft-versus-leukemia effect may play a role in the relapse of myeloid leukemias following allogeneic bone marrow
transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;19:989.
70. Verdonck L, Lokhorst H, Dekker A, et al. Graft-versus-myeloma effect in two cases. Lancet 1996;347:800.
71. VanBesien KW, de Lima M, Giralt SA, et al. Management of lymphoma recurrence after allogeneic transplantation: the relevance of graft-versus lymphoma effect. Bone Marrow Transplant
1997;19:977.
72. Dazzi F, Szydio RM, Goldman JM. Donor lymphocyte infusions for relapse of chronic myeloid leukemia after allogeneic stem cell transplantation: Where do we now stand? Exp Hematol
1999;27:1477.
73. Nimer S, Giorgi J, Gajewski J, et al. Selective depletion of CD8-positive cells for prevention of graft-versus-host disease following bone marrow transplantation: a randomized control trial.
Transplantation 1994;57:82.
74. Champlin RE, Jansen J, Ho W, et al. Retention of graft-versus-leukemia using selective depletion of CD8-positive T lymphocytes for prevention of graft versus host disease following bone
marrow transplantation for chronic myelogenous leukemia. Tranplant Proc 1991;23:1695.
75. Champlin R, Giralt S, Przepiorka D, et al. Selective depletion of CD8-positive T lymphocytes for allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: engraftment, graft-versus-host disease and
graft-versus-leukemia. Prog Clin Biol Res 1992;377:385.
76. Giralt SA, Hetser J, Huh Y, et al. CD8-depleted donor lymphocyte infusion as treatment for relapsed chronic myelogenous leukemia after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Blood
1995;86:4337.
77. Alyea E, Soiffer RJ, Canning C, et al. Toxicity and efficacy of defined doses of CD4+ donor lymphocytes for treatment of relapse after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Blood
1998;91:3671.
78. Mackinnon S, Papadoupoulos EB, Carabasi MH, et al. Adoptive immunotherapy evaluating escalating doses of donor leukocytes for relapse of chronic myeloid leukemia after bone marrow
transplantation: separation of graft-versus-leukemia responses from graft-versus-host disease. Blood 1995;86:1261.
79. Dazzi F, Szydlo RM, Craddock C, et al. Comparison of single-dose and escalating-dose regimens of donor lymphocyte infusions for relapse after allografting for chronic myeloid leukemia.
Blood 2000;95:67.
80. Siegert W, Bever J, Kingreen D, et al. Treatment of relapse after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation with unmanipulated G-CSF mobilized peripheral blood stem cell preparation. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1998;22(6):579.
81. Falkenburg JHF, Goselink HM, van der Harst D, et al. Growth inhibition of clonogenic leukemic precursor cells by minor histocompatibility antigen specific cytotoxic T-lymphocytes. J Exp Med
1991;174:27.
82. Wang W, Meadowa LR, den Haan JMM, et al. A male-specific histocompatibility antigen derived from the SMCY protein. Science 1995;269:1588.
83. Den Haan JMM, Sherman NE, Blokland E, et al. Identification of a graft-versus-host diseaseassociated minor histocompatibility antigen. Science 1995;268:1476.

84. De Bueger M, Bakker A, van Rood JJ, van der Woude F, Goulmy E. Tissue distribution of minor histocompatibility antigens. J Immunol 1992;149:1788.
85. Marijt WAF, Kernan NA, Diaz-Barrientos TH, et al. Multiple minor histocompatibility antigen specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte clones can be generated during graft rejection after HLA identical
bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;16:125.
86. Van der Harst D, Gdulmy E, Falkenberg JHF, et al. Recognition of minor histocompatibility antigens on lymphocytic and myeloid leukemic cell lines by cytotoxic T-cell clones. Blood
1994;83:1060.
87. Barrett AJ, Jiang YZ. Immune responses to chronic myeloid leukemia: review. Bone Marrow Transplant 1992;9:305.
88. Oettel K, Wesly O, Albertini M, et al. Allogeneic T-cell clones able to selectively destroy Philadelphia chromosomebearing (Ph 1+) can also recognize Ph1 cells from the same patient. Blood
1994;83:3390.
89. Sosman JA, Oettel KR, Smith SD, et al. Specific recognition of human leukemic cells by allogeneic T cells: II. Evidence for HLA-D restricted determinants on leukemic cells that are cross
reactive with determinants present on unrelated nonleukemic cells. Blood 1990;75:2005.
90. Faber L, van Luxemberg-Heijs S, Willemze R, et al. Generation of leukemia reactive cytotoxic T lymphocyte clones from the HLA-identical bone marrow donor of a patient with leukemia. J Exp
Med 1992;176:1283.
91. Chen W, Peace BJ, Rovira DK, et al. T-cell immunity to the joining region of p210 BCR-ABL protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:1469.
92. Ten Bosch GJA, Toornvliet AC, Melief CJM, et al. Specific recognition of peptides corresponding to the joining region of p210 BCR-ABL by human T cells. Blood 1994;82:521(abst).
93. Cullis J, Barrett AJ, Lechler R, et al. Binding of pcr/abl junctional peptides to MHC class I molecules: studies in antigen processing defective cell lines. Leukemia 1994;8:165.
94. Hoffman T, Theobald M, Bunjes D, et al. Frequency of bone marrow T-cells responding to HLA-identical non-leukemic and leukemic stimulator cells. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:1.
95. Faber LM, van Luxemberg-Heijs SAP, Veenhof WFJ, et al. Generation of CD4+ cytotoxic T-lymphocyte clones from a patient with severe graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic bone
marrow transplantation: implications for graft-versus-leukemia reactivity. Blood 1995;86:2821.
96. Delain M, Tiberghien P, Racadot E, et al. Variability of the alloreactive T-cell response to human leukemic blasts. Leukemia 1994;8:642.
97. Jiang Y, Kanfer E, MacDonald D. Graft versus leukemia following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: emergence of cytotoxic T lymphocytes reacting to host leukemic cells. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1991;8:253.
98. Truitt RL, Atasoylu AA. Contribution of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells to graft-versus-host disease and graft-versus-leukemia reactivity after transplantation of MHC-compatible bone marrow. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1991;8:51.
99. Weiss L, Weigensberg M, Morecki S, et al. Characterization of effector cells of graft versus leukemia following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in mice inoculated with murine B-cell
leukemia. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1990;31:236.
100. Okunewick JP, Kociban DL, Machen LL, et al. The role of CD4 and CD8 T cells in the graft versus leukemia response in Rauscher murine leukemia. Bone Marrow Transplant 991;8:445.
101. Hercend T, Takvorian T, Nowill A, et al. Characterization of natural killer cells with anti-leukemia activity following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1986;67:301.
102. Morecki S, Gelfand Y, Levi S, et al. Activated long-term peripheral blood cultures as preparation for adoptive alloreactive therapy in cancer patients. J Hematother 1997;6:115.
103. Lamb LS Jr, Henslee-Downey PJ, Parrish RS, et al. Increased frequency of TCR gamma delta + T cells in disease-free survivors following T-cell depleted, partially mismatched, related donor
bone marrow transplantation for leukemia. J Hematother 1996;5:530.
104. Appelbaum FR, Strauchen JA, Graw RG. Acute lethal carditis caused by high dose combination chemotherapy. A unique clinical and pathological entity. Lancet 1976;1:58.
105. Haselberger MB, Schwinghammer TL. Efficacy of Mesna for prevention of hemorrhagic cystitis after high-dose cyclophosphamide therapy. Ann Pharmacother 1995;29:918.
106. Arthur RR, Shahk V, Baust SJ, et al. Association of BK viruria with hemorrhagic cystitis in recipients of bone marrow transplants. N Engl J Med 1986;315:230.
107. De la Camara R, Thomas JF, Figuera-Randa J, et al. High-dose Busulfan and seizures. Bone Marrow Transplant 1991;5:363.
108. Guiot HF, van den Broek PJ, van der Meer JW, et al. Selective antimicrobial modulation of the intestinal flora of patients with acute nonlymphocytic leukemia: a double-blind placebo controlled
study. J Infect Dis 1983;147:615.
109. Pizzo PA. Considerations for the prevention of infectious complications in immunocompromised patients with cancer. Rev Infect Dis 1989;11:1551.
110. Schmeisser T, Kurrie E, Arnold R, et al. Norfloxacin for the prevention of bacterial infection during severe granulocytopenia after bone marrow transplantation. Scand J Infect Dis 1988;20:625.
111. Menichetti F, Felicini R, Bucaneve G, et al. Norfloxacin prophylaxis for neutropenic patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1989;4:489.
112. Goodman JL, Winston DJ, Greenfield RA, et al. A controlled trial of fluconazole to prevent fungal infections in patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med 1992;326:845.
113. Winston DJ, Chandrasekar PH, Lazarus HM, et al. Fluconazole prophylaxis of fungal infections in patients with acute leukemia. Results of a randomized placebo-controlled, double-blind,
multicenter trial. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:495.
114. Bearman SI. The syndrome of hepatic veno-occlusive disease after bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1995;5:363.
115. Bearman SI, Appelbaum FR, Buckner CD, et al. Regimen-related toxicity in patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:15628.
116. Rollins BJ. Hepatic veno-occlusive disease. Am J Med 1986;81:297.
117. McDonald GB, Sharma P, Matthews DE, et al. Veno-occlusive disease of the liver after bone marrow transplantation: diagnosis, incidence, and predisposing factors. Hepatology 1984;4:116.
118. Atkinson K, Biggs J, Noble G, et al. Preparative regimens for marrow transplantation containing Busulfan are associated with hemorrhagic cystitis and hepatic veno-occlusive disease but a
short duration of leucopenia and little oro-pharyngeal mucositis. Bone Marrow Transplant 1987;2:385.
119. Carreras E, Granena A, Navasa M, et al. On the reliability of clinical criteria for the diagnosis of hepatic veno-occlusive disease. Ann Hematol 1993;66:7780.
120. Ibraham A, Pico JL, Ostronoff M, et al. Use of prostaglandin E1 for the treatment of veno-occlusive disease of the liver following autologous bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1990;5[Supp1 2]:82.
121. Baglin TP, Harper P, Marcus RE. Veno-occlusive disease of the liver complicating ABMT successfully treated with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator. Bone Marrow Transplant
1990;5:439.
122. Patton DF, Harper JL, Woolbridge TN, et al. Treatment of VOD of the liver with bolus tissue plasminogen activator and continuous infusion antithrombin III concentrate. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1996;17:443.
123. Bearman SI, Lee JL, Baron AE, et al. Treatment of hepatic venoocclusive disease with recombinant human tissue plasminogen activator and heparin in 42 marrow transplant patients. Blood
1997;89(5):1501.
124. Richardson PG, Elias AD, Krishnan A, et al. Treatment of severe veno-occlusive disease with defibrotide: compassionate use results in response without significant toxicity in a high-risk
population. Blood 1998;92(3):737.
125. Essel J, Schroeder M, Harman G, et al. Ursodiol prophylaxis against hepatic complications of allogeneic BMT: a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med
1988;128:975.
126. Weiner RS, Bortin MM, Gale RP. Risk factors associated with interstitial pneumonitis following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for leukemia. Transplant Proc 1985;17: 470.
127. Piedbois P, Cordonnier C, Levy C, et al. Diffuse interstitial pneumonitis following BMTincidence and relationship with parameters of single fraction TBI. Bone Marrow Transplant 1988;3:273.
128. Granena A, Carreras E, Rozman C, et al. Interstitial pneumonitis after BMT: 15 years experience in a single institution. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;11:453.
129. Meyers JD, Flournoy N, Thomas ED. Non-bacterial pneumonitis after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: a review of ten years' experience. Rev Infect Dis 1982;4:1119.
130. Appelbaum FR, Meyers JD, Fefer A, et al. Nonbacterial nonfungal pneumonia following marrow transplantation in 100 identical twins. Transplantation 1982;33:265.
131. Wingard JR, Mellits ED, Sostrin MB, et al. Interstitial pneumonitis after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Nine-year experience at a single institution. Medicine (Baltimore)
1988;67(3):175.
132. Hartsell F, Czyzewski EA, Ghalie R, et al. Pulmonary complications of bone marrow transplantation: a comparison of total body irradiation and cyclophosphamide to Busulfan and
cyclophosphamide. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32(1):69.
133. Shanker G, Scott Bryson J, Jennings D, et al. Idiopathic pneumonia syndrome after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in mice. Role of pretransplant radiation conditioning. Am J Respir
Cell Mol Biol 1999;20(6):1116.
134. Haselton DJ, Klekamp JG, Christman BW. Use of high-dose corticosteroids and high-frequency oscillatory ventilation for treatment of a child with diffuse alveolar hemorrhage after bone
marrow transplantation: case report and review of the literature. Crit Care Med 200;28(1):245.
135. Chao NJ, Duncan SR, Long GD, at al. Corticosteroid therapy for diffuse alveolar hemorrhage in autologous BMT recipients. Ann Int Med 1991;114:145.
136. Kolb HJ, Poetscher C. Late effects after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Curr Opin Hematol 1997;4(6):401.
137. Deeg HJ, Flournoy N, Sullivan KM, et al. Cataracts after total body irradiation and marrow transplantation: a sparing effect of dose fractionation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:957.
138. Fraunfelder FT, Meyer SM. Ocular toxicity of antineoplastic agents. Ophthalmology 1983;90:1.
139. Witherspoon RP, Fisher LD, Schoch G, et al. Secondary cancers after bone marrow transplantation for leukemia or aplastic anemia. N Engl J Med 1989;321:784.
140. Bhatia S, Ramsay N, Steinbuch M, et al. Malignant neoplasms following bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1996;87:3633.
141. Kolb HJ, Socie G, Duell T, et al. Malignant neoplasms in long-term survivors of bone marrow transplantation: late effects. Working Party of the European Cooperative Group for Blood and
Marrow Transplantation and the European Late Effect Project Group. Ann Intern Med 1999;131(10):738.
142. Lones MA, Lopez-Terrada D, Shintaku IP. Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder in pediatric bone marrow transplant recipients: disseminated disease of donor origin demonstrated by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1998;122(8):708.
143. Gerritsen EJ, Stam ED, Hermans J. Risk factors for developing EBV-related B cell lymphoproliferative disorders (BLPD) after non-HLA-identical BMT in children. Bone Marrow Transplant
1996;18(2):377.
144. Orazi A, Hromas RA, Neiman RS, et al. Posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorders in bone marrow recipients are aggressive diseases with a high incidence of adverse histologic and
immunobiologic features. Am J Clin Pathol 1997;107:419.
145. Papadopoulos EB, Ladanyi M, Emanuel D. Infusion of donor leukocytes to treat Epstein-Barr virusassociated lymphoproliferative disorders after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. N Engl
J Med 1994;330:1185.
146. Rooney CM, Smith CA, Ng CY, et al. Infusion of cytotoxic T cells for the prevention and treatment of Epstein-Barr virusinduced lymphoma in allogeneic transplant recipients. Blood
1998;92:1549.
147. Cavazzana-Calvo M, Bensoussan D, Jabado N, et al. Prevention of EBV-induced B-lymphoproliferative disorder by ex vivo marrow B-cell depletion in HLA-phenoidentical or nonidentical
T-depleted bone marrow transplantation. Br J Haematol 1998;103:543.
148. Kuehnle I, Huls MH, Liu Z, et al. CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab) for therapy of Epstein-Barr virus lymphoma after hemopoietic stem-cell transplantation. Blood 2000; 95:1502.
149. Magriko K, Karo S, Hagihara M. Stable clonal expansion of T-cells induced by bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1996;87:789.
150. Dietrich PY, Caignard A, Diu A, et al. Analysis of T-cell receptor variability in transplanted patients with acute graft-versus-host disease. Blood 1992;80:2419.
151. Dietrich PY, Caignard A, et al. In vivo T-cell clonal amplification at time of acute graft- versus-host disease. Blood 1994;84:2815.
152. Glucksberg H, Storb R, Fefer A, et al. Clinical manifestations of graft-vs-host disease in human recipients of marrow from HLA-matched sibling donors. Transplantation 1974;18:295.
153. Bertheau P, Hadengue A, Cazalshatem D, et al. Chronic cholestasis in patients after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: several diseases are often associated. Bone Marrow Transplant
1995;16:261.
154. Vogelsang GB, Hess AD, Santos GW. Acute graft-vs-host disease: clinical characteristics in the cyclosporine era. Medicine 1988;67:163.
155. Deeg HJ, Cottler-Fox M. Clinical spectrum and pathophysiology of acute graft-vs-host disease. In: Burakoff SJ, Deeg HJ, Ferrara J, Atkinson K, eds. Graft-vs-host disease. New York: Marcel
Dekker Inc, 1990:311.
156. Weisdorf DJ, Snover DC, Haake R, et al. Acute gastrointestinal graft-vs-host disease: clinical significance and response to immunosuppressive therapy. Blood 1990;76:624.
157. Thomas ED, Storb R, Clift RA, et al. Bone marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med 1975;292:895.
158. Roosnek E, Hogendijk S, Zawadynski S, et al. The frequency of pretransplant donor cytotoxic T-cell precursors with anti-host specificity predicts survival of patients transplanted with bone
marrow donors other than HLA-identical siblings. Transplantation 1993;56:691.
159. Schwarer AP, Jiang YZ, Brookes PA, et al. Frequency of anti-recipient alloreactive helper T-cell precursors in donor blood and graft-versus-host disease after HLA-identical sibling bone marrow
transplantation. Lancet 1993;341:203.
160. Theobald M, Nierle T, Bunjes D, et al. Host-specific interleukin-2-secreting donor T-cell precursors as predictors of acute graft-versus-host disease in bone marrow transplantation between

HLA-identical siblings. N Engl J Med 1992;327:1613.
161. Nierle T, Bunjes D, Arnold R, et al. Quantitative assessment of posttransplant host-specific interleukin-2-secreting T-helper cell precursors in patients with and without graft-versus-host disease
after allogeneic HLA-identical sibling bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1993;81:841.
162. Theobald M, Bunjes D. Pretransplant detection of human minor histocompatibility antigen-specific naive and memory interleukin-2 secreting T-cells within class-I major histocompatibility
complex (MHC)restricted CD8+ and class-II MHC-restricted CD4+ T-cell subsets. Blood 1993;82:298.
163. Den Haan JMM, Sherman NE, Blokland E, et al. Identification of a graft versus host diseaseassociated human minor histocompatibility antigen. Science 1995;268:1476.
164. Perreault C, Decary F, Brochu S, et al. Minor histocompatibility antigens. Blood 1990;76:1269.
165. Goulmy E, Voogt P, van Els C, et al. The role of minor histocompatibility antigens in GVHD and rejection: a mini-review [Review]. Bone Marrow Transplant 1991;7[Suppl 1]:49.
166. Goulmy E, Schipper R, Pool J, et al. Mismatches of minor histocompatibility antigens between HLA-identical donors and recipients and the development of graft-versus-host disease after bone
marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med 1996;334:281.
167. Nash RA, Pepe MS, Storb R, et al. Acute graft-versus-host disease: analysis of risk factors after allogeneic marrow transplantation and prophylaxis with cyclosporin and methotrexate [see
comments]. Blood 1992;80:1838.
168. Hagglund H, Bostrom L, Remberger M, et al. Risk factors for acute graft-versus-host disease in 291 consecutive HLA identical bone marrow transplant recipients. Bone Marrow Transplant
1995;16:747.
169. Gale RP, Bortin MM, Van Bekkum DW, et al. Risk factors for acute graft-versus-host disease. Br J Haematol 1987;67:397.
170. Henslee-Downey PJ. Mismatched bone marrow transplantation. Curr Opin Oncol 1995;7:115.
171. Storb R, Deeg HJ, Pepe M, et al. Graft-versus-host disease prevention by methotrexate combined with cyclosporine compared to methotrexate alone in patients given marrow grafts for severe
aplastic anemia: long-term follow-up of a controlled trial. Br J Haematol 1989;72:567.
172. Storb R, Leisenring W, Deeg HJ, et al. Long-term follow-up of a randomized trial of graft-versus-host disease prevention by methotrexate/cyclosporine versus methotrexate alone in patients
given marrow grafts for severe aplastic anemia. Blood 1994;83:2749.
173. Storb E, Pepe M, Anasetti C, et al. What role for prednisone in prevention of acute graft-versus-host disease in patients undergoing marrow transplantation? Blood 1990;76:1037.
174. Marmount A, Horowitz MM, Gale RP, et al. T-cell depletion of HLA-identical transplants in leukemia. Blood 1991;78:2120.
175. Barrett AJ, Mavroudis D, Tisdale J, et al. T cell depleted bone marrow transplantation and delayed T cell add-back to control acute GVHD and conserve a graft-versus-leukemia effect. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1998;21(6):543.
176. Neudorf S, Filipovich A, Ramsay N, et al. Prevention and treatment of acute GVHD. Semin Hematol 1984;21:91.
177. Bacigalupo A, Van Lint MT, Frassoni F, et al. High dose methylprednisolone for the treatment of acute GVHD. Blut 1983;46:125.
178. Kanojia MD, Anagnostou AA, Zander AR, et al. High dose methylprednisolone treatment for acute GVHD after bone marrow transplantation in adults. Transplantation 1984;37:246.
179. Van Lint MT, Uderzo C, Losasciulli A, et al. Early treatment of acute GVHD with high or low dose methylprednisolone. A multicenter randomized trial from the Italian Group for Bone Marrow
Transplantation. Blood 1998;92:2288.
180. Martin PJ, Schoch G, Fisher L, et al. A retrospective analysis of therapy for acute graft-versus-host disease: secondary treatment. Blood 1991;77:1821.
181. Hebart H, Ehninger G, Schmidt H, et al. Treatment of steroid-resistant graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation with antiCD3/TCR monoclonal antibodies. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1995;15:891.
182. Anasetti C, Martin PJ, Hansen JA, et al. A phase III study evaluating the murine anti-IL-2 receptor antibody 2A3 for treatment of acute graft-versus-host disease. Transplantation 1990;50:49.
183. Anasetti C, Hansen JA, Waldmann TA, et al. Treatment of acute graft-versus-host disease with humanized anti-Tac: an antibody that binds to the interleukin-2 receptor. Blood 1994;84:1320.
184. Antin JH, Weinstein HJ, Guinan EC, et al. Recombinant human interleukin-1 receptor antagonist in the treatment of steroid-resistant graft-versus-host disease. Blood 1994;84:1342.
185. Lipsky JJ. Mycophenolate mofetil (drug profile). Lancet 1996;348:1357.
186. Greinix HT, Volc-Platzer B, Rabitsch W, et al. Successful use of extracorporeal photochemotherapy in the treatment of severe acute and chronic graft-versus-host disease. Blood 1998;92:3098.
187. Ringden O. Management of graft-versus-host disease. Eur J Haematol 1993;51:1.
188. Sullivan KM, Shulman HM, Storb R, et al. Chronic graft-versus-host disease in 52 patients: adverse natural course and successful treatment with combination immunosuppression. Blood
1981;57:267.
189. Shulman HM, Sullivan KM, Weiden PL, et al. Chronic graft-versus-host disease syndrome in man. A long-term clinico-pathologic study of 20 Seattle patients. Am J Med 1980;69:204.
190. Ferrara JLM, Deeg HJ. Graft-versus-host disease. N Engl J Med 1991;324:667.
191. Loughran TP Jr, Sullivan K, Morton T, et al. Value of day 100 screening studies for predicting the development of chronic graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic bone marrow
transplantation. Blood 1990;76:228.
192. Wingard JR, Piantadosi S, Vogelsang GB, et al. Predictors of death from chronic graft-versus-host disease after bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1989;74:1428.
193. Atkinson K. Chronic graft-versus-host disease. Bone Marrow Transplant 1990;5:69.
194. Sullivan KM, Witherspoon RP, Storb R, et al. Alternating-day cyclosporine and prednisone for treatment of high-risk chronic graft-versus-host disease. Blood 1988;72:555.
195. Volc-Platzer B, Honigsmann H, Hinterberger W, et al. Photo-chemotherapy improves chronic cutaneous graft-versus-host disease. J Am Acad Dermatol 1990;23:220.
196. Vogelsang GB, Farmer ER, Hess AD, et al. Thalidomide for the treatment of chronic GVHD. N Engl J Med 1992;325:1055.
197. Mookerjee B, Altomonte V, Vogelsang G. Salvage therapy for refractory chronic graft-versus- host disease with mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999; 24:517.
198. Voogt PJ, Fibbe WE, Marijt WA, et al. Rejection of bone marrow graft by recipient-derived cytotoxic T lymphocytes against minor histocompatibility antigens. Lancet 1990;335:131.
199. Goss GD, Wittwer MA, Bezwoda WR, et al. Effects of natural killer cells on syngeneic bone marrow: in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrating graft failure due to NK cells in an identical twin
treated by bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1985;66:1043.
200. Bosserman LD, Murray C, Takvorian T, et al. Mechanism of graft failure in HLA-matched and HLA-mismatched bone marrow transplant recipients. Bone Marrow Transplant 1989;4:239.
201. Champlin RE, Horowitz MM, Van Bekkum DW, et al. Graft failure following bone marrow transplantation for severe aplastic anemia: risk factors and treatment results. Blood 1989;73:606.
202. Kernan NA, Bordignon C, Heller G, et al. Graft failure after T-cell depleted human leukocyte antigen identical marrow transplants for leukemia: I. Analysis of risk factors and results of secondary
transplants. Blood 1989;74:2227.
203. Martin PJ, Hansen JA, Torok-Storb B, et al. G raft failure in patients receiving T-cell depleted HLA-identical allogeneic marrow transplants. Bone Marrow Transplant 1988;3:445.
204. Niederwieser D, Pepe M, Storb R, et al. Improvement in rejection, engraftment rate and survival without increase in graft-versus-host disease by high marrow cell dose in patients transplanted
for aplastic anemia. Br J Haematol 1988;69:23.
205. Anasetti C, Amos D, Beatty PG, et al. Effect of HLA compatibility on engraftment of bone marrow transplants in patients with leukemia or lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1989;320:197.
206. Deeg Hj, Self S, Storb R, et al. Decreased incidence of marrow graft rejection in patients with severe aplastic anemia: changing impact of risk factors. Blood 1986;68:1363.
207. Nemunaitis J, Singer JW, Buckner CD, et al. Use of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in graft failure after bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1990;76:245.
208. Weisdorf DJ, Verfaillie CM, Davies SM, et al. Hematopoietic growth factors for graft failure after bone marrow transplantation: a randomized trial of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (GM-CSF) versus sequential GM-CSF plus granulocyte-CSF. Blood 1995;85:3452.
209. Bolger GB, Sullivan KM, Storb R, et al. Second marrow infusion for poor graft function after allogeneic marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1986;1:21.
210. Davies SM, Weisdorf DJ, Haake RJ, et al. Second infusion of bone marrow for treatment of graft failure after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1994;14:73.
211. Emanuel D, Cunningham I, Jules-Elysee K, et al. Cytomegalovirus pneumonia after bone marrow transplantation successfully treated with the combination of ganciclovir and high-dose
intravenous immunoglobulin. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:777.
212. Paulin T, Ringdén O, Ljungman P, et al. Symptomatic cytomegalovirus infection after bone marrow transplantation. Clin Transplant 1989;3:279.
213. Weiner RS, Bortin MM, Gale RP, et al. Interstitial pneumonitis after bone marrow transplantation. Ann Intern Med 1986;104:168.
214. Bowden RA, Slichter SJ, Sayers MH, et al. Use of leukocyte-depleted platelets and cytomegalovirus-seronegative red blood cells for prevention of primary cytomegalovirus infection after
marrow transplant. Blood 1981;78:246.
215. Winston DJ, Ho WG, Lin C-H, et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin for prevention of cytomegalovirus infection anti-interstitial pneumonia after bone marrow transplantation. Ann Intern Med
1987;106:12.
216. Bowden RA, Sayers M, Flournoy N, et al. Cytomegalovirus immune globulin and seronegative blood products to prevent primary cytomegalovirus infection after marrow transplantation. N Engl
J Med 1986;314:1006.
217. Atkinson K, Downs K, Golenia M, et al. Prophylactic use of ganciclovir in allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: absence of clinical cytomegalovirus infection. Br J Haematol 1991;79:57.
218. Goodrich J, Bowden R, Fisher L, et al. Ganciclovir prophylaxis to prevent cytomegalovirus disease after allogeneic marrow transplant. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:173.
219. Ljungman P, Lore K, Aschan J, et al. Use of a semi-quantitative PCR for cytomegalovirus DNA as a basis for preemptive antiviral therapy in allogeneic bone marrow transplant patients. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1996;17:583.
220. Walther EA, Greenberg PD, Gilbert MJ, et al. Reconstitution of cellular immunity against cytomegalovirus in recipients of allogeneic bone marrow by transfer of T-cell clones from donor. N Engl
J Med 1995;333:1038.
221. Kessinger A, Smith DM, Strandjord SE, et al. Allogeneic transplantation of blood-derived T-cell-depleted haemopoietic stem cells after myeloablative treatment in a patient with acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia. Bone Marrow Transplant 1989;4:643.
222. Russell NH, Hunter A, Rogers S., et al. Peripheral-blood stem-cells as an alternative to marrow for allogeneic transplantation [Letter]. Lancet 1993;341:1482.
223. Bensinger WI, Weaver C, Appelbaum F, et al. Transplantation of allogeneic peripheral blood stem cells mobilized by recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. Blood
1995;85:1655.
224. Korbling M, Przepiorka D, Huh Y, et al. Allogeneic blood stem cell transplantation for refractory leukaemia and lymphoma: potential advantages of blood over marrow allograft. Blood
1995;85:1659.
225. Russell JA, Kuider J, Weaver M, et al. Collection of progenitor cells for allogeneic transplantation from peripheral blood of normal donors. Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;15:111.
226. Schmitz N, Dreger P, Suttorp M, et al. Primary transplantation of allogeneic peripheral- blood progenitor cells mobilized by filgrastim (granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor). Blood
1995;85:1666.
227. Russell JA, Brown C, Bowen T, et al. Allogeneic blood cell transplants for haematological malignancy: preliminary comparison of outcomes with bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1996;17:703.
228. Grigg AP, Roberts AW, Raunow H, et al. Optimizing dose and scheduling of filgrastim (GCSF) for mobilization and collection of peripheral blood progenitor cells in normal volunteers. Blood
1995;86:4437.
229. Dreger P, Haferlach T, Eckstein V, et al. G-CSF-mobilized peripheral blood progenitor cells for allogeneic transplantation: safety, kinetics of mobilization, and composition of the graft. Br J
Haematol 1994;87:609.
230. Ottinger HD, Beelen DW, Scheulen B, et al. Improved immune reconstitution after allotransplantation of peripheral blood stem cells instead of bone marrow. Blood 1997;88:2775.
231. Schmitz N, Bacigalupo A, Hasenclever D, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation vs filgrastim-mobilised peripheral blood progenitor cell transplantation in patients with early leukemia:
first results of a randomised multicentre trial of the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1998;21:995.
232. Bensinger WI, Clift R, Martin P, et al. Allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplantation in patients with advanced hematologic malignancies: a retrospective comparison with marrow
transplantation. Blood 1996;88:2794.
233. Bensinger W, Martin P, Clift R, et al. A prospective randomized trial of peripheral blood stem cells (PBSC) or marrow (BM) for patients undergoing allogeneic transplantation for hematologic
malignancy. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:368a(abst).
234. Gluckman E, Broxmeyer HE, Auerbach AD, et al. Hematopoietic reconstitution in a patient with Fanconi's anemia by means of umbilical cord blood from an HLA-identical sibling. N Engl J Med
1989;321:1174.
235. Wagner JE, Kernan NA, Steinbuch M, et al. Allogeneic sibling umbilical-cord blood transplantation in children with malignant and non-malignant disease. Lancet 1995;346:214.
236. Kurezberg J, Laughlin M, Graham ML, et al. Placental blood as a source of hematopoietic stem cells for transplantation into unrelated recipients. N Engl J Med 1996;335:157.
237. Wagner JE, Rosenthal J, Sweerman R, et al. Successful transplantation of HLA-matched and HLA-mismatched umbilical cord blood from unrelated donors; analysis of engraftment and acute

graft-versus-host disease. Blood 1996;88:795.
238. Mayani H, Lansdorp PM. Thy-1 expression is linked to functional properties of primitive hematopoietic progenitor cells from human umbilical cord blood. Blood 1994;83:2410.
239. Morrison SJ, Wandycz AM, Akashi K, et al. The aging of hematopoietic stem cells. Nat Med 1996;2:1011.
240. Vaziri H, Dragowska W, Allsop RC, et al. Evidence for a mitotic clock in human hematopoietic stem cells: loss of telomeric DNA with age. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:9857.
241. Gluckman E, Rocha V, Boyer-Chammard B, et al. Outcome of cord blood transplantation from related and unrelated donor. N Engl J Med 1997;337:373.
242. Anasetti C, Amos D, Beatty PG, et al. Effect of HLA compatibility on engraftment of bone marrow transplants in patients with leukemia or lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1989;320:197.
243. Ash RC, Casper JT, Chitambar CR, et al. Successful allogeneic transplantation of T-cell-depleted bone marrow from closely HLA-matched unrelated donors. N Engl J Med 1990;322:485.
244. Beatty PG, Hansen JA, Longton GM, et al. Marrow transplantation from HLA-matched unrelated donors for treatment of hematologic malignancies. Transplantation 1991;51:443.
245. Balduzzi A, Gooley T, Anasetti C, et al. Unrelated donor marrow transplantation in children. Blood 1995;86:3247.
246. Oudshoorn M, Cornelissen JJ, Fibbe WE, et al. Problems and possible solutions in finding an unrelated bone marrow donor: results of consecutive searches for 240 Dutch patients. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1997;20:1011.
247. Henslee-Downey PJ, Gluckman E. Allogeneic transplantation from donors other than HLA-identical sibling. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1999;13:1017.
248. Clay TM, Bidwell JL, Howard MR, et al. PCR-fingerprinting for selection of HLA-matched unrelated marrow donors. Lancet 1991;337:1049.
249. Hansen JA, Gooley TA, Martin PJ, et al. Bone marrow transplants from unrelated donors for patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 1998;338:962.
250. Davies SM, Wagner JE, Shu X-O, et al. Unrelated donor bone marrow transplantation for children with acute leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:557.
251. Kernan NA, Bartsch G, Ash RC, et al. Analysis of 462 transplantations from unrelated donors facilitated by the National Marrow Donor Program. N Engl J Med 1993;328:593.
252. Hongeng S, Krance RW, Bowman LC, et al. Outcomes of transplantation with matched-sibling and unrelated donor bone marrow in children with leukemia. Lancet 1997;350:767.
253. Speiser DE, Tiercy JM, Rufer N, et al. High resolution HLA matching associated with decreased mortality after unrelated bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1996;10:4455.
254. Nademanee A, Schmidt GM, Parker P, et al. The outcome of matched unrelated donor bone marrow transplantation in patients with haematologic malignancies using molecular typing for donor
selection and graft-versus-host disease prophylaxis regimen of cyclosporin, methotrexate, and prednisone. Blood 1995;86:1228.
255. Ringdén O, Remberger M, Bornhauser M, et al. Peripheral blood stem cell transplantation from unrelated donors: a comparison with marrow transplantation. Blood 1999;94:455.
256. Petersdorf EW, Longton GM, Anasetti C, et al. Definition of HLA-DQ as a transplantation antigen. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:15358.
257. Petersdorf EW, Longton GM, Anasetti C, et al. Association of HLA-C disparity with graft failure after marrow transplantation from unrelated donors. Blood 1997;89:1818.
258. Wagner JE, King R, Kollman C, et al. Unrelated donor bone marrow transplantation (UBMT) in 5075 patients with malignant and non-malignant disorders: impact of marrow T cell depletion.
Blood 1998;92[Suppl 1]:686a(abst).
259. Sierra J, Storer B, Hansen JA, et al. Transplantation of marrow cells from unrelated donors for treatment of high-risk acute leukemia: the effect of leukemic burden, donor HLA-matching, and
marrow cell dose. Blood 1997;89:4226.
260. Powles RL, Morgenstern GR, Kay HEM, et al. Mismatched family donors for bone marrow transplantation as treatment for acute leukemia. Lancet 1983;1:612.
261. Beatty PG, Clift RA, Mickelson EM, et al. Marrow transplantation from related donors other than HLA-identical siblings. N Engl J Med 1985;313:765.
262. Anasetti C, Amos D, Beatty PG, et al. Effect of HLA compatibility on engraftment of bone marrow transplants in patients with leukemia or lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1989; 320:197.
263. Ash RC, Horowitz MM, Gale RP, et al. Bone marrow transplantation from related donors other than HLA-identical siblings: effect of T-cell depletion. Bone Marrow Transplant 1991;7:443.
264. Ash RC, Horowitz MM, Gale RP, et al. Bone marrow transplantation from related donors other than HLA-identical siblings: effect of T-cell depletion. Bone Marrow Transplant 1991;7:443.
265. Szydlo R, Goldman JM, Klein JP, et al. Results of allogeneic bone marrow transplants for leukemia using donors other than HLA-identical siblings. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1767.
266. Beatty PG, Clift RA, Mickelson EM, et al. Marrow transplantation from related donors other than HLA-identical siblings. N Engl J Med 1985;313:765.
267. Beatty PG, Hansen JA, Longton GM, et al. Marrow transplantation from HLA-matched unrelated donors for treatment of hematologic malignancies. Transplantation 1991;51:443.
268. Henslee PJ, Thompson JS, Romond EH, et al. T-cell depletion of HLA and haploidentical marrow reduces graft-versus-host disease but it may impair a graft-versus-leukemia effect. Transplant
Proc 1987;19:2701.
269. Trigg ME, Sondel PM, Billing R, et al. Mismatched bone marrow transplantation in children with hematologic malignancy using T-lymphocyte depleted bone marrow. J Biol Response Mod
1985;4:602.
270. O'Reilly RJ, Collins NH, Kernan N, et al. Transplantation of marrow-depleted T-cells by soybean lectin agglutination and E-rosette depletion: major histocompatibility complexrelated graft
resistance in leukemic transplant patients. Transplant Proc 1985;17:455.
271. Fleeting DR, Henslee-Downey PJ, Romond EH, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation with T celldepleted partially matched related donors for advanced acute lymphoblastic leukemia in
children and adults: a comparative matched cohort study. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;17:917.
272. Henslee-Downey PJ, Abhyankar SH, Parrish RS, et al. Use of partially mismatched related donors extends access to allogeneic marrow transplant. Blood 1997;89:3864.
273. Aversa F, Tabilio A, Terenzi A, et al. Successful engraftment of T-cell-depleted haploidentical “three-loci” incompatible transplants in leukemia patients by addition of recombinant human
granulocyte colony-stimulating factormobilized peripheral blood progenitor cells to bone marrow inoculum. Blood 1994;84:3948.
274. Aversa F, Tabilio A, Velardi A, et al. Treatment of high-risk acute leukemia with T-cell depleted stem cells from related donors with one fully mismatched I-ILA haplotype. N Engl J Med
1998;339:1186.
275. Guinan EC, Boussiotis VA, Neuberg D, et al. Transplantation of anergic histocompatible bone marrow allografts. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1704.
276. Ringdén O, Nilsson B. Death by graft-versus-host disease associated with HLA mismatch, high recipient age, low marrow cell dose, and splenectomy. Transplantation 1985;40:39.
277. Barrett AJ, Horowitz MM, Gale RP, et al. Marrow transplantation for acute lymphoblastic leukemia: factors affecting relapse and survival. Blood 1989;74:862.
278. Giralt S, Estey E, Albitar M, et al. Engraftment of allogeneic hemapoietic progenitor cells with purine analogcontaining chemotherapy: harnessing graft-versus-leukaemia without myeloablative
therapy. Blood 1997;89:4531.
279. Slavin S, Nagler A, Naparstak E, et al. Nonmyeloablative stem cell transplantation and cell therapy as an alternative to conventional bone marrow transplantation with lethal cytoreduction for
the treatment of malignant and non malignant hematologic diseases. Blood 1988;91:756.
280. Khouri I, Keating MJ, Korbling M, et al. Transplant-lite: induction of graft-versus-malignancy using fludarabine-based nonablative chemotherapy and allogeneic progenitor cell transplantation as
treatment for lymphoid malignancies. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2817.
281. Sykes M, Preffer F, McAfee S, et al. Mixed lymphohaemopoietic chimerism and graft-versus-lymphoma effects after non-myeloablative therapy and HLA mismatched bone marrow
transplantation. Lancet 1999;353:1755.
282. Childs R, Epperson D, Bahceci E, et al. Molecular remission of chronic myeloid leukaemia following a non-myeloablative allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplant: in vivo and in vitro
evidence for a graft-versus-leukaemia effect. Br J Haematol 1999;107:396.
283. Grigg A, Bardy P, Byron K, et al. Fludarabine-based non-myeloablative chemotherapy followed by infusion of HLA-identical stem cells for relapsed leukaemia and lymphoma. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1999;23:107.
284. Childs R, Clave E, Tisdale J, et al. Successful treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma with a nonmyeloablative allogeneic peripheral blood progenitor cell transplant: evidence for a
graft-versus-tumor effect. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2044.
285. Craddock C. Nonmyeloablative stem cell transplants. Curr Opin Hematol 1999;6:383.
286. Storb R, Yu C, Sandmaier BM, et al. Mixed hematopoietic chimerism after marrow allografts: transplantation in the ambulatory care setting. Ann NY Acad Sci 1999;872:372.
287. Storb R, Yu C, Wagner J, et al. Stable mixed hematopoietic chimerism in DLA-identical littermate dogs given sublethal total body irradiation before and pharmacological immunosuppression
after marrow transplantation. Blood 1997;89:3048.
288. Sykes M, Sheard MA, Sachs DH. Graft-versus-host-related immunosuppression is induced in mixed chimeras by alloresponses against either host or donor lymphohematopoietic cells. J Exp
Med 1988;168:2391.
289. Childs R, Clave E, Contenin N, et al. Engraftment kinetics after nonmyeloablative allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplantation: full donor T-cell chimerism recedes alloimmune
responses. Blood 1999;94:3234.
290. Sandmaier BM, McSweeny P, Yu C, et al. Nonmyeloablative transplants: Preclinical and clinical results. Semin Oncol 2000;2(Suppl5):78.
291. Niederwieser D, Wolff D, Hegenbart U, et al. Hematopoietic stem cell transplants (HSCT) from HLA matched and 1 allele mismatched unrelated donors using a nonmyeloablative regimen.
Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:561a(abst).
292. Childs R, Contenin N, Clave E, et al. Reduced toxicity and transplant related mortality (TRM) following non-myeloablative allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplantation for malignant
disease. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:393a(abst).
293. Kottaridis P, Chakravarty R, Milligan D, et al. A non-myeloablative regimen for allografting high-risk patients: low toxicity, stable engraftment without GVHD, disease control and potential for
GVL with adoptive immunotherapy. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:348a(abst).
294. Khouri I, Lee M, Palmer L, et al. Transplant-lite using fludarabine-cyclophosphamide (FC) and allogeneic stem cell transplant (AlloSCT) for low grade lymphoma (LGL). Blood 1999;94[Suppl
1]:348a(abst).
295. Michallet M, Bilger K, Garban F, et al. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplants after immune-ablative preparative regimen: a report of 92 cases. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:348a(abst).
296. Shimoni A, Anderlini P, Andersson B, et al. Allogeneic transplantation for leukaemia in patients older than 60 years of age should not exclude treatment with non-myeloablative regimens. Blood
1999;94[Suppl 1]:710a(abst).
297. Childs R, Contentin N, Clave E, et al. Sustained regression of metastatic renal cell carcinoma following non-myeloablative allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplantation: a new applicant
of allogeneic immunology. Blood 1999;94[Suppl 1]:710a(abst).
298. Bensinger WI, Buckner CD, Anasetti C, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for multiple myeloid: an analysis of risk factors on outcome. Blood 1996;88:2787.
299. Biggs JC, Szer J, Grilley P, et al. Treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia with allogeneic bone marrow transplantation after preparation with BuCy 2. Blood 1992;80:1353.
300. Clift RA, Buckner CD, Thomas ED, et al. Marrow transplantation for patients in accelerated phase of chronic myeloid leukemia. Blood 1994;84:4368.
301. Goldman J, Apperley JF, Jones L, et al. Bone marrow transplantation for patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 1986;314:202.
302. McGlave P, Arthur D, Haake R, et al. Therapy of chronic myelogenous leukemia with allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1033.
303. Wagner JE, Zahurak M, Piantadosi S, et al. Bone marrow transplantation of chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase: evaluation of risks and benefits. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:779.
304. Hansen JA, Gooley TA, Martin PJ, et al. Bone marrow transplants from unrelated donors for patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 1998;338:962.
305. Keating MJ, Smith TL, Kantarjian H, et al. Cytogenetic patterns in acute myelogenous leukemia: a major reproducible determinant of outcome. Leukemia 1988;2:403.
306. Grimwade D, Walker H, Oliver F, et al. The importance of diagnostic cytogenetics on outcome in AML: analysis of 1,612 patients entered into the MRC AML 10 trial. Blood 1998;92:2322.
307. Bostrom B, Brunning RD, McGlave P, et al. Bone marrow transplantation for acute nonlymphocytic leukemia in first remission: analysis of prognostic factors. Blood 1985;65:1191.
308. Forman SJ, Spruce WE, Farbstein MJ, et al. Bone marrow ablation followed by allogeneic marrow grafting during first complete remission of acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. Blood
1983;61:439.
309. Helenglass G, Powles RL, McElwain TJ, et al. Melphalan and total body irradiation (TBI) versus cyclophosphamide and TBI as conditioning for allogeneic matched sibling bone marrow
transplants for acute myeloblastic leukemia in first remission. Bone Marrow Transplant 1988;3:21.
310. McGlave PB, Haake RJ, Bostrom BC, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for acute nonlymphocytic leukemia in first remission. Blood 1988;72:1512.
311. Buckner CD, Clift RA, Thomas ED, et al. Allogeneic marrow transplantation for patients with acute non-lymphoblastic leukemia in second remission. Leuk Res 1982;6:395.
312. Appelbaum FR, Clift RA, Buckner CD, et al. Allogeneic marrow transplantation for acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia after first complete relapse. Blood 1983;61:949.
313. Hoelzer D, Ludwig WD, Thiel D, et al. Improved outcome in adult B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1996;87:495.
314. Hoelzer D, Thiel E, Loffler T, et al. Prognostic factors in a multicentric study for treatment of active lymphoblastic leukemia in adults. Blood 1988;71:123.
315. Laport GE, Larson R. Treatment of adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Semin Oncol 1997;24:70.
316. Faderl S, Kantarjian M, Talpaz M, et al. Clinical significance of cytogenetic abnormalities in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1998;91:3996.
317. Barrett AJ, Horowitz MM, Ash RC, et al. Bone marrow transplantation for Philadelphia chromosomepositive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 1992;79:3067.
318. Chao NJ, Forman SJ, Schmidt GM, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for high-risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia during first complete remission. Blood 1991;78:1923.
319. Forman SJ. The role of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in the treatment of high-risk acute lymphocytic leukemia in adults. Leukemia 1997;11[Suppl 4]:S18.

320. Chao NJ, Forman SJ, Schmidt GM, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for high-risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia during first complete remission. Blood 1991;78:1923.
321. Sanders JE, Thomas ED, Buckner CD, et al. Marrow transplantation for children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia in second remission. Blood 1987;70:324.
322. Barrett AJ, Horowitz MM, Pollock BH, et al. Bone marrow transplants from HLA-identical siblings as compared with chemotherapy for children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia in a second
remission. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1253.
323. Anderson JE, Appelbaum FR, Fisher LD, et al. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for 93 patients with myelodysplastic syndrome. Blood 1993;82:677.
324. Runde V, de Witte T, Arnold R, et al. Bone marrow transplantation from HLA-identical siblings as first-line treatment in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes: early transplantation is
associated with improved outcome. Chronic Leukemia Working Party of the European Group forBloodand Marrow Transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1998;21:255.
325. Nevill T, Fung H, Shepard J, et al. Cytogenetic abnormalities in primary myelodysplastic syndrome are highly predictive of outcome after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Blood
1998;92:1910.
326. Michallet M, Archimbaud E, Bandini G, et al. HLA-identical sibling bone marrow transplantation in younger patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. European Group forBloodand Marrow
Transplantation and the International Bone Marrow TransplantRegistry. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:311.
327. Gahrton G, Tura S, Ljungman P, et al. Prognostic factors in allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1312.
328. Chopra R, Goldstone AH, Pearce R, et al. Autologous versus allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a case-controlled analysis of the European Bone Marrow
TransplantGroup Registry data. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1690.
329. Ratanatharathorn V, Uberti J, Karanes C, et al. Prospective comparative trial of autologous versus allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood
1994;84:1050.
330. Anderson JE, Litzow MR, Appelbaum FR, et al. Allogeneic, syngeneic, and autologous marrow transplantation for Hodgkin's disease: the 21-year Seattle experience. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2342.
331. Dann EJ, Daugherty CK, Larson RA. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for relapsed and refractory Hodgkin's disease and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Bone Marrow Transplant
1997;20:369.

SECTION 53.4 Hematopoietic Growth Factors
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 53.4
Hematopoietic Growth Factors
JAMES D. GRIFFIN
Introduction
Overview of Hematopoietic Growth Factors
Biologic Features of the Major Hematopoietic Growth Factors in Clinical use
Erythropoietin
Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor
Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor
Clinical Applications of Hematopoietic Growth Factors in Cancer therapy
Treatment of Anemia in Cancer Patients
Reduction Of Chemotherapy-Associated Neutropenia
Increase Of Chemotherapy Dose Intensity
Adjuncts To Autologous Or Allogeneic Transplantation
Treatment Of Leukemias
Reduction Of Chemotherapy-Related Thrombocytopenia
Long-Term Effects of Growth Factor Administration
Conclusions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The hematopoietic growth factors (HGFs) are a family of cytokines that regulate the proliferation, differentiation, and viability of hematopoietic progenitor cells and
mature blood elements. More than 20 different cytokines have been discovered, all of which are believed to have effects on blood cell development or function, and
many of these have been tested in preclinical or clinical trials in cancer patients over the last 15 years. Four HGFs—erythropoietin (EPO), granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and interleukin-11 (IL-11)—have been approved by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration for specific uses ( Table 53.4-1), and other approvals are likely in the future. Early phase I and II trials indicated that G-CSF or GM-CSF had
the potential to ameliorate myelosuppression in many circumstances, and now there is abundant evidence from randomized, phase III trials that this is the case.
Similarly, EPO has been shown to be an effective treatment for the anemia of cancer in some patients, and IL-11 has been shown to reduce chemotherapy-associated
thrombocytopenia in some circumstances. In addition, G-CSF, GM-CSF, and other growth factors are now commonly used to induce transient mobilization of
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells into the blood to allow collection for both autologous and allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Finally, other new cytokines
[such as thrombopoietin (TPO)] with well-defined effects on thrombopoiesis are being investigated in on-going clinical trials. Overall, the ability to use HGFs
therapeutically to enhance hematopoiesis has now become an important and widely used part of the treatment of certain cancers and has led to improved safety of
high-dose chemotherapy and bone marrow transplantation in particular. This is still a field with many questions, however, and the cost-effectiveness of cytokine use in
many areas of cancer treatment is still unknown. This chapter focuses on the four HGFs currently approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for one or more
applications in cancer and then summarizes the current state of clinical development of other cytokines of potential interest in cancer medicine.

TABLE 53.4-1. Major Hematopoietic Growth Factors in Clinical Use for Cancer Treatment

OVERVIEW OF HEMATOPOIETIC GROWTH FACTORS
All the formed elements of the blood—leukocytes, erythrocytes, and platelets—are derived from multipotent stem cells found primarily in the marrow. Because the life
span of blood cells is relatively short, large numbers of cells need to be replenished daily, and this daily requirement may be further increased by bleeding or acute
infection. Most of the stem cells are not actively cycling, and it is thought that hematopoiesis is maintained by the activity of only a small fraction of the total stem cell
pool at any given point in time. As these cells mature, however, they become progressively more committed to a single lineage, creating a series of “progenitor” cells
that are actively proliferating and very sensitive to regulation by HGFs. Interestingly, recent studies have identified stem cells with hematopoietic potential in other
tissues, including brain and muscle. 1 The significance of these cells and their potential for clinical development is of considerable interest.
There has been a dramatic increase in the knowledge of the regulation of hematopoiesis as the genes for individual HGFs have been cloned and recombinant
proteins produced (Table 53.4-2). The existence of HGFs has been recognized for more than 35 years but, before cloning of HGF genes, they could be studied only
as partially purified “activities” secreted by activated normal cells or certain cancer cell lines. The large number of cytokines now believed to be involved in potentially
regulating hematopoiesis and the complexity of that regulation were unanticipated, and the remarkable history of the development of this field has been extensively
reviewed.2,3,4,5,6,7,8 and 9 Some factors, such as Steel factor and Flt3 ligand, appear to have effects predominantly on stem and progenitor cells and minimal effects on
more mature cells. In contrast, more lineage-restricted factors, such as EPO and G-CSF, have prominent effects on progenitor cells and mature cells and minimal
effects on stem cells.

TABLE 53.4-2. Selected Hematopoietic Growth Factors and Other Cytokines in Clinical Development for Applications in Cancer Therapy

It is likely that a baseline production of growth factors maintains hematopoiesis in a steady state. Many HGFs are secreted by cells in the marrow microenvironment
and may be concentrated either on the cell surface of stromal cells or on extracellular matrix proteins in the marrow. One exception to this is the apparently exclusive
production of EPO outside the marrow, in the kidney and liver. In emergency situations, HGFs can be produced in many tissues. For example, keratinocytes,
fibroblasts, and endothelial cells can produce large amounts of G-CSF, GM-CSF, IL-1, and others in response to inflammation or other types of activation.
Interestingly, some HGFs circulate in detectable levels in the blood, while many others do not. The serum concentrations of EPO, G-CSF, and TPO vary inversely with
red cell oxygen-carrying capacity, neutrophil count, and platelet count, respectively. However, except for EPO, the mechanisms to “sense” the need for increased
synthesis of a specific cytokine in vivo are not well understood. In the case of bacterial infections, certain bacterial cell wall products, such as lipopolysaccharides, are
potent inducers of G-CSF synthesis by macrophages and other cells. In addition, a number of cytokines associated with an acute immune response, such as
interferon-g and tumor necrosis factor, will induce secretion of G-CSF and GM-CSF by a variety of other cells. Other factors, such as GM-CSF and IL-3, rarely
circulate in detectable levels even during severe neutropenia.
New insights into cytokine biology have been recently obtained by studying mice engineered to lack one or more cytokines. These knockout mice have provided
information in some cases that challenges hypotheses of cytokine function based on many years of tissue culture studies. 8,10,11 For example, mice deficient in
GM-CSF production are not leukopenic and, in fact, have so far been found to have only a pulmonary defect that resembles pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. 12
Similarly, mice deficient in IL-3 have normal production of granulocytes, red cells, and platelets but have defects in mast cells and certain immune responses. 13,14
Mice with natural mutations in the macrophage colony-stimulating factor or colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) gene have reduced macrophage number and severe
osteopetrosis. Other cytokine-deficient mice also have significant hematopoietic defects. Mice that are deficient in G-CSF, 15 EPO,16 and TPO17 are selectively
neutropenic, anemic, and thrombocytopenic, respectively. Steel factor–deficient mice may be severely anemic, depending on the exact mutation. 18,19 Overall, these
emerging results further suggest that the cytokine network that regulates hematopoiesis is complex, with overlapping and redundant functions for some factors and
unclear functions for other factors. To investigate these possibilities, mice deficient in multiple factors are now being studied. These mice will likely provide further
insights into the critical events of hematopoietic regulation. 20

BIOLOGIC FEATURES OF THE MAJOR HEMATOPOIETIC GROWTH FACTORS IN CLINICAL USE
ERYTHROPOIETIN
EPO is the primary regulator of the late stages of red cell production, and both humans and mice deficient in EPO production develop severe anemia. The biology and
pharmacology of EPO have been reviewed extensively. 21,22,23,24 and 25 The EPO gene is located on human chromosome 7q11-22, and the cDNA was cloned in
1984.26,27 and 28 The mature protein contains 165 amino acids and has a molecular weight of 30,400 daltons. EPO is produced in the kidney in response to hypoxia or
decreased oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood. The mechanism is still not completely understood, but it is clear that transcription of the EPO gene is regulated in
part by a pathway that involves an oxygen-binding heme protein. 29 Occasional patients present with erythrocytosis secondary to either a renal tumor causing local
hypoxia related to compression or, more rarely, secondary to secretion of EPO by the tumor.
EPO binds to bone marrow cells expressing the EPO receptor and stimulates proliferation of erythroid colony-forming cells and a subset of less mature burst-forming
units. Cloning of the EPO receptor was reported in 1989, 30 and it was shown to be a single-chain transmembrane protein that is believed to function as either a
monomer or homodimer. The receptor is a member of the HGF receptor superfamily and shares homology with the receptors for G-CSF, GM-CSF, IL-2, TPO, and
other cytokines. 31,32 Interestingly, the receptor interacts with the gp55 protein of the Friend erythroleukemia virus, and the resulting activation of the EPO receptor is
involved in causing erythroleukemias of mice. 33,34 and 35 In addition, other recent studies with the Friend erythroleukemia virus suggest that the EPO receptor may also
interact with a transmembrane tyrosine kinase termed Ron/stk. Mutations in the distal end of the EPO receptor are associated with familial erythrocytosis 36,37 and 38 but
have not yet been associated with human erythroleukemias.
The serum concentration of EPO in normal individuals is approximately 4 to 30 U/L, and the half-life of recombinant EPO administered intravenously in humans is 9 to
13 hours. Serum EPO levels reproducibly start to rise as the hematocrit drops below approximately 35% and can increase 100- to 1000-fold with severe anemia. In
cancer patients with chronic anemias, the EPO level is often inappropriately low. 39,40 The clinical indications for EPO treatment are described in detail later in the
section Treatment of Anemia in Cancer Patients. In cancer patients, EPO treatment is indicated for chemotherapy-associated anemia not due to other causes (iron
deficiency, marrow involvement with tumor, etc.) and is most likely to have benefit if the serum EPO level is abnormally low.
Toxic effects of EPO in cancer patients are generally minimal. The hypertension and thrombotic events seen in patients with chronic renal failure treated with EPO are
rarely seen in cancer patients with normal renal function. Monitoring of hematocrit is required to avoid erythrocytosis.
GRANULOCYTE COLONY-STIMULATING FACTOR
G-CSF (filgrastim, lenograstim) regulates the production, maturation, and function of cells of the neutrophil lineage. 8,41,42 and 43 G-CSF was initially investigated in the
mouse as a factor with potent capacity to differentiate myeloid leukemia cell lines and was later purified from mouse lung–conditioned medium. 44 Human G-CSF was
purified from medium conditioned by bladder and head and neck cancer cell lines, and the gene was then cloned. 45,46 The human gene is located on chromosome
17q11-21 and encodes a mature polypeptide of 175 amino acids with a molecular weight of 18,800 daltons. In tissue culture studies, G-CSF induces proliferation and
differentiation of cells of the neutrophil lineage. In the mouse, knockout of the G-CSF gene produces severe neutropenia but has minimal effect on other lineages. 15
Hammond et al.47 have also shown that dogs induced to form neutralizing antiantibodies to G-CSF become profoundly neutropenic. 47 G-CSF may also enhance
several functions of neutrophils, but the significance of this observation is unknown. Overall, it is clear that G-CSF is critically involved in regulating neutrophil
production.
G-CSF is produced by many different cell types, and expression of G-CSF can be rapidly induced by exposure of epithelial cells, macrophages, endothelial cells, and
marrow stromal cells to inflammatory stimuli, particularly endotoxin. Unlike many other hemopoietins, there is readily detectable G-CSF in the serum of normal
individuals, with a typical range of 20 to 100 pg/mL. The serum level varies inversely with neutrophil concentration in the blood, and in bacteremic, neutropenic
patients, serum levels can exceed 2000 pg/mL.
The receptor for G-CSF is widely expressed, not only on myeloid lineage cells but on endothelial cells and epithelial cancer cell lines. The function of
nonhematopoietic G-CSF receptors is not clear, however. The receptor for G-CSF is a member of the cytokine receptor superfamily 48,49 and is composed of a single
known transmembrane protein of approximately 100 kD molecular weight. Mutations in the cytoplasmic domain of the receptor have recently been demonstrated in a
small number of patients with congenital neutropenia and acute myeloblastic leukemia. 50 The mutations truncate the receptor, possibly removing a domain involved in
the differentiation-inducing function of G-CSF. 50 Function of the truncated receptor in murine models suggests that the receptor may be activated to an excessive level
by G-CSF. 51
Administration of G-CSF to humans results in a dose-dependent increase in circulating neutrophils accompanied by expansion of the myeloid components in the
marrow and accelerated production of neutrophils due to reduced transit time from stem cell to mature neutrophil. The fraction of myeloid progenitor cells in S-phase
in the marrow is increased, and there is some suggestion that G-CSF enhances entry of quiescent stem and progenitor cells into the cell cycle. Neutrophils produced
in response to G-CSF therapy have been shown to be functionally normal in terms of standard assays for phagocytosis and activation of the respiratory burst and
further appear to have normal function in vivo. Marrow aspirates performed on patients receiving G-CSF or other myeloid growth factors may show a striking left shift,
and circulating neutrophils have interesting morphologic changes consistent with activation, including Döhle's inclusion bodies, toxic granulation, and an increase in
band forms. The elimination half-life of G-CSF in the serum is in the range of 1.3 to 4.2 hours but appears to vary with neutrophil mass, suggesting that neutrophils
may contribute to metabolizing the cytokine. 52
Toxic side effects of G-CSF in humans have been generally mild. Some patients experience bone pain during administration, but fever and weight gain are rare.
Chronic administration of G-CSF has been associated with benign splenomegaly, 53 presumably due to extramedullary hematopoiesis. Bone scan abnormalities have
also been reported, including an apparent “flare” of metastatic bone lesions and increased uptake in the axial skeleton or juxtaarticular regions. 54 In many patients,
there is an acute response to intravenous injections of G-CSF characterized by abrupt, but transient, neutropenia. 55 Occasionally, patients will have transient dyspnea

and pulmonary infiltrates on chest radiography. In patients with underlying severe pulmonary disease, these effects can be clinically significant. 56 The acute
neutropenia is believed to be due to up-regulation of neutrophil adhesion receptors followed by either intravascular aggregation or margination, and is generally not
seen with subcutaneous administration. 55,57 In patients with normal marrow function, prolonged administration of G-CSF can lead to very high neutrophil counts, and it
is recommended that in most cases, G-CSF should be discontinued or dose-reduced when the neutrophil count exceeds 10,000 cells/mL. Once G-CSF is
discontinued, the absolute neutrophil count typically falls by approximately 50% per day and will return to baseline in 4 to 6 days. Careful studies in normal volunteers
have also shown that some alterations of blood chemistries are common but of no apparent clinical consequence. 58
GRANULOCYTE-MACROPHAGE COLONY-STIMULATING FACTOR
GM-CSF (sargramostim, molgramostim) is a potent growth factor for the myeloid lineage in tissue culture and was cloned by Wong et al. 59 GM-CSF is a glycoprotein
with an approximate molecular weight of 22,000 daltons, and the gene has been localized to chromosome 5q31 in close proximity to the gene for IL-3. 60 GM-CSF can
be produced by many cells in the body, particularly by activated T cells. Recombinant or purified natural GM-CSF stimulates granulocyte-macrophage and eosinophil
colony formation and cooperates with EPO to stimulate growth of erythroid bursts. GM-CSF also stimulates the activity of multiple neutrophil functions and primes
these cells to respond more vigorously to other stimuli. 61,62 Changes in expression of neutrophil adhesion molecules are particularly prominent, including
up-regulation of the beta-2 integrin CD11/CD18 both in vitro and in vivo.63
A mouse in which the GM-CSF gene has been knocked out does not have demonstrable defects in hematopoiesis but develops a severe lung disorder similar to
pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. 12,64 Interestingly, patients with this disorder have been shown to have defects in expression, function, or mutations in the beta chain of
the receptor for GM-CSF. 65,66 Receptors for GM-CSF are normally found on both hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic cells, including endothelial cells and some
tumor cell lines, such as melanoma and lung cancer cells. The function of these receptors, if any, on nonhematopoietic cells is unclear. The receptor is a heterodimer,
composed of a ligand-binding alpha chain and a beta chain necessary for high-affinity binding and signal transduction. The alpha chain uniquely binds GM-CSF, but
the same beta chain is also used by the receptors for IL-3 and -5.
Administration of GM-CSF to humans results in a dose-dependent increase in blood neutrophils, eosinophils and, to a lesser extent, macrophages and sometimes
lymphocytes. This is accompanied by a dramatic left shift in the myeloid series in the marrow. There is no significant effect on the red cell or platelet lineages. The
toxic effects of GM-CSF have been evaluated extensively. If given intravenously in particular, the first dose of GM-CSF may be accompanied by acute but self-limited
neutropenia thought to be due to up-regulation of adhesion receptors on neutrophils. 55 Occasional patients may experience brief dyspnea. Many patients experience
a low-grade fever, myalgias, and fatigue. At high doses, weight gain, pericarditis, pleuritis, and a capillary leak syndrome may develop, 67 but this is rare at doses in
current use. The activities and toxicities of GM-CSF and G-CSF have been directly compared in very few studies. In a randomized study after autologous stem cell
transplantation for breast cancer, the efficacy and toxicities of the two factors were equivalent. 68
There are several formulations of recombinant GM-CSF available, including yeast-derived (sargramostim) and Escherichia coli–derived (molgramostim) versions. At
present, various formulations of GM-CSF seem to have similar biologic effects. Sargramostim is glycosylated and therefore has a lower specific activity than
Molgramostim (because of its higher molecular weight). Manufacturer's directions should be read carefully when changing between formulations of GM-CSF. The
recommended dosing for sargramostim is 250 mg/m2/d in patients receiving chemotherapy. Subcutaneous administration is generally preferred over short-term
intravenous administration, due to reduced toxicity and equivalent efficacy. However, if clinically indicated, intravenous administration of GM-CSF is acceptable.

CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF HEMATOPOIETIC GROWTH FACTORS IN CANCER THERAPY
TREATMENT OF ANEMIA IN CANCER PATIENTS
Pathophysiology
Anemia in cancer patients is common and may contribute significantly to quality of life. Anemia can be multifactorial in the cancer patient and can be caused by blood
loss, iron or vitamin deficiency, chemotherapy, radiation to the marrow, stem cell damage, hemolysis, hypersplenism, drug toxicity, or tumor involvement of the
marrow. An entity known as anemia of cancer has been described but may be multifactorial and is likely related to anemia of chronic disease. In both anemias, EPO
production is inadequate for the degree of anemia. 69 There may also be an impaired response to EPO by marrow progenitor cells. Stem cell depletion may be more
common than generally appreciated because of increasing use of higher doses and repeated courses of chemotherapy and radiation. Radiation involving the pelvis or
spine is particularly problematic because of the large volume of marrow in those bones.
Clinical Trials with Erythropoietin
Use of EPO in anemia associated with cancer has been extensively investigated. 70,71 and 72 Trials have been conducted in patients with anemia due to marrow
involvement with lymphoproliferative disorders 73; in those with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs) or solid tumors; in those developing anemia after
chemotherapy,74,75 and 76 autologous transplantation, 77 allogeneic transplantation, 78 or radiation therapy 79; and in those with anemia of cancer. The rates of response,
generally defined as an increase in hemoglobin or a decrease in transfusion requirements (or both), are fairly high in most groups of patients, typically in the range of
50%.76,80,81,82 and 83 Lack of response correlates with high pretreatment serum level of endogenous EPO. Patients who have an increase in hemoglobin of more than 0.5
g/dL within 2 weeks have a high likelihood of a sustained response. 84 The benefit of EPO treatment with cyclical chemotherapy has been confirmed in several
randomized, placebo-controlled multicenter trials, and response has been associated with improved performance status and quality of life. 85 However, despite the
high response rate and the apparent reduction in transfusions, EPO therapy is expensive, and careful selection of patients most likely to benefit is warranted. 86
Subcutaneous EPO administration three times weekly appears to be at least as effective as daily intravenous administration. Higher doses are not clearly better than
lower doses, but there is a threshold effect, and intravenous doses less than 100 U/kg and subcutaneous doses less than 50 U/kg may be associated with lower
response rates. A reasonable approach would be 50 to 150 U/kg three times weekly by subcutaneous injection, which could be increased to 300 U/kg after 6 weeks
without response. Interestingly, late responses are fairly common, and nine weeks of therapy or more may be required in some responding patients. Since many
patients fail to respond even to higher levels of EPO, there has been considerable interest in predicting early in the course of treatment which patients are not likely to
respond. Several algorithms have been generated and suggest that failure to increase hemoglobin by more than 0.5 g/dL or serum ferritin by more than 400 ng/mL
after 2 weeks of treatment predicts for failure. 84,87 Iron deficiency will prevent response to EPO and should be considered in selected nonresponsive patients. 88
Finally, most studies so far have involved concurrent administration of EPO with chemotherapy. Other schedules in which EPO is given before or at the end of
chemotherapy are being investigated.
CISPLATIN -ASSOCIATED ANEMIA. Approximately 40% of patients receiving cisplatin chemotherapy develop anemia, and many will require transfusion. Studies of EPO

administration to treat cisplatin-induced anemia have generally been positive, even in elderly patients. 81,82,89 Henry and Abels76 performed three randomized
double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of EPO for anemic cancer patients not receiving concomitant chemotherapy, patients receiving chemotherapy that did not
include cisplatin, and patients receiving cisplatin-containing chemotherapy. Patients not receiving chemotherapy received 100 U/kg three times weekly, while those on
chemotherapy received 150 U/kg three times weekly. Overall, the trials involved 413 patients. Patients receiving EPO in all three trials had a statistically significant
increase in hematocrit as compared to placebo-treated patients. 76 Quality of life improved significantly for EPO-treated patients, with an overall response rate of
approximately 50% in all three groups. Similar results were reported by Cascinu et al., 74 who performed a randomized, double-blind trial with EPO versus placebo in
100 patients with cisplatin-associated anemia (hemoglobin <90 g/L), administering EPO at 100 U/kg subcutaneously thrice weekly. After 9 weeks of therapy, the mean
hemoglobin levels of the EPO-treated group were statistically different from placebo patients: EPO patients went from a baseline of 86.3 ± 6.2 g/dL to 105.1 ± 9.4 g/dL
at 9 weeks, while placebo patients went from a baseline of 87.3 ± 5.2 g/dL to 81.2 ± 11 g/dL at 9 weeks. Also, only 20% of EPO-treated patients required blood
transfusion versus 56% of placebo-treated patients. No significant side effects of EPO treatment were encountered. Another multicenter, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial was conducted by Case et al., 75 who randomly assigned 153 anemic cancer patients receiving cyclic chemotherapy to EPO, 150 U/kg three
times weekly, or placebo. EPO-treated patients had a statistically significant increase in hematocrit and a trend toward lower transfusion requirements. Again, no
significant side effects were encountered. Also, ten Bokkel Huinink et al. 90 randomly chose 122 ovarian cancer patients receiving platinum-based chemotherapy to
EPO or control arms, and demonstrated a significant reduction in transfusion requirement. Overall, these multiple, randomized, controlled trials indicate that EPO is
safe and effective for therapy of both chemotherapy-associated and non–chemotherapy-associated chronic anemias in patients with solid tumors. Treatment reduces
need for transfusion and improves quality of life for many patients. 91 Recently, EPO therapy in children receiving cisplatin-based therapy has also been shown to

reduce the need for transfusions. 92
ANEMIAS ASSOCIATED WITH MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES. The role of EPO in treating anemia associated with hematologic malignancies is somewhat less clear,

particularly for the anemia of MDS. Most studies reported to date are uncontrolled and have included only small numbers of patients. 93,94,95,96,97,98,99 and 100 The
response rates tend to be more than 25%, although a few patients will respond to higher doses of EPO. 101 A metaanalysis of 205 patients with an MDS from 17
different studies found an overall response rate of only 16%, with a particularly low response rate—7.5%—in patients with refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts.
Factors that predicted for a low response rate were transfusion dependence, high serum EPO, and refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts. Several studies have
looked at sequential or combined use of a myeloid growth factor with EPO, 101,102,103 and 104 but responses are not clearly higher with the doses and schedules studied so
far. As is the case for the anemia of cancer, late EPO responses may be observed, 105 necessitating long courses of therapy in clinical trials. At present, EPO appears
to benefit only a small number of patients with MDS, primarily patients with low serum EPO levels and minimal transfusion requirement. In recent studies, the
combined use of EPO with G-CSF has been encouraging, with a higher fraction of patients responding to the combination. 106,107
BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTATION. The available data suggest that EPO treatment may be useful for treatment of anemia associated with allogeneic bone marrow

transplantation, but is not clearly useful as an adjunct for autologous transplantation. 108 Several randomized, controlled studies have compared EPO versus placebo
after autologous or allogeneic transplantation. 78,109,110 Biggs et al. 78 gave EPO (300 U/kg intravenously three times weekly) or placebo to 91 patients undergoing
allotransplantation. There was no reduction in red blood cell or platelet transfusion requirement and no reduction in hospital stay. 78 Link et al.109 randomly selected
107 patients undergoing allotransplantation to EPO (150 U/kg/d by continuous intravenous infusion) or placebo until patients reached 7 days of transfusion
independence or day 41. 109 The time to transfusion independence was reduced by EPO from 27 days to 19 days, but the number of transfusions required in the
peritransplantation period was similar. EPO-treated patients had a somewhat smaller transfusion requirement from days 42 to 100. The same authors conducted a
randomized trial of identical design with 57 patients undergoing autologous transplantation. 109 No difference in transfusion requirement was observed. Chao et al. 110
conducted a placebo-controlled trial of EPO (600 U/kg three times weekly) starting 3 weeks before autologous bone marrow transplantation in 35 patients with
lymphoma.110 All patients also received G-CSF after marrow reinfusion. No differences were observed in transfusion requirement or hematopoietic recovery. Similar
results were reported when EPO was combined with GM-CSF in a nonrandomized study of autologous marrow transplantation with historical controls. 111 However,
other recent studies have suggested a benefit in combining EPO with G-CSF after transplantation. 112 Another potential use of EPO is in the treatment of late-onset
anemia after transplantation, concerning which encouraging pilot studies have been presented. 113 Overall, EPO has been of modest benefit in the allogeneic marrow
transplantation setting.
Overall, EPO has an important role in the therapy of anemia in some cancer patients. In the individual cancer patient, the clinician needs to look carefully for treatable
causes of anemia, such as iron deficiency or blood loss and to consider the underlying illness and other factors, such as the serum EPO level, to determine whether a
course of EPO treatment is warranted.
REDUCTION OF CHEMOTHERAPY-ASSOCIATED NEUTROPENIA
Myelosuppression Associated with Standard-Dose Chemotherapy
Neutropenia and infection are major causes of morbidity and mortality in cancer patients and are dose-limiting for many types of chemotherapy. It is standard practice
to treat all neutropenic, febrile patients with broad-spectrum antibiotics, even though many patients do not have documented infections. This adversely affects quality
of life, increases hospital costs, and often results in reduction of chemotherapy doses for subsequent cycles. Reducing the incidence of febrile neutropenia and
infection are major goals of CSF therapy in this setting.
GRANULOCYTE COLONY-STIMULATING FACTOR. G-CSF has been extensively investigated in clinical trials as an adjunct to cancer chemotherapy, and its use in this

setting has been extensively reviewed. 114,115,116 and 117 The initial phase I and phase II studies in bladder cancer and small cell lung cancer patients established that
G-CSF administration by either subcutaneous or intravenous routes caused a dramatic, dose-dependent increase in blood neutrophil counts. Data from numerous
phase I and phase II studies predicted that administration of G-CSF after standard-dose, myelosuppressive chemotherapy would shorten the duration of neutropenia,
but it was not clear from these early trials whether this would translate into clinical benefit. The efficacy of G-CSF has now been established in a series of randomized,
controlled clinical trials in which the chemotherapy was sufficient to cause febrile neutropenia in more than 40% of the control group. A pivotal trial was conducted by
Crawford et al., 118 who randomly chose patients with small cell lung cancer to receive G-CSF or placebo after a myelosuppressive regimen containing
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and etoposide (CAE). The incidence of febrile neutropenia was significantly reduced in patients receiving G-CSF. Further, length of
hospital stay, incidence of confirmed infections, and days of antibiotic use were reduced by approximately 50%. 118 The results of this study have been confirmed by
several additional randomized, controlled phase III studies (small cell lung cancer patients receiving CAE chemotherapy 119; non-Hodgkin's lymphoma patients
receiving vincristine, doxorubicin, prednisolone, etoposide, cyclophosphamide, and bleomycin 120; and patients with various types of cancer receiving several different
chemotherapy regimens121). In none of these randomized studies was there a clear difference in mortality, tumor response rate, or survival. Thus, despite the fact that
some epithelial tumor cells express G-CSF receptors, there does not appear to be any adverse effect of G-CSF on tumor growth when given with chemotherapy. In
these randomized studies, the toxicity of G-CSF has been minimal and was generally limited to medullary bone pain that can usually be relieved with analgesics.
The timing of G-CSF after chemotherapy has been investigated in patients receiving melphalan (25 mg/m 2).57 Delaying administration to 8 days after completion of
chemotherapy appeared to be somewhat less effective than immediate administration, and it is now general practice to start G-CSF 24 to 48 hours after completing
chemotherapy administration, typically continuing until the neutrophil count has recovered to 10,000/mL. However, administration of G-CSF for a defined period of
only 7 days had benefit. 57 Also, there is considerable interest in evaluating G-CSF schedules with lower doses than the standard 5 mg/kg/d. In a randomized trial,
Toner et al.122 found that 2 mg/kg/d was as effective as 5 mg/kg/d in reducing the duration and severity of chemotherapy-related neutropenia. Also, shorter courses of
G-CSF therapy are being investigated. 123
GRANULOCYTE-MACROPHAGE COLONY-STIMULATING FACTOR. Administration of GM-CSF after standard-dose chemotherapy has also been extensively evaluated. In

phase I and phase II studies where GM-CSF was administered in alternate cycles, shortening of the duration of neutropenia has been observed. 67 In larger,
randomized, placebo-controlled studies, however, benefit has in some cases been limited to subsets of patients. 124,125 and 126 In one randomized study in patients with
small cell lung cancer receiving CAE chemotherapy, GM-CSF reduced the duration of neutropenia but not the incidence of febrile neutropenia, days in hospital, or
antibiotic use. Similarly, in a randomized trial of GM-CSF in patients with germ cell cancer receiving vinblastine, ifosfamide, and platinum, no significant beneficial
effects were seen. 124 When given with 21 days of oral etoposide, GM-CSF did not significantly reduce neutropenia or neutropenic complications in a randomized
study in patients with advanced cancers. 127 However, in a randomized study of fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide therapy in 142 patients with breast
cancer, GM-CSF reduced the median duration of severe neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count <500/mL) to 2.8 days as compared to 6.8 days with placebo ( P<.001)
and reduced the duration of an absolute neutrophil count less than 1000/mL to 6.0 versus 9.1 days, respectively. 128 In children with solid tumors, GM-CSF reduced
the duration of neutropenia but not the rate of febrile neutropenia.
There are very few studies in which the activities of GM-CSF and G-CSF have been directly compared. In one randomized study comparing these two growth factors
after cyclophosphamide (7 g/m2), patients treated with G-CSF recovered neutrophils slightly more rapidly, but patients treated with GM-CSF recovered platelets more
rapidly; overall, both GM-CSF and G-CSF were thought to be effective. 129
Concurrent Administration of Growth Factors with Chemotherapy or Radiation Therapy
Although the number of relevant studies is small, there is concern that simultaneous administration of GM-CSF or G-CSF with chemotherapy or radiation may lead to
serious toxicity. 130 In a randomized trial in limited-stage small cell lung cancer patients receiving platinum, etoposide, and chest radiation, patients receiving GM-CSF
had more thrombocytopenia, more toxic deaths, more antibiotic use, and longer hospital stays. 131 Similarly, patients with non–small cell lung cancer given G-CSF with
cisplatin, etoposide, and radiation therapy had worse thrombocytopenia than controls. 132 Concern has also been raised about continuing G-CSF up to less than 48
hours before the next cycle of chemotherapy. 133 In contrast, concurrent administration of G-CSF with weekly cycles of dose-intensive vinorelbine did not lead to an
apparent increase in myelosuppression. 134 However, until more information is available, concurrent administration of myelosuppressive chemotherapy with growth
factors should remain investigational, and the special situation where both chemotherapy and radiation therapy are given concurrently with a growth factor should be
avoided.

Treatment of Febrile Neutropenia
Although CSFs have been shown to reduce the incidence of febrile neutropenia in patients receiving myelosuppressive chemotherapy, it is clear that most patients
receiving standard types of chemotherapy regimens will not develop febrile neutropenia or infection and would, therefore, not benefit from CSF administration. Since
CSFs are expensive, are inconvenient for patients, and may have some toxic effects, there is increasing interest in better defining who is most likely to benefit so as to
restrict use to appropriate patients. The American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) generated a set of guidelines based on a thorough evidence-based analysis of
published literature through 1997 135,136 and 137 and concluded that use of CSFs in chemotherapy sessions where the incidence of febrile neutropenia was expected to
be less than 40% was not likely to be cost-effective. When less myelosuppressive chemotherapy was planned, CSF administration was recommended only for
individual patients with high-risk factors, such as decreased marrow reserve, or those who have had a previous episode of febrile neutropenia with the same
chemotherapy regimen. In many institutions, it is now common practice to withhold CSFs until a patient has had an episode of febrile neutropenia or infection and then
to initiate CSF prophylaxis with the next cycle. The alternative to this approach is to dose-reduce or delay chemotherapy. For many situations where there is no firm
evidence that dose or dose intensity are valuable, this is a very reasonable alternative to CSFs. Enthusiasm for use of a CSF should be highest for those tumors
where it is clear that there is value in maintaining maximum scheduled chemotherapy dose with respect to tumor response rate, quality of life, or survival. The ASCO
guideline authors did conclude that some “high-risk” patients could be reasonable candidates for CSF therapy before occurrence of an episode of febrile neutropenia.
Such patients would include those with reduced marrow function (due to prior pelvic radiation therapy, prior extensive chemotherapy, or marrow involvement with
tumor); those with preexisting neutropenia for any reason; those with any other preexisting immune dysfunction; those with active infection; and those with a
documented previous episode of chemotherapy-induced febrile neutropenia or infection. A summary of the ASCO guidelines is shown in Table 53.4-3.

TABLE 53.4-3. Summary of American Society of Clinical Oncology Guidelines for Administration of Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor and
Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor

One of the inevitable problems faced by authors of guidelines is in defining what constitutes a benefit. GM-CSF and G-CSF can reduce the incidence of febrile
neutropenia in aggressive regimens. When viewed as supportive therapy, the benefits of GM-CSF or G-CSF in this situation are clear. However, the larger question of
whether the entire treatment program of aggressive chemotherapy with growth factor (or stem cell) support has led to a clinically significant benefit for the patient as
compared to standard treatment has often not been addressed. Ultimately, the clinical indications for use of HGFs will need to be linked to treatment plans where
high-dose therapy results in improved quality of life or prolonged survival.
An alternative to prophylactic use of G-CSF or GM-CSF after chemotherapy is administration of a CSF to patients who develop febrile neutropenia in an effort to
shorten hospitalization, reduce antibiotic use, and improve outcome. In the largest randomized study so far, 218 patients with febrile neutropenia were randomly
assigned to receive G-CSF or placebo along with antibiotics. G-CSF–treated patients had 1 day less neutropenia, but duration of fever and hospital stay was not
reduced. Similarly, GM-CSF failed to reduce significantly median duration of fever or hospital stay in patients with febrile neutropenia in two trials. 138,139 However, in
patients with tissue infections, the addition of GM-CSF to antibiotics significantly improved outcome. Of 121 patients randomly chosen to receive G-CSF, GM-CSF, or
placebo, CSF-treated patients had significantly shorter neutropenia, fever, hospital stay, and overall hospital costs. 140 Similarly, in a placebo-controlled study in
children, both GM-CSF141 and G-CSF142 significantly reduced hospital stay, antibiotic use, and duration of neutropenia. In 134 adult cancer patients with febrile
neutropenia, GM-CSF treatment reduced duration of neutropenia but not days of hospital stay or cost. 143 It may be possible to identify groups of patients in whom
GM-CSF is most likely to have benefit. 123 Overall, with both positive and negative studies, the indications for CSFs in febrile neutropenia remain unknown, and
additional studies are warranted, particularly emphasizing both cost and quality-of-life issues. 135 At present, the benefits of a CSF to low-risk patients are unclear. In
contrast, some high-risk neutropenic patients with documented infections are candidates for CSF treatment, particularly those with pneumonia, prolonged
neutropenia, or fungal infections. 139 There is no current indication for CSF administration to afebrile neutropenic patients. 144
INCREASE OF CHEMOTHERAPY DOSE INTENSITY
Dose Escalation
There is experimental evidence for a steep dose-response curve for many chemotherapy agents, and this has generated considerable interest in using CSFs to
facilitate administration of higher doses of chemotherapy drugs where dose is limited primarily by myelosuppression. A variety of phase I trials have been reported in
which the possibility that use of GM-CSF 145 or G-CSF would allow escalation of doses of single chemotherapy drugs or multiagent chemotherapy, but
placebo-controlled, randomized studies are lacking. The reported phase I studies suggest that escalation of chemotherapy drug dose to levels higher than “standard”
has often been possible. However, this approach overall has had limited success, in part due to the fact that thrombocytopenia and nonhematologic side effects often
emerge quickly as dose-limiting toxicities. For example, G-CSF was used to investigate accelerated delivery of doxorubicin, 50 mg/m 2 × 2; etoposide, 120 mg/m2 × 3;
and ifosfamide, 2 g/m 2 given every 14 days. 146 Optimal on-time administration was feasible in 66% of 48 patients for three courses but feasible for only 23% for six
courses. Twenty-two of 48 patients were withdrawn from the study, including 12 patients with sepsis (4 fatal) or grade 4 thrombocytopenia. Overall, dose-intensity was
1.8 times higher than when the same regimen was used at a 3-week interval. 146 In a randomized study in extensive small cell carcinoma of the lung, it was not
possible to increase dose significantly with the addition of GM-CSF. 147 However, in a study of breast cancer patients receiving docetaxel and mitoxantrone, G-CSF
allowed a significant increase in maximum tolerated dose of both drugs. 148
Maintenance of Dose Intensity
There have been a number of studies indicating that either G-CSF or GM-CSF can improve the ability to maintain dose intensity in multicycle regimens. In a
randomized study, Pettengell et al. 120 compared G-CSF to placebo in patients with lymphoma receiving vincristine, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), prednisone, VP-16, and
bleomycin chemotherapy and found a significant reduction of treatment delays related to myelosuppression and an overall increase in dose intensity of 13%. Similarly,
G-CSF treatment led to an 8% increase in dose intensity of CAE chemotherapy as compared to placebo in patients with small cell lung cancer. 119 However, it has
been difficult to demonstrate so far that use of a CSF for maintenance of dose intensity in most standard chemotherapy regimens provides a significant advantage in
terms of response or disease-free survival. 149 Overall, despite the attractiveness of the concept, use of CSFs to permit dose escalation of chemotherapy (without stem
cell rescue) remains a research question. For standard regimens in which the expected incidence of treatment delay or dose reduction is high (i.e., >40%) and in
which it is thought that dose intensity is critical, use of G-CSF or GM-CSF is likely to improve on-time, full-dose delivery. The value of dose maintenance will need to
be established, however, by prospective, randomized trials in each tumor type.
ADJUNCTS TO AUTOLOGOUS OR ALLOGENEIC TRANSPLANTATION
Acceleration of Hematopoietic Reconstitution after Autologous or Allogeneic Transplantation
GM-CSF and G-CSF have been extensively investigated as adjuncts to autologous and allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Both GM-CSF 150,151,152,153,154 and 155 and
G-CSF110,156,157,158 and 159 have been shown in randomized, placebo-controlled trials to reduce the period of neutropenia after autologous bone marrow transplantation.

In some, but not all, of these studies, hospital stay, antibiotic use, infections, or platelet transfusions were also reduced. There has been no evidence of reduced
mortality or increase in tumor response rates. In studies with autologous, mobilized blood stem cells, G-CSF also reduces the duration of neutropenia, but the overall
impact on the transplant procedure may be less than when marrow stem cells are used for the transplantation. 160,161 Interestingly, administration of G-CSF after blood
stem cell autologous transplant can be delayed for several days without loss of efficacy. 162 In children, the use of G-CSF after autologous blood transplantation is
controversial. 163 In studies with allogeneic marrow transplantation, addition of a CSF tended to reduce neutropenia, but infection rate and hospital stay have not been
consistently reduced. 117,164,165,166,167,168,169,170 and 171 The use of GM-CSF after blood stem cell transplantation has shown only marginal benefit. 172
The potential use of growth factors for treatment of graft failure or delayed engraftment after either autologous or allogeneic transplantation has been explored to a
limited extent, and results are encouraging for both GM-CSF and G-CSF. 173,174,175,176,177,178 and 179 It is clear that while not all patients will respond, neutrophil counts can
be rapidly increased in many cases. Combining GM-CSF and G-CSF in a sequential manner did not improve results over GM-CSF alone. 174 In many cases,
retransplantation with growth factor–mobilized blood stem cells has been of great value. 180
Mobilization of Peripheral Blood Progenitor Cells by Hematopoietic Growth Factors
One of the most remarkable effects of G-CSF and GM-CSF is transient mobilization of hematopoietic progenitor and stem cells into the peripheral blood. This
unexpected phenomenon was first noted during early phase I studies with GM-CSF 181 and G-CSF182 and has now been observed with several other cytokines, such
as IL-3183 and even EPO.184 The effects of either GM-CSF or G-CSF appear to be independent and additive to the effects of myelosuppressive chemotherapy 181 and,
in some circumstances, mobilization with growth factor is as good as with a combination of growth factor and cyclophosphamide. 185 The concentration of progenitor
cells in the blood of normal individuals is too low to render harvesting of these cells practical. GM-CSF or G-CSF increases progenitor cell concentration
approximately tenfold and, when administered after some types of chemotherapy, such as high-dose cyclophosphamide, 186 the increase in blood progenitor cell
concentration can be 100-fold or more. However, interpatient variability is substantial, and mobilization is generally reduced in patients with extensive prior exposure
to chemotherapy or radiation, particularly to the pelvis. Nonetheless, GM-CSF-mobilized or G-CSF-mobilized progenitor cells can be collected from most cancer
patients by leukapheresis in sufficient quantity to replace marrow harvests for autologous transplantation protocols. The mobilized cells may be more immature than
the progenitor cells that are resident in the blood of untreated individuals. 187 Patients receiving peripheral blood progenitor cells tend to reconstitute earlier and to
require fewer platelet transfusions than patients receiving autologous marrow. 188 As a result, using GM-CSF or G-CSF to assist in mobilizing progenitor cells has
become used in autologous transplantation protocols for many different tumors. 186,189,190,191,192 and 193 G-CSF–mobilized or GM-CSF–mobilized peripheral blood
progenitor cells also offer advantages in allogeneic transplantation. 194 In this situation, no chemotherapy is administered, but collection of adequate amounts of
progenitor cells with several episodes of leukapheresis is well tolerated by normal donors. 195 Reconstitution is prompt and durable, 196,197 and 198 and preliminary results
of a randomized trial comparing allogeneic marrow with blood stem cells favors the blood source. 199 Recent studies suggest that combinations of cytokines may be
more effective than single cytokines. Winter et al. 200 compared the mobilizing effects of GM-CSF and G-CSF, either alone or in various combinations, including adding
G-CSF for 5 days after 7 days of GM-CSF and adding GM-CSF after 7 days of G-CSF. When used individually, GM-CSF and G-CSF administration resulted in
mobilization of approximately the same number of progenitor cells, approximately a 35-fold increase over pretreatment values. 200 Administration of G-CSF to patients
already receiving GM-CSF resulted in an increase to approximately 80-fold over baseline. Interestingly, the combination of G-CSF and stem cell factor may have
particularly good ability to mobilize stem cells, and a number of studies are ongoing with this combination. 201,202 Thus, cytokine combinations may be more efficacious
than single cytokines for mobilization, and other combinations and schedules should be tested.
Most studies using cytokine-mobilized peripheral blood progenitor cells have also given G-CSF or GM-CSF after transplant to accelerate reconstitution. This
approach seems reasonable at present in autologous transplantation, but additional studies are needed in allogeneic transplants of blood stem cells. The
hematopoietic reconstitution observed after peripheral blood progenitor cell transplantations may be sufficiently fast so that the cost-effectiveness of G-CSF or
GM-CSF will need to be carefully evaluated.
Tumor cell contamination of progenitor cells collected from the blood could limit the success of these products for autologous transplantation, as is the case for
autologous marrow transplantation. 203,204,205 and 206 Recent efforts to reduce tumor cell contamination have focused on either immunologic purging of contaminating
tumor cells or positive selection of progenitor cells using the CD34 cell surface marker. 205,207,208 In general, mobilized stem cell products have a high likelihood of
containing tumor cells. 209
Ex Vivo Expansion of Hematopoietic Progenitor Cells
One area of active research is the potential use of growth factors to permit ex vivo expansion of either marrow or blood stem cells. When partially purified stem cells
are cultured with mixtures of growth factors, typically containing Steel factor and a variety of HGFs, substantial expansion of progenitor cells has been observed.
However, currently only limited expansion of hematopoietic stem cells has been achieved, and there is the potential that there will not be enough true hematopoietic
stem cells to effect long-term permanent reconstitution if these expanded populations are used in transplantation settings. It is possible that there are yet unknown
cytokines that will induce stem cell proliferation while inhibiting differentiation, and such cytokines might be ideal for this process. Alternatively, expanded progenitor
cells may have some uses, even if the stem cell content is decreased. For example, progenitor cells may be useful to accelerate hematopoietic recovery after
myelosuppressive, but not myeloablative, chemotherapy regimens.
TREATMENT OF LEUKEMIAS
Acute Myelogenous Leukemia
Infection related to neutropenia remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality during all phases of the treatment of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), and any
reduction of chemotherapy- or disease-associated neutropenia could be beneficial. The use of GM-CSF and G-CSF in AML therapy has been approached with
justifiable caution, however, since both of these cytokines are excellent growth factors for leukemia cells in vitro, and there remains concern that these factors could
either accelerate leukemic cell growth, reduce chemotherapy response, or enhance toxicity. AML cells from most patients have receptors for both GM-CSF and
G-CSF,210,211 and 212 and both factors induce rapid proliferation of leukemic cells without any evidence of terminal differentiation. Thus, administration of either factor
carries the risk of promoting leukemic cell proliferation. In the small number of clinical trials conducted so far, however, administration of G-CSF or GM-CSF
immediately after standard chemotherapy has not been associated with leukemic cell regrowth or early relapse. Ohno et al. 213 randomly assigned a heterogeneous
group of patients with acute leukemia to G-CSF or no treatment during induction therapy. There was a 1-week reduction in the duration of severe neutropenia but no
decrease in antibiotic use or hospital stay. The complete remission rate was not decreased by G-CSF, and long-term outcome was unchanged. 213 The results of this
study were confirmed in a large study conducted in 31 centers in Europe and Australia in which 521 adult patients with AML were randomly chosen to receive G-CSF
or placebo after induction and consolidation therapy. 214 Patients in the G-CSF arm had a statistically significant improvement in duration of neutropenia, a 5-day
reduction in the median duration of hospital stay, and a reduction in duration of antibiotic use. There was no significant difference reported in rate of complete
remission or overall survival. 214 The Southwest Oncology Group randomly selected 234 patients older than age 55 and having de novo or secondary AML to receive
G-CSF or placebo. 215 Patients on the G-CSF arm had a 3- to 4-day reduction in the duration of severe neutropenia after induction therapy and also reduced antibiotic
use and days of fever. However, there was no reduction in the incidence of severe infections or any difference in complete remission rate or overall survival. 215
ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA IN THE ELDERLY. GM-CSF has been investigated in two large randomized group trials in induction therapy of AML in older patients.

216,217
An

Eastern Cooperative Group Study randomly chose 124 AML patients ages 55 to 70 to receive GM-CSF or placebo after induction therapy. 217 The study drug was
started on day 11 if a day-10 marrow was hypoplastic, and patients who entered complete remission received the study drug after consolidation therapy as well.
Patients receiving GM-CSF experienced a significant reduction of infectious toxicity and a marginal improvement in median survival. Ten percent of GM-CSF–treated
patients experienced severe infections, as compared to 36% of placebo patients. Mortality of patients who developed fungal infections was also lower with GM-CSF
treatment, and overall early mortality (within 30 days) was significantly reduced in the GM-CSF arm. However, the beneficial effects of GM-CSF in an elderly
population with AML were not confirmed in a larger Cancer and Leukemia Group B study reported by Stone et al. 216 In that study, 388 patients older than age 60 were
randomly assigned to GM-CSF or placebo. There was no difference in remission rate, incidence of severe infections, or early deaths. There was a significant
decrease in median duration of neutropenia for patients receiving GM-CSF, but the absolute difference was small (15 vs. 17 days).
Considering all the studies in which patients with AML have been randomly chosen to receive growth factor (G-CSF or GM-CSF) or placebo, it appears that although
there may be some reduction in duration of neutropenia during induction therapy, this has not resulted in any significant reduction of severe infections or improvement

in remission rate and survival. 218,219 At this time, the use of growth factors in myeloid leukemias, particularly in the elderly, requires additional study.
“PRIMING” OF ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA CELLS AND DIFFERENTIATION THERAPY WITH GROWTH FACTORS. Several investigators have tried to take advantage of the fact

that GM-CSF or G-CSF induces proliferation of myeloid leukemic cells 212 by using these cytokines to induce leukemic cells to initiate or increase DNA synthesis,
followed immediately by administration of chemotherapy with drugs such as cytosine arabinoside, which are most effective against cells actively synthesizing DNA.
This approach, termed priming, is remarkably effective in the laboratory. 220 However, although pilot studies suggested that GM-CSF and cytosine arabinoside could
be coadministered without undue toxicity, 221 larger studies did not suggest that this approach had any benefit in terms of increased complete remission rate or
increased survival. 222,223 One explanation is that the CSFs promote viability as well as proliferation of leukemic cells, and they may be paradoxically reducing cell
death due to cytotoxic chemotherapy. At present, there is no indication for using CSFs as priming agents outside of a clinical trial.
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
The use of cytokines during induction therapy of adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) has not been extensively investigated. A prospective, multicenter trial
reported by Ottmann et al. 224 randomly chose 76 patients to receive G-CSF or no growth factor during induction therapy. Patients in the G-CSF arm had a statistically
significant reduction in the duration of severe neutropenia (8 days vs. 12.5 days), a lower incidence of nonviral infections, and fewer interruptions of scheduled
chemotherapy.224 The complete remission rates in the G-CSF and control groups were the same (95%), and the probability of disease-free survival at 20 months was
also identical. A randomized Cancer and Leukemia Group B trial arrived at similar conclusions. 225 Adults who received intensive chemotherapy for ALL benefited from
G-CSF treatment in terms of more rapid recovery of neutrophils, but overall outcome was unchanged. Thus, as is the case for adults with AML, adults with ALL treated
with G-CSF have less neutropenia and probably fewer infections but no real improvement in disease outcome.
Myelodysplastic Syndromes
Anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia are common and chronic problems for patients with MDSs and, as a result, MDS patients have been among the first
groups to receive HGFs. 226,227 and 228 The use of EPO to treat anemias of MDS patients was described earlier in the section Treatment of Anemia in Cancer Patients. In
phase I and phase II trials, both GM-CSF 229,230,231 and 232 and G-CSF229,230,231 and 232 have been shown to increase the neutrophil count by at least twofold in a variable
number of patients (but generally less than 50%) and inevitably for only as long as the cytokine was administered. Even minimal red cell and platelet responses have
been uncommon with both GM-CSF and G-CSF. A randomized trial of GM-CSF or observation was conducted in which 133 neutropenic patients with MDS were
entered and followed up for 90 days. 233 Patients treated with GM-CSF had a statistically significant increase in neutrophils after 30, 60, and 90 days of treatment 233
and a significant reduction in major infections during the treatment period (15%, GM-CSF; 33%, observation). However, GM-CSF did not increase in hemoglobin or
platelets, change transfusion requirement, or reduce the incidence of conversion to AML. The increase in neutrophil counts has been confirmed in other large studies
of MDS patients treated with GM-CSF by Willemze et al., 231 who treated 101 cases with two different daily doses of GM-CSF for 8 weeks. Of 82 evaluable patients,
66% had an increase in neutrophil count of twofold or more during the study, but sustained neutrophil responses, red cell responses, and platelet responses were
rare. Interestingly, neutrophil responses in MDS patients may require only very low doses of GM-CSF. 234 There is no evidence so far that GM-CSF preferentially
stimulates proliferation of normal progenitor cells rather than MDS progenitor cells. Serial karyotype analysis in one study showed that karyotypes of patients on
GM-CSF remained abnormal or became increasingly abnormal over the study duration. 235 There is no clear evidence that GM-CSF administration accelerates
development of acute leukemia, although some patients with advanced MDS may have an increase in blood or marrow blasts that may decrease after withdrawal of
cytokine. Combinations of GM-CSF and EPO may have increased activity as compared to either agent alone. 106
G-CSF is also effective at increasing neutrophil counts of patients with MDS. 236,237 In a randomized phase III trial of G-CSF versus observation, the G-CSF–treated
arm had a statistically significant increase in neutrophil count. 238 However, the survival for patients with refractory anemia with excess blasts was significantly shorter
in the G-CSF arm at the time of the initial analysis of the study. 238 It is not clear whether this is possibly due to an increased number of poor prognosis patients having
been randomly assigned to the G-CSF arm or whether this is an effect of G-CSF. The combination of G-CSF with EPO may have significant advantages and deserves
further study.107,112,239
Both GM-CSF232,240 and G-CSF241 have been used as adjuncts to chemotherapy in patients with MDS to reduce myelosuppression. Both factors appear to reduce
myelosuppression, but there is no clear effect on response rates or rates of infection. 232,241 The beneficial effects of G-CSF on recovery from neutropenia have been
confirmed in recent randomized trials. 242,243
Overall, the use of GM-CSF and G-CSF remains experimental in MDS, with no clear demonstration of benefit in large patient populations. However, in the individual
neutropenic patient with repeated infections, a trial of G-CSF or GM-CSF is reasonable.
REDUCTION OF CHEMOTHERAPY-RELATED THROMBOCYTOPENIA
Interleukin-11
IL-11 (Neumega) is a growth factor produced by stromal cells and has activity on progenitor cells, B cells, intestinal crypt cells, and osteoclasts, but not on stem
cells. 244,245,246,247,248 and 249 Preliminary studies in both animals and humans suggested that IL-11 increased platelet counts, presumably through an effect on
megakaryocytes. 250,251 Side effects in a phase I clinical study in breast cancer patients included fatigue, myalgia, and arthralgia and a grade 3 central nervous system
event in one patient but no fever or capillary leak syndrome. 251 The incidence of severe thrombocytopenia after cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin appeared to be
reduced.251 Several randomized placebo controlled clinical trials have shown a reduction in the need for platelet transfusions in the settin g of intensive
chemotherapy.252,253 In autologous transplantation, IL-11 did not reduce platelet transfusion requirement. 254In vitro, IL-11 acts synergistically with several other HGFs
to support proliferation of hematopoietic progenitor cells, 245,246 suggesting that combinations of IL-11 with other growth factors will be worth exploring in clinical trials.
Interestingly, IL-11 reduces chemotherapy- or radiation therapy–induced damage to the intestine in animal models, 255,256 and it is possible that this factor will reduce
therapy-associated gastrointestinal toxicity in humans. 257 IL-11 is currently approved for use in treating chemotherapy-associated thrombocytopenia.
Thrombopoietin (Megakaryocyte Growth and Development Factor)
TPO was cloned by several groups after either purification of the protein from plasma of thrombocytopenic animals, by using the receptor for ligand affinity
purification, or by clever expression cloning strategies. 258,259,260 and 261 The receptor for TPO has been identified as c-MPL, the cellular homologue of a viral oncogene
that causes a myeloproliferative syndrome in mice. TPO levels vary inversely with the platelet count, 262 suggesting that TPO secretion can be directly induced by
thrombocytopenia. TPO induces proliferation of megakaryocyte progenitor cells, 263 expansion of megakaryocytes in vivo, and production and release of platelets. 264
Further, TPO acts synergistically with several other growth factors to enhance megakaryocyte differentiation and proliferation. 265 Randomized, placebo-controlled
clinical trials in cancer patients have shown a benefit for TPO administration, 266,267 but development has been slowed by rare instances of thrombocytopenia. This
cytokine has not yet been approved for use in cancer patients, and its final role in cancer chemotherapy is still to be determined.

LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF GROWTH FACTOR ADMINISTRATION
The long-term consequences of administration of HGFs are not yet known. In children with congenital neutropenias responsive to G-CSF, some have now received
this cytokine for several years. Although splenomegaly, apparently related to extramedullary hematopoiesis, has been observed, few serious side effects have been
reported.53 One interesting case has been described in which G-CSF–related extramedullary hematopoiesis was confused with recurrent lymphoma. 268 However,
there is no evidence to date that CSF administration by itself predisposes patients to develop leukemia or myelodysplasia. Concern has been raised that
administration of CSFs with chemotherapy may increase the cumulative stem cell damage that can occur with some types of chemotherapy drugs or radiation. In fact,
in a mouse model, repeated sequential administration of cyclophosphamide and G-CSF was more toxic to stem cells than cyclophosphamide alone. 269 It is possible
that CSFs will induce more stem cells to enter the cell cycle and, therefore, potentially become more sensitive to chemotherapy-induced DNA damage. Careful
follow-up of patients receiving aggressive chemotherapy with growth factor support is warranted, particularly if these patients later undergo autologous progenitor cell
transplantation, or during other situations in which the marrow is stressed, such as during serious bacterial or viral infections.

CONCLUSIONS
There is little doubt that the use of HGFs represents a significant advance in the supportive care available to cancer patients. At present, there are a number of
clinical situations wherein administration of a growth factor is warranted, such as after myelosuppressive chemotherapy where there is a high likelihood of febrile
neutropenia and after autologous progenitor cell transplantation. Patients who have already had an episode of febrile neutropenia should receive a growth factor if
there are good reasons to maintain dose intensity. Ultimately, however, the utility of high-dose chemotherapy needs to be established in each tumor in terms of
survival or improved quality of life. Finally, cytokines are expensive, and further efforts to define cost-effectiveness in useful terms are needed. However, despite
these cautions, the remarkable ability to manipulate hematopoiesis with growth factors is likely to be beneficial to cancer patients in many different situations.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Bjornson CR, Rietze RL, Reynolds BA, Magli MC, Vescovi AL. Turning brain into blood: a hematopoietic fate adopted by adult neural stem cells in vivo. Science 1999;283:534.
2. Metcalf D. The molecular control of cell division, differentiation commitment and maturation in haematopoietic cells. Nature 1989;339:27.
3. Uchida N, Fleming WH, Alpern EJ, Weissman IL. Heterogeneity of hematopoietic stem cells. Curr Opin Immunol 1993;5:177.
4. Sachs L. The molecular control of hematopoiesis: from clonal development in culture to therapy in the clinic. Int J Cell Cloning 1992;10:196.
5. Dexter TM, Heyworth CM. Growth factors and the molecular control of haematopoiesis. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1994;13:S3.
6. Ogawa M. Differentiation and proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells. Blood 1993;81:2844.
7. Metcalf D. The molecular control of granulocytes and macrophages. Ciba Found Symp 1997;204:40.
8. Metcalf D. The molecular control of hematopoiesis: progress and problems with gene manipulation. Stem Cells 1998;16:314.
9. Metcalf D. The Charlotte Friend Memorial Lecture. The role of hematopoietic growth factors in the development and suppression of myeloid leukemias. Leukemia 1997;11:1599.
10. Metcalf D. Hematopoietic regulators: redundancy or subtlety? Blood 1993;82:3515.
11. Lieschke GJ. CSF-deficient micewhat have they taught us? Ciba Found Symp 1997;204:60.
12. Dranoff G, Crawford AD, Sadelain M, et al. Involvement of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in pulmonary homeostasis. Science 1994;264:713.
13. Mach N, Lantz CS, Galli SJ, et al. Involvement of interleukin-3 in delayed-type hypersensitivity. Blood 1998;91:778.
14. Lantz CS, Boesiger J, Song CH, et al. Role for interleukin-3 in mast-cell and basophil development and in immunity to parasites. Nature 1998;392:90.
15. Lieschke GJ, Grail D, Hodgson G, et al. Mice lacking granulocyte colony-stimulating factor have chronic neutropenia, granulocyte and macrophage progenitor cell deficiency, and impaired
neutrophil mobilization. Blood 1994;84:1737.
16. Wu H, Liu X, Jaenisch R, Lodish HF. Generation of committed erythroid BFU-E and CFU-E progenitors does not require erythropoietin or the erythropoietin receptor. Cell 1995;83:59.
17. de Sauvage FJ, Shiuh-Ming L, Carver-Moore K, et al. Deficiencies in early and late stages of megakaryocytopoiesis in TPO-KO mice. Blood 1995;86:1007a.
18. Lev S, Blechman JM, Givol D, Yarden Y. Steel factor and c-kit protooncogene: genetic lessons in signal transduction. Crit Rev Oncog 1994;5:141.
19. Besmer P, Manova K, Duttlinger R, et al. The kit-ligand (Steel factor) and its receptor c-kit/W: pleiotropic roles in gametogenesis and melanogenesis. Dev Suppl 1993;125.
20. Zhan Y, Lieschke GJ, Grail D, Dunn AR, Cheers C. Essential roles for granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and G-CSF in the sustained hematopoietic response of
Listeria monocytogenesinfected mice. Blood 1998;91:863.
21. Petersdorf SH, Dale DC. The biology and clinical applications of erythropoietin and the colony-stimulating factors. Adv Intern Med 1995;40:395.
22. Alter BP. Biology of erythropoiesis. Ann NY Acad Sci 1994;731:36.
23. Sawyer ST, Penta K. Erythropoietin cell biology. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1994;8:895.
24. Lok S, Foster DC. The structure, biology and potential therapeutic applications of recombinant thrombopoietin. Stem Cells 1994;12:586.
25. Markham A, Bryson HM. Epoetin alfa. A review of its pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties and therapeutic use in nonrenal applications. Drugs 1995;49:232.
26. Lee-Huang S. Cloning and expression of human erythropoietin cDNA in Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1984;81:2708.
27. Lin FK, Suggs S, Lin CH, et al. Cloning and expression of the human erythropoietin gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1985;82:7580.
28. Jacobs K, Shoemaker C, Rudersdorf R, et al. Isolation and characterization of genomic and cDNA clones of human erythropoietin. Nature 1985;313:806.
29. Ebert BL, Bunn HF. Regulation of the erythropoietin gene. Blood 1999;94:1864.
30. D'Andrea AD, Lodish HF, Wong GG. Expression cloning of the murine erythropoietin receptor. Cell 1989;57:277.
31. D'Andrea AD, Fasman GD, Lodish HF. A new hematopoietic growth factor receptor superfamily: structural features and implications for signal transduction. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1990;2:648.
32. D'Andrea AD, Fasman GD, Lodish HF. Erythropoietin receptor and interleukin-2 receptor beta chain: a new receptor family. Cell 1989;58:1023.
33. Li JP, D'Andrea AD, Lodish HF, Baltimore D. Activation of cell growth by binding of Friend spleen focus-forming virus gp55 glycoprotein to the erythropoietin receptor. Nature 1990;343:762.
34. D'Andrea AD, Moreau JF, Showers MO. Molecular mimicry of erythropoietin by the spleen focus-forming virus gp55 glycoprotein: the first stage of Friend virusinduced erythroleukemia. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1992;1114:31.
35. Zon LI, Moreau JF, Koo JW, Mathey-Prevot B, D'Andrea AD. The erythropoietin receptor transmembrane region is necessary for activation by the Friend spleen focus-forming virus gp55
glycoprotein. Mol Cell Biol 1992;12:2949.
36. Sokol L, Luhovy M, Guan Y, et al. Primary familial polycythemia: a frameshift mutation in the erythropoietin receptor gene and increased sensitivity of erythroid progenitors to erythropoietin.
Blood 1995;86:15.
37. de la Chapelle A, Sistonen P, Lehvaslaiho H, Ikkala E, Juvonen E. Familial erythrocytosis genetically linked to erythropoietin receptor gene. Lancet 1993;341:82.
38. de la Chapelle A, Traskelin AL, Juvonen E. Truncated erythropoietin receptor causes dominantly inherited benign human erythrocytosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:4495.
39. Spivak JL. Cancer-related anemia: its causes and characteristics. Semin Oncol 1994;21:3.
40. Spivak JL. The biology and clinical applications of recombinant erythropoietin. Semin Oncol 1998;25:7.
41. Morstyn G, Foote M, Perkins D, Vincent M. The clinical utility of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor: early achievements and future promise. Stem Cells 1994;1:213.
42. Dale DC, Liles WC, Summer WR, Nelson S. Review: granulocyte colony-stimulating factorrole and relationships in infectious diseases. J Infect Dis 1995;172:1061.
43. Marty M. The optimal dose of glycosylated recombinant human granulocyte colony stimulating factor for use in clinical practice: a review. Eur J Cancer 1994;3:S20.
44. Metcalf D, Nicola NA. Proliferative effects of purified granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) on normal mouse hemopoietic cells. JCell Physiol 1983;116:198.
45. Nagata S, Tsuchiya M, Asano S, et al. Molecular cloning and expression of cDNA for human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. Nature 1986;319:415.
46. Souza LM, Boone TC, Gabrilove J, et al. Recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor: effects on normal and leukemic myeloid cells. Science 1986;232:61.
47. Hammond WP, Csiba E, Canin A, et al. Chronic neutropenia. A new canine model induced by human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. J Clin Invest 1991;87:704.
48. Fukunaga R, Seto Y, Mizushima S, Nagata S. Three different mRNAs encoding human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:8702.
49. Larsen A, Davis T, Curtis BM, et al. Expression cloning of a human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor: a structural mosaic of hematopoietin receptor, immunoglobulin, and
fibronectin domains. J Exp Med 1990;172:1559.
50. Dong F, Brynes RK, Tidow N, et al. Mutations in the gene for the granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor in patients with acute myeloid leukemia preceded by severe congenital
neutropenia. N Engl J Med 1995;333:487.
51. Hermans MH, Antonissen C, Ward AC, et al. Sustained receptor activation and hyperproliferation in response to granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) in mice with a severe congenital
neutropenia/acute myeloid leukemiaderived mutation in the G-CSF receptor gene. J Exp Med 1999;189:683.
52. Layton JE, Hockman H, Sheridan WP, Mortsyn G. Evidence for a novel in vivo control mechanism of granulopoiesis: mature cell-related control of a regulatory growth factor. Blood
1989;74:1303.
53. Bonilla MA, Dale D, Zeidler C, et al. Long-term safety of treatment with recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (r-metHuG-CSF) in patients with severe congenital
neutropenias. Br J Haematol 1994;88:723.
54. Stokkel MP, Valdes Olmos RA, Hoefnagel CA, Richel DJ. Tumor and therapy associated abnormal changes on bone scintigraphy. Old and new phenomena. Clin Nucl Med 1993;18:821.
55. Lieschke GJ, Cebon J, Morstyn G. Characterization of the clinical effects after the first dose of bacterially synthesized recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor.
Blood 1989;74:2634.
56. Schilero GJ, Oropello J, Benjamin E. Impairment in gas exchange after granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) in a patient with the adult respiratory distress syndrome. Chest
1995;107:276.
57. Morstyn G, Campbell L, Lieschke G, et al. Treatment of chemotherapy-induced neutropenia by subcutaneously administered granulocyte colony-stimulating factor with optimization of dose and
duration of therapy. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1554.
58. Stroncek DF, Clay ME, Petzoldt ML, et al. Treatment of normal individuals with granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor: donor experiences and the effects on peripheral blood CD34+ cell counts
and on the collection of peripheral blood stem cells. Transfusion 1996;36:601.
59. Wong GG, Witek JS, Temple PA, et al. Human GM-CSF: molecular cloning of the complementary DNA and purification of the natural and recombinant proteins. Science 1985;228:810.
60. Yang YC, Kovacic S, Kriz R, et al. The human genes for GM-CSF and IL 3 are closely linked in tandem on chromosome 5. Blood 1988;71:958.
61. Gasson JC, Weisbart RH, Kaufman SE, et al. Purified human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor: direct action on neutrophils. Science 1984;226:1339.
62. Lopez AF, Williamson DJ, Gamble JR, et al. Recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor stimulates in vitro mature human neutrophil and eosinophil function,
surface receptor expression, and survival. J Clin Invest 1986;78:1220.
63. Socinski MA, Cannistra SA, Sullivan R, et al. Human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor induces the expression of the CD11b surface adhesion molecule on granulocyte in vivo.
Blood 1988;72:691.
64. Stanley E, Lieschke GJ, Grail D, et al. Granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating-factor-deficient mice show no major perturbation of hematopoiesis but develop a characteristic pulmonary
pathology. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:5592.
65. Dirksen U, Nishinakamura R, Groneck P, et al. Human pulmonary alveolar proteinosis associated with a defect in GM-CSF/IL-3/IL-5 receptor common beta chain expression. J Clin Invest
1997;100:2211.
66. Seymour JF, Begley CG, Dirksen U, et al. Attenuated hematopoietic response to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in patients with acquired pulmonary alveolar proteinosis.
Blood 1998;92:2657.
67. Antman KS, Griffin JD, Elias A, et al. The effect of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (rhGM-CSF) on chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression. N Engl J
Med 1988;319:593.
68. Caballero MD, Vazquez L, Barragan JM, et al. Randomized study of filgrastim versus molgramostim after peripheral stem cell transplant in breast cancer. Haematologica 1998;83:514.
69. Miller CB, Jones RJ, Piantadosi S, Abeloff MD, Spivak JL. Decreased erythropoietin response in patients with the anemia of cancer. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1689.
70. Adamson JW, Spivak JL. Physiologic basis for the pharmacologic use of recombinant human erythropoietin in surgery and cancer treatment. Surgery 1994;115:7.
71. Henry DH. Recombinant human erythropoietin for the treatment of anemia in patients with advanced cancer. Semin Hematol 1993;30:12.
72. Spivak JL. Recombinant human erythropoietin and the anemia of cancer [Editorial]. Blood 1994;84:997.
73. Oster W, Herrmann F, Gamm H, et al. Erythropoietin for the treatment of anemia of malignancy associated with neoplastic bone marrow infiltration. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:956.
74. Cascinu S, Fedeli A, Del Ferro A, Luzi Fedeli S, Catalano G. Recombinant human erythropoietin treatment in cisplatin-associated anemia: a randomized, double-blind trial with placebo. J Clin
Oncol 1994;12:1058.
75. Case D Jr, Bukowski RM, Carey RW, et al. Recombinant human erythropoietin therapy for anemic cancer patients on combination chemotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:801.

76. Henry DH, Abels RI. Recombinant human erythropoietin in the treatment of cancer and chemotherapy-induced anemia: results of double-blind and open-label follow-up studies. Semin Oncol
1994;21:21.
77. Ayash LJ, Elias A, Hunt M, et al. Recombinant human erythropoietin for the treatment of the anaemia associated with autologous bone marrow transplantation. Br J Haematol 1994;87:153.
78. Biggs JC, Atkinson KA, Booker V, et al. Prospective randomised double-blind trial of the in vivo use of recombinant human erythropoietin in bone marrow transplantation from HLA-identical
sibling donors. The Australian Bone Marrow Transplant Study Group. Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;15:129.
79. Lavey RS, Dempsey WH. Erythropoietin increases hemoglobin in cancer patients during radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;27:1147.
80. Falkson CI, Keren-Rosenberg S, Uys A, et al. Recombinant human erythropoietin in the treatment of cancer-related anaemia. Oncology 1994;51:497.
81. Cascinu S, Del Ferro E, Fedeli A, et al. Recombinant human erythropoietin treatment in elderly cancer patients with cisplatin-associated anemia. Oncology 1995;52:422.
82. Gamucci T, Thorel MF, Frasca AM, Giannarell D, Calabresi F. Erythropoietin for the prevention of anaemia in neoplastic patients treated with cisplatin. Eur J Cancer 1993;2:S13.
83. Abels RI. Use of recombinant human erythropoietin in the treatment of anemia in patients who have cancer. Semin Oncol 1992;19:29.
84. Adamson JW, Ludwig H. Predicting the hematopoietic response to recombinant human erythropoietin (Epoetin alfa) in the treatment of the anemia of cancer. Oncology 1999;56:46.
85. Thatcher N. Management of chemotherapy-induced anemia in solid tumors. Semin Oncol 1998;25:23.
86. Jilani SM, Glaspy JA. Impact of epoetin alfa in chemotherapy-associated anemia. Semin Oncol 1998;25:571.
87. Ludwig H, Fritz E, Leitgeb C, et al. Prediction of response to erythropoietin treatment in chronic anemia of cancer. Blood 1994;84:1056.
88. Cazzola M, Ponchio L, Beguin Y, et al. Subcutaneous erythropoietin for treatment of refractory anemia in hematologic disorders. Results of a phase I/II clinical trial. Blood 1992;79:29.
89. Onat H, Inanc SE, Dalay N, et al. Effect of cisplatin on erythropoietin and iron changes [Letter]. Eur J Cancer 1993;5:777.
90. ten Bokkel Huinink WW, de Swart CA, van Toorn DW, et al. Controlled multicentre study of the influence of subcutaneous recombinant human erythropoietin on anaemia and transfusion
dependency in patients with ovarian carcinoma treated with platinum-based chemotherapy. Med Oncol 1998;15:174.
91. Barosi G, Marchetti M, Liberato NL. Cost-effectiveness of recombinant human erythropoietin in the prevention of chemotherapy-induced anaemia. Br J Cancer 1998;78:781.
92. Varan A, Buyukpamukcu M, Kutluk T, Akyuz C. Recombinant human erythropoietin treatment for chemotherapy-related anemia in children. Pediatrics 1999;103:E16.
93. Bowen D, Culligan D, Jacobs A. The treatment of anaemia in the myelodysplastic syndromes with recombinant human erythropoietin. Br J Haematol 1991;77:419.
94. van Kamp H, Prinsze-Postema TC, Kluin PM, et al. Effect of subcutaneously administered human recombinant erythropoietin on erythropoiesis in patients with myelodysplasia. Br J Haematol
1991;78:488.
95. Stein RS, Abels RI, Krantz SB. Pharmacologic doses of recombinant human erythropoietin in the treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood 1991;78:1658.
96. Kurzrock R, Talpaz M, Estey E, et al. Erythropoietin treatment in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome and anemia. Leukemia 1991;5:985.
97. Ghio R, Balleari E, Ballestrero A, et al. Subcutaneous recombinant human erythropoietin for the treatment of anemia in myelodysplastic syndromes. ActaHaematol 1993;90:58.
98. Stone RM, Bernstein SH, Demetri G, et al. Therapy with recombinant human erythropoietin in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes. Leuk Res 1994;18:769.
99. Isnard F, Najman A, Jaar B, et al. Efficacy of recombinant human erythropoietin in the treatment of refractory anemias without excess of blasts in myelodysplastic syndromes. Leuk Lymphoma
1994;12:307.
100. Rose EH, Abels RI, Nelson RA, McCullough DM, Lessin L. The use of r-HuEpo in the treatment of anaemia related to myelodysplasia (MDS). Br J Haematol 1995;89:831.
101. Runde V, Aul C, Ebert A, Grabenhorst U, Schneider W. Sequential administration of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and human erythropoietin for
treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes. Eur J Haematol 1995;54:39.
102. Negrin RS, Stein R, Vardiman J, et al. Treatment of the anemia of myelodysplastic syndromes using recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in combination with
erythropoietin. Blood 1993;82:737.
103. Imamura M, Kobayashi M, Kobayashi S, et al. Failure of combination therapy with recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and erythropoietin in myelodysplastic syndromes. Ann
Hematol 1994;68:163.
104. Hansen PB, Johnsen HE, Hippe E, Hellstrom-Lindberg E, Ralfkiaer E. Recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor plus recombinant human erythropoietin may
improve anemia in selected patients with myelodysplastic syndromes. Am J Hematol 1993;44:229.
105. Lewinski UH, Floru S, Cohen AM, Mittelmann M. Recombinant human erythropoietin in the treatment of myelodysplastic syndromesresponse patterns. Leuk Lymphoma 1994;15:149.
106. Stasi R, Pagano A, Terzoli E, Amadori S. Recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor plus erythropoietin for the treatment of cytopenias in patients with
myelodysplastic syndromes. Br J Haematol 1999;105:141.
107. Hellstrom-Lindberg E, Negrin R, Stein R, et al. Erythroid response to treatment with G-CSF plus erythropoietin for the anaemia of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes: proposal for a
predictive model. Br J Haematol 1997;99:344.
108. Klaesson S. Clinical use of rHuEPO in bone marrow transplantation. Med Oncol 1999;16:2.
109. Link H, Boogaerts MA, Fauser AA, et al. A controlled trial of recombinant human erythropoietin after bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1994;84:3327.
110. Chao NJ, Schriber JR, Long GD, et al. A randomized study of erythropoietin and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) versus placebo and G-CSF for patients with Hodgkin's and
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma undergoing autologous bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1994;83:2823.
111. Pene R, Appelbaum FR, Fisher L, et al. Use of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and erythropoietin in combination after autologous marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1993;11:219.
112. Vannucchi AM, Bosi A, Ieri A, et al. Combination therapy with G-CSF and erythropoietin after autologous bone marrow transplantation for lymphoid malignancies: a randomized trial. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1996;17:527.
113. Fujimori Y, Kanamaru A, Saheki K, et al. Recombinant human erythropoietin for late-onset anemia after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Int J Hematol 1998;67:131.
114. Ganser A, Karthaus M. Clinical use of hematopoietic growth factors. Curr Opin Oncol 1996;8:265.
115. Fisher DC, Peters WP. Advances in the clinical use of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor to intensify cancer chemotherapy. Curr Opin
Hematol 1994;1:221.
116. Le Corroller AG, Moatti JP. The economic evaluation of hematopoietic growth factors in high-dose chemotherapy. Anticancer Drugs 1998;9:917.
117. Lifton R, Bennett JM. Clinical use of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in neutropenia associated with malignancy. Hematol Oncol Clin
North Am 1996;10:825.
118. Crawford J, Ozer H, Stoller R, et al. Reduction by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor of fever and neutropenia induced by chemotherapy in patients with small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med
1991;325:164.
119. Trillet-Lenoir V, Green J, Manegold C, et al. Recombinant granulocyte colony stimulating factor reduces the infectious complications of cytotoxic chemotherapy. Eur J Cancer 1993;3:319.
120. Pettengell R, Gurney H, Radford JA, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor to prevent dose-limiting neutropenia in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a randomized controlled trial. Blood
1992;80:1430.
121. Gebbia V, Testa A, Valenza R, et al. A prospective evaluation of the activity of human granulocyte-colony stimulating factor on the prevention of chemotherapy-related neutropenia in patients
with advanced carcinoma. J Chemother 1993;5:186.
122. Toner GC, Shapiro JD, Laidlaw CR, et al. Low-dose versus standard-dose lenograstim prophylaxis after chemotherapy: a randomized, crossover comparison. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3874.
123. Ribas A, Albanell J, Bellmunt J, et al. Five-day course of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in patients with prolonged neutropenia after adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer is a safe
and cost-effective schedule to maintain dose-intensity. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1573.
124. Bajorin DF, Nichols CR, Schmoll HJ, et al. Recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor as an adjunct to conventional-dose ifosfamide-based chemotherapy for
patients with advanced or relapsed germ cell tumors: a randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:79.
125. Gerhartz HH, Engelhard M, Meusers P, et al. Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase III study of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor as adjunct
to induction treatment of high-grade malignant non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Blood 1993;82:2329.
126. Kaplan LD, Kahn JO, Crowe S, et al. Clinical and virologic effects of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in patients receiving chemotherapy for human
immunodeficiency virusassociated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: results of a randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:929.
127. Weiss GR, Shaffer DW, DeMoor C, et al. A randomized phase I study of oral etoposide with or without granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor for the treatment of patients with
advanced cancer. Anticancer Drugs 1996;7:402.
128. Jones SE, Schottstaedt MW, Duncan LA, et al. Randomized double-blind prospective trial to evaluate the effects of sargramostim versus placebo in a moderate-dose fluorouracil, doxorubicin,
and cyclophosphamide adjuvant chemotherapy program for stage II and III breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2976.
129. Bregni M, Siena S, Di Nicola M, et al. Comparative effects of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor after high-dose cyclophosphamide
cancer therapy. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:628.
130. Petros WP, Crawford J. Safety of concomitant use of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor with cytotoxic chemotherapy agents. Curr Opin
Hematol 1997;4:213.
131. Bunn P Jr, Crowley J, Kelly K, et al. Chemoradiotherapy with or without granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in the treatment of limited-stage small-cell lung cancer: a prospective
phase III randomized study of the Southwest Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1632.
132. Momin F, Kraut M, Lattin P, Valdivieso M. Thrombocytopenia in patients receiving chemoradiotherapy and g-csf for locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer (nsclc). Proc Annu Meet Am
Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11:983a.
133. Tjan-Heijnen VC, Biesma B, Festen J, et al. Enhanced myelotoxicity due to granulocyte colony-stimulating factor administration until 48 hours before the next chemotherapy course in patients
with small-cell lung carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2708.
134. Livingston RB, Ellis GK, Gralow JR, et al. Dose-intensive vinorelbine with concurrent granulocyte colony-stimulating factor support in paclitaxel-refractory metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:1395.
135. American Society of Clinical Oncology. Recommendations for the use of hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors: evidence-based, clinical practice guidelines. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2471.
136. American Society of Clinical Oncology. Update of recommendations for the use of hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors: evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. J Clin Oncol
1996;14:1957.
137. American Society of Clinical Oncology. 1997 update of recommendations for the use of hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors: evidence-based, clinical practice guidelines. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:3288.
138. Biesma B, de Vries EG, Willemse PH, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in patients with chemotherapy-related leukopenia
and fever. Eur J Cancer 1990;26:932.
139. Bodey GP, Anaissie E, Gutterman J, Vadhan-Raj S. Role of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor as adjuvant treatment in neutropenic patients with bacterial and fungal infection.
Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1994;13:S18.
140. Mayordomo JI, Rivera F, Diaz-Puente MT, et al. Improving treatment of chemotherapy-induced neutropenic fever by administration of colony-stimulating factors. J Natl Cancer Inst
1995;87:803.
141. Riikonen P, Saarinen UM, Makipernaa A, et al. Recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in the treatment of febrile neutropenia: a double blind placebo-controlled
study in children. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1994;13:197.
142. Mitchell PL, Morland B, Stevens MC, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in established febrile neutropenia: a randomized study of pediatric patients. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1163.
143. Vellenga E, Uyl-de Groot CA, de Wit R, et al. Randomized placebo-controlled trial of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in patients with chemotherapy-related febrile
neutropenia. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:619.
144. Hartmann LC, Tschetter LK, Habermann TM, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in severe chemotherapy-induced afebrile neutropenia. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1776.
145. Clark DA, Neidhart JA. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor with dose-intensified treatment of cancer. Semin Hematol 1992;29:27.
146. Trillet-Lenoir V, Soler-Michel C. Granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) enables dose intensification of chemotherapy in small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Proc Annu Meet Am Soc Clin
Oncol 1994;13:1141a.
147. Pujol JL, Douillard JY, Riviere A, et al. Dose-intensity of a four-drug chemotherapy regimen with or without recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in
extensive-stage small-cell lung cancer: a multicenter randomized phase III study. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2082.

148. Kouroussis C, Androulakis N, Kakolyris S, et al. Dose-escalation study of docetaxel in combination with mitoxantrone as first-line treatment in patients with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1999;17:862.
149. Johnston EM, Crawford J. Hematopoietic growth factors in the reduction of chemotherapeutic toxicity. Semin Oncol 1998;25:552.
150. Gulati SC, Bennett CL. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) as adjunct therapy in relapsed Hodgkin disease. Ann Intern Med 1992;116:177.
151. Rabinowe SN, Neuberg D, Bierman PJ, et al. Long-term follow-up of a phase III study of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor after autologous bone marrow
transplantation for lymphoid malignancies. Blood 1993;81:1903.
152. Link H, Boogaerts MA, Carella AM, et al. A controlled trial of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor after total body irradiation, high-dose chemotherapy, and
autologous bone marrow transplantation for acute lymphoblastic leukemia or malignant lymphoma. Blood 1992;80:2188.
153. Gorin NC, Coiffier B, Hayat M, et al. Recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor after high-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation with
unpurged and purged marrow in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Blood 1992;80:1149.
154. Nemunaitis J, Rabinowe SN, Singer JW, et al. Recombinant granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor after autologous bone marrow transplantation for lymphoid cancer. N Engl J Med
1991;324:1773.
155. Advani R, Chao NJ, Horning SJ, et al. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) as an adjunct to autologous hemopoietic stem cell transplantation for lymphoma. Ann Intern
Med 1992;116:183.
156. Gisselbrecht C, Prentice HG, Bacigalupo A, et al. Placebo-controlled phase III trial of lenograstim in bone-marrow transplantation. Lancet 1994;343:696.
157. Klumpp TR, Mangan KF, Goldberg SL, Pearlman ES, Macdonald JS. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor accelerates neutrophil engraftment following peripheral-blood stem-cell
transplantation: a prospective, randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1323.
158. Stahel R, Jost L, Pichert G, et al. Controlled study of filgrastim after high-dose chemotherapy and ABMT for high risk lymphoma [Abstract]. Presented at the Molecular Biology of Hematopoiesis
Eighth Symposium. Basel, Switzerland: July 1993.
159. Stahel RA, Jost LM, Cerny T, et al. Randomized study of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor after high-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation
for high-risk lymphoid malignancies. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1931.
160. Linch DC, Milligan DW, Winfield DA, et al. G-CSF after peripheral blood stem cell transplantation in lymphoma patients significantly accelerated neutrophil recovery and shortened time in
hospital: results of a randomized BNLI trial. Br J Haematol 1997;99:933.
161. Ojeda E, Garcia-Bustos J, Aguado M, et al. A prospective randomized trial of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor therapy after autologous blood stem cell transplantation in adults. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1999;24:601.
162. Bolwell BJ, Pohlman B, Andresen S, et al. Delayed G-CSF after autologous progenitor cell transplantation: a prospective randomized trial. Bone Marrow Transplant 1998;21:369.
163. Kawano Y, Takaue Y, Mimaya J, et al. Marginal benefit/disadvantage of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor therapy after autologous blood stem cell transplantation in children: results of a
prospective randomized trial. The Japanese Cooperative Study Group of PBSCT. Blood 1990;892:4040.
164. De Witte T, Gratwohl A, Van Der Lely N, et al. Recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor accelerates neutrophil and monocyte recovery after allogeneic
T-cell-depleted bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1992;79:1359.
165. Lazarus HM, Rowe JM. Clinical use of hematopoietic growth factors in allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Blood Rev 1994;8:169.
166. Powles R, Smith C, Milan S, et al. Human recombinant GM-CSF in allogeneic bone-marrow transplantation for leukaemia: double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 1990;336:1417.
167. Asano S, Masaoka T, Takabu F. Beneficial effect of recombinant human glycosylated granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in marrow-transplanted patients: results of multicenter phase II-III
studies. Transplantation Proc 1991;23:1701.
168. Hiraoka A, Masaoka T, Mizoguchi H, et al. Recombinant human non-glycosylated granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: double-blind
placebo-controlled phase III clinical trial. Japanese J Clin Oncol 1994;24:205.
169. Nemunaitis J, Anasetti C, Storb R, et al. Phase II trial of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in patients undergoing allogeneic bone marrow transplantation
from unrelated donors. Blood 1992;79:2572.
170. Nemunaitis J, Buckner CD, Appelbaum FR, et al. Phase I/II trial of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.
Blood 1991;77:2065.
171. Schriber JR, Chao NJ, Long GD, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1994;84:1680.
172. Legros M, Fleury J, Bay JO, et al. rhGM-CSF vs placebo following rhGM-CSF-mobilized PBPC transplantation: a phase III double-blind randomized trial. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;19:209.
173. Vadhan-Raj S, Buescher S, LeMaistre A, et al. Stimulation of hematopoiesis in patients with bone marrow failure and in patients with malignancy by recombinant human
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. Blood 1988;72:134.
174. Weisdorf DJ, Verfaillie CM, Davies SM, et al. Hematopoietic growth factors for graft failure after bone marrow transplantation: a randomized trial of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (GM-CSF) versus sequential GM-CSF plus granulocyte-CSF. Blood 1995;85:3452.
175. Ippoliti C, Przepiorka D, Giralt S, et al. Low-dose non-glycosylated rhGM-CSF is effective for the treatment of delayed hematopoietic recovery after autologous marrow or peripheral blood stem
cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;11:55.
176. Vose JM, Bierman PJ, Kessinger A, et al. The use of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor for the treatment of delayed engraftment following high dose
therapy and autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for lymphoid malignancies. Bone Marrow Transplant 1991;7:139.
177. Nemunaitis J, Singer JW, Buckner CD, et al. Use of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in graft failure after bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1990;76:245.
178. Nemunaitis J. The role of hematopoietic growth factor in the treatment of graft failure. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:S50.
179. Sierra J, Terol MJ, Urbano-Ispizua A, et al. Different response to recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in primary and secondary graft failure after bone
marrow transplantation. Exp Hematol 1994;22:566.
180. Zecca M, Perotti C, Marradi P, et al. Recombinant human G-CSF-mobilized peripheral blood stem cells for second allogeneic transplant after bone marrow graft rejection in children. Br J
Haematol 1996;92:432.
181. Socinski MA, Cannistra SA, Elias A, et al. Granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor expands the circulating hematopoietic progenitor cell compartment in humans. Lancet
1988;1:1194.
182. Duhrsen U, Villeval JL, Boyd J, et al. Effects of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor on hematopoietic progenitor cells in cancer patients. Blood 1988;72:2074.
183. Brugger W, Bross K, Frisch J, et al. Mobilization of peripheral blood progenitor cells by sequential administration of interleukin-3 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor following
polychemotherapy with etoposide, ifosfamide, and cisplatin. Blood 1992;79:1193.
184. Kessinger A, Bishop MR, Jackson JD, et al. Erythropoietin for mobilization of circulating progenitor cells in patients with previously treated relapsed malignancies. Exp Hematol 1995;23:609.
185. Desikan KR, Barlogie B, Jagannath S, et al. Comparable engraftment kinetics following peripheral-blood stem-cell infusion mobilized with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor with or without
cyclophosphamide in multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1547.
186. Gianni AM, Tarella C, Siena S, et al. Durable and complete hematopoietic reconstitution after autografting of rhGM-CSF exposed peripheral blood progenitor cells. Bone Marrow Transplant
1990;6:143.
187. Pettengell R, Testa NG, Swindell R, Crowther D, Dexter TM. Transplantation potential of hematopoietic cells released into the circulation during routine chemotherapy for non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma. Blood 1993;82:2239.
188. Beyer J, Schwella N, Zingsem J, et al. Hematopoietic rescue after high-dose chemotherapy using autologous peripheral-blood progenitor cells or bone marrow: a randomized comparison. J Clin
Oncol 1995;13:1328.
189. Negrin RS, Kusnierz-Glaz CR, Still BJ, et al. Transplantation of enriched and purged peripheral blood progenitor cells from a single apheresis product in patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Blood 1995;85:3334.
190. Bensinger W, Singer J, Appelbaum F, et al. Autologous transplantation with peripheral blood mononuclear cells collected after administration of recombinant granulocyte stimulating factor.
Blood 1993;81:3158.
191. Abboud CN, Liesveld JL, Belanger TJ, et al. Prospective randomized trial of four peripheral blood stem cell (PBSC) mobilization regimens in cancer patients undergoing autologous marrow
transplantation (ABMT). Proc Annu Meet Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:706a.
192. Pileri A, Tarella C, Bregni M, et al. GM-CSF-exposed peripheral blood progenitors as sole source of stem cells for autologous transplantation in two patients with multiple myeloma.
Haematologica 1990;1:79.
193. Juttner CA, Fibbe WE, Nemunaitis J, Kanz L, Gianni AM. Blood cell transplantation: report from an International Consensus Meeting. Bone Marrow Transplant 1994;14:689.
194. Bishop MR, Tarantolo SR, Jackson JD, et al. Allogeneic-blood stem-cell collection following mobilization with low-dose granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1601.
195. Lane TA, Law P, Maruyama M, et al. Harvesting and enrichment of hematopoietic progenitor cells mobilized into the peripheral blood of normal donors by granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) or G-CSF: potential role in allogeneic marrow transplantation. Blood 1995;85:275.
196. Weaver CH, Buckner CD, Longin K, et al. Syngeneic transplantation with peripheral blood mononuclear cells collected after the administration of recombinant human granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor. Blood 1993;82:1981.
197. Molina L, Chabannon C, Viret F, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor-mobilized allogeneic peripheral blood stem cells for rescue graft failure after allogeneic bone marrow
transplantation in two patients with acute myeloblastic leukemia in first complete remission [Letter]. Blood 1995;85:1678.
198. Korbling M, Przepiorka D, Huh YO, et al. Allogeneic blood stem cell transplantation for refractory leukemia and lymphoma: potential advantage of blood over marrow allografts. Blood
1995;85:1659.
199. Bensinger W, Martin P, Clift R, et al. A prospective, randomised trial of peripheral blood stem cells (pbsc) or marrow (bm) for patients undergoing allogeneic transplantation for hematologic
malignancies. Blood 1999;94:1637a.
200. Winter JN, Lazarus HM, Rademaker A, et al. Phase I/II study of combined granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor administration for the
mobilization of hematopoietic progenitor cells. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:277.
201. Facon T, Harousseau JL, Maloisel F, et al. Stem cell factor in combination with filgrastim after chemotherapy improves peripheral blood progenitor cell yield and reduces apheresis
requirements in multiple myeloma patients: a randomized, controlled trial. Blood 1999;94:1218.
202. Glaspy JA, Shpall EJ, LeMaistre CF, et al. Peripheral blood progenitor cell mobilization using stem cell factor in combination with filgrastim in breast cancer patients. Blood 1997;90:2939.
203. Ross AA, Cooper BW, Lazarus HM, et al. Incidence of tumor cell contamination in peripheral blood stem cell (PBSC) collections from breast cancer patients [Abstract]. Proc Annu Meet Am Soc
Clin Oncol 1993;12:77a.
204. Craig JI, Langlands K, Parker AC, Anthony RS. Molecular detection of tumor contamination in peripheral blood stem cell harvests. Exp Hematol 1994;22:898.
205. Shpall EJ, Jones RB, Bearman SI, et al. Transplantation of enriched CD34-positive autologous marrow into breast cancer patients following high-dose chemotherapy: influence of CD34-positive
peripheral-blood progenitors and growth factors on engraftment. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:28.
206. Vora AJ, Toh CH, Peel J, Greaves M. Use of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) for mobilizing peripheral blood stem cells: risk of mobilizing clonal myeloma cells in patients with
bone marrow infiltration. Br J Haematol 1994;86:180.
207. Schiller G, Vescio R, Freytes C, et al. Transplantation of CD34+ peripheral blood progenitor cells after high-dose chemotherapy for patients with advanced multiple myeloma. Blood
1995;86:390.
208. Gazitt Y, Reading CC, Hoffman R, et al. Purified CD34+ Lin Thy+ stem cells do not contain clonal myeloma cells. Blood 1995;86:381.
209. Franklin WA, Glaspy J, Pflaumer SM, et al. Incidence of tumor-cell contamination in leukapheresis products of breast cancer patients mobilized with stem cell factor and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) or with G-CSF alone. Blood 1999;94:340.
210. Griffin JD, Young D, Herrmann F, et al. Effects of recombinant human GM-CSF on proliferation of clonogenic cells in acute myeloblastic leukemia. Blood 1986;67:1448.
211. Kelleher C, Miyauchi J, Wong G, et al. Synergism between recombinant growth factors. GM-CSF and G-CSF, acting on the blast cells of acute myeloblastic leukemia. Blood 1987;69:1498.
212. Vellenga E, Young DC, Wagner K, et al. The effects of GM-CSF and G-CSF in promoting growth of clonogenic cells in acute myeloblastic leukemia. Blood 1987;69:1771.
213. Ohno R, Hiraoka A, Tanimoto M, et al. No increase of leukemia relapse in newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia (AML) who received granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) for
life-threatening infection during induction and consolidation therapy [Abstract]. Blood 1993;81:561.

214. Heil G, Hoelzer D, Sanz MA, et al. Results of a randomized, double-blind placebo controlled phase III study of filgrastim in remission induction and early consolidation therapy for adults with de
novo acute myeloid leukemia. Blood 1995;86:1053a.
215. Godwin JE, Kopecky KJ, Head DR, et al. A double blind placebo controlled trial of G-CSF in elderly patients with previously untreated acute myeloid leukemia, a Southwest Oncology Group
Study. Blood 1995;86:1723a.
216. Stone RM, Berg DT, George SL, et al. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor after initial chemotherapy for elderly patients with primary acute myelogenous leukemia. Cancer and
Leukemia Group B. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1671.
217. Rowe JM, Andersen JW, Mazza JJ, et al. A randomized placebo-controlled phase III study of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in adult patients (>55 to 70 years of age) with
acute myelogenous leukemia: a study of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (E1490). Blood 1995;86:457.
218. Estey E. Hematopoietic growth factors in the treatment of acute leukemia. Curr Opin Oncol 1998;10:23.
219. Ganser A, Heil G. Use of hematopoietic growth factors in the treatment of acute myelogenous leukemia. Curr Opin Hematol 1997;4:191.
220. Cannistra SA, Groshek P, Griffin JD. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor enhances the cytotoxic effects of cytosine arabinoside in acute myeloblastic leukemia and in the
myeloid blast crisis phase of chronic myeloid leukemia. Leukemia 1989;3:328.
221. Cannistra SA, DiCarlo J, Groshek P, et al. Simultaneous administration of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and cytosine arabinoside for the treatment of relapsed acute
myeloid leukemia. Leukemia 1991;5:230.
222. Estey E, Thall PF, Kantarjian H, et al. Treatment of newly diagnosed acute myelogenous leukemia with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) before and during
continuous-infusion high-dose ara-C + daunorubicin: comparison to patients treated without GM-CSF. Blood 1992;79:2246.
223. Lowenberg B, Boogaerts MA, Daenen SM, et al. Value of different modalities of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor applied during or after induction therapy of acute myeloid
leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:3496.
224. Ottmann OG, Hoelzer D, Gracien E, et al. Concomitant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and induction chemoradiotherapy in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a randomized phase III
trial. Blood 1995;86:444.
225. Larson RA, Dodge RK, Linker CA, et al. A randomized controlled trial of filgrastim during remission induction and consolidation chemotherapy for adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia:
CALGB study 9111. Blood 1998;92:1556.
226. Greenberg PL. Treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes with hemopoietic growth factors. Semin Oncol 1992;19:106.
227. Schuster MW. Will cytokines alter the treatment of myelodysplastic syndrome? Am J Med Sci 1993;305:72.
228. Ganser A, Seipelt G, Eder M, et al. Treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes with cytokines and cytotoxic drugs. Semin Oncol 1992;19:95.
229. Vadhan-Raj S, Keating M, LeMaistre A, et al. Effects of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes. N Engl J Med
1987;317:1545.
230. Ganser A, Volkers B, Greher J, et al. Recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in patients with myelodysplastic syndromesa phase I/II trial. Blood 1989;73:31.
231. Willemze R, van der Lely N, Zwierzina H, et al. A randomized phase-i/ii multicenter study of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (gm-csf) therapy for patients
with myelodysplastic syndromes and a relatively low risk of acute leukemia. EORTC leukemia cooperative group. Ann Hematol 1992;64:173.
232. Economopoulos T, Papageorgiou E, Stathakis N, et al. Treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes with human granulocytic-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) or GM-CSF
combined with low-dose cytosine arabinoside. Eur J Haematol 1992;49:138.
233. Schuster MW, Larson RA, Thompson JA, et al. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) for myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS): results of a multi-center randomized
controlled trial. Blood 1990;76:318a.
234. Rose C, Wattel E, Bastion Y, et al. Treatment with very low-dose GM-CSF in myelodysplastic syndromes with neutropenia. A report on 28 cases. Leukemia 1994;8:1458.
235. Gradishar WJ, Le Beau MM, O'Laughlin R, Vardiman JW, Larson RA. Clinical and cytogenetic responses to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in therapy-related
myelodysplasia. Blood 1992;80:2463.
236. Negrin RS, Haeuber DH, Nagler A, et al. Treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes with recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. a phase I-II trial. Ann Intern Med
1989;110:976.
237. Negrin RS, Haeuber DH, Nagler A, et al. Maintenance treatment of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes using recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. Blood 1990;76:36.
238. Greenberg P, Taylor K, Larson R, et al. Phase III randomized multicenter trial of G-CSF vs. observation for myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). Blood 1993;82:196a.
239. Ganser A, Maurer A, Contzen C, et al. Improved multilineage response of hematopoiesis in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes to a combination therapy with all- trans-retinoic acid,
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, erythropoietin and alpha-tocopherol. Ann Hematol 1996;72:237.
240. Gerhartz HH, Marcus R, Delmer A, et al. A randomized phase II study of low-dose cytosine arabinoside (LD-AraC) plus granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (rhGM-CSF) in
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) with a high risk of developing leukemia. EORTC Leukemia Cooperative Group. Leukemia 1994;8:16.
241. Estey E, Thall P, Andreeff M, et al. Use of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor before, during, and after fludarabine plus cytarabine induction therapy of newly diagnosed acute myelogenous
leukemia or myelodysplastic syndromes: comparison with fludarabine plus cytarabine without granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:671.
242. Bernasconi C, Alessandrino EP, Bernasconi P, et al. Randomized clinical study comparing aggressive chemotherapy with or without G-CSF support for high-risk myelodysplastic syndromes or
secondary acute myeloid leukaemia evolving from MDS. Br J Haematol 1998;102:678.
243. Ossenkoppele GJ, van der Holt B, Verhoef GE, et al. A randomized study of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor applied during and after chemotherapy in patients with poor risk
myelodysplastic syndromes: a report from the HOVON Cooperative Group. Dutch-Belgian Hemato-Oncology Cooperative Group. Leukemia 1999;13:1207.
244. Du XX, Williams DA. Interleukin-11: a multifunctional growth factor derived from the hematopoietic microenvironment. Blood 1994;83:2023.
245. Du XX, Scott D, Yang ZX, et al. Interleukin-11 stimulates multilineage progenitors, but not stem cells, in murine and human long-term marrow cultures. Blood 1995;86:128.
246. Lemoli RM, Fogli M, Fortuna A, et al. Interleukin-11 stimulates the proliferation of human hematopoietic CD34+ and CD34+CD33DR cells and synergizes with stem cell factor, interleukin-3, and
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. Exp Hematol 1993;21:1668.
247. Du XX, Neben T, Goldman S, Williams DA. Effects of recombinant human interleukin-11 on hematopoietic reconstitution in transplant mice: acceleration of recovery of peripheral blood
neutrophils and platelets. Blood 1993;81:27.
248. Anderson KC, Morimoto C, Paul SR, et al. Interleukin-11 promotes accessory cell-dependent B-cell differentiation in humans. Blood 1992;80:2797
249. Yang YC, Yin T. Interleukin-11 and its receptor. Biofactors 1992;4:15.
250. Nash RA, Seidel K, Storb R, et al. Effects of rhIL-11 on normal dogs and after sublethal radiation. Exp Hematol 1995;23:389.
251. Gordon MS, Hoffman R, Battiato L, et al. Recombinant human interleukin eleven (Neumega rhIL-11 growth factor; rhIL-11) prevents severe thrombocytopenia in breast cancer patients
receiving multiple cycles of cyclophosphamide (C) and doxorubicin (A) chemotherapy [Abstract]. Proc Annu Meet Am Soc Clin Oncol 1994;13:326a.
252. Isaacs C, Robert NJ, Bailey FA, et al. Randomized placebo-controlled study of recombinant human interleukin-11 to prevent chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia in patients with breast
cancer receiving dose-intensive cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:3368.
253. Tepler I, Elias L, Smith JW 2nd, et al. A randomized placebo-controlled trial of recombinant human interleukin-11 in cancer patients with severe thrombocytopenia due to chemotherapy. Blood
1996;87:3607.
254. Vredenburgh JJ, Hussein A, Fisher D, et al. A randomized trial of recombinant human interleukin-11 following autologous bone marrow transplantation with peripheral blood progenitor cell
support in patients with breast cancer. BiolBlood MarrowTransplant 1998;4:134.
255. Du XX, Doerschuk CM, Orazi A, Williams DA. A bone marrow stromal-derived growth factor, interleukin-11, stimulates recovery of small intestinal mucosal cells after cytoablative therapy.
Blood 1994;83:33.
256. Potten CS. Interleukin-11 protects the clonogenic stem cells in murine small-intestinal crypts from impairment of their reproductive capacity by radiation. Int J Cancer 1995; 62:356.
257. Schwertschlag US, Trepicchio WL, Dykstra KH, et al. Hematopoietic, immunomodulatory and epithelial effects of interleukin-11. Leukemia 1999;13:1307.
258. Chang MS, McNinch J, Basu R, et al. Cloning and characterization of the human megakaryocyte growth and development factor (MGDF) gene. J Biol Chem 1995;270:511.
259. Sohma Y, Akahori H, Seki N, et al. Molecular cloning and chromosomal localization of the human thrombopoietin gene. Febs Lett 1994;353:57.
260. Lok S, Kaushansky K, Holly RD, et al. Cloning and expression of murine thrombopoietin cDNA and stimulation of platelet production in vivo. Nature 1994;369:565.
261. Gurney AL, Kuang WJ, Xie MH, et al. Genomic structure, chromosomal localization, and conserved alternative splice forms of thrombopoietin. Blood 1995;85:981.
262. Kuter DJ, Rosenberg RD. The reciprocal relationship of thrombopoietin (c-Mpl ligand) to changes in the platelet mass during busulfan-induced thrombocytopenia in the rabbit. Blood
1995;85:2720.
263. Banu N, Wang JF, Deng B, Groopman JE, Avraham H. Modulation of megakaryocytopoiesis by thrombopoietin: the c-Mpl ligand. Blood 1995;86:1331.
264. Kaushansky K. Thrombopoietin: the primary regulator of platelet production. Blood 1995;86:419.
265. Broudy VC, Lin NL, Kaushansky K. Thrombopoietin (c-mpl ligand) acts synergistically with erythropoietin, stem cell factor, and interleukin-11 to enhance murine megakaryocyte colony growth
and increases megakaryocyte ploidy in vitro. Blood 1995;85:1719.
266. Basser RL, Rasko JE, Clarke K, et al. Randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled phase I trial of pegylated recombinant human megakaryocyte growth and development factor with filgrastim after
dose-intensive chemotherapy in patients with advanced cancer. Blood 1997;89:3118.
267. Fanucchi M, Glaspy J, Crawford J, et al. Effects of polyethylene glycol-conjugated recombinant human megakaryocyte growth and development factor on platelet counts after chemotherapy for
lung cancer. N Engl J Med 1997;336:404.
268. Friedman HD, Sanderson SO, Stein CK, et al. Extramedullary granulopoiesis mimicking recurrent lymphoma after prolonged administration of human recombinant granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor. Ann Hematol 1998;77:79.
269. Hornung RL, Longo DL. Hematopoietic stem cell depletion by restorative growth factor regimens during repeated high-dose cyclophosphamide therapy. Blood 1992;80:77.

CHAPTER 54 Infections in the Cancer Patient
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 54
Infections in the Cancer Patient
BRAHM H. SEGAL
THOMAS J. WALSH
STEVEN M. HOLLAND
Introduction
Factors Predisposing to Infection in Patients with Cancer
Absolute Neutrophil Count Greater Than 500/mL And No Immunosuppressive Therapy
Neutropenia
Mucosal Immunity
Immunosuppressive Agents not Related to Neutropenia
Splenectomy
Bone Marrow Transplantation
Alterations In Microflora Colonization
Bacterial Pathogens in Cancer Patients
Staphylococcus Species
Enterococcus Species
Viridans Streptococci
Miscellaneous Gram-Positive Bacteria
Enterobacteriaceae
Pseudomonas Aeruginosa
Stenotrophomonas (Xanthomonas) Maltophilia
Acinetobacter Species
Clostridium Species
Mycobacteria
Nocardia
Fungal Infections
Candidiasis
Aspergillosis
Zygomycosis
Cryptococcus Neoformans
Emerging Opportunistic Fungal Pathogens
Endemic Dimorphic Fungi
Antifungal Agents
Viral Infections
Herpes Viruses
Community Respiratory Viruses
Hepatitis Viruses
Parasitic Infections
Pneumocystis Carinii
Toxoplasmosis
Acanthamoeba
Strongyloides Stercoralis
Evaluation and Management of Febrile Neutropenia
Antibiotic Regimens
Monotherapy
Duotherapy Without Vancomycin
When To Add Vancomycin
Duration of Antibacterial Therapy
Outpatient Antibiotic Therapy for Neutropenic Fever
Antibacterial Prophylaxis in Afebrile Neutropenic Patients
Protected Environments
Manifestations and Therapy of Infections
Bacteremia
Implanted Vascular Catheters
Skin Lesions and Soft Tissue Infections
Sinusitis
Pulmonary Infiltrates
Cardiac Infections
Oropharyngeal Infections
Epiglottitis
Esophagitis
Intraabdominal Infection
Anorectal Infections
Central Nervous System Infections
Dementias
Genitourinary Infections
Immune Augmentation Strategies
Granulocyte Transfusions
Growth Factors
Interferon-g
Adoptive Immunotherapy In Bone Marrow Transplant Recipients
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Infections are major causes of morbidity and mortality in patients with cancer. The risk of infection is principally related to the intensity and duration of
immunosuppressive chemotherapy. It is essential to know the patient's quantitative and qualitative immune defects and to stratify the risk for specific pathogens in the
context of the history, physical examination, and radiologic and laboratory data.
In the 1980s, there was a shift in the relative prevalence of specific pathogens afflicting patients with cancer. Whereas in the 1960s and 1970s, gram-negative
bacterial pathogens (Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa) were the principal causes of bacteremia, in the 1990s and 1980s, gram-positive bacterial
pathogens became predominant. 1 Today, filamentous fungi are a major cause of mortality in allogeneic bone marrow transplant (BMT) recipients and in patients with
prolonged neutropenia. The spectrum of invasive fungal infections has dramatically increased. Examples of such emerging pathogens include Fusarium, Acremonium,
Scedosporium, and dematiaceous (dark-walled fungi) species, and the yeast Trichosporon beigelii. This population is also at risk for a broad spectrum of viral and
protozoal infections.
We describe the clinical manifestations and treatment of the major pathogens encountered in an oncology population. Specific infectious syndromes, such as fever
without a documented source, pneumonia, skin infection, gastrointestinal infection, and sepsis, are reviewed. We also discuss novel approaches aimed at prevention

and early diagnosis of infections and immune augmentation strategies.

FACTORS PREDISPOSING TO INFECTION IN PATIENTS WITH CANCER
Patients with cancer are a highly varied population, both in terms of the underlying malignancy and the level of immunosuppression. We describe specific categories
of immunosuppression and the pathogens to which these patients are most susceptible. Multiple predisposing factors may exist in a single patient, thus increasing the
spectrum of likely pathogens. The major categories of immunologic deficits in persons with cancer and the pathogens to which they are susceptible are summarized in
Table 54-1.

TABLE 54-1. Predominant Immunologic Defects and Associated Pathogens in Patients with Cancer

ABSOLUTE NEUTROPHIL COUNT GREATER THAN 500/mL AND NO IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE THERAPY
The group with absolute neutrophil count greater than 500/µl and no immunosuppressive therapy represents the least immunosuppressed patients with cancer, but
some level of risk of infection may still exist. The malignancy itself may be associated with an immune defect. Malignancies associated with defective immunoglobulin
production lead to increased susceptibility to encapsulated bacteria, principally Streptococcus pneumoniae. Such patients may have recurrent sinopulmonary
infections, septicemia, and disseminated infection. Patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia frequently have hypogammaglobulinemia or dysglobulinemia. 2 Low
levels of both total immunoglobulin G (IgG) and specific antibodies to pneumococcal polysaccharide capsule are associated with an increased rate of infections in
these patients. 2 A decision analysis suggested that routine administration of immunoglobulin to patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia and
hypogammaglobulinemia reduces the frequency of bacterial infections, but is not cost-effective. 3
Patients with multiple myeloma and other related gammaglobulinopathies also are often functionally hypogammaglobulinemic; the total level of immunoglobulin
production is elevated, but the repertoire of antibody production is restricted. Savage et al. 4 noted a biphasic pattern of infection among patients with multiple
myeloma. Infections by S pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae occurred early in the disease and in patients responding to chemotherapy, whereas infections by
Staphylococcus aureus and gram-negative pathogens occurred more commonly in advanced disease and during neutropenia. Serum from patients with multiple
myeloma may be defective in the activation of C3, the major opsonin of the complement system, which likely further contributes to susceptibility to pneumococcal
infection. 5 One randomized study showed that prophylactic intravenous immunoglobulin protected against life-threatening and recurrent infections in patients with
multiple myeloma. 6 The patients who benefited most from immunoglobulin therapy were those with poor IgG antibody responses to pneumococcal vaccination.
Patients with hairy cell leukemia appear to have a defect in cell-mediated immunity, leaving them prone to develop an unusually high frequency of opportunistic
atypical mycobacterial infections. 7 Patients with untreated Hodgkin's disease have significant abnormalities in T-cell number and function, which persist in the majority
of long-term survivors.8 Such patients are at increased risk for toxoplasmosis, nocardiosis, pneumocystosis, cryptococcosis, mycobacterial infections, and herpes
zoster. Most opportunistic infections occurred during poorly controlled malignancy when patients were receiving corticosteroids, myeloablative chemotherapy, or
both. 9
Adrenal tumors and ectopic adrenocorticotropic hormone–secreting tumors resulting in high levels of cortisol 10,11 and T-cell leukemias 12 are associated with defects in
cellular immunity resulting in an increased risk of mucosal candidiasis, Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP), and invasive aspergillosis.
Solid tumors may predispose patients to infection because of anatomic factors. Tumors that overgrow their blood supply become necrotic, thus forming a nidus for
infection. Head and neck tumors may cause erosion through the fascial planes of the neck and floor of the mouth, predisposing patients to serious infections caused
by mouth flora. Lemierre's syndrome, a septic thrombophlebitis of the neck with possible embolization to the tricuspid valve and lung and dissemination to other
organs, is usually caused by Fusobacterium species, which are anaerobic oral commensal organisms. 13 This infection may develop during the course of uncontrolled
head and neck cancer. Head and neck cancers may also increase the risk of aspiration pneumonia. Endobronchial lung tumors are associated with recurrent
postobstructive pneumonias. Abdominal tumors may obstruct hollow viscera, such as the genitourinary or hepatobiliary tracts, predisposing to pyelonephritis and
cholangitis, respectively. Direct invasion through the colonic mucosa is associated with local abscess formation and sepsis by enteric flora. Streptococcus bovis
bacteremia is highly associated with colon cancer. Breast tumors increase the risk of mastitis and abscess formation, usually by Staphylococcus aureus.
Therapy for the underlying malignancy, independent of the immunosuppression, may be associated with an increased risk of infection. Local radiation therapy is
associated with loss of epithelial integrity, necrosis, loss of blood supply, and consequent poor ability to repair wounds. Visceral complications include radiation
pneumonitis, esophagitis, and enteritis. Implantable hardware necessary for administration of chemotherapy, such as cuffed intravenous catheters and Ommaya
reservoirs, are potential niduses of infection.
Patients with malignancy commonly experience malnutrition, which increases the risk of infection. Weight loss frequently precedes the diagnosis of cancer, and the
nausea, mucositis, and enteritis that follow antineoplastic chemotherapy worsen malnutrition.
NEUTROPENIA
Neutropenia may develop independently of chemotherapy in certain patients with cancer. In acute leukemia, the marrow may be replaced with malignant cells so that
virtually no normal circulating neutrophils exist. Similarly, patients with premalignant hematologic disease, such as myelodysplastic syndrome, may have associated
bone marrow failure. Patients also may develop neutropenia due to tumor-related autoimmune neutrophil destruction. 14 Persons rendered neutropenic by
myeloablative chemotherapy are likely to be at greater risk for life-threatening infections due to the concomitant disruption of epithelial mucosal barriers by such
agents.
The relationship between circulating leukocytes and risk of infection was established by Bodey et al. 15 in a classic early study of 52 patients with acute lymphocytic
leukemia or acute myelogenous leukemia. The frequency of severe infections was highest when the absolute neutrophil count (ANC) was less than 100/µL and
proportionately less frequent at 100 to 500/µL and 500 to 1000/µL, respectively. This relationship was sustained whether the patient was in relapse or remission,
although the overall risk of infection was greater during relapse. Ninety percent of disseminated fungal infections and 78% of septicemias occurred when the ANC was
less than 500/µL. No further reduction in the rate of serious infections occurred at ANC greater than 1000 to 1500/µL. In addition to the depth of neutropenia, the risk
of infection was strongly related to the duration of neutropenia. A neutrophil count of less than 100/µL resulted in infections in all patients within 3 weeks and in severe
infections within 6 weeks. The likelihood of survival from severe infections was related to both the initial granulocyte level and whether an increase in the neutrophil
count occurred within the first week. With an initial ANC of less than 100/µL and no increase within the first week, mortality was 80%.
The risk of invasive aspergillosis is also directly related to the period of neutropenia. In patients with leukemia, Gerson et al. 16 showed that aspergillosis was
uncommon when neutropenia lasted for less than 14 days. However, after 14 days, the risk of aspergillosis increased in direct proportion to the length of neutropenia.
Invasive aspergillosis is also a major cause of mortality in patients with persistent neutropenia secondary to aplastic anemia. 17 Since the mid-1980s, an increasing

spectrum of fungal pathogens has been encountered in patients with prolonged neutropenia, including Fusarium species, dark-walled molds, and Trichosporon
species.18,19
Diagnosis of infection in granulocytopenic patients may be hampered by the lack of typical symptoms and signs. Sickles et al. 20 compared the clinical manifestations
of infections in neutropenic and nonneutropenic patients with cancer. Fever was present in virtually all patients with an ANC less than 100/µL and in 90% of patients
with 101 to 1000/µL. However, physical findings of infection, including fluctuance, exudate, local heat and swelling, ulceration, and local adenopathy, were less
frequent in neutropenic than in nonneutropenic patients with similar infections. Local erythema and tenderness were sensitive indicators of infection in neutropenic
patients. In neutropenic patients with pneumonia, sputum and physical examination signs of consolidation were less frequent than in nonneutropenic patients as were
localizing symptoms and pyuria in cases of urinary tract infection. Local infections more commonly led to bacteremia with an ANC less than 100/µL. Thus, fever is a
relatively sensitive sign of infection in the neutropenic patient, whereas other findings of infection are often lacking. The high likelihood of systemic infection and
mortality in febrile neutropenic patients constitutes the rationale for initiating empiric antibacterial therapy before a documented source of infection or culture data are
available.
MUCOSAL IMMUNITY
The mucosal linings in the gastrointestinal, sinopulmonary, and genitourinary tracts constitute the first line of host defense against a variety of pathogens.
Chemotherapy and radiation therapy cause defects in mucosal immunity at several different levels. The physical protective barrier conferred by the epithelial lining is
compromised, thus allowing access to colonizing microflora. In BMT patients, chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) further compromises mucosal immunity.
These patients have defective salivary immunoglobulin secretion, 21 and corticosteroids profoundly compromise mucosa–associated lymphoid tissue by inducing
apoptosis of M cells and depleting lymphoid follicles of T and B cells. 22
Mucosal epithelial cells secrete a variety of antimicrobial peptides, including lactoferrin (iron sequestration), lysozyme (hydrolysis of peptidoglycan of gram-positive
bacteria), and phospholipase A2 (cleavage of structural phospholipids of bacteria). 23 Defensins are a group of small cysteine-rich antibacterial peptides (molecular
weight, approximately 4 kD) located abundantly in the primary (azurophilic) granules of neutrophils and in a variety of mucosal epithelial cells, including bronchial
epithelium and Paneth's cells within small intestinal crypts. 23 Neutropenia and loss of the epithelial cell anatomic barrier and local production of antimicrobial proteins
likely predispose to typhlitis (neutropenic enterocolitis). Synthetically produced antimicrobial peptides are potential therapeutic candidates for augmenting mucosal
immunity.24
IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE AGENTS NOT RELATED TO NEUTROPENIA
Corticosteroids
Corticosteroids have profound effects on the distribution and function of neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes. They induce a neutrophilic leukocytosis by
accelerating the release of neutrophils from the bone marrow and by inhibiting the egress of neutrophils from the circulation. Corticosteroids reduce adherence of
neutrophils to the endothelium, thus inhibiting migration to inflammatory sites, and inhibit neutrophil fungicidal activity. 25
Corticosteroids elicit a peripheral blood monocytopenia that lasts for 24 hours. In addition, a number of monocyte functions are impaired, including chemotaxis,
bactericidal activity, and production of interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a). 26
Corticosteroids inhibit T-cell activation, leading to reduced proliferative responses and cytokine production, and also induce a redistribution of lymphocytes out of the
circulation, leading to peripheral lymphocytopenia. This redistribution predominantly involves T cells. 27 At high doses, corticosteroids also inhibit immunoglobulin
generation by B cells. 28
In patients with cancer, corticosteroids are seldom the only immunosuppressive agents being administered, and it is therefore difficult to delineate the degree of
impairment in host defense elicited by the corticosteroid regimen alone. Infections that occur in patients with collagen vascular diseases treated with corticosteroids
are associated with both impaired phagocytic function (such as S aureus and Enterobacteriaceae) and cell-mediated immunity (such as herpes zoster, and P carinii).26
In this population, the incidence of infectious complications increases when the adult equivalent of prednisone, 20 to 40 mg/d, is administered for longer than 4 to 6
weeks.27,29 In patients with cancer, the most intensive corticosteroid regimens (usually the equivalent of prednisone, 1 g daily) are used to treat BMT recipients with
GVHD, leading to a global suppression of phagocytic and cell-mediated activity and rendering these patients highly susceptible to a broad spectrum of bacterial,
fungal, viral, and protozoal pathogens. In addition to immunosuppression, corticosteroids directly stimulate the growth of Aspergillus fumigatus in vitro,30 possibly via
sterol-binding proteins in the fungus.
Methotrexate
Methotrexate inhibits dihydrofolate reductase, an enzyme required for the synthesis of DNA and certain amino acids. At the high doses used in antineoplastic
chemotherapy, methotrexate is highly immunosuppressive. As with other cytotoxic agents, methotrexate causes bone marrow suppression and mucositis.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, an antifolate drug commonly used as prophylaxis against P carinii infection in this population, may aggravate the hematologic toxicity
of methotrexate.31
In patients with collagen vascular disease treated with low-dose methotrexate, the infection rate was low. The most common opportunistic pathogens were P carinii
and herpes zoster. 26 Other reported infections included aspergillosis, histoplasmosis, nocardiosis, mycobacterial infections, and Listeria monocytogenes meningitis. 26
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)–associated B-cell lymphoproliferative disease has been identified in a few patients with collagen vascular diseases treated with
methotrexate.32 Thus, long-term use of low-dose methotrexate can lead to significant depression of cell-mediated immunity, independent of its myeloid toxicity.
Cyclosporin A
Cyclosporin A (CSA) is a potent inhibitor of T-cell activation that is commonly used in the postengraftment period after BMT. CSA is a prodrug that binds to the
intracellular protein, cyclophilin. The resulting complex in turn inhibits the calcium-regulated protein phosphatase, calcineurin, a protein required for signal
transduction after activation of the T-cell receptor. Calcium-dependent production of the potent neutrophil chemoattractant, IL-8, is inhibited by CSA. 33 Compared with
methotrexate, CSA is associated with less mucositis, and in some studies, more rapid myeloid recovery in BMT recipients. 34,35
Fludarabine
Fludarabine is a fluorinated analog of adenine that has been used in a variety of hematologic malignancies, including chronic lymphocytic leukemia, hairy cell
leukemia, and low-grade lymphomas. Fludarabine is a lymphotoxic compound, primarily affecting CD4+ lymphocytes. The combination of fludarabine and
corticosteroids is more immunosuppressive than either agent alone. 36 Fludarabine plus prednisone results in a uniform depression of CD4+ cells that may persist for
several months after completion of therapy. 37 In one series, 14 of 264 patients (5%) with chronic lymphocytic leukemia developed either PCP or listeriosis, and three
cases occurred more than 1 year after therapy in patients who were in remission. Other opportunistic pathogens reflecting T-cell depression include disseminated
varicella, mycobacteria, and fungi. 38 Prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (which has activity against both P carinii and L monocytogenes) appears to be
warranted.
Interleukin-2
Patients receiving high-dose IL-2 for malignancy have an increased risk of bacterial infections. Among 345 patients with cancer enrolled in a multicenter study of IL-2,
88 (26%) had bacteremia. 39 S aureus followed by coagulase-negative staphylococci were the most common pathogens. The frequency of sepsis in IL-2 recipients was
several-fold greater than in nonneutropenic patients with indwelling central catheters. IL-2 causes a profound but reversible defect in neutrophil chemotaxis that may
account for the increased frequency of infections. 39

SPLENECTOMY
The spleen is a reservoir in which rapid antigen presentation occurs, leading to the production of opsonizing antibodies by B cells. Splenic macrophages remove both
opsonized and nonopsonized particles from the blood stream. The removal of nonopsonized bacteria is a particularly important function to protect against
encapsulated bacteria to which the patient is not immune.
Asplenic patients are principally at risk for overwhelming sepsis by encapsulated bacteria. The most common pathogen is S pneumoniae, but other pathogens include
Haemophilus influenzae and Neisseria meningitidis. It is best to immunize individuals against encapsulated bacteria in advance of splenectomy. If this is not feasible,
immunization is still advisable after splenectomy, because such patients are still capable of mounting a protective antibody response. In a study of asplenic patients,
IgG responses to immunization with pneumococcal, H influenzae type b, and meningococcal vaccines were normal by day 28. 40 Patients with Hodgkin's disease, most
of whom were asplenic, had normal IgG responses to pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine. Molrine et al. 40 suggest reimmunization of asplenic persons every 5
years with the pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine based on a potential increased risk for disease as protective antibody levels wane over time.
Asplenic patients should be advised to seek medical attention when fever occurs. Prophylaxis with penicillin has been traditionally used after splenectomy. However,
the growing frequency of antimicrobial resistance among S pneumoniae isolates raises a note of caution. In a surveillance study, the overall percentages of
respiratory pneumococcal isolates from the United States with intermediate and high-level resistance to penicillin were 28% and 16%, respectively. 41 A significant
minority of penicillin-resistant isolates are cross-resistant to cephalosporins, macrolides, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole . 41 Newer generation quinolones have
reliable activity against penicillin-resistant pneumococci, though a Canadian study documented an increased frequency of quinolone-resistant pneumococcal isolates
in association with increased use of these agents. 42 Physicians should be aware of local patterns of resistance to guide prophylactic and empiric antibiotic therapy.
Other pathogens associated with a more fulminant course in asplenic individuals include Capnocytophaga species, 43,44 babesiosis, 45 malaria, and Salmonella species.
Capnocytophaga canimorsus infection is typically associated with dog bites and can lead to sepsis with or without evidence of cellulitis. Babesia microti is transmitted
by the Ixodes tick, which is also the vector for Lyme disease. When in Lyme-endemic regions in the spring to autumn periods, patients should follow basic precautions
to avoid tick bites (long sleeves, tick repellants) and be vigilant about fever. The diagnosis of babesiosis is confirmed by a peripheral blood smear showing
characteristic intraerythrocytic inclusions.
BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTATION
The spectrum of pathogens to which BMT recipients are most susceptible follows a time line corresponding to the predominant immune defects observed at different
periods (Table 54-2). In the early stage of BMT, neutropenia is the principal host defense defect. These patients are at risk for the same spectrum of bacterial and
fungal infections that afflict nontransplant patients who have been treated with potent myeloablative therapy (see Neutropenia, earlier in this chapter). Severe
mucocutaneous herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection is also commonly observed in the first month of transplantation in association with chemotherapy-induced
mucositis. After myeloid engraftment, fever and mucositis typically resolve, and the risk of serious bacterial and fungal infections decreases.

TABLE 54-2. Time Line of Principal Immune Defects and Infectious Complications in Bone Marrow Transplant Recipients

After myeloid engraftment, a qualitative dysfunction of phagocytes persists due to corticosteroid therapy and other immunosuppressive agents (see
Immunosuppressive Agents Not Related to Neutropenia , earlier in this chapter). The risk of infection by filamentous fungi during this period is strongly associated with
the severity of GVHD and requirement for potent immunosuppressive regimens. Impairment in neutrophil chemotaxis has been noted in some patients and may
increase the risk of infection. 46,47 Alveolar macrophage function in patients studied within 4 months of allogeneic BMT was impaired based on chemotaxis,
phagocytosis, and killing of bacterial and candidal species. 48 These observations may, in part, account for the increased risk of pneumonia during this period.
Defects in cell-mediated immunity persist for several months even in uncomplicated allogeneic transplant recipients, thus predisposing these patients to a variety of
opportunistic infections, such as candidiasis, P carinii, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and herpes zoster (see Table 54-2). Repopulation of specific T-cell subsets occurs at
different rates, resulting in a lower than normal CD4+ (helper T cell) to CD8+ (suppressor-cytotoxic T cell) ratio for the first 6 months after engraftment. 49 In addition to
quantitative T-cell deficiencies, loss of T-cell receptor diversity is observed. 50 During the first 100 days of transplantation, delayed hypersensitivity responses,
proliferative responses to mitogens and antigens, and T-cell–mediated activation of B cells to produce immunoglobulin are impaired. 51 By 1 year after engraftment,
BMT recipients without chronic GVHD have normalized CD4+/CD8+ ratios, and in general, have normal in vivo and in vitro T-cell responses.
Defective reconstitution of humoral immunity is a major factor contributing to increased infection susceptibility in the late transplant period. Winston et al. 52 noted an
unusually high frequency of pneumococcal infections between 7 and 36 months after transplantation. All infections occurred after trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
prophylaxis for P carinii was halted. The risk of pneumococcal infection was associated with serum opsonic deficiency for S pneumoniae. Kalhs et al. 53,54 showed that
functional asplenia, as determined by the presence of Howell-Jolly bodies in peripheral blood smears, was a late complication of allogeneic BMT only in patients with
severe GVHD. Thus, even in BMT recipients who have had an uncomplicated course, fever in the late transplant period must be evaluated promptly (similar to
patients with asplenia) because of the risk of overwhelming infection by one of these pathogens (see Table 54-2).
During periods of severe GVHD, the immunosuppressive regimen is intensified to include high-dose corticosteroids in combination with CSA and possibly an
antilymphocyte globulin preparation. CD4+ lymphocytopenia may, in part, result from GVHD-induced injury of thymic epithelial cells. 55 Whereas mature and
cooperative T- and B-cell functions are generally reconstituted by 1 year after engraftment in uncomplicated allogeneic BMT, chronic GVHD is associated with
persistently depressed cell-mediated and humoral immunity.
Autologous transplants are associated with less infectious complications than allogeneic transplants due to reduced severity of GVHD and earlier reconstitution of
T-cell immunity. Allogeneic transplantation using alternative donors (such as HLA-matched unrelated donors, partially mismatched related donors, and mismatched
cord blood) has a higher risk of GVHD and usually requires depletion of mature donor T cells, leading to delayed immune reconstitution and, consequently, a greater
risk of infectious complications.
ALTERATIONS IN MICROFLORA COLONIZATION
A shift in the normal respiratory flora toward colonization with aerobic gram-negative bacilli occurs in sick hospitalized patients. 56 This may be due to changes in the
fibronectin content of cell surfaces in debilitated persons, leading to reduced adherence by the normal anaerobic flora, thus favoring colonization by aerobic
gram-negative bacilli. 57 In immunocompromised patients with cancer, alterations in bowel flora leading to acquisition of more virulent bacteria are well documented.
This change is exacerbated by the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics that may suppress the normal anaerobic bowel flora. Patients with acute leukemia are frequent

stool carriers of P aeruginosa, and nosocomial infections are often preceded by enteric colonization by the infecting strain.
In a classic study, Schimpff et al. 58 collected surveillance cultures from the nose, gingiva, axilla, and rectum of hospitalized patients with acute nonlymphocytic
leukemia. Infection nearly always occurred during neutropenia, and in approximately 85% of cases, the infecting organism had been isolated in surveillance cultures
before the onset of disease. In almost one-half of the cases, the pathogen was acquired after hospital admission.

BACTERIAL PATHOGENS IN CANCER PATIENTS
STAPHYLOCOCCUS SPECIES
Since the 1980s, there has been a marked increase in the proportion of bacterial infections and bacteremia caused by Staphylococcus species. The frequency of S
aureus infections has remained stable, whereas the incidence of infections caused by coagulase-negative staphylococci has increased, almost certainly due to
widespread use of broad-spectrum antibiotics and surgically implantable central venous catheters. Coagulase-negative staphylococci are considered to be low
pathogens of low virulence, and their isolation from blood is frequently dismissed as a skin contaminant. In patients with cancer, coagulase-negative staphylococci
may produce a localized catheter-associated infection, bacteremia, or, less frequently, metastatic infection. The majority of nosocomial coagulase-negative
staphylococci are resistant to antistaphylococcal penicillins, making vancomycin the initial drug of choice for such infections. However, given the increased prevalence
of serious infections due to vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), an antistaphylococcal penicillin should be used for staphylococci sensitive to one of these
agents.
S aureus is the most common cause of surgical wound infections and can cause both local and systemic disease. In some instances a toxic shock syndrome occurs,
manifesting as fever, hypotension, gastrointestinal toxicity, rash, and skin exfoliation. Prompt initiation of antibiotics, fluid resuscitation, removal of surgical packing,
and wound débridement are required. In patients with cancer, disruptions of the skin barrier from indwelling intravenous catheters or biopsy sites are additional portals
of entry.
The incidence of methicillin-resistant S aureus (MRSA) isolates causing nosocomial blood stream infections in the United States is increasing. In a 3-year surveillance
study of more than 10,000 cases of nosocomial bacteremia, almost 30% of S aureus isolates were methicillin resistant. 59 Among hematology and oncology patients,
the rate was 25%. These observations highlight the need to be familiar with the resistance patterns of bacterial pathogens at one's institution to guide empiric
antibiotic therapy before the availability of culture results (see Evaluation and Management of Febrile Neutropenia without an Apparent Source , later in this chapter).
MRSA isolates are typically broadly resistant to all antibiotics, except vancomycin. Clinical S aureus isolates have been isolated with intermediate resistance to
vancomycin.60,61 Preventing emergence and spread of these organisms requires careful attention to infection control guidelines and judicious use of antibiotics.
Patients with MRSA infection should be kept in private rooms, under contact precautions. Gown and gloves should be worn by hospital staff in cases of a draining
wound or other situations in which spread to hands and clothing is likely to occur. Attempts at eradication of nasal carriage of S aureus with topical mupirocin and
other agents have produced mixed results, and MRSA may develop resistance to mupirocin. 62
ENTEROCOCCUS SPECIES
An increased incidence of nosocomial infections caused by multidrug-resistant enterococcal species has been observed. Approximately 50% of Enterococcus faecium
and the minority of Enterococcus faecalis isolates are resistant to vancomycin 59 and are typically multiply resistant to penicillin, ampicillin, and aminoglycosides.
Patients with cancer who spend a significant time in the hospital are at high risk for being colonized by drug-resistant Enterococcus species. The portal of entry for
enterococcal bacteremia may be an indwelling central catheter or defects in the gut mucosa from chemotherapy or radiation toxicity. Tumor invasion of the gut may
predispose to bacteremia by Enterococcus species, as well as Streptococcus bovis.
Ampicillin is the drug of choice for sensitive Enterococcus isolates. For serious infections (e.g., bacteremia), addition of an aminoglycoside for synergy is reasonable
because even sensitive strains are intrinsically tolerant to the bactericidal activity of penicillins and vancomycin. The newly licensed streptogramin antibiotic,
quinupristin/dalfopristin (Synercid), is active against most strains of E faecium but not E faecalis.63 Linezolid, a prototype of the oxazolidinone group of antimicrobial
agents, has broad activity against gram-positive pathogens, including MRSA and VRE, and is being evaluated in clinical trials. 64 Chloramphenicol, fluoroquinolones,
tetracyclines, and rifampin may also have activity against VRE. Prevention and infection control methods, including prudent use of antibiotics (restriction of
vancomycin usage), isolation of colonized and infected patients, surveillance, hand washing, and use of appropriate barrier protections, are critical for reducing rates
of VRE infection.
VIRIDANS STREPTOCOCCI
Viridans streptococci, also called a-hemolytic streptococci, are oral commensal organisms. In the nonimmunocompromised population, they are the most common
cause of native valve endocarditis, which usually has a subacute course. In neutropenic patients, viridans streptococci are more virulent. Cytosine arabinoside
(Ara-C), a highly mucotoxic agent, and prophylaxis with ciprofloxacin or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (presumably, by selecting for resistant streptococci) are the
major risk factors for bacteremia by viridans streptococci. 65,66 and 67
Neutropenic patients with viridans streptococcal bacteremia may have a 24- to 48-hour prodrome of low-grade fever and facial flushing, followed by a high fever and
chills. In approximately 25% of patients, bacteremia is complicated by a shock syndrome, characterized by hypotension, respiratory distress syndrome, renal failure,
and a maculopapular rash usually starting at the trunk and spreading centrifugally to the face and extremities. 65 Desquamation of the palms and soles may
subsequently occur. Endocarditis is observed in a minority of patients. Septic shock may be more common in children than in adults. 68,69
In a secondary analysis of 909 bacteremias in patients previously enrolled in trials of neutropenic fever, 13% were caused by viridans streptococci. 70 All 52 patients
with viridans streptococcal bacteremia who received initial vancomycin survived, compared with an 86% survival rate in patients whose vancomycin therapy was
delayed 2 to 3 days (P = .004). Of the empiric monotherapy regimens used for febrile neutropenia, ceftazidime has the poorest activity against viridans streptococci,
thus prompting some investigators to add vancomycin empirically in patients with neutropenic fever and significant chemotherapy-induced mucositis (see Evaluation
and Management of Febrile Neutropenia without an Apparent Source , later in this chapter). 71
MISCELLANEOUS GRAM-POSITIVE BACTERIA
In the 1990s, there has been an emerging spectrum of gram-positive bacterial infections in patients with cancer. The widespread use of surgically implanted central
venous catheters and fluoroquinolone prophylaxis may be contributing to the more frequent isolation of these bacteria. They include Corynebacterium jeikeium,
Bacillus cereus, Stomatococcus mucilaginosus, and Leuconostoc species.1 These bacteria are associated with localized catheter and wound infections, bacteremia,
and disseminated infection.
C jeikeium is a common cutaneous commensal organism that has been associated with infection of prosthetic devices, such as vascular catheters, peritoneal dialysis
catheters, prosthetic valves, and ventricular shunts. C jeikeium is highly resistant to antibiotics, except vancomycin.
In a review of C jeikeium infections in patients with hematologic malignancies, skin lesions were present in one-half of the cases, pulmonary lesions occurred in
approximately one-third of cases, and one-third of the patients died. 72 In neutropenic patients, survival was strongly associated with resolution of neutropenia.
Virtually all of these patients had an indwelling central venous catheter, which was likely to be the principal portal of entry. In a series of BMT recipients with C
jeikeium bacteremia, all eight patients who received appropriate antibiotic therapy and who had their central intravenous catheters removed survived regardless of
persistent neutropenia. 73 Mortality was greater than 50% in those patients who received no antibiotics and in those who received antibiotics without removal of the
central venous catheter. Current treatment consists of prompt initiation of vancomycin and consideration of removal of the infected intravenous catheters.
In neutropenic children, Bacillus cereus was associated with a primary cutaneous infection involving vesicular and pustular lesions. 74 Stomatococcus mucilaginosus
appears to be particularly virulent in neutropenic patients and has been associated with septic shock, respiratory distress syndrome, and meningitis. 75 Leuconostoc,

Lactobacillus, and Pediococcus species are often resistant to vancomycin, 76 but most isolates are susceptible to penicillin.
ENTEROBACTERIACEAE
The Enterobacteriaceae include several pathogenic species, including Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Proteus, Enterobacter, Serratia, and Citrobacter species. Patients
with neutropenia are at highest risk for bacteremia and life-threatening infections by these pathogens. The principal portal of entry appears to be translocation of
bacteria from the alimentary tract.
There has been an increasing frequency of infection due to Enterobacteriaceae and other gram-negative bacteria (such as Stenotrophomonas maltophilia and
Acinetobacter species), which are highly resistant to b-lactam antibiotics. Bush et al. 77 presented an updated classification of b-lactamases, which include three
groups of enzymes: (1) group 1 cephalosporinases (also referred to as Bush group 1 bw-lactamases) are not well inhibited by clavulanic acid; (2) group 2
penicillinases, cephalosporinases, and extended spectrum b-lactamases are generally inhibited by b-lactamase inhibitors; and (3) group 3 metallo-b-lactamases that
hydrolyze penicillins, cephalosporins, and carbapenems and confer broad resistance to almost all b-lactam antibiotics. Table 54-3 summarizes commonly used
antibacterial agents in patients with cancer.

TABLE 54-3. Commonly Used Antibacterial Agents in Patients with Cancer

Extended spectrum b-lactamase–producing pathogens (most common in E coli and Klebsiella species) may not be detected with standard susceptibility testing
because of different susceptibility patterns among third-generation cephalosporins. In one study of a nosocomial outbreak of extended spectrum b-lactamases
producing Klebsiella strain (as indicated by ceftazidime resistance), use of other third-generation cephalosporins was associated with a poorer outcome. 78
Carbapenems (imipenem and meropenem) have consistent bactericidal activity against extended spectrum b-lactamase–producing strains and should be considered
drugs of choice in serious infections by these pathogens.
The Bush group 1 b-lactamases may not be initially expressed (repressed), but are induced (de-repressed) after exposure to broad-spectrum cephalosporins, and
confer resistance to virtually all b-lactam antibiotics with the exception of the carbapenems and cefepime. This group of b-lactamases is characteristic of Enterobacter
species, but is also observed in P aeruginosa, Citrobacter, Serratia, and indole-positive Proteus species. Thus, if an Enterobacter species is isolated from a blood
culture, it is reasonable to change the initial antibiotic regimen to a carbapenem, knowing the potential for induction of a cephalosporinase if third-generation
cephalosporin therapy is continued.
PSEUDOMONAS AERUGINOSA
Infections caused by P aeruginosa in patients with cancer have diminished since the 1960s and 1970s. Currently, approximately 5% to 10% of bacteremias are
caused by this organism in patients with neutropenia. This reduction may reflect the widespread use of fluoroquinolones as prophylaxis as well as the availability of
agents with potent antipseudomonal activity, such as ceftazidime, that are used as initial empiric therapy for febrile neutropenia.
Bodey et al. 79 retrospectively analyzed 410 cases of P aeruginosa bacteremia in patients with cancer. The overall rate was 4.7 cases per 1000 admissions and was
most common among patients with leukemia. Neutropenia was the dominant risk factor. The infections were highly virulent, with 33% of patients developing septic
shock and 32% having pneumonia. Other sites of infection included soft tissue, urinary tract, perirectal region, and central venous catheters. Patients who received an
antipseudomonal b-lactam antibiotic, with or without an aminoglycoside, had survival rates of 72% and 71%, respectively, compared with 29% survival in patients who
received only an aminoglycoside.
The site of disease often reflects where colonization has occurred. 58 Colonization of the upper airway may lead to pneumonia after aspiration of infected droplets.
Typhlitis (neutropenic enterocolitis) and perineal cellulitis may follow colonization of the gut by P aeruginosa. Pathologically, P aeruginosa invades small arteries and
veins, leading to thrombosis, hemorrhage, and infarction. This angioinvasion is most evident in cases of ecthyma gangrenosum in which P aeruginosa invades
cutaneous blood vessels and perivascular connective tissue, leading to coagulative necrosis of the dermis ( Fig. 54-1). The lesions of ecthyma gangrenosum usually
evolve from erythematous macules to papules, and ultimately necrotic nodules and bullae. The lesions may present in any stage with minimal or absent inflammatory
infiltrate.

FIGURE 54-1. Lesions of ecthyma gangrenosum in a neutropenic patient with bacteremia due to Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The ecthyma lesions are in the necrotic
ulcerative edge.

Initial optimal antibiotic therapy for P aeruginosa bacteremia consists of an antipseudomonal b-lactam antibiotic and an aminoglycoside. It is reasonable to continue
aminoglycoside therapy until clinical stability and sterilization of blood have been achieved. Emergence of resistance to cephalosporins and carbapenems during
monotherapy for P aeruginosa infections may occur. Carbapenem resistance results from an alteration of a porin protein on the outer membrane of the bacteria,
preventing penetration of the antibiotic and b-lactamase production. 80 Emergence of resistance to carbapenems during therapy for P aeruginosa is well documented
and may result in treatment failure. Quinolone-resistant P aeruginosa isolates are being observed with increasing frequency. See sections on Neutropenic Fever and
Manifestations and Therapy of Infections , later in this chapter.
STENOTROPHOMONAS (XANTHOMONAS) MALTOPHILIA

Stenotrophomonas maltophilia colonizes hospital environments and establishes carriage generally in patients who have been treated with broad-spectrum
antimicrobial agents. This organism has become an increasingly important cause of nosocomial infections in patients with cancer. 81 Clinical manifestations include
bacteremia, pneumonia, endocarditis, mastoiditis, and meningitis. Vartivarian et al. 82 reviewed 17 cases of mucocutaneous and soft tissue infections caused by S
maltophilia in patients with cancer. These infections manifested as mucocutaneous ulcerations, primary cellulitis (usually catheter related), and metastatic cellulitis
consisting of multiple hard, tender nodules with surrounding or distant cellulitic areas resembling disseminated fungal infection, and one case of ecthyma
gangrenosum, resembling P aeruginosa. Disseminated cellulitic lesions were most common in patients with refractory leukemia and were frequently associated with
septic shock, multiorgan failure, and pneumonia.
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is resistant to imipenem, and isolates are often broadly resistant to other agents. The organism elaborates a metallo-b-lactamase,
which hydrolyzes carbapenems. The majority of strains are susceptible to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, which is the preferred initial antibiotic for this organism,
pending susceptibility data.
ACINETOBACTER SPECIES
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus and Acinetobacter baumannii are the principal pathogenic species within this genus. These gram-negative coccobacilli are ubiquitous,
easily colonize hospital environments, and have been associated with nosocomial outbreaks. Acinetobacter species are frequently multidrug resistant, and the risk of
infection in one nosocomial outbreak was associated with quinolones. 83 In the largest series of Acinetobacter septicemia in patients with cancer (95 cases), 80% of
cases were thought to be catheter related and responded to catheter removal and antimicrobial therapy. 84 Infection was polymicrobial in 25% of cases. 84
CLOSTRIDIUM SPECIES
Clostridium species include highly virulent toxin-producing species as well as relatively avirulent saprophytes. Toxin-producing species can cause invasive disease
such as myonecrosis (gas gangrene), emphysematous cholecystitis and pyelonephritis, necrotizing enterocolitis (typhlitis), and septic shock (see Intraabdominal
Infections, later in this chapter). Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium septicum are the most common clostridial species to cause bacteremia in patients with
cancer. Clostridium tertium sepsis is less commonly observed, but is highly virulent. 85 Cases of infection due to clostridial species other than C perfringens, C
septicum, and C tertium are usually only associated with fever, without evidence of organ involvement, and a low mortality.
Extraintestinal clostridial infections can be devastating. The morbidity and mortality associated with clostridial bacteremia depends on the virulence of the species and
the immune status of the host. Clostridial bacteremia after septic abortion is usually self-limited, but clostridial bacteremia with septic shock and myonecrosis requires
emergent surgical débridement.
Bodey et al. 86 evaluated 136 episodes of bacteremia due to clostridial species in patients with cancer. Most cases were associated with leukemia, gastrointestinal,
and genitourinary malignancies. Eighty-three cases were monomicrobial and 53 were polymicrobial. In 45% of cases of polymicrobial bacteremia, three or more
organisms were isolated from the blood. Isolates associated with clostridial sepsis consisted predominantly of enteric flora: E coli, Klebsiella species, and Bacteroides
species. Polymicrobial bacteremias were more likely to result in septic shock and death. The overall survival rate from clostridial bacteremia was 58%, a dramatically
poorer prognosis than monomicrobial bacteremias caused by aerobic gram-positive and gram-negative species.
Local and systemic clostridial infections are associated with gastrointestinal and genitourinary neoplasms. They are normally commensals, but proliferate in tissues
with a low redox potential, such as necrotic tumors. Damage to the mucosa by chemotherapy or radiation therapy likely further predisposes to local invasion and
dissemination. Local bowel invasion by clostridial species can result in necrotizing colitis (typhlitis), which typically involves the cecum but can extend to other regions
of the bowel.
Clostridial infections often have a fulminant course. Acute hemolysis, myonecrosis, diffuse spreading cellulitis, and septic shock have a high mortality. Clostridial
myonecrosis may respond to rapid surgical débridement. A needle aspiration or biopsy of the infected tissue showing large, thick gram-positive rods is highly
suggestive of the diagnosis. However, staining of the organism in clinical material may be variable or appear to be gram negative. In patients with leukemia, clostridial
soft tissue infection and septic shock may be particularly rapid, precluding surgical intervention.
Clindamycin and metronidazole are both active against Clostridia. Clindamycin, in addition to its antianaerobic activity, may have a theoretical value of reducing toxin
production. In a mouse model of myonecrosis by C perfringens, clindamycin and metronidazole were each more effective than penicillin. 87 The initial antibiotic
regimen should also include an agent active against aerobic enteric flora, such as ceftriaxone, since deep soft tissue infections are often polymicrobial. In neutropenic
patients, metronidazole or clindamycin plus an antipseudomonal b-lactam (such as ceftazidime or cefepime), with or without an aminoglycoside, are reasonable
regimens.
MYCOBACTERIA
Host defense against Mycobacterium species relies principally on functional T lymphocytes. It is therefore surprising that the incidence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(MTB) infection in BMT recipients is relatively low. In two large BMT centers in the United States, MTB infection occurred in approximately 1 per 1000 patients. 88,89 In
a Saudi Arabian study, the incidence of tuberculosis was 0.6% among BMT recipients. 90 In contrast, a study in Hong Kong, a highly endemic area for MTB, reported a
5.5% incidence of MTB in BMT recipients. 91 Therefore, an extra level of vigilance for MTB is necessary among patients who have resided in endemic countries.
In patients with compromised T-cell immunity, the clinical manifestations of infection due to MTB may be atypical, and disseminated disease is more common than in
immunocompetent patients.92 The chest radiographic appearance is highly variable and may include an isolated nodule, an infiltrate, or a diffuse reticulonodular
pattern indicative of hematogenous dissemination. The chest radiographic result may be negative in patients with disseminated extrapulmonary tuberculosis. Cavitary
lung disease is less commonly observed in immunocompromised hosts. Extrapulmonary manifestations may include meningitis, brain abscess, vertebral or
paravertebral abscess, septic joint, hepatic and splenic disease, and bone marrow involvement. Patients who consume unpasteurized dairy products are at increased
risk of gastrointestinal tuberculosis caused by Mycobacterium bovis. In addition, systemic iatrogenic M bovis infection may rarely occur after intravesicular therapy
with bacille Calmette-Guérin for bladder cancer. 93
Because of the varied manifestations of MTB, a high index of suspicion may be required to make the diagnosis. For example, a new pulmonary nodule or infiltrate may
be mistaken for aspergillosis, and gastrointestinal tuberculosis may be mistaken for GVHD. A definitive diagnosis should be pursued aggressively and early. Detection
of mycobacterial DNA in clinical specimens by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) may facilitate a more rapid diagnosis, although cultures are required for drug
susceptibility testing.
Due to the increased frequency of drug-resistant isolates, initial therapy for tuberculosis consists of a four-drug regimen (isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and
ethambutol) for the first 2 months. If a positive clinical response is seen, an additional 4 months of isoniazid and rifampin (if the isolate is sensitive to these agents) is
administered. In patients with profound immunosuppression, it is reasonable to extend the course of therapy to 9 months, given the potential increased risk for
recrudescent infection. Rifampin is both metabolized by, and is a potent inducer of, the hepatic cytochrome P-4503A isozyme, creating the potential for adverse
drug–drug interactions with other drugs (such as CSA and antifungal azoles) used in this patient group that are also metabolized through this pathway. Consultation
with MTB specialists is advised for suspected or confirmed multidrug-resistant tuberculosis.
Prevention of infection relies on compliance with established infection control measures, including respiratory isolation of persons with presumed or known active
tuberculosis in negative pressure rooms. Given the low prevalence of tuberculosis in cancer centers in the United States, we suggest that skin testing be reserved for
patients with some additional risk factor for tuberculosis (such as residence in an endemic country or human immunodeficiency virus infection).
Infection with nontuberculous mycobacteria (atypical mycobacteria) is well described among patients with cancer. Pathogenic species include Mycobacterium avium
complex, Mycobacterium kansasii, Mycobacterium haemophilum, and the Mycobacterium fortuitum-chelonae complex. Clinical manifestations include pneumonia, soft
tissue or wound infections, and central catheter infections that may require surgical excision of the infected tunnel site 94 (see Implanted Vascular Catheters, later in
this chapter). Patients with hairy cell leukemia appear to be particularly susceptible to M kansasii infection. 95 Sites of involvement include the lungs, lymph nodes,
liver, and spleen, and disseminated disease. M haemophilum may cause fatal pneumonia and disseminated cutaneous lesions. 96 This organism has a unique

requirement for iron supplementation for growth, and therefore the microbiology laboratory should be alerted that this diagnosis is being considered. Speciation of
mycobacterial isolates is essential because atypical mycobacteria are typically resistant to regimens for MTB. DNA probes are used to rapidly identify isolates at the
species level.
NOCARDIA
Nocardia infections are most frequent in patients with impaired T-cell immunity. Patients with Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma receiving immunosuppressive
therapy appear to be at particularly high risk for nocardiosis. 97,98 and 99 Nocardiosis is relatively uncommon in BMT recipients, with an incidence of 0.3% to 0.7%. 100,101
In the largest series, nocardiosis occurred exclusively in allogeneic transplant recipients and developed in both the early and late transplant period (median time, 210
days). 100
The lungs are the most common site of infection for bronchopneumonia, lobar pneumonia, nodules, and necrotizing abscesses with cavitation observed. Empyema
and extension to the chest wall occur. The lesion may be mistaken for a tumor. Extrapulmonary nocardiosis may occur in the presence or absence of pulmonary
disease. Brain abscess, meningitis, osteomyelitis, soft tissue mass, cutaneous abscess, catheter exit site infection, liver abscess, bacteremia, and disseminated
disease are seen.
Nocardia species are slender, filamentous, beaded, branching gram-positive rods. When nocardiosis is considered, a modified acid fast smear should be ordered
because Nocardia species stain variably when the conventional acid fast smear is used. Visualization of Nocardia species in histologic specimens may also be
variable due to weak uptake of stains. A combination of Gram's staining and staining using the Ziehl-Neelsen (acid alcohol decolorizing agent) and Fite (sulfuric acid
used instead of alcohol) methods may increase the diagnostic yield. 100 Although Nocardia species grow on a variety of media, it is important to alert the microbiology
laboratory so that appropriate culture conditions are used.
Therapy consists of high-dose trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (15 to 20 mg of trimethoprin/kg daily in three to four divided doses). Combination therapy consisting of a
sulfonamide plus an agent with presumed synergy, such as amikacin, imipenem, minocycline, or ceftriaxone, also is frequently used. 100 Surgical drainage or resection
should be considered in cases refractory to medical therapy. However, the time course of resolution is slow, and the therapy must be continued for months.

FUNGAL INFECTIONS
CANDIDIASIS
Oropharyngeal and Esophageal Candidiasis
Oral mucosal candidiasis, also called thrush, indicates T-cell immunodeficiency. In patients with cancer, conditions that predispose to oral candidiasis include
cytotoxic chemotherapy causing mucosal disruption, high-dose corticosteroids, and use of broad-spectrum antibiotics.
The diagnosis of oral candidiasis is usually made visually. White adherent plaques develop on the palate, buccal mucosa, tongue, or gingiva. The differential
diagnosis includes chemotherapy-induced mucositis, bacterial infections, and HSV infection. A wet mount or Gram's stain showing pseudohyphae establishes the
diagnosis. A culture of the oral mucosa that grows Candida species is not by itself diagnostic as these species commonly colonize the mouth. Therapy for
oropharyngeal candidiasis includes local treatments such as nystatin or clotrimazole troches or oral fluconazole.
Esophageal candidiasis is a more severe mucosal disease that typically manifests with odynophagia. The differential diagnosis includes esophageal infection by HSV,
CMV (in BMT recipients), and bacterial infections (see Esophagitis, later in this chapter). Systemic antifungal therapy (fluconazole or amphotericin B) is required.
Candidemia
Candida species are the fourth most common nosocomial blood culture isolates in the United States. 102 In some series, the attributable mortality to candidemia was
40% to 60%.103 This high mortality may reflect the fact that these patients often have serious comorbidities, such as malignancy, neutropenia, and illness requiring
prolonged periods in the intensive care unit. In a European surveillance study of candidemia in cancer patients, the overall 30-day mortality was 39%, with increased
mortality occurring in older patients, in those with poorly controlled malignancy, and in cases in which Candida (Torulopsis)glabrata was isolated.104 In a retrospective
study of 476 cases of candidemia at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, the mortality was 52%. Neutropenia, a high APACHE (Acute Physiology and Chronic Health
Education) score, and disseminated disease were associated with poorer outcomes. 105
Candida albicans is the most common species isolated from the blood. The proportion of non- albicans Candida species varies among different centers. Among
patients with cancer, non- albicans Candida species account for approximately 45% of cases of systemic candidiasis. 106 Among non-albicans Candida species,
Candida tropicalis was the most common isolate followed by C glabrata, C parapsilosis, and C krusei.106 The proportion of non-albicans Candida isolates has direct
clinical significance. C krusei is always resistant to fluconazole, and C glabrata is variably resistant. When either of these two species are isolated from the blood,
amphotericin B therapy is necessary. C tropicalis is more virulent than C albicans in immunocompromised animal models107 and often has a more severe clinical
course in patients. 108 Cutaneous dissemination, arthralgias, myalgias, and renal failure appear to be more common in C tropicalis infection. 108 C parapsilosis is mostly
associated with vascular catheters and lipid formulations used for total parenteral nutrition. Some C guilliermondi and C lusitaniae isolates are resistant to
amphotericin B.
Antifungal susceptibility testing is becoming more common and gaining acceptance. Standard guidelines and interpretive breakpoints for susceptibility testing of
fluconazole, itraconazole, and 5-flucytosine against yeasts have been proposed by the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards. These may be useful in
select cases in which resistance is suspected and in epidemiologic studies.
Isolation of Candida species from blood remains unreliable even with modern blood culture isolation systems. The sensitivity for detecting candidemia has been
significantly improved by the lysis centrifugation system (Isolator, Wampole Laboratories, Cranbury, NJ) and the BacTAlert system (Organon Teknika, Durham, NC),
which detect candidemia earlier and more reliably than conventional broth systems. 18 However, in single organ infection and in early disseminated candidiasis, even
lysis centrifugation culture has limited sensitivity. 109 Nonculture methods, such as amplification by PCR, antigen detection, and detection of metabolites, are
investigational and may prove useful in complementing culture methods. 110
All candidemic patients, both neutropenic and nonneutropenic, should be treated with fluconazole or amphotericin B. Isolation of a Candida species from only a single
blood culture (whether drawn from a catheter or peripheral vein), should be considered indicative of hematogenously disseminated disease. The rationale for early
antifungal therapy is to avoid sequelae, such as endophthalmitis and hepatosplenic candidiasis. In a retrospective study of 155 cases of catheter-associated fungemia
in patients with cancer, a significant proportion of patients who did not receive antifungal therapy after isolation of a Candida species from the blood (possibly
because the isolate was considered to be a contaminant or candidemia was considered to be transient) subsequently developed disseminated candidiasis. 111 The site
of blood collection, either from a central catheter or peripheral site, had no predictive value in defining the risk of subsequent disseminated disease. 111
A large randomized study comparing intravenous fluconazole (400 mg daily) with amphotericin B (0.5 mg/kg daily) as therapy for candidemia in nonneutropenic
patients found both regimens equally effective. 112 In uncomplicated candidemia, at least 2 weeks of antifungal therapy after the last positive culture result should be
administered. Due to the increased frequency of Candida isolates with intermediate or complete resistance to fluconazole, a National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Disease Mycosis Study Group trial is underway to compare fluconazole plus amphotericin B versus fluconazole alone in nonneutropenic patients with candidemia.
Management of candidemia in neutropenic patients is more controversial. Amphotericin B has been the standard therapy, but use of fluconazole in this population has
increased. In a consensus conference dealing with the management of candidal infections, 17 of 20 investigators chose fluconazole for treatment of uncomplicated
candidemia in stable neutropenic patients if no prior azole prophylaxis was administered and no evidence of hematogenous seeding or deep organ involvement
existed.103 A randomized multicenter study 113 and a matched cohort study 114 showed that fluconazole and amphotericin B had comparable efficacy in invasive
candidiasis in neutropenic and nonneutropenic patients. In centers in which non- albicans Candida species (most notably, C krusei and C glabrata) are frequently
isolated, we believe that it is prudent to use amphotericin B initially. Candiduria in the neutropenic patient should be treated with systemic antifungal therapy because

of the risk of systemic infection in this population.
In unstable patients with candidemia such as those with hypotension or hematogenously seeded deep organ infections, amphotericin B (1.0 mg/kg daily) should be
initiated. Acute disseminated candidiasis may occur during neutropenia and is characterized by hypotension, skeletal muscle involvement (typically causing severe
pain), multiorgan failure, and cutaneous lesions. We suggest adding 5-flucytosine in these settings for synergy ( Table 54-4). 5-flucytosine is also likely to be
advantageous in central nervous system (CNS) candidiasis because of its excellent cerebrospinal fluid penetration. Inotropic support and hemodynamic monitoring
may be necessary.

TABLE 54-4. Antifungal Agents Commonly Used in Patients with Cancer

The requirement for intravenous catheter removal in candidemia has never been evaluated in a randomized study. Early catheter removal may reduce the likelihood
of late complications by eliminating a potential nidus of ongoing candidemia. Removal of intravenous catheters in candidemic patients has been shown to reduce the
time to sterilization of the blood in nonneutropenic patients. 115 The opposing argument is that in patients who have received cytotoxic chemotherapy, candidemia is
likely to arise from defects in the gut mucosa rather than the catheter. 116 Most investigators in the consensus panel would remove nonsurgically implanted catheters,
but would attempt to sterilize surgically implanted catheters with antifungal treatment. 103 If the catheter is not immediately removed, we advise rotating antifungal
infusions through all ports to increase the likelihood of catheter sterilization. Clinical instability, lack of resolution of fever, and persistent candidemia after 1 to 2 days
of antifungal therapy are each indications to replace all catheter devices.
Chronic Disseminated Candidiasis
Chronic disseminated candidiasis typically affects the liver and spleen. During neutropenia, these organs, as well as kidneys, lungs, skin, bone, and other sites,
become seeded by Candida species in the blood stream (which may be undetected by blood culture). 117 The only symptom may be persistent fever. After resolution of
neutropenia, numerous target lesions in the liver and spleen become apparent by radiologic imaging, such as computed tomography (CT), ultrasonography, or
magnetic resonance imaging. A liver biopsy is required for a definitive diagnosis, but because the lesions are discrete, the biopsy result may be falsely negative. An
open or laparoscopic-guided liver biopsy is recommended if a percutaneous biopsy is nondiagnostic. Various acceptable therapeutic approaches exist. In stable
patients, fluconazole (400 to 800 mg daily) may be used. 113,114 Alternatively, amphotericin B (0.7 to 1.0 mg/kg daily) may be initially administered, followed by a
prolonged course of fluconazole once fever has resolved and the lesions are improved. Because lipid formulations of amphotericin B preferentially accumulate in the
reticuloendothelial system, a pharmacodynamic rationale exists for their use in refractory cases. Amphotericin B lipid complex (ABLC) has been used successfully in
the treatment of hepatosplenic candidiasis in children. 118
Hepatosplenic candidiasis per se is not a contraindication for subsequent antineoplastic myeloablative chemotherapy. 119 Patients in whom fever and lesions have
resolved with antifungal therapy can undergo further episodes of neutropenia without progression of the fungal infection if antifungal therapy is reinitiated during the
neutropenic periods. 119
ASPERGILLOSIS
Prolonged and persistent neutropenia is a critical risk factor for aspergillosis. 16 The more frequent use of allogeneic BMT for malignancy has expanded the risk factors
for aspergillosis. Wald et al. 120 conduced a case-control analysis of 158 cases of proven or probable cases of aspergillosis among BMT recipients. The onset of
infection was bimodal, with the first peak occurring at a mean of 16 days after transplant (before or shortly after engraftment) and the second peak occurring at a
mean of 96 days after transplant. Risk factors for late aspergillosis (after day 40 of transplantation) included age older than 18 years, diagnosis other than chronic
myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase, an unrelated donor, acute GVHD (grade 2 to 4), neutropenia, and corticosteroid use. Among autologous BMT recipients,
aspergillosis was most likely to occur during neutropenia and was rare after engraftment. In contrast, aspergillosis was more likely to occur after the first 40 days in
allogeneic transplant recipients. Other series from Europe 121 and Asia122 have also reported the predominance of aspergillosis cases occurring in the postengraftment
period in BMT recipients, with GVHD being an important risk factor. The reasons for the increased proportion of aspergillosis in the postengraftment period are likely
twofold: (1) a reduction in the neutropenic period as a result of myelopoietic growth factors and infusion of larger numbers of myeloid progenitors and (2) increased
proportion of unrelated donors and HLA-mismatched transplants, which predispose to GVHD.
Aspergillosis can involve virtually any organ in the immunocompromised host, but sinopulmonary disease is the most common. Alveolar macrophages constitute the
first line of host defense against aerosolized conidia. After germination, neutrophils are the dominant host defense arm against the hyphal stage. Invasive
aspergillosis in the neutropenic host may present as fever, sinus pain or congestion, cough, pleuritic chest pain, and hemoptysis. Erosion through a large central
blood vessel wall can lead to massive pulmonary hemorrhage and exsanguination. The radiographic appearance of pulmonary aspergillosis includes
bronchopneumonia, lobar consolidation, segmental pneumonia, nodular lesions resembling septic emboli, and cavitary lesions ( Fig. 54-2).

FIGURE 54-2. Computed tomographic scan of the chest in a neutropenic patient with invasive pulmonary infection by Aspergillus fumigatus. The lesion in the right
upper lobe consist of a hazy infiltrate surrounding a denser nodular lesion. This halo sign is most commonly associated with angioinvasive infection by Aspergillus
species. Other filamentous fungi and Pseudomonas aeruginosa may have a similar appearance.

The CNS is a common target site for hematogenously disseminated aspergillosis (see Central Nervous System Infection, later in this chapter). Gastrointestinal
aspergillosis usually coexists with pulmonary disease, but in rare instances it is the sole organ involved. 123 In an early study, involvement of the gastrointestinal tract
was documented at autopsy in approximately 50% of cases of disseminated aspergillosis. 123 The manifestations include abdominal pain, gastrointestinal infarction

with hemorrhage, perforation, and polymicrobial sepsis. Early diagnosis of isolated gastrointestinal aspergillosis followed by resection of the involved bowel and
systemic antifungal therapy may be life saving. Other sites of disseminated aspergillosis include the skin, heart, eye, bone, kidney, liver, and thyroid.
Isolation of an Aspergillus species from a sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage specimen should be presumed to represent invasive disease in neutropenic patients. 124 In
the study by Wald et al. 120 a mucosal isolate of an Aspergillus species had a positive predictive value of 60% for invasive disease among BMT recipients; during the
neutropenic period, the positive predictive value was 94%.
Early diagnosis of aspergillosis in highly immunocompromised patients remains difficult. Blood cultures are rarely positive, sputum and bronchoalveolar cultures have
approximately 50% sensitivity in focal pulmonary lesions, and definitive diagnosis often requires an invasive procedure and is usually only made when the disease is
advanced.
CT scanning of the chest may facilitate early detection of aspergillosis. A CT scan may show peripheral or subpleural nodules inapparent on plain chest radiographs.
The halo sign is a characteristic chest CT feature of angioinvasive organisms. 125 The hazy alveolar infiltrates appear to correspond to regions of ischemia and are
highly suggestive of invasive aspergillosis. 125 Ultrafast CT technology reduces the scanning time to as little as 5 minutes, thus permitting wider application to seriously
ill patients. Early recognition of pulmonary aspergillosis followed by intensive antifungal therapy and surgical resection of localized disease (see discussion later in
this section) has led to improved survival. 126
PCR-based detection of subclinical aspergillosis is a promising tool for early diagnosis. In a European study, 134 patients underwent at least two bronchoalveolar
lavages at the time of BMT, and PCR for Aspergillus species was performed.127 Of seven patients whose bronchoalveolar lavage was PCR positive and culture and
cytology were negative, five developed invasive pulmonary aspergillosis within the first 100 days of transplant. A larger study to prospectively evaluate the predictive
value of PCR screening of whole blood for Aspergillus species DNA among allogeneic BMT recipients is underway. A sensitive double-sandwich enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay for detection of the fungal cell wall constituent galactomannan has been developed. 128 Clinical trials are now essential to delineate which of
these diagnostic methods, or which combination, provides the optimal positive and negative predictive value for invasive disease among high-risk patients, and how
this information should be translated into a rational therapeutic algorithm.
Aspergillus fumigatus followed by Aspergillus flavus are the most common species causing invasive disease in neutropenic patients and after BMT. Therapy for
invasive aspergillosis in neutropenic patients and in BMT recipients involves high-dose conventional amphotericin B (1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg daily) or a lipid formulation of
amphotericin B. Aspergillus terreus is an emerging pathogen in this population that is notable for being resistant to amphotericin B. 129 In cases of invasive A terreus
infection, the third-generation triazole, voriconazole, may be of value based on in vitro sensitivity data. 129
Surgical excision of locally invasive disease, such as sinusitis, primary cutaneous lesions, intravitreal disease, or bone lesions should be performed. Removal of
infected intravenous and peritoneal dialysis catheters and silk sutures in bronchial stumps are also necessary components of therapy. In neutropenic patients and in
allogeneic BMT recipients, combined surgery and systemic antifungal therapy should be used in cases of apparent localized disease because of the risk of subclinical
dissemination.
The indications for and timing of thoracic surgery for aspergillosis are controversial. In postpneumonectomy patients, infection of the bronchial stump should be
débrided and sutures removed. Invasive pleural and pericardial aspergillosis should be treated with decortication and stripping. When possible, pulmonary
aspergillosis adjacent to major vessels should be surgically removed to avoid exsanguinating hemoptysis. In a retrospective series of patients with acute leukemia and
pulmonary filamentous mycosis (mostly caused by Aspergillus species), hemoptysis most commonly occurred shortly after resolution of neutropenia. 130
Patients who recover from an episode of invasive aspergillosis are at risk for relapse during a subsequent course of myeloablative chemotherapy. In the largest
series, a retrospective analysis was performed on 48 patients with definite or probable aspergillosis who subsequently were treated with BMT (77% allogeneic). 131 All
patients received systemic antifungal therapy, and approximately 40% underwent surgical resection as initial therapy. Forty-one of 48 (85%) patients received
secondary prophylaxis at the time of BMT; the regimens included itraconazole, amphotericin B (conventional and lipid formulations), and combinations of agents with
wide variability in dosage and duration. The overall incidence of relapse was 29% among patients receiving secondary prophylaxis and 57% among those who did
not. Fourteen of 16 (88%) patients who had relapses died. Other smaller series have also shown that systemic antifungal therapy (with and without surgical resection)
of primary fungal infection followed by secondary prophylaxis can suppress reactivation in the majority of patients subsequently undergoing additional myeloablative
chemotherapy or BMT.132,133
We advise using high-dose amphotericin B (1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg daily) or a lipid formulation of amphotericin B for secondary prophylaxis of invasive aspergillosis during
neutropenia after intensive chemotherapy for leukemia or preparative regimens for BMT. Oral itraconazole is more suitable as a maintenance regimen after resolution
of neutropenia and mucositis. Antifungal prophylaxis should be reinitiated preemptively during GVHD. Surgical resection does not obviate the need for secondary
antifungal prophylaxis during subsequent chemotherapy given the likelihood of residual foci of disease not apparent on diagnostic imaging.
An additional component in treating aspergillosis is reversal or amelioration of immunosuppression. In patients with neutropenia and disseminated aspergillosis,
resolution of neutropenia is critical for survival. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) may
accelerate myelopoiesis and reduce the neutropenic period as well as augment neutrophil activity. Use of these agents for treatment of serious fungal infections is
limited so far to case reports. Corticosteroid therapy should be reduced or discontinued if at all feasible. Granulocyte transfusions may stabilize progressive invasive
aspergillosis refractory to antifungal chemotherapy and allow more time until recovery from neutropenia (see Granulocyte Transfusions, later in this chapter).
ZYGOMYCOSIS
Risk factors for zygomycosis (also termed mucormycosis) include diabetic ketoacidosis, protein-calorie malnutrition, iron overload, and prolonged neutropenia. 134
Patients receiving potent myeloablative chemotherapy for leukemia are at risk for locally invasive as well as disseminated disease.
Zygomycosis typically manifests as rhinocerebral or pulmonary disease after inhalation of spores. In rhinocerebral disease, fever, facial pain, and headache are
common findings. Contiguous extension may lead to orbital involvement with proptosis and extraocular muscle paresis, involvement of hard palate, and spread to the
brain. An eschar over the palate is suggestive of zygomycosis, but other filamentous fungi can produce similar findings in highly immunocompromised persons.
Occasionally, isolated primary cutaneous disease may follow minor trauma. Injection drug users may inject contaminating spores directly into the blood stream and
may present with isolated space-occupying lesions of the brain or other organs. Therapy for zygomycosis involves high-dose amphotericin B (conventional or lipid
formulations) plus early and aggressive surgical débridement. Itraconazole is not active against Zygomycetes species.
CRYPTOCOCCUS NEOFORMANS
Among patients with cancer, lymphoreticular malignancy and corticosteroid therapy appear to be major risk factors. 135 Host defense against cryptococcal infection is
dependent on T-cell immunity. Isolated neutropenia is rarely associated with cryptococcal infection. Immunoglobulins directed against capsular epitopes and
complement facilitate phagocytosis of the organism and likely play a role in host defense. 136,137 The principal portal of entry of this organism is via inhalation. Spread
to the blood and then to the CNS is a prerequisite for subsequent development of cryptococcal meningitis.
Although meningitis is the most common presentation of cryptococcal infection, other manifestations include primary pneumonia, fungemia, and cutaneous and
visceral dissemination. In the pre–acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) era, patients who died early during therapy were more likely to have rapidly
progressive infection, cerebrospinal fluid with high opening pressure, a low glucose level, less than 20 leukocytes/µL, a positive india ink preparation, culture of
cryptococci from extraneural sites, and high titers of cryptococcal antigen in serum and cerebrospinal fluid. 135 A more recent study of non-AIDS–associated
cryptococcal disease showed that mortality was highest among persons with malignancy. 138 Additional CNS complications include development of a mass lesion,
obstructive hydrocephalus requiring shunting, 139 and vision loss. Vision loss may be a consequence of endophthalmitis, a space-occupying lesion in the visual
pathway, direct invasion of the optic nerve (which may cause vision loss over several hours), and as a consequence of elevated intracranial pressure. 140
Optimal therapy for non-AIDS–associated cryptococcal disease is not well defined. In a classic study, Bennett et al. 141 showed that the combination of amphotericin B
plus 5-flucytosine for 6 weeks was superior to amphotericin B alone administered for 10 weeks in non-AIDS–associated cryptococcal meningitis. In AIDS-associated

cryptococcal meningitis, the optimal regimen currently is amphotericin B (0.7 mg/kg daily) plus 5-flucytosine (100 mg/kg daily) for the first 2 weeks, followed by
life-long maintenance fluconazole therapy (400 mg daily). 142,143 This is an appropriate regimen to use in non-AIDS–associated cryptococcal infection in the absence of
modern randomized trials. In neutropenic patients, reduction of the dosage of 5-flucytosine may be considered to avoid delay in myeloid recovery. Because
fluconazole is well tolerated, continuing therapy with this agent for several months (or longer if intensive immunosuppressive therapy is continued) is reasonable. In a
retrospective series, fluconazole was as efficacious as amphotericin B as initial therapy for non-AIDS–associated cryptococcal disease. 138 Further studies are
required to evaluate initial therapy with fluconazole in different populations with cryptococcal disease.
EMERGING OPPORTUNISTIC FUNGAL PATHOGENS
Trichosporon Species
Trichosporon species typically infect profoundly neutropenic patients and those receiving corticosteroid therapy. Acute disseminated trichosporonosis typically
manifests with refractory fungemia, funguria, cutaneous lesions, renal failure, pulmonary lesions, and chorioretinitis. 144,145 Disseminated trichosporonosis may yield a
false-positive cryptococcal latex antigen test result because of cross-reactivity with the polysaccharide capsule of C neoformans.146 This cross-reactivity may be
clinically important because patients treated with high-dose corticosteroid therapy are at risk for both infections, and C neoformans typically responds to amphotericin
B therapy, whereas Trichosporon species are usually resistant.
In vitro and experimental infections indicate that most Trichosporon species are inhibited, but not killed, by achievable serum levels of conventional amphotericin B. 147
Fluconazole has superior activity in experimental infections and is recommended as the preferred antifungal agent. 148,149 Combination therapy with high-dose
amphotericin B (1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg daily) and fluconazole (800 mg daily or 12 mg/kg daily in children) may have synergy against some strains based on murine models
of trichosporonosis. 148
Blastoschizomyces capitatus (formerly Trichosporon capitatus) usually presents as a chronic disseminated infection, resembling chronic candidiasis. 150 A CT scan
may show lesions suggestive of hepatosplenic candidiasis, and definitive diagnosis requires either a positive blood culture result or biopsy. CNS involvement is also
observed. B capitatus does not cross-react with the cryptococcal latex agglutination test.
Malassezia Species
Malassezia furfur is often associated with lipid parenteral nutrition administered through a central venous catheter in immunocompromised patients or premature
infants. 151 Clinical manifestations, including persistent fungemia, pulmonary infiltrates, and thrombocytopenia, occur in premature infants but not in adults. Blood
culture recovery is enhanced by addition of olive oil or other long-chain fatty acids to the culture plates.
M furfur is often refractory to amphotericin B therapy. Fluconazole therapy is probably the drug of choice, but discontinuation of lipid infusions and removal of the
central catheter are important for successful resolution of fungemia. In neutropenic patients and patients treated with corticosteroids, a folliculitis resembling
disseminated candidiasis may occur. This infection is a localized process and does not imply disseminated infection. Malassezia pachydermatis is a less common
cause of infection than M furfur and has similar clinical manifestations.
Dematiaceous (Dark-Walled) Molds
Dark-walled molds contain melanin in their cell walls that imparts a brown or olive-green pigment in culture. In immunocompromised patients, soft tissue infection,
sinusitis, CNS infection, pneumonia, fungemia, and disseminated disease are observed. Subcutaneous infection is most frequently caused by Alternaria species.152
Bipolaris, Cladophialophora (Xylohypha or Cladosporium) bantiana, Wangiella, and Dactylaria species have strong predispositions to cause CNS disease. 153
Definitive diagnosis of phaeohyphomycosis requires documentation of fungal invasion and recovery of the mold from culture of tissue specimens. Positive results of
Fontana-Masson staining of tissue specimens, which detects phenolic compounds, including melanin, are suggestive, but not diagnostic, of phaeohyphomycosis. 154
Disseminated infection by Bipolaris species may yield a positive blood culture result.
Therapy in immunocompromised patients involves surgical excision of localized disease when feasible and systemic antifungal therapy. Amphotericin B (1.0 to 1.5
mg/kg daily) is standard initial therapy. Sensitivity to amphotericin B is variable, and clinical failures have been reported. Itraconazole has been shown to be effective
in cases of phaeohyphomycosis refractory to amphotericin B. 249 Our practice has been to use amphotericin B plus itraconazole as initial therapy for
phaeohyphomycosis in severely immunosuppressed patients, followed by prolonged itraconazole maintenance therapy once stabilization has been achieved.
Monitoring of serum itraconazole levels is necessary to document oral absorption.
Fusarium Species
Fusarium species are soil saprophytes that have been associated with soft tissue infection, onychomycosis, and keratitis in immunocompetent hosts. With the
widespread use of intensive antineoplastic therapy and BMT, more than 150 cases of invasive and disseminated fusariosis have been reported, most within the
1990s.155 The clinical findings and histologic appearance may be indistinguishable from aspergillosis. In the absence of a definitive culture diagnosis, the likelihood of
infection by a Fusarium species is substantially increased by the presence of disseminated cutaneous lesions and isolation of a mold from blood culture.
Boutati and Anaissie 155 made important observations about invasive and disseminated fusariosis in a retrospective review of 43 cases occurring in patients with
hematologic malignancies at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. Most cases of disseminated fusariosis were diagnosed during neutropenia, and a high risk of relapse
was associated with subsequent myelosuppression. Similar to aspergillosis, a bimodal distribution of fusariosis occurred in BMT recipients (before and after myeloid
engraftment). The skin was identified as an important portal of entry. Initial localized manifestations included onychomycosis, paronychia, and cellulitis. Early
identification of localized skin disease and surgical débridement may be life saving. Inhalation of spores is another major portal of entry, leading to fungal sinusitis and
pneumonia.
Survival from disseminated fusariosis is critically dependent on resolution of neutropenia. Despite the poor response, amphotericin B (1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg daily) or a lipid
formulation (greater than or equal to 5 mg/kg/d) is standard therapy. We use G-CSF and granulocyte transfusions in combination with antifungal therapy to try to
control the infection until myeloid recovery occurs.
Scedosporium Species
Scedosporium apiospermum (Pseudallescheria boydii) and Scedosporium prolificans are the principal pathogenic species in the genus Scedosporium. In neutropenic
patients, P boydii is a virulent pathogen, which clinically and histologically resembles aspergillosis. Invasion of blood vessels leading to infarction is common. P boydii
causes sinopulmonary disease, endophthalmitis, and dissemination to the CNS. The infection can also spread directly from the skin to bone and joint. Establishing a
culture diagnosis of P boydii is important because of its frequent resistance to amphotericin B. P boydii is usually susceptible to azoles, and in vitro studies and some
clinical experience suggest that the combination of amphotericin B plus an azole (e.g., fluconazole, itraconazole, or miconazole) may provide enhanced activity. 156
Surgical resection of localized lesions is strongly advised. S prolificans causes a similar spectrum of disease as P boydii and is generally resistant to all antifungal
agents.
ENDEMIC DIMORPHIC FUNGI
Endemic dimorphic fungi are so named because of their characteristic geographic distribution. These organisms include Histoplasma capsulatum, Coccidioides
immitis, Blastomyces dermatitidis, and Penicillium marneffei (P marneffei is endemic in Southeast Asia). These fungi are dimorphic, existing in nature in the mycelial
stage, and convert to yeast stage at body temperature. Because some of these pathogens may be quiescent during the initial infection and only manifest clinically
during a subsequent period of severe depression or cell-mediated immunity, a detailed travel history is essential.
Endemic mycoses in the central United States include histoplasmosis and blastomycosis. In the immunocompetent host, inhalation of Histoplasma microconidia is

typically asymptomatic, but may manifest with acute fever, pulmonary infiltrates, and hypoxia. Immunocompromised patients have a higher risk of disseminated
histoplasmosis involving the liver, spleen, lymph nodes, bone marrow, adrenal glands, mucocutaneous tissues, gastrointestinal tract, and CNS. The chest radiograph
may show a miliary reticulonodular appearance, suggestive of tuberculosis. An acute sepsis syndrome with hypotension and disseminated intravascular coagulation,
adrenal crisis, and meningitis are additional potentially lethal complications.
A rapid diagnosis of histoplasmosis can be made by Giemsa staining of a peripheral blood smear of bone marrow aspirate demonstrating characteristic intracellular
yeast forms. Lysis centrifugation is the preferred blood culture system. Antigen detection from blood and urine is a sensitive and specific method in disseminated
disease. 157 Antibody detection may also be useful, but false-negative results may occur in immunocompromised patients. Biopsy of specimens may show intracellular
or narrow budding yeasts suggestive of the diagnosis, which should be confirmed by culture. In the immunocompromised patient, histoplasmosis should be treated
with high-dose amphotericin B (1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg of body weight daily). Prolonged therapy with itraconazole may be initiated after stabilization of disease and should
probably be continued for the duration of immunosuppression.
Blastomyces dermatitides may present as an acute pulmonary infection resembling bacterial pneumonia, or as a chronic infection resembling tuberculosis or lung
cancer. Extrapulmonary manifestations include involvement of bone, prostate, and CNS. Skin disease resulting from direct inoculation includes large ulcerative and
verrucous lesions.
Coccidioides immitis is endemic in the southwestern United States. In normal persons, infection is usually symptomatic or self-limited. In patients with compromised
cell-mediated immunity, C immitis is likely to be more virulent. In an early review of C immitis infection in immunocompromised patients, disseminated disease
occurred in almost one-half of the cases and was associated with a high mortality. 158 Progression of infection was often fulminant, and evidence of pulmonary disease
frequently occurred after signs of dissemination manifested. 158 Diagnosis is most easily established by serology (in systemic disease) or demonstration of
pathognomonic spherules in sputum or tissue samples. Coccidioidomycosis can involve virtually any organ in disseminated disease, but has a particular trophism for
bone and the CNS. Therapy for disseminated disease generally requires amphotericin B followed by maintenance fluconazole. Intracisternal amphotericin B should be
added in cases of meningitis.
ANTIFUNGAL AGENTS
Azoles
The antifungal activity of azoles principally results from inhibition of the enzyme, lanosterol 14-a-demethylase, which converts lanosterol to ergosterol, a critical
component of the fungal cell membrane. These agents also inhibit the cytochrome P-450–dependent enzymes of the fungal respiratory chain. One of the potential
toxicities of these compounds is that, to varying degrees, they inhibit mammalian hepatic cytochrome P-450 mixed function oxidases (e.g., 3A4, 3C9, and 3C19),
which are involved in the metabolism of numerous drugs. Thus, the potential exists for serious and even life-threatening drug–drug interactions resulting from toxic
levels of drugs metabolized by cytochrome P-450 system when they are administered concurrently with the antifungal azoles. The triazoles fluconazole and
itraconazole are the most commonly used azoles in patients with cancer (see Table 54-4).
Fluconazole
Fluconazole has activity against yeasts, dermatophytes, and dimorphic fungi, but not against Aspergillus species and other filamentous fungi. It has a favorable
pharmacokinetic profile. The oral bioavailability of fluconazole exceeds 90%, and absorption is not affected by food or gastric pH. Fluconazole effectively penetrates
the CNS, making it a valuable drug for maintenance therapy for cryptococcal and coccidioidal meningitis. The elimination half-life is approximately 30 hours.
Drug–drug interactions with fluconazole appear to be less severe than with itraconazole and ketoconazole.
The minimum dose of fluconazole for candidemia or invasive candidiasis is 400 mg daily in adults or 8 to 10 mg/kg/d in children. Dosage reduction is required in
patients with renal impairment (creatinine clearance less than 50 mL/min). Clinical experience has been gained using dosages of 800 mg or greater, 159 and several
investigators recommend using such a dosage in patients with invasive candidiasis until control of infection is achieved. 103
One of the major uses of fluconazole in patients with cancer is as a prophylactic agent. In BMT recipients, two double-blind, placebo-controlled trials have shown that
prophylactic fluconazole controlled yeast colonization and reduced the rate of mucosal candidiasis and invasive Candida infections. 160,161 The use of empiric
amphotericin B for prolonged neutropenic fever also was delayed. A reduction in mortality was noted in one of the studies. 161 In an autopsy series of BMT recipients
performed at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, fluconazole prophylaxis was associated with a reduction in candidal infections, most notably in hepatic
candidiasis, but infections by Aspergillus species were increased. 162
Fluconazole prophylaxis has produced mixed results in patients with leukemia receiving chemotherapy. In one randomized study, fluconazole prophylaxis was
associated with a reduction in skin and mucosal infection and delay in empiric amphotericin B, but with no significant difference in invasive candidiasis or mortality in
comparison with the placebo arm. 163 In another study, fluconazole prophylaxis reduced fungal colonization, invasive infection, and fungal infection-related mortality in
patients with leukemia receiving intensive cytotoxic chemotherapy. 164 The major concern with prophylactic fluconazole is the emergence of resistant Candida
species165 (see Candidemia, earlier in this chapter).
Itraconazole
Itraconazole has antifungal activity against yeasts, dermatophytes, and dimorphic fungi, and in contrast to fluconazole, is also active against Aspergillus species and
dark-walled molds. Itraconazole is not active against Fusarium species or the agents of zygomycosis.
Itraconazole is available in oral form (capsules and solution) but its oral bioavailability can be erratic. The parenteral solution of itraconazole has been made available
in the United States. However, little is known about its use in neutropenic hosts or BMT recipients. Itraconazole is soluble only at an acidic pH, and thus absorption is
compromised in patients with achlorhydria and in those patients taking antacids or H 2-receptor antagonists. Absorption is enhanced when itraconazole is taken with
food or an acidic beverage. The cyclodextrin preparation of itraconazole is in solution form and has approximately a twofold increased bioavailability compared with
that of itraconazole capsules. Because of the inconsistent absorption, plasma itraconazole levels should be monitored. There is no established target plasma
itraconazole level that has been clearly associated with clinical response. In a cyclosporin-methylprednisolone animal model, plasma itraconazole levels were shown
to correlate with microbiologic clearance of experimental aspergillosis. 166 Based on such studies, we recommend that the plasma itraconazole level should be at least
4 µg/mL by bioassay or 1 µg/mL by high-pressure liquid chromatography in the setting of invasive fungal infection.
Itraconazole is approved as a second-line agent for treatment of aspergillosis in patients intolerant of amphotericin B. In a nonrandomized, compassionate use
protocol, itraconazole had comparable efficacy compared with amphotericin B in the treatment of invasive aspergillosis in a variety of patient populations. 167,168 We
advise that amphotericin B (conventional or lipid formulation) be the initial agent of choice for invasive mold infections in neutropenic or otherwise severely
immunosuppressed patients with cancer. The bioavailability of the oral preparation of itraconazole is unreliable, making it more suitable as a maintenance regimen
after control of infection has been achieved. Randomized, prospective studies are required to delineate the optimal role of parenteral itraconazole in neutropenic
patients and BMT recipients.
Third-Generation Azoles
In view of the lack of antifungal activity of fluconazole against filamentous fungi, the increasing frequency of fluconazole-resistant Candida species, and the
inconsistent oral absorption of itraconazole, newer azoles have been developed to overcome some of these limitations. Voriconazole, posaconazole (SCH 56592),
and ravuconazole (BMS 207147) are third-generation triazoles that are currently being evaluated in clinical trials. These agents can be administered orally or
intravenously and have activity against Candida species (including species that are resistant to fluconazole), Aspergillus species, dematiaceous molds, Fusarium
species, and dimorphic fungi. 169
AMPHOTERICIN B. Amphotericin B is a member of the polyene group of antifungal agents whose principal mechanism of action is binding to ergosterol, a sterol present

in fungal cell membranes. Amphotericin B is active against the majority of fungal pathogens. However, in vitro and clinical resistance to amphotericin B has been
encountered in a variety of pathogenic fungi afflicting patients with cancer, including isolates of Candida lusitaniae, Trichosporon beigelii, Pseudallescheria boydii,

Fusarium species, and Aspergillus terreus. High dosages (1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg daily) of conventional amphotericin B are required for invasive filamentous fungal
infections.
Multiple toxicities are observed with conventional amphotericin B. Acute infusion-related events include fever, rigors, myalgias, nausea, and, less commonly,
hypotension, flushing, and bronchospasm. Fever and rigors may result from release of IL-1 and TNF-a from monocytes 170,171 and tend to be most severe during the
initial infusions and abate with subsequent administrations. Infusion-related reactions can be lessened with slowing the infusion rate and premedication with
acetaminophen, antiemetics, low-dose hydrocortisone (25 to 50 mg in adults), and meperidine (reduces rigors).
The principal long-term adverse effect of amphotericin B is nephrotoxicity. Azotemia occurs in a large proportion of patients receiving amphotericin B, and
nephrotoxicity may be compounded by concomitant administration of other nephrotoxic agents such as CSA and aminoglycosides. The azotemia in part results from
an increase in tubular glomerular feedback leading to a reduction in glomerular filtration. Administration of normal saline (2 to 4 mEq/kg) before amphotericin can
prevent or ameliorate this physiologic azotemia. Long-term administration of amphotericin B is almost invariably associated with renal potassium and magnesium
wasting, requiring aggressive electrolyte replacement, often for weeks after the drug has been stopped. Renal tubular acidosis is also observed. Normochromic
normocytic anemia likely mediated by suppression of erythropoietin synthesis is another common toxicity. 172
The toxicity of amphotericin B not only contributes to patient morbidity, but also limits the maximum dosages that can be administered. Lipid formulations of
amphotericin B have significantly less nephrotoxicity and, in the case of liposomal amphotericin B, reduced infusion-related toxicity. These lipid formulations (in
addition to the newer broad-spectrum azoles and antifungal peptides) are therefore highly promising drugs that are evolving as important alternatives to conventional
amphotericin B. Three lipid preparations of amphotericin B have been licensed: liposomal amphotericin B (LAMB or AmBisome), ABLC, and amphotericin B colloidal
dispersion (ABCD). These lipid preparations have different biochemical and pharmacokinetic properties, which have been discussed in detail elsewhere. 169,173 All
have reduced nephrotoxicity compared with that of conventional amphotericin B.
LIPOSOMAL AMPHOTERICIN B. LAMB. is the only true liposomal preparation of amphotericin B, consisting of unilamellar spheric vesicles. Walsh et al.

174

compared LAMB
(343 patients) with conventional amphotericin B (344 patients) in neutropenic cancer patients with fever persisting for 5 days or more in a prospective randomized
double-blind multicenter study of empiric antifungal therapy. Standard dosages of the two regimens were used (LAMB at 3 mg/kg daily and conventional amphotericin
B at 0.6 mg/kg daily), and dose reductions were allowed in cases of renal insufficiency. The liposomal preparation was associated with a reduced incidence of
nephrotoxicity, and infusion-related side effects, including fever, chills, hypotension, hypertension, and hypoxia. Fewer proven breakthrough invasive fungal infections
(11 proven, six probable) occurred in the LAMB arm in comparison with 30 (27 proven, three probable) in the conventional amphotericin B arm ( P = .009). A
significantly lower incidence of breakthrough candidemia occurred in the LAMB versus the conventional amphotericin B arm 93 versus 12 patients, respectively ( P =
.03). Survival at 7 days after study drug initiation was approximately 90% in both groups. A European study of LAMB versus conventional amphotericin B found
reduced nephrotoxicity in the LAMB arm.174a In a prospective, randomized trial comparing LAMB (3 or 5 mg/kg daily) with ABLC (5 mg/kg daily) as empiric therapy for
persistent febrile neutropenia, patients receiving LAMB had significantly reduced infusion-related toxicity and nephrotoxicity. 175
AMPHOTERICIN B LIPID COMPLEX. ABLC derives its name from being a complex of two phospholipids arranged in a ribbon-like structure. In the largest series, ABLC (5

mg/kg/d) was evaluated on an emergency use basis in 556 patients with definite or probable invasive mycosis in which the infection was refractory or the patient was
intolerant to standard antifungal agents. 176 Among patients with significant azotemia at baseline, the mean serum creatinine improved over the course of ABLC
therapy. Among 291 confirmed cases of fungal infection, response to ABLC occurred in 55 of 130 (42%) cases of aspergillosis, 28 of 42 (67%) cases of disseminated
candidiasis, 17 of 24 (71%) cases of zygomycosis, and 9 of 11 (82%) cases of fusariosis. Open-label ABLC was also effective in an emergency use study of children
with invasive fungal infections. 174 In a prospective study comparing ABLC with conventional amphotericin B as treatment for hematogenous and invasive candidiasis,
the two agents had similar efficacy, but ABLC was associated with reduced nephrotoxicity. 177
AMPHOTERICIN B COLLOIDAL DISPERSION. ABCD. is a complex of amphotericin B and cholesteryl sulfate forming a disc-like structure. In a dose-escalation study in BMT

recipients with invasive fungal infections, infusion-related toxicities occurred in approximately 70% of patients; however, nephrotoxicity was not observed. 178 ABCD (4
mg/kg daily) was shown to be safe and to not exacerbate renal insufficiency in a retrospective series of 220 BMT recipients with invasive fungal infection. 179,180 In an
open label compassionate use protocol in patients with invasive mycosis who either failed or were intolerant to conventional amphotericin B, the clinical response rate
was approximately 50%, and nephrotoxicity was uncommon.179 In a retrospective study, 82 patients with proven or probable aspergillosis treated with ABCD had
increased survival (50% vs. 28%) and reduced nephrotoxicity compared with historical controls treated with amphotericin B. 181 ABCD as empiric therapy for prolonged
neutropenic fever was associated with less nephrotoxicity but a greater frequency of infusion-related hypoxia and chills compared with conventional amphotericin B. 182
WHEN TO CONSIDER A LIPID FORMULATION OF AMPHOTERICIN B. Clinical trials and a growing clinical experience suggest that lipid formulations of amphotericin B have

comparable efficacy and reduced nephrotoxicity compared with conventional amphotericin B. However, the majority of treatment protocols for definite or probable
invasive mycosis are limited by being open label and uncontrolled or using historical controls. The high cost of the lipid formulations of amphotericin B is an important
consideration. However, in a retrospective study of 239 immunosuppressed patients receiving conventional amphotericin B for aspergillosis, serum creatinine greater
than 2.5 mg/dL and BMT (autologous and allogeneic) were independently associated with subsequent requirement for dialysis and a higher mortality. 183 Seen in this
light, lipid formulations of amphotericin B may reduce morbidity and cost in select patient groups.
A reasonable approach is to use a lipid preparation of amphotericin B as initial therapy when baseline renal insufficiency exists (e.g., creatinine clearance less than
50 mL/min) or a concomitant nephrotoxic agent is used (e.g., aminoglycoside, cyclosporin, foscarnet). Progressive deterioration of renal function despite adequate
saline loading and severe infusion-related toxicities, such as high fever, rigors, and myalgias, inadequately controlled by premedication regimens clearly justify the
use of a lipid preparation of amphotericin B. If maximal dosages of conventional amphotericin B do not adequately control infection, a lipid formulation may be
considered as a salvage regimen. In the setting of invasive mycotic infections, the maximum recommended dosages of lipid formulations should be used.
Echinocandins
A large number of naturally produced antibacterial and antifungal peptides have been characterized. 24 These antimicrobial peptides have been isolated from
mammals, amphibians, insects, and bacterial and fungal species. Antifungal peptides have two principal modes of action: (1) direct damage to the fungal membrane
structure and (2) inhibition of synthesis of cell wall constituents. The latter group can in turn be divided into inhibitors of chitin and glucan synthesis.
The echinocandins are a family of cyclic lipopeptides that are noncompetitive inhibitors of (1,3)-b-D-glucan synthase, an enzyme complex that forms glucan polymers
in fungal cell walls. Echinocandins have a broad spectrum of activity against Candida and Aspergillus species and P carinii. Three echinocandins are leading
candidates for clinical trials: caspofungin (MK-0991), LY303366, and FK463. In a study of 400 blood stream isolates of Candida species, echinocandins were active
against all isolates, including those that were resistant to fluconazole or itraconazole. 184 Echinocandins were effective in animal models of disseminated candidiasis
and aspergillosis. 185,186
Echinocandins have been used successfully in AIDS-associated mucosal and esophageal candidiasis. 187 Currently, caspofungin (Merck) and FK463 (Fujisawa Health
Care) are being evaluated in phase III studies of hematogenous candidiasis and as prophylaxis in BMT recipients, respectively. Other echinocandin agents are in
preclinical stages of development.

VIRAL INFECTIONS
HERPES VIRUSES
The herpes viruses are the most important viral pathogens in patients with cancer. Pathogens in this group include HSV 1 and 2, varicella zoster virus (VZV), CMV,
EBV, and human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6). These DNA viruses establish a latent phase after primary infection, in which the viral genome resides in target cells for the
lifetime of the host, with the potential to reactivate. Host defense against these viruses is dependent on viral-specific helper and cytotoxic T lymphocytes, and thus
both the likelihood of reactivation and the severity of disease are augmented during profound T-cell immunosuppression. Table 54-5 summarizes common antiviral
agents used in persons with cancer (see reference 188 for an excellent review).

TABLE 54-5. Antiviral Agents Commonly Used in Immunocompromised Patients with Cancer

Herpes Simplex Virus
HSV differs from other members of the herpes virus group by predominantly affecting patients during profound neutropenia. Among seropositive patients, the
incidence of HSV reactivation is approximately 70% to 80% after induction chemotherapy for leukemia 189 or conditioning for BMT 190 in seropositive patients. Among
BMT recipients, HSV disease is most likely to occur within the first few weeks, but may occur in later stages during intense immunosuppression. Oropharyngeal HSV
(usually caused by HSV-1) during neutropenia may be severe, causing gingival disease, stomatitis, and cheilitis, clinically indistinguishable from mucositis after
cytotoxic chemotherapy. An oral swab culture for HSV detects viral shedding, suggesting that HSV is contributing to the mucosal disease. Local spread of HSV may
cause esophagitis, and aspiration of mucosal HSV may occasionally lead to tracheitis and pneumonia. Documentation of pulmonary involvement requires a biopsy
because respiratory secretions may be contaminated by oral mucosal HSV. Disseminated HSV disease may involve the skin abdominal organs (most notably,
necrotizing hepatitis) and brain. HSV-2 disease is more likely to cause genital and anal disease.
Diagnosis of HSV disease is made by culture, by biopsy material, or both showing characteristic inclusions with positive immunohistochemistry. In patients with
mucosal disease, it is safest to treat with intravenous acyclovir (5 mg/kg every 8 hours), switching to an oral regimen when the disease is abating. Milder HSV disease
can be treated initially with an oral regimen (famciclovir, 500 mg three times a day, or valacyclovir, 1 g three times a day) under close observation. Disseminated HSV
disease should be treated with intravenous acyclovir (10 mg/kg every 8 hours). Acyclovir prophylaxis during intensive myeloablative chemotherapy for acute
leukemia189 and during the early period of BMT 191 markedly reduces the incidence of HSV.
Cytomegalovirus and Prevention of Cytomegalovirus Disease
CMV is the most serious of the viral pathogens in BMT recipients, with seropositive recipients at the greatest risk of developing CMV disease. Before the widespread
adoption of prophylaxis against CMV, approximately 50% of seropositive transplant recipients developed CMV disease. Seronegative recipients may acquire primary
CMV infection from the bone marrow allograft from a seropositive donor or from infected blood products.
CMV disease most commonly occurs in the postengraftment period, between days 30 and 100 of transplantation. However, disease after day 100 is well documented.
In patients with GVHD requiring intensive immunosuppressive therapy, T-cell immunity is suppressed, and the risk for CMV disease is consequently increased. 192
Antilymphocyte antibody preparations profoundly reduce the number of circulating T cells and likely further increase the risk of CMV reactivation. CMV disease is far
less frequent in autologous BMT recipients, but can be lethal. CD34-selected autologous stem cell transplantation is associated with a greater risk of CMV disease
than conventional nonselected peripheral stem cell transplantation. 193 The period of risk in autologous transplantation is generally confined to the first 3 months,
corresponding to the period of reconstitution of T-cell immunity. 193
CMV infection, either primary or reactivated, can have protean manifestations in the BMT recipient, ranging from asymptomatic viral shedding, to a self-limited
mononucleosis-like syndrome, to life-threatening organ disease. Pulmonary disease typically manifests as an interstitial pneumonitis resembling PCP, associated with
hypoxia and progression to respiratory failure. A definitive diagnosis of CMV pneumonitis requires a compatible clinical syndrome plus either the histologic
documentation of characteristic CMV inclusions within parenchymal tissue or intracellular inclusions within epithelial cells obtained by bronchoalveolar lavage.
Because CMV can be shed from pulmonary secretions without causing invasive disease, simple recovery of CMV from pulmonary secretions by culture, PCR, or
antigen detection studies should not be considered evidence of CMV disease. However, in an allogeneic transplant recipient with a compatible chest radiograph, such
documentation of CMV infection in the absence of cytologic or histologic evidence of disease should prompt anti-CMV therapy given the high likelihood of CMV
disease in this setting. Both infectious and noninfectious processes may masquerade as, or occur in addition to, pulmonary CMV disease. In one study of late CMV
pneumonia (occurring after day 100 of transplantation), approximately one-half of the cases were associated with concurrent pulmonary infections, including P
aeruginosa, Legionella, Aspergillus species, Mycobacteria species, Nocardia species, toxoplasmosis, and respiratory viruses. 194 Therefore, diffuse interstitial disease
in a BMT recipient should be evaluated early with bronchoalveolar lavage, and if feasible, transbronchial biopsy (see Pulmonary Infiltrates, later in this chapter).
Treatment of CMV pneumonia consists of ganciclovir (5 mg/kg every 12 hours) plus immunoglobulin (normal or CMV hyperimmune). The expected mortality is
between 30% and 50%, which is significantly improved compared with series in which ganciclovir alone was used. 195
CMV disease can occur at any location within the gastrointestinal tract, although esophagitis and colitis are the most common sites. In the esophagus, ulcerations
resembling HSV or candidal esophagitis occur. Differentiation of CMV from these causes relies on biopsy or cytology. CMV colitis is associated with abdominal pain
and diarrhea. CMV involvement of enteric vessels may result in hemorrhage and infarction. However, in a randomized study, treatment of CMV gastroenteritis with
ganciclovir produced similar results as placebo. 196
CMV hepatitis should be considered in the setting of fever and elevations of liver transaminase enzymes. Other potential viral etiologies include HSV-1 and -2,
hepatitis viruses, and EBV. A liver biopsy documenting CMV inclusions definitively establishes the diagnosis.
Less common sites of CMV disease in BMT recipients include pancreas, brain, spinal cord (transverse myelitis), and adrenals. CMV retinitis, the most common
complication in patients with AIDS, is rare in transplant recipients. A CMV syndrome is associated with fever, pancytopenia, and CMV viremia and may precede the
development of organ disease.
Because of the high mortality associated with CMV disease, much effort has been focused on prevention. CMV-seronegative blood transplant recipients should
receive only CMV-seronegative blood products or leukocyte-depleted products to avoid primary CMV infection. The incidence of CMV infection in CMV-seronegative
transplant recipients who had CMV-seronegative donors and were given only CMV-seronegative blood products was approximately 5% in three separate
studies. 197,198 and 199 Use of CMV-seronegative blood products likely reduces the frequency of CMV infection in cases of CMV-seronegative recipients and seropositive
donors, although the magnitude of protection varies widely with different series. 197,198 and 199
Reactivation of latent CMV infection after transplantation occurs in approximately 70% of seropositive recipients who do not receive antiviral prophylaxis. Antiviral
agents have been used successfully to reduce the rate of CMV disease. The following two preventive approaches have been evaluated in allogeneic BMT
recipients.195
1. Prophylaxis: antiviral agents are administered to all CMV-seropositive BMT recipients (CMV-seronegative recipients receiving seropositive bone marrow were
also candidates for antiviral prophylaxis in some studies).
2. Preemptive therapy: initiation of antiviral agents after detection of asymptomatic CMV infection by screening cultures or molecular detection methods.
Offering anti-CMV prophylaxis to all seropositive allogeneic transplant recipients has important advantages and shortcomings. In two studies, acyclovir prophylaxis
was associated with increased survival, but the rates of CMV reactivation and disease were fairly high. 200,201 In vitro, ganciclovir, an acyclic nucleoside analog of
guanosine, is approximately 50 times more active than acyclovir against CMV. 202 Two randomized placebo-controlled studies of ganciclovir prophylaxis for
CMV-seropositive allogeneic transplant recipients produced similar results. 197,203 Ganciclovir prophylaxis was highly effective at suppressing CMV during the early

transplant period, but was associated with higher rates of neutropenia, bacterial and opportunistic infections, and late CMV disease. Ganciclovir prophylaxis did not
lead to an improvement in survival.
Nguyen et al.194 retrospectively reviewed 541 adult allogeneic transplant recipients at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center who had received
ganciclovir prophylaxis. Thirty-five episodes of CMV pneumonia were documented, 26 (74%) of which occurred after day 100. The mortality was approximately 75%.
Almost all cases of late CMV pneumonia occurred in patients with GVHD or who had received T-cell–depleted transplants. Reconstitution of CMV-specific T-cell
responses are delayed in allogeneic transplant recipients who received ganciclovir prophylaxis, thus, conceivably predisposing such patients to late CMV disease. 204
These observations provide a rationale for targeting patients at highest risk for CMV disease for antiviral therapy as opposed to administering prophylaxis to all
seropositive patients.
Highly sensitive detection methods to identify subclinical CMV infection have been evaluated. These methods include detection of the CMV pp65 antigen from
peripheral blood leukocytes and detection of CMV DNA by PCR from blood, serum, or plasma. Boeckh et al. 205,206 showed that preemptive ganciclovir based on
detection of CMV antigenemia was associated with a similar rate of CMV disease and similar long-term survival rates as standard ganciclovir prophylaxis initiated at
engraftment.
Einsele et al. 207 randomized allogeneic transplant recipients to receive preemptive ganciclovir therapy based on PCR detection of CMV from blood (PCR group) or a
positive CMV culture from blood, urine, or throat washings (culture group). PCR screening led to earlier detection of subclinical CMV infection compared with culture.
The PCR group had a reduced rate of CMV disease, duration of ganciclovir therapy, neutropenia, and nonviral infections compared with the culture group, and overall
survival was superior. Discontinuing preemptive ganciclovir in patients whose blood became PCR negative appeared to be safe.
Foscarnet, an antiviral drug with activity against CMV, may have an advantage over ganciclovir in patients with delayed engraftment or with ganciclovir-associated
neutropenia. Azotemia is the major toxicity associated with foscarnet. Moretti et al. 208 compared ganciclovir with foscarnet as preemptive therapy at the time of
documentation of subclinical CMV antigenemia. There was a trend to more rapid clearance of CMV antigenemia in the foscarnet group. The major adverse effect was
cytopenia in the ganciclovir group and azotemia in the foscarnet group. The study was not sufficiently powered to detect a difference in CMV disease or mortality.
Determination of optimal CMV preventive strategies will require additional prospective randomized studies. Newer, less toxic antiviral agents will need to be
evaluated. Lowance et al. 209 showed that valacyclovir (a valine esterified analog of acyclovir with high oral bioavailability) was well tolerated and reduced CMV
disease in renal transplant recipients. In addition, immune augmentation strategies (see Immune Augmentation Strategies, later in this chapter) may also be useful as
preventive and treatment strategies.
Varicella Zoster Virus
Control of VZV infection is dependent on T-cell 210,211 and 212 and humoral immunity.213 BMT recipients and patients receiving intensive corticosteroid therapy are at risk
for life-threatening disseminated primary and reactivated VZV infection. Reactivated VZV disease is typically a late complication of BMT, usually occurring 3 months
to more than a year after transplantation. Before the routine use of antiviral agents for prophylaxis against CMV infection, 17% of BMT recipients had an episode of
reactivated VZV within the first year. 214 In one study of acyclovir prophylaxis for CMV, the rate of VZV at day 210 after transplantation was only 3% in patients
receiving prolonged high-dose acyclovir. 200
The major risk factor for developing VZV is acute and chronic GVHD requiring intensive immunosuppressive therapy. 214 In such immunocompromised patients, VZV
infection may manifest with a multidermatomal or disseminated vesicular exanthem associated with hemorrhage and necrosis. Infection of visceral can cause
hemorrhagic pneumonia, encephalitis, retinal necrosis, hepatitis, and small bowel disease. Secondary bacterial infections may occur in cutaneous VZV lesions. VZV
infection can also be complicated by bleeding disorders, thrombocytopenia , vasculitis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and fulminant purpura resembling
bacterial sepsis.
The diagnosis of single dermatomal shingles can usually be made by visual inspection alone. In the immunosuppressed patient, multidermatomal or disseminated
cutaneous disease may make the diagnosis on clinical grounds less certain. Immunofluorescent staining of material from an unroofed skin lesion or from a skin biopsy
may establish the diagnosis within hours. A Tzanck's preparation confirms infection by a herpes virus, but is not specific for VZV. Viral culture should also be
performed.
Intravenous acyclovir (10 mg/kg every 8 hours) is the established treatment for primary or reactivated VZV in immunosuppressed patients. 215 Early initiation of
acyclovir reduces progression of disease and usually eliminates mortality in patients with reactivated disease. All BMT recipients with VZV infection should be treated
initially as inpatients because of the potential for dissemination. Once clinical improvement has occurred (e.g., resolution of fever, healing of lesions), an oral regimen
can be substituted and completed as an outpatient. The oral regimen may consist of acyclovir (800 mg five times per day), valacyclovir (1 g three times a day), or
famciclovir (500 mg three times a day). Salicylates should not be used because of the risk of Reye's syndrome.
Lack of a clinical response to therapy should prompt reconsideration of the initial diagnosis, the possibility of a secondary infection, or VZV resistance to acyclovir.
Streptococcal impetigo, dermatitis, and various noninfectious bullous diseases can mimic VZV. In such cases, a biopsy is required to establish the diagnosis. Severe
streptococcal infections may occur after primary VZV infection. Resistance of VZV to acyclovir may be increased in BMT recipients who have received prolonged
courses of acyclovir or ganciclovir as prophylaxis for CMV infection. However, in one study of acyclovir prophylaxis against CMV, the relatively small proportion (less
than 10%) of patients who developed VZV disease were successfully treated with acyclovir, indicating that either antiviral resistance did not occur or could be
overcome by intensification of the acyclovir regimen. 200 If VZV infection develops while receiving ganciclovir, foscarnet should be initiated because of the
cross-resistance between acyclovir and ganciclovir.
Nosocomial transmission of VZV is well documented. 216 Patients with primary varicella (chicken pox), those with disseminated zoster, or immunocompromised patients
with dermatomal zoster should be placed under contact and respiratory isolation (private negative-pressure room, air exhausted to outside, six or more air exchanges
per hour). Varicella zoster immune globulin should be offered to immunosuppressed VZV-seronegative patients after exposures such as prolonged face-to-face
contact, a household or playmate contact, or exposure to a roommate in a shared hospital room. Varicella zoster immune globulin is most effective when administered
within 72 hours of exposure; its efficacy is unknown 96 hours after exposure.
The current varicella vaccine uses the live attenuated Oka strain (Merck). The vaccine is immunogenic and protective. The attenuated VZV can cause latent infection,
and zoster caused by either the vaccine-type or wild-type VZV can occur months to years after vaccination. 217 This vaccine has been studied extensively in children
with leukemia and has been shown to be safe and effective. 217,218
The American Academy of Pediatrics states that the Oka vaccine is contraindicated in immunocompromised individuals, except for children with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia to whom the vaccine may be administered in study conditions. 219 In families with immunocompromised persons, no precautions are required after
vaccination of healthy children in whom a rash has not developed. If a rash does occur, direct contact with immunocompromised persons should be avoided. If
inadvertent contact occurs, the use of varicella zoster immune globulin is not recommended because of the low transmission rate and the expectation that disease will
be mild if it occurs.
Epstein-Barr Virus
In the United States, most adults have been infected by EBV. Primary infection is usually asymptomatic, but may cause a mononucleosis syndrome. Latent infection
persists in B cells and produces no disease in the vast majority of people. EBV-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes are the principal controllers of the replication of
EBV-infected B cells. 220,221 EBV lymphoproliferative disorders are encountered in patients with severely impaired T-cell immunity, 222 such as AIDS or intensive and
prolonged immunosuppressive therapy. EBV-induced posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) is defined as an abnormal proliferation of B-lymphoid cells in
transplant recipients. The lesions may be composed of a polyclonal or monoclonal population of transformed B cells. PTLD is most common during the first year of
transplantation. Patients with GVHD treated with antilymphocyte immunoglobulins 223 and recipients of T-cell–depleted marrow from HLA-mismatched donors 224 are at
highest risk for PTLD.

Clinical manifestations of PTLD are varied, and a high index of suspicion is required to make the diagnosis. Patients may have a mononucleosis-like syndrome with
fever and localized adenopathy. Disseminated disease may manifest with generalized adenopathy and extranodal organ involvement, including the bowel, liver, bone
marrow, and CNS. A CT scan of the head, chest, abdomen, and pelvis is useful in evaluating a high-risk patient with unexplained fever. Diagnosis of PTLD requires
biopsy of an affected area showing a characteristic histologic appearance and evidence of EBV infection using immunohistochemical methods or by detecting EBV
DNA.
In organ transplant recipients, most PTLD is of recipient origin. In BMT-associated PTLD, the abnormal clones are typically of donor origin. 223,224 Thus, in allogeneic
BMT recipients, a balance is created between donor-derived B-cell clonal proliferation and the establishment of donor-derived cytotoxic T-cell immunity, which contain
these proliferative responses. Whereas PTLD in organ transplant recipients typically responds to a reduction in the intensity of immunosuppression, PTLD in BMT
recipients may not respond to such conservative measures. Adoptive immunotherapy is a promising strategy (see Immune Augmentation Strategies, later in this
chapter).
Human Herpesvirus 6
HHV-6 was first isolated from peripheral blood from patients with lymphoproliferative disorders. 225 This virus was initially called human B-lymphotrophic virus, but it
was later discovered that the virus is predominantly T-cell trophic. 226 HHV-6 has been recognized as an opportunistic pathogen in solid organ and BMT recipients. In
BMT recipients, HHV-6 has been associated with a variety of syndromes: (1) fever and rash clinically resembling cutaneous GVHD; (2) an increased risk of GVHD; (3)
bone marrow suppression; (4) encephalitis; and (5) pneumonitis. However, establishing a causal relationship between HHV-6 and these syndromes is made difficult
by the fact that HHV-6 can be documented in approximately 50% of BMT recipients, usually between 2 and 4 weeks after transplantation. 227,228 and 229 The evidence
supporting a link between HHV-6 infection and encephalitis 230 and interstitial pneumonitis 231 is the most persuasive, based on the in situ documentation of HHV-6 in
the respective organs using immunohistochemistry, molecular detection methods, and culture.
Singh and Carrigan 232 proposed the following two criteria for the diagnosis of HHV-6 disease: (1) presence of bone marrow suppression, encephalitis, or pneumonitis
and (2) documentation of active infection by culture, PCR from an acellular specimen (a positive PCR result from blood cannot distinguish active from latent infection),
or immunohistochemistry. Comparative studies evaluating therapy for HHV-6 have not been performed, and it is therefore not possible to make definitive
recommendations about therapy. HHV-6 is sensitive in vitro to ganciclovir and foscarnet, and it is reasonable to initiate therapy with either of these agents when
HHV-6 disease is proven or strongly suspected. The role of screening for asymptomatic HHV-6 infection and prophylaxis with antiviral agents is uncertain.
COMMUNITY RESPIRATORY VIRUSES
Community respiratory viruses include members of the Orthomyxoviridae (influenza A, B, and C) and Paramyxoviridae [parainfluenza 1 through 4, respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV), and measles] families, adenoviruses, and picornaviruses. These viruses are important causes of morbidity and mortality in immunocompromised
patients. 233,234 With the progress in prophylaxis and treatment of CMV disease in BMT recipients, the relative proportion of pulmonary infections caused by community
respiratory viruses is likely to grow. In contrast to CMV, these viruses are seasonal and are rapidly transmitted from one person to another by respiratory secretions,
thus having the potential for nosocomial outbreaks.
Respiratory viruses may account for a significant proportion of undiagnosed or idiopathic pneumonias in BMT recipients in older series. 234 Their importance as
pathogens in this population has been documented more recently by centers that routinely screen for community viral pathogens in patients with respiratory illnesses.
Respiratory Syncytial Virus
RSV infection is highly virulent in patients with leukemia and in BMT recipients. In patients with leukemia, progression to pneumonia and mortality are more common
in the setting of neutropenia. 235 RSV infection can occur throughout the transplantation period, from the preengraftment stage to more than a year after
transplantation. Upper respiratory symptoms (sinusitis, coryza, rhinorrhea) usually precede lower respiratory tract involvement (dyspnea, wheezing) and pneumonia,
although upper airway symptoms may be absent. The historic mortality from RSV pneumonia in BMT recipients is approximately 80%. 236 At the University of Texas M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center, patients who received aerosolized ribavirin and intravenous immunoglobulin containing high RSV-neutralizing titers at least 24 hours
before respiratory failure had a 22% mortality compared with 100% mortality in patients who either did not receive therapy or in whom treatment was initiated after
respiratory failure had occurred. 237
Rapid diagnosis of RSV has been made possible by antigen detection methods. Englund et al. 238 showed that compared with culture, antigen detection had a
sensitivity of 89% in bronchoalveolar lavage, 15% in nasal and throat washings, and 71% in endotracheal aspirates in symptomatic adult leukemia or BMT patients.
The specificity was 97% to 100% from these sources. The lower sensitivity of antigen detection from the upper airway of adults is attributed to a lower viral burden.
The low yield of upper airway cultures severely limits the value of these noninvasive tests in adults with respiratory disease.
A preliminary study of intravenous ribavirin for RSV pneumonia in BMT recipients who at enrollment did not require mechanical ventilation, was associated with an
eventual 80% mortality.239 In a second strategy, aerosolized ribavirin was administered to patients in whom RSV was isolated from nasopharyngeal washes without
signs of lower respiratory tract involvement. Pneumonia developed in 8 of 25 (32%) patients, with a mortality of 29%. 236 These studies suggest that early diagnosis
and treatment of RSV in this population may be life saving.
Parainfluenza
Parainfluenza viruses are important community respiratory viruses in leukemia and BMT patients. In a review of 45 cases of parainfluenza virus infection in BMT
recipients, 26 (58%) patients had pneumonia, of whom 39% died. 240
Therapy for parainfluenza infection has not been established. An uncontrolled retrospective series from the University of Minnesota showed that survival with and
without aerosolized ribavirin was approximately 80% in BMT recipients with parainfluenza infection. 241 Ribavirin was generally begun late after onset of respiratory
symptoms, which may have reduced its efficacy. The role of intravenous immunoglobulin against this organism merits further exploration.
Influenza Virus
Influenza virus is the most important respiratory virus globally and the most common cause of excess seasonal mortality in North America, accounting for
approximately 20,000 deaths in the United States annually. During a winter outbreak period, influenza was diagnosed in approximately 30% of adult patients
hospitalized for a respiratory illness at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. 240 Pneumonia occurred in 12 of 15 (80%) of patients with influenza, and four of these
patients died. In other centers, the incidence of pneumonia and mortality associated with influenza virus infection was substantially lower. 236
Amantadine and rimantadine are the most common agents used in treating influenza. These agents are only active against influenza A, not influenza B. In one center,
resistance to these agents rapidly developed during therapy for influenza A among patients with leukemia and BMT recipients. 242 Ribavirin has activity against
influenza A and B and has been used in patients with influenza virus infection. 243
Two agents (zanamivir and oseltamivir) that inhibit the influenza virus neuraminidase have been licensed. These drugs are active against both influenza A and B and
have been shown to be effective in reducing the duration of influenza illness 244 and to have a prophylactic benefit during community outbreaks. 245,246 The role of these
agents as treatment or prophylaxis in immunocompromised patients with cancer has not been evaluated.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend annual administration of the inactivated influenza vaccine to immunocompromised persons and their
close contacts (e.g., health care workers and household members). 247 Immunocompromised persons are less likely to mount an adequate antibody response to
immunization.248 Immunization should be provided ideally 2 weeks before chemotherapy, or if given during chemotherapy, immunization is preferably administered

between cycles. In one study, a two-step vaccination regimen enhanced the immune response in patients receiving chemotherapy for lymphoma. 249
Adenovirus
The clinical manifestations of adenoviruses in BMT recipients include pneumonia, bronchiolitis, upper respiratory tract infection, renal parenchymal disease,
hemorrhagic cystitis, hepatitis, small and large bowel disease, encephalitis, and disseminated infection. 250,251 Viral shedding from throat secretions, urine, and stool is
common, occurring in approximately 5% to 20% of BMT recipients, and should not be equated with disease. In patients with definite invasive disease, long-term
survival was poor. GVHD was the only significant risk factor in both studies.
Adenoviruses were cultured from 28 adult BMT recipients at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. 240 Seven of 12 patients with pneumonia and all six patients with
disseminated disease died, whereas ten patients with upper respiratory tract infection survived. Risk factors for mortality included isolation of adenovirus from multiple
sites and prolonged shedding. Ribavirin was not associated with benefit in this retrospective series. The role of intravenous immunoglobulin for management of
adenovirus infection has not been established.
Measles
Kaplan et al.252 conducted an extensive review of measles in immunocompromised patients. Of 40 patients (aged 3 months to 22 years) with malignancy, 16 (40%)
had no rash whereas the remainder had either typical or atypical exanthemas. Twenty-three (58%) had pneumonitis, eight (20%) had encephalitis, six (20%) had both,
and six (20%) had no complications. The overall fatality rate was 55%. The benefit of ribavirin could not be assessed.
Diagnosis of Respiratory Viruses
Rapid immunodiagnostic methods for common respiratory viruses have become widely used, and have resulted in reduced hospital stays, antibiotic use, and
microbiologic investigations. 253 Such rapid methods also have additional potential benefits for early initiation of antiviral agents and implementation of appropriate
infection control precautions. Cell culture is generally more sensitive than antigen detection methods, with the exception of RSV in children, in whom antigen detection
is highly sensitive. Rapid antigen detection methods and cell culture are therefore complementary. PCR amplification methods are being evaluated and show
promise.254
HEPATITIS VIRUSES
Liver test abnormalities are common in patients with cancer. Among BMT recipients, the differential diagnosis is broad and includes drug toxicity, GVHD,
venoocclusive disease, recurrent malignancy, and infectious hepatitis. Patients who receive multiple transfusions of blood and pooled plasma products are at a higher
risk for transfusion-associated viral hepatitis, despite the highly effective screening methods of blood products currently used. In addition, such patients are likely to
be at higher risk for reactivation of latent viral infection during intensive immunosuppressive therapy and for developing life-threatening complications.
Hepatitis B
Reactivation of latent hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection in BMT recipients is an unpredictable but rare event. Although the hepatitis B surface antigen carrier state is not
a contraindication to BMT, such patients appear to be at a higher risk for fulminant hepatitis as a result of reactivation. 255,256 and 257 In a prospective study of 100
Chinese patients who received induction chemotherapy for lymphoma, hepatitis developed in 67% of HBsAg-positive patients compared with 14% of HBsAg-negative
patients. 258 Reactivation of HBV (as determined by serum levels of HBV DNA and HBeAg) was associated with icteric hepatitis, but infrequently with liver failure and
mortality. Symptomatic hepatitis may manifest after withdrawal of immunosuppressive agents or between cycles of chemotherapy when recovery of immune responses
occurs. 259,260
Precore mutant HBV has been associated with cases of fulminant hepatic failure after cytotoxic chemotherapy and fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis. 261,262 This mutation
results in failure to secrete HBeAg, and, therefore, this marker can not be used as an indicator of active viral replication.
Chronic HBV hepatitis has been reported in patients with negative serologic study results. Vergani et al. 263 reported 23 cases of histologically proven HBV infection in
23 children with leukemia and liver disease, none of whom had detectable HBV serum antigens or antibodies. In eight of the children, HBV markers subsequently
appeared in the serum within 15 months of stopping chemotherapy. Bréchot et al. 264 documented HBV DNA in 59% of liver samples but in only 10% of serum samples
among patients with chronic liver disease and negative test results for HBsAg.
Treatment of chronic HBV involves either the antiviral nucleoside analog lamivudine 265,266 or interferon-a (IFN-a). 267 The advantages of lamivudine include limited side
effects and the fact that histologic improvement was documented in the majority of patients. 265 Favoring IFN-a is the limited duration of therapy and the absence of
viral mutations that lead to resistance to therapy. 265
Vaccination against HBV should be considered in seronegative patients with cancer. However, among BMT recipients, active immunization in the immediate
pretransplant and posttransplant periods is often ineffective, most likely as a result of defective T-cell and B-cell function. Adoptive transfer of immunity to HBV can be
achieved after allogeneic BMT from immune donors. 268
Hepatitis C
Before routine blood screening began in 1991, BMT recipients were at significant risk for hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. HCV infection can cause both early and
late complications in BMT recipients. In a cohort study from Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, pretransplant HCV infection plus an elevated serum aspartate
transaminase level was predictive of severe venoocclusive disease (VOD) (relative risk, 9.6) 269; HCV infection without elevated transaminases was not a significant
risk factor for VOD. An acute flare of hepatitis occurred in about one-third of HCV-positive patients at a mean of 4 to 5 months after transplant and was usually self
limited.269 Frickhofen et al. also noted an association between pretransplant HCV infection and severe VOD in the early transplant period. 270
Approximately one-half of HCV-positive transplant recipients at Fred Hutchinson continued to have mild to moderate elevations in liver enzymes 5 to 10 years
following transplant. 269 However, HCV was not associated with increased mortality. 269 Cirrhosis was identified in 31 of 3721 patients surviving 1 or more years after
BMT.271 HCV infection was documented in 25 of the 31 (81%) patients, and cirrhosis was attributed to HCV infection in 15 of 16 (93%) patients presenting more than
10 years after transplantation. 271 To try to avoid cirrhosis, interferon-a and ribavirin therapy should be considered in transplant recipients with chronic HCV infection
who have been off immunosuppressive agents for at least 6 months, have normal marrow recovery, and have no GVHD. 271a
HCV is universally transmitted from HCV RNA-positive donors to their recipients. 271a If an HCV-positive donor is the best available match, treatment of the donor with
interferon-a and ribavirin before marrow or stem cell harvest may be considered to try to eliminate viremia (which can be monitored by PCR). Interferon should be
stopped at least 1 week before harvest to avoid problems with engraftment in the recipient. 271a
Significant hepatic dysfunction is uncommon in nontransplant HCV-positive patients receiving chemotherapy for hematologic malignancies. 271b In a prospective study
of 305 patients with lymphoma, the prevalence of HCV and HBV infection was 16% and 3.2%, respectively. 271c No reactivation in HCV-positive patients occurred
during chemotherapy. In contrast, HBV reactivation occurred in approximately 80% of HBV-infected patients, and was associated with a 37% mortality rate. Thus,
HBV should be considered to be an opportunistic pathogen in heavily immunosuppressed persons with hematologic malignancies, whereas HCV is not.
Other Transfusion-Associated Hepatitis Viruses
Hepatitis G is a newly discovered transfusion-associated virus that can establish persistent infection in asymptomatic individuals. Surveillance studies have not
established a role for this virus in non-A through E acute transfusion-related hepatitis or chronic liver disease. 273,274 TT virus is another virus capable of establishing
persistent infection whose pathogenicity remains questionable. 275 In a Japanese study, TT virus DNA was detected with far greater frequency in BMT recipients than

in blood donors, and, in one patient, was temporally associated with elevated serum hepatic enzymes. 276 Conceivably, these other transfusion-associated viruses yet
to be discovered, may be agents of non-A through E hepatitis in heavily transfused persons with cancer.

PARASITIC INFECTIONS
PNEUMOCYSTIS CARINII
Pneumocystis carinii is more appropriately classified as a fungus than a protozoan based on gene sequence data and cell wall constituents. Defective T-cell immunity
is the principal risk factor for PCP. Sepkowitz et al. 277,278 and 279 reported that corticosteroid use was associated with 204 of 227 (90%) cases of PCP in patients without
AIDS at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center between 1963 and 1992. The median time that patients received corticosteroids was 2 months, although a minority
of patients had received corticosteroids for less than 1 month. Approximately 60% of patients had hematologic malignancies, 25% had solid tumors, 10% were BMT
recipients, and 5% were receiving relatively mild immunosuppressive regimens.
The risk of PCP increases with the intensity of the immunosuppressive regimen. In a study of pediatric patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia, the risk of PCP was
strikingly increased from less than 5% to 22% when cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C) was used. 280 Browne et al.281 reported a 32% rate of PCP (probable plus definite) in
patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma treated with an intensive regimen consisting of corticosteroids and multiple cytotoxic agents (methotrexate, doxorubicin,
cyclophosphamide, etoposide, Ara-C, bleomycin, vincristine) as compared with no cases of PCP in patients who did not receive Ara-C and bleomycin.
Pneumocystis carinii can have a fulminant course, resembling a bacterial pneumonia with rapid progression to respiratory failure, or can be indolent. 282 Patients
treated with corticosteroids may develop initial clinical manifestations of PCP only during corticosteroid taper. Bilateral interstitial infiltrates are most common in PCP,
although unilateral or patchy infiltrates are also observed. Nodules, cavitary lesions, and pleural effusions are less common. In a minority of patients, the chest
radiograph is normal. Extrapulmonary P carinii infection is rare in patients with cancer and has for the most part been reported only in patients with AIDS.
Diagnosis of PCP relies on visualization of the organism microscopically. Immunofluorescent staining using monoclonal antibodies is more sensitive than older
staining methods, such as silver staining or Wright-Giemsa. 283 PCR-based detection of P carinii from induced sputum or blood is a promising experimental diagnostic
method.284
Spontaneously expectorated sputum is generally unsatisfactory for diagnosis of PCP, but sputum induction using 3% sodium chloride solution in an ultrasonic
nebulizer usually yields a satisfactory sample. In a small study of non-AIDS patients with PCP, the diagnostic sensitivity using this method was approximately 60%. 285
If sputum induction is nondiagnostic, bronchoscopy should be pursued.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (trimethoprim 15 to 20 mg/kg daily divided into three to four doses) is the treatment of choice for P carinii. In patients intolerant of this
agent, intravenous pentamidine, dapsone-trimethoprim, and clindamycin-primaquine are acceptable alternatives. In cases of a prior non–life-threatening reaction to a
sulfonamide (e.g., a nonurticarial rash), experience with AIDS patients has shown that rechallenge with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is safe under close medical
observation, 286 although some investigators would opt for desensitization. 287 Patients without AIDS are less likely to have adverse reactions to
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole .282 In patients with moderate or severe PCP (PaO 2 less than 70 mm), corticosteroids should be added based on studies of patients
with AIDS-associated PCP.288 In patients who are not responding to therapy, repeat bronchoscopy should be performed to exclude additional pathogens that may
have been missed or may not have been present initially.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is highly effective as prophylaxis against PCP. In children with cancer at high risk for PCP, no case of PCP occurred in patients
administered daily trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, compared with an approximately 20% incidence in the placebo arm. 289 Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis
was also associated with a reduction in bacterial infections. In a subsequent study of children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
administered either daily or on 3 consecutive days weekly was fully protective against PCP. 290
Defining which patients with cancer will benefit from prophylaxis against PCP is often empiric given the absence of controlled studies in several high-risk groups.
Children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia and allogeneic BMT recipients are known high-risk groups that should be offered prophylaxis. In BMT recipients, the peak
risk of PCP is between 1 and 4 months after transplantation, corresponding to the period of most profound T-cell immunodeficiency. Prophylaxis is generally
administered shortly after engraftment until 6 to 12 months after BMT, but should be reinitiated at later periods in the setting of GVHD requiring intensification of
immunosuppressive agents. Adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, 291 patients with CNS tumors receiving high-dose corticosteroid therapy, 292,293 and patients
receiving combination corticosteroid therapy with either myelotoxic agents or fludarabine are also at high risk for PCP, and prophylaxis should be considered.
TOXOPLASMOSIS
Reactivation of Toxoplasma gondii is associated with life-threatening disease primarily in patients with profound deficits in T-cell immunity. In a review of 128 reported
cases of toxoplasmosis in patients with neoplastic disorders, 59 patients had Hodgkin's disease, 12 had non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and 36 had acute or chronic
leukemias.294 Therapy with corticosteroids; cytotoxic agents, radiation therapy, or both; and poorly controlled malignancy are risk factors for toxoplasmas. 295
Toxoplasmosis is an uncommon complication of BMT. In the largest series, toxoplasmosis was diagnosed in 12 of 3803 (0.3%) consecutive allogeneic BMT recipients
and in none of 509 autologous transplant recipients at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center. 296 All 12 patients died; ten cases were diagnosed postmortem, and
toxoplasmosis was believed to contribute to mortality in at least four patients. Toxoplasmosis manifested within the first 4 months of transplantation. Pretransplant
seropositivity for T gondii and severe GVHD were the predominant risk factors.
CNS disease is most commonly observed. Altered mental status, coma, seizures, cranial nerve abnormalities, and motor weakness are the most common findings. 294
Cerebrospinal fluid is usually normal; however, a mononuclear pleocytosis and elevated protein level may be seen. Other organs involved may include the heart,
lungs, liver, spleen, lymph nodes, bone marrow, pancreas, spleen, and skeletal muscle.
Definitive diagnosis of toxoplasmosis usually relies on demonstration of tachyzoites and cysts in histopathologic sections. Use of electron microscopy 297 and
immunoperoxidase staining298 may facilitate diagnosis. Visualization of the organism in cerebrospinal fluid using Giemsa staining is diagnostic of disease, but the
sensitivity of this method is low. 299 Demonstration of local antibody production in cerebrospinal fluid 300 or aqueous humor 301 may facilitate the diagnosis of encephalitis
and chorioretinitis, respectively. PCR is a promising diagnostic method available at specialized laboratories.
The treatment of choice for toxoplasmosis is oral sulfadiazine, 4 to 6 g/d, plus pyrimethamine (loading dose of 200 mg, followed by 50 to 75 mg daily). Folinic acid
should be administered to reduce myeloid toxicity. Whether maintenance therapy is required after quiescence of disease is unknown. It is reasonable to continue a
maintenance regimen (which may consist of sulfadiazine, 2 g/d, plus pyrimethamine, 50 mg/d) during periods of immunosuppressive therapy. In patients intolerant of
sulfonamides, clindamycin and primaquine may be used instead.
ACANTHAMOEBA
Acanthamoeba species may cause an insidious granulomatous encephalitis in immunocompromised patients, such as those receiving high-dose corticosteroid
therapy, solid organ transplant recipients, and patients with AIDS. Skin manifestations include persistent ulcers, nodules, or subcutaneous abscesses. BMT recipients
may have a more fulminant course characterized by obtundation, coma, and seizures, associated with a necrotizing meningoencephalitis and hydrocephalus. 302 A
necrotizing pneumonitis and adrenalitis may also be present. A diagnosis may be established by cerebrospinal fluid analysis or biopsy showing characteristic amebic
trophozoites. The treatment of choice is parenteral pentamidine.
STRONGYLOIDES STERCORALIS
Strongyloides stercoralis is an intestinal nematode that can cause disseminated infection, or hyperinfection syndrome, in immunocompromised patients. 303 S
stercoralis is particularly common in tropical and subtropical regions, but the parasite also is endemic in certain rural southern regions of the United States.
Cross-infection between humans through contact with material soiled with feces appears to be likely in overcrowded and unsanitary conditions. 304 S stercoralis can

establish an asymptomatic chronic gastrointestinal infection through internal autoinfection, with the hyperinfection syndrome occurring several years after the initial
infection, frequently in the setting of immunosuppression. This underscores the need to obtain a thorough history about prior residence in endemic areas.
Corticosteroid therapy with and without other agents appears to be associated with the highest risk of disseminated disease. 304 Among reported cases of
hyperinfection syndrome associated with cancer, approximately 90% of patients had a hematologic malignancy. 304
The hyperinfection syndrome results from penetration of filariform larvae through the intestinal mucosa, followed by dissemination. Sites of dissemination include the
lungs, lymph nodes, brain, and abdominal organs. Secondary bacterial infection presumably results from passage of enteric bacteria through the bowel as a
consequence of gastrointestinal strongyloidiasis, and may result in peritonitis, bacteremia, and meningitis.
Diagnosis of infection relies on visualization of larvae in feces, duodenal aspirates, sputum samples, or in other body fluids or tissue. Although uncommon, patients
from endemic areas should be screened for S stercoralis carriage, ideally before receiving immunosuppressive agents. Obtaining multiple fresh stool samples
increases the diagnostic yield. Patients with S stercoralis infection should be treated with thiabendazole or ivermectin.

EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF FEBRILE NEUTROPENIA
Patients with cancer and neutropenic fever often have an established or an occult infection, and bacteremia is documented in approximately 20% of cases. 305
Because of the high likelihood of occult infection in a patient with febrile neutropenia without localizing symptoms or signs, and the potential for rapid progression to
severe sepsis, prompt initiation of empiric antibiotics is essential. The likelihood of bacteremia is related to the intensity (with an ANC of less than 100/µL carrying the
greatest risk) and the duration of neutropenia. A rapid decrease in the neutrophil count may also be a risk factor for infection, whereas evidence of marrow recovery
even if the neutrophil count is still less than 500/µL, is a positive prognostic factor. For the purpose of this discussion, we use the following established criteria for
neutropenic fever:
1. A single oral temperature of greater than 38.3°C (101°F) or greater than or equal to 38.0°C (100.4°F) over at least 1 hour.
2. ANC less than 500/µL or less than 1000/µL with predicted rapid decline to less than 500/µL.
Evaluation of the febrile neutropenic patient begins with a careful history and physical examination. A history of prior infectious complications associated with
chemotherapy may be useful for risk stratification and selecting an empiric regimen. For example, a history of recent colitis caused by Clostridium difficile raises the
likelihood of recurrent infection in a patient with fever and diarrhea. Prior invasive candidiasis or infection by one of the filamentous fungi may recur during subsequent
neutropenic periods. The duration of neutropenia closely correlates with the risk of serious infectious complications, including the development of invasive fungal
infections in patients with prolonged neutropenia (such as patients with leukemia and BMT recipients). Concomitant use of corticosteroid therapy raises the likelihood
of opportunistic pathogens, such as P carinii, that characteristically afflict patients with defects in cell-mediated immunity. Epidemiologic exposures can provide useful
clues for uncommon or rare pathogens. For example, swimming or fishing in fresh or brackish waters raises the possibility of infection by Aeromonas hydrophilia.
Exposure to salt water increases the likelihood of infection by Vibrio vulnificus. Fever after a dog bite raisees the concern about infection by Capnocytophaga
canimorsus (DF-2).
A meticulous physical examination is necessary, bearing in mind that typical signs of infection may be blunted or absent as a result of immunosuppression. Mucositis
is commonly observed after chemotherapy and may be difficult to distinguish from gingivostomatitis caused by reactivation of HSV infection. The presence of thrush
reflects compromise of cell-mediated immunity. In patients with prolonged neutropenia or who receive concomitant high-dose corticosteroid therapy, fungal infection of
the palate, typically by Zygomycete or Aspergillus species, constitutes a surgical emergency. A black necrotic region is the most common sign of such infections.
Palpation over the anterior sinuses and an ophthalmologic examination should be performed. A detailed inspection of the skin, including the nails, may disclose a
lesion suggestive of systemic infection or a possible portal of entry. Examples include ecthyma gangrenosum caused by P aeruginosa, or erythematous papules
caused by disseminated candidiasis. Catheter sites and sites of prior skin penetration (such as surgical wounds and biopsy sites) should be palpated. The perineum
and perianal region are easily missed sources of infection that need careful inspection and palpation.
The initial evaluation should include the following: complete blood cell count and differential; serum chemistry, including liver associated enzymes; at least two sets of
blood cultures from different sites (including from each lumen of the central venous catheter if one is present); a urine culture; and a chest radiograph. Potential sites
of infection, such as skin lesions or sputum, should be obtained before instituting antibiotics. However, febrile neutropenia should be considered a medical
emergency, and prompt initiation of empiric antibiotics should not be delayed if culture material is not immediately available. After the initial physical examination, it is
critical to reevaluate the patient regularly to monitor the response to therapy and to identify evolving signs of infection that were not present during the initial
encounter.
ANTIBIOTIC REGIMENS
In the early 1970s, Schimpff and colleagues conducted a nonrandomized study of 75 patients with cancer and febrile neutropenia who were treated empirically with
carbenicillin and gentamicin. 306 Treated patients with P aeruginosa infection had dramatically improved survival rates compared with historic controls. This study
established the rationale for empiric combination antibiotic therapy, based on the wide range of resistant profiles of P aeruginosa and enteric gram-negative rod
isolates to carbenicillin. Empiric combination therapy increases the likelihood that at least one antibiotic will have activity against the isolate before the availability of
susceptibility data. In addition, the b-lactam plus gentamicin combination has synergistic bactericidal activity in vitro. Since this early study, typical combination
regimens for neutropenic fever have included an antipseudomonal penicillin plus an aminoglycoside with or without a drug with antistaphylococcal activity, such as a
first-generation cephalosporin or vancomycin.
Since the mid-1980s, the development of broad-spectrum antipseudomonal antibiotics (ceftazidime and imipenem) with a high serum bactericidal level to minimal
inhibitory concentration ratio has led to a reevaluation of the need for combination antibiotic therapy. Obviating the need for an aminoglycoside would be expected to
reduce nephrotoxicity in a patient population frequently treated with nephrotoxic drugs, such as CSA, cisplatin, and amphotericin B. Pizzo et al. 307 conducted a
randomized trial comparing ceftazidime monotherapy with a combination of cephalothin, gentamicin, and carbenicillin in 550 episodes of neutropenic fever in patients
with cancer at the National Institutes of Health. Approximately 45% of patients had leukemias or lymphomas, and the remainder had solid tumors. The mean duration
of neutropenia was 8 to 9 days. In patients with unexplained fever, 98% of patients in both groups survived by the time neutropenia resolved. Of the patients with
documented infection, the survival rate was 89% in the monotherapy arm and 91% in the combination arm. Most patients with documented infections in both treatment
arms required modifications in the initial antibiotic regimen, whereas the initial regimen was usually not modified in cases of no documented infection. This study was
the first to establish that initial empiric monotherapy was safe and effective in this patient population. An important caveat is that patients must be closely monitored
and the antibiotic regimen modified based on subsequent clinical and microbiologic data.
In a subsequent multicenter trial, De Pauw et al. 308 evaluated ceftazidime versus piperacillin plus tobramycin in approximately 800 episodes of neutropenic fever. The
majority of patients had leukemia or were BMT recipients. The mean duration of neutropenia was 18 days. The two regimens were similar with regard to control of
infections and infection-related mortality, but less adverse reactions occurred in the ceftazidime arm. This study confirmed that ceftazidime monotherapy is a viable
empiric regimen in high-risk patients with febrile neutropenia. In a metaanalysis, ceftazidime monotherapy had similar efficacy as combination regimens for empiric
treatment of neutropenic fever. 309
Numerous studies of monotherapy and combination therapy have been conducted that further delineate the advantages and disadvantages of various empiric
regimens for neutropenic fever. The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) has published evidence-based guidelines on antibiotic therapy for neutropenic
fever without a documented source. 71 Initial antibiotic regimens are divided into three categories: (1) monotherapy, (2) duotherapy without vancomycin, and (3)
vancomycin plus one or two drugs (Table 54-6).

TABLE 54-6. Empirical Regimens for Neutropenic Fever

MONOTHERAPY
The IDSA considered the following four antibiotics to be appropriate as empiric monotherapy for neutropenic fever: ceftazidime, cefepime, imipenem, and
meropenem.71 At the National Institutes of Health, ceftazidime monotherapy has been used since the 1980s in more than 1000 patients and has an excellent record in
terms of efficacy and safety. Emergence of ceftazidime-resistant isolates has been infrequent. A disadvantage of ceftazidime monotherapy is the modest or absent
activity against certain gram-positive pathogens (e.g., viridans streptococci, enterococci) and gram-negative pathogens with extended spectrum b-lactamases (most
often encountered in E coli and Klebsiella species) and Bush group 1 b-lactamases (most commonly encountered in Enterobacter, Serratia, Citrobacter, and
indole-positive Proteus species). The carbapenems (imipenem and meropenem) have a broader antibacterial spectrum that includes activity against these pathogens
as well as potent activity against anaerobes.
In a randomized study of 399 episodes of neutropenic fever at the National Institutes of Health comparing ceftazidime with imipenem as initial therapy, the survival
rate was approximately 98% for both regimens. 310 Forty-four percent of patients had leukemia or lymphoma, and the remainder had solid tumors. The mean duration
of neutropenia was 9 days. Imipenem was associated with greater toxicity, including Clostridium difficile–associated diarrhea and nausea and vomiting.
In a study at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, imipenem with and without amikacin was compared with ceftazidime with and without amikacin as initial therapy in 750
episodes of neutropenic fever. 311 The success rate (resolution of clinical and laboratory signs of infection without modification of the initial regimen) was poorest in the
ceftazidime monotherapy arm (59%) but similar in the other three arms (71% to 76%). The majority of failures were due to coagulase-negative staphylococci and
viridans streptococci. Nevertheless, overall mortality was less than 1%.
Cefepime is a fourth-generation cephalosporin with broad-spectrum activity appropriate for empiric therapy for neutropenic fever. In a study of activity of b-lactam
antibiotics against gram-positive isolates from patients with cancer, cefepime had activity similar to imipenem and superior to ceftazidime. 312 Seventy-six percent of
viridans streptococci were sensitive to cefepime versus 53% to ceftazidime. Ninety-eight percent of b-hemolytic streptococci were sensitive to cefepime versus 34% to
ceftazidime. Cefepime has activity against greater than 95% of enteric aerobic gram-negative bacterial isolates harboring either Bush group 1 b-lactamases or
extended spectrum b-lactamases.313,314 and 315 In contrast, Pseudomonas, Stenotrophomonas, and Acinetobacter species resistant to ceftazidime are usually
cross-resistant to cefepime.315 Thus, in centers where ceftazidime-resistant Enterobacteriaceae are frequent, cefepime as empiric monotherapy for febrile neutropenia
may be a viable option.
In a multicenter French study of 400 patients with neutropenic fever, empiric therapy with cefepime had similar survival compared with imipenem (95% vs. 98%,
respectively), but caused less gastrointestinal toxicity. 316 In a study of 99 patients with febrile neutropenia, empiric cefepime therapy had similar efficacy compared
with piperacillin plus gentamicin, but reduced nephrotoxicity. 317 Cefepime at a relatively high dose (2 g every 8 hours) is approved as monotherapy for empiric
treatment of neutropenic fever.
Meropenem is a new carbapenem with a spectrum similar to that of imipenem, except for enhanced activity against gram-negative and less activity against
gram-positive bacteria. 318 In a large multicenter study of 958 patients with febrile neutropenia, meropenem monotherapy was as effective as ceftazidime plus amikacin
as initial empiric therapy. 319 The survival rate was 98% in the meropenem arm and 97% in the combination arm, and the proportion of adverse side effects was low in
both groups. The mean duration of neutropenia, defined as an ANC less than 1000/µl, was 16 to 17 days. Bacteremia occurred in 10% of patients in the meropenem
arm and in 7% of patients in the combination arm. Meropenem monotherapy was safe and effective for neutropenic fever in two other European studies compared with
ceftazidime320 and ceftazidime plus amikacin.321 Meropenem appears to have less gastrointestinal toxicity than imipenem and a lower frequency of seizures. Thus,
meropenem appears to be an appropriate alternative to imipenem in febrile neutropenic patients.
DUOTHERAPY WITHOUT VANCOMYCIN
The standard duotherapy regimen for empiric therapy of neutropenic fever is a broad-spectrum antipseudomonal b-lactam plus an aminoglycoside. The
b-lactam/aminoglycoside synergy was thought to be important in effecting a rapid resolution of bacteremia. In addition, duotherapy increases the likelihood of the
isolate being sensitive to at least one of the agents.
The hypothesis that a synergistic antibiotic regimen is superior to monotherapy as empiric treatment of neutropenic fever has not been validated in prospective clinical
studies. In fact, ceftazidime singly has greater serum bactericidal activity against gram-negative bacteria compared with ticarcillin plus amikacin. 322
Combination therapy using two b-lactam agents should generally not be used. The fact that some b-lactams may also be b-lactamase inducers raises concern about
such combinations. This concern does not apply when an antistaphylococcal penicillin (e.g., oxacillin) is paired with an antipseudomonal b-lactam agent (e.g.,
ceftazidime).
Pairing an antipseudomonal b-lactam with a quinolone is yet another combination regimen used for neutropenic fever. The rationale of such a combination is to
provide broad-spectrum activity against highly resistant gram-negative pathogens. In a small randomized study, piperacillin plus ciprofloxacin led to more rapid
defervescence and reduced requirement for empiric amphotericin B compared with piperacillin plus gentamicin. 323 Other studies showed that azlocillin plus
ciprofloxacin had similar efficacy compared with a b-lactam plus an aminoglycoside. 324,325
An aminoglycoside as the sole agent active against gram-negative bacteria is not recommended because of the high failure rate. Ceftriaxone plus an aminoglycoside,
which has the potential for single daily dosing, has been shown to be effective in some studies. 326,327 and 328 However, ceftriaxone does not have reliable activity against
P aeruginosa. Therefore, in centers where this pathogen is encountered, the ceftriaxone plus aminoglycoside regimen may be suboptimal. In centers with a high
frequency of Enterobacteriaceae resistant to third-generation cephalosporins, we advise against using empiric aztreonam as the sole agent active against
gram-negative bacteria because of the likelihood of cross-resistance (see Table 54-3).
Today, with the availability of highly effective monotherapy regimens for neutropenic fever, initial empiric duotherapy regimens may be most appropriate in unstable
patients and in institutions in which multidrug-resistant pathogens are frequently encountered.
WHEN TO ADD VANCOMYCIN
The rationale to add vancomycin to an empiric regimen for neutropenic fever stems from the increased proportion of infections by gram-positive bacteria. The change
in the proportion of infections in neutropenic patients from predominantly gram-negative to gram-positive bacteria is associated with the widespread use of tunneled
catheters in this patient population. Catheter-associated infection by coagulase-negative staphylococci has become the most common cause of bacteremia in patients

with cancer.
Among the common gram-positive infections in neutropenic patients, the following are typically resistant to ceftazidime: MRSA, coagulase-negative Staphylococcus
species, and Enterococcus species. In addition, although ceftazidime has in vitro activity against most viridans streptococci, serious infection by these pathogens has
occurred in neutropenic patients receiving ceftazidime. 70,329
Numerous studies have evaluated single and multiple drug regimens with and without vancomycin. In the largest study, ceftazidime plus amikacin with and without
vancomycin were compared in 747 patients with febrile neutropenia in Europe and Canada. 330 The addition of vancomycin to the empiric regimen was not associated
with any benefit with regard to duration of fever or morbidity or mortality related to gram-positive infections. Smaller studies of ceftazidime with or without an
aminoglycoside also showed no benefit from adding vancomycin to the initial regimen. 331,332
Because of the lack of efficacy of routine addition of vancomycin to empiric regimens for neutropenic fever, and because of the emergence of VRE in association with
excessive vancomycin use, the IDSA guidelines have advised against the routine use of vancomycin as initial empiric therapy of neutropenic fever. 71 At institutions in
which MRSA is common or if a patient is known to be colonized by MRSA, vancomycin should be included in the initial regimen for neutropenic fever. Erythema or
tenderness at a catheter site requires the addition of vancomycin while awaiting culture results. Addition of vancomycin is reasonable in patients receiving prophylaxis
with ciprofloxacin, which some studies have associated with breakthrough infections by viridans streptococci (see Viridans Streptococci, earlier in this chapter). The
IDSA suggests the addition of vancomycin in patients with substantial mucosal damage from chemotherapy (such as regimens containing high-dose Ara-C) because
of the added risk of infection by viridans streptococci. Empiric vancomycin should be discontinued after 2 days if the initial culture results are negative or show a
pathogen, such as methicillin-sensitive S aureus, for which other antibiotics can be used.
In neutropenic febrile patients with allergies to b-lactams, empiric vancomycin should be combined with antibiotics active against aerobic gram-negative pathogens. In
a clinically stable neutropenic patient, vancomycin plus aztreonam is a reasonable regimen 333,334 (see Table 54-6). Aztreonam monotherapy is not acceptable because
it has no activity against gram-positive bacteria.
DURATION OF ANTIBACTERIAL THERAPY
Resolution of Fever within First 3 Days of Treatment and Persistent Neutropenia
If the fever rapidly abates after initiation of empiric therapy in a patient with an unremarkable physical examination and negative culture results, one should assume
that an occult infection exists that has responded to antibiotics. Pizzo et al. 335 randomized patients with prolonged neutropenia and an undifferentiated fever to either
discontinuing empiric antibiotics on day 7 of therapy or continuing therapy until resolution of neutropenia. Of patients who had become afebrile, 40% had recurrent
fever after antibiotics were stopped, leading to the conclusion that day 7 of therapy was too early to stop antibiotics in the setting of persistent neutropenia.
Discontinuation of antibiotics on day 14 of therapy is a reasonable practice among patients who remain afebrile during therapy, but who are still neutropenic. 336
Since these early studies, attempts have been made to identify low-risk patients in whom early discharge on an oral regimen could be safely done while still
neutropenic. In a retrospective series of 509 pediatric patients with neutropenic fever, lack of signs of sepsis on admission (chills, hypotension, requirement for
intravenous hydration), ANC greater than 100 µL, and resolution of fever within 48 hours of therapy accurately distinguished patients who could be discharged on oral
agents. 337 Buchanan's group reported that antibiotics could be safely discontinued and that early discharge was feasible in neutropenic pediatric patients who had
become afebrile if there were no signs of infection, culture results were negative, and evidence of early marrow recovery existed. 338,339
Based on these studies, the IDSA guidelines advise that low-risk patients with undifferentiated neutropenic fever who have become afebrile within 3 days of initiation
of empiric parenteral antibiotics can be treated with an oral regimen (cefixime or quinolone) and discharged while still neutropenic. 71 In high-risk patients who become
afebrile within 3 days, the IDSA recommends continuing parenteral antibiotics. If the high-risk patient remains afebrile and persistently neutropenic after 2 weeks of
therapy, antibiotics can be stopped if no signs of infection exist. 71
One difficulty in applying such guidelines is the lack of a uniform definition of low- and high-risk patients. The IDSA guidelines define low risk as appearing clinically
well, absence of mucositis or unstable signs, and an ANC greater than 100/µL. 71 Several investigators consider whether the ANC is rising or falling and the
anticipated rate of myeloid recovery to also be important predictors of risk. Talcott et al. 340,341 developed a risk prediction model to distinguish low- and high-risk
groups with febrile neutropenia, which is further discussed in Outpatient Antibiotic Therapy for Neutropenic Fever , later in this chapter.
Persistent Fever in the Neutropenic Patient
After selection of an initial empiric regimen for neutropenic fever, close observation of the patient is necessary. Throughout the duration of neutropenic fever, daily
physical examination should be performed. Modifications of the initial antibiotic regimen should be made on the basis of new physical examination findings pointing to
a previously inapparent focus of infection, and radiographic and culture data. 342 If no source of infection is documented, the initial empiric antibacterial regimen need
not be changed solely on the basis of persistent fever in a clinically stable patient (see Empiric Antifungal Therapy, later in this chapter). Antibiotic therapy should be
continued for the duration of neutropenic fever.
New symptoms and signs of infection in neutropenic patients may be subtle and should be aggressively investigated ( Table 54-7). A new erythematous papular lesion
may provide initial evidence for isolated cutaneous or disseminated infection by bacterial or fungal pathogens, and biopsy and culture are necessary. Catheter exit
sites, surgical wounds, and biopsy sites should be meticulously inspected and palpated for signs of infection. In the neutropenic patient, fever and local tenderness
may be the only signs of infection. A diffuse maculopapular rash is suggestive of a drug etiology, but a culture should be performed to rule out an infectious etiology.
Blurred vision may represent keratitis or endophthalmitis caused by bacterial, viral, or candidal species, or a CNS process. Careful optical evaluation, corneal
scrapings, and aspiration of the vitreous may be needed to establish the diagnosis. Sinopulmonary symptoms in a persistently neutropenic patient (longer than 10
days) or in a patient receiving high-dose corticosteroid therapy are worrisome for a fungal infection. A CT scan is more sensitive and provides superior anatomic
delineation of disease than plain radiographs. Aspiration or biopsy of lesions should be performed when feasible. Abdominal pain and tenderness, typically in the right
lower quadrant, raises the possibility of typhlitis. Tenesmus suggests a rectal, perineal, or prostatic infection. In cases of suspected bowel or perianal infection, the
antibiotic regimen should have broad-spectrum activity against anaerobes, such as imipenem or meropenem alone, or ceftazidime plus metronidazole. Because of the
large differential diagnosis of causes of persistent fever in neutropenic patients, a systematic checklist of symptoms and signs should be evaluated daily. Table 54-6
summarizes the management of commonly encountered scenarios in neutropenic fever.

TABLE 54-7. Diagnostic Evaluation and Modifications of Therapy during Neutropenia

We suggest that two sets of blood cultures from different sites be obtained daily in patients with persistent neutropenic fever to avoid delay in making appropriate
modifications to the antibiotic regimen in cases of superinfection during neutropenia. For pathogens that are not reliably isolated from the blood (such as fungal

species), frequent collection of blood cultures may increase the likelihood of making an earlier diagnosis. In addition, the common use of deep, central catheters
makes line infection an ever present and easily detected cause of fever.
Empiric Antifungal Therapy
The rationale for empiric antifungal therapy for persistent febrile neutropenia is that meticulous clinical examination and collection of cultures are not sufficiently
sensitive for early detection of fungal infections. 123 Before standard implementation of empiric antifungal therapy, there was a correlation between prolonged
neutropenic fever and mortality in patients with cancer, and fungal infection was frequently found at autopsy. Two randomized prospective studies showed empiric
amphotericin B was associated with fewer serious fungal infections in antibiotic-treated neutropenic patients with persistent fever. 343,344 Because fungal infections are
uncommonly encountered in the first 7 days of neutropenic fever, empiric amphotericin B (0.5 to 0.6 mg/kg daily) is typically begun between days 4 and 7 of
neutropenic fever (Table 54-7). Empiric antifungal therapy should be continued for the duration of neutropenia. The potential role of lipid formulations of amphotericin
B and antifungal azoles are discussed in Antifungal Agents, earlier in this chapter.
Persistent Fever after Resolution of Neutropenia
In most cases, an undifferentiated fever that has persisted during neutropenia will resolve around the time of myeloid recovery. In a minority of patients, a fever of
unknown origin persists for several days after myeloid recovery. Similar to the neutropenic period, evaluation of fever after myeloid recovery begins with a methodic
evaluation of both noninfectious causes, such as drug fever (e.g., recombinant growth factors, b-lactam antibiotics), transfusion reactions, and deep venous
thrombosis, as well as infectious causes.
A careful physical examination may show a site of infection that was inapparent during neutropenia, such as a perirectal process. A chest radiograph should be
obtained because pulmonary infection may not be apparent radiographically during neutropenia. Blood and urine cultures, complete blood cell count, serum
chemistry, and liver enzymes should be obtained. An elevated alkaline phosphatase should prompt consideration of hepatosplenic candidiasis, even if blood culture
results were negative for Candida species. A CT scan, magnetic resonance imaging, and ultrasound are complementary imaging modalities and may show discrete
bull's-eye lesions (see Candidiasis, earlier in this chapter).
In contrast to the neutropenic period, empiric antibiotics can be discontinued after resolution of neutropenia in patients who are stable with an undifferentiated fever
and negative culture data. If a source of infection is known, then antibiotic therapy targeted to the specific pathogen(s), rather than broad-spectrum empiric regimens
used for neutropenic fever, is advised.
OUTPATIENT ANTIBIOTIC THERAPY FOR NEUTROPENIC FEVER
Because of the high morbidity and mortality in febrile neutropenic patients and the need for emergent institution of systemic antibacterial therapy, hospital admission
has been regarded as necessary, and inpatient observation was typically continued until resolution of neutropenia. More recent studies have shown that patients with
febrile neutropenia can be stratified according to their risk of developing major or life-threatening infectious complications. Prospective randomized studies have
suggested that patients in the lowest risk group are reasonable candidates for carefully monitored empiric outpatient antibiotic therapy.
Patients with a duration of neutropenia of 7 days or less are considered to be at low risk for serious infectious complications. In a study of 590 patients with
neutropenia and an undifferentiated fever who had defervesced after initiation of empiric antibiotics, the risk for recurrent fever was directly related to the duration of
neutropenia. Among patients with less than 7 days of neutropenia, only 0.6% developed a recurrent fever. The frequency of recurrent fever was 4% when the duration
of neutropenia was 7 to 14 days and 38% when the duration of neutropenia exceeded 14 days. 345 Patients with neutropenia of 7 days or less were also far less likely
to require modifications in the initial antibiotic regimen compared with patients with neutropenia lasting longer than 14 days. 346 Therefore, patients with long-duration
neutropenia are less able to contain ongoing infections or are more likely to develop new infections (or both) after initiation of appropriate empiric antibiotics. 342
Talcott et al. 340,341 developed a risk prediction model of serious complications and mortality in patients with febrile neutropenia based on a retrospective analysis of
261 patients and validated prospectively in 444 patients with cancer and febrile neutropenia. The following features predicted a high risk of substantial morbidity (25%
to 40%) and mortality (12% to 18%): (1) inpatient status at time of fever and neutropenia (mostly made up of patients with hematologic malignancy or BMT recipients);
(2) outpatients with concurrent comorbidity (hypotension, organ dysfunction, altered mentation, uncontrolled bleeding, and so forth); and (3) outpatients with
uncontrolled progressive malignancy. In contrast, outpatients without significant comorbidity and with controlled malignancy had a low rate of morbidity (2% to 5%)
and no infection-related mortality.
Talcott's group subsequently studied 30 low-risk patients with primarily hematologic malignancies and febrile neutropenia at the Dana Farber Cancer Center. 347
Standard intravenous antibiotics were administered for the initial 2 days as inpatients, followed by home antibiotic therapy with gentamicin plus either mezlocillin or
ceftazidime. Patients with documented infections were excluded. Only 16 (53%) patients responded to the initial antibiotic regimen; nine (30%) patients were
readmitted; and four (13%) patients had serious complications, including hypotension, renal failure, disseminated fungal infection, and coagulase-negative
Staphylococcus bacteremia. No patient died, but the incidence of serious complications and the high admission rate in this pilot study suggested that criteria for
selecting patients for outpatient therapy required further refinement.
Malik et al. 348 conducted a prospective, randomized study comparing oral ofloxacin with combination parenteral antibiotics (amikacin plus carbenicillin, cloxacillin, or
piperacillin) in 122 hospitalized febrile neutropenic patients in Pakistan. This study was not confined to low-risk patients. Approximately two-thirds of patients had a
hematologic malignancy or aplastic anemia, and the mean duration of neutropenia was 9 days. The overall response to antibiotics was 77% in the oral arm and 73%
in the parenteral arm. Mortality in the oral group and parenteral groups were similar (7% and 10%, respectively).
This group subsequently compared oral ofloxacin administered in the outpatient versus the inpatient setting in 169 patients with febrile neutropenia. 349 Only low-risk
patients as generally defined by the Talcott criteria were enrolled. Two-thirds of patients had solid tumors, and the remainder had hematologic malignancies. The
mean duration of neutropenia was 5 days. Approximately 80% of outpatients and inpatients responded to ofloxacin monotherapy, and 20% of patients randomized to
the outpatient group were subsequently admitted for parenteral antibiotics. Successful treatment with ofloxacin was more likely in cases in which no source of fever
was documented by cultures or physical examination. Mortality in the group initially treated as outpatients was 4% versus 2% in the initial inpatient group.
Hidalgo et al. 350 compared outpatient-administered oral ofloxacin with inpatient-administered parenteral ceftazidime and amikacin in a prospective, randomized trial in
95 low-risk febrile neutropenic patients with solid tumors. The median duration of neutropenia was 3 to 4 days. Treatment failure, defined as fever persisting for 3
days or longer, a second febrile episode, or progression of infection, occurred in 10% and 8% of patients in the oral and parenteral arms, respectively. Eight patients
in the oral arm were admitted for parenteral therapy, five because of treatment failure and three because of positive blood culture results. No death or serious
complication occurred in those randomized to the oral arm, and one (2%) death occurred in the parenteral arm.
Rubenstein et al. 351 compared outpatient oral ciprofloxacin (750 mg three times a day) plus clindamycin with parenteral clindamycin and aztreonam in 83 low-risk
febrile neutropenic patients with solid tumors or leukemia at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. Patients were observed for 2 hours, then both oral and parenteral groups
were sent home to complete therapy. The response rate (defined as resolution of clinical and laboratory evidence of infection) was 88% in the oral arm and 95% in the
parenteral arm. Of the 20% in both groups who had bacteremia, five of seven in the oral arm and seven of eight in the parenteral arm responded to initial antimicrobial
therapy. Six patients in the oral arm and none in the intravenous arm were admitted. No mortality or severe complications occurred in either group. The oral arm had
additional renal toxicity, perhaps related to dehydration, the relatively high dose of ciprofloxacin, or both. The authors considered the parenteral regimen to have
greater safety than the oral one.
Subsequently, the oral regimen was changed to ciprofloxacin (500 mg) plus amoxicillin/clavulanate (500 mg) every 8 hours, and the parenteral regimen was
unchanged in a study of 179 patients with mostly solid tumors. Outcomes were similar, with 90% and 87% response rates in the oral and parenteral arms,
respectively. Patients with solid tumors had higher response rates than those with hematologic malignancies. All patients survived without major infectious
complications or antibiotic-related toxicity.
In general, these studies are encouraging about the safety of outpatient antibiotic therapy for low-risk patients with neutropenic fever (see references 352, 353, and
354 for more detailed reviews). However, important limitations exist in making broad conclusions. The prospective, randomized studies described previously

individually each enrolled fewer than 200 patients, and therefore lacked sufficient power to detect small differences between treatment groups. Pooling data from
different studies as a metaanalysis is made difficult by the differences in eligibility criteria, choice of antibiotics, criteria for hospital admission, and criteria for a
successful outcome.
The National Cancer Institute and H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center compared an oral regimen consisting of ciprofloxacin plus amoxicillin-clavulanate with intravenous
ceftazidime alone in patients with febrile neutropenia in whom the expected duration of neutropenia was less than or equal to 10 days from the onset of fever. 355 All
patients were hospitalized for the entire duration of neutropenic fever. A total of 116 episodes of neutropenic fever were evaluated. Approximately 75% of patients had
solid tumors, and the remainder had leukemia or lymphoma. The mean duration of neutropenia in both groups was 3 to 4 days. Approximately two-thirds of febrile
episodes were unexplained, and blood stream infections occurred in only 7% of episodes. Serious complications, such as hypotension or intraabdominal infection,
were rarely encountered. Breakthrough infections associated with bacteremia, oral, or soft tissue infections were also rare in both groups and were controlled by
modifications in the antibiotic regimen. There were no deaths.
In a European multicenter study of febrile neutropenia (defined as ANC less than 1000/µL), patients with an expected duration of neutropenia of less than or equal to
10 days were randomized to receive either oral ciprofloxacin plus amoxicillin-clavulanate or intravenous ceftriaxone plus amikacin. 356 A total of 312 patients were
evaluated, approximately 70% with a solid tumor and the remainder with a hematologic malignancy. The median duration of neutropenia after antibiotics was 4 days.
Two patients in the oral group and six patients in the intravenous group died of infection. At day 30 after randomization, survival was approximately 95% in both
groups. Bacteremia occurred in less than 15% of patients in both groups. The duration of fever, duration of therapy, and need for modification of the initial regimen
were similar in both groups.
These two well-designed studies clearly establish that for carefully selected patients with febrile neutropenia, an oral regimen consisting of ciprofloxacin plus
amoxicillin-clavulanate is safe and effective. Both studies evaluated lower risk patients, but the inclusion of patients with hematologic malignancies and patients with
an expected duration of neutropenia as high as 10 days after the onset of fever reflect more liberal criteria for risk stratification. Patients with comorbidities predictive
of a higher risk of complications (e.g., hemodynamic instability; neurologic, hepatic, respiratory, or renal impairment; catheter infections; inability to take oral
medications) were excluded. In addition, these studies were conducted in hospitalized patients and, therefore, extrapolations should not be made about the feasibility
of this oral regimen in the outpatient setting.
The greatest concern about outpatient management of neutropenic fever relates to the possibility of life-threatening complications that may be reversible if detected
early and appropriate interventions are made immediately (e.g., intravenous fluid, vasopressors, broadening of antibiotic coverage). Randomized clinical trials with
sufficient statistical power are required to more precisely stratify patients for whom outpatient management of neutropenic fever is safe and to delineate optimal
antibiotic regimens (oral versus parenteral) for different patient groups.
ANTIBACTERIAL PROPHYLAXIS IN AFEBRILE NEUTROPENIC PATIENTS
Despite improvements in antibacterial agents used in febrile neutropenia, persistent and profound neutropenia remains the most important predictor of life-threatening
infections. Prophylactic agents administered at the onset of neutropenia therefore have potential appeal as a means of reducing the incidence of infections during this
high-risk period. However, the concern for emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria plus the lack of a survival benefit associated with antibacterial prophylaxis led to
the reasonable recommendation against routine prophylaxis in neutropenic patients by the IDSA. 71
Today, antibacterial prophylaxis for neutropenia is largely restricted to quinolones and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. These agents have activity against
Enterobacteriaceae without significant activity against commensal intestinal anaerobes, thus providing selective decontamination of the gut. The rationale for
selective, as opposed to global, suppression of gut flora is based on the concept of colonization resistance. In human studies, maintenance of the normal commensal
intestinal flora provides a potent barrier to acquisition of pathogenic aerobic gram-negative rods. 357 Thus, it has been argued that an ideal prophylactic antibiotic
regimen selectively targets aerobic gram-negative bacteria without inducing alterations in the normal intestinal microflora. Quinolones and
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole have the added advantage of achieving high serum and tissue levels after oral administration, an important consideration given that
multiple portals of bacterial invasion exist in neutropenic patients.
Two meta-analyses have been conducted on trials of fluoroquinolone prophylaxis in neutropenic patients. 358,359 The more recent study evaluated 18 trials with 1408
patients in which quinolones were compared with either placebo or trimethoprim- sulfamethoxazole. 358 Patients who received quinolones had 79% fewer
gram-negative infections than those without prophylaxis, leading to an overall 46% reduction in total infections. The reduction in fever was small, and in blinded trials,
was not significant. Quinolones were more effective than trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole in preventing gram-negative infections. Prophylaxis with either agent did not
affect mortality.
The frequencies of quinolone-resistant gram-negative isolates, gram-positive infections, and fungal infections were not significantly affected by quinolone prophylaxis
in the metaanalysis. 358 However, a note of caution is required. Although quinolones have remained particularly effective at preventing gram-negative bacterial
infections, quinolone-resistant gram-negative infections have developed during prophylaxis at several centers. 358 Among gram-positive pathogens, viridans
streptococcal bacteremia is of particular concern in patients receiving quinolone prophylaxis (see Viridans Streptococci, earlier in this chapter).
To try to overcome the inadequate activity of quinolones against gram-positive bacteria, combination prophylactic regimens have been used. One large randomized
study showed that addition of penicillin to a quinolone (pefloxacin) reduced the rate of bacteremia, especially that due to streptococcal species, compared with the
quinolone alone. 360 Another randomized study showed that the combination of prophylactic ofloxacin and rifampin led to a reduction in gram-positive infections
compared with ofloxacin alone.361 However, addition of these agents to quinolone prophylaxis, of course, defeats the concept of selective decontamination. Newer
generation quinolones with enhanced activity against streptococci are potential candidates for prophylaxis and warrant further study.
If prophylactic ciprofloxacin is used, vancomycin should be considered in the initial empiric regimen for neutropenic fever based on the high likelihood of breakthrough
gram-positive infections. Vancomycin plus ceftazidime is a logical combination in this setting.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole as prophylaxis against P carinii in children with acute lymphocytic leukemia was also highly effective as prophylaxis against bacterial
infections and sepsis. 289 More recent studies comparing trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole with placebo have yielded inconsistent results. This discrepancy may reflect
the emergence of resistant gram-negative bacteria during trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis. In comparative studies, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole has, in
general, been shown to be less effective than quinolones with regard to protection against gram-negative infections. 358 Other disadvantages of
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis include lack of activity against P aeruginosa, potential suppression and delay of myeloid recovery, and hypersensitivity
reactions. The main advantage of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole over quinolones relates to effective prophylaxis against P carinii. Although P carinii is rarely
associated with isolated neutropenia, other comorbid conditions (such as AIDS) and regimens that contain intensive corticosteroid therapy predispose to infection by
this organism (see Pneumocystis carinii, earlier in this chapter). Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole may also reduce the frequency of nocardiosis, listeriosis, and
toxoplasmosis in persons with compromised T-cell immunity.
PROTECTED ENVIRONMENTS
The rationale for protective environments for neutropenic patients is derived from the same principle as selective decontamination by prophylactic antibiotics. By
reducing the frequency of colonization by virulent bacteria, a germ-free environment was considered to be important in protecting neutropenic patients from infection.
However, it became clear that such stringent measures were not necessary for the majority of neutropenic patients. Nauseef and Maki 362 compared protective
isolation (single room and use of gowns, gloves, and masks) with standard hospital care in hospitalized neutropenic patients with acute nonlymphocytic leukemia.
Neither group received prophylactic antibiotics or sterilized food. The two groups were similar with respect to incidence of infection and days with fever. Paradoxically,
the rate of bacteremia was higher in patients randomized to protective isolation. The availability of more effective antibacterial agents, the shift in predominance of
infections from gram-negative to gram-positive pathogens in neutropenic patients, and the lack of evidence supporting the benefit of protective isolation have led to
the adoption of less stringent methods of isolation at most centers. The cost and excess labor required to maintain stringent isolation and the additional emotional
burden that patients and families must endure further militates against the routine use of such measures.
Isolation of aerobic gram-negative bacteria from food in hospitals is well known. 363 Uncooked vegetables often contain relatively large burdens of E coli, Klebsiella

species, and P aeruginosa.364 Thus, although not validated by controlled studies, it is reasonable to omit such foods from the diets of neutropenic patients. Similarly,
tap water can harbor P aeruginosa and Legionella species. Careful hand washing before and after patient contacts remains the most effective method for preventing
nosocomial infection. 365
Laminar air flow units with high-efficiency particulate air filtration is the most effective means of removing aerosolized bacteria and fungal spores. 366 With more
effective antimicrobial agents used today as empiric therapy for neutropenic fever, it is unclear that such protected environments are of benefit for most neutropenic
patients. The high cost of maintaining such units makes them impractical for routine use for all neutropenic patients at most centers. 367 Today, the principal benefit of
laminar air flow units is likely to be protection against Aspergillus species and other filamentous fungi. From a practical standpoint, they are usually restricted to
patients at high risk for infection by molds (e.g., patients with leukemia and BMT recipients).

MANIFESTATIONS AND THERAPY OF INFECTIONS
BACTEREMIA
Bacteremia is a common complication of antineoplastic myeloablative chemotherapy. In a review of empiric antimicrobial regimens for neutropenic fever, the dominant
risk factor for bacteremia was the duration of neutropenia. 305 Neutropenia lasting 1 to 5 days before trial entry was associated with a relative risk of bacteremia of 5.2
compared with no neutropenia; neutropenia of 6 to 15 days had a relative risk of 7.35. Patients with a hematologic disease and BMT recipients were also more likely
to have bacteremia than patients with solid tumors. The presence of shock was highly predictive of bacteremia with a relative risk of 5.6.
In patients with suspected systemic infection, a meticulous physical examination and culture of all potential sources of infection should ideally be done before initiation
of antibiotics. If it is not feasible to obtain all culture material at the time of initial evaluation, however, empiric antibiotic therapy should not be delayed. Cultures
should be obtained from blood and urine, and depending on the clinical situation, from sputum, pleural fluid, and peritoneal fluid. Wounds and skin lesions should be
aspirated or biopsied, and material submitted for culture. Particularly in neutropenic patients, the appearance of wounds may be deceptively benign without erythema
or purulence.
Once a positive blood culture result is reported, the initial antibiotic therapy may need to be altered (see Table 54-7). Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus species
and Corynebacterium (diphtheroid) species are common blood culture contaminants. However, patients with cancer often have indwelling intravenous catheters,
which can be portals of entry for these bacteria, thereby increasing the risk of bacteremia. The likelihood of contamination is increased if these organisms are isolated
from a single blood culture. It is therefore important to draw at least two sets of blood cultures from separate sites. Corynebacterium jeikeium is a virulent species
associated with bacteremia and disseminated organ infection; isolation of this organism from a single blood culture requires prompt initiation of vancomycin therapy.
Similarly, isolation of S aureus from a single blood culture (or from the urine in a febrile or septic appearing patient) should be considered to represent hematogenous
infection.
If a gram-negative organism is isolated from a blood culture collected before the initiation of antibiotics, an appropriate parenteral regimen used empirically at the
onset of neutropenic fever can be maintained while awaiting drug sensitivity data so long as the patient is clinically stable. 368 The rationale is that standard empiric
antibiotic regimens for neutropenic fever and the specific regimen adopted at a given institution are selected to provide reliable coverage against all likely
gram-negative pathogens. If the patient is not stable or if the gram-negative organism is isolated after initiation of antibiotics (i.e., breakthrough bacteremia), change
to a new regimen is warranted (see Table 54-7 for specific suggestions). Once antibiotic susceptibilities are known, therapy should be tailored appropriately.
Shock and multiple organ dysfunction are dreaded complications of sepsis. In patients with neutropenia, prompt initiation of broad-spectrum antibiotics directed
against commonly encountered blood-borne pathogens is essential (e.g., S aureus, viridans streptococci, Enterobacteriaceae, and P aeruginosa). Unlike the stable
patient with neutropenic fever, there is likely not to be an opportunity to modify antibiotics based on culture data if the initial regimen does not provide adequate
coverage. Combination vancomycin, imipenem, and an aminoglycoside is a reasonable empiric regimen. At centers in which carbapenem-resistant P aeruginosa is
frequent, cefepime plus metronidazole may be used instead of imipenem. Modifications should be made once culture and sensitivity data are known.
In septic shock, several interventions should be made rapidly. When possible, removal of all indwelling catheters should be performed. If a nidus of infection is
identified, surgical débridement should be performed emergently, and material sent for culture and staining for bacteria and fungi. Standard supportive measures
include fluid resuscitation, oxygen, and invasive hemodynamic monitoring, and vasopressor agents should be instituted. In patients with documented or suspected
adrenal insufficiency, stress dose corticosteroids (e.g., hydrocortisone, 50 to 100 mg every 8 hours) should be administered. Empiric corticosteroid administration for
adrenal insufficiency is appropriate in patients who have received significant corticosteroid therapy within the last year, such as for the underlying malignancy or for
GVHD. However, routine use of corticosteroids for severe sepsis and shock is not warranted. 369
Numerous studies have evaluated therapy directed against specific mediators of septic shock, including antibodies against endotoxin and TNF-a and a recombinant
IL-1 receptor antagonist. Other potential strategies include endotoxin vaccine, polyclonal hyperimmune serum (to neutralize bacterial toxins), bradykinin,
cyclooxygenase, leukotriene, platelet-activating factor antagonists, pentoxifylline, endogenous antibacterial peptides (such as bactericidal permeability increasing
protein), and inhibition of nitric oxide. 370 All such therapeutic modalities directed against mediators of the sepsis cascade should be considered to be experimental.
IMPLANTED VASCULAR CATHETERS
Tunneled, cuffed vascular catheters have been used extensively in patients with cancer, providing long-term central venous access for blood drawing and infusions.
Catheter infections have been divided into several categories. 371 Greene371 distinguished exit from tunnel infections based on whether inflammation extended greater
than 2 cm from the exit site. Purulence from the exit site may be present, although in neutropenic patients, local erythema and tenderness may be the only signs of
infection, making it difficult to distinguish from sterile inflammation associated with mild trauma. Tunnel infections manifest with inflammation extending along the
subcutaneous tract through which the catheter was inserted. The third major category is catheter-related bacteremia or fungemia, which may occur in the presence or
absence of signs of localized infection. A 5- to 10-fold greater organism recovery from blood drawn from the catheter compared with peripheral blood cultures is highly
suggestive of a catheter source of septicemia. The fourth category is a septic thrombophlebitis in which a venous thrombus is documented in association with positive
blood culture results.
Most exit site infections can be cured with antibiotics alone without catheter removal. At the University of Maryland Cancer Center, 160 exit site infections were
identified out of 690 Hickman catheters placed, most caused by S epidermidis or S aureus.372 Treatment was usually with vancomycin, and only 10 of 160 exit site
infections resulted in catheter removal. In another study, 55 of 65 exit site infections were successfully treated with antibiotics and local care alone. 373
In contrast to exit site infections, tunnel infections generally require catheter removal because of failure of antibiotic therapy alone. In cases of tunnel infection caused
by the Mycobacterium fortuitum complex (M fortuitum and M chelonae), surgical excision of the tissue surrounding the tunnel may be required. 374
Most cases of catheter-associated bacteremia can be cured without catheter removal, but certain situations should prompt catheter removal. Persistently positive
blood culture results for longer than 3 days or recurrences of bacteremia by the same pathogen despite adequate antibiotic therapy are evidence of antibiotic failure
and require catheter removal. In patients with severe sepsis (e.g., hypotension unresponsive to intravenous fluids), a new site of intravenous access should be
established followed by immediate removal of all previous indwelling catheters. Certain pathogens (e.g., fungi, M fortuitum complex, Bacillus species, and
antibiotic-resistant bacteria) are unlikely to clear or are prone to relapse without catheter removal.
In cases of septic thrombophlebitis, prompt catheter removal and initiation of antimicrobial therapy is essential. Anticoagulation is generally used, although its value
has not been clearly established. Septic phlebitis of a central vein usually does not require surgical drainage if the catheter is removed. In cases in which a focus of
infection exists in the soft tissue around the vein, surgical drainage may be necessary. 375
Central catheters may be partially implanted, such as the Broviac or Hickman type in which the ports are exposed to the outside, or they may be entirely implanted.
The totally implanted venous access devices have the advantage of being less likely to be traumatized or colonized by external skin flora and have fewer infections
compared with catheters with external ports. In a study at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 341 of 788 (43%) external tunneled catheters became infected
compared with 57 of 680 (8%) completely implanted ports, 376 and external catheters were significantly more likely to be removed because of infection. It is possible
that the more favorable infection rate associated with implanted ports is that such catheters are more likely used in patients with solid tumors who do not require

multiple ports for intravenous access; the external catheters are in turn more likely to be used in patients who require more catheter manipulations, such as those with
leukemia and BMT recipients.
The use of long-term tunneled catheters with a Dacron cuff to reduce entry of skin flora is generally associated with fewer infections than nontunneled catheters.
However, at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, nontunneled silastic catheters were associated with long durability and a low infection rate comparable with tunneled
catheters.371 Such an approach requires meticulous catheter care, but has the advantage of reduced expense and morbidity associated with catheter insertion and
easier catheter removal.
SKIN LESIONS AND SOFT TISSUE INFECTIONS
In the heavily immunocompromised patient with cancer, skin lesions can arise from several different etiologies (see reference 377 for an excellent review). Drug
reactions are probably the most common noninfectious cause of cutaneous lesions. b-Lactam and sulfa antibiotics are relatively common offenders that are used
extensively in this patient population. Cutaneous lesions may be manifestations of the underlying malignancy. For example, hematologic malignancies are associated
with mixed cryoglobulinemia, which may produce cutaneous vasculitis. Sweet's syndrome is characterized by fever and skin lesions that may be papular, nodular, or
ulcerative. These lesions may be misdiagnosed as cellulitis and be treated inappropriately with antibiotics. Histologically, a dense neutrophilic infiltrate located mostly
in the mid and upper dermis is diagnostic. Sweet's syndrome is associated with hematologic malignancies and may occur during the neutropenic period. In the
transplant recipient, GVHD typically presents as a diffuse maculopapular rash, and involvement of the gut and liver is common. Biopsy of skin lesions for histology
and culture and staining for bacteria, fungi, mycobacteria, and viral infections is prudent to rule out infection.
Infections of the skin can either be localized or manifestations of systemic infection. Ecthyma gangrenosum is the most characteristic skin lesion associated with
systemic P aeruginosa infection, but it is not pathognomonic (see Fig. 54-1). Ecthyma gangrenosum–like lesions can be caused by S aureus, enteric gram-negative
rod infection, and by filamentous fungi, including Aspergillus, Zygomycete, and Fusarium species. Ecthyma gangrenosum begins as a raised erythematous papule or
nodule that progresses to a bluish-black necrotic lesion within 12 to 24 hours. A central area of necrosis surrounded by erythema is typical. Hemorrhagic bullae may
be observed. Pathologically, ecthyma gangrenosum is a necrotizing process in which masses of bacteria are often observed within the vessel wall. In neutropenic
patients, infiltrating white cells may be absent.
Local soft tissue infection by P aeruginosa in the neutropenic patient can rapidly spread through fascial planes, causing extensive necrosis and fulminant sepsis. 378
The initial signs at the site of entry may be mild, pain and tenderness may be out of proportion to erythema, and purulence is likely to be absent. A needle aspiration
of the lesion showing gram-negative bacilli establishes the diagnosis of invasive infection; however, a negative aspiration does not rule out the diagnosis. Prompt
surgical débridement may be life saving in cases of localized disease.
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia can cause a variety of dermatologic infections, including mucocutaneous ulcerations, primary cellulitis, a metastatic nodular cellulitis,
and ecthyma gangrenosum [see Stenotrophomonas (Xanthomonas) maltophilia, earlier in this chapter]. Aeromonas hydrophilia is a gram-negative rod that grows in
fresh and brackish waters and can be acquired by nosocomial transmission. Immunocompromised persons are more susceptible to extensive soft tissue infections
from direct penetration through the skin, leading to sepsis. In a patient exposed to fresh or brackish water preceding an episode of cellulitis, an antibiotic regimen with
activity against A hydrophilia should be initiated. The organism is usually susceptible to fluoroquinolones, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, third-generation
cephalosporins, and imipenem.
Septicemia by viridans streptococci is associated with facial flushing and a rash in 60% of cases in a series from the M. D. Anderson Center in Texas. 65 The rash was
usually maculopapular, started on the trunk, and extended to the face and extremities. Skin exfoliation occurred on the palms and soles in 25% of patients 2 weeks
after the onset of the rash. These manifestations are likely the result of acquisition of a plasmid producing a toxin associated with a toxic shock syndrome.
Bacteremia caused by C jeikeium is associated with skin lesions in 30% to 50% of neutropenic patients. The skin lesions often occur at catheter sites and at sites of
trauma, such as bone marrow aspiration, and may only become apparent after resolution of neutropenia. 72 The portal of entry is usually through the skin. The lesions
may be cellulitic, ulcerative, or pustular. If diphtheroids are isolated from a skin lesion, the microbiology laboratory should be asked specifically to evaluate for C
jeikeium. Bacillus species are rare causes of skin infection, but can be associated with impetiginous, ulcerative, and necrotic skin lesions. C jeikeium and Bacillus
species are sensitive to vancomycin.
Clostridium species are gram-positive anaerobes that cause deep soft tissue infection involving the fascia and muscle (see Clostridium Species, earlier in this
chapter). Typically, a small dusky or purplish lesion on the leg or abdominal wall rapidly expands, and as infection progresses, the lesions become necrotic, bullous,
and hemorrhagic. Systemic toxicity, including fever, malaise, and mental status changes occur early. Because the infection occurs in the deep soft tissue, tenderness
and evidence of vascular compromise typically precede the development of cellulitis . A rapidly progressive deep soft tissue infection with gas formation suggests
clostridial myonecrosis (or polymicrobial necrotizing fascitis). Needle aspiration characteristically shows the organism in the setting of a mild or absent inflammatory
response. Extensive surgical débridement may be life saving if initiated early, although at this stage of disease, most patients die. 86
The characteristic skin lesions of disseminated candidiasis are raised erythematous discrete papules, measuring approximately 0.5 to 1.0 cm in diameter. The lesions
are usually not tender. Concurrent myalgias raises the possibility of Candida myositis.379 The yeast is cultured from skin lesions in approximately one-half the cases.
Therefore, a negative culture result does not rule out the diagnosis. Biopsy and fungal staining of cutaneous lesions can provide an immediate clue to the diagnosis,
prompting the early addition of antifungal therapy.
Trichosporon beigelii is a yeast that causes sepsis and disseminated infection in neutropenic patients. 144,145,380 Skin lesions occur in 30% of disseminated infections
and are characterized by nontender erythematous nodules that may become necrotic. Histologically, budding yeast are present in the dermis, as distinguished from
Candida species, which produce pseudohyphae. High-dose azole therapy is considered the treatment of choice.
Cutaneous infection by filamentous fungi may be primary or may represent systemic infection. Primary cutaneous infection with molds can occur in immunocompetent
patients by traumatic inoculation. However, progression to angioinvasion, infarction, extension to the deep soft tissue fascia and muscle, and dissemination denote
profound immunosuppression. Walmsley et al. 381 described 16 cases of primary cutaneous aspergillosis in children, most of whom had leukemia or lymphoma or had
undergone BMT. Eleven cases were related to intravenous arm boards, and five cases were attributed to hematogenous dissemination. Clinically, these lesions
resemble ecthyma gangrenosum associated with disseminated P aeruginosa infection. Histologically, hyphal elements are present and may cause angioinvasion and
infarction.
Infection by Fusarium species is being observed with increasing frequency, predominantly in leukemia patients with prolonged neutropenia. Primary cutaneous
fusariosis has a varied appearance, including cellulitis, paronychia, onychomycosis resembling dermatophyte infection, as well as papular and nodular lesions, and
subcutaneous nodules 155 (see Fusarium Species, earlier in this chapter).
In the case of primary localized cutaneous infection with a mold, surgical resection is necessary and has an excellent prognosis. 382 In the neutropenic patient, the
likelihood of subclinical systemic infection is high, and, therefore, high-dose amphotericin B (1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg daily) or a lipid formulation should be administered.
SINUSITIS
In immunocompetent patients, sinusitis results principally from inadequate drainage of mucous secretions from the sinus cavities. Respiratory bacterial pathogens,
including S pneumoniae, H influenzae, and M catarrhalis predominate. In patients with neutropenia or otherwise highly immunocompromised patients, infections by P
aeruginosa, Enterobacteriaceae, and molds are more commonly observed.
Treatment of sinusitis in immunocompetent patients with cancer involves a standard antibiotic regimen, such as trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole,
amoxicillin-clavulanate, or a cephalosporin with activity against respiratory pathogens. In cases of an obstructing tumor interfering with drainage from the maxillary
sinuses, surgical creation of an antral window may be required to facilitate drainage.
In neutropenic patients with symptoms or signs suggestive of sinusitis, a regimen with activity against gram-negative bacteria (such as ceftazidime) should be
administered. If no improvement occurs within 3 days, a CT scan of the sinuses with diagnostic aspiration of fluid collections is recommended. A sinus endoscopy may

also be useful to visualize the upper airways and to obtain diagnostic material.
Infections by community respiratory viruses may initially manifest with sinus congestion or nonspecific upper airway symptoms. A high index of suspicion for such
viruses is necessary for early therapy and prevention of nosocomial outbreaks. A nasopharyngeal or throat wash may rapidly establish the diagnosis (see Community
Respiratory Viruses, earlier in this chapter).
Invasive fungal sinusitis in immunocompromised patients often has devastating results. Infection by Aspergillus species is most common in patients with persistent
neutropenia (e.g., aplastic anemia) and in BMT recipients. The agents of mucormycosis are classically associated with rhinocerebral disease, leading to necrosis of
the palate, and extension to surrounding structures. Sinusitis by emerging fungal pathogens, including Fusarium species, Alternaria species, dark-walled molds, and
Pseudallescheria boydii are being recognized with increasing frequency. 154,383 A cluster of fungal sinusitis in a pediatric hospital was associated with soil reservoirs
disturbed by hospital construction. 384
Symptoms and signs suggestive of fungal sinusitis include fever, nasal congestion, headache, maxillary tenderness, and periorbital swelling. Sinus endoscopy may
show necrotic material or ulceration. Hyphal invasion into blood vessels leads to tissue infarction and hemorrhage. Mental status changes are suggestive of
involvement of the brain.
Therapy for invasive mold infections involves a combined medical and surgical approach. High-dose amphotericin B (1.5 mg/kg/d) or a lipid formulation of
amphotericin B should be initiated. When feasible, surgical resection of involved tissue should be performed, as medical therapy alone is unlikely to contain infection
in the setting of neutropenia or severe immunosuppression. Amphotericin B should be continued even if all of the visualized necrotic tissue is fully débrided, given the
likelihood of inapparent local and disseminated disease. The most important predictor of a successful outcome is resolution of neutropenia.
PULMONARY INFILTRATES
In patients with cancer, pulmonary infiltrates pose a particularly difficult challenge. Numerous noninfectious causes of pulmonary infiltrates include congestive heart
failure, pulmonary hemorrhage, infarction, drug-induced pneumonitis, radiation injury, tumor, and acute respiratory distress syndrome ( Table 54-8). In addition,
common processes can have atypical radiographic appearances, and two or more pulmonary processes can exist simultaneously in this patient population.
Establishing an early diagnosis is crucial so that appropriate therapy can be instituted, and the toxicity of inappropriate therapy is avoided.

TABLE 54-8. Differential Diagnosis of Pulmonary Infiltrates in Patients with Cancer

In heavily immunocompromised patients with cancer, such as those with leukemia and BMT recipients, pneumonia is common and is associated with a high mortality.
Walsh and Pizzo 385 divided pulmonary infiltrates in neutropenic patients into four categories: (1) early, focal; (2) refractory, focal; (3) late, focal; and (4) interstitial or
diffuse. Early infiltrates are defined as those that develop with the first onset of fever in a neutropenic patient. These infections are likely to be caused by
Enterobacteriaceae, P aeruginosa, and S aureus. Because of neutropenia, physical findings of consolidation and sputum production may be absent. Two sets of
blood cultures, a urine culture, a chest radiograph, and, if possible, a sputum for Gram's stain and culture should be obtained. Early in the course, the infiltrate is
localized, but rapid progression to respiratory failure and sepsis is common. It is therefore essential to initiate appropriate empiric antibiotic therapy promptly and to
closely monitor the response in an inpatient setting.
The optimal antibiotic regimen is controversial. The potential advantages of combination antibiotics include synergy and a reduced likelihood of the pathogen being
resistant to all antibiotics in the initial regimen. An antipseudomonal penicillin (such as piperacillin or ticarcillin) or a third- (ceftazidime) or fourth- (cefepime)
generation cephalosporin with activity against P aeruginosa may be combined with an aminoglycoside. If MRSA is common, empiric vancomycin should be added.
Alternatively, standard monotherapy regimens for empiric treatment of febrile neutropenia, including ceftazidime, cefepime, imipenem, or meropenem, have
sufficiently broad-spectrum activity to be used for treatment of acute bacterial pneumonia in neutropenic patients. The principle that a broad-spectrum antibiotic can
be used as monotherapy for serious community-acquired and nosocomial pneumonias has gained widespread acceptance through well-designed prospective
studies. 386,387 With regard to patients with cancer, ceftazidime monotherapy was shown to be equivalent to combination regimens as empiric therapy for neutropenic
fever, including a subgroup of patients with pulmonary infiltrates. The rationale of monotherapy is to design a regimen with broad-spectrum activity against the most
common pathogens and against the pathogens most likely to result in serious or life-threatening complications. Modifications of the initial regimen should be made on
the basis of clinical response and microbiologic data. For this reason, use of a single antibiotic is probably not appropriate as empiric therapy for a fulminant
pneumonia causing respiratory failure and sepsis, in which delay in the institution of appropriate antibiotics is likely to have disastrous consequences. The
appropriateness of a particular empiric regimen for pneumonia, either monotherapy or combination therapy, depends on the frequency of isolates and their sensitivity
profiles at a given institution.
If clinical improvement occurs within 48 to 72 hours, no further diagnostic measures are necessary, and antibiotic therapy should be continued until neutropenia
resolves and for at least 10 to 14 days. Once neutropenia resolves, an appropriate oral antibiotic regimen could be administered for the remainder of the course.
In cases of refractory pneumonia, the possibility of a bacterial infection resistant to the empiric regimen as well as atypical causes of pneumonia become more likely.
Examples of the latter group include Legionella,388 Chlamydia, Mycoplasma, P carinii, Nocardia, and Mycobacteria species, as well as viral and fungal pathogens.
Pneumonia and sepsis caused by enteric flora in a patient from an endemic area may result from a hyperinfection syndrome by Strongyloides stercoralis. A CT scan of
the chest is useful in defining the location and morphology of the lesions, and an invasive diagnostic procedure (bronchoalveolar lavage, needle aspiration, open lung
biopsy) may be warranted to establish the diagnosis.
Late onset of focal infiltrates applies to new pulmonary lesions developing on or after 7 days of empiric antibacterial therapy in persistently neutropenic patients. The
likelihood of a fungal pneumonia in this setting is high. In contrast, development of a new pulmonary infiltrate after resolution of neutropenia is likely to represent a
previous infection that was unrecognized during the neutropenic period; such infiltrates usually resolve without complications. Aspergillus species are the most
common cause of pneumonia in persistently neutropenic patients. Less common fungal pathogens include Trichosporon, Rhizopus, Fusarium species, and
dematiaceous molds. Aspergillus species and other filamentous fungi are angioinvasive and may cause pulmonary hemorrhage and infarction (see Aspergillosis,
earlier in this chapter). Pleuritic chest pain may result from pulmonary infarction or direct invasion of chest wall structures. As is the case for refractory pneumonia,
infection with resistant bacteria, viruses, and protozoa remain in the differential diagnosis.
Diffuse pulmonary infiltrates may be due to a variety of infectious causes, including progressive bacterial infection, Legionella, P carinii, M tuberculosis (miliary),
atypical mycobacteria, S stercoralis, and fungal and viral pathogens. In the BMT recipient, CMV infection is the most common cause of pulmonary infiltrates in the
postengraftment period, generally between 1 to 4 months after transplant. Respiratory viruses, including RSV, parainfluenza, influenza, and adenovirus can cause
severe pulmonary infection in transplant recipients. In winter months, upper respiratory symptoms and bronchospasm favor the diagnosis of RSV. Diffuse necrotizing
pneumonia by varicella and HSV are also encountered in transplant recipients. Patients receiving concomitant corticosteroid therapy in addition to myeloablative
therapy are at particular risk for P carinii infection, and, to a lesser degree, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis, and reactivation of tuberculosis.

Based on careful evaluation of the patient's level of immunosuppression, time course of the illness, epidemiologic exposures, physical examination, and radiographic
and laboratory data, a preliminary differential diagnosis is established. For patients who are either not responding to antibacterial therapy or whose clinical course is
not suggestive of an acute bacterial process, an aggressive and expeditious approach to establishing the diagnosis is indicated. Sputum induction with hypertonic
saline is diagnostic of PCP in approximately 60% of cases in patients who not infected with human immunodeficiency syndrome. 285 Sputum induction is also of value
in diagnosing tuberculosis. If sputum induction is not diagnostic, bronchoalveolar lavage has a high diagnostic yield in alveolar infiltrates such as pneumonia caused
by P carinii, M tuberculosis, and respiratory viruses. The sensitivity of bronchoalveolar lavage for focal lesions such as nodules is variable. In lesions larger than 2 cm,
the sensitivity of bronchoalveolar lavage ranges from 50% to 80%, but in smaller lesions, the diagnostic yield is usually approximately 15%. 385 Quantitative cultures
from bronchoalveolar lavage or from a protected brush catheter may increase the specificity in the diagnosis of bacterial pneumonia as distinguished from oral flora.
However, the diagnostic yield of such procedures is substantially reduced by prior antibiotic therapy.
Bronchoalveolar lavage is a relatively insensitive method for diagnosing aspergillosis, detecting only approximately 50% of cases. 389,390 In one study of patients with
leukemia, bronchoalveolar lavage failed to document all nine cases of autopsy-proven pulmonary aspergillosis. 391 Percutaneous biopsy may increase the diagnostic
yield, but in thrombocytopenic patients, the risk of bleeding may be unacceptably high. Open lung biopsy is the definitive diagnostic method in immunocompromised
patients with pulmonary lesions. This procedure also allows for easier visualization and control of bleeding. False-negative results occur in approximately 5% of open
lung biopsies as a result of sampling error in the case of patchy lesions.
CARDIAC INFECTIONS
Cardiac infections are relatively uncommon in patients with cancer. Infection can occur as a complication of thoracic surgery, such as a pneumonectomy, in which
dehiscence of the bronchial stump can lead to a bronchopleural fistula and infection of the pleural space with extension to the pericardium. Meticulous and repeated
débridements of infected tissue and repair of the fistula are necessary.
Endocarditis can occur as a complication of catheter-associated bacteremia 392 or a septic thrombophlebitis of the neck. In neutropenic patients, dental procedures
should be avoided, but if they are necessary, antibiotic prophylaxis (amoxicillin) is reasonable to avoid secondary bacteremia. Evaluation by echocardiography is
warranted in patients with bacteremia with signs suggestive of endocarditis, such as a new murmur or embolic phenomena.
Fungal endocarditis (principally Candida and Aspergillus species) may result from cardiac surgery and from illicit drug use. 393 Therapy for fungal endocarditis requires
removal of the infected valve based on the poor penetration of antifungal agents into the valve, and the propensity for large vessel embolization. If valve surgery is not
feasible, combination therapy generally consisting of high-dose amphotericin B (1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg/d) plus 5-flucytosine followed by prolonged fluconazole therapy has
been successful in case reports of Candida endocarditis. 394,395 Rarely, filamentous fungi may also cause myocardial abscesses with direct extension to and
destruction of the contiguous valve in profoundly immunosuppressed patients. 396
Pericardial aspergillosis is a rare, but highly lethal complication in profoundly immunosuppressed patients with cancer. 397 In a review of 28 cases, pericardial
involvement resulted from contiguous spread from the lungs or myocardium in all patients. 398 Patients with a hematologic malignancy are at highest risk for pericardial
aspergillosis, reflecting the increased propensity for pulmonary Aspergillus infection. Clinical manifestations include chest pain, a pericardial friction rub, and
pericardial constriction and tamponade.
Other pathogens associated with myopericarditis or endocarditis include T gondii, C neoformans, histoplasmosis, Mycobacterium species, nocardiosis, Bartonella
species, and viral infections (e.g., HSV, CMV, influenza).
OROPHARYNGEAL INFECTIONS
Oropharyngeal infections in patients with cancer usually result from the combination of neutropenia and the breakdown of mucosal barriers related to cytotoxic
chemotherapy and radiation therapy (see Mucosal Immunity, earlier in this chapter). A variety of oral manifestations may occur, including stomatitis, cheilitis, gingivitis,
and periodontitis. Gingivitis is characterized by ulceration of the epithelium lining the gingival sulcus, resulting in a pocket between the gingiva and tooth. Necrotizing
ulcerative gingivitis represents a severe end of the spectrum of this disease. In periodontitis, inflammation involves the supporting bone. The principal clinical sign of
periodontal disease is bleeding through the ulcerated epithelium. 399
Determining the incidence of oral bacterial infections in neutropenic patients is made difficult by the fact that the oral cavity is not a sterile site, making the distinction
of chemotherapy-induced mucosal erosions from superimposed bacterial infection difficult. HSV is commonly shed in oral secretions and may produce mucosal
ulcerations resembling chemotherapy-induced mucositis and necrotizing gingivitis. Oral mucosal candidiasis is most common in patients with profound T-cell
deficiencies, such as those receiving high-dose corticosteroid therapy. Diagnosis is usually made by visual inspection alone, although in cases of uncertainty, a wet
mount preparation showing pseudohyphal forms is confirmatory. A swab culture is not of diagnostic value because Candida species are commensals in the oral
cavity. Filamentous fungi (e.g., Aspergillus and Zygomycete species) can cause invasive disease of the hard palate and other oral cavity structures, principally in
patients with prolonged neutropenia. 400 The involved mucosa may initially have a dusky or violaceous appearance followed by necrosis, eschar formation, and
ulceration. Surgical débridement of localized disease plus systemic antifungal therapy may be life saving.
Patients with oral mucosal disease may have difficulty eating because of pain. Malnourishment and dehydration may be severe if parenteral nutrition and fluid
replacement are not initiated. Severe local infection with spread to adjacent tissue structures may occur, including paranasal sinusitis and septic thrombophlebitis.
Disrupted oral mucosa may be a portal of entry for bacterial pathogens, leading to systemic infection.
If feasible, dental disease should be treated in advance of initiating chemotherapy and radiation therapy to allow for an adequate healing time. Plaque should be
removed by scaling and curettage, and severely decayed or periapically infected teeth should be removed. A dentist experienced in the care of patients with
malignancies should perform the initial clinical and radiographic evaluation and provide regular follow-up examinations through the course of antineoplastic therapy.
Chemical plaque control with agents such as chlorhexidine mouth rinses have been used routinely in patients with cancer, and different cancer centers use various
rinsing protocols to enhance oral hygiene. Such rinses have lead to a reduction in microbial counts, but their value with regard to reducing oral disease and systemic
infection remains unproved. (see reference 401 for review).
EPIGLOTTITIS
The diagnosis of epiglottitis should be considered in patients with fever and pain in the throat, odynophagia, difficulty handling upper airway secretions, and signs of
upper airway compromise. In patients with cancer, the combination of neutropenia and mucotoxic chemotherapy and radiation therapy predisposes patients to
epiglottitis. 402 Pathogens associated with epiglottitis in this population include common respiratory pathogens (such as S pneumoniae and H influenzae), as well as
aerobic gram-negative rods and fungal pathogens. Candida epiglottitis is an unusual complication of neutropenia that may represent localized disease or
disseminated infection. 403 Treatment with amphotericin B (1.0 mg/kg/d) is warranted for this potentially life-threatening infection.
If epiglottitis is considered, care should be taken to avoid unnecessary manipulations of the upper airway (e.g., probing the oral cavity with tongue depressors).
Urgent consultation with an otolaryngologist should be obtained, and evaluation of the upper airway and obtaining culture material may be performed in the operating
room. Tracheal intubation is required for impending upper airway obstruction.
ESOPHAGITIS
Esophagitis is encountered commonly in patients with cancer. A gradual onset of retrosternal chest pain or burning and odynophagia are the most common symptoms.
The differential diagnosis includes candidiasis, HSV, CMV (principally in BMT recipients), bacterial infections, and aspergillosis. Radiation therapy to the chest may
produce an erosive esophagitis clinically indistinguishable from the infectious etiologies.
The evaluation of presumed esophagitis requires consideration of the patient's immune status. Patients with prolonged neutropenia and BMT recipients are more

likely to have an infectious etiology. In this population, Candida esophagitis is probably the most common etiology. More than one infectious cause may be present
concomitantly. The presence of oral mucosal candidiasis increases the likelihood of Candida species as the etiology of esophagitis. However, the use of prophylactic
topical antifungal agents (such as nystatin oral rinses) may protect against thrush while leaving the patient susceptible to esophageal candidiasis.
In highly immunocompromised patients with symptoms suggestive of esophagitis, two general strategies have been used. In the first, an endoscopy is performed
initially. Whitish plaques are suggestive of candidiasis, whereas ulcerative lesions are more suggestive of viral infection. However, the gross endoscopic appearance
is not specific enough to differentiate the various etiologies. Brushings and biopsy have the highest diagnostic yield. A brushing may suffice in lieu of a biopsy, which
may carry the risk of bleeding, particularly in patients with thrombocytopenia.
In the second approach, empiric therapy is administered initially without an endoscopy. Fluconazole, with or without high-dose acyclovir (5 mg/kg every 8 hours), is
administered as therapy for Candida and HSV, respectively. Alternatively, fluconazole may be administered initially, followed by acyclovir if no clinical response has
occurred within 2 to 3 days. A history of oral HSV infections or presence of anti-HSV antibodies should prompt early initiation of acyclovir. In the setting of concurrent
neutropenic fever, appropriate broad-spectrum antibacterial agents (e.g., vancomycin plus ceftazidime) with activity against oral flora should be added empirically. If
symptoms do not rapidly abate, endoscopy should be performed.
Diagnosis of bacterial esophagitis relies on demonstration of bacterial invasion of the esophageal wall. Bacteria causing local disease include gram-positive cocci,
gram-negative rods, and mixed infection. 404 Esophagitis may be complicated by bacteremia by predominantly gram-positive pathogens (viridans streptococci, S
aureus, Bacillus species). 404 Erosive esophagitis may rarely lead to esophageal rupture or life-threatening bleeding.
INTRAABDOMINAL INFECTION
Intraabdominal infections present a unique set of challenges in patients with cancer. Incorporating clinical data related to the malignancy, therapy, and the immune
status of the host is critical when evaluating a potential acute abdomen. Common causes of an acute abdomen in the general population (such as cholecystitis,
pancreatitis, appendicitis, and diverticulitis) also occur in patients with malignancy. Intraabdominal tumors, depending on their location, may lead to an obstructive
cholangitis (e.g., pancreatic and hepatobiliary tumors) or erosion through a viscus. In some instances, tumor may replace most of the bowel wall, with perforation after
initiation of cytoreductive chemotherapy. An upright abdominal film showing air under the diaphragm in a patient who has not undergone recent abdominal surgery is
likely to be indicative of a bowel perforation or an intraabdominal infection caused by gas-producing organisms.
Patients with prolonged neutropenia are at risk for a necrotizing enterocolitis, referred to as neutropenic enterocolitis or typhlitis. Typhlitis likely results from a
combination of neutropenia and defects in the bowel mucosa related to cytotoxic chemotherapy. This disease is most common in patients with leukemia who have
undergone intensive myeloablative chemotherapy. Pediatric patients appear to be at greater risk for typhlitis than adults. Rarely, typhlitis has been reported in
patients with leukemia who have not received chemotherapy. 405 P aeruginosa is the principal pathogen associated with typhlitis, though clostridial species are
implicated in a minority of cases. Pathologically, typhlitis is characterized by ulceration and necrosis of the bowel wall, hemorrhage, and masses of organisms. In the
setting of neutropenia, inflammation may be sparse.
Presumptive diagnostic criteria for typhlitis include fever, abdominal pain and tenderness, and radiologic evidence of right-sided colonic inflammation in patients with
neutropenia.406 Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea (often bloody) are the most common associated symptoms. Abdominal distension, tenderness, and a right lower
quadrant fullness or mass reflecting thickened bowel or a pericecal collection may occur. Tenderness is usually localized to the right lower quadrant, but may become
diffuse. Septicemia by aerobic gram-negative bacteria ( P aeruginosa and Enterobacteriaceae) is common; prostration and hypotension may be presenting signs. 406
Septicemia may be due to polymicrobial pathogens, including anaerobes. Clostridial species are the most common anaerobic pathogens, and bacteremia may result
in a devastating myonecrosis (see Clostridium Species, earlier in this chapter).
Diagnostic imaging by CT scans or ultrasonography should be performed in neutropenic patients with abdominal complaints. Positive findings are present in
approximately 80% of cases406 and include a right lower quadrant inflammatory mass, pericecal fluid, soft tissue inflammatory changes, localized bowel wall thickening
and mucosal edema, and a paralytic ileus. Usually, disease is limited to the cecum, but more extensive involvement of the large bowel and disease of the terminal
ileum may occur. Barium studies may show mucosal edema and effacement of the haustral markings, but are associated with a potential risk of bowel perforation.
Treatment of typhlitis involves administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics with activity against aerobic gram-negative rods and anaerobes. Imipenem or ceftazidime
plus metronidazole are appropriate regimens. Supportive care, including intravenous fluids, bowel rest, and nasogastric decompression, should be instituted.
Granulocyte transfusions and myeloid growth factors should be considered, as resolution of neutropenia is critical to a successful outcome.
The indications for surgery are derived from clinical experience rather than trials. Some older series suggest early surgical intervention 407 and others argue for a
conservative approach except in situations of widespread necrosis of the colon. 408 Shamberger et al.409 proposed the following criteria for surgical intervention: (1)
persistent gastrointestinal bleeding after resolution of neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and clotting abnormalities; (2) free intraperitoneal perforation; (3) uncontrolled
sepsis despite fluid and vasopressor support; and (4) an intraabdominal process (such as an appendicitis) that would require surgery in the absence of neutropenia.
Using these criteria, 20 of 25 pediatric patients with typhlitis were managed without surgery, and only one patient died of typhlitis. In cases of a localized peritonitis, a
pericecal collection, or a suspected sealed off cecal perforation in a clinically stable neutropenic patient, surgical intervention may be delayed until resolution of
neutropenia, given the increased surgical mortality during neutropenia. Surgical intervention involves resection of necrotic bowel, usually entailing a right
hemicolectomy, ileostomy, and mucous fistula. 410
Patients with cancer are at high risk for C difficile–associated colitis, probably in large measure due to prolonged hospitalization where environmental transmission is
likely to occur, and to patients' receiving broad-spectrum antibiotics that alter the normal colonic flora and facilitate C difficile colonization. Hospitalized patients
commonly become colonized with C difficile.411 Clinical manifestations include asymptomatic carriage, colitis without pseudomembrane formation, pseudomembranous
colitis, and fulminant colitis. 412 C difficile colitis may also increase the risk of bacteremia by enteric pathogens, including VRE. 413 In severe C difficile disease, patients
may be septic. Paralytic ileus, toxic dilation of the colon, and bowel perforation may occur. An abdominal film typically shows a dilatated colon with mucosal edema
(thumbprinting).
Oral metronidazole is the standard therapy for C difficile colitis. Because of the risk of selection for VRE, oral vancomycin should be reserved for refractory cases and
for patients intolerant to metronidazole. Patients in whom oral agents cannot be administered should receive parenteral metronidazole, because biliary excretion of
the drug and exudation from inflamed colon generally result in adequate luminal concentrations of the drug. 414 Intravenous vancomycin is of no value in this setting
because of inadequate lumen levels. In cases involving toxic dilation of the colon or perforation, surgical management typically involving a subtotal colectomy and
diverting ileostomy may be life saving.
Endoscopic diagnosis of pseudomembranous colitis relies on visualization of characteristic raised, adherent, yellow plaques on the colonic mucosa. A tissue culture
cytotoxicity assay that detects C difficile toxin B in stool is the gold standard laboratory diagnostic method. Direct culture of C difficile does not distinguish
toxin-producing from non–toxin-producing strains, and thus, by itself, is not a useful diagnostic method. Several commercial enzyme immunoassays are available that
detect C difficile toxins A or B, with sensitivities of approximately 80% and specificities close to 100%. 415
ANORECTAL INFECTIONS
Anorectal infections in patients with malignancy may be life-threatening. In some cases, infection may follow the development of an anal fissure. In other instances,
tiny abrasions may be a portal of entry. Alternatively, infection may originate in the anal crypts. Once anorectal infection is established, fascial extension to the
external genitalia, pelvic floor, retroperitoneum, and peritoneal cavity may occur. Anorectal infections, with or without extensive regional spread, may lead to
septicemia and metastatic infections.
Patients with leukemia receiving intensive myeloablative chemotherapy are at greatest risk for anorectal infections. Recovery from neutropenia is the most important
prognostic indicator for a positive outcome. 416 The most common pathogens isolated at surgery or from wound aspiration are the Enterobacteriaceae, anaerobes,
group D streptococci, and P aeruginosa.416,417 In most cases, the infection is polymicrobial.
The incidence of anorectal infections in patients receiving intensive myeloablative chemotherapy is approximately 5%. 416,418 Fever often precedes symptoms and

signs suggestive of anorectal infection, and perirectal pain, often exacerbated by defecation, may initially occur in the absence of physical examination findings. 417
Therefore, serial examinations of the perianal region are necessary.
In one series, point tenderness and poorly demarcated induration were the most consistent signs of perianal infection. 417 Localized erythema and warmth were also
observed. Advanced disease was heralded by soft tissue breakdown and necrosis and progressive extension to the adjacent perineal and pelvic structures.
Mild perianal infection characterized by slight tenderness or small fissures may respond to initial therapy for fever and neutropenia. The presence of significant local
tenderness, swelling, or skin maceration should prompt early administration of antibiotics appropriate for neutropenic fever and with activity against anaerobes (such
as ceftazidime plus metronidazole or imipenem monotherapy). Digital rectal examination should not be performed due to the risk of infection and bleeding. A pelvic CT
scan may aid in assessing for perirectal infection. Stool softeners, sitz baths, warm compresses, and analgesics should be provided.
Most cases of anorectal infections can be managed with appropriate broad-spectrum antibiotics and supportive measures. 416,419 Indications for surgery include
progression of disease locally or continued sepsis despite adequate antibiotics, obvious tissue necrosis, or fluctuance. With adequate surgical drainage, pain typically
resolves within 2 days. 417 At surgery, perirectal lesions usually consist of necrotic cavities filled with tissue debris. 417
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM INFECTIONS
CNS infections in patients with cancer can be divided into surgical and nonsurgical complications. Common surgical procedures include resection of tumor, insertion
of a shunt for hydrocephalus, and insertion of a reservoir to facilitate delivery of chemotherapeutic agents and easy sampling of cerebrospinal fluid. Patients with
cancer involving the brain typically receive high-dose corticosteroid and local radiation therapy, which may further increase the risk of neurosurgical infections.
Infections related to implanted hardware may manifest in a variety of ways. Infection of a shunt or an Ommaya reservoir may manifest with malfunction of the device.
Overt signs of meningitis, such as meningismus and photophobia do not usually occur, but most patients have fever. 420 Change in mental status may be the only sign
of infection. A CT scan may suggest meningitis, ventriculitis, or a brain abscess if the device is infected at the proximal end. Evaluation of the cerebrospinal fluid is
required for a diagnosis. Infection may occur in the more distal region of the device manifesting as a soft tissue infection. In cases of ventriculoatrial shunts, a distal
site of infection may cause persistently positive blood culture results, thrombophlebitis, right-sided endocarditis, or septic pulmonary emboli. Distal
ventriculoperitoneal shunt infections are associated with peritonitis and intraabdominal collections.
Coagulase-negative staphylococci, S aureus, and Propionibacterium acnes are the most common organisms infecting intraventricular devices. Enterobacteriaceae
and P aeruginosa account for approximately 10% of infections. Coagulase-negative staphylococci and P acnes usually cause indolent late postoperative infections.
When feasible, removal of the entire device should be performed and appropriate antibiotics administered. 420 Antibiotic therapy should be tailored to the specific
pathogen isolated. In an acutely ill patient with suspected meningitis related to prior neurosurgery, empiric therapy with parenteral vancomycin should be administered
to cover Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Propionibacterium species in combination with an agent with activity against Enterobacteriaceae and P aeruginosa (such
as ceftazidime).
CNS infections unrelated to neurosurgery are relatively uncommon in patients with cancer. In two series, the incidence of CNS infections in BMT recipients was
approximately 2%.421,422 In a review of 58 cases of brain abscesses after BMT at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, 92% were caused by fungi. 423 Aspergillus
species accounted for approximately 60% of isolates and one-third were caused by Candida species. The remainder of fungal infections included agents of
mucormycosis and Scopulariopsis and Pseudallescheria species. Approximately 90% of cases of CNS aspergillosis were associated with a pulmonary focus, whereas
most cases of Candida brain abscess were associated with candidemia or neutropenia. Only 4 of 58 patients had a bacterial brain abscess, and one patient had
cerebral toxoplasmosis. The mortality in this series was 97%.
The CNS is the most common target organ of hematogenous disseminated aspergillosis. Manifestations of CNS aspergillosis include focal seizures, hemiparesis,
cranial nerve palsies, and hemorrhagic infarcts due to vascular invasion. 424 The presence of pulmonary infiltrates and focal neurologic deficits in an
immunocompromised patient were significantly more predictive of CNS aspergillosis than for CNS candidiasis or cryptococcosis in a multivariate discriminant analysis
of autopsy-proven fungal CNS infections. 425 Aspergillus brain abscesses are typically multiple, hypodense, and nonenhancing, with little mass effect. CT scans with
contrast enhancement initially may reveal no focal lesions, but in a later stage may demonstrate focal ring-enhancing or hemorrhagic lesions. Magnetic resonance
imaging may further facilitate early detection. Intermediate T2 signal surrounded by a rim of higher signal may be observed. 421 Biopsy of these lesions reveals the
same pattern of vascular invasion and infarction similar to that seen in lung biopsy specimens. We suggest that CNS infections by Candida and Aspergillus species
be treated with amphotericin B plus 5-flucytosine, which readily penetrates the blood–brain barrier.
Other less common causes of CNS infections in patients with cancer include members of the herpes virus family (HSV, VZV, CMV, EBV, and HHV-6), adenovirus, L
monocytogenes, Acanthamoeba, Nocardia species, Mycobacterium species, and T gondii, which have been discussed earlier (see Bacterial Pathogens in Cancer
Patients, Viral Infections, and Parasitic Infections , earlier in this chapter).
DEMENTIAS
Patients with cancer may develop a chronic dementia related to leukoencephalopathy, a debilitating complication of therapy for their malignancy. The combination of
cranial radiation therapy and intrathecal or systemic methotrexate has been most closely linked with leukoencephalopathy, although other intrathecal regimens may
produce similar findings. 426,427
Progressive multifocal encephalopathy (PML) is a demyelinating disease associated with lytic infection of oligodendrocytes by the human polyomavirus JC virus.
Patients may develop rapidly progressive dementia as well as focal motor or cerebellar findings. Today, this disease is most commonly seen in patients with advanced
AIDS, reflecting the critical role of cell-mediated immunity in controlling this infection. Occasionally, PML is seen in heavily immunocompromised persons with
hematologic malignancies and in BMT recipients. 428 Magnetic resonance imaging typically shows unilateral or bilateral white matter disease without mass effect or
enhancement. Diagnosis is established by either brain biopsy or by detection of the JC virus in spinal fluid by PCR. There is no established therapy for PML. In
patients with AIDS, highly active antiretroviral therapy has produced mixed results in patients with PML. 429,430 and 431 By extrapolation, it is logical to try to reduce
immunosuppressive therapy in persons with cancer and PML as a means of augmenting cell-mediated immunity.
GENITOURINARY INFECTIONS
Patients with cancer may be at an increased risk of serious urinary tract infections as a result of breaches of the normal anatomy of the genitourinary system,
colonization by pathogenic organisms, and defects in host defense. The most common mechanism of seeding the bladder is via the ascending route. Barriers to entry
and proliferation of pathogens include the presence of normal perineal flora, urination, mucosal epithelial lining, phagocytes, and, possibly, immunoglobulin secretion
(IgA and IgG). 432
A bladder catheter greatly facilitates colonization of the normally sterile bladder. A strong correlation exists between precatheterization rectal and periurethral isolates
and organisms subsequently isolated from the urinary tract after bladder catheterization. 432 Obstruction to urinary flow permits colonization and multiplication of
bacteria. In patients with cancer, obstruction of urine flow may result from tumors originating within and outside of the genitourinary tract. Tumors associated with
hypercalcemia or hyperuricemia predispose to urinary stones. Impaired bladder emptying resulting in urine stasis may result from tumors involving the spinal cord.
Urinary intestinal diversions are associated with a high incidence of bacteriuria and may predispose to clinically significant infections after myeloablative
chemotherapy.
The epithelial lining of the bladder and a layer of mucopolysaccharide form a protective barrier against bacterial colonization and invasion. Injury to the bladder
mucosa by cytotoxic agents likely increases the risk of infection. In dogs, stripping of the bladder mucinous layer led to increased colonization of the bladder mucosa
by bacteria. 433 During neutropenia, the genitourinary tract may be an important portal of entry for systemic infections. Alternatively, the kidney may be secondarily
seeded as a consequence of hematogenous infection. Neutropenic patients with a urinary tract infection are less likely to have dysuria and pyuria and are far more

likely to become bacteremic compared with nonneutropenic patients. 20
Infection of the prostate, seminal vesicles, epididymis, and testes may represent localized disease or hematogenous seeding. Common bacterial infections include
Enterobacteriaceae, P aeruginosa, S aureus, and enterococci. Less common pathogens include Salmonella species, tuberculosis (more likely to involve the kidneys
and ureters), Nocardia species, Candida species, Blastomyces dermatitidis, and C neoformans.
Asymptomatic candiduria is common in patients with bladder catheters. Management of candiduria is limited by lack of knowledge about the natural history of this
infection, specifically with regard to predicting in which patients systemic infection will occur. Fluconazole is effective in eradicating candiduria in the short term, but
recurrent infection is likely. 434 Removal of indwelling bladder catheters and antibacterial agents frequently lead to clearing of candiduria. Therefore, routine treatment
of candiduria in afebrile nonneutropenic patients with local or systemic antifungal agents does not appear to be warranted. Because of the risk of candidemia after
genitourinary tract manipulations, candiduria should be treated before such procedures are performed. 435 Because of the increased risk of candidemia, neutropenic
patients with candiduria should receive systemic antifungal therapy.
Hemorrhagic cystitis is a common consequence of cytotoxic regimens that cause direct bladder mucosal injury and thrombocytopenia. In BMT recipients with
unexplained hematuria occurring beyond the early period (when it is an expected toxicity of the preparative regimen), a viral etiology should be considered.
Adenovirus, the polyomavirus BK, and, rarely, CMV 436 have been associated with hemorrhagic cystitis. Childs et al. 437 reported adenovirus (four cases) or
polyomavirus (four cases) in nine cases of hemorrhagic cystitis in patients receiving T-cell–depleted BMT.
Adenovirus can cause fatal disseminated infections in BMT recipients (see Viral Infections, earlier in this chapter). Detection of urinary shedding of this virus by PCR
appears to be more sensitive than cell culture methods, and may, in some cases, be a harbinger of disseminated disease. 438
BK virus is ubiquitous. Approximately one-half of BMT recipients shed BK virus in the urine. 439 Hemorrhagic cystitis occurred four times more frequently in patients
with BK viruria, and BK shedding often preceded or occurred simultaneously with cystitis. In some patients, prolonged urinary BK shedding did not result in disease.
Documentation of BK viruria can be made by electron microscopy of urinary sediments, PCR, and DNA hybridization. Treatment of BK virus–associated hemorrhagic
cystitis is supportive and may include prolonged bladder irrigation to prevent clot retention as well as blood transfusions. 440

IMMUNE AUGMENTATION STRATEGIES
GRANULOCYTE TRANSFUSIONS
The rationale for granulocyte transfusions is to buy time for the neutropenic patient with a life-threatening infection by augmenting the number of circulating
neutrophils until native myeloid regeneration occurs.
In the 1970s, the technology for harvesting and infusing granulocytes became available. Controlled trials of granulocyte transfusions as adjuvant therapy in
neutropenic patients produced mixed results. 441 In the 1980s, the enthusiasm for granulocyte transfusions waned as more effective antibiotics became available,
survival from serious bacterial infections was improved, and recombinant growth factors reduced the duration of neutropenia. In addition, there were concerns about
the toxicity of granulocyte transfusions, including pulmonary leukostasis, risk of HLA alloimmunization (complicating platelet transfusions and conceivably myeloid
engraftment after BMT), and risk of transfusion-associated infections, which appeared to outweigh their perceived benefit.
Today, the impetus to take a second look at granulocyte transfusions in large part stems from improvements made in the mobilization methods. 442 Recombinant
G-CSF with or without corticosteroids is now routinely administered to donors approximately 12 hours before apheresis. G-CSF is a potent stimulus for neutrophil
production by mobilizing myeloid precursors from marrow reserves. Using a standard continuous flow centrifugation apparatus, the mean absolute neutrophil yield per
collection typically exceeds 3 × 10 10 cells.443,444 The higher number of harvested neutrophils in turn correlates with a higher neutrophil count in the recipient after
transfusion. 445 The increased neutropenia-free period may also be related to a prolonged circulating half-life of G-CSF–mobilized granulocytes. 444 The qualitative
functions of G-CSF–mobilized and corticosteroid-mobilized neutrophils appear to be intact, as measured by in vitro bactericidal activity, respiratory burst, and in vivo
migration to experimental skin chambers.444 G-CSF–mobilized granulocytes have been shown to localize to sites of inflammation after transfusion in allogeneic BMT
recipients.446
Successful outcomes using granulocyte transfusions have been described in patients with life-threatening fungal infections in small series and case reports. In one
nonrandomized retrospective study, no benefit of granulocyte transfusions was documented in treating fungal infections in BMT recipients. 447 Obviously, such reports
must be interpreted with caution and do not permit general recommendations. A more recent phase I/II clinical trial using G-CSF–mobilized transfusions for treatment
of refractory fungal infections in neutropenic patients with hematologic malignancies reported favorable responses in 11 of 15 patients. 448 Adverse transfusion-related
reactions were infrequent.
In the absence of modern, prospective, randomized studies, when might granulocyte transfusions be considered? Currently, there is no justification (outside of a
clinical trial) to use granulocyte transfusions either as prophylaxis or in cases of documented infections that are likely to respond to conventional therapy. We reserve
granulocyte transfusions for patients with prolonged neutropenia and life-threatening infections refractory to conventional therapy. Filamentous fungi are likely to
constitute the majority of such refractory infections.
If granulocyte transfusions are used, several considerations are important. In neutropenic patients, it is likely that daily or every other day transfusions will be
administered, depending on the length of the neutropenia-free period after transfusions. Granulocytes should be infused quickly after harvesting, given the short
storage half-life. With modern apheresis methods, the number of harvested neutrophils should exceed 2 × 10 9 cells. Infusions of amphotericin B should be separated
by several hours from granulocyte transfusions to avoid pulmonary toxicity. 449 Leukocyte compatibility should be established by HLA matching and, if available, by
leukocyte cross-matching to avoid alloimmunization. In some highly alloimmunized patients, transfused granulocytes are rapidly consumed and are likely to have
more toxicity than benefit. In CMV-seronegative BMT recipients, only seronegative donors should be used.
GROWTH FACTORS
Normal myelopoiesis requires the establishment of myeloid stem cells, which, under the influence of stem cell factor, IL-3, and GM-CSF, gives rise to a the
colony-forming unit granulocyte-macrophage. G-CSF acts at a later stage in concert with other growth factors to specifically drive granulopoiesis.
Many potential applications exist for recombinant colony-stimulating factors in patients with cancer, the most obvious being a reduction in chemotherapy-induced
neutropenia. We discuss the use of colony-stimulating factors in two specific settings: (1) prophylaxis (growth factor is administered around the time of initiation of the
myeloablative regimen), and (2) adjunctive therapy for established infection.
Prophylaxis
Prophylactic G-CSF has been evaluated in several prospective, randomized studies. The most consistent benefit has been a reduction in the neutropenic period. In
some studies of patients with acute myelogenous leukemia receiving potent myeloablative chemotherapy, the acceleration of myeloid recovery was associated with a
reduction in the duration of fever, use of antibiotics, and hospitalization. 450,451 The frequency of infections and the number of fatal infections were unaffected by
G-CSF.450 In patients with small cell lung cancer, G-CSF led to a reduction of the neutropenic period, duration of hospitalization, and rate of confirmed infections. 452
Use of G-CSF in patients with a short duration of neutropenia is associated with a reduction in the neutropenic period, but no effect on the rate and days of
hospitalization, duration of parenteral antibiotics, and number of documented infections. 453 Prophylactic G-CSF had no benefit except for a modest reduction in the
neutropenic period after preparative regimens for autologous stem cell transplantation. 454,455
Prophylactic GM-CSF has been evaluated in two prospective, randomized studies of elderly patients with acute myelogenous leukemia. 456 In one study, GM-CSF was
only administered to patients who had a hypocellular or remission marrow on day 10 of induction chemotherapy. 457 Patients who achieved complete remission
received the same study drug (GM-CSF or placebo) for consolidation chemotherapy. The median time to neutrophil recovery was significantly reduced in the GM-CSF

group as was the frequency of fatal fungal infections and early infection-related mortality. There was a trend toward increased complete remission in the GM-CSF
group. Most important, the 6-month mortality was significantly reduced in the GM-CSF arm. To our knowledge, this is the only study that has shown a survival
advantage attributed to a colony-stimulating factor. This study formed the basis for approval by the Food and Drug Administration of GM-CSF for patients with acute
myelogenous leukemia. A larger study conducted by the International Oncology Study Group using a similar design is underway to evaluate prophylactic GM-CSF in
older and younger patients with acute myelogenous leukemia. 456
In another study of 388 elderly patients with acute myelogenous leukemia, prophylactic GM-CSF led to a modest reduction in the neutropenic period. 458 The incidence
of serious infections, regrowth of leukemic cells, and treatment-related mortality was similar between the two groups. The authors concluded that GM-CSF should not
be recommended for elderly patients with acute myelogenous leukemia.
The inconsistent results of studies of prophylactic colony-stimulating factors for chemotherapy-induced neutropenia are almost certainly due to important differences
in the study population and in the study design. The populations differ with respect to the underlying malignancy and the chemotherapy regimen. Some studies are
insufficiently powered to detect differences in morbidity between treatment arms. In addition, the timing and dosing of colony-stimulating factors vary among studies.
In the case of GM-CSF, different formulations consisting of glycosylated and nonglycosylated products have been used in different trials. 459
The American Society of Clinical Oncology has recommended that prophylactic colony-stimulating factors (G-CSF and GM-CSF) be used only in populations in which
the frequency of febrile neutropenia is likely to exceed 40%. 460 The American Society of Clinical Oncology considered that certain patients receiving a relatively
nonmyelosuppressive regimen may benefit from CSFs if they are at an unusually high risk for infectious complications. Such risk factors may include preexisting
neutropenia, extensive prior chemotherapy or pelvic irradiation leading to a reduction in myeloid reserves, a history of recurrent febrile neutropenia associated with
relatively nonmyelotoxic complications, or the presence of an open wound or an active infection. Patients with a history of a serious or life-threatening infection, such
as typhlitis, or an invasive fungal infection should also be considered for CSF prophylaxis during subsequent chemotherapy cycles.
Colony Growth Factors in Established Infection
The rationale for colony-stimulating factors for established infections stems from both the quantitative and qualitative effects of these agents on phagocytic cells. In
neutropenic patients with life-threatening infections, survival is strongly influenced by the rapidity of neutrophil recovery. Thus, colony-stimulating factors and
granulocyte transfusions are used in these settings to augment the number of circulating neutrophils.
In addition to accelerating myelopoiesis, colony-stimulating factors augment phagocyte function. G-CSF, GM-CSF, and macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF)
increase the fungicidal activity of phagocytes in vitro against Candida and Aspergillus species. 461,462,463 and 464 The action of G-CSF is specific to neutrophils. M-CSF
increases phagocytosis, chemotaxis, and secondary cytokine production in monocytes and macrophages. 465 GM-CSF stimulates various neutrophil effector functions
and prolongs neutrophil survival in vitro, increases antibody-dependent cytotoxicity of eosinophils, accelerates the proliferation of the monocyte-macrophage system,
and is a potent activator of monocytes and macrophages (reviewed in reference 465). Thus, GM-CSF may have a theoretical advantage against pathogens such as
Candida and Aspergillus species, in which host defense is dependent on both neutrophil and macrophage function.
At present, published data related to colony-stimulating factors as adjunctive therapy for established infection are limited to animal studies, case reports, and
open-label pilot studies in humans. Nemunaitis et al. 465,466 suggested that among patients with candidiasis or aspergillosis, treatment with antifungal agents plus
M-CSF was associated with enhanced survival compared with historical controls. In another pilot study of eight patients with established fungal infection, adjuvant
GM-CSF appeared to be promising. 467 These initial studies are insufficient to permit conclusions about the efficacy of these agents.
INTERFERON-g
IFN-g is a macrophage-activating factor that is critical in host defense against intracellular infections such as Leishmania and Mycobacteria species. IFN-g augments

generation of microbicidal reactive oxidants in phagocytes and is also a potent activator of oxidant-independent mechanisms, including augmentation of TNF-a
production, tryptophan metabolism, granule protein synthesis, and MHC II expression. 468 IFN-g administered to normal volunteers was shown to increase expression
of FcgR1 receptors on phagocytes, leading to enhanced phagocytosis, and to increased b 2-integrin expression on monocytes, which may improve phagocyte
trafficking in vivo.469 The combination of G-CSF and IFN-g overcame the suppressive effects of corticosteroids on the in vitro fungicidal activity of neutrophils against
Aspergillus hyphae.25 These data suggest that IFN-g may have a role in augmenting phagocyte function in immunosuppressed patients with cancer.
Currently, IFN-g is licensed as a prophylactic agent in patients with chronic granulomatous disease, an inherited disorder of the phagocyte nicotinamide-adenine
dinucleotide phosphate (reduced form) oxidase that renders phagocytes defective in generating superoxide anion and its downstream reactive oxidant metabolites. 470
Patients with chronic granulomatous disease experience recurrent life-threatening bacterial and fungal infections. The major cause of mortality in chronic
granulomatous disease is from invasive aspergillosis. 471,472 Prophylactic IFN-g reduced the number of serious infections by more than 70% in patients with chronic
granulomatous disease. 470 In addition, IFN-g in combination with antimycobacterial agents had a positive effect on patients with refractory atypical mycobacterial
infection resulting from defective IFN-g production. 473 It remains to be seen whether IFN-g may have similar positive effects on patients with cancer with iatrogenic
phagocytic disorders.
In certain experimental fungal infections, host defense was enhanced by augmentation of T cells committed to Th1 phenotype, reflecting cell-mediated immunity. IL-12
is generated by activated macrophages and drives uncommitted T-helper cells to the Th1 pole to produce IL-2 and IFN-g. 474 This pathway appears to be critical in
controlling various fungal infections. IL-12 reduced organism load in a murine cryptococcal model and acted synergistically when combined with fluconazole. 475
Improvement or worsening of experimental candidiasis correlated with administration of cytokines that stimulated a Th1 or Th2 T-cell response, respectively. 476 In a
mouse model of invasive aspergillosis, administration of IFN-g and TNF-a were protective. 477 These studies provide a scientific basis for evaluating combination
immunotherapy and antimicrobial therapy in fungal infections in immunocompromised patients.
ADOPTIVE IMMUNOTHERAPY IN BONE MARROW TRANSPLANT RECIPIENTS
As discussed previously, the intensive preparative regimens used in allogeneic BMT result in a profound disruption of T-cell immunity. Reconstitution of T-cell
immunity occurs over several months in uncomplicated cases and is further delayed in cases of GVHD requiring high-dose corticosteroid therapy and potentially
antilymphocyte globulins. CMV and EBV are members of the herpes virus family that establish latent infection in normal hosts, and control of reactivation is largely
mediated by CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes recognize intracellular proteins that are presented by surface MHC class I molecules on
antigen-presenting cells.
Studies on immune reconstitution after allogeneic BMT have shown that recovery of CMV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses confers protection from
subsequent CMV disease,204,478,479 and 480 and these protective responses are specific for the structural virion proteins. 204 Thus, one potential strategy for preventing
CMV disease (aside from prophylaxis with antiviral agents) is by adoptive transfer of CMV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte clones obtained from CMV-seropositive
bone marrow donors and selectively expanded by in vitro culture. Such an approach has led to early reconstitution of CMV-specific immunity in allogeneic BMT
recipients, which persisted for at least 12 weeks after infusion corresponding to the period of maximal risk for CMV disease. 481
In allogeneic BMT recipients, the major risk of uncontrolled EBV infection is development of an aggressive EBV lymphoproliferative disease or lymphoma, which can
be rapidly fatal. Infusions of unfractionated peripheral blood mononuclear cells from EBV-seropositive donors have been used to treat EBV lymphoproliferative
disease in allogeneic BMT recipients. 482 However, alloreactive T cells in such unfractionated preparations may induce GVHD. A safer approach involves transfer of
EBV-specific donor cytotoxic T-lymphocyte clones that have been selectively enriched in vitro.483,484 This method has led to persistent cellular immune responses to
EBV for as long as 18 months.484
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Donna Ball, NP, for reviewing the chapter and making thoughtful suggestions and acknowledge the expert secretarial assistance provided
by Jeanette Chase, Tracey Roth, Kimberly De Pasquale, and Kathleen Kingsbury.

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Zinner SH. Changing epidemiology of infections in patients with neutropenia and cancer: emphasis on gram-positive and resistant bacteria. Clin Infect Dis 1999;29:490.
2. Griffiths H, Lea J, Bunch C, Lee M, Chapel H. Predictors of infection in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL). Clin Exp Immunol 1992;89:374.
3. Weeks JC, Tierney MR, Weinstein MC. Cost effectiveness of prophylactic intravenous immune globulin in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1991;325:81.
4. Savage DG, Lindenbaum J, Garrett TJ. Biphasic pattern of bacterial infection in multiple myeloma. Ann Intern Med 1982;96:47.
5. Cheson BD, Walker HS, Heath ME, Gobel RJ, Janatova J. Defective binding of the third component of complement (C3) to Streptococcus pneumoniae in multiple myeloma. Blood 1984;63:949.
6. Chapel HM, Lee M, Hargreaves R, Pamphilon DH, Prentice AG. Randomised trial of intravenous immunoglobulin as prophylaxis against infection in plateau-phase multiple myeloma. The UK
Group for Immunoglobulin Replacement Therapy in Multiple Myeloma. Lancet 1994;343:1059.
7. Mackowiak PA, Demian SE, Sutker WL, et al. Infections of hairy cell leukemia. Clinical evidence of a pronounced defect in cell-mediated immunity. Am J Med 1980;68:718.
8. Fisher RI, DeVita VT Jr, Bostick F, et al. Persistent immunologic abnormalities in long-term survivors of advanced Hodgkin's disease. Ann Intern Med 1980;92:595.
9. Casazza AR, Duvall CP, Carbone PP. Summary of infectious complications occurring in patients with Hodgkin's disease. Cancer Res 1966;26:1290.
10. Graham BS, Tucker WS Jr. Opportunistic infections in endogenous Cushing's syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:334.
11. Walsh TJ, Mendelsohn G. Invasive aspergillosis complicating Cushing's syndrome. Arch Intern Med 1981;141:1227.
12. Tomonaga M. Adult T-cell leukemia and opportunistic infections. Intern Med 1999;38:83.
13. Walsh TJ, Meyers RAM, Herrington D, et al. Lemierre's postanginal septicemia: multidisciplinary management of severe fusobacterial infections. Infect Med 1985;2:83.
14. Heyman MR, Walsh TJ. Autoimmune neutropenia and Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1987;59:1903.
15. Bodey GP, Buckley M, Sathe YS, Freireich EJ. Quantitative relationships between circulating leukocytes and infection in patients with acute leukemia. Ann Intern Med 1966;64:328.
16. Gerson SL, Talbot GH, Hurwitz S, et al. Prolonged granulocytopenia: the major risk factor for invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in patients with acute leukemia. Ann Intern Med 1984;100:345.
17. Weinberger M, Elattar I, Marshall D, et al. Patterns of infection in patients with aplastic anemia and the emergence of Aspergillus as a major cause of death. Medicine (Baltimore) 1992;71:24.
18. Walsh TJ, Hiemenz JW, Anaissie E. Recent progress and current problems in treatment of invasive fungal infections in neutropenic patients. Infect Dis Clin North Am 1996;10:365.
19. Rex JH, Walsh TJ, Anaissie EJ. Fungal infections in iatrogenically compromised hosts. Adv Intern Med 1998;43:321.
20. Sickles EA, Greene WH, Wiernik PH. Clinical presentation of infection in granulocytopenic patients. Arch Intern Med 1975;135:715.
21. Izutsu KT, Sullivan KM, Schubert MM, et al. Disordered salivary immunoglobulin secretion and sodium transport in human chronic graft-versus-host disease. Transplantation 1983;35:441.
22. Roy MJ, Walsh TJ. Histopathologic and immunohistochemical changes in gut-associated lymphoid tissues after treatment of rabbits with dexamethasone. Lab Invest 1992;66:437.
23. Ganz T, Weiss J. Antimicrobial peptides of phagocytes and epithelia. Semin Hematol 1997;34:343.
24. De Lucca AJ, Walsh TJ. Antifungal peptides: novel therapeutic compounds against emerging pathogens. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:1.
25. Roilides E, Uhlig K, Venzon D, Pizzo PA, Walsh TJ. Prevention of corticosteroid-induced suppression of human polymorphonuclear leukocyte-induced damage of Aspergillus fumigatus hyphae
by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and gamma interferon. Infect Immunol 1993;61:4870.
26. Segal BH, Sneller MC. Infectious complications of immunosuppressive therapy in patients with rheumatic diseases. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 1997;23:219.
27. Fauci AS, Dale DC, Balow JE. Glucocorticosteroid therapy: mechanisms of action and clinical considerations. Ann Intern Med 1976;84:304.
28. Butler WT, Rossen RD. Effects of corticosteroids on immunity in man. I. Decreased serum IgG concentration caused by 3 or 5 days of high doses of methylprednisolone. J Clin Invest
1973;52:2629.
29. Staples PJ, Gerding DN, Decker JL, Gordon RS Jr. Incidence of infection in systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum 1974;17:1.
30. Ng TT, Robson GD, Denning DW. Hydrocortisone-enhanced growth of Aspergillus spp.: implications for pathogenesis. Microbiology 1994;140:2475.
31. Ferrazzini G, Klein J, Sulh H, et al. Interaction between trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and methotrexate in children with leukemia. J Pediatr 1990;117:823.
32. Kamel OW, van de Rijn M, Weiss LM, et al. Brief report: reversible lymphomas associated with Epstein-Barr virus occurring during methotrexate therapy for rheumatoid arthritis and
dermatomyositis. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1317.
33. Kuhns DB, Young HA, Gallin EK, Gallin JI. Ca 2+-dependent production and release of IL-8 in human neutrophils. J Immunol 1998;161:4332.
34. Ringden O, Backman L, Lonnqvist B, et al. A randomized trial comparing use of cyclosporin and methotrexate for graft-versus-host disease prophylaxis in bone marrow transplant recipients
with haematological malignancies. Bone Marrow Transplant 1986;1:41.
35. Atkinson K, Biggs JC, Ting A, et al. Cyclosporin A is associated with faster engraftment and less mucositis than methotrexate after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Br J Haematol
1983;53:265.
36. Anaissie E, Kontoyiannis DP, Kantarjian H, et al. Listeriosis in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia who were treated with fludarabine and prednisone. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:466.
37. O'Brien S, Kantarjian H, Beran M, et al. Results of fludarabine and prednisone therapy in 264 patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia with multivariate analysis-derived prognostic model for
response to treatment. Blood 1993;82:1695.
38. Byrd JC, Hargis JB, Kester KE, et al. Opportunistic pulmonary infections with fludarabine in previously treated patients with low-grade lymphoid malignancies: a role for Pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia prophylaxis. Am J Hematol 1995;49:135.
39. Klempner MS, Noring R, Mier JW, Atkins MB. An acquired chemotactic defect in neutrophils from patients receiving interleukin-2 immunotherapy. N Engl J Med 1990;322:959.
40. Molrine DC, Siber GR, Samra Y, et al. Normal IgG and impaired IgM responses to polysaccharide vaccines in asplenic patients. J Infect Dis 1999;179:513.
41. Doern GV, Pfaller MA, Erwin ME, Brueggemann AB, Jones RN. The prevalence of fluoroquinolone resistance among clinically significant respiratory tract isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae
in the United States and Canada1997 results from the SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;32:313.
42. Chen DK, McGeer A, de Azavedo JC, Low DE. Decreased susceptibility of Streptococcus pneumoniae to fluoroquinolones in Canada. Canadian Bacterial Surveillance Network. N Engl J Med
1999;341:233.
43. Pers C, Gahrn-Hansen B, Frederiksen W. Capnocytophaga canimorsus septicemia in Denmark, 19821995: review of 39 cases. Clin Infect Dis 1996;23:71.
44. Lion C, Escande F, Burdin JC. Capnocytophaga canimorsus infections in human: review of the literature and cases report. Eur J Epidemiol 1996;12:521.
45. Rosner F, Zarrabi MH, Benach JL, Habicht GS. Babesiosis in splenectomized adults. Review of 22 reported cases. Am J Med 1984;76:696.
46. Clark RA, Johnson FL, Klebanoff SJ, Thomas ED. Defective neutrophil chemotaxis in bone marrow transplant patients. J Clin Invest 1976;58:22.
47. Sosa R, Weiden PL, Storb R, Syrotuck J, Thomas ED. Granulocyte function in human allogenic marrow graft recipients. Exp Hematol 1980;8:1183.
48. Winston DJ, Territo MC, Ho WG, et al. Alveolar macrophage dysfunction in human bone marrow transplant recipients. Am J Med 1982;73:859.
49. Lum LG. The kinetics of immune reconstitution after human marrow transplantation. Blood 1987;69:369.
50. Mackall CL, Gress RE. Pathways of T-cell regeneration in mice and humans: implications for bone marrow transplantation and immunotherapy. Immunol Rev 1997;157:61.
51. Matsue K, Lum LG, Witherspoon RP, Storb R. Proliferative and differentiative responses of B cells from human marrow graft recipients to T cell-derived factors. Blood 1987;69:308.
52. Winston DJ, Schiffman G, Wang DC, et al. Pneumococcal infections after human bone-marrow transplantation. Ann Intern Med 1979;91:835.
53. Kalhs P, Kier P, Lechner K. Functional asplenia after bone marrow transplantation [letter]. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:805.
54. Kalhs P, Panzer S, Kletter K, et al. Functional asplenia after bone marrow transplantation. A late complication related to extensive chronic graft-versus-host disease. Ann Intern Med
1988;109:461.
55. Seddik M, Seemayer TA, Lapp WS. T cell functional defect associated with thymic epithelial cell injury induced by a graft-versus-host reaction. Transplantation 1980;29:61.
56. Johanson WG, Pierce AK, Sanford JP. Changing pharyngeal bacterial flora of hospitalized patients. Emergence of gram-negative bacilli. N Engl J Med 1969;281:1137.
57. Woods DE. Role of fibronectin in the pathogenesis of gram-negative bacillary pneumonia. Rev Infect Dis 1987;9(Suppl 4):S386.
58. Schimpff SC, Young VM, Green WH, et al. Origin of infection in acute lymphocytic leukemia: significance of hospital acquisition of potential pathogens. Ann Intern Med 1972;77:707.
59. Edmond MB, Wallace SE, McClish DK, et al. Nosocomial bloodstream infections in United States hospitals: a three-year analysis. Clin Infect Dis 1999;29:239.
60. Smith TL, Pearson ML, Wilcox KR, et al. Emergence of vancomycin resistance in Staphylococcus aureus. Glycopeptide-intermediate Staphylococcus aureus Working Group. N Engl J Med
1999;340:493.
61. Sieradzki K, Roberts RB, Haber SW, Tomasz A. The development of vancomycin resistance in a patient with methicillin- resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection. N Engl J Med 1999;340:517.
62. Irish D, Eltringham I, Teall A, et al. Control of an outbreak of an epidemic methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus also resistant to mupirocin. J Hosp Infect 1998;39:19.
63. Moellering RC, Linden PK, Reinhardt J, et al. The efficacy and safety of quinupristin/dalfopristin for the treatment of infections caused by vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium. Synercid
Emergency-Use Study Group. J Antimicrob Chemother 1999;44:251.
64. Noskin GA, Siddiqui F, Stosor V, Hacek D, Peterson LR. In vitro activities of linezolid against important gram-positive bacterial pathogens including vancomycin-resistant enterococci.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2059.
65. Elting LS, Bodey GP, Keefe BH. Septicemia and shock syndrome due to viridans streptococci: a case-control study of predisposing factors. Clin Infect Dis 1992;14:1201.
66. McWhinney PH, Patel S, Whiley RA, et al. Activities of potential therapeutic and prophylactic antibiotics against blood culture isolates of viridans group streptococci from neutropenic patients
receiving ciprofloxacin. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1993;37:2493.
67. Bochud PY, Calandra T, Francioli P. Bacteremia due to viridans streptococci in neutropenic patients: a review. Am J Med 1994;97:256.
68. Steiner M, Villablanca J, Kersey J, et al. Viridans streptococcal shock in bone marrow transplantation patients. Am J Hematol 1993;42:354.
69. Martino R, Manteiga R, Sanchez I, et al. Viridans streptococcal shock syndrome during bone marrow transplantation. Acta Haematol 1995;94:69.
70. Elting LS, Rubenstein EB, Rolston KV, Bodey GP. Outcomes of bacteremia in patients with cancer and neutropenia: observations from two decades of epidemiological and clinical trials. Clin
Infect Dis 1997;25:247.
71. Hughes WT, Armstrong D, Bodey GP, et al. 1997 guidelines for the use of antimicrobial agents in neutropenic patients with unexplained fever. Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin
Infect Dis 1997;25:551.
72. van der Lelie H, Leverstein-Van Hall M, Mertens M, et al. Corynebacterium CDC group JK (Corynebacterium jeikeium) sepsis in haematological patients: a report of three cases and a
systematic literature review. Scand J Infect Dis 1995;27:581.
73. Stamm WE, Tompkins LS, Wagner KF, et al. Infection due to Corynebacterium species in marrow transplant patients. Ann Intern Med 1979;91:167.
74. Henrickson KJ, Shenep JL, Flynn PM, Pui CH. Primary cutaneous bacillus cereus infection in neutropenic children. Lancet 1989;1:601.
75. McWhinney PH, Kibbler CC, Gillespie SH, et al. Stomatococcus mucilaginosus: an emerging pathogen in neutropenic patients. Clin Infect Dis 1992;14:641.
76. Swenson JM, Facklam RR, Thornsberry C. Antimicrobial susceptibility of vancomycin-resistant Leuconostoc, Pediococcus, and Lactobacillus species. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
1990;34:543.
77. Bush K, Jacoby GA, Medeiros AA. A functional classification scheme for beta-lactamases and its correlation with molecular structure. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1995;39:1211.
78. Meyer KS, Urban C, Eagan JA, Berger BJ, Rahal JJ. Nosocomial outbreak of Klebsiella infection resistant to late-generation cephalosporins. Ann Intern Med 1993;119:353.
79. Bodey GP, Jadeja L, Elting L. Pseudomonas bacteremia. Retrospective analysis of 410 episodes. Arch Intern Med 1985;145:1621.
80. Livermore DM. Interplay of impermeability and chromosomal b-lactamase activity in imipenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1992;36:2046.
81. Khardori N, Elting L, Wong E, Schable B, Bodey GP. Nosocomial infections due to Xanthomonas maltophilia (Pseudomonas maltophilia) in patients with cancer. Rev Infect Dis 1990;12:997.
82. Vartivarian SE, Papadakis KA, Palacios JA, Manning JT Jr, Anaissie EJ. Mucocutaneous and soft tissue infections caused by Xanthomonas maltophilia. A new spectrum. Ann Intern Med
1994;121:969.
83. Villers D, Espaze E, Coste-Burel M, et al. Nosocomial Acinetobacter baumannii infections: microbiological and clinical epidemiology. Ann Intern Med 1998;129:182.
84. Rolston K, Guan Z, Bodey GP, Elting L. Acinetobacter calcoaceticus septicemia in patients with cancer. South Med J 1985;78:647.
85. Thaler M, Gill V, Pizzo PA. Emergence of Clostridium tertium as a pathogen in neutropenic patients. Am J Med 1986;81:596.
86. Bodey GP, Rodriguez S, Fainstein V, Elting LS. Clostridial bacteremia in cancer patients. A 12-year experience. Cancer 1991;67:1928.

87. Stevens DL, Maier KA, Laine BM, Mitten JE. Comparison of clindamycin, rifampin, tetracycline, metronidazole, and penicillin for efficacy in prevention of experimental gas gangrene due to
Clostridium perfringens. J Infect Dis 1987;155:220.
88. Kurzrock R, Zander A, Vellekoop L, et al. Mycobacterial pulmonary infections after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Am J Med 1984;77:35
89. Roy V, Weisdorf D. Mycobacterial infections following bone marrow transplantation: a 20 year retrospective review. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;19:467.
90. Aljurf M, Gyger M, Alrajhi A, et al. Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in allogeneic bone marrow transplantation patients. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;24:551.
91. Ip MS, Yuen KY, Woo PC, et al. Risk factors for pulmonary tuberculosis in bone marrow transplant recipients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;158:1173.
92. Skogberg K, Ruutu P, Tukiainen P, Valtonen V. Effect of immunosuppressive therapy on the clinical presentation and outcome of tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17:1012.
93. Aljada IS, Crane JK, Corriere N, Wagle DG, Amsterdam D. Mycobacterium bovis BCG causing vertebral osteomyelitis (Pott's disease) following intravesical BCG therapy. J Clin Microbiol
1999;37:2106.
94. Ward MS, Lam KV, Cannell PK, Herrmann RP. Mycobacterial central venous catheter tunnel infection: a difficult problem. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999;24:325.
95. Bennett C, Vardiman J, Golomb H. Disseminated atypical mycobacterial infection in patients with hairy cell leukemia. Am J Med 1986;80:891.
96. White MH, Papadopoulos EB, Small TN, Kiehn TE, Armstrong D. Mycobacterium haemophilum infections in bone marrow transplant recipients. Transplantation 1995;60:957.
97. Berkey P, Bodey GP. Nocardial infection in patients with neoplastic disease. Rev Infect Dis 1989;11:407.
98. Frazier AR, Rosenow ECD, Roberts GD. Nocardiosis. A review of 25 cases occurring during 24 months. Mayo Clin Proc 1975;50:657.
99. Young LS, Armstrong D, Blevins A, Lieberman P. Nocardia asteroides infection complicating neoplastic disease. Am J Med 1971;50:356.
100. van Burik JA, Hackman RC, Nadeem SQ, et al. Nocardiosis after bone marrow transplantation: a retrospective study. Clin Infect Dis 1997;24:1154.
101. Choucino C, Goodman SA, Greer JP, et al. Nocardial infections in bone marrow transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 1996;23:1012.
102. Pfaller MA, Jones RN, Messer SA, Edmond MB, Wenzel RP. National surveillance of nosocomial blood stream infection due to Candida albicans: frequency of occurrence and antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327.
103. Edwards JE Jr, Bodey GP, Bowden RA, et al. International Conference for the Development of a Consensus on the Management and Prevention of Severe Candidal Infections. Clin Infect Dis
1997;25:43.
104. Viscoli C, Girmenia C, Marinus A, et al. Candidemia in cancer patients: a prospective, multicenter surveillance study by the Invasive Fungal Infection Group (IFIG) of the European Organization
for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC). Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:1071.
105. Anaissie EJ, Kontoyiannis DP, O'Brien S, et al. Infections in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia treated with fludarabine. Ann Intern Med 1998;129:559.
106. Wingard JR. Importance of Candida species other than C. albicans as pathogens in oncology patients. Clin Infect Dis 1995;20:115.
107. Wingard JR, Dick JD, Merz WG, et al. Pathogenicity of Candida tropicalis and Candida albicans after gastrointestinal inoculation in mice. Infect Immunol 1980;29:808.
108. Wingard JR, Merz WG, Saral R. Candida tropicalis: a major pathogen in immunocompromised patients. Ann Intern Med 1979;91:539.
109. Berenguer J, Buck M, Witebsky F, et al. Lysis-centrifugation blood cultures in the detection of tissue-proven invasive candidiasis. Disseminated versus single-organ infection. Diagn Microbiol
Infect Dis 1993;17:103.
110. Walsh TJ, Chanock SJ. Diagnosis of invasive fungal infections: advances in nonculture systems. Curr Clin Top Infect Dis 1998;18:101.
111. Lecciones JA, Lee JW, Navarro EE, et al. Vascular catheter-associated fungemia in patients with cancer: analysis of 155 episodes. Clin Infect Dis 1992;14:875.
112. Rex JH, Bennett JE, Sugar AM, et al. A randomized trial comparing fluconazole with amphotericin B for the treatment of candidemia in patients without neutropenia. Candidemia Study Group
and the National Institute. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1325.
113. Anaissie EJ, Darouiche RO, Abi-Said D, et al. Management of invasive candidal infections: results of a prospective, randomized, multicenter study of fluconazole versus amphotericin B and
review of the literature. Clin Infect Dis 1996;23:964.
114. Anaissie EJ, Vartivarian SE, Abi-Said D, et al. Fluconazole versus amphotericin B in the treatment of hematogenous candidiasis: a matched cohort study. Am J Med 1996;101:170.
115. Rex JH, Bennett JE, Sugar AM, et al. Intravascular catheter exchange and duration of candidemia. NIAID Mycoses Study Group and the Candidemia Study Group. Clin Infect Dis 1995;21:994.
116. Cole GT, Halawa AA, Anaissie EJ. The role of the gastrointestinal tract in hematogenous candidiasis: from the laboratory to the bedside. Clin Infect Dis 1996;22(Suppl 2):S73.
117. Thaler M, Pastakia B, Shawker TH, O'Leary T, Pizzo PA. Hepatic candidiasis in cancer patients: the evolving picture of the syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:88.
118. Walsh TJ, Whitcomb P, Piscitelli S, et al. Safety, tolerance, and pharmacokinetics of amphotericin B lipid complex in children with hepatosplenic candidiasis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
1997;41:1944.
119. Walsh TJ, Whitcomb PO, Revankar SG, Pizzo PA. Successful treatment of hepatosplenic candidiasis through repeated cycles of chemotherapy and neutropenia. Cancer 1995;76:2357.
120. Wald A, Leisenring W, van Burik JA, Bowden RA. Epidemiology of Aspergillus infections in a large cohort of patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1459.
121. McWhinney PH, Kibbler CC, Hamon MD, et al. Progress in the diagnosis and management of aspergillosis in bone marrow transplantation: 13 years' experience. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17:397.
122. Yuen KY, Woo PC, Ip MS, et al. Stage-specific manifestation of mold infections in bone marrow transplant recipients: risk factors and clinical significance of positive concentrated smears. Clin
Infect Dis 1997;25:37.
123. Young RC, Bennett JE, Vogel CL, Carbone PP, DeVita VT. Aspergillosis. The spectrum of the disease in 98 patients. Medicine (Baltimore) 1970;49:147.
124. Yu VL, Muder RR, Poorsattar A. Significance of isolation of Aspergillus from the respiratory tract in diagnosis of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Results from a three-year prospective study.
Am J Med 1986;81:249.
125. Kuhlman JE, Fishman EK, Burch PA, et al. Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in acute leukemia. The contribution of CT to early diagnosis and aggressive management. Chest 1987;92:95.
126. Caillot D, Casasnovas O, Bernard A, et al. Improved management of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in neutropenic patients using early thoracic computed tomographic scan and surgery. J
Clin Oncol 1997;15:139.
127. Einsele H, Quabeck K, Muller KD, et al. Prediction of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis from colonisation of lower respiratory tract before marrow transplantation [letter]. Lancet 1998;352:1443.
128. Bretagne S, Costa JM, Bart-Delabesse E, et al. Comparison of serum galactomannan antigen detection and competitive polymerase chain reaction for diagnosing invasive aspergillosis. Clin
Infect Dis 1998;26:1407.
129. Sutton DA, Sanche SE, Revankar SG, Fothergill AW, Rinaldi MG. In vitro amphotericin B resistance in clinical isolates of Aspergillus terreus, with a head-to-head comparison to voriconazole. J
Clin Microbiol 1999;37:2343.
130. Pagano L, Ricci P, Nosari A, et al. Fatal haemoptysis in pulmonary filamentous mycosis: an underevaluated cause of death in patients with acute leukaemia in haematological complete
remission. A retrospective study and review of the literature. Gimema Infection Program (Gruppo Italiano Malattie Ematologiche dell'Adulto). Br J Haematol 1995;89:500.
131. Offner F, Cordonnier C, Ljungman P, et al. Impact of previous aspergillosis on the outcome of bone marrow transplantation. Clin Infect Dis 1998;26:1098.
132. Karp JE, Burch PA, Merz WG. An approach to intensive antileukemia therapy in patients with previous invasive aspergillosis. Am J Med 1988;85:203.
133. Martino R, Lopez R, Sureda A, Brunet S, Domingo-Albos A. Risk of reactivation of a recent invasive fungal infection in patients with hematological malignancies undergoing further intensive
chemo-radiotherapy. A single-center experience and review of the literature. Haematologica 1997;82:297.
134. Sugar AM. Mucormycosis. Clin Infect Dis 1992;14(Suppl 1):S126.
135. Diamond RD, Bennett JE. Prognostic factors in cryptococcal meningitis: a study of 11 cases. Ann Intern Med 1974;80:176.
136. Griffin FM Jr. Roles of macrophage Fc and C3b receptors in phagocytosis of immunologically coated Cryptococcus neoformans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1981;78:3853.
137. Kozel TR. Opsonization and phagocytosis of Cryptococcus neoformans. Arch Med Res 1993;24:211.
138. Dromer F, Mathoulin S, Dupont B, Brugiere O, Letenneur L. Comparison of the efficacy of amphotericin B and fluconazole in the treatment of cryptococcosis in human immunodeficiency
virus-negative patients: retrospective analysis of 83 cases. French Cryptococcosis Study Group. Clin Infect Dis 1996;22(Suppl 2):S154.
139. Park MK, Hospenthal DR, Bennett JE. Treatment of hydrocephalus secondary to cryptococcal meningitis by use of shunting. Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:629.
140. Rex JH, Larsen RA, Dismukes WE, Cloud GA, Bennett JE. Catastrophic visual loss due to Cryptococcus neoformans meningitis. Medicine (Baltimore) 1993;72:207.
141. Bennett JE, Dismukes WE, Duma RJ, et al. A comparison of amphotericin B alone and combined with flucytosine in the treatment of cryptoccal meningitis. N Engl J Med 1979;301:126.
142. Saag MS, Cloud GA, Graybill JR, et al. A comparison of itraconazole versus fluconazole as maintenance therapy for AIDS-associated cryptococcal meningitis. National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases Mycoses Study Group. Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:291.
143. van der Horst CM, Saag MS, Cloud GA, et al. Treatment of cryptococcal meningitis associated with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases Mycoses Study Group and AIDS Clinical Trials Group. N Engl J Med 1997;337:15.
144. Walsh TJ, Newman KR, Moody M, Wharton RC, Wade JC. Trichosporonosis in patients with neoplastic disease. Medicine (Baltimore) 1986;65:268.
145. Walsh TJ. Trichosporonosis. Infect Dis Clin North Am 1989;3:43.
146. Campbell CK, Payne AL, Teall AJ, Brownell A, Mackenzie DW. Cryptococcal latex antigen test positive in patient with Trichosporon beigelii infection [letter]. Lancet 1985;2:43.
147. Walsh TJ, Lee JW, Roilides E, Pizzo PA. Recent progress and current problems in management of invasive fungal infections in patients with neoplastic diseases. Curr Opin Oncol 1992;4:647.
148. Anaissie EJ, Hachem R, Karyotakis NC, et al. Comparative efficacies of amphotericin B, triazoles, and combination of both as experimental therapy for murine trichosporonosis. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 1994;38:2541.
149. Anaissie E, Gokaslan A, Hachem R, et al. Azole therapy for trichosporonosis: clinical evaluation of eight patients, experimental therapy for murine infection, and review. Clin Infect Dis
1992;15:781.
150. Martino P, Venditti M, Micozzi A, et al. Blastoschizomyces capitatus: an emerging cause of invasive fungal disease in leukemia patients. Rev Infect Dis 1990;12:570.
151. Redline RW, Dahms BB. Malassezia pulmonary vasculitis in an infant on long-term Intralipid therapy. N Engl J Med 1981;305:1395.
152. Vartivarian SE, Anaissie EJ, Bodey GP. Emerging fungal pathogens in immunocompromised patients: classification, diagnosis, and management. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17(Suppl 2):S487.
153. Dixon DM, Walsh TJ, Merz WG, McGinnis MR. Infections due to Xylohypha bantiana (Cladosporium trichoides). Rev Infect Dis 1989;11:515.
154. Segal BH, Walsh TJ, Liu JM, Wilson JD, Kwon-Chung KJ. Invasive infection with Fusarium chlamydosporum in a patient with aplastic anemia. J Clin Microbiol 1998;36:1772.
155. Boutati EI, Anaissie EJ. Fusarium, a significant emerging pathogen in patients with hematologic malignancy: ten years' experience at a cancer center and implications for management. Blood
1997;90:999.
156. Walsh TJ, Peter J, McGough DA, et al. Activities of amphotericin B and antifungal azoles alone and in combination against Pseudallescheria boydii. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
1995;39:1361.
157. Durkin MM, Connolly PA, Wheat LJ. Comparison of radioimmunoassay and enzyme-linked immunoassay methods for detection of Histoplasma capsulatum var. capsulatum antigen. J Clin
Microbiol 1997;35:2252.
158. Deresinski SC, Stevens DA. Coccidioidomycosis in compromised hosts. Experience at Stanford University Hospital. Medicine (Baltimore) 1975;54:377.
159. Anaissie EJ, Vadhan-Raj S. Is it time to redefine the management of febrile neutropenia in cancer patients? Am J Med 1995;98:221.
160. Goodman JL, Winston DJ, Greenfield RA, et al. A controlled trial of fluconazole to prevent fungal infections in patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med 1992;326:845.
161. Slavin MA, Osborne B, Adams R, et al. Efficacy and safety of fluconazole prophylaxis for fungal infections after marrow transplantationa prospective, randomized, double-blind study. J Infect
Dis 1995;171:1545.
162. van Burik JH, Leisenring W, Myerson D, et al. The effect of prophylactic fluconazole on the clinical spectrum of fungal diseases in bone marrow transplant recipients with special attention to
hepatic candidiasis. An autopsy study of 355 patients. Medicine (Baltimore) 1998;77:246.
163. Winston DJ, Chandrasekar PH, Lazarus HM, et al. Fluconazole prophylaxis of fungal infections in patients with acute leukemia. Results of a randomized placebo-controlled, double-blind,
multicenter trial. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:495.
164. Rotstein C, Bow EJ, Laverdiere M, et al. Randomized placebo-controlled trial of fluconazole prophylaxis for neutropenic cancer patients: benefit based on purpose and intensity of cytotoxic
therapy. The Canadian Fluconazole Prophylaxis Study Group. Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:331.
165. Wingard JR, Merz WG, Rinaldi MG, et al. Increase in Candida krusei infection among patients with bone marrow transplantation and neutropenia treated prophylactically with fluconazole. N
Engl J Med 1991;325:1274.
166. Berenguer J, Ali NM, Allende MC, et al. Itraconazole for experimental pulmonary aspergillosis: comparison with amphotericin B, interaction with cyclosporin A, and correlation between
therapeutic response and itraconazole concentrations in plasma. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1994;38:1303.
167. Denning DW, Lee JY, Hostetler JS, et al. NIAID Mycoses Study Group Multicenter Trial of Oral Itraconazole Therapy for Invasive Aspergillosis [published erratum appears in Am J Med 1994

Nov;97:497]. Am J Med 1994;97:135.
168. Stevens DA, Lee JY. Analysis of compassionate use itraconazole therapy for invasive aspergillosis by the NIAID Mycoses Study Group criteria. Arch Intern Med 1997;157:1857.
169. Groll AH, Piscitelli SC, Walsh TJ. Clinical pharmacology of systemic antifungal agents: a comprehensive review of agents in clinical use, current investigational compounds, and putative
targets for antifungal drug development. Adv Pharmacol 1998;44:343.
170. Louie A, Baltch AL, Franke MA, Smith RP, Gordon MA. Comparative capacity of four antifungal agents to stimulate murine macrophages to produce tumour necrosis factor alpha: an effect that
is attenuated by pentoxifylline, liposomal vesicles, and dexamethasone. J Antimicrob Chemother 1994;34:975.
171. Rogers PD, Kramer RE, Chapman SW, Cleary JD. Amphotericin B-induced interleukin-1beta expression in human monocytic cells is calcium and calmodulin dependent. J Infect Dis
1999;180:1259.
172. MacGregor RR, Bennett JE, Erslev AJ. Erythropoietin concentration in amphotericin B-induced anemia. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1978;14:270.
173. Hiemenz JW, Walsh TJ. Lipid formulations of amphotericin B: recent progress and future directions. Clin Infect Dis 1996;22(Suppl 2):S133.
174. Walsh TJ, Finberg RW, Arndt C, et al. Liposomal amphotericin B for empiric therapy in patients with persistent fever and neutropenia. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
Mycoses Study Group. N Engl J Med 1999;340:764.
174a. Prentice HG, Hann IM, Herbrecht R, et al. A randomized comparison of liposomal versus conventional amphotericin B for the treatment of pyrexia of unknown origin in neutropenic patients.
Br J Haematol 1997;98:711.
175. Wingard JR, Hiemenz J, Anaissie EJ, et al. A randomized study double blind safety study of AmBisome and Abelcet in febrile neutropenic patients [abst]. Focus on Fungal Infections, 9, San
Diego, CA, March 1999.
176. Walsh TJ, Hiemenz JW, Seibel NL, et al. Amphotericin B lipid complex for invasive fungal infections: analysis of safety and efficacy in 556 cases. Clin Infect Dis 1998;26:1383.
177. Anaissie EJ, White J, Uzun O, et al. Amphotericin B lipid complex (ABLC) versus amphotericin B (AMB) for treatment of hematogenous and invasive candidiasis: a prospective, randomized,
multicenter trial. Abstracts of the 35th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, Washington, DC, 1995. American Society for Microbiology.
178. Bowden RA, Cays M, Gooley T, Mamelok RD, van Burik JA. Phase I study of amphotericin B colloidal dispersion for the treatment of invasive fungal infections after marrow transplant. J Infect
Dis 1996;173:1208.
179. Oppenheim BA, Herbrecht R, Kusne S. The safety and efficacy of amphotericin B colloidal dispersion in the treatment of invasive mycoses. Clin Infect Dis 1995;21:1145.
180. Noskin G, Pietrelli L, Gurwith M, Bowden R. Treatment of invasive fungal infections with amphotericin B colloidal dispersion in bone marrow transplant recipients. Bone Marrow Transplant
1999;23:697.
181. White MH, Anaissie EJ, Kusne S, et al. Amphotericin B colloidal dispersion vs. amphotericin B as therapy for invasive aspergillosis. Clin Infect Dis 1997;24:635.
182. White MH, Bowden RA, Sandler ES, et al. Randomized, double-blind clinical trial of amphotericin B colloidal dispersion vs. amphotericin B in the empiric treatment of fever and neutropenia.
Clin Infect Dis 1998;27:296.
183. Wingard JR, Kubilis P, Lee L, et al. Clinical significance of nephrotoxicity in patients treated with Amphotericin B for suspected or proven aspergillosis. Clin Infect Dis 1999;29:1402.
184. Marco F, Pfaller MA, Messer SA, Jones RN. Activity of MK-0991 (L-743,872), a new echinocandin, compared with those of LY303366 and four other antifungal agents tested against blood
stream isolates of Candida spp. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;32:33.
185. Abruzzo GK, Flattery AM, Gill CJ, et al. Evaluation of the echinocandin antifungal MK-0991 (L-743,872): efficacies in mouse models of disseminated aspergillosis, candidiasis, and
cryptococcosis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1997;41:2333.
186. Petraitiene R, Petraitis V, Groll AH, et al. Antifungal activity of LY303366, a novel echinocandin B, in experimental disseminated candidiasis in rabbits. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
1999;43:2148.
187. Arathoon E, Gotuzzo E, Noriega L, et al. A randomized, double-blind, multicenter trial of MK-0991, an echinocandin antifungal agent, vs amphotericin B for the treatment of oropharyngeal
candidiasis in adults. Infectious Disease Society of America, Denver, CO, 1998.
188. Balfour HH Jr. Antiviral drugs. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1255.
189. Saral R, Ambinder RF, Burns WH, et al. Acyclovir prophylaxis against herpes simplex virus infection in patients with leukemia. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Ann Intern
Med 1983;99:773.
190. Meyers JD, Flournoy N, Thomas ED. Infection with herpes simplex virus and cell-mediated immunity after marrow transplant. J Infect Dis 1980;142:338.
191. Wade JC, Newton B, Flournoy N, Meyers JD. Oral acyclovir for prevention of herpes simplex virus reactivation after marrow transplantation. Ann Intern Med 1984;100:823.
192. Miller W, Flynn P, McCullough J, et al. Cytomegalovirus infection after bone marrow transplantation: an association with acute graft-v-host disease. Blood 1986;67:1162.
193. Holmberg LA, Boeckh M, Hooper H, et al. Increased incidence of cytomegalovirus disease after autologous CD34-selected peripheral stem cell transplantation. Blood 1999;94:4029.
194. Nguyen Q, Champlin R, Giralt S, et al. Late cytomegalovirus pneumonia in adult allogeneic blood and marrow transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:618.
195. Prentice HG, Kho P. Clinical strategies for the management of cytomegalovirus infection and disease in allogeneic bone marrow transplant. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;19:135.
196. Reed EC, Wolford JL, Kopecky KJ, et al. Ganciclovir for the treatment of cytomegalovirus gastroenteritis in bone marrow transplant patients. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern
Med 1990;112:505.
197. Winston DJ, Ho WG, Bartoni K, et al. Ganciclovir prophylaxis of cytomegalovirus infection and disease in allogeneic bone marrow transplant recipients. Results of a placebo-controlled,
double-blind trial. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:179.
198. Bowden RA, Sayers M, Flournoy N, et al. Cytomegalovirus immune globulin and seronegative blood products to prevent primary cytomegalovirus infection after marrow transplantation. N Engl
J Med 1986;314:1006.
199. Miller WJ, McCullough J, Balfour HH Jr, et al. Prevention of cytomegalovirus infection following bone marrow transplantation: a randomized trial of blood product screening. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1991;7:227.
200. Prentice HG, Gluckman E, Powles RL, et al. Impact of long-term acyclovir on cytomegalovirus infection and survival after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. European Acyclovir for CMV
Prophylaxis Study Group. Lancet 1994;343:749.
201. Meyers JD, Reed EC, Shepp DH, et al. Acyclovir for prevention of cytomegalovirus infection and disease after allogeneic marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med 1988;318:70.
202. Buhles WC Jr, Mastre BJ, Tinker AJ, Strand V, Koretz SH. Ganciclovir treatment of life- or sight-threatening cytomegalovirus infection: experience in 314 immunocompromised patients. Rev
Infect Dis 1988;10(Suppl 3):S495.
203. Goodrich JM, Bowden RA, Fisher L, et al. Ganciclovir prophylaxis to prevent cytomegalovirus disease after allogeneic marrow transplant. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:173.
204. Li CR, Greenberg PD, Gilbert MJ, Goodrich JM, Riddell SR. Recovery of HLA-restricted cytomegalovirus (CMV)-specific T-cell responses after allogeneic bone marrow transplant: correlation
with CMV disease and effect of ganciclovir prophylaxis. Blood 1994;83:1971.
205. Boeckh M, Gooley TA, Myerson D, et al. Cytomegalovirus pp65 antigenemia-guided early treatment with ganciclovir versus ganciclovir at engraftment after allogeneic marrow transplantation: a
randomized double-blind study. Blood 1996;88:4063.
206. Boeckh M, Bowden RA, Gooley T, Myerson D, Corey L. Successful modification of a pp65 antigenemia-based early treatment strategy for prevention of cytomegalovirus disease in allogeneic
marrow transplant recipients [letter]. Blood 1999;93:1781.
207. Einsele H, Ehninger G, Hebart H, et al. Polymerase chain reaction monitoring reduces the incidence of cytomegalovirus disease and the duration and side effects of antiviral therapy after bone
marrow transplantation. Blood 1995;86:2815.
208. Moretti S, Zikos P, Van Lint MT, et al. Forscarnet vs ganciclovir for cytomegalovirus (CMV) antigenemia after allogeneic hemopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT): a randomised study.
Bone Marrow Transplant 1998;22:175.
209. Lowance D, Neumayer HH, Legendre CM, et al. Valacyclovir for the prevention of cytomegalovirus disease after renal transplantation. International Valacyclovir Cytomegalovirus Prophylaxis
Transplantation Study Group. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1462.
210. Huang Z, Vafai A, Lee J, Mahalingam R, Hayward AR. Specific lysis of targets expressing varicella-zoster virus gpI or gpIV by CD4+ human T-cell clones. J Virol 1992;66:2664.
211. Diaz PS, Smith S, Hunter E, Arvin AM. T lymphocyte cytotoxicity with natural varicella-zoster virus infection and after immunization with live attenuated varicella vaccine. J Immunol
1989;142:636.
212. Meyers JD, Flournoy N, Thomas ED. Cell-mediated immunity to varicella-zoster virus after allogeneic marrow transplant. J Infect Dis 1980;141:479.
213. Haumont M, Jurdan M, Kangro H, et al. Neutralizing antibody responses induced by varicella-zoster virus gE and gB glycoproteins following infection, reactivation or immunization. J Med Virol
1997;53:63.
214. Locksley RM, Flournoy N, Sullivan KM, Meyers JD. Infection with varicella-zoster virus after marrow transplantation. J Infect Dis 1985;152:1172.
215. Balfour HH Jr, Bean B, Laskin OL, et al. Acyclovir halts progression of herpes zoster in immunocompromised patients. N Engl J Med 1983;308:1448.
216. Williams WW. CDC guidelines for the prevention and control of nosocomial infections. Guideline for infection control in hospital personnel. Am J Infect Control 1984;12:34.
217. Hardy I, Gershon AA, Steinberg SP, LaRussa P. The incidence of zoster after immunization with live attenuated varicella vaccine. A study in children with leukemia. Varicella Vaccine
Collaborative Study Group. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1545.
218. Gershon AA, Steinberg SP. Persistence of immunity to varicella in children with leukemia immunized with live attenuated varicella vaccine. N Engl J Med 1989;320:892.
219. Peter G. 1997 Red Book: Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 1997.
220. Rickinson AB, Moss DJ. Human cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses to Epstein-Barr virus infection. Annu Rev Immunol 1997;15:405.
221. Lucas KG, Small TN, Heller G, Dupont B, O'Reilly RJ. The development of cellular immunity to Epstein-Barr virus after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1996;87:2594.
222. Young L, Alfieri C, Hennessy K, et al. Expression of Epstein-Barr virus transformation-associated genes in tissues of patients with EBV lymphoproliferative disease. N Engl J Med
1989;321:1080.
223. Zutter MM, Martin PJ, Sale GE, et al. Epstein-Barr virus lymphoproliferation after bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1988;72:520.
224. Shapiro RS, McClain K, Frizzera G, et al. Epstein-Barr virus associated B cell lymphoproliferative disorders following bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1988;71:1234.
225. Salahuddin SZ, Ablashi DV, Markham PD, et al. Isolation of a new virus, HBLV, in patients with lymphoproliferative disorders. Science 1986;234:596.
226. Lusso P, Markham PD, Tschachler E, et al. In vitro cellular tropism of human B-lymphotropic virus (human herpesvirus-6). J Exp Med 1988;167:1659.
227. Wilborn F, Brinkmann V, Schmidt CA, et al. Herpesvirus type 6 in patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation: serologic features and detection by polymerase chain reaction. Blood
1994;83:3052.
228. Frenkel N, Katsafanas GC, Wyatt LS, Yoshikawa T, Asano Y. Bone marrow transplant recipients harbor the B variant of human herpesvirus 6. Bone Marrow Transplant 1994;14:839.
229. Drobyski WR, Dunne WM, Burd EM, et al. Human herpesvirus-6 (HHV-6) infection in allogeneic bone marrow transplant recipients: evidence of a marrow-suppressive role for HHV-6 in vivo. J
Infect Dis 1993;167:735.
230. Drobyski WR, Knox KK, Majewski D, Carrigan DR. Brief report: fatal encephalitis due to variant B human herpesvirus-6 infection in a bone marrow-transplant recipient. N Engl J Med
1994;330:1356.
231. Carrigan DR, Drobyski WR, Russler SK, et al. Interstitial pneumonitis associated with human herpesvirus-6 infection after marrow transplantation. Lancet 1991;338:147.
232. Singh N, Carrigan DR. Human herpesvirus-6 in transplantation: an emerging pathogen. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:1065.
233. Whimbey E, Champlin RE, Couch RB, et al. Community respiratory virus infections among hospitalized adult bone marrow transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 1996;22:778.
234. Sable CA, Hayden FG. Orthomyxoviral and paramyxoviral infections in transplant patients. Infect Dis Clin North Am 1995;9:987.
235. Whimbey E, Couch RB, Englund JA, et al. Respiratory syncytial virus pneumonia in hospitalized adult patients with leukemia. Clin Infect Dis 1995;21:376.
236. Bowden R. Respiratory virus infections after marrow transplant: the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center Experience. In Proceedings of a symposium: community respiratory infections in
the immunocompromised host. Am J Med 1997;102:27.
237. Whimbey E, Champlin RE, Englund JA, et al. Combination therapy with aerosolized ribavirin and intravenous immunoglobulin for respiratory syncytial virus disease in adult bone marrow
transplant recipients. Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;16:393.

238. Englund JA, Piedra PA, Jewell A, et al. Rapid diagnosis of respiratory syncytial virus infections in immunocompromised adults. J Clin Microbiol 1996;34:1649.
239. Lewinsohn DM, Bowden RA, Mattson D, Crawford SW. Phase I study of intravenous ribavirin treatment of respiratory syncytial virus pneumonia after marrow transplantation. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 1996;40:2555.
240. Whimbey E, Englund JA, Couch RB. Community respiratory virus infections in immunocompromised pateints with cancer. In Proceedings of a symposium: community respiratory infections in
the immunocompromised host. Am J Med 1997;102:10.
241. Wendt CH, Weisdorf DJ, Jordan MC, Balfour HH Jr, Hertz MI. Parainfluenza virus respiratory infection after bone marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med 1992;326:921.
242. Englund JA, Champlin RE, Wyde PR, et al. Common emergence of amantadine- and rimantadine-resistant influenza A viruses in symptomatic immunocompromised adults. Clin Infect Dis
1998;26:1418.
243. Stein DS, Creticos CM, Jackson GG, et al. Oral ribavirin treatment of influenza A and B. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1987;31:1285.
244. Hayden FG, Osterhaus AD, Treanor JJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of the neuraminidase inhibitor zanamivir in the treatment of influenzavirus infections. GG167 Influenza Study Group. N Engl J
Med 1997;337:874.
245. Hayden FG, Atmar RL, Schilling M, et al. Use of the selective oral neuraminidase inhibitor oseltamivir to prevent influenza. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1336.
246. Monto AS, Robinson DP, Herlocher ML, et al. Zanamivir in the prevention of influenza among healthy adults: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1999;282:31.
247. Prevention and control of influenza: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1999;48:1.
248. Gross PA, Gould AL, Brown AE. Effect of cancer chemotherapy on the immune response to influenza virus vaccine: review of published studies. Rev Infect Dis 1985;7:613.
249. Lo W, Whimbey E, Elting L, et al. Antibody response to a two-dose influenza vaccine regimen in adult lymphoma patients on chemotherapy. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1993;12:778.
250. Shields AF, Hackman RC, Fife KH, Corey L, Meyers JD. Adenovirus infections in patients undergoing bone-marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med 1985;312:529.
251. Flomenberg P, Babbitt J, Drobvski WR, et al. Increasing incidence of adenovirus disease in bone marrow transplant recipients. J Infect Dis 1994;169:775.
252. Kaplan LJ, Daum RS, Smaron M, McCarthy CA. Severe measles in immunocompromised patients. JAMA 1992;267:1237.
253. Woo PC, Chiu SS, Seto WH, Peiris M. Cost-effectiveness of rapid diagnosis of viral respiratory tract infections in pediatric patients. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:1579.
254. Fan J, Henrickson KJ, Savatski LL. Rapid simultaneous diagnosis of infections with respiratory syncytial viruses A and B, influenza viruses A and B, and human parainfluenza virus types 1, 2,
and 3 by multiplex quantitative reverse transcription- polymerase chain reaction-enzyme hybridization assay (Hexaplex). Clin Infect Dis 1998;26:1397.
255. Chen PM, Chiou TJ, Fan FS, et al. Fulminant hepatitis is significantly increased in hepatitis B carriers after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Transplantation 1999;67:1425.
256. Webster A, Brenner MK, Prentice HG, Griffiths PD. Fatal hepatitis B reactivation after autologous bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1989;4:207.
257. Pariente EA, Goudeau A, Dubois F, et al. Fulminant hepatitis due to reactivation of chronic hepatitis B virus infection after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Dig Dis Sci 1988;33:1185.
258. Lok AS, Liang RH, Chiu EK, et al. Reactivation of hepatitis B virus replication in patients receiving cytotoxic therapy. Report of a prospective study. Gastroenterology 1991;100:182.
259. Hoofnagle JH, Dusheiko GM, Schafer DF, et al. Reactivation of chronic hepatitis B virus infection by cancer chemotherapy. Ann Intern Med 1982;96:447.
260. Galbraith RM, Eddleston AL, Williams R, Zuckerman AJ. Fulminant hepatic failure in leukaemia and choriocarcinoma related to withdrawal of cytotoxic drug therapy. Lancet 1975;2:528.
261. McIvor C, Morton J, Bryant A, et al. Fatal reactivation of precore mutant hepatitis B virus associated with fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis after bone marrow transplantation. Ann Intern Med
1994;121:274.
262. Yoshiba M, Sekiyama K, Sugata F, et al. Reactivation of precore mutant hepatitis B virus leading to fulminant hepatic failure following cytotoxic treatment. Dig Dis Sci 1992;37:1253.
263. Vergani D, Locasciulli A, Masera G, et al. Histological evidence of hepatitis-B-virus infection with negative serology in children with acute leukaemia who develop chronic liver disease. Lancet
1982;1:361.
264. Bréchot C, Degos F, Lugassy C, et al. Hepatitis B virus DNA in patients with chronic liver disease and negative tests for hepatitis B surface antigen. N Engl J Med 1985;312:270.
265. Dienstag JL, Schiff ER, Wright TL, et al. Lamivudine as initial treatment for chronic hepatitis B in the United States. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1256.
266. Lai CL, Chien RN, Leung NW, et al. A one-year trial of lamivudine for chronic hepatitis B. Asia Hepatitis Lamivudine Study Group. N Engl J Med 1998;339:61.
267. Niederau C, Heintges T, Lange S, et al. Long-term follow-up of HBeAg-positive patients treated with interferon alfa for chronic hepatitis B. N Engl J Med 1996;334:1422.
268. Ilan Y, Nagler A, Adler R, et al. Adoptive transfer of immunity to hepatitis B virus after T cell-depleted allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Hepatology 1993;18:246.
269. Strasser SI, Myerson D, Spurgeon CL, et al. Hepatitis C infection and bone marrow transplantation: a cohort study with a 10-year follow-up. Hepatology 1999;29:1893.
270. Frickhoken N, Wiesneth M, Jainto C, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection is a risk factor for liver failure from veno-occlusive disease after bone marrow transplantation. Blood 1994;83:1998.
271. Strasser SI, Sullivan KM, Myerson D, et al. Cirrhosis of the liver in long term marrow transplant survivors. Blood 1999;93:3259.
271a. Strasser SI, McDonald GB. Hepatitis viruses and hematopoietic cell transplantation: a guide to patient and donor management. Blood 1999; 93:1127.
271b. Zuckerman E, Zuckerman T, Douer D, et al. Liver dysfunction in patients infected with hepatitis C virus undergoing chemotherapy for hematologic malignancies. Cancer 1998;83:1224.
271c. Markovic S, Drozina G, Vovk M, Fidler-Jenko M. Reactivation of hepatitis B but not hepatitis C in patients with malignant lymphoma and immunosuppressive therapy. A prospective study in
305 patients. Hepatogastroenterology 1999;46:2925.
272. Davis GL, Esteban-Mur R, Rustgi V, et al. Interferon alfa-2b alone or in combination with ribavirin for the treatment of relapse of chronic hepatitis C. International Hepatitis Interventional
Therapy Group. N Engl J Med 1998;339:1493.
273. Alter HJ, Nakatsuji Y, Melpolder J, et al. The incidence of transfusion-associated hepatitis G virus infection and its relation to liver disease. N Engl J Med 1997;336:747.
274. Alter MJ, Gallagher M, Morris TT, et al. Acute non-A-E hepatitis in the United States and the role of hepatitis G virus infection. Sentinel Counties Viral Hepatitis Study Team. N Engl J Med
1997;336:741.
275. Lefrere JJ, Roudot-Thoraval F, Lefrere F, et al. Natural history of the TT virus infection through follow-up of TTV DNA- positive multiple-transfused patients. Blood 2000;95:347.
276. Kanda Y, Tanaka Y, Kami M, et al. TT virus in bone marrow transplant recipients. Blood 1999;93:2485.
277. Sepkowitz KA, Brown AE, Telzak EE, Gottlieb S, Armstrong D. Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia among patients without AIDS at a cancer hospital. JAMA 1992;267:832.
278. Sepkowitz KA. Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in patients without AIDS. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17(Suppl 2):S416.
279. Sepkowitz KA, Brown AE, Armstrong D. Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia without acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. More patients, same risk [editorial]. Arch Intern Med 1995;155:1125.
280. Hughes WT, Feldman S, Aur RJ, et al. Intensity of immunosuppressive therapy and the incidence of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonitis. Cancer 1975;36:2004.
281. Browne MJ, Hubbard SM, Longo DL, et al. Excess prevalence of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in patients treated for lymphoma with combination chemotherapy. Ann Intern Med
1986;104:338.
282. Kovacs JA, Hiemenz JW, Macher AM, et al. Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia: a comparison between patients with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome and patients with other
immunodeficiencies. Ann Intern Med 1984;100:663.
283. Kovacs JA, Ng VL, Masur H, et al. Diagnosis of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia: improved detection in sputum with use of monoclonal antibodies. N Engl J Med 1988;318:589.
284. Lipschik GY, Gill VJ, Lundgren JD, et al. Improved diagnosis of Pneumocystis carinii infection by polymerase chain reaction on induced sputum and blood. Lancet 1992;340:203.
285. Masur H, Gill VJ, Ognibene FP, et al. Diagnosis of Pneumocystis pneumonia by induced sputum technique in patients without the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Ann Intern Med
1988;109:755.
286. Carr A, Penny R, Cooper DA. Efficacy and safety of rechallenge with low-dose trimethoprim- sulphamethoxazole in previously hypersensitive HIV-infected patients. AIDS 1993;7:65.
287. Koopmans PP, Burger DM. Managing drug reactions to sulfonamides and other drugs in HIV infection: desensitization rather than rechallenge? Pharm World Sci 1998;20:253.
288. Bozzette SA, Sattler FR, Chiu J, et al. A controlled trial of early adjunctive treatment with corticosteroids for Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
California Collaborative Treatment Group. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1451.
289. Hughes WT, Kuhn S, Chaudhary S, et al. Successful chemoprophylaxis for Pneumocystis carinii pneumonitis. N Engl J Med 1977;297:1419.
290. Hughes WT, Rivera GK, Schell MJ, Thornton D, Lott L. Successful intermittent chemoprophylaxis for Pneumocystis carinii pneumonitis. N Engl J Med 1987;316:1627.
291. Lyytikainen O, Elonen E, Lautenschlager I, et al. Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in adults with acute leukaemia: is there a need for primary chemoprophylaxis? [letter]. Eur J Haematol
1996;56:188.
292. Henson JW, Jalaj JK, Walker RW, Stover DE, Fels AO. Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in patients with primary brain tumors. Arch Neurol 1991;48:406.
293. Slivka A, Wen PY, Shea WM, Loeffler JS. Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia during steroid taper in patients with primary brain tumors. Am J Med 1993;94:216.
294. Israelski DM, Remington JS. Toxoplasmosis in patients with cancer. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17(Suppl 2):S423.
295. Hakes TB, Armstrong D. Toxoplasmosis. Problems in diagnosis and treatment. Cancer 1983;52:1535.
296. Slavin MA, Meyers JD, Remington JS, Hackman RC. Toxoplasma gondii infection in marrow transplant recipients: a 20 year experience. Bone Marrow Transplant 1994;13:549.
297. Tang TT, Harb JM, Dunne WM Jr, et al. Cerebral toxoplasmosis in an immunocompromised host. A precise and rapid diagnosis by electron microscopy. Am J Clin Pathol 1986;85:104.
298. Conley FK, Jenkins KA, Remington JS. Toxoplasma gondii infection of the central nervous system. Use of the peroxidase-antiperoxidase method to demonstrate toxoplasma in formalin fixed,
paraffin embedded tissue sections. Hum Pathol 1981;12:690.
299. Eggers C, Gross U, Klinker H, et al. Limited value of cerebrospinal fluid for direct detection of Toxoplasma gondii in toxoplasmic encephalitis associated with AIDS. J Neurol 1995;242:644.
300. Potasman I, Resnick L, Luft BJ, Remington JS. Intrathecal production of antibodies against Toxoplasma gondii in patients with toxoplasmic encephalitis and the acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS). Ann Intern Med 1988;108:49.
301. Kijlstra A, Luyendijk L, Baarsma GS, et al. Aqueous humor analysis as a diagnostic tool in toxoplasma uveitis. Int Ophthalmol 1989;13:383.
302. Anderlini P, Przepiorka D, Luna M, et al. Acanthamoeba meningoencephalitis after bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1994;14:459.
303. Cruz T, Reboucas G, Rocha H. Fatal strongyloidiasis in patients receiving corticosteroids. N Engl J Med 1966;275:1093.
304. Igra-Siegman Y, Kapila R, Sen P, Kaminski ZC, Louria DB. Syndrome of hyperinfection with Strongyloides stercoralis. Rev Infect Dis 1981;3:397.
305. Hann I, Viscoli C, Paesmans M, Gaya H, Glauser M. A comparison of outcome from febrile neutropenic episodes in children compared with adults: results from four EORTC studies.
International Antimicrobial Therapy Cooperative Group (IATCG) of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC). Br J Haematol 1997;99:580.
306. Schimpff S, Satterlee W, Young VM, Serpick A. Empiric therapy with carbenicillin and gentamicin for febrile patients with cancer and granulocytopenia. N Engl J Med 1971;284:1061.
307. Pizzo PA, Hathorn JW, Hiemenz J, et al. A randomized trial comparing ceftazidime alone with combination antibiotic therapy in cancer patients with fever and neutropenia. N Engl J Med
1986;315:552.
308. De Pauw BE, Deresinski SC, Feld R, Lane-Allman EF, Donnelly JP. Ceftazidime compared with piperacillin and tobramycin for the empiric treatment of fever in neutropenic patients with
cancer. A multicenter randomized trial. The Intercontinental Antimicrobial Study Group. Ann Intern Med 1994;120:834.
309. Sanders JW, Powe NR, Moore RD. Ceftazidime monotherapy for empiric treatment of febrile neutropenic patients: a meta-analysis. J Infect Dis 1991;164:907.
310. Freifeld AG, Walsh T, Marshall D, et al. Monotherapy for fever and neutropenia in cancer patients: a randomized comparison of ceftazidime versus imipenem. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:165.
311. Rolston KV, Berkey P, Bodey GP, et al. A comparison of imipenem to ceftazidime with or without amikacin as empiric therapy in febrile neutropenic patients. Arch Intern Med 1992;152:283.
312. Diekema DJ, Coffman SL, Marshall SA, et al. Comparison of activities of broad-spectrum beta-lactam compounds against 1,128 gram-positive cocci recently isolated in cancer treatment
centers. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:940.
313. Jones RN, Pfaller MA, Doern GV, Erwin ME, Hollis RJ. Antimicrobial activity and spectrum investigation of eight broad-spectrum beta-lactam drugs: a 1997 surveillance trial in 102 medical
centers in the United States. Cefepime Study Group. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;30:215.
314. Pfaller MA, Jones RN, Marshall SA, et al. Inducible amp C beta-lactamase producing gram-negative bacilli from blood stream infections: frequency, antimicrobial susceptibility, and molecular
epidemiology in a national surveillance program (SCOPE). Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1997;28:211.
315. Jones RN, Marshall SA. Antimicrobial activity of cefepime tested against Bush group I beta-lactamase-producing strains resistant to ceftazidime. A multilaboratory national and international
clinical isolate study. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1994;19:33.
316. Biron P, Fuhrmann C, Cure H, et al. Cefepime versus imipenem-cilastatin as empirical monotherapy in 400 febrile patients with short duration neutropenia. CEMIC (Study Group of Infectious
Diseases in Cancer). J Antimicrob Chemother 1998;42:511.

317. Yamamura D, Gucalp R, Carlisle P, et al. Open randomized study of cefepime versus piperacillin-gentamicin for treatment of febrile neutropenic cancer patients. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
1997;41:1704.
318. Pfaller MA, Jones RN. A review of the in vitro activity of meropenem and comparative antimicrobial agents tested against 30,254 aerobic and anaerobic pathogens isolated world wide. Diagn
Microbiol Infect Dis 1997;28:157.
319. Cometta A, Calandra T, Gaya H, et al. Monotherapy with meropenem versus combination therapy with ceftazidime plus amikacin as empiric therapy for fever in granulocytopenic patients with
cancer. The International Antimicrobial Therapy Cooperative Group of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer and the Gruppo Italiano Malattie Ematologiche
Maligne dell'Adulto Infection Program. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1996;40:1108.
320. Equivalent efficacies of meropenem and ceftazidime as empirical monotherapy of febrile neutropenic patients. The Meropenem Study Group of Leuven, London and Nijmegen. J Antimicrob
Chemother 1995;36:185.
321. Behre G, Link H, Maschmeyer G, et al. Meropenem monotherapy versus combination therapy with ceftazidime and amikacin for empirical treatment of febrile neutropenic patients. Ann Hematol
1998;76:73.
322. Standiford HC, Drusano GL, Fitzpatrick B, Tatem B, Schimpff SC. Bactericidal activity of ceftazidime in serum compared with that of ticarcillin combined with amikacin. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 1984;26:339.
323. Griggs JJ, Blair EA, Norton JR, et al. Ciprofloxacin plus piperacillin is an equally effective regimen for empiric therapy in febrile neutropenic patients compared with standard therapy. Am J
Hematol 1998;58:293.
324. Philpott-Howard JN, Barker KF, Wade JJ, et al. Randomized multicentre study of ciprofloxacin and azlocillin versus gentamicin and azlocillin in the treatment of febrile neutropenic patients. J
Antimicrob Chemother 1990;26(Suppl F):89.
325. Flaherty JP, Waitley D, Edlin B, et al. Multicenter, randomized trial of ciprofloxacin plus azlocillin versus ceftazidime plus amikacin for empiric treatment of febrile neutropenic patients. Am J
Med 1989;87:278S.
326. Charnas R, Luthi AR, Ruch W. Once daily ceftriaxone plus amikacin vs. three times daily ceftazidime plus amikacin for treatment of febrile neutropenic children with cancer. Writing Committee
for the International Collaboration on Antimicrobial Treatment of Febrile Neutropenia in Children. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1997;16:346.
327. Leoni F, Ciolli S, Pascarella A, et al. Ceftriaxone plus conventional or single-daily dose amikacin versus ceftazidime/amikacin as empiric therapy in febrile neutropenic patients. Chemotherapy
1993;39:147.
328. Gibson J, Johnson L, Snowdon L, et al. Single daily ceftriaxone and tobramycin in the empirical management of febrile neutropenic patients: a randomised trial. Int J Hematol 1993;58:63.
329. Kramer BS, Ramphal R, Rand KH. Randomized comparison between two ceftazidime-containing regimens and cephalothin-gentamicin-carbenicillin in febrile granulocytopenic cancer patients.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1986;30:64.
330. Vancomycin added to empirical combination antibiotic therapy for fever in granulocytopenic cancer patients. European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC)
International Antimicrobial Therapy Cooperative Group and the National Cancer Institute of Canada-Clinical Trials Group [published erratum appears in J Infect Dis 1991 Oct;164:832]. J Infect
Dis 1991;163:951.
331. Viscoli C, Moroni C, Boni L, et al. Ceftazidime plus amikacin versus ceftazidime plus vancomycin as empiric therapy in febrile neutropenic children with cancer. Rev Infect Dis 1991;13:397.
332. Ramphal R, Bolger M, Oblon DJ, et al. Vancomycin is not an essential component of the initial empiric treatment regimen for febrile neutropenic patients receiving ceftazidime: a randomized
prospective study. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1992;36:1062.
333. Raad II, Whimbey EE, Rolston KV, et al. A comparison of aztreonam plus vancomycin and imipenem plus vancomycin as initial therapy for febrile neutropenic cancer patients. Cancer
1996;77:1386.
334. Jones PG, Rolston KV, Fainstein V, et al. Aztreonam therapy in neutropenic patients with cancer. Am J Med 1986;81:243.
335. Pizzo PA, Robichaud KJ, Gill FA, et al. Duration of empiric antibiotic therapy in granulocytopenic patients with cancer. Am J Med 1979;67:194.
336. Pizzo PA, Commers J, Cotton D, et al. Approaching the controversies in antibacterial management of cancer patients. Am J Med 1984;76:436.
337. Lucas KG, Brown AE, Armstrong D, Chapman D, Heller G. The identification of febrile, neutropenic children with neoplastic disease at low risk for bacteremia and complications of sepsis.
Cancer 1996;77:791.
338. Bash RO, Katz JA, Cash JV, Buchanan GR. Safety and cost effectiveness of early hospital discharge of lower risk children with cancer admitted for fever and neutropenia. Cancer 1994;74:189.
339. Aquino VM, Tkaczewski I, Buchanan GR. Early discharge of low-risk febrile neutropenic children and adolescents with cancer. Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:74.
340. Talcott JA, Finberg R, Mayer RJ, Goldman L. The medical course of cancer patients with fever and neutropenia. Clinical identification of a low-risk subgroup at presentation. Arch Intern Med
1988;148:2561.
341. Talcott JA, Siegel RD, Finberg R, Goldman L. Risk assessment in cancer patients with fever and neutropenia: a prospective, two-center validation of a prediction rule. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:316.
342. Freifeld AG, Walsh TJ, Pizzo PA. Infections in the cancer patient. In: DeVita VTJ, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles & practice of oncology. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven,
1997:2659.
343. Pizzo PA, Robichaud KJ, Gill FA, Witebsky FG. Empiric antibiotic and antifungal therapy for cancer patients with prolonged fever and granulocytopenia. Am J Med 1982;72:101.
344. Empiric antifungal therapy in febrile granulocytopenic patients. EORTC International Antimicrobial Therapy Cooperative Group. Am J Med 1989;86:668.
345. Pizzo PA, Robichaud KJ, Wesley R, Commers JR. Fever in the pediatric and young adult patient with cancer. A prospective study of 1001 episodes. Medicine (Baltimore) 1982;61:153.
346. Pizzo PA. After empiric therapy: what to do until the granulocyte comes back. Rev Infect Dis 1987;9:214.
347. Talcott JA, Whalen A, Clark J, Rieker PP, Finberg R. Home antibiotic therapy for low-risk cancer patients with fever and neutropenia: a pilot study of 30 patients based on a validated prediction
rule. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:107.
348. Malik IA, Abbas Z, Karim M. Randomised comparison of oral ofloxacin alone with combination of parenteral antibiotics in neutropenic febrile patients [published erratum appears in Lancet 1992
Jul 11;340:128]. Lancet 1992;339:1092.
349. Malik IA, Khan WA, Karim M, Aziz Z, Khan MA. Feasibility of outpatient management of fever in cancer patients with low-risk neutropenia: results of a prospective randomized trial. Am J Med
1995;98:224.
350. Hidalgo M, Hornedo J, Lumbreras C, et al. Outpatient therapy with oral ofloxacin for patients with low risk neutropenia and fever: a prospective, randomized clinical trial. Cancer 1999;85:213.
351. Rubenstein EB, Rolston K, Benjamin RS, et al. Outpatient treatment of febrile episodes in low-risk neutropenic patients with cancer. Cancer 1993;71:3640.
352. Freifeld AG, Pizzo PA. The outpatient management of febrile neutropenia in cancer patients. Oncology (Huntingt) 1996;10:599, 611; discussion 615.
353. Tice AD. Outpatient parenteral antibiotic therapy for fever and neutropenia. Infect Dis Clin North Am 1998;12:963.
354. Rolston KV. New trends in patient management: risk-based therapy for febrile patients with neutropenia. Clin Infect Dis 1999;29:515.
355. Freifeld A, Marchigiani D, Walsh T, et al. A double-blind comparison of empirical oral and intravenous antibiotic therapy for low-risk febrile patients with neutropenia during cancer
chemotherapy. N Engl J Med 1999;341:305.
356. Kern WV, Cometta A, De Bock R, et al. Oral versus intravenous empirical antimicrobial therapy for fever in patients with granulocytopenia who are receiving cancer chemotherapy. International
Antimicrobial Therapy Cooperative Group of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;341:312.
357. Buck AC, Cooke EM. The fate of ingested Pseudomonas aeruginosa in normal persons. J Med Microbiol 1969;2:521.
358. Engels EA, Lau J, Barza M. Efficacy of quinolone prophylaxis in neutropenic cancer patients: a meta-analysis. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1179.
359. Cruciani M, Rampazzo R, Malena M, et al. Prophylaxis with fluoroquinolones for bacterial infections in neutropenic patients: a meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis 1996;23:795.
360. Reduction of fever and streptococcal bacteremia in granulocytopenic patients with cancer. A trial of oral penicillin V or placebo combined with pefloxacin. International Antimicrobial Therapy
Cooperative Group of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer. JAMA 1994;272:1183.
361. Bow EJ, Mandell LA, Louie TJ, et al. Quinolone-based antibacterial chemoprophylaxis in neutropenic patients: effect of augmented gram-positive activity on infectious morbidity. National
Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. Ann Intern Med 1996;125:183.
362. Nauseef WM, Maki DG. A study of the value of simple protective isolation in patients with granulocytopenia. N Engl J Med 1981;304:448.
363. Shooter RA, Cooke EM, Faiers MC, Breaden AL, O'Farrell SM. Isolation of Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Klebsiella from food in hospitals, canteens, and schools. Lancet
1971;2:390.
364. Remington JS, Schimpff SC. Occasional notes. Please don't eat the salads. N Engl J Med 1981;304:433.
365. Steere AC, Mallison GF. Handwashing practices for the prevention of nosocomial infections. Ann Intern Med 1975;83:683.
366. Bodey GP. Symposium on infectious complications of neoplastic disease (part II). Current status of prophylaxis of infection with protected environments. Am J Med 1984;76:678.
367. Fenelon LE. Protective isolation: who needs it? J Hosp Infect 1995;30(Suppl):218.
368. Pizzo PA. Management of fever in patients with cancer and treatment-induced neutropenia. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1323.
369. Bone RC, Fisher CJ Jr, Clemmer TP, et al. A controlled clinical trial of high-dose methylprednisolone in the treatment of severe sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J Med 1987;317:653.
370. Natanson C, Hoffman WD, Suffredini AF, Eichacker PQ, Danner RL. Selected treatment strategies for septic shock based on proposed mechanisms of pathogenesis. Ann Intern Med
1994;120:771.
371. Greene JN. Catheter-related complications of cancer therapy. Infect Dis Clin North Am 1996;10:255.
372. Newman KA, Reed WP, Schimpff SC, Bustamante CI, Wade JC. Hickman catheters in association with intensive cancer chemotherapy. Support Care Cancer 1993;1:92.
373. Press OW, Ramsey PG, Larson EB, Fefer A, Hickman RO. Hickman catheter infections in patients with malignancies. Medicine (Baltimore) 1984;63:189.
374. Raad II, Vartivarian S, Khan A, Bodey GP. Catheter-related infections caused by the Mycobacterium fortuitum complex: 15 cases and review. Rev Infect Dis 1991;13:1120.
375. Verghese A, Widrich WC, Arbeit RD. Central venous septic thrombophlebitisthe role of medical therapy. Medicine (Baltimore) 1985;64:394.
376. Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168.
377. Bodey GP. Dermatologic manifestations of infections in neutropenic patients. Infect Dis Clin North Am 1994;8:655.
378. Kusne S, Eibling DE, Yu VL, et al. Gangrenous cellulitis associated with gram-negative bacilli in pancytopenic patients: dilemma with respect to effective therapy. Am J Med 1988;85:490.
379. Kressel B, Szewczyk C, Tuazon CU. Early clinical recognition of disseminated candidiasis by muscle and skin biopsy. Arch Intern Med 1978;138:429.
380. Walsh TJ, Melcher GP, Rinaldi MG, et al. Trichosporon beigelii, an emerging pathogen resistant to amphotericin B. J Clin Microbiol 1990;28:1616.
381. Walmsley S, Devi S, King S, et al. Invasive Aspergillus infections in a pediatric hospital: a ten-year review. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1993;12:673.
382. Walsh TJ. Primary cutaneous aspergillosisan emerging infection among immunocompromised patients. Clin Infect Dis 1998;27:453.
383. Iwen PC, Rupp ME, Hinrichs SH. Invasive mold sinusitis: 17 cases in immunocompromised patients and review of the literature. Clin Infect Dis 1997;24:1178.
384. Lueg EA, Ballagh RH, Forte V. Analysis of the recent cluster of invasive fungal sinusitis at the Toronto Hospital for Sick Children. J Otolaryngol 1996;25:366.
385. Shelhamer JH, Toews GB, Masur H, et al. NIH conference. Respiratory disease in the immunosuppressed patient. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:415.
386. Fink MP, Snydman DR, Niederman MS, et al. Treatment of severe pneumonia in hospitalized patients: results of a multicenter, randomized, double-blind trial comparing intravenous
ciprofloxacin with imipenem-cilastatin. The Severe Pneumonia Study Group. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1994;38:547.
387. Bartlett JG, Breiman RF, Mandell LA, File TM Jr. Community-acquired pneumonia in adults: guidelines for management. The Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis
1998;26:811.
388. Schwebke JR, Hackman R, Bowden R. Pneumonia due to Legionella micdadei in bone marrow transplant recipients. Rev Infect Dis 1990;12:824.
389. Levine SJ. An approach to the diagnosis of pulmonary infections in immunosuppressed patients. Semin Respir Infect 1992;7:81.
390. Kahn FW, Jones JM, England DM. The role of bronchoalveolar lavage in the diagnosis of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Am J Clin Pathol 1986;86:518.
391. Saito H, Anaissie EJ, Morice RC, Dekmezian R, Bodey GP. Bronchoalveolar lavage in the diagnosis of pulmonary infiltrates in patients with acute leukemia. Chest 1988;94:745.
392. Martino P, Micozzi A, Venditti M, et al. Catheter-related right-sided endocarditis in bone marrow transplant recipients. Rev Infect Dis 1990;12:250.
393. Rubinstein E, Noriega ER, Simberkoff MS, Holzman R, Rahal JJ Jr. Fungal endocarditis: analysis of 24 cases and review of the literature. Medicine (Baltimore) 1975;54:331.
394. Nguyen MH, Nguyen ML, Yu VL, et al. Candida prosthetic valve endocarditis: prospective study of six cases and review of the literature. Clin Infect Dis 1996;22:262.
395. Zenker PN, Rosenberg EM, Van Dyke RB, Rabalais GP, Daum RS. Successful medical treatment of presumed Candida endocarditis in critically ill infants. J Pediatr 1991;119:472.
396. Walsh TJ, Hutchins GM. Aspergillus mural endocarditis. Am J Clin Pathol 1979;71:640.

397. Walsh TJ, Bulkley BH. Aspergillus pericarditis: clinical and pathologic features in the immunocompromised patient. Cancer 1982;49:48.
398. Le Moing V, Lortholary O, Timsit JF, et al. Aspergillus pericarditis with tamponade: report of a successfully treated case and review. Clin Infect Dis 1998;26:451.
399. Overholser CD, Peterson DE, Williams LT, Schimpff SC. Periodontal infection in patients with acute nonlymphocyte leukemia. Prevalence of acute exacerbations. Arch Intern Med
1982;142:551.
400. Myoken Y, Sugata T, Kyo TI, Fujihara M. Pathological features of invasive oral aspergillosis in patients with hematologic malignancies. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1996;54:263.
401. Armstrong TS. Stomatitis in the bone marrow transplant patient. An overview and proposed oral care protocol. Cancer Nurs 1994;17:403.
402. Murray JC, Chiu JK, Dorfman SR, Ogden AK. Epiglottitis following preparation for allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;15:997.
403. Walsh TJ, Gray WC. Candida epiglottitis in immunocompromised patients. Chest 1987;91:482.
404. Walsh TJ, Belitsos NJ, Hamilton SR. Bacterial esophagitis in immunocompromised patients. Arch Intern Med 1986;146:1345.
405. Paulino AF, Kenney R, Forman EN, Medeiros LJ. Typhlitis in a patient with acute lymphoblastic leukemia before the administration of chemotherapy. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1994;16:348.
406. Sloas MM, Flynn PM, Kaste SC, Patrick CC. Typhlitis in children with cancer: a 30-year experience. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17:484.
407. Varki AP, Armitage JO, Feagler JR. Typhlitis in acute leukemia: successful treatment by early surgical intervention. Cancer 1979;43:695.
408. Shaked A, Shinar E, Freund H. Neutropenic typhlitis. A plea for conservatism. Dis Colon Rectum 1983;26:351.
409. Shamberger RC, Weinstein HJ, Delorey MJ, Levey RH. The medical and surgical management of typhlitis in children with acute nonlymphocytic (myelogenous) leukemia. Cancer 1986;57:603.
410. Moir CR, Scudamore CH, Benny WB. Typhlitis: selective surgical management. Am J Surg 1986;151:563.
411. McFarland LV, Mulligan ME, Kwok RY, Stamm WE. Nosocomial acquisition of Clostridium difficile infection. N Engl J Med 1989;320:204.
412. Kelly CP, Pothoulakis C, LaMont JT. Clostridium difficile colitis. N Engl J Med 1994;330:257.
413. Roghmann MC, McCarter RJ Jr, Brewrink J, Cross AS, Morris JG Jr. Clostridium difficile infection is a risk factor for bacteremia due to vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) in VRE-colonized
patients with acute leukemia. Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:1056.
414. Bolton RP, Culshaw MA. Faecal metronidazole concentrations during oral and intravenous therapy for antibiotic associated colitis due to Clostridium difficile. Gut 1986;27:1169.
415. Doern GV, Coughlin RT, Wu L. Laboratory diagnosis of Clostridium difficile-associated gastrointestinal disease: comparison of a monoclonal antibody enzyme immunoassay for toxins A and B
with a monoclonal antibody enzyme immunoassay for toxin A only and two cytotoxicity assays. J Clin Microbiol 1992;30:2042.
416. Glenn J, Cotton D, Wesley R, Pizzo P. Anorectal infections in patients with malignant diseases. Rev Infect Dis 1988;10:42.
417. Barnes SG, Sattler FR, Ballard JO. Perirectal infections in acute leukemia. Improved survival after incision and debridement. Ann Intern Med 1984;100:515.
418. Earle MF, Fossieck BE Jr, Cohen MH, et al. Perirectal infections in patients with small cell lung cancer. JAMA 1981;246:2464.
419. Cohen JS, Paz IB, O'Donnell MR, Ellenhorn JD. Treatment of perianal infection following bone marrow transplantation. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;39:981.
420. Schoenbaum SC, Gardner P, Shillito J. Infections of cerebrospinal fluid shunts: epidemiology, clinical manifestations, and therapy. J Infect Dis 1975;131:543.
421. Coley SC, Jager HR, Szydlo RM, Goldman JM. CT and MRI manifestations of central nervous system infection following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Clin Radiol 1999;54:390.
422. Graus F, Saiz A, Sierra J, et al. Neurologic complications of autologous and allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in patients with leukemia: a comparative study. Neurology 1996;46:1004.
423. Hagensee ME, Bauwens JE, Kjos B, Bowden RA. Brain abscess following marrow transplantation: experience at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 19841992. Clin Infect Dis
1994;19:402.
424. Walsh TJ, Hier DB, Caplan LR. Aspergillosis of the central nervous system: clinicopathological analysis of 17 patients. Ann Neurol 1985;18:574.
425. Walsh TJ, Hier DB, Caplan LR. Fungal infections of the central nervous system: comparative analysis of risk factors and clinical signs in 57 patients. Neurology 1985;35:1654.
426. Norrell H, Wilson CB, Slagel DE, Clark DB. Leukoencephalopathy following the administration of methotrexate into the cerebrospinal fluid in the treatment of primary brain tumors. Cancer
1974;33:923.
427. Ch'ien LT, Aur RJ, Verzosa MS, et al. Progression of methotrexate-induced leukoencephalopathy in children with leukemia. Med Pediatr Oncol 1981;9:133.
428. Seong D, Bruner JM, Lee KH, et al. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy after autologous bone marrow transplantation in a patient with chronic myelogenous leukemia. Clin Infect Dis
1996;23:402.
429. De Luca A, Ammassari A, Cingolani A, Giancola ML, Antinori A. Disease progression and poor survival of AIDS-associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy despite highly active
antiretroviral therapy [letter]. AIDS 1998;12:1937.
430. Albrecht H, Hoffmann C, Degen O, et al. Highly active antiretroviral therapy significantly improves the prognosis of patients with HIV-associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.
AIDS 1998;12:1149.
431. Tantisiriwat W, Tebas P, Clifford DB, Powderly WG, Fichtenbaum CJ. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in patients with AIDS receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy. Clin Infect
Dis 1999;28:1152.
432. Korzeniowski OM. Urinary tract infection in the impaired host. Med Clin North Am 1991;75:391.
433. Parsons CL, Greenspan C, Moore SW, Mulholland SG. Role of surface mucin in primary antibacterial defense of bladder. Urology 1977;9:48.
434. Sobel JD. Management of asymptomatic candiduria. Int J Antimicrob Agents 1999;11:285.
435. Ang BS, Telenti A, King B, Steckelberg JM, Wilson WR. Candidemia from a urinary tract source: microbiological aspects and clinical significance. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17:662.
436. Spach DH, Bauwens JE, Myerson D, Mustafa MM, Bowden RA. Cytomegalovirus-induced hemorrhagic cystitis following bone marrow transplantation. Clin Infect Dis 1993;16:142.
437. Childs R, Sanchez C, Engler H, et al. High incidence of adeno- and polyomavirus-induced hemorrhagic cystitis in bone marrow allotransplantation for hematological malignancy following T cell
depletion and cyclosporine. Bone Marrow Transplant 1998;22:889.
438. Echavarria MS, Ray SC, Ambinder R, Dumler JS, Charache P. PCR detection of adenovirus in a bone marrow transplant recipient: hemorrhagic cystitis as a presenting manifestation of
disseminated disease. J Clin Microbiol 1999;37:686.
439. Arthur RR, Shah KV, Baust SJ, Santos GW, Saral R. Association of BK viruria with hemorrhagic cystitis in recipients of bone marrow transplants. N Engl J Med 1986;315:230.
440. Vogeli TA, Peinemann F, Burdach S, Ackermann R. Urological treatment and clinical course of BK polyomavirus-associated hemorrhagic cystitis in children after bone marrow transplantation.
Eur Urol 1999;36:252.
441. Strauss RG. Granulocyte transfusion therapy. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1994;8:1159.
442. Chanock SJ, Gorlin JB. Granulocyte transfusions. Time for a second look. Infect Dis Clin North Am 1996;10:327.
443. Jendiroba DB, Lichtiger B, Anaissie E, et al. Evaluation and comparison of three mobilization methods for the collection of granulocytes. Transfusion 1998;38:722.
444. Dale DC, Liles WC, Llewellyn C, Rodger E, Price TH. Neutrophil transfusions: kinetics and functions of neutrophils mobilized with granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor and dexamethasone.
Transfusion 1998;38:713.
445. Bensinger WI, Price TH, Dale DC, et al. The effects of daily recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor administration on normal granulocyte donors undergoing leukapheresis.
Blood 1993;81:1883.
446. Adkins D, Goodgold H, Hendershott L, et al. Indium-labeled white blood cells apheresed from donors receiving G-CSF localize to sites of inflammation when infused into allogeneic bone
marrow transplant recipients. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;19:809.
447. Bhatia S, McCullough J, Perry EH, et al. Granulocyte transfusions: efficacy in treating fungal infections in neutropenic patients following bone marrow transplantation. Transfusion 1994;34:226.
448. Dignani MC, Anaissie EJ, Hester JP, et al. Treatment of neutropenia-related fungal infections with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor-elicited white blood cell transfusions: a pilot study.
Leukemia 1997;11:1621.
449. Wright DG, Robichaud KJ, Pizzo PA, Deisseroth AB. Lethal pulmonary reactions associated with the combined use of amphotericin B and leukocyte transfusions. N Engl J Med 1981;304:1185.
450. Godwin JE, Kopecky KJ, Head DR, et al. A double-blind placebo-controlled trial of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in elderly patients with previously untreated acute myeloid leukemia: a
Southwest oncology group study (9031). Blood 1998;91:3607.
451. Heil G, Hoelzer D, Sanz MA, et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase III study of filgrastim in remission induction and consolidation therapy for adults with de novo acute
myeloid leukemia. The International Acute Myeloid Leukemia Study Group. Blood 1997;90:4710.
452. Crawford J, Ozer H, Stoller R, et al. Reduction by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor of fever and neutropenia induced by chemotherapy in patients with small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med
1991;325:164.
453. Hartmann LC, Tschetter LK, Habermann TM, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in severe chemotherapy-induced afebrile neutropenia. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1776.
454. Ojeda E, Garcia-Bustos J, Aguado M, et al. A prospective randomized trial of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor therapy after autologous blood stem cell transplantation in adults. Bone
Marrow Transplant 1999;24:601.
455. Kawano Y, Takaue Y, Mimaya J, et al. Marginal benefit/disadvantage of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor therapy after autologous blood stem cell transplantation in children: results of a
prospective randomized trial. The Japanese Cooperative Study Group of PBSCT. Blood 1998;92:4040.
456. Giles FJ. Monocyte-macrophages, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and prolonged survival among patients with acute myeloid leukemia and stem cell transplants. Clin Infect
Dis 1998;26:1282.
457. Rowe JM, Andersen JW, Mazza JJ, et al. A randomized placebo-controlled phase III study of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in adult patients (greater than 55 to 70 years of
age) with acute myelogenous leukemia: a study of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (E1490). Blood 1995;86:457.
458. Stone RM, Berg DT, George SL, et al. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor after initial chemotherapy for elderly patients with primary acute myelogenous leukemia. Cancer and
Leukemia Group B. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1671.
459. Rowe JM. Treatment of acute myeloid leukemia with cytokines: effect on duration of neutropenia and response to infections. Clin Infect Dis 1998;26:1290.
460. American Society of Clinical Oncology. Recommendations for the use of hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors: evidence-based, clinical practice guidelines. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2471.
461. Roilides E, Uhlig K, Venzon D, Pizzo PA, Walsh TJ. Enhancement of oxidative response and damage caused by human neutrophils to Aspergillus fumigatus hyphae by granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor and gamma interferon. Infect Immunol 1993;61:1185.
462. Roilides E, Holmes A, Blake C, Venzon D, Pizzo PA. Antifungal activity of elutriated human monocytes against Aspergillus fumigatus hyphae: enhancement by granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor and interferon-gamma. J Infect Dis 1994;170:894.
463. Roilides E, Sein T, Holmes A, et al. Effects of macrophage colony-stimulating factor on antifungal activity of mononuclear phagocytes against Aspergillus fumigatus. J Infect Dis 1995;172:1028.
464. Roilides E, Holmes A, Blake C, Pizzo PA, Walsh TJ. Effects of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and interferon-gamma on antifungal activity of human polymorphonuclear neutrophils
against pseudohyphae of different medically important Candida species. J Leukoc Biol 1995;57:651.
465. Nemunaitis J. Use of macrophage colony-stimulating factor in the treatment of fungal infections. Clin Infect Dis 1998;26:1279.
466. Nemunaitis J, Meyers JD, Buckner CD, et al. Phase I trial of recombinant human macrophage colony-stimulating factor in patients with invasive fungal infections. Blood 1991;78:907.
467. Bodey GP, Anaissie E, Gutterman J, Vadhan-Raj S. Role of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor as adjuvant therapy for fungal infection in patients with cancer. Clin Infect Dis
1993;17:705.
468. Gallin JI, Farber JM, Holland SM, Nutman TB. Interferon-gamma in the management of infectious diseases [clinical conference]. Ann Intern Med 1995;123:216.
469. Schiff DE, Rae J, Martin TR, Davis BH, Curnutte JT. Increased phagocyte Fc gammaRI expression and improved Fc gamma- receptor-mediated phagocytosis after in vivo recombinant human
interferon-gamma treatment of normal human subjects. Blood 1997;90:3187.
470. A controlled trial of interferon gamma to prevent infection in chronic granulomatous disease. The International Chronic Granulomatous Disease Cooperative Study Group. N Engl J Med
1991;324:509.
471. Segal BH, DeCarlo ES, Kwon-Chung KJ, et al. Aspergillus nidulans infection in chronic granulomatous disease. Medicine (Baltimore) 1998;77:345.
472. Cohen MS, Isturiz RE, Malech HL, et al. Fungal infection in chronic granulomatous disease. The importance of the phagocyte in defense against fungi. Am J Med 1981;71:59.
473. Holland SM, Eisenstein EM, Kuhns DB, et al. Treatment of refractory disseminated nontuberculous mycobacterial infection with interferon gamma. A preliminary report. N Engl J Med
1994;330:1348.
474. Seder RA, Gazzinelli R, Sher A, Paul WE. Interleukin 12 acts directly on CD4+ T cells to enhance priming for interferon gamma production and diminishes interleukin 4 inhibition of such
priming. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:10188.
475. Clemons KV, Brummer E, Stevens DA. Cytokine treatment of central nervous system infection: efficacy of interleukin-12 alone and synergy with conventional antifungal therapy in experimental

cryptococcosis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1994;38:460.
476. Stevens DA. Combination immunotherapy and antifungal chemotherapy. Clin Infect Dis 1998;26:1266.
477. Nagai H, Guo J, Choi H, Kurup V. Interferon-gamma and tumor necrosis factor-alpha protect mice from invasive aspergillosis. J Infect Dis 1995;172:1554.
478. Riddell SR, Watanabe KS, Goodrich JM, et al. Restoration of viral immunity in immunodeficient humans by the adoptive transfer of T cell clones. Science 1992;257:238.
479. Reusser P, Riddell SR, Meyers JD, Greenberg PD. Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte response to cytomegalovirus after human allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: pattern of recovery and
correlation with cytomegalovirus infection and disease. Blood 1991;78:1373.
480. Quinnan GV Jr, Kirmani N, Rook AH, et al. Cytotoxic T cells in cytomegalovirus infection: HLA-restricted T-lymphocyte and non-T-lymphocyte cytotoxic responses correlate with recovery from
cytomegalovirus infection in bone-marrow-transplant recipients. N Engl J Med 1982;307:7.
481. Walter EA, Greenberg PD, Gilbert MJ, et al. Reconstitution of cellular immunity against cytomegalovirus in recipients of allogeneic bone marrow by transfer of T-cell clones from the donor. N
Engl J Med 1995;333:1038.
482. Papadopoulos EB, Ladanyi M, Emanuel D, et al. Infusions of donor leukocytes to treat Epstein-Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferative disorders after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.
N Engl J Med 1994;330:1185.
483. Rooney CM, Smith CA, Ng CY, et al. Use of gene-modified virus-specific T lymphocytes to control Epstein-Barr-virus-related lymphoproliferation. Lancet 1995;345:9.
484. Heslop HE, Ng CY, Li C, et al. Long-term restoration of immunity against Epstein-Barr virus infection by adoptive transfer of gene-modified virus-specific T lymphocytes. Nat Med 1996;2:551.

SECTION 55.1 Nausea and Vomiting
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 55.1
Nausea and Vomiting
ANN M. BERGER
REBECCA A. CLARK-SNOW
Nature of the Problem
Pathophysiology of Nausea and Vomiting
Emetic Syndromes
Control of Emesis and Patient Characteristics
Antiemetic Agents
Most Active Agents
Antiemetics of Lower Activity
Delayed Emesis
Anticipatory Nausea and Vomiting
Radiation Induced Nausea and Vomiting
Nausea and Vomiting Secondary to Comorbid Conditions
Cost and Benefit of Antiemetic Therapy
Chapter References

NATURE OF THE PROBLEM
Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting remain two of patients' most feared effects of cancer treatment. The incidence and severity of nausea or vomiting in
patients receiving chemotherapy varies, depending on the type of chemotherapy given, dose, schedule, combinations of medications, and individual characteristics.
Approximately 70% to 80% of all patients who receive chemotherapy experience nausea and vomiting. 1,2 Anticipatory nausea and vomiting are experienced by
approximately 10% to 44% of patients who receive chemotherapy. 3,4,5 and 6
The phenothiazines were the mainstay of antiemetic agents before the mid-1970s. 7,8 Currently, there are many efficacious antiemetic regimens for the nausea and
vomiting produced by chemotherapeutic agents. 9 In a study conducted in 1983, cancer patients ranked nausea and vomiting as the first and second most severe side
effects of chemotherapy, respectively. 10 After the emergence of new antiemetic agents and alterations in chemotherapeutic regimens, patients' perceptions of the most
severe side effects were modified. In a 1993 study, 155 cancer patients receiving chemotherapy reported that they experienced an average of 20 physical and
psychosocial symptoms: Nausea was ranked as the most severe symptom and vomiting as the fifth. 11 Therefore, nausea is also an important efficacy parameter when
evaluating an antiemetic.
Use of these new antiemetic agents has decreased the incidence and severity of nausea and vomiting induced by chemotherapy; however, these agents have not
totally prevented the problems. The consequences of not controlling the nausea and vomiting induced by cancer treatment may lead to medical complications, a
failure of the patient to comply with the cancer therapy and follow-up, and a diminished quality of life.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF NAUSEA AND VOMITING
The precise mechanisms by which chemotherapy induces nausea and vomiting are unknown; however, it appears probable that different chemotherapeutic agents act
at different sites and that some chemotherapeutic agents act at multiple sites. 12 The fact that different chemotherapeutic agents cause nausea and vomiting by
different mechanisms and that one chemotherapeutic agent may induce nausea and vomiting by more than one mechanism helps us to understand why there is no
one antiemetic regimen that is effective all of the time.
Mechanisms by which chemotherapeutic agents cause nausea and vomiting are activation of the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ) either directly or indirectly;
peripheral stimulation of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract; vestibular mechanisms; cortical mechanisms; or alterations of taste and smell ( Table 55.1-1). For the majority
of the chemotherapeutic agents, the most common mechanism is thought to be activation of the CTZ.

TABLE 55.1-1. Mechanisms of Nausea and Vomiting after Chemotherapy

The CTZ is located in the area postrema of the brain and can be reached by emetogenic chemicals via the cerebrospinal fluid or the blood. The thought is that the
mechanisms of interaction between the CTZ and chemotherapy involve the release of various neurotransmitters that activate the vomiting center. Either one or a
combination of these transmitters may induce vomiting. Some of the neurotransmitters located in the area postrema of the brain that may be excited and lead to
emesis include dopamine, serotonin, histamine, norepinephrine, apomorphine, neurotensin, angiotensin II, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, gastrin, vasopressin,
thyrotropin-releasing hormone, leucine-enkephalin, and substance P. 13 Other enzymes surround the CTZ, such as adenosine triphosphatase, monoamine oxidase,
cholinesterase, and catecholamines; however, their role in chemotherapy-induced emesis is unknown.
Until recently, the neurotransmitter that appeared to be the most responsible for chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting was dopamine. Many effective
antiemetics are dopamine antagonists that may bind specifically to the D 2receptor. However, there is a high degree of variation in dopamine receptor binding affinity
by these drugs.14 The action of some drugs that cause nausea and vomiting is affected very little or not at all by dopamine antagonists. It is known that not all the
important receptors in the CTZ are dopaminergic, as the effect of dopamine antagonists is not equal to surgical ablation of the CTZ. 15 It has also been noted that the
degree of antiemetic activity of high-dose metoclopramide cannot be explained on the basis of dopamine blockade alone. 16
Histamine receptors are found in abundance in the CTZ; however, H 2 antagonists do not work at all as antiemetics. H 1 antagonists alleviate nausea and vomiting
induced by vestibular disorder and motion sickness but not nausea and vomiting induced by chemotherapy. 17,18
Knowledge that opiate receptors are found in abundance in the CTZ, as well as the facts that narcotics have mixed emetic and antiemetic effects that are blocked by
naloxone and that naloxone has emetic properties, have led to the proposal of opiates or enkephalins as an antiemetic. High doses of naloxone augments emesis
induced by chemotherapy, and low doses of narcotic may reduce emesis. 19 Studies to date have shown that opiates can prevent chemotherapy-induced emesis in
laboratory animals; however, both butorphanol and buprenorphine have not proven to be effective antiemetics in patients who received previous chemotherapy. 20,21
One study by Lissoni et al. 22 did demonstrate that Fk-33-824 was more effective as an antiemetic in patients who received cisplatin; however, it was ineffective for

patients receiving cyclophosphamide or epirubicin.
Edwards et al.23 found that arginine vasopressin levels rise to a greater extent in patients who vomit when they receive chemotherapy as compared to those who do
not vomit.23 It has been suggested that perhaps arginine vasopressin plays a role in nausea more than in the vomiting induced by chemotherapy. Dexamethasone,
which is a known effective antiemetic, may work by reducing arginine vasopressin levels. 24 Another mechanism of action of corticosteroids as antiemetics may be
related to modulation of prostaglandin release. 25
Some evidence suggests that although no one neurotransmitter is responsible for all chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting, it appears that serotonin and
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) receptors are particularly important in the pathophysiology of acute vomiting, whereas others may be more important in the
pathophysiology of nausea and delayed emesis. The role of the 5-HT type 3 (5-HT 3) receptor in chemotherapy-induced emesis was recognized by examining the
mechanism of action of high-dose metoclopramide in decreasing cisplatin-induced emesis. High-dose metoclopramide, unlike other D 2-receptor antagonists, has an
exceptionally good capacity to decrease the emesis induced by cisplatin administration. 26 It has been recognized that metoclopramide has pharmacologic effects
other than dopamine antagonism. Metoclopramide is a weak antagonist of peripheral 5-HT 3 receptors27 and can stimulate GI motility by increasing acetylcholine
release from the cholinergic nerves of the GI tract. 28 To test whether 5-HT3-receptor blockade would decrease cisplatin-induced emesis, Miner and Sanger 29 took a
substituted benzamide, BRL 24924, which has stimulatory effects on the GI tract and is a 5-HT 3-receptor blocker, and demonstrated decreased emesis in ferrets that
received cisplatin. This study was repeated with a nonbenzamide, selective 5-HT 3-receptor blocker MDL 72222, which has no GI-stimulating activity. The study
revealed that cisplatin-induced emesis was totally blocked by this compound. 30 The same conclusion was reached in another study using a different nonbenzamide,
the selective 5-HT 3 antagonist ICS 205-930. 31 These studies demonstrated the role of 5-HT 3-receptor blockade in chemotherapy-induced emesis.
The precise mechanism of action of the 5-HT-receptor antagonists is unknown; however, they may have both a central and a peripheral effect. The GI tract contains
80% of the body's supply of serotonin, and it has been suggested that perhaps chemotherapy administration causes release of serotonin from the enterochromaffin
cells of the GI tract, which then stimulates emesis via both the vagus and greater splanchnic nerve as well as stimulating the area postrema of the brain. After cisplatin
administration, there is an increase in urinary excretion of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, the main metabolite of serotonin, and this increase parallels the number of
episodes of emesis.32 Studies have shown that the 5-HT 3-receptor antagonists decrease emesis from several chemotherapeutic agents, including cisplatin,
cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin. 33,34,35 and 36
There has been new evidence regarding the potential role of substance P in emesis and new data about the use of neurokinin (NK1) antagonists in the management
of emesis. Substance P, a neuropeptide found in the GI tract and the CTZ of the area postrema, exerts its emetic effects by binding to a specific neuroreceptor, NK1.
A number of compounds that selectively block NK1 have been identified. These NK1 antagonists demonstrate a wide spectrum of antiemetic activity against
numerous emetic stimuli in animal models, including several emetic stimuli that are not affected by serotonin and dopamine receptor antagonists. Studies in preclinical
models have demonstrated that several NK1 antagonists have activity in the prevention of both acute and delayed cisplatin-induced nausea and vomiting. Two
randomized double-blind studies have demonstrated that NK1 antagonists are beneficial in the prevention of delayed emesis. 37,38 These agents may also provide
additional benefit in the prevention of acute nausea and vomiting when combined with a 5-HT 3 antagonist and dexamethasone.
The second most important mechanism whereby chemotherapy may induce emesis is peripheral effects that are thought to arise from the pharynx and the upper GI
tract. Most likely, the chemotherapy does not directly stimulate the peripheral receptors. Rather, neurotransmitters probably are released as a result of local GI
irritation or damage. GI tract serotonin, dopamine, opiate, histamine, and cholinergic receptors are most likely involved in the emesis induced by chemotherapy. The
peripheral effects may be abolished by vagotomy, indicating that impulses from the GI tract may reach the vomiting center via the vagus and sympathetic nerves. 39
Another mechanism that may be involved in chemotherapy-induced emesis could be the therapy's effect on the vestibular system. It is known that patients who have a
history of motion sickness experience a greater severity, frequency, and duration of nausea and vomiting from chemotherapy than patients who do not experience
motion sickness. The mechanism by which the vestibular system may lead to chemotherapy-induced emesis is unknown; however, it is postulated that sensory
information that is received by the vestibular system is different from information that was expected. 40
Some investigators believe that taste changes induced by chemotherapy may lead to nausea and vomiting. Some chemotherapeutic agents, such as cisplatin or
gallium nitrate, can lead to loss of taste sensation or to a metallic taste in the mouth. A study conducted with patients receiving chemotherapy for malignant melanoma
revealed that patients developed a more intense sense of taste for sweet, bitter, sour, and salt. After chemotherapy, the patients rated the highest concentration of
sweet as lower, and the patients' discrimination between highest and lowest concentrations of sour, bitter, and sweet was decreased. 41 In another study of patients
with breast carcinoma who received cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil, 36% reported a bitter taste in their mouth. One-third of the patients thought
that the bitter taste caused vomiting. 42 The exact mechanism by which taste is changed by chemotherapy is unknown; however, it is thought that while the drugs are in
the plasma or saliva, they have a direct effect on the oral mucosa or taste buds. Changes in taste may contribute both to nausea and vomiting as well as to anorexia.
Finally, chemotherapy-induced emesis may be induced by direct or indirect effects on the cerebral cortex. Animal studies have shown that nitrogen mustard partially
causes emesis via direct stimulation of the cerebral cortex. 43 Studies demonstrate that the risk of nausea and vomiting is increased when a patient's roommate is
experiencing nausea and vomiting. It is also known that the amount of sleep before receiving chemotherapy may influence whether a patient develops
chemotherapy-induced emesis. In addition, large differences exist in the severity and incidence of nausea and vomiting from the same chemotherapeutic agents in
different countries. 44 These studies indicate that indirect psychological effects can mediate chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting.
Aside from there being more than one mechanism by which each chemotherapeutic agent may induce emesis, chemotherapy induces emesis in a manner different
from that of other classic emetic agents. Drugs such as apomorphine, levodopa, digitalis, pilocarpine, nicotine, and morphine cause vomiting almost immediately.
Nitrogen mustard also may lead to emesis immediately; however, most chemotherapeutic agents and radiotherapy require a latency period before emesis begins.
Also, most chemotherapeutic agents do not induce emesis in a monophasic way, as do the classic emetic agents. Chemotherapeutic agents induce emesis with a
delayed onset, and the emesis has multiphasic time courses. 45 When managing chemotherapy-induced emesis, one should realize that there is most likely more than
one mechanism involved, suggesting that there will not be one antiemetic regimen that will work for all patients all of the time.

EMETIC SYNDROMES
Patients undergoing therapy for the treatment and possible cure of cancer with chemotherapy often are faced with the distressing side effects of nausea and vomiting.
Although advances in the 1990s have provided the clinician with an array of antiemetics and varied regimens, therapy-induced nausea and vomiting have yet to be
totally eliminated. The goals of antiemetic therapy are as follows: (1) to achieve complete control in all settings, (2) to provide maximum convenience for patients and
staff, (3) to eliminate potential side effects of the agents, and (4) to minimize the cost of treatment with antiemetic agents and drug administration.
As a result of antiemetic investigations, five distinct but related emetic syndromes have been identified: acute chemotherapy-induced emesis, delayed emesis,
breakthrough nausea and vomiting, refractory emesis, and anticipatory emesis. Traditionally, acute nausea and vomiting are defined as occurring within the first 24
hours after administration of chemotherapy. Delayed nausea and vomiting have been arbitrarily defined as occurring 24 hours after chemotherapy administration.
More recent observations of the pattern of emesis indicate that delayed emesis may begin as early as 16 hours after chemotherapy administration and that serotonin
may not be the primary mediator of symptoms for delayed emesis. Breakthrough nausea and vomiting are nausea and vomiting that occur despite preventive therapy.
Rescue therapy is the treatment administered to patients who have not responded to the prophylactic regimens prescribed for acute or delayed nausea and vomiting.
Refractory emesis occurs during subsequent cycles when antiemetic prophylaxis or rescues (or both) have failed in earlier cycles.
Anticipatory vomiting is a learned or conditioned response that typically occurs before, during, or after the administration of chemotherapy. Patients receiving one or a
combination of several of the agents must receive an antiemetic regimen that is tailored to the individual pattern and emetic potential of each agent. For example,
patients receiving a combination of high doses of intravenous cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin (Adriamycin) would require antiemetic coverage for the early onset
of emesis usually seen with Adriamycin, as well as continued protection from cyclophosphamide-induced emesis that does not begin until 9 to 18 hours after the
drug's administration. 46 If patients are given the opportunity to receive the optimal antiemetic regimen during their initial course of chemotherapy, the likelihood of
developing anticipatory emesis with subsequent cycles is greatly reduced. Other advantages for patients include increased tolerance of dose-intensified
chemotherapeutic regimens. In addition, through the prevention of emesis, patients are able to achieve an enhanced quality of life at a particularly difficult time.
Two reports, one by Hesketh et al. 47 and an expert consensus by the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, 48 contain new guidelines for the classification

of the acute emetogenicity of chemotherapy into five levels ( Table 55.1-2). When the agents are combined, ratings are based on the combined emetogenicity of the
individual agents. An algorithm for defining the emetogenicity of combination chemotherapy has been developed ( Table 55.1-3).

TABLE 55.1-2. Emetic Potential of Chemotherapeutic Agents

TABLE 55.1-3. Rules for Identifying the Emetogenicity of Combination Chemotherapy

CONTROL OF EMESIS AND PATIENT CHARACTERISTICS
The methodology used in antiemetic studies has identified several useful patient characteristics and prognostic factors that may affect antiemetic control. These
indicators become important for tailoring antiemetic regimens as well as designing antiemetic trials. Careful studies have defined previous experience with
chemotherapy, alcohol intake history, age, and gender as influencing patient outcomes. These references are listed below.
A patient's prior exposure to chemotherapy very often determines success or failure in controlling emesis with future treatment courses. Administration of the
appropriate antiemetic during an initial course of chemotherapy can very often eliminate or significantly reduce the development of anticipatory emesis, in addition to
decreasing the severity of delayed emesis.
Chronic and heavy alcohol usage—defined as more than 100 g of alcohol or five mixed drinks per day, whether in the past or currently—has been shown positively to
affect the control of emesis. Ninety-three percent of patients in a prospective study who had a history of high alcohol intake were able to achieve a complete
response, or no emesis, after receiving high doses of cisplatin with a combination antiemetic regimen. 49 The hypothesis is that chemotherapy-induced emesis may be
decreased in patients with a high alcohol intake because of “burnout” of the CTZ. Although emesis may be easier to control in this setting, patients nonetheless must
receive an appropriate and effective antiemetic regimen. As a result, this prognostic factor has been incorporated in many prospective trials for stratification purposes.
Age as a prognostic factor cannot predict patient response to antiemetic therapy. Some studies have indicated better control in older patients, while others have
reported little difference among various age groups. Age is, however, an important factor in determining the potential for the occurrence of acute dystonic reactions.
Patients aged 30 years and younger are more prone to experience the acute dystonic reactions associated with the dopamine-receptor blocking agents, such as the
phenothiazines, butyrophenones, and substituted benzamides. These side effects are usually characterized by trismus or torticollis. It is also important to remember
that within this population of patients, chemotherapeutic agents that might necessitate antiemetics often are given over several consecutive days, increasing the
possibility of the occurrence of acute dystonic reactions. 50 A distinct advantage for the use of the serotonin or 5-HT 3-blocking antiemetic agents is that they do not
cause acute dystonic reactions, making them an especially beneficial treatment option for children and younger adults.
It has been difficult to explain the rationale for poorer control of emesis in some women receiving treatment for various malignancies. A possible explanation may be
that women characteristically receive chemotherapeutic regimens that contain highly emetogenic agents, such as cisplatin and cyclophosphamide, usually given in
combination, and are less likely than men to have a history of a high alcohol intake. Although these may be contributing factors, multivariate analyses in some larger
studies have indicated that gender is an independent consideration that must be recognized in planning and analyzing clinical studies.
Other factors also have been reported possibly to affect the incidence of nausea and vomiting after chemotherapy. A patient may develop nausea and vomiting if he
or she is anxious during the chemotherapy infusion, there is an expectation of severe side effects, or the patient's roommate is experiencing nausea and vomiting.
Patients who are well motivated and have a good performance status may experience a decreased incidence of nausea and vomiting. 51,52 Food intake before
chemotherapy and the amount of sleep a patient has had may influence the degree of nausea and vomiting. 53 Patients who are more likely to develop nausea and
vomiting are those who have had severe emesis during pregnancy 54 and those who are prone to motion sickness (Table 55.1-4).55,56

TABLE 55.1-4. Factors Affecting the Control and Incidence of Nausea and Vomiting after Chemotherapy

ANTIEMETIC AGENTS

MOST ACTIVE AGENTS
As outlined in the Pathophysiology of Nausea/Vomiting section, antagonism of the type 3 serotonin receptor (5-HT 3) is an important approach to controlling
chemotherapy-induced emesis. Several agents are available that exert their efficacy in this manner. Metoclopramide, which was previously thought to block emesis by
antagonism of a dopamine receptor (D23), probably works primarily via the 5-HT 3 pathway at higher doses. This explains why higher doses of metoclopramide are
more effective.57 However, metoclopramide is not selective for the 5-HT 3 pathway, and development of highly selective antagonists of the 5-HT 3 receptor allowed for
good antiemetic effect with a lower side effect profile.
Several selective 5-HT 3 antagonists are commercially available in many countries: dolasetron, granisetron, ondansetron, and tropisetron. Other similar agents are
available in individual countries or under investigation. Many multiple, randomized, well-controlled studies have demonstrated that these agents have equivalent
antiemetic activity and safety. 58,59,60,61 and 62
Nonetheless, some differences do exist among these agents. The differences are primarily in their structure and pharmacokinetic profile; however, to date none of
these differences has been shown to be of clinical importance. All agents work by the identical mechanism: antagonism of the 5-HT 3 receptor. All appear to
accomplish this maximally, and differences among the relative potencies are unimportant at the recommended doses. There is no clear evidence that one of these
agents will be effective when another is not. Half-lives in the serum vary from approximately 3 to 11 hours, but activity at the receptor appears to be similar in that
single doses of all agents are equally effective. All agents have good bioavailability for oral administration. When tested, oral administration is as effective as is the
intravenous route. 63,64,65,66,67,68 and 69
Controversy remains concerning the optimal dose of the serotonin antagonists. From current trials, it appears that maximal benefit occurs once all relevant receptors
are saturated. No matter what the emetic source, if the best results are to be achieved, an adequate dose should be given. Higher doses are not advantageous once
all receptors have been saturated. 70,71 In that these are very safe and well-tolerated agents, it has been difficult to define the best dose regimens, and different doses
have been mandated in different countries. Several international consensus guidelines have been published, including those from the subcommittee for antiemetics of
the Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer, those from the American Association of Clinical Oncology, and those from the American Society of
Health-Systems Pharmacists. As a general rule, the lowest adequately tested dose should be assumed to be the best dose in all settings ( Table 55.1-5).

TABLE 55.1-5. Doses, Schedules, and Classes of Commonly Administered Antiemetics

Although some debate persists concerning the best dose of ondansetron, the majority of trials have indicated that the lower dose (8 mg) is as effective as the higher
and far more expensive dose of 32 mg.72,73 The latter dose was superior in only one trial and was troubled by a high inadequate treatment rate, indicating a poorly
conducted trial. 74 The lower granisetron dose of 10 mg/kg is as effective in all circumstances as four times the dosage. 75,76 The same dose recommendations continue
for single-agent or combination use.
The side effect profile of the 5-HT 3 antagonists provides an advantage over such effective antiemetics as metoclopramide. Central nervous system effects,
extrapyramidal reactions, and sedation are not observed with serotonin antagonists; this is particularly beneficial in younger patients. Common side effects include
mild headaches usually not requiring treatment, transient transaminase elevations, and mild constipation with some agents. 77,78,79 and 80
As indicated, the antiemetic activity of metoclopramide is likely as a serotonin antagonist, although it has substantial dopamine antagonist action as well. This latter
mechanism explains the potential for extrapyramidal reactions. Studies have shown that higher doses are more effective. 81,82 A dose of 3 mg/kg given every 2 hours
for two doses in a combination regimen has been found to be effective. 83,84 To date, metoclopramide appears to be at least as effective as serotonin antagonists in
preventing delayed emesis and is far less expensive. 85,86 and 87
Corticosteroids are valuable antiemetics. Dexamethasone is the best studied of all these agents, is available in oral and parenteral preparations and, in most
countries, is very inexpensive. Although the best dose has not been established, it appears that a single 20-mg dose is adequate, with no clear indication that either
higher or lower doses is preferred. 88 The other steroid that has been studied and that can be used is methylprednisolone. Caution must be used when treating
diabetic patients or others with poor tolerance for corticosteroids. However, the short recommended course makes these agents very safe and easy to use. In
preventing delayed emesis, adequate doses of corticosteroids currently are viewed as the starting point of treatment, with some studies showing advantage for
metoclopramide combined with steroids. 89,90 and 91
Efficacy for corticosteroids has been clearly outlined for cisplatin-containing regimens as well as other types of chemotherapy with lesser emetic potential. 92,93,94,95,96,97
and 98
The addition of a corticosteroid to 5-HT 3 antagonists significantly improves antiemetic efficacy with each of the agents. This is seen with cisplatin
chemotherapy99,100 as well as with such drugs as anthracyclines, cyclophosphamide, and carboplatin. 101 Double-blind studies have shown that efficacy is raised in
from 40% or 50% of patients having complete control with single agents to 75% or 85% of patients with a combination of 5-HT 3 antagonist plus a corticosteroid. 102,103
and 104
This has led most investigators to advise that a corticosteroid should be added whenever the emetic source is thought to warrant a serotonin antagonist, unless
a clearly documented reason for not using a corticosteroid in that patient has been demonstrated.
ANTIEMETICS OF LOWER ACTIVITY
Older agents, such as phenothiazines, butyrophenones, and cannabinoids, all have some degree of antiemetic efficacy. In general, this efficacy is substantially lower
than that seen with the serotonin antagonists (including high-dose metoclopramide), and the side effects are greater. 105 When given intravenously, phenothiazines
appear to be more active than when given by other routes but are associated with hypotension (especially orthostatic), which can be severe. Thus, these agents are
not highly recommended. Oral forms of all three of these agents exhibit only modest activity and are of similarly low efficacy.
Several cannabinoids have been tested in chemotherapy-induced emesis and are of both historic and lay press interest. Semisynthetic agents, such as nabilone and
levonantradol; tetrahydrocannabinol (or delta 9-THC), the active agent in marijuana; and inhaled marijuana, all appear to be of low and equal efficacy, with frequent
autonomic side effects. These toxicities include dry mouth, hypotension, and dizziness. 106,107 Dronabinol may be useful as an adjuvant to other antiemetics.
Antianxiety agents, such as the benzodiazepine lorazepam, have little efficacy as single agents in carefully conducted trials. 108 However, they function well against
anxiety in the emotionally charged atmosphere of receiving chemotherapy, although they add only a minor antiemetic effect to more active agents. 109 They should be
regarded as adjuncts to antiemetics and, in that role, can be useful for many patients. Recommended doses range from 0.5 to 1.5 mg. It is not clear that there is any
advantage in giving these agents parenterally rather than orally when given with the most effective antiemetics. Additionally, these drugs may be useful when given to
patients with anticipatory emesis, starting one or more days before the next chemotherapy dosing. Side effects mainly concern sedation, which can be marked in

some patients, especially if the drug is given intravenously (see Table 55.1-5).

DELAYED EMESIS
With the identification of useful antiemetics for the treatment of the acute emetic syndrome, it became apparent in patients receiving high total doses of cisplatin that,
despite good control of emesis during the initial 24 hours after therapy, delayed emesis became an issue. To date, the pathophysiology of this especially difficult
problem remains unclear. What is known, however, is that delayed emesis is a phenomenon observed in as many as 80% of patients, typically occurring 24 to 72
hours after high total doses of cisplatin (>100 mg/m 2) have been administered. 110 Delayed emesis may also be seen in a substantial number of patients who receive
as little as 50 mg/m 2 cisplatin or a chemotherapy combination, including cyclophosphamide and an anthracycline. A study that outlined the natural history of delayed
emesis concluded that although the emesis associated with this dilemma is less severe than that which is seen in the acute phase, it still poses significant problems
with nutrition, hydration, and, possibly, a prolonged hospital course.
Initial studies revealed that delayed emesis could be controlled with a regimen of metoclopramide and dexamethasone ( Table 55.1-6). Because of the possibility of
extrapyramidal side effects, such as anxiety, akathisia, restlessness, torticollis, or oculogyric crisis, with metoclopramide, the patient should routinely be given a
supply of diphenhydramine that should be taken at the first sign of an extrapyramidal symptom. In the younger patient, diphenhydramine should be given
prophylactically.

TABLE 55.1-6. Recommended Regimen for Delayed Emesis

Initial trials addressing the treatment of delayed emesis with the single-agent serotonin antagonist ondansetron were discouraging and labeled the serotonin
antagonists as having low activity. 111,112 Two randomized studies, one with ondansetron and one with granisetron, indicated efficacy of the serotonin antagonists for
delayed emesis in patients receiving chemotherapy of intermediate emetogenicity. 113,114
As it is known from previous studies that a delayed antiemetic regimen with a substituted benzamide and dexamethasone controls the emesis, further research is
needed to compare this standard regimen with a regimen of a serotonin antagonist and dexamethasone. One may need to differentiate between late-onset acute
emesis (i.e., 18 to 48 hours after cyclophosphamide administration, for which oral granisetron and ondansetron have demonstrated benefit) versus true delayed
emesis that is evident 2 to 7 days after cisplatin administration, for which the 5-HT 3 antagonists may not have a large advantage over standard metoclopramide-based
regimens. It is likely that the mechanism of action for delayed emesis is very different from that for acute chemotherapy-induced emesis, and perhaps serotonin is not
involved at all. This should be addressed further in carefully controlled clinical trials, as the cost of the serotonin antagonists is far more than the cost of a substituted
benzamide.
Another group of agents that have a potential role in the prevention of delayed nausea and vomiting are the NK1 antagonists. Substance P, which is found in the GI
tract and the central nervous system and can produce vomiting when injected into ferrets, exerts its effects by binding to the neuroreceptor NK1. Hesketh et al. 115
reported on a randomized phase II study of the NK1-receptor antagonist CJ-11,974 in the control of cisplatin-induced emesis in 61 patients. This exploratory trial
revealed that CJ-11,974 was superior to placebo in controlling delayed emesis and may provide additive benefit in acute emesis and nausea control when combined
with a 5-HT 3 antagonist and dexamethasone. In a multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 159 patients who received a single dose of cisplatin, the
NK1-receptor antagonist L-754,030 prevented delayed emesis and, in combination with granisetron plus dexamethasone, improved the prevention of acute emesis. 116
Other agents that may be of benefit in the treatment of delayed emesis include benzodiazepines, especially lorazepam and alprazolam; the H 2 blockers cimetidine
and ranitidine; and omeprazole. Studies are currently under way on the use of cisapride, a potent gastric prokinetic agent that does not affect the D 2 receptors and,
therefore, does not lead to adverse extrapyramidal effects.

ANTICIPATORY NAUSEA AND VOMITING
Anticipatory nausea and vomiting usually occur approximately 24 hours before the patient begins chemotherapy. The symptoms may occur outside the hospital, in the
clinic, when talking about chemotherapy, or when the patient perceives special tastes or odors.
Acute nausea and vomiting that occur with chemotherapy are thought to be secondary to the medication. The exact mechanism of posttreatment nausea and vomiting
is unknown, though is most likely secondary to the chemotherapeutic agent itself; at times, it may also involve a psychological mechanism. Anticipatory nausea and
vomiting always involve a psychological mechanism in that they are triggered by events that are not secondary to the direct administration of the chemotherapeutic
agent itself.
The prevalence of anticipatory nausea and vomiting varies, depending on the study cited and whether nausea and vomiting are analyzed separately. A review by
Morrow and Dobkin117 summarized 28 surveys that were carried out in North America since 1979. The prevalence of anticipatory nausea ranged anywhere from 14%
to 63%, with a median of 33%. Many factors that appear to be associated with anticipatory nausea and vomiting have been studied ( Table 55.1-7).

TABLE 55.1-7. Factors Associated with an Increased Incidence of Anticipatory Nausea and Vomiting

Numerous studies have revealed a relationship between severe postchemotherapy side effects and the development of anticipatory nausea and vomiting. 118,119,120 and

121

The schedule of chemotherapy also appears to be related to anticipatory symptoms. Anticipatory symptoms are related to the emetogenicity of the
chemotherapeutic agents in most studies. 122,123 and 124 They also are related to the length of chemotherapy, in that patients who receive chemotherapy for longer
periods have a higher incidence of anticipatory symptoms. 125,126 and 127
Motion sickness is a risk factor for the development of postchemotherapy nausea and vomiting. 128 One study by Morrow129 of 608 patients and another study by
Morrow et al.130 of 355 patients found a significant relationship between motion sickness and anticipatory nausea and vomiting. In some studies, age appears to be
related to anticipatory symptoms. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting occur more often in patients younger than 45 to 50 years old. 131,132,133 and 134 Possibly, age is
related to anticipatory symptoms in part because younger patients receive stronger emetogenic chemotherapeutic agents, which leads to increased
postchemotherapy nausea and vomiting and, therefore, increased anticipatory nausea and vomiting. Another proposed explanation is that younger patients have a
higher level of anxiety while receiving chemotherapy, which may lead to increases in anticipatory symptoms. Both of these explanations are plausible, though current
data do not support either. 135
Other factors that have been reported to be related to anticipatory nausea and vomiting include expectations. Those patients with anticipatory symptoms report the
expectation of developing nausea and vomiting after chemotherapy. 136,137 Type and stage of cancer also are related. 138,139 Anticipatory symptoms have been found to
be correlated with a patient's previous response of nausea and vomiting to different situations. 140 It has been noted that patients with anticipatory nausea and vomiting
have higher levels of depression. 141 A relationship between anxiety and anticipatory nausea and vomiting has also been noted, 142,143 though, at this time, insufficient
evidence is available to indicate the way that anxiety is related to anticipatory symptoms. 144
Several retrospective reviews have indicated that taste and odors are related to anticipatory nausea and vomiting. 145,146,147,148 and 149 Though a prospective study did
not reveal any relationship among taste, odors, and anticipatory nausea and vomiting, Bovbjerg et al. 150 reported a study in which they administered a beverage to
patients before their receipt of chemotherapy. The investigators found a clear relationship between anticipatory nausea and a special taste. Blasco 151 suggested that
taste and odors may be involved not only in anticipatory nausea and vomiting but perhaps with postchemotherapy nausea and vomiting. Indeed, the role of taste and
smell is largely unknown; however, it may be involved in a spectrum of GI complaints experienced by the patient with cancer. Studies by Bernstein 152 suggest that a
learned food aversion develops to specific tastes or food and occurs because of an association of the food with unpleasant symptoms, such as nausea and vomiting.
This food aversion could partially explain the anorexia associated with cancer.
Antiemetics used in the treatment of acute nausea and vomiting induced by chemotherapy are ineffective in treating anticipatory nausea and vomiting. Many studies
have indicated that behavioral techniques are effective in reducing anxiety as well as reducing or eliminating anticipatory nausea and vomiting. Behavioral techniques
that have been studied and found to be effective include progressive relaxation with guided imagery, systematic desensitization, hypnosis, and cognitive and
intentional distraction. 153,154,155 and 156
In one report in the literature, a lemon solution given to a patient before the receipt of chemotherapy masked taste sensations so that the patient experienced
decreased anticipatory nausea and vomiting. 157 It has also been suggested that the use of benzodiazepines, especially lorazepam, may be helpful in treating
anticipatory nausea and vomiting. However, no formal studies have established lorazepam's effectiveness in this situation.

RADIATION-INDUCED NAUSEA AND VOMITING
The etiology of radiation-induced emesis, like chemotherapy-induced emesis, is not completely understood. However, it is clear that it is a complex, multifactorial
event. The incidence, severity, and onset of radiation-induced emesis appear to be related to the size of the radiation field, the dose per fraction, and the site of
irradiation. Radiation-induced emesis occurs acutely in more than 90% of patients who receive total body irradiation for bone marrow transplantation, within 30 to 60
minutes in more than 80% of patients who receive single high-dose or large-field hemibody irradiation (>500 cGy), and within 2 to 3 weeks in approximately 50% of
patients who receive conventional fractionated radiotherapy (200 cGy per fraction) to the upper abdomen. 158 Radiation-induced emesis also occurs in those patients
who receive radiosurgery to the area postrema in excess of 350 to 400 cGy in a single dose. The emesis usually occurs between 1 and 12 hours after the
radiosurgery.
The exact mechanism of radiation-induced emesis remains unclear. However, as with chemotherapy-induced emesis, it is thought that it most likely is due to a
peripheral mechanism in the GI tract or a central mechanism involving the CTZ. It has been proposed that several substances, including dopamine, catecholamines,
and prostaglandins, are released and stimulate afferent visceral fibers, an action that then initiates sensory signals to the CTZ. As a result of both preclinical and
clinical studies with serotonin antagonists, it has been suggested that serotonin may be released from enterochromaffin cells of the GI tract and may mediate emesis
via mechanisms involving the 5-HT 3 receptors, visceral afferent fibers, and the CTZ. This mechanism is most likely involved when radiation is applied to the upper
abdomen, hemibody, or total body. Radiosurgery to the area postrema most likely induces emesis from the release of serotonin in the CTZ. 159
Clinical studies in the past using metoclopramide, nabilone (cannabinoid derivative), and chlorpromazine in the treatment of radiation-induced emesis revealed a
response of 50% to 58%.160,161 In a nonplacebo trial with domperidone, a dopamine antagonist, a response of 82% was reported. 162 A nonrandomized trial comparing
ondansetron with other antiemetics reported response rates of 100% for ondansetron versus 43% for other antiemetics and 19% for no antiemetic treatment for
patients who received middle to upper hemibody irradiation. 163 A randomized study by Priestman et al. 164 of patients who received radiotherapy to the abdomen,
pelvis, and thoracolumbar spine reported response rates of 45% for metoclopramide versus 97% for ondansetron. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
evaluation revealed oral ondansetron to be an effective therapy for the prevention of emesis induced by total body irradiation. 165 Ondansetron has been reported to be
effective in radiotherapy-induced emesis in children 166 as well as for patients who receive radiosurgery to the area postrema. 167
Data are available from two double-blind, randomized studies in the use of oral granisetron, 2 mg once daily, in radiation-induced nausea and vomiting. In a study
involving patients undergoing fractionated upper abdominal radiation, patients who received oral granisetron had a significantly longer median time to first emesis
than did those who received placebo (35 days vs. 9 days, respectively) and a longer median time to first nausea (11 days vs. 1 day, respectively). 168 In another study
of patients undergoing total body irradiation, patients treated with oral granisetron had significantly greater complete control as compared to the historical control
group over the entire 4-day treatment period (22% vs. 0%, respectively). 169
Fauser et al.170 reported on the use of oral dolasetron for the control of emesis during total body irradiation and high-dose cyclophosphamide in patients undergoing
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.

NAUSEA AND VOMITING SECONDARY TO COMORBID CONDITIONS
A number of comorbid conditions also may lead to nausea and vomiting, even though the majority of patients with cancer develop nausea and vomiting as a result of
chemotherapy or radiotherapy (Table 55.1-8). Because the mechanism of the nausea and vomiting secondary to comorbid conditions is not usually well understood, it
is difficult to know which antiemetics may be helpful. A study by Bruera et al. 171 revealed that controlled-release metoclopramide is safe and effective in managing
chronic nausea in patients with advanced cancer. Future studies must be conducted to determine the optimal doses of metoclopramide as well as other antiemetics
that may be used in drug combinations (e.g., metoclopramide plus corticosteroids) for the nausea and vomiting secondary to the malignancy itself.

TABLE 55.1-8. Comorbid Conditions That May Lead to Nausea and Vomiting

COST AND BENEFIT OF ANTIEMETIC THERAPY
The important results of research that provide the medical community with additional chemotherapeutic choices and supportive care measures often translate into
added health care costs for patients and families. With the increased use of expensive antiemetics and with managed care dictating the length of hospital stays, the
emphasis is shifting to primary outpatient management of patient treatment courses. The challenge for physicians becomes one of providing a treatment plan in which
patients are offered state-of-the-art and cost-effective therapy. This can be accomplished by applying certain guidelines.
Specifically addressing 5-HT 3 antagonist antiemetics and their associated cost, the choice among these agents should be made on the basis of acquisition costs and
reimbursement differences. The 5-HT 3 antagonists all have demonstrated equivalent efficacy and side effects; therefore, once an effective dose has been established,
there would be no advantage in exceeding this threshold dose. Ultimately, the 5-HT 3 antagonist of lowest cost should be selected for administration. Single-dose
regimens given in combination with a corticosteroid provide an effective and convenient alternative in antiemetic therapy. Regimens that take advantage of a
completely oral route of administration are easy and convenient for patients and are likely to reduce nursing and pharmacy costs; however, prolonged use of oral
serotonin antagonists should be avoided, as there appears to be little or no value in this setting. In addition to these recommendations, adherence by physicians and
nurses to established doses and schedules of antiemetics and their appropriate use can be cost-effective measures for patients and institutions.
Nolte et al. 172 discussed guidelines developed by the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center for the cost-effective use of 5-HT 3 antagonists that resulted in
substantial savings while treating more patients. The initial guidelines in 1993 were developed based on the premise that the dose of the intravenous 5-HT 3
antagonist ondansetron, 8 to 32 mg, could be adjusted on the basis of emetogenic potential of the chemotherapeutic regimen schema proposed by Hesketh et al. 95
Cost savings were documented without affecting the quality of life, as reported by the patients. The guidelines were modified in 1994 to include granisetron, 10 mg/kg,
for moderately or highly emetogenic chemotherapy. When oral granisetron tablets were approved in 1995 for the prevention of highly emetogenic chemotherapeutic
regimens, the guidelines were further modified to incorporate the use of oral granisetron instead of intravenous 5-HT 3 antagonists for moderately to highly emetogenic
chemotherapy. Additional cost savings were realized while the quality of life of the patients was unaffected.
The use of an oral form of a 5-HT 3 antagonist for highly emetogenic chemotherapy, when data from well-controlled trials demonstrate comparable efficacy to the
intravenous formulation, appears to be cost-effective. 173,174 One should take into consideration, when evaluating the results of these studies, whether a stringent
efficacy end point was used. Some studies did not use “no nausea” as one of the criteria for a complete response. Because nausea was ranked as the most severe
chemotherapy-related symptom according to a relatively recent survey, the effect of the agents on nausea should also be evaluated.
Economic considerations for the selection of antiemetic regimens should answer the following questions:
Will the use of the regimens likely result in a reduced hospitalization?
While receiving therapy, will patients be able to maintain their usual level of activity?
Will nursing and pharmacy costs be reduced?
Are there mandated restrictions on the use of an agent in hospital formularies and in clinical settings?
Will the antiemetic regimen affect the patient's out-of-pocket expenses?
Extensive basic and clinical research has made it possible to control treatment-induced nausea and vomiting. With recognition and anticipation of nausea and
vomiting, counseling of the patient and family, prophylactic intervention, flexibility in the therapeutic approach, and constant reassessment of the treatment plan,
chemotherapy- and radiotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting can be managed effectively in 80% to 90% of patients. The progress made in the field of
treatment-induced nausea and vomiting must be a paradigm for other symptoms faced by the cancer patient that lead to suffering and that affect the patient's quality
of life.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Jenns K. Importance of nausea. Cancer Nurs 1994;17:488.
2. Morran C, Smith DC, Anderson DA, et al. Incidence of nausea and vomiting with cytotoxic chemotherapy: a prospective randomized trial of antiemetics. BMJ 1979;1:1323.
3. Carey MP, Burish TG. Anxiety as a predictor of behavioral therapy outcome for cancer chemotherapy patients. J Consult Clin Psychol 1985;53:860.
4. Wilcox PM, Fetting JH, Nettesheim KM, et al. Anticipatory vomiting in women receiving cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-FU (CMF) adjuvant chemotherapy for breast carcinoma.
Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:1601.
5. Morrow GR, Lindke J, Black PM. Predicting development of anticipatory nausea in cancer patients: prospective examination of eight clinical characteristics. J Pain Symptom Manage
1991;6:2155.
6. Nesse RM, Carli T, Curtis GC, et al. Pretreatment nausea in cancer chemotherapy: a conditioned response? Psychosom Med 1980;42:33.
7. Moertel C, Reitemeir R, Gage R. A controlled clinical evaluation of antiemetic drugs. JAMA 1963;186:116.
8. Moertel C, Reitemeir R. Controlled clinical studies of orally administered antiemetic drugs. Gastroenterology 1989;57:262.
9. Ettinger DS. Preventing chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: an update and review of emesis. Semin Oncol 1995;22:4[Suppl 10]:6.
10. Coates A, Abraham S, Kaye SB, et al. On the receiving end. Patient perceptions of the side-effects of cancer chemotherapy. Eur J Clin Oncol 1983;19:203.
11. Griffin AM, Butow PN, Coates AS, et al. On the receiving end: patient perceptions of the side effects of cancer chemotherapy. Ann Oncol 1996;7:189.
12. Stewart DJ. Nausea and vomiting in cancer patients. In: Kucharczyk J, Stewart DJ, Miller AD, eds. Nausea and vomiting: recent research and clinical advances. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press,
1991:177.
13. Young RW. Mechanisms and treatment of radiation-induced nausea and vomiting. In: Davis CJ, Lake-Bakaar GV, Graham-Smith DG, eds. Nausea and vomiting: mechanisms and treatment.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1986:94.
14. Ison PJ, Peroutka SJ. Neurotransmitter receptor binding studies predict antiemetic efficacy and side effects. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:637.
15. McCarthy LE, Borison HL. Cisplatin-induced vomiting eliminated by ablation of the area postrema in cats. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:401.
16. Stewart DJ. Nausea and vomiting in cancer patients. In: Kucharczyk J, Stewart DJ, Miller AD, eds. Nausea and vomiting: recent research and clinical advances. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press,
1991:190.
17. Fortner CL, Finley RS, Grove WR. Combination antiemetic therapy in the control of chemotherapy-induced drug emetogenic potential emesis. Drug Intell Clin Pharm 1985;19:21.
18. Price NM, Schmitt LG, McGuire J. Transdermal scopolamine in the prevention of motion sickness at sea. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1981;29:414.
19. Kobrinsky NL. Regulation of nausea and vomiting in cancer chemotherapy. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1988;10:209.
20. Hilliard D, Wilbur D, Camacho E. Butorphenol vs metoclopramide in the control of cisplatin-induced emesis. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1985;4:274.
21. Dullemond-Westland AC, Neijt JP, Nortier JWR, et al. Buprenorphine versus domperidone in chemotherapy-induced emesis. A pilot study. Radiother Oncol 1986;6:127.
22. Lissoni P, Barni S, Crispino S, et al. Synthetic enkephalin analog in the treatment of cancer chemotherapy-induced vomiting. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:665.
23. Edwards C, Carmichael J, Baylis P, et al. Arginine vasopressina mediator of chemotherapy induced emesis? Br J Cancer 1989;59:467.
24. Kobrinsky NL. Regulation of nausea and vomiting in cancer chemotherapy. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1988;10:209.
25. Ettinger DS. Preventing chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: an update and review of emesis. Semin Oncol 1995;22:4:[Suppl 10]:7.
26. Gralla RJ, Itri LM, Pisko SE, et al. Antiemetic efficacy of high-dose metoclopramide: randomized trials with placebo and prochlorperazine in patients with chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting. N Engl J Med 1981;305:905.
27. Fozard JR. Neuronal 5-HT receptors in the periphery. Neuropharmacology 1984;23:1473.
28. Sanger GJ. Mechanisms by which metoclopramide can increase gastrointestinal motility. In: Bennett A, Velo G, eds. Mechanisms of gastrointestinal motility and secretion. New York: Plenum
Publishing, 1984:303.
29. Miner WD, Sanger GJ, Turner DH. Comparison of the effect of BRL 24924, metoclopramide and domperidone on cisplatin-induced emesis in the ferret. Br J Pharmacol 1986;88:374.
30. Miner WD, Sanger GJ. Inhibition of cisplatin-induced vomiting by selective 5-hydroxytryptamine M-receptor antagonism. Br J Pharmacol 1986;88:497.
31. Costall B, Domeney AM, Naylor RJ, et al. 5-Hydroxytryptamine M-receptor antagonism to prevent cisplatin-induced emesis. Neuropharmacology 1986;25:959.
32. Cubeddu L, Hoffman I, Fuenmayor N, et al. Efficacy of ondansetron (GR 38032F) and the role of serotonin in cisplatin-induced nausea and vomiting. N Engl J Med 1990;322:810.
33. Cubeddu LX, Hoffman IS, Fuenmayor N, et al. Antagonism of serotonin S3 receptors with ondansetron prevents nausea and emesis induced by cyclophosphamide-containing chemotherapy
regimens. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1721.
34. Khojasteh A, Sartiano G, Tapazoglou E, et al. Ondansetron for the prevention of emesis induced by high-dose cisplatin. A multi-center dose-response study. Cancer 1990;66:1101.
35. Carden PA, Mitchell SL, Waters KD, et al. Prevention of cyclophosphamide/cytarabine emesis with ondansetron in children with leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1531.
36. Bonneterre J, Chevallier B, Metz R, et al. A randomized double-blind comparison of ondansetron and metoclopramide in the prophylaxis of emesis induced by cyclophosphamide, fluorouracil,
and doxorubicin or epirubicin chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1063.
37. Hesketh PJ, Gralla RJ, Webb W, et al. Randomized phase II study of the neurokinin 1 receptor antagonist CJ-11,974 in the control of cisplatin-induced emesis. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:338.
38. Navari RM, Reinhardt RR, Gralla RJ, et al. Reduction of cisplatin-induced emesis by a selective neurokinin-1-receptor antagonist. N Engl J Med 1999;340:190.
39. Harris JG. Nausea, vomiting and cancer treatment. CA Cancer J Clin 1978;28:194.
40. Morrow GR. The effect of a susceptibility to motion sickness on the side effects of cancer chemotherapy. Cancer 1985;55:2766.

41. Mulder NH, Smit JM, Kreumer WMI, et al. Effect of chemotherapy on taste sensation in patients with disseminated malignant melanoma. Oncology 1983;40:36.
42. Fetting JH, Wilcox PM, Sheidler VR, et al. Tastes associated with parenteral chemotherapy for breast cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:1249.
43. Fortner CL, Finley RS, Grove WR. Combination antiemetic therapy in the control of chemotherapy-induced drug emetogenic potential emesis. Drug Intell Clin Pharm 1985;19:21.
44. Cassileth BR, Lusk EJ, Bodenheimer BJ, et al. Chemotherapeutic toxicitythe relationship between patient's pretreatment expectations and posttreatment results. Am J Clin Oncol 1985;8:419.
45. Borison HL, McCarthy LE. Neuropharmacology of chemotherapy-induced emesis. Drugs 1983;25[Suppl 1]:13.
46. Fetting JH, Grochow LB, Folstein MF, et al. The course of nausea and vomiting after high-dose cyclophosphamide. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:1487.
47. Hesketh P, Kris M, Grunberg SM, et al. Proposal for classifying the acute emetogenicity of cancer chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:103.
48. American Society of Health-Systems Pharmacists. Therapeutic guidelines on the pharmacologic management of nausea and vomiting in adult and pediatric patients receiving chemotherapy or
radiation therapy or undergoing surgery. Am J Health Syst Pharm 1999;56:729.
49. D'Acquisto RW, Tyson LB, et al. Antiemetic trials to control delayed vomiting following high-dose cisplatin. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1986;5:257.
50. Allen JC, Gralla RJ, Reilly C, et al. Metoclopramide dose-related toxicity and preliminary antiemetic studies in children receiving cancer chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1136.
51. Holland JF, Frei E III, eds. Cancer medicine, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1982:2332.
52. Jacobsen P, Andrykowski M, Redd W, et al. Nonpharmacologic factors in the development of posttreatment nausea with adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. Cancer 1988;61:379.
53. Stewart DJ. Nausea and vomiting in cancer patients. In: Kucharczyk J, Stewart DJ, Miller AD, eds. Nausea and vomiting: recent research and clinical advances. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press,
1991:177.
54. Martin M, Diaz-Rubio E. Emesis during pregnancy: a new prognostic factor in chemotherapy-induced emesis. Ann Oncol 1990;1:152.
55. Morrow GR. The effect of a susceptibility to motion sickness on the side effects of cancer chemotherapy. Cancer 1985;55:2766.
56. Guillem V, Aranda E, Carrato A, et al. Previous history of emesis during pregnancy and motion sickness as risk factors for chemotherapy-induced emesis. J Clin Oncol
1999;2280(18):590a(abst).
57. Gralla RJ, Itri LM, Pisko SE, et al. Antiemetic efficacy of high-dose metoclopramide: randomized trials with placebo and prochlorperazine in patients with chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting. N Engl J Med 1981;305:905.
58. American Society of Health-Systems Pharmacists. Therapeutic guidelines on the pharmacological management of nausea and vomiting in adult and pediatric patients receiving chemotherapy
or radiation therapy or undergoing surgery. Am J Health Syst Pharm 1999;56:729.
59. Ettinger DS, Huber S, Kris MG, et al. NCCN antiemesis practice guidelines. Oncology 1997;11A:57.
60. Gralla RJ, Osoba D, Kris MG, et al. Recommendations for the use of antiemetics: evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2971.
61. Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer. Prevention of chemotherapy and radiotherapy-induced emesis: results of the Perugia consensus conference. Ann Oncol 1998;9:811.
62. Roila F, Ballatori, Tonato M, et. al. 5HT3 receptor antagonists: differences and similarities. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:1364.
63. Rubenstein E, Kalman L, Hainsworth J, et al. Dose-response trial across 4 oral doses of dolasetron for emesis prevention after moderately emetogenic chemotherapy. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1995;14:527.
64. Palmer R, Moriconi W, Cohn J, et al. A double-blind comparison of the efficacy and safety of oral granisetron with oral prochlorperazine in preventing nausea and emesis in patients receiving
moderately emetogenic chemotherapy. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:528.
65. Gralla RJ, Rittenberg CN, Lettow L, et al. A unique all-oral, single-dose, combination antiemetic regimen with high efficacy and marked cost saving potential. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1995;14:526.
66. Anthony LB, Krozely MG, Woodward NJ, et al. Antiemetic effect of oral versus intravenous metoclopramide in patients receiving cisplatin: a randomized double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol
1986;4(1):98.
67. Tyson LB, Gralla RJ, Kris MG, et al. Dose-ranging antiemetic trial of high-dose oral metoclopramide. AmJ Clin Oncol 1989;12(3):239.
68. Krzakowski M, Graham, E, Goedhals L, et al. A multicenter, double-blind comparison of i.v. and oral administration of ondansetron plus dexamethasone for acute cisplatin-induced emesis.
Anticancer Drugs 1998;9:593.
69. Lindley C, McCune J, Goodin S, et al. Efficacy of oral ondansetron and dexamethasone in prevention of nausea and vomiting associated with moderately high and highly emetogenic
chemotherapy. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;244:1763a(abst).
70. Kris MG, Gralla RJ, Clark RA, et al. Phase II trials of the serotonin antagonist GR38032F for the control of vomiting caused by cisplatin. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:42.
71. Kris MG, Gralla RJ, Clark RA, et al. Dose ranging evaluation of the serotonin antagonist GR-C507/75 (GR38032F) when used as an antiemetic in patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. J Clin
Oncol 1988;6:659.
72. Seynaeve C, Schuller J, Buser K, et al. Comparison of the anti-emetic efficacy of different doses of ondansetron given as either a continuous infusion or a single intravenous dose, in acute
cisplatin-induced emesis. A multicentre, double-blind, randomized, parallel group study. Br J Cancer 1992;66:192.
73. Ruff P, Paska W, Goedhals L, et al. Ondansetron compared with granisetron in the prophylaxis of cisplatin-induced acute emesis: a multicenter double-blind, randomized, parallel group study.
Oncology 1994;5:113.
74. Beck TM, Hesketh PJ, Madajewicz S, et al. Stratified, randomized, double-blind comparison of intravenous dose regimens in the prevention of cisplatin-induced nausea and vomiting. J Clin
Oncol 1992;10(12):1969.
75. Navari R, Gandara D, Hesketh P, et al. Comparative clinical trial of granisetron and ondansetron in the prophylaxis of cisplatin-induced emesis. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1242.
76. Perez EA, Gandara DR. The clinical role of granisetron (Kytril) in the prevention of chemotherapy-induced emesis. Semin Oncol 1994;21[Suppl 5]:15.
77. Gralla RJ, Itri LM, Pisko SE, et al. Antiemetic efficacy of high-dose metoclopramide: randomized trials with placebo and prochlorperazine in patients with chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting. N Engl J Med 1981;305:905.
78. Navari R, Gandara D, Hesketh P, et al. Comparative clinical trial of granisetron and ondansetron in the prophylaxis of cisplatin-induced emesis. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1242.
79. DeMulder PHM, Seynaeve C, Vermorker JB, et al. Ondansetron compared with high-dose metoclopramide in prophylaxis of acute and delayed cisplatin-induced nausea and vomiting. A
multicenter, randomized, double-blind, crossover study. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:834.
80. Navari R, Hesketh P, Grote T, et al. A double-blind, randomized, comparison intravenous study of single dose dolasetron versus ondansetron in preventing cisplatin-related emesis. Proc Am
Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:522.
81. Gralla RJ, Itri LM, Pisko SE, et al. Antiemetic efficacy of high-dose metoclopramide: randomized trials with placebo and prochlorperazine in patients with chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting. N Engl J Med 1981;305:905.
82. Basurto C, Roila F, Tonato M, et al. Antiemetic activity of high-dose metoclopramide combined with methylprednisolone versus metoclopramide alone in dacarbazine-treated cancer patients. A
randomized double-blind study of the Italian Oncology Group for Clinical Research. AmJ Clin Oncol 1989;12(3):235.
83. Kris MG, Gralla RJ, Clark RA, et al. Antiemetic control and prevention of side effects of anticancer therapy with lorazepam or diphenhydramine when used in conjunction with metoclopramide
plus dexamethasone. A double-blind, randomized trial. Cancer 1987;69:1353.
84. Kris MG, Gralla RJ, Tyson LB, et al. Improved control of cisplatin-induced emesis with high dose metoclopramide and with combinations of metoclopramide, dexamethasone, and
diphenhydramine. Results of consecutive trials in 255 patients. Cancer 1985;55:527.
85. Roila F, De Angelis V, Cognetti F, et al. Ondansetron vs. granisetron, both combined with dexamethasone in the prevention of cisplatin-induced emesis. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:523.
86. DeMulder PHM, Seynaeve C, Vermorker JB, et al. Ondansetron compared with high-dose metoclopramide in prophylaxis of acute and delayed cisplatin-induced nausea and vomiting. A
multicenter, randomized, double-blind, crossover study. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:834.
87. Kris MG, Gralla RJ, Tyson LB, et al. Controlling delayed vomiting: a double-blind, randomized trial comparing placebo, dexamethasone alone, and metoclopramide plus dexamethasone in
patients receiving cisplatin. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:108.
88. Kris MG, Gralla RJ, Tyson LB, et al. Improved control of cisplatin-induced emesis with high dose metoclopramide and with combinations of metoclopramide, dexamethasone, and
diphenhydramine. Results of consecutive trials in 255 patients. Cancer 1985;55:527.
89. Rittenberg CN, Gralla REJ, Lettow LA, Cronin MD, Kardinal CG. New approaches in preventing delayed emesis: altering the time of regimen initiation and use of combination therapy in a 109
patient trial. Proc Am Soc Oncol 1995;14:526.
90. Roila F, Tonato M, Cognetti F, et al. Prevention of cisplatin-induced emesis: a double-blind multicenter randomized crossover study comparing ondansetron and ondansetron plus
dexamethasone. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:675.
91. Kris MG, Gralla RJ, Tyson LB, et al. Controlling delayed vomiting: a double-blind, randomized trial comparing placebo, dexamethasone alone, and metoclopramide plus dexamethasone in
patients receiving cisplatin. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:108.
92. Navari R, Gandara D, Hesketh P, et al. Comparative clinical trial of granisetron and ondansetron in the prophylaxis of cisplatin-induced emesis. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1242.
93. Kris MG, Grunberg SM, Gralla RJ, et al. Dose-ranging evaluation of the serotonin antagonist dolasetron mesylate in patients receiving high-dose cisplatin. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1045.
94. Kris MG, Gralla RJ, Clark RA, et al. Phase II trials of the serotonin antagonist GR38032F for the control of vomiting caused by cisplatin. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:42.
95. Hesketh PJ, Murphy WK, Lester RP, et al. GR38032F: a novel compound effective in the prevention of acute cisplatin-induced emesis. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:700.
96. Hainsworth J, Harvey W, Pendergrass K, et al. A single-blind comparison of intravenous ondansetron, a selective serotonin antagonist, with intravenous metoclopramide in the prevention of
nausea and vomiting associated with high-dose cisplatin chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:721.
97. Kaplan HG, Jofthagen C. Use of granisetron to prevent platinol induced nausea and vomiting. Proc Am Soc Oncol 1991;10:339.
98. Schrnoll HJ. The role of ondansetron in the treatment of emesis induced by non-cisplatin-containing chemotherapy regimens. Eur J Cancer 1989;25[Suppl 1]:555.
99. Roila F, De Angelis V, Cognetti F, et al. Ondansetron vs. granisetron, both combined with dexamethasone in the prevention of cisplatin-induced emesis. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:523.
100. Kris MG, Gralla RJ, Clark RA, et al. Dose ranging evaluation of the serotonin antagonist GR-C507/75 (GR38032F) when used as an antiemetic in patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. J Clin
Oncol 1988;6:659.
101. The Italian Group for Antiemetic Trials. Dexamethasone, granisetron, or both for the prevention of nausea and vomiting during chemotherapy for cancer. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1.
102. Roila F, De Angelis V, Cognetti F, et al. Ondansetron vs. granisetron, both combined with dexamethasone in the prevention of cisplatin-induced emesis. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1995;14:523.
103. Kris MG, Gralla RJ, Clark RA, et al. Antiemetic control and prevention of side effects of anticancer therapy with lorazepam or diphenhydramine when used in conjunction with metoclopramide
plus dexamethasone. A double-blind, randomized trial. Cancer 1987;69:1353.
104. Dilly SG, Friedman C, Yocom K. Contribution of dexamethasone to antiemetic control with granisetron is greatest in patients at high risk of emesis. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1994;13:436.
105. Gralla RJ, Itri LM, Pisko SE, et al. Antiemetic efficacy of high-dose metoclopramide: randomized trials with placebo and prochlorperazine in patients with chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting. N Engl J Med 1981;305:905.
106. Gralla RJ, Tyson LB, Borden LA, et al. Antiemetic therapy: a review of recent studies and a report of a random assignment trial comparing metoclopramide with delta-9-tetrahyrocannabinol.
Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:163.
107. Levitt M, Faiman C, Hawks R, et al. Randomized double-blind comparison of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and marijuana as chemotherapy antiemetics. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1984;3:91.
108. Lazlo J, Clark RA. Lorazepam in patients treated with cisplatin: a drug having antiemetic and anxiolytic effects. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:864.
109. Kris MG, Gralla RJ, Clark RA, et al. Antiemetic control and prevention of side effects of anticancer therapy with lorazepam or diphenhydramine when used in conjunction with metoclopramide
plus dexamethasone. A double-blind, randomized trial. Cancer 1987;69:1353.
110. Kris MG, Gralla RJ, Clark RA, et al. Incidence, course, and severity of delayed nausea and vomiting following the administration of high-dose cisplatin. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1379.
111. Kris MG, Tyson LB, Clark RA, et al. Oral ondansetron for the control of delayed emesis after cisplatin: report of a phase II study and a review of completed trials to manage delayed emesis.
Cancer 1992;70:1012.
112. Grunberg SM, Groshen S, Stevenson LI, et al. Double-blind randomized study of two doses of oral ondansetron for the prevention of cisplatin-induced delayed nausea and vomiting. Proc Am
Soc Clin Oncol 1990;9:327.
113. Kaizer L, Warr D, Hoskins P, et al. Effect of schedule and maintenance on the antiemetic efficacy of ondansetron combined with dexamethasone in acute and delayed nausea and emesis in
patients receiving moderately emetogenic chemotherapy: a phase III trial by the National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1050.
114. Guillem V, Carrato A, Rifa J, et al. High efficacy of oral granisetron in the total control of cyclophosphamide-induced prolonged emesis. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:46a(abst 177).

115. Hesketh PJ, Gralla RJ, Webb RT, et al. Randomized phase II study of the neurokinin 1 receptor antagonist CJ-11,974 in the control of cisplatin-induced emesis. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:338.
116. Navari RM, Reinhardt RR, Gralla RJ. Reduction of cisplatin induced emesis by a selective neurokinin-1-receptor antagonist. N Engl J Med 1999;340:190.
117. Morrow GR, Dobkin PL. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting in cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy treatment: prevalence, etiology, and behavioral interventions. Clin Psychol Rev
1988;8:517.
118. Fetting JH, Wilcox PM, Iwata BA, et al. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting in an ambulatory medical oncology population. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67(12):1093.
119. Dolgin MJ, Katz ER, McGinty K, et al. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting in pediatric cancer pediatrics. Pediatrics 1985;75(3):547.
120. Morrow GR, Lindke J, Black PM. Anticipatory nausea development in cancer patients: replication and extension of a learning model. Br J Psychol 1991;82:61.
121. Wilcox PM, Fetting JH, Nettesheim KM, et al. Anticipatory vomiting in women receiving cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-FU (CMF) adjuvant chemotherapy for breast carcinoma.
Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66(8):1601.
122. Dolgin MJ, Katz ER, McGinty K, et al. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting in pediatric cancer pediatrics. Pediatrics 1985;75(3):547.
123. Morrow GR. Prevalence and correlates of anticipatory nausea and vomiting in chemotherapy patients. J Natl Cancer Inst 1982;68(4):585.
124. Redd WH, Andrykowski MA. Behavioral intervention in cancer treatment: controlling aversion reactions to chemotherapy. J Consult Clin Psychol 1982;50(6):1018.
125. Andrykowski MA, Redd WH, Hatfield AK. Development of anticipatory nausea: a prospective analysis. J Consult Clin Psychol 1985;53(4):447.
126. Olafsdottir M, Sjoden PB, Wrestling B. Prevalence and prediction of chemotherapy-related anxiety, nausea and vomiting in cancer patients. Behav Res Ther 1986;24(1):59.
127. Alba E, Bastus R, De Andres L, et al. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting: prevalence and predictors in chemotherapy patients. Oncology 1989;46:26.
128. Morrow GR. The effect of a susceptibility to motion sickness on the side effects of cancer chemotherapy. Cancer 1985;55:2766.
129. Morrow GR. Susceptibility to motion-sickness and the development of anticipatory nausea and vomiting in cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68(9):1177.
130. Morrow GR, Lindke J, Black PM. Anticipatory nausea development in cancer patients: replication and extension of a learning model. Br J Psychol 1991;82:61.
131. Redd WH, Andrykowski MA. Behavioral intervention in cancer treatment: controlling aversion reactions to chemotherapy. J Consult Clin Psychol 1982;50(6):1018.
132. Morrow GR. Prevalence and correlates of anticipatory nausea and vomiting in chemotherapy patients. J Natl Cancer Inst 1982;68(4):585.
133. Fetting JH, Wilcox PM, Iwata BA, et al. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting in an ambulatory medical oncology population. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67(12):1093.
134. Andrykowski MA, Redd WH, Hatfield AK. Development of anticipatory nausea: a prospective analysis. J Consult Clin Psychol 1985;53(4):447.
135. Watson M, Marvell C. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting among cancer patients: a review. Psychol Health 1992;6:97.
136. Andrykowski MA, Redd WH. Longitudinal analysis of the development of anticipatory nausea. J Consult Clin Psychol 1987;55(1):36.
137. Andrykowski MA, Jacobsen PB, Marks E, et al. Prevalence, predictors and course of anticipatory nausea in women receiving adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. Cancer 1988;62:2607.
138. Fetting JH, Wilcox PM, Iwata BA, et al. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting in an ambulatory medical oncology population. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67(12):1093.
139. Nesse RM, Carli T, Curtis GC, et al. Pretreatment nausea in cancer chemotherapy: a conditioned response? Psychosom Med 1980;42(1):33.
140. Andrykowski MA, Jacobsen PB, Marks E, et al. Prevalence, predictors and course of anticipatory nausea in women receiving adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. Cancer 1988;62:2607.
141. Redd WH, Andrykowski MA. Behavioral intervention in cancer treatment: controlling aversion reactions to chemotherapy. J Consult Clin Psychol 1982;50(6):1018.
142. Andrykowski MA, Redd WH. Longitudinal analysis of the development of anticipatory nausea. J Consult Clin Psychol 1987;55(1):36.
143. Andrykowski MA, Redd WH, Hatfield AK. Development of anticipatory nausea: a prospective analysis. J Consult Clin Psychol 1985;53(4):447.
144. Andrykowski MA. The role of anxiety in the development of anticipatory nausea in cancer chemotherapy: a review and synthesis. Psychosom Med 1990;52:458.
145. Fetting JH, Wilcox PM, Iwata BA, et al. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting in an ambulatory medical oncology population. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67(12):1093.
146. Olafsdottir M, Sjoden PB, Wrestling B. Prevalence and prediction of chemotherapy-related anxiety, nausea and vomiting in cancer patients. Behav Res Ther 1986;24(1):59.
147. Nerenz DR, Leventhal H, Easterling DV, et al. Anxiety and drug taste as predictors of anticipatory nausea in cancer chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1986;4(2):224.
148. Redd WH, Andrykowski MA. Behavioral intervention in cancer treatment: controlling aversion reactions to chemotherapy. J Consult Clin Psychol 1982;50(6):1018.
149. Andrykowski MA. Do infusion-related tastes and odors facilitate the development of anticipatory nausea? A failure to support hypothesis. Health Psychol 1987;6(4):329.
150. Bovbjerg DH, Redd WH, Jacobsen PB, et al. An experimental analysis of classically conditioned nausea during cancer chemotherapy. Psychosom Med 1992;54:623.
151. Blasco T. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting: are psychological factors adequately investigated? Br J Clin Psychol 1994;33:85.
152. Bernstein IL. Physiological and psychological mechanisms of cancer anorexia. Cancer Res 1982;42[Suppl]:715.
153. Burish TG, Shartner D, Lyles JN. Effectiveness of multiple site EMG biofeedback and relaxation in reducing the aversiveness of cancer chemotherapy. Biofeedback Self-Reg 1981;6:523.
154. Morrow GR, Morrell BS. Behavioral treatment for the anticipatory nausea and vomiting induced by cancer chemotherapy. N Engl J Med 1982;307:1476.
155. Redd WH, Andresen GV, Minagawa RY. Hypnotic control of anticipatory nausea in patients undergoing cancer chemotherapy. J Consult Clin Psychol 1982;50:14.
156. Redd WH, Jacobsen PB, Die-Trill M, et al. Cognitive/attentional distraction in the control of conditioned nausea in pediatric cancer patients receiving chemotherapy. J Consult Clin Psychol
1987;55:391.
157. Greene P, Seime R. Stimulus control of anticipatory nausea in cancer chemotherapy. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry 1987;18:61.
158. Scarantino CW, Ornitz RD, Hoffman LG, et al. Radiation-induced emesis: effects of ondansetron. Semin Oncol 1992;19(6)[Suppl 15]:38.
159. Bodis S, Alexander E, Kooy H, et al. The prevention of radiosurgery-induced nausea and vomiting by ondansetron: evidence of a direct effect on the central nervous system chemoreceptor
trigger zone. Surg Neurol 1994;42:249.
160. Priestman TJ, Priestman SG. An initial evaluation of nabilone in the control of radiotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Clin Radiol 1984;35:265.
161. Lucraft HH, Palmer MK. Randomized clinical trial of levonantradol and chlorpromazine in the prevention of radiotherapy-induced vomiting. Clin Radiol 1982;33:621.
162. Reyntjens A. Domperidone as an anti-emetic: summary of research reports. Postgrad Med J 1979;55[Suppl]:50.
163. Scarantino CW, Ornitz RD, Hoffman LG, et al. Radiation-induced emesis: effects of ondansetron. Semin Oncol 1992;19(6)[Suppl 15]:38.
164. Priestman TJ, Roberts JT, Lucraft CH, et al. Results of a randomized, double-blind comparative study of ondansetron and metoclopramide in the prevention of nausea and vomiting following
high dose upper abdominal irradiation. Clin Oncol 1990;2:71.
165. Spitzer TR, Bryson JC, Cirenza E, et al. Randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled evaluation of oral ondansetron in the prevention of nausea and vomiting associated with fractionated
total-body irradiation. J Clin Oncol 1994;12(11):2432.
166. Jurgens H, McQuade B. Ondansetron as prophylaxis for chemotherapy and radiotherapy-induced emesis in children. Oncology 1992;49:279.
167. Bodis S, Alexander E, Kooy H, et al. The prevention of radiosurgery-induced nausea and vomiting by ondansetron: evidence of a direct effect on the central nervous system chemoreceptor
trigger zone. Surg Neurol 1994;42:249.
168. Lanciano R, Sherman DM, Michalski J, et al. The efficacy and safety of Kytril Tablets (2 mg) once daily in patients receiving at least 10 fractions of upper abdominal radiation for malignancy. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42[Suppl]:159(abst).
169. Spitzer TR, Friedman C, Bushnell J, et al. Oral granisetron (Kytril) and ondansetron (Zofran) in the prevention of hyperfractionated total body irradiation induced emesis: the results of a
double-blind, randomized parallel group study. Blood 1998;92[Suppl 1]:278a(abst).
170. Fauser AA, Russ W, Bischiff M. Oral dolasetron mesilate for the control of emesis during fractionated total-body irradiation and high-dose cyclophosphamide in patients undergoing allogenic
bone marrow transplantation. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:219.
171. Bruera E, MacEachern TJ, Spachynski KA, et al. Comparison of the efficacy, safety and pharmacokinetics of controlled release and immediate release metoclopramide for the management of
chronic nausea in patients with advanced cancer. Cancer 1994;74(31):7204.
172. Nolte MJ, Berkery R, Pizzo B, et. al. Assuring the optimal use of serotonin antagonist antiemetics: the process for development and implementation of institutional antiemetic guidelines at
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:771.
173. Gralla R, Navari RM, Hesketh P, et al. Single-dose oral granisetron has equivalent antiemetic efficacy to intravenous ondansetron for highly emetogenic cisplatin-based chemotherapy. J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:1568.
174. Spector JI, Lester EP, Chevlon EM, et al. A comparison of oral ondansetron and intravenous granisetron for the prevention of nausea and emesis associated with cisplatin-based chemotherapy.
Oncologist 1998;3:432.

SECTION 55.2 Oral Complications
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 55.2
Oral Complications
ANN M. BERGER
THOMAS J. KILROY
Introduction
Direct Stomatotoxicity
Pathophysiology of Mucositis
Phase I: Inflammatory or Vascular Phase
Phase 2: Epithelial Phase
Phase 3: Ulcerative or Bacteriologic Phase
Phase 4: Healing Phase
Risk Factors
Assessment of the Oral Mucosa
Remedies for the Prevention and Treatment of Mucositis
Direct Cytoprotectants
Indirect Cytoprotectants
Cryotherapy
Laser
Anesthetic Cocktails
Capsaicin
Narcotics
Oral Complications in Radiotherapy
Xerostomia
Osteoradionecrosis
Conclusion
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
In the discussion of orofacial complications and pain and its management for patients receiving chemotherapy or radiotherapy, we must consider and discuss many
factors. In the brief space allocated to oral complications, we shall evaluate dentition, mucosa, and bone to understand the interrelationship of these organ systems
and how they interface with orofacial pain.
Orofacial pain that develops during the course of oncologic therapy cannot simply be labeled mucositis. Although this is the term commonly applied to the
presentation of oral symptoms that develop in an oncology patient during the course of therapy, mucositis is not simply the result of mucosal ulceration from
chemotherapy or radiotherapy. We must examine the various etiologies of orofacial pain, as such pain arises from multiple origins ( Table 55.2-1). The oral
environment, when in a state of imbalance, poses a serious threat to the success of both chemotherapy and radiotherapy. A complex interrelationship exists among
the oral microflora, occlusal pathology, dental restorations, and mucositis. In chemotherapy, bacteria play a major role in the morbidity associated with mucositis. For
patients receiving radiotherapy, oral microorganisms and restorative dental procedures have a significant impact on both transient mucositis and long-term dental
management.

TABLE 55.2-1. Etiologic Factors Contributing to Pain in the Oncology Patient

Oral mucositis is a significant problem in patients receiving chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Estimates of oral mucositis incidence among cancer therapy patients range
from 40% of those receiving standard chemotherapy to 76% of bone marrow transplant patients. 1 Virtually all patients who receive radiotherapy to the head and neck
area develop oral complications. Mucositis not only is painful but also can limit adequate nutritional intake and decrease patients' willingness to continue treatment.
Severe mucositis with extensive ulceration may necessitate costly hospitalizations, parenteral nutrition, and use of narcotics. Mucositis diminishes the quality of life
and may result in serious clinical complications. A healthy oral mucosa serves to clear microorganisms and provides a chemical barrier that limits penetration of many
compounds into the epithelium. A mucosal surface that is damaged increases the risk of a secondary infection and may even prove to be a nidus for systemic
infection. Mucositis may result in the need to reduce the dosage of subsequent chemotherapy cycles or to delay radiotherapy, which ultimately may affect a patient's
response to therapy.
Dentition, supporting tissue (both hard and soft), and fixed and removable prostheses must be thoroughly examined before commencement of therapy. Dental caries
involving previous restorations or unrestored teeth will be a source of bacteria that can be implicated in the etiology of mucositis. The xerostomia associated with
radiotherapy significantly increases plaque colonization on the surfaces of teeth and prostheses. Increases in bacterial volume are directly related to mucositis
symptoms and elevated caries activity on the eroded and worn surfaces of the dentition.

DIRECT STOMATOTOXICITY
Normally, cells of the mouth undergo rapid renewal over a 7- to 14-day cycle. Both chemotherapy and radiotherapy interfere with cellular mitosis and reduce the
regenerative ability of the oral mucosa. Cancer chemotherapeutic drugs that produce direct stomatotoxicity include the alkylating agents, antimetabolites, natural
products, and other synthetic agents such as hydroxyurea and procarbazine hydrochloride. 2 Typical sequelae of these cytotoxic agents include epithelial hyperplasia,
collagen and glandular degeneration, and epithelial dysplasia. 3 Mucositis is an inevitable side effect of irradiation. The severity of the mucositis depends on the type
of ionizing radiation, the volume of irradiated tissue, the dose per day, and the cumulative dose. As the mucositis becomes more severe, pseudomembranes and
ulcerations develop. Poor nutritional status further interferes with mucosal regeneration by decreasing cellular migration and renewal. 4
Direct stomatotoxicity usually is seen 5 to 7 days after the administration of chemotherapy or radiotherapy. In the nonmyelosuppressed patient, oral lesions heal within
2 to 3 weeks.5 The nonkeratinized mucosa is most affected. The most common sites include the labial, buccal, and soft palate mucosa, as well as the floor of the
mouth and the ventral surface of the tongue. Clinically, mucositis presents with multiple complex symptoms: The condition begins with asymptomatic redness and
erythema and progresses through solitary, white, elevated desquamative patches that are slightly painful to contact pressure, to large, contiguous,
pseudomembranous, acutely painful lesions with associated dysphagia and decreased oral intake. Histopathologically, edema of the rete pegs will be noted, along
with vascular changes that demonstrate a thickening of the tunica intima and concomitant reduction in the size of the lumen and destruction of the elastic and muscle

fibers of the vessel walls. The loss of basement membrane epithelial cells exposes the underlying connective tissue stroma with its associated innervation, which, as
the mucosal lesions enlarge, contributes to increasing pain levels. Oral infections, which may be due to bacteria, viruses, or fungal organisms, can further exacerbate
the mucositis and may lead to systemic infections. If the patient develops both severe mucositis and thrombocytopenia, oral bleeding may occur and may be very
difficult to treat.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF MUCOSITIS
Sonis et al. 6 proposed a hypothesis as to the mechanisms of the development and healing of mucositis. The hypothesis is based on both animal and clinical data,
though it remains speculative to some degree. It describes mucositis as a complex biologic process that occurs in four phases: (1) the inflammatory or vascular phase,
(2) the epithelial phase, (3) the ulcerative or bacteriologic phase, and (4) the healing phase ( Table 55.2-2). Each phase is interdependent and is a consequence of the
effect of the chemotherapy or radiotherapy on the epithelium, as well as actions mediated by cytokines, the status of the patient's bone marrow, and the oral bacterial
flora. 6

TABLE 55.2-2. Four Phases in the Development of Mucositis

PHASE I: INFLAMMATORY OR VASCULAR PHASE
Cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-a, interleukin-1 (IL-1), and perhaps interleukin-6, are released from the epithelial tissue and adjacent connective tissue
shortly after the administration of chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Most likely, the initiating event in the development of mucositis is local tissue damage caused by the
cytokines. Additional concentrations of cytotoxic drugs in the mucosa may result from the increased vascularity caused by IL-1. Also during this phase, increased
submucosal vascularity occurs.
PHASE 2: EPITHELIAL PHASE
Reduced epithelial renewal, with atrophy and ulceration, occurs as a result of both radiotherapy and chemotherapy, particularly with drugs affecting the S phase of the
cell cycle, whereby the impact is on dividing cells of the oral basal epithelium. The atrophy and ulceration that occurs is most likely exacerbated by locally produced
cytokines as well as functional trauma. The first two phases usually occur from days 0 to 5 of therapy.
PHASE 3: ULCERATIVE OR BACTERIOLOGIC PHASE
The most complex and symptomatic phase is phase 3, during which localized areas of erosion often become covered with a fibrinous pseudomembrane. This phase
usually coincides with the patient's period of maximum neutropenia. Secondary bacterial colonization, involving some gram-negative organisms, occurs, and the
gram-negative organisms provide a source of endotoxin, which stimulates further cytokine release from the connective tissue around the cells. The patient's condition
is exacerbated by the cytokines as well as the nitric oxide that is released. This phase usually occurs from days 6 to 12 of therapy.
PHASE 4: HEALING PHASE
The final phase usually consists of renewal in epithelial proliferation and differentiation, with normalization of the patient's peripheral white blood cell count and
reestablishment of the local microbial flora. The healing phase usually takes place from days 12 to 16.

RISK FACTORS
Both direct and indirect factors appear to contribute to oropharyngeal mucositis. The direct factors include the chemotherapeutic agent, dosage, and schedule ( Table
55.2-3), the total dose and days of radiotherapy, mucosal damage from such problems as ill-fitting dental prostheses, periodontal disease, microbial flora, salivary
gland dysfunction, and patient susceptibility. Indirect factors include myelosuppression, immunosuppression, reduced secretory IgA, and bacterial, viral, or fungal
infections.

TABLE 55.2-3. Chemotherapeutic Agents Commonly Producing Mucositis

A variety of patient-related factors have potential for affecting the development of mucositis after chemotherapy. It has been suggested that the repair of ill-fitting
prostheses, extraction of offending teeth, elimination of periodontal disease, and effective oral hygiene reduce the incidence and severity of mucositis. A patient might
develop more severe mucositis if his or her nutrition is poor, through impairment of mucosal regeneration. Xerostomia that develops as a result of irradiation or drug
use contributes significantly to the development of oral mucositis. Drugs that can result in xerostomia include antidepressants, opiates, antihypertensives,
antihistamines, diuretics, and sedatives. Although both alcohol and tobacco can impair salivary function, it has been suggested that tobacco has been associated with
a decreased incidence of chemotherapy-induced stomatitis. 7 One recent study involving 332 outpatients receiving chemotherapy revealed no significant differences in
the incidence of mucositis between patients who wore dental appliances, had a history of oral lesions and a history of smoking, and practiced different oral hygiene
regimens, and those patients who did not. 8 These findings suggest that the risk factors for the development of chemotherapy-induced mucositis are many and
complicated and that further research is needed.
Reports on the effects of age on chemotherapy-induced mucositis development are conflicting. In general, younger patients are at increased risk for developing

mucositis.7 Recent reports look at gender differences and the risk of mucositis. A metaanalysis of six North Central Cancer Treatment Group (NCCTG) trials involving
731 patients (402 men and 329 women) revealed that women reported stomatitis both more often and of greater severity as compared with men. 9 In a pilot project
using capsaicin for treating mucositis, data analysis revealed that women had a higher level of pain secondary to oral mucositis. It is also known that women are
“supertasters” when tested with chemical relative phenylthiocarbamide/6-n-propylthiouracil (PROP); possibly, individuals who are supertasters and who therefore
have more taste buds experience increased stomatitis (Table 55.2-4).10,11

TABLE 55.2-4. Risk Factors Contributing to Mucositis

ASSESSMENT OF THE ORAL MUCOSA
A mucositis grading system allows the physician to assess mucositis severity in terms of both pain and the patient's ability to maintain adequate nutrition, so that a
treatment plan can be appropriately constructed. Many different grading systems exist, most of which are based on two or more clinical parameters, including
erythema, pain, and problems with eating ( Table 55.2-5). An example of a common grading system is that proposed by the National Cancer Institute, which uses a
numbering scale from 0 to 4. Grade 0 indicates no mucositis; grade 1, the presence of painless ulcers, erythema, or mild soreness; grade 2, the presence of painful
erythema, edema, or ulcers, but not interfering with the patient's ability to eat; and grade 4, symptoms so severe that the patient requires parenteral or enteral
support. 12

TABLE 55.2-5. Mucositis Grading

Recently, new scoring systems have been developed for the assessment of oral mucositis. Sonis et al. 13 reported on a scale that uses an objective measure of
mucositis, evaluating ulceration and pseudomembrane formation and erythema. Subjective outcomes of mouth pain, ability to swallow, and function were measured.
Analgesia use for mouth sensitivity was also recorded. In the study that was conducted in nine centers, there was high interobserver correlation, with objective
mucositis scores demonstrating strong correlation with symptoms.
At the 1989 National Institutes of Health consensus conference on oral complications of cancer therapy, clinicians and researchers agreed that effective prevention of
mucositis requires a comprehensive patient examination to identify potentially complicating oral disease before the cancer therapy begins. 14 Significant problems that
must be corrected include poor oral hygiene, periapical pathology, third molar pathology, periodontal disease, dental caries, defective restorations, orthodontic
appliances, ill-fitting prostheses, and other potential sources of infection. Bacterial and fungal surveillance cultures are not necessary, but prophylactic use of
acyclovir should be considered in patients who are seropositive and at high risk for reactivating herpes simplex viral infection, such as those who undergo bone
marrow transplant or who have prolonged and pronounced myelosuppression. If a diagnosis is made of a fungal, viral, or bacterial infection along with the mucosal
lesions, prompt treatment is necessary to avoid the risk of systemic infection.

REMEDIES FOR THE PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF MUCOSITIS
A standardized approach for the prevention and treatment of chemotherapy- and radiotherapy-induced mucositis is essential, although the efficacy and safety of most
of the regimens have not been established. The prophylactic measures usually used for the prevention of mucositis include chlorhexidine gluconate (Peridex), saline
rinses, sodium bicarbonate rinses, acyclovir, amphotericin, and ice. Regimens commonly used for the treatment of mucositis and the associated pain include a local
anesthetic such as lidocaine or dyclonine, magnesium-based antacids (Maalox, Mylanta), diphenhydramine (Benadryl), nystatin, or sucralfate. These agents are used
either alone or in different combinations that compose a mouthwash. Other agents used less commonly include kaolin-pectin (Kaopectate), allopurinol, vitamin E,
b-carotene, chamomile (Kamillosan) liquid, aspirin, antiprostaglandins, prostaglandins, MGI 209 (marketed as Oratect Gel), silver nitrate, and antibiotics. Oral and
sometimes parenteral narcotics are used to relieve the pain caused by mucositis. A new method that uses capsaicin for such pain relief is currently being studied.
DIRECT CYTOPROTECTANTS
Sucralfate
Sucralfate, an aluminum salt of sucrose orasulfate, which has been used successfully to treat gastrointestinal ulceration, has been tested as a rinse for the prevention
and treatment of mucositis. Sucralfate's mechanism of action appears to be by forming an ionic bond to proteins in an ulcer site, thereby creating a protective
barrier. 15 Additionally, evidence points to an increase in the local production of prostaglandin E 2(PGE2), which results in an increase in mucosal blood flow, mucus
production, mitotic activity, and surface migration of cells. 16,17
Anecdotal experience suggests that sucralfate might be useful in the prevention and treatment of chemotherapy-induced mucositis; however, data from the studies are
conflicting. Solomon 18 reported a 55% objective response rate in patients receiving chemotherapy (19 patients), which was defined as a decrease in one grade on the
cancer and leukemia group B (CALGB) scale of oral toxicity. In 1984 and 1985, Ferraro and Mattern 19,20 reported encouraging results in the use of sucralfate for
chemotherapy-induced mucositis. Two randomized, double-blind clinical trials also have evaluated sucralfate for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced mucositis.
Pfeiffer et al. 21 found a significant reduction in edema, erythema, erosion, and ulceration in 23 of 40 evaluable patients receiving cisplatin and continuous infusion with
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) with or without bleomycin. Patient preference favored sucralfate, although this preference failed to reach statistical significance. Ten of the
patients did not complete the study as the swishing of the sucralfate and the placebo aggravated chemotherapy-induced nausea. The authors suggested that, to help
overcome this problem, the solution should have a neutral taste and should not be swallowed after swishing. In contrast, results from a similarly designed study, in
which patients receiving remission-induction chemotherapy for acute nonlymphocytic leukemia were treated with sucralfate for mucositis, did not support the

amelioration of mucositis. 22 The latter study also concluded that chronic administration of the sucralfate suspension had no effect on the incidence of gastrointestinal
bleeding and ulceration. The authors did note that some patients reported pain relief from sucralfate. 22 A phase III study of sucralfate suspension versus placebo,
recently completed by the NCCTG, revealed that of the 50 patients who developed stomatitis, the sucralfate suspensions provided no beneficial reduction in the
duration or severity of 5-FU-induced mucositis. 23 In addition, the sucralfate induced considerable additional gastrointestinal toxicity.
Sucralfate has also been tested in patients receiving radiotherapy. One study compared 21 patients who received standard oral care to the head and neck with 24
patients who received sucralfate suspension four times daily. 24 Results revealed a significant difference in mucosal edema, pain, dysphagia, and weight loss in those
patients receiving sucralfate. In a pilot study done by Pfeiffer et al., 25 sequential patients who received radiotherapy to the head and neck received sucralfate at the
onset of mucositis. The majority of patients had a decrease in pain after sucralfate use. A double-blind placebo-controlled study with sucralfate in 33 patients who
received irradiation to the head and neck reported no statistically significant differences in mucositis; however, the sucralfate group reported less oral pain and, in
these patients, other topical and systemic analgesics were started later in the course of radiation. 26
A prospective double-blind study compared the effectiveness of sucralfate suspension to that of diphenhydramine syrup plus kaolin-pectin on radiotherapy-induced
mucositis. Data on perceived pain, helpfulness of mouth rinses, weekly mucositis grade, weight change, and interruption of therapy were collected daily. Analysis of
the two groups revealed no statistically significant differences between them. A retrospective comparison of a group of 15 patients who had not used daily oral rinses
and the preceding two groups suggested that the use of a daily oral rinse with a mouth-coating agent may result in less pain, may reduce weight loss, and may help to
prevent interruption of radiotherapy because of severe mucositis. 27
Prostaglandins, Antiprostaglandins, and Nonsteroidal Agents
Prostaglandins are a family of naturally occurring eicosanoids, some of which have known cytoprotective activity. Dinoprostone, or PGE 2, has been reported to be
beneficial in healing both gastric ulcers and chronic leg ulcers. 28,29 Pilot studies revealed the need for controlled clinical trials. In a pilot study undertaken by Kuhrer et
al.,30 five patients received topical dinoprostone for chemotherapy-induced mucositis. Four of the five patients reported pain relief, with healing of the ulcers within 3 to
7 days. Kuhrer's group then tested the prophylactic efficacy of dinoprostone by applying it topically to one patient who was receiving chemotherapy and who had
developed previous episodes of mucositis, as well as to two patients receiving total body irradiation. 30 Only one of the patients who had received the dinoprostone
and total body irradiation developed mucositis.
In a nonblinded study, ten patients who were receiving 5-FU and mitomycin with concomitant radiation for oral carcinomas were treated by Porteder et al., 31 with
dinoprostone four times daily during treatment. The control group consisted of 14 patients who were receiving identical treatment. Eight of the ten patients who
received dinoprostone were evaluable, and none developed severe mucositis, as compared with six episodes in the control arm.
A third pilot study conducted with 15 patients who received radiotherapy of the head and neck found that an inflammatory reaction in the vicinity of the tumor could be
detected in only 5 patients treated with topically applied PGE 2, and none of the patients developed any bullous or desquamating inflammatory lesions. 32 A
double-blind, placebo-controlled study of PGE 2 in 60 patients undergoing bone marrow transplant revealed no significant differences in the incidence, severity, or
duration of mucositis. It was noted that the incidence of herpes simplex virus was higher in those on the PGE 2arm, and, in those patients who developed herpes
simplex virus, there was an increase in the severity of the mucositis. 33
Benzydamine is a nonsteroidal with analgesic, anesthetic, antiinflammatory, and antimicrobial properties. Epstein and Stevenson-Moore 34 found, in a double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial, that benzydamine produced statistically significant relief of pain from radiation-induced mucositis. Positive responses to benzydamine were
reported in at least two other studies. 35,36 The study conducted by Epstein and Stevenson-Moore 34 revealed not only a trend toward reduction in pain but also a
statistically significant reduction in the total area of ulceration as well as the size of the ulcer. Another study demonstrated that when indomethacin, an
antiprostaglandin, was given orally, it reduced the severity and delayed the onset of mucositis induced by radiotherapy. 37
Corticosteroids
No placebo-controlled studies of the use of corticosteroids for chemotherapy-induced mucositis have been reported, though two reports have focused on pilot work
conducted with patients who received radiotherapy. Abdelaal et al. 38 reported the use of a betamethasone and water mouthwash in five patients receiving
radiotherapy whose mucosa remained virtually ulcer-free and who did not report any pain. The proposed mechanism of action of the steroid mouthwash was inhibition
of leukotriene and prostaglandin production. Another pilot study compared 21 patients receiving radiotherapy who used an oral rinse consisting of hydrocortisone in
combination with nystatin, tetracycline, and diphenhydramine with patients using a placebo rinse. Though only 12 of the 21 patients were evaluable, by the end of the
radiotherapy cycles, there was a statistically significant difference in mucositis and a trend toward a reduction in pain. No patients in the treatment group needed to
interrupt the radiotherapeutic regimen, whereas three patients in the control group did need to interrupt their radiotherapeutic care. 39
Vitamins and Other Antioxidants
Vitamins in pharmacologic doses have been used to treat mucositis. Vitamin E has been tested in chemotherapy-induced mucositis because it can stabilize cellular
membranes and may improve herpetic gingivitis, possibly through antioxidant activity. 40,41 and 42 The efficacy of vitamin E was demonstrated by Wadleigh et al. 43 in a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Eighteen patients receiving chemotherapy were randomized to receive a topical application of vitamin E or a
placebo. In the vitamin E–treated group, six of nine patients had complete resolution of their mucositis within 4 days of initiating therapy, whereas in the placebo group
only one of nine had resolution of the lesions during the 5-day study period. This difference was statistically significant. 43 Because both sucralfate and vitamin E
provide some effectiveness in mucositis, a phase III study of sucralfate versus vitamin E for treatment-induced mucositis is currently under way.
Other antioxidants that have been used clinically include vitamin C and glutathione. Another antioxidant tested in a pilot study, azelastine hydrochloride has been
used in many allergic diseases and has been shown to be effective in the treatment of aphthous ulcers in Behçet's disease. Osaki et al. 44 reported on a study
involving 63 patients who had head and neck tumors and received a combination of radiotherapy and concomitant chemotherapy. Twenty-six patients received
regimen 1, which consisted of vitamins C and E and glutathione, whereas 37 patients received regimen 2, which consisted of everything in regimen 1 plus azelastine.
At the completion of treatment, 21 of the patients in the azelastine arm remained at grade 1 or 2 mucositis, with 6 patients having grade 3 mucositis and 10 having
grade 4 mucositis. In the control group, grade 3 or 4 mucositis was induced in 6 and 15 patients, respectively, with only 2 patients having grade 1 mucositis and 2
having grade 2 mucositis. The azelastine was shown to suppress neutrophil respiratory burst both in vivo and in vitro, as well as to suppress cytokine release from
lymphocytes. The authors concluded that a regimen including azelastine, which suppresses reactive oxygen production and stabilizes cell membranes, may be useful
for the prophylaxis of mucositis due to chemoradiotherapy. 44
b-Carotene, a vitamin A precursor with known effects on cellular differentiation, has been used for mucositis induced by radiation. b-Carotene has been shown to
produce regression of oral leukoplakia lesions. 45 Mills 46 reported on the use of b-carotene in treatment-induced mucositis. Ten patients receiving radiation
interspersed with two cycles of chemotherapy were given b-carotene, 250 mg/d for the first 3 weeks of therapy and then 75 mg/d for the last 5 weeks of therapy. The
control group consisted of ten patients with oral cancer who were receiving the identical treatment. At the end of treatment, there was a statistically significant
difference in grade 3 to 4 mucositis in the b-carotene group; there was no difference in grades 1 and 2 mucositis. 46
Silver Nitrate
Silver nitrate, a caustic agent, has been tested in radiation-induced mucositis. Because silver nitrate is known to stimulate cell division when it is applied to normal
mucosa, it was thought that, if it were applied before cytotoxic therapy, it might enhance repair and replacement of mucosa that was damaged by cytotoxic therapy.
Maciejewski et al.47 reported on 16 patients who received radiotherapy to bilateral opposing fields. Silver nitrate 2% was applied to the left side of the oral mucosa
three times daily for 5 days before radiotherapy and during the first 2 days of radiotherapy. The right side of the oral mucosa was unpainted and served as the control.
The study revealed significantly less severe mucositis and a decrease in duration of mucositis on the mucosa that was treated with silver nitrate. 47 A second trial failed
to confirm these results. 48 Silver nitrate has not been formally evaluated in the treatment of chemotherapy-induced mucositis.

Miscellaneous Cytoprotectants
An uncontrolled study involving 98 patients with different malignancies who were receiving different medical regimens with either chemotherapy or radiotherapy
reported that Kamillosan liquid taken before and after the development of mucositis helped to prevent and decrease the duration of mucositis. 49 In a
placebo-controlled trial conducted by NCCTG, patients were randomized to receive chamomile or placebo, along with an established oral cryotherapy regimen. This
study revealed that chamomile mouthwash did not reduce stomatitis associated with 5-FU chemotherapy. 50
Oshitani et al. 51 reported on the use of topical sodium alginate, an agent that has been shown to promote healing of esophageal and gastric mucosa, in
radiation-induced mucositis. Thirty-nine patients with mucositis were randomized to receive either sodium alginate or placebo. Those who received sodium alginate
had a reduction in both mucosal erosions and pain. 51 Other topical agents used clinically for treatment-induced mucositis include Kaopectate, Benadryl, saline,
sodium bicarbonate, and gentian violet. Even though the previously mentioned agents are used clinically for treatment-induced mucositis, no controlled clinical trials
have yet established their efficacy.
INDIRECT CYTOPROTECTANTS
Hematologic Growth Factors
Hematologic growth factors currently are standard in the treatment of patients receiving high-dose chemotherapy. The effect of the hematologic growth factors on
decreasing the depth and duration of chemotherapy-induced neutropenia is well established. Lieschke et al. 52 examined the levels of neutrophil count and assessed
whether oral neutrophil count correlated with oral mucositis. In the study, the researchers found that the oral neutrophil count, similar to circulating systemic
neutrophils, diminished to undetectable levels but recovered earlier than did the systemic circulating neutrophils. In those patients receiving granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), the mean cumulative mucositis score was less than that in patients who did not receive G-CSF. 52
Gabrilove et al. 53 reported on 27 patients receiving methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin for bladder carcinoma and escalating doses of G-CSF. The
patients received the G-CSF on their first cycle of chemotherapy and did not receive it on their second chemotherapeutic cycle. Significantly less mucositis was seen
during the cycle in which the patients received the G-CSF. In this study, a bias may have been inherent as there is perhaps cumulative chemotherapeutic toxicity such
that with each cycle of chemotherapy, the severity of mucositis increases.
Bronchud et al.54 treated 17 patients with breast or ovarian carcinoma who were receiving escalating doses of doxorubicin with G-CSF support. In this study, the
G-CSF did not prevent severe mucositis. In a fourth study using G-CSF, 41 patients receiving chemotherapy for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma received G-CSF, whereas
39 received chemotherapy without G-CSF. In those patients who did not receive G-CSF, the main cause of treatment delay was neutropenia, whereas in those
patients who did receive G-CSF, the main cause of treatment delay was mucositis. 55
In a small prospective study, patients who received platinum, infused 5-FU, and leucovorin plus granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) had a
decreased incidence of grade 3 mucositis. 56 In a study comparing patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation in whom GM-CSF was used to historical controls,
recovery of neutrophils was more rapid in the GM-CSF group; however, there was no difference in the severity of mucositis nor in duration of hospitalization. 57 At this
time, the use of colony-stimulating factors in the prevention or treatment of mucositis is investigational.
The effect of other biologically active factors on mucositis development is currently being studied. In vitro studies have shown that epidermal growth factor (EGF) not
only is present in saliva but has the ability to affect growth, cell differentiation, and cell migration. 58,59 It is known that EGF induces chemotaxis of oral epithelial cells,
indicating that it may be important in maintaining the integrity of the oral epithelium, especially in wound healing. Patients with peptic ulcers have been shown to have
significantly lower levels of EGF in their saliva, suggesting that EGF may be involved in either protection or repair. 60 In an animal study in which the animals received
either 5-FU with an infusion of EGF for 7 and 15 days or a placebo, the animals that received the EGF experienced increased mucosal breakdown. The results of the
study indicate that chemotherapy-induced mucositis depends on the rate of epithelial cell growth. The timing of administration of the EGF in relation to the
chemotherapy may determine whether the patient develops increased oral toxicity or repair of the mucosa. 61 In a study conducted by Sonis et al., 62 hamsters received
EGF versus placebo using four different treatment schedules. In this study, delayed exposure to EGF delayed the onset of mucositis, but it had no beneficial effects
on the duration or severity of mucositis.
Tumor growth factor-b3 (TGF-b3) is an inhibitor of epithelial cell growth. In a study using Syrian hamsters done by Sonis et al., 63 the topical application of TGF-b3
resulted in a decrease in the severity and duration of chemotherapy-induced mucositis. In another study performed by Spijkervet and Sonis 64 with Syrian hamsters,
the topical application of TGF-b3 significantly reduced the severity and duration of ulcerative mucositis induced by 5-FU. In animal experiments, IL-1 and IL-11
demonstrated a cytoprotective effect. 65,66 and 67
Antimicrobials
Many conflicting studies have been published on the use of chlorhexidine mouthwash for both alleviating mucositis and reducing oral colonization by gram-positive,
gram-negative, and Candida species in patients receiving radiotherapy, chemotherapy, or bone marrow transplantation. In 1990, Ferretti et al., 68 in a randomized,
controlled trial, demonstrated that prophylactic chlorhexidine mouthwash reduces oral mucositis and microbial burden in cancer patients receiving chemotherapy. The
majority of studies since that time have not demonstrated a reduction in mucositis in patients receiving intensive chemotherapy and using chlorhexidine
mouthwash.69,70 and 71 However, Weisdorf et al. 70 and Epstein et al. 71 did demonstrate a reduction in oral colonization by Candida species and oral candidiasis. Ferretti
et al.72 found that the use of chlorhexidine rinse for the prevention of mucositis was not effective, though there was a reduction in streptococcal counts. Spijkervet et
al.,73 in a placebo-controlled, double-blind study, revealed that the colonization index of viridans streptococci was reduced after 5 weeks of chlorhexidine treatment,
though such therapy did not decrease the colonization of Candida species, Streptococcus faecalis, staphylococci, Enterobacteriaceae, Pseudomonadaceae, and
Acinetobacter species, and there was no difference in the development and severity of mucositis. A recent randomized, double-blind study comparing chlorhexidine
mouthwash to placebo in 25 patients receiving radiotherapy revealed that there was a trend toward more mucositis as well as mouthwash-induced discomfort, taste
alteration, and teeth staining in the chlorhexidine arm. 74 The overall statistical data lead to the conclusion that chlorhexidine may result in improved oral hygiene, but
the discomfort of using the rinse negates its minimal benefits.
The endotoxins of aerobic gram-negative bacilli are implicated in the etiology of mucositis. A study by Spijkervet et al. 75 postulated that lozenges containing 2 mg
polymyxin E, 1.8 mg tobramycin, and 10 mg amphotericin (PTA) four times daily on the oropharyngeal flora would mediate and control mucositis. These researchers
compared 15 irradiated patients using PTA and two other groups of 15 patients each, one of which was using 0.1% chlorhexidine and the other of which was using
placebo. In the selectively decontaminated group, the severity and extent of mucositis was significantly reduced as compared with that in the chlorhexidine and
placebo groups (P <.05). Clinically, all patients in the lozenge group showed erythema only, whereas 80% of both the placebo and chlorhexidine rinse patients
experienced severe mucositis with extended pseudomembranes from the third week of irradiation. No nasogastric tube feedings were needed in the PTA group, as
compared to 30% of patients in the other groups. 75 The potential role of PTA lozenges remains to be clarified.
IB-367, a broad-spectrum antimicrobial peptide found in porcine leukocytes, was tested in a hamster model. 76 The results indicated that mucositis scores were
significantly lower in hamsters given topical IB-367 as compared to those receiving placebo. Though further study is needed, IB-367 might improve clinical outcomes
in patients at risk for the development of mucositis. 76 Another antimicrobial, nystatin suspension, has been studied in the prophylaxis of candidiasis in leukemia and
bone marrow transplantation patients. The majority of publications do not support the use of nystatin. 77,78,79,80,81,82,83 and 84
Pharmacologic Modulation
Another agent that has been evaluated for the prevention and treatment of oral mucositis induced by 5-FU chemotherapy is allopurinol. The rationale for allopurinol
mouthwash was based on data that systemic allopurinol was able to decrease 5-FU-induced toxicity by inhibiting the enzyme orotidylate decarboxylase and formation
of the metabolites of fluorodeoxyuridine monophosphate (FdUMP) and fluorouridine (FUrd). 85 Two pilot studies support the use of allopurinol for oral mucositis. The
study by Clark and Selvin 86 revealed that allopurinol mouthwash substantially decreased the incidence and severity of mucositis in six patients who received bolus
5-FU chemotherapy. Another pilot study, involving 16 patients receiving 5-day intravenous 5-FU infusions and using allopurinol mouthwashes four to six times daily,

also found that the allopurinol alleviated the mucositis in all patients. 87 After the success of these pilot studies, the use of allopurinol became routine medical practice
in many institutions. The efficacy of allopurinol was tested by the NCCTG and the Mayo Clinic in a randomized, double-blind clinical trial. Seventy-five patients were
assigned to receive allopurinol mouthwash or placebo while they received their first 5-day course of 5-FU with or without leucovorin. This study demonstrated no
protective effect against 5-FU-induced mucositis by the allopurinol regimen. 88
Leucovorin has been used in combination with methotrexate to help decrease the oral mucositis that occurs with methotrexate. In a pilot study involving 19 patients
who received edatrexate for non–small cell lung carcinoma, less mucositis was seen than was anticipated. 89 There is decreased mucositis when reduced folates are
given systemically following methotrexate administration. 90 In a small crossover study, administration of leucovorin-hyaluronidase mouthwashes did not reduce the
severity of mucositis induced by high-dose methotrexate. 91
Glutamine administration in animal studies has been shown to lead to a reduction in both morbidity and mortality of animals who have received a variety of
chemotherapeutic agents, including methotrexate. The glutamine both preserved the morphologic structure of the gastrointestinal tract and reduced the incidence of
bacteremia. 92,93 In a randomized trial of 28 patients with gastrointestinal cancers who received 5-FU and folinic acid, no effect on oral mucositis was seen in the group
who also received 16 g glutamine daily for 8 days as compared to the group who received a placebo. The authors concluded that perhaps both the dose and duration
of exposure to the glutamine were not sufficient to show a decrease in mucositis. 94
According to laboratory data, another agent that protects host tissues selectively from 5-FU's toxic effects without loss of antitumor effect is uridine. 95 A study was
conducted involving 29 patients with advanced malignancies who received N-phosphoracetyl-disodium L-aspartic acid (PALA) and methotrexate, each at 250 mg/m2,
followed 24 hours later by increasing doses of 5-FU (600 to 750 mg/m 2), with a leucovorin rescue and uridine rescue for a 72-hour infusion. The uridine allowed dose
escalation of 5-FU to 750 mg/m 2, with a decrease in all toxicities of the 5-FU except mucositis, which remained as the only significant chemotherapy-induced toxic
effect. 96 Perhaps additional studies with oral uridine will reveal a reduction of the toxicity from mucositis.
A pilot study using propantheline, an anticholinergic agent that causes xerostomia, was performed to test whether the incidence of mucositis could be reduced when
patients received etoposide. 97 It was hypothesized that the mucosal toxicity might be related to salivary excretion of etoposide after its systemic administration.
Propantheline or placebo was given to 12 patients. The results revealed a decrease in the incidence and severity of mucositis in the patients who received the
propantheline. 97
CRYOTHERAPY
Cryotherapy, in the form of ice chips and flavored ice pops, has been used to prevent mucositis. The NCCTG and the Mayo Clinic undertook a controlled, randomized
trial of oral cryotherapy for preventing 5-FU-induced mucositis and found that cryotherapy is helpful in reducing the severity of 5-FU-induced mucositis. 98,99 After this
study had been completed, another was undertaken in which patients were randomized to receive 30 minutes versus 60 minutes of cryotherapy. 100 A total of 178
evaluable patients were studied. Both cryotherapy groups had similar degrees of mucositis. The conclusion was to continue to recommend the use of 30 minutes of
oral cryotherapy for patients receiving bolus intensive courses of 5-FU-based chemotherapy. 100 An additional study, conducted after the original study reported by the
NCCTG and the Mayo Clinic, once again confirmed that oral cryotherapy can reduce 5-FU-induced mucositis. 101
LASER
Laser as a palliative methodology for mucositis has only recently begun to be investigated. The potential for lesion and pain control using laser was initially studied in
an animal model. In a study of four groups of animals having a mucosal lesion, three groups received impulse laser exposure from 60 to 600 pulses, and one group
remained untreated. 102 The only group that demonstrated more rapid resolution of the mucosal lesion (14 vs. 21 to 25 days) was the group that received the 600
pulsed exposures.
A preliminary report revealed that laser may be beneficial in reducing the severity and duration of mucositis. A study involving 20 patients, all having different cancers
and chemotherapeutic protocols, who served as the controls and 16 patients who composed the treatment group and received laser revealed reduced duration of the
mucosal lesions, from a mean of 19.3 days in the control arm to 8.1 days in the treatment arm. 103 At this time, double-blind, randomized trials are needed to verify
these earlier reports.
ANESTHETIC COCKTAILS
Several anesthetic cocktails, made up of agents such as viscous lidocaine (Xylocaine) or dyclonine hydrochloride, have been used with some success. 104 The
anesthetic agents relieve the patient's pain, but this relief is temporary and also prevents taste perception, which can further interfere with food intake. Other
analgesics and mucosal coating agents that can control pain include kaolin-pectin, diphenhydramine, Orabase, and Oratect Gel. In a prospective, double-blinded
study involving 18 patients, viscous lidocaine with cocaine 1%, dyclonine hydrochloride 1%, kaolin-pectin solution, diphenhydramine, and saline solution were
compared with a placebo. The dyclonine hydrochloride 1% provided the most pain relief, whereas dyclonine hydrochloride with viscous lidocaine and cocaine 1%
provided the longest pain relief. 105 Even though clinicians use many of the topical agents, little experimental evidence exists to establish the efficacy of many of
them.106
CAPSAICIN
Capsaicin, the active ingredient in chili peppers, is a remedy that has been used for many different pain syndromes through the years and that may prove beneficial
for mucositis pain induced by chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Several studies support the medical efficacy of locally applied capsaicin in a cream vehicle in
neuropathic pain syndromes. A large, multicenter trial involving 277 patients demonstrated that topically applied capsaicin used for up to 8 weeks significantly
reduced pain and improved quality of life in both postherpetic neuralgia and diabetic neuropathy. 107,108 and 109 Other neuropathic pain syndromes for which capsaicin
has been shown to be effective include postmastectomy pain, 110 stump pain,111 trigeminal neuralgia, 112 reflex sympathetic dystrophy,113 and Guillain-Barré
syndrome.114 Topical capsaicin has also been shown to decrease the pain associated with rheumatoid and osteoarthritis, 115 and intranasal capsaicin spray has been
shown to reduce the pain associated with cluster headaches. 116 Topical capsaicin has been shown to improve the rate of reepithelialization of wound healing in
minipigs; thus, it may prove to be efficacious in wound healing in humans. 117
In a pilot project, capsaicin in a candy vehicle (cayenne pepper candy) was given to patients with therapy-induced mucositis. Patients were instructed to allow the
candy to dissolve in the mouth without chewing it. After the candy had dissolved, the burn produced by the candy was allowed to fade. The patients rated their pain
before and after eating the candy. The reduction in pain was highly statistically significant. 10,11 A double-blinded, placebo-controlled study is under way to test the
efficacy of oral capsaicin for pain control.
NARCOTICS
Many of the agents previously mentioned may have some value in preventing mucositis or palliating the pain; however, very few controlled clinical trials have
established their efficacy. At present, no standard treatment has been defined for the prevention or treatment of mucositis. When mucositis is severe and interferes
with nutritional intake and quality of life, it is appropriate to use any of the treatments that have already been cited, as well as oral, transmucosal or, if necessary,
parenteral narcotics. Currently, a study is under way to investigate the usefulness of transmucosal fentanyl (Actiq) in the treatment of mucositis ( Table 55.2-6). A
recent article also reported on the successful use of topical opioids (morphine 0.08% gel, prepared with taste supplements) in treating oral mucositis in a patient who
was terminally ill. 118 To discover an efficacious treatment, it is essential to continue studies of the treatments already available and to develop any promising new
approaches.

TABLE 55.2-6. Formulary of Common Remedies for Oral Complications

ORAL COMPLICATIONS IN RADIOTHERAPY
Before one can discuss orofacial pain, one must understand the nature and necessity of a comprehensive dental examination and how its data interfaces with the
treatment regimen. In accordance with the guidelines developed by the National Institutes of Health, 119 it is supremely important that the oncology patient be managed
by a team. We recommend that a Preventive Dental Oncology Service be established for identification and management of patients receiving head and neck
oncologic surgery, irradiation, and or chemotherapy. The objective of the Preventive Dental Oncology Service program is to evaluate the oncology patient for intraoral
problems as related to the specific surgery, radiotherapy, or chemotherapy and to formulate a treatment plan for resolution of the intraoral symptoms associated with
therapy.
Radiotherapy for the oncology patient carries a significant risk of mucositis. However, the long-term effects of the radiation are of greater concern to the clinical team
than is the transient mucositis. The decrease in the numbers of osteocytes and the concomitant loss of vascularity in the maxillary or mandibular treatment fields
precludes bone healing in the event of osseous surgery after therapy. The impaired, retarded, or nonhealing wound presents as an osteoradionecrosis (ORN), which
requires specific management protocols (i.e., hyperbaric oxygen and intravenous antibiotics followed by osseous resection and additional hyperbaric oxygen and
intravenous antibiotics). Second to the treatment of mucositis is xerostomia.
XEROSTOMIA
Xerostomia is a complex phenomenon that cannot be attributed to radiation damage to the salivary glands alone. To understand xerostomia and the radiotherapy
patient more fully, one must review the mechanisms behind saliva production. Secretion of saliva is subject to reflex stimulation of not only a physical but of a psychic
nature. 120 Physical stimulation of the salivary gland originates in the taste buds. The psychic stimulation of the salivary glands is via the sensory nerve receptors.
Xerostomia presents with a twofold pathogenesis. First, the lack of a wetting medium reduces the ability of the chemoreceptors on the dorsum of the tongue and the
palate to accept the stimuli presented with foods or liquids. This loss of physical stimulation (chemical) fails to trigger the neurogenic response to the salivary gland
and the anticipated salivary response never occurs. The minimal, thickened, mucinous saliva produced by the affected glands coats the mucosa of the cheeks,
tongue, and palate, forming an effective barrier that prevents physical contact of the taste buds by the dietary substances (chemophores) and diminishes the physical
response to thermal and mechanical stimulation. The cumulative result of being unable to stimulate the taste buds physically has a direct corresponding effect on the
psychic component of salivary gland secretions. Histopathologically, the mucosa on the dorsum of the tongue appears atrophied, the end result of which is decreased
surface area on the taste buds.
In the xerostomic patient, the clinician notices a significant loss of appetite that occurs concomitantly with mucositis. The role of xerostomia, and not merely stomatitis,
in weight loss must not be discounted. When the physical component of salivary stimulation is denigrated by mechanical (mucous) barriers, the anticipated taste
sensation associated with specific food groups is altered. If the patient no longer can perceive what should be sour or sweet, he or she will be unable to elicit the
correct sensory response through the neurogenic paths; consequently, the second component of salivary stimulation, the visual component, becomes ineffective and
the xerostomia is exacerbated further. When patients no longer can achieve the sensory gratification normally associated with specific food groups, dietary intake
decreases and weight loss becomes a significant factor in continuation of therapy. With the decrease of salivary enzymes necessary for the initial stages of digestion,
a third factor presents itself in the weight loss arena—namely, inability to assimilate dietary nutrients efficiently. Xerostomia is compounded by other factors such as
antidepressant therapy, diabetes, interstitial nephritis, aging, postmenopausal syndromes, antihypertensives, and diuretics. Vitamin A and nicotinic acid deficiencies
also can affect salivary secretions.
The management of xerostomia is complex, requiring attention to the patient's medical history for drug interaction, provision of a diet that both physically and
psychologically is able to stimulate the salivary responses, maintenance of excellent oral hygiene to provide physical access to the taste receptors, and monitoring of
the vitamin A and nicotinic acid levels for deficiencies. Increased intake of nicotinic acid and vitamin A on a specific, monitored response-to-dose program can be
effective in increasing saliva flow. Mechanical débridement of the dorsum of the tongue with a soft toothbrush and the use of a spray mister before and during meals
assists in maintaining access to taste buds.
Early clinical pilot studies by Fox et al. 121 and Greenspan and Daniels 122 indicated that low doses of oral pilocarpine reduced radiation-induced xerostomia. Recently,
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial by Johnson et al. 123 found that pilocarpine improved saliva production and relieved symptoms of xerostomia after
irradiation for cancer of the head and neck, with minor side effects that were predominantly limited to sweating.
A randomized, controlled trial of standard fractionated radiation with or without amifostine (Ethyol), administered at 200 mg/m 2 as a 3-minute IV infusion 15 to 30
minutes before each fraction of radiation, was conducted in 315 patients with head and neck cancer. Patients were required to have at least 75% of both parotid
glands in the radiation field. The incidence of grade 2 or higher acute xerostomia (90 days from the start of radiotherapy) and late xerostomia (9 to 12 months after
radiotherapy), as assessed by the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group Acute and Late Morbidity Scoring Criteria, was significantly reduced in patients receiving
Ethyol. At 1 year after radiotherapy, whole saliva collection after irradiation showed that more patients given Ethyol produced 0.1 g of saliva (72% vs. 49%). In
addition, the median saliva production at 1 year was higher in those patients who received Ethyol (0.26 g vs. 0.1 g). Stimulated saliva collections did not show a
difference between treatment arms. These improvements in saliva production were supported by the patients' subjective responses to a questionnaire regarding oral
dryness.124
With effective management of xerostomia, the thickened mucinous film that accumulates on the mucosa of the tongue, floor of mouth, palate, and buccal folds is
eliminated. With this simple maintenance step that can be managed by the patient or support staff, a significant reduction in bacterial volume is achieved, which, in
turn, will reduce the incidence of mucositis significantly. When xerostomia is not controlled, significant plaque and material will accumulate on the surfaces of
prosthetic appliances. This bacterial film can contribute to denture irritation that will compound therapy-related mucositis and can lead to fenestration of the supporting
mucosa and development of an osteonecrosis in the posttreatment patient. When xerostomia is not monitored or controlled, the clinical team can anticipate heavy
plaque accumulation on the surfaces of the teeth. This plaque film is highly cariogenic and ultimately will cause dental complications involving the teeth (decay) and
the supporting tissue (gingivitis and periodontitis). Patients with high plaque indices will not benefit from anticariogenic treatment using fluoride applicators, because
the plaque is an effective barrier against fluoride absorption. It must be assumed that the elevated plaque matrix resulting from xerostomia poses the greatest risk in
the postradiotherapy morbidity of ORN.
Because of this risk of ORN, it will be necessary for the clinical team not only to assess a patient's pretreatment periodontal health but also to query the patient
regarding his or her intent to maintain adequate oral hygiene. If a patient is not psychologically prepared to play a role in his or her oral hygiene or if a patient is
physically or mentally impaired and unable to manage an appropriate personal oral hygiene program, it will be prudent to consider oral surgery to remove all high-risk
teeth, as a preventive measure. Amputation of a patient's dentition is a serious irreversible step and must be thoroughly planned by all members of the clinical team
before proceeding.
From the dental examination, diagnostic models, and radiographs obtained before radiotherapy or chemotherapy, high-risk teeth can be identified and treated
restoratively or surgically. The therapy team must recognize and identify teeth and other bone anatomy aberrations that would require posttreatment surgery. Because

of the reduction in the vascular network and the permanent alteration of osteocytes in the bone in the treatment ports, it will be necessary to perform all prospective
surgeries before the initiation of radiotherapy. This will minimize the potential for ORN in cases in which an operation must be performed after radiotherapy has been
completed.
High-risk teeth and bone can be summarized as impacted third molars (both bony and soft tissue); teeth in which periodontal disease has been diagnosed and that
will require mucosal flap surgery for treatment; unrestored endodontically treated teeth that are at high risk for traumatic fracture; teeth that have been surgically
removed, endodontically treated, and reimplanted; teeth restored with dental implants; and teeth with root resorption secondary to orthodontic therapy.
Supernumerary teeth and ossifications must also be evaluated.
After the dentition has been restored and appropriate surgeries have been completed, vacuum-formed vinyl fluoride applicators are made for home-care fluoride
application. These applicators provide two functions: First, they help to prevent xerostomia-induced dental caries through fluoride induction into the tooth enamel and
dentin. Second, the increased ambient fluoride levels on the tooth surface and the residual fluoride that remains in the oral cavity after each fluoride application
reduces the level of oral bacteria and assists in microbial prophylaxis, which aids in the reduction of mucositis. In general, 0.04% stannous fluoride gel appears to be
more effective than sodium fluoride 1.1%, as it reduces the levels of Streptococcus mutans, which causes caries.125 In the use of fluoride applicators, Shenep et al. 125
recommend that a 0.04% stannous fluoride gel be placed into the applicators and that these be placed on the teeth and allowed to remain there for 3 minutes. After 3
minutes, the applicators should be removed and the excess fluoride expectorated, and the patient should not be allowed to rinse, eat, or drink for 30 minutes. For the
week before initiation and for weeks 1 and 2 of radiotherapy, we recommend using the fluoride three times daily. This is in anticipation that we may discontinue
fluoride therapy during the third, fourth, and fifth weeks of radiotherapy. For the first 3 months after radiotherapy, we recommend twice-daily fluoride. After 3 months
and a thorough dental assessment, if the plaque indices are below 5%, we will maintain the patient on once-daily fluoride maintenance for life.
Before beginning radiotherapy, a protective radiation stent is fabricated. These stents are used during the radiotherapeutic sessions for all patients who have natural
dentition. The purpose of the stents is to eliminate soft tissue contact with the surfaces of large dental restorations, thereby eliminating the secondary electron scatter
from radiotherapy that will cause significant localized mucositis.
From the diagnostic examination and radiographs, the practitioner must ascertain whether the patient undergoing radiotherapy has had dental implants placed for
prosthetic rehabilitation. Oral implantology is rapidly becoming commonplace in the prosthetic rehabilitation of missing teeth, support for cleft palate obturators, and
support for facial muloges and prostheses. If it has been determined that implants are present, the dental oncologist must be prepared to fabricate the appropriate
radiation shields and blocks to protect the areas of the bone supporting the implants, to minimize increased radiation dosimetry in those portions of the mandible or
maxilla.
Keus et al. 126 reported on the effect of customized beam shaping on normal tissue complications in radiotherapy for parotid gland tumors. They evaluated a
customized beam's-eye view as opposed to unblocked portals with field sizes defined by the largest target contour found in any computed tomographic slice and
found that the volume of unnecessary exposed normal tissue that received more than 90% of the prescribed dose was reduced by a factor of 4% to 44%, on average,
when the volume is expressed as a percentage of the target volume in each patient. For a tumor dose of 70 Gy, the average bone necrosis probability was reduced
from 8.4% to 4.1%.
As regards patients with extensive implanted, supported, fixed or fixed removable prostheses, a very large volume of gold alloy is used in the fixed prostheses and in
the framework of the fixed removable prostheses. For patients with dental implants, removal of the detachable portions of the prosthesis should be completed before
radiotherapy, and beam-shaping blocks should be fabricated by the prosthodontist for protection of the mandible containing the titanium implant fixture. These
precautions are necessary to reduce the risk of radiation-induced ORN.
OSTEORADIONECROSIS
ORN carries the greatest morbidity in any radiotherapy program involving osseous tissue. ORN is not an infection but nonhealing, acellular, avascular bone that may
have been present for months or years before becoming clinically evident. Continuous monitoring of the radiotherapy patient by the dental oncologist on a 3-month
recall basis is appropriate. This recall schedule will allow for evaluation of the plaque indices, monitoring of fluoride compliance, and maintenance of developing
dental disease. Even with the best of diagnosis, planning, and staging, an osteonecrosis can develop spontaneously. Early osteonecrotic changes are subtle and
difficult to detect. In many instances, ORN presents as asymptomatic dehiscence in the mucosa. As the necrosis progresses, the site can become more erythematous
and painful. At this stage, it is not uncommon for the clinician to misdiagnose the signs as a minor infection and to place the patient on a regimen of antibiotics, which
will minimize the symptoms but allow the necrosis to continue to progress. If teeth are present, the clinical symptoms are mobility, minimal to moderate pain, and
ectopic eruption. In the early stages, routine dental radiographs are insufficient to provide an accurate diagnosis. As the necrosis advances, extraoral fistulas and
intraoral antral fistulas will develop. Eventually, occlusion pathology becomes evident and, in many cases, pathologic fractures will occur.
Early definitive diagnosis using computed tomographic scans, dentiscans, bone density studies, and magnetic resonance imaging will aid in determining the extent of
the necrosis so that a surgical template can be made. In very small, isolated, solitary lesions of less than 0.5 cm, surgical exposure and cautious débridement along
with appropriate prophylactic antibiotics may suffice. This seldom is the case with ORN and, if remission and healing are not evident within the first 8 weeks,
presurgical and postsurgical hyperbaric oxygen, intravenous antibiotics, and radical excision of the necrotic avascular bone will be necessary.
Myers and Marx127 reported on the use of hyperbaric oxygen, which stimulates angiogenesis, leading to increased neovascularization and optimization of cellular
levels of oxygen for osteoblast and fibroblast proliferation, collagen formation, and support of ingrowing blood vessels. The hypoxic, acellular matrix in the
postirradiated field is changed to a hypercellular, hyperoxic or normally oxygenated situation. Oxygen is used as an adjunct to appropriate surgical intervention; by
use of these two modalities in combination, the salvage rate for ORN and its complications of orocutaneous fistula, pathologic fractures, and severe bone loss can be
increased dramatically. 127

CONCLUSION
With accurate pretherapeutic diagnosis, appropriate treatment planning, and therapeutic staging by all members of the clinical team, the incidence of ORN and other
oral complications can be minimized or eliminated. The medicolegal accountability, if such pretreatment protocols are not in place, is significant and economically
devastating. For no reason should a patient be denied a thorough, comprehensive examination followed by a well-formulated and well-staged treatment plan. In
summary, a total team effort is mandatory for the standard of care necessary to provide the oncology patient with a comprehensive treatment plan that encompasses
all medical and dental health and rehabilitation issues.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Sonis ST. Oral complications of cancer therapy. In DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: Principles and practice of oncology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1993:2385.
2. Sonis ST. Oral complications of cancer therapy. In DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: Principles and practice of oncology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1993:2389.
3. Peterson DE, Ambrosio JA. Diagnosis and management of acute and chronic oral complications of nonsurgical cancer therapies. Dent Clin North Am 1992;36:945.
4. Sonis ST. Oral complications of cancer therapy. In DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: Principles and practice of oncology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1993:2385.
5. Sonis S, Clark J. Prevention and management of oral mucositis induced by antineoplastic therapy. Oncology 1991;5:11.
6. Sonis ST. Mucositis as a biological process: a new hypothesis for the development of chemotherapy-induced stomatotoxicity. Oral Oncol 1998;34(1):39.
7. Wilkes JD. Prevention and treatment of oral mucositis following cancer chemotherapy. Semin Oncol 1998;25:538.
8. Dodd MJ, Miaskowski C, Shiba GH, et al. Risk factors for chemotherapy-induced oral mucositis: dental appliances, oral hygiene, previous oral lesion, and a history of smoking. Cancer Invest
1999;17(4):278.
9. Sloan JA, Loprinzi CL, Novotny PJ, et al. Sex differences in fluorouracil-induced stomatitis. J Clin Oncol 2000;18(2):412.
10. Berger AM, Henderson M, Nadoolman W, et al. Oral capsaicin provides temporary relief for oral mucositis pain secondary to chemotherapy/radiation therapy. J Pain Symptom Manage
1995;10(3):243.
11. Berger AM, Bartoshuk LM, Duffy VB, et al. Capsaicin for the treatment of oral mucositis pain. Principles Pract Oncol 1995;9:1.
12. Oken MM, Creech RH, Tormey DC, et al. Toxicity and response criteria of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Am J Clin Oncol 1982;5:649.
13. Sonis ST, Eilers JP, Epstein JB. Validation of a new scoring system for the assessment of clinical trial research of oral mucositis induced by radiation or chemotherapy. Cancer
1999;85(10):2103.
14. Conference C. Oral complications of cancer therapies: diagnosis, prevention and treatment. Conn Med 1989;53:595.
15. Nagashima R, Hirano T. Selective binding of sucralfate to ulcer lesion: I. Experiments in rats with acetic acidinduced gastric ulcer receiving unlabeled sucralfate. Arzneimittelforschung
1980;30:80.
16. Nagashima R, Yoshida N, Terao N. Sucralfate, a basic aluminum salt of sucrose sulfate II. Inhibition of peptic hydrolysis as it results from sucrose sulfate interaction with protein substrate,

serum albumins. Arzneimittelforschung 1979;29:73.
17. Ferraro JM, Mattern J. Sucralfate suspension for stomatitis. Drug Intel Clin Pharm 1984;18:153.
18. Solomon MA. Oral sucralfate suspension for mucositis. N Engl J Med 1986;315:459.
19. Ferraro JM, Mattern J. Sucralfate suspension for stomatitis [Letter]. Drug Intel Clin Pharm 1984;18:153.
20. Ferraro JM, Mattern J. Sucralfate suspension for mouth ulcers [Letter]. Drug Intel Clin Pharm 1985;19:480.
21. Pfeiffer P, Madsen EL, Hansen O, et al. Effect of prophylactic sucralfate suspension on stomatitis induced by cancer chemotherapy. A randomized, double-blind cross-over study. Acta Oncol
1990;29:171.
22. Shenep JL, Kalwihsky D, Hudson PR, et al. Oral sucralfate in chemotherapy-induced mucositis. J Pediatr 1988;113:753.
23. Loprinzi CL, Ghosh C, Camoriani J, et al. Phase III controlled evaluation of sucralfate to alleviate stomatitis in patients receiving fluorouracil-based chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1235.
24. Scherlacher A, Beaufort-Spontin E. Radiotherapy of head-neck neoplasms: prevention of inflammation of the mucosa by sucralfate treatment. HNO 1990;38:24.
25. Pfeiffer P, Hansen O, Madsen EL, et al. A prospective pilot study on the effect of sucralfate mouth-swishing in reducing stomatitis during radiotherapy of the oral cavity. Acta Oncol
1990;29:471.
26. Epstein JB, Wong FLW. The efficacy of sucralfate suspension in the prevention of oral mucositis due to radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;28:693.
27. Barker G, Loftus L, Cuddy P, et al. The effects of sucralfate suspension and diphenhydramine syrup plus kaolin-pectin on radiotherapy-induced mucositis. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
1991;71:288.
28. Cohen MM, Clark L. Preventing acetylsalicylic acid damage to human gastric mucosa by the use of prostaglandin E 2. Can J Surg 1983;26:116.
29. Ericksson B, Johansson C, Aly A. Prostaglandin E 2 for chronic leg ulcers. Lancet 1986;1:905.
30. Kuhrer I, Kuzmits R, Linkesch W, et al. Topical PGE 2 enhances healing of chemotherapy-associated mucosal lesions. Lancet 1986;1:623.
31. Porteder H, Rausch E, Kment G, et al. Local prostaglandin E 2 in patients with oral malignancies undergoing chemo and radiotherapy. J Craniomaxillofac Surg 1988;16:371.
32. Matejka M, Nell A, Kment G, et al. Local benefit of prostaglandin E 2 in radiochemotherapy-induced oral mucositis. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1990;28:89.
33. Labor B, Mrsic M, Pavleric A, et al. Prostaglandin E 2 for prophylaxis of oral mucositis following BMT. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;11:379.
34. Epstein JB, Stevenson-Moore P. Benzydamine hydrochloride in prevention and management of pain in mucositis associated with radiation therapy. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
1986;62:145.
35. Epstein JB, Stevenson-Moore P, Jackson S, et al. Prevention of oral mucositis in radiation therapy: a controlled study with benzydamine hydrochloride rinse. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1989;16:1571.
36. Lever SA, Dupuis LL, Chan SL. Comparative evaluation of benzydamine oral rinse in children with antineoplastic-induced stomatitis. Drug Intel Clin Pharm 1987;21:359.
37. Pillsbury HC, Webster WP, Rosenman J. Prostaglandin inhibitor and radiotherapy in advanced head and neck cancer. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1986;112:552.
38. Abdelaal AS, Barker DS, Fergusson MM. Treatment for irradiation-induced mucositis. Lancet 1987;1:97.
39. Rothwell BR, Speltor WS. Palliation of radiation-related mucositis. Spec Care Dentistry 1990;10:21.
40. Starasoler S, Haber GS. Use of vitamin E oil in primary herpes gingivostomatitis in an adult. NY State Dentistry 1978;44:382.
41. Tampo Y, Yonaha M. Vitamin E and glutathione are required for preservation of microsomal glutathione S-transferase from oxidative stress in microsomes. Pharmacology 1990;66:259.
42. Regan V, Servinova E, Packer L. Antioxidant effects of ubiquinones in microsomes and mitochondria are mediated by tocopherol recycling. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1990;169:851.
43. Wadleigh RG, Redman RS, Graham Ml, et al. Vitamin E in the treatment of chemo-induced mucositis. Am J Med 1992;92:481.
44. Osaki T, Ueta E, Yoneda K, et al. Prophylaxis of oral mucositis associated with chemoradiotherapy for oral carcinoma by Azelastine hydrochloride with other antioxidants. Head Neck
1994;16:331.
45. Garewal HS, Meyskens F. Retinoids and carcinoids in the prevention of oral cancer. A critical appraisal. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1992;1:155.
46. Mills EE. The modifying effect of beta-carotene on radiation and chemotherapy induced oral mucositis. Br J Cancer 1988;57:416.
47. Maciejewski B, Zajusz A, Pilecki B, et al. Acute mucositis in the stimulated oral mucosa of patients during radiotherapy for head and neck cancer. Radiother Oncol 1991;22:7.
48. Dorr W, Jacubek A, Kummermehr J, et al. Effects of stimulated repopulation on oral mucositis during conventional radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol 1995;37:100.
49. Carl W, Emrich LS. Management of oral mucositis during local radiation and systemic chemotherapy. A study of 98 patients. J Prosthet Dent 1991;66:361.
50. Fidler P, Loprinzi CL, Lee JK, et al. A randomized clinical trial of chamomile mouthwash for prevention of 5-FU-induced oral mucositis. Cancer 1996;77:522.
51. Oshitani T, Okada K, Kushima T, et al. Clinical evaluation of sodium alginate on oral mucositis associated with radiotherapy. J Jpn Soc Cancer Ther 1990;25:1129.
52. Lieschke GT, Ramenghi U, O'Connor MP, et al. Studies of oral neutrophil levels in patients receiving G-CSF after autologous marrow transplantation. Br J Haematol 1992;82:589.
53. Gabrilove JL, Jakubowski A, Scher H, et al. Effect of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor on neutropenia and associated morbidity due to chemotherapy for transitional-cell carcinoma of the
urothelium. N Engl J Med 1988;318:1414.
54. Bronchud MH, Howell A, Crowther D, et al. The use of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor to increase the intensity of treatment with doxorubicin in patients with advanced breast and ovarian
cancer. Br J Cancer 1989;60:121.
55. Pettengell R, Gurney H, Radford JA, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor to prevent dose-limiting neutropenia in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a randomized controlled trial. Blood
1992;80:1430.
56. Chi KH, Chen CH, Chan WK, et al. Effect of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor on oral mucositis in head and neck cancer patients after cisplatin, fluorouracil, and leucovorin. J
Clin Oncol 1995;13:2620.
57. Atkinson K, Biggs JC, Downs K, et al. GM-CSF after allogeneic bone marrow transplantationaccelerated recovery of neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes. Aust NZ J Med 1991;21:686.
58. Game SM, Stone A, Scully C, et al. Tumour progression in experimental oral carcinogenesis is associated with changes in EGF and TGF-beta receptor expression and altered responses to
those growth factors. Carcinogenesis 1990;11:965.
59. Sundqvist K, Liu Y, Arvidson K, et al. Growth regulation of serum free cultures of epithelial cells from normal human buccal mucosa. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol 1991;27A:562.
60. Maccini DM, Veit BC. Salivary epidermal growth factor in patients with and without acid peptic disease. Am J Gastroenterol 1990;85:1102.
61. Sonis ST, Costa JW Jr, Evitts SM, et al. Effect of epidermal growth factor on ulcerative mucositis in hamsters that receive cancer chemotherapy. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1992;74:749.
62. Sonis ST, Tracey C, Shklar G, et al. An animal model for mucositis induced by cancer chemotherapy. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1990;69:437.
63. Sonis ST, Lindquist L, Vugt V, et al. Prevention of chemotherapy-induced ulcerative mucositis by TGF-b3. Cancer Res 1994;54:1135.
64. Spijkervet FK, Sonis ST. New frontiers in the management of chemotherapy-induced mucositis. Curr Opin Oncol 1998;10[Suppl 1]:S23.
65. Zaghloul MS, Dorie MJ, Kallman RF, et al. Interleukin 1 increases thymidine labeling index of normal tissue of mice, not the tumor. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:805.
66. Sonis ST, Lindquist L, Vugt V, et al. Alteration in the frequency, severity, and duration of chemotherapy-induced mucositis in hamsters by interleukin-11. Eur J Cancer 1995;31B:261.
67. Sonis S, Edwards L, Lucey C. The biological basis for the attenuation of mucositis: the example of interleukin-11. Leukemia 1999;13:831.
68. Ferretti AG, Raybould TP, Brown AT, et al. Chlorhexidine prophylaxis for chemotherapy and radiotherapy-induced stomatitis: a randomized double-blind trial. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
1990;69:1331.
69. Wahlin BY. Effects of chlorhexidine mouthrinse on oral health in patients with acute leukemia. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1989;68:279.
70. Weisdorf DJ, Bostrom B, Raether D, et al. Oropharyngeal mucositis complicating bone marrow transplantation: prognostic factors and the effect of chlorhexidine mouth rinse. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1989;4:89.
71. Epstein JB, Vickais L, Spinelli J, et al. Efficacy of chlorhexidine and nystatin rinses in prevention of oral complications in leukemia and bone marrow transplantation. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
Pathol 1992;73:682.
72. Ferretti AG, Raybould TP, Brown AT, et al. Chlorhexidine prophylaxis for chemotherapy and radiotherapy-induced stomatitis: a randomized double-blind trial. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
1990;69:1331.
73. Spijkervet FKL, Saene HKF, Panders AK, et al. Effect of chlorhexidine rinsing on the oropharyngeal ecology in patients with head and neck cancer who have irradiation mucositis. Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol 1989;67:154.
74. Foote RL, Loprinzi CL, Frank AR, et al. Randomized trial of a chlorhexidine mouthwash for alleviation of radiation-induced mucositis. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2630.
75. Spijkervet FK, Saene HK, van Saene JJ, et al. Effect of selective elimination of the oral flora on mucositis in irradiated head and neck cancer patients. J Surg Oncol 1991;46:167.
76. Loury DJ, Embree JR, Steinberg DA. Effect of local application of the antimicrobial peptide IB-367 on the incidence and severity of oral mucositis in hamsters. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
Oral Radiol Endod 1999;87:544.
77. Epstein JB, Vickais L, Spinelli J, et al. Efficacy of chlorhexidine and nystatin rinses in prevention of oral complications in leukemia and bone marrow transplantation. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
Pathol 1992;73:682.
78. Barrett AP. A long-term prospective clinical study of oral complications during conventional chemotherapy for acute leukemia. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1987;63:313.
79. DeGregorio MW, Lee WMF, Linker CA, et al. Fungal infections in patients with acute leukemia. Am J Med 1982;73:543.
80. Bender JF, Schimpff SC, Young VM, et al. A comparative trial of tobramycin vs gentamicin in combination with vancomycin and nystatin for alimentary tract suppression in leukemic patients.
Eur J Cancer 1979;15:35.
81. Barrett AP. Evaluation of nystatin in prevention and elimination of oropharyngeal Candida in immunosuppressed patients. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1984;58:148.
82. William C, Whitehouse JMA, Lister TA, et al. Oral anticandidal prophylaxis in patients undergoing chemotherapy for acute leukemia. Med Pediatr Oncol 1977;3:275.
83. Carpentieri V, Haggard ME, Lockhart LH, et al. Clinical experience in prevention of candidiasis by nystatin in children with acute lymphocytic leukemia. J Pediatr 1978;92:593.
84. Hann IM, Prentice HG, Corringham R, et al. Ketoconazole versus nystatin plus amphotericin B for fungal prophylaxis in severely immunocompromised patients. Lancet 1982;1:826.
85. Schwartz PM, Dunigan JM, Marsh JC, et al. Allopurinol modification of the toxicity and antitumor activity of 5-fluorouracil. Cancer Res 1980;40:1885.
86. Clark PI, Selvin ML. Allopurinol mouthwash and 5-fluorouracil-induced oral toxicity. Eur J Surg Oncol 1985;11:267.
87. Tsavaris N, Caraglauris P, Kosmidus P. Reduction of oral toxicity of 5-fluorouracil by allopurinol mouthwashes. Eur J Surg Oncol 1988;14:405.
88. Loprinzi CI, Cianflone SG, Dose AM, et al. A controlled evaluation of an allopurinol mouthwash as prophylaxis against 5-fluorouracil induced stomatitis. Cancer 1990;65:1879.
89. Lee JS, Murphy WK, Shirinian MH, et al. Alleviation by leucovorin of the dose-limiting toxicity of edatrexate: potential for improved therapeutic efficacy. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1991;28:199.
90. Ackland SP, Schilsky RL. High-dose methotrexate: a critical reappraisal. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:2017.
91. Oliff A, Bleyer WA, Poplack DG. Methotrexate-induced oral mucositis and salivary methotrexate concentrations. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1979;2:225.
92. Fox AD, Kripke SA, Depaula JA, et al. Effect of a glutamine supplemented enteral diet on methotrexate-induced enterocolitis. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1988;12:325.
93. O'Dwyer ST, Scott T, Smith RJ, et al. 5-Fluorouracil toxicity on small intestinal mucosa but not white blood cells is decreased by glutamine. Clin Res 1987;35:367A(abst).
94. Jebb SA, Osborne RJ, Maughan TS, et al. 5-Fluorouracil and folinic acidinduced mucositis: no effect of oral glutamine supplementation. Br J Cancer 1994;70:132.
95. Martin DS, Stolf RL, Sawyer RC, et al. High-dose 5-fluorouracil with delayed uridine rescue in mice. Cancer Res 1982;42:3964.
96. Seiter K, Kemeny N, Martin D, et al. Uridine allows dose escalation of 5-fluorouracil when given with N-phosphonacetyl- L-aspartate, methotrexate, and leucovorin. Cancer 1993;71(5):1875.
97. Ahmed T, Engelking C, Szalyga J, et al. Propantheline prevention of mucositis from etoposide. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:131.
98. Dose AM, Mahoud DJ, Loprinzi CL. A controlled trial of oral cryotherapy for preventing stomatitis in patients receiving 5-fluorouracil plus leucovorin. A North Central Cancer Treatment Group
and Mayo Clinic Study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;9:1242.
99. Mahoud DJ, Dose AM, Loprinzi CL, et al. Inhibition of fluorouracil-induced stomatitis by oral cryotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:449.
100. Rocke LK, Loprinzi CL, Lee JK, et al. A randomized clinical trial of two different durations of oral cryotherapy for prevention of 5-fluorouracil-related stomatitis. Cancer 1993;72(7):2234.
101. Cascinu S, Fedeli A, Fedeli SL, et al. Oral cooling (cryotherapy), an effective treatment for the prevention of 5-fluorouracil-induced stomatitis. Oral Oncol Eur J Cancer 1994; 30(4):234.
102. Bugai EP, Saprykina VA, Vakhtin VI, et al. The effect of light from a low intensity impulse laser on the processes of experimental inflammation and regeneration in the oral mucosa.
Stomatologiia 1991;2:6.

103. Pourreau-Schneider N, Soudry M, Franquin JC, et al. Soft-laser therapy for iatrogenic mucositis in cancer patients receiving high-dose fluorouracil: a preliminary report. J Natl Cancer Inst
1992;84:358.
104. Poland J. Prevention and treatment of oral complications in the cancer patient. Oncology 1991;5:45.
105. Carnal SB, Blakeslee DB, Oswald SG, et al. Treatment of radiation- and chemotherapy-induced stomatitis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1990;102:326.
106. Miaskowski C. Management of mucositis during therapy. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1990;9:95.
107. Watson CPN, Evans RJ, Watt VR, et al. Post-herpetic neuralgia: 208 cases. Pain 1988;35:289.
108. Scheffler NM, Sheitel PL, Lipton MN. Treatment of painful diabetic neuropathy with capsaicin 0.075%. J Am Podiatr Med Assoc 1991;81:288.
109. Group CS. Treatment of painful diabetic neuropathy with topical capsaicin. A multicenter, double-blind, vehicle-controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:2225.
110. Watson CPN, Evans RJ, Watt VR. The post-mastectomy pain syndrome and the effect of topical capsaicin. Pain 1989;38:177.
111. Weintraub M, Golik A, Rubio A. Capsaicin for treatment of post-traumatic amputation stump pain. Lancet 1990;336:1003.
112. Fusco BM, Alessandri M. Analgesic effect of capsaicin in idiopathic trigeminal neuralgia. Anesth Analg 1992;74:375.
113. Cheshire WP, Snyder CR. Treatment of reflex sympathetic dystrophy with topical capsaicin: case report. Pain 1990;42:307.
114. Morgenlander JC, Hurwitz BJ, Massey EW. Capsaicin for the treatment of pain in Guillain-Barré syndrome. Ann Neurol 1990;28:199.
115. Deal CL, Schnitzer JJ, Lipstein E, et al. Treatment of arthritis with topical capsaicin. A double-blind trial. Clin Ther 1991;13:383.
116. Sicuteri F, Fusco BM, Marabini S. Beneficial effect of capsaicin application to the nasal mucosa in cluster headache. Clin J Pain 1989;5:49.
117. Watcher MA, Wheeland RG. The role of topical agents in the healing of full-thickness wounds. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 1989;15:1188.
118. Krajnik M, Zylicz Z, Finlay I, et al. Potential uses of topical opioids in palliative carereport of 6 cases. Pain 1999;80:121.
119. Conference C. Oral complications of cancer therapies: diagnosis, prevention and treatment. Conn Med 1989;53:595.
120. Thoma, Goldman. Oral pathology. St Louis: Mosby, 1960:892.
121. Fox PC, Atkinson JC, Macynski AA, et al. Pilocarpine treatment of salivary gland hypofunction and dry mouth (xerostomia). Arch Intern Med 1991;151:1149.
122. Greenspan D, Daniels TE. Effectiveness of pilocarpine in postradiation xerostomia. Cancer 1987;59:1123.
123. Johnson JT, Ferretti GA, Nethery J, et al. Oral pilocarpine for post-irradiation xerostomia in patients with head and neck cancer. N Engl J Med 1993;329:390.
124. Brizel DM, Wasserman TH, Strnad V, et al. Final report of a phase III randomized trial of amifostine as a radioprotectant in head and neck cancer. 41st annual meeting of the American Society
for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology. Texas, 1999 (abstract).
125. Shenep JL, Kalwihsky D, Hudson PR, et al. Oral sucralfate in chemotherapy-induced mucositis. J Pediatr 1988;113:758.
126. Keus R, Noach P, de Boer R, Lebesque J. The effect of customized beam shaping on normal tissue complications in radiation therapy of parotid gland tumors. Radiother Oncol 1991;21(3):211.
127. Myers RA, Marx RE. Uses of hyperbaric oxygen in postradiation head and neck surgery. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1990;9:151.

SECTION 55.3 Pulmonary Toxicity
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 55.3
Pulmonary Toxicity
DIANE E. STOVER
ROBERT J. KANER
Introduction
Radiation Induced Pulmonary Toxicity
Mechanism of Lung Injury
Histopathology
Clinical Features
Diagnosis
Treatment
Radiation-Related Bronchiolitis Obliterans With Organizing Pneumonia
Chemotherapy-Induced Pulmonary Toxicity
Mechanisms of Pulmonary Injury
Histopathology
Clinical Features
Diagnosis
Treatment
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Pulmonary disease can be caused by a wide spectrum of pathogenetic mechanisms in patients with cancer. These include a variety of infectious agents and
neoplastic disorders as well as pulmonary thromboembolic disease, pulmonary hemorrhage, pulmonary edema (cardiogenic and noncardiogenic), and leukocyte
agglutinin reactions. Pulmonary toxicity caused by antineoplastic agents is being recognized more frequently, and the number of drugs known or suspected to cause
lung disease is steadily increasing. Because continued use of the offending agent may cause death and because withholding the agent may result in resolution of the
pulmonary toxicity, it is important to recognize radiation- and drug-induced pulmonary disease. In this section, parenchymal lung disease caused by irradiation and
chemotherapy is discussed. Mechanisms of lung injury, histopathologic findings, clinical and laboratory features, and diagnosis and treatment of the abnormalities
produced by radiation therapeutic and chemotherapeutic agents are reviewed.

RADIATION-INDUCED PULMONARY TOXICITY
MECHANISM OF LUNG INJURY
Radiation can affect dividing and nondividing cells and can cause genetic and nongenetic damage. 1,2 In the lung, a hypothetical reconstruction of radiation injury might
be as follows: Therapeutic radiation may result in nongenetic damage that is apparent in all cells, but capillary endothelial and type I cells (epithelial lining cells)
appear to be most susceptible. 3 Many of these cells, whether dividing or not, undergo early necrobiosis and slough. The apoptotic pathway appears to be an important
mechanism of cellular destruction after radiation. Specific signal transduction pathways are activated by radiation, including sphingomyelin hydrolysis, which
generates ceramide as a second messenger and leads to apoptotic DNA degradation. 4 Nonlethal ionizing radiation also activates a stress response in cells, which
leads to up-regulation of specific nuclear transcription factors such as NF-kB and transcription of such specific early-response genes as c-abl, c-jun, Egr-1, and
c-fos.5,6 This cellular activation initiates a repair process that involves cytokines and growth factors such as basic fibroblast growth factor, 7 as well as interleukin-1 and
transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b). 8 Prostaglandin synthesis is also up-regulated. 9 Over time, capillaries regenerate, and the alveolar epithelium is repopulated by
type II cells (surfactant-producing cells), because type I pneumocytes do not regenerate. Some of these type II cells redifferentiate into type I cells. If the initial injury
is severe, extracellular matrix components of the lung, such as basement membrane glycoproteins and proteoglycans, are damaged. This can impede reconstruction
of the delicate three-dimensional structure of the alveolar-capillary unit and result in functional derangement and scar formation, even if the cellular components are
able to regenerate. Genetic damage to dividing cells, such as endothelial cells or type II pneumonocytes, can also occur. Depletion of these cells may result during
successive mitoses, causing a loss of integrity of pulmonary capillaries and exudation of fluid into the alveoli. At the physiologic level, loss of compliance, abnormal
gas exchange, and respiratory failure can occur owing to leakage of plasma proteins into the alveolar space. This type of genetic damage may also explain why
pneumonitis may be seen so late after radiation. One might speculate that some endothelial cells initially remain normal but that, in the course of the next four cell
divisions, chromosomal aberrations prevent further reduplication, which leads to loss of integrity of the capillary. 1
Certain factors are critical to the development of classic radiation pneumonitis. In general, damage to the lung increases as the volume of lung tissue irradiated
increases. There also appears to be a threshold effect, such that irradiation of at least 10% of the lung is required to produce significant pulmonary toxicity. 10 This
threshold may be reached in the treatment of some patients with breast cancer, depending on the specifics of their individualized treatment program. 10 Also, the toxic
effects of radiation, as measured by symptoms and signs, radiographic changes, and physiologic tests, are proportionate to the total amount delivered to the lung.
Radiation pneumonitis after a single-dose whole lung irradiation shows a threshold level and a steep sigmoid dose-response curve. 11 Radiation pneumonitis seldom
occurs with fractionated total doses of less than 20 Gy but is highly likely when doses exceed 60 Gy. 12 An unusual and dramatic demonstration of this principle is the
use of therapeutic pneumothorax to protect the lung when high-dose external-beam radiation therapy is given for the treatment of chest wall tumors. 13
Because local control of lung cancer is greater when higher doses are delivered to the tumor, 14 methods are being devised to give high doses to the target tissue
while sparing normal surrounding lung. One such technique is called three-dimensional treatment planning.15,16,17 and 18 To spare the lung further toxicity, in situ
isolated lung perfusion for the treatment of unresectable pulmonary tumors, preceded or followed by high-dose irradiation, soon may be available. 19 Studies to
evaluate the therapeutic activity of inhaled chemotherapeutic agents, such as doxorubicin, on metastasis to the lung are under way also. 20 Whether these treatment
modalities will have a sparing effect on the lung or whether they will be associated with an increase in pulmonary toxicity is unknown.
Besides the total radiation dose, the number of fractions into which it is divided and, to a lesser extent, the time span over which it is delivered are important factors. 21
The greater the number of fractions in which the radiation is given, the lower is the damaging effect. However, the incidence of radiation pneumonitis still exhibits a
threshold effect and a steep sigmoidal dose-response curve. 22Fractionation is different from dose rate, which refers to output of the machine during radiation therapy.
Dose rate certainly has an effect on lung tolerance: Radiation delivered as 5 cGy/minute is less damaging than radiation delivered at 30 cGy/minute, which in turn is
less damaging than radiation delivered at 2 to 3 Gy/minute. The incidence and severity of radiation damage to the lungs thus are related principally to the volume of
lung tissue irradiated, the total dose, the fractions into which the total dose is divided, and the quality of the radiation.
Genetic factors also influence the severity of response to lung irradiation in animals 23 and presumably may do so in humans as well, although there is no current
method to evaluate this clinically.
HISTOPATHOLOGY
The histopathologic changes of radiation-induced pulmonary toxicity can be divided into early, intermediate, and late stages based on the time course and intensity of
the radiation injury. 24 Early radiation damage (0 to 2 months after irradiation) is characterized by injury to small vessels and capillaries and subsequent development
of vascular congestion and increased capillary permeability. 25 At this stage, a fibrin-rich exudate is present in the alveolar spaces. Hyaline membranes form on the
alveoli, probably from condensation of the intraalveolar fibrin. After 1 month, an inflammatory infiltrate also is present, which may lead to a second course of increased
permeability. 26 Abnormalities in the intermediate stage (2 to 9 months after irradiation) are characterized by obstruction of pulmonary capillaries by platelets, fibrin,
and collagen. Alveolar-lining cells (primarily type II pneumonocytes) become hyperplastic, and the alveolar walls become infiltrated with fibroblasts and mast cells. 27 If
the radiation injury is mild, these changes may subside entirely; however, when the injury is severe, a chronic phase (9 months or longer after irradiation) ensues that

may persist or progress for months or years. In animal models, there is marked activation of genes that encode fibrillar collagens. 8 The histopathologic appearance
then is dominated by dense fibrosis, thickening of the alveolar walls, vascular subintimal fibrosis, and luminal narrowing. In some instances, the lung may shrink to
less than half its original size, with a thickened adherent pleura and scarred hilar structures.
In addition to this classic pattern of radiation pneumonitis, another syndrome of out-of-field pneumonitis, characterized by a hypersensitivity pneumonitis in areas of
lung not directly irradiated, has been described. This syndrome, which occurs in a minority of patients, is characterized by a bilateral lymphocytic alveolitis of activated
CD4+ T lymphocytes 4 to 6 weeks after strictly unilateral lung irradiation. 28
CLINICAL FEATURES
Signs and Symptoms
The clinical syndrome of radiation pneumonitis develops in 5% to 15% of patients receiving high-dose external-beam radiation for treatment of lung cancer. Factors
that can add to the development of radiation pneumonitis include concomitant chemotherapy, previous irradiation, and withdrawal of steroids. The incidence of
radiation pneumonitis does not differ significantly between the young and the elderly, but the pneumonitis is inclined to be more severe in the latter group. 29
Underlying chronic obstructive pulmonary disease does not appear to potentiate radiation damage.
Symptoms of acute radiation pneumonitis usually become evident 2 to 3 months after the completion of therapy; rarely, they occur within the first month and,
occasionally, as late as 6 months after irradiation. In general, the early onset of symptoms implies a more serious and more protracted clinical course. The cardinal
symptom of radiation pneumonitis is dyspnea. 24 It may be self-limited or may progress to severe respiratory distress, depending on the extent and intensity of the
injury. Patients may also have a nonproductive cough or a cough productive of small amounts of pinkish sputum. Frank hemoptysis early in the clinical course is
distinctly uncommon; however, massive hemoptysis has been reported as a late complication of therapeutic pulmonary irradiation. 30 Fever is unusual but can be high
and spiking; in severe cases, other constitutional symptoms may occur. Chest pain, which is rarely a prominent feature, may be due to fractured ribs, pleural changes,
or coughing. Symptoms of airway obstruction can occur in the first few days of radiation therapy and usually are associated with swelling of a central bronchogenic
carcinoma. Severe respiratory distress can result and may be prevented by the administration of steroids the day before and several days after the initiation of
radiation therapy. Hemoptysis and other manifestations of radiation pneumonitis may also occur in patients given palliative endobronchial brachytherapy 31 or after
surgical implantation of radioactive seeds.
On physical examination, signs of pulmonary involvement are minimal. Occasionally, moist rales, a pleural friction rub, or evidence of pleural fluid may be heard over
the area of irradiation. In severe cases, tachypnea and cyanosis may be present and, occasionally, evidence of acute cor pulmonale appears, usually predicting a
fatal outcome. Finger clubbing due to radiation is distinctly unusual and, if present, is most likely caused by the underlying malignancy. Skin changes corresponding to
the ports of irradiation often are present but provide no clue as to the presence or severity of the pulmonary reaction beneath.
Although patients with acute pneumonitis may show complete resolution of signs and symptoms, most develop gradual, progressive fibrosis. In some cases, patients
present with radiation fibrosis without a previous history of acute pneumonitis. The permanent changes of fibrosis evolve over 6 to 24 months but usually remain
stable after 2 years. Patients with fibrosis may be asymptomatic or may have varying degrees of dyspnea. The major complications of radiation pneumonitis occur late
in the disease and are secondary to persistent fibrosis of a large volume of lung. These include cor pulmonale and respiratory failure.
Diagnostic Imaging
Although radiographic abnormalities invariably are found concurrently with clinical radiation pneumonitis, these changes may be seen in asymptomatic patients as
well. Early radiographic changes include a ground-glass opacification, diffuse haziness, or indistinct normal pulmonary markings over the irradiated area. 32 Later, the
chest radiograph may show alveolar infiltrates or dense consolidation with or without air bronchograms. As the pneumonitis progresses to fibrosis, the radiographic
appearance changes to that of linear streaks radiating from the area of pneumonitis and of contraction toward the hilar, the perimediastinal, or the apical areas.
Pleural effusions, if present, are usually small and always coincident with the pneumonitis. 33 They can persist for long periods but often disappear spontaneously and
never increase over a period of stability unless secondary complications occur, such as radiation-induced pericarditis. Mediastinal or hilar adenopathy and cavitation
are almost always attributable to causes other than radiation pneumonitis. 2 Pneumothorax occasionally is associated with radiation fibrosis but not with acute
pneumonitis.
One of the most characteristic features of radiation pneumonitis and fibrosis is that the radiologic changes are confined to the outlines of the field of radiation. In a few
cases, extensive changes outside the field, even in the contralateral lung, have been observed. This syndrome of out-of-field pneumonitis is thought to represent a
hypersensitivity response to the radiation. 34 Other possible explanations for this phenomenon include obstruction of lymphatic flow from radiation-induced mediastinal
fibrosis 35 and absorption of x-rays by regions outside the irradiated ports. 36
Some data suggest that computed tomographic scans of the chest and gallium 67 citrate imaging are more sensitive than chest radiography in the detection of
radiation changes. 37,38 Correlation of abnormalities seen in these tests with the development of physiologic dysfunction and clinical toxicity requires clarification.
Pulmonary Function Tests
No gross physiologic changes occur in the lung until 4 to 8 weeks after completion of irradiation, usually coincident with the period of clinical pneumonitis. Then, one
sees a decrease in lung volumes, which can progress. 39,40,41 and 42 These changes persist indefinitely, with little evidence of recovery. 41 Gas exchange abnormalities,
which include a decrease in diffusing capacity and arterial hypoxemia, especially with exercise, occur about the same time but show some tendency toward recovery
after 6 to 12 months.40,41 and 42 A fall in compliance coincident with the clinical pneumonitis is seen in most subjects. 40 Accordingly, the elastic work of breathing is
increased, and dyspnea, a result of the increased workload, ensues. 40 Air flow parameters remain nearly normal in most studies. 39,40,41 and 42
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of radiation pneumonitis can sometimes be made clinically on the basis of the timing of irradiation in relation to symptoms and the typical chest
radiographic appearance (i.e., infiltrates corresponding to the margins of the irradiated portal). Differentiation from recurrent malignancy or infection often poses a
problem, and then lung biopsy is necessary. Although histopathologic changes are nonspecific for radiation pneumonitis, when elements of the acute stages (fibrin
exudate in the alveoli) are seen adjacent to the more chronic stages (alveolar fibrosis and subintimal sclerosis), 43 this entity can be diagnosed with reasonable
certainty.
Biochemical markers that indicate radiation lung injury before the onset of clinical pathologic events would be valuable in the early diagnosis and management of
patients with radiation toxicity. In irradiated animals, studies demonstrate that surfactant found in the serum may be a marker and predictor for later radiation
pneumonitis.44 Prospective studies are needed in humans to identify the sensitivity and specificity of monitoring serum surfactant levels as an early means of
diagnosing clinical radiation toxicity. Though no standard tests currently are used to monitor patients for radiation pneumonitis (because most methods have little
predictive value), some reports suggest that soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 45 or transforming growth factor-b 46 may be good candidates.
TREATMENT
Three treatment modalities have been used, prophylactically and therapeutically, for radiation-induced pneumonitis: corticosteroids, antibiotics, and anticoagulants. Of
these, corticosteroid therapy is the most important.
Corticosteroid administration during irradiation in mice markedly improves the physiologic abnormalities and decreases mortality, 47,48 without exerting an effect on late
pulmonary fibrosis.49 No controlled clinical trials are available of the efficacy of steroid therapy in radiation pneumonitis in humans. Rubin and Casarett 2 collected data
from eight studies on humans and categorized them according to whether corticosteroids were used prophylactically or therapeutically. Corticosteroids given
prophylactically failed to prevent radiation pneumonitis but, when administered as clinical pneumonitis occurred, these agents prompted an objective response. In
other reports, steroid therapy failed to ameliorate severe pneumonitis. Nonetheless, our practice is to begin prednisone, 1 mg/kg, as soon as the diagnosis is

reasonably certain. The initial dose is maintained for several weeks and then reduced cautiously and slowly. It has been our experience that if steroids are tapered
too rapidly, symptoms can be exacerbated, necessitating higher doses for longer periods. Similarly, if corticosteroids are part of a recent chemotherapeutic regimen,
stopping them abruptly can precipitate clinically evident radiation pneumonitis. Which parameters, if any, to follow during the tapering schedule are not known, and no
studies are available. Generally, decisions are based on the symptoms. Most authors agree that corticosteroids have no place in the treatment of radiation fibrosis.
In experimental and clinical reports, antibiotic administration has no effect on the course or outcome of radiation pneumonitis. 2,50 Although there is some rationale for
the use of anticoagulants in view of the effects of irradiation on the vascular system, neither heparin injections nor oral anticoagulants have been found to be
beneficial. 50 Captopril has been shown to be effective in animal studies, 51 but no human trials have been reported. The mechanism of action of captopril in this setting
probably is not its inhibition of angiotensin-converting enzyme. 52 Pentoxifylline also has some effects on the late phase of pneumonitis in animal models. 53

RADIATION-RELATED BRONCHIOLITIS OBLITERANS WITH ORGANIZING PNEUMONIA
Although bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneumonia (BOOP) is an unusual histopathologic pattern for drug-induced lung injury, radiation damage resulting in
BOOP has been reported. 54 Patients with lung cancer usually receive the highest doses of radiation to the largest volume of lung tissue, which makes them more
susceptible to radiation injury as compared with other patients receiving irradiation. Most of the cases of radiation-related BOOP, however, have occurred in patients
receiving radiation to the breast. Whether the low dose or indirect radiation that these patients receive makes them more susceptible to this type of lung injury is not
known. Besides the unusual pathologic pattern in these irradiated patients, clinical and radiologic differences are evident, as compared to conventional radiation
pneumonitis. Whereas dyspnea is the hallmark of radiation-induced lung injury, fever and cough are the predominant features of radiation-related BOOP.
Radiographically, the infiltrates can begin in the radiated areas but always progress outside the portal and, in approximately 40% of the cases, the radiographic
abnormalities were observed on the side contralateral to the irradiated breast. Although patients respond dramatically to corticosteroid therapy with no obvious
evidence of residual damage, there is a 67% relapse rate when the drug is tapered or discontinued. As with conventional radiation-induced pneumonitis, no studies
are available on the minimal effective dose or duration of therapy but, in view of the high relapse rate, it seems prudent to taper corticosteroid therapy very slowly,
with meticulous vigilance for clinical signs of relapse.
To spare the lung the toxic effects of chemotherapy, several unique treatment modalities are now being investigated. These include isolated lung perfusion (one or
both lungs) with doxorubicin for either metastatic disease or bronchoalveolar carcinoma. In one study, six patients received the perfusate and, although no major
responses were observed, the patients tolerated the procedure well and five of the six did not have any serious complications. 19 Antitumor efficacy in mice and dogs
has been observed with inhaled chemotherapeutic agents 20; clinical human testing now is under way in patients with metastatic lung disease using doxorubicin via
nebulization.

CHEMOTHERAPY-INDUCED PULMONARY TOXICITY
The list of chemotherapeutic agents reported to cause cytotoxic drug-induced lung disease continues to grow ( Table 55.3-1). Recently added agents are docetaxel
and gemcitabine. An overview of the potential mechanisms of lung damage, a summary of the pathologic findings, and common clinical features of pulmonary toxicity
are discussed in this section. Characteristics of pulmonary disease caused by some of these drugs are presented.

TABLE 55.3-1. Chemotherapeutic Agents Associated with Pulmonary Parenchymal Disease

MECHANISMS OF PULMONARY INJURY
The details of the pathophysiology of specific chemotherapeutic agents, except for bleomycin, generally are not known; however, several mechanisms of pulmonary
toxicity mediated by these agents have been proposed. Certain cytotoxic drugs may induce pulmonary injury by triggering the formation of reactive oxygen
metabolites, including the superoxide anion, 55 hydrogen peroxide, and hydroxyl radicals, primarily from activated neutrophils. Bleomycin induces reactive oxygen
radicals by forming a complex with Fe3+. Consistent with a direct pathologic role for this mechanism, iron chelators ameliorate the pulmonary toxicity of bleomycin in
animal models. 56 Reactive oxygen species can produce direct toxicity through participation in redox reactions and subsequent fatty acid oxidation, which leads to
membrane instability. 57 Oxidants can cause other inflammatory reactions within the lung. For example, the oxidation of arachidonic acid is an initial step in the
metabolic cascade that produces immunologically active mediators, including prostaglandins and leukotrienes. 58 Cytokines such as interleukin-1, macrophage
inflammatory protein-1 (MIP-1), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), and TGF-b are released from alveolar macrophages in animal models of bleomycin
toxicity.55,59,60 and 61 Cytotoxic drugs may also affect the local immune system. Because the lung is exposed to so many substances that can activate its immune system,
there appears to be a pulmonary immune tolerance state to avoid unnecessary overreactions. 62 This tolerance state may, in part, be a result of effector and
suppressor cell balance.
Cytotoxic drugs can alter the normal effector and suppressor balance, which may cause tissue damage. 63,64 and 65 Other homeostatic systems within the lung can be
affected as well, such as the balance between collagen formation and collagenolysis. 62 Through modulation of fibroblast proliferation and phenotype, 66 excessive
collagen deposition may result in severe, irreversible pulmonary fibrosis. Bleomycin is one cytotoxic agent that has this potential. 67,68 and 69 In addition, bleomycin may
up-regulate collagen synthesis in fibroblasts by stimulating transcription directly through a TGF-b response element in the procollagen (I)a promoter as well as by an
autocrine loop involving extracellular release of TGF-b. 69 Mast cells may also be involved in the inflammatory and fibrotic process. 70 Imbalance between the protease
and antiprotease system has been implicated as well in a number of pulmonary disorders, including drug toxicities. 62 Bleomycin and cyclophosphamide produce
substances that can inactivate the antiprotease system, enhancing the effects of proteolytic enzymes on the lung. Bleomycin also causes profound effects on the
fibrinolytic system, altering the balance between fibrin deposition and fibrinolysis on the alveolar surface, leading to fibrin deposition. 71 Drugs may damage the lung
through a variety of other mechanisms, and considerable investigation should be done to define and clarify the exact mechanism of lung injury for each
chemotherapeutic drug.
One of the potential determinants of bleomycin toxicity is the cytoplasmic cysteine proteinase bleomycin hydrolase, which is the major enzyme responsible for
metabolizing bleomycin to a nontoxic molecule. 72 In animal models, bleomycin hydrolase knockout mice are highly susceptible to bleomycin toxicity. 73 The two organs
that are the most common targets for bleomycin toxicity—lung and skin—harbor the lowest levels of the enzyme. 74 With the cloning of the human gene encoding
bleomycin hydrolase,75 studies are needed to determine whether genetic variability of this enzyme can account for increased individual susceptibility to bleomycin
pulmonary toxicity.
HISTOPATHOLOGY
The histopathologic changes of drug-induced pulmonary toxicity demonstrate common features. Similar to radiation-induced damage, abnormalities are seen in
endothelial and epithelial cells. The vascular damage is characterized by endothelial swelling with exudation of fluid into the interstitium and the intraalveolar spaces.
There is destruction and desquamation of type I pneumonocytes, with proliferation of type II pneumocytes. Mononuclear cell infiltration and fibroblast proliferation with

fibrosis are common findings; the character of the inflammatory cellular infiltrate may be a feature that distinguishes the toxicity of one drug from another.
Bronchoalveolar lavage studies in patients with methotrexate pulmonary toxicity have shown the presence of a T-lymphocytic alveolitis, whereas studies on some
patients with bleomycin toxicity have revealed a polymorphonuclear alveolitis. 63,76 Eosinophil infiltration has been associated with drugs that cause apparent
hypersensitivity reactions, such as methotrexate, procarbazine, and bleomycin. 62,63,77,78
CLINICAL FEATURES
Table 55.3-2 lists predisposing factors associated with enhancement of drug-induced pneumonitis. 79,80,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90,91,92,93,94,95,96,97,98 and 99 Because bleomycin
toxicity is relatively common, it warrants special mention. Although it drastically increases with doses in excess of 450 to 500 mg, toxicity can occur with much lower
doses, especially when other risk factors are present. One study described 9 of 45 patients (20%) who developed lung toxicity when they received bleomycin after
cisplatin infusion. 95 Renal damage after cisplatin administration, with subsequent accumulation of bleomycin, was a likely cause of the high pulmonary toxicity and
mortality rate of 67%. Extreme caution is recommended in the administration of combined bleomycin and cisplatin chemotherapy; if possible, bleomycin should
precede cisplatin infusion to minimize the risk of lung toxicity. Some data suggest that continuous infusion of bleomycin may be associated with less pulmonary
toxicity than bolus therapy 96; however, these data are inconclusive, and further studies are warranted. Supplemental oxygen is a classic cofactor in bleomycin
pulmonary toxicity. 97 An increased risk of pulmonary toxicity (4 of 12 patients, fatal in 75%) was described in a small, uncontrolled study of patients receiving
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in combination with bleomycin-containing combination chemotherapy [BACOP (bleomycin, Adriamycin, cyclophosphamide,
Oncovin, prednisone)] for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. 98 However, larger studies have not confirmed any increased risk of bleomycin toxicity with the use of granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor. 99

TABLE 55.3-2. Factors Associated with Increased Risk of Drug-Induced Pneumonitis

The interest in administration of several cycles of high-dose chemotherapy followed by peripheral stem cell rescue for treatment of breast cancer and lymphoma has
led to reports of pulmonary toxicity of agents not previously thought to be highly toxic to the lung, such as etoposide. 100 Importantly, careful studies of pulmonary
function after high-dose chemotherapy containing cyclophosphamide, cisplatin, and carmustine [1,3-Bis(2 chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea (BCNU)], followed by autologous
bone marrow transplant, for treatment of breast cancer show a delayed drop in diffusing capacity averaging 30% by week 18. 101 The majority of patients were
symptomatic with dyspnea and responded well to systemic corticosteroids. 101 More of this type of toxicity can be anticipated in the future as this treatment modality
becomes more common and new regimens for high-dose chemotherapy are studied.
Long intervals between drug administration and onset of clinical toxicity have been described. Late-onset pulmonary fibrosis has been reported many years after
discontinuing cyclophosphamide 102 and carmustine.103
Signs and Symptoms
The cardinal symptom of drug-induced pulmonary toxicity is dyspnea. Nonproductive cough, fatigue, and malaise are other commonly associated complaints. Other
characteristics of chemotherapy-induced pulmonary disease are outlined in Table 55.3-3. Although symptoms usually develop over a period of several weeks to
months, hypersensitivity drug-induced lung disease can develop over hours. Fever may be a common finding with this type of toxicity. Chest pain has been reported
during infusion of bleomycin 104 or immediately after therapy with methotrexate105; however, it is an unusual manifestation of toxicity. A syndrome of acute dyspnea,
probably due to acute direct toxicity to the pulmonary vasculature, can occur during or shortly after vinca alkaloid infusion when given in combination with mitomycin
for treatment of non–small cell lung cancer. 106 Because hemoptysis is an uncommon feature of drug-induced pulmonary toxicity, when it is present, other diagnoses
should be considered. Physical examination of the lungs may be normal or may reveal end-inspiratory “Velcro” rales. Finger clubbing is distinctly unusual, but it may
be related to the underlying malignancy.

TABLE 55.3-3. Characteristics of Pulmonary Disease Caused by Commonly Used Chemotherapeutic Agents

All-trans-retinoic acid treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia induces a distinct syndrome of respiratory distress, which are thought to be mediated by newly
differentiated leukemia cells that are marginating into the pulmonary circulation, thereby increasing capillary permeability and releasing cytokines that induce
neutrophil migration into the interstitium. High doses of corticosteroids are the most effective treatment. 107 Steroid prophylaxis of this syndrome has been reported to
be useful.108
Paclitaxel (Taxol) and Docetaxel (Taxotere) cause bronchospasm and, in some cases, frank anaphylaxis or pulmonary edema, probably on the basis of a
hypersensitivity reaction to the solvent needed to dissolve these agents. Prophylaxis with corticosteroids, administration of H 1 and H2 histamine blockers, and slowing
of the infusion rate are effective in reducing the incidence and severity of these reactions.
Diagnostic Imaging
The most common radiographic abnormality associated with drug-induced pulmonary toxicity is a reticulonodular pattern, which may be basilar or diffuse. Pleural
effusions are uncommon but have occasionally been reported in association with mitomycin, busulfan, methotrexate, and procarbazine toxicity. 109,110,111 and 112
Hypersensitivity lung disease associated with methotrexate and procarbazine may present with bilateral acinar infiltrates that clear rapidly. 112 In some instances, the
chest radiograph is normal, even in the presence of histologically proved pulmonary infiltration and fibrosis. 111,113 Most commonly, methotrexate and carmustine

toxicity have been reported with normal chest radiographic findings. Hilar adenopathy is distinctly unusual and has been reported only with methotrexate toxicity. 111
Nodules with or without cavitation, simulating metastatic disease, have been seen with bleomycin toxicity. 114,115
Both high-resolution, thin-section computed tomographic chest scans and gallium scintigraphy have been shown to be more sensitive techniques than chest
radiography for detecting pulmonary parenchymal changes in association with drug toxicity. 116,117 Scintigraphy with technetium 99 aerosols appears to be highly
sensitive for subtle capillary permeability defects in bleomycin toxicity. 118 The full relation of these changes to the development of functional or physiologic impairment
is unclear, and further studies are needed. Magnetic resonance spectrometry may eventually be useful to differentiate among fibrosis, edema, and hemorrhage in the
lung but, at present, it is not helpful in diagnosing interstitial lung disorders such as drug toxicity. 119
Pulmonary Function Tests
The most common abnormalities associated with chemotherapy-induced pulmonary toxicity are a reduced diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide and a restrictive
ventilatory defect. 62 Isolated gas transport abnormalities, manifested by a decrease in the diffusing capacity or arterial hypoxemia, especially with exercise, have been
seen. Screening pulmonary function tests to predict which patients receiving chemotherapy are likely to develop toxicity would be helpful but have not been
established for most pulmonary toxic agents. In bleomycin toxicity, changes in the diffusing capacity may be transient, whereas decreases in total lung capacity seem
to correlate better with radiographic abnormalities. 120
DIAGNOSIS
Although one might have a high clinical suspicion of drug-induced pulmonary toxicity, lung biopsy is usually necessary for a definitive diagnosis. Because
pathognomonic pathologic changes associated with drug-induced pneumonitis often are not present, a biopsy is necessary to eliminate other specific diagnoses, such
as opportunistic infection and malignancy. Through the use of bronchoalveolar lavage, several studies reported the presence of a characteristic or predominant cell
associated with particular drugs. 63,76 Although these data might be of value in understanding the pathogenesis of drug-induced lung disorders, their usefulness in
diagnosing drug toxicity is limited.
A serum marker for drug-induced pulmonary toxicity would be very useful. Though such a serum marker does not currently exist, initial studies of serum collagen type
III N-propeptide in patients receiving neoadjuvant preoperative mitomycin, vinblastine, and cisplatin for stage III non–small cell lung cancer appear promising. 121 This
peptide is elevated in serum after bleomycin treatment, but it does not correlate with toxicity. 122 Elevated levels of TGF-b in plasma after high-dose chemotherapy for
breast cancer predicted an increased risk of pulmonary toxicity after autologous bone marrow transplantation. 123
TREATMENT
The most effective way to manage pulmonary toxicity associated with chemotherapeutic agents is to prevent it. Animal studies of bleomycin toxicity showed a
beneficial preventive effect of dietary supplementation with taurine and niacin; no comparable human studies have been reported. If toxicity occurs, withdrawal of the
offending agent is the cornerstone of therapy. Although no controlled studies in humans have systematically examined the efficacy of corticosteroids, a trial of these
agents probably is warranted in most cases. 124,125 The optimal dose and duration of therapy are not known; however, 1 mg/kg/d usually is initiated, with a slow and
careful tapering schedule, because clinical deterioration after tapering has been reported. 126,127 One report described the case of a 23-year-old male patient who
underwent a single lung transplantation because of presumed drug-induced pulmonary fibrosis 12 years after undergoing chemotherapy for acute lymphocytic
leukemia.128 The use of lung transplantation in the treatment of advanced drug-induced pulmonary fibrosis should be considered in appropriate patients, as more
experience with successful lung transplantation in this setting is accumulating. 129
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Gross NJ. The pathogenesis of radiation-induced lung damage. Lung 1981;159:115.
2. Rubin P, Casarett GW. Clinical radiation pathology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1968.
3. Adamison ILR, Bowden DH, Wyatt JP. A pathway to pulmonary fibrosis: an ultrastructural study of mouse and rat following radiation to the whole body and hemithorax. Am J Pathol
1970;58:481.
4. Haimovitz-Friedman A, Kan CC, Ehleiter D, et al. Ionizing radiation acts on cellular membranes to generate ceramide and initiate apoptosis. J Exp Med 1994;180:525.
5. Weichselbaum RR, Hallahan D, Fuks Z, et al. Radiation induction of immediate early genes: effectors of the radiation-stress response [Review]. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;30:229.
6. Kharbanda S, Ren R, Pandey P, et al. Activation of the c-Abl tyrosine kinase in the stress response to DNA-damaging agents. Nature 1995;376:785.
7. Haimovitz-Friedman A, Vlodavsky I, Chaudhuri A, et al. Autocrine effects of fibroblast growth factor in repair of radiation damage in endothelial cells. Cancer Res 1991;51:2552.
8. Rubin P, Johnston CJ, Williams JP, et al. A perpetual cascade of cytokines postirradiation leads to pulmonary fibrosis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;33:99.
9. Tsao C, Tsao FH, Taylor JM, et al. Annexin I concentration, phospholipase activity and thromboxane synthesis in irradiated rat lung. Radiat Res 1995;142:85.
10. Kimsey FC, Mendenhall NP, Ewald LM, et al. Is radiation treatment volume a predictor for acute or late effect on pulmonary function? A prospective study of patients treated with
breast-conserving surgery and postoperative irradiation. Cancer 1994;73:2549.
11. VanDyk J, Keane T, Kan S, et al. Radiation pneumonitis following large single dose irradiation: a reevaluation based on absolute lung dose. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;31:361.
12. Jennings FL, Arden A. Development of radiation pneumonitis: time and dose factors. Arch Pathol 1962;74:351.
13. Christie DR, Spry NA, Lamb DS, et al. Artificial pneumothorax can be used to prevent lung toxicity in chest wall radiotherapy. Clin Oncol 1993;5:257.
14. Perez C, Stanley K, Grundy C, et al. Impact of irradiation technique and tumor extent in tumor control and survival of patients with unresectable non-oat cell carcinoma of the lung. Cancer
1982;50:1091.
15. Goitein M, Abrams M, Rowell D, et al. Multidimensional treatment planning: beam's eye view back projection through CT sections. Int J Radiol Oncol Biol Phys 1983;9:789.
16. Emami B, Purdy JA, Manolis J, et al. Three dimensional treatment planning for lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;21:217.
17. Armstrong JG. Three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy: precision treatment of lung cancer [Review]. Chest Surg Clin N Am 1994;4:29.
18. Ling CC, Fuks Z. Conformal radiation treatment: a critical appraisal [Review]. Eur J Cancer 1995;5:799.
19. Johnston MR, Minchen RF, Dawson CA. Lung perfusion with chemotherapy in patients with unresectable sarcoma to the lung or diffuse bronchioloalveolar carcinoma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
1995;110:368.
20. Tatsumura T, Koyama S, Stujimoto M, et al. Further study of nebulization chemotherapy, a new chemotherapeutic method in the treatment of lung carcinoma: fundamental and clinical. Br J
Cancer 1993;68:1146.
21. Wara WM, Phillips TL, Margolis LW, et al. Radiation pneumonitis: a new approach to the deviation of time dose factors. Cancer 1973;32:547.
22. Mah K, Dyk JV, Keane T, et al. Acute radiation-induced pulmonary damage: a clinical study on the response to fractionated radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:179.
23. Franko AJ, Sharplin J, Ward WF, et al. The genetic basis of strain-dependent differences in the early phase of radiation injury in mouse lung. Radiat Res 1991;126:349.
24. Gross NJ. Pulmonary effects of radiation therapy. Ann Intern Med 1977;86:81.
25. Maisin JR. The ultrastructure of the lung of mice exposed to a supralethal dose of ionizing radiation on the thorax. Radiat Res 1970;44:545.
26. Rosiello RA, Merrill WW, Rockwell S, et al. Radiation pneumonitis: bronchoalveolar lavage assessment and modulation by a recombinant cytokine. Am Rev Respir Dis 1993;148:1671.
27. Ward HE, Kemsley L, Davies L, et al. The pulmonary response to sublethal thoracic irradiation in the rat. Radiat Res 1993;136:15.
28. Roberts C, Foulcher E, Zaunders J, et al. Radiation pneumonitis: a possible lymphocyte-mediated hypersensitivity reaction. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:696.
29. Koga K, Kusumoto S, Watanabe K, et al. Age factor relevant to the development of radiation pneumonitis in radiotherapy of lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol 1988;14:367.
30. Isaacs RD, Wallie WJ, Wells UE, et al. Massive hemoptysis as a late complication of pulmonary irradiation. Thorax 1987;42:77.
31. Gustafson G, Vicini F, Freedman L, et al. High dose rate endobronchial brachytherapy in the management of primary and recurrent bronchogenic malignancies. Cancer 1995;75:2345.
32. Bate D, Guttman RJ. Changes in lung and pleura following two-million-volt therapy for carcinoma of the breast. Radiology 1957;73:679.
33. Bachman AL, Macken K. Pleural effusions following supervoltage radiation for breast carcinoma. Radiology 1959;72:699.
34. Smith JC. Radiation pneumonitis: case report of bilateral reaction after unilateral irradiation. Am Rev Respir Dis 1964;89:264.
35. Holt JAG. The acute radiation pneumonitis syndrome. J Coll Radiol Aust 1964;8:40.
36. Bennett DE, Million RR, Ackerman LV. Bilateral radiation pneumonitis: a complication of the radiotherapy of bronchogenic carcinoma. Cancer 1969;23:1001.
37. Ikezoe J, Takashima S, Morimoto S, et al. CT appearance of acute radiation-induced injury in the lung. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1988;150:765.
38. Kataoka M. Gallium-67 imaging for the assessment of radiation pneumonitis. Ann Nucl Med 1989;3:73.
39. Brady LW, German PA, Cander L. The effects of radiation therapy on pulmonary function in carcinoma of the lung. Radiology 1965;85:130.
40. Emirgil C, Heinemann HO. Effects of radiation of the chest on pulmonary function in men. J Appl Physiol 1961;16:331.
41. Prato FS, Kurdyak R, Saibil EA, et al. Regional and total lung function in patients following pulmonary irradiation. Invest Radiol 1977;12:224.
42. Wohl MEB, Griscom NT, Traggis DC, et al. Effects of therapeutic irradiation delivered in early childhood upon subsequent lung function. Pediatrics 1975;55:507.
43. Warren S, Spencer J. Radiation reaction in the lung. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1940;43:682.
44. Rubin P, McDonald S, Maasilta P, et al. Serum markers for prediction of pulmonary radiation syndromes. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:553.
45. Ishii Y, Kitamura S. Soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 as an early detection marker for radiation pneumonitis. Eur Respir J 1999;13:733.
46. Anscher MS, Kong FM, Andrews K, et al. Plasma transforming growth factor beta-1 as a predictor of radiation pneumonitis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;41:1029.
47. Gross NJ, Narine KR. Experimental radiation pneumonitis: corticosteroids increase the replicative activity of aveolar type 2 cells. Radiat Res 1988;115:543.
48. Gross NJ, Narine KR, Wade R. Protective effect of corticosteroids on radiation pneumonitis. Radiat Res 1988;113:112.
49. Ward HE, Kemsley L, Davies L, et al. The effect of steroids on radiation-induced lung disease in the rat. Radiat Res 1993;136:22.
50. Moss WT, Haddy FJ, Sweany SK. Some factors altering the severity of acute radiation pneumonitis: variation with cortisone, heparin, and antibiotics. Radiology 1960;75:50.
51. Ward WF, Molteni A, Tsao CH, et al. Radiation pneumotoxicity in rats: modification by inhibitors of angiotensin converting enzyme. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;22:623.

52. Nguyen L, Ward WF, Tsao CH, et al. Captopril inhibits proliferation of human lung fibroblasts in culture: a potential antifibrotic mechanism. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1994;205:80.
53. Koh WJ, Stelzer KJ, Peterson LM, et al. Effect of pentoxifylline on radiation-induced lung and skin toxicity in rats. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:71.
54. Arbetter KR, Prakash VB, Tazelaar HD, et al. Radiation-induced pneumonitis in the “non-irradiated” lung. Mayo Clin Proc 1999;74:27.
55. Sakanashi Y, Takeya M, Yoshimura T, et al. Kinetics of macrophage subpopulations and expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) in bleomycin-induced lung injury of rats
studied by a novel monoclonal antibody against rat MCP-1. J Leukoc Biol 1994;56:741.
56. Herman EH, Hasinoff BB, Zhang J, et al. Morphologic and morphometric evaluation of the effect of ICRF-187 on bleomycin-induced pulmonary toxicity. Toxicology 1995;98:163.
57. Freeman BA, Crapo JD. Biology of disease: free radicals and tissue injury. Lab Invest 1982;47:412
58. Lewis RA, Austen KF. The biologically active leukotrienes: biosynthesis, metabolism, receptors, functions and pharmacology. J Clin Invest 1984;73:889.
59. Khalil N, Whitman C, Zuo L, et al. Regulation of alveolar macrophage transforming growth factor-beta secretion by corticosteroids in bleomycin-induced pulmonary inflammation in the rat. J
Clin Invest 1993;92:1812.
60. Smith RE, Strieter RM, Phan SH, et al. Production and function of murine macrophage inflammatory protein-1 alpha in bleomycin-induced lung injury. J Immunol 1994;153:4704.
61. Smith RE, Strieter RM, Zhang K, et al. A role for C-C chemokines in fibrotic lung disease [Review]. J Leukoc Biol 1995;57:782.
62. Cooper JAD, White DA, Matthay RA. Drug-induced pulmonary disease: I. Cytotoxic drugs. Am Rev Respir Dis 1986;133:321.
63. White DA, Rankin JR, Stover DE, et al. Methotrexate pneumonitis: lavage findings suggest an immune mediated disorder. Am Rev Respir Dis 1989;139:18.
64. Askenase PW, Hayden BJ, Gershon RK. Augmentation of delayed-type hypersensitivity by doses of cyclophosphamide which do not affect antibody responses. J Exp Med 1974;141:697.
65. L'Age-Stehr J, Diamanstein T. Induction of autoreactive T lymphocytes and their suppressor cells by cyclophosphamide. Nature 1978;27:1663.
66. Vyalov SL, Gabbiani G, Kapanci Y. Rat alveolar myofibroblasts acquire alpha-smooth muscle actin expression during bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Pathol 1933;143:1754.
67. Absher M, Hildebran J, Trombley L, et al. Characteristics of cultured lung fibroblasts from bleomycin-treated rats: comparison with in vitro exposed normal fibroblasts. Am Rev Respir Dis
1984;129:125.
68. Clark JG, Kostal KM, Marino BA. Bleomycin induced pulmonary fibrosis in hamsters: an alveolar macrophage product increases fibroblast prostaglandin E2 and cyclic adenosine
monophosphate and suppresses fibroblast proliferation and collagen production. J Clin Invest 1983;72:2082.
69. King SL, Lichtler AC, Rowe DW, et al. Bleomycin stimulates pro-alpha 1 (I) collagen promoter through transforming growth factor beta response element by intracellular and extracellular
signaling. J Biol Chem 1994;269:13156.
70. O'Brien-Ladner AR, Wesselius LJ, Stechschulte DJ. Bleomycin injury of the lung in a mast-cell-deficient model. Agents Actions 1993;39:20.
71. Olman MA, Mackman N, Gladson CL, et al. Changes in procoagulant and fibrinolytic gene expression during bleomycin-induced lung injury in the mouse. J Clin Invest 1995;96:1621.
72. Lazo JS, Humphreys CJ. Lack of metabolism as the biochemical basis of bleomycin induced pulmonary toxicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1983;80:3064.
73. Schwartz DR, Homanics GE, Hoyt DG, et al. The neutral cysteine protease bleomycin hydrolase is essential for epidermal integrity and bleomycin resistance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1999;96:4680.
74. Sikic BI. Biochemical and cellular determinants of bleomycin cytotoxicity. Cancer Surv 1986;5:81.
75. Ferrando AA, Pendas AM, Llano E, et al. Gene characterization, promoter analysis, and chromosomal localization of human bleomycin hydrolase. J Biol Chem 1997;272:33298.
76. White DA, Kris MG, Stover DE. Bronchoalveolar lavage cell populations in bleomycin-induced pulmonary toxicity. Thorax 1987;42:551.
77. Jones SE, Moore M, Blank N, et al. Hypersensitivity to procarbazine (Matulane) manifested by fever and pleuropulmonary reaction. Cancer 1972;29:498.
78. Holoye PY, Luna MA, McKay B, et al. Bleomycin hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Ann Intern Med 1978;88:47.
79. Ginsberg SJ, Comis RL. The pulmonary toxicity of antineoplastic agents. Semin Oncol 1982;9:34.
80. Blum RH, Carter SK, Agre K. A clinical review of bleomycin: a new antineoplastic agent. Cancer 1973;31:903.
81. Goldiner PL, Carlon CC, Cvitkovic E, et al. Factors influencing postoperative morbidity and mortality in patients treated with bleomycin. Br Med J 1978;1:1664.
82. Hakkinen PJ, Whiteley JW, Witschi HR. Hyperoxia, but not thoracic x-irradiation, potentiates bleomycin and cyclophosphamide-induced lung damage in mice. Am Rev Respir Dis
1982;126:281.
83. Tryka AF, Codleski JJ, Brian JD. Differences in effects of immediate and delayed hyperoxia exposure on bleomycin-induced pulmonary injury. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68:759.
84. Franklin R, Buroker TR, Vaishampayan W, et al. Combined therapies in esophageal squamous cell cancer. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1979;20:223(abst).
85. Einhorn L, Krause M, Hornback N, et al. Enhanced pulmonary toxicity with bleomycin and radiotherapy in oat cell cancer. Cancer 1976;37:2414.
86. Samuels ML, Johnson DE, Holoye PY, et al. Large-dose bleomycin therapy and pulmonary toxicity: a possible role of prior radiotherapy. JAMA 1976;235:1117.
87. Soble AR, Perry H. Fatal radiation pneumonia following subclinical busulfan injury. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1977;128:15.
88. Buzdar AU, Legha SS, Luna MA, et al. Pulmonary toxicity of mitomycin. Cancer 1980;45:236.
89. Durant JR, Norgard MJ, Murad TM, et al. Pulmonary toxicity associated with bis-chloroethyl nitrosourea (BCNU). Ann Intern Med 1979;90:191.
90. Luedke D, Mclaughlin TT, Daughaday C, et al. Mitomycin C and vindesine associated pulmonary toxicity with variable clinical expression. Cancer 1985;55:542.
91. White DA, Orenstein M, Codwin TA, et al. Chemotherapy-associated pulmonary toxic reactions during treatment for breast cancer. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:953.
92. Skarin AT, Rosenthal DS, Maloney WC. The treatment of advanced non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) with bleomycin, adriamycin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine and prednisone. Blood
1977;49:759.
93. Bauer KA, Skarin AT, Balikian JP, et al. Pulmonary complications associated with combination chemotherapy programs containing bleomycin. Am J Med 1983;74:557.
94. Aronin PA, Mahaley MS, Rudnick SA, et al. Prediction of BCNU pulmonary toxicity in patients with malignant gliomas: an assessment of risk factors. N Engl J Med 1980;303:1983.
95. Rabinowits M, Souhami L, Gil RA, et al. Increased pulmonary toxicity with bleomycin and cisplatin chemotherapy combinations. Am J Clin Oncol 1990;13:132.
96. Cooper KR, Hong WK. Prospective study of the pulmonary toxicity of continuously infused bleomycin. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:419.
97. Ingrassia TB, Ryu JH, Trastek VF, et al. Oxygen-exacerbated bleomycin pulmonary toxicity [Review]. Mayo Clin Proc 1991;66:173.
98. Lei KI, Leung WT, Johnson PJ. Serious pulmonary complications in patients receiving recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor during BACOP chemotherapy for aggressive
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Br J Cancer 1994;70:1009.
99. Bastion Y, Reyes F, Bosly A, et al. Possible toxicity with the association of G-CSF and bleomycin [Letter; comment]. Lancet 1994;343:1221.
100. Crilley P, Topolsky D, Styler MJ, et al. Extramedullary toxicity of a conditioning regimen containing busulphan, cyclophosphamide and etoposide in 84 patients undergoing autologous and
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;15:361.
101. Wilczynski SW, Erasmus JJ, Petros WP, Vredenburgh JJ, Folz RJ. Delayed pulmonary toxicity syndrome following high dose chemotherapy and bone marrow transplantation for breast cancer.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:565.
102. Alvarado CS, Boat TF, Newman M. Late onset pulmonary fibrosis and chest deformity in two children treated with cyclophosphamide. J Pediatr 1978;92:443.
103. O'Driscoll BR, Hasleton PS, Taylor PM. Active lung fibrosis up to 17 years after chemotherapy with carmustine (BCNU) in childhood. N Engl J Med 1990;323:378.
104. White DA, Schwartzberg L, Kris MC, et al. Acute chest pain during bleomycin infusions. Cancer 1987;59:1582.
105. Walden PAM, Mitchell-Heggs PF, Coppin C, et al. Pleurisy and methotrexate treatment. Br Med J 1977;2:867.
106. Rivera MP, Kris MG, Gralla RJ, et al. Syndrome of acute dyspnea related to combined mitomycin plus vinca alkaloid chemotherapy. Am J Clin Oncol 1995;18:245.
107. Vahdat L, Maslak P, Miller W Jr, et al. Early mortality and the retinoic acid syndrome in acute promyelocytic leukemia: impact of leukocytosis, low-dose chemotherapy, PMN/RAR-alpha
isoform, and CD13 expression in patients treated with all- trans retinoic acid [Review]. Blood 1994;84:3843.
108. Wiley JS, Firkin FC, Australian Leukaemia Study Group. Reduction of pulmonary toxicity by prednisolone prophylaxis during all- trans retinoic acid treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia.
Leukemia 1995;9:774.
109. Orwoll ES, Kiessling P, Patterson R. Interstitial pneumonia from mitomycin. Ann Intern Med 1978;89:352.
110. Smalley RV, Wall RL. Two cases of busulfan toxicity. Ann Intern Med 1966;64:154.
111. Sostman HD, Matthay RA, Putnam CE. Methotrexate-induced pneumonitis. Medicine 1976;55:371.
112. Ecker MD, May B, Keohane MF. Procarbazine lung. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1978;131:527.
113. Weiss RB, Poster DS, Penta JS. The nitrosoureas and pulmonary toxicity. Cancer Treat Rev 1981;8:111.
114. Glasier CM, Siegel MJ. Multiple pulmonary nodules: unusual manifestations of bleomycin toxicity. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1981;137:155.
115. Talcott JA, Garnick MB, Stomper PL, et al. Cavitary lung nodules associated with combination chemotherapy containing bleomycin. J Urol 1987;138:619.
116. Taylor CR. Diagnostic imaging techniques in the evaluation of drug-induced pulmonary disease. Clin Chest Med 1990;11:87.
117. Kuhlman JE. The role of chest computed tomography in the diagnosis of drug-related reactions [Review]. J Thorac Imag 1991;6:52.
118. Ugur O, Caner B, Balbay MD, et al. Bleomycin lung toxicity detected by technetium-99m diethylene triamine penta-acetic acid aerosol scintigraphy. Eur J Nucl Med 1993;20:114.
119. Vinitski S, Pearson MG, Karlik ST, et al. Differentiation of parenchymal lung disorders with in vivo proton nuclear magnetic resonance. Magn Reson Med 1986;3:120.
120. Wolkowicz J, Sturgeon J, Rawji M, et al. Bleomycin-induced pulmonary function abnormalities. Chest 1992;101:97.
121. Kaner R, McCaffrey T, Gerl M, et al. Serum connective tissue polypeptides are sensitive markers of matrix synthesis in iatrogenic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1994;149:A381.
122. Villani F, Bacchella L, Bulgheroni A, et al. Study of functional and biochemical indicators of subclinical lung damage in bleomycin-treated patients. Respir Med 1992;86:327.
123. Anscher MS, Peters WP, Reisenbichler H, et al. Transforming growth factor beta as a predictor of liver and lung fibrosis after autologous bone marrow transplantation for advanced breast
cancer. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1592.
124. Kozielski J. Reversal of bleomycin lung toxicity with corticosteroids [Letter; comment]. Thorax 1994;49:290.
125. Kalaycioglu M, Kavuru M, Tuason L, et al. Empiric prednisone therapy for pulmonary toxic reaction after high-dose chemotherapy containing carmustine (BCNU). Chest 1995;107:482.
126. Gunstream SR, Seidenfeld JJ, Sobonya RE, et al. Mitomycin-associated lung disease. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:301.
127. Spector JI, Zimbler H, Ross JS. Cyclophosphamide and interstitial pneumonitis. JAMA 1980;243:1133.
128. Grossman RF, Frost A, Zamel N, et al. Results of single lung transplantation for bilateral pulmonary fibrosis. N Engl J Med 1990;322:727.
129. Levine SM, Anzueto A, Peters JI, et al. Single lung transplantation in patients with systemic disease. Chest 1994;105:837.
130. Locatelli F, Giorgiani G, Pession A, et al. Late effects in children after bone marrow transplantation: a review [Review]. Haematologica 1993;78:319.
131. Stover DE, Zaman MB, Hajdu SI, et al. Bronchoalveolar lavage in the diagnosis of diffuse pulmonary infiltrates in the immunosuppressed host. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:1.
132. Kuplic JB, Higley CS, Niewoehner DE. Pulmonary ossification associated with long-term busulfan therapy in chronic myeloid leukemia. Am Rev Respir Dis 1972;106:759.
133. Heard BE, Cooke RA. Busulfan lung. Thorax 1968;233:1987.
134. Burns WA, McFarland W, Matthews MJ. Busulfan-induced pulmonary disease: report of a case and review of the literature. Am Rev Respir Dis 1970;101:408.
135. Ghalie R, Reynolds J, Valentino LA, et al. Busulfan-containing pre-transplant regimens for the treatment of solid tumors. Bone Marrow Transplant 1994;14:437.
136. Collis CH. Lung damage from cytotoxic drugs. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1980;4:17.
137. Mark CJ, Lehimgar-Zadeh A, Ragsdale BD. Cyclophosphamide pneumonitis. Thorax 1978;33:89.
138. Alvarado CS, Boat TF, Newman M. Late onset pulmonary fibrosis and chest deformity in two children treated with cyclophosphamide. J Pediatr 1978;92:443.
139. Maxwell I. Reversible pulmonary edema following cyclophosphamide treatment. JAMA 1974;229:137.
140. Cole SR, Myers TJ, Kiatsky AU. Pulmonary disease with chlorambucil therapy. Cancer 1978;41:455.
141. Taetle R, Dickman PS, Feldman PS. Pulmonary histopathologic changes associated with melphalan therapy. Cancer 1978;42:1239.
142. Goucher C, Rowland V, Hawkins J. Melphalan-induced pulmonary interstitial fibrosis. Chest 1980;77:805.
143. Berend N. Protective effect of hypoxia on bleomycin lung toxicity in the rat. Am Rev Respir Dis 1984;130:307.
144. Frank L. Protection from O 2 toxicity by preexposure to hypoxia: lung antioxidant enzyme role. J Appl Physiol 1982;53:475.
145. Wesselius LJ, Catanzaro A, Wasserman SI. Neutrophil chemotactic activity generation by alveolar macrophages after bleomycin injury. Am Rev Respir Dis 1984;129:485.
146. Kelley J, Newman RA, Evans JN. Bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in the rat: prevention with an inhibitor of collagen synthesis. J Lab Clin Med 1980;96:954.

147. White DA, Stover DE. Severe bleomycin-induced pneumonitis: clinical features and response to corticosteroids. Chest 1984;86:723.
148. Luna MA, Bedrossian CWM, Uchtiger B, et al. Interstitial pneumonitis associated with bleomycin therapy. J Clin Pathol 1972;58:501.
149. DeLena M, Cuzzon A, Monfardim S, et al. Clinical, radiologic and histopathologic studies on pulmonary toxicity induced by treatment with bleomycin (NSC-125066). Cancer Chemother Rep
1972;56:343.
150. Jules KJ, White DA. Bleomycin-induced pulmonary toxicity. Clin Chest Med 1990;11:1.
151. Jolivet J, Giroux L, Laurin S, et al. Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, renal failure, and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema: a chemotherapy-induced syndrome. Cancer Treat Rep
1983;67:429.
152. Kaner R, Garofano S, Rivera P, et al. Bronchoalveolar lavage findings after mitomycin combination chemotherapy for nonsmall cell lung cancer. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;151:A201.
153. Castro M, Su J, Veeder M, et al. A prospective study of pulmonary function in patients receiving mitomycin-C. Chest 1996;109:939.
154. Cordonnier C, Vernant J-P, Mital P, et al. Pulmonary fibrosis subsequent to high doses of CCNU for chronic leukemia. Cancer 1983;51:1814.
155. Lee W, Moore RP, Wampler CL. Interstitial pulmonary fibrosis as a complication of prolonged methyl-CCNU therapy. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:1355.
156. Sordillo EM, Sordillo PP, Stover DE, et al. Chlorozotocin (DCNU)-induced pulmonary toxicity. Cancer Clin Trials 1981;4:397.
157. Nathan CF, Arrick BA, Murray HW, et al. Tumor cell antioxidant defenses: inhibition of the glutathione redox cycle enhances macrophage-mediated cytolysis. J Exp Med 1981;153:766.
158. Reznil-Schuller HM, Smith AC, Thenot JP, et al. Pulmonary toxicity of the anticancer drug, bis-chloroethyl nitrosourea (BCNU) in rats. Toxicologist 1984;4:29.
159. Selker RC, Jacobs SA, Moore PB. BCNU [1,3-bis (2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea] introduced pulmonary fibrosis. Neurosurgery 1980;7:560.
160. Taylor PM, O'Driscoll BR, Gattamaneni HR, et al. Chronic lung fibrosis following carmustine (BCNU) chemotherapy: radiological features. Clin Radiol 1991;44:299.
161. Haupt HM, Hutchins CM, Moore CW. Ara-C lung: noncardiogenic pulmonary edema complicating cytosine arabinoside therapy of leukemia. Am J Med 1981;70:256.
162. Hewlett RI, Wilson AF. Adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) following aggressive management of extensive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Cancer 1977;39:2422.
163. Vander Els N, Miller V. Successful treatment of gemcitabine toxicity with a brief course of oral corticosteroid therapy. Chest 1998;114:1779.
164. Lokich JJ, Moloney WC. Allergic reaction to procarbazine. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1972; 13:573.
165. Kris MC, Pablo D, Gralla RJ, et al. Dyspnea following vinblastine or vindesine administration in patients receiving mitomycin plus vinca alkaloid combination therapy. Cancer Treat Rep
1984;68:1029.
166. Konits PH, Aisner J, Sutherland J, et al. Possible pulmonary toxicity secondary to vinblastine. Cancer 1982;50:2771.
167. Sleijfer S, Van der Mark TW, Schraffordt Koops H, et al. Decrease in pulmonary function during bleomycin-containing combination chemotherapy for testicular cancer: not only a bleomycin
effect. Br J Cancer 1995;71:120.
168. Dajczman E, Srolovitz H, Kreisman H, et al. Fatal pulmonary toxicity following oral etoposide therapy. Lung Cancer 1995;12:81.
169. Ramanathan RK, Reddy VV, Holbert JM. Chest 1996;110:289.

SECTION 55.4 Cardiac Toxicity
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 55.4
Cardiac Toxicity
LAUREL J. STEINHERZ
JOACHIM YAHALOM
Introduction
Chemotherapy
Anthracyclines
Mitoxantrone
Amsacrine
Cyclophosphamide
Ifosfamide
Retinoicacid
Taxanes
Homoharringtonine
Vincristine and Vinblastine
Mitomycinc
5-Fluorouracil
Cisplatin
Interferon
Other Biologic Agents
Other Agents
Agents Used for Supportive Care
Radiation-Induced Heart Disease
Pericardial Disease
Myocardial Dysfunction
Valvular Disease
Electrical Abnormalities
Coronary Artery Disease
Conclusion
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The treatment of cancer has been vastly improved by the expansion of chemotherapeutic agents and refinement of radiotherapy over the past three decades.
However, many of the most effective antineoplastic agents and mediastinal irradiation produce toxic effects on the heart. This chapter describes some of these
problems and discusses attempts at prevention and management.

CHEMOTHERAPY
ANTHRACYCLINES
The anthracyclines have been associated with cardiomyopathy since their introduction in the late 1960s. Early reports included isolated cases of unexplained cardiac
failure in patients undergoing treatment with daunorubicin 1,2 and 3 and later, in the early 1970s with doxorubicin. 4,5,6,7 and 8 Lefrak et al.9 reported a series in 1973 of 399
patients treated with doxorubicin. He found a 30% incidence of cardiac failure in the patients who received more than 550 mg/m 2 of doxorubicin, and a lower incidence
in those who received less. This introduced the concept of increasing cardiotoxicity with cumulative doses above a safe threshold cumulative dose. In 1974, Halazun
et al.10 reported a series of children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, in remission, treated with two different maintenance protocols, one including and one
excluding daunorubicin. There was a 10% incidence of cardiac failure in the arm with daunorubicin and none in the arm without. This report clearly demonstrated the
relationship of anthracycline treatment to the incidence of cardiac failure, while it excluded the influence of active malignancy or the stress of induction therapy as
contributory factors. Von Hoff et al. demonstrated, in 5613 patients treated with daunorubicin 11 and in 4018 patients treated with doxorubicin, 12 a continuous, almost
exponential increase of incidence of cardiac failure with increasing cumulative dose. Subsequently, Bristow et al. 13,14 used endomyocardial biopsy to show that
pathologic lesions progressively worsened in a linear relationship to the increase in total cumulative dose, in contrast to the nonlinear increase in myocardial
dysfunction. This contrast suggested a threshold of tolerable myocardial damage beyond which the administration of additional drug would result in clinical
symptomatology. Both clinical and pathologic abnormalities increased at any dose level in patients who received mediastinal radiotherapy. 15
Clinical Presentation
Anthracycline cardiomyopathy has been described as having three clinical presentations: acute, subacute, and late. The acute toxicity 16 presents as a myopericarditis
and probably results from the combination of acute myocyte damage from drug exposure and the effects of the catecholamine and histamine 17 surge provoked by the
administration of anthracyclines. This occurs within days of a dose and includes transient arrhythmias, 18,19 pericardial effusion, and myocardial dysfunction,
sometimes leading to transient cardiac failure and occasionally death. 13,16 Histologically, acute myocyte disruption and sometimes infiltration of the myocardium by
granulocytes, lymphocytes, and histiocytes 20 are seen.
The classic subacute presentation has a more insidious onset and appears from 0 to 231 days after the last dose (up to 30 months later), 21 with a peak onset of
symptoms at 3 months from the last dose.11 The clinical picture presents with increasing tachycardia and fatigue, progressing in some patients to tachypnea, dyspnea,
and finally pulmonary edema, right-sided congestive signs, and low cardiac output. The mortality of patients actually manifesting congestive heart failure in these
early series ranged up to 60%, although some patients could be stabilized with intensive cardiac treatment, 22,23 and many showed remarkable improvement of cardiac
function over the first few years after chemotherapy. 23,24,25 and 26 However, evaluation of hemodynamics with exercise has revealed significant underlying abnormalities
even in asymptomatic patients with normal resting parameters. 27 The pathology noted on endomyocardial biopsy and autopsy within the first 2 years after completion
of anthracyclines includes disruption and loss of myofibrils, mitochondrial swelling, and disruption of the sarcoplasmic reticulum producing intramyocyte
vacuolization. 15,28,29 With mild toxicity such damage is patchy, whereas with higher doses and toxicity it is found more extensively throughout the heart, with
progression to myocyte necrosis and loss. Changes in children and adults are similar except for the more frequent appearance of lipid droplets within the myocytes of
children younger than age 10. 30 While some authors have reported the finding of infiltrates of T lymphocytes in biopsy specimens otherwise indicative of subacute
anthracycline cardiomyopathy, 31 classically a lymphocytic infiltrate is absent. 30 The biopsy findings after treatment with anthracycline analogues have been similar. 30
Later pathologic examination, 41 to 47 months from chemotherapy, reveals hypertrophy of the remaining myocytes without fibrosis, and diminution of vacuolization,
suggesting healing and compensation. 32
The late presentation of anthracycline cardiomyopathy has been described to occur 5 or more years after completion of anthracycline
therapy. 33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50 and 51 It involves late clinical decompensation of patients who had recovered from subacute cardiac symptoms 33,34 and 35
(Fig. 55.4-1), or the occurrence of cardiac failure de novo in patients with no previous symptoms, 6 to 25 years after anthracycline therapy. 33,34,35,36,37 and 38,42 It has
also been demonstrated subclinically, as abnormal systolic cardiac function in 23%, 33,34 and 35,42 abnormal myocardial mass in 52%,38,39,40 and 41 and abnormal exercise
response in up to 80% of patients. 43,44 and 45 While some authors have reported abnormalities of diastolic function 40,46 others have found no significant diastolic
changes.47,48 The conflicting results may reflect different sensitivity of different diastolic measurements used. 49 As with subacute toxicity, an increased incidence of
late abnormalities correlates with increasing cumulative dose of anthracycline received, and mediastinal irradiation is an additive risk factor. 34,41,42,50 However, late

abnormalities of resting echocardiography were found in patients treated with as little as 75 mg/m 2 of doxorubicin, 39 and late abnormalities of exercise response were
seen in 55% of patients treated with low cumulative doses (median, 263 mg/m 2).45 A correlation of late cardiotoxicity with individual dose intensity has been reported. 41
Abnormalities of myocardial mass are said, by some authors, to be more pronounced in patients treated in early childhood, implying a negative effect on myocardial
growth.39 Abnormalities of systolic function did not correlate with age during chemotherapy. 34 Measurements of systolic function 34,35 and myocardial wall thickness 39
deteriorate progressively with increasing time after anthracyclines as emphasized in reports including patients followed for more than 15 years after completion of
anthracycline therapy 42 (Fig. 55.4-2). Serious arrhythmias have been identified in symptomatic and asymptomatic patients at late cardiac follow-up, including
ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation and second-degree heart block. 34,35,37,45,51 Several young patients with late cardiomyopathy have experienced sudden death up
to 15 years after chemotherapy. 34,35,36 and 37 The pathology found on biopsy and autopsy of patients with late cardiotoxicity is predominantly fibrosis and hypertrophy of
remaining myocytes, with little remaining vacuolization. 34,35,36 and 37 Thus, even asymptomatic patients who have been treated with anthracyclines need long-term
cardiac follow-up, and new symptoms suggestive of arrhythmia and especially syncope need vigorous investigation. Cardiac status on noninvasive testing during the
year after completion of therapy is predictive for the likelihood of late abnormality ( Fig. 55.4-3) and indicates the advisable frequency of follow-up. 34,35

FIGURE 55.4-1. The clinical course of a patient after subclinical anthracycline cardiotoxicity. The initial increase and then progressive decrease of her fractional
shortening on echocardiography and increasing requirements for therapeutic support of cardiac function can be seen. Despite an early fractional shortening of 11%,
she gradually improved over the first 6 years. She discontinued diuretics, achieved modest exercise tolerance, and completed high school. Her fractional shortening
on echocardiography reached 30% 6 years posttherapy. However, 8 years postdoxorubicin she required increasing amounts of diuretics for recurrent edema. Ten
years postchemotherapy she had progressive deterioration of exercise tolerance and fractional shortening despite increasingly intensive medical management. During
the last 2 years she was found to have moderately frequent premature ventricular contractions but no syncope or runs of ectopic ventricular beats. She was deemed
unsuitable for cardiac transplant. Finally at 20 years post initial diagnosis and 17 years after her last anthracycline dose, she developed a tachy-bradyarrhythmia
leading to sudden syncope and cardiac arrest. CHF, congestive failure; RT, radiotherapy; VPCS, ventricular premature contractions.

FIGURE 55.4-2. The percent of patients found to have abnormal echocardiogram results at the time of long-term follow-up is illustrated. Despite a similar cumulative
anthracycline dose (495 vs. 420 mg/m 2), 38% of those followed 10 years or longer had decreased fractional shortening (FS) as compared with 18% of those followed
less than 10 years (P <.004). More than 50% of the abnormalities (11 of 21) seen in the 10 year or longer group were moderate (FS = 21% to 24%) or severe (FS
£20%), while the degree of abnormality was mild (FS = 25% to 28%) in 77% (20 of 26) of the abnormal patients with shorter follow-up.

FIGURE 55.4-3. An echocardiogram (ECHO) taken after completion of anthracycline therapy has prognostic implications for cardiac function on late follow-up (LTFU).
Eighty-seven percent of patients who had normal fractional shortening on echocardiography taken during the year posttherapy remained normal at LTFU, whereas
only 29% of patients who were even mildly abnormal on end therapy echocardiography were normal at LTFU ( P <.0001). FU, follow-up; TD, total dose.

Mechanisms of Pathogenesis
An understanding of the mechanism of cardiotoxicity provides the basis for attempts at prevention. There are many mechanisms proposed and several may interact to
cause the multiple sites of intracellular injury seen histologically. In the mitochondria, there is a deletion mutation of mitochondrial DNA that increases proportionate to
dosage and duration of anthracycline exposure. 52 In addition, doxorubicin is found to bind to cardiolipin in the inner mitochondrial membrane 53,54 with two deleterious
results. The electron transfer in the respiratory chain, which is dependent on the binding of cardiolipin to cytochrome c for its interaction with cytochrome oxidase, and
the activation by cardiolipin of the nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate to cytochrome c oxidoreductase complex (complex I to III), for the synthesis of
adenosine triphosphate (ATP), is disrupted. This leads to depletion of ATP and phosphocreatine concentrations and depression of contractility. 55 In addition, the
doxorubicin-cardiolipin complex promotes transfer of electrons through doxorubicin, forming a doxorubicin free radical that can reduce molecular oxygen, producing
O2–. This induces the generation of free hydroxyl radicals and hydrogen peroxide, leading to mitochondrial membrane damage, further disruption of enzymatic
respiration, and more extensive lipid peroxidation. 53,54 Oxidative damage is worsened by the concomitant decrease, during chemotherapy, in glutathione peroxidase,
which normally serves as a free radical scavenger. Glutathione is especially important in myocytes, which lack catalase, which serves as a scavenger in other tissues.
Free radical lipid peroxidation was identified 56,57 as an important mechanism of myocyte damage and has been found to depend, in the heart, on an iron-doxorubicin
complex.54,58,59 The resultant disruption of the sarcoplasmic reticulum and direct effects of the metabolite doxorubicinol 60,61 have been shown to cause disturbances of
Ca2+ transport,54,62 such as decrease in calcium release channels, 63 which is critical to regulation of cardiac action potentials, contraction, and relaxation. 64
Chronically, there is alteration of contractile proteins and their enzymes with a shift in the ratio of prevalent isomyosin types and decreased production of a myosin

heavy chains, perhaps as an adaptation to chronic low-energy states. 65
Prevention
MONITORING. Attempts at prevention of cardiomyopathy initially involved limitation of total cumulative dose below 450 to 550 mg/m 2. This limit was chosen to avoid the

rapid increase in prevalence of clinical cardiac dysfunction, in excess of 30%, which occurs above that dose range. However, arbitrary dose limitation was inadequate
because of variability of individual tolerance. Therefore, therapy has been modified according to serial monitoring of cardiac status, by various means, to identify
increasing risk of unacceptable toxicity. Monitoring of systolic time intervals and of electrocardiography (ECG) for QRS voltage loss 66 or ST-T changes was too
nonspecific or showed changes too late to direct prevention. Serial echocardiography has been helpful to identify changes in systolic and diastolic function, especially
in children, in whom echo images are clear and more easily measurable. 67,68,69,70,71,72 and 73 The fractional shortening is the most frequent parameter followed, although
some groups follow end-systolic wall stress and the relationship between wall stress and velocity of circumferential fiber shortening. 71 Early trends of rate of decrease
in fractional shortening, at lower cumulative doses, have been reported to be predictive of eventual cardiac findings at end therapy, after higher cumulative doses. 73
Changes in posterior wall thickness appear to be more useful in late follow-up than for monitoring during chemotherapy. 73 Digitized echocardiography, with calculation
of velocity of wall motion, thickening, and velocity of change of left ventricular chamber size in systole and diastole have been employed to enhance sensitivity.
Radionuclide cardiac angiography has been used by many authors to follow systolic 74,75,76 and 77 and diastolic function, 78,79 and specific guidelines for modification of
chemotherapy on the basis of radionuclide ejection fraction in adults, proposed by Schwartz et al., have gained wide acceptance. 74 Adherence to these guidelines
reduced the incidence of cardiac failure from 21% to 3% in their study. The addition of measurements of contractility during exercise for comparison with those at rest
has added sensitivity according to some authors, 75,76 and 77 but has been less helpful according to others. 80 Recommendations for monitoring, including radionuclide
studies and quantitation of pathologic damage by endomyocardial biopsy, have been offered by investigators from Stanford University Medical Center. 77 However,
these recommendations do not suggest monitoring until a cumulative dose of 450 mg/m 2 unless the baseline study is abnormal, the patient is older than 70 years of
age, or has hypertension, other cardiac disease, or was receiving mediastinal irradiation. This will not identify early sensitivity in patients without those particular risk
factors. Another format for monitoring, using a combination of echocardiography and radionuclide studies, was formulated by the multiinstitutional Cardiology
Discipline Committee of the Children's Cancer Study Group. 67,68 These recommendations include cardiac evaluation before anthracyclines and further monitoring
before every other course until a cumulative dose of 300 mg/m 2 and every course beyond this. Endomyocardial biopsy, which has proven to be safe and effective in
experienced hands, with a complication rate of 1.5%, 81,82 is suggested to clarify abnormal or equivocal results. 67
Although, not yet included in current routine monitoring, several newer modalities have been used for detection of toxicity. Tantalum 178 first-pass radionuclide
imaging has allowed calculation of both right and left ventricular systolic function. 83 Indium-111-antimyosin scintigraphy 84,85 uses a monoclonal antibody labeled with
111In that binds with cardiac myosin, which becomes exposed when cardiac myocytes are injured. Increasing uptake of 111In during anthracycline therapy would imply
increasing cardiac damage. Abnormalities of uptake of 111In have been seen before a decrease in radionuclide ejection fraction 86 and could be used to compare
damage from different methods of administration of conventional anthracyclines 86 or from different cardiotoxic agents. 87 This method was also reported to discriminate
patients with sustained cardiotoxicity from those with transient decreases in ejection fraction or myocardial metastasis. 88 In studies in rats, the amount of cardiac 111In
uptake correlated with both histologic changes and end-diastolic pressure, and there was specific immunolocalization of the radiotracer in injured myocytes as
opposed to normal neighboring ones microscopically. 89
Another radionuclide, radioiodinated metaiodobenzylguanidine ( 123I-MIBG), has been used to indicate early anthracycline cardiotoxicity. MIBG is an analogue of
norepinephrine and reflects cardiac adrenergic neuron integrity that is disrupted with anthracycline damage. Animal studies 90 and clinic trials 91,92 demonstrated
abnormalities of uptake and clearance of MIBG even before abnormalities of systolic and diastolic function are seen by echocardiography. These MIBG abnormalities
were proportionate to severity of systolic dysfunction in patients with toxicity.
Positron emission tomography has been used to identify metabolic changes suggesting cardiac damage in patients receiving chemotherapy. 9331P nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy has also demonstrated metabolic changes that correlate with the amount of doxorubicin-induced degeneration of myofibrils microscopically. 94
Reports on the usefulness of monitoring serum levels of troponin T postmyocardial infarction, to detect limited myocardial necrosis, prompted investigation of this
method's usefulness to detect early anthracycline damage. Although animal study results seem promising, 95 clinical trials are still in progress. Therefore, this method
remains investigational and is not yet recommended for routine monitoring. Some investigators have reported that elevated serum natriuretic peptide, which is
released in response to chronic or acute increase in atrial transmural pressure and stretch, may be a marker for anthracycline damage. 96
Schwartz et al. correlated prolongation of the corrected QT interval (QTc) on 12-lead ECG with increasing anthracycline dose in both acute and chronic anthracycline
cardiomyopathy.97 Careful attention to concomitant electrolyte and calcium imbalance is clearly mandatory to avoid false results. Jakacki et al. suggested an algorithm
combining measurement of QTc with fractional shortening on echocardiography and a history of exercise intolerance for screening. 98 Another new measurement from
signal-averaged ECG, that of ventricular late potentials, may also have predictive value. 99
SCHEDULE MODIFICATION. Other attempts to prevent cardiomyopathy involve decreasing the peak dose of anthracycline delivered to the heart by modification of

schedules of delivery. 100,101,102,103,104,105 and 106 Legha et al. demonstrated that patients receiving continuous infusions of doxorubicin developed lower peak plasma
levels the longer the time of the infusion. 100 Thus, levels with a 48-hour infusion were lower than with a 24-hour infusion and a 96-hour infusion of the same dose per
course produced still lower levels. They proved by comparing endomyocardial biopsy scores in patients receiving doxorubicin that patients receiving their dose by 48or 96-hour infusion had significantly lower biopsy scores, indicating less cardiomyopathy than patients receiving the dose by 20-minute bolus. In addition, the patients
receiving 96-hour infusions had lower biopsy scores than those receiving 24-hour infusions. Infusions were administered through an indwelling intravenous line using
a battery-powered portable pump. Currently, continuous infusion chemotherapy is usually given through a surgically implanted central venous access catheter. A
study by Shapira et al., using radionuclide cardiac angiography to evaluate cardiotoxicity, demonstrated a decline in left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of only 6%
after a total cumulative dose of 400 mg/m 2 administered by only 6-hour continuous infusion, compared with a decrease of 21% in patients who received the same
range of total doxorubicin dose by 20-minute bolus. 102 Casper et al. confirmed the cardioprotective effects of 72-hour infusion in a prospective randomized trial of 82
patients with soft tissue sarcoma.101 The article suggested, however, that continuous infusion might have a negative effect on antitumor efficacy, although this was not
conclusive since their infusion patients had tumors with worse prognostic features than their bolus patients. Other uncontrolled trials using continuous infusion for
various solid tumors have shown no decrease in efficacy. 105 Reports of prospective randomized trials comparing infusion with bolus for treatment of leukemia, in which
efficacy can be measured by percent cell kill on bone marrow sampling, 103 and in osteogenic sarcoma in which it is measured as histologic response of the surgically
removed tumor after preoperative chemotherapy,106 have shown no significant decrease in antitumor efficacy with continuous infusion. In fact, in the leukemia study,
efficacy was better with infusion. 103 Schedules dividing the planned monthly doxorubicin dose into smaller weekly dosages have also decreased pathologic and
physiologic abnormalities, allowing higher cumulative doses to be given. 107,108
Cardioprotective Agents
Free radical scavengers vitamin E, 109 ascorbic acid,110 N-acetyl-cysteine, 111 and others112,113 have shown promise in animals but no clear benefit in patients, although
results of one study in rats using the lipid-lowering antioxidant agent probucol seem encouraging. 114 Similarly, trials of concomitant administration of verapamil, 115,116
prenylamine, 117 other calcium channel blockers, and b-adrenergic and histamine blockers 118,119 to prevent the effects of excessive vasoactive agents, antiinflammatory
agents, carnitine, digoxin, 120 and amrinone121 have not yet proven definitively useful in patients. Studies are ongoing examining the usefulness of coenzyme Q10 122
and amifostine. 123 Encapsulation of the anthracycline in liposomes and binding to agarose 124 were initially disappointing. However, the use of more stable liposomal
complexes has provided some protection. 125,126
Attempts to exploit the importance of the iron-doxorubicin complex appear to be more successful. The classic chelator deferoxamine did not prevent anthracycline
cardiomyopathy in normal as opposed to iron overloaded cardiac cells. 127 However, 1-2-bis(3,5-dioxopiperazinyl-1-yl) propane, known as ICRF-187, ADR-529, or
dexrazoxane and commercially as Zinecard or Cardioxane, an iron chelator that achieves better intracellular concentration, has been shown in various animals, 128,129
and 130
and several human studies to exhibit significant protection against anthracycline cardiomyopathy. Animal studies have demonstrated healing of lesions within 3
months after discontinuation of therapy in rabbits treated with ICRF. 131 Initial clinical trials included a pilot study of 12 patients with various solid tumors 132 and a
randomized therapeutic trial in women with breast cancer. 133,134 and 135 Patients were evaluated both by radionuclide ejection fraction and myocardial biopsy. Incidence
of clinical toxicity, degree of decrease of ejection fraction, and biopsy score were significantly less in the ICRF arm. These results have been confirmed in a large

multicenter trial, in adults with breast cancer using fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide (FAC), and small cell lung cancer, using similar cardiac
monitoring. 136,137,138 and 139 Smaller trials have been equally promising in pediatric patients. 140,141,142 and 143 The multicenter adult trial 136,137,138 and 139 and larger pediatric
trials 143 have also attempted to examine the effect of ICRF on antimalignant efficacy, which seems, in most cases, to be preserved. 143 Investigators had hoped to
combine the protective effects of infusion scheduling of doxorubicin and concomitant ICRF. To that end, studies of infusional ICRF are in progress. 144
This agent appears to also provide cardiac protection for anthracycline analogues such as epirubicin 85,145,146 and mitoxantrone.146,147 and 148
NEW ANALOGUES. Analogues of daunorubicin and doxorubicin have been studied in clinical trials. Many agents that appear to have decreased cardiotoxicity in animal

studies and even in early clinical trials eventually have been found to have similar toxicity to the parent compound. Patients treated with zorubicin experienced
cardiotoxicity that was additive to prior anthracycline toxicity and some developed cardiac failure. 149,150 4'Epi-doxorubicin is another analogue with cardiotoxicity similar
to or possibly less 151,152 and 153 than doxorubicin. Incidences of atrioventricular block, ventricular fibrillation, decreased ejection fraction, and decreased velocity of
circumferential fiber shortening 154,155 have been reported in phase I and II trials with another analogue, aclarubicin. Demethoxy daunorubicin (Idarubicin) has shown
activity in patients whose malignancy has become resistant to daunorubicin. However, it is also cardiotoxic. 156,157 Its myelotoxicity is approximately four times that of
daunorubicin milligram for milligram. When given in amounts of equivalent myelotoxicity, the cardiotoxicity is also similar. 157,158 Thus, careful monitoring of this agent
would be warranted above a cumulative dose of 75 mg/m2. Cardiac failure and subclinical decrease in ejection fraction occurred in patients treated with the analogue
esorubicin. A 5% drop in mean LVEF was noted at 240 mg/m2 and a 10% drop at 480 mg/m2 of this agent.159 Animal studies of 4'-deoxy-4'iodo-doxorubicinol indicate
acute and chronic cardiotoxicity but possibly less than daunorubicin. 160 The ideal anthracycline has not yet been found.
Management
Clinical anthracycline cardiomyopathy needs to be managed with inotropic support and afterload reduction, 20 often initially by the intravenous route.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors have played an important role in stabilizing cardiac failure and delaying further myocardial deterioration. 37,51 Current reports
suggest that selective b-receptor blockers, such as metoprolol 161 and more recently carvedilol, 162 may be useful in patients who do not improve with these modalities.
Control of malignant arrhythmias may require intensive medical management with drugs such as amiodarone and mexiletine or placement of indwelling automatic
cardioverters and pacemakers.37,42,51 Most patients can be stabilized and show clinical improvement. Patients who have been refractory to treatment or have repeat
bouts of pulmonary edema and are free of malignancy have benefited from cardiac transplantation. 163,164,165,166 and 167
MITOXANTRONE
Mitoxantrone hydrochloride is an anthracenedione that is similar in structure to doxorubicin. It was found to be toxic to cardiac cells in culture despite a lack of
production of free radical peroxidation. 147 The toxicity appeared to involve an interaction with iron similar to that of doxorubicin. 147 Animal studies revealed conflicting
findings in different species. There were ECG abnormalities in treated monkeys and dose-related impairment of contractility in the rabbit heart, 168 but no ECG changes
or progressive anthracycline-like lesions on endomyocardial biopsy specimens of Beagle hearts. 169 There were cases of cardiac failure and arrhythmia (mainly
supraventricular) reported from the early phase I and II trials under the auspices of the National Cancer Institute. 170,171 The incidence of myocardial dysfunction and
cardiac failure increased with increasing cumulative dose as with doxorubicin. 170,172 Significant decreases in ejection fraction occurred in these trials around 110
mg/m2170 and a rapid increase in incidence of cardiac failure was noted at 160 mg/m 2.172 Later studies have continued to detect cardiomyopathy and cardiac failure in
patients with173 and without174 prior anthracycline therapy, and conduction delay, with prolongation of PR, QRS, and QT interval on ECG, was also reported. 175 A
British patient trial reported a 46% incidence of abnormal LVEF, using radionuclide angiography during rest and cold pressor stress, in patients who received a wide
range of doses.176 A Greek cooperative study found decreases in ejection fraction of greater than or equal to 10% within normal range, in 10% of patients tested, and
they reported minimal changes in echo systolic function and significant changes in systolic time intervals in the patient cohort as a whole, after receiving 60 mg/m 2
combined with cyclophosphamide and fluorouracil. 177 An Italian trial reported ECG abnormalities in 41%, echocardiographic abnormalities in 66%, and a greater than
or equal to 15% decrease in radionuclide LVEF in almost 25% of patients receiving a cumulative dose of 28 to 84 mg/m 2.178 The overall incidence, reported by
Immunex Laboratories, of subclinical moderate to serious decrement in LVEF was 13%, and the incidence of cardiac failure, up to a cumulative dose of 140 mg/m 2,
was 2.6%.179
AMSACRINE
Amsacrine (AMSA) is an acridine derivative used mainly in nonlymphoblastic leukemia. It has been associated with myocardial infarction 180 and ventricular and
supraventricular arrhythmias including fatal ventricular fibrillation. 181,182,183 and 184 Many of these arrhythmias have been attributed to coexisting electrolyte
abnormalities, particularly hypokalemia, and more recently AMSA has been safely administered even to patients with preexisting atrial 189 and ventricular 185
arrhythmias. Noninvasive monitoring of cardiac function during a prospective study of AMSA revealed reversible abnormalities on serial echocardiography in 18 of 27
patients and cardiac failure in 7 of 27 patients. 186,187 Echocardiographic abnormalities generally appeared within a week of AMSA therapy and resolved in most, once
therapy was discontinued. Four patients died with persistent cardiac failure. The incidence of echocardiographic abnormalities was related to total dose of AMSA, rate
of AMSA administration, and the total dose of anthracyclines previously received. No patient who received less than 200 mg/m 2 AMSA in 48 hours, after having
received less than 400 mg/m 2 of anthracyclines, had echocardiographic abnormalities. In contrast, all patients who received greater than or equal to 200 mg/m 2 of
AMSA within 48 hours after having received greater than 400 mg/m 2 of anthracyclines exhibited echocardiographic abnormalities. 186 More recently, Arlin et al. treated
24 patients with preexisting myocardial dysfunction with AMSA greater than 200 mg/m 2/48 hours and reported no occurrences of cardiac failure in this group. 188 Nine
of the patients had radionuclide ejection fractions determined after AMSA treatment and two of nine showed a further decrease of ejection fraction by more than 10%.
It is not stated how soon after treatment the radionuclide angiograms were obtained. Therefore, it is possible that there were additional transient deficits that were not
detected in this study. However, the absence of any clinical cardiac failure in these heavily treated patients is significant.
CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE
There is still disagreement if doses of cyclophosphamide under 100 mg/kg/week contribute to cardiomyopathy, 13,24,107,189 and in our experience such doses do not.
However, higher doses used for cytoreduction and immunosuppression before bone marrow transplantation can cause an acute hemorrhagic pancarditis. It was
initially described in case reports, 190,191 and 192 animal studies, 193 and autopsy series 194,195 as involving a serosanguinous pericardial effusion, mural thickening with
edema, and endocardial, myocardial, and epicardial hemorrhage. This results from endothelial capillary damage that allows extravasation of fluid and red cells into
cardiac and pulmonary tissues. Reports of patient series 196,197,198 and 199 described the acute course, with an onset during the first week posttreatment, peak toxicity at 7
to 9 days, and improvement over the next 3 weeks. Abnormal findings of diastolic dysfunction, small to moderate pericardial effusion, restrictive cardiomyopathy,
sometimes mimicking pericardial tamponade, and later systolic dysfunction, were found in more than one-half the patients. 197,198 and 199 The most frequent ECG change
seen was decreased voltage, which did not necessarily correlate with impairment of function. 197,198 and 199 Abnormalities of T waves and ST segment and arrhythmias
are seen,200 including complete heart block 201 and ventricular tachyarrhythmias. 200 Some arrhythmias may be due to the infusion of the cryopreserved marrow graft. 202
The majority of patients remained asymptomatic.197,199,203 Some had mild symptoms of fluid retention, edema, and tachypnea, and a few had an extremely fulminant
course of cardiac failure shock and death that was resistant to even intensive treatment. Risk factors of previous anthracycline therapy and previous abnormal cardiac
function were identified and the importance of dose and rate of delivery was stressed. 197,204 A weekly dose of 170 mg/kg over 4 days without anthracyclines and 120
mg/kg over 2 days after anthracyclines predicted risk for at least subclinical changes. More rapid delivery of 120 mg/kg over 24 hours produced fulminant
cardiomyopathy in one patient. 192,194 Mildly symptomatic patients responded to diuretics and, if necessary, transient digitalization or intravenous inotropic agents.
Those with the more fulminant course required prolonged intravenous inotropic support, respiratory assistance, and hemofiltration. 199 Pericardial drainage has not
been helpful usually, although rare cases of true cardiac tamponade responding to pericardiocentesis have been reported. 205 In most cases the effusion can be
managed with analgesics and corticosteroids. 206 To avoid this clinical cardiotoxicity, patients have been screened during the past decade with echocardiography or
radionuclide studies to identify abnormal cardiac function and the pretransplant regimen adjusted for higher risk patients by administering the cyclophosphamide over
additional days or using a preparative regimen without cyclophosphamide. A pretreatment radionuclide LVEF of less than 50%, 207,208 or even less than 55%, 209 has
been correlated with increased risk of cardiotoxicity. 207,208 and 209 Studies have suggested that giving the cyclophosphamide by infusion or in smaller twice-a-day doses
decreased the incidence of systolic dysfunction, although changes of myocardial mass were still seen. 208 Evaluation of patients' hemodynamics during exercise at
least a year after transplant has shown significant abnormalities in children treated for malignancy before transplant with anthracyclines. However, the few children

with aplastic anemia, who had not received anthracyclines, were normal. 210
IFOSFAMIDE
Ifosfamide , an alkylating oxazaphosphorine related to cyclophosphamide, has been associated with atrial ectopy (including atrial fibrillation) and, less commonly,
ST-T wave changes and bradycardia. These abnormalities were noted in patients who had received doses as high as 6.25 to 10.0 g/m 2 over 3 to 5 days.211 One
series reported an incidence of congestive heart failure in 9 of 52 patients enrolled in a phase I trial of high-dose ifosfamide with other agents with autologous marrow
transplantation. 212 ECG abnormalities, negative inotropic effects, and pathologic myocardial damage were also found in animals who received high doses of
ifosfamide.213,214
RETINOIC ACID
Trans-retinoic acid is an active agent for the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia. However, in more than 10% of patients, a syndrome is produced, known as
RA syndrome, involving fever, dyspnea, pleural and pericardial effusion, pulmonary infiltrates, peripheral edema, and transient myocardial dysfunction and heart
failure. 215 This is especially prevalent during the first 2 weeks of therapy and has responded to dexamethasone.
TAXANES
Paclitaxel (Taxol) has been described as causing abnormalities of cardiac rhythm, conduction, and function. In preclinical studies, paclitaxel produced arrhythmias
and slowing of beat frequencies of rat cardiac cells growing in vitro.216 Cases of clinically significant disturbances of cardiac rhythm and conduction were reported
during phase I and II trials of this agent. 217 Significant sinus bradycardia (heart rate, 30 to 50 bpm) was common, occurring in up to 29% of patients in a phase II trial
for ovarian cancer. 218 Several patients exhibited progressive although transient atrioventricular conduction delay from first-degree heart block, to complete heart block,
to asystole 218 on continuous ECG monitoring during paclitaxel infusion as a single agent. Associated presyncope and syncope have been reported, 217 requiring
temporary pacing. Episodes of sustained and nonsustained ventricular tachycardia have been reported with the combination of paclitaxel and cisplatin. 219 However,
Markman et al. used this combination successfully in patients with significant preexisting cardiac risk factors. 220 Since few of their patients had significant preexisting
conduction disorders, it is still recommended that patients with arrhythmia or abnormal conduction be monitored with continuous ECG during paclitaxel administration.
The combination of paclitaxel with doxorubicin for the treatment of breast cancer has resulted in an increased incidence of clinically significant deterioration of left
ventricular function at a lower cumulative dose of doxorubicin. It has been suggested that this is due to interaction between the two agents resulting in decreased
elimination of the doxorubicin and that the cumulative doxorubicin dose should be limited to 340 to 380 mg/m 2 in this combination. 221 Preliminary experience with the
synthetic analogue docetaxel (Taxatere) suggested similar potential for dysrhythmia; however, clinical trials have not shown cardiotoxicity of this agent or significant
increase in doxorubicin toxicity when docetaxel and doxorubicin are combined. 222
HOMOHARRINGTONINE
Homoharringtonine is an alkaloid from the Chinese Cephalotaxus. It is another drug that causes reversible atrioventricular block, 223 ventricular ectopy,224
supraventricular tachycardia, and ST-T wave changes in animals 225 and patients. 223 It has also produced cardiac failure and hypotension, with vacuolar degeneration
of the myocardium on pathologic examination.223,225
VINCRISTINE AND VINBLASTINE
Vincristine has been associated with cardiac autonomic dysfunction. One study demonstrated a loss of cyclic respiratory phase–related heart rate variation in nine
children during vincristine treatment. 226
Vincristine 227,228 and 229 and vinblastine 230 have also been associated with myocardial infarction. Angina pectoris was reported in up to 38% of patients during treatment
with vinblastine combined with cisplatinum and bleomycin. 231 Another study of the same combination, reported angina with infarct-like ECG changes and apical
akinesia occurring repeatedly, during multiple courses, in a 47-year-old patient with normal coronary angiography. 232 This seemed to clearly implicate the
chemotherapy as the cause.
MITOMYCIN C
Mitomycin C has been reported to increase the incidence of anthracycline cardiotoxicity when these agents are combined 233 due to enhancement of formation of
superoxide and hydrogen peroxide. 234 It has more recently been described as a cause of acute congestive heart failure in a woman who received a cumulative dose of
225 mg/m2 of mitomycin as a single agent235 and in another patient when 30 mg/m 2 of mitomycin was added to treatment with 150 mg/m2 of doxorubicin. 236 The overall
incidence of cardiotoxicity is said to be under 10% and limited to patients receiving a cumulative dose of at least 30 mg/m 2.236,237
5-FLUOROURACIL
The cardiotoxicity of 5-fluorouracil was first identified by Dent and McColl in 1975. 238 A survey of 1083 patients in 1982 reported cardiotoxicity in 1.1% of all patients,
and 4.6% of patients with prior evidence of heart disease. 239 By 1990 there were more than 67 clinical cases described. 240 Since then, more frequent use of
continuous infusion 5-fluorouracil increased awareness of the problem, and more sophisticated monitoring has increased the reported incidence. Thus, by 1991
another large cooperative series of 1145 patients included 31 patients with cardiac symptoms including four cardiotoxic deaths, an incidence of almost 3% of all
patients. 241 An even higher incidence of cardiotoxicity of 7.6% was reported from a prospective study of high-dose continuous infusion in 1992. 242 An incidence of
silent ischemic ECG changes, as high as 68%, was identified in patients monitored by continuous 24-hour ambulatory ECG during fluorouracil infusion. 243 The
cardiotoxicity described has involved (1) precordial pain (both nonspecific and anginal) 240; (2) ECG ST-T wave changes (nonspecific and ischemic) 240,243,244; (3) acute
myocardial infarction (rare) 244,245 and 246; (4) atrial arrhythmias (including atrial fibrillation) and, less frequently, ventricular ectopy (including refractory ventricular
tachycardia and fibrillation) 243,244,245,246,247 and 248; (5) ventricular dysfunction (usually global, less frequently segmental); (6) cardiac failure, pulmonary edema, and
cardiogenic shock (with and without ischemic symptoms) 246,248,249,250,251 and 252; and (7) sudden death. 246,247 In most cases the arrhythmias were treatable and the
ischemia-like symptoms and ECG changes disappeared if the infusion was discontinued, or responded to nitrates, allowing the infusion to continue. The abnormalities
of segmental and global ventricular function reverted to normal within days to weeks of cessation of infusion. However, some patients needed intravenous inotropic
and vasodilator support during the initial period. 248,249 and 250,252,253 In most cases with chest pain with or without ECG changes, the creatine phosphokinase (CPK) MB
fraction remained normal. 240,246,249,251 Most frequently, patients developed cardiac toxicity during the second or later course of treatment, but some experienced
problems during the first course. 240 Those who developed cardiac toxicity and recovered, usually had symptoms again when rechallanged with another
infusion. 240,246,248 Some investigators reported success in preventing cardiotoxicity with calcium blockers such as nifedipine and diltiazem, 254 whereas others had less
success.251,255 There was no influence of age or sex on incidence. 240 Symptoms were reported in a 38-year-old man 252 and several women in their 40s 240,249,250 with no
prior cardiac history. Cardiac findings have occurred when 5-fluorouracil was given by infusion or bolus, as a single agent, or with cisplatin and other drugs. 240,244
While some believed that cardiac irradiation 256 and preexisting heart disease 239,243 were risk factors, others did not. 240,257 Several investigators have documented
normal coronary arteries in patients with severe symptoms. 246,250 One investigator excluded increased proclivity for coronary vasospasm by challenging a patient, who
had previous angina during fluorouracil infusion, with ergonovine during a posttreatment coronary study. 246 Findings on autopsy and endomyocardial biopsy have
shown diffuse, interstitial edema, intracytoplasmic vacuolization of myocytes, and no inflammatory infiltrate. 258 Acute infarcts have been demonstrated pathologically in
some, but not all, patients with clinical infarction. 240
The ischemic-like pain and ECG findings, with lack of CPK MB changes, with frequent response to nitrates and at times to calcium channel blockers, in the setting of
anatomically normal coronary angiograms plus reversible contractility deficits, would suggest coronary vasospasm as a mechanism for fluorouracil cardiotoxicity.
However, the global dysfunction, possibly due to stunned myocardium, and lack of universal response to coronary vasodilators leaves some questions about this
hypothesis and some postulate a myocarditis or myocardiopathy etiology. 259,260 and 261
Although the mechanism is still uncertain, it seems clear that careful observation for cardiac symptoms and arrhythmias is warranted during drug infusion, especially

in patients who have been symptomatic in prior courses.
CISPLATIN
Cisplatin has been associated with arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation 262 and with angina and ST-T wave changes on ECG. 263,264,265 and 266 These may be caused or
exacerbated by electrolyte imbalances from the excessive hydration and forced diuresis required for the drug's administration.
INTERFERON
Cardiotoxicity has been identified in 44 of 432 patients from 15 phase I clinical trials of interferon-a, a 2, b, and g. 267 Significant abnormalities of cardiac rhythm and
conduction, 267,268,269 and 270 ischemia and infarction, 267,271,272,273 and 274 and cardiomyopathy 267,274,275 and 276 were observed. These problems were identified with all types of
interferon used except interferon-b, which was used in only a small subset of the patients. 267 No correlation with patient age, individual dose, or cumulative dose was
identified although some patients had less toxicity when retreated at doses lower than the dose producing toxicity. 267,275 Cardiomyopathy was seen in patients after
more prolonged treatment, 275 but the other forms of toxicity were seen frequently during the first 5 weeks of treatment, even within 1 to 7 days of initiation of
therapy. 267 The occurrence of ischemia and infarction was definitely related to a prior history of ischemic heart disease and may have related to increased myocardial
oxygen demand from the fever and stress of the flu-like syndrome accompanying treatment or to peripheral and coronary arterial constriction. 267 The arrhythmias were
less clearly related to prior heart disease but may have been exacerbated by the features of this flu-like syndrome as well. Arrhythmias and ischemic ECG changes
were identified in mice treated with interferon-a with no myocardial lesions on necropsy, suggesting mediation by peripheral effects. 270 Arrhythmias have been seen in
up to 20% of patients in clinical trials. 269 The arrhythmias observed include fatal 277 and reversible 278 ventricular fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia, 268,269 atrial flutter
and fibrillation, atrioventricular block, and less severe atrial and ventricular ectopy. 267 Sudden death was seen in two patients. 267 Cardiomyopathy, presenting as
cardiac failure, with severe decrease in radionuclide ejection fraction to 10% to 33%, was seen in seven patients during prolonged administration of interferon-a or
interferon-a 2.275,276,279,280 The cardiomyopathy was reversible in four of the patients after cessation of interferon, with and without inotropic, diuretic, and afterload
reduction therapy. Congestive symptoms disappeared and ejection fractions improved to 29% to 46%. Two patients were able to be retreated with lower doses of
interferon without return of failure. Three of the patients with reversible cardiomyopathy had acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) with Kaposi's sarcoma. 275
However, AIDS-associated cardiomyopathy is not reversible. Two others had chronic myelogenous leukemia 279 and hairy cell leukemia, 276 and two more patients had
other cancer.280 Myocardial biopsy in one patient revealed only mild focal intramyocyte vacuolization. 275 The etiologic mechanism is unknown. In vitro studies have
been conflicting. One study in isolated rat cardiac myocytes, incubated with interferon, showed inhibition of contractility and depletion of ATP, 281 while another similar
study did not. 282 Some postulate an interaction between interferon and noradrenaline. 267,283 Cautious observation for cardiac symptoms and monitoring of rhythm
appear to be warranted for these agents with reduction in dose for significant abnormalities.
OTHER BIOLOGIC AGENTS
Interleukin-2 and tumor necrosis factor produced no reduction of ATP or decrease in contractility when incubated with isolated rat cardiac myocytes for 24 to 48
hours. 282 However, a major reduction of ventricular stroke work index was found in patients with a variety of solid tumors monitored with indwelling arterial and
pulmonary catheters during interleukin-2 treatment. 284 This resulted from a poor increase in cardiac index in comparison with the decrease in peripheral resistance. All
patients developed a capillary leak syndrome 285 requiring dopamine and crystalloid support. Deleterious effects on blood pressure, systemic resistance, and stroke
work appeared to peak at approximately 4 hours after individual doses and to worsen with subsequent doses. 284 In addition, there has been a significant (4% to 30%
in various trials) incidence of apparent myocardial infarction with this agent. 274,284,285,286,287,288,289 and 290 One patient with elevated CPK MB fraction, focal injury pattern
on ECG, and segmental wall motion abnormality on radionuclide angiography underwent coronary angiography, revealing normal coronary arteries. 291 This suggested
a pathogenesis involving coronary vasospasm or focal myocarditis. A series of 199 patients had an incidence of 6% arrhythmias including ventricular tachycardia,
53% hypotension, and 25% elevated CPK MB. 292 Another biologic agent, interleukin-4, has been associated with myocarditis. 293
A new biologic agent OK432 derived from Streptococcus was suspected of inducing an autoimmune cardiomyopathy. However, it was shown not to provoke the
formation of antiheart antibody or ECG changes in rabbits or human patients. 294 Continued evidence of lack of cardiotoxicity should remove an obstacle toward its
development as an active anticancer agent.
Trastuzumab (Herceptin), a humanized monoclonal antibody developed to target the HER2 receptor (an epidermal growth factor receptor that is overexpressed in
many types of tumor cells), has been associated with cardiotoxicity in several clinical trials. 295,296 and 297 The toxicity was manifested as deteriorating systolic function
with either asymptomatic decrease in ejection fraction or congestive heart failure similar to anthracycline toxicity. This was observed, however, mainly in patients who
had previously received anthracyclines or were concomitantly receiving anthracyclines. 296 Therefore, it is not clear that trastuzumab is itself cardiotoxic or rather
potentiates the cardiotoxicity from the previous or ongoing anthracycline therapy. The mechanism of the cardiotoxicity is unknown and histologic information from
endomyocardial biopsy is not available. However, clinical and noninvasive evidence of abnormal systolic function was seen more than four times as frequently in
patients treated with doxorubicin plus trastuzumab (27%) as in patients treated with doxorubicin alone (6%) in a phase III clinical trial. 295,296 In another randomized
clinical trial there was more congestive heart failure in patients treated with paclitaxel and trastuzumab (11%) than in patients treated with paclitaxel alone (1%). 297 In
a third trial, a single-arm study, there was a 7% incidence of congestive failure in 213 patients receiving trastuzumab alone. 297 Clearly the cardiotoxic potential of this
promising agent will require further investigation, and patients treated with both trastuzumab and an anthracycline need careful monitoring.
OTHER AGENTS
Case reports have attributed cardiotoxicity to several other agents. Melphalan, 298 Bis(helenal)malonate, 299 mithramycin,300 and bis[1,2-bis(diphenylphosphino)ethane]
gold (I) chloride (a cytotoxic antineoplastic drug containing gold), 301 teniposide, 302 etoposide,303 busulfan,304 and deoxycoformycin305 have been implicated in this
respect.
AGENTS USED FOR SUPPORTIVE CARE
Patients undergoing therapy for cancer usually receive various medications, in addition to their chemotherapeutic agents, especially for supportive care and treatment
of toxicity. Some of these may also have cardiotoxic effects. For example, granisetron, an antiemetic, has been associated with sinus bradycardia, atrioventricular
block varying from increased PR interval to Wenckebach's and junctional rhythm. 306 The cytokines, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor, have been associated with pericardial effusion.

RADIATION-INDUCED HEART DISEASE
Cardiac complications resulting from mediastinal irradiation were considered rare and insignificant for a long period in the history of radiotherapy. 307,308 Since the
mid-1960s, when follow-up information on a large number of patients who had been cured of Hodgkin's disease (HD) with higher doses of radiation became available,
the heart has no longer been considered radioresistant. 309 Radiation-induced heart disease has now been characterized 310,311 and 312 and investigated in experimental
animals, 313,314,315,316 and 317 and the pathologic features of the damage have been described with regard to the coronary arteries and all three layers of the
heart.318,319,320,321,322 and 323
Pericarditis and pericardial effusion have been regarded as the most common side effects of cardiac irradiation. 310 However, modern techniques of irradiation, dose
fractionation, and reduction of the heart volume irradiated in most malignancies have substantially reduced the frequency of this complication during the last
decade.324 At the same time, evidence has accumulated to suggest that ischemic heart disease resulting from radiation-induced CAD is the most concerning long-term
risk of cardiac irradiation, particularly in high-risk patients. 325,326,327,328 and 329
The clinical spectrum of radiation-induced heart disease involves most structures of the heart and is summarized as follows:
Pericardial disease
Acute pericarditis during irradiation

Delayed acute pericarditis
Pericardial effusion
Constrictive pericarditis
Myocardial dysfunction
Valvular heart disease
Electrical conduction abnormalities
Coronary artery disease
Although the pathologic and clinical manifestations of radiation-induced heart disease may overlap in many patients, they are discussed separately in the following
paragraphs.
PERICARDIAL DISEASE
Incidence
The risk of radiation-induced pericardial disease depends on both the dose given and on the volume of the heart irradiated. 310,312,322,330,331 Even when a large volume
of the heart (60% or more) is irradiated at or below 40 Gy, the risk for mild pericarditis is below 5%, and severe pericarditis is rare. 324 Smaller heart volumes (20% to
30%) may tolerate up to 60 Gy, with an expected 2% risk of mild pericarditis. The importance of both volume and dose in the production of radiation pericarditis in HD
was demonstrated in an analysis of mantle field radiotherapy practices at Stanford. 332 In instances in which the whole pericardium was irradiated, the pericarditis
incidence was 20%, but when most of the left ventricle was excluded, it was reduced to 7%. When an additional block was implemented to shield most of the heart
after 30 Gy, the incidence was reduced to only 2.5%. An update of the Stanford data corroborated this finding, demonstrating a sharp decrease in the risk of death
from cardiac complications other than acute myocardial infarction for patients who received mediastinal irradiation after 1972. 326 Indeed, all series that showed a high
risk of pericarditis 333,334 and 335 are of patients treated with a radiation technique, energy, and fractionation schedules that are no longer considered to be an acceptable
standard of care in most centers.329 With current radiotherapy techniques for HD and breast cancer, pericarditis is an infrequent event. 329,331,336,337
Pathology
Clinical and pathologic changes involving the pericardium are the most common abnormalities described after cardiac irradiation. 317,323 The macroscopic abnormalities
consist of pericardial thickening and effusion. 310 Collagen replaces the normal adipose tissue, fibrinous exudate is present on the surface and interstitially, and
proliferation of small blood vessels can be observed microscopically. 310 The pericardial fluid is protein rich and may contain strands of fibrin. The fluid ranges in
appearance from serous to grossly sanguineous. 311 Over time, the fibrinous exudate may organize with the fibrotic pericardium and epicardium to develop into
constrictive pericarditis. The mechanism for pericardial fibrosis and effusion is not clear. It may result from increased capillary permeability and inhibition of the local
fibrinolytic mechanism. 310,338 Radiation-induced hypothyroidism should also be considered in the etiology of pericardial effusion after mediastinal irradiation. 339
Acute Pericarditis during Radiation
Acute pericarditis during the course of radiotherapy is rare. It is almost always associated with massive mediastinal tumors adjacent to the heart. The signs and
symptoms are of acute nonspecific pericarditis with chest pain, fever, and often ECG abnormalities. It does not lead to a significant risk of late pericardial damage and
is not an indication for interrupting the radiation course. 310,312,327
Delayed Pericarditis
Radiation-induced pericarditis typically occurs within the first year after mediastinal irradiation. The common range is between 4 months to several years after
treatment.310,312,335,340,341 and 342 Pericardial disease presents either as an acute pericarditis, as a pericardial effusion that may be asymptomatic, or as a combination of
both. The symptoms of delayed acute pericarditis are indistinguishable from those of other types of pericarditis and usually consist of fever, pleuritic chest pain,
pericardial friction rub, ST-T segment changes, and a decrease of the QRS voltage in the ECG. 310,311,335
Pericardial effusion may be large and manifest as an enlarged cardiac silhouette. 343 The differential diagnosis of pericardial effusion after radiation includes recurrent
malignancy, idiopathic pericarditis, myxedema, and pericardial abscess. 311,344,345 It is estimated that 10% to 30% of patients with radiation-related pericardial effusion
develop tamponade and require pericardiocentesis. 334,346,347 Most cases of radiation-induced pericarditis and pericardial effusion resolve spontaneously, usually within
16 months.347 Approximately 20% of patients with delayed pericarditis progress within 5 to 10 years to develop symptomatic constriction requiring pericardiectomy. 348
Treatment
Careful cardiac evaluation and monitoring with echocardiography and radionuclide ventriculography should be performed whenever radiation-induced heart disease is
suspected.340,343 Patients with mild symptoms and no hemodynamic compromise may be followed without treatment or may receive symptomatic therapy with
salicylates or other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents. 310,311 There are reports of a few patients who have received corticosteroids with apparent improvement. 349
However, relapse of symptoms or unmasking of latent radiation injury following rapid withdrawal of corticosteroid therapy has been reported. 350,351 Symptomatic
pericardial effusion or clinical evidence for hemodynamic compromise warrants a drainage procedure. Pericardiocentesis with or without percutaneous placement of
an indwelling catheter is successful in the majority of patients. 337,352 Failure to relieve tamponade with pericardiocentesis, recurrence of effusion, or the presence of
symptomatic constrictive pericarditis requires pericardiectomy. 314,335,353 The mortality of this procedure in patients with postradiation pericarditis is high. Cameron and
colleagues 354 reported a postoperative mortality of 21%, and a review by Ni and associates 355 showed an early mortality of 22% in patients operated on for
radiation-induced pericarditis and a late mortality (after 30 days or more) of 35%. The high rate of complication in previously irradiated patients is attributed to the
existence of additional radiation injury to other cardiac and thoracic structures. Occult constrictive pericarditis requires no surgical intervention and usually has a good
prognosis. 311
MYOCARDIAL DYSFUNCTION
When myocardial dysfunction is detected after standard-dose mediastinal irradiation, it is typically mild or subclinical. 311,329,356,357 Impaired exercise capacity in
asymptomatic postradiation patients has been reported. 358,359 In patients who were studied 15 days after mediastinal irradiation, a transient decrease in LVEF was
observed. Complete recovery of ejection fraction 2 months after irradiation and no additional change in patients who were also receiving doxorubicin was documented
in this study.360 Noninvasive studies using echocardiography and radionuclide angiogram detected subtle left ventricular dysfunction in HD patients evaluated a few
years after mediastinal irradiation. 334,353,355 The majority of patients with abnormal ventricular function findings, however, do not have clinical heart failure. 351
The magnitude of the potential contribution of cardiac irradiation to the risk of doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy is not well established. But some data suggest
potentiation of anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity when combined with radiotherapy. 11,15,22,356,357 and 358 The histopathologies of radiation heart disease and
anthracycline heart disease are different, 359 and the combined effects are probably additive rather than synergistic. 307,359,360 Reducing the doxorubicin dose to 300 to
350 mg/m2 in the setting of cardiac irradiation has been recommended. 11 In programs of combined modality therapy for HD that included relatively low doses of
doxorubicin (up to 250 mg/m2) and mediastinal irradiation of 20 to 40 Gy, no significant clinical myocardial dysfunction was detected. 361,362,363,364,365,366,367,368 and 369
However, longer follow-up is required to fully appreciate the potential risk of combined modality cardiac toxicity. 34
Symptomatic myocardial dysfunction after a radiation dose that does not exceed 60 Gy is rare. 310 The few cases described with intractable heart failure had
myocardial fibrosis as part of pancarditis, a generalized process with damage to all three layers of the heart. The hemodynamic pattern is usually of restrictive
cardiomyopathy and is difficult to distinguish from constrictive pericarditis. 310,311,338 Its coexistence with pericarditis explains the poor outcome of pericardiectomy when
attempted under these circumstances. 310,355 In a pathologic analysis of cardiac tissue from patients with radiation-induced heart disease, interstitial fibrosis (of various
degrees) of the myocardium was mostly pericellular and perivascular. The degree of fibrosis was proportional to the radiation dose and was not enhanced in cases in

which doxorubicin therapy was also administered. 323
VALVULAR DISEASE
Clinically significant valvular heart disease resulting from mediastinal irradiation is rare. 310,311,370,371 In a review of radiation-associated valvular disease, only ten
patients with symptomatic postradiation valvular disease could be found. 370 Analysis of 635 patients treated for HD before the age of 21 years revealed 29 patients
who developed new murmurs of indeterminate significance. Of those, 14 received mediastinal doses of 44 Gy or more, and two patients who received high-dose
irradiation died of valvular heart disease. 326,327 When echocardiographic studies were performed in asymptomatic HD patients more than 7 years after mediastinal
irradiation, valvular abnormalities were detected in 25% to 33% of the patients, although there was rarely any clinical significance. Of interest is a report from Norway
that showed a significantly higher risk of cardiopulmonary complications for female subjects after radiation for HD. 357,372,373 and 374 Most of the changes were found in the
mitral or aortic valve and consisted of thickening or regurgitation. 323,357,370,372,375 In one series, 358 mild pulmonary stenosis was detected in three patients 6 to 12 years
after radiotherapy. Fibrous thickening of the valvular endocardium was found at autopsy in 13 of 16 young patients who received over 35 Gy to the heart, but none of
them had apparent valvular dysfunction. 318 The mean interval from irradiation to detection of valvular disease in asymptomatic and symptomatic patients was 11.5 and
16.5 years, respectively. 370 The contribution of irradiation to clinically significant valvular disease appears to be small. 323,329
ELECTRICAL ABNORMALITIES
Many ECG abnormalities were recorded years after mediastinal irradiation, the most common clinically significant abnormality being complete atrioventricular
block. 340,358,376,377,378,379,380,381,382 and 383 Slama and colleagues 380 reported that radiation-related atrioventricular block was typically infranodal and occurred at long
intervals (mean of 12 years), after radiation doses above 40 Gy, most frequently in patients with abnormal conduction on ECG before the advent of complete block,
and who had other radiation-related cardiac abnormalities. At postmortem examination, fibrosis of the conduction system has been reported. 377,380
Another aspect of radiation therapy and heart disease relates to the management of patients with implanted cardiac pacemakers. 386 Although transient interference
from electromagnetic noise (with the exception of betatrons) is not a problem in properly functioning radiotherapy equipment, pacemaker-dependent patients should
be closely observed during the first treatment with a linear accelerator. 385 Placing the pacemaker in an unshielded radiotherapy field may cause cumulative damage to
the pacemaker components.384 The absorbed dose to the pacemaker should be estimated before treatment. If the total dose to the pacemaker might exceed 2 Gy, the
pacemaker function should be checked weekly to detect any indicator of damage that may require replacement of the device. 384
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
Experiments in laboratory animals, 313,314,315 and 316,386,387 and 388 analysis of pathologic specimens, 318 clinical observations, 333,389,390 and 391 and, in the 1990s, long-term risk
analysis in large series of patients treated for HD 325,326 and 327,392,393 and 394 all indicate that mediastinal irradiation may facilitate the development of CAD.
Studies in rabbits on an atherogenic diet and exposed to radiation showed extensive atherosclerotic coronary damage to a degree disproportionately higher than what
might have been expected from the summation of the changes induced by radiation alone and by high-cholesterol diet alone. 387 Similar observations have been made
in other experimental animals. 388,389
An autopsy study in 16 young patients (aged 15 to 33 years) who received over 35 Gy to the heart showed that 16 of 64 (25%) major coronary arteries had significant
stenosis (greater than 76% obstruction) compared with only 1 of 40 (2.5%) obstructed coronary arteries in a group of age- and sex-matched controls. 318 In this study,
the proximal portion of the arteries had significantly more narrowing than the distal parts. McEniery and coworkers 391 described coronary angiograms of 15 patients
with CAD after chest irradiation. Eight of these 15 had significant narrowing (more than 50% diameter) of the left main coronary artery, and four had severe ostial
stenosis of the right coronary artery. Stenosis at the origin of the coronary arteries appears to be a common finding for radiation-associated CAD. 328,395,396,397 and 398
After mediastinal irradiation, there is a greater likelihood for right coronary or left main or left anterior descending coronary artery lesions as opposed to circumflex
lesions, which might be due to the fact that the former vessels, particularly at their origin, receive more radiation. 399 Coronary spasm following radiotherapy has also
been documented in patients who developed acute myocardial infarction with patent coronary arteries. 391,400
Reports of CAD in young patients who had received mediastinal irradiation for HD have long indicated that radiation is a facilitating factor in this multifactorial disease
process.311,318,389,390 and 391,399 However, only more recently could analyses of large databases of patients with HD demonstrate a significantly increased risk of mortality
from myocardial infarction after mediastinal irradiation. These studies are summarized in Table 55.4-1. Although only approximately 1% to 2% of HD patients in these
series died of myocardial infarction, the observed risk in all six series was still higher than expected. 325,326,327,328 and 329,336,392,393 Boivin and associates 392 analyzed the
risk of mortality from CAD in 4665 patients treated for HD and followed for an average of 7 years. The age-adjusted relative risk of death with myocardial infarction
after mediastinal irradiation was 2.6 and was even higher (relative risk, 4.0) when myocardial infarction was considered as a direct cause of death. In this study, the
onset of increased risk was rapid, within the first 5 years of observation. None of the risk factors for CAD significantly altered the relative risk estimates.

TABLE 55.4-1. Relative Risk of Mortality from Myocardial Infarction after Mediastinal Irradiation for Hodgkin's Disease

Current mantle radiotherapy techniques, better fractionation schemes, and modern equipment deliver smaller doses of radiation to the coronary arteries and may
have a lower risk of promoting CAD. 331 In the study by Boivin and colleagues, 392 the relative risk of acute myocardial infarction was reduced from 6.33 for patients
treated during the years 1940 to 1966 to 1.97 (with no significant difference from unity) for patients irradiated from 1967 to 1985.
Hancock and coworkers326,327 analyzed the risk of cardiac disease in patients with HD who were treated at Stanford from 1961 to 1991. The analysis that was limited
to children and adolescents younger than age 21 years at the time of treatment showed that the relative risk for death from acute myocardial infarction in this age
group was 41.5 (95% CI, 18.1 to 82.1) and that the actuarial risk of fatal or nonfatal myocardial infarction at 22 years was 8.1%. 327 Of note, all deaths in this study
occurred in patients who received relatively high doses of radiation (42 to 45 Gy) to the mediastinum. When the Stanford analysis was extended to include 2232 HD
patients of all age groups, the relative risk for death from acute myocardial infarction was 3.2 (95% CI, 1.5 to 5.8). 326 This study showed that patients younger than 20
years who received high-dose irradiation had the highest relative risk, the risk decreases with increasing age, and patients older than 50 years of age had no
increased risk. However, these results contrast with data published by other investigators, 325,328,392 suggesting an increased risk of acute myocardial infarction for the
older age groups. The small number of patients in the Stanford study who received radiation doses of less than 30 Gy did not allow an adequate analysis of the dose
effect. The average interval between HD treatment and death from acute myocardial infarction was 10.3 years, but risk was already significant during the first 5 years
following treatment and remained elevated throughout the follow-up period (more than 20 years). 326
Two European studies analyzed the ischemic heart disease in HD patients who received standard fractions and dose (30 to 42 Gy) of mediastinal irradiation. 328,329

Both studies demonstrated an increase of ischemic heart disease after mediastinal irradiation. The study from Rotterdam, with a median follow-up of 14 years,
reported that 12% of the patients experienced ischemic heart disease, with death rate of 4.7% (from myocardial infarction or sudden death). 328 When compared with
expected incidence, the standardized mortality ratio was 5.3 (CI 2.7 to 9.3). Of importance, a multivariate analysis of risk factors in the Rotterdam study showed that
increasing age, gender (male), and a pretreatment cardiac medical history were significant for developing ischemic heart disease. Treatment-related parameters did
not affect the risk.328 In a study from Zurich, a detailed analysis of the effect of other CAD risk factors on the radiation-induced risk was performed. The study showed
that while the risk of CAD after irradiation increased by 4.2 for all patients, in irradiated female patients and in all irradiated patients without other cardiovascular risk
factors (smoking, hypertension, obesity, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes), the risk remained as expected in the normal population. 329
Long-term mortality data from three trials, which randomized breast cancer patients to receive postmastectomy radiotherapy as opposed to no additional treatment,
demonstrated a higher incidence of cardiac death in the irradiated group. 401,402 and 403 The excess in mortality did not appear until after 10 years posttreatment. 402,403 In
one study, the increase in mortality risk was significant only in women who were irradiated for tumors in the left breast. 403 It was also increased in patients treated with
orthovoltage irradiation as opposed to those treated with more modern supervoltage equipment. 403
These data demonstrate the risk associated with coronary artery irradiation. It should be emphasized that the old breast irradiation techniques used in these particular
studies delivered high doses of radiation to the heart. 331,404 These techniques are no longer in use in most centers. Long-term follow-up of patients in similar
randomized trials who were treated with heart-sparing techniques did not show increased cardiovascular morbidity. 405,406 and 407 Prophylactic irradiation of the internal
mammary nodes using a single anterior photon beam ( hockey stick technique), which may deliver a high dosage to the heart, is not indicated in most patients
irradiated for breast conservation or postmastectomy. 408,409 Breast cancer patients irradiated with modern techniques, energies, and fractionation schedules are
unlikely to receive a significant dose of radiation to the coronary arteries. 404,410,411 and 412
Conventional-dose doxorubicin-containing chemotherapy used as adjuvant in combination with locoregional irradiation was not associated with a significant increase
in the risk of cardiac events. However, higher doses of adjuvant doxorubicin were associated with a threefold to fourfold increased risk of cardiac events. This appears
to be especially true in patients treated with higher dose volumes of cardiac irradiation. 413
The radiation threshold for an increased risk of CAD has not been determined. Lederman and associates 414 reported that patients with seminoma who received a
relatively low dose of mediastinal irradiation (median, 24 Gy) had more ischemic heart disease compared with a similar group of patients whose mediastinums were
not irradiated. It should be noted, however, that the observed cardiac risk in the irradiated group did not differ significantly from the expected risk of a comparable
normal population.
Monitoring and reduction of other contributing CAD factors in patients who received mediastinal irradiation should be part of the follow-up of patients who underwent
mediastinal irradiation. However, the value of routine noninvasive or invasive cardiac studies in asymptomatic patients has not been determined. 329,373,415,416,417 and 418
Still, early detection of CAD should be encouraged, particularly in irradiated patients with other CAD risk factors, 329 because angioplastic or surgical intervention may
be indicated in special anatomic or clinical situations. Successful treatment of radiation-induced coronary disease with bypass surgery and with angioplasty has been
reported.391,419,420 In some cases, surgery may be technically difficult because of mediastinal and pericardial fibrosis. 391
Although the mechanism of radiation-induced coronary heart disease remains unclear, insult to the endothelial cell is considered to be a central event in the
pathogenesis of damage to the coronary arteries. 397 Research indicates that programmed cell death (apoptosis) is the underlying mechanism for postradiation
endothelial cell death. 421 Growth factors that interfere with the apoptotic pathway, such as bFGF, may prevent radiation-induced death of endothelial cells, as in the
study by Fuks and colleagues, 421 who demonstrated that treatment with bFGF during chest irradiation of experimental animals decreased postradiation blood vessel
stenosis and significantly increased the survival of the bFGF-treated animals following radiation. These findings provide a basis for future interventions that may
decrease the risk of radiation-induced heart disease.

CONCLUSION
It is hoped that increased awareness and knowledge about potential cardiotoxicity from chemotherapy and radiotherapy will enable physicians to adequately monitor
patients and modify therapy so as to minimize serious acute and chronic cardiac sequelae. The growing information about late cardiac effects should facilitate early
diagnosis and therapeutic intervention for the benefit of previously treated patients.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Tan CT, Tasaka H, Yu KP, et al. Daunomycin an antitumor antibiotic in the treatment of neoplastic disease. Cancer 1967;20:333.
2. Malpas JS, Scott RB. Rubidomycin in acute leukaemia in adults. BMJ 1968;3:227.
3. Marmont AM, Damasio E, Rossi F. Cardiac toxicity of daunorubicin. Lancet 1969;1:837.
4. Bonadonna G, Monfardini S, De Lena M, et al. Phase I and preliminary phase II evaluation of adriamycin. Cancer Res 1970;30:2572.
5. Tan C, Etcubans E, Wollner N, et al. Adriamycin an antitumor antibiotic in the treatment of neoplastic disease. Cancer 1973;32:9.
6. O'Bryan RM, Luce JK, Tally RW, et al. Phase II evaluation of adriamycin in human neoplasia. Cancer 1973;32:1.
7. Blum RH, Carter SK. Adriamycin, a new anticancer drug with significant clinical activity. Ann Intern Med 1974;80:249.
8. Gilladoga AC, Manuel C, Tan CT, et al. Cardiotoxicity of adriamycin in children. Cancer Chemother Rep 1975;6:75.
9. Lefrak EA, Pitha J, Rosenheim S, et al. A clinicopathologic analysis of adriamycin cardiotoxicity. Cancer 1973;32:302.
10. Halazun JF, Wagner HR, Gaeta JF, et al. Daunorubicin cardiac toxicity in children with acute lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer 1974;33:545.
11. Von Hoff DD, Layard M, Basa P. Risk factors for doxorubicin induced congestive heart failure. Ann Intern Med 1979;91:701.
12. Von Hoff DD, Rozencweig M, Layard M, et al. Daunomycin-induced cardiotoxicity in children and adults. Am J Med 1977; 62:200.
13. Bristow MR, Billingham ME, Mason JW, et al. Clinical spectrum of anthracycline cardiotoxicity. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:873.
14. Bristow MR. Pathophysiologic basis for cardiac monitoring in patients receiving anthracyclines. In: Crooke ST, Reich SD, eds. Anthracyclines: current status and new developments. New York:
Academic Press, 1980:255.
15. Billingham ME, Bristow MR, Glastein E, et al. Adriamycin cardiotoxicity: endomyocardial biopsy evidence of enhancement by irradiation. Am J Surg Pathol 1977;1:17.
16. Bristow MR, Thompson PD, Martin RP, et al. Early anthracycline cardiotoxicity. Am J Med 1978;65:823.
17. Bristow MR, Minobe WA, Billingham ME, et al. Anthracycline-associated cardiac and renal damage in rabbits. Evidence for mediation by vasoactive substances. Lab Invest 1981;45:157.
18. Wortman JE, Lucas VS, Schuster E, et al. Sudden death during doxorubicin administration. Cancer 1979;44:1588.
19. Dindogru A, Barcos M, Henderson ES, et al. Electrocardiographic changes following Adriamycin treatment. Med Pediatr Oncol 1978;5:65.
20. Porembka DT, Lowder JN, Orlowski JP, Bastulli J, Lockrem J. Doxorubicin cardiotoxicity. Crit Care Med 1989;17:569.
21. Gottlieb SL, Edmiston WA, Haywood LJ. Late, late doxorubicin cardiotoxicity. Chest 1980;78:880.
22. Gilladoga AC, Manuel C, Tan CTC, et al. The cardiotoxicity of adriamycin and daunomycin in children. Cancer 1976;37:1070.
23. Goorin AM, Borow KM, Goldman A, et al. Congestive heart failure due to adriamycin cardiotoxicity: it's natural history in children. Cancer 1981;47:2810.
24. Alexander J, Dainiak N, Berger HJ, et al. Serial assessment of doxorubicin cardiotoxicity with quantitative radionuclide angiocardiography. N Engl J Med 1979;300:278.
25. Cohen M, Kronzon I, Lebowitz A. Reversible doxorubicin-induced congestive heart failure. Arch Intern Med 1982;142:1570.
26. Saini J, Rich MW, Lyss AP. Reversibility of severe left ventricular dysfunction due to doxorubicin cardiotoxicity. Ann Intern Med 1987;106:814.
27. Yeung ST, Yoong C, Spink J, Galbraith A, Smith PJ. Functional myocardial impairment in children treated with anthracyclines for cancer. Lancet 1991;337:816.
28. Bristow MR, Mason JW, Billingham ME, Daniels JR. Doxorubicin cardiomyopathy: evaluation by phonocardiography, endomyocardial biopsy, and cardiac catheterization. Ann Intern Med
1978;88:168.
29. Billingham ME, Mason JW, Bristow MR, et al. Anthracycline cardiomyopathy monitored by morphologic changes. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:865.
30. Billingham ME, Masek MA. The pathology of anthracycline cardiotoxicity in children, adolescents, and adults. In: Bricker JT, Green DM, D'Angio GJ, eds. Cardiac toxicity after treatment for
childhood cancer. New York: Wiley-Liss, 1993:17.
31. Gaudin PB, Hruban RH, Beschorner WE, et al. Myocarditis associated with doxorubicin cardiotoxicity. Am J Clin Pathol 1993;100:158.
32. Koh E, Imashuku S, Kiyosawa N, Sawada T. Anthracycline-induced congestive heart failure in two pediatric leukemia cases and long-term follow-up. Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1988;5:245.
33. Steinherz L, Murphy ML, Steinherz P, et al. Long-term cardiac follow up 4-13 years post anthracycline therapy. In: Doyle E, Engle MA, Gersony W, Rashkin W, Talner N, eds. Pediatric
cardiology. New York: Springer Verlag, 1986:1058.
34. Steinherz LJ, Steinherz PG, Tan CTC, Heller G, Murphy ML. Cardiotoxicity 4-20 years after completing anthracycline therapy. JAMA 1991;266:1672.
35. Steinherz LJ, Steinherz PG. Delayed anthracyclines cardiac toxicity. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology, PPO updates. 1991;5:1.
36. Steinherz L, Steinherz P. Cardiac failure more than six years post anthracyclines. Am J Cardiol 1988;62:505.
37. Steinherz LJ, Steinherz PG, Tan C. Cardiac failure and dysrhythmias 6-19 years after anthracycline therapy: a series of 15 patients. Med Pediatr Oncol 1995;24:352.
38. Krischer JP, Epstein S, Cuthbertson DD, et al. Clinical cardiotoxicity following anthracycline treatment for childhood Cancer: the Pediatric Oncology Group Experience. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:1544.
39. Lipshultz SE, Colan SD, Gelber RD, et al. Late cardiac effects of doxorubicin in childhood lymphoblastic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1991;324:808.
40. Hausdorf G, Morf G, Beron G, et al. Long-term doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in childhood: non-invasive evaluation of the contractile state and diastolic filling. Br Heart J 1988; 60:309.
41. Sorenson K, Levitt G, Sebag-Montefiore D, Bull C, Sullivan I. Cardiac function in Wilms' tumor survivors. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1546.
42. Steinherz LJ. Anthracycline-induced cardiomyopathy. Ann Intern Med 1996;126:827.

43. Pihkala J, Happonen JM, Virtanen K, et al. Cardiopulmonary evaluation of exercise tolerance after chest irradiation and anticancer chemotherapy in children and adolescents. Pediatrics
1995;95:722.
44. Weesner KM, Bledsoe M, Chauvenet A, Wofford M. Exercise echocardiography in the detection of anthracycline cardiotoxicity. Cancer 1991;68:435.
45. Jakacki RI, Larsen RL, Barber G, Goldwein JW, Silber JH. Cardiac function following cardiotoxic therapy during childhood: assessing the damage. In: Bricker JT, Green DM, D'Angio GJ, eds.
Cardiac toxicity after treatment for childhood cancer. New York: Wiley-Liss, 1993:87.
46. Stoddard MF, Seeger J, Liddell NE, Hadley TJ, Sullivan DM, Kupersmith J. Prolongation of isovolumetric relaxation time as assessed by Doppler echocardiography predicts
doxorubicin-induced systolic dysfunction in humans. J Am Coll Cardiol 1992;20:62.
47. Kreuser ED, VollerH, Behlers C, et al. Evaluation of late cardiotoxicity with pulsed Doppler echocardiography in patients treated for Hodgkin's disease. Br J Haematol 1993;84:615.
48. Ewer MS, Ali MK, Gibbs HR, et al. Cardiac diastolic function in pediatric patients receiving doxorubicin. Acta Oncol 1994;33:645.
49. Fukazawa R, Ogawa S, Hirayama T. Early detection of anthracycline cardiotocixity in children with acute leukemia using exercise-based echocardiography and Doppler echocardiography. Jpn
Circ J 1994;58:625.
50. Steinherz LJ, Steinherz PG, Heller G. Anthracycline-related cardiac damage. In: Bricker JT, Green DM, D'Angio GJ, eds. Cardiac toxicity after treatment for childhood cancer. New York:
Wiley-Liss, 1993:63.
51. Hausdorf G. Late effects of anthracycline therapy in childhood: evaluation and current therapy. In: Bricker JT, Green DM, D'Angio GJ, eds. Cardiac toxicity after treatment for childhood cancer.
New York: Wiley-Liss, 1993:73.
52. Adachi K, Fujiura Y, Mayumi F, et al. A deletion of mitochondrial DNA in murine doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity. Biochem Biophys Res Comm 1993;195:945.
53. Goormaghtigh E, Huart P, Praet M, Brasseur R, Ruysschaert JM. Structure of the adriamycin-cardiolipin complex role in mitochondrial toxicity. Biophys Chem 1990;35:247.
54. Fu LX, Waagstein F, Hjalmarson A. A new insight into adriamycin-induced cardiotoxicity. Int J Cardiol 1990;29:15.
55. Kapelko VI, Saks VA, Novikova NA, et al. Adaptation of cardiac contractile functions to conditions of chronic energy deficiency. J Mol Cell Cardiol 1989;21:79.
56. Myers CE, McGuire WP, Liss RH, et al. Adriamycin: the role of lipid peroxidation in cardiac toxicity and tumor response. Science 1977;197:165.
57. Rajagopalan S, Politi PM, Sinha BK, Myers CE. Adriamycin-induced free radical formation in the perfused rat heart: implications for cardiotoxicity. Cancer Res 1988;48:4766.
58. Myers CE, Gianna L, Simone CB, Klecker R, Greene R. Oxidative destruction of erythrocyte ghost membranes catalyzed by the doxorubicin-iron complex. Biochemistry 1982;21:1707.
59. Gutteridge JM. Lipid peroxidation and possible hydroxyl radical formation stimulated by the self-reduction of a doxorubicin-iron (III) complex. Biochem Pharmacol 1984;33:1725.
60. Olson RD, Mushlin PS, Brenner DE, et al. Doxorubicin cardiotoxicity may be caused by its metabolite doxorubicinol. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:3585.
61. Cusack BJ, Mushlin PS, Voulelis LD, et al. Daunorubicin-induced cardiac injury in the rabbit: a role for daunorubicinol? Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1993;118:177.
62. Pessah IN, Durie EL, Schiedt MJ, Zimanyi I. Anthraquinone-sensitized Ca 2+ release channel from rat cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum: possible receptor-mediated mechanism of doxorubicin
cardiomyopathy. Mol Pharmacol 1990;37:503.
63. Dodd DA, Atkinson JB, Olson RD, et al. Doxorubicin cardiomyopathy is associated with a decrease in calcium release channel of the sarcoplasmic retuculum in a chronic rabbit model. J Clin
Invest 1993;91:1697.
64. Shenasa H, Calderone A, Vermeulen M, et al. Chronic doxorubicin induced cardiomyopathy in rabbits: mechanical, intracellular action potential, and beta adrenergic characteristics of the failing
myocardium. Cardiovasc Res 1990;24:591.
65. Cappelli V, Moggio R, Monti E, et al. Reduction of myofibrillar ATPase activity and isomyosin shift in delayed doxorubicin cardiotoxicity. J Mol Cell Cardiol 1989;21:93.
66. Minow RA, Benjamin RS, Lee ET, et al. QRS voltage change with adriamycin administration. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:931.
67. Steinherz LJ, Graham T, Hurwitz R, et al. Guidelines for cardiac monitoring of children during and after anthracycline therapy: report of the Cardiology Committee of the Childrens Cancer Study
Group. Pediatrics 1992;89:942
68. Iacuone J, Steinherz LJ, Oblender M, Barnard D, Ablin AR. Modifications for toxicity. In: Ablin AR, ed. Supportive care of children with cancer: current therapy and guidelines from the Childrens
Cancer Group, 2nd ed. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997:79.
69. Bloom K, Bini R, Williams C, et al. Echocardiography in adriamycin cardiotoxicity. Cancer 1978;41:1265.
70. Biancaniello T, Meyer RA, Wong KY, et al. Doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in children. J Pediatr 1980;97:45.
71. Borow K, Henderson I, Neuman A, et al. Assessment of left ventricular contractility in patients receiving doxorubicin. Ann Intern Med 1983;99:750.
72. Steinherz LJ, Wexler LH. The prevention of anthracycline cardiomyopathy. Prog Pediatr Cardiol 1998;8:97.
73. Bu'Lock FA, Martin RP, Oakhill A, Mott MG. Early identification of anthracycline cardiomyopathy: possibilities and implications. Arch Dis Child 1996;75:1416.
74. Schwartz RG, McKenzie WB, Alexander S, et al. Congestive heart failure and left ventricular dysfunction complicating doxorubicin therapy: a seven year experience using serial radionuclide
angiocardiography. Am J Med 1987;82:1109.
75. Gottdiener JS, Mathisen DJ, Borer JS, et al. Doxorubicin cardiotoxicity: assessment of late left ventricular dysfunction by radionuclide cineangiography. Ann Intern Med 1981;94:430.
76. Palmeri ST, Bonow RO, Myers CE, et al. Prospective evaluation of doxorubicin cardiotoxicity by rest and exercise radionuclide angiography. Am J Cardiol 1986;58:607.
77. McKillop JH, Bristow MR, Goris ML, et al. Sensitivity and specificity of radionuclide ejection fractions in doxorubicin cardiotoxicity. Am Heart J 1983;106:1048.
78. Lee BH, Goodenday LS, Muswick GJ, et al. Alterations in left ventricular diastolic function with doxorubicin therapy. J Am Coll of Cardiol 1987;9:184.
79. Ganz WI, Sridhar KS, Forness TJ. Detection of early anthracycline cardiotoxicity by monitoring the peak filling rate. Am J Clin Oncol 1993;16:109.
80. Iarussi D, Auricchio U, Agretto A, et al. Protective effect of coenzyme Q10 on anthracycline cardiotoxicity: control study in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia and non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma. Mol Asp Med 1994;15:207.
81. Ewer MS, Carrasco CH, Mackay B, Ali MK, Benjamin RS. Cardiac biopsy procedures at a cancer center. Proc Ann Meet Am Soc Clin Oncol 1991;10:A1189.
82. Siveski-Iliskovic N, Hill M, Chow DA, Singal PK. Probucol protects against Adriamycin cardiomyopathy without interfering with its antitumor effect. Circulation 1995;91:10.
83. Dreyer Z, Guidry G, Mahoney D, et al. Tantalum-178 first pass radionuclide imaging (Ta-RNA) sensitive early detection of cardiac dysfunction (CD) in anthracycline (ANTH) treated pediatric
patients. Proc Ann Meet Am Soc Clin Oncol 1994;13:A1499.
84. Estorch M, Carrio I, Berna L, et al. Indium-111-antimyosin scintigraphy after doxorubicin therapy in patients with advanced breast cancer. J Nucl Med 1990;31:1965.
85. Lopez M, Vici P, Di Lauro K, et al. Randomized prospective clinical trial of high-dose epirubicin and dexrazoxane in patients with advanced breast cancer and soft tissue sarcomas. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:86.
86. Carrio I, Lopez-Pousa A, Estorch M, et al. Detection of doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in patients with sarcomas by indium-111-antimyosin monoclonal antibody studies. J Nucl Med 1993;34:1503.
87. Estorch M, Carrio I, Martinez-Duncker D, et al. Myocyte cell damage after administration of doxorubicin or mitoxantrone in antibody studies. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1264.
88. Fountzilas G, Afthonidis D, Geleris P, et al. Cardiotoxicity evaluation in patients treated with a mitoxantrone combination as adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. Anticancer Res
1992;12:231.
89. Hiroe M, Ohta Y, Fujita N, et al. Myocardial uptake of Indium 111 in monoclonal antimyosin Fab in detecting doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in rats. Morphological and hemodynamic findings.
Circulation 1992;86:1965.
90. Wagasugi S, Fischman AJ, Babich JW, et al. Metaiodobenzylgaunidine: evaluation of its potential as a tracer for monitoring doxorubicin cardiomyopathy. J Nucl Med 1993;34:1282.
91. Valdes Olmos RA, ten Bokkel Huinink WW, Greve JC, Hoefnagel CA. I-123 MIBG and serial radionuclide angiocardiography in doxorubicin-related cardiotoxcity. Clin Nucl Med 1992;17:163.
92. Takeishi Y, Sukekawa H, Sakurai T, et al. Noninvasive identification of anthracycline cardiotoxicity: comparison of 123I-MIBG and 123I-BMIPP imaging. Ann Nucl Med 1994;8:177.
93. Gardner SF, Lazarus HM, Bednarczyk EM, et al. High-dose cyclophosphamide-induced myocardial damage during BMT: assessment by position emission tomography. Bone Marrow Transplant
1993;12:139.
94. Thompson RT, Marsh GD, Butland T, et al. An in vivo animal model to study chronic adriamycin cardiotoxocity: a F-31-nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy investigation. In Vivo
1991;5:13.
95. Herman EH, Lipshultz SE, Rifai N, et al. Use of cardiac troponin T levels as an indicator of doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity. Cancer Res 1998;58:195.
96. Bauch M, Ester A, Kimura B, et al. Atrial natriuretic peptide as a marker for doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxic effects. Cancer 1992;69:1492.
97. Schwartz CL, Hobbie WL, Truesdell A. Corrected QT interval prolongation in anthracycline treated survivors of childhood cancer. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1906.
98. Jakacki R, Larsen RL, Barber G, et al. Comparison of cardiac function tests after anthracycline therapy in childhood. Cancer 1993;72:2739.
99. Foltinova A, Sejnova D, Mladosievicova B, Hulin I. Anthracycline-related abnormalities on signal-averaged ECG in survivors of childhood cancer. Med Pediatr Oncol 1999;33:247(abst).
100. Legha SS, Benjamin RS, Mackay B, et al. Reduction of doxorubicin cardiotoxicity by prolonged continuous intravenous infusion. Ann Intern Med 1982;96:l33.
101. Casper ES, Gaynor JJ, Hajdu SI, et al. A prospective randomized trial of adjuvant chemotherapy with bolus versus continuous infusion of doxorubicin in patients with high-grade extremity soft
tissue sarcoma and an analysis of prognostic factors. Cancer 1991;68:1221.
102. Shapira J, Gotfried M, Lishner M, Ravid M. Reduced cardiotoxicity of doxorubicin by a 6-hour infusion regimen. Cancer 1990;65:870.
103. Steinherz P, Redner A, Steinherz L, et al. Intensive therapy for acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in children at increased risk of early relapsethe MSK-NY-II protocol. Cancer 1993;72:3120.
104. Ewer M, Benjamin R. Prevention of cardiac damage due to adriamycin: modification of method of administration. In: Bricker JT, Green DM, D'Angio GJ, eds. Cardiac toxicity after treatment for
childhood cancer. New York: Wiley-Liss, 1993:109.
105. Bielack SS, Erttmann R, Winkler K, Landbeck G. Doxorubicin: effect of different schedules on toxicity and antitumour efficacy. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1989;25:873.
106. Bielack SS, Erttmann R, Kempf-Bielack B, Winkler K. Impact of scheduling on toxicity and clinical efficacy of doxorubicin: what do we know in the mid-nineties? Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:1652.
107. Torti FM, Bristow MR, Howes AE, et al. Reduced cardiotoxicity of doxorubicin delivered on a weekly schedule: assessment by endomyocardial biopsy. Ann Intern Med 1983;99:745.
108. Weiss A, Manthel RW. Experience with the use of adriamycin in combination with other anti cancer agents using a weekly schedule with particular reference to lack of cardiac toxicity. Cancer
1977;40:2046.
109. Sonneveid P. Effect of a-tocopherol on the cardiotoxicity of Adriamycin in the rat. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:1033.
110. Shimpo K, Nagatsu T, Yamada K, et al. Ascorbic acid and adriamycin toxicity. Am J Clin Nutr 1991;54(6 Suppl):1298S.
111. Villani F, Galimberti M, Monti E, et al. Effect of glutathione and N-acetylcysteine on in vitro and in vivo cardiac toxicity of doxorubicin. Free Radic Res Commun 1990;11:145.
112. Perletti G, Monti E, Paracchini L, Piccinini F. Effect of trimetazidine on early and delayed doxorubicin myocardial toxicity. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1989;302:280.
113. Buc-Calderon P, Praet M, Ruysschaert JM, Roberfroid M. Increasing therapeutic effect and reducing toxicity of doxorubicin by N-acyl dehydroalanines. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1989;25:679.
114. Siveski-Iliskovic N, Hill M, Chow DA, Singal PK. Probucol protects against adriamycin cardiomyopathy without interfering with its antitumor effect. Circulation 1995;91:10.
115. Kraft J, Grille W, Appelt M, et al. Effects of verapamil on anthracycline-induced cardiomyopathy: preliminary results of a prospective multicenter trial. Hamatol Bluttransfus 1990;33:566.
116. Akimoto H, Bruno NA, Slate DL, et al. Effect of verapamil on doxorubicin cardiotoxicity: altered muscle gene expression in cultured neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. Cancer Res 1993;53:4658.
117. Milei J, Vazquez A, Boveris A, et al. The role of prenylamine in the prevention of adriamycin-induced cardiotoxicity. A review of experimental and clinical findings. J Int Med Res 1988;16:19.
118. Bartoli KF, Decorti G, Candussio L, et al. Effect of ketotifen on adriamycin toxicity: role of histamine. Cancer Lett 1988;39:145.
119. Harman GS, Craig JB, Kuhn JG, et al. Phase I and clinical pharmacology trial of crisnatol (BWA770u mesylate) using a monthly single-dose schedule. Cancer Res 1988;48:4706.
120. Reeves WC, Griffith JW, Wood MA, Whitesell L. Exacerbation of doxorubicin cardiotoxicity by digoxin administration in an experimental rabbit model. Int J Cancer 1990;45:731.
121. Villani F, Manzotti C, Mella M, et al. Effect of amrinone on anthracycline-induced lethal and cardiac toxicity in mice and rats. Med Oncol Tumor Pharmacother 1990;7:227.
122. Iarussi D, Auricchio U, Agretto A, et al. Protective effect of coenzyme Q10 on anthracycline cardiotoxicity: control study in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia and non-Hodgkins
lymphoma. Mol Asp Med 1994;15:207.
123. Nazeyrollas P, Prevost A, Baccard N, et al. Effects of amifostine on perfused isolated rat heart and on acute doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1999;43:227.
124. Hacker MP, Lazo JS, Pritsos CA, Tritton TR. Immobilized adriamycin: toxic potential in vivo and in vitro. Sel Cancer Ther 1989;5:67.
125. Berry G, Billingham M, Alderman E, et al. The use of cardiac biopsy to demonstrate reduced cardiotoxicity in AIDS Kaposi's sarcoma patients treated with pegylated liposomal doxorubicin. Ann
Oncol 1998;9:711.
126. Speyer J, Wasserheit C. Strategies for reduction of anthracycline cardiac toxicity. Semin Oncol 1998;25:525.
127. Hershko C, Link G, Tzahor M, et al. Anthracycline toxicity is potentiated by iron and inhibited by deferoxamine: studies in rat heart cells in culture. J Lab Clin Med 1993;122:245.
128. Herman EH, Ferrans VJ. Reduction of chronic doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in dogs by pretreatment with (+) -1,2-bis(3,5-dioxopiperazinyl-l-yl) propane (ICRF-187). Cancer Res 1981;41:3436.

129. Herman EG, Ferrans VJ, Jordan W, Ardalan B. Reduction of chronic daunorubicin cardiotoxicity by ICRF-187 in rabbits. Res Comm Chem Pathol Pharmacol 1981;31:85.
130. Alderton P, Gross J, Green MD. Role of (+)-1,2-Bis(3,5-dioxo-piperazinyl-1-yl-propane (ICRF-187) in modulating free radical scavenging enzymes in doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy.
Cancer Res 1990;50:5136.
131. Herman EH, Ferrans VJ. Animal models of anthracycline cardiotoxicity: basic mechanisms and cardioprotective activity. Prog Pediatr Cardiol 1997;8:49.
132. Belt RJ. Prevention of Adriamycin-induced cardiotoxicity by ICRF-187 (NSC-169780). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1984;3:27.
133. Speyer JL, Green MD, Kramer E, et al. Protective effect of the bispiperazinedione ICRF-187 against doxorubicin-induced cardiac toxicity in women with advanced breast cancer. N Engl J Med
1988;319:745.
134. Speyer JL, Green MD, Sanger J, et al. A prospective randomized trial of ICRF-187 for prevention of cumulative doxorubicin-induced cardiac toxicity in women with breast cancer. Cancer Treat
Rev 1990;17:161.
135. Green MD, Alderton P, Sobol MM, et al. ICRF-187 (ADR-529) cardioprotection against anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity: clinical and preclinical studies. Cancer Treat Res 1991;58:101.
136. Swain SM, Whaley FS, Gerber MC, et al. Cardioprotection with dexrazoxane for doxorubicin-containing therapy in advanced breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1318.
137. Rosenfeld CS, Weisberg SR, York RM, et al. Prevention of adriamycin cardiomyopathy with dexrazoxane (ADR-529, ICRF-87). Proc Ann Meet Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11:A74.
138. Swain SM, Whaley FS, Gerber MC, et al. Delayed administration of dexrazoxane provides cardioprotection for patients with advanced breast cancer treated with doxorubicin-containing therapy.
J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1333.
139. Swain SM. Adult multicenter trials using dexrazoxane to protect against cardiac toxicity. Semin Oncol 1998;25:43.
140. Bu'Lock FA, Gavriel H, Oakhill A, Mott GM, Martin RP. Cardioprotection by ICRF187 against high dose anthracycline toxicity in children with malignant disease. Br Heart J 1993;70:185.
141. Rubio ME, Wiegman A, Naeff MSJ, et al. ICRF-187 protection against doxorubicin induced cardiomyopathy in paediatric osteosarcoma patients (SIOP XXVII Meeting Abstract). Med Pediatr
Oncol 1995;25:292.
142. Schiavetti A, Castello MA, Clerico A, et al. Use of ICRF-187 for prevention of anthracycline cardiotoxicity in children: preliminary results. (SIOP XXVII Meeting Abstract). Med Pediatr Oncol
1995;25:293.
143. Wexler LH, Andrich MP, Venzon D, et al. A randomized trial of the cardioprotective agent, ICRF-187, in pediatric sarcoma patients treated with doxorubicin. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:362.
144. Synold TW, Tetef ML, Doroshow JH. Antineoplastic activity of continuous exposure to dexrazoxane: potential new role as a novel topoisomerase II inhibitor. Semin Oncol 1998;25:93.
145. Venturini M, Michelotti A, Del Mastro L, et al. Multicenter randomized controlled clinical trial to evaluate cardioprotection of dexrazoxane versus no cardioprotection in women receiving
epirubicin chemotherapy for advanced breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:3112.
146. Alderton PM, Gross J, Green MD. Comparative study of doxorubicin, mitoxantrone, and epirubicin in combination with ICRF-187 (ADR-529) in a chronic cardiotoxicity animal model. Cancer
Res 1992;52:194.
147. Lemez P, Maresova J. Efficacy of dexrazoxane as a cardioprotective agent in patients receiving mitoxantrone- and daunorubicin-based chemotherapy. Semin Oncol 1998;25(Suppl 10):61.
148. Shipp NG, Dorr RT, Alberts DS, Dawson BV, Hendrix M. Characterization of experimental mitoxantrone cardiotoxicity and its partial inhibition by ICRF-187 in cultured neonatal rat heart cells.
Cancer Res 1993;53:550.
149. Tan C, Mitta SK, Steinherz L, Miller DR. Phase I trial of Rubidazone (NSC-164011) in children with cancer. Med Pediatr Oncol 1981;9:347.
150. Benjamin RS, Mason JW, Billingham ME. Cardiac toxicity of adriamycin-DNA complex and rubidazone: evaluation by electrocardiogram and endomyocardial biopsy. Cancer Treat Rep
1978;62:935.
151. Tan CTC, Hancock C, Steinherz LJ. Preliminary results of epirubicin in children with acute leukemia. In: Bonadonna G, ed. Advances in anthracycline chemotherapy: epirubicin. Milan: Masson
Italia Editori, 1984:129.
152. Nielsen D, Jensen JB, Dombernowsky P, et al. Epirubicin cardiotoxicity: a study of 135 patients with advanced breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1806.
153. Ryberg M, Nielson D, Skovsgaard T, et al. Epirubicin cardiotoxicity: an analysis of 469 patients with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3502.
154. Mortensen SA. Aclarubicin: preclinical and clinical data suggesting less chronic cardiotoxicity compared with conventional anthracyclines. Eur J Heametol 1987;47(Suppl):21.
155. Wojnar J, Mandecki M, Wnuk-Wojnar AM, Holowiecki J. Clinical studies on aclacinomycin A cardiotoxicity in adult patients with acute non lymphoblastic leukemia. Folia Haematol, Leipsiz
1989;116:S.297.
156. Carella AM, Berman E, Maraone MP, Ganzina F. Idarubicin in the treatment of acute leukemias. An overview of preclinical and clinical studies. Haematology 1990;75:159.
157. Tan CT, Hancock C, Steinherz P, et al. Phase I and clinical pharmacological study of 4-demethoxydaunorubicin (Idarubicin) in children with advanced cancer. Cancer Res 1987;47:2990.
158. Feig SA, Krailo MD, Harris RE, et al. Determination of the maximum tolerated dose of idarubicin when used in a combination chemotherapy program of reinduction of childhood ALL at first
marrow relapse and a preliminary assessment of toxicity compared with that of daunorubicin: a report from the Children's Cancer Study Group. Med Pediatr Oncol 1992;20:124.
159. Ringenberg QS, Propert KJ, Muss HB, et al. Clinical cardiotoxicity of esorubicin (4'-deoxydoxorubicin DxDy): prospective studies with serial gated heart scans and reports of selected cases.
Invest New Drugs 1990;8:221.
160. Danesi R, Marchetti A, Bernardini N, et al. Cardiac toxicity and antitumor activity of 4'-deoxy-4'-iodo-doxorubicinol. Cancer Chemother Phamacol 1990;26:403.
161. Shaddy RE, Olsen SI, Bristow MR, et al. Efficacy and safety of metoprolol in the treatment of doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy in pediatric patients. Am Heart J 1995;129:197.
162. Fazio S, Palmieri EA, Ferravante B, et al. Doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy treated with carvedilol. Clin Cardiol 1998;21:777.
163. Musci M, Loebe M, Grauhan O, et al. Heart transplantation for doxorubicin-induced congestive heart failure in children and adolescents. Transplant Proc 1997;29:578.
164. Arico M, Pedroni E, Nespoli L, et al. Long-term survival after heart transplantation for doxorubicin induced cardiomyopathy. Arch Dis Child 1991;66:985.
165. Levitt G, Bunch K, Rogers CA, Whitehead B. Cardiac transplantation in childhood cancer survivors in Great Britian. Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:826.
166. Schaison G, Sommelet D, Le Bidois J, et al. Good results of heart transplantation for anthracycline (A) (+/- mediastinal radiotherapy (RY)) related cardiomyopathy in cancer in childhood. Proc
Ann Meet Am Soc Clin Oncol 1996;15:A1432(abst).
167. Edwards BS, Hunt SA, Fowler MB, et al. Cardiac transplantation in patients with preexisting neoplastic diseases. Am J Cardiol 1990;65:501.
168. Tumminello FM, Leto G, Gebbia N, et al. Acute myocardial effects of mitoxantrone in the rabbit. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:529.
169. Sparano BM, Gordon G, Hall C, Iatropoulos MJ, Noble FJ. Safety assessment of a new anticancer compound, mitoxantrone, in beagle dogs. Comparison with doxorubicin. II Histologic and
ultrastructural pathology. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:1145.
170. Saletan S. Mitoxantrone: an active, new antitumor agent with an improved therapeutic index. Cancer Treat Rev 1987;14:297.
171. Shenkenberg TD, Von Hoff DD. Mitoxantrone: a new anticancer drug with significant clinical activity. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:67.
172. Posner LE, Dukart G, Goldberg J, Bernstein T, Cartwright K. Mitoxantrone: an overview of safety and toxicity. Invest New Drugs 1985;3:123.
173. Janmohammed R, Milligan DW. Mitoxantrone induced congestive heart failure in patients previously treated with anthracyclines. Br J Haematol 1989;71:292.
174. Pai GR, Reed NS, Ruddell WS. A case of mitozantrone-associated cardiomyopathy without prior anthracycline therapy. Br J Radiol 1987;60:1125.
175. Ewer MS, Ali MK, Abraham K, et al. Electrocardiographic (ECG) changes in patients receiving mitoxantrone previously treated with adriamycin. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1990;9:315.
176. Cassidy J, Merrick MV, Smyth JF, Leonard RC. Cardiotoxicity of mitozantrone assessed by stress and resting nuclear ventriculography. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1988;24:935.
177. Fountzilas G, Afthonidis D, Geleris P, et al. Cardiotoxicity evaluation in patients treated with a mitoxantrone combination as adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. Anticancer Res
1992;12:231.
178. Villani F, Galimberti M, Crippa F. Evaluation of ventricular function by echocardiography and radionuclide angiography in patients treated with mitoxantrone. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1989;15:501.
179. Physicians Desk Reference. 50th ed. 1996:1280.
180. Lindpaintner K, Lindpaintner LS, Wentworth M, et al. Acute myocardial necrosis during administration of amsacrine. Cancer 1986;57:1284.
181. Legha SS, Latreille J, McCredie KB, et al. Neurologic and cardiac rhythm abnormalities associated with 4'-(9-acridinylamino) methanesulfon-m-anisidide (AMSA) therapy. Cancer Treat Rep
1979;63:2001.
182. Von Hoff DD, Elson D, Polk G, et al. Acute ventricular fibrillation and death during infusion of 4'-(9-acridinylamino) methanesulfon-m-anisidide (AMSA) [letter]. Cancer Treat Rep 1980;64:356.
183. Falkson G. Multiple ventricular extrasystoles following administration of 4'-(9-acridinylamino) methanesulfon-m-anisidide (AMSA). Cancer Treat Rep 1980;64:358.
184. Arlin Z, Mehta R, Feldman E, Sullivan P, Pucillo A. Amsacrine treatment of patients with supraventricular arrhythmias and acute leukemia. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1987;19:163.
185. Puccio CA, Feldman EJ, Arlin ZA. Amsacrine is safe in patients with ventricular ectopy. Am J Hematol 1988;28:197.
186. Steinherz LJ, Steinherz PG, Mangiacasale D, Tan C, Miller DR. Cardiac abnormalities after AMSA administration. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:483.
187. Tan CTC, Hancock C, Steinherz PG, et al. Phase II study of 4'-(9-acridinylamino) methanesulfon-m-anisidide (NSC 249992) in children with acute leukemia and lymphoma. Cancer Res
1982;42:1579.
188. Arlin ZA, Feldman EJ, Mittelman A, et al. Amsacrine is safe and effective therapy for patients with myocardial dysfunction and acute leukemia. Cancer 1991;68:1198.
189. Praga C, Beretta G, Vigo PL, et al. Adriamycin cardiotoxicity: a survey of 1273 patients. Cancer Treat Rep 1979;63:827.
190. Santos GW, Sensenbrenner LL, Burke PJ, et al. Marrow transplants in man using cyclophosphamide summary of Baltimore experience. Exp Hematol 1970;20:78.
191. Buckner CD, Rudolph RH, Fefer A, et al. High-dose cyclophosphamide therapy for malignant disease (toxicity, tumor, response, and the effects of stored autologous marrow). Cancer
1972;29:357.
192. Mullins GM, Anderson PN, Santos GW. High dose cyclophosphamide therapy in solid tumors. Therapeutic, toxic and immunosuppressive effects. Cancer 1975;36:1950.
193. Storb R, Buckner CS, Dillingham LA, et al. Cyclophosphamide regimens in rhesus monkeys with and without marrow infusion. Cancer Res 1970;30:2195.
194. Slavin RE, Millan JC, Mullins GM. Pathology of high dose intermittent cyclophosphamide therapy. Hum Pathol 1975;6:693.
195. Buja LM, Ferrans VJ, Graw RG. Cardiac pathologic findings in patients treated with bone marrow transplantation. Hum Pathol 1976;7:17.
196. Applebaum FR, Strauchen JA, Graw RG, et al. Acute lethal carditis caused by high dose combination chemotherapy. A unique clinical and pathological entity. Lancet 1976;1:58.
197. Steinherz L, Steinherz P, Mangiacasale D, et al. Cardiac changes with cyclophosphamide. Med Pediatr Oncol 1981;9:417.
198. Lee CK, Harman GS, Hohl RJ, Gingrich RD. Fatal cyclophosphamide cardiomyopathy: its clinical course and treatment. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;18:573.
199. Steinherz LJ, Steinherz PG. Cyclophosphamide cardiotoxicity. Cancer Bull 1985;37:231.
200. Kupari M, Volin L, Suokas A, et al. Cardiac involvement in bone marrow transplantation: electrocardiographic changes, arrhythmias, heart failure and autopsy findings. Bone Marrow Transplant
1990;5:91.
201. Ramireddy K, Kane KM, Adhar GC. Acquired episodic complete heart block after high-dose chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide and thiotepa. Am Heart J 1994;127:701.
202. Lopez-Jimenez J, Cervero C, Munoz A, et al. Cardiovascular toxicities related to the infusion of cryopreserved grafts: results of a controlled study. Bone Marrow Transplant 1994;13:789.
203. Kupari M, Volin L, Suokas A, Hekali P, Ruutu T. Cardiac involvement in bone marrow transplantation: serial changes in left ventricular size, mass and performance. J Int Med 1990;227:259.
204. Isberg B, Paul C, Johsson L, Svahn U. Myocardial toxicity of high-dose cyclophosphamide in rabbits treated with daunorubicin. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1991;28:717.
205. Angelucci E, Mariotti E, Lucarelli G, et al. Sudden cardiac tamponade after chemotherapy for marrow transplantation in thalassaemia. Lancet 1992;339:287.
206. Veys PA, McAvinchey R, Rothman MT, Mair GHM, Newland AC. Pericardial effusion following conditioning for bone marrow transplantation in acute leukemia. Bone Marrow Transplant
1987;2:213.
207. Bearman SI, Petersen FB, Schor RA, et al. Radionuclide ejection fractions in the evaluation of patients being considered for bone marrow transplantation: risk for cardiac toxicity. Bone Marrow
Transplant 1990;5:173.
208. Braverman AC, Antin JH, Plappert MT, Cook EF, Lee RT. Cyclophosphamide cardiotoxicity in bone marrow transplantation: a prospective evaluation of new dosing regimens. J Clin Oncol
1991;9:1215.
209. Hertenstein B, Stefanic M, Schmeiser T, et al. Cardiac toxicity of bone marrow transplantation: preventive value of cardiologic evaluation before transplant. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:998.
210. Larsen RL, Barber G, Heise CT, August CS. Exercise assessment of cardiac function in children and young adults before and after bone marrow transplantation. Pediatrics 1992;89:722.
211. Kandylis K, Vassilomanolakis M, Tsoussis S, Efremidis AP. Ifosfamide cardiotoxicity in humans. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1989;24:395.
212. Quezado ZM, Wilson WH, Cunnion RE, et al. High-dose ifosfamide is associated with severe, reversible cardiac dysfunction. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:31.
213. Herman EM, Mhatre RM, Warardekar VS, Lee IP. Comparison of the cardiovascular actions of NSC-109, 824 (ifosfamide) and cyclophosphamide. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1972;23:178.
214. O'Connel TX, Berenbaum MC. Cardiac and pulmonary effects of high doses of cyclophosphamide and isophosphamide. Cancer Res 1974;34:1586.
215. De Botton S, Dombret H, Sanz M, et al. Incidence, clinical features, and outcome of all trans-retinoic acid syndrome in 413 cases of newly diagnosed acute promyelocytic leukemia. The

European APL Group. Blood 1998;92:2712.
216. Brouty-Boye D, Kolonias D, Lampidis TJ. Antiproliferataive activity of taxol on human tumor and normal breast cells vs. effects on cardiac cells. Int J Cancer 1995;60:571.
217. Rowinsky EK, McGuire WP, Guarnieri T, et al. Cardiac disturbances during the administration of Taxol. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1704.
218. McGuire WP, Rowinsky EK, Rosenshein NB, et al. Taxol: a unique antineoplastic agent with significant activity in advanced ovarian epithelial neoplasms. Ann Intern Med 1989;111:273.
219. Rowinsky EK, Bilbert MR, McGuire WP, et al. Sequences of taxol and cisplatin: a phase I and pharmacologic study. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1692.
220. Markman M, Kennedy A, Webster K, et al. Paclitaxel administration to gynecologic cancer patients with major cardiac risk factors. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3483.
221. Perez EA. Paclitaxel and cardiotoxicity. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3481.
222. Aapro MS. Combining new agents with anthracyclines in metastatic breast cancer: an overview of recent findings. Semin Oncol 1999;26(Suppl 3):17.
223. Tan CTC, Luks E, Bacha DM, et al. Phase I trial of homoharringtonine (NSC 141633) in children with refractory leukemia. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:1245.
224. Ajani JA, Dimery I, Chawla SP, et al. Phase II studies of homoharringtonine in patients with advanced malignant melanoma: sarcoma and head and neck, breast and colorectal carcinomas.
Cancer Treat Rep 1989;70:375.
225. Jongii L, Hui Y, Xueying L, et al. Experimental studies on the toxicity of harringtonine and homoharringtonine. Chin Med J 1979;92:175.
226. Hirvonen HE, Salmi TT, Heinonen E, Antila KJ, Valimaki IA. Vincristine treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia induces transient autonomic cardioneuropathy. Cancer 1989;64:801.
227. Mandel EM, Lewinski U, Djadetti M. Vincristine-induced myocardial infarction. Cancer 1975;36:1979.
228. Cargill RI, Boyter AC, Lipworth BJ. Reversible myocardial ischaemia following vincristine containing chemotherapy. Respir Med 1994;88:709.
229. House KW, Simon SR, Pugh RP. Chemotherapy-induced myocardial infarction in a young man with Hodgkin's disease. Clin Cardiol 1992;15:122.
230. Lejonc JL, Vernant JP, Macquin I, et al. Myocardial infarction following vinblastine treatment. Lancet 1980;2:692.
231. Stefenelli T, Kuzmits R, Ulrich W, Glogar D. Acute vascular toxicity after combination chemotherapy with cisplatin, vinblastine, and bleomycin for testicular cancer. Eur Heart J 1988;9:552.
232. Zeymer U, Neuhaus KL. Infarct-typical changes in the electrocardiogram following chemotherapy with vinblastine. Dtsch Med Wochenschr 1989;114:589.
233. Buzdar AR, Leghe SS, Tashimal CK, et al. Adriamycin and mitomycin C: possible synergistic toxicity. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:1005.
234. Doroshow JH. Mitomycin-C enhanced superoxide and hydrogen peroxide in the rat heart. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1981;218:206.
235. Sivanesaratnam V. FRCOG Mitomycin-C cardiotoxicity. Med J Aust 1989;151:300.
236. Verweij J, Funke-Kupper AJ, Teule GJJ, Pinedo HM. A prospective study on the dose dependency of cardiotoxicity induced by mitomycin C. Med Oncol Tumor Pharmacother 1988;5:159.
237. Verweij J, Van Der Burg ME, Pinedo HM. Mitomycin C-induced hemolytic uremic syndrome. Six case reports and review of the literature on renal, pulmonary and cardiac side effects of the
drug. Radiother Oncol 1987;8:33.
238. Dent R, McColl I. 5-fluorouracil and angina. Lancet 1975;1:347.
239. Labianca R, Beretta G, Clerici M, Fraschini P, Luporini G. Cardiac toxicity of 5-fluorouracil: a study of 1083 patients. Tumori 1982;68:505.
240. Lomeo AM, Avolio C, Iacobellis G, Manzione L. 5-Fluorouracil cardiotoxicity. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol 1990;3:237.
241. Clavel M, Sorbette F, David M, Vignoud J, Hauchecorne J. 5-Fluorouracil (5FU) cardiotoxicity. 33 events out of 1145 consecutive patients. Proc Ann Meet Am Soc Clin Oncol 1991;10:A346.
242. de Forni M, Malet-Martino MC, Jaillais P, et al. Cardiotoxicity of high-dose continuous infusion fluorouracil: a prospective clinical study. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1795.
243. Rezkalla S, Kloner RA, Ensley J, et al. Continuous ambulatory ECG monitoring during fluorouracil therapy: a prospective study. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:509.
244. Keefe DL, Roistacher N, Pierri MK. Clinical cardiotoxicity of 5-fluorouracil. J Clin Pharmacol 1993;33:1060.
245. Collins C, Weiden PL. Cardiotoxicity of 5-fluorouracil. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:733.
246. Freeman NJ, Costanza ME. 5-Fluorouracil-associated cardiotoxicity. Cancer 1988;61:36.
247. Eskilsson J, Albertsson M, Mercke C. Adverse cardiac effects during induction chemotherapy treatment with cis-platin and 5-fluorouracil. Radiother Oncol 1988;13:41.
248. Weidmann B, Jansen W, Heider A, Niederle N. 5-Fluorouracil cardiotoxicity with left ventricular dysfunction under different dosing regimens. Am J Cardiol 1995;75:194.
249. Jakubowski AA, Kemeny N. Hypotension as a manifestation of cardiotoxicity in three patients receiving cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil. Cancer 1988;62:266.
250. McKendall GR, Shurman A, Anamur M, Most AS. Toxic cardiogenic shock associated with infusion of 5-fluorouracil. Am Heart J 1989;118:184.
251. Patel B, Kloner RA, Ensley J, Al-Sarraf M, Kish J, Wynne J. 5-Fluorouracil cardiotoxicity: Left ventricular dysfunction and effect of coronary vasodilators. Am J MedSci 1987;294:238.
252. Misset B, Escudier B, Leclercq B, et al. Acute myocardiotoxicity during 5-fluorouracil therapy. Intensive Care Med 1990;16:210.
253. Coronel B, Madonna O, Mercatello A, Caillette A, Moskovtchenko JF. Myocardiotoxicity of 5 fluorouracil. Intensive Care Med 1988;14:429.
254. Kleiman NS, Lehane DE, Geyer CE Jr, Pratt CM, Young JB. Prinzmetal's angina during 5-fluorouracil chemotherapy. Am J Med 1987;82:566.
255. Burger AJ, Mannino S. 5-Fluorouracil-induced coronary vasospasm. Am Heart J 1987;114:433.
256. Pottage A, Holt S, Ludgate S, Langlands A. Fluorouracil cardiotoxicity. BMJ 1978;1:1547.
257. Jeremic B, Jevremovic S, Djuric L, Mijatovic L. Cardiotoxicity during chemotherapy treatment with 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin. J Chemother 1990;2:264.
258. Martin M, Diaz-Rubio E, Furio V, et al. Lethal cardiac toxicity after cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil chemotherapy. Report of a case with necropsy study. Am J Clin Oncol 1989;12:229.
259. Liss RH, Chadwick M. Correlation of 5-fluorouracil distribution in rodents with toxicity and chemotherapy in man. Cancer Chemother Rep 1974;58:777.
260. Suzuki T, Nakanishi H, Hayashi A, et al. Cardiac toxicity of 5-fluorouracil in rabbits. Jpn J Pharmacol 1972;27:(Suppl)137.
261. Matsubara I, Kamiya J, Imai S. Cardiotoxicity effects of 5-fluorouracil in the guinea pig. Jpn J Pharmacol 1980;30:871.
262. Menard O, Martinet Y, Lamay P. Cis-platin-induced atrial fibrillation. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:192.
263. Fassio T, Canobbio L, Gasparini G, Villani F. Paroxymal supraventricular tachycardia during treatment with cisplatin and etoposide combination. Oncology 1986;43:219.
264. Talley RW, O'Bryan RM, Gutterman JV, Brownlee RW, McGredie KB. Clinical evaluation of toxic effects of cis-diammine dichloroplatinum (NSC-119875). Phase I clinical study. Cancer
Chemother Rep 1973;57:465.
265. Tomirotti M, Riundi R, Pulici S, et al. Ischemic cardiopathy from cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (CDDP). Tumori 1984;70:235.
266. Doll DC, List AF, Greco A, et al. Acute vascular ischemic events after cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy for germ-cell tumors of the testis. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:48.
267. Sonnenblick M, Rosin A. Cardiotoxicity of interferon. A review of 44 cases. Chest 1991;99:557.
268. Friess GG, Brown TD, Wrenn RC. Cardiovascular rhythm effects of gamma recombinant DNA interferon. Invest New Drugs 1989;7:275.
269. Martino S, Ratanatharathorn V, Karanes C, et al. Reversible arrhythmias observed in patients treated with recombinant alpha 2 interferon. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1987;113:376.
270. Zbinden G. Effects of recombinant human alpha-interferon in a rodent cardiotoxicity model. Toxicol Lett 1990;50:25.
271. Dickson D. Death halts interferon trials in France. Science 1982;218:772.
272. Foon KA, Sherwin SA, Abrams PG, et al. Treatment of advanced non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with recombinant leukocyte A interferon. N Engl J Med 1984;311:1148.
273. Brown TD, Koeller J, Beougher K, et al. A phase I clinical trial of recombinant DNA gamma interferon. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:790.
274. Kruit WH, Punt KJ, Goey SH, et al. Cardiotoxicity as a dose-limiting factor in a schedule of high dose bolus therapy with interleukin-2 and alpha-interferon. Cancer 1994;74:2850.
275. Deyton LR, Walker RE, Kovacs JA, et al. Reversible cardiac dysfunction associated with interferon Alfa therapy in AIDS patients with Kaposi's sarcoma. N Engl J Med 1989;321:1246.
276. Sonnenblick M, Rosenmann D, Rosin A. Reversible cardiomyopathy induced by interferon. BMJ 1990;300:1174.
277. Budd GT, Bukowski RM, Miketo L, Yen-Lieberman B, Proffitt MR. Phase I trial of ultrapure human leukocyte interferon in human malignancy. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1984;12:39.
278. Grunberg SM, Kempf RA, Itri LM, et al. Phase II study of recombinant alpha interferon in the treatment of advanced non-small cell lung carcinoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:1031.
279. Cohen MC, Huberman MS, Nesto RW. Recombinant alpha-2 interferon related cardiomyopathy. Am J Med 1988;85:549.
280. Sherwin SA. The interferons. Ann Intern Med 1987;106:425.
281. Lampidis TJ, Brouty-Boye D. Interferon inhibits cardiac cell function in vitro (41043). Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1981;166:181.
282. Dorr RT, Shipp NG. Effect of interferon, interleukin-2 and tumor necrosis factor on myocardial cell viability and doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in vitro. Immunopharmacology 1989;18:31.
283. Bialock JE, Stanton JD. Common pathways of interferon and hormonal action. Nature 1980;283:406.
284. Nora R, Abrams JS, Tait NS, Hiponia DJ, Silverman HJ. Myocardial toxic effects during recombinant interleukin-2 therapy. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:59.
285. Schechter D, Nagler A. Recombinant interleukin-2 and recombinant interferon a immunotherapy cardiovascular toxicity. Am Heart J 1992;123:1736.
286. Rosenberg SA, Lotze MT, Muul LM, et al. A progress report on the treatment of 157 patients with advanced cancer using lymphokine-activated killer cell and interleukin-2 or high dose
interleukin alone. N Engl J Med 1987;316:889.
287. Nora R, Belani C, Silverman H, et al. Immunotherapy of advanced cancer [letter]. N Engl J Med 1987;316:275.
288. Nora R, Abrams J, Silverman HJ. Myocardial infarction (MI) in patients receiving high dose recombinant interleukin-2 (rIL-2). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1987;6:245.
289. Fisher RI, Coltman CA, Doroshow JH, et al. Metastatic renal cancer treated with interleukin-2 and lymphokine-activated killer cells. A phase II clinical trial. Ann Int Med 1988; 108:518.
290. Dutcher JP, Creekmore S, Weiss GR, et al. Phase II study of interleukin-2 and lymphokine-activated killer cells in patients with metastatic malignant melanoma. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:477.
291. Osanto S, Cluitmans FGM, Franks CR, et al. Myocardial injury after interleukin-2 therapy. Lancet 1988;2:48.
292. White RL, Schwartzentruber DJ, Guleria A, et al. Cardiopulmonary toxicity of treatment with high dose interleukin-2 in 199 consecutive patients with metastatic melanoma or renal cell
carcinoma. Cancer 1994;74:3212.
293. Trehu EG, Isner JM, Mier JW, Karp DD, Atkins MB. Possible myocardial toxicity associated with interleukin-4 therapy. J Immunother 1993;14:348.
294. Torisu M, Goya T, Hayashi Y, et al. Electrocardiogram studies on cancer patients treated with OK-432, a streptococcal preparation with potent biological response modifier activities. J Biol Res
Mod 1989;8:665.
295. Slamon D, Leyland-Jones B, Shak S, et al. Addition of Herceptin (humanized anti-HER2 antibody) to first line chemotherapy for HER2 overexpressing metastatic breast cancer (HER2+/MBC)
markedly increases anticancer activity: A randomized, multinational controlled phase III trial. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1998;17:98a.
296. Ewer MS, Gibbs HR, Swafford J, Benjamin RS. Cardiotoxicity in patients receiving trastuzumab (Herceptin): primary toxicity, synergistic or sequential stress, or surveillance artifact? Semin
Oncol 1999;26:96.
297. Jerian S, Keegan P. Cardiotoxicity associated with paclitaxel/trastuzumab combination therapy. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1647.
298. Sanz Manrique N, Valcarce Perez J, Broto Escapa P, et al. Enhancing factors in the cardiotoxicity of anthracyclines. Anales Espanoles de Pediatria 1990;32:11.
299. Hall IH, Grippo AA, Holbrook DJ, et al. Renal, hepatic, cardiac and thymic acute toxicity afforded by bis(helenalinyl)malonate in BDF1 mice. Toxicity 1990;64:205.
300. Bashir Y, Tomson CR. Cardiac arrest associated with hypokalaemia in a patient receiving mithramycin. Postgrad Med J 1988;64:228.
301. Hoke GD, Macia RA, Meunier PC, et al. In vivo and in vitro cardiotoxicity of a gold-containing antineoplastic drug candidate in the rabbit. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1989;100:293.
302. Gebbia N, Flandina C, Leto G, Tumminello FM, et al. The roleof histamine in doxorubicin and teniposide-induced cardiotoxicity in dog and mouse. Tumori 1987;73:279.
303. Schecter JP, Jones SE. Myocardial infarction in a 27 year old woman: possible complication of treatment with VP-16-213 (NSC-141540), mediastinal irradiation or both. Cancer Chemother Rep
1975;59:887.
304. Winberger A, Pinkhas J, Sandbank U, et al. Endocardial fibrosis following busulfan treatment. JAMA 1975;231:495.
305. Grem JL, King SA, Chun HG, Grever MR. Cardiac complications observed in elderly patients following 2'-deoxycoformycin therapy. Am J Hematol 1991;38:245.
306. Watanabe H, Hasegawa A, Shinozaki T, Arita S, Chigira M. Possible cardiac side effects of granisetron, an antiemetic agent, in patients with bone and soft-tissue sarcomas receiving cytotoxic
chemotherapy. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1995;35:278.
307. Desjardins AU. Action of roentgen rays and radium on the heart and lungs. Am J Roentgenol 1932;27:153, 303, 447.
308. Leach JEL. Effect of roentgen therapy on the heart: clinical study. Arch Intern Med 1943;72:715.
309. Cohn KE, Stewart JR, Fajardo LF, et al. Heart disease following radiation. Medicine 1967;46:281.
310. Stewart JR, Fajardo LF. Radiation-induced heart disease: an update. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 1984;27:173.
311. Arsenian MA. Cardiovascular sequelae of therapeutic thoracic radiation. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 1991;33:299.
312. Benoff LJ, Schweitzer P. Radiation therapy-induced cardiac injury [Review]. Am Heart J 1995;129:1193.
313. Stewart JR, Fajardo LF, Cohn KE. Experimental radiation-induced heart disease in rabbits. Radiology 1968;91:814.
314. Fajardo LF, Stewart JR. Experimental radiation-induced heart disease. I. Light microscopic studies. Am J Pathol 1970;59:299.

315. Lauk S, Kiszel Z, Buschmann J, et al. Radiation-induced heart disease in rats. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:801.
316. Gillette EL, McChesney SL, Hoopes PJ. Isoeffect curves for radiation-induced cardiomyopathy in the dog. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1985;11:2091.
317. Schultz-Hector S. Radiation-induced heart disease: review of experimental data on dose response and pathogenesis [Review]. Int J Radiat Biol 1992;61:149.
318. Brosius FC, Waller BF, Robert WG. Radiation heart disease: analysis of 16 young (aged 15 to 33 years) necropsy patients who received over 3,500 rads to the heart. Am J Med 1981; 70:519.
319. Fajardo LF, Stewart JR, Cohn KE. Morphology of radiation-induced heart disease. Arch Pathol 1968;86:512.
320. Fajardo LF, Stewart JR. Pathogenesis of radiation-induced myocardial fibrosis. Lab Invest 1973;29:244.
321. Fajardo LF. In: Stemberg S, ed. Pathology of radiation injury. New York: Masson, 1982.
322. Stewart JR, Fajardo L, Gillette S, et al. Radiation injury to the heart. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:1205.
323. Veinot JP, Edwards WD. Pathology of radiation-induced heart disease: a surgical and autopsy study of 27 cases. Hum Pathol 1996;27:766.
324. Stewart JR. Normal tissue tolerance irradiation of the cardiovascular system. Front Radiat Ther Oncol 1989;23:302.
325. Mauch P, Kalish L, Marcus KC, et al. Long-term survival in Hodgkin's disease. Cancer J Sci Am 1995;1:33.
326. Hancock SL, Tucker MA, Hoppe RT. Factors affecting late mortality from heart disease after treatment of Hodgkin's disease. JAMA 1993;270:1949.
327. Hancock SL, Donaldson SS, Hoppe RT. Cardiac disease following treatment of Hodgkin's disease in children and adolescents. J Clin Oncol 1993;1:1208.
328. Reinders JG, Heijmen BJ, Olofsen-van Acht MJ, et al. Ischemic heart disease after mantlefield irradiation for Hodgkin's disease in long-term follow-up. Radiother Oncol 1999;51:35.
329. Glanzmann C, Kaufmann P, Jenni R, et al. Cardiac risk after mediastinal irradiation for Hodgkin's disease. Radiother Oncol 1998;46:51.
330. Stewart JR, Fajardo LF. Dose response in human and experimental radiation-induced heart disease: application of the nominal standard dose (NSD) concept. Radiology 1971;99:403.
331. Corn BW, Trock BJ, Goodman RL. Irradiation-related ischemic heart disease. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:741.
332. Carmel RJ, Kaplan HS. Mantle irradiation in Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1976;37:2813.
333. Appelfeld MM, Slawson RG, Spicer KM, et al. Long-term cardiovascular evaluation of patients treated by thoracic mantle radiation therapy. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:1003.
334. Appelfeld MM, Wiernik PH. Cardiac disease after radiation therapy for Hodgkin's disease: analysis of 48 patients. Am Heart J 1983;51:1679.
335. Ruckdeschel JC, Chang P, Martin RG, et al. Radiation-related pericardial effusions in patients with Hodgkin's disease. Medicine 1975;54:245.
336. Tarbell NJ, Thompson L, Mauch P. Thoracic irradiation in Hodgkin's disease: disease control and long-term complications. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;18:275.
337. Harris JR, Recht A. In: Harris JR, Hellman S, Henderson IC, Kinne DW, eds. Breast diseases, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1991:406.
338. Fleming WH, Szakacs TE, King ER. The effects of gamma radiation on the fibrinolytic system of the dog lung and its modification by certain drugs: relationship to radiation pneumonitis and
hyaline membrane formation in the lung. J Nucl Med 1962;3:34.
339. Blayney DW, Longo D. Radiation-induced pericarditis. N Engl J Med 1982;306:550.
340. Gottdeiner JS, Katin MJ, Borer JS, et al. Late cardiac effects of therapeutic mediastinal irradiation: assessment by echocardiography and radionuclide angiography. N Engl J Med 1983;308:569.
341. Totterman KJ, Personen E, Siltanen P. Radiation-related chronic heart disease. Chest 1983;83:875.
342. Gomm SA, Stretton TB. Chronic pericardial effusion after mediastinal radiotherapy. Thorax 1981;36:149.
343. Loyer EM, Delpassand ES. Radiation-induced heart disease: imaging features [Review]. Semin Roentgenol 1993;28:321.
344. Posner MR, Cohen GI, Skarin AT. Pericardial disease in patients with cancer. Am J Med 1981;71:407.
345. Carey RW, Sawicka JM, Choi NC. Cytologically negative pericardial effusion complicating combined modality therapy for localized small-cell carcinoma of the lung. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:818.
346. Stewart JR, Fajardo LF. Radiation-induced heart disease. Radiol Clin North Am 1971;3:511.
347. Martin RG, Ruckdeschel JC, Chang P, et al. Radiation-related pericarditis. Am J Cardiol 1975;35:216.
348. Fajardo LF, Stewart JR. Radiation-induced heart disease: human and experimental observations. In: Bristow MR, ed. Drug-induced heart disease. Amsterdam: Elsevier North-Holland,
1980:291.
349. Keelan MH, Rudders RA. Successful treatment of radiation pericarditis with corticosteroids. Arch Intern Med 1974;134:145.
350. Castellino RA, Glatstein E, Turbow MM, et al. Latent radiation injury of lungs or heart activated by steroid withdrawal. Ann Intern Med 1974;80:593.
351. Biran S. Corticosteroids in radiation-induced pericarditis. Chest 1978;74:96.
352. Krikorian JG, Hancock EW. Pericardiocentesis. Am J Med 1978;65:808.
353. Morton DL, Glancy L, Joseph WL, et al. Management of patients with radiation-induced pericarditis with effusion: a note on the development of aortic regurgitation in two of them. Chest
1973;64:291.
354. Cameron J, Osterle SN, Baldwin JC, et al. The etiologic spectrum of constrictive pericarditis. Am Heart J 1987;113:354.
355. Ni Y, von Segesser LK, Turina M. Futility of pericardiectomy for postirradiation constrictive pericarditis? Ann Thorac Surg 1990;49:445.
356. Savage DE, Constine LS, Schwartz RG, Rubin P. Radiation effects of left ventricular function and myocardial perfusion in long-term survivors of Hodgkin's disease. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1990;19:721.
357. Perrault DJ, Levy M, Herman JD, et al. Echocardiographic abnormalities following cardiac radiation. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:546.
358. Pohjola-Sintonen S, Totterman KJ, Salmo M, et al. Late cardiac effects of mediastinal radiotherapy in patients with Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1987;60:31.
359. Burns RJ, Bar-Shlomo B, Druck MN, et al. Detection of radiation cardiomyopathy by gated radionuclide angiography. Am J Med 1983;74:297.
360. Lagrange JL, Darcourt J, Benoliel J, et al. Acute cardiac effects of mediastinal irradiation: assessment by radionuclide angiography. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;22:897.
361. Gomez GA, Park JJ, Panahon AM, et al. Heart size and function after radiation therapy to the mediastinum in patients with Hodgkin's disease. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67:1099.
362. Merrill J, Greco FA, Zimbler H, et al. Adriamycin and radiation: synergistic cardiotoxicity. Ann Intern Med 1975;82:122.
363. Kinsella TJ, Ahmann DL, Giuliani ER, et al. Adriamycin cardiotoxicity in stage IV breast cancer: possible enhancement with prior left chest radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1979;5:1997.
364. Mayer EG, Poulter CA, Aristizabal SA. Complications of irradiation related to apparent drug potentiation by Adriamycin. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1976;1:1179.
365. Eltringham JR, Fajardo LF, Stewart JR, et al. Investigation of cardiotoxicity in rabbits from Adriamycin and fractionated cardiac irradiation: preliminary results. Front Radiat Ther Oncol
1979;13:21.
366. Petrovic D, Brown SM, Yatvin MB. Effects of Adriamycin and irradiation on beating of rat heart muscle cells in culture. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1977;2:505.
367. LaMonte CS, Yeh SDJ, Straus DJ. Long-term follow-up of cardiac function in patients with Hodgkin's disease treated with mediastinal irradiation and combination chemotherapy including
doxorubicin. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:439.
368. Santoro A, Bonadonna G, Valagusso P, et al. Long-term results of combined chemotherapy-radiotherapy approach in Hodgkin's disease: superiority of ABVD plus radiotherapy versus MOPP
plus radiotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:27.
369. Brice P, Tredaniel J, Monsuez JJ, et al. Cardiopulmonary toxicity after three courses of ABVD and mediastinal irradiation in favorable Hodgkin's disease. Ann Oncol 1991;2(Suppl 2):73.
370. Carlson RG, Mayfield WR, Normann S, Alexander JA. Radiation-associated valvular disease. Chest 1991;99:538.
371. Glanzmann C, Huguenin P, Lutolf UM, et al. Cardiac lesions after mediastinal irradiation for Hodgkin's disease. Radiother Oncol 1994;30:43.
372. Kadota RP, Burgert EO Jr, Driscoll DJ, et al. Cardiopulmonary function in long-term survivors of childhood Hodgkin's lymphoma: a pilot study. Mayo Clin Proc 1988;63:362.
373. Gustavsson A, Eskilsson J, Landberg T, et al. Late cardiac effects after mantle radiotherapy in patients with Hodgkin's disease. Ann Oncol 1990;1:355.
374. Lund MB, Kongerud J, Boe J, et al. Cardiopulmonary sequelae after treatment for Hodgkin's disease: increased risk in females? Ann Oncol 1996;7:257.
375. Warda M, Khan A, Massumi A, et al. Radiation-induced valvular dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol 1983;2:180.
376. Cohen SL, Bharati S, Glass J, et al. Radiotherapy as a cause of complete atrioventricular block in Hodgkin's disease. Arch Intern Med 1981;141:676.
377. Mary-Rabine L, Waleffe A, Kulbertius HE. Severe conduction disturbances and ventricular arrhythmias complicating mediastinal irradiation for Hodgkin's disease: a case report. PACE
1980;3:612.
378. Tzivoni D, Ratzkowski E, Biran S, et al. Complete heart block following therapeutic irradiation of the left side of the chest. Chest 1977;71:231.
379. Kereiakes DJ, Morady F, Ports TA. High degree atrioventricular block after radiation therapy. Am J Cardiol 1983;51:1233.
380. Slama M-S, LeGuludec D, Sebag C, et al. Complete atrioventricular block following mediastinal irradiation: a report of six cases. PACE 1991;14:1112.
381. Strender LE, Lindahl J, Larsson LE. Incidence of heart disease and functional significance of change in the electrocardiogram 10 years after radiotherapy for breast cancer. Cancer 1986;57:929.
382. Watchie J, Coleman CN, Raffin TA, et al. Minimal long-term cardiopulmonary dysfunction following treatment for Hodgkin's disease. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1987;13:513.
383. Orzan F, Brusca A, Gaita F, et al. Associated cardiac lesions in patients with radiation-induced complete heart block [Review]. Int J Cardiol 1993;39:151.
384. Marbach JR, Sontag MR, Van DJ, et al. Management of radiation oncology patients with implanted cardiac pacemakers: report of AAPM Task Group No. 34. American Association of Physicists
in Medicine. Med Phys 1994;21:85.
385. Souliman SK, Christie J. Pacemaker failure induced by radiotherapy. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 1994;17:270.
386. Amronim GD, Solomon RD. Production of arteriosclerosis in the rabbit: a quantitative assessment. Arch Pathol 1965;75:219.
387. Gold H. Production of arteriosclerosis in the rat: effect of X-ray and high-fat diet. Arch Pathol 1961;71:268.
388. Artom C, Lofton HB, Clarkson TB. Ionizing radiation atherosclerosis and lipid metabolism in pigeons. Radiat Res 1965;26:165.
389. Kopelson G, Herwig KJ. The etiologies of coronary artery disease in cancer patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1978;4:895.
390. Yahalom J, Hasin Y, Fuks Z. Acute myocardial infarction with normal coronary arteriogram after mantle field radiation therapy for Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1983;52:637.
391. McEniery PT, Dorosti K, Schiavone WA, et al. Clinical and angiographic features of coronary artery disease after chest irradiation. Am J Cardiol 1987;60:1020.
392. Boivin JF, Hutchison GB, Lubin JH, Mauch P. Coronary artery disease mortality in patients treated for Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1992;69:1241.
393. Henry-Amar M, Hayat M, Meerwaldt JH. Causes of death after therapy for early stage Hodgkin's disease entered on EORTC protocols. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:1155.
394. Cosset JM, Henry-Amar M, Meerwaldt JH. Long-term toxicity of early stages of Hodgkin's disease therapy: the EORTC experience. Am Oncol 1991;2(Suppl 2):77.
395. Handler CE, Livesey S, Lawton PA. Coronary ostial stenosis after radiotherapy: angioplasty or coronary artery surgery? Br Heart J 1989;61:208.
396. Grollier G, Commeau P, Mercier V, et al. Post-radiotherapeutic left main coronary ostial stenosis: clinical and histiological study. Eur Heart J 1988;9:567.
397. Om A, Ellahham S, Vetrovec GW. Radiation-induced coronary artery disease [Review]. Am Heart J 1992;124:1598.
398. Orzan F, Brusca A, Conte MR, et al. Severe coronary artery disease after radiation therapy of the chest and mediastinum: clinical presentation and treatment. Br Heart J 1993;69:496.
399. Annest LS, Anderson RP, Li W, et al. Coronary artery disease following mediastinal radiation therapy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1983;85:257.
400. Miller DD, Waters DD, Dangoisse V, et al. Symptomatic coronary artery spasm following radiotherapy for Hodgkin's disease. Chest 1983;83:284.
401. Host H, Brennhoud IO, Loeb M. Post-operative radiotherapy in breast cancer: long-term results from the Oslo study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:727.
402. Jones JM, Ribeiro GG. Mortality patterns over 34 years of breast cancer patients in a clinical trial of post-operative radiotherapy. Clin Radiol 1989;40:204.
403. Haybittle JL, Brinkley D, Houghton J, et al. Postoperative radiotherapy and late mortality: evidence from the Cancer Research Campaign trial for early breast cancer. BMJ 1989;298:1611.
404. Levitt SH, Fletcher GH. Trials and tribulations: do clinical trials prove that irradiation increases cardiac and secondary cancer mortality in the breast cancer patient? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1991;20:523.
405. Wallgren A, Arner O, Bergstrom J, et al. Radiation therapy in operable breast cancer: results from the Stockholm trial in adjuvant radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12:533.
406. Stender LE, Lindahl J, Larsson LE. Incidence of heart disease and functional significance of changes in the electrocardiogram 10 years after radiotherapy for breast cancer. Cancer
1986;57:929.
407. Cuzick J, Stewart H, Rutqvist L, et al. Cause-specific mortality in long-term survivors of breast cancer who participated in trials of radiotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:447.
408. Harris JR, Hellman S. Put the “hockey stick” on ice. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:497.
409. Marks LB, Hebert ME, Bentel G, et al. To treat or not to treat the internal mammary nodes: an opposible compromise. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29:903.
410. Gustavsson A, Bendahl PO, Cwikeil M, et al. No serious late cardiac effects after adjuvant radiotherapy following mastectomy in premenopausal women with early breast cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1999;43:745.
411. Nixon AJ, Manola J, Gelman R, et al. No long-term increase in cardiac-related mortality after breast-conserving surgery and radiation therapy using modern techniques. J Clin Oncol

1998;16:1374.
412. Rutqvist LE, Leidberg A, Hammar N, Dalhberg K. Myocardial infarction among women with early-stage breast cancer treated with conservative surgery and breast irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1998;40:359.
413. Shapiro CL, et al. Cardiac effects of adjuvant doxorubicin and radiation therapy in breast cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3493.
414. Lederman GS, Sheldon TA, Chaffey JT, et al. Cardiac disease after mediastinal irradiation for seminoma. Cancer 1987;60:772.
415. Savage DE, Constine LS, Schwartz RG, et al. Radiation effects on left ventricular function and myocardial perfusion in long-term survivors of Hodgkin's disease. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1990;19:721.
416. Pierga JY, Maunoury C, Valette H, et al. Follow-up thallium-201 scintigraphy after mantle field radiotherapy for Hodgkin's disease. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:871.
417. Pihkala J, Happonen JM, Virtanen K, et al. Cardiopulmonary evaluation of exercise tolerance after chest irradiation and anticancer chemotherapy in children and adolescents. Pediatrics
1995;95:755.
418. Piovaccari G, Ferretti RM, Prati F, et al. Cardiac disease after chest irradiation for Hodgkin's disease: incidence in 108 patients with long follow-up. Int J Cardiol 1995;49:39.
419. Reber D, Birnbaum DE, Tollenaere P. Heart disease following mediastinal irradiation: surgical management. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1995;9:202.
420. Van Son JA, Noyez L, van Asten WN. Use of internal mammary artery in myocardial revascularization after mediastinal irradiation. J Thoracic Cardiovasc Surg 1992;104:1539.
421. Fuks Z, Persaud RS, Alfieri A, et al. Basic fibroblast growth factor protects endothelial cells against radiation-induced programmed cell death in vitro and in vivo. Cancer Res 1994;54:2582.

SECTION 55.5 Hair Loss
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 55.5
Hair Loss
CLAUDIA A. SEIPP
Introduction
Head Covering
Prevention of Alopecia
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Alopecia is a psychologically distressing but common side effect of many chemotherapeutic agents and radiation therapy. As patients embark on new therapies, hair
loss can induce a negative body image, cause depression and alter interpersonal relationships, and arouse enough anxiety to cause some patients to reject
potentially curative treatment. In one study, 88% of women who received perioperative chemotherapy for early breast cancer considered alopecia to be the most
traumatic aspect of therapy. 1 Adolescents have particular difficulty in coping with hair loss during a time of adjustment to the diagnosis of cancer. 2
Frank discussion of the problem by clinicians and oncology nurses, with recognition of patients' stress and personal loss of self-esteem, is helpful in preparing
affected patients to confront this event. 3 Although not all patients are entirely satisfied by current methods for the prevention of total scalp hair loss or the use of wigs
after hair loss, care-givers can offer supportive listening, some practical suggestions, and identification of resources. Often, the presence of a spouse, family member,
or friend during such a discussion with patients is helpful to place the problem in perspective and to aid affected families and patients in adapting. 4
The hair loss caused by scalp irradiation is unpredictable. Epilation can begin at doses of 500 cGy and generally progresses, causing spotty areas of baldness as the
course of treatment continues. The prospects for hair regrowth diminish with increasing doses. 5 Irradiation ports on extremities have been noted to be hair-free 10
years after radiation therapy and may never have hair regrowth. In lower-dose ranges, regrowth begins 8 to 9 weeks after cessation of therapy. Patients should be
cautioned that new hair may be different in character from pretreatment hair. 6
The extent of body hair loss by patients in any chemotherapeutic program is both drug- and dose-dependent and is related to the frequency of cycle repetition. Often,
it is caused by more than one drug used concurrently ( Table 55.5-1). Long-term therapy may result in loss of pubic, axillary, and facial hair in addition to scalp hair.
Often, the loss of scalp hair occurs in an acute episode while washing. It should be emphasized to patients that alopecia from chemotherapy is reversible, with hair
regeneration beginning 1 to 2 months after therapy is discontinued. Alterations in color and texture of hair may occur: Shade of hair may be lighter or darker and often
is curlier as it regrows. 7 Hair loss may begin 1 to 2 weeks after a single chemotherapeutic dose and reaches maximum loss within 2 months in most drug sequences.
Doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide are common cytologic agents known to cause epilation after two cycles at doses of doxorubicin greater than 50 mg/m 2 and
cyclophosphamide greater than 500 mg/m2. Although agents differ in degree to which they cause hair loss, alopecia may be expected with other single-agent
antibiotics, alkylators, nitrosoureas, and especially their combinations. 8

TABLE 55.5-1. Single Agents with Potential to Induce Reversible Alopecia

HEAD COVERING
Most patients will choose to cover their heads during periods of hair loss. Nurses and clinicians can suggest wigs or head covering with stylish scarves, turbans, or
hats. Wigs should be selected before hair loss begins so that the patient is prepared when alopecia occurs and so that hair color and style can be matched.
Hairpieces are tax-deductible medical expenses and are covered by some medical insurance policies. The American Cancer Society (ACS) can provide wigs free of
charge through their “wig bank” program. Several small private businesses have been developed by former patients who distribute or sell head coverings of various
designs. An ACS patient service called Look Good, Feel Better has been developed in partnership with the National Cosmetology Association and the Cosmetic,
Toiletry, and Fragrance Association Foundation. This service specifically assists women in compensating for hair loss and skin changes to enhance self-image during
cancer treatment.9 Volunteer beauticians and cosmetologists help women to improve their appearance and to feel more comfortable with changes in appearance,
such as dry, discolored, or blotching skin; loss of eyebrows and eyelashes; discolored nails; and alopecia. Such volunteers provide instruction with makeup and give
advice about wigs and other types of head coverings. Information about group programs and their location is available through an ACS toll-free telephone number,
1-800-395-LOOK, 24 hours daily, 7 days per week. The support program is active in all 50 states and Puerto Rico, with groups designed especially for teenagers in
limited areas around the country. The program celebrated its tenth anniversary in 1999, having provided this service to more than 250,000 women.

PREVENTION OF ALOPECIA
Since 1966, interventions have been proposed to prevent scalp hair loss from chemotherapy. 9 The rationale for these procedures is to prevent drug circulation to the
hair follicles by causing temporary vasoconstriction and decreasing tissue metabolism at the time of peak plasma drug level, with either an occlusive scalp tourniquet
or localized hypothermia. The pharmacokinetic profiles of the drugs to be used should be understood before either of these methods is considered. Scalp-cooling
systems must maintain temperatures below 22°C to have any effect. Occlusion of the superficial scalp veins must begin before the drugs are given and, to be
effective, must be extended beyond the time of the peak plasma drug levels. 9,10 and 11
Various types of scalp-icing devices have been manufactured by several different American companies. Although the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
initially had approved the marketing of cooling caps intended to cause localized scalp hypothermia, early in 1990 the FDA reviewed these applications and became
concerned that the safety and efficacy of these devices had not been substantiated by adequate clinical data. 12,13,14,15 and 16 Regulatory action was initiated to address
the following concerns:
The potential for scalp metastasis posed by the use of these devices.
The potential for reducing drug circulation to other anatomic sites beyond the scalp, such as the skull and possibly the brain.
The effectiveness of preventing hair loss and effects of specific cytologic doses and other variables on the results achieved.
On the basis of these factors, the FDA halted the commercial distribution of these devices. Five years after their withdrawal, no company has come forward with
supporting clinical evidence of reasonable safety and effectiveness, according to Frances Moreland Curtis of the FDA's Division of General and Restorative Devices

(written communication, August 1995).
Though indications demonstrate that continuous-flow systems with thermostatically controlled cooling caps still are used in Europe, they seem to be limited to
regimens containing a single anthracycline alopecia-inducing agent. 16 Limitations of safety and inconclusive and conflicting reports of the results of the usefulness of
scalp hypothermia should be factors discussed with patients seeking information about these devices and hair preservation techniques.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Kiebert GM, Hanneke CJM de Haes, Kievit J, van de Verde CJH. Effect of perioperative chemotherapy on quality of life of patients with early breast cancer. Eur J Cancer 1990;26:1038.
2. Pickard-Holley S. The symptom experience of alopecia. Semin Oncol Nurs 1995;11:235.
3. Williams J, Wood C, Cunningham-Warburton P. A narrative study of chemotherapy-induced alopecia. Oncol Nurs Forum 1999;26(9):1463.
4. Freedman T. Social and cultural dimensions of hair loss in women treated for breast cancer. Cancer Nurs 1994;17(4):334.
5. Moss WT, Brand WN, Battiford H. Radiation oncology: rationale, techniques, results, 5th ed. St. Louis: Mosby, 1979:57.
6. Nordstrom RE, Holsti LR. Hair transplantation in alopecia due to radiation. Plast Reconstr Surg 1983;72:454.
7. Cancer, cancer therapy, and hair [Editorial]. Lancet 1983;2:1177.
8. Cline BW. Prevention of chemotherapy-induced alopecia: a review of the literature. Cancer Nurs 1984;7:221.
9. Satterwaite B, Zimm S. The use of scalp hypothermia in the prevention of doxorubicin-induced hair loss. Cancer 1984;54:34.
10. Robinson MH, Jones AC, Durant KD. Effectiveness of scalp cooling in reducing scalp alopecia caused by epirubicin treatment in breast cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:913.
11. Middleton J, Franks D, Buchanan RB, et al. Failure of scalp hypothermia to prevent hair loss when cyclosphosphamide is added to doxorubicin and vincristine. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:337.
12. Wheelock JB, Myers MB, Krebs HB, et al. I neffectiveness of scalp hypothermia in the prevention of alopecia in patients treated with doxorubicin and cis-platin combinations. Cancer Treat Rep
1984;68:1387.
13. Seipp CA. Scalp hypothermia: indicators for precaution [Letter]. Oncol Nurs Forum 1983;10:12.
14. Whitman G, Cadman E, Chen M. Misuse of scalp hypothermia. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:507.
15. Camp-Sorrell D. Scalp hypothermia devices: current status. ONS News 1991;7:1.
16. Tollenaar RAEM, Liefors GJ, Repelaer van Driel OJ, van de Velde CJH. Scalp cooling has no place in the prevention of alopecia in adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. Eur J Cancer
1994;10:1448.

SECTION 55.6 Gonadal Dysfunction
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 55.6
Gonadal Dysfunction
MARVIN L. MEISTRICH
RENA VASSILOPOULOU-SELLIN
LARRY I. LIPSHULTZ
Introduction
Effects of Cytotoxic Agents on Adult Men
Biologic Considerations
Characteristics of Gonadal Toxicity
Individual Drugs
Radiation Therapy
Combination Regimens
Effects of Cytotoxic Agents on Adult Women
Biologic Considerations
Characteristics of Gonadal Toxicity
Individual Drugs
Radiation Therapy
Combination Regimens
Effects of Cytotoxic Agents On Children
Biologic Considerations in Boys
Extent of Gonadal Toxicity in Boys
Biologic Considerations in Girls
Extent of Gonadal Toxicity in Girls
Gonadal Dysfunction after Cranial Irradiation
Preservation of Fertility, Hormone Levels, and Sexual Function
Choice of Regimens
Gonadal Shielding
Male Germ Cell Cryopreservation
Female Germ Cell Cryopreservation
Assisted Reproductive Technologies
Hormonal Methods of Preserving Fertility
Optimization of Fertility after Treatment
Hormone Replacement Therapy
Modified Nerve-Sparing Surgery
Management of Retrograde Ejaculation
Genetic Concerns
Biologic Considerations
Gamete Genomic Analysis
Pregnancy Outcome
Counseling
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
For young adults who have cancer, the success of treatment with regimens that are toxic to gonadal function has made infertility an important problem. When the
cancer is controlled, quality of life then becomes a major issue. To many of these young men and women, a major quality-of-life issue is the ability to have a normal
child.
Both neoplastic disease and its treatment can interfere with normal sexual and reproductive function ( Table 55.6-1). Testicular and ovarian cancer directly involves
the gonad, and prostate, endometrial, and cervical cancer directly involves the reproductive tract. Surgical treatment for any of these diseases results by necessity in
the loss of these important reproductive organs. Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND) for testicular and colon cancer, as well as prostatectomy and surgery
involving the bladder neck, may result in loss of the ability to ejaculate. Primary and metastatic tumors in the hypothalamus and pituitary can directly affect
gonadotropin secretion, resulting in secondary hypogonadism. Both chemotherapy and radiation can cause a variety of toxic effects on the male and female gonads.
Cytotoxic therapies delivered to women during pregnancy might have teratogenic effects on the fetus. 1,2 If fertility is maintained or returns, there remains the concern
about the heritability of cancer and at least a theoretical risk of mutagenic alterations to germ cells caused by cytotoxic therapies.

TABLE 55.6-1. Impact of Cancer and Cancer Therapy on the Reproductive System

The reproductive consequences of cancer therapy affect many people. In the United States, 17,000 men 15 to 45 years old are diagnosed each year with Hodgkin's
disease, lymphoma, bone and soft tissue sarcomas, testicular cancer, or leukemia. 3,4 Of these, more than 3000 are treated with doses of alkylating agents, platinum
drugs, or radiation sufficient to induce prolonged azoospermia. Similarly, 35,000 women aged 15 to 45 years old are treated for breast cancer (mostly), Hodgkin's
disease, lymphoma, and leukemia; at least 80% of these patients receive radiation or alkylating agent–based cytotoxic therapies. These treatments cause not only
sterility but also premature menopause and the associated estrogen deficiency in nearly 20,000 women. In addition, 12,000 children younger than 15 years are
diagnosed each year with cancer, including leukemia, nervous system tumors, lymphomas, and other solid tumors. 5 Survival is approaching 80%, and because 85%
of patients receive chemotherapy or gonadal or pituitary irradiation, reproductive dysfunction is a significant concern.

EFFECTS OF CYTOTOXIC AGENTS ON ADULT MEN
BIOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
The sensitivities of the seminiferous (or germinal) epithelium and the endocrine components of the testis to killing by cytotoxic therapies are related to the relative
proliferation rates of the different cells. 6 The germ cells consist of stem spermatogonia, differentiating spermatogonia, spermatocytes, spermatids, and sperm. Among

the germ cells, which are within the seminiferous epithelium, the differentiating spermatogonia proliferate most actively and are extremely susceptible to cytotoxic
agents. In contrast, the Leydig cells, which are in the interstitium and produce the androgens, and the Sertoli cells, which provide support and regulatory factors to the
germ cells, do not proliferate in adults and so survive most cytotoxic therapies. These cells may, however, suffer functional damage. Frequently after cytotoxic
therapies, germinal tissue appears completely absent, a state described as germinal aplasia, and only the Sertoli cells remain lining the tubules. This could be a result
of killing of the spermatogenic stem cells, the loss of the ability of the somatic cells to support the differentiation of a few surviving stem cells, or a combination of both.
After cytotoxic treatment, sperm count diminishes with a time course that depends on the sensitivities of the different spermatogenic cells and their kinetics of
maturation to sperm. Because the later-stage germ cells (spermatocytes onward) are relatively insensitive to killing and progress with invariant kinetics, sperm count
is not immediately affected. However, these cells are susceptible to the induction of mutagenic damage, and studies in rodents have shown they can become
spermatozoa and transmit mutations induced in their DNA to the next generation. 7 The eventual recovery of sperm production depends on the survival of the
spermatogonial stem cells and their ability to differentiate. In both rats and humans, surviving stem cells may fail to produce differentiating germ cells for a year or
more after cytotoxic insult. 8,9
The loss of germinal cells has secondary effects on the endocrine function of the testis and the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. Inhibin secretion by the Sertoli
cells declines and, as inhibin limits follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) secretion by the pituitary, serum FSH rises. Because germinal aplasia reduces testis size and
there is a concomitant reduction in testicular blood flow, 10 less testosterone is distributed into the circulation, and as testosterone inhibits pituitary luteinizing hormone
(LH) secretion, serum LH increases. Conversely, LH is the primary stimulator of Leydig cell testosterone synthesis, and the reduced blood flow also lessens Leydig
cell exposure to circulating LH. These alterations of pituitary-gonadal feedback could elevate serum LH and reduce serum testosterone levels even in the absence of
any Leydig cell injury.
CHARACTERISTICS OF GONADAL TOXICITY
Although subnormal semen profiles, ejaculatory dysfunction, and low libido in treated patients are most likely a result of treatment, other causes must be considered,
too. A sexual and reproductive history should include developmental factors such as age of testicular descent and puberty; surgery or injury to the genitals; diseases
that might affect reproduction; drug, chemical, or heat exposure; and pretreatment fertility and libido status. A physical examination should consist of examination of
the testicles and secondary sexual characteristics such as beard and hair distribution pattern. Laboratory tests entail semen analysis and a hormone profile. Normal
values and those associated with germinal aplasia are outlined in Table 55.6-2.

TABLE 55.6-2. Typical Clinical and Laboratory Features for Diagnosis of Male Reproductive Dysfunction

During the first 2 months of cytotoxic therapy, sperm counts may remain normal or be only moderately reduced. Some regimens cause azoospermia 2 to 3 months
after the initiation of therapy, 11,12 corresponding to the interval during which the sensitive differentiating spermatogonia become sperm. With other regimens,
oligospermia or even normospermia may be maintained. 13
Increases in FSH are associated with germinal aplasia. Although FSH measurements have sometimes been used as a surrogate for sperm count, they only show an
imperfect correlation, 14 in part because of interpatient variability in baseline FSH levels. 15 After cytotoxic therapy, LH tends to be elevated and serum testosterone
levels in the low normal range. 16 This has been interpreted as indicating subclinical, compensated Leydig cell failure; however, changes in testicular blood flow can
also explain these observations. 10 The only treatment that produces testosterone insufficiency in a high proportion of adult patients is high-dose (30 Gy) radiation
direct to the testes, which directly damages Leydig cell function. 17
The induced azoospermia can be either temporary or prolonged, depending on the ability of surviving stem spermatogonia to proliferate, differentiate, and produce
spermatozoa, which in turn depends on the nature of the cytotoxic agent and dose ( Table 55.6-3). If treatment is limited to the cytotoxic agents that do not kill stem
spermatogonia or block their differentiation into spermatozoa, normospermic levels are usually restored within 3 months after the cytotoxic therapy. However, if agents
that inactivate stem spermatogonia or affect differentiation are used, longer periods of azoospermia ensure. At lower doses of these agents, recovery to normospermic
levels can occur within 1 to 3 years, but at higher doses, azoospermia can be more prolonged or even permanent. The probability that spermatogenesis will recover
decreases with the duration of azoospermia. 12,18 However, in a few men spermatogenesis recovered after as long as 20 years of azoospermia. 19 FSH levels drop to
normal when sperm production recovers. When sperm count recovers after cytotoxic therapy, sperm motility appears to be normal, 12,18,20 and fertility is generally
restored. However, when the duration of azoospermia is long, recovery may sometimes plateau at less than 1 million/mL, 12 which may not be compatible with fertility.

TABLE 55.6-3. Effects of Different Antitumor Agents on Sperm Production in Men

To evaluate the effects of cytotoxic therapy, the initial gonadal status must be considered. Men with both seminomas and nonseminomatous germ cell tumors have
impaired semen quality even before cytotoxic therapy is instituted. Approximately 65% are oligospermic (counts less than 20 million/mL), 50% have less than 10
million/mL, and 13% are azoospermic, 21,22 compared with values of 9%, 5%, and 1%, respectively, in control populations. 23 In approximately 40% of the patients with
reduced semen quality, this impaired testicular function is a result of irreversible abnormalities associated with the uninvolved gonad (e.g., carcinoma in situ or a
history of cryptorchidism) that predate the onset of cancer. 24 In the other 60%, it may be a result of reversible factors such as elevated chorionic gonadotropin
produced by the tumor with resulting increases in estradiol. 25 In addition, emission and ejaculation may have been compromised by earlier RPLND so that the sperm
density may not accurately reflect gonadal function. 26 In contrast to the severe dysfunction in testicular cancer, in Hodgkin's disease only 21% of Hodgkin's disease
patients are oligospermic and 2% are azoospermic, and the distribution of counts in the remainder is not significantly different from normal. 27 The presence of
low-grade fever and B symptoms was not predictive for poor semen quality. 27,28 Similarly, in other lymphomas and sarcomas, pretreatment sperm counts tend to be

normal except for a trend toward an increase in the incidence of oligospermia. 12,18,20
Age at treatment is not a major factor in recovery from gonadal damage in men. Two studies indicate increased incidence of testicular damage after cytotoxic therapy
in older men, 29,30 but others fail to indicate any effect. 12,18,31
INDIVIDUAL DRUGS
The most sterilizing drugs are the alkylating agents and cisplatin, all of which form adducts and/or cross-links on DNA. Only two of these, chlorambucil 32 and
cyclophosphamide, 33 have been demonstrated to induce prolonged azoospermia when given alone. Evidence from combination chemotherapy regimens
demonstrates that procarbazine34,35 and cisplatin in high doses 20,36 are also highly sterilizing. Table 55.6-3 lists the cumulative doses of these drugs at which recovery
of sperm production is unlikely. The cumulative dose appears to be more important than the dose rate. 12 Some doses are based on data from combination
chemotherapy regimens and do not account for possible additive contributions from other drugs in the regimen.
The evaluations of other individual alkylating agents have been obtained from combination chemotherapy regimens. Busulfan has an additive effect on the sterility in
men resulting from cyclophosphamide treatment, 37 but there are no studies on busulfan in the absence of highly sterilizing agents. Carboplatin, an analogue of
cisplatin, is expected to produce sterility, but in clinical studies it appeared to be less sterilizing than cisplatin. 21 The addition of the cyclophosphamide analogue
ifosfamide to cisplatin-containing chemotherapy regimens failed to produce significant levels of additional prolonged azoospermia. 38 Treatment of boys with
carmustine and lomustine did produce prolonged azoospermia, 39 and it is likely, but not proven, that the same would occur in adults.
The list of agents that only have temporary effects (see Table 55.6-3) includes some that have been used as single agents. However, most were used in regimens that
do not cause prolonged azoospermia or were not independent prognostic factors in the prediction of recovery in variably sterilizing regimens. 18
In addition to cytotoxic agents, hormonal and biologic agent therapies are also used in treatment of cancer. 40 Any reproductive effects of hormones should generally
be reversible. However, only the corticosteroid prednisone and the cytokine interferon-a have been studied, and there are no indications of negative effects on male
gonadal function of these agents. 18,41
RADIATION THERAPY
The effects of radiation on the testes are dependent on the fractionation regimen: Doses given in 3- to 7-week fractionated courses cause more gonadal damage than
do single doses.42 In contrast, in all other organ systems fractionation of radiation reduces the damage. Doses of radiation to the testes above 0.15 Gy diminish sperm
count after a lag period of approximately 6 weeks. 43 Fractionated doses between 0.15 and 0.5 Gy only cause oligospermia. The nadir of sperm count is at 4 to 6
months after the end of treatment, but 10 to 18 months are required for complete recovery. 44 At doses above 0.6 Gy, azoospermia occurs. The duration of
azoospermia is dose dependent, and recovery can begin within 1 year after doses of less than 1 Gy, 45 but requires 2.0 to 3.5 years at approximately 2 Gy. 30
Cumulative doses of fractionated radiotherapy of 2.5 Gy and higher generally result in prolonged and likely permanent azoospermia. 46 Likewise, single testicular
doses of 8 Gy or fractionated doses of 12 Gy, given as total body irradiation in preparation for bone marrow transplantation, generally produce permanent
azoospermia. However, spermatogenesis does recover in 17% of these men after a median follow-up time of 5 years, 37 but the recovery is only 10% when
cyclophosphamide (4.5 g/m2) is added to the conditioning regimen. 47
Direct testicular radiation is the only treatment that consistently produces clinically significant reductions in testicular androgen production in the adult. Doses of 30 Gy
for treatment of testicular carcinoma in situ significantly reduce testosterone levels, 17 but doses of less than 20 Gy do not appear to have clinically significant effects
on testosterone levels. 48 Furthermore, the gonadal scatter doses of 2 to 6 Gy during treatment for prostate cancer also do not produce clinically significant reductions
in testosterone levels 49; the radiation-associated impotence after such treatments is likely a result of vascular damage. 50
COMBINATION REGIMENS
The sterilizing potential of different combinations depends on the individual agents and the dose given. Although interindividual variation makes it impossible to
predict whether sperm production in any given man will recover, the probability of inducing prolonged azoospermia has been determined for many combinations
(Table 55.6-4).

TABLE 55.6-4. Probability of Germinal Aplasia in Men Treated with Different Combination Chemotherapy Regimens

The sterilizing potentials of combination chemotherapy and chemotherapy plus radiotherapy regimens are additive; there is no evidence for synergistic interactions
between the agents. The listing in Table 55.6-3 and the results with similar regimens can be used to predict the sterilizing potential of regimens not presented here.
The additive effects of multiple agents can be seen in the case of cyclophosphamide, which when given alone requires 19 g/m 2 to produce prolonged sterility in
one-half the men. However, the prolonged azoospermia observed in one-half the men after a median cyclophosphamide dose of only 10.6 g/m 2 in the CY(V)ADIC
regimen, which had a median doxorubicin dose of 880 g/m 2, can be explained by additive effects from other drugs, particularly doxorubicin. 12,18 The absence of
azoospermia after 5.1 g/m2 of cyclophosphamide given for treatment of leukemia 57 may be a result of the extreme fractionation, as the drug was given once every 20
weeks over 3.5 years. Two cycles of Mustargen, Oncovin, procarbazine, and prednisone (MOPP) and pelvic radiotherapy had additive effects on the induction of
prolonged azoospermia,34 but the gonadal toxicity of mitoxantrone, vincristine, vinblastine, and prednisone (NOVP) was insufficient to produce noticeable
enhancement of the sterilizing effects of pelvic radiotherapy. 60

EFFECTS OF CYTOTOXIC AGENTS ON ADULT WOMEN
BIOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Gonadal cell kinetics in women are opposite of those in men, as the germ cells are nonproliferative whereas the somatic cells proliferate. Prenatally, female germ cells
proliferate as oogonia and become arrested at the oocyte stage. At birth, a woman has 1 million oocytes, which are reduced to 300,000 at puberty. These are
progressively lost by atresia, development, and ovulation, until almost all are lost and menopause is reached at approximately age 50 years.
Before recruitment to the process leading to ovulation, oocytes are found in primordial follicles with few pregranulosa cells, surrounded by thecal cells of the ovarian
stroma. The stimulus for the initiation of follicular maturation, which occurs in the absence of gonadotropic hormones, is unknown, but a role for gonadotropins cannot
be excluded.61 Once a follicle is recruited into growth, it develops until it either degenerates or ovulates. Follicular maturation is characterized by proliferation of
granulosa cells and the development of steroidogenic potential of both the thecal and granulosa cells. Estrogens, produced by biosynthetic steps in both the thecal

and the granulosa cells under LH and FSH stimulation, cause the LH surge that triggers ovulation. The day-to-day sequential variations in FSH, LH, and estradiol are
essential for menstrual cyclicity and the female reproductive processes. The close interaction between granulosa cells and oocytes makes it difficult to identify which
type of cell is the target of cytotoxic agents; death of either results in atrophy of the other. Because destruction of oocytes results in loss of follicles and
steroidogenesis, germ cell loss leads directly to estrogen insufficiency.
The time between recruitment of follicles and their ovulation is approximately 85 days. When maturing follicles are destroyed by cytotoxic therapy, temporary
amenorrhea results. If primordial follicles are reduced below the minimum number necessary for menstrual cyclicity, irreversible ovarian failure occurs and the
amenorrhea is permanent. Different species of experimental animals have yielded conflicting information regarding the sensitivity of primordial follicles to radiation 62
and cyclophosphamide63,64 and do not yet allow prediction of response in women.
CHARACTERISTICS OF GONADAL TOXICITY
Because the size of the germ cell population in women cannot be estimated, menstrual and reproductive histories are important in assessing the effects of cytotoxic
therapy on ovarian function. Information on the patient's menstrual cycle during and after therapy, as well as oral contraceptive use, should be noted. To determine if
effects are related to cytotoxic therapy, pretherapy ovarian function should be evaluated from the history of menarche, menses, pregnancies, and oral contraceptive
use. The occurrence of symptoms of recent primary ovarian failure, including hot flashes, night sweats, insomnia, mood swings, irritability, vaginal dryness,
dyspareunia, decreased libido, and bladder infection, should be recorded. Laboratory measurements of hormone levels are most definitive in the diagnosis of primary
ovarian failure; FSH is the most sensitive, but LH and estradiol levels are also useful ( Table 55.6-5). The symptoms of ovarian failure may be masked and the
hormone levels altered if the woman is taking oral contraceptives.

TABLE 55.6-5. Typical Laboratory Features for Diagnosis of Ovarian Failure

Some of the variability reported in the literature regarding the incidence of ovarian failure after cytotoxic therapy is a result of the lack of consistent definitions. 65
Menopause should be defined as more than 12 months without a menstrual period, treatment-related amenorrhea as at least 6 months without menstrual periods in a
premenopausal patient, and oligomenorrhea as a reduction in the frequency of menses to between 40 days and 6 months. Because the mechanisms of temporary and
irreversible treatment-related amenorrhea may be different, posttreatment follow-up time should be given, and they should be distinct outcomes.
Cytotoxic therapy often induces temporary amenorrhea, which may last a few months or up to 7 years. 66 Some of this temporary amenorrhea is a result of direct
ovarian damage, causing failure of follicular recruitment or loss of maturing follicles. Alternatively, stress and malnutrition or weight loss can also cause temporary
gonadal dysfunction by altering hypothalamic activity and estrogen metabolism. 67 The destruction of growing follicles and the resulting temporary amenorrhea during
treatment appear to be independent of age. 68 Although some patients with treatment-induced temporary amenorrhea do display menopausal symptoms, these
symptoms are usually indicative of permanent ovarian failure. In contrast, permanent treatment-induced amenorrhea, which is equivalent to ovarian failure,
dramatically increases in an apparently continuous manner with age at treatment 69,70; examples are given in Table 55.6-6 and Table 55.6-7. This trend is expected as
the number of follicles decreases with increasing age. The permanent amenorrhea may begin during chemotherapy or subsequently after several years of
oligomenorrhea. 71,72

TABLE 55.6-6. Effects of Different Cytotoxic Agents on Ovarian Function

TABLE 55.6-7. Probability of Ovarian Failure in Postmenarchal Women with Combination Chemotherapy Regimens Containing Alkylating Agents

If cytotoxic therapy depletes the pool of primordial follicles, premature ovarian failure should occur even in young women who continue menstruating after cytotoxic
therapy. 71,73 In women aged 13 to 19 years at diagnosis treated with alkylating agent chemotherapy and radiotherapy below the diaphragm, the median age at
menopause is 32 years, compared with 44 years for women treated with radiotherapy or chemotherapy alone, and 49 years for controls. 74 The degree of acceleration
of menopause in these women correlated with the probability of induction of primary ovarian failure by the different therapies. 75
Cytotoxic therapy-induced ovarian failure and premature menopause can accelerate bone density loss. 76 However, when only chemotherapy is used, some residual

ovarian function may be present and can ameliorate the loss. 77
INDIVIDUAL DRUGS
As in men, only alkylating agents appear to produce permanent gonadal failure in women (see Table 55.6-6), and the cumulative dose appears to be more important
than the dose rate. Administration of low daily doses of cyclophosphamide over several months 78 is only slightly less effective at inducing permanent ovarian failure
than is a high dose in 4 days. 73 Melphalan, chlorambucil, busulfan, mitomycin C, and doses of cisplatin of 600 mg/m 2 or higher87 also produce permanent ovarian
failure. Procarbazine is likely to be highly sterilizing inasmuch as permanent ovarian failure is observed in all procarbazine-containing combinations and, in the case
of cyclophosphamide, Oncovin, procarbazine, and prednisone (COPP), the dose of cyclophosphamide is insufficient to cause this effect (see Table 55.6-7).
Other agents studied do not induce permanent ovarian failure. 5-Fluorouracil up to 30 g did not induce amenorrhea in women with a median age of 35. 78 Methotrexate
(200 g) plus vincristine (40 g), 92 etoposide (5 g),93 and cisplatin (less than 450 mg/m 2) plus doxorubicin (less than 400 mg/m 2)87 failed to produce permanent ovarian
failure in women 15 to 30 years of age. Doxorubicin, bleomycin, vincristine, and dacarbazine (ABVD), must not induce ovarian failure because none is observed after
treatment of women up to age 41.94 Reproductive effects of hormonal agents, such as tamoxifen, which interferes with pregnancy in animals, 95 should be reversible.
RADIATION THERAPY
Radiation is highly effective at inducing permanent ovarian failure with a marked age-dependence in sensitivity 96 (see Table 55.6-6). In adult women, irradiation of the
ovaries occurs in the treatment of Hodgkin's disease and during total body irradiation in preparation for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Irradiation of the
paraaortic nodes results in cumulative doses of only 1.5 Gy to the ovaries and does not appear to interfere with menstruation in most patients. 88,97 When total nodal
irradiation for Hodgkin's disease or pelvic radiation for cervical cancer is given, and the ovarian dose can be reduced to 4 to 5 Gy by translocation (oophoropexy) and
shielding of the ovaries, a partial preservation of fertility in younger women results. 70,98 Total body irradiation in preparation for bone marrow transplantation delivers 8
to 12 Gy to the gonads, which destroys ovarian function in all adult women, even the young ones. 73,85 Fractionation appeared not to spare the ovary, as 27% of
women receiving 10 Gy in a single fraction recovered ovarian function as opposed to only 10% of those receiving 12 Gy in 6 days. 37
COMBINATION REGIMENS
All combinations that include procarbazine or high doses of other alkylating agents [e.g., mechlorethamine, vinblastine, procarbazine, and prednisone (MOPP);
COPP; and chlorambucil, vinblastine, procarbazine, and prednisone (ChlVPP)] induce ovarian failure in almost all older women and even in some younger ones (see
Table 55.6-7). Recovery is better when the dose of procarbazine is reduced by using the MOPP/ABVD regimen. 90 Radiation and MOPP chemotherapy clearly have an
additive (but not synergistic) effect, and the combination results in a higher incidence of ovarian failure than either modality alone. 70
Similarly, regimens using high doses of cyclophosphamide, as used in treatment of breast cancer, also produce ovarian failure; however, the age dependence
obscures any possible dose dependence. 69,79,91 Lower doses of cyclophosphamide usually given along with antimetabolites and other agents for treatment of leukemia
do not destroy primordial follicles nor produce permanent ovarian failure. 35,68 Combination chemotherapy regimens without alkylating agents tend not to produce
ovarian failure.

EFFECTS OF CYTOTOXIC AGENTS ON CHILDREN
BIOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS IN BOYS
In the prepubertal testis, the immature Sertoli cells are the most numerous cells in the seminiferous tubules. 99 They proliferate at an extremely low level in the
prepubertal period, only increasing twofold in numbers, but there is a marked increase during puberty. Spermatogonia are the only germ cells present and transform
from an appearance of fetal germ cells to that of adult spermatogonia. They proliferate at a low level, increasing sixfold from birth to 10 years. Leydig cells cannot be
identified in the interstitial spaces from shortly after birth until puberty. At puberty, new Leydig cells are formed from mesenchymal cells already in the interstitium,
involving extensive proliferation of the precursors. 100 The appearance of the Leydig cells elevates secretion of testosterone, which, along with enhanced FSH levels,
initiates spermatogenesis at a median age of 13.
EXTENT OF GONADAL TOXICITY IN BOYS
The germinal epithelium in the prepubertal testis does not appear to be any more resistant to cytotoxic therapy than that in the adult. The concept that prepubertal are
less sensitive than adult testes 101 derived from comparison of cyclophosphamide doses given on a milligram per kilogram basis and the failure of prepubertal boys to
show elevation of FSH after chemotherapy. 102 But when treated patients are followed after puberty by sperm count and hormone evaluation, the sensitivity of the
prepubertal testis to a variety of cytotoxic regimens is apparent. Appropriately expressing chemotherapy doses to boys on a milligram per square meter basis and
using calculated radiation doses, the sterilizing effects of a variety of chemotherapy regimens 103,104,105,106 and 107 and radiotherapy 86,108 can be predicted on the basis of
the sensitivity of the adult testis (see Table 55.6-3 and Table 55.6-4).
As in adults, radiation and alkylating agents, such as procarbazine, cyclophosphamide, and chlorambucil, are the most sterilizing and produce prolonged and
sometimes permanent azoospermia. The nitrosoureas (carmustine, lomustine), which are also alkylating agents, and cisplatin likewise produce prolonged germinal
aplasia. 39,87 In addition, high doses of doxorubicin and cytosine arabinoside appear to be additive with the preceding agents in producing gonadal damage. 109 In
general, regimens lacking alkylating agents, such as some used for acute lymphocytic leukemia, allow pubertal progression of spermatogenesis even during
treatment 110 and do not appear to affect postpubertal sperm counts 111 or fertility. 75
Chemotherapy does not have major effects on Leydig cell function, and hence the timing of pubertal development and postpubertal testosterone levels are generally
normal.112 There is one report that treatment with MOPP chemotherapy during puberty results in gynecomastia 102; however, other studies indicate that this incidence
is not above background levels. 107,113 Preliminary data do indicate, however, that approximately 30% of boys treated with busulfan plus cyclophosphamide show
delayed puberty.66 In contrast, direct testicular irradiation, used in treatment of leukemia or sarcomas, produces dramatic Leydig cell damage. There is significant age
dependence, as children are more sensitive than adults 114 and within the prepubertal period, the youngest are most sensitive. 115 The incidence of extremely low
testosterone levels and failure to complete puberty rises from 0% at 7.5 Gy, 116 to 0% to 50% at 12 Gy,66,117 75% at 24 Gy,118,119 and 100% at 27 to 30 Gy. 114
BIOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS IN GIRLS
Despite the low levels of circulating gonadotropins, the immature ovary is far from quiescent. In addition to primordial follicles, maturing follicles up to and including
the large antral stage appear within a few months after birth. 120 After 6 years of age, FSH levels, the numbers and diameters of large antral follicles, and estrogen
levels all increase. The lack of gonadotropin support prevents full follicular development or ovulation before menarche.
EXTENT OF GONADAL TOXICITY IN GIRLS
Prepubertal girls appear to be even less susceptible than young postpubertal women to ovarian failure induced by cytotoxic therapy (see Table 55.6-6). Furthermore,
girls treated between the ages of 0 and 12 do not appear to experience premature menopause during their 20s and 30s as is the case with those treated at ages 13 to
19.74 However, additional numbers and longer follow-up are needed.
Radiation is the most damaging agent to the prepubertal ovary. Doses of approximately 20 to 30 Gy induce permanent ovarian failure in nearly all girls. 121,122 Doses of
8 to 15 Gy, given as single doses or in a few fractions, usually with some cyclophosphamide in preparation for bone marrow transplantation, cause permanent ovarian
failure and failure of pubertal development in only 50% of girls, with those at younger ages being less sensitive than older ones. 66,115 Fractionated doses of up to 7 Gy
cause little failure of ovarian function or pubertal development, 86,123 although there can be additive detrimental effects of chemotherapy.

Most chemotherapy regimens, including high doses of cyclophosphamide up to 48 g, 80 do not cause failure of pubertal development and menarche. Although various
combination chemotherapy regimens used for treatment of leukemia and Hodgkin's disease reduce the number of growing follicles, no significant change in numbers
of primordial follicles could be measured, 124 and puberty and associated ovarian function develop normally. 112,125 Even with the standard MOPP chemotherapy for
Hodgkin's disease, 90% of prepubertal girls develop normally. 86,126 However, regimens with high doses of certain alkylating agents can produce detectable ovarian
damage in a significant percentage of prepubertal girls. ChlVPP (30% failure) 127 and carmustine or lomustine (greater than 90% failure) 128 produce transient
biochemical evidence of ovarian failure, but there is no evidence that they interfere with pubertal development. In contrast, busulfan plus cyclophosphamide actually
inhibits puberty in 50% of girls. 66

GONADAL DYSFUNCTION AFTER CRANIAL IRRADIATION
Whereas gonadal irradiation causes primary hypogonadism, cranial irradiation is associated with secondary hypogonadism due to damage to the hypothalamus,
gonadotrophs in the pituitary, or both. In patients with pituitary or suprasellar lesions, gonadotropin deficiency is often present before antineoplastic therapy; however,
patients with nasopharyngeal cancer or brain tumors have normal hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axes until they receive therapeutic irradiation with fields
encompassing the hypothalamic-pituitary areas. There is no convincing evidence that any of the cytotoxic drugs directly impair hypothalamic and anterior pituitary
function.
In children, prophylactic cranial irradiation with 24 Gy for leukemia does not affect LH or FSH pulsatile secretion in the first 6 years. 129 Irradiation of children for cranial
tumors with doses of 25 to 55 Gy to the hypothalamic-pituitary region decreased LH and FSH secretion in 11% of cases within 6 years in one study. 130 However, in
some cases radiation doses between 18 and 47 Gy, sometimes combined with chemotherapy, may not inactivate the mechanisms necessary for gonadotropin
production and secretion, but indirectly stimulate this process before puberty, and hence increase LH and FSH levels and cause precocious puberty. 131,132 Because
growth hormone deficiency is common in these patients, precocious puberty further exacerbates the risk of adult shortness.
In adults, decreased LH and FSH secretion, measured after gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) stimulation, is observed after cranial irradiation. The damage
increases with treatment dose 133 and time interval since treatment. 134 LH and FSH deficiency is observed in 33% of patients 5 years after treatment with 20 Gy, but
66% are affected 5 years after 35 to 49 Gy, progressing to 100% by 10 years. 135 This results in oligomenorrhea in women and low testosterone in men;
hyperprolactinemia might mediate the observed gonadal dysfunction is some cases. 136,137
In many patients who receive multimodality treatment, complex hormonal dysregulation may develop; although cranial irradiation, for example, may affect the
hypothalamus and pituitary, total body or abdominal irradiation and concomitant chemotherapy may induce primary gonadal failure.

PRESERVATION OF FERTILITY, HORMONE LEVELS, AND SEXUAL FUNCTION
CHOICE OF REGIMENS
It is sometimes possible to choose between nearly equally curative regimens on the basis of their sterilizing potentials. The principle is to minimize the doses of the
agents in Table 55.6-3 and Table 55.6-6 that are most sterilizing. A classic example is to use ABVD instead of MOPP to treat Hodgkin's disease. 13 In the treatment of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, regimens that minimize the dose of cyclophosphamide, such as VAPEC-B, produce less gonadal failure in men than does
cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin (Adriamycin), Oncovin, prednisone, and bleomycin (CHOP-Bleo). 138
GONADAL SHIELDING
Except when they must be irradiated because of neoplastic involvement or anatomic inclusion within the irradiated target, the gonads are outside or are shielded from
the direct radiation beam. Nevertheless, an appreciable radiation dose from the accelerator head, collimator scatter, or internal lateral scatter may reach the gonads.
Even at moderately low radiation doses, the possibilities of additive effects from chemotherapy and genetic damage to the sperm make it desirable to further minimize
the radiation dose.
Gonadal dose depends on distance from the field edge, field size, and photon energy; it can vary from 0.1% to 10.0% of the prescribed dose within the field. 139 Pelvic
radiation fields result in significant doses to the testis. Clamshell type shields 139,140 and beam blocking can reduce testicular doses approximately fivefold to
approximately 2 Gy for the inverted Y field used for Hodgkin's disease and approximately 0.5 Gy for the hemipelvic field used for seminoma. When treatment of the
hemiscrotum after unilateral orchiectomy for testicular cancer is indicated, a special positioning device to retract the remaining testicle out of the treatment field and
provide shielding above the area 141 can reduce the dose to the gonad to 0.6 Gy. 142
To shield the ovaries, an oophoropexy, in which the ovaries are surgically translocated, usually to the midline behind the uterus, must be performed. That region is
then shielded from the direct radiation beam using lead blocks. Some investigators report reductions in cumulative ovarian doses to approximately 4 to 5 Gy during
total nodal irradiation 143 and good preservation of fertility in younger women 86 (see Table 55.6-6); however, others report higher doses and poorer recoveries. 97
MALE GERM CELL CRYOPRESERVATION
Semen cryopreservation is an extremely important procedure for men who want to preserve their fertility potential after cytotoxic treatment for cancer. The significance
of notifying the patient of the potential risk of iatrogenic sterility as early as possible cannot be overemphasized. Physicians often are aware early during the
diagnostic process that the patient will most likely need to receive potentially sterilizing cytotoxic therapy, although the exact diagnosis, stage, and treatment regimen
have not yet been decided. This time should be used to initiate and complete the cryopreservation procedure. The banking of at least three semen samples with at
least a 48-hour period of abstinence between samples is recommended. This usually requires 5 to 8 days to complete. Additional samples (four) and longer
abstinence periods (72 hours) to achieve higher total sperm counts may be considered. But fewer samples with shorter times are often obtained because of the need
to initiate anticancer therapy quickly, and it is important to avoid possible increased genetic damage in sperm collected after the start of therapy. 7 It is even possible to
obtain semen with normal characteristics from 14- to 17-year-old boys. 144 In boys unable to obtain samples by masturbation, penile vibratory stimulation or
electroejaculation have been used. 145
Because of the low overall success rate with artificial insemination using banked semen in the past, it had been recommended that only samples with high sperm
counts and motilities be stored. Currently, the success of in vitro fertilization (IVF) and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) make cryopreservation of all samples
containing any live sperm appropriate. The cost of sperm banking three samples, including analysis and storage for 5 years, is approximately $1200 at a university
medical school clinic, although it may be higher at private sperm banks. The patient should be made aware that conception rates are only 30% with interuterine
insemination (cost per cycle, approximately $250). If the sperm count or motility are significantly impaired, more complicated assisted reproductive technologies may
be necessary. The average cost of IVF without ICSI, including the drugs used, is $10,000 per cycle and with ICSI it is approximately an additional $1200 per cycle.
The transplantation of a population of testicular cells, including stem spermatogonia from a donor mouse to a recipient mouse, in which endogenous stem
spermatogonia were killed with busulfan, restored spermatogenesis and fertility. 146 Restoration of spermatogenesis is also possible with cryopreserved cells. 147 This
suggests the possibility that testicular tissue may be harvested from men before sterilizing cytotoxic therapy and cryopreserved as a cell suspension, for later injection
back into the testis after the completion of chemotherapy. Currently, a trial is underway at the Christie Hospital, Manchester, England. 148 This technique would be
most valuable for boys, who may be too young to produce sperm, especially because the prepubertal testis is enriched in spermatogonia. 146
FEMALE GERM CELL CRYOPRESERVATION
Freezing oocytes, unlike sperm, is currently still experimental. There have been offspring born using frozen human oocytes in IVF procedures 149; however, the
success rate is low. In addition, currently used procedures for freezing human and animal oocytes may increase chromosomal aberrations. 150 Furthermore, obtaining
mature oocytes is limited to patients in whom there are no contraindications to hormone-induced superovulation. It is also possible to freeze embryos obtained by IVF
or by uterine lavage after natural coitus, 151 but these methods are rarely practical with cancer patients, especially when cytotoxic therapy must be initiated without

much delay.
Another alternative under active investigation is the surgical removal of ovarian tissue, cryopreservation of tissue slices, and grafting back to the remaining vessels
after chemotherapy. This procedure restored ovarian endocrine function and fertility in sheep. 152 Follicular development has been observed in human ovarian tissue
implanted into immunodeficient mice. 153 Restoration of hormone production and follicular growth after transplantation of cryopreserved ovarian tissue has been
reported,154 but the true long-term success of this technique remains to be determined. 148 One limitation is the concern that the technique may reintroduce malignant
cells to patients in remission. 155 Isolating a follicle from the thawed tissue and maturing an oocyte in vitro would be a preferable option, but at present the technique
has only been developed in the mouse.
ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGIES
Assisted reproductive technologies have and still are undergoing rapid advances, providing new options for survivors of cancer with gonadal damage to achieve
fertility. 156 Previously, intrauterine artificial insemination, often using controlled ovarian hyperstimulation, had been the only method available. Only approximately 30%
of women whose partners were cancer patients were able to achieve pregnancy, 157 because of the limited number of samples, poor semen quality in some patients,
and loss of motility during freezing and thawing.
Currently, IVF, and especially IVF with ICSI, either as the primary modality or after unsuccessful attempts with artificial insemination, are important in achieving
pregnancies from stored semen after the completion of cytotoxic therapy. In IVF, only approximately 100,000 motile sperm are placed in a small droplet of medium
with an oocyte, and fertilization is allowed to occur. In ICSI, one spermatozoon is selected with a micropipette and microinjected into the cytoplasm of an oocyte. 158 In
both procedures, the oocytes are examined for fertilization and embryo cleavage, and multiple embryos are reimplanted into the uterine cavity. Multiple oocytes can
be fertilized in a single IVF cycle, and the embryos that are not transferred can be frozen for implantation at a later time. IVF, however, requires hormonal induction of
multiple ovulations, and the implantation of several embryos increases the risks of fetal loss and multiple births.
Because freezing and thawing may result in complete loss of sperm motility, IVF may not be possible in some cases, but IVF with ICSI can still be used. 158 ICSI can be
performed with semen samples with 0% motility as long as the sperm are viable. 158 It is possible to select sperm for injection from individuals with exceptionally low
counts (e.g., 100 per ejaculate) and even from the testis (testicular sperm extraction). 159,160
If the number and quality of the sperm meet standards set by a given clinic, IVF alone is used. However if the standards are not met or if IVF has failed, IVF with ICSI
is then used. With ICSI, the fertilization rate is 50% to 60%. The success rate of IVF or IVF is ICSI is 22% per initiated cycle and 26% per completed cycle. 161 When
multiple cycles are used, these procedures offer couples a success rate of 80% to 100% for achieving a pregnancy. 157,162
There appear to be no increases in congenital malformations in the offspring from IVF or ICSI; however, there is a small increase in the incidence of chromosomal
abnormalities, mostly in the numbers of sex chromosomes.163 Some of the chromosome abnormalities observed after the use of ICSI for primary male infertility are not
caused by ICSI but are already in the spermatozoa of the infertile patient 164; the latter should not be a factor in cryopreserved sperm from cancer patients.
HORMONAL METHODS OF PRESERVING FERTILITY
Although hormone treatments have been used to enhance the survival of germ cells and their ability to recover after cytotoxic treatments, there currently are no
reliable methods for hormonal protection of gonadal function in humans.
Pretreatment of male rats with gonadal steroids, 165 GnRH analogues,166 or GnRH analogues combined with antiandrogens, 167 all of which suppress gonadotropin and
testosterone levels and action, enhance recovery of spermatogenesis and fertility after procarbazine, irradiation, or cyclophosphamide. The original proposal that
these treatments protect the spermatogonia from killing by suppressing their proliferation 168 is incorrect, as the protective hormone treatments neither suppress
spermatogonial proliferation 169 nor enhance stem spermatogonial survival. 170 Rather, the hormones appear to act via suppression of testosterone levels to protect the
subsequent ability of the somatic cells of the testis to support the recovery of spermatogenesis from surviving stem spermatogonia. In rats, stem spermatogonia
survive some cytotoxic therapies but are unable to differentiate, 171,172 and hormone treatment, even given after the cytotoxic treatment, can stimulate recovery of
spermatogenesis.171 The presence of stem spermatogonia in testes of cancer patients during prolonged periods of iatrogenic azoospermia suggests that this
procedure may be applicable to humans as well. Only one out of eight clinical trials has been able to demonstrate protection of spermatogenesis in humans by
hormone treatment before and during cytotoxic therapy. 173,174 and 175 The failures may, in part, be attributed to the administration, along with the GnRH agonist
(GnRH-Ag), of testosterone, which has been shown in the rat to reduce the recovery of spermatogenesis. The continuation of testosterone-suppressive treatment after
completion of cytotoxic therapy, which was successful in the rat, 176 has not been tested in humans.
In the female rat, there is one convincing study showing protection of ovarian function. The number of developing follicles several months after cyclophosphamide
treatment was enhanced when GnRH-Ag had been given along with cyclophosphamide. 177 It is not apparent how GnRH-Ag worked as recruitment of primordial
follicles is gonadotropin independent. However, GnRH-Ag also inhibits the normal physiologic loss of primordial follicles by recruitment and atresia. 178 Thus, GnRH-Ag
treatment for several months might prolong fertility in rodents because it could be given for an appreciable fraction of their reproductive lifetime, but if this were the
mechanism, it would not have a significant effect in women, who have a 40-year interval from menarche to menopause. Clinical studies attempting to protect ovarian
function in women with GnRH-Ag179,180 or oral contraceptives 181,182 during treatment for Hodgkin's disease have yielded contradictory results.
Despite clinical symptoms of ovarian failure, there may be some residual ovarian function remaining after chemotherapy; the possibility is less likely after gonadal
radiation. 77 It is possible to stimulate ovulation and fertility after apparent chemotherapy-induced ovarian failure, at least for a short time, with a brief course of
gonadotropin treatment 183 or with steroid hormone replacement therapy. 85
OPTIMIZATION OF FERTILITY AFTER TREATMENT
Men whose sperm count recovers after cancer therapy usually achieve normospermic levels, but some remain oligospermic for extended periods. Although controlled
studies have not been done, these men appear to have normal fertility based on their sperm count, and the incidence of infertility in these patients does not appear to
be any higher than the 15% rate among couples in the general population. In contrast, cancer patients with recovered sperm counts ranging from below 1 to 10
million/mL, levels associated with subfertility when they occur in the general population, are able to successfully father children. 14,43,51 In cases of infertility with
oligospermic counts, management of the patient should be the same as in those from a normal population with male factor infertility. Of the various procedures, IVF
and IVF with ICSI appear to offer the most promise. 184
In most women who continue to have menstrual function after cytotoxic therapy for cancer, infertility should generally be treated as in a normal population. The one
major exception is those who received high doses of abdominal radiation (10 to 16 Gy for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and more than 20 Gy for Wilms'
tumor), particularly in childhood. These patients have increased rates of adverse pregnancy outcomes, including fetal or neonatal deaths, premature deliveries,
low-birth-weight babies, and neonatal deaths, and hence these pregnancies must be closely monitored. 37,185
HORMONE REPLACEMENT THERAPY
It is important to test for ovarian failure and to start hormone replacement therapy rapidly because, in some cases, a 2- to 3-year delay in administering estrogen
replacement therapy may result in an irreversible loss of bone mass and increased risk of osteoporosis. 76 In addition, estrogen deficiency places women at increased
risk for morbidity and mortality from cardiovascular disease and causes sexual dysfunction. 186 Estrogen replacement can be provided orally, transdermally, or by
injection. 187 If a patient has an intact uterus, estrogen should generally be combined with progesterone to prevent endometrial hyperplasia and cancer. 188
In male subjects, germinal aplasia is often associated with testosterone levels in the low to normal range, and they may experience reduced bone mineral density. 16
Some of these men with reduced libido after chemotherapy report improvement after testosterone treatment. 53 Testosterone replacement is important in cases of overt
Leydig cell failure in prepubertal boys to promote secondary sexual characteristics, growth, and bone density. It can be provided transdermally or by injection 188; the

use of oral anabolic preparations should be discouraged.
MODIFIED NERVE-SPARING SURGERY
Ejaculation of semen involves emission, by which semen is deposited in the posterior urethra by contractions of the vas deferens, seminal vesicles, and prostate, and
antegrade ejaculation, which requires coordinated tightening of the bladder neck, relaxation of the external sphincter, and expulsion of semen. Most of these
processes are controlled by nerve fibers that arise from the lumbar ganglia at L1 to L4 and then course anteriorly over the aorta and coalesce into multiple trunks,
forming the hypogastric plexus overlying the aorta and sacrum below the origin of the inferior mesenteric artery. 24
Surgery in the treatment of testicular, prostate, and bladder cancer can produce neurologic dysfunction resulting in failure of emission, retrograde ejaculation,
impotence, and loss of orgasm. However, improvements in surgical techniques have reduced these adverse outcomes without diminishing the efficacy of treating the
cancer.
RPLND has an important role in the treatment of nonseminomatous testicular germ cell tumors. Procedures for radical RPLND that were standard before 1972 almost
always produced failures of emission and ejaculation. Based on the location of positive nodes, a modified template of dissection (unilateral dissection below the
inferior mesenteric artery), which avoids disturbance of the lumbar sympathetic fibers, particularly at the hypogastric plexus, was developed, 24 preserving ejaculation
of semen in 50% to 85% of men. The RPLND technique has been further refined by identifying the postganglionic fibers and retracting them from the lymph nodes
over and around the aorta, which are then dissected out and removed in multiple small packages, sparing the nerve fibers, 189 preserving ejaculation of semen in 89%
of men.190
Improved surgical techniques also preserve sexual function in many men undergoing surgery for prostate and bladder cancer. 191 By avoiding damage to the nerve
fibers that are located in neurovascular bundles that innervate the penile corpora cavernosa, sexual function, including the ability to have an erection sufficient for
vaginal penetration and orgasm, is maintained in 70% to 80% of men undergoing radical prostatectomy for localized prostate cancer or radical cystoprostatectomy for
invasive bladder cancer. In addition, a promising technique for those patients who do require nerve excision with the prostate is that of bilateral sural nerve grafts. 192 It
is too early to quantify the true effectiveness of this technique, but the results are encouraging.
MANAGEMENT OF RETROGRADE EJACULATION
In patients with ejaculatory dysfunction after RPLND, sympathomimetic agents may enhance seminal emission and partially or completely convert the patient to
antegrade ejaculation. 26 Drugs, such as pseudoephedrine HCl, ephedrine sulfate, phenylpropanolamine HCl, or imipramine HCl, should be given sequentially as
2-week trials until improvements in semen volume and sperm count are observed. Pregnancies have been reported but, in general, medical therapy must be
combined with some additional techniques to use sperm from retrograde ejaculation.
When retrograde ejaculation is present, sperm may be recovered from the bladder by direct voiding or by catheterization with irrigation. 193 For greater sperm survival,
it is important to ensure a dilute, slightly alkaline urine and then to dilute the voided semen-urine mixture with buffering media to reduce harmful urine components.
When medical treatment is not successful at producing emission and ejaculation, electroejaculation has been successful in more than 70% of patients. 194 After
administration of general anesthesia, a rectal probe is used to electrically stimulate sympathetic efferent fibers and smooth muscle. Although most patients have some
antegrade ejaculate, catheterization should always be done to collect the retrograde semen. Sperm motility tends to be low after electroejaculation, and the fecundity
per cycle is at most 9% using artificial insemination. IVF with ICSI is now being used to enhance pregnancy rates. 184

GENETIC CONCERNS
BIOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
Many anticancer agents damage DNA and interfere with DNA replication, DNA repair, and chromosome segregation in both animal and human cells. They induce
mutations in germ cells of animals that cause genetic disease. 195 Because the studies that have been or can be done in humans are limited, risk estimates are derived
from the induction of single-gene mutations and chromosomal aberrations, both of which contribute significantly to human genetic disease in the mouse. 196
Radiation, procarbazine, melphalan, and mitomycin C produce single-gene mutations in murine spermatogonia, whereas seven other tested chemotherapeutic drugs
do not.195,197 Risk can be estimated by using the doubling dose (i.e., dose to produce twice the background rate of mutation) from the mouse and the incidence of
clinically significant dominant genetic traits in human liveborn due to new mutations. 196 Doubling doses for single-gene mutations in mouse spermatogonial mutations
are 1 Gy for subchronic radiation and 0.4 g/m 2 for procarbazine. 198 At the mouse doubling dose, the incidence of dominant mutations in humans should be increased
by 0.2%; however, data from offspring of atomic bomb survivors indicate that estimates based on the mouse may overestimate the human genetic risk. 199
Radiation is the only agent that effectively induces stable reciprocal chromosomal translocations in stem spermatogonia that can be visualized in spermatocytes or in
offspring. 196 Although the mouse data indicate that a fractionated dose of 1 Gy would induce translocations in 0.06% of the offspring, the induction of translocations in
human germ cells appears to be higher than in the mouse. 200
In male rodents, meiotic and postmeiotic germ cells are more sensitive to induction and transmission of mutations than are stem spermatogonia. 7 Therefore,
mutational risks are highest when a pregnancy occurs within one spermatogenic cycle (time for stem cell to become sperm) after the man is exposed to the damaging
agent. In men, this higher risk period extends from the start of cytotoxic therapy until 3 months after the last course. (In practice, waiting 6 months after therapy to
effect a pregnancy is recommended for safety.) After this time, the incidence of mutations is at the lower level found in sperm that were exposed to the mutagen as
stem cells, which determines the genetic risk for the remainder of the reproductive lifetime.
Fewer studies of the mutagenicity of cytotoxic agents have been done in the female subject. Single-gene and chromosomal mutations are induced by radiation in the
developing oocytes of female mice at a similar rate as in stem spermatogonia. 196 Procarbazine induces a similar level of specific-locus mutations in primordial oocytes
as in stem spermatogonia.201 Most alkylating agents and a variety of other drugs induce chromosome aberrations or mutations in oocytes in growing follicles, resulting
in embryonic death.195,197 Although there are insufficient data to determine whether growing oocytes are more sensitive to induction of mutations than primordial
oocytes, it is still prudent for a woman to wait at least 3 months after cytotoxic treatment before conceiving.
These animal studies show that there are theoretical genetic risks to the offspring of treated patients of both sexes. Calculations predict that the incidence of
congenital abnormalities would be increased by less than 2%, even at the highest doses of cytotoxic therapies and, hence, large-scale controlled studies will be
required to measure effects in human populations.
GAMETE GENOMIC ANALYSIS
Because epidemiologic studies of genetic damage in humans require large numbers of offspring, direct analysis of the genetic material of gametes has potential
advantages for identifying mutations in human germ cells. Such analyses are practical only in the male subject because harvest of female gametes is impractical.
Several assays have been developed and new methods are under investigation ( Table 55.6-8).

TABLE 55.6-8. Mutational End Points Used in Human Germ Cells

Sperm karyotyping has demonstrated the persistence of structural and numeric chromosomal abnormalities several years after radiation or chemotherapy. 204,207
Currently, the more efficient technique of fluorescence in situ hybridization of sperm is being used to measure the rates of aneuploidy and chromosome breakage.
There was a significant sixfold increase in aneuploidy 208 and chromosome structural aberrations 209 during mitoxantrone, vincristine, vinblastine, and prednisone
(NOVP) chemotherapy, demonstrating that there are genetic risks if conception or storage of sperm occurs during cytotoxic therapy. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
failed to show any significant persistence of the increase in aneuploidy 6 months after the completion of NOVP or cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin (PEB)
chemotherapy,205,210 but increases after MOPP chemotherapy did persist. 209
Minisatellite repeat number mutations in human spermatozoa 202 could also be a useful marker for detecting mutations. Minisatellite mutations were increased in
offspring of men exposed to radioactive fallout from Chernobyl. 211 However, studies so far have not detected any significant induction of these mutations by
radiotherapy or chemotherapy for cancer. 212
PREGNANCY OUTCOME
Nearly all of the case reports, small series, and a few large retrospective case studies of the outcomes of pregnancies in, or produced by, survivors of cancer
indicated no significant increase in birth defects or genetic disease, above the background in the general population of approximately 4%, in offspring conceived after
cytotoxic treatment.213 The results from the atomic bomb studies in Japan also show no significant increase in genetic damage in 30,000 offspring born to
radiation-exposed parents. 199 These observations should reassure those who wish to have children after treatment for cancer. However, they do not rule out the
possibility of a small genetic risk.
The largest published studies involved patients who were children or adolescents at the time of treatment. 214,215 A total of 630 offspring from patients receiving
potentially mutagenic therapy (radiation proximal to the gonads or alkylating agents) showed no significant increases in birth defects or other genetic diseases. A
study of incidence of cancer in offspring of patients treated with potentially mutagenic therapies also found no increase above control populations in the induction of
cancer (excluding highly heritable cancers). 216 There was, however, a fourfold increase in adverse reproductive outcomes observed in women who received more than
20 Gy abdominal radiation in childhood, primarily for Wilms' tumor. 185 The cause of this increase appears not to be genetic but rather irreversible radiation damage to
the uterine musculature and blood flow. 217
The largest study of offspring from adults treated with cytotoxic therapies involved 368 conceptions in women treated with methotrexate alone or in combination for
choriocarcinoma or invasive mole; there were no significant increases in miscarriages, stillbirths, neonatal deaths, or congenital abnormalities. 218 In male subjects, a
study of 70 offspring from testicular cancer patients treated with radiotherapy, chemotherapy, or both revealed no apparent increase in congenital malformations; the
power of the study was sufficient to rule out an increase greater than threefold. 219 In a large case-control study (parents of children with a congenital anomaly versus
parents of normal children), the relative risk that treatment with mutagenic therapy would cause congenital abnormalities was close to 1, and the upper confidence
limits were approximately 2.220
The lack of observable increases in birth defects or genetic diseases in nearly all studies makes it highly probable that there is less than a twofold increase in genetic
risk after radiotherapy or chemotherapy of both adults and children. However, larger studies will be required to determine whether that limit can be further reduced,
and further research is needed to evaluate new chemotherapeutic agents.
There are limited reports of outcomes of pregnancies in which conception occurred while the father was undergoing cytotoxic therapy. No significant increases in
untoward pregnancy outcomes or birth defects were reported in a review of nine conceptions. 221 However, one child with trisomy was conceived shortly after the
completion of therapy, 222 and this aneuploidy might be attributable to mutagenesis in maturing germ cells. If conception does occur during these times, the couple
should be informed of the risks, which may only be moderate, to evaluate the continuation of the pregnancy.
The teratogenic risk from cytotoxic therapy delivered to a woman during pregnancy can be much higher than mutagenic risk from prior exposure. The decisions of
whether to initiate, continue, modify, or withhold therapy and whether to continue or terminate the pregnancy are extremely complex. 1 There are documented risks
from fetal radiation doses as low as 0.2 Gy in the first trimester and from somewhat higher doses in the second trimester. 223 All of the cytotoxic chemotherapeutic
agents are classified as teratogens 224; however, some may be given in the second and third trimester of pregnancy. Treatment with fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and
cyclophosphamide during this period did not result in any pregnancy complications, congenital abnormalities, or immediate postpartum deficits; methotrexate was
deliberately excluded from the combination. 2

COUNSELING
Cancer patients should be informed by their physician about the possibilities of sterility and genetic risk from the disease and treatment ( Table 55.6-9). They should
also be told about psychological and physical effects on sexual desire, erectile function, and the ability to achieve orgasm.

TABLE 55.6-9. Guidelines for Reproductive and Genetic Counseling of Couples Seeking Pregnancy after Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment

During treatment, sexual relations between partners may continue, but reliable contraception should be used. The genetic and teratogenic risk of conception when
either partner is undergoing treatment should be outlined. In addition, the seminal transmission of chemotherapeutic drugs should be mentioned, and the use of

condoms when sexual intercourse occurs within 24 hours of administration of a chemotherapeutic agent to the man should be recommended.
The probability that sterility will result from the planned cytotoxic therapy should be calculated from the cumulative doses of agents and combinations that cause
prolonged azoospermia (see Table 55.6-3 and Table 55.6-4) and ovarian failure (see Table 55.6-6 and Table 55.6-7). This risk should be communicated to the
patient.
Pretreatment sperm banking should be offered to all male patients interested in having children after the completion of cytotoxic therapy. The risks of sterility from a
given treatment and the probability that more aggressive, highly sterilizing treatment may be needed before there is another opportunity for semen storage should be
considered in making the decision on sperm banking. The costs of semen cryopreservation and other assisted reproductive technologies should be presented, and
the patient should be reminded that these are not standard benefits in the majority of health insurance programs in the United States.
Female patients should be told that the use of cryopreserved ovarian tissue is experimental at this time. If therapy can be delayed for several months and the woman
has a partner, embryo cryopreservation may be possible. Women should also be told about the risks of chemotherapy-induced premature menopause. If this does
occur, it is important to present a balanced discussion of potential benefits of prompt initiation of hormone replacement therapy versus the risk (e.g., possibly
endometrial and breast cancers) so that an individually appropriate decision may be reached.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Allen HH, Nisker JA, eds. Cancer in pregnancy. Mt. Kisco, NY: Futura, 1986.
2. Berry DL, Theriault RL, Holmes FA, et al. Management of breast cancer during pregnancy using a standardized protocol. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:855.
3. Ries LA, Hankey BF, Edwards BK. Cancer statistics review, 19731987. Bethesda, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1991.
4. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics, 1999. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:8.
5. Bleyer WA. Impact of childhood cancer on the United States and the world. CA Cancer J Clin 1990;40:355.
6. Meistrich ML. Relationship between spermatogonial stem cell survival and testis function after cytotoxic therapy. Br J Cancer 1986;53(Suppl VII):89.
7. Meistrich ML. Potential genetic risks of using semen collected during chemotherapy. Hum Reprod 1993;8:8.
8. Kangasniemi M, Huhtaniemi I, Meistrich ML. Failure of spermatogenesis to recover despite the presence of A spermatogonia in the irradiated LBNF 1 rat. Biol Reprod 1996;54:1200.
9. Clifton DK, Bremner WJ. The effect of testicular X-irradiation on spermatogenesis in man. A comparison with the mouse. J Androl 1983;4:387.
10. Wang J, Galil KAA, Setchell BP. Changes in testicular blood flow and testosterone production during aspermatogenesis after irradiation. J Endocrinol 1983;98:35.
11. Chapman RM, Sutcliffe SB, Malpas JS. Male gonadal dysfunction in Hodgkin's disease. A prospective study. JAMA 1981;245:1323.
12. Meistrich ML, Wilson G, Brown BW, da Cunha MF, Lipshultz LI. Impact of cyclophosphamide on long-term reduction in sperm count in men treated with combination chemotherapy for Ewing's
and soft tissue sarcomas. Cancer 1992;70:2703.
13. Viviani S, Santoro A, Ragni G, et al. Gonadal toxicity after combination chemotherapy for Hodgkin's disease. Comparative results of MOPP vs ABVD. Eur J Cancer Clin Onc 1985;21:601.
14. Marmor D, Duyck F. Male reproductive potential after MOPP therapy for Hodgkin's disease: a long-term survey. Andrologia 1995;27:99.
15. Kinsella TJ, Trivette G, Rowland J, et al. Long-term follow-up of testicular function following radiation therapy for early-stage Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:718.
16. Holmes SJ, Whitehouse RW, Clark ST, et al. Reduced bone mineral density in men following chemotherapy for Hodgkin's disease. Br J Cancer 1994;70:371.
17. Shalet SM. Effect of irradiation treatment on gonadal function in men treated for germ cell cancer. Eur Urol 1993;23:148.
18. Pryzant RM, Meistrich ML, Wilson E, Brown B, McLaughlin P. Long-term reduction in sperm count after chemotherapy with and without radiation therapy for non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. J Clin
Oncol 1993;11:239.
19. Marmor D, Grob-Menendez F, Duyck F, Delafontaine D. Very late return of spermatogenesis after chlorambucil therapy: case reports. Fertil Steril 1992;58:845.
20. Meistrich ML, Chawla SP, da Cunha MF, et al. Recovery of sperm production after chemotherapy for osteosarcoma. Cancer 1989;63:2115.
21. Lampe H, Horwich A, Norman A, Nicholls J, Dearnaley DP. Fertility after chemotherapy for testicular germ cell cancers. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:239.
22. Pont J, Albrecht W. Fertility after chemotherapy for testicular germ cell cancer. Fertil Steril 1997;68:1.
23. Lipshultz LI, Ross CE, Whorton D, et al. Dibromochloropropane and its effect on testicular function in man. J Urol 1980;124:464.
24. Lange PH, Narayan P, Fraley EE. Fertility issues following therapy for testicular cancer. Semin Urol 1984;11:264.
25. Morrish DW, Venner PM, Siy O, et al. Mechanisms of endocrine dysfunction in patients with testicular cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:412.
26. Narayan P, Lange PH, Fraley EE. Ejaculation and fertility after extended retriperitoneal lymph node dissection for testicular cancer. J Urol 1982;127:685.
27. Redman JR, Bajorunas DR, Goldstein MC, Evenson DP. Semen cryopreservation and artificial insemination for Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:233.
28. Viviani S, Ragni G, Santoro A, et al. Testicular dysfunction in Hodgkin's disease before and after treatment. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:1389.
29. Shamberger RC, Sherins RJ, Rosenberg SA. The effects of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy on testicular function in men undergoing treatment for soft tissue sarcoma.
Cancer 1981;47:2368.
30. Hansen PV, Trykker H, Svennakjaer IL, Hvolby J. Long-term recovery of spermatogenesis after radiotherapy in patients with testicular cancer. Radiother Oncol 1990;18:117.
31. Drasga RE, Einhorn LH, Williams SD, Patel DN, Stevens EE. Fertility after chemotherapy for testicular cancer. J Clin Oncol 1983;1:179.
32. Marina S, Barcelo P. Permanent sterility after immunosuppressive therapy. Int J Androl 1979;2:6.
33. Buchanan JD, Fairley KF, Barrie JV. Return of spermatogenesis after stopping cyclophosphamide therapy. Lancet 1975;2:156.
34. da Cunha MF, Meistrich ML, Fuller LM, et al. Recovery of spermatogenesis after treatment for Hodgkin's disease: limiting dose of MOPP chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 1984;2:571.
35. Kreuser ED, Xiros N, Hetzel WD, Heimpel H. Reproductive and endocrine gonadal capacity in patients treated with COPP chemotherapy for Hodgkin's disease. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
1987;113:260.
36. Hansen PV, Trykker H, Helkjaer PE, Andersen J. Testicular function in patients with testicular cancer treated with orchiectomy alone or orchiectomy plus cisplatin-based chemotherapy. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1989;81:1246.
37. Sanders JE, Hawley J, Levy W, et al. Pregnancies following high-dose cyclophosphamide with or without high-dose busulfan or total-body irradiation and bone marrow transplantation. Blood
1996;87:3045.
38. Brennemann W, Stoffel-Wagner B, Helmers A, et al. Gonadal function of patients treated with cisplatin based chemotherapy for germ cell cancer. J Urol 1997;158:844.
39. Ahmed SR, Shalet SM, Campbell RHA, Deakin DP. Primary gonadal damage following treatment of brain tumors in childhood. J Pediatr 1983;103:562.
40. Vassilopoulou-Sellin R. Endocrine effects of cytokines. Oncology 1994;8:43.
41. Schilsky RL, Davidson HS, Magid D, Daiter S, Golomb HM. Gonadal and sexual function in male patients with hairy cell leukemia: lack of adverse effects of recombinant a2-interferon
treatment. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:179.
42. Meistrich ML, van Beek MEAB. Radiation sensitivity of the human testis. In: Lett JR, Altman KI, eds. Advances in radiation biology. New York: Academic Press, 1990:227.
43. Sandeman TF. The effects of X irradiation on male human fertility. Br J Radiol 1966;39:901.
44. Gordon W, Siegmund K, Stanisic TH, et al. A study of reproductive function in patients with seminoma treated with radiotherapy and orchidectomy: (SWOG-8711). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1997;38:83.
45. Schlappack OK, Kratzik C, Schmidt W, Spona J, Schuster E. Response of the seminiferous epithelium to scattered radiation in seminoma patients. Cancer 1988;62:1487.
46. Centola GM, Keller JW, Henzler M, Rubin P. Effect of low-dose testicular irradiation on sperm count and fertility in patients with testicular seminoma. J Androl 1994;15:608.
47. Jacob A, Barker H, Goodman A, Holmes J. Recovery of spermatogenesis following bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1998;22:277.
48. Giwercman A, von der Maase H, Berthelsen JG, et al. Localized irradiation of testes with carcinoma in situ: effects on Leydig cell function and eradication of malignant germ cells in 20 patients.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1991;73:596.
49. Zagars GK, Pollack A. Serum testosterone levels after external beam radiation for clinically localized prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;39:85.
50. Goldstein I, Feldman MI, Deckers PJ, Babayan RK, Krane RJ. Radiation-associated impotence. A clinical study of its mechanism. JAMA 1984;251:903.
51. Chapman RM, Sutcliffe SB, Rees LH, Edwards CRW, Malpas JS. Cyclical combination chemotherapy and gonadal function. A retrospective study in males. Lancet 1979;1:285.
52. Kulkarni SS, Sastry PS, Saikia TK, et al. Gonadal function following ABVD therapy for Hodgkin's disease. Am J Clin Oncol 1997;20:354.
53. Clark ST, Radford JA, Crowther D, Swindell R, Shalet SM. A comparative study of MVPP and a seven-drug hybrid regimen. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:134.
54. Shamberger RC, Sherins RJ, Ziegler JL, Glatstein E, Rosenberg SA. Effects of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy on ovarian function in women undergoing treatment for
soft tissue sarcoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1981;67:1213.
55. Fossa SD, Klepp O, Norman N. Lack of gonadal protection by medroxyprogesterone acetate-induced transient medical castration during chemotherapy for testicular cancer. Br J Urol
1988;62:449.
56. Meistrich ML, Wilson G, Mathur K, et al. Rapid recovery of spermatogenesis after mitoxantrone, vincristine, vinblastine, and prednisone chemotherapy for Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:3488.
57. Evenson DP, Arlin Z, Welt S, Claps ML, Melamed MR. Male reproductive capacity may recover following drug treatment with the L-10 protocol for acute lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer
1984;53:30.
58. Kreuser ED, Hetzel WD, Heit W, et al. Reproductive and endocrine gonadal functions in adults following multidrug chemotherapy for acute lymphoblastic or undifferentiated leukemia. J Clin
Oncol 1988;6:588.
59. Stephenson WT, Poirier SM, Rubin L, Einhorn LH. Evaluation of reproductive capacity in germ cell tumor patients following treatment with cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:2278.
60. Dubey P, Wilson G, Mathur KK, et al. Recovery of sperm production following radiation therapy for Hodgkin's disease after induction chemotherapy with mitoxantrone, vincristine, vinblastine
and prednisone (NOVP). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2000;46:609.
61. Greenwald GS, Roy SK. Follicular development and its control. In: Knobil E, Neill JD, eds. The physiology of reproduction. 2nd ed. New York: Raven Press, 1994:629.
62. Dobson RL, Felton JS. Female germ cell loss from radiation and chemical exposures. Am J Ind Med 1983;4:175.
63. Plowchalk DR, Mattison DR. Reproductive toxicity of cyclophosphamide in the C57BL/6N mouse: 1. Effects on ovarian structure and function. Reprod Toxicol 1991;6:411.
64. Jarrell J, YoungLai EV, Barr R, et al. Ovarian toxicity of cyclosphosphamide alone and in combination with ovarian irradiation in the rat. Cancer Res 1987;47:2340.
65. Bines J, Oleske DM, Cobleigh MA. Ovarian function in premenopausal women treated with adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1718.
66. Sanders JE. Growth and development after hematopoietic cell transplantation. In: Thomas ED, Blume KG, Forman SJ, eds. Hematopoietic cell transplantation. 2nd ed. Malden, MA: Blackwell,
1999:764.
67. Speroff L, Glass RH, Kase NG. Amenorrhea. In: Speroff L, Glass RH, Kase NG, eds. Clinical gynecologic, endocrinology, and infertility. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1994:401.
68. Kuhajda FP, Haupt HM, Moore GW, Hutchins GM. Gonadal morphology in patients receiving chemotherapy for leukemia. Evidence for reproductive potential and against a testicular tumor
sanctuary. Am J Med 1982;72:759.
69. Hortobagyi GN, Buzdar AU, Marcus CE, Smith TL. Immediate and long-term toxicity of adjuvant chemotherapy regimens containing doxorubicin in trials at M.D. Anderson Hospital and Tumor
Institute. NCI Monogr 1986;1:105.

70. Horning SJ, Hoppe RT, Kaplan HS, Rosenberg SA. Female reproductive potential after treatment for Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1981;304:1377.
71. Schilsky RL, Sherins RJ, Hubbard SM, et al. Long-term follow-up of ovarian function in women treated with MOPP chemotherapy for Hodgkin's disease. Am J Med 1981;71:552.
72. Chapman RM, Sutcliffe SB, Malpas JS. Cytotoxic-induced ovarian failure in women with Hodgkin's disease. I. Hormone function. JAMA 1979;242:1877.
73. Sanders JE, Buckner CD, Amos D, et al. Ovarian function following marrow transplantation for aplastic anemia or leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:813.
74. Byrne J, Fears TR, Gail MH, et al. Early menopause in long-term survivors of cancer during adolescence. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;166:788.
75. Byrne J, Mulvihill JJ, Myers MH, et al. Effects of treatment on fertility in long-term survivors of childhood or adolescent cancer. N Engl J Med 1987;317:1315.
76. Kreuser ED, Felsenberg D, Behles C, et al. Long-term gonadal dysfunction and its impact on bone mineralization in patients following COPP/ABVD chemotherapy for Hodgkin's disease. Ann
Oncol 1992;3:S105.
77. Howell SJ, Berger G, Adams JE, Shalet SM. Bone mineral density in women with cytotoxic-induced ovarian failure. Clin Endocrinol 1998;49:397.
78. Koyama H, Wada T, Nishizawa Y, Iwanaga T, Aoki Y. Cyclophosphamide-induced ovarian failure and its therapeutic significance in patients with breast cancer. Cancer 1977;39:1403.
79. Dnistrian AM, Schwartz MK, Fraccia AA, et al. Endocrine consequences of CMF adjuvant therapy in premenopausal and postmenopausal breast cancer patients. Cancer 1983;51:803.
80. Watson AR, Taylor J, Rance CP, Bain J. Gonadal function in women treated with cyclophosphamide for childhood nephrotic syndrome: a long-term follow-up study. Fertil Steril 1986;46:331.
81. Rose DP, Davis TE. Ovarian function in patients receiving adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. Lancet 1977;1:1174.
82. Fisher B, Sherman B, Rockette H, et al. L-phenylalanine mustard (L-PAM) in the management of premenopausal patients with primary breast cancer. Lack of association of disease-free
survival with depression of ovarian function. Cancer 1979;44:847.
83. Singhal S, Powles R, Treleaven J, et al. Melphalan alone before allogeneic bone marrow transplantation from HLA-identical sibling donors for hematologic malignancies: alloengraftment with
potential preservation of fertility in women. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;18:1049.
84. Freckman HA, Fry HL, Mendez FL, Maurer ER. Chlorambucil-prednisolone therapy for disseminated breast carcinoma. JAMA 1964;189:111.
85. Spinelli S, Chiodi S, Bacigalupo A, et al. Ovarian recovery after total body irradiation and allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: long-term follow up of 79 females. Bone Marrow Transplant
1994;14:373.
86. Sy Ortin TT, Shostak CA, Donaldson SS. Gonadal status and reproductive function following treatment for Hodgkin's disease in childhood: the Stanford experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1990;19:873.
87. Wallace WHB, Shalet SM, Crowne EC, et al. Gonadal dysfunction due to cisplatinum. Med Pediatr Oncol 1989;17:409.
88. Specht L, Hansen MM, Geisler C. Ovarian function in young women in long-term remission after treatment for Hodgkin's disease stage I and II. Scand J Hematol 1984;32:265.
89. Andrieu JM, Ochoa-Molina ME. Menstrual cycle, pregnancies and offspring before and after MOPP therapy for Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1983;52:435.
90. Longo DL, Glatstein E, Duffey PL, et al. Alternating MOPP and ABVD chemotherapy plus mantle-field radiation therapy in patients with massive mediastinal Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:3338.
91. Samaan NA, deAsis DN, Buzdar AU, Blumenschein GR. Pituitary-ovarian function in breast cancer patients on adjuvant chemoimmunotherapy. Cancer 1978;41:2084.
92. Shamberger RC, Rosenberg SA, Seipp CA, Sherins RJ. Effects of high-dose methotrexate and vincristine on ovarian and testicular functions in patients undergoing postoperative adjuvant
treatment for osteosarcoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:739.
93. Choo YC, Chan SYW, Wong LC, Ho K. Ovarian dysfunction in patients with gestational trophoblastic neoplasia treated with short intensive courses of etoposide (VP-16-213). Cancer
1985;55:2348.
94. Bonadonna G, Santoro A, Viviani S, Lombardi C, Ragni G. Gonadal damage in Hodgkin's disease from cancer chemotherapy regimens. Arch Toxicol 1984;7(Suppl):140.
95. Wisel MS, Datta JK, Saxena RN. Effects of anti-estrogens on early pregnancy in guinea pigs. Int J Fertil Menopausal Stud 1994;39:156.
96. Ash P. The influence of radiation on fertility in man. Br J Radiol 1980;53:271.
97. Thomas PRM, Winstantly D, Peckham M, et al. Reproductive and endocrine function in patients with Hodgkin's disease: effects of oophoropexy and irradiation. Br J Cancer 1976;33:226.
98. Chambers SK, Chambers JT, Kier R, Peschel RE. Sequelae of lateral ovarian transposition in irradiated cervical cancer patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1991;20:1305.
99. Muller J, Skakkebaek NE. The prenatal and postnatal development of the testis. Ballieres Clin Endocrinol Metab 1992;6:251.
100. Teerds KJ, de Rooij DG, Rommerts FFG, Wensing CJG. Development of a new Leydig cell population after the destruction of existing Leydig cells by ethane dimenthane sulphonate in rats: an
autoradiographic study. J Endocrinol 1990;126:229.
101. Rivkees SA, Crawford JD. The relationship of gonadal activity and chemotherapy-induced gonadal damage. JAMA 1988;259:2123.
102. Sherins RJ, Olweny CLM, Ziegler JL. Gynecomastia and gonadal dysfunction in Hodgkin's disease: a prospective study. N Engl J Med 1978;229:12.
103. Jaffe N, Sullivan MP, Ried H, et al. Male reproductive function in long-term survivors of childhood cancer. Med Pediatr Oncol 1988;16:241.
104. Aubier R, Flamant F, Brauner R, et al. Male gonadal function after chemotherapy for solid tumors in childhood. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:304.
105. Bramswig JH, Heimes U, Heiermann E, et al. The effects of different cumulative doses of chemotherapy on testicular function. Results in 75 patients treated for Hodgkin's disease during
childhood and adolescence. Cancer 1990;65:1298.
106. Dhabhar BN, Malhotra H, Joseph R, et al. Gonadal function in prepubertal boys following treatment for Hodgkin's disease. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1993;15:306.
107. Whitehead E, Shalet SM, Morris-Jones PH, Beardwell CG, Deakin DP. Gonadal function after combination chemotherapy for Hodgkin's disease in childhood. Arch Dis Child 1982;47:287.
108. Shalet SM, Beardwell CG, Jacobs HS, Pearson D. Testicular function following irradiation of the human prepubertal testis. Clin Endocrinol 1978;9:483.
109. Siimes MA, Dunkel L, Rautonen J. Risk factors for endocrine testicular dysfunction in adolescent and adult males who have survived malignancies in childhood. Cancer Journal 1992;5:28.
110. Muller J, Skakkebaek NE, Hertz H. Initiation of spermatogenesis during chemotherapy for leukemia. Acta Paediatr Scand 1985;74:956.
111. Blatt J, Poplack DG, Sherins RJ. Testicular function in boys after chemotherapy for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1981;304:1121.
112. Quigley C, Cowell C, Jiminez M, et al. Normal or early development of puberty despite gonadal damage in children treated for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1989;321:143.
113. Green DM, Brecher ML, Lindsay AN, et al. Gonadal function in pediatric patients following treatment for Hodgkin disease. Med Pediatr Oncol 1981;9:235.
114. Shalet SM, Tsatsoulis A, Whitehead E, Read G. Vulnerability of the human Leydig cell to radiation damage is dependent upon age. J Endocrinol 1989;120:161.
115. Sarafoglou K, Boulad F, Gillio A, Sklar C. Gonadal function after bone marrow transplantation for acute leukemia during childhood. J Pediatr 1997;130:210.
116. Sklar CA, Kim TH, Ramsay NKC. Testicular function following bone marrow transplantation performed during or after puberty. Cancer 1984;53:1498.
117. Castillo LA, Craft AW, Kernahan J, Evans RG, Aynsley-Green A. Gonadal function after 12-Gy testicular irradiation in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Med Pediatr Oncol
1990;18:185.
118. Brauner R, Czernichow P, Cramer P, Schaison G, Rappaport R. Leydig-cell function in children after direct testicular irradiation for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1983;309:25.
119. Blatt J, Sherins RJ, Niebrugge D, Bleyer WA, Poplack DG. Leydig cell function in boys following treatment for testicular relapse of acute lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1227.
120. Peters H, Himelstein-Braw R, Faber M. The normal development of the ovary in childhood. Acta Endocrinol 1976;82:617.
121. Himelstein-Braw R, Peters H, Faber M. Influence of irradiation and chemotherapy on the ovaries of children with abdominal tumours. Br J Cancer 1977;36:269.
122. Stillman RJ, Schinfeld JS, Schiff I, et al. Ovarian failure in long-term survivors of childhood malignancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1981;139:62.
123. Thibaud E, Ramirez M, Brauner R, et al. Preservation of ovarian function by ovarian transposition performed before pelvic irradiation during childhood. J Pediatr 1992;121:880.
124. Nicosia SV, Matus-Ridley M, Meadows AT. Gonadal effects of cancer therapy in girls. Cancer 1985;55:2364.
125. Fryer CJ, Hutchinson RJ, Krailo M, et al. Efficacy and toxicity of 12 courses of ABVD chemotherapy followed by low-dose regional radiation in advanced Hodgkin's disease in children: a report
from the Children's Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1971.
126. Donaldson SS, Kaplan HS. Complications of treatment of Hodgkin's disease in children. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:977.
127. Mackie EJ, Radford M, Shalet SM. Gonadal function following chemotherapy for childhood Hodgkin's disease. Med Pediatr Oncol 1996;27:74.
128. Clayton PE, Shalet SM, Price DA, Jones PH. Ovarian function following chemotherapy for childhood brain tumors. Med Pediatr Oncol 1989;17:92.
129. Mauras N, Sabio H, Rogol QD. Neuroendocrine function in survivors of childhood acute lymphocytic leukemia and non-Hodgkins lymphoma: a study of pulsatile growth hormone and
gonadotropin secretion. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1988;10:9.
130. Rappaport R, Brauner R, Czernichow P, et al. Effect of hypothalamic and pituitary irradiation on pubertal development in children with cranial tumors. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1982;54:1164.
131. Rappaport R, Brauner R. Growth and endocrine disorders secondary to cranial irradiation. Pediatr Res 1989;25:561.
132. Lannering B, Jansson C, Rosberg S, Albertsson-Wikland K. Increased LH and FSH secretion after cranial irradiation in boys. Med Pediatr Oncol 1997;29:280
133. Chen MS, Lin FJ, Huang MJ, et al. Prospective hormone study of hypothalamic-pituatary function in patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma after high-dose irradiation. Jpn J Clin Oncol
1989;19:265.
134. Samaan NA, Schultz PN, Yang KPP, et al. Endocrine complications after radiotherapy for tumors of the head and neck. J Lab Clin Med 1987;109:364.
135. Littley MD, Shalet SM, Beardwell CG, Robinson EL, Sutton ML. Radiation-induced hypopituitarism is dose-dependent. Clin Endocrinol 1989;31:363.
136. Lam KS, Tse VK, Wang C, Yeung RT, Ho JH. Effects of cranial irradiation on hypothalamic-pituitary function: a 5-year longitudinal study in patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Q J Med
1991;78:165.
137. Constine LS, Woolf PD, Cann D, et al. Hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction after radiation for brain tumors. N Engl J Med 1993;328:87.
138. Radford JA, Clark S, Crowther D, Shalet SM. Male fertility after VAPEC-B chemotherapy for Hodgkin's disease and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Br J Cancer 1994;69:379.
139. Fraass BA, Kinsella TJ, Harrington FS, Glatstein E. Peripheral dose to the testes: the design and clinical use of a practical and effective gonadal shield. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1985;11:609.
140. Kubo H, Shipley WU. Reduction of the scatter dose to the testicle outside the radiation treatment fields. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982;8:1741.
141. Harter DJ, Hussey DH, Delclos L, Eagle DF, Moore EB. Device to position the testicle during irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1976;1:361.
142. Zagars GK. Management of stage I seminoma: radiotherapy. In: Horwich A, ed. Testicular cancer. London: Chapman & Hall, 1994:83.
143. Le Floch O, Donaldson SS, Kaplan HS. Pregnancy following oophoropexy and total nodal irradiation in women with Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1976;38:2263.
144. Kliesch S, Behre HM, Jurgens H, Nieschlag E. Cryopreservation of semen from adolescent patients with malignancies. Med Pediatr Oncol 1996;26:20.
145. Schmiegelow ML, Sommer P, Carlsen E, et al. Penile vibratory stimulation and electroejaculation before anticancer therapy in two pubertal boys. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1998;20:429.
146. Brinster RL, Avarbock MR. Germline transmission of donor haplotype following spermatogonial transplantation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:11303.
147. Avarbock MR, Brinster CJ, Brinster RL. Reconstitution of spermatogenesis from frozen spermatogonial stem cells. Nat Med 1996;2:693.
148. Radford J, Shalet S, Lieberman B. Fertility after treatment for cancer. Questions remain over ways of preserving ovarian and testicular tissue. BMJ 1999;319:935.
149. Chen C. Pregnancy after human oocyte cryopreservation. Lancet 1986;1:884.
150. Bouquet M, Selva J, Auroux M. Cryopreservation of mouse oocytes: mutagenic effects in the embryo. Biol Reprod 1993;49:764.
151. Buster JE, Bustillo M, Rodi IA, et al. Biologic and morphologic development of donated human ova recovered by nonsurgical uterine lavage. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;153:211.
152. Baird DT, Webb R, Campbell BK, Harkness LM, Gosden RG. Long-term ovarian function in sheep after ovariectomy and transplantation of autografts stored at -196 C. Endocrinology
1999;140:462.
153. Oktay K, Newton H, Mullan J, Gosden RG. Development of human primordial follicles to antral stages in SCID/hpg mice stimulated with follicle stimulating hormone. Hum Reprod
1998;13:1133.
154. Oktay K, Karlikaya G, Gosden R, Schwartz R. Ovarian function after autologous transplantation of frozen-banked human ovarian tissue. Fertil Steril 1999;72:s21(abst).
155. Shaw JM, Bowles J, Koopman P, Wood EC, Trounson AO. Fresh and cryopreserved ovarian tissue samples from donors with lymphoma transmit the cancer to graft recipients. Hum Reprod
1996;11:1668.
156. Pfeifer SM, Coutifaris C. Reproductive technologies 1998: options available for the cancer patient. Med Pediatr Oncol 1999;33:34.
157. Sanger WG, Olson JH, Sherman JK. Semen cryobanking for men with cancer-criteria change. Fertil Steril 1992;58:1024.
158. Palermo GD, Cohen J, Alikani M, Adler A, Rosenwaks Z. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection: a novel treatment for all forms of male factor infertility. Fertil Steril 1995;63:1231.
159. Sherins RJ, Thorsell LP, Dorfmann A, et al. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection facilitates fertilization even in the most severe forms of male infertility: pregnancy outcome correlates with maternal
age and number of eggs available. Fertil Steril 1995;64:369.
160. Rosenlund B, Sjoblom P, Tornblom M, Hultling C, Hillensjo T. In-vitro fertilization and intracytoplasmic sperm injection in the treatment of infertility after testicular cancer. Hum Reprod

1998;13:414.
161. Anonymous. Assisted reproductive technology in the United States and Canada: 1994 results generated from the American Society for Reproductive Medicine/Society for Assisted Reproductive
Technology Registry. Fertil Steril 1996;66:697.
162. Tournaye H, Camus M, Bollen N, et al. In vitro fertilization techniques with frozen-thawed sperm: a method for preserving the progenitive potential of Hodgkin patients. Fertil Steril 1991;55:443.
163. Bonduelle M, Wilikens A, Buysse A, et al. Prospective follow-up study of 877 children born after intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), with ejaculated epididymal and testicular spermatozoa
and after replacement of cryopreserved embryos obtained after ICSI. Hum Reprod 1996;11(Suppl 4):131.
164. Pfeffer J, Pang MG, Hoegerman SF, et al. Aneuploidy frequencies in semen fractions from ten oligoasthenoteratozoospermic patients donating sperm for intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Fertil
Steril 1999;72:472.
165. Delic JI, Bush C, Peckham MJ. Protection from procarbazine-induced damage of spermatogenesis in the rat by androgen. Cancer Res 1986;46:1909.
166. Ward JA, Robinson J, Furr BJA, Shalet SM, Morris ID. Protection of spermatogenesis in rats from the cytotoxic procarbazine by the depot formulation of Zoladex, a gonadotropin-releasing
hormone agonist. Cancer Res 1990;50:568.
167. Meistrich ML, Parchuri N, Wilson G, Kurdoglu B, Kangasniemi M. Hormonal protection from cyclophosphamide-induced inactivation of rat stem spermatogonia. J Androl 1995;16:334.
168. Glode LM, Robinson J, Gould SF. Protection from cyclophosphamide-induced testicular damage with an analogue of gonadotropin-releasing hormone. Lancet 1981;1:1132.
169. Meistrich ML, Wilson G, Zhang Y, Kurdoglu B, Terry NHA. Protection from procarbazine-induced testicular damage by hormonal pretreatment does not involve arrest of spermatogonial
proliferation. Cancer Res 1997;57:1091.
170. Meistrich ML, Wilson G, Kangasniemi M, Huhtaniemi I. Mechanism of “protection” of rat spermatogenesis by hormonal pretreatment: stimulation of spermatogonial differentiation after
irradiation. J Androl 2000;21:464.
171. Meistrich ML, Wilson G, Huhtaniemi I. Hormonal treatment after cytotoxic therapy stimulates recovery of spermatogenesis. Cancer Res 1999;59:3557.
172. Meistrich ML. Hormonal stimulation of the recovery of spermatogenesis following chemo- or radiotherapy. APMIS 1998;106:37.
173. Morris ID, Shalet SM. Protection of gonadal function from cytotoxic chemotherapy and irradiation. Ballieres Clin Endocrinol Metab 1990;4:97.
174. Kreuser ED, Klingmuller D, Thiel E. The role of LHRH-analogues in protecting gonadal functions during chemotherapy and irradiation. Eur Urol 1993;23:157.
175. Masala A, Faedda R, Alagna S, et al. Use of testosterone to prevent cyclophosphamide-induced azoospermia. Ann Intern Med 1997;126:292.
176. Pogach LM, Lee Y, Gould S, Giglio W, Huang HFS. Partial prevention of procarbazine induced germinal cell aplasia in rats by sequential GnRH antagonist and testosterone administration.
Cancer Res 1988;48:4354.
177. Bokser L, Szende B, Schally AV. Protective effects of D-Trp 6-luteinising hormone-releasing hormone microcapsules against cyclophosphamide-induced gonadotoxicity in female rats. Br J
Cancer 1990;61:861.
178. Ataya KM, Tadros M, Ramahi A. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist inhibits physiologic ovarian follicular loss in rats. Acta Endocrinol 1989;121:55.
179. Waxman JH, Ahmed R, Smith D, et al. Failure to preserve fertility in patients with Hodgkin's disease. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1987;19:159.
180. Blumenfeld Z, Avivi I, Linn S, et al. Prevention of irreversible chemotherapy-induced ovarian damage in young women with lymphoma by a gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist in parallel
to chemotherapy. Hum Reprod 1996;11:1620.
181. Whitehead E, Shalet SM, Blackledge G, et al. The effect of combination chemotherapy on ovarian function in women treated for Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1983;52:988.
182. Chapman RM, Sutcliffe SB. Protection of ovarian function by oral contraceptives in women receiving chemotherapy for Hodgkin's disease. Blood 1981;58:849.
183. Chatterjee R, Goldstone AH. Gonadal damage and effects on fertility in adult patients with haematological malignancy undergoing stem cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;17:5.
184. Chung PH, Palermo G, Schlegel PN, et al. The use of intracytoplasmic sperm injection with electroejaculates from anejaculatory men. Hum Reprod 1998;13:1854.
185. Li FP, Gimbrere K, Gelber RD, et al. Outcome of pregnancy in survivors of Wilms' tumor. JAMA 1987;257:216.
186. Syrjala KL, Roth-Roemer SL, Abrams JR, et al. Prevalence and predictors of sexual dysfunction in long-term survivors of marrow transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3148.
187. Apperley JF, Reddy N. Mechanism and management of treatment-related gonadal failure in recipients of high dose chemoradiotherapy. Blood Rev 1995;9:93.
188. Mulder JE. Benefits and risks of hormone replacement therapy in young adult cancer survivors with gonadal failure. Med Pediatr Oncol 1999;33:46.
189. Donohoe JP. Nerve-sparing retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy with preservation of ejaculation. J Urol 1990;144:287.
190. Jacobsen KD, Ous S, Waehre H, et al. Ejaculation in testicular cancer patients after post-chemotherapy retroperitoneal lymph node dissection. Br J Cancer 1999;80:249.
191. Walsh PC, Mostwin JL. Radical prostatectomy and cystoprostatectomy with preservation of potency. Results using a new nerve-sparing technique. Br J Urol 1984;56:694.
192. Kim ED, Scardino PT, Hampel O, et al. Interposition of sural nerve restores function of cavernous nerves resected during radical prostatectomy. J Urol 1999;161:199.
193. Gilja I, Parazajder J, Radej M, Cvitkovic P, Kovacic M. Retrograde ejaculation and loss of emission: possibilities of conservative treatment. Eur Urol 1994;25:226.
194. Ohl DA, Denil J, Bennett CJ, et al. Electroejaculation following retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy. J Urol 1991;145:980.
195. Witt KL, Bishop JB. Mutagenicity of anticancer drugs in mammalian germ cells. Mutat Res 1996;355:209.
196. BEIR (Committee on Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation). Health effects of exposure to low levels of ionizing radiation (BEIR V). Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1990.
197. Shelby MD, Bishop JB, Mason JM, Tindall KR. Fertility, reproduction, and genetic disease: studies on the mutagenic effects of environmental agents on mammalian germ cells. Environ Health
Perspect 1993;100:283.
198. Ehling UH, Neuhauser A. Procarbazine-induced specific locus mutations in male mice. Mutat Res 1979;59:245.
199. Neel JV, Schull WJ, Awa AA, et al. The children of parents exposed to atomic bombs: estimates of the genetic doubling dose of radiation for humans. Am J Hum Genet 1990;46:1053.
200. Searle AG. Radiationthe genetic risk. Trends Genet 1987;3:152.
201. Ehling UH, Neuhauser-Klaus A. Induction of specific-locus mutation in female mice by 1-ethyl-1-nitrosourea and procarbazine. Mutat Res 1988;202:139.
202. Jeffreys AJ, Tamaki K, MacLeod A, et al. Complex gene conversion events in germline mutation at human minisatellites. Nat Genet 1994;6:136.
203. Brewen JG, Preston RJ, Gengozian N. Analysis of x-ray-induced chromosomal translocations in human and marmoset spermatogonial stem cells. Nature 1975;253:468.
204. Brandriff BF, Meistrich ML, Gordon LA, Carrano AV, Liang JC. Chromosomal damage in sperm of patients surviving Hodgkin's disease following MOPP therapy with and without radiotherapy.
Hum Genet 1994;93:295.
205. Robbins WA, Meistrich ML, Moore D, et al. Chemotherapy induces transient sex chromosomal and autosomal aneuploidy in human sperm. Nat Genet 1997;16:74.
206. Baumgartner A, Van Hummelen P, Lowe XR, Adler ID, Wyrobek AJ. Numerical and structural chromosomal abnormalities detected in human sperm with a combination of multicolor FISH
assays. Environ Mol Mutagen 1999;33:49.
207. Martin RH, Rademaker A, Hildebrand K, et al. A comparison of chromosomal aberrations induced in vivo by radiotherapy in human sperm and lymphocytes. Mutat Res 1989;226:21.
208. Robbins WA, Meistrich ML, Cassel MJ, Wyrobek AJ. Aneuploidy in sperm of Hodgkin's disease patients receiving NOVP chemotherapy. Am J Hum Genet 1994;55(Suppl):A68(abst).
209. Van Hummelen P, Lowe X, Meistrich ML, Wyrobek AJ. A novel multi-probe FISH procedure for the simultaneous detection of chromosomal aberrations, disomy, and diploidy in sperm of
Hodgkin patients receiving chemotherapy. Am J Hum Genet 1995;57(Suppl):A79(abst).
210. Martin RH, Ernst S, Rademaker A, et al. Chromosomal abnormalities in sperm from testicular cancer patients before and after chemotherapy. Hum Genet 1997;99:214.
211. Dubrova YE, Nesterov VN, Krouchinsky NG, et al. Further evidence for elevated human minisatellite mutation rate in Belarus eight years after the Chernobyl accident. Mutat Res 1997;381:267.
212. Armour JA, Brinkworth MH, Kamischke A. Direct analysis by small-pool PCR of MS205 minisatellite mutation rates in sperm after mutagenic therapies. Mutat Res 1999;445:73.
213. Blatt J. Pregnancy outcome in long-term survivors of childhood cancer. Med Pediatr Oncol 1999;33:29.
214. Hawkins MM. Is there evidence of a therapy-related increase in germ cell mutation among childhood cancer survivors? J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:1643.
215. Byrne J, Rasmussen SA, Steinhorn SC, et al. Genetic disease in offspring of long-term survivors of childhood and adolescent cancer. Am J Hum Genet 1998;62:45.
216. Hawkins MM, Draper GJ, Smith RA. Cancer among 1,348 offspring of survivors of childhood cancer. Int J Cancer 1989;43:975.
217. Critchley HO. Factors of importance for implantation and problems after treatment for childhood cancer. Med Pediatr Oncol 1999;33:9.
218. Rustin GJ, Booth M, Dent J, et al. Pregnancy after cytotoxic chemotherapy for gestational trophoblastic tumours. BMJ 1984;288:103.
219. Senturia YD, Peckham CS, Peckham MJ. Children fathered by men treated for testicular cancer. Lancet 1985;2:766.
220. Dodds L, Marrett LD, Tomkins DJ, Green B, Sherman G. Case-control study of congenital anomalies in children of cancer patients. BMJ 1993;307:164.
221. Carson SA, Gentry WL, Smith AL, Buster JE. Feasibility of semen collection and cryopreservation during chemotherapy. Hum Reprod 1991;6:992.
222. Gulati SC, Vega R, Gee T, Koziner B, Clarkson B. Growth and development of children born to patients after cancer therapy. Cancer Invest 1986;4:197.
223. Yamazaki JN, Schull WJ. Perinatal loss and neurological abnormalities among children of the atomic bomb. Nagasaki and Hiroshima revisited, 1949 to 1989. JAMA 1990;264:605.
224. Wiebe VJ, Sipila PE. Pharmacology of antineoplastic agents in pregnancy. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 1994;16:75.

SECTION 55.7 Second Cancers
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 55.7
Second Cancers
FLORA E. VAN LEEUWEN
LOIS B. TRAVIS
Introduction
Methods to Assess Second Cancer Risk
Carcinogenicity of Individual Treatment Modalities
Radiotherapy
Chemotherapy
Risk of Second Malignancy in Patients with Selected Primary Cancers
Hodgkin's Disease
Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma
Testicular Cancer
Ovarian Cancer
Breast Cancer
Pediatric Malignancies
Conclusion
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Modern chemotherapy and radiotherapy have increased substantially the survival of patients with cancer. In particular, cure rates have shown dramatic improvement
for patients with Hodgkin's disease, testicular cancer, and pediatric malignancies. Less impressive, but nonetheless convincing, improvements in survival also have
been achieved for patients with breast cancer, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), and several other tumors. Now that substantial numbers of cancer patients experience
such a favorable prognosis, it becomes increasingly important to evaluate the long-term complications of treatment. Because the survival benefits associated with
modern treatments have been greatest for those cancers that occur at relatively young ages, cured patients are subject to long-term side effects, which may not
emerge until several decades after treatment. Paradoxically, research conducted since the late 1970s has clearly demonstrated that some of the modalities used to
treat cancer have the potential to induce new (second) primary malignancies. Of the many late complications of treatment, second cancers are generally considered
to be the most serious, because they not only cause substantial morbidity but also considerable mortality. For example, among 15-year survivors of Hodgkin's
disease, second cancer deaths have been reported to be the largest contributor to the substantial excess mortality that these patients experience. 1 Increased risks of
second cancers have been observed after radiotherapy, chemotherapy, or combined modality treatment.
In any discussion of treatment-related second malignancies, it is of primary importance to remember that not all second cancers are due to therapy. The occurrence of
two primary malignancies in the same individual may reflect the operation of numerous influences. Multiple primary cancers may result from host susceptibility
(genetic predisposition or immunodeficiency), common carcinogenic influences, a clustering of risk factors, treatment for the first tumor, diagnostic surveillance, a
chance event, or the interaction of these factors. In view of the high prevalence of cancer in the general population and the increasing incidence of most cancers with
age, it is important to exclude the role of chance in the development of second cancers. To this end, comparison with cancer incidence statistics derived from the
general population is crucial. If a second malignancy is demonstrated to occur in excess, the contributions of other risk factors need to be ruled out convincingly
before the increased risk can be attributed to treatment. The temporal trend of excess second cancer risk may provide an important initial clue to etiology; for
example, the risk of solid tumors after radiotherapy generally increases with time since exposure. The evaluation of the carcinogenic effects of therapy, however, is
complicated by the fact that therapeutic agents are frequently given in combination. Appropriate epidemiologic and statistical methods are required to quantify the
excess risk and to unravel the role of treatment and other factors.
Whenever interpreting results of second cancer studies, it must be kept in mind that the problem of treatment-induced malignancies has arisen by virtue of the
success of cancer therapy. As more becomes known about the influence of various treatment factors on second cancer risk, therapies may be modified to decrease
the risk while maintaining equal levels of therapeutic effectiveness.
The major aspects of second malignancy risk in relation to cancer treatment are addressed in this chapter. After a discussion of methods used for the assessment of
second cancer risk, an overview of the carcinogenic effects of radiotherapy and chemotherapy is presented. Subsequently, the risk of second malignancies after
treatment for Hodgkin's disease, NHL, testicular cancer, breast cancer, ovarian cancer, and pediatric malignancies is reviewed. Emphasis is on large studies that
have been published most recently.

METHODS TO ASSESS SECOND CANCER RISK
Estimates of second cancer risk after treatment of various primary malignancies derive from several sources, including population-based cancer registries,
hospital-based cancer registries, or clinical trial series. 2 The epidemiologic study designs generally used are the cohort study and the case-control study.
In a cohort study, a large group of patients with a specified first malignancy (the cohort) is followed for a number of years to determine the incidence of second
cancers. To evaluate whether second cancer risk in the cohort is increased compared with cancer risk in the general population, the observed number of second
cancers in the cohort is compared with the number expected on the basis of age-, gender-, and calendar year–specific cancer incidence rates in the general
population. The analysis takes into account the observation period of individual patients (person-years). 3 The relative risk of developing a second cancer is estimated
by comparing the ratio of the observed number of second cancer cases in the cohort to the number expected. When the relative risk is increased, the question arises
as to whether the excesses are due to therapy. This issue can be evaluated by comparing risks between treatment groups, preferably within specified follow-up
intervals and, when possible, with a reference group of patients not treated with radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Second cancer risk in the cohort (and in different
treatment groups) can also be expressed by the cumulative (actuarial estimated) risk, 4 which yields the proportion of patients alive at time t (e.g., 5 years from
diagnosis) who can be expected to develop a second malignancy. When the cohort's death rate due to causes other than second malignancy is high, the assumptions
underlying the actuarial method may not be valid, and competing risk techniques should be considered to estimate cumulative risk. 5,6 Because many treatment-related
cancers are rare in the general population (e.g., leukemia, sarcoma), a high relative risk (compared to the population) may still translate into a rather low cumulative
risk. Absolute excess risk, which estimates the excess number of second malignancies per 10,000 patients per year, perhaps best reflects the second cancer burden
in a cohort. This risk measure is also the most appropriate one by which to identify those second malignancies that contribute the most to elevated risks.
Each of the data sources used to construct a cohort has its own set of advantages and disadvantages. Population-based cancer registries frequently have large
numbers of patients available, which allows the detection of even small increases in the site-specific risk of second cancers. 7 An additional advantage is that the
observed and expected numbers of cancers derive from the same reference population. Disadvantages of this approach include the limited availability of treatment
data, underreporting of second cancers 8,9 (in particular hematologic malignancies and bilateral cancers in paired organs), and different diagnostic criteria for second
cancers. Population-based registries differ greatly in these aspects and, hence, in their usefulness for second cancer studies. If treatment data are not available, it is
impossible to determine whether excess risk for a second malignancy is related to treatment or to shared etiology with the first cancer. Despite their disadvantages,
population-based registries are especially well suited to broadly evaluate which second cancers occur in excess after a wide spectrum of different first primary
malignancies. They also provide a valuable starting point for case-control studies that evaluate treatment effects in detail (see later in this section).
A major strength of clinical trial databases is that detailed treatment data on all patients are available. Comparison of second cancer risk between the treatment arms
of the trial controls for any intrinsic risk for a second malignancy associated with the first cancer. Limitations of most trials include the small number of patients
involved and the frequent lack of data on subsequent therapy. The dearth of large numbers becomes more serious when the second cancer of interest has a low
background incidence (e.g., leukemia). Furthermore, the end points of interest in the majority of clinical trials include only treatment response and survival, not the
development of second cancers. Therefore, many clinical trials do not routinely collect information on second malignancies, and some do not collect any data beyond

5 years. Routine reporting and assessment of second malignancy risk should become an integral part of clinical trial research. 10
Many large cancer treatment centers maintain registries of all admitted patients. Most of these registries have been in existence for decades and collect extensive
data on treatment and follow-up. As compared with trial data, hospital registries provide larger patient numbers and a wider variety of treatments and dose levels,
which may yield important information on drug and radiation carcinogenesis. Most studies of second cancer risk after Hodgkin's disease have been based on data
accrued from hospital registries. 11,12 and 13
The cohort study is not an efficient design when examining detailed treatment factors (e.g., cumulative dose of alkylating agents) in relation to second cancer risk.
Most cohorts are fairly large (to yield reliable estimates of second cancer risk), rendering the collection of detailed treatment data for all patients prohibitively
expensive and time-consuming. In such instances, the so-called nested case-control study within an existing cohort is the preferred approach. The case group
consists of all patients identified with the second cancer of interest, whereas the controls are a matched sample of all patients in the cohort who did not develop the
cancer concerned, although they experienced the same amount of follow-up time. Matching factors typically include age, gender, and calendar year of diagnosis of
the first cancer. Even when the control group is three times as large as the case group, detailed treatment data need only be collected for a small proportion of the
total cohort. In each case-control investigation, it is critical to the validity of the study that the controls are truly representative of all patients who did not contract the
second cancer of interest. In data analysis, treatment factors are compared between cases and controls, and the risk associated with specific therapies is estimated
relative to the risk in patients who received other treatments. The cumulative risk of developing a second malignancy cannot be derived from a case-control study.
Treatment-specific absolute excess risks can be estimated, however, when the case-control study follows a cohort analysis. Although case-control methodology has
not been applied to the investigation of second cancer risk for a long period, 14,15 several landmark studies have already demonstrated its strengths. 8,16,17,18,19,20,21 and 22

CARCINOGENICITY OF INDIVIDUAL TREATMENT MODALITIES
RADIOTHERAPY
The carcinogenic potential of ionizing radiation was first recognized in the mid-twentieth century, 23,24 and 25 and comprehensive reviews have now been published. 26,27
and 28 Much of the data with regard to radiation effects in humans has derived from epidemiologic studies of the atomic bomb survivors in Japan, 29,30,31 and 32
occupationally exposed workers, 33,34 patients given large amounts of diagnostic radiation, 35,36 and patients treated with radiotherapy for malignant 16,19,37,38 and 39 and
nonmalignant diseases. 40,41,42,43 and 44 Most types of cancer, with the exception of chronic lymphocytic leukemia, can be caused by exposure to ionizing radiation. 26,30,45
Boice et al. 28 have ranked various body tissues with regard to cancer induction by radiation; certain sites, such as the thyroid, female breast, and bone marrow, clearly
are more radiosensitive than others.
The excess risk of leukemia attributable to irradiation is observed within a few years after exposure, with a peak at 5 to 9 years, and a slow decline
thereafter.16,27,30,40,41 Some controversy exists as to whether, and when, leukemia risk decreases to background levels in the population. 16,30,41,46,47 In the atomic bomb
survivors, risk declined more rapidly for those exposed earlier in life. 30 Increased risks of solid tumors have been shown to emerge much later. After a minimum
induction period of 5 to 10 years, 12,13,37,40,41,48 solid tumor risk appears to follow a time-response model consistent with a multiplicative relationship with the underlying
incidence in the population—that is, risk after exposure is proportional to the background incidence of cancer over time. 27,41 Data are inconsistent as to whether the
risk remains elevated throughout life. Studies in the atomic bomb survivors 31 and in women treated for benign gynecologic disorders 41,49 have shown that the excess
relative risk per Gray (Gy) tends to be fairly stable over time for at least 30 years after radiation. However, the last update of the mortality experience of ankylosing
spondylitis patients showed that, 25 years after irradiation, risk had decreased for a number of malignancies. 40 In the few studies of second cancer risk in which the
time course beyond 20 years from first treatment was evaluated, the relative risks of solid tumor development tended to decrease in very long-term survivors. 50,51 The
most recent cancer incidence report on the Japanese atomic bomb survivors, with 42 years of follow-up, indicated that the excess relative risk decreased with time for
the younger age-at-exposure groups and remained virtually constant for the older cohorts. 31 Cancer incidence data from the atomic bomb survivors and five other
groups exposed to radiation have been analyzed to specifically address the evolution of risk with increasing time since exposure in childhood. 52 Ten to 15 years after
radiation exposure, the relative risk of solid tumors decreased with increasing follow-up time (5.7% to 6.1% per year). The excess absolute risk, however, significantly
increased with time since exposure. 52
An important part of our knowledge of radiation carcinogenesis derives from populations exposed to relatively low levels of radiation, such as the atomic bomb
survivors. For solid tumors, convincing evidence for a strongly linear radiation dose-response in the lower dose ranges (up to approximately 5 Gy) has emerged. 31,35,40
The results for leukemia are less consistent, but data from most studies are compatible with a linear trend for doses of less than 1.5 to 2.0 Gy. 16,30,45 Extrapolation of
radiation effects from low doses to the high-dose ranges used therapeutically cannot be done with certainty, because of the possibility of cell killing at high doses.
Therefore, more recent studies of second cancer risk have focused on the shape of the radiation dose-response curve in the high-dose range.
Radiation-related leukemia risk depends on a number of parameters, such as radiation dose to the active bone marrow, dose rate, and percentage of marrow
exposed. Consistent evidence indicates that the excess risk of leukemia per unit radiation dose is much higher at low doses than at the high doses administered for
the treatment of malignant disease. 16,30,45,47 This phenomenon has been attributed to cell killing or inactivation of potentially leukemic cells at the higher radiation
doses.16,27 Many studies in cancer patients have shown that high radiation doses to a limited field confer very little or no increased risk of leukemia. 8,17,18,20 Both in the
atomic bomb survivors and in patients who received radiotherapy for cervical cancer, leukemia risk appeared to increase with increasing average dose to the bone
marrow until approximately 4 Gy, above which leukemia risk was progressively reduced with increasing dose. 16,30 However, leukemia risk in survivors of uterine
cancer showed little evidence for a downturn in risk at bone marrow doses as high as 6 to 14 Gy 45; at more than 1.5 Gy, the dose-response pattern was more or less
flat, and the risk after continuous exposures from brachytherapy at comparatively low doses was similar to that after fractionated exposures at much higher doses from
external beam radiotherapy. Clearly, more research is needed into the effects of dose fractionation and portion of bone marrow irradiated. Age at exposure to
irradiation does not appear to greatly influence the risk of radiation-induced leukemia, 30,41,45,53 although decreasing relative risk with increasing age at exposure has
been reported for one radiogenic leukemia subtype [acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)]. 47
In contrast, studies of radiogenic breast cancer have demonstrated that age at exposure is a major determinant of risk, with the greatest risk for those irradiated as
children and adolescents. 32,50,54 Irradiation may thus affect cells of the mammary ducts before full organ development begins. Atomic bomb survivors who were
younger than 10 years old at the time of the bombing had an excess relative risk per Gy five times that of women who were older than 40 years when exposed. A
strong trend of increasing breast cancer risk with decreasing age at exposure was also observed in patients irradiated for Hodgkin's disease, 13,39,50,55 with no excess
breast cancer risk apparent among women irradiated at 40 years or older. 13,22,35,39,55 In two studies, increased breast cancer risk after radiation exposure in childhood
emerged at an early age (younger than 40), before the peak incidence in the population. 50,56 In the low-dose range, breast cancer risk increases linearly with radiation
dose.35,36,44 For a specified dose, the age-specific excess rates of breast cancer were found to be remarkably similar across studies in the Japanese atomic bomb
survivors and in medically irradiated populations in the United States. 32,35 Very few studies have examined whether linear dose-response extends to the higher dose
ranges used therapeutically. However, long-term survivors of Hodgkin's disease who were younger than 20 years when they received breast doses between 4 and 45
Gy from mantle field irradiation were reported to have a 40- to 75-fold increased risk of breast cancer. 13,39,57 One study found that a higher radiation dose to the
mantle region (20 Gy or more vs. less than 20 Gy) was associated with a significantly greater increase of breast cancer risk. 57
Risk of lung cancer also rises with increasing radiation dose in the lower dose range, 31,40 but studies in survivors of Hodgkin's disease 38 and breast cancer 58 suggest
that the risk may level off at doses higher than 9 to 10 Gy. A similar leveling of risk at doses of 10 Gy or more has been observed for radiation-induced thyroid
cancer. 59,60 However, even at thyroid doses up to 60 Gy, the risk of thyroid cancer did not decrease. 60 For bone sarcoma, two studies in survivors of childhood
cancer19,61 show no evidence of increased risk for doses less than 10 Gy to the site of the bone tumor. Beyond 10 Gy, risk for bone sarcoma rose sharply with
increasing dose, reaching more than 90-fold at doses of 30 to 50 Gy. 61 Importantly, studies have shown that, also for solid tumors other than breast cancer, the
excess relative risk due to radiation is much greater for children and adolescents than for adults. 12,31,50,59,62,63 Significantly greater relative risks with younger age at
radiation exposure have been reported for lung cancer, 63 thyroid cancer, 31 bone sarcoma,12,62 and gastrointestinal cancer. 50,63 After radiation in childhood, the excess
relative risk per Gy for thyroid cancer [RR, 7.7; 95% confidence interval (CI), 2.1 to 28.7] is higher than for any other solid malignancy. 31
For radiogenic lung cancer, the interaction of radiation with other risk factors, such as smoking, has been examined. Studies in uranium and tin miners exposed to
radon have indicated that smoking and radiation may act multiplicatively (or at least supraadditively) in the causation of lung cancer, 64,65 and 66 implying that the

absolute risk of developing radon-induced cancer is much higher in smokers than in nonsmokers. In Hodgkin's disease patients, the combined effects of smoking and
high-dose radiotherapy for Hodgkin's disease were significantly stronger than multiplicative. 38,67 In the latter study, the increase in lung cancer risk with increasing
radiation dose was significantly greater among patients who continued to smoke after diagnosis of Hodgkin's disease than among those who refrained from smoking.
As discussed more extensively in the previous edition of this text, 68 interaction models accounting for the sequencing of radiation and smoking suggest that radiation
may act as a powerful promoter of cells initiated by smoking.
The carcinogenic effects of therapeutic irradiation deserve much more study. Issues to be clarified include the shape of the radiation dose-response curve in the
higher dose range, the duration of radiation-induced cancer risk and, importantly, the interaction of radiotherapy with environmental carcinogens (e.g., smoking) and
genetic susceptibility. Increasing evidence suggests that genetic factors contribute to the development of radiation-induced cancers. This is perhaps best
demonstrated in survivors of hereditary retinoblastoma who harbor a heterozygous germline mutation in the RB1 tumor suppressor gene, and who have a much
greater risk of developing osteosarcomas within the radiation field than children irradiated for nonhereditary retinoblastoma. 69 In addition, two studies showed that
patients with a positive family history of cancer are more likely to develop radiation-associated second malignancies. 70,71 In view of the postulated radiation sensitivity
of heterozygous carriers of the mutated ataxia-telangiectasia (ATM) gene, it has been speculated that AT heterozygotes (approximately 1.0% of the population) may
have an increased risk of radiation-induced cancer, specifically breast cancer. 72,73 In two studies, however, no ATM mutations were found in a total of 56 women who
had developed breast cancer after radiotherapy for Hodgkin's disease. 71,74 Further studies should focus on the identification of other genes that may influence
susceptibility to the DNA damaging effects of radiation. Such research will provide more insight into the mechanisms underlying radiation carcinogenesis and will also
be of clinical benefit in minimizing radiation exposure to the most susceptible subgroups of the population.
CHEMOTHERAPY
The development of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) after chemotherapy for malignant disease was reported as early as 1970 by Kyle et al. 75 In the following three
decades, the occurrence of this late effect has increased to the extent that, in some institutions, treatment-related AML now comprises up to 10% to 20% of all such
entities. 76 Moreover, it is now established that the spectrum of treatment-related leukemia extends beyond AML. ALL, for example, is increasingly recognized as
therapy-related 77,78 and may comprise 5% to 10% of all secondary acute leukemias. 78 Chronic granulocytic leukemia accounts for a small percentage of secondary
leukemia,77,79 and has been included in numerous analytic studies in which associations with prior chemotherapy have been evaluated, 8,17,18,20,80,81 although separate
risk estimates have not been presented. To date, only chronic lymphocytic leukemia has not been convincingly associated with prior exposure to chemotherapy.
Chemotherapy is far more potent than radiotherapy in inducing leukemia. It has become evident that at least two major syndromes of treatment-related leukemia may
exist82,83: “classic” alkylating agent–induced AML and acute leukemia related to the topoisomerase II inhibitors. Risk of alkylating agent–related leukemia typically
begins to increase 1 to 2 years after the start of chemotherapy, peaks in the 5- to 10-year follow-up period, and decreases afterward. 8,13,17,20,84 Even in large patient
series, the number of long-term survivors has typically been too small to determine whether 15 to 20 years after chemotherapy the risk of leukemia returns to the
background level of the population. 13 Although one registry-based study indicates that leukemia risk might persist among 15-year survivors of testicular cancer, 85 it is
not clear whether these late excesses might reflect the influence of salvage therapy. More than 50% of leukemias after alkylating agent therapy present initially as
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), whereas de novo AML is preceded by MDS much less frequently. 77 Most cases of MDS progress to AML within 1 year. 77
Cytogenetic studies of alkylating agent–related AML/MDS have shown unbalanced chromosome aberrations, typically with loss of whole chromosomes 5 or 7 (or
both), or various parts of the long arms of these chromosomes. 86 Morphologically, alkylating agent–related AML most commonly consists of French-American-British
(FAB) subtypes M1/M2, but most subtypes,77 including erythroleukemia, 20 have been observed. Survival after secondary AML is generally quite poor, typically only
several months. 87
Alkylating agents with known leukemogenic effects in humans include mechlorethamine, chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide, melphalan, semustine, lomustine,
carmustine, prednimustine, busulfan, and dihydroxybusulfan. 20,77,82,88,89 and 90 Controversial findings have been reported with regard to procarbazine, 89,91 which
demonstrates an underlying mechanism of action similar to alkylating agents. Few studies have addressed the relative leukemogenicity of the various alkylating
drugs, but a strong body of evidence to date suggests that, at doses of equal therapeutic effect, cyclophosphamide is substantially less leukemogenic than melphalan,
mechlorethamine, chlorambucil, lomustine, and thiotepa. 8,17,20,89,90,92 The risk of alkylating agent–related AML has been shown to increase with increasing cumulative
dose or duration of therapy. 20,89,90 Few studies have attempted to separate the effects of cumulative dose, duration of treatment, and dose intensity, which tend to be
highly correlated, but limited evidence to date suggests that cumulative dose may be a pivotal determinant of risk 20,89 (discussed later in Hodgkin's Disease).
The platinating agents cisplatin and carboplatin are among the most important cytotoxic drugs introduced since the 1960s and are widely used to treat many cancers.
The platinum compounds, however, demonstrate carcinogenicity in vitro and in laboratory animals, 10 forming intrastrand and interstrand DNA cross-links similar to
bifunctional alkylating agents. In a population-based study of women with ovarian cancer, 81 cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy was linked to significantly
increased risks of leukemia (P trend for cumulative dose <.001) in a multivariate model adjusted for other treatment parameters (discussed later in Ovarian Cancer).
Future studies should evaluate whether other drug combinations that include platinum might also be linked to elevated risks of leukemia, because it is not clear
whether cisplatin acts as a human leukemogen only in combination with selected cytotoxic agents.
The topoisomerase II inhibitors, especially the epipodophyllotoxins, have been implicated in the development of a clinically and cytogenetically distinct type of AML.
The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has concluded that the epipodophyllotoxins etoposide and teniposide are probably carcinogenic to
humans.93 Ratain and coworkers 94 were the first to recognize the potentially leukemogenic properties of etoposide-containing regimens in patients with non–small cell
lung cancer, which also has been documented for patients with other types of malignancies. 95,96 and 97 As compared with “classic” alkylating agent–induced AML,
epipodophyllotoxin-related AML has a shorter induction period (median, 2 to 3 years) and generally lacks a preceding phase of MDS. Furthermore, this type of AML
appears to be characterized by balanced translocations involving chromosome bands 11q23, 21q22, and 3q23, 93,98 as well as morphologic features consistent with
acute monoblastic or myelomonocytic leukemia (M4 or M5 according to the FAB criteria). 82,99,100 It is unclear whether epipodophyllotoxin-related AML has a better
prognosis than “classic” alkylating agent–related AML, which is notoriously resistant to antileukemic treatment. 86,97
Evidence has accumulated that the anthracyclines doxorubicin and 4-epi-doxorubicin, which are intercalating topoisomerase II inhibitors, may induce a similar type of
AML as the one related to epipodophyllotoxin treatment. 17,101,102 In 1987, the IARC concluded that doxorubicin was probably carcinogenic to humans, based on a
review of limited data. 88 As with many cytotoxic drugs, an evaluation of the carcinogenic potential of doxorubicin is complicated, because it is typically given in
combination with other chemotherapeutic agents, including alkylators. 17,101,102 and 103 Curtis et al.20 found no increase in the risk of leukemia associated with doxorubicin
therapy for breast cancer, after adjusting for the effects of alkylating agents and radiotherapy. Although increasing dose of doxorubicin to treat childhood cancer
seemed weakly associated with an increased risk of leukemia after adjustment for alkylating agents, 18 the investigators concluded that the excess risk was almost
completely attributable to alkylators. In a study of children with Wilms' tumor, 104 the relative risk of leukemia (six cases) after doxorubicin-containing regimens was
approximately 14-fold; however, because a relatively constant dose (300 mg/m 2) of doxorubicin was used and data for treatment of relapse were incomplete,
evaluation of a dose-response relation was not possible.
The relative leukemogenicity of the anthracyclines and different epipodophyllotoxins is not known. Furthermore, it is unclear whether the schedule of administration or
the cumulative dose is the major determinant of leukemia risk (discussed in more detail later in the sections Testicular Cancer and Pediatric Malignancies).95,96 and
97,105,106
In view of the widespread use of epipodophyllotoxins and anthracyclines in curative treatments, continued evaluation of the leukemogenic potential of these
agents is urgently needed. 83,106 Detailed descriptions of molecular mechanisms involved in the development of AML after administration of these cytotoxic drugs have
been provided elsewhere. 82,83,107,108 and 109 As postulated by Pedersen-Bjergaard and Rowley, 82 cytostatic drugs with different mechanisms of action [i.e., direct binding
to DNA (alkylating agents) and inhibition of DNA-topoisomerase II (epipodophyllotoxins and anthracyclines)] may have a synergistic effect in leukemogenesis.
The antimetabolites have generally not been regarded as carcinogenic, 88 and Cheson et al. 110 observed that nucleoside analogue therapy for chronic lymphocytic
leukemia did not appear to confer a significantly increased risk of second cancer. However, in a report 111 from St. Jude's Children's Research Hospital, it was shown
that children with ALL who received cranial irradiation and who had wild-type thiopurine methyltransferase phenotype had an 8.3% cumulative risk of brain cancer,
while children with ALL who received irradiation and had a defective phenotype had a 42% risk ( P = .0077). Patients also had received concurrent systemic
chemotherapy with high-dose (75 mg/m2) 6-mercaptopurine plus high-dose methotrexate. It was hypothesized that the defective thiopurine methyltransferase activity
resulted in higher exposures to thioguanine nucleotide metabolites of 6-mercaptopurine during the period of radiation.

Just as the pharmacology of effective cancer chemotherapy is impacted by underlying principles of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics (see Chapter 19.1),
these influences likely contribute to the development of secondary leukemia. The possible role of polymorphisms in drug-metabolizing genes, including the
cytochrome P-450 enzymes, glutathione S-transferases, and arylamine N-acetyltransferases in chemotherapy-related leukemias has been reviewed. 112 Felix et al. 113
described an association between CYP3A4 genotype and treatment-related leukemia. Other factors in the development of chemotherapy-related leukemias may
include interindividual differences in repair of DNA damage, 114,115 germline mutations in tumor suppressor genes, 76,112 administration of concomitant medications, and
interpatient variation in renal and hepatic function. Clarification of the important interrelationships between these factors are critical to a better understanding of
individual susceptibility to secondary leukemia. Because cancer patients frequently receive large doses of cytotoxic drugs, interindividual differences in drug
absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion are accentuated. Until these influences and their interrelationships are better understood, empiric end points, such
as the development of acute hematopoietic toxicity after chemotherapy, might be explored for their value as possible surrogate markers of secondary leukemia risk. 89
For cytotoxic agents for which both oral and intravenous formulations are available, the route of administration in describing dose-response associations with
secondary leukemia risk should also be taken into account. 81 Whether chemoprotectants such as amifostine (WR-2721), which ameliorates the myelosuppressive
effects of alkylating agents 116 and platinum compounds,117 might possibly contribute to decreased risks of second leukemias should be examined.
Many chemotherapeutic agents are known mutagens and animal carcinogens, 88 and the induction period of solid tumors may be longer than the observation period
available in published research. Thus, the question of whether the increased risks of leukemia after chemotherapy might be later followed by excess solid tumors is
important. To date, the causal link between cyclophosphamide and bladder cancer represents one of the few established relationships between a specific cytostatic
drug and a solid tumor (reviewed later in Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma).21,118,119 Elevated risks of bone sarcomas19,61 and possibly lung cancers 120,121 also have been
observed after alkylating agent chemotherapy. The contribution of chemotherapy to radiation-induced solid tumors 50,55,104,111,122 should also be investigated. For
example, as discussed in the section Pediatric Malignancies, doxorubicin has been found to potentiate the development of second solid tumors after radiation for
Wilms' tumor. 104 The investigators of this study 104 hypothesized that doxorubicin may inhibit the repair of radiation-induced damage, likely through its interaction with
DNA topoisomerase II. Newton et al.123 reported a significantly shorter time to bone sarcoma in children given both anthracyclines and radiation to treat cancer. The
radiation enhancement properties of other cytotoxic drugs (e.g., platinum, hydroxyurea, and 5-fluorouracil) have been well described 124; whether these features might
be correlated with increased risk of solid tumors in cancer patients who survive long term after radiotherapy might also be explored.

RISK OF SECOND MALIGNANCY IN PATIENTS WITH SELECTED PRIMARY CANCERS
HODGKIN'S DISEASE
In view of the excellent cure rates that are currently achieved in the relatively young population of Hodgkin's disease patients, it has become increasingly important to
evaluate how the occurrence of second cancers affects their long-term survival. Since the first reports of increased second cancer risk in Hodgkin's disease patients in
the early 1970s, 125,126 nearly all major treatment centers have evaluated second cancer risk in their patients. An excess of AML in chemotherapy-treated patients and
an increased risk of solid tumors in radiotherapy-treated patients have been reported consistently in the literature. 127 The overall risk of selected second malignancies
compared with the general population is given in Table 55.7-1, based on a combined analysis of three studies that included a total of 9618 patients. 50,63,128
The largest relative risk (95-fold) is observed for AML, followed by a 19-fold increased risk for NHL, tenfold excesses for connective tissue and bone cancers, and a
ninefold elevated risk for thyroid cancer. Moderately increased risks (two- to fivefold) are observed for a number of solid tumors, such as cancers of the lung, stomach,
colon, breast, mouth, and pharynx, as well as melanoma. Because AML and NHL are diseases with a low incidence in the general population, even a high relative risk
compared to the population may translate into a low cumulative (actuarial) risk. As shown in Figure 55.7-1, for the entire follow-up period, the cumulative risk of solid
tumors far exceeds that of leukemia or NHL.50 Absolute excess risk is the best measure to judge which subsequent tumors contribute most to the second cancer
burden. Table 55.7-1 shows that, compared with the general population, Hodgkin's disease patients experience an excess of 62 malignancies per 10,000
person-years of observation. Solid tumors account for the majority of excess cancers (38 per 10,000 patients per year), with lung cancer contributing 13 excess cases
per 10,000 person-years. Leukemia and NHL each account for approximately 12 cases per 10,000 person-years.
The evolution of second malignancy risk over follow-up time varies by tumor site. In the majority of studies, increased leukemia risk is observed as early as 2 to 4
years after initiation of chemotherapy, with peak occurrence between 5 and 9 years and decreasing risks thereafter. 8,13,48,50,57,63 In studies with large numbers of
long-term survivors, significantly increased relative risks are still observed for 15 years after first treatment. 13,50,63 The relative risk of NHL is already greatly increased
in the first 5 years after treatment. In some studies, the risk remains rather constant over time, 48,55 whereas others report that risk increases with time since
treatment.12,13 The relative risk of solid tumors is minimally elevated in the 1- to 4-year follow-up period and increases steadily with increasing follow-up time from 5
years since first treatment.12,13,48,50,55,63,84 For several tumor sites (breast, thyroid), the excess risk does not become apparent until after 10 or even 15 years of
observation. In the few studies that include data on 20-year survivors, the relative risk of solid tumors continued to increase through the 15- to 20-year follow-up
period.13,39,50,55,57,63,84,122 Almost no data are available on the time course of risk 20 or more years after treatment. In a study of patients diagnosed with Hodgkin's
disease before age 40 in the Netherlands, the relative risk of solid tumor development in 25-year survivors was somewhat lower than in the 15- to 24-year follow-up
period (RRs of 5.3 and 8.8, respectively; P = .29), suggesting that relative risk may decrease in very long-term survivors. 50 In this study, the 25-year risk of developing
any second malignancy was 27.7% (95% CI, 23.1% to 32.8%), compared with 4% in the general population (see Fig. 55.7-1).50 Because the relative risks of leukemia,
NHL, and solid tumors each show a distinctive pattern with time since first treatment, the absolute excess risks in 10-year survivors differ greatly from those observed
in the entire patient population. Based on combined estimates from two of the studies included in Table 55.7-1,50,63 lung cancer contributes most to the absolute
excess risk in 10-year survivors, with 22 excess cases per 10,000 patients per year, followed by NHL (16 per 10,000 per year), gastrointestinal tract tumors (15 per
10,000 per year), and leukemia (7 per 10,000 per year). In females, breast cancer accounts for most of the absolute excess risk in 10-year survivors (58 per 10,000
per year). 39,50

FIGURE 55.7-1. Cumulative risk of second cancers in 1253 patients with Hodgkin's disease diagnosed younger than 40 years of age. MDS, myelodysplastic
syndromes. (From ref. 50, with permission.)

TABLE 55.7-1. Relative Risk of Second Cancers after Hodgkin's Disease: Combined Results from Three Large Studies in 9618 Patients

For several second malignancies, the association with treatment factors has been investigated in detail. Leukemia after Hodgkin's disease is certainly the most
studied malignancy induced by treatment, and extensive knowledge of its risk factors has emerged. 127 Radiotherapy alone is associated with very little or no increased
risk of leukemia, 12,48,63,84,89 whereas alkylating agent chemotherapy is linked with greatly elevated risk. Several studies have compared the leukemogenicity of different
chemotherapy regimens. Risk of AML rises sharply with an increasing number of mechlorethamine, vincristine, procarbazine, and prednisone (MOPP or MOPP-like)
cycles.8,89 The risk associated with 10 to 12 MOPP cycles appears to be approximately three to five times higher than the risk after six MOPP cycles. 8,89 Since the
1980s, MOPP-only chemotherapy has been gradually replaced by doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine [ABV(D)]-containing regimens in many
centers. Only a few reports have described AML occurrence after ABV(D) alone. Patients treated with ABVD in the Milan Cancer Institute, where this regimen was
designed, were shown to have a significantly lower risk of AML than MOPP-treated patients (15-year cumulative risks of 0.7% and 9.5%, respectively). 129 Another
study showed that Hodgkin's disease patients treated with MOPP/ABV(D)-containing regimens in the 1980s had a substantially lower risk of AML/MDS than patients
treated in the 1970s with MOPP alone (10-year cumulative risks of 2.1% and 6.4%, respectively, P = .07). 13 The German-Austrian Pediatric Hodgkin's Disease Group
observed a low risk of AML (1.1% at 15 years) after regimens that contained relatively low doses of procarbazine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide, without
mechlorethamine.130
An important question is whether radiotherapy adds to the leukemia risk associated with chemotherapy. Evidence that combined modality treatment results in greater
risk than chemotherapy alone is provided by several reports, 84,129,131 whereas other large series indicate that the risk of AML after combined treatment is comparable
to that after chemotherapy alone. 8,12,13,48,57,63,89,91 These inconsistent results may be due partly to differences in treatment regimens between studies but also to lack of
adjustment for type and amount of chemotherapy in some reports. The interaction between radiotherapy and chemotherapy could be evaluated most rigorously in the
large case-control study by Kaldor and associates, 8 which included 163 cases of leukemia after Hodgkin's disease. When examining the combined effects of radiation
dose to the active bone marrow and number of mechlorethamine-procarbazine containing cycles, it was found that, for each category of radiation dose (less than 10,
10 to 20, and more than 20 Gy to the marrow), leukemia risk clearly increased with the number of chemotherapy cycles. In contrast, among patients with a given
number of chemotherapy cycles, risk of leukemia did not consistently increase with higher radiation dose. Taken together, the preponderance of available data does
not support the hypothesis that the combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy confers a higher risk of leukemia than chemotherapy alone.
Several studies have identified splenectomy as an independent risk factor for the development of AML, 8,84,91,129,132 with an approximate twofold difference in risk
between patients who did and did not undergo a splenectomy. In other reports, however, splenectomy was either not linked or was only weakly related to leukemia
risk.57,131 The mechanism underlying the association with splenectomy remains unclear, but a relationship with immunologic function of the spleen seems likely. 89
The modifying effect of host-related factors, such as age, on leukemia risk in Hodgkin's disease survivors has been examined in a number of studies and has been
reviewed elsewhere. 127 The reported higher cumulative risk of AML in older Hodgkin's disease patients as compared to younger ones simply reflects the higher
baseline incidence of the disease in older persons. In the few studies that have analyzed relative risk of leukemia by age, based on comparisons to general population
expectations, no differences between age groups were observed, 12,50,55 or the relative risk of AML was even significantly greater at younger ages than at older
ages.8,63 The risk of AML in relation to treatment-associated acute and chronic bone marrow toxicity has been examined in only one study to date. 89 Significantly
increased risks of leukemia were found among patients who developed thrombocytopenia, either in response to initial therapy or during follow-up. After adjustment for
type and amount of chemotherapy, patients who showed a decrease of 70% or more in platelet counts after initial treatment had an approximately fivefold higher risk
of developing leukemia than patients who showed a decrease of 50% or less. Severe acute thrombocytopenia may indicate greater bioavailability of cytotoxic drugs,
which would likely contribute to the development of leukemia.
Although increased risks of NHL after Hodgkin's disease are consistently reported, the causes of the excess risk are not well understood. 127 Because increased risks
of NHL occur in immunosuppressed patients, such as transplantation recipients, 133 and because Hodgkin's disease may be accompanied by immunosuppression, 134
several investigators have argued that the elevated risk of NHL may be attributed to Hodgkin's disease itself rather than to its treatment. This view is supported by
several studies in which risk did not vary appreciably between treatments. 12,48,55,63 In other studies, however, the risk of NHL was found to be lowest among patients
treated with radiotherapy alone and highest among patients who received intensive combined modality treatment, both initially and for relapse. 13,84,135,136 The
inconsistent results regarding the relationship with treatment may be partly attributed to diagnostic misclassification—that is, misdiagnosis of the primary tumor as
Hodgkin's disease, whereas NHL was represented according to modern lymphoma classification schemes. 127 In only very few studies were diagnostic pathology slides
of the second NHL and original Hodgkin's disease reviewed to avoid such misclassification. 13,48 Although transformation to NHL may be part of the natural history of
some types of Hodgkin's disease, the role of intensive combined modality treatment and its associated immunosuppression should be explored further.
Increased risks of solid cancers after Hodgkin's disease generally have been attributed to radiotherapy. 12,13,39,48,50,55,57,84,122,127,137 Excesses of melanoma, however, are
more likely to be related to immunosuppression accompanying Hodgkin's disease or its treatment, because elevated risks appear as early as in the 1- to 4-year
follow-up interval. 63,138 The other sites for which excess solid cancers have been reported (lung, breast, gastrointestinal tract, thyroid, bone, connective tissue) are
those for which elevated risks also have been described in other radiation-exposed cohorts. 26,28 One case-control study examined lung cancer risk in relation to the
radiation dose to the affected lung area, as well as the modifying effect of the patient's smoking habits. 38 Based on 30 cases of lung cancer in a cohort of 1939
patients with Hodgkin's disease, it was observed that lung cancer risk rose with increasing radiation dose ( P trend = .01), with a relative risk of 9.6 (95% CI, 0.93 to
98.0) for patients who received 9 Gy or more as compared to those who received less than 1 Gy. The increase in risk of lung cancer with increasing radiation dose
was significantly greater among patients who smoked after diagnosis of Hodgkin's disease than among those who refrained from smoking.
A very important question is whether chemotherapy for Hodgkin's disease can also induce solid cancers, and if so, at which sites. A few studies have raised concern
about a possible long-term effect of chemotherapy on lung cancer risk. 48,63,120 The British National Lymphoma Investigation cohort study of 2846 patients 48 showed a
significantly increased risk of lung cancer after chemotherapy alone, with the relative risk (4.2; 95% CI, 2.2 to 7.3) of similar magnitude as that observed in patients
treated with either extensive radiotherapy or combined modality treatment. A similar excess risk of lung cancer in patients given chemotherapy, but no radiotherapy,
was found in a more recent expansion and update of this study. 63 No increased risk of lung cancer, or solid tumors overall, followed chemotherapy alone in several
other series. 12,50,57,84,89 However, the expected number of solid tumors 10 or more years after chemotherapy alone was less than two in nearly all negative studies,
rendering it impossible to exclude a moderate increase in risk. If chemotherapy indeed affects solid tumor risk, one would expect that patients receiving combined
modality treatment would have a greater relative risk than patients treated solely with radiotherapy. Only one study to date has reported a significantly greater risk for
solid cancers overall after chemotherapy and radiotherapy compared with irradiation alone, 55 whereas no such difference has been found in the majority of
investigations. 12,48,57,84,89,128 However, for selected solid cancer sites (e.g., gastrointestinal tract), larger risks were observed after combined modality treatment than
after irradiation alone. 50,63,122 For lung cancer risk in irradiated patients, two case-control studies showed no association with chemotherapy overall, the number of
cycles, or the cumulative doses of mechlorethamine and procarbazine, 38,120 which argues against an important contribution of chemotherapy to lung cancer risk.
The inconsistent results reported with regard to the influence of chemotherapy on solid tumor risk may be partly related to the fact that most studies considered all
solid tumors combined, whereas chemotherapy may differentially affect the risk of tumors at disparate sites. A study from the Netherlands Cancer Institute
demonstrated that the addition of salvage chemotherapy to initial radiotherapy, as compared to initial irradiation alone, did not influence the risk of solid cancers
overall but significantly increased the risk of solid tumors other than breast cancer (RR, 9.4, compared to 4.7 for initial irradiation alone). 50 Conversely, patients who
received salvage chemotherapy were found to experience significantly lower risks of breast cancer than patients treated with radiotherapy alone (RRs of 2.8 and 7.6,
respectively), possibly related to premature ovarian failure due to intensive chemotherapy. 50 Additional studies are warranted to examine which cytotoxic drugs might
be responsible for site-specific increased risks of solid tumors.
The strongly elevated risk of breast cancer after radiotherapy for Hodgkin's disease has become a major concern for female survivors. 139,140 and 141 In a Dutch study, 27
cases of breast cancer were observed in 544 female patients diagnosed with Hodgkin's disease during adolescence or young adulthood and were followed for an
average of 14 years. 50 Women with follow-up equal to or exceeding 15 years had 9.4-fold increased risk of breast cancer as compared with the general population.
The risk of developing breast cancer increased dramatically with younger age at first irradiation. Fifteen-year survivors who had radiation treatment before 20 years of
age had an 18-fold increased risk of breast cancer; women irradiated at ages 20 to 29 had a sixfold increased risk; and a small, nonsignificant increase was observed

for women irradiated at age 30 or older (RR, 1.7). A similar trend, with even larger relative risks, has been reported from Stanford University. 39 An approximately
100-fold increase of breast cancer risk has been observed after treatment at younger than 16 years of age, with relative risks ranging from 17 to 458. 39,55,57,142 This
huge variation in estimated risk is not surprising in view of the large differences between series in important variables such as proportion of patients irradiated,
duration of follow-up, and completeness of follow-up. Generally, surveys with more complete follow-up have found lower relative risks of breast cancer 50,63,142,143 than
those in which completeness of follow-up was less satisfactory or not addressed. 55,57,144 Incomplete follow-up may lead to overestimation of second malignancy risk if
patients who remain well lose contact with clinical follow-up, whereas those with second cancer come to attention because of this. The very high actuarial risks
reported in two U.S. studies (34% at 25 years after first treatment for women treated at younger than 20 years of age, 144 and 35% at 40 years of age for those treated
when younger than 16 years 57) are likely to be exaggerated estimates, not only because of losses to follow-up, but also because the actuarial method is less
appropriate when including events that occur at follow-up intervals later than those at which data for most of the patients were censored. 139 In the more recently
published Dutch study, with (nearly) complete follow-up, the 25-year actuarial risk of breast cancer amounted to 16%, both for women first treated before the age of 20
and at ages 20 to 30.50 In two studies, the majority of breast cancers arose within or at the margin of the anterior radiation field, in breast tissue that had received a
treatment dose of 40 to 46 Gy. 39,57 Because it is not known whether breast cancer risk is linearly related to radiation dose in the therapeutic dose range, it will be of
interest to see whether the reduced mantle field doses in current treatment protocols will result in lower breast cancer risk.
Several studies have demonstrated that age at treatment for Hodgkin's disease is also a crucial determinant of increased relative risks for solid malignancies other
than breast cancer. 50,63,122 Van Leeuwen and colleagues 50 reported that the relative risks of nonbreast solid tumors were 4.9, 6.9, and 12.7 for patients first treated at
ages 31 to 39, 21 to 30, and 20 or younger, respectively ( Table 55.7-2). Data from Stanford University and the United Kingdom show that the highest relative risks for
gastrointestinal cancers (approximately eightfold) 63,122 and thyroid cancer 63 occur among patients treated before age 25, with no excesses observed for those treated
after 45 years of age. Importantly, Table 55.7-2 demonstrates that the absolute excess risk of developing a solid cancer does not show much variation by age at first
treatment, probably because the increasing background incidence of solid tumors with age in the population at large outweighs the stronger increase of relative risk at
younger ages.

TABLE 55.7-2. Relative and Absolute Excess Risks of Second Cancer in 1253 Patients with Hodgkin's Disease, According to Age at Start of Treatment

The strongly increased relative risks of solid tumors in patients treated for Hodgkin's disease at a young age only become manifest after an extended follow-up period.
This might point to a prolonged induction period, but it may also be due to this young patient group reaching an age at which solid tumor incidence begins to rise in
the general population. Although a few studies addressed the relative risk of solid malignancies according to attained age, 39,50,122 only one study distinguished the
separate contributions of age at first treatment and attained age. 50 Solid tumor risk was greatest among patients treated at a young age (20 years or younger), but the
largest relative risk emerged before the patients attained the age range at which solid tumors normally occur. Among patients first treated at age 20 or before, the
relative risk of developing a solid tumor at ages 40 to 49 was significantly lower than the relative risk of solid tumor development before age 40 (RR, 4.2 vs. 27.9; P =
.0001). It is notable that a similar finding has been reported with regard to breast cancer risk among atomic bomb survivors in Japan. 145
In conclusion, the occurrence of treatment-related second cancers is a major problem in survivors of Hodgkin's disease. The substantial increase in solid tumor risk
with time since Hodgkin's disease diagnosis necessitates careful, lifelong medical surveillance of all patients. The greatly increased risk of NHL throughout follow-up
demonstrates the importance of performing biopsies in recurrent Hodgkin's disease. Because smokers experience a significantly greater risk of lung cancer
attributable to radiotherapy than nonsmokers, physicians should make a special effort to dissuade Hodgkin's disease patients from smoking, even before treatment
starts. Women treated with mantle field irradiation before age 30 are at greatly increased risk of breast cancer. The importance of regular breast examinations should
be explained to them, and they should be taught to perform monthly breast self-examination. From 8 years after irradiation, the follow-up program of these women
should include yearly breast palpation and mammography. Physicians should also be alert to the higher risk of gastrointestinal cancers in patients who received
paraaortic and pelvic radiation fields. Thorough examination of gastrointestinal complaints is indicated. An important question to be answered in future research is
whether, in long-term survivors, chemotherapy contributes to the risk of solid tumors, and if so, which cytotoxic drugs are responsible for the excess risk. The most
devastating second malignancy to occur among patients cured of Hodgkin's disease remains chemotherapy-related leukemia. Because the poor prognosis of this
complication cannot be changed by early diagnosis, it is promising that leukemia risk has decreased dramatically with the introduction of ABV-based regimens in the
1980s. It is hoped that current treatment protocols that limit the dose and fields of radiotherapy will similarly reduce the late risk of solid cancers.
NON-HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA
Although surveys in the past 146,147 concluded that NHL patients are not at increased risk for second solid tumors, most either predated the advent of modern
therapeutic approaches or lacked sufficient statistical power to detect all but very high risks. Due largely to the introduction of effective treatment, NHL patients now
demonstrate a 5-year relative survival rate of approximately 51%. 148 Commensurate with improvements in life expectancy, several large follow-up studies of NHL
patients reported significantly increased risks of second cancers. 149,150 In the largest published study to date, the incidence of second malignancies was estimated in
29,153 patients diagnosed with NHL between 1973 and 1987 in one of nine population-based areas participating in the National Cancer Institute's Surveillance,
Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program.149 Significantly increased risks were observed for all second cancers taken together (observed/expected [O/E] = 1.2;
O = 1231), with excesses increasing with follow-up time to reach 1.8 in 10-year survivors. A subsequent international survey of 6171 2-year survivors of NHL
confirmed the increased risk of second cancer and showed that significant excesses persisted for two decades. 150 In an update of the SEER program data, which
included more than 48,000 patients diagnosed with NHL between 1973 and 1993, significantly increased site-specific risks were observed for cancers of lip (O/E =
2.0), lung (O/E = 1.4), kidney (O/E = 1.3), bladder (O/E = 1.4), thyroid (O/E = 2.0), and bone (O/E = 4.1), as well as AML (O/E = 3.6) (L. Travis, unpublished
observations). Although registry-based treatment data are incomplete, it appeared that chemotherapy was related to subsequent AML and to bladder cancer and that
radiotherapy was associated with AML and, possibly, cancers of lung, bladder, and bone.
The excesses of second genitourinary cancers 21,118 and AML14,90,151,152,153,154 and 155 have been examined in relationship to treatment for NHL. The largest investigation 21
of secondary bladder tumors was set within a cohort of 6171 2-year survivors of NHL and included 31 patients with transitional cell carcinoma, along with 17 cases of
kidney cancer. Detailed information on chemotherapeutic drugs and cumulative dose was collected for all subjects, and radiation dose to the target organ was
estimated from individual radiotherapy records. A significant 4.5-fold risk of bladder cancer followed therapy with cyclophosphamide, with risk strongly dependent on
cumulative dose (Table 55.7-3).

TABLE 55.7-3. Risk of Bladder Cancer According to Cumulative Dose and Duration of Cyclophosphamide Therapy

Significantly elevated sixfold and 14.5-fold risks followed cumulative doses of 20 to 50 g and 50 g or more, respectively ( P trend = .004). Neither radiotherapy nor
cyclophosphamide was associated with excess kidney cancers. The absolute risk of bladder cancer predicted during 15 years of follow-up was on the order of three
excess cancers per 100 NHL patients who had been given cumulative doses of between 20 and 50 g. At cumulative doses of 50 g or more, the excess risk increased
to approximately seven bladder cancers per 100 NHL patients.
NHL treatment has been linked to excess risks of AML in several studies, 14,90,151,152,153,154 and 155 which have been reviewed.155 Because leukemic progressions of NHL
(lymphocytic leukemias) are relatively frequent, histopathologic confirmation of AML diagnosis has been an essential part of all series in which leukemia risk was
examined. The largest investigation to date 90 included 11,386 2-year survivors of NHL, among whom 35 cases of AML or MDS were identified. The risk of AML was
only weakly associated with the use of cyclophosphamide-containing regimens (RR, 1.8; 95% CI, 0.7 to 4.9) and did not increase with increasing cumulative dose or
duration of treatment. However, the median cumulative dose of cyclophosphamide was only 12.5 g, which is considerably lower than in previous studies 14,152 in which
nine leukemia cases each were included and substantially higher risks (RR, 105 and 76, respectively) were reported. The weak association between
cyclophosphamide at lower dose levels and AML, 90 however, supports other evidence that the drug has a low leukemogenic potential. 8,20,92 Among 10,000 NHL
patients treated for 6 months with chemotherapy regimens containing low cumulative doses of cyclophosphamide, an excess of four AMLs might develop in 10 years
of follow-up.90 This is an important conclusion in view of the frequent use of cyclophosphamide-containing regimens in current treatment regimens for NHL. Risk of
AML after alkylating agent therapy did not vary significantly by age at NHL diagnosis or gender when evaluated by multivariate methods.
Low-dose total body irradiation (TBI), as used in past treatment approaches for NHL, seems linked with an unusually high occurrence of secondary leukemias. 155,156
This treatment modality used very low individual TBI fraction sizes (most commonly 10 to 15 cGy) given several times a week until a cumulative dose of approximately
150 cGy was administered. The risk of leukemia after low-dose TBI was quantified in a study of 61 2-year NHL survivors who received low-dose TBI as primary
therapy. 155 Four patients developed AML (RR, 117 compared with population rates; 95% CI, 31.5 to 300.0). A fifth patient was diagnosed with MDS. All five patients
with secondary hematologic malignancies had received salvage treatment with either alkylating agents alone or combined modality therapy. It is noteworthy that the
excess risk of AML after low-dose TBI 155 was much greater than the risk observed in the larger international investigation of AML after NHL, 90 although similar
chemotherapy regimens were used. Other types of NHL treatment that combine high-dose, large-field radiotherapy with alkylating agents also have been associated
with very large risks (100- to 1000-fold) of AML. 14,151 It is likely that the chemotherapy contributed to the excess risk of leukemia, either directly or by enhancing the
effect of low-dose TBI. 155 Studies of laboratory animals suggest that low-dose TBI may expand the number of bone marrow stem cells subject to potential
transformation by alkylating agents. 157
Estimates of the cumulative risk of secondary MDS/AML 5 to 6 years after autologous bone marrow transplantation (ABMT) for NHL range from 4% to 18%. 6,158,159
Based on long-term follow-up of a large cohort, Friedberg et al. 160 reported that the actuarial risk at 10 years was approximately 20%, with no evidence of a plateau.
Because most lymphoma patients tend to be intensively treated, even before ABMT, 158,159 the roles of prior therapy and the preparative regimen for transplantation in
the development of leukemia are difficult to distinguish. 6,158,159 In a review, Traweek et al. 161 concluded that although the available evidence suggests that prior therapy
makes a pivotal contribution to risk of secondary leukemia, an ancillary role for the transplantation procedure itself can not be excluded. The investigators 161
suggested that the incidence of leukemia after ABMT for lymphoma might be reduced by earlier transplantation or stem cell harvest (or both) and the screening of
bone marrow for karyotypic abnormalities before autologous grafting. Based on analyses of pretransplant specimens, Abruzzese and colleagues 162 suggested that, in
many cases of MDS after ABMT, stem cell damage results from prior chemotherapy.
In conclusion, survivors of NHL are at increased risk for a number of second malignancies, albeit much less so than patients with Hodgkin's disease. To date, the
excess risks of AML and bladder cancer have been demonstrated to be treatment-related. To assess risk factors for leukemia after ABMT, there is a strong need for a
large study with data on prior therapy, the transplant preparative regimen, and the transplantation procedure itself.
TESTICULAR CANCER
The introduction of cisplatin into chemotherapy protocols for testicular cancer represents one of the landmark accomplishments of modern cancer treatment. 163
Testicular cancer is now largely curable, with a 5-year relative survival rate of approximately 95%. 148 Although effective therapy for early-stage seminoma with
infradiaphragmatic radiotherapy has been used for many decades, treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy for nonseminoma and advanced seminoma was not
widely available until the late 1970s. In the interim period, radiotherapy fields to treat testicular cancer have decreased in size and smaller doses are used, 164 but
patients treated with earlier, more aggressive approaches remain at risk for possible late sequelae. Few studies have addressed the long-term risks of second
cancers among a sizable number of survivors 85,165,166 and 167 that also take into account the histologic type of testicular tumor. 85 The largest study of second malignant
neoplasms after testicular cancer included 28,843 1-year survivors diagnosed with a first primary cancer of the testis between 1935 and 1993 and reported to 16
population-based cancer registries in North America and Europe. 85 More than 3300 testicular cancer patients survived more than 20 years after diagnosis. Second
cancers, excluding contralateral testis, developed in 1406 patients (O/E = 1.43; 95% CI, 1.36 to 1.51) ( Table 55.7-4).

TABLE 55.7-4. Observed and Expected Numbers of Selected Second Malignant Neoplasms among 1-Year Survivors of Testicular Cancer a

The absolute risk was 16 excess cancers per 10,000 men per year. Significantly elevated risks were observed for all second solid tumors (O/E = 1.4; O = 1251), with
significant site-specific excesses for ALL, acute nonlymphocytic leukemia, melanoma, NHL, and cancers of the stomach, colon, rectum, pancreas, prostate, kidney,
bladder, thyroid, and connective tissue. Second cancer risk was similar after seminomas (O/E = 1.4) and nonseminomatous tumors (O/E = 1.5), with little variation in
site-specific patterns. Increased risks for cancers of small intestine (O/E = 4.4) and rectum (O/E = 1.6) were observed only for seminomas, whereas patients with

nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (GCT) showed elevated twofold risks for hepatobiliary cancer. Risk of solid tumors increased with time since diagnosis of
testicular cancer to reach 1.5 after 20 years ( P trend = .00002). Among 20-year survivors, 369 (O/E = 1.5) solid tumors were reported, with significant excesses for
cancers of stomach (O/E = 2.3), colon (O/E = 1.7), pancreas (O/E = 3.2), prostate (O/E = 1.4), kidney (O/E = 2.3), bladder (O/E = 2.8), and connective tissue (O/E =
4.7).85 The actuarial risks of developing any second cancer, excluding contralateral testicular tumors, were 15.7% and 22.6%, respectively, 25 and 30 years after
testicular cancer diagnosis. The corresponding population expected risks were 9.3% and 13.1%, respectively. The somewhat higher cumulative risk of second cancer
at 25 years for men with seminomas (Fig. 55.7-2) reflects the younger mean age of the patients with nonseminomatous tumors, because the excess cumulative risks
were comparable.

FIGURE 55.7-2. Cumulative risk of second malignant neoplasms among 28,010 1-year survivors of testicular germ cell tumors (GCT). Percentages in parentheses
indicate the actuarial risk at 25 years. Within the figure, 95% confidence intervals for point estimates are shown by vertical bars. (From ref. 85, with permission.)

Increased risks for cancers of the stomach, bladder and, possibly, pancreas seemed associated with antecedent radiotherapy, whereas leukemia was linked with both
prior radiation and chemotherapy. In the past, large doses (mean, 13 to 26 Gy) of radiation could be delivered to the stomach during irradiation of paraaortic lymph
nodes for testicular cancer. 85 In prior smaller surveys, a significant eightfold risk of stomach cancer (n = 2) was associated with infra- and supradiaphragmatic
irradiation for testicular tumors, 165 and a four- to fivefold risk with was associated with abdominal radiotherapy (n = 10). 166 The study by Travis et al. 85 demonstrated
that the increased risks for stomach cancer persisted for at least two decades after diagnosis of testicular cancer. After irradiation for peptic ulcer disease, significant
excesses of stomach cancer extend beyond 30 years.168 A pattern of increasing risk of pancreas cancer with time in the international study, 85 with excesses mainly in
testicular cancer patients who received initial radiotherapy, was suggestive of a radiogenic effect, consistent with the location of the pancreas in the radiation field
(mean organ dose, 17 to 34 Gy) during therapy for testicular cancer. The pancreas is not considered particularly susceptible to the carcinogenic effects of ionizing
radiation, 26 except when very high doses (e.g., on the order of 13 Gy) are given. 168
Few large, comprehensive studies that quantify the high risk of contralateral testicular cancer (CLTC) have been published, 166,169 which has historically been attributed
to common predisposing factors, such as cryptorchism or atrophic testis. Van Leeuwen and colleagues 166 assessed the risk of all second malignancies, including
CLTC, in a population-based cohort of 1909 testicular cancer patients for whom complete treatment data and nearly complete follow-up information were available.
With a median follow-up of 7.7 years, 20 CLTCs were observed (RR, 35.7; 95% CI, 21.8 to 55.2). Importantly, it appeared that chemotherapy may have reduced the
risk of CLTC compared with patients who received radiation or surgery alone.
The increased risk of leukemia after testicular cancer is an order of magnitude lower than that observed in patients with Hodgkin's disease. Moderately elevated risks
have been observed after chemotherapy, 95,96 but also after irradiation alone. 165,166 Mediastinal nonseminomatous GCTs are known to be associated with an inherent
predisposition to develop secondary leukemias, 170 however, such a relationship has not been reported for testicular tumors. In men with mediastinal GCT and
leukemia, both cancers contain the cytogenetic abnormality i(12p) pathognomonic of GCT,171 consistent with a common derivation. 170 In contrast, cytogenetic studies
of leukemias that follow testicular cancer have displayed alterations characteristic of treatment-related AML. 172,173 and 174 Analytic studies that have examined the risk of
leukemia after testicular cancer have typically excluded mediastinal GCT.
In the early years of platinum-based chemotherapy, the majority of patients received the PVB regimen (cisplatin, vinblastine, bleomycin). The absence of excess
leukemia risk after this regimen has been documented in several large studies. 95,166,175,176 and 177 In contrast, a number of studies have reported a 20- to 330-fold
increased risk of AML after etoposide-containing regimens, which were introduced for the treatment of testicular cancer in the early 1980s. 95,96,172,174 In most of these
schedules, etoposide is combined with a platinum compound and other active drugs (bleomycin), but classical alkylating drugs are generally not used. More recently,
the IARC concluded that sufficient evidence indicates that etoposide in combination with cisplatin and bleomycin is carcinogenic to humans. 93
The report by Pedersen-Bjergaard and colleagues 95 was one of the first to note that leukemias induced by epipodophyllotoxins were cytogenetically distinct from
classical alkylating agent–related AML. All five cases of AML/MDS were observed in the subgroup of 82 patients who had received cumulative doses of more than
3000 mg/m2 of etoposide (most patients had three 3-weekly cycles with etoposide, 200 mg/m 2 daily, for 5 days, resulting in a cumulative dose of 3000 mg/m 2). Most
etoposide-containing treatment regimens for testicular cancer have used lower cumulative doses of etoposide (up to 2000 mg/m 2) and also a lower dose intensity (100
to 120 mg/m2). On the basis of the combined data from five studies, Bokemeyer and Schmoll 167 estimated that the relative risk for AML was approximately 20-fold
increased in patients treated with conventional etoposide-containing regimens (cumulative dose less than 2000 mg/m 2). Because of the low background incidence of
AML in the population, this rather high relative risk translates to a low cumulative risk of 0.6% (95% CI, 0.3 to 0.9%) at 5 years.
In conclusion, patients treated for testicular cancer have less than one-third of the excess risk of second malignancy experienced by patients with Hodgkin's disease.
The increased risk of stomach cancer should alert clinicians to the importance of thorough examination of gastrointestinal complaints in patients who received
radiotherapy to the paraaortic lymph nodes. Because all reports of increased risks of gastrointestinal cancer have derived from studies in which patients were treated
with high doses of radiation, it is important to determine whether smaller risks will follow the lower doses (20 to 25 Gy) that are currently used. Reassuringly, PVB
chemotherapy seems to carry a negligible risk of leukemia. Although high-dose etoposide therapy (more than 2000 mg/m 2 in combination regimens) is associated with
substantial excess leukemia, cumulative risk after conventional-dose etoposide-containing regimens is low. Radiotherapy regimens for testicular cancer have been
modified with the introduction of smaller fields, lower doses, and elimination of prophylactic mediastinal radiation, but the late sequelae of therapy given decades ago
continue to emerge. In the future, radiation dose to second cancer sites for which risks are elevated should be estimated in individual patients, along with specific
chemotherapeutic agents to further delineate the contribution of treatment factors. Long-term follow-up studies are also needed to evaluate the risk of second solid
tumors among testicular cancer patients treated with modern cisplatin-based chemotherapy. 10,81
OVARIAN CANCER
Because survival for ovarian cancer patients has improved significantly within the last two decades, 148 the study of second primary cancers has assumed increasing
clinical importance. 178 The site-specific risk of solid tumors after ovarian cancer has been quantified in a large population-based study of more than 32,000 women
with ovarian cancer, including 4402 10-year survivors. 178 Almost 1300 second cancers (n = 1296) were reported, representing a significantly increased risk (O/E = 1.3;
95% CI, 1.2 to 1.4). Significant excesses were observed for cancers of colon (O/E = 1.3), rectum (O/E = 1.4), breast (O/E = 1.2), and bladder (O/E = 2.1), as well as
leukemia (O/E = 4.2). Ocular melanoma (O/E = 4.5) was also significantly increased. Secondary leukemia appeared to be linked with antecedent chemotherapy,
whereas radiotherapy was associated with cancers of connective tissue, bladder and, possibly, pancreas. The risk of solid tumors was elevated during all follow-up
intervals, including 10 to 14 years (O/E = 1.3) and 15 years or more (O/E = 1.3) after ovarian cancer. Fifteen-year survivors experienced significant excesses of
cancers of pancreas, bladder, and connective tissue. The cumulative risk of second cancers at 20 years was 18.2% compared with a population-expected risk of
11.5% (Fig. 55.7-3).

FIGURE 55.7-3. Cumulative risk of second malignant neoplasms among 32,251 2-month survivors of ovarian cancer. Percentages in parentheses are actuarial risk at
20 years. Within the figure, 95% confidence intervals for point estimates are shown by vertical bars. (From Travis LB, Curtis RE, Boice JD Jr, et al. Second malignant
neoplasms among long-term survivors of ovarian cancer. Cancer Res 1996;56:1564, with permission.)

In an analytic study of bladder cancer after ovarian cancer, Kaldor et al. 119 found increased risks after radiotherapy only (RR, 1.9; 95% CI, 0.8 to 4.9) compared with
patients treated with surgery alone. Cyclophosphamide-based chemotherapy, with or without radiotherapy, was associated with a fourfold risk.
Large risks of AML and preleukemia have been documented after ovarian cancer, and they have been linked to therapy with melphalan, 17,92 cyclophosphamide,17,80,92
and chlorambucil. 17,179 In one large population-based study of more than 28,000 ovarian cancer patients in whom 96 leukemias were diagnosed, platinum-based
combination chemotherapy was associated with a significantly increased fourfold risk compared with women who received neither alkylating drugs nor radiotherapy. 81
Excesses of leukemia increased with increasing cumulative platinum dose ( P trend for dose <.001) (Table 55.7-5).

TABLE 55.7-5. Risk of Leukemia According to the Cumulative Dose of Platinum, Duration of Therapy, and Specific Drug a

Although the platinating agents were frequently given in combination with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, or both, a multivariate model that took into account the
cumulative amount of these drugs did not provide an improved fit to the data ( P >.5) compared with a model that took into account only dose categories of platinum.
Although the risk of leukemia after platinum-based chemotherapy tended to be somewhat higher among younger patients, differences in relative risk according to age
were not significant (P for heterogeneity = .48). Radiotherapy without chemotherapy (mean bone marrow dose, 13.4 Gy) did not increase the risk of leukemia, 81 but
few women received radiation alone. Patients given radiotherapy and platinum-based chemotherapy, however, had a significantly ( P = .006) higher risk of leukemia
than those who received platinum-based chemotherapy alone in a multivariate model adjusted for cumulative amount of the drug. A dose response was observed for
platinum among women treated and not treated with radiotherapy, with risks higher within the radiation group; in all of the latter patients, radiotherapy had been given
as part of initial treatment. It is unlikely that women newly diagnosed with ovarian cancer would receive both platinum and radiotherapy in view of modern treatment
recommendations.180 However, the possibility that the risk of leukemia after treatment with platinum might be increased by radiotherapy should be investigated among
patients with other cancers, especially cancers of bladder and head and neck, given therapeutic strategies to increase dose intensities of both modalities in the
treatment of these tumors.181
The risk of leukemia associated with the cumulative dose of melphalan 17,92 and, importantly, route of administration 81 also has been evaluated among women with
ovarian cancer. In the largest study to date, 81 significant excesses of leukemia followed intravenous (RR, 22.9) and oral (RR, 9.0) melphalan, and risks increased with
increasing cumulative dose and duration of therapy. Intravenous melphalan was six times more leukemogenic than platinum.
In conclusion, survivors of ovarian cancer experience significantly increased risks of secondary leukemias and solid tumors. Despite the elevated relative risk of
leukemia after modern platinum-based chemotherapy for ovarian cancer, the absolute risk is small. 81 Of 10,000 ovarian cancer patients treated for 6 months with
cumulative doses of cisplatin between 500 and 1000 mg or 1000 mg or more and followed for one decade, an excess of 21 and 71 leukemias, respectively, was
predicted based on observed risks. 81 Thus, Travis and colleagues 81 concluded that the significant improvement in clinical response provided by platinum-based
treatment for advanced ovarian cancer, with 5-year survival rates of up to 20% to 30%, 180,182 far exceeded the relatively small excesses of leukemia. Further
interdisciplinary investigations are needed to elucidate the carcinogenic risks associated with modern therapies for ovarian cancer and with shared susceptibility
mechanisms, including genetic and reproductive factors. Meanwhile, in proposing recommendations for the follow-up and management of women with ovarian
cancer, 180 it is important to recognize their long-term predisposition to an array of second cancers.
BREAST CANCER
Numerous studies have demonstrated that women with breast cancer are at a three- to fourfold increased risk of developing a new primary cancer in the contralateral
breast.183,184 Significant excesses relative to the general population also have been observed for cancers of the ovary, 183,185 uterus,183,186,187 lung,58,183,185,188,189
esophagus,190 colon-rectum,183,185,187 connective tissue,183,189,191,192 and 193 and thyroid,183,185 as well as melanoma183,189 and leukemia.101,185,189,194 For some of these
cancers, such as those of the contralateral breast, ovary, and uterus, and possibly melanoma, the excesses may be fully or partly explained by a common etiology
(e.g., genetic predisposition or hormonal risk factors). Other excess risks may be treatment-related or reflect the interaction of several factors. Adjuvant chemotherapy,
hormonal treatment, and radiotherapy, and combinations of these modalities, are being administered to a growing proportion of breast cancer patients. In view of the
proven therapeutic benefit of these treatments 195,196 and the prolonged life expectancy of those treated, it has become exceedingly important to evaluate the
carcinogenic potential of adjuvant treatment.
Contralateral breast cancer accounts for 40% to 50% of all second tumors in women with breast cancer, 183 and the 15-year cumulative risk of developing contralateral
disease amounts to 10% to 13%. 197,198 With this high risk, even small effects of treatment may have a large impact in terms of absolute numbers of contralateral breast
cancers. The effect of radiation treatment for the initial breast cancer was evaluated in two large case-control studies in Connecticut and Denmark that involved 655
and 529 women with contralateral breast cancer, respectively. The mean radiation doses to the contralateral breast were estimated at 2.8 and 2.5 Gy,
respectively.22,199 Both studies found that radiotherapy did not contribute to the high risk of contralateral disease among women treated after the age of 45. In the
Connecticut study, however, significantly elevated risks were observed for women who underwent irradiation before the age of 45, with a radiation-associated relative
risk of 1.9 among those who survived for at least 10 years. 22 Significant excess risk in women irradiated at a young age was not found in the Danish study, possibly
because it included fewer women younger than 45 years of age. 199 Based on the Connecticut study, Boice and associates 22 estimated that approximately 11% of all
second breast cancers in women irradiated before age 45 could be attributed to radiotherapy.

Several large studies have shown that hormonal treatment with tamoxifen reduces the risk of contralateral breast cancer by approximately 40%. 186,187,195,200,201 Data
collected by the Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group (EBCTCG), based on 37,000 women from 55 trials, demonstrated that longer durations of
tamoxifen use were associated with greater reductions in risk, such that 1 year, 2 years, and 5 years of treatment produced risk reductions of 13%, 26%, and 47%,
respectively.195 It is not yet known whether the protective effect of tamoxifen against contralateral disease persists over prolonged follow-up periods (more than 10
years). Some studies have provided evidence that adjuvant chemotherapy may also reduce the risk of contralateral breast cancer, a phenomenon that is likely to be
mediated through drug-induced premature ovarian failure. 153,196,202
Several studies have assessed the risk of leukemia after adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy for breast cancer. The relationship between AML risk and drug
dose was examined in detail in the large case-control study by Curtis and associates. 20 These investigators identified 90 cases of leukemia or MDS among 82,700
women diagnosed with breast cancer between 1973 and 1985 in five areas of the United States. Compared with patients treated without alkylating agents and
irradiation, the risk of AML was significantly elevated after locoregional radiotherapy alone (RR, 2.4), after treatment with alkylating agents alone (RR, 10.0) and after
treatment with alkylating agents in combination with radiotherapy (RR, 17.4). The risk of AML associated with combined modality treatment was significantly greater
than that for alkylating agents alone ( P = .02). The study included large numbers of women who had been treated with only one alkylating agent, including
cyclophosphamide. Cumulative cyclophosphamide doses of less than 20 g were associated with an approximately twofold, nonsignificant increase in risk (compared
with women not exposed to alkylating agents), whereas women treated with 20 g or more had a 5.7-fold risk of AML (95% CI, 1.6 to 20.6). Women who received
melphalan experienced tenfold risks of AML compared with women treated with cyclophosphamide ( P <.001). After adjustment for the effects of chemotherapy, the
risk of AML increased significantly with higher doses of radiation to the active bone marrow, with a sevenfold risk increase for patients who received 9 Gy or more
(compared to patients not treated with radiotherapy).
Present-day adjuvant treatment of early breast cancer is in several ways different from the treatments evaluated in this large study by Curtis et al. 20 In the 1980s, the
cumulative doses of cyclophosphamide were reduced [approximately 12 to 15 g with six standard cycles of CMF (cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil)
or FAC (fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide)]. Regional radiotherapy is less frequently used. On the basis of their data, Curtis and associates 20
estimated that, among 10,000 patients with breast cancer treated for 6 months with a cyclophosphamide-based regimen and followed for 10 years, an excess of only
five cases of treatment-related AML would be expected to develop.
The low risk of AML after CMF-based chemotherapy was confirmed by the Milan Cancer Institute 203 and the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, 204 with cumulative
risks of AML of 0.23% at 15 years and 0.18% at 7 years, respectively. Thirty-nine percent of women treated with CMF-based chemotherapy in the Milan series 203 also
received doxorubicin, and no clear evidence indicated a synergistic effect of cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin on leukemia risk. Radiation therapy (applied only
after breast-conserving surgery) did not add to the risk of AML. The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center has reported a higher risk of leukemia after
standard dose–intensity FAC treatment. Fourteen cases of leukemia were observed among 1474 patients, for an estimated cumulative risk of 1.5% (95% CI, 0.7 to
2.9) at 10 years. The risk of AML was significantly higher when chemotherapy was given in combination with radiotherapy (2.5% vs. 0.5%). 103
There has been an increasing trend toward the use of dose intensification strategies in chemotherapy protocols for breast cancer. Typically, these regimens contain
high-dose cyclophosphamide in combination with one of the anthracyclines (doxorubicin or 4-epidoxorubicin) and other active drugs. The risk of AML associated with
such dose-intensive chemotherapy has not yet been quantified, but evidence suggests that the combination of anthracyclines and alkylating agents (including
cisplatin) may be leukemogenic. 101 With the increasing tendency to administer high doses of cytotoxic drugs accompanied by bone marrow support, there is certainly
a strong need to closely monitor the subsequent risk of AML.
Patients treated with CMF-based chemotherapy have not been reported to be at increased risk of solid tumors. 203,205 More prolonged follow-up, however, is needed to
evaluate possible carcinogenic effects 15 years or more after treatment.
Conclusive evidence has emerged that tamoxifen is associated with a moderately increased risk of endometrial cancer. 186,187,195,200,206,207,208,209 and 210 The consistent
results across studies with different designs, the duration-response relationship observed in several investigations, 206,207,209,211,212 and the established estrogen-agonist
effects of tamoxifen on the endometrium213,214 and 215 strongly support a causal relationship. 208 The individual studies, which are summarized in Table 55.7-6, show that
the use of tamoxifen for 2 years is associated with an approximately twofold increased risk of endometrial cancer, whereas use for 5 or more years produces four- to
eightfold excess risks. Although the risk estimates in some studies may be affected by a certain degree of detection bias as a result of gynecologic examinations in
women with side effects from tamoxifen, the magnitude of the observed risk is unlikely to be explained by such bias. 208 Furthermore, the analysis of the EBCTCG not
only shows increased incidence of endometrial cancer in women randomized to tamoxifen treatment (as compared to women not randomized to tamoxifen) but also
significantly increased mortality due to endometrial cancer. 195 From Table 55.7-6, it is clear that elevated risks of endometrial cancer have been observed after daily
tamoxifen dosages of 20 mg, 30 mg, or 40 mg. In the Netherlands case-control study, which included different dose intensities, daily dosage did not affect endometrial
cancer risk in a model accounting for duration of use, and the duration-response trends were similar, with daily doses of 40 mg, or 30 mg or less. 211 Very few studies
have addressed the risk for ex-users. In three investigations, 209,211,212 recent and former users of tamoxifen were found to experience very similar increases in risk;
however, only a few patients had discontinued tamoxifen more than 2 years before the diagnosis of endometrial cancer.

TABLE 55.7-6. Risk of Endometrial Cancer after Tamoxifen Therapy in Women with Breast Cancer

Only two studies have addressed the combined effects of tamoxifen and other risk factors for endometrial cancer. 209,211 In the largest study conducted to date,
Bernstein and colleagues 209 reported that women who previously used estrogen replacement therapy experienced greater increases in endometrial cancer risk
associated with tamoxifen use than women not exposed to estrogen replacement therapy. Furthermore, the effects of tamoxifen on endometrial cancer risk were
stronger among heavy women than among thin women. In the Dutch study, however, body weight did not modify the increased risk associated with tamoxifen use. 211
An important question is whether the clinicopathologic characteristics and ultimate prognosis of endometrial cancers after tamoxifen treatment are different from those
in patients not treated with tamoxifen. In four small studies, the stage distribution and histologic features of endometrial cancers in tamoxifen-treated women were not
remarkably different from those diagnosed in nontreated women. 186,200,206,216 Magriples and colleagues, 217 however, reported a higher frequency of poorly
differentiated and high-grade tumors with a poor prognosis in tamoxifen-treated patients. In the Dutch study, which included 309 patients with endometrial cancer after
breast cancer, endometrial tumors of FIGO stage III and IV occurred more frequently among long-term tamoxifen users (2 or more years) than in nonusers (17% vs.
5%, P = .006). Based on a centralized review of diagnostic pathology slides, long-term tamoxifen users more often developed malignant mixed mesodermal tumors or
sarcomas of the endometrium than did nonusers (15% vs. 3%, P = .02). Furthermore, the tumors diagnosed among long-term tamoxifen users were more often
p53-positive and estrogen receptor–negative. Figure 55.7-4 shows that the 3-year actuarial endometrial cancer–specific survival in this study was significantly worse
for long-term tamoxifen users than for nonusers, largely due to the less favorable tumor characteristics associated with tamoxifen use. 211 The association between
tamoxifen use and specific clinicopathologic and molecular characteristics of subsequent endometrial cancer deserves further investigation in large studies.

FIGURE 55.7-4. Actuarial endometrial cancer–specific survival according to duration of tamoxifen use. (From ref. 211, with permission.)

Animal experiments have shown that tamoxifen can act as a hepatic carcinogen in rats. 218,219 However, no increased risk of hepatocellular cancer in tamoxifen-treated
patents has been observed to date. 186,187,195,200 In the large metaanalysis of the EBCTCG, women randomized to tamoxifen had a slightly lower mortality from primary
liver cancer than the control group. 195 The joint analysis of Scandinavian tamoxifen trials showed an elevated risk of gastrointestinal cancer after tamoxifen use (RR,
1.9; 95% CI, 1.2 to 2.9) 187; however, the excess risk was due to colorectal and stomach cancer, not liver cancer. Furthermore, a study from the SEER program found
that tamoxifen was associated with a 50% increased risk of colorectal cancer in the period 5 or more years after diagnosis. 220 No such risk increase was observed in
the EBCTCG data.195
Increased risks of lung cancer after breast cancer have been largely attributed to radiotherapy. 58,188,221 No appreciable risk increase has been observed within 10
years of treatment, but two- to threefold elevated risks have been reported in 10-year survivors. 58,188,189 The association between breast radiotherapy and subsequent
lung cancer risk was found to be stronger for the ipsilateral lung, which supports a radiogenic effect. 188,221 Using individual patient dosimetry, Inskip and associates 58
assessed the effect of radiation dose to the lung in a case-control study of lung cancer after breast cancer. Sixty-one lung cancers were identified among 8976
10-year survivors of breast cancer treated in Connecticut between 1935 and 1971. Mean radiation dose was 15 Gy to the ipsilateral lung and 4.6 Gy to the
contralateral lung. A nonsignificant increase in lung cancer risk was noted with increasing radiation dose to the affected lung, with an approximate threefold excess
risk for patients who received 5 to 10 Gy. Risk seemed to level off at doses higher than 10 Gy, as has been observed in a similar study of lung cancer after Hodgkin's
disease. 38 The results were used to predict that, among 10,000 10-year survivors of breast cancer who received an average lung dose of 10 Gy, approximately nine
radiogenic lung cancers would be expected to develop per year. Current radiotherapy practices for breast cancer involve high-energy megavoltage treatment to
localized radiation fields, which results in considerably lower lung doses than the orthovoltage and cobalt-60 radiation treatments used in the studies described
above. The risk of radiogenic lung cancer should be correspondingly lower (i.e., approximately one excess lung cancer per 10,000 women-years per Gy) beginning 10
years after radiotherapy. 58 In one study, smokers were found to be at greater risk of radiation-associated lung cancer than nonsmokers. 221,222
Heightened concern with regard to the subsequently increased risk of angiosarcomas in the irradiated conserved breast has been expressed. 192,193 In a nationwide
study, 21 Dutch patients with angiosarcoma of the breast after breast-conserving treatment and localized radiation were reported, with a median latency of 6 years. 193
The incidence of angiosarcoma in the breast was estimated at 1.6 per 1000 patients treated with breast conservation per year. Although the absolute excess risk is
small, the relative risk is more than 1000-fold increased in comparison with the incidence of this very rare disease in the general population. In a nationwide
case-control study in Sweden 191 of 116 women with soft tissue sarcoma after a diagnosis of breast cancer between 1958 and 1992, it was found that the risk of
sarcomas other than angiosarcoma increased with the amount of radiation, but stabilized at high doses. The study included 40 angiosarcomas (located mostly in the
ipsilateral arm, with only two cases in conserved breasts). The risk of angiosarcoma was 9.5-fold increased in women with lymphoedema of the arm, but radiotherapy
was not a risk factor.
In conclusion, only part of the elevated risk of second malignancies after breast cancer is due to treatment. The intrinsically increased risk of developing a
contralateral tumor is unlikely to be meaningfully affected by current radiotherapy for the initial breast cancer, whereas tamoxifen reduces the risk of contralateral
disease. Standard dose–intensity CMF treatment is associated with a low excess risk of leukemia, whereas conventional FAC treatment may be associated with a
somewhat higher risk. Whether the risk of leukemia will increase further with the introduction of dose-intensification strategies should be explored. Although tamoxifen
causes a moderate increase in endometrial cancer risk, the proven clinical benefit of this drug in controlling breast cancer 195 far outweighs the excess morbidity and
mortality due to endometrial cancer. Clinicians should be alert to signs and symptoms in women taking tamoxifen, and long-term users should be advised to seek
prompt gynecologic evaluation on the development of symptoms. The effectiveness of screening for endometrial cancer has not been demonstrated. Consequently,
outside of research settings, there is no basis for regular gynecologic examinations in asymptomatic patients taking tamoxifen. The absolute excess risk of lung
cancer is likely to be small with current radiotherapy techniques for breast cancer. Nevertheless, there is ample reason to advise breast cancer patients to stop
smoking when they receive radiation treatment.
PEDIATRIC MALIGNANCIES
Survival rates for children with cancer have improved substantially since the late 1970s. Consequently, a rapidly growing young population is subject to the late
effects of cancer treatment for life. The overall pattern of second cancer risk in the population of childhood cancer survivors has been described in several large
studies. 51,62,223,224 and 225 Most recently, de Vathaire and colleagues 51 reported on the long-term risk of second cancer in a cohort of 4400 3-year survivors of childhood
cancer (excluding patients with leukemia) treated in eight centers in France and the United Kingdom. The risk of second solid malignancies was increased 9.2-fold
compared to the general population (95% CI, 7.6 to 11.0), and the absolute excess risk was 188 cases per 10,000 patients per year. The 30-year cumulative risk was
7.7% (95% CI, 5.0 to 8.2%). Olsen and collaborators 223 observed a 3.6-fold increased risk of second malignancy (95% CI, 3.1 to 4.1) in 30,880 children diagnosed
with cancer and reported to the population-based cancer registries of five Nordic countries between 1943 and 1987. The cumulative risks of developing a second
tumor within 25 years were 3.7% and 3.5%, respectively. Among 9170 2-year survivors of childhood cancer who were treated by members of the U.S. Late Effects
Study Group (LESG), the risk of developing a second malignancy was increased 15-fold compared to the general population (95% CI, 13 to 17), with a cumulative
incidence of 12.1% at 25 years. 62 The lower risks in the European studies may be related to their population-based nature (less selection), 223,224 to treatment
differences between Europe and the United States, and to differences between the study populations with respect to calendar years of diagnosis and length of
follow-up. In all studies, the largest relative risks were found for second primary bone tumors (133-fold and 43-fold increased risks in the LESG 225 and British
cohort,224 respectively) and second soft tissue sarcoma. Large risks were also observed for second thyroid cancer, gastrointestinal cancers, brain tumors, and
leukemia. Retinoblastoma is the initial malignancy that has been consistently associated with the highest risk of subsequent tumors. 51,62,223,224
Only a portion of the excess second cancer risk in survivors of childhood cancer is related to treatment. Retinoblastoma is the prototype of an initial malignancy in
which genetic factors are responsible for a large part of subsequent cancers. Familial retinoblastoma is caused by inherited mutations of the RB1 tumor suppressor
gene, which has been localized to the long arm of chromosome 13q14. 226,227 Approximately 80% of hereditary retinoblastoma patients have bilateral disease. In a
long-term follow-up study of 1604 1-year survivors of retinoblastoma diagnosed between 1914 and 1984 (median follow-up, 20 years), the incidence of second
cancers as well as risk factors for second malignancy were evaluated. 69 Overall, the risk of second malignancy was increased 17-fold compared to the general
population expectation. The excess risk was restricted to the 961 patients with hereditary retinoblastoma (RR, 30; 95% CI, 26 to 47), with strongly increased relative
risks for cancers of the bone, soft tissues, nasal cavities, and brain, and for melanoma (relative risks of 446, 103, more than 100, 14, and 51, respectively). No
significantly increased risk of second malignancy was observed among 643 nonhereditary retinoblastoma patients (RR, 1.6; 95% CI, 0.7 to 3.1). Fifty years after
retinoblastoma diagnosis, the cumulative risk of second primary cancer was 51.0% (± 6.2%) in hereditary cases, and only 5.0% (± 3.0%) in nonhereditary cases. As
shown in Figure 55.7-5, radiotherapy significantly increased the risk of second cancers in patients with hereditary retinoblastoma (50-year cumulative risk of 58% vs.
27% in nonirradiated hereditary patients). Radiotherapy did not significantly affect risk in nonhereditary retinoblastoma patients. 69 In a case-control investigation that
included 52 patients with bone sarcoma, 31 with soft tissue sarcoma, and 89 controls without sarcoma, Wong and associates 69 also collected individual radiation
dosimetry data. For all sarcomas combined, risk was significantly elevated at all dose levels, even at 5.0 to 9.9 Gy, and a significant increase in risk was observed
with increasing radiation dose to the site of tumor (relative risk of 11 for doses of 60 Gy or more as compared with doses of 0 to 4.9 Gy) For the first time in humans, a
radiation dose-response relationship was also demonstrated for soft tissue sarcoma, with a 12-fold risk increase at doses of 60 Gy or greater. Osteosarcomas and
soft tissue sarcomas developing after hereditary retinoblastoma harbor similar RB1 mutations as those found in retinoblastoma. 228,229 Radiation is thus likely to cause

somatic mutations needed to produce sarcomas in carriers of germline RB1 mutations.

FIGURE 55.7-5. Cumulative incidence (± s.e.) of second cancers after diagnosis of retinoblastoma in 961 patients with hereditary disease, by radiation treatment.
(From ref. 69, with permission.)

Wilms' tumor is another example of an initial malignancy in which genetic predisposition contributes to the excess risk of second cancers. 225 The National Wilms'
Tumor Study Group reported on the second malignancy experience of 5278 patients followed for an average of 7.5 years. 104 Forty-three second malignancies were
observed, with an overall relative risk of 8.4 (95% CI, 6.1 to 11.4). The 15- and 20-year cumulative risks of developing a second tumor were 1.6% and 3.8%,
respectively. Significant excesses were seen for leukemia (RR, 7.0), lymphoma (RR, 9.0), osteosarcoma (RR, 19), soft tissue sarcoma (RR, 22), and hepatocellular
carcinoma (RR, 56)104 (N. E. Breslow, written communication, April 1996). Among patients not treated with radiation or doxorubicin, risk of second malignancy was
increased threefold, reflecting genetic predisposition. 104 Each 10 Gy of abdominal irradiation was found to increase second malignancy risk by 43% in the absence of
doxorubicin and by 78% in its presence. Treatment with both doxorubicin and more than 35 Gy of abdominal irradiation was associated with a relative risk of 36 (95%
CI, 16 to 72). 104 Because the small numbers of individual second malignancies precluded an analysis by site, it is unclear whether these results apply equally for
leukemia, sarcoma, and other tumors.
ALL, the most common malignancy in childhood, is also associated with an increased risk of subsequent cancer. In a series of 9720 childhood ALL patients treated in
trials of the Children's Cancer Study Group between 1972 and 1988, the risk of developing a second malignancy was increased 6.9-fold as compared with the general
population.230 The associated 10- and 15-year cumulative risks were 1.5% and 2.5%, respectively. In a multicenter Italian study including 1664 ALL patients, the
relative risk of all second cancers was 13.6, with cumulative risks of 2.6% and 4.5%, respectively, at 10 and 15 years since the completion of initial treatment. 231 In
both studies, the largest excess was observed for central nervous system tumors, with relative risks of 22 230 and 52.231 Most brain tumors were high-grade
astrocytomas or glioblastomas, and all occurred in children who had previously received radiotherapy, mostly cranial irradiation with doses ranging from 18 to 24 Gy.
A study of 1612 patients with ALL from St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, with long-term follow-up data (median follow-up, 16 years), demonstrated an excess of
high-grade gliomas during early follow-up (up to 10 years after diagnosis), whereas an increased risk of low-grade brain tumors was observed at later follow-up
intervals. 232 The risk of developing a brain tumor was significantly increased with increasing cranial radiation dose, with 20-year cumulative risks of 1.0%, 1.7%, and
3.2% for patients who received radiation doses of 10 to 21 Gy, 21 to 30 Gy, and 30 Gy or more, respectively.
During the 1990s, prophylactic cranial radiotherapy has been largely replaced by intrathecal methotrexate. The number of intrathecal methotrexate administrations
was not related to the risk of brain tumors, 232 but few children treated without cranial radiation were followed for more than 15 years. In two studies, 230,232 risk of central
nervous system tumors was significantly higher in children 5 years of age or younger at first treatment.
Several very large studies of ALL survivors have reported negligible risks of AML after chemotherapy regimens that contain cyclophosphamide, anthracyclines, or
both. 230,231,233 In contrast, very high risks of AML have been reported for children treated with epipodophyllotoxin-containing regimens. Pui and associates 97 were the
first to report on the risk of AML in 734 children with ALL who received maintenance treatment according to different schedules of epipodophyllotoxin administration at
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital. AML developed in 21 children, with an overall cumulative risk of 3.8% at 6 years follow-up. The schedule of epipodophyllotoxin
treatment appeared to be a crucial factor in determining AML risk. Patients who received weekly or twice-weekly doses of teniposide (with or without etoposide), were
at an approximately 12 times greater risk of AML than patients treated only during remission induction, or every 2 weeks during maintenance treatment. Several
subgroups of patients in this study were exposed to other potentially leukemogenic factors, such as cyclophosphamide and cranial irradiation. The strongest evidence
that the excess risk of AML was due to epipodophyllotoxin treatment came from comparing two subgroups that differed only in schedule of epipodophyllotoxin
administration. Among 84 patients who received epipodophyllotoxins weekly, the risk of AML was clearly and significantly increased (12.4% at 6 years; 95% CI, 6.1%
to 24.4%) compared with 148 patients who received the agents every other week (1.6% at 6 years; 95% CI, 0.4% to 6.1%; P = .01). Cumulative dose did not show
enough variation within the study groups to reliably assess its effect. Compelling evidence for a causal link between epipodophyllotoxin therapy for ALL and the
development of AML was also provided by Winick and associates. 234
Elevated risk of AML also has been reported after a number of other childhood malignancies, especially lymphomas. 57,62,105,223,235,236 Two case-control studies
addressed the effects of radiation dose and amount of chemotherapy on the risk of AML in children treated for various malignancies. 18,105 A significant dose-response
relationship between total dose of alkylating agents and AML risk was observed in both studies. The Late Effects Study Group 18 found no association between
leukemia risk and radiation dose to active bone marrow. In contrast, using similar methods of estimating bone marrow dose, Hawkins and colleagues 105 observed a
highly significant trend, with an approximately 20-fold increased risk for patients receiving 15 Gy or more (compared to patients not treated with radiotherapy). These
discrepant results may be explained by differences between the studies in the pattern of first cancers and in therapeutic practices. It is possible that the patients in the
British study received lower radiation doses to larger volumes of bone marrow, which, for a specified dose, might result in less cell kill and a greater susceptibility to
leukemogenic transformation. 105 The case-control study in the United Kingdom 105 included ten cases of secondary AML after epipodophyllotoxin treatment, mostly for
pediatric NHL. It is of interest that, at much lower cumulative doses than used in the St. Jude Children's Research Hospital study, 97 a steep increase in AML risk was
noted with increasing dose of epipodophyllotoxins. Another striking difference between the two studies was that the strong dose-response relationship in the British
study was observed for regimens in which the epipodophyllotoxins were given less frequently than weekly.
The Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program of the National Cancer Institute has developed a monitoring plan to better quantify the risk of AML after epipodophyllotoxin
treatment. Smith and colleagues 106 reported results for patients included in trials that used epipodophyllotoxins at low (less than 1.5 g/m 2), moderate (1.5 to 2.9 g/m2),
or higher (3 g/m 2 or more) cumulative etoposide doses. The 6-year cumulative risks for AML (including MDS) with the low, moderate, and higher cumulative dose
groups were 3.3% (based on eight AML cases in 451 patients), 0.7% (based on four AML cases in 1270 patients), and 2.2% (based on five AML cases in 570
patients), respectively. This result does not appear to provide support for a cumulative-dose effect for the leukemogenic activity of the epipodophyllotoxins, at least
not within the cumulative-dose range and with the treatment schedules encompassed by the monitoring plan (cumulative etoposide dose of 5.0 g/m 2 or less, on daily
times 2-to 5 schedules). A limitation of this study, however, is that the three treatment strata according to cumulative etoposide dose also differed with respect to other
cytotoxic drugs received, primary tumor, and age. These differences and the administration of radiotherapy were not accounted for in the analysis. 93 Smith and
associates 106 suggested that the much larger AML risk observed in earlier investigations might be due to the higher cumulative epipodophyllotoxin doses used in
those studies (as high as 9 to 19 g/m 2)97,234,235 or, alternatively, to their schedule of weekly or twice-weekly administration. This intermittent exposure schedule, which
is not commonly used in current treatment regimens, has been associated with increased leukemogenicity in vitro.237 In view of several inconsistencies between the
studies conducted to date, final conclusions regarding the leukemogenicity of different epipodophyllotoxin-based regimens cannot yet be drawn.
Hawkins and associates61 addressed the quantitative relationship between radiation dose, alkylating agent therapy, and risk of bone sarcoma in a case-control study
within a British cohort of 13,175 3-year survivors of childhood cancer. Risk of bone cancer was strongly increased in all follow-up intervals beyond 3 years, with no
apparent trend of increasing or decreasing relative risks up to 25 years after diagnosis of primary cancer. As in an earlier study, 19 no increased risk was observed for
radiation doses to the site of the bone tumor of less than 10 Gy. At more than 10 Gy, risk for bone sarcoma rose sharply with increasing radiation dose, with a relative
risk of 93 for patients who received 30 to 50 Gy as compared to those not treated with radiation. At higher radiation doses, however, the risk appeared to decline
somewhat (Table 55.7-7). Such a downturn in relative risk at very high doses was also observed in a smaller case-control study of osteosarcoma after childhood
cancer238 but was not found in the large case-control investigation nested in the LESG cohort. 19 In the latter study, Tucker and colleagues 19 showed that the pattern of

risk increase in relation to radiation dose was similar in patients treated for retinoblastoma and those treated for other initial malignancies. Thus, although patients
with retinoblastoma have a higher intrinsic risk for sarcoma development, their relative responses to radiation treatment do not appear to be different from patients
with other childhood cancers. Importantly, the study by Hawkins and colleagues 61 also showed that the relative risk of bone sarcoma increases with increasing
cumulative exposure to alkylating agents, even after adjustment for radiation therapy (see Table 55.7-7). It is clear, however, that the effect of radiotherapy on
sarcoma risk is stronger than that of chemotherapy. An association between chemotherapy and risk of bone sarcoma also has been observed in other
studies19,91,238,239; an effect of alkylating chemotherapy on sarcoma risk in the absence of radiotherapy was found only in the LESG study. 19 Comparative studies of
children and adults irradiated for Hodgkin's disease have shown that children experience a much higher relative risk of developing bone sarcomas than adults,
probably because of greater radiosensitivity of growing bone. 12,62

TABLE 55.7-7. A Case-Control Study of Second Primary Bone Cancer in Relation to Radiation Dose and Cumulative Exposure to Alkylating Agents

The risk of thyroid cancer after radiotherapy for childhood malignancies was assessed in the LESG cohort. 60 High relative risks compared with general population
rates were observed for thyroid malignancies after treatment of neuroblastoma (RR, 350), Wilms' tumor (RR, 132), and Hodgkin's disease (RR, 67). The relative risk
increased significantly with time since treatment throughout the observation period (more than 20 years). In a case-control study, radiation dose to the thyroid was
estimated for 23 thyroid cancer cases and 89 matched controls. Radiation doses of 2 Gy or more carried 13 times greater risk than doses of less than 2 Gy ( P <.05).
Because all patients with thyroid cancer had been exposed to at least 1 Gy of radiation to the thyroid, the risk associated with doses less than 2 Gy could not be
reliably determined in this study. However, the investigators estimated that the risk associated with doses of 2 Gy or more was increased approximately 130-fold
compared to nonirradiated patients. 60 Unexpectedly, the dose-response relationship was more or less flat at radiation doses beyond 2 Gy; even at doses as high as
60 Gy, no decrease in thyroid cancer risk was observed. A pooled analysis of seven large studies of thyroid cancer after various radiation exposures demonstrated
that the risk decreases significantly with increasing age at exposure and is highest for persons with radiation exposure before age 5 years. 59
In conclusion, survivors of childhood cancer are at substantially elevated risk to develop new malignancies. The magnitude of this risk depends on the type of the
initial malignancy, because some childhood cancers, such as bilateral retinoblastoma, carry a high intrinsic risk for second cancer occurrence. Long-term survival
after various types of childhood cancer has become possible through therapies introduced from the early 1970s onwards. Consequently, the growing population of
cured patients is just beginning to enter the ages at which adult cancers typically occur, so the full spectrum of second malignancies has not yet been encountered. It
is therefore imperative that survivors of childhood cancer be carefully monitored to assess the long-term risks of various types of second cancers. Bone sarcoma has
consistently been identified as the second malignancy for which the excess risk is highest. Of much interest is the potential interaction between genetic susceptibility
and treatment in second cancer development. The leukemogenic potential of epipodophyllotoxin-containing regimens that vary in cumulative dose and schedule of
administration should continue to be rigorously assessed. As quantitative risk information from more studies becomes available, it will be possible to carefully weigh
the benefits derived from epipodophyllotoxin treatment against the risks. Second cancers among survivors of childhood cancer are associated with a poor
prognosis. 97,230,232,240,241 Hence, the need is pressing to develop therapeutic strategies with less oncogenic potential, without compromising the excellent cure rates
that have been achieved.

CONCLUSION
The results described in this chapter have multiple clinical implications. Knowledge of risk factors for second malignancy has made it possible to identify patient
groups at high risk of developing second cancers due to treatments that they received in the past. Whenever effective screening methods are available, these should
be implemented in the patients' follow-up program to improve their survival after diagnosis of second malignancy. In some cases, preventive strategies (e.g., smoking
cessation) may reduce substantially the risk of developing a treatment-related cancer. The issue of treatment-induced second cancers must always be viewed in
relation to the sometimes dramatic improvement in survival rates for patients with various malignancies. The risks associated with various treatments should be
weighed carefully against the consequences of not using such treatments. Clinical research should focus on the development of therapeutic regimens with less
carcinogenic potential. However, the arbitrary alteration of a successful therapy to mitigate second cancer risk is unwarranted. It is of the utmost importance that
changes in therapy to reduce the risk of late complications be made only in the context of carefully designed clinical trials that evaluate whether the overall efficacy of
treatment is maintained.
For many cancer treatments, the long-term effects on second malignancy risk are not yet known. In addition, new therapies are being introduced continuously, and the
associated risks of late sequelae must be evaluated. Whenever possible, future studies of second cancer risk should incorporate investigations at the molecular level.
Results of these laboratory analyses may clarify the influence of genetic susceptibility on treatment-related risk and contribute important data for the elucidation of
mechanisms underlying drug- and radiation-induced carcinogenesis.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Hoppe RT. Hodgkin's disease: complications of therapy and excess mortality. Ann Oncol 1997;8[Suppl 1]:115.
2. Kaldor JM, Day NE, Shiboski S. Epidemiological studies of anticancer drug carcinogenicity. IARC Sci Publ 1986;78:189.
3. Makuch R, Simon R. Recommendations for the analysis of the effect of treatment on the development of second malignancies. Cancer 1979;44:250.
4. Kaplan EL, Meier P. Non-parametric estimation from incomplete observations. J Am Stat Assoc 1958;53:457.
5. Pepe MS, Mori M. Kaplan-Meier, marginal or conditional probability curves in summarizing competing risks failure time data? Stat Med 1993;12:737.
6. Darrington DL, Vose JM, Anderson JR, et al. Incidence and characterization of secondary myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myelogenous leukemia following high-dose chemoradiotherapy
and autologous stem-cell transplantation for lymphoid malignancies. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2527.
7. Boice JD Jr, Day NE, Andersen A, et al. Second cancers following radiation treatment for cervical cancer. An international collaboration among cancer registries. J Natl Cancer Inst
1985;74:955.
8. Kaldor JM, Day NE, Clarke EA, et al. Leukemia following Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1990;322:7.
9. Storm HH, Prener A. Second cancer following lymphatic and hematopoietic cancers in Denmark, 194380. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1985;68:389.
10. Greene MH. Is cisplatin a human carcinogen? [Review]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:306.
11. Coleman CN, Williams CJ, Flint A, et al. Hematologic neoplasia in patients treated for Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1977;297:1249.
12. Tucker MA, Coleman CN, Cox RS, Varghese A, Rosenberg SA. Risk of second cancers after treatment for Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1988;318:76.
13. van Leeuwen FE, Klokman WJ, Hagenbeek A, et al. Second cancer risk following Hodgkin's disease: a 20-year follow-up study. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:312.
14. Greene MH, Young RC, Merrill JM, DeVita VT. Evidence of a treatment dose response in acute nonlymphocytic leukemias which occur after therapy of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer Res
1983;43:1891.
15. Ewertz M, Machado SG, Boice JD Jr, Jensen OM. Endometrial cancer following treatment for breast cancer: a case-control study in Denmark. Br J Cancer 1984;50:687.
16. Boice JD Jr, Blettner M, Kleinerman RA, et al. Radiation dose and leukemia risk in patients treated for cancer of the cervix. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;79:1295.
17. Kaldor JM, Day NE, Pettersson F, et al. Leukemia following chemotherapy for ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1.
18. Tucker MA, Meadows AT, Boice JD Jr, et al. Leukemia after therapy with alkylating agents for childhood cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1987;78:459.
19. Tucker MA, D'Angio GJ, Boice JD Jr, et al. Bone sarcomas linked to radiotherapy and chemotherapy in children. N Engl J Med 1987;317:588.
20. Curtis RE, Boice JD Jr, Stovall M, et al. Risk of leukemia after chemotherapy and radiation treatment for breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1745.
21. Travis LB, Curtis RE, Glimelius B, et al. Bladder and kidney cancer following cyclophosphamide therapy for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:524.
22. Boice JD Jr, Harvey EB, Blettner M, Stovall M, Flannery JT. Cancer in the contralateral breast after radiotherapy for breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1992;326:781.
23. Court-Brown WM, Doll R. Leukaemia and aplastic anaemia in patients irradiated for ankylosing spondylitis. London: Her Majesty's Stationary Office, 1957.
24. Upton AC. Physical carcinogenesis: radiation, history and sources. In: Becker FF, ed. Cancer: a comprehensive treatise. New York: Plenum Press, 1975:387.
25. Martland HS. The occurrence of malignancy in radioactive persons: a general review of data gathered in the study of the radium dial painters, with special reference to the occurrence of

osteogenic sarcoma and the interrelationship of certain blood diseases. Am J Cancer 1931;15:2435.
26. United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation. Sources and effects of ionizing radiation: UNSCEAR 1994 report to the general assembly with scientific annexes. New
York: United Nations, 1994.
27. Boice JD Jr. Carcinogenesisa synopsis of human experience with external exposure in medicine [Review]. Health Phys 1988;55:621.
28. Boice JD Jr, Land CE, Preston DL. Ionizing radiation. In: Schottenfeld D, Fraumeni JF Jr, eds. Cancer epidemiology and prevention. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996:319.
29. Heyssel R, Brill AB, Woodbury L, et al. Leukemia in Hiroshima atomic bomb survivors. Blood 1960;15:313.
30. Preston DL, Kusumi S, Tomonaga M, et al. Cancer incidence in atomic bomb survivors. Part III. Leukemia, lymphoma and multiple myeloma, 19501987 [published erratum appears in Radiat
Res 1994;139:129]. Radiat Res 1994;137:S68.
31. Thompson DE, Mabuchi K, Ron E, et al. Cancer incidence in atomic bomb survivors. Part II: Solid tumors, 19581987 [published erratum appears in Radiat Res 1994;139:129]. Radiat Res
1994;137:S17.
32. Tokunaga M, Land CE, Tokuoka S, et al. Incidence of female breast cancer among atomic bomb survivors, 19501985. Radiat Res 1994;138:209.
33. Smith PG, Doll R. Mortality from cancer and all causes among British radiologists. Br J Radiol 1981;54:187.
34. Wang JX, Inskip PD, Boice JD Jr, et al. Cancer incidence among medical diagnostic x-ray workers in China, 1950 to 1985. Int J Cancer 1990;45:889.
35. Boice JD Jr, Preston D, Davis FG, Monson RR. Frequent chest x-ray fluoroscopy and breast cancer incidence among tuberculosis patients in Massachusetts. Radiat Res 1991;125:214.
36. Miller AB, Howe GR, Sherman GJ, et al. Mortality from breast cancer after irradiation during fluoroscopic examinations in patients being treated for tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 1989;321:1285.
37. Boice JD Jr, Engholm G, Kleinerman RA, et al. Radiation dose and second cancer risk in patients treated for cancer of the cervix. Radiat Res 1988;116:3.
38. van Leeuwen FE, Klokman WJ, Stovall M, et al. Roles of radiotherapy and smoking in lung cancer following Hodgkin's disease. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1530.
39. Hancock SL, Tucker MA, Hoppe RT. Breast cancer after treatment of Hodgkin's disease. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:25.
40. Weiss HA, Darby SC, Doll R. Cancer mortality following x-ray treatment for ankylosing spondylitis. Int J Cancer 1994;59:327.
41. Darby SC, Reeves G, Key T, Doll R, Stovall M. Mortality in a cohort of women given x-ray therapy for metropathia haemorrhagica. Int J Cancer 1994;56:793.
42. Hildreth NG, Shore RE, Hempelmann LH, Rosenstein M. Risk of extrathyroid tumors following radiation treatment in infancy for thymic enlargement. Radiat Res 1985;102:378.
43. Karlsson P, Holmberg E, Lundberg LM, Nordborg C, Wallgren A. Intracranial tumors after radium treatment for skin hemangioma during infancya cohort and case-control study. Radiat Res
1997;148:161.
44. Lundell M, Mattsson A, Karlsson P, et al. Breast cancer risk after radiotherapy in infancy: a pooled analysis of two Swedish cohorts of 17,202 infants. Radiat Res 1999;151:626.
45. Curtis RE, Boice JD Jr, Stovall M, et al. Relationship of leukemia risk to radiation dose following cancer of the uterine corpus. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1315.
46. Inskip PD, Monson RR, Wagoner JK, et al. Leukemia following radiotherapy for uterine bleeding. Radiat Res 1990;122:107.
47. Little MP, Weiss HA, Boice JD Jr, et al. Risks of leukemia in Japanese atomic bomb survivors, in women treated for cervical cancer, and in patients treated for ankylosing spondylitis. Radiat
Res 1999;152:280.
48. Swerdlow AJ, Douglas AJ, Hudson GV, et al. Risk of second primary cancers after Hodgkin's disease by type of treatment: analysis of 2846 patients in the British National Lymphoma
Investigation. BMJ 1992;304:1137.
49. Inskip PD, Monson RR, Wagoner JK, et al. Cancer mortality following radium treatment for uterine bleeding [published erratum appears in Radiat Res 1991;128:326]. Radiat Res 1990;123:331.
50. van Leeuwen FE, Klokman WJ, Veer MB, et al. Long-term risk of second malignancy in survivors of Hodgkin's disease treated during adolescence or young adulthood. J Clin Oncol
2000;18:487.
51. de Vathaire F, Hawkins M, Campbell S, et al. Second malignant neoplasms after a first cancer in childhood: temporal pattern of risk according to type of treatment. Br J Cancer 1999;79:1884.
52. Little MP, de Vathaire F, Charles MW, Hawkins MM, Muirhead CR. Variations with time and age in the risks of solid cancer incidence after radiation exposure in childhood. Stat Med
1998;17:1341.
53. Darby SC, Doll R, Gill SK, Smith PG. Long term mortality after a single treatment course with x-rays in patients treated for ankylosing spondylitis. Br J Cancer 1987;55:179.
54. Hildreth NG, Shore RE, Dvoretsky PM. The risk of breast cancer after irradiation of the thymus in infancy. N Engl J Med 1989;321:1281.
55. Mauch PM, Kalish LA, Marcus KC, et al. Second malignancies after treatment for laparotomy staged IA-IIIB Hodgkin's disease: long-term analysis of risk factors and outcome. Blood
1996;87:3625.
56. Land CE, Hayakawa N, Machado SG, et al. A case-control interview study of breast cancer among Japanese A-bomb survivors. II. Interactions with radiation dose. Cancer Causes Control
1994;5:167.
57. Bhatia S, Robison LL, Oberlin O, et al. Breast cancer and other second neoplasms after childhood Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1996;334:745.
58. Inskip PD, Stovall M, Flannery JT. Lung cancer risk and radiation dose among women treated for breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:983.
59. Ron E, Lubin JH, Shore RE, et al. Thyroid cancer after exposure to external radiation: a pooled analysis of seven studies. Radiat Res 1995;141:259.
60. Tucker MA, Jones PH, Boice JD Jr, et al. Therapeutic radiation at a young age is linked to secondary thyroid cancer. The Late Effects Study Group. Cancer Res 1991;51:2885.
61. Hawkins MM, Wilson LM, Burton HS, et al. Radiotherapy, alkylating agents, and risk of bone cancer after childhood cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:270.
62. Tucker MA, Meadows AT, Boice JD Jr, Hoover RN, Fraumeni JF Jr. Cancer risk following treatment of childhood cancer. In: Boice JD, Fraumeni JF, eds. Radiation carcinogenesis:
epidemiology and biological significance. New York: Raven Press, 1984:211.
63. Swerdlow AJ, Barber JA, Hudson GV, et al. Risk of second malignancy after Hodgkin's disease in a collaborative British cohort: the relation to age at treatment. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:498.
64. National Research Council. Health risks of radon and other internally deposited alpha-emitters. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1988.
65. Moolgavkar SH, Luebeck EG, Krewski D, Zielinski JM. Radon, cigarette smoke, and lung cancer: a re-analysis of the Colorado Plateau uranium miners' data. Epidemiology 1993;4:204.
66. Yao SX, Lubin JH, Qiao YL, et al. Exposure to radon progeny, tobacco use and lung cancer in a case-control study in southern China. Radiat Res 1994;138:326.
67. van Leeuwen FE, Klokman WJ. Re: Smoking, treatment for Hodgkin's disease, and subsequent lung cancer risk. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:209.
68. van Leeuwen FE. Second cancers. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1997:2773.
69. Wong FL, Boice JD Jr, Abramson DH, et al. Cancer incidence after retinoblastoma. Radiation dose and sarcoma risk. JAMA 1997;278:1262.
70. Kony SJ, de Vathaire F, Chompret A, et al. Radiation and genetic factors in the risk of second malignant neoplasms after a first cancer in childhood. Lancet 1997;350:91.
71. Nichols KE, Levitz S, Shannon KE, et al. Heterozygous germline ATM mutations do not contribute to radiation-associated malignancies after Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1259.
72. Easton DF. Cancer risks in A-T heterozygotes [Review]. Int J Radiat Biol 1994;66:S177.
73. Swift M, Morrell D, Massey RB, Chase CL. Incidence of cancer in 161 families affected by ataxia-telangiectasia. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1831.
74. Broeks A, Russell NS, Floore AN, et al. Increased risk of breast cancer following irradiation for Hodgkin's disease is not a result of ATM germline mutations. Int J Radiat Biol 2000;76:693.
75. Kyle RA, Pierre RV, Bayrd ED. Multiple myeloma and acute myelomonocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1970;283:1121.
76. Smith MA, McCaffrey RP, Karp JE. The secondary leukemias: challenges and research directions [Review]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:407.
77. Levine EG, Bloomfield CD. Leukemias and myelodysplastic syndromes secondary to drug, radiation, and environmental exposure [Review]. Semin Oncol 1992;19:47.
78. Hunger SP, Sklar J, Link MP. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia occurring as a second malignant neoplasm in childhood: report of three cases and review of the literature [Review]. J Clin Oncol
1992;10:156.
79. Whang-Peng J, Young RC, Lee EC, et al. Cytogenetic studies in patients with secondary leukemia/dysmyelopoietic syndrome after different treatment modalities. Blood 1988;71:403.
80. Haas JF, Kittelmann B, Mehnert WH, et al. Risk of leukaemia in ovarian tumour and breast cancer patients following treatment by cyclophosphamide. Br J Cancer 1987;55:213.
81. Travis LB, Holowaty EJ, Bergfeldt K, et al. Risk of leukemia after platinum-based chemotherapy for ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;340:351.
82. Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Rowley JD. The balanced and the unbalanced chromosome aberrations of acute myeloid leukemia may develop in different ways and may contribute differently to
malignant transformation [Review]. Blood 1994;83:2780.
83. Smith MA, Rubinstein L, Ungerleider RS. Therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia following treatment with epipodophyllotoxins: estimating the risks [Review]. Med Pediatr Oncol 1994;23:86.
84. Henry-Amar M. Second cancer after the treatment for Hodgkin's disease: a report from the International Database on Hodgkin's Disease. Ann Oncol 1992;3[Suppl 4]:117.
85. Travis LB, Curtis RE, Storm H, et al. Risk of second malignant neoplasms among long-term survivors of testicular cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1429.
86. Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Philip P, Larsen SO, Jensen G, Byrsting K. Chromosome aberrations and prognostic factors in therapy-related myelodysplasia and acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. Blood
1990;76:1083.
87. Neugut AI, Robinson E, Nieves J, Murray T, Tsai WY. Poor survival of treatment-related acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. JAMA 1990;264:1006.
88. Overall evaluations of carcinogenicity: an updating of IARC Monographs volumes 1 to 42. IARC Monogr Eval Carcinog Risks Hum Suppl 1987;7:1.
89. van Leeuwen FE, Chorus AM, van den Belt-Dusebout AW, et al. Leukemia risk following Hodgkin's disease: relation to cumulative dose of alkylating agents, treatment with teniposide
combinations, number of episodes of chemotherapy, and bone marrow damage. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1063.
90. Travis LB, Curtis RE, Stovall M, et al. Risk of leukemia following treatment for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1450.
91. Boivin JF, Hutchison GB, Zauber AG, et al. Incidence of second cancers in patients treated for Hodgkin's disease. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:732.
92. Greene MH, Harris EL, Gershenson DM, et al. Melphalan may be a more potent leukemogen than cyclophosphamide. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:360.
93. Some antiviral and antineoplastic drugs, and other pharmaceutical agents. IARC Monogr Eval Carcinog Risks Hum 2000;76:177.
94. Ratain MJ, Kaminer LS, Bitran JD, et al. Acute nonlymphocytic leukemia following etoposide and cisplatin combination chemotherapy for advanced non-small-cell carcinoma of the lung. Blood
1987;70:1412.
95. Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Daugaard G, Hansen SW, et al. Increased risk of myelodysplasia and leukaemia after etoposide, cisplatin, and bleomycin for germ-cell tumours. Lancet 1991;338:359.
96. Boshoff C, Begent RH, Oliver RT, et al. Secondary tumours following etoposide containing therapy for germ cell cancer. Ann Oncol 1995;6:35.
97. Pui CH, Ribeiro RC, Hancock ML, et al. Acute myeloid leukemia in children treated with epipodophyllotoxins for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1682.
98. Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Pedersen M, Roulston D, Philip P. Different genetic pathways in leukemogenesis for patients presenting with therapy-related myelodysplasia and therapy-related acute
myeloid leukemia. Blood 1995;86:3542.
99. Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Philip P. Balanced translocations involving chromosome bands 11q23 and 21q22 are highly characteristic of myelodysplasia and leukemia following therapy with
cytostatic agents targeting at DNA-topoisomerase II [Letter]. Blood 1991;78:1147.
100. Rubin CM, Arthur DC, Woods WG, et al. Therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia in children: correlation between chromosomal abnormalities and prior therapy.
Blood 1991;78:2982.
101. Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Sigsgaard TC, Nielsen D, et al. Acute monocytic or myelomonocytic leukemia with balanced chromosome translocations to band 11q23 after therapy with
4-epi-doxorubicin and cisplatin or cyclophosphamide for breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:1444.
102. Sandoval C, Pui CH, Bowman LC, et al. Secondary acute myeloid leukemia in children previously treated with alkylating agents, intercalating topoisomerase II inhibitors, and irradiation. J Clin
Oncol 1993;11:1039.
103. Diamandidou E, Buzdar AU, Smith TL, et al. Treatment-related leukemia in breast cancer patients treated with fluorouracil-doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide combination adjuvant chemotherapy:
the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center experience. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2722.
104. Breslow NE, Takashima JR, Whitton JA, et al. Second malignant neoplasms following treatment for Wilms' tumor: a report from the National Wilms' Tumor Study Group. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:1851.
105. Hawkins MM, Wilson LM, Stovall MA, et al. Epipodophyllotoxins, alkylating agents, and radiation and risk of secondary leukaemia after childhood cancer. BMJ 1992;304:951.
106. Smith MA, Rubinstein L, Anderson JR, et al. Secondary leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome after treatment with epipodophyllotoxins. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:569.
107. Anderson RD, Berger NA. International Commission for Protection Against Environmental Mutagens and Carcinogens. Mutagenicity and carcinogenicity of topoisomerase-interactive agents
[Review]. Mutat Res 1994;309:109.
108. Rivera GK, Pui CH, Santana VM, Pratt CB, Crist WM. Epipodophyllotoxins in the treatment of childhood cancer [Review]. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1994;34[Suppl]:S89.
109. Davies SM. Mechanisms of cytotoxicity and leukemogenesis: topoisomerase II inhibitors and alkylating agents. Proceedings of the American Society of Clinical Oncology Educational Symposia
31st annual meeting, Los Angeles, May 2023, 1995. Los Angeles: American Society of Clinical Oncology, 1995:204.
110. Cheson BD, Vena DA, Barrett J, Freidlin B. Second malignancies as a consequence of nucleoside analog therapy for chronic lymphoid leukemias. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2454.

111. Relling MV, Rubnitz JE, Rivera GK, et al. High incidence of secondary brain tumours after radiotherapy and antimetabolites. Lancet 1999;354:34.
112. Felix CA. Chemotherapy-related second cancers. In: Neugut AI, Meadows AT, Robinson E, eds. Multiple primary cancers. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999:137.
113. Felix CA, Walker AH, Lange BJ, et al. Association of CYP3A4 genotype with treatment-related leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:13176.
114. Ben-Yehuda D, Krichevsky S, Caspi O, et al. Microsatellite instability and p53 mutations in therapy-related leukemia suggest mutator phenotype. Blood 1996;88:4296.
115. Zhu YM, Das-Gupta EP, Russell NH. Microsatellite instability and p53 mutations are associated with abnormal expression of the MSH2 gene in adult acute leukemia. Blood 1999;94:733.
116. Alberts DS. Protection by amifostine of cyclophosphamide-induced myelosuppression [Review]. Semin Oncol 1999;26[Suppl 7]:37.
117. Castiglione F, Dalla Mola A, Porcile G. Protection of normal tissues from radiation and cytotoxic therapy: the development of amifostine [Review]. Tumori 1999;85:85.
118. Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Ersboll J, Hansen VL, et al. Carcinoma of the urinary bladder after treatment with cyclophosphamide for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. N Engl J Med 1988;318:1028.
119. Kaldor JM, Day NE, Kittelmann B, et al. Bladder tumours following chemotherapy and radiotherapy for ovarian cancer: a case-control study. Int J Cancer 1995;63:1.
120. Kaldor JM, Day NE, Bell J, et al. Lung cancer following Hodgkin's disease: a case-control study. Int J Cancer 1992;52:677.
121. Tucker MA, Murray N, Shaw EG, et al. Second primary cancers related to smoking and treatment of small-cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer Working Cadre. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1782.
122. Birdwell SH, Hancock SL, Varghese A, Cox RS, Hoppe RT. Gastrointestinal cancer after treatment of Hodgkin's disease. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997;37:67.
123. Newton WA Jr, Meadows AT, Shimada H, Bunin GR, Vawter GF. Bone sarcomas as second malignant neoplasms following childhood cancer. Cancer 1991;67:193.
124. Schilsky RL. Biochemical pharmacology of chemotherapeutic drugs used as radiation enhancers [Review]. Semin Oncol 1992;19[Suppl 11]:2.
125. Arseneau JC, Sponzo RW, Levin DL, et al. Nonlymphomatous malignant tumors complicating Hodgkin's disease. Possible association with intensive therapy. N Engl J Med 1972;287:1119.
126. Bonadonna G, De Lena M, Banfi A, Lattuada A. Secondary neoplasms in malignant lymphomas after intensive therapy. N Engl J Med 1973;288:1242.
127. van Leeuwen FE, Swerdlow AJ, Valagussa P, Tucker MA. Second cancers after treatment of Hodgkin's disease. In: Mauch PM, Armitage JO, Diehl V, Hoppe RT, Weiss LM, eds. Hodgkin's
disease. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999:607.
128. Hancock SL, Hoppe RT. Long-term complications of treatment and causes of mortality after Hodgkin's disease. Semin Radiat Oncol 1996;6:225.
129. Valagussa PA, Bonadonna G. Carcinogenic effects of cancer treatment. In: Peckham M, Pinedo H, Veronesi U, eds. Oxford textbook of oncology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995:2348.
130. Schellong G, Riepenhausen M, Creutzig U, et al. Low risk of secondary leukemias after chemotherapy without mechlorethamine in childhood Hodgkin's disease. German-Austrian Pediatric
Hodgkin's Disease Group. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2247.
131. Andrieu JM, Ifrah N, Payen C, et al. Increased risk of secondary acute nonlymphocytic leukemia after extended-field radiation therapy combined with MOPP chemotherapy for Hodgkin's
disease [Review]. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1148.
132. van Leeuwen FE, Somers R, Hart AA. Splenectomy in Hodgkin's disease and second leukaemias [Letter]. Lancet 1987;2:210.
133. Penn I. Cancers complicating organ transplantation [Editorial; comment]. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1767.
134. van Rijswijk RE, Sybesma JP, Kater L. A prospective study of the changes in immune status following radiotherapy for Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1984;53:62.
135. Krikorian JG, Burke JS, Rosenberg SA, Kaplan HS. Occurrence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma after therapy for Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1979;300:452.
136. Prosper F, Robledo C, Cuesta B, et al. Incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in patients treated for Hodgkin's disease. Leuk Lymphoma 1994;12:457.
137. Hancock SL, Cox RS, McDougall IR. Thyroid diseases after treatment of Hodgkin's disease. N Engl J Med 1991;325:599.
138. Tucker MA, Misfeldt D, Coleman CN, Clark WH Jr, Rosenberg SA. Cutaneous malignant melanoma after Hodgkin's disease. Ann Intern Med 1985;102:37.
139. Donaldson SS, Hancock SL. Second cancers after Hodgkin's disease in childhood [Editorial; comment]. N Engl J Med 1996;334:792.
140. Goss PE, Sierra S. Current perspectives on radiation-induced breast cancer [Review]. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:338.
141. Wolf J, Schellong G, Diehl V. Breast cancer following treatment of Hodgkin's diseasemore reasons for less radiotherapy? [Editorial; comment]. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:2293.
142. Sankila R, Garwicz S, Olsen JH, et al. Risk of subsequent malignant neoplasms among 1,641 Hodgkin's disease patients diagnosed in childhood and adolescence: a population-based cohort
study in the five Nordic countries. Association of the Nordic Cancer Registries and the Nordic Society of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1442.
143. Wolden SL, Lamborn KR, Cleary SF, Tate DJ, Donaldson SS. Second cancers following pediatric Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:536.
144. Aisenberg AC, Finkelstein DM, Doppke KP, et al. High risk of breast carcinoma after irradiation of young women with Hodgkin's disease. Cancer 1997;79:1203.
145. Land CE. Studies of cancer and radiation dose among atomic bomb survivors. The example of breast cancer. JAMA 1995;274:402.
146. Zarrabi MH. Association of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) and second neoplasms. Semin Oncol 1980;7:340.
147. MacDougall BK, Weinerman BH, Kemel S. Second malignancies in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer 1981;48:1299.
148. SEER cancer statistics review, 19731994. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, 1997.
149. Travis LB, Curtis RE, Boice JD Jr, Hankey BF, Fraumeni JF Jr. Second cancers following non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer 1991;67:2002.
150. Travis LB, Curtis RE, Glimelius B, et al. Second cancers among long-term survivors of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1932.
151. Gomez GA, Aggarwal KK, Han T. Post-therapeutic acute malignant myeloproliferative syndrome and acute nonlymphocytic leukemia in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer 1982;50:2285.
152. Pedersen-Bjergaard J, Ersboll J, Sorensen HM, et al. Risk of acute nonlymphocytic leukemia and preleukemia in patients treated with cyclophosphamide for non-Hodgkin's lymphomas.
Comparison with results obtained in patients treated for Hodgkin's disease and ovarian carcinoma with other alkylating agents. Ann Intern Med 1985;103:195.
153. Lavey RS, Eby NL, Prosnitz LR. Impact on second malignancy risk of the combined use of radiation and chemotherapy for lymphomas. Cancer 1990;66:80.
154. Lishner M, Slingerland J, Barr J, et al. Second malignant neoplasms in patients with non Hodgkin's lymphoma. Hematol Oncol 1991;9:169.
155. Travis LB, Weeks J, Curtis RE, et al. Leukemia following low-dose total body irradiation and chemotherapy for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:565.
156. Mendenhall NP, Noyes WD, Million RR. Total body irradiation for stage IIIV non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: ten-year follow-up. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:67.
157. Rubin P, Constine LS III, Scarantino CW. The paradoxes in patterns and mechanism of bone marrow regeneration after irradiation. II. Total body irradiation. Radiother Oncol 1984;2:227.
158. Miller JS, Arthur DC, Litz CE, et al. Myelodysplastic syndrome after autologous bone marrow transplantation: an additional late complication of curative cancer therapy. Blood 1994;83:3780.
159. Stone RM, Neuberg D, Soiffer R, et al. Myelodysplastic syndrome as a late complication following autologous bone marrow transplantation for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:2535.
160. Friedberg JW, Neuberg D, Stone RM, et al. Outcome in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome after autologous bone marrow transplantation for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:3128.
161. Traweek ST, Slovak ML, Nademanee AP, et al. Myelodysplasia and acute myeloid leukemia occurring after autologous bone marrow transplantation for lymphoma [Review]. Leuk Lymphoma
1996;20:365.
162. Abruzzese E, Radford JE, Miller JS, et al. Detection of abnormal pretransplant clones in progenitor cells of patients who developed myelodysplasia after autologous transplantation. Blood
1999;94:1814.
163. Einhorn LH. Testicular cancer as a model for a curable neoplasm: The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Foundation Award Lecture. Cancer Res 1981;41:3275.
164. Fossa SD, Horwich A, Russell JM, et al. Optimal planning target volume for stage I testicular seminoma: a Medical Research Council randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1146.
165. Fossa SD, Langmark F, Aass N, et al. Second nongerm cell malignancies after radiotherapy of testicular cancer with or without chemotherapy. Br J Cancer 1990;61:639.
166. van Leeuwen FE, Stiggelbout AM, van den Belt-Dusebout AW, et al. Second cancer risk following testicular cancer: a follow-up study of 1,909 patients. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:415.
167. Bokemeyer C, Schmoll HJ. Treatment of testicular cancer and the development of secondary malignancies [Review]. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:283.
168. Griem ML, Kleinerman RA, Boice JD Jr, et al. Cancer following radiotherapy for peptic ulcer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:842.
169. Osterlind A, Berthelsen JG, Abildgaard N, et al. Risk of bilateral testicular germ cell cancer in Denmark: 19601984. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:1391.
170. Nichols CR, Roth BJ, Heerema N, Griep J, Tricot G. Hematologic neoplasia associated with primary mediastinal germ-cell tumors. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1425.
171. Oliver RT. Testicular cancer [Review]. Curr Opin Oncol 1994;6:285.
172. Nichols CR, Breeden ES, Loehrer PJ, Williams SD, Einhorn LH. Secondary leukemia associated with a conventional dose of etoposide: review of serial germ cell tumor protocols. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1993;85:36.
173. Bajorin DF, Motzer RJ, Rodriguez E, Murphy B, Bosl GJ. Acute nonlymphocytic leukemia in germ cell tumor patients treated with etoposide-containing chemotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst
1993;85:60.
174. Bokemeyer C, Schmoll HJ, Kuczyk MA, Beyer J, Siegert W. Risk of secondary leukemia following high cumulative doses of etoposide during chemotherapy for testicular cancer [Letter]. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1995;87:58.
175. Bokemeyer C, Schmoll HJ. Secondary neoplasms following treatment of malignant germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:1703.
176. Roth BJ, Greist A, Kubilis PS, Williams SD, Einhorn LH. Cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy for disseminated germ cell tumors: long-term follow-up. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1239.
177. Ozols RF, Ihde DC, Linehan WM, et al. A randomized trial of standard chemotherapy vs a high-dose chemotherapy regimen in the treatment of poor prognosis nonseminomatous germ-cell
tumors. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1031.
178. Travis LB, Curtis RE, Boice JD Jr, et al. Second malignant neoplasms among long-term survivors of ovarian cancer. Cancer Res 1996;56:1564.
179. Greene MH, Boice JD Jr, Greer BE, Blessing JA, Dembo AJ. Acute nonlymphocytic leukemia after therapy with alkylating agents for ovarian cancer: a study of five randomized clinical trials. N
Engl J Med 1982;307:1416.
180. NIH consensus conference. Ovarian cancer. Screening, treatment, and follow-up. NIH Consensus Development Panel on Ovarian Cancer [Review]. JAMA 1995;273:491.
181. Vokes EE, Weichselbaum RR. Concomitant chemoradiotherapy: rationale and clinical experience in patients with solid tumors [published erratum appears in J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1447]. J Clin
Oncol 1990;8:911.
182. Neijt JP. New therapy for ovarian cancer [Editorial; comment]. N Engl J Med 1996;334:50.
183. Harvey EB, Brinton LA. Second cancer following cancer of the breast in Connecticut, 193582. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1985;68:99.
184. Adami HO, Bergstrom R, Hansen J. Age at first primary as a determinant of the incidence of bilateral breast cancer. Cumulative and relative risks in a population-based case-control study.
Cancer 1985;55:643.
185. Teppo L, Pukkala E, Saxen E. Multiple canceran epidemiologic exercise in Finland. J Natl Cancer Inst 1985;75:207.
186. Fisher B, Costantino JP, Redmond CK, et al. Endometrial cancer in tamoxifen-treated breast cancer patients: findings from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP)
B-14 [Prior annotation incorrect]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:527.
187. Rutqvist LE, Johansson H, Signomklao T, et al. Adjuvant tamoxifen therapy for early stage breast cancer and second primary alignancies. Stockholm Breast Cancer Study Group. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1995;87:645.
188. Neugut AI, Robinson E, Lee WC, et al. Lung cancer after radiation therapy for breast cancer. Cancer 1993;71:3054.
189. Ewertz M, Mouridsen HT. Second cancer following cancer of the female breast in Denmark, 194380. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1985;68:325.
190. Ahsan H, Neugut AI. Radiation therapy for breast cancer and increased risk for esophageal carcinoma. Ann Intern Med 1998;128:114.
191. Karlsson P, Holmberg E, Samuelsson A, Johansson KA, Wallgren A. Soft tissue sarcoma after treatment for breast cancera Swedish population-based study. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:2068.
192. Wijnmaalen A, van Ooijen B, van Geel BN, Henzen-Logmans SC, Treurniet-Donker AD. Angiosarcoma of the breast following lumpectomy, axillary lymph node dissection, and radiotherapy for
primary breast cancer: three case reports and a review of the literature [Review]. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;26:135.
193. Strobbe LJ, Peterse HL, van Tinteren H, Wijnmaalen A, Rutgers EJ. Angiosarcoma of the breast after conservation therapy for invasive cancer, the incidence and outcome. An unforseen
sequela. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1998;47:101.
194. Fisher B, Rockette H, Fisher ER, et al. Leukemia in breast cancer patients following adjuvant chemotherapy or postoperative radiation: the NSABP experience. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1640.
195. Tamoxifen for early breast cancer: an overview of the randomised trials. Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group. Lancet 1998;351:1451.
196. Polychemotherapy for early breast cancer: an overview of the randomised trials. Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group. Lancet 1998;352:930.
197. Chaudary MA, Millis RR, Hoskins EO, et al. Bilateral primary breast cancer: a prospective study of disease incidence. Br J Surg 1984;71:711.
198. Kurtz JM, Amalric R, Brandone H, Ayme Y, Spitalier JM. Contralateral breast cancer and other second malignancies in patients treated by breast-conserving therapy with radiation. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1988;15:277.
199. Storm HH, Andersson M, Boice JD Jr, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy and risk of contralateral breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1245.

200. Curtis RE, Boice JD Jr, Shriner DA, Hankey BF, Fraumeni JF Jr. Second cancers after adjuvant tamoxifen therapy for breast cancer: brief communication. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:832.
201. O'Regan R, Jordan VC, Gradishar WJ. Tamoxifen and contralateral breast cancer. J Am Coll Surg 1999;188:678.
202. Bernstein JL, Thompson WD, Risch N, Holford TR. Risk factors predicting the incidence of second primary breast cancer among women diagnosed with a first primary breast cancer. Am J
Epidemiol 1992;136:925.
203. Valagussa P, Moliterni A, Terenziani M, Zambetti M, Bonadonna G. Second malignancies following CMF-based adjuvant chemotherapy in resectable breast cancer. Ann Oncol 1994;5:803.
204. Tallman MS, Gray R, Bennett JM, et al. Leukemogenic potential of adjuvant chemotherapy for early-stage breast cancer: the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group experience. J Clin Oncol
1995;13:1557.
205. Castiglione M, Goldhirsch A. Second tumours after breast cancer: is it still too soon to tell? [Editorial]. Ann Oncol 1994;5:785.
206. van Leeuwen FE, Benraadt J, Coebergh JW, et al. Risk of endometrial cancer after tamoxifen treatment of breast cancer. Lancet 1994;343:448.
207. Sasco AJ, Chaplain G, Saez S, Amoros E. Case-control study of endometrial cancer following breast cancer: effect of tamoxifen and radiotherapeutic castration. Epidemiology 1996;7:9(abst).
208. Some pharmaceutical drugs. IARC Monogr Eval Carcinog Risks Hum 1996;66:35.
209. Bernstein L, Deapen D, Cerhan JR, et al. Tamoxifen therapy for breast cancer and endometrial cancer risk. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1654.
210. Fisher B, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Tamoxifen for prevention of breast cancer: report of the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project P-1 Study. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90:1371.
211. Bergman L, Beelen MLR, Gallee MPW, Benraadt J, van Leeuwen FE. The effect of tamoxifen on the risk and prognosis of endometrial cancer following breast cancer: a study with 309 cases.
Lancet 2000 (in press).
212. Mignotte H, Lasset C, Bonadona V, et al. Iatrogenic risks of endometrial carcinoma after treatment for breast cancer in a large French case-control study. Federation Nationale des Centres de
Lutte Contre le Cancer (FNCLCC). Int J Cancer 1998;76:325.
213. Gottardis MM, Robinson SP, Satyaswaroop PG, Jordan VC. Contrasting actions of tamoxifen on endometrial and breast tumor growth in the athymic mouse. Cancer Res 1988;48:812.
214. Nayfield SG, Karp JE, Ford LG, Dorr FA, Kramer BS. Potential role of tamoxifen in prevention of breast cancer [Review]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;83:1450.
215. De Muylder X, Neven P, De Somer M, et al. Endometrial lesions in patients undergoing tamoxifen therapy. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1991;36:127.
216. Fornander T, Hellstrom AC, Moberger B. Descriptive clinicopathologic study of 17 patients with endometrial cancer during or after adjuvant tamoxifen in early breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst
1993;85:1850.
217. Magriples U, Naftolin F, Schwartz PE, Carcangiu ML. High-grade endometrial carcinoma in tamoxifen-treated breast cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:485.
218. Greaves P, Goonetilleke R, Nunn G, Topham J, Orton T. Two-year carcinogenicity study of tamoxifen in Alderley Park Wistar-derived rats. Cancer Res 1993;53:3919.
219. Williams GM, Iatropoulos MJ, Djordjevic MV, Kaltenberg OP. The triphenylethylene drug tamoxifen is a strong liver carcinogen in the rat. Carcinogenesis 1993;14:315.
220. Newcomb PA, Solomon C, White E. Tamoxifen and risk of large bowel cancer in women with breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1999;53:271.
221. Neugut AI, Murray T, Santos J, et al. Increased risk of lung cancer after breast cancer radiation therapy in cigarette smokers. Cancer 1994;73:1615.
222. Inskip PD, Boice JD Jr. Radiotherapy-induced lung cancer among women who smoke [Editorial; comment] [published erratum appears in Cancer 1994;73:2456]. Cancer 1994;73:1541.
223. Olsen JH, Garwicz S, Hertz H, et al. Second malignant neoplasms after cancer in childhood or adolescence. Nordic Society of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology Association of the Nordic
Cancer Registries. BMJ 1993;307:1030.
224. Hawkins MM, Draper GJ, Kingston JE. Incidence of second primary tumours among childhood cancer survivors. Br J Cancer 1987;56:339.
225. Meadows AT, Baum E, Fossati-Bellani F, et al. Second malignant neoplasms in children: an update from the Late Effects Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:532.
226. Friend SH, Bernards R, Rogelj S, et al. A human DNA segment with properties of the gene that predisposes to retinoblastoma and osteosarcoma. Nature 1986;323:643.
227. Knudson AG Jr, Meadows AT, Nichols WW, Hill R. Chromosomal deletion and retinoblastoma. N Engl J Med 1976;295:1120.
228. Brachman DG, Hallahan DE, Beckett MA, Yandell DW, Weichselbaum RR. p53 gene mutations and abnormal retinoblastoma protein in radiation-induced human sarcomas. Cancer Res
1991;51:6393.
229. Weichselbaum RR, Beckett M, Diamond A. Some retinoblastomas, osteosarcomas, and soft tissue sarcomas may share a common etiology. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:2106.
230. Neglia JP, Meadows AT, Robison LL, et al. Second neoplasms after acute lymphoblastic leukemia in childhood. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1330.
231. Rosso P, Terracini B, Fears TR, et al. Second malignant tumors after elective end of therapy for a first cancer in childhood: a multicenter study in Italy. Int J Cancer 1994;59:451.
232. Walter AW, Hancock ML, Pui CH, et al. Secondary brain tumors in children treated for acute lymphoblastic leukemia at St Jude Children's Research Hospital. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3761.
233. Kreissman SG, Gelber RD, Cohen HJ, et al. Incidence of secondary acute myelogenous leukemia after treatment of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Cancer 1992; 70:2208.
234. Winick NJ, McKenna RW, Shuster JJ, et al. Secondary acute myeloid leukemia in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia treated with etoposide. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:209.
235. Sugita K, Furukawa T, Tsuchida M, et al. High frequency of etoposide (VP-16)-related secondary leukemia in children with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Am J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 1993;15:99.
236. Heyn R, Khan F, Ensign LG, et al. Acute myeloid leukemia in patients treated for rhabdomyosarcoma with cyclophosphamide and low-dose etoposide on Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study
III: an interim report. Med Pediatr Oncol 1994;23:99.
237. Chen CL, Fuscoe JC, Liu Q, et al. Relationship between cytotoxicity and site-specific DNA recombination after in vitro exposure of leukemia cells to etoposide. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1840.
238. Le Vu B, de Vathaire F, Shamsaldin A, et al. Radiation dose, chemotherapy and risk of osteosarcoma after solid tumours during childhood. Int J Cancer 1998;77:370.
239. Strong LC, Herson J, Osborne BM, Sutow WW. Risk of radiation-related subsequent malignant tumors in survivors of Ewing's sarcoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1979;62:1401.
240. Smith MB, Xue H, Strong L, et al. Forty-year experience with second malignancies after treatment of childhood cancer: analysis of outcome following the development of the second
malignancy. J Pediatr Surg 1993;28:1342.
241. Sandler ES, Friedman DJ, Mustafa MM, et al. Treatment of children with epipodophyllotoxin-induced secondary acute myeloid leukemia. Cancer 1997;79:1049.

SECTION 55.8 Miscellaneous Toxicities
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 55.8
Miscellaneous Toxicities
RAYMOND B. WEISS
Neurotoxicity
Vincristine , Vinblastine, and Vinorelbine
Cisplatin and Oxaliplatin
Cytarabine
Ifosfamide
5-Fluorouracil
Methotrexate
Paclitaxel and Docetaxel
Altretamine (Hexamethylmelamine)
Procarbazine
Aldesleukin (Interleukin-2)
Fludarabine , Cladribine, and Pentostatin
Other Agents
Nephrotoxicity
Cisplatin and Carboplatin
Mitomycin
Methotrexate
Streptozocin , Carmustine, and Lomustine
Ifosfamide
Other Agents
Hepatotoxicity
Hepatocellular Dysfunction
Venoocclusive Disease
Chronic Fibrosis
Hypersensitivity Reactions
Vascular Toxicity
Chapter References

NEUROTOXICITY
VINCRISTINE , VINBLASTINE, AND VINORELBINE
The first drug class to be recognized as having neurotoxicity was the vinca alkaloids, especially vincristine. Vincristine is unique among the antitumor agents in that
neurotoxicity is the sole dose-limiting problem. The neurologic injury can occur in the peripheral, central, or autonomic nervous systems. 1,2
The most common and initial manifestations of neurotoxicity are depression of the deep tendon reflexes and paresthesias of the distal extremities. The Achilles'
tendon reflexes and the fingertips are the usual respective initial sites of abnormalities. Loss of the tendon reflexes is usually asymptomatic. The paresthesias
commonly progress proximally as vincristine therapy is continued and may involve the entire hands or feet. Despite the presence of peripheral paresthesias, vibration
sense, position sense, pinprick sensation, and two-point discrimination are generally unaffected.
Motor dysfunction and gait disorders are initially manifested as lower extremity weakness. Footdrop may ensue, and if vincristine is continued, weakness to the point
of paraparesis may develop. However, when vincristine and corticosteroids are administered together, steroid myopathy often occurs and causes similar symptoms of
weakness, which should not be ascribed to vincristine neurotoxicity and result in a dose modification of the wrong drug. 3 Patients with hereditary neuropathies are
especially prone to the additive effects of vincristine neuropathy. 4 Severe bone pain (especially in the mandible) may occur acutely a few hours after drug
administration but usually subsides after a few days. 5
Cranial nerves may be affected and cause ophthalmoplegia and facial palsy. Toxicity to the parasympathetic nervous system is manifested by constipation and
difficult micturition, which can progress to paralytic ileus and bladder atony. Autonomic neuropathy can produce orthostatic hypotension (which can be symptomatic or
clinically silent 6) and erection/ejaculatory dysfunction. 7 Other rare, but severe, neurotoxic manifestations observed from vincristine include cortical blindness 8 and
laryngeal nerve (with vocal cord) paralysis, 9 resulting in dysphonia and even aphonia.
Neurotoxicity from the vinca alkaloids, especially vincristine, is both an individual dose and a cumulative dose phenomena. The usual practice in adults is to limit an
individual dose of vincristine to 2 mg. Studies of higher vincristine dosing 7 have shown a very high rate of neurotoxicity. No effective prevention or treatment has been
developed except to stop therapy and wait for neurologic recovery. The neuropathy symptoms may persist as long as 3 or 4 years after cessation of therapy, but they
usually wane to a point where they are no longer troublesome to the patient. 10 Empiric vitamin therapy is ineffective. Intestinal dysfunction from autonomic neuropathy
may be improved by metoclopramide therapy. 11
Vincristine binds to the B subunit of tubulin, causing disruption of microtubule function in neuronal axons. Electrophysiologic studies indicate distal axonal dysfunction,
and nerve conduction testing shows sensory nerves are most affected with a reduced amplitude of nerve action potentials. Histologic changes are generally those of
axonal degeneration.
The vincristine analogues vinblastine and vinorelbine also have neurotoxicity potential. The primary dose-limiting toxicity of both vinblastine and vinorelbine is
myelosuppression, and neurotoxicity is less common than that occurring from vincristine. The form and range of neurotoxicity manifestations from these analogues are
similar to those of vincristine, and again, the degree of dysfunction is related to both individual and cumulative drug doses. However, vinblastine and vinorelbine seem
to produce more autonomic effects, resulting in severe constipation and paralytic ileus. 12
Concurrent use of two neurotoxic agents has been reported to cause enhanced neurotoxicity or no such toxicity, depending on the drug involved. The combination of
vinorelbine and cisplatin seems not to increase the incidence or severity of neuropathy. 13 However, when vinorelbine is used either in combination with, or
sequentially after, paclitaxel, there is more potential for severe neuropathy. 14,15 In addition, the combination of vincristine and a granulocyte growth factor may
precipitate a severe neuropathy involving primarily the legs. 16
CISPLATIN AND OXALIPLATIN
Although nephrotoxicity is a major and cumulative dose-limiting toxicity of cisplatin, neurotoxicity is also a common problem and can be dose-limiting for both single
and cumulative doses, but primarily the latter. 17,18,19 and 20 Cisplatin-induced neuropathy can be manifested as sensory peripheral neuropathy, Lhermitte's sign,
autonomic neuropathy, grand mal or focal seizures, encephalopathy, transient cortical blindness, retrobulbar neuritis, and retinal injury. 17,21,22
The incidence of neurotoxicity ranges up to 100%, depending on individual and cumulative drug dose, treatment duration, concurrent or prior neurotoxic drugs used,
the presence of other medical conditions, and possibly gender (women being more sensitive). 17,18 A cumulative cisplatin dose of 300 to 500 mg/m 2 is the range in
which toxicity most often occurs.17,20

Peripheral neuropathy similar to that induced by vincristine is the most common form of cisplatin neurotoxicity. Vincristine produces initial paresthesias in the fingers,
whereas cisplatin most often affects the toes and feet. 23 Loss of the Achilles' tendon reflexes is an early sign, and continued treatment leads to sensory ataxia and
loss of proximal deep tendon reflexes and vibration sense. Although muscle cramps are a common symptom, motor function is usually not affected.
The pathophysiology of cisplatin neurotoxicity is not known, but it is probably related to the accumulation of inorganic platinum within neurons, which may be
irreversible. An autopsy study 24 of platinum concentrations and histopathologic changes in the dorsal root ganglia of cisplatin-treated patients demonstrated a
correlation of the tissue level of platinum with neuronal histologic changes and clinical neurotoxicity.
Treatment is discontinuation of therapy, but neurotoxic symptoms may last for months after cisplatin therapy is discontinued. The electrophysiologic test abnormalities
may last for several years and perhaps indefinitely. The symptoms and signs may even progress despite discontinuing treatment. 25 Amitriptyline has been used as
treatment for the neuropathies related to use of antitumor agents, but no clinical trials in this clinical setting evaluating efficacy in double-blind fashion have been
performed. Because treatment of neurotoxicity is of limited benefit, prevention using protective agents has been extensively explored. 26 Amifostine, a nephrotoxicity
protectant, also provides significant protection against peripheral neuropathy when used in conjunction with cisplatin. 27 Dimesna is a new drug with exceptional
promise as a neuroprotective agent and is in advanced clinical development for this indication. 28
Concurrent use of cisplatin with paclitaxel has demonstrated an enhanced potential for neurotoxicity, although variability exists, probably related to the drug doses
and schedules employed. At the doses of these two drugs that are commonly used, more than 50% of patients may develop neuropathy, and this problem is often
dose-limiting.29,30 When patients receiving this drug combination are closely monitored, neurotoxicity may be evident after just two cycles in nearly all cases. 30
Neuropathy is the most common toxicity of the cisplatin analogue oxaliplatin, and cumulative neurotoxicity is usually dose-limiting. The manifestations are peripheral
sensory neuropathy and muscle cramps similar to that of cisplatin, but pharyngolaryngeal dysesthesias (presenting as dyspnea and dysphagia) are a unique symptom
seen with this drug. 31 These neuropathic problems may be triggered by touching cold surfaces (finger paresthesias) or drinking cold liquids (pharyngolaryngeal
symptoms). Most patients have a nearly full recovery within 6 months after discontinuing therapy. 32
CYTARABINE
Cytarabine is administered both intravenously and intrathecally, and both routes can produce neurotoxicity. Manifestations include cerebellar dysfunction, seizures,
generalized encephalopathy, peripheral neuropathy, necrotizing leukoencephalopathy, spinal myelopathy, basal ganglia necrosis, and pseudobulbar palsy. 33
The highest incidence (15% to 37%) occurs in patients receiving high-dose cytarabine therapy (i.e., more than 1 g/m 2 in multiple doses). 33,34 The toxicity is generally
acute and not related to cumulative drug doses, in contrast to neuropathy associated with cisplatin and vincristine. Risk factors for neurotoxicity are age older than 50
years, drug dose, prior cytarabine treatment, and renal dysfunction. 33,35
Cerebellar effects (dysarthria, ataxia, and dysmetria) are the most common form of neurotoxicity. These symptoms often occur within days of first treatment and are
accompanied by headache, altered mentation, memory loss, and somnolence. Seizures have rarely occurred. Peripheral neuropathy can also occur but is rare.
Symptoms range from a purely sensory neuropathy to sensorimotor polyneuropathies in a glove-stocking distribution. 33 The neuropathy can even progress to a
quadriparesis, with ventilatory support being necessary. 36 Intrathecal cytarabine can produce an ascending myelopathy. 37 All of these neurologic abnormalities (even
the peripheral neuropathy) can progress to coma and death. 33,35,38
Recovery from the neurologic effects usually occurs within a few days after discontinuing cytarabine therapy. There is no known treatment. Serial radiographic studies
of the brain have shown improvement in cerebellar abnormalities after discontinuing treatment, 39 but progressive atrophy may also occur after a few months and is
associated with persistent symptoms.40 Instances 41 have been reported of ascending myelopathy with paraplegia from intrathecal cytarabine in which complete
recovery took place within 1 hour after onset.
The mechanism of such neurotoxicity is not known. When high drug doses are used, cytotoxic concentrations of cytarabine reach the cerebrospinal fluid, but parent
drug and metabolites are cleared more slowly from spinal fluid than blood, a likely explanation for the dose relationship of this toxicity. 42 Neuron function and survival
appears to be inhibited by cytarabine through blocking of an essential deoxynucleoside. 43 Why the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum are particularly prone to injury from
intravenous cytarabine, even in experimental animals, 44 is unknown.
IFOSFAMIDE
Ifosfamide and cyclophosphamide have similar chemical structures, but ifosfamide induces neurotoxicity (as it does nephrotoxicity), whereas cyclophosphamide does
not. Acute symptoms are visual and auditory hallucinations, vivid dreams, logorrhea, incontinence, dizziness, palilalia, confusion, perseveration, agitation, personality
changes, somnolence, cerebellar and cranial nerve dysfunction, hemiparesis, seizures, coma, and occasionally death. 45,46,47 and 48 Peripheral neuropathy and
extrapyramidal abnormalities, such as myoclonus and muscular spasticity, also have been reported. The onset is acute up to 5 days after beginning ifosfamide, and
recovery usually occurs within a few days after discontinuing therapy. Memory and affect disorders may occasionally persist. No cumulative-dose neurotoxic effects
have been reported, but re-treatment with ifosfamide may again precipitate the same acute toxicity manifestations.
Significant neurotoxic abnormalities occur in approximately 10% of patients treated with ifosfamide. The incidence varies depending on how carefully patients are
monitored for this problem, the ifosfamide dose and method of administration used, and the presence of various risk factors. Such risk factors are low serum albumin,
any degree of renal dysfunction, prior administration of cisplatin (probably resulting in subclinical renal dysfunction), poor performance status, the presence of central
nervous system tumor, and age (children being more susceptible than adults). 45,48,49 High doses may accentuate symptoms of an underlying mild neuropathy and
cause severe and painful paresthesias. 50 For unknown reasons, oral administration of ifosfamide has more neurotoxic potential than the intravenous route. 51
The etiology of this neurotoxicity is probably multifactorial and is due to one or more metabolites of ifosfamide that are produced in high quantities. 52
Cyclophosphamide may not produce neurotoxicity because metabolites with encephalopathic potential are a minor component of its degradation. Effective treatment
(besides discontinuing the ifosfamide) has been intravenous diazepam 53 and methylene blue. 52,54 Such treatment can produce dramatic reversal of the neurotoxic
manifestations. Means of prevention include a continuous infusion schedule of drug administration and concurrent use of methylene blue. 54
5-FLUOROURACIL
5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) has been known to cause neurotoxicity since the earliest clinical trials were conducted with this drug. Cerebellar dysfunction with findings of gait
ataxia, nystagmus, dysmetria, and dysarthria is the most common form of neurotoxicity, but confusion, somnolence, seizures, coma, and peripheral neuropathy also
have been observed. 55,56 and 57 The incidence is approximately 5%, and it may occur with any of the administration schedules in common use. Neurotoxicity from this
drug is acute in onset, and a cumulative-dose effect has not been observed. It is now common practice to administer leucovorin in combination with 5-FU to enhance
antitumor activity. Leucovorin may itself be the etiology 58 of some of the instances of seizures occurring in conjunction with administration of these two drugs.
The combination of 5-FU and levamisole may produce a multifocal leukoencephalopathy manifested by agitation, confusion, short-term memory loss, diplopia,
cerebellar dysfunction, and expressive aphasia. 59 Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain shows multiple, enhanced, white matter lesions (sometimes
ring-enhanced) in the cerebrum, and histologic examination shows focal demyelination. Such toxicity has not been reported when 5-FU has been used alone, but it
has occurred with use of levamisole alone. 60 Therefore, the levamisole in this adjuvant therapy combination is probably the most culpable in producing these cerebral
effects.
The etiology of 5-FU neurotoxicity is not well understood. 5-FU metabolites have been shown to have neuropathic action in experimental animals. 61 However, it may
also be due to parent drug, and not metabolites, because patients have been reported who developed severe toxic symptoms due to a genetic deficiency of the initial
enzyme necessary for catabolizing 5-FU. 62 Patients with complete or partial deficiency of this enzyme, dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, appear particularly subject

to 5-FU toxicity of all kinds including neuropathy.
METHOTREXATE
Neurotoxicity from methotrexate can manifest as meningeal irritation, transient paraparesis, or encephalopathy. When the drug is administered intrathecally (IT), it can
cause headache, nausea and vomiting, lethargy, nuchal rigidity, and other features of meningeal irritation. 63 A subacute set of abnormalities include paraparesis,
hemiparesis, somnolence, cranial nerve dysfunction, cerebellar symptoms, and seizures, which can develop days to several weeks after therapy. Such
encephalopathy symptoms may occur more commonly when both IT and intravenous high-dose methotrexate are administered. 64 When IT methotrexate is given
repetitively (especially if it is administered via an intraventricular device), progressive necrotizing leukoencephalopathy may develop. Although acute onset with
resultant death has occurred, 65 the usual symptoms include initial memory loss with occasional later progression to severe dementia, gait disturbance, dysphasia, and
seizures.66 Even if serious neuropathy does not occur, subtle cognitive deficits may develop months to years later, especially in children. 67 Risk factors for such
problems are cranial irradiation, presence of neoplastic cells in the spinal fluid, and cumulative drug dose. The neurotoxic effect is probably a direct consequence of
high drug dose concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid.
Intravenous methotrexate also can produce encephalopathy, especially if high doses and leucovorin rescue are used. 68 The manifestations and risk factors are similar
to those of IT methotrexate. The neurologic dysfunction may be acute and transient or delayed in onset with personality changes. Magnetic resonance imaging can
show white matter abnormalities in asymptomatic patients that are probably subclinical manifestations of neurotoxicity. 69 However, it has been argued that such
findings do not necessarily correlate with subsequent intellectual dysfunction and therefore may be inconsequential. 70 Treatment consists of active hydration to
facilitate methotrexate clearance and leucovorin to circumvent the enzyme inhibition of methotrexate.
It has been postulated that this toxicity arises from methotrexate-related impairment of synthesis of neurotransmitters and accumulation of adenosine and
homocysteine.71 Based on this hypothesis that the neurotoxicity is related to brain accumulation of adenosine, aminophylline (an adenosine receptor antagonist) has
been used successfully to reverse the neurologic effects of methotrexate. 72
PACLITAXEL AND DOCETAXEL
The two analogues paclitaxel and docetaxel cause neurotoxicity similar to that of cisplatin and vincristine in the form of a peripheral neuropathy that can be a
treatment-limiting effect. 73,74,75,76 and 77 The clinical manifestations are glove-stocking or perioral paresthesias and/or burning pain, loss of vibration sense, loss of deep
tendon reflexes, Lhermitte's sign, and orthostatic hypotension. Motor dysfunction in the form of both proximal and distal extremity weakness also has been observed. 78
However, it is impossible to determine how much taxane-associated myopathy might be due to the antitumor drug and how much to the intermittent, but large, doses
of corticosteroids that are used concurrently with the taxanes to minimize the risk of hypersensitivity reactions. Transient scintillating scotomata and visual deficits due
to optic neuropathy 79 and encephalopathy 80 in the form of confusion and behavioral changes also have been reported. A possible risk factor for initiating or enhancing
the neural dysfunction from these drugs is an underlying neuropathy from other conditions such as diabetes mellitus and ethanol abuse. 73 However, one study81 has
shown that patients with diabetes may be treated with standard doses of paclitaxel, and they do not develop neurotoxicity to a greater degree than expected.
Both a single-dose and cumulative-dose relationship is noted for paclitaxel. Single doses of more than 175 mg/m 2 given at 3-week intervals produce a higher rate of
neurotoxicity than lesser doses, and at 250 mg/m 2, neurotoxicity is dose-limiting in as many as 70% of patients. 74 When paclitaxel is given weekly in 1-hour infusions,
severe neurotoxicity occurs at doses of more than 100 mg/m 2.82 Cumulative dosing also increases the frequency of neurotoxicity, but there is no neurotoxic dose
threshold. Depending on the drug dose used, the onset of these problems can be within a few days of receiving the first dose or after several cycles of therapy. A
docetaxel dose of 100 mg/m 2 also induces mild to moderate neurotoxic symptoms in as many as 50% of patients after five cycles of therapy. 76,77 A cumulative
docetaxel dose of 400 mg/m 2 can produce severe symptoms and electrophysiologic changes in nerves, 77 but as with paclitaxel, there is no threshold dose. Concurrent
or prior use of other neurotoxic agents (cisplatin, 30,83,84 oxaliplatin, 85 or vinorelbine 14) enhances the risk and degree of neurotoxicity manifestations from both of the
taxanes.
The mechanism of taxane neurotoxicity is likely a drug effect on neuronal microtubules, causing axonal degeneration and demyelination. Neurometric testing
demonstrates decreased nerve conduction velocities and absent sural nerve action potentials from both taxanes. 73,76,77
The only effective treatment, as with the other neurotoxic antitumor agents, is discontinuing therapy and allowing the symptoms to wane over time (which they usually,
but not always, do). Amitriptyline may or may not help with symptom relief. With this toxicity being so prevalent and often dose-limiting with these two potent antitumor
agents, development of an efficacious neuroprotectant is a high priority. Amifostine has not demonstrated efficacy as a neurotoxicity protectant for paclitaxel. 86
Dimesna is a new agent in clinical development as a protectant for both paclitaxel-induced 87 and cisplatin-induced 28 neurotoxicity.
ALTRETAMINE (HEXAMETHYLMELAMINE)
Altretamine (hexamethylmelamine) causes a variety of peripheral and central nervous system toxicities. Peripheral neuropathy is the most common form and
manifests as paresthesias, hyperesthesia, hyporeflexia, and diminished proprioception. 88 Central nervous effects are confusion, dysphagia, personality changes,
ataxia, somnolence, seizures, respiratory dyskinesia, and parkinsonian tremors. 88
Neurotoxicity is related to both individual and cumulative doses. Intermittent dosing schedules help reduce this side effect. The incidence varies depending on the
dose but can be as high as 40%. Altretamine can be safely administered to patients who have been treated previously with cisplatin, but if significant cisplatin
neuropathy is present, the neurotoxic manifestations may worsen. 89
PROCARBAZINE
Neurotoxicity from procarbazine has been known since it was first used clinically. 90 Both central and peripheral neurotoxicity symptoms can occur. Cerebral symptoms
predominate and consist of lethargy, depression, confusion, hallucinations, agitation and, rarely, psychosis. Extremity paresthesias and depressed deep tendon
reflexes are the manifestations of peripheral neuropathy.
Procarbazine is most commonly used in combination with the vinca alkaloids, so it is difficult to determine which agent is causing peripheral neuropathy symptoms.
The incidence of neuropathy induced by procarbazine alone is 20% or less. It is much higher when procarbazine and vincristine are used concurrently. Treatment is
discontinuation of therapy. Cerebral symptoms usually resolve promptly, but peripheral neuropathy may last for weeks to months.
ALDESLEUKIN (INTERLEUKIN-2)
The biologic antitumor agent aldesleukin (interleukin-2) has many toxicities precipitated by increased vascular permeability. Neurotoxicity in the form of hallucinations,
disorientation, agitation, combativeness, seizures, and coma may also occur. 91,92 A neurotoxic manifestation unique to this drug is carpal tunnel syndrome, which
appears to be a consequence of interstitial edema (due to the vascular leak), causing pressure on the median nerve. 93
FLUDARABINE , CLADRIBINE, AND PENTOSTATIN
When fludarabine was tested in phase I and II trials, central nervous toxicity was so severe that the studies had to be closed prematurely. Altered mental status,
photophobia, amaurosis, generalized seizures, dementia, spastic or flaccid paralysis, quadriparesis, and coma occurred at doses of more than 90 mg/m 2 given for 5 to
7 days. 94 Despite discontinuing therapy, some patients had progressive neurologic abnormalities and died. At autopsy, leukoencephalopathy was present in the
occipital lobes. Because such severe toxicity is clearly dose-related, the recommended fludarabine dose is 25 mg/m 2 daily for 5 days at monthly intervals. This dose
usually causes no more than mild and uncommon (incidence of approximately 15%) neurotoxicity symptoms, but sporadic cases of severe (and even fatal)
neurotoxicity have occurred, some of which even developed a few months after fludarabine therapy was stopped. 95,96 and 97
Both cladribine and pentostatin can cause severe, and fatal, neurotoxicity when administered at doses producing marked myelosuppression. The manifestations are

similar to those of fludarabine. 95 However, like fludarabine, drug doses in the range recommended for usual therapy produce only rare instances of severe
neurotoxicity.95
OTHER AGENTS
Table 55.8-1 lists other antitumor drugs that can produce neurotoxicity and categorizes them based on the risk for this effect. The manifestations are similar to those
described for the individual drugs. Certain ones (e.g., busulfan 98) produce problems such as seizures only when very high doses are administered in the stem cell
transplantation setting, even despite the use of prophylactic anticonvulsant medication.

TABLE 55.8-1. Antitumor Agents That Cause Neurotoxicity

NEPHROTOXICITY
The kidneys are the elimination pathway of many antitumor drugs and their metabolites and, therefore, are vulnerable to injury. The entire anatomic pathway from
glomerulus to distal tubule is at risk, depending on the drug involved. The symptoms vary from an asymptomatic rise in serum creatinine or mild proteinuria to acute
renal failure with anuria requiring dialysis.
CISPLATIN AND CARBOPLATIN
The nephrotoxicity of cisplatin has been well known since it was first used clinically in the early 1970s. This obstacle to its clinical use has been so profound that
several thousand cisplatin analogues have subsequently been synthesized in hopes of finding a less nephrotoxic compound with equivalent antitumor efficacy. A
means of avoiding nephrotoxicity by forcing diuresis and enhancing cisplatin excretion was first reported in 1977. 99 This seminal work allowed safer use of this drug
with its wide spectrum of antitumor efficacy.
Cisplatin renal toxicity is dose-related, cumulative, and manifested primarily by a decrease in the glomerular filtration rate, which is clinically approximated by
increases in the serum creatinine and decreases in the creatinine clearance. Single drug doses of less than 50 mg/m 2 usually cause little renal injury, but higher
doses require aggressive hydration, otherwise abrupt, irreversible renal failure may ensue. 100 Hydration reduces cisplatin concentration and the time it is in contact
with the tubular epithelium, which helps to limit the tubular injurious effect of the drug. The hydration used most successfully is normal saline because the high
chloride inhibits cisplatin hydrolysis in the tubules, which seems to add to the nephrotoxicity-protection effect of diuresis. Mannitol also is used to enhance diuresis,
but no evidence indicates that mannitol is necessary. Concurrent use of furosemide to enhance diuresis further is unnecessary and may even be harmful, as it was in
animal experiments.101 A urine output of at least 100 mL/hour for 2 to 4 hours before and 4 to 6 hours after cisplatin doses of 50 to 75 mg/m 2 reduces, but does not
eliminate, nephrotoxicity. More intensive hydration schedules are necessary when higher cisplatin doses are used.
The pathologic lesion of cisplatin nephrotoxicity is seen primarily in the proximal and distal tubules but also may involve the collecting ducts, whereas the glomeruli
are unaffected. 102 The extent of tubular injury helps to explain why electrolyte abnormalities, such as hyponatremia and hypomagnesemia, are so common after
cisplatin administration. 103,104 The hypomagnesemia is symptomatic only in approximately 10% of patients, but it can last months to years after completing therapy. 105
Magnesium supplementation in conjunction with cisplatin administration can minimize, but does not eliminate, hypomagnesemia. 106 The hyponatremia has been
reported to cause persistent orthostatic hypotension. 104
The mechanism of the tubular injury is not fully understood. It is not simply the tubular handling of a heavy metal, because the trans isomer of cisplatin is not
nephrotoxic. Cisplatin produces DNA intrastrand cross-links as one of its mechanisms of antitumor effect, and the same effect perhaps occurs on DNA in tubule cells,
causing defects in tubular (especially proximal) resorption.
A variety of substances have been evaluated for minimizing cisplatin nephrotoxicity in the hope that the cumbersome process of hydration can be circumvented.
These include sodium thiosulfate, amifostine, probenecid, diethyldithiocarbamate, superoxide dismutase, hypertonic saline, glutathione, bismuth compound, and
mesna.107 Only one of these many compounds (amifostine) has provided sufficient protective benefits to become accepted for routine use. Amifostine demonstrated
statistically significant protection against cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity 27,108 and is now marketed for this indication. However, amifostine has its own toxicities that
can be an obstacle to convenient use, such as hypotension and nausea and vomiting. One simple technique for nephrotoxicity protection besides hydration is to
administer cisplatin in the evening to take advantage of circadian rhythm effects that have been shown to reduce renal injury, 109 although this timing may be
impractical in the outpatient setting. A final measure of protection is to be certain that renal function is normal by performing a pretreatment 24-hour, measured
creatinine clearance. A result of less than 70 mL/min, especially in patients older than 60 years of age, may preclude cisplatin use without a significant risk of
nephrotoxicity. 110 In addition, other renal tubular toxins, such as aminoglycoside antibiotics, should be avoided whenever possible to prevent additive tubular damage.
Carboplatin was synthesized as a cisplatin alternative with less nephrotoxicity and without a requirement of hydration for safe administration. It is definitely less
nephrotoxic, but it is not free of potential for renal injury, especially in patients who have previously received nephrotoxins, or when given in high doses in the stem
cell transplantation setting. 111,112 Carboplatin-related renal dysfunction is usually detectable only by means of sensitive kidney function tests, such as urine tubular
enzyme excretion or glomerular filtration rate, and is transient. 113,114 The serum creatinine and creatinine clearance are rarely affected.
Life-threatening hemolytic-uremic syndrome has been reported as a rare form of acute renal dysfunction related to cisplatin and carboplatin. 115,116 Many of the
reported instances related to cisplatin have involved combined use of cisplatin and bleomycin, 117 so it is unclear which drug is most culpable in initiating this fulminant
toxicity.
MITOMYCIN
The capacity of mitomycin to produce renal toxicity has been known for many years, and it can be life-threatening. The clinical manifestations vary from a chronic,
progressive rise in serum creatinine to fulminant onset of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (MAHA). The latter problem has been reported in a large number of
anecdotal cases, 118,119 but in one study of adjuvant therapy with mitomycin, a 10.7% incidence occurred. 120 It was also observed121 in 10% of patients treated with a
combination of mitomycin and tamoxifen, and the authors of this study suggested some interaction between the two drugs might have contributed to the development
of this toxicity.
The MAHA toxicity is cumulative dose–related, but even only several mitomycin doses can initiate it. It also can develop a few months after mitomycin has been
discontinued.118,122 The risk of developing MAHA increases when the cumulative mitomycin dose exceeds 60 mg. 122
The clinical presentation of MAHA is an abrupt and often severe hemolytic anemia that usually precedes the renal dysfunction by 1 or 2 weeks. The peripheral blood

smear shows schistocytes, and thrombocytopenia becomes apparent as renal failure develops. Other manifestations are rash, fever, arterial hypertension, central
neurologic dysfunction, pericarditis, interstitial pneumonitis, pulmonary hemorrhage, hematuria, and proteinuria. 118,122 A high rate (65%) of patients have
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema. 122 A prominent feature is the fact the MAHA is often precipitated or worsened by blood transfusions, suggesting that blood product
administration should be avoided as much as possible when treating patients with mitomycin. The outcome is often (more than 50% of the time) death, despite
vigorous treatment, although a few long-term survivors (who have persistent mild renal dysfunction) have been reported. 122,123
Treatment includes hemodialysis and plasmapheresis. The most successful treatment has been plasma perfusion over filters containing staphylococcal protein A, a
method of extracting circulating immune complexes.124
The pathogenesis of this acute nephropathy is not certain. When injected directly into the renal arteries of rats, mitomycin caused glomerular endothelial damage, 125
and increases in vascular endothelial cell markers in plasma have been observed in patients who developed MAHA related to mitomycin. 126 This vascular injury
probably activates platelets and leads to fibrin thrombi deposition in the microvasculature of the kidney, thus initiating renal dysfunction and a mechanical shearing of
red blood cells with resultant hemolysis.
METHOTREXATE
When methotrexate is administered in conventional oral or intravenous doses, nephrotoxicity is only an occasional problem. If high doses with folinic acid rescue are
used, acute nephrotoxicity can pose a greater danger.
Methotrexate is excreted rapidly in the urine whether it is administered orally or parenterally. Both the parent compound and the major metabolite,
7-hydroxymethotrexate, are filtered by the glomeruli and actively secreted by the tubules. At physiologic pH, the drug is fully ionized, but in acidified form (pH less
than 5.7), the parent drug and main metabolite are less ionized and may precipitate. During urinary excretion, drug precipitation occurs as the urine is concentrated
and acidified in the tubules. The solubility of 7-hydroxymethotrexate is only one-fourth that of the parent drug, thus providing further potential for drug precipitation
within tubules and resultant acute renal dysfunction.
Acute methotrexate nephrotoxicity produces abrupt renal insufficiency. The serum creatinine rises rapidly, and costovertebral angle pain (from renal swelling) may
occur. Dehydration, oliguria, and even anuria may develop.
Methotrexate-induced renal insufficiency is primarily a physical process of tubular drug precipitation. It can be largely prevented by methods designed to hinder this
precipitation of drug in the tubules: hydration and urine alkalinization. 127 Whenever a drug dose high enough to require leucovorin rescue is being given, the urine
should be kept alkaline (pH higher than 8) with sodium bicarbonate administration, and a urine output of 100 mL/hour should be maintained. Serial serum
methotrexate levels should be monitored until the drug concentration declines to 10 –8 molar or less, 24 to 48 hours after administration. 127
If methotrexate clearance is impaired by renal dysfunction already present or initiated by concurrently administered drugs, nephrotoxicity can develop or be enhanced.
For example, prior therapy with cisplatin may contribute to methotrexate nephrotoxicity, 128 and concurrent administration of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs may
engender serious, and even fatal, renal dysfunction from methotrexate. Indomethacin, ketoprofen, diclofenac, and naproxen all have been reported to intensify renal
dysfunction from methotrexate, whether it is being given in high doses 129 or low doses.130 This enhanced toxicity is probably mediated by a reduction in methotrexate
clearance caused by the concurrent drug administration.
Sequential hemodialysis and charcoal hemofiltration 131 have been used as treatment of acute nephrotoxicity from high methotrexate doses. A highly successful
therapy has been administration of a combination of thymidine, leucovorin, and the recombinant form of the bacterial enzyme carboxypeptidase G 2,132 which quickly
converts methotrexate to a harmless metabolite. Both thymidine and carboxypeptidase are available on a compassionate-use basis from the National Cancer Institute
for treating this life-threatening toxicity. 132
STREPTOZOCIN , CARMUSTINE, AND LOMUSTINE
Streptozocin has the most potential for nephrotoxicity in the nitrosourea drug class, and renal damage is its dose-limiting toxicity. 133 Prolonged drug administration
increases the risk of such toxicity, and most patients eventually display it if therapy continues.
The kidneys are the major excretion pathway for both parent drug and its metabolites, the probable main factor in the pathogenesis of the nephrotoxicity. Streptozocin
injury occurs in both the glomeruli and tubules (primarily the proximal), where histologic changes have been observed, but the mechanism is unknown.
Hyperphosphatemia and proteinuria are early indicators of renal effect. Renal tubular acidosis is a frequent occurrence, manifested by glycosuria, acetonuria,
hyperchloremia, and aminoaciduria. 133 If streptozocin is discontinued, these findings usually resolve. A rising serum creatinine is a later, and sometimes irreversible,
finding. Hydration and diuresis during therapy have occasionally minimized the renal dysfunction. 134
The other two nitrosoureas in wide clinical use (carmustine and lomustine) are much less nephrotoxic. Carmustine usually causes interstitial pneumonitis toxicity
before it affects the kidneys. Lomustine has produced only rare instances of nephrotoxicity when unusually large cumulative doses have been administered. 135
IFOSFAMIDE
Cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide are analogues with similar chemical structures. Both produce the metabolite acrolein, which can cause hemorrhagic cystitis during
urinary excretion. Despite their similarities in chemical structure, toxicity, and antitumor efficacy, they differ significantly in their ability to cause nephrotoxicity.
Cyclophosphamide produces no renal toxicity of any clinical consequence, whereas ifosfamide initiates a variety of renal abnormalities that may in some instances
result in death or irreversible renal failure requiring chronic hemodialysis or renal transplantation, especially in children who are at higher risk for this problem. 136,137
Hypotheses regarding the mechanism of ifosfamide nephrotoxicity and why cyclophosphamide does not have such effect have been formulated based on the
differences in metabolism of these two drugs (ifosfamide produces much more chloracetaldehyde) and the unique effect of ifosfamide on proximal renal tubule
cells. 138,139
Initial clinical studies of ifosfamide showed that single high doses could precipitate acute tubular necrosis and renal failure within a few days of administration. This
severe toxicity was one reason a fractionated dose schedule was developed for this drug. Administration over 5 consecutive days reduced both renal and bladder
toxicity, but the most effective measure for reducing urinary tract problems was the development of mesna as a means of protection against the drug-induced cystitis.
Mesna is now a standard accompaniment to ifosfamide use, but it limits the cystitis, not the nephrotoxicity.140 There is no known means of preventing ifosfamide renal
toxicity.
The incidence of renal toxicity varies from 5% up to 30%. Besides young age (especially younger than 5 years), 137 risk factors are drug dose (cumulative doses of
more than 60 g/m2), unilateral nephrectomy, prior renal irradiation, presence of retroperitoneal masses, and prior cisplatin treatment. 141,142 and 143 Clinical manifestations
include tubular dysfunction, Fanconi's syndrome, and a rising serum creatinine. The tubular injury is indicated by aminoaciduria, glycosuria, renal tubular acidosis,
hypokalemia, proteinuria, and phosphaturia with hypophosphatemia. 138 These abnormalities can even result in renal rickets and growth retardation, which require
long-term therapy. 137,141,144 Once acute renal dysfunction from this drug becomes evident, it may or may not be reversible, so frequent monitoring of renal and tubular
function during ifosfamide therapy is important, with prompt treatment when dysfunction occurs. 138 Progression to renal failure is generally not a problem in children, 144
but such failure may occur in adults, even with only moderate cumulative doses of ifosfamide. 145 Renal abnormalities may not become evident until long after
ifosfamide therapy has been completed. 146
OTHER AGENTS
Table 55.8-2 lists the antitumor agents that have been reported to cause renal injury. They are categorized by the risk of such toxicity from those drugs with an
occasional anecdotal report to those with high risk for severe damage.

TABLE 55.8-2. Antitumor Agents That Cause Nephrotoxicity

Not only can individual drugs cause nephrotoxicity, but combinations of agents can occasionally precipitate serious reactions, such as hemolytic uremic syndrome
from cisplatin and bleomycin. 117 In addition, the intensive doses of chemotherapy used in conditioning for stem cell transplantation can induce hemolytic uremic
syndrome with an acute or delayed onset and sometimes fatal outcome. 147

HEPATOTOXICITY
A number of antitumor agents cause hepatic toxicity (Table 55.8-3). This toxicity takes three main forms: hepatocellular dysfunction and chemical hepatitis,
venoocclusive disease (VOD), and chronic fibrosis.

TABLE 55.8-3. Antitumor Agents That Cause Hepatotoxicity

HEPATOCELLULAR DYSFUNCTION
Hepatocellular dysfunction usually is caused by a direct effect of either the parent drug or a metabolite and is an acute event. Serum hepatic enzymes rise as cellular
damage occurs. Fatty infiltration and cholestasis may occur as the toxic effect progresses. Hepatic metastases, viral hepatitis, and drugs administered for other
therapeutic purposes (e.g., antiemetics) can cause similar enzymatic abnormalities. Thus, the clinical picture, appropriate laboratory or radiologic studies, and the
pattern of abnormal liver function tests must be analyzed to identify the cause of the hepatic changes.
The drugs most likely to cause enzymatic abnormalities are L-asparaginase, carmustine in high doses, cytarabine, dactinomycin, etoposide, levamisole in combination
with 5-FU, 6-mercaptopurine, methotrexate in high doses, streptozocin, and vincristine. These drugs can cause rises in the serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase,
serum glutamic-pyruvic transaminase, and serum bilirubin.
L-Asparaginase causes the widest spectrum of liver abnormalities and has the highest incidence of hepatotoxicity. It produces changes in liver enzymes and in

hepatic protein synthesis, resulting in low plasma levels of albumin, lipoproteins, and clotting factors. Prolongation of the prothrombin and thrombin times occurs as a
result. Fatty metamorphosis is commonly seen, and these changes may persist for several months after discontinuing treatment. 148
The combination of levamisole and 5-FU, used as adjuvant therapy for colon cancer, also frequently produces reversible hepatic enzyme and serum bilirubin
changes.149 These abnormalities are due to fatty infiltration of the liver, and in some cases the degree of liver abnormality may be sufficient to mimic liver metastases
on radiographic studies. 150
Cytarabine hepatotoxicity is a common event in the treatment of acute leukemia, especially when high doses are used. 151 Because patients with acute leukemia are
subject to transfusion-related hepatitis and receive a variety of potentially hepatotoxic drugs, it is always difficult to establish cytarabine as the sole hepatotoxin.
However, hyperbilirubinemia developing in temporal relation to cytarabine administration, accompanied by histologic abnormalities on liver biopsy, has confirmed the
hepatotoxicity potential of this drug. 152
6-Mercaptopurine has been known since the 1950s to cause hepatotoxicity, which may even be rarely fatal. 153 Intrahepatic cholestasis is the most common
abnormality, and liver function usually returns to normal with discontinuation of therapy.
Hepatic dysfunction from dactinomycin may occur in up to 10% of patients with Wilms' tumor treated with this drug, but it is very uncommon when used for treatment of
other malignancies. Hepatomegaly, enzyme abnormalities, and jaundice may occur. 154 Fever is also common, and thrombocytopenia may occur. Most cases appear to
be associated with Wilms' tumors occurring in the right kidney, so the tumor mass effect present in the liver region may play a precipitating role in this toxic
manifestation. 155
VENOOCCLUSIVE DISEASE
VOD results from blockage of venous outflow in the small centrilobular and sublobular hepatic vessels. Antitumor drugs known to produce this form of hepatotoxicity
are cytarabine, cyclophosphamide, dacarbazine, 6-mercaptopurine, mitomycin, and 6-thioguanine. In addition, high doses of busulfan, carmustine, cyclophosphamide,
and mitomycin given in the stem cell transplantation setting can cause VOD.
The clinical features of VOD are painful hepatomegaly, ascites, peripheral edema, marked elevations in serum enzymes and bilirubin, and hepatic encephalopathy.
The onset is often abrupt, occurring during the first posttransplant week, and the clinical course is fulminant. It is caused by damage to endothelial cells, sinusoids,
and hepatocytes in the area of the liver surrounding the central vein. 156 Thrombosis is precipitated, causing ischemia and hepatocellular necrosis. A component of
hepatocellular injury may also be directly related to the high doses of drugs and not mediated by thrombosis. VOD occurring in the transplantation setting may be
irreversible and lead to death with multiorgan failure in 25% to 50% of the patients developing it. 156 All of the drugs reported to induce VOD at high doses have been
alkylating agents. This situation may not be because of any unusual tendency of alkylating agents to cause VOD, but rather to the fact that these are the drugs used
in very large doses in the stem cell transplantation setting.

Conventional doses of certain antitumor agents (e.g., dacarbazine, 6-mercaptopurine, 6-thioguanine) can also cause hepatic VOD. Dacarbazine has been most
frequently implicated in this form of hepatotoxicity, but only sporadic cases have been reported, both from dacarbazine alone and in combination with other drugs. 157
Why only some patients develop this life-threatening complication of dacarbazine is unknown. It may be some sort of idiosyncratic or hypersensitivity reaction.
CHRONIC FIBROSIS
Methotrexate used for cancer treatment can produce acute and reversible hepatocellular injury and elevation of serum enzymes. The intermittent dosing schedules
seem to obviate any chronic hepatotoxicity from this drug. However, long-term use of methotrexate for the treatment of nonmalignant disease (e.g., rheumatoid
arthritis) poses a hazard for the development of irreversible hepatic fibrosis. 158 Because patients with autoimmune diseases may already have underlying liver
abnormalities, methotrexate may not be the sole etiologic factor in the development of this chronic toxicity.

HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIONS
Most of the available antitumor agents can produce hypersensitivity reactions, and a substantial minority cause such reactions in 5% or more of patients treated.
Several drugs (e.g., L-asparaginase and the taxanes) cause hypersensitivity reactions that are frequent enough to be a major treatment-limiting toxicity. Most of the
other antitumor drugs produce such reactions only sporadically. The mechanism of these reactions is often unknown or evaluated only in a single patient.
Premedication regimens designed to prevent or minimize reactions from the taxanes and a new formulation of L-asparaginase (pegaspargase) created to minimize
reactions from this drug have been successful in reducing the frequency and severity of this toxicity.
L-Asparaginase produces hypersensitivity reactions in 10% to 20% of patients treated, which can be immediate and life-threatening, with all the components of
anaphylaxis. This high rate is related to the fact L-asparaginase is a polypeptide of bacterial origin, displaying multiple antigenic sites that can stimulate production of

immunoglobulin E (IgE) or other immunoglobulins. These immunoglobulins can then mediate an acute anaphylactic reaction.
The clinical manifestations are typical of type I reactions, with acute onset of wheezing, pruritus, rash, angioedema, extremity pain, agitation, and hypotension. 159,160
The mechanism of L-asparaginase reactions appears to be mediated by an IgE antibody in at least some cases. Complement activation also occurs, perhaps induced
by specific IgG or IgM antibodies. A number of factors increase the risk for hypersensitivity reactions, including a history of atopy or other drug allergy, prior
L-asparaginase therapy (including even several years previously), high drug doses, and the intravenous route of administration. Intramuscular administration often
reduces the severity of reactions, 161 but they can still occur and may do so several hours after the drug is given. Concurrent treatment with prednisone and vincristine
(for the acute leukemia being treated) also appears to reduce the risk of reactions. 159
No reliable method has been found that can indicate who will have a reaction to any dose of L-asparaginase. Intradermal skin testing may give either false-negative or
false-positive results, and test doses of the drug are valueless. 159 Therefore, one must approach each dose of L-asparaginase as the one that could initiate a
hypersensitivity reaction and be prepared to treat it. Antianaphylaxis medication must be at hand, and the patient should be observed for approximately 1 hour after
the drug is administered.
When a hypersensitivity reaction occurs with the Escherichia coli source of L-asparaginase, one can substitute the Erwinia chrysanthemia form and continue therapy
without a loss of efficacy of this important drug for the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. 160 This drug form is immunologically distinct and appears to have a
lower degree of immunogenicity. Patients may still sustain a hypersensitivity reaction from the substitute, but most (more than 75%) do not and can complete the
planned therapy. 160 Precautions for treating anaphylaxis are necessary no matter the origin of the L-asparaginase. A third form of L-asparaginase (pegaspargase 162)
provides another alternative for the patient who is reactive to either of the other asparaginases. This form is a conjugate of polyethylene glycol with the enzyme. It may
be the least immunogenic of all three forms of this drug, but hypersensitivity reactions are still possible. Because this drug has a prolonged serum half-life compared
to the other two, it is administered only once or twice per week.
Paclitaxel has high potential for initiating a hypersensitivity reaction, and because of this fact, it is necessary to administer prophylaxis therapy before each dose. 163
The Cremophor EL excipient used to maintain solubility of paclitaxel has long been suspected of being the initiator of these reactions. When docetaxel was first
evaluated in clinical trials, it was assumed that premedication to prevent hypersensitivity reactions was unnecessary, because docetaxel is formulated with Tween 80
(instead of Cremophor EL), and thus reactions would be unlikely to occur. This assumption proved incorrect, because docetaxel can initiate reactions with the same
manifestations and with approximately the same frequency (5%) as paclitaxel. 164 The signs and symptoms can occur even despite premedication, although the
intensity may be diminished. 164 The etiology appears to be either the two taxanes themselves or that Cremophor EL and Tween 80 are equally capable of causing
reactions, with the former explanation being more likely. The mechanism of these reactions has not been well studied. Although a few reported cases have occurred
from later drug cycles, 165 the fact that they most often (more than 70% of the time) occur with the first drug dose 163,164 suggests a nonimmunologic mechanism.
The clinical manifestations are those of any type I hypersensitivity reaction and include bronchospasm and wheezing, agitation, chest and back pain, rash,
angioedema, and hypotension. The onset is usually within minutes of starting a drug infusion, and even very small drug doses are capable of initiating a reaction. A
form of apparent hypersensitivity that may be delayed in onset is pulmonary infiltrates typical of a hypersensitivity pneumonitis that may either resolve spontaneously
or after corticosteroid therapy. 166
To prevent or assuage these reactions, paclitaxel is usually infused over 1 to 3 hours. Infusion in any interval shorter than 1 hour may precipitate an unacceptable
frequency of reactions. 167 Premedication with corticosteroids and antihistamines is standard procedure. Docetaxel is given over 1 hour, and premedications must also
be used. Such measures reduce the frequency and perhaps the intensity of reactions but do not fully prevent them.
A number of other chemotherapeutic agents (Table 55.8-4) are known to produce hypersensitivity reactions in at least sporadic instances. Most of these reactions
have the features of a type I hypersensitivity, whether mediated by IgE or nonimmunologically. Hemolytic anemia (a type II reaction) is an uncommon form of such
toxicity. Some drugs, such as procarbazine and methotrexate, may produce acute episodes that are typical of a type III reaction and cause interstitial pneumonitis and
vasculitis.

TABLE 55.8-4. Antitumor Agents That Cause Hypersensitivity Reactions

In most instances of hypersensitivity reactions from antitumor drugs, only isolated cases are studied adequately to define the cause of the reaction, and it is not
possible to exclude the excipients used in drug formulation (e.g., benzyl alcohol, dimethyl acetamide) or other drugs given concurrently (e.g., mesna, mannitol, white
blood cell growth factors) as the source of the reactivity. When such reactions occur from one drug, it is often possible to continue therapy by either substituting
another drug in the same class or administering premedication as prophylaxis.

VASCULAR TOXICITY
Four main forms of vascular toxicity are produced by cancer chemotherapeutic agents: VOD, thrombotic microangiopathy with hemolytic uremic syndrome, venous or
arterial thrombosis, and vascular ischemia (involving cerebral, myocardial, or extremity arterial vessels). 168 VOD of hepatic vessels (see the section Venoocclusive
Disease) and microangiopathy (see the section Mitomycin) were discussed earlier in this chapter.
Venous thrombosis in association with metastatic cancer has long been recognized (Trousseau's syndrome). Chemotherapeutic agents can also induce venous
thrombosis in the form of extremity thromboses and pulmonary emboli, even in the absence of demonstrable metastatic cancer. 169,170 Although they are less common,
thromboses of cerebral, coronary, and extremity arteries can also be initiated by chemotherapy, again in the absence of demonstrable cancer. 171,172 These events are
not limited to one form of cancer. They have occurred in a variety of cancers as disparate as stage II breast cancer, testicular cancer, and lymphomas. One drug
associated with such thrombotic episodes more than others is cisplatin, 173 and a combination of chemotherapy with tamoxifen seems to produce a higher rate of such
thrombotic episodes than either one alone. 170
Arterial ischemia without thrombosis can be induced by chemotherapy in major coronary or cerebral vessels and in the small vessels of the extremities. Myocardial
ischemia and infarction occur in patients who receive continuous infusions of 5-FU, and precipitous heart failure and sudden death have occurred. 174 Such events
may occur in patients who have no known underlying coronary vessel disease, and they develop a few days after the start of the first infusion of 5-FU. The
pathogenesis seems to be induction of coronary spasm by 5-FU, but the physiologic mechanism is not known. Anginal symptoms are often a precursor, which can be
relieved by discontinuing the 5-FU therapy. Raynaud's phenomenon occurs as a chronic toxicity in approximately 40% of young men treated with cisplatin-bleomycin
regimens for testicular cancer. 175 Cigarette smoking increases the risk for this toxicity. Clinical manifestations are painful digits and paresthesias, which may last
indefinitely for years after the chemotherapy is completed. The mechanism appears to be vasozspasm, without thrombosis, in the terminal arterioles of the fingers due
to impaired smooth muscle function.176 Bleomycin is the most likely etiology of this toxicity, because it can cause Raynaud's phenomenon when administered alone. 177
In similar fashion to causing vasoconstriction in coronary arteries, a continuous infusion of 5-FU may also engender digital arterial spasm and Raynaud's
phenomenon.178
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Weiden PL, Wright SE. Vincristine neurotoxicity. N Engl J Med 1972;286:1369.
2. Casey EB, Jellife AM, Le Quesne PM, Millett YL. Vincristine neuropathy. Clinical and electrophysiologic observations. Brain 1973;96:69.
3. DeAngelis LM, Gnecco C, Taylor L, Warrell RP. Evolution of neuropathy and myopathy during intensive vincristine/corticosteroid chemotherapy for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer
1991;67:2241.
4. Graf WD, Chance PF, Lensch MW, et al. Severe vincristine neuropathy in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A. Cancer 1996;77:1356.
5. McCarthy GM, Skillings JR. Jaw and other orofacial pain in patients receiving vincristine for the treatment of cancer. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1992;74:299.
6. Roca E, Bruera E, Politi PM, et al. Vinca alkaloidinduced cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:149.
7. Haim N, Epelbaum R, Ben-Shahar M, et al. Full dose vincristine (without 2-mg dose limit) in the treatment of lymphomas. Cancer 1994;73:2515.
8. Merimsky O, Loewenstein A, Chaitchik S. Cortical blindnessa catastrophic side effect of vincristine. Anti-Cancer Drugs 1992;3:371.
9. Burns BV, Shotton JC. Vocal fold palsy following vinca alkaloid treatment. J Laryngol Otol 1998;112:485.
10. Postma TJ, Benard BA, Huijgens PC, Ossenkoppele GJ, Heimans JJ. Long term effects of vincristine on the peripheral nervous system. J Neurooncol 1993;15:23.
11. Garewal HS, Dalton WS. Metoclopramide in vincristine-induced ileus. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:1309.
12. Lonardi F, Pavanato G, Ferrari V, et al. Neurotoxicity after chemotherapy with vinorelbine. Eur J Cancer 1993;29A:1794.
13. Le Chevalier T, Brisgand D, Douillard JY, et al. Randomized study of vinorelbine and cisplatin versus vindesine and cisplatin versus vinorelbine alone in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer:
results of a European multicenter trial including 612 patients. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:360.
14. Parimoo D, Jeffers S, Muggia FM. Severe neurotoxicity from vinorelbine-paclitaxel combinations. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1079.
15. Fazeny B, Zifki U, Meryn S, et al. Vinorelbine-induced neurotoxicity in patients with advanced breast cancer pretreated with paclitaxelA phase II study. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1996;39:150.
16. Weintraub M, Adde MA, Venzon DJ, et al. Severe atypical neuropathy associated with administration of hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors and vincristine. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:935.
17. Cersosimo RJ. Cisplatin neurotoxicity. Cancer Treat Rev 1989;16:195.
18. Gerritsen van der Hoop R, van der Burg MEL, ten Bokkel Huinink WW, van Houweligen JC, Neijt JP. Incidence of neuropathy in 395 patients with ovarian cancer treated with or without
cisplatin. Cancer 1990;66:1697.
19. Cavaletti G, Marzorati L, Bogliun G, et al. Cisplatin-induced peripheral neurotoxicity is dependent on total dose intensity and single-dose intensity. Cancer 1992;69:203.
20. Hilkens PHE, van der Burg MEL, Moll JWB, et al. Neurotoxicity is not enhanced by increased dose intensities of cisplatin administration. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:678.
21. van Gelder T, Geurs P, Kho GS, et al. Cortical blindness and seizures following cisplatin treatment: Both of epileptic origin. Eur J Cancer 1993;29A:1497.
22. Wilding G, Caruso R, Lawrence TS, et al. Retinal toxicity after high-dose cisplatin therapy. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1683.
23. Thompson SW, Davis LE, Kornfeld M, Hilgers RD, Standefer JC. Cisplatin neuropathy: Clinical, electrophysiologic, morphologic, and toxicologic studies. Cancer 1984;54:1269.
24. Gregg RW, Molepo JM, Monpetit VJA, et al. Cisplatin neurotoxicity: The relationship between dosage, time, and platinum concentration in neurologic tissues, and morphologic evidence of
toxicity. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:795.
25. Siegal T, Haim N. Cisplatin-induced peripheral neuropathy: Frequent off-therapy deterioration, demyelinating syndromes, and muscle cramps. Cancer 1990;66:1117.
26. Alberts DS, Noel JK. Cisplatin-associated neurotoxicity: Can it be prevented? Anti-Cancer Drugs 1995;6:369.
27. Kemp G, Rose P, Lurain J, et al. Amifostine pretreatment for protection against cyclophosphamide-induced and cisplatin-induced toxicities: Results of a randomized control trial in patients with
advanced ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2101.
28. Hausheer F, Cavalletti E, Cavaletti G, et al. Oral and intravenous BNP7787 protects against platinum neurotoxicity without in vitro or in vivo tumor protection. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res
1999;40:398.
29. Wasserheit C, Frazein A, Oratz R, et al. Phase II trial of paclitaxel and cisplatin in women with advanced breast cancer: an active regimen with limiting neurotoxicity. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1993.
30. Berger T, Malayeri R, Doppelbauer A, et al. Neurological monitoring for neurotoxicity induced by paclitaxel/cisplatin chemotherapy. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:1393.
31. Becouarn Y, Ychou M, Ducreux M, et al. Phase II trial of oxaliplatin as first-line chemotherapy in metastatic colorectal cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2739.
32. Gilles-Amar V, Garcia ML, Seille A, et al. Evolution of severe sensory neuropathy with oxaliplatin combined to the bimonthly 48h leucovorin (LV) and 5-fluorouracil (5FU) regimens (FOLFOX) in
metastatic colorectal cancer. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:246a.
33. Baker WJ, Royer GL, Weiss RB. Cytarabine and neurologic toxicity. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:679.
34. Graves T, Hooks MA. Drug-induced toxicities associated with high-dose cytosine arabinoside infusions. Pharmacotherapy 1989;9:23.
35. Rubin EH, Anderson JW, Berg DT, et al. Risk factors for high-dose cytarabine neurotoxicity: an analysis of a Cancer and Leukemia Group B trial in patients with acute myeloid leukemia. J Clin
Oncol 1992;10:948.
36. Openshaw H, Slatkin NE, Stein AS, Hinton DR, Forman SJ. Acute polyneuropathy after high dose cytosine arabinoside in patients with leukemia. Cancer 1996;78:1899.
37. Resar LMS, Phillips PC, Kastan MB, et al. Acute neurotoxicity after intrathecal cytosine arabinoside in two adolescents with acute lymphoblastic leukemia of B-cell type. Cancer 1993;71:117.
38. Paul M, Joshua D, Rahme N, et al. Fatal peripheral neuropathy associated with axonal degeneration after high-dose cytosine arabinoside in acute leukemia. Br J Haematol 1991;79:521.
39. Patel AG, Rao R. Transient ara-C leukoencephalopathy: MR findings. J Comput Tomogr 1996;20:161.
40. Miller L, Link MP, Bologna S, Parker BR. Cerebellar atrophy caused by high-dose cytosine arabinoside: CT and MR findings. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1989;152:343.
41. Dunkelman H, Earl HM, Twelves C. Acute reversible neurological deficit following intrathecal chemotherapy. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1991;27:329.
42. DeAngelis LM, Kreis W, Chan K, Dantis E, Akerman S. Pharmacokinetics of ara-C and ara-U in plasma and CSF after high-dose administration of cytosine arabinoside. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol 1992;29:173.
43. Wallace TL, Johnson EM. Cytosine arabinoside kills postmitotic neurons: evidence that deoxycytidine may have a role in neuronal survival that is independent of DNA synthesis. J Neurosci
1989;9:115.
44. Ono K, Mizukawa K, Yangihara M, Tokunaga A. Morphological changes of astroglia in the cerebellar cortex of developing mice after neonatal administration of cytosine arabinoside. GLIA
1990;3:311.
45. Weiss RB. Ifosfamide vs cyclophosphamide in cancer therapy. Oncology (Huntingt) 1991;5:67.
46. Merimsky O, Inbar M, Reider-Grosswasser I, Scharf M, Chaitchik S. Ifosfamide-related acute encephalopathy: clinical and radiological aspects. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:1188.
47. Miller LJ, Eaton VE. Ifosfamide-induced neurotoxicity: a case report and review of the literature. Ann Pharmacother 1992;26:183.
48. Chastagner P, Sommelet-Olive D, Kalifa C, et al. Phase II study of ifosfamide in childhood brain tumors: a report by the French Society of Pediatric Oncology (SFOP). Med Pediatr Oncol
1993;21:49.
49. Cerny T, Kupfer A. The enigma of ifosfamide encephalopathy. Ann Oncol 1992;3:679.
50. Patel SR, Forman AD, Benjamin RS. High-dose ifosfamide-induced exacerbation of peripheral neuropathy. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:305.
51. Manegold C, Drings P, Pawinski A, et al. Oral ifosfamide/mesna versus intravenous ifosfamide/mesna in nonsmall cell lung cancer: a randomized phase II trial of the EORTC Lung Cancer
Cooperative Group. Ann Oncol 1996;7:637.
52. Kupfer A, Aeschlimann C, Cerny T. Methylene blue and the neurotoxic mechanisms of ifosfamide encephalopathy. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1996;50:249.
53. Simonian NA, Gilliam FG, Chiappa KH. Ifosfamide causes a diazepam-sensitive encephalopathy. Neurology 1993;43:2700.
54. Kupfer A, Aeschlimann C, Wermuth B, Cerny T. Prophylaxis and reversal of ifosfamide encephalopathy with methylene-blue. Lancet 1994;343:763.
55. Bygrave HA, Geh JI, Jani Y, Glynne-Jones R. Neurological complications of 5-fluorouracil chemotherapy: case report and review of the literature. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) 1998;10:334.
56. Langer CJ, Hageboutros A, Kloth DD, Roby D, Shaer AH. Acute encephalopathy attributed to 5-FU. Pharmacotherapy 1996;16:311.
57. Stein ME, Drumea K, Yarnitsky D, Benny A, Tzuk-Shina T. A rare event of 5-fluorouracil-associated peripheral neuropathy: a report of two patients. Am J Clin Oncol 1998;21:248.
58. Meropol NJ, Creaven PJ, Petrelli NJ, White RM, Arbuck SG. Seizures associated with leucovorin administration in cancer patients. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:56.
59. Fassas ABT, Gattani AM, Morgello S. Cerebral demyelination with 5-fluorouracil and levamisole. Cancer Invest 1994;12:379.
60. Lucia P, Pocek M, Passacantando A, Sebastiani ML, De Martinis C. Multifocal leucoencephalopathy induced by levamisole. Lancet 1996;348:1450.
61. Okeda R, Shibutani M, Matsuo T, et al. Experimental neurotoxicity of 5-fluorouracil and its derivatives is due to poisoning by the monofluorinated organic metabolites, monofluoroacetic acid
and a-fluoro-b-alanine. Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 1990;81:66.
62. Milano G, Etienne MC, Vierrefite V, et al. Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency and fluorouracil-related toxicity. Br J Cancer 1999;79:627.

63. Nelson RW, Frank JT. Intrathecal methotrexate-induced neurotoxicities. Am J Hosp Pharm 1981;38:65.
64. Rubnitz JE, Relling MV, Harrison PL, et al. Transient encephalopathy following high-dose methotrexate treatment in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemia 1998;12:1176.
65. Shore T, Barnett MJ, Phillips GL. Sudden neurologic death after intrathecal methotrexate. Med Pediatr Oncol 1990;18:159.
66. Lovblad KO, Kelkar P, Ozdoba C, et al. Pure methotrexate encephalopathy presenting with seizures: CT and MRI features. Pediatr Radiol 1998;28:86.
67. Brown RT, Madan-Swain A, Walco GA, et al. Cognitive and academic late effects among children previously treated for acute lymphocytic leukemia receiving chemotherapy as CNS
prophylaxis. J Pediatr Psych 1998;23:333.
68. Kiu MC, Liaw CC, Yang TS, et al. Transient neurological disturbances induced by the chemotherapy of high-dose methotrexate for osteogenic sarcoma. Anti-Cancer Drugs 1994;5:480.
69. Lien HH, Blomlie V, Saeter G, Solheim O, Fossa SD. Osteogenic sarcoma: MR signal abnormalities of the brain in asymptomatic patients treated with high-dose methotrexate. Radiology
1991;179:547.
70. Bleyer WA. Leukoencephalopathy detectable by magnetic resonance imaging: much ado about nothing? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:1251.
71. Quinn CT, Griener JC, Bottiglieri T, et al. Elevation of homocysteine and excitatory amino acid neurotransmitters in the CSF of children who receive methotrexate for the treatment of cancer. J
Clin Oncol 1997;15:2800.
72. Bernini JC, Fort DW, Griener KC, et al. Aminophylline for methotrexate-induced neurotoxicity. Lancet 1995;345:544.
73. Rowinsky EK, Chaudhry V, Cornblath DR, Donehower RC. Neurotoxicity of Taxol. Monog Natl Cancer Inst 1993;15:107.
74. Postma TJ, Vermoken JB, Liefting AJM, Pinedo HM, Heimans JJ. Paclitaxel-induced neuropathy. Ann Oncol 1995;6:489.
75. Forsyth PA, Balmaceda C, Peterson K, et al. Prospective study of paclitaxel-induced peripheral neuropathy with quantitative sensory testing. J Neurooncol 1997;35:47.
76. Hilkens PHE, Verweij J, Vecht CJ, Stoter G, van den Bent MJ. Clinical characteristics of severe peripheral neuropathy induced by docetaxel (Taxotere). Ann Oncol 1997;8:187.
77. New PZ, Jackson CE, Rinaldi D, Burris H, Barohn RJ. Peripheral neuropathy secondary to docetaxel (Taxotere). Neurology 1996;46:108.
78. Freilich RJ, Balmaceda C, Seidman AD, Rubin M, DeAngelis LM. Motor neuropathy due to docetaxel and paclitaxel. Neurology 1996;47:115.
79. Capri G, Munzone E, Trarenzi E, et al. Optic nerve disturbances: a new form of paclitaxel neurotoxicity. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1099.
80. Perry JR, Warner E. Transient encephalopathy after paclitaxel (Taxol) infusion. Neurology 1996;46:1596.
81. Gogas H, Shapiro F, Aghajanian C, et al. The impact of diabetes mellitus on the toxicity of therapy for advanced ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1996;61:22.
82. Seidman AD, Hudis CA, McCaffrey J, et al. Dose-dense therapy with paclitaxel via weekly 1-hour infusion: preliminary experience in the treatment of metastatic breast cancer. Semin Oncol
1997;24[Suppl 17]:S17.
83. Connelly E, Markman M, Kennedy A, et al. Paclitaxel delivered as a 3-hr infusion with cisplatin in patients with gynecologic cancers: unexpected incidence of neurotoxicity. Gynecol Oncol
1966;62:166.
84. Cavaletti G, Boglium G, Marzorati L, et al. Peripheral neurotoxicity of Taxol in patients previously treated with cisplatin. Cancer 1995;75:1141.
85. Faivre S, Kalla S, Cvitkovic E, et al. Oxaliplatin and paclitaxel combination in patients with platinum-pretreated ovarian carcinoma: an investigator-originated compassionate-use experience.
Ann Oncol 1999;10:1125.
86. Gelman K, Eisenhauer E, Bryce C, et al. Randomized phase II study of high-dose paclitaxel with or without amifostine in patients with metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3038.
87. Cavalletti E, Cavaletti G, Tredici G, et al. Oral and intravenous BNP7787 protects against paclitaxel-mediated neurotoxicity in Wistar rats. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1999;22:398.
88. Weiss RB. The role of hexamethylmelamine in advanced ovarian carcinoma treatment. Gynecol Oncol 1981;12:141.
89. Manetta A, MacNeill C, Lyter JA, et al. Hexamethylmelamine as a single second-line agent in ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 1990;36:93.
90. Brunner KW, Young CW. A methylhydrazine derivative in Hodgkin's disease and other malignant neoplasms: therapeutic and toxic effects studied in 51 patients. Ann Intern Med 1965;63:69.
91. Siegel JP, Puri RK. Interleukin-2 toxicity. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:694.
92. Fenner MH, Hanninen EL, Kirchner HH, Poliwoda H, Atzpodien J. Neuropsychiatric symptoms during treatment with interleukin-2 and interferon-a. Lancet 1993;341:372.
93. Puduvalli VK, Sella S, Austin SF, Forman AD. Carpal tunnel syndrome associated with interleukin-2 therapy. Cancer 1996;77:1189.
94. Chun HG, Leyland-Jones BR, Caryk SM, Hoth DF. Central nervous system toxicity of fludarabine phosphate. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:1225.
95. Cheson BD, Vena DA, Foss FM, Sorenson JM. Neurotoxicity of purine analogs: a review. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2216.
96. Johnson PWM, Fearnley J, Domizio P, et al. Neurological illness following treatment with fludarabine. Br J Cancer 1994;70:966.
97. Zabernigg A, Maier H, Thaler J, Gattringer C. Late-onset fatal neurological toxicity of fludarabine. Lancet 1994;344:1780.
98. Kobayashi R, Watanabe N, Iguchi A, et al. Electroencephalogram abnormality and high-dose busulfan in conditioning regimens for stem cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant
1998;21:217.
99. Hayes DM, Cvitkovic E, Golbey RB, et al. High dose cis-platinum diammine dichloride. Amelioration of renal toxicity by mannitol diuresis. Cancer 1977;39:1372.
100. Higby DJ, Wallace HJ, Albert DJ, Holland JF. Diaminedichloroplatinum: a phase I study showing responses in testicular and other tumors. Cancer 1974;33:1219.
101. Pera MF, Zook BC, Harder HC. Effects of mannitol or furosemide diuresis on the nephrotoxicity and physiologic distribution of cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum-(II) in rats. Cancer Res
1979;39:1269.
102. Tanaka H, Ishikawa E, Teshima S, et al. Histopathological study of human cisplatin nephropathy. Toxicol Pathol 1986;14:247.
103. Lajer H, Daugaard G. Cisplatin and hypomagnesemia. Cancer Treat Rev 1999;25:47.
104. Hutchison FN, Perez EA, Gandara DR, Lawrence HJ, Kaysen GA. Renal salt wasting in patients treated with cisplatin. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:21.
105. Markman M, Rothman R, Reichman B, et al. Persistent hypomagnesemia following cisplatin chemotherapy in patients with ovarian cancer. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1991;117:89.
106. Evans TRJ, Harper CL, Beveridge IG, Wastnage R, Mansi JL. A randomized study to determine whether routine intravenous magnesium supplements are necessary in patients receiving
cisplatin chemotherapy with continuous infusion 5-fluorouracil. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:174.
107. Pinzani V, Bressolle F, Haug IJ, et al. Cisplatin-induced renal toxicity and toxicity-modulating strategies: a review. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1994;35:1.
108. Tannehill SP, Mehta MP, Larson M, et al. Effect of amifostine on toxicities associated with sequential chemotherapy and radiation therapy for unresectable non-small-cell cancer: results of a
phase III trial. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2850.
109. Hrushesky WJM. Circadian timing of cancer chemotherapy. Science 1985;228:73.
110. Hargis JB, Anderson JR, Propert KJ, et al. Predicting genitourinary toxicity in patients receiving cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy: a Cancer and Leukemia Group B study. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol 1992;30:291.
111. McDonald BR, Kirmani S, Vasquez M, Mehta RL. Acute renal failure associated with the use of intraperitoneal carboplatin: a report of two cases and review of the literature. Am J Med
1991;90:386.
112. Frenkel J, Kool G, de Kraker J. Acute renal failure in high-dose carboplatin chemotherapy. Med Pediatr Oncol 1995;25:473.
113. Sleijfer DT, Smit EF, Meijer S, Mulder NH, Postmus PE. Acute and cumulative effects of carboplatin on renal function. Br J Cancer 1989;60:116.
114. Hardy JR, Tan S, Fryatt I, Wiltshaw E. How nephrotoxic is carboplatin? Br J Cancer 1990;61:644.
115. Palmisano J, Agraharkar M, Kaplan AA. Successful treatment of cisplatin-induced hemolytic uremic syndrome with therapeutic plasma exchange. Am J Kidney Dis 1998;32:314.
116. Walker RW, Rosenblum MK, Kempin SJ, Christian MC. Carboplatin-associated thrombotic microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. Cancer 1989;64:1017.
117. Gardner G, Mesler D, Gitelman HJ. Hemolytic uremic syndrome following cisplatin, bleomycin, and vincristine chemotherapy: a report of a case and a review of the literature. Renal Failure
1989;11:133.
118. Doll DC, Weiss RB. Hemolytic anemia associated with antineoplastic agents. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:777.
119. Wu DC, Liu JM, Chen YM, et al. Mitomycin-C induced hemolytic uremic syndrome: a case report and literature review. Jpn J Clin Oncol 1997;27:115.
120. Allum WH, Hallissey MT, Kelly KA, for the British Stomach Cancer Group. Adjuvant chemotherapy in operable gastric cancer. Lancet 1989;1:571.
121. Montes A, Powles TJ, O'Brien MER, et al. A toxic interaction between mitomycin C and tamoxifen causing the haemolytic uraemic syndrome. Eur J Cancer 1993;29A:1854.
122. Lesesne JB, Rothschild N, Erickson B, et al. Cancer-associated hemolytic-uremic syndrome: analysis of 85 cases from a national registry. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:781.
123. Motoo Y, Sawabu N, Ikeda K, et al. Long-term follow-up of mitomycin C nephropathy. Intern Med 1994;33:180.
124. Snyder HW, Mittelman A, Oral A, et al. Treatment of cancer chemotherapyassociated thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura/hemolytic uremic syndrome by protein A immunoadsorption of
plasma. Cancer 1993;71:1882.
125. Cattell V. Mitomycin-induced hemolytic uremic kidney: an experimental model in the rat. Am J Pathol 1985;121:88.
126. Nagaya S, Wada H, Oka K, et al. Hemostatic abnormalities and increased vascular endothelial cell markers in patients with red cell fragmentation syndrome induced by mitomycin C. Am J
Hematol 1995;50:237.
127. Ackland SP, Schilsky RL. High-dose methotrexate: a critical reappraisal. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:2017.
128. Goren MP, Wright RK, Horowitz ME, Meyer WH. Enhancement of methotrexate nephrotoxicity after cisplatin therapy. Cancer 1986;58:2617.
129. Thyss A, Kubar J, Milano G, Namer M, Schneider M. Clinical and pharmacokinetic evidence of life-threatening interaction between methotrexate and ketoprofen. Lancet 1986;1:256.
130. Singh RR, Malaviya AN, Pandey JN, Guleria JS. Fatal interaction between methotrexate and naproxen. Lancet 1986;1:1390.
131. Molina R, Fabian C, Cowley B. Use of charcoal hemoperfusion with sequential hemodialysis to reduce serum methotrexate levels in a patient with acute renal insufficiency. Am J Med
1987;82:350.
132. Widemann BC, Balis FM, Murphy RF, et al. Carboxypeptidase-G 2, thymidine, and leucovorin rescue in cancer patients with methotrexate-induced renal dysfunction. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2125.
133. Weiss RB. Streptozocin: a review of its pharmacology, efficacy, and toxicity. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:427.
134. Tobin MV, Warenius HM, Morris AI. Forced diuresis to reduce nephrotoxicity of streptozotocin in the treatment of advanced metastatic insulinoma. BMJ 1987;294:1128.
135. Ellis ME, Weiss RB, Kuperminc M. Nephrotoxicity of lomustine: a case report and literature review. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1985;15:174.
136. Berns JS, Haghighat A, Staddon A, et al. Severe, irreversible renal failure after ifosfamide treatment. A clinicopathologic report of two patients. Cancer 1995;76:497.
137. Loebstein R, Atanackovic G, Bishai R, et al. Risk factors for long-term outcome of ifosfamide-induced nephrotoxicity in children. J Clin Pharmacol 1999;39:454.
138. Skinner R, Sharkey IM, Pearson ADJ, Craft AW. Ifosfamide, mesna, and nephrotoxicity in children. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:173.
139. Rossi R. Nephrotoxicity of ifosfamidemoving towards understanding the molecular mechanisms. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1997;12:1091.
140. Sangster G, Kaye SB, Calman KC, Dalton JF. Failure of 2-mercaptoethane sulphonate sodium (mesna) to protect against ifosfamide nephrotoxicity. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1984;20:435.
141. Rossi R, Godde A, Kleinebrand A, et al. Unilateral nephrectomy and cisplatin as risk factors of ifosfamide-induced nephrotoxicity: analysis of 120 patients. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:159.
142. Skinner R, Pearson ADJ, English MW, et al. Risk factors for ifosfamide nephrotoxicity in children. Lancet 1996;348:578.
143. Le Cesne A, Antoine E, Spielmann M, et al. High-dose ifosfamide: circumvention of resistance to standard-dose ifosfamide in advanced soft tissue sarcomas. J Clin Oncol 1995; 13:1600.
144. Rossi R, Pleyer J, Schafers P, et al. Development of ifosfamide-induced nephrotoxicity: prospective follow-up in 75 patients. Med Pediatr Oncol 1999;32:177.
145. Kramer A, Goldschmidt H, Hahn U, Andrassy K. Progressive renal failure in two breast cancer patients after high-dose ifosfamide. Lancet 1994;344:1569.
146. Friedlaender MM, Haviv YS, Rosenmann E, Peylan-Ramu N. End-stage renal interstitial fibrosis in an adult ten years after ifosfamide therapy. Am J Nephrol 1998;18:131.
147. van der Lelie H, Baars JW, Rodenhuis S, et al. Hemolytic uremic syndrome after high dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell support. Cancer 1995;76:2338.
148. Pratt CB, Johnson WW. Duration and severity of fatty metamorphosis of the liver following L-asparaginase therapy. Cancer 1971;28:361.
149. Moertel CG, Fleming TR, Macdonald JS, Haller DG, Laurie JA. Hepatic toxicity associated with fluorouracil plus levamisole adjuvant therapy. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2386.
150. Norum J. 5-Fluorouracil/levamisole induced intrahepatic fat infiltration imitating liver metastasis. Acta Oncol 1995;34:971.
151. Herzig RH, Wolff SN, Lazarus HM, et al. High-dose cytosine arabinoside therapy for refractory leukemia. Blood 1983;62:361.
152. Pizzuto J, Aviles A, Ramos E, Cervera J, Aguirre J. Cytosine arabinoside induced liver damage: histopathologic demonstration. Med Pediatr Oncol 1983;11:287.
153. Laidlaw ST, Reilly JT, Suvarna SK. Fatal hepatotoxicity associated with 6-mercaptopurine therapy. Br J Haematol 1999;105:316.
154. Raine J, Bowman A, Wallendszus K, Pritchard J. Hepatopathy-thrombocytopenia syndromea complication of dactinomycin therapy for Wilms' tumor: a report from the United Kingdom
Childrens Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:268.
155. Davidson A, Pritchard J. Actinomycin D, hepatic toxicity, and Wilms' tumora mystery explained? Eur J Cancer 1998;34:1145.

156. Richardson P, Bearman SI. Prevention and treatment of hepatic venoocclusive disease after high-dose cytoreductive therapy. Leuk Lymphoma 1998;31:267.
157. Marsh JC. Hepatic vascular toxicity of dacarbazine (DTIC): not a rare complication. Hepatology 1989;9:790.
158. West SG. Methotrexate hepatotoxicity. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 1997;23:883.
159. Evans WE, Tsiatis A, Rivera G, et al. Anaphylactoid reactions of Escherichia coli and Erwinia asparaginase in children with leukemia and lymphoma. Cancer 1982;49:1378.
160. Larson RA, Fretzin MH, Dodge RK, Schiffer CA. Hypersensitivity reactions to L-asparaginase do not impact on the remission duration of adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemia
1998;12:660.
161. Eden OB, Shaw MP, Lilleyman JS, Richards S. Non-randomized study comparing toxicity of Escherichia coli and Erwinia asparaginase in children with leukaemia. Med Pediatr Oncol
1990;18:497.
162. Pegaspargase for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Med Lett Drugs Ther 1995;37:23.
163. Weiss RB, Donehower RH, Wiernik PH, et al. Hypersensitivity reactions from Taxol. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1263.
164. Tyson LB, Kris MG, Corso DM, Choy E, Timoney JP. Incidence, course, and severity of taxoid-induced hypersensitivity reaction in 646 oncology patients. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:585a.
165. van Herpen CML, van Hoesel QGCM, Punt CJA. Paclitaxel-induced severe hypersensitivity reaction occurring as a late toxicity. Ann Oncol 1995;6:852.
166. Ramanathan RK, Reddy VV, Holbert JM, Belani CP. Pulmonary infiltrates following administration of paclitaxel. Chest 1996;110:289.
167. Tsavaris NB, Kosmas C. Risk of severe acute hypersensitivity reactions after rapid paclitaxel infusion of less than 1-h duration. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1998;42:509.
168. Doll DC, Yarbro JW. Vascular toxicity associated with antineoplastic agents. Semin Oncol 1992;19:580.
169. Weiss RB, Tormey DC, Holland JF, Weinberg VE. Venous thrombosis during multimodal therapy of primary breast carcinoma. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:677.
170. Pritchard KI, Paterson AHG, Paul NA, et al. Increased thromboembolic complications with concurrent tamoxifen and chemotherapy in a randomized trial of adjuvant therapy for women with
breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2731.
171. Wall JG, Weiss RB, Norton L, et al. Arterial thrombosis associated with adjuvant chemotherapy for breast carcinoma: a Cancer and Leukemia Group B study. Am J Med 1989;87:501.
172. Gerl A. Vascular toxicity associated with chemotherapy for testicular cancer. Anti-Cancer Drugs 1994;5:607.
173. Czaykowski PM, Moore MJ, Tannock IF. High risk of vascular events in patients with urothelial transitional cell carcinoma treated with cisplatin based chemotherapy. J Urol 1998;160:2021.
174. Meyer CC, Calis KA, Burke LB, Walawander CA, Grasela TH. Symptomatic cardiotoxicity associated with 5-fluorouracil. Pharmacotherapy 1997;17:729.
175. Berger CC, Bokemeyer C, Schneider M, Kuczyk MA, Schmoll HJ. Secondary Raynaud's phenomenon and other late vascular complications following chemotherapy for testicular cancer. Eur J
Cancer 1995;31A:2229.
176. Hansen SW, Olsen N, Rossing N, Rorth M. Vascular toxicity and the mechanism underlying Raynaud's phenomenon in patients treated with cisplatin, vinblastine and bleomycin. Ann Oncol
1990;1:289.
177. Epstein E. Intralesional bleomycin and Raynaud's phenomenon. J Am Acad Dermatol 1991;24:785.
178. Papmichael D, Amft N, Slevin ML, D'Cruz D. 5-fluorouracil-induced Raynaud's phenomenon. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:1983.

SECTION 56.1 Management of Cancer Pain
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 56.1
Management of Cancer Pain
KATHLEEN M. FOLEY
Introduction
Epidemiology
Definition and Types of Cancer Pain
Definition of Pain
Anatomy and Physiology of Pain
Types of Pain
Somatic Pain
Visceral Pain
Neuropathic Pain
Temporal Aspects of Pain
Acute Pain
Chronic Pain
Intensity of Pain
Measurement of Pain
Brief Pain Inventory (BPI)
McGill Pain Questionnaire
Memorial Pain Assessment Card
Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale
Quality Improvement Guidelines for the Treatment of Cancer Pain
Classification of Patients with Cancer Pain
Group I Acute Cancer-Related Pain
Group IA: Tumor-Associated Pain
Group IB: Pain Associated with Cancer Therapy
Group II: Chronic Cancer-Related Pain
Group IIA: Chronic Pain from Tumor Progression
Group IIB: Chronic Pain Associated with Cancer Therapy
Group III: Preexisting Chronic Pain and Cancer-Related Pain
Group IV: Patients with a History of Drug Addiction and Pain
Group V: Dying Patients with Pain
Common Pain Syndromes
Clinical Assessment of Pain
Believe the Patient's Complaint of Pain
Take a Careful History of the Patient's Pain Complaint
Evaluate the Patient's Psychological State
Perform a Careful Medical and Neurologic Examination
Order and Personally Review the Appropriate Diagnostic Studies
Treat the Pain to Facilitate the Appropriate Workup
Reassess the Patient's Response to Therapy
Individualize the Diagnostic and Therapeutic Approach
Discuss Advance Directives with the Patient and Family
Management of Cancer Pain
Analgesic Drug Therapy
World Health Organization Three-Step Analgesic Ladder
Classes of Drugs
Nonopioid Analgesics
Opioid Drugs
Principles of Opioid Drug Therapy
Start with a Specific Drug for a Specific Type of Pain
Know the Equianalgesic Dose of the Drug and Its Route of Administration
Administer Analgesics Regularly after Initial Titration
Gear the Route of Administration to the Patient's Needs
Use a Combination of Drugs
Anticipate and Treat Side Effects
Manage Tolerance
Taper Drugs Slowly
Anticipate Complications
Adjuvant Drugs
Psychological Approaches
Anesthetic and Neurosurgical Approaches
Local Anesthetics
Peripheral Nerve Blocks
Autonomic Nerve Block
Neuroadenolysis of the Pituitary
Antitumor Approaches
Antinociceptive Procedures
Trigger Point Injection
Neurosurgical Approaches
Physiatric Approaches
Sedation in the Imminently Dying
Nitrous Oxide
Intravenous Barbiturates
Algorithm for Cancer Pain Management
Future Directions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Advances in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer, coupled with advances in our understanding of the anatomy, physiology, pharmacology, and psychology of pain
perception, have led to improved care of the patient with pain of malignant origin. 1 Specialized methods of cancer diagnosis and treatment provide the most direct
approach to treating cancer pain by treating the cause of the pain. However, before the introduction of successful antitumor therapy, when treatment of the cause of
the pain has failed, or when injury to bone, soft tissue, or nerve has occurred as a result of therapy, appropriate pain management is essential. Patients with cancer
are managed most effectively by a multidisciplinary approach, using the expertise of a wide range of health care professionals. The goal of pain therapy for patients
receiving active treatment is to provide them with sufficient relief to tolerate the diagnostic and therapeutic approaches required to treat their cancer. For patients with
advanced disease, pain control should be sufficient to allow them to function at a level they choose and to die relatively free of pain. 2 The management of the
symptom of pain is only one component of a broad palliative care approach for cancer patients. 3 Control of other symptoms, treatment of psychological distress, and
attention to the religious, spiritual, and existential dimensions of the patient's illness experience should be concurrently addressed to maintain the patient's quality of
life throughout the cancer illness course from diagnosis to death. 4

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Existing studies based on numerous national and international surveys and World Health Organization (WHO) estimates suggest that moderate to severe pain is

experienced by one-third of cancer patients receiving active therapy and by 60% to 90% of patients with advanced disease. 5,6,7,8 ans 9 There are 17 million new cases of
cancer diagnosed worldwide each year and 5 million cancer deaths, accounting for large numbers of patients who suffer from cancer pain. 9 Pain associated with
direct tumor involvement is the most common cause of cancer pain, occurring in as many as 85% of patients reported from a pain service study, to 65% from an
outpatient cancer center pain clinic survey. 5 Bone pain is the most common type, with tumor infiltration of nerve and hollow viscus as the second and third most
common pain locations. Cancer therapy causes pain in approximately 15% to 25% of patients receiving chemotherapy, surgery, or radiation therapy. Three percent to
10% of patients with cancer have pain caused by non–cancer-related problems, with pain syndromes reflecting the common causes of pain in the general population.
Patients with cancer often have multiple causes of pain and multiple sites of pain. 6 Based on a variety of survey data, up to one-third of patients had more than one
pain and 81% of patients reported two or more distinct pain complaints; 34% reported three pains. Cross-cultural studies from India, Thailand, Vietnam, Germany,
France, Taiwan, the Philippines, and China report a similar prevalence of cancer pain in patients in active therapy and advanced disease. 10,11 and 12
Studies have focused not only on the prevalence of pain but on its intensity, degree of pain relief, and the effect of pain on quality of life in patients with various
cancers including lung, colon, ovarian, and pancreatic cancers. 13,14 and 15 In one study of lung and colon cancer ambulatory patients, the median pain duration was 4
weeks and the average pain intensity was moderate. Ninety percent experienced pain more than 25% of the time, and 50% reported that pain interfered moderately or
more with their general activity or work. 13 In the Netherlands, 60% of all outpatients seen at an oncology clinic were in pain and 20% of this group reported moderate
to severe pain.16 In a 1999 survey of cancer outpatients, Weber and Huber reported inadequate documentation of pain severity, opioid dose, and rescue doses,
observing that lack of documentation is a significant barrier to providing effective pain control. 17 Cleeland et al., in a study of patients who were followed by the
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, reported that 56% of patients reported moderate to severe pain 50% of the time. 18 Numerous studies point out the fact that pain
is prevalent in ambulatory patients, as well as hospitalized patients, and compromises function in approximately one-half of the patients who experience it.
A series of studies have focused on the seriously ill and nursing home cancer population and have identified a high prevalence of pain in these populations. The
Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatments showed that 50% of adults who die in the hospital experience moderate to
severe pain in the last 3 days of life. 19 A study of 4000 elderly nursing home residents with cancer revealed that 24%, 29%, and 38% of those over age 85, 74 to 84,
and 65 to 74, respectively, reported daily pain. 20 Twenty-six percent in daily pain did not receive any medication. Those over 85 who reported pain were most likely to
receive no analgesic. 20
Such studies have led to an assessment of the factors that influence the prevalence of cancer pain. Primary tumor type is one factor. Tumors that commonly
metastasize to bone such as breast or prostate have a higher incidence of pain (60% to 80%) as compared with patients with lymphoma and leukemia. Stage of
disease is a contributing factor, with increasing pain prevalence with disease progression. For example, less than 15% of patients with nonmetastatic disease report
pain. Tumors that occur in close proximity to neural structures also have a greater incidence of pain. Patient variables such as anxiety, depression, and history of
previous substance abuse influence the patient's report and experience of pain. 21
Several studies have detailed the characteristics of patient populations followed by pain services and palliative and hospice care programs, providing further data on
the magnitude of the cancer pain problem. 18,22,23,24,25,26 and 27 A 10-year experience of a German anesthesiology-based pain service associated with a palliative care
program reported on the course of treatment of 2118 patients over a period of 140,478 treatment days. 27 Table 56.1-1 lists the primary tumors and pain localization
etiology and type of pain syndrome. In their survey, gastrointestinal and head and neck cancers were the most common types, with the majority (85%) caused by
tumor involvement. Pain intensity data were collected through the course of treatment. Eighty-two percent of patients had moderate to very severe pain at the
beginning of treatment, with only 7% reporting such high intensity at the completion of treatment.

TABLE 56.1-1. Sites of Cancer Pain and Localization, Etiology, and Type of Pain Syndromes

Several studies have also addressed the epidemiology and ethnography of pain treatment. In a study to assess the effect of a comprehensive medical and neurologic
evaluation of pain in the cancer patient, 64% of patients had a lesion newly identified by the pain consultant. 28 Of note, more than 50% were neurologic in origin and,
in 19% of patients further anticancer therapy combined with analgesic approaches were recommended. Further studies have observed that neurologic lesions make
up a substantial portion of painful lesions in the cancer population. In a prospective study of neurologic symptoms, neurologic diagnoses, and primary tumors in all
patients with a history with systemic cancer referred to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center Neurology Consultation Service, the three most common symptoms in
851 patients were back pain (18.2%), altered mental status (17.1%), and headache (15.4%). 29 The most common neurologic diagnosis was brain metastases (15.9%),
followed by metabolic encephalopathy (10.2%), pain associated with bone metastases only (9.9%), and epidural extension or metastases of tumor (8.4%). 29
In studies of patients with far-advanced disease cared for in palliative care programs, pain is the most common physical symptom. Of note, pain treatment significantly
reduced this symptom but several other prominent symptoms including anxiety, fatigue, weakness, anorexia, nausea and vomiting, and dyspnea were less effectively
managed.30 This observation supports the critical need to evaluate, prioritize, and treat all symptoms to improve cancer pain patients' quality of life.

DEFINITION AND TYPES OF CANCER PAIN
DEFINITION OF PAIN
The definition of pain proposed by the International Association for the Study of Pain is “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or
potential tissue damage or described in terms of such damage.” 31 Because pain is a subjective complaint, there is no definitive way to distinguish pain occurring in the
absence of tissue damage from pain resulting from such damage. Pain as a somatic delusion or masked depression is rare in cancer patients and the presence of
pain usually implies a pathologic process.
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF PAIN
Extensive investigations over the last 30 years have expanded our knowledge of ascending and descending central nervous system pathways that process and
modulate nociceptive information. These advances provide a scientific rationale for the use of new and improved methods of cancer pain treatment. 1,32,33 and 34 A brief
review of the neuroanatomy, physiology, and pharmacology of pain provides a background for the later discussions of specific drug, anesthetic, and neurosurgical
approaches. Detailed information now supports the theory that activation of peripheral receptors in both superficial and deep structures as well as viscera by
mechanical and chemical stimuli excites afferent discharges. Nonnociceptive messages are transmitted through rapidly conducting A-beta fibers and nociceptive
information is signaled through slowly conducting A-delta and C-fiber afferents. The receptor endings of A-delta fibers most often respond to one sensory stimulus,
whereas most C-fiber receptors are multimodal and respond to multiple high-threshold stimuli. These primary sensory afferents have their cell bodies in the dorsal
root ganglion, and their axons enter the spinal cord via the dorsal root. The synaptic connections of these primary afferents with the corresponding second-order
nociceptive neurons in the spinal dorsal horn are the initial site of processing for sensory information and act as a relay in transmitting noxious signals to the central

nervous system.34,35
They ascend or descend from one or two segments in Lissauer's tract and synapse in specific lamina in the dorsal horn, lamina I and lamina II. Evidence suggests
that myelinated nociceptors project to lamina I and V and unmyelinated nociceptors to lamina II and possibly lamina I, and nonnociceptive myelinated afferents project
to only deep lamina. The dorsal horn is a critical site for modulating sensory input. Sensory transmission is mediated through excitatory amino acids (EAAs),
predominantly glutamate.36 The EAA aspartate and the neuropeptides substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide are also involved. Excitatory synaptic
transmission from the primary afferent is also modulated by the N-methyl- D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor as well as non-NMDA receptors. 34 Following EAA-NMDA
receptor interaction, intracellular calcium influx and mobilization of intracellular calcium lead to subsequent changes in second messenger systems. One second
messenger system activated following EAA-NMDA receptor interaction is the generation of nitric oxide via the enzyme nitric oxide synthase. There is also an increase
in transcription of immediate early gene c-fos, which may regulate the subsequent expression of endogenous opioid genes, preproenkephalin and preprodynorphin.
NMDA receptor activation initiates and maintains central sensitization and the component known as windup. These phenomena are manifestations of persistent
signaling from primary sensory afferents. Central sensitization is thought to be the major mechanism underlying neuropathic pain and accounts for the hyperpathia
and enlarged cutaneous receptor fields that occur following nerve injury.
At the level of the second-order neurons in the dorsal horn, sensory processing occurs through interactions among neurochemical transmitters released by primary
afferents including gamma-aminobutyric acid, glycine, adenosine, bombesin, cholecystokinin, dynorphin, enkephalin, neuropeptide Y, neurotensin, substance P,
somatostatin, and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide.
Several ascending pathways arise from these second-order neurons and decussate in the central gray of the spinal cord to become the neospinothalamic and
paleospinothalamic tracts. These tracts project to discrete regions of the thalamus and cortex. The neospinothalamic pathway subserves pain intensity and
localization, whereas the phylogenetically older paleospinothalamic pathway subserves the arousal and emotional component of pain. Descending pathways, the
most important of which originate from the periaqueductal gray nuclei of the midbrain, synapse in the raphae magnus nucleus of the medulla. From this nucleus a
medial pathway, the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus, projects to the dorsal horn to modulate pain transmission. This pathway represents an important descending
inhibitory pathway. A more laterally placed descending pathway from the locus ceruleus to the dorsal horn also plays a role on pain modulation at the spinal cord
level.
Opiate receptors, stereospecific binding sites on the end of free nerve endings that bind exogenous opioids, are localized in the ascending and descending pain
pathways. These receptors mediate the multiple pharmacologic effects of the opioid analgesics. Subpopulations of opioid receptors including high-affinity and
low-affinity µ receptors and g, k, and d receptors are localized to specific areas of the brain and spinal cord. More recently, several opioid receptor subtypes have
been cloned and quantitative changes in the messenger RNA for these receptors determined in experimental models. The cloning of these subtypes of receptors that
mediate different pharmacologic effects and then are located in specific cerebral and spinal sites offers the possibility of developing new analgesics targeted for
specific receptors. 37 For example, µ receptors modulate predominantly supraspinal analgesia, whereas d and k receptors are important in modulating analgesia at the
spinal cord level. The periaqueductal gray region in the midbrain and dorsal horn in the spinal cord are rich in these receptors and are the supraspinal and spinal
sites that mediate opioid analgesia. The use of brainstem stimulation and the administration of opioid analgesics directly into the cerebrospinal fluid bathing the
selective opioid sites in animals and cancer patients with pain are procedures based on this knowledge. 38 Pain transmission at the spinal cord level can be inhibited
by the direct application of morphine, and these studies have led to the use of spinal opioid analgesia in clinical pain states. 39,40 There is now increasing information
about the molecular basis of opioid tolerance development. A variety of NMDA receptor antagonists have been demonstrated both to attenuate and to reverse
experimental opioid analgesic tolerance. 41 Therefore, the confluence of NMDA receptors in pain transmission and their role in the development of tolerance have
provided new insights into the role of opioid receptors in analgesia.
These advances in our understanding of pain modulatory systems and their neuroanatomic and neuropharmacologic correlates have had a major effect on the
management of patients with pain. A better understanding of the molecular biology of both nociceptive and neuropathic pain is facilitating the wide application of a
variety of agents including the NMDA antagonists, calcium channel agonists and antagonists, and topical and local systemic anesthetics and opioids. 34,35

TYPES OF PAIN
Three types of pain have been described based on the neuroanatomy and the neurophysiology of pain pathways: somatic, visceral, and neuropathic pain. Each type
results from activation and sensitization of nociceptors and mechanoreceptors in the periphery by either mechanical (tumor compression or infiltration) or chemical
(epinephrine, serotonin, bradykinin, prostaglandin, histamine, and so forth) stimuli.
SOMATIC PAIN
When nociceptors are activated in cutaneous or deep tissues, somatic pain results, typically characterized by a dull or aching but well-localized pain. Metastatic bone
pain, postsurgical incisional pain, and myofascial and musculoskeletal pain are common examples of somatic pain.
VISCERAL PAIN
Visceral pain results from activation of nociceptors from infiltration, compression, extension, or stretching of the thoracic, abdominal, or pelvic viscera. This typically
occurs in patients with intraperitoneal metastases and is common with pancreatic cancer. This type of pain is poorly localized; is often described as deep, squeezing,
and pressure-like; and when acute is often associated with significant autonomic dysfunction, including nausea, vomiting, and diaphoresis. Visceral pain is often
referred to cutaneous sites that may be remote from the site of the lesion (e.g., shoulder pain with diaphragmatic irritation). It may be associated with tenderness in
the referred cutaneous site. Increasing data have demonstrated the role of k opioid receptors in modulating visceral pain. 42
NEUROPATHIC PAIN
Neuropathic pain results from injury to the peripheral or central nervous system as a consequence of tumor compression or infiltration of peripheral nerves or the
spinal cord, or from chemical injury to the peripheral nerve or spinal cord caused by surgery, radiation therapy, or chemotherapy. Examples of neuropathic pain
include both metastatic and radiation-induced brachial and lumbosacral plexopathies, chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathies, paraneoplastic peripheral
neuropathies, and postmastectomy, postthoracotomy, and phantom limb pain. 34,43 Pain from nerve injury is often severe and is described as burning or dysesthetic,
with a vice-like quality. The pain is typically most common in the site of sensory loss and may be associated with hypersensitivity to nonnoxious (allodynia) and
noxious stimuli. Intermittently, patients complain of paroxysms or burning or electric shock–like sensations. The latter symptoms result from the phenomenon of central
sensitization.
These three types of pain may occur alone or combined in the same patient. These different types of pain account for different responses to drug and nondrug
approaches. For instance, the nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) reduce chemical activation of nociceptors peripherally (e.g., bone pain), whereas
anesthetic approaches suppress the pain transmission in peripheral nerves. Management of both somatic and visceral pain suggests that these types of pain respond
to a wide variety of approaches. The management of neuropathic pain is more complicated: Changes in the peripheral nervous system and the central nervous
system make this type of pain less responsive to a wide variety of pharmacologic, anesthetic, and neurosurgical approaches.
Evidence suggests that most cancer patients have both somatic and visceral pain, with neuropathic pain representing 15% to 20% of the significant pain problems in
this population. 1,32 Certain adjuvant drugs appear to be more appropriate in the management of neuropathic pain; these issues are discussed in a later (see Adjuvant
Analgesics for Neuropathic Pain ).

TEMPORAL ASPECTS OF PAIN
ACUTE PAIN
Acute pain is characterized by a well-defined temporal pattern of pain onset, generally associated with subjective and objective physical signs and with hyperactivity
of the autonomic nervous system. These signs provide the physician with objective evidence that substantiates the patient's complaint of pain. Acute pain is usually

self-limited and responds to treatment with analgesic drug therapy and to treatment of its precipitating cause. It can be further subdivided into subacute and episodic.
Subacute pain comes on over several days, often with increasing intensity, and represents a pattern of progressive pain symptomatology. Episodic or intermittent pain
occurs during confined periods of time on a regular or irregular basis. All of the pains in this category of acute pain have associated autonomic hyperactivity.
CHRONIC PAIN
Chronic pain is the persistence of pain for more than 3 months, with a less well-defined temporal onset. The autonomic nervous system adapts, and chronic pain
patients lack the objective signs common to those with acute pain. Chronic pain leads to significant changes in personality, lifestyle, and functional ability. Treatment
of chronic pain in the cancer patient is especially challenging because it requires a careful assessment of not only the intensity of the pain but its broad
multidimensional aspects. 21 Evidence suggests that the persistence of pain plays a major negative role in the quality of life of patients with pain and cancer.
Investigators have developed a nomenclature to describe a series of specific pains in cancer patients with both acute and chronic pain states. Baseline pain is the
average pain intensity experienced for 12 or more hours during a 24-hour period. Breakthrough pain is a transient increase in pain to greater than moderate intensity
occurring on a baseline pain of moderate intensity or less. In a study of 70 adult inpatient cancer patients, 65% reported breakthrough pain. 44 The median number of
reported pains was four, with a wide range. Most pains had a rapid onset and a brief duration. Breakthrough pain has a diversity of characteristics. Some authors
have detailed the prevalence of such transitory flares of pain. 45 In a study of 613 consecutive cancer patients, 39% reported transitory flares that were severe or
worse in 92% of patients. There were no correlations with gender, age, tumor site, stage, and therapy. The pain was somatic in 39%, visceral in 22%, and neuropathic
in 36%. In this and other series, the transitory increase in pain marks the onset or worsening of pain at the end of the dosing interval or the regularly scheduled
analgesic. In other patients, it is caused by an action of the patient, referred to as incident pain; sometimes the incident pain has a nonvolitional precipitant, such as
flatulence. Most breakthrough or transitory pains are thought to be associated with a known malignant cause from direct tumor infiltration. Clinical trials with an oral
transmucosal fentanyl preparation have focused attention on the clinical management of such episodes of worsening pain. 46

INTENSITY OF PAIN
Pain may also be defined on the basis of intensity, but there are limitations to a concept of pain based solely on intensity. Specific categoric scales of pain intensity
have been used in which patients are asked to describe their pain as mild, moderate, severe, or excruciating. 47 Visual analog scales (VAS) have also been used.
These are often a 10-cm line anchored on either end by two points, signifying no pain and worst possible pain. The patient is asked to mark the intensity of the pain on
the line. Numeric scales are also commonly used, asking patients to rate their pain between 1 (no pain) and 10 (worst possible pain). These scales have their
limitations, but they are part of a series of validated instruments that include a measure of pain intensity as one of the components of the pain experience to be
defined.47 In a study of physicians' and nurses' understanding of the language to describe pain, there was a close correlation among them of the level of intensity
meant by the terms ache, hurt, or pain.48 Although health care professionals may understand the common language of pain, there is an enormous discrepancy
between their assessment and the patient's report of pain, particularly when the patient reports pain as moderate or severe. They compared the ratings of pain
severity by patients with those by physicians and found that patients tended to rate their pain as more intense than did physicians. In a study by Grossman and
associates, the cancer patients' report of pain and the physicians' concurrent observation had a close correlation when patients reported mild pain. 49 However, when
patients reported moderate to severe pain, the correlation of the nurse, house officer, and oncology fellow differed significantly from that of the patient: The
concordance dropped from 78% for patients with mild pain to 20% for those with moderate to severe pain.

MEASUREMENT OF PAIN
These problems in communication about pain intensity strongly support the argument that multiple dimensions of the pain experience should be used to assess it
adequately. Several validated instruments for pain measurement attempt to look at it in a multidimensional nature. The use of such methods can provide rapid
evaluation in clinical settings of the major aspects of the pain experienced by cancer patients. Growing evidence suggests that they should be integrated into clinical
trials and should be available for use on a routine basis to better define the pain symptomatology and to study the effect on pain by various treatment approaches.
BRIEF PAIN INVENTORY (BPI)
The Wisconsin Brief Pain Questionnaire (BPI) is a self-administered, easily understood, brief method to assess pain. 50 It addresses the relevant aspects of pain
(history, intensity, location, and quality) and the pain's ability to interfere with the patient's activities and helps to provide an understanding of its cause. The history of
pain and its relation to the patient's disease are assessed initially. If the patient admits to pain in the last month, he or she answers questions about current
manifestations of pain. If the patient has no pain, he or she skips to the end of the questionnaire to complete demographic information. For patients with pain, a
human figure drawing is provided for the patient to shade the area corresponding to the pain. Patients are asked to rate their pain at its worst, usual pain, and pain
now. The pain scales consist of numbers from 0 to 10; 0 is labeled no pain and 10 is labeled pain as bad as you can imagine. Patients are asked to report the
medications or treatments they receive for pain, the percent relief that these medications or treatment provide, and their belief about the cause of their pain. Finally,
they are asked to rate how much the pain interferes with their mood, relations with other people, and functional ability (walking, sleeping, working, enjoying life). All
patients, including those without pain, are asked for basic demographic information about marital status, education, occupation, spouse's occupation, and months
since diagnosis.
This inventory has been translated into numerous languages and has been used to assess pain in cancer patients in such diverse settings as Vietnam, Mexico, the
Philippines, China, and the University of Wisconsin Cancer Center. Data from these studies suggest that cancer pain patients from widely different cultural and
linguistic backgrounds respond in a similar fashion to rating the severity of their cancer-related pain and the interference caused by the pain.
MCGILL PAIN QUESTIONNAIRE
The McGill Pain Questionnaire (MPQ) is an extensively used pain assessment instrument that produces scores on four empirically derived dimensions, as well as
several summary scores.51 The instrument consists of 78 adjectives that cluster in 20 categories. Within each category, the adjectives are arranged in order of
intensity from low to high. The categories are divided into four dimensions: sensory, affective, evaluative, and miscellaneous. The patient is asked to choose one
adjective from each applicable category that describes an aspect of his or her current pain, and the score for each dimension is obtained by adding the rank values of
the selected adjectives. A total summary score is derived by adding the scores across the four dimensions, and a total word count is also obtained. Finally, a rating of
present pain intensity is made on a five-point scale. Studies with this instrument have demonstrated that the factors derived reflect specific sensory qualities and
combined emotional and sensory dimensions. This tool has also been used to assess distinct score profiles according to the nature of pain. For instance, patients with
acute pain tend to use more sensory words, but patients with chronic pain tend to use more affective and reaction word subgroups. The MPQ offers a methodologic
approach to assess the sensory, affective, and evaluative components of pain, but it may be more difficult and cumbersome for patients to understand and complete
and may be limited by its language constraints.
MEMORIAL PAIN ASSESSMENT CARD
The Memorial Pain Assessment Card (MPAC) (Fig. 56.1-1) was initially developed by the Analgesic Studies Section of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center to
assess the relative potency of new and standard analgesic drugs. In that context, this method was found repeatedly to be a valid, reliable, efficient, and sensitive
measure.52 The MPAC consists of three VAS that measure pain intensity, pain relief, and mood, and a set of pain severity descriptors adapted from the Tursky rating
scale. The card is 8.5 by 11 inches and is folded in the middle so that the four sides can be quickly presented to the patient. Three sides are imprinted with the
100-mm long VAS scale; the fourth side is the set of Tursky adjectives. The pain intensity VAS is anchored by the terms least possible pain and worst possible pain.
The patient is asked to place a mark along the line to indicate his or her subjective judgment of pain intensity. The score on this and the other VAS is obtained by
measuring in millimeters the distance between the left end of the line and the patient's mark. The Tursky pain adjective scale is a categorical measure of pain
intensity. Eight intensity descriptors, ranging from no pain to excruciating, are printed in a random arrangement and the patient is asked to circle the adjective that
describes his or her subjective experience of pain severity. Side 3 of the MPAC is a pain-relief VAS. Patients are asked to indicate with a mark the degree of pain
reduction they experience after the most recent intervention, which is usually the administration of an analgesic drug. On side 4 the VAS measures the subjective
experience of mood; on this side patients are asked to rate their current feeling, from worst to best. The instructions for administration of these scales are simple and
readily understood, and an experienced patient can complete the four ratings in less than 20 seconds.

FIGURE 56.1-1. Memorial Pain Assessment Card, front (1 and 4) and back (2 and 3) sides. The card is folded along the broken line, and each measure is presented
to the patient separately, in the numbered order. (1) Visual analog scale (VAS) of pain intensity; (2) modified Tursky pain descriptors scale; (3) VAS pain relief; (4)
VAS mood. (From ref. 52, with permission.)

The MPAC has been compared with the MPQ, the Profile of Mood States Questionnaire (a standardized self-report instrument that measures six dimensions of mood,
reflecting degree and type of psychological distress), the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (an interviewer-rated scale evaluating the presence and severity of 17
symptoms typical of clinical depression), and the Zung Anxiety Scale (a standardized self-report scale that reports the presence and severity of various symptoms of
anxiety). The MPAC and the MPQ both provide reasonably equivalent assessments of the intensity dimension of pain. However, the evaluative scales of the MPQ did
not correlate significantly with any of the measures of the MPAC, suggesting that the cognitive judgmental dimension of pain may be independent of the experiences
of intensity, relief, and mood. None of the MPQ subscales correlated significantly with the VAS ratings of mood and pain relief.
These observations have led to the conclusion that the VAS mood scale on the MPAC represents a much more global assessment of general psychological distress
rather than a specific pain-related affect. This would suggest that the MPAC provides a broader assessment of the patient by its use of the mood scale, whereas the
MPQ has a more narrow focus of simply representing pain-related emotional distress. What was particularly impressive was that in the use of any of the available
scales, patients could differentiate pain and mood when they were explicitly asked. The perceptions of pain intensity and pain relief have different weights as
components of psychological distress. The existence of such distinctions has important clinical and theoretical significance. Although the perception of pain intensity
was found to contribute significantly to subjective distress, the perception of inadequate pain relief was a more important factor. The MPAC provides valid,
multidimensional information for the evaluation of pain and distress in cancer patients. It can distinguish pain intensity from pain relief and from global suffering, and it
can be used to study the subtle interactions of these factors. With repeated administration it has now been demonstrated to be valid, reliable, easy to use, and
nondisruptive. The MPAC and the BPI are the tools recommended for use in the clinical evaluation of individual patients and as an outcome measure in clinical
trials.53
MEMORIAL SYMPTOM ASSESSMENT SCALE
The Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale (MSAS) is a validated, patient-rated measure that provides multidimensional information about a diverse group of common
symptoms.30 Thirty-two physical and psychological symptoms are characterized in terms of intensity, frequency, and distress. The MSAS provides a Global Distress
Index (MSAS-GDI), a ten-item subscale that reflects global symptom distress and separate subscales that measure physical (MSAS-Phys) and psychological
(MSAS-Psych) symptom distress, respectively. Ongoing studies have confirmed its value in patients with various types of cancer, and studies of its reliability and
validity with repeated administration are currently under way. The use of the MSAS allows the concurrent measurement of pain with various other symptoms,
psychological distress, and psychological factors and represents overall a useful, patient-accepted method to measure the multidimensional issues facing cancer
patients with pain. 53 Newer studies have identified the usefulness of a short form for rapid assessment. 54
QUALITY IMPROVEMENT GUIDELINES FOR THE TREATMENT OF CANCER PAIN
The American Pain Society Quality of Care Committee has strongly advocated pain measurement as an integral part of any continuous quality-improvement
program.55 They have argued that such quality-improvement programs should include five key elements: (1) ensuring that a report of unrelieved pain raises a red flag
that attracts clinicians' attention; (2) making information about analgesics convenient where orders are written; (3) promising patients responsive analgesic care and
urging them to communicate pain; (4) implementing policies and safeguards for the use of modern analgesic technologies; and (5) coordinating and implementing
these measures. They have argued formally for there to be methods in place to chart and display patients' self-reported pain in a way that makes it highly visible and
facilitates regular review by members of the health care team. Such information should be incorporated in the patient's permanent record. Figure 56.1-2 is an example
of recording pain data as a fifth vital sign to be available on a page at the front of the patient's record. Unrelieved pain then should be a red flag that promptly turns
attention to the problem. National programs have supported the development of broad institutional programs to improve pain management. The Veterans
Administration has instituted a quality-improvement program in a wide effort to include pain as the fifth vital sign. The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals
has similarly adopted clear guidelines for hospitals to improve pain management. Both of these programs, although not specifically focused on the cancer patient, are
evidence of a broad commitment to reduce the barriers to effective pain management at institutional levels by instituting routine quality indicators of pain
management. DuPen and colleagues have focused attention on the need to improve outpatient pain management, and through the use of a specific algorithm and
nurse and chart reminders have demonstrated improved pain management for outpatient cancer patients using a specific algorithm. 56

FIGURE 56.1-2. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Observation Chart with patient-rated pain intensity and relief measures. (From ref. 53, with permission.)

CLASSIFICATION OF PATIENTS WITH CANCER PAIN
Five types of cancer pain patients can be identified, exemplifying the distinctions between acute and chronic pain ( Table 56.1-2). Although these categories are fluid,
they serve as a useful preamble for discussion of the specific therapeutic approaches to the management of cancer patients.

TABLE 56.1-2. Types of Patients with Pain from Cancer

GROUP I: ACUTE CANCER-RELATED PAIN
Group I, patients with acute cancer-related pain, can be subdivided further according to etiology.
GROUP IA: TUMOR-ASSOCIATED PAIN
For group IA patients, with tumor-associated pain, pain is the major symptom prompting medical consultation and the diagnosis of cancer. In addition, pain has a
special significance as the harbinger of the patient's illness. Recurrent pain during the course of the illness or after successful therapy has the immediate implication
of recurrent disease. Defining the cause of the pain may present a diagnostic problem, but effective treatment of its cause (e.g., radiation therapy for bone
metastases) is usually associated with dramatic pain relief in most patients.
GROUP IB: PAIN ASSOCIATED WITH CANCER THERAPY
Group IB patients have postoperative pain, pain secondary to oral ulceration from chemotherapy, or myalgias secondary to corticosteroid withdrawal. The cause of the
pain is readily identifiable, and its course is predictable and self-limiting ( Table 56.1-3). These patients do not represent difficult diagnostic problems. Pain treatment
directed at the cause of the pain is used to manage the transient symptoms. These patients endure significant pain for the promise of a successful outcome.

TABLE 56.1-3. Cancer-Related Acute Pain Syndromes

GROUP II: CHRONIC CANCER-RELATED PAIN
Group II patients, those with chronic cancer-related pain, represent difficult diagnostic and therapeutic problems, in contrast to patients with acute cancer-related pain.
They can be divided for discussion purposes into two groups: those with chronic pain from tumor progression, and those with chronic pain related to cancer treatment.
Both groups share the characteristic of a pain symptom that has persisted for more than 3 months.
GROUP IIA: CHRONIC PAIN FROM TUMOR PROGRESSION
In patients with chronic pain associated with progression of disease (e.g., patients with carcinoma of the pancreas, metastatic melanoma to bone, or Pancoast's
syndrome), the pain escalates in intensity secondary to tumor infiltration of adjacent bone, nerve, or soft tissue. Combinations of antitumor therapy, analgesic drug
therapy, anesthetic blocks, and behavioral approaches are all applied with varying degrees of success. Psychological factors play a significant role in this group of
patients, in whom palliative cancer therapy may be of little value and is physically debilitating. The sense of hopelessness and fear of impending death may further
add to and exaggerate the pain complaint; pain then becomes an aspect of the global suffering component.57 Identifying both the pain and the suffering component is
essential to the development of adequate therapy for these patients. Management approaches must be directed to controlling the pain and identifying and developing
treatment strategies for each of the components of the patient's symptoms and psychological distress. Analgesic therapy combined with a wide range of alternative
approaches is necessary to provide adequate analgesia. Such patients are appropriate candidates for palliative care programs to address the broader aspects of
symptom management and psychological support. 2,4,58
GROUP IIB: CHRONIC PAIN ASSOCIATED WITH CANCER THERAPY
Group IIB includes patients with chronic pain associated with cancer therapy, such as patients who develop pain after mastectomy, thoracotomy, or limb amputation
(phantom limb). The nature of pain in these patients is secondary to nerve injury (neuropathic pain) with the development of a traumatic neuroma. Treatment of the
pain for these patients is limited by the lack of available methods to remove the cause of the pain. Again, treatment is directed at the symptoms, not the cause. These
patients closely parallel those in the general population with chronic intractable pain syndromes. Psychological factors play a significant role in how these patients
adapt to and function with chronic pain. Defining this group is imperative: Identifying the cause of the pain as not directly related to tumor markedly alters the patient's
therapy, prognosis, and psychological state. Each of the primary modalities of cancer therapy is associated with a series of specific chronic pain syndromes with
characteristic pain patterns and clinical presentations ( Table 56.1-4, Table 56.1-5, and Table 56.1-6). Although it is consoling to both the patient and the physician to
realize that the pain does not represent recurrent or progressive disease, the persistence of the pain is a constant reminder of the previous diagnosis of cancer.

TABLE 56.1-4. Treatment-Related Chronic Pain Syndromes

TABLE 56.1-5. Tumor-Related Chronic Pain Syndromes

TABLE 56.1-6. Causes of Brachial Plexopathy in Patients with Breast Cancer: Distinguishing Clinical Features

In these patients, all approaches aimed at maintaining the patient's functional status should be used. Alternative methods of therapy, in contrast to drug therapy,
represent the major management approach. This group of patients with neuropathic pain is increasing in number and accounts for 15% to 25% of patients referred to
a medical pain clinic.

GROUP III: PREEXISTING CHRONIC PAIN AND CANCER-RELATED PAIN
Group III includes patients with a history of chronic nonmalignant pain who develop cancer and pain. Psychological factors play a significant role in this group of
patients, whose psychological and functional status is already compromised by their chronic nonmalignant pain state. These patients are at high risk of developing
further functional incapacity and escalating chronic pain symptoms. However, their history should not be used in a punitive way to minimize or deny their complaints.
Identifying this group of patients as a high-risk group helps to improve their psychological assessment and intervention.

GROUP IV: PATIENTS WITH A HISTORY OF DRUG ADDICTION AND PAIN
Group IV includes patients with a history of drug addiction who have cancer-related pain. Three subgroups can be identified: patients actively involved in illicit drug
use and drug-seeking behavior, those receiving methadone in a maintenance program, and those who have not used drugs for several years. Undertreatment with
analgesic drugs occurs most commonly in this group of patients. Assessment of reported pain by physicians and nurses is colored by the fact that the pain symptoms
are confused with drug-seeking behavior. Attention to the medical and psychological needs of these patients requires individualized assessment and consultation with
experts in drug-related problems. The first subgroup represents a major management problem, straining the most tolerant of medical care systems. Pain in the other
two subgroups is readily managed, with the recognition that the psychological stresses consequent to the pain and cancer may place the patient at a high risk for
recidivism. There is increasing expertise to address the need of this patient population with experts in addiction medicine and cancer pain working together to provide
a coordinated system of care. 59

GROUP V: DYING PATIENTS WITH PAIN
In dying patients in pain, diagnostic and therapeutic considerations are directed at maintaining the patient's comfort. This group is identified separately from group II
patients, because the psychological factors further compound adequate pain management. The issues of hopelessness and coping with death and dying become
more prominent, and the suffering component must be addressed. 57,60,61 Inadequate control of pain in the dying patient exacerbates the suffering component and
demoralizes the family and the caregivers, who feel that they have failed in treating the patient's pain at a time when adequate treatment may matter the most. Rapid
escalation of analgesic drug therapy, usually by the parenteral route (intravenous, subcutaneous, or transdermal), and amelioration of psychological symptoms should
be attempted. The risk-to-benefit ratios in analgesic approaches become less of an issue when the goal of pain therapy is the patient's comfort. It is now widely
recognized that it is the role and the responsibility of the physician to treat pain and suffering in this population of patients. Defined guidelines for the care of the dying
have been published. 2,61,62 Good physician–patient communication, which include issues of truth telling and the assault of truth; respect for patients' religious, cultural,
and spiritual needs; and clearly defining goals of care can improve the care of this population of patients. 58

COMMON PAIN SYNDROMES
Pain in the cancer patient results from direct tumor infiltration and from the various cancer treatments and can occur unrelated to the cancer and cancer therapy.
Table 56.1-3, Table 56.1-4, and Table 56.1-5 list the common acute and chronic pain syndromes that occur in patients with cancer. These lists are a compendium of
various sources, but serve to summarize the broad and now well-recognized pain syndromes that occur often uniquely in this population of patients. 32,33,64,65

CLINICAL ASSESSMENT OF PAIN
Certain general principles should be followed in evaluating cancer patients who complain of pain. Lack of attention to these general principles is the major cause for
misdiagnosis of a specific pain syndrome. Adequate assessment is a critical component for defining the appropriate therapeutic strategy for each patient. The general
principles are presented here:
Believe the patient's complaint of pain.
Take a careful history of the patient's pain complaint.
Evaluate the patient's psychological state.
Perform a careful medical and neurologic examination.
Order and personally review the appropriate diagnostic studies.

Treat the pain to facilitate the appropriate workup.
Reassess the patient's response to therapy.
Individualize the diagnostic and therapeutic approaches.
Clearly define the goals of care.
Discuss advance directives with the patient and the family.
BELIEVE THE PATIENT'S COMPLAINT OF PAIN
Critical to the management of the patient with cancer pain is the establishment of a trusting relationship with the physician. The complaint of pain is a symptom, not a
diagnosis. Pain perception is not simply a function of the amount of physical injury sustained by the patient, but is a complex state determined by multiple factors. The
diagnosis of a specific pain syndrome and a complete understanding of the patient's psychological state is not always made during the initial evaluation. In fact, it may
take several weeks to define its nature because of the lack of radiologic or pathologic verification. It may take a similar period to fully comprehend each patient's
psychological makeup. Numerous examples in the assessment of patients with pain and cancer highlight the limitation of the diagnostic process. It is not uncommon
for patients with tumor infiltration of the brachial plexus from either lung or breast cancer to have pain for several weeks or months before the onset of objective
radiologic and neurologic findings. A comprehensive evaluation involves taking a careful history; performing a detailed medical, neurologic, and psychological
evaluation; developing a series of diagnosis-related hypotheses; and ordering the appropriate diagnostic studies.
TAKE A CAREFUL HISTORY OF THE PATIENT'S PAIN COMPLAINT
A careful history of the patient's pain complaint should include the patient's description of site of pain, quality of pain, exacerbating and relieving factors, temporal
pattern, exact onset, associated symptoms and signs, interference with activities of daily living, effect on the patient's psychological state, and response to previous
and current analgesic therapies. Multiple pain complaints are common in patients with advanced disease and must be ranked and classified.
EVALUATE THE PATIENT'S PSYCHOLOGICAL STATE
The patient's current level of anxiety and depression must be clarified and his or her past history of such symptoms must be defined. Knowledge of the patient's
previous psychiatric history and need for past hospitalization for psychiatric care helps to clarify the patient's potential psychological risk. Information on how the
patient has handled previous painful events may provide insight into whether the patient has demonstrated chronic illness behavior or has a past history of a chronic
pain syndrome. It is important to know about a personal or family history of alcohol or drug dependence, to understand why the patient may be fearful or refuse to take
opioid drugs.
Because each patient has his or her own understanding of the meaning of pain, it is useful to have the patient elaborate this meaning. 21,57,63,66 Does he or she think it
represents recurrent tumor, or is he or she convinced it is simply arthritis? Evidence suggests that when patients have a clear understanding of the meaning of their
pain as representing recurrent tumor, they have increased psychological distress.
The importance of defining the psychological makeup of the patient with pain is supported by a variety of studies that have focused on the effect of suffering in
patients with pain. 2,57 Psychological factors play a significant role in accounting for the differences in pain experiences in cancer patients. A series of psychiatric
syndromes have been described for cancer patients, with depression occurring in as many as 25% of patients. 21 The depression presents either as an acute stress
response or as a major depression. Awareness of the common psychiatric syndromes when evaluating the pain complaint expands the physician's understanding of
such a complaint.
Although it is critical to know as much as possible about each patient with pain, some information may not be readily available in the first interview; in some instances
it may never be available because of the lack of intellectual competence on the patient's part to define clearly the various components of the pain complaint. It is often
necessary to verify the history from a family member who may provide information that the patient is unable or unwilling to provide. The family may be more objective
in assessing a disability of a patient who underreports his or her symptoms. Similarly, in a patient who is a poor historian, the family member may be able to provide
essential information that may alter the diagnostic approach. All attempts should be made to compile a careful history and define the medical, neurologic, and
psychological profile of the pain complaint.
It is also useful to define for the patient the goal of treatment. Some patients may have unreasonable expectations for adequate pain control, whereas others fail to
critically consider the various options available to them. Before starting any new procedure, review carefully with the patient the risks and benefits to provide them with
their expectation of the potential outcome of the therapeutic approach. As patients become more active in defining advance directives and as they focus on the quality
of life, it is critical to ask patients to define what they would do if the pain were intractable or intolerable. 67 Did the patient have a family member who died a painful
death? From our experience, patients who have had such an experience are particularly fearful of their own deaths. Does the patient have suicidal thoughts or a pact
with a family member? Does the patient have a family history of suicide? Does the patient have drugs in reserve or a gun in the house that he or she might use in
desperation? 67 In a study by Chochinov et al., pain alone did not correlate with patients' suicidal ideation. 68 Significant depression appeared to be the major
correlating factor, although pain clearly played a role in the development of depression in some patients. This series of questions allows patients to discuss openly
their fears of death and their intention to take matters into their own hands rather than trust the health care professional. Such open discussions can allow the
physician to better define for the patient the options for care and to reassure the patient of the physician's commitment to care. Because patients rarely offer this
information unless requested, it is critical to develop specific questions that can be readily integrated into the initial history taken by the physician. Discussing with the
patient how they would die and engaging the patient in a discussion of his or her concerns and wants can address the commonly heard quote of patients, “I have
never died before, how do I do it?”
PERFORM A CAREFUL MEDICAL AND NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION
A medical and neurologic examination helps provide the necessary data to substantiate the history. It also provides a direct assessment of the cognitive status of the
patient. Knowledge of the referral patterns of pain and the common cancer pain syndromes can direct the examination. The commonly described pain syndromes in
cancer patients associated with a postmastectomy pain syndrome can readily be defined as separate from tumor infiltration of the brachial plexus 5,69 (see Table
56.1-6).
The physical and neurologic examination allows the physician to visually inspect and palpate the site of pain and to look for the associated physical and neurologic
signs that might help to better define the nature of the pain symptom. Defining the degree of motor or sensory changes can help define the specific site in the nervous
system that may be involved. Similarly, in patients with sensory loss, the presence of allodynia and hyperesthesia can further define the nature of the sensory problem
and define a neuropathic pain syndrome. Moreover, the degree of muscle spasm, gait instability, and impaired coordination can only be fully assessed by such an
evaluation.
ORDER AND PERSONALLY REVIEW THE APPROPRIATE DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
Diagnostic studies confirm the diagnosis and define in patients with metastatic disease the site and extent of tumor infiltration. Computed tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) are the most useful diagnostic procedures in evaluating cancer patients with pain. 70 The positron emission tomography scan is increasingly
being used to further define tumor and to differentiate tumor from radiation injury. The bone scan is a useful screening device and is more sensitive for demonstrating
abnormalities in the bone before changes appear on plain radiography. However, a negative bone scan does not rule out bony metastatic disease, nor does a positive
bone scan confirm the diagnosis of metastatic tumor. In patients with collapsed vertebral bodies, an MRI can distinguish osteoporotic from tumor-induced bony
changes. The physician should review the results personally with the radiologist to correlate any pathologic change with the site of pain.
Evaluation of the extent of metastatic disease may help to discover the relation of the pain complaint to possible recurrent disease. The use of tumor markers such as
carcinoembryonic antigen, CA 125, CA 15-3, and prostate-specific antigen can be useful in a patient in whom recurrent tumor is suspected. In certain pain syndromes
the presence of recurrent disease is closely associated with the onset of pain (e.g., in the appearance of late postthoracotomy pain syndrome in a patient after initial
resolution of the postoperative pain).

TREAT THE PAIN TO FACILITATE THE APPROPRIATE WORKUP
No patient should be evaluated inadequately because of a significant pain problem. Early management of the pain while investigating the source markedly improves
the patient's ability to participate in the necessary diagnostic procedures. Table 56.1-7 lists the reasons for a pain consultation at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center. During the initial evaluation of the pain complaint, early consideration of the use of alternative methods of pain control, including anesthetic and neurosurgical
approaches, should be considered (e.g., the temporary use of a local anesthetic via an epidural catheter to manage sacral pain).

TABLE 56.1-7. Reasons for Referral to the Pain Service (n=100)

REASSESS THE PATIENT'S RESPONSE TO THERAPY
Continual reassessment of the response of the patient's pain complaint to the prescribed therapy provides the best method to validate the initial diagnosis as correct.
If relief is less than predicted or if the pain worsens, reassessment of the treatment approach or a search for a new cause of the pain should be considered. A
common example is the patient with epidural cord compression who develops a second block proximal to the one being radiated, with neurologic signs mimicking the
original one. 71
INDIVIDUALIZE THE DIAGNOSTIC AND THERAPEUTIC APPROACH
Evaluation of the patient must be closely linked to the patient's level of function, ability to participate in the diagnostic workup, willingness to undergo the necessary
diagnostic approaches, objective evidence that treatment approaches may be beneficial, and life expectancy. Careful judgment is required to select diagnostic
approaches that will have a direct effect on the choice of the therapeutic strategy or will answer a specific question. The random use of diagnostic procedures in these
patients, particularly those with advanced cancer and significant pain, is inappropriate because it may have an adverse effect on their quality of life. Open discussion
with the patient about the need for assessment as well as the therapeutic options is critical to allow the patient to be part of the decision-making process. In some
patients, diagnostic procedures such as MRI are inappropriate because they simply confirm the existence of a disease for which no treatment is available or for which
the treatment would be a major surgical procedure (e.g., vertebral body resection) that would be inappropriate for a dying patient. Patient refusal of evaluation or
treatment must be respected when the physician has fully explained the options and is convinced that the patient has an accurate understanding of the implications of
no further workup or treatment.72
DISCUSS ADVANCE DIRECTIVES WITH THE PATIENT AND FAMILY
When developing approaches for treatment, there must be an open discussion about advance directives so that the physician has a clear understanding of the
patient's goal for therapy or his or her ambivalence in developing a therapeutic strategy. The physician must have unconditional positive regard for the patient, placing
the control of symptoms of pain and treatment of psychological distress in the highest regard. Knowledge of the patient's decisions about resuscitation, living wills,
and symptom management should he or she become incompetent improves the physician's ability to appropriately and humanely care for the dying patient with
advanced disease. 61 In a study of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center patients evaluated by the Pain and Palliative Care Service, patients reported reluctance to
discuss end-of-life care issues with their physicians, preferring to discuss their concerns with family and friends. 73 Such data emphasize the need for education of
families in the continuum of cancer care including issues of pain management and the role of sedation in patients whose lives are ending.

MANAGEMENT OF CANCER PAIN
The management of cancer pain incorporates treatment of the primary disease with analgesic drug therapy and aesthetic, neurosurgical, rehabilitative, psychological
(cognitive behavioral), and psychiatric methods. Individualizations of the treatment strategy and titration to effective pain relief are the hallmarks of this therapeutic
approach. Increasing sophistication in the use of analgesic drugs, coupled with advances in research on the underlying mechanisms of pain, have provided the
scientific rationale for the more effective use of standard analgesic drug therapy (nonopioid, opioid, and adjuvant drugs), including the use of novel routes of drug
administration (transdermal and transmucosal), the use of novel methods (bisphosphonates and calcitonin for bone pain, antidepressants and anticonvulsants for
neuropathic pain), and the indication for the use of anesthetic, neurosurgical, psychological, and psychiatric approaches concurrently applied in the overall continuum
of care.
Pain management is only one aspect of a broad palliative care approach, but it serves as a model for the scientific rigor and clinical trials that have defined cancer
pain treatment as a specific strategic focus. The full impact of such a comprehensive approach has not been fully determined. From data evaluating the use of
analgesic drug therapy to cancer pain alone, 70% to 90% of patients report adequate analgesia. Studies from various pain services, hospices, and palliative care
programs report results as high as 95% of patients receiving effective analgesia.
To develop appropriate outcome assessment methods and to provide a basis for comparison of treatment strategies, Bruera and Wantanabe have developed the
Edmonton Staging System for cancer pain, patterning it to the various staging systems for different primary tumors. Stage I (good prognosis), stage II (intermediate
prognosis), and stage III (poor prognosis) are based on five prognostic features, including the presence or absence of neuropathic pain, incident pain, psychological
distress, rapid tolerance development, and a history of drug addiction or alcohol abuse. 74 This methodology, in preliminary studies, has been validated as a way to
compare different patient populations with different primary tumors in clinical trials and outcome assessments of cancer pain therapy. 75

ANALGESIC DRUG THERAPY
Numerous guidelines for the management of cancer pain have been issued by various organizations and researchers. 3,76,77 All of these guidelines have emphasized
that analgesic drug therapy is the mainstay of treatment and have focused on the aims of drug therapy to achieve adequate pain relief safely within an acceptable
time frame, minimize side effects of treatment, and provide ongoing analgesic therapy by the most convenient and least noxious means available. More recently,
detailed descriptions of the decision-making process implemented during the treatment of patients with pain have provided further data on the rationale and outcomes
of specific decisions and have detailed a series of principles in the selection of opioid drug and route of administration. 26,78 In the following section, guidelines for the
rational use of analgesics in the management of cancer pain are detailed. These guidelines are based on clinical pharmacologic principles, clinical trials, available
metaanalyses of analgesic studies, and the clinical experience developed by the Pain Service at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. Table 56.1-7 lists the
reasons why patients with pain were referred to an inpatient consultation service at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. These reasons for referral point out the
complexity that has now developed in providing individualized pharmacotherapy for patients with pain. These data also point out the need for physicians and nurses
to be knowledgeable in the use of these guidelines to provide patients with effective analgesia. These data, from 100 consecutive inpatients who were referred over a
14-week period to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center Pain Service had 158 reasons for referral. 26 The two most common reasons were uncontrolled chronic
pain, which occurred in 73 patients, and excessive side effects without adequate analgesia, despite analgesic therapy, which occurred in 24 patients. The most
common reasons included difficulties in pain assessment and poorly controlled acute pain. At the time of initial evaluation, 77 patients had a pain intensity of 7 out of

10, and 18 patients had a pain intensity of 4 to 6 out of 10. After initial evaluation by the Pain Service physicians, the therapeutic intent of analgesic therapy was to
provide comfort and function for 87 patients and comfort only for 13 patients. Comfort and function were the therapeutic intent of analgesic therapy for 75 of the
patients discharged (92%) and comfort only for 17 patients who died (94%). After initial evaluation, the Pain Service physicians changed the opioid drug, the route of
administration, or both for 58 patients. Of 42 patients whose regimens were not changed, 17 were discharged, 3 died, and 22 required subsequent changes in either
drug or route of administration. In short, a total of 80 patients required changes in opioid therapy before death or discharge. Sixty-four patients required more than one
change in therapy. Forty-four patients required one or more changes, and 20 patients required two or more changes. These data are particularly important to point out
the complexity of analgesic drug therapy in this population of patients. Side effects were problematic in providing patients with a balance between adequate analgesia
and excessive side effects. It is critical, then, that the goals of care for an individual patient be recognized and help provide the essential context for therapeutic
decision making. When patients prioritize optimal comfort and function equally, the therapeutic attempt is to achieve an adequate degree of relief without
compromising cognitive and physical function. When comfort is the overriding goal of care, there is a willingness to use whatever analgesic therapy is necessary to
achieve relief, even if function is diminished in the process. To achieve the goal of care as comfort and function, substantial effort is necessary to optimize a balance
between relief and side effects through dose adjustment, sequential trials of opioid drugs, coadministration of adjuvant medications, and the use of spinal analgesic
techniques. Increasing attention has focused on the need to switch patients from one opioid to another. Several studies have outlined the need for opioid rotation and
substitution. 78,79,8,81 and 82
In the following section, detailed guidelines for the rational use of analgesics in the management of cancer pain are provided ( Table 56.1-8). The use of drug therapy
should be within the armamentarium of any physician or nurse who cares for patients with pain in cancer. Similarly, the integration of some of the psychological and
psychiatric approaches should be widely available. The use of specific anesthetic and neurosurgical techniques will often require the services of trained medical
personnel who have clinical experience in managing cancer pain, but such approaches may require referral to a specialty center.

TABLE 56.1-8. Guidelines for the Rational Use of Analgesics in the Management of Cancer Pain

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION THREE-STEP ANALGESIC LADDER
As part of a global program of WHO, the Cancer and Palliative Care Unit has created a Cancer Pain Relief Program, and through a series of expert panels, has
developed guidelines for the treatment of cancer pain. 7,83,84 This program has achieved a broad international consensus, based on the concept that analgesic drug
therapy is the mainstay for the majority of patients with cancer pain. As previously stated, field testing of the WHO guidelines, in conjunction with clinical experience,
has shown that 70% to 90% of cancer patient's pain can be controlled using a simple and inexpensive method described as the three-step analgesic ladder.83 This
approach is based on the use of a combination of nonopioid, opioid, and adjuvant drugs, titrated to the individual needs of the patient according to the severity of pain
and its pathophysiology ( Tables 56.1-9, Table 56.1-10, and Table 56.1-11). Implementation of the analgesic guidelines, assurance of drug availability (specifically
opioids), the education of health care professionals, and designating cancer pain as a priority for all national cancer control programs are the major goals of the WHO
effort.84

TABLE 56.1-9. Nonopioid Analgesic Drugs in the Management of Cancer Pain

TABLE 56.1-10. Opioid Drugs Commonly Used in Cancer Pain Management

TABLE 56.1-11. Adjuvant Analgesics in the Management of Cancer Pain

Step 1
Step 1 of the analgesic ladder focuses on analgesic drug therapy for patients with mild to moderate cancer pain. Such patients should be treated with a nonopioid
analgesic that may or may not be combined with an adjuvant drug, depending on the specific pain pathophysiology. For example, in a patient with mild pain from bone
metastases, the use of acetaminophen, aspirin, or one of the NSAIDs would be appropriate. In a patient with mild pain from a peripheral neuropathy, the combination
of a nonopioid with a tricyclic antidepressant drug, such as amitriptyline, would be an appropriate combination.
Step 2
Step 2 focuses on patients with moderate pain who failed to achieve adequate relief after a trial of a nonopioid analgesic. They are candidates for a combination of a
nonopioid (e.g., aspirin or acetaminophen) and an opioid such as codeine, oxycodone, propoxyphene, buprenorphine, or tramadol. Dependent on the pain
pathophysiology, adjuvant drugs should be used as well.
Step 3
Step 3 is for those patients who fail to achieve adequate relief following appropriate administration of drugs on the second rung of the analgesic ladder. Nonopioids
are often used in combination to spare the opioid effect and adjuvants are used dependent on the pain pathophysiology or the need to control other concurrent
symptoms in the individual patient.
In short, the analgesic drug ladder of the WHO simply defines a method for using drug combinations and is based on previously well-tested pharmacologic principles.
It is well recognized that nonopioid drugs such as aspirin and acetaminophen when combined with opioids provide additive analgesia. It is also well recognized that
drugs such as morphine, methadone, fentanyl, levorphanol, and so forth are most effective for severe pain, whereas drugs such as codeine, oxycodone, and tramadol
are more effective in a range of pain intensity of mild to moderate. What continues to be controversial in the application of the WHO ladder is the choice of the
analgesic drug for the individual patient. Such controversies are discussed within the framework of the current application of the guidelines for rational use. 78,85,86,87 and
88
Critical assessment of the WHO ladder has raised challenging questions to the selection of specific drugs. A metaanalysis of the role of NSAIDs in bone pain did
not define them as any more or less effective than opioids. 89

CLASSES OF DRUGS
NONOPIOID ANALGESICS
The nonopioid analgesics include acetaminophen and the NSAIDs, of which aspirin is the prototypic agent. These compounds are most commonly used orally and
their analgesia is limited by a ceiling effect, so that increasing the dose beyond a certain level (900 to 1300 mg/dose of aspirin) produces no increase in peak effect.
Tolerance and physical dependence do not occur with repeated administration. Aspirin and the other NSAIDs have analgesic, antipyretic, antiinflammatory, and
antiplatelet actions. Some NSAIDs lack the antiplatelet effects of aspirin, such as choline, magnesium trisalicylate. Others appear to produce fewer gastrointestinal
side effects than aspirin (ibuprofen). Two new drugs within the NSAID class are the cyclooxygenase enzyme inhibitors and include rofecoxib (Vioxx) and celecoxib
(Celebrex). Neither drug has been studied in cancer patients, and the current indications for use are based on their current approval by the Food and Drug
Administration; rofecoxib for acute pain management and osteoarthritis and celecoxib for osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis. 90 Although these drugs offer the
unique advantage of less gastrointestinal and renal toxicity, their specific role remains undefined. Acetaminophen, which is equipotent to aspirin, is an analgesic and
antipyretic. It is much less effective as an antiinflammatory agent and does not interfere with platelet function. In general, this class of drugs is thought to produce
analgesia by inhibiting activation of peripheral nociceptors through their prevention of the formation of prostaglandin E 2, a known sensitizer of peripheral receptors to
nociceptive stimulation from tissue injury. Evidence suggests that central mechanisms augment the peripheral effects of these drugs via inhibition of neural activity
induced by EAAs such as glutamate or tachykinins (such as substance P). The NSAIDs differ from each other both in duration of analgesic action and in their
pharmacokinetic profile. Ibuprofen and fenoprofen have short half-lives and the same duration of action as aspirin, whereas diflunisal and naproxen have longer
half-lives and are longer acting. These drugs are thought to have a special role to play in the management of bone pain because numerous studies have shown that
aspirin inhibits tumor growth in an animal model of metastatic bone tumor. A metaanalysis of NSAIDs in bone pain did not demonstrate them to be more effective than
weak opioids such as codeine, oxycodone, and propoxyphene. 89 From clinical experience, some patients respond better to one NSAID than to another, and each
patient should be given an adequate trial of one drug on a regular basis before switching to another. Survey data from the WHO demonstration projects suggest that
20% to 40% of patients obtain pain relief with the use of nonopioid analgesics alone. 91
Numerous studies have elucidated the major risk factors for gastrointestinal toxicity associated with NSAID use. Various factors contribute to the high risk of ulcer
complications including advanced age, use of higher doses, concomitant administration of corticosteroids, and a history of either ulcer disease or previous
gastrointestinal complications from NSAIDs. The empiric use of various prophylactic therapies to prevent gastrointestinal complications is controversial. Except for
misoprostol, there is no evidence that any of these approaches reduces the risk of serious gastrointestinal toxicity. The empiric approach at this time is to administer
misoprostol to all patients who have significant risk factors for gastrointestinal complications. 92 Many of these data have been accumulated in the general literature
and have not been specifically analyzed for the patient with cancer. Several NSAIDs have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for use as analgesics
for mild to moderate pain and are listed in Table 56.1-12. Guidelines for the use of NSAIDs in patients with cancer are largely empiric. This class of drugs represents
the first-line approach, but the choice and use of the nonopioid need to be individualized. Each patient should be given an adequate trial of one nonopioid analgesic
before switching to an alternative one. Such a trial should include administration of the drug to maximum levels at regular intervals. Because there is a great variability
among patient responses to different drugs, patients may require trials with several NSAIDs before finding an effective drug and dose regimen. If pain relief is not
obtained, adding an opioid to a nonopioid provides additive analgesia. Combinations of codeine, oxycodone, and propoxyphene are available, but these combinations
often contain less than the full dose of 650 mg of aspirin or acetaminophen. Prescribing each drug separately provides a better method for individualizing pain control.
This is particularly important when the patient requires escalation of the combination to provide analgesia, in which case the additional dosage of the NSAID or
acetaminophen may become excessive.

TABLE 56.1-12. Types of Anesthetics Procedures Commonly Used in Cancer Pain

OPIOID DRUGS

The opioid analgesics, of which morphine is the prototype, vary in potency, efficacy, and adverse effects. These drugs produce their analgesic effects by binding to
discrete opiate receptors in the peripheral and central nervous systems. This group also includes a series of heterogeneous substances with varying chemical
structures. In contrast to the nonopioid analgesics, opioid analgesics, at least the opioid pure agonist, do not appear to have a ceiling effect (i.e., as the dose is
escalated on a log scale, the increment in analgesia is linear to the point of loss of consciousness). There are also series of drugs that are pure antagonists (i.e., they
block the effect of morphine at the receptor). The drug most commonly used in clinical practice is naloxone, which is used to reverse respiratory depression and other
complications associated with opioid overdose.
Effective use of the opioid drugs requires the balancing of the most desirable effects of pain relief with the undesirable effects of nausea, vomiting, mental clouding,
sedation, constipation, tolerance, and physical dependence. These undesirable effects impose a practical limit on the dose useful for a particular patient and have led
to the concept of opioid responsiveness (see Principles of Opioid Drug Therapy , later in this chapter).
The use of opioids in the management of cancer pain remains a controversial issue. 85,86 and 87 Some of the controversies include their role in the management of
neuropathic pain, which has been suggested for the opioid resistant, the specific choice of opioid drug, the use of sequential trials of opioids, routes of administration,
development of tolerance, economic factors influencing these controversies, and the concern that opioids are agents of physician-assisted suicide and
euthanasia. 93,94,95 and 96 When appropriate, these controversies are addressed in the following discussion of the principles of opioid drug therapy.

PRINCIPLES OF OPIOID DRUG THERAPY
START WITH A SPECIFIC DRUG FOR A SPECIFIC TYPE OF PAIN
As defined by the three-step analgesic ladder, the specific drug chosen is dependent in part on the degree of pain intensity. As previously noted, cancer patients
commonly have multiple sites and types of pain. It has been suggested that neuropathic pain, which accounts for 10% to 20% of pain problems that are difficult to
manage, is opioid resistant, and that opioid drugs should not be used in this population. 88 Studies in cancer patients with both nociceptive and neuropathic pain, as
well as controlled studies in nonmalignant neuropathic pain, demonstrate the variable responsiveness of neuropathic pain to opioid analgesics. 88 The concept of a
continuum of opioid responsiveness, rather than an all or none quantal phenomenon, has been clearly observed. Opioid responsiveness is defined as the degree of
analgesia achieved during dose escalation to either intolerable side effects or adequate analgesia. Patient characteristics, pain-related factors, as well as
drug-selective effects influence this variable response.
A wide range of adjuvant analgesics has been suggested to provide analgesia alone or in combination with opioid drug therapy, and there are specific adjuvants for
bone pain and neuropathic pain. Not only pain intensity and type of pain dictate the choice of a specific drug, but also the patient's prior opioid exposure, history of
allergy, and history of side effects.
The WHO Cancer Pain Guidelines designated morphine as the drug of choice in its Cancer Pain Relief Program. The choice was based on practical, not scientific,
considerations. The introduction of the WHO program rapidly demonstrated the limited availability of morphine worldwide for oral treatment of chronic cancer pain. 97
Morphine consumption worldwide is now used as an indicator of the success of the WHO Cancer Pain Relief Program. For example, in Japan following a nationwide
program to improve cancer pain management, a 17-fold increase in morphine consumption has been reported. The expanded use of morphine, combined with new
formulations and new information about the analgesic activities of its metabolites, focuses renewed attention on its clinical pharmacology with recognition of
morphine-6-glucuronide (M6G) as an active metabolite. 98 Human studies have shown that M6G is analgesic in humans and appears in the plasma and cerebrospinal
fluid of patients receiving morphine systemically. 99 In renal dysfunction, M6G has an increased elimination half-life and decreased clearance, confirming a true delay
in elimination of the compound, leading to an increase in the M6G to morphine ratio during chronic therapy. 100 Adverse effects (nausea and respiratory depression)
have been attributed to plasma concentration of the metabolite, particularly in patients with renal failure. 101 However, attempts to correlate M6G to morphine ratio or
M6G to M3G ratio with side effects such as cognitive impairment or myoclonus have not been possible. 102,103 Various factors may influence the levels of both M6G and
M3G, including route (increased M6G following oral administration), age (increased M3G and M6G if greater than 70 years), male sex (decreased morphine and M6G
plasma concentrations), concurrent use of tricyclic antidepressants (increased M3G), and use of ranitidine (increased morphine). Controlled-release oral morphine is
currently available in a wide range of doses from 50 to 200 mg for every 8-, 12-, and 24-hour administration. These preparations provide comparable analgesia with
immediate release forms and offer increased convenience, improved compliance, and a reduction in duration of pain.
The increasing need for a wide range of opioids to manage cancer pain has led to the wide use of a series of alternative opioids to morphine, including
hydromorphone, oxycodone, oxymorphone, and levorphanol, all congeners of morphine. Hydromorphone has poor oral availability and a short half-life. It is highly
soluble and available in a high-potency parenteral form (10 mg/mL), making it a useful choice for chronic subcutaneous administration. Because of its short half-life, it
is commonly used in the elderly patient. Myoclonus has been reported following high doses possibly due to accumulation of its metabolites (3-0 methyl or a
6-glucuronide). 104 When compared in a double-blind trial of patient-controlled analgesia, no differences in analgesia or side effects were noted between morphine and
hydromorphone. Although cognitive performance was poorer in the hydromorphone group, patients reported better mood as compared with morphine. 105
Hydromorphone is available in slow-release preparations.
Oxycodone, which is commonly used at a 5-mg dose in the second step of the WHO analgesic ladder, can also be used in the third step at higher doses. It is now
available in a slow-release preparation. 106 Its half-life is approximately 3 to 4 hours. Oxymorphone is its active metabolite. Oxymorphone is currently only available by
the intravenous and rectal routes and serves as an alternative to morphine and its other congeners. Oxymorphone has less of a histamine effect and may be of use in
those patients who complain of headache or itch following other opioid administration.
Levorphanol has good bioavailability but a long plasma half-life (12 to 16 hours). It should be used cautiously because with repeated administration, accumulation
may occur.
The role of methadone in cancer pain also remains controversial. 79,80,81 and 82 Methadone represents a second-line drug for cancer pain patients who have had prior
exposure to opioids. It is a relatively inexpensive oral analgesic, but its name has negative connotations for cancer patients who view methadone as a drug used to
treat addicts. The bioavailability of methadone is higher than that of morphine (85% vs. 35%, respectively). Its analgesic potency also differs with a parenteral to oral
ratio of 1:2 in contrast to 1:6 with morphine. Moreover, the plasma half-life of methadone is 17 to 24 hours, with reports of up to 50 hours in some cancer patients, but
with a duration of analgesia of only 4 to 8 hours. Significant adverse effects have been reported in cancer patients receiving methadone by various routes. The
discrepancy between analgesic duration and plasma half-life of methadone have made it a difficult drug to use in the naïve patient because of the need for careful
titration.
A number of case reports have highlighted the possible greater analgesic potency of methadone than the often quoted 1:1 equivalency with morphine. 79,80,81 and 82
Studies of interindividual differences in response to opioid analgesics demonstrate dramatically reduced doses of methadone required to produce analgesia in
patients chronically taking morphine or hydromorphone. Several authors have shown marked reductions in the equianalgesic dose of methadone when patients with
either uncontrolled pain or extreme side effects were switched. These clinical survey studies suggested up to a 75% reduction in the methadone equianalgesic dose.
In the only perspective study, Ripamonti et al. developed a specific dose ratio based on the patient's morphine doses. 80 For patients on 30 to 90 mg of morphine, the
dose ratio is 4:1; for those on 90 to 300 mg daily, the dose ratio is 6:1; and for those on 300 mg or more, the dose ratio is 8:1. Bruera et al. developed a similar ratio
for hydromorphone based on survey data. 79 In patients receiving more than 330 mg of hydromorphone, the dose ratio is 1.6:1; and less than 300 mg, the dose ratio is
0.95:1.
In general, a good rule is to reduce the calculated equianalgesic dose by 75% and titrate the patients to effective pain relief. These reports have pointed out the need
to use one-fourth to one-third the equianalgesic dose of methadone when switching from other opioids to this regimen. This observation relates in part to significant
incomplete cross-tolerance with methadone and other factors that have not been fully assessed. Methadone can be administered by a variety of routes, but the
subcutaneous route is associated with adverse effects including cutaneous hypersensitivity. 107 Due to its long half-life, some offer the suggestion that methadone be
used on a every 8 to 12 hour basis, whereas others have demonstrated analgesic efficacy and safety in acute 3- to 4-hour dosing intervals. Ongoing studies are
attempting to elucidate better the clinical pharmacology of methadone to facilitate its broader use.
Meperidine is a drug that should not be used chronically in the management of patients with cancer pain. Meperidine has a poor parenteral to oral ratio (1:4). It is

available in oral and intramuscular routes but repetitive intramuscular administration is associated with local tissue fibrosis and sterile abscess. Repetitive dosing of
meperidine (greater than 250 mg/d) can lead to normeperidine accumulation, an active metabolite that can produce central nervous system hyperexcitability. 108 This
hyperirritability is characterized by subtle mood effects followed by tremors, multifocal myoclonus, and occasional seizures. It occurs most commonly in patients with
renal disease, but can also occur following repeated administration in patients with normal renal function. Naloxone does not reverse meperidine-induced seizures
and its use in meperidine toxicity is controversial; there have been some case reports that the use of naloxone has precipitated generalized seizures in individual
patients. In rare instances, central nervous system toxicity characterized by hyperpyrexia, muscle rigidity, and seizure have been reported following the administration
of a single dose of meperidine to patients receiving treatment with monoaminoxidase inhibitors.
With the development of a novel transdermal patch, fentanyl is an opioid analgesic used effectively in cancer pain patients for management of both acute and chronic
pain.109 The half-life of fentanyl is 1 to 2 hours. Its relative potency compared with parenteral morphine is 1 to 20 in intolerant acute pain patients. In chronic cancer
pain, relative potency comparisons have not been fully established but the common dosing guideline is that 4 mg of intravenous morphine is equivalent to 100 µg of
intravenous fentanyl. The uniqueness of this preparation facilitates the management of patients who are unable to take drugs by mouth by providing them with
continuous opioid analgesia. Patches are currently available in 25 to 100 µg/h doses. Fentanyl can also be used as an anesthetic premedication, as well as
intravenously and epidurally for pain control. Oral transmucosal formulations have demonstrated effectiveness in breakthrough pain in cancer patients. 45 Fentanyl
(Actiq) is available in a range of dosages from 200 to 1600 µg. Twenty-five percent of the preparations in a lozenge formulation in a stylet is absorbed transmucosally
over a 15-minute period and an additional 25% is absorbed via the gastrointestinal tract over the following 90 minutes. Onset of relief occurs in 5 minutes. Oral
transmucosal fentanyl citrate in dose titration trials is shown to be safe and effective with the effective dose being a variable requiring titration in the majority of
patients.
KNOW THE EQUIANALGESIC DOSE OF THE DRUG AND ITS ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION
Knowing the equianalgesic dose can ensure more appropriate drug use. Lack of attention to these differences in drug dose is the most common cause of
undermedication of pain patients. These doses have been derived from assessment of the relative analgesic potency of a drug. Relative potency is the ratio of the
doses of two analgesics required to produce the same effect. Estimates of relative potency allow calculation of the equianalgesic dose, which provides the basis for
selecting the appropriate dose when switching drugs or route of administration of the same drug. The values in Table 56.1-10 are based on studies in which 10 mg of
morphine was the standard dose. 110 The equianalgesic dose is the recommended starting dose, with the optimal dose for each patient determined by dose
adjustment. There is now evidence to suggest that relative potency may differ in single-dose and repeated dose studies. For example, for morphine, a 1:6 relative
analgesic potency ratio should be used for patients with acute pain, whereas a 1:2 or 1:3 ratio in patients treated with repeated doses on a chronic basis is more
appropriate. For methadone, the equianalgesic dose ratios vary with the degree of prior exposure as previously discussed. 80
ADMINISTER ANALGESICS REGULARLY AFTER INITIAL TITRATION
Medication should be given regularly in order to maintain the plasma level of the drug above the minimum effective concentration for pain relief. In the initial titration,
patients should be advised to take their medication as needed to determine their total 24-hour requirements. This is also the time frame for reaching the steady-state
level of drug, which depends on the drug's half-life. For morphine, steady state can be reached in 24 hours; with methadone it may take up to 5 to 7 days to reach
steady state. In patients on a fixed schedule, rescue medications equivalent to one-half of the standing dose should be available to patients for breakthrough pain.
Continuous intravenous and subcutaneous opioid infusions to manage both acute and chronic cancer pain are commonly used with a patient-controlled analgesic
pump programmed to the patient's need with a set lock-out time to prevent overdosing. This method of drug administration is especially useful to manage patients with
breakthrough pain. It is a significant advance in facilitating adequate titration of analgesics in chronic cancer patients, allowing discharge to home and hospice
settings.
GEAR THE ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION TO THE PATIENT'S NEEDS
Various methods of drug delivery of opioids have been developed in an attempt to maximize pharmacologic effects and minimize side effects. Most patients require at
least two routes of drug administration, and 20% need up to four approaches during the course of their cancer pain treatment, from diagnosis to death.
The oral route is preferable and easy. Orally administered drugs have a slower onset of action, delayed peak time, and longer duration of effect; drugs given
parenterally have a rapid onset of action but a shorter duration of effect. Slow-release preparations of morphine, hydromorphone, and oxycodone allow more
convenient dosing of cancer pain patients every 8 to 12 hours or 24 hours.
For cancer pain management by the sublingual route, these are drugs that are well absorbed sublingually including both fentanyl and methadone. 111 As discussed
there is now an oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate preparation that has been widely studied for the management of breakthrough pain and is absorbed transmucosally.
For the rectal route, oxymorphone, hydromorphone, and morphine are available in suppository form. Oxymorphone suppositories produce analgesia equivalent to 10
mg of parenteral morphine. Slow-release oxycodone and morphine preparations have also been demonstrated to be effective rectally and ongoing studies with rectal
methadone suggest that this drug is well absorbed by the rectal route.
The transdermal route is a convenient way to deliver a potent short-acting opioid on a continuous basis. Drug is released through the skin patch at a nearly constant
amount per unit time with a concentration gradient from patch to skin. Serum fentanyl concentrations increase and steady-state levels are approached at 12 to 24
hours. 109 After patch removal, the drug persists in the skin, with falling blood levels over 24 hours. In calculating the equianalgesic dose, 4 mg of intravenous
morphine is equivalent to 100 µg of fentanyl transdermally. Innovative transdermal delivery systems are in development, which include systems for immediate-dose
delivery using iontophoresis and drug reservoirs. Iontophoresis is the transfer of ionic solutes through biologic membranes under the influence of an electric field. It
offers an alternative system for parenteral administration and has been shown to allow for comparatively rapid achievement of fentanyl dose levels using a
transdermal system.112
Various parenteral routes include intermittent and continuous subcutaneous, intravenous, epidural, intraventricular, and intrathecal infusions. The use of intermittent
and continuous subcutaneous infusions is most useful in patients who cannot tolerate oral analgesics because of gastrointestinal obstruction or intractable nausea
and vomiting and do not have intravenous access. The usefulness of this technique has been demonstrated using morphine, heroin, hydromorphone, levorphanol,
and fentanyl. Methadone by this route is associated with the development of a cutaneous hypersensitivity syndrome. 107
Patient-controlled analgesic pumps designed to infuse continuously but with options for bolus administration are connected to a 27-gauge butterfly needle that the
patient can insert into a new subcutaneous site every third to sixth day. Limited pharmacokinetic studies have demonstrated that systemic absorption of the drug from
subcutaneous sites at steady state has an 87% bioavailability with hydromorphone, for example. 112
Intermittent and continuous intravenous infusions are used if intravenous access is available and more commonly in the patient who is hospitalized. Specific
guidelines for the use of continuous infusions have been developed. 113
Intermittent and continuous epidural and intrathecal opioid infusions are based on the demonstration of opioid receptors in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and the
availability of opioid drugs to suppress noxious stimuli at the spinal cord level. 34,35 Localized selective analgesia is produced without motor or sensory blockade. The
pharmacokinetics of epidural opioid administration demonstrate that there is significant systemic uptake after epidural injection, comparable with an intramuscular
injection of the same drug and dose. However, distribution of the drug directly into the cerebrospinal fluid is 10 to 100 times greater. Existing studies demonstrate that
approximately 10% of cancer patients use this approach to maximize analgesia and minimize side effects. This technique is commonly used in patients who have
mixed nociceptive neuropathic pain syndromes and in whom combinations of local anesthetics and opioids are administered epidurally.
Rarely, intraventricular opioid infusion has been used to manage patients with pain in the cervical and craniofacial region from tumor infiltration. 114 Doses between 1.0
and 7.5 mg/24 hours have been used and patients have reported 70% excellent results. At present, there is not a clear indication that this intraventricular route offers
special advantages over systemic opioids. 114

USE A COMBINATION OF DRUGS
The use of a combination of drugs enables a physician to increase analgesic effects without escalating the opioid dose. Combinations that produce additive analgesic
effects include an opioid plus a nonopioid, an opioid plus an antihistamine (100 mg of intramuscular hydroxyzine), and an opioid plus an amphetamine (10 mg of
intramuscular dextroamphetamine).115,116 and 117 Trials with opioids combined with dextromethorphan demonstrate additive analgesia and such combinations are now
under study for their role in cancer pain patients. 118
ANTICIPATE AND TREAT SIDE EFFECTS
The side effects of the opioid analgesics often limit their effective use. The most common side effects are sedation, respiratory depression, nausea, vomiting,
constipation, and multifocal myoclonus and seizures.
Sedation and drowsiness vary with the drug and dose and may occur after both single and repeated administration. They are mediated through activation of opiate
receptors in the reticular formation and diffusely throughout the cortex. Management of these effects includes reducing the individual drug dose but prescribing the
drug more frequently, or switching to an analgesic with a shorter plasma half-life. Amphetamine, methylphenidate, and caffeine can be used to counteract these
sedative effects.116,117,119 It is important to discontinue all other drugs that might exacerbate the sedative effects of the opioid analgesic, including a wide variety of
medications such as cimetidine, barbiturates, and other anxiolytic medications.
Respiratory depression is the most serious adverse effect of the opioid drugs. It occurs most commonly after short-term administration of an opioid and is usually
associated with other signs of central nervous system depression, including sedation and drowsiness. The opioid-agonist drugs act on brainstem respiratory centers
to produce, as a function of dose, increasing respiratory depression to the point of apnea. Tolerance to this effect develops rapidly with repeated drug administration,
thereby allowing prolonged use without significant risk of respiratory depression.
Respiratory depression can be reversed by giving the short-acting opioid antagonist naloxone (suggested dose, 0.4 mg/mL). Repeated administration, including an
intravenous drip, may be necessary to prevent respiratory arrest in such patients. In patients receiving opioids for prolonged periods who develop respiratory
depression, diluted doses of naloxone (0.4 mg in 10 mL of saline) should be titrated carefully to prevent the precipitation of severe withdrawal symptoms while
reversing the respiratory depression. A useful dosing normogram for continuous intravenous infusion of naloxone has been developed in which two-thirds of the initial
bolus is started on an hourly basis and titrated against the patient's symptoms. 120
In some patients the use of naloxone to reverse drug-induced respiratory depression can be dangerous. An endotracheal tube should be placed in the comatose
patient before giving naloxone to prevent aspiration from excessive salivation and bronchial spasm induced by naloxone administration. In patients receiving
meperidine over a longer period, naloxone may precipitate seizures by lowering the seizure threshold and by allowing the convulsant activity of the active metabolite,
normeperidine, to become evident. In this instance, special attention must be given to the potential seizure effect of naloxone. If naloxone is used, diluted doses, slow
titration, and appropriate seizure precautions are advised. There is insufficient clinical evidence to make more specific recommendations. If respiratory support can be
effected by other means (i.e., continuous stimulation to maintain the patient's wakefulness), such an approach may place the patient at less risk and clearly in less
discomfort.
The opioid analgesics produce nausea and vomiting by an action limited to the medullary chemoreceptor trigger zone. The incidence of nausea and vomiting is
markedly increased in ambulatory patients. Tolerance develops to these side effects with repeated administration. Nausea with one drug does not mean that all drugs
will produce it. 121 Switching to alternative opioid analgesics or using an antiemetic together with the opioid analgesic are ways to obviate this effect. Lack of controlled
trials to identify a specific first-line agent has supported the practice of using sequential trials of agents beginning with prochlorperazine (Compazine) concurrently
with the opioid to clarify a useful regimen. Droperidol has also been noted to be effective in opioid-induced nausea and vomiting.
Constipation results from the action of these drugs at multiple sites in the gastrointestinal tract and in the spinal cord to produce a decrease in the intestinal secretions
and peristalsis, resulting in a dry stool and constipation. When opioid analgesics are started, a regular bowel regimen, including cathartics and stool softeners, should
also be instituted. Several bowel regimens have been suggested because of their specific ability to counteract the effects of the opioid drugs, but none has been
studied in a controlled way. 122 Anecdotal surveys suggest that doses far above those used for routine bowel management are needed, that senna derivatives are
effective, and that careful attention to dietary factors along with the use of a bowel regimen can reduce patient complaints dramatically. Tolerance to this effect
develops over time, but relatively slowly. Oral naloxone has been shown to be effective in treating constipation, but its use is variable depending on the degree of
opioid exposure of the patient. 123
Multifocal myoclonus may occur with high doses of all of the opioid drugs. Multifocal myoclonus and seizures have been reported in patients receiving multiple doses
of meperidine (250 mg or more per day), although signs and symptoms of central nervous system hyperirritability may occur with toxic doses of all the opioid
analgesics. In a series of cancer patients receiving meperidine, accumulation of the active metabolite normeperidine was associated with these neurologic signs and
symptoms. However, in a similar group of cancer patients with pain, subtle mood effects were noted after meperidine administration, which suggests a spectrum of
central nervous system effects. Management of this hyperirritability includes discontinuing the meperidine, using intravenous diazepam if seizures occur, and
substituting morphine to control the persistent pain. Because the half-life of normeperidine is 16 hours, it may take 2 or 3 days for the signs of central nervous system
hyperirritability to clear completely. Meperidine is contraindicated in patients with chronic renal disease, but these complications noted in cancer pain occurred in
patients with normal renal function. 108 Morphine and hydromorphone at high doses produce myoclonus, which has not been directly associated with their known active
metabolite such as M6G and hydromorphone-6-glucuronide. In dying patients with myoclonus, the use of benzodiazepines or barbiturates has been reported
anecdotally to suppress this sign, improving the patient's comfort.
Opioid hyperexcitability and hyperalgesia have been reported with the use of increasing opioid doses by the parenteral acute and epidural routes. It has most often
been observed in patients on high doses of morphine and hydromorphone and is characterized by uncontrolled pain, hypervigilance, total body hyperalgesia, and
allodynia. It is best managed by rapid dose reduction and substitution with an alternative opioid such as methadone. The mechanism of action is unclear. 103
In animal studies with morphine it is thought to be related to M3G, which in animals is associated with allodynia and hyperalgesia following intracerebroventricular
administration. This action of M3G is mimicked by strychnine, a glycine agonist. Glycine medicates postsynaptic inhibition on dorsal horn neurons. It is suggested that
high doses of morphine or its metabolites may act via a spinal antiglycinergic effect, reducing postsynaptic inhibition causing allodynia and myoclonus.
MANAGE TOLERANCE
The earliest sign of the development of tolerance is the patient's complaint that the duration of effective analgesia has decreased. For reasons not yet understood, the
rate of development of tolerance varies greatly among cancer patients. Some demonstrate tolerance within days of initiating opioid therapy; others remain controlled
for many months on the same dose. Studies in an outpatient clinic population, a hospitalized population, and a home care population revealed three patterns of drug
use: those who rapidly increase their opioid requirements, those who stabilize at one dose for several weeks or months, and those who decrease or eliminate
opioids. 124 Increased opioid requirements are most commonly associated with disease progression rather than tolerance alone. With the development of tolerance,
increases in the frequency of the dose of the opioid are required to provide continued pain relief. Because the analgesic effect is a logarithmic function of the dose of
opioid, a doubling of the dose may be needed to restore full analgesia. There appears to be no limit to the development of tolerance, and with appropriate dose
adjustments patients can continue to obtain pain relief. Cross-tolerance among the opioid analgesics is not complete; therefore, it is advantageous to change to an
alternative opioid, selecting half the predicted equianalgesic dose as the starting dose.
The use of analgesic combinations can reduce the amount of opioid required. Similarly, the use of bolus or continuous epidural local anesthesia in patients with
perineal pain can dramatically reduce the need for systemic opioids and reverse tolerance.
TAPER DRUGS SLOWLY
The long-term administration of opioid analgesics is associated with the development of physical dependence, a state in which the sudden cessation of the opioid
analgesic produces signs and symptoms of withdrawal: agitation, tremors, insomnia, fear, marked autonomic nervous system hyperexcitability, and exacerbation of

pain. Slowly tapering the dose of the opioid analgesic prevents such symptoms. The appearance of abstinence symptoms from the time of drug withdrawal is related
to the elimination half-life for the particular drug. The type of abstinence syndrome similarly varies with the drug. For example, with morphine, withdrawal symptoms
occur within 6 to 12 hours after drug cessation. Reinstituting the drug in doses of approximately 25% of the previous daily dose suppresses these symptoms.
ANTICIPATE COMPLICATIONS
Overdose with opioid analgesics occurs either intentionally, when a patient takes an excessive amount of drug in a suicide attempt, or unintentionally, when the
recommended dosage accidentally produces excessive sedation and respiratory depression. In both instances, the complication can be treated effectively with
naloxone. Intentional overdose in cancer patients occurs rarely, and concern for this is overemphasized. Overdose in patients previously stabilized on a opioid
regimen for cancer pain rarely is caused by drug intake alone. More commonly, it is the medical deterioration of the patient with a superimposed metabolic
encephalopathy. Eagel studied the use and misuse of naloxone and identified that sedation was the most common reason for naloxone use. 125 Of note, in this study of
naloxone use in 34 patients over 1 year in a cancer center, 71% of patients had a medical reason other than opioid dose escalation as an explanation for the change
in medical condition prompting naloxone use. Following naloxone administration, 64% of patients experienced significant side effects; 42% had increased pain and
14% had increased agitation. Patients were given intravenous boluses of 0.4 mg of naloxone rather than titrated with diluted naloxone as has been recommended. 126
Reducing the opioid drug dosage and carefully assessing the patient's metabolic status usually provide the differential diagnosis. Patients who have taken an
unintentional drug overdose should be scrutinized carefully to rule out other causes of excessive sedation, confusion, or respiratory depression. In such cases a
reversal of these effects with naloxone is more therapeutic than diagnostic.
Psychological dependence or addiction is characterized by a concomitant behavioral pattern of drug abuse evidenced by craving a drug for other than pain relief and
overwhelming involvement in the use and procurement of the drug. This is a state distinct from tolerance and physical dependence, which are responses to the
pharmacologic effects of long-term opioid administration. The profound fear of causing psychological dependence plays a major role in a physician's reluctance to
prescribe opioid analgesics, particularly in cancer patients in the early phase of their disease. Patients may share this fear, consistently taking less analgesic drug
than is effective to control their pain. Increasing evidence suggests that cancer patients with pain can take opioid analgesics for prolonged periods but can
discontinue such drugs when adequate pain relief is achieved from other approaches. In almost all instances, dramatic escalation of drug intake is associated with
progression of disease and subsequent death. Few patients with cancer and pain become psychologically dependent on the drugs and participate in drug-seeking
and illicit drug use. Careful evaluation of patients who might be at risk for this complication is necessary, but such concern should not be punitive to the patient with
severe cancer pain.
Out-of-control aberrant drug taking among oncology patients with or without a prior history of substance abuse represents a serious and complex clinical occurrence.
Passik and Portenoy have developed guidelines to manage such patients. 59 The most difficult situations present themselves in the patient who is actively abusing
illicit or prescription drugs or alcohol while concurrently receiving medical therapies. Such patients need a multidisciplinary approach usually focused on a
harm-reduction concept that attempts to enhance social support for the patient to maximize treatment compliance. Passik and Portenoy have outlined a series of
approaches to maximize a number of strategies for promoting compliance, including the consideration of a written contract between the team and patient, the inclusion
of spot urine toxicology screens to assess compliance, set expectations regarding attendance in clinic, and the patient's management of medication supplies. It is
often most useful to see the patient on a regular basis, often every several days, and to limit prescribing of opioids to that basis until the patient has demonstrated his
or her willingness to be compliant and to follow an appropriate drug regimen. Other approaches include the use and encouragement for the patient to attend a 12-step
program and to engage the patient's family members and friends to further bolster social support and functioning. Such approaches can be helpful on an outpatient
basis, but on an inpatient basis when patients demonstrate manipulative behaviors in the inappropriate use of medication, direct discussion with the patient about the
drug use in an open manner is a first step. Providing the patient with a private room near the nurses' station to monitor the patient and discourage attempts to leave
the hospital for purchase of illicit drugs and requiring visitors to check in with the nursing staff before visitation are additional steps. As well, the use of daily urine
specimens is another method to evaluate compliance. Underlying all of this is the attempt to provide the patient with a supportive environment that respects the
patient's pain symptomatology and serious medical illness and attempts to limit harm to the patient or others by the aberrant drug use and behaviors.
ADJUVANT DRUGS
Adjuvant drugs are used to enhance opioid analgesia, provide analgesia for certain types of pain (e.g., neuropathic pain, bone pain, and visceral pain), and treat
opioid side effects or other symptoms associated with pain. 127 They are an integral part of the WHO three-step analgesic ladder. Because of the lack of well-defined
guidelines for their use, sequential drug trials are necessary to identify the most useful drug and dose titration to find a safe effective dose. Table 56.1-11 lists the
commonly used adjuvants and their therapeutic categories.
Adjuvants to Enhance Analgesia
Adjuvants to enhance analgesia have been previously discussed in the section on combinations of drugs (see Use a Combination of Drugs, earlier in this chapter).
Acetaminophen, NSAIDs, hydroxyzine, and dextromethorphan have been demonstrated to provide additive analgesia to patients chronically receiving opioids.
Adjuvant Analgesics for Neuropathic Pain
The common neuropathic pain syndromes in patients with cancer include injury to peripheral nerves and plexus by tumor invasion, chemotherapy, surgery, or viral
agents. Depending on the intensity of pain, nonopioid and opioid analgesics are the first-line agents. However, as previously discussed, there is evidence to suggest
that such neuropathic pains are less responsive to nonopioid and opioid approaches. Some of the commonly used adjuvant drugs for managing this population of
patients are described in the following sections.
Antidepressants
The tricyclic antidepressants may be the most useful group of psychotropic drugs used in pain management. 128,129 Their analgesic effects are mediated by
enhancement of serotonin activity. Data from controlled trials indicate that both the tertiary amine tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline, doxepin, imipramine and
clomipramine), and the secondary amine compounds (desipramine and nortriptyline) have analgesic effects. More recently, one of the serotonin selective reuptake
inhibitors, paroxetine, has also been shown to have analgesic properties in patients with neuropathic pain. 130 These drugs have been reported to be effective in
treating continuous dysesthesias, as well as intermittent lancinating dysesthetic pain. The doses used for analgesia are far below those needed to produce an
antidepressant effect. The analgesic properties of these drugs appear to occur independent of their mood-altering effects. Patients should be started on low doses of
10 to 25 mg and titrated up to achieve adequate analgesia in a 2- to 4-week trial. Blood levels should be measured to determine both patient compliance and drug
absorption, because of wide individual variation. Patients who are unable to tolerate amitriptyline, or who are predisposed to its sedative, anticholinergic or
hypotensive effects, should be considered for a trial with a secondary amine tricyclic antidepressant, or a serotonin selective reuptake inhibitor such as paroxetine. In
the management of cancer patients with pain, the antidepressant drugs are the first-line therapeutic approach for neuropathic pain, and every attempt should be made
to provide the patient with a several-week trial before discontinuing these drugs.
Anticonvulsants
The role of anticonvulsants in the management of patients with neuropathic pain is based, in part, on the fact that the mode of action is to stabilize membranes and
alter sodium and calcium influx. 130,131 Many patients with neuropathic pain complain of paroxysmal, brief lancinating pains. To date, clinical experience with the
anticonvulsants has been positive. The drugs most commonly used include gabapentin, carbamazepine, phenytoin, valproate, and clonazepam. Gabapentin is
considered the first-line anticonvulsant to manage neuropathic pain. Controlled trials in diabetic neuropathy, postherpetic neuralgia, and acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome neuropathy demonstrate the effectiveness of this agent in reducing pain. Doses range from 900 to 1800 mg/d. 131 The major drug side effect is sedation.
Patients should be started at 300 mg/d and rapidly titrated to 900 mg. Pain relief up to 30% to 50% of patients has been suggested. Clinical studies with
carbamazepine demonstrate efficacy, but the utility of this drug in the cancer population is limited by its potential to produce bone marrow suppression, particularly
leukopenia. The dosing guidelines used for the treatment of seizures are suggested in managing neuropathic pain. Each of the drugs should be initiated at low doses
and gradually titrated upward. There is anecdotal experience to suggest that using intravenous loading doses of phenytoin for patients in an acute crisis with severe
lancinating pain may be of clinical value. Gabapentin was not effective in drug trials in neuropathic pain. Both valproate and clonazepam have been reported
anecdotally to be useful in neuropathic pain, but these are considered third-line agents in this patient population. Currently, there are no data to relate the plasma
level and pain relief with any of these drugs. As previously stated, sequential trials are necessary to identify the most useful agent. With the use of baclofen, which is
generally well tolerated, doses should begin at 5 mg two or three times a day, with titrations upward, with the highest reported doses between 100 to 150 mg/d titrated

to the individual responses of the patient. 132
Local Anesthetics
The use of both brief intravenous local anesthetic infusions (lidocaine), as well as maintenance oral anesthetic drugs, have demonstrated some efficacy in the
management of chronic neuropathic pain, particularly in those patients with both lancinating and continuous dysesthesias. Mexiletine is the oral local anesthetic for
which there are pilot data to support its analgesic efficacy. 133 The initial dose of mexiletine is low, at 150 mg/d, with gradual upward dose titration. Electrocardiograms
should be monitored at higher doses, and blood levels of mexiletine may be useful to prevent toxicity. Currently, there are no good data available to predict what
patient might respond to the use of oral local or intravenous anesthetics, as have been done in the use of brief local anesthetic infusions to determine control of
cardiac arrhythmias.
Epidural local anesthetics (bupivacaine, lidocaine) have been most widely used to manage neuropathic pain either alone or in combination with opioid. Alternatively,
the use of brief intravenous infusions of lidocaine may be helpful in patients who have an opioid-refractory continuous dysesthesia that has not responded to an
antidepressant or anticonvulsant. 134 These drugs clearly serve as a second-line approach, with individualized therapy the rule.
CUTANEOUS LOCAL ANESTHETICS. The use of cutaneous anesthesia has been suggested to be most helpful in patients who have significant allodynia and marked

hyperesthesia. The use of the topical application of a local anesthetic, such as a eutectic mixture of local anesthetics, has been demonstrated to be efficacious in
patients with postherpetic neuralgia. 135 The cream should be applied under an occlusive dressing, to increase skin penetration and augment analgesic efficacy. The
use of high-concentration lidocaine (5% and 10%) has also been reported to be effective in this population of patients. 136
Corticosteroids
A series of controlled and uncontrolled surveys have demonstrated that the use of chronic corticosteroid therapy to reduce pain in patients with breast and prostate
cancer improves quality of life. 70,137,138 In a controlled study of corticosteroid use in patients with far-advanced disease, transient improvement in appetite, analgesia,
and mood were noted, but they were not sustained after the initial effect. 139 The major indications for corticosteroid use include refractory neuropathic pain, bone pain,
pain associated with capular expansion or duct obstruction, and headache due to increased intercranial pressure. In certain cancer pain syndromes, such as epidural
cord compression, 85% of patients receiving 100 mg of dexamethasone as part of their radiation therapy protocol reported significant pain relief associated with
marked reduction in analgesic requirements. 70 Similarly, in patients with tumor infiltration of the brachial and lumbosacral plexus, corticosteroids provided additive
analgesic effects. The risk of adverse effects associated with corticosteroid therapy varies with the duration. Long-term use may be associated with gastrointestinal
toxicity and acute psychosis. A wide range of doses have been suggested, including doses of 30 mg/d in patients with prostate cancer, which was effective in
providing improved quality of life and reduced pain. As stated, with epidural cord compression, initial doses of 100 mg with maintenance doses of 16 mg have been
associated with effective analgesia. In our experience, the use of 16 mg as a loading bolus and rapid titration to lower doses of approximately 4 mg/d is one approach
commonly used in the refractory chronic pain patient with advanced disease.
Other Adjuvant Drugs
There are a wide variety of other drugs that have been used to manage neuropathic pain, including benzodiazepines, neuroleptics, a 2-adrenergic agonist drugs,
NMDA antagonists, and peptides. Of the benzodiazepines, clonazepam is commonly used in patients with lancinating or paroxysmal pain. 140 The use of these drugs
must be balanced with their potential for somnolence and cognitive impairment. They serve as second- to third-line therapy in patients who have not responded to
antidepressant or anticonvulsant drug therapy. Of the neuroleptics, pimozide has been reported to be analgesic in patients with trigeminal neuralgia. 141
Methotrimeprazine has been demonstrated to have analgesic properties comparable with morphine. 142 This drug has sedative, anxiolytic, and antiemetic properties
and is commonly used in patients who have excessive opioid side effects. It provides analgesia by a nonopioid mechanism.
Coadministration of these drugs with opioids can often be effective in patients with neuropathic pain. Of the a 2-adrenergic agonist drugs, clonidine has been
demonstrated to be analgesic in controlled trials. 143 It can be used by either the oral or transdermal route and has been reported to be specifically effective in patients
with dysesthetic pain, who demonstrate sympathetic hyperactivity. Following intrathecal administration, clonidine was reported to improve pain in patients with
intolerable neuropathic pain. Dextromethorphan and ketamine are two commercially available NMDA antagonists. Both have been shown to have analgesic effects in
controlled studies. 144,145 The mechanism of action relates to the fact that the NMDA receptor reduces the development of the windup phenomenon, which occurs as a
result of changes in the response of central dorsal horn neurons with neuropathic pain. Case reports have suggested that dextromethorphan has been beneficial in
selected patients, although a controlled trial of low-dose dextromethorphan had negative results. 145 The drug may be initiated at doses of 40 to 60 mg daily and
gradually escalated. Doses of 1 g have been administered safely, at least in the short-term. Studies of dextromethorphan combined with opioids demonstrated added
analgesia, suggesting an opioid-sparing effect of the drug. The use of ketamine infusions have been previously well established to produce analgesia, and they have
been reintroduced into clinical use as brief infusions for the management of patients with refractory neuropathic pain. Further studies are necessary to demonstrate
the safety and efficacy of these treatment approaches in long-term management for chronic neuropathic pain. Oral ketamine in case reports has demonstrated
efficacy in cancer patients with pain uncontrolled by other approaches.
Calcitonin has been reported to provide analgesia in patients with sympathetically maintained pain and in the management of acute phantom pain. 146 The mechanism
underlying these analgesic effects is unknown, but it has suggested the empiric use of calcitonin in patients with refractory neuropathic pain. The clinical, anecdotal
literature suggests that patients be treated initially with a low dose, after initial skin testing to rule out hypersensitivity to this agent, with gradual escalation to a range
of 100 to 200 IU/d. Its use chronically has not been assessed, and further studies are necessary to define its place in the treatment of patients with neuropathic pain.
Adjuvants for Bone Pain
Metastatic disease to bone is the most common cause of pain in patients with cancer. Analgesic drug therapy is commonly used to manage the pain during the initial
treatment with either chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Numerous investigators have identified a management approach for bone pain, which includes the use of
specific surgical palliative approaches, radiotherapeutic approaches, hormonal therapies, and bone resorption inhibitors. Multifocal metastatic bone disease that is
refractory to routine treatments may benefit from the use of a series of agents, including the bisphosphonate compounds, gallium nitrate, calcitonin, and strontium 89.
The current bisphosphonates most widely studied for the treatment of bone pain include pamidronate and clonidronate. 147,148 and 149 Pamidronate is usually
administered as a brief infusion in a starting dose of 60 to 120 mg. Analgesia, if it occurs, usually appears within days, but may accrue for many weeks with repeated
infusions. In two studies patients receiving pamidronate in doses of 30 to 60 mg every 2 weeks showed relief of pain in 30% to 60% of patients. Bisphosphonates'
analgesic effect appears to be dose dependent. Current recommendations include a regimen of intravenous pamidronate, 60 mg every 2 weeks for at least two or
three treatments. If no response, therapy can be discontinued. If effective, a biweekly regimen can be continued. A study of pamidronate, 120 mg intravenously,
versus placebo in patients with painful bone metastases revealed a correlation between analgesic response and collagen cross-links suggesting such peptide
cross-links may be used to select those patients more likely to achieve improvement in pain with bisphosphonate therapy. The major indication of these drugs is to
prevent skeletal morbidity, with data in breast cancer patients and patients with multiple myeloma showing efficacy in reduction of fractures and reduction in bone
pain. Clonidronate may be administered orally and has been demonstrated to be efficacious in patients with breast cancer and multiple myeloma.
Calcitonin has also been reported anecdotally to be useful in patients with malignant bone pain, but the appropriate dose and dosing frequency have not been well
defined.150 Gallium nitrate has also been used with some efficacy in patients with metastatic bone pain, but the limited experience has not well defined the appropriate
dosing guidelines, and nephrotoxicity has been reported. 151 Strontium 89 is a bone-seeking radiopharmaceutical, recognized as useful in the treatment of bone pain
secondary to metastatic disease.152,153 It is indicated in patients with refractory multifocal pain due to osteoblastic lesions who have a life expectancy greater than 3
months, who have sufficient bone marrow reserve (i.e., a platelet count above 60,000 and a white blood cell count above 2400), and for whom there is no further
planned myelosuppressive chemotherapy. The onset of effect is slow and may require several weeks, with peak effects at 2 to 3 months. Bone marrow suppression is
the major adverse effect, with irreversible thrombocytopenia.
The selection of any one of these treatments in metastatic bone pain needs to be individualized, with evidence that both the bisphosphonates and strontium 89 have
clearly demonstrated efficacy in certain patients.

Adjuvants to Treat Side Effects
Nausea and vomiting, confusion, sedation, and constipation are common opioid-induced side effects. The use of drugs to manage these have been previously
discussed (discussed earlier, in Anticipate and Treat Side Effects ). The use of caffeine, methylphenidate, and dextroamphetamine have all been demonstrated in
clinical trials to reduce opioid-induced sedation. Haloperidol is the treatment of choice to manage hallucinations and agitated delirium in patients receiving opioid
analgesics. The use of bowel regimens to manage depressed gastrointestinal motility have also been discussed.

PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACHES
Psychological approaches should be an integral part of the care of the cancer patient with pain. A series of psychological variables contribute to the cancer pain
experience and suffering, such as perception of control, the meaning of pain, fear of death, depressed mood, and hopelessness. The level of psychological distress
experienced by each patient varies depending on personality, coping ability, social support, and medical factors. Pain has a profound effect on levels of emotional
distress, and psychological factors such as depression and anxiety intensify the pain experience. Measures of emotional disturbance have been reported to be
predictors of pain in advancing later stages of cancer. The incidence of pain, depression, and delirium increases with high levels of physical debilitation in advanced
disease. Approximately 25% of all cancer patients experience severe depressive symptoms, with the prevalence increasing to 77% in those with advanced illness.
Uncontrolled pain is a major factor in cancer suicide. 21
Various psychological interventions have been advocated for patients with cancer pain. Optimal treatment is multimodal and requires pharmacologic,
psychotherapeutic, and cognitive-behavioral approaches. The roles of the psychiatrist, psychologist, and social worker in cancer pain management are well described
in the literature.
The goals of short-term psychotherapy are to provide emotional support, continuity, and information and to assist patients in adapting to the crisis. Communication
skills are of paramount importance for patient and family, particularly about pain and analgesic issues. The needs of the patient and family must be addressed.
Psychotherapy in the cancer pain setting is primarily nonanalytic and focuses on current issues and exploration of reactions to cancer, which often provides insight
into other life issues. Group interventions may also be helpful.
A specialized approach called cognitive-behavioral therapy has been used to treat pain disorders, including cancer pain. 154 This approach uses short-term therapeutic
interventions based on theoretically and empirically derived principles that can be adapted to each patient's problems and needs. It includes a set of systematic
mental and behavioral techniques designed to modify specific emotional, behavioral, and social problems as well as the global experience of pain and distress. Its
major goal is to enhance the sense of personal control or self-efficacy. In a multidisciplinary approach to cancer pain, not every patient needs referral for this therapy,
but it is useful if all members of the pain team follow a cognitive-behavioral model. Because cognitive-behavioral therapy is a commonsense psychological approach
consisting of specific techniques, it can be learned and practiced by any interested clinician, nurse, or social worker who can gain practical training in the use of these
techniques and apply them effectively.
Various intervention methods have been developed and are arbitrarily divided into behavioral and cognitive methods for discussion purposes. These approaches
must be targeted to each patient's needs.
Behavioral techniques include ways to modify physiologic pain reactions and pain behaviors. Relaxation training can be used by all caregivers who manage patients
with pain and cancer. Its mechanism of action includes the reduction of muscle tension, and it can provide the patient with a sense of improved self-control and a
calming diversion of attention, breaking the associated pain-anxiety-tension cycle. Techniques range from simple deep-breathing exercises to more specialized
methods of biofeedback and hypnosis. Contingency management is another behavioral approach designed to modify dysfunctional pain behaviors and replace them
with well behaviors.
Cognitive techniques are designed to modify dysfunctional mental processes or to teach adaptive coping strategies. Cognitive coping and cognitive modification are
approaches in which distraction, focusing, and perception and interpretation of the meaning of pain are assessed.

ANESTHETIC AND NEUROSURGICAL APPROACHES
Anesthetic and neurosurgical approaches are most effective in treating patients with well-defined localized pain. Table 56.1-12 and Table 56.1-13 outline the
indications for their use. Approximately 10% to 20% of cancer pain patients require these approaches, together with pharmacologic approaches, to provide adequate
analgesia.

TABLE 56.1-13. Neuroablative and Neurostimulatory Procedures for Relief of Pain from Cancer

In a prospective study, Ventafridda and colleagues evaluated two groups of patients for 3 months who presented with intractable cancer pain not responsive to
specific anticancer therapies. 22 One group was treated with sequential pharmacologic approaches using the analgesic ladder. The second group was treated with a
multimodal approach of analgesic therapy followed by the use of neurolytic blocks or chronic spinal opioid administration. Patients treated with neurolytic procedures
combined with pharmacologic therapy showed a statistically significant degree of greater pain relief than those treated with drugs alone by the third week of therapy.
However, by 6 weeks, there was no statistical difference between the two groups. Complete pain relief without the need for analgesic drug therapy persisted to 3
months in 29% of the patients who received spinal opiates, 25% treated with celiac ganglion neurolytic block, 24% with percutaneous cordotomy, 12% with chemical
rhizotomy, and 7% with gasserian thermorhizotomy. This study demonstrated that although analgesic therapy is the mainstay of treatment, anesthetic and
neurosurgical procedures provide an important, but limited, contribution to adequate analgesia. Cherny et al. reported that 17% of patients in a prospective study of
100 cancer patients involved at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center were evaluated for anesthetic and neurosurgical approaches with 10% requiring such
approaches. One study assessed attitudes of oncologists toward interventional cancer pain treatments. Eighty-one percent of oncologists reported patient referral to
pain specialists, yet their familiarity with intrathecal therapy was low, with only 46% referring patients for intrathecal therapy in the previous 6 months, citing the
invasive nature of device placement as a drawback by 42% of physicians. 26
Several factors are important in selecting the appropriate procedure for each patient. Because diffuse pain problems are common in cancer patients and most of the
procedures are useful for well-defined localized pain, the role of these approaches is limited at best. Further complicating their use is the limited number of
professionals who have expertise in these procedures. As patients become more cognizant of their disease and treatment options, they are often hesitant to undergo
neurodestructive procedures. Patients often consider their pain to be an important marker for their disease and are frightened of the potential, although unlikely,
complications of these procedures. As a result, these procedures are often performed late in the illness, and full evaluation of their effectiveness and duration of
action is limited by the patient's overriding medical problems.

These procedures are often not very effective in managing neuropathic pain, except for the use of local anesthetics, and are most helpful in managing most types of
somatic and visceral pain. However, cancer patients often have a mixed somatic, visceral, and neuropathic pain syndrome. We advocate early consideration for the
use of some of these anesthetic and neurosurgical procedures in patients to improve their quality of life through adequate pain management.
LOCAL ANESTHETICS
Anecdotal reports and several controlled studies support the use of cutaneous, subcutaneous, intravenous, intrapleural, and epidural local anesthetics in the
management of patients with somatic, visceral, and neuropathic pain. 37
Intravenous lidocaine should be considered as both a diagnostic and therapeutic approach in patients with neuropathic pain. 155 If such patients obtain an analgesic
response, a trial of oral mexiletine or the use of continuous subcutaneous lidocaine should be considered to determine whether prolonged relief may be possible.
Although no studies have confirmed that the response to lidocaine predicts a response to mexiletine for pain, a comparable predictive value exists in the cardiac
literature, in which intravenous lidocaine's effectiveness in controlling ventricular arrhythmias predicts the usefulness of mexiletine for this same disorder.
Brose and Cousins reported the use of continuous subcutaneous infusions in two patients with cancer-related neuropathic pain, advocating this approach as an
alternative in patients who do not respond to standard opioid and adjuvant treatments as well as anesthetic approaches for neuropathic pain. 134
Intrapleural local anesthetics have been used for acute pain in the chest wall and have been adapted for the management of chronic cancer pain. 156 A subcutaneously
tunneled intrapleural catheter offered long-term relief of right upper quadrant pain from hepatic metastases in a patient with significant pain from tumor infiltration of
the liver. This novel method offers an alternative approach for patients with local regional pain in the pleural and abdominal regions.
Epidural local anesthetics are used to manage patients with localized pain syndromes, usually below the waist. Intermittent and continuous epidural infusions of local
anesthetics have been used to manage the difficult chronic pain associated with metastatic disease below the waist, often involving the sacrum and lumbosacral
plexus.157 This method consists of infusing a local anesthetic via a subcutaneous infusion pump or Ommaya reservoir to a catheter, temporarily or permanently placed
in the epidural space. If the amount and concentration of the anesthetic are varied, effective pain relief can be achieved without interrupting significant motor or
autonomic function. The risk of infection is minimized because local anesthetics have antimicrobial effects. The use of continuous low-dose infusions of local
anesthetics is associated with minimal systemic side effects. Further studies on the use of this technique in comparison with standard therapies are needed to define
its place in the management of the cancer patient. Its major advantages are that the resultant analgesia is not cross-tolerant with the analgesic produced by the opioid
analgesic, and that temporary use of this technique allows for reduction in the amount of systemic opiate drugs, therefore partially reversing tolerance. This has been
a useful preliminary approach in patients for whom the use of spinal opiate analgesia is considered, but who have developed tolerance from large doses of systemic
opiates. Because tolerance develops to these analgesic effects, this approach is temporary (days to weeks) rather than long-term. This approach is most useful in
patients who experience an acute pain crisis, such as the patient with a pathologic hip fracture who is not a surgical candidate; this approach would allow the patient
to move about in bed. In patients with chronic cancer neuropathic pain, local anesthetics combined with opioids are used.
PERIPHERAL NERVE BLOCKS
Peripheral nerve blocks are used both diagnostically to localize the nerve distribution and therapeutically to interrupt pain transmission within a determined nerve
distribution. This technique is limited to areas of the body in which the interruption of both motor and sensory function will not interfere with the patient's functional
status. This approach is most commonly used with patients who have pain in the head, chest, or abdomen. 158,159 This technique is also limited by the fact that each
peripheral nerve subserves sensory function over many levels, and usually several nerves must be blocked to provide adequate analgesia. These techniques are
most useful in patients with somatic pain; neuropathic pain is rarely controlled by peripheral nerve blocks alone. Examples of successful blocks include gasserian
ganglion block for craniofacial pain, intercostal blocks for chest wall infiltration from tumor, and paravertebral blocks for radicular pain.
In patients with somatic pain who respond to a local anesthetic block, neurolytic blockade with either alcohol or phenol may provide more prolonged relief. A block
produced by phenol tends to be less profound and of shorter duration than that produced by alcohol. Phenol has local anesthetic as well as neurolytic effects.
The most common peripheral neurolytic block is a paravertebral block for localized intercostal pain. From our experience in treating patients with chest wall pain, we
advise that this procedure be done under fluoroscopic control or computed tomographic localization to accurately interrupt the individual intercostal nerve.
Epidural and intrathecal neurolytic blocks have been used primarily to manage patients with far-advanced disease whose pain is either unilateral in the chest or
abdomen or midline in the perineum. These approaches are less useful in managing upper and lower limb pain associated with brachial and lumbosacral plexopathy
because of the high risk of motor weakness associated with effective neurolytic blockade by this route. Epidural phenol blocks are useful in chest wall pain over
several dermatomes. Such an approach obviates the need for multiple paravertebral injections. Phenol is injected in small increments (1 to 2 mL per segment) over 2
or 3 days by an epidural catheter, and preliminary data demonstrate 80% pain relief in patients with documented somatic pain. Epidural and intrathecal phenol blocks
have been used to manage perineal pain, but no studies have delineated the superiority of one approach over the other. 159
A review of a large number of alcohol subarachnoid blocks reports an average of 60% good relief, 21% fair relief, and 18% poor relief. 70 Because the duration of pain
relief has seldom been documented with careful follow-up studies, the overall estimate for relief of pain with both subarachnoid alcohol and phenol blocks suggests a
mean duration of pain relief of between 2 weeks and 3 months.
Complications are of two kinds. With intrathecal injection, a self-limiting spinal headache may occur. Complications that result from the action of neurolytic substances
on nerve fibers include motor paresis, loss of sphincter function, impairment of touch and proprioception, and troublesome dysesthesias. Injection in the thoracic
region has a low complication rate. In our experience, many cancer patients already have both motor and autonomic dysfunction before the use of neurolytic
blockade; these often remain the same or may worsen. Patients should be informed of the risk of these procedures, with particular attention to the fact that they may
develop motor paresis and bladder dysfunction, specifically incontinence, after the blockade.
The selection of patients for management with epidural or intrathecal neurolytic agents should be based on the following criteria: exhaustion of appropriate antitumor
approaches; clear clinical and radiologic definition of the pain; poor candidacy for percutaneous cordotomy; failure of nonopioid, opioid, and adjuvant analgesics to
produce adequate analgesia without significant side effects; a favorable response to diagnostic or epidural or intrathecal blocks, producing at least 75% pain relief;
and MRI of the spine or myelography done before the procedure to rule out tumor infiltration of the subarachnoid space.
AUTONOMIC NERVE BLOCK
Sympathetic block is effective in conditions with vasomotor or visceromotor hyperactivity. This hyperactivity accompanies many of the cancer-related pain syndromes
such as visceral pain or plexopathies. The most commonly used sympathetic block is that of the celiac ganglion for pain due to abdominal malignancy, including
cancer of the pancreas, stomach, duodenum, liver, gallbladder, adrenal gland, and colon. Nociceptive fibers of the splanchnic, sympathetic, vagal, phrenic, and
somatic nerves converge on the celiac ganglion, which is amenable to a regional block that is successful in from 70% to 85% of patients treated. 158
Standardized approaches for the use of this technique have been described using computed tomography monitoring or fluoroscopic control. After placement of the
needle, 25 mg of absolute alcohol mixed with local anesthetic and contrast is injected. Bilateral needle placement has been reported to provide the best results, but
anecdotal reports suggest that unilateral needle placement on the right provides comparable analgesia. The major side effect of the procedure is transient
hypotension, and patients must be well hydrated and monitored carefully during the procedure and for 4 to 6 hours afterward. Significant neurologic complications
occur in less than 1% of patients if proper technique is used. Complications include paraparesis, postural hypotension, and urinary difficulties.
Although there has been debate about the usefulness of this procedure in patients with pancreatic cancer, it should be considered as one of the approaches, together
with pharmacologic approaches, in managing these patients.
Lumbar sympathetic block may provide significant relief of intractable urogenital pain or pain due to carcinomatous invasion of local nerves and plexus in the
perineum and lower extremity.159 This ganglion conveys visceral nociceptive afferents from the pelvic viscera. Pain caused by cancer of the sigmoid colon or rectum

may be relieved by bilateral lumbar sympathetic block if the disease is confined to those viscera. Pain caused by cancer of the seminal vesicles or prostate may
sometimes be relieved by bilateral lumbar sympathetic block. Similarly, pain caused by uterine cancer may be relieved if the disease is confined to the body of the
uterus. In many instances, however, the block must be extended to the T-12 ganglion. Good evidence suggests that lumbar sympathetic block alone is not useful in
patients with lumbosacral plexopathy; therefore, the role of this procedure is limited to specific anatomic sites of pain.
Stellate ganglion block may sometimes be useful for pain in the face, upper neck, ear, and hemicranium. However, the potential complications of stellate ganglion
block limit the use of this technique with neurolytic solution, as there is a high risk of spillage of the neurolytic material into the brachial plexus, with secondary nerve
injury and focal pain.
NEUROADENOLYSIS OF THE PITUITARY
Chemical hypophysectomy is a special use of a neurolytic method. Several early studies suggest that 35% to 95% of patients undergoing this approach report pain
relief, with a median duration of 6 to 7 weeks and a maximum duration of 20 weeks. 160 The mechanism by which analgesia is produced may result from alcohol
tracking up the pituitary stalk into the hypothalamus, with consequent disruption of the hypothalamic-thalamic endorphinergic pain pathways. Side effects include
diabetes insipidus, cranial nerve palsies, cerebrospinal fluid leakage, and rarely meningitis. The lack of detailed clinical data limits critical assessment of these
studies. This technique is rarely if ever used in patients with diffuse pain.

NEUROSURGICAL APPROACHES
Neurosurgical approaches for cancer pain can be divided into two major categories, antitumor and antinociceptive. These approaches are often used alone or in
combination by neurosurgeons to provide improved pain relief. 161,162
ANTITUMOR APPROACHES
Antitumor approaches are often more acceptable to patients because they focus on cancer treatment, offering the hope of prolonged survival. The major procedures
are listed in Table 56.1-8 and include tumor removal from the spine, epidural space, or adjacent plexus; stabilization procedures for spinal fracture, instability, and
subluxation; and implantation of regional delivery devices for epidural, intrathecal, and intraventricular opioid drugs.
Tumor removal through resection of spinal metastases is associated with dramatic improvements in pain in 70% to 90% of patients. 163,164 With the use of improved
methods of internal fixation with methyl methacrylate and improved stabilizing procedures, the use of this approach has increased in patients with intractable
continuous or incidental back and neck pain. Patients may also have an associated segmental instability associated with a pathologic fracture of the vertebral body or
subluxation, syndromes that place patients at significant risk for neurologic dysfunction. Careful radiologic workup is necessary to define the specific anatomic basis
for the spinal pain, but aggressive surgical approaches have improved the quality of life for many patients bedridden by uncontrolled pain. In patients with epidural
cord compression, the indications for surgery include uncontrolled pain in a patient with a pathologic fracture or a solitary relapse in the epidural space or vertebral
body from a radioresistant tumor. In patients with radiosensitive tumors who relapse after radiation therapy, spinal surgery should be considered as a reasonable
approach and is specifically indicated in the patient with an acute neurologic deterioration during radiation therapy. When percutaneous or open vertebral body biopsy
is impossible, surgical resection should be strongly considered to define the primary tumor type in patients with undiagnosed lesions; this serves as both a diagnostic
and therapeutic procedure.
In patients with paraspinal tumor or tumor infiltration of the plexus, en bloc resection of tumor has successfully provided pain relief and has served as a debulking
antitumor procedure. In patients with Pancoast's syndrome, invasion of the spine or epidural extension is present in 20% at initial presentation and is associated with
a significant morbidity in up to 50% of patients when local treatment is ineffective. In the good-risk patient with plexopathy and spinal invasion, Sundaresan et al.
recommend surgery in which tumor is removed from the lower plexus, C-8 to T-1, and the vertebral body is resected, with brachytherapy to provide further tumor
control. 164
In patients with tumor invasion of the paraspinal area (specifically the psoas and iliacus), radical resection of these tumor masses concurrent with spinal surgery,
followed by brachytherapy, combines antitumor and antinociceptive therapies.
When considering the use of these neurosurgical procedures to provide palliative surgery with an antinociceptive component, the patient's extent of disease,
performance score, prognosis, and ability to tolerate the surgery must be weighed.
ANTINOCICEPTIVE PROCEDURES
Antinociceptive procedures include neuroablative, neurostimulatory, and neuropharmacologic approaches.
Neuroablative Procedures
Neuroablative procedures involve the production of a surgical or radiofrequency lesion along the nociceptive neural pathway. Sectioning on the posterior roots
(rhizotomy), lesioning the lateral dorsal horn (dorsal root entry zone lesion), and interrupting the ascending neospinothalamic pathway (cordotomy) or the crossing
interneuronal fibers (myelotomy) in the spinal cord are examples of neuroablative procedures performed for pain relief.
Cordotomy, either percutaneous or open, is the most common neuroablative procedure used to manage cancer pain. 162,163,164,165,166 and 167 It is the neurosurgical
procedure of choice for patients with unilateral pain below the waist and with a relatively short life expectancy. Cordotomy is usually effective for 1 to 3 years, with
dysesthesias substituting for analgesia in patients living longer than 3 years. Pain in the chest wall or upper extremity may be successfully treated initially with
cordotomy, but extensive data demonstrate that, with time, the level of analgesia drops, limiting the effectiveness of this approach. Somatic pain appears to be the
most responsive to cordotomy; visceral and neuropathic pain are less responsive for reasons that are not fully understood.
Percutaneous cordotomy is performed in a supine, awake patient through a lateral C-1 to C-2 approach. 162,165 A needle is advanced under fluoroscopic control until
cerebrospinal fluid is obtained. A minimyelogram is done to identify the dentate ligament. A cordotomy electrode is passed through the spinal needle and the spinal
cord is punctured with the aid of impedance monitoring. Electrophysiologic stimulation is done to identify the spinothalamic tract and then a radiofrequency lesion is
made in the appropriate painful site. Such a lesion interrupts pain and temperature on the contralateral side of the lesioned site. Patients typically report spontaneous
relief of pain in this lesioned area.
The anatomic area at the lesion site includes fibers mediating respiration and autonomic function. These fibers are adjacent to the anterior horn and the cervical
spinothalamic fibers. Near the lumbar spinothalamic tract are the fibers governing the intercostal muscles. This quadrant of the spinal cord also contains the sacral
fibers to and from the bladder, which are closer to the spinothalamic fibers. These anatomic relations explain some of the complications associated with cordotomy:
bladder dysfunction, respiratory compromise, and ipsilateral motor weakness.
From the literature that does not provide comparative studies in cancer patients with pain, pain relief can be obtained in 60% to 80% of patients immediately after
cordotomy; results at 6 to 12 months are 40% to 50%. 162,163,164,165,166 and 165 In a retrospective survey of 40 percutaneous cordotomies in patients with predominant
unilateral pain below the waist, 70% of patients obtained complete relief with continued use of some supplemental analgesics, 16% had moderate relief, and 13% did
not benefit from this procedure. 167 In another study, Arbit reported that 16% of patients referred for percutaneous cordotomy could not undergo the procedure because
of difficulty in positioning or with participating in the procedure, even with the use of increased analgesic drug doses and anesthetic assistance. 162 Careful patient
selection is necessary for this procedure.
Open cordotomy is usually done below the cervicothoracic junction through a hemilaminectomy or full laminectomy. Open cordotomy should be reserved for the
patient who cannot tolerate a percutaneous approach or for the patient with limited motor or sensory dysfunction from tumor infiltration below the waist in whom
bilateral cordotomy is to be done for bilateral or midline pain.

The complications of cordotomy vary with the type of procedure (percutaneous or open) and are also strongly influenced by the patient's premorbid neurologic
condition. Many patients have borderline bladder function and mild paresis from tumor infiltration that is transiently or permanently exacerbated by these procedures.
In our series at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 45% of patients had transient or permanent urinary retention. 167 After cordotomy there is often an unmasking
of pain ipsilateral to the cordotomy site. This pain was reported in 22% of patients in our series. 162 In some patients it was difficult to clarify if this nerve pain was
caused by unidentified tumor and really represented mirror pain or was caused by the unmasking of tumor-related pain. In 60% of patients in the Arbit series,
unmasking of pain on the contralateral side occurred because of bilateral lumbosacral plexopathy. Dysesthesias characterized by burning pain in the area of sensory
loss are reported in 1% to 2% of patients after a delay of several months to 2 years after the procedure. Ipsilateral motor weakness results from an inadvertent
anterior extension of the lesion to involve the corticospinal tract. In our series, 7% of patients had transient paresis and 22% had permanent paresis. Most series
report motor paresis in 10% to 20% of patients.
Respiratory complications occur in patients with a dysfunctional lung contralateral to the site of the cordotomy. This is a predictable risk when patients undergo
cordotomy on the same side as their only functioning lung: Interruption of the reticulospinal fibers controlling the intercostal muscles and of the phrenic nerve may
occur because of their proximity to the lateral spinothalamic tract in this spinal cord quadrant.
Several other complications, including headache, fever, and meningismus, are associated with the percutaneous procedure, as well as a Horner's syndrome because
of interruption of the sympathetic tract.
In our series, 30% of patients demonstrated a profound depressive syndrome associated with significant pain relief. 167 Patients should be warned about this
complication, but the factors contributing to its development have not been fully clarified. Rapid reduction in opioids, realization that with pain relief they must face
their terminal illness, and other factors, including exhaustion, depression, and preexisting psychopathology, may all play a role in the appearance of this problematic
complication. Psychological intervention and the use of tricyclic antidepressants have been effective in managing these patients.
Dorsal rhizotomy is the next most common neuroablative procedure used for cancer pain. It is performed by sectioning the posterior sensory rootlets, and a specific
localized dermatomal pain level can be identified. It can be performed by an operative section of the nerve, or as previously discussed, by a neurolytic block. In
patients with chest wall pain from tumor invasion, improved analgesia in 50% to 80% has been reported with dorsal rhizotomy. 168 Arbit et al. have adapted this
procedure to manage patients with significant chest wall pain. 169
Rhizotomies of the trigeminal nerve, nervus intermedius, glossopharyngeal nerve, and portions of the vagus nerve are effective in controlling pain from head and neck
tumors that invade the base of the skull. 170 Bilateral sacral rhizotomy has been reported to treat sacral or perineal pain involving the sacral plexus at the S-2 and S-3
levels. However, these patients have often had extensive radiation therapy, and wound closure in the irradiated skin over the sacrum may complicate recovery and
increase the risk-to-benefit ratio. A neurolytic, epidural, or subarachnoid block is usually considered before surgical sacral rhizotomy.
The use of a dorsal root entry zone lesion is based on the recognition that nociceptive fibers enter laminae I and II at the dorsal horn; interruption of this anterior
lateral site has been associated with reduction in neuropathic pain in experimental animals. This approach has been used most commonly in avulsion of the brachial
plexus, postherpetic neuralgia, and postradiation plexopathy. Because this approach has not been widely used in cancer pain, its usefulness for brachial and
lumbosacral plexopathy is not established, but it is an interesting approach for such patients. 171 The procedure requires a laminectomy of several levels to provide an
adequate approach to this anatomic site, and this may be too extensive a procedure for the cancer patient with advanced disease. Further studies are necessary to
determine its usefulness.
The midline commissural myelotomy approach has been used in patients with midline perineal or coccygeal pain or bilateral pain in the lower extremities. Using a
limited midline myelotomy, Gildenberg and Hirschberg reported satisfactory pain relief in 10 to 14 patients with midline pain below the waist from cancer. 172 This
procedure is based on the fact that nociceptive fibers cross in the anterior commissure from the dorsal horn to the contralateral spinothalamic pathway. This approach
is used rarely, if ever, in patients with bilateral pain.
Cingulotomy has received attention in the treatment of some patients with cancer pain, using a stereotactic procedure with MRI to permit a radiofrequency lesion. Four
patients with pain from widely metastatic, diffuse bone disease who were receiving opioid analgesics reported immediate pain relief with bilateral cingulate lesions. 173
The pain relief persisted until death in 2 to 6 weeks. This procedure was previously used to treat psychiatric illness and has a long history of use in severe chronic
pain from a variety of neuropathic syndromes. The literature suggests that up to 50% of cancer patients have had moderate, marked, or complete relief for 3 months
after the procedure. The extent to which the development of this improved method will alter the use of this technique needs to be clarified.
Neurostimulatory Procedures
Neurostimulatory procedures involving the peripheral nerve and spinal cord are generally based on the gate theory of pain. The original theory suggests that there is
a neurophysiologic gating mechanism in the spinal cord, probably within the substantia gelatinosa. Noxious sensation is conducted via small-diameter peripheral
nerve fibers and nonnoxious sensation via large-diameter fibers, and both send collaterals to the substantia gelatinosa and up the spinal dorsal columns. Stimulation
of the small fibers tends to promote pain, or open the gate, whereas stimulation of the large fibers tends to inhibit pain or close the gate. Because the large nerve
fibers ascend in a compact bundle through the dorsal columns, they are accessible to selected electric stimulation. Retrograde firing of the large fibers ensues, and
pain sensation is inhibited at multiple levels of the spinal cord below that being stimulated.
Based on reports that high-frequency (50 to 100 Hz) percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation relieved chronic neurogenic pain, the use of transcutaneous electrical
nerve stimulation (TENS) was reported effective in treating neuropathic pain. Although control studies are lacking, numerous clinical surveys suggest that this
approach is useful for nociceptive and neuropathic pain. With the advent of sophisticated electronic devices, various patterns of electric stimulation are currently in
use transcutaneously, including pulsed (burst), modulation (ramped), random, and complex wave forms, all designed to improve efficacy. Patients are instructed on
proper electrode placement in a dermatomal pattern and are instructed to try both intermittent and continuous stimulation. By trial and error, analgesic effects should
be observed either immediately or, in some cases, after the stimulation is discontinued.
TENS is used for a wide variety of pains and serves as a safe, noninvasive approach. Clinical experience suggests its usefulness in some patients with peripheral
nerve pain. Several investigators have reported that it is useful in cancer pain for a wide variety of tumor-related and neuropathic pain syndromes. 174 Further studies
are necessary to define the usefulness of TENS in the cancer patient with pain.
The dorsal column stimulation technique involves the introduction of an electrode into the epidural or intrathecal space and advancing it to the appropriate level
overlying the dorsal columns. The main indications for placement of a dorsal column stimulator are intractable dysesthetic or deafferentation pain of the limbs or trunk,
such as radiation-induced brachial or lumbosacral plexopathy. This procedure is effective in 43% to 75% of patients and carries a low morbidity. The most common
complication is failure of the device itself, which occurs in approximately 10% of patients annually. Other complications include infection, cerebrospinal fluid fistula,
allergic or rejection response to the device material, and changes in stimulation over time, which may be related to cellular changes around the electrode or shifts in
its position.
Thalamic stimulation involves the placement of electrodes in the medial thalamus and has been reported to be most useful for managing neuropathic pain from
lesions in the central and peripheral nervous system. There are a series of reports on the usefulness of this technique in patients with head and neck cancer and
prominent cranial neuropathic pain, but the limited use of this technique in these patients makes it difficult to define its specific role. 175,176
Neuropharmacologic Approaches
Epidural and intraspinal analgesia using opioids alone or in combination with local anesthetics, clonidine, or both or experimental agents are used to manage chronic
cancer pain in patients with a reasonable (1 year) prognosis. In all instances, patients should have a trial of an epidural or intraspinal drug combination before
permanent implementation is considered. It is advised that patients have as continuous intrathecal trial lasting as long as possible before permanent implementation,
and Figure 56.1-3 provides an algorithm for the use of opioid intrathecal alone or with clonidine in a patient with a mixed somatic-neuropathic pain syndrome
inadequately managed by systemic opioids. 177 A wide array of external and implantable catheters and pumps are available with specific indicators and uses. Both
computer-controlled battery-operated pumps and continuous fixed infusion pumps are used. Cost of the pumps and the patient's psychosocial status and social

support systems and ability to care for the pump and port are important considerations in selecting the use of such devices. No studies have clearly defined the
efficacy of this approach as compared with systemic treatment, and longitudinal surveys have identified complication rates that vary from 10% to 50%, with meningitis
as a serious complication. With long-term epidural catheter use, 5% to 15% infection rates have been reported.

FIGURE 56.1-3. In intrathecal analgesic titration, doses are usually increased to about 20 mg/day of morphine and sometimes higher. Alternative therapies for when
intraspinal morphine is failing are shown.

TRIGGER POINT INJECTION
The use of trigger point injections is within the scope of the practicing physician. 178 Patients with significant musculoskeletal pain often describe specific, tender trigger
point areas that, when injected with either saline or local anesthetic, are associated with significant pain relief. Effective relief of pain from trigger point injections,
however, is not diagnostic of musculoskeletal pain alone, and an evaluation of the cause of the pain is still necessary to rule out the specific etiology.
Acupuncture has been used to treat both acute and chronic pain. The selected acupuncture points are manually or electrically stimulated with a needle until the
patient feels the sensation. A wide variety of acupuncture techniques are available, ranging from a traditional Chinese approach to a Western adaptation. Laser
acupuncture with external laser probes has also been used. The studies in cancer patients with pain represent large, uncontrolled, retrospective surveys. Minimal
stimulation in manual acupuncture was used in all cases, and three acupuncture treatments represented an adequate trial. Fifty-two percent and 56% of patients
reported some pain improvement for at least 7 days; an additional 30% and 22% had pain relief for 2 days or less or reported increased mobility alone. 179 A lack of
detailed pain assessment in specific acupuncture techniques or a critical review of the patient population make it difficult to interpret these observations. Based on its
current empiric use, this approach is relatively safe, but its benefit in cancer patients with pain remains undefined.

PHYSIATRIC APPROACHES
Rehabilitation medicine plays an important role in the multidisciplinary approach to the patient with cancer pain. Physiatrists are concerned with a patient's physical
functioning and provide expertise in assessing how impairment in a patient's physical capacity affects his or her ability to function. A wide variety of interventions are
available, including TENS, diathermy (heating pads, ultrasound, hydrotherapy), and cryotherapy (ice and vapo-coolants). Assistive device and braces, as well as
therapeutic exercise and massage, are important. Trigger point injections and acupuncture have also been used. These interventions are commonly used in
combination with other pain-therapy approaches, particularly behavioral and pharmacologic approaches. Rehabilitation approaches are discussed throughout the text
specific to cancer patients' needs.
A large body of data supports the use of rehabilitative interventions in acute and chronic nonmalignant pain, but similar studies have not addressed the rehabilitation
needs of the cancer pain patient. From our experiences, neurologic dysfunction is one of the common components in patients with cancer pain, and aggressive
neurorehabilitation is necessary to ambulate these patients and provide them with functional independence.

SEDATION IN THE IMMINENTLY DYING
NITROUS OXIDE
Nitrous oxide has analgesic properties and has been used in the management of patients with far-advanced disease to provide added analgesia. It is administered
with oxygen through a nonrebreathing face mask in concentrations from 25% to 75%. Its use in combination with systemic opioid analgesics is associated with
improvement of symptoms of pain and anxiety and a demonstrable improvement in alertness. 180 This anesthetic approach should be considered in patients with
breakthrough pain or incident pain to provide adequate analgesia to facilitate their care.
INTRAVENOUS BARBITURATES
This approach has been advocated to manage dying patients who have inadequate analgesia or uncontrolled symptoms, who ask to be maintained in a sedated state.
Intravenous thiopental titrated to a level of sedation was the approach advocated in a series of 17 terminally ill patients. 181 The authors suggested that the value of
this approach is based on the use of one agent to treat both physical and psychological symptoms. This approach may be seen as a more generalized one to
palliative care and should be considered only if the standard approaches with opioid analgesics and adjuvant drugs fail to provide adequate analgesia with minimum
side effects. However, because it is the physician's responsibility to manage not only pain but also suffering, this may be a reasonable approach, particularly in the
dying patient with profound dyspnea, myoclonus, or agitation. Further studies are needed to clarify the usefulness of this approach. In the published study, 13 of 17
patients developed somnolence and died; the somnolence lasted from 2 hours to 4 days, with an average of 23 hours. Four patients died without being somnolent.
Several problematic symptoms often arise in the management of the dying patient, including intractable vomiting, profound dyspnea, extreme agitation and anxiety,
and uncontrolled pain. Several authors have reported that most cancer patients have crescendo symptoms before death, requiring somnolence. 182,183 and 184 This
approach offers one method to manage these difficult patients.
Whatever pain management techniques are used, the physician is responsible for providing continuing care, constantly reassessing both the diagnosis and the
treatment to achieve optimal relief of pain and suffering for both patient and family.
The care of patients with cancer and chronic pain strains the resources of a single physician, especially after the patient's discharge from the hospital. Various
supportive care and continuing care programs have been developed to manage dying patients, both in the hospital and at home. In these patients the focus of
treatment shifts to symptom control and palliative comfort care. Palliative care services, home- and hospital-based hospices, and high-technology home care
programs are some of the approaches to care for patients with terminal illness.
The program at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center centers on the patient and family and is coordinated by a nurse, physician, and social worker. 185 The nurse
is responsible for day-to-day management of the patient's pain and works with the patient, family, and community physicians and nurses on symptom control and
supportive care. Community health professionals work with the patient at home, and the team is available to the patient, family, and community health workers on a
24-hour-a-day basis.

ALGORITHM FOR CANCER PAIN MANAGEMENT
An algorithm has been developed that integrates all of these management approaches for cancer pain. It attempts to integrate assessment techniques, drug therapy,
behavioral approaches, and anesthetic and neurosurgical approaches and stresses continuity of care. Treatment begins with a diagnostic evaluation that addresses
the medical, psychological, and social components of pain. A plan is developed to treat the cancer and pain. If the anticancer treatment is effective, pain relief usually

occurs and the drugs used for analgesia can be discontinued without difficulty. Pain treatment begins with the use of analgesic drugs, starting with nonopioid drugs
alone or in combination. If they are successful, no further therapy is necessary. If severe persistent pain does not respond to analgesic drugs or if the side effects of
the drugs are not tolerated, the physician should consider switching analgesics (e.g., from oral morphine to methadone), changing the route of administration (e.g.,
from oral to subcutaneous), or performing a cordotomy for localized pain. A trial of an adjuvant drug together with the opioid and nonopioid drug would also be
appropriate. In patients with excessive sedation or confusion, the use of a neurostimulant or haloperidol provides adequate treatment of the side effects of the opioid
drugs and maintains the patient's analgesia while markedly reducing concurrent side effects. Alternatively, epidural or intrathecal opioids may be considered if
systemic analgesics produce excessive side effects such as confusion or sedation. If the pain is localized (e.g., intercostal pain from tumor infiltration of the chest
wall), neurolytic blocks are indicated. If the pain is unilateral and below the waist, cordotomy should be considered. For diffuse pain, nitrous oxide inhalation may be
tried. Cognitive-behavioral approaches must be integrated from the onset of treatment and should be used along with the medical and surgical approaches.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The study of pain in cancer patients offers a unique opportunity to use clinical observations to advance our biologic knowledge. There is a critical need to expand both
the research and educational efforts in cancer pain to improve the control of pain in these patients. Information on the basic mechanisms of pain modulation can be
culled only from a careful study of these clinical pain problems. These patients can teach us the physiologic and psychological differences between acute and chronic
pain problems, the importance of the evolution of psychological factors, the difference between pain and suffering, the clinical pharmacology of analgesic drugs, and
the behavioral mechanisms humans use to suppress pain. The use of innovative approaches based on sound scientific principles and advanced on research
technology offers the opportunity to understand the complex phenomenon of pain.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Foley KM. Advances in cancer pain. Arch Neurol 1999;56:413.
2. Foley KM. Clinical crossroads: a 44-year old woman with severe pain at the end of life. JAMA 1999;281:1937.
3. Doyle D, Hanks GWC, MacDonald N, eds. Oxford textbook of palliative medicine, 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.
4. MacDonald N. The interface between oncology and palliative medicine. In: Doyle D, Hanks GWC, MacDonald N, eds. Oxford textbook of palliative medicine, 2nd ed. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1998:11.
5. Foley KM. Pain syndromes in patients with cancer. In: Bonica JJ, Ventafridda V, eds. Advances in pain research and therapy. New York: Raven Press, 1979:59.
6. Twycross RG, Fairfield S. Pain in far-advanced cancer. Pain 1982;14:303.
7. World Health Organization. Cancer pain relief, 2nd ed. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1996.
8. Daut RL, Cleeland CS. The prevalence and severity of pain in cancer. Cancer 1982;50:1913.
9. Stjernsward J. Pampallona palliative medicine: a global perspective. In: Doyle D, Hanks GWC, MacDonald N, eds. Oxford textbook of palliative medicine. New York: Oxford University Press,
1998:1127.
10. Cleeland CS, Ladinsky JL, Serlin RC, Thuy NC. Multidimensional measurement of cancer pain: comparisons of US and Vietnamese patients. J Pain Symptom Manage 1988;3:23.
11. Cleeland CS. Assessment of pain in cancer: measurement issues. In: Foley KM, Bonica JJ, Ventafiridda V, eds. Advances in pain research and therapy. New York: Raven Press, 1990:47.
12. Foley KM, Portenoy RK. WHO and IASP: joint programs in pain and palliative care. J Pain Symptom Manage 1993;8:335.
13. Portenoy RK, Miransky J, Thaler HT, et al. Pain in ambulatory patients with lung or cancer: prevalence, characteristics and impact. Cancer 1992;70:1616.
14. Portenoy RK, Thaler HT, Kornblith AB, et al. Pain in ovarian cancer: prevalence, characteristics, and associated symptoms. Cancer 1994;74:907.
15. Kelsen D, Portenoy RK, Thaler HT, et al. Pain and depression in patients with newly diagnosed pancreas cancer. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:748.
16. Schuit KW, Sleijfer DT, Meijler WJ, et al. Symptoms and functional status of patients with disseminated cancer visiting outpatient departments. J Pain Symptom Manage 1998;16:290.
17. Weber M, Huber C. Documentation of severe pain, opioid doses, opioid related side effect with patients with cancer: a retrospective study. J Pain Symptom Manage 1999;17:49.
18. Cleeland CS, Gonin R, Hatfield AK, et al. Pain and its treatment in outpatient with metastatic cancer. N Engl J Med 1994;330:592.
19. The SUPPORT principal investigators. A controlled trial to improve care for seriously ill hospitalized patients: the study to understand prognosis and preferences for outcomes and risks of
treatments. JAMA 1995;274:1591.
20. Bernabei R, Gambassi G, Lapane K, et al. Management of pain in elderly patients with cancer. JAMA 1998;279:1877.
21. Chochinov HM, Breithart WS, eds. Handbook of psychiatry in palliative medicine. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
22. Ventafridda V, DeConno F, Riparnonti C, Gamba A, Tamburini M. Quality-of-life assessment during a palliative care programme. Ann Oncol 1990;1:415.
23. Coyle N, Adelhardt J, Foley KM, Portenoy RK. Character of terminal illness in the advanced cancer patient: pain and other symptoms during the last 4 weeks of life. J Pain Symptom Manage
1990;5:83.
24. Ventafridda V, Ripamonti C, DeConno F, Tamburini M. Symptom prevalence and control during cancer patients' last days of life. J Palliative Care 1990;6:7.
25. Moulin DE, Foley KM. A review of a hospital-based pain service. In: Foley KM, Bonica JJ, Ventafridda V, eds. Advances in pain research and therapy. New York: Raven Press, 1990:413.
26. Cherny NI, Chang V, Frager G, et al. Opioid pharmacotherapy in the management of cancer pain. Cancer 1995;76:1283.
27. Zech DL, Grond S, Lynch J, Hertel D, Lehman KA. Validation of World Health Organization guidelines for cancer pain relief: a 10 year prospective study. Pain 1995;63:65.
28. Gonzales GR, Elliott KJ, Portenoy RK, Foley KM. Impact of a comprehensive evaluation in the management of cancer pain. Pain 1991;47:141.
29. Clouston P, DeAngelis L, Posner JB. The spectrum of neurologic disease in patients with systemic cancer. Ann Neurol 1992;31:268.
30. Portenoy RK, Thaler HT, Kornblith AB, et al. Symptom prevalence, characteristics and distress in a cancer population. Quality of Life Research 1994;3:183.
31. IASP Subcommittee on Taxonomy. Pain terms: a list with definitions and notes on usage. Pain 1980;8:249.
32. Portenoy RK, Lesage P. Management of cancer pain. Lancet 1999;353:1695.
33. Levy MH. Pharmacologic treatment of cancer pain. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1124.
34. Woolf CJ, Mannion RJ. Neuropathic pain: etiology, mechanisms and management. Lancet 1999;353:1959.
35. Besson JM. The neurobiology of pain. Lancet 1999;353:1610.
36. Pasternak GW. Multiple morphine and encephalin receptors and the relief of pain. JAMA 1988;259(9):1362.
37. Swarm RA, Cousins MJ. Anesthetic techniques for pain control. In: Doyle D, Hanks GWC, MacDonald N, eds. Oxford textbook of palliative medicine, 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press,
1998:390.
38. Max MB, Inturrisi CE, Kaiko RF, Grabinski PY, Li CH, Foley KM. Epidural and intrathecal opiates: distribution in CSF and plasma and analgesic effects in patients with cancer. Clin Pharm Ther
1985;38:631.
39. Onofrio BM, Yaksh TL. Long-term pain relief: intrathecal morphine infusion in 53 patients. J Neurosurg 1990;72:200.
40. Elliott KJ, Brodsky M, Hynansky A, Foley KM. Dextromethorphan suppresses the formalin-induced increase in spinal cord C-fos mRNA. Soc Neurosci 1994;568:1391.
41. Cervero F, Laird JMA. Pain: visceral pain. Lancet 1999;353:2145.
42. Elliott K, Foley KM. Neurologic pain syndromes in patients with cancer. Crit Care Clin 1990;6:393.
43. Portenoy RK, Hagen NA. Breakthrough pain: definition, prevalence, and characteristics. Pain 1990;41:273.
44. Petzke F, Radbruch L, Zech D, Loick G, Grong S. Temporal presentation of chronic cancer pain: transitory pains on admission to a multidisciplinary pain clinic. J Pain Symptom Manage
1999;17:391.
45. Portenoy RK, Payne R, Coluzzi P, et al. Oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate (OTFC) for the treatment of breakthrough pain in cancer patients, a controlled dose titration study. Pain 1999;79:303.
46. Wallenstein SL. Measurement of pain and analgesia in cancer patients. Cancer 1984;53:2217.
47. Foley KM. Pain assessment and cancer pain syndromes. In: Doyle D, Hanks GW, MacDonald RN, eds. Oxford textbook of palliative medicine, 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press,
1998:310.
48. McGrath PJ, Beyer J, Cleeland CS, et al. Report of a subcommittee on assessment and methodologic issues in the management of childhood cancer. Pediatrics 1990;86:813.
49. Grossman SA, Sheidler VR, Swedeen K, Mucenski J, Pianladosi S. Correlation of patient and caregiver ratings of cancer pain. J Pain Symptom Manage 1991;6:53.
50. Daut RL, Cleeland CS, Flanery RC. The development of the Wisconsin Brief Pain Questionnaire to assess pain in cancer and other diseases. Pain 1983;1:197.
51. Graham C, Bond SS, Gertrovitch MM, Cook MR. Use of the McGill Pain Questionnaire in the management of cancer pain-replicability and consistency. Pain 1980;8:377.
52. Fishman B, Pasternak S, Wallenstein SL, et al. The Memorial Pain Assessment Card: a valid instrument for the assessment of cancer pain. Cancer 1986;60:1151.
53. Ingham JM, Portenoy RK. Symptom assessment. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:21.
54. Chang VT, Hwang SS, Feuerman M, et al. Symptom and quality of life survey of medical oncology patients at a Veterans Affairs Medical Center. A role for symptom assessment. Cancer
2000;88:1175.
55. American Pain Society Quality of Care Committee. Quality improvement guidelines for the treatment of acute pain and cancer pain. JAMA 1995;274:1874.
56. DuPen SL, DuPen AR, Palissar N, et al. Implementation of guidelines for cancer pain management: results of a randomized controlled clinical trial. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:361.
57. Cherny NI, Coyle N, Foley KM. Suffering in the advanced cancer patient. Part I: a definition and taxonomy. J Palliat Care 1994;10:57.
58. Cherny NI, Catane R. Palliative medicine and the medical oncologist: defining the purview of care. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:1.
59. Passik SD, Portenoy Rk. Substance abuse issues in palliative care. In: Berger A, et al., eds. Principles and practices of supportive oncology. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven, 1998.
60. Foley KM. The relationship of pain and symptom management to patient requests for physician-assisted suicide. J Pain Symptom Manage 1991;6:289.
61. Cherny NI, Coyle N, Foley KM. Guidelines in the care of the dying cancer patient. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:261.
62. Cassem NH. The dying patient. In: Cassem NH, ed. Massachusetts General Hospital handbook of general hospital psychiatry. St Louis: MosbyYear Book, 1991:343.
63. Buckman R. Communication in palliative care: a practical guide. In: Doyle D, Hanks GW, MacDonald N, eds. Oxford textbook of palliative medicine. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press,
1993:47.
64. Cherny NI, Portenoy RK. Cancer pain: principles of assessment and syndromes. In: Wall PK, Melzack R, eds. Textbook of pain. London: Churchill Livingstone, 1994:787.
65. Foley KM. The treatment of cancer pain. N Engl J Med 1985;313:84.
66. Cassell EJ. The nature of suffering and the goals of medicine. N EngI J Med 1982;306:639.
67. Roth AJ, Breitbart W. Psychiatric emergencies in terminally ill cancer patients. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:235.
68. Chochinov HM, Wilson KG, Enns M, et al. Desire for death in the terminally ill. Am J Psychiatry 1995;152:1185.
69. Cherny NI, Foley KM. Brachial plexopathy in patients with breast cancer. In: Harris JR, Hellman S, Henderson IC, Kinne D, eds. Breast diseases, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1996:796.
70. Hewitt JD, Foley KM. Neuro-imaging. In: Greenberg J, ed. A companion to Adams and Victors principles of neurology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995:4182.
71. Posner JB. Neurologic complications of cancer. Philadelphia: F.A. Davis, 1995.
72. Emmanuel EJ. Pain and symptom control: patient rights and physician responsibilities. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:41.
73. Constantini-Ferrando M, Foley KM, Rapkin BD. Communicating with patients about advanced cancer. JAMA 1998;280:1403.
74. Bruera E, Wantanabe S. New developments in the assessment of pain in cancer patients. Supportive Cancer Care 1994;2:312.
75. Chang VT, Hwang S, Feuerman M. Validation of the Edmonton symptom assessment scale. Cancer 2000;88:2164.

76. American Pain Society. Principles of analgesic use in the treatment of acute pain and cancer pain, 3rd ed. Skokie, IL: American Pain Society, 1992.
77. Management of cancer pain guideline panel. Management of cancer pain: clinical practice guideline. AHCPR Pub. No. 94-0592. Rockville, MD: US Public Health Service, Agency for Health
Care Policy and Research, 1994.
78. McQuay H. Opioids in pain management. Lancet 1999;353:2229.
79. Bruera E, Pereira J, Watanabe S, et al. Opioid rotation in patients with cancer pain. A retrospective comparison of dose ratios between methadone, hydromorphone, and morphine. Cancer
1996;78:852.
80. Ripamonti C, Groff L, Bernelli C, et al. Switching from morphine to oral methadone in treating cancer pain: what is the equianalgesic dose ratio? J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3216.
81. Mercadante S, Casuccio A, Aguello A, et al. Morphine versus methadone in the pain treatment of advanced cancer patients followed up at home. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3656.
82. Mercadante S, Casuccio A, Calderone L. Rapid switching from morphine to methadone in cancer patients with poor response to morphine. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3307.
83. Ventafridda V, Caraceni A, Gamba A. Field-testing of the WHO Guidelines for Cancer Pain Relief: summary report of demonstration projects. In: Foley KM, Bonica JJ, Ventafridda V, Callaway
MV, eds. Second International Congress on Cancer Pain. Advances in Pain Research and Therapy, Vol. 16. New York: Raven Press, 1990;451.
84. World Health Organization. Cancer pain relief and palliative care. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1990.
85. Foley KM. Controversies in cancer painmedical perspective. Cancer 1989;63:2266.
86. Foley KM. Current controversies in the management of cancer pain. NIDA Research Monograph Series 1981;36:169.
87. Jadad AR, Bowman GP. The WHO analgesic ladder for cancer pain management. Stepping up the quality of its evaluation. JAMA 1996;274:1870.
88. Portenoy RK, Foley KM, Inturrisi CE. The nature of opioid responsiveness and its implications for neuropathic pain: new hypotheses derived from studies of opioid infusions. Pain 1990;43:273.
89. Eisenberg E, Berkey CS, Carr DB, Mosteller F, Chalmers TC. Efficacy and safety of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs for cancer pain: a meta-analysis. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:2756.
90. Lane NE. Pain management in osteoarthritis: the role of Cox-2 inhibitors. J Rheumatol 1997;24:20.
91. Ventafridda V, DeConno F, Panerai AE, et al. Non steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as the first step in cancer pain therapy; double-blind, within-patient study comparing nine drugs. J Intl Med
Res 1990;18:21.
92. Langman MJS. Treating ulcers in patients receiving anti-arthritic drugs. Q J Med 1989;73:1089.
93. Foley KM. Changing concepts of tolerance to opioids. What the cancer patient has taught us. In: Chapman CR, Foley KM, eds. Current & emerging issues in cancer pain: research & practice .
New York: Raven Press, 1993:331.
94. Ferrell BR, Griffith H. Cost issues related to pain management: report from the cancer pain panel of the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research. J Pain Symptom Manage 1994;9:221.
95. Foley KM. Competent care for the dying instead of physician-assisted suicide. N Engl J Med 1997;336:54.
96. Foley KM. For more rhetoric and less regulation. Pain Forum 1995;4:197.
97. Joranson DE. Availability of opioids for cancer pain relief: recent trends, assessment of symptom barriers, New York health organization guidelines, and the risk of diversion. J Pain Symptom
Manage 1993;8:353.
98. Paul D, Standifier KM, Inturrisi CE, Pasternak GW. Pharmacological characterization of morphine-6-glucuronide, a very potent morphine metabolite. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1989;251:477.
99. Portenoy RK, Thaler HT, Inturrisi CE, Friedlander-Klar H, Foley KM. Metabolite, morphine-6-glucuronide, contributes to the analgesia produced by morphine infusion in pain patients with normal
renal function. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1992;51:422.
100. Portenoy RK, Foley KM, Stuhnan J, et al. Plasma morphine and morphine-6-glucuronide during chronic morphine therapy for cancer pain: plasma profiles, steady-state concentrations and the
consequences of renal failure. Pain 1991;47:13.
101. Hagen N, Foley KM, Cebrone DJ, Portenoy RK, Inturrisi CE. Chronic nausea and morphine-6-glucuronide. J Pain Symptom Manage 1991;6:125.
102. Tiseo PJ, Thaler HT, Lapin J, et al. Morphine-6-glucuronide concentrations and opioid-related side effects: a survey in cancer patients. Pain 1995;61:47.
103. Sjogren P. Clinical implications of morphine metabolites. In: Portenoy RK, Bruera E, eds. Topics in palliative care, Vol. 1. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997:163.
104. Babul N, Darke AC, Hagen N. Hydromorphone metabolite accumulation in renal failure. J Pain Symptom Manage 1995;10:184.
105. Moulin DE, Kreeft JH, Murray-Parsons N, et al. Comparison of continuous subcutaneous and intravenous hydromorphine infusions for management of cancer pain. Lancet 1991;337:465.
106. Kaiko BF, Benziger DP, Fitzmartin RD, et al. Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationships of controlled-release oxycodone. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1995;59:50.
107. Bruera E, Fainsinger R, Moore M, et al. Local toxicity with subcutaneous methadone. Pain 1991;45:141.
108. Kaiko RR, Foley KM, Grabinski PY, et al. Central nervous system excitatory effects of meperidine in cancer patients. Ann Neurol 1983;13:180.
109. Portenoy RK, Southam MA, Gupta SK, et al. Transdermal fentanyl for cancer pain: repeated dose pharmacokinetics. Anesthesiology 1993;78:36.
110. Houde RW. Methods for measuring clinical pain in humans. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1982;74(Suppl):25.
111. Weinberg DS, Inturrisi CE, Reidenberg B, et al. Sublingual absorption of selected opioid analgesics. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1988;44:335.
112. Moulin DE, Kreeft JH, Murray-Parsons N, Bouquillon AL. Comparison of continuous subcutaneous and intravenous hydromorphone infusions for management of cancer pain. Lancet
1991;337:465.
113. Portenoy RK, Moulin DE, Rogers A, Inturrisi CE, Foley KM. Infusion of opioids in cancer pain: clinical review and guidelines for use. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;70:575.
114. Dennis CG, DeWitty RL. Long-term intraventricular infusion of morphine for intractable pain in cancer of the head and neck. Neurosurgery 1990;26:404.
115. Beaver WT. Comparison of analgesic effects of morphine sulfate, hydroxyzine and other combinations in patients with postoperative pain. In: Bonica JJ, Ventafridda V, eds. Advances in pain
research and therapy. New York: Raven Press, 1976:553.
116. Forrest WH, Brown B, Brown C, et al. Dextroamphetamine with morphine for the treatment of postoperative pain. N Engl J Med 1977;296:712.
117. Bruera E, Chadwich S, Brenneis C, et al. Methylphenidate associated with narcotics for the treatment of cancer pain. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:67.
118. Mercandante S, Casuccio A, Genovese G. Ineffectiveness of dextromethorphan in cancer pain. J Pain Symptom Manage 1998;16:317.
119. Laska EM, Sunshine A, Mueller F, et al. Caffeine as an analgesic adjuvant. JAMA 1984;251:1711.
120. Goldfrank L, Weisman RS, Enick JK, Lo MW. A normogram for continuous intravenous naloxone. Ann Emerg Med 1986;1:566.
121. Lichter J. Nausea and vomiting in patients with cancer. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:207.
122. Derby S, Portenoy RK. Assessment and management of opioid-induced constipation. In: Portenoy RK, Bruera E, eds. Topics in palliative care, Vol. 1. New York: Oxford University Press,
1997;1:95.
123. Yuan CS, Foss JF, O'Connor M, et al. Methylnaltrexone for reversal of constipation due to chronic methadone use: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2000;283:367.
124. Kanner RM, Foley KM. Patterns of narcotic drug use in a cancer pain clinic. Ann NY Acad Sci 1981;362:161.
125. Eagel B, Portnoy R, Foley KM. Use and misuse of naloxone. J Pain Symptom Manage 2000 (in press).
126. Manfredi PL, Ribeiro S, Chandler SW, Payne R. Inappropriate use of naloxone in cancer patients with pain. J Pain Symptom Manage 1996;11:131.
127. Portenoy RK. Adjuvant analgesic agents. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:103.
128. Max MB, Culnane M, Schafer SC, et al. Amitriptyline relieves diabetic neuropathy pain in patients with normal or depressed mood. Neurology 1987;37:589.
129. Max MB, Schafer SC, Culnane M, et al. Association of pain relief with drug side effects in postherpetic neuralgia: a single dose study of clonidine, codeine, ibuprofen, and placebo. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 1988;43:363.
130. Sindrup SH, Gram LF, Brosen K, et al. The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor paroxetine is effective in the treatment of diabetic neuropathy symptoms. Pain 1990;42:135.
131. Backonja M, Beydoun A, Edwards KR, et al. Gabapentin for the symptomatic treatment of painful neuropathy in diabetes mellitus, a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1998;280:1831.
132. Fromm GH, Terence CR, Chatta AS. Baclofen in the treatment of trigeminal neuralgia. Ann Neurol 1984;15:240.
133. Dejgard A, Petersen P, Kastrup J. Mexiletine for treatment of chronic painful diabetic neuropathy. Lancet 1988;1:9.
134. Brose WG, Cousins MJ. Subcutaneous lidocaine for treatment of neuropathic cancer pain. Pain 1991;45:141.
135. Ehrenstrom GME, Reiz SLA. EMLAa eutectic mixture of local anesthetics for topical anesthesia. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1982;26:596.
136. Rowbotham MC, Davies PS, Fields HL. Topical lidocaine relieves postherpetic neuralgia. Ann Neurol 1995:37:246.
137. Tannock I, Gospodarowicz M, Meakin W, et al. Treatment of metastatic prostate cancer with low-dose prednisoneevaluation of pain and quality of life as prognostic indices of response. J Clin
Oncol 1989;7:590.
138. Bruera E, Roca E, Cedaro L, Carraro S, Chacon R. Action of oral methylprednisolone in terminal cancer patients: a prospective randomized double-blind study. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:751.
139. Weissman DE. Glucocorticoid treatment for brain metastases and epidural spinal cord compressions review. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:543.
140. Fernandez F, Adams F, Holmes VF. Analgesic effect of alprazolam in patients with chronic, organic pain of malignant origin. J Clin Psychopharmacol 1987;7:167.
141. Lechin F, vander Dijs B, Lechin ME, et al. Pimozide therapy for trigeminal neuralgia. Arch Neurol 1989;9:960.
142. Beaver WT, Wallenstein SM, Houde RW, et al. A comparison of the analgesic effects of methotrimeprazine and morphine in patients with cancer. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1966;7:436.
143. Eisenach JC, Dewan DM, Rose JC, et al. Epidural clonidine produces antinociception, but not hypotension, in sheep. Anesthesiology 1987;66:496.
144. Persson J, Axelsson G, Hallin RG, et al. Beneficial effects of ketamine in a chronic pain state with allodynia, possibly due to central sensitization. Pain 1995;60:217.
145. McQuay HJ, Carrol D, Jadad AR, et al. Dextromethorphan for the treatment of neuropathic pain: a double-blind, randomised controlled crossover trial with integral n-of-1 design. Pain
1994;59:127.
146. Jaeger H, Maier C. Calcitonin in phantom limb pain: a double blind study. Pain 1992;48:21.
147. Ernst DS, MacDonald RN, Paterson AH, et al. A double-blind, crossover trial of intravenous clodronate in metastatic bone pain. J Pain Symptom Manage 1992;7:4.
148. Thiebaud D, Leyvraz S, von Fliedner V, et al. Treatment of bone metastases from breast cancer and myeloma with pamidronate. Eur J Cancer 1991;27:37.
149. Glover D, Lipton A, Keller A, et al. Intravenous pamidronate disodium treatment: bone metastases in patients with breast cancer. Cancer 1994;74:2949.
150. Roth A, Kolaric K. Analgesic activity of calcitonin in patient with painful osteolytic metastases of breast cancer: results of a controlled randomized study. Oncology 1986;43:283.
151. Warrel RP, Lovett D, Dilmanian FA, et al. Low-dose gallium nitrate for prevention of osteolysis in myeloma: results of a pilot randomized study. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2443.
152. Porter AT, McEwan AJ, Powe JE, et al. Results of a randomized phase-III trial to evaluate the efficacy of strontium-89 adjuvant to local field external beam irradiation in the management of
endocrine resistant metastatic prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:805.
153. Berna L, Carrio J, Alinso C, et al. Bone pain palliation with strontium 89 in breast cancer patients with bone metastases with refractory bone pain. Eur J Nucl Med 1995;22:1101.
154. Loscalzo M, Amendola J. Psychosocial and behavioral management of cancer pain: the social work contribution. In: Foley KM, Bonica JJ, Ventafridda V, eds. Advances in pain research and
therapy. New York: Raven Press, 1990:429.
155. Edwards WT, Habib F, Burney RG, Begin G. Intravenous lidocaine in the management of various chronic pain states. Reg Anesth 1985;10:1.
156. Waldman SD, Cronen MC. Thoracic epidural morphine in the palliation of chest wall pain secondary to relapsing polychondritis. J Pain Symptom Manage 1989;4:38.
157. Cherny NI, Arbit E, Jain S. Invasive techniques in the management of cancer pain. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:121.
158. Patt R. Peripheral neurolysis and the management of cancer pain. In: Patt R, ed. Cancer pain. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1993:359.
159. Robertson DH. Transsacral neurolytic nerve block. An alternative approach to intractable perineal pain. Br J Anaesth 1983;55:873.
160. Gianasi C. Neuroadenolysis of the pituitary: an overview of development, mechanisms, technique and results. In: Benedetti C, Chapman CR, Moricca G, et al., eds. Advances in pain research
and therapy. New York: Raven Press, 1984:647.
161. Sundaresan N, DiGiacinto GV, Hughes EO. Neurosurgery in the treatment of cancer pain. Cancer 1989;63:2365.
162. Arbit E. Neurosurgical management of cancer pain. In: Foley KM, Bonica JJ, Ventafridda V, eds. Advances in pain research and therapy. New York: Raven Press, 1990:289.
163. Sundaresan N, Galicich JH, Lane JM, Scher H. Stabilization of the spine involved by cancer. In: Dunsker DB, Schmidek HH, eds. The unstable spine. Orlando: Grune & Stratton, 1986:249.
164. Sundaresan N, Hilaris BS, Martini N. The combined neurosurgical-thoracic management of superior sulcus tumors. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1739.
165. Lahuerta T, Lipton SA, Wells JD. Percutaneous cervical cordotomy: results and complications in a recent series of 100 patients. Ann R Coll Surg Exp 1985;67:41.
166. Ischia S, Luzzani A, Ischia A, et al. Subarachnoid neurolytic block (L5, S1) and unilateral percutaneous cervical cordotomy for the treatment of neoplastic vertebral pain. Pain 1984;19:123.
167. Macaluso C, Arbit E, Foley KM. Cordotomy for lumbosacral, pelvic, and lower extremity pain of malignant origin: safety and efficacy. Neurology 1988;38:110.
168. Barrash JM, Milan EL. Dorsal rhizotomy for the relief of pain of malignant tumor origin. J Neurosurg 1973;38:755.

169. Arbit E, Galicich JH, Burt M, et al. Modified open thoracic rhizotomy for treatment of intractable chest wall pain of malignant etiology. Ann Thorac Surg 1989;48:820.
170. Giorgi C, Broggi G. Surgical treatment of glossopharyngeal neuralgia and pain from cancer of the nasopharynx. J Neurosurg 1984;61:952.
171. Nashold BS, Ostdahl RH. Dorsal root entry zone lesions for pain relief. J Neurosurg 1979;51:59.
172. Gildenberg PL, Hirschberg RM. Limited myelotomy for the treatment of intractable cancer pain. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1984;47:94.
173. Hassenbusch SJ, Pillay PK, Barnett GH. Radiofrequency cingulotomy for intractable cancer pain using stereotaxis guided by magnetic resonance imaging. Neurosurgery 1990;27:220.
174. Thompson JW, Filshie J. In: Doyle D, Hanks G, MacDonald N, eds. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation and acupuncture in palliative care medicine. New York: Oxford University Press,
1992.
175. Levy RM, Lamb S, Adams JE. Treatment of chronic pain by deep brain stimulation: long-term followup and review of the literature. Neurosurgery 1987;21:885.
176. Young RF, Brechner T. Electrical stimulation of the brain for relief of intractable pain due to cancer. Cancer 1986;57:1266.
177. Staats P. Neuraxial infusion for pain control: when, why and what to do after the implant. Oncology 1999;13:58.
178. Travell JG, Simons DG. Myofascial pain and dysfunction: the trigger-point manual. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1983.
179. Filshle J. Acupuncture and malignant pain problems. Acupuncture in Medicine 1990;8:38.
180. Fosburg MT, Crone RK. Nitrous oxide analgesia for refractory pain in the terminally ill. JAMA 1983;250:511.
181. Green VFR, David WH. Titrated intravenous barbiturates in the control of symptoms in patients with terminal cancer. South Med J 1991;84:332.
182. Cherny NI, Portenoy RK. Sedation in the management of refractory symptoms: guidelines for evaluation and treatment. J Palliat Care 1994;10:31.
183. Roy D. Need they sleep before they die? J Palliat Care 1990;6:3.
184. Ventafridda V, Ripamonti C, De Conno F, et al. Symptom prevalence and control during cancer patients' last days of life. J Palliat Care 1990;6:7.
185. Coyle N. A model of continuity of care for cancer patients with chronic pain. Med Clin North Am 1987;71:24.

SECTION 56.2 Nutritional Support
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 56.2
Nutritional Support
J. STANLEY SMITH
WILEY W. SOUBA
Introduction
Clinical Manifestations of Cancer Cachexia
Weight Loss
Loss of Appetite
Weakness
Causes and Consequences of Cancer Cachexia
Anorexia of Malignancy
Anorexia of Therapy
Cachexia Secondary to Alterations of Host Intermediary Metabolism
Glutamine and Cancer Cachexia
Cytokines: Mediators of Cancer Cachexia
Nutritional Support of the Cancer Patient
Rationale
Nutritional Assessment of the Cancer Patient
Nutrition and Tumor Growth
Enteral Nutrition in Cancer Patients
Total Parenteral Nutrition in the Cancer Patient: General Recommendations
Specific Indications for the Use of Total Parenteral Nutrition in the Cancer Patient
Composition of Total Parenteral Nutrition Formulations
Potential Complications of Total Parenteral Nutrition
Effects of Total Parenteral Nutrition on the Gastrointestinal Tract
Improving the Efficacy of Current Feeding Regimens
Techniques of Providing Nutritional Support
Transnasal (Nasogastric and Nasoduodenal) Feeding Catheters
Gastrostomy Tube Feedings
Feeding Catheter Jejunostomy Placement and Witzel Jejunostomy
Peripheral Intravenous Feedings
Central Venous Total Parenteral Nutrition
Nutrition Support for Cancer Patients and Health Care Reform
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Malnutrition is common in cancer patients and is frequently referred to as cancer cachexia. Although this is a true malnutrition syndrome, it differs from the
protein-calorie malnutrition seen in starvation. Further, the etiology of this clinically obvious problem is not entirely clear, but investigations delineating the role of
cytokines and other substances responsible for mediating the cachexia of cancer have increased our knowledge of the causes of malnutrition in these patients with
advanced malignant disease. Studies have also provided insight into why it is difficult or impossible to gain lean body mass in cachectic cancer patients even when
aggressive feeding regimens are implemented. Now and in the future, nutritional therapy may be most effective in cancer patients when used in combination with
other forms of metabolic intervention.
While cancer patients can develop deficiencies in vitamins and trace minerals, the most common form of nutritional depletion is that of protein-calorie malnutrition,
manifested as a loss of body cell mass. Severe protein-calorie malnutrition is associated with increases in postoperative complications in cancer patients, and it has
been shown to have adverse effects on immune function and treatment tolerance to anticancer treatments. Since intuition would indicate the well-nourished patient
should tolerate aggressive antineoplastic therapy better than the malnourished individual, numerous studies have tried to define the role of nutritional support in
patients with malignant disease. Moreover, the observation that this commonly occurring weight loss is a predictor of therapeutic response and survival has led to
aggressive attempts to restore nutritional integrity. The rationale for providing nutritional support to selected patients is to prevent or reverse host tissue wasting,
broaden the spectrum of therapeutic options, improve the clinical course, and ultimately prolong patient survival.
More recent developments have increased our understanding of the relationship between nutrition and metabolism in cancer patients, and it is clear that limited
weight loss in cancer patients is acceptable because short-term undernutrition does not appear to adversely affect treatment tolerance. However, many cancer
patients do develop significant malnutrition such that some form of nutritional support or metabolic intervention appears to be indicated. Cancer patients often require
chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or both in combination with surgery, and these treatments can further compromise an already fragile nutritional status and further
reduce treatment tolerance. Not only may the anticancer treatments directly affect nutrition and reduce the urge to eat, but they may affect the ability to chew, swallow,
or absorb food. Accordingly, oncologists need to become familiar with the changes in body metabolism developing during malignancy and with the indications and
delivery of nutritional or metabolic support to the cancer patient. Although the need for well-designed prospective randomized trials examining the role of nutritional
support as adjunctive therapy in cancer patients continues to exist, it is clear that patients with a functioning gut deserve enteral nutrition as the route of preference for
feeding. Parenteral nutrition should be reserved for patients who have unusable gastrointestinal tracts.
The purpose of this chapter is to examine the etiologies and metabolic alterations in cancer cachexia, to establish a rationale for metabolic treatment and support in
the malnourished cancer patient, and to define the indications for and the effect of nutritional support in patients with malignant disease. Portions of this review have
been previously published. 1,2,3 and 4

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF CANCER CACHEXIA
WEIGHT LOSS
The most obvious clinical manifestation of cancer cachexia is the depletion of host tissues that becomes quite apparent to the casual observer as weight loss. Most
patients lose weight at some point during the course of their disease and nearly one-half of all cancer patients have weight loss at the time of initial diagnosis. Warren
and colleagues in 1932 reported that 22% of deaths were due to inanition, and two-thirds of all tumor-bearing patients in their series developed some degree of
cachexia. 5 A large study from the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group showed significantly shorter survival if weight loss was present. Further, the amount of weight
loss was dependent on the type and site of the tumor. Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, breast cancers, acute nonlymphocytic leukemias, and sarcomas had the least
weight loss. Colon, prostate, and lung cancers had a moderate weight loss, whereas pancreatic and gastric cancers had the most. 6
DeWys and colleagues 6 reported that patients who presented without weight loss had a significantly prolonged survival following therapy than similarly treated
patients who had weight loss at presentation. These findings suggest that weight loss adversely affects survival following antineoplastic therapy and imply that
appropriate nutritional therapy may be beneficial to certain patient groups ( Table 56.2-1). In both animals and patients with cancer, it is apparent that weight loss is
dependent on the presence of the tumor since curative surgical resection (or nonsurgical ablation) of the malignancy is almost invariably associated with a return of
normal food intake and normal body weight, whereas palliative resection is not. In fact, in patients not regaining their weight following supposedly curative surgical
resection, the presence of metastatic or recurrent disease should be suspected. As a general rule, cancer patients with significant weight loss do not tolerate
treatment regimens as well as well-nourished patients.

TABLE 56.2-1. Extent of Weight Loss in Cancer Patients at the Time of Initial Diagnosis and Its Effect on Survival after Antineoplastic Therapy

Nutritional support therapy has attempted to reverse this cachexia and, although some weight loss has been halted, restoration of the protein and caloric intake has
not reversed the abnormalities of energy, protein, carbohydrate, and fat metabolism, showing that something else must be added. 7,8
LOSS OF APPETITE
Loss of appetite resulting in a reduction in voluntary food intake is a central component of the syndrome of cancer cachexia. Careful studies in numerous animal
models of cancer cachexia have documented a decline in food intake.
Appetite is strongly controlled by various neurotransmitters such as serotonin, catecholamines, and opiates. 9 Any serotonergic agonist decreases appetite. In animal
studies, there is evidence of increased brain tryptophan and serotonin turnover in the tumor-bearing host. 10,11 Inhibition of serotonin synthesis increases food intake.
However, serotonin antagonists demonstrate no effect on tumor anorexia. Further, there may be a serum factor responsible since rats receiving serum from
tumor-bearing rats become anorectic. 12
At some point during the course of their disease, most patients report a loss of appetite including alterations in taste and smell plus the loss of the appeal of most
foods. Moreover, some patients exhibit an increase in resting energy expenditure (REE) that is seldom accompanied by a compensatory increase in calorie intake.
The combination of a decrease in voluntary food intake with an increase in energy expenditure further contributes to weight loss and negative calorie and nitrogen
balance.
There may also be anatomic factors including the location of the tumor affecting the ability to eat. Sometimes the malignant process may even involve the digestive
tract, leading to pain, early satiety, mechanical obstruction, or nausea. Head and neck cancers and the treatments used for them may cause dysphagia, mucositis,
and stomatitis, with the resultant inability to take oral feeds. Gastric and pancreatic cancers cause obstruction, early satiety, or pain with eating and notoriously
present late with marked metabolic changes and weight loss. Early provision of enteral routes for feeding need to be considered along with any other types of
treatment and should be performed with the primary surgery or early in the course of radiation therapy. With today's minimally invasive procedures for tube
placements, there is no excuse for delay in provision of enteral feeds.
WEAKNESS
Secondary to loss of body cell mass and treatment regimens, cancer patients almost invariably develop a reduction in strength and a diminished physical capacity for
work. Evidence for a central role of the tumor in the etiology of this weakness is derived from the clinical observation that cure of the cancer almost always results in a
return to preillness strength and work capacity.

CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES OF CANCER CACHEXIA
Many of the physiologic changes seen in cancer cachexia resemble those of simple starvation, but it is clear that more derangement is involved since few studies
have documented that aggressive feeding of cachectic cancer patients completely restores lean body mass 7 (Table 56.2-2). Rather, such patients tend to primarily
gain water and fat. Although the substrate demand of the tumor may account for the tumor behaving as a nitrogen trap, the actual energy and nitrogen demands of
human tumors cannot account for the profound weight loss generally observed. It is unusual for the total mass of the tumor to exceed 1% or 2% of total body weight,
yet patients with much smaller tumors are often markedly cachectic. Studies in the last decade suggest that circulating factors are the major cause of cancer cachexia
and that appropriate therapy for this detrimental syndrome of weight loss and wasting will require a better understanding of these mediators.

TABLE 56.2-2. Metabolic Differences between the Response to Simple Starvation and Advanced Malignant Disease

The term cancer cachexia is used to describe a complex metabolic syndrome composed of weight loss, anorexia, and wasting of host lean body mass secondary to
the growing malignancy. No consistent or clear-cut association with duration of illness, stage of disease, or tumor histology has been demonstrated. Although the
exact prevalence of cancer cachexia is unknown, many studies have shown a high frequency of nutritional derangements in cancer patients. These studies have
focused on findings such as weight loss or hypoproteinemia as indicators of cancer cachexia. Consequently, the prevalence of cancer cachexia may be
underestimated, since it is likely that subtle metabolic alterations precede these clinically apparent changes manifested by the weight and lean tissue loss.
Since many cancer-related deaths are a consequence of malnutrition and host depletion, understanding the mechanism of cancer cachexia is imperative, as the
syndrome always results in death if oncologic therapy is not administered. Many etiologies for the cancer cachexia syndrome have been proposed, but no clear
explanation exists. Therefore, the etiology seems to be multifactorial. Causes can be broadly categorized into anorexia of malignancy, anorexia of therapy, and
abnormalities in host intermediary metabolism.
ANOREXIA OF MALIGNANCY
As mentioned previously, the anorexia of malignancy refers to the decrease in voluntary food intake that occurs in cancer patients. Although this anorexia comes
eventually in all patients with advanced cancer, it may sometimes develop early in the course of the disease when the tumor is quite small. Weight loss is common in
patients with gastrointestinal tumors, but dysfunction of the digestive tract cannot solely explain this phenomenon, since significant cachexia is also noted in patients
with cancers that originate outside the abdominal cavity. Proposed mechanisms include local effects of the tumor, alterations in taste or palatability, hypothalamic

dysfunction, modification of satiety mechanisms, and learned food aversion. Many of these effects seem to be mediated by circulating factors.
ANOREXIA OF THERAPY
Oncologic therapies may often initiate or worsen anorexia. Many chemotherapeutic agents can cause nausea, vomiting, mucositis, gastrointestinal dysfunction, or all
of these symptoms for varying periods of time that may result in anorexia and weight loss. Radiation therapy is often associated with similar acute side effects and
may lead to stricture formation in the bowel. After surgery, causes of weight loss range from routine postoperative ileus to the hypermetabolism associated with
sepsis. An important consideration for the clinician to remember is that, in the midst of a diagnostic workup, hospitalized cancer patients are often restricted from
taking adequate nutrition. As a result, the patient may become iatrogenically malnourished before even the initiation of oncologic treatment.
CACHEXIA SECONDARY TO ALTERATIONS OF HOST INTERMEDIARY METABOLISM
A number of metabolic abnormalities are characteristic of the tumor-bearing host ( Table 56.2-3). REE is variably affected by the presence of a tumor. Knox and
coworkers studied 200 malnourished cancer patients using indirect calorimetry and found that 41% had normal basal metabolic rates, 33% had decreased
expenditures, and 25% had increased expenditures. 13 Even patients with no increase in metabolic rate can develop weight loss and negative nitrogen balance despite
a normal food intake and a small tumor burden. Fearon and coworkers demonstrated that whole body protein turnover was increased 50% in solid tumor-bearing
patients, despite having no change in REE. 14 Other studies have shown that, unlike simple starvation, REE remains elevated even in the face of reduced intake. 15 But,
even for tumors with elevated REE, the increased energy expenditure is not enough to explain the weight loss. Curative resections return the REE to normal, but
palliation does not. 16,17 and 18 Further, rebound in the REE indicates a recurrence of the tumor.

TABLE 56.2-3. Metabolic Abnormalities in Animal and Human Cancer Cachexia

Glucose metabolism is also abnormal in cancer patients secondary to increased whole body glucose turnover. There is decreased glucose use by skeletal muscle,
increased hepatic glucose production, and increased production of glucose from lactate through Cori's cycle. 19,20 There is also increased glucose use by the tumor as
the tumor switches to glucose as its primary fuel source. Shaw and Wolfe demonstrated that hepatic gluconeogenesis in patients with gastrointestinal malignancies
was elevated proportional to tumor burden. 20 Patients with the largest tumors even failed to suppress endogenous glucose production during glucose infusion, a
response attributed to insulin resistance. 20,21 and 22 This glucose intolerance and hyperglycemia in cancer patients has been recognized for a long time. 23 Lundholm et
al. showed that the beta cell receptor in the pancreas may have diminished sensitivity to glucose loading, 24 indicating that the tumor-bearing host may be in a type II
diabetic-like state. However, this insulin resistance also shares elements similar to the stress state. Overall, there is a combination of a significant decrease in
metabolized and cleared glucose in both the weight-stable and weight-losing cancer patients. Since the insulin resistance may decrease after complete tumor
resection, it appears to be related to the tumor itself, rather than the associated malnutrition. 25 This could contribute significantly to tissue wasting, since insulin is
important for tissue anabolism.
Protein and amino acid metabolism are also altered in the tumor-bearing host. Jeevanandam et al. compared tumor-bearing patients with both malnourished
non–tumor-bearing patients and healthy controls to find elevated levels of protein turnover in the cancer group. 26,27 and 28 Patients with non–small cell lung cancer have
increased whole body protein turnover, elevated 3-methylhistidine excretion, and increased muscle proteolysis. 29 In tumor-bearing rats, whole body nitrogen turnover
and liver protein fractional synthetic rates increase, and the animal cannot adapt to starvation by diminishing the rate of muscle amino acid release. Further, skeletal
muscle synthesis of new protein decreases. Norton et al. measured arteriovenous differences of amino acids across a sarcoma-bearing limb in patients using the
non–tumor-bearing limb as a control. 30 Compared with the non–tumor-bearing extremity, the tumor-bearing limb released lesser amounts of every amino acid,
consistent with the tumor's requirement for amino acids to support neoplastic growth. Further work by Fischer et al. has shown the primary amino acid for tumor
protein synthesis is glutamine. 34
Lipid metabolism is also altered in the host with cancer. Shaw and Wolfe studied glycerol and fatty acid kinetics using radioisotopes and found cancer patients with
weight loss have increased glycerol and fatty acid turnover compared with weight-stable patients. 20 These weight-losing patients may be incapable of oxidizing
endogenous fatty acids or intravenous lipids at normal rates and fail to suppress lipolysis during glucose infusion. In fact, there is increased lipid mobilization from
peripheral fat stores and decreased serum lipid clearance, leading to depletion of body fatty tissue. There have now been a number of studies suggesting a
transmissible fat-mobilizing substance [lipid-mobilizing proteoglycan (LMF), azaftig] in the serum of cancer patients that increases lipid breakdown and decreases fat
synthesis. 31,32 and 33 This lipid-mobilizing factor is a 24-kD zinc a 2-glycoprotein that has been isolated from the urine of tumor-bearing animals and patients. It has been
found in the urine of pancreas, lung, breast, and ovarian cancer patients. The N-terminal amino acid sequence is different from that of any of the known cytokines.
Administration of this material shows significant reduction in body weight and decrease in both fat and lean body mass and can be neutralized by administration of
monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies.
GLUTAMINE AND CANCER CACHEXIA
Glutamine metabolism in the tumor-bearing host has been extensively studied for four principal reasons: (1) glutamine is the principal amino acid used by many
cancers,36 (2) it is the most abundant amino acid in the body, (3) its stores are quite labile, and (4) studies indicate that glutamine is a conditionally essential amino
acid. Glutamine appears to be an unusually good substrate for use by the tumor. In fibrosarcoma cells, glutamine oxidation is decreased and the glutamine is shunted
into protein synthesis while the tumor switches to glucose for energy. 34 Circulating glutamine extraction by the tumor is 50% greater than the rate of glutamine
extraction for any normal healthy organ. Because tumors must compete with host tissues for plasma amino acids and are often poorly vascularized, they must possess
efficient mechanisms for their extraction, especially in an environment (e.g., intratumoral space) in which levels of these nutrients may be diminished compared with
plasma levels. Studies 35 in a variety of different solid tumor cell lines, regardless of tissue origin, indicate a single efficient high-affinity carrier-mediated
Na+-dependent glutamine transport. There was a range of kinetic parameters for the glutamine transporter in each cell type, but the amino acid inhibition profiles were
nearly identical, consistent with uptake by the system ASC family of transporters. Rates of cell growth, DNA and protein synthesis, and thymidine transport correlated
with the glutamine concentration in the culture media, indicating the central role of this amino acid in regulating cellular proliferation.
The methylcholanthrene-induced sarcoma (MCA tumor) rat model has been used by several investigators to study glutamine metabolism. 35 One of the most
reproducible observations in rats bearing the MCA tumor is a progressive decrease in plasma glutamine concentrations that correlates with tumor size. With time,
blood glutamine levels decrease to less than 50% of normal, indicating an imbalance between rates of glutamine production and consumption expressed by the
various organs of the body. This reduction in circulating levels occurs despite an increase in the rate of muscle glutamine release because the accelerated glutamine
consumption by tumor and other tissues exceeds the net rate of glutamine uptake into the blood stream. Concomitant temporally with the tumor-induced alterations in
muscle glutamine metabolism are marked increases in tumor and hepatic glutamine uptake. Thus, with progressive tumor growth, glutamine depletion gradually
becomes more severe. This low glutamine level may serve as a signal to induce net proteolysis.
Since glutamine uptake by the tumor is increased, the assumption might be made that providing exogenous glutamine would promote tumor growth. However,

glutamine-enriched total parenteral nutrition (TPN) seems to be more beneficial to the host than the tumor. 36 In fact, dietary glutamine improves the immune status of
rats recovering from chemotherapy in a dose-dependent manner and becomes more pronounced after a longer duration of intake. 37
CYTOKINES: MEDIATORS OF CANCER CACHEXIA
Cytokines, polypeptide signalers produced by the host's cells in response to a growing tumor, regulate many of the nutritional and metabolic derangements that occur
in the host with cancer ( Table 56.2-4). The recognition that cytokines are important mediators of the body's response to the growing tumor has allowed investigators
to focus research efforts on finding common mechanisms responsible for the development of the cancer cachexia. These studies will likely lead to the incorporation of
nutritional strategies designed to optimize the metabolic and immunologic integrity of the host while simultaneously allowing tumor-directed therapies to be maximally
effective.

TABLE 56.2-4. Some Effects of Cytokines on Nutrition and Metabolism in the Tumor-Bearing Host

Elevated concentrations of tissue and circulating cytokines have been demonstrated in the host with cancer, 38 and enhanced hepatic cytokine gene expression has
been demonstrated in tumor-bearing animals. Cytokines can regulate both energy intake (appetite) and energy expenditure (metabolic rate). Administration of tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) to rodents and humans decreases food intake, but the effect appears to be short lived. In rats treated with chronic injections of TNF, voluntary
food intake was markedly reduced for 2 days but had normalized by the sixth day of TNF administration. 39 In patients receiving TNF, food intake was also diminished,
but nitrogen losses were not accelerated, indicating that the resultant negative nitrogen balance was due to something other than TNF alone. Interleukin-1 (IL-1) also
suppresses food intake, and its effect, like that of TNF, appears to be directly on the central nervous system. Darling and associates 40 suggest that when TNF is given
via a constant infusion, the anorexic effects are sustained as opposed to the tolerance that develops when the cytokine is given by bolus injection. Further evidence
for a role for TNF and IL-1 in mediating appetite suppression during critical illness comes from additional studies that demonstrate that treatment of tumor-bearing
mice with anticytokine antibodies improves food intake and attenuates weight loss. 41 Even mice whose tumors were injected with inhibitors to TNF and IL-1 resulted in
the attenuation of weight loss, an increase in food intake, a decrease in serum triglyceride and glucose, and an increase in total protein. 42 Mice implanted with tumors
that secreted TNF showed marked reductions in weight compared with animals with non–TNF-secreting tumors. 43 Therefore, the effects of TNF on food intake and
body composition are unlikely to be due to partial starvation alone, but rather may be due to the ability of TNF to stimulate basal metabolic rate (oxygen consumption).
In patients receiving injections of TNF, metabolic rates were noted to increase by 30%. 44
In addition to stimulating anorexia and thermogenesis, cytokines can also stimulate mobilization of fat and protein stores in vivo. Accordingly, TNF was first identified
as a mediator of cachexia and was termed cachectin. Although few clinical studies demonstrate weight loss in subjects receiving TNF, it is likely that these cytokines
cause fluid retention. It is clear that TNF can alter the vascular endothelium and lead to an increase in capillary permeability.
Other cytokines have been shown to have effects as well, particularly IL-6. IL-6 is increased in lung cancer patients and is correlated with poor nutritional status and
shorter survival. 45 Further, IL-6 levels decrease in treatment responders and do not change or may even increase in nonresponders. IL-12 may also increase
secretion of interferon-g, which may enhance TNF production and subsequent cytokine-induced cachexia. 46 Serum levels of soluble TNF receptors have also been
measured and found to correlate with the extent of disease, degree of cachexia, and inversely with nutritional parameters. 47 But the cachexia of cancer does not
depend on cytokines alone. Other mediators that have been investigated include corticosteroids, b-agonists, and insulin-like growth factors. Glucocorticoids appear to
have additive effects to cytokines in the development of cachexia and may be the missing factor for the cachectic effects of cytokines. 48 In the presence of
dexamethasone, there is an up-regulation of IL-6 receptors that seems to prime liver cells for subsequent stimulation by cytokines. 49 There may also be an effect from
the autonomic nervous system. One study has shown increased renal sympathetic nerve activity in cachexia, and another has shown improvement in dietary intake
with the use of propranolol to block the elevation of REE from this autonomic dysfunction. 50,51 Insulin-like growth factor and insulin have also been studied in an
attempt to attenuate cancer cachexia and although they induced weight gain in other mice, they could not do so in those with colon tumors. 52 Some of the most
promising effects on cachexia may come from eicosanoids and progestogens (see Nutritional Support of the Cancer Patient , later in this chapter).
Effects on Glucose Metabolism
Studies evaluating the effects of cytokine administration on the circulating glucose concentration indicate that the plasma glucose level rises or falls depending on the
dose of cytokine administered, the temporal nature of the measurement, and the specific cytokine given. In rats, sublethal doses of TNF that do not produce
hemodynamic changes result in the development of hyperglycemia within 1 hour of administration. 53 The increase in plasma glucose was only mild, however (20%),
and was associated with an increase in the circulating concentration of glucagon, adrenocorticotropic hormone, corticosterone, and epinephrine, all of which can
cause hyperglycemia. Further, incubation of adrenocortical cells with TNF stimulated cortisol secretion to the same extent, as did adrenocorticotropic hormone. Blood
glucose was unchanged when a lower dose of TNF was used. 54 Similar changes in blood glucose levels are observed after IL-1 administration. At higher IL-1 doses,
Fischer and colleagues 55 reported a rapid increase in blood glucose from 100 to 140 mg/dL within 1 hour. However, this increase was transient, with a return to
baseline levels by 2 hours. Simultaneously, there was a several-fold increase in hindquarter (most likely skeletal muscle) glucose consumption that was also transient.
In cultured muscle cells (L6 cell line), TNF-a stimulates glucose transport via a mechanism that involves de novo synthesis of glucose transporters that are inserted
into the plasma membrane.56 Simultaneously, there is depletion of cellular glycogen stores and an increase in lactate efflux, all of which are consistent with stimulation
of anaerobic glycolysis.
Meszaros and colleagues 57 have studied tissue glucose utilization in vivo using the 2-deoxyglucose tracer technique in rats following infusion of a nonlethal dose of
TNF. Glucose uptake was increased by 80% to 100% in liver, kidney, and spleen, skin (60%), lung (30% to 40%), and ileum (30% to 40%). The largest increase was
observed in diaphragm (150%). No significant increase was observed in skeletal muscle, testis, or brain. These data indicate a marked increase in whole body
glucose use following TNF administration. Acute exposure of pancreatic islets to IL-1b results in no change in glucose uptake but diminishes the rate of mitochondrial
glucose oxidation, a response that is potentiated by TNF. 58 In response to IL-1b, islets exhibit an increase in insulin release in the presence of high glucose
concentrations.
Effect on Fat Metabolism
Altered fat metabolism is apparent clinically in catabolic patients from the observation that fat stores are diminished in association with weight loss. It is likely that the
loss of fat stores in cancer patients is due to the ability of TNF, IL-1, and LMF to mobilize fat stores. Bolus administration of TNF to rats causes an increase in serum
triglyceride levels within 2 hours. 50 Greenberg and colleagues investigated the possible role of IL-6 and TNF in mediating the depleted fat stores that occur with
malignancy-associated cachexia. 59 Injection of IL-6 and TNF each reduced adipose tissue lipoprotein lipase activity by more than 50%. Similarly, both IL-6 and TNF
reduced heparin-releasable lipoprotein lipase activity in 3T3-L1 adipocytes in a dosedependent manner by 50% to 70%. In addition to a reduction in adipocyte
lipoprotein lipase activity, the increase in serum triglyceride levels that is observed after TNF administration is also due to stimulation of hepatic lipid secretion. 60 and 61
The discovery of the LMF may either add to the lipid-mobilizing effects or be stimulated by the cytokines. Further study of this factor is needed to elucidate its full

effects in cancer cachexia.
Regulation of Protein and Amino Acid Metabolism
Marked changes in protein and amino acid metabolism are characteristic of cancer patients, and a number of published studies have evaluated the effects of
cytokines on muscle protein metabolism with conflicting results. When recombinant TNF was infused into cancer patients, forearm amino acid efflux was accelerated,
consistent with net skeletal muscle proteolysis, although this accelerated nitrogen release could have been due to starvation effects. 58 Similarly, when Flores and
colleagues infused radiolabeled leucine into rats receiving TNF, IL-1, or both using tracer methodology techniques, they found an increase in muscle protein
degradation in cytokine-treated animals. 62 However, when the IL-1 activity in activated monocyte supernatants was blocked with specific anti–IL-1 antibodies, the
accelerated protein breakdown was not attenuated, indicating a major role for other mediators. 63,64 Thus, although it is generally agreed that cytokine administration in
vivo (at sufficient doses) stimulates net muscle proteolysis, it is unclear which distal mediators in the cytokine cascade are the key players (IL-6, LMF).
In contrast to whole animal studies, the majority of which indicate that in vivo administration of TNF or IL-1 results in net muscle proteolysis, in vitro studies have
yielded negative results. In studies evaluating the effects of corticosterone on muscle protein breakdown, this glucocorticoid was noted to accelerate protein
degradation and diminish protein synthesis. In combination with TNF, these steroid-mediated effects were augmented, but TNF alone did not alter protein turnover,
indicating a helping role for the corticosteroid. 65
In vitro and in vivo studies demonstrate that cytokines occupy an important role in mediating the hepatic metabolic response to malignant disease. Tumor-bearing rats
display a global increase in Na +-dependent amino acid transport, a response that can be attenuated by treatment with anti-TNF antibody. 66 Similar observations were
made in animals treated with a single dose of TNF: Stimulation of hepatic amino acid transport systems A, ASC, and N were noted within 4 hours of TNF
administration. 67,68 The increase in transport activity was due to an increase in carrier maximal transport velocity, consistent with the appearance of increased
numbers of transport protein molecules in the plasma membrane. IL-6 and glucocorticoids have also been shown to work in a coordinated fashion to stimulate hepatic
amino acid transport in vivo.69 Moreover, these cytokines stimulate amino acid transport activity in cultured hepatocytes. 70

NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT OF THE CANCER PATIENT
RATIONALE
Malnutrition is defined as any nutritional deficit that is associated with an increased risk of morbidity and mortality. There is a diminished risk of such events when the
nutritional deficiency is corrected. Although it seems apparent that the provision of nutritional support to the malnourished patient with cancer is essential and would
be beneficial, evidence indicating that currently available nutritional formulae alone can maintain or reverse malnutrition in the patient with advanced malignant
disease is lacking. This observation suggests that many patients with cancer exhibit ongoing catabolism of body cell mass that persists and is refractory to nutritional
repletion. Despite diminished food intake, the tumor-bearing host does not adapt to partial starvation by conserving lean body mass. Instead, the host continues to
deplete its own muscle mass to provide amino acids taken up by the tumor to support growth and by the liver to support gluconeogenesis and biosynthesis of
important defense proteins. The rationale behind the provision of specialized nutritional support, whether it be enteral or parenteral, is the belief that such support will
preferentially benefit the patient rather than stimulate tumor growth. From a more practical standpoint, nutritional support would not be indicated if it clearly
demonstrated no favorable effect on the response to antineoplastic therapies, no lengthening of the disease-free survival, or no improvement in the quality of life.
Interestingly, a consensus of opinion regarding the role and efficacy of nutritional support in patients with cancer is lacking. Nonetheless, several well-designed
clinical studies have allowed us to generate guidelines for the use of enteral and parenteral nutrition in patients with cancer, and most physicians and surgeons who
care for patients with cancer continue to use nutritional support aggressively under specific circumstances.
Several studies have suggested additional therapies can be used along with nutritional support to alleviate the tumor cachexia. The synthetic progestogens,
megestrol acetate (MA) and medroxyprogesterone acetate, may be helpful in high doses in the non–hormone-sensitive cancer with associated cachexia syndrome to
decrease production of cytokines, particularly TNF and IL-6, as well as serotonin. These agents have been able to improve appetite, well-being, and quality of life as
well as decreasing nausea and vomiting. MA has also been shown to increase body nonfluid weight gain although primarily with fat. Patients have been reported to
respond with only 15 days of therapy with MA, and it may be discontinued after just 2 weeks of therapy. However, MA may be associated with more thromboembolic
complications and there may have been less response to chemotherapeutic regimens. 71,72,73,74,75,76,77,78,79 and 80
Other agents associated with a beneficial effect on the cachexia syndrome include eicosanoids and melatonin. Tisdale reported eicosapentaenoic acid, a component
of fish oil, attenuated the action of cachectic factors and stabilized the weight loss and energy expenditure in patients with pancreatic cancer. 81 Reports from Japan
show that maintained body weight was significantly greater in groups of mice treated with two different eicosanoids, docosahexanoic acid and eicosapentaenoic
acid. 82 McMillan et al. reported that patients with advanced gastrointestinal cancers given ibuprofen, 1200 mg/d, in addition to MA, 480 mg/d, had an increase in body
weight and no change in body water. 83 Lissoni et al. reported that melatonin has also been shown to decrease levels of TNF and lead to decreased weight loss in
untreatable metastatic tumor patients and may therefore be helpful in treating cancer cachexia. 84 Gagnon and Bruera reviewed other treatment modalities for cancer
cachexia and suggested drugs such as thalidomide and melatonin may be useful because of their effects on TNF. They also suggested b-adrenergic agonists might
help as well because of their effect on muscle metabolism. 85
NUTRITIONAL ASSESSMENT OF THE CANCER PATIENT
In order to determine the best strategies for treatment of the cancer patient, the nutritional status must first be determined. This is done by a careful history and
physical examination followed by additional tests to confirm the clinical impression. The history should include inquiries about appetite, preferred foods, and weight
loss. The physical examination can establish the diagnosis of muscle wasting and specific nutrient deficiencies. Anthropometric measurements should be done
including measurement of body weight and height, skinfold thickness, and a 24-hour urine collection for the measurement of nitrogen. Peripheral blood lymphocyte
count and skin testing to common antigens for assessment of delayed hypersensitivity have been used as indicators of immunocompetence in the cancer patient.
Altered immunologic responses are not specific for nutritional deficiencies and are often observed even in patients with advanced malignant disease who are well
nourished. Serum albumin and transferrin are the most common serum proteins measured. Other laboratory studies useful in nutritional assessment include red blood
cell indices to determine iron and micronutrient deficiencies, plasma glucose to assess insulin resistance, blood urea nitrogen to determine renal status, and liver
function tests to evaluate hepatic function.
NUTRITION AND TUMOR GROWTH
With the introduction of specialized enteral and parenteral feeding regimens into clinical medicine, aggressive nutritional support can be provided to cancer patients
who previously could not or would not eat. However, concerns over the stimulation of tumor growth have existed for many years. While animal studies indicate that
tumor growth can be enhanced with a high-protein diet and diminished by protein-depleted diets, studies in cancer patients are less clear. Baron and coworkers
studied 14 malnourished patients with untreated head and neck squamous cell carcinoma who underwent biopsies of both normal and malignant tissues. 86 The
patients were then randomized to either a control or TPN group. Cell-cycle kinetics were analyzed using flow cytometry after 3 to 17 days of TPN. After TPN, the
percentage of hyperdiploid cells in malignant tissue was significantly increased over controls. It is likely that species differences exist and that different tumors
respond dissimilarly to nutrient manipulation. If tumor growth is stimulated by nutritional or metabolic support, this could potentially be exploited with cycle-specific
chemotherapeutic agents.
ENTERAL NUTRITION IN CANCER PATIENTS
Numerous clinical trials have evaluated the use of aggressive enteral nutritional support as adjunctive therapy during the administration of antineoplastic regimens to
cancer patients, but well-designed studies make up a small fraction of these. Although these trials do not demonstrate any consistent benefits of enteral nutrition,
most authorities would agree that enteral nutrition is always the preferred route of feeding cancer patients when the gastrointestinal tract is functional ( Table 56.2-5).
This can be accomplished by using in-between meal supplements, inserting soft comfortable nasogastric feeding tubes, or inserting gastrostomy or jejunostomy
feeding catheters. Some of the better enteral clinical trials in cancer patients 87,88,89,90,91,92,93,94,95,96,97 and 98 are listed in Table 56.2-6, Table 56.2-7, and Table 56.2-8.
Commonly used enteral formulas are listed in Table 56.2-9. A physician order form for enteral nutrition is presented in Figure 56.2-1.

TABLE 56.2-5. Proposed Benefits of Oral and Enteral Nutrition versus Parenteral Nutrition

TABLE 56.2-6. Results of Major Prospective Randomized Controlled Trials Evaluating Perioperative Nutrition

TABLE 56.2-7. Results of Prospective Randomized Controlled Trials in Patients Treated with Radiation Therapy

TABLE 56.2-8. Results of Prospective Randomized Controlled Trials Evaluating Nutritional Therapy in Patients Receiving Chemotherapy

TABLE 56.2-9. Adult Nutrition: Physician Order Form for Tube Feedings a

FIGURE 56.2-1. Enteral order sheet. KUB, kidney, ureter, bladder; LCT, long-chain triglyceride.

TOTAL PARENTERAL NUTRITION IN THE CANCER PATIENT: GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Although the initial enthusiasm for the use of TPN in cancer patients was considerable, it is now clear that TPN should only be provided to selected patients. Because
of the failure of numerous clinical trials to yield a consensus with regard to the efficacy of TPN in cancer
patients89,99,100,101,102,103,104,105,106,107,108,109,110,111,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,120,121,122 and 123 (see Table 56.2-6, Table 56.2-7, and Table 56.2-8), more recently published
articles have used metaanalysis to review these studies collectively and generate feeding guidelines. The general conclusion has been that parenteral nutrition
appears to be of little benefit in most cancer populations. In some patients, the use of TPN was associated with an increase in complications. However, the most
important factor to consider when making decisions about the use of TPN in patients with cancer is the response of the tumor to antineoplastic therapy. It is
anticipated that the guidelines listed in Table 56.2-10 will undergo future revision, as more effective antitumor regimens become clinically available.

TABLE 56.2-10. Indications for the Use of Total Parenteral Nutrition in the Cancer Patient

SPECIFIC INDICATIONS FOR THE USE OF TOTAL PARENTERAL NUTRITION IN THE CANCER PATIENT
Patients with Enterocutaneous Fistulas
Patients with cancer who undergo major gastrointestinal surgery occasionally develop enterocutaneous fistulas that preclude the use of the gastrointestinal tract for
nutritional support. In such patients, enteral nutrition often stimulates fistula output and can result in metabolic disturbances and dehydration. TPN can affect the
course of disease in cancer patients with gastrointestinal fistulas. Studies indicate that TPN increases the spontaneous closure rate of enterocutaneous fistulas,
although fistulas that originate from radiated or neoplastic bowel have a much lower rate of spontaneous closure. In such patients, aggressive early surgical treatment
is generally indicated. Provision of TPN maintains the nutritional status of the cancer patient who develops an enterocutaneous fistula such that he or she better
tolerates operative intervention if closure does not occur. Perhaps insulin-like growth factor or a progestogen may help in this situation.
Patients with Hepatic or Renal Failure
Patients with cancer occasionally develop liver failure after major surgery or from cytotoxic chemotherapy. Because of liver damage and portasystemic shunting, these
patients develop derangements in their circulating levels of amino acids. The plasma aromatic to branched chain amino acid ratio is increased. Transport of amino
acids across the blood–brain barrier favors the aromatic amino acids such as tryptophan, precursors for false neurotransmitters such as serotonin, which contribute to
lethargy and encephalopathy. Treatment of individuals with liver failure with solutions enriched in branched chain amino acids and deficient in aromatic amino acids
may result in improved tolerance to the administered protein and clinical improvement in the encephalopathic state.
TPN with amino acids of high biologic value may also be of value in patients with acute renal failure. Presumably, provision of only essential amino acids allows the
body to maximally reuse nitrogen for the synthesis of nonessential amino acids and thereby helps prevent rapid increases in blood urea nitrogen. If the
hypermetabolic cancer patient is receiving dialysis, there appears to be no advantage to using an essential amino acid solution and therefore a balanced standard
amino acid formulation is recommended. Solutions containing branched chain amino acids or just essential amino acids are expensive and probably not worth the cost
except in specific patients in whom adjusted standard formulas are not tolerated.
Acute Radiation and Chemotherapy Enteritis
Cancer patients who receive abdominal or pelvic irradiation or chemotherapy may develop severe and prolonged mucositis and enterocolitis, precluding use of the
gastrointestinal tract for nutritional support. Under these circumstances, TPN should be provided to malnourished patients until the enteritis resolves and oral feeding
can be resumed. Moreover, under circumstances in which chemotherapy has been contraindicated secondary to severe malnutrition, TPN may be beneficial in
optimizing nutritional status and allowing the initiation of the chemotherapeutic regimen. When enteral nutrition is feasible in such patients, TPN has not demonstrated
a treatment advantage. When studies have been performed using well-nourished patients, the effects of TPN predictably have not been beneficial.
Patients undergoing radiation treatment may also develop malnutrition secondary to inadequate nutritional intake from an inability to eat. The potential side effects
from radiotherapy are broad and include nausea, vomiting, malnutrition, mucositis, xerostomia, dysphagia, diarrhea, and anorexia. Whenever possible, the enteral
route is preferable for nutritional support. However, in cases involving severe dysfunction of the gastrointestinal tract, TPN is indicated. TPN can be useful in allowing
the malnourished, poor-risk patient to complete radiotherapy with less morbidity. Patients undergoing irradiation of the head, neck, or chest need to be considered for
early tube placement so enteral nutrition can be used.
Use of Perioperative Total Parenteral Nutrition in Cancer Patients
One of the best studies to date evaluating the effects of preoperative TPN was published by the Veterans Affairs Total Parenteral Nutrition Cooperative Study
Group.107 More than 3500 patients, many of whom had cancer, were entered into this prospective randomized trial. The patients were divided into one of four groups:
well-nourished, borderline malnourished, moderately malnourished, or severely malnourished. Patients in each malnourished category were randomized to at least 7
days of preoperative TPN or immediate operation. Patients randomized to receive TPN received 1000 kcal/d in excess of calculated caloric requirements. Lipid was
provided on a daily basis. One criticism of this study was that patients were allowed to eat in addition to receiving parenteral feedings. Analysis of the data from this
study indicated that there was no difference in short-term or long-term survival among groups. Infectious complications including pneumonia, abscess, and line sepsis
were statistically significantly higher in patients receiving TPN. Noninfectious complications (impaired wound healing) were significantly lower only in those patients
receiving TPN who were in the severely malnourished group (greater than 15% weight loss and serum albumin less than 2.8 mg%). This study strongly suggests that
preoperative TPN should be limited to the severely malnourished patient. Therefore, contraindications to the use of preoperative TPN should include patients
requiring emergency operation and those who are only mildly or moderately malnourished.
In the few patients who are candidates for preoperative nutritional support, we recommend instituting TPN only if the gastrointestinal tract cannot be used for tube
feedings. In most patients undergoing major abdominal surgery, feeding tubes may be placed intraoperatively if resumption of oral feedings is not anticipated for
relatively lengthy periods of time (7 to 10 days) after surgery. TPN may also be required in the well-nourished cancer patient who develops a postoperative
complication that precludes enteral support. For example, some cancer patients develop a prolonged ileus after an abdominal procedure that precludes the use of the
intestinal tract as a route of feeding. Such an occurrence is generally unpredictable and the cause of the ileus is often not demonstrated. If the patient is unable to eat

by postoperative day 7, TPN should be considered. The ileus may persist for several weeks, especially in gastric or pancreatic cancer patients. Although provision of
TPN does not influence the disease process per se, it is beneficial because it prevents further erosion of lean body mass.
Two prospective studies have helped to further clarify both the indications and contraindications for the use of TPN in the surgical patient with cancer. Brennan and
colleagues 124 examined the use of routine postoperative TPN following major pancreatic resection. In patients randomized to receive TPN starting on postoperative
day 1, the investigators found a statistically significant increase in the incidence of intraabdominal abscesses as well as a tendency toward an increased incidence of
peritonitis and bowel obstruction. The control group received a peripheral infusion of dextrose rather than luminal nutrition, suggesting that the increase in
complications was not due to the absence of luminal nutrients but rather to some toxic effect of the TPN. The authors concluded that routine use of postoperative TPN
was not indicated and may in fact have harmful side effects. It should be noted that many surgeons would elect to place a feeding jejunostomy in such patients.
In contrast to the Brennan study, Fan and colleagues 125 studied the use of perioperative (starting 7 days before the planned procedure) TPN for patients undergoing
hepatectomy for hepatocellular carcinoma. They found that patients randomized to receive perioperative TPN had a statistically significant reduction in infectious
complications and a decreased diuretic requirement compared with similar patients who did not receive TPN. The significance of this study is that it is only one of two
studies that show a benefit to the use of routine perioperative TPN in patients not suffering from severe malnutrition. In addition, it establishes a distinct group of
patients in whom routine perioperative TPN may be of benefit. The mechanism by which TPN is of value in these patients is not known.
Patients with Short Bowel Syndrome
Cancer patients may develop short bowel syndrome secondary to multiple bowel resections or massive resection of infarcted bowel. Most of these patients, if cured of
their cancer, can now survive for long periods on home TPN. Due to the duration of therapy involved, these patients are at risk for developing long-term problems
such as micronutrient deficiency, bone demineralization, or line sepsis. Studies by Wilmore and colleagues 126 have demonstrated that the requirement for TPN could
be decreased or even eliminated in patients with short gut syndrome by providing a nutritional regimen consisting of supplemental glutamine, growth hormone, and a
modified oral high-carbohydrate, low-fat diet. There was a marked improvement in the absorption of nutrients with this combination therapy and a decrease in stool
output. In addition, TPN requirements were reduced by 50%, as were the costs associated with care of these individuals. Discontinuation of the growth hormone did
not increase TPN needs in these patients once they had undergone successful gut rehabilitation.
COMPOSITION OF TOTAL PARENTERAL NUTRITION FORMULATIONS
TPN solutions are administered through a central venous catheter that is generally inserted into the subclavian vein. TPN solutions are hyperosmolar and calorie
dense (1 kcal/mL), and the infusion of 2.0 to 2.5 L/d provides 2000 to 2500 kcal/d. The addition of minerals, vitamins, and electrolytes completes the basic
composition of the solution ( Table 56.2-11). Solutions must be prepared under sterile conditions. Because of the hyperosmolarity of such solutions, they must be
delivered into a high flow system to prevent venous sclerosis. As a general rule, 65% of total nonprotein calories should be provided as dextrose and 35% in the form
of an intravenous fat emulsion. Patients receiving TPN should be monitored regularly by measuring blood sugar, serum electrolytes, triglycerides, and liver function
test results. The amounts of the various electrolytes provided to cancer patients receiving TPN may vary depending on factors such as previous nutritional and
hydration status. Careful monitoring is critical because severe hypokalemia or hypophosphatemia can develop with aggressive feedings. Hypophosphatemia may
develop in the chronically malnourished cachectic cancer patient given dextrose infusion who uses the phosphate to make adenosine triphosphate. This is referred to
as the refeeding syndrome. These electrolyte disturbances can develop rapidly and are much more life-threatening than hyponatremia. Critical drops in serum
phosphate levels below 1.5 mmol/dL can lead to an irreversible cardiac arrest.

TABLE 56.2-11. Composition of a Standard Central Venous Solution

POTENTIAL COMPLICATIONS OF TOTAL PARENTERAL NUTRITION
Advances in technology, monitoring, and catheter care have greatly reduced the incidence of complications associated with the use of TPN. The establishment of a
nutritional support team (physician, dietitian, nurse, and pharmacist) and the recognition of such a team as an important part of overall patient care have also been
key factors in reducing complications. Complications of TPN that occur in cancer patients can be divided into three types: (1) mechanical (i.e., pneumothorax,
laceration of the subclavian artery, air embolism, catheter embolism); (2) metabolic (hyperglycemia, electrolyte abnormalities, abnormalities in liver enzymes); and (3)
infectious (catheter sepsis). These complications are listed in Table 56.2-12. The management of the patient who develops signs and symptoms of catheter sepsis is
shown in Figure 56.2-2.

FIGURE 56.2-2. Algorithm for the evaluation of a cancer patient on total parenteral nutrition (TPN) who develops signs and symptoms of sepsis.

TABLE 56.2-12. Complications Associated with the Use of Total Parenteral Nutrition

EFFECTS OF TOTAL PARENTERAL NUTRITION ON THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Although the intestinal tract had long been considered an organ of inactivity in critically ill patients, this concept has clearly been shown to be invalid. Disuse of the
gastrointestinal tract, either via starvation or nutritional support by TPN, may lead to numerous physiologic derangements as well as changes in gut microflora,
impaired gut immune function, and disruption of the integrity of the mucosal barrier. Thus, maintaining gut function in the cancer patient who is receiving vigorous
therapy may be essential in order to minimize septic complications and organ failure.
The majority of studies that have examined the effects of TPN on intestinal function and immunity have been done in animals. These studies clearly demonstrate that
TPN is detrimental and related to intestinal disuse. In rats receiving TPN, villous atrophy develops and there appears to be a breakdown in the gut mucosal barrier.
TPN results in significant disruption of the intestinal microflora and bacterial translocation from the gut lumen to the mesenteric lymph nodes. In addition, when insults
such as chemotherapy or radiation are introduced into these models, animals on TPN have a much higher mortality. This body of literature suggests that under certain
circumstances, TPN may predispose patients to an increase in gut-derived infectious complications. Whether these are related to bacterial translocation or just
absorption of endotoxin or cytokines is still debated.
IMPROVING THE EFFICACY OF CURRENT FEEDING REGIMENS
Role of Ambulation
Patients with cancer may be bedridden, but should be encouraged to ambulate as much as is feasible. Exercise can increase functional aerobic capacity, stimulate
skeletal muscle amino acid uptake, and reduce proteolysis in normal individuals receiving TPN. It is unclear whether higher exercise thresholds are necessary to
induce anabolism in nutritionally depleted cancer patients, although a higher threshold does seem to reduce fatigue.
Pharmacologic and Hormonal Therapy
The potential beneficial effects of the administration of insulin, the primary anabolic hormone in the body, to the tumor-bearing host has been studied because of its
role in stimulating muscle amino acid uptake and protein synthesis. Studies indicate that treatment with insulin stimulates food intake and nitrogen retention without
stimulating tumor growth. Likewise, administration of insulin in combination with the glutamine antimetabolite acivicin to tumor-bearing rats on TPN preserved lean
body mass and retarded tumor growth. Whether these observations can be extrapolated to the clinical arena is unknown.
The availability of recombinant human growth hormone has led investigators to examine the role of this anabolic agent in patients. The present data indicate that
growth hormone is capable of promoting accrual of lean body mass in healthy individuals. It is unclear whether this anabolism will be observed in cachectic cancer
patients. A potential downside to the use of growth hormone in patients is its association with the development of lymphoid malignancies. In tumor-bearing rats,
treatment with exogenous growth hormone has been shown to increase carcass weight and improve the host immune response. Additional studies that examine the
effects of growth hormone on tumor growth parameters are necessary before clinical use of this drug is justifiable.
Additional research using the progestogens MA and medroxyprogesterone acetate, as well as melatonin, is needed to assess the value of their use in treating or
preventing cancer cachexia. Current recommendations for MA are 480 mg/d in addition to nutritional support.
Use of Glutamine and Arginine
The classification of glutamine as a nonessential or nutritionally dispensable amino acid implies that, in its absence from the diet, it can be synthesized in adequate
quantities from other amino acids and precursors. For this reason, and because of the relative instability and short shelf life of glutamine compared with other amino
acids, it has not been considered necessary to include glutamine in nutritional formulas. Glutamine has been eliminated from TPN solutions and with few exceptions,
glutamine is present in oral and enteral diets only at the relatively low levels characteristic of its concentration in most dietary proteins. Based on our knowledge of the
changes in glutamine metabolism that are characteristic of the host with cancer, this categorization of glutamine as a nonessential amino acid may be misleading.
Several studies in the tumor-bearing host suggest that supplemental glutamine may benefit the cancer patient ( Table 56.2-13). One of the best studies to date
evaluating the effects of glutamine-enriched TPN in cancer patients is a randomized, double-blind controlled trial in adults receiving allogeneic bone marrow
transplants for hematologic malignancies. 127 Patients received a standard, glutamine-free TPN solution or an experimental isonitrogenous, isocaloric solution
supplemented with L-glutamine (0.57 g/kg body weight per day). Patients received the diets for approximately 4 weeks after transplantation. Patients receiving
glutamine-supplemented parenteral nutrition after bone marrow transplant had improved nitrogen balance, a diminished incidence of clinical infections, less fluid
accumulation, and a shortened hospital stay (see Table 56.2-13). In a more recent study, glutamine-enriched TPN was shown to prevent the increase in gut mucosal
permeability that develops with the administration of commercially available glutamine-free TPN. Van der Hulst and associates 128 randomized surgical patients
requiring parenteral feedings to either receive standard TPN or glutamine-enriched TPN for 10 to 14 days. Duodenal mucosal biopsies and gut permeability studies
were performed at the start and completion of TPN. The investigators found no change in either villous height or gut permeability in the group receiving
glutamine-enriched TPN, whereas the control group showed both loss of villous height and increased gut permeability. This study provides strong evidence in favor of
a gut-protective effect of glutamine. Similarly, arginine, because of its immunomodulatory properties may be useful as a dietary supplement in cancer patients, but
further work is necessary to more clearly define the potential role of these two amino acids in the nutritional care of the cancer patient.

TABLE 56.2-13. Results of a Randomized Trial of Glutamine-Enriched Total Parenteral Nutrition versus Standard Total Parenteral Nutrition after Bone Marrow
Transplantation a

TECHNIQUES OF PROVIDING NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT
TRANSNASAL (NASOGASTRIC AND NASODUODENAL) FEEDING CATHETERS
The use of transnasal feeding catheters for intragastric feeding or for duodenal intubation is a popular adjunct for providing nutritional support by the enteral route.
The stomach is easily accessed by the passage of a soft flexible (8 Fr.) feeding tube. Intragastric feedings provide several advantages for the patient. The stomach
has the capacity and reservoir for bolus feedings. Feeding into the stomach results in the stimulation of biliary-pancreatic axis, which is probably trophic for the small
bowel, and gastric secretions have a dilutional effect on the osmolarity of the feedings, reducing the risk of diarrhea. The major risk of intragastric feeding is the
regurgitation of gastric contents resulting in aspiration into the tracheobronchial tree. This risk is highest in patients who have an altered mental sensorium or who are
paralyzed.
The placement of the feeding tube through the pylorus into the fourth portion of the duodenum reduces the risk of regurgitation and aspiration of feeding formulas. To
place a transnasal intraduodenal feeding catheter, the patient should be in the sitting position with the neck slightly flexed. This allows for the passage of a lubricated
8-Fr. polyurethane feeding catheter (with a stylette in place) through the patient's nose in a posterior and inferior direction, bringing the catheter to the level of the
pharynx. The head is brought back to a neutral position and the patient is instructed to swallow while the feeding catheter is simultaneously passed down into the
esophageal lumen. The advancement of the catheter is continued for a distance of about 45 to 50 cm. Once the catheter is confirmed to be in the stomach by injecting
air while listening over the epigastrium, the patient is laid on the right side and the tube is advanced another 15 to 20 cm. This should position the tube into the
duodenum and can be confirmed by listening over the right upper quadrant while advancing the tube. The stylette is removed and the position of the catheter is
confirmed radiographically before the initiation of feedings. Tubes can be positioned fluoroscopically if necessary.
Gastric feedings are initiated by a bolus test volume of saline, representing the hourly feeding volume infused over 1 hour, into the stomach. The tube is clamped for
30 minutes and then checked for residual volume. If less than 50% of the volume load returns, then the selected volume is appropriate. In general, duodenal feedings
can be started at 25 mL/hr at full-strength concentration unless the patient has been at bowel rest for several days, in which case the formula should be diluted to
one-fourth strength. In such patients, we generally increase the rate of infusion before increasing the concentration. Despite these precautions, approximately 10% to
20% of patients receiving enteral feedings develop some degree of diarrhea secondary to malabsorption and the osmotic load of the feedings. When this occurs,
decrease the rate of feeding by 50% rather than stopping the feedings altogether. The rate of feedings is then increased as tolerated over the next 3 to 4 days.
GASTROSTOMY TUBE FEEDINGS
A feeding gastrostomy should be considered in patients requiring long-term enteral nutrition and in patients with unresectable carcinomas of the head and neck or
esophagus. In patients with an unresectable esophageal carcinoma who are not surgical candidates or in individuals who are unable to maintain caloric needs, a
permanent gastrostomy should be considered. A temporary Stamm gastrostomy is a popular method for access to the gastric lumen that can be performed at the time
of any major abdominal procedure. The surgical technique is relatively simple and straightforward. 4 After placement, the gastrostomy tube is placed to gravity
drainage for 3 days and then is elevated. If the patient tolerates catheter elevation, we advance enteral feedings as described previously.
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy to provide access for gastric feedings can be performed without a laparotomy or general anesthesia. This technique involves
the safe passage of an endoscope into the stomach. The stomach is then dilated by the insufflation of air via the endoscope. Transabdominal illumination with the
endoscopic light source selects an area on the anterior abdominal wall, usually halfway between the costal margin and the umbilicus. Local anesthesia is injected
over the site followed by the insertion of an Angiocath percutaneously into the stomach. A wire is passed through the Angiocath, grabbed by a snare that has been
passed through the endoscope, and pulled back with the endoscope out of the mouth. A standard percutaneous gastrostomy tube with a wire loop is attached to the
guidewire and pulled back down the esophagus and out through the abdominal wall. The endoscope is passed back with the tube and the catheter is pulled under
direct visualization until taut and then sutured to the abdominal wall. Inability to pass the endoscope safely or to identify the transabdominal illumination of the
endoscope tip within the dilated stomach are contraindications to the procedure. Ascites, coagulopathies, and intraabdominal infections are relative contraindications
as well.
FEEDING CATHETER JEJUNOSTOMY PLACEMENT AND WITZEL JEJUNOSTOMY
A feeding catheter jejunostomy should be placed following any major upper abdominal oncologic procedure if prolonged enteral nutrition support is anticipated,
especially after gastric or pancreatic cancer surgery. The simplest method is a needle catheter jejunostomy, which can be performed fairly quickly at the end of the
definitive operation. The entire length of a 14-gauge needle is used to create a subserosal tunnel approximately 30 to 40 cm distal to the ligament of Treitz and then
the needle tip is introduced into the jejunal lumen. A 16-gauge feeding catheter is inserted through the needle and advanced 30 to 40 cm distally into the bowel lumen
and the needle is withdrawn. The catheter is secured to the jejunal wall with sutures and then the loop of jejunum is anchored to the parietal peritoneum. The catheter
is then secured to the skin with nylon sutures. The needle catheter jejunostomy is generally removed 2 to 4 weeks postoperatively when no longer needed.
A more permanent form of feeding jejunostomy employs the use of a 14-Fr. red rubber catheter for feeding. The placement technique is simple Witzel tunnel 128 and
takes only 10 to 15 minutes. Jejunal feeding catheters can be used immediately for feeding purposes following the operation. Catheter care is essential to maintain
patency, and the nursing staff need to flush the catheter with saline every 8 hours to ensure adequate patency. The catheter can be removed at the patient's bedside
at the desired time by simple traction and the resulting fistula should close quickly.
PERIPHERAL INTRAVENOUS FEEDINGS
Peripheral veins may be used for infusion of glucose, amino acid solutions, and fat emulsions. However, these solutions must be nearly isotonic to avoid peripheral
vein sclerosis. Ten percent glucose solutions may be used to increase the efficacy of amino acid use. Fat emulsions can be administered simultaneously with glucose
and amino acid solutions, because they provide an efficient fuel source and isotonic. The major disadvantage of these peripherally administered mixtures is limited
caloric delivery to meet catabolic demands within tolerated fluid volumes. Patients with renal and cardiac diseases may not tolerate the additional fluid load.
Indications for peripheral vein feeding include the following: (1) as a supplement when enteral feedings can only be partially tolerated because of gastrointestinal
dysfunction; (2) as a method of nutritional support when the gastrointestinal tract must be kept relatively empty for short periods during diagnostic workup; and (3) as
preliminary feedings before subclavian catheter insertion in patients requiring TPN.
CENTRAL VENOUS TOTAL PARENTERAL NUTRITION
The preferred method of access to the superior vena cava is by percutaneous cannulation of the subclavian vein. Alternate sites include the internal and external
jugular vein, but with the catheter exiting in the neck region this makes it more difficult to secure and maintain a sterile dressing site. Thus, long-term indwelling
catheters should not be placed in this location because of an increased risk of catheter infections.
An individual who is experienced in the technique should perform the placement of a central venous catheter. To reduce the risk of hemostatic complications, patients
with a platelet count below 50,000 should receive fresh platelets before catheter insertion. The procedure is performed using aseptic technique; the surgeon should
wear a hat, mask, gown, and gloves. The patient is placed in Trendelenburg's position with both arms at the sides and the head turned away from the site of insertion.
The chest is shaved, prepped, and draped in a sterile fashion. Local anesthesia is infiltrated near the insertion site and the underlying tissues along the inferior border
of the clavicle. A standard subclavian insertion tray is used for catheter insertion via the Seldinger technique. The tip of the needle is inserted into the skin and
subcutaneous tissues at the midpoint of the clavicle aiming for the suprasternal notch. The needle is directed parallel to the patient's bed, inserting beneath the
clavicle with negative pressure applied at all times to the syringe. The prompt inflow of blood into the syringe indicates entrance into the subclavian vein, and the
needle is advanced a few millimeters to ensure the bevel is within the lumen of the vessel. The patient is instructed to perform a gentle Valsalva maneuver to prevent
an air embolism, the syringe is disconnected from the needle and the guidewire is passed through the needle lumen, and the needle is then withdrawn over the
guidewire. The passage of the wire through the needle should be met with minimal resistance and the needle should be removed only after 15 cm of the wire has
been passed into the vessel. A small incision is made at the guidewire exit site and a dilator is passed over the wire. The dilator is then removed over the wire and is
replaced by the catheter that is fully advanced. The wire is withdrawn and the catheter is flushed with sterile saline. The catheter is then sutured into position, the
insertion site cleaned, and a sterile dressing placed. A portable chest radiograph is taken to confirm placement of the catheter. Chest films are inspected for location
of the catheter tip and to search for evidence of pneumothorax and hemothorax.

Complications from long-term central venous catheterization in the cancer patient population include venous thrombosis and catheter-related infections. Thrombosis
of the central vessels is a complication that may be often overlooked. The clinical suspicion of subclavian vein thrombosis is only approximately 3%, whereas studies
that use phlebography or radionuclide venography indicate that the incidence is as high as 35%. Febrile episodes are not uncommon in the cancer patient population,
particularly in the neutropenic individual. If primary catheter sepsis is confirmed, the catheter must be removed immediately. The tip of the catheter is sent to the
laboratory for culture and compared with the blood cultures drawn from the patient. Appropriate antibiotics are administered and a new catheter is inserted when the
patient's repeat blood culture results are negative.

NUTRITION SUPPORT FOR CANCER PATIENTS AND HEALTH CARE REFORM
The effect of corporate medicine on nutrition support has been addressed. 129 With the introduction of health care reform, nutrition support teams and the services they
provide are now considered a cost center rather than a revenue center and both the role and existence of the traditional team is being threatened. Formal nutrition
support teams began to form in the 1970s when TPN gained widespread clinical acceptance in the cancer. Although the indications for TPN in the cancer patient are
few, the risk to these patients is that issues of cost may override those of access to and quality of nutritional support.
The challenge to nutrition support professionals is to coordinate efficient and early intervention and to document its efficacy and outcome. In the absence of any
documented efficacy, many people argue, there is no need for formal nutrition support or the team in charge of that service. Therefore, it becomes imperative that the
team justifies its importance to the hospital and convinces the administration that a formal nutrition support team provides quality control and polices the
administration of nutritional support. To do this, nutrition support units must (1) identify specific patient populations who will benefit from nutrition support, (2) establish
clinical pathways (guidelines), and (3) develop and implement measurements of efficacy (outcomes). In capitated models of health care, it is in the best interest of all
caregivers to provide cost-effective care.
In the past, the costs required to pay the members of the nutrition support team have been more than offset by the reimbursements for the services provided,
particularly for the delivery of TPN. The danger of this approach in the nutritional support of hospitalized patients, particularly patients with complicated problems and
complex diseases, is that the withholding of nutritional and metabolic support from certain patients may result in serious consequences. Aggressive early feeding may
be the best approach if it reduces complications in the long run. Methods of ensuring that nutrition support is cost effective have been suggested. 129
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Souba WW, Wilmore DW. Diet and nutrition in the care of the patient with surgery, trauma, and sepsis. In: Shils M, Young V, eds. Modern nutrition in health and disease, 8th ed. Philadelphia:
Lea & Febiger, 1994:1202.
2. Souba WW. Total parenteral nutrition. In: Copeland EM III, Levine BA, Howard RJ, et al., eds. Current practice of surgery. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1993.
3. Souba WW. Cytokines: key regulators of the nutritional/metabolic response to critical illness. Curr Probl Surg 1994;31:577.
4. Hautamaki RD, Souba WW. Principles and techniques of nutritional support in the cancer patient. In: Karakousis CP, Copeland EM, Bland KI, eds. Atlas of surgical oncology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders,1995:740.
5. Warren S. The immediate causes of death in cancer. Am J Med Sci 1932;184:610.
6. DeWys WD, Begg D, Lavin PT, et al. Prognostic effect of weight loss before chemotherapy in cancer patients. Am J Med 1980; 69:491.
7. Espat NJ, Moldawer LL, Copeland EM III. Cytokine-mediated alterations in host metabolism prevent nutritional repletion in cachectic cancer patients. J Surg Oncol 1995;58:77.
8. Mercadente S. Parenteral versus enteral nutrition in cancer patients: indications and practice. Supportive Care in Cancer 1998;6:85.
9. Bernstein IL, Bernstein ID. Learned food aversion and cancer anorexia. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65(Suppl 5):37.
10. Nelson KA, Walsh D, Sheehan FA. The cancer anorexia-cachexia syndrome. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:213.
11. Wesdorf RIC, Krause R, von Meyenfeldt MF. Cancer cachexia and its nutritional implications. Br J Surg 1983;70:352.
12. Norton JA, Moley JF, Green MV, Carson RE, Morrison SD. Parabiotic transfer of cancer anorexia/cachexia in male rats. Cancer Res 1985;45:5547.
13. Knox LS, Crosby LO, Feurer ID, et al. Energy expenditure in malnourished cancer patients. Ann Surg 1983;197:152.
14. Fearon KCH, Hansell DT, Preston T, et al. Influence of whole body protein turnover rate on resting energy expenditure on patients with cancer. Cancer Res 1988;48:2590.
15. Brennan MF. Uncomplicated starvation versus cancer cachexia. Cancer Res 1977;37:2359.
16. Arbeit JM, Lees DE, Corsey R, Brennan MF. Resting energy expenditure in controls and cancer patients with localized and diffuse disease. Ann Surg 1984;199:292.
17. Frederix EWHM, Soeters PB, Wouters EFM, et al. Effect of different tumor types on resting energy expenditure. Cancer Res 1991;61:38.
18. Luketich JD, Mullen JL, Feurer ID, Sternleib J, Fried RC. Ablation of abnormal energy expenditure by curative tumor resection. Arch Surg 1990;125:337.
19. Kolal WA, McCulloch A, Wright PD, Johnston IDA. Glucose turnover and recycling on colorectal cancer. Ann Surg 1983;198:601.
20. Shaw JHF, Wolfe RR. Glucose and urea kinetics in patients with early and advanced gastrointestinal cancer: the response to glucose infusion, parenteral feeding, and surgical resection.
Surgery 1986;101:181.
21. Shaw JHF, Humberstone DM, Wolfe RR. Energy and protein metabolism in sarcoma patients. Ann Surg 1988; 203:283.
22. Humberstone DM, Shaw JHF. Metabolism in hematologic malignancy. Cancer 1988;62:1619.
23. Glickman AS, Rawson RW. Diabetes and altered carbohydrate metabolism in patients with cancer. Cancer 1956;9:1127.
24. Lundholm K, Edstrom S, Karlberg I, et al. Glucose turnover, gluconeogenesis from glycerol, and estimation of net glucose cycling in cancer patients. Cancer 1982;50:1142.
25. Yoshikawa T, Noguchi Y, Matsumoto A. Effects of tumor removal and body weight loss on insulin resistance in patients with cancer. Surgery 1994;116:62.
26. Jeevanandam M, Lowry SF, Horowitz GD, et al. Cancer cachexia and protein metabolism. Lancet 1984;1:1423.
27. Goodlad GAJ, Clark CM. The action of the Walker 256 carcinoma and toxohormone on amino acid incorporation into diaphragm protein. Eur J Cancer 1973;9:139.
28. Lundholm K, Edstrom S, Ekman L, et al. A comparative study of the influence of malignant tumor on host metabolism in mice and man. Cancer 1978;42:453.
29. Heber D, Chlebowski RT, Ishibashi DE, et al. Abnormalities in glucose and protein metabolism in noncachectic lung cancer patients. Cancer Res 1982;42:4815.
30. Norton JA, Burt ME, Brennan MF. In vivo utilization of substrate by human sarcoma bearing limbs. Cancer 1980;45:29.
31. Cariuk P, Lorite MJ, Todorov PT, et al. Induction of cachexia in mice by a product isolated from the urine of cachectic cancer patients. Br J Cancer 1997;76:606.
32. Todoruv PT, McDevitt TM, Meyer DJ, et al. Purification and characterization of a tumor lipid-mobilizing factor. Cancer Res 1998;58:2353.
33. Choudhary G, Chakel J, Hancock W, et al. Investigation of the potential of capillary electrophoresis with off-line matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry for
clinical analysis: examination of a glycoprotein factor associated with cancer cachexia. Analytical Chem 1999;71:855.
34. Fischer CP, Bode BP, Souba WW. Adaptive alterations in cellular metabolism with malignant transformation. Ann Surg 1998;227:627.
35. Wasa M, Bode B, Abcouwer S, Tanabe K, Souba WW. Glutamine as a regulator of DNA and protein biosynthesis in human solid tumor cell lines. Ann Surg 1996;224:189.
36. Souba WW. Glutamine and cancer. Ann Surg 1993;218:715.
37. Lin CM, Abcouwer SF, Souba WW. Effect of dietary glutamate on chemotherapy-induced immunosuppression. Nutrition 1999;15:687.
38. Balkwill F, Osborne R, Burke F, et al. Evidence for tumor necrosis factor/cachectin production in cancer. Lancet 1987;2:1229.
39. Michie HR, Sherman ML, Spriggs DR, et al. Chronic TNF infusion causes anorexia but not accelerated nitrogen loss. Ann Surg 1989;209:19.
40. Darling G, Fraker DL, Jensen C, et al. Cachectic effects of recombinant human tumor necrosis factor in rats. Cancer Res 1990;50:4008.
41. Sherry BA, Gelin J, Fong Y, et al. Anticachectin/tumor necrosis factor-a antibodies attenuate development of cachexia in tumor models. FASEB J 1989;3:1956.
42. Yamamoto N, Kawamura I, Nishigaki F, et al. Effect of FR143430, a novel cytokine suppressive agent, on adenocarcinoma colon 26-induced cachexia in mice. Anticancer Res 1998;18:139.
43. Oliff A, Defeo-Jones D, Boyer M, et al. Tumors secreting human TNF/cachectin induce cachexia in mice. Cell 1987;50:555.
44. Starnes HF, Warren RS, Jeevanandem M, et al. Tumor necrosis factor and the acute metabolic response to injury in man. J Clin Invest 1988;82:1321.
45. Martin F, Santolaria F, Batista N, et al. Cytokine levels (IL-6 and IFN-gamma), acute phase response and nutritional status as prognostic factors in lung cancer. Cytokine 1999;11:80.
46. Uno K, Setoguchi J, Tanigawa M, et al. Differential IL-12 responsiveness for interferon-gamma production in advanced stages of cancer patients correlates with performance status. Clin Cancer
Res 1998;4:2425.
47. Shibata M, Takekawa M, Amano S. Increased serum concentrations of soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor I in non-cachectic and cachectic patients with advanced gastric and colorectal
cancer. Surg Today 1998;28:884.
48. Argiles JM, Lopez-Soriano FJ. The role of cytokines in cancer cachexia. Med Res Rev 1999;19:223.
49. Fischer CP, Bode BP, Takahashi K, Tanabe KK, Souba WW. Glucocorticoid-dependent induction of IL-6 receptor expression in human hepatocytes facilitates IL-6 stimulation of amino acid
transport. Ann Surg 1996;223:610.
50. Gambardella A, Tortoriello R, Pesce L, et al. Intralipid infusion combined with propranolol administration has favorable metabolic effects in elderly malnourished cancer patients. Metabol Clin
Exp 1999;48:291.
51. Mimura Y, Kanauchi H, Ogawa T, Oohara T. Resistance to natriuresis in patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis. Horm Metab Res 1996;28:183.
52. Lazarus DD, Kambayashi T, Lowry SF, Strassman G. The lack of an effect by insulin or insulin-like growth factor-1 in attenuating colon-26 mediated cancer cachexia. Cancer Lett 1996;103:71.
53. Darling G, Goldstein DS, Stull R, et al. Tumor necrosis factor: immune endocrine interaction. Surgery 1989;106:1155.
54. Arbos J, Lpoz-Soriano FJ, Carbo N, et al. Effects of tumor necrosis factor-a (cachectin) on glucose metabolism in the rat. Mol Cell Biochem 1992;112:53.
55. Fischer E, Marano M, Barber AE, et al. Comparison between effects of interleukin-1a administration and sublethal endotoxemia in primates. Am J Physiol 1991;261:R442.
56. Lee MD, Zentella A, Pekala PH, et al. Effect of endotoxin-induced monokines on glucose metabolism in the muscle cell line L6. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987;84:2590.
57. Meszaros K, Lang CH, Bagby GJ. Tumor necrosis factor increases in vivo glucose utilization of macrophage-rich tissues. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1987;149:1.
58. Eisirik DL. Interleukin-1 induced impairment in pancreatic islet oxidative metabolism of glucose is potentiated by tumor necrosis factor. Acta Endocrinol 1988;119:321.
59. Greenberg AS, Nordan RP, McIntosh J, et al. Interleukin 6 reduces lipoprotein lipase activity in adipose tissue of mice in vivo and in 3T3-L1 adipocytes: a possible role for interleukin 6 in cancer
cachexia. Cancer Res 1992;52:4113.
60. Memon RA, Feingold KR, Moser AH, et al. Differential effects of interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor on ketogenesis. Am J Physiol 1992;263:E301.
61. Warren RS, Starnes HF, Gabrilove JL, et al. The acute metabolic effects of tumor necrosis factor administration in humans. Arch Surg 1987;122:1396.
62. Flores EA, Bistrian BR, Pomposelli JJ, et al. Infusion of tumor necrosis factor/cachectin promotes muscle catabolism in the rat. J Clin Invest 1989;83:1614.
63. Fong Y, Moldawer LL, Marano M, et al. Cachectin/TNF or IL-1a induces cachexia with redistribution of body proteins. Am J Physiol 1989;256:R659.
64. Moldawer LL, Svanninger G, Gelin J, et al. Interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor do not regulate protein balance in skeletal muscle. Am J Physiol 1987;253:C766.
65. Hall-Angeras M, Angeras U, Zamir O, et al. Interaction between corticosterone and tumor necrosis factor stimulated protein breakdown in rat skeletal muscle, similar to sepsis. Surgery

1990;108:460.
66. Inoue Y, Bode B, Copeland EM, Souba WW. Tumor necrosis factor mediates tumor-induced increases in hepatic amino acid transport. Cancer Res 1995;55:3525.
67. Hummel RP, Warner B, Pedersen P, et al. In vitro effects of TNF, IL-1a, and other monokines on skeletal muscle amino acid uptake and protein degradation. Surg Forum 1987;38:13.
68. Pacitti AJ, Inoue Y, Souba WW. Tumor necrosis factor stimulates Na +-dependent amino acid uptake in plasma membrane vesicles. J Clin Invest 1993;91:474.
69. Watkins K, Souba WW. Coordinated regulation of hepatic amino acid transport by interleukin-6 and glucocorticoids. J Trauma 1994;36:523.
70. Fischer CP, Bode BP, Souba WW. Glucocorticoids exert a permissive effect on cytokine-stimulated glutamine transport in cultured hepatocytes. Surg Forum 1995;46:546.
71. McMillan DC, O'Gorman P, Fearon KC, McArdle CS. A pilot study of megestrol acetate and ibuprofen in the treatment of cachexia in gastrointestinal cancer patients. Br J Cancer 1997;76:788.
72. Von Roenn JH, Knopf K. Anorexia/cachexia in patients with HIV: lessons for the oncologist. Oncology 1996;10:1049.
73. Vansteenkiste JF, Simons JP, Wouters EF, Demedts MG. Hormonal treatment in advanced non-small cell lung cancer: fact or fiction? Eur Respir J 1996;9:1707.
74. Strang P. The effect of megestrol acetate on anorexia, weight loss and cachexia in cancer and AIDS patients. Anticancer Res 1997;17:657.
75. Vadell C, Segui MA, Gimenez-Arnau JM, et al. Anticachectic efficacy of megestrol acetate at different doses and versus placebo in patients with neoplastic cachexia. Am J Clin Oncol
1998;21:347.
76. Bruera E, Ernst S, Hagen N, et al. Effectiveness of megestrol acetate in patients with advanced cancer: a randomized, double-blind, crossover study. Cancer Prev Control 1998;2:74.
77. De Conno F, Martini C, Zecca E, et al. Megestrol acetate for anorexia in patients with far-advanced cancer: a double-blind controlled clinical trial. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:1705.
78. Kurebayashi J, Yamamoto S, Otsuki T, Sonoo H. Medroxyprogesterone acetate inhibits IL-6 secretion from KPL-4 human breast cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo: a possible mechanism of
the anticachectic effect. Br J Cancer 1999;79:631.
79. Mantovani G, Maccio A, Esu S, et al. Medroxyprogesterone acetate reduces the invitro production of cytokines and serotonin involved in anorexia/cachexia and emesis by peripheral blood
mononuclear cells of cancer patients. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:602.
80. Simons JP, Schols AM, Hoefnagels JM, et al. Effects of medroxyprogesterone acetate on food intake, body composition, and resting energy expenditure in patients with advanced,
non-hormone sensitive cancer: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Cancer 1998;82:553.
81. Tisdale MJ. Biology of cachexia. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1763.
82. Ohira T, Nishio K, Ohe Y, et al. Improvement by eicosanoids in cancer cachexia induced by LLC-IL6 transplantation. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1996;122:711.
83. McMillan DC, O'Gorman P, Fearon KC, McArdle CS. A pilot study of megestrol acetate and ibuprofen in the treatment of cachexia in gastrointestinal cancer patients. Br J Cancer 1997;76:788.
84. Lissoni P, Paolorossi F, Tancini G, et al. Is there a role for melatonin in the treatment of neoplastic cachexia? Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:1340.
85. Gagnon B, Bruera E. A review of drug treatment of cachexia associated with cancer. Drugs 1998;55:675.
86. Baron PL, Lawrence W, Chan WM, et al. Effects of parenteral nutrition on cell cycle kinetics of head and neck cancer. Arch Surg 1986;121:1282.
87. Shukla HS, Rao RR, Banu N, et al. Enteral hyperalimentation in malnourished surgical patients. Indian J Med Res 1984;80:339.
88. Smith RC, Hartemink RJ, Holinshead JW, et al. Fine bore jejunostomy feeding following major abdominal surgery: a controlled randomized clinical trial. Br J Surg 1985;72:458.
89. von Meyenfeldt MF, Meyerink WJ, Soeters PB, et al. Perioperative nutritional support results in a reduction of major postoperative complications especially in high risk patients.
Gastroenterology 1991;100:A553(abst).
90. Douglass HO, Milliron S, Nava H, et al. Elemental diet as an adjuvant for patients with locally advanced gastrointestinal cancer receiving radiation therapy: a prospectively randomized study.
JPEN 1978;2:682.
91. Brown MS, Buchanan RB, Karran SJ. Clinical observations on the effects of elemental diet supplementation during irradiation. Clin Radiol 1980;31:19.
92. Bounous G, LeBel E, Shuster J, et al. Dietary protection during radiation therapy. Strahlentherapie 1975;149:476.
93. Daly JM, Hearne B, Dunaj J, et al. Nutritional rehabilitation in patients with advanced head and neck cancer receiving radiation therapy. Am J Surg 1984;148:514.
94. Moloney M, Moriarty M, Daly L. Controlled studies of nutritional intake in patients with malignant disease undergoing treatment. Hum Nutr Appl Nutr 1983;37A:30.
95. Elkort RJ, Baker FL, Vitale JJ, et al. Long-term nutritional support as an adjunct to chemotherapy for breast cancer. JPEN 1981;5:385.
96. Evans WK, Nixon DW, Dlay JM, et al. A randomized study of oral nutritional support versus ad lib nutritional intake during chemotherapy for advanced colorectal and non-small cell lung cancer.
J Clin Oncol 1987;5:113.
97. Tandon SP, Gupta SC, Sinha SN, et al. Nutritional support as an adjunct therapy of advanced cancer patients. Indian J Med Res 1984;80:180.
98. Bounous G, Gentile JM, Hugon J. Elemental diet in the management of the intestinal lesion produced by 5-fluorouracil in man. Can J Surg 1971;14:312.
99. Holter AR, Fischer JE. The effects of perioperative hyper-alimentation complications in patients with carcinoma and weight loss. J Surg Res 1977;23:31.
100. Heatley RV, Williams RH, Lewis MH. Pre-operative intravenous feeding: a controlled trial. Postgrad Med J 1979;55:541.
101. Yamada N, Koyama H, Hioki K, et al. Effect of postoperative total parenteral nutrition (TPN) as an adjunct to gastrectomy for advanced gastric carcinoma. Br J Surg 1983;70:267.
102. Askanazi J, Hensle TW, Starker PM, et al. Effect of immediate postoperative nutritional support on length of hospitalization. Ann Surg 1986;203:236.
103. Müller JM, Keller HW, Brenner U, et al. Indications and effects of preoperative parenteral nutrition. World J Surg 1986;10:53.
104. Bellantone R, Doglietto GB, Bossola M, et al. Preoperative parenteral nutrition in the high risk surgical patient. JPEN 1988;12:195.
105. Bellantone R, Doglietto G, Bossola M, et al. Preoperative parenteral nutrition of malnourished surgical patients. Acta Chir Scand 1988;154:249.
106. Woolfson AM, Smith JA. Elective nutritional support after major surgery: a prospective randomized trial. Clin Nutr 1989;8:15.
107. Buzby GP. The Veterans Affairs Total Parenteral Nutrition Cooperative Study Group. Perioperative total parenteral nutrition in surgical patients. N Engl J Med 1991;325:525.
108. Sandstrom R, Drott C, Hyltander A, et al. The effect of postoperative intravenous feeding (TPN) on outcome following major surgery evaluated in a randomized study. Ann Surg 1993;217:185.
109. Sciafani LM, Shike M, Quesada E, et al. A randomized prospective trial of TPN following major pancreatic resection or radioactive implant for pancreatic cancer. Presented at the Society of
Surgical Oncology, March 1991, Orlando, FL.
110. Solassol C, Joyeux J, Dubois JB. Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) with complete nutritive mixtures: an artificial gut in cancer patients. Nutr Cancer 1979;1:13.
111. Kinsella TJ, Malcolm AW, Bothe A, et al. Prospective study of nutritional support during pelvic irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1981;7:543.
112. Ghavimi F, Shils ME, Scott BF, et al. Comparison of morbidity in children requiring abdominal radiation and chemotherapy, with and without total parenteral nutrition. J Pediatr 1982;101:530.
113. Donaldson SS, Wesley MN, Ghavimi F, et al. A prospective randomized clinical trial of total parenteral nutrition in children with cancer. Med Pediatr Oncol 1982;10:129.
114. Nixon DW, Moffitt S, Lawson DH, et al. Total parenteral nutrition as an adjunct to chemotherapy of metastatic colorectal cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65(Suppl 5):121.
115. Nixon DW, Heymsfield SB, Lawson DH, et al. Effect of total parenteral nutrition on survival in advanced colon cancer. Cancer Detect Prev 1981;4:421.
116. Samuels ML, Selig DE, Ogden S, et al. IV hyperalimentation and chemotherapy for stage II testicular cancer: a randomized study. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:615.
117. Shamberger RC, Brennan MF, Goodgame JT, et al. A prospective, randomized study of adjuvant parenteral nutrition in the treatment of sarcoma: results of metabolic and survival studies.
Surgery 1984;96:1.
118. Shamberger RC, Pizzo PA, Goodgame JT, et al. The effect of total parenteral nutrition on chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression. Am J Med 1983;74:40.
119. Valdivieso M, Frankmann C, Murphy WK, et al. Long-term effects of intravenous hyperalimentation administered during intensive chemotherapy for small cell bronchogenic carcinoma. Cancer
1987;59:362.
120. Valdivieso M, Bodey GP, Benjamin RS, et al. Role of intravenous hyperalimentation as an adjunct to intensive chemotherapy for small cell bronchogenic carcinoma. Cancer Treat Rep
1981;65(Suppl 5):145.
121. Clamon GH, Feld R, Evans WK, et al. Effect of adjuvant central IV hyperalimentation on the survival and response to treatment of patients with small cell lung cancer: a randomized trial.
Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:167.
122. Issell BF, Valdivieso MD, Zaren HA, et al. Protection against chemotherapy toxicity by IV hyperalimentation. Cancer Treat Rep 1978;62:1139.
123. Jordan WM, Valdivieso M, Frankman C, et al. Treatment of advanced adenocarcinoma of the lung with ftorafur, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and cisplatin (FACP) and intensive IV
hyperalimentation. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65:197.
124. Brennan MF, Pisters PWT, Posner M, et al. A prospective randomized trial of total parenteral nutrition after major pancreatic resection for malignancy. Ann Surg 1994;220:436.
125. Fan ST, Lo CM, Lai ECS, et al. Perioperative nutritional support in patients undergoing hepatectomy for hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1547.
126. Wilmore DW, Byrne TA, Young LS, et al. A new treatment for patients with the short bowel syndrome: growth hormone, glutamine, and a modified diet. Ann Surg 1995;222:243.
127. Ziegler TR, Young LS, Benfell K, et al. Glutamine-supplemented parenteral nutrition improves nitrogen retention and reduces hospital mortality versus standard parenteral nutrition following
bone marrow transplantation: a randomized, double-blind trial. Ann Intern Med 1992;116:821.
128. van der Hulst RRWJ, van Kreel BK, von Meyenfeldt MF, et al. Glutamine and the preservation of gut integrity. Lancet 1993;341:1363.
129. Nelson J. The impact of health care reform on nutrition supportthe practitioner's perspective. Nutr Clin Pract 1995;4:1.
130. Buzby GP. Overview of randomized clinical trials of total parenteral nutrition for malnourished surgical patients. World J Surg 1993;17:173.
131. Foschi D, Cavagna G, Callioni F, et al. Hyperalimentation of jaundiced patients on percutaneous biliary drainage. Br J Surg 1986;73:716.

SECTION 56.3 Sexual Problems
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 56.3
Sexual Problems
PATRICIA A. GANZ
MARK S. LITWIN
BETH E. MEYEROWITZ
Introduction
Sexual Health and Physiology
Human Sexual Response Cycle
Sexual Dysfunctions and Problems
Sexual Problems and Their Prevalence Among the General Population
Prevalence of Sexual Dysfunctions and Problems
Sexuality and Aging
Menopause and Sexual Functioning
Erectile Dysfunction in Healthy Aging Men
Impact of Cancer and its Treatment on Sexual Health
Psychological Distress
Body Image Changes
Deteriorating Physical Function, Fatigue, and Pain
Partner Relationships
Specific Treatments
Concerns About Fertility
Sexual Problems Associated with Specific Cancers
Breast Cancer
Prostate Cancer
Testis Cancer
Bladder Cancer
Gynecologic Cancers
Hodgkin's Disease
Colorectal Cancer
Strategies for Assessment and Intervention
Assessment
Counseling, Intervention, and Referral
Medical Interventions for Women
Medical and Surgical Interventions for Men
Conclusions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
To understand the impact of a cancer diagnosis and its treatment on sexual health and functioning, it is useful to have some knowledge about what is “normal,” as
well as the range of sexual problems that occur in the general population not affected by cancer. This background is essential for understanding the unique
contribution that cancer and its treatments play in exacerbating what are often premorbid sexual difficulties. Table 56.3-1 describes a broad range of factors that
influence sexual functioning before a cancer diagnosis (e.g., age, gender, anxiety, chronic disease), and these preexisting factors strongly influence sexual
functioning after a cancer diagnosis. Other naturally occurring events that may coincide with cancer are age-related changes in sexual functioning, such as erectile
dysfunction in men and menopause-related changes in women. Cancer treatments, however, cause unique side effects not usually experienced in other patient
populations (e.g., body image changes, infertility, fatigue, and pain). Sexual problems can also be exacerbated by the uncertain prognosis associated with a cancer
diagnosis. In this chapter, we provide some background about normal sexual health and functioning to provide a context for the changes associated with a cancer
diagnosis. We then discuss general changes in sexuality associated with cancer, as well as treatment and site-specific changes.

TABLE 56.3-1. Factors Affecting Sexual Functioning before and after a Cancer Diagnosis

TABLE 56.3-2. Human Sexual Response Cycle

SEXUAL HEALTH AND PHYSIOLOGY
HUMAN SEXUAL RESPONSE CYCLE
The human sexual response cycle (HSRC), as detailed by Masters and Johnson, 1 involves the physiologic changes that occur when individuals receive adequate

sexual stimulation. The HSRC consists of four, somewhat arbitrary, phases— excitement, plateau, orgasm, and resolution. In Table 56.3-2 we have listed some of the
key responses in each phase, with a focus on those that might be affected by cancer and its treatments. The disease and treatment can disrupt the response cycle
entirely or can lead to changes in sensation and experience during the response cycle. The response cycle is similar for women and men, with parallel processes for
homologous tissues.
Although Masters and Johnson's research advanced our knowledge of the psychophysiology of human sexual response, the four-phase model of the HSRC has been
criticized on both conceptual and methodologic grounds. 2,3 In a triphasic model of human sexuality, Kaplan 4 addressed two of the primary concerns—the
characterization of the phases of sexual responding as sequential and interdependent and the inattention to motivational aspects of sexuality. The triphasic model is
characterized by separate desire, excitement, and orgasm phases. Kaplan proposed that these are discrete phases controlled by distinct neurophysiologic
mechanisms. Thus, she suggests that different etiologic factors and treatment approaches should be considered, depending on the phase in which difficulties occur. 5
However, the extent to which responses in each of these phases is mediated through different pathways has not been documented empirically. 2 The fact that
individuals often report dysfunction in more than one phase argues against assuming unrelated etiologies. 6
SEXUAL DYSFUNCTIONS AND PROBLEMS
The nomenclature for diagnosing sexual dysfunctions 7 uses the triphasic model of sexuality—involving disturbances in desire, excitement, or orgasm—or by pain
associated with sexual intercourse. For patients to be diagnosed with a sexual dysfunction, their disturbance or pain must cause marked distress or interpersonal
difficulties, must be persistent or recurrent, and cannot be due to another psychiatric disorder (such as mood or personality disorders). The diagnosis also includes
reference to etiologic factors. If the dysfunction is due exclusively to one set of factors (psychological causes, general medical conditions, or substance use), the
diagnosis so indicates. In the case of many cancer patients, sexual dysfunctions may be diagnosed as “due to combined factors,” indicating a more complex etiology
in which multiple causes contribute to the dysfunction. Table 56.3-3 provides a list of the diagnostic categories given in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fourth Edition.7

TABLE 56.3-3. Diagnostic Categories for Sexual Dysfunctions

In addition to these diagnosable disorders, many patients experience disruptions that are less intense in nature but that, nonetheless, cause decreases in previously
enjoyable sexual activities and reduce global satisfaction with sexuality. The subjective experience that one has a satisfying sex life may or may not be associated
with the ability to progress through the phases of the HSRC. Some individuals with no diagnosable dysfunction can be dissatisfied with factors such as the frequency
or variety of sexual behavior, whereas some individuals with organically based dysfunctions can enjoy other forms of sexual and intimate contact. Also, as indicated in
Table 56.3-1, cancer can have an indirect influence on sexuality through disruptions in partnership factors, body image, and overall psychological well-being.

SEXUAL PROBLEMS AND THEIR PREVALENCE AMONG THE GENERAL POPULATION
PREVALENCE OF SEXUAL DYSFUNCTIONS AND PROBLEMS
Sexual problems are common, even among community samples of happily married couples.8,9 In a large and extensive national survey of sexuality of 18 to 59 year
olds in the United States, 43% of women and 31% of men reported dysfunction in one of the diagnostic categories during the previous year. 10 Among men, premature
ejaculation was the most common complaint (28.5%), followed by anxiety about performance (17.0%), lack of interest in sex (15.8%), and inability to keep an erection
(10.4%).8 Women most frequently reported lack of interest in sex (33.4%), inability to reach orgasm (24.1%), not finding sex pleasurable (21.2%), difficulty becoming
lubricated (18.8%), and pain during intercourse (14.4%). Individuals who experienced emotional or stress-related problems or who were victims of adult-child sexual
contact were significantly more likely to report sexual dysfunction. Other predictors varied somewhat between men and women, with poor health being particularly
salient for men and falling household income and low sexual activity being important for women. Despite these difficulties, most respondents indicated that sex was
emotionally satisfying and was associated with very positive feelings.
Although specific prevalence rates vary somewhat in other studies, 11,12,13,14,15,16 and 17 depending on study sample and methodology, the general conclusions are
similar. Sexual dysfunction is a common experience, with most individuals experiencing difficulty at some points in their lives. However, sexual dysfunction need not
result in dissatisfaction with sexuality or loss of intimacy. Sexuality after cancer should be viewed within this larger context.
SEXUALITY AND AGING
Normal aging is associated with decreases in both physiologic functioning and behavioral aspects of sexuality. With regard to the phases of the HSRC, response
slows and decreases in intensity with age for both men and women. 1 For example, vasocongestion during arousal occurs more slowly, extending the time required for
penile erection and vaginal lubrication. More intense and direct tactile stimulation typically is required for arousal and orgasm than is needed in younger men and
women. As most men age, erections are less rigid, ejaculation is less forceful, and the refractory period lasts longer (often for many hours). In addition to the anatomic
changes associated with menopause, women experience decreased lubrication and, in some cases, reduced intensity of orgasm. Chronic medical conditions and
general ill-health can exacerbate the natural slowing of sexual response. 18
The prevalence of some diagnosable sexual disorders varies with age, although little research has been done on very old populations to provide specific information.
Sexual desire and the frequency of sexual thoughts appear to decline with age, particularly for men, although sexual interest does remain present. 2,10,19,20
Researchers consistently have found that erectile functioning also worsens with age, with increases in dysfunction beginning in middle age and increasing gradually
over the rest of the lifespan. 10,21,22 For example, the Massachusetts Male Aging Study 22 demonstrated that rates of complete erectile dysfunction triple from 5% to 15%
between the ages of 40 and 70. For women, the prevalence of arousal disorders, as indicated by difficulty lubricating, increases with age. 2,10 Findings regarding the
rates of other disorders in women are inconsistent, with different studies reporting that problems can increase, decrease, or remain stable. 10,14,15,18,21
Sexual activity decreases with age for both women and men.8,14,15,21,23 In some cases, this decrease results from the absence of a partner, coupled with an
unwillingness to engage in self-pleasuring activities, especially among very old women. 10,13,23 Even among older married couples, rates of intercourse decrease. 8,21
Nonetheless, many older individuals do consider sex an important part of their lives and have satisfying sex lives. 8,24 Age alone should not be viewed as an adequate
explanation for serious sexual dysfunction or inactivity among interested older adults.
MENOPAUSE AND SEXUAL FUNCTIONING
Menopause is clinically diagnosed when a previously menstruating woman with an intact uterus has amenorrhea for at least 12 months. The average age of
menopause in North American women is 51 years.25 Secondary forms of amenorrhea may be related to endocrine disorders or conditions such as anorexia nervosa;
however, cancer treatment–induced secondary amenorrhea is the most relevant for our purposes. Hysterectomy can complicate the evaluation of woman's

menopausal status, because menstrual bleeding can no longer be used to classify her status. If a woman's ovaries are removed as a result of surgery, she
experiences a surgically induced menopause.
The menopausal transition is characterized by a decreased responsiveness of the ovaries to luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone. Gradually, over
time, the estradiol levels fall as the ovarian follicles are depleted and there is no further response to the pituitary gonadotropins luteinizing hormone and
follicle-stimulating hormone. It is with these changes that the clinical symptoms of estrogen deficiency begin to occur. Lowered levels of estradiol affect various target
tissues, including the vagina, skin, bone, vascular endothelium, and smooth muscle, as well as the hypothalamic temperature-regulating centers. 26 The ovaries are
the primary source of androgens in women, even into postmenopause, and decreased production of ovarian androgens may account for changes in libido during this
time. Many women who become menopausal experience symptoms associated with estrogen deficiency, including vasomotor symptoms (hot flashes, sweats,
palpitations), urinary incontinence, and vaginal dryness. Vasomotor symptoms are most frequent (up to 75% of menopausal women experience these at some point)
and are among the earliest symptoms of menopause, with urinary incontinence and vaginal dryness increasing slowly during the later postmenopausal years. 26
The impact of menopause on sexual health is controversial, because many women remain sexually active into old age. Several population-based studies of
perimenopausal and menopausal women have documented that most women who have partners are sexually active 13; however, changes can occur in sexual
functioning (desire, arousal, orgasm) that are age related 23,27 and to which menopause may contribute. The relation between menopause, sex steroids, and sexual
motivation (“libido”) remain controversial. 26 Research suggests that, in postmenopausal women, a variety of factors are potential moderators of the components of
sexual functioning (e.g., psychological distress, quality of the partner relationship, physical activity, body mass index). 13 Without sufficient levels of endogenous
estrogen, the vaginal epithelium may become atrophic, leading to clinical symptoms of vaginal dryness and dyspareunia. With chronic or untreated symptoms of
vaginal dryness, postmenopausal women may choose to avoid sexual intercourse completely. However, this may not preclude other forms of sexual activity. In a
volunteer sample of healthy postmenopausal women who were not on hormone replacement therapy, vaginal dryness was reported by 37% of women 45 to 64 years
of age.13 Hormone replacement therapy is effective in managing menopausal symptoms, such as hot flashes and vaginal dryness, but does not appear to improve
sexual functioning. 28,29
Premature menopause and vaginal dryness that cannot be treated with estrogen after cancer can contribute to dyspareunia, thus affecting both desire and arousal in
women with cancer (see Chemotherapy, later in this chapter). If one adds to this the variety of physical, psychosocial, and treatment-related factors associated with
cancer treatment, a menopausal woman may certainly experience sexual dysfunction. Nevertheless, the menopause per se may not be the culprit.
ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION IN HEALTHY AGING MEN
Erectile function may be impaired by a number of conditions, both physical and psychological, and it declines with advancing age. As healthy men age, androgen
levels begin to decline. Although these changes do not occur as precipitously as in menopause, a steady, age-related diminution is noted in most men. This can result
in declining libido, which in turn tends to decrease erectile function. A notable variation in this pattern exists, and it is not uncommon for men to remain libidinous and
potent well into advanced years. Peripheral circulatory problems and degenerative neuromuscular conditions also become more common, both increasing the
incidence of vasculogenic and neurogenic erectile dysfunction (see Table 56.3-1).30

IMPACT OF CANCER AND ITS TREATMENT ON SEXUAL HEALTH
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTRESS
Symptoms of anxiety or depression are frequent, and often appropriate, among cancer patients. 31,32 and 33 Psychological distress affects sexual functioning in healthy
individuals, and this can be an important problem for patients with cancer. The literature suggests that patients with higher levels of psychological distress experience
more sexual dysfunction. 31,32,33,34 and 35 For example, in a study of 227 newly diagnosed breast cancer patients, Schag et al. 31 found that patients who were classified
by a social worker at 1 month after surgery as being “at-risk” for psychosocial distress were found to have more sexual difficulties than a comparison “low-risk” group,
both at 1 month after surgery and 1 year later. Sexual problems that were increased included not being interested in having sex, difficulty in being sexually aroused,
and difficulty reaching orgasm. 31 In a comprehensive follow-up study of advanced Hodgkin's disease and acute leukemia survivors, Kornblith et al. 33 found higher
levels of distress in the Hodgkin's disease survivors, which was associated with significantly poorer sexual functioning than in the acute leukemia survivors. In a study
of patients with early-stage cervical cancer, psychological as well as physical problems were highly correlated with sexual outcome. 34 In a study of long-term survivors
of acute leukemia, no difference was found in psychosexual outcomes for patients treated with bone marrow transplantation compared to conventional therapy;
however, those survivors who reported decreased sexual frequency and satisfaction and poorer body image were more likely to demonstrate greater psychological
distress and decreased energy. 44 Thus, psychological distress, often manifested as increased symptoms of anxiety or depression, is an important variable that
influences sexual outcomes, both acutely and chronically, in cancer patients.
BODY IMAGE CHANGES
One prominent cause of distress among cancer patients is change in body image. The changes associated with cancer and its treatment are often dramatic, ranging
from surgical defects and deformities (e.g., limb amputation, loss of a breast, radical neck dissection) to total body alopecia from chemotherapy (e.g., loss of scalp
hair, eyebrows, eyelashes, pubic and axillary hair) to more subtle changes (e.g., weight loss secondary to disease or treatment, weight gain from corticosteroids). All
of these alterations can influence the patient's sense of sexual attractiveness and self-esteem. 36
For women with breast cancer, the major advantage of breast-conserving surgery is the preservation of body image. 37,38,39 and 40 Patients with head and neck cancer
often experience a range of physical and psychosocial problems related to disfiguring surgery, with consequent effects on sexual functioning. 41 Patients with
colorectal cancer and stomas experience more body image problems than nonstoma patients and have poorer sexual functioning. 42 Thus, contemporary treatments
that set organ preservation as a goal or provide immediate reconstructive surgery may well spare cancer patients the added burden of poorer body image. In one
study, more favorable body image was a significant predictor of sexual interest in breast cancer survivors. 43 Nevertheless, the complexity of contemporary combined
modality treatment (surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy) aimed at organ preservation may also contribute to poorer body image through weight loss and hair
loss, which may have a temporary or long-term adverse effect on body image. 35,44,45 In a study of long-term survivors of Hodgkin's disease (median time since
treatment, 9 years), Fobair et al. 45 found that 26% of these survivors felt that their physical attractiveness had decreased, which was attributed to the diagnosis or
treatment of the disease. More research is needed to determine the mechanisms through which body image disruption affects sexual functioning.
For some patients, weight gain is an important consequence of treatment that can interfere with body image. This effect has been particularly noted for women
receiving adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. 46,47,48 and 49 Goodwin et al.49 followed an inception cohort of 535 women with newly diagnosed locoregional breast
cancer and performed anthropometric measurements at baseline and 1 year later. Mean weight gain overall was 1.6 kg, with an average 2.5 kg gain in women
receiving chemotherapy, 1.3 kg in those receiving tamoxifen, and 0.6 kg in those receiving no adjuvant treatment. In a multivariate analysis, onset of menopause and
chemotherapy administration were each independent predictors of weight gain. Weight gain was not explained by increased caloric intake or decreased physical
activity.49 Thus, in addition to the effects of chemotherapy on energy, nausea, vomiting, and alopecia, weight gain must be added to the list, potentially decreasing
self-esteem and sexual attractiveness.
DETERIORATING PHYSICAL FUNCTION, FATIGUE, AND PAIN
Declining physical functioning and the symptoms of fatigue and pain negatively influence sexual functioning. In a cross-sectional evaluation of 779 patients with
colorectal, lung, and prostate cancers at all phases of disease (i.e., no evidence of disease, localized, and metastatic), sexual functioning was poorest for patients
with advanced metastatic disease, who concomitantly experienced more frequent and severe physical problems associated with the cancer. 50 This finding was most
significant for the patients with colorectal and lung cancer, whereas sexual problems were important for prostate cancer patients independent of stage and physical
symptoms, likely due to the local effects of treatment on sexual functioning for all stages of the disease. 50
Fatigue has begun to emerge as an important symptomatic problem for cancer patients and survivors. 51,52 and 53 Although this may be the result of clinical problems,
such as anemia, which can be managed medically with transfusions or growth factors, chronic fatigue after cancer treatment may be multifactorial and represent late
effects of chemotherapy and radiation, as well as be manifestations of both pain and depression. Fatigue has been most dramatically noted in patients treated for
Hodgkin's disease, 45,53 in which the impact of fatigue on quality of life is multifaceted but includes sexual dysfunction as well. Treatment of the underlying causes of

the fatigue, whether medically or psychologically, may have important benefits in terms of psychological functioning.
Other studies have begun to examine fatigue in breast cancer survivors. 51,52,54 In an analysis reported by Bower et al. 54 in almost 2000 breast cancer survivors, the
strongest predictors of fatigue were pain and depression—both treatable problems. In that study sample, fatigue was significantly correlated with poorer sexual
functioning (r = –0.265, P = .0001); when fatigue scores were used to classify the patients as either high or low energy, a significant difference was found in sexual
functioning scores (P = .0001).55 Interestingly, specific treatments (chemotherapy, radiation, tamoxifen) were not significantly associated with fatigue in the predictive
model.54
Similarly, uncontrolled pain can be an important contributor to sexual dysfunction in cancer patients and survivors. Uncontrolled pain is associated with psychological
distress, poor appetite, and lack of sleep, all of which can decrease sexual interest. Surprisingly, little empiric research has been conducted in this area. However,
one study demonstrated the association of pain with decreased sexual functioning after high dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow support. 56 Another
study that examined breast cancer patients with upper extremity lymphedema found that the presence of associated pain predicted psychological distress, but it did
not independently predict sexual dysfunction. 57
PARTNER RELATIONSHIPS
The literature suggests that the presence of a partner plays an important role in the maintenance of an active sex life for both men and women. 8,10,13,23 Problems in the
marital relationship after cancer most often reflect preexisting stresses and strains, such that marital dissolution as a result of cancer is probably less common than
once thought.58 Often, cancer patients cite improvement in their love relationships rather than deterioration. 59 In a study of prostate cancer survivors compared with
aged matched health controls, marital function did not differ between treatment groups and controls. 60
The presence of a spouse or partner is invaluable for patients facing the possibility of sexual dysfunction from cancer or its treatments. Not only can spouses provide
much needed emotional support, but they may also contribute to the clinical decision-making process. Physicians must be aware that the spouse often does not agree
with the patient when assessing the relative value of sexual function versus survival. In fact, studies comparing husbands and wives suggest that the latter are much
more willing to give up sexual function for a chance at longer survival. 61,62 Ultimately, the right choice of treatment must emanate from the patients themselves, but
involvement of spouses can facilitate this process.
In addressing the partner relationship, it is also important never to assume that the patient is heterosexual, especially when the patient is alone for tests,
consultations, and follow-up visits. The astute clinician should probe in a nonjudgmental way about the patient's partnership status and ensure that a same-gender
partner is included, as appropriate, in medical decision making. Gay and lesbian couples enjoy long-term relationships that are emotionally equivalent to heterosexual
marriage, yet given the degree of societal homophobia, they may fear being honest, even with their physicians. A few words of candid support may go a long way in
allowing patients to feel better about involving their same-gender partner.
The literature does suggest that survivors of childhood and adolescent cancers are at increased risk for marital difficulties. In a large study of long-term survivors of
childhood cancers compared with sibling controls, Byrne and colleagues 63 noted that both male and female survivors were less likely to marry than sibling controls
and that the marriage deficit was particularly pronounced for survivors of brain and central nervous system tumors. In addition, the average length of first marriages
was shorter for survivors than controls. 63 Men who had survived central nervous system tumors before the age of 10 years and male survivors of retinoblastoma had
substantially higher divorce rates than controls (relative risk, 2.9 and 1.9, respectively). As noted by this study's authors, the treatment intensity for the patients
studied in this cohort was much less intense than contemporary therapies, thus making altered marriage practices an important concern among adult survivors of
pediatric brain tumors. 63 These findings have largely been confirmed in a preliminary report from a successor cohort study, the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study, in
which rates of marriage have been compared to U.S. population census data and are found to be reduced. 64 Survivors were less likely to have married, particularly
women and whites, but once married, they were less likely to divorce or separate. As in the study of Byrne et al., 63 pediatric brain tumor survivors, particularly men,
were less likely to have married and more likely to divorce or separate compared to those with other cancer diagnoses and the general population. 64 Other
single-institution, detailed investigations of childhood survivors support these findings, 65 with the observation that many former patients indicate their diagnosis and
treatment for childhood cancer influenced their own personal decision to have children and that this decision may play a role in the marital relationship. These findings
may have important long-term implications for the sexual functioning of these long-term survivors, warranting more detailed inquiry.
SPECIFIC TREATMENTS
Surgery in General and Pelvic Surgery
Surgical treatment usually involves hospitalization, general or local anesthetic, and exploration of body cavities (thoracic, abdominal, pelvic), with adjacent organ
dysfunction and the need to recover from the treatment insult. Postoperative pain and fatigue are important factors that limit recovery of sexual functioning for several
weeks after surgery. Surgical treatments with the most significant impact on sexual functioning are those involving the pelvis, such as radical prostatectomy, radical
cystectomy, abdominal-perineal resection for rectal cancer, and radical hysterectomy for gynecologic cancers. When radiation is added to surgical treatments,
additional nerve and tissue injury may occur, with fibrosis and occasional pelvic pain syndromes. Changes in body image may occur as a result of surgery, especially
when it is disfiguring and visible to others, but even hidden body scars may present a difficulty for some patients.
In men, pelvic surgery for prostate, bladder, or rectal cancer can easily damage the parasympathetic sacral fibers that are responsible for penile erection. These
nerves course posterolateral to the prostate and anterolateral to the rectum and are intimately associated with both structures, especially at the apex of the prostate
just anterior to the rectal wall. Although techniques have been developed for identification and preservation of these neurovascular bundles during radical
prostatectomy,66 such preservation is much more difficult during abdominal-perineal resection of the rectum. 67,68 These nerves do not need to be cut to disrupt their
function. The mere trauma of dissection to separate them from the prostate or rectum may also lead to their permanent failure. The effect is immediate, and neuronal
recovery is slow, often lasting months or years. Pelvic surgery for bladder or rectal cancer may also result in female sexual dysfunction, largely due to scarring,
shortening, and stenosis of the vagina. 69,70 Despite initial dyspareunia, many women who are treated for bladder cancer with surgery and radiation ultimately do enjoy
a return of sexual function. 71
Retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy in men with testis cancer does not interfere with erections, but it may cause retrograde ejaculation. The primary landing site for
lymphatic spread from the testes is located in the interaortocaval region for right-sided tumors and in the paraaortic region for left-sided tumors. From here, metastatic
deposits can extend cephalad or caudad alongside the great vessels. Intertwined with these lymphatic channels are the lumbar sympathetic fibers that are responsible
for normal antegrade ejaculation. If these are damaged during surgery, patients may experience a failure of both seminal emission and bladder neck closure. This in
turn results in retrograde ejaculation. Although the patient is able to enjoy the pleasure of orgasm, it is dry and fluidless. Techniques to preserve these nerve fibers by
using template dissections have been popularized and are largely successful at maintaining antegrade ejaculation in most men undergoing retroperitoneal
lymphadenectomy.72,73,74 and 75
The effects of pelvic and genital surgery on sexual response in men and women vary depending on the organs involved and are summarized in Table 56.3-4 and
Table 56.3-5. Schover and Fife 76 provide an excellent overview of the components of the sexual response that are affected by these various surgical procedures. The
amount of dysfunction depends on the extent of injury to the sacral plexus (especially for erectile functioning in men), and for women, vaginal lubrication may be
strongly influenced by oophorectomy and the loss of estrogen, as well as the prohibition against estrogen replacement therapy. Dry orgasms occur in men after
radical prostatectomy and radical cystectomy through surgical removal of the prostate and seminal vesicles. For women, vaginal shortening and anatomic changes
that result from several of the surgical procedures leads to dyspareunia and the need to use lubricants and vaginal dilators.

TABLE 56.3-4. Effects of Surgery for Pelvic or Genital Cancer on Male Sexual Physiology

TABLE 56.3-5. Effects of Surgery for Pelvic or Genital Cancer on Female Sexual Physiology

The goals of contemporary multimodal therapies for cancer have focused on limiting the extent of surgery, with the addition of chemotherapy and radiation to control
local and distant disease. Excellent examples of this trend are primary radiation therapy for prostate cancer, bladder-conserving surgery with radiation and
chemotherapy, and sphincter preservation treatment of anal and rectal cancer. These approaches still have associated sexual dysfunctions, but the time course and
specific problems may differ from surgery alone. In addition, patients may have to deal with the morbidity of the additional therapies. Other procedures, such as
bladder replacement with a continent reservoir, may avoid the embarrassment of external stomas and appliances, but this may not necessarily have a positive impact
on sexual functioning. 77
Chemotherapy
The effects of systemic chemotherapy on sexual functioning can be conceptualized as acute and chronic, with somewhat different risks for men and women. Acutely,
and dependent on the type of chemotherapeutic agent, many patients experience nausea, vomiting, fatigue, hair loss, and mucositis. All of these factors contribute to
a decrease in well-being and less interest in sexual activity. Women may experience vaginal and perineal mucositis from some agents, with some data suggesting
decreased vaginal lubrication as a late effect of chemotherapy. 78,79 Loss of body hair decreases sexual attractiveness for most individuals, and extra effort may be
required to maintain this aspect of sexuality. All of these effects are intensified in those receiving high-dose chemotherapy regimens. 80 Protracted fatigue may be a
significant contributor to sexual dysfunction in bone marrow transplantation survivors. 56
For women, one of the most dramatic consequences of chemotherapy treatment is the cessation of menses and the onset of menopause, with the consequent loss of
fertility. This effect also has been reviewed for breast cancer treatments. 81,82 In a prospective study of a cohort of 183 early-stage breast cancer patients receiving no
adjuvant therapy, either chemotherapy or tamoxifen adjuvant therapy, or both chemotherapy and tamoxifen, 83 age and systemic chemotherapy (in this case
cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, or epirubicin, plus 5-fluorouracil) were the strongest predictors of menopause in women with locoregional disease, with tamoxifen
making a small contribution ( Fig. 56.3-1). As Figure 56.3-1 demonstrates, the probability of menopause with chemotherapy begins to rise at approximately 35 years of
age, with more than 40% of women at age 40 predicted to become amenorrheic. The closer a woman was to the age of natural menopause (age 51), the greater her
risk of amenorrhea. 83 Because this study only followed women for 1 year after treatment, however, some small proportion of women may have resumed menses after
that time. Because some evidence suggests that amenorrhea may be beneficial in preventing breast cancer recurrence, it may be an acceptable consequence of
treatment for some women. Nevertheless, the effects of menopause on sexual functioning, especially vaginal dryness, may contribute to sexual dysfunction in breast
cancer survivors. 43

FIGURE 56.3-1. Probability of menopause during the first year after the diagnosis and adjuvant treatment of breast cancer. Horm, hormone; Chem, chemotherapy.
(From ref. 90, with permission.)

Preservation of fertility is very important for younger patients treated for leukemia, testicular cancer, lymphoma, and Hodgkin's disease. Although current regimens for
Hodgkin's disease that avoid alkylating agent therapy [e.g., Adriamycin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine (ABVD)] may spare ovarian and testicular function in
terms of fertility and premature menopause, their value in preservation of sexual functioning may be more limited. 84 In Kornblith et al.'s study 84 examining the late
effects of ABVD in comparison to Mustargen, Oncovin, procarbazine, and prednisone (MOPP) or MOPP/ABVD, no difference was found in sexual functioning by
treatment arm. However, the small sample size of this study (93 disease-free survivors) across three treatment arm comparisons may have made it difficult to detect
significant differences in outcomes. In another study comparing survivors of advanced-stage Hodgkin's disease and acute leukemia survivors treated on a variety of
chemotherapy protocols, Kornblith et al. 33 found that Hodgkin's disease survivors experienced significantly poorer sexual relationships than the leukemia survivors.
Thus, the specific type of chemotherapy regimen and its duration can have differing effects on sexual functioning.
Radiation Therapy
The acute effects of radiation include fatigue, nausea, skin changes, and hair loss, with local changes limited to the area of the radiation port. As already discussed,
fatigue can interfere with sexual functioning, and hair loss and skin changes can affect sexual functioning through changes in body image. Long-lasting effects on skin

and hair may occasionally occur, especially when combined modality therapies are used. Radiation injury to the pelvis can lead to fibrosis of soft tissue, as well as
nerve damage, with loss of sexual functioning attributable to treatment. This is especially an issue when high-dose primary therapy is given, as for prostate cancer,
bladder-conservation treatment, cervical cancer, and rectal cancers. In addition, injury to adjacent normal tissues (rectum, bladder, vagina) can lead to symptomatic
problems (proctitis, cystitis, vaginal stenosis) that can detract from sexual activities.
Primary pelvic irradiation for prostate or bladder cancer may be as damaging to the erectile nerves as surgery. Radiation also damages the small blood vessels that
supply and drain the corpora cavernosa. 85 The primary difference is the time course over which the effect is seen. Whereas surgical nerve injury reveals itself
immediately, radiation injury to the nerves and vessels often does not manifest itself for many months. Because the mechanism of radiation tissue damage is to induce
scarring over time, the pelvic vessels and erectile nerves may retain normal function initially and then decline fairly rapidly as long as 18 to 36 months after the
completion of treatment.86 The advent of three-dimensional conformal therapy has improved the radiation oncologist's ability to focus the beam at the center of the
prostate and decrease the dose delivered to its periphery, where the nerves are located. 87 To treat prostate cancer effectively, however, an adequate dose must be
administered to the entire gland, and this can certainly cause subsequent nerve damage. Proton-beam therapy, a variation of external-beam radiotherapy, is heavily
marketed as causing fewer erectile complications in prostate cancer patients; however, no published evidence supports this claim.
Brachytherapy, the implantation of radioactive seeds into the prostate, has gained national prominence because it, too, is reputed to cause fewer complications than
external-beam therapy. However, no reliable and valid longitudinal measurements of erectile function have yet been reported in patients who undergo this form of
treatment. More information is needed before it can be established whether brachytherapy preserves erectile function in men treated for prostate cancer.
Hormonal Treatments
Hormonal treatments used in the management of endocrine-sensitive cancers may have important effects on sexual functioning. Tamoxifen, an antiestrogen,
increases the rate of vaginal discharge and vasomotor symptoms in a proportion of breast cancer patients 79 and in those women taking this therapy for breast cancer
prevention. 88 Although rates of sexual activity did not appear to differ between the women taking tamoxifen and those taking a placebo in the now completed Breast
Cancer Prevention Trial, subtle differences in sexual functioning for women taking tamoxifen were noted (see Breast Cancer, later in this chapter). 88 In a small study
that examined the effect of tamoxifen and sexual functioning in patients with breast cancer, Mortimer et al. 89 found that the desire, arousal, and orgasmic problems
were not increased in their patient sample, but that more than one-half of patients complained of pain, burning, or discomfort with intercourse and that the majority of
those with these symptoms routinely used a vaginal lubricant with intercourse. Vaginal cytology was examined in these women, and the presence of an estrogen
effect was associated with negative reactions during sex ( P = .02) and vaginal dryness or tightness ( P = .046), but it was not associated with other aspects of sexual
functioning. 89
Weight gain is an important side effect with megestrol acetate, which is often used in the treatment of metastatic breast and endometrial cancers. This weight gain
may contribute to a poorer body image in these patients and potentially affect sexual functioning. 90 Since the 1990s, interest has been renewed in ovarian ablation for
women with breast cancer, either with surgical oophorectomy or with use of gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues. As already mentioned, the precipitation of
premature menopause in these women may cause substantial disruption in sexual functioning.
For men with advanced prostate cancer, the mainstay of therapy is androgen ablation, 91 which can be accomplished by either surgical or medical castration.
Historically, the medical approach involved an oral estrogen, such as diethylstilbestrol, which inhibits the release of luteinizing hormone from the anterior pituitary and,
in turn, decreases testicular androgen production. More recently, chemical castration is achieved with gonadotropin-releasing hormone blockers with or without the
addition of antiandrogens to eliminate the effect of adrenal androgens. Other agents, such as aminoglutethimide or ketoconazole, may also be used for the same
effect. Men who participate actively in the selection of their androgen ablation option tend to be happier with their decisions. 92
The primary sexual side effect of androgen ablation is loss of libido. Many men report the ability to have erections and ejaculations despite the absence of
testosterone, although decline in libido is universal. As a result, men who are sexually active and asymptomatic from the cancer (e.g., those who have a rising
prostate-specific antigen level without documented metastatic disease) often choose to delay hormone therapy. For men who are experiencing clinical progression of
metastatic prostate cancer, sexual function may already have declined or disappeared as their constitutional symptoms have advanced. For these individuals,
androgen ablation may not have a great impact on erectile function, which is already greatly reduced. 93
CONCERNS ABOUT FERTILITY
Preservation of fertility is an important aspect of treatment, especially for those individuals who have not had children. This issue pertains in particular to children and
young adults with cancers who are treated with curative intent. As noted by Laufer, 94 it is increasingly useful to know the reproductive health outcomes for specific
types of cancer treatments and “to differentiate between sex steroid production and fertility or reproductive function.” In one of the largest studies of the effects of
treatment on fertility in long-term survivors of childhood or adolescent cancer, Byrne and colleagues 95 estimated the risk of infertility after treatment in a retrospective
cohort study of survivors of cancer and controls. The cancer patients, who were diagnosed before the age of 20 years, were treated between 1945 and 1975 at five
cancer centers in the United States. Cancer survivors who married were less likely than their sibling controls to have ever begun a pregnancy [relative fertility, 0.85;
95% confidence interval (CI), 0.78 to 0.92]. With regard to therapy, radiation directed below the diaphragm decreased fertility in both sexes by approximately 25%,
and chemotherapy with alkylating agents, with or without subdiaphragmatic radiation, was associated with a fertility deficit of approximately 60% in men. Among
women, no effect of alkylating agents alone was found in this young group of patients; however, a moderate fertility deficit was noted when alkylating agents were
combined with subdiaphragmatic radiation (relative fertility, 0.81). 95 Adjusted relative fertility varied widely by cancer site, with a rate of 0.45 (95% CI, 0.26 to 0.78) for
male genital cancer and 1.47 (95% CI, 0.81 to 2.65) for Wilms' tumor. For many of the cancer sites, the 95% confidence intervals overlapped by 1.0. 95
More detailed studies of gonadal function tend to confirm these general observations, with evidence of preserved Leydig cell function in young boys receiving
treatment but also of increased germ cell dysfunction and decreased spermatogenesis. 96,97 Female childhood cancer survivors do not exhibit significant changes in
gonadal function with contemporary treatments 97; however, in the earlier era of extensive craniospinal and abdominal radiation used in the treatment of childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia, lack of pubertal development and delayed onset of menses was common. 98 Even in young women treated for ovarian dysgerminoma,
reproductive function can be preserved with conservative surgery and contemporary chemotherapy treatment regimens. 99
For young adults with cancer, strategies to conserve fertility are often used and are highly dependent on the type of cancer and available treatments. 100 ABVD has
largely replaced MOPP chemotherapy for Hodgkin's disease because of a more limited risk of infertility. 101 In general, however, diseases that require treatment with
alkylating agents are likely to put both men and women at risk for infertility. 100 The risk for women begins to rise after 30 years of age, and for men the risk increases
at any age. Cryopreservation of sperm is a strategy used to preserve fertility in men. Newer approaches to ovarian tissue preservation and subsequent reimplantation
are on the horizon for women. 102,103
A past history of cancer, uncertainty related to reproductive potential, and changes in sense of self-esteem and attractiveness may impair dating and sexual function
in young adults with a history of cancer. Often, young adults who were treated for cancer as a child may have limited awareness of their past treatment, and they may
be confronting this aspect of their health for the first time as they marry and attempt to start a family. Importantly, these individuals can be reassured that their
offspring are unlikely to experience adverse consequences as a result of past parental treatments for cancer. 104,105

SEXUAL PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH SPECIFIC CANCERS
BREAST CANCER
Among specific cancer sites, breast cancer has been one of the most frequently studied regarding sexual functioning because of the surgical trauma to the breast and
the severe disruption in body image associated with mastectomy. The important role of the breast in terms of femininity and sexual identity, and as an organ involved
in sexual activity, has made sexual health after breast cancer an important issue. All of these concerns point to the potential impact of the type of surgical treatment on
sexual functioning. However, as adjuvant treatment for breast cancer has expanded to earlier stages of disease, including noninvasive cancer, the impact of
chemotherapy and hormonal therapy (e.g., tamoxifen, oophorectomy, gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues) must also be considered. As already noted, each
of these adjuvant therapies may induce premature menopause, lead to vaginal dryness, and may have other specific effects that can influence sexual health. These
issues take on increasing importance in treatment decision making, because women with very early-stage breast cancer can expect survival that is equivalent to

women without a cancer diagnosis.
One of the most investigated questions in breast cancer patients has been the impact of type of surgery on sexual health and quality of life. 40,106,107 and 108 Several large
reviews of this topic37,38 and 39,109 address the potential differences in outcomes for women treated with modified radical mastectomy compared to breast-conserving
surgery with radiation. In only a few studies were women randomly assigned to the type of surgical treatment; most have been observational cohort studies in which
patient choice or preference for treatment likely occurred. Thus, some bias could be influencing the results. Nevertheless, the consistency of findings across so many
studies and countries suggests that the findings are real. There is consensus that breast-conserving surgery offers a better sense of body image to women after
breast cancer but only limited differences in other dimensions of quality of life (physical, emotional, or social functioning). In studies that have specifically addressed
sexual functioning, 40,107,109,110 little difference was found between the two types of surgery, although in the one randomized treatment trial, 110 some evidence suggested
better sexual functioning in women with conservation surgery.
In a study comparing women with breast conservation treatment to those receiving mastectomy with reconstruction, Schover et al. 111 found that the two groups did not
differ in body image, satisfaction with relationships, or sexual life. However, the authors did find that women with breast reconstruction experienced less caressing of
the breast in lovemaking than women with partial mastectomy.111 In a study of sexual health and functioning in breast cancer survivors, 43 body image influenced
sexual interest, but the type of surgery did not predict any aspect of sexual health after breast cancer. Thus, although total loss of the breast may negatively influence
a woman's body image, it does not necessarily impact her sexual health and functioning. As has been shown in healthy women without breast cancer 13 and in breast
cancer survivors, 43 other factors may play a more important role in influencing sexual health in middle-age women (e.g., presence of a partner, vaginal dryness,
emotional well-being, quality of the partnered relationship).
The etiology of sexual dysfunction in breast cancer survivors has not been well studied. As with other patients, multiple predisposing factors are involved, including
preexisting sexual problems, negative sexual self-schemas, and normal age-related changes in sexual functioning. 14,15,112,113 In addition, induction of premature
menopause by chemotherapy can result in an estrogen deficiency state that increases the likelihood of hot flashes and poor vaginal lubrication that may contribute to
sexual dysfunction. 81,114,115 and 116 These symptoms are also a potential problem for older patients for whom hormone replacement therapy is discontinued at the time of
a breast cancer diagnosis. Furthermore, these symptoms may be exacerbated by tamoxifen adjuvant therapy. 117 The results from the newly completed Breast Cancer
Prevention Trial 88 suggest that, overall, tamoxifen has minimal effects on sexual functioning in healthy high-risk women. Comparing women taking tamoxifen to those
taking placebo,88 over the course of 3 years of follow-up, no difference was found in the number of women who were sexually active, although both groups showed a
subtle decline in sexual activity over time. There was an increase in vaginal discharge, genital itching, and pain with intercourse in women taking tamoxifen, as well as
very subtle changes in some aspects of sexual functioning (sexual interest, sexual arousal, orgasm). 88
Multiple studies suggest an important role for chemotherapy in increasing sexual dysfunction in women with breast cancer. 78,79,115,118,119 This effect may be working
through the precipitation of premature menopause and loss of both estrogens and androgens from the ovary. 119 However, chemotherapy may also have a direct effect
on the vaginal epithelium, causing vaginal dryness, because postmenopausal women also experience poorer sexual functioning after chemotherapy. 78
An increasing body of literature has examined sexual functioning in long-term survivors of breast cancer, with comparative information on women without a cancer
diagnosis. 78,120,121 and 122 In a cross-sectional study of more than 800 breast cancer survivors between 1 and 5 years after diagnosis, Ganz et al. 78 found that
approximately 60% of the study sample had been sexually active with a partner in the past 6 months, with the most common reason for inactivity being lack of a
partner, lack of interest, her partner's lack of interest, or the partner's physical health problems. 78 Sexual functioning data from two standardized instruments showed a
decline in sexual functioning with age, especially in the areas of arousal and orgasm. Overall, the responses of the breast cancer survivors were comparable to an
age- and menopause-matched sample of healthy women who participated in the Postmenopausal Estrogen Progestins Intervention Trial and were not on hormone
replacement therapy.13 Overall, the breast cancer survivors reported fairly high levels of satisfaction with their sexual relationships. 78,121 Nevertheless, in a more
detailed analysis, this study's authors found that one-third of women reported that breast cancer had had a negative impact on their sex life, and most reported
negative changes in at least some areas (e.g., frequency of sexual activity, awareness of decreased lubrication in vagina with sexual activity, pain in genital area
during sexual activity, discomfort when touching breast cancer surgery area). 121 Women who were most likely to report a negative impact were significantly more likely
to report relationship difficulties, to have experienced changes in hormonal levels because of breast cancer (premature menopause or discontinuation of hormone
replacement), and to be bothered by vaginal dryness. 121 These findings are similar to those obtained in smaller samples of breast cancer survivors. 120,122
PROSTATE CANCER
The effect of erectile dysfunction on sexual functioning after treatment for prostate cancer has been studied extensively with a variety of experimental designs. All
studies have shown that men undergoing radical prostatectomy or pelvic irradiation have more sexual impairment than age-matched controls. 123,124 Despite consistent
reports of better outcomes with nerve-sparing techniques in centers of excellence, rates of sexual dysfunction in random, national, population-based samples reveal
that erectile dysfunction remains common after surgery 125,126 or radiation 127 for early-stage prostate cancer.
Talcott128 examined a group of men who underwent nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy and compared them with men who underwent non–nerve-sparing radical
prostatectomy. Talcott found that patients who underwent nerve-sparing surgery had low levels of sexual function that were not significantly different from men who
underwent non–nerve-sparing procedures. However, when the nerve-sparing population was broken down into one or both nerves spared, the bilateral nerve-sparing
group reported significantly better potency at 1 year when compared to those who underwent non–nerve-sparing surgery. In a longitudinal follow-up study, Talcott et
al.129 confirmed that nerve-sparing appears to improve postoperative sexual function to a lesser extent than previously reported. Talcott et al. 86 also published the first
prospective cohort study of patients treated with either surgery or radiotherapy, in which 279 patients were assessed with validated quality-of-life instruments before
treatment and at 3 and 12 months afterward. Initially, surgery patients had more impotence; however, over time, sexual function declined in the radiotherapy group
and improved in the surgery group. Hence, with longer follow-up, treatment group differences in sexual function continued to narrow. Other studies also have shown
that the incidence of impotence increases to at least 35% to 40% during the 2 to 3 years after radiation therapy for localized prostate cancer. 130,131
In a more recent longitudinal study of 438 men treated with surgery or radiation for early-stage prostate cancer, 132 sexual function after treatment for prostate cancer
appeared to improve over time. Although sexual function was significantly better in radiation than surgery patients immediately after treatment, both groups improved
at comparable rates during the first year. In the second year, radiation patients began to show a modest but statistically significant decline in sexual function, whereas
surgery patients continued to improve. Both nerve-sparing and postsurgical erectile aids improved sexual function after prostatectomy. Given the decline in sexual
function during the second year after radiation, these factors ultimately serve to equalize sexual function in the postsurgical and postradiation settings. The most
elderly men experienced a posttreatment sexual function course that differed greatly from the youngest men. This finding validates the clinical observation that older
men are much less likely than younger men to regain sexual function after treatment. In particular, octogenarians who choose radiotherapy can expect significant
declines in sexual function without apparent recovery.
TESTIS CANCER
Therapy for testicular cancer, including orchiectomy, retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy, and radiation therapy, can cause a variety of physical and psychological
sequelae.133 Rieker et al. 134,135 showed that these patients express distress over poor sexual performance and infertility, although not with decreased libido. Those
with ejaculatory dysfunction note more strained intimate relationships and more psychological problems. Compared with healthy controls, testis cancer patients as a
group do not reveal any more difficulty with relationships, employment, divorce, or overall mental outlook. Bloom et al. 136 compared a sample of men treated for testis
cancer with an age-matched sample treated for Hodgkin's disease. Those with testicular cancer were significantly more likely to report decreased sexual enjoyment;
however, they were also more likely to report their health as excellent when compared to the lymphoma group, leading the authors to conclude that the response to
testicular cancer is more site-specific.
After radiation therapy for seminoma, most men marry within a few years; however, a significant proportion of patients continue to report ejaculatory dysfunction and
anxiety about fertility. 137 Gritz et al. 44,138 compared the outlooks of patients and their wives several years after testicular cancer treatment. Compared to their wives,
patients reported higher levels of anxiety over sexual performance. Long-term psychosocial adjustment was good in both groups, however.
BLADDER CANCER

The overwhelming majority of men who undergo cystectomy for bladder cancer either report difficulties before treatment or develop erectile dysfunction after
treatment. Despite this observation, at least 50% of these patients continue to enjoy some form of sexual stimulation other than coitus after recuperation from
surgery, 139 and at least 75% maintain their libido. 140 For women, changes may occur that are associated with decreased vaginal lubrication if women are estrogen
deficient, 76 and similar issues face both men and women if a stoma is created. Mansson and colleagues 77 administered a quality-of-life instrument to patients
undergoing cystectomy and compared those reconstructed by continent cutaneous ileocecal diversion with those undergoing simple conduit diversion. Patients in
both groups experienced equivalent declines in quality of life related to sexual problems, disturbed partner relationships, and emotional dysfunction. 77 In a similar
study, Boyd and colleagues 141 demonstrated that, postoperatively, ileal conduit patients had the poorest self-image, as defined by a decrease in sexual desire and in
all forms of physical contact (sexual and nonsexual). Those who later underwent conversion from ileal conduit diversions to continent cutaneous Kock pouches were
the most physically and sexually active. Gerharz et al. 142 found that, after cystectomy, patients receiving an ileal conduit had worse scores than continent reservoir
patients in sexual activity and general quality-of-life domains. Hart et al. 143 reported more optimistic findings, showing that general quality of life was not differentially
affected by the choice of urinary diversion method after cystectomy in either women or men.
GYNECOLOGIC CANCERS
Cancer involving the female genital organs immediately evokes concerns about sexual dysfunction related to cancer-related symptoms that predate the diagnosis, 144
as well as treatments that may be required to extirpate the cancer. Cancers of the uterine corpus and cervix make up the majority of gynecologic cancers (roughly
70%), and these primarily localized cancers are treated with surgery or radiotherapeutic approaches, or both. Rarer cancers, such as vulvar cancer, may be treated
with a variety of local or extensive surgical modalities, with some use of topical therapies. Nevertheless, the visible and disfiguring aspects of perineal surgery has its
own serious sexual consequences. Other gynecologic cancers (ovarian cancer, trophoblastic disease, uterine sarcomas) are treated with combinations of
chemotherapy, surgery and, sometimes, radiotherapy. The more disseminated nature of these cancers and the severity of the disease lead to different patterns of
sexual dysfunction. For all gynecologic cancers, the age, partnership status, menopausal status, and preexisting sexual functioning of a woman play an important role
in her sexual rehabilitation after cancer treatment (see Table 56.3-1 and review by Andersen145).
Because of the involvement of the genital organs with gynecologic cancers, changes in sexual functioning may often take place before the diagnosis of cancer. In a
comparison of healthy control subjects and women with early-stage cervical and uterine cancer, Andersen et al. 144 found few differences in aspects of the sexual
response cycle reported before the onset of signs or symptoms of the cancer. However, a substantial number of the gynecologic cancer patients reported a disruption
in sexual responsiveness with the onset of symptoms, including changes in desire, excitement, orgasm, and resolution and a global deterioration in sexual
functioning. 144 These changes were most often associated with symptoms of fatigue, postcoital bleeding, and multiple other signs and symptoms.
Sexual functioning outcomes in patients with gynecologic cancers often have been reported in small case series. Andersen and colleagues 146 prospectively studied 47
women with early-stage gynecologic cancers (cervix, n = 33; endometrium, n = 9; ovary, n = 5) and benign gynecologic disease before treatment, and then
interviewed them again at 4, 8, and 12 months posttreatment. Women treated for disease, whether benign or malignant, reported similar declines in frequency of
intercourse, decreased sexual excitement, and a less positive global evaluation of their sexual life. In addition, a three- to sixfold increase in the incidence of sexual
dysfunction diagnoses was found in comparison to the rates in healthy women. 146 Pain with intercourse, prominent early in the recovery period in treated women,
improved with time but remained more frequent in the cancer patients. Although both treated groups experienced increased sexual dysfunctions posttreatment, the
cancer patients experienced a higher incidence of inhibited excitement. As discussed by Andersen et al., 146 these particular changes can be a manifestation of
increased anxiety associated with the cancer diagnosis.
Looking more specifically at the impact of cervical cancer and its treatment on sexual functioning, several other small, descriptive studies are relevant. Schover et
al.147 examined sexual frequency, function, and behavior in 61 women with early-stage invasive carcinoma of the cervix. The impact of treatment (radical hysterectomy
alone, radiotherapy with or without surgery) was examined in this study. Sexual satisfaction, capacity for orgasm, and frequency of masturbation remained stable over
12 months of observation posttreatment; however, frequency of sexual activity with a partner and the range of sexual practices decreased significantly over the course
of the year of follow-up. Although at 6 months few differences were noted between those who had received irradiation and those who had not, at the 12-month
assessment, the women receiving radiotherapy had more dyspareunia (as well as an abnormal vaginal examination) and had more problems with sexual desire and
arousal.147 Treatment modality had no effect on marital happiness or stability.
These findings suggest an additional complication from irradiation of the pelvis, which is vaginal stenosis or foreshortening. Several other studies have documented
this problem, 148,149 with level of sexual activity being lowest at the completion of radiotherapy. The finding of progressive dyspareunia and vaginal shortening 147
suggests the need for active intervention in these women, with the need for early use of vaginal lubricants, resumption of sexual activity, or use of dilators to maintain
vaginal length and elasticity. In one small study, 150 women who did not follow advice regarding use of vaginal dilators and did not resume the same level of sexual
intercourse as before their illness were more likely to develop physical and sexual changes.
These small descriptive studies shed some light on the mechanisms of sexual dysfunction and the range of sexual problems in the first year after treatment for
cervical cancer. However, the late sexual effects of treatment for cervical cancer are important, because this is a group of women who are likely to be cured of their
disease and be long-term cancer survivors. A report by Bergmark et al. 151 provides important new information on vaginal changes and sexuality in a large sample of
Swedish cervical cancer survivors (n = 256) and a concurrent control sample (n = 350). The cancer survivors had been treated, on average, approximately 5 years
earlier and were a mean age of 51 years at the time they responded to the study questionnaire. Significant differences were found between the two groups in
problems with vaginal lubrication (26% of the women with cancer vs. 11% of the controls), reporting of a short vagina (26% of the women with cancer vs. 3% of the
controls), and decreased vaginal elasticity (23% of the women with cancer vs. 4% of the controls). In spite of these significant changes associated with the treatment
of cervical cancer, no differences were noted in sexual interest, desire, frequency of vaginal intercourse, or orgasm; however, there was much distress related to the
frequency of vaginal intercourse and problems during vaginal intercourse (dyspareunia, vaginal bleeding) among the women with a history of cervical cancer. 151
Treatment with surgery alone was associated with decreased vaginal lubrication, vaginal shortness, and decreased vaginal elasticity. 151 When surgery was combined
with radiotherapy or when radiotherapy was given alone, no apparent differences in these vaginal outcomes were found when compared to surgery alone, except for
some decreased sexual interest among those treated with radiotherapy alone. Interestingly, treatment for cervical cancer negatively influenced feelings of femininity
and attractiveness among the cervical cancer survivors but did not seem to influence sexual satisfaction. Importantly, the authors observed no age above which
sexual function was not important to women, and they suggest that efforts to prevent vaginal changes or relieve them after therapy should be considered in all women
who are treated for cervical cancer. 151 Finally, it should be noted that the use of a healthy control group in this study was important, in that 41% of both patients and
controls reported little or no interest in sex in the previous 6 months, with more than 50% reporting reduced sexual desire in the previous 5 years. Without such a
control group, these findings might have been attributed to the history of cancer.
Although rare, other gynecologic cancers can have profound effects on sexual functioning. In spite of being the third most common gynecologic cancer, ovarian
cancer patients have been less frequently studied. 152 Most experience all of the physical changes associated with the treatment of uterine and cervical cancer due to
surgical removal of the uterus and ovaries. However, treatment of these patients is often dominated by the use of systemic or intraperitoneal chemotherapy and the
side effects of this treatment, especially decreased physical functioning, fatigue, pain, and abdominal discomfort. Symptoms of advanced cancer significantly impact
sexual functioning in these women.
Sexual functioning after vulvar cancer has been examined in two series. 153,154 In Andersen et al.'s study, 153 women with in situ vulvar cancer were compared with a
matched sample of gynecologically healthy women. They found a higher rate of inhibited sexual excitement and inhibited orgasm among the women with cancer, as
well as an increasing rate of sexual inactivity over time, compared with the healthy women. As might be predicted, the wider the surgical excision, the greater the
magnitude of sexual disruption. 153 In a prospective study of ten couples, with the women being treated for vulvar cancer with radical vulvectomy, Weijmar Schultz et
al.154 found a postoperative decline in functioning with gradual recovery over 2 years. However, genital symptoms of sexual arousal and satisfaction were diminished
in the cancer group and did not return to levels of those found in the control group. 154 Importantly, general satisfaction with sexual interaction with the partner hardly
changed over a 2-year period of observation. 154
HODGKIN'S DISEASE
As a group, patients with Hodgkin's disease can anticipate long-term survival and cure. Therefore, the impact of disease and treatment on sexual functioning is an

important consideration. Several groups have studied the long-term psychosocial outcomes for this group of patients. 32,45 Hodgkin's disease survivors in one study 32
(n = 273) were found to have elevated levels of psychological distress, on average, compared to healthy controls, and those survivors in greater distress reported
more problems in other areas of functioning, including sexual problems. When survivors rated their overall current sexual satisfaction, the median scores were similar
to healthy subjects. However, when asked to consider the effect of cancer on their sexual life, 37% reported one or more sexual problems, primarily because of
decreased sexual satisfaction (31%), interest (21%), and activity (18%). Of these survivors, 26% had been tested and were told they were infertile, and an additional
27% believed that they were infertile. 32 In addition, all survivors who were not currently married experienced higher distress than those who were married, and 56% of
those who were separated or divorced attributed their marital status to having had cancer. 32 Although these data are not controlled, from the patient perspective, the
disease and its treatment has had a substantial effect on sexual functioning. However, in a comparative study of survivors of acute leukemia, 33 the same investigators
found substantially more psychological distress and poorer sexual functioning among the Hodgkin's disease survivors than those with leukemia. These authors
suggest that the risk of second malignancies, relapse, and infertility are likely contributors to the greater problems in adjustment among the Hodgkin's disease
survivors. 33
In another comparative study, Bloom et al. 136 examined the psychosocial outcomes of testicular cancer and Hodgkin's disease to test the hypothesis that more specific
dysfunction and less hiding of symptoms would be found among the testicular cancer patients. The main differences were in physical activity, fatigue, and vigor (worse
for Hodgkin's disease) and decrease in quality of orgasm (worse for testicular cancer), with no difference in psychological distress between the two groups of patients.
In addition, no differences between the two sites were found in terms of body image. 136 As noted by these authors, 136 without concurrent data on healthy controls, it is
uncertain how much sexual dysfunction may be specifically related to the disease, its treatment, age, or other unmeasured variables.
COLORECTAL CANCER
Colorectal cancer is a disease of older individuals, with most cancers occurring in persons older than 60 years of age. There is a paucity of specific literature on
sexual dysfunction in this population, but the information that is available focuses on the consequences of abdominoperineal resection and ostomies. In a review of
sexual functioning in women after radical surgery for rectal cancer, 155 prospective studies of small samples suggest a decline in sexual activity postoperatively, with
declines in interest, lubrication, and orgasmic activity. In a study comparing abdominoperineal resection with colostomy and low anterior resection, sexual functioning
was preserved at a higher rate with low anterior resection. Overall, the prognostic variables most influencing posttreatment sexual functioning include the woman's
age at surgery, the magnitude of the surgical intervention, handmade versus stapled anastomoses, and the number of autonomic nerves present in the surgical
specimen.155
For men, similar issues pertain; however, erectile dysfunction is a more salient issue. 156 In a study of 60 sexually active men surgically treated for colorectal cancer,
Koukouras et al.156 found that sexual activity was decreased in 32% of patients. The distribution of difficulties among those affected were dry ejaculate (25%), erection
not firm enough for penetration (45%), and complete absence of erection (25%). The decreases in sexual functioning occurred in all groups of patients, from high
anterior resection to low anterior resection to abdominoperineal resection, but were most frequent in those with abdominoperineal resection. 156
In another report, Sprangers et al. 42 reviewed the quality of life in colorectal cancer according to whether a sphincter-preserving procedure was performed. They
found that stoma patients reported higher levels of psychological distress than nonstoma patients and that sexual functioning of male and female stoma patients is
consistently more impaired than that of patients with intact sphincters. Both groups, however, are troubled by frequent and irregular bowel function that can increase
psychological distress and affect sexual functioning. 42

STRATEGIES FOR ASSESSMENT AND INTERVENTION
ASSESSMENT
A comprehensive assessment of sexual difficulties requires an interdisciplinary and multifaceted approach that is often beyond the scope of the oncology team.
Depending on the particular problem(s), it can be important to consider hormonal, physiologic, anatomic, psychological, cognitive, behavioral, relational, and cultural
factors in a biopsychosocial model 6 (see Table 56.3-1). To provide a differential diagnosis, it also is necessary to assess for psychopathology, medical conditions,
substance abuse, and relationship difficulties as primary etiologic factors. Modes of assessment include open-ended conversations, structured diagnostic interviews,
standardized self-report questionnaires, medical examination, and laboratory studies. Several volumes are available for readers who wish to learn about specific
assessment procedures.2,4,17,157
Although a comprehensive assessment is unrealistic within the constraints of an oncology practice, a preliminary review of sexual difficulties is essential to providing
optimal care to the cancer patient. Patients regularly report that they would like to discuss sexual issues with their physicians but feel reluctant to do so. 24,114
Therefore, it is up to the medical team to broach the issue and open lines of communication. Straightforward questions about each of the four categories of sexual
dysfunction—desire, arousal, orgasm, and pain—and questions about sexual activity and satisfaction generally provide sufficient information to determine the need
for further testing or referral. 11,158 One member of the team could be identified as a primary resource for assessment and referral.
COUNSELING, INTERVENTION, AND REFERRAL
After a member of the oncology team has raised the issue of sexuality and made a preliminary assessment of reported problems, a decision must be made regarding
the level and type of intervention that is needed. 159 In some cases, the specific concerns that arise can be addressed directly by a member of the team who has
developed expertise in sexuality and cancer. Providing patients and (when appropriate) their partners with information about sexual functioning, aging, and sexual
problems related to the cancer experience can help to normalize the concerns that arise for some patients. Patients also can benefit from receiving written materials,
such as those available from the National Cancer Institute and the American Cancer Society or produced by other experts. 160 They may also benefit from learning
about local resources for cancer patients and survivors. For limited problems, specific suggestions or a brief course of sexual counseling may be sufficient. For
example, for a woman with vaginal dryness who cannot use estrogen, a vaginal lubricant or moisturizer might be extremely effective. Schover and colleagues 16 found
that 63.5% of cancer patients who received brief sexual counseling within a cancer center reported improvement. Patients who were depressed or in conflicted
marriages were least likely to benefit.
When the patient has more complex problems, it may be necessary to provide a referral to a mental health professional with special training in sex therapy, marital
therapy, or individual psychotherapy with cancer patients. The oncologist can play a pivotal role in ensuring successful treatment by making appropriate referrals that
normalize the need for therapy. In addition, specific medical interventions such as those detailed in the next two sections may be helpful.
MEDICAL INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN
One of the most important targets for intervention in women is vaginal dryness. This problem is common for women as they age, independent of cancer treatment, and
is usually managed with some form of estrogen therapy. In women who can receive estrogen therapy after cancer, this treatment is the most effective therapeutic
remedy, and it can be used topically or systemically. The role of hormone replacement in addressing sexual functioning after intensive chemotherapy should not be
underestimated. In a study of the prevalence and predictors of sexual dysfunction in long-term survivors of bone marrow transplantation, Syrjala et al. 161 found that
women reported significantly more sexual dysfunction than men. The number of women with lubrication problems increased from 30% before transplantation to 49% at
1 year posttransplantation and 52% at 3 years posttransplantation. 161 This finding was associated with a doubling in the rate of women reporting pain with intercourse,
from 14% at pretransplantation to approximately 34% posttransplantation. In addition, this study's authors found a significant difference in sexual satisfaction at 3
years for those who had received hormone replacement therapy by 1 year compared to the 15% of women who had not. Changing hormone replacement therapy after
1 year, either by starting therapy or electing to stop hormone therapy, did not show a measurable influence on reported sexual satisfaction at 3 years. 161 This finding
suggests that once sexual problems are established early after cancer treatment (vaginal dryness, dyspareunia), it may be more difficult to restore satisfactory sexual
activity. Thus, early intervention with hormonal therapy should be considered for patients receiving chemotherapy if it is not otherwise contraindicated.
In breast cancer patients and survivors, the use of hormone replacement therapy is much more controversial (see discussion of menopause earlier in Menopause and
Sexual Functioning). As a result, nonestrogen alternatives are often considered first in the management of vaginal dryness. One randomized controlled trial
comparing estrogen to the vaginal moisturizer Replens has demonstrated improvement in vaginal cytology with this preparation in healthy women. 162 The North
Central Cancer Treatment Group has tested the efficacy of Replens for the management of vaginal dryness and dyspareunia in a placebo-controlled trial. 163 They

found this product to be effective in relieving symptoms; however, similar results were seen with the placebo (K-Y Jelly), which was apparently not an inert substance.
A discussion of these nonestrogen alternatives is reviewed elsewhere. 164,165 and 166 If these therapies do not work, the use of the estrogen-impregnated product Estring
can be considered for topical relief of symptoms without significant systemic absorption. 167
In a study addressing menopausal symptoms in breast cancer survivors, Ganz et al. 168 found that most of the women who wanted some form of treatment were highly
symptomatic, with more than 80% having two of three symptoms (hot flashes, vaginal dryness, urinary incontinence). Using education, counseling, lifestyle
modifications, and several pharmacologic agents (Bellergal-S, clonidine patch, megestrol acetate, Replens), after a 4-month period of intervention, a significant
improvement in the target menopausal symptoms and sexual functioning in the women assigned to treatment was demonstrated, compared to a no-treatment control
group. Unlike the single-agent pharmacologic trials, this study tried to address all three symptoms simultaneously, as well as tailor the treatment strategies to the
individual's needs and her willingness or unwillingness to take a medication.
Other important strategies to consider are the treatment of psychological distress and marital or partner difficulties. In both healthy women and women with breast
cancer, 13,43 distress in these domains has been shown to influence sexual functioning and satisfaction. Control of pain and other symptoms may also be critical for
assuring sufficient relaxation to allow women to engage in meaningful sexual activities.
MEDICAL AND SURGICAL INTERVENTIONS FOR MEN
The clinical management of cancer patients with erectile dysfunction should follow the same algorithms used in men presenting primarily for evaluation of impotence.
Even when other interventions are prescribed, brief sexual counseling in the primary oncology setting can play a critical role in the care of the patient. 169 The model
currently used in the management of patients with erectile dysfunction involves a stepwise approach. 169 First-line therapies are selected based on their ease of
administration, reversibility, and noninvasiveness. Oral erectogenic agents, such as sildenafil, yohimbine, trazodone, and phentolamine, have gained widespread
popularity, largely because of the convenience and effectiveness of sildenafil. 170 Sildenafil works in most forms of erectile dysfunction and has few side effects. It is a
selective type 5 phosphodiesterase inhibitor, which increases penile cyclic guanosine monophosphate, thus enhancing the effect of nitric oxide in response to sexual
stimulation. In the penis, the effect of sildenafil is to increase cavernosal smooth muscle dilation, a requisite component of erection. At doses of 25, 50, or 100 mg
taken 30 to 60 minutes before sex, it is successful in approximately 70% of impotent men. Side effects are minor and may include mild headache, facial flushing,
rhinitis, dyspepsia, or blue-hued vision. 171 Sildenafil is thought to have been partially responsible for mortality in a very small percentage of cases by interacting with
medicinal or recreational nitrates or by allowing sexual overexertion in men with severe cardiac disease. It should never be used concomitantly with nitrates.
Apomorphine, another oral erectogenic whose U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval is reportedly imminent, is thought to work by interacting with central and
peripheral dopaminergic pathways in impotent men. 172
Another noninvasive technique is the penile vacuum erection device (VED). 173,174 and 175 Although it is somewhat more cumbersome and requires training, a substantial
minority of patients prefer the VED for its simplicity, safety, and effectiveness. A clear, plastic, hollow cylinder is placed around the penis and sealed at the skin with
lubricant. A small handheld pump, attached by a rubber tube to the tip of the cylinder, is activated, creating a vacuum around the penis within the cylinder. This draws
blood into the erectile bodies and creates an erection. Once the penis becomes tumescent, a rubber constriction band is placed around the base of the penis to retain
the erection, and the cylinder is removed. After sex, the band is removed, allowing the penile blood to drain. Few risks are associated with use of the VED.
Second-line therapies involve the administration of pharmacologic vasodilators, either by direct intracavernosal needle injection 176 or by intraurethral suppository. 177
Injections typically include prostaglandin E 1 alone (marketed as Caverject or Edex) or in combination with papaverine or phentolamine. The intraurethral suppository
(marketed as Muse) contains prostaglandin E 1 alone in doses of 5, 10, or 20 µg. Both methods function by producing dilation of the cavernosal smooth muscle,
enhancing the vascular component of penile erection. Intracavernosal injection is much more effective than intraurethral administration, but it also carries a greater
short-term risk of priapism or pain and the long-term risk of corporal scarring at the injection sites. With intracavernosal medication, the patient is trained to draw up
the drug in a tuberculin syringe and inject it into the penis. The patient must take care to place the needle perpendicular to the long axis of the penis and advance it all
the way through the subcutaneous fat into the corpus cavernosum. Because of intercavernosal connections, only one corpus needs to be injected to induce erection.
The patient must be careful to avoid the nerve bundle dorsally and the urethra ventrally. He must also rotate injection sites and apply 2 to 3 minutes of pressure after
injection to avoid bruising. The intraurethral medication is sold as a suppository of 250, 500, or 1000 µg loaded into a small applicator that the patients inserts into his
urethral meatus. Once in position, he pushes the medicated pellet out by advancing a small probe. The medication is packaged with pictorial instructions that facilitate
patient teaching. With either penile vasodilator, the dose must be individually titrated.
Third-line therapies include the surgical implantation of semirigid or inflatable penile prostheses. 178 The operation is usually performed on an outpatient basis and
involves a single, small dorsal or ventral incision at the base of the penis. After dissecting and entering the corpora cavernosa, their internal spongy tissue is
compressed with dilators and their size calibrated. The appropriate length prostheses are inserted into both corpora. Semirigid prostheses may contain malleable
metal rods encased in silicone, or they may be made of solid silicone. After recovery from surgery, the semirigid penile prosthesis requires no training and is ready for
use approximately 8 to 12 weeks postoperatively. Inflatable prostheses contain pliable hollow tubes that are filled with saline from a nearby reservoir by activating a
pump. In the three-piece versions, the reservoir is implanted through the groin in the perivesical space, and the pump is implanted subcutaneously in the scrotum.
These components are connected to each other and to the cylinders with silicone tubing. A two-piece version is also available, in which the pump and reservoir are
combined into one scrotal component. Self-contained inflatable prostheses have the cylinders, reservoir, and pump all located in one structure. These have become
the preferred choice because of easier surgical implantation. After recovery, the inflatable prosthesis requires detailed training before the patient becomes
comfortable with its use. The primary advantage of the inflatable version is that it appears flaccid when not in use; however, it is also associated with a greater chance
of mechanical problems, which may require further surgery. Both semirigid and inflatable prostheses carry some risk of infection, but this complication is uncommon.
Placement of a penile prosthesis is an invasive maneuver, in which any residual existing erectile capacity is lost. This option is reserved for the most severe and
refractory cases of erectile dysfunction. If the devices ever require removal, natural erections are unlikely to return.

CONCLUSIONS
It is important to recognize that sexual problems are prevalent in the general population and that age-related changes in sexual interest and responsiveness occur
naturally. When one adds a cancer diagnosis and its treatments to this background environment, existing sexual problems can be exacerbated, and an active sex life
may cease for some cancer patients. Understanding the natural history of sexual problems associated with specific treatments and cancers can enhance the ability of
clinicians to detect sexual problems in the patients under their care. Because patients seldom directly express sexual concerns to their health care provider either
before or after cancer treatment, it is essential that these issues be brought up with patients in a routine and matter-of-fact way. The treating oncologist should find a
comfortable way to ask, “How is your sex life going?” Often, a good time to ask this question is somewhere in the middle or toward the end of a treatment course. This
can serve as a “check-in” to let the patient know the oncologist is willing to talk about these issues. If the patient has no problems or is not interested in talking, the
conversation ends there. However, patients know that they can bring up the topic in the future if they wish. Similarly, patients who are anxious to share concerns
about sexual functioning appreciate the opportunity to discuss the specific problems. The health care professional can often provide information, reassurance,
referrals, and specific remedies (e.g., treatment for vaginal dryness, medication of erectile dysfunction, treatment of pain).
Another perspective that is often overlooked is that of the young adult with cancer. Even more challenging than when a spouse is present is the young man with testis
cancer, the young woman with breast cancer, or the teenager with lymphoma. With less experience and self-confidence, these individuals may be even shyer about
bringing up the topic of sexuality with their oncologists. For the young adult with cancer, it is especially incumbent upon the clinician to talk about sex during and after
treatment. In these situations, the difficult questions may be, for example, “Should I tell a new romantic interest about the cancer on the first date, or should I wait?” Of
course, these problems are relevant for the single patient at any age.
With the increasing media attention given to sexual health in the general population, patients now expect their physicians to be well informed and receptive to
discussing these issues. The very privileged relationship that oncologists have with their patients with cancer, guiding them through treatment decisions for a
life-threatening condition, should permit the physician to assist the patient with this aspect of health and recovery. We are fortunate that a growing body of research
on sexual health after cancer now exists, which can inform and guide those discussions.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Masters WH, Johnson VE. Human sexual response. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1966.
2. Bancroft J. Human sexuality and its problems. Edinburgh, Scotland: Churchill Livingstone, 1989.
3. Tiefer L. The medicalization of sexuality: conceptual, normative, and professional issues. Ann Rev Sex Res 1996;7:252.

4. Kaplan HS. Disorders of sexual desire: the new sex therapy. New York: Brunner/Mazel, 1979.
5. Kaplan HS. The evaluation of sexual disorders: psychological and medical aspects. New York: Brunner/Mazel, 1983.
6. Rosen RC, Leiblum SR. Treatment of sexual disorders in the 1990s: an integrated approach. J Consult Clin Psychol 1995;63:877.
7. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 4th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association, 1994.
8. Laumann EO, Gagnon JH, Michael RT, Michaels S. The social organization of sexuality: sexual practices in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.
9. Frank E, Anderson C, Rubinstein D. Frequency of sexual dysfunction in “normal” couples. N Engl J Med 1978;299:111.
10. Laumann EO, Paik A, Rosen RC. Sexual dysfunction in the United States: prevalence and predictors. JAMA 1999;281:537.
11. Ackerman MD, Carey MP. Psychology's role in the assessment of erectile dysfunction: historical precedents, current knowledge, and methods. J Consult Clin Psychol 1995;63:862.
12. Beck JG. Hypoactive sexual desire disorder: an overview. J Consult Clin Psychol 1995;63:919.
13. Greendale GA, Hogan P, Shumaker S, for the Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin Interventions (PEPI) Trial investigators. Sexual functioning in postmenopausal women: the postmenopausal
estrogen/progestin interventions (PEPI) trial. J Womens Health 1996;5:445.
14. Hawton K, Gath D, Day A. Sexual function in a community sample of middle-aged women with partners: effects of age, marital, socioeconomic, psychiatric, gynecological, and menopausal
factors. Arch Sex Behav 1994;23:375.
15. Rosen RC, Taylor JF, Leiblum SR, Bachmann GA. Prevalence of sexual dysfunction in women: results of a survey study of 329 women in an outpatient gynecology clinic. J Sex Marital Ther
1993;19:171.
16. Schover LR, Evans RB, von Eschenbach AC. Sexual rehabilitation in a cancer center: diagnosis and outcome in 384 consultations. Arch Sex Behav 1987;16:445.
17. Wincze JP, Carey MP. Sexual dysfunction: a guide for assessment and treatment. New York: Guilford Press, 1991.
18. Bachmann GA. Sexual function in the perimenopause. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 1993; 20:379.
19. Schiavi RC, Schreiner-Engel P, Mandeli J, Schanzer H, Cohen E. Healthy aging and male sexual function. Am J Psychiatry 1990;147:766.
20. Mulligan T, Moss CR. Sexuality and aging in male veterans: a cross-sectional study of interest, ability, and activity. Arch Sex Behav 1991;20:17.
21. Dionko AC, Brown MB, Herzog AR. Sexual function in the elderly. Arch Intern Med 1990;150:197.
22. Feldman HA, Goldstein I, Hatzichristou DG, Krane RJ, McKinlay JB. Impotence and its medical and psychosocial correlates: results of the Massachusetts Male Aging Study. J Urol 1994;151:54.
23. Thirlaway K, Fallowfield L, Cuzick J. The Sexual Activity Questionnaire: a measure of women's sexual functioning. Qual Life Res 1996;5:81.
24. Loehr J, Verma S, Seguin R. Issues of sexuality in older women. J Womens Health 1997;6:451.
25. McKinlay SM. The normal menopause transition: an overview. Maturitas 1996;23:137.
26. Greendale GA, Lee NP, Arriola ER. The menopause. Lancet 1999;353:571.
27. Ganz PA, Day R, Ware JE, et al. Base-line quality-of-life assessment in the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project Breast Cancer Prevention Trial. J Natl Cancer Inst
1995;87:1372.
28. Myers LS, Dixen J, Morrissette D, Carmichael M, Davidson JM. Effects of estrogen, androgen, and progestin on sexual psychophysiology and behavior in postmenopausal women. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 1990;70:1124.
29. Sherwin BB. The impact of different doses of estrogen and progestin on mood and sexual behavior in postmenopausal women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1991;72:336.
30. Helgason AR, Adolfsson J, Dickman P, et al. Factors associated with waning sexual function among elderly men and prostate cancer patients. J Urol 1997;158:155.
31. Schag CAC, Ganz PA, Polinsky ML, et al. Characteristics of women at risk for psychosocial distress in the year after breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:783.
32. Kornblith AB, Anderson J, Cella DF, et al. Hodgkin disease survivors at increased risk for problems in psychosocial adaptation. Cancer 1992;70:2214.
33. Kornblith AB, Herndon JE II, Zuckerman E, et al. Comparison of psychosocial adaptation of advanced stage Hodgkin's disease and acute leukemia survivors. Cancer and Leukemia Group B.
Ann Oncol 1998;9:297.
34. Cull A, Cowie VJ, Farquharson DI, et al. Early stage cervical cancer: psychosocial and sexual outcomes of treatment. Cancer 1993;68:1216.
35. Mumma GH, Mashberg D, Lesko LM. Long-term psychosexual adjustment of acute leukemia survivors: impact of marrow transplantation versus conventional chemotherapy. Gen Hosp
Psychiatry 1992;14:43.
36. Wood JD, Tombrink J. Impact of cancer on sexuality and self-image: a group program for patients and partners. Soc Work Health Care 1983;8(4):45.
37. Kiebert GM, de Haes JCJM, van de Velde CJH. The impact of breast-conserving treatment and mastectomy on the quality of life of early-stage breast cancer patients: a review. J Clin Oncol
1991;9:1059.
38. Hall A, Fallowfield L. Psychological outcome of treatment for early breast cancer: a review. Stress Med 1989;5:167.
39. Moyer A. Psychosocial outcomes of breast-conserving surgery versus mastectomy: a meta-analytic review. Health Psychol 1997;16:284.
40. Ganz PA, Schag CAC, Lee JJ, Polinsky ML, Tan SJ. Breast conservation versus mastectomy: is there a difference in psychological adjustment or quality of life in the year after surgery? Cancer
1992;69:1729.
41. DeBoer MF, McCormick LK, Pruyn JF, Ryckman RM, van den Borne BW. Physical and psychosocial correlates of head and neck cancer: a review of the literature. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
1999;120:427.
42. Sprangers MA, Taal BG, Aaronson NK, te Velde A. Quality of life in colorectal cancer. Stoma vs. nonstoma patients. Dis Colon Rectum 1995;38:361.
43. Ganz PA, Desmond KA, Belin TR, Meyerowitz BE, Rowland JH. Predictors of sexual health in women after a breast cancer diagnosis. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2371.
44. Gritz ER, Wellisch DK, Wang HJ, et al. Long-term effects of testicular cancer on sexual functioning in married couples. Cancer 1989;64:1560.
45. Fobair P, Hoppe RT, Bloom J, et al. Psychosocial problems among survivors of Hodgkin's disease. J Clin Oncol 1986;4:805.
46. Knobf MK, Mullen JC, Xistris D, et al. Weight gain among women with breast cancer receiving adjuvant chemotherapy. Oncol Nurs Forum 1983;10:28.
47. Goodwin PJ, Panzarella T, Boyd NF. Weight gain in women with localized breast cancer: a descriptive study. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1988;11:59.
48. Demark-Wahnefried W, Rimer BK, Winer EP. Weight gain in women diagnosed with breast cancer. J Am Diet Assoc 1997;97:519.
49. Goodwin PJ, Ennis M, Pritchard KI, et al. Adjuvant treatment and onset of menopause predict weight gain after breast cancer diagnosis. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:120.
50. Ganz PA, Lee JJ, Schag CAC, Sim MS. The CARES: a generic measure of health-related quality of life for patients with cancer. Qual Life Res 1992;1:19.
51. Hann DM, Jacobsen P, Azzarello LM, et al. Measurement of fatigue in cancer patients: development and validation of the Fatigue Symptom Inventory. Qual Life Res 1998;7:301.
52. Andrykowski MA, Curran SL, Lighner R. Off-treatment fatigue in breast cancer survivors: a controlled comparison. J Behav Med 1998;21:1.
53. Loge JH, Abrahamsen AF, Ekeberg O, Kaasa S. Hodgkin's disease survivors more fatigued than the general population. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:253.
54. Bower JE, Ganz PA, Desmond KA, et al. Fatigue in breast cancer survivors: occurrence, correlates, and impact on quality of life. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:743.
55. Ganz PA, unpublished data, 1999.
56. Winer EP, Lindley C, Hardee M, et al. Quality of life in patients surviving at least 12 months following high dose chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow support. Psychooncology
1999;8:167.
57. Passik SD, Newman ML, Brennan M, Tunkel R. Predictors of psychological distress, sexual dysfunction and physical functioning among women with upper extremity lymphedema related to
breast cancer. Psychooncology 1995;4:255.
58. Dorval M, Maunsell E, Taylor-Brown J, Kilpatrick M. Marital stability after breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:54.
59. Andrykowski MA, Curran SL, Studts JL, et al. Psychosocial adjustment and quality of life in women with breast cancer and benign breast problems: a controlled comparison. J Clin Epidemiol
1996;49:827.
60. Litwin MS, Hays RD, Fink A, et al. Quality-of-life outcomes in men treated for localized prostate cancer. JAMA 1995;273:129.
61. Barry HC. Do husbands and wives agree on prostate cancer screening? J Fam Pract 1997;44:443.
62. Volk RJ, Cantor SB, Spann SJ, et al. Preferences of husbands and wives for prostate cancer screening. Arch Fam Med 1997;6:72.
63. Byrne J, Fears TR, Steinhorn SC, et al. Marriage and divorce after childhood and adolescent cancer. JAMA 1989;262:2693.
64. Rauck AM, Green DM, Yasui Y, Mertens A, Robison LL. Marriage in the survivors of childhood cancer: a preliminary description from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. Med Pediatr Oncol
1999;33:60.
65. Green DM, Zevon MA, Hall B. Achievement of life goals by adult survivors of modern treatment for childhood cancer. Cancer 1991;67:206.
66. Walsh PC, Donker PJ. Impotence following radical prostatectomy: insight into etiology and prevention. J Urol 1982;128:492.
67. Fegiz GA, Trenti A, Bezzi M, et al. Sexual and bladder dysfunctions following surgery for rectal carcinoma. Ital J Surg Sci 1986;16:103.
68. Kinn AC, Ohman U. Bladder and sexual function after surgery for rectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1986;29:43.
69. Jhaveri FM, Whitesides EW, Sackett CK, Bissada NK, Mohler JL. Preservation of sexual function in women after anterior exenteration for bladder cancer. Br J Urol 1998;81:312.
70. van Driel MF, Weymar Schultz WC, van de Wiel HB, Hahn DE, Mensink HJ. Female sexual functioning after radical surgical treatment of rectal and bladder cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol
1993;19:183.
71. Schover LR, von Eschenbach AC. Sexual function and female radical cystectomy: a case series. J Urol 1985;134:465.
72. Coogan CL, Hejase MJ, Wahle GR, et al. Nerve sparing post-chemotherapy retroperitoneal lymph node dissection for advanced testicular cancer. J Urol 1996;156:1656.
73. Donohue JP, Foster RS, Rowland RG, et al. Nerve-sparing retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy with preservation of ejaculation. J Urol 1990;144:287; discussion, 291.
74. Donohue JP, Foster RS. Retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy in staging and treatment. The development of nerve-sparing techniques. Urol Clin North Am 1998;25:461.
75. Donohue JP. Nerve-sparing retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy for testis cancer. Evolution of surgical templates for low-stage disease. Eur Urol 1993;23:44.
76. Schover LR, Fife M. Sexual counseling of patients undergoing radical surgery for pelvic or genital cancer. J Psychosoc Oncol 1985;3:21.
77. Mansson A, Johnson G, Mansson W. Quality of life after cystectomy. Comparison between patients with conduit and those with continent caecal reservoir urinary diversion. Br J Urol
1988;62:240.
78. Ganz PA, Rowland JH, Desmond K, Meyerowitz BE, Wyatt GE. Life after breast cancer: understanding women's health-related quality of life and sexual functioning. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:501.
79. Ganz PA, Rowland JH, Meyerowitz BE, Desmond KA. Impact of different adjuvant therapy strategies on quality of life in breast cancer survivors. Recent Results Cancer Res 1998;152:396.
80. Neitzert CS, Ritvo P, Dancey J, et al. The psychosocial impact of bone marrow transplantation: a review of the literature. Bone Marrow Transplantation 1998;22:409.
81. Bines J, Oleske DM, Cobleigh MA. Ovarian function in premenopausal women treated with adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1718.
82. Knobf MT. Natural menopause and ovarian toxicity associated with breast cancer therapy. Oncol Nurs Forum 1998;25:1519.
83. Goodwin PJ, Ennis M, Pritchard KI, Trudeau M, Hoo N. Risk of menopause during the first year after breast cancer diagnosis. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2365.
84. Kornblith AB, Anderson J, Cella DF, et al. Comparison of psychosocial adaptation and sexual function of survivors of advanced Hodgkin disease treated by MOPP, ABVD, or MOPP alternating
with ABVD. Cancer 1992;70:2508.
85. Goldstein I, Feldman MI, Deckers PJ, Babayan RK, Krane RJ. Radiation-associated impotence. A clinical study of its mechanism. JAMA 1984;251:903.
86. Talcott JA, Rieker P, Clark JA, et al. Patient-reported symptoms after primary therapy for early prostate cancer: results of a prospective cohort study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:275.
87. Beard CJ, Propert KJ, Rieker PP, et al. Complications after treatment with external-beam irradiation in early-stage prostate cancer patients: a prospective multiinstitutional outcomes study. J
Clin Oncol 1997;15:223.
88. Day R, Ganz PA, Costantino JP, et al. Health-related quality of life and tamoxifen in breast cancer prevention: a report from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project P-1 study.
J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2659.
89. Mortimer JE, Boucher L, Baty J, et al. Effect of tamoxifen on sexual functioning in patients with breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1488.
90. Kornblith AB, Hollis DR, Zuckerman E, et al. Effect of megestrol acetate on quality of life in a dose-response trial in women with advanced breast cancer. The Cancer and Leukemia Group B. J
Clin Oncol 1993;11:2081.
91. Huggins C, Hodges CV. Studies in prostate cancer. 1. The effects of castration, of estrogen and androgen injection on serum phosphatases in metastatic carcinoma of the prostate. Cancer Res
1941;1:293.
92. Cassileth BR, Hait HI, Kennealey GT, et al. Patients' choice of treatment in stage D prostate cancer. Urology 1989;33:57.

93. Cassileth BR, Soloway MS, Vogelzang NJ, et al. Quality of life and psychosocial status in stage D prostate cancer. Zoladex Prostate Cancer Study Group. Qual Life Res 1992;1:323.
94. Laufer MR. Reproductive issues for cancer patients/survivors. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2631.
95. Byrne J, Mulvihill JJ, Myers MH, et al. Effects of treatment on fertility in long-term survivors of childhood or adolescent cancer. N Engl J Med 1987;317:1315.
96. Sklar CA, Robison LL, Nesbit ME, et al. Effects of radiation on testicular function in long-term survivors of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a report from the Children Cancer Study
Group. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1981.
97. Müller HL, Klinkhammer-Schalke M, Seelbach-Göbel B, Hartman AA, Kühl J. Gonadal function of young adults after therapy of malignancies during childhood or adolescence. Eur J Pediatr
1996;155:763.
98. Hamre MR, Robison LL, Nesbit ME, et al. Effects of radiation on ovarian function in long-term survivors of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a report from the Children's Cancer Study
Group. J Clin Oncol 1987;5:1759.
99. Brewer M, Gershenson DM, Herzog CE, et al. Outcome and reproductive function after chemotherapy for ovarian dysgerminoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2670.
100. Kreuser ED, Hetzel WD, Billia DO, Thiel E. Gonadal toxicity following cancer therapy in adults: significance, diagnosis, prevention and treatment. Cancer Treat Rev 1990;17:169.
101. Viviani S, Santoro A, Ragni G, et al. Gonadal toxicity after combination chemotherapy for Hodgkin's disease. Comparative results of MOPP vs ABVD. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1985;21:601.
102. Opsahl MS, Fugger EF, Sherins RJ, Schulman JD. Preservation of reproductive function before therapy for cancer: new options involving sperm and ovary cryopreservation. Cancer J
1997;3:189.
103. Oktay K, Newton H, Aubard Y, Salha O, Gosden RG. Cryopreservation of immature human oocytes and ovarian tissue: an emerging technology? Fertil Steril 1998;69:1.
104. Janov AJ, Anderson J, Cella DF, et al. Pregnancy outcome in survivors of advanced Hodgkin disease. Cancer 1992;70:688.
105. Mulvihill JJ, McKeen EA, Rosner F, Zarrabi MH. Pregnancy outcome in cancer patients. Experience in a large cooperative group. Cancer 1987;60:1143.
106. Maunsell E, Brisson J, Deschennes L. Psychological distress after initial treatment for breast cancer: a comparison of partial and total mastectomy. J Clin Epidemiol 1989;42:765.
107. Wolberg WH, Romsaas EP, Tanner MA, Malec JF. Psychosexual adaptation to breast cancer surgery. Cancer 1989;63:1645.
108. Shimozuma K, Ganz PA, Petersen L, Hirji K. Quality of life in the first year after breast cancer surgery: rehabilitation needs and patterns of recovery. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1999;56:45.
109. Fallowfield LJ, Hall A. Psychosocial and sexual impact of diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer. Br Med Bull 1991;47:388.
110. Schain WS, d'Angelo TM, Dunn ME, Lichter AS, Pierce LJ. Mastectomy versus conservative surgery and radiation therapy. Psychosocial consequences. Cancer 1994;73:1221.
111. Schover LR, Yetman RJ, Tuason LJ, et al. Partial mastectomy and breast reconstruction. A comparison of their effects on psychosocial adjustment, body image, and sexuality. Cancer
1995;75:54.
112. Sarrel PM. Sexuality and menopause. Obstet Gynecol 1990;75:26S.
113. Cyranowksi JM, Andersen BL. Schemas, sexuality and romantic attachment. J Pers Soc Psychol 1998;74:1364.
114. Kaplan HS. A neglected issue: the sexual side effects of current treatments for breast cancer. J Sex Marital Ther 1992;18:3.
115. Schover LR. The impact of breast cancer on sexuality, body image, and intimate relationships. CA Cancer J Clin 1991;41:112.
116. Cobleigh MA, Berris RF, Bush T, et al. Estrogen replacement therapy in breast cancer survivors. A time for change. JAMA 1994;272:540.
117. Love RR, Cameron L, Connell BL, Leventhal H. Symptoms associated with tamoxifen treatment in postmenopausal women. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:1842.
118. Young-McCaughan S. Sexual functioning in women with breast cancer after treatment with adjuvant therapy. Cancer Nurs 1996;19:308.
119. Schover LR. Sexuality and body image in younger women with breast cancer. Monogr Natl Cancer Inst 1994;16:177.
120. Dorval M, Maunsell E, Deschênes L, Brisson J, Mâsse B. Long-term quality of life after breast cancer: comparison of 8-year survivors with population controls. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:487.
121. Meyerowitz BE, Desmond KE, Rowland JH, Wyatt GE, Ganz PA. Sexuality following breast cancer. J Sex Marital Ther 1999;25:237.
122. Lindley C, Vasa S, Sawyer WT, Winer EP. Quality of life and preferences for treatment following systemic adjuvant therapy for early-stage breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1380.
123. Fransson P, Widmark A. Self-assessed sexual function after pelvic irradiation for prostate carcinoma. Comparison with an age-matched control group. Cancer 1996;78:1066.
124. Widmark A, Fransson P, Tavelin B. Self-assessment questionnaire for evaluating urinary and intestinal late side effects after pelvic radiotherapy in patients with prostate cancer compared with
an age-matched control population. Cancer 1994;74:2520.
125. Fowler FJ Jr, Barry MJ, Lu-Yao GL, et al. Patient-reported complications and follow-up treatment after radical prostatectomy. Urology 1993;42:622.
126. Fowler FJ Jr, Barry MJ, Lu-Yao G, et al. Effect of radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer on patient quality of life: results from a Medicare survey. Urology 1995;45:1007.
127. Fowler FJ Jr, Barry MJ, Lu-Yao G, Wasson JH, Bin L. Outcomes of external-beam radiation therapy for prostate cancer: a study of Medicare beneficiaries in three Surveillance, Epidemiology,
and End Results areas. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:2258.
128. Talcott JA. Quality of life in early prostate cancer. Do we know enough to treat? Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:691.
129. Talcott JA, Rieker P, Propert KJ, et al. Patient-reported impotence and incontinence after nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1117.
130. Crook J, Esche B, Futter N. Effect of pelvic radiotherapy for prostate cancer on bowel, bladder, and sexual function: the patient's perspective. Urology 1996;47:387.
131. Turner SL, Adams K, Bull CA, Berry MP. Sexual dysfunction after radical radiation therapy for prostate cancer: a prospective evaluation. Urology 1999;54:124.
132. Litwin MS, Flanders SC, Pasta DJ, et al. Sexual function and bother after radical prostatectomy or radiation for prostate cancer: multivariate quality-of-life analysis from CaPSURE. Cancer of
the Prostate Strategic Urologic Research Endeavor. Urology 1999;54:503.
133. Schover LR. Sexuality and fertility in urologic cancer patients. Cancer 1987;60:553.
134. Rieker PP, Edbril SD, Garnick MB. Curative testis cancer therapy: psychosocial sequelae. J Clin Oncol 1985;3:1117.
135. Rieker PP, Fitzgerald EM, Kalish LA, et al. Psychosocial factors, curative therapies, and behavioral outcomes. A comparison of testis cancer survivors and a control group of healthy men.
Cancer 1989;64:2399.
136. Bloom JR, Fobair P, Gritz E, et al. Psychosocial outcomes of cancer: a comparative analysis of Hodgkin's disease and testicular cancer. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:979.
137. Schover LR, Gonzales M, von Eschenbach AC. Sexual and marital relationships after radiotherapy for seminoma. Urology 1986;27:117.
138. Gritz ER, Wellisch DK, Siau J, Wang HJ. Long-term effects of testicular cancer on marital relationships. Psychosomatics 1990;31:301.
139. Schover LR, Evans R, von Eschenbach AC. Sexual rehabilitation and male radical cystectomy. J Urol 1986;136:1015.
140. Oishi K, Arai Y, Hashimura T, et al. [Quality of life of the patients with continent urinary reservoir]. Hinyokika Kiyo 1993;39:7.
141. Boyd SD, Feinberg SM, Skinner DG, et al. Quality of life survey of urinary diversion patients: comparison of ileal conduits versus continent Kock ileal reservoirs. J Urol 1987;138:1386.
142. Gerharz EW, Weingartner K, Dopatka T, et al. Quality of life after cystectomy and urinary diversion: results of a retrospective interdisciplinary study [published erratum appears in J Urol
1997;158:2253]. J Urol 1997;158[3 Pt 1]:778.
143. Hart S, Skinner EC, Meyerowitz BE, et al. Quality of life after radical cystectomy for bladder cancer in patients with an ileal conduit, cutaneous or urethral Kock pouch. J Urol 1999;162:77.
144. Andersen BL, Lachenbruch PA, Anderson B, DeProsse C. Sexual dysfunction and signs of gynecological cancer. Cancer 1986;57:1880.
145. Andersen BL. Sexual functioning complications in women with gynecologic cancer. Outcomes and directions for prevention. Cancer 1987;60:2123.
146. Andersen BL, Anderson BA, DeProsse C. Controlled prospective longitudinal study of women with cancer. I. Sexual functioning outcomes. J Consult Clin Psychol 1989;57:683.
147. Schover LR, Fife M, Gershenson DM. Sexual dysfunction and treatment for early stage cervical cancer. Cancer 1989;63:204.
148. Bruner DW, Lanciano R, Keegan M, et al. Vaginal stenosis and sexual function following intracavitary radiation for the treatment of cervical and endometrial carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1993;27:825.
149. Flay LD, Matthews JH. The effects of radiotherapy and surgery on the sexual function of women treated for cervical cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;31:399.
150. Krumm S, Lamberti J. Changes in sexual behavior following radiation therapy for cervical cancer. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol 1993;14:51.
151. Bergmark K, Åvall-Lundqvist E, Dickman PW, Henningsohn L, Steineck G. Vaginal changes and sexuality in women with a history of cervical cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1383.
152. Ganz PA. Overviewquality of life and psychosocial issues. In: Sharp F, Blackett T, Berek J, Bast R, eds. Ovarian cancer 5. Oxford: Isis Medical Media, 1998:409.
153. Andersen BL, Turnquist D, LaPolla J, Turner D. Sexual functioning after treatment of in situ vulvar cancer: preliminary report. Obstet Gynecol 1988;71:15.
154. Weijmar Schultz WC, van de Wiel HB, Bouma J, Janssens J, Littlewood J. Psychosexual functioning after the treatment of cancer of the vulva. A longitudinal study. Cancer 1990;66:402.
155. van Driel MF, Weymar Schultz WC, van de Wiel HB, Hahn DE, Mensink HJ. Female sexual functioning after radical surgical treatment of rectal and bladder cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol
1993;19:183.
156. Koukouras D, Spilotis J, Scopa CD, et al. Radical consequence in the sexuality of male patients operated for colorectal carcinoma. Eur J Surg Oncol 1991;17:285.
157. Schover LR, Jensen SB. Sexuality and chronic illness: a comprehensive approach. New York: Guilford Press, 1988.
158. Taylor JF, Rosen RC, Leiblum SR. Self-report assessment of female sexual function: psychometric evaluation of the brief index of sexual functioning for women. Arch Sex Behav 1994;23:627.
159. Annon J. Behavioral treatment of sexual problems. Honolulu: Enabling Systems, 1974.
160. Schover LR. Sexuality and fertility after cancer. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997.
161. Syrjala KL, Roth-Roemer SL, Abrams JR, et al. Prevalence and predictors of sexual dysfunction in long-term survivors of marrow transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3148.
162. Nachtigall LE. Comparative study: Replens versus local estrogen in menopausal women. Fertil Steril 1994;61:178.
163. Loprinzi CL, Abu-Ghazaleh S, Sloan JA, et al. Phase III randomized double-blind study to evaluate the efficacy of a polycarbophil-based vaginal moisturizer in women with breast cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1997;15:969.
164. Cass I, Runowicz CD. Nonhormonal alternative to treating menopausal symptoms. Am J Managed Care 1998;4:732.
165. Boar's Head Workshop Conference Consensus Statement. Treatment of estrogen deficiency symptoms in women surviving breast cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998;83:1993.
166. The consensus conference on treatment of estrogen deficiency symptoms in women surviving breast cancer. Obstet Gynecol Surv 1998;53(10)[Suppl]:S1.
167. Holmgren PA, Lindskog M, von Schoultz B. Vaginal rings for continuous low-dose release of oestradiol in the treatment of urogenital atrophy. Maturitas 1989;11:55.
168. Ganz PA, Greendale GA, Petersen L, et al. Managing menopausal symptoms in breast cancer survivors: results of a randomized controlled trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000; 92:1054
169. Schover LR. Sexual rehabilitation after treatment for prostate cancer. Cancer 1993; 71[Suppl]:1024.
170. Meinhardt W, Kropman RF, Vermeij P. Comparative tolerability and efficacy of treatments for impotence. Drug Safety 1999;20:133.
171. Goldstein I, Lue TF, Padma-Nathan H, et al. Oral sildenafil in the treatment of erectile dysfunction. Sildenafil Study Group [see comments] [published erratum appears in N Engl J Med
1998;339:59]. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1397.
172. O'Sullivan JD, Hughes AJ. Apomorphine-induced penile erections in Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord 1998;13:536.
173. Earle CM, Seah M, Coulden SE, Stuckey BG, Keogh EJ. The use of the vacuum erection device in the management of erectile impotence. Int J Impot Res 1996;8:237.
174. Opsomer RJ, Wese FX, De Groote P, Van Cangh PJ. The external vacuum device in the management of erectile dysfunction. Acta Urol Belg 1997;65:13.
175. Turner LA, Althof SE, Levine SB, et al. Treating erectile dysfunction with external vacuum devices: impact upon sexual, psychological and marital functioning. J Urol 1990;144:79.
176. Godschalk MF, Chen J, Katz PG, Mulligan T. Treatment of erectile failure with prostaglandin E1: a double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-response study. J Urol 1994;151:1530.
177. Padma-Nathan H, Hellstrom WJ, Kaiser FE, et al. Treatment of men with erectile dysfunction with transurethral alprostadil. Medicated Urethral System for Erection (MUSE) Study Group. N
Engl J Med 1997;336:1.
178. Montague DK. Penile prostheses. An overview. Urol Clin North Am 1989;16:7.

SECTION 56.4 Genetic Counseling
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 56.4
Genetic Counseling
ELLEN T. MATLOFF
ALLEN E. BALE
Introduction
Who is A Candidate for Cancer Genetic Counseling?
Components of the Cancer Genetic Counseling Session
Precounseling Information
Family History
Dysmorphology Screening
Risk Assessment
Dna Testing
Options for Surveillance and Risk Reduction
Follow-Up
Issues In Cancer Genetic Counseling
Psychosocial Issues
Presymptomatic Testing of Children
Confidentiality
Insurance Issues
Discrimination
Future Directions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The availability of clinically based genetic testing has brought with it a growing demand for accurate risk assessment and cancer genetic counseling. Extensive
coverage of this topic by the media and widespread advertising by commercial testing laboratories has further fueled the demand for counseling and testing.
The field of cancer genetic counseling is evolving rapidly to meet the newfound needs of patients and the medical community. Cancer genetic counseling is a
communication process between health care professionals and individuals concerning cancer occurrence and risk in their family. 1 The process, which may include the
entire family through a blend of genetic, medical, and psychosocial assessment and intervention, has been described as a bridge between the fields of traditional
oncology and genetic counseling. 1
The goals of this process include providing clients with an assessment of individual cancer risk while offering the emotional support needed to understand and cope
with this information. 2 The process also involves deciphering whether the cancers in a family are likely to be caused by a mutation in a cancer gene and, if so, which
one. To achieve the informed consent crucial to the testing process, each patient is thoroughly counseled about the associated risks, benefits, and limitations of
testing. If the patient is interested in pursuing testing, the counselor will identify a laboratory that offers appropriate genetic testing and will facilitate sample collection
and shipping and result interpretation. The result session will include detailed counseling about medical management options for early detection and risk reduction
counseling and may include referrals to prevention trials, surveillance programs, and medical specialists.
Counselors find that this process differs from traditional genetic counseling in several ways. Clients seeking cancer genetic counseling are rarely concerned with
reproductive decisions and risks that are often the primary focus in traditional genetic counseling but are instead seeking information about their own and other
relatives' chances of developing cancer. 3,4 Additionally, the risks given are not absolute but change over time as the family and personal history changes and the
patient ages. Perhaps the greatest divergence from traditional genetic counseling is the departure from nondirectiveness. Nondirectiveness, one of the cornerstones
of traditional genetic counseling, can be loosely defined as the tenet of presenting clients with accurate genetic and medical information, providing them with their
options, helping them to choose the option that best fits their needs (free of coercion from the counselor regarding which choices are “right” or “wrong”), and then
supporting their decision. Nondirectiveness is not always appropriate in cancer genetic counseling. Standard screening guidelines and prevention strategies are
presented as recommendations, 5 and the counselor is often proactive in promoting behavioral changes that could reduce the risk of developing cancer. 3 Counseling
for susceptibility testing is based on the nondirective framework, although some data indicate that patients desire more assistance in decision making than their health
care providers offer. 6 Helping patients reach the decision that is most consistent with their personal values and goals and that is best suited to their personal situation
is the ultimate goal of genetic counseling.
Why is cancer genetic counseling necessary? The advances in cancer genetics bring with them new issues involving the medical, psychological, discriminatory, and
ethical side effects of genetic testing for cancer predisposition. 7 Potential clients must be made aware of these risks before testing and, when possible, assisted in
avoiding pitfalls. Additionally, the public demands this resource. 8 Several studies have documented a high level of interest in genetic testing among people who have
one first-degree relative with diagnosed cancer. 9,10,11,12 and 13 Although anticipated interest in testing generally overestimates actual uptake, 14,15,16 and 17 the need for
cancer genetic counseling is great and is bound to grow as more genes are cloned.
At present, a limited number of referral centers across the country specialize in cancer genetic counseling. Graduate programs in genetic counseling are actively
integrating this new body of knowledge into their curricula and are producing more counselors who can provide cancer services. However, some experts insist that the
only way to keep up with the overwhelming demand for counseling will be to educate more physicians and nurses in cancer genetics. 18,19 The feasibility of adding
another time- and energy-consuming task to the clinical burden of these professionals is questionable. A more practical goal may be to educate primary care
providers better in the area of generalized risk assessment so that they can screen their patient populations for individuals at high risk for hereditary cancer and refer
them to comprehensive counseling and testing programs.

WHO IS A CANDIDATE FOR CANCER GENETIC COUNSELING?
Only 5% to 10% of most cancers are due to mutations within inherited cancer susceptibility genes. 20 The key for the clinician is to determine which patients are at
greatest risk to carry one of these mutations. Six risk factors that are common among hereditary cancer families have been identified ( Table 56.4-1). The first is early
age of cancer onset. This risk factor, even in the absence of a family history, has been shown to be associated with an increased frequency of germline mutations in
many types of cancers.21,22,23,24,25 and 26 The second risk factor is the presence of the same cancer in multiple affected relatives on the same side of the pedigree that
are consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance. These cancers do not necessarily have to be of similar histologic type to be caused by a single mutation. The
third risk factor is the clustering of cancers known to be caused by a single gene mutation in one family. Examples include breast-ovarian cancer, pancreatic
cancer–melanoma, and colon-ovarian-uterine cancers. The fourth risk factor is the occurrence of multiple primary cancers in one individual. This includes multiple
primary breast cancers, colon cancers, and melanomas and a single individual with separate cancers known to be caused by a single gene mutation (e.g., breast and
ovarian cancer in a single individual). Ethnicity also plays a role in determining who is at greatest risk to carry a hereditary cancer mutation. Individuals of Jewish
ancestry are at increased risk to carry three specific BRCA1/2 mutations 27 and the I1307K APC allele. 28 Founder BRCA1/2 mutations have also been discovered in
families of French Canadian descent, and mutations in cancer susceptibility genes are likely to be identified in other ethnicities as more subpopulations are
studied.29,30,31 and 32 The final risk factor for a hereditary cancer syndrome is the presence of a cancer that presents unusually, the prime example of which is breast
cancer in a man. These risk factors should be viewed in the context of the entire family history and must be weighed in proportion to the number of individuals who
have not developed cancer.

TABLE 56.4-1. Risks Factors for Hereditary Cancer Syndromes

A less common but extremely important finding is the presence of birth defects or unusual medical findings that are known to be associated with rare hereditary
cancer syndromes. Examples include benign skin findings and thyroid disorders in Cowden syndrome, sebaceous skin tumors in Muir-Torre syndrome, and
supernumerary teeth in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). 33
Another class of candidates for genetic counseling are those patients who are very concerned about their risks for cancer, even in the absence of a strong family
history. Many patients overestimate their risks to develop cancer. This inaccurate perception of risk may have a profound effect on a patient's anxiety level and quality
of life and may have a negative impact on his or her surveillance patterns. 34 Such patients may gain reassurance and empowerment from learning their actual—as
compared to their anticipated—risks for developing cancer and their options to reduce those risks.
At present, breast-ovarian cancer syndrome referrals account for the majority of patients seen in the average cancer genetic counseling clinic. In this chapter, the
breast-ovarian cancer counseling session will serve as a paradigm that all other sessions may follow broadly.

COMPONENTS OF THE CANCER GENETIC COUNSELING SESSION
PRECOUNSELING INFORMATION
Before coming in for genetic counseling, the counselee should be given some basic information about the process. This information, which can be imparted by
telephone or in the form of written material, should outline what the counselee can expect at each session and what information he or she should collect before the
first visit. The counselee can then begin to collect medical and family history information that will be essential for the genetic counseling session.
FAMILY HISTORY
An accurate family history is undoubtedly one of the most essential components of the cancer genetic counseling session. Despite its importance, the thorough family
cancer history has been called “the most severely neglected portion of the patient's medical evaluation,” 35 possibly reflecting a lack of emphasis placed on the family
history during the primary and postgraduate education of physicians. 36 It may also be due, in part, to the lack of knowledge about what to do with the information once
it has been collected.
A thorough family history should include at least two, optimally three, generations. 37 For each individual affected with cancer, it is important to document the exact
diagnosis, age at diagnosis, treatment strategies, and environmental exposures (i.e., occupational exposures, cigarettes, other agents). 5 The current age of the
individual and laterality and occurrence of any other cancers must also be documented. 3 Individuals should be asked whether there are any consanguineous (inbred)
relationships in the family, whether any relatives were born with birth defects or mental retardation, and whether other genetic diseases run in the family, as these
pieces of information could prove important in reaching a diagnosis and in counseling.
It is advised that cancer diagnoses be documented with pathology reports, hospital summaries, or other medical records to maintain accuracy. 3 A study by Love et
al.38 revealed that individuals accurately reported the primary site of cancer only 83% of the time in their first-degree relatives with cancer and 67% and 60% of the
time in second- and third-degree relatives, respectively. It is common for patients to report a uterine cancer as an ovarian cancer or a colon polyp as an invasive
colorectal cancer. These differences, although seemingly subtle to the patient, can make a tremendous difference in risk assessment.
The most common misconception in family history taking is that somehow a maternal family history of breast, ovarian, or uterine cancer is more significant than a
paternal history. Conversely, many still believe that a paternal history of prostate cancer is more significant than a maternal history. Few of the cancer genes
discovered thus far are located on the sex chromosomes; therefore, both maternal and paternal history are significant and must be explored thoroughly.
DYSMORPHOLOGY SCREENING
Congenital anomalies, benign tumors, and unusual dermatologic features occur in a large number of hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes. Examples include
osteomas of the jaw in FAP, palmar pits in Gorlin syndrome, and papillomas of the lips and mucous membranes in Cowden syndrome. Obtaining an accurate medical
history of benign lesions and birth defects and screening for such dysmorphology can have a great impact on diagnosis and counseling. For example, BRCA1/2
testing is unnecessary in a patient with breast cancer who has a family history of thyroid cancer and the orocutaneous manifestations of Cowden syndrome.
RISK ASSESSMENT
Risk assessment is one of the most complicated components of the genetic counseling session. It is crucial to remember that risk assessment changes over time as
the person ages and as the health status of family members changes. 3 Risk assessment can be broken down into three separate components: What is the chance that
the counselee will develop the cancer observed in his or her family (or a genetically related cancer)? What is the chance that the cancers in this family are caused by
a single gene mutation? What is the chance that we can identify the gene mutation in this family with our current knowledge and laboratory techniques?
Cancer clustering in a family may be due to genetic or environmental factors (or both) or may be coincidental because some cancers are common in the general
population. Although inherited factors may be the primary cause of cancers in some families, in others cancer may develop because an inherited factor increases the
individual's susceptibility to environmental carcinogens. 39 It is also possible that members of the same family may be exposed to similar environmental exposures,
owing to shared geography or patterns in behavior and diet that may increase the risk of cancer. 40 Therefore, it is important to distinguish the difference between a
familial pattern of cancer (due to environmental factors or chance) and a hereditary pattern of cancer (due to a shared genetic mutation).
Several models are available to calculate the chance that a woman will develop breast cancer. Each model has its strengths and weaknesses, and the counselor must
decide which model is most appropriate for each individual family. The Gail model for calculating risk takes into account current age, age of first menses, age at first
live birth, and number of previous biopsies. 41 This model may be problematic for women who cannot recall their exact age at menses and who are followed more
aggressively than women without a positive family history and, therefore, may be subjected to biopsy more frequently. Biopsy results are not considered in this model,
so a normal biopsy is weighed equally with a result of atypical hyperplasia. It has also been suggested that the importance of general risk factors for breast cancer,
such as age at first menses and first live birth, may vary in hereditary cancer families. 42 A modified form of the Gail model was used to determine entry into the
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) Breast Cancer Prevention Trial and will also be used for entry into the NSABP P-2 STAR trial. 43
Although this model has utility in determining entry for trials and may be of use for women in the general population who receive frequent breast screening, it is not
appropriate in families in which there is a question of a hereditary cancer syndrome. The Gail model considers only first-degree relatives in its calculations and,
therefore, does not take into account paternal family history and extended family members. It does not weigh ovarian cancer, Jewish ancestry, male breast cancer,

and other factors essential in hereditary risk assessment and is, therefore, not the appropriate tool when hereditary cancer is in question.
Claus et al. 44 created a model that considers limited paternal and maternal family history as well as age of onset of affected relatives in determining empiric cancer
risk. This model allows calculation of individual risk by decade and by lifetime, which is useful in helping women understand that their risk accumulates over time and
is not clumped at their current age. This model does not take ancestry, ovarian cancer, or extended family history into account and is, therefore, not useful in families
in which there appears to be a genetic mutation. Of course, all empiric risks are superseded in families in which DNA testing has revealed a mutation for cancer
predisposition.
When the BRCA1 gene was mapped, risk tables were created based on linkage data from high-risk breast and ovarian cancer families. These tables estimated the
chance that the cancers found in hereditary breast-ovarian cancer families were due to mutations in BRCA1, and these estimates were fairly high. 45 When direct
mutation analysis for BRCA1 became available, the number of families found to carry a mutation was significantly smaller than predicted by linkage studies. This
finding suggests that current techniques do not detect all mutations within the gene. More recent tables reflect the chance of actually finding a mutation within
BRCA1.46 Parmigiani et al. 47 have developed a more sophisticated computer model that calculates the probability of finding a BRCA1 or 2 mutation in a family using a
variety of risk factors. This model is being validated.
DNA TESTING
DNA testing is available for a variety of hereditary cancer syndromes [e.g., breast-ovarian cancer syndrome, hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC), and
hereditary melanoma]. However, despite misrepresentation by the media, 48 testing is feasible for only a small percentage of individuals with cancer. DNA testing
offers the obvious and important advantage of presenting clients with actual risks instead of the empiric risks derived from risk calculation models.
The results of DNA testing are generally provided in person in a result disclosure session. It is recommended that patients bring a close friend or relative with them to
this session who can provide them with emotional support and who can help them to listen to and process the information provided.
One of most crucial aspects of DNA testing is accurate result interpretation. One study found that test results for the hereditary colon cancer syndrome FAP were
misinterpreted more than 30% of the time by those ordering the testing. 49 The potential impact of test results on the patient and his or her family is great; therefore,
accurate interpretation of the results is paramount.
Results of genetic testing fall into three categories: true positive, whereby an individual is found to carry a mutation that is known to be deleterious; true negative,
whereby an individual does not carry the deleterious mutation found in their family and, therefore, the cancer risks are reduced to the population risks; and
indeterminate, whereby a mutation cannot be identified in the affected family members or a genetic change is identified with unknown significance. This result
category is currently the most common outcome.
To pinpoint the mutation in a family, an affected individual likely to carry a mutation should be tested first. This is most often a person affected with the cancer in
question (i.e., the proband). Test subjects should be selected with care, as it is possible for a person to develop sporadic cancer in a hereditary cancer family. If a
mutation is detected in an affected relative, other unaffected family members can be tested for the same mutation with a great degree of accuracy. Family members
who do not carry the mutation found in their family are deemed to be true negative. Those who are found to carry the mutation in their family will have more definitive
information about their risks to develop cancer. This information can be crucial in assisting patients in decision making regarding surveillance and risk reduction.
If a mutation is not identified in the affected relative, it usually means either that the cancers in the family are not caused by a single genetic mutation or that the
mutation in the family is undetectable by current methods. Such results are indeterminate, and other family members cannot be offered accurate predisposition
testing. In some such cases, DNA banking should be offered to the proband for a time in the future when improved testing may become available. A notarized letter
indicating exactly who in the family has access to the DNA should accompany the banked sample.
The result stated as “genetic variant of uncertain significance” must be interpreted with caution. Sometimes, other affected family members can be tested to see
whether the variant segregates with disease in the family. Most of the time, the significance of the variant remains unknown until functional studies are conclusive or
further data are available.
The penetrance of mutations in cancer susceptibility genes is also difficult to interpret. Initial estimates derived from high-risk families provided very high cancer risks
for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. 45 More recent studies of populations that were not selected for family history have revealed lower penetrances. 27 Some
have interpreted these population-based data as being “more accurate” and have suggested that they apply to all families. In fact, the higher range of risk may be
more accurate for families who present with strong histories of breast and ovarian cancer. Because exact penetrance rates cannot be determined for individual
families at this time, it is prudent to provide patients with a range of cancer risk and to explain that their risk probably falls somewhere within this spectrum. 50,51
Female carriers of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations have a 50% to 85% lifetime risk of developing breast cancer and between a 15% to 60% lifetime risk of developing
ovarian cancer. 27,45,52,53,54,55,56 and 57 Carriers of HNPCC mutations have a 65% to 85% lifetime risk of developing colon cancer, and female carriers have a 30% to 40%
lifetime risk of uterine cancer and as great as a 10% risk of ovarian cancer. 58,59
OPTIONS FOR SURVEILLANCE AND RISK REDUCTION
The cancer risk counseling session is a forum to provide counselees with choices, options, and hope ( Table 56.4-2). Mutation carriers can be offered earlier and
aggressive surveillance, chemoprevention plus surveillance, or prophylactic surgery.

TABLE 56.4-2. Methods for Surveillance and Risk Reduction for Selected Hereditary Cancers

It is recommended that individuals at increased risk for breast cancer have annual mammograms beginning between ages 25 and 35 years and annual or semiannual
clinical breast examinations, and that they perform monthly breast self-examinations. 60 BRCA1/2 carriers may take tamoxifen in hopes of reducing their risks of
developing breast cancer. However, although tamoxifen has proven effective in women at risk due to a positive family history of breast cancer, the efficacy of this
intervention in BRCA1/2 carriers is still unknown. 61 The results of preliminary studies indicate that a second chemopreventive agent, raloxifene (EVISTA), may also be
effective in reducing the risk of breast cancer in healthy postmenopausal women. 62 However, this medication is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
only for the prevention of osteoporosis and has not been studied in BRCA1/2-positive women. A current study, the NSABP P-2 STAR trial, is examining the role of this
drug in women at high risk for breast cancer. Data should be available by 2006. Prophylactic bilateral mastectomy is believed to reduce the risk of breast cancer by
more than 90% in women at high risk for the disease 63; however, the efficacy of this procedure specifically in BRCA mutation carriers is unknown. Before genetic
testing was available, it was not uncommon for entire generations of cancer families to have their at-risk organs removed without knowing whether they were
personally at increased risk for their familial cancer. Fifty percent of individuals in hereditary cancer families do not carry the inherited predisposition gene and can be

spared prophylactic surgery or invasive high-risk surveillance regimens. Therefore, it is no longer appropriate to offer prophylactic surgery until a patient is referred for
genetic counseling and, if possible, testing ( Table 56.4-3).64

TABLE 56.4-3. Cancer Genetic Counseling and Testing Resources

Women who carry BRCA1/2 mutations are also at increased risk for developing second contralateral and ipsilateral primary tumors of the breast. 65 These data bring
into question the option of breast-conserving surgery in women at high risk to develop a second primary tumor within the same breast. For this reason, BRCA1/2
carrier status may have a profound impact on surgical decision making in the future. 64
Women who carry BRCA1/2 mutations are also at increased risk for developing ovarian cancer, even if no one in their family has developed this cancer. Surveillance
for ovarian cancer is complex, with the recommended interventions being annual transvaginal ultrasonography and tests of CA-125 levels beginning between the ages
of 25 and 35 years. 60 The effectiveness of such surveillance in detecting ovarian cancers at early and more treatable stages has not been proven in any population.
Oral contraceptives have been shown to reduce the risk of ovarian cancer in women carrying BRCA mutations. 66 The impact of this intervention on breast cancer risk
is not known. However, it is possible that, given the likelihood of mortality from breast versus ovarian cancer, a risk-benefit analysis would favor the use of oral
contraceptives in carriers of BRCA1/2 mutations. 40 Prophylactic oophorectomy is the most effective means to reduce the risk of ovarian cancer, 67 but even women who
have had this procedure may develop primary peritoneal carcinoma. 68,69 This condition is clinically and histologically similar to ovarian cancer but appears to arise
from the cells lining the peritoneal cavity. Some data indicate that BRCA1 carriers who opt for prophylactic oophorectomy also have a reduced chance of developing a
subsequent breast cancer, particularly if they have this surgery before menopause. 70 Premenopausal women who opt for oophorectomy and, therefore, experience
premature surgical menopause may be candidates for hormone replacement therapy (HRT) with the lowest dose of estrogen possible. 40 This may provide some of the
benefits of HRT while minimizing the potential breast cancer–related risks. Preliminary data suggest that premenopausal BRCA1 carriers who have oophorectomies
followed by HRT still have a reduced risk of future breast cancers. 70
The standard surveillance method in carriers of HNPCC mutations is full colonoscopy to the cecum every 1 to 3 years beginning between the ages of 20 and 25
years. 71 Although several studies are investigating chemopreventive options for colorectal cancer, no agents are currently approved for clinical use. Prophylactic
subtotal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis is an option for HNPCC carriers, and a decision analysis revealed that this procedure may offer slightly greater gains in
life expectancy for young HNPCC carriers than surveillance alone. 72,73
Options for endometrial cancer surveillance include endometrial aspirate and transvaginal ultrasonography beginning between the ages of 25 and 35 years. The
efficacy of such surveillance in HNPCC carriers is unknown. Oral contraceptives are known to reduce the risk of endometrial cancer in the general population, 74 but
the impact of this intervention in HNPCC carriers is currently unknown. Prophylactic transabdominal hysterectomy is also an option. Although this option is likely to
reduce risk of uterine cancer significantly, long-term prospective studies of the impact of this intervention on HNPCC carriers have not been performed. Women who
carry HNPCC mutations are also at risk for ovarian cancer and should, therefore, be offered the aforementioned surveillance and risk reduction options for ovarian
cancer.
Management of hereditary melanoma patients involves frequent full-body examination by a dermatologist familiar with pigmented lesions. Semiannual appointments
typically include photography of the entire body, to allow for objective determination of differences in size or appearance of moles, and subsequent excision of any
suspicious lesions. Avoidance of sunlight exposure is recommended. Melanoma is often curable when diagnosed and treated in an early stage.
Genetic counseling and testing are also available for many rare cancer syndromes, including von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, multiple endocrine neoplasia, and FAP.
Surveillance and risk reduction for patients who are known mutation carriers for such conditions may decrease the associated morbidity and mortality of these
syndromes.
FOLLOW-UP
A follow-up letter to the patient is a concrete means of documenting the information conveyed in the sessions so that the patient and his or her family members can
review it over time. (It is crucial that this letter be sent only to the patient and health care professionals to whom the patient has granted access to this information; in
most cases, it should not be placed in the patient's general medical records.) A follow-up phone call is also helpful, particularly in the case of a positive test result.
Some programs provide patients with an annual or biannual newsletter updating them on new information in the field of cancer genetics. A small proportion of patients
may return for a follow-up counseling session months, or even years, after their initial consult to discuss the emergence of new family history data and new clinical
issues or because they are now ready to move forward with genetic testing.

ISSUES IN CANCER GENETIC COUNSELING
PSYCHOSOCIAL ISSUES
The psychosocial impact of cancer genetic counseling cannot be underestimated. Just the process of scheduling a cancer risk counseling session may be fairly
difficult for some individuals with a family history who are not only frightened about their own cancer risk but are reliving painful experiences associated with the
cancer of their loved ones. 2 Counselees may be faced with an onslaught of emotions, including anger, fear of developing cancer, fear of disfigurement and dying,
grief, lack of control, negative body image, and a sense of isolation. 5 Their feelings about cancer will also vary depending on how close they have been to affected
individuals, both emotionally and in geographic proximity, and how often they saw these relatives. Some counselees are wrestling with the fear that insurance
companies, employers, family members, and even future partners will react negatively to their cancer risks. For many, it is a double-edged sword as they balance their
fears and apprehensions about dredging up these issues with the possibility of obtaining reassuring news and much-needed information.
A person's perceived cancer risk is often dependent on many “nonmedical” variables. They may estimate that their risk is higher if they resemble an affected
individual or share some of that individual's personality traits. 5 Their perceived risks will vary depending on whether their relatives were cancer survivors or died
painful deaths from the disease. Many people wonder not whether they are going to get cancer but when. Some first-degree relatives of women with breast cancer
said they felt as though they were living with a sword over their heads or that they were walking time bombs. 75
In their study of women with a first-degree relative who had breast cancer, Lerman et al. 76 found that more than one-half of their respondents reported having intrusive
thoughts and waves of feelings about breast cancer. More than one-third of these nonaffected women reported breast cancer images and associations that intruded
on their awareness, and 20% had difficulty in sleeping because of their breast cancer concerns. Importantly, these authors found that genetic counseling was
significantly less effective among women with higher baseline levels of breast cancer preoccupation. Therefore, they concluded that efforts to provide individuals with
cancer genetic counseling are not likely to be effective unless their cancer anxieties and feelings are also addressed. 76

It might be assumed that fear of cancer motivates individuals to increase their cancer awareness and prevention strategies. On the contrary, Kash et al. 34 found that
women who perceived their breast cancer risks as high were engaged in fewer general preventive health care behaviors (including breast self-examinations and
regular clinical breast examinations) than those women who perceived their risks as only moderate. It is theorized that perhaps these individuals believe that they will
definitely develop breast cancer and are helpless in decreasing their risks, or perhaps they are completely immobilized by their fear or denial. Whatever the reason for
these behaviors, it is obvious that psychological and educational interventions should be a component of cancer genetic counseling.
The counseling session is an opportunity for individuals to express why they believe that they have developed cancer or why their family members have cancer. Some
explanations may revolve around family folklore, and it is important to listen to and address these explanations rather than to dismiss them. 5 In doing this, the
counselor will allow the clients to alleviate their greatest fears and to give more credibility to the “medical” theory. For patients who are moving forward with DNA
testing, a referral to a mental health care professional who can help to facilitate the process is often very helpful.
To date, studies conducted in the setting of pre– and post–genetic counseling have revealed that, at least in the short term, most patients do not experience adverse
psychological outcomes after receiving their test results. 77,78 In fact, preliminary data have revealed that individuals in families with known mutations who seek testing
seem to fare better psychologically at 6 months than those who avoid testing. 79 Although these data are reassuring, it is important to recognize that genetic testing is
an individual decision and will not be right for every patient or every family.
PRESYMPTOMATIC TESTING OF CHILDREN
Presymptomatic testing of children has been widely discussed, and most concur that it is appropriate only when the onset of the condition regularly occurs in
childhood or there are useful interventions that can be applied. 80 For example, DNA-based diagnosis of children and young adults at risk for hereditary medullary
thyroid carcinoma has improved the management of these patients. 81,82 and 83 DNA-based testing for RET mutations is virtually 100% accurate and allows at-risk family
members to make informed decisions about prophylactic thyroidectomy. FAP is a disorder that occurs in childhood and in which mortality can be reduced if detection
is presymptomatic.84,85 Testing is clearly indicated in these instances.
Predisposition testing may also be appropriate if it will be useful to the minor child in making reproductive decisions now or in the near future. 86 Early observations by
Malkin et al. 87 indicated an interest among parents in cancer-predictive testing for their children. Their willingness to have their children undergo testing appeared to
be dependent on the accuracy of the test and the availability of preventive or curative options. Questions have been raised about parents' right to demand testing for
adult-onset diseases. Parents may have a constitutionally protected right to demand that unwilling physicians order this test, but there is little risk for liability for
damages unless the child experiences physical harm as a direct result of this refusal. 80 The child's right not to be tested must be considered. Whenever childhood
testing is not medically indicated, it is preferable that testing decisions be postponed until the children are adults and can decide for themselves whether to be tested.
However, the argument has been made that if a child younger than 18 years is able to appreciate not only the genetic facts but also the emotional and social
consequences, he or she should be allowed to have genetic testing. 88 This subject is highly controversial and will likely continue to be debated.
CONFIDENTIALITY
The level of confidentiality surrounding cancer genetic testing is paramount, owing to concerns of genetic discrimination. Many programs are opting to keep shadow
files separate from the general hospital charts. Patient-identifying data are generally not entered into computer databases that are accessible by modem or a network
of users. Some counseling programs are submitting DNA samples to laboratories by coded number only in an attempt to increase the level of confidentiality. Special
precautions to protect confidentiality should be taken when leaving voice mail messages, at home and at work, regarding patient appointments. Conversations with
patients or other colleagues via E-mail that include patient names are discouraged, as the Internet is not secure. Additionally, genetic counseling summary letters are
sent directly to patients and are copied to the referring physicians only with the explicit permission of the patient. These measures are taken because confidentiality
and genetic discrimination are a grave concern for many of the patients seen in the cancer genetic counseling clinic. 15,74,89
Confidentiality of test results within a family can also be an issue, as genetic counseling and testing often reveal the risk status of family members other than the
patient. Under confidentiality codes, the patient should grant permission before at-risk family members can be contacted. It has been questioned whether family
members could sue a health care professional for negligence if they were identified as at high risk yet not informed. 90 Most recommendations have stated that the
burden of confidentiality lies between the provider and the patient. However, more recent recommendations state that confidentiality should be violated if the potential
harm of not notifying other family members outweighs the harm of breaking a confidence to the patient. 91 There is no patent solution for this difficult dilemma, and
situations must be considered on a case-by-case basis with the assistance of the in-house legal department and ethics committee.
Patients should be counseled about the benefits to other family members of knowing testing results but, at present, the decision is ultimately the patient's. Extended
family members who are notified with the patient's consent may not always be grateful to receive this information and may think that their privacy has been invaded by
being contacted.
INSURANCE ISSUES
Insurance companies are, understandably, in the business of making money. Before issuing health insurance policies, some companies determine the risk that an
individual carries and adjust the premium to match that risk. 92 Information regarding family history, genetic information, and prior diagnostic testing may very well be
used in calculating this risk. This should be clearly conveyed to the patient in the precounseling interview, as it may change the method by which he or she chooses to
pay for the session or for testing. These issues should be discussed in detail again in the counseling session. Although individuals and counselors can attempt to
keep records and results confidential, there is always a risk that this information will reach insurers.
More and more patients are choosing to submit their genetic counseling or testing charges to their health insurance companies. In the last few years, more insurance
companies have agreed to pay for counseling or testing (or both), 93 perhaps in light of decision analyses that show these services and subsequent prophylactic
surgeries to be cost-effective. 94 Letters of justification are often required for insurance companies to cover the charges for testing. These letters must clearly delineate
the impact of testing on the short- and long-term management of the patient being tested. Justification of testing based on assisting other, unaffected family members
is rarely helpful.
DISCRIMINATION
Many health care providers and patients fear that genetic discrimination by health, life, and disability insurance companies resulting from a positive test is a potential
hazard of genetic testing. 95,96 Fear of genetic discrimination by patients has been cited as a major deterrent to genetic testing. 15,74,89 Some data indicate that consumer
fear of genetic discrimination is out of proportion with the actual amount of discrimination experienced 97; however, it is well known that current legislation aimed at
protecting individuals from genetic discrimination is not without loopholes. 98 Patients should be informed of local and national legislation on genetic discrimination as
well as the limitations of these laws.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The field of cancer genetic counseling and testing grew tremendously in the late 1990s. Although cancer genetic counseling is targeted at individuals with strong
personal or family histories of cancer, it is clear that this focus will broaden over the next decade. Genetic testing may be used to guide surgical decision making, as
the risk of new primary tumors is greater in individuals who carry germline mutations. 64,65 Data showing that germline mutations are more frequent in individuals with
early-onset breast and colon cancers, even in the absence of a family history of these diseases, will expand the criteria for genetic testing. 21,22,23,24,25 and 26 Specific
histologic tumor types may indicate that a patient is at increased risk to carry a germline mutation 99 and may prompt a referral to genetic counseling. The U.S. Food
and Drug Administration approval of tamoxifen as a method of breast cancer risk reduction for women at moderately increased risk of the disease will likely bring an
onslaught of genetic counseling referrals. These patients will need to know their personal risks of developing breast cancer, and the counseling session will include a
detailed discussion of their personal risks for osteoporosis, coronary heart disease, menopausal symptoms, and cognitive deficiencies and the pros and cons of HRT
versus selective estrogen receptor modulators, such as tamoxifen. The discovery of modifying genes 100 and specific environmental factors that affect the lifetime risks

of cancer associated with current susceptibility genes will render it possible to refine lifetime cancer risks in individual families.
Perhaps the most profound new direction in cancer genetics will be the integration of genetic testing for high-prevalence, low-penetrance mutations, such as the APC
mutation I1307K. I1307K is a common mutation among Ashkenazi Jews that is associated with an increased, but relatively modest, risk of colorectal cancer. 28 The
utility of such testing among Jews with a family history of colon cancer has been questioned, as increased surveillance is recommended, owing to the family history,
regardless of the test result. Gruber et al. 101 described that Ashkenazi Jewish individuals with no family history of colon cancer may actually derive the most benefit
from such testing, as a positive test result would elucidate which patients in that population would benefit from increased colorectal surveillance. This shift in
emphasis from rare, high-risk mutation screening to broad screening for lower-penetrance mutations could change the face of the field of cancer genetic counseling.
The combination of technologic advances in genetic testing, new pharmacologic developments for cancer risk reduction, and increased utility for testing in high- and
moderate-risk populations will result in a significant expansion in the field of cancer genetic counseling. Maintenance of high standards for thorough genetic
counseling, informed consent, and accurate result interpretation will be paramount in reducing potential risks and maximizing the benefits of this technology in the
next century.
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Beth N. Peshkin, MS, for her insightful review of this chapter.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Peters J. Breast cancer genetics: relevance to oncology practice. Cancer Control 1995;May/June:195.
2. Kelly PT. Informational needs of individuals and families with hereditary cancers. Semin Oncol Nurs 1992;8:288.
3. Peters JA. Familial cancer risk: 1. Impact on today's oncology practice. J Oncol Manage 1994;Sept/Oct:18.
4. Kelly PT. Genetic counseling with the cancer patient's family. Curr Probl Cancer 1983;7:15.
5. Schneider KA. Counseling about cancer: strategies for genetic counselors. Boston: Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 1994.
6. Geller G, Bernhardt BA, Doksum T, et al. Decision making about breast cancer susceptibility testing: How similar are the attitudes of physicians, nurse practitioners, and at-risk women? J Clin
Oncol 1998;16:2868.
7. Lerman C, Rimer BK, Engstrom PF. Cancer risk notification: psychosocial and ethical implications. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:1275.
8. Peters JA. Familial cancer risk: II. Breast cancer risk counseling and genetic susceptibility testing. J Oncol Manage 1994;Nov/Dec:14.
9. Lerman C, Seay J, Balshem A, Audrain J. Interest in genetic testing among first-degree relatives of breast cancer patients. Am J Med Genet 1995;57:385.
10. Benkendorf JL, Reutenauer JE, Hughes CA, et al. Patients' attitudes about autonomy and confidentiality in genetic testing for breast-ovarian cancer susceptibility. Am J Med Genet
1997;73:296.
11. Durfy SJ, Bowen DJ, McTiernan A, et al. Attitudes and interest in genetic testing for breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility in diverse groups of women in western Washington. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1999;8:369.
12. Glanz K, Grove J, Lerman C, et al. Correlates of intentions to obtain genetic counseling and colorectal cancer gene testing among at-risk relatives from three ethnic groups. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 1999;8:329.
13. Smith KR, Croyle RT. Attitudes toward genetic testing for colon cancer risk. Am J Public Health 1995;85:1435.
14. Lerman C, Narod S, Schulman K, et al. BRCA1 testing in families with hereditary breast-ovarian cancer. A prospective study of patient decision making and outcomes. JAMA 1996;275:1885.
15. Lynch HT, Lemon SJ, Durham C, et al. A descriptive study of BRCA1 testing and reactions to disclosure of test results. Cancer 1997;79:2219.
16. Croyle RT, Lerman C. Interest in genetic testing for colon cancer susceptibility: cognitive and emotional correlates. Prev Med 1993;22:284.
17. Lerman C, Hughes C, Trock BJ. Genetic testing in families with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. JAMA 1999;281:1618.
18. Cotton P. Prognosis, diagnosis, or who knows? Time to learn what gene tests mean. JAMA 1995;273:93.
19. Collins FS. Preparing health professionals for the genetic revolution. JAMA 1997; 278(15):1285.
20. Claus EB, Schildkraut JM, Thompson WD, et al. The genetic attributable risks of breast and ovarian cancer. Cancer 1996;77:2318.
21. FitzGerald MG, MacDonald DJ, Krainer M, et al. Germ-line BRCA1 mutations in Jewish and non-Jewish women with early-onset breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1996;334:143.
22. Langston AA, Malone KE, Thompson JD, et al. BRCA1 mutations in a population-based sample of young women with breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1996;334:137.
23. Krainer M, Silva-Arrieta S, FitzGerald MG, et al. Differential contributions of BRCA1 and BRCA2 to early-onset breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1416.
24. Farrington SM, Lin-Goerke J, Ling J, et al. Systematic analysis of hMSH2 and hMLH1 in young colon cancer patients and controls. Am J Hum Genet 1998;63:749.
25. Syngal S, Fox EA, Li C, et al. Interpretation of genetic test results for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer: implications for clinical predisposition testing. JAMA 1999;282:247.
26. Peto J, Collins N, Barfoot R, et al. Prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations in patients with early-onset breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:943.
27. Struewing JP, Hartge P, Wacholder S, et al. The risk of cancer associated with specific mutations of BRCA1 and BRCA2 among Ashkenazi Jews. N Eng J Med 1997;336:1401.
28. Gryfe R, Nicola ND, Lal G, Gallinger S, Redston M. Inherited colorectal polyposis and cancer risk of the APC I1307K polymorphism. Am J Hum Genet 1999;64:378.
29. Tonin PT, Mes-Masson A-M, Futreal PA, et al. Founder BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in French Canadian breast and ovarian cancer families. Am J Hum Genet 1998;63:1341.
30. Santarosa M, Viel A, Dolcetti R, et al. Low incidence of BRCA1 mutations among Italian families with breast and ovarian cancer. Int J Cancer 1998;78:581.
31. Tang NLS, Pang C-P, Yeo W, et al. Prevalence of mutations in the BRCA1 gene among Chinese patients with breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91(10):882.
32. Weber TK, Chin H-M, Rodriguez-Bigas M, et al. Novel hMLH1 and hMSH2 germline mutations in African Americans with colorectal cancer. JAMA 1999;281:2316.
33. Lindor NM, Greene MH. The Mayo Familial Cancer Program. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90(14):1039.
34. Kash KM, Holland JC, Halper MS, Miller DG. Psychological distress and surveillance behaviors of women with a family history of breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:24.
35. Lynch HT. Cancer and the family history trail. NY State J Med 1991;91:145.
36. Lynch HT, Kullander S. Introduction to cancer genetics in women. In: Lynch HT, Kullander S, eds. Cancer genetics in women, vol 1. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1987.
37. Eng C, Stratton M, Ponder B, et al. Familial cancer syndromes. Lancet 1994;343:709.
38. Love RR, Evan AM, Josten DM. The accuracy of patient reports of a family history of cancer. J Chronic Dis 1985;38:289.
39. Hodgson SV, Maher ER. A practical guide to human genetics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
40. Olopade OI, Weber BL. Breast cancer genetics: toward molecular characterization of individuals at increased risk for breast cancer: II. PPO Updates 1998;12(11):1.
41. Gail MH, Brinton LA, Byar DP, et al. Projecting individualized probabilities of developing breast cancer for white females who are being examined annually. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:1879.
42. Colditz GA, Rosner BA, Speizer FE. Risk factors for breast cancer according to family history of breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:365.
43. Anderson SJ, Ahnn S, Duff K. NSABP breast cancer prevention trial risk assessment program, version 2 [Technical Report]. Pittsburgh, PA: National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel
Project Biostatistical Center, 1992.
44. Claus EB, Risch N, Thompson WD. Autosomal dominant inheritance of early-onset breast cancer. Cancer 1994;73:643.
45. Ford D, Easton DF, Bishop DT, et al. Risks of cancer in BRCA1-mutation carriers. Lancet 1994;343:692.
46. Couch FJ, DeShano ML, Blackwood A, et al. BRCA1 mutations in women attending clinics that evaluate the risk of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1997;336(20):1409.
47. Parmigiani G, Berry DA, Agiular O. Determining carrier probabilities for breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2. Am J Hum Genet 1998;62:145.
48. Richards MPM, Hallowell N, Green JM, Murton F, Statham H. Counseling families with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer: a psychosocial perspective. J Genet Couns 1995;4:219.
49. Giardiello FM, Brensinger JD, Petersen GM, et al. The use and interpretation of commercial APC gene testing for familial adenomatous polyposis. N Engl J Med 1997;336:823.
50. Lynch HT, Watson P, Tinley S, et al. An update on DNA-Based BRCA1/BRCA2 genetic counseling in hereditary breast cancer. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1999;109:91.
51. Easton DF, Ford D, Bishop T, et al. Breast and ovarian cancer incidence in BRCA1-mutation carriers. Am J Hum Genet 1995;56:265.
52. Easton DF, Steele L, Fields P, et al. Cancer risks in two large breast cancer families linked to BRCA2 on chromosome 13q12-13. Am J Hum Genet 1997;61:120.
53. Struewing JP, Brody LC, Erdos MR, et al. Detection of eight BRCA1 mutations in 10 breast/ovarian cancer families, including 1 family with male breast cancer. Am J Hum Genet 1995;57:1.
54. Friedman LS, Gayther SA, Kurosaki T, et al. Mutation analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in a male breast cancer population. Am J Hum Genet 1997;60:313.
55. Serova OM, Mazoyer S, Puget N, et al. Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 in breast cancer families: Are there more breast cancer-susceptibility genes? Am J Hum Genet 1997;60:486.
56. Phelan CM, Lancaster JM, Tonin P, et al. Mutation analysis of the BRCA2 gene in 49 site-specific breast cancer families. Nat Genet 1996;13:120.
57. Wooster R, Bignell G, Lancaster J, et al. Identification of the breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA2. Nature 1995;378:789.
58. Marra G, Boland CR. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1114.
59. Aarnio M, Mecklin J-P, Aaltonen LA, et al. Lifetime risk of different cancers in hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) syndrome. Int J Cancer 1995;64:430.
60. Burke W, Daly M, Garber J, et al. Recommendations for follow-up care of individuals with an inherited predisposition to cancer: II. BRCA1 and BRCA2. JAMA 1997;277:997.
61. Fisher B, Costantino JP, Wickerman DL, et al. Tamoxifen for the prevention of breast cancer: report of the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project P-1 study. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90:1371.
62. Cummings SR, Eckert S, Krueger KA, et al. The effect of raloxifene on risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women: results from the MORE randomized trial. JAMA 1999;281:2189.
63. Hartmann LC, Schaid DJ, Woods JE, et al. Efficacy of bilateral prophylactic mastectomy in women with a family history of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;340:77.
64. Matloff ET, Peshkin BN, Ward BA. The impact of genetic screening on surgical decision making in breast cancer. In: Szabo Z, Lewis JE, Fantini GA, Savalgi RS, eds. Surgical technology
international VII: international developments in surgery and surgical research. San Francisco: Universal Medical Press, 1998.
65. Turner BC, Harold E, Matloff E, et al. BRCA1/BRCA2 germline mutations in locally recurrent breast cancer patients after lumpectomy and radiation therapy: implications for breast-conserving
management in patients with BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations. J Clin Oncol 1999;10:3017.
66. Narod SA, Risch H, Moslehi R, et al. Oral contraceptives and the risk of hereditary ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med 1998;339:424.
67. American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology. Committee opinion: breast-ovarian cancer screening. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;176:1.
68. Piver MS, Jishi MF, Tsukada Y, et al. Primary peritoneal carcinoma after prophylactic oophorectomy in women with a family history of ovarian cancer. Cancer 1993;71:2751.
69. Struewing JP, Watson P, Easton DF, et al. Prophylactic oophorectomy in inherited breast/ovarian cancer families. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1995;17:33.
70. Rebbeck TR, Levin AM, Eisen A, et al. Breast cancer risk after bilateral prophylactic oophorectomy in BRCA1 mutation carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91(17):1475.
71. Burke W, Petersen G, Lynch P, et al. Recommendations for follow-up care of individuals with an inherited predisposition to cancer. Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. JAMA 1997;277:915.
72. DeCosse JJ. Surgical prophylaxis of familial colon cancer: prevention of death from familial colorectal cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1995;17:31.
73. Syngal S, Weeks JC, Schrag D, et al. Benefits of colonoscopic surveillance and prophylactic colectomy in patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer mutations. Ann Intern Med
1998;129:787.
74. Silverberg SG, Makowski EL. Endometrial carcinoma in young women taking oral contraceptive agents. Obstet Gynecol 1975;46:503.
75. Kelly PT. Breast cancer risk analysis: a genetic epidemiology service for families. J Genet Couns 1992;1:155.
76. Lerman C, Lustbader E, Rimer B, et al. Effects of individualized breast cancer risk counseling: a randomized trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:286.

77. Lerman C, Narod S, Schulman K, et al. BRCA1 testing in families with hereditary breast-ovarian cancer: a prospective study of patient decision making and outcomes. JAMA
1996;275(24):1885.
78. Croyle RT, Smith KR, Botkin JR, et al. Psychological responses to BRCA1 mutation testing: preliminary findings. Health Psychol 1997;16:63.
79. Lerman C, Hughes C, Lemon SJ, et al. What you don't know can hurt you: adverse psychologic effects in members of BRCA1-linked and BRCA2-linked families who decline genetic testing. J
Clin Oncol 1998:16:1650.
80. Clayton EW. Removing the shadow of the law from the debate about genetic testing of children. Am J Med Genet 1995;57:630.
81. Ledger GA, Khosia S, Lindor NM, Thibodeau SN, Gharib H. Genetic testing in the diagnosis and management of multiple endocrine neoplasia type II. Ann Intern Med 1995;122:118.
82. Lips CJ, Landsvater RM, Hoppener JW, et al. Clinical screening as compared with DNA analysis in families with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. N Engl J Med 1994;331:828.
83. Wells SA Jr, Chi DD, Toshima K, et al. Predictive DNA testing and prophylactic thyroidectomy in patients at risk for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. Ann Surg 1994;220:237.
84. Rhodes M, Bradburn DM. Overview of screening and management of familial adenomatous polyposis. Gut 1992;33:125.
85. Lerman C, Marshall J, Audrain J, et al. Genetic testing for colon cancer susceptibility: anticipated reactions of patients and challenges to providers. Int J Cancer 1996;69:58.
86. Wertz DC, Fanos JH, Reilly PR. Genetic testing for children and adolescents: Who decides? JAMA 1994;272:875.
87. Malkin D, Australie K, Shuman C, Barrera M, Weksberg R. Childhood cancer: parental attitudes to genetic counseling and predictive testing. Am J Hum Gen 1995;57:A156(abst).
88. Dickenson DL. Can children and young people consent to be tested for adult onset genetic disorders? BMJ 1999;318:1063.
89. Bluman LG, Rimer BK, Berry DA, et al. Attitudes, knowledge, and risk perceptions of women with breast and/or ovarian cancer considering testing for BRCA1 and BRCA2. J Natl Cancer Inst
1999;17:1040.
90. Tsoucalas CL. Legal aspects of cancer geneticsscreening, counseling, and registers. In: Lynch HT, Kullander S, eds. Cancer genetics in women, vol 1. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1987:9.
91. The American Society of Human Genetics Social Issues Subcommittee on Familial Disclosure. ASHG statement: professional disclosure of familial genetic information. Am J Hum Genet
1998;62:474.
92. ASHG Ad Hoc Committee on Insurance Issues in Genetic Testing. Background statement: genetic testing and insurance. Am J Hum Genet 1995;56:327.
93. Manley SA, Pennell RL, Frank TS. Insurance coverage of BRCA1 and BRCA2 sequence analysis. J Genet Couns 1998;7(6):A462.
94. Grann VR, Whang W, Jacobson JS, et al. Benefits and costs of screening Ashkenazi Jewish women for BRCA1 and BRCA2. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:494.
95. Lapham EV, Kozma C, Weiss JO. Genetic discrimination: perspectives of consumers. Science 1996;274:621.
96. Billings PR, Kohn MA, de Cuevas M, et al. Discrimination as a consequence of genetic testing. Am J Hum Genet 1992;50:476.
97. Wingrove KJ, Norris J, Barton PL, et al. Experiences and attitudes concerning genetic testing and insurance in a Colorado population: a survey of families diagnosed with fragile X syndrome.
Am J Med Genet 1996;64:378.
98. Smetanka SL. The asymptomatic ill and genetic discrimination: 2. Health Care Law Monogr 1998;9:3.
99. Eisinger F, Jacquemier J, Charafe-Jauffret E, et al. More about multifactorial analysis of difference between sporadic breast cancers and cancers involving BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91(16):1421.
100. Rebbeck TR, Kantoff PW, Krithivas K, et al. Modification of BRCA1-associated breast cancer risk by the polymorphic androgen-receptor CAG repeat. Am J Hum Genet 1999;64: 1371.
101. Gruber SB, Petersen GM, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Cancer, crash sites, and the new genetics of neoplasia. Gastroenterology 1999;116(1):210.

SECTION 56.5 Psychological Issues
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 56.5
Psychological Issues
MARY JANE MASSIE
LISA CHERTKOV
ANDREW J. ROTH
Psychiatric Disorders in Cancer Patients
Prevalence
Depression
Cancer-Related Suicide
Anxiety
Delirium
Psychiatric Symptoms in Cancer Patients with Pain
Unconventional Cancer Treatments
Psychotherapeutic Interventions with Cancer Patients
Individual Psychotherapy
Group Psychotherapy
Self-Help And Mutual Support Programs
Survivor Issues
Chapter References

PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS IN CANCER PATIENTS
One-third of patients with cancer report a degree of anxiety or depression that requires psychiatric treatment. 1,2 In the past, symptoms of emotional distress were often
unrecognized, undetected and, as a result, untreated. In this chapter, we review the normal responses to cancer; the most frequently encountered psychiatric
disorders; and psychotherapeutic, pharmacologic, and behavioral management of these disorders.
There are characteristic normal responses to receiving a diagnosis of cancer. A period of initial disbelief, denial, or despair is common and generally lasts only a few
days. Subsequently, many have a dysphoric mood, with anxiety symptoms, depressed mood, anorexia, insomnia, or irritability lasting a few weeks. The ability to
concentrate and to carry out usual daily activities is impaired, and intrusive thoughts of the illness and uncertainty about the future are present. Adaptation usually
begins after several weeks and continues for months to years as most patients integrate new information, confront reality issues, find reasons for optimism, and
resume activities. 3
The patient's ability to successfully manage a cancer diagnosis depends on medical, psychological, and social factors and commonly changes over the course of the
illness. These factors include the disease itself (i.e., site, symptoms, clinical course, prognosis, type of treatments required); prior level of adjustment, especially to
medical illness; the threat that cancer poses to attaining age-appropriate developmental tasks and goals (i.e., adolescence, career, family, retirement); cultural,
spiritual, and religious attitudes; the presence of emotionally supportive persons in the patient's environment; the patient's potential for physical and psychological
rehabilitation; the patient's own personality and coping style; prior experience with cancer; and history of losses.
PREVALENCE
There have been many assumptions about the psychological state of cancer patients, varying between the assumption that all patients must be depressed and need
help and the opposite assumption that most manage well and few need psychiatric intervention. Prevalence studies counter these extreme attitudes. In the first
comprehensive study, the Psychosocial Collaborative Oncology Group reported that of 215 randomly selected hospitalized and ambulatory patients at three major
cancer centers, 47% met criteria for a psychiatric disorder. 4 Of the cancer patients who had an identified psychiatric disorder, 68% had an adjustment disorder with
depressed, anxious, or mixed mood; 13% had major depression; 8% had an organic mental disorder (i.e., delirium); 7% had a personality disorder; and 4% had an
anxiety disorder. Depressive disorders accounted for the majority of diagnoses. Nearly 90% of the psychiatric disorders observed were either reactions to, or
manifestations of, disease or treatment. Only 11% of patients had prior psychiatric illness. Patients with cancer are thus largely psychologically healthy individuals
who have emotional distress related to illness. However, there is a significant incidence of psychiatric illness, as approximately 25% of all cancer patients experience
significant depression, irrespective of their hospital and physical status. 5
DEPRESSION
Depression is clearly the most prevalent psychiatric symptom in cancer patients. Depression can be distinguished from normal sadness and anticipatory grieving
based on the nature and severity of the symptoms, their duration and intensity, and their impact on functioning. Depression in cancer patients results from (1) stress
related to the cancer diagnosis and treatment; (2) medications ( Table 56.5-1); (3) underlying neurologic or medical problems, such as nutritional deficiencies (folate,
vitamin B12), endocrine disturbances (thyroid abnormalities, adrenal insufficiency), brain metastases, and leptomeningeal disease; or (4) recurrence of a preexisting
depressive syndrome or bipolar mood disorder. The emotional stress of the cancer experience and medications are the most common causes of depression. Whereas
the diagnosis of depression in physically healthy patients depends heavily on the somatic symptoms of anorexia, fatigue, and weight loss, these indicators are of
lesser value in the assessment of a cancer patient, since they are common to both cancer and depression. Diagnosis must rest on psychological or cognitive
symptoms: anhedonia, dysphoric mood, feelings of hopelessness-helplessness-worthlessness-guilt, poor self-esteem, or suicidality. Cancer patients are at higher risk
for depression if they are in poor physical condition, have inadequately controlled pain, are in the advanced stages of illness, have a history of depression, or have
other significant life stresses or losses. 5 An increased risk has also been associated with pancreatic, head and neck, and lung cancer.

TABLE 56.5-1. Medications That Can Cause Depression in Cancer Patients

Early detection and aggressive treatment of depression is essential in cancer patients. Psychoeducation about normal responses to coping with the stresses of cancer
and identification of symptoms requiring treatment is the first step. Despite tremendous advances in efforts to destigmatize psychiatric illness and treatment, many
patients continue to be reluctant to seek counseling or to consider psychotropic medications. The oncologist and nursing staff play essential roles in communicating
the importance of treating the whole person, and attending to the psychological distress that many patients experience. Referral for psychiatric evaluation when
indicated is a significant opportunity to validate the patient's feelings of distress and provide supportive counseling. A recent report by Watson et al. 6 that a high
helplessness-hopelessness score has a detrimental effect on 5-year survival in women with early breast cancer and that a high score for depression is linked to a

significantly reduced chance of survival is provocative and calls for more research in the identification and treatment of the depressed cancer patient. Currently, a
range of psychopharmacologic and psychotherapeutic treatments is available for depression ( Table 56.5-2).

TABLE 56.5-2. Antidepressants Commonly Prescribed for Cancer Patients

Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors and Other New Antidepressants
The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are the first-line antidepressants prescribed in cancer settings because they are effective, with few side effects
and few drug interactions. The SSRIs (e.g., fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, and citralopram) have proven as effective as tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) but with
less sedative and autonomic effects. The most common side effects are mild nausea, gastrointestinal disturbance, headache, somnolence or insomnia, and a brief
period of increased anxiety. SSRIs can cause sexual dysfunction in both men and women, a side effect that often leads to cessation of the drug, although there are a
number of interventions that may address this symptom. There has been contradictory information about the potential for appetite suppression with SSRIs as they
have been demonstrated to cause transient anorexia but have also been successfully used in patients with eating disorders to improve food intake. Some cancer
patients experience transient weight loss; however, weight usually returns to baseline level, and the anorectic properties of these drugs have not been a limiting factor
in this population. The SSRIs do vary in their metabolism, with paroxetine having no active metabolites and sertraline having relatively few and both paroxetine and
sertraline having short half-lives. The newest SSRI, citalopram, may be less likely to cause gastrointestinal symptoms and anxiety. Fluoxetine, sertraline, and
paroxetine have been used to reduce both the number and intensity of hot flashes in nondepressed women who become menopausal after chemotherapy for breast
cancer.
Bupropion and trazodone are prescribed less frequently than the SSRIs for individuals with cancer. Bupropion's activating profile makes it useful in lethargic patients,
but it is associated with anorexia and increased seizure risk and should be avoided in patients with a history of seizures or brain tumor and in those who are
malnourished. Bupropion has been demonstrated to improve the chances of success for patients attempting to quit smoking tobacco and thus may be especially
important in patients with lung or head and neck cancers. Trazodone is strongly sedating and in low doses (25 to 100 mg q.h.s.) is helpful in the treatment of the
depressed cancer patient with insomnia. Trazodone has been associated with priapism and should, therefore, be used with caution in male patients. The use of
venlafaxine, nefazodone, and mirtazapine has not been studied in cancer patients. Venlafaxine affects both norepinephrine and serotonin neurotransmitter systems,
but it does not produce the same uncomfortable antimuscarinic and antiadrenergic side effects as the tricyclic antidepressants. Hypertensive side effects at higher
doses can be problematic in medically ill patients. Nefazodone also affects serotonin and norepinephrine systems and is useful in those with agitated depression or
insomnia. Mirtazapine, another sedating antidepressant, is similarly efficacious for patients with agitated depression and insomnia and is currently under study for its
potential analgesic and antiemetic effects. Bupropion, nefazodone, and mirtazapine are less likely to cause sexual dysfunction than the SSRIs and venlafaxine.
Tricyclic Antidepressants
The tricyclic antidepressants are still used to treat depression in adults and children with cancer. Nortriptyline and desipramine have the most favorable side effect
profiles for cancer patients, with less anticholinergic and sedating symptoms. For reasons that are unclear, depressed cancer patients often show a therapeutic
response to a tricyclic at much lower doses (75 to 125 mg/d) than are usually required in physically healthy depressed patients (150 to 300 mg/d). Obtaining serum
levels of the medications is helpful in titrating dosages and monitoring toxicity. The beneficial effects on appetite and sleep are frequently immediate, while the effects
on mood may be delayed. Tricyclic antidepressants have been favored in medical settings because of their demonstrated analgesic effects in some patients.
However, they are notorious for their side effects, such as hypotension and cardiac conduction disturbances.
Psychostimulants
In cancer patients, low doses of psychostimulants (i.e., dextroamphetamine, methylphenidate, and pemoline) promote a sense of well-being, decrease fatigue, and
stimulate appetite. Psychostimulants offer clear benefits, especially in terminally medically ill patients, as there may be an improvement in symptoms within hours to
days.
Psychostimulants can also potentiate the analgesic effects of opioid analgesics and are commonly used to counteract opioid-induced sedation. As tolerance develops,
an adjustment of the dose is necessary. Side effects at low doses include insomnia, tachycardia, euphoria, and mood lability. High doses and long-term use may
produce nightmares, insomnia, and paranoia. Patients should be cardiologically and neurologically stable before starting a stimulant.
Psychostimulant dosing is usually at 8 a.m. and noon to avoid any potential for sleep disturbance. Pemoline, a gentler psychostimulant available in chewable form
with buccal absorption, may be chosen for more frail, debilitated patients or for those who cannot swallow. However, pemoline should be used with caution in patients
with renal impairment; liver and renal function tests should be monitored periodically. Typically, patients are maintained on a psychostimulant for 1 to 2 months, after
which time many can discontinue these medications without a recurrence of depressive symptoms. Those who experience further depressive symptoms can be
maintained on a psychostimulant for longer periods, and tapering may be aided by concurrent use of another antidepressant.
Mood Stabilizers
Patients with a history of bipolar disorder (manic-depressive illness) maintained on mood stabilizers must be continued on their medications throughout treatment.
They may require close psychiatric monitoring, as the stresses of their illness and treatment place them at high risk for episodes of severe affective illness. There are
few studies of the use of mood stabilizers during cancer treatment. Patients who have been treated with lithium carbonate should be maintained on it throughout their
cancer treatment, but close monitoring is necessary, as patients are vulnerable to toxicity in the setting of fluid and electrolyte imbalances, such as during
perioperative periods, in critically ill patients with renal dysfunction, or in those receiving potentially nephrotoxic drugs. Use of carbamazepine as a mood stabilizer
can be problematic in cancer patients because of its marrow-suppressing properties. Valproic acid, on the other hand, is better tolerated and considered to be quite
efficacious. Gabapentin is currently under study as a mood stabilizer. It is well tolerated with few side effects and has a growing role in the treatment of neuropathic
pain.
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
If a patient has responded well to a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) for depression before treatment for cancer, its continued use is warranted. Most
psychiatrists, however, are reluctant to start depressed cancer patients on MAOIs because of the difficulty of maintaining dietary restrictions in patients who may
already be confronting nutritional problems due to their illness and treatment. These drugs may also be contraindicated in patients receiving the antineoplastic
procarbazine, because it has some monoamine oxidase inhibitory activity. Although MAOIs have demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of depression, the risk of
hypertensive crisis and serotonin syndrome due to drug interactions (i.e., meperidine) has led to substantial concern about their safety.
Electroconvulsive Therapy

Electroconvulsive therapy is one of the most effective treatments for depression in patients who are medically ill and unable to tolerate psychotropic medications.
Electroconvulsive therapy continues to be a viable option for patients who are refractory to antidepressants, for whom medications are medically contraindicated, or
for those with psychotic features, dangerous suicidality, or self-injurious behavior. The most common side effects include anterograde amnesia that usually improves
within days to weeks of the treatment.
CANCER-RELATED SUICIDE
Although few cancer patients commit suicide, they may be at a somewhat greater risk than the general population. Passive suicidal thoughts are relatively common;
confronting mortality while battling a life-threatening illness leads many to contemplate suicide. Consideration of death and dying is complex for patients who are
faced with substantial suffering and are struggling to assess quality-of-life concerns. Suicide may transiently appear to be a means of maintaining a sense of control
and a reassuring theoretic alternative for patients overwhelmed by uncertainty, feelings of helplessness, and fears of suffering. The actual suicide rate in cancer
patients is difficult to confirm as death certificates may reflect an underreporting of suicide in patients with advanced illness. The degree to which noncompliance or
treatment refusal represents a deliberate decision to end life is unknown.
Factors associated with an increased risk of suicide in cancer patients include being male, having tumors associated with alcohol and tobacco abuse, advanced stage
of disease, poor prognosis, delirium with poor impulse control, inadequately controlled pain, depression, history of psychiatric illness, current or previous alcohol or
substance abuse, previous suicide attempts, physical and emotional exhaustion, and social isolation. 5,7 Suicidal depression has been associated with chemotherapy
treatment.8
Frank discussion of suicidal ideation is important. Although such discussion is often feared by clinicians, there is no evidence that talking about suicide encourages
attempts. Assessment of severity of suicide risk depends on the clinical circumstances, identification of factors that may increase impulsivity or impair judgment (e.g.,
active substance abuse or delirium), and review of the patient's intent and plan. Emergent psychiatric evaluation is indicated when there is a risk of injury to self or
others. Identifying and treating depression among patients with cancer has been shown to decrease morbidity and mortality. 9,10
ANXIETY
Anxiety is a normal reaction to the emotionally stressful, even traumatic, experience of cancer. Cancer may force changes in social roles, disrupt personal
relationships, cause bodily dysfunction, and alter appearance, in addition to posing a threat of death or significantly shortened life. 11 Anxiety is common at crisis
points, such as the time of diagnosis, before the start of any new treatment, when recurrent disease is diagnosed, and when the patient progresses to advanced and
terminal illness stages. After initial shock and disbelief, patients may develop symptoms of anxiety, accompanied by irritability, loss of appetite, insomnia, intrusive
thoughts about their prognosis, and decreased ability to concentrate and carry on usual activities. Anxiety that persists and causes impairment is considered
pathologic. Anxiety disorders may present with a variety of symptoms, including phobias, obsessive-compulsive symptoms, panic attacks, generalized anxiety, or
somatic complaints. Severe anxiety can contribute to denial and noncompliance with treatment, disabling anticipatory nausea and vomiting before chemotherapy,
avoidance of tests and procedures, panic attacks, and overwhelming distress. Untreated anxiety increases the risk of alcohol and substance abuse. Multiple organic
factors may give rise to anxiety disorders in cancer patients, including poorly controlled pain, altered metabolic states (e.g., hypoxia, hypotension), sepsis, neurologic
disorders, endocrine disturbances (e.g., thyroid dysfunction), hormone-secreting tumors, and medications (e.g., steroids).
The management of anxiety symptoms begins with the provision of emotional support and information to the patient and family. Patient education may offer
substantial relief through identification of anxiety symptoms, explanation of the interplay of psychological and somatic symptoms, and reassurance that severe distress
is treatable. Often the physical symptoms, such as sweating, tremor, dyspnea, or chest tightness, cause even greater anxiety in cancer patients who may already be
somatically preoccupied. There are many possible psychotherapeutic and psychopharmacologic interventions available for the treatment of anxiety symptoms.
Many patients are helped through behavioral techniques, such as relaxation, distraction, and cognitive reframing. 12 In addition to behavioral treatments, individual
psychotherapy and group interventions have been demonstrated as effectively reducing anxiety in cancer patients. Studies of group interventions that included
education, emotional support, and behavioral training demonstrated benefits of less tension and fewer phobias (trend) than was found in the control groups. 13 Many
patients with intermittent anxiety or simple phobias find relaxation therapy and distraction techniques helpful. When the need for a diagnostic procedure or treatment
is urgent, benzodiazepines should be used.
Phobias related to medical procedures are common in children with cancer and also are problematic in some adults. While careful attention to preparation of children
in advance of painful procedures (e.g., role playing) may limit the incidence of anxiety, specific behavioral interventions, including relaxation training and distraction,
may be indicated for some symptoms.14 Self-hypnosis is a highly effective treatment for both generalized anxiety and specific phobias in children and adolescents.
Before being treated with an anxiolytic, all patients should be screened for depressive symptoms as well as for other symptoms in the anxiety disorder spectrum, such
as posttraumatic stress disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Anxiety and its associated somatic complaints often accompany depression, and effective
treatment, therefore, may require use of an antidepressant in conjunction with, or instead of, a short trial of a benzodiazepine. The experience of cancer treatment
may reawaken longer-standing problems in patients who have been the victims of previous trauma, increasing their risk of anxiety and depressive symptoms.
Benzodiazepines (lorazepam, alprazolam, and clonazepam) are the drugs of choice for acute anxiety states. Table 56.5-3 lists the usual initial dose of
benzodiazepines, approximate dose equivalent, half-life, and presence or absence of active metabolites. The dosing schedule depends on the patient's tolerance and
the anxiolytic's duration of action. The shorter-acting benzodiazepines may be given four or more times a day. Lorazepam and alprazolam are favored in the acute
setting due to their rapid onset of action and thus are efficacious when prescribed on an as-needed basis. Lorazepam is available in both oral and parenteral forms
and has both antiemetic and anxiolytic properties. 15 Clonazepam is substantially longer-acting, offering the benefit of ease of administration as well as avoiding the
potential for recurrent anxiety between doses and rebound symptoms of worsened anxiety. It is best to increase the dose before switching to another agent in patients
with persistent symptoms, as there is substantial variability in patient tolerance of the benzodiazepines and in effective dosages. The most common side effects of the
benzodiazepines are dose-dependent and include drowsiness, confusion, and poor motor coordination. These occur more frequently in older patients and in those
with impaired liver function. The synergistic effects of the benzodiazepines with other medications with central nervous system depressant properties, such as
narcotics and some antidepressants, can contribute to excess sedation. When the dose is lowered, uncomfortable sedation often disappears, while the antianxiety
effects continue. Lorazepam is renally excreted and, hence, is better tolerated by patients with impaired hepatic function and by those taking other medications with
sedative effects (e.g., analgesics). There are effective alternatives to benzodiazepines, including other anxiolytics, such as buspirone. In addition, antidepressants
with more calming-sedating side effects, such as nefazadone, mirtazapine, and paroxetine, have also been found to be beneficial in the treatment of anxiety. Low
doses of neuroleptics (i.e., olanzapine, haloperidol, or thioridazine) are effective in patients with severe anxiety that is not controlled with maximal therapeutic doses of
benzodiazepines, in patients whose anxiety leads to frank agitation, and for those who cannot tolerate benzodiazepines due to respiratory problems.

TABLE 56.5-3. Benzodiazepines Commonly Prescribed for Cancer Patients

DELIRIUM
Delirium is common in cancer as a result of direct central nervous system involvement by tumor, paraneoplastic syndromes, and the indirect effects of toxic-metabolic
sequelae of the disease and treatment ( Table 56.5-4).16 The hallmark of delirium is impairment of consciousness, usually accompanied by global cognitive
dysfunction, and abnormalities of mood, behavior, and perception. The onset is often rapid, and the course is usually fluctuating. The prevalence of delirium in cancer
patients ranges from 5% to 25% in various studies and is substantially higher in terminal stages of illness. 17

TABLE 56.5-4. Chemotherapeutic Drugs That Can Cause Delirium

Delirium is a syndrome of symptoms with multiple possible etiologies. Changes in mental status may be subtle or extreme, ranging from an appearance of mild
depression or social withdrawal to severe agitation or hallucinations. Early symptoms of delirium are often unrecognized or misdiagnosed by medical or nursing staff
as depression. Yet, early recognition of delirium is essential, since the underlying etiology may be a treatable complication of cancer. When faced with an abrupt
behavior change in a cancer patient, the physician must investigate a number of potential causes of delirium. Particularly frequent metabolic causes include
hyponatremia, hypercalcemia, malnutrition, and liver failure. Altered thyroid or adrenal status may cause delirium. Infections and brain metastases commonly cause
delirium. Patients with hematologic malignancies are at especially high risk for opportunistic infection. Other cancers, such as those of the lung and the breast,
frequently metastasize to the brain. Head and neck cancer patients undergoing surgery are at high risk for delirium because of their generally older age and the high
prevalence of alcohol abuse and withdrawal syndromes. Many antineoplastic and immunotherapeutic agents (i.e., interleukin) 18 can cause delirium and other changes
in mental status. 19 Corticosteroids can cause confusion, depression, mania, and anxiety. Antibiotics and antifungals, such as amphotericin B, can cause delirium,
particularly with intrathecal administration. In seriously ill cancer patients, the etiology of delirium is often multifactorial. The delirium workup is tailored to the patient's
specific cancer and medical condition at the time that the symptoms develop.
The management of delirium includes identification and correction of its underlying causes while symptomatic and supportive therapies are initiated. Symptomatic
treatment measures include reassurance and support for the patient and family, manipulation of the environment to provide a reorienting safe milieu, and appropriate
use of pharmacotherapy. Measures to help reduce anxiety and mild disorientation include a quiet, well-lit room with familiar objects, a visible clock or calendar, and
the presence of family, as these increase structure and familiarity. Judicious use of physical restraints to prevent self-harm, along with one-to-one nursing
observation, may also be necessary. Often, these supportive techniques alone are not sufficient, and symptomatic treatment with neuroleptic or sedative medications
is necessary.
As with other medically ill patients, neuroleptics are the mainstay in the management of delirium in cancer patients. Haloperidol is particularly useful because of its low
incidence of cardiovascular and anticholinergic effects and its availability in parenteral and oral forms. Relatively low doses of haloperidol (1 to 3 mg/d) are usually
effective in treating agitation, hallucinations, paranoia, and fear, and most cancer patients respond to less than 20 mg in divided doses over 24 hours. The more
common side effects of haloperidol include akathisia and extrapyramidal side effects (cog-wheeling, masked facies, and gait disturbances). Dystonic reactions are
treated with anticholinergic medications. Newer neuroleptics, such as risperidone and olanzapine, have not been studied in cancer patients; however, they appear to
be well tolerated, with lower incidences of extrapyramidal side effects than haloperidol. They are not yet available in parenteral form. Methotrimeprazine (available in
intravenous or subcutaneous form) and midazolam have been used to control confusion and agitation in terminal delirium. 20

PSYCHIATRIC SYMPTOMS IN CANCER PATIENTS WITH PAIN
There is clearly an increased incidence of depression and anxiety in patients experiencing severe pain. In the Psychosocial Collaborative Oncology Group study, 39%
of patients with a psychiatric diagnosis experienced significant pain. In more than 80% of these patients, a depressive syndrome was diagnosed. In contrast, only 19%
of patients who did not receive a psychiatric diagnosis had significant pain. 4
The psychiatric symptoms of patients who are in significant pain must initially be considered a consequence of their uncontrolled pain. Acute anxiety, depression with
despair (especially when the patient believes the pain means disease progression), agitation, irritability, lack of cooperation, anger, and insomnia may be the
emotional or behavioral concomitants of pain. These symptoms are not labeled as a psychiatric disorder unless they persist after pain is adequately controlled.
Undertreatment of pain is a major problem in both adult and pediatric settings. Aggressive pain management strategies, including narcotics, are essential to the
emotional care of both physically ill children and adults. Long-term psychiatric sequelae of cancer are less likely in children whose pain is well treated. There is no
evidence of increased risk of subsequent drug abuse in cancer patients receiving narcotic analgesia. In fact, most patients associate the narcotic effects with the
unpleasant aspects of the illness and seek to avoid narcotics during their recovery. 21 Effective pain management often requires substantial patient education and has
been facilitated by recent advances, such as the growing emphasis on the use of adequate regimens of standing doses of analgesics with as-needed rescue dosing
for breakthrough pain, and the advent of patient-controlled analgesia. Collaborative efforts between doctor and patient to identify problematic symptoms and negotiate
treatment strategies depend on open communication about pain and its psychological sequelae. A full discussion of issues in pain management is available in
Chapter 56.1.

UNCONVENTIONAL CANCER TREATMENTS
The alternative therapies ranging from herbal treatments and spiritual teachers to acupuncture, physical manipulation, and mental imaging proliferated in the 1990s,
and many “traditional” Western doctors are seeking to understand these modalities. Recent surveys suggest that 30% to 40% of the U.S. public use what are
described as alternative or complementary therapies. 22 The field is broad and encompasses many modalities and ideas. However, due to the lack of clinical trials of
many of these therapies, conventional practitioners and alternative healers exist on opposite ends of the spectrum, often leaving patients confused about how to
integrate these differing perspectives. Despite this, the demand for these therapies has led insurers to offer some expanded benefits for alternative medicine.
The overlap of traditional and alternative therapies is particularly complex in the provision of psychosocial and behavioral treatments to cancer patients. Some of the
psychological and behavioral methods that are used in medicine (i.e., psychological support, visual imagery, hypnosis, and relaxation exercises) for enhancing quality
of life and symptom control are also included in unconventional therapies that promise cancer cure or extended survival. A recent study of 480 women with newly
diagnosed early-stage breast cancer found 28% used alternative medicine as a complimentary therapy. 23 Interestingly, the use of alternative medicine was
independently associated with depression, fear of recurrence of cancer, lower scores for mental health and sexual satisfaction, and more physical symptoms as well
as symptoms of greater intensity. The study suggests that patients seeking alternative medicine therapies may be experiencing anxiety, depression, or physical
symptoms that should be addressed by the “traditional” medical system. Further, the study demonstrated that the use of these therapies does not always provide the
sought-after panacea.
The urgency with which many cancer patients and families feel the need to seek any potentially beneficial or hopeful treatment option leads many to try any promising
therapy that is offered. In the setting of tremendous fear and uncertainty, it is difficult for patients even to choose between conflicting traditional biomedical opinions,
much less to navigate the uncharted waters of alternative treatments. Many patients elect untried or unproven therapies in their desperate search for a cure or for a

more acceptable quality of life, attempting any therapy “as long as it doesn't hurt.”
There are real challenges for the clinician attempting to advise patients about the use of unconventional therapies. Many conflicts are born of the desire not to take
away hope but also not to condone unproven treatments. There has been concern that some therapies that suggest that personality and behavior are the vehicle for
recovery or tumor progression place undue burden on patients who may hold themselves responsible for a negative outcome. Some patients feel empowered in the
hopeful “heroic warrior” stance described by Gray and Doan 24 and should be encouraged to maintain it. These patients benefit from the oncologist's admission that
there are still many unknowns and encouragement of their use of self-help books, visualization, efforts to improve mental attitude, and diet regimens, insofar as they
find them to be helpful. However, there are other patients for whom the warrior myth is a distressing burden, leading to self-criticism and a sense of guilt because they
cannot fight hard enough and will be responsible for their own death. Families may contribute to the patient's guilt about illness, offering unrealistic advice and
remedies in an effort to overcome their own feelings of helplessness and expressing frustration and anger with the patient's failure to live up to their expectations and
to fight hard enough. Further study of alternatives is important, as current research does not support the assertion that unconventional therapies prolong survival. 25,26
However, there is no question that alternative therapies may play a substantial role in the patient's experience of illness and quality of life.

PSYCHOTHERAPEUTIC INTERVENTIONS WITH CANCER PATIENTS
INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOTHERAPY
Although psychological interventions for patients with cancer were slow to develop, since the 1950s efforts to implement interventions have grown steadily because of
a greater emphasis on quality-of-life concerns. The types of interventions most commonly used by health professionals working with cancer patients are education,
behavioral training, groups, and individual psychotherapy. Fawzy et al. 27 have provided a critical review of psychosocial interventions in cancer care that should be
read by all individuals who are preparing to establish psychosocial support services for cancer patients.
Although some enthusiasts have advocated offering counseling to all patients on the assumption that they can benefit from help and will take advantage of it, many
patients reject the offer of psychological help. In one study, only two-thirds of the patients identified as high-risk accepted counseling. 28 Those who refused had a
positive outlook, minimized the implications of their diagnosis, and viewed the offer of therapy as a threat to their emotional equilibrium. Patients who accepted
counseling were less able to deny the diagnosis and its implications; they were less hopeful and were more apt to experience their situation in religious or existential
terms. Stam et al.29 found that 20% of 449 ambulatory cancer patients seen in a single cancer center in Canada were referred and seen for psychological counseling
over a 1-year period. Family and personal problems were the most common reasons for seeking help. Interventions most commonly applied are either educational or
psychotherapeutic, including supportive, insight-oriented, interpersonal, and cognitive behavioral therapies. 30,31 and 32
Sourkes et al. 33 have described the focus of psychotherapy with the cancer patient as the emotional stress engendered by the illness, rather than the more general
intrapsychic and interpersonal concerns of the physically healthy person. 33 The therapist who is outside of the friend and kinship circle plays a useful role by
encouraging exploring emotions, which are otherwise unexpressed. Because of the strong bond felt by families for the therapist who took care of their relative over the
course of a long illness, families often enter into a one- to ten-session bereavement counseling with the patient's therapist after the patient's death to provide a
healing conclusion to a long illness.
GROUP PSYCHOTHERAPY
Group therapy may be advantageous for cancer patients, allowing them to receive support from others who have experienced and conquered similar problems of
medical illness. 34,35 The cancer patient, in a group setting, learns that there is a range of normal reactions to illness and a range of healthy adaptive coping styles and
strategies that others have used to make adjustment to illness easier. Group participation helps decrease the sense of isolation and alienation because the patient
and the family can see that they are not alone in adjusting to illness. Groups for cancer patients or families (or both) are often disease-specific or targeted for patients
at the same stage of different diseases. In the past, doctors had some concern about having the dying patient in a group with patients who recently were given
diagnoses or whose prognosis was good, but when directed by skilled leaders, these groups can be highly rewarding. 13 The Spiegel et al. 36 report of greater longevity
in a small number of women with advanced breast cancer undergoing group psychotherapy remains controversial, and replication with larger samples is needed. 37,38
SELF-HELP AND MUTUAL SUPPORT PROGRAMS
Self-help and mutual support programs are additional potential supports for patients and families. Life crises, such as life-threatening illness and bereavement, often
are the impetus for individuals to seek emotional support from others experiencing the same trauma. Uniquely American in their inception, most self-help support
networks work closely with professional medical services, thereby offering social support as an adjunct to medical care. Self-help groups or visitation programs help
decrease the sense of alienation and isolation of patients because of the unique knowledge and sensitivity that volunteers bring from personal experience. Veteran
patients facilitate coping by being a source of credible information about the needs of cancer patients, demonstrating constructive ways of managing and living
despite illness, providing the motivation for rehabilitation and enhancement of self-worth, and encouraging patients to participate in their own treatment. 39

SURVIVOR ISSUES
Advances in the treatment of cancer in the last 30 years have led to improvement in both prognosis and quality of life, resulting in a rapidly growing population of more
than 5 million long-term survivors, many of them children and young adults. Psychiatric sequelae of cancer include those related to the direct effects of the disease as
well as those that are consequences of the treatments, of family factors, and of the individual psychology of the person. The long-term adjustment of survivors of
childhood cancer appears to be largely unimpaired. Cured cancer patients have special medical and psychiatric concerns, including fears of termination of treatment,
preoccupation with disease recurrence, and minor physical problems; a sense of greater vulnerability to illness (the Damocles syndrome); pervasive awareness of
mortality and difficulty with reentry into normal life (the Lazarus syndrome); persistent guilt (the survivor syndrome); difficult adjustment to physical losses and
handicaps; a sense of physical inferiority; diminished self-esteem or confidence; perceived loss of job mobility, and fear of insurance discrimination. A recent book by
Landay 40 teaches patients how to handle many “nuts and bolts” issues of coping, such as insurance, career issues, estate planning, advanced directives, and home
and hospice care. Concerns about infertility, often understandably submerged at the time of diagnosis and treatment, reappear when rigorous treatment concludes.
The survivor's intellectual functioning is also a major concern. Children and adults with brain tumors or central nervous system involvement and those undergoing
bone marrow transplant are at risk from both their disease and their treatment. Most have residual deficits with neuropsychological impairment, including compromised
motor and cognitive test performance. 41
In coping with a variety of physical, social, sexual, employment, and insurance problems, survivors often report psychological distress at subsyndromal levels. The
severity of these symptoms may vary by premorbid adjustment personality traits and site of cancer and treatment (i.e., bone marrow transplantation), but they usually
do not interfere with reentry to family, social, or employment networks. 41 Survival may be associated with an increased risk for delayed medical complications,
including organ failure, central nervous system dysfunction, sterility, secondary malignancies, and decreased physical stamina. 42,43 Sociodemographic,
disease-treatment, and psychological distress variables only partially explain the wide variability in survivors' psychosocial dysfunction. 44
Special attention to identifying adolescent and young adult survivors most at risk for psychosocial dysfunction is needed. Adolescents who have been treated for
cancer not only have the substantial physical, cognitive, emotional, and interpersonal tasks faced by all adolescents but have the added burden of integrating a
life-threatening disease into their experiences. Persistent body image concerns, somatic preoccupation, disruptions in sexual relationships, and deficits in social
competence are not uncommon.45 Fritz and Williams 46 assessed 52 survivors of childhood cancer and their families who were more than 2 years past treatment.
Two-thirds of the patients studied had excellent psychosocial functioning without serious social issues. Many expressed a positive effect of their illness and reported
little depression. Illness variables were not predictive of psychosocial outcome, unlike some psychosocial variables, such as communication patterns and peer
support. The National Coalition of Cancer Survivorship is an outgrowth of survivors' need for support. The political issues surrounding health and life insurance are a
prime example of an area where research is needed to delineate problems, and advocacy is needed to encourage societal solutions.
Acknowledgment
The authors thank Robert F. Quigley and Theresa A. Carpenter for their assistance in the preparation of this manuscript.

CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Roth AJ, Kornblith AB, Barel-Copel L, et al. Rapid screening for psychological distress in men with prostate carcinoma: a pilot study. Cancer 1998;82:1904.
2. Payne DK, Hoffman RG, Theodoulou M, Dosik M, Massie MJ. Screening for anxiety and depression in women with breast cancer. Psychosomatics 1999;40:64.
3. Roth AJ, McClear KZ, Massie MJ. Oncology. In: Stoudemire A, Fogel BS, Greenberg D, eds. Psychiatric care of the medical patient. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000:733.
4. Derogatis LR, Morrow GR, Fetting JH, et al. The prevalence of psychiatric disorders among cancer patients. JAMA 1983;249:751.
5. Massie MJ, Popkin M. Depressive disorders. In: Holland JC, ed. Psycho-oncology. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998;518.
6. Watson M, Haviland JS, Greer S, Davidson J, Bliss JM. Influence of psychological response on survival in breast cancer: a population-based cohort study. Lancet 1999;40:64.
7. Henderson JM, Ord RA. Suicide in head and neck cancer patients. J Oral Maxiollofac Surg 1997;55:1217.
8. Cousins JP, Harper G. Neurobiochemical changes from Taxol/Neupogen chemotherapy for metastatic breast carcinoma corresponds with suicidal depression. Cancer Lett 1996;110:163.
9. Chochinov HM, Wilson KG, Enns M, et al. Desire for death in the terminally ill. Am J Psychiatry 1995;152:1185.
10. Valente SM, Saunders JM. Diagnosis and treatment of major depression among people with cancer. Cancer Nurs 1997;20:168.
11. Noyes R, Holt CS, Massie MJ. Anxiety disorders. In: Holland JC, ed. Psycho-oncology. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998;548.
12. Payne DK, Massie MJ. Anxiety and depression. In: Berger A, Levy MH, Portenoy RK, Weissman DE, eds. Principles and practice of supportive oncology. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co,
1997:497.
13. Spiegel D, Bloom J, Yalom I. Group support for patients with metastatic cancer. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1981;455:333.
14. Redd WH, Adresen GV, Minagawa Y. Hypnotic control of anticipatory emesis in patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. J Consult Clin Psycho 1989;50:14.
15. Greenberg DB. Strategic use of benzodiazepines in cancer patients. Oncology 1991;5:83.
16. Patchel RA, Posner JB. Cancer and the nervous system. In: Holland JC, Rowland J, eds. Handbook of psycho-oncology. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989:314.
17. Fleishman S, Lesko L, Breitbart WS. Treatment of organic mental disorders in cancer patients. In: Breitbart WS, Holland JC, eds. Psychiatric aspects of symptom management in cancer
patients. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press, 1993:23.
18. Smith MJ, Mougwad R, Vuillemin E, et al. Psychological side effects induced by interleukin-2/alpha interferon treatment. Psychooncology 1994;3:289.
19. Brown TM, Stoudemire A. Antineoplastic agents. In: Brown TM, Stoudemire A, eds. Psychiatric side effects of prescription and over-the-counter medications. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Press, 1998:239.
20. Ramani S, Karnard AB. Long term subcutaneous infusion of midazolam for refractory delirium in terminal breast cancer. South Med J 1996;89:1101.
21. Caraceni A, Cheville A, Portenoy RK. Pain management: pharmacological and nonpharmacological treatments. In: Massie MJ, ed. Pain: what psychiatrists need to know (Review of Psychiatry
Series, Vol. 19, No. 2; Oldham JO, Riba MB, series eds.) Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 2000.
22. Eisenberg DM. Advising patients who seek alternative medical therapies. Ann Intern Med 1997;127:61.
23. Burnstein HJ, Gelber S, Guadagnoli E, Weeks JC. Use of alternative medicine by women with early stage breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1733.
24. Gray RE, Doan BD. Heroic self-healing and cancer: clinical issues for the health professions. J Palliat Care 1990;6:32.
25. Bagenal FS, Easton DF, Harris E, Chilvers CE, McElwain TJ. Survival of patients with breast cancer attending Bristol Cancer Help Centre. Lancet 1990;336:606.
26. Morgenstern H, Gellert GA, Walter SD, Ostfeld AM, Siegel BS. The impact of a psychosocial support program on survival with breast cancer: the importance of selection bias in program
evaluation. J Chronic Dis 1984;37:273.
27. Fawzy FI, Fawzy NW, Arndt LA, Pasnau RO. Critical review of psycho-social interventions in cancer care. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1995;52:100.
28. Worden JW, Weisman AD. Preventive psychosocial intervention with newly diagnosed cancer patients. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 1984;6:243.
29. Stam HJ, Bultz BP, Pittman CA. Psychosocial problems and interventions in a referred sample of cancer patients. Psychosom Med 1986;48:563.
30. Moynihan C, Bliss JM, Davidson J, Burchell L, Horwich A. Evaluation of adjuvant psychological therapy in patients with testicular cancer: randomized controlled trial. Br Med J 1998;316:429.
31. Lovejoy NC, Matteis M. Cognitive-behavioral interventions to manage depression in patients with cancer: research and theoretical initiatives. Cancer Nurs 1997;20:155.
32. Kissane DW, Bloch S, Miach P, et al. Cognitive-existential group therapy for patients with primary breast cancer-techniques and themes. Psychooncology 1997;6:25.
33. Sourkes B, Massie MJ, Holland JC. Psycho-therapeutic issues. In: Holland JC, ed. Psycho-oncology. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998:694.
34. Bottomley A. Where are we not? Evaluating two decades of group interventions with adult cancer patients. J Psychiatr Ment Health Nurs 1997;4:251.
35. Cunningham AJ. Group psychological therapy for cancer patients. A brief discussion of indications for its use, and the range of interventions available. Support Care Cancer 1995;3:244.
36. Speigel D, Bloom JR, Kraemer HJC, Gottheil E. Effect of psychosocial treatment on survival of patients with metastatic breast cancer. Lancet 1989;14:888.
37. Fox BH. A hypothesis about Spiegel et al.'s 1989 paper on psychological intervention and breast cancer survival. Psychooncology 1998;7:361.
38. Cunningham AJ, Edmonds CV, Jenkens GP, et al. A randomized controlled trial of the effects of group psychological therapy on survival in women with metastatic breast cancer.
Psychooncology 1998;7:508.
39. Mastrovito R, Moynahan R. Self-help and mutual support programs in cancer. In: Holland JC, Rowland JH, eds. Handbook of psycho-oncology. New York: Oxford University Press 1989:502.
40. Landay DS. Be prepared. New York: St. Martin Press, 1998.
41. Kornblith AB. Psychological adaptation to cancer: cancer survivor's adaptation. In: Holland JC, ed. Psycho-oncology. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998:223.
42. Meadows A, Silber J. Delayed consequences of therapy for childhood cancer. Cancer 1985;58:524.
43. Meadows A, Hobbie N. The medical consequences of cure. Cancer 1986;58:524.
44. Lesko LM, Ostroff JS, Mumma GH, Mashberg DE, Holland JC. Long-term psychological adjustment of acute leukemia survivors: impact of bone marrow transplantation vs. chemotherapy.
Psychosom Med 1992;54:30.
45. Mulhern R, Wasserman A, Friedman A, Fairclough D. Social competence and behavioral adjustment of children who are long-term survivors of cancer. Pediatrics 1989;83:18.
46. Fritz B, Williams J. Issues of adolescent development for survivors of childhood cancer. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1988;27:712.

SECTION 56.6 Community Resources
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 56.6
Community Resources
BONNIE A. INDECK
PHYLLIS M. SMITH
Introduction
Initial Diagnosis of Cancer
Social Support Network
Emotional Support
Assessment and Evaluation of Coping Skills
Family as Emotional Support
Emotional Support Outside the Family System
Visitation Groups
Self-Help Groups
Support Groups
Role of the Medical Team in Emotional Support
Informational Support
Internet
Computer Groups
Instrumental Support
Finances
Transportation
Home Health Care
Hospice
Barriers to Effective Home Care
Medical Equipment
Trends Affecting Demand For Community Services
Survivorship
Appendix: Common Resources
Bone Marrow Transplantation
Camps
Care Facilities
Childhood Resources
Emotional Support
Financial Assistance
Income-Related Assistance
Treatment-Related Assistance
Home Health Care
Housing
Survivorship
Transportation
Veterans Benefits
Wish Foundations
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The impact of changes in the health care system has caused greater numbers of patients to be treated in an ambulatory setting. Services in this setting range from
maintenance of central lines to chemotherapy, nutritional support, pain control, intravenous antibiotics, and blood support. Patients are not usually admitted to the
hospital unless their condition is so serious that it meets an acute level of care. Ever-changing reimbursement issues along with an ever-increasing number of cancer
survivors1 have placed yet a greater burden on the community to provide services for this often chronically ill population. 2
Resource directories are regularly updated to include the latest evolving information. The American Cancer Society (ACS) and Cancer Care are just two sources that
publish a comprehensive listing of services. 3,4 These guides may be cross-referenced from the general to specific site of cancer and often provide information on a
variety of services, including emotional support, financial assistance, and transportation resources. Additionally, increasing access to personal computers and the
World Wide Web have allowed individuals to gather information in an unprecedented manner. Rimer points out that “communication is central to effective cancer
control, from primary prevention to survivorship.” 5 Although this information, along with the increasing fingertip access to the most current information, should
theoretically allow patients to gather the assistance they require to live with their illness, a gap still remains between availability of these resources and specific
individual needs. These gaps in provision of service occur across many communities and insurance carriers.
The individual diagnosed with cancer undergoes an experience that is intensely personal, that calls into question basic assumptions and expectations about life, and
that somehow must be integrated into a sense of self, and thus involves the complexities of individual personalities. To deliver effective service, those who are
working with this population must understand the adaptation that occurs. This adaptation involves incorporating a new sense of self after living through the crisis of
diagnosis, initial treatment, potential side effects, and emotional impact on one's self and one's family. In addition to discussing individual adjustment, this chapter
discusses different types of support and resources that may be beneficial to the patient and family, computer trends, the impact of an evolving health care delivery
and reimbursement system, and survivorship issues, and concludes with a list of available resources.

INITIAL DIAGNOSIS OF CANCER
Cancer is the third major cause of mortality. 6 More than 1 million people are estimated to have been diagnosed with cancer in 1999, and 564,000 people will survive
their disease. 1 Although these statistics present an increase in survivorship, the reality of living with cancer represents something quite different. Concerns must be
broadened to view cancer as a chronic or curable illness. 7 The majority of those 1 million people diagnosed with cancer must face their own mortality, but they then
move from focusing on their mortality to dealing with their illness. It is incumbent on medical providers to help the patient participate in a plan to develop adequate
internal and external resources for living with cancer.
The spectrum of reactions includes fear, shock, despair, anger, anxiety and, sometimes, total insensibility. 8 In the 1970s, Weisman and Worden identified the
immediate coping response of denial as appropriate, albeit temporarily. 9 This is still valid today, but given the changing nature of today's medical delivery system, we
may need to help patients progress from denial to mastery in a more expeditious fashion. Although today's cancer patients experience distress that is often not
considered or reflected in the economics of treatment, they still desire and need psychosocial intervention to cope with their cancer. The medical system has
resources that can address these emotions and enable a person to function more effectively. The physician may call on members of the team, such as the oncology
social worker or oncology nurse, to assist in presenting the diagnosis. These team members can facilitate the understanding of the diagnosis in many distinct ways.
The professional oncology team helps the patient move toward a sense of mastery over the situation. Assistance is provided so that a patient moves along a
continuum through which control is gained and progress is made from a passive to an active state. This movement promotes an active course of treatment.

SOCIAL SUPPORT NETWORK
During the 1980s, the literature identified and recognized the importance of a social support network. Research has consistently found that people coping with cancer
have difficulty with interpersonal relationships and that one's social support system can alleviate these stressors. 7 Although this network may not prolong the life of a
cancer patient, it has been shown to enhance the quality of life one experiences. The providers in a social support network may be professionals from the community,

family, friends, significant others, organizations, and agencies. These providers enable the cancer patient to enhance their coping skills so that they may function in
an effective, competent, and proficient manner. The literature continues to report that this social support network impacts positively on the psychological well-being of
the cancer patient.10,11 The constructs of the social support system identified as emotional, informational, or instrumental as defined by Wortman 12 is the structure in
which we define support and resources for the cancer patient.

EMOTIONAL SUPPORT
Psychosocial interventions have consistently contributed to a positive outcome on the emotional adjustment of a person coping with cancer, 13 and emotional support
is frequently considered to be one of the most essential interventions. Family, friends, and those closest to the patient frequently provide emotional support.
Dunkel-Schetter 14 surveyed 79 cancer patients and found that 81% defined emotional support as most helpful, followed by informational support (41%) and
instrumental aid (6%).
ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION OF COPING SKILLS
Individuals deal with problems in diverse ways. It is important that the medical team identify an individual's ability to cope with stress so that they have some indication
of how the patient will deal with their cancer. An assessment of other crises endured and how those were handled is particularly helpful in an assessment and
evaluation. Studies have led to development of a profile of predictors of poor coping. 15 Some indicators of the inability to cope with crises are character traits such as
rigidity of behavior or morose, gloomy outlook on life. This type of patient may not be amenable to the support received or may need more intense intervention.
Substance abuse, recent losses, social isolation, unemployment, or other debilitating illnesses may be warning signs that an individual may be more emotionally
overwhelmed. Cancer causes much emotional distress in a person's life, and disruptions in routine functioning are normal. Some of these disruptions may have
lingering effects and cause enduring problems. 16 Traditional emotional support may not be enough for such individuals. Specialized or very individualized emotional
support may be necessary for these patients to cope with cancer.
FAMILY AS EMOTIONAL SUPPORT
As the person diagnosed with cancer enters the health care system it is important for the professionals to recognize that this person rarely functions alone. The
person who receives a diagnosis of cancer usually summons his or her closest family to become the immediate support system. As healthcare professionals, we must
recognize the significance of including the family at times of diagnosis, recurrence, change in treatment plans, and terminal illness. 17 The family system changes when
the diagnosis is made. All members who interact with the patient should be aware of the potential changes and the subsequent impact on the family.
The family value and belief system must be identified so that help can be provided within the context of the sociocultural system. Fears are minimized and coping
skills enhanced if understanding is provided within a familiar context. It must be recognized that cancer is not openly discussed in all cultural groups. Certain cultural
groups may need special assistance to contend with a health care system in which the patient is expected to be an active participant. Roles within the family
frequently change when a diagnosis of cancer is made. Family members may need help in evaluating whether these role changes are comfortable for them. In
addition, a family member who is also a health care professional, and particularly an oncology health care professional, may need help in maintaining the role of a
family member rather than becoming the resource person. The alacrity to help is frequently seen during the initial crisis of diagnosis. This is the time a family pulls
itself together and offers whatever resources they can provide for the newly diagnosed patient. As the illness extends over time and sometimes becomes chronic,
family support may wane and become difficult to sustain. It is at this time that patients and families may need to find resources outside the immediate family system.
EMOTIONAL SUPPORT OUTSIDE THE FAMILY SYSTEM
The social support network, as identified earlier, includes friends, neighbors, both self-help and professionally facilitated support groups, religious groups, community
agencies, and health care professionals. 15 A review of the literature has indicated that making use of emotional support, whether informal or formal, can relieve
distress. 13 It is important that there be some commonality perceived in the support system. People undergoing similar experiences may find it easier to relate to each
other because the cancer is accepted more easily. If the perception is that a situation is understood, empathy can be accepted and emotional support to the patient
becomes positive. The validity of the cancer patient's experiences must be recognized by the support system for support to be effective. A member of a support
system who truly does not understand the trauma cannot minimize the anxieties and fears of the cancer patient. Support is not effective in a situation in which real
feelings are not recognized.
VISITATION GROUPS
The changing scene of health care delivery has affected visits by volunteers. The ACS has many groups maintained by volunteers who have had cancer experiences.
Reach to Recovery, Cansurmount, and the ostomy programs all have volunteers who have undergone some type of cancer experience. In the past, these volunteers
were able to visit with newly diagnosed patients in the hospital. In today's health care system, patients are admitted and discharged quickly, and frequently their
procedures are performed in 1-day surgery centers, so there may not be time for these volunteers to visit. Health care professionals must take special care in
providing patients with information about these groups, and patients must be encouraged to become proactive and make the first contact themselves. The health care
professional that one meets in the hospital or surgical center is an invaluable source of information. Cancer Information Service, reachable at 1-800-4-CANCER, can
also help patients with local resources.
SELF-HELP GROUPS
An extensive network of self-help groups exists for the cancer patient. Self-help groups are frequently formed by people with similar interests or concerns, and many
of these groups are disease specific. They may meet weekly, biweekly, or monthly. These groups are not professionally led; rather, they are a gathering led by the
peer participants, although medical professionals may be invited to present their particular expertise. Information about self-help groups can be accessed through the
National Self-Help Network. This organization is listed individually in each state.
SUPPORT GROUPS
Support groups are available in most communities and are facilitated by health care professionals. The professional has the responsibility of establishing a group that
is cohesive and has the goals of providing educational and emotional support. Groups may be established for patients, for family members and significant others, or
for patients and family together. Although no positive correlation has been made that support groups have cured disease, improved survival of patients in support
groups has been found. 18
Although emotional support and social support are separated for descriptive purposes here, they are frequently intertwined and inseparable. The family member who
transports a cancer patient for daily radiation treatments is both part of the social support system and is also providing the necessary emotional support.
ROLE OF THE MEDICAL TEAM IN EMOTIONAL SUPPORT
The medical team is comprised of a number of people who can assist the cancer patient. Social workers, clinical nurse specialists, psychologists, psychiatrists, and
nutritionists are often available to provide services. Although these professionals may not be immediately available in every setting, referrals can be made for
consultation. Ancillary personnel have become more important in today's system of health care delivery. Many concerns cannot be addressed in the leisurely manner
of years ago. Specialized health care professionals can also help a patient navigate the health care system with greater ease and less stress.

INFORMATIONAL SUPPORT
It is axiomatic that knowledge is power and that cancer patients and families who know more about the illness and are actively involved in treatment decisions cope
better than do those who are more passive. It is this demand for knowledge and information that helps such individuals feel less powerless and helpless and more in
control of the situation. The need for information depends not only on individual preference for control, but on a person's educational, cultural, and financial
background.19 In the past, initial cancer information was obtained in the physician's office or hospital. Today, 22 million adults use the Internet to find health

information, and 70% search for information before even meeting with a physician. 20 Dr. Gaisser, of the Cancer Information Service in Heidelberg, Germany, analyzed
when inquiries were made to the service. Forty-three percent of the requests in 1996 occurred before the patient's second treatment, illustrating the patient's need for
earlier information. 21
According to Fernsler and Cannon 22 “patients with cancer benefit from education in terms of their ability to care for themselves, enhanced self-image and self-esteem,
improved symptom management, reduced anxiety and reduced disruption in daily life.” Other benefits of education include increased participation in treatment
decisions and improved understanding of the disease process and treatment options. There may be some inherent differences for some individuals in obtaining
information because of personality style. Too much information can increase anxiety for some people and cause greater difficulty in coping. It is therefore important to
first assess a person's readiness to receive information by reviewing their cultural and socioeconomic background, literacy, educational level, psychological
adjustment, and personal preferences for control.
Because culture influences the very meaning of the disease to the individual, it is imperative to understand that person's background, values, and beliefs.
Communities also vary by culture, implying that culturally sensitive material must be developed. Providers must explore the patient's educational level and determine
how to maximize both comprehension and retention of material while encouraging greater patient participation in decision making and encouraging greater dialogue
with the health care team. Harris 19 talks about individuals with poor reading skills having greater difficulty understanding instructions and integrating them into their
activities of daily living. As already mentioned, a diagnosis of cancer is a psychologically traumatic event. One's disposition affects how well the information is
integrated and remembered. It has been suggested that individuals who try to maintain self-control are more likely to be compliant with health care regimens. They
also tend to seek more detailed information and are therefore more involved in treatment decisions. Those individuals who give more control to the team are more of a
challenge to educate and are not as receptive to the information. Lastly, a patient's financial situation directly impacts his or her ability to obtain information.
In summary, the best education occurs when there is open communication, awareness of the patient's needs, minimization of the patient's stress level, and a caring
attitude on the part of the professionals. Patients are sensitive to the health professional's voice, body language, eye contact and proximity. It is crucial to meet and
talk at an appropriate time and place while being supportive, encouraging, and personal in style. Print materials are often helpful, particularly those endorsed by the
physician; however, screening for low-literacy populations is mandatory. Social workers can often remove barriers that may hinder education by facilitating
communication or by connecting to community resources whose main goal it is to educate the public.

INTERNET
The Internet can increase knowledge and hasten the pace of obtaining this knowledge via the following online services 23:
E-mail: Messages are posted electronically, facilitating instant communication. By 1998, 1,300,000 pieces of e-mail per week were being processed by the
cancer-related listservs hosted by the Association of Cancer Online Resources. That same year, 22.3 million Americans performed online searches for medical
and health information. 5
Mailing lists and listservs: Through e-mail, one can subscribe to specific mailing lists, through which information is shared regarding similar interests.
World Wide Web: The Web allows easy access to an unlimited amount of information. One can research particular interests via search engines such as Yahoo,
Excite, AltaVista, or a host of others.
Bulletin boards: Electronic message boards allow one to post a message concerning a specific topic while not needing to be on the computer simultaneously with
others.
Chat rooms: In these forums, one can participate in “live” conversation, usually in regard to specific topics. These gatherings may be formalized with a facilitator or
be used for informal discussion purposes.
Professionals, patients, and caregivers are using these Internet resources regularly. In the past, information was unidirectional, from health professionals to patients;
now many patients are seeking out this information for themselves. Although access to this information is valuable, it is not without issue. People on the Internet are
not always as they present themselves, and information obtained may be inaccurate or misleading. Because material can be posted on the Internet without proper
oversight or professional review and because people have a tendency to believe what they read, reliance on the Internet for information can cause potential harm.
Web sites should be evaluated by the same five criteria generally used for printed material, including evaluation of the authority, accuracy, objectivity, currency and
coverage, and intended audience of the information. 20 Is an author listed? What are the author's qualifications? How reliable is the information? Has the material been
reviewed by editors? Is the information provided without bias? Is the content up-to-date with date listed (of both creation and revision)? To what depth are the topics
explored? It is extremely important for health care professionals to encourage access to this new technology but also give caution about the potential pitfalls. In
general, it is advisable to encourage patients and family members to start their searches with reputable sites. C. Everett Koop, former Surgeon General, has a Web
site (World Wide Web URL: http://www.drkoop.com) that rates approximately 10% of the 15,000 health-related sites on the Internet for credibility, content, and
opportunity for feedback. A list of cancer-related Web sites appears in the appendix at the end of this chapter.

COMPUTER GROUPS
Groups have been long cited in the literature as an effective means of treating individuals with cancer. 24,25 These groups often provide information, education, and
support that illustrates positive survival outcomes, 26 but today the strain of diagnosis and the rigors of treatment combined with concerns about confidentiality often
discourage patients from attending these groups. In the past, people had to physically leave their homes and go to hospitals, physicians' offices, religious houses of
worship, or community centers to attend a support group. With the advent of personal computers, Internet support groups have become popular. 27,28 In 1998, more
than 40% of households owned a computer. The ability to use computer technology has assisted individuals in overcoming barriers to group participation, such as
groups that meet at an inconvenient time, transportation difficulties, physical ill health, inclement weather, or the stigma that may be associated with attending the
group. Computer networks have been described as a “support group without walls.” 30 Advantages to computer group membership include increased patient control of
both time of participation and of information disclosed or obtained, safety to discuss difficult issues, availability of information, and subsequent support. The system
also has been described as empowering. 31 These groups also benefit individuals with hearing or speech disabilities. 32 Logistical obstacles, such as time spent in the
assembly of the group or in travel, cost of transportation, facility costs, and scheduling problems, are overcome. An additional important benefit is anonymity.
Anonymity may lead to greater self-disclosure, honesty, and intimacy while allowing specific issues to be more quickly discussed as well as discussion of taboo topics
that might otherwise not arise. One of the major disadvantages is decreased interpersonal relationships. Although anonymity may be an advantage, the inability to see
individuals, hear their voices, or read their body language may encourage isolation or interfere with empathy. Technological problems have been noted, including
computer malfunction, cost of telephone lines and computers, access to such equipment, illiteracy, and patient discomfort with technology. Another challenge has
been to facilitate group process. Individuals who are less verbal may not be encouraged to participate as much as in a face-to-face group. Trust may take longer to
develop, and bonding may be more gradual. Because one must wait for feedback (and some individuals do not have good typing skills), response rate may be altered.
The group leader may have more difficulty interpreting, limit setting, and tracking patterns. More recent technological advances now allow individuals to actually
“speak” to each other online. The Internet site Yahoo! ( http://www.yahoo.com) allows individuals with the use of a microphone to download their software for free, thus
enabling them to talk and hear others. A “conference” across the Internet can occur, which may counteract decreased proficiency with typing and other discomforts
that the patient may have.
Fernsler and Manchester 28 evaluated the use of a computer network (CompuServe Information Service's Cancer Forum) both by individuals and those supporting
them. They found that respondents began using the network within 4 months of diagnosis and continued through all stages of the diagnosis. They concluded that
“information seeking is a common coping strategy, both initially and throughout the cancer experience.” Both patients and caregivers were positive about the
information and support received via the computer, and this may be a “convenient alternative to traditional information and support services.” 28

INSTRUMENTAL SUPPORT
As health care delivery evolved during the 1990s, emphasis shifted to ambulatory care. Most medical care is now provided on an outpatient basis, which can create
additional stressors for the patient and support system. In a study done by Emanuel et al., 33 more than 86% of the population surveyed indicated a need for

assistance. Sixty-two percent indicated a need for transportation assistance, and 55% indicated a need for homemaking assistance.
Transportation can sometimes emerge as a barrier to quality treatment. Medications that were previously administered in the hospital are now given on an outpatient
basis and may not be covered by insurance. Home care and medical equipment needs may be intensified as hospital stays have become abbreviated.
FINANCES
The cost of the illness and the financial impact on the patient and family has been well documented. The direct cost of the illness as well as incidental expenses such
as transportation, parking, and child care can be overwhelming to patients. Mor and associates 34 interviewed 217 people with cancer and found that 87% had
experienced a significant increase in monthly expenses directly related to the disease. Wang et al. 35 indicated that minorities had more concerns about finances than
whites. For the elderly and others on fixed incomes, the uninsured, and the unemployed, these expenses become significant barriers to continuing treatment.
Patients are often reluctant to discuss their finances with physicians and may feel more comfortable with another member of the medical team. A social worker can do
an in-depth financial assessment, including a full discussion of insurance coverage and subsequent referral to available resources. Constant reevaluation of
insurance coverage is necessary as insurance changes with employment changes, managed care providers differ in services offered, and family income changes.
Patients may feel pressure, either self-imposed or by hospital and physicians' offices, for prepayment or payment of outstanding bills, 36 all adding to the stress of
contending with cancer.
Coverage for medical care costs in the United States comes from four main sources: the federal government, employers and private health insurance, state and local
government, and private households. 37 Exploration of privately funded sources should be made with the assistance of the social worker. Cancer Care is an agency
that frequently assists with finances. Hospital and communities may have funds established from donations that help with finances for the cancer patient.
The federal government funds the Medicare program and the Social Security Disability program. Eligibility is governed by age or permanent disability for Medicare
application and by work history for Social Security Disability. Eligibility for Medicaid and local welfare programs always involves a means test, although this test differs
regionally. Application for Medicaid programs is made through the state department of social services. Local aid is available through individual towns to those who
have state applications pending or do not meet a particular state's eligibility requirements. A newly diagnosed, unemployed, uninsured person might be eligible for
these entitlements.
TRANSPORTATION
Patients often live at great distances from treatment centers or are too debilitated to drive themselves. Transportation becomes a major issue in accessing proper
care. Family members, although well meaning and caring, may not be able to devote as much time as they wish to provide transportation. Transportation to doctor
appointments or home from the hospital is infrequently covered by insurance. In a study of the terminally ill, 33 it was found that 62% of patients indicated a need for
help with transportation. Transportation needs for economically disadvantaged patients were particularly troublesome. 38
The ACS, the American Red Cross, and the Leukemia Society are agencies that exist nationwide and assist in transporting patients to medical care. In many areas,
local towns or regional districts provide transportation to medical appointments. Resources change frequently, and it is necessary to investigate local services to
assess availability.
HOME HEALTH CARE
Home health care provides for those patients who do not require hospitalization, and it is the most rapidly expanding segment of the health care industry today.
Agencies, visits, and services have multiplied exponentially due to two major influences—demographic changes and managed care. Each year, almost 500,000 new
senior citizens are added to the census, 39 and there is steadily increasing pressure from insurance companies and managed care programs to search for the least
expensive treatment method and to emphasize the lowest appropriate level of care, low-cost alternatives, and early discharge from hospitals and other health care
facilities. As the trend toward home care has grown, patients are becoming more familiar with the concept of this type of care in today's health care delivery system.
To be eligible for home care services, a patient must be homebound and require skilled nursing services. Short-term custodial services are provided after the these
criteria are met. The value of home health care to both patient and family has been confirmed in a study by Groebe and colleagues. 40 Home health care also provides
for continuity of care between physician visits.
HOSPICE
Hospice home care is available for patients living at home and requiring nursing care who have a prognosis of 6 months or less. The first hospice was organized in
Connecticut in 1974; in 1996, more than 3000 hospice programs were caring for close to 500,000 dying patients in the United States. 41 A patient can be eligible for
hospice home care even while receiving chemotherapy or radiation outpatient services. In addition to providing nursing care, emphasis also is placed on patient and
family support. Physicians, nurses, social workers, clergy, volunteers, aides, and other ancillary personnel work together to provide services to patients and families
from diagnosis through bereavement. This service can be invaluable for those dealing with a terminal illness.
BARRIERS TO EFFECTIVE HOME CARE
Home care should provide the support, reassurance, and medical assistance necessary to help patients function while remaining in the comfort of their own home
environment. The success of a good home care plan depends on the skills of the professional responsible for planning this service before patient discharge from the
hospital. A serviceable home care plan also relies heavily on family support and family caregivers. Most insurance companies follow Medicare guidelines and usually
provide for a maximum of 2 to 3 hours of home care daily.
The burden of home care usually becomes the responsibility of the primary caregiver, who, although frequently willing to provide care on a time-limited basis, cannot
continue to do so for an extended period. Patients may lack knowledge regarding the available services or may be unable to afford services to supplement
insurance–covered home care. In some areas, geographic limitations exist, and not all services are available in all areas. Rural regions, in particular, usually have a
dearth of available services. 42
The growing number of home health care agencies, although ensuring a degree of competition, can make it more difficult for patients to select the agency that is most
appropriate for them. Selection may be based on availability, patient and family needs, reimbursement, cost, or insurance dictates. Agencies that provide home care
services may be Medicare certified, public health departments, and proprietary agencies, both profit and nonprofit. Services offered can include nursing, home health
aides, social work, physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, nutritional assessment and monitoring, laboratory work, and intravenous therapy.
In caring for a patient at home, the caregivers must provide various levels of support. Needs may range from the highly technical to simple companionship and
monitoring for safety. Technical support can be received from a home health care agency, whereas less technical support, such as housecleaning, shopping, or
cooking, may be available from church or synagogue groups or senior center groups.
MEDICAL EQUIPMENT
At various times during the course of treatment for cancer, a patient may need special medical equipment or require modification to their home. The medical team
should make this assessment before discharge from the hospital or during the course of treatment. Home health care personnel can also complete a safety
evaluation. Insurance may cover these items, but only when prescribed by a physician. The ACS and Visiting Nurses Association often have loan closets in which
equipment owned by such agencies is stored and available, usually free of charge. It is critical that the patient and those providing care be given ample instruction in
the care and use of any equipment, including emergency access numbers for urgent problems.
Case managers now have access to a remote patient monitoring system called a telemedicine system. Images are transmitted via telephone lines and a video camera
to allow various segments of the health care community, including physicians, clinic staff, and home care companies, to view patient images. More than 250,000

diagnostic teleradiology readings were done in the United States in 1997, and most commonly, telemedicine is used to monitor vital signs. Dr. Ace Allen, editor of
Telemedicine Today, stated that patients with chronic diseases could be better managed if they received ongoing monitoring at home. 43 Despite the expansion of
telemedicine, the volume of patients receiving services that use this technology remains relatively low (approximately 21,000 in 1996). 44 Currently, the evaluative data
on telemedicine consultations are not definitive and need further exploration, particularly in the areas of insurance coverage, cost-effectiveness, and state-of-the-art
evaluation. 45

TRENDS AFFECTING DEMAND FOR COMMUNITY SERVICES
Because significant changes in the health care environment affect the need for specific resources, it is necessary to discuss them even though they remain in a
continual state of flux. The maelstrom of public debate early in the 1990s swirled around the concerns of escalating medical spending 46,47 and suboptimal care, 48,49
along with increasing awareness that a significant contingent of Americans has no health insurance or inadequate insurance. 50 Since Congress rejected President
Clinton's proposal for health care reform, the most significant issue has been how to protect consumers from restrictions or access to care by managed care
organizations. All states have a contact for health insurance complaints at the National Association of Insurance Commissioners ( http://www.naic.org/).
The percentage of health maintenance organization (HMO) members in for-profit organizations increased from 12% in 1981 to 62% in 1998. Typical issues that have
arisen include the fact that the number of Americans without insurance increased to 16.1% in 1997 52 and that 100,000 Americans lose their health insurance each
month.53 According to the latest U.S. census report, a total of 44.3 million Americans were uninsured in 1998, 54 which was 1 million more than just a year earlier.
Children, Hispanics, and part-time workers were affected the most by these insurance losses. Kuttner 50 also states that the number of inadequately insured people is
growing even faster. This development is related to several trends in coverage, 55 namely the deterioration of employer-provided coverage that insures two out of three
Americans. Employers have streamlined employee choice of plans while shifting the costs to the employee and sometimes terminating coverage because of the high
cost of premiums. Some plans limit benefits, such as prescription coverage, or charge higher copayments and deductibles. In addition, “casual” employees and
part-time workers rarely receive insurance coverage, yet these groups accounted for approximately 29% of working Americans in 1997. 51 Americans with the broadest
choice of plans are either government workers or those insured by Medicare or Medicaid. 56
The 1985 Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) allows people to leave their jobs and pay privately for their insurance, but it does not consider
the expense involved. Although the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) prohibits denial of those with preexisting conditions, this cost is so
exorbitant that it becomes self-limiting, protecting only a few hundred thousand people instead of the potential 25 million who have lost insurance. A 1998 study by the
Lewin Group for Consumers Union 29 found that one in eight families spend 10% of their income on premiums and out-of-pocket expenses, but the number increased
to two in ten in families with a family member between the ages of 55 and 64, and to five in ten with a family member older than 65. Thirty-four percent of insured
adults have been enrolled in their plan for less than 2 years, 51 which results in lack of continuity of care and inability to track patterns, pointing to additional problems
with managed care and needed resources.
Congress has considered patient protection legislation, including allowing subscribers to bring suit against their HMO. Managed care forces practitioners to search for
the least expensive treatment method and emphasizes the lowest appropriate level of care. In addition to these issues, it has been determined that trust and
confidence in managed care plans decreased 12% from 1998 to 1999 (42% to 30%) in a survey of 160,000 households in 1999 by the National Research
Corporation. 57 A Kaiser Family Foundation survey found that physicians overwhelmingly report that HMOs have denied coverage, resulting in a decline in patient
health. A Maryland state audit of denial for hospital services concluded that questionable judgment is used in denying care, and a Washington state study found a
pattern of improper denials for emergency room treatment. 57 However, according to Karen Ignagni, chief executive officer of the American Association of Health Plans,
health plans have heard the public's concerns and have subsequently developed “point of service” plans and grievance procedures and are incorporating
independent external review. She believes that if Congress continues down its current path of allowing managed care organization decisions to be questioned in the
courtroom, HMOs will not be able to challenge the dangerous levels of misuse of health care resources and that continued variations in medical practice may threaten
patient safety. 57 Nonetheless, these coverage denials have placed an all-encompassing burden on the general public, adding the emotional burden of having to
advocate for themselves while they are physically compromised and financially vulnerable.
As prescription costs continue to increase, many of the elderly are flocking to “managed Medicare” policies, because traditional Medicare does not cover this service.
Although the managed care plans may be enticing, patients may not realize the involved restrictions that are imposed. Many professionals are advocates for the effort
to “shift power not from physicians and hospitals to patients but from managed care companies, insurance companies and health care facilities to patients and their
physicians.” 58 In 1999, a for-profit managed care company hired a liaison to “quell a mounting rebellion by doctors upset with new rules the insurer is trying to impose
on them,” 59 including finding the cheapest way to treat patients, even if another treatment would be more beneficial, and penalizing physicians who refer to
out-of-network providers, even if the patient requires the specialist services. It is precisely these types of restrictions from which the public must be protected.
Between 1998 and 2002, hospitals nationwide are expecting a $71 billion reduction in Medicare payments resulting from the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. 60 These
reductions, combined with Medicaid shortfalls, will potentially compromise the current level of care provided by hospitals. Because individuals are now hospitalized for
shorter periods, the multidisciplinary team often is no longer able to help patients adjust to a new diagnosis while anticipating the next phase of the illness and
adaptation to its demands. Often, a social worker or discharge planner assisted the patient and family with transition to the community and assessed the barriers to
care and, subsequently, planned for appropriate intervention. Although reimbursable services are obtainable, a wide gap in financial assistance faces patients without
adequate coverage. Because of the these concerns, many suggestions have been put forward for a universal health policy, 53,61 thereby allowing greater access for a
majority of Americans.

SURVIVORSHIP
The National Coalition of Cancer Survivorship defines survivors as living through and beyond a cancer diagnosis. 62 Today, approximately 8 million cancer survivors
are alive,63 and for the first time since the 1930s, the death rate of this disease has decreased and is leveling off or declining in all major body sites. 1 These statistics
are mainly true for the nonminority community. According to McDonald, 64 African Americans continue to have higher incidence rates and are at greater risk of dying
from cancer than any other racial or ethnic group.
Dow et al.65 sent surveys to 1200 National Coalition of Cancer Survivorship members to explore quality-of-life issues for survivors. In a sample of nearly 700 people,
the top emerging quality-of-life themes related to fatigue and pain, menopausal symptoms, and reproductive and fertility concerns, as well as to fears related to
recurrence and immobility after treatment. Issues such as these encouraged the National Cancer Institute (NCI) to create the Office of Cancer Survivorship in July
1996. Additional issues reported by the NCI include fear of recurrence, late effects of treatment, the economic burden of the disease, physiological difficulties,
depression, and sexual problems. Psychosocial difficulties occur more often with those who have had more aggressive initial treatment and those who have
experienced a relapse. Additional concerns include cognitive deficits, such as in memory and concentration. Cases of discrimination in the workplace also have been
reported, with their subsequent economic burdens. Klausner, director of the NCI, has stated that “the NCI has a responsibility to direct its efforts to issues that concern
the many individuals who have survived cancer and their quality of life beyond treatment.” The ACS also directs part of its mission toward the needs of cancer
survivors, and organizations such as the Leukemia Society are following suit. 66 Continuing assessment of quality-of-life issues, along with appropriate interventions in
the community, can enhance the lives of the ever-increasing number of cancer survivors. New and creative resources must be developed to meet the needs of this
growing population, such as the technology that now allows for removal, freezing, and reimplantation of a woman's ovary to restore fertility. 57

APPENDIX: COMMON RESOURCES
This appendix lists the most commonly used and helpful resources, to which most of the populace can gain easy access.
BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTATION
Barbara Ann DeBoer Foundation: Identifies and makes use of resources in the patient's community to raise the funds necessary for the procedure.
1-800-895-8478.
Blood and Marrow Transplant Newsletter: Provides a newsletter, resource directory, and patient support through telephone or e-mail. Keeps a list of attorneys
who advocate for patients where insurance coverage has been difficult. 1-888-597-7674.
Bone Marrow Transplant Link: Provides educational booklets, resource guides, and peer support via the telephone. 1-800-LINK-BMT.

Bone Marrow Transplant Family Support Network: Provides support for newly diagnosed patients with recovered bone marrow transplantation patients. Offers
counseling, groups, and insurance assistance. 1-800-826-9376.
Caitlin Raymond International Registry: An international search coordinating center that assists individuals in finding compatible bone marrow donors.
1-800-726-2824.
National Children's Cancer Society: Provides financial assistance for children diagnosed before 18 years of age in need of a bone marrow transplantation.
Assists with fund-raising efforts and provides education, information, and patient advocacy. 1-800-882-6227.
National Marrow Donor Program: Central registry facilitating searches and matches of donors and recipients. 1-800-654-1247.
National Transplant Assistance Fund: Helps individuals raise funds for medically related transplantation expenses. Offers direct financial assistance in the form
of grants to eligible candidates. 1-800-642-8399.
Childrens' Organ Transplant Association: Helps families to raise funds for transplantation-related expenses. 1-800-366-2682.
The Bone Marrow Foundation: Provides limited financial assistance for adjunct costs associated with bone marrow transplantation. 1-800-365-1336.
CAMPS
Contact the local ACS (1-800-ACS-2345), Cancer Information Service (1-800-4-CANCER), or Children's Oncology Camps of America (803-434-3503) for a listing of
local camps.
CARE FACILITIES
Care facilities provide for the continuous health-related care of patients who are temporarily or permanently no longer able to manage living in their home. Various
levels of care are available, and patients should explore these services with their physician or social worker to ascertain the most appropriate level of care. Patients
should also confer with their insurance company to determine coverage.
Licensed boarding home: Provides a room and meals to fairly independent individuals. Health aides are often on staff.
Intermediate care facility: Provides limited nursing supervision and care.
Skilled nursing facility: Provides medical and continuous nursing and health-related services to patients who are not in the acute phase of an illness but who
require an inpatient setting.
Subacute facility: Provides continuous medical, nursing, and health-related services to patients in a semiacute phase of their illness. These patients usually
require high-tech care, such as total parenteral nutrition and intravenous antibiotics.
Hospice: Provides supportive care, terminal care, or symptom control to patients in various stages of cancer.
Rehabilitation: Provides services to patients with the goal of restoring them to an adequate level of functioning.
CHILDHOOD RESOURCES
Candlelighters Childhood Cancer Foundation: Provides information, support, and advocacy to families of children with cancer, survivors of childhood cancer, and
professionals who work with these populations. 1-800-366-2223.
Childhood Leukemia Foundation: 1-732-840-4533.
Children's Hospice International: Provides support, education, resources, information, and referrals for the care of ill children and the professionals who work with
them. 1-800-242-4453.
Compassionate Friends: Provides assistance with bereavement issues after the death of a child. 630-990-0010.
Many people coping with a diagnosis of cancer now turn to their computers for cutting-edge information. When researching these databases, patients should always
be aware of the source of information. Is it an informed oncology professional organization or credible institution? The following ( Tables 56.6-1 and Table 56.6-2) is a
representative listing of the numerous commercial databases that can assist in accessing oncology information. Many databases and associated links exist for specific
cancers. To obtain a more comprehensive list, search engines can be used, such as About.com, Achoo, AtCancer, CiteLine, Physicians' Choice, MedNets, Medscape,
Medical Matrix, Medsite, and Yahoo!.
Organizations with Online Services
American Association for Cancer Research
American Brain Tumor Association
American Cancer Society
American Institute for Cancer Research
American Lung Association
BMT Newsletter
Cancer Care
Cancer Guide
Cancer Information Service
Candlelighters Childhood Cancer Foundation
Coping Magazine
Compassionate Friends
Cure for Lymphoma Foundation
Friends Network/Fun Letters
Gillette Women's Cancer Connection
International Myeloma Foundation
Kidney Cancer Association
Kids Konnected
Susan B. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation
Leukemia Society of America
Lymphoma Research Foundation
National Alliance of Breast Cancer Organizations
National Bone Marrow Transplant Link
National Brain Tumor Foundation
National Cancer Institute
National Childhood Cancer Foundation
National Coalition for Cancer Survivorship
National Hospice Organization
National Lymphedema Network
National Marrow Donor Program
National Ovarian Cancer Coalition
National Patient Air Transport Helpline
National Prostate Cancer Coalition
Patient Advocate Foundation
R. A. Bloch Cancer Foundation, Inc.

http://www.aacr.org
http://www.abta.org
http://www.cancer.org
http://www.aicr.org
http://www.lungusa.org
http://www.bmtnews.org
http://www.cancercare.org
http://www.cancerguide.org
http://cis.nci.nih.gov
http://www.candlelighters.org
E-mail: copingmag@aol.com
http://www.compassionatefriends.org
http://www.cfl.org
http://www.friendsnetwork.org
http://www.gillettecancerconnect.org
http://www.myeloma.org
http://www.nkca.org
http://www.kidskonnected.org
http://www.breastcancerinfo.com
http://www.leukemia.org
http://www.lymphoma.org
http://www.nabco.org
http://comnet.org/nbmtlink
http://www.braintumor.org
http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov
http://www.nccf.org
http://www.cansearch.org
http://www.nho.org
http://www.lymphnet.org
http://www.marrow.org
http://www.ovarian.com
http://www.npath.org
http://www.4npcc.org
http://www.patientadvocate.org
http://www.blochcancer.org

Ronald McDonald House Charities
Support for People with Oral and Head and Neck Cancer
The Brain Tumor Society
The Wellness Community
United Ostomy Association, Inc.
US TOO! International, Inc.
Vital Options Telesupport Cancer Network
Y-ME National Breast Cancer Organization

http://www.rmhc.com
http://www.spohnc.org
http://www.tbts.org
http://www.thewc.com
http://www.uoa.org
http://www.ustoo.com
http://www.vitaloptions.org
http://www.y-me.org

Oncology Web Sites
http://www.CancerDirectory.com
http://www.CancerEducation.com
http://www.CancerFacts.com
http://www.CancerGroup.com
http://www.CancerHelp.com
http://www.Cancer-info.com
http://www.CancerLinksUSA.com
http://www.CancerNews.com
http://www.CancerPage.com
http://www.CancerResources.com
http://www.CancerSource.com
http://www.Nocr.com
http://www.Oncology.com
http://www.OncoLink.com
http://www.Meds.com
http://www.Patientsupport.com

Assists in providing products and services to accommodate needs resulting from cancer
Improves cancer care through the dissemination of information
Provides information to help patients make treatment choices
Cancer Group Institute
Provides comprehensive cancer resources
Cancer Information and Support International
Provides support and information
Offers information on diagnosis, treatment, and prevention
Provides assistance to becoming informed, connected, andempowered
Guide to information, resources, and organizations
Provides comprehensive, reliable, and personalized informationby internationally known
Network for Oncology Communication and Research
Provides oncology news and information
Provides assistance in obtaining accurate oncology information
Provides medical information and education
Provides general cancer information

and related treatment

health professionals

EMOTIONAL SUPPORT
In the cancer experience, stress commonly occurs at the time of diagnosis, during the treatment phase, at the end of treatment, at time of relapse, or during the
terminal phase. To adequately cope with the impact of cancer, emotional support is essential for both the patient and the caregiver. Although some individuals may
choose to procure support from intimate sources, others look to the community for support. Community services include self-help, professional, individual, or group
modalities. Ambulatory and hospital-based settings may provide social work, psychiatric therapy, and pastoral care services.
American Cancer Society: The ACS sponsors the following programs. Contact your local ACS at 1-800-ACS-2345, as programs may vary.
Cancer Survivors Network: Provides one-to-one telephone or computer support to cancer survivors.
I Can Cope: Support group for individuals with cancer and their families.
Look Good Feel Better: Provides assistance to individuals with cancer regarding skin and hair changes.
Man to Man: Support for men with prostate cancer.
Reach to Recovery: Provides support, information, and education to women who have been diagnosed with breast cancer.
Road to Recovery: Provides volunteer drivers to assist with transportation to and from physicians' offices or hospitals.
Taking Charge of Money Matters Workshop: Provides education about financial concerns during the treatment of cancer, regardless of insurance status.
American Chronic Pain Association: A self-help organization that offers education and peer support to help people live with chronic pain.
Cancer Care: Offers free support services, education, information, and referrals. 1-800-813-HOPE.
Family service agencies: Provides information, emotional support, and psychological assistance.
International Association of Laryngectomies: Works toward the rehabilitation of the laryngectomy patient by providing support to those individuals who have
lost their voice box as a result of cancer. 301-983-9323.
Leukemia Society of America: Provides support, education, and limited financial assistance. 1-800-955-4572.
National Self-Help Clearinghouse: Refers individuals to self-help groups in their community. 212-817-1822.
Private practitioners: Provide emotional support and psychological interventions. Many insurance companies have a preferred provider list, which should be
consulted for reimbursement purposes.
Bloch Cancer Foundation: Provides information, peer counseling, and support groups. 1-800-433-0464.
Religious organizations: Provide emotional support, pastoral care, and spiritual guidance.
Us Too International: Provides support to men with prostate cancer and their families.
Well Spouse Foundation: Provides support groups and newsletters to partners and caregivers of the chronically ill. 1-800-838-0879.
Y-Me: Provides peer support to women with breast cancer. 1-800-221-2141.

FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
INCOME-RELATED ASSISTANCE
Short-term disability: Some employers offer short-term disability income with proof of medical necessity.
Social Security Administration: 1-800-772-1213.
Supplemental Security Income (SSI): A federally funded income maintenance program for the elderly, blind, or disabled. SSI has restrictions on income and asset
allotments.

Social Security Disability: A federally funded program for the disabled and for survivors of a deceased wage earner.
City, state, or federal assistance
Aid to Dependent Children: Provides financial assistance, medical insurance, and food stamps for eligible families with dependent children.
General assistance/city or town welfare: Financial assistance program for eligible individuals who do not have enough resources to meet basic needs.
Food stamps: A program designed to assist eligible individuals or families to purchase food.
TREATMENT-RELATED ASSISTANCE
State departments on insurance can provide information about local insurance carriers. Once cancer is diagnosed, it is often difficult for patients to obtain commercial
insurance, except with an exclusionary clause.
Medicare: A federally funded insurance program for the elderly or disabled. To be eligible as the latter, one must be on Social Security Disability for 2 years.
Hospital coverage is called Part A and covers the costs of hospitalization, except for the deductible, skilled nursing facility, and home health care. Medical
coverage is called Part B and pays for a share of the cost for physician, outpatient, and hospital services; ambulance transportation; and physical and occupational
therapy. One must be enrolled in Part B and pay monthly for this coverage. Social Security can be contacted at 1-800-772-1213 for more details.
Medicare health maintenance organizations: Similar benefits to Medicare but “managed” differently and may include additional benefits, such as prescription
coverage. A preferred provider list is used.
Medicaid: A state program that provides coverage for medical expenses and financial entitlements to eligible individuals. The Department of Social Services can
be contacted for more information. Check local phone listings.
Hill Burton: Federal funds are provided to some institutions to cover the cost of care for individuals who are ineligible for other entitlements. Financial restrictions
apply. 1-800-638-0742.
American Association of Retired Persons: Organization that assists persons 50 years of age and older. Provides information and supplemental insurance options.
Fees vary based on policy choice. 202-434-2277.
Pharmaceutical assistance: Some states offer programs that assist with the cost of prescription drugs for the elderly or disabled who meet financial criteria. Most
pharmaceutical companies offer drugs at no cost to people who cannot afford them; however, stringent criteria apply and application is required. A listing can be
obtained through PhRMA (America's Pharmaceutical Research Companies; http://www.phrma.org).
Transportation reimbursement: Can be obtained through various agencies, such as the Leukemia Society.
HOME HEALTH CARE
Resources can be provided through hospital departments of social work or discharge planning, as well as physicians' offices or ambulatory settings.
Visiting nurse/public health nurse: Provides skilled care, nurses aides, and ancillary staff to eligible individuals. Requires physician's orders and, often,
preauthorization. Can also provide information about local resources to supplement these programs.
Hospice: Provides comprehensive home care services, including the use of volunteers, to individuals with a limited prognosis. Requires physician's orders and,
often, preauthorization.
Home medical equipment: Usually reimbursed by insurance and is available through local suppliers. Some local agencies, such as the ACS or the Visiting Nurse
Association, may have a loan closet.
Proprietary home care agencies: Can provide high-tech services in the home, such as home chemotherapy, total parenteral nutrition, and intravenous
administration of antibiotics or other drugs. Preauthorization is needed.
Meals on Wheels: Meals are prepared and delivered to eligible homebound elderly or disabled people. A fee is often charged.
Friendly Visiting: A community outreach program offered through towns, agencies, and religious organizations in many areas.
HOUSING
Ronald McDonald House: Provides housing for families of out-of-town pediatric patients. Some facilities can occasionally accept adult patients on a priority basis.
Contact local hospital social work departments or physicians' offices for referral.
Westin Hotels: Some of these hotels offer free accommodations to ambulatory patients and their family members. Contact the hotel directly or the ACS.
National Association of Hospital Hospitality Houses: Provides a resource directory of no-cost accommodation. 1-800-542-9730.
SURVIVORSHIP
Cancervive: Assists cancer survivors to face and overcome the challenges of having cancer. 310-203-9232.
Coping magazine: Publication for individuals involved with cancer. 615-790-2400.
National Cancer Survivors Day: National annual celebration of life for cancer survivors.
National Coalition for Cancer Survivorship: Provides information regarding the issues of survivorship and provides peer support. 877-622-7937.
The Wellness Community: Provides psychosocial support to individuals recovering from cancer. 310-314-2555.
TRANSPORTATION
Airlifeline: A nonprofit association of pilots who donate their time, fuel, and aircraft to provide medical transportation to ambulatory patients. 1-800-446-1231.
Ambulance/chair cars (Handivans): Can be arranged for medical appointments and sometimes are covered by insurance. Preauthorization is necessary, except in
emergency.

American Airlines Miles for Kids in Need: Provides free transportation to children who demonstrate need. 817-963-8118.
Corporate Angel Network: A nonprofit organization that provides free plane transportation. 914-328-1313.
National Patient Transport Helpline: Assists patients in finding the most economical way of being transported to a medical facility. 1-800-296-1217.
Southwest Airlines: Provides no-cost transportation to medical destinations to patients in medical need. 214-792-4103.
VETERANS BENEFITS
U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs: Provides benefit information to veterans regarding educational assistance, disability compensation, medical care, life insurance,
burial benefits, and dependent benefits. Some states may offer local benefits.
WISH FOUNDATIONS
A Wish with Wings: Grants wishes to children with life-threatening illness. 817-469-WISH.
Brass Ring Society: Grants wishes to children with life-threatening illness. 1-800-666-9474.
Dream Factory: Grants wishes to children ages 3 to 13 with life-threatening illness in cities where there are chapters. 502-637-8700.
Make-a-Wish Foundation: Grants wishes to children with life-threatening illness. 1-800-722-9474.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics, 1999. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:8.
2. Dehgan A, Mellody P, Owen M. Keys to managing oncology care. Case Manag 1999;May/June:68.
3. ACS resource directory. Community connection: resources, information and guidance. Atlanta, American Cancer Society, 1995.
4. “A helping hand”—the resource guide for people with cancer, 2nd ed. New York: Cancer Care Inc., 1998.
5. Rimer B. Future directions in cancer patient education: using new media to enhance cancer communications. National Cancer Institute, Cancer Patient Education Network meeting, Tampa,
Florida, September 23, 1999.
6. Iacovino V, Recsor K. Literature on interventions to address cancer patients' psychosocial needs: what does it tell us? J Psychosoc Oncol 1997;15:47.
7. Holland J. Historical overview. In: Holland JC, Rowland JH, eds. Handbook of psychooncology. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989:3.
8. Zabora JR, Blanchard CG, Smith ED, et al. Prevalence of psychological distress among cancer patients across the disease continuum. J Psychosoc Oncol 1997;15:73.
9. Weisman AD, Worden JW. The existential plight in cancer: significance of the first 100 days. Int J Psychiatry Med 1976;7:1.
10. Gotay CC, Wilson MG. Social support and screening in African American Hispanic and Native American women. Cancer Pract 1998;6:31.
11. Guidry JJ, Aday LA, Zhang D, Winn RJ. The role of informal and formal social support networks for patients with cancer. Cancer Pract 1997;5:241.
12. Wortman CB. Social support and the cancer patient. Cancer 1984;5[Supp1]:2339.
13. Cwikel JG, Behar LC, Zabora JR. Psychosocial factors that affect the survival of adult cancer patients: a review of research. J Psychosoc Oncol 1997;15:1.
14. Dunkel-Schetter C. Social support and cancer: findings based on patient interviews and their implications. J Soc Issues 1984;40:77.
15. Rowland JH. Intrapersonal resources: coping. In: Holland JC, Rowland JH, eds. Handbook of psychooncology. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989:58.
16. Nezu CM, Nezu AM, Friedman SH, et al. Cancer and psychological distress: two investigations regarding the role of social problem solving. J Psychosoc Oncol 1999;16:27.
17. Ey S, Compas BE, Epping-Jordan JE, Worsham N. Stress responses and psychological adjustment in patients with cancer and their spouses. J Psychosoc Oncol 1998;16:59.
18. Spiegel D. Facilitating emotional coping during treatment. Cancer 1990;16[Suppl]:1422.
19. Harris KA. The informational needs of patients with cancer and their families. Cancer Pract 1998;6:39.
20. Brown-McCormack K. Evaluation of cancer-related websites on the WWW. National Cancer Institute, Cancer Patient Education Network meeting, Tampa, Florida, September 23, 1999.
21. Improving doctor-patient communication. Presented at the European Cancer Conference, September 1418, 1997.
22. Fernsler JI, Cannon CA. The whys of patient education. Semin Oncol Nurs 1991;7:79.
23. Giffords ED. Social work on the Internet: an introduction. Social Work 1998;43:243.
24. Baumans IJ, Gervey R, Siegel K. Factors associated with cancer patients' participation in support groups. J Psychosoc Oncol 1992;10:1.
25. Cella DF, Yellen SB. Cancer support groups: the state of the art. Cancer Prac 1993;1:56.
26. Spiegel D, Bloom JR, Kraemer HC, Gotthell E. Effect of psychosocial treatment on survival of patients with metastatic breast cancer. Lancet 1989;2:888.
27. “Internet patients” turn to support groups to guide medical decisions. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:1695.
28. Fernsler JI, Manchester LJ. Evaluation of a computer-based cancer support network. Cancer Pract 1997;5:46.
29. Shearer G. Hidden from view: the growing burden of health care costs. Washington DC: Consumers Union, 1998:3.
30. Brennan PF, Ripich S, Moore SM. The use of home-based computers to support persons living with AIDS/ARC. J Community Health Nurs 1991;8:3.
31. Gustafson D, Wise M, McTavish P, et al. Development and pilot evaluation of a computer-based support system with women with breast cancer. J Psychosoc Oncol 1993;11:69.
32. Galinsky MJ, Schopler JH, Abell MD. Connecting group members through telephone and computer groups. Health Soc Work 1997;22:181.
33. Emanuel EF, Fairclough DL, Slutsman J, et al. Assistance from family members, friends, paid caregivers, and volunteers in the care of terminally ill patients. N Engl J Med 1999;13:956.
34. Mor V, Guadagnoli E, Wood M. The role of concrete services in cancer care. Adv Psychosom Med 1988;18:102.
35. Wang X, Cosby LG, Harris MG, Liv T. Major concerns and needs of breast cancer patients. Cancer Nurs 1999;22:157.
36. Glajchen M. Psychosocial consequences of inadequate health insurance for patients with cancer. Cancer Pract 1994;2:115.
37. Ginzberg E, Ostow M. The road to reform: the future of health care in America. New York: Macmillan, 1994.
38. Guidry JJ, Aday LA, Zhang D, Winn RJ. Transportation as a barrier to cancer treatment. Cancer Pract 1997;5:361.
39. Thomas RK. Healthcare's changing face. Home Health Care Dealer 1995;7:135.
40. Groebe ME, Ahmann DL, Ilstrup DM. Needs assessment for advanced cancer patients and their families. Oncol Nurs Forum 1982;9:26.
41. Horne BK. Partners at the end of life. Case Manag 1998;SeptOct:59.
42. Buehler JA, Lee HL. Exploration of homecare resources for rural families with cancer. Cancer Nurs 1992;15:299.
43. Talking technology: telemedicine update for case managers. Case Manag 1998;Sept-Oct:55.
44. Grigsby J, Sanders JH. Telemedicine: where it is and where it's going. Ann Intern Med 1998;129:138.
45. Sanders JH. Moving forward, looking back: telemedicine in the year ahead. Telemed Telehealth Netw 1998;4:28.
46. Igelhart JK. The American health care systemexpenditures. N Engl J Med 1999;340:70.
47. Smith S, Freeland M, Heffler S, McKusick D. The next ten years of health spending: what does the future hold? Health Aff (Millwood) 1998;17:128.
48. The President's Advisory Commission on Consumer Protection and Quality in the Health Care Industry. Quality first: better health care for all Americans: final report to the President of the
United States. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1998.
49. Brook RH, McGlynn EA, Cleary PD. Measuring quality of care. N Engl J Med 1996; 335:966.
50. Kuttner R. The American health care systemhealth insurance coverage. N Engl J Med 1999;340:163.
51. Kuttner R. M ust good HMOs go bad? Part I. The commercialization of prepaid group health care. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1558.
52. Igelhart JK. The American health care systemMedicare. N Engl J Med 1999;340:403.
53. Light DW. Good managed care needs universal health insurance. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:686.
54. Los Angeles Times, October 4, 1999.
55. Fronstin P. Features of employment based health plans. Washington, D.C.: Employee Benefit Research Institute, 1998.
56. Kuttner R. Must good HMOs go bad? Part II. The search for checks and balances. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1635.
57. “Confidence in HMOs sinks, but Congress is still offering placebos.” USA Today, September 24, 1999.
58. Annas GJ. A national bill of patients' rights. N Engl J Med 1998;338:695.
59. New Haven Register, October 2, 1999.
60. BulletinThe Newsletter of Yale-New Haven Hospital, vol 22, August 12, 1999.
61. Blumenthal D. Sounding boardhealth care reform at the close of the 20th century. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1916.
62. Clark EJ, Stovall E, Leigh S, et al. Imperatives for quality cancer care: access, advocacy, action and accountability. Silver Spring, MD: National Coalition of Cancer Survivorship, 1996.
63. Facts and figures 1999. Atlanta: American Cancer Society, 1999.
64. McDonald CJ. Cancer statistics, 1999: challenges in minority populations. CA Cancer J Clin 1999;49:6.
65. Dow KH, Ferrell BR, Haberman MR, Eaton L. The meaning of quality of life in cancer survivorship. Oncol Nurs Forum 1999;26:519.
66. “Survivorship program set for nationwide roll out.” Leukemia Society of America Newsline, Fall 1999.

SECTION 56.7 Specialized Care of the Terminally Ill
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 56.7
Specialized Care of the Terminally Ill
FREDERICK A. FLATOW
SCOTT LONG
Introduction
Overview of Hospice Care
A Brief History
Organization and Financing
The Organization and Philosophy of Hospice Today
Diagnoses, Admission Guidelines, and Estimating Prognosis
Futility and the Decision to Seek Palliative Care
Symptom Management
Symptom Prevalence in Hospice Patients
Failure to Thrive
Pain
Dyspnea
Nausea and Vomiting
Fluids and Nutrition
Psychiatric Symptoms
Actively Dying Patients: Calm, Comfort, and Refractory Symptoms at the end of Life
Conclusion
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
“The functions of medicine are threefold: to relieve pain, to reduce the violence of disease and to refrain from trying to cure those whom disease has conquered, acknowledging that in such cases
medicine is powerless.”1
Hippocrates

Although Hippocrates called for restraint in the presence of terminal illness, research has documented substantial shortcomings in the contemporary care of terminally
ill patients. The Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatments (SUPPORT), involving more than 9000 patients hospitalized
in five U.S. medical centers, found that end-of-life treatments were overly aggressive and too often not in accordance with patients' wishes. Furthermore, 50% of
conscious patients dying in the hospital were reported by their surviving family members to have been in moderate to severe pain in the last week of life. 2 Among 913
Canadian outpatients “respondents were more likely to be dissatisfied with their treatments for their symptoms than for their cancer,” 3 which were similar to findings in
Italy. 4 Reasons for inadequate care of the seriously ill range from a basic lack of medical education and experience in palliative care to a professional ideology that
precludes the acceptance of death as an outcome of care.
Organized efforts to promote palliative care in the United States are relatively recent. Several U.S. organizations have funded studies and developed programs to
promote palliative care (Table 56.7-1). The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, through Last Acts, has sponsored several initiatives in end-of-life care, and the Open
Society Institute's Project on Death in America supports clinicians active in this area of medicine. The American Medical Association has now launched the Education
for Physicians on End-of-Life Care (EPEC) Project.

TABLE 56.7-1. Selected Web Sites in Palliative Care

These programs promote integration of palliative care standards into our major health care delivery systems, as well as education for consumers about options at the
end of life. Changes in medical education are also occurring. 5 Publishers of medical and nursing textbooks are incorporating new content on end-of-life care. The fifth
edition of this textbook received the award for “Best Chapter with End-of-Life Care Content in a Specialty Textbook,” sponsored by the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation.

OVERVIEW OF HOSPICE CARE
A BRIEF HISTORY
In the second half of the nineteenth century, the Irish Sisters of Charity in Dublin, Ireland, and a group of “pious widows” in Lyon, France, began to provide care
specifically dedicated to the dying. In 1905, the Irish nuns opened St. Joseph's Hospice in Hackney, where Cicely Saunders (now Dame Cicely in honor of this
achievement) began her work in developing the principles of modern hospice and palliative care. With formal training in social work, nursing, and medicine, Dr.
Saunders has continued these efforts at St. Christopher's in Sydenham outside London since 1967. The concept of around-the-clock analgesia, consideration of “total
pain,” and comprehensive care through the integrated work of an interdisciplinary team (IDT) are hers.
Inspired by visits from Dr. Saunders to the Yale School of Medicine in the early 1960s, a group of forward-looking health care practitioners from several clinical
disciplines developed a hospice program that received state regulatory approval. The home hospice served its first patient and family in early 1974, followed by the
opening of the first American inpatient facility in Branford, Connecticut, in 1980.
In 1978, the U.S. government established a Hospice Task Force to examine the potential role of the federal government in the development of hospice care. The
Health Care Financing Administration funded a project to assess cost and quality of service provided by hospices. 6
ORGANIZATION AND FINANCING
The National Hospice Education Project, the political arm of the hospice movement, crafted legislation that eventually became part of the Tax Equity and Fiscal
Responsibility Act of August 1982. 7 In 1983, terminally ill patients older than 65 years of age became eligible for hospice services under the Hospice Benefit of the

Medicare program. To qualify for the benefit, a patient must be certified by both the referring physician and the hospice physician as having a terminal illness with life
expectancy of 6 months or less. Services were limited by time and a financial cap. Eighty percent of patient care costs for each hospice were allocated to home care
services to reduce expenditures for institutional care. Patients receiving services reimbursed by Medicare under the Hospice Benefit relinquished their Part A
coverage for any active treatment of their terminal illness. If patients wish to return to active treatment, they may revoke the Hospice Benefit at any time. In later years,
Medicaid coverage was approved by the Health Care Financing Administration as a state option. At present, Medicaid covers hospice care in 43 states and the
District of Columbia. 8
THE ORGANIZATION AND PHILOSOPHY OF HOSPICE TODAY
In 1999, the National Hospice Organization estimated that more than 3000 hospices are operating in the fifty states, Washington D.C., and Puerto Rico.
Approximately 540,000 patients and families received hospice care in 1998. Although hospices may exist within institutions, such as a hospice wing in a hospital, or
as freestanding hospices, the majority of care is provided as home care. 8
No standard definition of hospice care exists, but several core principles govern its practice: (1) Hospice work is meant to enhance the quality of remaining life, not to
hasten death or prolong life. The goal is to maintain for patients and families the level of comfort and calm that they wish and to offer education and guidance
concerning their options at various stages of disease. (2) Delivery of care to patients and family is provided by an IDT that includes nurses, physicians, social workers,
pastoral care givers, and volunteers. Often, additional members contribute through the arts, physical therapy, dietary consultations, and alternative therapies. (3) The
patient and family group is considered the primary focus of care, not just the patient and not just the disease. After a patient's death, hospice provides bereavement
services.
DIAGNOSES, ADMISSION GUIDELINES, AND ESTIMATING PROGNOSIS
The life-threatening illness most identified with hospice is cancer. In 1995, however, the National Hospice Organization census reported that malignant disease
accounted for only 60% of hospice patients. 8 From its beginnings, hospice services have been available to patients with other terminal illnesses, and criteria for
admission to hospice with these diagnoses were formulated and, in 1998, accepted by Medicare. 9 Most hospice patients are covered by Medicare under the Hospice
Benefit.
Prognosis is generally taken in medicine to indicate whether a given disease is life-threatening and, if so, how long the patient can expect to live. Establishing a
prognosis for an individual cancer patient is much more difficult than doing so for a population of such patients.
Three studies that included large numbers of patients with cancer at all stages 10,11 and 12 found that functional or performance status was the most accurate predictor of
survival. Decline in activities of daily living, including bathing, continence, dressing, and transfer, were very strongly associated with decreased survival. The
Karnofsky performance status is another useful measure of prognosis, and it clearly differentiates the survival time of patients with terminal cancer. The median length
of survival for three groups with Karnofsky scores of 10 to 20, 30 to 40, and 50 or higher were 17, 50, and 86 days, respectively. This predictive score was
strengthened by five common findings: anorexia, weight loss within 2 weeks, dry mouth, shortness of breath, and dysphagia. 11 Deteriorating mental status and
cognitive ability are also predictors of shortened survival in cancer patients. 13
A model of survival at 2 and 6 months for seriously ill hospitalized patients has been developed as part of the SUPPORT study. This model uses primarily
demographic, diagnostic, and physiologic variables as opposed to the symptom-based models. However, addition of a physician's prognosis improved the model's
performance.14
All authors agree that accurate prognosis for cancer patients is both important and difficult for physicians, patients, and families. Physician prognoses are often too
optimistic15,16 (but not always). 17 Overoptimistic prognoses can inappropriately commit the patient to futile interventions, thereby increasing the anguish of patient and
family, and also increase the expenditure of valuable time and resources. In addition, unexpectedly short survival times and resulting late referrals to hospice
programs deprive patients and families of available support and of time to settle affairs and achieve closure. 18 More research is needed to improve the accuracy of
predicting life expectancy. The ultimate decision to seek admission to hospice must rest on the patient's, family's, and physician's acceptance of the futility of further
curative treatments.
FUTILITY AND THE DECISION TO SEEK PALLIATIVE CARE
In the progression of most serious illnesses, therapeutic response eventually diminishes or disappears; risks begin to outweigh benefits as further therapy becomes
futile.
Jecker and Schneiderman 19 identify four common sources for the current debate over futility and health care: (1) Increasing costs raise societal concerns about
equitable delivery and possible rationing of health care. (2) Expensive technical innovations make it possible to extend life in ways that only recently seemed
impossible. (3) The aging of the population raises concerns about future costs during years of longer life in this increasingly numerous group. (4) The concept of
patient autonomy is being challenged as society confronts the new concerns just mentioned. Physicians must be better prepared to educate patients and families
about the options of palliative care as a desirable option in progressive terminal illness.
Acknowledgment of futility is a moment when optimal care of the patient shifts from a focus of cure and care to a palliative one of care only. Jonsen 20 has formulated
the following situations in which futility should be considered: (1) futility in process, in which a long and difficult course continues without any improvement; (2) futility in
prognosis, when patients start treatment that has rarely or never proved useful in similar cases; (3) futility in result, when treatment is technically successful but the
resulting quality of life is undesirable. Each of these decision points is frequently encountered by oncologists.
Recognizing these junctures and communicating them to patients and families requires physician sensitivity to the philosophy and practice of palliative care. The
patient's concerns, fears, and goals can be elicited by using open-ended questions and probing the patient's response. 21 Some patients sincerely question the
advisability of pursuing or initiating new active therapy, thereby providing an opportunity for discussing other options. During such discussions, the physician can state
that cure or control of disease is no longer possible. The choice of “no therapy” can hold the same stature as the alternative. Each physician must use his or her
experience to influence the proper choice, always supporting the patient in the final decision and never implying disappointment, anger, or abandonment. Where
patient and family insist on or demand futile treatments, it is incumbent upon the physician to begin discussion of palliative care as an acceptable option. Furthermore,
the possibility for hope and the new goal of maintaining quality of life through palliative care are emphasized. Patients and families should understand that their role in
developing symptom management may be greater than their role in directing curative therapies. This shift in goals and participation is a significant part of the process
for patients and families in dealing with the end of life.
Many patients have fears and beliefs that make it difficult for them to accept palliative rather than curative care. Patients may fear that accepting death means that
they will experience abandonment and isolation as both their families and medical care givers “give up” on them. They may foresee uncontrolled pain and suffering
and devaluation of their personhood. Physicians should be mindful that these concerns may hinder patients from finding hope in the decision to seek palliative care,
and they should openly discuss the support provided by palliative care programs. 22 The decision for palliative care usually involves the opening of many other
emotional, interpersonal, and spiritual opportunities for patients and families. Patients may use this decision point to resolve these interpersonal issues and to seek
closure. Hospice caregivers are trained to assist patients in reviewing their lives, thereby affirming self-worth. The IDT includes the pastoral care staff whose members
can help patients and families find spiritual meaning as they face the end of the patient's life.
From the physician's perspective, providing palliative care rather than therapy with curative intent implies a change in his or her role with respect to patient and family.
Within hospice, the physician is only one member of the IDT. The physician receives support from that team and, in turn, can help empower patients to see their
medical care and symptom management as part of a more comprehensive approach to terminal illness.
The following section describes in greater detail the most common symptoms encountered at the end of life and the options available to physicians, patients, and
families.

SYMPTOM MANAGEMENT
SYMPTOM PREVALENCE IN HOSPICE PATIENTS
Table 56.7-2 lists symptom prevalence as percent of patients affected in the surveyed populations; other comparable studies exist. 11,23 The results allow a few
clear-cut conclusions: (1) Weakness, fatigue, pain, dyspnea, nausea, and vomiting remain important symptoms throughout much of the course of the disease. As
cancer progresses, some decrease in pain may be due to adequate palliation. Others have noted increasing prevalence of dyspnea at the very end of life. 24,25 (2)
Weight loss, anorexia, and insomnia become irrelevant in the last stages of disease, despite earlier importance. (3) Troublesome oral and respiratory secretions
(“chesty” symptoms), drowsiness, and myoclonus become prominent in the last days of life.

TABLE 56.7-2. Symptom Prevalence in Cancer Patients at Various Stages of Disease

Several important points about symptom prevalence are not evident from Table 56.7-2: (1) Most cancer patients have multiple symptoms.24,26,27,28,29 and 30 (2) The most
common symptoms are often the most severe.3,27,28 (3) The constellation of symptoms shows some variation with the site of primary disease. 25,26 and 27,31,32 For
example, dyspnea is especially common in lung cancer 25,27; nausea and vomiting in carcinoma of pulmonary, gastrointestinal, and gynecologic origins 26,27; dysphagia
in carcinoma of head and neck and of esophagus 27; and pain in bony metastases of any origin and in primary lung, gynecologic, and prostate cancers. 26,27,31 (4) Some
symptoms either worsen or recur, and new ones appear as cancer progresses. In one study of the last 48 hours of life, 22% of patients had worsening of previously
controlled pain, and 30% had new pain. 33 (5) Older patients tend, as a group, to have less pain than younger patients. 27,31
In the following sections, palliation of many of these symptoms is discussed; others are treated more fully in Chapter 55.1, Chapter 56.1, Chapter 56.2, and Chapter
56.5. Readers should consult the review by Ingham and Portenoy 34 for extended discussion of symptom assessment tools.
FAILURE TO THRIVE
The effects of cancer disrupt normal anatomy and physiology, locally in the vicinity of the tumor or its metastases and globally in sites far removed from the tumor. The
latter global effects may also be called constitutional or paraneoplastic. The signs and symptoms of failure to thrive are a prime example of constitutional change and
occur in many (and probably most) cancers. 3,35,36 The phrase failure to thrive incorporates many terms, including anorexia, asthenia, cachexia, fatigue, lethargy, and
weakness, which overlap in etiology and manifestations. Weakness implies generalized physical debility and lethargy refers to the inability to maintain normal physical
and mental effort. In this discussion, fatigue is comprised of weakness and lethargy. Failure to thrive is defined as a symptom complex of anorexia and fatigue.
The intensity of the components of failure to thrive is not necessarily related to tumor size, tissue origin, cell type, or degree of differentiation. 37 Evidence now
implicates tumor-associated cytokines and their interaction with normal components of the immune system creating these signs and symptoms. 38
Anorexia occurs in most patients with cancer at some time.30,36,39 The goal of its treatment in hospice care is patient satisfaction and, in some cases, nonfluid weight
gain.
Pharmacologic therapy can promote nutrition by increasing appetite, controlling nausea and vomiting, improving gastric reflux, and sometimes by relieving
obstruction. Clear-cut improvement in anorexia has been documented with progestational drugs, especially megestrol acetate. At 800 mg/d, patients showed improved
appetite, nonfluid weight gain, and reduction in nausea and vomiting. 40,41 and 42 Doses of more than 800 mg/d are not more effective. In a trial of chemotherapy with and
without megestrol in patients with extensive small cell lung cancer, 42 however, neither quality of life nor survival time was improved with megestrol. Corticosteroids
may also be helpful in stimulating appetite and improving mood. Corticosteroids are less expensive than progestational agents but also have more significant side
effects. 43 Other agents are being studied as therapy for anorexia and wasting. For surveys of these medications, the reader should consult available reviews. 38,39,44
Nonpharmacologic maneuvers may be helpful in treating anorexia and promoting nutrition. These maneuvers include mouth care, maintenance of regular bowel
movements, and stressing patient choice in food preparation. Meals should consist of small portions served at the proper temperature, usually course by course, and
seasoned to the patient's taste. Family and friends eating with the patient creates a shared experience that may be beneficial to all. 45 Mouth care involves simple
measures such as gentle cleansing of the tongue, teeth, and gums; moistening with artificial saliva or ice chips; and promoting salivation with tart foods such as lemon
ice. On occasion, oral comfort entails more intensive therapy to treat mucositis due to antitumor therapy or oral thrush. 46
In late stages of cancer, most patients neither wish nor profit from interventions to treat anorexia pharmacologically. Similarly, forced feedings or nutritional
supplements urged on the patient by well-meaning clinicians and family often offer more risk (e.g., aspiration, anxiety) than benefit. Enteral and parenteral nutrition
have not been shown to be helpful in improving the quality of life or prolonging survival of cancer patients at the end of life. 47,48
Fatigue is a major symptom in the failure to thrive of progressive illness. 3,24,35,36 The components of weakness and lethargy are multifactorial and appear to be driven
by direct effects of tumor products creating deleterious changes in skeletal muscle and the central nervous system. 38 Many common elements of cancer and its
treatment may contribute to fatigue: fluid and electrolyte imbalance, infection, anemia, paraneoplastic disorders, side effects of chemotherapy, radiation, other
medications, and psychological reactions to disease and therapy.
In evaluation of fatigue, one monitors the patient for potentially correctable causes, such as anemia, dehydration, hyponatremia, hypokalemia, hypercalcemia,
hypoglycemia, and renal and hepatic function. Medications that contribute to fatigue, including the opioids, sedatives, antidepressants, and muscle relaxants, can be
adjusted by choosing agents for better side effect profiles. Rotation of opioids can maintain analgesia while decreasing side effects. Other medications can be
discontinued if not important to comfort.
Nonpharmacologic approaches to improving fatigue include budgeting energy, delegating some daily tasks to others, and rescheduling activities to allow time for rest.
Reassessment of goals in everyday life is necessary to form realistic expectations of physical abilities and energy capacity. Controlled programs of exercise and the
use of physical and occupational therapy can improve a patient's tolerance of everyday activities. 49
Medications used to alleviate fatigue include psychostimulants and steroids. Psychostimulants such as methylphenidate 50,51 and pemoline 52 are used in palliative care
to counter the sedative effects of opioid analgesia and as antidepressants. 52,53 Steroid therapy has shown some improvement in asthenia, 43 although the beneficial
effect seems to diminish 2 to 3 weeks after initial use. As was noted with anorexia, total parenteral nutrition does not reverse fatigue. 47
Finally, although the emphasis in palliative medicine is symptom control rather than curative therapy, palliative antineoplastic therapy is the most global means of

controlling the cancer and its underlying pathophysiology and improving failure to thrive.
PAIN
Pain pervades the physical being, social relationships, and spiritual dimensions of those who live with it. The presence or recurrence of pain is perceived as a sign of
persistent disease and creates fear and anxiety. However, its treatment by physicians is often inadequate 2,54,55 (see Chapter 56.1 for an extensive discussion of pain
and its treatment). Twelve important considerations in pain management relative to the terminally ill patient are emphasized in this chapter:
1. Assess pain carefully and reassess frequently. Believe the patient and treat pain promptly. Successful analgesia is possible in 85% to 95% of cancer patients
using basic pain management techniques. 56
2. The World Health Organization ladder is used to start treatment at the level most appropriate to the degree of pain, with escalation as necessary. 57
3. Morphine is the standard of opioid therapy for severe pain.
4. The oral route for opioids is preferred whenever possible.
5. Alternative preparations and routes of administration are available, including rectal suppositories, transdermal patches, and both subcutaneous and intravenous
parenteral preparations. A percutaneous button for multiple injections provides a single subcutaneous route lasting 3 to 4 days before change of site is needed.
Compact portable pumps can deliver medication by both intravenous and subcutaneous infusion.
6. Around-the-clock analgesia controls pain best, with breakthrough doses available as needed.
7. A good command of equianalgesic doses and oral-parenteral ratios of the available opioids is essential. Methadone is gaining more acceptance for chronic pain
therapy. 58 Note that the equianalgesic ratio, published as 1:1, may be much smaller, implying that methadone is more potent than anticipated. 59 When switching
to methadone, approximately 10% to 30% of the equivalent daily morphine dose should be used. 60
8. Rotation of opioids can be helpful in controlling side effects. 61 The cross-tolerance of opioids is incomplete, and using one-half to two-thirds of the equianalgesic
dose of an alternate opioid can result in the same level of pain control with fewer side effects.
9. Avoid chronic use of inappropriate opioids. Accumulation of the active metabolite of meperidine, normeperidine, can produce central nervous system
hyperexcitability with myoclonus and generalized seizures. 62 The mixed agonist-antagonist analgesics have a ceiling dose for pain control and can block the
pure agonists at the mu opioid receptor sites.
10. Use adjuvant medications in combination with opioids, particularly for neuropathic pain and pain due to bone metastases.
11. Always begin medications for bowel care when opioid therapy starts.
12. Understand tolerance, dependence, and addiction. Psychological dependence or addiction is extremely rare in the patient with cancer and chronic pain. 63,64 This
consideration should never be a barrier to good pain control in cancer patients, including those with a history of illicit drug use.
DYSPNEA
Dyspnea is the uncomfortable sensation of labored breathing. Shortness of breath can be a terrifying experience, and it frequently increases at the end of life. 24,25
Pain, anxiety, and fear complicate its clinical presentation. For patients with terminal illness but months to live, proper evaluation of dyspnea may lead to at least
temporary control of its underlying cause or causes. For those with days or weeks of life remaining and who are unable or unwilling to undergo further testing, one
should proceed directly to symptom control.
Dyspnea can be multifactorial in many cancer patients. Investigation of dyspnea is often limited by patient tolerance. Full pulmonary function tests are not usually
necessary. However, measuring the forced expiratory volume with and without bronchodilators, standard chest x-rays, ultrasound, and ventilation/perfusion scans are
not invasive and can detect abnormalities that respond to tolerable remedies.
Therapy for dyspnea requires addressing both malignant and nonmalignant causes in cancer patients. Treatment of chronic lung disease, pulmonary infection,
cardiac failure, and arrhythmias can improve the patient's comfort. Venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism are common in malignant disease and, barring major
contraindication, can be managed with oral or subcutaneous anticoagulants. Thoracentesis and paracentesis can be bedside procedures in a hospice inpatient
setting. However, thoracentesis can result in pneumothorax, and the risks must be discussed, particularly when tube thoracostomy is not immediately at hand. For the
dyspnea of obstructing pulmonary lesions with atelectasis, a short course of palliative chest radiation may be appropriate. 65 Aspiration of a pericardial effusion can
bring dramatic relief of dyspnea, but proceeding to a pericardial window requires careful consideration of benefits to the patient. Maximal supportive care may be more
appropriate. Similarly, laser therapy of obstructing pulmonary lesions and endobronchial stents 66 are available for patients who can tolerate the procedures.
High-dose corticosteroids can temporarily improve the dyspnea of metastatic pulmonary lesions, especially that of the lymphangitic type. Steroids also are effective in
treating superior vena cava syndrome and, to a lesser extent, radiation pneumonitis.
Respiratory sedatives must be considered for those patients very near the end of life who are in respiratory distress and cannot tolerate the treatments just mentioned.
The benefit of these medications, including alcohol, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, phenothiazines, and opioids, comes from suppression of respiratory awareness.
Parenteral opioids have become an established treatment of dyspnea in cancer patients, without causing significant deterioration in respiratory function. 67,68 Morphine
sulfate, 2.5 to 5.0 mg, subcutaneously as a single dose can be effective in the opioid naïve patient or in patients receiving only intermittent analgesia. It may be
necessary to repeat two or three doses at 20- to 30-minute intervals for satisfactory relief. For those patients already receiving opioids for pain on a regular basis, a
larger dose is needed, one that is 1.5 to 2.5 times the patient's q4h dose. Morphine for dyspnea is usually prescribed on an as-needed basis, but for chronic dyspnea,
administration is needed every 4 hours.
Nebulized morphine has been proposed as an alternative route of administration for therapy of dyspnea. Its use has been reported in both cancer patients 69,70 and 71
and those with nonmalignant chronic lung disease. 72,73 and 74 Although several authors report relief with nebulized opioids, the studies are uncontrolled case reports
and retrospective chart reviews. Morphine and hydromorphone were the most commonly used medications. A subset of patients responded to this treatment, but
additional randomized and controlled studies are needed.
Morphine is prepared for inhalation by addition of 5 mg of the standard parenteral product to 3 mL of normal saline as a starting dose. Doses as high as 50 mg have
been used without undue side effects. 70,71 In both normal volunteers and patients at surgery, systemic bioavailability of morphine after inhalation is only 5% to 35% of
the comparable parenteral dose. 75 Patients familiar with nebulizer therapy may prefer this route. Nebulizer therapy is easily used at home and is inexpensive.
However, a word of caution is necessary. Rarely, inhaled morphine can induce bronchospasm, possibly related to the preservatives present. 69 The first dose by
inhalation should be administered in a controlled situation. In some patients, severe unremitting cough can contribute to breathlessness, and relief can be obtained
with nebulized anesthetics. Nebulized lidocaine can be an effective cough suppressant.
Audible congestion in the last hours of life, the death rattle, is very disturbing to caregivers and family, if not the patient. Scopolamine can reduce secretions and
control noisy respiration. A scopolamine patch may be sufficient, but a subcutaneous dose of 0.4 to 0.8 mg of scopolamine every 2 hours as needed is more potent
and more rapid in onset. Scopolamine is sedating and may not be appropriate in some situations.
NAUSEA AND VOMITING
Increasingly, interest in nausea and vomiting has been directed toward terminally ill cancer patients not receiving chemotherapy. 76 Prevalence can be as high as 40%
to 46% in the last 6 weeks of life 77 and, in the final days, may be so refractory that patients require sedation. The physiology of nausea and vomiting and appropriate
therapies are reviewed in Chapter 55.1, especially as related to chemotherapy.
Workup of this problem in a terminally ill patient begins with a history and physical examination. Diagnostic studies must be consistent with the patient's condition and
goals of palliative care. Invasive diagnostic studies may not be appropriate when no primary therapy exists.
Four anatomic centers initiate stimuli that produce nausea and vomiting: the central nervous system, the vestibular apparatus, the chemoreceptor trigger zone, and
the viscera. 78
Recurrent primary or metastatic brain tumors often cause emesis. Dexamethasone up to 30 mg/d may relieve symptoms associated with increased intracranial
pressure due to either primary or metastatic tumors. Fear, anxiety, and pain can cause nausea and vomiting, and can be controlled by benzodiazepines and

analgesics, respectively.
Vestibular causes may respond to anticholinergics (scopolamine), antihistamines (meclizine), and phenothiazines with H 1 antagonism (promethazine).
Relief of nausea and vomiting due to stimulation of the chemoreceptor trigger zone requires adjustment or replacement of medications. Chronic medications
previously tolerated may become toxic because of altered drug metabolism or excretion as cancer progresses. Evaluation of metabolic abnormalities, such as
hypercalcemia and uremia, may reveal correctable causes of nausea and vomiting.
The most problematic and refractory causes of emesis in advanced cancer patients result from gastrointestinal or visceral disease. If gastric irritation is suspected, as
from nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, cytoprotectants and acid-blocking agents can be effective without the need for antiemetics. New medications time-related to
onset of nausea and vomiting can be stopped or replaced.
Overfeeding can lead to vomiting; and small feedings satisfy anorexic patients. At the end of life, tube feedings are associated with large gastric residuals, gastric
distension, vomiting, and increased risk of aspiration. 48 Prokinetics, such as metoclopramide, may be helpful, but it is often appropriate to reduce or discontinue
feeding. Effective bowel care controls nausea and vomiting associated with constipation. Laxatives must accompany routine opioid use. Urinary catheterization with
relief of retention can end nausea, agitation, and restlessness.
The pain and nausea of hepatic metastases presumably caused by stretching of the liver capsule are relieved by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and
corticosteroids with gastroprotection. Paracentesis for tense ascites controls one cause of the “squashed stomach syndrome,” with restricted gastric volume, early
satiety, and nausea.
Gastrointestinal obstruction, commonly due to ovarian, colonic, pancreatic, and gastric carcinomas, results in nausea and vomiting 79; metastases from extraabdominal
cancers, such as lung and breast carcinoma and melanoma, can also obstruct. 80 Gastric outlet obstruction from benign or malignant causes produces large-volume
vomiting. A percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube allows gastric drainage and relieves vomiting, while a jejunostomy tube provides feeding and
medication. 81,82
Obstruction of both small and large bowel is a frequent terminal event in cancer patients. Obstruction may be partial or complete at single or multiple sites and may be
due to benign causes (adhesions, radiation bowel damage, hernia) or malignant causes (new or recurrent tumor, abdominal carcinomatosis). 80 Tumor infiltration of
mesentery or bowel wall and, occasionally, of celiac plexus, may cause mechanical obstruction of the lumen or paralytic ileus. Common symptoms include intestinal
colic, abdominal pain, and vomiting.
Surgical treatment of bowel obstruction remains controversial. Review of therapies for gastrointestinal obstruction compared exploratory laparotomy with bowel
bypass and more conservative therapy with gastrostomy drainage. The authors 83 concluded that intestinal obstruction due to chemotherapy-resistant tumors and
peritoneal carcinomatosis associated with ascites or palpable masses should not be treated surgically, and neither should patients with intestinal paralysis secondary
to tumor involvement of the mesentery. PEG tube placement was a simple procedure for drainage, and it improved quality of life without other surgical intervention. 83
Consideration for surgical palliation of malignant obstruction requires careful individual patient evaluation.
The goal of medical management of bowel obstruction is relief of abdominal pain and vomiting in patients in whom surgical intervention is contraindicated. 79,80 In
partial obstruction, clear liquid diet, corticosteroids (dexamethasone, 12 to 24 mg/d) to reduce peritumoral edema, and bisacodyl suppositories to decompress the
colon can improve intestinal passage. The steroid dose can be tapered and the diet advanced if bowel function resumes. In complete obstruction, drainage by PEG
tube is the most important intervention to relieve nausea and vomiting, but antiemetics (haloperidol or prochlorperazine) may be needed. Intestinal colic is controlled
with scopolamine (0.15 to 0.30 mg subcutaneously every 6 to 8 hours as needed), and abdominal pain is controlled with opioids. Octreotide (0.1 to 0.2 mg every 8 to
12 hours subcutaneously) reduces intestinal epithelial electrolyte and water secretion. 84,85 This reduces bowel distention, vomiting, and pain and may preclude the
need for gastric drainage.
Research has revealed four major neurotransmitter receptor systems involved in emesis: muscarinic (M, one of the cholinergic subclasses), dopaminergic (D 2),
histaminic (H 1), and serotonergic (5-HT 3). No one broad spectrum antiemetic is effective in all pathways 78 despite the fact that many antiemetics affect more than one
neurotransmitter pathway as shown in Table 56.7-3.86 Furthermore, nausea and vomiting in a patient may have more than one cause. When the probable causes of
nausea and vomiting are established, the most effective medication should be selected from the appropriate class of medications.

TABLE 56.7-3. Medications for Nausea and Vomiting with Associated Neurotransmitter Receptors

Among commonly used antiemetics, phenothiazines such as perchlorperazine and chlorpromazine have a broad range (i.e., affect several pathways) and offer several
routes of administration; chlorpromazine, however, is sedating and may cause hypotension. Haloperidol is available in concentrated solution (5 mg/mL) so that
effective doses can be given subcutaneously in small injected volumes. Metoclopramide promotes gastric emptying. In severe nausea and vomiting, 5-HT 3 antagonists
such as ondansetron, granisetron, and dolasetron can bring relief. One protocol for ondansetron is given in Table 56.7-3. In addition to control of intracranial
pressure, adjuvant corticosteroids (dexamethasone) empirically enhance many antiemetics.
FLUIDS AND NUTRITION
Provision of fluids and nutrition to terminally ill patients may be a contentious issue between families and hospice caregivers. 87 Families often feel that fluids and
nutrition prevent suffering by reducing dehydration and starvation. The issue often intensifies as patients begin to lose the ability to take sustenance and medications
orally. Even a balanced discussion of not starting artificial fluid and nutritional support may cast the caregivers in the eyes of the family as threats to the patient's
comfort. At the same time, hospice caregivers differ personally and professionally concerning provision of nonoral fluids and about the degree of suffering resulting
from thirst. 88,89
Estimation of the prevalence of thirst and dry mouth among cancer patients in palliative care ranges from 28% 90 to 83%.91 Clinical concerns favoring provision of fluids
include protection of patients from bed sores, constipation, nausea, delirium, myoclonus, and accumulation of drug metabolites with significant risk to patient comfort.
Commonly used palliative medications (e.g., opioids, tricyclic antidepressants, phenothiazines, some antiemetics) all promote dry mouth. In some cases, intravenous
fluids are delivered because the benefits to the family outweigh any risks. 87
On the other hand, intravenous hydration and nutrition may prolong life so that patients die from other less comfortable causes. They may cause prolonged suffering
from other symptoms, including increased respiratory and gastrointestinal secretions, phlebitis at the intravenous site, ascites and edema, and need for a urinary

catheter with its accompanying risks and discomfort. Some of these objections may be avoided by using subcutaneous delivery of fluids by hypodermoclysis. 89,92,93
The symptom of thirst is not identical to dry mouth or other signs of dehydration, often defined clinically as serum sodium, osmolality, and azotemia above normal
values. Thirst is best assessed by patient report. Substituting a workup of dehydration by physical and laboratory examinations may be misleading.
It is difficult to draw firm conclusions about the relations among thirst, dry mouth, dehydration, and suffering from the few clinical studies published. 94 As a group,
these studies90,91,95,96 and 97 support but do not prove the following statements:
1. Thirst, dry mouth, and fluid retention are not closely associated with demonstrable dehydration. 95,96
2. Intravenous fluids do not uniformly alleviate dehydration or thirst nor improve awareness. 96,97
3. Assiduous mouth care and small amounts of ice chips or fluid may or may not relieve dry mouth or thirst. 90,91
4. Dehydration is associated with decreased awareness and may not be improved by intravenous fluids. 97 In contrast, in a large study of a palliative care center, 61
decreased prevalence of delirium was associated with increasing use of hydration and opioid rotation.
5. Thirst was not significantly related to length of survival in one study, 95 although taken together, the studies cited show increasing prevalences of thirst and
dehydration as patients approach death. Of note, these studies do not define subgroups of patients whose symptoms improve with hydration.
In hospice care, no single approach to provision of fluid by nonoral routes is used. Most caregivers would agree that the patient's choice is paramount. At the same
time, institutional preferences for providing or withholding nonoral fluids exist and have been discussed. 89 The scientific basis for such patterns is still not clear and
needs more study.
The issues surrounding nutrition in terminally ill patients are simpler than those concerning fluids. As cancer progresses, patients become increasingly anorexic rather
than hungrier. Fewer than one-third of patients admitted to the hospice unit complained of hunger, and that occurred only during the first quarter of their stay. 90 The
issue of hunger is rarely mentioned among symptoms in patients in the last 24 to 48 hours of life. Furthermore, little or no evidence shows that enteral feeding by
either nasogastric or by gastrostomy and jejunostomy tubes prevents malnutrition, infections, or pressure ulcers or that it improves functional status or survival
compared to patients without feeding tubes. 48 Conservative measures may be helpful to the patient and family without subjecting the patient to what appears to be a
futile intervention in most cases, especially in the terminal phases of illness. Such measures involve frequent, careful feeding of small bites or boluses (generally less
than a teaspoon) placed carefully into the mouth, encouragement to chew and to swallow, use of a patient's favorite foods, use of flavorful food and fluids, diets ad lib
enriched with cream and fats, and the company of family and friends when desired. 48
PSYCHIATRIC SYMPTOMS
The major psychiatric complications in terminally ill cancer patients are anxiety, depression, and delirium. Uncontrolled physical symptoms, especially pain, increase
their prevalence and intensity. 98
Anxiety
In many cancer patients, anxiety is a pervasive feeling of dread for themselves and others in their lives. Beginning in some patients before diagnosis, anxiety
produces easy distraction, poor attention and concentration, and physical signs of autonomic activation. At times, anxiety may escalate into panic. Control is important
for patient comfort and for adequate calm so that the patient can understand and cooperate with caregivers during workup and treatment of physical illness and
psychosocial issues.
Diagnosis is based primarily in observing and talking to the patient and family; the goal is to elicit any previous history of anxiety disorders and treatment, as well as
current history and symptoms. We ask the patient to describe the major sources of anxiety so that we can respond to them. Anxiety commonly concerns both self and
others. The physical examination may reveal anxious facies; tics; and signs of autonomic hyperactivity, such palpitations, tachycardia, dyspnea, sweating, nausea and
vomiting, diarrhea, and paresthesias.
Some patients calm adequately in response to information and to empathic support from members of the IDT and from family and friends. Others require therapies
and medications designed to control anxiety. Nonpharmacologic therapies include relaxation techniques such as meditation, biofeedback, and guided imagery, as well
as “talk therapy.” 99,100 Such therapy should be tried, but success may depend on addition of medication, usually a benzodiazepine. A wide variety of benzodiazepines
is available with differences in duration of action, metabolites, timing of onset, and routes.
In urgent situations, short-acting benzodiazepines, such as alprazolam and lorazepam, are used; the latter can be given intramuscularly or by slow intravenous push
as well as by mouth. Shorter acting benzodiazepines provide easier titration of the medication. Longer acting benzodiazepines, such as diazepam and clonazepam,
are used for routine control of anxiety and may be given two or three times a day.
Selective use of benzodiazepines depends on the clinical situation. Anxiety due to ongoing pain should be addressed first with analgesics. Anticipated pain can be
treated with both analgesia and a benzodiazepine; lorazepam in this situation not only acts as an anxiolytic and adjuvant analgesic but also provides anterograde
amnesia. Similarly, lorazepam given before chemotherapy works to relieve anxiety as well as nausea and vomiting. 100
Anxiety is a concomitant of dyspnea. Relief of dyspnea with oxygen and, in some cases, morphine may relieve anxiety. If not, trial of an antihistamine such as
hydroxyzine may be effective and prevent the use of benzodiazepines, which can interact with opioids to depress respiration. Opioids and benzodiazepines used
together for rapid relief of dyspnea are appropriate at the very end of life when more concern is focused on providing dying patients with calm and comfort during this
irreversible process and less on drug interactions.
Benzodiazepines protect patients during withdrawal from habit-forming substances (e.g., barbiturates, alcohol, opioids, and other benzodiazepines). After 2 to 4
weeks of routine use, benzodiazepines should be tapered to prevent physiologic withdrawal.
On occasion, the clinical situation suggests that other medications be used to treat anxiety or supplement the benzodiazepines already used. Butyrophenones such
as haloperidol or a lower potency phenothiazine such as thioridiazine may be appropriate, especially in anxious patients with psychotic features of hallucinations and
delusions. More sedating drugs, such as thioridazine and chlorpromazine, are helpful in agitated or insomniac patients. Methotrimeprazine is a phenothiazine that
combines relief of both pain and anxiety. Like chlorpromazine, however, it is associated with sedation, hypotension and orthostasis, and the anticholinergic side
effects. Anxiety escalating into panic attacks can be treated with tricyclics such as imipramine, the benzodiazepine clonazepam or a selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor such as paroxetine. 100,101
Depression
Diagnosis of depression in cancer patients relies heavily on psychological and cognitive signs and symptoms (e.g., feelings of guilt, worthlessness, futility, suicidal
ideation) because many of its physical signs and symptoms (e.g., fatigue, anorexia, weight loss) can result from underlying cancer and its treatments. 102 Prevalence of
self-reported depression in cancer patients is near 25% 103 and increases with poor symptom control.98 Among hospitalized cancer patients referred for psychiatric
consultations, almost 60% were seen for depression, suicidal ideation, or both. 104
Diagnosis and treatment for depression in early stages of cancer have been reviewed 105 and are discussed in Chapter 56.5. In this chapter, we concentrate on
depression in the last stages of disease, when patients and families cannot wait weeks for therapeutic response.
Psychostimulants such as dextroamphetamine, methylphenidate, and pemoline may improve depression in a few days, as well as counteract sedative side effects of
opioids and promote appetite and concentration 51,53; in the presence of opioids, they also provide adjuvant analgesia. 51,106 Initial dosing of methylphenidate is 2.5 mg
at breakfast and lunch. The dose is increased every 3 to 4 days until relief of depression or unacceptable side effects (e.g. anxiety, autonomic hyperactivity,
confusion) intervene; it is rarely necessary to go beyond 30 mg/d. Relief of depression is usually evident in a few days, as opposed to the few weeks with tricyclics
and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Pemoline is reported to be as effective as dextroamphetamine and methylphenidate and has fewer sympathomimetic side

effects, although it should be used with caution in patients with liver dysfunction. 52
Patients with poor symptom control, especially pain and depression, are at high risk for suicidal ideation. Members of the IDT must be alert to protect them through
symptom control, counseling, and pharmacotherapy. 101
Delirium
Clinically, confusion is most often divided into delirium and dementia, although other categories of cognitive disorders exist. Delirium refers to a fluctuating complex of
mental states of “altered alertness and impaired cognition,” 107 including some or all of the following presentations: variable attention, shifting awareness, disturbed
sleeping patterns, disorientation, hallucinations, and difficulties of memory and speech. 101 In delirium, changes in mental status occur over hours to 1 or 2 weeks,
which is much more rapidly than in dementia. Fluctuations of mental status and, in some cases, reversibility of delirium also distinguish it from dementia.
Differentiation of dementia and delirium is especially difficult when they coexist, as they commonly do in older patients.
Prevalence of delirium increases as cancer progresses, estimated variously at 10% to 27% early in the course to 85% near death. 103,108,109 At the very end of life, it
may be a major component of terminal restlessness or terminal agitation. The inability of patients to communicate with families and caregivers is frustrating. Stress
created by a delirious patient can produce the “destructive triangle” 110: a distressed family creates pressure for relief on the nurse who then adds his or her own
distress to the pressure transmitted to the prescribing physician who may treat by sedating the patient without an appropriate workup. At the very end of life, however,
proceeding directly to sedation may be the most effective and appropriate help.
A wide range of etiologies exists for what is called by the single name delirium, and Table 56.7-4 lists some of these. In earlier stages of disease, when a desirable
quality of life can potentially be restored, search for and treatment of causes related to both cancer and to comorbid conditions is appropriate. Causes may not be
found, even in this multifactorial condition. In one study of confused terminally ill patients, only 44% had identifiable causes of confusion. 13

TABLE 56.7-4. Delirium in Cancer Patients: Etiologies and Facilitators

Several tools exist to aid in predicting, diagnosing, and following the evolution of delirium. 111,112 The Mini-Mental State Examination measures cognitive function and
has the advantage that it can be administered in a few minutes by caregivers without special training. Other instruments may be used to measure aspects of delirium
other than cognitive failure and to check the validity of the Mini-Mental State Examination if in doubt. 111
Treatment of delirium, usually begun during workup, involves several steps: stabilization of the environment, modification of medications, and correction of
contributory conditions when appropriate. 113
At all stages of disease, a stable environment minimizes delirium (e.g., the presence of trusted family and friends at the bedside, use of consistent and trusted
caregivers, a well-lighted environment with date and time readily available). Efforts to engage patients in conversation help to reorient and to distract them from
distressing thoughts and hallucinations. Personal observation is usually better than physical restraints in maintaining patients' safety.
All patients should have medications reviewed to eliminate unneeded medications and substitute others less harmful whenever possible, including rotation of opioids
to take advantage of partial cross-tolerance. Hydration and rotation of opioids may produce or contribute to clearing of mental status. 61
Pharmacotherapy for delirium varies depending on the stage of illness. Haloperidol has the advantage for some patients of being less sedating than other
phenothiazines. Because haloperidol administered parenterally has a faster onset and is approximately twice as potent as the same dose orally, it is used
intravenously or subcutaneously in urgent cases. For agitated delirium, the initial dose is 2 to 5 mg, preferably by the intravenous route, repeated every 15 to 30
minutes with a maximal dose of 5 mg every 15 minutes. For calmer patients, starting doses are 0.5 to 1.0 mg orally or parenterally, then titrated up every 45 to 60
minutes as necessary. 101 Ultimately, most patients receive 0.5 to 3.0 mg three times a day by mouth or parenterally. Side effects of haloperidol and other
phenothiazines include extrapyramidal effects, including akathisia and, rarely, neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
At times, confused patients may be aided by a sedating benzodiazepine used with haloperidol (e.g., lorazepam, which has no active metabolites), initially started at
0.5 to 1.0 mg every 1 to 2 hours by mouth, intravenously, or intramuscularly. Effective doses of these two drugs are then adjusted so that haloperidol is given every 8
hours and lorazepam every 6 hours.
Alternatively, the sedating phenothiazine chlorpromazine is usually successful in calming an agitated patient at doses of 12.5 to 50.0 mg given by mouth,
intravenously, or intramuscularly every 4 to 12 hours. 102 As death nears, the benefit of imposing calm outweighs the risk of hypotension associated with
chlorpromazine. In dying patients with poorly controlled agitation, a very short-acting benzodiazepine with rapid onset, midazolam, is used intravenously or
subcutaneously for sedation; it does not correct disordered thought. Initially, midazolam is started at 0.4 mg/hr and is titrated up to control agitation, usually in the
range of 20 to 60 mg/d, although higher doses up to 200 mg/d have been used. 114,115
ACTIVELY DYING PATIENTS: CALM, COMFORT, AND REFRACTORY SYMPTOMS AT THE END OF LIFE
Several groups have confirmed significant improvement in symptom control, especially pain, during hospice care. 24,25,29,116 Good control of overall symptom distress
increased from 64% of patients on admission to a palliative care unit to 84% on the day of death, 117 and Saunders notes that only 2% did not die peacefully in her
survey. 32 In contrast, the National Hospice Study showed that only 19% of patients were pain free at the time of last pain measurement before death, whereas 18%
had persistent pain. 31
Management of refractory symptoms was sharply focused in 1990 by a prospective study of 120 Italian home care hospice patients with cancer, 52% of whom had
such severe symptoms that only sedation provided comfort. 28 Subsequent reviews reported a range of 18% to 48% of hospice patients with refractory symptoms. 117,118
and 119
The most common symptoms requiring sedation were dyspnea, pain, delirium, and nausea. Time from starting sedation to death was, on average, 2 to 4
28,118,119
days.
Refractory symptoms, as thoughtfully discussed by Cheney and Portenoy, 120 are those for which no adequate relief can be found despite rational and thorough trials
of conventional approaches. In addition, other options cannot be effected in an acceptable length of time or may cause further suffering in trying them. These authors
discuss efforts to control terrible pain as a guide to the workup of other symptoms before their classification as “refractory.” The emphasis on interdisciplinary
teamwork is further stressed in a brief discussion of intolerable psychological or existential suffering.

In the studies cited, the most common medications used to produce sedation were midazolam (more than any other benzodiazepines); neuroleptics, such as
haloperidol and chlorpromazine; opioids; and barbiturates. Choice of sedating medications depends in part on the symptom to be controlled—for example, opioids for
pain, opioids and benzodiazepines for dyspnea, and neuroleptics for agitated delirium. In some cases, higher doses entrain unacceptable side effects (e.g.,
myoclonus with opioids); in this particular case, rotation of opioids may be helpful. Additional medication may be needed. At the beginning of sedation, medications
with shorter half-lives provide physicians with better control, which is especially important when varying degrees of sedation may be sought. Among benzodiazepines,
midazolam offers not only a short half-life but also a variety of routes. Special attention has been given to primary use of chlorpromazine 121 and of barbiturates 122,123 as
agents of sedation for refractory symptoms.
Among the most difficult of all tasks for caregivers are withdrawal of life support 124,125 and sedation for refractory symptoms to provide patients with calm and comfort
as they die. Both professionally and personally, caregivers often feel frustrated and threatened by not being able to provide adequate comfort; this frustration can lead
to a sense of division among members of the caregiving team. Some clinicians may have qualms that symptom control may hasten the patient's death rather than
preserving or improving the quality of life. The principle of the “double effect” provides comfort to some caregivers. The double effect refers to the fact that medication
given for the purpose of symptom relief carries foreseeable risk and may unintentionally hasten a patient's death. This principle recognizes the ethical desirability of
promoting symptom relief and is meant to protect caregivers so long as they have sought comfort for their patients and not their deaths. These situations are often
complex, however, and a simple statement of benign intent may not encompass all components of decision. 126 Clinicians unable to accept the distinction between
intended benefit and an unavoidable risk of death for the treated patient may need to transfer the patient's care to another colleague.

CONCLUSION
Although still relatively recent in American medical history, hospice is becoming accepted practice in caring for the terminally ill. Insurers, providers, and patients and
their families are increasingly aware that hospice is available to them and that it is often the best choice for care at the end of life. Nevertheless, hospice and palliative
care practice standards remain outside the mainstream of medicine and are only now being included in medical education curricula at all levels of training from
medical school to oncology fellowships.
Practitioners, researchers, and funders are beginning to establish a clinical knowledge base, which can be used to guide the practice of palliative medicine that will
grow with experience and systematic research. However, the practice of hospice care will face many challenges as well. Hospice stays have been shortening in many
programs, suggesting that patients may be referred to hospice later than is desirable. 18 Research is needed to understand better the sources of this shift, including
problems with prognosis, institutional barriers, physician knowledge and attitudes, and the views of families and patients. Better understanding of the underuse of
hospice can inform a variety of approaches, including policy changes, health education interventions, and professional training resources. The desired outcome is
continuing growth of knowledge and training in palliative care and its expanded use for patients with terminal illness.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Hippocratic Corpus. In: Jones WHS, trans. The art. Cambridge, MA: 1959;11,193.
2. SUPPORT Principal Investigators. A controlled trial to improve care for the seriously ill hospitalized patients: the study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of
Treatments (SUPPORT). JAMA 1995;274:1591.
3. Ashbury FD, Findlay H, Reynolds B, McKerracher K. A Canadian survey of cancer patients' experiences: are their needs being met? J Pain Symptom Manage 1998; 16:298.
4. Morasso G, Capelli M, Viterbori P, et al. Psychological and symptom distress in terminal cancer patients with met and unmet needs. J Pain Symptom Manage 1999;17:402.
5. Billings JA, Block S. Palliative care in undergraduate medical education. Status report and future directions. JAMA 1997:278:733.
6. Hoyer T. A history of the Medicare hospice benefit. Hospice J 1998;13(2):61.
7. Bayer R, Feldman E. Hospice under the Medicare wing. Hastings Center Rep 1982;12(6):5.
8. National Hospice Organization. NHO fact sheet. World Wide Web URL: http://www.nho.org, Spring 1999.
9. National Hospice Organization. Medical guidelines for determining prognosis in selected non-cancer diseases. Hospice J 1996;11:47.
10. Loprinzi CL, Laurie JA, Wieand HS, et al. Prospective evaluation of prognostic variables from patient-completed questionnaires. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:601.
11. Reuben DB, Mor V, Hiris J. Clinical symptoms and length of survival in patients with terminal cancer. Arch Intern Med 1988;148:1586.
12. Allard P, Dionne A, Potvin D. Factors associated with length of survival among 1081 terminally ill cancer patients. J Palliat Care 1995;11:20.
13. Bruera E, Miller L, McCallion J, et al. Cognitive failure (CF) in patients with terminal cancer: a prospective study. J Pain Symptom Manage 1992;7:192.
14. Knaus WA, Harrell FE, Lynn J, et al. The SUPPORT prognostic model. Objective estimates of survival for seriously ill hospitalized adults. Ann Intern Med 1995;122:191.
15. Forster LE, Lynn J. Predicting life span for applicants to inpatient hospice. Arch Intern Med 1988;148:2540.
16. Lamont EB, Christakis NA. Some elements of prognosis in terminal cancer. Oncology 1999;13:1165.
17. Zhong Z, Lynn J. The Lamont/Christakis article reviewed. Oncology 1999;12:1172.
18. Christakis N, Escarce JJ. Survival of Medicare patients after enrollment in hospice programs. New Engl J Med 1996;335:172.
19. Jecker NS, Schneiderman LJ. Futility and rationing. Am J Med 1992;92:189.
20. Jonsen AR. Intimations of futility. Am J Med 1994;96:107.
21. Lo B, Quill T, Tulsky J. Discussing palliative care with patients. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:744.
22. Herth K. Fostering hope in terminally ill people. J Adv Nurs 1990;15:1250.
23. Brescia FJ, Adler D, Gray G, et al. Hospitalized advanced cancer patients: a profile. J Pain Symptom Manage 1990;5:221.
24. Coyle N, Adelhardt J, Foley KM, Portenoy RKP. Character of terminal illness in the advanced cancer patient: pain and other symptoms during the last four weeks of life. J Pain Symptom
Manage 1990;5:83.
25. Higginson J, McCarthy M. Measuring symptoms in terminal cancer: are pain and dyspnea controlled? J Royal Soc Med 1989;82:264.
26. Bedard K, Dionne A, Dionne L. The experience of La Maison Michel Sarrazin (19851990): profile analysis of 952 terminal-phase cancer patients. J Palliat Care 1991;7:42.
27. Donnelly S, Walsh D, Rybicky L. The symptoms of advanced cancer: identification of clinical and research priorities by assessment of prevalence and severity. J Palliat Care 1995;11:27.
28. Ventafridda V, Ripamonti C, de Conno F, Tamburini M. Symptom prevalence and control during cancer patients' last days of life. J Palliat Care 1990;6:7.
29. Connill C, Verger E, Henriquez I, et al. Symptom prevalence in the last week of life. J Pain Symptom Manage 1997;14;328.
30. Schuit KW, Sleijfer DT, Meijler WJ, et al. Symptoms and functional status of patients with disseminated cancer visiting outpatient departments. J Pain Symptom Manage 1998;16:290.
31. Morris JN, Mor V, Goldberg RJ, et al. The effect of treatment setting and patient characteristics on pain in terminal cancer patients: a report from the National Hospice Study. J Chronic Dis
1986;39:27.
32. Saunders C. Pain and impending death. In: Wall PD, Melzack R, eds. Textbook of pain. London: Churchill Livingstone, 1989:624.
33. Lichter I, Hunt E. The last 48 hours of life. J Palliat Care 1990;6:7.
34. Ingham J, Portenoy RK. The measurement of pain and other symptoms. In: Doyle D, Hanks GWC, MacDonald N, eds. The Oxford textbook of palliative medicine, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1998:203.
35. Neuenschwander H, Bruera E. Asthenia. In: Doyle D, Hanks GWC, MacDonald N, eds. The Oxford textbook of palliative medicine, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998:573.
36. Vachon MS, Kristjanson L, Higginson I. Psychosocial issues in palliative care: the patient, the family and the process and outcome of care. J Pain Symptom Manage 1995;10:142.
37. DeWys WD, Begg C, Lavin PT, et al. Prognostic effect of weight loss prior to chemotherapy in cancer patients. Am J Med 1980;69;491.
38. Loprinzi L, Goldberg RM, Peethambaram PP. Cancer anorexia/cachexia. In: Berger A, Portenoy RK, Weissman DE, eds. Principles and practice of supportive oncology. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven, 1998:133.
39. Bruera E, Fainsinger RL. Clinical management of cachexia and anorexia. In: Doyle D, Hanks GWC, MacDonald N, eds. The Oxford textbook of palliative medicine, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1998:548.
40. Bruera E, Macmillan K, Kuehn N, Hansen J, MacDonald RN. A controlled trial of megestrol acetate on appetite, caloric intake, nutritional status, and other symptoms in patients with advanced
cancer. Cancer 1990;66:1279.
41. Loprinzi CL, Schaid DJ, Dose AM, Burnham NL, Jensen MD. Body composition changes in patients who gain weight while receiving megestrol acetate. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:152.
42. Rowland KM Jr, Loprinzi CL, Shaw EG, et al. Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of cisplatin and etoposide plus megestrol acetate/placebo in extensive stage small cell lung
cancer: a North Central Cancer Treatment Group Study. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:135.
43. Bruera E, Roca E, Cedaro L, Carraro S, Chacon R. Action of oral methylprednisolone in terminal cancer patients: a prospective randomized double-blind study. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69:751.
44. Bruera E. Recent research in pain and cachexia in advanced cancer and AIDS. In: Eguchi K, Klastersky J, Feld R, eds. Current perspectives and future directions in palliative medicine. Tokyo:
Springer-Verlag, 1998:3.
45. World Health Organization. Symptom relief in terminal illness. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1998.
46. Berger A, Kilroy TJ. Oral complications of cancer therapy. In: Berger A, Portenoy RK, Weissman DE, eds. Principles and practice of supportive oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1998:223.
47. American College of Physicians. Parenteral nutrition and the cancer patient. Ann Intern Med 1989;110:734.
48. Finucane TE, Christmas C, Travis K. Tube feeding in patients with advanced dementia. A review of the evidence. JAMA 1999;282:1365.
49. O'Gorman B. Physiotherapy in palliative medicine. In: Saunders C, Sykes N, eds. The management of terminal malignant disease, 3rd ed. London: Edward Arnold, 1993:168.
50. Bruera E, Watanabe S. Psychostimulants as adjuvant analgesics. J Pain Symptom Manage 1994;9:412.
51. Bruera E, Miller MJ, Macmillan K, Kuehn N. Neuropsychological effects of methylphenidate in patients receiving a continuous infusion of narcotics for cancer pain. Pain 1992;48:163.
52. Breitbart W, Mermelstein H. Pemoline. An alternative psychostimulant for the management of depressive disorders in cancer patients. Psychosomatics 1992;33:352.
53. Rosenberg PB, Ahmed I, Hurwitz S. Methylphenidate in depressed medically ill patients. J Clin Psychiatry 1991;52:263.
54. Weisman SJ, ed. Pain management in children. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin North Am 1997;6(4):687.
55. Wolfe J, Grier HE, Klar N, et al. Symptoms and suffering at the end of life in children with cancer. N Engl J Med 2000;342:326.
56. Levy MH. Pharmacologic treatment of pain. New Engl J Med 1996;335:1124.
57. Jacox A, Carr DB, Payne R, et al. Management of cancer pain: clinical practice guideline no. 9. Rockville, MD: Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Public Health Service, March 1994. AHCPR publication 94-0592.

58. Bruera E, Neumann CM. Role of methadone in the management of pain in cancer patients. Oncology 1999;13:1275.
59. Ripamonti C, Groff L, Brunelle C, et al. Switching from morphine to oral methadone in treating cancer pain: what is the equianalgesic dose ratio? J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3216.
60. Lawlor PG, Turner KS, Hanson J, Bruera E. Dose ratio between morphine and methadone in patients with cancer pain: a retrospective study. Cancer 1998;82:1167.
61. Bruera E, Franco JJ, Maltoni M, Watanabe S, Suarez-Almazor M. Changing pattern of agitated impaired mental status in patients with advanced cancer: association with cognitive monitoring,
hydration and opioid rotation. J Pain Symptom Manage 1995;10:287.
62. Kaiko RF, Foley KM, Grabinski PY, et al. Central nervous system excitatory effects of meperidine in cancer patients. Ann Neurol 1983;13:180.
63. Porter J, Jick H. Addiction rare in patients treated with narcotics [Letter]. New Engl J Med 1980;302:123.
64. Perry S, Heidrich G. Management of pain during debridement: a survey of U.S. burn units. Pain 1982;13:267.
65. Medical Research Council. Lung cancer: a Medical Research Council randomized trial of palliative radiotherapy with two fractions or ten fractions. Br J Cancer 1991;63:265.
66. Pierce RJ. Lasers, brachytherapy and stentskeeping airways open. Respir Med 1991;85:263.
67. Bruera E, MacEachern T, Ripamonti C, Hanson J. Subcutaneous morphine for dyspnea in patients. Ann Intern Med 1993;119:906.
68. Allard P, Lamontagne C, Bernard P, Tremblay C. How effective are supplementary doses of opioids for dyspnea in terminally ill cancer patients? A randomized continuous sequential clinical
trial. J Pain Symptom Manage 1999;17:256.
69. Farncombe M, Chater S, Gillin A. The use of nebulized opioids for breathlessness: a chart review. Palliat Med 1994;8:306.
70. Quelch PC, Faulkner DE, Yun JWS. Nebulized opioids in the treatment of dyspnea. J Palliat Care 1997;13(3):48.
71. Davis C. The role of nebulized drugs in palliating respiratory symptoms of malignant disease. Eur J Palliat Care 1995;2:9.
72. Davis CL, Hodder C, Love S, et al. Effect of nebulized morphine and morphine 6-glucuronide on exercise endurance in patients with chronic obstructive airways disease. Thorax 1989;44:387.
73. Beauford W, Saylor TT, Stansbury D, Avalos K, Light R. Effects of nebulized morphine sulfate on the exercise tolerance of the ventilatory limited COPD patient. Chest 1993;104:175.
74. Young IH, Daviskas E, Keena VA. Effect of low dose nebulized morphine on exercise endurance in patients with chronic lung disease. Thorax 1989;44:387.
75. Davis CL, Lam W, Butcher M, Joel SP, Slevin ML. Low systemic bio-availability of nebulized morphine: potential therapeutic role for the relief of dyspnea. Br J Cancer 1992;[Suppl 16]:S12.
76. Fallon BG. Nausea and vomiting unrelated to cancer treatment. In: Berger A, Portenoy RK, Weissman DE, eds. Principles and practice of supportive oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1998:179.
77. Wachtel T, Allen-Masterson S, Reuben D, Goldberg R, Mor V. The end stage cancer patient: terminal common pathway. Hospice J 1988;4:43.
78. Lichter I. Which antiemetic? J Palliat Care 1993;9:42.
79. Baines M, Oliver DJ, Carter RL. Medical management of intestinal obstruction in patients with advanced malignant disease. Lancet 1985;2:990.
80. Ripamonti C, DeConno F, Ventrafridda V, Rossi B, Baines MJ. Management of bowel obstruction in advanced and terminal cancer patients. Ann Oncol 1993;4:15.
81. Stellato TA, Gauderer MW. Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy for gastrointestinal decompression. Ann Surg 1987;205:119.
82. Gilbar PJ. A guide to enteral drug administration in palliative care. J Pain Symptom Manage 1999;17:197.
83. van Ooijen B, van der Burg MEL, Planting AS, Siersema PD, Wiggers T. Surgical treatment or gastric drainage only for intestinal obstruction in patients with carcinoma of the ovary or
peritoneal carcinomatosis of other origin. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1993;176:469.
84. Marks WH, Perkal MF, Schwartz PE. Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy for gastric decompression in metastatic gynecologic malignancies. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1993;177:573.
85. Mercadante S, Maddaloni S. Octreotide in the management of inoperable gastrointestinal obstruction in terminal cancer patients. J Pain Symptom Manage 1992;7:496.
86. Lichter I. Results of antiemetic management in terminal illness. J Palliat Care 1993;9(2):19.
87. Parkash R, Burge F. The family's perspective on issues of hydration in terminal care. J Palliat Care 1997;13:23.
88. Collaud T, Rapin CH. Dehydration in dying patients: study with physicians in French-speaking Switzerland. J Pain Symptom Manage 1991;6:230.
89. Fainsinger R, Bruera E. The management of dehydration in terminally ill patients. J Palliat Care 1994;10:55.
90. McCann RM, Hall WJ, Groth-Juncker A. Comfort care for terminally ill patients. The appropriate use of nutrition and hydration. JAMA 1994;272:1263.
91. Ellershaw JE, Sutcliffe JM, Saunders CM. Dehydration and the dying patient. J Pain Symptom Manage 1995;10:192.
92. Fainsinger RL, MacEachern T, Miller MJ, et al. The use of hypodermoclysis (HDC) for rehydration in terminally ill cancer patients. J Pain Symptom Manage 1994;9:298.
93. Centeno C, Bruera E. Subcutaneous hydration with no hyaluronidase in patients with advanced cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage 1999;17:305.
94. Viola RA, Wells GA, Peterson J. The effects of fluid status and fluid therapy on the dying: a systematic review. J Palliat Care 1997;13:41.
95. Burge FI. Dehydration symptoms of palliative care cancer patients. J Pain Symptom Manage 1993;8:454.
96. Musgrave CF, Bartal N, Opstad J. The sensation of thirst in dying patients receiving IV hydration. J Palliat Care 1995;11:17.
97. Waller A, Hershkowitz M, Adunsky A. The effect of intravenous fluid infusion on blood and urine parameters of hydration and on state of consciousness in terminal cancer patients. Am J Hosp
Palliat Care 1994;11:22.
98. Derogatis LR, Morrow GR, Fetting J, et al. The prevalence of psychiatric disorders among cancer patients. JAMA 1983;249:751.
99. Fawzy FI, Fawzy WW, Arndt LA, Pasnau RO. Critical review of psychosocial interventions in cancer care. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1995;52:100.
100. Noyes R Jr, Holt CS, Massie MJ. Anxiety disorders. In: Holland JC, ed. Psycho-oncology. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998:548.
101. Roth AJ, Breitbart W. Psychiatric emergencies in terminally ill cancer patients. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1996;10:235.
102. Breitbart W, Jacobsen PB. Psychiatric symptom management in terminal care. Clin Geriatr Med 1996;12:329.
103. Massie MJ, Holland JC. The cancer patient with pain: psychiatric complications and their management. J Pain Symptom Manage 1992;7:99.
104. Massie MJ, Holland JC. The cancer patient with pain: psychiatric complications and their management. Med Clin North Am 1987;71:243.
105. Block SD. Assessing and managing depression in the terminally ill patient. Ann Intern Med 2000;132:209.
106. Bruera E, Chadwick S, Brenneis C, Hanson J, MacDonald RN. Methylphenidate associated with narcotics for the treatment of cancer pain. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:67.
107. Ingham J, Caraceni AT. Delirium. In: Berger A, Portenoy RK, Weissman DE, eds. Principles and practice of supportive oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1998:477.
108. Pereira J, Hanson J, Bruera E. The frequency and clinical course of cognitive impairment in patients with terminal cancer. Cancer 1997;69:835.
109. Massie MJ, Holland J, Glass E. Delirium in terminally ill cancer patients. Am J Psychiatry 1983;140:1048.
110. Fainsinger RL, Tapper M, Bruera E. A perspective on the management of delirium in terminally ill patients on a palliative care unit. J Palliat Care 1993;9:4.
111. Smith MJ, Breitbart WS, Platt MM. A critique of instruments and methods to detect, diagnose, and rate delirium. J Pain Symptom Manage 1995;10:35.
112. Inouye SK, Van Dyck CH, Alessi CA, et al. Clarifying confusion: the confusion assessment method. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:941.
113. de Stoutz ND, Tapper M, Fainsinger RL. Reversible delirium in terminally ill patients. J Pain Symptom Manage 1995;10:249.
114. DeSousa E, Jepson A. Midazolam in terminal care. Lancet 1988;1:67.
115. Bottomley DM, Hanks GW. Subcutaneous midazolam infusion in palliative care. J Pain Symptom Manage 1990;5:259.
116. Twycross R, Lichter I. The terminal phase. In: Doyle D, Hanks GWC, MacDonald N, eds. The Oxford textbook of palliative medicine, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998:977.
117. Fainsinger R, Miller MJ, Bruera E, Hanson J, MacEachern T. Symptom control during the last week of life on a palliative care unit. J Palliat Care 1991;7:5.
118. Fainsinger RL, Landman W, Hoskings M, Bruera E. Sedation for uncontrolled symptoms in a South African hospice. J Pain Symptom Manage 1998;16:145.
119. Morita T, Inoue S, Chihara S. Sedation for symptom control in Japan: the importance of intermittent use and communication with family members. J Pain Symptom Manage 1996;12:32.
120. Cheney NI, Portenoy RK. Sedation in the management of refractory symptoms: guidelines for evaluation and treatment. J Palliat Care 1991;10:31.
121. MacIver B, Walsh D, Nelson K. The use of chlorpromazine for symptom control in dying cancer patients. J Pain Symptom Manage 1994;9:341.
122. Truog RD, Berde CB, Mitchell C, Grier HE. Barbiturates in the care of the terminally ill. N Engl J Med 1992;327:1678.
123. Stirling LC, Kurowska A, Tookman A. The use of phenobarbitone in the management of agitation and seizures at the end of life. J Pain Symptom Manage 1999;17:363.
124. Dickey N. Withholding or withdrawing life-prolonging medical treatment. JAMA 1986;256:471.
125. Brody H, Campbell ML, Faber-Langendoen K, Ogle KS. Withdrawing intensive life-sustaining treatmentrecommendations for compassionate clinical management. New Engl J Med
1997;336:652.
126. Quill TE. The ambiguity of clinical intentions. New Engl J Med 1993;329:1039.

CHAPTER 57 Rehabilitation of the Cancer Patient
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 57
Rehabilitation of the Cancer Patient
LYNN GERBER
JEANNE HICKS
JAY SHAH
Introduction
Cancer Rehabilitation Team
Functional Assessment
Common Functional Impairments in Oncology
Immobility and its Impact
Muscle Wasting and Cachexia
Generalized Deconditioning
Skin Breakdown
Contractures
Tumor-Associated Myopathy
Paraneoplastic Syndrome
Carcinomatous Myopathy
Carcinomatous Neuropathy and Myopathy
Steroid Myopathy
Bone Replacement by Tumor
Prevention and Management of Pathologic Fractures
Spinal Cord Injury Syndromes and Rehabilitation of Impairment
Neuropathies and Plexopathies
Chemotherapy-Induced Neuropathies
Brachial Plexopathies
Lumbosacral Plexopathy and Radiculopathy
Lymphedema and Deep Venous Thrombosis
Bowel and Bladder Disorders
Management of Bowel Dysfunction
Management of the Neurogenic Bladder
Management of the Ostomy Patient
Psychosocial Aspects of Cancer Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation and Management of Specific Tumors
Sarcoma of the Extremities
Melanoma
Lung Cancer
Central Nervous System Neoplasms
Hematopoietic Tumors
Conclusion
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The American Cancer Society predicts 1.2 million new cases of cancer diagnosed in 1999 and 8 million cancer survivors requiring care for cancer-related problems. 1
These patients are likely to be older, will survive for years with their cancers, and will present considerable challenge to health professionals.
The incidence of cancer climbs appreciably with each decade of life, and the population is aging. 2 The 5-year survival has improved over the last 20 years, such that
more than 50% of those with cancer of the prostate, colon, bladder, breast, uterus, thyroid, and some lymphomas will survive 5 years. 2
Patients with cancer, in part because of the likelihood that they are older and have preexisting medical conditions, are likely to present significant challenges and
complex management decisions. They are complex because, often, cancer has many phases and may recur and remit throughout multiple life stages. The illness may
not be stable, and the functional impact may vary with disease stage and may change with remote effects of treatments. Table 57-1 outlines one scheme for
conceptualizing this view of cancer management needs.

TABLE 57-1. Rehabilitation Support throughout Phases of Cancer

The pretreatment and treatment phases should include a functional assessment to help to identify what the patient is able and wishes to do and to predict what is
likely to influence function subsequently. A systematic evaluation of the neuromusculoskeletal system is essential for targeting areas likely to need intervention for
maintaining or restoring function. Often, instruction in the use of gait aides can best be given before treatment, when pain and mobility loss have not occurred.
Prosthetic and orthotic devices can be planned and provided intraoperatively when needed.
The post–definitive treatment phase is an opportunity for initiating preventive measures. Early mobilization, the use of wraps, and limb massage may help to mitigate
disuse and deconditioning or control lymphedema and limb swelling. This phase usually includes preparing the patient and family for discharge and educating them
about what the course is likely to be and what they (collectively) should be doing to keep the functional level high.
The intercurrent period, when the definitive treatment has been complete, may be psychologically difficult and require guidance to assist patients and family to enter
or reenter an active and healthy life program and resume usual activities, when possible. Patients may need to plan for adjusting to late neurologic sequelae
(plexopathies, neuropathies) or musculoskeletal sequelae (fibrosis, atrophy) of disease or treatment. Chronic pain, weakness, fatigue, and lymphedema may require
ongoing and intensive therapy.
Recurrence may require that the cycle of assessment and treatment begin anew. This process may be fairly psychologically demanding and anxiety-provoking. The
goals of rehabilitation management are to provide education about problem solving for issues relating to functional loss.
Rehabilitation professionals also have significant contributions to make at the end of life. During this phase, rehabilitation professionals can assist in answering

questions pertaining to nonpharmacologic treatments for pain control and strategies for enhancing quality activities and independence and can help families, friends,
and patients address issues at the end of life.
Cancer is common, chronic, and complex. Decision making about primary cancer treatment often factors elements reflective of these features. In fact, patients (our
consumers) are not only requesting participation in decision making, they are asking for information about the impact of the tumor and its treatments on function and
their quality of life. Patients, especially cancer patients, fear disability and have identified a host of concerns that include fatigue, independence, and pursuit of valued
activity, in addition to mortality, that influence their ultimate treatment choices. 3 Many concerns and needs of patients throughout the phases of cancer treatment can
be ameliorated by rehabilitation professionals. Table 57-2 describes the functional areas affected by various symptoms and in need of rehabilitation.

TABLE 57-2. Patient Functional Areas Affected by Cancer Symptoms in Various Phases of Disease

CANCER REHABILITATION TEAM
Rehabilitation specialists most frequently involved in treatment of the cancer patient include physiatrists; occupational, physical, and recreation therapists;
speech-language pathologists; audiologists; and vocational counselors. Other health care professionals join the team as needed for particular problems (e.g.,
orthotists-prosthetists, psychologists, dietitians).
Physiatrists are trained in the specialty practice of physical medicine and rehabilitation. This training enables them to assess functional ability, relative strength and
stamina, the basics of human mobility (biomechanics), the design and appropriate use of adaptive equipment, and orthotics and prostheses. Physiatrists often
combine information about disease and its treatment with the impact it is likely to have on function. It is usually physiatrists that coordinate rehabilitation services and
prepare a comprehensive plan for treatment and follow-up.
Occupational therapy is an integral part of the rehabilitation of the cancer patient. Therapists evaluate the impact of disease or treatment on function, roles and daily
routines, and the coping strategies needed to compensate for changes in a person's ability to participate as fully as possible in activity. Occupational therapists (OTs)
determine which strengths and support networks are available to a person and identify interventions that are critical to potentiate quality of life for those who are
terminally ill. Adaptive device training and safety training for activities of daily living (ADL); fabrication of splints or prosthetic training to maximize upper extremity
function; counseling for the development of coping strategies; fracture risk education and assistance with mobility; and seating and environmental adaptations are
examples of interventions that an OT can provide. Preparation for discharge requires input from an OT, with concentration on environmental safety (e.g., home,
bathroom) and functional independence (Table 57-3).

TABLE 57-3. Occupational Therapy: Evaluation and Treatment

Physical therapists (PTs) provide evaluation and treatment of human motion. Treatments include strategies and exercises to improve mobility, strength, and stamina.
Therapists often help to relieve painful musculoskeletal symptoms using nonpharmacologic modalities and postural treatment. If therapy is instituted early, it can
prevent muscle atrophy and joint contractures and maintain or promote fitness. Typically, PTs assess range of motion (ROM), muscle strength, exercise tolerance,
gait, shoulder and trunk strength, and balance. PTs usually apply orthotics and prostheses for the lower extremities, apply modalities of heat and cold, and help to
manage peripheral edema using compression pumps and stockings. Standardized evaluations are listed in Table 57-4.

TABLE 57-4. Physical Therapy: Evaluation and Treatment

Rehabilitation counseling addresses the educational-vocational issues of the cancer patient. Table 57-5 summarizes this information.

TABLE 57-5. Rehabilitation Counseling: Evaluation and Treatment

Recreation therapists (RTs) are part of a comprehensive cancer rehabilitation program. RTs evaluate whether areas of function that have been adversely affected by
disease or its treatment are amenable to interventions aimed at enhancing leisure activity. Interventions designed to address the primary and secondary symptoms
and side effects related to cancer and cancer treatment include behavioral and cognitive strategies for pain, anxiety, and stress management; recreational activities
for fine and gross motor function and stamina building; games for cognitive stimulation; age- and developmentally appropriate activities to ensure normalized
experiences for hospitalized children and adolescents; and creative and expressive outlets for thoughts and feelings. Further, RTs assist patients in identifying
opportunities for developing interpersonal and social supports through avocational activities; in enhancing patient management by providing clinical information; in
motivating patient compliance; and in educating the patient and significant others about strategies for coping and maintaining quality of life. A summary of what RTs
provide is found in Table 57-6.

TABLE 57-6. Recreation Therapy: Evaluation and Treatment

Speech-language pathology provides oral motor evaluation of speech and swallowing and assessment of cognition for patients with cancer diagnoses, as needed.
Specifically, patients with central nervous system (CNS) tumors or head and neck tumors are evaluated for communication skills, comprehension, and memory.
Speech pathologists assess functional integrity and compensatory ability of structures and mechanisms needed to achieve adequate communication, deglutition, and
cognition. They evaluate dysphagia and work with gastroenterologists to identify its causes. They frequently collaborate with maxillofacial prosthetists in the
restoration of facial appearance and oral function.

FUNCTIONAL ASSESSMENT
There has been substantial improvement in the ability to assess function, its limitations, and quality of life during the last decade. Measures are available to quantitate
performance and activity of daily routines and assess changes in social and psychocognitive function. 4,5,6 and 7 When these assessments, which incorporate multiple
domains, add measures of value, they are termed quality-of-life measures. Many of these have been developed specifically for those with cancer diagnoses. 8,9

COMMON FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENTS IN ONCOLOGY
IMMOBILITY AND ITS IMPACT
One of the most significant problems facing cancer patients is the impact of relative or absolute immobility. Bed rest in cancer patients is associated with numerous
metabolic and physiologic changes that may impair the patient's medical and functional recovery. 10 Bone loss is well documented and, in extreme cases, may lead to
hypercalcemia. 11,12 and 13 In patients who are already osteoporotic or who have metastatic involvement of the skeletal system, this may predispose to pathologic
fractures and further disability. Muscle atrophy can be fairly rapid, often leading to an inability to walk in as short a time as a week. Decreased activity may result in
contractures and changes in muscle and joint physiology. 14,15 Lack of mobility can also lead to the development of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolus. 16
Changes in muscle physiology and fiber type have been documented as well. 17,18 This is particularly true of patients with gastroenterologic tumors in which weight
loss, anorexia, and inflammatory cytokine production negatively impact on function and quality of life. 19,20 As muscle mass becomes reduced, the amount of soft tissue
covering bony prominences can become marginal, predisposing to the development of pressure (decubitus) ulcers. In this state, pressure over peripheral nerves,
especially as it crosses bony prominences, may lead to a neuropraxia. All these factors can significantly reduce mobility and independence.
MUSCLE WASTING AND CACHEXIA
Patients with a variety of tumors, including gastrointestinal tract, breast, colon, prostate, lung, small cell, and the like, may develop muscle wasting and cachexia.
Cachexia is a condition characterized by weight loss, anorexia, weakness, loss of functional capacity, and fundamental changes in metabolic processes. 21
Some of these changes include presence of inflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis factor-a, interleukin-6), severe negative nitrogen balance, increased proteolysis,
and gluconeogenesis. Muscle mass, body fat mass, and energy stores all are decreased. Interestingly, parenteral nutrition seems to maintain body hydration and fat
stores but has little effect on loss or restoration of lean mass and, as such, cannot reverse muscle wasting.
Exercise, long used to build lean mass, is often ineffective in this population. In the setting of cachexia, the effects of exercise on nitrogen balance and other
metabolic abnormalities are fairly modest. Rigor of exercise is significantly curtailed, in part limited by symptoms of pain, fatigue, depression, and aesthenia. 22
GENERALIZED DECONDITIONING
As a rule, each week of immobility requires as much as a month of rehabilitation to regain functional mobility. Complications such as pathologic fractures and pressure
ulcers can further delay recovery. Although it is sometimes impossible to fully mobilize a patient receiving chemotherapy or major surgery, some degree of
mobilization under a PT's supervision may significantly reduce morbidity. For the patient who is mildly restricted by disease or treatment, active ambulation at least
once or twice daily is strongly encouraged. If this is not possible, an exercise program in bed may be started, using resistance against gravity or against an elastic
band. A tilt table may be used to maintain sympathetic tone, reduce orthostatic hypotension, or restore cardiovascular conditioning in the patient who is unable to
stand. This also helps to minimize heel cord contractures, increase muscular tone, and facilitate venous compression and helps to maintain cardiovascular volume. In
patients with severe dependent edema, compressive garments or manual therapy, such as massage and lymph drainage, may help to maintain the vascular volume

and to reduce the degree of the edema while facilitating ambulation. Passive or active assistive stretching may be needed to maintain joints in functional alignment.
SKIN BREAKDOWN
Prevention of skin breakdown is critical for the bed-bound patient. Above all else, the patient must not be allowed to remain in a single position for more than 2 hours.
If patients are unable to position themselves in bed, repositioning should be done with pillows or cushions, taking care not to encourage the development of
contractures by, for example, persistently flexing the neck, hips, or knees. Air-cushioned beds can help to reduce the incidence of pressure injuries.
Shear forces and direct pressure are important in the development of decubitus ulcers. Care should be taken, therefore, to avoid dragging patients across sheets or
examination tables.
If skin becomes dry, aqueous remoisturizing creams should be applied. Healing is promoted in a moist wound environment. Greasy agents can predispose to
maceration and breakdown. Irradiated skin is of particular concern, due to the loss of normal resilience and healing capacity. Hygiene is important with irradiated skin,
and all open cuts and abrasions should receive scrutiny, because they can easily become infected.
When complications arise, they should be treated promptly. Areas of skin redness that do not blanch should be considered early pressure ulcers (stage 1) and treated
by removing pressure over the affected area. Most tissue damage in pressure ulcers occurs in the deep layers of the dermis and underlying tissues, such that the
visible portion of the ulcer may represent only a fraction of the total extent. In many instances, hydrotherapy (whirlpool) can aid in the process of debridement and
cleansing.
Packing the wound with an antiseptic solution should be done only when proven infection is present. In the case of noninfected small lesions, absorptive hydrocolloid
occlusive dressings can be effective in promoting healing, provided that they are used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. The use of occlusive
dressings with larger wounds is controversial. Management should include mechanical and enzymatic débridement when necrotic tissue is present. Although we have
seen many cases of complete resolution with the use of absorptive granules and occlusive dressings in deeper wounds, the potential exists for developing a
superinfection. Occlusive dressings cannot be used as a substitute for adequate nursing care.
CONTRACTURES
In cases of prolonged disuse or fixed joint positions, collagen fibers within muscles, tendons, and ligaments shorten, leading to contractures. Shoulder, heel cord,
hamstring, and hip flexor contractures are most common.
ROM exercises should be practiced actively by the debilitated patient or passively by nursing or by the family at least two to three times each day, moving all major
joints through their full ROM in all directions. In the case of the shoulder, this includes external and internal rotation, full abduction, and flexion. If flexion and
abduction need to be limited, (e.g., in the patient after mastectomy or axillary lymph node dissection), internal and external rotation should be performed to stretch the
joint capsule.23 Splinting may be used to maintain functional hand and foot position.
The role of upper extremity bracing during the acute or chronic stages of disease or treatment should not be overlooked. Because of the complexities of movement
patterns and compensatory adjustments, patients can continue to manipulate objects despite progressive changes that, if left unattended, may render them
nonfunctional. Splints are designed to maintain soft tissue length, place joints in functional positions, and align hands and wrists to prepare for grasp and release
activities. Thumbs can be positioned to oppose fingers for pinch, fingers can be pulled into extension with dynamic forces to compensate for weakness, wrists can be
supported to allow for better mechanical advantage of forearm finger tendon function, and elbows or shoulders can be positioned by slings or splints to aid in the
prevention of joint subluxation and ligamentous laxity. Rehabilitation goals are to prevent contractures, when possible. Uses for splinting devices are summarized in
Table 57-7.

TABLE 57-7. Upper Extremity Orthoses

When neuropathy from disease or treatment results in dysfunction, splints can be applied to hand and wrist to compensate for loss of proprioception. If sensory loss is
severe, splint design can foster safety as well as positioning during manipulation. When weakness is severe or prolonged, splints aid by preventing or improving
contractures. Long finger flexors contract quickly; thus, night resting splints are indicated to position the wrist and fingers in a functional position (i.e., 30 degrees wrist
extension, 50 degrees metacarpophalangeal joint flexion and 20 degrees proximal interphalangeal joint flexion, and 10 degrees distal interphalangeal joint flexion,
with the thumb opposed).
When neuropathy, immobility, weakness, pain, or the disease process itself has an impact on hand and wrist manipulation, appropriately designed splints need to be
applied immediately, adjusted over time in accordance with the condition of the individual, and monitored for effectiveness. They also need to be used in conjunction
with exercises and education regarding wearing schedules and precautions. When used appropriately and in a timely fashion, splints can make a difference in the
functional outcome of patients and help to preserve alignment.
Radiation may potentiate fibrosis and the development of joint contractures. The effect of radiation on soft tissues is often long term, rendering recovery of ROM
especially difficult. The rehabilitation team should instruct the patient in a home stretching program when radiation is initiated, and it should be continued for the life of
the patient because of the tendency for irradiated tissues to develop persistent fibrosis.
If contractures do occur, affected areas may require months of therapy to regain full or functional motion or they may never achieve this. Stretching exercises should
be performed at least once or twice daily under the guidance of a PT. This may be supplemented by the use of superficial or deep heating modalities, particularly
ultrasonography, which can help to increase the distensibility of collagen, facilitating stretching. However, ultrasonography is contraindicated in an area of tumor. It
has been shown to increase blood flow and tumor size and may increase the tendency for metastasis. 24 In extreme conditions of fixed, painful, and unresponsive
contractures, surgical release or manipulation under anesthesia may be considered.

TUMOR-ASSOCIATED MYOPATHY
Tumor-associated myopathy may result in immobility and ADL deficits. The myopathy may be a result of direct tumor invasion of muscle and other soft tissues,
paraneoplastic syndrome, carcinomatous myopathy, steroid myopathy, or carcinomatous neuromyopathy.
PARANEOPLASTIC SYNDROME
Nonmetastatic paraneoplastic syndromes of malignancy have been recognized with polymyositis and dermatomyositis. Malignancy occurs primarily in association with

dermatomyositis rather than with polymyositis. 25 The incidence is thought to be higher in men older than 50 years. 26 A study by Lakhanpal et al. 27 mentions a 25%
incidence of malignancy in a polymyositis and dermatomyositis group and a 17% incidence in the control group. Breast cancers (18%) and lung cancers (16%) are
most frequently associated with polymyositis and dermatomyositis. 28
Patients with paraneoplastic syndrome have decreased endurance, muscle weakness, pain, decreased joint motion, and problems with ambulation, self-care, sexual
performance, and work-related activity. Treatment to increase joint motion with stretching exercise, to increase muscle strength with isometric exercise, to improve
mobility with gait aides and bracing, and to improve ADL with assistive devices are all appropriate. The patient should be instructed in energy conservation, joint
protection, and sexual and vocational counseling.
CARCINOMATOUS MYOPATHY
Carcinomatous myopathy may be seen with metastatic malignant disease. Histologically, there is widespread muscle necrosis and minimal or no inflammatory
response. Clinically, there is proximal muscle weakness in this type of myopathy. 29 Because of the necrosis of muscle, it is thought that these patients would probably
not respond well to an exercise program, but function should be maintained if possible. They should be given appropriate pain-relieving modalities and assistive and
mobility devices to help with ADL and safe ambulation. The environment should be altered to help to ensure safety and easy access.
CARCINOMATOUS NEUROPATHY AND MYOPATHY
Simultaneous carcinomatous neuropathy and myopathy occur with metastatic disease and affect peripheral nerve and muscle due to either toxic or immunopathologic
effects of the tumor. Diminished reflexes and diminished sensation ensue. 29 The rehabilitative treatment is similar to that recommended in the management of
carcinomatous myopathy. However, distal weakness occurs in addition to the proximal weakness, and appropriate bracing to improve ankle dorsiflexion may be
needed. If weakness is severe, an electric scooter may be needed. Several assistive devices to help with hand function are useful.
STEROID MYOPATHY
Steroid-induced muscle weakness is really a selective atrophy of type II fibers in proximal muscles. It tends not to affect neck flexor muscles. It may be superimposed
on the weakness of carcinomatous myopathy or polymyositis- and dermatomyositis-associated myopathy and exacerbate it. It is caused by catabolic and anabolic
effects of steroid on muscle. Amino acids leak into the circulation, and there is decreased incorporation of protein into muscle. The condition may be diminished by
providing exercise to enhance protein metabolism by muscle. 30 Isometric exercise can be used to accomplish this goal. It may take up to 1 year after cessation of
steroids for muscles weakened by steroid use to return to normal. 31

BONE REPLACEMENT BY TUMOR
Bone can be invaded by tumor via direct extension, as is frequently seen in sarcoma; via embolization through the right side of the heart, the most frequent cause of
distant metastasis; or via direct venous spread through Batson's plexus involving vertebral bodies and pelvis, the most frequent cause for metastatic bone disease in
prostate cancer. Some tumors, such as leukemias, lymphomas, or myelomas, invade bone marrow.
Bony metastatic disease is most frequently associated with breast, lung, prostate, colon, or kidney tumors. It is important to note that the survival for patients with
these tumors and bony metastases is years. Although any tumor can metastasize to bone, the most likely to spread are prostate, breast, lung, kidney, and
thyroid. 32,33,34 and 35 The hematologic malignancies do frequently as well. Nearly 20% of tumors with distant spread will involve bone. Bony involvement is the third most
frequent site for metastasis, with vertebral bodies, pelvis, femur, and ribs affected in order of frequency. Often, multiple sites are involved, of which 20% are in the
upper extremities. 36
Pain is the most frequent symptom associated with bony metastasis. This is characteristically dull, aching, and nocturnal. The spine is the most frequently involved
area for metastatic spread, and the lumbar region is the most common site. When there is vertebral involvement, 50% of patients will have radicular symptoms. Cord
compression, on the other hand, most frequently results from thoracic region involvement. Pain on weight bearing may be a sign of bony involvement or even a
pathologic fracture. A bone scan is the simplest means of screening for bony tumor. Plain films offer definition of the local extent of the tumor, although computed
tomography (CT) may be needed for better quantification of involvement.
PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT OF PATHOLOGIC FRACTURES
Pathologic fractures can limit mobility in a marginally functioning patient and, in some cases, lead to significant morbidity and mortality. Hip fractures are particularly
debilitating and often difficult to stabilize, and they may lead to a significant hemorrhage. Prevention of pathologic fracture is important. Fracture should be considered
imminent when the size of a lytic lesion exceeds 60% of the total bone width (usually >2.5 cm in lower and >3.0 cm in upper extremities), if cortical involvement
exceeds 50%, or if the axial extent of cortical destruction exceeds 13 mm in the femoral neck and 30 mm elsewhere. 37 These calculations are difficult to measure
accurately, in part because local osteopenia is common and margins are often irregular and difficult to distinguish.
Pain with weight bearing suggests a need to reduce load on or immobilize the affected structure. A cane used in the hand opposite the affected lower extremity can
theoretically remove approximately 50% of body weight from that extremity. Such attachments as a quadruped base (quad-cane) or a forearm support (forearm or
Lofstrand crutch) may help to stabilize the cane, but they cannot overcome the simple physics of gravitation loading. Canes or a single crutch can be used for the
patient who has pain with weight bearing, but they should not be used for the patient with a fracture or one that is imminent.
Bilateral support is essential for the patient in whom no weight bearing is required. For the more debilitated patient, a simple walker suffices. For the more active
patient, axillary or forearm crutches may be used. Toe touch of the affected leg can usually be allowed but, in the patient who has difficulty coordinating the use of
crutches or walker, total avoidance of weight bearing may be needed to avoid sudden weight bearing if the assistive device is not properly placed. Patients need to be
evaluated for metastatic disease in the upper extremities. It is fairly possible to develop a pathologic fracture of an involved humerus if it is used as a weight bearing
structure. The patient should be cautioned against torquing the affected extremity, because this can often lead to fracture, even without weight bearing.
After an affected extremity has been unweighted, options for stabilization can be considered. Radiation often can be used to treat lesions of the long bones. Irradiation
does not directly repair damaged bone, and irradiated bone heals much more slowly than normal bone. For small lesions, irradiation, along with the use of a cane,
may be all that is required. For larger lesions, surgical stabilization should be considered if possible. Intramedullary rods or methylmethacrylate can be used to
increase strength of the invaded bone or, if used prophylactically, to stabilize a painful lesion and prevent fractures. 38 This gives the patient a more functional limb and
allows increased mobility.
Destruction of the femoral head or acetabulum may be treated with hip joint arthroplasty, rendering ambulation a possibility while providing excellent palliation of pain.
Fractures of the ischium may be painful during sitting and should be treated with cushions to reduce weight bearing over the fracture. Fractures of a single portion of
the pelvic ring are generally not a problem. Multiple fractures, however, can interfere with ambulation and should be addressed appropriately. Fractures of the iliac
wing may be painful during active hip flexion and abduction, due to the attachments of the iliacus and gluteal abductors, respectively. Assistive devices used to avoid
activation of these muscles during ambulation can provide significant relief of pain.
When lower extremity and upper extremity are involved, use of gait aides may be contraindicated either because of pain or impending fracture. In this situation, a
wheelchair may be needed until internal fixation can be performed. When upper extremity involvement is associated with pain but there is no immediate threat to bony
integrity, a thermoplastic splint for forearm or a humeral cuff for lesions of the humerus may provide stability and symptom relief.
Ribs are also a common site of bony involvement and fracture. Generally, only a rib belt will be required. Pathologic fractures of non–weight-bearing bones can be
managed with splinting or sling immobilization while irradiation is delivered. ROM or isometric exercises may be appropriate to maintain function. If a dominant upper
extremity is involved, assistive devices and training in one-handed strategies by an OT can significantly improve function. Devices such as reachers and dressing aids
can help the patient to avoid torquing the spine or hips if the risk of fracture is high.
In the patient who presents with neurologic deficits, the physician must always rule out spinal cord compression by tumor. Other causes of paraparesis in the cancer

patient include peripheral neuropathy, lumbosacral plexitis, radiation myelitis, and pseudotumor, often from radiation fibrosis. Radiation-related paraparesis may not
occur for some time after the completion of all treatment. We have seen patients with radiation myelitis presenting as long as 7 years after having been declared free
of disease. Hyperreflexia may be masked by peripheral neuropathy or plexopathy related to chemotherapy or irradiation, and patients with extensive metastatic
involvement of the vertebral column may even have little or no pain.
The prevention of serious spinal cord injury should be the primary goal of the cancer rehabilitation team in treating the patient with known vertebral destruction by
primary or metastatic disease. Although radiation treatment may be used to control tumor growth and to relieve spinal cord compression, this does not address the
issue of spinal stability.
Although no good models of vertebral collapse from tumor exist, it has been assumed that spinal stability in the cancer patient can be addressed in much the same
way that it is in the patient with a traumatic injury of the spine. 39 The most widely accepted method of stability evaluation involves the concept of three columns. 40,41
This method considers the spine to be made up of three supporting columnsthe anterior, middle, and posterior structures of the vertebraeroughly divided into equal
thirds. Any two of these supporting columns must be intact for the spine to be stable. For example, complete destruction of a vertebral body puts the spinal cord at risk
for compression, because the posterior structures (facet joints) can easily sublux. A simple compression fracture, however, is usually stable because the posterior and
middle columns are relatively intact. Of particular concern are lesions at the atlantoaxial and thoracolumbar junctions, due to the significant bending and torquing
moments generated at these interfaces.
Whenever possible, an unstable lesion of the bony spine should be stabilized surgically, because virtually no brace can be completely effective in preventing
subluxation. Irradiated bone heals slowly and often incompletely, and continued malignant destruction may sometimes occur. It is desirable from the rehabilitation
standpoint to mobilize the patient as quickly as possible to prevent the complications associated with immobility. Even if there is extensive vertebral destruction,
surgical stabilization can usually be accomplished by means of rods, strut grafts, and cement. 42,43 Occasionally, extensive multilevel involvement may render it
impossible to find adequate healthy bone to which stabilizing hardware can be attached, or the patient's health may preclude any surgical option. In such cases,
bracing may provide the only means of protecting the spinal canal.
If it becomes necessary to use a more “practical” cervical stabilization, orthosis selection should be based on the level of potential instability and the directions of
motion that might lead to instability. 44 The Philadelphia collar, consisting of a foam collar with rigid supports, provides moderately successful stabilization of higher
segments in flexion and extension but inadequate stabilization at lower levels and inadequate stabilization for side bending and rotation, and it is of limited usefulness
as a spinal stabilization brace.
Two alternatives that provide excellent stabilization of lower segments in flexion and extension are the two-poster and sternal occipital mandibular immobilization
(SOMI) braces (Fig. 57-1). The SOMI is particularly useful in managing debilitated patients, due to its open design and the ease with which it can be applied, because
all components are attached from the front. It can be used with a light-weight chest piece, as supplied, or it can be bolted onto a lower spinal orthosis, making it useful
in cases of multilevel instability ( Fig. 57-2). An alternative cervical thoracic orthosis is the Yale brace, which essentially consists of a Philadelphia collar attached to a
thoracic extension. With any of these orthoses, the patient must be informed that the brace is a compromise solution and that care is indicated, particularly with
motions not well supported by the particular brace.

FIGURE 57-1. Cervical orthosis: two-poster support with sternal occipital mandibular immobilization reduces triplanar motion.

FIGURE 57-2. Sternal occipital mandibular immobilization orthosis with extended chest support reduces triplanar motion.

Stabilization of the thoracolumbar regions is generally achieved using two basic types of bracing. Metal braces, such as the Jewitt or the Taylor-Knight ( Fig. 57-3)
orthoses, can be fit to the patient rapidly, providing optimum limitation of flexion and extension. The custom-molded plastic thoracolumbosacral orthosis, or body
jacket, additionally provides limitation in rotation as well. These braces are frequently poorly tolerated in the debilitated patient with atrophic skin. Elastic back braces
and corsets, often used in the management of mechanical low back pain, do not provide adequate spinal stabilization, although rigid corsets may be worthy of
consideration in the patient who absolutely cannot tolerate anything else.

FIGURE 57-3. Thoracolumbar stabilization device (Taylor-Knight).

High thoracic lesions and cases of extensive vertebral involvement may require the use of a combination orthosis. A cervical extension or SOMI brace can, for
example, be attached to a body jacket (Fig. 57-4), providing restricted mobility of the entire spine. These braces should be worn whenever the patient is upright or
travels in a motor vehicle. When the patient lies in bed without the brace, the head of the bed should not be elevated more than 30%. Patients should be cautioned
against twisting or torquing their backs, because this may potentiate the injury. Cervical orthoses should be worn even when the patient is recumbent and should be
removed only in a supervised setting.

FIGURE 57-4. Body jacket for thoracic support and triplanar movement control.

The prescription of exercise and participation in vocational-avocation activity should be written by knowledgeable professionals. The goals for treatment should be
limited to what the patient can do safely, and should promote independence and quality function at minimal risk. Exercise to promote fitness with minimal bony impact,
such as aquatics; strengthening by using isometric rather than resistive exercise; and activity patterns that minimize single-limb weight bearing for lower extremities
are recommended strategies. Education to help patients and caregivers to maximize safety is also important.
SPINAL CORD INJURY SYNDROMES AND REHABILITATION OF IMPAIRMENT
Spinal cord disorders in cancer patients may result from malignant invasion; bony compression or trauma; syrinx or hematoma formation; radiation myelitis; or
vascular events. Radiation myelitis is directly related to radiation dose and often does not develop until years after the completion of therapy. 45 Spinal cord
dysfunction has been associated with high-dose intrathecal chemotherapy. 46,47
The degree of functional impairment in a spinal cord disorder is related to the level of the lesion and to its degree of completeness. The level of a lesion is, by
American convention, the last fully functional spinal root level. For example, a C-5 (cervical root 5) quadriplegic has intact function of the biceps brachii (innervated
primarily by C-5 and C-6), with intact sensation over the shoulders and lateral aspects of the arms. A C-5 quadriplegic is able to bring the hand to the mouth but will
require assistance for most self-care. A level of C-4 is required for unassisted breathing. C-6 quadriplegics will have intact wrist extension, allowing some light grasp
through the tenodesis effect. C-7 quadriplegics are able to extend the elbows, making it possible for them to lift themselves, performing their own weight shifts. C-8
and T-1 are required for intact hand function.
The remaining thoracic segments are of significance primarily in the motor control of trunk stability. In the lower spine, the degree of functional use of the legs is more
vague, due to the extensive overlap of motor segments. Generally, hip and knee extensor strength of sufficient magnitude to overcome gravity (3/5) is essential for
safe ambulation. Although long leg braces can be used for paraplegic ambulation, the level of energy required is usually beyond the capability of many healthy
persons, let alone the patient debilitated by cancer. Short leg braces, or ankle-foot orthoses (AFOs) can be used effectively to compensate for the loss of ankle
dorsiflexors and plantar flexors. In selected patients with intact hip musculature, AFOs that limit dorsiflexion can be used to create an extension moment at the knee,
substituting for quadriceps function during the stance phase of gait.
Damage of the central portion of the spinal cord may occur, with the outer portions being spared. This may occur with intramedullary tumors, with syrinx formation, or
in certain vascular events. The central cord syndrome is characterized by loss of upper extremity function, with relative sparing of function in the legs. If only one side
of the spinal cord is involved, the Brown-Sequard syndrome results, in which motor function is affected on the ipsilateral side while most sensory function is affected
on the contralateral side.
Because of the complexities involved with spinal cord dysfunction, rehabilitation should be provided by those familiar with management of spinal cord injury. Assisted
mobility using manual or motorized wheelchairs or crutches or canes with braces will usually be required. Adaptive equipment and strategies for self-care may be
needed in the cancer patient with spinal cord involvement.
Bowel and bladder dysfunction in this patient population is virtually universal, requiring particular attention. Even in the patient with apparent normal voiding, silent
bladder and sphincter spasticity may lead to infection, bladder reflux, and significant morbidity. We have seen cases of hydronephrosis with almost complete
destruction of the kidneys in asymptomatic persons. Foley catheters may be used for short-term management if there are other medical indications. Otherwise,
intermittent catheterization done frequently enough to keep the bladder volume at less than 500 mL is the method of choice during the acute phase. A urologist should
be consulted after the patient has stabilized. Regular use of laxatives as part of a bowel-training program is frequently required.
Autonomic dysreflexia or hyperreflexia is a true emergency in the spinal cord–impaired patient. When the spinal cord level is T-6 or above, uncontrolled
vasoconstriction and severe hypertension may result. Paradoxically, the heart rate is often slowed, due to the intact vagus nerve. The first objective should be to lower
the blood pressure as quickly as possible. Sitting the patient upright will help to reduce intracerebral pressure. A fast-acting agent, such as sublingual nifedipine, may
be used initially, followed by a longer-acting agent, such as nitroprusside, if needed. After the blood pressure has been stabilized, the causeusually a noxious
stimulusshould be isolated and corrected. The most common cause is an overdistended bladder, and distended bowel and skin trauma are other possible
explanations.

NEUROPATHIES AND PLEXOPATHIES
Peripheral nerve involvement is a common diagnostic dilemma in the cancer patient. Dysfunction of peripheral nerves usually results from the use of cisplatin or
vincristine and irradiation. 48,50 Peripheral neuropathies and plexopathies can also be the result of direct tumor invasion or a paraneoplastic syndrome.
CHEMOTHERAPY-INDUCED NEUROPATHIES
Generally chemotherapy-related neuropathies tend to be distal and symmetric. Occasionally, initial symptoms are unilateral, mimicking a mononeuritis or invasive
lesion. Vincristine and cisplatin are documented causes of autonomic neuropathies. 51,52 In some instances, this has been severe enough to mimic spinal cord
involvement. 53 Cytarabine has caused brachial plexus neuropathy. 54 Suramin, largely an experimental drug, has caused a profound polyneuropathy, mimicking
Guillain-Barré syndrome. Agents that are lipid-soluble or that have metabolites with a prolonged half-life may lead to a progressive neuropathy, even after
discontinuance of the drug. 55
Vincristine seems to induce distal axonal degeneration similar to that of other toxic neuropathies. 48 Because of this, the duration of the neuropathy tends to be
prolonged because of the time needed for nerve fiber regeneration. Many patients receiving this agent develop sensory complaints of numbness and paresthesias.
Some patients develop severe neuropathic pain. Often, the degree of motor neuropathy is significant, sometimes resulting in a virtual quadriparesis. Although it may
take months after cessation of chemotherapy to recover function, recovery is usually complete. Neurotoxicity is one of the most common reasons for limiting the
dosage of vincristine chemotherapy.

Neuropathies due to cisplatin generally tend to be less frequent and often milder. We have treated several patients who have developed a severe permanent
neuropathy from the use of cisplatin. There does not seem to be any common factor that can be used to predict the development of lasting neuropathy. Rarely is an
adjustment in cisplatin dosage indicated. 49
BRACHIAL PLEXOPATHIES
Radiation-induced brachial plexopathy is an uncommon problem in the conservative management of breast cancer if supraclavicular and axillary lymph nodes are
irradiated. It may be seen as a late effect of mantle irradiation for Hodgkin's disease. Onset of symptoms is usually delayed. In one study, symptoms began more than
1 year after therapy, and the overall prognosis for recovery was poor. 56
Differentiation of radiation from neoplastic plexitis is essential. Severe pain has been documented in 80% of patients with infiltrating tumor, but only 19% of patients
with radiation injury described this finding. 57 Horner's syndrome is more common in cases of tumor involvement, and lymphedema is a much more common
concomitant finding in radiation injury. The distribution of involvement of the brachial plexus is an important diagnostic criterion, with 72% of patients with invasive
tumor having involvement of the lower trunk and 78% of patients with radiation injury having involvement of the upper trunk.
Electrodiagnostically, myokymic discharges are virtually diagnostic of radiation plexitis, occurring in 63% of patients. 58 Other abnormalities are common in both types
of injury, with nerve conduction studies being of limited usefulness. 59 Tumor detection by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provides definitive evidence of neoplastic
involvement. Even without visible tumor during surgery, neoplastic disease has sometimes been found microscopically, and it may not be possible to rule out
neoplastic plexopathy for many months after the onset of symptoms.60,61
LUMBOSACRAL PLEXOPATHY AND RADICULOPATHY
Involvement of the lumbosacral plexus is common in pelvic tumors due to direct invasion. 62 In a study of 11 patients with lumbosacral plexopathy, 6 had metastatic
involvement, 2 had radiation-induced plexopathy, 1 had a primary tumor, and 2 had neuritis due to intraarterial chemotherapy. 63 Direct imaging of tumor with CT or
MRI may be difficult after irradiation or surgery. We have seen a preponderance of delayed painful plexopathy in patients receiving intraoperative radiation. It is
important to attempt to differentiate plexus lesions from those of the spinal cord, due to the difference in treatment, rehabilitation management, and prognosis.
Neuropathic pain is commonly seen with peripheral neuropathies. Loss of sensation may render the patient susceptible to skin injury. The patient with insensate skin
should be cautioned about the avoidance of potential injuries from burns and sharp objects and about the need for daily skin inspection to avoid the development of
infection. Loss of proprioceptive feedback, particularly in the patient with impaired vision, may interfere with simple fine-motor tasks and with ambulation. A cane can
provide proprioceptive feedback to the upper extremities in the patient with impaired proprioception in the lower extremities. Motor impairment is treated similarly to
other neurologic disorders, with bracing and adaptive devices as needed.
In addition to the use of narcotic agents, which has become the mainstay of palliative treatment in the cancer patient, the physical modalities of pain control may
significantly help to alleviate suffering. More aggressive approaches, including nerve blocks and rhizotomies, have been used with limited success. Sympathetic nerve
blocks and sympathectomies may be effective in patients with the reflex sympathetic dystrophy syndrome. Trigger point injections are also sometimes helpful in
musculoskeletal pain disorders.
The use of physical modalities can be a particularly effective adjunct in the management of pain in the cancer patient. Heat modalities, including superficial heat,
shortwave diathermy, and ultrasonography, may provide relief in musculoskeletal pain syndromes, but ultrasonography may help to spread lymphatic disease. Other
heat modalities increase circulation to the affected area, questionably increasing the potential for metastatic spread. Therapeutic cold can also sometimes help to
reduce pain.
Electrical stimulation has met with increasing criticism in the literature, but we have found electrical stimulation to be effective in reducing narcotics usage in a variety
of cancer patients with a variety of pain syndromes. It seems to be particularly effective in the management of phantom limb pain and in treating radiculopathy and
incisional pain. If effective, the patient can be provided with a pocket-sized transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) unit, which can be used as needed.
Electrodes should be placed at the site of maximum pain or, in the case of referred pain, at the site of the lesion. A conventional high-frequency setting is usually most
effective. Many TENS units are available at modest cost. Progressive muscle relaxation has also been reported to be useful.

LYMPHEDEMA AND DEEP VENOUS THROMBOSIS
The swollen extremity is often a diagnostic dilemma in the patient with a history of cancer. Because of the possibility of malignant compression or invasion of
lymphatics or venous drainage, and because of the possibility of deep venous thrombosis, a swollen extremity should always be fully evaluated in the cancer patient
or cancer survivor. Idiopathic lymphedema, rather than edema secondarily caused by infection or tumor, should be a diagnosis of exclusion. Tumor can usually be
excluded by imaging studies, such as CT, MRI, or bone scan or, in extreme instances, by lymphangiogram.
Deep venous thrombosis can usually be ruled out using impedance plethysmography or ultrasonography. 64,65 If certainty is required, a venogram can be performed.
Suspected pulmonary embolism can be evaluated with a ventilation-perfusion scan or, more definitively, by pulmonary angiography. The greatest risk of embolization
is from proximal thromboses.
Lymphedema in the cancer patient is frequent, with lymph node involvement or after lymph node dissection. Late edema is usually related to radiotherapy and the
gradual development of fibrous tissue and change in the protein content of the fluid. Edema in a nonirradiated extremity should always be thoroughly evaluated, and
remediable causes, such as infection or cardiovascular causes, should be treated.
The simplest means of minimizing edema is to keep the affected extremity elevated as much as possible. Legs should be placed on an elevated foot support,
preferably keeping the feet above the level of the heart. Arms should be rested on a high table surface. A sling may be of short-term benefit. Isometric exercises, by
increasing muscle tone, may help to minimize edema.
The management of lymphedema varies from treatment center to treatment center and from country to country. Rehabilitative therapies have typically included
education about limb position to minimize gravity, use of massage, exercise to enhance lymph flow and maintain mobility, and the use of pneumatic compression
devices and compression garments to reduce lymphedema in the involved extremity. Because of a better understanding in the anatomy, physiology, and
pathophysiology of the lymphatic system, a combination of techniques has evolved to manage lymphedema better. 66
Manual lymph drainage (MLD) 67 is a specialized massage technique based on the concept of emptying the central regions first, to give the lymph from the periphery
somewhere to go.68,69 The lymph is moved proximally and, across lymphatic watersheds, into the nearest normally drained lymphotomes. The proximal region of the
limb is always cleaned first, then the massage is extended distally; effleurage that starts at the distal end and attempts to push the lymph into the unemptied, proximal
regions is ineffective. 70
After MLD, some treatment centers will continue lymph drainage with the use of a sequential pneumatic compression device. Other centers will follow MLD
immediately with compression bandaging, using the low-elastic Comprilan (Beiersdorf, Germany) applied over padding (Artiflex Soft, Beiersdorf, Germany) and an
undergauze (Tricofix, Beiersdorf, Germany). 70 Once the compression bandages have been applied to the extremity, special exercises are performed to supplement
the effects of the MLD.
The frequency and duration of the foregoing techniques vary from treatment center to treatment center. However, the greatest reduction in lymphedema usually
occurs within the first week of treatment (when the treatment is provided by a highly trained and skilled PT). Just before discharge from the treatment program, the
extremity is fitted with a compression garment to maintain the reduction in lymphedema. An example of a wrapped upper extremity in presented in Figure 57-5. The
National Lymphedema Network located in San Francisco has a list of manual lymphatic drainage therapists and treatment centers throughout the United States.

FIGURE 57-5. Wraps to reduce limb edema.

BOWEL AND BLADDER DISORDERS
Bowel obstruction or ureteral or urethral compromise is usually the result of malignant invasion or spinal cord or nerve root compression. Constipation and urinary
hesitancy are frequently related to the use of medication, particularly narcotics and drugs with anticholinergic properties. Input from the rehabilitation team is most
often needed if there is neurologic dysfunction or in ostomy care.
MANAGEMENT OF BOWEL DYSFUNCTION
Disorders of fecal elimination are frequently the most significant complaint of the cancer patient. Constipation is extremely common and is best treated using dietary
modifications and medication. Often, a high-fiber diet with copious fluid intake will be all that is required to ensure regularity. If fiber supplements are used, the patient
should be cautioned about the absolute need for fluid intake, because bulk in the absence of fluid can lead to impaction. If necessary, stool softeners (e.g., docusate
sodium, 50 to 200 mg/d) can be added to reduce straining. A stimulant medication (e.g., metoclopramide hydrochloride, 10 mg 30 minutes before meals and at
bedtime) can be used for delayed gastric emptying.
When spontaneous defecation does not occur, a stimulant agent may be required. A mild preparation with a well-controlled transit time, such as an over-the-counter
senna preparation, is preferred. A standard dose of senna (e.g., Senokot, two tablets) at bedtime usually results in controlled defecation in the morning. Stronger
agents, such as bisacodyl (5 to 15 mg) or magnesium hydroxide (milk of magnesia, 30 mL) may be used in more recalcitrant cases, although it should be kept in mind
that magnesium is mildly nephrotoxic. Such cathartics as magnesium citrate should be used as a last resort and only if there is no suspicion of obstruction or
impaction.
In the patient with neurogenic bowel dysfunction, stimulation from below may be required. Digital stimulation or, if needed, use of a glycerin or bisacodyl (10 mg)
suppository should usually be sufficient to initiate evacuation. Rarely, an enema may be required. By instituting a regular bowel-training program in which full
evacuation is achieved on a daily or every-other-day basis through the use of medications and rectal stimulation, it is usually possible to achieve continence.
Diarrhea in the cancer patient is usually the result of chemotherapy. Standard antidiarrheal preparations, narcotics, and anticholinergics may be used. If diarrhea
occurs in the face of antibiotics, pseudomembranous colitis resulting from infection with Clostridium difficile should always be ruled out. Other bacterial or parasitic
diarrhea should be treated with appropriate antibiotics, as determined by stool culture or smear. Narcotic antidiarrheal agents should be avoided in this case due to
the potential for toxic megacolon development. Viral diarrhea should generally be allowed to run its course.
MANAGEMENT OF THE NEUROGENIC BLADDER
Proper evaluation and management of bladder dysfunction in cancer patients with neurologic abnormalities is essential to prevent significant morbidity. Although
bladder dysfunction is often arbitrarily divided into disorders of incontinence or reduced bladder capacity and disorders of retention, this model is overly simplistic.
Patients with spinal cord or brain stem involvement should always undergo formal evaluation of bladder function.
There may be various combinations of a spastic or flaccid bladder and a spastic or flaccid urinary sphincter. 71 The combination of a spastic bladder and sphincter is
the most dangerous, because this can lead to reflux, causing hydronephrosis or upper tract infection or to autonomic hyperreflexia. Such medications as oxybutynin
chloride, 5 mg two to four times daily, can be used to reduce bladder spasticity, but mechanical means of drainage may be needed. 72 Urinary tract infections are
frequent in the patient with neurogenic bladder, and proper evaluation and treatment are mandatory.
In the acute phase of management, an indwelling catheter is usually sufficient if there are appropriate medical indications. Catheters should be removed as soon as
the patient is stable, so as to minimize the risk of infection. In the patient who appears to be voiding normally, evaluation for possible retention should still be done.
Postvoiding residual urine volumes as determined by catheterization or by ultrasonography should be less than 50 mL. If the patient does exhibit retention,
intermittent catheterization should be instituted, taking care to catheterize frequently enough to keep bladder volumes at less than 500 mL. In the incontinent patient
without retention, condom (Texas) catheters may be used for men. Collection devices for females are often less than satisfactory.
MANAGEMENT OF THE OSTOMY PATIENT
Cancer patients may have ostomies for a variety of reasons. Ureteral stints are often used in patients with ureteral obstruction, occasionally in combination with a
temporary ostomy for kidney drainage. Patients with bladder carcinoma may have a ureteral diversion to an ileal loop, which is drained through an ostomy. Patients
with bowel carcinoma or other types of bowel obstruction may need a temporary or permanent ostomy for fecal elimination. This may be required at any level of the
small bowel or colon. Ileostomies, involving diversion of the terminal small bowel, are sometimes problematic because of the volume of fluid present in the fecal
contents before entry into the colon. An ileal pouch is sometimes created surgically as a reservoir for urine or ileal fluid as a means of providing continence.
In cases of neck tumors or if there is impaired swallowing, a gastrostomy may be required for supplemental nutrition. This can often be placed by percutaneous
endoscopic gastrostomy, eliminating the need for major surgery. Tracheostomies are often used in cases of head or neck tumors or if there is a need for prolonged
access to the airway, as in the patient with severe cognitive impairment and uncontrolled tracheal secretions.
Ostomy training should be a regular part of the cancer patient's rehabilitation process. 73 Proper cleaning technique avoids the likelihood of infection. Proper attention
to skin care should avoid maceration and breakdown. Occasionally, a bowel-training program can be instituted for colostomy patients, regularizing emptying and
sometimes eliminating the need for an ostomy bag. A variety of ostomy collection systems are available, including one-piece collection bags, applied directly to the
skin using an adhesive, and two-piece collection bags involving an occlusive seal that is applied to the skin and a separate detachable bag. 74 Collection bags may be
closed and disposed of with each use or may be open, allowing for drainage and reuse. One- and two-piece barriers may be used to help patients to maintain
continence. Support groups for ostomy patients are available in most areas, and a variety of patient information materials are available. 75,76 and 77

PSYCHOSOCIAL ASPECTS OF CANCER REHABILITATION
Accommodating to change in daily performance, to loss of function, and to modifications in life style that accompany the diagnosis and treatment of cancer has
relevance for all individuals. However, life management goals vary widely and may be influenced by each individual's values, stage in life and phase of disease, life
experiences, and temperament. The challenge facing oncologists is identifying and addressing unique psychosocial reactions presented by the patient during all
stages of oncologic management, including the terminal phase.
Table 57-8 summarizes some common emotional reactions to oncologic illness as they may be manifested during different stages of treatment. Also included are

intervention approaches. Pivotal in medical and rehabilitation intervention is interdisciplinary management of these reactions to facilitate mastery of the long-term
impact of cancer on function. With proper management, the likelihood of developing handicapping conditions and of impairing quality of life is decreased.

TABLE 57-8. Psychosocial Aspects of Cancer Rehabilitation

REHABILITATION AND MANAGEMENT OF SPECIFIC TUMORS
SARCOMA OF THE EXTREMITIES
Ablative extremity surgery (amputation), formerly the treatment of choice for local control of sarcomas, has been replaced by limb-sparing surgery in the majority of
cases.78,79 Since clinical trials indicate no benefit from amputation in overall survival rate in selected cases 80,81 and function and desirability favor limb preservation in
many, limb-sparing surgery has become more prevalent.
Clinical trials have shown reduction of local tumor reoccurrence in soft tissue sarcomas (STS) 82,83 and 84 with preoperative and postoperative radiotherapy treatments
and brachytherapy and of distal metastatic disease in osteosarcoma (OS) 85 with the use of preoperative and postoperative adjuvant chemotherapeutic regimens. Limb
perfusion has reduced tumor size even when advanced, to permit limb-sparing surgery. 86 For those in whom there was still no option for limb-sparing surgery, a
reduction in tumor size is often associated with palliation of pain and better cosmesis.
Tumor size, pathologic type, and adequacy of excision remain the main predictors of local control. Tumor location, involvement of neurologic tissue, and size often are
the better predictors of function.
In recent years, the chance for better functional outcome in limb-spared patients has resulted from (1) refined surgical interventions (abandonment of
origin-to-insertion whole-muscle group excision in favor of partial group excisions); (2) use of endoprostheses and bone allografts, muscle transfers, and sophisticated
soft tissue reconstructive procedures; (3) refined radiotherapy procedures (abandonment of full-dose radiotherapy to the entire port in favor of advanced simulation
techniques), which permit a cone-down high dose to the direct tumor site and lower doses to the rest of the port, with corrections also made to reduce dose and
scatter to joints; and (4) the development of specific rehabilitation programs to follow up the limb-spared patient throughout the trajectory of the disease process.
In some patients, amputations are still needed. These tend to occur for large tumors involving other critical structures in which resection would result in poor functional
outcome or poor local control. Often, these are high-level amputations. Amputation also occurs more often for hand and foot tumors where there is little leeway to
obtain an adequate excision without severely compromising function. However, more sophisticated reconstructive procedures have recently been reported to salvage
the hand and thumb.87,88 Children younger than 13 years with OS are too young for limb-sparing procedures using endoprostheses. Other procedures may be used in
some cases.
Functional deficits, impairments, and symptoms from limb-sparing surgery result from (1) the local procedure itself (depending on the extent of the resection and
resection of adjacent structures, such as nerves and vessels); (2) adjuvant therapy (chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and limb perfusion); (3) the effects of local
reoccurrence and distal metastasis; and (4) premorbid patient characteristics.
Specific impairments and symptoms include pain, edema, fatigue, reduced strength and joint motion, stress, and depression. Functional deficits occur in the areas of
mobility; ADL; vocational, social, and sexual adjustment; and recreation and leisure.
Rehabilitation plays a major role in assessing the person's potential for limb sparing, predicting their functional outcome after the procedure, maximizing their function
by treating their impairments and symptoms, and educating them in the proper care of their spared or amputated limb to prevent complications and encourage
preservation and coping strategies related to impairment and handicap. Rehabilitation interventions should occur over the trajectory of the patient's life span as new
problems emerge in different disease phases.
Role of Rehabilitation
Resection may involve partial muscle group removal, muscle transfer, and bony replacement by endoprosthesis or allograft (and less often, vessel and nerve
removal). The surgeon predicts which structures will need to be removed for an adequate tumor excision. Based on the extent of the planned surgery, the physiatrist
anticipates the level of function of the limb after surgery. Both surgeon and physiatrist discuss and concur on this prediction. A judgment is then made whether this
would be acceptable function for the patient. A comparison of functional outcome resulting from amputation and limb sparing should be made before treatment
selection. These discussions should be shared with affected patients before a treatment choice is selected, should be the best from such patients' perspective, and
should be supportive of their needs.
For adequate function, the limb may need some permanent postoperative bracing or splinting. These are usually needed if there has been sacrifice of a key nerve or
muscle. The patient should be informed preoperatively that these adjunctive devices may be necessary for independent functioning. Special age, wear, and fracture
risk considerations take place if an endoprosthesis is used. In OS, usually a longer endoprosthesis must be placed, rendering the spared limb longer for patients aged
15 to 17 years. This compensates for growth arrest in the operative limb. A major growth plate may need to be stapled on the normal side in OS if the limb grows
disproportionately and exceeds the affected side by more than 2 cm. A heel lift of up to 1 inch may be used if the endoprosthetic side is shorter than on the normal
leg. Endoprosthetic loosening may occur, depending on the amount of wear and tear from activities, but endoprostheses can last up to 10 years. For long-term
survivors, endoprosthetic replacement will be needed. There is generally a limit of two to three replacement reconstructions. Reconstructions are also necessary for
prosthetic dislocation, bone fracture, and loosening. Removal of the prosthesis is often necessary for serious bony infection. Infections with some organisms
(Staphylococcus epidermidis) have been successfully treated with 3 months of appropriate intravenous antibiotics. 89 Therefore, some patients who initially underwent
limb-sparing procedures will need amputations later in their life. They need to be aware of the possibility of these problems preoperatively when choosing a
limb-sparing surgery.
If the patient needs an amputation, the physiatrist should evaluate the patient preoperatively and recommend the most functional level. A very short above-knee
amputation (AKA) can be fitted with a prosthesis and is much more functional and energy-efficient than a hip disarticulation. In some cases, a hip disarticulation can
be converted to a short AKA by use of a custom-made short femoral endoprosthesis. A short below-elbow and below-knee amputation can be fitted appropriately with
a prosthesis and is much more functional than its counterpart (above-elbow and AKA).
Treatment during Phases of Disease
INITIAL PHASE. Rehabilitation interventions begin preoperatively with instruction about crutch usage. The type of interventions and the rate at which rehabilitation

progresses depend on a number of factors. Although general statements can be made about how a patient progresses, each resection is somewhat different, and the

treatment plan and progression of treatment are individualized to each patient. Progression and intensity of rehabilitation are slower for bony reconstructive
procedures. 90,91
POSTSURGICAL PHASE. Postoperatively, the patient is reevaluated for level of pain, fatigue, stress, motivation, muscle strength, and joint motion. In general for STS

patients, early treatment begins with correct positioning in bed to facilitate lymph drainage; a posterior splint or sling may be needed. Passive ROM by a PT or OT
therapist is performed for joints distal to the resection and, in other joints, active motion is performed by the patient. On day 2, the patient is allowed to transfer out of
bed with assistance and sit in a chair with proper limb positioning. For lower limb procedures, non–weight-bearing gait with crutches or a walker and posterior knee
splint are initiated; if the upper extremity is the operative site, an appropriate sling or splint is used. The patient engages in active ROM of joints distal to the surgery.
As drainage decreases and the drain is removed, gait progresses with toe touch and partial weight bearing. The joint near the surgical procedure receives active
assistive ROM with the PT or OT therapist. Arc of motion is increased as the wound heals. Assessment of wound healing is made before ROM progression. When the
staples are removed at around 14 days, the patient should be fully weight bearing and can come off crutches in a week.
Special procedures, such as the Tinkoff-Lindberg procedure for shoulder STS, require extensive soft tissue reconstruction and an endoprosthesis. The rehabilitation
course is slower and similar to that of resections for proximal humeral OS tumors. The functional outcome is also the same.
Early rehabilitation for bony reconstruction is usually performed for OS but has a longer postoperative rehabilitation course, and the progression of treatment is highly
dependent on the type and extent of the excision. Any complications that occur postoperatively alter the progression of rehabilitation. Two of the complications that
occur are skin breakdown at the initial closure site and soft tissue or joint infection. The former often requires reoperation for closure or skin grafting (or both), and the
latter requires intravenous antibiotic therapy and sometimes endoprosthesis removal. During these complications, rehabilitation is often put on hold and restarted
when appropriate.
If no complications occur, patients with humeral excisions can be given passive hand ROM on day 2 and actively use their hand 2 weeks postoperatively. Passive
ROM is performed on the elbow for 3 weeks postoperatively. Patients usually lack approximately 40 degrees of extension. Use of moist heat over the elbow followed
by gentle stretching can be started at approximately 4 weeks after the reconstructive procedure involving the shoulder if the wound is sufficiently healed and can
withstand the tension of biceps lengthening. The therapist performs progressive passive ROM of the shoulder beginning with 20 degrees flexion-extension, then
adding abduction and internal-external rotation. Close contact with the surgeon is maintained in increasing the degree of ROM. Usually, passive ROM in abduction
and internal-external ROM attained is approximately 60 degrees. Active ROM is not expected to be functional.
Patients with distal femoral endoprosthetic replacements generally wear a knee immobilizer for 3 weeks. The therapist performs passive ROM of distal joints. The
therapist is allowed to perform limited-arc passive knee ROM of the involved joint between 2 to 3 weeks, carefully observing the wound closure for any signs of
potential breakdown from increased tension with ROM. When the sutures are removed, active assistive ROM is performed, and the ROM arc is gradually increased.
The patient should be able to perform some isometric exercise in the immobilizer on day 3 and begin active ROM at 1 month. Quadriceps strengthening to improve
knee biomechanics is very important. Exercise intensity is advanced with addition of some isotonic light weight at 6 weeks. From a mobility point of view, patients walk
with crutches and immobilizer and are non–weight bearing from days 4 to 10. Gradual weight bearing starts then with toe touching and progresses to tolerance, while
monitoring pain and looking for development of any knee effusion. Usually, weight-bearing status is decreased if the latter occurs. By 2 to 3 months, when the
quadriceps is sufficiently strengthened to support the knee and affected patients have no complications, they ambulate with a cane. Independent ambulation without a
cane occurs anywhere from 3 to 4 months postoperatively.
Patients with proximal tibial resections have a slower course. One main reason for this is that the surgical procedure requires quadriceps reconstruction with a
gastrocnemius flap and reattachment of the quadriceps mechanism to the metal endoprosthesis. Healing of the reconstruction takes longer. The limb is elevated for
10 days. Quadriceps isometrics are started on day 2. ROM and weight bearing are introduced at a slower pace. The patient wears a bivalved cast for a month. Knee
ROM begins when the cast is removed. Active motion exercise starts when the patient is able to extend the knee. Often, the patient wears a long leg brace for an
additional 2 months, which allows 30 degrees of flexion. Full weight bearing with a cane is not expected before 4 to 5 months. The quadriceps mechanism is initially
weaker than with the distal femoral procedure, due to the quadriceps reconstruction. A more significant knee extension lag can occur. More intensive quadriceps
strengthening is needed to help to reduce knee extension lag, allow for active knee extension, and ensure safe gait. Final functional outcomes are pain-free,
independent ambulation without a cane and ADL around 6 to 8 months.
Early rehabilitation for amputees begins with fitting the residual limb with an immediate postoperative cast in the operating room. This is achieved for above-elbow
amputation, below-elbow amputation, AKA, and below-knee amputation levels. The purpose is to shape the residual limb and to reduce pain and edema.
High-level amputees, or hemipelvectomies, may have considerable phantom pain because of surgical severance of large nerve trunks. Often, reduction of edema by
elastic compression on manual drainage, use of TENS, and pharmacologic interventions help with pain reduction.
In most centers where limb-sparing surgeries are performed, the patient's function is evaluated at intervals to document clinical progress and to follow function in drug
trials. Patients are followed up long term for 10 to 15 years and are often evaluated at 6-month intervals the first 3 to 5 years and yearly thereafter. If they are
disease-free at 10 to 15 years, they are usually discharged.
Functional assessments include objective measures of strength (manual muscle test), ROM (goniometer), edema, and pain and fatigue by visual analog scales. A
functional questionnaire may be used for determining level of participation in ADL and use of assistive devices and to identify psychosocial and vocational problems.
A cancer-specific questionnaire is the Cancer Rehabilitation Evaluation Systems. 5 A combined physical evaluation and patient questionnaire for assessing function of
OS patients is the Enneking or Musculoskeletal Tumor Society Rating Scale. 92 A recent questionnaire, the Toronto Extremity Salvage Score, was developed and
validated for both STS and OS patients. 93 Patients with STS and OS may also be assessed from a biomechanical standpoint in motion analysis laboratories looking at
velocity, stride length, and substitutive gait patterns.
Patients with STS who undergo wide local excision generally have satisfactory to excellent functional outcomes because one of the criteria for surgery is predicted
satisfactory outcome. The specific outcome depends on the extent of the excision and adjacent structures and postoperative complications. 94,95
Patients are generally independent either with or without assistive devices and braces. Some patients may need a change in vocational status. OS limb-spared
patients generally have good to excellent function, as judged by the Enneking Assessment and Gait Analysis. 96 Some, however, fall into the poor to fair categories.
Gait analysis reveals that such patients may have slower cadence and uneven stride lengths. They often use substitutive muscle strategies. 97 These vary widely. For
instance, in the presence of a weak quadriceps, such patients strike their toe first on stance rather than heel strike. This creates an extension moment at the knee to
help to stabilize it and, therefore, to improve gait safety. Limb-spared procedures require a reconstruction if there is dislocation, fracture at the bone cement interface,
serious infection unresponsive to intravenous antibiotics, or worn-out components. Studies of these reconstructions are limited to case reports but indicate good to
excellent function. 98
Amputations are still necessary if limb salvage cannot be performed or if a former limb-sparing procedure cannot be done. Amputation levels for sarcoma (OS and
STS) are performed at all levels, depending on tumor site and size. Skip lesions often occur in OS; thus, the amount of bone involved by the primary tumor in these
lesions requires a higher amputation level for cure. In comparison to amputations for diabetes and vascular disease, which are usually midlevel below-knee
amputations and AKAs, those for sarcomas tend to be high-level procedures (hemipelvectomy, hip disarticulation, high AKAs, short below-elbow amputations, and
forequarters). Prosthetic fitting in these cases is more difficult. Achieved functional level and compliance with use of some prosthesis, as hemipelvectomies, is low,
and energy requirements for use are higher. Forequarter prostheses are rarely functional and often not used.
In general, amputees are usually independent in mobility and ADL with or without crutches. Vocational status often needs to be changed. Phantom pain may interfere
with function and needs to be treated.
The function of limb-spared patients versus amputees has been addressed. Some amputees may be more functional than limb-spared patients and vice versa. Since
some prosthetic limbs are durable, participation in contact sports, running, high-impact dances, tennis, and golf are no problem. However, amputees with cosmetic
limbs, humeral OS or lower limb sparing, should have more restriction in sport activities. Limited sport may be needed to preserve endoprostheses. However, an
upper extremity Tinkoff-Lindberg procedure for humeral OS is much more functional than a forequarter amputation.

Pain. Management of pain postoperatively is essential. Pharmacologic management with narcotics is essential in the first postoperative week. Rehabilitation
treatments begin with proper limb positioning to reduce edema and avoid contracture. Immobilization of operative sites using splints and use of TENS are common
adjuncts. Acupuncture may also be useful to reduce pain.
Lymphedema. Edema can cause pain and interfere with function. Significant lymphedema commonly occurs with STS resections involving the adductor and
hamstring, anterior compartment muscle groups, and breast sarcoma. This is controlled by proper positioning and the use of a compression garment. With these four
excisions, edema is often chronic and needs to be treated long-term with combined modalities of massage, wrapping, and pumping. It can usually be well controlled or
reduced. A new technique of nonelastic wrapping has proven very effective in management. 69
Mobility. OS and STS limb-spared patients have short- and long-term mobility problems.
In the immediate postoperative phase, crutches and walkers are often needed. Often, patients will not need these devices at 6 months. Orthoses are needed after
some soft tissue resections to replace lost function. The most common brace used is for knee control after excision of the quadriceps; for ankle control after
gastrocnemius with peroneal nerve removal; and for wrist extension after radial nerve or forearm extensor removal. For knee control, an AFO with 5-degree plantar
flexion is often used. This creates an extension movement to stabilize the knee. The peroneal nerve brace is a plastic AFO to correct equinovarus of the foot. A
cock-up splint is used to maintain wrist extension or a dynamic outrigger brace is used to restore finger extension if the long extensors have been resected.
Below-knee and above-knee and above-elbow and below-elbow amputees are fitted with an immediate postoperative cast, after the suture line is closed, and a
temporary pylon and foot are added at day 10 postoperatively for the below-knee and above-knee amputees. A permanent limb is ordered when the residual limb is
well shaped and the patient does not have fluid and weight shifts from chemotherapy. If no chemotherapy is involved, a permanent prosthesis is made 6 weeks
postoperatively. For chemotherapy patients, this may be delayed by 3 months.
Two main types of prostheses are used: endoskeletal and exoskeletal. Endoskeletal prostheses have an internal metal support system and an external molded, soft
skin-color cover. They are more cosmetic and lighter in weight than exoskeletal. However, they will tear when subjected to contact sports or even walking in the
woods. They are cosmetically more acceptable to many. Exoskeletal prosthesis have a hard durable shell and can be used for sports activities and are heavier.
New components using graphite for joint components have lessened the weight of prosthesis. The choice of the particular types of components, such as knees and
ankles, and strength of cables for an upper extremity prosthesis depend on the activities in which the patient is engaged. Young amputees (common in the case of
OS) prefer hydraulic knees that facilitate such activities as dancing and ankles that are flexible, which facilitate push-off in the gait cycle and render gait more
propulsive. These are useful for sports activities.
Better form-fitting, more naturally aligned prosthetic sockets are routinely used. More sporty socket suspensions and prostheses are available, including swim legs
and adaptations for skiing. Myoelectric upper extremity prostheses with switches are sometimes used but are very expensive. They are more cosmetic, but the hand
component can lift only light objects.
Cosmesis. Cosmesis is very important to cancer patients. Wide local excision of STS often causes soft tissue deficits. Some of these can be ameliorated by soft,
contoured fillers. Some examples of these are a buttock prosthesis for buttectomies, a gastrocnemius prosthesis, a shoulder prosthesis for forequarter amputations
and after the Tinkoff-Lindberg procedure, and a foot prosthesis after partial-ray resection. Breast prostheses made of various materials (gels, fluff, etc.) are used for
mastectomies secondary to sarcoma.
Fatigue. Fatigue results from inactivity, the disease itself, depression, and chemotherapy (Adriamycin). Exercise to increase strength and joint motion is an important
component in facilitating and maintaining regain of function in limb-spared patients. Often, low-intensity, low-impact aerobic programs are prescribed. Frequently,
particular muscles are targeted for exercise (e.g., quadriceps in distal femoral and proximal tibial limb-sparing procedures for OS and partial quadriceps removal for
STS). General strengthening and ROM exercises are performed for uninvolved muscles. Isometrics and isotonic strengthening with weights to 2 pounds using a short
lever arm are permitted in patients with endoprostheses. Isokinetic machine exercise is not permitted.
Maintaining at least critical joint motion for function is important. It is not necessary that the joint motion be completely normal for adequate function.
Vocational Activity. STS can occur in all age groups, but the median age tends to be midlife and later. This places people in that part of their lives when they are
working and supporting families. As a result, some may need to change their vocation, though many remain in their jobs with reasonable accommodation. Some
studies have shown individuals with STS often enter into retirement. 99
OS occurs in children and young adults. Often, they are faced with career choices influenced by their level of physical as well as cognitive abilities. Career counseling
is advised.
Recreational Activities. Recreational and social activities are important to cancer patients. Patients with wide local excision often can continue their premorbid
recreational and social activities. With resections requiring bracing, some activities are not possible. Patients with STS and radiated bone and OS with
endoprostheses must avoid contact sports and activities that cause torquing. In addition, impact activities (running, some dances) are not appropriate for limb-spared
OS patients. These more aggressive activities can result in bony fracture, bone-prosthetic interface fracture, endoprosthetic dislocation, and early breakdown of
prosthetic components.
Education of the patient about which activities are appropriate is important in preventing complications. Adaptive methods of participating in some sports are
appropriate. For instance, modification of stance, position, and swing may reduce torque and allow some lower limb–spared patients to play golf. Doubles tennis
played at less aggressive levels may also be appropriate. A young teen going to the prom can dance but needs to avoid torquing and high-impact dances.
LONG-TERM CARE PHASE. Limb-spared patients have had decreased morbidity, owing to appropriate adjunctive chemotherapeutic and radiotherapy regimens and

defined and innovative surgical techniques. Limb-spared patients should be followed up from a rehabilitation standpoint to ensure that they are not developing any
long-term radiotherapy problems (motion loss, radiculopathy, and cord syndromes) that would decrease function. Any new development of pain should signal local
reoccurrence or fracture at the endoprosthetic junction. Amputees generally need new prostheses every 4 to 5 years, depending on level of use.
Special problem areas that arise in this treatment phase include adjustment to disability and vocational change and recreational, social, and schooling issues. The
important goal is to maintain function.
METASTATIC DISEASE AND LOCAL RECURRENCE PHASE. When metastases occur with OS, they are most commonly to the lung or other bones. Often, it is a single

metastasis or a few, possibly amenable to local resections. With STS, lung metastases occur. Patients may have multiple surgical procedures over time, usually a
median sternotomy or thoracotomy with pleura and chest wall resections. A newer procedure allows for removal of lung metastases without major chest surgery.
Chemotherapy is reintroduced after the local chest resection. These surgical treatment interventions often are associated with postoperative chest pain. The patients
may become deconditioned and experience fatigue, anxiety, and weight loss during these treatment periods and may require rehabilitation interventions much as they
did in the initial phase. Vocational and educational endeavors are disrupted. Rehabilitation strategies to relieve postoperative pain (TENS) and reduce fatigue
(assistive devices, energy conservation techniques) and anxiety (stress management, relaxation techniques, and imagery) are helpful. Referral to a dietitian is made
to support good nutrition.
When metastases return and are inoperable, experimental chemotherapy regimens are used. Often, these have low success rates and high toxicities. Likewise, local
reoccurrence may happen, particularly with STS. These also require additional therapies. At this stage, emotional support, comfort, and education about problem
solving to promote and preserve independence can be provided by the rehabilitation team.
MELANOMA
In advanced or recurrent melanoma, oncologists have reported the efficacy of isolated limb perfusion with various chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., melphalan) and

biologic response modifiers (e.g., tumor necrosis factor and interferon) where mild to moderate limb toxicity has been reported. 100 Complications resulting from these
procedures include transient peripheral neuropathy, edema, skin breakdown, and vascular compromise with tissue necrosis. As a result of these complications,
rehabilitation of these patients is often protracted and requires careful daily monitoring of the skin for areas of pressure combined with an active program of exercises
and progressive ambulation. Management of edema, using compression garments and inelastic wraps, may be achieved for symptom relief and control. Amputation
rarely must be performed to treat complications of limb perfusion. Prosthetic fitting and training may be undertaken.
LUNG CANCER
Lung cancer patients may benefit from rehabilitation interventions addressing pain control, cardiopulmonary conditioning, and work and home modifications.
Rehabilitation of the patient with lung cancer is generally divided into a preoperative or pretreatment phase and a postoperative phase. The pretreatment phase
consists of a medical review of the chart to ascertain the stage and type of the tumor and whether metastases are present. The physician should review the planned
medical treatment. In addition to assessment of current medical status in regard to cardiopulmonary function, tests should be performed for hemoglobin, hematocrit,
and electrolyte levels. The current vocational status and family support situation should be assessed. A preoperative physical examination, with particular attention to
chest wall expansion, musculoskeletal status, and cardiopulmonary status, is requisite. The patient is generally educated in proper coughing and breathing
techniques (e.g., diaphragmatic, segmental). It should be explained to the patient that these exercises help air to enter the lungs better, increase the efficiency of the
respiratory muscles, increase chest mobility, and decrease risk of pneumonia. Lower extremity exercises after surgery to prevent thrombophlebitis are also explained.
During the postoperative stage, the patient's pulmonary function and chest excursion are again assessed. Specific breathing exercises are started after the patient is
extubated. Posture and lower extremity exercises are addressed. Chest wall pain is often relieved by use of a TENS unit. After pain is controlled and the patient is
allowed to ambulate, some assessment of endurance should be made. Endurance exercises should be gradually introduced into the rehabilitation program.
In patients with metastatic disease of the brain, speech and language deficits should be included in a cognition, language, and swallowing evaluation. Depending on
the location of the metastasis, there may also be focal motor and sensory deficits. Ambulatory aids, bracing or splinting, and occupational therapy intervention for
assistive devices and safety equipment may be needed. Bone metastasis may need unweighting with crutches or a walker and spinal bracing and pain management.
Depending on the prognosis of patients, there should be discussions with them and their families about adjustment to whatever disabilities there may be. Careful
assessment of whether such persons can continue working should be made.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM NEOPLASMS
Brain damage may result from primary tumors of the brain, from metastatic disease, or from treatment of the cancer: surgery, radiation, or chemotherapy. The
resultant symptoms, impairments, and disabilities may vary considerably but are similar to those that are seen in patients who have sustained a cerebrovascular
accident or traumatic brain injury (TBI) affecting different parts of the brain. The crucial difference here is the potentially progressive or recurrent nature of the brain
cancer and its uncertain prognosis. The greatest deficits are frequently seen immediately after surgery or during radiation and chemotherapy, after which
extraordinary improvement may occur. Late brain injury from radiation with infarction or necrosis also may occur, but the subsequent disability has a less favorable
prognosis for recovery.
Simple rehabilitation treatments can help the majority of patients, whereas those with more severe disease and deficits may require comprehensive inpatient
rehabilitation, which should be provided when longer life expectancy allows. Structured, comprehensive cancer rehabilitation services have not been widely available,
especially to patients with brain tumors. Nevertheless, there is good evidence that cancer patients can benefit significantly from rehabilitation intervention and that
recurrent or metastatic tumors and ongoing aggressive tumor therapy should not preclude admission to a rehabilitation unit. 101
Philip et al. 102 demonstrated that after definitive treatment of primary brain tumors in children, rehabilitation significantly improves outcome in self-care activities,
transfers into and out of bed, and locomotion by a wheelchair or walking. Furthermore, preliminary evidence supports the efficacy of post–acute brain injury
rehabilitation services for patients with primary malignant tumors, resulting in sustained increases in productivity. 103 Specific program interventions for these
successful services include evaluation of cognitive, behavioral, affective, and social functioning; identification of impairments and their impact on patients' daily
functioning; individualized therapies to improve functioning; and return to desired vocational status.
Rehabilitation intervention most commonly begins after removal of the brain tumor. When affected patients are medically stable, a referral to rehabilitation should be
initiated so that they can be helped to sit up, get out of bed, and start an active restoration program that is tailored to their general condition. Recovery may be fairly
rapid, initially due to control of edema. Hemiplegia or hemiparesis is a common sign of brain cancer and is often most profound just after the brain surgery. Some
return of motor strength is common and may continue for several weeks or months. While muscles that are still paralyzed 4 to 8 weeks postoperatively generally
remain so, functional improvement can still occur through routine daily activity as well as therapeutic exercise and use of appropriate assistive devices (orthoses or
gait aids). Encouragement in the use of the affected limb is recommended, rather than learning to substitute for the affected side using one-sided activity. Data
suggest that recovery of motor and language function can proceed over significant periods with proper encouragement and stimulation.
If patients are kept in bed, they should be placed on a special mattress designed to prevent pressure sores. To prevent capsular contractures of the shoulder, patients
should lie with the affected arm abducted, externally rotated, and slightly elevated. The lower extremity should be positioned to minimize hip-knee flexion. Passive
joint ROM exercises should be applied to the paralyzed extremities and active exercises to the unaffected parts twice a day.
Most patients are able to ambulate with assistive devices and training. Good sitting balance and standing balance are prerequisites for functional transfers and
ambulation. Therapists use feedback mechanisms to correct patients' tendency to lean toward the affected side. For example, “handling” is a therapeutic technique
designed to establish normal alignment, reduce or eliminate abnormal tone and movement, reeducate muscles in normal patterns in the trunk and limbs, and produce
an active movement pattern in hemiplegic patients. “Inhibition” techniques are manual techniques and hand placements used to decrease or eliminate spasticity.
Dynamic sitting balance is achieved through trunk exercises, use of mirrors, and verbal feedback regarding position. Potential ambulatory ability should be assessed
by standing patients in the parallel bars. Patients should be taught bed-to-chair transfer activities as soon as sitting balance and weight shifting allow. Patients whose
hip flexors and extensors remain weak will not ambulate independently because no satisfactory hip bracing is available. Weak knee extensors can be stabilized with a
temporary knee-ankle-foot orthosis, which locks the knee in extension during weight bearing. Weak ankle dorsiflexors are often the last muscles to recover and can
be stabilized with a plastic ankle-foot orthosis (AFO) to prevent toe dragging during the swing phase of gait. Elevation activities, such as climbing and descending
stairs, ramps, or curbs, are started when a good gait pattern on level ground has been achieved. Patients with severe neurologic deficits may require a wheelchair,
either for mobility at all times or only when ambulation endurance or safety is impaired.
The major goal in the rehabilitation of the patient with brain cancer is independence in ADL, which may be obtained through training, prescription of proper assistive
devices (e.g., adaptive eating utensils, bathroom equipment, positioning and transferring equipment, and gait aids) and modification of the patient's home and work
environment (Fig. 57-6).

FIGURE 57-6. Adaptive eating utensils for patients with upper extremity spasticity or weakness.

Spasticity is a frequent impediment to mobility and performance of ADL. Factors that may aggravate spasticity, such as skin lesions, infections, and anxiety, need to
be identified and treated. Thorough stretching of all joints should be performed daily. Medications, such as dantrolene, baclofen (starting at 5 mg three times daily and
titrated until therapeutic dose is reached, usually 40 to 80 mg/d), and diazepam (2 to 10 mg three to four times daily), may be of some benefit but should be used
sparingly because of their potential for producing somnolence. Selected nerve root blocks with dilute solutions of phenol or concentrated alcohol are usually effective
in reducing spasticity. Botulinum toxin injections are also used, and proper dosage and administration site are essential for a favorable response. Surgical procedures
for reducing spasticity in this population are rarely indicated.
Joint contractures may be caused by muscle imbalance, spasticity, poor nursing care, prolonged immobility, improper bed positioning, or an inadequate exercise
program. Whatever the cause, the contractures may adversely affect the rehabilitation prognosis. For example, development of a frozen shoulder may render
independent dressing impossible. Therefore, prevention of contractures by proper positioning and posture and joint ROM exercises is imperative, since treatment of
contracture is relatively ineffective.
Cancer of the brain may cause pain in different parts of the body. Pain in the hemiplegic shoulder is common and may benefit from shoulder support by an arm sling
or a lap board, administration of analgesics, application of heat or cold modalities, and gentle ROM and strengthening exercises. Complex regional pain syndrome of
the shoulder (previously known as shoulder-hand syndrome) may also occur and requires similar treatment, but more effective relief may be obtained by prescribing
oral steroids. Dysesthetic thalamic pain is notably refractory to treatment, though various centrally acting agents may be helpful.
Varying degrees of sensory loss are commonly seen in patients with brain cancer, either in the distribution of the cranial nerves or on one or both sides of the body.
They may interfere with balance and mobility, since patients who cannot feel motion are unable to control it. Training with adaptive gait aids may help such patients to
ambulate functionally again.
Vision deficits, such as double vision, homonymous hemianopsia, and anosognosia, may greatly interfere with function, especially in patients with a right brain lesion.
Fortunately, specialized programs of cognitive remediation have been found to be effective with these patients. 104 Such programs include basic scanning training,
somatosensory awareness and size estimation training, and complex visual perceptual training.
Aphasia, a disorder of both the expression and reception of propositional language secondary to cortical or subcortical disease, may be seen in patients with cancer
in the left dominant hemisphere of the brain. Listening, speaking, reading, and writing are usually affected to varying degrees; thus, several types of aphasia are
recognized. Expressive or nonfluent aphasia is caused by lesions in the Broca area of the brain. Reduced language production, vocabulary, and grammar are
characteristic. The patient is well aware of these difficulties and becomes easily frustrated. Receptive or fluent aphasia is caused by lesions in the Wernicke area of
the brain and results in difficulty in understanding language, both the patient's and that of others. Patients may be able to speak continuously at normal speed and
with normal melody without giving any relevant information and be unaware of the errors. Speech therapy is indicated, whenever available, not only for psychological
support but to stimulate patients to use their maximal speech ability and to adjust to new circumstances. It is also helpful to instruct affected families in proper
communication with involved patients by such means as using proper sentences at a normal voice volume and using gestures and facial expressions while increasing
respect, optimism, patience, and encouragement.
Dysarthria is a motor disturbance of speech characterized by weakness, slowness, or incoordination of the muscles that produce speech. Therefore, there is complete
understanding of written or spoken language. The main problem is articulation, though speed, rhythm, sound, and intonation may also be impaired. Speech therapy
emphasizes teaching the patient to use the remaining speech muscles more effectively or to bypass the effects of disturbed function.
Aprosopia is a communication disorder caused by lesions of the nondominant right hemisphere. It results in the inability to express and comprehend variations in
pitch, rhythm, and stress, which give emotional meaning to speech. Affected patients may speak in a relatively flat voice and are often unable to recognize the
emotional tones of speech, including the meaning of nonlanguage speech sounds, such as grunts or sighs. Therefore, the clinician and family should communicate
with the patient strictly by words, because specific therapy does not exist. Fortunately, considerable improvement usually occurs over time.
Dysphagia, or impaired swallowing, is most commonly seen in lesions involving the brain stem. With severe involvement, the patient may be totally unable to swallow
or, in milder cases, there may be difficulty only with the swallowing of liquids. Whatever the degree of severity, the patient is at risk for aspiration with resulting
pneumonia, so suspicion of the condition with timely intervention is key to treatment. Serial radiographic swallowing studies are indicated for proper monitoring of the
condition until it resolves or other and safer means of nutrition are provided. Speech therapy may institute a swallowing training program in which patients attempt to
swallow food of different consistency using different techniques and positions. If indicated, a nasogastric tube can be used for several weeks while waiting for
spontaneous recovery. A more persistent dysphagia may warrant a gastrostomy tube for prolonged feeding.
Neurobehavioral problems often have an underappreciated but large impact on the quality of life of patients with tumors and their families. Implementation of services
directed toward these problems is only now receiving attention. The use of traditional cognitive and vocational rehabilitation for patients with brain tumors is
complicated by the fact that existing programs are not entirely appropriate. The patterns and types of cognitive deficits experienced by these patients are different
from those experienced by stroke or TBI patients. Anderson et al. 105 found that patients with brain tumors have milder cognitive deficits and greater variability in the
nature and extent of their deficits, compared with people who have strokes that affect the same neuroanatomic site. Furthermore, the natural history of the disease
process is different from that of cerebrovascular disease or TBI. The latter two are usually characterized by an acute onset and gradual recovery, while the onset of
disease in brain tumors is relatively insidious. Although some recovery of function may be seen after surgery or other therapy, most patients experience a gradual
deterioration of function as the tumor progresses.
The most common type of neurobehaviorally oriented program is the day treatment program, which emphasizes cognitive and vocational rehabilitation. Although these
programs are frequently affiliated with an inpatient rehabilitation program, many are located in the community to provide better access to resources. The first step in
cognitive and vocational rehabilitation is to identify realistic goals for the patient. Formal neuropsychological and vocational testing to identify preserved skills have
been found to be useful. The major goal is to train patients to compensate for their neurobehavioral deficits at home and on the job. Memory, problem-solving skills,
and social behavior are typical areas targeted for retraining. For example, patients with memory deficits may compensate by using tools, such as written reminders
and alarm watches. Patients with behavioral problems should be taught to inhibit socially inappropriate remarks or to reduce frustration intolerance. Furthermore,
patients and family members should be counseled about the need to select jobs that are less demanding although not as financially rewarding or prestigious.
In addition to providing rehabilitation to appropriate patients with brain cancer, patients' families should be offered education and emotional support. Families of such
patients are often burdened by the patients' cognitive and behavioral changes in addition to the typical psychological problems of coping with cancer in a family
member. Support groups for patients with brain cancer and their families may be of great benefit.
HEMATOPOIETIC TUMORS
Leukemias
Leukemia is the uncontrolled proliferation and incomplete maturation of leukocyte and lymphocyte precursors appearing in bone marrow and peripheral blood.
Leukemia may occur in acute or chronic form. The acute leukemias include acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). They are
more common in childhood. Both leukemias are associated with anemia, fatigue, fever, bleeding gums, gastrointestinal tract or urinary tract symptoms, easy bruising,
and pallor. Headache, mental changes, and cranial nerve palsy are common in ALL with CNS involvement. Joint pain is often seen with ALL but rarely in AML. The
prognosis for AML, even with treatment, is poor. ALL responds much better to treatment, and complete remissions are often seen. Treatment of AML consists of
cytarabine, daunorubicin, and amsacrine. The mainstay treatment in ALL consists of vincristine and prednisone.
Chronic myelogenous leukemia is not usually seen before 20 years of age, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia is generally seen after 50 years of age. Both present
with abdominal discomfort, organ enlargement, malaise, and fatigue. Anemia, low platelet count, bruising, and cutaneous bleeding are seen with chronic myelogenous
leukemia.
The rehabilitation team must address the effects of the leukemia itself and the side effects of medications and irradiation. A leukemia that does not respond
completely to treatment has a course of remissions and exacerbations that seriously affects the ability to attend school or continue working. Long periods of rest may

be needed during treatment or during times of low platelets. Generalized deconditioning and decreased muscle strength occur. Steroids contribute to decreased
strength when they cause a myopathy. They may be associated with osteoporosis, compression fractures, and painful aseptic necrosis of bone. CNS leukemia is
associated with altered cognition, cranial nerve abnormalities, and other neurologic deficits. Vincristine causes peripheral neuropathy. Hair loss occurs with some
chemotherapeutic agents. Bone marrow transplantation requires a 6-week hospital stay, usually with confinement in a bone marrow hospital unit because of the
necessary immunosuppression (e.g., leukocyte count <1000/mm 3).
Management of muscle weakness, decreased endurance, focal neurologic deficits, joint pain, cosmesis, and psychosocial and vocational problems are a challenge to
rehabilitation specialists dealing with this group of patients. The type and intensity of exercises allowable depends mainly on the platelet count and hemoglobin level.
Exercise should be nonresistive when the platelet count is less than 50,000/mm 3. No exercise is performed with counts below 20,000/mm3.106 Aerobic or endurance
exercise is limited when hemoglobin measures less than 8 to 10 g/dL. Whenever exercise and activity are possible, they should be encouraged. Patients undergoing
bone marrow transplantation are always placed on an exercise program to increase strength and endurance. Recent studies demonstrate the safety and efficacy of
aerobic conditioning during bone marrow transplantation and during treatment with chemotherapy. 107,113 Exercise should be performed either 2 hours before or 2 hours
after radiation is delivered, to avoid a radiation-enhancing effect that occurs during increased blood flow resulting from exercise. Those who are on high-dose steroid
therapy and are particularly susceptible to steroid myopathy, osteoporosis, and aseptic necrosis. Their exercise program includes weight-bearing activities, upper
extremity ROM, an isometric program, and back extension exercises. An aerobic program is introduced when platelet and hemoglobin levels permit. Exercise also
seems to be effective for reducing symptoms of nausea and fatigue and for improving psychological well-being. 114
Bracing and splinting are needed for neurologic deficits. A wig should be provided at initiation of treatment in anticipation of hair loss due to chemotherapy.
Assessment of ADL and issuance of safety equipment and assistive devices may be needed. Energy conservation education is important. Assisting patients and their
families in coping with acute and chronic problems is essential.
Lymphomas
Lymphomas constitute a group of malignant tumors that arise principally from lymph node cellular structures, other reticuloendothelial organs, and bone marrow.
These tumors are classified as Hodgkin's disease and non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHLs). The type of cells and their growth pattern help to differentiate the types of
lymphomas. Knowledge of the stage of the disease is important because medical and rehabilitation treatment regimens are oriented to the stage-specific problems
and prognosis.
Treatment consists of combination chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Many multidrug regimens exist. Choice of an appropriate drug regimen depends on the stage of
the disease. Most of the regimens include prednisone, and side effects of osteoporosis, compression fracture, myopathy, and aseptic necrosis may be seen in 10%. 114
Other drugs with potential side effects that need to be addressed by rehabilitation include doxorubicin, which produces decreased cardiac ejection fraction, and
vincristine, which causes peripheral neuropathy. Combination regimens may result in hair loss, aspermia, and early menopause. Prolonged bed rest results in muscle
weakness and decreased endurance. Treatment with radiotherapy can result in skin tightness, restricted joint motion, and aspermia.
The disease itself can be asymptomatic (subtype A) or symptomatic (subtype B). Systemic symptoms of fever, night sweats, weight loss, and decreased endurance
are present with stage I through IVB disease.
Aggressive high-grade lymphomas, such as Burkitt's, have a high propensity for metastasis to the CNS ( e.g., meningeal carcinomatosis), causing symptoms of
headache, diplopia, cranial nerve palsy, and weakness. Spinal cord compression can occur if lymphoma involves the epidural space. CNS and spinal cord
involvement can occur with NHL and Hodgkin's disease.
Other problems that arise with lymphomas include increased susceptibility to infection, pleural and pericardial effusion, and superior vena cava syndrome due to
compression of the superior vena cava by enlarged lymph nodes.
Chemotherapy and irradiation regimens for NHL are chosen according to the grade and type of tumor. Vincristine, prednisone, and cyclophosphamide are commonly
used in these regimens. (Side effects are similar to those described in Chapter 45.6 on Hodgkin's disease.)
As for patients with any type of cancer, it is important to know the type and stage of lymphoma, the treatment indicated, and side effects and the general prognosis
when planning a rehabilitation regimen. In general, patients have to cope with disease-related problems and the effects of complex chemotherapeutic and
radiotherapy regimens. Some patients may have an early complete cure and be left with no residual problems. Others may have had more advanced or more
malignant disease with incomplete remissions or recurrences and disease- and treatment-related morbidity. In this latter group, vocational and school status should
be assessed. All members of the rehabilitation team are involved in the management of these patients.
Neurologic involvement may require bracing, mobility aides, assistive devices, and speech and language evaluation. Unweighting lower extremity joints involved with
aseptic necrosis is appropriate. Muscle weakness and deconditioning should be addressed with appropriate strengthening and endurance exercises. The same
precautions about platelet and hemoglobin levels hold true for lymphomas and leukemias. Particular attention should be paid to unweighting bony lower extremity
lesions if there is more than 50% cortical involvement. Appropriate spinal bracing for vertebral involvement should be addressed. Unstable lesions should be
evaluated surgically. If the patient has advanced disease and surgery cannot be done, choice of a body jacket for thoracic and lumbar lesions and a four-poster brace
for cervical lesions may need to be used to help prevent spinal cord compression. When treating patients in rehabilitation, any early signs of spinal cord compression,
such as new weakness, sensory deficits, or reflex changes, should be reported to the primary physician, because radiotherapy may be effective in reducing the size of
spinal metastasis and relieving spinal compression. Likewise, any signs of superior vena cava syndrome, such as increased dyspnea, facial edema, and dilated chest
wall veins, should be reported, because radiation may palliate these symptoms.

CONCLUSION
The cancer population presents a significant challenge to health care professionals because management is complex and is unique to individual patients and their
phase in life and stage of disease. A model for planning treatment for the entire life expectancy of these patients, which is likely to be measured in years, is that of
managing a chronic illness. This chronic illness may also have acute phases. Treatment goals should always support those of the patients and promote, restore, or
preserve functional activity that has value to patients in their unique social, vocational, and physical environment.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Stolberg S. New cancer cases decreasing as deaths do, too. New York Times, March 13, 1998.
2. National Institutes of Health. Cancer: rates and risks, 4th ed. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, 1996:12.
3. Whelan TJ, ME, Willan AR, et al. The supportive care needs of newly diagnosed cancer patients attending a regional cancer center. Cancer 1997;80:1518.
4. Bergner M, et al. The sickness impact profile: development and final revision of a health status measure. Med Care 1981;19:787.
5. Ganz P. Long range effect of clinical trail interventions on quality of life. Cancer 1994;74[Suppl 9]:2620.
6. Osoba D. Lessons learned from mesuring health-related quality of life in oncology. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:608.
7. Karnofsky DA, Abelmann WH, Carver LF, Burchenal JH. The use of nitrogen mustards in the palliative treatment of carcinoma, vol 1. Cancer 1948;1:634.
8. Fawzy FI, Fawzy NW, Hyun CS, et al. Malignant melanoma: effects of an early structured psychiatric intervention, coping and affective state on recurrence and survival 6 years later. Arch Gen
Psych 1993;50:681.
9. Given CW, Given BA, Stommel M. The impact of age, treatment and symptoms on the physical and mental health of cancer patients: a longitudinal perspective. Cancer 1994;74[Suppl 7]:2128.
10. Wilmore DW. Catabolic illness: strategies for enhancing recovery. N Engl J Med 1991;325(10):695.
11. Gross M, et al. Calcaneal bone density reduction in patients with restricted mobility. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1987;68(3):158.
12. Stewart AF, et al. Calcium homeostasis in immobilization: an example of resorptive hypercalcemia. N Engl J Med 1982;306:1136.
13. Claus-Walker J, Halstead LS, Rodriguez GP, Henry YK. Spinal cord injury hypercalcemia: therapeutic profile. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1982;63(3):108.
14. Akeson WH, Amiel D, Abel MF, Garfin SR, Woo SL. Effects of immobilization on joints. Clin Orthop 1987;(219):28.
15. Woo SL-Y, Gomez MA, Sites TJ, et al. The biomechanical and morphological changes in the medial collateral ligament of the rabbit after immobilization and remobilization. J Bone Joint Surg
Am 1987;69(8):1200.
16. Mohr DN, Ryn JH, Litin SC, Rosenow EC 3rd. Recent advances in the management of venous thromboembolism. Mayo Clin Proc 1988;63:281.
17. Booth FW. Physiologic and biochemical effects of immobilization on muscle. Clin Orthop 1987;(219):15.
18. Häggmark TE, Eriksson E, Jansson E. Muscle fiber type changes in human skeletal muscle after injuries and immobilization. Orthopedics 1986;9(2):181.
19. O'Gorman P, McMillan DC, McArdle CS. Impact of weight loss, appetite and the inflammatory response on quality of life in GI cancer patients. Nutr Cancer 1998;32:76.
20. Ishihara K. Long term quality of life in patients after total gastrectomy. Cancer Nurs 1999;22:220.

21. Hautamaki RD, Souba WW . Principles and techniques of nutritional support in the cancer patient. In: Bland KI, Karakousis CP, Copeland EM, eds. Atlas of surgical oncology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, 1995:740.
22. Moldawer LL, Copeland EM 3rd. Proinflammatory cytokines, nutritional support and the cachexia syndrome in interactions and therapeutic options. Cancer 1997;79:1828.
23. Lotze MT, Duncan MA, Gerber LH, et al. Early versus delayed shoulder motion following axillary dissection. Ann Surg 1981;193(325):288.
24. Sicard-Rosenbaum L, Lord D, Danoff JV, Thom AK, Eckhaus MA. Effects of continuous therapeutic ultrasound on growth and metastasis of subcutaneous murine tumors. Phys Ther
1995;75(25):3.
25. Dalakas M. Polymyositis dermatomyositis and inclusion body myositis. N Engl J Med 1991;325(25):1487.
26. Cairncross G. Effects of cancer on the nervous system. In: Wittes R, ed. Manual of oncological therapeutics. New York: JB Lippincott Co, 1991.
27. Lakhanpal S, Bunch TW, Strup IL, et al. Polymyositis-dermatomyositis and malignant lesions: Does an association exist? Mayo Clin Proc 1986;61:645.
28. Bohm A. Clinical presentation and diagnosis of polymyositis and dermatomyositis. In: Dalakas M, ed. Polymyositis and dermatomyositis, vol 28. London: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1987.
29. Rosenberg N, Carry M, Rengel S. Association of inflammatory myopathies with other connective tissue disorders and malignancies. In: Dalakas M, ed. Polymyositis and dermatomyositis, vol
28. London: Butterworth, 1987.
30. Dalakas, M. Treatment of polymyositis and dermatolyositis with corticosteroids. In: Dalakas M, ed. Polymyositis and dermatomyositis, vol 28. London: Butterworth, 1987.
31. David D, Greico H, Cushman P. Adrenal glucocorticoids after twenty years: a review of their clinically relevant consequences. J Chron Dis 1970;22:637.
32. Scher HI, Yagoda A. Bone metastases: pathogenesis, treatment, and rationale for use of resorption inhibitors. Am J Med 1987;82(2A):6.
33. Paterson AH. Bone metastases in breast cancer, prostate cancer and myeloma. Bone 1987;8[Suppl 1]:S17.
34. Nielsen OS, Munro AJ, Tannock IF. Bone mestatases: pathophysiology and management policy. J Clin Oncol 1991;9(3):509.
35. Tofe AJ, Francis MD, Harvey WJ. Correlation of neoplasms with incidence and localization of skeletal metastasis: an analysis of 355 diphosphonate bone scans. J Nucl Med 1975;16:986.
36. Tubiana-Hulin M. Incidence, prevalence, and distribution of bone metastasis. Bone 1991;12[Suppl 1]:9.
37. Menck H, Schulze S, Larsen E. Metastasis size in pathologic femoral fractures. Acta Orthop Scand 1988;59(2):151.
38. Galasko CSB. Skeletal metastases. Clin Orthop 1986;210:18.
39. Errico TJ, Kostuik JP. Diagnosis and treatment of metastatic disease of the spinal column: a review. Contemp Orthop 1986;13(5):15.
40. Denis F. Spinal instability as defined by the three-column spine concept in acute spinal trauma. Clin Orhtop 1984;(189):65.
41. Pal GP, Sherk HH. The vertical stability of the cervical spine. Spine 1988;13(5):447.
42. Onimus M, Schraub S, Bertin D, Basset JF, Guidet M. Surgical treatment of vertebral metastasis. Spine 1986;11(9):883.
43. Galasko CSB. Spinal instability secondary to metastatic cancer. J Bone Joint Surg 1991;73-B(1):104.
44. Johnson RO Jr, Hart DL, Callahan RA. Cervical orthoses: a guide to their selection and use. Clin Orthop 1981;154:34.
45. Sutherland IA, Myers SJ. Radiation myelopathy. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1976;57:81.
46. Cooper PR, Maravilla KR, Sklar FH, Moody SF, Clark WK. Halo immobilization of cervical spine fractures. indications and results. J Neurosurg 1979;50(5):603.
47. Werner RA. Paraplegia and quadriplegia after intrathecal chemotherapy. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1988;9(12):1054.
48. Ryan JR, Emami A. Vincristine neurotoxicity with residual equinocavus deformity in children with acute leukemia. Cancer 1983;51(3):423.
49. Loehrer PJ, Einhorn LH. Drugs five years later. Cisplatin. Ann Intern Med 1984;100(5):704.
50. Salner AL, Botnick LE, Herzog AG, et al. Reversible brachial plexopathy following primary radiation therapy for breast cancer. Cancer Treat Rep 1981;65(9):797.
51. Wheeler JS Jr, Siroky MB, Bell R, et al. Vincristine-induced bladder neuropathy. J Urol 1983;130(2):342.
52. Rosenfeld CS, Broder LE. Cisplatin-induced autonomic neuropathy. Cancer Treat Rep 1984;68(4):659.
53. Raphaelson MI Stevens JC, Newman RP. Vincristine neuropathy with bowel and bladder atony: mimicking spinal cord compression [Letter]. Cancer Treat Rep 1983;67(6):604.
54. Scherokman B, Filing-Katz MR, Tell D. Brachial plexus neuropathy following high-dose cytarabine in acute monoblastic leukemia. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;69(9):1005.
55. La Rocca RV, Meer J, Gilliatt RW, et al. Suramin-induced polyneuropathy. Neurology 1990;40(6):954.
56. Basso-Ricci S, della Costa C, Viganotti G, Ventafridda V, Zanolla R. Report on 42 cases of postirradiation lesions of the brachial plexus and their treatment. Tumori 1980;66(1):117.
57. Kori SH, Foley KM, Posner JB. Brachial plexus lesions in patients with cancer: 100 cases. Neurology 1981;31(1):45.
58. Harper CM Jr, Thomas JE, Cascino TL, Litchy WJ. Distinction between neoplastic and radiation-induced brachial plexopathy, with emphasis on the role of EMG. Neurology 1989;39:502.
59. Mondrup K, Olsen NK, Pfeiffer P, Rose C. Clinical and electrodiagnostic findings in breast cancer patients with radiation-induced brachial plexus neuropathy. Acta Neurol Scand 1990;81:153.
60. Barr LC, Kissin MW. Radiation-induced brachial plexus neuropathy following breast conservation and radical radiotherapy. Br J Surg 1987;74:855.
61. Hoang P, Ford DJ, Burke FDA. Post mastectomy pain after brachial plexus palsey: metastases or radiation neuritis. J Hand Surg 1986;11-B(3):441.
62. Jaeckle KA Young DF, Foley KM. The natural history of lumbosacral plexopathy in cancer. Neurology 1985;35(1):8.
63. Pettigrew LC, Glass JP, Maor M, Zornoza J. Diagnosis and treatment of lumbosacral plexopathies in patients with cancer. Arch Neurol 1984;41:1282.
64. Ricci MA. Deep venous thrombosis in orthopedic patients. Current techniques in precise diagnosis. Orthop Rev 1984;13(4):185.
65. Dauzat MM, Laroche JP Charras C, et al. Real-time B-mode ultrasonography for better specificity in the noninvasive diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis. J Ultrasound Med 1986;5(11):625.
66. Brennan MJ, Miller LT. Overview of treatment options and review of the current role and use of compression garments, intermittent pumps and exercise in the management of lymphedema.
Cancer 1998;83:S2821.
67. Wittlinger H, Wittinger G, Harris RH, eds. Textbook of Dr. Vodder's manual lymph drainage, 5th ed, vol 1. Brussels: Haug International, 1992.
68. Foldi M. Treatment of lymphedema. Lymphology 1994;27:1.
69. Casley Smith J. Modern treatment of lymphoedema. Mod Med Aust 1992;35:70.
70. Habermann ET, Lopez RA. Metastatic disease of bone and treatment of pathological fractures. Orthop Clin North Am 1989;20(3):469.
71. Madersbacher H. The various types of neurogenic bladder dysfunction: an update of current therapeutic concepts. Paraplegia 1990;28:217.
72. Wyndaele JJ. Pharmacotherapy for urinary bladder dysfunction in spinal cord injury patients. Paraplegia 1990;28:146.
73. Broadwell D, Jackson BS. Principles of ostomy care. St Louis: Mosby, 1982.
74. ConvaTec. A professionals guide for counseling ostomy patients. Princeton: Squibb and Sons, 1989.
75. Broadwell D, Sorrells SL. Ileostomy care, vol 21. Plainfield, NJ: Patient Education Press, 1988.
76. Broadwell D, Broadhurst BB. Colostomy care, vol 26. Plainfield, NJ: Patient Education Press, 1989.
77. Broadwell D, Broadhurst BB, Urinary diversion, vol 24. Plainfield, NJ: Patient Education Press, 1989.
78. Brennan MF, Casper ES, Harrison LB. Sarcomas of soft tissue and bone. In: DeVita VT, Rosenberg SA, Hellman S, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology, 5th ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1997:1759.
79. Malawer MM, Link MP, Donaldson SS. Principles and techniques of limb-sparing surgery. In: DeVita VT, Rosenberg SA, Hellman S, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology, 5th ed.
Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1997:1800.
80. Rosenberg SA, Tepper J, Glatstein E, et al. The treatment of soft tissue sarcoma of the extremities: prospective randomized evaluations of 1) limb sparing surgery plus radiation therapy
compared to amputation; 2) the role of adjuvant chemotherapy. Ann Surg 1982;196:305.
81. Simon MA, Aschliman MA, Thomas N, Mankin HJ. Limb salvage treatment versus amputation for osteogenic sarcoma of the distal end of the femur. J Bone Joint Surg 1986;68A:1331.
82. Yang JC, Chang AE, Baker AR, et al. Randomized prospective study of the benefit of adjuvant radiation in the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas of the extremity. J Clin Oncol 1998;16(1):197.
83. Brennan M. Long term results of a prospective randomized trial of adjuvant brachytherapy in soft tissue sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1996;14(3):859.
84. Liu L, Glicksman AS. The role of radiation in the management of soft tissue sarcoma. Med Health 1997;80(1):32.
85. Link MP, Goorin AM, Horowitz M, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy of high-grade osteosarcoma of the extremity: updated results of the Multi-Institutional Osteosarcoma Study. Clin Orthop
1991;270:8.
86. Eggermont AM, Schraffordt Koops H, Klausner JM, et al. Isolated limb perfusion with tumor necrosis factor and melphalan for limb salvage in 186 patients with locally advanced soft tissue
sarcoma. The cumulative multicenter European experience. Ann Surg 1996;224(6):756.
87. Atiyeh BS, Zaatari AM. Fibrohistiocytic sarcoma of the thumb treated by wide resection and immediate free flap reconstruction. Scand J Plast Reconstr Surg Hand Surg 1996;30(1):75.
88. Bray PW, Bell RS, Bowen CV, et al. Limb salvage surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy for soft tissue sarcomas of the forearm and hand. J Hand Surg 1997;22A(3):495.
89. Malawer M. Personal communication of clinical experience with cases, 1999.
90. Lampert MH, Gahagen C. Rehabilitation of the sarcoma patient. In: MC, ed. Physical therapy for the cancer patient. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1990:111.
91. Lampert MH, Gahagen C. Rehabilitation of patients with extremity sarcoma. In: Sugarbaker P, Malawar MM, eds. Musculoskeletal surgery for cancer. New York: Thieme Medical Publishers,
1992:55.
92. Enneking W. A system for the functional evaluation of the surgical management of musculoskeletal tumors. In: Enneking W, ed. Limb-sparing surgery for musculoskeletal tumors. New York:
Churchill Livingstone, 1987:5.
93. Davis AM, Wright JG, Williams JI, et al. Development of a measure of function for patients with bone and soft tissue sarcoma. Qual Life Res 1996;55(5):508.
94. Robinson M. Post-treatment limb function in soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer Treat Res 1997;91:77.
95. Arzouman JM, Dudas S, Ferrans CE, et al. Quality of life in patients with sarcoma post-chemotherapy. Oncol Nurs Forum 1991;10(5):889.
96. Malawer M, Chow L, Seibel N, et al. Endoprosthetic (EP) survival and long-term functional and clinical outcome of 82 patients treated with limb sparing (LS) surgery with endoprosthetic
replacement for high grade bone sarcomas. Proc Annu Meet Ann Soc Clin Oncol 1994;13:A1776.
97. Stanhope J, Hicks JE, Malawer MM, et al. Knee joint control mechanisms in the limb spared patient. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1988;69(9):744.
98. Hicks J, Siegel K. Unpublished clinical data on gait analysis in limb-spared second endoprosthetic replacements. 1998
99. Lampert MH, Gerber LH, Glatstein E. Soft tissue sarcoma: functional outcome after wide local excision and radiation therapy. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1984;65(8):477.
100. Schover LR, Schain WS, Montague DK. Sexual problems of patients with cancer. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds, Cancer: principles and practice of oncology. Philadelphia: JB
Lippincott Co, 1989:2206.
101. Marciniak C, Sliwa JA, Spill G, Heinemann AW, Semik PE. Functional outcome following rehabilitation of the cancer patient. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1996;77:54.
102. Philip PA, Ayyanger R, Vanderbilt J, Gaebler-Spira DJ. Rehabilitation outcome in children after treatment of primary brain tumor. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1994;75:36.
103. Sherer M, Meyers CA, Bergloff P. Efficacy of post–acute brain injury rehabilitation for patients with primary malignant brain tumors. Cancer 1997;80:250.
104. Gordon WA, Hibbard MR, Egolko S, et al. Perceptual remediation in patients with right brain damage: a comprehensive program. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1985;66:353.
105. Anderson SW, Damasio H, Tanel D. Neuropsychological impairments associated with lesions caused by tumor or stroke. Arch Neurol 1990;47:397.
106. Holtzman L, Chesney K. Rehabilitation of the leukemia/lymphoma patient. In: McGarvey C, ed. Clinics in physical therapy: physical therapy for the cancer patient. New York: Churchill
Livingstone, 1990:85.
107. Dimeo F, Bertz H, Finke S, et al. An aerobic exercise program for patients with haematological malignancies after bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;18:1157.
108. Dimeo FC, Tilmann MH, Bertz H, et al. Aerobic exercise in the rehabilitation of cancer patients after high-dose chemotherapy and autologous peripheral stem cell transplantation. Cancer
1997;9:1117.
109. Dimeo F, Fetscher S, Lange W, Mertelsmann R, Keul J. Effects of aerobic exercise on the physical performance and incidence of treatment-related complications after high-dose
chemotherapy. Blood 1997;90:3390.
110. Dimeo F, Rumberger BG, Keul J. Aerobic exercise as therapy for cancer fatigue. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1998;30(4):475.
111. MacVicar MG, Winningham ML, Nickel JL. Effects of aerobic interval training on cancer patients' functional capacity. Nurs Res 1989;38:348.
112. Winningham ML, MacVicar MG. The effect of aerobic exercise on patient reports of nausea. Oncol Nurs Forum 1988;15:447.
113. Dimeo FC, Stieglitz RD, Novelli-Fisher U, et al. Effects of physical activity on the fatigue and psychological status of cancer patients during chemotherapy. Cancer 1999;85:2273.
114. Proswitz LR, Lawson JP, Friedlander GE, et al. Avascular necrosis of bone in Hodgkin's disease patients treated with combined-modality therapy. Cancer 1981;47:2793.

CHAPTER 58 Advanced Practice Nurses and Physician Assistants in Oncology Care
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 58
Advanced Practice Nurses and Physician Assistants in Oncology Care
M. TISH KNOBF
SUSAN ANDERSON
Introduction
Physician Assistants
Education and Certification
Future Directions for Physician Assistants
Advanced Practice in Oncology Nursing
Educational Preparation of Oncology Advanced Practice Nurses
Regulating Practice: Certification, Licensure, and Prescriptive Privileges
Role Implementation of Advanced Practice Nurses
Collaborative Practice
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The current health care environment has influenced the delivery of cancer care, with shifts in patient acuity levels, volume, and management of patients across care
settings. In response to the dynamic health care changes and therapeutic advances in oncology over the past decade, a growing trend is evident to use advanced
practice nurses (APNs) and midlevel practitioners [i.e., physician assistants (PAs)] in the effort to provide high-quality, cost-effective oncology care. This chapter
describes the preparation and role implementation of the PA, defines the oncology APN, identifies the professional issues that influence regulations of practice,
delineates the role components of the oncology APN, and identifies the benefits of a collaboration between physicians, APNs, and PAs in oncology practice.

PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
The first PA education program began at Duke in 1965. It was designed to train a general assistant, who could develop areas of expertise over time under the direct
supervision of a physician, initially in the areas of primary care and general surgery. The American Academy of Physician Assistant estimates that there are 34,192
PAs practicing, predominantly in primary care (53%), family practice (40%), general surgery (19%), and emergency medicine (10%). 1 Currently, less than 6% of the
PA population practices in one of the subspecialties of internal medicine, and only 1% work in adult or pediatric oncology. 2 PA practice includes history and physical
examinations, diagnosis and management, prescription of controlled and noncontrolled medications in those states allowed by law, 3 screening procedures, ordering
and interpreting laboratory and diagnostic tests, referrals and consultations, and counseling patients. Approximately one-half of the PAs in practice report performing
invasive procedures, including bone marrows, lumbar punctures, and suturing and repair of lacerations. 1
EDUCATION AND CERTIFICATION
There are 116 PA training programs in the United States, with 42% offering a master's degree. Among the PAs in practice, 64% hold bachelor degrees and 22% hold
master's degrees.1 Programs are divided into a didactic phase and a clinical phase. Postresidency programs at selected teaching hospitals offer advanced training in
a specialty area.
Certification of PAs occurs at both national and state levels. National certification requires a certificate of completion from an accredited PA educational program and
passing the Physician Assistant National Certification Examination, which is administered by the National Commission of National Certification of PAs. To maintain
certification, PAs must fulfill annual continuing medical education requirements and must recertify every 6 years by written examination. Similar to initial certification,
recertification focuses on primary care knowledge.
At the state level, 49 states plus the District of Columbia have licensing boards, which control prescriptive authority, reimbursement , and scope of practice. All states
require physician collaboration in practice and for prescribing drugs. 3 Most states have legislation that mandates Medicaid and Medicare coverage for PAs, but few
have statutes requiring reimbursement from private insurers.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS FOR PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
In 1998, the Department of Health and Human Services asked the American Association of Physician Assistant Programs to develop a 3-year strategic plan
stimulated by the current environment of the medical profession and the proliferation of training programs for nonphysician clinicians. 4 Highlights of the plan include
that education should continue to focus on primary care and allow for specialty developments over the course of one's career through continuing education
requirements; competency should be promoted through continuing education programs and recertification examinations; PAs should continue to function in a
delegated role under physician supervision, work with other health care disciplines to focus on underserved populations, enhance and empower patient populations
through education, and attempt to provide cost-effective high-quality care.

ADVANCED PRACTICE IN ONCOLOGY NURSING
The oncology APN is defined as “a registered nurse, prepared with a minimum of a master's degree in nursing, who has acquired advanced, in depth knowledge and
preceptored clinical experiences in oncology that enable her or him to exhibit a high degree of independent and collaborative judgment and clinical skill in providing
nursing care to patients with cancer and their families.” 5 In 2000, the Oncology Nursing Society includes nearly 5000 members who are prepared at the master's
degree level or higher (World Wide Web site: http://www.ons.org). The acquired knowledge and clinical practice experience at the graduate level prepares the APN
for expansion within areas of practice that overlap traditional medical practice and for integration of theory and research into practice. 6 Improved patient outcomes,
cost-effective care, and improved quality of life for patients and family are well-documented advanced practice nursing outcomes. 7,8 and 9 Nursing, the core of advanced
practice, is defined as assisting the individual in activities that contribute to health, recovery, or death 10 and the diagnosis and treatment of human responses to health
and illness. 6 Collaborative practice between APNs and physicians results in better quality health care by combining the unique, documented contributions of the
nursing discipline with the expert medical treatment of the illness. 11,12 and 13
EDUCATIONAL PREPARATION OF ONCOLOGY ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSES
Understanding the educational preparation of APNs is critical to decision making for employment and role implementation. The current recommendation for a master's
degree with a specialty in advanced practice oncology ( Table 58-1), is designed for both the clinical nurse specialist (CNS) and nurse practitioner (NP), allowing for
flexibility in emphasis of content for specific role preparation. Precepted clinical experiences in programs range from 600 to 800 hours. 14 These recommendations are
consistent with national recommendations for advanced nursing practice education and should prepare nurses to practice across settings of care. 15,16 and 17

TABLE 58-1. Recommended Course Content for a Master's Degree with a Specialty in Advanced Practice Oncology Nursing

The Oncology Nursing Society annually publishes a listing of master's programs in oncology nursing. 18 Common program characteristics of the schools that have
provided information include four semesters of full-time study with greater than or equal to 600 clinical hours required. These programs include curriculum that
prepare APNs as CNS, oncology NP, and acute care NP, and the majority provide a postmaster's option. The foundation for many of the oncology NP programs is the
primary care adult NP curriculum, preparing students with a broad base of knowledge about common clinical problems of midlife and older adults, such as
hypertension, upper respiratory infections, arthritis, cardiac disease, and diabetes. The combination of primary care and oncology knowledge provides a strong
foundation for assessment and management of patients with noncancer as well as cancer-related health problems.
REGULATING PRACTICE: CERTIFICATION, LICENSURE, AND PRESCRIPTIVE PRIVILEGES
Regulation of advanced practice nursing is the responsibility of state legislators and boards of nursing. There are four levels of regulation and it is important to know
the individual state regulations as they affect implementation of the role and prescriptive authority. 19,20 The least restrictive is designation and recognition of the
credentials of an APN, which in oncology is the CNS and the NP. 21 The second level of regulation is registration with the state board of nursing, and certification is the
third level of regulation. Certification for advanced practice nursing is a process, usually a written examination, that a nongovernment organization uses to establish
that a licensed registered nurse has mastered a certain body of knowledge and skills. 22,23 Certification is a voluntary professional activity but becomes mandatory for
advanced practice licensure in most states. 20 The American Nurses Association has provided leadership for certification and established a credentialing center in
1993,19 which offers advanced practice nursing certification ( Table 58-2). Specialty organizations also offer certification. The Oncology Nursing Certification
Corporation has objectively established criteria for delineating the role of advanced practice nursing in oncology. 24 Eligibility for the Advanced Oncology Certified
Nurse certification is open to those not only with advanced clinical preparation but anyone with a master's degree or higher degree in administration, education, or
research. Specialty certification is highly valued and recommended, but because Advanced Oncology Certified Nurse certification is not recognized by all states for
licensure, many oncology APNs hold dual certification, one for licensure and one for specialty recognition (see Table 58-2).

TABLE 58-2. Certification for Advanced Practice Nurses Who Practice in Adult Oncology

Licensure is the fourth regulatory level that defines the scope of practice and qualifications, designed to protect public health, safety, and welfare and is associated
with a high level of accountability. 19 Advanced Practice Registered Nurse (APRN) licensure is granted by a governmental agency at the state level, and Pearson 20
provides an annual review of the variations by each state on legal authority, reimbursement, prescriptive authority, scope of practice, and titling.
Reimbursement is provided by for-profit corporations and insurers, government [Medicare, Medicaid, Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed Services
(CHAMPUS)], nonprofit, and self-insured corporations. 23 Federal and state legislation dictate the level of reimbursement and the 1997 Balanced Budget Act provides
direct reimbursement for NPs and CNSs across a variety of settings. NPs and CNSs are required to submit their own provider number in addition to the group practice
number where applicable. Payments made to NPs and CNSs are “80% of the lesser of either the actual charge or 85% of the physician fee schedule amount.” 25 The
Health Care Financing Administration rules require a master's degree, state authority granted to practice as an NP or CNS, and certification by a nationally
recognized certifying body (World Wide Web site http://www.nurse.org/acnp/medicare/hcfa9804.shtml). The educational requirement does not include a grandfather
clause for NPs who were not prepared at the master's level and, thus, their services are not reimbursable under the current rules.
Prescriptive authority is part of state regulation and ranges from the APN as an independent prescriber to an interdependent relationship with a physician to the most
restrictive, which only allows an APN to prescribe drugs from a list that has been preapproved by the state. 23 Prescriptive authority includes controlled substances, as
allowed by the individual state law ( Table 58-3). For those states that include prescriptive authority for controlled substances, the APN can apply to the Drug
Enforcement Agency and obtain individual Drug Enforcement Agency authorization.

TABLE 58-3. Nurse Practitioner Prescriptive Authority by State a

Credentialing is a general term that refers to validation of the educational preparation, licensure, credentials, certification, and advanced scope of nursing
practice. 19Credentialing is the term often used by institutions for the process of evaluating and granting clinical practice privileges. 23
ROLE IMPLEMENTATION OF ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSES
The APN implements the role as a direct caregiver, educator, consultant, administrator, and researcher. A role-delineation study 24 confirmed that these role
components were relevant to both the CNS and NP APNs in oncology, with less than 10% of the items differentiating the roles. This study supports the standards of
practice for advanced practice nursing in oncology, 5 supports identified competencies for role implementation, 17 and further validates the similar and overlapping role

functions of the CNS and NP in clinical practice. 12,13,26,27
Direct Care Provider
In provision of direct care to the patient, the roles of the CNS and NP are more blended than distinct, reflecting the similarity in advanced physical and psychosocial
assessment and management.13 The distinction between these APNs lies in the emphasis and time spent on specific role functions. 24,28 The NP direct care role is
defined by comprehensive health assessment, diagnosis, health promotion, prescriptive authority, and management of acute and chronic problems. 6,12,20 Oncology
NPs also perform procedures, write orders, prescribe chemotherapy, admit patients to the hospital, and write inpatient progress notes. 28 Some CNSs have adopted a
practice model, in which the individual patient is the primary focus. In that model, the practice of the CNS and NP have little, if any, distinction. However, many CNSs
continue a practice model, which was designed to promote improvement of nursing care by all nurses to a population of patients. 6 Thus, the direct hands-on care role
for the oncology CNS refers to direct patient care but also to the supportive role for nursing staff related to assessment, clinical decision making, introducing new skills
into practice, and interventions. 29 The reality of fewer professional registered nurses in hospitals, increased numbers of unlicensed personnel, continued
specialization, and high patient acuity across settings of care have “recreated the scenario that first produced the need for specialized nurses earlier in the century.” 30
In oncology, there is a real and persistent need to provide direction and consultation for direct patient care to less well-prepared nursing and nonnursing staff in order
to deliver high-quality, safe, and competent nursing care.
Practice Setting
The changing nature of oncology practice creates continuous opportunities for diversity in role implementation across practice settings. The practice setting of the
oncology APN is diverse, ranging from screening, detection, and genetic counseling programs to care of patients in the hospital, ambulatory clinics, private office
practices, radiation therapy centers, home care, and hospice. 31 In the hospital, implementation of the role of the acute care NP with critically ill cancer patients is
increasingly evident, 32,33 and 34 and a subacute NP role has been described for routine admissions of patients on a medical oncology service. 35 Consistent with changes
in the health care environment, there has been a recognized shift of the oncology APN role to nontertiary settings, specifically home care, 8,36 palliative care, 37,38
ambulatory clinics and comprehensive cancer centers, 39,40 and 41 and radiation therapy. 42,43 and 44 Many APNs in clinics and private office settings have hospital
privileges and provide care across settings. 28,39,45
Educator
The APN's educator role addresses the learning needs of the patient and family, other nurses, disciplinary colleagues, and the community. Teaching the patient and
family is a primary role of the NP and the CNS across all settings 46 and may include identification and use of appropriate culturally sensitive educational materials,
development of practice standards for patient teaching, and evaluation of the effectiveness of educational interventions.
Another major responsibility of the oncology APN is to improve patient care through staff education. 47 In the current health care climate of high acuity and shortened
stays in acute care settings and high volume and more complex care required for patients in ambulatory settings, informal on-site education for nurses by the APN for
diagnostic, therapeutic, and ethical reasoning in clinical judgment provides a critical method to improve nursing care and patient outcomes. 46,48 Oncology APNs have
made significant contributions to nursing education and clinical care through dissemination of clinical knowledge in specialty journals such as Cancer Nursing,
Oncology Nursing Forum, Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing, Cancer Practice, Seminars in Oncology Nursing, and oncology nursing
texts.49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62 and 63 Many of these texts serve as excellent on-site resources for clinical staff.
Consultant
Providing expert advice to nursing and professional colleagues on individual patient cases and on complex problems of a specific patient population is a
well-established function of the oncology APN. Consultation can be informal (verbal) or formal (written) and can be initiated with APNs from within or outside of the
oncology specialty or practice setting. 64 Symptom management, the need to acquire new skills, understanding and use of innovative technology, chemotherapy
information for the nononcology staff, and complex clinical problems are common examples for consulting with the oncology APN. In addition, the oncology APN
provides important consultation in the development and revision of institutional policies, procedures, and clinical practice guidelines 32; and professional consultation,
such as educational programs and peer review for journal articles.
Clinical Leader
The clinical leader role should not be confused with institutional leadership activities of management. 32 The APN leadership is directed at the practice environment,
patient outcomes, and improving nursing care. The APN functions as a change agent, the primary purpose of which is to effect change to maintain or improve the
quality of care delivered. The oncology APN by virtue of specialty knowledge and change agent skills is uniquely qualified to assess the process of care delivery;
evaluate the clinical, psychosocial, functional, fiscal, and patient satisfaction outcomes across the continuum of cancer care; determine what needs to be changed to
achieve desired outcomes; and effectively implement change. 7 Creative change agency is needed to challenge the status quo, introduce new skills or technology,
integrate research findings into practice, and adapt care delivery within and across settings to improve continuity. 65
Researcher
Use of research in practice is dependent on the available body of research, dissemination of findings, and integration of the research findings by nurses in their
clinical practice. Oncology nurses prepared at the doctoral level have made significant research contributions to the care of patients and families, with progression
from earlier descriptive studies to intervention research. Symptom management is a major nursing focus 50 and a consistent research priority. In 1994, a metaanalysis
was performed on 28 studies that addressed nausea and vomiting, pain, anxiety, alopecia, infection, chemotherapy side effects, shivering, radiodermatitis, anorexia,
and mucositis.66 Overall, interventions were successful in relieving symptoms and significant effectiveness was obtained for interventions used in the management of
nausea and vomiting, pain, anxiety, alopecia, infection, and side effects of chemotherapy. 66 In that same year, a State of the Knowledge Conference on the symptom
of fatigue summarized existing data. 67 That conference summary provided direction for future research, which has resulted in multiple publications from studies on
measurement, prevalence, severity, perceived distress, and intervention effectiveness for the symptom of fatigue in cancer patients. These examples provide a small
glimpse of the extent and scope of oncology nursing research that directly relates to practice.
RESEARCH UTILIZATION. Nursing is accountable to use research findings to support practice and maintain an evidence-based practice. As an example, Bookbinder and

colleagues 68 spearheaded a research utilization project at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center that was designed to improve quality patient care through
integration of the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research Cancer Pain Management Clinical Practice Guideline into practice. APNs provided leadership for this
project, which resulted in an organized clinical pain management program, pain management education programs, revision of assessment forms to include pain
assessment and relief as the fifth vital sign, standards of care for professional and patient education and patient satisfaction, a systematic method to continually
improve pain, and improved treatment outcomes. Collaboration of doctorally prepared clinical nurses and researchers with oncology APNs in clinical settings offers an
opportunity to create environments that bridge the gap between practice and research, stimulate critical thinking among staff nurses, foster the value of research and
application to practice, enhance practice-relevant nursing research, and ultimately, achieve the goal to improve patient care outcomes. 69,70
NURSES' CONTRIBUTION TO THERAPEUTIC CLINICAL TRIAL RESEARCH. The growth in numbers of APNs over the next 10 years presents an opportunity to develop a

unique role in clinical research. 4 Oncology nurses have traditionally played a major role in cancer clinical research by assuming the responsibility of safe study drug
administration but also providing a full range of responsibilities related to research, including input into study design, feasibility assessments, and budgetary analysis;
recruitment and education of patients; maintenance of regulatory documents; collection of data; and study summary and analysis. 71 The role and number of APNs
currently working in clinical trial research is unknown. However, the depth of specialty knowledge, research preparation, and advanced clinical nursing skills of the
oncology APN offer unique qualifications to meet the challenges of a research coordinator for clinical trials. 72 Additionally, the APN's autonomy as a direct care
provider in toxicity assessment and in the management of complex cancer patients offers a model of care that combines resources to provide comprehensive care and
maintain a high level of rigor in the research process. Few medical oncologists report any clinical research training, and many nurses involved in clinical trials do not
have master's degrees. Thus, nursing has identified the need for advanced level knowledge and skill in this area and has implemented programs for master's degrees
and postmaster's certificates in clinical trials management at Duke University, University of California in San Francisco, and Columbia University. The content includes

protocol design, development strategies for drug development, principles of data management, and business practices for clinical research. Other schools such as
Georgetown University have collaborated with pharmaceutical companies to offer continuing education programs in clinical research management. The courses at
Georgetown include an explanation of the drug development process and preparation for advanced management of multisite trials.
Professional training in federal regulations governing clinical research, business aspects, and overall management roles are also addressed by the Cooperative
Group Training Sessions, the Society of Research Nurses, the Association of Clinical Research Professionals (ACPR) and the Society of Clinical Research
Professionals (SOCRA).
COLLABORATIVE PRACTICE
Collaborative practice among physicians and APNs or PAs is an appropriate model for oncology. The current health care environment and the increasing complexity
of oncology have highlighted the need for professional interdependence and collaboration in order to provide safe care. 73,74 A multidisciplinary approach has been an
established cornerstone of oncology practice, contributing to a more comprehensive plan of care and better overall patient outcomes. The PA and APN offer
significant contributions to the delivery of high-quality comprehensive oncology care, although educational preparation and disciplinary practice focus differentiates
their unique contributions. All APNs are prepared at the master's level and most within the specialty of oncology. Nursing is a distinct health profession and nurses
practice under a professional nursing license. Primary care is the focus of the PA's educational preparation and PAs practice within the medical model in a delegated
role under the supervision of a physician. 3 APNs may practice independently or collaboratively with physicians, as permitted by individual state law. 20 Collaborative
practice between a physician and an APN represents a relationship in which both disciplines share knowledge and have diverse but complementary expertise and
skills. 9 This type of interdisciplinary relationship between a physician and APN enhances communication and understanding, provides mutual support and results in
an efficient approach to the delivery of comprehensive quality care, improved patient outcomes, and increased patient satisfaction. 38,43,45,75,76 and 77
The current health care environment presents significant challenges to the delivery of high-quality patient-centered oncology care. Innovative collaborative models of
care among providers can create environments that support the oncology health care team to achieve high-quality clinical outcomes, efficient use of resources,
empowerment of the patient and family, and successful clinical research and maintain a state-of-the-art evidence-based practice.
Acknowledgments
For review of the manuscript: Mary Cooley, RN, PhD, NP; Janet van Cleve, RN, MSN, NP; Gail Melkus, RN, EdD; and Pamela Minarik, RN, MSN, CNS. Support for M.
Tish Knobf: American Cancer Society Professor of Oncology Nursing.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. American Association of Physician Assistant (AAPA). 1998 Physician assistant census report. 1998.
2. Hooker RS, Cawley JF. Physician assistants in American medicine. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1997.
3. Cooper RA, Henderson T, Dietrich CL. Roles of nonphysician clinicians as autonomous providers of patient care. JAMA 1996;280:795.
4. Cooper RA, Laud P, Dietrich BS. Current and projected workforce of nonphysician clinicians. JAMA 1996;208:788.
5. Oncology Nursing Society. Statement on the scope and standards of advanced practice in oncology nursing. Pittsburgh, PA: Author, 1997.
6. American Nurses Association. Nursing's social policy statement. Washington, DC: Author, 1995.
7. Brooten D, Naylor MD. Nurses' effect on changing patient outcomes. Image Journal Nursing Scholarship 1995;27:95.
8. McCorkle R, Benoliel JQ, Donaldson G, et al. A randomized clinical trial of home nursing care for lung cancer patients. Cancer 1989;64:1375.
9. Freund CM, Fox JA. Research in support of nurse practitioners. In: Mezey MD, McGivern DO, eds. Nurses, nurse practitioners. New York: Springer, 1999:32.
10. Henderson V. Nature of nursing. New York: Macmillan, 1966.
11. Caitlin AJ, McAuliffe M. Proliferation of non-physician providers as reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), 1998. Image Journal Nursing Scholarship 1999;31:175.
12. Snyder M, Mirr MP. Advanced practice nursing. 2nd ed. New York: Springer, 1999.
13. Cooley M, Spatz DL, Yasko JM. Role implementation in cancer nursing. In: McCorkle R, Grant M, Frank-Stromberg M, Baird S, eds. Cancer nursing: a comprehensive textbook. 2nd ed.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1996:25.
14. Mezey MD, McGivern DO. Nurses, nurse practitioners. 3rd ed. New York: Springer, 1999.
15. American Association of Colleges of Nursing. The essentials of master's education for advanced practice nursing. Washington, DC: Author, 1997.
16. National Organization of Nurse Practitioner Faculties. Advanced nursing practice: curriculum guidelines. Washington, DC: Author, 1995.
17. American Cancer Society/Oncology Nursing Society. The master's degree with a specialty in advanced practice oncology nursing, curriculum guide. 3rd ed. American Cancer Society: 1994.
18. Brown J, Hinds P. Assessing master's programs in advanced practice oncology nursing. Oncol Nurs Forum 1999;26:1371.
19. Porcher FK. Licensure, certification and credentialing. In: Mezey MD, McGivern DO, eds. Nurses, nurse practitioners. 3rd ed. New York: Springer, 1999:422.
20. Pearson LJ. Annual update of how each state stands on legislative issues affecting advanced nursing practice. Nurse Practitioner 1999;24:16.
21. National Council of State Boards of Nursing. National Council State Boards of Nursing position paper on the licensure of advanced nursing practice. Chicago: Author, 1992.
22. Greco KE. Regulation of advanced nursing practice: part onesecond licensure. Oncol Nurs Forum 1995;22(Suppl):35.
23. Lindeke L, Mirr MP. Professional issues: licensure and certification, prescriptive privileges and reimbursement. In: Snyder M, Mirr MP, eds. Advanced practice nursing. 2nd ed. New York:
Springer, 1999:37.
24. McMillan SC, Huesinkveld KB, Spray JA, Murphy CM. Revising the blueprint for the AOCN examination using a role delineation study for advanced practice oncology nursing. Oncol Nurs
Forum 1999;26:529.
25. American College of Nurse Practitioners. Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement for NPs. ( http:/www.nurse.org/acnp/facts/reimbur.shtml), 1998.
26. Jacobs LA, Kreamer KM. The oncology clinical nurse specialist in a post-master's nurse practitioner program: a personal and professional journey. Oncol Nurs Forum 1997;24:1387.
27. Cobb MA. CNS role in women's health promotion and collaborative practice. Clinical Nurse Specialist 1998;12:112.
28. Kinney A, Hawkins R, Hudmon KS. A descriptive study of the role of the oncology nurse practitioner. Oncol Nurs Forum 1997;24:811.
29. Scott RA. A description of the roles, activities and skills of clinical nurse specialists in the United States. Clinical Nurse Specialist 1999;13:183.
30. McGivern DO, Mezey MD. Advanced practice nursing: preparation and clinical practice. In: Mezey MD, McGivern DO, eds. Nurse, nurse practitioners. 3rd ed. New York: Springer, 1999:3.
31. Galassi A. Role of the oncology advanced practice nurse. In: Groenwald S, Frogge M, Goodman M, Yarbro CH, eds. Cancer nursing principles and practice. 4th ed. Boston: Jones & Bartlett,
1997:1755.
32. Kaplow R. The role of the advanced practice nurse in the care of patients critically ill with cancer. AACN Clinical Issues 1996;7:120.
33. Daly BJ. The acute care nurse practitioner. New York: Springer, 1997.
34. Logan P. Principles and practice of acute care nurse practitioner. Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1999.
35. Suter S, Snow S. Integrating advanced practice nurses into in patient care. Oncol Nurs Forum 1999;26:975.
36. Haylock PJ. Home care for the person with cancer. Home Healthcare Nurse 1993;11:16.
37. Brant JM. The art of palliative care: living with hope, dying with dignity. Oncol Nurs Forum 1998;25:995.
38. Krammer LM, Muir JC, Gooding-Kellar N, Williams MB, vonGunten CF. Palliative care and oncology: opportunities for oncology nursing. Oncology Nursing Updates 1999;6:1.
39. Cooley ME, Lin EM, Hunter SW. The ambulatory oncology nurse's role. Seminars Oncol Nurs 1994;10:245.
40. Vooght S, Richardson A. A study to explore the role of a community oncology nurse specialist. Eur J Cancer Care 1996;5:217.
41. Poole K. The evolving role of the clinical nurse specialist within the comprehensive breast cancer centre. J Clin Nurs 1996;5:341.
42. Bodansky BE. The advanced practice nurse in radiation oncology. In: Dow KH, Bucholtz JD, Iwamoto R, Fieler V, Hilderley L, eds. Nursing care in radiation oncology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, 1997:377.
43. Hilderley LJ. Nurse-physician collaborative practice: the clinical nurse specialist in radiation oncology private practice. Oncol Nurs Forum 1991;18:585.
44. Moore GJ. Collaborative role of a nurse practitioner in a university radiation oncology department. Cancer Pract 1996;4:285.
45. Mast ME. Nurse practitioners help to provide quality cost-effective care to patients with cancer. ONS News 1998;13:1.
46. Sparks RK. The APN as educator. In: Snyder M, Mirr MP, eds. Advanced practice nursing. New York: Springer, 1999;117.
47. Bakke SI. Implementing the staff educator component of the oncology clinical nurse specialist. Oncol Nurs Forum 1992;19:607.
48. Gordon M, Murphy CP, Candee D, Hiltunen E. Clinical judgement: an integrated model. Adv Nurs Sci 1994;16:55.
49. Groenwald S, Frogge MH, Goodman M, Yarbro CH. Cancer nursing principles and practice. 4th ed. Boston: Jones & Bartlett, 1997.
50. Yarbro CH, Frogge MH, Goodman M. Cancer symptom management. 2nd ed. Boston: Jones & Bartlett, 1999.
51. McCorkle R, Grant M, Frank-Stromberg M, Baird SB. Cancer nursing: a comprehensive textbook. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1996.
52. Dow KH, Bucholtz KD, Iwamoto R, Fieler V, Hilderley L. Nursing care in radiation oncology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1997.
53. Dow KH. Contemporary issues in breast cancer. Boston: Jones & Bartlett, 1996.
54. Johnson BL, Gross J. Handbook of oncology nursing, 3rd ed. Boston: Jones & Bartlett, 1998.
55. Wilkes G, Barton Burke M, Ingwersen K. 2000 Oncology nursing drug handbook. Boston: Jones & Bartlett, 1999.
56. Itano JK, Taoka KN. Core curriculum for oncology nursing. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1998.
57. Rieger PT. Clinical handbook for biotherapy. Boston: Jones & Bartlett, 1999.
58. McGuire DB, Yarbro CH, Ferrell BR. Cancer pain management. 2nd ed. Boston: Jones & Bartlett, 1995.
59. Moore GJ. Women and cancer: a gynecologic oncology nursing perspective. Boston: Jones & Bartlett, 1997.
60. Varrichio C, Pierce M, Walker CL, Ades TB. A cancer sourcebook for nurses. 7th ed. Atlanta: American Cancer Society, 1997.
61. Shapiro TW, Davison DB, Rust DM. A clinical guide to stem cell and bone marrow transplantation. Boston: Jones & Bartlett, 1997.
62. King CR, Hinds PS. Quality of life from nursing and patient perspectives. Boston: Jones & Bartlett, 1998.
63. Winningham ML, Barton Burke M. Fatigue in cancer. Boston: Jones & Bartlett, 1999.
64. Moniken DR. Consultation in advanced practice nursing. In: Snyder M, Mirr MP, eds. Advanced practice nursing. 2nd ed. New York: Springer, 1999:149.
65. Hansen HE. The advanced practice nurse as a change agent. In: Snyder M, Mirr MP, eds. Advanced practice nursing. 2nd ed. New York: Springer, 1999:187.

66. Smith MS, Holcombe JK, Stullenbarger E. A meta-analysis of intervention effectiveness for symptom management in oncology nursing research. Oncol Nurs Forum 1994;21: 1201.
67. Winningham ML, Nail LN, Barton Burke M, et al. Fatigue and the cancer experience: the state of the knowledge. Oncol Nurs Forum 1994;21:23.
68. Bookbinder M, Goldstein ML, Derby S, et al. The research connection to quality care in the 21st century. Oncology Nursing Updates 1996;3:1.
69. Berger AM, Eilers JG, Heerman JA, et al. State-of-the-art patient care. The impact of doctorally prepared clinical nurses. Clinical Nurse Specialist 1999;13:259.
70. Goldberg NJ, Moch SD. An advanced practice nurse-nurse researcher collaborative model. Clinical Nurse Specialist 1998;12:251.
71. DiStasio SA, Hubbard SM. Principles of clinical research. In: Johnson BL, Gross J. Handbook of oncology nursing. 3rd ed. Boston: Jones & Bartlett, 1998:219.
72. Raybuck JA. The clinical nurse specialist as research coordinator in clinical drug trials. Clinical Nurse Specialist 1997;11:15.
73. Knox GE, et al. Downsizing, reengineering and patient safety: numbers, new-ness and resultant risk. J Health Risk Manag 1999;19:18.
74. Fischer DS, Alfano S, Knobf MT, Donovan C, Beaulieu N. Improving the cancer chemotherapy use process. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:3148.
75. Baggs JG, Schmitt MH. Collaboration between nurse and physicians. Image Journal Nursing Scholarship 1988;20:145.
76. Kavesh W. Physician and nurse practitioner relationships. In: Mezey MD, McGivern DO, eds. Nurses, nurse practitioners. 3rd ed. New York: Springer, 1999:186.
77. Neale J. Nurse practitioners and physicians: a collaborative practice. Clinical Nurse Specialist 1999;13:252.

CHAPTER 59 Ethical Issues in Oncology and Clinical Trials
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 59
Ethical Issues in Oncology and Clinical Trials
CHRISTOPHER DAUGHERTY
MARK SIEGLER
Introduction
Doctor–Patient Relationship and Clinical Medical Ethics
Informed Consent and Shared Decision Making
Prognosis Determination and Communication
Ethical Issues in the Care of Patients with Life-Threatening and Life-Ending Disease
Ethical Issues in Cancer Clinical Trials
Ethical Principles Guiding Clinical Research
Informed Consent for Clinical Research
Ethical Issues in Phase I Trials
Ethical Issues in Phase II Trials
Ethical Issues in Phase III Trials
Conclusions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
This chapter begins with an overview of clinical medical ethics and the doctor–patient relationship (DPR) and then examines ethical issues, primarily in medical
oncology, relating to both clinical care and clinical research. With regard to cancer clinical care, an effort has been made to cover those topics of greatest importance
to the cancer physician: informed consent and decision making; prognosis determination and communication; and ethical issues in the care of patient with
life-threatening and life-ending disease, including palliative care, advanced care planning, specific dilemmas related to providing end-of-life cancer care, and
physician-assisted suicide (PAS). In examining cancer clinical research, the chapter focuses on specific ethical principles that ought to guide such research; the
issues surrounding the concept and practice of informed consent for clinical trials; and the ethical issues and dilemmas associated with phase I, II, and III trials in
oncology. Wherever possible, available empiric research is used in an attempt to address, and even resolve, the ethical issues and dilemmas that arise in cancer care
and research settings.

ETHICAL ISSUES IN CANCER CLINICAL CARE
DOCTOR–PATIENT RELATIONSHIP AND CLINICAL MEDICAL ETHICS
To practice medicine competently and to provide high-quality care for cancer patients and others, physicians require both scientific and technical proficiency as well
as a working knowledge of medical ethics. 1 This specialized knowledge and proficiency is used to assist patients, sometimes by curing or managing their illness and
disease and sometimes by helping them overcome the fear, pain, and suffering that are often associated with illness. Competent physicians need not only practical
and technical skills, but also the ability to manage such issues as informed consent, decision making, as well as end-of-life and palliative care. A working knowledge
of practical ethics is not a substitute for the traditional standards of character and virtue expected of the good physician: competency, integrity, honesty, compassion,
and respect for patients and colleagues. Since 1985, medical ethics has emerged as a new and useful component of medical practice and has assisted physicians
and patients to reach ethically acceptable decisions. Clinical ethics focuses on how patients and physicians work within existing administrative, economic, and
political structures to reach mutual agreement on clinical decisions that affect the patient.
The DPR is at the center of clinical medical ethics. 2 Most day-to-day ethical problems that arise in patient care present in the context of the DPR and most are
resolved within this relationship. In the United States, the DPR has undergone two major changes in the past generation. Initially, in the 1970s and 1980s, the
relationship began evolving from a paternalistic one, in which physicians made choices for patients based on physicians' values, to a more equal relationship of
shared decision making, in which physicians advised patients, but patients ultimately made their own health care choices. Patient preferences are the ethical and
legal nucleus of the DPR. In addition, respect for patients and their preferences is a clinical obligation because patients who reach a shared health care decision have
greater trust and loyalty in the DPR, cooperate more fully to implement the shared decision, express greater satisfaction with their health care, and most important,
have been shown to have better clinical outcomes in several chronic diseases. 3
The second major change in the DPR has occurred more recently and relates to cost containment and managed care. To curtail health costs, private and government
payers for health care have attempted to limit the freedom of decision making of both patients and physicians. Such actions have given rise to new and recurring
ethical concerns within the DPR, as well as to potential repercussions 4 (e.g., the so-called patient bill of rights). Changes in the relationship between patients and
physicians to a more equal relationship of shared decision making demand attention to ethical issues such as honest disclosure, effective communication, and
informed consent.
Sound ethical analysis in clinical settings rests on a foundation of trust between the patient and physician, in other words, within the DPR. Crucial components in the
analysis of any ethical issue include an understanding by both parties of the medical and scientific facts; the preferences, values, and goals of both patient and the
physician; and the external constraints such as cost, limited resources, and legal duties that shape or restrict choices. 5 For instance, in the cancer setting, physicians
have the excellent opportunity to cement trust and reduce the chances of conflict arising with respect to end-of-life care decisions by communicating clearly with
patients about prognosis and treatment goals.
For a variety of reasons, ethical issues arise in oncology practice more frequently than in the past. Scientific advances and new technologies have raised
unprecedented ethical problems: When should efforts to prolong life with ventilators or dialysis machines be stopped? To what populations of patients should
potentially life-saving or life-prolonging (but highly toxic) therapies such as stem cell transplantation be applied? Changes in molecular medicine and genetics are
generating new and different ethical problems in such traditional areas as informed consent and confidentiality: Who should have access to an individual's results of
BRCA1 testing, and how should such information be used? Managed care has given rise to new ethical issues such as limitations on decision-making freedom for
patients and physicians, and potential financial conflicts of interest associated with limiting the use of health resources.
Despite scientific developments of the past century, and despite the financial changes alluded to, the role of the medical profession in human societies has changed
surprisingly little since the time of Hippocrates. In general, the DPR has also changed little and the encounter of healer and patient has remained the principal means
by which medicine achieves its goals. Several reasons explain the extraordinary continuity over time of the DPR: (1) Medicine serves a universal and unchanging
human need by responding to a patient's sense of illness or disease; (2) medicine has an unchanging central goal, which is to help patients; and (3) most medical
help is delivered in the direct encounter of patient and physician (i.e., in the DPR). It is hardly surprising, therefore, that the DPR is the context in which the important
ethical issues such as informed consent, decision making, prognosis communication, and the care of those with life-threatening and life-ending cancer diagnoses
(e.g., advanced care planning, end-of-life care, and PAS) must be examined.
INFORMED CONSENT AND SHARED DECISION MAKING
The process by which physicians and patients make decisions together is often summarized in the phrase informed consent. This doctrine, which reflects respect for
patients, is at the heart of the DPR and is based on the ethical principle of respect for individual autonomy, dignity, and self-determination. 6 Informed consent has
three key components: disclosure, competency, and voluntariness.
Disclosure means that physicians tell patients about the medical diagnosis, prognosis, and risks and benefits associated with possible treatment options. Patients are
entitled to enough information to permit them to ask reasonable questions about the diagnosis and the options that are available. Competency means that patients are

able to understand relevant information, appreciate their own needs and values, manipulate information rationally, and communicate a treatment choice.
Voluntariness means that a patient chooses freely, without coercion from the physician or anyone else.
Informed consent is not an event, nor does it refer to a patient's signature on a consent form. It is a process of continuous communication and dialogue between
doctor and patient. In this process, physicians can help to empower patients to act in an autonomous manner by educating them about the nature of their medical
problems and reasonable medical alternatives to resolve (or cope with) them. Patients are then in a position to choose treatment based on their own personal
preferences, values, and goals. This subsequently enables them to directly exercise their autonomy or control over treatment decisions. 7,8,9 and 10
From an ethical perspective, no cancer patient can make a truly informed decision about a particular plan of care until he or she has been made aware of, and
understands, the potential alternatives. For cancer patients and others, either in clinical research or receiving clinical care, disclosure by the patient's health care
provider of treatment alternatives is one of the central components of the informed consent process. 1,6,11 Such disclosure is essential if shared decision making is to
occur. 6,7 Patient participation is also advocated because it has been linked to better health outcomes, including decreased anxiety, increased patient satisfaction, and
improved compliance.3,12,13,14,15,16,17 and 18 Moreover, many practitioners believe that improvement in overall quality of life can occur only when patients are fully
informed of all reasonable alternatives and become equal partners in the decision-making process. 7,19
Decision Making versus Information Seeking
The idea that treatment decision making and information seeking are distinctive and separate components of the medical encounter has become increasingly
recognized within the doctor–patient communication literature. 14,20,21 Traditionally, the link between patients' desire for decision-making control has been assumed to
be directly related to their information-seeking patterns. 18,22,23 and 24 It has also been assumed that patients are unable to achieve more involvement in treatment
decision making because they have insufficient information. 22 Similarly, it has been expected that patients who want more control will also want more information
about their treatment options. 22 Conversely, those who are information seekers are assumed to prefer involvement in decision making because of their proactive
approach to maintaining their health. Increasingly, however, evidence suggests that, while patients generally express preferences for information about their illness
and treatment,11,18,22,23,24 and 25 they do not necessarily engage in information- seeking behaviors.25 Further, their preferences for participating in treatment decision may
vary and may not be linked to their wish for information. 24,25 and 26 In fact, several studies have shown no correlation between many cancer patients'
information-seeking and decision-making preferences 11,24,26 or between information seeking and their level of participation in actual treatment decisions. 27 Many other
variables seemingly unrelated to decision participation may also influence cancer patients' information-seeking patterns. 18,24,25,28
PROGNOSIS DETERMINATION AND COMMUNICATION
Considering the life-threatening severity of their illness, it is not unreasonable to assume that prognostic information would play a pivotal role in shaping the overall
medical decision-making process of cancer patients and lead to the most appropriate treatment decisions. In fact, from an ethical perspective, a discussion of
prognosis should be an integral and necessary part of the communication and decision-making processes for cancer patients. This is the case, in part, because
prognostic information has been shown to be significantly associated with cancer patients' treatment choices. 29 Nevertheless, several studies have suggested that
advanced cancer patients have an inadequate understanding of their prognoses, 29,30,31 and 32 with patients generally overestimating the probability of their long-term
survival. As well, many terminally ill cancer patients believe that the purpose of their treatment, even in the palliative care setting, is to cure them. 30,32,33 Despite this
available empiric data, it should be recognized that this issue (i.e., awareness of prognosis) remains a difficult one to study because patient anxiety, fear, and the
need to maintain hope in the face of a grave prognosis may affect advanced cancer patients' understanding of their prognoses. In addition, this research may be
limited because, from a methodologic standpoint, these same emotions may affect their measured responses to queries about their awareness of when they believe
they are going to die. Thus, these measured responses may not necessarily be an accurate reflection of cancer patients' true awareness of prognosis. Moreover, no
studies have examined the effect of physician anxiety and physician desire to help patients maintain hope on actual communication of prognoses to cancer patients.
Physician Disclosure of Prognosis
Early research, some of which dates from the 1940s and 1950s, examining physician communication with cancer patients, clearly documented a great reluctance to
disclose a cancer diagnosis and virtually no willingness to discuss prognosis. 34,35,36,37,38 and 39 Of those physicians surveyed in even the earliest of studies (most of
whom did not disclose a cancer diagnosis), the majority said they would disclose the diagnosis if there was no other way to get the patient to comply with a needed
diagnostic or therapeutic intervention. 34,35 Thus, it was not that cancer physicians did not wish to tell a diagnosis, but rather that they did not want to give a terminal
prognosis. Interestingly, improvements in nonsurgical methods of evaluation (predominantly including radiologic, i.e., computed tomographic scans, and lesser
invasive biopsy techniques) for confirming a cancer diagnosis have undoubtedly only resulted in the increasing need to better inform patients in order to obtain
compliance for more complicated interventions. In addition, during the interval between these studies of the 1940s and 1950s and the late 1970s, when full disclosure
of a cancer diagnosis had become the norm, 40 the perceived threat of a cancer diagnosis as a fatal disease has lessened. This is a result of multiple factors, including
community and public health education efforts toward early cancer detection, and the U. S. government's declaration of the “War on Cancer,” and the ever increasing
range of treatment options now available (including many with high rates of success). 41
Considering, and even in spite of, these events, it is still not difficult to imagine that physicians would remain reluctant to want to give a terminal prognosis. In fact,
with regard to current practices toward disclosure of prognosis to cancer patients, the limited available empiric data document that physicians withhold information. 42,43
Physicians would appear to be reluctant to disclose grim prognostic information for the same ethical and psychological reasons they traditionally withheld a
diagnosis. 39,44 Physicians may fear that the revelation of a grim prognosis would psychologically damage patients' hope to survive. 43,44 and 45 Physicians may also feel
discomfort when placing odds on survival, recurrence, and cure. Thus, while the behavior of physicians has changed regarding disclosure of diagnosis, only limited
information is available regarding whether they have changed in regard to practices of disclosure of prognosis.
While, from an ethical perspective, physicians have obligations to disclose a terminal prognosis, a question remains as to how such prognostic information ought to
be provided. 10,46,47 Some cancer patients may better understand their prognosis when it is discussed through the use of numeric descriptors, 48 whereas others
understand their prognoses when it is conveyed in qualitative descriptors. 49 Patients may also discern important information about their prognoses based on
physicians' use of euphemisms, vague estimations, and nonverbal or nonlinguistic cues, for example, tone of voice, word choice, extent of eye contact, and so forth. 43
Further, situational factors, including the seriousness of the disease, patient characteristics, and seniority of the physician, have been shown to influence the extent to
which physicians disclose prognostic information. 50 As mentioned, quantitative research has shown that patients generally have inaccurate estimates of their
prognoses. 29,30,31 and 32 Most studies investigating how physicians foresee cancer patients' prognoses reveal that physicians themselves are often overly and
incorrectly optimistic in their predictions of individual cancer patient survival. 51,52,53,54,55,56,57 and 58 Yet, how, and even whether, physicians' communication may
contribute to patient misunderstanding remains unknown.
How oncologists make decisions about presenting prognostic information is undoubtedly a complex process, potentially influenced by multiple factors, including the
patient's clinical condition and sociodemographics. As well, the physician's own sociocultural background may influence the depth and style of presenting prognostic
information. In addition, the relationships between a particular oncologist and patient, the perceived patient desire for control over medical decisions, and a patient's
information-seeking preferences may influence a physician's information-giving practices. An oncologist may provide more information about a patient's prognosis
when a patient requests it, or may present little information based on their understanding of a patient's psychological state.
ETHICAL ISSUES IN THE CARE OF PATIENTS WITH LIFE-THREATENING AND LIFE-ENDING DISEASE
Oncologists deal almost exclusively with patients with serious and life-threatening diseases, many of whom are terminally ill. It is therefore essential that oncologists
have a working knowledge regarding the ethical issues related to palliative care, advanced care planning, the specific dilemmas present in end-of-life cancer care,
and PAS.
Palliative Care
Oncologists must become experts in providing excellent palliative care, including both pain management and the relief of other symptoms such as nausea, dyspnea,
and anxiety. Although palliative care has often come to be specifically emphasized in the setting of end-of-life care, oncologists must be equipped to provide excellent

palliative care to all of their patients, not just to those who are terminally ill. For a complete discussion, see Chapter 56.1, Chapter 56.2, Chapter 56.3, Chapter 56.4,
Chapter 56.5, Chapter 56.6, Chapter 56.7.
Advance Care Planning
ADVANCE CARE PLANNING FOR AWAKE PATIENTS WITH DECISION-MAKING CAPACITY. When oncologists and patients reach joint decisions about a plan for diagnosis and

treatment, they are engaged in advance care planning. A fundamental ethical principle that underlies advance care planning is informed consent. Adult patients who
have decision-making capacity, sometimes referred to by the legal term competence, have a right to make their own health care choices after being provided with
appropriate information about the risks and benefits of reasonable alternative approaches. The principle of informed consent applies even to treatments that may be
necessary to save a patient's life. Competent adult patients have the ethical and legal right to decline, or ask to have discontinued, treatments that may be life-saving,
including intensive care unit care, life support measures such as dialysis and mechanical ventilation, and chemotherapy. Before accepting a patient's statement or
decision, physicians must assess the following: (1) Has the patient been provided with adequate information to make life and death choices? (2) Does the patient
understand the risks and benefits of the physician's recommendation and the alternatives? (3) Does the patient understand that the refusal of the proposed treatment
will result in death? (4) Why is the patient making the choice against treatment? (5) Does the patient have adequate decision-making capacity to make a life and
death choice?
None of these questions is easy to answer, but physicians nevertheless have a responsibility to make a good faith effort before acceding to a patient's wish to refuse
life-sustaining treatment. Sometimes consultations with colleagues, including psychiatrists, may be necessary to resolve the question of decision-making capacity. In
the end, however, the central principles of autonomy and patient rights mean that a competent patient may refuse life-sustaining treatment even if the physician
believes such a refusal is a bad choice or is not consistent with the patient's prior wishes or is morally wrong.
ADVANCE CARE PLANNING FOR PATIENTS WHO LACK DECISION-MAKING CAPACITY. Decision making for unconscious patients, or for patients who are conscious but lack

decision-making capacity, follows the same informed consent model as applies to competent adults. Essentially, incompetent patients are accorded the right to have
their previous wishes made known and acted on by their physicians. Advance care planning is a process in which patients, their families, and their physicians plan in
advance for treatment decisions, including decisions about life-sustaining treatment, that may have to made when the patient is no longer capable of participating in
the decision. During the past 30 years, the traditional approach used for advance care planning in the United States has involved formal, written advance directives
that indicate who should serve as the patient's proxy or surrogate and what end-of-life choices a patient would want if he or she were unable to participate in the
decision. In our view, advance directives have not been a successful strategy for achieving patients' wishes and goals. There are many reasons to explain the failure
of advance directives, but simply put, most people have not completed written advance directives and when they have, they are often overruled by a patient's family,
ignored by physicians, or simply misunderstood. 59
To achieve more successful advance care planning, written formal advance directives should not be exclusively relied on to make such extremely important decisions,
but rather oncologists should commit themselves to the process of advance care planning. The process, rather than the simple event of signing a written advance
directive form (sometimes months or years in advance of the need to make a decision), involves a series of conversations over time between the treating oncologist
and the patient (and often the patient's family) in which the patient's goals and preferences are discussed and clarified. Such conversations should always be specific
to the individual patient and to the actual clinical circumstances that are likely to be present at some near or distant future time when the patient may have lost
decision-making capacity.
These conversations should determine two things: (1) Who would the patient want to serve as a proxy decision maker if the patient were unable to make decisions?
(2) Based on the most likely future scenario for a particular patient, what choices would the patient want the surrogate to make (e.g., for aggressive or curative care,
palliative care, or focusing more exclusively on end-of-life care). These conversations should be documented in the physician's notes and such conversations likely
should occur on more than one occasion as the patient's clinical and life circumstances change. These are not easy conversations to have, and many physicians feel
ill prepared to discuss these matters with their patients. This is an educational and behavorial failure. Physicians must learn how to conduct these important
conversations. Good patient care requires that we advise and council our patients on what is possible and what is reasonable. The advance care planning process is
an opportunity to do that.
Ethical Dilemmas in End-of-Life Cancer Care
As previously discussed, in the setting of cancer care in which prognosis is known to result in eventual death (i.e., advanced cancer) how and when such prognoses
should be communicated remain matters of concern and controversy. In addition, several equally important concerns arise in the specific setting of advanced cancer
regarding how and when palliative care may be implemented, as opposed to care that includes further attempts with anticancer agents. For advanced cancer patients
who, by definition, have a life-ending diagnosis for which an anticancer standard of care has failed (or is unidentified), it remains unclear what factors influence their
decisions to receive any particular form of care. For the more than 500,000 advanced cancer patients who die each year in the United States, 60 from both societal and
medical perspectives, it is accepted that the ideal alternatives of care include receiving state-of-the-art palliative care, as available in hospice, and participation in
clinical research involving an experimental agent (e.g., phase I trials). For reasons to be discussed, because of the complexities related to predicting time to death in
those with advanced cancer, it may be difficult to know when referral to hospice might be appropriate or when it is still medically appropriate to continue attempts at
anticancer therapy, including experimental agents. 51,61,62,63 and 64
For advanced cancer patients to formally receive hospice care in the United States, through Medicare and insurance hospice benefits, they must be documented by
their physician as having a prognosis of 6 months or less. Interestingly, for cancer patients participating in phase I trials of experimental agents, their median survival
has been described as being almost identical to this prognostic milestone—6.5 months. 65 It is not clear which of these alternatives, experimental agents or hospice
care, results in longer life or improved quality of life. 52,66,67 and 68 As well, there is limited data on the cost effectiveness of these alternatives. 69,70,71 and 72
With regard to hospice care, as it is currently provided within third-party payer systems, it is clear that it remains greatly underused for advanced cancer patients. Only
approximately 20% to 30% of cancer patients die each year while under hospice care. In addition, available Medicare data have shown that the median survival of
cancer patients in hospice is only on the order of 2 to 3 weeks. 73 It has been argued that one of the obstacles to providing appropriate palliative care, as available in
hospice, is a result of physician inaccuracy in predicting time to death. 52,73,74 While this undoubtedly plays some role in many physicians' hesitancy (and even
unwillingness) to refer cancer patients to hospice, it does not provide a complete explanation for the apparent underuse of hospice services. Other reasons clearly
exist for this hesitancy and unwillingness including perceived dilemmas related to physicians' desire to effectively communicate terminal prognoses to cancer patients
and their families and still be able to facilitate the maintenance of hope; patients' and families' hesitancy or unwillingness to accept such prognoses; physician
concerns regarding loss of control over their patients' medical care; and concerns about the methods by which the majority of hospice care is paid for in the United
States, which may be insufficient to meet the needs of the dying.
Perceptions about damaging patient's and family's hope in the face of communicating a terminal prognosis remain a matter of concern among many clinicians. In fact,
many clinicians believe that if they were to effectively communicate a terminal prognosis to a patient, they would essentially destroy the patient's hope. 44 Many
physicians maintain that regardless of how sensitively or compassionately a terminal diagnosis is communicated, the ability of patients to sustain any meaningful hope
is compromised. The effect of this physician belief clearly creates obstacles to quality end-of-life care and should not be underestimated.
In addition, for patients and families to accept referral to hospice, they presumably must (in some way) accept a terminal prognosis. This may not necessarily have to
be the case, but patients or family members must sign consent forms for hospice care documenting that the terminal prognosis of the patient has been disclosed
(even understood), and that they wish to receive no further treatment aimed at reversing their cancer. In addition, they must sign an advance directive stating that they
wish no life-sustaining interventions be used in their care. Physicians often perceive that such disclosure of a terminal prognosis, and the requirements associated
with signing such forms, may also severely damage a patient's and family members' hopes. As well, physicians may believe, with patients and family members often
sharing this belief, that to agree to such care is to essentially give up. Patients are known to deny their terminal prognoses even in the face of explicit physician
disclosure. 75 If this is the case, it obviously will be more difficult, perhaps even unethical, to refer such patients to hospice who willingly choose not to accept their
terminal prognoses, as compared with those who have accepted their prognoses.
Some physicians and patients may also have fears or concerns regarding patient abandonment if and when they are referred to hospice. This may be the case in
settings in which a cancer patient has been receiving significant amounts of anticancer therapy (e.g., chemotherapy) for several months or years before the
recognition of a terminal prognosis. Now, with the introduction of the potential for hospice care, the care environment may be perceived as changing in dramatic ways.
For example, such patients will no longer be receiving chemotherapy, or undergoing the pattern of physician and nursing visits as they had previously. This may be

particularly true for those patients who have received their cancer care almost exclusively at hospitals or medical centers some distance from their homes or
communities. Traditionally, when patients are referred to hospice in the United States, they typically undergo fewer (if any) physician office visits, receiving the vast
majority of care in the home. Thus, patients may feel as though they are being abandoned by their physicians and health care providers. Some physicians may even
perceive this threat of abandonment (real or otherwise) within patients or family members and, as a result, not pursue the option of hospice care.
Even further complicating matters, physicians may develop conflicts of interests when an appropriate time comes when adequate palliative care could be provided in
hospice. These conflicts can relate to both financial and psychological issues. In a not uncommon example, consider a patient who is appropriate for referral to
hospice yet a physician continues to make medical decisions that involve chemotherapy and receives reimbursement for such care. Here, a physician may have
financial conflicts of interest and may be unwilling to refer to hospice for fear of lost income. Another more common (and perhaps more acceptable) example is
physicians may perceive referral to hospice as implying loss of decision control and may be unwilling to refer because they have psychological needs to maintain
decision control or maintain emotional attachments to their patients.
A final example of the dilemmas present in providing end-of-life care to advanced cancer patients relates to the Medicare and insurance benefits that exist to provide
reimbursement for hospice care in the United States. In 2000, such care is paid for through a per diem benefit, with the Medicare per diem being approximately $120 a
day (the actual rate depending on the region of the country in which the care is provided). A clear dilemma arises for some cancer patients, whose prognoses are
undoubtedly terminal (i.e., consistent with less than 6 months of life) but who may have an otherwise excellent performance status and show evidence for continuing
to benefit from rather expensive or aggressive palliative interventions. These might include such interventions as antibiotics, blood transfusions, and possibly even
chemotherapy in some specific circumstances, for example, palliative chemotherapy for pancreatic carcinoma, indolent breast cancer, hormone-refractory prostate
cancer, or those with hematologic malignancies. In these advanced cancer patient examples, such a per diem would not cover the costs of aggressive palliative care.
As a result, physicians may not ever refer certain populations of patients to hospice. Or, they may perceive that hospices are not particularly interested in caring for
such patients because of the high cost of such palliative interventions. Indeed, many hospices do have practical and appropriate concerns about cost containment.
Thus, for a hospice that is attempting to maintain its solvency and continue to care for many terminally ill patients, many aggressive interventions may be financially
prohibitive.
Some of the dilemmas present in providing end-of-life cancer care in the United States might be eliminated, or at least reduced in magnitude, by increasing or
restructuring the Medicare hospice benefit. 76 As well, continuing medical education programs designed at improving communication techniques among oncologists
may be effective in improving the ability of cancer physicians to communicate a terminal prognosis without the perceptions, real or otherwise, relating to the
destruction of patient and family hope. 77 However, as long as perceptions and beliefs (appropriate or otherwise) exist among physicians, patients, and families that to
accept (or disclose) a terminal cancer prognosis is equivalent to giving up hope, 78 there will likely always be hesitancy, resistance, and even unwillingness to accept
end-of-life care as it has been traditionally provided.
Physician-Assisted Suicide
Oncologists must be informed about PAS so they are prepared to discuss this controversial issue if it is raised by patients or their families. Whenever PAS is raised in
the clinical context, oncologists should be certain that the patient's pain is being controlled, that symptoms other than pain such as dyspnea, pruritus, and constipation
are adequately managed, that advance care planning has been done, and that the patient is given the opportunity to maintain control over his or her situation (e.g., by
being permitted to make medical choices).
RELEVANT DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONS. PAS is defined as a physician prescribing a lethal dose of medication, and sometimes providing technical advice to a

patient, who subsequently commits suicide without further assistance from the physician. The distinction between PAS and euthanasia is generally based on who
administers the lethal dose: the patient (in PAS) or the physician (in euthanasia). PAS also differs from a competent adult patient's right to decline life-sustaining
treatment in terms of the actual cause of death, the class of patients potentially affected by the practice, and the legality of the action. For example, PAS is currently
illegal except in Oregon, whereas the right of patients to decline or forgo life support is clinically, ethically, and legally the standard of care throughout the United
States.1 The final distinction is the most subtle one (i.e., between PAS and aggressive pain management as occurs when a morphine drip is hung). Essentially, if the
morphine drip is being used to palliate the patient's symptoms of pain, nausea, anxiety, and so forth, its use does not represent PAS, whereas if the morphine drip is
being used deliberately to hasten the patient's death or kill the patient, it probably represents euthanasia rather than PAS.
ARGUMENTS FOR AND AGAINST PHYSICIAN-ASSISTED SUICIDE. The strongest arguments favoring PAS are claims based on autonomy and beneficence. The autonomy

argument maintains that individuals have moral authority over their lives and should be permitted to control all aspects of life based on their own assessment of
benefits and burdens, including the timing and means of their deaths. In this context, patients not only have a right to refuse treatment but also have a right to request
PAS. Patients may exercise this choice if they are in pain, or are suffering, or perceive a loss of dignity, or indeed if they offer any reason, or none at all, for doing so.
The beneficence argument favoring PAS claims that the relief of pain and suffering is a central aspect of medical care and, therefore, PAS should be viewed as part of
the continuum of care to relieve a patient's pain and suffering. Patients who have received appropriate pain management and adequate palliative care, but who
continue to experience physical pain or unremitting suffering should be permitted to request PAS from compassionate physicians who are capable of providing the
means to end the patient's life painlessly and efficiently. 79
Both the autonomy and beneficent claims favoring PAS can be answered. The autonomy claim for PAS can be countered with the argument that no rights are
absolute and the demand to be assisted by physicians to commit suicide must be balanced against the clinical, psychological, legal, and moral prohibitions against
suicide and against assisting others to commit suicide. The central argument against the beneficence claim is that all physicians, especially oncologists who
frequently care for patients who experience pain, must improve their ability to provide better pain management and comfort for patients, but this intervention does not
have to include PAS.
Additional arguments against PAS are based on the following three risks of adverse consequences for individuals and for society:
The risk that those requesting PAS are clinically depressed.
The “slippery slope” risk that PAS may be performed in some patients who have not voluntarily requested it.
The risk that PAS may harm the DPR by undermining trust between patients and physicians.
PHYSICIAN-ASSISTED SUICIDE AND DEPRESSION. Depression rather than physical pain is often associated with patient requests for PAS. Among cancer patients,

depression is fairly common, probably two to four times more frequent than in the general population. Studies have found that 25% of cancer patients meet criteria for
major or minor depression,80 whereas another series reported that 25% of patients on palliative care services are depressed. 81 For these reasons, it is not surprising
that suicide rates among cancer patients are substantially higher than those among the general public. 82 Most important, as in other populations, there is a high
association between suicide and depression in cancer patients. 80,83,84 and 85 Among terminally ill patients with cancer, the disease often produces somatic symptoms of
depression (insomnia, anorexia, fatigue) and makes it difficult to reach a diagnosis of depression. Furthermore, many physicians view depression following a
diagnosis of cancer as appropriate, rather than as a symptom that needs treatment. Yet, depression among terminally ill patients can be treated with medications or
with counseling. Despite the prevalence of potentially treatable mood disorders, data from the Netherlands suggest that only 3% of requests for PAS resulted in a
psychiatric consultation. 86,87
These data suggest that many depressed oncology patients who express an interest in PAS may have a reversible condition, depression, that often is not diagnosed
and frequently is not treated. In addition, current safeguards in the Oregon PAS laws are inadequate and contain no mandatory requirement for a formal psychiatric
evaluation of the patient, even in cases in which the diagnosis of depression is suspected.
PHYSICIAN-ASSISTED SUICIDE AND THE SLIPPERY SLOPE. One potential slippery slope concern is encouraged PAS, in which chronically ill or terminally ill patients may

be encouraged or pressured by their families to choose PAS. In a benign variation of this approach, patients without direct coercion from their family may feel that the
availability of the PAS option requires them to do the noble thing to prevent becoming a burden to their families.
Data on PAS and the slippery slope have come primarily from the experiences in the Netherlands. One of the most important findings to emerge from the empiric
studies of Dutch practices regarding PAS and euthanasia concern the practice of voluntary euthanasia. A report commissioned by the Dutch government to
empirically evaluate the practice of euthanasia reported that there were approximately 2300 cases of euthanasia per year (1.8% of all deaths) and 400 cases of PAS

per year (0.3% of all deaths) in the Netherlands. 87 In addition, there were 1000 cases (0.8% of all deaths) in which patients received euthanasia either without
explicitly requesting it or while deemed incompetent to make such a request. 88 In 56% of these cases, the patient was no longer competent when euthanasia was
performed. Overall, 27% of Dutch physicians who were interviewed indicated that they had performed euthanasia at least once without an explicit voluntary request
for euthanasia by the patient.
These data suggest that in the Netherlands a slippery slope has developed in which euthanasia has been extended from competent adults who voluntarily request it
to incompetent patients (both adults and children) who have never made such a request. More recently, a group of Dutch physicians reported on the high complication
rate (23%) associated with efforts to perform PAS in 114 cases. 89 In 21 of the 114 cases (18%), the physician decided to administer a lethal medication, which thus
transformed the situation from PAS to actual direct euthanasia. This is another variation on the slippery slope that American physicians must be concerned with before
PAS is legalized generally. 90
Two studies of physicians in the state of Washington have been published to help characterize the current status of PAS in this country. In a 1994 study by Cohen
and colleagues of 938 physicians (69% response rate), 91 although 54% thought that euthanasia should be legal in some situations, nearly one-half agreed with the
statement that euthanasia is never ethically justified. Hematologists and oncologists were most likely to oppose PAS. Two years later, more research from Washington
reporting on actual requests for PAS and physician responses was published. 92 The major finding of this 828 physician survey study was that 12% had received one
or more explicit requests for PAS and 4% for euthanasia in the past year. The requests were generally from patients with cancer, neurologic disorders, and acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome. Patients requests were most often based on concerns about loss of control, being a burden to others, and loss of dignity. Physicians in
this study reported providing PAS in 24% of cases in which it had been requested and intended to provide PAS more often to patients with physical symptoms. The
authors express concern that physicians did not consult their colleagues in many cases, raising questions about the appropriate regulatory framework to ensure
quality in the evaluations of patient requests for physician-assisted death.
Further information regarding attitudes and practices regarding PAS in the United States is available form in an empiric, vignette-based study, by Emmanuel et al. The
investigators examined the experiences of the public, cancer patients, and oncologists. 93 In the setting of unremitting pain, approximately two-thirds of cancer patients
and the public found both euthanasia and PAS acceptable. They found it less acceptable in the setting of existential suffering, or in the setting in which there was the
potential for a patient to be a “burden on the family” (vignette wording). Among patients actually experiencing pain, they were more likely to find euthanasia and PAS
unacceptable. Among oncologists, more than one-half stated they had had a request for either euthanasia or PAS, and one in seven said they had performed either
practice at least once. In a related set of data, nearly one-half of these oncologists could imagine a situation in which they would want PAS or euthanasia for
themselves.94 These oncologists were more than twice as likely to find euthanasia or PAS acceptable for their patients, as compared with oncologists who could not
imagine a situation in which they would want PAS or euthanasia for themselves (86% vs. 42%, respectively). Many oncologists (42%) who would find PAS or
euthanasia unacceptable for themselves still found these practices ethical for their patients.
These data can be viewed as concerning as they suggest that there is significant, although not majority support, for the use of PAS and euthanasia in at least some
cancer care cases, and that as many as 15% of oncologists have carried out such practices at least once in their professional careers. Interestingly, in subsequent
research, Emmanuel found that some oncologists suffered adverse consequences (emotional or psychological) from having performed PAS or euthanasia. 95 Further
research is undoubtedly needed to better understand oncologists' attitudes to PAS and their perception of pain and suffering and their perceived obligations in helping
cancer patient to end their lives.
Another data source that is being closely scrutinized for evidence of the slippery slope derives from the experience in the state of Oregon, which legalized PAS on
October 27, 1997. During the first year of PAS activity, 23 persons requested lethal medications and 15 died after taking the medication. 96 Reports of the second-year
experience indicate that 33 persons requested lethal medications and 26 died after taking the medication. 97 In both years, the median age of the patients was 69 to
71; the most common underlying diagnosis was cancer; and the most common reasons for PAS were not physical pain but rather “loss of autonomy due to illness, loss
of control of bodily functions,” and a wish to determine and control the manner of one's death. Based on the first two reports from Oregon, the use of PAS occurs
infrequently and has generally involved patients who were well-insured, educated, and already in hospice programs. It is too soon to know whether vulnerable
populations will also be recruited to participate in Oregon's PAS initiative.
THREAT TO PROFESSIONAL INTEGRITY AND TRUST BETWEEN PATIENT AND PHYSICIAN. Cancer patients often have a heightened sense of their own mortality and a need

to trust a physician in a relationship that is based on honest communication but nurtures hope. 44 The conflation of the concept of healing with procedures designed to
bring about the patient's death creates a serious threat to the integrity of the medical profession. 98 PAS and euthanasia distort the fundamental norms of medicine in
at least three ways: (1) by diverting attention from the substantive issues of providing good care for dying patients; (2) by subverting the social role of the physician as
healer; and (3) by often undermining the trust that patients place in their physicians. Many patients benefit from knowing that PAS is not an option that their physician
would contemplate, and this reassurance strengthens the trust that cancer patients place in their doctors. Similarly, physicians efforts to prolong life and aggressively
relieve pain and suffering are bolstered by the fundamental prohibition against actively ending the lives of their patients with PAS and euthanasia.
Based on our analysis of the scanty but worrying data on these practices (especially those available from the Netherlands), along with our view that PAS and
euthanasia will ultimately weaken, not strengthen, the relationship of oncologists and patients and will attenuate the fundamental prohibition against killing in the
medical context, we recommend that at this time oncologists resist appeals to participate in PAS and euthanasia.

ETHICAL ISSUES IN CANCER CLINICAL TRIALS
This section of the chapter examines the ethical issues associated with the clinical research of cancer. Following a brief overview of certain principles that guide the
ethical conduct of clinical research, the chapter discusses the history and development of ethical guidelines and requirements regarding human experimentation.
Further discussion and background pertaining to the concept and process of informed consent as it specifically relates to cancer patients and clinical research,
including the use of consent forms for research, is also provided. The ethical aspects of clinical trials in oncology, including phase I, II, and III studies, are then
examined. Wherever possible, empiric information is incorporated into these discussions from research on the informed consent and clinical trial process in cancer.
ETHICAL PRINCIPLES GUIDING CLINICAL RESEARCH
The main objective of clinical research in oncology is to improve medical care for future cancer patients. From both a societal and ethical perspective, this is viewed
as a laudable and important goal. As such, no meaningful criticisms can truly be offered against the need and desire to better care for those with cancer. However,
when one examines the methods by which this goal is pursued, problematic issues can be found. As is discussed, it is the process of using current patients as
research subjects to achieve this goal in which true ethical dilemmas are created.
Whether in the context of clinical practice or clinical research, several specific principles guide the management of patients by physicians. 99,100 The first such principle
worthy of mention in this context is, “One ought not to use others as means to an end.” In the process of clinical research this general ethical principle is, in many
ways, allowed to be violated. However, to allow violation of this principle, it is expected that no patient can participate as a research subject unless there is the
potential for benefit. No doubt, in considering what is an acceptable degree of potential benefit, this safeguard is in place for a great proportion of clinical research.
(Here, benefit is implied as it is traditionally measured in oncology, i.e., as a specific anticancer response or improvement in a patient–subject's symptoms.) However,
as is discussed in the section regarding phase I trials (see Ethical Issues in Phase I Trials , later in this chapter), ethical dilemmas that challenge this safeguard are
created in the early drug development process in which the potential for such benefit may be exceedingly small for involved cancer patients.
A second related ethical principle that must guide behavior in the research setting is, “One should not allow harm to come to others.” Certainly, oversimplification or
generalization of this principle would lead to the prohibition of specific patterns of behavior in the clinical (nonresearch) setting of cancer care, where the harm from
toxicities is deemed acceptable because of the known benefits to be achieved. Thus, as with the first principle mentioned, the specific issue of harm cannot truly be
weighed without consideration of the relative benefit that may be achieved for cancer patients. However, when cancer patients participate as research subjects in
early clinical trials of anticancer agents, there is a greater relative potential for harm to come to patients as a result of the specific methodologies and research
objectives employed in these trials. In addition to the recognition that benefit is not likely, there is even an expectation that harm will come. In fact, it may even be a
goal of the study to produce harm. The safeguard that must be in place to allow violation of this principle is that the potential for harm to participating subjects must be
warranted either as a result of the potential benefits to be achieved or (more commonly) that, given the circumstances of many advanced cancer patients participating
in such trials, there are perceived to be no other available meaningful anticancer alternatives.

A third ethical principle that guides behavior in this context is, “One ought never to deceive others.” Within clinical research, several safeguards are in place that are
designed to prevent the deception of patients who become the subjects of research. The informed consent process itself, and other federal and institutional
regulations, provide mechanisms in which oversight of both specific research protocols and the described methods of information provision are present to prevent any
intentional deception of patients. More importantly, the conscientious communication efforts of participating physician–investigators are also relied on to prevent
deception. However, in the setting of early trials of investigational agents, in which research subjects are most often those with far advanced disease, many have
wondered about the potential vulnerability of these subjects and the potential for them to be unintentionally deceived. Indeed, the very fact that the agents under study
in early drug trials have shown promise in preclinical models creates a variety of stated or unstated inducements that may play on some advanced cancer patients
potentially overwhelming desire for therapeutic benefit and lead to a process akin to deception, albeit unintentional.
In a final principle worthy of mention, medical ethics itself teaches us that, “The interests of an individual physician's patient should be placed above the interests of
others.” One can easily argue that placing a cancer patient on a clinical trial involving a new investigational agent does not at all compromise their interest in receiving
state-of-the-art care. However, one must keep in mind that the overall goal of clinical research (improving care for future patients) remains intact whenever a patient
enters a clinical trial. Thus, at the very least, other interests beyond the individual care of a patient are present when that patient enters a clinical trial. As is discussed,
these potentially competing interests can lead to dilemmas. Further insight into these issues and dilemmas can be gained by specifically examining the early phases
of cancer clinical research and the attendant informed consent process.
INFORMED CONSENT FOR CLINICAL RESEARCH
The concept of informed consent, which acknowledges the rights of patients to voluntarily participate in health care, applies both to clinical practice and clinical
research.6,101 Informed consent in clinical research is related to, but recognized as being more stringent than, informed consent outside the context of clinical trials. 102
This heightened consent standard exists for at least two reasons. First, from an ethical perspective, a patient considering clinical trial participation is always viewed as
potentially vulnerable. 103 As a result of this potential vulnerability, he or she may have great difficulty in appreciating the differences between the therapeutic and
research aspects of a given alternative of care or treatment. Without this distinction, patients cannot make uncoerced and autonomous health care decisions. Thus,
the informed consent process, and the ethics of clinical research, require that such a clear distinction be made. 8,104 Second, the physician–investigator is seen as
having an intrinsic conflict of interest in the role both as a physician for an individual patient and as a scientific investigator attempting to develop improved methods of
medical care and treatment.102,103,105 As previously mentioned, within the sole context of a therapeutic relationship, the physician places his or her patients' interests
above all else. 1 However, within the context of clinical research, investigators have additional interests that may not be relative to their patients'
interests.105,106,107,108,109 and 110 From an ethical perspective, many concerns exist about the ability of clinical investigators to provide the requisite information to patients
regarding participation in research in such a way that allows patients to recognize the distinction between research and therapy. 8,111,112 and 113
A definition of informed consent for clinical research that encompasses all relevant aspects of the process remains somewhat elusive, with varying definitions having
been described. 6,101,102 and 103 Generally, it is viewed as a process of communication between a patient–subject and a clinician–investigator regarding an investigational
or experimental treatment. Within this communication process, several elements must be disclosed. These include the disclosure of the type of research to be
performed, the risks and benefits of the treatment or research, the unproven nature of the research, the alternatives other than participation in the clinical trial, and
finally, disclosure of the subject's freedom to withdraw or not to participate in the research without any detrimental effect on the patient's continued access to adequate
health care. Separate from the issue of disclosure within this process is the issue of actual understanding on the part of the patient with regard to these disclosed
elements. Whether the definition of informed consent should include an actual understanding of these elements, or how much of an understanding it should include,
remain matters of controversy.6,112,114 However, from an ethical standpoint it is accepted that the process of informed consent requires at least some attempt on the
part of the clinician–investigator to help a patient understand those aspects of the consent process that have been disclosed so that the patient may autonomously
and voluntarily decide to participate in research. 100,115 Other elements that have been described as important parts of the informed consent process include
maintaining the confidentiality of a research subject's participation and, controversially, possible disclosure of potential conflicts of interest on the part of the
clinician–investigator.
In an attempt to emphasize the importance of the distinctions between research and therapy, most ethical regulations governing clinical research have focused on the
informed consent process as a means of protecting potentially vulnerable research subjects from physical and psychological harm. 102,103,113 These regulations have
relied heavily on written informed consent documents to achieve full disclosure of the important elements of consent, including the risks of research participation, the
nature of the research, and alternatives to research participation. Thus, informed consent is currently and most commonly viewed as a means of protection of a
potentially vulnerable research subject from harm. 102,103 However, from their inception to the present day, many critics have recognized the imperfect nature of the
methods used to regulate the informed consent process. 112,116,117,118,119 and 120 More recent empiric research on informed consent, a great proportion of which as been
conducted in the cancer setting, may be helpful in attempting to objectively identify the current problems and deficiencies associated with written consent documents
and their oversight. As reviewed elsewhere, several studies reported since 1980 have increasingly demonstrated that although regulations are being followed,
informed consent documents have become increasingly unreadable, lengthy, and uninformative. 121,122 and 123 Indeed, they may actually be interfering with what might
otherwise be an ethically appropriate informed consent process for patients, including not only those with cancer, but any patient considering therapeutic clinical trial
participation.
Shaping of the Regulatory Process for Consent
Beginning in the 1960s, several events occurred that significantly changed the practice and process of informed consent in therapeutic research. One of the most
important events, and clearly of greatest significance with regard to cancer and other related therapeutic research, was the publication of Henry Beecher's paper in
the New England Journal of Medicine in 1966.124 Beecher, a clinical investigator and anesthesiologist at Harvard, assembled 22 recent research reports that he pulled
from the peer-reviewed medical literature that contained, in his view, clear violations of both patients' human rights and the recognized ethical principles of informed
consent. Of note, several of the research reports that he described were specifically related to cancer clinical research. One such case was a published report
regarding a young woman with metastatic melanoma. In this report, the investigators described excising one of the melanoma lesions from the patient and
transplanting it onto the patient's mother. Subsequently, serum was withdrawn from the mother and given to the patient in hopes of producing an immune-mediated
tumor response. The patient went on to die relatively quickly of widespread metastatic disease. Even more horrific, the mother subsequently died of metastatic
melanoma approximately 1 year later. Another of Beecher's examples, although described without identifiers, clearly included the much publicized case of the Jewish
Chronic Disease Hospital. 111 Researchers in this published study, in an attempt to gain information relevant to organ transplantation, injected malignant cells from
cancer patients into elderly and debilitated noncancer patients at the hospital.
Beecher's cancer research examples, and the other reports described, put a great deal of the medical research process into the public spotlight. The subsequent
outcry from the public and medical community led to regulations in the late 1960s and early 1970s that resulted in greatly increased scrutiny of government-sponsored
clinical research. 102,111,125 Clinical researchers themselves undoubtedly became more sensitive to the issues regarding the use of patients, including those with cancer
and others, as research subjects. Other events, including the disclosure to the public regarding the United States Public Health Service Syphilis Studies (also known
as the Tuskegee Syphilis Study) 96,102,126 as well as the thalidomide experience and subsequent passage of the 1962 amendments to the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act, 127 also had a great effect on the regulatory requirements for informed consent in clinical research. All of these events eventually led to the creation of the National
Commission for the protection of human subjects in biomedical and behavioral research. The resulting recommendations of the National Commission led to the now
required and pervasive practice of formalized institutional review of clinical research protocols. 103
Undoubtedly, the use of consent forms for clinical trials of new anticancer agents is one such setting in which these issues take on great significance, especially if we
are to continue to recognize the value of patient–subject autonomy and the moral importance of the consent process as a mechanism of protection for potentially
vulnerable patients attempting to make difficult decisions regarding their medical care. Separate from the content of the consent forms themselves, concerns also exist
about the overall effect of the forms on different aspects of the consent process, including its outcome and the decision-making process of patients before the
eventual decision to actually participate in a therapeutic clinical trial.
In the clinical trial setting, several studies have examined the potential effect of different information-provision methods on the informed consent process. 10,128,129 and 130
It is interesting to note that in a review by Edwards et al. of different methods of information provision in clinical trials across the entire spectrum of disease
processes,130 nearly 60% of these studies were conducted by cancer investigators and focused on clinical trials involving cancer patients as research subjects. In the
review by Edwards et al., and as evidenced by the previously mentioned research, despite the format of presentation, information provision may have little effect on

patient–subject understanding. Other significant research contributions within the cancer setting to the informed consent literature can be found elsewhere. 121,122,129
In considering this available empiric data, one is certainly left to wonder about the utility and value of the current consent process for therapeutic clinical trials.
Particular concerns develop when one recognizes that great emphasis continues to be placed on consent forms and their content. Such concerns become even more
challenging in areas in which consent forms detail investigational therapies with relatively extreme toxicities, and in which the therapeutic goals of the alternatives to
clinical trial participation may be quite different from the inherent or perceived goals of investigational therapy.
ETHICAL ISSUES IN PHASE I TRIALS
It is in the specific setting of cancer trials involving new agents (i.e., phase I trials) in which the general concerns about informed consent in therapeutic clinical trials
become especially troubling and challenging. 103,131,132 and 133 This is because phase I trials typically involve patients with advanced, eventually life-ending disease in a
research endeavor where the chance of meaningful objective therapeutic benefit has traditionally been described as being quite low, less than 5%. 134,135,136 and 137 As a
result of the dose-escalation methods in these trials, 131 a more specific dilemma is the relative ratio of toxicity and benefit for patients who participate. Further
complicating this is the need to adequately inform patients about these particular issues and then allow them to willingly and freely consent to participate in such
studies. The complexities of the consent process for advanced cancer patients in phase I trials relate both to what degree such patients should be viewed as
vulnerable, and to what extent a participating physician's own expectations and interests play a role in guiding patients to decide to participate. This unique form of
therapeutic clinical research creates an intense environment of medical decision making in which arguably, many patients may not benefit from the traditional
informed consent process.
If patients were to participate in phase I trials solely for altruistic reasons, in other words, to help forward cancer research and potentially help future cancer patients,
phase I trials would probably carry less ethical conflict. As well, this would imply that the traditional informed consent process might more readily achieve the desired
ideal outcome of understanding all elements of consent, including an understanding of the nature of phase I research and the alternatives to trial participation, as
these less vulnerable patients would not necessarily be seeking benefit for themselves. However, the objective information available regarding the informed consent
process for patients participating as research subjects in phase I trials tells us that altruism is not the primary motivating factor for patients participating in such clinical
research. As reviewed in this section, the empiric studies examining the phase I consent process highlight the true ethical dilemmas associated with this early stage of
clinical research.
In the first such study, Rodenhuis et al. evaluated the quality of informed consent among patients with advanced cancer who were offered participation in a phase I
trial.138 The majority of patients who gave their consent was motivated either by hope for improvement of their condition, pressure exerted by relatives and friends, or
simply because they felt they had “no choice.” Some patients did mention the desire to contribute to the progress of medicine. The investigators concluded that
encouragement by relatives or friends appears to be a powerful force in motivating some patients to participate in phase I trials. In a similar but much smaller series of
European advanced cancer patients, Willem and Sessa found corroborating results with regard to patient motivations for participation in such trials. 139
Investigators at the University of Chicago conducted an in-depth survey study of 27 cancer patients who had given informed consent to participate in phase I trials at
their institution. 33 Concurrently, the oncologists identified by the surveyed patients as responsible for their care and consent were surveyed as well. Eighty-five
percent of patients decided to participate in a phase I trial for reasons of possible therapeutic benefit, 11% because of the advice or trust of physicians, and 4%
because of family pressure. Ninety-three percent said they understood all (33%) or most (60%) of the information provided to them about the trial in which they had
decided to participate. Only 33% were able to state the purpose of the trial in which they were participating, with patients able to state the purpose of phase I trials as
dose-escalation or dose-finding studies being more educated ( P = .01). The surveyed oncologists had wide ranging beliefs regarding expectations of possible benefits
and toxicities for their patients participating in a phase I trial. The authors concluded that patients who participate in phase I trials are almost exclusively motivated by
the hope of therapeutic benefit. Altruistic feelings, while perhaps present, appear to have a limited role in motivating patients to participate in these trials. Subsequent
studies conducted by these investigators in a much larger series of subjects have found similar findings. In fact, in larger series of subjects, quantifiable survey data
show that patients may even be less aware of the research purposes of phase I trials and are unable to recall whether alternatives to clinical trial participation,
including palliative care or other nonexperimental therapies, were either discussed with or disclosed to them. 140 This is despite the fact that all surveyed patients had
signed consent forms detailing the research purpose of phase I trials and the alternatives to trial participation.
Tomamichel and colleagues conducted an analysis of the communication process involved in informed consent for cancer patients agreeing to participate in phase I
trials.141 The authors concluded that the informed consent procedure was satisfactory from a quantitative point of view. Interestingly, they found that the most
important items of information were acceptably communicated to patients. However, they also stated that greater attention should be paid to the indirect messages
and implied criticism of patients to improve their participation in decision making. They also conclude that physicians should become more skillful in providing
adequate information and to improve their methods of communication.
Yoder and colleagues conducted a prospective study involving entry and exit interviews of 37 advanced cancer patients participating in phase I trials. 142 The
investigators found that patients expected slightly increased support from family members and received more support than expected. Perhaps not surprisingly,
patients' expectations for tumor response and increased communication with their physician were not met. Their expectations were also not met with regard to
improvement of symptoms such as fatigue, nausea and vomiting, and weight loss. They noted that one strong theme that emerged from the data was hope and
optimism. They conclude that an issue that needs further exploration is the extent to which patients accurately understand information in the consent form and in the
consent process itself. Their findings also support the importance of communication between the patient and family and all members of the health care team, and
stress the importance of oncology nurses who may be able to mediate the flow of information between physicians and patients.
Research results providing a cross-cultural perspective are available as well. Japanese investigators, conducting a similar study, attempted to characterize the
motivation, comprehension, and expectations of patients who had given informed consent to participate in phase I trials at the National Cancer Center in Japan. 143
Before receiving any investigational agents, 32 of 33 subjects were approached and completed a multiple choice questionnaire addressing these issues. When
questioned regarding their expectations, more than one-half the subjects indicated that there might be personal benefit to themselves. As well, slightly more than
one-third of the subjects (35%) believed that it was possible that their cancer could be cured, and 12 subjects fully expected to be cured as a result of participation in
a phase I trial. The investigators found that older adults had slightly higher expectations of cure from participation in a phase I trial (although this did not reach
statistical significance). With closed ended questioning, most patients appeared to comprehend the major features of a phase I trial, namely its investigational nature,
the unknown effects of the agent investigated, and the unclear benefit to themselves. As well, nearly 60% of the patients anticipated they might suffer severe or
life-threatening side effects from participation. As many as 43% of subjects were able to accurately indicate (again, in closed ended questioning) the research purpose
of a phase I trial as a dose-determination study.
One disturbing finding from these studies is the potential discrepancies among what has been disclosed to patients, what they think they understand, and what they
may actually understand. For example, the University of Chicago study found that 90% of patients stated they understood all or most of the information provided to
them about the phase I trial in which they had agreed to participate. 33 However, only approximately one-third of the patients could state the purpose of a phase I trial,
and an even smaller proportion of patients could state the research purpose of phase I trials in a much larger study. 140 This discrepancy likely results from several
factors, including inadequate informed consent. It may also lie in the methodologic difficulties of determining what a patient actually understands in relation to the
information they have been given.
The information gained from this research strongly supports the argument that the current process of obtaining informed consent for phase I trials may be inadequate
to appropriately ensure that such advanced cancer patients understand both the nature of the research in which they are participating and the alternatives to trial
participation. In addition, despite recognizing the existence of their potential vulnerability, we do not know how that vulnerability specifically affects an advanced
cancer patient's ability to give what is otherwise perceived to be adequate informed consent. It is possible that several poorly understood and seldom studied factors
play a vital role in shaping the informed consent process for potentially vulnerable advanced cancer patients considering participation in phase I trials. These likely
include relatively subtle and less apparent factors as may exist in other health care decision-making environments for advanced cancer patients, for example, a
patient's awareness of the certainty of his or her death 42,78,144 and the patient's cultural and ethnic background. 145 In addition, advanced cancer patients' religious or
spiritual beliefs, their degree of hope and emotional well-being, and their attitudes toward medical decision making may likely influence the shape of the consent
process in this setting. Further research will be required to better understand and delineate these issues and their importance on the informed consent process in this
difficult and highly charged setting.

ETHICAL ISSUES IN PHASE II TRIALS
Some of the ethical issues related to phase II trials of new agents are similar to issues in phase I trials with regard to the participation of human subjects with
otherwise incurable illnesses in biomedical research and the potential vulnerability of these patients in seeking therapy. 131,132 and 133 Although still troubling, issues in
phase II trials can be viewed as potentially less complex for several reasons. In the phase II setting, there is less of the unknown for both oncologist–investigator and
patient, as all agents studied in phase II trials have completed toxicity finding and dose-determination (phase I) studies. Thus, there may be greater attitudes of
certainty with regard to expected toxicities. There may also be greater hope or expectations of benefit, in part because these agents are being administered at or near
the maximum tolerated dose. Therefore, one unique issue in the phase II trial is the higher likelihood of toxicity developing for all patients in a trial, as they are being
administered agents at relatively higher doses, as compared with patients in a prior phase I study investigating the same agents. The intentions and motivations of a
participating oncologist, in the role of physician–healer or physician–investigator, are central issues in both phase I and II trials. Again, however, expectations or hope
of benefit for their patients may be greater in the phase II setting. This may translate into greater therapeutic intent and subsequently be communicated to patients,
resulting in greater expectations or hopes on their part as well.
Although these issues may be less complex and more easily examined in the phase II setting involving new agents, they are still troubling as there is an overall low
probability of benefit with regard to tumor responses in these trials. 146 In fact, this concern may actually increase even as a phase II study is accruing patient–subjects.
This relates to the accepted statistical requirements of phase II trials of new agents that are present to exclude, with an accepted amount of certainty or confidence, a
low level of efficacy for a new agent. 147 Traditional stopping rules for many phase II trials would allow as many as 14 consecutive nonresponders to accrue to a trial
before concluding that the agent lacks disease-specific efficacy. Yet, physician–investigators' attitudes and beliefs may change significantly with regard to an agent
under study as response data accumulate that suggest a lack of efficacy, but the trial remains open in order to reach the statistically required accrual.
How should evolving data be handled during a phase II trial that suggests a lack of efficacy, but is not sufficiently substantiated from a statistical standpoint? In a
study of even a small number of patients, if an agent is given to initial patient–subjects without apparent benefits or tumor responses, but not enough patients have
been involved to satisfy statistical requirements, what information should be provided to prospective patient–subjects? For example, in a simple phase II single-agent
study seeking to accrue 14 to 20 patients, if six evaluable patient–subjects have been administered the agent and are known to have not received any apparent
benefits, what should the informed consent process consist of for prospective patient–subjects with regard to risks and benefits?
We know oncologists' attitudes, perceptions, and biases toward clinical trial chemotherapy may substantially affect clinical trial accrual. 148,149 and 150 These factors are
likely to be important for phase II trial accrual. How oncologists, either as investigators or practitioners, interpret clinical trial data from ongoing trials could have a
significant effect on their views toward continued accrual. How oncologists assimilate this information and communicate it to prospective cancer patient–subjects likely
changes over the course of a trial. Yet, the consent forms for such trials are almost always static, potentially leading to subjects receiving conflicting information. As
well, oncologists' enthusiasm or beliefs toward the potential efficacy of an agent may decline as information is acquired regarding nonresponders. What is troubling
about this is that, quite often, accrual will continue unabated using the same consent process until the statistical requirements for accrual have been satisfied. This
may well be justified in order to establish confidence regarding lack of efficacy of a new agent in a specific disease, but the potential dilemma remains and is no less
troubling. Some might argue that as nonresponse information accumulates, such declining enthusiasm for a new agent should be allowed to affect accrual and should
be uniformly communicated to prospective patient–subjects. However, traditionally, after the initiation of a phase II trial, subsequent patients are accrued with little
formal response or toxicity information available to prospective subjects about prior evaluable patients in the trial. Interestingly, if such information could be fully and
appropriately withheld from involved clinician–investigators, some of the described dilemmas in phase II trials might resolve themselves. As well, if one could
guarantee an unprecedented quick rate of accrual of all the subjects necessary to meet the statistical requirements to a phase II trial, these dilemmas could potentially
be less challenging. Practically speaking, these actions are not likely to be routinely achievable. Research on these issues in the phase II setting is needed.
ETHICAL ISSUES IN PHASE III TRIALS
Although ethical issues are present throughout all phases of clinical research, and early trials of new agents certainly present troubling dilemmas, it is randomized
phase III trials that have undergone the most intense scrutiny. Indeed, much of this scrutiny has centered on the randomized trial process specifically in cancer clinical
research. The overall informed consent process in phase III trials and, more specifically, how disclosure to potential subjects regarding the randomization process
itself should be conducted, remain issues of controversy. An even more basic and primary ethical concern is the application of the phase III trial design itself, with
much debate and controversy focused on when, rather than if, it is ethically appropriate to perform randomized comparative trials. Indeed, no ethical arguments have
been made against the actual intended goals of phase III trials. Rather, it is phase III methodology, in which patient–subjects are randomly assigned to receive either
an investigational therapy or a standard of care, that has caused concerns for some. 151,152,153,154,155,156 and 157 Such concerns deal with a perceived dilemma for the
treating physician of a specific patient, and whether the physician's therapeutic responsibilities to that individual patient overwhelm any responsibilities to clinical
research and the needs to improve medical care for future patients. Some have described this as a potential conflict that arises between the physician as investigator
and the physician as healer for an individual patient. 110,155,156 Supporters of this view have argued that the responsibilities of the physician as healer carry far greater
moral weight than those of the physician as investigator, to the extent that it becomes unethical to allow a random process to be the determining factor in what therapy
a patient receives. Complicating this further is the fact that in the phase III setting the lines separating research from therapy are sometimes less clear. 8,104,153
Much of the debate regarding ethical issues in phase III trials has centered around the issue of equipoise. As originally defined by Fried, 158equipoise is viewed as a state
of genuine uncertainty on the part of a clinical investigator or treating physician regarding the comparative merits of different treatments for a patient's specific disease
process, such as cancer. Some have argued that equipoise must exist for an individual investigator or physician in regard to an individual patient, in order that he or
she can ethically ask (or encourage) that patient to participate in an appropriately designed phase III trial. Others have argued that a broader definition of equipoise
be accepted to justify randomized phase III trials; specifically, that clinical equipoise need not exist for an individual physician or investigator, but need only exist
within a specified medical community.159,160 and 161 In the cancer setting, clinicians, researchers, and ethicists have debated this issue of equipoise (whether it should be
applied as an individual versus a community standard), and whether randomized studies are ethical at all. 155 The empiric research available from the cancer setting
strongly suggests that the issue of equipoise remains quite unresolved for investigators, clinicians, and even patients. 162,163,164,165,166,167,168 and 169 The available
evidence also suggests that many oncologists view the informed consent process requirements within randomized clinical trials as too cumbersome or potentially
threatening to the patient, DPR, or both to the extent that they are a significant obstacle to patient accrual to phase III trials. 162,163,168
Keeping this issue of equipoise in mind, and returning to the process of informed consent in phase III trials, Freedman has quite rationally argued that an individual
physician or investigator is not the sole arbiter of appropriate or acceptable medical practice. 159 Rather, the medical community as a whole determines equipoise and,
as long as equipoise truly exists, an individual physician can remain ethically and morally justified in consenting patients to participate in a phase III trial, even if the
physician is not in equipoise. With regard to the informed consent process itself, Royall has extended this argument, noting that in situations involving an autonomous
patient, the decision to participate in a randomized study does not rest with the physician but with the patient. 170 This is certainly the case as long as an adequate
(perhaps ideal) process of informed consent can be carried out, including full disclosure of alternatives to randomized trial participation. Royall argues that what is
needed for randomized trials to be justifiably conducted, beyond the presence of medical uncertainty (or equipoise) regarding particular therapies, is not physicians
without preferences. Rather, it is patients who are informed of the uncertainty (i.e., the existence of perceived equipoise and are autonomously willing to consent to
randomization). Thus, within the context of phase III trials, the informed consent process becomes one of utmost importance. In the cancer setting this may be
especially true because of the life-threatening nature of these diseases and the relative toxicities of potential therapies contained within arms of many randomized
trials.
Some efforts have been undertaken to examine different methods of obtaining consent for randomized trials and the effect of these methods on the quality of
consent.171,172 and 173 Many of these investigators have examined alternatives to the conventional methods of informed consent for phase III trials (i.e., in which subjects
are first consented to the trial and then randomized to either standard or experimental treatment). The alternatives to this conventional method of consent and
randomization include so-called preconsent randomization, where subjects are first randomized to one arm of the trial and then asked to consent to participation.
As reviewed by Altman and colleagues, 174 and originally proposed by Zelen, 175 these alternatives include single- and double-randomized consent designs. In the
single-randomized consent design, eligible subjects are first randomized to one of the treatment arms under study in a trial before consent and without their
knowledge. Subjects randomized to standard treatment are simply evaluated with routine follow-up and nothing is said to them about the trial or their participation (i.e.,
no formal consent is obtained from them). Subjects randomized to the experimental arm in such designs are consented to receive the investigational therapy. If these
subjects refuse participation, they would then receive standard treatment and be followed similarly to those originally randomized to standard treatment. In the
double-randomized consent design, all subjects are first randomized without their knowledge, then asked if they would consent to participate, receiving either the

standard treatment or the experimental treatment to which they had already been randomized. Those refusing trial participation would then be offered treatment with
the opposite arm to which they had been randomized (e.g., those refusing standard treatment would be treated with the experimental therapy).
Such designs were proposed in order to make the informed consent process less cumbersome and threatening for a participating physician–investigator. In fact,
Zelen proposed such trial designs because of practical difficulties in getting physicians to participate in randomized trials, hoping to increase their willingness to
participate.175 The common theme of such designs is that patients are asked to consent to a specific treatment, rather than to participate in a randomized trial. Many
statistical difficulties arise with such randomized consent designs, including an inability to blind subjects to the treatment. As well, such designs create both an
underestimation and a dilution of possible differences in treatment effects, resulting in larger (and even unpredictable) accrual goals. Significant ethical issues also
arise with such designs, including the fact that some subjects would be unaware that they are in a clinical trial. In addition, many subjects would likely receive biased
information about the particular treatment to which they had already been prerandomized by the participating physician–investigator approaching them for inclusion in
the trial.
Interestingly, even considering such criticisms, nearly a dozen cancer clinical trials have employed these or similar consent designs. As reviewed elsewhere, 174,175
many of these trials were in the cooperative group setting. Most of these trials had been originally initiated with conventional consent designs, but were then modified
to include randomized consent designs in order to improve on slow patient accrual. Several of these trials increased their accrual rates substantially, some by a factor
of three to six times the initial accrual rates. 176,177 and 178 Despite these improvements in accrual, these consent designs remain controversial. Gallo and colleagues
examined the use of such trial designs, comparing different preconsent procedures for a hypothetical randomized trial among more than 2000 healthy subjects. 171 The
investigators conclude that preconsent randomization methods are highly inefficient with regard to improving accrual, as subjects knowingly randomized to receive
standard treatment would be likely to refuse clinical trial entry. In general, the ethical and statistical difficulties have prevented their implementation on a routine basis
and they have not been recommended for such use.

CONCLUSIONS
If cancer physicians and investigators are to provide high-quality cancer care and conduct research according to the highest possible standards, they must maintain a
heightened sensitivity to the ethical issues discussed. Certainly, continued study and debate regarding these complex issues is unquestionably needed if the
dilemmas present in cancer care and research are to be addressed and, it is to be hoped, resolved. Considering their long-standing awareness, cancer physicians
and investigators remain well qualified to continue to provide guidance in shaping this future study.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Jonsen AR, Siegler M, Winslade WJ. Clinical ethics. 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998.
2. Siegler M, Pellegrino ED, Singer PA. Clinical medical ethics: the first decade. J Clin Ethics 1990;1:5.
3. Tarlov AL, Ware JE, Greenfield S, et al. The Medical Outcomes Study: an application of methods for monitoring the results of medical care. JAMA 1989;262:925.
4. Siegler M. Falling off the pedestal: what is happening to the traditional doctor-patient relationship? Mayo Clin Proc 1993;68:1.
5. Siegler M. The physician-patient accommodation: a central event in clinical medicine. Arch Intern Med 1982;142:1899.
6. Faden RR, Beauchamp TL, King NMP. A history and theory of informed consent. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.
7. Vetch RM. Abandoning informed consent. Hast Cent Rep 1995;25:5.
8. Bok S. Shading the truth in seeking informed consent for research purposes. Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal 1995;5:1.
9. Engelhardt HT. The foundations of bioethics. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
10. Llewellyn-Thomas HA, McGreal J, Theil EC. Cancer patients' decision making and trial-entry preferences: the effects of “framing” information about short-term toxicity and long-term survival.
Med Decis Making 1995;15:4.
11. Sutherland HJ, Llewellyn-Thomas HA, Lockwood GA, Tritchler DL, Till JE. Cancer patients: their desire for information and participation in treatment decisions. J Royal Soc Med 1989;82:260.
12. Margalith I, Shapiro A. Anxiety and patient participation in clinical decision-making: the case of patients with ureteral calculi . Soc Sci Med 1997;45:419.
13. Brockopp DY, Hayko D, Davenport W, Winscott C. Personal control and the needs for hope and information among adults diagnosed with cancer. Cancer Nurs 1989;12:112.
14. Charles C, Gafni A, Whelan T. Shared decision-making in the medical encounter: what does it mean? (or it takes at least two to tango). Soc Sci Med 1997;44:681.
15. Hall JA, Roter DL, Katz NR. Meta-analysis of correlates of provider behavior in medical encounters. Med Care 1988;26:657.
16. Pendleton DA, Bochner S. The communication of medical information in general practice consultations as a function of patients' social class. Soc Sci Med 1980;14A:669.
17. Waitzkin H, Stoeckle JD. The communication of information about illness: clinical, sociological, and methodological considerations. Adv Psychosomat Med 1972;8:180.
18. Cassileth BR, Zupkis RV, Sutton-Smith K, March V. Information and participation preferences among cancer patients. Ann Intern Med 1980;92:832.
19. Orona CJ, Koenig BA, Davis AJ. Cultural aspects of nondisclosure. Camb Q Healthcare Ethics 1994;3:338.
20. Ong LM, De Haes JCJM, Hoos AM, Lammes FB. Doctor-patient communication: a review of the literature. Soc Sci Med 1995;40:903.
21. Turner S, Maher EJ, Young T, Hudson GV. What are the information priorities for cancer patients involved in treatment decisions? An experienced surrogate study in Hodgkin's disease. Br J
Cancer 1996;73:222.
22. Hack TF, Degner LF, Dyck DG. Relationship between preferences for decisional control and illness information among women with breast cancer: a quantitative and qualitative analysis. Soc
Sci Med 1994;39:279.
23. Strull WM, Lo B, Charles G. Do patients want to participate in medical decision making? JAMA 1984;252:2990.
24. Blanchard CG, Labrecque MS, Ruckdeschel JC, Blanchard EB. Information and decision-making preferences of hospitalized adult cancer patients . Soc Sci Med 1988;27:1139.
25. Beisecker AE, Beisecker TD. Patient information-seeking behaviors when communicating with doctors. Med Care 1990;28:19.
26. Ende J, Kazis L, Ash A, Moskowitz MA. Measuring patients' desire for autonomy: decision making and information-seeking preferences among medical patients. J Gen Intern Med 1989;4:23.
27. Charles C, Redko C, Whelan T, Gafni A, Reyno L. Doing nothing is no choice: lay constructions of treatment decision-making among women with early-stage breast cancer. Sociol Health
Illness 1998;20:71.
28. Turk-Charles S, Meyerowitz BE, Gatz M. Age differences in information seeking among cancer patients. Intl J Aging Hum Dev 1997;45:85.
29. Weeks JC, Cook F, O'Day SJ, et al. Relationship between cancer patients' predictions of prognosis and their treatment preferences. JAMA 1998;279:1709.
30. Eidinger RN, Schapira DV. Cancer patients' insight into their treatment, prognosis, and unconventional therapies. Cancer 1984;53:2736.
31. Mackillop WJ, Stewart WE, Ginsburg AD, Stewart SS. Cancer patients' perceptions of their disease and its treatment. Br J Cancer 1988;58:355.
32. Sulmassy DP, Terry PB, Weisman CS, et al. The accuracy of substituted judgments in patients with terminal diagnoses. Ann Intern Med 1998;128:621.
33. Daugherty C, Ratain MJ, Grochowski E, et al. Perceptions of cancer patients and their physicians involved in phase I trials. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1062.
34. Fitts WT, Ravdin IS. What Philadelphia physicians tell patients with cancer. JAMA 1953;153:901.
35. Oken D. What to tell cancer patients: a study of medical attitudes. JAMA 1961;175:1120.
36. Kelley WD, Friesen SR. Do cancer patients want to be told? Surgery 1950;27:822.
37. Koenig RR. Anticipating death from cancer: physician and patient attitudes. Michigan Medicine 1969;(Sept):899.
38. Gerle B, Lunden G, Sandlom P. The patient with inoperable cancer from the psychiatric and social standpoints. Cancer 1960;13:1206.
39. McIntosh J. Processes of communication, information seeking and control associated with cancer: a selective review of the literature. Soc Sci Med 1974;8:167.
40. Novack DH, Plumer R, Smith RL, et al. Changes in physicians' attitudes toward telling the cancer patient. JAMA 1979;241:897.
41. Patterson JT. The dread disease: cancer and modern American culture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987.
42. Seale C. Communication and awareness about death: a study of a random sample of dying people. Soc Sci Med 1991;32:943.
43. Miyaji N. The power of compassion: truth-telling among American doctors in the care of dying patients. Soc Sci Med 1993;36:249.
44. Kodish E, Post SG. Oncology and hope. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:1817.
45. DelVecchio Good MJ, Good B, Schaffer C, et al. American oncology and the discourse on hope. Cult Med Psychiatry 1990;14:59.
46. Hux J, Naylor CD. Does the format of efficacy data determine patients' acceptance of treatment? Med Decis Making 1995;15:152.
47. Jacoby A, Baker G, Chadwick D, Johnson A. The impact of counseling with a practical statistical model on patients' decision-making about treatment for epilepsy: findings from a pilot study.
Epilepsy Res 1993;16:207.
48. Siminoff LA, Fetting JH. Factors affecting treatment decisions for a life-threatening illness: the case of medical treatment of breast cancer. Soc Sci Med 1991;32:813.
49. Ravdin PM, Siminoff LA, Harvey JA. Survey of breast cancer patients concerning their knowledge and expectations of adjuvant therapy. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:515.
50. Amir M. Considerations guiding physicians when informing cancer patients. Soc Sci Med 1987;24:741.
51. Forster LE, Lynn J. Predicting life span for applicants to inpatient Hospice. Arch Intern Med 1988;148:2540.
52. Lamont EB, Christakis NA. Some elements of prognosis in terminal cancer. Oncology 1999;13:1165.
53. Evans C, McCarthy M. Prognostic uncertainty in terminal care: can the Karnofsky Index help? Lancet 1985;1:1204.
54. Heyse-Moore LH, Johnson-Bell VE. Can doctors accurately predict the life expectancy of patients with terminal cancer? Palliat Med 1987;1:165.
55. Maltoni M, Nanni O, Derni S, et al. Clinical prediction of survival is more accurate than the Karnofsky Performance Status in estimating life span of terminally ill cancer patients. EurJ Cancer
1994;30A:764.
56. Oxenham D, Cornbleet MA. Accuracy of prediction of survival by different professional groups in a hospice. Palliat Med 1998;12:117.
57. Parkes CM. Accuracy of predictions of survival in later stages of cancer. BMJ 1972;1:29.
58. Mackillop WJ, Quirt CF. Measuring the accuracy of prognostic judgments in oncology. J Clin Epidemiol 1997;50:21.
59. The SUPPORT Principal Investigators. A controlled trial to improve care for seriously ill hospitalized patients. The Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of
Treatments (SUPPORT). JAMA 1995;274:1591.
60. Cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin 1998;48:6.
61. Parkes M. Accuracy of prediction of survival in later stages of cancer. BMJ 1972;2:29.
62. Yates JW, Chalmer B, McKegney FP. Evaluation of patients with advanced cancer using the Karnofsky Performance Status. Cancer 1980;45:2220.
63. Evans C, McCarthy M. Prognostic uncertainty in terminal care: can the Karnofsky Index help? Lancet 1985;1:1204.
64. Reuben DB, Mor V, Hiris J. Clinical symptoms and length of survival in patients with terminal cancer. Arch Intern Med 1988;148:1586.
65. Janisch L, Mick R, Schilsky RL, et al. Prognostic factors for survival in patients treated in phase I clinical trials. Cancer 1994;74:1965.
66. Barry ZS, Lynn J. Hospice medicine. JAMA 1993;270:221.

67. Levy MH. Living with cancer: hospice/palliative care. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1283.
68. Kinzbrunner BM. Hospice: what to do when anti-cancer therapy is no longer appropriate, effective, or desired. Semin Oncol 1994;21:792.
69. Bayer R, Callahan D, Fletcher J, et al. The care of the terminally ill: morality and economics. N Engl J Med 1983;309:1490.
70. Long SH, Gibbs JO, Crozier JP, et al. Medical expenditures of terminal cancer patients during the last year of life. Inquiry 1984;21:315.
71. Kedder D. The effects of hospice coverage on Medicare expenditures. Health Services Research 1992;27:195.
72. Emanuel EJ. Cost savings at the end of life. JAMA 1996;275:1901.
73. Christakis NA, Escarce JJ. Survival of Medicare patients after enrollment in hospice programs. N Engl J Med 1996;355:172.
74. Christakis N. Death foretold: prophecy and progress in medical care. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.
75. Daugherty CK, Hlubocky F, Ratain MJ, Banik DM. Assessing advanced cancer patients' awareness of prognosis: why simply asking may not be measuring. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol
1999;18:417a.
76. Kinzbrunner BM. Ethical dilemmas in hospice and palliative care. Support Care Cancer 1995;3:28.
77. Fallowfield L, Lipkin M, Hall A. Teaching senior oncologists communication skills: results from a phase I of a comprehensive longitudinal program in the United Kingdom. J Clin Oncol
1998;16:1961.
78. Hinton J. How reliable are relatives' retrospective reports of terminal illness? Patients' and relatives' accounts compared. Soc Sci Med 1996;43:1229.
79. Quill TE, Cassel CK, Meier DE. Care of the hopelessly ill. Proposed clinical criteria for physician-assisted suicide. N Engl J Med 1992;327:1380.
80. Bukberg J, Penman D, Holland JC. Depression in hospitalized cancer patients. Psychosom Med 1984;46:199.
81. Chochinov HM, Wilson KG, Enns M, et al. Prevalence of depression in the terminally ill: effects of diagnostic criteria and symptom threshold judgments. Am J Psychiatry 1994;151:537.
82. Bolund C. Suicide and cancer: I. Demographical and suicidological description of suicides among cancer patients in Sweden. J Psychosom Oncol 1985;3:17.
83. Allebeck P, Bolund C, Ringback G. Increased suicide rate in cancer patients. A cohort study based on the Swedish Cancer-Environment Register. J Clin Epidemiol 1989;42:611.
84. Winokur G, Tsuang M. The Iowa 500: suicide in mania, depression, and schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry 1975;132:650.
85. Barraclough B, Bunch J, Nelson B, et al. A hundred cases of suicide: clinical aspects. Br J Psychiatry 1974;125:355.
86. Groenewould JH, Van Der Maas J, Van Der Wal G, et al. Physician-assisted death in psychiatric practice in the Netherlands. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1795.
87. Van Der Maas PJ, Van Delden JJ, Pijnenborg L, et al. Euthanasia and other medical decisions concerning the end of life [see comments]. Lancet 1991;338:669.
88. Pijenborg L, van der Maas PJ, van Delden JJM, Looman CWN. Life terminating acts without explicit request of the patient. Lancet 1993;341:1196.
89. Groenewould JH, van der Heide A, Onwuteaka-Philipsen BN, et al. Clinical problems with performance of euthanasia and PAS in the Netherlands. N Engl J Med 2000;348:551.
90. Nuland SB. PAS and you in practice. N Engl JMed 2000;342:583.
91. Cohen JS, Fihn SD, Boyko EJ, et al. Attitudes toward assisted suicide and euthanasia among physicians in Washington state. N Engl J Med 1994;331:89.
92. Back AL, Wallace JI, Starks HE, et al. Physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia in Washington State. Patient requests and physician responses [see comments]. JAMA 1996;275:919.
93. Emanuel EJ, Fairclough DL, Daniels ER, et al. Euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide: attitudes and experiences of oncology patients, oncologists, and the public [see comments]. Lancet
1996;347:1805.
94. Howard OM, Fairclough DL, Daniels ER, et al. Physician desire for euthanasia and assisted suicide: would physicians practice what they preach? [see comments]. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:428.
95. Emanuel EJ, Daniels ER, Fairclough DL, et al. The practice of euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide in the United States: adherence to proposed safeguards and effects on physicians [see
comments]. JAMA 1998;280:507.
96. Chiu AE, Hedberg K, Higgison GK, Fleming DW. Legalized physician-assisted suicide in Oregonthe first year's experience. N Engl J Med 2000;340:577.
97. Sullivan AD, Itedberg K, Fleming DW. Legalized physician-assisted suicide in Oregonthe second year. N Engl J Med 2000;342:598.
98. Gaylin W, Kass LR, Pellegrino ED, Siegler M. Doctors must not kill. JAMA 1988;259:2139.
99. Engelhardt HT. The foundations of bioethics. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996:330.
100. The final report of the president's advisory committee. The human radiation experiments. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
101. Applebaum PS, Lindz CN, Meisel A. Informed consent: legal theory and clinical practice. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.
102. Levine RJ. Ethics and regulation of clinical research. 2nd ed. Baltimore: Urban and Schwarzenburg, 1986.
103. National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research. Belmont Report; ethical principles and guidelines for the protection of human subjects of
research. Publication number (05) 78-0012. Washington, DC: USGPO, 1978.
104. Freedman B, Fuks A, Weijer C. Demarcating research in treatment: a systematic approach for the analysis of the ethics of clinical research. Clin Res 1992;40:655.
105. Pelligrino ED. Beneficence, scientific autonomy, and self-interest: ethical dilemmas in clinical research. Cumb Q Health Ethics 1992;1:361.
106. Schaffner KF. Ethical problems in clinical trials. J Med Philos 1986;11:297.
107. Markman M. The objective clinical scientist versus the advocate: a complex ethical and political dilemma facing cancer investigators and the public. Cancer Invest 1995;13:324.
108. Elks ML. Conflict of interest and the physician-researcher. J Lab Clin Med 1995;126:19.
109. Hammerschmidt DE. When commitments and interests conflict. J Lab Clin Med 1995;126:5.
110. Levine RJ. Clinical trials and physicians as double agents. Yale J Biol Med 1992;65:68.
111. Katz J. Experimentation with human beings. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1972.
112. Annas GJ. The changing landscape of human experimentation; Nuremberg, Helsinki, and beyond. J Law Med 1992;2:119.
113. The President's Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral Research. Implementing human research regulations: the adequacy and uniformity of
federal rules and their implementation. Washington, DC: USGPO, publication number 040-000-00471-8, 1983.
114. Engelhardt HT. The foundations of bioethics. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996:330.
115. Jonas H. Philosophical reflections on experimenting with human subjects. In: Freund PA, ed. Experimentation with human subjects. New York: George Brazilier, 1969.
116. Epstein LC, Lasagna L. Obtaining informed consent, form or substance. Arch Intern Med 1969;123:682.
117. Gray BH, Cooke RA, Tannebaum AS. Research involving human subjects. The performance of institutional review boards is assessed in this empirical study. Science 1978;201:1094.
118. Hammerschmidt DE, Keanse MA. Institutional review board review lacks impact on the readability of consent forms for research. Am J Med Sci 1992;304:341.
119. Edgar H, Rothman DJ. The institutional review board and beyond: future challenges to the ethics of human experimentation. J Milb Q 1995;73:489.
120. Redshaw ME, Harris A, Baum JD. Research ethics committee audit: differences between committees. J Med Ethics 1996;22:78.
121. Kent G. Shared understandings for informed consent: the relevance of psychological research on the provision of information. Soc Sci Med 1996;43:1517.
122. Verheggen FWSM, van Wijmen FCB. Informed consent in clinical trials. Health Policy 1996;36:131.
123. Katz J. Human experimentation and human rights. St. Louis University Law Journal 1993;38:7.
124. Beecher HK. Ethics in clinical research. N Engl J Med 1966;274:1354.
125. Rothman DJ. Ethics and human experimentation: Henry Beecher revisited. N Engl J Med 1987;317:1195.
126. Jones JH. Bad blood. 2nd ed. New York: Free Press, 1993.
127. The final report of the president's advisory committee. The human radiation experiments. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996:98.
128. Simes RJ, Tattersal MHN, Coates AS, et al. Randomized comparison of procedures for obtaining informed consent in clinical trials of treatment for cancer. BMJ 1986;293:1065.
129. Daugherty CK. Impact of therapeutic research on informed consent and the ethics of clinical trials: a medical oncology perspective. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1601.
130. Edwards SJL, Lilford RJ, Thornton J, et al. Informal consent for clinical trials: in search of the “best” method. Soc Sci Med 1998;47:1825.
131. Ratain MJ, Mick R, Schilsky R, Siegler M. Statistical and ethical issues in the design and conduct of phase I and II clinical trials of new anticancer agents. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1637.
132. Vanderpool HY. The ethics of research involving human subjects. Facing the 21st Century. Frederick, MD: University Publishing Group, 1996:306.
133. Freedman B. Cohort-specific consent: an honest approach to phase I cancer studies. IRB Rev Human Subjects Res 1990;12:5.
134. Von Hoff DD, Turner J. Response rates, duration of response, and dose response effect in phase I studies in antineoplastics. Invest New Drugs 1991;9:115.
135. Decoster G, Stein G, Holdener EE. Responses and toxic deaths in phase I clinical trials. J Ann Oncol 1990;2:175.
136. Estey E, Hoth D, Wittes R, et al. Therapeutic responses in phase I trials of antineoplastic agents. Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:1105.
137. Smith TL, Lee JJ, Kantarjian HM, et al. Design and results of phase I cancer clinical trials: 3 year experience at MD Anderson Cancer Center. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:287.
138. Rodenhuis S, van-den Heuvel WJ, Annyas AA, et al. Patient motivation and informed consent in a phase I study of an anticancer agent. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1984;20:457.
139. Willem Y, Sessa C. Informing patients about phase I trialshow should it be done? Aeta Oncol 1989;28:106.
140. Daugherty CK, Banik DM, Janisch L, Ratain MJ. Quantitative analysis of ethical issues in phase I trials: a survey interview study of 144 advanced cancer patients. IRB Rev Hum Sub Res
2000;22:6.
141. Tomamichel M, Sessa C, Herzig S, et al. Informed consent for phase I studies: evaluation of quantity and quality of information provided to patients. Ann Oncol 1995;6:321.
142. Yoder LH, O'Rourke TJ, Ethyre A, Spears DT. Expectations and experiences of patients with cancer participating in phase I clinical trials. Oncol Nurs Forum 1997;24:891.
143. Itoh K, Sasaki Y, Fuji H, et al. Patients in phase I trials of anti-cancer agents in Japan: motivation, comprehension and expectations. Br J Cancer 1997;76:107.
144. Mor V, Masterson-Allen S. A comparison of hospice vs conventional care of the terminally-ill cancer patients. Oncology 1990;4:85.
145. Trill MD, Holland J. Cross-cultural differences in the care of patients with cancer. A review. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 1993;15:21.
146. Marsoni S, Hoth D, Simon R, et al. Clinical drug development: an analysis of phase II trials. Cancer Treat Rep 1987;71:80.
147. Stores B, DeMetts D. Current phase I/II designs: are they adequate? J Clin Res Drug Dev 1987;1:121.
148. Rajagopal S, Goodman PJ, Tannock IF. Adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer: discordance between physicians' perception of benefit and the results of clinical trials. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:1296.
149. Belanger D, Moore M, Tannock I. How American oncologists treat breast cancer: an assessment of the influence of clinical trials. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:7.
150. Baar J, Tannock I. Analyzing the same data in two ways: a demonstration model to illustrate the reporting and misreporting of clinical trials. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:969.
151. Schafer A. The ethics of the randomized clinical trial. N Engl J Med 1982;307:719.
152. Gifford F. The conflict between randomized clinical trials and the therapeutic obligation. J Med Philos 1986;11:347.
153. Kodish E, Lantos JD, Siegler M. Ethical considerations in randomized controlled clinical trials. Cancer 1990;65(Suppl):2400.
154. Marquis D. Leaving therapy to chance: an impasse in the ethics of clinical trials. Hast Cen Rep 1983;13:40.
155. Hellman S, Hellman DS. Of mice but not men. Problems of the randomized clinical trial. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1585.
156. Markman M. Ethical difficulties with randomized clinical trials involving cancer patients: examples from the field of gynecologic oncology. J Clin Ethics 1992;3:193.
157. Emmanual EJ, Peterson WB. Ethics of randomized clinical trials. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:365.
158. Freid C. Medical experimentation: personal integrity and social policy. Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing, 1974.
159. Freedman B. Equipoise and the ethics of clinical research. N Engl J Med 1987;317:141.
160. Gifford F. Community equipoise and the ethics of randomized clinical trials. Bioethics 1995;9:127.
161. Freedman B. A response to a purported ethical difficulty with randomized clinical trials involving cancer patients. J Clin Ethics 1992;3:231.
162. Taylor KM, Margolese RG, Soskolne CL. Physicians' reasons for not entering eligible patients in a randomized clinical trial of surgery for breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1984;310:1363.
163. Taylor KM, Shapiro M, Soskolne CL, et al. Physician response to informed consent regulations for randomized clinical trials. Cancer 1987;60:1415.
164. Fetting JH, Simonoff LA, Piantodosi S, et al. The effects of patients' expectations of benefit with standard breast cancer adjuvant chemotherapy on participation in a randomized clinical trial: a
clinical vignette study. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1476.
165. Silverman WA, Altman DG. Patients' preferences and randomized trials. Lancet 1996;347:171.
166. Cassileth BR, Lusk ES, Hurwitz S, et al. Attitudes towards clinical trials among patients and the public. JAMA 1982;248:968.
167. Slevin MJ, Stubb L, Plant HJ, et al. Attitudes to chemotherapy: comparing views of patients with cancer with those of doctors, nurses, and the general public. BMJ 1990;300:1458.

168. Taylor KM, Feldstein ML, Skeel RT, et al. Fundamental dilemmas of the randomized clinical trial process: results of a survey of 1,737 Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group investigators. J Clin
Oncol 1994;12:1796.
169. Lynoe N, Sandland M, Jacobson L. Cancer clinical researchsome aspects on doctors' attitudes to informing participants. Acta Oncol 1996;35:749.
170. Royall RM. Ignorance and altruism. J Clin Ethics 1992;3:229.
171. Gallo C, Perrone F, Deplando S, Giust C. Informed versus randomized consent to clinical trials. Lancet 1995;346:1060.
172. Simel DL, Feussner JR. A randomized controlled trial comparing quantitative informed consent formats. J Clin Epidemiol 1991;44:771.
173. Baum M. New approach for recruitment into randomized controlled trials. Lancet 1993;341:812.
174. Altman DG, Whitehead J, Parman MK, et al. Randomized consent designs in cancer clinical trials. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:1934.
175. Zelen M. Strategy and alternate randomized designs in cancer clinical trials. Cancer Treat Rep 1982;66:1095.
176. Riethmuller G, Schneider-Gadicke E, Schilmok G, et al. Randomized trial of monoclonal antibody for adjuvant therapy of resected Dukes' C colorectal carcinoma. Lancet 1994;343:1177.
177. Mansour EG, Gray R, Shatila AH, et al. Efficacy of adjuvant chemotherapy of high-risk node-negative breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1989;320:485.
178. Fisher B, Redmond C, Poisson R, et al. Eight-year results of a randomized clinical trial comparing total mastectomy and lumpectomy with or without irradiation in the treatment of breast cancer.
N Engl J Med 1989;320:822.

CHAPTER 60 Information Systems in Oncology
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 60
Information Systems in Oncology
SUSAN MOLLOY HUBBARD
Introduction
National Cancer Institute's Information Services
Physician Data Query
Cancerlit
Physician Data Query/Cancernet Redesign
Conclusion
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
As the twentieth century slipped into history, there could be little doubt that we live in an age in which information technology will continue to catalyze dramatic
changes in society that affect our daily lives, especially in the field of health care. The Internet has revolutionized telecommunications, enabling electronic devices
with different operating systems and data formats to communicate with each other seamlessly and making the “Net” and the “Web” ubiquitous terms in our lives.
Computing power continues to increase steadily as more powerful chips become available, and powerful hand-held computers with wireless access to the Internet are
now available. Direct Internet connections, once only available in academic centers, are now readily available in the home, workplace, and a growing number of public
settings, such as public libraries and shopping malls. Internet access is available through dial-up, cable, and wireless Internet service providers at a reasonable cost.
The simplicity and accessibility of Internet access have now made the Web a primary mechanism for communicating health information. As a result, the Internet has
rapidly become an extremely popular vehicle for information queries and research.
Effective communication is central to efficient, high-quality health care. Information empowers individuals, enabling them to make informed decisions. Changes in the
accessibility of medical information and the way the public can acquire it are altering the field of health care and the relationship between health care professionals
and patients. A federally funded science panel on interactive health communication has concluded that few other interventions have greater potential to improve
health outcomes, decrease costs, and enhance consumer satisfaction than communication. 1 Data from CyberDialogue, a group that has followed Internet trends since
1993, reported that, in 1999, more than 69.3 million adult Americans (35% of the adult population) were actively online; more than 26.3 million (38%) searched the
Internet to obtain health and medical information. 2 In 2000, more than 33.5 million adults are expected to use the Internet to search for health information. 3 Use of the
Internet as a channel for communicating health and medical information will continue to increase as interactive health communication applications become more
sophisticated and the cost of electronic devices and Internet access decreases. However, major gaps in knowledge exist about how consumers process and use
health information; distinguish important from insignificant health risks; decide to modify risky behavior, such as smoking; resolve contradictory health messages; and
make decisions about their health care options. 4
Many of the health care applications currently in development are designed to support complex user interactions and sophisticated decision-making tools.
Increasingly, applications feature multimedia assets that enable designers to communicate complex information on health to users in ways that can be tailored to the
user's unique needs and perspectives. Applications are being designed for a variety of dissemination vehicles, including standalone systems; locally networked
computers; and Internet access via personal computers, mobile wireless digital devices, kiosks, and Web television.
Innovative strategies to ensure that communication technologies fulfill the inherent promise they offer must take into consideration the “digital divide” that exists
between those that can readily access computers and the Internet and those who cannot. This digital divide reflects the societal gap that exists between the “haves”
and “have nots.” Internet use by those who live in rural settings; blacks, Hispanics, and other central city minorities; and households headed by the poor, by females,
and by the young (younger than 25 years of age) lags behind white users. 5 Efforts to address barriers to access for these disadvantaged populations deserve high
priority by developers, because underserved and minority populations often carry a particularly heavy burden of one or more cancers. Studies have shown that
patients in underserved populations do use computer-mediated advice services and rate them highly. 6,7
The availability of accurate, credible information is essential for anyone making decisions about cancer care. Cancer patients, their families, and many of those who
perceive themselves at risk of developing cancer face the arduous task of gathering and interpreting information they find or are given to make well-informed
decisions about their care options. Cancer patients learn about their diagnosis and management options from many sources and, in today's health care environment,
are more likely to ask health care providers sophisticated and pointed questions. When faced with the task of gathering cancer information either for oneself or for a
family member, the Internet provides an instantaneous, inexpensive, and voluminous source of information. Valuable information resources are available on Web
sites, e-mail services, news and usenet groups, and online discussion groups to anyone seeking information on cancer, whether the focus of the search is on
treatment, prevention, screening, or support. An increasing number of cancer-oriented Web sites offer significant opportunities for individuals to profile themselves so
that they can tailor information on the site to meet specific needs and preferences.
However, as Internet access and Web site development tools have become basic software for computer systems, anyone with a computer, an Internet connection,
and the appropriate software can create a Web site, a fact with staggering implications for the amount and quality of medical information available to consumers. A
search on the term “cancer” via any of the popular Web search engines retrieves more than 2,000 Web sites offering cancer information from one of the more than
20,000 health-related Web sites. 8 For patients and the lay public, the plethora of health information on the Internet often represents a mixed blessing. At present, the
Internet is still an unregulated, uncensored medium. Information that is anecdotal, unreviewed, and undated can be found on many Web sites, e-mail services, and
news and usenet groups. In an article on the accuracy of medical information on the Web, an oncologist searching the Web for information on Ewing's sarcoma found
that 50% of the online material was irrelevant and 6% contained major errors. Inaccuracy of information is not the only cause for concern. Some health-oriented sites
hawk health care products or refer users to e-commerce partners and then take a cut of the sales. 9,10 Some post information in an attempt to advance unproven
approaches to disease management that are not medically or scientifically sound.
It can be difficult for a novice to determine whether the information is current, accurate, and complete unless the information provider clearly articulates the standards
of quality that are being used for the inclusion of materials on the site and the criteria for linking to other Web sites. Users must prepare to take responsibility for
making decisions about the value and applicability of the information, just as those using more traditional information sources do.
The National Cancer Institute (NCI) has always had a formal review process for the inclusion of content in its databases and information services. 11,12,13,14 and 15 It has
established a formal process for ensuring that its Web site only provides hypertext links to Web sites that are accurate, useful, and current, and it provides information
on how to evaluate electronic information ( Table 60-1).16,17 Other medical information providers have begun to recognize the need to take responsibility for ensuring
that patients are not exposed to bogus and potentially harmful cancer information by using criteria for selecting information they disseminate. 18,19,20,21,22,23 and 24 To help
users determine what Web sites are credible, the Health on the Net Foundation has established criteria for evaluating Web sites ( Table 60-2).25,26 The principles
embodied in these criteria have been widely adopted by credible health-related Web sites.

TABLE 60-1. Cancer-Oriented Web Sites

TABLE 60-2. Health on the Net Criteria for Site Evaluation

As profiling of users becomes a more common feature of interactive health communication, understanding a site's position on the confidentiality of personal
information is becoming increasingly important. Users should determine what personally identifiable information is collected from them by the Web site; how the
information will be used; with whom the information may be shared; what 27 choices they have regarding the collection, use, and distribution of the information; the kind
of security procedures that are in place to protect the loss, misuse, or alteration of information; and how they can correct any inaccuracies in the information. TRUSTe
is an independent, nonprofit initiative whose mission is to build trust and confidence in the Internet by promoting these principles of disclosure and informed consent.
Many health-related sites explicitly state their privacy policy or display the TRUSTe mark.

NATIONAL CANCER INSTITUTE'S INFORMATION SERVICES
For more than two decades, the staff of NCI's International Cancer Information Center (ICIC) have striven to meet the challenge of assisting health professionals and
the public to effectively use current medical knowledge by providing current, high-quality information through a variety of media. The primary information resources
are Physician Data Query (PDQ), a comprehensive database of current, peer-reviewed syntheses of state-of-the-art information on cancer care
(http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/pdq.html ), and CANCERLIT, a comprehensive source of bibliographic citations on published cancer research
(http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/cancerlit.html ). These databases are distributed through a variety of media, including CancerFax, one of the first fully automated fax-back
services; CancerMail, an automated e-mail service; and CancerNet ( http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov ), an Internet Web site that provides point and click access to NCI's
information resources and has become a primary mechanism for disseminating PDQ and CANCERLIT information. These information resources undergo
well-established peer-review processes that draw on a broad base of cancer experts to ensure that content is current and accurate. These systems are updated on a
monthly basis, which ensures that users are provided with more current information than can be provided by most hard-copy publications. 9,10,11,12,13 and 14
PHYSICIAN DATA QUERY
PDQ, the NCI's comprehensive cancer information database, first became available to health professionals in 1984. 9,10,11 and 12 It is unique in the fact that its content is
developed based on systematic reviews of the medical literature and expert opinion. Five editorial boards synthesize information from the literature into concise, clear
summaries that are updated on a regular basis.
PDQ consists of three main types of information: (1) literature-based, full-text summaries that reflect current, state-of-the-art information on the treatment of adult and
pediatric malignancies, the prevention and screening of cancer, the supportive care for cancer and its complications, and cancer genetics; (2) summaries of clinical
trials currently accruing patients and those that are closed or completed; and (3) directories of physicians who provide cancer care and listings of health professionals
who provide services related to cancer genetic risk assessment, counseling, and testing. 13,14
Cancer Information Summaries
TREATMENT OPTIONS. PDQ contains treatment information on all major types of cancer in children and adults, including autoimmune deficiency syndrome–related

cancers (http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/treatment.html). For each cancer, a detailed summary, designed to meet the information needs of health professionals, is
provided that contains an overview, information on staging, and information on treatment options by important disease-specific parameters (e.g., stage, histology,
anatomic location). Key citations to the literature are referenced to enable users to see the research data on which the texts of the PDQ summaries are based. Users
can retrieve abstracts of these citations for review. Levels of evidence are provided for each summary ( Table 60-3). A limited number of brief summaries on more rare
cancers are also available. In addition, PDQ provides treatment summaries that contain similar information written in nontechnical language for patients and their
families. All of the summaries are available in English and Spanish.

TABLE 60-3. Levels of Evidence for Therapeutic Benefit from Treatment Interventions

COPING WITH CANCER. PDQ contains summaries on issues that relate to coping with the management of side effects of cancer treatment, complications caused by

cancer, and the psychosocial aspects of cancer and its treatment ( http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/coping.html).
SCREENING AND PREVENTION. The screening information in PDQ includes summaries on screening for breast, cervical, colorectal, endometrial, gastric, liver, lung,

neuroblastoma, oral, ovarian, prostate, skin, and testicular cancers ( http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/testing.html). Each summary contains the available data concerning
screening for that particular disease site, the levels of evidence for that summary, and the significance and evidence of benefit for the summary statement ( Table
60-4). They include references to the current literature that support the information in the summary. In addition, PDQ contains a version of the summary on screening
for breast cancer written for non–health professionals.

TABLE 60-4. Levels of Evidence for Physician Data Query/CancerNet Screening Summaries

PDQ also contains summaries on the prevention of breast, cervical, colorectal, endometrial, gastric, lung, oral, ovarian, prostate, and skin cancer
(http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/genetics_prevention.html ). Similar in format to the PDQ information on screening, these summaries contain level(s) of evidence of the
supporting research (Table 60-5).

TABLE 60-5. Levels of Evidence for Physician Data Query/CancerNet Prevention Summaries

CANCER GENETICS. An editorial board was established in 1998 to address issues that relate to the impact of research in cancer genetics on cancer prevention,

screening, and treatment strategies ( http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/genetics_prevention.html ). An overview of cancer genetics and the genetics of breast and ovarian
cancer are currently available. Summaries on the genetics of colorectal and prostate cancer, the elements of cancer risk assessment and counseling, and the multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 2 syndrome are in preparation.
COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES. In collaboration with the National Institutes of Health's National Center for Complementary and Alternative

Medicine, ICIC staff are preparing evidence-based summaries on nontraditional approaches to cancer prevention, treatment, and symptom control. An advisory board
composed of oncologists and representatives of the complementary and alternative medicine community review the summaries to ensure that they are accurate,
informative, up to date, and well balanced. Summaries on cartilage and hydrazine sulfate are currently available, and summaries on Laetrile, antineoplastons, essaic,
MTH-68 (Newcastle disease virus), 714-X, green and black tea, coenzyme Q10, mistletoe, IP-6 (inositol hexaphosphate), Cancell, and Coriollus versicolorare are in
preparation (http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/treatment.html).
Peer Review: The Process
The information in PDQ is reviewed by five core editorial boards, each handling one of the following topics: adult treatment, pediatric treatment, supportive care,
screening and prevention, and cancer genetics. These core boards are comprised of more than 80 cancer specialists who meet regularly to review the current
literature and to update PDQ summaries based on scientific data. Most (67%) are not government employees. Each core board is supplemented by an external
advisory board that reviews summaries annually. More than 100 additional health professionals with expertise in cancer screening, prevention, treatment, genetics,
coping, and complementary and alternative care serve on these advisory boards.
A process has been developed to assist board members to efficiently identify literature with important new data. Each month, more than 80 biomedical journals are
screened by professionals who identify citations of potential relevance. The boards may also review papers submitted for consideration by investigators, including
important, but unpublished, manuscripts that have been accepted for publication.
After the articles are screened, those considered the most relevant and significant are sent to appropriate board members for review. If the board members believe the
data warrant a change in a state-of-the-art summary, the manuscript is put on the agenda of an upcoming board meeting. At the meeting, members discuss the
positive and negative points of the research and make decisions about whether to modify summaries based on the data. Changes may involve the addition of a new
management option, the deletion of one that is no longer supported by data, the integration of new data that lend additional support to existing options, or an
interpretation of controversial data. Literature citations are provided for each option so that users can make their own assessment of the current literature. Users can
link to these citations as well.
Use of Formal Evidence-Based Criteria in Physician Data Query/CancerNet
Editorial board members understand the volume of medical knowledge and the increased emphasis on physician accountability and cost-effective practice. In an
attempt to assist health professionals to apply data from the medical literature in clinical practice, all of the editorial boards have moved from a consensus
development approach to summary development to an evidence-based approach to evaluating the literature and summarizing it. The practice of developing
evidence-based summaries of the existing literature enables the editorial boards to draw attention to significant gaps in medical evidence that are important to
consider in making patient management decisions. 28,29 Pointing out these gaps is not only important for health professionals and patients in decision-making
decisions; it also helps to define areas that are most in need of additional research.
Evidence-based criteria have been used exclusively by the screening and prevention board to develop and refine screening and prevention summaries since the
board's inception. This approach has proven to be useful in the consideration of scientific data on cancer screening and prevention and has proven to be well suited
to the presentation of controversial information. Evidence-based methodology allows editorial board members to summarize the information currently available on a
particular topic and to indicate the strength of that evidence. Annotations on the strength of the evidence for a particular approach afford the user a good

understanding of the intervention and the strength of the data supporting it (see Tables 60-3,Tables 60-4, and Tables 60-5).
In therapeutic studies, a variety of end points may be measured and reported. These end points include total mortality (or survival from the initiation of therapy),
cause-specific mortality, quality of life, or indirect surrogates of these three outcomes, such as disease-free survival, progression-free survival, or tumor response rate.
End points may also be determined within study designs of varying strength, ranging from the gold standard (the randomized, double-blinded, controlled clinical trial)
to case series experiences from nonconsecutive patients. The adult treatment editorial board uses a formal ranking system of levels of evidence to help the reader
judge the strength of evidence linked to the reported results of a therapeutic strategy. For any given therapy, results can be ranked on each of the following two
scales: (1) strength of the study design and (2) strength of the end points. Because studies or clinical experiences are ranked both by strength of design and
importance of end points, a given study has a two-tiered ranking [e.g., I(ii)/A for a nonblinded randomized study showing a favorable outcome in overall survival, and
III(iii)/D(iii) for a phase II trial of selected patients with response rate as the outcome]. Thus, the two rankings give an idea of the overall strength of evidence (see
Table 60-3).
In addition, all recommendations try to take into account other issues that cannot be so easily quantified, such as toxicity, width of confidence intervals of
observations, trial size, quality assurance in the trial, and cost. Depending on their perspectives, different expert panels, professional organizations, and individual
physicians may use different cut points of overall strength of evidence in formulating therapeutic guidelines or in taking action. 30 Nevertheless, this ranking system
does provide an ordinal categorization of strength of evidence as a starting point for discussions of study results, and the formal descriptions of the levels of evidence
provide a uniform framework for the data. The editorial boards are currently integrating information on the levels of evidence into the summaries as they review and
update summaries.
PDQ's state-of-the-art summaries are dynamic and can be updated as frequently as each month. On average in 1999, 15% of the summaries were revised each
month. Approximately 90% of the changes were revisions of the summaries, and approximately 30% of the summaries underwent substantial revisions. All licensees
are required to ensure that the information a user prints from PDQ is dated so that it is clear to the user when the information was retrieved from the database.
Physician Directory
The PDQ physician directory contains names, addresses, and telephone numbers for more than 25,000 physicians who devote a major portion of their practice to the
treatment of cancer patients. Also included is information on medical specialties, oncologic subspecialty board certification, and organizational affiliations for each of
these physicians. Physicians listed in the membership directories of major oncologic societies or organizations and clinical investigators who have protocols in PDQ or
are members of NCI-sponsored clinical trials groups are also listed in this directory.
Organization Directory
The PDQ organization directory contains information on more than 3000 health care institutions that provide care for cancer patients, including NCI-designated
comprehensive and clinical cancer centers, community clinical oncology programs, clinical trial groups, and members of the Association of Community Cancer
Centers. Information on organizations is retrievable by any combination of name, city, state, country, or zip code. These directories are not yet available through
CancerNet.
Cancer Genetics Services Directory
Cancer Genetics Services (http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/genesrch.shtml) is a directory of approximately 300 health professionals of various disciplines, such as genetic
counseling, oncology, nursing, psychology, social work, and clinical genetics, who provide services related to cancer genetics, including cancer risk assessment,
genetic counseling, and genetic susceptibility testing. Each individual listed must be licensed, certified, or eligible for board certification in their profession; have
specific training in cancer genetics; and be affiliated with an interdisciplinary team with substantial expertise in cancer genetics. They must also be members of one of
the professional organizations listed on the application for inclusion in the directory ( http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/genetics/gc_application.html ) and be willing to accept
referrals.
Clinical Trials
PDQ and CancerNet contain more than 1700 summaries of clinical trials that are open or approved for patient accrual ( http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/trialsrch.shtml ).
Treatment, screening, prevention, and supportive care protocols supported by the NCI are listed in PDQ. Each can be retrieved by diagnosis, stage, treatment
modality, phase of investigation, location, and drug name, or any combination of these and other parameters. Approximately 45% of the active trials in PDQ are not
directly sponsored by NCI and are submitted voluntarily by the study chairperson; 10% are submitted by the pharmaceutical industry. Criteria for including voluntary
submissions include whether the study design is reasonable, whether the trial is based on rational scientific information, whether the trial is likely to yield some useful
information or is unduly risky to patients, and whether the entry criteria and statistical section are clear and complete. Trial summaries can be submitted to CancerNet
online (http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/protosub/protocol.html ). CancerNet's trial summaries can also be found on ClinicalTrials.gov ( http://www.clinicaltrials.gov), a Web
site developed by the National Library of Medicine to provide patients, family members, and members of the public information about clinical research studies
currently under way for anyone with a life-threatening disease. Collaboration with U.S. Food and Drug Administration and other National Institutes of Health staff to
encourage submissions from the pharmaceutical industry is ongoing.
A member of the clinical trials review editorial board reviews protocols voluntarily submitted by investigators who are not directly supported by the NCI before their
inclusion. Phase II and III trials that have been submitted to the Food and Drug Administration under the investigational new drug application regulations do not
require further editorial review. Foreign clinical trials are included after the review process of the sponsoring organization is approved by the PDQ editorial board. If
the clinical trials editorial board finds a reason not to include a trial in PDQ and CancerNet, a letter containing the board's concern(s) is sent to the investigator, who is
invited to respond by either modifying the protocol document according to the reviewers' comments or by clarifying the information in the protocol document. Once a
response is received from the investigator, the protocol is re-reviewed by the clinical trials review board. More than 90% of the trials submitted for review are included.
An archival file of more than 10,800 closed protocols provides a rich source of data on previously completed clinical research, some of which is not published and is
not available elsewhere. Whenever possible, ICIC staff link the protocol summaries to published reports on trial outcomes.
Since 1996, PDQ and CancerNet also has contained consumer-oriented summaries of active clinical trials. On CancerNet, the technical terms in each summary are
hyperlinked to a glossary. The technical and consumer-oriented trial summaries are also linked to one another.
Since April 1998, NCI staff has provided additional contextual information on clinical trials on its cancerTrials Web site ( http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov ). The site was
established to raise awareness about clinical trials and to address some of the perceived barriers to participation. The information contained on cancerTrials falls into
the following categories: a framework for understanding what clinical trials are and deciding about participation; information about clinical research grouped by type of
cancer; information on how to find trials, which features a hyperlink to the CancerNet clinical trials search form ( http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/trialsrch.shtml ); news and
features highlighting topics under clinical investigation and trial results; and resources for researchers, such as a library of downloadable resources for clinical
investigators that includes templates, guidelines, and policy documents. Information on specific cancers features hypertext links to the cancer information summaries
in PDQ on CancerNet, as well as news about clinical trials.
CANCERLIT
CANCERLIT is a bibliographic archival database containing more than 1.5 million citations and abstracts of published research in cancer biology, etiology, screening,
prevention, and treatment published from 1963 to the present from more than 4000 different sources. It is updated monthly and provides a comprehensive, up-to-date
resource of cancer literature. Preformulated search “digests” for more than 90 clinical topics are also available ( http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/canlit/canlit.htm ). The
complete database can be searched on CancerNet (http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/cancerlit.shtml ).
Access to Physician Data Query, CancerNet, and CANCERLIT
The CancerNet Web site has become NCI's primary dissemination vehicle for PDQ and CANCERLIT data. At the end of 1999, monthly user statistics documented
more than 9 million “hits” (2 million page views) in more than 400,000 user sessions per month. In addition to its own distribution outlet, staff manage a licensing

program that allows for use of the databases by a variety of commercial and nonprofit distributors. Through a trademark license, these distributors deliver PDQ and
CANCERLIT data to worldwide audiences through a variety of media. The mechanisms fall into two general categories: online time-sharing systems with dial-up or
Internet access; and “local” implementations in which the database resides on a computer, CD-ROM, kiosk, or local area network. CANCERLIT is also available
online through a variety of commercial database vendors as an online or CD-ROM product. The program began in 1982 with one agreement, has grown to 72
agreements (39 for PDQ, 15 for CANCERLIT, and 18 for CancerMail), and continues to grow. All new requests to license are reviewed and evaluated on the following
criteria:
Does the organization share NCI's goal of disseminating and sharing cancer information?
What is the impact of the organization's efforts?
Would licensing the information to the organization enable ICIC to reach a larger or new audience?
Is the organization willing and able to update the information monthly and provide ICIC with user feedback and statistics?
Licensing efforts include partnerships with vendors that produce Web sites and public kiosks with credible health information, as well as those that are developing
health information “portal” sites.
Toll-Free Search Services
One of the problems faced by those responsible for disseminating health care information is how to make it easily accessible to people without direct personal access
to the technology. The Cancer Information Service (CIS) is an NCI-supported nationwide network of 14 regional offices located at 34 sites in the United States, Puerto
Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Through its toll-free telephone service (1-800-4-CANCER) and Web site ( http://cis.nci.nih.gov), certified information specialists
trained by the NCI use a variety of printed and computer resources to provide accurate, up-to-date information on cancer. In 1999, the CIS responded to more than
890,000 calls from patients, family members, health professionals, and the general public. More than 300,000 inquiries came over the Internet, and 17% of callers
reported that they obtained the toll-free number from the Internet. CIS staff conduct customized searches of PDQ and make more than 100,000 referrals to clinical
trials from PDQ each year. Staff also interpret research findings; explain diagnostic and treatment information; inform callers about emerging areas of science, such
as hereditary risk; clarify media stories about scientific discoveries; and provide smoking cessation counseling.
The CIS makes available nearly 600 publications and materials on a range of topics, including treatment information and research studies, specific types of cancer,
community services, screening tests and examinations, adopting healthier behavior, coping with cancer, and cancer risk. The CIS offers printed and audio-visual
materials that are easy to read and culturally appropriate; materials are also available in Spanish. A Web-based publication-ordering service is available
(http://publications.nci.nih.gov ).
Each year, the CIS Partnership Program assists 4500 organizations that serve minority and medically underserved populations within their communities. CIS staff
provide partners with access to the latest, most accurate cancer information; assist with coalition building and networking; offer program planning, implementation,
and evaluation assistance; provide media assistance; identify resource experts; and assist with training. Efforts involve breast and cervical cancer, tobacco education,
science awareness, and overcoming barriers to clinical trial participation.
The CIS serves as a health communications laboratory through an NCI-funded research consortium. CIS staff are involved in studies that test and identify the most
effective ways to communicate health information to help people adopt healthier behaviors. These studies have evaluated types of information messages provided,
the manner in which they are delivered, how often messages should be communicated to affect health behaviors, and the value of tailoring messages to an
individual's particular perspective. 31
The CIS intends to apply the strengths of the telephone service to the Internet and plans to provide real-time interactions over the Web to position the CIS as the
world's premier cancer information navigator. Under development is instant messaging, Web-based tailoring, Webcasting, an interactive voice response system for
the publication ordering, and an interface with mobile wireless digital devices.
Physician Data Query/CANCERLIT Service Center
The PDQ/CANCERLIT Service Center provides customized searches from the NCI's PDQ database to health professionals, who can request and receive information
through a toll-free telephone service, e-mail, or facsimile. The goal of the service center is to make the information from PDQ available to health professionals who do
not have the time or resources to access electronic systems directly. The service center can be reached by calling toll-free 1-800-345-3300 (in the United States),
Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Eastern time. Alternatively, requests can be faxed to 1-800-380-1575 or sent via e-mail to pdqsearch@icicc.nci.nih.gov. More
information on the search center can be found on the Web site.
PHYSICIAN DATA QUERY/CANCERNET REDESIGN
In mid-1990, ICIC staff recognized that the infrastructure supporting PDQ, CancerNet, CancerFax, and CancerMail was old and obsolete. The legacy system had
become increasingly difficult to adapt for cutting edge information technology. It could only produce simple text (ASCII data) and could not support commonplace
features, such as metatags, that make information easier to find on the Internet. Production processes were also hampered by a paper-based workflow/document
management system used to identify, track, process, and update more than 480 peer-reviewed information summaries from more than 80 core editorial board
members, many of whom receive materials for review every month.
In 1998, ICIC staff embarked on an initiative to restructure the infrastructure to take full advantage of advances in computing technology. A 2-day formal needs
assessment was performed in February 1998 to identify functional requirements for the new system. This meeting provided an opportunity for more than 190 patients,
advocates, clinical investigators, practicing oncologists, oncology nurses, librarians, health educators, social workers, and other health professionals, as well as
experts in medical and consumer informatics and representatives from the pharmaceutical and insurance industries, to advise NCI on what should be included in the
new system. Participants in the meeting provided specific input on the range of content, ease of navigation, user interface issues, use of current and emerging
technologies, and barriers to access. Operational, marketing, and evaluation issues were also discussed. The recommendations were used to develop the
specifications for a more robust and flexible system that could accommodate real-time updates and multimedia data and provide advanced concept search
capabilities. Participants also directed NCI to develop evaluation strategies to ensure that user feedback is obtained on an ongoing basis and that enhancements are
integrated and reevaluated in an iterative fashion.
Fundamental to the redesign initiative was the development of a flexible and scalable infrastructure to support a dynamic, broad-based, and modular information
system. To meet this need, ICIC computer specialists developed a universal database (UDB) server that is both a repository and a powerful retrieval engine. It also
contains pointers to data located in other databases and Web sites. The power of the UDB enabled ICIC staff to develop a flexible and scalable new user interface to
CancerNet. The UDB allows users to search across different data types with a single query and obtain information on a specific topic from resources in Web sites and
databases produced and maintained by other divisions, institutes, and organizations. The UDB links and organizes on the fly related documents for users to review,
supports multiple dissemination media and delivery mechanisms, and can accommodate future delivery mechanisms with the addition of new access modules that will
not require changing the system's infrastructure. Also under development is a new workflow/document management system that will enable ICIC staff to streamline
the review and updating of peer-reviewed summaries and provide users with real-time updates to CancerNet as soon as quality control procedures are complete.
Additional research and development is under way and includes instant messaging; the development of a CancerFax system that does not require handsets on
facsimile machines; CancerVoice, an automatic text-to-speech conversion and speech recognition system that will permit the physically challenged and those without
access to computers, fax machines, or the Internet to access CancerNet information via the telephone; audio supplements that will enable CancerNet users to
simultaneously see and hear information, a feature that will be beneficial for the elderly and vision-impaired; a Web-based protocol assembly application that will
permit online clinical trial protocol submission, review, and updates; content enhancements that will provide information in additional levels of technical detail;
intelligent software tools that will enable ICIC staff to customize output in response to user requests, download information to hand-held wireless communication
devices, and dynamically link terms requiring explanation to the glossary; search wizards to help users find information; and improved indexing that will enhance
search functionality. The UDB will enable ICIC staff to metatag each section of more than 480 PDQ information summaries as “independent” documents with unique
identifiers, indexes, and links, so that it can compile responses on the fly that are precisely tailored to a user's requests. This feature will also enable ICIC staff to
provide advocacy organizations serving highly focused audiences with information on specific cancers and import trial summaries from trusted partners for

distribution, eliminating the need to duplicate their efforts.
Another core principle is that this new information infrastructure will be tightly integrated into the NCI clinical trials system, an apparatus that is undergoing change.
Staff are working in other NCI offices to develop a comprehensive cancer informatics infrastructure that will support secure access to systems for electronic
submission, review, manipulation, and updating of clinical trials data. The development of such resources will facilitate the rapid and efficient communication of
information across systems and among the various components of the National Cancer Program. 32
The NCI designated health communication as one of the extraordinary opportunities for investment in the bypass budget for 2001. ICIC staff are active participants in
the development of a comprehensive strategy for funding research in cancer communications and developing strategies for improving access and use of cancer
information regardless of race, ethnicity, health status, education, income, age, gender, or geographic area. 4
Site Design
In a study of 15 large Web sites, users clicked away in frustration, complaining that they could not find the information they sought 58% of the time. 33 Despite
attractive graphic identities and volumes of valuable content, these sites did not provide intuitive access to information because the information architecture did not
assist users in finding information quickly and easily. Often, the site architecture is confusing because the developers did not obtain user input on the organization of
information; hierarchy and layout of menus; ease of navigation; usability of search forms, site indexes, and instructions for users; and the overall graphic design of the
system.
To ensure that the new CancerNet Web site would not fall prey to such problems, ICIC staff made use of emerging research on Web site usability engineering. The
principles of usability engineering provide guidance on overall Web site design, navigation, and functionality. Usability engineering assists Web designers in
achieving their objectives by requiring them to identify and focus on the goal of the Web site, the needs of the target audience, and the technical constraints that a
typical user faces with regard to hardware, software, access, and experience before developing the Web site. It is a cost-effective technique that eliminates the need
to build a site until key components of its functionality are evident from user input.
An integral part of the redesign was the prospective gathering of data on the information needs of the full spectrum of current and potential users. An online
questionnaire provided input from more than 600 individuals; 37% were accessing the site for the first time, 23% were looking for information on a specific cancer, and
11% were seeking clinical trial information. After this stage, personal interviews were conducted with current and potential users to further define their information
requirements. Based on this feedback, the first prototype was constructed and then subjected to iterative evaluations with current and potential users to see if their
needs were being served by the prototype. Test participants representing the various target audiences were recruited to search for information in response to a series
of specific questions. While attempting to find the information required to answer the questions, test participants were asked to “think out loud” so that their thought
processes could be captured and recorded on videotape to identify flaws in terminology, layout of information, hierarchy, menu structure, and navigational elements.
The process proved to be an effective method of validating the information architecture and drove the redesign process. For example, usability tests conclusively
documented that there was no single preferred way to search for information. Therefore, the new site was designed to permit users to find information in multiple
ways, with each path linking to the same page, so that a primary document exists in only one place on the Web site.
In November 1999, ICIC staff launched the first version of the redesigned CancerNet Web site. One of the things that ICIC staff were most proud of was the fact that
the new site was built with user input at every stage of development. Major enhancements include a new user interface that makes site navigation easy;
cancer-specific pages that provide ready access to all of the information on the site about that cancer ( http://cancernet. nci.nih.gov/cancertypes.html ); powerful new
search capabilities (http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/searchoptions.html ); a network of hyperlinks between PDQ summaries, clinical trials, and CANCERLIT citations; a
guide for first time visitors with hyperlinks to the information described ( http://cancernet. nci.nih.gov/firsttime.html); a site map; a dictionary of more than 1200 medical
terms; a greatly expanded list of hyperlinks to other cancer-related Web sites; and a publication locator that allows users to view and download NCI publications or
order them by e-mail. Updates on new enhancements, content, search tools, and other changes are featured in a What's New area
(http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/whatsnew.html). This area also will be used to highlight feedback from users, enable them to automatically receive updates on
enhancements to CancerNet, and sign up for the CancerNet listserv. Feedback from this area and iterative usability testing will continue to drive development and
implementation activities.
Multiple approaches for increasing awareness about the new site are being used to heighten the visibility of CancerNet as a primary source for high-quality cancer
information, including a robust system of metatags, an e-mail notification service for users, and reciprocal linking agreements with other Web sites. Licensing efforts
include partnerships with vendors who produce kiosks and those developing health information “portal” sites. ICIC staff will also continue to work with public libraries
to increase awareness and use. CancerNet information is featured inMEDLINE plus, the National Library of Medicine's health and medical information service for the
public (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus).
The “reinvention” of PDQ represents more than the mere updating of PDQ's content or the elaboration of new technologies. At a fundamental level, the redesign
involves a complete rethinking of how technology products such as PDQ should be designed and maintained over time through a process of continuous
refinement.34,35 The phases of product conceptualization, development, testing, and dissemination are no longer thought of as being consecutive; rather, all of these
phases overlap by design. Consumer input throughout product conceptualization helped to focus the developers. Continuous feedback from consumers during early
stages of product development helped to inform and reshape the initial conceptualization, sometimes in dramatic departures from the site as originally conceived.
Continued usability tests will provide additional input and result in further refinements and enhancements that are driven by continuous consumer review of blueprints
and prototypes before new versions and major refinements are implemented and marketed.

CONCLUSION
The Internet will continue to revolutionize the way the world obtains and disseminates information, and rapidly advancing technology promises to continue to
revolutionize the way that medicine is practiced. It is clear that computing and communication technologies have a major role to play in decision support in medicine.
Medical students have access to huge collections of information and can participate in training sessions anywhere in the world. Collaborating physicians can share
patient charts, laboratory results, and x-rays and other images without considering distance or time delays. However, legal considerations, such as malpractice
liability, licensure, accreditation, and reimbursement for teleconsultation, remain to be addressed. With encryption authentication, some sites are already offering
automated claims and payment services, and sensitive materials, such as digital medical records that contain digitized images and full-motion video clips, will cross
the Internet, opening the doors for innovative patient evaluation and consultation, as well as remote assessment and monitoring of patients.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Science Panel on Interactive Communication and Health; Eng T, Gustafson D, eds. Wired for health and well being: the emergence of
interactive health communication. Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1999:1.
2. Cyber Dialogue. Internet Users, World Wide Web URL: http://www.cyberdialogue.com/resource/data/ic/index.html
3. Cyber Dialogue. Healthcare, World Wide Web URL: http://www.cyberdialogue.com/resource/data/cch/index.html
4. Cancer communications. In: The Nation's investment in cancer research. A budget proposal for the year 2001. NIH Publication No 99-4373, October 1999:69. World Wide Web URL:
http://2001.cancer.gov
5. McConnaughey JW, Lader W, Chin R, Everette D. Falling through the net II: new data on the digital divide. National Telecommunications and Information Administration. World Wide Web
URL: http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/net2/falling.html
6. Gustafson DH, Hawkins RP, Boberg EW, et al. Impact of patient centered computer-based health information and support system. Am J Prev Med 1999;16:1.
7. Alemi F, Stephens R. Computer services to patients' homes through their telephones. Application to other disease management efforts. Med Care 1996;34[Suppl]:OS52.
8. Grimes B, Stuart PJ. Is the web bad for your health? PC World 2000;Feb:167.
9. Noble HB. E-MEDICINEa special report: hailed as a surgeon general, Koop is faulted on web ethic. New York Times September 5, 1999.
10. Schwartz J. The fox in ‘chick' Koop: the former surgeon general has gone public, and prospered in the process. Washington Post January 9, 2000.
11. Hubbard SM, Henney JE, DeVita VT. A computer data base for information on cancer treatment. N Eng J of Med 1987;316:315.
12. Hubbard SM, Shields V, Thurn A, DeVita VT. PDQ: access to cancer information: NCI's Physician's Data Query system. In: Dollinger M, Rosenbaum EH, Cable G, eds. Everyone's guide to
cancer therapy, 3rd ed. Kansas City, MO: Andrews McMeel Publishing, 1997:302.
13. Hubbard SM. Access to cancer information, Part I. The Internet challenge. Clin Oncol Alert 1997;12:46.
14. Hubbard SM. Access to cancer information, Part II. The Internet challenge. Clin Oncol Alert 1997;12:54.
15. Hubbard SM, Thurn AL. PDQ: in information systems in oncology. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott
Co, 1997:2983.
16. CancerNet, World Wide Web URL: http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/pdq.html
17. Robinson TN, Patrick K, Eng TR, Gustafson D. An evidence-based approach to interactive health communication: a challenge to medicine in the information age. JAMA 1998;280:1265.

18. CancerTrials, World Wide Web URL: http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov/beyond/evaluating.html
19. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Healthfinder, World Wide Web URL: http://www.healthfinder.gov/; selection criteria can be found at World Wide Web URL:
http://www.healthfinder.gov/aboutus/selectionpolicy.htm
20. Goldwein JW, Benjamin I. Internet-based medical information: time to take charge. Ann Intern Med 1995;123:152.
21. Larkin M. Internet accelerates spread of bogus cancer cure. Lancet 1999;353:331.
22. Sikorski R, Peters R. Oncology ASAP: where to find reliable cancer information on the Internet. JAMA 1997;277:1431.
23. Silberg W, Lundberg G, Musacchio R. Assessing, controlling, and assuring the quality of medical information on the Internet. JAMA 1997;277:1244.
24. Jadad A, Gagliardi A. Rating health information on the Internet: navigating to knowledge or to Babel. JAMA 1998;279:611.
25. Mayer D. Cancer patient empowerment. In: Hubbard S, Goodman M, Knobf T, eds. Oncology nursing updates. Cedar Knolls, NJ: Lippincott, Willliams & Wilkins Healthcare, 1999;6:1.
26. Health on the Net Foundation. HON code of conduct for medical and health Web sites. World Wide Web URL: http://www.hon.ch/HONcode/
27. CancerNet. World Wide Web URL: http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/aboutsite.html#privacy
28. Hubbard SM, Thurn A. The National Cancer Institute's CancerNet: a reliable source of current cancer information on the Internet. Health Care Internet 1997;1:15.
29. Costa A, Hubbard S. Evidence-based medicine: a new challenge. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:987.
30. Cancer Care Ontario Practice Guidelines Initiative. World Wide Web URL: http://hiru.mcmaster.ca/ccopgi/
31. Marcus AC, Morra ME, Bettinghaus E, et al. The Cancer Information Service Research Consortium: an emerging laboratory for cancer control research. Prev Med 1998;27[Suppl]:S3.
32. Informatics and information flow. In: The nation's investment in cancer research. A budget proposal for the year 2001. NIH Publication No 99-4373, October 1999:89. Also World Wide Web
URL: http://2001.cancer.gov .
33. Spool J. Web site usability: a designer's guide. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1999.
34. Iansiti M, McCormick A. Developing products on Internet time. Harvard Business Review September/October 1997:107 (reprint No. 975050).
35. Nielsen J. Top ten mistakes of Web management. Alert box for June 15, 1997; World Wide Web URL: http://www.useit.com/alertbox/9706b.htm

CHAPTER 61 Complementary, Alternative, and Unproven Methods of Cancer Treatment
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 61
Complementary, Alternative, and Unproven Methods of Cancer Treatment
JEFFREY D. WHITE
Definitions
Phenomenology of Complementary and Alternative Medicine in Cancer
Reasons for Cancer Patient use of Complementary and Alternative Medicine Modalities
Complementary and Alternative Medicine Therapies
Antineoplastons
Metabolic Therapies
Biologically Based Therapies
Hydrazine (or Hydrazinium) Sulfate
Laetrile
Supportive Care (Complementary Medicine)
Acupuncture
Pain Management
Self-Help and Support Groups and Hypnosis
Complementary and Alternative Medicine Cancer Research
National Cancer Institute Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative Medicine and the Best Case Series Program
Examples of Complementary and Alternative Medicine Topics Requiring more Research
Practical Issues in the Interface of Oncology and Complementary and Alternative Medicine
Physician-Patient Communication
Interactions of Alternative Medicines with Conventional Medicines
Sources of Information for Patients, Physicians, and Researchers
Chapter References

DEFINITIONS
Alternative medicine is a somewhat contentious but generally accepted term that refers to a diverse assortment of philosophies, theories, and diagnostic, preventive,
and therapeutic practices not generally viewed as arising from or belonging to the modern Western biomedical paradigm. Many of these interventions are used
around the world by indigenous peoples of non-Western cultures as their primary form of health care. 1 However, in most developed countries, these practices
generally are used along with conventional Western medicine. Consequently, the terms complementary medicine and integrative medicine are used often to
acknowledge the blending of these world views and therapeutic approaches. The term complementary medicine can be used also to refer to conventional modalities
used in unconventional ways or to achieve unconventional end points (e.g., psychosocial support groups to prolong cancer patient survival).
In April 1995, the National Institutes of Health Office of Alternative Medicine established a Panel on Definition and Description, charging it “to establish a definition of
the field of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) for purposes of identification and research; and to identify factors critical to thorough and unbiased
description of CAM systems and practices that would be applicable to both quantitative and qualitative research.” 2 The panel defined CAM as follows:
Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) is a broad domain of healing resources that encompasses all health systems, modalities, and practices and their
accompanying theories and beliefs, other than those intrinsic to the politically dominant health system of a particular society or culture in a given historical period.
CAM includes all such practices and ideas self-defined by their users as preventing or treating illness or promoting health and well-being. Boundaries within CAM and
between the CAM domain and the domain of the dominant system are not always sharp or fixed.
Other authors prefer to define complementary therapy separately, believing that it encompasses practices that can be integrated with conventional medicine, whereas
so-called alternative medicines often are promoted as independent therapeutic approaches not amenable to combination with conventional therapy. 3,4 Many other
terms have been used to define this subject: unconventional, unproved, unorthodox, unsound, nontraditional, holistic, and non-Western. Table 61-1 presents a partial
list of CAM modalities used for the prevention or treatment of cancer, of cancer symptoms, or of conventional treatment side effects.

TABLE 61-1. Commonly Used Complementary and Alternative Medicine Modalities in Cancer

PHENOMENOLOGY OF COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE IN CANCER
CAM usage by cancer patients is very prevalent all over the world ( Table 61-2). Recent surveys have reported CAM use by cancer populations in Austria, 5 Australia, 6
Finland,7 Germany,8,9 Italy,10 the Netherlands, 11 Norway,12,13 and 14 Taiwan,15 the United Kingdom,16 the United States,17,18,19,20,21,22 and 23 and Canada.24,25,26,27 and 28

TABLE 61-2. Prevalence of Alternative Cancer Therapy Use among Cancer Patients

A systematic review of surveys of various cancer populations has given some validation to the general gestalt that the prevalence of CAM usage is increasing. 16
However, accurate assessment of trends in CAM usage by cancer patients is rendered difficult by the lack of consistency in the definition of CAM, by survey
methodology, and by population demographics.
One study specifically attempted to gauge the change in prevalence of CAM use by cancer patients. Abu-Realh et al. 29 reviewed data from a subgroup of responders
to the 1992 National Health Interview Survey to determine the growth in use of self-help therapies (e.g., relaxation exercises, imagery, humor, laughter, meditation,
prayer, affirmations, self-hypnosis, and music, aroma, and color therapy) and psychosocial therapies (i.e., counseling and support groups). The authors compared the
percentage of CAM users among individuals with diagnosed cancer prior to and after 1986 and found a 63% increase in use of those modalities (8.3% prior to 1986
vs. 13.6% after 1986).
The growth of general CAM usage in the United States has been investigated more thoroughly. Eisenberg et al. 30 reported results of a follow-up to their 1990 survey 31
of the American public for CAM use. The 1997 survey found that 42% of the interviewed participants had used at least one CAM modality in the last 12 months. Of
the CAM users, 46% had at least one visit to an alternative medicine practitioner. These figures were significantly greater than the 34% overall CAM usage and the
36% of those visiting an alternative medicine practitioner reported in the 1990 survey. These surveys, and others from various countries, also found that CAM use was
more prevalent among younger patients 5,26,28 and those with higher education 18,19,28 and higher income. 18,28
The largest survey of CAM use by U.S. cancer patients was reported by the American Cancer Society in 1992. 32 Telephone interviews of approximately 36,000
households across the nation led to the identification of a group of 3272 living individuals who had had a cancer other than a nonmelanomatous skin cancer.
Approximately two-thirds of these patients were interviewed, and information about the other one-third was obtained from family members. The authors found that 9%
of cancer patients used CAM and that subpopulations of patients with certain tumor types had rates as high as 21% (e.g., brain cancer).
Ernst and Cassileth 16 performed a comprehensive review of surveys of cancer patients' use of CAM. Surveys of cancer patients in various settings have yielded rates
ranging from 9% to 91%. Selected surveys are summarized in Table 61-2. The differences between the prevalence figures obtained likely are due to differences in the
demographics of the populations, the definition of CAM, and the survey methodology.
Some recurring themes are seen across surveys. Most cancer patients who use CAM use more that one modality, often simultaneously. 18,19,33 Greater use has been
noted among patients with advanced disease or a poor prognosis (or both). 9,11,32,34 Many studies have found that most users of CAM therapies for cancer judged them
to be effective and were satisfied with their outcomes. 10,19,24,27
Both similarities and some important differences are seen in the types of CAM modalities used by the general public, by individuals with a known noncancer illness,
and by cancer patients. The most commonly used U.S. CAM modalities identified among patients with a variety of noncancer illnesses are chiropractic, relaxation,
massage, herbal medicines, spiritual healing, and imagery. 30 Among U.S. and Canadian cancer patients, the modalities identified most frequently in the 1990s have
been mind-body approaches (mediation, relaxation, hypnotherapy, visualization, and other imagery techniques); specialized diets and dietary supplements; herbal
preparations; megavitamin therapy; and spirituality, prayer, and spiritual healing (see Table 61-2).
Two surveys reported the use of CAM approaches by pediatric cancer patients. Fernandez et al. 24 surveyed patients attending the only tertiary-care pediatric
oncology center in British Columbia, Canada, and found that 42% of the patients in the study used a CAM modality, with herbal teas, plant extracts, relaxation
therapy-imagery, and therapeutic vitamins being the most common. In a smaller study in the Netherlands, 11 31% of the patients were using alternative treatments, with
a greater rate of usage among the subgroup of relapsed patients (46%).

REASONS FOR CANCER PATIENT USE OF COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE MODALITIES
Many patients use CAM approaches to “boost” the immune system,9,24 but many also choose them with hopes of slowing the progression of tumors or ultimately
obtaining a cure. 24,26 Even in a study of patients referred to a pain and symptom management clinic, most CAM users had used the modalities for a potential
anticancer effect. 26
Some observers have suggested that disease recurrence or progression is the primary trigger for patients to seek CAM therapies. 35 However, for many patients, the
initial diagnosis of cancer raises enough concerns to investigate alternative or complementary modalities. 18 For some patients, experimentation with CAM modalities
may be due to fear of the uncertainty of response to conventional therapy; for others, this choice may be simply an attempt to participate in the healing process. 27
Burstein et al. 18 reported that new use of CAM among a group of women with recently diagnosed early-stage breast cancer correlated with significantly more
depression, less sexual satisfaction, greater fear of recurrence, and somatic symptoms. The problems of low sexual satisfaction and fear remained at the 12-month
observation point, but the other areas improved and were not significantly different from those of nonusers. The authors suggested that initiation of CAM use should
alert clinicians to inquire about anxiety, depression, or physical symptoms.

COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE THERAPIES
CAM therapies for cancer are legion, and many have multiple variations. In this section, some of the more prevalent therapies are described briefly, primarily from the
standpoint of the published evidence. Other therapies are listed in Table 61-1 with references for those not discussed here. For most of these approaches, definitive
clinical trials to assess their potential efficacy have not been performed. For many others, their use continues despite results of randomized controlled clinical trials
indicating no efficacy.
ANTINEOPLASTONS
In the 1960s and 1970s, Dr. Stanislav Burzynski reported the identification of small peptide molecules in the blood and urine of normal humans, which he called
antineoplastons.36,37 Burzynski postulated that these compounds were components of a natural anticancer defense system or “chemo-surveillance system” 38 and
named them for the original designation of the urine fractions from which they were extracted. Antineoplaston A10 is a 1:4 ratio of phenylacetylisoglutamine and
phenylacetylglutamine, and AS2-1 is a 1:4 ratio of phenylacetylglutamine and phenylacetic acid. 39
Burzynski reported his clinical experience with antineoplastons in cancer patients. 40,41 and 42 However, as pointed out in a comprehensive review of the subject, 43 the
use of unconventional definitions of response and the confounding factors of concurrent conventional therapies hamper the interpretation of the results of these
studies. One study by a Japanese group 44 evaluated the toxicity, and preliminarily evaluated the response rates, of patients with various tumors to AS2-1 and A10.
Some of these patients received concurrent chemotherapy. The authors reported responses in 3 of 46 measurable tumors but gave insufficient information about the
patients to assess the role of antineoplastons in these responses.
In 1991, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) reviewed a series of seven case reports of patients with brain tumors treated with antineoplastons. The reviewers found
that presumptive evidence of antitumor activity was demonstrated, and phase II trials were initiated.
A trial of patients with recurrent high-grade glioma was designed and initiated with significant input from Burzynski. 39 Nine patients were treated with AS2-1 and A10 in
the study before accrual was halted, owing to an inability to reach agreement with the supplier of the antineoplastons on protocol modifications designed to increase
accrual. None of the six assessable patients manifested a radiographic remission, and all had progressive disease within less than 10 weeks of starting treatment. A
recent study of continuous infusion of phenylacetate alone in patients with recurrent malignant gliomas has revealed low-level activity (3 partial responses of 40
patients). 45
METABOLIC THERAPIES

Gerson Therapy
A therapy for cancer and other illnesses was developed empirically by Max B. Gerson, a German-born physician, and was administered in his sanitarium during the
1930s, 1940s, and 1950s until his death in 1959. 46,47 Gerson sought to “balance” potassium and sodium, as their “imbalance” was thought to support tumor growth.
His therapy consisted of a low sodium, high potassium, lactovegetarian diet that emphasized fresh vegetables and fruit juices and vitamin supplements. Frequent
enemas, including coffee enemas, and injections of a liver extract also were part of the regimen. Raw veal liver juice was discontinued in 1987, owing to contamination
with Campylobacter fetus.
In 1977, the Gerson Institute was founded and based in Bonita, CA. The Institute oversees a clinic in Tijuana, Mexico [Centro Hospitalario Internacional del Pacifico,
SA (CHIPSA)] where the Gerson therapy is offered along with other adjunctive measures. 48
A retrospective study of 235 melanoma patients treated from 1975 to 1990 at the CHIPSA clinic has been published. 49 This report evaluated the 5-year survival rates
of the 153 patients for which adequate staging information was available and compared them to historical controls. The authors reported 100% survival for stage I and
stage II disease and a 71% survival for stage III disease, comparing favorably with the historical control. Other researchers have claimed that the Gerson regimen is
useful to palliate pain and diminish the side effects of conventional irradiation and chemotherapy. 50
Macrobiotic Diet
Apparently, the macrobiotic philosophy was developed by George Ohsawa (1893 to 1966) (also known as Yukikazu Sakurazawa), who first introduced his concepts to
the United States in 1959. Subsequently, macrobiotic theories and practices were developed and promoted by Michio Kushi who, in 1978, founded the Kushi Institute.
This establishment offers courses in physical and psychological health and in ecology, spiritual development, and world peace.
Originally, Ohsawa described 10 stages of diet designated –3 to +7. The +7 diet consisted of 100% cereals and was prescribed for short periods to patients with
various illnesses, including cancer. 51 Reports of clinically significant vitamin and mineral deficiency states were reported with some versions of this diet. 52,53 However,
the standard macrobiotic diet currently recommended by Kushi 54 is a better-balanced, high–complex carbohydrate, low-fat vegetarian diet that may include small
amounts of seafood. Individuals consuming a macrobiotic diet have been found to have urinary levels of diphenolic phytoestrogens much higher than those of control
groups of lacto-ovovegetarians or omnivores. 55
Two unreported retrospective studies of survival of patients with pancreatic and prostate cancer and a series of case reports were reviewed by the Unconventional
Cancer Therapies Panel of the Office of Technology Assessment. 51 Despite this, no consensus of compelling evidence for activity was obtained.
Kelley-Gonzalez Regimen
In the 1950s and 1960s, Dr. William D. Kelley, 57 a dentist from the Midwest, developed a theory of health and illness that classified people as metabolic types, with
physiologies in which the activity either of the parasympathetic or of the sympathetic nervous system was dominant or the two were balanced. 56 He then prescribed
diets ranging from purely vegetarian (for sympathetic types) to predominantly meat-containing (for parasympathetic types) to compensate for years of “wrong” diets
that had resulted in illness. Kelley also believed that pancreatic proteolytic enzymes were secreted into the blood stream and acted as the body's first line of defense
against malignancy.
The Kelley program for cancer treatment consists of six basic components: (1) the appropriate diet, (2) vitamin and mineral supplementation, (3) concentrates of raw
beef organs and glands in pill form, (4) digestive aids, including pepsin, hydrochloric acid, bile, and various pancreatic enzymes, (5) frequent doses of proteolytic
pancreatic enzymes between meals, and (6) a “detoxification” regimen that included frequent coffee enemas. 57
Currently, variations of the Kelley regimen still are practiced by a few individuals in the United States. Dr. Nicholas Gonzalez has used this approach for several years
and recently reported the results of a small prospective study in advanced pancreatic cancer patients. 58 Over the period of the study, 36 patients with pancreatic
cancer were seen. Eleven of these patients were considered assessable, and the other 25 were deemed unassessable because they either did not start the regimen
or stopped taking the therapy in less than 8 weeks (n = 13) or had one of six other exclusion criteria (n = 12). The patients had stage I to stage IV pancreatic cancer.
All patients' tumors either were unresected or resected incompletely. The median survival was 17.0 months in the treatment group, compared to a literature control
showing a 4- to 6-month median survival. A trial of this regimen versus gemcitabine in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer is under way at Columbia University.
BIOLOGICALLY BASED THERAPIES
Cartilage (Shark and Bovine)
Cartilage products of various sources long have been suspected of having anticancer activities and have been the subject of much lay literature. Frequently, shark
cartilage is used by U.S. and Canadian cancer patients. 19,24 Estimates for 1992 maintained that more than 50,000 Americans used shark cartilage products. 59
Some shark cartilage extracts and various isolated molecular species have in vitro antiangiogenesis and matrix metalloprotease inhibitor activity. 60,61,62 and 63 Evidence
of oral bioavailability of the active components on a water-soluble shark cartilage extract has been demonstrated in a rat model. 64
Reports of positive results from a Cuban trial of shark cartilage were aired on the television news magazine “60 Minutes” in 1994 65 but have not been followed by a
published scientific article. Miller et al. 66 reported a phase I and II trial of a powdered shark cartilage product in which 60 patients with advanced, previously treated
cancers were treated with 1 g/kg/d orally. The dose was increased to 1.3 g/kg if no response was seen after 6 weeks. No patient experienced a complete or partial
remission, but 10 of 50 assessable patients had stable disease for at least 12 weeks. Another single-arm trial has been reported, but the results were confounded by
the presence of concurrent conventional therapy. 67 Phase III trials of two oral shark cartilage products in advanced cancer patients are planned by the M.D. Anderson
Community Clinical Oncology Program and the North Central Cancer Treatment Group.
Bovine cartilage has been administered either subcutaneously only 68 or both orally and subcutaneously. 69,70 Puccio et al.70 reported 3 partial remissions in 22
metastatic renal carcinoma patients. Another study by Romano et al. 68 obtained one complete remission in nine patients with various types of tumors. The complete
remission is reported to have been the resolution of lung metastases and a flank mass in a patient with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. This response had been
continuous for 9 months when the trial was reported. The largest experience of human cancers treated with bovine cartilage was reported by Prudden. 69 He reported a
90% response rate (61% complete response) in 31 cases of a variety of malignancies.
Herbal Mixtures
ESSIAC. The Essiac herbal mixture has been used widely in Canada since the 1920s. The original recipe for this mixture is said to have been developed by an Ojibwa

healer and was given to Rene Caisse (Essiac is Caisse spelled backward), a nurse working in Ontario, Canada, by a woman who believed herself to have been cured
of breast cancer through its use. 71
The original recipe contained four main herbs: burdock root ( Arctium lappa) (also used in the Hoxsey treatment, discussed next in this chapter); Indian or turkey
rhubarb (Rheum palmatum); sheep or sheepshead sorrel (Rumex acetosella); and the inner bark of slippery elm ( Ulmus fulva or Ulmus rubra). Later, watercress
(Nasturtium officinale), blessed thistle (Cnicus benedictus L.), red clover (Trifolium pratense), and kelp were added. 72 This mixture is manufactured by Essiac Products
(New Brunswick, Canada) and is available directly from the manufacturer or, for Canadian patients, through the Emergency Drug Release Program of Health
Canada.73
The individual herbal components of Essiac have been tested, and reports show varying activities despite the fact that certain purified chemical moieties from each of
the herbs have reproducible antitumor activities. 72 To date, no published clinical trials have evaluated Essiac in cancer patients, but this product continues to be one

of the CAM anticancer therapies used most commonly by American and Canadian cancer patients. 19,24
HOXSEY TREATMENT. The Hoxsey therapy is composed of a variety of herbal preparations made famous by Harry Hoxsey beginning in the 1920s. After attaining a

wide-ranging popularity in the United States, a series of violations of U.S. Food and Drug Administration regulations resulted in the closing of the U.S. clinics and the
export of the treatment to a CHIPSA clinic in Tijuana, Mexico (see Gerson Therapy, earlier in this chapter).
The internal Hoxsey treatment is composed of licorice ( Glycyrrhiza glabra), red clover (Trifolium pratense), burdock (Arctium lappa), stillingia root (Stillingia sylvatica),
berberis root (Berberis vulgaris), poke root (Phytolacca americana), cascara (Rhammus purshiana), aromatic USP 14 (artificial flavor), prickly ash bark ( Zanthoxylum
americanum), and buckthorn bark (Rhamnus frangula).74 The clinic treatment includes other dietary and hygiene manipulations. As with Essiac, some of the purified
components of individual herbs within the mixture have reproducible anticancer activities, but the whole form of the herbs have yielded variable results. Neither
clinical trials nor in vitro or animal model testing of the entire mixture has been reported. Series of case reports were submitted to the NCI in 1945 and 1950 but were
judged to contain no evidence of anticancer activity. 74
MISTLETOE. Mistletoe (Viscum album L.) is used extensively in Europe and is one of the CAM modalities used most frequently in Germany.

9,12,75
A semiparasitic plant

member of the Loranthacea family, mistletoe draws water and minerals from host trees but produces carbohydrates by its own photosynthesis. Loranthacene species
were proposed in 1916 to be useful in cancer by Rudolf Steiner, an Austrian who founded a system of health promotion called anthroposophy, attempting to link
science and spirituality.
The active moieties in mistletoe are thought to be lectins (glycoproteins) and viscotoxins (proteins). The lectin component has been demonstrated to have
immunostimulant activity in vitro. It induces macrophage production of tumor necrosis factor 76 and increases interleukin-1 and interleukin-6 production. 77 The
viscotoxins have been shown to have direct cytotoxic activity against certain cancer cell lines. 78
The currently available mistletoe products are Iscador, Helixor, Abnoba Viscum, Isorel, and Eurixor. They are whole or purified extracts, fermented or nonfermented.
Iscador also has added metals (silver, copper, and mercury).
A large body of clinical literature (case reports, retrospective analysis, and a variety of clinical trials) deals with the commercially available mistletoe products. A few
randomized, controlled cancer clinical trials of mistletoe have been reported from Europe. In the largest study, 677 women who had received radical or simple
mastectomy for breast cancer were randomly assigned to Helixor (parenterally) with or without radiation therapy; to chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide,
methotrexate, and fluorouracil with or without radiation therapy; or to no treatment. 79 A statistically significant survival advantage was identified for the Helixor arm as
compared to no treatment, but no significant difference was found between the Helixor arm and the chemotherapy arm. Although side effects reportedly were not
documented systematically, the primary adverse reactions associated with Helixor were said to be primarily inflammatory reactions at the injection site and occasional
fevers.
In a study of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer, patients were randomly assigned to Helixor and fluorouracil and folinic acid (n = 20) versus fluorouracil and
folinic acid (n = 20). Ten complete remissions were reported in the Helixor group, and six were reported in the control group. Median survival time was 14 months for
controls and 26 months for the Helixor arm (P = .06). The difference in side effects between the two arms was small. Further randomized, multicenter clinical trials are
under way.80
Other studies have investigated the immunomodulatory activity of mistletoe. A study of adjuvant therapy in glioma randomly assigned 35 patients either to receive
subcutaneous injections of a standardized extract of mistletoe lectins for 3 months or to receive no therapy. 81 Increased lymphocyte numbers and activity were noted
in the mistletoe lectin arm as was an improved quality of life determined by a standardized questionnaire.
SPES AND PC-SPES. SPES and PC-SPES are herbal mixtures developed by Dr. Sophie Chen, a researcher at New York Medical College, and distributed by

BotanicLab in Brea, CA. 82 Reportedly, more than 2000 patients have used PC-SPES for the treatment of prostate cancer. 83
SPES contains 14 herbs: Agrimonia pilosa Ledeb, Cervus nippon Temminck, Cheng-min chou, Corydalis busbosa, Ganoderma lucidum, Panax ginseng C.A. Meyer,
glycyrrhiza, Lycoris radiata, Mou hui tou, Phrola rotoundifolia L, Rabdosia rubescens, Stephania delavayi Diels, Stephania sinica Diels, Zanthozylum nitidum.
PC-SPES contains eight herbs: chrysanthemum, isatis, licorice, Ganoderma lucidum, Panax pseudo-ginseng, Rabdosia rubescens, saw palmetto, and scutellaria
(skullcap).
Hsieh et al. 84 demonstrated the induction of apoptosis and down-regulation of bcl-6 in mutu I cells treated with ethanolic extracts of PC-SPES. Tumors induced in rats
inoculated with a metastasizing prostate cancer cell line underwent apoptosis when the rats were fed rodent chow containing PC-SPES at levels of 0.05% and
0.045%. Neither obvious toxicity nor a significant difference in food intake was noted after 8 weeks. Dose-dependent inhibitory effects of dietary PC-SPES were
observed on both tumor incidence and rate of tumor growth. 85
A phase II study of PC-SPES has been performed at University of California, Los Angeles. 86 The results of the treatment of 34 patients (20 hormone-naïve, 14
androgen-independent) were reported. Prostatic-specific antigen (PSA) declined by more than 50% in 9 of 12 hormone-naïve patients and in 9 of 12
androgen-independent patients. Testosterone levels fell to anorchid levels by 1 month in 7 of 21 (33%). The toxicities noted were suggestive of estrogenic activity.
Tender gynecomastia was seen in 71% of patients, and one patient had a thromboembolic event. Sixty percent of patients with previously normal testosterone levels
lost libido and potency when present pretreatment.
Sixteen patients with advanced prostate cancer taking PC-SPES as a dietary supplement (2.7 g daily) were followed in another study. 82 At 3 months, 10 of 16 patients
showed a decrease in PSA levels in excess of 50%. In a report of prostate cancer patients treated with PC-SPES, decreased serum testosterone levels were noted in
six of six men, and drops in the PSA level were noted in eight of eight patients. 87
HYDRAZINE (OR HYDRAZINIUM) SULFATE
Hydrazine is a chemical with a variety of uses and is an important intermediate in the synthesis of some pharmaceutical drugs, such as isoniazid, hydralazine, and
procarbazine.88 Gold89 reported that the growth of Walker 256 tumor in mice was inhibited by hydrazine sulfate. Another study found that Morris hepatoma growth in
rats was inhibited when the animals were fed hydrazinium sulfate, 15 mg/kg orally twice daily for 5 days. 90 However, this response was associated with reduction of
body weight, anorexia, and decreased nitrogen metabolism and retention. An identical group that was fed parenterally sustained body weight but suffered stimulated
tumor growth and symptoms of liver toxicity.
Hydrazine sulfate is also an inhibitor of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, a key enzyme in mammalian gluconeogenesis. This metabolic pathway has been
recognized to play a role in cancer cachexia. 91 Gold92 postulated that hydrazine sulfate interrupts host energy wasting by inhibiting the conversion of lactic acid to
glucose in the liver. This process is also thought to decrease the glucose available to the tumor and therefore can lead to a slowing of tumor growth.
A report of a large patient experience (740 patients) from Russia calculated that 47% of the patients had symptomatic improvement. 93 They also reported some
patients with objective responses (4% of lung cancer patients) or stable disease (22% of lung cancer patients).
Gold 94 studied 84 patients with various cancers and reported that 70% had symptomatic improvement (increased appetite, weight gain, decreased pain) and 17% had
prolonged tumor stabilization or some degree of tumor regression. Three small single-arm trials by other investigators failed to substantiate these findings. 22,95,96
There have been four randomized, controlled clinical trials of hydrazine sulfate in cancer patients that have yielded mixed results. The first study by Chelbowski et
al.97 had the most promising findings but did not show a significant difference in survival between the two arms until a subgroup analysis was done.
The NCI sponsored three follow-up clinical trials. Two trials studied lung cancer patients simultaneously treated with platinum-based chemotherapy regimens with
hydrazine sulfate or placebo, 98,99 and a third study looked at hydrazine sulfate alone versus placebo alone in patients with advanced colorectal cancer. 100 None of
these follow-up studies showed a statistically significant improvement in survival in the hydrazine sulfate arm, and the Cancer and Leukemia Group B study 98 showed

a lesser quality of life in the hydrazine sulfate arm. All together, these three follow-up studies contained more than 600 patients.
There is still significant interest by the public in hydrazine sulfate and a feeling among some that the clinical trials were flawed and the results invalid. The General
Accounting Office investigated the three NCI-supported randomized trials and found that they were accurate. 101
LAETRILE
Laetrile is a mixture of amygdalin, a plant glycoside, and other compounds found in the pits of some fruits, raw nuts, and other plants. 102,103 Although frequently called
vitamin B17 in the lay literature, amygdalin is not recognized as a vitamin by the Committee on Nomenclature of the American Institute of Nutrition. Laetrile has been
given orally and intravenously, with different pharmacokinetics and toxicity profiles.
The NCI supported a trial at the Mayo Clinic using amygdalin and a “metabolic therapy” containing vitamins A, C, E, and B complex and pancreatic enzymes. 104 One
hundred and seventy-nine patients with advanced cancer who had either failed attempts at prior standard therapy or for which no standard therapy with a curative
potential was available were treated. Of the 175 assessable patients, only one met the criteria for a partial remission. There were no other responders, and all patients
had progression by 7 months. The median survival from the start of therapy was 4.8 months.
Despite the fact that no new clinical trials have been reported, use of laetrile continues. 105 No further research appears to be under way.

SUPPORTIVE CARE (COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINE)
ACUPUNCTURE
Dundee et al. 106 found that acupuncture needling with 5 minutes of electrical stimulation at the P6 point (volar surface of the wrist) was effective in preventing
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Ten patients were studied in a randomized, crossover portion of the study in which patients received either P6
electroacupuncture or stimulation at a “dummy” point. The antiemetic effect lasted approximately 8 hours. After a systematic review of the literature, the NIH
Consensus Development Panel on Acupuncture found sufficient evidence existed for efficacy in managing chemotherapy-induced nausea. 107
Preliminary evidence suggests that acupuncture may also be effective in the treatment of vasomotor symptoms (i.e., hot flushes) in men receiving gonadotropin
analogues for prostate cancer therapy. A pilot study used electroacupuncture to a fixed set of acupuncture points for 30 minutes, twice a week for 2 weeks followed by
once a week for 10 weeks. The mean number of flushes per day for the six men who continued therapy for more than 2 weeks decreased from 7.9 during the week
before therapy to 2.5 after 10 weeks. 108
PAIN MANAGEMENT
A variety of CAM modalities have been used to aid in pain management. Reiki, an “energy healing system” based on Tibetan scriptures but developed in Japan, has
been tested in at least one pilot study with reportedly positive effects. 109
Use of relaxation, imagery, and cognitive-behavior training for the management of oral mucositis pain has been studied in a randomized, controlled trial. 110 Ninety-four
patients at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center undergoing their first bone marrow transplant completed the study. Oral mucositis pain levels were
evaluated in four groups of patients. The two groups receiving relaxation and imagery reported significantly lower pain levels as assessed by a visual analogue scale.
A randomized controlled trial of 96 women with newly diagnosed large or locally advanced breast cancer compared standard care versus standard plus relaxation
training and imagery. 111 A significantly improved quality of life was seen in the group receiving relaxation and imaging. Other studies have used questionnaires
designed to assess general patient comfort. One such randomized study by Kolcaba and Fox 112 demonstrated an improved level of comfort among the patients
undergoing a guided imagery intervention.
SELF-HELP AND SUPPORT GROUPS AND HYPNOSIS
There appears to have been an increase in the number of cancer patients attending support groups. 29 Although patients are likely attending these groups mostly for
psychosocial support, there is some evidence that these interventions may also be related to an increased survival for some groups.
Spiegel et al. 113 were the first to report evidence for a beneficial effect on survival of a support group intervention in a group of cancer patients. Eighty-six patients with
metastatic breast cancer were randomly assigned to intervention (n = 50) or control group (n = 36). The intervention consisted of 1 year of weekly 90-minute support
groups led by a therapist who had breast cancer in remission. The groups were structured to encourage discussion of how to cope with cancer and for patients to
express their feelings about the illness and its effect on their lives. Also a self-hypnosis strategy was taught for pain control. The mean survival in control group was
18.9 months versus 36.6 months in the treatment group. Interestingly, a survival advantage was not seen until approximately 8 months after the completion of the
group intervention (i.e., at 20 months from entry on study).
Spiegel and Spira 114 have written a manual explaining the details of their psychosocial intervention. Follow-up studies by Goodwin et al. 115 in Toronto, Canada, and
Spiegel et al. 160 at the University of Rochester are under way.
Another study of a support group intervention with cognitive behavioral therapy in patients with metastatic breast cancer found no survival advantage for the treated
group over a randomized control group. 116 Also a retrospective cohort study of a group of breast cancer patients with localized, regional, or distant disease found no
advantage for the combination intervention of patient and family support groups with directed relaxation, imagery, and meditation. 117
Fawzy et al.118 reported the survival of surgically resected stage I melanoma patients randomly assigned to either six weekly 1.5-hour sessions of group support and
education versus no intervention. An analysis of overall survival of the two groups, 6 years after the surgical excision of the melanoma, showed 10 of 34 dead in the
control group and 3 of 34 in the treatment group. The difference was statistically significant.

COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE CANCER RESEARCH
Many medical and surgical oncologists as well as other health care practitioners and clinical and basic science researchers have recognized the need for good quality
research into CAM modalities. 25,119 However, concerns have been raised about the use of different standards of evidence. 120
Research programs are being established to focus on alternative medicine in cancer. The Osher Center for Integrative Medicine at the University of California at San
Francisco has active protocols for patients with breast cancer and prostate cancer. 121 Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) has recently added an
Integrative Medicine Service, and the University of Texas-Houston has had a center supported by the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine.
The National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM) and the NCI plan to support other centers for basic and clinical research in CAM and
cancer.
NATIONAL CANCER INSTITUTE OFFICE OF CANCER COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE AND THE BEST CASE SERIES PROGRAM
In 1998, the NCI established the Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative Medicine to focus and extend the efforts of the Institute in the arena of CAM. This
office seeks to promote and support research in the various disciplines and modalities associated with the field of CAM as they relate to the diagnosis, prevention,
and treatment of cancer.
Since 1991, the NCI has had a process for the evaluation of data from alternative medicine practitioners of groups of patients with cancer treated with alternative
medical approaches. This process, the Best Case Series Program, provides an independent review of the medical records and primary source materials (medical

imaging and pathology) and an overall assessment of the evidence for a therapeutic effect.
In 1998, the NCCAM of the National Institutes of Health in collaboration with the NCI established a Cancer Advisory Panel for Complementary and Alternative
Medicine that reviews evidence about CAM modalities and advises the director of the NCCAM about promising CAM approaches that warrant further research. The
NCI works closely with this new body, and Best Case Series are now presented to this panel for their review and assessment.
EXAMPLES OF COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE TOPICS REQUIRING MORE RESEARCH
Controversy exists about the consequences of women with or at high risk for breast cancer using soy products or other plants containing phytoestrogens. Herbs such
as dong quai (angelica sinensis), black cohosh, and ginseng as well as foods such as soy contain phytoestrogens. These estrogens bind both physiologic forms of
the estrogen receptor, and some induce signs and symptoms of exogenous estrogen administration. 122 Some of these herbs are used by cancer patients to alleviate
menopausal symptoms.123 Further research is needed to assess the risk-benefit ratio of these various products. Similarly, with the recent growth of interest and use of
the androgen dihydroepiandrosterone, which is available as a dietary supplement, research is needed about its potential effect on men with or at high risk for prostate
cancer.
Another controversy rages over the potential risks and benefits of the use of antioxidants during chemotherapy or radiation therapy. 124,125 With preclinical evidence on
both sides of the issue, definitive clinical trials are needed. The toxicity profiles of herbs and the mechanisms of herb-drug interactions are other areas in which further
research would be immediately rewarding.

PRACTICAL ISSUES IN THE INTERFACE OF ONCOLOGY AND COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE
PHYSICIAN-PATIENT COMMUNICATION
Cases have been reported of patients with potentially very curable tumors who delayed or interrupted conventional treatment to pursue unsuccessful alternative
approaches and subsequently died of advanced cancer. 126,127 and 128 Therefore, the physician's relationship with his or her patient and communication with patients
about CAM are of primary importance. 129 Eisenberg 130 has described an approach for the physician to take in inquiring about and exploring a patient's use of CAM.
INTERACTIONS OF ALTERNATIVE MEDICINES WITH CONVENTIONAL MEDICINES
Oncologists often are not aware of their patients' use of CAM. 17,19,24,25,27 One study found that 29% of cancer patients reported taking an herbal supplement while they
were receiving chemotherapy. 19 The potential for interactions of alternative medicines and conventional medicines is real. One group has reported that a mixture of
naturopathic remedies used by a 7-year-old child reduced the bioavailability of oral mercaptopurine used as maintenance therapy for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. 131
Examples of other interactions are listed in Table 61-3. There are several herbs that theoretically could interact with anticoagulants or might be contraindicated in
patients with thrombocytopenia. Some of these are listed in Table 61-4.

TABLE 61-3. Reported Toxicities or Drug Interactions of Herbs Used by Cancer Patients

TABLE 61-4. Potential and Documented Dietary Supplement–Drug Interactions

SOURCES OF INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS, PHYSICIANS, AND RESEARCHERS
A Canadian study of cancer patients attending an outpatient pain and symptom clinic found that the top two sources of information for CAM modalities that were used
were health store staff and self-help literature followed by family members, friends, and herbalists. 26 Even in a setting with more cultural acceptance of specific CAM
therapies (i.e., Taiwan), the majority of the patients make their decisions about the use of alternative approaches based on information obtained by word of mouth or
through advertisement rather than through consulting with a licensed practitioner in alternative medicine or a conventional health care practitioner. 15
The Office of Technology Assessment Report of the Unconventional Cancer Treatments Panel is a valuable source of background information about many CAM
modalities still in use. This report may be downloaded from the Office of Technology Assessment Web site at http://www.ota.nap.edu/pdf/1990idx.html.
The American Cancer Society has summaries of various CAM modalities on its Web site at http://www.cancer.org. The NCCAM has a Web site at http://nccam.nih.gov
that has links to useful information about CAM research.
The NCI's Cancer Information Service has summaries about CAM modalities available through its CancerNet Web site at http://www.cancernet.nci.nih.gov or via mail.
The Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative Research of the NCI has a Web site ( http://www.cancer.gov/cam) with information about CAM cancer research.
The Task Force on Alternative Therapeutics of the Canadian Breast Cancer Research Initiative has produced several useful reviews of CAM modalities. 132,133,134,135,136
and 137

CHAPTER REFERENCES

1. Bannerman RHO, Burton J, Ch'en W-C. Traditional medicine and health care coverage: a reader for health administrators and practitioners. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1983:342.
2. Panel on Definition and Description. Defining and describing complementary and alternative medicine. CAM Research Methodology Conference, April 1995. Altern Ther 1997;3:49.
3. Cassileth BR. “Complementary” or “alternative”? It makes a difference in cancer care. Complement Ther Med 1999;7:35.
4. Schimpff SC. Complementary medicine. Curr Opin Oncol 1997;9:327.
5. Rasky E, Stronegger WJ, Freidl W. [Use of unconventional therapies by cancer patients.] Soz Praventivmed 1999;44:22.
6. Sawyer MG, Gannoni AF, Toogood IR, Antoniou G, Rice M. The use of alternative therapies by children with cancer. Med J Aust 1994;160:320.
7. Arkko PJ, Arkko BL, Kari-Koskinen O, Taskinen PJ. A survey of unproven cancer remedies and their users in an outpatient clinic for cancer therapy in Finland. Soc Sci Med [Med Psychol Med
Sociol] 1980;14A:511.
8. Kaiser G, Birkmann S, Buschel G, et al. [Unconventional, alternative therapy methods in oncology.] Internist (Berl) 1998;39:1159.
9. Grothey A, Duppe J, Hasenburg A, Voigtmann R. [Use of alternative medicine in oncology patients.] Dtsch Med Wochenschr 1998;123:923.
10. Crocetti E, Crotti N, Feltrin A, et al. The use of complementary therapies by breast cancer patients attending conventional treatment. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:324.
11. Grootenhuis MA, Last BF, de Graaf-Nijkerk JH, van der Wel M. Use of alternative treatment in pediatric oncology. Cancer Nurs 1998;21:282.
12. Risberg T, Wist E, Melsom H, Kaasa S. [Use of alternative medicine among Norwegian hospitalized cancer patients.] Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen 1997;117:2458.
13. Risberg T, Kaasa S, Wist E, Melsom H. Why are cancer patients using non-proven complementary therapies? A cross-sectional multicentre study in Norway. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:575.
14. Risberg T, Lund E, Wist E, Kaasa S, Wilsgaard T. Cancer patients use of nonproven therapy: a 5-year follow-up study. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:6.
15. Liu JM, Chu HC, Chin YH, et al. Cross sectional study of use of alternative medicines in Chinese cancer patients. JpnJ Clin Oncol 1997;27:37.
16. Ernst E, Cassileth BR. The prevalence of complementary/alternative medicine in cancer: a systematic review. Cancer 1998;83:777.
17. Adler SR, Fosket JR. Disclosing complementary and alternative medicine use in the medical encounter: a qualitative study in women with breast cancer. J Fam Pract 1999;48:453.
18. Burstein HJ, Gelber S, Guadagnoli E, Weeks JC. Use of alternative medicine by women with early-stage breast cancer. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1733.
19. Gotay CC, Hara W, Issell BF, Maskarinec G. Use of complementary and alternative medicine in Hawaii cancer patients. Hawaii Med J 1999;58:94.
20. Sparber A, Bauer L, Curt G, et al. Use of complementary medicine by adult patients participating in cancer clinical trials. Oncol Nurs Forum (in press).
21. VandeCreek L, Rogers E, Lester J. Use of alternative therapies among breast cancer outpatients compared with the general population. Altern Ther Health Med 1999;5:71.
22. Lerner HJ, Regelson W. Clinical trial of hydrazine sulfate in solid tumors. Cancer Treat Rep 1976;60:959.
23. Goldstein J, Chao C, Valentine E, Chabon B, Davis L. Use of unproven cancer treatment by patients in a radiation oncology department: a survey. J Psychosoc Oncol 1991;9:59.
24. Fernandez CV, Stutzer CA, MacWilliam L , Fryer C. Alternative and complementary therapy use in pediatric oncology patients in British Columbia: prevalence and reasons for use and nonuse.
J Clin Oncol 1998;16:1279.
25. Nam RK, Fleshner N, Rakovitch E, et al. Prevalence and patterns of the use of complementary therapies among prostate cancer patients: an epidemiological analysis. J Urol 1999;161:1521.
26. Oneschuk D, Fennell L, Hanson J, Bruera E. The use of complementary medications by cancer patients attending an outpatient pain and symptom clinic. J Palliat Care 1998;14:21.
27. Verhoef MJ, Hagen N, Pelletier G, Forsyth P. Alternative therapy use in neurologic diseases: use in brain tumor patients. Neurology 1999;52:617.
28. Warrick PD, Irish JC, Morningstar M, et al. Use of alternative medicine among patients with head and neck cancer. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1999;125:573.
29. Abu-Realh MH, Magwood G, Narayan MC, Rupprecht C, Suraci M. The use of complementary therapies by cancer patients. Nurs Conn 1996;9:3.
30. Eisenberg DM, Davis RB, Ettner SL, et al. Trends in alternative medicine use in the United States 19901997: results of a follow-up national survey. JAMA 1998;280:1569.
31. Eisenberg DM, Kessler RC, Foster C, et al. Unconventional medicine in the United States. Prevalence costs and patterns of use. N Engl J Med 1993;328:246.
32. Lerner IJ, Kennedy BJ. The prevalence of questionable methods of cancer treatment in the United States. CA Cancer J Clin 1992;42:181.
33. Montbriand MJ. An overview of alternate therapies chosen by patients with cancer. Oncol Nurs Forum 1994;21:1547.
34. Risberg T, Lund E, Wist E, et al. The use of non-proven therapy among patients treated in Norwegian oncological departments. A cross-sectional national multicentre study. Eur J Cancer
1995;31A:1785.
35. Holland JC. Why patients seek unproven cancer remedies: a psychological perspective. CA Cancer J Clin 1982;32:10.
36. Burzynski SR. Antineoplastons: biochemical defense against cancer. Physiol Chem Phys 1976;8:275.
37. Burzynski SR. Antineoplastons: history of the research. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1986;12(Suppl 1):1.
38. Liau MC, Szopa M, Burzynski B, Burzynski SR. Chemo-surveillance: a novel concept of the natural defence mechanism against cancer. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1987;13(Suppl 1):71.
39. Buckner JC, Malkin MG, Reed E, et al. Phase II study of antineoplastons A10 (NSC 648539) and AS2-1 (NSC 620261) in patients with recurrent glioma. Mayo Clin Proc 1999;74:137.
40. Burzynski SR, Stolzmann Z, Szopa B, Stolzmann E, Kaltenberg OP. Antineoplaston A in cancer therapy. Physiol Chem Phys 1977;9:485.
41. Burzynski SR, Kubove E. Initial clinical study with antineoplaston A2 injections in cancer patients with five years' follow-up. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1987;13(Suppl 1):1.
42. Burzynski SR, Kubove E. Phase I clinical studies of antineoplaston A3 injections. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1987;13(Suppl 1):17.
43. U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment. Pharmacologic and biologic treatments. Unconventional cancer treatments. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office; 1990;
OTA-H-405, 93.
44. Tsuda H, Iemura A, Sata M, et al. Inhibitory effect of antineoplaston A10 and AS2-1 on human hepatocellular carcinoma. Kurume Med J 1996;43:137.
45. Chang SM, Kuhn JG, Robins HI, et al. Phase II study of phenylacetate in patients with recurrent malignant glioma: a North American Brain Tumor Consortium report. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:984.
46. Gerson M. Dietary considerations in malignant neoplastic disease. Rev Gastroenterol 1945;12:419.
47. Gerson M. A cancer therapy: results of fifty cases. San Diego: Gerson Institute, 1990.
48. U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment. Dietary treatments. Unconventional cancer treatments. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office; 1990; OTA-H-405, 44.
49. Hildenbrand GL, Hildenbrand LC, Bradford K, Cavin SW. Five-year survival rates of melanoma patients treated by diet therapy after the manner of Gerson: a retrospective review. Altern Ther
Health Med 1995;1:29.
50. Lechner P, Kronberger I. Erfahrungen mit dem Einstaz. Aktuel Ernahrungsmed 1990;2:72.
51. U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment. Dietary treatments. Unconventional cancer treatments. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office; 1990; OTA-H-405, 58.
52. Sherlock P, Rothschild EO. Scurvy produced by a Zen macrobiotic diet. JAMA 1967;199:794.
53. Salmon P, Rees JR, Flanagan M, O'Moore R. Hypocalcaemia in a mother and rickets in an infant associated with a Zen macrobiotic diet. Ir J Med Sci 1981;150:192.
54. Kushi M, Denver J, Blauer S. Macrobiotic way: the complete macrobiotic diet & exercise book, 2nd ed. Garden City Park, NY: Avery Publishing Group, 1993.
55. Adlercreutz H, Fotsis T, Bannwart C, et al. Determination of urinary lignans and phytoestrogen metabolites potential antiestrogens and anticarcinogens in urine of women on various habitual
diets. J Steroid Biochem 1986;25:791.
56. Gonzalez N. One man alone: an investigation of nutrition, cancer and William Donald Kelly [manuscript]. New York, 1987.
57. Kelley WD. One answer to cancer, 2nd ed. Mineral Wells, TX: Cancer Coalition, Inc.,1997:74.
58. Gonzalez NJ, Isaacs LL. Evaluation of pancreatic proteolytic enzyme treatment of adenocarcinoma of the pancreas with nutrition and detoxification support. Nutr Cancer 1999;33:117.
59. Workshop on Alternative Medicine. Pharmacological and biological treatments. In: Alternative medicine: expanding medical horizons. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office,
1992:162.
60. Beliveau R, Delbecchi L, Beaulieu E, Kachra Z. AE-941: a potent inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1999;40:458.
61. Folkman J. The vascularization of tumors. Sci Am 1976;234:58.
62. Lee A, Langer R. Shark cartilage contains inhibitors of tumor angiogenesis. Science 1983;221:1185.
63. Oikawa T, Ashino-Fuse H, Shimamura M, Koide U, Iwaguchi T. A novel angiogenic inhibitor derived from Japanese shark cartilage: I. Extraction and estimation of inhibitory activities toward
tumor and embryonic angiogenesis. Cancer Lett 1990;51:181.
64. Evans WK, Latreille J, Batist G, et al. Neovastat (AE-941) an inhibitor of angiogenesis: rationale for development in combination with induction chemotherapy/radiotherapy in patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In: European Cancer Conference in Oncology (ECCO-10). Vienna, Austria, 1999.
65. Lane IW. Having my say. Shark cartilage therapy: a personal history of its development. Altern Complement Ther 1995;1:238.
66. Miller DR, Anderson GT, Stark JJ, Granick JL, Richardson D. Phase I/II trial of the safety and efficacy of shark cartilage in the treatment of advanced cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3649.
67. Milner M. Follow-up of cancer patients using shark cartilage. Altern Complement Ther 1996;2:99.
68. Romano CF, Lipton A, Harvey HA, et al. A phase II study of Catrix-S in solid tumors. J Biol Response Mod 1985;4:585.
69. Prudden JF. The treatment of human cancer with agents prepared from bovine cartilage. J Biol Response Mod 1985;4:551.
70. Puccio C, Mittelman A, Chun H, Baskind P, Ahmed T. Treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma with Catrix. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1994;14:246(abst).
71. LeMoine L. Essiac: an historical perspective.Can Oncol Nurs J 1997;7:216.
72. U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment. Herbal treatments. Unconventional cancer treatments. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office 1990; OTA-H-405, 71.
73. Initiative CBCR Essiac: an information package. Toronto: CBCRI, 1996.
74. U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment. Herbal treatments. Unconventional cancer treatments. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office 1990; OTA-H-405, 75.
75. Munstedt K, Kirsch K, Milch W, Sachsse S, Vahrson H. Unconventional cancer therapysurvey of patients with gynaecological malignancy. Arch Gynecol Obstet 1996;258:81.
76. Mannel DN, Becker H, Gundt A, Kist A, Franz H. Induction of tumor necrosis factor expression by a lectin from Viscum album. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1991;33:177.
77. Bocci V. Mistletoe (Viscum album) lectins as cytokine inducers and immunoadjuvant in tumor therapy. A review. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents 1993;7:1.
78. Jung ML, Baudino S, Ribereau-Gayon G, Beck JP. Characterization of cytotoxic proteins from mistletoe ( Viscumalbum L.). Cancer Lett 1990;51:103.
79. Gutsch J, Berger H, Scholz G, Denck H. Prospektive studie beim radikal operierten Mammakarzinom mit Polychemotherapie Helixor und unbehandelter Kontrolle. Dtsch Zeitschrift Onkol
1988;4:94.
80. Beuth J. Clinical relevance of immunoactive mistletoe lectin-I. Anticancer Drugs 1997;8(Suppl 1):S53.
81. Lenartz D, Stoffel B, Menzel J, Beuth J. Immunoprotective activity of the galactoside-specific lectin from mistletoe after tumor destructive therapy in glioma patients. Anticancer Res
1996;16:3799.
82. Tiwari RK, Geliebter J, Garikapaty VP, et al. Anti-tumor effects of PC-SPES, an herbal formulation in prostate cancer. Int J Oncol 1999;14:713.
83. Chen S. Personal communication,1999.
84. Hsieh TC, Ng C, Chang CC, et al. Induction of apoptosis and down-regulation of bcl-6 in mutu I cells treated with ethanolic extracts of the Chinese herbal supplement PC- SPES. Int J Oncol
1998;13:1199.
85. Mittelman A, Tiawari RK, Chen S, Geliebter J. Preclinical analysis of the in vivo and in vitro effects of PC-SPES on rat prostate cancer cells. Proc ASCO 1999;18:82a.
86. Kameda H, Small EJ, Reese DM, et al. A phase II study of PC-SPES, an herbal compound, for the treatment of advanced prostate cancer (PCa). Proc ASCO 1999;18:320a.
87. DiPaola RS, Zhang H, Lambert GH, et al. Clinical and biologic activity of an estrogenic herbal combination (PC- SPES) in prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 1998;339:785.
88. Schmidt EW. Hydrazine and its derivatives: preparation properties applications. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1984:1059.
89. Gold J. Inhibition of Walker 256 intramuscular carcinoma in rats by administration of hydrazine sulfate. Oncology 1971;25:66.
90. Grubbs B, Rogers W, Cameron I. Total parenteral nutrition and inhibition of gluconeogenesis on tumor-host responses. Oncology 1979;36:216.
91. Keller U. Pathophysiology of cancer cachexia. Support Care Cancer 1993;1:290.
92. Gold J. Hydrazine sulfate: a current perspective. Nutr Cancer 1987;9:59.
93. Filov VA, Gershanovich ML, Danova LA, Ivin BA. Experience of the treatment with Sehydrin (Hydrazine Sulfate HS) in the advanced cancer patients. Invest New Drugs 1995;13:89.
94. Gold J. Use of hydrazine sulfate in terminal and preterminal cancer patients: results of investigational new drug (IND) study in 84 evaluable patients. Oncology 1975;32:1.
95. Ochoa M Jr, Wittes RE, Krakoff IH. Trial of hydrazine sulfate (NSC-150014) in patients with cancer. Cancer Chemother Rep 1975;59:1151.
96. Spremulli E, Wampler GL, Regelson W. Clinical study of hydrazine sulfate in advanced cancer patients. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1979;3:121.
97. Chlebowski RT, Bulcavage L, Grosvenor M, et al. Hydrazine sulfate influence on nutritional status and survival in non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:9.
98. Kosty MP, Fleishman SB, Herndon JE 2nd, et al. Cisplatin, vinblastine, and hydrazine sulfate in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a randomized placebo-controlled, double-blind phase III

study of the Cancer and Leukemia Group B. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1113.
99. Loprinzi CL, Goldberg RM, Su JQ, et al. Placebo-controlled trial of hydrazine sulfate in patients with newly diagnosed non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1126.
100. Loprinzi CL, Kuross SA, O'Fallon JR, et al. Randomized placebo-controlled evaluation of hydrazine sulfate in patients with advanced colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 1994;12:1121.
101. Hydrazine sulfate trials were accurate GAO finds. Cancer Lett 1995;21:5.
102. Nout MJ, Tuncel G, Brimer L. Microbial degradation of amygdalin of bitter apricot seeds ( Prunus armeniaca). Int J Food Microbiol 1995;24:407.
103. Tuncel G, Nout MJ, Brimer L, Goktan D. Toxicological, nutritional and microbiological evaluation of tempe fermentation with Rhizopus oligosporus of bitter and sweet apricot seeds. Int J Food
Microbiol 1990;11:337.
104. Moertel CG, Fleming TR, Rubin J, et al. A clinical trial of amygdalin (Laetrile) in the treatment of human cancer. N Engl J Med 1982;306:201.
105. Diamond WJ, Cowden WL, Goldberg B. An alternative medicine definitive guide to cancer. Tiburon, CA: Futura Medicine Publishing Inc, 1997:1116.
106. Dundee JW, Ghaly RG, Fitzpatrick KT, Abram WP, Lynch GA. Acupuncture prophylaxis of cancer chemotherapy-induced sickness. J R Soc Med 82: 268-71 1989.
107. NIH Consensus Conference. Acupuncture. JAMA 1998;280:1518.
108. Hammar M, Frisk J, Grimas O, et al. Acupuncture treatment of vasomotor symptoms in men with prostatic carcinoma: a pilot study. J Urol 1999;161:853.
109. Olson K, Hanson J. Using Reiki to manage pain: a preliminary report. Cancer Prev Control 1997;1:108.
110. Syrjala KL, Donaldson GW, Davis MW, Kippes ME, Carr JE. Relaxation and imagery and cognitive-behavioral training reduce pain during cancer treatment: a controlled clinical trial. Pain
1995;63:189.
111. Walker LG, Walker MB, Ogston K, et al. Psychological clinical and pathological effects of relaxation training and guided imagery during primary chemotherapy. Br J Cancer 1999;80:262.
112. Kolcaba K, Fox C. The effects of guided imagery on comfort of women with early stage breast cancer undergoing radiation therapy. Oncol Nurs Forum 1999;26:67.
113. Spiegel D. Psychological support for women with metastatic carcinoma. Psychosomatics 1979;20:780.
114. Spiegel D, Spira J. Supportive-expressive group therapy: a treatment manual of psychosocial intervention for women with recurrent breast cancer. Stanford, CA: Psychosocial Treatment
Laboratory, Stanford University School of Medicine, 1991.
115. Goodwin PJ, Leszcz M, Koopmans J, et al. Randomized trial of group psychosocial support in metastatic breast cancer: the BEST study. Breast-Expressive Supportive Therapy study. Cancer
Treat Rev 1996;22(Suppl A):91.
116. Cunningham AJ, Edmonds CV, Jenkins GP, et al. A randomized controlled trial of the effects of group psychological therapy on survival in women with metastatic breast cancer.
Psychooncology 1998;7:508.
117. Gellert GA, Maxwell RM, Siegel BS. Survival of breast cancer patients receiving adjunctive psychosocial support therapy: a 10-year follow-up study. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:66.
118. Fawzy FI, Fawzy NW, Hyun CS, et al. Malignant melanoma. Effects of an early structured psychiatric intervention, coping, and affective state on recurrence and survival 6 years later. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 1993;50:681.
119. Herbert CP, Verhoef M, White M, O'Beirne M, Doll R. Complementary therapy and cancer: decision making by patients and their physicians setting a research agenda. Patient Educ Counsel
1999;38:87.
120. Tannock IF, Warr DG. Unconventional therapies for cancer: a refuge from the rules of evidence? [Editorial]. Cmaj 1998;159:801.
121. Study begins of Chinese medicine to ease chemotherapy side effects. The Blue Sheet, 1998;41:9.
122. Eagan CL, Elm ES, Teepe AG, Eagan PK. Medicinal botanicals: estrogenicity in rat uterus and liver. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 1997;38:293.
123. Boyle FM. Adverse interaction of herbal medicine with breast cancer treatment [Letter]. Med J Aust 1997;167:286.
124. Prasad KN, Kumar A, Kochupillai V, Cole WC. High doses of multiple antioxidant vitamins: essential ingredients in improving the efficacy of standard cancer therapy. J Am Coll Nutr
1999;18:13.
125. Labriola D, Livingston R. Possible interactions between dietary antioxidants and chemotherapy. Oncology (Huntingt) 1999;13:1003.
126. Jenkins CA, Scarfe A, Bruera E. Integration of palliative care with alternative medicine in patients who have refused curative cancer therapy: a report of two cases. J Palliat Care 1998;14:55.
127. Mehta P. Ineffectiveness of laetrile in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 1980;19:363.
128. Coppes MJ, Anderson RA, Egeler RM, Wolff JE. Alternative therapies for the treatment of childhood cancer [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1998;339:846.
129. Risberg T, Bremnes RM, Wist E, Kaasa S, Jacobsen BK. Communicating with and treating cancer patients: how does the use of non-proven therapies and patients' feeling of mental distress
influence the interaction between the patient and the hospital staff? Eur J Cancer 1997;33:883.
130. Eisenberg DM. Advising patients who seek alternative medical therapies. Ann Intern Med 1997;127:61.
131. Fernandez C, Pyesmany A, Stutzer C. Alternative therapies in childhood cancer [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1999;340:569.
132. Kaegi E. Unconventional therapies for cancer: IV. 714-X. Task Force on Alternative Therapeutic of the Canadian Breast Cancer Research Initiative. Cmaj 1998;158:1621.
133. Kaegi E. Unconventional therapies for cancer: V. Vitamins A, C and E. The Task Force on Alternative Therapies of the Canadian Breast Cancer Research Initiative. Cmaj 1998;158:1483.
134. Kaegi E. A patient's guide to choosing unconventional therapies. Cmaj 1998;158:1161.
135. Kaegi E. Unconventional therapies for cancer: III. Iscador. Task Force on Alternative Therapies of the Canadian Breast Cancer Research Initiative. Cmaj 1998;158:1157.
136. Kaegi E. Unconventional therapies for cancer: II. Green tea. The Task Force on Alternative Therapies of the Canadian Breast Cancer Research Initiative. Cmaj 1998;158:1033.
137. Kaegi E. Unconventional therapies for cancer: I. Essiac. The Task Force on Alternative Therapies of the Canadian Breast Cancer Research Initiative. Cmaj 1998;158:897.
138. U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment. Pharmacologic and biologic treatments. Unconventional cancer treatments. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office; 1990;
OTA-H-405, 120.
139. Hodges S, Hertz N, Lockwood K, Lister R. CoQ10: could it have a role in cancer management? Biofactors 1999;9:365.
140. U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment. Herbal treatments. Unconventional cancer treatments. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office; 1990; OTA-H-405, 70.
141. Starn JR. Energy healing with women and children. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs 1998;27:576.
142. Samarel N. Therapeutic touch dialogue and women's experiences in breast cancer surgery. Holist Nurs Pract 1997;12:62.
143. Cohen MA. Emanuel Revici M.D.: innovator in nontoxic cancer chemotherapy 18961997. J Altern Complement Med 1998;4:140.
144. Holzman D. Green tea, mistletoe, and more: Canadians test alternative cancer therapies. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:683.
145. U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment. Immunoaugmentative therapy. Unconventional cancer treatments. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office; 1990; OTA-H-405, 129.
146. Ghoneum M. Enhancement of human natural killer cell activity by modified arabinoxylane from rice bran (MGN-3). Int J Immunother 1998;24:89.
147. Nakazato H, Koike A, Saji S, Ogawa N, Sakamoto J. Efficacy of immunochemotherapy as adjuvant treatment after curative resection of gastric cancer. Study Group of Immunochemotherapy
with PSK for Gastric Cancer. Lancet 1994;343:1122.
148. Ernst E. Thymus therapy for cancer? A criteria-based systematic review. Eur J Cancer 1997;33:531.
149. Jirillo A, Lacava J, Leone BA, Lonardi F, Bonciarelli G. Survey on the use of questionable methods of cancer treatment. GOCS. Grupo Oncologico Cooperativo del Sur Republica Argentina.
Tumori 1996;82:215.
150. Mottonen M, Uhari M. Use of micronutrients and alternative drugs by children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Med Pediatr Oncol 1997;28:205.
151. Gordon DW, Rosenthal G, Hart J, Sirota R, Baker AL. Chaparral ingestion. The broadening spectrum of liver injury caused by herbal medications. JAMA 1995;273:489.
152. Stormer FC, Reistad R, Alexander J. Glycyrrhizic acid in liquoriceevaluation of health hazard. Food Chem Toxicol 1993;31:303.
153. Farese RV Jr, Biglieri EG, Shackleton CH, Irony I, Gomez-Fontes R. Licorice-induced hypermineralocorticoidism. N Engl J Med 1991;325:1223.
154. Unexpected severe illness possibly associated with consumption of Kombucha teaIowa 1995. MMWR 1995;44:892.
155. Page RL 2nd, Lawrence JD. Potentiation of warfarin by dong quai. Pharmacotherapy 1999;19:870.
156. MacGregor FB, Abernethy VE, Dahabra S, Cobden I, Hayes PC. Hepatotoxicity of herbal remedies. Br Med J 1989;299:1156.
157. De Smet PA. Health risks of herbal remedies. Drug Saf 1995;13:81.
158. Miller LG. Herbal medicinals: selected clinical considerations focusing on known or potential drug-herb interactions. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:2200.
159. Reuter HD, Koch HP, Watson LD. Therapeutic effects and applications of garlic and its preparations. In: Koch HP, ed. Garlic: the science and therapeutic application of Allium sativum L. and
related species, 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1996, 156.
160. Spiegel D, Morrow GR, Classen C, et al. Group psychotherapy for recently diagnosed breast cancer patients: a multicenter feasibility study. Psychooncology 1999;8:482.

SECTION 62.1 Gene Therapy
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 62.1
Gene Therapy
PATRICK HWU
Introduction
Methods of Gene Transfer
Retroviral Vectors
Lentiviral Vectors
Adenoviral Vectors
Adenoassociated Virus Vectors
Pox Vectors
Nonviral Methods of Gene Transfer
Gene Marking Studies
T-Cell Marking Studies
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Marking Studies
Genetic Modification of the Immune Response
Active Immunization
Noncytokine Genes
Genetic Modification of Immune Effector Cells
Modification of Tumors with Genes that have Direct Antitumor Effects
Tumor Suppressor Genes
Antisense and Ribozymes
Suicide Genes
Selective Replication of Virus in Tumors
Introduction of Genes into Hematopoietic Stem Cells to Decrease Toxicity from Chemotherapy
Antiangiogenic Gene Therapy
Genes that Inhibit Proangiogenic Cytokines
Genes with Antiangiogenic Properties
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
Gene therapy can be defined as the introduction of new genetic material into cells for therapeutic intent. This encompasses a broad array of experimental cancer
therapies, including immunization with cytokine or tumor antigen genes as well as the introduction of toxic genes directly into tumors ( Table 62.1-1). Since the first
gene transfer trial in 1989, a large number of cancer gene therapy clinical trials have been initiated ( Table 62.1-2). Results of the first clinical trials have been
published, and they highlight not only the potential promise of gene therapy but also the current limitations and areas where further efforts are needed. For example,
because cancer is the result of mutation or loss of genetic material within cells, perhaps the most obvious approach to cancer gene therapy is the introduction of
genes to correct these aberrations. Restoration of the normal p53 gene in human tumor cells deficient of this gene because of gene loss or mutation causes
decreased tumorigenicity in nude mice. 1 However, current clinical efforts to apply this concept have been limited by the absence of technology that would allow
efficient in vivo gene transfer into tumors. As vector technology improves, these approaches may become more feasible.

TABLE 62.1-1. Cancer Gene Therapy Approaches

TABLE 62.1-2. Cancer Gene Therapy Clinical Trials Approved by the National Institutes of Health Recombinant Advisory Committee a

Many gene therapy protocols have used ex vivo gene transfer. This technique involves the removal of cells from an individual followed by gene transfer and growth in
the laboratory before reinfusion into the patient.
Two requirements exist for successful genetic manipulation of a eukaryotic cell. First, a method must exist to provide successful gene insertion into the correct cell
type with adequate efficiency for a particular therapeutic purpose. Some therapeutic approaches may require permanent gene transfer, whereas for others, transient
activity may suffice. Second, the inserted gene must be adequately expressed by that cell. A high level of expression is required for some purposes, whereas a low
level of gene expression is sufficient for others. Constitutive or regulated expression may be necessary, depending on the specific application.

METHODS OF GENE TRANSFER
Numerous techniques are available for gene transfer into mammalian cells ( Table 62.1-3). The choice of a particular gene transfer technique depends on the biologic
requirements of the specific therapeutic strategy. For example, to protect hematopoietic stem cells from the toxic effects of systemic chemotherapy, often given for
several cycles, the multidrug resistance (MDR) gene must be stably integrated into stem cells, using gene transfer techniques that include retroviral vectors. However,

to immunize patients against tumors, it is possible that only transient expression of antigen genes by viral vectors such as adenovirus will be sufficient.

TABLE 62.1-3. A Comparison of Gene Transfer Methods

Many techniques of gene transfer make use of viruses to introduce genetic material, because viruses in most cases can deliver genes to cells with higher efficiencies
compared to nonviral methods.
RETROVIRAL VECTORS
Retroviruses are RNA viruses that are capable of stably integrating DNA within the host cell genome. The replication cycle of a retrovirus begins with viral attachment
to a cell by a specific receptor ( Fig. 62.1-1). The virus enters the cell, and the viral RNA is reverse transcribed to DNA by the virally encoded reverse transcriptase.
The viral DNA is then transported to the nucleus, where it integrates into the host cell genome. The integrated viral DNA, termed the provirus, is transcribed, and then
both spliced and unspliced transcripts are translated to form the viral proteins. Some of the unspliced transcripts are packaged, via a packaging signal sequence (y),
into viral capsids. The mature viruses then bud from the host cell membrane.

FIGURE 62.1-1. Retrovirus replication cycle. The retrovirus uses envelope glycoproteins to bind to specific receptors on the cell surface. Viral RNA then enters the
cell and is reverse transcribed to DNA. The viral DNA is transported to the nucleus, where it integrates in the host chromosome and directs transcription of the
provirus using the viral long terminal repeat. Viral transcripts are translated by the infected cell to form viral structural proteins. Some of the unspliced viral transcripts
are packaged into the newly formed viral particles and are released by budding. (From ref. 243, with permission.)

Retroviral vectors for gene transfer have been constructed by substituting the gene of interest in place of the viral protein coding regions, 2,3 thus making these vectors
replication incompetent ( Fig. 62.1-2). These vectors are packaged into retroviral particles using helper, or packaging, cell lines that contain the structural viral protein
genes in trans (i.e., from another site in the packaging cell genome). Because the retroviral vector contains the y sequences, it is packaged into the mature virus and
is capable of infecting target cells, but it is incapable of replication because of the absence of the retroviral protein coding regions. The viral structural genes, provided
in trans, are not packaged because of the absence of the y sequences ( Fig. 62.1-3).

FIGURE 62.1-2. Schematic diagram of the LNL6 retroviral vector. The protein-coding regions of the virus have been removed and replaced with the gene for
neomycin resistance (Neo R). The viral packaging site (y) has been left intact. The vector is a derivative of the Moloney murine leukemia virus. 244,245 LTR, long terminal
repeats.

FIGURE 62.1-3. Production of retroviral vectors with packaging cells. The gene of interest is cloned into a retroviral vector (see Fig. 62.1-2), and then transfected into
a helper cell line, which provides the retroviral structural genes in trans. The retroviral structural genes cannot be packaged because of the absence of a packaging
sequence (y), whereas the retroviral vector can be packaged, thereby producing a replication-incompetent retrovirus. LTR, long terminal repeats. (From ref. 246, with
permission.)

Retroviral vectors are one of the most common methods of gene transfer in currently approved gene therapy protocols. Their advantages include the ability to stably
integrate into the host genome and the absence of viral protein expression. Current disadvantages of retroviral vectors include low titers, resulting in low levels of
gene transfer efficiency, although new methods have been described to concentrate retroviral supernatants using ultracentrifugation. 4
Retroviral packaging cells can use a variety of envelope genes from other viruses. Because the envelope protein is the primary determinant of the host range of the
retrovirus, the particular envelope, or pseudotype, used can have a profound impact on transduction efficiencies. 5 Table 62.1-4 lists a number of envelope genes
along with their relative host ranges. The development of packaging cell lines that use alternative envelope genes has resulted in significant advances in the ability to
transduce primary lymphocytes. Retroviral vectors produced from the PG13 packaging cell line, 6 which uses the gibbon ape leukemia virus envelope (GALV), are
capable of transducing B cells 7 and T cells 8 with significantly higher efficiencies compared with those derived from amphotropic packaging cell lines. In one study,
transduction of primary T cells was 4- to 18-fold higher with PG13-packaged vectors compared with amphotropic PA317-packaged vectors. 8 This was found to
correlate with an 8- to 19-fold higher expression of the GALV receptor (Pit-1) compared with the amphotropic receptor (Pit-2) in primary T cells, although other factors
besides receptor expression have been found to play a role in transduction efficiency. 9 By combining the use of PG13-packaged vectors with a 1-hour centrifugation
at 1000 g, Bunnell et al. 10 were able to obtain transduction efficiencies of primary T cells in the 40% range.

TABLE 62.1-4. Envelopes Used for Retroviral Vectors

The vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) G glycoprotein can also be used to pseudotype retroviral vectors. 11 Unlike other envelope proteins, the VSV-G protein confers
enhanced physical stability to retroviral particles, allowing concentration with ultracentrifugation to titers of 10 9 or higher. VSV-G pseudotyped retroviral vectors have a
wide host range and have been used successfully to transduce primary T cells. 12,13
In addition, future retroviral vectors may contain improved promoters for higher and regulatable levels of gene expression.
LENTIVIRAL VECTORS
Stable gene transfer using vectors based on murine retroviruses is only possible in dividing cells. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) can infect and integrate into
the genome of nonproliferating cells because of proteins that mediate the active transport of the lentiviral preintegration complex through the nucleopore. These
proteins—integrase, matrix, and vpr—interact with the nuclear import machinery to transport the HIV preintegration complex from the cytoplasm to the nucleus.
Naldini et al. 14 designed lentiviral vectors based on HIV that are capable of stably infecting nondividing cells. A packaging construct was used to express HIV proteins
in trans. To avoid production of wild-type HIV, the construct is defective for the production of viral envelope and the accessory protein Vpu, and has deletions in the 5'
signal sequence. To make defective lentiviral vectors, packaging cells are transiently transfected with the packaging construct, along with a separate plasmid
encoding a heterologous envelope protein, such as VSV-G protein. A third plasmid, the transfer vector, encodes the gene of interest, along with the packaging signal
and other cis-acting sequences of HIV required for packaging, reverse transcription, and integration. 14 Lentiviral vectors are currently being refined to enhance safety,
transduction efficiency, and convenience. 15 HIV-based lentiviral vectors have been shown to be efficient vehicles of gene transfer into postmitotic cells, including
brain, liver, muscle, CD34+ hematopoietic cells, and retina. 14,16,17,18,19 and 20 Current efforts are focused on the use of lentiviral vectors in the transduction of
hematopoietic stem cells in an attempt to enhance long-term engraftment of gene-modified cells. 17,19
ADENOVIRAL VECTORS
The adenoviral genome is divided into four early gene regions, E1 to E4, which are expressed before viral DNA replication, and late genes, which primarily encode
viral structural proteins. On infection, the E1 gene products are expressed first and are responsible for transcriptionally activating other genes that begin a cascade of
events ultimately leading to viral replication. Removing the E1 region therefore results in an adenoviral particle that is replication deficient. These replication-deficient
adenoviruses can be used for gene transfer by cloning the gene of interest into the deleted E1 region. 21 The recombinant adenovirus, however, must be produced
using cell lines that provide the E1 products in trans, such as in 293 cells, which constitutively express Ad5 E1 genes.
Adenoviral gene transfer can be performed in many cells, both dividing and nondividing, with high efficiency, and it can result in high levels of gene expression. In
addition, adenoviral vectors can be produced at high titers and are capable of infecting some tissues directly in vivo, such as pulmonary epithelial cells. 22 However,
because adenoviral DNA exists episomally, with little or no incorporation into the host cell genome, expression of the transgene is transient, and it is lost as the
infected cell divides. For some therapeutic strategies, this high-level transient expression may be adequate, whereas other treatment approaches may require more
prolonged gene expression.
One potential problem with in vivo administration of current adenoviral vectors is their ability to trigger a host immune response. Both neutrophilic and lymphocytic
inflammatory infiltrates can be seen histologically at sites of injection of adenoviral vectors. 23 In addition, antibody responses to adenoviral vectors have been
demonstrated in a variety of animal models, and gene expression with repeated dosing is inversely proportional to the antibody response in some systems. 24 Nude
mice expressing adenoviral vectors in the liver exhibit transgene expression for 60 days, compared with 21 days in normal mice, implying that the absence of T cells
can lead to longer gene expression. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) responses compared with adenoviral proteins also have been reported. 25 It has been postulated
that late gene products, such as adenoviral hexon and fiber proteins, may be the cause of the T-cell response.
The effect of neutralizing antibodies on current clinical efforts with recombinant adenovirus is not clear. In a clinical trial with recombinant adenoviruses containing
tumor antigen genes, high levels of neutralizing antibody were found in the pretreatment sera of patients, which may have impaired the ability of these viruses to
immunize patients.26 In another study, however, intratumoral administration of an adenoviral vector expressing b-galactosidase resulted in b-galactosidase–specific T
helper, CTL, and antibody responses in three of four patients. 27
New generations of adenoviral vectors are attempting to limit the antiviral immune response by eliminating much of the adenoviral genome. Besides reducing
immunogenicity, this also allows an increased gene carrying capacity by the adenoviral vector. Packaging of these “gutless” adenoviral vectors requires helper virus
or the expression of additional adenoviral genes by the helper cell lines. In addition, adenoviral vectors are being developed that may allow targeted, regulable gene
expression.
Burcin and colleagues 28 have reported the construction of a recombinant adenovirus containing a tissue-specific, regulable target gene. The recombinant adenoviral
vector lacked all viral coding sequences to avoid immunogenicity, and it contained a transgene that could be induced in vivo with the antiprogestin mifepristone.
Tissue specificity was conferred by coupling the regulator cassette to the liver-specific transthyretin promoter region. 28 Inducible expression of the transgene was

demonstrated in vivo, but the tissue specificity was not confirmed.
In an effort to confer targeting ability to adenoviral vectors, surface modification of the Ad fiber coat protein 29,30 and 31 or use of adenoviral/antibody complexes 32,33 has
been attempted. Much work in vector development remains to be done for adenoviral vectors to be fully utilized in effective gene therapy strategies.
ADENOASSOCIATED VIRUS VECTORS
Adenoassociated virus (AAV), a member of the parvovirus family, can only replicate in the presence of a helper virus, such as adenovirus. The virus is nonenveloped
and consists of a single-stranded linear DNA of 4.7 kilobases, which contains two major open reading frames. The left-hand open reading frame encodes the Rep
proteins, which are responsible for AAV replication. The right-hand open reading frame encodes the Cap proteins, which form the structural proteins of the viral
capsid. In the absence of a helper virus, such as adenovirus, AAV cannot replicate; instead, it integrates into the host genome through the AAV-inverted terminal
repeats present on each end of the AAV genome. The ability to integrate makes AAV an attractive vehicle for gene transfer.
To provide room for a transgene, the majority of the AAV genome between the inverted terminal repeats can be removed and replaced with a gene of interest driven
by an appropriate promoter. 34 Once packaged, the replication-incompetent AAV vector has been shown to be capable of infecting and integrating into a target cell
genome. However, producing recombinant AAV is cumbersome. The remainder of the AAV genome must be provided in trans, and a wild-type helper virus, such as
adenovirus, must be present. The final recombinant AAV vector must be purified from the helper virus by heat or density centrifugation. Production of large quantities
of high-titer AAV vector free of helper virus and wild-type AAV has been one of the obstacles to using AAV for clinical purposes. However, new packaging systems to
produce helper virus–free recombinant AAV vectors may decrease this problem. 35,36
New hybrid vector techniques are under development that may combine the advantages of two systems. For example, adenovirus/AAV hybrid vectors may allow
efficient, stable gene transfer. 37,38
POX VECTORS
The poxviruses are a family of DNA viruses characterized by a large enveloped virion containing enzymes for messenger RNA (mRNA) synthesis, a genome
composed of a single, linear, double-stranded DNA molecule of 130 to 300 kilobases, and the ability to replicate within the cytoplasm of the infected cell. The poxvirus
genome encodes 150 to 200 genes, which can be divided into early and late genes. Early genes are expressed before viral DNA replication, and late genes are
expressed after DNA replication.
Several properties of poxviruses make them attractive vectors for the introduction of foreign genes. 39,40,41 and 42 Because of the large size of the poxvirus genome, large
amounts of foreign DNA can be incorporated without adversely effecting viral infectivity. Several silent or nonessential regions of the genome have been identified for
the insertion of foreign DNA by homologous recombination. Plasmids that provide viral promoters and regions to facilitate homologous recombination into
nonessential sites, such as the viral thymidine kinase (TK) region, have been constructed to produce recombinant vaccinia vectors. Multiple genes each can be
inserted at a different site in the virus. Screening methods have been designed to isolate and expand recombinant clones containing the genes of interest.
A primary advantage of recombinant poxviruses is the large amount of gene expression that is possible because of the use of vaccinia transcription factors. Because
gene expression is entirely cytoplasmic and does not rely on host-cell transcriptional machinery, it is not dependent on potential regulatory mechanisms of the host
cell, and hence, large quantities of gene expression have been observed in a wide variety of cell types.
Disadvantages of poxviruses are the transient nature of gene expression and the cell lysis that results after infection. Some attenuated vaccinia strains 40 have been
developed that result in delayed lysis of infected human target cells. Avipox viruses, such as fowlpox or canarypox, or swinepox viruses can infect human cells, but
they do not result in cell lysis. 43 Another problem with recombinant poxviruses is that up to 200 viral gene products are expressed, many of which may be
immunogenic or may adversely interact with the target cell or the gene product of interest.
NONVIRAL METHODS OF GENE TRANSFER
Cationic lipids, complexed to DNA, have been developed that are capable of mediating high gene transfer efficiencies in vitro for some cell types. Cationic lipids, 44
such as DOTMA (1,2-dioleyloxypropyl-3-trimethyl ammonium bromide), the prototype cationic lipid, along with a neutral lipid, such as DOPE
(dioleoylphosphatidyletanolamine), can be complexed with DNA and added to cultured cells. New formulations of lipids are currently under development that may
allow improved in vitro gene transfer as well as in vivo administration. Cationic lipid formulations have already been used to deliver genes to the lung in vivo,45 as well
as intratumorally. 46,47 and 48 Most recently, DNA-gelatin nanospheres have been used to allow the slow release of DNA in vivo. In a murine model, intramuscular
injection of nanospheres containing the b-galactosidase marker gene led to higher expression levels than injection with naked DNA or DNA/lipid complexes. 49
Physical methods of gene transfer include the “gene gun,” 50 which propels gold beads coated with DNA into cells. Although this method results in low transfection
efficiencies, gene transfer to epithelial cells can be performed in vivo, giving it a potential role in immunization strategies.
The direct in vivo injection of DNA alone into selected tissues, such as muscle 51 and thyroid, 52 can result in gene transfer. This approach, termed naked DNA, has
been used primarily for studies attempting to immunize against the products of the encoded genes.
Nonviral methods of gene delivery are more convenient and have obvious safety advantages over viral methods. However, the majority of current nonviral gene
transfer methods result in transient gene expression, and the efficiency of gene transfer is lower compared with most viral methods.

GENE MARKING STUDIES
The first gene transfer study in humans in 1989 was designed to assess the safety and feasibility of gene transfer in humans, using a marker gene, neomycin
phosphotransferase (Neo R), an enzyme that inactivates neomycin and neomycin analogues. 53,54
Subsequent goals of gene marking studies were to understand the biology of cancer and cancer treatments. For example, because a unique, foreign gene was
introduced into cells, the fate of these cells could be followed in vivo. Adoptively transferred T cells could be followed for their survival in vivo, and patients receiving
autologous bone marrow transplantations transduced with marker genes could be followed to see whether subsequent recurrences were in part due to viable tumor
cells that were present in the transferred bone marrow.
T-CELL MARKING STUDIES
The first gene transfer study in humans was performed in 1989 in the Surgery Branch of the National Cancer Institute. 54 Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) were
genetically modified with a marker gene encoding Neo R. The goals of the study were to evaluate the safety and feasibility of using gene-modified cells in humans. In
addition, because a unique, foreign gene was placed into the TIL, survival and distribution studies of the infused cells could be done using polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) assays on DNA from peripheral blood lymphocytes and tumor biopsies.
Because this was the first study of its kind, safety issues pertaining to the patients and the public were a major concern by regulatory agencies, such as the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC). Consequently, many safety studies were required before approval of this and subsequent clinical trials. Ultimately, ten
patients were treated, and no safety or toxicity problems were associated with the gene transfer. Using PCR analysis, TILs were found in tumor biopsies up to 64 days
and in peripheral blood up to 189 days after infusion 54,55 (Fig. 62.1-4). Since this initial study, more than 300 human gene transfer and therapy studies have been
approved by the RAC, and research in this field throughout the world has expanded tremendously.

FIGURE 62.1-4. Results of polymerase chain reaction assays of peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL, circles) and tumor-biopsy specimens (squares) obtained from
patients at various intervals after the infusion of gene-transduced tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. Open symbols denote negative results, and solid symbols indicate
positive results. All results were corroborated in at least two separate Southern blot assays. The assays were performed and assessed in a blinded fashion. (From ref.
54, with permission.)

T-cell marking studies have been performed using melanoma TILs, 56,57 renal TILs,58 bone marrow stem cells,59 and anti-HIV CTLs. 60 Using gene-marked Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV)–specific CTLs in immunocompromised patients, Heslop et al. 61 found that EBV precursors could proliferate in response to in vivo or ex vivo viral challenge
for as long as 18 months (Fig. 62.1-5).

FIGURE 62.1-5. Recruitment of gene-marked, Epstein-Barr virus ( EBV)-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) by antigenic stimulation in vivo. DNA was obtained from
peripheral blood mononuclear cells ( MNC) of a patient between 0 and 108 weeks after bone marrow transplantation ( BMT), and it was divided into two portions. One
was analyzed by polymerase chain reaction amplification using EBV-specific primers, whereas the second was amplified using neo-specific primers. The figure shows
the relationship between levels of EBV-DNA and the presence of neomycin resistance (Neo R)–marked, EBV-specific T cells. (From ref. 61, with permission.)

Researchers at the University of Washington in Seattle have used Neo-marked, HIV-1, Gag-specific CD8+ CTL clones to treat HIV-infected individuals. 62 Using PCR
amplification for the neo gene followed by in situ hybridization with fluorescein-labeled neo-specific oligonucleotides, the percentage of circulating transduced cells
could be quantitated by flow cytometry. One day after cell infusion, 2.0% to 3.5% of CD8+ cells circulating in the periphery were neo-positive. The frequency of
neo-modified CTL was found to correlate inversely with the percentage of HIV-infected cells in the peripheral blood after cell infusion. In addition, neo-positive CTLs
were found to accumulate in lymph node biopsies obtained 4 days after cell infusion (2.2% to 7.9%), compared with the concurrent percentages of neo-positive CTLs
circulating in the periphery (0.5% to 0.7%). Interestingly, neo-positive CTL aggregates were found in the parafollicular regions of the lymph node near cells that were
productively infected with HIV. This finding illustrates the utility of cell marking to determine not only the overall traffic and survival of infused cells, but also their
microanatomic localization.
HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL MARKING STUDIES
The ability to label stem cells with unique, integrated DNA sequences has enabled investigators to track stem cells and their differentiated progeny, 63 allowing such
studies as, for example, the comparison of bone marrow stem cells with peripheral blood stem cells for their ability to reconstitute the host. In addition, because
microscopic tumor deposits present within the marrow also are marked by retroviral vectors, attempts have been made to assess the source of disease recurrence
after autologous bone marrow transplantation therapy in patients with acute myeloid leukemia and neuroblastoma. In one study, bone marrow was harvested during
complete remission and retrovirally transduced with the Neo R gene before reinfusion. Three of 12 acute myeloid leukemia patients have relapsed, and in two of these
patients, tumor cells from the relapse contained the Neo R gene. Of nine neuroblastoma patients studied, three have relapsed, and in all three cases, the Neo R gene
was found in the recurrent tumor cells. 63,64,65 and 66 Analysis of neuroblastoma DNA for discrete integration sites revealed that at least 200 malignant cells were
introduced with the autologous marrow transplantation and contributed to the relapse. 66
In a similar study using Neo R transduced autologous CD34 cells in chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) patients, two relapsing patients were studied, and both had
leukemic cells that were positive for the Neo R gene.67 Thus, it is clear that remission marrow can contribute to disease relapse.
Using similar techniques, a variety of bone marrow purging regimens can be evaluated within the same patient to assess their success in eliminating tumor cells from
the marrow.68 This evaluation allows recurrent tumor cells to be analyzed genetically to determine if they had previously been exposed to a particular purging
regimen.
Finally, gene transfer itself is being investigated as a purging technique, using antisense oligodeoxynucleotides against activated oncogenes as a means to eliminate
tumor cells within the autologous marrow. 69,70,71,72 and 73

GENETIC MODIFICATION OF THE IMMUNE RESPONSE
Several approaches have been proposed for cancer gene therapy (see Table 62.1-1). One strategy that has been pursued is an attempt to enhance the immune
response against cancer using gene transfer techniques.
ACTIVE IMMUNIZATION
Much has been learned concerning the nature of the T-cell response to human cancers. Tumor antigens recognized by T cells have been cloned from melanoma
cells. 74,75,76,77,78,79,80 and 81 These antigens have been shown to be nonmutated melanocyte differentiation antigens, nonmutated proteins expressed only in selected
tissues such as testes, or mutated intracellular proteins. Despite the expression of known antigens on tumor cells, however, these tumors grow in their hosts,
seemingly unopposed by any antitumor immune response. This lack of an adequate immune response could be due to a number of reasons, including deficient tumor
antigen processing and presentation, lack of immune costimulation, production of inhibitory factors by the tumor cell, and insufficient helper activity from CD4 cells. In
an attempt to bypass these potential deficiencies and stimulate a stronger antitumor response in the host, tumor cells have been genetically modified with a variety of
cytokine genes and costimulatory molecules, and these modified tumor cells have been used as antitumor vaccines.

Modification of Tumor Cells with Genes That Enhance Tumor Immunogenicity
CYTOKINE GENES. In contrast to the systemic administration of cytokines, which results in low concentrations in vivo, the introduction of genes encoding cytokines
into tumor cells can result in the production of very high levels of cytokines in the tumor microenvironment. This approach is designed to more accurately mimic the
paracrine nature by which cytokines normally interact to regulate immune responses. Tumors have been transduced with a variety of genes in an attempt to enhance
immunogenicity.
Interleukin-2. In several murine models, tumors expressing the gene for interleukin-2 (IL-2) regress after an initial period of growth, leading to long-lasting protection
from subsequent rechallenge. 82,83 In some cases, the immune response was shown to be dependent on CD8, but not CD4. This suggests that the IL-2 released by the
tumor cells was bypassing the need for help from CD4 cells. In many studies, however, it was not clear whether systemic immunity was enhanced to levels greater
than that which could be achieved using irradiated, nonmodified tumor cells.
In another study, 84 intraperitoneal, irradiated, IL-2–transduced murine bladder cancer cells were capable of treating 7-day parental tumors established by orthotopic
implantation of tumor cells into the bladder wall. Irradiated nontransfected cells showed no antitumor response in these experiments.
Forty-five patients with renal cell cancer, melanoma, and sarcoma were treated with intratumoral injections of a DNA plasmid encoding human IL-2 complexed to the
cationic lipids DMRIE/DOPE in a phase I/II study. Partial responses in uninjected tumors were observed in 2 of 14 patients with renal cell cancer and 1 of 16 patients
with melanoma. On immunohistochemical evaluation of pre- and posttreatment biopsy specimens of injected tumors, an increase in IL-2 expression and CD8+
infiltration was observed in some patients. 46
In another study, 23 patients with metastatic breast cancer and melanoma were treated with intratumoral injections of a recombinant adenovirus expressing IL-2. No
clinical responses were seen, but IL-2 protein was detected by enzyme-linked immunoadsorbent assay in tumor at 48 hours but not at 7 days after injection. This
finding demonstrated that some transgene expression could be detected, despite the presence of preexisting neutralizing antibodies against adenovirus. 85 Other trials
have used autologous tumor or fibroblasts expressing IL-2 in melanoma 86 and colorectal cancer patients, 87 but no clinical responses have been reported.
Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) is a cytokine with the unique ability to stimulate the
differentiation of hematopoietic progenitor cells into dendritic cells, a potent antigen-presenting cell. This property may allow increased presentation of tumor antigens
on dendritic cells after immunization with tumors that express GM-CSF. In a comparative study, 88 mice were immunized with irradiated B16 melanoma cells that were
transduced with either IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, GM-CSF, interferon-g (IFN-g), tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), intracellular adhesion molecule 1, or CD2. Only mice
immunized with GM-CSF–transduced tumor cells were significantly protected against a subsequent tumor challenge ( Fig. 62.1-6). IL-4– and IL-6–transduced tumor
cells were minimally protective, but none of the other groups displayed a significant systemic antitumor response. GM-CSF–transduced B16 melanoma cells were also
capable of significantly impacting on 3-day subcutaneous implants of a small inoculum of nontransduced B16 cells. 88 Immunization with GM-CSF–transduced tumor
generated long-lasting systemic antitumor immunity that was dependent on both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. Further studies have demonstrated that GM-CSF
transduced tumor vaccines activate bone marrow–derived antigen-presenting cells to process and present tumor antigens to both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. 89
Activated, tumor-specific CD4+ T cells were in turn shown to express both Th1 and Th2 cytokines that recruited other effector cells to the tumor, including eosinophils
and macrophages. In addition, antitumor activity of GM-CSF–transduced vaccines were found to depend on the production of IFN-g, IL-4, and IL-5. 90

FIGURE 62.1-6. Comparative analysis of vaccine efficacies of a poorly immunogenic murine tumor transduced with different cytokine genes. Syngeneic C57BL/6 mice
were vaccinated subcutaneously with 5 ¥ 10 5 irradiated (3500 rad) B16 melanoma cells transduced with eight different cytokine genes using the MFG retroviral vector.
Animals were challenged 14 days later with 1 ¥ 10 6 live nontransduced B16 cells subcutaneously. (From ref. 88, with permission.) Open circles, animal succumbed to
tumor challenge; solid circles, animal protected from tumor challenge. GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; IFN-g, interferon-g; IL, interleukin;
TNF, tumor necrosis factor.

Three clinical studies have been reported that used GM-CSF–transduced tumors in renal cell cancer, 91 melanoma,92 and prostate cancer.93 In a phase I, randomized,
double-blind dose-escalation study, patients with metastatic renal cell cancer were immunized with intradermal and subcutaneous injections of either nontransduced
or GM-CSF–transduced autologous, irradiated renal cancer cells. Biopsy sites from patients receiving GM-CSF–transduced vaccines demonstrated infiltrates of
macrophages, dendritic cells, eosinophils, neutrophils, and T cells consistent with preclinical studies. Delayed-type hypersensitivity responses using nontransduced
autologous tumor cells revealed eosinophil infiltrates in only those patients who previously received GM-CSF–transduced vaccines. One partial response was seen
out of nine patients treated with GM-CSF–transduced vaccines. 91
In a phase I trial for patients with metastatic melanoma, 21 patients were immunized intradermally and subcutaneously with autologous melanoma cells transduced to
express GM-CSF. Again, immunization sites were found to be infiltrated with T lymphocytes, dendritic cells, macrophages, and eosinophils in all 21 patients. Although
only 1 of 21 patients had an objective partial response, 11 of 16 patients evaluated had T lymphocyte and plasma cell infiltrates in tumor biopsies after
immunization.92 In a phase I trial evaluating GM-CSF–transduced prostate cancer vaccination, delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions against nontransduced
autologous tumor cells were positive in two of eight patients before vaccination and seven of eight patients after vaccination. However, no clinical responses were
reported.93
Interferon-g. The introduction of the IFN-g gene into tumor cells can lead to the up-regulation of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and class II gene
products. 94 Although this effect can lead to decreased tumorigenicity, 95 it is unclear whether systemic immunity is enhanced. In some tumor systems with low class I
expression or antigen processing defects, however, IFN-g–transduced tumor allowed the isolation of CD8+ lymphocytes capable of treating established pulmonary
metastases from the parental, nontransduced tumor. 96 Thus, for some cancers, immunization with IFN-g–transduced tumor cells may allow the isolation of T cells
capable of impacting on established, systemic disease.
Other Cytokine Genes. The introduction into tumor cells of a variety of other cytokine genes, such as TNF, 88,97,98,99 and 100 IL-1,101 IL-4,102,103 and 104 IL-6,105,106 and 107
IL-7,108,109 and 110 IL-13,111 G-CSF,112 MCP,113,114 and RANTES, 115 can lead to decreased tumorigenicity. No evidence suggests, however, that these manipulations can
increase systemic immunity above that which can be elicited from irradiated tumor cells.
Tahara et al. 116 introduced the IL-12 gene into murine MCA207 tumor cells (MCA207-IL-12), which resulted in decreased tumorigenicity. In addition, mice were
injected with 3 ¥ 10 5 MCA207 cells in the left flank on day 0, followed by treatment on day 3 with saline, MCA207-Neo R, or MCA207-IL-12. Thirty-three percent of mice
were free of tumor by day 21 when treated with MCA207-IL-12 tumor, compared to no animals free of tumor that were treated with saline or MCA207-Neo R tumor.116
However, it is not clear whether these effects were due to the paracrine secretion of IL-12 or to a systemic effect of secreted IL-12.
Although the transduction of tumor cells with a variety of cytokine genes can result in decreased tumorigenicity in murine models, few studies have demonstrated that

this transduction leads to an enhanced immune response against the parental, nontransduced tumor compared to immunization with irradiated, nontransduced tumor
cells. In one study, Hock et al. 117 demonstrated that tumor cells modified with different cytokine genes (IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, TNF, or IFN-g) were only slightly superior to
irradiated parental cells as immunogens. Moreover, parental cells admixed with the classical adjuvant Cryptosporidium parvum were found to be superior to the
cytokine-modified tumors in their ability to immunize mice against the tumor. 117
NONCYTOKINE GENES
B7-1 (CD80). The activation of T lymphocytes requires that they come in contact with a specific antigen and a costimulatory signal. One potential reason that some
cancers develop and evade the immune system is that T lymphocytes are not adequately costimulated to become activated. The adhesion molecules B7-1 (CD80)
and B7-2 (CD86) can bind to the CD28 receptor on T cells to provide costimulation. 118 Several groups have demonstrated that tumor cells transfected with B7-1
locally regress and lead to protection against subsequent tumor challenge with the parental tumor. 119,120 and 121 In one study,122 regression of B7-transduced tumors was
dependent on the intrinsic immunogenicity of the parental tumor.
Further studies are needed to assess the potency of B7 in the ability to stimulate an antitumor response.
HLA-B7. Several clinical trials based on murine models have been performed using intratumoral injection with plasmid DNA encoding HLA-B7 in HLA-B7–negative
patients in the hopes of generating a stronger immune response against unmodified tumor cells. 123 Intratumoral injection of HLA-B7 plasmid DNA in a cationic lipid
vector resulted in RNA or protein expression at the injection site in some patients, 47,48 but no tumor regression was seen in noninjected sites.
Immunization with Genes Encoding Tumor Antigens
RECOMBINANT VACCINES. Whole tumor cells have been used as immunogens because the specific antigens recognized by T cells have been largely unknown.
However, the cloning of several melanoma antigens recognized by T cells 74,75,76,77 and 78 has opened new possibilities for active immunization strategies for cancer.
Studies in murine models have demonstrated that antigens expressed at high levels in recombinant adenoviral, fowlpox, and vaccinia vector systems can induce a
significant antitumor immune response against tumors bearing the same antigen. 124,125,126 and 127 Recombinant viral vaccines can result in the in vivo production of high
quantities of heterologous proteins. However, expression of native viral proteins by these vectors can also result in a host immune response against the vector itself,
thereby diminishing the effectiveness of repeated immunizations.
Immunization studies with “naked DNA” given intramuscularly, or DNA administered on gold beads using the “gene gun” technique, have resulted in significant
antitumor effects. Because these methods do not use viral vectors, no irrelevant viral proteins are expressed, thus allowing repeated immunizations.
Current efforts are focused on enhancing immune responses through adjuvant exogenous cytokine administration or introduction of genes encoding cytokines or
costimulatory molecules into the recombinant vectors.
DENDRITIC CELLS. Another strategy to actively immunize a patient against cancer is to use potent antigen-presenting cells, such as dendritic cells. These cells are
capable of stimulating immune responses from quiescent lymphocytes. Dendritic cells pulsed with tumor peptide or protein antigens have been shown to have
significant antitumor effects in murine models 128 and were reported to be effective in one study of patients with lymphomas. Nestle and colleagues 129 treated 16
metastatic melanoma patients with intranodal injections of dendritic cells pulsed with tumor lysates or peptides derived from known tumor antigens. Eleven of 16
patients demonstrated a positive delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction to peptide-pulsed dendritic cells, and clinical responses were observed in five patients. 129
Although antitumor responses can be obtained in murine models by administering dendritic cells pulsed with peptide antigens or whole proteins, this approach limits
immune responses to specific, defined MHC-binding epitopes within a given antigen or requires the production of recombinant proteins. For many tumor antigens,
however, multiple epitopes have been described that bind to a variety of MHC molecules. One strategy that may enable the presentation of multiple, even undefined,
epitopes within a given tumor antigen is the introduction of an antigen gene into the dendritic cell. This strategy may allow multiple epitopes to be presented in the
context of both class I and class II molecules as well as the constitutive expression of these antigens in transduced dendritic cells. Several strategies have been
proposed to genetically modify dendritic cells with tumor antigens. One is to transduce bone marrow cells and differentiate the cells in vitro into dendritic cells, using
GM-CSF. 130,131 and 132 Another is the transient transfection of dendritic cells using cationic lipids, 133 gene gun, adenovirus, 134,135 or recombinant influenza virus. 136
GENETIC MODIFICATION OF IMMUNE EFFECTOR CELLS
Several lines of evidence indicate that adoptively transferred T cells can be therapeutically effective. TILs have been shown to mediate significant responses in
patients with melanoma, even in those who have not been successful with previous therapy with IL-2. 137 Adoptively transferred cytomegalovirus-specific T cells have
been shown to prevent cytomegalovirus infections in patients after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. 138 Infusion of donor T cells has been effective in treating
the EBV-driven lymphoproliferative disease that sometimes complicates allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. 64 Patients with CML recurrence after allogeneic bone
marrow transplantation can experience remission after transfer of donor T cells. 139 Several strategies for the genetic modification of transferred T cells attempt to
increase their effectiveness.
Enhancing Survival of Immune Cells
For T cells to be functional against a tumor, they must survive in vivo, recognize the target, and then execute an adequate antitumor effector mechanism, either by
direct cell lysis or release of cytokines that may attract and stimulate other immune cells. There are several ways to potentially enhance these steps. T cells grow in
response to stimulation by various cytokines, such as IL-2. On adoptive transfer of TILs in murine models, the administration of systemic IL-2 potentiates the antitumor
effect, presumably by maintaining growth and viability of the administered TILs. 140 By inserting the gene for IL-2, TILs may become able to stimulate themselves in an
autocrine fashion, as demonstrated by Yamada et al. 141 and Karasuyama et al. 142 in CTL line and murine HT-2 T cells, respectively. Treisman et al. 143 demonstrated
that a T-cell clone transduced with the IL-2 gene could grow in an IL-2–independent fashion while maintaining antigen specificity. 143 However, further work must be
done to obtain sufficient IL-2 secretion in primary lymphocytes for this approach to be clinically useful. In addition, insertion of the gene encoding the IL-2 receptor,
which is normally up-regulated by lymphocytes after antigen stimulation, may also be required to obtain a proliferative response to IL-2.
Increasing Tumor Recognition by Using Novel Receptor Genes
CHIMERIC ANTIBODY/T-CELL RECEPTOR GENES. Although adoptive immunotherapeutic strategies have been developed for some cancers, tumor-reactive T cells
are difficult to isolate and expand from most types of cancer. A variety of monoclonal antibodies have been developed that bind to specific cancers. Although cancer
therapy with antibodies has been largely disappointing, partially because of the lack of an adequate effector mechanism to destroy tumor cells on binding. By
combining the antigen-recognition domains from antibodies with the intracellular, signaling chains of T cells, chimeric receptors can be generated that activate T cells
based on antibody-like recognition ( Fig. 62.1-7). This approach, which uses the antigen-binding capabilities of antibodies with the potent antitumor activity of T cells,
would allow the production of specific T cells against any antigen for which a monoclonal antibody exists. This strategy could widely generalize the use of adoptive
immunotherapy for cancer and infectious diseases.

FIGURE 62.1-7. The chimeric immunoglobulin T-cell receptor (TCR) combines antibody-variable regions with T-cell signaling chains. In this diagram, a single-chain
antibody variable (scFv) fragment derived from the variable regions of a monoclonal antibody is joined to the Fc receptor g chain, which is related to the TCR-z chain
and can mediate T-cell signal transduction. 149

The successful combination of antibody-variable regions with T-cell signaling chains has been established for several model antigens, such as phosphorylcholine,
digoxin, and trinitrophenyl. 144,145,146 and 147 These initial approaches, however, required the use of two genes, because the antibody-variable region is encoded by a
combination of light and heavy chains. This two-gene strategy, however, is impractical for use in clinical trials using primary T cells, because transduction efficiencies
are relatively low for even one gene. Therefore, chimeric receptors encoded on a single gene 148,149 were designed by making use of single-chain antibody variable
(scFv) regions in which the light- and heavy-chain variable regions are connected by a flexible linker. 150,151 and 152 These scFv fragments were joined to T-cell receptor
(TCR) z or Fc receptor g chains, both of which are closely related and have been demonstrated to be capable of mediating TCR signal transduction. 153,154,155,156 and 157
Using this single-gene approach, receptors have been constructed using the mAb MOv18, which binds to a folate-binding protein overexpressed on most ovarian
adenocarcinomas.158,159 T cells retrovirally transduced with these receptor genes demonstrate specific cytokine secretion and cytolysis when cultured with human
ovarian cancer cells. In addition, intravenously administered murine T cells transduced with this receptor could specifically treat experimental lung metastases from
tumors that express the ovarian cancer antigen. Intraperitoneal administration of these T cells could also successfully treat human ovarian cancer cells growing
intraperitoneally in nude mice. 160 These studies demonstrate that T cells can be manipulated genetically to recognize and destroy tumor cells based on antibody-type
specificity.
Besides triggering direct T-cell activation with g and z chains, antibody-variable regions can be coupled to other signaling chains, such as the intracellular portion of
CD28, an important T-cell costimulatory receptor. This approach has been found to enhance T-cell survival and proliferation in vitro.161
Most recently, the transduction of hematopoietic stem cells with chimeric receptor genes has been under investigation, because this may not only provide a stable
supply of redirected T cells, but also granulocytes, macrophages, and natural killer cells, all of which may have significant antitumor activity on expression of chimeric
receptor genes. Mice that received MOv-g–transduced bone marrow cells exhibited significant antigen-specific antitumor activity in vivo.162
These strategies have the potential of widely generalizing the use of adoptive immunotherapy. scFv-g and -z receptors have been constructed against breast cancer
using an anti-HER2 mAb, 163 colon cancer using an anti-GA733 mAb, 164 and HIV using an anti-gp41 mAb. 165 This strategy could be applied to a wide range of cancer
histologies or infectious diseases for which appropriate mAb exist.
NATIVE T-CELL RECEPTOR GENES. T-cell specificity can also be altered by the introduction of genes encoding native TCRs. The TCR consists of an a and b chain
heterodimer that confers the ability to specifically recognize peptide/MHC complexes on antigen-presenting cells and target cells. TCRs derived from
melanoma-specific CTLs have been identified, cloned, and characterized. 166 Clay et al. 167 transduced primary lymphocytes with a TCR gene specific for the MART-1
melanoma tumor rejection antigen. Because the TCR consists of two individual chains, a retroviral vector was constructed that uses internal ribosomal entry sites
(IRES sequences) that allow the translation of multiple genes from a single transcript. Primary T cells transduced with this construct were capable of specifically
recognizing tumor cells expressing the MART-1 melanoma tumor antigen in the context of HLA-A2. As more TCRs recognizing specific tumor antigens are
characterized and cloned, this strategy may generalize the use of adoptive immunotherapy, circumventing the need to isolate T cells with specific reactivities from
each individual patient.
Transduction of T Cells and Donor Lymphocytes with Suicide Genes
Adoptively transferred T cells have been safely administered to many patients for more than 10 years. In specific situations, however, the adoptively transferred cells
may be toxic to the host, such as in the treatment of immunocompromised HIV patients. In the setting of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for hematologic
malignancies, donor lymphocyte infusions can be highly effective against tumor as well as EBV-induced lymphoma but may also incite graft-versus-host disease. In an
attempt to increase the therapeutic index of adoptively transferred cells in these situations, “suicide” genes can be introduced into lymphocytes to specifically delete
the transduced cells should they become toxic to patients in vivo. The gene for herpes TK (hTK) has been used for this purpose, because it specifically sensitizes
cells to the antiviral agent ganciclovir.
In one study using hTK-transduced donor lymphocytes, three of eight patients receiving donor lymphocytes after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for
hematologic malignancies developed acute or chronic graft-versus-host disease. In these patients, ganciclovir administration significantly diminished the number of
circulating hTK-transduced cells within 24 hours, resulting in complete or partial remissions of the disease 168 (Table 62.1-5).

TABLE 62.1-5. Effect of Ganciclovir Treatment on Elimination of Herpes Thymidine Kinase–Modified Donor Lymphocytes and on Graft-Versus-Host Disease (GVHD)

In another study, anti-HIV CTLs were transduced with a fusion gene encoding hTK and the selectable marker hygromycin before administration in HIV-infected
patients. 169 Because HIV patients are immunocompromised, the CTLs could be irradicated with ganciclovir should the transduced cells become toxic. However, initial
results of the trial revealed that the patients were developing cellular immune responses against the hTK-hygromycin fusion protein, thus demonstrating that foreign
genes, including selectable markers, can themselves become targets of the host immune response.
Increasing Antitumor Efficacy of Immune Cells
TNF has potent antitumor activity against large tumor burdens in some murine models. 170,171 and 172 However, humans can only tolerate 2% of the systemic TNF dose
(by weight) required in mice, due to dose-limiting hypotension. 173,174,175,176 and 177 High doses of TNF, administered locally via direct tumor injection 178,179 or isolated limb
perfusion,180 can result in dramatic tumor regressions in some cancer patients. At the National Cancer Institute's Surgery Branch, regressions of liver metastases have
been seen in patients treated with TNF administered as a component of an isolated hepatic perfusion. 181 Therefore, tumor regressions seem possible in patients when
adequate local concentrations of TNF can be achieved. Because TILs have been demonstrated to accumulate at sites of tumor, 182,183, and 184 the transduction of TILs
with the TNF gene may allow high concentrations of TNF to be delivered locally in the absence of systemic toxicity. 185
Twelve patients have been treated with TNF-transduced TILs in a phase I trial using escalating doses of TILs and IL-2. No safety problems or toxicity have been
detected. Replacement of the TNF transmembrane region with the signal peptide from interferon-g, thus bypassing the transmembrane form, 186,187 resulted in a
fivefold increase in TNF production. 185 Despite this improvement, however, primary lymphocytes transduced with the TNF gene probably do not produce high enough

levels of TNF constitutively to be clinically effective. To optimize this treatment strategy, current efforts are directed toward identifying promoter/enhancer regions that
direct higher levels of gene expression in primary lymphocytes.

MODIFICATION OF TUMORS WITH GENES THAT HAVE DIRECT ANTITUMOR EFFECTS
The gene therapies that have been discussed thus far have all focused on the stimulation of the immune system to react against tumor cells. Another approach to
cancer gene therapy is to introduce genes into tumor cells that have direct antiproliferative or toxic effects on that cell. This approach, however, requires techniques to
directly administer genes into tumor cells in vivo with high efficiencies, which is not technically possible at this time. However, as vector development continues, the
direct administration of genes into patients may play a more important role. Some preliminary studies have been initiated that use direct in vivo administration of
genes into tumor cells.
TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENES
Cancer can result from the abnormal expression of genes that control the cell cycle. Some genes, termed tumor suppressor genes, regulate cell growth, and their
absence by mutation or deletion results in the malignant phenotype. One approach to treat tumors with deleted or mutated tumor suppressor genes is to replace these
genes by in vivo gene transfer. Currently, gene transfer techniques do not exist that are capable of efficiently delivering these genes systemically to all tumor cells in
the body, and significant technical improvements are required if this approach is to become practical.
Because of this limitation in systemic delivery, several groups have attempted local gene delivery of tumor suppressor genes. 188,189 Swisher and colleagues 190 treated
28 patients with non–small cell lung cancer with intratumoral administration of an adenovirus vector containing wild-type p53 complementary DNA.
Reverse-transcriptase PCR analysis of posttreatment biopsies were positive for the presence of vector-specific p53 mRNA in 12 of 26 patients. Partial response of the
injected lesion was observed in 2 of 25 evaluable patients (8%). 190 Because local therapy is of limited utility in the face of metastatic disease, these studies highlight
the need for improved vectors that would allow efficient, systemic gene delivery.
ANTISENSE AND RIBOZYMES
Oncogenes are genes that cause uncontrolled cell growth when mutated or overexpressed, and neutralization of these genes can reverse the malignant phenotype.
One approach to inactivate genes uses antisense oligodeoxynucleotides, 191,192 which are short sequences that are complementary to target RNA transcripts and can
inhibit translation of the RNA into protein.
Oligonucleotides have been shown to enter cells by at least two pathways (i.e., endocytosis and pinocytosis), and significant activity of antisense constructs has been
observed in vitro using tissue culture cell lines. In vitro growth suppression has been demonstrated using antisense oligonucleotides against BCL-2 193 in leukemia
cells, BCR-ABL194 in CML cells, MYC195 in lymphoma cell lines, and MYB196,197 in adenocarcinoma and leukemia cell lines.
Several studies have been performed in mice demonstrating in vivo efficacy of antisense oligonucleotides against tumors. Antisense inhibition of c-myb mRNA
increased survival of scid mice bearing human K562 leukemia cells. 198 In another study, antisense against the p65 subunit of nuclear factor kB inhibited the growth of
the murine fibrosarcoma K-BALB and the murine melanoma B16.199
Webb and colleagues 200 treated nine patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with daily subcutaneous BCL-2 antisense oligonucleotide for 2 weeks. BCL-2
overexpression can promote tumorigenesis by causing resistance to programmed cell death (apoptosis). A complete response was observed in one of nine patients,
with resolution of left axillary lymphadenopathy. 200
A current limitation to this approach is the inability to successfully deliver antisense constructs to tumor cells in vivo with adequate efficiency. In addition, antisense
studies must be interpreted carefully, because of the possibility of nonspecific effects. For example, because charged oligonucleotides are polyanions, they can bind
nonspecifically to growth factors, such as basis fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). 201
Another potential method to target activated oncogenes is through the use of ribozymes. These are RNA enzymes that catalyze endoribonucleolytic cleavage of
RNA.202 Several investigators have reported cleavage of the bcr-abl transcript, which is involved in the pathogenesis of chronic myelogenous leukemia, by specific
hammerhead ribozymes. Anti-fos and anti-ras ribozymes also have been reported. 202 At the present time, however, no adequate ex vivo or in vivo systems can deliver
ribozymes to target cells.
SUICIDE GENES
Because retroviral vectors integrate preferentially into dividing cells, replicating tumor cells might be targeted with relative specificity compared to normal tissues. To
test this hypothesis, Culver et al. 203 implanted cell lines producing recombinant retrovirus containing the hTK gene into brain tumors in rats, then administered
systemic ganciclovir therapy. Ganciclovir is a nucleotide analogue that is converted into a cytotoxic molecule by hTK, but it is a poor substrate for mammalian TK.
Using this method, tumors regressed, and significant toxicity to surrounding normal tissues was not observed. Because the hTK gene can only be delivered locally in
vivo, this treatment approach is limited to those cancers whose primary morbidity is due to local, unresectable disease. More than 30 clinical trials using suicide gene
therapy have been approved by the RAC, including studies of patients with brain tumors, mesothelioma, prostate cancer, head and neck cancer, ovarian cancer, and
colorectal cancer (see Table 62.1-2). These trials use retroviral and adenoviral gene transfer techniques to deliver the herpes simplex virus (HSV)-TK or cytosine
deaminase suicide genes, which is followed by systemic therapy with ganciclovir (for HSV-TK) or 5-fluorocytosine (for cytosine deaminase).
Ram and colleagues 204 treated 15 patients with brain tumors, including malignant glioma (n = 12), metastatic melanoma (n = 2), and metastatic breast cancer (n = 1),
with intratumoral implantation of up to 1 ¥ 10 9 producer cells making retroviral vectors encoding HSV-TK, followed by systemic ganciclovir therapy for 14 days. In situ
hybridization revealed that vector producer cells survived up to 7 days in vivo but were associated with only a low level of gene transfer to tumors. Five of the smaller
tumors (1.4 ± 0.5 mL) showed evidence of antitumor activity, but larger tumors did not respond.
Several groups have reported the local administration of recombinant adenovirus containing HSV-TK, 205,206 but it is not clear whether these approaches have any
advantages over other methods of local therapy. In addition, the tumor specificity of this approach is a potential problem, because, in contrast to retroviral vectors, no
evidence indicates that adenovirus infects dividing tumor cells preferentially over nondividing normal tissue.
In an attempt to enhance the tissue specificity of suicide gene therapy, Pandha and colleagues 207 treated 12 breast cancer patients with intratumoral injections of a
plasmid construct encoding the Escherichia coli cytosine deaminase suicide gene driven by the human erbB-2 promoter, followed by systemic prodrug administration.
Significant levels of expression of the suicide gene were specifically restricted to erbB-2–positive tumor cells. 207
A major limitation in the current application of in vivo gene therapy approaches for cancer, such as suicide gene strategies, is the absence of an adequate delivery
system that could transfer the suicide gene to all cancer cells within a patient's body. Despite a potential “bystander effect,” which may mediate the destruction of
tumor cells surrounding those expressing the suicide gene, current gene transfer technology is too inefficient to allow the application of this strategy for the treatment
of disseminated metastatic cancer. A second limitation to the use of suicide genes is that of specificity. For any cancer therapy to be effective, the toxicity for the tumor
cells must be greater than for normal tissues. Retroviral vectors may theoretically be more selective for tumor cells than normal tissues, because retroviruses only
infect proliferating cells. However, retroviruses are suboptimal for in vivo administration because of their low efficiency of transduction. Adenoviral vectors, on the
other hand, show no selectivity towards tumor cells.
Enhanced tumor specificity might be accomplished by using tumor-specific promoter/enhancer regions to direct transcription of the suicide genes. For example, the
a-fetoprotein promoter is primarily active in hepatoma cells, 208 whereas the tyrosinase promoter is specifically active in melanocytes and melanoma cells. 209 This
approach also has been suggested to target tumor vasculature, using promoters that are relatively specific for endothelial cells, such as the E-selectin, vascular cell
adhesion molecule, and CD31 promoters. 210 The use of tumor- or tumor-vasculature–specific promoters might decrease destruction of normal cells, because they
would not express the suicide gene product. For these approaches, however, the fundamental problem of inadequate gene delivery still remains.

SELECTIVE REPLICATION OF VIRUS IN TUMORS
In vivo gene delivery to tumors using replication-defective viral systems are presently inadequate to obtain sufficient transduction efficiency. The design of a virus that
could specifically replicate in and destroy tumor cells would be of obvious value. Some efforts 211 have used E1B-defective adenoviruses capable of specifically
replicating and destroying tumor cells that lack p53 tumor suppressor function. The p53 protein is a transcription factor that acts as a potent tumor suppressor by its
ability to induce cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. Functional p53 is present in normal cells but is absent in more than 50% of the common solid tumors. Normally, on
viral infection, p53 triggers early apoptosis of the cell, thereby limiting viral replication and spread. However, many viruses have evolved proteins, such as the
adenoviral E1B 55-kD protein, that inhibit normal p53 function, thereby allowing maximal viral replication. E1B-defective adenoviruses, therefore, cannot fully replicate
in normal tissues expressing p53, but they can replicate in tumor cells that lack functional p53.
Bischoff et al. 211 found that an E1B-deleted adenovirus (ONYX-015) could lyse p53-deficient human tumor cells but not cells with functional p53. Intratumoral injection
of ONYX-015 caused regression of human cervical carcinomas grown in nude mice. Heise and colleagues 212 reported augmentation of antitumor effects of ONYX-015
by chemotherapy, as well as the efficacy of intravenously administered ONYX-015 in nude mice with subcutaneous human tumor xenografts. 213 Clinical trials are
ongoing to test this approach in patients with head and neck cancer.
Studies have questioned whether the tumor specificity of ONYX-015 is strictly related to p53 expression by the tumor cells. Rothmann et al. 214 found that replication of
ONYX-015 was independent of p53 status in tumor cells, and Hall and colleagues 215 reported that productive adenovirus infection was dependent on the p53
pathway. Therefore, much needs to be determined regarding the host range and mechanism of action of ONYX-015. In addition, the next generation of tumor-specific
“smart viruses” must address enhanced specificity and systemic delivery of the virus, as well as methods to prevent humoral and cellular host immune responses
against the virus.

INTRODUCTION OF GENES INTO HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELLS TO DECREASE TOXICITY FROM CHEMOTHERAPY
Expression of the MDR gene decreases the toxicity from certain chemotherapy drugs, such as Taxol, Adriamycin, vincristine, and actinomycin D, by encoding for a
transmembrane molecule that actively pumps these cytotoxic agents out of the cell. 216,217 Expression of the MDR gene in tumor cells is commonly associated with
tumor resistance to these cytotoxic agents. Sorrentino et al. 218 transplanted MDR-transduced bone marrow cells into mice and substantially enriched for these cells
after treatment with Taxol. Several clinical trials are now under way that attempt to genetically modify bone marrow cells with the MDR gene, then reinfuse them into
the patient in an attempt to decrease hematopoietic toxicity from subsequent chemotherapy. However, clinical trials with patients receiving transduced bone marrow
have shown that only a small percentage of hematopoietic cells are gene modified. 219,220 This limitation has been confirmed by several groups attempting to decrease
chemotherapy toxicity with MDR-transduced hematopoietic progenitor cells. Cowan et al. 221 found low levels of short-term engraftment of MDR-transduced cells in
three of four patients treated, and Hersdorffer and colleagues 222 had similar results in two of five patients. Hanania et al. 223 found that the method of transduction was
important. They compared a 3-day transduction method on a stromal monolayer to a 4- to 6-hour transduction procedure in a culture bag. Three to 4 weeks after
transplantation, none of ten patients receiving cells transduced with the supernatant method had MDR-positive cells, whereas five of eight patients receiving cells
transduced with the stromal method had MDR-positive cells. 223 However, the percentage of positive cells was not quantified and was presumably low because of the
requirement for sensitive PCR methods for detection.
Therefore, the success of this strategy may depend on whether the levels of gene transfer are sufficient to allow the administration of higher doses of chemotherapy. If
this approach is to have a significant impact in cancer therapy, an effective chemotherapeutic regimen must exist that can eradicate tumor before the development of
significant nonhematopoietic toxicities, such as liver failure.

ANTIANGIOGENIC GENE THERAPY
The discovery by Folkman 224 in the 1970s that tumors produce substances that stimulate the growth of their vasculature has led to intensive investigation into
methods to inhibit tumor neovessel formation. Production of proangiogenic cytokines, including vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and FGF, result in
angiogenesis, which is required for tumor growth. 225 One gene therapy strategy, therefore, has focused on the inhibition of the production or function of proangiogenic
cytokines. A second strategy involves the delivery of genes that encode inhibitors of angiogenesis. 226 A number of endogenous proteins have been described that are
capable of inhibiting angiogenesis, and their expression in vivo may result in antitumor activity through interference with tumor blood supply.
GENES THAT INHIBIT PROANGIOGENIC CYTOKINES
VEGF is a proangiogenic cytokine that can bind to two high-affinity receptors (VEGFR-1/FLT-1 and VEGFR-2/KDR) expressed on vascular endothelial cells. An
endogenous, alternatively spliced soluble form of FLT-1 (sFLT-1) has been identified 227 that is capable of inhibiting the effects of VEGF on vascular endothelial cells
in vitro. Systemic administration of recombinant adenovirus expressing sFLT-1 resulted in tumor inhibition in mice with preexisting lung or liver metastases. 228 In
another preclinical model using GS-9L gliosarcoma cells in rats, intracerebral or subcutaneous intratumoral injection of retrovirus-producing cells encoding a
dominant-negative VEGFR-2 resulted in tumor inhibition that was associated with decreased vessel density within tumors. 229
Antisense approaches also are being tested as a means to inhibit VEGF. Use of a recombinant adenovirus-encoding antisense VEGF for intratumoral injection of
subcutaneous human gliomas in nude mice resulted in the inhibition of tumor growth. 230 The von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene 231 has been shown to down-regulate
VEGF production by human renal cancer cells. 232 Therefore, gene therapy by introducing the VHL gene into tumors is a potential strategy to down-regulate VEGF
expression in vivo. As with other approaches that depend on in vivo gene delivery into tumor cells, this approach is limited by the requirement for an efficient system
that allows gene transfer to a majority of cancer cells in vivo.
Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (u-PA) is a FGF that can result in endothelial cell proliferation. Soluble N-terminal fragments of u-PA have been used to
competitively inhibit the binding of endogenous u-PA with its receptor. Systemic administration of recombinant adenovirus encoding a competitor fragment of u-PA has
been shown to inhibit liver metastases in an experimental model of human colon cancer in nude mice. 233
Tie2 is an endothelium-specific receptor tyrosine kinase that plays an important role in angiogenesis of embryonic vasculature through the interaction with its ligand,
angiopoietin 1. 234,235 Systemic administration of a recombinant adenovirus expressing a soluble Tie2 receptor (sTie2) capable of blocking Tie2 activation resulted in
growth inhibition of subcutaneous murine mammary (4T1) and melanoma (B16F10.9) cells. In addition, the sTie2 recombinant adenovirus inhibited the development
and neovascularization of pulmonary metastaes. 236
GENES WITH ANTIANGIOGENIC PROPERTIES
A number of endogenous inhibitors of angiogenesis have been described. They include antiangiogenic proteolytic fragments, ILs, IFNs, thrombospondins, and tissue
inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs). Angiostatin is a 38-kD internal fragment of plasminogen, and endostatin is a 20-kD fragment derived from the
C-terminal noncollagenous domain of the basement membrane constituent collagen XVIII. 237,238 Administration of angiostatin and endostatin can lead to tumor
dormancy and regression in murine models. 237,238 However, these proteins have been difficult to produce in large quantities for clinical use because of instability.
Because it may be necessary to administer antiangiogenic agents chronically to maintain long-term tumor suppression, other strategies besides administration of
recombinant protein may be required for these approaches to be effective. Gene therapy using genes encoding these proteolytic fragments may be an attractive
alternative to exogenous dosing.
Systemic administration of recombinant adenovirus expressing angiostatin resulted in dose-dependent inhibition of the establishment and growth of C6 rat gliomas in
nude mice.239 Using intravenous delivery of complexes of cationic liposomes and plasmid DNA-encoding angiostatin, Liu et al. 240 demonstrated reduced B16F10
melanoma metastases in a 7-day tumor model.
Feldman et al.241 demonstrated inhibition of subcutaneous MC38 murine colon adenocarcinomas using intravenous administration of recombinant adenovirus

expressing the endostatin gene. In this model, circulating levels of endostatin were as high as 2038 ng/mL in nude mice after injection of adenovirus. 241
Preclinical gene therapy approaches have been investigated using genes encoding a number of other antiangiogenic agents, including IL-4, IL-10, IL-12, IFN-b,
thrombospondin-1, TIMP-1, TIMP-2, and platelet factor-4. In addition, the combination of ionizing radiation and intratumoral administration of a recombinant
adenovirus expressing TNF-a resulted in tumor suppression in a murine xenograft model mediated by the destruction of tumor microvasculature. 242
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Cheng J, Yee JK, Yeargin J, Friedmann T, Haas M. Suppression of acute lymphoblastic leukemia by the human wild-type p53 gene. Cancer Res 1992;52:222.
2. Miller AD, Miller DG, Garcia JV, Lynch CM. Use of retroviral vectors for gene transfer and expression. Methods Enzymol 1993;217:581.
3. Danos O, Mulligan RC. Safe and efficient generation of recombinant retroviruses with amphotropic and ecotropic host ranges. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:6460.
4. Burns JC, Friedmann T, Driever W, Burrascano M, Yee JK. Vesicular stomatitis virus G glycoprotein pseudotyped retroviral vectors: concentration to very high titer and efficient gene transfer
into mammalian and nonmammalian cells [see comments]. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:8033.
5. Miller AD. Cell-surface receptors for retroviruses and implications for gene transfer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:11407.
6. Miller AD, Garcia JV, von Suhr N, et al. Construction and properties of retrovirus packaging cells based on gibbon ape leukemia virus. J Virol 1991;65:2220.
7. Bauer TR Jr, Miller AD, Hickstein DD. Improved transfer of the leukocyte integrin CD18 subunit into hematopoietic cell lines by using retroviral vectors having a gibbon ape leukemia virus
envelope. Blood 1995;86:2379.
8. Lam JS, Cowherd R, Rosenberg SA, Hwu P. Improved gene transfer into lymphocytes using retroviruses that express the gibbon ape leukemia virus envelope. Hum Gene Ther 1996;7:1415.
9. Uckert W, Willimsky G, Pedersen FS, Blankenstein T, Pedersen L. RNA levels of human retrovirus receptors Pit1 and Pit2 do not correlate with infectibility by three retroviral vector
pseudotypes. Hum Gene Ther 1998;9:2619.
10. Bunnell BA, Muul LM, Donahue RE, Blaese RM, Morgan RA. High-efficiency retroviral-mediated gene transfer into human and nonhuman primate peripheral blood lymphocytes. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1995;92:7739.
11. Yee JK, Friedmann T, Burns JC. Generation of high-titer pseudotyped retroviral vectors with very broad host range. Methods Cell Biol 1994;43[Pt A]:99.
12. Sharma S, Cantwell M, Kipps TJ, Friedmann T. Efficient infection of a human T-cell line and of human primary peripheral blood leukocytes with a pseudotyped retrovirus vector. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1996;93:11842.
13. Gallardo HF. Recombinant retroviruses pseudotyped with the vesicular stomatitis virus G glycoprotein mediate both stable gene transfer and pseudotransduction in human peripheral blood
lymphocytes. Blood 1997;90:952.
14. Naldini L, Blomer U, Gallay P, et al. In vivo gene delivery and stable transduction of nondividing cells by a lentiviral vector [see comments]. Science 1996;272:263.
15. Kafri T, van Praag H, Ouyang L, Gage FH, Verma IM. A packaging cell line for lentivirus vectors. J Virol 1999;73:576.
16. Naldini L, Blomer U, Gage F, Trono D, Verma I. Efficient transfer, integration, and sustained long-term expression of the transgene in adult rat brains injected with a lentiviral vector. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1997;93:11382.
17. Case SS, Price MA, Jordan CT, et al. Stable transduction of quiescent CD34(+)CD38() human hematopoietic cells by HIV-1-based lentiviral vectors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:2988.
18. Kafri T, Blomer U, Peterson DA, Gage FH, Verma IM. Sustained expression of genes delivered directly into liver and muscle by lentiviral vectors. Nat Genet 1997;17:314.
19. Miyoshi H, Smith KA, Mosier DE, Verma IM, Torbett BE. Transduction of human CD34+ cells that mediate long-term engraftment of NOD/SCID mice by HIV vectors. Science 1999;283:682.
20. Miyoshi H, Takahashi M, Gage FH, Verma IM. Stable and efficient gene transfer into the retina using an HIV-based lentiviral vector. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:10319.
21. Berkner KL. Expression of heterologous sequences in adenoviral vectors. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1992;158:39.
22. Rosenfeld MA, Yoshimura K, Trapnell BC, et al. In vivo transfer of the human cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene to the airay epithelium. Cell 1992;68:143.
23. Yei S, Mittereder N, Wert S, et al. In vivo evaluation of the safety of adenovirus-mediated transfer of the human cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator cDNA to the lung. Hum
Gene Ther 1994;5:733.
24. Yei S, Mittereder N, Tank K, O'Sullivan C, Trapnell BC. Adenovirus-mediated gene transfer for cystic fibrosis: quantitative evaluation of repeated in vivo vector administration to the lung. Gene
Ther 1994;1:192.
25. Yang Y, Nunes FA, Berencsi K, et al. Cellular immunity to viral antigens limits E1 deleted adenoviruses for gene therapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:4407.
26. Rosenberg SA, Zhai Y, Yang JC, et al. Immunizing patients with metastatic melanoma using recombinant adenoviruses encoding MART-1 or gp100 melanoma antigens. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90:1894.
27. Gahery-Segard H, Molinier-Frenkel V, Le Boulaire C, et al. Phase I trial of recombinant adenovirus gene transfer in lung cancer. Longitudinal study of the immune responses to transgene and
viral products. J Clin Invest 1997;100:2218.
28. Burcin MM, Schiedner G, Kochanek S, Tsai SY, O'Malley BW. Adenovirus-mediated regulable target gene expression in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:355.
29. Wickham TJ, Tzeng E, Shears LL, et al. Increased in vitro and in vivo gene transfer by adenovirus vectors containing chimeric fiber proteins. J Virol 1997;71:8221.
30. Wickham TJ, Carrion ME, Kovesdi I. Targeting of adenovirus penton base to new receptors through replacement of its RGD motif with other receptor-specific peptide motifs. Gene Ther
1995;2:750.
31. Michael SI, Hong JS, Curiel DT, Engler JA. Addition of a short peptide ligand to the adenovirus fiber protein. Gene Ther 1995;2:660.
32. Wickham TJ, Segal DM, Roelvink PW, et al. Targeted adenovirus gene transfer to endothelial and smooth muscle cells by using bispecific antibodies. J Virol 1996;70:6831.
33. Douglas JT, Rogers BE, Rosenfeld ME, et al. Targeted gene delivery by tropism-modified adenoviral vectors. Nat Biotechnol 1996;14:1574.
34. Muzyczka N. Use of adeno-associated virus as a general transduction vector for mammalian cells. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1992;158:97.
35. Collaco RF, Cao X, Trempe JP. A helper virus-free packaging system for recombinant adeno-associated virus vectors. Gene 1999;238:397.
36. Inoue N, Russell DW. Packaging cells based on inducible gene amplification for the production of adeno-associated virus vectors. J Virol 1998;72:7024.
37. Lieber A, Steinwaerder DS, Carlson CA, Kay MA. Integrating adenovirus-adeno-associated virus hybrid vectors devoid of all viral genes. J Virol 1999;73:9314.
38. Recchia A, Parks RJ, Lamartina S, et al. Site-specific integration mediated by a hybrid adenovirus/adeno-associated virus vector. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:2615.
39. Moss B. Vaccinia virus vectors. Biotechnology 1992;20:345.
40. Moss B. Poxvirus expression vectors. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1992;158:25.
41. Jenkins S, Gritz L, Fedor CH, et al. Formation of lentivirus particles by mammalian cells infected with recombinant fowlpox virus. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1991;7:991.
42. Spehner D, Drillien R, Lecocq JP. Construction of fowlpox virus vectors with intergenic insertions: expression of the beta-galactosidase gene and the measles virus fusion gene. J Virol
1990;64:527.
43. Wild F, Giraudon P, Spehner D, Drillien R, Lecocq JP. Fowlpox virus recombinant encoding the measles virus fusion protein: protection of mice against fatal measles encephalitis. Vaccine
1990;8:441.
44. Felgner PL, Ringold GM. Cationic liposome-mediated transfection. Nature 1989;337:387.
45. Stribling R, Brunette E, Liggitt D, Gaensler K, Debs R. Aerosol gene delivery in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:11277.
46. Galanis E, Hersh EM, Stopeck AT, et al. Immunotherapy of advanced malignancy by direct gene transfer of an interleukin-2 DNA/DMRIE/DOPE lipid complex: phase I/II experience. J Clin
Oncol 1999;17:3313.
47. Stopeck AT, Hersh EM, Akporiaye ET, et al. Phase I study of direct gene transfer of an allogeneic histocompatibility antigen, HLA-B7, in patients with metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol
1997;15:341.
48. Nabel GJ, Gordon D, Bishop DK, et al. Immune response in human melanoma after transfer of an allogeneic class I major histocompatibility complex gene with DNA-liposome complexes. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:15388.
49. Truong-Le VL, August JT, Leong KW. Controlled gene delivery by DNA-gelatin nanospheres. Hum Gene Ther 1998;9:1709.
50. Yang NS, Burkholder J, Roberts B, Martinell B, McCabe D. In vivo and in vitro gene transfer to mammalian somatic cells by particle bombardment. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:9568.
51. Wolff JA, Malone RW, Williams P, et al. Direct gene transfer into mouse muscle in vivo. Science 1990;247:1465.
52. Sikes M, O'Malley BW, Finegold MJ, Ledley FD. In vivo gene transfer into rabbit thyroid follicular cells by direct DNA injection. Hum Gene Ther 1994;5:827.
53. Kasid A, Morecki S, Aebersold P, et al. Human gene transfer: characterization of human tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes as vehicles for retroviral-mediated gene transfer in man. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1990;87:473.
54. Rosenberg SA, Aebersold P, Cornetta K, et al. Gene transfer into humansimmunotherapy of patients with advanced melanoma, using tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes modified by retroviral gene
transduction. N Engl J Med 1990;323:570.
55. Rosenberg SA, Anderson WF, Blaese M, et al. The development of gene therapy for the treatment of cancer. Ann Surg 1993;218:455.
56. Favrot MC, Philip T. Treatment of patients with advanced cancer using tumor infiltrating lymphocytes transduced with the gene of resistance to neomycin. Hum Gene Ther 1992;3:533.
57. Lotze MT. The treatment of patients with melanoma using interleukin-2, interleukin-4 and tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. Hum Gene Ther 1992;3:167.
58. Miller AR, Skotzko MJ, Rhoades K, et al. Simultaneous use of two retroviral vectors in human gene marking trials: feasibility and potential applications. Hum Gene Ther 1992;3:619.
59. Brenner MK, Rill DR, Holladay MS, et al. Gene marking to determine whether autologous marrow infusion restores long-term haemopoiesis in cancer patients. Lancet 1993;342:1134.
60. Riddell SR, Greenberg PD, Overell RW, et al. Phase I study of cellular adoptive immunotherapy using genetically modified CD8+ HIV-specific T cells for HIV seropositive patients undergoing
allogeneic bone marrow transplant. The Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center and the University of Washington School of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division of Oncology. Hum
Gene Ther 1992;3:319.
61. Heslop HE, Ng CY, Li C, et al. Long-term restoration of immunity against Epstein-Barr virus infection by adoptive transfer of gene-modified virus-specific T lymphocytes. Nat Med 1996;2:551.
62. Brodie SJ, Lewinsohn DA, Patterson BK, et al. In vivo migration and function of transferred HIV-1-specific cytotoxic T cells [see comments]. Nat Med 1999;5:34.
63. Brenner MK, Rill DR, Moen RC, et al. Gene marking and autologous bone marrow transplantation. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1994;716:204; discussion 214.
64. Brenner MK, Rill DR, Heslop HE, et al. Gene marking after bone marrow transplantation. Eur J Cancer 1994;30A:1171.
65. Brenner MK, Rill DR, Moen RC, et al. Gene-marking to trace origin of relapse after autologous bone-marrow transplantation. Lancet 1993;341:85.
66. Rill DR, Santana VM, Roberts WM, et al. Direct demonstration that autologous bone marrow transplantation for solid tumors can return a multiplicity of tumorigenic cells. Blood 1994;84:380.
67. Deisseroth AB, Zu Z, Claxton D, et al. Genetic marking shows that Ph+ cells present in autologous transplants of CML contribute to relapse after autologous bone marrow in CML. Blood
1994;83:3068.
68. Brenner M, Krance R, Heslop HE, et al. Assessment of the efficacy of purging by using gene marked autologous marrow transplantation for children with AML in first complete remission. Hum
Gene Ther 1994;5:481.
69. Kirkland MA, O'Brien SG, McDonald C, et al. BCR-ABL antisense purging in chronic myeloid leukaemia [Letter]. Lancet 1993;342:614.
70. Gewirtz AM. Potential therapeutic applications of antisense oligodeoxynucleotides in the treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia. Leuk Lymphoma 1993;11[Suppl 1]:131.
71. de Fabritiis P, Amadori S, Calabretta B, Mandelli F. Elimination of clonogenic Philadelphia-positive cells using BCR-ABL antisense oligodeoxynucleotides. Bone Marrow Transplant
1993;12:261.
72. Yuan T, Zhou YQ, Herst CV, et al. Molecular approaches to purging of chronic myelogenous leukemia marrow in autologous transplantation. Prog Clin Biol Res 1992;377:227.
73. Gewirtz AM. Bone marrow purging with antisense oligodeoxynucleotides. Prog Clin Biol Res 1992;377:215; discussion 225.
74. Kawakami Y, Eliyahu S, Sakaguchi K, et al. Identification of the immunodominant peptides of the MART-1 human melanoma antigen recognized by the majority of HLA-A2-restricted tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1994;180:347.
75. Kawakami Y, Eliyahu S, Delgado CH, et al. Cloning of the gene coding for a shared human melanoma antigen recognized by autologous T cells infiltrating into tumor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

1994;91:3515.
76. Kawakami Y, Eliyahu S, Delgado CH, et al. Identification of a melanoma antigen recognized by tumor infiltrating lymphocytes associated with in vivo tumor rejection. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1994;91:6458.
77. Van Der Bruggen P, Traversari C, Chomez P, et al. A gene encoding an antigen recognized by cytolytic T lymphocytes on a human melanoma. Science 1991;254:1643.
78. Brichard V, Van Pel A, Wölfel T, et al. The tyrosinase gene codes for an antigen recognized by autologous cytolytic T lymphocytes on HLA-A2 melanomas. J Exp Med 1993;178:489.
79. Wang RF, Robbins PF, Kawakami Y, Kang XQ, Rosenberg SA. Identification of a gene encoding a melanoma tumor antigen recognized by HLA-A31-restricted tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
[published erratum appears in J Exp Med 1995;181:1261]. J Exp Med 1995;181:799.
80. Robbins PF, el-Gamil M, Li YF, et al. Cloning of a new gene encoding an antigen recognized by melanoma-specific HLA-A24-restricted tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. J Immunol
1995;154:5944.
81. Robbins PF, el-Gamil M, Kawakami Y, et al. Recognition of tyrosinase by tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes from a patient responding to immunotherapy [published erratum appears in Cancer Res
1994;54:3952]. Cancer Res 1994;54:3124.
82. Fearon E, Pardoll D, Itaya T, et al. Interleukin-2 production by tumor cells bypasses T helper function in the generation of an antitumor response. Cell 1990;60:397.
83. Gansbacher B, Zier K, Daniels B, et al. Interleukin 2 gene transfer into tumor cells abrogates tumorigenicity and induces protective immunity. J Exp Med 1990;172:1217.
84. Connor J, Bannerji R, Saito S, et al. Regression of bladder tumors in mice treated with interleukin 2 gene-modified tumor cells [published erratum appears in J Exp Med 1993;177:following
1831]. J Exp Med 1993;177:1127.
85. Stewart AK, Lassam NJ, Quirt IC, et al. Adenovector-mediated gene delivery of interleukin-2 in metastatic breast cancer and melanoma: results of a phase 1 clinical trial. Gene Ther
1999;6:350.
86. Palmer K, Moore J, Everard M, et al. Gene therapy with autologous, interleukin 2secreting tumor cells in patients with malignant melanoma. Hum Gene Ther 1999;10:1261.
87. Sobol RE, Shawler DL, Carson C, et al. Interleukin 2 gene therapy of colorectal carcinoma with autologous irradiated tumor cells and genetically engineered fibroblasts: a phase I study. Clin
Cancer Res 1999;5:2359.
88. Dranoff G, Jaffee E, Lazenby A, et al. Vaccination with irradiated tumor cells engineered to secrete murine granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor stimulates potent, specific, and
long-lasting anti-tumor immunity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:3539.
89. Huang AY, Golumbek P, Ahmadzadeh M, et al. Role of bone marrow-derived cells in presenting MHC class Irestricted tumor antigens. Science 1994;264:961.
90. Hung K, Hayashi R, Lafond-Walker A, et al. The central role of CD4(+) T cells in the antitumor immune response. J Exp Med 1998;188:2357.
91. Simons JW, Jaffee EM, Weber CE, et al. Bioactivity of autologous irradiated renal cell carcinoma vaccines generated by ex vivo granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor gene
transfer. Cancer Res 1997;57:1537.
92. Soiffer R, Lynch T, Mihm M, et al. Vaccination with irradiated autologous melanoma cells engineered to secrete human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor generates potent
antitumor immunity in patients with metastatic melanoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:13141.
93. Simons JW, Mikhak B, Chang JF, et al. Induction of immunity to prostate cancer antigens: results of a clinical trial of vaccination with irradiated autologous prostate tumor cells engineered to
secrete granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor using ex vivo gene transfer. Cancer Res 1999;59:5160.
94. Ogasawara M, Rosenberg SA. Enhanced expression of HLA molecules and stimulation of autologous human tumor infiltrating lymphocytes following transduction of melanoma cells with
gamma-interferon genes. Cancer Res 1993;53:3561.
95. Watanabe Y, Kuribayashi K, Miyatake S, et al. Exogenous expression of mouse interferon gamma cDNA in mouse neuroblastoma C1300 cells results in reduced tumorigenicity by augmented
anti-tumor immunity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:9456.
96. Restifo NP, Spiess PJ, Karp SE, Mule JJ, Rosenberg SA. A nonimmunogenic sarcoma transduced with the cDNA for interferon-gamma elicits CD8+ T cells against the wild-type tumor:
correlation with antigen presentation capability. J Exp Med 1992;175:1423.
97. Asher AL, Mule JJ, Kasid A, et al. Murine tumor cells transduced with the gene for tumor necrosis factor-alpha. Evidence for paracrine immune effects of tumor necrosis factor against tumors. J
Immunol 1991;146:3227.
98. Blankenstein T, Qin Z, Uberla K. Tumor suppression after tumor celltargeted tumor necrosis factor alpha gene transfer. J Exp Med 1991;173:1047.
99. Teng MN, Park BH, Koeppen HKW. Long-term inhibition of tumor growth by tumor necrosis factor in the absence of cachexia or T-cell immunity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:3535.
100. Marincola FM, Ettinghausen SE, Cohen PA, et al. Treatment of established lung metastases with tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes derived from a poorly immunogenic tumor engineered to secrete
hTNF-alpha. J Immunol 1994;152:3500.
101. Douvdevani A, Huleihel M, Zöller M, Segal S, Apte RN. Reduced tumorigenicity of fibrosarcomas which constitutively generate IL-1 alpha either spontaneously or following IL-1 alpha gene
transfer. Int J Cancer 1992;51:822.
102. Tepper R, Pattengale P, Leder P. Murine interleukin-4 displays potent anti-tumor activity in vivo. Cell 1989;57:503.
103. Tepper RI, Coffman RL, Leder P. An eosinophil-dependent mechanism for the antitumor effect of interleukin-4. Science 1992;257:548.
104. Golumbek P, Lazenby A, Levitsky H, Jaffee E. Treatment of established renal cancer by tumor cells engineered to secrete interleukin-4. Science 1991;254:713.
105. Mullen CA, Coale MM, Levy AT, et al. Fibrosarcoma cells transduced with the IL-6 gene exhibited reduced tumorigenicity, increased immunogenicity, and decreased metastatic potential.
Cancer Res 1992;52:6020.
106. Sun WH, Kreisle RA, Phillips AW, Ershler WB. In vivo and in vitro characteristics of interleukin 6-transfected B16 melanoma cells. Cancer Res 1992;52:5412.
107. Porgador A, Tzehoval E, Katz A, et al. Interleukin 6 gene transfection into Lewis lung carcinoma tumor cells suppresses the malignant phenotype and confers immunotherapeutic competence
against parental metastatic cells. Cancer Res 1992;52:3679.
108. McBride WH, Thacker JD, Comora S, et al. Genetic modification of a murine fibrosarcoma to produce interleukin 7 stimulates host cell infiltration and tumor immunity. Cancer Res
1992;52:3931.
109. Hock H, Dorsch M, Diamantstein T, Blankenstein T. Interleukin 7 induces CD4+ T cell-dependent tumor rejection. J Exp Med 1991;174:1291.
110. Aoki T, Tashiro K, Miyatake S, et al. Expression of murine interleukin 7 in a murine glioma cell line results in reduced tumorigenicity in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:3850.
111. Lebel-Binay S, Laguerre B, Quintin-Colonna F, et al. Experimental gene therapy of cancer using tumor cells engineered to secrete interleukin-13. Eur J Immunol 1995;25:2340.
112. Colombo MP, Ferrari G, Stoppacciaro A, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor gene transfer suppresses tumorigenicity of a murine adenocarcinoma in vivo. J Exp Med 1991;173:889.
113. Rollins BJ, Sunday ME. Suppression of tumor formation in vivo by expression of the JE gene in malignant cells. Mol Cell Biol 1991;11:3125.
114. Bottazzi B, Walter S, Govoni D, Colotta F, Mantovani A. Monocyte chemotactic cytokine gene transfer modulates macrophage infiltration, growth, and susceptibility to IL-2 therapy of a murine
melanoma. J Immunol 1992;148:1280.
115. Mule JJ, Custer MC, Averbook B, et al. RANTES secretion by gene-modified tumor cells results in loss of tumorigenicity in vivo: role of immune cell subpopulations. Hum Gene Ther
1996;7:1545.
116. Tahara H, Zitvogel L, Storkus W, et al. Effective eradication of established murine tumors with IL-12 gene therapy using a polycistronic retroviral vector. J Immunol 1995;154:6466.
117. Hock H, Dorsch M, Kunzendorf U, et al. Vaccinations with tumor cells genetically engineered to produce different cytokines: effectivity not superior to a classical adjuvant. Cancer Res
1993;53:714.
118. Linsley PS, Clark EA, Ledbetter JA. T-cell antigen CD28 mediates adhesion with B cells by interacting with activation antigen B7/BB-1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:5031.
119. Chen L, Ashe S, Brady WA, et al. Costimulation of antitumor immunity by the B7 counterreceptor for the T lymphocyte molecules CD28 and CTLA-4. Cell 1992;71:1093.
120. Townsend SE, Allison JP. Tumor rejection after direct costimulation of CD8+ T cells by B7-transfected melanoma cells [see comments]. Science 1993;259:368.
121. Baskar S, Ostrand-Rosenberg S, Nabavi N, et al. Constitutive expression of B7 restores immunogenicity of tumor cells expressing truncated major histocompatibility complex class II molecules.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:5687.
122. Chen L, McGowan P, Ashe S, et al. Tumor immunogenicity determines the effect of B7 costimulation on T cell-mediated tumor immunity. J Exp Med 1994;179:523.
123. Plautz GE, Yang ZY, Wu BY, et al. Immunotherapy of malignancy by in vivo gene transfer into tumors [see comments]. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:4645.
124. Irvine KR, McCabe BJ, Rosenberg SA, Restifo NP. Synthetic oligonucleotide expressed by a recombinant vaccinia virus elicits therapeutic CTL. J Immunol 1995;154:4651.
125. Wang M, Bronte V, Chen PW, et al. Active immunotherapy of cancer with a nonreplicating recombinant fowlpox virus encoding a model tumor-associated antigen. J Immunol 1995;154:4685.
126. McCabe BJ, Irvine KR, Nishimura M, et al. Minimal determinant expressed by a recombinant vaccinia virus elicits therapeutic antitumor cytolytic T lymphocyte responses. Cancer Res
1995;55:1741.
127. Bronte V, Tsung K, Rao J, et al. IL-2 enhances the function of recombinant poxvirus-based vaccines in the treatment of established pulmonary metastases. J Immunol 1995;154:5282.
128. Celluzzi CM, Mayordomo JI, Storkus WJ, Lotze MT, Falo LD. Peptide-pulsed dendritic cells induce antigen-specific CTL-mediated protective immunity. J Exp Med 1996;183:283.
129. Nestle FO, Alijagic S, Gilliet M, et al. Vaccination of melanoma patients with peptide- or tumor lysatepulsed dendritic cells. Nat Med 1998;4:328.
130. Inaba K, Inaba M, Romani N, et al. Generation of large numbers of dendritic cells from mouse bone marrow cultures supplemented with granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor. J
Exp Med 1992;176:1693.
131. Specht J, Wang G, Do M, et al. Dendritic cells retrovirally transduced with a model antigen gene are therapeutically effective against established pulmonary metastases. J Exp Med
1997;186:1213.
132. Reeves ME, Royal RE, Lam JS, Rosenberg SA, Hwu P. Retroviral transduction of human dendritic cells with a tumor-associated antigen gene. Cancer Res 1996;56:5672.
133. Alijagic S, Moller P, Artuc M, et al. Dendritic cells generated from peripheral blood transfected with human tyrosinase induce specific T cell activation. Eur J Immunol 1995;25:3100.
134. Kaplan JM, Yu Q, Piraino ST, et al. Induction of antitumor immunity with dendritic cells transduced with adenovirus vectorencoding endogenous tumor-associated antigens. J Immunol
1999;163:699.
135. Song W, Kong HL, Carpenter H, et al. Dendritic cells genetically modified with an adenovirus vector encoding the cDNA for a model antigen induce protective and therapeutic antitumor
immunity. J Exp Med 1997;186:1247.
136. Bhardwaj N, Bender A, Gonzalez N, et al. Influenza virusinfected dendritic cells stimulate strong proliferative and cytolytic responses from human CD8+ T cells. J Clin Invest 1994;94:797.
137. Rosenberg SA, Packard BS, Aebersold PM, et al. Use of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes and interleukin-2 in the immunotherapy of patients with metastatic melanoma. Preliminary report. N Engl
J Med 1988;319:1676.
138. Walter EA, Greenberg PD, Gilbert MJ, et al. Reconstitution of cellular immunity against cytomegalovirus in recipients of allogeneic bone marrow by transfer of T-cell clones from the donor. N
Engl J Med 1995;333:1038.
139. Drobyski WR, Keever CA, Roth MS, et al. Salvage immunotherapy using donor leukocyte infusions as treatment for relapsed chronic myelogenous leukemia after allogeneic bone marrow
transplantation: efficacy and toxicity of a defined T-cell dose. Blood 1993;82:2310.
140. Shu S, Chou T, Rosenberg SA. In vitro sensitization and expansion with viable tumor cells and interleukin-2 in the generation of specific therapeutic effector cells. J Immunol 1986;136:3891.
141. Yamada G, Kitamura Y, Sonoda H, et al. Retroviral expression of the human IL-2 gene in a murine T cell line results in cell growth autonomy and tumorigenicity. EMBO J 1987;6:2705.
142. Karasuyama H, Tohyama N, Tada T. Autocrine growth and tumorigenicity of interleukin 2dependent helper T cells transfected with IL-2 gene. J Exp Med 1989;169:13.
143. Treisman J, Hwu P, Minamoto S, et al. Interleukin-2-transduced lymphocytes grow in an autocrine fashion and remain responsive to antigen. Blood 1995;85:139.
144. Kuwana Y, Asakura Y, Utsunomiya N, et al. Expression of chimeric receptor composed of immunoglobulin-derived V regions and T-cell receptorderived C regions. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 1987;149:960.
145. Gross G, Waks T, Eshhar Z. Expression of immunoglobulinT-cell receptor chimeric molecules as functional receptors with antibody-type specificity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:10024.
146. Hwu P, Schwarz S, Custer M, et al. Use of soluble recombinant TNF receptor to improve detection of TNF secretion in cultures of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. J Immunol Methods
1992;151:139.
147. Goverman J, Gomez SM, Segesman KD, et al. Chimeric immunoglobulinT cell receptor proteins form functional receptors: implications for T cell receptor complex formation and activation.
Cell 1990;60:929.
148. Eshhar Z, Waks T, Gross G, Schindler D. Specific activation and targeting of cytotoxic lymphocytes through chimeric single chains consisting of antibody-binding domains and the gamma or
zeta subunits of the immunoglobulin and T-cell receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:720.
149. Hwu P, Shafer GE, Treisman J, et al. Lysis of ovarian cancer cells by human lymphocytes redirected with a chimeric gene composed of an antibody variable region and the Fc receptor gamma

chain. J Exp Med 1993;178:361.
150. Huston JS, Levinson D, Mudgett-Hunter M, et al. Protein engineering of antibody binding sites: recovery of specific activity in an anti-digoxin single-chain Fv analogue produced in Escherichia
coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:5879.
151. Bird RE, Hardman KD, Jacobson JW, et al. Single-chain antigen-binding proteins. Science 1988;242:423.
152. Bird RE, Walker BW. Single chain antibody variable regions. Trends Biotechnol 1991;9:132.
153. Orloff D, Ra C, Frank SJ, Klausner RD, Kinet JP. Family of disulphide-linked dimers containing the zeta and eta chains of the T-cell receptor and the gamma chain of Fc receptors. Nature
1990;347:189.
154. Letourneur F, Klausner RD. T-cell and basophil activation through the cytoplasmic tail of T-cell-receptor zeta family proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:8905.
155. Romeo C, Amiot M, Seed B. Sequence requirements for induction of cytolysis by the T cell antigen/Fc receptor zeta chain. Cell 1992;68:889.
156. Romeo C, Seed B. Cellular immunity to HIV activated by CD4 fused to T cell or Fc receptor polypeptides. Cell 1991;64:1037.
157. Irving BA, Weiss A. The cytoplasmic domain of the T cell receptor zeta chain is sufficient to couple to receptor-associated signal transduction pathways. Cell 1991;64:891.
158. Coney LR, Tomassetti A, Carayannopoulos L, et al. Cloning of a tumor-associated antigen: MOv18 and MOv19 antibodies recognize a folate-binding protein. Cancer Res 1991;51:6125.
159. Miotti S, Canevari S, Ménard S, et al. Characterization of human ovarian carcinomaassociated antigens defined by novel monoclonal antibodies with tumor-restricted specificity. Int J Cancer
1987;39:297.
160. Hwu P, Yang JC, Cowherd R, et al. In vivo antitumor activity of T-cells redirected with chimeric antibody/T-cell receptor genes. Cancer Res 1995;55:3369.
161. Krause A. Antigen-dependent CD28 signaling selectively enhances survival and proliferation in genetically modified activated human primary T lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1998;188:619.
162. Wang G. A T cell-independent antitumor response in mice with bone marrow cells retrovirally transduced with an antibody/Fc-gamma chain chimeric receptor gene recognizing a human ovarian
cancer antigen. Nat Med 1998;4:168.
163. Stancovski I, Schindler DG, Waks T, et al. Targeting of T lymphocytes to Neu/HER2-expressing cells using chimeric single chain Fv receptors. J Immunol 1993;151:6577.
164. Daly T, Royal RE, Kershaw MH, et al. Recognition of human colon cancer by T cells transduced with a chimeric receptor gene. Cancer Gene Ther 2000;7:284.
165. Finer MH, Dull TJ, Qin L, Farson D, Roberts MR. kat: a high-efficiency retroviral transduction system for primary human T lymphocytes. Blood 1994;83:43.
166. Cole DJ, Weil DP, Shilyansky J, et al. Characterization of the functional specificity of a cloned T-cell receptor heterodimer recognizing the MART-1 melanoma antigen. Cancer Res
1995;55:748.
167. Clay TM, Custer M, Sachs J, et al. Efficient transfer of a tumor antigen-reactive TCR to human peripheral blood lymphocytes confers anti-tumor reactivity. J Immunol 1999;163:507.
168. Bonini C, Ferrari G, Verzeletti S, et al. HSV-TK gene transfer into donor lymphocytes for control of allogeneic graft-versus-leukemia [see comments]. Science 1997;276:1719.
169. Riddell SR, Elliott M, Lewinsohn DA, et al. T-cell mediated rejection of gene-modified HIV-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in HIV-infected patients [see comments]. Nat Med 1996;2:216.
170. Haranaka K, Satomi N, Sakurai A. Antitumor activity of murine tumor necrosis factor (TNF) against transplanted murine tumors and heterotransplanted human tumors in nude mice. Int J
Cancer 1984;34:263.
171. Creasey A, Reynolds MT, Laird W. Cures and partial regression of murine and human tumors by recombinant human tumor necrosis factor. Cancer Res 1986;46:5687.
172. Asher A, Mulé J, Reichert C, Shiloni E, Rosenberg SA. Studies on the anti-tumor efficacy of systemically administered recombinant tumor necrosis factor against several murine tumors in vivo.
J Immunol 1987;138:963.
173. Feinberg B, Kurzrock R, Talpaz M, et al. A phase I trial of intravenously-administered recombinant tumor necrosis factor-alpha in cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:1328.
174. Moritz T, Niederle N, Baumann J, et al. Phase I study of recombinant human tumor necrosis factor a in advanced malignant disease. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1989;29:144.
175. Rosenberg SA, Lotze M, Yang J, et al. Experience with the use of high-dose interleukin-2 in the treatment of 652 cancer patients. Ann Surg 1989;210:474.
176. Sherman M, Spriggs D, Arthur K, et al. Recombinant human tumor necrosis factor administered as a five-day continuous infusion in cancer patients: phase I toxicity and effects on lipid
metabolism. J Clin Oncol 1988;6:344.
177. Spriggs D, Sherman M, Michie H, et al. Recombinant human tumor necrosis factor administered as a 24-hour intravenous infusion. A phase I and pharmacologic study. J Natl Cancer Inst
1988;80:1039.
178. Bartsch H, Pfizenmaier K, Schroeder M, Nagel G. Intralesional application of recombinant human tumor necrosis factor alpha induces local tumor regression in patients with advanced
malignancies. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 1989;25:287.
179. Kahn JO, Kaplan LD, Volberding PA, et al. Intralesional recombinant tumor necrosis factor-alpha for AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma: a randomized, double-blind trial. J Acquir Immune Defic
Syndr 1989;2:217.
180. Lienard D, Ewalenko P, Delmotte J, Renard N, Lejeune F. High-dose recombinant tumor necrosis factor alpha in combination with interferon gamma and melphalan in isolation perfusion of the
limbs for melanoma and sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 1992;10:52.
181. Fraker DL, Alexander HR. The use of tumour necrosis factor (TNF) in isolated perfusion: results and side effects. The NCI results. Melanoma Res 1994;4[Suppl 1]:27.
182. Fisher B, Packard B, Read E, et al. Tumor localization of adoptively transferred indium-111 labeled tumor infiltrating lymphocytes in patients with metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol
1989;7:250.
183. Griffith KD, Read EJ, Carrasquillo JA, et al. In vivo distribution of adoptively transferred indium-111 labeled tumor infiltrating lymphocytes and peripheral blood lymphocytes in patients with
metastatic melanoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:1709.
184. Pockaj BA, Sherry RM, Wei JP, et al. Localization of 111-indium-labelled tumor infiltrating lymphocytes to tumor in patients receiving adoptive immunotherapy. Cancer 1994;73:1731.
185. Hwu P, Yannelli J, Kriegler M, et al. Functional and molecular characterization of TIL transduced with the TNFa cDNA for the gene therapy of cancer in man. J Immunol 1993;150:4104.
186. Perez C, Albert I, DeFay K, et al. A nonsecretable cell surface mutant of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) kills by cell-to-cell contact. Cell 1990;63:251.
187. Kriegler M, Perez C, DeFay K, Albert I, Lu S. A novel form of TNF/cachectin is a cell surface cytotoxic transmembrane protein: ramifications for the complex physiology of TNF. Cell
1988;53:45.
188. Tait DL, Obermiller PS, Hatmaker AR, Redlin-Frazier S, Holt JT. Ovarian cancer BRCA1 gene therapy: phase I and II trial differences in immune response and vector stability. Clin Cancer Res
1999;5:1708.
189. Roth JA, Nguyen D, Lawrence DD, et al. Retrovirus-mediated wild-type p53 gene transfer to tumors of patients with lung cancer [see comments]. Nat Med 1996;2:985.
190. Swisher SG, Roth JA, Nemunaitis J, et al. Adenovirus-mediated p53 gene transfer in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:763.
191. Calabretta B. Inhibition of protooncogene expression by antisense oligodeoxynucleotides: biological and therapeutic implications. Cancer Res 1991;51:4505.
192. Mercola D, Cohen JS. Antisense approaches to cancer gene therapy. Cancer Gene Ther 1995;2:47.
193. Reed JC, Stein C, Subasinghe C, et al. Antisense-mediated inhibition of BCL2 protooncogene expression and leukemic cell growth and survival: comparisons of phosphodiester and
phosphorothioate oligodeoxynucleotides. Cancer Res 1990;50:6565.
194. Szczylik C, Skorski T, Nicolaides NC, et al. Selective inhibition of leukemia cell proliferation by BCR-ABL antisense oligodeoxynucleotides. Science 1991;253:562.
195. McManaway ME, Neckers LM, Loke SL, et al. Tumour-specific inhibition of lymphoma growth by an antisense oligodeoxynucleotide. Lancet 1990;335:808.
196. Melani C, Rivoltini L, Parmiani G, Calabretta B, Colombo MP. Inhibition of proliferation by c-myb antisense oligodeoxynucleotides in colon adenocarcinoma cell lines that express c-myb.
Cancer Res 1991;51:2897.
197. Anfossi G, Gewirtz AM, Calabretta B. An oligomer complementary to c-myb-encoded mRNA inhibits proliferation of human myeloid leukemia cell lines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:3379.
198. Ratajczak MZ, Kant JA, Luger SM, et al. In vivo treatment of human leukemia in a scid mouse model with c-myb antisense oligodeoxynucleotides. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:11823.
199. Higgins KA, Perez JR, Coleman TA, et al. Antisense inhibition of the p65 subunit of NF-kappa B blocks tumorigenicity and causes tumor regression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:9901.
200. Webb A, Cunningham D, Cotter F, et al. BCL-2 antisense therapy in patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Lancet 1997;349:1137.
201. Stein CA. Antisense oligodeoxynucleotides. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. Biologic therapy of cancer. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1995:759.
202. Poeschla E, Wong-Staal F. Antiviral and anticancer ribozymes. Curr Opin Oncol 1994;6:601.
203. Culver K, Ram Z, Wallbridge S, et al. In vivo gene transfer with retroviral vector-producer cells for treatment of experimental brain tumors. Science 1992;256:1550.
204. Ram Z, Culver KW, Oshiro EM, et al. Therapy of malignant brain tumors by intratumoral implantation of retroviral vector-producing cells [see comments]. Nat Med 1997;3:1354.
205. Herman JR, Adler HL, Aguilar-Cordova E, et al. In situ gene therapy for adenocarcinoma of the prostate: a phase I clinical trial. Hum Gene Ther 1999;10:1239.
206. Molnar-Kimber KL, Sterman DH, Chang M, et al. Impact of preexisting and induced humoral and cellular immune responses in an adenovirus-based gene therapy phase I clinical trial for
localized mesothelioma. Hum Gene Ther 1998;9:2121.
207. Pandha HS, Martin LA, Rigg A, et al. Genetic prodrug activation therapy for breast cancer: a phase I clinical trial of erbB-2-directed suicide gene expression. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2180.
208. Huber BE, Richards CA, Krenitsky TA. Retroviral-mediated gene therapy for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma: an innovative approach for cancer therapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1991;88:8039.
209. Vile RG, Hart IR. In vitro and in vivo targeting of gene expression to melanoma cells. Cancer Res 1993;53:962.
210. Bicknell R. Vascular targeting and the inhibition of angiogenesis. Ann Oncol 1994;5[Suppl 4]:45.
211. Bischoff JR, Kirn DH, Williams A, et al. An adenovirus mutant that replicates selectively in p53-deficient human tumor cells [see comments]. Science 1996;274:373.
212. Heise C, Sampson-Johannes A, Williams A, et al. ONYX-015, an E1B geneattenuated adenovirus, causes tumor-specific cytolysis and antitumoral efficacy that can be augmented by standard
chemotherapeutic agents [see comments]. Nat Med 1997;3:639.
213. Heise CC, Williams AM, Xue S, Propst M, Kirn DH. Intravenous administration of ONYX-015, a selectively replicating adenovirus, induces antitumoral efficacy. Cancer Res 1999;59:2623.
214. Rothmann T, Hengstermann A, Whitaker NJ, Scheffner M, zur Hausen H. Replication of ONYX-015, a potential anticancer adenovirus, is independent of p53 status in tumor cells. J Virol
1998;72:9470.
215. Hall AR, Dix BR, O'Carroll SJ, Braithwaite AW. p53-dependent cell death/apoptosis is required for a productive adenovirus infection [see comments]. Nat Med 1998;4:1068.
216. Gottesman M. How cancer cells evade chemotherapy: sixteenth Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Foundation Award Lecture. Cancer Res 1993;53:747.
217. Kane S, Pastan I, Gottesman M. Genetic basis of multidrug resistance of tumor cells. J Bioenerg Biomembr 1990;22:593.
218. Sorrentino BP, Brandt SJ, Bodine D, et al. Selection of drug-resistant bone marrow cells in vivo after retroviral transfer of human MDR1. Science 1992;257:99.
219. Dunbar CE, Kohn DB, Schiffmann R, et al. Retroviral transfer of the glucocerebrosidase gene into CD34+ cells from patients with Gaucher disease: in vivo detection of transduced cells without
myeloablation. Hum Gene Ther 1998;9:2629.
220. Dunbar CE, Young NS. Gene marking and gene therapy directed at primary hematopoietic cells. Curr Opin Hematol 1996;3:430.
221. Cowan KH, Moscow JA, Huang H, et al. Paclitaxel chemotherapy after autologous stem-cell transplantation and engraftment of hematopoietic cells transduced with a retrovirus containing the
multidrug resistance complementary DNA (MDR1) in metastatic breast cancer patients [see comments]. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:1619.
222. Hesdorffer C, Ayello J, Ward M, et al. Phase I trial of retroviral-mediated transfer of the human MDR1 gene as marrow chemoprotection in patients undergoing high-dose chemotherapy and
autologous stem-cell transplantation. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:165.
223. Hanania EG, Giles RE, Kavanagh J, et al. Results of MDR-1 vector modification trial indicate that granulocyte/macrophage colony-forming unit cells do not contribute to posttransplant
hematopoietic recovery following intensive systemic therapy [published erratum appears in Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:5495]. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:15346.
224. Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis: therapeutic implications. N Engl J Med 1971;285:1182.
225. Folkman J. What is the evidence that tumors are angiogenesis dependent? [Editorial]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:4.
226. Feldman AL, Libutti SK. Progress in antiangiogenic gene therapy of cancer. 2000 ( submitted).
227. Kendall RL, Thomas KA. Inhibition of vascular endothelial cell growth factor activity by an endogenously encoded soluble receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:10705.
228. Kong HL, Hecht D, Song W, et al. Regional suppression of tumor growth by in vivo transfer of a cDNA encoding a secreted form of the extracellular domain of the flt-1 vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor. Hum Gene Ther 1998;9:823.
229. Machein MR, Risau W, Plate KH. Antiangiogenic gene therapy in a rat glioma model using a dominant-negative vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2. Hum Gene Ther 1999;10:1117.
230. Im SA, Gomez-Manzano C, Fueyo J, et al. Antiangiogenesis treatment for gliomas: transfer of antisense-vascular endothelial growth factor inhibits tumor growth in vivo. Cancer Res
1999;59:895.
231. Linehan WM, Lerman MI, Zbar B. Identification of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene. Its role in renal cancer. JAMA 1995;273:564.

232. Gnarra JR, Zhou S, Merrill MJ, et al. Post-transcriptional regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor mRNA by the product of the VHL tumor suppressor gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1996;93:10589.
233. Li H, Lu H, Griscelli F, et al. Adenovirus-mediated delivery of a uPA/uPAR antagonist suppresses angiogenesis-dependent tumor growth and dissemination in mice. Gene Ther 1998;5:1105.
234. Suri C, Jones PF, Patan S, et al. Requisite role of angiopoietin-1, a ligand for the TIE2 receptor, during embryonic angiogenesis [see comments]. Cell 1996;87:1171.
235. Davis S, Aldrich TH, Jones PF, et al. Isolation of angiopoietin-1, a ligand for the TIE2 receptor, by secretion-trap expression cloning [see comments]. Cell 1996;87:1161.
236. Lin P, Buxton JA, Acheson A, et al. Antiangiogenic gene therapy targeting the endothelium-specific receptor tyrosine kinase Tie2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:8829.
237. O'Reilly MS, Boehm T, Shing Y, et al. Endostatin: an endogenous inhibitor of angiogenesis and tumor growth. Cell 1997;88:277.
238. O'Reilly MS, Holmgren L, Shing Y, et al. Angiostatin: a novel angiogenesis inhibitor that mediates the suppression of metastases by a Lewis lung carcinoma [see comments]. Cell 1994;79:315.
239. Griscelli F, Li H, Bennaceur-Griscelli A, et al. Angiostatin gene transfer: inhibition of tumor growth in vivo by blockage of endothelial cell proliferation associated with a mitosis arrest. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:6367.
240. Liu Y, Thor A, Shtivelman E, et al. Systemic gene delivery expands the repertoire of effective antiangiogenic agents. J Biol Chem 1999;274:13338.
241. Feldman AL, Restifo NP, Alexander HR, et al. Antiangiogenic gene therapy of cancer utilizing a recombinant adenovirus to elevate systemic endostatin levels in mice. Cancer Res
2000;60:1503.
242. Staba MJ, Mauceri HJ, Kufe DW, Hallahan DE, Weichselbaum RR. Adenoviral TNF-alpha gene therapy and radiation damage tumor vasculature in a human malignant glioma xenograft. Gene
Ther 1998;5:293.
243. Boris-Lawrie K, Temin HM. The retroviral vector: replication cycle and safety considerations for retrovirus-mediated gene therapy. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1994;716:59.
244. Miller AD, Rosman GJ. Improved retroviral vectors for gene transfer and expression. Biotechniques 1989;7:980.
245. Miller AD, Buttimore C. Redesign of retrovirus packaging cell lines to avoid recombination leading to helper virus production. Mol Cell Biol 1986;6:2895.
246. Eglitis MA, Anderson WF. Retroviral vectors for introduction of genes into mammalian cells. Biotechniques 1988;6:608.

SECTION 62.2 Molecular Therapy
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 62.2
Molecular Therapy
ALBERT B. DEISSEROTH
AMANDA PSYRRI
DAVID J. AUSTIN
Introduction
Strategies of New Drug Design
Types of Targets
Attributes of an Ideal Target Protein for Molecular Therapy
Approaches to Drug Design
Structure Analysis of Target
Mimics of Inhibitors or Substrates
Low-Molecular-Weight Inhibitors for the Angiogenesis Receptor
Chemical Inhibitors for Oncoproteins of DNA Tumor Viruses
Growth Factor Receptor Inhibitors
Summary and Future Directions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The modern age of chemotherapy has its origins in ancient civilizations thousands of years ago, when therapists went to the forests to dig up roots, to peel the bark
from trees, and to pick the leaves and flowers from plants as the first step in drug development. Through the time-consuming process of trial and error, extracts of
these natural substances were identified that conferred a beneficial effect on the natural history of life-threatening diseases, such as cancer. It was not until the middle
of the twentieth century that sufficient quantities of the purified active ingredients of these plant extracts were available for clinical trials.
The structure of these plant alkaloids, which were complex polycyclic hydrocarbon molecules, barely soluble in aqueous solvents and associated with very significant
toxicities for the central nervous system, the kidney, and the hematopoietic and the gastrointestinal tissues, posed challenges for the therapist. Despite these
limitations, plant compounds, such as the epidophyllotoxins, the periwinkle alkaloids, the taxanes, and the camptothecins, have formed the basis of the most
successful cancer treatment regimens of the first 30 years of chemotherapy.
Tremendous ingenuity has been displayed by pharmacologists and cancer treatment specialists, who have designed methods for limiting and circumventing the very
significant toxicities of these compounds. Chemists working with synthetic organic compounds have continuously attempted to improve on the original natural
products, which have spawned synthetic derivative compounds of the original natural products, such as vinorelbine tartrate, taxotere, and irinotecan, which are now
displaying exciting patterns of activity in refractory epithelial neoplasms.
The next phase of the development of chemotherapy was the cloning of the genes for naturally occurring biologically active molecules, such as interferon,
interleukin-2, and the growth factors. During the last decade of the twentieth century, the enormous power of structural biology and computational chemistry was used
to design totally synthetic compounds, which have no relationship to natural products but have displayed exciting activity in disease states: the protease inhibitors for
human immunodeficiency virus, the kinase inhibitors for chronic myelocytic leukemia (CML), and the low-molecular-weight chemical inhibitors for virally associated
cancers.
Now, at the dawn of the twenty-first century, the power of protein structure analysis, computational chemistry, combinatorial chemistry, and the engineering of
biopolymers are being combined to produce an entirely new generation of antineoplastic drugs that are already reaching the clinic.

STRATEGIES OF NEW DRUG DESIGN
TYPES OF TARGETS
The drugs discussed here are those that will be designed to modify the assembly of subunits in a multimeric protein or to alter the assembly of complexes of multiple
proteins into a receptor or a multiprotein array that is promoting the formation of a transcription initiation complex or a replication initiation complex. Thus, the ideal
types of protein domains as targets for inhibition by low-molecular-weight chemicals must be considered before proceeding to the design of an inhibitor.
ATTRIBUTES OF AN IDEAL TARGET PROTEIN FOR MOLECULAR THERAPY
The attributes of an ideal target protein are outlined in Table 62.2-1. The ideal target for molecular therapy is a protein the sequence of which is unique to the tumor
cell and is one that confers a selective growth advantage to the tumor cells. In addition, it is important that the target sequence be present in the tumor cells of all
patients with that type of cancer and that 100% of the tumor cells in every patient have the target sequence.

TABLE 62.2-1. Ideal Attributes of a Target Protein Oncoprotein Domain for Molecular Therapy

The ideal target is present in 100% of the cells of a tumor population, because the presence of this protein target confers on the cell in which it resides a selective
advantage over cells that do not contain this change. This type of target has dual advantages: The inhibition of the function of this target protein will suppress the
transformed phenotype and, at the very least, will halt the progression of the disease state. It may also induce cell death of the neoplastic cell.
Another attribute that is important for an ideal target is that it presents some feature unique to the regulatory environment of the tumor cell that is not shared by the
normal noncancerous cell. This type of tumor-specific target enhances the probability that an inhibitor will be specifically toxic for the tumor cell and will not adversely
affect the normal cells. Examples of targets that are totally unique for the tumor cell include viral oncoproteins (proteins that may not have a correlate in normal
mammalian cells), a chimeric gene that produces proteins with protein junctional domains that are not present in normal cells, a mutant primary structure of a widely
expressed protein, posttranslational modification of a protein that is unique to the tumor cell, and a protein that is either expressed inappropriately in a particular type
of tissue or appears in an intracellular location that is unique to the tumor cell. Table 62.2-2 presents a list of examples of such target oncoproteins that exhibit one or

more of these attributes.

TABLE 62.2-2. List of Candidate Target Oncoproteins

In terms of the types of domains in the target protein that are more or less optimal for computational analysis and for interaction with low-molecular-weight chemical
inhibitors of protein action, there is general consensus in the field that protein-protein contact regions are very poor regions for modulation by chemical inhibitors. The
interactions that represent the contact points for proteins often are hydrophobic areas that are binding to one another through van Der Waals forces. Such forces are
at any given point extremely weak in terms of affinity. Thus, the interposition of a chemical that blocks interaction at a single point in this broad surface has very little
effect on the overall assembly of a protein.
In contrast, receptors or pockets in which the catalytic site of an enzyme is located, or the crevice of a DNA binding domain, or a homodimerization domain that
consists of interlocking invaginations, or stacking of flat aromatic amino acid side chains (e.g., tryptophans), which can bind to one another through sharing of electron
orbitals, provide the structure within which a low-molecular-weight inhibitor can interact to disrupt a complex. Chemical inhibitors can act at multiple points with the
local peptide domains to establish a very stable, high-affinity interaction that can have an impact on the entire protein.
Although receptors or enzyme pockets have a more stable conformation, all these regions of the protein are very mobile and are in continuous motion at the atomic
level. Thus, interactions with low-molecular-weight chemical inhibitors may stabilize one of more of the conformations available to a protein domain.
Low-molecular-weight chemicals that are designed to be inhibitors can stabilize a nonfunctional or inactive state of the protein. One example is the inactive state of a
growth factor or an integrin receptor. Another example is the inactive state of the RAS proteins. A third example is a drug that can stabilize a conformal state of the
protein, which limits access of a substrate, inhibits assembly of a multisubunit protein, or reduces the probability of assembly of a transcription initiation complex.
Obviously, the more detailed the structural information, the more successful any design effort that is based on structure.
The alternative approach in developing drugs that stabilize one conformal state versus another is to select low-molecular-weight chemicals from a library of thousands
of structural variants, each of which differs from the others by single atoms (i.e., two vs. one carbon atom in a side chain, etc.). Thus, the conformation of a chemical
that best promotes the stabilization of an inactive conformal state of an enzyme or a receptor can be identified without any information about the structural details of
the active and inactive states, merely by generating structural diversity, isolating relevant structures in a binding assay, and then assaying for loss of function of the
protein molecules in the presence of that chemical. The same principle applies to the use of phage display libraries of random amino acid peptides. This requires the
extra step of using computational and synthetic chemistry to create a chemical mimic of the peptide that produces the desired change in the protein. These two
approaches can be combined by biasing the composition of the libraries on the basis of the structural information that exists about the target protein or the domain of
the protein that is the contact point for the inhibitor.
Another issue is whether a domain that is in constant motion is a poor or good target as compared to a domain in which the order of the protein is so great as to
reduce or restrict the excursions of the atoms and chemical functionalities. Accordingly, programs are available for simulating the possible trajectories of each atom in
a biopolymer so that the dimensions of each state at very short expanses of time (nanoseconds) can be used to identify a useful target for engagement by a chemical
inhibitor.
Thus, the true power of the use of structural data for drug design is revealed. Not only is there a possibility of identifying chemicals that could be selective for a
particular primary amino acid sequence, but the possibility exists of identifying the chemical that is specific for the 1 in 1000 possible conformal states that can be
engaged by a particular chemical structure for the purposes of stabilization or destabilization. The library approach exploits this vast expanse of possible targets by
interrogating a large number of structural variants which can promote the conformal state of the target that is useful therapeutically.

APPROACHES TO DRUG DESIGN
STRUCTURE ANALYSIS OF TARGET
The recent example of the use of x-ray crystal structure of the human immunodeficiency virus protease for the development of successful drug treatment for the
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) has led many researchers to apply this approach to the study of oncoproteins for drug development. The recent success
in developing inhibitors of substrate-binding sites and cofactor-binding (adenosine triphosphate–binding) sites in the CML oncoprotein p210bcrabl led to the
introduction into the clinic of a selective inhibitor of the p210bcrabl kinase in CML. 1 This new low-molecular-weight chemical inhibitor of CML was developed through
the application of a structural model for the analysis of the cofactor-binding site of the p210bcrabl kinase oncoprotein of CML. 1
MIMICS OF INHIBITORS OR SUBSTRATES
The application of analysis of substrates and mimics of ligands led to the RGD mimic inhibitors of integrin receptors that contribute to the ability of tumor cells to
metastasize.2 Mimics of guanosine triphosphate (GTP) are also being used to develop inhibitors of the membrane RAS signal transduction proteins. 3
The development of chemical inhibitors of oncoproteins may start from computational analysis of the protein domain binding the cofactor or substrate, or it can start
with the screening of combinatorial libraries of chemical mimics of a substrate or naturally occurring inhibitors of an oncoprotein. Alternatively, phage display libraries
of random peptides can be used to collect all the peptide sequences that bind to an oncoprotein target. 4 Analysis of the peptide motifs that are associated with
high-affinity binding to the target can then lead to the design of mimics of the peptide inhibitors of the oncoprotein.
Substrate Mimics for Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors for Use in Chronic Myelocytic Leukemia
CML is an ideal disease for the development of molecular therapy, since there is a single genetic change that is absolutely essential for the development of the
leukemia, which is present in 100% of the patients and is present in 100% of the cells of each patient. 5
The first hint that inhibition of an oncoprotein would suppress the phenotype of a neoplastic disease came from the antisense oligonucleotide field. 6 Because CML is a
disease of genetic instability and one in which the acquisition of sequential somatic mutations leads to evolution of the clinical phenotype of the disease, it was
predicted that antisense oligonucleotides would have activity only in the very earliest stages of the disease process when the genetic complexity of the mutational
change within the leukemic cells was lowest. Surprisingly, the anti-p210bcrabl antisense oligonucleotides were active in blast crisis cells both at the very end of the
evolution of the disease process and at the very earliest stages of the disease process. 6 These findings now make sense in light of our understanding of the many
actions of the p210bcrabl oncoprotein. Two of these pathways are activated within the CML cell. The first is the Pl3 kinase/Alt kinase/BAD pathway that results in the
release of BCL-2 in the leukemic cells, prolonging survival in the absence of growth factors and extracellular matrix apoptosis rescue ligands and conferring
chemotherapy resistance on these cells. 7 The second results in increases in BCL-2 levels inside the CML cells through the GRB-2/RAS/RAF/BAD pathway. These two

pathways are important, even at the blast crisis stage, in conferring resistance to chemotherapy on these cells.
The next stage in the evolution of molecular therapy for CML was the discovery that peptide ligands, which are parts of naturally occurring negative regulatory
proteins for the abl kinase, could be used to suppress the transformed phenotype of CML cells. 8,9 This work led to the demonstration that expression vectors that carry
inhibitory peptide transcription units directed to the ATP-binding sites of the tyrosine-specific protein kinases could also suppress the transformed phenotype of CML
cells. 10
It was a natural extension of these findings to proceed to an examination of chemical inhibitors of either the substrate-binding site or the cofactor-binding (ATP) site of
the tyrosine-specific protein kinase oncoproteins in CML. A picture of the catalytic pocket of this oncoprotein is presented in Figure 62.2-1. The tryphostins were the
class of compounds found that inhibit tyrosine-specific protein kinases by binding to the substrate-binding site of p210bcrabl. 11 These compounds were shown to
decrease the in vitro proliferation of CML cells and to sensitize CML cells to the effects of chemotherapy. Interestingly, the tryphostins showed synergy when
combined with cytokine therapy of chronic myelogenous leukemia cells. 11

FIGURE 62.2-1. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) kinase pocket of the p210bcrabl oncoprotein, in which the abl tyrosine-specific protein kinase catalytic site is depicted.
This kinase pocket contains a substrate-binding site (SBS), a catalytic site (CS), and a cofactor-binding site (ATP BS). The ATP cofactor is shown donating its gamma
high-energy phosphate to the substrate.

The next stage of development of chemical inhibitors was to engineer competitive inhibitors for the cofactor-binding (ATP) site of the tyrosine-specific protein
kinase–binding site of p210bcrabl. This class of inhibitors is structurally distinct from the tryphostins. These compounds have been refined by Druker et al., 12 who
have introduced STI 571, a low-molecular-weight inhibitor of ATP binding, into the therapy of CML.
Druker et al. 12 have already shown that these compounds in vitro are remarkably selective for the abl kinase and are able to reduce the circulating level of the white
blood cell count in chronic-phase CML. Although the evaluation of these compounds is still at its early stage, cytogenetic remissions have already been achieved in
some chronic-phase patients. In addition, the level of circulating leukemic cells is reduced even in myeloid blast crisis patients. These compounds exhibit inhibitory
activity for the abl kinase at micromolar concentrations and are remarkably specific for the abl kinase, showing cross-inhibitory activity only for the platelet-derived
growth factor kinase. These compounds are already producing great interest on the part of therapists as a vindication of the use of structural analysis of biopolymers
and computational chemistry. The duration of these remissions and the extent to which all chronic-phase patients will exhibit such remissions are the subject of
current clinical trials.
Building on this advance, other workers are attempting produce low-molecular-weight inhibitors that are more selective and more effective than the compounds of
Druker. At Yale, Austin has proposed (D. J. Austin, personal communication, 1998) that a chemical mimic of ATP can be constructed by attaching adenosine to a
bicyclic scaffold molecule, which is a mimic of the triphosphate of ATP ( Fig. 62.2-2).

FIGURE 62.2-2. Adenosine-scaffold mimic in the adenosine triphosphate kinase pocket of the p210bcrabl oncoprotein. The interaction of the side chains of the
adenosine scaffold with the local peptide domains of the kinase pocket is depicted. ATP BS, cofactor-binding site; CS, catalytic site; SBS, substrate-binding site.

The bicyclic scaffold molecule contains five ligands that can interact with local protein domains in the abl kinase pocket. As shown in Figure 62.2-2, these chemical
functionalities can engage multiple local protein domains in the kinase pocket and can be projected into a spherical three-dimensional space through the use of the
bicyclic scaffold. In the example presented in Figure 62.2-2, adenosine, the natural ligand for ATP to the cofactor kinase–binding site of abl, is attached to the
scaffold, leaving four other positions where chemical functionalities can be attached.
Automated, convergent, synthetic, combinatorial chemical synthesis can be used to generate low-complexity libraries of compound, all of which have the scaffold and
the adenosine but in which the structure of the other chemical functionalities can be varied automatically to generate diversity. Recombinant clones of the kinase
pocket are used for screening the libraries for the high-affinity binders, which may identify molecules that display therapeutic activity that is greater than existing
compounds.
RAS Oncoproteins (Farnesylation Inhibitors and G Pocket Inhibitors)
The RAS family of membrane-bound G proteins usually is activated in response to growth factor stimulation and trigger activation of at least two types of pathways
within the cell: the MAP kinase pathway that ends in the nucleus at the level of transcription factor activation and the RAF/BAD pathway that results in the release of
BCL-2 within the cell. In cancer, the acquisition of point mutations in RAS leads to continuous activation of these proteins, contributes to the dual phenotypes of
chemotherapy resistance, and increases proliferation. This combination has the resultant effect of increasing the genetic instability of populations of cancer cells.
These point mutations often are acquired as secondary mutations in a broad spectrum of epithelial neoplastic cells. In fact, very few neoplastic diseases exist in which
RAS mutations do not occur. CML is an example of a disease in which the acquisition of RAS-activating point mutations is very rare, in part, perhaps, owing to the fact
that the p210bcrabl kinase of CML results in activation of the RAS proteins.
The connections made by RAS, which are essential for it to be linked to its interacting pathways that link growth factor stimulation with gene expression of survival,
depends on its localization to the plasma membrane. This localization depends on the action of a number of enzymes, which mediate posttranslational modifications
of the RAS protein. 14 Inhibitors of one of these posttranslational enzymes—protein farnesyltransferase—showed activity in animal models with respect to the
suppression of human tumor xenografts. Interestingly, although the spectrum of clinical activity of the farnesylation inhibitors has been somewhat of a disappointment,

the interesting surprise is that these agents appear to display activity even in tumor populations in which farnesylation of RAS is not playing a role in the natural
history of the disease. 14
Despite the initially disappointing spectrum of activity in trials of the farnesylation inhibitors, the inhibition of RAS activity is still an important goal. Every time a
transdominant negative inhibitor of RAS activation has been tested in animal models or cell lines, a dramatic effect on the phenotype of the cancer cells has been
observed in a spectrum of malignancies, including CML, 14 melanoma,15 and gastrointestinal cancer. 17 Thus, many groups have been attempting to analyze the
structure of RAS so as to design low-molecular inhibitors of RAS.
At the center of these new molecular approaches to the development of inhibitory agents for RAS is the GTP/GDP exchange role of RAS. As outlined previously, RAS
acts as a molecular switch for cell growth. In its off state, p21RAS is bound to guanosine diphosphate (GDP), whereas on activation, GDP is exchanged for GTP ( Fig.
62.2-3).

FIGURE 62.2-3. Guanosine triphosphate (GTP) pocket of the RAS G protein.

When GTP occupies the guanine nucleotide pocket of RAS, cell growth is promoted. In fact, many of the point mutations acquired in tumor cells by RAS prevent the
hydrolysis of GTP. This maintains the activated state of RAS and prevents a return to its off state. The Karplus group at Harvard 17 has designed molecules that would
recognize the dimensions and charge of the guanine nucleotide pocket of RAS in its activated state. Such molecules would bind to activated RAS, not to RAS proteins
in their nonactivated state. This group is undertaking a computational analysis of the molecular switch regions of RAS (residues 30–38 and residues 60–75).
Karplus and his coworkers studied the bicyclic scaffold shown in Figure 62.2-2, now attached to a guanosine molecule ( Fig. 62.2-4) and found that the guanosine
scaffold was energetically a good mimic of the GTP and engaged the same amino acid side chains in the RAS guanine nucleotide–binding pocket as does GTP.
These computational models have suggested that the designing of chemical mimics of GTP such that they will bind more tightly and selectively to the inner protein
domains lining the GTP pocket of RAS is feasible. The guanosine scaffold shown in Figure 62.2-5 may engage multiple domains in the RAS-binding pocket and,
therefore, produce inhibitors that can override even an excess of GTP and, owing to the multiple sites of interaction, can produce inhibitors that are selective and,
therefore, nontoxic as well (M. Karplus, personal communication, 1996).

FIGURE 62.2-4. Austin bicyclic molecular scaffold as a mimic for the triphosphate domain of guanosine triphosphate (GTP). The natural cofactor of the abl kinase,
GTP, is compared to the guanosine-scaffold mimic.

FIGURE 62.2-5. Guanosine-scaffold mimic in the guanosine triphosphate (GTP) pocket of the RAS G protein. The interaction of the side chains of the guanosine
scaffold with the local peptide domains of the GTP pocket is depicted.

Metastasis Inhibitors
The integrin receptors constitute a complex class of surface cytoadhesion molecules that mediate apoptosis rescue signals from extracellular matrix proteins and
stromal cells or supporting cell ligands into the cell, with connections to cytoskeletal structures and transcriptional regulation pathways within the cell. 18 The integrin
receptors can exhibit changes in the number of receptors on the membrane and changes in the composition of the available subunits that contribute to the
heterodimeric arrays of integrin receptors, and they can undergo changes in conformation, sometimes associated with posttranslational modification, which define
differing states of functionality. Integrin receptors can also be activated to functionally active conformal states from signals arising from within the cell. Thus, the
integrin receptors, which are apoptosis rescue signal transduction elements, can be activated from “inside out” and from “outside in.” 18
Several researchers have reported that the transfection of integrin expression vectors carrying specific integrin subunits, such as the b 3 integrin, can direct cells to
metastasize to specific organs. Indeed, the aVb 3 integrin receptor is commonly encountered in cancer cells that are metastatic and rapidly proliferating, whereas the
aVb5 integrin receptor is often found in differentiating cells.
Extensive testing of the ligands and antibodies that can engage various integrin receptors have shown that the inhibitors of integrin receptors can be effective in

suppressing particular patterns of metastatic spread in preclinical animal models. Some groups have used phage display libraries in which thousands of phage
clones, each with a different peptide, are injected into the tail vein of a mouse. This is followed by analysis of the endothelial cells from the vessels of different tissues.
These studies have shown that peptide sequences exist that are characteristic of the vessels of different tissues. This knowledge has led to the speculation that
chemical mimics of trafficking molecules on the endothelial surface of different tissues could be used to prevent metastases to a particular target organ. An example
would be the treatment of individuals with stage III colon cancer with chemical mimics of peptides, which would bind to the cytoadhesion molecules characteristic of
vasculatures of hepatic tissues.
Several groups have reported the isolation of chemical mimics of the RGD peptide, which binds to the integrin receptor. The use of phage display peptide libraries led
to the collection of peptide motifs, including RGD, that bind to integrin receptors. Now, combinatorial chemical libraries are being used to refine the structure of
low-molecular chemical inhibitors of integrin receptors that appear to reduce the metastatic potential of a cell. These types of drugs should be highly exciting
therapeutically when they are brought into the clinic.
LOW-MOLECULAR-WEIGHT INHIBITORS FOR THE ANGIOGENESIS RECEPTOR
One of the most exciting paradigm shifts has been the attempt to target drug development to normal tissues. Angiogenesis is a process that takes place during tumor
growth. Now, inhibitors of this process are being tested in the therapy of solid tumor malignancies. This approach was stimulated by the correlation between the
density of the neovasculature in histopathologic specimens and the aggressiveness of the natural history of the disease in a given patient. Also stimulating interest in
this area was the demonstration in animal models that a number of naturally occurring modulators of angiogenesis also displayed activity in modulating the rate of
tumor growth in animal models. This has led to the isolation of a large number of agents (synthetic chemicals as well as naturally occurring biologically active
proteins) that are known to affect angiogenesis in the treatment of solid tumors and hematopoietic neoplasms. There is immense interest in the current clinical trials of
these natural products and naturally occurring proteins to determine whether they are selective for tumor neovasculature or whether they affect the formation of
vasculature in normal tissues as well.
Computational and combinatorial chemistry is being used to test whether it is possible to develop synthetic inhibitors of angiogenesis that are specific for tumor cell
neovasculature. The first step was to test whether computational analysis of the normal angiogenesis receptor could be used to design and synthesize
low-molecular-weight chemical inhibitors of the angiogenesis receptor; this has been accomplished (C. Crews, personal communication, 1999). Two approaches are
being used now to develop chemical therapy that is antiangiogenic. The first is to engineer low-molecular-weight inhibitors of the angiogenesis receptor. At Yale, Hu
et al.19 have taken a second approach: chimeric immunoconjugate molecules that are composed of an amino-terminal targeting domain that binds specifically to tumor
endothelial cells, and a carboxyl-terminal end that carries the Fc fragment of IgG. The latter molecule is known to bind to natural killer cells. Hu et al. 19 have reported
that the release of such chimeric immunoconjugate molecules into the systemic circulation of human tumor xenografts in nude mice results in regression of
established tumor nodules. This reaction has been shown to depend on the binding of natural killer cells to the Fc fragment of the immunoconjugate molecules.
CHEMICAL INHIBITORS FOR ONCOPROTEINS OF DNA TUMOR VIRUSES
The oncoprotein products of DNA tumor viruses provide almost ideal targets for the development of low-molecular-weight chemical inhibitors for cancer treatment or
prevention. As in many of the other targets we have discussed, the continued expression of these proteins is essential to the maintenance of the neoplastic
phenotype. Moreover, since they are viral proteins, those proteins are unique targets that are not essential to the survival or proliferation of normal cells. Thus, drugs
developed against these proteins may be highly selective for the tumor tissue and not toxic to the uninfected normal tissue.
The diseases associated with the DNA tumor viruses, human papilloma virus (HPV), and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) are significant world health problems. 20
HPV-associated malignancies represent the second leading cause of cancer death in the world among women. 20 In addition, it is estimated that 40% of all AIDS
patients alive today will eventually develop an EBV-associated non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. 21
Again, the use of antisense oligonucleotides first showed convincingly that the continued expression of the protein products of the episomal DNA of these viruses was
essential for the continued replication of tumor cell lines and growth of these cells in human tumor xenografts in severe combined immunodeficiency mice. 22 HPV
E6/E7 antisense oligonucleotide transcription units were shown to suppress the growth of cervical cancer cell lines in severe combined immunodeficiency mice. 23
Antisense oligonucleotides to the EBNA I and LMP2 proteins of the EBV were shown to induce replication arrest of EBV-associated tumor cell lines and induction of
apoptosis of these cells. Additionally, use of the antisense oligonucleotides to these unique targets produces sensitization of these cells to chemotherapy.
Most surprising is that cervical cancer cell lines harboring HPV-transforming proteins E6 and E7 still retained dependency on these oncoproteins for the continued
proliferation and survival of these cells in vitro as well as in animal models.24 Thus, drug development is being targeted to these two proteins and their associated
proteins, with the aims of stopping progression of disease as well as sensitizing the cervical cancer cells to the effects of chemotherapy.
The E2 protein of HPV is also an interesting target for prevention of cervical cancer. Very commonly, the chronic infection of HPV in the cervical mucus, which is
associated with dysplasia and chromosomal translocations, persists for years before the development of invasive cancer. In the United States, such dysplastic states
of the cervical mucosa can be identified by repetitive Papanicolaou smear, and appropriate surgical action can be taken if the dysplasia is severe or persists. In
contrast, in most areas of the world, the infrastructure necessary to screen women for HPV-associated dysplasia does not exist. Thus, the development of chemicals
that will inhibit the formation of viral protein complexes necessary for the assembly of the replication initiation complex could be useful for the development of
preventive therapy for cervical cancer.
Two of the viral proteins—E1, a helicase, and E2, a chaperone protein—are important for assembly of a functional replication initiation complex in HPV-infected cells.
Once infected, the germinal epithelial cells of the cervical mucosa contain approximately 50 copies of HPV DNA per cell. 25 These copies of HPV are retained at a
stable copy number because the replication of the HPV DNA episome is coupled to the replication of the host cells. This is probably owing to the need for host DNA
polymerase for the replication of the HPV DNA.
E2 must form a homodimer before binding to the E2-binding sites in the HPV origin of replication. E2 also connects with E1, which also binds to HPV DNA. Thus,
many virus-specific protein contact domains, which are virus-specific and not shared by the host mammalian cell, are available as targets for inhibition: the E2
homodimerization domain, the E2 DNA-binding domain, the E2/E1 contact domain, and the E1 DNA-binding domain. Computational analysis of these surfaces led to
predictions about the structure of potential inhibitory compounds, which in turn led to a prospectively randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of drugs in a
multiinstitutional setting, sponsored by the National Cancer Institute.
GROWTH FACTOR RECEPTOR INHIBITORS
The use of monoclonal antibodies has already shown that blocking of growth factor receptors can act to suppress the proliferation of tumor cells, enhance their
chemotherapeutic sensitivity, and extend the duration of the progression-free interval in cancer patients. The Her2/neu receptor antibody Herceptin and the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitory antibody C221 have been shown to sensitize tumor cells to chemotherapy. 26 These clinical examples have shown that
blocking of the appropriate domain on the growth factor receptor is sufficient to suppress the transformed phenotype of the cell.
Computational analysis of these two closely related receptors (EGFR and Her2/neu) is being directed to the development of low-molecular-weight chemical inhibitors
of these receptors in such cancers as breast, gastric, and esophageal cancer, squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck, and ovarian and lung cancer, which
are associated with amplification of these receptors' genes.

SUMMARY AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In the twenty-first century, drug development will no longer depend on going to the forests to dig up roots, to pick flowers and leaves, or to strip the bark from the trees
to discover new drugs for cancer treatment. It is now possible for a laboratory scientist to recapitulate in a few months what once required millions of years of
evolution to produce. The ability to analyze protein structure, to decipher the dynamic array of conformal states of oncoproteins (both activating and inactive), and to
characterize the genetic changes that may exert a dominant effect on the natural history of solid tumors and hematopoietic neoplasms ( Table 62.2-3) has opened the
door to selecting for drug development the best domains on target oncoproteins.

TABLE 62.2-3. Genetic Changes in Solid Tumor and Hematopoietic Neoplasms That Are Suitable Targets for Drug Development

The availability of computational chemistry and the ability to generate diversity in chemical structure have enabled scientists to reach beyond the limits of available
data about structure and activity relationships and to probe deeply in the unknown repository of untapped chemical structures for molecules that may exhibit favorable
binding and specificity properties. It is apparent that the explosion of information about genetic changes in tumor cells will provide the necessary clues with which the
chemist can direct structural diversification and screening to isolate newer and more effective compounds. Recent successes in the development of drugs for AIDS
and CML on the basis of protein structure is a dramatic validation of this new approach to drug design. It is possible that this paradigm will be reiterated many times in
the development of an entirely new generation of cancer treatment drugs based on inhibitors of receptors, transcription factors, adaptor molecules, viral and somatic
cell oncoproteins, and apoptosis rescue proteins. The dividends for cancer patients and society may be substantial in terms of reducing the cost of therapy and
enhancing its efficacy.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Druker BJ, Lydon NB. Lessons learned from the development of an Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor for chronic myelogenous leukemia. J Clin Invest 2000;105:3.
2. Wickham TJ, Mathias P, Cheresh DA, Memerow G. Integrins alpha vbeta3 and alpha v beta5 promote adenovirus internalization but not virus attachment. Cell 1993;73:309.
3. Krengel U, Schlichting L, Scherer A, et al. Three-dimensional structures of H-ras p21 mutants: molecular basis for their inability to function as switch molecules. Cell 1990;62:539.
4. Sternberg N, Hoess RH. Display of peptides and proteins on the surface of bacteriophage lambda. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995;92:1609.
5. Nowell PC, Hungerford DA. Chromosome studies on normal and leukemic human leukocytes. J Natl Cancer Inst 1960;25:85.
6. DeFabritiis P, Petti MC, Montefusco E, et al. Bcrabl antisense oligodeoxynucleotide in vitro purging and autologous bone marrow transplantation for patients with CML in advanced phase. Blood
1998;91:3156.
7. Skorski T, Palanisamy K, Nieborowska-Skorska M, et al. Phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase activity is regulated by BCR/ABL and is required for the growth of Philadelphia chromosomepositive cells.
J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;86:726.
8. Knudsen ES, Buckmaster C, Chen TT, Feramisco JR, Wang JYJ. Inhibition of DNA synthesis by Rb: effects on G/S1 transition and S phase progression. Growth Dev 1998;12:2278.
9. Guo XYD, Cuillerot JM, Wang T, et al. Peptide containing the BCR oligomerization domain (AA 160) reverses the transformed phenotype of p210bcrabl positive 32D myeloid leukemia cells.
Oncogene 1998;17:825.
10. Guo XYD, Balague C, Wang T, et al. The presence of the Rb c-box peptide in the cytoplasm inhibits p210bcrabl transforming function. Oncogene 1999;18:1589.
11. Anafi M, Gazit A, Zehavi A, et al. Tyrphostin-induced inhibition of p210bcrabl tyrosine kinase activity induces K562 to differentiate. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;82:3524.
12. Druker B, Tamua S, Buchdunger E, et al. Effects of a selective inhibitor of the Abl tyrosine kinase on the growth of Bcr-Abl positive cells. Nat Med 1996;2:564.
13. Casey PJ, Seabra JC. Protein prenyltransferases. J Biol Chem 1996;271:5289.
14. Pendergast AM, Quilliam LA, Cripe LD, et al. Bcr-abl induced oncogenesis is mediated by direct interaction with the SH2 domain of the GRB-2 adaptor protein. Cell 1993;75:175.
15. Chin L, Tam A, Pumerante J, et al. Essential role for oncogenic ras in tumour maintenance. Nature 1999;400:468.
16. Breevik J, Meling GI, Spurkland A, et al. K-ras mutation in colorectal cancer: relations to patient age, sex, and tumor location. Br J Cancer 1994;69:367.
17. Caflisch A, Miranker A, Karplus M. Multiple copy simultaneous search and construction of ligands in binding sites: application to inhibitors of HIV-1 aspartic proteinase. J Med Chem
1993;36:2142.
18. Horwitz HF. Integrins and health. Sci Am 1997;276:68.
19. Hu Z, Sun Y, Garen A. Targeting tumor vasculature endothelial cells and tumor cells for immunotherapy of human melanoma in a mouse xenograft model. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1999;96:8161.
20. Parkin DM, Pisani P, Ferlay J. Estimates of the worldwide incidence of 25 major cancers in 1990. Int J Cancer 1990;80:827.
21. Pluda JM, Yarchoan R, Jaffe ES, et al. Development of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in a cohort of patients with severe human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection on long-term antiretroviral
therapy. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:276.
22. Roth G, Curiel T, Lacy J. Epstein-Barr viral nuclear antigen 1 antisense oligodeoxynucleotides inhibits proliferation of Epstein-Barr virusimmortalized B cells. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;84:582.
23. Hu G, Liu W, Mendelsohn J, et al. High epidermal growth factorreceptor levels induced by the HPVE6/E7 proteins lead to unregulated growth in cervical carcinoma cells. J Natl Cancer Inst
1997;89:1271.
24. Hu G, Liu W, Hanania EG, et al. Suppression of tumorigenesis by transcription units expressing the antisense E6 and E7 messenger RNA (mRNA) for the transforming proteins of the human
papilloma virus and the sense mRNA for the retinoblastoma gene in cervical carcinoma cells. Cancer Gene Ther 1995;2:19.
25. Schneider A, Oltersdorf T, Schneider V, et al. Distribution of human papillomavirus 16 genome in cervical neoplasia by molecular in situ hybridization of tissue sections. Int J Cancer
1987;39:717.
26. Pegram MD, Lipton A, Hayes DF, et al. Phase II study of receptor enhanced chemosensitivity using recombinant humanized anti-p185her2/neu monoclonal antibody plus cisplatin in patients
with her2/neu-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer refractory to chemotherapy treatment. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2659.

SECTION 63.1 Preventive Cancer Vaccines
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 63.1
Preventive Cancer Vaccines
DOUGLAS R. LOWY
JOHN T. SCHILLER
Introduction
Infectious Agents and Cancer
Prophylactic Versus Therapeutic Vaccination
Hepatitis B Virus
Human Papillomavirus
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The high rate of morbidity and mortality attributable to cancer has stimulated concerted efforts to prevent malignancies from developing. The recognition that
environmental factors may account for the majority of cancers has encouraged researchers to identify the exogenous factors that trigger the carcinogenic process and
to define their role in tumorigenesis. Infectious agents make up one important class of environmental factors implicated in tumor development. 1,2 and 3
Although the oncogenic potential of some infectious agents, such as hepatitis B virus (HBV), was recognized more than two decades ago, many of the infectious
agents now believed to be oncogenic were discovered after 1975 ( Table 63.1-1).2 These latter include the oncogenic papillomaviruses, hepatitis C virus, herpesvirus
type 8, and Helicobacter pylori. It seems likely that further research will result in additional forms of cancer being attributed to infectious agents. The expanded list will
arise via the demonstration that infectious agents already recognized as oncogenic may be causally involved with additional forms of cancer, by attributing these
additional cancers to other infectious agents not yet recognized as oncogenic, or both.
Identification of an infectious agent in the etiology of a malignant process implies that timely interference with the infection could prevent the tumor from arising. 4,5 The
development of effective vaccines against infectious carcinogenic agents represents a potentially powerful approach and is the main focus of this chapter. The
prototype for this approach is the HBV vaccine, which can protect immunized individuals against both acute disease and the malignant consequences attributable to
this virus. 6,7
This chapter briefly considers how infectious oncogenic agents lead to cancer, discusses general issues related to developing vaccines against these agents, and
presents individual sections devoted to the three agents that account for the most cancers worldwide. Vaccines against other infectious oncogenic agents are also in
various stages of development. 8,9 and 10

INFECTIOUS AGENTS AND CANCER
Reducing exposure to an identified carcinogen represents the principal approach to reducing the carcinogenic effects of many environmental carcinogens. For
carcinogens such as cigarette smoke, entrenched human behavior and conflicting economic interests may present considerable obstacles to reducing or eliminating
exposure. By contrast, a vaccine against an infectious carcinogen does not require modification of the behavior that leads to exposure because the vaccine
attenuates the oncogenic activity of the infectious agent by reducing or preventing infection of target tissue. 4,5,11 Furthermore, the induction of herd immunity via the
widespread use of an effective vaccine, offers the possibility of reducing the risk of nonimmunized individuals to exposure to the infectious agent. Vaccination also
offers the long-term possibility of eliminating the agent from the environment.
Before considering vaccination itself, it is worthwhile reviewing some features of oncogenic infectious agents, as their characteristics may have implications for
vaccine development, testing, and implementation. Viruses, bacteria, and parasites have all been implicated in the pathogenesis of human cancer (see Table 63.1-1).
Investigators at the International Agency for Research on Cancer estimated that in 1990 approximately 15% of cancers worldwide could be attributed to infectious
agents (Table 63.1-2).2 In the United States and other developed countries, a smaller proportion of cancers (approximately 9%) are associated with these agents,
while they account for a higher proportion (approximately 20%) in developing countries.

TABLE 63.1-1. Oncogenic Infectious Agents

TABLE 63.1-2. Cancers Attributable to Infection: Estimate of Worldwide Distribution According to Type (Annual Number of Cases in Thousands) a

Several factors probably account for these differences. Some of the infectious agents, such as parasites with oncogenic potential, are extremely uncommon in the
United States, or the rate of infection may vary greatly, as with HBV. 12 For others, such as human papillomaviruses (HPV), infection in the United States is common,
but Pap smear screening for premalignant lesions in the cervix leads to effective treatment before carcinomas develop. 13 In still other instances, strain differences or
the interaction between the infectious agent and environmental, host factors, or both might help determine the rate of carcinogenic progression. 14

The identified oncogenic infectious agents share at least four characteristics: the ability to establish chronic infection, the actual establishment of chronic infection in
those individuals destined to develop malignancy attributable to the infection, an interval of many years between the initial infection and the development of
malignancy, and a benign (i.e., nonmalignant) outcome for most infected individuals. These characteristics imply that cancer attributable to infectious agents develops
only after prolonged infection and that a malignant outcome arises only after the development of infection-dependent changes in the host.
Consistent with current concepts of the multistep nature of carcinogenesis, the changes in the host probably involve genetic alterations in potential target cells,
impairment of the immune system, or both. Since not all infectious agents that establish a chronic infection are carcinogenic, chronic infection with agents not
implicated in carcinogenesis must be much less efficient in inducing the types of changes that lead to cancer than are those agents that are implicated in
carcinogenesis.
Infection seems to induce tumors by three main mechanisms, either singly or in combination, depending on the agent. 5 In some instances, such as with the
papillomaviruses, the agent infects the potential target cell population and induces a series of changes from within those cells that lead to cancer. 15 Some of the
changes include alterations in the agent, so that only a subset of its genetic information is expressed. The viral genes that continue to be expressed contribute directly
to the tumorigenic phenotype by, for example, inactivating the activity of tumor suppressor genes. Other genes from the virus are presumably silenced to lower the
likelihood of the tumor cells being recognized and destroyed by the immune system.
In a second scenario, as occurs with H pylori, the infectious agent is present in the target tissue and induces cancer by local effects, usually chronic inflammation, but
the agent remains outside the tumor cells. 16,17 By the time the tumor is capable of distant metastasis, if not sooner, its growth becomes independent of the infectious
agent.
The third mechanism, which is more indirect, results in increased tumor risk secondary to suppression of the host immune system. This process has been identified in
tumors that arise as a consequence of infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which predisposes infected individuals to a variety of tumors. 18,19 As the
immunosuppression associated with HIV renders patients much more susceptible to chronic infection with other agents, including some with oncogenic potential,
many of the tumors result from the combined effects of coinfection with HIV and these other agents.

PROPHYLACTIC VERSUS THERAPEUTIC VACCINATION
Vaccination against an infectious oncogenic agent can be contemplated in three possible clinical settings: as a prophylactic vaccine to prevent infection or acute
disease, as a therapeutic vaccine to treat an established infection before a malignancy has been induced, and as a therapeutic vaccine to treat the infection after the
malignant tumor has developed, provided the growth, viability, or both growth and viability of the tumor still depend on the presence of the infectious agent. The use of
vaccines in the treatment of cancer, which is the subject of intense investigation, is covered later in this chapter. This section examines the potential utility, complexity,
and challenges for vaccines whose goals are to prevent established infection or to eradicate established infection before tumor development.
Ideally, a vaccine should be effective in both prevention and treatment. However, it has proven easier to develop prophylactic vaccines against infectious agents than
therapeutic ones. Of the more than 20 approved vaccines in the United States, all are approved for prevention, rather than treatment, of established infection. 20
The cellular and humoral arms of the immune system generally function together to interfere either with the initial phases of infection or the eradication of established
infection. Antibodies capable of neutralizing the infectious agent appear to be the prime effectors in preventing infection, while CD8+ T cells appear to serve more
critical roles in the resolution of established infection. 11,21,22 The success of prophylactic vaccines in inducing long-term protection against infection probably lies
primarily in their ability to induce neutralizing antibodies, although other immune components probably also contribute to their overall effectiveness.
For infections that induce serious acute disease, such as polio, the main theoretical goal of vaccination is the prevention or modification of the acute disease. Since it
is easier to reduce the incidence of acute disease by inducing widespread immunity with a prophylactic vaccine than by treating established infection, a prophylactic
vaccine approach has an important theoretical advantage in this setting over a therapeutic one.
However, for cancer-causing microbes that induce benign primary infection, such as papillomaviruses, the long interval between infection and cancer, combined with
the apparently necessary role played by the infectious agent during much of this period, provides a relatively long opportunity to identify and treat the infected
population. Situations in which premalignant lesions attributable to the microbe are frequently identified, as in the case of Pap smear screening for cervical cancer,
present an opportunity to intervene with a therapeutic vaccine.
The comparative ease with which prophylactic vaccines can be developed, relative to the continuing challenge posed by therapeutic vaccine development, makes
prophylactic vaccination an important approach for cancer vaccines. Another advantage of prophylactic vaccines is that they do not depend on effective progress in
identifying individuals with premalignant disease. Furthermore, worldwide public health vaccine efforts are designed primarily for the administration of prophylactic
vaccines, and this vaccine approach has been extremely successful and highly cost-effective in combating many infectious disease. In addition, the primary disease
induced by many oncogenic infectious agents can provide sufficient rationale for development of a prophylactic vaccine, in addition to the long-term prevention of
cancer.
Numerous theoretical and practical concerns arise when considering development of a prophylactic vaccine against cancer. Safety is especially important for a
vaccine whose primary goal is to prevent cancer, as many individuals will never be infected by the agent, the majority of infected individuals will never develop
malignancy, and malignancy only develops many years after infection. In addition, it requires many years to determine whether a candidate prophylactic vaccine can
prevent cancer. The minimum theoretical duration of efficacy trials whose end point was prevention of malignancy would be the length of the latent period between
infection and malignancy. Thus, while vaccination against HBV was found more than 20 years ago to prevent primary infection, data showing this vaccination can
actually reduce the frequency of hepatocellular carcinoma are only beginning to accumulate. 7
Although cancer prevention might appear to be a necessary end point for establishing vaccine efficacy, there can be serious ethical obstacles to using this clinical
end point. For those clinical situations in which the standard of care involves the treatment of premalignant lesions to prevent the development of malignancy, as with
cervical abnormalities related to Pap smear screening, it may be unethical to delay treatment until cancer develops. In addition, once a vaccine has been shown to be
effective in preventing infection, it might be considered unethical to withhold the vaccine from the control group, despite the possible ambiguities such vaccination
might create for efforts to determine directly whether the vaccine could reduce cancer frequency.
The most critical information for vaccine development lies in determining which antigens can induce protective immunity. For HBV, many aspects of its immunology
and its role in carcinogenesis remain incompletely understood, but identification of a protective viral antigen was able to lead to development of an effective
vaccine.6,12,23
Many of the infectious agents with recognized oncogenic activity (see Table 63.1-1) induce nonmalignant diseases that carry significant morbidity and economic cost
long before they cause cancer, although oncogenic HPV infection may be a notable exception. It may be more practical to use a nonmalignant end point in efforts to
demonstrate efficacy, with the effect on cancer being determined, directly or indirectly, by follow-up studies. This was the approach taken with the hepatitis B vaccine,
which has been approved for use in the United States because of its ability to prevent acute hepatitis. However, the presumption that the vaccine would prevent many
liver cancers attributable to hepatitis B infection was also considered in recommending widespread use of the vaccine.
Some issues surrounding a therapeutic vaccine differ from those of a prophylactic one. As the individual is already infected, it is usually much easier to carry out
therapeutic clinical trials that determine efficacy, compared with prophylactic trials. A therapeutic vaccine trial can limit its enrollment to infected individuals at a
particular stage of disease, and the response to vaccine can be evaluated, usually within a short period, by suppression of infection and of the disease.
Another major theoretical advantage of an effective therapeutic vaccine is that it can have an effect on the incidence of malignant disease much sooner than a
prophylactic vaccine. For cervical cancer, where the interval between HPV infection and cancer typically takes more than 20 years, it would take at least this length of
time before a prophylactic vaccine, even if it were completely effective and were given to all at-risk individuals, would have any effect in the incidence of malignancy.
By contrast, an effective therapeutic vaccine could reduce the incidence of cervical cancer after a much shorter interval. These considerations underscore the
potential utility of determining whether successes with therapeutic vaccines in experimental animal systems, such as H pylori17,24 and papillomaviruses, 25 can be

achieved in people.

HEPATITIS B VIRUS
The identification of HBV in the 1960s led to epidemiologic studies that have clarified its worldwide role in hepatocellular cancer. 6,12,26,27 Although infection with this
DNA virus can cause acute hepatitis, its most serious global consequences are chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma, all of which are associated
with chronic HBV infection. It is estimated that there are more than 1 million chronic HBV carriers in the United States and more than 300 million carriers throughout
the world. The virus is believed to account for approximately 1 million deaths per year worldwide, approximately one-half of them secondary to hepatocellular
carcinoma.
In highly endemic areas, the lifetime risk of exposure may exceed 50%, and most HBV infections occur perinatally or in early childhood. In areas of low endemicity,
HBV transmission occurs mainly in adults, often via sexual exposure or parenteral exposure from infected shared needles used with illicit drugs. The risk of medical
exposure to infected blood products has been greatly reduced by systematic screening of these materials for HBV.
The HBV carrier state, which is a measure of persistent infection, is a critical determinant of the long-term risk for hepatocellular carcinoma. HBV carrier rates vary
dramatically in different populations, being less than 0.5% in the United States and many other countries with high standards of living, to rates of 10% to 20% in parts
of Africa, Asia, and the South Pacific. The relative incidence of cancer attributable to HBV follows a similar geographic distribution, with many studies consistently
showing chronic HBV infection is an important risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma.
The frequency with which persistent HBV infection is established varies inversely with the age of exposure. The highest risk by far occurs during the perinatal period
and the first year of life. More than 70% of neonates born to infected mothers become chronic carriers, compared with around 8% of those exposed at 3 years of age
and an even lower proportion in immunocompetent adults. 26
Conversely, HBV is much more likely to induce acute hepatitis in older age groups, while acute infection is usually asymptomatic when exposure occurs in the
perinatal period. This difference occurs because the acute hepatic disease results from the immune response to infection, as HBV does not directly induce
hepatocellular damage. Thus, the relative immunoincompetence of infants probably accounts for their lack of symptoms and for the high frequency with which the
virus establishes persistent infection in this age group.
The precise role of the virus in the development of hepatocellular carcinoma has not been fully determined. Persistent infection appears to lead to cancer mainly as
the result of chronic inflammation and repeated cellular regeneration, and some evidence implicates the viral X gene, which encodes a transcription factor, in this
process.28 Most cases of liver cancer associated with HBV infection arise after chronic hepatitis has lead to cirrhosis. Hepatocellular carcinoma may develop in as
little as 5 to 10 years of infection, but it does not usually occur until an individual has been infected for at least 20 to 30 years. Ongoing infection continues to be a risk
factor for carcinoma, with an estimated cumulative risk of 15% for an individual who has had persistent infection for 50 years. 12
The rate of hepatocellular carcinoma attributable to HBV is at least three times higher in male than in female subjects, even when a similar proportion of male and
female subjects are exposed to HBV. The difference is explained in part by the higher frequency with which the HBV carrier state is established in male subjects
(close to 2:1) and the greater likelihood of female subjects to eliminate the carrier state.
The HBV vaccine is the prototype prophylactic vaccine against an oncogenic infectious agent. 6,12,29,30 A key to HBV vaccine development was the recognition that the
neutralizing antibodies were directed against the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), and that there is only one HBV serotype. The HBsAg is expressed in relatively
pure form as circulating enveloped virus-like particles (VLPs) in the blood of infected HBV carriers. The HBsAg particles do not carry the viral genome and are not
infectious. It was possible to purify the particles, inactivate possibly contaminating infectious virus with formalin (which should also have inactivated other viruses),
and to test the particles as a subunit vaccine in human clinical trials that were initiated in 1975.
The HBsAg vaccine was found to be well tolerated, to induce an immune response in almost all vaccinees, and to reduce the infection rate in adults by at least 95%
and in neonates by at least 85%. The protection rates in neonates may be further increased by giving hepatitis B immune globulin in addition to the vaccine. The
vaccine was licensed in the United States in 1981.
An analogous HBsAg particle vaccine has been produced in yeast by recombinant DNA technology, and it was licensed in the United States in 1986. The recombinant
vaccine has replaced the blood-derived vaccine, although the immunogenic properties of the latter product are somewhat superior to the recombinant material.
Efficacy trials have shown that the recombinant vaccine confers a similar rate of protection against HBV as the blood-derived vaccine. 12,29,30 In addition, the
recombinant vaccine is less expensive to manufacture and does not have the theoretical concern of contaminating infectious material, although extensive analysis of
the blood-derived vaccine recipients failed to document excess exposure to infectious agents.
The initial series of immunizations, with either vaccine preparation, confers protection against infection for at least several years. In instances in which breakthrough
infection has occurred several years after immunization, it has not been associated with development of a chronic carrier state. Routine revaccination is not
recommended at this time by vaccine advisory groups in the United States. Further studies, in progress, should determine whether this policy should remain in place
or be modified.
The long interval between HBV infection and the development of hepatocellular carcinoma means that only limited data thus far indicate directly that vaccination can
actually decrease the incidence of cancer attributable to HBV. Data from an HBV vaccination program in Taiwan, an area with high HBV endemicity where universal
vaccination was instituted in 1984, do show such a reduction in children. 7 From 1990 through 1994, the incidence of cancer in children aged 6 to 14 was one-half the
rate before implementing vaccination, and that for children aged 6 to 9 was only one-fourth the rate of the earlier period.
These results indicate that HBV vaccination can achieve the long-term goal of cancer reduction. However, such a reduction will occur only if the populations most at
risk are given the vaccine in a timely manner. Even in such a setting, reduction in cancer among adults, in whom the incidence is greatest, would not be expected to
be seen until these children achieve adulthood.

HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS
Papillomaviruses are epitheliotropic agents that induce benign papillomas of the skin and mucous membranes. 31,32 In contrast to HBV, there are more than 100 HPV
genotypes (types).33 A subset of HPV types, which are almost always transmitted sexually, are the main cause of human cervical cancer. Infection with these HPV
types is a strong risk factor for cervical cancer, and HPV DNA from one or more of these types is found in virtually all cervical tumors. 31,34,35 and 36 The virus encodes
oncoproteins that appear to be required both for the induction and the maintenance of the cancer. 32
HPV infection has also been linked to the majority of anal cancers, in which the molecular pathogenesis seems to be similar to that of the cervix, as well as to other
anogenital malignancies and to tumors of the upper aerodigestive tract.e The precise relationship between HPV infection and the development of some of these
cancers is not as firmly established as that with cervical cancer.
As with HBV, cancer attributable to HPV develops only after many years of persistent HPV infection and is an infrequent outcome of infection. Cervical HPV infection
is remarkably common, with sensitive polymerase chain reaction assays indicating prevalence rates of 20% to 40% among young sexually active women. Most
infections are self-limited, and clinical cures are associated with resistance to reinfection. The antigenic divergence between HPV types is such that protection
appears to be largely type specific.
The HPVs associated with cervical and anal cancer are usually designated high-risk types, as contrasted with the low-risk types, which also participate in anogenital
infection but are almost never found in cervical or anal cancers. 15,32 Although there are several high-risk HPV types, HPV-16 is the most common type, being present
in more than one-half of cervical cancers worldwide. The viral E6 and E7 genes are preferentially retained and expressed in the tumors, where they inactivate the p53
and Rb tumor suppressor proteins, respectively.

In principle, cervical cancer is already a largely preventable disease. In countries in which Pap smear screening reaches most women, the incidence of cervical
cancer has decreased markedly. In the United States, for example, the rate of cervical cancer has decreased several-fold since the 1950s, from more than 50 in
100,000 to less than 10 in 100,000. This decrease in cancer rates is even more impressive because it has occurred during a period in which increased sexual
promiscuity has been associated with an increased frequency of genital HPV infection.
However, the cost of Pap smear screening and follow-up is high (estimated to be more than $5 billion annually in the United States), and Pap smear screening is not
routinely available in many less well-developed countries. This situation has made cervical cancer the leading cancer among women in many developing countries,
and it remains the third most common female cancer worldwide. 39
Establishing the etiologic link between HPV infection and cervical cancer (and other tumors) has focused interest on developing an HPV vaccine. 35,40,41 The main goal
would be to protect against cervical cancer, which accounts for approximately 75% of the cancers worldwide attributable to HPV infection (see Table 63.1-1).2 Since
cervical cancer is especially prevalent in developing countries, such a vaccine would potentially have its greatest public health effect in these populations. However,
in the United States, an effective HPV vaccine might further reduce the current incidence of cervical cancer by reaching populations that currently do not receive
adequate Pap screening. In addition, by decreasing the frequency of genital HPV infection, a vaccine could decrease the anxiety and morbidity associated with
cervical dysplasia and its treatment and reduce the social stigma associated with genital HPV infection. If widely used, a vaccine might reduce the frequency and
overall cost of cervical cancer screening. The overall effectiveness of a vaccine, even for prevention of cervical cancer, would be greater if it were given to male
subjects as well as to female subjects.
As papillomaviruses contain oncogenes, and a prophylactic vaccine would be directed toward healthy young individuals, efforts to develop a prophylactic vaccine
have emphasized a subunit approach, analogous to that used for HBV. 40,41 and 42 Indeed, constitutive high-level expression of the L1 major structural viral protein, even
in nonmammalian cells, will lead to its efficient self-assembly into VLPs that resemble authentic viral capsids structurally and antigenically. Preparative amounts of
VLPs can be synthesized in insect cells or yeast. Such VLPs are suitable immunogens that, as is true of authentic virions, possess the immunodominant
conformational epitopes capable of raising high titer neutralizing antibodies.
Since papillomaviruses are species specific, animal papillomavirus models have been used preclinically to evaluate VLPs as a candidate subunit prophylactic
vaccine.40,41 and 42 Excellent results (90% to 100% protection, even without adjuvant, against high-dose virus challenge) have been obtained with systemic
immunization in three models, one cutaneous and two oral mucosal. The neutralizing antibodies appear to be largely responsible for the protection, which can last at
least 1 year. Excellent protection has also been reported in the cutaneous animal model when a vaccinia vector was used to express L1 or when the L1 gene was
injected as naked DNA. However, administration of protein seems more likely to be readily accepted by regulatory authorities in developed countries.
Alternative approaches are also being considered. 40,41 and 42 These include mucosal immunization via purified VLPs or via nonpathogenic enteric bacteria or the use of
nonstructural viral proteins either alone or as incorporated into VLPs. Nonstructural viral proteins have been shown to prevent and, in some cases treat, animal
papillomavirus infection, 25,43 in addition to working in tumorigenic models with cells that express a papillomavirus protein. 42 The utility of a vaccine that might treat
established infection, especially if it were also effective prophylactically, makes it highly worthwhile to pursue the development of therapeutic HPV vaccines.
HPV-11 and HPV-16 L1 VLPs have been tested in early safety and immunogenicity trials of intramuscular injection of healthy human volunteers. 44,45 The vaccines
were well tolerated and induced serum antibody titers, with or without adjuvant, comparable with the protective levels induced in animals. Large-scale efficacy trials
will be needed to determine if this approach, which is not specifically directed toward the mucosal immune system, will confer protection against cervical HPV
infection.
As noted in the Prophylactic versus Therapeutic Vaccination section, it would take many years to establish unequivocally if a vaccine actually had an effect on
cervical cancer, since cervical HPV infection usually precedes the development of malignancy by more than 20 years. In addition, ethical considerations would argue
against allowing cervical lesions arising in women in a vaccine study population to progress to malignancy. However, since infection with high-risk HPV is highly
associated with the development of Pap smear cytologic abnormalities, which in turn place women at increased risk of progression, 34 it is likely that surrogate
intermediate end points of infection will be used to determine vaccine efficacy in prospective trials.
If prophylactic vaccination with VLPs proves efficacious, the type specificity of neutralizing antibodies makes it likely that protection will also be type specific. Since
multiple HPV types are found in cervical cancer, the type-specific nature of the immune protection implies that a polyvalent vaccine would be required to inhibit the
majority of cervical cancers. For example, a vaccine that contained VLPs against HPV-16, 18, 31, and 45, might theoretically prevent close to 80% of cervical cancers.
Helicobacter pylori
H pylori, which was discovered in 1982, induces chronic gastric infection of almost one-half the world population. Infection with H pylori is associated with a variable
proportion of several disorders, including duodenal ulcer, gastric ulcer, carcinoma of the gastric antrum and fundus, which is the second most common cancer
worldwide, and gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas. 2,16,24,46
H pylori is usually acquired in childhood. It disproportionately affects people of lower socioeconomic status, and the majority of adults from developing countries are
infected. The bacterium is found less frequently among individuals in developed countries such as the United States, and the low rate of infection in children from
developed countries suggests the proportion in adults will continue to fall. 24
Most H pylori infections are asymptomatic and have a benign outcome. When infection does lead to stomach cancer, it usually takes decades. 46 In this process,
bacterially induced chronic gastritis is believed to progress to atrophic gastritis and metaplasia, and then to cancer. The bacterium appears to be required only until
atrophic gastritis develops, at which stage it frequently can no longer be cultured from the stomach. Experimental H pylori infection of Mongolian gerbils can induce
these sequential pathologic changes, including gastric adenocarcinoma. 47
Gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma is much less common than gastric carcinoma and has a distinct pathogenesis. 16 This B-cell lymphoma arises
from H pylori–dependent chronic stimulation of the Peyer's patches in the gastric mucosa. Localized mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue tumors often remain
dependent on continued stimulation by bacterial antigens, and eradication of the bacteria with antibiotic treatment may frequently be associated with lymphoma
regression at this stage. However, the growth of more invasive tumors, which may become widely disseminated, is usually autonomous, and these tumors typically do
not respond to antibacterial therapy.
Several bacterial virulence factors account for the ability of H pylori to colonize and persist in the gastric mucosa. 17,24 Although different isolates of H pylori are closely
related antigenically, type I isolates, which are associated with carcinoma, contain a cassette of genes that are designated a pathogenicity-associated island called
cag.
In principle, H pylori infection can be eradicated by combined treatment with several antimicrobial agents plus proton pump inhibitors. However, the high cost and the
emergence of antibiotic resistance make this approach poorly suited for bacterial eradication from whole populations. These limitations have fostered efforts to
develop H pylori vaccines.17,24 Encouraging preclinical studies have been obtained with a variety of animal models. Mucosal immunization with bacterial lysates,
purified bacterial antigens, or with attenuated salmonellae encoding H pylori antigen can all prevent experimental infection. Some of these vaccines have also been
used successfully to eradicate established infection in the animal models. It remains to be determined which of these approaches will prove efficacious in human
vaccine trials. The most desirable outcome would be a cost-effective vaccine that could eradicate established infection while also protecting against new infections.
Such a vaccine would have the long-term benefits of a purely prophylactic vaccine while reducing the incidence of gastric cancer after a much shorter interval.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Ames BN, Gold LS. The prevention of cancer. Drug Metab Rev 1998;30:201.
2. Pisani P, Parkin DM, Munoz N, Ferlay J. Cancer and infection: estimates of the attributable fraction in 1990. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1997;6:387.
3. Tominaga S. Major avoidable risk factors of cancer. Cancer Lett 1999;143(Suppl 1):S19.
4. Hilleman MR. Overview of viruses, cancer, and vaccines in concept and in reality. Recent Results Cancer Res 1998;154:345.

5. Persing DH, Prendergast FG. Infection, immunity, and cancer. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1999;123:1015.
6. Blumberg BS. Hepatitis B virus, the vaccine, and the control of primary cancer of the liver. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:7121.
7. Chang MH, Chen CJ, Lai MS, et al. Universal hepatitis B vaccination in Taiwan and the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in children. Taiwan Childhood Hepatoma Study Group [see
comments]. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1855.
8. Abrignani S, Houghton M, Hsu HH. Perspectives for a vaccine against hepatitis C virus. J Hepatol 1999;31:259.
9. Cohen J. The scientific challenge of hepatitis C [see comments]. Science 1999;285:26.
10. Khanna R, Moss DJ, Burrows SR. Vaccine strategies against Epstein-Barr virus-associated diseases: lessons from studies on cytotoxic T-cell-mediated immune regulation. Immunol Rev
1999;170:49.
11. Murphy BR, Chanock RM. Immunization against virus disease. In: Fields BN, Knipe DM, Howley PM, eds. Fields Virology. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven, 1996:467.
12. Hollinger FB. Hepatitis B virus. In: Fields BN, Knipe DM, Howley PM, eds. Fields Virology. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven, 1996:2739.
13. Rinas AC. The gynecological Pap test. Clin Lab Sci 1999;12:239.
14. Maeda S, Ogura K, Yoshida H, et al. Major virulence factors, VacA and CagA, are commonly positive in Helicobacter pylori isolates in Japan. Gut 1998;42:338.
15. Lazo PA. The molecular genetics of cervical carcinoma. Br J Cancer 1999;80:2008.
16. Isaacson PG. Gastric MALT lymphoma: from concept to cure. Ann Oncol 1999;10:637.
17. Vyas SP, Sihorkar V. Exploring novel vaccines against Helicobacter pylori: protective and therapeutic immunization. J Clin Pharm Ther 1999;24:259.
18. Blattner WA. Human retroviruses: their role in cancer. Proc Assoc Am Physicians 1999;111:563.
19. Weiss RA. Viruses, cancer and AIDS. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 1999;26:227.
20. Katz SL. Future vaccines and a global perspective. Lancet 1997;350:1767.
21. Ahmed R, Gray D. Immunological memory and protective immunity: understanding their relation. Science 1996;272:54.
22. Zajac AJ, Murali-Krishna K, Blattman JN, Ahmed R. Therapeutic vaccination against chronic viral infection: the importance of cooperation between CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. Curr Opin Immunol
1998;10:444.
23. Lee WM. Hepatitis B virus infection [see comments]. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1733.
24. Covacci A, Telford JL, Del Giudice G, Parsonnet J, Rappuoli R. Helicobacter pylori virulence and genetic geography. Science 1999;284:1328.
25. Selvakumar R, Borenstein LA, Lin YL, Ahmed R, Wettstein FO. Immunization with nonstructural proteins E1 and E2 of cottontail rabbit papillomavirus stimulates regression of virus-induced
papillomas. J Virol 1995;69:602.
26. Beasley RP, Hwang LY. Overview on the epidemiology of hepatocellular carcinoma. In: Hollinger FB, Lemon SM, Margolis HS, eds. Viral hepatitis and liver disease. Baltimore: Williams &
Wilkins, 1991:532.
27. IARC. Hepatitis viruses. Monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans. Lyon: IARC Monographs, Vol. 59, 1994.
28. Chen PJ, Chen DS. Hepatitis B virus infection and hepatocellular carcinoma: molecular genetics and clinical perspectives. Semin Liver Dis 1999;19:253.
29. Lemon SM, Thomas DL. Vaccines to prevent viral hepatitis. N Engl J Med 1997;336:196.
30. Mahoney FJ. Update on diagnosis, management, and prevention of hepatitis B virus infection. Clin Microbiol Rev 1999;12:351.
31. IARC. Human papillomaviruses. IARC Monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans. Lyon: IARC Monagraphs, Vol. 64, 1995.
32. Shah KV, Howley PM. Papillomaviruses. In: Fields BN, Knipe DM, Howley PM, eds. Fields virology. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven, 1996:2077.
33. De Villiers EM. Papillomavirus and HPV typing. Clin Dermatol 1997;15:199.
34. Schiffman MH. New epidemiology of human papillomavirus infection and cervical neoplasia [editorial; comment]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1345.
35. Munoz N, Bosch FX. The causal link between HPV and cervical cancer and its implications for prevention of cervical cancer. Bull Pan Am Health Organ 1996;30:362.
36. Walboomers JM, Jacobs MV, Manos MM, et al. Human papillomavirus is a necessary cause of invasive cervical cancer worldwide. J Pathol 1999;189:12.
37. Melbye M, Frisch M. The role of human papillomaviruses in anogenital cancers. Semin Cancer Biol 1998;8:307.
38. Frisch M, Biggar RJ. Aetiological parallel between tonsillar and anogenital squamous-cell carcinomas. Lancet 1999;354:1442.
39. Parkin DM, Pisani P, Ferlay J. Estimates of the worldwide incidence of 25 major cancers in 1990. Int J Cancer 1999;80:827.
40. Hines JF, Ghim SJ, Jenson AB. Prospects for human papillomavirus vaccine development: emerging HPV vaccines. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 1998;10:15.
41. Lowy DR, Schiller JT. Papillomaviruses: prophylactic vaccine prospects. Biochim Biophys Acta 1999;1423:M1.
42. Tindle RW. Immunomanipulative strategies for the control of human papillomavirus associated cervical disease. Immunol Res 1997;16:387.
43. Han R, Cladel NM, Reed CA, Peng X, Christensen ND. Protection of rabbits from viral challenge by gene gun-based intracutaneous vaccination with a combination of cottontail rabbit
papillomavirus E1, E2, E6, and E7 genes. J Virol 1999;73:7039.
44. Reichman R, Balsley J, Carlin D, et al. Evaluation of the safety and immunogenicity of a recombinant HPV-11 L1 virus like particle vaccine in healthy adult volunteers. (Submitted).
45. Harro CD, Pang Y-YS, Rodan RBS, et al. A safety and immunogenicity trial of a candidate HPV16 virus-like particle vaccine. (Submitted).
46. Asaka M, Kudo M, Kato M, Sugiyama T, Takeda H. Review article: long-term Helicobacter pylori infectionfrom gastritis to gastric cancer. Ailment Pharmacol Ther 1998; 12(Suppl 1):9.
47. Watanabe T, Tada M, Nagai H, Sasaki S, Nakao M. Helicobacter pylori infection induces gastric cancer in mongolian gerbils [see comments]. Gastroenterology 1998;115:642.

SECTION 63.2 Therapeutic Cancer Vaccines
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

SECTION 63.2
Therapeutic Cancer Vaccines
NICHOLAS P. RESTIFO
MARIO SZNOL
WILLEM W. OVERWIJK
Introduction
Immune Mechanisms Underlying Vaccine Function
Critical Role of T Cells in the Antitumor Immune Response
Tumor-Associated Antigens
Role of Dendritic Cells in Vaccine Function
Role of Antibodies in Immune-Mediated Antitumor Responses
Monitoring of Cancer Vaccine Trials
Anticancer Vaccine Approaches Derived from Autologous and Allogeneic Tumor Cells
Clinical Experience
Approaches Using Recombinant and Synthetic Anticancer Vaccines
Recombinant Virus–Based Vaccines
Recombinant Vaccines Based on Naked Nucleic Acid
Peptide Vaccines
Vaccination Using Purified or Synthetic Defined Proteins
Vaccination Using Host Antigen-Presenting Cells (Dendritic Cell Vaccines)
Vaccination Using Idiotypes or Antiidiotypes
Vaccines Using Carbohydrate and Ganglioside Cell Surface Antigens
Enhancing Vaccine-Induced Immune Responses
Optimizing Dose, Boosting, and Route of the Immunization
Cytokines, Chemokines, and Costimulatory Molecules as Molecularly Defined Adjuvants
Future Challenges: Tumor Escape from Immune Recognition
Lack of Inflammation
Induction of Tolerance by Tumor Cells
Production of Immunosuppressive Factors
Tumor as a Moving Target
Conclusion
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
The term vaccine originally referred to use of live cowpox virus inoculated in the skin as prophylaxis against smallpox, and hence is derived from the Latin vacca,
which means cow. This meaning was extended to include the use of live, attenuated, or killed microbes or derivatives of microbes given by virtually any route to
prevent the development of an infectious disease. The most recent incarnations of this term include the use of any antigen or fragment of an antigen, or any collection
of antigens used alone, or together with an adjuvant, to modulate an immune response.
Vaccines are traditionally thought of as preventing infectious diseases, but they may have new uses in the treatment of malignancies. In the case of cancer, it is now
clear that the immune system can recognize and destroy even large quantities of established tumor. Evidence for this immune-mediated destruction comes primarily
from clinical trials using interleukin-2 (IL-2), which is now approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for treatment for melanoma and renal cell carcinoma. 1
Although data are limited, experimental therapeutic vaccines have also been demonstrated to cause regression of cancer in a small percentage of patients. 2,3 and 4
The goal of designing vaccines to prevent cancer may be appealing, but a variety of practical and theoretical problems arise in creating a prophylactic vaccine.
Predicting which patients will develop cancer remains difficult, although assessment of risk becomes more accurate with the expansion in knowledge of genetic and
environmental factors that contribute to carcinogenesis. There are also theoretical reasons why prophylactic vaccination against defined antigens may not be feasible.
For example, the difficulty in predicting which of myriad mutations may occur in any one of a large number of genes makes vaccination against mutated tumor
antigens unlikely to be successful. Similarly, vaccination against self-antigens may be subject to chronic immunologic tolerization, or may produce untoward side
effects resulting from the destruction of normal tissues that express the same antigen.
The only truly preventive cancer vaccines that are under serious consideration are vaccines designed to prevent infectious diseases linked to the development of
cancer. 5 For example, vaccines that prevent human papillomavirus or hepatitis B virus infections should also prevent cervical cancer and liver cancer, respectively.
However, most cancers affecting individuals in developed countries have not been associated with viruses. Thus, prophylactic vaccines for cancer are likely to be the
exception rather than the rule. Most research in the field of cancer vaccines is devoted to vaccines designed to activate the immune system to destroy established
cancer cells.
The notion that cancer cells could be recognized by the immune system has been the subject of scientific investigation for over 100 years. The nineteenth-century
physician William Coley attempted to treat tumor-bearing patients by injecting fluid cultures of living Streptococcus erysipelas and reported an apparent decrease in
tumor burden in some of his patients. 6 Since then, results from experiments first done by Gross, then by Prehn and Main, and finally expanded on by Klein and
colleagues, indicated that mice could be immunized against subsequent challenge with methylcholanthrene-induced sarcomas. 7,8 Advances in molecular biology and
immunology have since led to the identification of prospective tumor antigens and improved methods of immunization. Clinical studies of human immunotherapies and
work done in experimental animal tumor systems have been mutually enhancing efforts. A number of broad categories of anticancer vaccine approaches have
emerged from this research (Table 63.2-1).

TABLE 63.2-1. Candidate Vaccines for the Treatment of Established Cancer

IMMUNE MECHANISMS UNDERLYING VACCINE FUNCTION
CRITICAL ROLE OF T CELLS IN THE ANTITUMOR IMMUNE RESPONSE

The principle that T cells were critically important in the immune response against cancer was derived originally in mice with methylcholanthrene-induced
tumors.9,10,11,12 and 13 In both animal tumors and some human malignancies, T cells that accumulate within the mass of a tumor have been shown to specifically
recognize autologous tumor cells in vitro, and to proliferate and specifically secrete cytokines, such as IL-2, interferon-g (IFN-g), granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), in response to stimulation with autologous tumor cells. 14,15 and 16 The adoptive transfer of
these antitumor T cells can treat substantial tumor burdens in both humans and mice. 17,18 Furthermore, the antitumor activity observed with systemic administration of
the T-cell growth factor IL-2 in animal models, and perhaps also in patients, appears to be mediated in large part by tumor antigen-specific T lymphocytes. 19,20
Several mouse studies have suggested that tumor rejection is largely dependent on CD8+, cytolytic T cells, with little if any role for CD4+T cells. 21 In addition,
adoptive transfer of pure populations of CD8+ T lymphocytes was shown to mediate tumor regression in mice. 22,23 and 24 Thus, many efforts to develop therapeutic
anticancer vaccines have focused on CD8+ T lymphocytes, and the molecular targets of these cells have been identified in human and mouse systems. 25,26
Compared with the comprehensive studies using CD8+ T cells in tumor models, relatively little is known about how CD4+ T cells influence antitumor immunity. Early
work demonstrated that disseminated murine leukemia could be eradicated by a combination of cyclophosphamide and adoptive transfer of CD4+ T cells. 27,28
We now understand some aspects of how CD4+ T lymphocytes help initiate and maintain the antitumor immune response. 29,30 CD4+ T cells regulate antigen-specific
immune responses by regulating the functions of other components of the immune system, including B lymphocytes and CD8+ T lymphocytes. In the B16 murine
melanoma system, CD4+ T cells appear crucial for the induction of both antitumor and autoimmunity that is mediated by B lymphocytes, as well as eosinophils and
macrophages.31,32,33,34,35,36 and 37
Activated CD4+ T cells express CD40 ligand (gp39), which can engage the CD40 receptor on antigen-presenting cells (APCs) such as dendritic cells (DCs). These
DCs can secrete proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-12, which in turn trigger the activation of CD8+ T cells and their production of IFN-g and IL-2, resulting in the
attraction of a host of other immune cells to the site. 38,39
One potentially important experimental thrust in the use of adoptively transferred T cells may be the intentional addition of helper CD4+ T cells to adoptively
transferred CD8+ T cells. Walter and colleagues found that the cytotoxic activity of adoptively transferred cytomegalovirus-specific CD8+ T-cell clones declined in
patients deficient in cytomegalovirus-specific helper CD4+ T cells. 40
Perhaps the most dramatic examples of the power of CD4+ T cells in the immune response to self proteins can be found in murine models of autoimmune diseases
such as experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and diabetes. In these models, disease can often be transferred to naive mice with
purified, self-reactive CD4+ splenocytes or specific CD4+ T lymphocyte clones. 41,42 These studies suggest that the full activation of autoreactive CD4+ T cells may be
a key element missing from many current clinical cancer vaccine trials. Attempts to identify the molecular targets of antitumor CD4+ T cells have already been
successful. 43,44,45,46,47 and 48 Thus, current work focuses on efforts to harness the potential capabilities of tumor-specific CD4+ T cells.
TUMOR-ASSOCIATED ANTIGENS
Now that many tumor antigens have been identified ( Table 63.2-2), how does one go about choosing an antigen appropriate for use in the design of a cancer
vaccine? Some workers have picked target antigens because they are frequently mutated in tumors, as in the case of p53 49 or ras,50,51 are at the site of joining of a
translocation such as bcr-abl, 52 or are aberrantly glycosylated and thus the subject of recognition by antibodies as is the case for MUC-1. 53,54

TABLE 63.2-2. Examples of Defined Tumor-Associated Antigens in Cancer Vaccine Clinical Trials

It is clear that not every peptide that can be generated from a protein will be presented in a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I–restricted fashion. The
chances that any given peptide will be presented on the tumor cell surface are in the range of 1%, although this number is approximate. Because not every
MHC-binding tumor-derived peptide will be naturally presented on the tumor cell surface, it is possible to induce a cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) that can kill
peptide-pulsed targets but not actual tumors. 56
Identifying Tumor Antigens Recognized by T Lymphocytes
Because of the difficulty in predicting what peptides from a given potential antigen will be present on the cell surface, one of the most successful approaches to
identifying tumor-associated antigens suitable for the development of cancer vaccines starts with the antitumor immune response. In many cases, the antitumor T cells
were derived from cultures of tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte. Our own group [the Surgery Branch of the National Cancer Institute (NCI)] has focused on the T-cell
reactivities that were associated with objective regressions of metastatic melanoma lesions after their adoptive transfer. 57 cDNA libraries of expressed melanoma
genes were screened by transfecting these genes, along with the gene for the restricting MHC molecule, into an antigen-negative cell line that was then admixed with
T lymphocytes that have antitumor activity. If the T cells recognize the transfected cell line, they lyse it and release cytokines such as GM-CSF, TNF-a, and IFN-g, any
of which can be measured. 2,14 This process of cloning genes encoding tumor antigens is under constant improvement and has become considerably faster and more
streamlined. 58
Targeting Self-Antigens
The identification of self-antigens as potential targets in the immunotherapy of cancer has been an important factor driving interest in cancer vaccine development.
Many of the tumor antigens that have been identified, in the case of melanoma, are tissue differentiation antigens in melanocytes and include gp100, 59,60,61,62,63,64 and 65
MART-1/MelanA,66,67,68,69 and 70 tyrosinase, 61,71,72,73 and 74 and tyrosinase-related protein-1/gp75 75 and tyrosinase-related protein-2. 76,77 and 78 Interestingly, these antigens
are involved in the synthesis of melanin that gives both melanocytes and deposits of melanoma tumor their dark pigment. CEA expressed in gastrointestinal and some
other malignancies, and prostate-specific antigen (PSA), are other examples of differentiation antigens that have relatively restricted expression in normal tissues and
could be targeted by cancer vaccines. 79
A second group of self-antigens are expressed by a diversity of tumor histologies but are not expressed by normal tissues other than testis. Cloned in large part by Dr.
Thierry Boon and his colleagues, these antigens are encoded by genes with family names like MAGE, BAGE, GAGE, RAGE, LAGE, and CAMEL. 80,81 and 82 NY-ESO-1
also falls into this group and is expressed in a significant proportion of human melanoma cells as well as tumors arising from breast, ovary, bladder, prostate, and
liver. 83,84,85,86,87 and 88

The fact that differentiation antigens are nonmutated in most tumors has two important implications. First, expression of these antigens would be expected in subsets
of patients with a defined tumor histology, thus an off-the-shelf vaccine strategy targeting these antigens is possible (a strategy that targets a mutated antigen may
have to be individualized for every mutation). Second, the nonmutated nature of these antigens suggests that immunotherapies that target these antigens could elicit
autoreactivity. One consequence of this autoreactivity may be vitiligo, the patchy and permanent loss of pigment from the skin and hair thought to result from the
autoimmune destruction of pigment cells. 31 Vitiligo has been correlated with objective shrinkage of deposits of metastatic melanoma in patients receiving high-dose
IL-2, a cytokine known to activate and expand T lymphocytes. 89 This correlation is among the strongest evidence that the antitumor effects of IL-2 are mediated by
antigen-specific immune responses and supports the notion that targeting immune responses to recognize self-antigens expressed by tumor can lead to tumor
regression.
Are Mutated Tumor Antigens Better Targets for Immune Recognition?
Besides shared antigens, human tumors also express mutated antigens that can be processed and presented for recognition by T cells. Neoantigens produced as a
result of mutation often are found to originate in ubiquitously expressed proteins. Examples include epitopes from b-catenin, 90 CDK4,91 MUM1,92 FLICE (caspase 8),93
HLA-A2,94 and a mutant gene from a bladder carcinoma that is recorded in databases under the name KIAA0205, whose function is unknown. 93,95 Interestingly, some
of these antigens are also oncogenic, including the mutations described for b-catenin and CDK4. 90,91
Mutated antigens may not lend themselves easily to off-the-shelf vaccines consisting of purely recombinant and synthetic components, because each neoantigen for
each patient must be checked for sequence and that sequence must be verified to be present on the surface of a tumor cell. Some workers have asserted that
mutated tumor antigens are superior targets for vaccine design because immune cells will not be tolerized to these antigens. 96 However, work has shown that even
the most immunogenic foreign antigen, such as the hemagglutinin antigen from the influenza A virus, can be tolerizing when expressed peripherally (i.e., outside the
thymus) either in normal cells 97 or tumor cells. 98 Thus, mutated or otherwise foreign antigens may also induce peripheral tolerance when expressed by tumor cells.
ROLE OF DENDRITIC CELLS IN VACCINE FUNCTION
It is likely that DCs are a key mediator of vaccine function. 99,100 and 101 DCs activate T-cell responses by capturing, processing, and presenting antigens in the context of
MHC molecules to T lymphocytes. In addition, DCs express the costimulatory molecules B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86), which provide a second signal on interaction
with their receptors on the surface of T cells known as CD28 and CTLA-4. 102,103 Engagement of CD28 is associated with proliferation and differentiation whereas
CTLA-4 may trigger functional unresponsiveness. 104,105 Blocking CTLA-4 engagement has been reported to enhance immune responses to tumor cells. 106 Activating T
cells by DC is thus accomplished by presenting antigen/MHC complexes in the context of a variety of other activating signals. 107
DCs can undergo maturation or super activation through the activity of GM-CSF and TNF-a and other macrophage-derived cytokines, greatly enhancing their ability to
activate naive T cells. In addition, CD40 and its ligand have been shown to be important in B-cell activation, in the production of type 1 cytokines by T-helper cells,
and in the generation of cytotoxic T-cell memory responses. We and others have found that the addition of CD40L trimer to DNA vaccination can significantly increase
antitumor efficacy. 108 Another molecule called FLT3 ligand can induce the apparent growth and differentiation of functional DC and has been reported to have
antitumor effects,109,110 and its effect on the function of recombinant and synthetic anticancer vaccines is the subject of a great deal of investigation in experimental
mouse models.
ROLE OF ANTIBODIES IN IMMUNE-MEDIATED ANTITUMOR RESPONSES
Much of the experimental data generated with cancer vaccines in animal models suggests that immune-mediated antitumor activity is attributable to T cells.
Nevertheless, adoptive transfer of antibodies directed against surface tumor antigens can cause regression of cancer in animal models, and vaccine-induced antibody
responses have been demonstrated to reject a tumor challenge and to cause regression of small-volume established cancer. 111 Antibodies mediate antitumor effects
by complement-dependent lysis or by antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. In addition, antibodies directed against growth factor receptors or other cell surface
molecules have demonstrated antitumor activity in animal models and in human clinical trials, by mechanisms that appear to involve blocking or stimulating a cell
signal. For example, trastuzumab (Herceptin) is a humanized monoclonal antibody that blocks the function of the HER-2/neu protooncogene, which is overexpressed
in 25% to 30% of breast cancers, and causes objective tumor responses in approximately 15% of breast cancer patients with metastatic disease. It also significantly
enhances the therapeutic effect of paclitaxel in these patients. Although the mechanism of action is thought to involve the inhibition of stimulatory signals provided by
multiple neuregulins and epidermal growth factor–like molecules, 112,113,114,115 and 116 there is some evidence that the therapeutic effect may also have an immunologic
component through direct killing of antibody-coated tumor cells by natural killer cells. 117
Antibody responses are generally directed toward cell surface components of tumor cells. Similar to T-cell responses, several factors may influence the antitumor
activity of an antibody response, including the density of the target on the cell surface; the type of target; the type of antibody response; the affinity of the antibody for
its target; the magnitude of the response (titer); the amount of circulating antigen; the presence of antigen on normal cells; and perhaps the availability at the tumor
site of effector immune cells bearing the appropriate Fc receptors. Entry of antibodies into tumors can be limited by physiologic barriers, for example, by high tumor
pressure, and the presence of complement inhibitors has been documented on various tumor cell lines, 118,119 perhaps limiting the activity of antibodies that require
complement activation for antitumor activity.

MONITORING OF CANCER VACCINE TRIALS
A major challenge for cancer vaccine trials is determination of efficacy, as measured by immune response and patient benefit. Techniques for measuring antibody
response have become relatively well established, although it is important to verify that the antibody responses actually recognize tumor cells bearing the antigen,
and that affinity, titer, and biologic activity are sufficiently high to expect antitumor activity in vivo.
T-cell responses can be measured through a biologic assay, for example, a skin test of delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH), by assessment of number and function of
antigen-specific T cells in peripheral blood, and by assessment of histologic changes and antigen-specific T-cell number and function within the tumor. DTH is
commonly used to measure responses to autologous and allogeneic cell vaccines. Application of appropriate controls for DTH testing is often difficult, and it is often
not possible to be certain that a positive reaction truly indicates response to a relevant tumor antigen and not, for example, serum or other components of the tumoral
growth medium.
Detection of antigen-specific T cells in blood or tumor can be accomplished by a physical characteristic (presence of a particular T-cell receptor) or function
(production of cytokine in response to the binding of a peptide-MHC complex with the T-cell receptor). If the peptide to which the immune response is directed is
known, peptide-MHC complexes can be joined to form a tetramer, which can be used to detect T cells bearing the appropriate T-cell receptor in a flow cytometer. 120
By this technique, the number of peptide-specific T cells in a bulk population can be enumerated, and after sorting, the functional capacity of the T cells can be
characterized. 121,122 The tetramer technique is promising but is still limited by the sensitivity of the flow cytometer.
Perhaps the most sensitive techniques for assessing a T-cell response to immunization are based on detecting a particular function of a T cell when exposed to its
antigen, most commonly secretion of cytokines, cytotoxicity toward antigen pulsed cells, tumor expressing the antigen, or all these. Ultimately, it is important to
demonstrate induction of immune responses that recognizes tumor cells and not just antigen presented by a target cell, since efficacy is based on the immune
response recognizing naturally processed and presented antigen. If immunization results in an increased frequency of T cells against the immunizing antigen,
posttreatment bulk cultures of T cells exposed to the appropriate target should produce greater amounts of cytokines than pretreatment bulk cultures. Indeed, the
latter has been shown after immunization with various peptides including MART-1 and modified gp100 melanoma peptides, although the posttreatment cultures still
require some expansion of precursors in vitro before measuring cytokine release. 123 Limiting dilution assays allow a more accurate enumeration of T-cell precursors
that are ultimately detected based on function such as cytokine release or cytotoxicity. 2
The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay–spot (ELISPOT) technique involves plating T cells with targets and fixed antibodies to a particular cytokine. The plate is
developed by a second antibody to the cytokine, so that a spot appears wherever a T cell has recognized a target and has been stimulated to produce the indicator
cytokine. By counting the number of spots and dividing by the number of T cells plated, an estimate of the frequency of antigen-specific T cells can be made. The

ELISPOT technique also has sensitivity limitations, but may become a useful tool in monitoring of some cancer vaccine trials. 124
The Surgery Branch of the NCI has explored the use of quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction techniques to detect evidence of immunization to
a peptide vaccine directly from peripheral blood and from tumor. The technique involves measurement of mRNA message for a particular cytokine normalized to a
standard curve. Measurements can be made on fine-needle aspirates of tumor. Since the mechanism of vaccine antitumor response likely involves infiltration of tumor
by T cells, and activity is dependent on cytokine production by the infiltrating T cells, an efficient measure of vaccine biologic activity is an increase in mRNA for a
particular cytokine at the tumor site. 125

ANTICANCER VACCINE APPROACHES DERIVED FROM AUTOLOGOUS AND ALLOGENEIC TUMOR CELLS
Many cancer vaccines in current development use autologous or allogeneic tumor cells as the source of antigen for immunizing patients. Autologous tumor cell
vaccines must be prepared individually for each patient, but offer the potential to immunize against antigens generated by patient- and tumor-specific gene mutations.
Allogeneic tumor cells provide a more reliable and uniform source of antigen for preparation of vaccines, but target only antigens that are shared between the cell
lines in the vaccine and the patient's tumor.
Final preparations of autologous or allogeneic tumor cell vaccines contain either whole cells, lysates, or extracts from the cells. Some attempts have been made to
immunize with live autologous cancer cells, but to avoid the concern that live cells might implant or metastasize, whole tumor cells are irradiated or otherwise killed
before reinjection. To ensure adequate presentation of antigens to the immune system, adjuvants such as bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG), 126,127Corynebacterium
parvum,128,129 DETOX, and alum must be added to the cells or cell extracts. Attempts to increase immunogenicity have also included the infection of allogeneic tumor
cells with vaccinia virus, 130,131 vesicular stomatitis virus, 132 as well as other viruses to create oncolysates that contain both viral and tumor antigens. The strong foreign
viral antigens serve as an immunologic adjuvant that enhances immune responses to the tumor antigens.
A significant body of work in experimental animals has shown that transfection of genes into tumor cells is capable of increasing their immunogenicity. 133,134 and 135
Based on these results, patients have been treated with tumor cells genetically modified ex vivo or in vivo to express several different classes of genes, including
cytokines, T-cell costimulatory molecules, or foreign genes encoding allogeneic or xenogeneic MHC class I molecules. The substantial work with gene-modified tumor
cells is described in greater detail in Chapter 62.1.
More recent efforts to improve the immunogenicity of autologous and allogeneic cancer cell vaccines have involved the direct transfer to, or expression of, potential
antigens in host APC. Methods under investigation in animal models, and either ongoing or planned for clinical trials, include expressing whole tumor cell RNA in host
APC,136 pulsing APC with peptides extracted by acid elution from the surface of tumor cells, 137,138 and creating DC–tumor cell fusions. 139,140
An alternative to the use of whole tumor cells in vaccines has been to enrich the relevant and immune-activating components of tumor cells while excluding the
irrelevant and immune-suppressing substances that may be present. Partially purified fractions of allogeneic tumor cell lines, in this instance shed tumor antigens into
the culture media, have been shown to yield preparations that are capable of stimulating immune responses in experimental murine models. 141 This method of
preparing a tumor vaccine has been extended into the clinic, 142,143 in combination with adjuvants such as alum 144 or DETOX.145 Srivastava and colleagues have shown
that heat shock proteins carry antigenic peptide determinants of cellular proteins, including tumor antigens, to the MHC molecules in the endoplasmic reticulum. 146,147
When isolated from tumor cells and administered as a vaccine, the heat shock proteins can apparently gain access to both the class I and class II antigen-processing
pathways of certain APCs, including macrophages, and can induce both tumor-antigen specific helper and cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses. 147 The heat shock
protein preparations have generated protective and therapeutic antitumor activity in animal models, and on this basis, have entered clinical trials. 148,149,150,151 and 152
CLINICAL EXPERIENCE
Some of the vaccines that have progressed to randomized trials are listed in Table 63.2-3. Most of the clinical experience has been in patients with melanoma. A large
number of clinical trials have been conducted including vaccinia-induced lysates of allogeneic melanoma cell lines 131; shed antigens from cultures of allogeneic
melanoma cell lines (admixed with alum)142,143; Melacine, lysates from two allogeneic melanoma cell lines (administered with DETOX) 145,153; CancerVax, a combination
of three allogeneic melanoma cell lines (with BCG as adjuvant) 154,155; and autologous melanoma cells chemically modified with dinitrophenyl (DNP). 156,157 and 158 For
several of the vaccines, including Melacine, CancerVax, and the DNP-modified autologous melanoma cells, low rates of objective responses were observed in
patients with metastatic disease, although usually not in patients with large tumor burdens or visceral involvement. A striking observation in trials of the DNP-modified
autologous melanoma cells was the induction of inflammation and lymphocytic infiltrates in distant metastatic lesions. For all the vaccines, single-arm studies
suggested that the vaccine improved disease-free survival of stage III patients (in general, patients following resection of their primary or regional nodes, or both, and
at high risk for recurrence), and for some of the vaccines improved survival was also suggested for patients with metastatic disease. Comparisons were made with
historical controls, or within the study, immune responders were compared with patients who had poor or no immunologic response to the vaccine.

TABLE 63.2-3. Moderate and Large Randomized Trials of Cancer Vaccines

Based on these data, several of the vaccines were tested or are currently in phase III randomized trials (see Table 63.2-3). The vaccinia melanoma oncolysate
showed no benefit for patients with stage III disease in one trial, although another larger study of a vaccinia melanoma oncolysate is pending analysis. Melacine, a
vaccine composed of lysates from two allogeneic melanoma cells lines admixed with DETOX, did not improve survival of patients with metastatic melanoma compared
with chemotherapy. Two randomized trials of an autologous colon cancer vaccine admixed with BCG adjuvant involving stage II/III patients have been published. 159
One of the studies indicated an improvement in disease-free survival for stage II patients only. The difference in outcome between the two trials was attributed to
improved quality control in vaccine preparation and administration of an additional dose for late boosting of the immune response in the positive trial. Additional
studies may be required to assess the true efficacy of the vaccine when administered optimally.
Various autologous tumor cell vaccine approaches have been explored in patients with advanced renal cell cancer. Among 20 evaluable patients immunized with
autologous tumor cells and a bacterial ( Corynebacterium parvum) adjuvant, one complete and four partial responses were observed, all in lung metastases. 160
Positive DTH responses to the autologous tumor cells correlated with response and survival. 161 Kugler et al. reported on 17 metastatic renal cell cancer patients
immunized with a vaccine composed of autologous tumor cells fused to allogeneic monocyte-derived DCs. 140 Theoretically, the tumor self-MHC molecules are
presenting unique cancer antigens to the host immune system, and the allogeneic DC fusion partner is providing the necessary costimulation to T cells to ensure
optimal activation. Four complete and two partial responses were observed. Regression was noted primarily in metastases of lung, bone, lymph node, and local
recurrences and appeared durable in some patients, although median follow-up was only 13 months at the time of the report. DTH responses to autologous tumor
developed in 11 of the 17 patients, which included all the objective antitumor responses.
The clinical experience obtained with tumor cells modified with genes encoding cytokines or other immune-stimulatory molecules is covered in Chapter 62.1. Whether
gene modification of tumor cells enhances their immunogenicity and therapeutic outcome in comparison with a simple admixture of tumor cells with nonspecific

adjuvants remains a subject of debate and further study in preclinical models and clinical trials. Nevertheless, a large number of clinical trials involving gene-modified
tumor cells have been initiated. An occasional antitumor response has been reported, but in general the vaccines have had minimal activity against advanced
disease. Of note, in a trial of GM-CSF–transfected autologous melanoma cells, the vaccine appeared to induce T-cell infiltrates in distant metastatic lesions, similar to
results reported for the DNP-modified autologous tumor cell vaccine. Despite the biologic activity, systemic antitumor response as measured by standard criteria was
observed in only a few patients. 162

APPROACHES USING RECOMBINANT AND SYNTHETIC ANTICANCER VACCINES
Because cancer cells are notoriously poor immunogens, workers in a number of laboratories have attempted to isolate tumor antigens and present them to the
immune system in more immunogenic formulations. This has led to the development of recombinant and synthetic cancer vaccines, which are predicated on the
identification of tumor-associated antigens.
Among the most effective immunization strategies for defined antigens in animal models has been to insert the gene for the antigen in recombinant vectors. A partial
list of recombinant viral immunogens includes vaccinia, fowlpox, canarypox, adenovirus, influenza, polio, and sindbis. 163 Recombinant organisms include Listeria,
Salmonella, and BCG.164,165 In addition, naked nucleic acid–based vectors include the administration of DNA by intramuscular or intradermal injection or by gene gun
and most recently, the administration of self-replicating nucleic acid-based immunogens. 166,167
RECOMBINANT VIRUS–BASED VACCINES
Recombinant virus–based cancer vaccines are created by inserting genes encoding tumor antigens into the viral genome. The safety of these recombinant viruses
can be ensured in a number of ways. Some of the recombinant vaccines are composed of viruses incapable of replicating in mammalian cells because of their host
range (e.g., the avian poxviruses), 168 whereas others are highly attenuated (such as certain influenza A viruses 169 or the Wyeth and MVA strains of vaccinia virus 170),
and still others are made safe by the removal of viral genes that are critical to viral replication and virulence (such as adenoviruses). 171
Vaccines based on live, attenuated, or killed viruses can be highly effective in preventing human viral diseases such as polio, smallpox, and even influenza A.
However, recombinant viruses encoding tumor antigens have an important shortcoming: The only component of the immune response that can be tumor specific is the
response elicited by the expression of the transgene(s) encoding the tumor antigen(s). Although viral elements might help boost immune reactivity through their
activity as helper epitopes, they will not contribute any specificity of immune reactivity for tumors, with the exception of recombinant virus-based immunogens used to
vaccinate against a virally induced cancer (e.g., the use of recombinant human papillomavirus to treat cervical cancer).
Problem of Preexisting Immunity to Viral Immunogens
Although viral vaccines are potent inducers of antitumor immunity in animal models, the obstacle of preexisting immunity remains an important problem in the
translation of these strategies to the clinic. We have learned in the conduct of our own clinical trials that humans have high neutralizing titers to recombinant viral
vaccines based on adenoviruses, likely due to the ubiquitous presence of adenovirus in the environment of the upper respiratory systems. 172,173,174 and 175
Vaccinia virus was widely used in the campaign to eradicate smallpox. 176 Thus, anyone born in the United States before approximately 1970 (the majority of patients
who currently have cancer) have already been immunized to vaccinia. 177 Elsewhere in the world, immunization with vaccinia was continued well after the early
1970s.178 Indeed, most patients appear to be able to rapidly clear these viruses, making it difficult or impossible to effectively use cancer vaccines based on these
viruses. One way of circumventing the problem of preexisting immunity is the use of viruses whose natural hosts are nonmammalian, such as the avian poxviruses. 168
Clinical Experience
Viruses engineered to express some tumor antigens induce potent immune responses in murine models, which serve as the basis for initiating human clinical studies.
However, the animal models may overestimate the efficacy of the recombinant viral vaccines in clinical trials. In addition to the problem of preexisting immunity to
several of the viral vectors, patients also are likely to have preexisting immunologic tolerance to the tumor antigen, which is often a self-antigen in the human trials.
The results of clinical studies to date seem to bear out these concerns ( Table 63.2-4). Limited data from a trial of vaccinia-CEA, and separately ALVAC-CEA, the latter
a nonreplicating poxvirus in humans, suggest that weak cellular responses to CEA can be induced in vivo, as measured by T-cell responses to an HLA-A201
restricted peptide from CEA. 179 Antibody responses to the CEA protein were not detected in a separate study. 180 The Surgery Branch, NCI, has conducted clinical
trials of adenovirus, vaccinia, and fowlpox separately carrying the MART-1 and gp100 melanoma genes 172 (S. A. Rosenburg, personal communication, 2000). One
patient treated with the adenovirus-MART-1 vector experienced a durable complete regression, but otherwise, no clinical responses were observed with any of the
vaccines used alone in patients with metastatic melanoma. Furthermore, the viral vaccines were not able to elicit immune responses to the viral-encoded tumor
antigens, as measured against known HLA-A201 restricted peptide epitopes of the antigen. Because of the methodologies used to detect immune responses in the
latter trials, it is not possible to exclude weak immune responses to known or unknown epitopes of the tumor antigens. Clinical trials of recombinant vaccinia and
fowlpox vectors containing PSA and MUC-1 are in progress. Preliminary results of the vaccinia-PSA trial, in patients with rising PSA levels postsurgery, suggest that
some patients may remain progression-free for an extended period, although actual benefit from the vaccine must be proven in randomized trials.

TABLE 63.2-4. Clinical Trials Using Vaccines Based on Recombinant Viruses a

Table 63.2-4 demonstrates that trials of recombinant viral vaccines have employed different routes of administration including scarification (multiple punctures of the
vaccine solution into the skin), intradermal, subcutaneous, and intramuscular injection. Some patients also received the nonreplicating fowlpox-gp100 vaccine
intravenously (S. A. Rosenberg et al., personal communication, 2000). A large range of doses has been explored in the phase I trials. Immunizations were repeated
monthly in most trials for a maximum of three to four doses. Using immune responses to the viral vector antigens as a guide, no route of administration has proven to
be superior, and a relationship between dose and immune response has not been established, although higher doses are predicted to be more effective for the
nonreplicating vectors. Exploration of schedule issues (e.g., a longer interval between doses) has been difficult in the selected patient populations with progressing
metastatic disease. For the vaccinia vectors, a take (formation of an inflammatory response and a bleb at the injection site) has occurred in most patients receiving the
vaccine by scarification or intradermal injection despite preexisting immunity to vaccinia. However, second and third doses of vaccinia are usually not associated with
a significant local reaction, suggesting that the vaccinia is cleared too quickly to allow boosting of immune responses to the encoded tumor antigen.
In order to improve the effects of these vectors, current studies are combining different viral vectors that are non–cross-reactive in patients, or viral vectors combined
with the corresponding peptide epitopes of the antigen gene, administered sequentially. These heterologous boost strategies were superior to repeated
immunizations with single vectors in animal models. 181,182 Examples of ongoing trials include sequential immunizations with vaccinia-CEA and ALVAC-CEA in patients
with CEA-expressing malignancies, and vaccinia-tyrosinase sequenced with fowlpox-tyrosinase in metastatic melanoma patients. Investigators are also combining
genes for T-cell costimulatory signals with the antigen gene within a single viral vector, or combining viral vectors that respectively express the antigen gene and
genes for cytokines or one or more T-cell costimulatory signals. Clinical trials of vaccinia containing genes for both CEA and B7-1 (CD80) have been initiated, but

results are pending. Several of the recombinant viral vaccines encoding tumor antigens have also been administered in combination with systemic or local
administration of GM-CSF, and with systemic IL-2. The Surgery Branch, NCI, administered high-dose IL-2 following immunization with adenovirus, fowlpox, and
vaccinia vectors containing either the MART-1 or gp100 genes in patients with metastatic melanoma 172 (S. A. Rosenberg, personal communication, 2000). Although
some clinical response were observed, the response rates did not appear higher than expected with IL-2 alone, and no enhancement of immunologic responses to the
tumor antigens was observed. Results of studies employing lower doses of IL-2 with other recombinant viral vaccines have not been completed.
RECOMBINANT VACCINES BASED ON NAKED NUCLEIC ACID
Reports dating from the early 1990s indicated the surprising finding that the intramuscular injection of naked plasmid DNA (i.e., DNA without a viral coat) could result
in an immune response.183 Like viral vaccines, the activity of DNA vaccines appears to be mediated through DCs and other professional APCs.100
In the case of gene-gun delivery, nucleic acid is precipitated onto an inert particle (generally gold beads) and forced into the cells with a helium blast. Transfected
cells then express the antigen encoded on the plasmid, resulting in an immune response. Like live or attenuated viruses, DNA vaccines effectively engage both MHC I
and MHC II pathways, allowing for the induction of CD8+ and CD4+ T cells.
DNA-based vaccines are relatively safe and easy to engineer and produce. In animal models, they are generally not as potent as recombinant viruses at eliciting
immune responses capable of destroying tumors. Important innovations in the design of DNA vaccines include promoter optimization, enhancement of
polyadenylation sequences, the removal of 5' and 3' untranslated regions from the inserted gene, and the use of intronic sequences to improve nuclear export.
Clinical trials using naked DNA vaccines encoding tumor antigens have begun. One of the first of these trials was launched at the Surgery Branch, NCI. It uses a
plasmid encoding a modified form of the human gp100 melanoma antigen first alone then in combination with IL-2, previously shown in murine studies to enhance
vaccination with plasmid. 166 Preliminary results indicate no clear signs of immunization and no objective tumor regressions.
One promising new approach to the development of nucleic acid vaccines may be strategies designed to make them self-replicating. Self-replication can be
accomplished by using a gene encoding an RNA replicase polyprotein derived from alphaviruses, a family of viruses that includes Semliki Forest virus, Sindbis virus,
and the Venezuelan encephalitis virus. A gene encoding a tumor antigen can be added to such a construct under the control of a viral promoter. Such constructs can
elicit antigen-specific antibody and CD8+ T-cell responses at doses as low as 0.1 µg. 166
PEPTIDE VACCINES
Table 63.2-5 describes the clinical results of selected trials conducted with peptide vaccines. Peptides have been derived from various antigens, including melanoma
antigens MART-1, gp100, tyrosinase, and tyrosinase-related protein-1; cancer testes antigen MAGE-3; PSA and prostate-specific membrane antigen; CEA; the mucin
MUC-1; the hormone human chorionic gonadotropin-a; the oncogene HER-2/neu; mutated ras and p53; and human papillomavirus E6 and E7 proteins. Several
conclusions can be drawn from the series of studies conducted with MHC class I (HLA-A201 in most trials) restricted peptides derived from the melanoma antigens. In
those trials, doses of 1 mg administered in an emulsion with a type of incomplete Freund's adjuvant were adequate to induce immune responses, and within the range
of doses studied (100 µg to 10 mg), the immune response did not appear to be dose related. While scheduling was not examined in detail, the studies revealed that
administration of the vaccine every 3 to 4 weeks was effective in inducing immune responses. Cytotoxic T-cell responses to the peptide and to HLA-A201+,
antigen-positive tumor cells could be detected by several techniques, and the strength of the immune response was dependent on the peptide. The ability to induce
detectable T-cell responses to peptides in patients, using current immune monitoring techniques, was found to be dependent on coadministration of an adjuvant (S. A.
Rosenberg et al., personal communication, 2000).

TABLE 63.2-5. Clinical Trials Using Vaccines Based on Synthetic Peptides or Purified Proteins

Occasional mixed and true objective antitumor responses have been observed in a small minority of patients receiving melanoma peptide vaccines. However, no
correlation has been made between detection of immune response and clinical outcome in these trials. In a study of an HLA-A1 restricted peptide from the cancer
testis antigen MAGE-3, administered without an adjuvant to 39 patients with metastatic melanoma, three complete responses and four other patients with objective
regression were reported, despite the inability to detect immune responses to the peptide. 184
A substantial experience has been developed in studies of a synthetic peptide immunogen corresponding to an epitope from the gp100 melanoma antigen. The
epitope, consisting of amino acids 209 to 217 and restricted by HLA-A*0201, was identified by determining reactivities of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes from patients
with metastatic melanoma. When the second amino acid from the amino terminus was modified from a threonine to a methionine to create a peptide called g209-2M,
binding to the HLA-A*0201 molecule could be increased ninefold compared with the native peptide in an in vitro competitive binding assay. 185In vivo, 91% of patients
vaccinated with this peptide were successfully immunized on the basis of immunologic assays in peripheral blood, a substantial improvement over the immunization
rate observed with the native peptide. CD8+ T-cell responses to the modified peptide recognized the native peptide as well as tumor cells expressing the gp100
protein. Despite the increased immunogenicity of the peptide in patients, antitumor responses were not observed. Clinical trials of immunization with a combination of
several HLA-A201 restricted peptides from different melanoma antigens including gp100, MART-1, and tyrosinase have been initiated, but preliminary results do not
indicate a marked improvement in activity against metastatic disease (S. A. Rosenberg et al., personal communication, 2000). However, a randomized trial of
immunization with the combined g209-2M, MART-1, and tyrosinase peptides in HLA-A201 stage IV melanoma patients who have had resection of all metastatic
disease, compared with placebo, is ongoing, and is designed to test whether immunization against these antigens will have greater effect in patients with minimal
tumor burdens.
The clinical experience with other peptides selected to induce only CD8+ lymphocyte responses remains limited. Results of studies involving peptide-pulsed DCs are
discussed in the section on DC tumor vaccines [see Vaccination Using Host Antigen-Presenting Cells (Dendritic Cell Vaccines) , later in this chapter]. HLA-A201
restricted peptides from the E7 human papillomavirus-16 have been administered in adjuvant or attached to a lipidated peptide designed to elicit broad nonspecific
T-cell helper responses. 186,187 Human papillomavirus-16 E7 peptide-specific T-cell responses were observed in several patients without evidence of antitumor activity.
A small experience with an HLA-A201 restricted peptide from the her2 protein illustrates an important principle in selection of peptides for clinical trials. The her2
peptide was shown to bind to HLA-A201 in vitro, and CTL raised to the peptide and some tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte preparations could kill peptide-pulsed target
cells. On this basis, a clinical trial was initiated administering the peptide in Montanide ISA 51 similar to the melanoma trials. 56 While the HER-2/neu peptide could be
demonstrated to induce peptide-specific T-cell responses in patients, the CTL did not recognize HER-2/neu+ HLA-A201+ tumors, suggesting that the peptide is not
naturally processed and presented on HLA-A201 molecules sufficiently by most tumor cells to allow T-cell activation. Therefore, it is possible to generate potent T-cell
responses to various MHC class I binding peptides in patients, but these immune responses do not necessarily recognize tumor, and therefore would not be expected
to have antitumor effects.
Various peptides of longer length, usually greater than 10 to 12 amino acids, have also been studied in clinical trials. Longer peptides are most often intended to
induce CD4+ T-helper cell responses, although long peptides are capable of inducing CD8+ lymphocyte responses if they are trimmed or processed in vivo to a
peptide of correct length that can bind to the patient's class I MHC molecules. Disis et al. demonstrated that immunization with peptides 15 to 18 amino acids in length

and selected from the HER-2/neu protein could induce T-cell proliferative responses to the her2 protein in six of eight patients with HER-2/neu+ tumors. 188
Demonstration of responses to the protein, rather than just the peptide itself, suggests that the immune responses are relevant and could recognize antigen presented
by tumor cells or picked up by host APC. The investigators also reported evidence of epitope spreading, manifest as the induction of proliferative responses to her2
peptide epitopes not in the vaccine. Clinical antitumor responses could not be assessed as most patients had minimal or no disease at the start of vaccination.
Immunization with a 105 aa peptide composed of five tandem repeats derived from MUC-1 did not produce antitumor activity among 63 patients with advanced
adenocarcinomas, although T-cell infiltrates were observed in the peptide delayed-type hypersensitivity skin test sites of 44 of 55 patients. 189 Immunization of 25
metastatic adenocarcinoma patients with a MUC-1 mannan fusion protein produced high antibody titers in 13, but T-cell responses were limited. 190 Low-level antibody
and T-cell proliferative responses, as well as regression of liver lesions in two patients, were reported among 21 patients immunized against a carboxy-terminal
peptide of human chorionic gonadotropin-b, conjugated to diphtheria toxoid. 191 The results have been extended to a randomized controlled trial in advanced colon
cancer.
Cytokines have been administered together with peptide vaccines to enhance presentation, for example, by recruiting and activating host APC, or to affect the
developing T-cell response by directly interacting with the T cells. When the T-cell growth and differentiation cytokine IL-2 was added to the g209-2M melanoma
peptide treatment regimen, 13 of 31 patients (42%) had objective clinical responses and four additional patients had mixed or minor responses ( Table 63.2-5).2 These
results are significantly different from results obtained in clinical trials using high-dose IL-2 alone, in which objective response rates are in the range of 15%, and a
randomized trial comparing IL-2 plus peptide with IL-2 alone is due to start in 2000. Of note, high-dose IL-2 diminished the CTL response to peptide as measured in
peripheral blood. Coadministration of IL-12 or GM-CSF with the g209-2M peptide in adjuvant also diminished CTL reactivity to the peptide, and among the 14 patients
treated with peptide and IL-12 and 13 treated with peptide and GM-CSF, there were no objective antitumor responses. 192 GM-CSF has been an effective adjuvant in
studies of the her2 peptides, which were not admixed with a nonspecific adjuvant. 188 The cytokine flt3, which increases the number of circulating and tissue APC, has
generated substantial interest and is being administered before peptide vaccination in a number of clinical studies, although results are not yet available.
Future directions in the development of synthetic peptide vaccines may include the use of modified peptides embedded into microspheres or coated onto microbeads,
a maneuver that can target antigen for uptake and MHC class I restricted presentation by professional APCs. 193,194 Other novel strategies developed in experimental
animal systems use toxin-linked peptides 195,196 and peptides linked to endoplasmic reticulum insertion signal sequences covalently attached to the amino terminus of a
peptide immunogen. 197
VACCINATION USING PURIFIED OR SYNTHETIC DEFINED PROTEINS
In relative terms, only a few vaccines are in development that are composed of synthetic or purified proteins. Proteins provide the opportunity for immunization against
multiple epitopes, and also have the potential for inducing both CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell responses. However, for some self-antigens, immunization with proteins may
be limited by tolerance to its dominant epitopes. Animal models have shown that immunization with xenogeneic proteins may be superior to the syngeneic self-protein,
due to amino acid differences that induce helper CD4+ T-cell responses, and the chance occurrence that the xenogeneic protein will contain a peptide epitope just
different enough from the native epitope to be highly immunogenic, but still induce T-cell responses to the native epitope. 198,199 An alternative to immunization with a
purified or recombinant protein is to insert the gene into a viral vector, which theoretically enters the cytoplasmic compartment of an APC to produce large amounts of
the protein for processing and antigen presentation.
Clinical experience with vaccines containing defined proteins is limited, with the exception of idiotype lymphoma vaccines (see Vaccination Using Idiotypes or
Antiidiotypes, later in this chapter). Results of trials of liposome-encapsulated PSA protein vaccines have been presented in abstract form.
VACCINATION USING HOST ANTIGEN-PRESENTING CELLS (DENDRITIC CELL VACCINES)
In order to improve the immunogenicity of antigens, investigators have increasingly adopted the approach of placing the antigen directly into host APCs, which when
fully differentiated present surface molecules and produce cytokines that result in optimal activation of T cells. Interpretation of the many clinical trials is confounded
by the different approaches to generating APC in vivo and in vitro; by the different types and functions of APC; by difficulty in fully defining the characteristics of APC
that result in optimal antigen presentation; by the many different approaches to place antigen into or onto APC; and by the variety in dose, route of administration, and
use of concurrent cytokines in the clinical studies. Few if any studies have compared APC-based vaccines with other immunization approaches, for example, peptide
pulsed on APC to peptide in adjuvant. A representative sample of tumor vaccines employing host APC is presented in Table 63.2-6. APC used to deliver antigens
derived from autologous tumor cells, for example, tumor cell-DC fusions, is discussed earlier (see Anticancer Vaccine Approaches Derived from Autologous and
Allogeneic Tumor Cells, earlier in this chapter).

TABLE 63.2-6. Clinical Trials Using Vaccines Based on Antigen-Presenting Cells

The majority of clinical studies have produced APC by ex vivo culture of nonadherent peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) in the presence of the cytokines
IL-4 and GM-CSF (monocyte-derived APC). After several days of culture, the APC are incubated with the antigen, and then administered to the patient. In some cases
an additional signal to mature APC is provided before the final harvest for injection, for example, addition of TNF or monocyte-conditioned media. Some clinical
studies use as the APC preparation all PBMC obtained from a pheresis with minimal ex vivo manipulation, or apply centrifugation and elutriation techniques to isolate
circulating APC from blood, which are then directly cultured in vitro with antigen only. The optimal route of administration for APC has not been determined, but clinical
protocols have employed intravenous, intradermal, subcutaneous, and intralymphatic routes, as well as direct injection into lymph nodes.
Preliminary data from immunization with monocyte-derived APC pulsed with melanoma peptides suggest that the approach is less effective than administering peptide
in adjuvant for generating CTL responses in peripheral blood (F. M. Marincola, personal communication, 2000). Nevertheless, some antitumor responses have been
observed in the clinical trials. Nestle et al. reported two complete and three partial responses among 16 melanoma patients treated with melanoma peptides or tumor
lysates pulsed onto monocyte-derived APC and injected directly into lymph nodes. 3 Immune response was assessed by delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions to
APC alone versus APC plus antigen, and 15 of the 16 patients appeared to have increased delayed-type hypersensitivity responses to the antigen-pulsed APC.
Declines in the PSA levels of prostate cancer patients have been observed following administration of APC-based vaccines. Approximately 25% of 70 patients,
including 33 with hormone-refractory disease, were reported to achieve complete or partial responses when treated with monocyte-derived APC pulsed with two
HLA-A2 restricted peptides from prostate-specific membrane antigen. 200
VACCINATION USING IDIOTYPES OR ANTIIDIOTYPES
The antigen-binding region of an antibody (the idiotype), which is formed from recombination of genes within the B cells, can theoretically be processed by the B cells
to peptides that bind self-MHC molecules and are presented on the surface of the cell, thus forming a unique antigen that can be recognized by T cells.
Antigen-binding regions of antibodies can also be recognized by other antibodies; therefore, it is possible to raise antibodies to the idiotype present on the surface of
malignant B cells. The specific antibody idiotype to be used in a vaccine must be prepared individually from each patient using hybridoma or recombinant DNA

techniques, processes that can take several weeks to months to generate a clinical product. Nevertheless, a substantial clinical experience is now available with
these unique lymphoma idiotype vaccines. 201,202 and 203 Optimal induction of immune responses requires conjugation of the idiotype protein to KLH and administration
with a strong nonspecific adjuvant. The Stanford group demonstrated induction of antibody responses to the idiotype in 20 of 41 immunized patients with follicular
lymphoma.202 Fifteen of the immune responders were among the 20 patients who were in complete remission at the beginning of vaccine treatment. There was a
marked increase in progression-free survival and overall survival in immune responders versus nonresponders. Two of 21 patients had regression of residual disease
with the vaccine treatment. A similar vaccine was studied at the NCI in follicular lymphoma patients in their first complete remission. 203 T-cell responses, including
proliferation to the idiotype and cytotoxicity toward autologous tumor, were reported in 19 of the 20 patients, and antibody responses to the idiotype in 15 of 20. Eight
of 11 patients with detectable bcl-2 translocations in peripheral blood following chemotherapy developed molecular complete remissions with vaccination.
Furthermore, 18 of 20 patients were relapse-free from 28+ to 53+ months from initiation of initial chemotherapy. Although the results of the two series are promising,
the data must be interpreted with caution since the beneficial clinical effects are occurring primarily in complete remission patients whose natural history of disease is
already quite favorable. A phase III randomized trial of the lymphoma idiotype vaccine is expected to begin in 2000.
The antibodies directed to the antigen-binding regions of other antibodies carry within their own antigen-binding region a physical resemblance to the original antigen.
For example, if CEA is the intended tumor antigen, an antibody is first raised to CEA. That antibody (termed Ab1) is itself used as an immunogen in mice to raise a
second group of antibodies (Ab2), some of which recognize the CEA-binding site of the Ab1. The antigen-binding site of Ab2 physically resembles CEA, and when
used to immunize animals or patients, can generate antibodies (Ab3) that recognize CEA. The Ab2 is capable of generating more potent immune responses to the
original antigen than the antigen itself in some circumstances, since the antigenic epitope is being presented outside of immune-tolerizing influences.
Clinical results of representative antiidiotype vaccines are presented in Table 63.2-7.156,204,205,206,207,208,209,210 and 211 The antiidiotype antibodies are most often of murine
origin and are administered together with a nonspecific immunologic adjuvant. Several antiidiotypes have been developed to immunize against melanoma cell surface
antigens. An antiidiotype developed to mimic the melanoma high-molecular-weight antigen generated antibody responses that recognized melanoma cells expressing
the antigen and was also associated with regression of metastatic disease in 3 of 52 patients. 212 Only a subset of the 52 patients received the antiidiotype conjugated
to KLH and administered with BCG, which appeared to be necessary to induce the antimelanoma antibodies. An antiidiotype mimicking the ganglioside GD2 produced
antibody responses to GD2 in 40 of 47 patients and was associated with one complete response and 12 patients who had stable disease for greater than 14
months.213 Another antiidiotype mimicking the ganglioside GD3 has been examined in patients with melanoma and small cell lung cancer. 214,215 Approximately
one-third of the patients receiving the GD3 antiidiotype developed antibodies to GD3, some despite having completed intensive chemotherapy. In the 15 patients with
small cell lung cancer who were immunized while in partial or complete remission from chemotherapy, disease-free survival appeared to be prolonged compared with
historical controls. The latter results formed the basis for an ongoing randomized phase III trial in the same patient population.

TABLE 63.2-7. Clinical Trials Using Vaccines Based on Idiotypes and Antiidiotypes

Antiidiotypes mimicking colorectal cancer antigens are also in clinical trials. A polyclonal goat antiidiotype mimicking the 17-1A antigen was the subject of a small
randomized trial in advanced colon cancer, and despite inducing antibodies to 17-1A in 12 of the 21 patients in the treatment arm, no survival benefit was observed
compared with the control (immunization with nonspecific goat polyclonal antibody). 216 An antiidiotype mimicking CEA was reported to induce high titer anti-CEA
antibodies in all 32 immunized patients. 217 Furthermore, because the antiidiotype contained sequences that were similar to the protein sequence of CEA, some
patients developed CD4+ T-cell proliferative responses to CEA. No antitumor responses were observed, but 18 of 23 patients with no evidence of disease, including
eight of nine with completely resected metastatic disease, were progression free at the time of the publication. Combination with 5-fluorouracil–containing regimens
did not appear to reduce the immunogenicity of the antiidiotype, and a phase III trial in the adjuvant setting is planned.
VACCINES USING CARBOHYDRATE AND GANGLIOSIDE CELL SURFACE ANTIGENS
Certain tumors, particularly melanoma and small cell lung cancer, are known to express gangliosides that can be recognized by antibodies. Induction of antibody
responses against the ganglioside antigens can have therapeutic value in animal models, particularly in micrometastatic settings. A vaccine composed of purified
GM2 combined with BCG was administered subcutaneously in a randomized controlled trial in patients with stage IIb/III melanoma. Patients received low-dose
cyclophosphamide before immunization. The GM2/BCG vaccine was shown to induce low to moderate titers of IgM anti-GM2 antibodies in the majority of patients,
and produced a trend toward improved disease-free survival. 218 When patients with preexisting anti-GM2 responses, which are associated with a better prognosis,
were excluded from the analysis of both arms, the differences between arms became statistically significant. Pilot studies of GM2 conjugated to the protein KLH and
admixed with QS-21 produced higher titers of IgM antibodies to GM2 compared with the GM2/BCG vaccine, and also high titers of IgG antibodies to GM2, although
the IgG anti-GM2 antibodies did not appear recognize cell surface GM2 in the majority of patients. 219,220 Among the patients who develop IgM anti-GM2 antibodies,
only approximately 40% to 50% have antibody responses that are cytotoxic for GM2-expressing melanoma cells. A phase III trial of the GM2-KLH/QS-21 vaccine
compared with high-dose IFN for patients with stage IIb/III melanoma completed accrual in 1999 and is awaiting analysis.
A vaccine containing both GM2 and GD2 gangliosides has been developed and appears to induce IgM and IgG antibody responses to both gangliosides. 221 Another
ganglioside, Fucosyl-GM1, which is expressed on small cell lung cancer, has been conjugated to KLH and administered with QS-21 to ten patients with small cell lung
cancer in partial or complete remission following chemotherapy. 215 The vaccine induced cytotoxic antibody responses in the majority of patients.
STn is a carbohydrate antigen from the MUC-1 glycoprotein, expressed on various adenocarcinomas including breast, ovarian, and colon cancer. 53,222,223 The
carbohydrate epitopes are revealed due to abnormal glycosylation patterns in tumors. A synthetic STn was conjugated to KLH and administered with the DETOX
adjuvant in several trials involving patients with metastatic breast, ovarian, and colon cancer. High-titer IgG responses to natural mucin STn epitopes were
demonstrated, and a correlation was found between survival and development of IgM (colon cancer) or IgG (breast cancer) titers above the median. 224,225 and 226 Of
note, there was no correlation in these same studies between survival and anti-KLH antibody responses. The STn-KLH/QS-21 vaccine is the subject of a large
randomized phase III trial in metastatic breast cancer patients who are stable or have a partial or complete response after initial chemotherapy.

ENHANCING VACCINE-INDUCED IMMUNE RESPONSES
OPTIMIZING DOSE, BOOSTING, AND ROUTE OF THE IMMUNIZATION
There are a bewildering number of choices that the immunotherapist must make when designing an anticancer vaccine, including choice of antigen, immunogen, and
adjuvant. In addition, it becomes important to consider the appropriate dose, route of administration, and the length of intervals between boosting. The answers to
these questions require an understanding of the immunophysiology of vaccination in vivo. In vitro work with human cells is of limited benefit, while work in human
subjects must necessarily be limited in its scope. Thus, in practice, questions regarding dose, route, and boosting are generally addressed in mouse models.
Based on the idea that more antigen is better, most viral and DNA vaccines are geared toward maximum expression and use the strongest available promoters. In our
own preclinical trials using immunogens based on vaccinia viruses, as well as DNA given by blasts with the gene gun, efficacy improves as the dose of immunogen

increases.166,227
It has long been known that boosting an immune response can increase its intensity. When primary and booster immunization using a single vector (i.e., homologous
boosting) is compared with a regimen that uses two different vectors (i.e., heterologous boosting), the heterologous boosting generally resulted in significantly more
potent antigen-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses. 181,182 This is likely due to absence of a neutralizing antivector immune response during the booster
immunization.
The route of immunization can determine its efficacy; for example, administration of a synthetic peptide by the intraperitoneal route can lead to tolerization, whereas
administration of the same peptide immunogen subcutaneously leads to activation. 228 For poxviral vectors, the intravenous route of immunization is optimal in mice. 229
For any given immunogen, we surmise that the optimal route of immunization is likely to be dictated by the route that leads to the presence of the antigen on the
maximal number of activated DCs, perhaps with the least amount of antigen presentation by normal, potentially tolerizing cells.
CYTOKINES, CHEMOKINES, AND COSTIMULATORY MOLECULES AS MOLECULARLY DEFINED ADJUVANTS
From the vaccinologist's point of view, cytokines, chemokines, and costimulatory molecules can be used as molecularly defined adjuvants, significantly improving
vaccine-induced immune responses. They can be administered systemically as protein or through insertion of their genes into recombinant vaccines. 166,230,231 and 232
We have found that gene gun delivery of a model antigen was protective by itself, but was only therapeutic when delivered with IL-2, IL-6, IL-7, or especially IL-12. 166
Other useful cytokine adjuvants include GM-CSF, a cytokine thought to play an important role in the recruitment and maturation of DCs. 162,233,234 Studies using
vaccinia virus-based immunogens have revealed that IL-2 and IL-12 166,230,231 are extremely potent in their ability to increase the efficacy of cancer vaccines. In
addition, the costimulatory molecules B7-1, B7-2, and CD40L have a beneficial effect on vaccination. 108,231,232,235 Less studied as vaccine adjuvants, chemokines
induce the activation and directional migration in a variety of immune cells. 236,237,238 and 239 They are produced locally in the tissues, often as a result of the presence of
pathogens, and act on leukocytes through a family of at least a dozen receptors.
Importantly, not all of the findings in murine models were confirmed in human clinical trials. When patients with metastatic melanoma were immunized with a modified
immunodominant peptide derived from gp100, no increase in efficacy as measured by objective clinical response was observed using GM-CSF or IL-12. 2,192 Only IL-2
was found to have a beneficial effect as an adjuvant for peptide immunization. 2
Bacterial DNA sequences called immunostimulatory sequences have been reported to be potent adjuvants. Nonmethylated, palindromic DNA sequences containing
CpG-oligodinucleotides can activate an innate immune response by activating monocytes, natural killer cells, DCs, and B cells in an antigen-independent manner. 240
Thus, the use of large amounts of plasmid for immunization may not only overcome the low transfection efficiency in vivo, but may also serve as an adjuvant, driving a
Th1 response.241

FUTURE CHALLENGES: TUMOR ESCAPE FROM IMMUNE RECOGNITION
Every cancer that kills a person is a cancer that has not been destroyed by the immune system, and many mechanisms have been hypothesized for this apparent lack
of immunogenicity (Table 63.2-8).

TABLE 63.2-8. Potential Impediments to Immunization against Tumor Antigens and Development of Effective Antitumor Immune Responses

LACK OF INFLAMMATION
One mechanism that may explain why patients with cancer usually do not reject their tumors involves the lack of inflammation at the tumor site. There are important
differences between the site of a tumor deposit and a site of infection. Tumors produce few, if any, immunologic danger signals to stimulate the immune
response.242,243 In contrast, at a site of infection, the innate immune response is triggered because of tissue destruction. Inflammatory cells, such as monocytes,
macrophages, and DCs, are activated as a result of this tissue destruction, and by components of the infectious agents themselves, such as lipopolysaccharide,
nonmethylated CpG sequences, and double-stranded RNA, each of which are components of invading microbes that are not shared by either normal host cells or
growing cancer cells. In the absence of these danger signals, the immune system may not become fully activated. 107,244
INDUCTION OF TOLERANCE BY TUMOR CELLS
Despite cancer cells' expression of clearly immunogenic molecules, the host usually does not mount an effective immune response to these antigens. One reason
could be the lack of expression of costimulatory molecules necessary for efficient T-cell activation by tumor cells. In the absence of costimulation, T cells tend to
become anergic, a process thought to protect against autoimmune disease. The costimulatory molecules CD80 (B7-1) and CD80 (B7-2) are expressed on
professional APC and on a variety of other tissues after exposure to inflammatory cytokines. 245 Transfection of tumor cells with both B7 isoforms has been used
successfully to trigger their immune-mediated rejection of experimental mouse tumors, which have some inherent immunogenicity. 246 However, this strategy is
insufficient for nonimmunogenic tumors, a category into which most, if not all, human tumors would likely fall. 247
A number of groups have conducted experiments in which highly immunogenic foreign antigens, such as the hemagglutinin protein from influenza, 98 the
b-galactosidase enzyme from Escherichia coli,168 and the ovalbumin protein from chicken are expressed in tumor cells. 248 The results are fairly uniform: Tumors tend to
grow progressively, retaining their lethality despite the expression of a foreign and highly immunogenic protein by the tumor cell.
Alternative immune mechanisms designated tolerance and ignorance have been used to explain why the immune system fails to recognize tumors expressing even
these normally highly immunogenic antigens. Tolerance generally refers to the lack of a destructive immune reaction to a given antigen. In the tumor context, we might
distinguish an active state of tolerance, in which the immune system undergoes a functional and phenotypic change after encounter with antigen, from ignorance, a
passive process in which immune cells do not have any contact with the antigen that alters their phenotype or function. 249,250 Both mechanisms likely play a role in the
immune system's unresponsiveness to tumor cells.
PRODUCTION OF IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE FACTORS
Tumor cells may ectopically employ normal immunosuppressive mechanisms, such as the production of transforming growth factor-b, normally produced by certain
immune and other somatic cells, but potentially antiproliferative for CTL, natural killer, and lymphokine-activated killer cells. 251 Another example, IL-10, produced by
activated T cells, B cells, monocytes, and keratinocytes may be produced by certain solid tumors and may interfere with macrophage-mediated antigen presentation

and other immune functions. 251
It has been reported that expression of Fas ligand (FasL/CD95L) by melanoma cells was responsible for their escape from immune recognition. 252 Because FasL was
reportedly expressed in areas of immune privilege such as the eye and testis, it was reasoned that expression of FasL by melanoma cells indicated that the tumor bed
was also an “immune privileged” site. In our own study, however, we found no FasL expressed by a panel of 26 human melanoma lines we tested. 253,254 and 255 Thus,
our data do not support a role for FasL expression in the escape of melanoma cells from immune destruction.
TUMOR AS A MOVING TARGET
Tumor cells can be a moving target when it comes to immune recognition. The field of chemotherapy has produced a number of well-known examples of tumor escape
from treatment including the induction of the expression of the multidrug resistance (MDR) gene. As recombinant and synthetic vaccines become more effective, the
selective pressure on the loss of particular target antigens may increase. Indeed, there is some evidence that tumor cells may preferentially loose the gp100 tumor
antigen as a result of treatment with the gp100 209 to 217 (2M) peptide plus IL-2. 256,257
Tumors have unstable genomes that lead them to be heterogenous for the expression of tumor-associated antigens. Further, their unstable genomes may enable
them to escape immune recognition because they loose or mutate key elements of the antigen processing machinery such as the TAP [transporter associated with
antigen processing] transporters, b 2-microglobulin, or the MHC class I a chain molecules. 258,259,260,261 and 262 Other mechanisms underlying the poor immunogenicity of
tumors includes the down-regulation of two IFN-g–inducible proteasomal components called LMP2 and LMP7 in certain human tumors. 258 The proteasome is a large
multicatalytic complex involved in the degradation of many of the peptides that later find their way into the MHC class I pathway.

CONCLUSION
The field of cancer vaccines has been greatly advanced by a wave of technological innovation as well as a deeper understanding of the immunologic response to both
cancer cells and potential vaccines. Vaccines using whole tumor cells have been optimized by transfection or addition of costimulatory molecules, cytokines, and
chemokines. In addition, target antigens that can mediate tumor cell recognition by immune cells have been cloned and are currently used in a variety of vaccine
approaches. The antigens that are most practical for application in vaccines are the self-antigens shared among cancer patients. Encoded in recombinant viruses and
bacteria, naked nucleic acids, or delivered as minimal peptide epitopes, these antigens can induce immune responses that can destroy established tumors in animal
models and in some instances even in cancer patients. The great genomic plasticity and poor inherent immunogenicity of tumor cells make them difficult targets for
complete eradication by the immune system. Yet our growing understanding of the important roles of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and APC, as well as the importance of
dosing and the frequency and route of vaccine administration, will further improve on these initial attempts at therapeutic cancer vaccines.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Rosenberg SA. Keynote address: perspectives on the use of interleukin-2 in cancer treatment. Cancer J Sci Am 1997;3(Suppl 1):S2.
2. Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, Schwartzentruber DJ, et al. Immunologic and therapeutic evaluation of a synthetic peptide vaccine for the treatment of patients with metastatic melanoma. Nat Med
1998;4:321.
3. Nestle FO, Alijagic S, Gilliet M, et al. Vaccination of melanoma patients with peptide- or tumor lysate-pulsed dendritic cells. Nat Med 1998;4:328.
4. Jaeger E, Bernhard H, Romero P, et al. Generation of cytotoxic T-cell responses with synthetic melanoma- associated peptides in vivo: implications for tumor vaccines with
melanoma-associated antigens. Int J Cancer 1996;66:162.
5. Lowy DR, Schiller JT. Papillomaviruses and cervical cancer: pathogenesis and vaccine development. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1998;23:27.
6. Oettgen HF. The history of cancer immunotherapy. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellmann S, Rosenberg S, eds. Biologic therapy of cancer. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1991:87.
7. Prehn RT, Main JM. Immunity to methylcholanthrene-induced sarcomas. J Natl Cancer Inst 1957;18:769.
8. Klein G, Sjogren HO, Klein E, Hellstrom KE. Demonstration of resistance against methylcholanthrene-induced sarcomas in the primary autochthonous host. Cancer Res 1960;20:1561.
9. Greenberg PD. Adoptive T cell therapy of tumors: mechanisms operative in the recognition and elimination of tumor cells. Adv Immunol 1991;49:281.
10. Schreiber H, Ward PL, Rowley DA, Stauss HJ. Unique tumor-specific antigens. Annu Rev Immunol 1988;6:465.
11. Greenberg PD, Cheever MA, Fefer A. H-2 restriction of adoptive immunotherapy of advanced tumors. J Immunol 1981;126:2100.
12. Rosenberg SA, Spiess P, Lafreniere R. A new approach to the adoptive immunotherapy of cancer with tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. Science 1986;233:1318.
13. Shimizu K, Shen FW. Role of different T cells sets in the rejection of syngeneic chemically induced tumors. J Immunol 1979;122:1162.
14. Hom SS, Schwartzentruber DJ, Rosenberg SA, Topalian SL. Specific release of cytokines by lymphocytes infiltrating human melanomas in response to shared melanoma antigens. J
Immunother 1993;13:18.
15. Topalian SL, Solomon D, Rosenberg SA. Tumor-specific cytolysis by lymphocytes infiltrating human melanomas. J Immunol 1989;142:3714.
16. Itoh K, Platsoucas CD, Balch CM. Autologous tumor-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in the infiltrate of human metastatic melanomas. Activation by interleukin 2 and autologous tumor cells,
and involvement of the T cell receptor. J Exp Med 1988;168:1419.
17. Rosenberg SA, Packard BS, Aebersold PM, et al. Use of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and interleukin-2 in the immunotherapy of patients with metastatic melanoma. A preliminary report [see
comments]. N Engl J Med 1988;319:1676.
18. Rosenberg SA, Yannelli JR, Yang JC, et al. Treatment of patients with metastatic melanoma with autologous tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and interleukin 2. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1159.
19. Mule JJ, Yang JC, Afreniere RL, Shu SY, Rosenberg SA. Identification of cellular mechanisms operational in vivo during the regression of established pulmonary metastases by the systemic
administration of high-dose recombinant interleukin 2. J Immunol 1987; 139:285.
20. Rosenberg SA. Immunotherapy of cancer using interleukin 2: current status and future prospects [see comments]. Immunol Today 1988;9:58.
21. Prehn RT. Relationship of tumor immunogenicity to concentration of the oncogen. J Natl Cancer Inst 1975;55:189.
22. Barth RJJ, Bock SN, Mule JJ, Rosenberg SA. Unique murine tumor-associated antigens identified by tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. J Immunol 1990;144:1531.
23. Melief CJ, Kast WM. T-cell immunotherapy of tumors by adoptive transfer of cytotoxic T lymphocytes and by vaccination with minimal essential epitopes. Immunol Rev 1995;145:167.
24. Yee C, Riddell SR, Greenberg PD. Prospects for adoptive T cell therapy. Curr Opin Immunol 1997;9:702.
25. De Smet C, Lurquin C, De Plaen E, et al. Genes coding for melanoma antigens recognised by cytolytic T lymphocytes. Eye 1997;11(Pt 2):243.
26. Restifo NP, Rosenberg SA. Developing recombinant and synthetic vaccines for the treatment of melanoma. Curr Opin Oncol 1999;11:50.
27. Greenberg PD, Cheever MA, Fefer A. Eradication of disseminated murine leukemia by chemoimmunotherapy with cyclophosphamide and adoptively transferred immune syngeneic Lyt-1+2lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1981;154:952.
28. Greenberg PD, Kern DE, Cheever MA. Therapy of disseminated murine leukemia with cyclophosphamide and immune Lyt-1+,2- T cells. Tumor eradication does not require participation of
cytotoxic T cells. J Exp Med 1985;161:1122.
29. Toes RE, Ossendorp F, Offringa R, Melief CJ. CD4 T cells and their role in antitumor immune responses. J Exp Med 1999;189:753.
30. Ossendorp F, Mengede E, Camps M, Filius R, Melief CJ. Specific T helper cell requirement for optimal induction of cytotoxic T lymphocytes against major histocompatibility complex class II
negative tumors. J Exp Med 1998;187:693.
31. Overwijk WW, Lee DS, Surman DR, et al. Vaccination with a recombinant vaccinia virus encoding a “self” antigen induces autoimmune vitiligo and tumor cell destruction in mice: Requirement
for CD4(+) T lymphocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:2982.
32. Pardoll DM. Inducing autoimmune disease to treat cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:5340.
33. Weber LW, Bowne WB, Wolchok JD, et al. Tumor immunity and autoimmunity induced by immunization with homologous DNA. J Clin Invest 1998;102:1258.
34. Clynes R, Takechi Y, Moroi Y, Houghton A, Ravetch JV. Fc receptors are required in passive and active immunity to melanoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:652.
35. Hara I, Takechi Y, Houghton AN. Implicating a role for immune recognition of self in tumor rejection: passive immunization against the brown locus protein. J Exp Med 1995;182:1609.
36. Hirschowitz EA, Leonard S, Song W, et al. Adenovirus- mediated expression of melanoma antigen gp75 as immunotherapy for metastatic melanoma. Gene Ther 1998;5:975.
37. Hung K, Hayashi R, Lafond-Walker A, et al. The central role of CD4(+) T cells in the antitumor immune response. J Exp Med 1998;188:2357.
38. Ridge JP, Di Rosa F, Matzinger P. A conditioned dendritic cell can be a temporal bridge between a CD4+ T- helper and a T-killer cell. Nature 1998;393:474.
39. Schoenberger SP, Toes RE, van der Voort EI, Offringa R, Melief CJ. T-cell help for cytotoxic T lymphocytes is mediated by CD40-CD40L interactions. Nature 1998;393:480.
40. Walter EA, Greenberg PD, Gilbert MJ, et al. Reconstitution of cellular immunity against cytomegalovirus in recipients of allogeneic bone marrow by transfer of T-cell clones from the donor [see
comments]. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1038.
41. McDevitt HO. The role of MHC class II molecules in susceptibility and resistance to autoimmunity. Curr Opin Immunol 1998;10:677.
42. Goodnow CC. Balancing immunity, autoimmunity, and self-tolerance. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1997;815:55.
43. Wang RF, Wang X, Atwood AC, Topalian SL, Rosenberg SA. Cloning genes encoding MHC class II-restricted antigens: mutated CDC27 as a tumor antigen. Science 1999;284:1351.
44. Wang RF, Wang X, Rosenberg SA. Identification of a novel major histocompatibility complex class II- restricted tumor antigen resulting from a chromosomal rearrangement recognized by
CD4(+) T cells. J Exp Med 1999;189:1659.
45. Topalian SL, Gonzales MI, Parkhurst M, et al. Melanoma- specific CD4+ T cells recognize nonmutated HLA-DR-restricted tyrosinase epitopes. J Exp Med 1996;183:1965.
46. Pieper R, Christian RE, Gonzales MI, et al. Biochemical identification of a mutated human melanoma antigen recognized by CD4(+) T Cells. J Exp Med 1999;189:757.
47. Chaux P, Vantomme V, Stroobant V, et al. Identification of MAGE-3 epitopes presented by HLA-DR molecules to CD4(+) T lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1999;189:767.
48. Manici S, Sturniolo T, Imro MA, et al. Melanoma cells present a MAGE-3 epitope to CD4(+) cytotoxic T cells in association with histocompatibility leukocyte antigen DR11. J Exp Med
1999;189:871.
49. Yanuck M, Carbone DP, Pendleton CD, et al. A mutant p53 tumor suppressor protein is a target for peptide-induced CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells. Cancer Res 1993;53:3257.
50. Bristol JA, Schlom J, Abrams SI. Persistence, immune specificity, and functional ability of murine mutant ras epitope-specific CD4(+) and CD8(+) T lymphocytes following in vivo adoptive
transfer. Cell Immunol 1999;194:78.
51. Abrams SI, Hand PH, Tsang KY, Schlom J. Mutant ras epitopes as targets for cancer vaccines. Semin Oncol 1996;23:118.
52. Chen W, Qin H, Reese VA, Cheever MA. CTLs specific for bcr-abl joining region segment peptides fail to lyse leukemia cells expressing p210 bcr-abl protein. J Immunother 1998;21:257.
53. Hiltbold EM, Ciborowski P, Finn OJ. Naturally processed class II epitope from the tumor antigen MUC1 primes human CD4+ T cells. Cancer Res 1998;58:5066.
54. Magarian-Blander J, Ciborowski P, Hsia S, Watkins SC, Finn OJ. Intercellular and intracellular events following the MHC-unrestricted TCR recognition of a tumor-specific peptide epitope on the
epithelial antigen MUC1. J Immunol 1998;160:3111.

55. Kass E, Schlom J, Thompson J, et al. Induction of protective host immunity to carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), a self-antigen in CEA transgenic mice, by immunizing with a recombinant
vaccinia-CEA virus. Cancer Res 1999;59:676.
56. Zaks TZ, Rosenberg SA. Immunization with a peptide epitope (p369-377) from HER- 2/neu leads to peptide-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes that fail to recognize HER- 2/neu+ tumors. Cancer
Res 1998;58:4902.
57. Rosenberg SA. A new era for cancer immunotherapy based on the genes that encode cancer antigens. Immunity 1999;10:281.
58. Wang RF, Wang X, Johnston SL, et al. Development of a retrovirus-based complementary DNA expression system for the cloning of tumor antigens. Cancer Res 1998;58:3519.
59. Kawakami Y, Eliyahu S, Delgado CH, et al. Identification of a human melanoma antigen recognized by tumor- infiltrating lymphocytes associated with in vivo tumor rejection. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1994;91:6458.
60. Kawakami Y, Eliyahu S, Jennings C, et al. Recognition of multiple epitopes in the human melanoma antigen gp100 by tumor-infiltrating T lymphocytes associated with in vivo tumor regression.
J Immunol 1995;154:3961.
61. Kawakami Y, Robbins PF, Wang X, et al. Identification of new melanoma epitopes on melanosomal proteins recognized by tumor infiltrating T lymphocytes restricted by HLA-A1, -A2, and -A3
alleles. J Immunol 1998;161:6985.
62. Bakker AB, Schreurs MW, de Boer AJ, et al. Melanocyte lineage-specific antigen gp100 is recognized by melanoma- derived tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1994;179:1005.
63. Skipper J, Kittlesen DJ, Hendrickson RC, et al. Shared epitopes for HLA-A3 restricted melanoma reactive human CTL include a naturally processed epitope from Pmel-17/gp100. J Immunol
1996;157:5027.
64. Cox A, Skipper J, Cehn Y, et al. Identification of a peptide recognized by five melanoma-specific human cytotoxic T cell lines. Science 1994;264:716.
65. Robbins PF, El-Gamil M, Li YF, et al. The intronic region of an incompletely spliced gp100 gene transcript encodes an epitope recognized by melanoma-reactive tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes.
J Immunol 1997;159:303.
66. Kawakami Y, Eliyahu S, Delgado CH, et al. Cloning of the gene coding for a shared human melanoma antigen recognized by autologous T cells infiltrating into tumor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1994;91:3515.
67. Kawakami Y, Eliyahu S, Sakaguchi K, et al. Identification of the immunodominant peptides of the MART-1 human melanoma antigen recognized by the majority of HLA-A2-restricted tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1994;180:347.
68. Schneider J, Brichard VG, Boon T, Buschenfelde K, Wolfel T. Overlapping peptides of melanocyte differentiation antigen MELAN-A/MART-1 recognized by autologous cytolytic T lymphocytes
in association with HLA-B45.1 and HLA-A2.1. Int J Cancer 1998;75:451.
69. Valmori D, Gervois N, Rimoldi D, et al. Diversity of the fine specificity displayed by HLA-A*0201-restricted CTL specific for the immunodominant Melan-A/MART-1 antigenic peptide. J Immunol
1998;161:6956.
70. Romero P, Gervois N, Schneider J, et al. Cytolytic T lymphocyte recognition of the immunodominant HLA-A*0201-restricted Melan-A/MART-1 antigenic peptide in melanoma. J Immunol
1997;159:2366.
71. Wolfel T, van Pel A, Brichard VG, et al. Two tyrosinase nonapeptides recognized on HLA-A2 melanomas by autologous cytolytic T lymphocytes. Eur J Immunol 1994;24:759.
72. Kittlesen DJ, Thompson LW, Gulden PH, et al. Human melanoma patients recognize and HLA-A1-restricted CTL epitope from tyrosinase containing two cysteine residues: implications for
vaccine development. J Immunol 1998;160:2099.
73. Brichard VG, Herman J, van Pel A, et al. A tyrosinase nonapeptide presented by HLA-B44 is recognized on a human melanoma by autologous cytolytic T lymphocytes. Eur J Immunol
1996;26:224.
74. Kang X-Q, Kawakami Y, Sakaguchi K, et al. Identification of a tyrosinase epitope recognized by HLA-A24 restricted tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. J Immunol 1995;155:1343.
75. Wang RF, Parkhurst MR, Kawakami Y, Robbins PF, Rosenberg SA. Utilization of an alternative open reading frame of a normal gene in generating a novel human cancer antigen. J Exp Med
1996;183:1131.
76. Wang RF, Appella E, Kawakami Y, Kang X, Rosenberg SA. Identification of TRP-2 as a human tumor antigen recognized by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1996;184:2207.
77. Wang RF, Johnston SL, Southwood S, Sette A, Rosenberg SA. Recognition of an antigenic peptide derived from tyrosinase-related protein-2 by CTL in the context of HLA-A31 and -A33. J
Immunol 1998;160:890.
78. Parkhurst MR, Fitzgerald EB, Southwood S, et al. Identification of a shared HLA-A*0201-restricted T-cell epitope from the melanoma antigen tyrosinase-related protein 2 (TRP2). Cancer Res
1998;58:4895.
79. Gilboa E. The makings of a tumor rejection antigen. Immunity 1999;11:263.
80. De Plaen E, De Backer O, Arnaud D, et al. A new family of mouse genes homologous to the human MAGE genes. Genomics 1999;55:176.
81. van Baren N, Chambost H, Ferrant A, et al. PRAME, a gene encoding an antigen recognized on a human melanoma by cytolytic T cells, is expressed in acute leukaemia cells. Br J Haematol
1998;102:1376.
82. Lethe B, Lucas S, Michaux L, et al. LAGE-1, a new gene with tumor specificity. Int J Cancer 1998;76:903.
83. Jager E, Chen YT, Drijfhout JW, et al. Simultaneous humoral and cellular immune response against cancer-testis antigen NY-ESO-1: definition of human histocompatibility leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-A2-binding peptide epitopes. J Exp Med 1998;187:265.
84. Stockert E, Jager E, Chen YT, et al. A survey of the humoral immune response of cancer patients to a panel of human tumor antigens. J Exp Med 1998;187:1349.
85. Chen YT, Scanlan MJ, Sahin U, et al. A testicular antigen aberrantly expressed in human cancers detected by autologous antibody screening. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:1914.
86. Boon T, Old LJ. Cancer tumor antigens. Curr Opin Immunol 1997;9:681.
87. Wang RF, Johnston SL, Zeng G, et al. A breast and melanoma-shared tumor antigen: T cell responses to antigenic peptides translated from different open reading frames. J Immunol
1998;161:3598.
88. Aarnoudse CA, van den Doel PB, Heemskerk B, Schrier PI. Interleukin-2-induced, melanoma-specific T cells recognize CAMEL, an unexpected translation product of LAGE-1. Int J Cancer
1999;82:442.
89. Rosenberg SA, White DE. Vitiligo in patients with melanoma: normal tissue antigens can be targets for cancer immunotherapy. J Immunother Emphasis Tumor Immunol 1996;19:81.
90. Robbins PF, El-Gamil M, Li YF, et al. A mutated beta- catenin gene encodes a melanoma-specific antigen recognized by tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1996;183:1185.
91. Wolfel T, Hauer M, Schneider J, et al. A p16INK4a-insensitive CDK4 mutant targeted by cytolytic T lymphocytes in a human melanoma. Science 1995;269:1281.
92. Coulie PG, Lehmann F, Lethe B, et al. A mutated intron sequence codes for an antigenic peptide recognized by cytolytic T lymphocytes on a human melanoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1995;92:7976.
93. Mandruzzato S, Brasseur F, Andry G, Boon T, van der Bruggen P. A CASP-8 mutation recognized by cytolytic T lymphocytes on a human head and neck carcinoma. J Exp Med 1997;186:785.
94. Brandle D, Brasseur F, Weynants P, Boon T, van den Eynde B. A mutated HLA-A2 molecule recognized by autologous cytotoxic T lymphocytes on a human renal cell carcinoma. J Exp Med
1996;183:2501.
95. Gueguen M, Patard JJ, Gaugler B, et al. An antigen recognized by autologous CTLs on a human bladder carcinoma. J Immunol 1998;160:6188.
96. Blachere NE, Srivastava PK. Heat shock protein-based cancer vaccines and related thoughts on immunogenicity of human tumors. Semin Cancer Biol 1995;6:349.
97. Lo D, Freedman J, Hesse S, et al. Peripheral tolerance to an islet cell-specific hemagglutinin transgene affects both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. Eur J Immunol 1992;22:1013.
98. Staveley-O'Carroll K, Sotomayor E, Montgomery J, et al. Induction of antigen-specific T cell anergy: an early event in the course of tumor progression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:1178.
99. Bronte V, Carroll MW, Goletz TJ, et al. Antigen expression by dendritic cells correlates with the therapeutic effectiveness of a model recombinant poxvirus tumor vaccine. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 1997;94:3183.
100. Porgador A, Irvine KR, Iwasaki A, et al. Predominant role for directly transfected dendritic cells in antigen presentation to CD8+ T cells after gene gun immunization. J Exp Med 1998;188:1075.
101. Banchereau J, Steinman RM. Dendritic cells and the control of immunity. Nature 1998;392:245.
102. Bluestone JA. Cell fate in the immune system: decisions, decisions, decisions. Immunol Rev 1998;165:5.
103. Schwartz RH. T cell clonal anergy. Curr Opin Immunol 1997;9:351.
104. Van Parijs L, Abbas AK. Homeostasis and self-tolerance in the immune system: turning lymphocytes off. Science 1998;280:243.
105. Walunas TL, Bluestone JA. CTLA-4 regulates tolerance induction and T cell differentiation in vivo. J Immunol 1998;160:3855.
106. Leach DR, Krummel MF, Allison JP. Enhancement of antitumor immunity by CTLA-4 blockade. Science 1996;271:1734.
107. Gallucci S, Lolkema M, Matzinger P. Natural adjuvants: endogenous activators of dendritic cells. Nat Med 1999;5:1249.
108. Gurunathan S, Irvine KR, Wu CY, et al. CD40 ligand/trimer DNA enhances both humoral and cellular immune responses and induces protective immunity to infectious and tumor challenge. J
Immunol 1998;161:4563.
109. Esche C, Subbotin VM, Maliszewski C, Lotze MT, Shurin MR. FLT3 ligand administration inhibits tumor growth in murine melanoma and lymphoma. Cancer Res 1998;58:380.
110. Shurin MR, Pandharipande PP, Zorina TD, et al. FLT3 ligand induces the generation of functionally active dendritic cells in mice. Cell Immunol 1997;179:174.
111. Zhang H, Zhang S, Cheung NK, Ragupathi G, Livingston PO. Antibodies against GD2 ganglioside can eradicate syngeneic cancer micrometastases. Cancer Res 1998;58:2844.
112. Klapper LN, Glathe S, Vaisman N, et al. The ErbB- 2/HER2 oncoprotein of human carcinomas may function solely as a shared coreceptor for multiple stroma-derived growth factors. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:4995.
113. Pegram MD, Lipton A, Hayes DF, et al. Phase II study of receptor-enhanced chemosensitivity using recombinant humanized anti-p185HER2/neu monoclonal antibody plus cisplatin in patients
with HER2/neu-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer refractory to chemotherapy treatment. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:2659.
114. Pekarek LA, Starr BA, Toledano AY, Schreiber H. Inhibition of tumor growth by elimination of granulocytes. J Exp Med 1995;181:435.
115. Baselga J, Norton L, Albanell J, Kim YM, Mendelsohn J. Recombinant humanized anti-HER2 antibody (Herceptin) enhances the antitumor activity of paclitaxel and doxorubicin against
HER2/neu overexpressing human breast cancer xenografts. Cancer Res 1998;58:2825.
116. Baselga J, Tripathy D, Mendelsohn J, et al. Phase II study of weekly intravenous recombinant humanized anti-p185HER2 monoclonal antibody in patients with HER2/neu-overexpressing
metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:737.
117. Cooley S, Burns LJ, Repka T, Miller JS. Natural killer cell cytotoxicity of breast cancer targets is enhanced by two distinct mechanisms of antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity against LFA-3
and HER2/neu. Exp Hematol 1999;27:1533.
118. Thorsteinsson L, O'Dowd GM, Harrington PM, Johnson PM. The complement regulatory proteins CD46 and CD59, but not CD55, are highly expressed by glandular epithelium of human breast
and colorectal tumour tissues. APMIS 1998;106:869.
119. Schmitt CA, Schwaeble W, Wittig BM, Meyer ZBK, Dippold WG. Expression and regulation by interferon-gamma of the membrane-bound complement regulators CD46 (MCP), CD55 (DAF)
and CD59 in gastrointestinal tumours. Eur J Cancer 1999;35:117.
120. Altman JD, Moss PH, Goulder PR, et al. Phenotypic analysis of antigen-specific T lymphocytes. Science 1996;274:94.
121. Lee PP, Yee C, Savage PA, et al. Characterization of circulating T cells specific for tumor-associated antigens in melanoma patients. Nat Med 1999;5:677.
122. Lee KH, Wang E, Nielsen MB, et al. Increased vaccine-specific T cell frequency after peptide-based vaccination correlates with increased susceptibility to in vitro stimulation but does not lead
to tumor regression. J Immunol 1999;163:6292.
123. Cormier JN, Salgaller ML, Prevette T, et al. Enhancement of cellular immunity in melanoma patients immunized with a peptide from MART-1/Melan A. Cancer J Sci Am 1997;3:37.
124. Pass HA, Schwarz SL, Wunderlich JR, Rosenberg SA. Immunization of patients with melanoma peptide vaccines: immunologic assessment using the ELISPOT assay. Cancer J Sci Am
1998;4:316.
125. Kammula US, Lee KH, Riker AI, et al. Functional analysis of antigen-specific T lymphocytes by serial measurement of gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and tumor
specimens. J Immunol 1999;163:6867.
126. Key ME, Hanna MGJ. Mechanism of action of BCG-tumor cell vaccines in the generation of systemic tumor immunity. I. Synergism between BCG and line 10 tumor cells in the induction of an
inflammatory response. J Natl Cancer Inst 1981;67:853.
127. Key ME, Hanna MGJ. Mechanism of action of BCG-tumor cell vaccines in the generation of systemic tumor immunity. II. Influence of the local inflammatory response on immune reactivity. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1981;67:863.
128. Likhite VV, Halpern BN. Lasting rejection of mammary adenocarcinoma cell tumors in DBA-2 mice with intratumor injection of killed Corynebacterium parvum. Cancer Res 1974;34:341.

129. Halpern BN, Biozzi G, Stiffel C, Mouton D. Inhibition of tumour growth by administration of killed Corynebacterium parvum. Nature 1966;212:853.
130. Bash JA. Active specific immunotherapy of murine colon adenocarcinoma with recombinant vaccinia/interleukin-2-infected tumor cell vaccines. Ann NY Acad Sci 1993;690:331.
131. Arroyo PJ, Bash JA, Wallack MK. Active specific immunotherapy with vaccinia colon oncolysate enhances the immunomodulatory and antitumor effects of interleukin-2 and interferon alpha in a
murine hepatic metastasis model. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1990;31:305.
132. Livingston PO, Albino AP, Chung TJ, et al. Serological response of melanoma patients to vaccines prepared from VSV lysates of autologous and allogeneic cultured melanoma cells. Cancer
1985;55:713.
133. Colombo MP, Forni G. Cytokine gene transfer in tumor inhibition and tumor therapy: where are we now? Immunol Today 1994;15:48.
134. Colombo MP, Rodolfo M. Tumor cells engineered to produce cytokines or cofactors as cellular vaccines: do animal studies really support clinical trials? Cancer Immunol Immunother
1995;41:265.
135. Pardoll DM. Paracrine cytokine adjuvants in cancer immunotherapy. Annu Rev Immunol 1995;13:399.
136. Ashley DM, Faiola B, Nair S, et al. Bone marrow-generated dendritic cells pulsed with tumor extracts or tumor RNA induce antitumor immunity against central nervous system tumors. J Exp
Med 1997;186:1177.
137. Celluzzi CM, Mayordomo JI, Storkus WJ, Lotze MT, Falo LDJ. Peptide-pulsed dendritic cells induce antigen-specific CTL-mediated protective tumor immunity. J Exp Med 1996;183:283.
138. Zitvogel L, Mayordomo JI, Tjandrawan T, et al. Therapy of murine tumors with tumor peptide-pulsed dendritic cells: dependence on T cells, B7 costimulation, and T helper cell 1-associated
cytokines. J Exp Med 1996;183:87.
139. Gong J, Chen D, Kashiwaba M, Kufe D. Induction of antitumor activity by immunization with fusions of dendritic and carcinoma cells. Nat Med 1997;3:558.
140. Kugler A, Stuhler G, Walden P, et al. Regression of human metastatic renal cell carcinoma after vaccination with tumor cell-dendritic cell hybrids. Nat Med 2000;6:332.
141. Johnston D, el Rouby S, Bystryn JC. Identification of melanoma cell surface antigens immunogenic in mice. Cancer Biother 1994;9:29.
142. Bystryn JC. Immunogenicity and clinical activity of a polyvalent melanoma antigen vaccine prepared from shed antigens. Ann NY Acad Sci 1993;690:190.
143. Bystryn JC, Henn M, Li J, Shroba S. Identification of immunogenic human melanoma antigens in a polyvalent melanoma vaccine. Cancer Res 1992;52:5948.
144. Bystryn JC, Oratz R, Roses D, et al. Relationship between immune response to melanoma vaccine immunization and clinical outcome in stage II malignant melanoma. Cancer 1992;69:1157.
145. Schultz N, Oratz R, Chen D, et al. Effect of DETOX as an adjuvant for melanoma vaccine. Vaccine 1995;13:503.
146. Blachere NE, Li Z, Chandawarkar RY, et al. Heat shock protein-peptide complexes, reconstituted in vitro, elicit peptide-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte response and tumor immunity. J Exp Med
1997;186:1315.
147. Suto R, Srivastava PK. A mechanism for the specific immunogenicity of heat shock protein-chaperoned peptides. Science 1995;269:1585.
148. Srivastava PK, Udono H. Heat shock protein-peptide complexes in cancer immunotherapy. Curr Opin Immunol 1994;6:728.
149. Udono H, Srivastava PK. Comparison of tumor-specific immunogenicities of stress-induced proteins gp96, hsp90, and hsp70. J Immunol 1994;152:5398.
150. Udono H, Levey DL, Srivastava PK. Cellular requirements for tumor-specific immunity elicited by heat shock proteins: tumor rejection antigen gp96 primes CD8+ T cells in vivo. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1994;91:3077.
151. Heike M, Blachere NE, Wolfel T, et al. Membranes activate tumor- and virus-specific precursor cytotoxic T lymphocytes in vivo and stimulate tumor-specific T lymphocytes in vitro: implications
for vaccination. J Immunother Emphasis Tumor Immunol 1994;15:165.
152. Tamura Y, Peng P, Liu K, Daou M, Srivastava PK. Immunotherapy of tumors with autologous tumor-derived heat shock protein preparations [published erratum appears in Science
1999;283(5405):preceding 1119]. Science 1997;278:117.
153. Elliott GT, McLeod RA, Perez J, Von Eschen KB. Interim results of a phase II multicenter clinical trial evaluating the activity of a therapeutic allogeneic melanoma vaccine (theraccine) in the
treatment of disseminated malignant melanoma. Semin Surg Oncol 1993;9:264.
154. Stover CK, de la Cruz VF, Fuerst TR, et al. New use of BCG for recombinant vaccines. Nature 1991;351:456.
155. Berd D, Maguire HCJ, McCue P, Mastrangelo MJ. Treatment of metastatic melanoma with an autologous tumor-cell vaccine: clinical and immunologic results in 64 patients. J Clin Oncol
1990;8:1858.
156. Sensi M, Farina C, Maccalli C, et al. Clonal expansion of T lymphocytes in human melanoma metastases after treatment with a hapten-modified autologous tumor vaccine. J Clin Invest
1997;99:710.
157. Berd D, Murphy G, Maguire HCJ, Mastrangelo MJ. Immunization with haptenized, autologous tumor cells induces inflammation of human melanoma metastases. Cancer Res 1991;51:2731.
158. Berd D, Maguire HCJ, Schuchter LM, et al. Autologous hapten-modified melanoma vaccine as postsurgical adjuvant treatment after resection of nodal metastases. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2359.
159. Vermorken JB, Claessen AM, van Tinteren H, et al. Active specific immunotherapy for stage II and stage III human colon cancer: a randomised trial. Lancet 1999;353:345.
160. Sahasrabudhe DM, deKernion JB, Pontes JE, et al. Specific immunotherapy with suppressor function inhibition for metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Biol Response Mod 1986;5:581.
161. McCune CS, O'Donnell RW, Marquis DM, Sahasrabudhe DM. Renal cell carcinoma treated by vaccines for active specific immunotherapy: correlation of survival with skin testing by autologous
tumor cells. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1990;32:62.
162. Simons JW, Jaffee EM, Weber CE, et al. Bioactivity of autologous irradiated renal cell carcinoma vaccines generated by ex vivo granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor gene
transfer. Cancer Res 1997;57:1537.
163. Restifo NP. The new vaccines: building viruses that elicit antitumor immunity. Curr Opin Immunol 1996;8:658.
164. Paterson Y. Rational approaches to immune regulation. Immunol Res 1998;17:191.
165. Paterson Y, Ikonomidis G. Recombinant Listeria monocytogenes cancer vaccines. Curr Opin Immunol 1996;8:664.
166. Ying H, Zaks TZ, Wang RF, et al. Cancer therapy using a self-replicating RNA vaccine. Nat Med 1999;5:823.
167. Polo JM, Dubensky TWJ. DNA vaccines with a kick. Nat Biotechnol 1998;16:517.
168. Wang M, Bronte V, Chen PW, et al. Active immunotherapy of cancer with a nonreplicating recombinant fowlpox virus encoding a model tumor-associated antigen. J Immunol 1995;154:4685.
169. Restifo NP, Surman DR, Zheng H, et al. Transfectant influenza A viruses are effective recombinant immunogens in the treatment of experimental cancer. Virology 1998;249:89.
170. Carroll MW, Overwijk WW, Chamberlain RS, et al. Highly attenuated modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA) as an effective recombinant vector: a murine tumor model.
Vaccine 1997;15:387.
171. Chen PW, Wang M, Bronte V, et al. Therapeutic antitumor response after immunization with a recombinant adenovirus encoding a model tumor-associated antigen. J Immunol 1996;156:224.
172. Rosenberg SA, Zhai Y, Yang JC, et al. Immunizing patients with metastatic melanoma using recombinant adenoviruses encoding MART-1 or gp100 melanoma antigens. J Natl Cancer Inst
1998;90:1894.
173. Gurwith MJ, Horwith GS, Impellizzeri CA, et al. Current use and future directions of adenovirus vaccine. Semin Respir Infect 1989;4:299.
174. Wood DJ. Adenovirus gastroenteritis. BMJ (Clin Res Ed) 1988;296:229.
175. Zahradnik JM. Adenovirus pneumonia. Semin Respir Infect 1987;2:104.
176. Wehrle PF. A reality in our timecertification of the global eradication of smallpox. J Infect Dis 1980;142:636.
177. Gregorio L. The smallpox legacy: a history of pediatric immunizations. Pharos 1996;59:7.
178. Fenner F. Risks and benefits of vaccinia vaccine use in the worldwide smallpox eradication campaign. Res Virol 1989;140:465.
179. Tsang KY, Zaremba S, Nieroda CA, et al. Generation of human cytotoxic T cells specific for human carcinoembryonic antigen epitopes from patients immunized with recombinant vaccinia-CEA
vaccine. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:982.
180. Conry RM, Khazaeli MB, Saleh MN, et al. Phase I trial of a recombinant vaccinia virus encoding carcinoembryonic antigen in metastatic adenocarcinoma: comparison of intradermal versus
subcutaneous administration. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:2330.
181. Irvine KR, Chamberlain RS, Shulman EP, et al. Enhancing efficacy of recombinant anticancer vaccines with prime/boost regimens that use two different vectors. J Natl Cancer Inst
1997;89:1595.
182. Hodge JW, McLaughlin JP, Kantor JA, Schlom J. Diversified prime and boost protocols using recombinant vaccinia virus and recombinant non-replicating avian pox virus to enhance T-cell
immunity and antitumor responses. Vaccine 1997;15:759.
183. Liu MA. Vaccine developments. Nat Med 1998;4:515.
184. Marchand M, van Baren N, Weynants P, et al. Tumor regressions observed in patients with metastatic melanoma treated with an antigenic peptide encoded by gene MAGE-3 and presented by
HLA-A1. Int J Cancer 1999;80:219.
185. Parkhurst MR, Salgaller ML, Southwood S, et al. Improved induction of melanoma-reactive CTL with peptides from the melanoma antigen gp100 modified at HLA-A*0201-binding residues. J
Immunol 1996;157:2539.
186. Steller MA, Gurski KJ, Murakami M, et al. Cell-mediated immunological responses in cervical and vaginal cancer patients immunized with a lipidated epitope of human papillomavirus type 16
E7. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:2103.
187. van Driel WJ, Ressing ME, Kenter GG, et al. Vaccination with HPV16 peptides of patients with advanced cervical carcinoma: clinical evaluation of a phase I-II trial. Eur J Cancer 1999;35:946.
188. Disis ML, Grabstein KH, Sleath PR, Cheever MA. Generation of immunity to the HER-2/neu oncogenic protein in patients with breast and ovarian cancer using a peptide-based vaccine. Clin
Cancer Res 1999;5:1289.
189. Goydos JS, Elder E, Whiteside TL, Finn OJ, Lotze MT. A phase I trial of a synthetic mucin peptide vaccine. Induction of specific immune reactivity in patients with adenocarcinoma. J Surg Res
1996;63:298.
190. Karanikas V, Hwang LA, Pearson J, et al. Antibody and T cell responses of patients with adenocarcinoma immunized with mannan-MUC1 fusion protein. J Clin Invest 1997;100:2783.
191. Triozzi PL, Stevens VC, Aldrich W, et al. Effects of a beta-human chorionic gonadotropin subunit immunogen administered in aqueous solution with a novel nonionic block copolymer adjuvant
in patients with advanced cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:2355.
192. Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, Schwartzentruber DJ, et al. Impact of cytokine administration on the generation of antitumor reactivity in patients with metastatic melanoma receiving a peptide
vaccine. J Immunol 1999;163:1690.
193. Falo LDJ, Kovacsovics-Bankowski M, Thompson K, Rock KL. Targeting antigen into the phagocytic pathway in vivo induces protective tumour immunity. Nat Med 1995;1:649.
194. Kovacsovics-Bankowski M, Rock KL. A phagosome-to-cytosol pathway for exogenous antigens presented on MHC class I molecules. Science 1995;267:243.
195. Goletz TJ, Klimpel KR, Arora N, et al. Targeting HIV proteins to the major histocompatibility complex class I processing pathway with a novel gp120-anthrax toxin fusion protein. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1997;94:12059.
196. Goletz TJ, Klimpel KR, Leppla SH, Keith JM, Berzofsky JA. Delivery of antigens to the MHC class I pathway using bacterial toxins. Hum Immunol 1997;54:129.
197. Minev B, McFarland BJ, Spiess PJ, Rosenberg SA, Restifo NP. Insertion signal sequence fused to a minimal peptide elicits specific CD8+ T cell responses and prolongs survival of
thymoma-bearing mice. Cancer Res 1994;54:4155.
198. Naftzger C, Takechi Y, Kohda H, et al. Immune response to a differentiation antigen induced by altered antigen: a study of tumor rejection and autoimmunity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1996;93:14809.
199. Overwijk WW, Tsung A, Irvine KR, et al. gp100/pmel 17 is a murine tumor rejection antigen: induction of “self”-reactive, tumoricidal T cells using high-affinity, altered peptide ligand. J Exp Med
1998;188:277.
200. Murphy GP, Tjoa BA, Simmons SJ, et al. Phase II prostate cancer vaccine trial: report of a study involving 37 patients with disease recurrence following primary treatment. Prostate 1999;39:54.
201. Nelson EL, Li X, Hsu FJ, et al. Tumor-specific, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte response after idiotype vaccination for B-cell, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Blood 1996;88:580.
202. Hsu FJ, Caspar CB, Czerwinski D, et al. Tumor- specific idiotype vaccines in the treatment of patients with B-cell lymphomalong-term results of a clinical trial. Blood 1997;89:3129.
203. Bendandi M, Gocke CD, Kobrin CB, et al. Complete molecular remissions induced by patient-specific vaccination plus granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor against lymphoma [see
comments]. Nat Med 1999;5:1171.
204. Singhai R, Levy JG. Isolation of a T-cell clone that reacts with both antigen and anti-idiotype: evidence for anti-idiotype as internal image for antigen at the T-cell level. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1987;84:3836.
205. Somasundaram R, Zaloudik J, Jacob L, et al. Induction of antigen-specific T and B cell immunity in colon carcinoma patients by anti-idiotypic antibody. J Immunol 1995;155:3253.
206. Herlyn D, Benden A, Kane M, et al. Anti-idiotype cancer vaccines: pre-clinical and clinical studies. In Vivo 1991;5:615.
207. Ferrone S. Anti-idiotypes in melanoma. Hybridoma 1993;12:509.

208. Foon KA, Chakraborty M, John WJ, et al. Immune response to the carcinoembryonic antigen in patients treated with an anti-idiotype antibody vaccine. J Clin Invest 1995;96:334.
209. Levitsky HI, Montgomery J, Ahmadzadeh M, et al. Immunization with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor-transduced, but not B7-1-transduced, lymphoma cells primes
idiotype-specific T cells and generates potent systemic antitumor immunity. J Immunol 1996;156:3858.
210. Foon KA, Bhattacharya-Chatterjee M. Idiotype vaccines in the clinic. Nat Med 1998;4:870.
211. Foon KA, Sen G, Hutchins L, et al. Antibody responses in melanoma patients immunized with an anti-idiotype antibody mimicking disialoganglioside GD2. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:1117.
212. Mittelman A, Chen GZ, Wong GY, et al. Human high molecular weight-melanoma associated antigen mimicry by mouse anti-idiotypic monoclonal antibody MK2-23: modulation of the
immunogenicity in patients with malignant melanoma. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:705.
213. Foon KA, Lutzky J, Baral RN, et al. Clinical and immune responses in advanced melanoma patients immunized with an anti-idiotype antibody mimicking disialoganglioside GD2. J Clin Oncol
2000;18:376.
214. McCaffery M, Yao TJ, Williams L, et al. Immunization of melanoma patients with BEC2 anti-idiotypic monoclonal antibody that mimics GD3 ganglioside: enhanced immunogenicity when
combined with adjuvant. Clin Cancer Res 1996;2:679.
215. Dickler MN, Ragupathi G, Liu NX, et al. Immunogenicity of a fucosyl-GM1-keyhole limpet hemocyanin conjugate vaccine in patients with small cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:2773.
216. Samonigg H, Wilders-Truschnig M, Kuss I, et al. A double-blind randomized-phase II trial comparing immunization with antiidiotype goat antibody vaccine SCV 106 versus unspecific goat
antibodies in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. J Immunother 1999;22:481.
217. Foon KA, John WJ, Chakraborty M, et al. Clinical and immune responses in resected colon cancer patients treated with anti-idiotype monoclonal antibody vaccine that mimics the
carcinoembryonic antigen. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2889.
218. Livingston PO, Adluri S, Helling F, et al. Phase 1 trial of immunological adjuvant QS-21 with a GM2 ganglioside-keyhole limpet haemocyanin conjugate vaccine in patients with malignant
melanoma. Vaccine 1994;12:1275.
219. Helling F, Zhang S, Shang A, et al. GM2-KLH conjugate vaccine: increased immunogenicity in melanoma patients after administration with immunological adjuvant QS-21. Cancer Res
1995;55:2783.
220. Kitamura K, Livingston PO, Fortunato SR, et al. Serological response patterns of melanoma patients immunized with a GM2 ganglioside conjugate vaccine. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1995;92:2805.
221. Takahashi T, Johnson TD, Nishinaka Y, Morton DL, Irie RF. IgM anti-ganglioside antibodies induced by melanoma cell vaccine correlate with survival of melanoma patients. J Invest Dermatol
1999;112:205.
222. Jerome KR, Barnd DL, Bendt KM, et al. Cytotoxic T-lymphocytes derived from patients with breast adenocarcinoma recognize an epitope present on the protein core of a mucin molecule
preferentially expressed by malignant cells. Cancer Res 1991;51:2908.
223. Taylor-Papadimitriou J, Finn OJ. Biology, biochemistry and immunology of carcinoma-associated mucins. Immunol Today 1997;18:105.
224. von Mensdorff-Pouilly S, Gourevitch MM, Kenemans P, et al. Humoral immune response to polymorphic epithelial mucin (MUC-1) in patients with benign and malignant breast tumours. Eur J
Cancer 1996;32A:1325.
225. Reddish MA, MacLean GD, Poppema S, Berg A, Longenecker BM. Pre-immunotherapy serum CA27.29 (MUC-1) mucin level and CD69+ lymphocytes correlate with effects of Theratope
sialyl-Tn-KLH cancer vaccine in active specific immunotherapy. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1996;42:303.
226. Kotera Y, Fontenot JD, Pecher G, Metzgar RS, Finn OJ. Humoral immunity against a tandem repeat epitope of human mucin MUC-1 in sera from breast, pancreatic, and colon cancer patients.
Cancer Res 1994;54:2856.
227. Restifo NP, Bacik I, Irvine KR, et al. Antigen processing in vivo and the elicitation of primary CTL responses. J Immunol 1995;154:4414.
228. Aichele P, Brduscha-Riem K, Zinkernagel RM, Hengartner H, Pircher H. T cell priming versus T cell tolerance induced by synthetic peptides. J Exp Med 1995;182:261.
229. Irvine KR, Chamberlain RS, Shulman EP, Rosenberg SA, Restifo NP. Route of immunization and the therapeutic impact of recombinant anticancer vaccines. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:390.
230. Bronte V, Tsung K, Rao JB, et al. IL-2 enhances the function of recombinant poxvirus-based vaccines in the treatment of established pulmonary metastases. J Immunol 1995;154:5282.
231. Rao JB, Chamberlain RS, Bronte V, et al. IL-12 is an effective adjuvant to recombinant vaccinia virus-based tumor vaccines: enhancement by simultaneous B7-1 expression. J Immunol
1996;156:3357.
232. Carroll MW, Overwijk WW, Surman DR, et al. Construction and characterization of a triple-recombinant vaccinia virus encoding B7-1, interleukin 12, and a model tumor antigen. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1998;90:1881.
233. Dranoff G, Jaffee E, Lazenby A, et al. Vaccination with irradiated tumor cells engineered to secrete murine granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor stimulates potent, specific, and
long-lasting anti-tumor immunity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:3539.
234. Witmer-Pack MD, Olivier W, Valinsky J, Schuler G, Steinman RM. Granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor is essential for the viability and function of cultured murine epidermal
Langerhans cells. J Exp Med 1987;166:1484.
235. Chamberlain RS, Carroll MW, Bronte V, et al. Costimulation enhances the active immunotherapy effect of recombinant anticancer vaccines. Cancer Res 1996;56:2832.
236. Mantovani A. The chemokine system: redundancy for robust outputs. Immunol Today 1999;20:254.
237. Sallusto F, Lanzavecchia A. Mobilizing dendritic cells for tolerance, priming, and chronic inflammation. J Exp Med 1999;189:611.
238. Ward SG, Bacon K, Westwick J. Chemokines and T lymphocytes: more than an attraction. Immunity 1998;9:1.
239. Baggiolini M. Chemokines and leukocyte traffic. Nature 1998;392:565.
240. Krieg AM, Yi AK, Schorr J, Davis HL. The role of CpG dinucleotides in DNA vaccines. Trends Microbiol 1998;6:23.
241. Brazolot MC, Weeratna R, Krieg AM, Siegrist CA, Davis HL. CpG DNA can induce strong Th1 humoral and cell-mediated immune responses against hepatitis B surface antigen in young mice.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:15553.
242. Fuchs EJ, Matzinger P. Is cancer dangerous to the immune system? Semin Immunol 1996;8:271.
243. Matzinger P. An innate sense of danger. Semin Immunol 1998;10:399.
244. Matzinger P. Tolerance, danger, and the extended family. Annu Rev Immunol 1994;12:991.
245. Liebowitz DN, Lee KP, June CH. Costimulatory approaches to adoptive immunotherapy. Curr Opin Oncol 1998;10:533.
246. La Motte RN, Sharpe AH, Bluestone JA, Mokyr MB. Importance of B7-1-expressing host antigen-presenting cells for the eradication of B7-2 transfected P815 tumor cells. J Immunol
1998;161:6552.
247. Chen L, McGowan P, Ashe S, et al. Tumor immunogenicity determines the effect of B7 costimulation on T cell-mediated tumor immunity. J Exp Med 1994;179:523.
248. McCabe BJ, Irvine KR, Nishimura MI, et al. Minimal determinant expressed by a recombinant vaccinia virus elicits therapeutic antitumor cytolytic T lymphocyte responses. Cancer Res
1995;55:1741.
249. Ochsenbein AF, Klenerman P, Karrer U, et al. Immune surveillance against a solid tumor fails because of immunological ignorance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:2233.
250. Chen L. Immunological ignorance of silent antigens as an explanation of tumor evasion. Immunol Today 1998;19:27.
251. Stearns ME, Garcia FU, Fudge K, Rhim J, Wang M. Role of interleukin 10 and transforming growth factor beta1 in the angiogenesis and metastasis of human prostate primary tumor lines from
orthotopic implants in severe combined immunodeficiency mice. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:711.
252. Hahne M, Rimoldi D, Schroter M, et al. Melanoma cell expression of Fas(Apo-1/CD95) ligand: implications for tumor immune escape. Science 1996;274:1363.
253. Chappell DB, Restifo NP. T cell-tumor cell: a fatal interaction? Cancer Immunol Immunother 1998;47:65.
254. Chappell DB. Human melanoma cells do not express Fas (Apo-1/CD95) ligand. Cancer Res 1999;59:59.
255. Zaks TZ, Chappell DB, Rosenberg SA, Restifo NP. Fas-mediated suicide of tumor- reactive T cells following activation by specific tumor: selective rescue by caspase inhibition. J Immunol
1999;162:3273.
256. Riker A, Cormier J, Panelli M, et al. Immune selection after antigen-specific immunotherapy of melanoma. Surgery 1999;126:112.
257. Cormier JN, Abati A, Fetsch P, et al. Comparative analysis of the in vivo expression of tyrosinase, MART-1/Melan-A, and gp100 in metastatic melanoma lesions: implications for
immunotherapy. J Immunother 1998;21:27.
258. Restifo NP, Esquivel F, Kawakami Y, et al. Identification of human cancers deficient in antigen processing. J Exp Med 1993;177:265.
259. Restifo NP, Kawakami Y, Marincola F, et al. Molecular mechanisms used by tumors to escape immune recognition: immunogenetherapy and the cell biology of major histocompatibility
complex class I. J Immunother 1993;14:182.
260. Restifo NP, Marincola FM, Kawakami Y, et al. Loss of functional beta 2-microglobulin in metastatic melanomas from five patients receiving immunotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:100.
261. Marincola FM, Shamamian P, Simonis TB, et al. Locus-specific analysis of human leukocyte antigen class I expression in melanoma cell lines. J Immunother Emphasis Tumor Immunol
1994;16:13.
262. Cormier JN, Panelli MC, Hackett JA, et al. Natural variation of the expression of HLA and endogenous antigen modulates CTL recognition in an in vitro melanoma model. Int J Cancer
1999;80:781.
263. Wallack MK, Sivanandham M, Balch CM, et al. Surgical adjuvant active specific immunotherapy for patients with stage III melanoma: the final analysis of data from a phase III, randomized,
double-blind, multicenter vaccinia melanoma oncolysate trial. J Am Coll Surg 1998;187:69.
264. Mitchell MS. Perspective on allogeneic melanoma lysates in active specific immunotherapy. Semin Oncol 1998;25:623.
265. Livingston PO, Wong GY, Adluri S, et al. Improved survival in stage III melanoma patients with GM2 antibodies: a randomized trial of adjuvant vaccination with GM2 ganglioside. J Clin Oncol
1994;12:1036.
266. Harris JE, Ryan L, Hoover HCJ, et al. Adjuvant active specific immunotherapy for stage II and III colon cancer with an autologous tumor cell vaccine: Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
Study E5283. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:148.
267. McAneny D, Ryan CA, Beazley RM, Kaufman HL. Results of a phase I trial of a recombinant vaccinia virus that expresses carcinoembryonic antigen in patients with advanced colorectal
cancer. Ann Surg Oncol 1996;3:495.
268. Zhu MZ, Marshall J, Cole D, Schlom J, Tsang KY. Specific cytolytic T-cell responses to human CEA from patients immunized with recombinant avipox-CEA vaccine. Clin Cancer Res
2000;6:24.
269. Marshall JL, Hawkins MJ, Tsang KY, et al. Phase I study in cancer patients of a replication-defective avipox recombinant vaccine that expresses human carcinoembryonic antigen. J Clin Oncol
1999;17:332.
270. Borysiewicz LK, Fiander A, Nimako M, et al. A recombinant vaccinia virus encoding human papillomavirus types 16 and 18, E6 and E7 proteins as immunotherapy for cervical cancer [see
comments]. Lancet 1996;347:1523.
271. Thurner B, Haendle I, Roder C, et al. Vaccination with mage-3A1 peptide-pulsed mature, monocyte-derived dendritic cells expands specific cytotoxic T cells and induces regression of some
metastases in advanced stage IV melanoma. J Exp Med 1999;190:1669.
272. Morse MA, Deng Y, Coleman D, et al. A phase I study of active immunotherapy with carcinoembryonic antigen peptide (CAP-1)-pulsed, autologous human cultured dendritic cells in patients
with metastatic malignancies expressing carcinoembryonic antigen. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:1331.
273. Murphy GP, Tjoa BA, Simmons SJ, et al. Infusion of dendritic cells pulsed with HLA-A2-specific prostate-specific membrane antigen peptides: a phase II prostate cancer vaccine trial involving
patients with hormone-refractory metastatic disease. Prostate 1999;38:73.
274. Salgaller ML, Marincola FM, Cormier JN, Rosenberg SA. Immunization against epitopes in the human melanoma antigen gp100 following patient immunization with synthetic peptides. Cancer
Res 1996;56:4749.
275. Weber JS, Hua FL, Spears L, et al. A phase I trial of an HLA-A1 restricted MAGE-3 epitope peptide with incomplete Freund's adjuvant in patients with resected high-risk melanoma. J
Immunother 1999;22:431.
276. Khleif SN, Abrams SI, Hamilton JM, et al. A phase I vaccine trial with peptides reflecting ras oncogene mutations of solid tumors. J Immunother 1999;22:155.
277. Grant SC, Kris MG, Houghton AN, Chapman PB. Long survival of patients with small cell lung cancer after adjuvant treatment with the anti-idiotypic antibody BEC2 plus Bacillus CalmetteGuérin. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:1319.
278. Durrant LG, Maxwell-Armstrong C, Buckley D, et al. A neoadjuvant clinical trial in colorectal cancer patients of the human anti-idiotypic antibody 105AD7, which mimics CD55 [In Process
Citation]. ClinCancer Res 2000;6:422.

279. Durrant LG, Doran M, Austin EB, Robins RA. Induction of cellular immune responses by a murine monoclonal anti-idiotypic antibody recognizing the 791Tgp72 antigen expressed on colorectal,
gastric and ovarian human tumours. Int J Cancer 1995;61:62.
280. Cormier JN, Hijazi YM, Abati A, et al. Heterogeneous expression of melanoma-associated antigens and HLA-A2 in metastatic melanoma in vivo. Int J Cancer 1998;75:517.
281. Sanda MG, Restifo NP, Walsh JC, et al. Molecular characterization of defective antigen processing in human prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:280.
282. Jager E, Ringhoffer M, Altmannsberger M, et al. Immunoselection in vivo: independent loss of MHC class I and melanocyte differentiation antigen expression in metastatic melanoma. Int J
Cancer 1997;71:142.
283. Kageshita T, Wang Z, Calorini L, et al. Selective loss of human leukocyte class I allospecificities and staining of melanoma cells by monoclonal antibodies recognizing monomorphic
determinants of class I human leukocyte antigens. Cancer Res 1993;53:3349.
284. Cabrera T, Collado A, Fernandez MA, et al. High frequency of altered HLA class I phenotypes in invasive colorectal carcinomas. Tissue Antigens 1998;52:114.
285. Cabrera T, Angustias FM, Sierra A, et al. High frequency of altered HLA class I phenotypes in invasive breast carcinomas. Hum Immunol 1996;50:127.
286. Kaplan DH, Shankaran V, Dighe AS, et al. Demonstration of an interferon gamma-dependent tumor surveillance system in immunocompetent mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:7556.
287. Ikeda H, Lethe B, Lehmann F, et al. Characterization of an antigen that is recognized on a melanoma showing partial HLA loss by CTL expressing an NK inhibitory receptor. Immunity
1997;6:199.
288. Chen JJ, Sun Y, Nabel GJ. Regulation of the proinflammatory effects of Fas ligand (CD95L). Science 1998;282:1714.
289. Bronte V, Wang M, Overwijk WW, et al. Apoptotic death of CD8+ T lymphocytes after immunization: induction of a suppressive population of Mac-1+/Gr-1+ cells. J Immunol 1998;161:5313.
290. Watson GA, Lopez DM. Aberrant antigen presentation by macrophages from tumor-bearing mice is involved in the down-regulation of their T cell responses. J Immunol 1995;155:3124.
291. Correa MR, Ochoa AC, Ghosh P, et al. Sequential development of structural and functional alterations in T cells from tumor-bearing mice. J Immunol 1997;158:5292.
292. Zea AH, Curti BD, Longo DL, et al. Alterations in T cell receptor and signal transduction molecules in melanoma patients. Clin Cancer Res 1995;1:1327.
293. Mizoguchi H, O'Shea JJ, Longo DL, et al. Alterations in signal transduction molecules in T lymphocytes from tumor-bearing mice. Science 1992;258:1795.
294. Ling W, Rayman P, Uzzo R, et al. Impaired activation of NFkappaB in T cells from a subset of renal cell carcinoma patients is mediated by inhibition of phosphorylation and degradation of the
inhibitor, IkappaBalpha. Blood 1998;92:1334.
295. Ishida T, Oyama T, Carbone DP, Gabrilovich DI. Defective function of Langerhans cells in tumor-bearing animals is the result of defective maturation from hemopoietic progenitors. J Immunol
1998;161:4842.
296. Gabrilovich D, Ishida T, Oyama T, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor inhibits the development of dendritic cells and dramatically affects the differentiation of multiple hematopoietic
lineages in vivo. Blood 1998;92:4150.
297. Steinbrink K, Jonuleit H, Muller G, et al. Interleukin-10-treated human dendritic cells induce a melanoma-antigen- specific anergy in CD8(+) T cells resulting in a failure to lyse tumor cells. Blood
1999;93:1634.
298. Mule JJ, Schwarz SL, Roberts AB, Sporn MB, Rosenberg SA. Transforming growth factor-beta inhibits the in vitro generation of lymphokine-activated killer cells and cytotoxic T cells. Cancer
Immunol Immunother 1988;26:95.
299. Torre-Amione G, Beauchamp RD, Koeppen H, et al. A highly immunogenic tumor transfected with a murine transforming growth factor type beta 1 cDNA escapes immune surveillance. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:1486.
300. Hu HM, Urba WJ, Fox BA. Gene-modified tumor vaccine with therapeutic potential shifts tumor-specific T cell response from a type 2 to a type 1 cytokine profile. J Immunol 1998;161:3033.
301. D'Orazio TJ, Niederkorn JY. A novel role for TGF-beta and IL-10 in the induction of immune privilege. J Immunol 1998;160:2089.
302. Sarzotti M, Robbins DS, Hoffman PM. Induction of protective CTL responses in newborn mice by a murine retrovirus. Science 1996;271:1726.
303. Shimizu Y, Guidotti LG, Fowler P, Chisari FV. Dendritic cell immunization breaks cytotoxic T lymphocyte tolerance in hepatitis B virus transgenic mice. J Immunol 1998;161:4520.
304. Rowse GJ, Tempero RM, VanLith ML, Hollingsworth MA, Gendler SJ. Tolerance and immunity to MUC1 in a human MUC1 transgenic murine model. Cancer Res 1998;58:315.
305. Clarke P, Mann J, Simpson JF, Rickard-Dickson K, Primus FJ. Mice transgenic for human carcinoembryonic antigen as a model for immunotherapy. Cancer Res 1998;58:1469.
306. Wei C, Willis RA, Tilton BR, et al. Tissue-specific expression of the human prostate-specific antigen gene in transgenic mice: implications for tolerance and immunotherapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 1997;94:6369.
307. Fong L, Ruegg CL, Brockstedt D, Engleman EG, Laus R. Induction of tissue-specific autoimmune prostatitis with prostatic acid phosphatase immunization: implications for immunotherapy of
prostate cancer. J Immunol 1997;159:3113.
308. Alexander-Miller MA, Leggatt GR, Berzofsky JA. Selective expansion of high- or low-avidity cytotoxic T lymphocytes and efficacy for adoptive immunotherapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1996;93:4102.
309. Morgan DJ, Kreuwel HT, Fleck S, et al. Activation of low avidity CTL specific for a self epitope results in tumor rejection but not autoimmunity. J Immunol 1998;160:643.
310. Targoni OS, Lehmann PV. Endogenous myelin basic protein inactivates the high avidity T cell repertoire. J Exp Med 1998;187:2055.
311. Suri-Payer E, Amar AZ, Thornton AM, Shevach EM. CD4+CD25+ T cells inhibit both the induction and effector function of autoreactive T cells and represent a unique lineage of
immunoregulatory cells. J Immunol 1998;160:1212.
312. Thornton AM, Shevach EM. CD4+CD25+ immunoregulatory T cells suppress polyclonal T cell activation in vitro by inhibiting interleukin 2 production. J Exp Med 1998;188:287.
313. Marelli-Berg FM, Weetman A, Frasca L, et al. Antigen presentation by epithelial cells induces anergic immunoregulatory CD45RO+ T cells and deletion of CD45RA+ T cells. J Immunol
1997;159:5853.
314. Loftus DJ, Squarcina P, Nielsen MB, et al. Peptides derived from self-proteins as partial agonists and antagonists of human CD8+ T-cell clones reactive to melanoma/melanocyte epitope
MART1(27-35). Cancer Res 1998;58:2433.
315. Ganss R, Hanahan D. Tumor microenvironment can restrict the effectiveness of activated antitumor lymphocytes. Cancer Res 1998;58:4673.
316. Wick M, Dubey P, Koeppen H, et al. Antigenic cancer cells grow progressively in immune hosts without evidence for T cell exhaustion or systemic anergy. J Exp Med 1997;186:229.
317. Allison J, Stephens LA, Kay TW, et al. The threshold for autoimmune T cell killing is influenced by B7-1. Eur J Immunol 1998;28:949.
318. Speiser DE, Miranda R, Zakarian A, et al. Self antigens expressed by solid tumors do not efficiently stimulate naive or activated T cells: implications for immunotherapy. J Exp Med
1997;186:645.
319. Prevost-Blondel A, Zimmermann C, Stemmer C, et al. Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes exhibiting high ex vivo cytolytic activity fail to prevent murine melanoma tumor growth in vivo.
J Immunol
1998;161:2187.
320. Burch PA, Breen JK, Buckner JC, et al. Priming tissue-specific cellular immunity in a Phase I trial of autologous dendritic cells for prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2000;6:2175.

CHAPTER 64 Image-Guided Surgery
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 64
Image-Guided Surgery
NICK BRYAN
STEVEN K. LIBUTTI
Introduction
Medical Imaging Techniques
X-Ray Images
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Ultrasound
Nuclear Medicine
Image Guidance
Data Acquisition
Image Processing
Registration
Surgical Planning
Performing the Surgery
Specific Applications of Image-Guided Surgery
Neurosurgery
Head and Neck Surgery
Surgical Oncology
Endocrine Surgery
Conclusions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
With the introduction of the x-ray at the turn of the twentieth century heralding the advent of modern medical imaging, the surgeon's eye has been supplemented with
indirect imaging data that better defines local disease. Conventional x-ray techniques have been supplemented, or even supplanted, by radiographic contrast agents,
nuclear imaging techniques, ultrasound (US), computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. There is no reason to believe that even more
powerful imaging techniques will not follow. These increasingly sophisticated imaging techniques have steadily improved the identification of local disease, and this
development, in combination with concomitant improvements in surgical techniques, has resulted in dramatic improvements in surgical outcomes. Newer imaging
techniques now allow disease that cannot easily be visualized with the naked eye to be “seen.” Furthermore, the diseased tissue can be better visualized in
relationship to adjacent normal tissue, allowing for more precise anatomic treatment. In contemporary practice, fewer and fewer diseases are treated on the basis of
direct observation alone. Such is the heritage of twentieth-century medicine.
Until relatively recently, however, the surgeon was still personally responsible for transferring the imaging data to the patient. That is, the surgeon usually reviewed
the various imaging studies before surgery and then mentally, but indirectly, incorporated this information into the actual surgical procedure. The future of
image-guided surgery (IGS) rests with the development of techniques that allow the operator to more directly incorporate the images into delivery of the therapy. The
goal is to enable more precise and less invasive access to a tumor and to monitor its resection, ablation, or other form of local therapy.

MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNIQUES
Any type of image (medical or other) has two intrinsic properties: spatial and signal. 1 The former defines the location and geometric features of a structure or lesion.
The latter, generally reflected by gray tone or color, is important for lesion detection and the definition of tissue type. Spatial features of an image include the number
of dimensions represented and the resolution. Most medical images are either two-dimensional (2D) projections, such as with a chest film, or three-dimensional (3D),
such as with thin section CT or MR. Obviously, 3D images provide more data for guiding a therapeutic device (including a scalpel) into a 3D object (a patient). High
spatial resolution, although generally desirable, is often impractical, being associated with longer examination times or poorer image quality. There is also no reason
to have higher resolution images than is necessary to detect a lesion or guide therapy. In general, “high-resolution” medical images have 0.5 to 1.0 mm 3 resolution.
The biophysical interactions of the imaging technique and the tissues of the body determine the “signal” properties of medical images. Different imaging techniques
report different features of tissues. The following are general characteristics of current medical imaging techniques. 2
X-RAY IMAGES
The measurements of x-ray emitted by a point source and transmitted through the human body depends on the integral of the electron density along rays projected
through the body, which is a function of the mean atomic number of the tissue. These measurements of “radiodensity” have traditionally been made on films or by
image intensifiers, both of which are devices that create analog images that can then be digitized. Digital images are required for most IGS applications. More
recently, x-ray–sensitive solid state detector systems in linear or planar arrays are being used to directly generate digital x-ray images. 3 The spatial resolution of most
2D x-ray images is less than 0.5 mm. Conventional x-ray images are used primarily to image bony structures, but also to image the distribution and temporal evolution
of contrast agents such as iodine in soft tissues (e.g., blood vessels). Soft tissue contrast is very poor on conventional x-ray studies.
Rotation of the x-ray source and detector around the longitudinal axis of a patient produces projections that can be used for tomographic reconstruction of slices, with
typical series of parallel 1- to 10-mm thick sections of 512 ¥ 512 pixels, each 0.25 to 1.0 mm 2 in size. Because this reconstruction process provides a correct
approximation of tissue densities and not integrals of tissue densities as in x-ray projections, CT images accurately differentiate bony and soft tissues. Since the
advent of CT in the 1970s, the technology has rapidly evolved. Now a common technique, the spiral CT uses a continuous rotation of the x-ray source and a
2D-detector array synchronized with a linear continuous motion of the patient. 4 This technique provides individual slices in approximately 1 second. On the horizon is
the use of planar detectors for real 3D volumetric acquisitions instead of reconstruction of 3D images from 2D sections. These x-ray volume imagers will become
increasingly important for IGS.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
MR imaging (MRI) provides information about molecular properties of tissues. 5 A body first is set into an intense constant magnetic field (ranging from 0.1 T to a few
Teslas). MRI studies the way tissues behave when they are submitted to a weak, transient perturbation of this strong magnetic field. Radiofrequency (RF) pulses
induce spinning motions of nuclei that come back to an equilibrium. Using a select sequence of perturbations, information is provided about the concentration (often
called density) of atoms (mainly hydrogen in H 2O) and about their physicochemical environment. Several components of the received signals, which relate to intrinsic
MR parameters (proton density, relaxation times T1 and T2) are used to create images. Although each of these MR tissue parameters reflects a unique aspect of the
biophysical milieu of tissue water, they remain poorly understood from a biologic perspective. However, they have been empirically shown to provide great contrast
between different types of normal and abnormal tissues, including benign and malignant neoplasms. MRI is a true 3D-imaging technique, because the application of
magnetic field gradients can define any point of the volume studied. Whereas most standard devices provide series of parallel sections in sagittal, coronal, or axial
planes, it is possible to obtain homogeneous 3D volumes of 256 ¥ 256 ¥ 256 voxels having a spatial resolution of 1 mm 3. A valuable modification of MRI is MR
angiography, which produces clear images of blood vessels noninvasively. 6
MR spectroscopy allows for metabolic studies of complex biologic systems: Spectra in the frequency domain correspond to the composition of molecules of a region. 7
Clinical applications of MR spectroscopy are increasing, with protons being the main nuclei that are observed. Chemical shift imaging techniques (multivoxel
spectroscopy) have been developed, 8 but more work still is necessary before these will be ready for routine clinical use. Miniaturization of RF coils for

ultra-high-resolution imaging of small regions is another interesting trend in MRI research, which may be important for IGS applications. 9
ULTRASOUND
US is a relatively inexpensive, portable, real-time imaging system with a typical spatial resolution of 1 mm. 10 These features make US a major imaging tool for IGS.
After the emission of an US wave from a piezoelectric element, the sound signal reflected by the discontinuities of acoustic impedances of tissues is analyzed. Time of
flight measurements of the reflected echoes gives spatial information of acoustical interfaces. Acoustic impedances of tissues are primarily related to physical features
rather than to their biologic properties. Selection of US frequency depends on a trade-off of resolution versus attenuation. High-resolution, 12-MHz US images of the
thyroid gland have 0.5 mm 3 resolution, but the depth of view is only a few centimeters. Mechanically or electronically moving the direction of US allows one to obtain a
2D or 3D image. Images may be corrupted by a rather strong texture noise and by distortions due to such things as bone and air.
The analysis of blood velocities is achievable through the use of Doppler US probes, some of which have been miniaturized and mounted at the tip of a needle.
Newer US imaging modalities include color and power Doppler sonography, which produce 2D or 3D color images of blood velocities superimposed on a standard
grayscale US image.11
NUCLEAR MEDICINE
In contrast to the imaging techniques already described, which are primarily dependent on physical, morphologic properties of tissue, nuclear imaging is usually
directly dependent on biochemical or physiologic properties. In nuclear medicine imaging, or scintigraphy, a source of photons (gamma) or positrons (beta) is
attached to a specific radiopharmaceutical and injected into the body. External detectors observe the emission of such radioactive elements. A typical image
corresponds to an orthogonal projection of the density of radioactive elements, which is related to the metabolism of the radiopharmaceutical in the studied region. 12
Rotation of the gamma camera around the patient provides a set of projections that is fed onto tomographic algorithms similar to those used for x-ray CT. The result is
a 3D volume of datatomoscintigraphy, or single photon emission CT (SPECT). 13 A more complex strategy studies the emission of positrons (negative electrons). Each
emitted positron collides with an electron of the environment and gives rise to two high-energy photons that go in opposite directions. A ring of detectors set around
the patient detects these two photons at very near instants. Thus, the associated events lie on a straight line between these two corresponding detectors. The
intersection of such lines gives rise to a 3D region of emission from which a 3D image can be reconstructed. Such is the technique of positron emission tomography
(PET).14 Both SPECT and PET have relatively poor spatial resolution when compared with CT or MRI (typically a set of 64 3 or 128 3 voxels, each 2 to 10 mm3, is
obtained), but these methods provide functional information that is not available with other techniques.

IMAGE GUIDANCE
These various modalities provide images of anatomic or pathologic structures that can form the basis for surgical planning and subsequent image guidance of a
procedure. In contrast to traditional surgery that depends heavily on physician inferences and qualitative decisions based on human perception of these images (and
other data), IGS depends on quantitative decisions (e.g., direction and depth of a needle) based on digital image data processed by computers that are directly linked
to surgical devices. The engineering requirements of such a system are extraordinarily demanding; system fidelity and reliability must be superb. Even with the most
sophisticated system, however, the physician operator remains the critical unit.
Generally, five important elements make up IGS: (1) high-quality digital images, (2) advanced computer image processing that includes tissue classification or
segmentation algorithms and 2D and 3D visualization tools, (3) a computer modeling system for simulation, (4) a registration system that links the medical images with
the real patient, and (5) digital interfaces to therapeutic devices. 15
DATA ACQUISITION
In most cases, image information is provided by preoperative or intraoperative studies. Medical a priori knowledge (e.g., an anatomic atlas) as well as video images or
different types of signals (e.g., Doppler, electrophysiology) can also be used.
IMAGE PROCESSING
The “raw” image data must be processed to allow the surgeon to intuitively perceive the pertinent image information and relate it to the planned surgical procedure.
Often, this process requires that images be reformatted into 3D or pseudo-3D images and that key structures or tissues be identified, either implicitly or explicitly. The
former step requires state of the art computer visualization tools, whereas the latter step requires accurate tissue classification or segmentation algorithms. Although
current segmentation techniques can quickly and accurately classify spatially well-defined and high-contrast tissues, such as bone on x-ray CT, much more work is
necessary for the accurate segmentation of subtle soft tissue differences, such as those related to infiltrating neoplasms.
REGISTRATION
The problem of matching all of the image data available for a patient into a unique coordinate system is commonly referred to as registration. Registration is a crucial
technology in IGS for three reasons. First, the coregistration of medical data allows the surgeon to plan an operation using all of the available information. Second,
registration of preoperative and postoperative data is crucial for individual patient follow-up and statistical analysis of results. Third, registration of preoperative and
intraoperative data provides the crucial step required to relate the “virtual patient” created from the medical images to the actual patient on the operating table. Ideally,
all patient data should be correlated with the physical space of the real surgery and made available to the surgeon. A variety of registration techniques have been
developed, some of which use external markers or fiducials placed on the patient, whereas other methods use intrinsic anatomic structures to register images and
physical spaces. 16 This latter capability is important because it is more direct, logistically easier, and potentially more robust. Although accurate rigid registration is
now routinely performed, a continuing challenge is still the elastic registration of nonrigid tissuesfor instance, tracking deformations due to surgery, respiration, and
temporal changes of structures.
SURGICAL PLANNING
A 3D model of the patient and pathology is created into which all the relevant image data has been incorporated. The operator (surgeon or physician) can then
manipulate the model in a virtual reality mode. This permits the surgeon to define the surgical strategy, which can then be simulated and modified.
PERFORMING THE SURGERY
Different types of guiding systems can be used to execute the surgical plan. Passive systems enable the surgeon to compare the actual intervention with the planned
one. This is the case with systems such as the ISG Wand (ISG Technologies, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada), 17 in which previously obtained images have been
registered to the patient using a computer system with a digital articulated arm. Surgical instruments are then attached to the articulated arm and manipulated by the
surgeon who can observe the tool in real, patient space as well as on the workstation in image, or virtual, space. Semiactive systems enable the physical guiding of
the instrument that is still controlled by the operator, which is the case, for example, with the stereotactic neurosurgical system described by Lavallee and Troccaz. 16
Finally, active systems execute part of the intervention. Kellygg developed a system in which a laser is used for brain microsurgery. The laser is directed toward a
tumor that has been localized by MRI. The laser is digitally manipulated until a synthesized image built from MRI data can be superimposed on an intraoperative video
image.
The use of active robots, perhaps the ultimate IGS, remains rare and experimental. However, there are some potential advantages to the use of robots in surgery,
including (1) repeatable tool position and trajectory; (2) steady motion; (3) ability to react rapidly to changes in force level; (4) remote operation; and (5) ability to
remain poised in a fixed position. 19 Because of such attributes, the use of robots could lead to more effective treatment. In the case of contagious diseases, reducing
human contact might lower the risk of infection. In other cases, robots might reduce risks to the patient by offering the potential of less invasive surgery.
However, a number of points should be considered before a suitably autonomous device is implemented, not least of which is the role of “expert systems” for
high-level system control. It is not reasonable that a robot system should operate without continuous backup from a surgeon who is in a position to define and check
the step-by-step progress of the task and to override the system in case of unforeseen difficulties. The robotic device would be driven to an acceptable start under

position control by the surgeon and, on instruction, would perform the defined task, prompted by the surgeon at each stage. The system would be required to react to
given situations in real time by comparison of actual behavior with sophisticated reference models, few of which exist.

SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS OF IMAGE-GUIDED SURGERY
A variety of imaging techniques have become an integral part of the surgeon's approach to managing tumors, both benign and malignant. Many can be used for both
preoperative and intraoperative localization. Several surgical specialties have incorporated IGS into their approach to patient management.
NEUROSURGERY
IGS has its origins in the development of techniques for stereotactic brain biopsy. 20,21,22 and 23 These early studies used CT to localize lesions in the brain through
coordinates provided by a device fixed to the patient's skull. In one study, RF ablation was applied to a deep brain lesion with symptomatic relief for the patient. 20 This
may represent one of the earliest applications of IGS.
The techniques and equipment used for image-guided neurosurgery have evolved substantially since the late 1970s. Improvements in biopsy techniques paved the
way for therapeutic interventions using a variety of ablative procedures, culminating in dedicated operating suites with real-time imaging from CT and MRI. 24 The
success of these techniques is predicated on their ability to allow surgeons to perform their procedures more safely and efficiently. 25 The approach to lesions that are
located deep in the brain presents challenges that help to illustrate where image guidance may prove its utility.
Microsurgery of deep brain lesions is often complicated by the close proximity of major vessels, eloquent brain, and the need to work in a confined space where
standard microscopic visualization may be limited. By combining images from CT, MRI, and digital angiography, a 3D rendering of the surgical field has been
successfully applied to guide microsurgical resections of deep-seated cerebral lesions. 26 The information obtained allows the surgeon to visualize the relationship
between the lesion and cerebral vessels as well as brain structures of high functional significance. 3D rendering allows the surgeon to overlay the position of surgical
instruments and to predict and simulate the trajectory of the approach. 26
Similar guidance systems have been used to allow for the ablation of brain tumors using heat generated by RF devices. In this setting, the accurate position of the RF
ablation probe is critical to minimizing the potential for collateral thermal injury of adjacent structures. In a study of 12 patients (14 lesions treated) with primary or
metastatic brain tumors, an MR-guided stereotactic RF procedure was evaluated. 27 Using MRI, the stereotactic coordinates of the tumor and the angle of the RF
ablation probe were calculated. Once the probe was properly positioned, the tissue was heated to the target temperature, and full ablation of the tumor was confirmed
by real-time MRI. All procedures were performed in awake patients, and patients were followed for up to 10 months. MRI was successful in demonstrating well-defined
lesions in all cases, documenting accurate placement of the RF probe. Characteristic changes in the appearance of the lesions during treatment on T2-weighted
images allowed for confirmation of focal energy delivery during the procedure. 27
In addition to providing for accurate localization and real-time anatomic feedback, newer computer-guided imaging systems also have been designed to give
functional information during the surgical procedure. Using real-time MR images in conjunction with superimposed functional data from somatosensory evoked
potentials derived from dipole tracings, investigators have been able to localize the central sulcus in 12 patients with intracranial disorders. 28 In six of the patients, 3D
computer graphics were reconstructed from MRIs, which allowed for the visualization of lesions deep in the brain. The 3D functional images were then superimposed
on the anatomic images. This technique allowed the surgeons to see the 3D relationship between the lesion and the functional sensorimotor cortex. This type of data
can potentially allow for greater preservation of normal brain function during surgery.
A significant advance for intraoperative IGS has been the open-bore MR unit ( Fig. 64-1). This is an open MR device, which allows for optimal vertical access of the
surgeon and assistant to the patient. Using such a system, surgeons at the Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston published their experience with 110 cases,
which included 47 biopsies, six catheter placements, four cyst drainage procedures, 47 craniotomies for resection, three spinal cases, and three laser tumor
ablations. 29 This intraoperative MR surgery unit was especially useful in guiding biopsies and resections near cysts, ventricles, and critical vascular structures.
Standard approaches using prior image data with framed and frameless techniques would be inadequate to show anatomic changes during the procedure. The
acquisition of real-time images of the biopsy needle within the lesion were found to be very useful. The information obtained from this system allowed for more
complete resection of infiltrative tumors. Image fusion of SPECT and neurofunctional data into the imaging space enabled the surgeons to better visualize tumor
invasion or neural function with real-time imaging during resection. 29

FIGURE 64-1. Open magnetic resonance imaging for image-guided surgery as implemented at the Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston.

The true test of whether image-guided techniques are of benefit in neurosurgery is whether an impact on outcome is the result. Studies focusing on outcome analysis
are beginning to emerge. 30,31,32 and 33 Early data indicate that the addition of image-guided techniques can reduce operative time, patient morbidity, and the need for
repeat procedures. Further prospective studies of cost analysis are necessary to definitively demonstrate these benefits.
HEAD AND NECK SURGERY
Because of anatomic similarities, IGS techniques developed for neurosurgery have found several applications in the management of patients with both benign and
malignant tumors of the head and neck. For patients with skull base tumors, an intraoperative guidance system has been used to provide nearly instantaneous CT
and MRI images with computer reconstruction to the surgeons. The ISG viewing wand can correlate any point within the operative field to its corresponding locus on
the reformatted images. 34,35 and 36 The use of this wand in 14 patients with skull base, cerebellopontine angle, or temporal bone lesions has allowed for minimally
invasive incisions, intraoperative navigation, and identification of important anatomic structures. This precision allowed for a greater margin of safety and a more
precise assessment of the extent of lesion resection. 34
Endoscopic techniques have revolutionized the approach to nasal and sinus surgery. A computer-assisted surgery system has been applied to help in intraoperative
localization during endoscopic surgery of the paranasal sinus region. 37 This system allows for the continuous orientation of the scope by using a 3D reconstruction of
the preoperative CT scan with superimposed positioning of the endoscope. By using a dual display on the endoscopic monitor, the surgeon can see the
video-endoscopic picture and the information from the localizer simultaneously. This allows for positional adjustments of the scope without the need for the surgeon to
look away from his or her operative field. This system also has been used for complex skull base and head and neck resections. 38
3D intraoperative navigational systems have been used to assist in craniofacial procedures ranging from corrections of craniofacial asymmetry to tumor resections. A
study of 17 patients undergoing craniofacial procedures demonstrated the utility of the ISG navigation system in precisely orienting the surgeon to his exact location
throughout the procedure. 39 The system was particularly useful in defining intraorbital anatomy, in determining ocular globe position, and in delineating tumor margins.

No additional operative time or adverse events were attributed to the use of the system.
The development of virtual endoscopy is another useful application of real-time imaging. A virtual otoscope has been designed that provides a precise view of the
structures of the inner ear. 40 The precision of the images derived from this device may replace the more invasive endoscopes in current use.
SURGICAL ONCOLOGY
The application of IGS to the management of malignancies of soft tissues in the abdominal cavity has required imagination as well as modifications of the approaches
used in neurosurgery. Unlike the brain, which is fixed in its position, the abdominal contents, such as small bowel, are more fluid and present certain difficulties in
making use of imaging techniques for “target” acquisition. The liver, however, represents a relatively fixed anatomic structure for which image-guided therapies have
been used.
A variety of ablation techniques have been applied to the treatment of liver tumors in situations in which surgical resection may not be appropriate. These techniques,
such as RF ablation, cryotherapy, and interstitial laser thermoablation are discussed in greater detail elsewhere in this text. These techniques share in common the
need to not only localize the target lesion, but also to monitor the effects of the therapy during the time it is being applied.
Several imaging modalities, including US, CT, and MRI, have been used to accurately position the ablation probes into the lesion and to monitor the effects of the
therapy. Using an Nd-YAG (neodymium:yttrium-aluminum garnet) laser system and real-time MRI, a group of 12 patients had a total of 27 lesions in the liver treated
under local or general anesthesia. 41 An MR colorization sequence was used to monitor changes in the tissue temperature during therapy. The patients tolerated the
procedure well, with 8 of the 12 being discharged home on the day after the procedure. Thermal zones of ablation up to 5 cm were achieved with two patients with
3-cm lesions, achieving complete ablation with a single procedure. Seven of the patients required multiple procedures to successfully ablate their lesions. Similar
procedures also have been performed laparoscopically. 42
Using intraoperative US and a laparoscopic approach, RF ablation has been applied to the treatment of liver metastases from neuroendocrine tumors. 43 In six patients
(13 lesions treated) no intraoperative complications were reported. US was used successfully to position the thermal ablation probe and to monitor the treatment effect
in the operating room to determine when an adequate zone of necrosis was achieved. US is able to detect the “outgassing,” which occurs as the tissue is heated and
gas is released into the surrounding parenchyma.
A trial at the National Cancer Institute is currently under way to evaluate US, CT, and MRI to determine the best modality for positioning the probes and monitoring the
effects of RF ablation in the liver. Figure 64-2 demonstrates a real-time CT image of a lesion in the liver before and after RF ablation. Patients are imaged with
dynamic enhanced MRI preoperatively and in follow-up as a means of following response.

FIGURE 64-2. A tumor (arrow) located in the right lobe of the liver in a patient with metastatic adrenal cancer as seen on computed tomographic (CT) scan. Panel A
shows the lesion before radiofrequency (RF) ablation on a noncontrast scan. Panel B shows a three-dimensional rendering of the lesion, illustrating the path of the
needle. This image was obtained while the patient was on the table, as a means of directing the therapy. Panel C demonstrates the lesion post–RF ablation on an
arterial phase postcontrast CT scan. Note that the lesion appears larger than at preablation. This is because of the 1-cm zone of necrosis achieved around the lesion.

Nuclear imaging has been applied to the preoperative and intraoperative detection of malignancy in the abdominal cavity. This approach has been most extensively
evaluated with respect to colon and rectal cancer. Two strategies have been pursued, one using anti-carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) antibody immunoscintigraphy
and the other using PET and the radiopharmaceutical [ 18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG).
Radioimmunoguided surgery (RIGS) has relied on the ability of radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies or antibody fragments to bind specifically to markers expressed on
tumor tissue. The sensitivity and specificity of these antibodies is based to a large degree on the tumor marker itself and how restricted its expression is to neoplastic
tissue. CEA has been extensively studied as a target for this approach. 44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51 and 52
Radioimmunoguided surgery using an intraoperative probe to detect radioactivity has been evaluated as an adjunct to second-look laparotomy in the evaluation of
colorectal cancer patients with rising serum CEA levels. 44 Sixteen asymptomatic patients with a history of colorectal cancer surgery and a rising serum CEA level
underwent second-look surgery using the RIGS approach. Patients received the anti–tumor-associated glycoprotein iodine 125–labeled monoclonal antibody (MoAb)
B72.3 preoperatively. RIGS exploration was combined with a standard exploratory laparotomy. Recurrent disease was observed in 14 of the 16 patients as the result
of this combined exploration. Standard exploration alone demonstrated recurrent disease in 9 of 16 patients (56.2%). In five patients (31.2%), RIGS detected disease
that would otherwise have been overlooked. The additional RIGS-detected tumor sites were resectable for cure. In this study, RIGS improved the results of colorectal
cancer, CEA-guided, second-look procedures in asymptomatic patients by recruiting one-third of patients to curative resections. 44
Preoperative SPECT imaging studies can be obtained using a gamma camera in addition to the use of the intraoperative probe. This combined approach was used in
a study evaluating in vivo posttargeting of tumor by means of anti-CEA monoclonal antibodies and the avidin-biotin three-step system. 52 Six patients with primary or
recurrent rectal cancer were preoperatively injected with 1 mg of FO23C5 (anti-CEA) and/or B72.3 anti–tumor-associated glycoprotein (TAG-72) biotinylated
monoclonal antibody. At 24 hours after injection, 1 mg of avidin was administered and, after a further 24 hours, biotin-labeled indium 111 was also injected. Eight
tumor sites were localized in the six patients. Four of the eight lesions were identified preoperatively by the gamma camera; and six intraoperatively using a nuclear
probe. An advantage of this method was the ability to perform preoperative scintigraphy and intraoperative radioimmunodetection with a single radioactive compound
injection of biotin labeled with 111In within a few days before surgery.52
Radioguided surgery using antibody-directed immunoscintigraphy relies on the ability of the antibody to bind efficiently to the target tissue and to be imaged above
background. It also requires multiple antibodies to be derived against a number of tumor markers, depending on the histology of the target lesion. Many of these
limitations could be overcome by using a more universal reagent that would be taken up by tumor tissue selectively, regardless of the tumor histology and
independent of the need for antibody-antigen interactions. The radiopharmaceutical FDG has many of these properties.
Several studies have shown that malignant lesions demonstrate elevated glycolysis when compared to normal tissues. 53,54 By using the radiolabeled glucose analog
FDG, investigators have documented increased uptake of FDG in cancer tissues. 55,56 PET scanning with FDG has been used to image a variety of malignant
neoplasms, including breast cancer, head and neck tumors, lung cancer, lymphoma, melanoma, ovarian tumors, bone cancers, and colorectal carcinomas.
The mechanism whereby FDG is selectively accumulated in neoplastic tissue is based primarily on increased uptake of FDG and conversion to FDG-6-phosphate.
The inability of cells to further metabolize FDG-6-phosphate causes the molecule to be trapped in the cells, facilitating accurate imaging. Figure 64-3 shows a
representative PET image using FDG. The intensity in this image is proportional to the amount of FDG that has entered the cells, begun the first steps of the
metabolic conversion of sugar to energy, and then been trapped. The reasons why so many tumors avidly accumulate glucose are only partly understood. The energy

needs of rapidly dividing cells obviously plays a role.

FIGURE 64-3. Positron emission tomographic image obtained using [ 18F]fluorodeoxyglucose in a patient with rising serum carcinoembryonic antigen in the setting of
metastatic colon cancer. The lesion is seen in the right lobe of the liver in all three views.

Currently, a study is under way at the National Cancer Institute evaluating the use of FDG-PET scanning and anti-CEA antibody immunoscintigraphy in the
preoperative and intraoperative detection of recurrent colon and rectal cancers. Patients are recruited based on a rising serum CEA value in the absence of
imageable disease, or with a single site of otherwise resectable disease. Patients are explored, and in some cases, a probe designed to detect FDG is used
intraoperatively. This study is ongoing and is designed to evaluate the sensitivity, specificity, and predictive value of these scans as well as second-look laparotomy
for the detection of recurrent tumor.
IGS has made possible a more minimally invasive approach to the diagnosis and management of breast lesions. The use of mammography and breast US has
resulted in successful localization of lesions. Percutaneous core sampling of lesions, guided by specialized, computerized, stereotactic radiographic equipment is less
painful and can be done under local anesthesia. 57,58 Tissue cores obtained are adequate to make the diagnosis in most cases.
Using an open MRI scanner, excisional biopsies of breast lesions have been successfully performed. 59 Intraoperative real-time scanning assisted in determining
adequacy of resection margin and in positioning and minimizing the size of the incision. In a study of women undergoing excision of benign lesions, the MR
demonstrated that all lesions were adequately excised with pathologic confirmation of clean margins. 59
During an exploratory laparotomy, the surgeon is limited in the examination of the hollow viscera by the inability to adequately assess the mucosal surfaces. Although
intraoperative endoscopy can be performed, this procedure is often difficult logistically and complicates the exploration because of the need to insufflate gas into the
bowel. Furthermore, the small bowel is virtually inaccessible. Virtual endoscopy may help to overcome these limitations.
Virtual colonoscopy, for example, is a method of colon examination in which computer-aided 3D visualization of spiral CT simulates fiberoptic colonoscopy. In one
study, a colon phantom containing spheres of various sizes was used to determine the influence of CT acquisition parameters on lesion detectability and sizing. 60
Results demonstrated that detection of beads of 4 mm or more was 100%. Detection decreased to 78% to 94% for 2.5 mm beads. The authors concluded that CT
scanning at 5 mm collimation and up to pitch 2 is adequate for detection of high-contrast lesions as small as 4 mm in their model. As the imaging algorithms are
improved, virtual colonoscopy may be used as a screening modality both preoperatively and intraoperatively in a CT-equipped operating suite.
Virtual endoscopic techniques also have been applied to the examination of the biliary and pancreatic ducts. MR cholangiography is a noninvasive technique that
allows one to image the biliary system without the need for a contrast agent. Depending on the MR sequence chosen and the image processing, the ductal anatomy
can be highlighted as a light or dark image. 61 Because this is an MRI-based approach, there is no radiation exposure. Images can be rendered in three dimensions to
give an accurate representation of the ductal anatomy. Studies have demonstrated that the image quality compares favorably to endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography of pancreatic (duct). 61
A similar approach has been used to image the pancreatic duct in patients with mucin-producing pancreatic tumors. In a group of 13 patients with a total of 18 lesions,
a computer-based virtual endoscopy system was used to render 3D reconstructions of the pancreatic ductal anatomy. 62 The virtual pancreatoscopy was successful in
demonstrating the surfaces of the bile and pancreatic duct and could distinguish cystic from solid tumors. The surfaces of the malignant mucin-producing tumors were
shown to be more irregular than those of the benign lesions. The data were useful for surgical planning with regard to extent of resection.
ENDOCRINE SURGERY
Nuclear imaging, making use of radioisotopes that target specific tissue types, has made significant contributions to IGS, allowing for more minimally invasive
procedures. The application of technetium Tc 99m sestamibi scanning to the preoperative and intraoperative localization of parathyroid adenomas has improved
detection and allowed for less morbid surgical procedures. For the majority of patients, routine preoperative imaging may not be necessary. 63 In experienced hands,
95% of patients with primary hyperparathyroidism (HPT) are cured after a careful bilateral neck exploration. 64
Imaging becomes critical for those patients who have persistent or recurrent HPT. In this patient population, reexploration is complicated by scarring, which not only
makes it difficult to identify the parathyroid glands, but also increases the risk of injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerves. 65,66 Furthermore, in patients who are not
cured at the first operation, it is possible that the abnormal parathyroid gland is located in an ectopic site, such as the pharynx or mediastinum. 67,68,69 and 70
Compared to other noninvasive imaging studies, such as CT, US, and MRI, the sestamibi scan has been shown to be superior, with a positive predictive value as high
as 90%.65,71 Sestamibi scans can localize the parathyroid adenoma to the correct side of the neck and to the position within the neck relative to other structures ( Fig.
64-4). The accuracy of sestamibi has led to the introduction of a minimally invasive approach to parathyroid surgery.

FIGURE 64-4. A: Technetium Tc 99m sestamibi scan demonstrating a parathyroid adenoma on the left in a patient with primary hyperparathyroidism. B: A large left
inferior parathyroid adenoma was found at operation.

The standard approach of bilateral neck exploration for the patient with primary hyperparathyroidism has been questioned. In a retrospective study, a group of 68

patients was reviewed with respect to localization studies and the need for bilateral neck exploration. 72 Forty-four patients were treated with localization study–aided
unilateral neck exploration, whereas 24 patients were treated with the standard bilateral approach without localization studies. In 15 patients, the preoperative
localization study was a sestamibi scan, which correctly localized the adenoma in all cases. All 15 patients with unilateral neck exploration guided by sestamibi results
were cured, as were all 24 patients who underwent a bilateral neck exploration. Based on their results, the authors recommend a preoperative sestamibi scan for
patients with primary hyperparathyroidism who have not undergone previous neck exploration, followed by a unilateral approach if the scan demonstrates a single
lesion. They suggest that the second gland on the explored side be identified and biopsied. They conclude that bilateral exploration should be reserved for patients
with multiple glands seen on sestamibi, or an abnormal biopsy of the second gland. This approach has been further supported by the use of an intraoperative probe
for the detection of sestamibi during the procedure. 73,74
However, caution should still be exercised in pursuing less than a bilateral neck exploration at the time of primary surgery for HPT. In a study using preoperative
sestamibi and intraoperative measurements of parathyroid hormone levels, a success rate of unilateral exploration of 67% at 3 months was reported. 75 Failed
unilateral exploration was due to multigland disease (31%), erroneous localization (31%), slow metabolism of parathyroid hormone (13%), and need for improved
exposure (25%). The authors suggest that, at best, the success rate of unilateral exploration using intraoperative parathyroid hormone measurements can be
expected to be 85%. 75 Although these strategies are a good example of how image guidance can change surgical management, the ultimate utility of this approach
compared with standard bilateral neck exploration with a historical success rate of 95% awaits more definitive prospective studies.

CONCLUSIONS
The ultimate goal of any medical therapy is obvious: precisely define the site and nature of disease and deliver the most effective therapy to the diseased tissue while
doing no harm to normal tissue. Two main therapeutic approaches have been followed: systemic (generally medicinal) and surgical. The fundamental basis of
surgery, for cancer or any other disease, is the concept of “local treatment of local disease.” This presumes that the disease, or a major component of the disease to
be treated, is (1) confined to a local region, (2) can be accurately defined, (3) is accessible, and (4) can be treated locally by resection or other ablative techniques.
Simplistically, this means that the surgeon is directly responsible for targeting the therapy. Systemic therapy, on the other hand, is based on the assumption that the
therapy (i.e., antibiotic or chemotherapy) will self-target the disease, which can be local or disseminated. Given these precepts, IGS is a redundant term. Some type of
“imaging” of the local disease must guide surgery and other forms of local therapy. Traditionally, the imaging has been performed by the surgeon's naked eye,
supplemented by other, cruder sensory facilities, such as palpation. As advanced imaging techniques and technology become available, the surgeon will be able to
expand the repertoire of available information and deliver local therapy in a more precise fashion.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Taylor RH, Lavallee S, Burdea GC, eds. Computer-integrated surgery: technology and clinical applications. Boston: MIT Press, 1996.
2. Webb S. The physics of medical imaging. Medical Science Series. Bristol, UK: IOP Publishing, 1988.
3. Chotas HG, Dobbins JT III, Ravin CE. Principles of digital radiography with large-area, electronically readable detectors: a review of the basics. Radiology 1999;210:595.
4. Kalender WA, Polacin G, Baert AL. Current status and new perspective in spiral CT. Advances in CT: Second European Scientific User Conference. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1992:85.
5. Wehrli FW, McGowan JC. The basis of MR contrast. In: Atlas SW, ed. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and spine. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1996:29.
6. Perl J, Turski PA, Masaryk TJ. MR angiography: techniques and clinical applications. In: Atlas SW, ed. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and spine. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1996:1547.
7. Lenkinski RE, Schnall MD. MR spectroscopy and the biochemical basis of neurologic disease. In: Atlas SW, ed. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and spine. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven, 1996:1619.
8. Barker PB, Soher BJ, Blackband SJ, et al. Quantitation of proton NMR spectra of the human brain using tissue water as an internal concentration reference. NMR Biomed 1993;6:89.
9. Peck TL, Lavalle L, Magin RL, et al. RF microcoils patterned using microlithographic techniques for use as microsensors in NMR. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society
Proceedings 1993:174.
10. Hottier F, Billion AC. 3-D echography: status and perspective. In: Hohne KH, ed. 3D Imaging in Medicine, vol F60. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1990:21.
11. Curry TS, Dowdy JE, Murry RC. Christensen's introduction to the physics of diagnostic radiology. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1984.
12. Mazziotta JC, Gilman S. Clinical brain imaging: principles and applications. Philadelphia: FA Davis Co, 1992.
13. Lassen NA, Holm S. Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT). In: Mazziotta JC, Gilman S, eds. Clinical brain imaging: principles and applications. Philadelphia: FA Davis Co,
1992:108.
14. Frost JJ, Wagner HN. Quantitative imaging: neuroreceptors, neurotransmitters, and enzymes. New York: Raven Press, 1990.
15. Kikinis R, Gleason PL. Surgical planning using computer-assisted three-dimensional reconstructions. In: Taylor RH, Lavallee S, Burdea GC, eds. Computer-integrated surgery. Boston: MIT
Press, 1996:147.
16. Lavallee S, Troccaz J. Image guided operating robot: a clinical application in stereotactic neurosurgery. In: Taylor RH, Lavallee S, Burdea GC, eds. Computer-integrated surgery. Boston: MIT
Press, 1996:343.
17. Zinreich SJ, Tebo SA, Long DM, et al. Frameless stereotaxic integration of CT imaging data: accuracy and initial applications. Radiology 1993;188:735.
18. Kelley PJ. Technical approaches to identification and stereotactic reduction of tumor burden. In: Walker MD, Thomas DGT, eds. Biology of brain tumor. The Hague, The Netherlands: Martinus
Nijhoff, 1986:237.
19. Khodabandehloo K, Brett PN. Special-purpose actuators and architectures for surgery robots. In: Taylor RH, Lavallee S, Burdea GC, eds. Computer-integrated surgery. Boston: MIT Press,
1996:263.
20. Gleason CA, Wise BL, Feinstein B. Stereotactic localization (with computerized tomographic scanning), biopsy, and radiofrequency treatment of deep brain lesions. Neurosurgery 1978;2:217.
21. Penn RD, Whisler WW, Smith CA, Yasnoff WA. Stereotactic surgery with image processing of computerized tomographic scans. Neurosurgery 1978;3:157.
22. Boethius J, Collins VP, Edner G, Lewander R, Zajicek J. Stereotactic biopsies and computer tomography in gliomas. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 1978;40:223.
23. Lewander R, Bergstrom M, Boethius J, et al. Stereotactic computer tomography for biopsy of gliomas. Acta Radiol Diagn (Stockh) 1978;19:867.
24. Lunsford LD, Coffey RJ, Cojocaru T, Leksell D. Image-guided stereotactic surgery: a 10-year evolutionary experience. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg 1990;55:375.
25. Wadley J, Kitchen N, Thomas D. Image-guided neurosurgery. Hosp Med 1999;60:34.
26. Giorgi C, Casolino DS, Ongania E, et al. Guided microsurgery by computer-assisted three-dimensional analysis of neuroanatomical data stereotactically acquired. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg
1990;55:482.
27. Anzai Y, Lufkin R, DeSalles A, et al. Preliminary experience with MR-guided thermal ablation of brain tumors. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1995;16:39; discussion, 49.
28. Hayashi N, Endo S, Kurimoto M, et al. Functional image-guided neurosurgical simulation system using computerized three-dimensional graphics and dipole tracing. Neurosurgery 1995;37:694.
29. Alexander E III, Moriarty TM, Kikinis R, Black P, Jolesz FM. The present and future role of intraoperative MRI in neurosurgical procedures. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg 1997;68:10.
30. Alberti O, Dorward NL, Kitchen ND, Thomas DG. Neuronavigationimpact on operating time. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg 1997;68:44.
31. Barnett GH. The role of image-guided technology in the surgical planning and resection of gliomas. J Neurooncol 1999;42:247.
32. Samii M, Brinker T, Samii A. Image-guided neurosurgerystate of the art and outlook. Wien Klin Wochenschr 1999;111:618.
33. Jolesz FA, Kettenbach J, Grundfest WS. Cost-effectiveness of image-guided surgery. Acad Radiol 1998;5[Suppl 2]:S428.
34. Carney AS, Patel N, Baldwin DL, Coakham HB, Sandeman DR. Intra-operative image guidance in otolaryngologythe use of the ISG viewing wand. J Laryngol Otol 1996; 110:322.
35. McDermott MW, Gutin PH. Image-guided surgery for skull base neoplasms using the ISG viewing wand. Anatomic and technical considerations. Neurosurg Clin North Am 1996;7:285.
36. Freysinger W, Gunkel AR, Thumfart WF. Image-guided endoscopic ENT surgery. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 1997;254:343.
37. Kruckels G, Korves B, Klimek L, Mosges R. Endoscopic surgery of the rhinobasis with a computer-assisted localizer. Surg Endosc 1996;10:453.
38. Vannier MW, Marsh JL. Three-dimensional imaging, surgical planning, and image-guided therapy. Radiol Clin North Am 1996;34:545.
39. Demianczuk AN, Antonyshyn OM. Application of a three-dimensional intraoperative navigational system in craniofacial surgery. J Craniofac Surg 1997;8:290.
40. Frankenthaler RP, Moharir V, Kikinis R, et al. Virtual otoscopy. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1998;31:383.
41. de Jode MG, Lamb GM, Thomas HC, Taylor-Robinson SD, Gedroyc WM. MRI guidance of infra-red laser liver tumour ablations, utilising an open MRI configuration system: technique and early
progress. J Hepatol 1999;31:347.
42. Germer CT, Albrecht D, Roggan A, Buhr HJ. Technology for in situ ablation by laparoscopic and image-guided interstitial laser hyperthermia. Semin Laparosc Surg 1998; 5:195.
43. Siperstein AE, Rogers SJ, Hansen PD, Gitomirsky A. Laparoscopic thermal ablation of hepatic neuroendocrine tumor metastases. Surgery 1997;122:1147; discussion, 1154.
44. Bertoglio S, Benevento A, Percivale P, et al. Radioimmunoguided surgery benefits in carcinoembryonic antigen-directed second-look surgery in the asymptomatic patient after curative
resection of colorectal cancer. Semin Surg Oncol 1998;15:263.
45. Bertoglio S, Percivale P, Schenone F, et al. Role of tumor-associated antigen expression in radioimmunoguided surgery for colorectal and breast cancer. Semin Surg Oncol 1998;15:249.
46. Bonjer HJ, Bruining HA, Pols HA, et al. Intraoperative nuclear guidance in benign hyperparathyroidism and parathyroid cancer. Eur J Nucl Med 1997;24:246.
47. Buchegger F, Mach JP, Pelegrin A, et al. Radiolabeled chimeric anti-CEA monoclonal antibody compared with the original mouse monoclonal antibody for surgically treated colorectal
carcinoma. J Nucl Med 1995;36:420.
48. Buchegger F, Gillet M, Doenz F, et al. Biodistribution of anti-CEA F(ab')2 fragments after intra-arterial and intravenous injection in patients with liver metastases due to colorectal carcinoma.
Nucl Med Commun 1996;17:500.
49. Chetanneau A, Barbet J, Peltier P, et al. Pretargeted imaging of colorectal cancer recurrences using an 111In-labelled bivalent hapten and a bispecific antibody conjugate. Nucl Med Commun
1994;15:972.
50. de Nardi P, Stella M, Magnani P, et al. Combination of monoclonal antibodies for radioimmunoguided surgery. Int J Colorectal Dis 1997;12:24.
51. Di Carlo V, Stella M, De Nardi P, Fazio F. Radioimmunoguided surgery: clinical experience with different monoclonal antibodies and methods. Tumori 1995;81:98.
52. Di Carlo V, De Nardi P, Stella M, Magnani P, Fazio F. Preoperative and intraoperative radioimmunodetection of cancer pretargeted by biotinylated monoclonal antibodies. Semin Surg Oncol
1998;15:235.
53. Conti PS, Lilien DL, Hawley K, et al. PET and [18F]-FDG in oncology: a clinical update. Nucl Med Biol 1996;23:717.
54. DiChiro G. Positron emission tomography using [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose in brain tumors: a powerful diagnostic and prognostic tool. Invest Radiol 1986;22:360.
55. Valk PE, Abella-Columna E, Haseman MK, et al. Whole-body PET imaging with [18F] flourodeoxglucose in management of recurrent colorectal cancer. Arch Surg 1999;134(5):503511.
56. Ito K, Kato T, Tadokoro M, et al. Recurrent rectal cancer and scar: differentiation with PET and MR imaging. Radiology 1992;182:549.
57. Burns RP. Image-guided breast biopsy. Am J Surg 1997;173:9; discussion, 12.
58. Graves TA, Bland KI. Surgery for early and minimally invasive breast cancer. Curr Opin Oncol 1996;8:468.

59. Gould SW, Lamb G, Lomax D, Gedroyc W, Darzi A. Interventional MR-guided excisional biopsy of breast lesions. J Magn Reson Imaging 1998;8:26.
60. Beaulieu CF, Napel S, Daniel BL, et al. Detection of colonic polyps in a phantom model: implications for virtual colonoscopy data acquisition. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1998;22:656.
61. Meakem TJ III, Schnall MD. Magnetic resonance cholangiography. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1995;24:221.
62. Nakagohri T, Jolesz FA, Okuda S, et al. Virtual pancreatoscopy of mucin-producing pancreatic tumors. Comput Aided Surg 1998;3:264.
63. Allerheiligen DA, Schoeber J, Houston RE, Mohl VK, Wildman KM. Hyperparathyroidism [published erratum appears in Am Fam Physician 1998;58:52]. Am Fam Physician 1998;57:1795, 1807.
64. Mundschenk J, Klose S, Lorenz K, Dralle H, Lehnert H. Diagnostic strategies and surgical procedures in persistent or recurrent primary hyperparathyroidism. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes
1999;107:331.
65. Jaskowiak N, Norton JA, Alexander HR, et al. A prospective trial evaluating a standard approach to reoperation for missed parathyroid adenoma. Ann Surg 1996;224:308; discussion 320.
66. Thompson GB, Grant CS, Perrier ND, et al. Reoperative parathyroid surgery in the era of sestamibi scanning and intraoperative parathyroid hormone monitoring. Arch Surg 1999;134:699;
discussion, 704.
67. Doppman JL, Skarulis MC, Chen CC, et al. Parathyroid adenomas in the aortopulmonary window [see comments]. Radiology 1996;201:456.
68. Doppman JL, Shawker TH, Fraker DL, et al. Parathyroid adenoma within the vagus nerve. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1994;163:943.
69. Buell JF, Fraker DL, Doppman JL, et al. High cervical intravagal hypercellular parathyroid gland as the etiology of severe persistent primary hyperparathyroidism. Am Surg 1995;61:943.
70. Billingsley KG, Fraker DL, Doppman JL, et al. Localization and operative management of undescended parathyroid adenomas in patients with persistent primary hyperparathyroidism. Surgery
1994;116:982; discussion, 989.
71. George EF, Komisar A, Scharf SC, Ferracci A, Blaugrund S. Diagnostic value of the preoperative sestamibi scan in intraoperative localization of parathyroid adenomas: a case study.
Laryngoscope 1998;108:627.
72. Kountakis SE, Maillard AJ. Parathyroid adenomas: is bilateral neck exploration necessary? Am J Otolaryngol 1999;20:396.
73. Singer JA, Sardi A, Conaway G, Spiegler EJ. Minimally invasive parathyroidectomy utilizing a gamma detecting probe intraoperatively. Md Med J 1999;48:55.
74. Costello D, Norman J. Minimally invasive radioguided parathyroidectomy. Surg Oncol Clin North Am 1999;8:555.
75. Moore FD Jr, Mannting F, Tanasijevic M. Intrinsic limitations to unilateral parathyroid exploration. Ann Surg 1999;230:382; discussion, 388.

CHAPTER 65 Proton Beam Radiation Therapy
Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology

CHAPTER 65
Proton Beam Radiation Therapy
IRA J. SPIRO
ANTHONY LOMAX
ALFRED R. SMITH
JAY S. LOEFFLER
Introduction
Physical Aspects of Protons
Proton Beam Radiation Treatment: Historical Note
Clinical Results
Prostate Carcinoma
Uveal Melanoma
Sarcomas of the Skull Base and Cervical Spine
Optic Pathway Glioma
Astrocytoma
Benign Meningioma
Paranasal Sinus Carcinoma
Hepatocellular Carcinoma
Lung Carcinoma
Proton Radiosurgery
Design of Clinical Trials Using Proton Beams
Conclusions and Future Directions
Chapter References

INTRODUCTION
There is a growing interest in developing techniques that produce extremely conformal x-ray dose distributions. Several means of reducing treatment volumes are
under active development and clinical testing. These new techniques include three-dimensional treatment planning, stereotactic patient positioning, and conformal
delivery technology, such as intensity-modulated radiation therapy. The results of these efforts support the concept that higher doses of radiation can be delivered
with equal or reduced normal tissue complications. The ability to deliver higher doses of radiation using proton radiation therapy should lead to improved local control
and survival rates.

PHYSICAL ASPECTS OF PROTONS
Protons have comparable biologic effects in tissue relative to high-energy x-rays used in conventional radiation therapy. Evidence of this comes from the fact that the
relative biologic effectiveness (RBE) of protons is approximately 1.1. The RBE of a proton beam is the ratio of the dose required to produce a specified effect using a
reference radiation, usually cobalt 60 photons, to the proton dose required to produce the same effect. Most recent studies have reported RBE values for clinical
protons in the range of 1.0 to 1.25. 1,2 and 3 Therefore, the advantage of proton radiation therapy is because of the superiority of the physical dose distributions
compared with those for conventional therapy beams, rather than a biologic advantage.
A proton loses its energy in tissue through coulombic interactions with electrons, although a small fraction of energy is transferred through nuclear collisions. The
energy loss per unit path length is relatively small and constant until near the end of the proton range, where the residual energy is lost over a short distance,
resulting in a steep rise in the absorbed dose (energy absorbed per unit mass). This portion of the particle track, where energy is rapidly lost over a short distance, is
known as the Bragg peak (see the curve labeled “Unmodulated Proton Beam” in Fig. 65-1). In physical terms, the magnitude of the transfer of energy to tissue per unit
path length traversed by the protons is inversely proportional to the square of the proton velocity. The initial low-dose region in the depth-dose curve, before the
Bragg peak, is referred to as the plateau of the dose distribution and is 30% to 40% of the maximum dose.

FIGURE 65-1. Depth dose curves (relative percent dose vs. depth in tissue) for an unmodulated proton beam (Bragg peak), a modulated proton peak (spread-out
Bragg peak; SOBP), and 10-MV x-rays.

The Bragg peak is too narrow to treat any but the smallest of targets. For irradiation of larger targets, the beam energy is modulated to widen the Bragg peak, which is
accomplished by superimposing several beams of closely spaced energies (ranges) to create a region of uniform dose over the depth of the target; these extended
regions of uniform dose are called spread-out Bragg peaks. This is illustrated in Figure 65-1. For comparison, Figure 65-1 also shows the depth-dose curve for a
10-MV x-ray beam, an energy commonly used to treat deep-seated tumors. Note that the x-ray beam dose rises to a maximum value at relatively shallow depths, then
falls off exponentially as depth increases. This fundamental difference in energy loss in tissue leads to superior dose distributions with protons.
The physical superiority of proton dose distributions is illustrated for the treatment of a paranasal sinus cancer ( Fig. 65-2) and a large Ewing's sarcoma of the pelvis
(Fig. 65-3). In this comparison, intensity-modulated x-ray therapy and intensity-modulated proton therapy are used. Both x-ray and proton treatment plans of the
paranasal sinus make use of multiple beam portals and identical constraints. The two treatment plans are designed to provide equal doses of 76 Gy to the target
volume. The differences in the two plans are shown in the lower panels of Figure 65-2. This illustration reveals that x-rays deliver an additional 5 to 15 Gy throughout
the brain. In the region of the right eye, which is magnified, the x-ray plan delivers up to 40 Gy more than the proton plan. The constraint on the right eye retina was
50 Gy. Had this been reduced, the x-ray dose would have been lower in this region, but at the expense of increased dose elsewhere or greater dose inhomogeneity in
the target. This comparison illustrates that protons can be made to stop sharply beyond a target volume, sparing a critical structure distal to the target.

FIGURE 65-2. Paranasal sinus tumor treated with intensity-modulated proton therapy (upper left) and intensity-modulated x-ray therapy (upper right). The difference
in the two plans is shown in the lower right panel and magnified in the lower left panel. Note the additional 5 to 15 Gy that the brain receives and the increased dose
to the right eye. The plans were developed by one of the authors (A. L.) at the Paul Scherrer Institute in Villigen, Switzerland.

FIGURE 65-3. Ewing's sarcoma of the right pelvis treated with intensity-modulated proton therapy (upper left) and intensity-modulated x-ray therapy (upper right). The
lower panel shows the difference in the two plans. Note the additional 8 to 28 Gy that the small bowel, midline structures, and contralateral sacrum receive. The plans
were developed by one of the authors (A. L.) at the Paul Scherrer Institute in Villigen, Switzerland.

The second example is a Ewing's sarcoma of the ilium in an 18-year-old man as shown in the transverse computed tomography images in Figure 65-3. The x-ray plan
delivers greater dose to the anterior small bowel and midline structures, such as the bladder, prostate, and large bowel. This plan also dispels the commonly held
misconception that protons only offer significant advantages over x-rays for small treatment volumes. The effects of excess dose outside of the target volume are not
well understood, although late effects of radiation do not occur in unirradiated tissues. Such excess radiation may also be important in the acute tolerance to treatment
as well as the tolerance to combined treatment with chemotherapy and radiation. These two examples illustrate the superiority of protons in treating both small and
large targets.

PROTON BEAM RADIATION TREATMENT: HISTORICAL NOTE
In 1946, Robert Wilson proposed that proton beams would provide superior dose distributions and should be considered for clinical radiation treatment. Initial efforts
were directed at intracranial targets and used single-dose protocols. The first treatments using proton or helium ion beams were at the University of California at
Berkeley (1955), University of Uppsala, Sweden (1957), Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH; 1961), Physics Research Institute, Dubna, Russia (1964), and the
Institute for Experimental and Theoretical Physics, Moscow (1969). As of 1999, approximately 24,500 patients have received part or all of their radiation treatment by
proton beams (for a historical review, see ref. 4). Today 19 proton treatment centers are established worldwide. Only one prospective randomized trial reporting on
the efficacy of proton beam radiation therapy versus photon therapy has been published. 5
The proton treatment program at MGH began in 1961. It was led by the neurosurgical group of W. Sweet and R. Kjellberg using the 160-MeV cyclotron in the
department of physics at Harvard University. Their targets were principally pituitary adenomas, arteriovenous malformations, and other benign intracranial neoplasms
and were treated by single-dose protocol. In January 1974, the MGH department of radiation oncology began a program of fractionated proton treatment. This clinical
research program represents an active collaboration between the Harvard Cyclotron Laboratory (HCL), the Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, the Harvard Medical
School, and MGH.

CLINICAL RESULTS
PROSTATE CARCINOMA
Investigators at MGH completed a phase III trial comparing 67.2 Gy of photons versus 75.6 Cobolt Grey Equivalent (CGE) using a conformal perineal proton boost. 5
From 1982 through 1992, 202 patients with T3–T4 prostate cancer received 50.4 Gy by four-field photons. Patients then received either 25.2 CGE with conformal
protons or a 16.8 Gy photon boost. No differences were found in overall survival, total recurrence-free survival, or local recurrence-free survival in the two groups. The
local recurrence-free survival rate at 7 years for patients with poorly differentiated (Gleason 9 and 10) tumors was 85% on the proton arm and 37% on the photon arm.
Grade 1 and 2 rectal bleeding was higher in the proton arm (32% vs. 12%), as was urethral stricture (19% vs. 8%). In conclusion, dose escalation to 75.6 CGE by
conformal proton boost led to increased late radiation sequelae, but not to increased total survival in any subgroup. However, there was an improved local
recurrence-free survival in patients with poorly differentiated tumors.
Based on the results of this trial, the Proton Radiation Oncology Group (PROG) 95-09 was initiated. Participants in the trial were MGH and Loma Linda University
(LLU) Medical Center. PROG 95-09 is a randomized phase III trial using conformal photons with proton boost in early-stage prostate cancer. The study was proposed
because long-term follow-up of T1–T2 irradiated patients demonstrated biochemical disease-free survival rates of 50%, 35%, and 20% for well, moderate, and poorly
differentiated tumors, respectively. This study randomized patients to two different proton boost dose levels, with patients receiving a total dose of either 79.2 Gy or
70.2 Gy. Patients deemed to be a low risk for local failure (prostate-specific antigen less than 4 ng/ml) and patients with high risk for distant disease (prostate-specific
antigen greater than 15 ng/ml and/or positive lymph nodes) are not likely to benefit from this dose escalation and thus were excluded. This randomized trial was
designed to detect a 20% increase in freedom from local failure and biochemical relapse at 5 years. With 390 patients entered, this trial is now closed and is awaiting
analysis.
The results of the LLU experience in early-stage prostate cancer have been published. 6 Three hundred and nineteen men with T1–T2b tumors were treated with 74 to
75 CGE protons, or combined protons and x-rays. The overall 5-year biochemical disease-free survival rate was 88%. No severe treatment-related morbidity was
observed.
UVEAL MELANOMA
As of October 1998, a total of 2586 patients have been treated for uveal melanoma at MGH with protons in collaboration with the Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary.7 Patients were treated with 70 CGE in five fractions over 7 to 9 days. The 5-year actuarial local control rate is 96% for all sites within the globe, with an 80%
survival. The probability of eye retention at 5 years was estimated to be 90% for the entire group and 97%, 93%, and 78% for patients with small, intermediate, and
large tumors, respectively. Independent risk factors for enucleation were involvement of the ciliary body, tumor height more than 8 mm, and distance between the

posterior tumor edge and the fovea. These results compare favorably with local control rates of 89% reported with protons in Nice, France. 8
Because some patients have experienced deteriorating vision after doses of 70 CGE, a randomized trial compared 50 and 70 CGE for small- and intermediate-size
lesions located within 6 mm of the optic disc or macula. This dose-reduction study was completed in June 1994 with accrual of 188 patients. Interim analysis based on
patients followed through September 1997 (median follow-up 60 months) suggested no reduction in either local control or survival rate. No marked improvement in
visual outcome or complications has been observed. However, visual field analysis does show a smaller mean defect in the patients randomized to 50 CGE. 7
A study has been completed comparing iodine 125 plaques to helium ions by the group at University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) and Lawrence Berkeley
Laboratories (LBL). 9 Patients with melanomas less than 10 mm in height and less than 15 mm in diameter were randomized by the UCSF/LBL group to receive either
70 CGE in five treatments with helium ions, or 70 Gy to the tumor apex with 125Iodine plaque brachytherapy. Local control was 100% in those patients treated with
helium ions compared with 87% in those patients treated with 125I plaques.
SARCOMAS OF THE SKULL BASE AND CERVICAL SPINE
Treatment of patients with a sarcoma of the skull base is challenging because of the large number of critical structures penetrating the skull base and the proximity of
these tumors to the brain stem and optic pathways. These factors have limited the success of conventional photon radiation therapy and surgery. The results of the
MGH series has been analyzed. 10 One hundred and sixty-nine patients with chordoma and 165 patients with chondrosarcoma were treated with protons between
1975 and 1998. The 5-year actuarial local control rates for skull-base chondrosarcomas was 98% and was 73% for chordoma patients. For cervical spine patients,
local control rates were 54% and 48% for chondrosarcoma and chordoma patients, respectively. The LLU proton experience for skull-base tumors showed 5-year
actuarial local control rates of 75% for chondrosarcoma and 59% for chordoma. 11 The MGH results compare favorably with the experience (median dose 50 Gy) from
Princess Margaret Hospital in Toronto of 55%. 12
OPTIC PATHWAY GLIOMA
Seven patients with optic pathway glioma were treated at LLU between 1992 and 1997. 13 Tumor volumes ranged from 3.9 cm3 to 127 cm3. At a median follow-up of 37
months, all patients were locally controlled. A reduction in tumor volume was seen in three patients, and tumor volumes remained stable in four patients. Visual acuity
remained stable in patients who presented with useful vision. Proton radiation therapy was shown to reduce the dose to the contralateral optic nerve by 47%,
compared with three-dimensional photon techniques.
ASTROCYTOMA
Between 1993 and 1998, 48 patients were treated for nonresectable grade II and III intracranial tumors at the Center for Proton Therapy in d'Orsay, France. 14 Mean
tumor doses ranged from 63 to 67 Gy at 1.8 Gy per fraction. With a median follow-up of 18 months, local control was 97% (33 of 34 cases) and 43% (6 of 14 cases)
for nonparenchymal and parenchymal lesions, respectively.
Twenty-three patients with the diagnosis of glioblastoma multiforme were treated to 90 CGE with twice-daily protons. 15 Median survival time was 20 months from the
date of surgery and 18.6 months from the start of radiation treatment. Actuarial survival at 2 and 3 years was 34% and 18%, respectively. Sixteen of the 23 patients
were judged to have had tumor progression. Of these 16, 15 had progression in tissues that received 60 to 70 CGE (or less). In only one patient was there evidence
of failure within the 90-CGE volume. All patients developed new areas of gadolinium enhancement during the follow-up period. Pathologic material was examined in
15 patients. Radiation necrosis only was demonstrated in seven patients. The survival rate for this group of 23 patients is comparable to that of the best
brachytherapy or radiosurgery series. However, a trend towards larger and less accessible tumors was seen in this patient population. This regimen has achieved an
apparent high frequency of tumor eradication in the 90-CGE volume, although toxicity has been significant.
BENIGN MENINGIOMA
Between 1981 and 1996, 46 patients with incompletely resected or recurrent benign meningioma were treated at the HCL with a combined proton-photon technique.
The median dose to the tumor volume was 59.0 CGE. Overall survival at 5 and 10 years was 93% and 77%, respectively, and recurrence-free survival at 5 and 10
years was 100% and 88%. Three patients developed local tumor recurrence at 61, 95, and 125 months, although no patient died from recurrent disease.
Complications have included focal brain stem necrosis in two patients and grade 3 memory loss in another patient. In four patients who developed ophthalmologic
toxicity, the maximum dose to the optic structures was 58.4, 59.2, 59.3, and 63.0 CGE. Unilateral sensineural hearing loss developed in two patients and
endocrinopathy in 11 patients.
Nineteen patients with inextirpable skull-base meningiomas were treated at the Svedberg Laboratory in Uppsala, Sweden, with 24 Gy in four fractions. With a
minimum follow-up time of 36 months, no patients have experienced disease progression. 16
PARANASAL SINUS CARCINOMA
Between 1991 and 1996, 32 patients with carcinomas of the paranasal sinuses were treated on an accelerated-dose proton-photon protocol. 17 The stage distribution
was T3 in two cases and T4 in 30 cases, and all were N0 and M0. Four patients had had a gross total resection, whereas the others had had only a biopsy (7) or
subtotal resection (19). The median observation period was 2.7 years. Actuarial disease-specific survival at 3 years was 62%. Ten deathsthree with intercurrent
disease and seven with metastatic tumorhave been reported. Three patients developed local failure. The 3-year actuarial local control rate was 89%. Late toxicity has
included temporal lobe necrosis in three patients, although all have regressed with steroid treatment. Three patients have required surgical soft tissue repair. These
local-control results appear to constitute a substantial gain over conventional surgery and photon treatment techniques.
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA
Investigators at Tsukuba University, Japan, have reported impressive long-term control and survival results in patients with primary hepatocellular carcinoma treated
with proton radiation therapy. 18 The dose per fraction was 4 Gy and the mean total dose was 72 Gy. The 7-year local control and survival results in this series of 122
patients were reported as 94% and 27%. Proton therapy did not cause clinically symptomatic changes in liver function. 19 The only notable change observed was a
transient increase in liver transaminases.
LUNG CARCINOMA
Between 1994 and 1998, 37 patients with medically inoperable stage I–IIIa lung cancer were treated at LLU with conformal photons and protons. 20 Patients received
either photons and protons or protons alone to 73.8 CGE over 5 weeks. Patients with poor lung function received 51 CGE in ten fractions over 2 weeks to the gross
tumor volume. With a median follow-up time of 14 months, disease-free survival at 2 years was 63% for all patients and 86% for stage I patients.
PROTON RADIOSURGERY
Between 1961 and 1993, 2987 patients were treated with single-fraction proton therapy (proton radiosurgery). This effort was led by the late Dr. Raymond Kjellberg, a
neurosurgeon at MGH. The majority of patients were treated for inoperable arteriovenous malformations and pituitary adenomas. 21 Beginning in 1991, a second
proton radiosurgery technique was developed using a patient positioning system capable of stereotactic alignment for radiosurgery (STAR). 22 This system was
developed because of the inherent restrictions of the fixed horizontal beam at the HCL. The STAR unit was based on target coordinates obtained directly from
computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, or angiography. Early results with arteriovenous malformations, acoustic neuromas, and brain metastases are
comparable with those produced by other stereotactic technologies (Gamma Knife, linear accelerator, Elecktra Corporation, Stockholm, Sweden).

DESIGN OF CLINICAL TRIALS USING PROTON BEAMS
The fixed horizontal, 160-MeV HCL proton beam, with an effective treatment depth of 15.9 cm, constrained the number of sites that could effectively be treated. For

this reason, past efforts have focused on intracranial targets, skull-base tumors, head and neck tumors, eye tumors, and prostatic carcinoma. The Northeast Proton
Therapy Center (NPTC) at MGH will have a more energetic beam (220 MeV) capable of treating to depths of 32 cm, a gantry-based delivery system, and
state-of-the-art patient positioners. These improvements will increase the numbers of patients that can be treated and will facilitate treatment at a number of new sites,
including lung, rectum, and liver. In addition, a major effort will be placed on developing protocols for the treatment of pediatric malignancies.
Several examples of the potential advantages of the NPTC proton beam have been documented. Medulloblastoma is a pediatric malignancy that occurs in the
posterior fossa and can spread through the cerebrospinal fluid to seed in the cranial cavity and the spinal axis, requiring radiation treatment to the cranial contents as
well as the spinal axis. As a result, these patients frequently experience hearing, neurologic, neuropsychological, endocrine, musculoskeletal, cardiac, and fertility
deficits because of the combined chemotherapy and radiation treatment. Figure 65-4 illustrates the dramatic reduction in the volume of normal tissue irradiated in the
thorax (heart, lung, and esophagus) seen with protons. In addition, similar reductions would be seen in the abdomen (stomach, small bowel, pancreas, and liver) and
pelvis (ovaries, bladder, and bowel). Also, not illustrated here, the dose to the middle ear can be reduced by 50% using photon techniques. Another example for which
protons would reduce treatment-related morbidity is the treatment of rectal carcinoma. Current treatment of patients with stage II and III rectal carcinoma includes
surgical resection, pelvic radiation, and infusional 5-fluorouracil. Significant treatment-related morbidity results from this regimen because of the irradiation of large
volumes of normal bowel and bladder with conventional photon radiation techniques. Proton beam treatment allows for irradiation of the target lymph nodes with
minimal dose to the small bowel and the bladder (Fig. 65-5).

FIGURE 65-4. Comparison of x-ray and proton single posterior portals for craniospinal irradiation in medulloblastoma. The x-ray plan results in exit irradiation of the
heart, lung, carina, esophagus (not visualized), and anterior soft tissues.

FIGURE 65-5. Posterior proton portal for the treatment of rectal carcinoma. The tumor bed and internal iliac lymph nodes are targeted, whereas the small bowel and
anterior soft tissues are not treated.

The reduction in normal tissue irradiation with protons has significant implications for combined radiation and chemotherapy protocols. Even when modest doses of
radiation are prescribed, as in the case of rectal carcinoma, proton radiation should improve tolerance to the combined regimen. This should result in fewer
dose-limiting toxicities and improved treatment intensity and treatment compliance, which may allow for higher chemotherapy doses and, ultimately, lead to higher
cancer control rates.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The history of radiation oncology has demonstrated that major improvements in local control have occurred because of improvements in dose distributions. Proton
radiation therapy represents one of the most precise and sophisticated treatment delivery systems in radiation oncology. Proton therapy will also make use of some of
the same improvements that have developed in conformal x-ray therapy (intensity modulation, rotational delivery, multileaf collimation, stereotactic localization) to
further improve the dose distribution of protons. Such improvements will allow for continued escalation in tumor doses while minimizing dose to normal, nontarget
tissues. With the installation of a high-energy (220 MeV) hospital-based proton therapy facility at the NPTC at MGH and the existing facility at LLU Medical Center,
the technology exists for continuing clinical research in proton radiation therapy. Efforts for the first decade of the twenty-first century will include: (1) comparing
intensity-modulated x-ray therapy and intensity-modulated proton therapy, (2) assessing the gains in treatment intensity in combined modality therapy with protons,
and (3) assessing the impact of proton therapy on improving cure rates in pediatric cancer and reducing late effects.
CHAPTER REFERENCES
1. Tepper J, Verhey L, Goitein M, Suit HD, Koehler AM. In vivo determinations of RBE in a high energy modulated proton beam using normal tissue reactions and fractionated dose schedules. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1977;2:1115.
2. Urano M, Verhey LJ, Goitein M, et al. Relative biological effectiveness of modulated proton beams in various murine tissues. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1984;10:509.
3. Gerweck LE, Kozin SV. Relative biological effectiveness of proton beams in clinical therapy [Review]. Radiother Oncol 1999;50:135.
4. Raju MR. Proton radiobiology, radiosurgery and radiotherapy [Review]. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;67:237.
5. Shipley WU, Verhey LJ, Munzenrider JE, et al. Advanced prostate cancer: the results of a randomized comparative trial of high dose irradiation boosting with conformal protons compared with
conventional dose irradiation using photons alone [see comments]. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995;32:3.
6. Slater JD, Rossi CJJ, Yonemoto LT, et al. Conformal proton therapy for early-stage prostate cancer. Urology 1999;53:978.
7. Munzenrider JE. Proton therapy for uveal melanomas and other eye lesions. Strahlentherapie und Onkologie 1999;175[Suppl 2]:68.
8. Courdi A, Caujolle JP, Grange JD, et al. Results of proton therapy of uveal melanomas treated in Nice. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:5.
9. Char DH, Quivey JM, Castro JR, Kroll S, Phillips T. Helium ions versus iodine 125 brachytherapy in the management of uveal melanoma. A prospective, randomized, dynamically balanced
trial. Ophthalmology 1993;100:1547.
10. Munzenrider JE, Liebsch NJ. Proton therapy for tumors of the skull base [Review]. Strahlentherapie und Onkologie 1999;175[Suppl 2]:57.
11. Hug EB, Loredo LN, Slater JD, et al. Proton radiation therapy for chordomas and chondrosarcomas of the skull base. J Neurosurg 1999;91:432.
12. Catton C, O'Sullivan B, Bell R, et al. Chordoma: long-term follow-up after radical photon irradiation. Radiother Oncol 1996;41:67.
13. Fuss M, Hug E, Schaefer RA, et al. Proton Radiation Therapy (PRT) for pediatric optic pathway gliomas: comparison with 3D planned conventional photons and a standard photon technique. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45:1117.
14. Habrand JL, Haie-Meder C, Rey A, et al. [Radiotherapy using a combination of photons and protons for locally aggressive intracranial tumors. Preliminary results of protocol CPO 94-C1].
Cancer Radiother 1999;3:480.
15. Fitzek MM, Thornton AF, Rabinov JD, et al. Accelerated fractionated proton/photon irradiation to 90 cobalt gray equivalent for glioblastoma multiforme: results of a phase II prospective trial. J
Neurosurg 1999;91:251.
16. Gudjonsson O, Blomquist E, Nyberg G, et al. Stereotactic irradiation of skull base meningiomas with high energy protons. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 1999;141:933.
17. Thornton AF, Fitzek MM, Varvarres M, et al. Accelerated, hyperfractionated proton/photon irradiation for advanced paranasal sinus cancer: results of a prospective phase I-II study. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42:222(abst).
18. Matsuzaki Y, Osuga T, Chiba T, et al. New, effective treatment using proton irradiation for unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. Intern Med 1995;34:302.
19. Tsuji H, Okumura T, Maruhashi A, et al. [Dose-volume histogram analysis of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma regarding changes in liver function after proton therapy] [Japanese]. Nippon
Igaku Hoshasen Gakkai Zasshi 1995;55:322.

